Nineteenth Century Miracles
========================================
Emma Hardinge Britten (1884) — Britten's great compendium of spiritualism worldwide — the movement's encyclopedic history. Source: https://archive.org/details/nineteenthcentur01brit. Public domain.

NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES; 

OR, 

SPIRITS    AND    THEIR    WORK    IN    EVERY    COUNTRY 
OF    THE    EARTH. 

A  COMPLETE  HISTORICAL  COMPENDIUM 

OF   THE    GREAT   MOVEMENT    KNOWN    AS 

^'MODERN    spiritualism:' 

K 

EMMA    HARDINGE   BRITTEN, 

Author  of 

'  History  of  Modern  American  Spiritualism  ; "  "  Wildfire  Club  ; "  "  Faiths,  Facts,  and  Frauds  of  Religious 

History  ;"  "  On  the  Road  :  or,  a  Manual  for  Spiritual  Investigators  ; "  "  The  Electric  Physician  ;" 

"The  Western  Star  Magazine  ;  "  and  numerous  Lectures  on  Religion, 

Theology,  Science  and  Reform. 

PUBLISHED    BY  WILLIAM   BRITTEN. 

New   York:    Lovell   &  Co.,   14,  Vesey   Street. 

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1S84, 

By  WILLIAM  BRITTEN, 

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington,   D.C. 

DEDICATION. 

losE  Names,  unknown  on  Earth,  shine  in  Laipjortal  Types 
IN  the  Archives  of  Eternity, 
This  Humble  Record  of  the  Mightiest  Work  ever 

Performed  on  Earth. 

Is    Gratefully    Inscribed    by 

The  Author. 

THE  Limes, 

HHmpJi.rey  St.,  Chectham  Hill, 

Jianchcster,  E:igland. 

December,  1SS3. 

TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 

Page. 
Introduction  i-5 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GERMANY. 
Chapters  i  to  6     7~4i 

SPIRITUALISM   IN   FRANCE. 
Chapters  7  to  11 41-90 

SPIRITUALISM   IN    GREAT   BRITAIN. 
Chapters  12  to  28 90-226 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   AUSTRALIA. 
Chapters  29  to  31  ...  227-261 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    NEW    ZEALAND. 
Chapters  32  and  33  • 262-276 

SPIRITUALISM  IN  THE  POLYNESIAN  AND  WEST  INDIA   ISLANDS. 
Chapter  34 277-284 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    SOUTH   AMERICA,    MEXICO,    &c. 
Chapter  35 2S4-291 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    THE    EAST    INDIES— HINDOSTAN,    &c. 
Chapters  36  to  38 291-326 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    HOLLAND. 
Chapters  39  to  41 326-341 

vi.  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    THE    DUTCH    INDIES. 
Chapter  42 341-34S 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    RUSSIA. 
Chapters  43  and  44         348-365 

SPIRITUALISM     IN    SCANDINAVIA,    NORWAY,  SWEDEN,  &c,,  &c. 
Chapters  45  and  46  •.         365-379 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    SWITZERLAND. 
Chapter  47 379-389 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    ITALY. 
Chapter  48 389-400 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    SPAIN. 
Chapter  49  ..  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...     400-412 

SPIRITUALISM    IN  EUROPE    CONCLUDED-^AUSTRIA,    BELGIUM, 
AND    TURKEY. 

Chapter  50 413-425 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    AMERICA. 
Chapters  51  to  61 425-556 

TABLE  OF   REFERENCE    ON   SPECIAL 
SUBJECTS. 

The  following  Table  of  References,  although  by  no  means  designed  to  fill  the 
place  of  a  complete  index,  will  be  found  serviceable  to  those  who  desire  to  refer  to 
prominent  cases  on  special  subjects  : — 

MESMERISM  AS  A  STEPPING-STONE  TO  SPIRITUALISM,— Pages  7  to 
18,  41  to  44,  48,  124  to  126. 

HEALINGS  AND  HEALERS.— Pages  26  and  seq.,  34,  60,  64  and  seq.,  68  and  seq., 
69,  72,  77.  83,  99.  125,  175,  217,  250  to  254,  277,  404,  415. 

SPIRIT  MUSIC.— Pages  75-76,  143-4,  147,  322,  337,  339,  340,  423,  480, 

DRAWINGS  BY  SPIRIT  POWER.— Pages  87,  100,  163,  170,  233,  339,  419,  423, 
433.  480,  532  to  534,  536. 

DIRECT  WRITINGS  BY  SPIRITS,— Pages  40,  59,  166-7-8,  214,  238,  291  to  296, 
337:  339- 

PASSAGE  OF  MATTER  THROUGH  MATTER.— Pages  40,  44,  80,  82,  84,  92  to 
96,  147,  148,  160  to  162,  166. 

FLOATING  OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY  IN  THE  AIR.— Pages  33,  144  to  146, 
160  to  162,  77,  258,  337,  422,  423. 

TESTIMONY  OF  ILLUSTRIOUS  PERSONAGES.— Pages  27-8-9,  35,  37,  43, 
73-4-5,  78-9.  105  to  128,  144-5,  150-1,  153,  176  to  180,  183  to  187,  189,  201,  202-3, 
205-6,  218  to  222,  230,  347,  349  to  352,  444-5,  448,  393,  413  and  seq.,  456  to  469. 

ECSTATICS. — Pages  29,  30,  67,  85,  168,  99  to  102;  Irish  Revivals,  no  to  123,  323, 
366,  415-16-17,  498  to  502. 

TALKING  SPIRITS.— Pages  loo-i,  103,  144,  385,  509  to  515. 

HAUNTINGS  AND  OBSESSIONS.— Pages  19  to  25,  31.  Berg  gheister,  Kobolds.— 
Pages  32,  65,  80  to  85,  92  to  99,  343  to  346,  362,  366  to  377,  379  to  385,  389,  392, 
399,  503  to  506. 

SPIRITUALISM  IN  THE  LAW  COURTS  AND  OFFICIAL  INVESTIGA- 
TIONS.— Pages  13,  51,  81,  82,  88,  127,  157,  182,  188  and  seq.,  193, 194,  ig6  to  198, 
248,  270,  355,  358,  435,  469  to  477. 

MATERIALIZED  SPIRIT  FORMS  AND  PHYSICAL  FORCE  MANIFESTA- 
TIONS.— Pages  18  to  2o'  28  to  33,  38  to  40,  80  to  90,  94  to  gg,  100  to  105,  142  to  149, 
152  to  159,  159  to  171,  214  to  216,  235,  241  to  246,  255  to  266,  277  to  284,  311  to  313, 
314,  338  to  341,  354,  359,  360,434,  435,405,  507  to  508,  515  to  518,  519  to  527,  539. 

SPEAKING  AND  WRITING  WITH  FOREIGN  "TONGUES."— Dr.  Slade, 
from  pages  37  to  40;  Irvingites,  100  to  109;  Irish  Revivals  (chaps.  14  and  15), 
227  to  236,  238  to  247,  434. 

WRITING  MEDIUMSHIP.— 36  to  40,  42  to  45,  58  to  60,  165  to  170,  227  to  249, 
318,  397,  401,  406,  414. 

NOTE    TO    THE    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

The  Author  having  found  it  impossible  to  procure  many  of  the  portraits  of  the 
various  illustrious  Spiritualists  of  different  countries  mentioned  in  this  work,  and  a 
large  number  having  been  furnished  from  Great  Britaih,  America,  and  one  or  two 
other  special  localities,  it  has  been  deemed  necessary  to  preserve  the  symmetry  of 
the  book  by  distributing  the  illustrations  uniformly  towards  the  close  of  every 
other  chapter.  The  reader,  no  less  than  the  honoured  originals  of  the  various 
portraits,  therefore,  must  kindly  allow  for  this  necessity,  and  be  prepared  to  find 
the  portraits  often  widely  removed  from  the  pages  wherein  the  persons  so  represented 
are  mentioned. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Eternity  and  Infinity  are  the  only  words  that  seeiB,  in  our  imperfect 
forms  of  speech,  to  embody  the  conditions  of  spiritual  existence.  Time 
and  Space  are  equally  apposite  to  the  state  of  being  we  call  "  material." 
Whilst  therefore,  we  essay  to  write  of  a  dispensation  which  manifests  the 
characteristics  of  the  endless  and  illimitable,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
we  are  yet  denizens  of  a  material  sphere,  bounded  in  on  every  side  by  the 
limitations  of  time  and  space. 

The  author  of  these  pages  would  press  the  above  propositions  upon  the 
reader's  attention,  because  they  may  serve  to  excuse  the  necessity  of 
secularizing  a  subject,  the  high  religious  import  of  which  should  command 
the  most  sublime  forms  of  expression  that  language  can  supply.  But  as 
the  inspiring  intelligences  who  prompt  the  production  of  this  volume,  mark 
out  the  beaten  path  of  verbal  simplicity  as  the  best  that  can  be  adopted 
for  the  reader's  benefit,  and  charge  the  author  to  leave  to  posterity  only  a 
brief  compendious  record  of  the  footprints  made  by  an  invisible  world  of 
being  in  this,  the  nineteenth  century,  so  must  our  chief  aim  be  to  reduce 
to  the  plainest  possible  mode  of  expression  the  tale  we  have  to  tell.  The 
reader  will  find  then  in  the  following  pages,  nothing  more  than  a  concise 
historical  summary  of  the  spiritual  movement  as  it  has  transpired  in  various 
countries  of  the  earth,  from  the  commencement  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

There  have  been  certain  features  of  specialty  in  this  "cause"  in  America, 
which  have  given  it  a  prominence  there  unparalleled  in  any  other  country. 
This  remarkable  distinctiveness  the  author  has  already  testified  to  by 
pubHshing  a  voluminous  work  embodying  the  history  of  the  first  twenty 
years  of  American  Spiritualism.*  Any  student  endowed  with  ordinary 
powers  of  observation  will  soon  discover  that  "  the  modern  outpouring  of 
the  spirit"  has  been  just  as  full  in  other  lands  as  in  America,  but  no  where 
else  has  the  same  freedom  of  speech  been  allowed  to  testify  to  the  facts  of 
spirit  communion.  No  other  people  have  so  fully  organised  the  propa- 
ganda of  the  movement  by  the  aid  of  professional  media  as  the  Americans, 
neither  have  the  inhabitants  of  any  other  country  so  universally  systema- 
tized the  use  and  culture  of  "  spiritual  gifts."  It  must  also  be  remembered, 
that  the  immense  mass  of  spiritual  literature  put  forth  through  the  American 
press  has  contributed  largely  to  the  popular  understanding  of  the  subject. 
Considering  however,  the  world-wide  character  of  the  spiritual  outpouring 
in  the  nineteenth  century,  the  author  has  been  urgently  entreated— by  such 

*  "  Modern  American  Spiritualism  :  a  twenty  years'  record  of  the  open  communion 
between  spirits  and  mortals."    By  Emma  Hardinge  Britten.    Published  by  Colby 
and  Rich,  office  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A. 
I 

2  INTR  OD  UCTION. 

dwellers  of  the  life  beyond  as  can  make  their  wishes  understood — to  sup- 
plement the  History  of  American  Spiritualism,  by  one  which  shall  include 
compendious  sketches  of  the  movement  all  over  the  earth,  as  well  as  con- 
tinue the  record  in  America  from  its  first  twenty  years  of  action  to  the 
present  date.  In  carrying  out  this  plan  of  the  work,  the  author  has  been 
strongly  counselled  by  the  same  inteUigences  as  prompt  the  undertaking, 
to  write  of  what  pertains  to  the  history  of  Spiritualism  without  fear 
or  favour,  but  to  omit,  as  far  as  possible,  all  notice  of  those  excres- 
cences which  invariably  fasten  on  the  armies  of  reform,  in  the  shape 
of  fraud,  imbecility,  or  such  evidences  of  human  selfishness  as  repre- 
sent what  Spiritualism  is  not — not  what  it  really  is.  Whilst  then,  we 
would  "nothing  extenuate,  or  set  down  aught  in  malice,"  we  shall 
unhesitatingly  point  to  any  breaches  made  in  the  spiritual  garrison  by 
human  intervention,  but  carefully  avoid  giving  to  the  worthless  interloper, 
that  notoriety  which  so  many  seek  to  obtain,  even  at  the  price  of  tamper- 
ing with  "  the  life  lightnings,"  through  which  the  angels  telegraph  to  man ; 
in  a  word,  the  cheat,  swindler,  and  parasite,  whose  genius  it  is  to  prey  upon 
any  cause  strong  enough  to  bear  them  along  on  the  broad  current  of 
progress,  may  look  in  vain  for  opportunities  to  make  capital  out  of  this 
volume.  Whether  we  send  it  down  the  stream  of  time  to  the  one  or  the 
many,  we  do  not  propose  to  disgrace  its  pages  with  names  which  simply 
represent  the  darker  features  of  humanity,  not  the  light  destined  to  be 
shed  abroad  by  the  great  nineteenth-century  spiritual  outpouring. 

With  these  impelling  motives  to  our  undertaking,  we  essay  its  commence- 
ment, committing  the  result  to  God  and  the  angels,  whose  work  it  is,  and 
under  whose  guidance  the  author  reverently  attempts  the  record. 

CONCERNING  THE   WORKERS    AND   THEIR   WORK. 

How  far  disembodied  spirits  are  the  authors  of  the  startling  phenomena 
which  have  obtained  the  name  of  "  Modern  Spiritualism,"  how  much  of 
the  reported  marvels  are  due  to  the  spirit  within  man  himself,  or  owe  their 
colouring  to  exaggeration  on  the  part  of  the  narrator,  and  easy  credulity 
on  that  of  the  observer,  are  questions  which  are  agitating  thoughtful  minds 
everywhere,  both  within  and  without  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism. 

That  fraudulent  manifestations  have  been  given,  and  in  many  instances 
publicly  represented  as  proceeding  from  spirits,  none  can  deny ;  but  the 
question  of  how  to  discern  the  true  from  the  false,  is  of  the  most  vital 
importance,  especially  to  a  writer,  whose  sole  aim  is  to  present  a  worthy 
record  of  a  sublime  truth,  yet  to  free  it  from  all  the  misrepresentation 
which  would  render  such  a  record  valueless. 

The  chief  obstacles  which  intervene  between  this  purpose  and  its 
accomplishment,  are  the  manifestations  of  partisan  spirit,  which  find  their 
readiest  sphere  of  representation  in  the  columns  of  the  spiritual  journals. 
One  set  of  writers  determinately  upholds  every  asserted  claim  to  medium- 
ship,  however  flimsy,  and  hurls  denunciation  against  every  individual  who 
either  presumes  to  question  the  validity  of  that  claim,  or  draws  attention  to 
the  most  palpable  evidence  of  imposture.  This  injurious  spirit  of  credulity, 
so  often  mistaken  by  the  world  for  complicity  with  the  impostor,  is  met  on 
the  other  hand  by  equally  violent  denunciation  of  all  which  the  denouncer 
cannot  himself  fully  apprehend. 

The  editors  of  the  spiritual  journals  are  besieged  with  demands  to  make 
their  columns  the  arena  of  this  unseemly  warfare.     If  they  comply,  they 

INTRODUCTION.  3 

disgust  and  offend  the  impartial,  whilst  their  refusals  to  do  so,  are  regarded 
as  tantamount  to  partisanship,  to  be  construed  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
belligerents.  But  a  still  worse  result  of  this  quarrelsome  and  self-assertive 
spirit,  is  the  difficulty  which  it  interposes  of  arriving  at  any  reliable 
representation  of  a  communion,  which  depends  wholly  for  its  acceptance 
on  the  validity  of  the  facts  claimed  for  it. 

The  philosophy  of  Spiritualism,  however  beautiful  in  theory,  or  true  in 
principle,  grows  out  of  its  facts,  for,  if  spirits  are  not  the  authors  of  the 
communications  received  in  their  names,  the  whole  theory  of  a  hereafter — 
as  demonstrated  by  Spiritualism — crumbles  into  the  dust  and  ashes  which 
underlie  the  unsustained  assertions  of  theology. 

To  place  religion  upon  the  assured  foundation  of  knowledge,  and  redeem 
mankind  from  the  tempest-tossed  ocean  of  speculative  opinion,  we  have 
nothing,  unless  we  have  facts  and  basic  fundamental  principles.  To 
demonstrate  these,  and  guide  our  drifting  souls  into  the  ports  of  eternity  by 
the  infallible  compass  of  truth,  spirits  have  come  to  earth. 

What  then  can  we  say  of  the  remorseless  swindlers,  who  would  simulate 
the  personality  of  these  angelic  pilots,  or  the  imbecile  credulity  of  those  who 
allow  themselves  to  be  duped  by  their  shallow  pretences  ? 

Testimony  on  so  weighty  and  solemn  a  question  as  Spiritual  existence, 
can  only  be  admissible  when  it  is  proven  beyond  the  peradventure  of  one 
or  two  interested  witnesses ;  in  short,  the  entire  intercommunion  between 
the  two  worlds,  must  be  based  on  the  impregnable  rock  of  truth,  or  it  can 
never  shake  the  earth  with  the  birth  throes  of  a  religion,  which  claims  to 
demonstrate  immortality,  as  the  corner-stone  upon  which  man's  faith  may 
rest  unmoved. 

On  the  other  hand,  psychological  conditions  are  subtle,  and  as  yet  often 
incomprehensible,  in  their  working. 

Those  who  attempt  to  deal  with  them,  whilst  they  should  observe  their 
modes  with  the  closest  scrutiny,  should  yet  approach  the  subject  in  a  con- 
siderate and  even  reverential  spirit;  always  remembering,  that  they  may 
break  or  destroy,  whilst  they  endeavour  to  bend  and  shape,  the  invisible 
force,  to  suit  man's  ignorance  and  presumption.  It  is  certain,  however,  that 
discourteous  treatment  and  rude  denunciation  are  not  the  methods  best 
calculated  to  evolve  psychic  phenomena,  or  ensure  results  which  obviously 
require  calm  and  harmonious  mental  conditions.  Dean  Swift  was  not  far 
wrong  when  he  said,  that  "  it  required  a  man  with  brains  to  write  a  book, 
but  any  brainless  ass  could  criticise  it."  And  this  is  true  of  all  intellectual 
processes,  Spiritualism  not  excepted.  Whilst  the  wise  and  philosophical 
investigator  may  take  much  pains  to  study  out  the  best  means  of  evolving 
phenomena,  the  presence  of  the  boorish  ignoramus  may  be  quite  sufficient 
to  mar  its  production.  At  present,  we  are  profoundly  ignorant  of  all  the  laws 
and  forces  concerned  in  the  evolution  of  spiritual  phenomena ;  hence,  we 
should  be  prepared  to  extend  an  equal  amount  of  charity  both  to  the  medium 
and  the  investigator,  confident  that  the  spirit  of  partizanship  will  never  favour 
the  discovery  of  truth,  or  promote  the  integrity  of  righteous  judgment. 
Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  draw  unfavourable  comparisons  between 
the  value  of  testimony  received  from  paid  or  professional  mediums,  and 
that  obtained  through  persons  whose  rank  and  wealth  might  be  supposed  to 
exclude  the  hypothesis  of  motives  for  practising  deception. 

Unfortunately  for  the  theory  that  non-professional  mediums  alone  are 
reliable,  the  assumption  is  not  based  upon  admissible  facts,  for  it  can  be 
shown,   that   a  large   percentage   of    the   alleged    spirit   communications 

4  'INTRODUCTION. 

received  through  non-professional  mediumship,  is  often  tinctured  by 
hallucination,  self-deception,  and  prepossession  of  opinion,  especially  upon 
religious  subjects,  whilst  some  of  the  most  notorious  exposes  that  have 
occurred  in  connexion  with  physical  mediumship,  have  involved  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  whose  positions  in  society,  were  assumed  to  be  sufficient  warranty, 
to  exclude  all  idea  of  fraud  or  deception. 

If  the  difficulty  also  of  testing  mediums,  when  the  investigators  are 
simply  guests,  and  the  slightest  appearance  of  suspicion  would  be  resented 
as  a  mortal  affront,  be  taken  into  account,  the  balance,  as  a  whole,  may  be 
struck  in  favour  of  maintaining  professional  mediumship,  especially  for  the 
purposes  of  investigation  and  the  more  general  advancement  of  Spiritualism 
amongst  the  masses.  In  the  meantime,  there  are  two  forms  of  spiritual 
manifestation  which  are  not  open  to  any  of  the  objections  above 
suggested ;  manifestations,  which  can  be  criticised  and  examined  at  pleasure, 
and  which  always  present  testimony  of  an  indisputable  character.  These  are, 
first ;  spontaneous  or  unevoked  phenomena,  occurring  without  preparation ; 
and  next,  all  such  forms  of  intelligence  as  cannot  be  traced,  either  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  communicants  or  the  mentality  of  the  recipients.  Multi- 
tudes of  both  these  forms  of  spiritual  agency  will  be  found  detailed  in  this 
volume ;  in  fact,  the  autltor  has  given  the  preference,  wherever  possible,  to 
the  records  of  spontaneous  phenomena,  because  its  production  is  freed 
from  all  those  equivocal  conditions  which  surround  invocatory  processes. 
These,  together  with  the  vast  mass  of  supra-mundane  intelligence  which 
has  been  given  during  the  modern  spiritual  dispensation,  are  quite  sufficient 
to  demonstrate  the  facts  of  spiritual  agency,  and  place  the  cause  on  a  basis 
of  proof,  that  rises  triumphantly  over  the  most  injudicious  partisanship,  or 
the  most  bigoted  antagonism. 

We  now  trust  our  readers  will  understand  in  what  spirit  this  volume  is 
written,  and  why  its  author  has  withheld  a  large  mass  of  offered  testimony, 
extravagantly  lauded  by  one  party,  and  equally  extravagantly  denounced 
by  another.  Also,  why  those  names  are  omitted  from  the  roll-call  of  the 
grand  spiritual  army  that  have  been  made  the  Shibboleth  of  contending 
parties,  to  prove  or  disprove  imposture. 

We  may  often  err  in  the  conclusions  we  attempt  to  draw,  and  utterly  fail 
to  do  justice  to  the  stupendous  theme  we  treat  of,  but  we  will  never  wilfully 
aid  in  deluding  a  generation,  seeking  to  find  in  Spiritualism,  the  path  to 
Heaven  that  no  merely  speculative  faith  can  point  out. 

In  endeavouring  to  trace  out  with  all  fidelity,  the  origin  of  the  great 
modern  spiritual  movement,  it  will  soon  become  apparent  that  though  very 
momentous  results  were  obtained  in  the  Hydesville  investigations  of  1848 — 
especially  in  the  discovery  of  a  systematic  mode  of  communing  with  spirits 
through  a  set  of  concerted  signals — yet  even  in  America,  the  land  in  which 
Spiritualism  has  attained  to  a  pre-eminent  degree  of  popularity,  spirit  com- 
munion was  demonstrated,  long  prior  to  the  "  Hydesville  disturbances " ; 
in  fact,  it  is  obvious  that  this  century  in  the  New,  as  well  as  the  Old  World, 
has  been  remarkable  for  the  persistence  with  which  spirits  have  endea- 
voured to  effect  a  direct  method  of  intercourse  with  mortals. 

The  causes  before  alluded  to,  which  have  favoured  the  marked  publicity 
to  which  Spiritualism  has  attained  in  America,  should  be  carefully 
considered,  and  will  be  found  explanatory  of  the  custom  of  dating  the 
commencement  of  the  modern  movement,  from  the  "Rochester  knockings" 
in  1848.  One  great  difficulty  in  attempting  to  chronicle  the  details  of  this 
movement,  is  the  very  fact  that  it  did  not  originate  in  any  special  locaUty, 

INTR  OD  UCTION.  5 

or  at  any  given  time,  inasmuch  as  it  manifested  its  influence  in  a  sponta- 
neous and  universal  outpouring  all  over  the  world,  coming  and  going  like 
the  wind — few,  if  any,  could  say  whence,  or  whitherward.  Again ;  it  is 
because  we  cannot  trace  up  the  history  of  modern  Spiritualism  consecutively 
from  point  to  point,  either  in  time  or  place,  that  we  find  it  expedient  to 
take  the  com.mencement  of  this  century  for  our  data,  and  propose  to  treat 
of  the  manifestations  as  they  occurred,  independently,  in  the  various  countries 
of  earth  from  which  authentic  records  are  obtainable.  In  pursuance  of 
this  plan,  we  shall  commence  our  researches  in  Germany,  where  we  shall 
find  abundant  testimony  to  the  supra-mundane  character  of  the  intelligence 
derivable  from  spirit  sources,  as  well  as  proof  positive,  that  spirits  have 
manifested  their  presence  on  earth  through  spontaneous  action  and  wholly 
unprepared  conditions. 

"NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES;" 

SPIRITS    AND    THEIR    WORK    IN    EVERY    COUNTRY    OF 
THE  WORLD. 

CHAPTER  I. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     GERMANY. 
(from  the   close  of  the    I  8th   to  the   beginning  of  the   19TH   CENTURY.) 

William  Howitt,  that  most  indefatigable  student  of  every  subject  on  which 
he  chose  to  exercise  his  facile  pen,  in  his  "  History  of  the  Supernatural," 
writes  in  strong  terms  against  the  custom  of  identifying  the  modern 
Spiritual  movement  with  America  as  its  birth  place,  or  the  "Rochester 
knockings,"  as  the  opening  of  intelligent  communication  between  mortals 
and  spirits. 

We  have  already  pointed  to  the  reasons  which  have  tended  to  popularize 
Spiritualism  in  America,  but  we  must  add,  that  the  very  methods  so  favour- 
able to  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  on  Spiritual  subjects,  are  not  in 
accordance  with  the  conservatism  of  older  countries,  especially  in  Germany, 
where  the  prevailing  policy  has  been  to  discountenance  and  even  forbid 
associations,  having  for  their  aim  the  investigation  of  subjects  not  im- 
mediately fostered  by  the  government. 

In  America,  the  investigator  finds  his  best  opportunities  for  gathering  up 
knowledge  concerning  the  status  of  Spiritualism,  in  public  meetings,  .s.*unday 
services,  conferences,  children's  lyceums,  and  the  columns  of  journals 
specially  devoted  to  the  interests  of  the  Spiritual  cause. 

In  Germany,  Spiritualism  has  no  publicly  defined  status.  It  is  not  known 
as  a  movement,  and  until  the  last  few  years,  has  had  no  periodicals  devoted 
to  its  exposition  ;  yet  the  higher  class  of  German  literature,  redolent  of 
Spiritual  facts  and  philosophy,  is  most  voluminous,  and  a  long  and  briUiant 
array  of  eminent  German  writers  could  be  mentioned,  whose  works  are 
almost  entirely  devoted  to  Spiritualistic  subjects. 

Take  for  example  the  history  of  Jiing  Stilling,  the  famous  pneumatologist, 
whose  life-long  experiences  in  seership,  inspiration,  prophecy,  and  the  gift 
of  healing,  no  bigot,  however  prejudiced,  can  deny.  Cotemporary  with 
this  celebrated  phenomenal  character,  was  the  noble  Swiss  philosopher 
Lavater,  whilst  the  literature  of  the  period  was  enriched  by  the  writings  of 

8  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

Eschenmayer,  Mayer,  Gorres,  Schubert,  Werner,  Kant,  Dr.  Ennemoser, 
the  author  of  the  most  exhaustive  treatise  on  magic,  extant ;  Dr.  Justinius 
Kerner,  the  renowned  magnetist  and  biographer  of  the  hfe  and  experiences 
of  "the  Seeress  of  Prevorst";  Zschocke,  the  famous  seer  and  mystic;  and  many 
others,  whose  works  connect  the  close  of  the  last  century  with  the  opening 
of  the  present,  and  by  the  profusion  of  spiritual  evidences  they  bring, 
unite  in  one  unbroken  chain,  the  modern  outpouring,  with  the  Sweden- 
borgian  and  Paracelsian  period ;  with  mediaeval  spiritualism,  or  those 
forms  of  influx  stigmatised  by  the  ignorance  of  the  times  as  "  Witchcraft 
and  Sorcery  "  ;  whilst  again ;  the  ghastly  records  of  those  dark  days  reach 
back  in  continuous  links  of  connection  with  the  more  sublime,  because 
more  distant  revelations  of  the  Christian,  Hebraic,  and  those  other  ancient 
dispensations,  during  which  the  foundations  of  world-wide  religious  systems 
were  laid. 

To  return  to  the  immediate  subject  of  this  chapter.  Germany  has  made 
no  sensational  mark  in  the  form  of  popular  spiritualism,  but  she  has  con- 
tributed to  the  age  a  wealth  of  recorded  facts,  philosophy,  and  high-toned 
spiritual  literature,  unmatched  by  any  other  nation  of  our  own  times.  It  is 
to  Germany  too,  that  the  world  owes  one  of  the  mightiest  discoveries  that 
has  ever  been  made  in  spiritual  science,  for  Germany  was  the  birth-place 
of  Anton  Mesmer,  a  pioneer  in  the  realms  of  the  imponderable,  through 
whose  stupendous  revelations,  miracle  became  converted  into  law,  the 
supernatural  into  the  spiritual,  and  ancient  alchemy  into  modern 
magnetism ;  in  a  word,  it  is  only  in  contemplating  the  great  and 
revolutionary  work  effected  by  Mesmer,  that  we  can  begin  to  appreciate  the 
influence  of  the  German  mind  upon  the  movement  we  now  assume  to  be  of 
purely  spiritual  authorship. 

SEERS,    PROPHETS,    AND    MEDIUMS. 

A  close  observer  of  all  phenomena  of  a  spiritualistic  character,  will 
recognise,  that  they  require  for  their  production  the  presence  of  certain 
exceptional  persons,  such  as  in  ancient  time  were  termed  seers  and 
prophets ;  in  the  middle  ages,  witches  and  wizards ;  and  in  our  own  time, 
magnetic  subjects,  or  spirit  mediums. 

In  the  mystic  writings  of  the  Orientalists,  it  is  intimated  that  the  wonder- 
working element  displayed  in  special  individuals  is  latent  in  the  whole 
human  race,  and  can  be  brought  into  action  by  certain  elaborate  methods 
of  culure.  Now,  although  the  Mediaeval  Mystics,  especially  Cornelius 
Agripf>^,  Van  Helmont,  and  Jacob  Bohmen,  have  professed  to  give 
instructions  for  the  unfoldment  of  magical  power,  the  readers  of  their 
treatises  have  seldom  profited  by  them ;  in  fact,  so  vast  have  been  the 
claims  for  what  might  be  done,  and  so  futile  the  attempts  to  realize  these 
claims,  that  magical  processes  have  long  been  relegated  to  the  realms  of 
shadowy  superstition.  Not  so  however,  the  study  of  those  mysterious 
forces  with  which  the  visible  universe  is  teeming.  Whether  the  affinities 
of  chemistry,  and  the  potencies  of  light,  heat,  and  magnetism,  &c.,  had 
anything  to  do  with  the  "vital  principle"  in  animated  bodies,  has  been  a 
question  which  often  obtruded  itself  upon  the  philosopher,  though  never  in 
such  a  shape  as  admitted  of  practical  analysis.  Paracelsus,  Van  Eelmont, 
and  Bohmen,  have  hinted  at  the  existence  of  such  a  connection,  and  the 
first  named,  professed  to  have  made  cures  by  discovering  the  assimilation 
of  the  magnet  to  the  hunian  system.     Still  the  great  problems  of  ,the  vital 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  9 

forces  or  the  Elixir  Vitce,  have  remained  unsolved,  and  would  have 
continued  to  do  so  but  for  the  timely  appearance  of  Anton  Mesmer,  who, 
about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  brought  the  wand  of  science  to  bear 
upon  the  enchantments  of  ignorance,  and  in  a  single  lifetime,  broke  that 
spell  of  mystery  which  had  enshrouded  the  hidden  secrets  of  life,  and  the 
correllation  of  all  forces  in  the  universe.  These  may  seem  large  claims 
to  make  for  one  who,  in  his  own  day,  was  denounced  as  an  impostor  by 
the  scientific  world,  misunderstood  and  deserted  even  by  those  he  had 
most  benefited,  and  suffered  to  die  in  obscurity  by  the  very  followers  who 
should  have  placed  him  on  the  highest  pinnacle  of  fame.  But  Anton 
Mesmer  is  no  exception  to  human  procedures  in  every  case,  where  the 
mind  leaps  before  its  age.  Slowly  but  surely,  the  world  recognises  its 
benefactors,  though  it  may  be  too  late  to  return  their  benefits.  To  those 
who  believe  that  the  immortal  spirit  is  the  real  man,  acknowledgment  of 
blessings  received,  will  never  seem  too  late,  even  if  they  are  only  sped  by 
grateful  memory  and  the  pen  of  posterity,  across  the  pathless  realms 
which  separate  men  from  the  land  of  ascended  spirits. 

In  considering  the  life,  work,  and  influence  of  Dr.  Mesmer,  it  would 
seem  as  if  he  had  been  providentially  born  and  prepared  for  the  part  he 
was  destined  to  fill  in  the  history  of  human  progress. 

Even  in  his'*eighth  year,  he  would  absent  himself  from  home  and  school, 
to  trace  up  the  source  of  streams,  and  wander  far  to  collect  stones,  shells, 
and  minerals,  which  he  would  pore  over  with  strange  and  unchildlike 
interest. 

Educated  as  a  physician,  he  took  his  degree  as  a  doctor  of  medicine,  at 
the  Vienna  University,  where  he  attracted  universal  attention  by  the  curious 
nature  of  his  inaugural  thesis,  the  subject  of  which  was,  "The  influence  of 
the  planets  on  the  human  body." 

During  his  residence  at  Vienna,  he  became  acquainted  with  the  professor 
of  astronomy  at  the  University,  Father  Hehl,  a  learned  Jesuit,  who  claimed 
to  be  the  inventor  of  certain  steel  plates,  in  which  he  could  conserve  the 
virtues  of  the  magnet,  so  as  to  apply  them  successfully  to  the  cure  of  disease. 

Whatever  might  have  been  the  original  merit  of  Father  Hehl's  discovery, 
his  friend  Mesmer  soon  improved  upon  it,  and  by  his  own  superadded 
methods,  produced  such  astonishing  results  in  the  cure  of  diseases,  that  he 
excited  the  spirit  of  rivalry,  not  only  in  the  mind  of  his  form.er  friend,  but 
also  in  the  entire  medical  faculty  of  Vienna. 

The  strife  thus  commenced  was  fanned  into  fury  by  Mesmer's  continued 
successes,  and  though  the  machinations  of  his  enemies  ultimately  obliged 
him  to  quit  the  city,  opposition  only  had  the  effect  of  stimulating  him  to 
fresh  energy  in  pursuing  his  path  of  discovery  ;  in  fact,  from  the  time  when, 
in  1772,  his  attention  was  first  called  to  the  curative  effects  of  the  magnet, 
up  to  the  date  of  his  death,  in  18 15,  he  never  ceased  to  study,  improve  in, 
and  practise  the  art  of  healing,  which  has  been  justly  called,  after  its  great 
discoverer,  "  Mesmerism." 

In  his  new  mode  of  practice.  Dr.  Mesmer's  earliest  efforts  were  directed 
towards  the  utilization  of  the  magnet,  and  his  first  cures  were  effected  by 
the  aid  of  magnetic  machines,  together  with  a  baqtiet  or  bath,  in  which 
various  mineral  substances,  immersed  in  water,  were  brought  into  connection 
with  his  patients.  In  a  very  short  time,  Mesmer  discovered  that  which  he 
had  previously  assumed,  namely,  that  the  chief  virtue  in  his  experiments 
resided  in  his  own  organism.  It  was  from  the  point  when  he  commenced 
the  application  of  magnetic  passes  with  his  own  hands,  and  found  that  he 

lo  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

could  transfer  the  life  principle  from  himself  to  his  patients,  under  the 
direction  of  his  will,  that  his  system  obtained  the  now  familiar  name  of 
"  animal  magnetism."  Our  purpose  js  not  to  write  the  biography  of  Anton 
Mesmer;  we  simply  aim  to  point  out  the  gradations  of  unfoldment,  by 
which  the  true  knowledge  of  occult  life  forces  was  obtained.  This  stupen- 
dous result  does  not  appear  to  have  been  known  to,  or  anticipated  by 
Mesmer,  although  it  undoubtedly  became  familiar  to  many  of  his  followers. 
The  extent  of  this  great  man's  discoveries,  and  the  theorems  upon  which  he 
based  his  whole  system,  are  succinctly  described  by  one  of  his  most 
eminent  biographers,  Dr.  Justinius  Kerner,  from  whose  admirable  work, 
"  The  Life  of  Mesmer,"  we  shall  epitomize  the  summary  of  his  views  in 
the  following  chapter. 

CHAPTER  II. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN    GERMANY    (CONTINUED). 

Dr.  Anton  Mesmer. 

Jn  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  Mr.  Wm.  Howitt,  one  of  its  ablest 
and  most  constant  contributors,  gives  a  series  of  papers  translated  from  Dr. 
Kerner's  life  of  Mesmer,  from  which  the  following  extracts  are  taken  : — 

"  During  his  fifteen  years  medical  practice  in  Vienna,  Mesmer  came  upon  his  new 
art  of  heahng  through  observing  the  origin  and  career  of  diseases  in  connection  with 
the  great  changes  in  our  solar  system  and  the  universe ;  in  short,  with  what  he  termed 
'  Universal  Magnetism.'     He  sought  for  this  magnetism  originally  in  electricity  and 

subsequently  in  mineral  magnetism It  was  after  this  manner  Mesmer 

reasoned.  There  must  exist  a  power  which  permeates  the  universe  and  binds  toge- 
ther all  bodies  upon  earth ;  and  it  must  be  possible  for  man  to  bring  this  influence 
under  his  command. 

"  This  power  he  first  sought  for  in  the  magnet.  He  then  pondered  upon  it  in 
regard  to  man  and  applied  it  successfully  to  the  cure  of  the  sick.  This  remarkable- 
result  would,  in  any  other  investigator,  have  brought  him  to  the  end  of  his  experi- 
ments. Not  so  with  Mesmer.  Ever  accompanied  by  the  idea  of  a  primal  power, 
which  must  pervade  the  universe,  the  thought  occurred  to  him  that  the  influence 
must  exist  yet  more  powerfully  in  man  than  in  the  magnet.  .  .  He  thus  perceived 
that  he  could  not  ascribe  alone  to  the  magnet  which  he  held  in  his  hands  the  efi'ects 
produced,  since  he  must  also,  in  his  turn,  influence  the  magnet. 

'■Upon  this,  he  cast  aside  his  magnet,  and  with  his  hands  alone,  brought  forth 
similar  and  unadulterated  effects." 

Seifert,  another  of  Mesmer's  biographers,  affirms  that  he  wore  beneath 
his  vest  a  shirt  of  leather,  Hned  with  silk,  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the 
magnetic  fluid. 

He  also  believed  that  Mesmer  wore  magnets  about  his  person,  with  a 
view  of  strengthening  his  own  magnetism. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  ii 

The  following  description  is  given  by  Seifert  of  the  Baquet  which 
Mesmer  used  in  the  early  days  of  his  magnetic  practice  — 

"This  receptacle  was  a  large  pan,  tub,  or  pool  of  water,  filled  with  various 
magnetic  substances,  such  as  water,  sand,  stone,  glass  bottles  (filled  with  magnetic 
water),  &c.  It  was  a  focus  within  which  the  magnetism  was  concentrated,  and  out  of 
which  proceeded  a  number  of  conductors.  These  being  bent  pointed  iron  wands, 
one  end  was  retained  in  the  baquet,  whilst  the  other  was  connected  with  the 
patient  and  applied  to  the  seat  of  the  disease.  This  arrangement  might  be  made  use 
of  by  any  number  of  persons  seated  round  the  baquet,  and  thus  a  fountain,  or  any 
receptacle  in  a  garden,  as  in  a  room,  would  answer  for  the  purpose  desired." 

mesmer's  theorems. 

The  following  summary  of  the  twenty-seven  theorems  which  Mesmer 
published  when  the  French  Academy  refused  to  indorse  his  discovery,  are 
taken  from  Memoire  sur  la  Decouverte  du  Magnetisme  Animal^  par 
M.  Mesmer.    Paris,  1779= — 

"  Animal  magnetism  is  a  fluid  universally  diffused. 

"  It  is  the  medium  of  a  mutual  influence  between  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  earth, 
and  animated  bodies. 

"  It  is  continuous,  so  as  to  leave  no  void.     Its  subtility  admits  of  no  comparison, 

"  It  is  capable  of  receiving,  propagating,  and  communicating  all  the  impressions  of 
motion.     It  is  susceptible  of  flux  and  reflux. 

"  The  animal  body  experiences  the  effect  of  this  agent  by  insinuating  itself  into  the 
substance  of  the  nerves — it  afl"ects  them  immediately. 

"  There  are  observed,  particularly  in  the  human  body,  properties  analogous  to 
those  of  the  magnet,  and  in  it  are  observed  poles  equally  different  and  opposite. 

''  The  action  and  the  virtues  of  animal  magnetism,  may  be  communicated  from  one 
body  to  other  bodies,  animate  and  inanimate. 

"  This  action  may  take  place  at  a  remote  distance,  without  the  aid  of  any  inter- 
mediate body. 

"It  is  increased,  reflected  by  mirrors;  communicated,  propagated,  augmented  hyO 
sound.     Its  virtues  may  be  accumulated,  concentrated,  transported. 

"  Although  this  fluid  is  universal,  all  animal  bodies  are  not  equally  susceptible  of 
it.  There  are  even  some — though  a  very  small  number — which  have  properties  so 
opposite,  that  their  very  presence  destroys  all  the  effects  of  this  fluid  on  other  bodies. 

''Animal  magnetism  is  capable  of  healing  diseases  of  the  nerves  immediately,  and 
others  mediately. 

"  It  perfects  the  action  of  medicines,  excites  and  directs  salutary  crises  in  such  a 
manner,  that  the  physician  may  render  himself  master  of  them.  By  its  means,  he  may 
know  the  state  of  each  individual's  health,  judge  the  most  complicated  diseases, 
prevent  their  increase,  and  heal  them  without  dangerous  efi"ects  or  troublesome  con- 
sequences, whatever  be  the  age,  sex,  or  temperament  of  the  patient. 

"  In  animal  magnetism,  nature  presents  an  universal  method  of  healing  and  pre- 
serving mankind."     .     .     . 

Nothing  in  the  history  of  the  race  is  more  admirably  illustrative  of 
providential  methods,  than  the  succession  of  steps  through  which  great  ideas 
are  perfected,  from  their  inception  to  their  fruitage. 

Thus  it  is  that  we  find  the  grand  discovery  of  Mesmer,  interpreting  the 
dreams  of  the  mystics  concerning  the  "  Philosopher's  Stone  "  and  "  Elixir 
Vitse  "  ;  illustrating  the  theories  of  Galileo  and  Newton,  and  converting  the 
universal  realm  of  gravitation  which  they  perceived,  into  the  soul-force  of 
the  universe,  which  could  "be  made  the  instrument  of  annihilating  disease 
and  indefinitely  extending  the  life  of  man.  But  though  Mesmer  capped 
the  climax  of  philosophic  research  in  the  direction  of  blind,  non-intelligent 
forces,  his  powers  of  observation  extended  no  farther.  He  himself  per- 
ceived that  there  were  unknown  realms  of  knowledge  yet  to  be  traversed ; 

12  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

and  that  as  the  element  with  which  he  was  attempting  to  deal,  was  itself 
illimitable,  so  the  paths  of  ~  new  discovery  must  also  be  boundless.  It  has 
often  been  urged  that  Mesmer  dared  not  advance  to  the  verification  of  the 
hypotheses  which  he  perceived — let  us  grant  this — still  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  it  was  his  bold  hand  which  opened  the  temple  door  of  life 
FORCES ;  also,  that  the  great  discoverer  laboured  at  first  alone  and 
unaided  j  and  when  at  last  he  succeeded  in  drawing  round  him  a  cordon 
of  sympathetic  minds,  he  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  all  the  persecution, 
scorn,  and  even  martyrdom,  which  ignorance  and  bigotry  ever  launch 
against  the  pioneers  of  new  ideas  and  progress. 

In  process  of  time,  the  very  bitterness  of  the  denunciations  that  were 
visited  upon  the  discoverer  of  animal  magnetism,  wrought  their  usual  effect 
of  provoking  general  investigation,  and  winning  over  numerous  converts  to 
the  new  system  of  cure. 

Amongst  the  most  enthusiastic  of  Mesmer's  early  followers,  was  the 
Marquis  de  Puysegur,  a  wealthy  and  influential  nobleman  of  Strasbourg, 
who,  in  carrying  out  the  instructions  of  the  great  mesmerist,  chanced  to 
hit  upon  the  still  more  remarkable  and  interesting  sequence  of  clair- 
voyance, evolved  through  the  mesmeric  sleep. 

At  first,  the  discovery  of  a  highly-exalted  intelligential  state  in  connection 
with  somnambulism,  was  so  amazing  to  M.  de  Puysegur,  that  he  was 
'  inclined  to  suppose  the  principle  of  cure  itself,  must  result  from  the  effect 
of  magnetism  upon  the  spirit.  Like  Mesmer,  he  immediately  began  to  put 
forth  theories  in  this  direction,  and,  like  Mesmer,  he  lived  to  realise  that 
he  had  as  yet  attained  only  to  the  first  glimmering  of  truth  on  these 
wonderful  and  occult  subjects. 

Puyslgur's  views  upon  the  new  discovery,  as  being  connected  with 
phenomena  of  the  most  curious  and  interesting  nature,  soon  began  to 
supersede  those  of  Mesmer,  and  amongst  his  most  devoted  adherents,  he 
had  the  good  fortune  to  include  the  celebrated  Lavater,  through  whose 
talents  and  influence,  many  other  persons  of  eminence  were  attracted  to  the 
marquis's  experiments. 

Thus  it  happened,  that  after  the  noble-minded  Mesmer  had  laid  his 
theory  before  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences,  only  to  find  it  scornfully 
rejected,  he  returned  to  Germany,  to  experience  neglect  and  ingratitude, 
and  find  the  laurels  he  had  so  justly  earned,  already  encircling  the  brow  of 
another.  The  truth  is,  Puys6gur's  experiments  challenged  from  all 
observers,  the  deepest  and  most  absorbing  attention. 

Mesmer  seems  to  have  been  aware  that  sleep-waking  intelligence  was 
not  unfrequently  a  result  of  animal  magnetism,  but  he  affirmed  this  state 
was  full  of  danger,  and  he  not  only  steadily  discountenanced  the  practice  of 
deepening  the  magnetic  sleep  into  waking  trance,  but  he  bitterly  opposed 
the  new  sect  formed  by  Puysegur,  and  disclaimed  all  alliance  with  his 
followers. 

It  might  have  been  partly  as  the  result  of  this  feud,  and  partly  in  con- 
temptible subservience  to  the  opinions  of  the  French  savants,  that  the  name 
of  Mesmer,  was  for  a  time  almost  tabooed  from  the  literature  of  the  subject, 
and  it  became  fashionable  to  speak  of,  and  investigate  the  wonders  of 
"Somnambulism,"  but  carefully  to  avoid  all  allusion  to  the  unpopular 
theme  of  animal  magnetism. 

Time,  the  immutable  touchstone  of  truth,  has  at  length  rendered  justice 
to  all  sides  of  this  vexed  question.  Puysegur,  Barberini,  Kerner,  Cahagnet, 
Dupotet,  Deleuze,  and  all  who  have  written  on,  or  experimented  with  these 

1 

^r^^:::^:^. 

Mesmer 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  13 

wondrous  occult  life  forces,  have  each  had  their  day,  commanded  the  fickle 
mind  of  the  populace  for  the  time  being,  and  aided  in  compelling  the  world 
to  acknowledge  the  facts  which  were  being  daily  enacted. 

Even  the  verdict  of  the  French  Academy  has  done  a  work  for  truth,  by 
proving  the  incapacity  of  stereotyped  associations  to  deal  with  matters  out- 
side the  groov^es  laid  down  for  their  own  action.  In  the  mean  time,  the 
rival  claims  of  Mesmer's  various  followers,  have  all  been  merged  in  the 
value  of  the  great  fundamental  discovery  of  a  demonstrable  vital  force,  and 
the  possibility  of  its  utilization  and  transfer,  as  originally  proved  by  Mesmer. 
Every  other  name  takes  rank — where  it  justly  belongs — as  secondary  to 
his.  Animal  magnetism,  and  all  the  marvels  which  follow  in  its  train,  are 
now  synonymous  with  the  equally  popular  term,  "  Mesmerism,"  and  the 
founder  of  the  system,  silently  but  inevitably,  takes  his  place  in  the  annals 
of  fame,  as  the  true  alchemist,  who  discovered  and  applied  to  the  use  of 
humanity,  the  "  Philosopher's  Stone,"  and  the  "  Elixir  Vitae." 

CHAPTER  III. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN      GERMANY    (CONTINUED). 
The  Philosopher's  Stone  in  Action. 

During  Mesmer's  visit  to  Paris,  and  pending  his  efforts  to  obtain  recog- 
nition for  his  new  curative  process  from  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences, 
he  drew  around  him  many  interested  followers,  amongst  whom  was 
M.  d'Eslon,  a  physician  of  great  eminence.  This  gentleman,  who  was 
highly  enthusiastic  in  his  adherence  to  the  new  science,  during  Mesmer's 
absence  from  Paris  conducted  experiments  himself,  with  more  eclat  than 
skill,  and  more  display  than  judgment. 

It  was  under  the  advice  of  d'Eslon  that  Mesmer  was  induced  to 
challenge  the  French  Academicians,  and  urge  them  to  investigate  the 
working  of  "  animal  magnetism."  It  was  also  by  aid  of  his  indomitable 
energy,  that  the  new  methods  of  cure  retained  their  hold  upon  the  popular 
mind  after  the  unfavourable  verdict  of  the  savants  had  condemned  it. 

M.  Bailly,  the  French  astronomer,  justly  celebrated  in  his  particular  sphere 
of  knowledge,  but  wholly  incapable  of  pronouncing  upon  psychological 
phenomena,  was  one  of  those,  whose  opinions  were  most  adverse  to  the 
claims  of  Mesmer.  He  gives  the  following  account  of  the  methods  pursued 
by  d'Eslon  3  we  quote  them  here,  to  show  how  purely  physical  they  were, 
and  how  thoroughly  they  disregarded  all  those  conditions,  which  we  now 
beUeve  to  be  essential  to  the  production  of  psychological  phenomena. 
Bailly  says  ; — 

' '  The  sick  persons,  arranged  in  great  numbers,  and  in  several  rows  around  the 
baquet  (bath),  received  the  magnetism  by  means  of  the  iron  rods,  which  conveyed  it 
to  them  from  the  baquet  by  the  cords  wound  round  their  bodies,  by  the  thumb  which 
connected  them  with  their  neighbours,  and  by  the  sounds  of  a  pianoforte,  or  an 
agreeable  voice,  diffusing  magnetism  in  the  air. 

14  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  The  patients  were  also  directly  magnetised  by  means  of  the  finger  and  wand  of 
the  magnetiser,  moved  slowly  before  their  faces,  above  or  behind  their  heads,  or  on 
the  diseased  parts. 

"  The  magnetiser  acts  also  by  fixing  his  eyes  on  the  subjects ;  by  the  application  of 
his  hands  on  the  region  of  the  solar  plexus  ;  an  application  which  sometimes  continues 
for  hours. 

"Meanwhile  the  patients  present  a  very  varied  picture. 

''  Some  are  calm,  tranquil,  and  experience  no  effect.  Others  cough  and  spit,  fee 
pains,  heat,  or  perspiration.     Others,  again,  are  convulsed. 

"  As  soon  as  one  begins  to  be  convulsed,  it  is  remarkable  that  others  are  imme- 
diately affected. 

"  The  Commissioners  have  observed  some  of  these  convulsions  last  more  than  three 
hours.  They  are  often  accompanied  with  expectorations  of  a  violent  character,  often 
streaked  with  blood.  The  convulsions  are  marked  with  involuntary  motions  of  the 
throat,  limbs,  and  sometimes  the  whole  body ;  by  dimness  of  the  eyes,  shrieks,  sobs, 
laughter,  and  the  wildest  hysteria.  These  states  are  often  followed  by  langour  and 
depression.  The  smallest  noise  appears  to  aggravate  the  symptoms,  and  often  to 
occasion  shudderings  and  terrible  cries.  It  was  noticeable  that  a  sudden  change  in 
the  air  or  time  of  the  music  had  a  great  influence  on  the  patients,  and  soothed  or 
accelerated  the  convulsions,  stimulating  them  to  ecstacy,  or  moving  them  to  floods  of 
tears. 

"  Nothing  is  more  astonishing  than  the  spectacle  of  these  convulsions. 

"  One  who  has  not  seen  them  can  form  no  idea  of  them.  The  spectator  is  as 
much  astonished  at  the  profound  repose  of  one  portion  of  the  patients  as  at  the  agita- 
tion of  the  rest. 

■'  Some  of  the  patients  may  be  seen  rushing  towards  each  other  with  open  arms, 
and  manifesting  every  symptom  of  attachment  and  affection. 

"  All  are  under  the  power  of  the  magaetizer ;  it  matters  not  what  state  of  drowsi- 
ness they  maybe  in,  the  sound  of  his  voice,  a  look,  a  motion  of  his  hands,  spasmodi- 
cally affects  them.* 

Let  it  be  remembered  that  besides  the  official  investigations  of  the 
Commissioners,  numerous  private  experiments  were  instituted  separately 
amongst  them,  the  result  of  which  brought  conviction  to  their  minds  at 
least,  that  "hysteria,  and  imagination,"  not  animal  magnetism,  as  an  actual 
force,  were  the  sources  of  the  effects  they  observed. 

Dr.  Mackay,  LL.D.,  in  his  work  on  "Popular  Delusions,"  says  : — ■ 

"The  report  of  the  Commissioners  was  drawn  up  by  the  unfortunate  and 
illustrious  Bailly.  After  detailing  the  experiments  made,  and  their  results,  they 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  only  proof  advanced  in  support  of  '  animal  magnetism' 
was  its  effects  on  the  human  body ;  that  those  effects  could  be  produced  without 
magnetic  passes  or  manipulations,  and  that  s^ich  effects  never  transpired  without  the 
patient's  knowledge,  hence,  that  imagination  did,  and  animal  magnetism  did  not,  account 
for  all  that  transpired." 

In  justice  to  the  cause  of  truth  it  should  be  observed,  that  none  of  that 
intelligence  which  often  accompanies  somnambulic  states,  such  as  clair- 
voyance, &c.,  seems  to  have  been  manifested  before  the  French  savants. 
Possibly  the  heterogeneous  character  of  the  assemblage  organised  by 
d'Eslon,  forbade  the  unfoldment  of  psychological  phenomena,  or  any  of  those 
curative  results  which  had  been  claimed  for  Mesmer's  practice.  When  these 
disadvantageous  concomitants  are  borne  in  mind — and  we  remember  the 
effect  produced  upon  modern  witnesses  by  the  spasmodic  jerks,  gasps,  shud- 
derings, &c.,  not  unfrequently  exhibited  in  nineteenth  century  spirit  circles, 
our  astonishment  at  the  imbecility  of  the  verdict  pronounced  against 
animal  magnetism  by  the  French  Academicians  may  be  considerably 
modified,  indeed  we  may  wish  we  had  a  few  of  those  illustrious  observers 
present  to  criticise  the  reports  so  freely  and  unconditionally  published 
to-day,  as  "  notes  of  spiritualistic  phenomena" 

*  Kapporte  des  Commissionaires.     Redige  par  M.  Bailly,  Paris,  1734. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  15 

The  chief  difficulty  in  sifting  and  describing  occult  phenomena  was  then, 
and  is  now,  the  distinction  between  mere  nervous  irritability  and  the  genuine 
effect  produced  in  the  physical  system  by  magnetism,  or  upon  the  mind  by 
the  psychological  impress  of  a  second  mind,  no  matter  whether  that  be  by  a 
disembodied  or  embodied  operator. 

The  force  which  can  change  a  diseased  tissue  into  a  healthy  one  must  be 
a  genuine,  substantial  element,  and  the  transmission  of  thought  from  one 
mind  to  another,  so  as  to  enable  an  entranced  subject  to  render  such 
intelligence  as  is  wholly  foreign  to  that  subject's  previous  knowledge,  is  an 
objective  proof  of  an  outside  power  from  which  no  candid  observer  can 
dissent. 

Tt  does  not  appear,  from  a  careful  study  of  M.  Bailly's  report,  that  any 
such  testimony  was  afforded.  Tears,  laughter,  hysteria,  and  convulsions 
were  prominent  amongst  the  effects  produced,  and  these  were  naturally 
enough  deemed  by  superficial  observers,  to  be  the  result  of  foreknowledge 
amongst  the  patients,  who,  in  a  state  of  expectancy,  might  quite  as  well 
have  been  under  the  influence  of  excited  imagination  as  animal  magnetism. 
It  is  scarcely  to  be  wondered  at  therefore,  that  mesmeric  experiments 
conducted  on  the  crude  and  wholesale  methods  described  by  Bailly, 
produced  no  results  that  might  not  have  been  readily  ascribed  to  the 
influence  of  diseased  imaginations. 

Had  no  other  methods  been  practised  by  Mesmer  himself  in  the  treat- 
ment of  private  patients,  his  reputation  would  never  have  survived  the 
shock  produced  by  d'Eslon's  injudicious  exhibitions. 

But  more  fortunate  results  did  attend  Mesmer's  practice,  and  the  many 
remarkable  cures  he  was  knoAvn  to  have  effected,  served  in  some  degree  to 
counteract  the  injurious  report  of  the  French  Academy. 

Still  more  productive  of  sensational  public  interest  were  the  phenomena 
evolved  by  the  magnetic  experiments  of  M.  de  Puys6gur. 

According  to  Dr.  Mackay's  statement  in  his  sketch  of  the  French 
Magnetizers,  M.  de  Puys^gur's  discovery  of  the  sleep-waking  state  in 
connection  with  animal  magnetism,  appears  to  have  resulted  more  from 
accident  than  design. 

Mackay  says : — 

"  The  Marquis  de  Puysegur  had  one  day  magnetized  his  gardener,  and  observing 
that  he  had  fallen  into  a  very  profound  sleep,  it  occurred  to  him  to  address  questions 
to  him  as  he  would  have  done  to  a  natural  somnambulist.  To  his  great  delight,  the 
man  answered  him  with  such  surprising  lucidity,  that  he  was  encouraged  to  renew  his 
experiments,  when  he  found  that  tlie  soul  of  the  speaker  was  enlarged,  and  brought  into 
more  intimate  connexion  with  the  hidden  things  of  life  and  nature,  and  with  himself, 
M.  de  Puysegur.  Very  soon  too,  he  discovered  that  all  farther  manipulations  were 
needless. 

'■  Without  speaking  or  making  a  sign,  he  could  mentally  impart  his  will  to  the 
patient ;  in  fact,  he  could  converse  with  him  soul  to  soul,  without  the  employment  of 
any  physical  methods  whatever." 

M.  de  Puysegur,  who  was  evidently  feeling  his  way  blindly  along  the  new 
path  of  occult  force,  also  discovered,  that  he  coald  impart  his  own  magnetic 
power  to  inanimate  objects,  which,  thus  charged,  would  re-act  upon  those 
brought  into  contact  with  them.  Thus,  in  order  to  reserve  as  much  as 
possible  the  mysterious  power  with  which  he  felt  himself  possessed,  he 
proceeded  to  magnetize  a  tree,  in  contact  with  which  he  claimed,  that  any 
number  of  patients  could  receive  all  the  benefit  which  could  be  imparted 
by  personal  manipulations. 

1 6  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Now,  although  the  unthinking  "great  public"  were  of  course  sufficiently 
prompt  to  cast  all  manner  of  derision  upon  M.  de  Puysegur's  "magical 
tree,"  and  "the  man  with  the  enlarged  soul,"  even  the  most  ill-natured 
criticisms  could  not  disguise  the  fact  that  veritable  results  of  healing  and 
clairvoyance  were  evolved.  M.  Dupotet's  Histoire  de  Magnetisme  bears 
witness  to  the  multitude  of  remarkable  cures  effected  by  Puysegur,  whilst 
his  one  clairvoyant  soon  multiplied  into  vast  numbers,  from  whose  entranced 
lips  the  most  marvellous  results  of  lucidity  were  constantly  obtained. 
Writing  of  his  first  and  most  celebrated  "  lucid,"  the  Marquis  says,  in  letters 
to  his  friend,  M.  Cloquet,  the  Receiver  of  Finance,  and  one  of  his  great 
sympathisers  : — 

"  It  is  from  this  simple  man  that  I  receive  the  wisest  counsel  and  the  most  prudent 
directions  in  all  great  emergencies.  Himself  one  of  the  most  ignorant  rustics  of  the 
country,  in  the  magnetic  sleep  he  is  a  peasant  no  longer.  A  being  who  awake,  can 
scarcely  utter  a  sentence,  commonplace,  illiterate  and  timid,  when  magnetized  he  is  a 
poet,  philosopher,  and  physician.  I  need  not  speak  either.  I  have  only  to  think 
Ijefore  him  and  he  instantly  understands  and  answers  me." 

Much  more  of  the  same  nature  M.  de  Puysegur  pours  forth  concerning 
his  clairvoyants,  but  as  the  powers  then  deemed  so  extraordinary,  are  now 
familiar  enough  to  the  reader,  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  pursue  these 
quotations  farther.  Whilst  the  Marquis  de  Puysegur  was  making  converts 
in  every  direction,  by  his  wonderful  somnambulists,  a  magnetizer  of  a  still 
higher  tone  appeared  on  the  scene  in  the  person  of  the  Chevalier  de  Bar- 
berini,  a  gentleman  of  Lyons,  whose  magnetic  processes,  associated  with 
prayer,  produced  results  even  more  extraordinary  than  the  clairvoyants  of 
Puysegur.  The  Chevaher  de  Barberini  magnetized  his  subjects  both  by 
manipulations  and  will,  but  in  most  instances,  the  effects  he  produced,  threw 
the  patients  into  that  state  now  known  as  trance  and  ecstasy.  Visions  of 
the  most  exalted  character  followed.  The  "lucids"  described  scenes  and 
persons  in  the  other  world ;  traversed  the  regions  of  disembodied  souls, 
and  only  returned  to  earth  reluctantly,  to  relate  their  aerial  flights  to  won- 
dermg  listeners,  and  describe  to  bereaved  mourners,  the  apparitions  of 
friends  who  had  long  since  passed  beyond  the  grave.  The  Continental 
Miscellany  and  Eoreign  Review,  describes  "The  New  Sect  of  Bar- 
berinists,"  and  affirms  that  in  Sweden  and  Germany,  where  they  were  very 
numerous,  "these  fanatics  were  called  Spiritualists,  to  distinguish  them 
from  the  followers  of  M.  de  Puysegur,  who  were  termed  Experimentalists  J' 
In  this  miscellany  an  account  of  the  magnetic  state  by  one  of  the  subjects, 
is  given  in  these  words  : — 

"In  such  an  one,  animal  instinct  ascends  to  the  highest  degree  admissible  in  this 
world.  The  clairvoyant  is  then  similar  to  God  :  his  eye  penetrates  all  the  secrets  of 
nature ;  in  spirit,  he  sees  through  all  space ;  friends,  enemies,  spirits.  He  sees  all 
actions,  penetrates  into  all  causes;  he  becomes  a  physician,  a  prophet,  a  divine.'' 

■  We  shall  now  proceed  to  consider  the  final  results  achieved  by  Mesmer 
and  his  followers  in  Germany.  In  such  a  review  we  may  regard  Mesmer, 
Puysegur,  Barberini,  and  their  various  adherents,  as  so  many  index  fingers 
pointing  on  the  well-defined  path  which  leads  the  investigator  through  the 
newly  discovered  fields  of  occult  force ;  from  mineral  to  animal  magnetism  ; 
from  their  effects  upon  the  body  to  those  of  the  nerves,  soul,  and  spirit ; 
from  the  clairvoyant  flights  of  the  spirit  upon  earth  to  the  life  beyond,  and 
into  realms  of  being,  peopled  by  spirits  with  spiritual  entities. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  17 

From  the  time  of  Mesmer  up  to  the  present  date,  the  practices  of  the 
Mesmerists  have  been  continuous,  and  the  results,  though  variable  with  the 
characteristics  both  of  operators  and  subjects,  may  be  classified  after  the 
following  manner : — 

1.  We  have  unmistakable  effects  produced  in  the  physical  organism, 
sometimes  modifying,  and  at  others  curing  diseases  of  various  types. 

2.  Magnetized  subjects,  when  questioned  during  their  sleep,  sometimes 
describe  their  own  states ;  prescribe  remedies  of  a  more  effective  nature 
than  their  physicians  could  do  for  them,  and  occasionally  delineate  the 
nature  of  disease,  and  prescribe  remedies  for  others. 

3.  Some  magnetic  subjects  can  describe  distant  scenes,  objects,  and 
persons ;  traverse  space  spiritually,  find  lost  property,  and  occasionally, 
describe  past  and  future  events  ;  speak  in  languages  they  have  not  studied, 
play  on  instruments  of  which  they  have  had  no  previous  knowledge,  and 
exhibit  other  supra-mundane  powers. 

4.  The  magnetized  subject  not  unfrequently  quits  the  realms  of  earth 
and  descends  into  dark  spheres,  and  ascends  into  bright  ones  inhabited 
by  spiritual  beings,  the  descriptions  of  whom,  correspond  perfectly  with  the 
identity  of  those  who  have  once  been  known  as  dwellers  on  earth. 

5.  Besides  the  effects  proceeding  as  above  described  from  magnetic 
manipulations,  thousands  of  instances  are  recorded  of  persons  manifesting 
one  or  more,  and  sometimes  all  the  phenomena  described  in  these  speci- 
fications, without  the  agency  of  any  human  magnetizer  at  all.  As  these 
persons  have  claimed  that  they  were  under  the  control  of  a  Spiritual 
magnetizer,  or  a  soul  who  had  once  inhabited  the  human  form,  and  as  the 
phenomena  they  exhibited,  paralleled  in  all  respects  those  evolved  by  the 
agency  of  a  human  magnetizer,  the  conclusion  is  inevitable,  that  the  Spirit 
of  the  magnetizer,  when  disembodied,  can  produce  the  same  effects  as 
when  on  earth,  and  that  those  who  are  susceptible  to  animal  magnetism,  may 
become  equally  receptive  of  the  same  influence,  projected  by  a  Spiritual 
magnetizer.  Finally,  it  is  proved,  that  a  certain  class  of  individuals  are  not 
receptive  to  the  influence  of  magnetism  at  all,  whflst  others  are  by 
predisposition,  operators  rather  than  subjects;  and  others  again,  erect 
psychological  barriers  of  dislike  or  antagonism  to  the  whole  subject,  thereby 
actively  repelling  the  influence.  It  has  also  been  demonstrated  that,  whilst 
some  magnetized  subjects  cannot  attain  to  more  than  one,  two,  or  three  of 
the  states  above  specified,  others  may  attain  to  them  all ;  thus  the  several 
states  may  be  recognized  as  degrees  to  which  differently  constituted  subjects 
attain,  by  laws  at  present  but  little  known  or  understood  by  man. 

Experience  has  shown,  that  the  presence  of  disease,  which  at  one  stage 
of  the  enquiry  was  deemed  a  necessary  element  for  the  receptivity  of 
magnetic  influence,  is  now  only  one  of  its  contingents  ;  hundreds  of  robust 
and  healthful  persons  having  exhibited  all  the  phases  of  somnambuUc 
power  above  described,  both  with  human  and  spiritual  magnetizers. 

It  will  appear  evident,  that  in  these  successive  states,  we  first  trace  out 
what  effects  animal  magnetism  can  produce  when  both  operator  and 
subject  are  mortals,  and  next,  show  that  precisely  the  same  results  are 
obtained  when  the  operator  is  a  spirit  and  the  subject  only  is  a  mortal. 
Whilst  spirits,  from  their  superior  conditions  of  knowledge,  can  effect  more 
wonderful  results  by  magnetism  and  psychology  than  mortals,  we  may 
assure  ourselves  that  the  modus  operandi  is  in  each  case  one  and  the  same 
thing.  Magnetic  subjects  are  the  mediums  for  spirits  still  in  the  body,  and 
mediums  are  the  subjects  of  spirits  out  of  the  body.  The  one  is  the 
2 

1 8  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

stepping-stone  to  the  other.  Animal  magnetism  is  the  body  of  the  science ; 
spiritual  magnetism  the  soul;  but  as  animal  magnetism  most  generally 
prepares  the  organism  of  the  subject  for  the  reception  of  the  higher  and 
more  subtle  force  of  spiritual  magnetism,  so  it  is  evident,  that  the  univer- 
sality with  which  animal  magnetism  has  been  practised  all  over  the  civilised 
world,  during  the  last  century,  has  prepared  the  organisms  of  multitudes 
of  susceptible  persons  for  the  influx  of  spiritual  magnetism,  besides 
stimulating  and  preparing  the  minds  of  men  for  the  unfoldment  of  occult 
phenomena.  In  this  view  of  the  question,  the  great  alchemist,  Anton 
Mesmer,  may  well  be  regarded  as  the  human  founder  of  the  New  Spiritual 
Dispensation  ;  whilst  the  work  he  has  effected  has  already  advanced  from 
matter  to  force,  from  thence  to  mind,  and  from  mind  again  onward  to 
spirit,  and  realms  of  purely  spiritual  existence. 

AUTHOR'S  DEFINITION  OF  BODY,  SOUL,  AND  SPIRIT. 
Body — Matter.    Soul — Force.    Spirit — Intelligence. 

Man — a  Trinity  of  Body,  Soul,  and  Spirit. 

A  Spirit  from  the  earth  spheres — a  duality  of  Soul  and  Spirit. 

An  Angel  from  the  celestial  heavens — Pure  Spirit. 

(Teachings  of  some  Oriental  occultists.) 

CHAPTER    IV. 

spiritualism     in     GERMANY   (continued). 

Wonderful  Narratives  by  Dr.  Justinius  Kerner. 

Amongst  the  most  important  contributions  to  modern  German  spiritual 
literature  are  the  writings  of  Dr.  Justinius  Kerner,  especially  a  volume 
published  in  1834,  entitled  "  Geschichten  Besessener  neurerer  Zeif." 

This  work  contains  numerous  narratives  of  what  is  commonly  called 
"obsession,"  but  what  the  learned  writer  uncompromisingly  designates  as 
"  Demoniacal  Possession.^'' 

Taking  the  ground  that  all  haunting  spirits  have  once  inhabited  the 
human  form.  Dr.  Kerner  throws  an  immense  flood  of  light  upon  the  dark 
regions  of  "  supernaturalism,"  proving  conclusively  the  modes  in  which 
unhappy  earth-bound  spirits  afflict  mediumistic  sensitives,  and  by  their 
strange  and  repulsive  acts  of  possession,  give  rise  to  the  frightful  superstitions 
that  have  heretofore  been  called  "Witchcraft  and  Diabolism." 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  19 

Many  of  the  cases  narrated  by  Dr.  Kerner  came  immediately  under  his 
own  supervision. 

It  was  to  his  residence,  that  the  afflicted  peasant  Grombach  brought  his 
unfortunate  daughter  Magdalene,  a  young  girl  who,  from  the  weird  notoriety 
obtained  by  her  state  of  obsession,  was  named  in  the  records  of  the  time, 
"The  Maid  of  Orlach."  Of  this  case  we  must  now  give  some  details,  as 
they  afford  a  striking  evidence  of  the  difficulties  which  attend  the  investi- 
gation of  psychological  phenomena,  unless  it  be  understood  that  spirits  can 
control  susceptible  human  beings  magnetically  as  well  as  mortals. 

Kerner's  narrative,  considerably  condensed,  is  as  follows  : — 

"  In  the  small  village  of  Orlach,  in  Wurtemburg,  lived  a  peasant  named  Grombach. 
He  was  a  good  Lutheran  Protestant,  and  an  honest,  respectable  man.  He  had  four 
children,  of  whom  his  daughter,  Magdalene — a  lively,  healthy,  industrious  girl — was 
one.  In  February,  1831,  strange  disturbances  began  to  occur  in  the  cow-house. 
The  cows  were  found  tied  up  in  unusual  ways  and  places.  Sometimes  their  tails 
would  be  found  plaited  all  together,  and  that  with  as  much  skill  as  if  the  finest  lace 
weaver  had  executed  the  work.  For  some  weeks  these  occurrences  were  repeated, 
but  the  most  incessant  watchfulness  could  never  detect  any  human  agency  at  work. 
About  this  time,  Magdalene,  whilst  sitting  milking,  received  a  smart  box  on  the  ear, 
and  her  cap  was  struck  off  with  so  much  violence,  by  invisible  hands,  that  it  flew 
against  her  father,  who  was  attracted  towards  her  by  her  cry.  On  several  occasions, 
strange  cats  and  birds  came  and  went  in  the  cow-house,  no  one  knew  from  whence 
or  whither. 

"On  the  8th  of  February,  1832,  whilst  Magdalene  and  her  brother  were  cleaning 
out  the  cow-house,  a  clear  fire  was  suddenly  found  to  be  burning  in  it.  No  com- 
bustible matter  whatever  was  known  to  have  been  near  the  building  ;  and  though 
the  flames  were  soon  extinguished  by  the  help  of  the  neighbours,  the  origin  of  the 
fire  was  entirely  unknown. 

"The  sudden  bursting  out  of  flames  was  repeated  on  the  gth,  loth  and  nth  of 
February,  until — at  the  urgent  request  of  Grombach — watchers  were  stationed  in  and 
around  the  premises  day  and  night,  notwithstanding  which,  flames  broke  out  in 
different  parts  of  the  dwelling,  obliging  the  poor  family  to  empty  it  of  all  furniture ; 
still  the  burning  continued  from  time  to  time  in  the  dismantled  cottage. 

"A  few  days  after  the  last  burning,  Magdalene  saw  in  the  cow-shed,  about  eight 
in  the  evening,  the  grey  shadowy  form  of  a  woman,  whose  head  and  body  appeared 
closely  swathed.  Before  she  had  time  to  cry  for  help,  the  figure  said  to  her — in  a 
strange,  distant,  though  clear  voice — '  Remove  the  house  ;  remove  the  house  !  If  it 
be  not  removed  before  the  5th  of  March  of  next  year,  great  misfortune  will  befal  you. 
The  house  has  been  set  on  fire  by  an  evil  spirit ;  but  unless  it  be  pulled  down  before 
the  5th  of  March  next  year,  I  cannot  protect  you  from  great  misfortune.  Promise 
that  the  house  shall  be  destroyed." 

"  The  girl,  who  seems  to  have  rallied  under  the  sense  of  a  benign  and  protecting 
influence  in  this  apparition,  gave  a  promise  to  that  effect.  Grombach  and  his  son 
were  present  at  this  interview.  They  heard  Magdalene's  words,  and  the  sound  of 
some  distant  voice  as  if  in  conversation  with  her,  but  they  could  neither  distinguish 
what  was  said  nor  did  they  see  the  apparition.  From  this  time,  the  female  spirit 
frequently  appeared  to  Magdalene,  and  always  brought  with  her  a  sense  of  strange 
strength  and  protection.  Magdalene  loved  her,  and  conversed  with  her  without  the 
slightest  sentiment  of  fear.  The  spirit  said  she  had  been  born  at  Orlach,  in  1412 ; 
that  she  had  been  made  a  nun  against  her  will,  and  had  been  guilty  of  many  crimes, 
of  which  she  could  not  then  speak.  She  seemed  very  religious,  but  very  sorrowful. 
She  could  read  the  girl's  thoughts,  but  refused  to  tell  why  the  house  should  be  pulled 
down,  or  what  was  the  cause  of  her  grief.  She  often  referred  to  a  '  black  spirit,' 
by  whom  she  was  bound  in  some  mysterious  way,  and  alleged  that  he  was  endeavour- 
ing to  work  great  evil  to  the  family,  which  she  desired  to  prevent.  This  '  white  spirit,' 
as  Magdalene  called  her,  often  foretold  events  truly,  and  manifested  a  tender  interest 
in  all  that  concerned  Magdalene. 

"  On  St.  John's  day,  when  all  the  family  were  at  church  except  Magdalene,  who 
remained  at  home  to  prepare  the  dinner,  she  was  startled  by  a  loud  explosion  in  the 
cow-house.  She  was  about  to  rush  out  to  see  what  had  occurred,  when  she  beheld 
close  to  her,  on  the  hearth,  a  heap  of  yellow  frogs. 

"  She  was  on  the  point  of  gathering  them  up  in  her  apron,  as  a  curiosity  to  show  her 

20  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

parents  on  their  return,  when  she  heard  a  voice  seeming  to  call  up  to  her  from  the 
ground,  '  Magdalene,  let  the  frogs  go,'  when  instantly  they  vanished. 

"  After  this,  a  terrible  time  of  persecution  ensued.  Magdalene  was  pursued  every- 
where by  voices,  scornful  laughter,  and  frightful  apparitions  of  animals  of  different 
kinds. 

"  At  length,  in  mid-day,  whilst  she  was  haymaking,  she  encountered  the  apparition 
of  a  black  man,  who  said  to  her,  '  What  does  she  want  who  comes  to  thee  ?  Do  not 
thou  speak  to  her  ;  but  speak  to  me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  key  to  the  cellar  beneath 
thy  house.  There  are  eight  firkins  of  wine  there,  and  many  rich  things.'  Then  he 
laughed  contemptuously  and  vanished.  For  several  days  during  the  season  of  hay- 
making, this  black  spirit  appeared  to  the  girl,  trying  to  tempt  her  to  answer  him,  and 
threatening  her  with  all  sorts  of  woes  if  she  conversed  any  more  with  the  white  spirit, 
whom  he  spoke  of  as  that  '  bag  of  bones.'  He  tried  to  induce  her  to  have  mass  said 
to  keep  the  weather  fine,  though  Magdalene  and  her  family  were  all  Protestants.  He 
seemed  to  be  dressed  as  a  monk,  and  often  alleged  that  he  was  one.  He  could 
imitate  the  voices  of  her  neighbours,  and  often  did  so  to  induce  her  to  answer  him  when 
he  called  her,  but  she  was  always  conscious  of  his  presence  and  mockery,  and  by  the 
advice  of  her  '  white  angel '  never  answered  him.  He  often  jeered  about  her  old 
father  carrying  a  bible  with  him,  and  told  her  'the  mass  was  much  finer  and  grander.' 

"  No  language  can  do  justice  to  the  persecutions  which  the  poor  girl  suffered  from 
this  terrible  spirit.  His  voice  was  frequently  heard  by  others  as  well  as  herself, 
mimicking  the  tones  of  her  family  or  friends,  and  always  calling  upon  her  for  answers  : 
but  her  peculiar  sensitiveness  enabled  her  so  to  distinguish  his  voice,  that  she  never 
answered  him.  He  often  predicted  the  future  truly,  and  on  one  occasion  promised  to 
give  her  some  money  in  proof  of  his  friendship.  The  next  evening,  Magdalene  and 
her  sister  being  in  the  cow-house,  a  small  bag  fell  suddenly  from  a  beam,  and  on 
opening  it  they  discovered  several  thalers  and  eleven  gulden.  No  one  could  give  any 
account  of  how  the  money  came  there,  or  who  owned  it.  In  the  evening  of  the  next 
day,  the  white  spirit  told  Magdalene  that  her  persecutor  had  placed  the  money  there 
in  fulfilment  of  one  of  his  promises,  but  that  she  must  not  keep  it,  but  give  it  to 
various  charities. 

"  The  spirit  then  added,  that  she  should  be  rewarded  for  her  obedience  by  having 
money  really  given  her,  with  which  she  advised  her  to  bYiy  a  hymn  book.  The  day 
after  this  interview,  Magdalene,  with  her  father,  hastened  to  the  town  of  Hall  to  dis- 
pose of  the  money  to  the  orphanage,  and  as  she  returned  she  was  accosted  by  a  shop- 
keeper, who  enquired  if  she  were  not  the  wonderful  peasant  girl  of  whom  he  had 
heard  so  much. 

"  Magdalene  modestly  informed  him  of  her  name,  when  he  begged  her  acceptance 
of  a  gulden  to  buy  a  new  hymn  book  with." 

Many  incidents  of  this  kind  are  given  in  Kerner's  narrative,  showing  the 
singular  and  antagonistic  intelligences  by  which  the  young  girl  was  besieged. 

"  At  length  her  persecutor  appeared  to  her  in  such  frightful  and  monstrous  shapes, 
that  she  frequently  swooned  from  excessive  fear,  and  it  was  in  one  of  these  cataleptic 
attacks  that  a  new  and  most  distressing  phase  of  her  enemy's  power  was  made  mani- 
fest. The  girl  affirmed,  that  a  black  and  frightful  monster  would  come  and  lay  a  cold 
icy  hand  on  the  back  of  her  neck  previous  to  the  attacks,  which  now  became  frequent. 
Sometimes  she  would  remain  unconscious,  cold,  and  rigid  for  hours.  At  others,  she 
would  strike  violently  at  everyone  who  approached  her,  with  the  left  hand  and 
foot,  which  were  icy  cold,  whilst  the  entire  right  side  of  her  body  was  warm  and 
quiescent. 

"  Her  parents  sent  for  doctors  and  clergymen,  but  all  without  effect.  When  ques- 
tioned she  would  cry  out,  '  The  black  spirit !  it  is  he  that  plagues  me.'  '  Where  is 
he  then  ? '  the  doctor  would  enquire ;  for  answer,  she  would  invariably  strike  at  her 
left  side  with  her  right  hand.  That  some  most  inexplicable  but  powerful  effect  was 
produced  in  the  girl's  system,  all  the  reports  of  the  medical  men  who  were  called  in 
to  attend  her  testify.  Generally,  the  left  side  was  cold,  stiff,  and  unmanageable ;  the 
right  warm,  and  perfectly  natural.  These  states  increased  in  strangeness  and  violence 
as  the  year  progressed,  until  at  last,  according  to  her  own  account,  the  black  spirit 
would  enter  her  lifeless  body,  and  cause  her  to  rise  up  and  speak  in  a  hoarse  bass 
voice,  language  thaf  was  only  worthy  of  a  demon. 

"  The  doctors  who  were  first  called  to  attend  her,  treated  her  according  to  their 
custom  with  bleeding  and  leeches.  In  her  somnambulic  states  she  would  frequently 
say  to  them,  'This  will  do  no  good.     I  am  not  ill.     No  physician  can  help  me.'     It 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  21 

was  asked,  '  Who  then  can  help  thee  ? '     Then  she  would   awake  suddenly,    and 
joyfully  cry,  '  I  am  helped ;  the  white  lady  has  helped  me.'  '' 

Dr.  Kerner's  report  on  this  extraordinary  case  seems  free  from  the 
exaggerated  horrors  of  other  narrators;  yet  his  descriptions  are  sufficiently 
appalUng.     We  quote  his  own  words  Hterally  in  the  following  statements. 

"From  this  time" — about  the  25th  of  August — "the  white  spirit  told  her  in 
connection  with  many  comforting  texts  of  Scripture,  that  the  black  spirit  must  for 
a  time  gain  full  possession  of  her  body,  but  that  she  would  always  be  with  her  and 
conduct  her  soul  to  a  place  of  safety,  whilst  the  black  spirit  remained. 

"  Magdalene's  own  account  of  her  frightful  persecution  was  this  : — She  would  see, 
even  in  the  midst  of  her  work,  the  outline  of  a  monk's  form,  clothed  in  black  ;  the 
face  she  could  never  clearly  discern.  Then  she  would  hear  him  say,  'Wilt  thou  still 
give  me  no  answer  ?  Take  care,  I  shall  plague  thee.'  Then  she  would  feel  him  press 
against  her  left  side,  and  seize  the  back  of  her  neck  with  five  cold  fingers. 

"  This  was  always  her  last  conscious  memory.  From  this  time,  she  only  spoke  with 
the  hoarse  man's  voice,  and  demoniacal  speech  of  her  tormentor.  Generally,  she 
lay  with  a  face  as  livid  as  death — her  eyes  closed,  the  pupils  when  examined  turned 
inwards,  and  the  left  foot  and  hand  constantly  moving  up  and  down  or  extended  to 
strike  or  menace.  These  attacks  lasted  from  four  to  five  hours,  and  on  awakening  a 
struggle  of  an  extraordinary  character  would  appear  to  ensue  between  her  right  and 
left  sides.  It  must  be  noticed  that  the  left  side  was  always  icy  cold,  though  in 
constant  motion,  whilst  the  right  was  warm  and  quiescent. 

"  She  never  seemed  to  have  any  knowledge  of  the  language  used  on  these  occasions, 
but  would  declare  that  she  had  been  to  church,  and  prayed  and  sung  with  the 
congregation. 

"After  this  condition  had  lasted  five  months  without  alleviation,  at  my  request, 
the  poor  girl  was  brought  to  my  house, 

"Whatever  I  might  myself  have  thought,  I  never  encouraged  the  idea  to  her 
parents,  or  the  various  physicians  who  examined  her  case,  of  'demoniacal  possession.' 

''  Still  I  felt  compelled  to  pronounce  her  sufferings  beyond  the  ordinary  means  of 
relief  from  medical  treatment, 

' '  I  only  prescribed  for  her  myself,  prayer,  and  spare  diet.  The  magnetic  passes 
which  on  a  few  occasions  I  tried  to  make,  were  immediately  neutralized  by  the 
demoniacal  power  which  impelled  her  to  make  counter-passes  with  her  own  hand. 

"  Thus  mesmeric,  and  indeed  every  other  mode  of  treatment,  were  unemployed  by 
me,  who  recognized  in  her  a  demoniacal  magnetic  condition,  and  confided  in  the  divina- 
tion of  the  white  spirit,  who  foretold  her  recovery  on  the  5th  of  March. 

"  Thus  believing,  I  allowed  her  without  anxiety,  to  return  to  her  parents,  convinced 
by  long  and  careful  observation,  that  there  was  not  the  slightest  shadow  of  dissimu- 
lation about  the  young  girl,  nor  was  it  possible  to  exaggerate  the  extraordinary,  and 
obvious  character  of  her  attacks.  I  earnestly  advised  the  parents  to  make  no  exhibi- 
tion of  their  daughter's  preternatural  condition  ;  to  keep  her  attacks  as  secret  as 
possible,  and  call  no  one  in  to  witness  them.  I  believe  it  was  not  owing  to  any 
negligence  on  the  part  of  the  parents,  to  whom  their  daughter's  condition  was  a 
great  loss,  as  well  as  a  serious  affliction,  but  to  the  curiosity  of  the  outer  world,  that 
crowds  of  inquisitive  people  streamed  to  the  hitherto  unknown  village  of  Orlach,  to 
see  and  hear  the  miraculous  girl.  In  this,  there  was  at  least  one  good  result,  which 
was,  the  observation  and  testimony  of  so  many  astonished  witnesses. 

"One  of  these  was  an  intelligent  and  scientific  man,  Pastor  Gerber,  who  saw 
Magdalene  in  several  of  her  attacks,  and  printed  his  observations  on  her  case  in  the 
Didaskalia. 

"  On  the  4th  of  March,  whilst  workmen  were  in  course  of  pulling  down  the  house, 
as  the  white  spirit  had  incessantly  commanded,  that  apparition  suddenly  stood 
before  Magdalene.  This  time  she  was  so  radiant,  and  attired  in  such  dazzling  white 
robes,  that  the  poor  girl  could  scarcely  dare  to  look  upon  her.  She  made  a  confession 
of  her  earthly  sins  through  Magdalene's  lips,  alleging  that  she  had  been  seduced  by 
a  monk,  the  '  black  spirit,'  and  become  the  partner  of  his  fearful  crimes.  She  spoke 
through  the  entranced  lips  of  Magdalene,  of  her  centuries  of  suffering,  penitence, 
firm  reliance  on  the  atonement  of  her  Saviour,  and  the  final  termination  of  her  long 
and  weary  penance.  After  a  most  affecting  and  ecstatic  prayer,  the  White  Spirit  left 
her,  and  for  the  last  time  as  it  seemed  she  was  possessed  bodily  by  her  foul  tor- 
mentor. .  .  .  From  Sunday  night  until  Tuesday  at  noon,  the  girl  took  no  food,  and 
remained  unchanged,  with  the  same  signs  of  demoniacal  possession  before  described. 

2  2  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

During  the  Tuesday,  an  immense  multitude  assembled  in  Orlach,  to  witness  the  final 
demolition  of  the  house,  and  question  the  demon.  His  language  though  still  uttered 
in  a  man's  bass  voice,  was  religious  and  full  of  hope  of  redemption.  He  prayed  in 
affecting  terms,  acknowledged  that  he  had  committed  fearful  crimes,  but  his  term  of 
earthly  imprisonment  was  nearly  ended. 

'■  He  described  castles,  and  scenes  in  the  country,  of  which  the  girl  could  have  had 
no  knowledge,  and  the  accurate  description  he  gave  of  the  ancient  monastery  of 
Krailsheim,  on  the  site  of  which  Grombach's  cottage  and  farm  had  stood,  was  pro- 
nounced by  an  antiquary  present,  to  be  perfectly  correct.  It  was  half-past  eleven  in 
the  morning  when  the  workmen  engaged  in  the  demolition  of  the  house,  came  to  an 
extremely  ancient  piece  of  masonry,  which,  on  being  removed,  disclosed  a  large  dry 
well,  filled  with  rubbish,  mixed  with  human  bones,  amongst  which  were  the  remains 
of  several  infants.  These  tokens,  coupled  with  the  confessions  of  the  spirits  speaking 
through  Magdalene  excited  the  most  profound  interest  in  the  community  at  large. 

"  Magdalene  herself  had  been  removed  to  the  house  of  a  neighbour  at  some  distance 
from  the  scene  of  her  former  home,  but  the  crisis  of  her  attack  kept  constant  and 
faithful  pace  with  the  progress  of  the  work,  and  just  as  the  above-named  ancient  piece 
of  masonry  was  discovered,  the  livid  appearance  of  her  face  entirely  changed  to  a 
bright  and  healthful  glow.  Her  eyes  opened,  and  never  shall  I  forget  the  astonishing 
transformation  she  exhibited.  Confused  and  amazed  at  seeing  herself  surrounded  by 
so  many  strangers,  the  poor  girl  covered  her  face  with  her  hands,  and  began  to  weep  ; 
she  soon  recovered  however,  and  became  at  once  and  entirely  free  from  the  monstrous 
obsession  to  which  she  had  been  subject  for  more  than  eighteen  months. 

"No  return  either  of  this  obsession,  nor  the  faculty  of  ghost-seeing  was  ever 
experienced.  Mind  and  body  alike  were  instantaneously  restored  to  their  normal 
condition  of  health  and  strength,  and  but  for  the  theory  of  demoniacal  possession,  the 
case  has  been  and  must  ever  remain  a  paradox  which  the  ordinary  experiences  of  the 
physician  can  never  explain." 

Besides  the  curious  facts  connected  with  this  case,  Dr.  Kerner  relates 
many  others  of  an  equally  striking  character. 

Of  course  it  will  be  understood  by  every  well-informed  reader  of  Spiritual 
literature,  that  the  most  extraordinary  illustration  on  record  of  German 
Spirituahsm,  or  indeed  of  any  country,  is  to  be  found  in  the  history  of 
Kerner's  renowned  "Seeress,"  Madame  Frederica  Hauffe  of  Prevorst, 
whose  mediumship  was  not  only  spontaneous  and  wholly  undesired, 
but  whose  philosophic  teachings  and  doctrine  of  the  spheres,  deserve  far 
more  attention  than  has  been  generally  accorded  to  them;  in  fact,  they 
antedate  in  some  respects,  and  far  excel  in  others,  all  that  has  since  been 
demonstrated  in  the  modern  Spiritual  movement. 

The  continual  recurrence  to  the  experiences  of  this  famed  Prevorst ' 
Seeress,  in  the  writings  of  nearly  all  Spiritualistic  authors,  would  render  their 
repetition  here  tedious  and  unnecessary.  We  cannot  close  Dr.  Kerner's 
invaluable  record  however,  without  adding  one  more  narrative  in  which  he 
was  interested,  although  for  special  and  private  reasons  it  was  not  pubUshed 
among  his  other  collected  cases  :— 

SCENES  PROM  BEYOND  THE  VEIL. 

"  Some  ten  years  ago  there  resided  in  New  York,  U.S.A.,  an  aged  lady  of  German  birth 
the  widow  of  an  eminent  American  merchant,  by  name  Madame  Walter.  This  lady 
having  become  deeply  interested  in  Spiritualism,  communicated  to  Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten 
the  particulars  of  her  own  early  experience,  at  a  period  of  her  life  when  she  had  been  a 
patient  of  the  renowned  German  physician,  philosopher,  and  writer.  Dr.  Justinius  Kerner, 
The  circumstances  of  her  case  were  so  remarkable  that  Dr.  Kerner  had  noted  them  down 
with  a  view  of  incorporating  them  with  other  narratives  of  a  kindred  character,  in  a  forth- 
coming volume.  At  Madame  Walter's  earnest  request,  her  experiences,  which  seemed  to 
her  at  that  time  too  sacred  to  be  entrusted  to  a  cold  materialistic  world,  were  simply 
recorded  in  MSS.  but  not  published.  At  the  time  when  the  strange  tale  was  communi- 
cated to  Mrs.  Britten,  the  narrator  deemed  it  her  solemn  duty  to  offer  her  record  as  a 
contribution  to  an  age,  better  prepared  than  formerly  to  receive  it.    It  need  only  be  added, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  23 

that  in  addition  to  the  high  and  unimpeachable  character  of  the  venerable  lady  from 
whom  Mrs.  Britten  received  the  history  orally,  she  is  also  in  possession  of  Dr.  Kerner's 
MSS.,  from  which  she  has  already  drawn  some  details  for  her  published  sketches,  and 
which  she  now  deems  worthy  of  being  presented  in  more  complete  form. 

"  Dr.  Kerner  stated  that  it  was  in  the  year  1827  that  a  medical  friend  of  his,  residing  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Weinsberg,  expressed  a  wish  that  he,  Dr.  Kerner,  would  take  charge 
of  a  singular  and  interesting  patient,  a  young  lady  who  had  been  placed  under  his  care 
for  medical  treatment. 

"  To  this  proposition  Dr.  Kerner  assented,  and  thus  he  became  acquainted  with  Mdlle. 

Olga  Schwartzenberg,  the  daughter  of  the  Baroness  M ,  of  Vienna. 

"  At  the  age  of  twenty,  Mdlle.  Olga  had  become  the  victim  of  a  severe  nervous  and  epi- 
gastric disorder,  which  had  determined  her  mother  to  send  her  to  Weinsberg,  to  the  care 
of  her  trusty  family  physician. 

"  The  mother  herself  was  a  gay,  heartless,  fashionable  widow,  who  had  just  contracted  a 

second  marriage  with  an  immensely  wealthy,  but  very  aged  man,  the  Baron  M ,  who 

had  become  captivated  with  the  fair  widow's  remarkable  personal  attractions. 

"  Under  the  treatment  of  Drs.  Kerner  and  Moran,  Mdlle.  Olga  not  only  began  to  recover 
her  health,  but  she  displayed  to  a  wonderful  degree,  the  faculty  of  clairvoyance,  and  by 
the  magnetic  passes  administered  to  her,  became  a  somnambulist  of  extraordinary 
lucidity. 

"  In  the  magnetic  sleep  she  could  speak  in  several  foreign  tongues  she  had  not  studied  ; 
play  on  any  instrument  presented  to  her,  though  entirely  unacquainted  with  music,  and 
discourse  most  eloquently  on  various  scientific  subjects.  Besides  these  interesting  results 
of  the  sleep-waking  condition,  Mdlle.  Olga,  in  her  normal  state,  could  see,  and  actually 
describe,  the  spirits  of  many  deceased  persons  known  to  those  around  her,  yet  wholly 
strange  to  herself.  Notwithstanding  the  peculiar  excellence  and  accuracy  of  these 
descriptions,  Mdlle.  Olga  treated  the  whole  subject  of  spiritual  existence  with  the  utmost 
scorn  and  derision,  and  insisted  on  attributing  the  apparitions  she  perceived,  to  the  reflex 
action  of  the  minds  of  those  with  whom  she  came  in  contact. 

"  As  this  young  lady  had  been  brought  up  by  a  worldly-minded,  atheistical  mother.  Dr. 
Kerner  was  at  no  loss  to  account  for  her  total  disbelief  in  immortality,  and  her  contempt 
of  all  religious  ideas  ;  still  it  pained  him  to  perceive  that  her  rare  gifts  of  seership  made  no 
other  impression  on  her  mind  than  to  furnish  food  for  ridicule,  and  denial  of  spiritual 
agency. 

"  It  was  on  a  certain  night  in  October,  1827,  that  Mdlle.  Olga  was  left  by  her  physician 
in  a  peaceful  magnetic  sleep,  her  maid,  Anna  Matterlich,  occupying  a  couch  in  an  adjoining 
apartment,  to  restrain — as  her  mistress  gaily  alleged — any  undue  flights  of  her  somnam- 
bulistic wanderings  '  beyond  the  confined  earth.' 

"At  a  very  early  hour  the  next  morning.  Dr.  Kerner  was  summoned  in  haste  to  attend 
his  patient,  and  he  then  received  from  her  pale  lips  the  following  astounding  statement : — 
"  '  Dr.  Kerner,'  she  said,  '  the  sleep  in  which  yoa  left  me  must  have  been  of  very  short 
duration,  for  the  moment  after  your  departure  I  became  so  wide  awake  that  I  heard,  and 
could  have  counted  the  number  of  your  retreating  footsteps.  At  the  instant  that  you 
closed  the  door  behind  you,  I  felt  irresistibly  impelled  to  rise  from  my  bed,  throw  on  a 
dressing  gown,  and  seat  myself  by  my  writing-table.  Whilst  I  sat,  abstractedly  gazing 
at  the  still  blazing  fire,  to  my  unspeakable  astonishment,  my  door  was  opened  noiselessly 
and  my  mother  entered  the  room,  and  without  attempting  to  salute  me,  took  a  chair,  and 
sat  down  by  the  fire  on  the  opposite  side  to  myself.' 

" '  If  I  was  astonished  at  her  unexpected  appearance,  I  was  still  more  so  at  the 
extraordinary  change  manifested  in  her  person.' 

" '  Her  dress — the  splendid  lace  in  which  she  was  married  to  the  Baron  M gave  me 

the  idea  of  a  cold  so  intense  that  it  froze  my  very  marrow  to  look  at  her  ;  indeed,  I  felt — 
though  she  did  not  complain,  or  shiver — that  she  was  perishing  with  cold.  I  had  always 
been  accustomed  to  hear  my  mother  spoken  of  as  a  very  beautiful  woman,  and  I  had 
often  gazed  at  her  myself  with  admiring  wonder  ;  but  oh  !  what  a  contrast  did  she  How 
present  to  the  loveliness  which  had  so  fascinated  all  beholders  !  Her  hair  was  loose  and 
hanging  around  her  shoulders  in  disorder  ;  but  to  my  amazement  I  perceived  that  it  was 
nearly  «11  false,  and  from  its  lack  of  arrangement  failed  to  conceal  the  grey  locks  which 
it  was  designed  to  hide.  One  cheek  was  coarsely  patched  with  rouge,  whilst  the  other 
was  deadly  pale.  A  set  of  false  teeth  was  in  her  hand,  and  her  neck  and  arms  were  only 
half  smeared  with  enamel.' 

"  '  I  had  never  seen  my  mother  at  her  toilette,  and  these  disclosures  fairly  overwhelmed 
me,  yet  all  this  was  forgotten,  totally  overlooked,  whilst  gazing  on  the  unutterable 
expression  of  woe  which  marked  every  lineament  of  that  wretched  face.  I  had  never 
seen  despair,  rage,  and  remorse  so  awfully  depicted  on  a  human  countenance,  nor  did  I 
deem  it  possible  that  those  passions  could  find  such  a  fearfully  vivid  expression.' 

24  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  '  I  seemed  to  see,  moreover, — and  wonderful  it  was  for  me  to  perceive  it, — my 
mother's  entire  past  history,  all  written, — I  could  not  tell  how  or  where, — yet  impressed 
clearly  upon  her,  and  obvious  to  every  eye.  And,  oh  Heaven  !  may  I  never  again  witness 
the  naked  deformity  of  an  ill-spent  life,  thus  indelibly  imprinted  on  the  form  !' 

"  '  Aghast  and  speechless,  I  listened  in  silence,  whilst  my  mother  spoke  to  me  !  but  her 
very  tones  were  changed,  and  instead  of  the  soft  silvery  accents  of  other  days,  her  voice 
was  hollow  and  faint,  and  seemed  to  come  from  an  illimitable  distance  off,  and  in  no  way 
to  proceed  from  the  forlorn  figure  that  sat  before  me.  It  said  :  "  Olga  !  I  have  come  to 
tell  you  of  a  very,  very  terrible  dream  I  have  had,  a  dream  you  ought  to  know,  and  one 
which,  if  I  had  realised  'before,  I  should  have  been  happier— happier  now ! "  She  sighed  ; 
— and  oh,  what  a  sigh  of  anguish  was  that ! — then  motioning  me  to  the  writing  table  by 
my  side,  she  bade  me  tnke  down  the  words  she  was  going  to  speak.' 

"  '  Mechanically  I  obeyed  her,  when  she  continued  as  follows,  speaking  so  slowly  and 
with  so  many  pauses,  that,  though  I  never  seemed  to  possess  the  courage  to  address  her, 
I  was  enabled  to  transcribe  her  words  faster  than  she  uttered  them  : — - 

" '  I  was  dressing,  as  you  see,  to  go  to  court,  when  a  sudden  faintness  seized  me, 
memory  fled,  and  consciousness  only  returned  in  the  form  of  this  horrible  dream.' 

"  Here  a  shudder  of  agony  seemed  to  shake  her  frame,  and  a  long  pause  ensued. 

" '  I  found  myself  on  the  brink  of  a  dreary,  high  cliff,  overhanging  a  wild  and  stormy 
sea.  The  air  was  thicker  and  heavier  than  night ;  yet  it  was  not  night.  All  was  lonely, 
wild,  black,  and  dreary.  It  seemed  as  if  I  had  stood  in  that  awful  solitude  for  ages,  yet 
why  or  how  I  came  there,  I  knew  not. 

" '  Suddenly,  the  ground  rocked  and  parted  beneath  my  feet.  Shrieking  in  mortal 
terror.  I  caught  at  the  earth,  blades  of  grass,  the  very  motes  in  the  air,  to  stay  my  fall, 
but  all  in  vain.  Down — down — I  was  hurled  !  oh,  how  long  I  was  in  falling  !  Surely  I 
must  have  spent  years  in  that  awful  descent,  for  the  whole  of  my  past  life,  even  to  its 
minutest  details,  passed  in  solemn  march  before  me  as  I  fell.  Not  the  vivid  flashes  of 
sudden  remembrance,  but  the  stately  panorama  of  every  year,  hour,  and  minute  unrolled 
itself  before  me  as  clearly  as  in  the  time  when  each  event  was  enacted.  I  saw  my  own 
pale  mother  sinking  into  an  early  grave,  but  the  bitter  causes  of  that  untimely  death  came 
with  her  ;  my  disobedience,  ingratitude,  and  desertion.  Every  unkind  word  or  act  of  folly 
I  had  committed  against  her,  was  engraved  on  the  funeral  pall  from  which  her  faded  form 
seemed  to  emerge. 

" '  I  saw  dim  effigies  of  young,  timid  hearts  that  my  idle  coquetries  had  broken.  I  saw 
the  charms  of  beauty  and  intellect  with  which  God  had  endowed  me,  first  adorning,  then 
disfiguring  my  own  phantom  likeness,  with  the  semblance  of  reptiles  and  loathsome 
animals.  I  saw  faces  of  many  a  weary  drudge  whom  I  had  sacrificed  to  my  service  ;  and 
those  who  had  bowed  to  me  and  cringed  before  me,  now  reviled  me  and  pointed  with  foul 
grimaces  to  my  unfinished  toilette. 

"  '  AU  this  and  more,  more  than  tongue  can  speak,  I  saw,  and  knew,  and  felt,  during 
that  tremendous  fall. 

"  '  I  tell  you,  girl,  a  thousand  years  must  have  passed  in  that  downward  flight.  At 
length  I  landed — landed  on  a  distant  shore,  where  thick  haze  clouded  at  first  my  straining 
vision,  and  the  cold  winds  swept  around  me  with  such  a  piercing,  icy  chill  as  I  never 
dreamed  to  exist  before. 

" '  As  I  shrank  and  shivered  in  their  tempestuous  cruelty,  myriads  of  ragged  forms 
flitted  before  me,  and  I  knew  they  were  wretched  creatures  whom  I  had  passed  by 
unnoticed  in  my  town  drives,  and  then  I  wept  to  think  I  had  never  done  anything  to 
alleviate  their  misery.  They  mocked  at  me  now,  and  then  they  passed  away.  I  would 
have  helped  them,  but  the  bitter  blast  sighed  out,  "  Too  late  !     Too  late  I " 

" '  Lies  I  had  spoken,  and  trivial  follies  long  since  forgotten,  seemed  now  to  assume 
tangible  shapes,  and  rose  up  to  meet  me  so  palpably  that  I  felt  with  shame  and  horror 
they  were  fastening  themselves  upon  my  form — my  very  dress,  and  would  be  seen  and 
known  by  all  beholders. 

'^ '  I  strove  to  hide  myself  for  very  shame,  but  millions  of  eyes  were  upon  me,  and  all 
seemed  to  read  me  through  and  through. 

"  '  Then  arose  the  wild  and  agonising  wish,  since  I  could  not  conceal  my  true  self,  that 
I  were  changed. 

"  '  I  screamed  aloud  a  frantic  prayer  to  return  to  earth  and  lead  a  new  life — do  some- 
thing, everything,  over  again,  and  be  a  better,  truer,  and  purer  woman.  But  again  the 
bitter  winds  sighed  out  the  doleful  cry,  '  Too  late  !  Too  late  !  '  In  my  despair  I  cried 
to  those  who  surrounded  me  that  I  was  not  fit  to  be  seen.  I  must  and  would  be  some- 
thing better.  And  then  I  remembered  what  the  priests  had  taught — how  they  had 
preached  that  the  blood  of  Christ  would  cleanse  the  worst  of  sinners,  and  redeem  all  who 
believed  in  Him  from  the  penalty  so  justly  due  to  iU- spent  lives.  I  had  never  believed 
this.     I  had  never  been  taught  to  believe,  but  I  would  do  so  now  ;  and  then  with  frantic 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  25 

haste  I  sped  on  to  find  a  priest.  With  the  wish  came  the  realisation.  A  celebrated 
minister  of  the  Christian  Church,  long  dead  and  gone,  started  up  suddenly  in  my  path, 
alive  again,  and  ofi"ered  me  a  crucifix.  But,  oh,  horror  !  As  I  gazed  upon  this  man  I  saw 
he  was  worse  than  I  was.  He  was  a  hypocrite,  a  base  deceiver,  and  his  changing  form 
was  marred  by  the  wild,  despairing  images  of  thousands  of  shipwrecked  souls  whom  his 
false  teachings  had  misled.  Still,  a  shadowy  hope  was  left.  I  would  cling  to  the  crucifix. 
Pictures  of  faithful  believers  thus  redeemed  flitted  before  my  eyes ;  but  even  as  with  out- 
stretched arms  I  strove  to  clasp  the  image,  it  sfolce,  and  in  sweet,  though  relentless,  tones 
it  said,  "  Not  everyone  who  saith  unto  me.  Lord,  Lord  !  but  he  who  doeth  the  will  of  my 
Father,  who  is  in  heaven,  he  shall  be  saved."  Then  I  shrieked  out,  "  Is  there  then  no  salva- 
tion?" The  answer  came,  "Work  out  thine  own  salvation."  "But  how?"  "Inaction." 
"  But,"  I  cried  again,  "I  am  dead.  There  is  no  hope,  no  repentance  after  death."  "  There 
is  no  death,"  answered  the  voice,  so  still,  so  soft,  yet  so  full  of  power  that  it  seemed  to  fill 
the  spaces  of  infinity.  Confused  and  overwhelmed,  yet  still  aroused  and  stirred  by  the 
strange  new  thought  that  there  miyM  he  progress  even  beyond  the  grave,  I  asked,  "  Where, 
then,  is  hell  ? "  No  answer  came,  but  yet  I  felt  that  answer,  and  it  impelled  rhe  to  look 
around  through  the  murky  air  on  the  bleak  and  barren  prospect,  and  the  dreary  stunted 
forms  of  beings  on  whose  faces  I  read  images  of  mis-spent  lives  like  my  own.  Then  I 
cried,  "  Lo,  I  am  in  hell,  and  I  myself  have  made  it ! " 

"  '  Then  I  thought,  but  did  not  dare  to  ask,  of  Heaven. 

" '  Thought  in  spirit  life  is  action,  reality,  and  with  the  thought  came  a  view  !  Oh, 
that  I  could  speak  of  the  radiant  visions  that  one  brief  glance  presented  ! 

'' '  The  brightest  and  highest  flights  of  ideality  on  earth  fall  short,  far  short,  of  that 
blooming,  sunlit  land,  and  the  happy,  lovely  people  that  inhabit  it.  And  yet  I  saw  what 
they  had  been,  as  clearly  as  I  saw  the  evil  lives  of  my  associates.  Some  had  been  crippled, 
blind,  starved,  worked  to  death,  or  worn  out  with  cares  and  toils,  but  all  had  been  true 
and  faithful  unto  death,  and  good  to  one  another.  All  those  that  dwell  in  those  heavenly 
spheres,  those  lands  of  light  and  beauty,  that  even  to  look  at  for  a  single  instant  is  worth 
a  thousand  years  of  suffering,  had  been  kind,  patient,  brave,  or  helpful. 

" '  Oh,  what  a  glory  it  was  to  look  upon  the  good  !  Oh,  that  I  had  been  good,  ever  so 
little !  Oh,  that  I  had  left  some  record  behind,  to  bless  mankind  !  that  single  blessing 
would  have  saved  me  !  But  whilst  I  sighed  in  heaviness,  with  Milton's  fallen  angel,  "  Me 
miserable  !"  the  sweet  soft  voice  breathed  in  my  ear  :  "  Up  and  be  doing  !  prepare,  and 
commence  thy  life  anew.  Work  out  thine  own  salvation.  Arise,  and  go  to  thy  Father." 
I  thought,  for  it  was  but  a  dream,  Olga — I  thought,  and  said,  I  will  arise  :  and  I  did  go, 
and  I  came  here,  as  the  first  fruit  of  my  new  life  and  new  resolution,  for  I  found,  that  is, 
I  thought  I  found,  that  the  only  way  to  help  myself  was  by  helping  others,  and  so  I  came 
hither  to  warn  my  child  ;  to  tell  her  that  not  in  church,  in  pulpit,  or  in  the  good  deeds  of 
another,  does  the  path  to  heaven  lie,  but  in  her  own  strivings  after  good  ;  in  her  deeds  to 
her  fellow  mortals  ;  in  pure  thoughts,  good  acts,  kind  words,  and  the  motives  for  good 
which  move  us  through  every  second  of  our  mortal  pilgrimage.  Heaven  and  hell  are 
states,  my  child.  No  foot  can  tread  the  path  by  which  we  reach  them  but  our  own  ;  no 
mouthing  hypocrite  can  teach  us  how  to  find  the  way,  or  save,  or  guide  us,  only  the  im- 
pulses to  good  and  truth  which  God  has  given  to  every  human  soul,  if  we  would  but  heed 
them.     These  are  our  saviours,  Olga.     Arise  !  and  save  thyself  ! " 

" '  She  ceased,  and  gaining  self-possession  from  the  cessation  of  the  agonising  tones  that 
had  so  long  rung  in  my  ear,  I  cried  out — 

"  *  Oh,  mother  !  tell  me  one  thing  more.  In  the  name  of  heaven,  tell  me  how  and 
when  you  came  here  ! ' 

" '  Raising  my  eyes  as  I  spoke,  I  sought  to  meet  her  glance,  but  I  gazed  on  vacancy. 
The  empty  chair  alone  remained  ;  the  pen,  ink,  and  wet  writing  inscribed  with  the  fearful 
tale  were  the  only  mementos  that  remained  of  that  awful  interview  ! ' 

"  The  lady  concluded  her  narrative  by  adding,  that  after  the  disappearance  of  the  appari- 
tion, she  remembered  no  more  until  she  found  Dr.  Kerner  and  her  maid  bending 
anxiously  over  her.     As  a  sequel  to  this  terrible  vision,  Dr.   Kerner  stated  that  the 

Baroness  M died  at  Vienna,  on  the  very  night  in  question  ;  she  had  been  found  at 

her  toilet  half  dressed,  but  covered  with  blood.  The  sudden  rupture  of  a  blood  vessel 
had  robbed  her  of  life,  in  the  very  act  ef  preparing  to  ensnare  all  hearts  in  the  meshes  of 
her  unreal  charms. 

"  The  appearance  of  the  corpse  in  all  respects  corresponded  to  the  apparition  witnessed 
by  the  daughter,  even  to  the  set  of  false  teeth  still  clutched  in  the  hand  of  the  mute  but 
eloquent  dead.  It  need  only  be  added  that  to  the  last  day  of  her  earthly  life  Madame 
Walter's  terrible  vision  bore  fruits  in  her  chastened  spirit,  by  inciting  her  to  ceaseless  acts 
of  benevolence,  holy  thoughts,  and  words  of  tender  sympathy,  which  made  all  who  knew 
her  in  life,  and  remembered  her  after  death,  '  rise  up  and  call  her  blessed.'  " 

2  6  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

CHAPTER  V, 

SPIRITUALISM     IN      GERMANY     (CONTINUED). 
Wonderful  Phenomenal  Personages. 

During  the  progress  of  the  Spiritual  movement,  the  desire  to  satisfy  the 
many  marvel  seekers  who  crowd  its  ranks  has  no  doubt  induced  those 
journalists  whose  business  it  is  to  administer  to  popular  taste,  to  ransack 
the  literature  of  the  past  for  proofs  of  Spirit  intercourse. 

Thus  there  are  very  few  well-attested  cases  but  what  have  already  found 
their  way  into  print,  and  helped  to  feed  man's  craving  appetite  for  addi- 
tional wonders  from  the  Spirit  world. 

At  the  risk  of  reiterating  some  experiences  that  have  been  already 
worn  threadbare,  the  scope  of  this  compendium  obliges  us  to  reprint  such 
cases  as  will  illustrate  various  phases  of  our  subject  occurring  in  different 
countries. 

It  is  with  this  view  that  we  now  proceed  to  give  a  brief  notice  of  the 
remarkable  cures  effected  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  celebrated 
Prince  Hohenlohe,  Archbishop  of  Gross wardein,  in  Hungary,  and  Abbot 
of  St.  Michael's  Monastery  at  Gaborjan. 

It  must  be  understood  that  this  eminent  ecclesiastic  attributed  his  great 
powers  of  healing  to  the  special  interposition  of  his  "  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ."  The  excellent  and  amiable  Arabian  gentleman,  Nathaniel 
Aymar,  of  whom  Bayard  Taylor  and  other  Eastern  travellers  make  men- 
tion, attributed  cures  just  as  remarkable  as  those  of  which  we  are  about  to 
write,  to  the  influence  of  Mahomet.  A  very  successful  Chinese  doctor  of 
California,  "  Ah  Sing,"  claimed  to  heal  diseases  only  under  the  influence  of 
Fo,  and  Dr.  Valmour,  a  negro,  of  New  Orleans,  performed  the  most 
astonishing  feats  of  healing  solely  through  what  he  assured  the  author,  was 
the  influence  of  his  father's  spirit,  who  was  a  physician  before  him.  The 
most  renowned  healers  of  America  cite  the  names  of  divers  spirits  as  the 
sources  of  their  astonishing  powers,  and  any  number  of  Buddhists  of 
whom  the  author  has  cognizance  make  cures  by  the  influence  of  their  God- 
man  Buddha.  To  the  one-idead  sectarian  of  any  shade  of  opinion  it  is 
necessary  to  preface  our  account  of  Prince  Hohenlohe's  cures  with  these 
remarks,  lest  we  should  be  instrumental  in  deluding  our  readers  concerning 
the  real  sources  of  that  remarkable  man's  beneficent  powers.  The  true 
scientist  will  be  at  no  loss  to  find  a  common  origin  for  all  spiritual  and 
magnetic  potencies,  and  that  independent  of  sect,  creed,  or  clime. 

The  following  particulars  are  taken  from  the  autobiography  of  Prince 
Hohenlohe,  of  which  a  fine  translation  has  been  rendered  by  William 
Howitt.  From  this  we  learn  that  the  Prince  was  born  in  1794,  and  being 
destined  for  the  church,  filled  many  clerical  positions  of  distinction  in 
Olmiitz,  Munich,  and  Bamberg. 

In  1820  he  became  acquainted  with  a  peasant  named  Martin  Michel, 
whom  he  met  at  a  watering-place  in  the  Duchy  of  Baden,  and  from  whom 
he  learned  that  the  power  of  healing,  " through  the  name  of  Christ"  was 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  27 

constantly  practised  by  him,  and  could  be  exercised  equally  well  by  any 
other  true  Christian.  The  Prince  relates  the  first  cure  he  effected  under 
the  influence  of  his  new  friend  Martin  in  the  following  terms  : — 

"At  the  commencement  of  the  year  1826,  I  proceeded  to  Hapfort,  to  pay  a  visit  to 
Prince  Louis,  heir  to  the  crown  of  Bavaria.  There  finding  Martin,  I  invited  him  to 
journey  with  me  in  my  carriage  to  Wiirtzburg.  On  the  morrow  I  paid  a  visit  to  Baron  von 
Eeinach,  and  when  we  were  about  to  dine,  the  domestics  carried  in  the  young  Princess 
Matilda  of  Schwartzenburg,  who  for  eight  years  had  not  the  power  of  walking,  through 
paralysis.  .  Touched  with  compassion  for  the  poor  cripple,  who  was  placed  at  my  side,  I 
bethought  me  of  Martin,  who  had  cured  me  of  a  violent  sore  throat,  and  I  said  within 
myself  tlaat  probably,  if  the  Princess  had  firm  confidence  in  the  help  of  the  Saviour, 
Martin  could  cure  her  likewise. 

"  On  the  21st  of  June,  after  performing  mass,  I  felt  myself  irresistibly  impelled  to 
hasten  to  the  Princess,  and  tell  her  that  if  she  had  a  firm  reliance  on  the  promise  of  Jesus 
Christ  she  could  be  healed.  I  went  to  the  Princess,  accompanied  by  Martin  Michel, 
and  leaving  him  in  the  ante-chamber,  was  shown  into  the  apartment  of  the  Princess, 
whom  I  found  reclining  on  a  bed,  enveloped  as  it  were  in  a  mass  of  machinery.  After 
the  usual  salutations  I  said  to  her,  '  My  dear  cousin,  God  is  able  to  help  you  through 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  and  I  have  brought  with  me  a  pious  peasant,  at  whose  prayer  God 
has  already  succoured  the  affiicted.  If  you  are  willing  I  will  call  him  in,  that  he  may  pray 
for  you.' 

"  '  With  all  my  heart,'  replied  the  Princess,  whereupon  I  called  Michel. 

"After  some  words  addressed  to  the  invalid,  Martin  commenced  praying,  but  it  is 
necessary  to  have  seen  him  to  have  a  just  idea  of  the  depth  of  fervour  with  which  he 
prayed.  I  avow  on  my  own  part  that  I  threw  myself  on  the  ground  in  supplication  also. 
The  prayers  ended,  I  felt  a  secret  power  which  I  could  not  explain  nor  resist,  which 
impelled  me  to  say  in  a  loud  voice  to  the  Princess,  '  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  arise  and 
walk  ! ' 

"  As  I  pronounced  these  words,  ever  memorable  to  me,  the  Princess  was  not  only  able 
to  rise,  which  she  had  not  done  for  eight  years,  but  to  walk  with  perfect  ease  and  strength. 

"  The  rumour  of  this  event  was  quickly  spread,  and  I  was  surrounded  by  invalids.  I 
say  nothing  of  the  number  of  such  facts  as  then  took  place,  for  it  is  not  for  me  to  speak 
of  them. 

The  Princess  it  seems  walked  to  church  on  the  following  Sunday,  to  the 
astonishment  of  the  whole  community,  and  in  sight  of  multitudes  who  for 
years  had  been  accustomed  only  to  see  her  reclining  in  a  carriage,  or  borne 
in  the  arms  of  attendants. 

The  next  notable  cure  was  performed  by  the  Prince  alone,  and  it  took 
place  on  the  person  of  Louis,  Crown  Prince  of  Bavaria,  the  well-known 
monarch  of  that  country,  and  the  liberal  patron  of  arts  and  sciences  in 
Munich. 

The  following  letter,  although  it  has  often  appeared  in  print  before,  is 
selected  for  quotation  in  this  place,  because  it  bears  a  testimony  which 
none  can  question  to  the  powers  of  the  celebrated  Therapeutist.  It  was 
written  by  Prince  Louis  of  Bavaria,  and  is  as  follows : — 

"to  the  count  von  sinsheim. 

"  Mt  Dear  Count, — There  are  still  miracles.  The  last  ten  days  of  the  month  the 
people  of  Wiirtzburg  might  believe  themselves  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles. 

"  The  deaf  hear,  the  blind  see,  the  lame  freely  walk,  not  by  the  aid  of  art,  but  by 
means  of  a  few  short  prayers,  and  the  invocation  of  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
Prince  of  Hohenlohe  demanded  only  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  to  heal  the  sick  ;  but  this  faith 
was  an  indispensable  condition. 

"  On  the  evening  of  the  28th  the  number  of  persons  cured  amounted  to  more  than 
seventy.  These  were  of  all  classes,  from  the  humblest  to  a  prince  of  the  blood,  who, 
without  any  exterior  means,  recovered  the  hearing  which  he  had  lost  from  his  infancy.* 
This  cure  was  effected  by  a  prayer  made  during  some  minutes  by  Prince  Hohenlohe,  a 
priest  of  only  twenty-seven  years  of  age. 

*Prince  Louis  here  speaks  of  himself  and  his  own  cure. 

28  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  .  .  .In  my  ante-chanber,  the  Prince  twice  unsuccessfully  pronounced  his  prayer 
for  a  woman  who  had  been  blind  for  twenty-five  years,  but  at  the  pressing  solicitation  of 
the  woman,  he  prayed  a  third  time,  and  she  recovered  her  sight.     .     .     . 

"The  inhabitants  of  Wiirtzburg  have  testified  by  the  most  lively  acclamations  the 
pleasure  which  my  cure  has  given  them.  You  are  at  liberty  to  communicate  this  letter, 
and  to  allow  any  one  who  wishes  it  to  take  a  copy  of  it." 

"Louis,  Prince  Eotal. 

"Bruckenau,  July  3rd,  1822.  " 

Whilst  no  honest  reader  can  fail  to  admire  the  manly  candour  with 
which  Prince  Louis  testified  to  those  marvels,  which  many  a  cowardly 
ingrate  would  have  kept  secret,  and  many  an  interested  bigot  would  have 
tried  to  smother  up,  the  scientist  might  suggest  the  pertinent  enquiry,  why 
the  Prince's  prayers  could  not  cure  the  blind  woman  mentioned  in  the 
above  letter  until  the  third  repetition. 

It  could  not  have  been  for  lack  oi  faith  on  the  part  of  the  patient, 
because  it  was  at  her  pressing  entreaty  that  the  third  prayer  was  offered. 

Was  the  good  healer's  "Saviour"  harder  to  be  entreated  in  this  poor 
woman's  case  than  in  that  of  the  Crown  Prince,  who  was  cured  instantane- 
ously, and  upon  the  strength  of  the  first  prayer  offered  ? 

If  we  were  called  upon  to  solve  such  a  problem  through  magnetic  and 
psychologic  laws  our  difficulties  would  be  explained  at  once.  We 
should  perceive  in  this,  as  in  many  other  instances,  that  special  and 
continuous  applications  of  the  good  healer's  force  were  required,  whilst  in 
the  Prince's  case  a  mere  shock,  or  primary  exertion  of  will,  was  all  that  was 
needed. 

Meantime,  those  who  insist  upon  calling  in  "  the  Lord  Jesus  "  as  the  sole 
agent  of  cure,  could  not  deny  that  he  was  somewhat  partial,  and  not  always 
just,  for  the  memoirs  of  Prince  Hohenlohe  prove  that  there  were  occa- 
sional failures,  although  all  that  came  appeared  to  have  been  "full  of 
faith  and  the  holy  spirit." 

Professor  Onymus,  of  the  University  of  Wiirzburg,  himself  an  eye-witness 
of  Prince  Hohenlohe's  wonderful  operations,  has  given  the  following  account 
of  them : — 

"  Prince  Hohenlohe  cures  the  sick  by  his  prayers.  From  all  sides  they  bring  the  sick, 
the  blind,  the  lame,  deaf,  and  dumb  to  his  door.  The  victims  of  every  evil  that  afflict 
humanity  besiege  the  house  where  he  stays,  and  it  is  not  without  great  trouble,  and  by 
the  assistance  of  the  pohce,  that  you  are  able  to  get  to  him.  Notwithstanding,  he  never 
seems  fatigued. 

"  He  never  refuses  his  aid  to  any  one,  even  to  the  poor,  or  mendicants  with  the  most 
disgusting  complaints. 

"  When  he  quits  the  house,  it  is  not  to  carry  alleviation  to  the  palaces  of  the  great ;  l\e 
goes  in  preference  to  the  cabins  of  the  poor.  When  he  prays  we  see  that  the  prayer 
comes  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  and  that  with  so  much  fervour,  that  he  oftentimes 
seems  ready  to  sink  with  exhaustion." 

As  we  cannot  do  justice  to  one  tenth  of  the  laudatory  notices  that  were 
written  of  the  Prince's  marvellous  cures,  we  must  conclude  by  selecting  a 
few  of  the  notable  cases  recorded  by  Legation  Councillor  Scharold,  who, 
like  many  other  distinguished  personages  of  the  time,  wrote  of  what  he 
himself  was  an  eye-witness  to. 

"Elizabeth  Laner,  cured  of  a  rheumatic  affection  of  the  nerves,  which  made  her  a 
helpless  cripple  of  twenty-five  years'  standing. 

"  Captain  Ruthlein,  of  Thundorf,  seventy  years  of  age,  and  Fraiilein  Fegelim,  upwards 
of  seventy,  both  cured  of  total  paralysis,  and  able  to  use  every  limb  and  organ  freely. 

"Michal  Dinsenbacher,  aged  twenty-four,  for  three  years   suffered  dreadful  agonies 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  29 

with  an  abscess  of  the  chest,  and  caries  of  bones.  Patient  of  hospital,  cured  on  the  spot, 
and  at  work  in  the  fields  the  next  day. 

'  ■  Two  lame  men,  carried  in  arms  into  the  house  of  Aulic  Councillor  Martin,  total 
paralysis, — cured  on  the  spot. 

•'  The  widow  Balzano,  and  another  woman  of  Narstadt,  blind  ;  one  for  twenty-five, 
another,  nineteen  years  ;  cured  at  the  Legation  office  of  Counsellor  Scharold." 

It  would  be  needless  to  pursue  this  list  farther. 

Prince  Charles  of  Bartenstein,  in  a  letter  to  his  father,  dated  August  18, 
1821,  expresses  his  amazement  at  the  cures- which  he  himself  had  witnessed 
in  the  chapel  at  Bruckenau,  where  he  declares,  "  four  hundred  blind,  deaf, 
dumb,  and  paralytic  people  &c.,  &c.,  were  instantaneously  and  completely 
cured."  A  vast  number  of  thoroughly  attested  cases  were  collected  and 
pubhshed  in  1825  in  the  German  papers. 

At  the  solicitation  of  the  medical  faculty  of  Geri7iany  however,  the 
Government  at  length  forbade  these  operations ;  and  Prince  Hohenlohe 
retired  to  Austria,  where  he  continued  his  divine  work  until  his  death, 
which  took  place  in  his  fifty-fifth  year,  at  Boslon,  near  Vienna. 

Among  the  great  variety  of  manifestations  recorded  by  the  American 
Spiritual  journals,  none  have  excited  more  interest  than  the  appearance  of 
letters,  names,  and  figures  on  the  flesh  of  the  mediums,  thus  affording 
incontrovertible  evidence  both  of  the  intelligence  which  arranges  the 
characters,  and  of  a  new  and  wonderful  phase  of  chemistry,  involved  in 
their  production. 

Not  to  depreciate  the  value  of  such  a  curious  form  of  supra-mundane 
agency,  but  to  show  its  accordance  with  some  unknown  law  at  work  in 
various  directions,  we  point  to  one  or  two  remarkable  cases  of  "  stigmata," 
many  of  which  have  been  indisputably  attested  on  the  Continent  of  Europe. 
Our  German  illustration  of  this  singular  phase  is  the  celebrated  Katherine 
Emerick,  the  nun  of  Diilmen,  of  whom  we  give  the  account  published  by 
Herr  Clemens  Von  Brentano,  who  visited  the  Ecstatic,  and  observed  her 
case  for  many  years.     He  says — 

''  The  most  remarkable  features  of  this  case  were — a  bloody  crown  encircling  the  head  ; 
marks  of  wounds  in  the  hands,  feet  and  side,  and  two  or  three  crosses  on  the  breast. 
These,  and  the  mark  round  her  forehead,  often  bled,  the  latter  usually  on  Wednesday, 
and  the  former  on  Friday,  and  with  such  obstinacy,  that  very  often  heavy  drops  ran 
down.  This  statement  has  been  subscribed  to  by  numerous  physicians,  and  others  also 
who  have  visited  her. 

"  In  1 820  the  Ecclesiastical  Board  visited  Diilmen  several  times,  and  found  the  facts 
more  or  less  to  agree  with  the  published  reports. 

"  On  the  breast  was  found  a  double  cross,  in  red  connected  lines.  The  bleedings 
had  developed  for  years,  and  all  accounts  agree  that  they  could  not  have  been  produced 
by  any  known  applications  from  without.  They  have  been  continually  watched  for  days, 
and  washed  by  physicians,  but  never  varied  in  appearance,  nor  could  they  be  accounted 
for  on  any  known  physiological  cause.  Katherine  appeared  to  have  been  a  highly  sensitive 
devout  person  from  childhood. 

"  In  one  of  her  numerous  visions  she  informed  her  confessor  that  she  had  a  vision  of 
the  Saviour,  who  appeared  to  her  as  a  radiant  youth,  offering  her  a  garland  with  the 
left  hand  and  a  crown  of  thorns  with  the  right.  She  seized  the  latter,  and  pressed  it  to 
her  brow,  but  on  regaining  outward  consciousness  she  felt  a  severe  pain  encircling  her 
head,  accompanied  by  drops  of  blood.  Soon  after  this,  in  1802,  she  entered  the  convent 
at  Diilmen. 

"About  1814  her  case  became  generally  known,  through  a  pamphlet  published  by  her 
attending  physician.  Still  later  she  submitted  —  though  reluctantly  —  to  an  official 
investigation,  and  though  she  always  desired  most  earnestly  to  be  left  in  strict 
retirement,  she  yielded  patiently  to  any  form  of  investigation  that  could  throw  light  on 
her  wonderful  case." 

The  celebrated  naturalist,  Count  Stolberg,  visited  Katherine  in  1821, 

so  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

and  from  his  account  we  learn  that  for  many  months  at  a  time,  her  whole 
nourishment  consisted  of  water  and  small  portions  of  an  apple,  plum,  or 
cherry,  daily.  She  was  subject  to  trances,  and  fasts  prolonged  for  incredible 
periods  of  time.  She  often  spoke  in  trance,  in  strange  and  beautiful 
language.  Her  prevision,  knowledge  of  character,  distant  events  and 
places,  was  astonishing,  and  her  cheerfulness,  piety,  and  resignation  excited 
the  admiration  of  all  around  her.  Early  on  the  Friday  morning,  the  thorn 
wounds  on  her  head  began  to  bleed ;  later  in  the  day  the  eight  wounds  on 
her  hands  and  feet  commenced  bleeding.  No  artist  could  have  more 
accurately  painted  the  crown  and  crosses,  and  no  matter  what  pains  were 
taken  to  wipe  off  the  drops  of  blood,  they  continued  to  flow  throughout 
the  entire  day.  She  had  many  remarkable  spiritual  gifts,  and  besides  the 
phenomena  already  described,  her  clairvoyant  perceptions  were  constant 
and  most  penetrating.  Ennemoser,  in  his  "  History  of  Magic,"  relates 
many  other  equally  remarkable  and  well  attested  cases  of  Stigmata,  none 
of  which  are  more  striking  in  the  persons  of  religious  ecstatics  than  that 
which  has  recently  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Continental  world,  in  the 
person  of  a  poor  servant  girl  of  Belgium,  of  whom  the  following  account  is 
rendered  by  Father  Johann  Weber,  a  Dominican  physician,  who  was  sent 
by  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese  to  the  village  of  Bois  d'Haisne,  in  Belgium, 
to  investigate  the  case  :— 

The  Dominican's  visit  is  described  in  the  Roman  CathoUc  Tablet  of  1869 
in  the  following  words  : — 

"  He  arrived  at  the  village  of  Bois  d'Haisne,  at  the  house  of  the  Lafans,  about  one 
o'clock  in  the  day.  Louisa  was  at  that  very  moment  in  Qne  of  her  mysterious  trances  ; 
but  the  venerable  Provincial  was  only  disposed  to  doubt,  since  her  appearance  was  per- 
fectly natural.  However,  the  parish  priest  who  accompanied  him  soon  convinced  him  of 
the  reality,  by  shaking  her  violently,  and  then  sticking  pins  into  her  arms  and  legs  with- 
out producing  the  smallest  effect  upon  her  ;  nor  did  blood  flow  from  the  punctures, 
though  they  were  deep.  Finding  that  she  was  entirely  insensible,  they  proceeded  to 
examine  her  hands  and  feet,  in  which  they  found  the  distinct  marks  of  the  stigmata. 
There  were  also  marks  of  the  crown  of  thorns  round  her  head,  but  there  was  no  trace  of 
blood  in  any  of  the  wounds.  After  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  observation,  the  priest 
recalled  her  to  consciousness  by  the  simple  words,  "  Well,  Louisa."  She  opened  her  eyes 
quite  naturally,  and  then  saw  the  Provincial.  The  priest  explained  to  her  that  he  had 
been  sent  by  the  bishop  to  investigate  the  matter.  In  answer  to  his  enquiry  as  to  what 
she  had  seen  in  her  ecstacy,  she  replied  that  she  had  been  assisting  in  the  bearing  of  the 
cross.  He  was  very  much  struck  both  with  her  simplicity  and  ignorance.  She  was 
merely  a  peasant  girl,  and  nothing  more.  The  priest  having  left  the  house,  the  Provincial 
resolved  to  remain  and  watch  the  case  ;  but  that  he  might  not  appear  to  be  doing  so,  he 
took  out  his  breviary  and  began  to  say  his  ofl[ice.  He  remarked  only  that  she  turned  to 
the  east,  and  that  her  expression  was  one  of  singular  modesty  and  reflection.  At  a 
little  before  two  o'clock  she  gave  a  deep  sigh  and  lifted  up  her  hands.  Soon  her  watcher 
perceived  a  stream  of  blood  to  issue  from  the  wound  in  her  left  hand,  which  could  not 
have  been  caused  by  any  instrument  or  other  agency,  as  she  had  not  moved  from  her  arm- 
chair, and  her  hands  did  not  touch  each  other.  Tears  flowed  from  her  eyes  and  fell  un- 
heeded on  her  cheek.  Her  expression  changed  to  one  expressing  great  anguish,  a  kind  of 
foam  escaped  from  her  lips  and  filled  her  mouth.  At  a  quarter  to  three  she  fell,  her  arms 
being  extended  in  the  shape  of  a  cross.  Her  sister  ran  to  j)ut  cloths  under  her  head  and 
feet,  the  former  being  lifted  with  great  difficulty.  Her  face  was  warm,  but  her  hands  and 
feet  were  icy  cold  as  if  dead,  while  the  pulse  apparently  ceased  to  beat.  At  three  o'clock 
she  moved,  crossing  her  feet  a  little,  and  assuming  exactly  the  attitude  of  Christ  on  the 
cross.  Thus  she  remained  until  four  o'clock,  when  she  suddenly  rose,  knelt  with  clasped 
hands,  and  seemed  to  pray  with  the  utmost  fervour.  Her  body  during  this  time  appeared 
as  if  it  scarcely  touched  the  ground.  After  about  ten  minutes  she  seated  herself  again  in 
the  arm  chair,  resuming  her  attitude  of  modest  recollection,  and  the  Provincial  thought 
she  would  soon  be  herself  again  ;  but  the  most  curious  phenomena  were  yet  to  come. 
After  a  few  seconds  her  expression  became  painfully  distressed  ;  she  lifted  her  arms  again 
in  the  shape  of  a  cross,  sighing  heavily,  and  greenish  foam  again  escaping  from  her  mouth, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  31 

while  the  mark  of  the  crown  of  thorns  on  her  head  became  more  and  more  distinct. 
Suddenly  she  burst  forth  in  a  loud  cry,  and  bowed  her  head.  At  that  moment  her  body 
had  all  the  appearance  of  death  ;  her  face  was  deadly  pale,  and  even  cadaverous  ;  her  lips 
were  black  and  livid  ;  her  eyes  glassy,  open,  and  apparently  without  life.  A  few  moments 
after,  the  coloiir  returned  to  her  cheeks,  and  her  face  assumed  an  expression  of  intense 
beatitude.  The  parish  priest  came  back  at  this  moment,  and  taking  a  lamp  of  petroleum, 
put  it  close  to  her  eyes  without  her  perceiving  it.  The  Provincial  pricked  her  feet,  both 
on  the  soles  and  on  the  upper  parts,  without  her  feeling  it  in  the  smallest;  degree.  At  a 
quarter  past  six  she  suddenly  became  perfectly  natural,  the  pulse  began  to  beat  as  usual, 
and  she  was  "  herself  "  again.  She  had  no  recollection  of  anything  she  had  herself  done 
during  her  ecstacy.  She  seemed  to  think  little  or  nothing  of  these  extraordinary  visions, 
and  did  not  attribute  to  herself  any  merit  or  holiness  in  consequence.  She  is  a  tertiary 
of  St.  Francis,  but  knows  very  little  of  his  history.  In  answer  to  some  questions  which 
were  put  to  her,  she  replied  that  she  had  never  been  spoken  to  by  Our  Lord,  and  that  she 
had  seen  the  evil  one  under  various  forms  ;  when  she  mentioned  him  she  was  filled  with 
great  fear. 

"  The  following  morning  she  was  at  the  parish  church,  and  received  the  communion  at 
the  hands  of  the  Provincial  with  great  reverence.  The  priest's  housekeeper  being  absent, 
she  came  to  the  presbytery  to  prepare  breakfast.  The  Provincial  was  struck  with  her 
brisk,  healthy  appearance,  and  could  scarcely  imagine  that  he  beheld  in  the  bright,  simple 
servant  girl  the  Extatica  who,  in  a  few  hours,  probably,  would  be  again  undergoing  the 
mysterious  conformity  to  the  Passion  above  described." 

Of  Stone-throwing,  hauntings,  or  the  disturbances  which  in  Germany  are 
commonly  attributed  to  the  "  Polter  Gheist,"  we  have  so  many  accounts, 
and  the  manifestations  so  nearly  resemble  each  other,  that  it  would  be 
tedious  to  repeat  them. 

Almost  every  reader  of  Spiritual  literature  is  familiar  with  the  accounts 
published  by  Brevior,  Howitt,  Owen,  Mrs.  Crowe,  &c.,  concerning  the 
hauntings  in  the  Castle  of  Slawensik,  in  Upper  Silesia,  especially  those 
which  occurred  to  Councillor  Hahn  and  his  friend  Cornet  Kern. 

Dr.  Dorfel,  a  physician  resident  at  Hamburgh,  quite  recently  sent  the 
author  a  numerously-signed  document,  containing  accounts,  known  to  and 
witnessed  personally  by  the  signers,  of  manifestations  which  tally  almost 
exactly  with  those  in  the  Castle  of  Slawensik.  These  hauntings  followed 
the  family  of  Dr.  Dorfel  for  a  period  of  more  than  three  years,  during  which 
he  removed  from  Darmstadt,  Berlin,  and  Bonn,  in  the  hope  of  avoiding 
them.  They  came  in  the  shape  of  frightful  apparitions,  groanings,  shrieks, 
poundings,  throwing  of  missiles,  movements  of  heavy  furniture,  &c.,  and 
had  been  witnessed  by  Madame  Dorfel  and  her  two  daughters,  besides 
about  one  hundred  different  persons,  neighbours  of  the  suffering  and 
afflicted  family,  who  had  been  called  in  at  various  times  and  places  in  the 
vain  hope  of  exorcising  the  persecutors  who  tormented  them. 

In  answer  to  Dorfel's  statement  sent  to  the  author,  the  latter  advised 
him  to  form  circles,  and  endeavour  to  communicate  with  the  invisible 
persecutors,  on  the  generally  pursued  system  of  American  Spiritualists. 
This  advice  being  followed,  proved  successful. 

During  the  year  1870,  the  harassed  family  succeeded  in  communicating 
by  raps  and  planchette  writing,  with  the  Polter  Gheist,  and  a  number  of 
his  weird  associates.  In  this  way  they  learned  a  terrible  history  of  crime 
and  wrong,  involving  persons  of  high  position,  of  whom  it  would  now  be 
injudicious  to  write.  The  spirits  represented  that  they  only  attached 
themselves  to  the  doctor's  family  because  they  found  in  its  members  the 
requisite  medium  power.  The  communications  soon  grew  orderly ;  the 
criminal  spirits  manifested  penitence  and  desire  for  progress,  after  which 
the  hauntings  entirely  ceased.  In  all  probability,  hundreds  of  similar  cases 
would  be  thus  explained  and  terminated,   if  those  who  are  cognisant  of 

32  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

them,  would  only  enter  upon  a  systematic  method  of  communing  with  the 
invisibles,  on  the  plan  of  the  modern  spirit  circle. 

From  the  reports  of  M.  Kalodzy,  the  author  of  several  valuable  works 
on  mineralogy,  mining,  engineering,  &c.,  we  have  received  a  curious 
collection  of  narratives  concerning  the  knockings  which  are  so  common 
in  Hungarian  and  Bohemian  mines.  M.  Kalodzy  says,  these  knockings 
have  been  repeatedly  heard  by  him  and  the  pupils  that  he — as  a  teacher 
in  the  Hungarian  School  of  Mines — has  introduced  there,  and  that  many 
of  the  miners  are  so  accustomed  to  the  signals  of  their  "  Kobolds  "  that 
they  would  not  like  to  work  in  any  direction  against  which  the  knockers 
warn  them.  In  Northern  Germany,  these  knockings  are  quite  common  in 
mines,  and  are  attributed  to  the  Berg-geister,  or  spirits  of  mountains 
and  mines. 

From  Mdme.  Kalodzy,  the  writer  of  "Rambles  in  the  Hartz  Mountains," 
and  "  The  Clock  Makers  of  the  Forest,"  &c.,  the  author  of  this  work  has 
received  the  following  account  of  these  "  Kobolds  "  or  spirits,  as  witnessed 
by  Madame  Kalodzy  and  three  companions,  who  spent  a  week  in  the  hut 
of  a  peasant,  one  Michael  Engelbrecht,  in  whose  family  the  Kobolds  seem 
to  have  been  perfectly  familiar  :■ — 

"  On  the  three  first  days  after  onr  arrival,"  said  Madame  K ,  "  we  only  heard  a 

few  dull  knocks,  sounding  in  and  about  the  mouth  of  the  mine,  as  if  produced  by  some 
vibrations  of  very  distant  blows,  but  when  on  the  thii-d  evening  Michael  came  home  from 
work,  he  brought  us  the  welcome  intelligence  that  his  friends,  the  Kobolds,  had  promised 
by  knockings  to  make  us  a  visit.  This  we  were  right  glad  of,  as  Dorothea,  our  Michael's 
mfe,  had  expressed  her  fears  that  they  might  be  shy  of  so  many  strangers,  and  would 
not  appear,  unless  we  spent  some  hours  in  the  mine. 

"We  were  about  to  sit  down  to  tea  when  Mdlle.  Gronin  called  our  attention  to  a  steady 
light,  round,  and  about  the  size  of  a  cheese  plate,  which  appeared  suddenly  on  the  wall  of 
the  little  garden  directly  opposite  the  door  of  the  hut  in  wliich  we  sat. 

"Before  any  of  us  could  rise  to  examine  it,  four  more  lights  appeared  almost  simul- 
taneously, about  the  same  shape,  and  varying  only  in  size.  Surrounding  each  one  was 
the  dim  outHne  of  a  small  human  figure,  black  and  grotesque,  more  like  a  little  image 
carved  out  of  black  shining  wood,  than  anything  else  I  can  Uken  them  to.  Dorothea 
kissed  her  hands  to  these  dreadful  little  shapes,  and  Michael  bowed  with  great  reverence. 
As  for  me  and  my  companions,  we  were  so  awe-struck  yet  amused  at  these  comical  shapes, 
that  we  could  not  move  or  speak  until  they  themselves  seemed  to  flit  about  in  a  sort  of 
wavering  dance,  and  then  vanish,  one  by  one." 

The  narrator  went  on  to  say,  that  she  and  her  husband  have  since  both 
heard  and  seen  these  little  men,  who  always  come  and  go  very  suddenly  ; 
appear  as  above  described  in  the  shadowy  image  of  diminutive  black  dwarfs 
about  two  or  three  feet  in  height,  and  at  that  part  which  in  the  human 
being  is  occupied  by  the  heart,  they  carry  the  round  luminous  circle  first 
described,  an  appearance  which  is  much  more  frequently  seen  than  the 
little  black  men  themselves. 

Mr.  Weske,  a  we'althy  and  intelligent  German  gentleman  of  San  Francisco, 
has  related  to  the  author  a  graphic  account  of  his  discovering  a  fine  gold 
lode  by  aid  of  these  knocking  mining  spirits.  Mr.  William  Howitt,  in  an 
article  on  the  Berg-Geister,  written' some  years  ago  for  the  London  Spiritual 
Magazine,  says  : — 

"  We  know  that  the  miners  of  Germany  and  the  North  have  always  asserted,  and  do 
stiU  assert,  the  existence  of  Kobolds  and  other  Berg-geister  or  spirits  of  the  mountains 
and  mines,  and  that  they  assist  or  thwart  their  exertions  in  quest  of  ore,  as  they  are 
irritated  or  placated." 

The  miners  describe  them  as  short,  black,  and  declare  that  when  they  are 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  33 

attached  to  certain  miners  they  go  before  them  in  the  sohd  subterranean 
rock,  knocking  with  their  hammers,  and  thus  indicating  the  presence  of 
metal  and  the  devious  course  of  the  vein.  If  it  is  lost  by  a  break  in  the 
strata,  or  "  fault "  as  they  call  it,  the  sound  of  the  Be?'g-geister's  hammer 
directs  where  again  to  seek  it,  and  when  there  is  a  busy  and  energetic 
thumping  of  many  hammers,  it  is  the  certain  announcement  of  abundant  ore. 
Not  caring  in  this  plain  matter  of  fact  compendium  to  enter  more  fully 
into  the  vexed  question  of  sub-human  spiritual  intelligences,  we  shall  treat 
no  more  on  what  is  termed  by  the  Occulists  "elementary  existences."  As 
abundance  of  testimony  on  this  question  can  be  found  in  other  writings,  we 
must  return  to  our  narrative  of  phenomena  which  may  be  attributed  to  the 
agency  of  human  spirits,  or  originate  in  the  realms  of  magnetism  and 
psychology. 

It  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  the  student  of  SpirituaHstic  phenomena  to 
learn,  that  besides  the  instances  of  levitation  recorded  of  Mr.  D.  D.  Home, 
and  other  physical  media  of  the  New  Dispensation,  several  spontaneous 
cases  of  this  kind  are  on  record. 

The  following  brief  article  is  selected  from  many  other  illustrations  of 
this  phase  of  sptrit  power,  because  it  comes  from  respectable  and  authentic 
sources. 

A  correspondent  in  t\iQ  Journal  de  Frankfort,  of  September,  1861,  writes 
as  follows  : — 

To  the  Editor  of  the  "Spiritual  Magazine." 

"  We  read  in  the  Geqenwart  of  Vienna  that  a  Catholic  Priest  was  preaching  before  his 
congregation  last  Sunday  in  the  Church  of  St.  Mary,  at  Vienna,  on  the  subject  of  the 
constant  protection  of  angels  over  the  faithful  committed  to  their  charge,  and  this  in 
words  of  great  exaltation,  and  with  an  unction  and  eloquence  which  touched  profoundly 
the  hearts  of  numbers  of  the  congregation.  Soon  after  the  commencement  of  the  sermon, 
a  girl  of  about  twenty  years  of  age  showed  all  the  signs  of  ecstacy,  and  soon,  her  arms 
crossed  upon  her  bosom,  and  with  her  eyes  fixed  on  the  preacher,  she  was  seen  by  the 
whole  congregation  to  be  raised  gradually  from  the  floor  into  the  air,  and  there  to  rest  at 
an  elevation,  of  more  than  a  foot,  to  the  end  of  the  sermon.  We  are  assured  that  the 
same  phenomenon  had  happened  several  days  previously  at  the  moment  of  her  receiving 
the  communion." — Journal  de  Frankfort,  Sept.  6,  1861. 

This  remarkable  occurrence  was  also  testified  of  by  the  late  Baron  de 
Palm,  who  was  present  on  the  occasion,  and  himself  related  it  to  the 
author.  In  connection  with  this  event,  Baron  Kirkup,  of  Florence,  a  well 
known  and  esteemed  correspondent  of  the  Londo?i  Spiritual  Magazine, 
writes  to  the  Editor  in  the  following  terms  : — 

"  This  is  a  confirmation  of  my  friend  Mr.  Home's  repeated  elevation,  of  which  there 
are  a  thousand  witnesses.  I  possess  eight  engravings  from  different  copperplates  of  a 
similar  elevation  of  Pope  Pius  VII.     There  is  this  inscription  : 

"  '  Pius  Sep.  Pont.  Max. 
Savonce  in  Ecstasim  iterum  raptus  die  Assumptionis  B.  F.  M. 
lUh  Augusti,  1811.' 
"  I  have  two  ancient  prints  of  diEferent  risings  in  the  air  of  St.  Catherine  of  Sienna  ; 
one  inscriptisn  is  : 

"  '  Sublime  per  echstasim  rapta  divina  arcana  contemplatur,'  &c. 
"  I  believe  many  of  your  friends  know 

"  Your  obedient  servant, 
"  Florence,  15  October,  1861.  Seymour  Kirkup." 

From  the  letters  of  an  esteemed  Spiritualist  of  Baden  Baden,  Col.  Kyd, 
a  gentleman  who,  in  connection  with  his  amiable  lady's  Planchette  writing, 
3 

34  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

has  done  much  to  stimulate  investigation  into  Spiritual  matters  throughout 
many  of  the  most  fashionable  circles  of  Germany,  the  author  learned 
accounts  concerning  a  certain  Pastor  Blumhard,  which  have  since  been 
verified  by  several  persons  who  have  visited  that  gentleman,  and  published 
details  of  his  wonderful  achievements.  Pastor  Blumhard  resides  at  Boll, 
near  Gappingen  in  Wiirtemberg,  and  is  a  noble-minded  enthusiast,  whose 
life,  in  a  more  limited  sphere  than  that  of  the  excellent  Pastor  Oberlin,  still 
greatly  resembles  it.  M.  Blumhard  performs  many  marvellous  cures  by  the 
laying  on  of  hands,  having  in  one  instance  cured  completely  an  unfortunate 
woman,  a  parishioner  of  his,  of  an  immense  wen.  The  report  of  this 
extraordinary  case  attracted  so  much  attention  to  the  good  Pastor,  that  he 
was  visited  from  far  and  near,  by  great  numbers  both  of  the  curious  and 
afflicted  of  earth.  M.  Blumhard  not  only  cures  the  sick,  but  he  administers 
to  the  miserably  poor,  of  whom  his  parish  is  full,  by  presents  of  fruit, 
vegetables,  wine,  and  provisions  of  all  kinds.  These  his  narrow  means 
could  never  enable  him  to  purchase,  but  all  his  great  benefactions,  though 
procured  through  human  means,  are  generally  brought  to  him  by  entire 
strangers,  and  always  in  answer  to  prayer.  Hundreds  of  persons  report 
that  they  have  been  compelled  by  a  power  they  could  not  resist,  to  send 
presents  of  clothes,  or  food,  to  Pastor  Blumhard.  On  these  occasions  it  is 
invariably  found  that  some  poor  needy  parishioner  has  besought  the  prayers 
of  the  good  Pastor  for  precisely  the  articles  sent  in.  Like  Miiller,  of 
Bristol,  England,  the  philosophy  of  this  life  of  prayer  and  faith  is  easily 
understood  by  the  student  of  magnetism  and  psychology,  but  as  in  Miiller's 
case.  Pastor  Blumhard's  religion  alone  is  held  responsible  for  the  Divine 
response.  Be  it  as  it  may,  a  good  work  is  accomplished,  and  an  humble 
German  priest  is  the  instrument  through  whom  it  is  wrought.  A  few  such 
evidences  of  Christian  faith  in  action,  would  do  more  to  prove  the  truth^ 
and  value  of  Christianity,  than  the  Pope  of  Rome  and  all  his  Cardinals,' 
or  the  barren  fruitless  sermons  of  the  whole  Bench  of  English  Bishops. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     GERMANY     (CONCLUDED.) 

To  the  writings  of  Kerner,  Ennemoser,  Eschenmayer,  and  their  cotem- 
poranes,  we  must  refer  our*  readers  for  further  details  concerning  the 
subjects  treated  of  in  the  last  chapter,  meantime  it  needs  no  reiteration  to 
show  that  all  the  spiritual  phenomena  now  so  generally  known  throughout 
the  world,  were  quite  famiHar  amongst  the  Germans  during  the  entire  of 
this  century, 

Even  the  inspiration  exhibited  on  the  public  rostrum,  for  which  American 
Spiritualism  has  been  so  specially  and  justly  celebrated,  has  not  been 
wanting  in  the  nineteenth-century  marvels  of  German  Spiritualism.  In 
proof  of  this  we  cite  the  case  of  the  celebrated  Baroness  Von  Krudener,  a 
Prussian  lady  of  high  birth,  who  for  more  than  twenty  years,  during  the 

Prince    Emil   de    Sayn.  Wittgenstein 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  35 

stormiest  days  of  revolutionary  strife  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,  that  is, 
from  1793  to  the  period  of  her  death  in  1824,  deemed  herself  called  upon 
to  quit  the  brilliant  life  of  the  salon,  and  the  attractions  which  her  rank 
and  station  offered,  in  order  that  she  might  preach  a  gospel  of  peace  and 
purity,  in  the  presence  of  warlike  and  violent  men,  many  of  them  the 
contending  generals,  princes,  and  potentates  who  ruled  the  destinies  of 
Europe. 

A  prophetess  and  orator  of  the  most  remarkable  power,  this  beautiful 
and  accomplished  lady  pursued  her  mission  in  despite  of  threats,  dangers, 
and  captivity. 

The  following  anecdote  will  suffice  to  show  the  great  power  she  wielded 
over  the  most  influential  personages  of  her  time. 

In  William  Howitt's  charming  biography  of  the  Baroness  Von  Kriidener, 
when  describing  the  chaotic  state  of  Europe  during  the  Napoleonic  wars, 
he  says  : — 

"  One  evening  the  Emperor  Alexander  of  Russia  who  had  been  making  his  way 
across  Bavaria  wearily  for  days,  through  crowds  of  exulting  people  who  looked  upon 
him  as  a  saviour,  entered  an  hotel  at  Heilbronn  borne  down  by  fatigue."  "  He  shut 
himself  up  in  his  room,  filled  with  deep  and  painful  reflections. 

"  Alexander  is  supposed  to  have  been  aware  of  the  intended  murder  of  his  father, 
the  Emperor  Paul,  and  despite  his  wish  to  become  his  people's  benefactor,  he  could 
not  rise  above  the  dark  memories  that  haunted  him. 

"He  himself  relates  that  he  had  just  exclaimed  aloud,  "Oh,  that  some  holy  soul 
might  be  sent  to  me,  who  could  solve  the  great  enigma  of  my  life  and  destiny !"  when 
the  door  opened,  and  Pnnce  Wollonsky,  entreating  pardon  for  the  intrusion, 
announced,  that  Madame  Kriidener  waited  without,  and  would  insist  upon  seeing  His 
Imperial  Highness. 

''  '  Madame  Kriidener!'  replied  the  Emperor,  'then  surely  she  comes  in  answer  to 
my  prayer ;  let  her  enter.'  Madam  Kriidener  had  met  the  Emperor  before,  and  won 
his  confidence  by  her  marvellous  spirit  of  prophecy,  fearless  love  of  truth,  and  simple 
piety. 

"  For  three  long  hours  the  noble  lady  counselled  with  the  tempest-tossed  soul  of 
the  monarch, 

"  He  himself  declared,  '  she  spoke  music  to  his  spirit,  and  brought  him  a  peace 
which  no  other  on  earth  could  give.'  Before  she  quitted  him,  she  declared,  she  had 
come  to  plead  the  cause  of  the  starving  peasantry  of  Russia,  famine-stricken  and 
perishing,  from  the  ravages  of  the  armies  that  had  passed  through  the  land,  and  con- 
sumed all  their  means  of  subsistence. 

"The  representations  of  this  admirable  woman  were  effectual,  as  Alexander 
exhausted  his  resources  in  sending  provisions  to  the  sufferers,  and  relieving  to  the 
utmost  extent  of  his  power  those,  for  whom  the  good  Baroness  had  so  ably  pleaded." 

Referring  to  Madame  Kriidener's  subsequent  residence  in  Paris,  in  the 
eventful  year  181 5,  her  biographer  says  : — 

''  Here  then  we  reach  a  point  in  our  heroine's  life,  which  fixed  upon  her  the  eyes 
and  wonder  of  all  Europe. 

''  Three  times  a  week,  she  held  religious  meetings,  which  were  attended  by  all  the 
princes,  nobles,  and  great  generals  of  Europe.  There,  in  a  simple  black,  or  dark  blue 
dress,  with  her  hair  cut  close,  and  although  past  fifty,  retaining  traces  of  her  former 
singular  beauty,  she  addressed  the  assembled  potentates  in  the  most  exalted  strains 
of  eloquence. 

' '  She  exhorted  them  to  put  an  end  to  the  horrors  of  war,  and  inaugurate  true 
Christianity,  by  peace  on  earth,  and  good  will  to  men. 

"  It  was  a  strange  spectacle,  to  see  those  who  commanded  the  destinies  of  Europe 
sitting  humbly  at  the  feet  of  this  inspired  woman. 

'■Madame  Von  Kriidener,  by  the  wonderful  fulfilment  of  her  predictions,  and  the 
inspiration  of  her  preaching,  had  herself  become  one  of  the  powers  of  Europe,  and  for 
a  time,  there  is  no  doubt,  that  she  actually  directed  the  movements  of  the  allied 
princes." 

36  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Few  who  read  this  description  will  fail  to  recognize  in  it,  the  characteris- 
tics which — with  all  due  allowance  for  difference  in  surrounding  circum- 
stances— distinguish  the  "trance-speaking  mediums"  of  America,  who,  like 
Madame  Kriidener,  have  become  an  irresistible  power  in  the  circle  of  their 
special  ministrations. 

Up  to  the  last  quarter  of  a  century,  despite  the  universality  with  which 
spiritual  gifts  were  manifested  in  individual  cases,  the  tendency  to 
materialism  on  the  one  hand,  and  intolerance  on  the  other,  succeeded 
in  repressing  the  public  advance  of  Spiritualism  in  Germany.  No  better 
illustration  of  this  Teutonic  conservatism  can  be  given,  than  the  antagonistic 
reception  that  was  accorded  to  Baron  Von  E.eichenbach's  brilliant 
discoveries,  in  what  he  termed  "  OdyUc  or  Od  Force." 

Although  Reichenbach's  treatises  on  "  Od  Force,"  have  been  made 
familiar  to  English  readers  by  Dr.  Ashburner's  fine  translation,  it  may  not 
be  amiss  to  explain  in  brief  the  nature  of  Reichenbach's  discoveries.  This 
indefatigable  scientist  procured  the  aid  of  a  large  number  of  "  Sensitives," 
or  what  would  now  be  termed,  clairvoyants  or  spirit  mediums. 

These  persons  he  placed  in  dark  rooms,  and  then  submitted  to  their 
spiritual  sight,  magnets,  shells,  crystals,  minerals,  animals,  human  hands, 
and  a  great  variety  of  animate  and  inanimate  objects,  known  only  to  him- 
self, but  detected  by  the  Sensitives,  through  the  flames  or  luminous 
appearances,  that  each  substance  gave  forth. 

These  flames  differed  in  colour,  size,  and  intensity,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  object  examined,  but  as  large  numbers  of  persons  fully 
corroborated  each  other's  observations,  and  the  Baron's  experiments  were 
conducted  for  years,  with  the  most  persevering  attention,  he  conceived 
himself  justified  in  arriving  at  the  conclusion,  that  from  every  object  in  the 
human,  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms,  there  emanated  a  force 
which  could  be  detected  under  favourable  conditions,  as  flames,  or 
luminous  appearances,  and  whilst  some  observers  were  disposed  to  regard 
these  as  the  universal  life  of  things,  he  (Reichenbach)  for  special  reasons 
defined  them  in  his  writings  as  "  Odyle,"  or  "  Od  Force." 

Whatever  name  or  style  Von  Reichenbach,  Mesmer,  Galvani,  Volta, 
Newton,  Paracelsus  the  Rosicrucian,  or  Geber  the  Alchemist,  may  have 
thought  proper  to  give  to  the  "force,"  or  "element,"  of  which  they  dis- 
coursed, the  intelligent  reader  will  be  at  no  loss  to  correlate  all  such  forces, 
and  resolve  them  into  the  one  all-pervading  life  principle  of  the  Universe. 

It  would  be  needless  to  enter  upon  further  details  of  Von  Reichenbach's 
discovery,  to  which  no  mere  summary  could  do  justice ;  it  is  enough  to  say 
that  when  he  first  gave  the  result  of  his  researches  to  the  world,  instead 
of  winning  the  applause  and  gratitude  of  his  countrymen,  he  simply  drew 
down  upon  himself  an  amount  of  insult  and  contempt,  of  which  the  most 
unenlightened  age  might  have  been  ashamed. 

In  1865,  the  first  regular  journal  devoted  to  SpirituaHsm  was  published  in 
Germany,  under  the  title  of  Psyche.  A  contemporary  French  paper  makes 
the  following  notice  of  this  periodical  in  connection  with  the  Baron  Von 
Reichenbach's  discoveries. 

"■Psyche  is  the  only  German  paper  treating  of  Spiritualism,  odic  force,  and  other     \ 
kindred   subjects,     It   is  published  monthly,  and  its  chief  editor  is  H.  A,  Berthe-     [, 
lea,   D.M,,  Zittan,   Saxony.     Since  this  excellent  little  periodical  was  commenced, 
many  fine  works  have  been   contributed   to   the  treasury   of    spiritual   literature, 
prominent  amongst  which  stands  a  noble  spiritual  journal  conducted  by  the  eminent 
Russian  Councillor  Hon.  Alexander  Aksakof,  entitled,  Psychische  Studien.    It  was  first 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  37 

published  at  Leipzig,  in  1874,  since  when  it  numbers  amongst  its  contributors  the 
honoured  names  of  the  Baron  and  Baroness  von  Vay,  Prince  Emil  Wittgenstein  ; 
Professors  Maximilian  Party,  Wagner,  Fichte,  and  a  long  list  of  potentates  and 
scientists  of  high  standing  and  distinguishad  ability." 

For  a  more  detailed  account  of  its  editor  Alexander  Aksakof,  and  the 
great  services  he  has  rendered  to  the  cause  of  human  progress,  we  must 
refer  our  readers  to  our  section  on  Russian  Spiritualism. 

Amongst  the  most  distinguished  supporters  of  the  movement  in  Ger- 
many, we  would  again  mention  the  Baroness  von  Vay,  a  highly-gifted 
seeress ;  also  Colonel  and  Mrs.  Kyd,  of  Baden  Baden ;  His  Imperial 
Highness  Nicholas,  Duke  of  Leuchtenberg ;  the  late  amiable  and  lamented 
Princess  Alice  of  Darmstadt,  the  Barons  Holmfeld,  Guldenstubbe,  and  de 
Palm,  and  many  other  celebrated  Spiritualists  of  distinction. 

Still,  Spiritualism  as  a  cause,  made  but  little  public  progress  until  the 
advent  of  the  Davenports,  Henry  Slade,  and  other  mediums  from  America, 
who,  by  their  professional  announcements,  compelled  the  press  to  notice 
the  subject,  and  draw  forth  investigators  from  the  privacy  of  the  salon,  to 
the  arena  of  public  discussion. 

There  are  many  reasons  for  believing  that  the  demonstrations  that  had 
already  been  published  abroad,  in  the  shape  of  hauntings,  obsessions,  &c., 
had  tended  to  repel  rather  than  attract  investigators. 

Thus,  about  1865,  when  Spiritualism  had  completely  captivated  the 
American,  and  British  mind,  and  in  France,  no  less  than  six  spiritual 
journals  were  liberally  supported,  Germany  could  only  boast  of  the  peri- 
odical before  mentioned,  called  Psyche. 

About  1867,  several  works  in  exposition  of  Spiritualism  were  put  forth 
at  Vienna,  and  found  a  rapid  sale  in  the  establishments  of  Lechner  and 
Wenedikt. 

Reports  of  American  spirit  photographs  being  taken,  and  stirring 
accounts  of  the  phenomena  produced  through  the  mediumiship  of  the  cele- 
brated Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  and  Rollin  Squire  of  America,  were  published 
in  tract  form,  and  widely  circulated. 

1\i^  seances  of  the  above  named  gentlemen  being  given  non-professionally, 
were  of  course  limited  only  to  the  favoured  few  with  whom  they  were 
guests.  Still  the  accounts  of  the  marvels  enacted  in  their  presence, 
stimulated  public  curiosity  to  the  highest  pitch.  About  this  time,  several 
other  works  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  were  put  forth,  amongst  them,  a 
fine  treatise  on  the  Science  of  Soul,  by  Dr.  Epps.  This  brochure  became 
so  popular,  that  the  publishers  could  hardly  keep  pace  with  the  demand. 

Private  circles  too  began  to  multiply  rapidly,  but  the  chief  impetus  given 
to  a  wide-spread  interest  in  the  cause  of  Spirituahsm,  was  unquestionably 
due  to  the  agency  so  much,  and  so  unwisely  denounced  by  many  leaders 
of  the  Spiritual  ranks,  namely,  professional  mediumship. 

The  distinguished  services  rendered  to  the  cause  by  Mr.  D.  D.  Home, 
were,  as  above  remarked,  confined  to  such  influential  personages  as  sought 
this  gentleman's  society,  in  the  character  of  a  friend  and  equal. 

The  deUberate  investigation  of  the  subject,  requisite  for  scientific  experi- 
ments, could  not  be  conducted  in  the  presence  of  monarchs  and  princes, 
neither  could  the  guest  of  such  exalted  personages  be  examined,  with  the 
severe  scrutiny  to  which  the  Davenports,  Messrs.  Foster,  Slade,  and  other 
professional  mediums,  have  felt  called  upon  to  submit. 

Strictly  speaking  then,  it  is  in  a  great  measure  due  to  the  services  of 
professional  media,  that  Spiritualism  has  at  last  conquered  the  stolidity  of 

38  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

German  conservatism,  and  made  itself  known  and  acknowledged  through- 
out the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land. 

With  a  view  of  rendering  equal  justice  to  both  sides  of  the  question, 
and  to  show  how  both  public  and  private  medium  ship  appeals  each,  to 
its  appropriate  class  of  minds,  we  shall  present  notices  of  each  phase, 
commencing  with  a  sketch  taken  from  the  book  reviewer's  notice  in  a 
recent  number  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  concerning  the  mediumship  of  the 
gifted  Baroness  von  Vay.     The  extract  is  as  follows  : — 

"VISIONEN    IM    WASSERGLASE,"    ETC. 

"  We  have  received  from  Baroness  Adelma  von  Vay,  of  Gonobitz,  Austria,  a  copy 
of  a  work  of  some  hundred  pages,  printed  in  the  German  tongue,  in  which  a  marked 
and  novel  phase  of  her  mediumship  is  practically  set  forth  to  the  reading;  world.  In 
her  preface,  this  talented  writer  and  worthy  lady  presents  the  object  of  the  brochure  as 
follows : — 

"  '  In  my  book,  "  Studies  of  the  Spirit- World,"  I  have  mentioned  my  visions  wit- 
nessed in  a  glass  of  water.  For  the  benefit  of  the  reader  who  has  not  perused  that 
work,  I  here  present  the  following  explanation  of  those  visions  from  the  "  Studies," 
page  85  :— 

"  '  Our  spirit  guides  advised  me  to  make  the  attempt  to  see  visions  in  a  glass  of  water. 
They  disclosed  to  me  one  day  that  I  possessed  the  gift  of  being  able  to  see  spirits 
without  becoming  somnambulic.  They  said  I  was  to  fill  a  glass  with  water,  and  look 
therein,  and  they  would  then  produce  spiritual  representations  in  the  same.  Upon 
making  the  trial,  I  immediately  saw  all  kinds  of  objects  in  the  water.  At  first  the 
water  seemed  to  be  agitated ;  by  degrees  the  pictures  appeared  at  the  brim  of  the 
glass.  I  perceive  these  visions  only  in  the  evening,  never  by  day,  and  I  must  feel  dis- 
posed thereto  through  an  earnest  desire  for  the  same.  I  am  in  a  normal  condition — 
i.  e.,  in  full  consciousness  of  what  I  observe  and  say.  The  desire  of  others  to  see  this 
or  that  picture  has  absolutely  no  influence  upon  me.  These  pictures  often  remain  a 
long  time  in  the  same  place,  others  again  disappear  instantaneously.  They  often 
appear  to  be  much  larger  than  the  surface  of  the  glass  would  seem  to  permit ;  some- 
times appear  like  photographs,  then  again  in  colors,  or  like  brilliant  light  cloud- 
pictures.  As  I  perceive  the  visions  in  the  water  I  dictate  the  view  to  my  husband, 
Baron  Eugene  von  Vay,  who  transcribes  it,  and  it  is  then  explained  by  my  guides. 

'  Adelma  Vay.'  " 

For  some  time  previous  to  the  breaking  out  of  the  Russian  war  with 
Turkey,  Professor  Boutlerof,  and  M.  Aksakof,  both  eminent  Russian  scien- 
tists, had  agreed  with  their  immediate  friends,  to  engage  Dr.  Slade,  of 
America,  to  assist  them  in  a  series  of  experiments  on  the  subject  of  physical 
force  mediumship,  in  which  direction,  Dr.  Slade  bore  a  high  reputation. 

The  disturbed  state  of -Russia  in  consequence  of  the  late  war,  measu- 
rably interfered  with  this  project,  and  though  some  satisfactory  seances  were 
conducted,  the  investigation  did  not  assume  the  character  originally 
intended. 

During  Dr.  Slade's  tour  through  Europe  however,  he  was  induced  to  give 
a  special  course  of  seances,  to  some  of  the  Professors  of  the  Leipzig 
University,  the  result  of  which  was,  that  six  of  that  distinguished  body, 
gave  in  their  testimony  to  the  truthfulness  of  Dr.  Slade,  and  signed  a  docu- 
ment, absolving  him  from  the  slightest  implication  of  fraud  or  personal 
agency  in  the  manifestations. 

Now  if  report  speaks  truly,  at  least  five  of  the  savants  have  yielded  assent 
to  the  claim  of  a  spiritual  origin  for  the  marvellous  effects  they  witnessed, 
whilst  the  sixth,  now  to  the  grief  of  his  many  friends  the  late  Professor 
Zoellner,  issued  a  work,  entitled  *'  Transcendental  Physics,"  in  which, 
though  attempting  to  show  that  the  wondrous  phenomena  he  described, 
were  due  to  the  interference  of  "  a  force,"  which  he  vaguely  defined,  as, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  39 

'  a  fourth  dimension  in  space,"  he  yet  fully  endorsed  the  truthfulness  of 
Slade,  acquitted  him  of  any  attempt  at  imposition;  described  the  super- 
mundane character  of  the  results  produced,  and  challenged  the  world  of 
science  to  account  for  the  same,  on  any  hypothesis,  save  the  spiritual  one 
alleged  by  the  Medium,  or  his  own  (Zoellner's)  theory  of  "  a  fourth  dimen- 
sion in  space." 

The  amazing  statements  put  forth  by  authorities  so  eminent  as  Zoellner, 
and  the  other  Leipzig  professors,  have  not  only  awakened  universal  interest 
throughout  Germany,  but  they  have  also  attracted  world-wide  attention, 
and  amongst  other  unlooked  for  effects,  provoked  a  curious  discussion  in 
America,  to  which  it  will  now  be  in  order  to  make  some  allusion. 

A  certain  blatant  preacher  and  lecturer,  one,  Rev.  Joseph  Cook,  of  Bos- 
ton, America,  during  a  course  of  what  he  announced  as  "  Scientific  Reli- 
gious Lectures,"  made  the  Leipzig  professor's  investigations,  the  subject  of 
several  addresses.  In  these,  he  read  aloud,  numerous  extracts  from  Pro- 
fessor Zoellner's  book,  and  commented  freely  on  the  astonishing 
phenomena  there  recorded. 

Whilst  the  Rev.  Joseph  Cook  was  thus  making  converts  to  the  Spiritual 
cause,  of  all  those  listeners  who  were  prone  to  beUeve  on  the  authority  of 
others,  he  seemed  to  have  forgotten,  how  far  he  was  committing  himself,  in 
the  opinion  of  those  clerical  brethren,  to  whom  Spiritualism  has  been  the 
grand  bete  noir  of  the  age.  Beginning  to  reaUze  possibly  that  he  had  gone 
too  far,  yet  unable  to  unsay  what  he  had  already  said,  or  explain  away  the 
marvels  on  which  he  had  so  freely  descanted,  he  undertook  to  beat  a 
retreat  in  the  following  creditable  (?)  fashion. 

In  a  lecture  to  be  given  by  him  at  Saratoga,  New  York,  for  the  bene- 
fit of  some  Christian  Church,  Mr.  Cook  announced,  that  he  would  take 
that  opportunity  of  setting  himself  right,  on  the  question  of  Spiritualism. 
Feeling  possibly,  that  the  "  ism  "  itself,  as  underlying  the  entire  structure  of 
the  religion  he,  and  all  other  Christians  profess,  was  too  much  for  him 
to  grapple  with,  Mr.  Cook  proceeded  to  set  himself  right,  before  an 
immense  audience,  including  a  large  number  of  highly  respectable 
SpirituaHsts,  by  pouring  forth  upon  the  latter,  as  a  class,  such  a  string  of 
vituperation,  and  abuse,  as  to  call  the  blush  of  shame  to  the  cheeks  of 
every  listener  present. 

At  the  request  of  the  indignant  SpirituaHsts  of  the  place,  the  author, 
who  was  one  of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Cook's  audience,  gave  a  review  of,  and 
answer  to  this  address,  in  a  lecture  delivered  the  following  evening.  Thus 
the  whole  subject  was  re-opened,  and  from  the  reports  taken  down  on  that 
occasion,  graphic  accounts  of  what  actually  occurred  in  the  presence  of  the 
Leipzig  professors,  as  detailed  by  Mr.  Cook  himself,  were  placed  side  by 
side,  with  the  vituperations  which  he  had  just  poured  out  against  those 
who  believed  in  the  facts  he  had  been  at  such  pains  to  relate.  Without 
any  farther  preface  we  shall  quote  as  much  of  the  author's  lecture,  as  will 
re-state  Cook's  account  of  the  Leipzig  investigations.  Mrs.  Hardinge 
Britten  said  : — 

''  In  the  Journal  of  February  21st,  of  this  year,  I  find  a  report  of  a  lecture  delivered 
by  Mr.  Joseph  Cook  in  Boston,  on  the  3rd  of  that  month,  in  which  he  gives  a  full 
account  of  some  noteworthy  experiments  of  six  distinguished  German  scientists, 
whose  spiritual  investigations  with  Henry  Slade,  the  American  medium,  were  pub- 
lished in  a  work  written  quite  recently  by  Prof.  Zoellner,  Professor  of  Physical 
Astronomy  at  Leipzig  University.  Without  attempting  to  reiterate  experiments  which 
seemed  as  amazing  to  Mr.  Cook  and  the  Leipzig  scientists,  as  they  are  familiar,  and 

40  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

their  recital  stale  and  uninteresting  to  experienced  Spiritualists,  I  must  still  commend 
to  your  attention  the  following  extracts  from  Mr.  Cook's  lecture.     He  says  :— 

'"Six  renowned  German  names  to  their  own  credit  or  discredit  can  now  be  quoted 
in  the  list  of  believers'in  the  reality  of  the  alleged  facts  of  the  modern  psychical  or 
spiritual  manifestations.  They  are  Profs.  Zoellner,  Fechner,  and  Sctieibner,  of 
Leipzig  University ;  Prof.  Weber,  of  Gottingen  University ;  Prof.  Fichte,  of  Stuttgart, 
and  Prof.  Ulrici,  of  Halle  University.' 

"  After  detailing  minutely  what  is  the  standing  and  reputation  of  these  emment 
scholars,  and  describing  with  equal  care  the  phenomena  they  witnessed,  he,  Mr.  Cook, 
goes  on  to  descant  on  the  high  moral  character  and  intellectual  ability  of  a  certam 
Signer  Bellachini,  Court  Conjurer  of  Germany.  This  gentleman,  he  shows,  havmg 
called  on  Henry  Slade,  and  witnessed  many  of  his  manifestations,  given  both  at 
Slade's  lodgings  and  the  conjurer's  own  apartments,  tendered  to  Slade  a  sworn 
affidavit  to  the  effect  that  no  conjuration  known  to  him  could  account  for  the  extraor- 
dinary demonstrations  of  occult  power  and  intelligence  he  had  thus  witnessed. 
Bellachini,  like  a  true  man,  as  well  as  a  true  artist,  commends  Mr.  Slade's  manifesta- 
tions to  the  respectful  consideration  of  science,  and  deprecates  any  unfavourable 
judgments  that  may  be  passed  upon  it  hastily,  or  without  thorough  investigation. 
This  manly  testimonial,  legally  witnessed  and  duly  filed,  Mr.  Cook  read  out  in  full. 

'■  His  next  noteworthy  remarks  are  as  follows,  and  are  given  verbatim  from  a  work 
on  '  Psychography '  recently  published  in  London  by  M.  A.  Oxon. 

"  '  Henry  Slade  having  proceeded  to  St.  Petersburg  to  fulfill  his  engagement  with 
Mr.  Aksakof  and  Prof.  Boutlerof,  and  to  present  the  phenomena  of  psychography  to 
the  scrutiny  of  a  committee  of  scientific  experts,  has  had  a  series  of  successful  sittings 
in  the  course  of  which  writing  has  been  obtained  In  the  Prussian  language.  At  one 
recent  sitting,  writing  in  six  different  languages  was  obtained  on  a  single  slate. 

" '  On  Wednesday,  February  20th,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Aksakof  and  Prof, 
Boutlerof,  Slade  had  a  most  successful  sitting  with  the  Grand  Duke  Constantine,  who 
received  them  cordially,  and  himself  obtained  writing  on  a  new  slate  held  by  himself 
alone.' 

"  Mr.  Cook  next  goes  on  to  describe  a  fresh  set  of  experiments,  remarkable  enough 
to  early  investigators,  but  sufficiently  familiar  to  us  as  the  phenomenon  of  writing 
obtained  m  closed  slates,  &c.  Mr.  Cook  also  read  out  in  detail  the  account  of  a  very 
curious  phenomenon,  being  no  other  than  the  sudden  disappearance  of  a  small  table 
in  a  light  room,  which  for  several  minutes  was  thoroughly  searched  in  vain  to  find  it. 
Whilst  the  amazed  Prof.  Zoellner,  was  continuing  his  fruitless  attempts  to  account 
for  the  disappearance  of  this  ponderable  body,  it  appeared  as  suddenly  as  it  had^disap- 
peared,  floating  in  the  air  just  below  the  ceiling — the  legs  upwards.  From  thence,  it 
floated  down  and  was  laid  by  invisible  hands  gently  on  another  piece  of  furniture.  In 
commenting  upon  this  extraordinary  manifestation  Mr.  Cook  says: — 

" '  The  mechanical  theory  of  matter  is  exploded  if  Zoellner's  alleged  facts  can  be 
proved  to  be  real,  but  here  are  grave  experts  who  unite  in  assuring  the  world  that 
these  events  occurred  under  their  own  eyesight.  [Then  how  dare  Mr.  Cook  insert  his 
presumption  if  in  this  category  ?]  Here  is  the  Court  Conjurer  who  says  he  can  do 
nothing  of  the  kind.  I  hold  in  my  hand  a  volume  by  Fichte,  and  he  says,  quoting 
these  experiments,  and  naming  the  professors  who  witnessed  them,  that  he  could  him- 
self, if  he  were  authorised,  give  in  addition  to  these  names  many  others  in  Germany 
who  by  the  experiments  at  Leipzig,  have  been  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  facts  and 
of  their  worthiness  to  be  made  the  subject  of  scientific  research.' 

"  But  Mr.  Cook  does  not  stop  here.  He  gives  yet  more  facts,  details  yet  more  of  the 
Leipzig  experiments  and  after  the  recital  of  one  remarkable  bomb-shell  thrown  into 
the  camp  of  materialism,  breaks  forth  into  the  following  bombastic  burst  of  oratory : — 

"  '  If  this  single  circumstance  attested  by  the  Leipzig  professors  is  a  fact,  it  blows 
to  the  four  moons  of  Jupiter  the  whole  materialistic  mechanical  theory  of  matter. 
The  materialism  of  ages  is  answered  by  a  simple  fact  like  this.  But  here  we  have 
these  six  men  agreeing  these  Leipzig  assertions  are  worthy  of  credence.'  Save  and 
except  the  insolent  imbecile  if,  with  which  Mr.  Cook  commences  this  paragraph,  and 
the  possibility  which  that  if  implies,  that  the  six  Leipzig  professors  who  have  investi- 
gated, don't  know  as  much  by  aid  of  their  senses,  as  he.  Cook,  does,  who  had  not  then 
investigated,  without  the  aid  of  his  senses ;  this  paragraph  alone  shows  that  when  he 
was  dealing  with  grand  dukes,  eminent  professors  and  men  of  higher  rank  than  he 
could  have  ever  before  dealt  with,  the  manifestations  were  worthy  of  all  credence,  and 
blew  opposing  theories  to  the  four  moons  of  Jupiter.  But  when  he,  Cook,  feels  the 
hand  of  clerical  pressure  hard  upon  him,  and  he  is  in  his  own  country,  and  amongst 
his  own  circle  of  grundy-worshipping  priests  and  deacons,  he  is  accused  of  believing 
that  which  his  spiritual  pastors  and  masters  desire  him  not  to  believe,  grand  dukes, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  41 

emperors,  statesmen,  kings,  queens,  princes  and  princesses ;  nobles,  potentates,  pro- 
fessors without  end;  magistrates,  lawyers,  doctors,  ladies,  gentlemen,  mechanics, 
operatives,  clergymen,  peasants,  for  all  these  grades  and  every  other  unnamed,  make 
up  the  tens  of  millions  of  European,  Asiatic,  Australian,  Indian,  and  American 
Spiritualism — all  these  become  at  once  vermin,  reptiles,  toads,  frogs,  snakes,  monsters, 
wretches,  &c.,  together  with  every  other  hard  and  vulgar  name,  which  this  truly 
Christian  man's  vocabulary  can  supply." 

We  must  apologize  to  our  readers  for  the  insertion  of  the  above  choice 
collection  of  epithets.  All  we  can  say  is,  that  the  language — although  strangely 
out  of  place  in  this  book — was  used  by  one  who  called  himself  a  "  gentle- 
man," and  a  Christian  minister ;  the  author  only  repeats  it,  for  the  sake  of 
giving  the  paragraph,  in  which  the  present  status  of  Spiritualism  is  summed 
up,  in  its  entirety, 

We  have  now  brought  to  a  close,  all  that  our  space  will  allow  us  to  give, 
concerning  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  Germany,  during  the  nineteenth 
century,  up  to  the  present  date. 

Germany !  The  land  of  Anton  Mesmer,  the  modern  discoverer  of  the 
true  Elixir  Vitce,  and  the  master  mind  from  whom  Puys^gur,  and 
Barberini,  derived  that  inspiration,  which  proclaimed  to  the  world  the 
power  of  the  soul  to  transcend  the  barriers  of  time  and  space !  Land  of 
Zschocke,  whose  sensitive  spirit  detected  the  invisible  soul  of  things ;  of 
Kerner,  that  brave  and  good  physician,  who  dared  the  sneers  of  materialism, 
and  the  threats  of  dogmatism,  in  proclaiming  abroad  the  stupendous  facts 
of  the  soul's  return,  beyond  the  grave.  Land  of  Schubert,  Werner,  Kant, 
and  Fichte  !  Land  where  the  soul  enfranchised  by  the  wand  of  magnetism, 
was  first  made  free  to  soar  away  into  the  realms  of  the  inimitable,  and 
bring  back  tidings  from  the  shores  of  the  eternal  beyond  ! 

Germany !  The  country  from  which  the  noble  Aksakof  could  freely 
send  abroad  the  message  of  spiritual  hght  and  life  through  the  columns  of 
a  high-toned  press  !  where  sages  and  schoolmen,  princes  and  potentates, 
listen  in  reverend  silence,  to  the  oracles  of  inspired  utterances.  Ger- 
many !  The  land  bound  up  in  the  external  fetters  of  cold  materialism, 
but  inwardly  illuminated  by  spiritual  gifts  of  such  wondrous  potency,  that 
it  only  needs  to  remove  the  barriers  of  social  and  conventional  restraint, 
liberate  the  mind,  and  permit  the  soul  and  its  possibilities  free  expression, 
to  make  it  the  church  of  humanity,  from  which  all  the  rays  of  spiritual 
sunlight  shall  stream  forth,  to  illuminate,  bless,  and  elevate,  the  entire  family 
of  mankind. 

CHAPTER    VIL 

SPIRITUALISM      IN      FRANCE. 

Although  the  sameness  which  prevails  in  reports  of  all  phenomena  arising 
from  a  common  source,  must  to  a  great  extent  mar  the  interest  of  the 
present  record,  there  are  two  features  of  compensation'  even  in  this  respect 
which  must  not  be  overlooked.  The  first  is,  the  circumstantial  evidence 
which  this  very  sameness  affords,  to  the  unity  of  the  source  from  whence 
"  Spiritual  manifestations "   are  derived.      And  next ;   we  cannot  fail  to 

42  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

observe,  that  certain  characteristic  features  of  variety  are  impressed  upon 
those  manifestations  by  the  peculiarities  of  the  people  to  whom  they  are 
addressed. 

Turning  our  lens  of  observation  from  Germany  to  France,  we  find  the 
same  historical  proofs  that  the  phenomena  derived  from  the  practices 
of  animal  magnetism,  which  antedated  the  unfoldment  of  Spiritualism  in 
the  one  country,  are  just  as  strikingly  demonstrated  in  the  other.  The 
impressions  produced  upon  the  people  of  these  two  lands,  however, 
were  totally  different. 

In  Germany,  the  physical  and  scientific  aspects  of  SpirituaHsm  have  found 
more  favour  than  its  religious  tendencies.  In  France  it  is  otherwise. 
There,  the  national  characteristics  are  impulsive,  and  emotional,  hence 
Spiritualistic  teachings  have  promoted  the  formation  of  new  sects,  and 
inspired  its  votaries  with  a  deep  rehgious  sentiment.  Mesmer,  with 
characteristic  caution,  never  sanctioned  any  advance  beyond  the  physical 
results  of  his  discoveries,  whilst  his  followers  Puysegur,  and  Barberini, 
soared  away  into  the  spiritual  realms  to  which  the  enfranchised  souls  of 
their  somnambulists  pointed  the  way. 

Very  soon  after  public  attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  subject  of 
magnetism  in  France,  by  Drs.  Mesmer  and  d'Eslon,  several  gentlemen 
distinguished  for  learning  and  scientific  attainments,  followed  up  their 
experiments  with  great  success. 

Amongst  these  was  the  Baron  Dupotet  whose  deep  interest  in  the  subject 
of  magnetism  induced  him  to  publish  a  fine  periodical  which,  under  the 
title  of  Journal  du  Magnetisme — still  forms  a  complete  treasury  of  well 
collated  facts,  and  curious  experiments  in  occult  force. 

From  this  work  we  learn,  that  the  Baron's  investigations  commenced  in 
the  year  1836,  since  which  period  up  to  1848,  he  chronicled  the  produc- 
tion of  the  following  remarkable  phases  of  phenomena,  the  occurrence  of 
which  is  testified  to  by  numerous  scientific  and  eminent  witnesses. 

Through  the  Baron's  magnetized  subjects  was  evolved,  clairvoyance, 
trance-speaking,  and  healing  ;  the  stigmata  or  raised  letters  and  figures  on 
the  subject's  body;  elevation  of  somnambuUsts  into  the  air;  insensibility 
to  fire,  injury,  or  touch.  In  the  presence  of  the  magnetized  subjects  also, 
heavy  bodies  were  moved  without  human  contact,  and  objects  were  brought 
from  distant  places  through  walls  and  closed  doors.  Sometimes  the 
"Lucides"  described  scenes  in  the  spirit  world,  found  lost  property, 
prophesied  and  spoke  in  foreign  languages. 

In  these  seances.,  styled  by  the  Baron  in  later  years,  magical^  apparitions 
presented  themselves  in  crystals,  water,  mirrois,  and  often  in  forms, 
tangible  alike  to  the  sight  attd  touch  of  all  present. 

Amongst  the  witnesses  to  these  seances  were  Messrs.  Bertrand,  d'Hunin, 
Seguin,  and  Morin  ;  men  whose  position  in  the  world  of  science  rendered 
their  testimony  absolutely  unquestionable. 

In  1840,  Baron  Dupotet  writes  that  he  had  "rediscovered  in  magnetism 
the  magic  of  antiquity."  "  Let  the  savants,'"  he  says,  "reject  the  doctrine 
of  spiritual  appearances  ;  the  enquirer  of  to-day  is  compelled  to  believe  it, 
from  an  examination  of  undeniable  facts."  .  .  .  "If  the  knowledge  of 
ancient  magic  is  lost,  all  the  facts  remain  on  which  to  reconstruct  it." 

The  Baron  after  summing  up  the  phenomena  named  above,  challenges 
the  world, of  science  either  to  account  for,  or  disprove  them. 

But  of  all  the  revelators  to  whom  French  Spiritualists  are  indebted  for 
indubitable  proof  of  super-mundane  intercourse,  none  stands  more  prominent 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  43 

in  truthfulness  and  worth,  than  M.  Cahagnet,  the  well-known  author  of 
"The  Celestial  Telegraph,"  a  work  translated  into  English  in  1848. 

M.  Cahagnet  was  an  unlearned  mechanic,  a  man  of  the  people,  and 
though  a  sensible  and  interesting  writer,  was  neither  well  read,  nor  highly 
educated.  He  affirms  that  he  was  a  "  Materialist "  when  first  his  attention 
was  attracted  to  the  subject  of  animal  magnetism,  but  being  of  a  thoughtful 
nature,  he  determined  to  devote  all  the  leisure  he  could  spare  to  a  thorough 
examination  of  its  possibilities.  When  he  found  that  he  possessed  the 
power  to  induce  the  magnetic  sleep  in  others,  he  proceeded  on  the  plan 
then  generally  adopted  by  mesmerists,  namely,  to  try  how  far  he  could 
succeed  in  biologizing  his  subjects,  that  is  to  say,  to  substitute  his  own 
senses,  mind,  and  will,  for  those  of  the  sleeper. 

In  the  course  of  these  experiments  M.  Cahagnet  discovered,  that  he  could 
effect  remarkable  cures  of  disease,  and  being  naturally  of  a  benevolent  dis- 
position, he  determined  to  bend  all  his  energies  in  this  desirable  direction. 

He  soon  found  however,  that  he  was  destined  to  realize  the  aphorism, 
"  he  builded  wiser  than  he  knew."  A  new  and  most  perplexing  obstacle 
arose  to  confound  his  philosophy  and  scatter  his  theories  to  the  winds ;  this 
was  the  fact,  that  some  of  his  subjects,  instead  of  representing  what  simply 
he  willed,  or  manifesting — in  accordance  with  his  views  of  biology — merely 
the  influence  of  his  mind,  began  to  transcend  both  will  and  mind,  and 
wander  off  in  space,  to  regions  they  persisted  in  calling  the  "  land  of 
spirits,"  and  to  describe  people,  whom  they  emphatically  affirmed  to  be 
the  souls  of  those,  the  world  called  dead. 

For  a  long  time  M.  Cahagnet  strove  vehemently  to  combat  what  he 
termed  these  "  wild  hallucinations,"  but  when  he  found  them  constantly 
recurring,  and  vast  numbers  of  those  who  had  come  to  witness  the  experi- 
ments in  magnetism,  recognizing  in  the  descriptions  given  by  the  somnam- 
buUsts,  the  spirits  of  those  whom  they  had  known  on  earth,  and  mourned 
as  dead,  conviction  became  inevitable,  and  the  magnetizer,  like  his  visitors, 
was  compelled  to  admit  a  new  and  wonderful  phase  of  lucidity,  and  one 
which  carried  the  vision  of  the  clairvoyant  from  earth  to  heaven,  and 
pierced  the  veil  which  separated  the  mortal  from  the  realms  of  immortality. 

It  was  after  a  long  series  of  carefully  conducted  experiments  of  the  above 
description,  that  M.  Cahagnet  was  finally  persuaded  to  give  the  results  of 
his  wonderful  seances  to  the  world,  under  the  name  and  style  of  "The 
Celestial  Telegraph,"  or,  "  Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come." 

The  following  extract  from  the  introduction  to  the  second  volume  of 
these  "  Secrets,"  will  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  cautious  spirit  in 
which  this  excellent  investigator  estabhshed  the  authenticity  of  his  revela- 
tions.    He  says : 

"  When  in  January  1848,  I  presented  the  public  with  the  first  volume  of  the 
'  Secrets,'  I  was  unable  to  verify  the  facts  therein  contained  by  any  testimony  but 
my  own. 

"  My  position  as  a  simple  workman — my  very  confined  social  relations,  absolutely 
null  in  the  scientific  world, — could  give  no  weight  to  the  statements  I  had  propounded, 
I  felt  that  despite  their  truth,  I  ought  to  support  these  revelations  by  honourable 
testimonials.  To  attain  this  end,  I  have  given  apparition  sittings  to  persons  who 
solicited  them,  and  now  I  can  surround  my  own  name  with  multitudes  of  others 
whom  the  public  venerate  as  authorities.  In  this  second  volume,  I  present  to  the 
world  a  vast  number  of  testimonials  to  apparitions  obtained,  recognized,  and 
testified  of  in  writing,  as  true,  by  princes,  nobles,  generals,  pastors  of  many  creeds, 
merchants,  men  of  letters,  artisans,  personages  of  all  classes,  and  many  nations,  all  of 
whom  are  ready  to  confirm  by  verbal  testimony  the  acknowledgments  signed  at  my 
abode." 

44  mNETEJ&NTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

About  the  year  1848,  M.  Cahagnet,  having  become  very  familiar  with 
somnambulic  revelations  from  the  world  of  spirits,  through  several  of  the 
most  remarkable  and  lucid  subjects  of  the  age,  received  a  number  of  com- 
munications affirming  the  fact  of  the  soul's  existence  anterior  to  its 
appearance  upon  earth.  Whilst  denying  emphatically  any  behef  in  the 
doctrine  of  Re-incarnation  and  declaring  against  it  in  the  most  positive 
terms,  the  communicating  spirits  uniformly  alleged  that,  when  freed  from 
the  trammels  of  matter,  they  all  remembered  having  lived  in  an  anterior 
state  of  purity  and  innocence  as  spirits  ;  that  they  perceived  how  truly  and 
wisely  their  earthly  lives  were  designed  for  probationary  purposes,  and 
meant  to  impart  vigour  and  knowledge  to  the  soul ;  but  that  once 
undergone,  it  was  never  again  repeated,  and  the  return  of  the  soul  to  its 
former  spiritual  state  was  never  interrupted  by  re-incarnations  on  earth. 
These  spirits,  too,  alleged  that  the  sphere  of  eternity  afforded  the  souls  of 
evil  or  unprogressed  men  all  the  opportunities  necessary  to  purify  them 
from  sin  and  its  effects,  through  innumerable  stages  of  progress. 

As  being  peculiarly  apposite  to  the  subject  discussed  in  this  chapter, 
especially  in  commenting  on  the  great  French  magnetists,  who  may  be 
justly  ranked  as  the  Joh7i  Baptists,  who  ushered  in  the  Messianic  Spiritual 
movement  of  the  nineteenth  century,  we  call  attention  to  the  following 
quotations  from  the  recondite  work  entitled  "  Art  Magic."  On  page  433 
the  author  says  : 

"  The  narrow  conservatism  of  the  age,  and  the  pitiful  jealousy  of  the  Medical 
Faculty,  rendered  it  diificult  and  harassing  to  conduct  magnetic  experiments  openly 
in  Europe  within  several  years  of  Mesmer's  decease.  Still  such  experiments  were  not 
wanting,  and  to  show  their  results,  we  give  a  few  excerpts  from  the  correspondence 
between  the  famous  French  Magnetists,  MM.  Deleuze  and  Billot,  from  the  years 
1829  to  1840.  By  these  letters,  pubhshed  in  1836,  it  appears  that  M.  Billot  com- 
menced his  experiments  in  magnetizing  as  early  as  1789,  and  that  during  forty  years, 
he  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  facts  in  clairvoyance,  ecstasy,  and  somnambulism, 
which  at  the  time  of  their  publication  transcended  the  belief  of  the  general  mass  of 
readers.  On  many  occasions  in  the  presence  of  entranced  subjects,  spirits  recognized 
as  having  once  lived  on  earth  in  mortal  form — would  come  in  bodily presma  before  the 
eyes  of  an  assembled  company  and  at  request,  bring  flowers,  fruits,  and  objects, 
removed  by  distance  from  the  scene  of  the  experiments. 

"  M.  Deleuze  frankly  admits  that  his  experience  was  more  limited  to  those  phases 
of  somnambulism  in  which  his  subjects  submitted  to  amputations  and  severe  surgical 
operations  without  experiencing  the  slightest  pain.  ...  In  a  letter  dated  1831  M. 
Billot  writing  to  Deleuze  says  : — 

"  '  I  repeat,  I  have  seen  and  known  all  that  is  permitted  to  man.  I  have  seen  the 
stigmata  arise  on  magnetized  subjects ;  I  have  dispelled  obsessions  of  evil  spirits  with 
a  single  word.  I  have  seen  spirits  bring  those  material  objects  I  told  you  of,  and 
when  requested,  make  them  so  light  that  they  would  float,  and,  again  a  small  boiteau 
de  bonbons  was  rendered  so  heavy,  that  I  failed  to  move  it  an  inch  until  the  power  was 
removed." 

"  'To  those  who  enjoyed  the  unspeakable  privilege  of  listening  to  the  ''  somnam- 
bules "  of  Billot,  Deleuze,  and  Cahagnet,  another  and  yet  more  striking  feature  of 
unanimous  revelation  was  poured  forth.  Spirits  of  those  who  had  passed  away  from 
earth  strong  in  the  faith  of  Roman  Catholicism — often  priests  and  dignitaries  of  that 
conservative  Church,  addressing  prejudiced  believers  in  their  former  doctrine,  asserted 
that  there  was  no  creed  in  Heaven — no  sectarian  worship,  or  ecclesiastical  dogmatism 
there  prevailing. 

"  '  They  taught  that  God  was  a  grand  Spiritual  Sun — life  on  earth  a  probation  ;— 
the  spheres,  different  degrees  of  Compensative  happiness  or  states  of  retributive  suffer- 
ing ; — each  appropriate  to  the  good  or  evil  deeds  done  on  earth.  They  described  the 
ascending  changes  open  to  every  soul  in  proportion  to  its  own  efforts  to  improve. 

"  'They  all  insisted  that  man  was  his  own  judge,  incurred  a  penalty  or  reward  for 
which  there  was  no  substitution.  They  taught  nothing  of  Christ,  absolutely  denied 
the  idea  of  vicarious  atonement — and  represented  man  as  his  oWll  Saviour  or 
destroyer. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

45 

"  'They  spoke  of  arts,  sciences,  and  continued  activities,  as  if  the  life  beyond  was 
but  an  extension  of  the  present  on  a  greatly  improved  scale.  Descriptions  of  the 
radiant  beauty,  supernal  happiness,  and  ecstatic  sublimity  manifested  by  the  blest 
spirits  who  had  risen  to  the  spheres  of  paradise,  Heaven,  and  the  glory  of  Angelic 
companionship,  melts  the  heart,  and  fills  the  soul  with  irresistible  yearnings  to  lay 
down  life's  weary  burdens  and  be  at  rest  with  them.'  " 

It  seems  unfortunate  for  the  good  people  who  insist  upon  making  a 
heaven  or  hell  to  suit  themselves,  and  whose  strong  sectarian  bias,  induces 
them  to  banish  every  spirit  from  their  presence  who  presumes  to  deny  their 
views,  that  Cahagnet's  revelating  angels  would  neither  endorse  Catholicism, 
Protestantism,  or  Re-incarnation. 

Having  shown  that  Spiritualism  arose  in  France  as  in  Germany  from  the 
awakening  of  soul  powers  evolved  by  magnetism  and  traced  the  footprints 
of  the  great  temple  builders  who  have  laid  the  foundation  stones  of  the 
mighty  Spiritual  edifice  in  the  human  system,  and  steadily  worked  upwards 
from  matter  to  force,  and  from  thence  to  spirit  in  every  gradation  of 
sphere,  life  and  progress,  we  recall  the  pithy  words  of  the  Baron  Dupotet, 
who,  addressing  the  would-be  leaders  of  public  opinion  in  his  splendid 
essay  on  the  "  Philosophical  Teaching  of  Magnetism,"  says  : 

"  You  savants  of  our  country ;  you  have  not  shown  yourselves  better  informed  than 
the  Siamese. 

''  For  these  sixty  years  it  has  been  shouted  in  your  ears,  The  magnetizers  march  to 
the  discovery  of  a  moral  world ;  all  the  phenomena  they  produce  indisputably  prove  its 
existence. 

"  You  have  declared  that  they  were  impostors,  imbeciles,  and  the  most  illustrious 
amongst  you,  have  only  pronounced  a  verdict  which  will  attest  to  future  ages  your 
ignorance  or  your  insincerity. 

''  Before  the  soul  is  disengaged  from  matter,  it  can,  and  does,  converse  with  pure 
spirits.  Already  it  can  gaze  prophetically  on  its  own  future  destiny,  by  regarding  the 
condition  of  those  who  have  gone  before ; — but  a  step ; — yet  one,  which  the  eye  of 
spirit  alone  can  measure,  and  if  men  are  spirits  already,  who  can  stay  the  eagle  glance 
of  the  soul  into  the  land  of  its  own  inheritance  ?  " 

In  following  up  the  history  of  Spiritualism  in  France,  although  we  find  it 
has  gained  an  immense  foothold,  and  exerted  a  wide-spread  influence  upon 
the  popular  mind,  it  is  nevertheless  evident,  that  one  of  the  chief 
obstacles  to  its  general  acceptance  has  been  its  lack  of  internal  unity,  and 
the  antagonistic  sentiments  which  have  prevailed  amongst  its  acknowledged 
leaders. 

Two  of  those  who  have  figured  most  prominently  in  the  grand  drama  of 
French  Spiritualism,  and  in  all  probability  exerted  more  influence  upon 
public  opinion  than  any  other  members  of  its  dramatis  personce,  were 
MM.  Allan  Kardec  and  Pierart  the  respective  editors  of  the  two  leading 
Spiritual  journals  entitled  La  Revue  Spirife  and  La  Revue  Spiritualiste. 
These  gentlemen  may  be  also  regarded  as  the  representatives  of  the  two 
opposing  factions  known  as 

SPIRITUALISTS   AND    SPIRITISTS 

the  former  teaching,  that  the  soul  of  man  undergoes  but  one  mortal  birth, 
and  continues  its  progress  through  eternity  in  spiritual  states,  the  latter 
affirming  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation,  and  alleging  that  the  one  spirit  in 
man  can  and  does  undergo  many  incarnations  in  different  mortal  forms. 

It  will  be  understood  that  M.  Kardec  and  his  followers  represent  the 
"  Spiritists "  or  re-incarnationists — M.  Pierart  leading  the  ranks  of  the 
opposing  faction  most  commonly  called  Spiritualists. 

46  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

To  M.  Kardec  has  been  generally  attributed  the  merit  or  demerit — as 
the  case  may  be — of  originating  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation, — at  least  as 
that  doctrine  is  taught  in  this  century.  This  is  quite  a  mistake,  as  will  be 
shown  by  the  following  extracts,  taken  from  a  paper  published  in  the 
London  S;piritualist  of  1875,  and  written  by  the  accomplished  scholar  and 
statesman,  the  Hon.  Alexander  Aksakof.  As  the  duty  of  a  faithful 
historian  is  rather  to  record  facts,  than  enunciate  opinions,  we  shall  make 
no  apology  for  introducing  M.  Aksakofs  paper  to  the  attention  of  the 
reader,  however  much  it  may  seem  to  savour  of  partisanship.     It  is  entitled 

"  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  HISTORICAL  ORIGIN  OF  THE  RE-INCARNATION 
SPECULATIONS  OF  FRENCH  SPIRITUALISTS  : — 

"  In  view  of  the  approaching  publication  of  translations  in  the  English  language  of 
the  works  of  Allan  Kardec,  of  which  the  principal  volume,  ''The  Spirits'  Book,"  is 
already  out,  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  lay  before  the  English  public  the  result  of  my 
researches  in  the  direction  of  the  origin  of  the  dogma  of  Reincarnation.  When 
"  Spiritism,"  newly  baptised  with  this  name,  and  embodied  in  the  form  of  a  doc- 
trine by  Kardec,  began  to  spread  in  France,  nothing  astonished  me  more  than  the 
divergence  of  this  doctrine  from  that  of  "Spiritualism,"  touching  the  point  of 
Reincarnation.  This  divergence  was  the  more  strange  because  the  sources  of  the 
contradictory  affirmations  claim  to  be  the  same,  namely  the  spirit-world  and  commu- 
nications given  by  spirits.  As  Spiritism  was  born  in  1856  with  the  publication  of  the 
"  Book  of  Spirits,"  it  is  clear  that  to  solve  this  enigma  it  was  necessary  to  begin  with 
the  historical  origin  of  this  book.  It  is  remarkable  that  nov/here,  either  in  this  volume 
or  in  any  of  his  others,  does  Kardec  give  upon  this  head  the  slightest  detail.  And 
why  was  this?  the  essential  point  in  all  serious  criticisms  being  to  know  before  all 
things  how  such  a  book  came  into  existence  ?  As  I  did  not  live  in  Paris,  it  was 
difficult  for  me  to  procure  the  necessary  information ;  all  that  I  could  learn  was  that 
a  certain  somnambulist,  known  by  the  name  of  Celina  Japhet,  had  contributed  largely 
to  the  work,  but  that  she  had  been  dead  for  a  long  time.  During  my  stay  in  Paris  in 
1873,  I  explained  to  a  Spiritualistic  friend  my  regret  that  I  had  never  met  this 
somnambulist  in  life,  to  which  he  replied  that  he  had  also  heard  that  she  was  dead, 
but  he  doubted  whether  the  rumour  was  true ;  also  that  he  had  reason  to  suppose 
that  this  was  nothing  but  a  rumour  spread  abroad  by  the  Spiritists,  and  that  it  would, 
be  well  if  I  made  further  personal  inquiry. 

"  He  gave  me  the  former  address  of  Madame  Japhet,  and  what  was  my  astonish- 
ment and  joy  to  find  her  in  perfect  health.  When  I  told  her  of  my  surprise  she 
replied,  that  it  was  nothing  new  to  her,  for  the  Spiritists  were  actually  making  her  pass 
for  a  dead  person. 

"  Here  is  the  substance  of  what  she  was  obliging  enough  to  give  me. 

"  Mdlle.  Celina  Bequet  was  a  natural  somnambulist  from  childhood.  About  sixteen 
years  of  age  she  was  mesmerised  for  the  first  time  by  Ricard.  In  1841  she  was 
attacked  with  a  serious  illness  which  confined  her  to  her  bed  for  twenty-seven  months. 

"  Finding  no  relief  from  medicine,  she  was  put  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  by  her 
brother.  She  then  prescribed  the  necessary  remedies,  and  after  six  weeks,  could  leave 
her  bed,  and  walk  by  aid  of  crutches.  At  last,  after  about  eleven  months,  she  entirely 
recovered  her  health. 

"  In  1845,  she  went  to  Paris  to  search  for  M.  Ricard,  and  made  the  acquaintance 
of  M.  Roustan  at  the  house  of  M.  Millet  a  mesmerist. 

"  She  then,  for  family  reasons,  took  the  name  of  Japhet,  and  became  a  professional 
somnambulist  under  the  control  of  M.  Roustan.  In  this  position  she  remained  till 
about  1848.  Under  her  assumed  name,  she  gave  medical  advice  by  the  direction  of 
the  spirits  of  her  grandfather,  Hahnemann,  and  Mesmer,  from  each  of  whom  she 
received  a  great  many  commuDications. 

"  In  this  manner  also  the  doctrine  of  re-incarnation  was  given  her,  hy  the  spirits  of 
her  grandfather,  St.  Teresa  and  others.  As  the  somnambulic  powers  of  Madame  Japhet 
were  developed  under  the  mesmeric  influence  of  M.  Roustan,  it  may  be  well  to  remark 
in  this  place,  that  M.  Roustan  himself  believed  in  the  plurality  of  terrestrial  existences. 
(See  Cahagnet's  Sanctuaire  au  Spiritualisme.    Paris,  1850.  p.  164.     Since  dated — 1848. 

"  In  1849,  Madame  d'Abnour  on  her  return  from  America,  desired  to  form  a  circle 
for  spiritual  phenomena,  of  which  she  had  lately  been  a  witness.     For  this  purpose 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  47 

she  called  upon  M.  de  Guldenstubbe,  by  whom  M.  Roustan  and  Celina  Japhet  were 
asked  to  become  members  of  his  spirit  circle. 

"  This  circle  was  joined  by  the  Abbe  Chatel,  and  the  three  Demoiselles  Bauvrais  ; 
it  consisted  of  nine  persons,  and  met  once  a  week  at  the  house  of  Madame  Japhet,  46, 
Rue  des  Martyrs,  afterwards,  almost  up  to  the  time  of  the  war  of  1870,  it  met  twice 
a  week. 

"In  1855,  the  circle  was  composed  of  M.  Taillandier,  M.  Tillman,  M.  Sagia  (since 
dead)  Messrs.  Sardou  father  and  son,  Madame  Japhet,  and  M.  Roustan,  who  con- 
tinued a  member  of  it  until  about  1864.  They  began  by  making  a  chain,  American 
fashion,  in  form  of  a  horse-shoe,  round  Madame  Celina,  and  they  obtained  spiritual 
phenomena  more  or  less  remarkable ;  but  soon  Madame  Celina  developed  as  a  writing 
medium,  and  it  was  through  that  channel  that  the  greater  part  of  the  communications 
were  obtained. 

"  In  1856  she  met  M.  Denizard  Rivail,  introduced  by  M.  Victorien  Sardou.  He 
correlated  the  materials  by  a  number  of  questions ;  himself  arranged  the  whole  in 
systematic  order,  and  published  'The  Spirits'  Book'  without  ever  mentioning  the 
name  of  Madame  C.  Japhet,  although  three-quarters  of  this  book  had  been  given 
through  her  mediumship.  The  rest  was  obtained  from  communications  through 
Madame  Bodin,  who  belonged  to  another  spirit-circle.  She  is  not  mentioned  except 
on  the  last  page  of  the  first  number  of  the  Revue  Spirite,  where,  in  consequence  of 
the  number  of  reproaches  that  were  addressed  to  him,  he  makes  a  short  mention  of 
her.  As  he  was  also  attached  to  an  important  journal,  VUnivers,  he  published 
his  book  under  the  names  which  he  had  borne  in  his  two  previous  existences.  One  of 
these  names  was  Allan— a  fact  revealed  to  him  by  Madame  Japhet,  and  the  other 
name  of  Kardec  was  revealed  to  him  by  the  medium  Roze.  After  the  publication  of 
the  '  Book  of  Spirits,'  of  which  Kardec  did  not  even  present  one  copy  to  Madame 
Japhet,  he  quitted  the  circle  and  arranged  another  in  his  own  house,  M.  Roze  being 
the  medium.  When  he  thus  left,  he  possessed  a  mass  of  manuscript  which  he  had 
carried  off  from  the  house  of  Madame  Japhet,  and  he  availed  himself  of  the  right  of 
an  editor  by  never  giving  it  back  again.  To  the  numerous  requests  for  its  return  which 
were  made  to  him,  he  contented  himself  by  replying,  '  Let  her  go  to  law  with  me.' 
These  manuscripts  were  to  some  extent  useful  in  the  compilation  of  the  '  Book  of 
Mediums,'  of  which  all  the  contents,  so  says  Madame  Japhet,  had  been  obtained 
through  medial  communications. 

"  It  would  be  essential  in  order  to  complete  this  article  to  review  the  ideas  on  pre- 
existence  and  on  reincarnation  which  were  strongly  in  vogue  in  France  just  before 
1850.  An  abstract  of  these  will  be  found  in  the  work  of  M.  Pezzani  on  '  The  Plurality 
of  Existences.'  The  works  of  Cahagnet  should  also  be  consulted.  As  I  am  now  away 
from  my  library,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  give  the  relative  points  exactly. 

''  In  addition  to  the  foregoing  supplementary  details,  bearing  upon  the  origin  of 
"  The  Book  of  Spirits  "  and  the  different  points  connected  therewith,  testimony  ought  to 
be  obtained  from  living  witnesses  to  throw  light  upon  the  conception  and  birth  of  this 
book,  such  as  Madame  Japhet,  Mdlle.  de  Guldenstubbe,  M.  Sardou,  and  M. 
Tallandier.  The  last  continues  up  to  the  present  time  to  work  with  Madame  Japhet 
as  a  medium  ;  she  is  still  in  possession  of  her  somnambulic  powers,  and  continues  to 
give  consultations.  She  sends  herself  off  to  sleep  by  means  of  objects  which  have  been 
mesmerised  by  M.  Roustan.  I  think  it  a  duty  on  this  occasion  to  testify  to  the  excellence 
of  her  lucidity.  I  consulted  her  about  myself,  and  she  gave  me  exact  information  as 
to  a  local  malady,  and  as  to  the  state  of  my  health  in  general.  Now  is  it  not  astonish- 
ing that  this  remarkable  person,  who  has  done  so  much  for  French  Spiritism,  should 
be  living  entirely  unknown  for  twenty  years,  and  no  notice  or  remark  made  about  her  ? 
Instead  of  being  the  centre  of  public  attention  she  is  totally  ignored ;  in  fact,  they 
have  buried  her  alive  !  Let  us  hope  that  reparation  which  is  due  to  her  will  be  made 
one  day.    "  Spiritualism  "  might,  in  this  matter,  offer  a  noble  example  to  "  Spiritism." 

"  Now  to  return  to  the  question  of  Reincarnation.  I  leave  it  to  English  critics  to 
draw  their  deductions  from  the  facts  which  I  unravelled  by  my  researches,  incomplete 
though  they  be ;  I  will  do  no  more  than  throw  out  the  following  ideas  :  That  the  pro- 
pagation of  this  doctrine  by  Kardec  was  a  matter  of  strong  predilection  is  clear ;  from 
the  beginning,  Reincarnation  has  not  been  presented  as  an  object  of  study,  but  as  a 
dogma.  To  sustain  it  he  has  always  had  resource  to  writing  mediums,  who  it  is  well 
known  pass  so  easily  under  the  psychological  influence  of  preconceived  ideas ;  and 
Spiritism  has  engendered  such  in  profusion ;  whereas  through  physical  mediums  the 
communications  are  not  only  more  objective,  but  always  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of 
Reincarnation.  Kardec  adopted  the  plan  of  always  disparaging  this  kind  of  medium- 
ship,  alleging  as  a  pretext  its  moral  inferiority.  Thus  the  experimental  method  is 
altogether  unknown  in  Spiritism ;  for  twenty  years  it  has  not  made  the  slightest 

48  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

intrinsic  progress,  and  it  has  remained  in  total  ignorance  of  Anglo-American  Spiri- 
tualism !  The  few  French  physical  mediums  who  developed  their  power  in  spite  of 
Kardec,  were  never  mentioned  by  him  in  the  Revue  ;  they  remained  almost  unknown 
to  Spiritists,. and  only  because  their  spirits  did  not  support  the  doctrine  of  Reincarna- 
tion !  Thus  Camile  Bredif,  a  very  good  physical  medium,  acquired  celebrity  only  in 
consequence  of  his  visit  to  St.  Petersburg.  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen  in 
the  Revue  Spirits  the  slightest  notice  of  him,  still  less  any  descriptions  of  manifesta- 
tions produced  in  his  presence.  Knowing  the  reputation  of  Mr.  Home,  Kardec  made 
several  overtures  to  get  him  upon  his  side ;  he  had  two  interviews  with  him  for  this 
purpose,  but  as  Mr.  Home  told  him  that  spirits  who  had  communicated  through  him 
never  endorsed  the  idea  of  Reincarnation,  he  thenceforth  ignored  him,  thereby  disre- 
garding the  value  of  the  manifestations  which  were  produced  in  his  presence.  I  have 
upon  this  head  a  letter  from  Mr.  .Home,  although  at  the  present  moment  it  is  not 
within  reach. 

"  In  conclusion ;  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  point  out  that  all  that  I  have  herein 
stated  does  not  affect  the  question  of  Reincarnation,  considered  upon  its  own  merits, 
but  only  concerns  the  causes  of  its  origin  and  of  its  propagation  as  Spiritisih." 

"  Chateau  de  Krotofka,  Russia,  July  24,  1875." 

Without  attempting  to  offer  any  comments  on  M.  Aksakofs  narrative — 
the  plain  facts  of  which  speak  for  themselves — it  may  be  remarked,  that 
in  most  magnetic  operations,  it  is  generally  found  that  the  first  effects  pro- 
duced, are  deep  somnolency,  or  a  sleep-waking  state.  The  next  is  most 
commonly  the  biological  condition,  in  which  the  subject  represents  the 
mind,  will,  sense,  &c.,  of  the  magnetizer ;  and  the  next  succeeding  that,  is  a 
condition  beyond  and  independent  of  the  operator,  in  which  an  invisible 
spirit  often  takes  control,  and  substitudes  his  mind,  will,  and  sense,  for  that 
of  the  earthly  magnetizer.  This  last  named  degree  is  now  recognised,  as 
"  Spirit  Mediumship."  It  is  one  which  may  or  may  not  be  induced  by 
human  magnetism,  but  whenever  it  does  ensue,  the  power  of  the  human 
mind  ceases  to  operate,  and  that  of  the  spirit  controlling  takes  its  place. 
Now  whilst  we  have  abundant  historical  testimony  to  show  that  this  condi- 
tion of  spiritual  control  was  attained  by  the  "  lucides  "  of  Messrs.  Billot, 
Dupotet,  and  Cahagnet,  we  have  no  such  evidence  of  independent  spiritual 
influence  operating  upon  Madame  Japhet,  whilst  she  was  the  magnetic 
subject  of  M.  .Roustan.  How  powerful  this  gentleman's  magnetism  must 
have  been,  and  how  completely  Madame  Japhet  was  dependent  upon  his 
control,  we  learn  from  her  own  acknowledgment  to  M.  Aksakof,  namely, 
that  she  still  gives  consultations,  and  sends  herself  off  to  sleeps  by  mea?is  of 
objects  which  have  been  mesmerized  by  M.  Roustan, 

What  stronger  proof  can  we  have  that  the  controlling  spirit  of  Madame 
Japhet  was  M.  Roustan  ?  and  that  "  The  Book  of  Spirits,"  emanated  far 
more  reasonably  from  his  biological  impression,  than  from  the  saints, 
apostles,  martyrs,  and  other  historical  celebrities,  to  whom  it  has  been 
attributed  ? 

Still  it  may  be  asked  by  the  devotees  of  the  re-incarnation  theory,  of 
what  consequence  is  it  whether  this  doctrine  was  first  taught  by  Roustan, 
or  Kardec,  so  long  as  it  is  true  ?  Aye  even  so !  So  long  as  it  is  true! 
That  indeed  is  the  main  question ;  but  ere  it  can  be  answered,  another 
arises,  and  that  is.  How  can  the  truth  of  this  doctrine  be  tested  ?  and  again ; 
Can  we  arrive  at  any  veritable  knowledge  of  spiritual  existence  except  from 
spirits  themselves,  and  that  in  communications  given  under  conditions 
which  preclude  the  possibility  of  human  interference  or  bias  ? 

To  this  it  may  be  objected,  that  no  such  independent  conditions  exist, 
the  general  opinion  being,  that  spirit  communications  are  always  more  or 
less  tinctured  by  the  characteristics  of  the  medium  through  whom  the 
intelligence  is  given. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  49 

Whilst  we  admit  the  force  of  this  objection  to  a  certain  extent,  we  still 
insist  that  there  are  some  conditions  far  more  favourable  for  the  trans- 
mission of  spiritual  revelations  than  others;  such  for  example,  were  the 
circumstances  under  which  spirits  influenced  the  visions  of  Messrs. 
Puys^gur  and  Barberini's  clairvoyants,  and  subsequently  gave  direct  com- 
munications through  the  "lucides"  of  Messrs.  Dupotet,  Billot,  and  Cahagnet. 
In  all  these  cases,  the  magnetizers  themselves  were  wholly  unprepared  for 
the  nature  of  the  intelligence  rendered,  in  fact  they  were  at  first  disposed 
to  reject  it,  because  it  conflicted  so  strongly  with  their  own  preconceived 
opinions.  The  same  independent  character  pervaded  the  spirit  communi- 
cations first  received  in  America,  they  being  in  general,  not  only  new  and 
strange,  but  totally  opposed  to  the  views  of  many  of  those  who  received 
them,  and  it  is  a  fact  worthy  of  the  gravest  consideration,  that  in  all  these 
EARLY  AND  UNBIASSED  REVELATIONS,  no  word  of  the  doctrine  of  re-incar- 
nation was  ever  given,  except  to  individuals  who  had  already  cherished  the 
belief. 

If  we  add,  that  in  the  most  independent  form  of  spiritual  revelation, 
namely  through  physical  mediumship,  few  if  any  instances  are  known 
wherein  spirits  have  taught  the  doctrine  of  re-incarnation,  we  deem  we 
have  proved  that  the  theory  in  question  has  not  originated  from  authentic 
and  reliable  spiritual  sources,  but  is  in  reality  one  of  those  Oriental  ideas 
which  other  philosophers  besides  M.  Roustan  cherish.  The  author  is 
even  now  well  acquainted  with  a  gentleman  who  appeals  to  every  person 
inhuman  enough  to  ill-treat  dumb  animals,  imploring  them  to  desist,  on 
the  plea,  that  they  may,  in  all  probability  be  abusing  one  of  their  own 
ancestors.  Thousands  of  such  erratic  opinions  have  been  in  vogue  and 
that  without  any  reason  for  attributing  them  to  spiritual  sources. 

As  a  result  of  M.  Aksakof's  researches  into  the  origin  of  the  modern 
French  re -incarnation  doctrine,  those  readers  who  have  had  any  experience 
in  psychological  experiments,  will  neither  be  surprised  to  find  Madame 
Japhet  reflecting  the  powerful  idiosyncrasies  of  M.  Roustan,  or  M.  Kardec 
impressing  his  equally  strong  opinions  upon  the  susceptible  individuals 
with  whom  he  came  in  contact. 

It  must  be  remembered  also,  to  account  for  the  great  prevalence  of  this 
remarkable  man's  doctrines  on  the  Continent — that  he  was  the  only 
notable  writer  who  distributed  works  in  the  French  language  on  this  subject, 
and  maintained  its  propagandism  with  untiring  zeal. 

In  respect  to  the  question  of  testimony,  it  must  be  remembered  that  M. 
Kardec  derived  his  communications  chiefly  from  those  writing  and  trance 
mediums  who  might  have  proved  the  most  susceptible  to  his  influence, 
and  is  said  to  have  persistently  banished  from  his  circles,  not  only  Mr. 
Home,  M.  Bredif,  and  other  physical  mediums,  but  all  those  who  did  not 
endorse  his  favourite  dogma  through  their  communications.  Having  now 
presented  the  historical  view  of  one  side  of  the  question,  it  becomes 
necessary  to  call  attention  to  some  of  the  representative  writings  of  the 
opposite  faction,  distinguished  from  the  followers  of  M.  Kardec  by  the 
soubriquet  of  "  SpirituaHsts." 

To  do  justice  to  this  portion  of  our  subject,  we  must  now  introduce  M. 
Pierart,  the  editor  of  the  opposition  paper  published  in  Paris,  of  which 
mention  has  already  been  made,  under  the  title  of  La  Revue  Spiritualiste. 

Although  it  seems  something  of  an  anomaly  to  commence  our  record 
of  a  noble  life  by  treating  of  its  close,  we  find  we  cannot  present  to  our 
readers  a  more  compendious  view  of  M.  Pierart's  good  service  in  the  cause 
4 

50  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

of  Spiritualism,  than  by  republishing  his  obituary  notice,  written  by  M.  F. 
Clavairoz,  Consul  General  of  France  at  Trieste,  and  copied  into  most  of 
the  English  and  American  Spiritual  journals.     This  gentleman  says : 

'•The  valiant  champion  whose  last  work,  'The  Primitive  World,'  I  noticed  a 
short  time  ago,  has  been  struck  down  by  death.  It  was,  alas  !  so  to  speak,  the  last 
flame  bursting  forth  from  the  soul  of  this  apostle.  He  corrected  the  proofs  upon  his 
bed  of  suffering,  where  my  hand  pressed  his.  M.  Pierart  succumbed  to  the  malady 
with  which  he  had  been  afflicted  for  several  months,  but  of  which  he  had  hoped  to  be 
cured.  The  cause  of  Spiritualism  has  suffered  a  great  loss  ;  but  progress  is  not 
arrested  because  a  combatant  falls  in  the  strife.  Without  being  in  any  way  dis- 
couraged in  our  aspirations,  our  regrets  follow  beyond  the  grave  those  whom  we 
have  known  and  loved,  and  whose  courage  has  sustained  us  in  our  efforts  in  the 
struggle.  He  whom  we  have  just  lost  is  stamped  with  the  seal  of  brave  soldiers  of  the 
truth.  Born  in  an  humble  condition,  he  valiantly  made  himself  what  he  afterwards 
became.  M.  Pierart  received  his  first  education  at  the  College  of  Avanes ;  entered 
the  grammar  school  of  Douai,  which  he  quitted  with  the  diploma  of  teacher,  and 
subsequently  became  professor  at  the  College  of  Maubenge.  While  there  he  was 
chosen  by  Baron  Dupotet  to  be  his  secretary,  and  they  worked  together  several  years. 
In  1858  he  founded  La  Revue  Spiritiialiste,  at  which  time  it  required  courage  to  propa- 
gate the  new  facts  which  had  opened  up  an  unknown  field  for  speculation  concerning 
the  soul.  His  magazine  reported  the  psychological  phenomena  which  began  in 
America,  and  it  was  continued  by  M.  Pierart  until  he  substituted  for  it  the  Concile  de 
la  Libre  Pense'e,  which  was  stopped  in  1873,  in  consequence  of  clerical  influence. 
Afterwards  he  resumed  his  spiritual  labours  by  publishing  the  Benedictin  de  St.  Maur, 
which  he  continued  until  the  last.  It  is  not  only  in  the  treatment  of  spiritual 
phenomena  that  M.  Pierart  has  shown  the  power  of  his  ardent  soul,  which  was  so 
captivated  by  all  that  is  great  and  generous,  for  he  published  a  number  of  historical 
works.  No  labour  was  too  great  for  him  when  what  seemed  doubtful  required  investi- 
gation, and  no  consideration  ever  caused  him  to  hesitate  to  divulge  what  he  considered 
to  be  true.  An  indefatigable  worker  and  careful  investigator,  history  and  archaeology 
attracted  him  as  much  as  mesmerism  and  the  occult  sciences.  He  penetrated  the 
arcana  of  Druidism,  and  studied  the  origin  of  the  most  ancient  religions.  His  style — 
always  precise,  clear,  and  enlightened  by  clairvoyance^gave  to  his  words  a  real 
authority.  No  one  had  more  knowledge  than  he  of  the  mysteries  of  the  past,  and  death 
came  upon  him  just  as  he  was  preparing  to  publish  the  result  of  his  investigations. 
M.  Pierart  has  for  twenty  years  fought  for  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  loved  by  all  who 
knew  him,  and  appreciated  by  all  who  read  him.  His  death  will  leave  a  great  gap, 
and  the  work  he  has  left  undone  will  be  difflcult  for  another  to  accomplish.  His  faith 
supported  him  in  his  earthly  struggle  against  poverty,  and  the  secret  persecutions  by 
which  he  was  beset.  As  for  Spiritualists,  who  know  that  death  is  only  a  transformation, 
we  believe  that  Pierart's  soul  will  be  with  us  and  continue  to  interest  itself  in  a  cause 
which  so  occupied  him  during  his  earthly  sojourn," 

In  order  to  make  our  readers  still  better  acquainted  with  this  admirable 
champion  of  Spiritualism,  and  show  some  of  the  curious  intrigues  by  which 
a  great  cause  may  be  sacrificed  to  human  ambition,  and  selfishness,  we  shall 
present  a  few  extracts  from  an  article  published  by  M.  Pierart  in  1878,  a 
translation  of  which  was  sent  to  the  English  Medium  of  London,  by  F. 
Tennyson,  Esq.,  of  St.  Ewolds,  Jersey. 

The  article  is  headed — 

APPEAL   OF   M.    PIERART. 

To  the  old  readers  of  the  Revue  Spiritiialiste,  and  the  Concile  de  Libre  Pensee,  and  all  those 
who  love  the  truth,  in  connexion  with  Morality  and  Philosophy. 

"  Friends  and  Brothers,-— It  is  now  many  years  since  our  voice  which  won  your 
sjmpathies,  has  made  itself  heard,  but  the  day  has  come  when  we  entertain  the  hope 
that  its  tones  will  once  again  rally  you  round  the  banner  of  truth  which  for  fifteen 
years  we  upheld  with  unflinching  resolution  and  zeal. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  51 

■'In  the  year  1858,  when  we  started  our  journal,  we  also  established  a  focus  of 
re-union  where  you  could  all  meet  for  the  discussion  of  those  consoling  verities  which 
were  our  delight,  and  the  common  subject  of  our  most  earnest  meditations.  This 
association  continued  until  1864. 

"  It  was  then  that  we  quitted  Paris,  and  withdrew  into  the  country  keeping  up  how- 
ever at  intervals  our  intercourse  with  those  who  remained  faithful  to  us,  and  our 
cause. 

"  Many  among  you  have  asked  why  we  quitted  the  capital,  to  bury  ourselves  in  the 
woods,  and  we  have  given  reasons  which  we  must  now  reproduce,  for  doing  so. 

"  Paris  is  a  sink  of  corruption,  and  the  man  who  does  not  lend  himself  to  it,  leads 
a  life  anything  but  agreeable.  There  is  no  room  in  this  Babylon  for  upright, 
courageous,  and  liberal  ministers  of  Truth.  To  obtain  intellectual  distinction,  one 
must  cringe  '  to  the  powers  that  be,'  a  degradation  we  would  not  sink  to. 

"  Besides,  we  encountered  not  a  few  such  men  as  are  descrided  in  the  gospel  of  St. 
Matthew — chap.  10,  ver.  17  to  27. 

"  We  were  desirous  of  resting  the  question  of  Spiritualism  on  the  ground  of  facts, 
and  critical  analysis,  trusting  that  the  phenomena  would  eventually  prove  themselves. 
But  in  this  we  were  unsupported,  left  alone,  and  misunderstood.  Clever  pychagogues 
launched  out  into  wild  guesses ;  published  catechisms,  and  foolish  articles  of  belief, 
the  results  of  ill-digested  compilations,  yet  of  a  nature  to  impress  the  simple- 
minded.  .  .  .  What  is  more,  the  enemy  wormed  himself  into  the  heart  of  our  unpre- 
tending society  in  order  to  paralyze  its  action. 

"  Mediums  deceived  us.  Others  introducing  themselves  through  our  journal,  availed 
themselves  of  this  opportunity  to  alienate  our  readers  and  set  up  opposition 
organs. 

"  It  was  then,  that  profoundly  discouraged,  we  proceeded  to  take  up  our  perma- 
nent abode  in  the  country ;  to  live  the  life  of  a  hermit,  alone  in  the  society  of  our 
beloved  books,  in  presence  of  the  works  of  God,  and  the  surroundings  of  Nature, 
which,  at  any  rate,  do  not  sadden  or  deceive  the  spirit  open  to  their  influences. 

"At  length  the  Jesuits  interfered  to  obstruct  our  work.  In  1873,  about  the  time 
the  '  Gouvernement  de  Combat "  was  installed ;  in  direct  violation  of  all  law,  our 
journal,  which  had  never  busied  itself  with  politics,  was  suppressed.  It  seems  that, 
in  spite  of  its  obscurity  and  slight  importance,  it  troubled  the  slumbers  of  the 
ecclesiastics.  It  was  regarded  by  the  prelates  and  politicians  of  this  same  "  Gou- 
vernement de  Combat "  as  extremely  dangerous.  Our  just  appeals  for  its  reinstate- 
ment were  disregarded.  Even  to  this  day  the  suppressed  numbers  are  in  the  office 
of  the  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and  we  have  never  been  able  to  recover  them.  Our 
letters  have  received  no  answers,  Thereby  hangs  a  tale  which  may  be  better  under- 
stood by  the  following  letter,  sent  to  the  republican  journals  in  the  month  of 
February,  1876 : — 

"'Saint  Maur  des  Fosses,  Jan.  6th,  1876. 

" '  Mr.  Editor, — The  abuse  of  the  state  of  siege  in  regard  to  the  political  press,  has 
been  recently  animadverted  upon  from  the  tribune  and  in  the  journals :  but  nothing 
has  been  said  of  the  outrages  which  the  periodical  and  non-political  press  has  had 
to  endure.  I  am  myself  a  victim  of  this  new-fangled  torture;  and  my  case  is  so 
perfectly  unprecedented,  that  I  can  no  longer  keep  silence. 

"'In  1858  I  started  a  journal,  which  I  called  the  Revue  SpirittiaUste,  devoted  to 
the  examination  of  philosophical  questions  and  religious  exegesis.  This  paper  was 
succeeded  in  1870  by  the  Concile  de  Libre  Pensie,  which  continued  to  discuss  the 
same  subjects.  It  cannot  be  alleged  that  this  publication  was  atheistical,  or  that  it 
propagated  evil  principles,  or  stimulated  bad  passions. 

" '  Unceasingly  it  pleaded  the  being  of  a  God,  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and 
carefully  avoided  entering  upon  political  and  social  questions.  The  Empire,  though 
by  no  means  favourably  disposed  towards  the  Press,  had  left  it  alone.  Not  so  the 
men  of  the  '  Gouvernement  de  Combat,'  whose  rise,  three  years  since,  France  beheld 
with  astonishment.     It  was  then  that  my  journal  was  suppressed. 

'"When  I  requested  an  explanation  they  did  not  deign  to  answer  me.  After 
waiting  two  years,  I  wrote  to  the  Director  of  the  Press  to  know  whether,  if  I  bound 
myself  by  entering  into  recognisances  and  agreed  to  publish  my  paper  in  a  depart- 
ment not  subject  to  the  state  of  siege,  I  might  be  permitted  to  continue  it.  The 
answer  was  that  under  no  conditions  whatsoever,  and  in  no  part  of  France,  would  it 
be  suffered  to  appear.  Why  ?  Not  the  shadow  of  a  reason  was  assigned  on  this  any 
more  than  on  the  previous  occasion. 

" '  I  began  to  publish,  about  this  time,  a  work  entitled  "  Revelations  and  Com- 
mentaries on  the  History  of  the  Early  World,"     I  found  that  after  several  pages  had 

52  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

been  printed,  the  proofs  were  seized  at  the  post-ofl&ce,  and  I  never  heard  any  more  of 
them,  so  that  I  was  constrained  to  discontinue  the  work. 

" '  Now,  what  elements  of  sedition  were  there  to  be  found  in  my  work  on  "  The 
Early  World  "  ?  They  could  not  assert  that  it  was  the  spark  to  fire  the  powder 
magazine  of  social  and  political  passions.  But  it  opposed  the  cosmogony  and 
chronology  of  the  Bible.  Besides,  it  demonstrated  the  wide  difference  between 
actual  Catholicism  and  primitive  Christianity,  and  had  perpetrated  the  unforgivable 
sin  of  exhibiting  in  new  points  of  view  the  abuses  of  the  confessional  and  the  celibacy 
of  the  priesthood. 

" '  Such  are  the  noted  facts,  as  unquestionable  as  they  are  incredible.'  " 

It  would  be  unnecessary  to  republish  M.  Pierart's  eloquent  comments  on 
what  he  considers  these  "incredible"  facts  in  farther  detail,  there  being 
few  Spiritualists  of  any  experience  who  could  not  parallel,  and  in  some 
respects  exceed  them ;  but  we  shall  yet  claim  the  reader's  attention  for  a 
few  more  extracts  from  this  gentleman's  voluminous  writings.  The  fol- 
lowing sketches  of  his  power  as  a  prophetic  Seer  being  both  original  in 
style  and  characteristic  of  French  Spiritualism  : — 

Extracts  from  the  "  Concile  de  Libre  Pensee  " 
{Books  8th  and  gth). 

''  The  year  in  which  visions  of  great  cotemporary  events  followed  close  upon  one 
another  was  i860. 

"  I  anticipated  the  war  which  terminated  in  the  bloody  battle  of  Sadowa.  The  night 
before  the  battle,  I  had  a  vision  of  a  Lancer  whom  I  recognised  by  his  uniform  to  be 
an  Austrian  Uhlan.  He  held  a  lance  with  a  black  pennant,  and  was  singing  a  mourn- 
ful air  which  I  remember  to  have  heard  in  my  youth  sung  by  the  veterans  who 
witnessed  the  disaster  of  1812  and  1813,     It  commenced  thus — 

'  They  lie  and  sleep  on  the  ground, 

And  the  drum  shall  wake  them  no  more  ! ' 

This  vision  made  a  painful  impression  upon  me  in  my  waking  hours,  but  its  signifi- 
cance was  soon  explained  by  the  arrival  of  the  telegram  which  announced  the  defeat 
and  slaughter  of  Sadowa. 

''  Towards  the  end  of  1867,  I  saw  in  vision  vast  multitudes  of  armed  men  approach- 
ing Paris  from  Germany,  and  the  French  Empire  tottering  beneath  their  heavy  tread. 

"  This  prophecy  was  soon  sadly  realized  in  the  fall  of  the  Second  Empire,  already 
often  predicted  by  a  host  of  mediums. 

"Before  the  advance  of  the  Black  Prussians  and  the  carnage  of  Champigny  and 
Villiers-sur-Marne,  I  saw  their  approach  in  a  cloud  of  black  ravens  which  swooped 
down  before  the  place  where  I  was  sitting. 

"  Shortly  after  this,  I  had  a  distinct  vision  of  myself  returning  from  the  north  of 
France  to  Paris.  On  the  way  I  encountered  cavalry  officers  in  foreign  uniforms,  one 
of  whom  thrust  me  aside  with  the  point  of  his  sabre,  ordering  me  in  an  imperious 
voice  to  stand  off.  Very  soon  after,  this  scene  was  enacted  in  all  its  minutiae,  for  on 
quitting  my  native  place  to  return  to  Paris,  I  encountered  suddenly  a  party  of 
Prussian  soldiers  who  represented  exactly  the  persons  and  scenes  of  my  vision. 

"Just  before  the  war,  when  all  was  apparently  peaceful  and  calm,  for  more  than 
fifteen  days,  every  morning  quite  early,  as  I  was  dressing,  I  heard  a  dull  sound  as  of 
a  cannonade,  which  seemed  to  come  from  Paris,  and  its  environs.  At  first  I  imagined 
there  was  some  emeute  in  the  great  city,  to  the  tune  of  artillery  practice  on  the 
esplanade  at  Vincennes,  but  I  soon  learnt  that  there  was  nothing  of  the  kind.  Whence 
came  this  noise  of  cannon  firing,  which  only  I  myself  could  hear,  but  at  regular 
intervals,  and  unmistakably  ?  I  could  not  account  for  it.  It  was  not  hallucination  ; 
I  was  in  perfect  possession  of  my  senses,  and  laying  my  ear  to  the  ground  I  heard  the 
sound  intensified.  Even  now  I  ask  myself  how  ever  this  audible  phenomenon  could 
be.  Was  I  to  understand  it  as  a  prophecy  of  the  dreadful  cannonade  which  was 
soon  to  thunder  in  Paris  and  its  environs  ?  At  this  present  date  I  should  so  explain 
it.  About  this  time  I  had  a  letter  from  my  friend  M.  Clavairoz.  He  asked  me  what 
my  spirits  said  about  the  war.  As  for  his  spirit,  in  whom  he  had  perfect  confidence, 
he  announced  nothing  but  disaster, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  53 

''  A  few  days  after  this  an  English  friend  of  mine  paid  me  a  visit.  It  was  Mr.  S. 
Chinnery,  a  very  sensitive  man,  and  good  seer,  whose  presentiments  rarely  deceived 
him.  He,  no  more  than  myself,  had  faith  in  the  coming  triumphs  of  France,  He 
related  tome  a  scene  he  had  just  witnessed  in  the  gardens  of  the  Tuileries,  by  the 
fountain  nearest  the  Palace.  A  man — his  dress  in  disorder,  wild-looking,  and  hollow- 
eyed — had  come  there  to  weave  a  sort  of  incantation  and  denounce  prophetically  the 
potentate  who  resided  close  by.  Laying  coals  on  the  edge  of  the  basin  and  turning 
toward  the  Tuileries  in  an  attitude  of  malediction,  he  thundered  out  these  words  : 
'  Napoleon,  thy  days  are  numbered,  thy  kingdom  is  coming  to  an  end.  Witness  these 
coals,  which  have  been  sent  me  by  one  in  the  last  stage  of  phthisis,  whose  death  is 
close  at  hand.' 

' '  After  giving  the  particulars  of  this  scene,  which  had  made  a  strong  impression  on 
him,  Mr.  Chinnery  recounted  various  prophecies  and  presentiments,  of  which  he  had 
made  a  collection,  and  which  convinced  him  that  France  was  about  to  pass  through 
a  very  lamentable  crisis. 

"  I  was  in  Belgium  at  the  time  of  the  disaster  at  Sedan.  Before  leaving,  I  had 
offered  to  the  Flamant  family,  who  dwelt  at  Joinville-le-Pont,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Marne,  the  use  of  my  apartment,  in  case  the  tide  of  war  should  reach  Paris  and  its 
environs.  I  knew  the  enemy  would  not  cross  this  stream  in  the  teeth  of  the  forts 
which  protected  it,  but  the  left  bank  was  in  great  danger  of  being  ravaged.  The 
members  of  this  family,  though  they  had  no  faith  in  my  predictions,  were  very  soon 
only  too  glad  to  accept  my  offer. 

"  But  I  have  now  to  relate  the  most  wondrous  of  all  the  phenomena  of  that  grievous 
period  of  terror.  I  was  far  away,  but  my  good  genius  guarded  my  home.  As  I  had 
quitted  home  in  a  hurry,  everything  had  been  left  in  confusion ;  but  when  they  took 
possession,  everything  was  found  in  the  most  perfect  order.  Certainly  no  mortal 
hand  could  have  acomplished  this  in  an  apartment  under  lock  and  key.  Who  then, 
could  have  put  everything  to  rights?  If  it  was  a  spirit,  the  new  occupiers  saw 
nothing  of  him  ;  but  their  dog  no  doubt  saw  him,  for  no  sooner  had  the  animal 
entered  than  he  began  to  tremble  all  over,  and  to  howl,  so  that  they  were  obliged  to 
open  the  door  for  him,  and  find  him  quarters  in  the  garden.  A  luminous  spirit  was 
seen  to  go  out  from  the  house  and  to  soar  over  it  in  the  open  air,  with  outstretched 
arms  in  sign  of  protection,  at  the  moment  when  the  enemy's  cannon  announced  the 
investment  of  the  Marne. 

"  From  that  time  I  pursued  in  the  journals  every  detail  of  the  siege  with  the  greatest 
anxiety.  As  the  enemy's  projectiles  were  aimed  at  the  heights  which  crowned  the 
approaches  to  the  river,  I  dreaded  lest  they  should  force  the  passage,  or  a  cannonade 
come  down  upon  the  lofty  building  that  contained  my  apartment,  which  was  close  by 
the  church,  on  the  highest  point  of  the  locality,  and  therefore  could  not  fail  to  be  a 
target  for  them.  One  morning  I  had  a  vision — it  seemed  to  me  that  a  bombardment 
had  commenced,  and  they  were  stowing  away  my  books  in  safe  hiding  places.  I 
afterwards  ascertained  that  this  vision  was  true. 

"  I  had  had  a  thousand  proofs  of  the  action  of  the  spiritual  world  on  the  natural. 
My  good  genius  over  and  over  again  had  saved  me  from  great  misfortunes.  To  turn 
aside  the  balls  once  fired  off  seemed  to  me  impossible  even  for  him,  but  I  believed  it 
might  be  in  his  power  to  act  on  the  organs  of  a  human  being,  so  I  besought  him,  in 
case  the  house  should  be  in  danger  of  bombardment,  to  exercise  his  influence  on  the 
visual  organs  of  the  artillery  officers  who  pointed  the  cannon.  I  had  no  hope  except 
in  this. 

"  I  was  not  deceived.  For  six  weeks  an  iron  hail  of  shells  hurled  over  the  centre 
of  the  village  of  St.  Maur.  The  houses  all  round  mine  were  burnt,  but  mine  remained 
intact.  This  so  astonished  the  Wurtemburg  artillery  officer  who  directed  the  firing, 
that  at  the  time  of  the  armistice  he  came  to  see  it,  and  declared,  in  presence  of  the 
assembled  villagers  who  had  returned,  and  the  brave  Flamant  family,  that  'the  house 
must  either  be  the  devil's  house  or  the  dwelling  of  a  sorcerer,  as  he  had  tried  to  set 
fire  to  it  for  six  weeks,  and  had  not  succeeded.'  At  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  the  good  dames  of  the  neighbourhood  attributed  this  fact  to  the  agency  of  '  Our 
Lady  of  Miracles '  of  St.  Maur ;  but,  at  all  events,  Our  Lady  might  as  well  have 
preserved  the  other  burnt  houses  while  she  was  about  it. 

"  Whether  people  believe  in  these  things  or  not,  and  howsoever  they  explain  them 
it  is  not  the  less  certain  that  they  are  facts ;  and  we  have  our  own  way  of  looking  at 
them,  undreamt  of  in  their  philosophy."  "  Z.  T.  Pjerart." 

54  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN     FRANCE, 

Spiritism  and  Spiritualism  (continued). 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  schism  which  divided  the  two  leaders 
of  French  SpirituaUsm  was  confined  to  the  immediate  sphere  of  action  in 
which  they  moved.  Scattered  sympathisers  with  the  writings  of  Allan 
Kardec  may  be  found  all  over  the  Continent  of  Europe  and  in  small 
numbers  in  America  also.  Few  people  who  read  works  put  forth  with 
authoritative  pretentions,  have  the  faculty  of  thoroughly  digesting  what  they 
read,  hence,  when  M.  Kardec's  books  were  translated  into  the  English 
language,  and  it  became  the  publisher's  interest  to  aid  in  their  circulation, 
they  found  more  readers  than  thinkers,  and  their  plausible  style  attracted 
more  admiration  than  sincere  convicton.  In  France,  no  doubt  M. 
Kardec's  personal  influence  and  strong  psychological  power,  admirably 
fitted  him  for  a  propagandist,  and  when  we  remember  how  readily  any 
doctrines  eloquently  advocated  will  command  adherents,  especially  amongst 
restless  and  excitable  natures,  we  need  be  at  no  loss  to  discover  why  M. 
Kardec's  writings  have  become  so  popular  and  his  opinions  so  generally 
accepted  by  his  readers.  Little  or  no  Spiritual  literature  was  disseminated 
in  the  French  language  when  Allan  Kardec's  works  were  first  pubUshed. 
He  possessed  that  indomitable  energy  and  psychological  influence  in  which 
his  much  harassed  rival  Pierart  was  wanting.  Thus  in  a  measure,  the 
field  of  Continental  Spiritual  propagandism  was  his  own,  nor  did  he  fail 
to  make  use  of  his  great  opportuuities. 

The  successes  achieved  by  Kardec's  journal  La  Revue  Spirite,  communi- 
cated a  wave  of  influence  also,  which  propagated  journals  of  a  similar 
character  all  over  the  country.  Thus  in  1864,  there  were  no  less  than  ten 
Spiritualistic  periodicals  published  in  France,  under  the  following  titles  : 
La  Revue  Spirite,  La  Revue  Spiritualisfe,  and  L'Avenir,  Paris  ;  four 
Spiritist  journals  published  in,  Bordeaux,  which,  in  1865,  became  merged 
into  L Union  Spirite  Bordelaise ;  La  Medium  Evangeliqut,  Toulouse; 
LEcho  d outre  Tonibe,  Marseilles  ;  and  La  Verite,  Lyons. 

The  editors  of  these  journals  are  said  to  have  been  all  followers  of 
Allan  Kardec,  with  the  exception  of  M.  Pierart,  editor  of  La  Revue 
Spiritualiste. 

How  far  the  Re-incarnationists  were  in  sympathy  with  Spiritualism  proper, 
may  be  gathered  from  the  fact,  that  they  never  noticed  an  opera  published 
in  1865  in  M.  Pierart's  paper,  said  to  be  the  production  of  spirits, 
through  the  mediumship  of  Dr.  C.  Maldigny,  entitled  "Swedenborg." 

Several  persons  of  literary  talent  pronounced  this  opera  a  very  meri- 
torious work,  but  as  its  publisher  M.  Pierart  was  a  Spiritualist,  amongst  a 
host  of  Spiritist  journalists,  not  one  contributed  to  popularize  it,  by  a 
single  word  of  comment. 

This  is  but  one  out  of  many  kindred  facts  which  tend  to  prove  the  total 
lack  of  sympathy  existing  between  the  opposing  parties. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  55 

It  must  be  remarked  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Re-incarnationists, 
although  defended  with  great  ability  by  their  propagandists,  who  in- 
cluded many  of  the  most  capable  minds  of  France,  were  not  suffered 
to  pass  without  severe  castigation  on  the  part  of  their  English  neigh- 
bours ;  and  as  we  are  pledged  to  represent  the  history  of  the  movement, 
rather  than  our  own  personal  predilections,  it  becomes  necessary  to  note 
how  the  French  spiritual  schism  was  received  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Channel. 

In  the  London  Spiritual  Magazijie  of  1865,  the  editor,  in  commenting 
on  the  ominous  silence  of  the  Spirite  journals  concerning  Dr.  Maldigny's 
opera  of  Swedenborg  says  : — 

''It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  journals  of  the  Kardec  school,  so  far  as  we  have 
seen  them,  do  not  take  the  least  notice  of  this  opera.  The  Avmir  of  Paris 
which  appears  weekly,  but  greatly  wants  facts,  has  not  a  word  to  say  about 
it.  .  .  .  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  the  main  object  of  the  Kardecian 
journals,  seems  to  be,  not  the  demonstration  of  the  constantly  recurring  facts  of 
Spiritualism,  but  the  deification  of  Kardec's  absurd  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation. 

"To  this  doctrine — which  has  nothing  to  do  with  Spiritualism,  even  if  it  had  a  leg 
of  reason  or  fact  to  stand  on — all  the  strength,  and  almost  all  the  space  of  these 
journals  is  devoted. 

"These  are  the  things  which  give  the  enemies  of  Spiritualism  a  real  handle 
against  it,  and  bring  it  into  contempt  with  sober  minds.  Re-incarnation  is  a  doctrine 
which  cuts  up  by  the  roots  all  individual  identity  in  the  future  existence.  It  deso- 
lates utterly  that  dearest  yearning  of  the  human  heart  for  reunion  with  its  loved 
ones  in  a  permanent  world.  If  some  are  to  go  back  into  fresh  physical  bodies, 
and  bear  new  names,  and  new  natures,  if  they  are  to  become  respectively  Tom 
Styles,  Ned  Snooks,  and  a  score  of  other  people,  who  shall  ever  hope  to  meet 
again  with  his  friends,  wife,  children,  brothers  and  sisters  ?  When  he  enters  the 
spirit-world  and  enquires  for  them,  he  will  have  to  learn  that  they  are  already 
gone  back  to  earth,  and  are  somebody  else,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  other  people, 
and  will  have  to  become  over  and  over  the  kindred  of  a  dozen  other  families  in  suc- 
cession !  Surely  no  such  most  cheerless  crotchet  could  bewitch  the  intellects  of  any 
people,  except  under  the  most  especial  bedevilment  of  the  most  sarcastic  and. 
mischievous  of  devils." 

In  the  January  number  for  1866,  a  still  stronger  article  on  this  subject 
appears  from  the  pen  of  Wm.  Howitt,  who  writes  the  following  fearless 
words  of  protest  against  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation  : — 

''  In  the  Avenir  of  November  2nd,  M.  Pezzani  thinks  he  has  silenced  M. 
Pierart,  by  asserting  that  without  Re-incarnation  all  is  chaos  and  injustice  in 
God's  creation — '  In  this  world  there  are  rich  and  poor,  oppressed  and  oppressors, 
and  without  Re-incarnation  God's  justice  could  not  be  vindicated.'  That  is  to  say, 
in  M.  Pezzani's  conception,  God  has  not  room  in  the  infinite  future  to  punish 
and  redress  every  wrong,  without  sending  back  souls  again  and  again  into  the 
flesh.  M.  Pezzani's  idea,  and  that  of  his  brother  Re-incarnationists  is,  that  the 
best  way  to  get  from  Paris  to  London  is  to  travel  any  number  of  times  from 
Paris  to  Calais  and  back  again.  We  English  that  the  only  way  is  to  go  on  to 
London  at  once.  .  .  .  As  to  M.  Pezzani's  notions  of  God's  injustice  without 
Re-incarnation,  if  souls  were  re-incamated  a  score  of  times,  injustice  between  man 
and  man,  riches  and  poverty,  oppression  and  wrong,  all  the  enigmas  of  social 
inequality  would  remain  just  then  as  now. 

"  In  noticing  these  movements  in  the  Spiritist  camp  in  France,  we  should  be  doing 
a  great  injustice  if  we  did  not  refer  to  the  zealous,  eloquent,  and  unremitting  exertions 
of  M.  Pierart  in  the  Revjce  Spiritualistc,  to  expose  and  resist  the  errors  of  the  Spirites  to 
which  we  have  alluded.  The  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation  M.  Pierart  has  persistently 
resisted  and  denounced  as  at  once  false,  unfounded  on  any  evidence,  and  most  per- 
nicious to  the  character  of  Spiritualism." 

Again  he  adds  : — 

5 6  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  ■ 

"  What  are  the  fruits  which  this  serpent  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation  have  already 
begun  to  produce  in  the  South  of  France  ?  There  the  medium  Hillaire,  having  run 
away  with  his  neighbour's  wife,  it  is  stated  that  the  unhappy  husband  appealed  to 
their  leader  Kardec  to  use  his  influence  to  bring  back  the  fugitive  wife  with  the 
money  which  she  and  her  paramour  had  carried  off. 

"  But  the  answer  is  stated  to  have  been  from  Kardec,  that  he  could  do  no  such 
thing,  as  the  husband  was  no  doubt  punished  for  a  similar  crime  in  some  former  state 
of  existence." 

M.  Pierart  in  commenting  on  this  notorious  case  says  in  the  Revue 
Spiritualiste,  8  th  vol.  : — 

"  In  the  south  of  France  a  people  has  only  awakened  from  the  death  of  materialistic 
belief,  to  the  death  of  all  virtue,  sense,  morality,  and  reason. 

"  There  a  tribunal  has  lately  heard  enunciated  the  doctrine,  that  it  is  necessary  to 
tolerate  theft  and  adultery,  because  these  crimes  can  only  happen  as  the  punishment 
of  like  sins  in  a  former  existence." 

M.  Pierart  concludes  a  scathing  article  on  this  case  in  the   following 

words  : — 

"  Away  then,  with  these  doctrines  destructive  of  progress,  negative  of  the  spirit 
which  ought  to  reign  in  humanity  !  Away !  and  it  is  high  time ;  for  seduction  and 
blind  error  are  arising  and  spreading  themselves  on  all  sides  like  a  leprosy,  which  it 
will  soon  be  too  late  to  attempt  to  cure.  They  go  on  originating  fanatical  impulses, 
made  obstinate  by  the  force  of  ignorance  and  the  absence  of  a  critical  spirit.  And  no 
one  calls  attention  to  the  danger  !  and  we  ourselves  stand  nearly  alone  and  unable  to 
vanquish  the  hydra.  But  we  shall  at  least  have  done  our  part.  Our  warnings  have 
been  heard  from  time  to  time,  and  if  they  remain  without  response,  we  shall  at  least 
enjoy  the  consciousness  of  having  performed  a  great  duty." 

Again  William  Howitt  writes  :  — 

"  We  may  regret  the  necessity, — one  which  amounts  to  a  duty, — of  devoting  so 
much  space  to  a  doctrine  which  assails,  and  would  uproot  if  permitted  to  flourish,  the 
most  vital  principles  of  Spiritualism,  amongst  which  are — 

"  I.  The  immortality  of  the  soul— utterly  annihilated  if  an  individual  known  as 
such  on  earth,  is  not  himself  at  all  but  somebody  else  in  past  life  and  will  be  somebody 
else  in  the  future. 

"  2.  It  negatives  eternal  progress,  if  the  soul  is  to  return  to  this  weary  earth  for 
endless  births  as  somebody  else,  instead  of  marching  on  through  the  decades  of 
eternity  in  unchanged,  and  ever  strengthening  individuality. 

"  3.  It  crushes  out  for  ever  the  sweet  ties  of  family  affection — if,  for  example  ; — 
the  blessed  mother  whom  we  have  known  and  adored,  is  not  our  mother,  but  we  are 
perchance  her  great  grandfather,  and  she  may  be  presently  born  again  as  the  child  of 
our  worst  enemy  ! 

"4.  It  wholly  discredits  the  facts  of  spirit  communion  upon  which  alone,  the 
foundations  of  Spiritualism  rest;  because  Spiritualism  came  to  us  a  stranger,  and 
before  we  had  begun  to  pervert  its  revealments  or  interpolate  them  with  our  own  wild 
theories,  it  declared  that  the  soul  moved  on  for  ever,  but  never  retrogressed  back  into 
its  rudimental  shell  of  mortal  mould.  It  showed  us  the  worst  of  spirits,  progressing 
through  the  spheres  of  Spiritual  existence,  growing  brighter  and  fairer  beneath  our 
very  eyes,  but  never  returning  to  be  re-born  in  strange  households,  to  the  distraction 
of  all  kindred  ties,  and  the  annihilation  of  that  divine  sentiment  of  love  for  one 
another,  which  is  the  redeeming  element  in  the  lowest  depths  of  humanity." 

"  Can  you  give  me  any  indisputable  proof  that  the  doctrine  of  the 
soul's  Re-incarnation  in  matter  is  true  ? "  asked  the  author  of  a  Spirit, 
communicating  under  test  conditions  so  well  defined,  as  to  render  doubt 
touching  that  spirit's  personality  impossible.  '•'  Can  you  give  me  any  indis- 
putable proof,"  replied  the  spirit,  "  that  an  acorn  having  once  grown  to  be 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  57 

an  oak,  ever  becomes  an  acorn  again,  or  the  eagle  having  once  given  birth 
to  its  young,  ever  becomes  again  a  germ  egg  ?  " 

Who  cannot  follow  out  these  living  pictures  of  Nature's  harmonious  and 
'Unbroken  laws,  from  plant  and  animal  life  to  man,  nor  dwarf  the  intellect 
down  to  the  measure  of  M.  Roustan's  dreams,  filtered  through  the  lips  of 
his  somnambulic  subject,  even  though  they  be  stamped  with  the  mighty 
genius  of  M.  Allan  Kardec  ? 

And  now  that  same  Allan  Kardec  is  a  spirit !  He  passed  from  the  scene 
of  his  earthly  pilgrimage  on  the  31st  of  March,  1869. 

Whatever  might  have  been  the  impulse  that  led  him  to  promulgate  a 
doctrine  fraught  with  so  much  that  many  SpirituaUsts  deem  false  and 
injurious,  it  is  impossible  that  he  could  have  exerted  over  his  own  imme- 
diate sympathizers  so  unbounded  an  influence  as  he  wielded,  without 
being  a  man  of  powerful  intellect,  and  indomitable  energy.  It  is  also 
impossible  that  he  could  so  long  have  remained  the  centre  of  a  large 
•  circle,  without  becoming  known  for  what  he  truly  was,  and  as  all  his  most 
intimate  associates  pronounce  upon  him  the  verdict  of  superior  excellence, 
who  shall  venture  to  visit  a  stupendous  intellectual  misconception,  upon 
the  heart  and  intention  of  the  man  ? 

That  he  had  the  elements  of  greatness,  let  us  cordially  acknowledge. 
Meantime,  whatever  he  may  now  be  in  sentiment  and  knowledge,  we 
are  assured  he  is  in  the  land  of  light,  where  he  will  no  more  "see  as  in  a 
glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face,"  with  divine  truth. 

Were  it  not  for  the  vice  of  the  age,  which  rejoices  to  represent  greatness 
through  the  shams  of  mediocrity,  we  might  hope  to  learn  from  the  lips 
.of  the  enfranchised  spirit  himself,  how  it  fares  with  him,  and  how  far  his 
spiritual  eyes  have  been  opened,  to  the  realities  of  his  new  sphere  of 
existence.  Still  again,  we  are  consoled  by  the  assurance,  that  all  progress 
for  all  living  souls,  is  but  a  question  of  time,  and  that  sooner  or  later,  he 
will  join  the  mighty  armies  of  progression,  whose  watchword  through 
eternity  is.  Excelsior  ! 

It  should  be  stated  in  this  brief  notice  of  a  memorable  man,  that  the 
followers  of  Allan  Kardec  are  accustomed  to  assemble  annually  at  his  tomb 
in  Pere  La  Chaise  and  celebrate  with  all  the  love  and  interest  which  his 
memory  excites,  their  continued  affiliation,  in  spirit  at  least,  with  their  great 
leader.  Until  within  the  last  twelvemonth,  these  touching  anniversary 
services  have  been  participated  in  by  the  venerable  Madame  Kardec. 
Quite  recently  however,  the  noble  widow  has  gone  to  join — as  we  faith- 
fully believe — the  husband  to  whom  she  seemed  to  be  bound  by  ties  of 
tenderness  and  personal  affection  which  strangely  contradict  her  cherished 
philosophy  of  Re-incarnation. 

Madame  Kardec  leaves  a  munificent  bequest  behind,  in  aid  of  the  fund 
■designed  to  publish  and  disseminate  her  husband's  writings,  and  it  seems 
to  have  been  in  view  of  her  noble  character  and  earnest  endeavour  to  act 
out  her  highest  sense  of  right,  that  her  obsequies  were  attended  by  crowds 
of  persons  distinguished  alike  for  their  literary  and  social  eminence.  The 
reader  cannot  fail  to  be  interested  in  the  following  excerpts  which  give  brief 
accounts  of  one  of  the  anniversary  gatherings  held  at  the  tomb  of  the 
celebrated  French  Spiritist. 

The  Daily  News  of  London  says  : — 

"  The  other  day  a  solemn  conclave  met  in  Paris  to  do  honour  to  a  name  which, 
;although   a  borrowed   one,  has   in  the  space  of  less  than  twenty  years  made  the 

58  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

circuit  of  the  globe,  and  founded  a  school  of  religious  philosophy  in  which  its- 
adepts  seem  to  find  the  meeting  point  of  Mysticism  and  Methodism.  Allan  Kardec, 
whose  imposing  tomb  at  Pere  La  Chaise  cannot  fail  to  have  attracted  the  atten- 
tion of  the  most  careless  visitor  to  that  city  of  the  dead,  was  the  son  of  a  French 
lawyer,  and  was  born  at  Lyons  in  the  early  years  of  the  century.  His  real  name 
was  Hippolyte  Leon  Denizard  Rivail,  and  with  it  for  more  than  fifty  years  he  was 
content  to  live  a  life  of  obscurity.  Some  few  years  however,  after  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Second  Empire,  Spiritualistic  manifestations  were  imported  into  France 
from  across  the  Atlantic.  It  fascinated  Rivail's  mind,  long  given  up  to  the  study  of 
the  mediaeval  Mystics.  In  1858  he  had  gathered  around  him  so  many  fellow-believers 
that  a  '  Societe  des  Etudes  Spirites '  was  constituted,  and  a  few  months  later  their 
organ,  the  Revue  Spirite,  appeared.  Both  the  Association  and  the  organ  still  survive, 
and  claim  to  be  making  important  progress,  not  only  in  France,  but  in  every 
Continental  country." 

Writing  of  the  same  occasion,  one  of  the  American  papers  remarks  : — • 

"  There  was  a  large  gathering  of  Continental  Spiritualists  around  the  tomb  of  Allan 
Kardec  in  the  cemetery  of  Pere  La  Chaise,  Paris,  on  the  occasion  of  the  recent  anniver- 
sary of  his  death.  Speeches  in  honour  of  him  and  his  work  were  delivered  by 
prominent  disciples.  One  of  the  floral  crowns  to  decorate  his  tomb  was  brought  from 
America.  Madame  Kardec  was  present,  and  received  the  sympathetic  salutations  of 
the  assemblage. 

''  In  the  evening  many  were  present  at  a  banquet  and  concert.  About  three 
hundred  brothers  and  sisters  in  belief  met  at  the  rooms  of  the  Society  for  continuing 
Allan  Kardec's  work,  in  the  Rue  des  Petits-Champs.  The  rooms  are  now  too  small 
for  the  growing  Society.  The  evening  was  devoted  to  oratorical,  poetical,  and  musical 
tributes  to  the  memory  of  the  venerated  founder." 

Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  writings  of  R.  D.  Owen,  Shorter,. 
Howitt,  and  other  celebrated  European  Spiritualists,  will  have  read  with 
absorbing  interest,  accounts  of  the  marvellous  phenomena  which  frequently 
occurred  in  the  presence  of  the  late  Baron  de  Guldenstubbe,  and  his  gifted 
sister.  The  speciality  of  the  Baron's  mediumship  was,  the  production  of 
writings  executed  by  the  hands  of  spirits  themselves.  These  writings  the 
Baron,  Mdlle.  Guldenstubbe,  and  their  friends,  obtained  in  the  following 
way.  According  to  certain  theories  of  his  own,  the  Baron  de  Guldenstubbe 
believed,  that  tombs,  altars,  statues,  and  other  objects  consecrated  to  the 
memory  of  the  illustrious  deceased,  were  imbued  with  special  magnetic 
properties,  which  aided  in  attracting  the  spirits  to  whose  memory  they  were 
dedicated.  With  this  impression  he  was  in  the  habit  of  placing  blank 
papers  in  concealed  niches  of  remarkable  monuments,  and  under  the 
most  crucial  test  conditions,  obtained  spirit  writings,  drawings,  and 
hieroglyphics  of  the  rarest  interest.  A  volume  could  be  filled  with 
descriptions  of  these  wonderful  productions,  the  genuine  character  of 
which  it  is  impossible  to  question.  As  some  facsimiles  and  elaborate 
accounts  have  been  published  by  several  well-known  authors,  of  these 
writings,  we  shall  ask  our  readers  to  satisfy  themselves  on  the  pre- 
sent occasion,  with  two  short  narratives,  both  of  which  are  selected, 
as  much  for  their  unquestionable  authenticity,  as  for  their  rarity.  The 
first  is  written  by  Dr.  G.  L.  Ditson  for  the  Banner  of  Light  of  1881,  and 
reads  thus  : — 

"  Following  the  above  is  an  account,  from  the  pen  of  Mons.  Leymarie,  of  a  visit 
made,  by  order  of  the  spirits,  by  Baron  Guldenstubbe  to  Versailles.  He  was  required 
to  go  with  certain  ladies  named,  whom  he  was  to  invite,  and  evidently  for  a  special 
purpose.  While  in  the  gallery  at  V.  the  Bishop  of  Orleans,  M.  Dupanloup,  passed  on 
his  way  to  celebrate  mass  in  the  chapel.    Knowing  the  ladies  referred  to  above,  he 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  59 

stopped  and  addressed  them,  and  also  the  Baron,  to  whom  he  expressed  his  regrets 
that  he  was  a  follower  of  Luther,  who  would  suffer  in  purgatory  for  the  division  he 
had  caused  in  the  true  Church.  The  Baron  replied  that  he  did  not  think  that 
Luther  was  in  purgatory  or  in  hell,  and  as  a  proof  of  it,  if  the  Bishop  would  place  a 
blank  piece  of  paper  on  Luther's  portrait,  there  would  come  some  evidence  of  his 
(the  Baron's)  belief.  The  Bishop  tore  a  piece  of  paper  from  his  register,  and  placed 
it  as  suggested.     After  a  few  moments  he  took  it  down  and  found  written  upon  it : 

'/k  vita  pestis  eram  Papce,    ■ 
In  morte  mors  ero.        Luther." 

(Living,  I  was  a  flail  to  the  Pope ;  dead,  I  will  be  his  death.)  They  were  all  greatly 
astonished.  The  Bishop  extended  his  hand  to  the  Baron  and  his  sisters  (both 
mediums),  asking  permission  to  visit  them  in  Paris.  The  permission  was  obtained, 
and  he  frequently  availed  himself  of  it  subsequently. 

''  Among  the  signatures  of  royalty  which  the  Baron  obtained  by  direct  writing  in 
the  crypt  of  St.  Denis  was  that  of  Marie  Antoinette,  which  resembled  hers  while  she 
was  in  the  flesh,  as  the  Director  of  the  Gobelin  tapestry  manufactory  declared — for  he 
had  some  of  her  letters.  Baron  Guldenstubbe,  as  is  well-known,  held  a  high  position 
among  men  of  science,  and  his  sister  is  perhaps  hardly  less  distinguished.  The 
Baron  healed  the  sick,  also,  by  animal  magnetism.  M.  Leymarie  refers  to  the 
Baroness  Guldenstubbe  as  a  lady  devoted  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  as  well  as  to 
the  sciences  in  general." 

The  second  and  last  notice  which  we  can  give  of  Baron  de  Guldenstubbe 
was  first  printed  in  the  Daily  News,  of  London,  in  1859,  and  has  been 
since  copied  into  some  of  the  Spiritual  papers.     It  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  Among  the  most  famous  '  mediums '  nowhere  [Paris]  is  a  German,  the  Baron 
Guldenstubbe,  and  his  sister.  The  Baron  is  a  nobleman  of  well-known  status  and  good 
fortune  ;  his  wife  is  a  firm  believer,  but  is  not  a  'medium,'  while  his  sister — said  to 
be  very  clever  and  amiable,  but  the  most  weird,  unearthly,  elfin-looking  little  creature 
imaginable— shares  her  brother's  gifts,  and  even  surpasses  him  in  this  line.  The 
Baron  and  his  sister,  with  a  number  of  friends,  have  been  in  the  habit  for  two  years 
past,  of  going  to  the  churches  here,  placing  bits  of  paper  and  pencil  on  the  tombs, 
and  finding  messages  written  on  the  papers  by  the  spirits  of  those  whose  mortal 
remains  lie  beneath  the  marble.  Those  who  have  been  to  the  scene  of  operations  say 
that  the  Baron  lays  a  bit  of  paper  and  pencil  on  each  tomb  from  whose  occupant  they 
desire  to  hear,  and  retires  a  few  paces  from  them  ;  that  in  the  course  of  ten  minutes 
the  friends  approach  the  tombs  and  take  up  their  papers,  when  messages  are  found 
written  on  the  latter.  The  papers  are  examined  carefully  before  they  are  laid  on  the 
tomb,  and  are  known  to  be  innocent  of  all  trace  of  writing ;  the  visitors  remain 
within  a  few  paces  of  them,  so  that  no  one  could  approach  without  being  seen  ;  and 
yet  when  the  papers  are  taken  up,  they  are  found  to  contain  writing,  always  distinctly 

visible.     A  week  or  so  ago  Madame  S caught  a  violent  cold  ;  the  white  of  her  eye 

changed,  as  it  were,  to  a  piece  of  red  cornelian.  It  was  frightful  to  look  at,  and 
she  fully  expected  that  she  would  find  herself  "  in  for  a  long  and  painful  attack." 

Before  the  attack  had  come  on  Madame  S had  been  desired  (by  the  "  spirit  "  of 

some  old  Norman  knight,  with  a  very  romantic  name,  who  came  to  her  one  evening 
at  the  Baron's  house)  to  go  on  the  following  Friday  to  Sevres,  to  place  a  paper  and 
pencil  in  the  middle  of  the  public  road,  at  thirty  paces  from  the  entrance  to  the 
famous  china  manufactory,  and  to  wait  there  for  a  message  from  him.     Though  her 

eye  was  so  inflamed  as  to  compel  her  to  relinquish  all  invitations,  Madame  S did 

not  hesitate,  protected  by  a  thick  veil,  to  go  to  Sevres  at  the  time  appointed.  She 
and  a  friend,  having  counted  off  the  thirty  paces,  held  a  bit  of  blank  paper  over  the 
spot  indicated  for  a  few  minutes,  "  to  magnetise  it,"  and  then  laid  it  on  the  ground 
with  a  pencil,  covering  them  with  some  stones,  so  as  to  prevent  the  wind  (which  was 

high  and  cold)  from  blowing  the  paper  away.     Madame  S says  that  she  hardly 

ventured  to  hope  the  writing  would  take  place,  as  Baron  Guldenstubbe,  who  had  been 
told  to  accompany  her,  took  no  part  in  the  thing,  but  walked  about  with  his  sister  in 
various  directions,  looking  at  the  building  and  fine  prospect.     Presently  the  two  came 

up  to  Madame  S and  oifered  to  place  the  paper  for  her. 

"  'Thank  you,'  she  said,  'I  have  placed  it  myself;  it  is  under  those  stones  yonder.' 
'■ '  But  you  will  probably  have  no  message,'  returned  the  Baron  ;  '  you  are  not  yet 
a  medium,  and  it  would  have  been  better  to  allow  me  to  help  you.' 

6o  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  '  Perhaps  so,'  replied  Madame  S ,   '  but  I  felt  an  impulse  prompting  me  to 

try  my  own  power.  I  have  magnetised  the  paper  before  putting  it  under  the  stones, 
and  by-and-bye  we  shall  see  what  is  the  result.'  At  that  moment  Mdlle.  Guldenstubbe 
suddenly  went  off  into  a  sort  of  cataleptic  vision,  throwing  up  her  arms,  which  grew 
rigid,  and  declaring,  with  a  face  of  horror  that  she  saw  a  man  in  armour  where  the 
stones  were;  a  javelin  had  struck  him  under  the  arm,  between  the  joints  of  his  mail, 
and  the  blood  was  flowing  in  torrents. 

" '  He  will  not  die  of  his  wound,'  she  cried,  '  but  he  suffers  dreadfully ;  he  Uegs 

Madame  S •  to  take  the  paper  from  under  the  stones  ;  he  has  written  upon  it,  and 

says  she  must  place  the  paper,  as  though  it  were  a  plaster,  on  her  eye  to-night  when 
she  goes  to  bed,  and  it  will  cure  her.' 

"  On  going  to  the  spot,  and  lifting  off  the  stones  that  covered  the  paper,  the  latter 
was  found  to  be  marked  with  a  single  letter — an  L  or  an  S— very  indistinct,  but  so 
firmly  traced,  that  the  paper  was  raised  by  the  pressure  of  the  pencil,  and  under  it 
was  a  queer  mark,  much  better  traced,  which  appeared  to  be  not  a  letter,  but  a 
cabalistic  sign.     Intensely  delighted  with  the  success  of  the  experiment,  the  party 

returned  to  Paris ;  and  on  retiring  for  the  night,  Madame  S laid  the  paper  on 

her  inflamed  eye,  tying  it  carefully  in  place  with  a  handkerchief.     Next  morning,  to 

her  great  satisfaction,  the  eye  was  cured  !     Now,  it  is  certain  that  Madame  S , 

however  much  she  may  unconsciously  deceive  herself,  is  quite  incapable  of  attempt- 
ing to  deceive  others ;  and  as  to  the  fact  of  the  sudden  and  inexplicable  cure  of  her 
eye,  numbers  of  her  friends,  are  witnesses  to  its  reality ;  but  what  is  one  to  think  of 
such  an  occurrence  ?     In  this  case  good  seems  to  have  been  done." 

We  shall  close  this  chapter  by  a  brief  account  of  a  wonderful  healer  who 
is  even  now  effecting  cures  by  spirit  power,  as  remarkable  as  any  one 
recorded  during  the  present  century. 

Our  subject  is  an  excellent  mechanic ; — a  watchmaker  by  trade,  by  the 
name  of  Hyppolite; — and  the  following  sketch  of  his  noble  work  is  transla- 
ted for  the  columns  of  Light  (l^ondon)  of  this  current  year,  1883,  from 
an  account  written  by  M.  Ch.  Fauvety,  President  of  the  "  Scientific  Psycho- 
logical Society  "  of  Paris. 

M.  Fauvety  says  in  the  Society's  Bulletin,  for  the  new  year : 

"  In  one  of  the  poorer  quarters  of  Paris,  cures  have  been,  and  are  still  being,  per- 
formed, by  imposition  of  hands,  &c.  The  subjects,  many  of  them  have  been  treated 
unsuccessfully  at  hospitals.  The  healer  asks  for  no  payment.  What  good  he  does  is, 
he  says,  for  the  love  of  God  and  humanity.  Orthodox  practitioners  could  gain  nothing 
by  prosecuting  a  heterodox  therapeutist  like  this,  so  he  goes  on  in  his  work  unmolested. 

"The  healer's  name  is  Hippolyte.  He  is  between  forty  and  fifty,  and  is  in  the 
business  of  a  watchmaker  with  his  father,  a  hale  and  upright  man  of  eighty. 

"  In  the  room  at  the  back  of  the  shop  early  every  morning  Hippolyte's  daughter  is 
ready  to  receive  sick  visitors,  giving  to  each  a  number  in  the  order  of  which  each  will 
be  attended  to.  At  nine  o'clock  Hippolyte  begins  and  keeps  at  his  work  of  healing 
until  past  noon,  and  then  he  goes  to  the  watchmaking  and  mending  by  which  the 
household  is  supported. 

"  With  respect  to  his  method  of  treatment,  Hippolyte  says  that  as  soon  as  rapport 
is  established  between  the  patient  and  himself — which  seems  to  be  pre-requisite — he 
has  impressions  as  to  what  is  out  of  order  and  what  he  has  to  do  ;  sometimes  his 
hands  are  used  to  make  passes ;  sometimes  somnambulic  sleep  comes  on,  in  which 
communications  are  made  through  the  patient  about  his  case,  to  help  in  the  cure.  In 
chronic  cases  the  method  generally  pursued  is  evidently  calculated  to  rouse  into 
activity  the  will  and  organic  forces  of  the  patient,  in  aid  of  which  Hippolyte  uses 
manipulations.     In  these  he  declares  he  is  moved  by  his  '  spirit  guides.' 

' '  Various  persons  have  watched  Hippolyte's  treatment,  and  all  concur  in  recog- 
nising positive  cures  or  palpable  amelioration. 

"The  maladies  we  saw  cured  included  paralyses,  neuralgia,  gouty  and  rheumatic 
affections,  diseases  of  joints, — some  condemned  to  amputation  at  hospitals, — spinal 
disorders,  &c.  As  many  as  thirty  patients  came  some  days,  of  both  sexes  and  all  ages. 
The  following  few  cases  will  illustrate  some  of  Hippolyte's  modes  of  proceeding  ; 
they  are  from  a  note  containing  more  written  for  me  by  him  : — 

'■ '  A  youth  suffering  from  epilepsy  was  brought  to  me  after  much  orthodox  treat- 
ment.     As  I  spoke  to  him  he  went  into  a  fit  of  fearful  severity,     I  felt  myself  moved 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  6i 

to  lay  my  hands  upon  him,  my  right  to  his  heart,  my  left  to  his  head,  and  to  direct  my 
gaze  to  his  throat.  He  presently  came  out  of  the  fit,  passing  into  the  somnambulic 
sleep.  Then,  in  answer  to  questions,  he  said,  that  the  exciting  cause  of  his  fits  was 
fright  occasioned  by  some  mischievous  companions  ;  he  then  predicted  the  day  and 
hour  of  the  next  fit,  and  said  he  would  be  well  and  would  not  need  treatment  until 
then.  When  he  returned  to  ordinary  consciousness  he  had  no  memory  of  what  had 
been  said  through  him.  I  got  his  promise  to  come  on  the  day  named.  He  came  in 
accordance  with  the  promise  and  went  into  a  similar  fit,  but  less  strong,  exactly  at  the 
predicted  hour.  My  hands  were  applied  as  before  ;  the  fit  lasted  but  a  few  minutes, 
he  passing  again  into  the  somnambulic  sleep  ;  in  it  came  another  prediction  that  the 
next  fit  would  not  be  until  after  twenty-one  weeks,  and  date  and  hour  were  named  ; 
that  the  fit  following  that  would  be  at  a  still  longer  interval  and  would  be  the  last. 
The  fulfilment  of  these  predictions  is  looked  forward  to  with  complete  confidence. 

'■  '  A.  Delavigne  came,  after  long  and  fruitless  treatment  by  the  faculty,  with  chronic 
articular  rheumatism  and  cold  swelling  of  wrist,  and  hand,  and  fingers,  quite 
disabling  her  from  her  work  of  lace-making.  While  treating  her  I  felt  the  impulse  to 
put  a  wooden  roller  under  her  hand,  and  upon  this  roller,  without  her  own  volition, 
and  without  any  aid  from  me,  her  hand  was  exercised  for  three  hours  with  intervals 
of  rest.  This  was  repeated  at  every  treatment.  Sometimes  the  bare  hand  would  be 
made  to  beat  the  table  forcibly  with  blow  after  blow,  without  any  effort  of  her  own, 
as  if  to  rouse  the  internal  parts  of  the  limb  into  action.  She  completely  recovered 
and  returned  to  work. 

"  'A  neighbouring  tradesman  asked  my  attention  to  the  case  of  a  lady-customer  of 
his.  Three  weeks  previously  she  came  to  his  shop  to  make  purchases,  and  while  doing 
so  her  little  boy,  who  accompanied  her,  fell  down  some  cellar-steps,  Thinking  he 
must  be  killed — but  he  was  not  hurt — -she  fainted  and  fell.  She  was  carried  home, 
for  it  was  found  that  all  power  had  left  her  lower  limbs.  She  had  been  under  medical 
treatment  ever  since,  but  with  no  good  result ;  she  was  getting  very  weak,  had  lost 
desire  for  food,  and  was  almost  sleepless.  She  came  in  an  invalid's  chair  and  was 
carried  in. 

"  '  After  the  first  treatment  of  twenty  minutes  she  was  able  to  walk  to  her  little 
carriage.  The  next  day,  while  under  treatment,  she  passed  into  somnambulic  sleep. 
In  it  she  spoke  of  her  internal  condition  and  predicted  coming  pains,  from  reaction, 
and  their  duration.  At  every  subsequent  treatment  she  passed  into  the  sleep,  assisted 
with  directions,  and  predicted  her  full  restoration.  At  the  end  of  a  few  weeks,  her 
visits  having  become  less  and  less  frequent,  she  felt  quite  well.  Her  last  visit  was  to 
tell  me,  with  radiant  and  grateful  countenance,  that  she  had  been  invited  to  a  soirie 
dansante,  and  had  found  that  her  limbs  had  entirely  regained  their  full  strength  and 
activity. 

''  M.  Fauvety  says  that  although  people  not  poor  find  their  way  to  Hippolyte,  the 
greater  number  are  very  poor,  as  may  be  judged  from  the  circumstance  that  on  the 
table  were  always  tickets  for  bread  placed  at  Hippolyte's  disposal  by  the  Conseil  de 
Bienfaisance  of  his  district ;  there  was  also  a  wooden  bowl  to  receive  the  small  contri- 
butions of  the  less  poor  for  him  to  distribute  among  those  who  needed  better  nourish- 
ment than  their  own  means  afforded,  or  to  pay  omnibus  fares  for  those  unable  to 
walk." 

A  large  number  of  additional  testimonials  both  printed  and  in  MSS.,  have 
been  sent  to  the  author  concerning  the  beneficent  gifts  of  this  noble  healer, 
and  the  excellent  uses  to  which  he  devotes  his  powers.  Our  space  forbids 
any  more  extended  notice  than  a  hearty  "  God  speed,"  words  which  will 
find  an  echo  in  the  hearts  of  hundreds,  whom  this  man's  Christ-Hke  work 
has  already  blessed  and  benefited. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    FRANCE    (CONTINUED). 

OF 

PHENOMENAL     AND     EXPERIMENTAL     SPIRITUALISM. 

The  Cur^  D'Ars,  Jacob  the  Zouave,  and  Our  Lady  of  Lourdes. 

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  experimental  method  of  receiving 
communications  through  physical  mediumship  was  not  in  favour  with  M. 
Allan  Kardec  and  his  followers,  (the  ruling  party  in  the  modern  movement 
in  France),  there  is  an  abundant  amount  of  phenomena  of  all  kinds 
recorded  in  M.  Pierart's  excellent  journal  La  Revue  Sj>tritualisfe,  also  in 
many  other  European  journals  devoted  to  the  subject.  From  this  treasury 
we  are  about  to  select  such  facts  of  a  representative  character  as  will  give 
a  general  view  of  French  Spiritualism  in  the  nineteenth  century. 

Pursuant  to  the  plan  of  this  work,  we  shall  first  record  a  case  of 
spontaneous  spirit  power  or  one  which  gives  unmistakable  proof  of  spiritual 
influence  without  the  aid  of  invocatory  processes,  and  the  illustration  we 
are  about  to  introduce,  is  the  celebrated  "  Cure  D'Ars,"  the  founder  of  the 
D'Ars  "  Providence,"  and  many  other  noble  works  of  charity. 

Jean  Baptiste  Vianney,  was  born  in  the  vicinity  of  Lyons  in  1786,  in 
an  humble  sphere  of  life. 

His  natural  capacity  was  by  no  means  remarkable,  and  at  school  he  was 
only  remembered  as  a  somewhat  dull  scholar. 

Circumstances  having  opened  up  the  way  for  his  becoming  a  priest, 
although  he  had  only  Latin  enough  to  say  mass,  and  no  learning  beyond 
the  routine  of  his  profession,  yet  his  amiable  nature  and  unaffected  piety 
won  him  friends  wherever  he  went.  After  some  changes  of  fortune  and  the 
rejection  of  two  good  offers  of  rich  positions,  which  in  his  extreme  humility 
he  did  not  deem  himself  fit  for,  he  accepted  the  pastoral  charge  of  the  little 
agricultural  village  of  D'Ars,  now  in  the  arrondisement  of  Trevoux. 

This  place,  the  scene  of  his  life-long  labours  was  almost  as  stagnant  and 
full  of  ignorance  as  good  Pastor  OberHn's  famous  valley  of  Ban  de  la 
Roche. 

When  M.  Vianney  became  its  Cure,  his  deep  devotion,  fervent  preaching, 
and  the  genuine  interest  he  displayed  in  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  his 
flock,  soon  won  their  confidence,  and  placed  him  in  the  very  centre  of 
their  hearts  and  affections. 

Although  he  was  wholly  dependent  for  subsistence  upon  the  small 
pittance  he  received  for  his  pastoral  services,  he  managed  to  live  upon 
such  meagre  fare  that  he  was  enabled  to  disburse  nearly  all  his  salary  in 
charity. 

Very  soon  his  reputation  for  beneficence  drew  around  him  a  much 
larger  circle  of  poor  dependents  than  he  could  provide  for,  and  then  it 
was  that  he  commenced  his  extraordinary  life  of  faith,  supplicating  in 
fervent  prayer  for  whatever  means  were  necessary  to  carry  out  his  divine 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  (^z 

mission  of  blessing  to  his  unfortunate  fellow  creatures.  In  this  way  the 
sphere  of  his  benevolence  and  the  wonderful  results  of  the  means  he 
employed  to  maintain  it,  reached  proportions  that  could  scarcely  be 
credited. 

Amongst  other  great  undertakings  he  built  three  chapels,  and  estab- 
Ushed  a  "  Providence  "  or  home  for  destitute  children,  to  which  he  added 
another  for  friendless  women.  When  the  number  of  his  poor  pensioners 
exceeded  his  means  of  accommodation,  he  devoted  one  room  after 
another  of  his  own  humble  dwelling  to  their  use,  reserving  only  the  garret 
for  himself.  All  these  undertakings  involved  not  only  incessant  labour 
but  vast  expense.  The  Cure  had  not  a  franc  of  his  own  to  devote  to 
these  purposes,  for  he  gave  away  in  casual  and  daily  charities  nearly  all  his 
means,  sometimes  even  depriving  himself  of  his  small  allowance  of  bread 
and  milk  to  feed  the  hungry. 

He  gave  away  the  bed  on  which  he  lay  and  cheerfully  substituted  for  it  a 
couch  of  straw,  which  he  declared  was  quite  good  enough  for  him.  He 
often  robbed  himself  of  the  decent  clothes  provided  for  him  by  admiring 
friends  and  administered  to  the  wants  of  others  in  fluttering  rags. 

Always  cheerful,  contented,  indomitably  active ;  planning  his  own  build- 
ings and  helping  to  raise  them  himself;  preaching  incessantly  and  never 
weary  of  speaking  words  of  good  cheer  and  consolation,  this  wonderful 
being  became  the  life  and  soul  as  well  as  the  founder  of  the  most  gigantic 
enterprises. 

When  the  orphans  of  poor  dependents  wanted  bread  he  prayed  for  it, 
and  it  was  sure  to  come.  When  the  treasury  was  empty  and  food  and 
fuel  must  be  purchased  he  prayed  and  the  money  came  pouring  in  from  all 
quarters.  When  the  work  on  his  buildings  came  to  a  standstill  and  the 
workmen  would  not  tease  the  good  father  for  help,  he  knew  exactly  what 
they  wanted—and  prayed  accordingly — food,  money,  building  materials, 
and  clothes,  were  sent  just  as  certainly  as  they  were  needed,  but  not  until 
the  good  pastor  had  put  up  his  fervent  petition  for  the  same. 

Kind  helpful  women  tendered  their  services  as  teachers  and  seamstresses, 
whereupon  he  opened  schools  for  the  children  and  established  clothing 
depots  for  the  destitute. 

The  idea  of  his  *'  Providence  "  too  became  contagious,  and  numbers  of 
other  institutions  of  a  similar  kind  began  to  spring  up  in  different  provinces 
of  France. 

M.  I'Abbe  Monnin,  whose  biography  of  this  wonderful  man  occupies 
two  bulky  volumes  avers,  that  his  "  Providence "  was  established  fifteen 
years  before  that  of  Miiller  in  Bristol,  England,  both  being  supported. in 
the  same  miraculous  way  by  faith  and  prayer. 

M.  Monnin  relates  endless  miracles  of  the  good  Cure,  the  recital  of 
which  could  add  but  little  to  the  reader's  interest  in  the  astonishing  facts 
already  narrated.  Here  were  three  chapels  erected,  four  or  five  houses 
built  and  endowed,  countless  numbers  relieved,  and  upwards  of  one 
hundred  poor  women  and  children  regularly  maintained,  and  all  by  a  man 
without  a  penny  in  the  world,  and  a  stipend  barely  sufficient  to  provide  for 
the  daily  wants  of  one  person. 

But  now  a  still  more  wonderful  thing  was  to  happen  in  the  enchanted 
region  of  D'Ars. 

Persons  afflicted  with  disease  began  to  experience  sudden  cures,  whilst 
praying  before  the  altar,  or  making  confessions  to  the  Cure. 

The  fame  of  this  new  miracle  soon  spread  abroad,  until  the  Abbe  Monnin 

64  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

declares,  that  upwards  of  20,000  persons  annually  came  from  Germany, 
Italy,  Belgium,  all  parts  of  France,  and  even  from  England,  and  that  in  less 
than  six  years,  this  number  increased  to  an  average  of  80,000. 

Diseases  of  every  kind  that  had  been  pronounced  incurable  were  dissi- 
pated at  once. 

The  indefatigable  Cure  gave  himself  up  to  the  work  heart  and  soul. 

His  church  stood  open  day  and  night,  and  the  immense  crowds  that 
surrounded  it,  were  obliged  to  wait  for  hours  and  sometimes  days  to  reach 
the  good  healer. 

No  one  was  allowed  to  take  precedence  of  the  rest,  except  in  cases  of 
extreme  poverty  or  extreme  suffering.  Princes,  nobles,  and  great  ladies, 
often  drove  up  as  near  as  they  could  to  the  church  in  grand  carriages,  and 
manifested  the  utmost  astonishment  when  informed,  that  notwithstanding 
their  rank,  they  could  not  be  admitted  except  in  turn. 

The  Cure  only  permitted  himself  to  take  four  hours  sleep,  namely  from 
eleven  to  three,  and  when  he  came  to  the  confessional  again,  the  church 
and  all  the  approaches  to  it  were  crowded  with  those  who  had  waited  all 
night  to  secure  their  places. 

Omnibuses  were  established  to  convey  patients  from  Lyons  to  D'Ars,  and 
the  Saone  was  covered  with  boats  full  of  anxious  pilgrims. 

Amongst  thousands  of  reported  cases  of  wonderful  cures,  there  was  one 
which  Mr.  Wm.  Howitt,  another  of  the  Cure  D'Ars'  biographers,  relates  in 
the  following  touching  terms.     He  says  : 

"  A  poor  woman  came  from  a  great  distance,  carrying  on  her  back  a  boy  of  eight 
years  old  who  had  no  use  in  his  legs  whatever.  For  four-and-twenty  hours  the  poor 
mother  perseveringly  endeavoured  to  get  near  the  Curd  At  length  he  put  his  hands 
on  the  child  and  blessed  him,  saying  some  words  of  comfort  to  the  mother.  On 
entering  their  lodgings  for  the  night  the  boy  said,  '  Mother,  buy  my  sabots,  for  M.  the 
Cur^  has  promised  that  I  shall  walk  to-morrow.'  The  words  of  the  Cure  had  not 
been  quite  so  positive,  but  the  child  had  such  faith  in  him  that  he  felt  confident  of 
his  cure.  The  mother  went  and  bought  the  sabots,  and  sure  enough,  on  the  morrow 
the  child  was  cured  and  ran  through  the  church  crying  joyfully,  "  I  am  cured  !  I  am 
cured  !'     The  mother  was  overwhelmed  with  tears  and  emotion." 

We  cannot  conclude  this  brief  notice  which  does  but  poor  justice  to  the 
subject  as  detailed  by  the  Abb^  Monnin,  without  making  the  following 
additional  extracts  from  Mr.  Howitt's  interesting  account  of  the  Cure.  He 
says  : 

"  Numerous  letters  are  found  in  these  volumes  [Abbe  Monnins'  biography]  from 
people,  detailing  the  circumstances  of  their  ailments  and  their  cures,  and  many  others 
from  well-known  persons  soliciting  the  prayers  of  the  Cure  for  themselves  and  friends. 
All  this  time  the  Cur^  was  not  only  expending  superhuman  exertions  in  church  services, 
from  year  to  year,  giving  himself  but  a  short  pause  for  a  very  meagre  breakfast  and 
dinner,  but  he  was  receiving  large  sums  from  all  sides  and  bestowing  them  as 
promptly  in  relieving  distress,  assisting  poor  pilgrims,  and  sending  relief  to  distant 
places.  When  somebody  asked  him  the  secret  of  obtaining  such  great  supplies  of 
money,  he  replied  that  it  was  by  simply  giving  it  away  again  as  fast  as  he  could,  to 
those  who  needed  it.  Nobody  at  the  same  time  could  be  more  unassuming,  unosten- 
tatious, or  unselfish.  He  expended  everything  he  had,  money,  prayers,  strength,  as 
long  as  he  had  any  :  and  this  life  he  continued  till  within  four  days  of  his  death,  in 
August,  1859,  at  the  age  of  73. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  the  Cure  d'Ars  was  the  condition  of  spiri- 
tual clairvoyance  to  which  he  had  attained.  By  his  extreme  abstemiousness,  his  intense 
exertions,  and  his  ardent  piety,  he  seemed  to  have  purged  away  almost  all  fleshly 
impediments  betwixt  the  invisible  world  and  himself.  Notwithstanding  the  constant 
throng  of  people  that  surrounded  him  so  that  he  had  difficulty  to  pass  amongst  them  in 
his  church,  or  to  and  from  his  house ;  though  they  were  coming  and  going  continually, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  65 

he  seemed  to  know  them,  their  names,  their  connections,  and  circumstances  as  soon 
as  he  cast  his  eyes  on  them.  He  would  pick  out  particular  individuals  in  the  crowd, 
tell  them  the  cases  he  knew  were  pressing,  take  them  into  his  confessional  and  speak 
to  them  of  their  wants  in  a  manner  that  filled  them  with  astonishment. 

"  Seeing  a  young  Savoyard  lady  in  the  congregation,  he  told  her  in  passing,  that 
he  would  see  her  on  the  morrow.  As  she  had  but  just  arrived  and  was  a  perfect 
stranger  she  thought  he  had  mistaken  her  for  some  one  else,  but  on  the  morrow  when 
she  was  admitted  to  his  confessional,  he  told  her  her  most  secret  thoughts ;  amongst 
other  things  of  which  she  had  never  spoken,  of  her  desire  to  enter  a  religious  house, 
of  the  sisters  she  had  left  at  home,  and  their  special  characters,  all  of  which  was 
perfectly  correct. 

"  Another  lady  from  a  distance,  he  advised  to  look  after  her  property  and  dispose 
of  it  at  once  to  her  relatives  as  she  had  no  time  to  lose.  Although  in  middle  life  and 
perfect  health  apparently,  she  died  suddenly,  almost  immediately  after  following  his 
advice.     This  the  lady's  relations,  grateful  for  his  judicious  council,  informed  him  of. 

"Le  Pere  Nigre  who  was  planning  in  his  own  mind  a  soldier's  home  at  Tourbieres, 
when  preaching  there,  stated  in  the  pulpit,  that  he  had  just  been  to  D'Ars,  when  the 
Cure,  to  whom  he  was  a  stranger,  accosted  him  by  saying,  '  Well,  father,  how  go  on 
your  plans  for  the  soldiers'  home  ?  Come ;  when  will  you  have  done  thinking  of  it, 
and  begin  building  it.^  'Now,'  said  the  preacher,  'though  this  thing  was  in  my 
mind,  I  had  never  spoken  of  it  to  a  living  creature,  yet  he  knew  all  about  it.' 

"  During  the  excitement  of  the  Revolution  of  1848,  many  persons  consulted  him 
about  the  safety  of  their  families.  He  bade  them  rest  in  peace  for  there  would  be  no 
blood  spilled  except  in  and  just  round  Paris. 

"  During  the  Crimean  war  he  was  asked  to  pray  for  the  safety  of  a  soldier  there, 
and  a  sister  ill  at  home.  He  replied,  '  The  soldier  will  return  quite  safe ;  the  sister 
is  ripe  for  heaven.'  He  was  quite  right  in  both  cases.  A  young  lady,  during  the 
Italian  war,  was  in  great  terror  for  her  husband.  'Tell  her,'  said  the  Cure,  'that  she 
has  nothing  to  fear.  Peace  will  be  made  directly.'  This  was  on  the  25th  June.  The 
news  of  the  interview  of  Villafranca  came  directly  afterwards. 

"A  man  who  had  a  little  land,  offered  it  for  sale  to  the  Cure;  he  advised  him 
whatever  he  did  not  to  part  with  it.  Very  soon  after,  a  mine  was  discovered  in  it, 
which  secured  the  proprietor  two  thousand  francs  annually.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
director  of  mines  consulted  him  on  investing  in  a  new  mine  lately  opened,  and  which 
promised  to  pay  richly.  He  counselled  him  by  no  means  to  do  it.  "Twelve  days  after, 
the  mine  was  flooded  with  water  and  became  unworkable,  besides  causing  the  death 
of  various  persons. 

"The  Cure,  like  many  of  the  old  saints,  believed  himself  terribly  assailed  by  the 
devil,  and  no  doubt  he  was,  but  perhaps  not  to  the  extent  that  he  supposed.  But  let 
us  see  what  phenomena  surrounded  him,  for  actual  spirits  were  busy  about  him ;  and 
let  us  take  their  proceedings  from  his  own  point  of  view.  From  the  moment  that 
the  Cure  opened  the  orphan  house  at  D'Ars,  six  years  after  his  going  there,  and  thence 
to  the  end  of  his  life,  he  was  beset  by  the  continual  evidences  of  what  he  deemed 
Satanic  influence.  At  nine  o'clock  one  evening,  as  he  retired  to  rest,  he  was  startled 
by  three  loud  knocks  at  his  outer  gate,  as  if  they  would  drive  it  in  with  a  huge  club. 
He  arose,  threw  open  the  window,  and  asked  who  was  there.  No  answer  was 
given.  He  returned  to  bed,  but  was  scarcely  asleep  when  he  was  roused  again  by 
other  blows,  this  time  not  on  the  outer  gate,  but  on  that  of  the  staircase  leading  to 
his  chamber.  He  arose  and  called  out,  but  again  there  was  no  answer.  Imagining 
that  they  were  thieves  who  came  to  steal  some  valuables  belonging  to  the  Viscomte 
d'Ars,  he  had  two  stout  men  to  come  and  sleep  at  the  parsonage ;  these  men  heard 
the  same  noises,  but  were  unable  to  discover  any  one,  and  soon  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  they  were  produced  by  no  human  power.  They  continued  their  watch 
for  several  nights,  still  hearing  the  noises,  but  discovering  no  one.  A  snow  fell  in  the 
night,  and  the  blows  coming  on  the  front  door,  the  Cure  descended  quickly,  thinking 
this  time  he  should  be  abb  to  trace  them  by  their  footmarks  in  the  snow.  To  his 
astonishment  there  were  no  marks  at  all.  He  was  now  quite  satisfied  that  the  men 
were  right,  that  they  were  no  mortal  disturbers.  Some  young  men  of  the  village, 
however,  formed  themselves  into  a  guard  over  the  house  during  the  night,  and  a 
party  of  his  neighbours  came  and  slept  in  the  room  adjoining  his  own.  The  cart- 
wright  of  the  village  came,  carrying  his  loaded  gun  with  him.  At  midnight  there 
came  a  terrific  noise,  and  the  furniture  of  the  room  in  which  this  poor  man  was 
stationed,  resounded  as  if  with  a  storm  of  blows.  The  cries  for  help  caused  the  Cure 
and  other  watchers  to  rush  in,  but  nothing  was  either  to  be  seen  or  heard. 

"  These  disturbances  continued  with  more  or  less  violence  for  a  period  of  over 
thirty-live  years.     Sometimes  there  were  heard  sounds  as  if  a  wild  horse  were  rearing 

5 

66  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

in  the  hall  below  the  Cure's  room  throwing  his  hoofs  to  the  ceiling  and  then  plunging 
with  all  four  feet  on  the  tiled  floor. 

"  At  other  times  a  gendarme  seemed  to  be  ascending  the  stairs  in  his  boots,  and 
stamping  loudly  as  he  ascended.  Again  it  seemed  like  a  great  flock  of  sheep  passing 
above  his  head,  and  making  sleep  impossible  by  that  monotonous  patter  of  hoofs. 
Catherine  Lassagne  in  her  notes  of  her  life  at  the  Providence  at  Ars,  relates  many  such 
things,  and  says  that  every  one  who  knew  the  Cure,  knew  that  he  would  sooner  suffer 
death  than  state  an  untruth.  He  said  to  her  one  day  that  when  the  flock  of  sheep 
seemed  running  over  his  head,  he  has  taken  a  stick  and  struck  smart  blows  on  the 
ceiling  to  cause  them  to  be  silent,  but  to  no  purpose.  Just  as  he  would  be  dropping 
asleep,  '  Grappin, '  as  he  called  the  devil,  or  the  grappling  iron,  would  begin,  as  it 
were  anew,  hooping  a  cask  with  iron  hoops,  and  with  a  tremendous  din. 

•'  All  this  things,  remarks  the  Abbe  Monnin,  are  precisely  what  happened  to  the 
ancient  saints,  and  which  are  to  be  found  in  abundance  in  the  Diabolische  Mystik,  of 
Gores,  B.V.,  chapters  xxi.  and  xxii.  On  the  occasion  of  the  Cure  going  to  Saint 
Trivier-sur-Moignans  to  preach,  at  a  great  jubilee  held  by  the  missionaries,  he  was 
much  teased  by  his  brother  clergymen  about  these  hauntings.  They  were  very  witty 
about  them,  telling  him  they  all  came  of  not  living  well  enough  ;  that  they  were  rats, 
and  a  dozen  other  things.  The  Cure  took  it  all  in  good  part,  bade  them  good  night, 
and  went  to  bed.  At  midnight  these  gentlemen  came  rushing  to  his  room  in  terrible 
affright.  The  house  seemed  turned  topsy-turvy ;  the  doors  banged,  the  windows  rattled, 
the  walls  shook,  and  ominous  cracks  appeared  to  announce  their  fall.  '  Rise !  rise  ! ' 
they  cried  to  the  Cure,  who  was  lying  quietly,  '  the  house  falls.'  '  Oh  ! '  said  he,  '  I 
know  very  well  what  it  is ;  go  to  your  beds  :  you  have  nothing  to  fear.'  An  hour 
after  a  bell  rung :  there  was  a  man  at  the  gate  who  had  come  several  leagues  to  con- 
fess to  the  Cure.  He  always  expected  when  these  disturbances  took  place  that  some 
one  was  on  his  way  to  seek  consolation  from  him ;  and  it  never  failed  to  prove  so.  He 
believed  the  demons  made  the  uproar  out  of  envy  of  the  good  he  was  about  to  do. 
The  clergy,  however,  were  cured  of  laughing  at  him,  and  one  of  them  made  a  vow 
never  again  to  jest  on  apparitions  and  nocturnal  noises.  Another  night  the  devil,  the 
Cure  said,  had  amused  himself  by  pushing  him  about  his  chamber  all  night  on  a  bed 
on  castors ;  and  the  next  day  when  he  entered  his  confessional,  he  felt  himself  lifted 
up  and  tossed  about  as  though  he  had  been  in  a  boat  on  a  rough  sea. 

''  But  was  the  devil  really  engaged  in  all  these  transactions  ?  The  truth  probably 
is,  that  M.  Vianney  had  so  reduced  his  body  by  fasting,  p-enance  and  enormous  exer- 
tion, that  he  had  opened  himself  to  all  kinds  of  spiritual  impressions,  in  which  the 
devil  was  sure  to  have  his  share.  But  most  likely  many  of  these  ghostly  visitors  were 
merely  spirits  of  a  low  order  who  liked  to  amuse  themselves,  as  they  found  the  Cur^ 
accessible  to  them.  Many,  no  doubt,  like  those  who  visited  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst, 
would  have  been  glad  of  his  prayers,  had  he  not  been  so  completely  shut  up  on  that 
head,  by  his  catholic  demonophobia. 

"  Nothing,  however,  is  more  certain  than  that  the  worthy  Cure  d'Ars  was  actively 
beset  by  spirits  of  one  kind  or  another  for  upwards  of  thirty  years.  He  exorcised 
several  persons  who  were  possessed,  and  records  dialogues  with  these  demons  in 
which  they  assured  him  that  they  often  said  mass. 

"  Altogether  the  biography  of  the  Cure  d'Ars  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of 
modern  times.  Miracles  of  the  highest  and  lowest  kinds  were  in  active  operation 
round  him  for  a  long  course  of  years.  They  were  exhibited  before  thousands  and  tens 
of  thousands  of  people  of  all  classes  and  ranks  and  of  many  countries. 

"  What  had  been  reported  from  all  past  ages  by  men  of  the  highest  character  for 
veracity  learning  and  talent,  was  repeated  at  Ars  for  thirty-five  years  in  all  its 
powers.  ...  Yet  we  are  told  that  all  this  time  the  press  of  France  preserved  a 
profound  silence  on  the  matter  as  though  no  such  things  were  taking  place." 

To  the  well-informed  Spiritualist,  all  comment  on  this  strange  history  is 
unnecessary.  The  greatest  miracle  of  the  good  man's  life  is  the  fact  that 
the  stolid  scepticism  of  a  cold  materialistic  age  can  still  exist,  after  events 
of _  such  astonishing  and  world-wide  celebrity  have  testified  to  divine  and 
spiritual  interposition  in  human  affairs. 

Another  phenomenal  personage  of  whom  the  world  has  heard  much,  was 
a  soldier  commonly  known  as  Jacob  the  Zouave,  a  healer  of  remarkable 
power,  and  one  who  during  his  brief  mission  performed  many  wonderful 
cures. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  67 

In  1866  or  1867,  he  first  became  publicly  known  whilst  yet  attached  to 
his  regiment,  for  his  curative  as  well  as  clairvoyant  powers.  From  childhood 
he  seemed  to  have  been  endowed  with  spiritual  gifts  of  which  those  around 
him  had  little  understanding. 

Without  any  instruction,  he  often  executed  beautiful  drawings  of  strange 
fruit  and  flowers  which  he  said  grew  on  the  planet  Venus.  He  could 
readily  detect  the  nature  of  obscure  diseases  and  read  the  character  and 
lives  of  strangers — in  a  word,  he  exhibited  constant  proofs  of  clairvoyant 
powers  up  to  the  time  when  he  became  famous  amongst  his  military 
associates  for  "  curing  sick  people  by  magnetism,  sympathy,  and  in  other 
strange  ways." 

As  soon  as  it  was  known  outside  his  regiment  that  he  possessed  these 
gifts,  he  was  followed  everywhere  by  solicitations  to  exercise  them.  Amongst 
those  who  heard  of  and  appealed  to  the  famous  Zouave,  was  a  talented 
young  gentleman  studying  at  one  of  the  universities,  but  who  was  obliged 
to  relinquish  all  his  hopes  of  name  and  fame  on  account  of  a  confirmed 
sciatica  which  settled  in  the  right  hip  and  obliged  him  to  walk  painfully  on 
crutches  for  four  years.  This  gentleman,  M,  Marney,  informed  the  author 
he  paid  but  one  visit  to  Jacob  who  held  his  hands,  stroked  his  body  a  few 
times  and  then  bid  him  walk — he  did  so,  and  never  after  experienced  the 
slightest  sense  of  pain  or  lameness.  This  marvellous  cure  wrought  on  the 
son  of  a  wealthy  landowner,  attracted  so  much  attention  that  the  barracks 
at  Versailles  where  M.  Jacob  was  quartered  became  thronged  with  visitors. 

The  officers  and  men  were  plied  with  entreaties  for  permission  to  see  the 
healer,  and  the  place — ^to  use  the  words  of  one  of  his  superior  officers, 
when  describing  the  scene  to  a  company  in  which  the  author  was  present — 
"  resembled  a  bear  garden."  Order  and  discipline  was  interrupted,  the 
annoyance  was  unendurable,  and  the  wonderful  Zouave  was  informed  he 
must  either  give  up  his  profession  of  killing  or  curing,  for  the  two  were 
incompatible.  After  much  effort  on  the  part  of  his  friends  and  admirers, 
the  Zouave's  release  from  the  army  was  procured,  and  he  commenced  his 
career  in  earnest  as  a  healing  medium.  Many  of  his  most  astonishing  cures 
were  effected  whilst  he  yet  remained  in  the  army,  but  when  he  was  emanci- 
pated from  that  restraint,  the  enthusiasm  which  followed  him  knew  no 
bounds. 

Doubtless,  many  of  the  reports  concerning  him  were  exaggerated,  and 
many  understated,  according  to  the  predilections  of  the  narrators.  Certain 
it  is,  that  his  cures  were  often  remarkable  enough  to  be  called  miraculous, 
although  he  himself  told  the  author  in  an  evening  visit  paid  to  her  in 
London,  that  he  never  professed  to  cure  every  one,  and  indeed  many  he 
felt  from  the  first  moment  of  their  approach  so  strongly  repelled  from,  that 
he  knew  instantly  they  were  no  subjects  for  him.  On  this  same  occasion 
he  explained  to  those  present,  that  he  saw  the  diseases  of  those  who  came 
to  him,  and  very  often  realised  that  they  had  sick  friends  or  relatives  whose 
condition,  if  time  had  permitted,  he  could  have  described  accurately.  To 
prove  this,  he  undertook  to  describe  a  young  lady  well  known  to  the 
author,  and  then  a  resident  of  America. 

He  gave  an  excellent  account  of  this  lady's  personal  appearance,  but 
insisted  that  she  was  the  victim  of  a  disease  which  would  terminate  fatally 
in  a  given  period  of  time,  a  prediction  which  was  actually  fulfilled,  although 
the  disease  itself  was  unknown  at  the  time.  He  (M.  Jacob)  added,  that 
he  almost  always  saw  spirits  busy  in  ministering  to  the  patients  who  called 
upon  him,  and  helping  him  in  his  modes  of  treatment. 

68  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Many  persons  complained  that  this  soldier-doctor  was  brusque  and  abrupt 
in  manners,  hence  that  he  was  not  generally  popular  with  those  even  whom 
he  had  most  benefited.  Whether  M.  Jacob  deemed  it  prudent  to  imitate 
the  rough,  repulsive,  manners  adopted  by  so  many  of  our  most  popular 
EngUsh  doctors,  under  the  impression,  doubtless,  that  it  is  Abernethy-like 
and  imposing,  or  whether  the  complainants  asked  too  much  of  an  humble 
private  soldier,  when  they  required  polished  manners,  in  addition  to  a 
GRATUITOUS  CURE,  we  need  not  take  the  trouble  to  enquire.  That  which 
we  do  know  is,  that  the  lame  walked,  the  blind  received  their  sight,  and  the 
deaf  heard,  and  all  this  and  much  more  than  any  ordinary  chronicle  can 
record,  was  done  without  money  and  without  price,  for  the  Zouave  would 
neither  accept  of  money  or  presents  for  his  great  services,  and  beyond  a 
paltry  franc,  paid  by  those  who  chose  to  buy  his  photograph  of  his  father, 
who  stood  at  the  door  with  them  for  sale,  this  generous  and  magnanimous 
creature  never  received  aught  for  his  services,  beyond  the  consciousness  of 
the  priceless  good  he  was  performing. 

Although  the  readers  of  the  Spiritual  journals  on  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic  have  become  familiar  with  the  name  of  Jacob  the  Zouave,  and  the 
methods  of  his  cures  have  been  too  frequently  described  to  need  reitera- 
tion, it  is  but  justice  to  this  noble  and  self-sacrificing  worker  to  insert  at 
least  one  testimonial  from  a  grateful  patient,  and  that  in  relation  to  a  cure, 
which  may  be  taken  as  an  illustration  of  the  Zouave's  usual  mode  of  pro- 
cedure. 

The  letter  in  question  was  addressed  to  the  Patrie  newspaper.  It  was 
written  by  the  Count  Chateau  Villard,  residing  at  60,  Rue  St.  Lazare,  Paris, 
and  was  introduced  by  the  editor  in  the  following  words  : — 

"  We  have  several  times  alluded  to  the  Zouave  Jacob,  garrisoned  at  Versailles  ; 
but  who  comes  to  Paris  to  effect  his  marvellous  cures. 

"  What  is  the  secret  of  all  this,  and  has  he  any  ?  Is  he  gifted  with  a  degree  of 
magnetic  influence  unrecognized  until  now  ?  How  are  the  various  cures  of  suffering 
people  to  be  explained  ?  We  can  give  no  opinion  ;  all  we  know  is,  that  the  house  in 
which  he  operates  is  continually  attended  by  invalids;  one  after  the  other  takes  his 
ticket  in  order  to  arrive  in  turn. 

"  We  must  add  that  the  Zouave  will  receive  no  money,  gifts,  or  thanks ;  he  will 
accept  literally  nothing !  All  these  facts  are  attested  by  an  honourable  witness  in  the 
person  of  the  Count  Chateau  Villard,  residing  at  60,  Rue  St.  Lazare,  who  writes  as 
follows : — 

"  '  Sir, — Reading  in  the  newspapers  that  I  had  offered  a  part  of  my  private  residence 
to  the  Zouave  Jacob,  I  beg  of  you  to  be  so  good  as  to  insert,  that  I  have  made  the 
offer  only  in  the  event  of  his  being  forced  to  quit  his  quarters  in  the  Rue  Roquette. 

"  '  God  knows  that  I  have  no  wish  to  take  him  away  from  the  poor  afflicted  who 
will  know  well  where  to  find  him ;  I  have  made  the  offer  in  gratitude,  and  for  the 
benefit  of  humanity. 

"  '  I  had  heard  such  extraordinary  things  of  the  Zouave,  that,  paralyzed  as  I  was, 
I  had  a  desire  to  attend  one  of  his  seances ;  I  took  my  lady  with  me,  who  has  been  a 
continual  sufferer  also,  and  I  here  state  what  actually  occurred. 

"  '  On  arriving  in  the  Rue  Roquette,  where  there  was  a  stoppage,  I  alighted  from 
my  carriage  with  the  aid  of  my  valet,  and  a  kind  working  man  who  hastened  to  take 
my  other  arm.  These  two  assisted  me  to  the  workshop  of  Monsieur  Dufayet.  In  this 
condition  I  arrived  at  the  door,  where  a  person  who  could  not  be  bribed,  refused  me 
admission  without  a  numbered  ticket ;  my  secretary,  who  by  a  fortunate  accident 
happened  to  know  the  principal  clerk  of  M.  Dufayet,  beckoned  to  him,  and  he  seeing 
my  state  of  impotence  allowed  me  to  enter  into  the  court,  crowded  with  sick  people. 
The  arrangements  of  the  Zouave  are  that  those  who  are  at  the  worst,  should  be 
treated  first. 

"  '  My  lady  began  to  weep  at  seeing  so  much  misery.  There  was  a  lady  who  had 
brought  her  daughter  ;  she  stated  that  the  child  was  being  treated  within ;  that  she 
herself  was  not  allowed  to  assist,  inasmuch  as  the  doors  are  only  open  to  actual 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  69 

invalids.  I  observed  after,  the  young  girl  come  out,  and  walk  to  the  vehicle  which 
had  brought  her,  followed  by  her  mother.  This  same  girl  had  been  taken  to  the  place 
carried  by  a  man. 

"  '  I  also  noticed  a  man  with  a  distorted  back,  unable  to  walk,  make  his  exit 
jumping  with  joy  ;  whilst  the  plaudits  of  the  crowd,  and  persons  from  that  quarter 
of  the  town  who  recognized  him,  joined  in. 

"  '  We  were  introduced  at  last  to  the  chamber,  which  may  really  be  designated  the 
miracle  chamber.  I  saw  there  a  human  being  frightfully  afflicted,  paralyzed  and 
incredibly  ill,  brought  in  by  M.  Dufayet  and  his  assistants,  and  placed  m  chairs 
closely  packed  one  against  the  other. 

'' '  As  soon  as  the  apartment  was  full,  the  Zouave  entered  and  said,  "  No  one  must 
speak  unless  I  interrogate  him,  otherwise  I  leave  you."  Here  the  greatest  stillness 
reigned.  He  then  went  round  telling  each  one  what  was  the  matter  with  him,  and 
without  touching  them  he  said  "  Rise  up  !  "  and  those  that  had  been  paralyzed  arose  ; 
I  am  one  of  the  number  and  raised  myself  without  the  slightest  effort. 

'' '  At  the  end  of  about  twenty  minutes,  he  told  us  all  to  retire  and  amidst  profound 
silence  each  one  left.  My  wife,  more  polite  than  I,  wanted  to  thank  him ;  he  imme- 
diately imposed  silence  and  said,  "  Other  sufferers  await  me  ;  you  are  cured,  let  that 
suffice,  begone  !  "  On  going  out  I  was  much  crowded  upon  by  persons  asking  me 
affectionately  of  what  had  occurred,  and  I  regained  my  carriage  without  help,  walking 
upon  a  very  badly  paved  street  where  the  best  man  might  find  it  awkward. 

'''  From  that  time  forth,  my  wife  also  has  been  marvellously  well. 

'''  There  is  an  extraordinary  fact  connected  with  this  strange  circumstance  which 
it  gives  me  pleasure  to  relate  ;  the  street  is  crowded  with  sick  people ;  not  only 
one  is  desirous  to  give  a  helping  hand,  but  all  seem  to  forget  their  ailments  in  their 
interest  to  help  others. 

'"Can  it  be,  that  this  immense  charitable  influence  spreads  itself  from  one  source 
into  the  hearts  of  all  ? 

'"I  am,  &c,, 

"  '  (Signed),        Chateau  Villard.'  " 

"  '  Paris,  August,  1867."  " 

More  than  one  half  of  the  columns  of  the  Petit  Journal,  a  paper  of  the 
largest  circulation  in  Paris,  was  occupied  for  several  days  the  following 
September  with  Jacob's  past  and  present  history.  One  of  the  editors  of 
that  journal  made  the  Zouave's  acquaintance  at  the  camp  at  Chalons  in 
August  1866,  where  his  fame  created  as  much  excitement  as  it  subse- 
quently did  in  Paris,  and  the  editor  vouched  for  a  wonderful  cure  of  a 
long  standing  complaint  effected  for  a  woman  who  was  a  servant  in  his 
family. 

The  crowds  that  assembled  daily  round  Jacob's  tent  at  Chalons,  obliged 
the  officer  in  command  to  put  an  end  lo  Jacob's  practice  of  his  great  and 
undoubted  gift  of  heahng. 

The  phenomenon  of  healing  by  magnetic  or  spiritual  methods  has  been 
by  no  means  an  uncommon  one  in  France. 

Many  mediums  less  distinguished  than  Jacob  the  Zouave,  but  not  less 
successful  in  a  more  limited  sphere,  have  practised  their  art  throughout 
the  land  with  excellent  results.  Amongst  the  records  of  remarkable  cures, 
it  has  often  been  questioned,  how  far  the  reports  of  "  healing  miracles," 
attributed  to  the  celebrated  shrine,  grotto,  or  fountain  of  "Our  Lady  at 
Lourdes,"  may  be  relied  on  as  genuine.  As  many  of  our  readers  may  not 
be  famiUar  with  the  current  accounts  rendered  of  this  famous  spotj,  we 
deem  it  in  order  to  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  brief  narrative  furnished 
from  a  distinguished  writer,  who  himself  visited  the  scene  of  the  reputed 
miracles,  brought  away  with  him  a  small  phial  of  the  healing  water,  and 
left  behind  a  severe  ulcer  which  for  many  months  had  fastened  on  his  arm, 
without  his  being  able  to  obtain  any  reUef  from  the  ordinary  course  of 
medical  treatment.     This  gentleman  who  was  obliged  to  conceal  the  little 

70  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

specimen  of  the  water  he  carried  away,  from  the  watchful  eyes  of  the  atten- 
dant brothers,  who  have  the  sacred  place  in  charge,  could  only  learn  from 
them  an  account  of  its  miraculous  discovery  with  a  mass  of  attendant 
circumstances  so  completely  in  harmony  with  ten  thousand  other  legends 
of  Catholic  wonders,  that  he  was  at  much  pains  to  obtain  information  from 
somewhat  more  disinterested  sources.  These  he  at  length  arrived  at,  and 
from  a  young  peasant  who  had  been  one  of  the  most  intimate  associates 
of  the  favoured  Seeress  Bernadette,  the  discoverer  of  the  spring,  he  received 
the  following  particulars.  Bernadette  was  the  invalid  child  of  a  very  poor 
couple,  Soubiroux  by  name,  who  lived  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town  of 
Lourdes,  a  small  place  but  little  known  till  recently,  in  the  Upper  Pyrenees. 
Marguerite,  the  peasant  friend  of  this  family,  seemed  to  imply,  that  little 
Bernadette  was  subject  to  fits,  and  on  the  whole,  was  what  the  Scotch 
country  folks  would  call  a  Httle  "  daft,"  or  at  the  most,  not  quite  as  bright 
as  ordinary  children. 

With  a  view  of  promoting  a  more  rugged  condition  of  health,  this  little 
one  was  permitted  to  wander  round  the  neighbouring  heights,  and  follow 
the  simple  occupation  of  sheep  tending.  One  day  as  the  child  was 
wandering  with  some  of  her  other  companions  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Gave,  having  lingered  behind  them  to  bathe  her  feet  in  the  clear  stream, 
she  was  amazed  to  find  herself  breathed  upon  by  a  sweet  wind,  although 
at  that  time  there  seemed  to  be  no  air  stirring.  Presently  a  sense  of  deep 
awe  fell  upon  her,  and  as  her  companion  to  whom  she  confided  her 
experience,  informed  the  narrator,  a  white  angel  all  radiant  and  glorious  with 
a  halo  around  her  head,  and  shining  white  garments,  appeared  before  her, 
bidding  her  not  to  be  afraid.  When  the  angel  disappeared,  the  little 
Seeress  hastened  to  rejoin  her  companions,  and  at  their  suggestion  returned 
to  the  spot,  hoping  they  too  might  see  the  glorious  vision.  The  girl 
Marguerite,  seemed  to  imply  that  no  one  in  that  neighbourhood  believed 
much  that  this  child  said,  hence  they  were  neither  surprised  nor  dis- 
appointed that  no  shining  white  lady  appeared  to  them.  It  was  added,  that 
no  one  would  ever  have  had  faith  in  these  visions  although  httle  Bernadette 
repeatedly  averred  that  she  continued  to  see  them,  until  she  one  day  came 
home  and  reported,  that  the  white  angel  had  conducted  her  to  a  grotto  in 
the  rocks,  and  there  made  her  bathe  her  feet  in  a  cold  spring,  and 
that  then  she  went  on  her  way  Hghter  and  stronger  than  she  had  ever  been 
in  her  life. 

This  tale  induced  her  protectors,  some  poor  peasants  who  had  the  charge 
of  her,  to  repair  with  her  to  the  grotto,  when  one  of  their  number  who  had 
a  paralyzed  hand  dipped  it  into  the  spring,  to  try  if  he  too  could  feel  how 
cold  it  was.  On  withdrawing  it,  great  was  his  astonishment  to  find  that  he 
could  use  his  hand  and  that  in  all  respects  it  was  entirely  restored.  Others 
following  the  peasant's  example,  flocked  to  the  newly-discovered  spring  and 
each  experienced  immediate  relief  of  whatever  ailment  possessed  them. 
Why  follow  up  the  narrative  farther  ? 

The  peasants  of  Lourdes  when  separately  and  cautiously  questioned,  all 
unite  in  confirming  the  above  story  in  all  its  general  features  ;  all  moreover 
have  marvels  to  relate  of  the  hundreds,  and  some  insist,  thousands^  of 
miraculous  cures  that  have  been  effected  by  these  wonder-working  waters. 

But  who  may  describe  the  elaborations  and  embeUishments  that  the 
Brothers  of  Lourdes  report  of  the  sacred  spring  ?  For  there  are  Brothers 
there  now,  and  they  not  only  have  charge  of  the  sacred  waters,  but  of  litde 
Bernadette  likewise,  and  very  good  care  they  take  of  her — so  much  so, 

The    Cure    D'Ars 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  71 

that  she  is  never  seen  nor  can  she  be  enquired  of  by  the  profane,  only  by 
select  members  of  Holy  Mother  Church,  and  faithful  votaries  of — not  the 
white  angel  any  longer,  but  "  Our  Lady  of  Lourdes  "  even  "  the  Blessed 
Virgin  herself,"  through  whose  miraculous  inspiration — "  her  adopted 
child,"  the  Saint  in  embryo,  Bernadette,  was  also  miraculously  guided  to  the 
sacred  grotto,  &c. 

From  this  plain  narrative  of  plain  facts,  the  reader  is  at  liberty  to  draw 
his  own  conclusions  as  we  venture  to  draw  ours.  If  he  happen  to  be  a 
good  Catholic,  little  Bernadette's  angelic  visitor  will  of  course  be  the 
impersonation  of  "  the  Blessed  Virgin,"  and  the  chances  are  ten  to  one  but 
he  or  she  will  give  a  donation  towards  the  erection  of  a  magnificent  church 
and  a  full  staff  of  priests  and  attendant  church  dignitaries,  whose  duty  it 
will  ultimately  become  to  absorb  the  healing  spring  for  the  sole  use  and 
benefit  of  the  said  church,  of  "  Our  Lady  of  Lourdes." 

If  these  pages  be  scanned  by  medical  eyes  of  the  "  Lankaster  "  and 
"  Forbes  Winslow "  type,  the  child's  visions  will  be  bosh !  the  water's 
magnetic  properties  "  trash,"  and  the  cures — all  the  effects  of  that  most 
wonderful  of  all  healers — "imagination."  To  any  Spiritualist  readers 
comment  is  unnecessary.  White  angels  leading  poor  mortals  to  benefi- 
cent discoveries  are  not  so  rare  amongst  us  as  to  create  wonder  or  disbe- 
lief All  we  may  have  to  regret  is,  that  little  Bernadette  and  her  angel 
visitants  have  not  an  opportunity  to  manipulate  the  heaUng  waters  of 
Lourdes  without  the  aid  of  a  band  of  highly  interested  "  Brothers." 

CHAPTER  X. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    FRANCE   (CONTINUED). 

Phenomenal  and  Experimental  Manifestations. 

We  presume  our  readers  are  sufficiently  informed  of  the  modus  operandi 
of  Spiritual  manifestations,  to  be  aware  that  their  production  is  due  either 
to  the  spontaneous  action  of  spirits,  or  to  their  evocation  through  the 
modern  circle. 

Some  instances  of  the  former  mode  we  have  already  cited,  and  hundreds 
more  could  be  described  did  space  permit. 

M.  Alphonse  Cahagnet  has  recorded  numerous  cases  of  apparitions,  stone- 
throwing,  hauntings,  visions,  prophetic  and  warning  dreams,  &c.,all  occurring 
spontaneously,  in  this  century,  in  his  appendix  to  the  first  volume  of 
"  Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come."  The  Baron  de  Guldenstubbe  has  made  a 
still  more  voluminous  collection  of  modern  facts  in  his  invaluable  work 
entitled  Pneumatologie  Positive.  Some  of  these  have  been  detailed  by  Mr, 
R.  D.  Owen,  in  his  "  Footfalls,"  and  others  again  are  mentioned  in  Wm. 
Howitt's  magnificent  work  "  The  History  of  the  Supernatural."  From  a 
large  collection  of  kindred  narratives  we  select  the  following  as  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  beneficent  character  of  spirit  influence  in  respect  to  spontaneous 
healing.     As  the  case  was  fully  reported  in  the  Revtie  Spirite  of  1877,  ^^ 

72  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

take  advantage  of  a  translation  made  by  Dr.  Carter  Blake  for  one  of  the 
London  Spiritual  Journals,  which  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  M.  Dauzac  had  both  his  legs  broken  by  a  heavily  laden  cart  passing  over  them. 
The  doctors  in  consultation  declared  amputation  necessary,  so  shattered  were  the 
limbs.  M.  Dauzac's  son,  who  is  a  medium,  retired  from  the  sick  room,  and  prayed 
fervently  that  advice  might  be  given  him  from  the  spirit  world,  and  in  particular  that 
a  good  spirit,  known  to  him  as  Dr.  Demeure,  might  be  sent  to  help  his  father.  The 
following  words  were  then  written  through  his  hand  :— '  Do  not  consent  to  the  ampu- 
tation, your  father  will  recover ;  he  will  be  able  to  walk  and  attend  to  his  affairs 
again.  I  will  mesmerise  him  spiritually,  and  give  him  strength  to  bear  the  operation, 
which  I  will  perform  myself;  after  much  suffering  he  will  be  delivered  from  this 
affliction.' 

"The  doctors  came,  but  pronounced  against  amputation  as  useless  to  save  the 
patient's  life.  He  was  in  a  high  state  of  fever,  and  already  doomed.  They  replaced 
the  bandages  and  left  the  house.  Immediately  Demeure,  aided  by  a  band  of  spirits, 
began  his  operations.     M.  Dauzac  says — 

"  'I  was  placed  in  a  position  in  which  I  could  not  have  held  myself  without  iron 
supports ;  I  then  felt  a  hand  rubbing  me  so  hard  that  I  cried  out ;  everything  seemed 
to  be  unwound  and  displaced ;  I  believed  that  I  was  suffering  from  cramp,  for  my  son 
had  invoked  the  beneficent  spirit  unknown  to  me.  In  about  ten  minutes,  when  I  was 
quite  exhausted  with  pain  and  fatigue,  I  was  allowed  to  rest  a  little ;  and  what  ease 
I  felt !  Ten  minutes  later  I  exclaimed,  ''  There  it  is  again !  It  is  in  the  other  leg  ! 
Everything  is  being  undone."  The  watchers  declared  nothing  had  happened;  the 
operation  was  repeated  five  times  on  each  leg,  at  mtervals  of  ten  mmutes ;  after  that 
I  slept  the  whole  night. 

"The  following  morning  the  son  consulted  his  spirit-friends,  and  Dr.  Demeure 
declared  that  bones,  tendons,  veins,  and  fibres  had  all  been  duly  laid  in  proper  order, 
and  that  the  cure  would  be  effected.  The  legs  would  be  slightly  shorter  than  before, 
but  the  patient  would  not  be  lame,  though  he  would  sometimes  suffer  pain.  A  dan- 
gerous crisis  followed,  consequent  on  the  extraction  by  the  doctors  of  a  portion  of 
detached  bone  ;  nevertheless,  young  M.  Dauzac,  encouraged  by  the  assurance  of  his 
spirit  guides,  would  not  give  up  hopes  of  his  father's  recovery.  One  evening  he  was 
told,  '  To-morrow  he  will  begin  to  mend,  and  will  steadily 'improve  until  restored  to 
health.'  The  next  morning  the  doctor  inquired  of  a  neighbour,  before  entering  the 
house,  whether  M.  Dauzac  were  dead.  '  No,  he  is  better,'  was  the  reply.  '  I  am 
astonished,"  said  the  doctor,  'this  change  must  be  the  precursor  of  death.'  A  fort- 
night later  he  told  his  patient,  '  You  may  now  get  up  ;  but  be  careful,  for  only  one  in  a 
thousand  could  have  lived  through  this  :  whether  this  cure  be  of  God  or  the  devil  I 
do  not  know,  but  there  is  something  in  it  which  I  cannot  understand.'  M.  Dauzac 
replied,  '  You  only  see  in  disease  a  disorganisation  of  matter ;  when  you  have  learned 
the  part  played  by  the  soul  and  the  perispnt  m  the  physiology  of  man,  and  the 
relations  between  spirit  and  matter,  this  fact  will  be  no  longer  a  mystery  to  you,  and 
you  will  make  many  more  remarkable  cures.'  The  doctor  had  nothing  to  reply, 
except  that  M.  Dauzac  would  certainly  never  walk  again.  He  went  on  crutches  for  a 
fortnight,  and  was  then  able  to  dispense  with  them  altogether. 

"  The  record  from  which  the  above  is  somewhat  condensed  is  signed  by  M.  Dauzac, 
his  son,  and  thirteen  other  persons,  and  is  dated  Naujean  par  Brame,  Gironde, 
January  i8th,  1877,  and  is  published  in  the  June  number  of  the  R&vw  Spirite." 

As  professional  mediumship  is  Httle  practised  in  France  except  when 
patronage  is  bestowed  upon  visitors  of  that  class  from  other  countries,  we 
do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  name  the  various  media  through  whom  the  members 
of  private  circles  have  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  phenomena,  still  we 
have  personal  evidence  of  the  fact,  that  hundreds  of  circles  are  held  in 
Paris  and  various  parts  of  France,  at  which  phenomena  both  of  physical 
and  mental  types  are  produced  in  great  abundance. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  first  well  marked  impulse  which 
experimental  SpirituaUsm  received  through  the  invocatory  processes  of  the 
circle,  in  France,  as  in  many  other  countries  of  Europe,  was  due  to  the 
visit  of  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  the  celebrated,  non-professional,  physical  medium 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  73 

and  subsequently  to  the  large  influx  of  professional  mediums  who  found  in 
France  an  excellent  field  for  the  demonstration  of  their  peculiar  gifts. 

Of  Mr.  Home's  stances  it  would  be  superfluous  to  write,  he  himself 
having  related  them  in  two  volumes  pubHshed  at  different  periods  of  his 
career,  and  his  many  admiring  friends  having  sufficiently  described  the 
marvels  of  which  they  were  witnesses  in  numerous  magazine  and  news- 
paper articles. 

Mr.  Home's  manifestations  were  given  in  France  almost  exclusively  to 
personages  of  rank  or  those  distinguished  by  literary  fame.  He  was  a 
guest  of  royalty,  the  nobility,  and  persons  of  the  highest  position.  During 
his  residence  in  Paris,  under  the  Imperial  regime,  he  was  a  frequent  and 
ever  welconje  visitor  at  the  Court  of  the  late  Emperor,  Louis  Napoleon. 
A  record  of  the  manifestations  produced  through  his  mediumship  was  kept 
by  command  of  the  Empress,  and  frequently  read  to  her  favoured 
friends.  Amongst  these  memoranda  is  one  which  went  the  round  of  the 
papers  at  the  time  of  its  occurrence,  hence  there  can  be  no  impropriety  in 
alluding  to  it  now.  It  stated  that  on  one  occasion  a  sianee  was  held  at  the 
Tuileries,  when  none  were  present  save  the  Emperor,  the  Empress,  the 
Duchess  de  Montebello,  and  Mr.  D.  D.  Home. 

On  the  table  were  placed  pen,  ink,  and  paper,  and  presently  a  spirit 
hand  was  seen,  which  dipped  the  pen  in  the  ink  and  deliberately  wrote  the 
name  of  the  first  Napoleon,  in  a  perfectly  facsimile  of  that  illustrious 
monarch's  handwriting.  The  Emperor  asked  if  he  might  be  permitted 
to  kiss  this  wonderful  hand,  when  it  instantly  rose  to  his  lips,  subsequently 
passing  to  those  of  the  Empress,  and  Mr.  Home.  The  Emperor  carefully 
preserved  this  precious  autograph,  and  inscribed  with  it  a  memorandum  to 
the  effect,  that  the  hand  was  warm,  soft,  and  resembled  exactly  that  of  his 
great  predecessor  and  uncle. 

From  personal  knowledge  of  Mr.  Home,  the  author  is  able  to  testify 
that  his  powers  were  most  unique,  and  his  mode  of  exhibiting  them  clear, 
candid,  and  unaffected. 

None  but  the  most  wilfully  blind  or  prejudiced  observer  could  attach  the 
idea  of  fraud  or  deception  to  Mr.  Home. 

The  author  has  been  present  in  brilliantly  lighted  salons,  when  the  spirits 
have  impelled  Mr.  Home  to  take  burning  coals  in  his  hand,  and  lay  his 
head  upon  a  blazing  fire  without  the  slightest  injury  to  the  tissues  of  the 
skin  or  hair;  when  his  body  was  elongated  several  times,  from  five  to  eight 
inches  beyond  his  usual  height  without  the  least  perceptible  motion  on  Mr. 
Home's  part ;  when  he  was  floated  in  the  air  above  the  heads  of  all  present ; 
also,  when  delightful  strains  of  music  were  played  on  an  accordion 
untouched  by  human  hands. 

These,  together  with  loud  rappings,  spirit  music,  motions  of  heavy 
bodies,  entrancement,  speaking  in  various  languages,  the  apparition  of 
many  hands,  in  a  word  every  form  of  spiritual  manifestation  exhibited 
through  other  media,  have  all  been  produced  through  Mr.  Home,  without 
the  equivocal  conditions  of  darkness,  cabinets,  or  the  smallest  show  of 
deception,  or  desire  to  evade  any  proposed  test.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the 
phenomena  abundantly  produced,  and  freely  given  under  such  circum- 
stances, should  have  created  an  immense  sensation  in  the  circles  of 
privileged  witnesses  and  excited  a  corresponding  amount  of  bitterness  and 
antagonism  amongst  the  enemies  of  Spiritualism,  especially  those  who  were 
not  favoured  with  an  entree  to  the  scene  of  the  marvels. 

Thus  it  was,  that  certain  disreputable  members  of  the  press,  scribblers 

74  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

whose  speciality  it  was  to  pander  to  the  lowest  appetites  of  the  vulgar,  and 
slander  those  whose  positions  were  beyond  their  reach,  began  to  pelt  Mr. 
Home  and  his  friends  with  the  scurrility  peculiar  to  their  calling. 

Disgraceful  lampoons  were  directed  against  him,  and  libellous  charges 
freely  circulated.  The  total  absence  of  justice  which  marks  all  judicial 
proceedings  in  which  Spiritualists  are  concerned,  deterred  Mr.  Home  from 
attempting  to  seek  redress  for  these  harassing  attacks,  meantime  their 
effect  was  confined  to  those  who  wished  them  to  be  true,  Mr.  Home's 
personal  friends  being  too  well  satisfied  of  his  work  to  be  affected  by 
scurrility  or  slander. 

Another  efficient  labourer  in  the  spiritual  vineyards  of  France,  was  Mr. 
RoUin  Squire,  a  young  American  gentleman,  now  an  eminent  lawyer  in 
Boston,  who  visited  Europe  about  i860,  and  passed  some  months  on  the 
Continent.  Mr.  Squire  was  a  physical  medium  endowed  with  an  extra- 
ordinary amount  of  the  power  which  enables  spirits  to  lift  immense  weights, 
and  perform  feats  of  strength  impossible  to  a  giant,  much  less  to  a  fragile 
youth  like  the  medium. 

The  young  American  soon  became  highly  popular,  and  as  he  never 
received  any  payment  beyond  the  pleasure  he  felt  in  obliging  those  who 
feted  him,  his  motives  were  of  course,  placed  beyond  suspicion  of  self- 
interest. 

In  1865  the  work  of  experimental  Spiritualism  was  greatly  aided  by  the 
introduction  of  the  celebrated  American  mediums,  the  Davenport  Brothers, 
who  were  induced  to  visit  Paris  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Samuel  Guppy,  a 
wealthy  English  gentleman,  devoted  to  the  study  of  Spiritualism  and  its 
phenomena. 

During  their  stay  in  Paris,  the  Davenports  were  called  upon  to  give  a 
specimen  of  their  peculiar  power  in  presence  of  the  Emperor  of  the  French. 
Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman,  a  steady  adherent  of  the  Spiritual  cause  in  England, 
furnished  the  following  account  of  this  seance  for  the  London  Spiritual 
Magazine : — 

THE  BROTHERS  DAVENPORT  AND  THE  EMPEROR  OF  THE  FRENCH. 

''  The  French  special  correspondent  of  the  Star  announced  that  the  Davenports 
had  '  performed  at  St.  Cloud  in  the  presence  of  the  Emperor,  Empress,  Prince 
Imperial,  and  all  the  Court ! '  The  facts  of  their  visit  I  have  from  one  who  was  pre- 
sent, and  they  are  as  follows : — 

"  On  the  arrival  of  the  Davenports  at  St.  Cloud,  accompanied  by  their  confrere,  Mr. 
Wm.  Fay,  they  found  to  their  surprise  that  all  the  preliminary  arrangements  had  been 
made  for  the  dark  circle.  Two  strong  common  chairs  were  placed  in  the  salon,  and 
the  fires  had  been  put  out  to  secure  the  necessary  condition  of  complete  darkness. 
The  cabinet  being  erected  in  the  presence  of  the  Imperial  party,  under  the  closest 
scrutiny,  the  exhibition  commenced ;  as  it  proceeded,  the  Emperor  showed  that  he 
was  not  only  intensely  interested,  by  repeated  ejaculations  of  '  How  extraordinary  ! ' 
'How  wonderful  ! '  but  he  readily  comphed  with  every  condition,  and  insisted  upon 
perfect  order  being  kept.  Two  persons  who  were  laughing  and  making  sceptical 
remarks,  were  reproved,  and  reminded  by  him  that  if  they  felt  no  interest  in  the 
exhibition  they  might  find  more  amusement  in  the  billiard  room.  The  Marquis  la 
Grange  having  entered  the  cabinet  with  the  Davenports,  he  extended  his  arms,  and 
was  fast  bound  to  each  of  the  brothers  in  the  usual  way.  The  instant  the  doors  were 
closed  the  noise  and  confusion  which  was  heard  within  the  cabinet  surprised  the 
Imperial  party  extremely  ;  when  the  doors  were  thrown  open  and  the  Marquis  was 
seen  with  his  cravat  removed,  a  bell  stuck  in  his  waistcoat,  the  violin  and  guitar  fan- 
tastically arranged  about  his  person,  and  the  tambourine  upon  his  head,  the  Emperor 
threw  himself  back  in  his  chair  and  laughed  heartily  at  the  grotesque  appearance  of 
the  helpless  and  somewhat  frightened  Marquis,  who  on  his  part  seriously  and 
emphatically  assured  the  company  that  the  brothers  had  not  moved  a  muscle. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  75 

"  During  the  dark  circle  the  Emperor  and  Empress  frequently  exclaimed,  '  A  hand 
is  touching  me.'  A  watch  being  held  b}^  the  Emperor  in  the  palm  of  his  hand,  it  was 
at  his  request  given  to  the  Empress,  and  upon  her  asking  that  it  might  be  taken  to  the 
Prince  Imperial  it  was  instantly  conveyed  a  distance  of  60  feet  to  the  young  Prince, 
who  threw  it  from  him  exclaiming,  '  It  was  so  hot,  he  could  not  hold  it.' 

"  When  Mr.  Fay's  hands  were  tightly  bound  behind  his  back,  the  Emperor  gave 
his  seal  to  impress  the  wax  with  which  the  knots  on  Mr.  Fay's  wrists  were  secured. 
In  an  instant  Mr.  Fay's  coat  was  whisked  from  his  back,  and  was  seen  flying  through 
the  air.  The  Emperor  satisfying  himself  that  the  cords  and  seal  were  still  intact 
upon  Mr.  Fay's  wrists,  he  exclaimed  again  and  again,  '  Most  wonderful !  most 
extraordinary ! ' 

'■  At  the  close  of  the  seance  the  Imperial  party  asked  many  questions,  the  Emperor 
saying  he  was  not  surprised  at  the  excitement  which  such  an  extraordinary  exhibition 
created  in  a  large  assembly.  It  was,  he  thought,  imprudent  to  attempt  to  show  such 
phenomena  to  many  persons  at  one  time,  who  could  not  test  for  themselves  their 
reality.  After  many  expressions  of  their  entire  satisfaction  the  Imperial  party  with- 
drew at  half-past  one  in  the  morning,  and  the  Davenport  party  sat  down  to  a 
sumptuous  supper  which  had  been  provided  for  them  at  the  palace. 

''  On  the  following  day  the  Emperor  marked  his  further  appreciation  of  the  exhibi- 
tion by  sending  to  the  Davenport  party  an  unusually  munificent  gift  for  their  services. 

"At  the  Davenports'  suggestion  the  Emperor  sent  for  M.  Houdin,  who  exhibited  his 
imitations,  and  without  any  comment  being  made  by  the  Emperor,  he  was  dismissed 
and  paid  the  usual  fee  of  500  francs,  and  his  expenses." 

Since  the  advent  of  the  Davenports  in  Paris,  many  celebrated  American 
and  English  mediums,  such  as  Messrs.  Chas.  Foster,  Henry  Slade,  Heme, 
Williams,  Eglinton,  Miss  Fowler,  Miss  Nichol,  Miss  Cook,  and  others,  both 
in  a  professional  and  private  capacity  have  visited  Paris  and  the  principal 
cities  of  France,  and  stimulated  investigation  by  their  remarkable  medial 
powers. 

xA.s  there  is  very  little  variety  in  the  demonstrations  of  clairvoyant  or 
physical  force  mediumship  and  the  public  for  years  past  has  been  fairly 
surfeited  with  magazine  and  journalistic  accounts  of  seances,  half  a  dozen  of 
which  will  exemplify  thousands,  we  forbear  to  offer  the  reader  any  detailed 
description  of  the  phenomena  produced  through  the  various  parties  above 
named.  Suffice  it  to  say,  they  have  collectively  demonstrated  beyond  a 
peradventure  to  many  thousands  of  believers,  the  solemn  affirmative  of  the 
question,  "  if  a  man  die  shall  he  live  again  ?  " 

There  are  a  few  incidents  which  break  the  monotony  of  ordinary  circle 
representations,  of  which  the  following  examples  may  QOt  prove  unacceptable. 

In  the  Gazette  de  France  of  1855,  we  find  a  curious  anecdote  related  by 
the  Count  de  La  Resie,  Author  of  Traitt  des  Sciences  Occultes  concerning 
the  mode  in  which  the  celebrated  violinist  Urham,  received  his  charming 
morceau  entitled  Audition — (hearing).     The  Count  says  : — 

"  Urham  was  a  very  pious  man,  and  addicted  to  devotion  ;  he  divided  his  life 
betwixt  music  and  prayer.  He  had  composed  a  melody  to  the  charming  words  of  the 
poet  Reboul — '  Angel  at  the  Cradle  of  the  Sick  Infant,'  which  is,  as  we  know,  his 
chef-d'-oeuvre.  Urham  after  composing  this  was  walking  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne. 
He  was  alone  in  a  narrow  glade,  plunged  into  profound  thought.  All  at  once,  he 
heard  in  the  air  a  sound  which  greatly  agitated  him,  and  lifting  up  his  head,  he  beheld 
a  light  without  form  and  precision.  To  the  sound  which  had  so  startled  him  succeeded 
another  which  was  continuous,  It  was  an  air  commenced — there  was  no  doubt  of  it, 
and  a  voice  sang  the  words  of  '  The  Angel  and  the  Infant,'  but  to  an  air  totally 
different  to  the  one  he  had  composed.  It  was  more  simple  and  touching  than  his 
own.  The  melody  acquired  body  in  developing  itself.  Giving  an  attentive  ear,  he 
not  only  distinguished  the  air,  but  also  an  accompaniment  with  the  accords  of  an 
.^olian  harp.  Astonished,  and  at  the  same  time  seized  with  a  deep  sadness  at  this 
celestial  inspiration,  he  fell  into  a  kind  of  ecstasy,  and  distinctly  heard  a  voice  which 
said  to  him  : — '  Dear  Urham,  write  down  what  I  have  sung.'     He  hurried  home  in  a 

76  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

state  of  mind  not  to  be  described,  and  noted  down  the  air  which  he  had  heard  with 
the  greatest  facility  :  for  the  notes,  he  said,  scored  themselves  on  the  paper.  He  pub- 
lished his  inspirations,  which  he  named  Audition,  as  we  have  said,  and  it  is  a  chif 
d'ceuvre  of  grace,  simplicity,  and  delicious  harmony.  It  is  a  similar  case  to  that  of  the 
Devil's  Sonata,  of  Tartini,  except  that  it  was  in  a  dream  that  Tartini  received  it,  and 
that  the  spirit,  the  more  to  strike  his  attention,  had  assumed  a  legendary  form  of  a 
demon,  for  assuredly  the  sonata  has  nothing  diabolic  about  it,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
is  a  very  good  composition  for  the  time." 

The  author,  being  deeply  interested  in  the  progress  of  musical  art,  and 
learning  that  the  following  remarkable  incident  had  occurred  in  the  experi- 
ence of  one  of  her  most  intimate  musical  acquaintances,  took  much  pains 
during  a  visit  to  Paris  to  ascertain  the  exact  circumstances  connected  with 
it. 

It  was  stated  by  M.  C.  S.  Bach  that  he  had  sent  the  account  of  his  rela- 
tive's experiences  to  Le  Grand  Journal,  which  gave  the  narrative  in  terms 
of  which  the  following  is  a  translation,  furnished  by  Mr.  B.  Coleman,  of 
England  : — 

"  On  the  4th  of  May,  1866,  M.  Leon  Bach,  of  No.  3,  Rue  Castellane,  great  grandson 
of  the  celebrated  Sebastian  Bach,  purchased  a  spinette  of  antique  fashion  admirably 
carved.  After  carefully  examining  it,  he  discovered  on  an  interior  board  an  inscription 
stating  that  it  was  made  in  Rome  in  1564,  He  passed  part  of  the  day  contemplating 
his  precious  spinette — he  thought  of  it  as  he  went  to  sleep,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that 
he  had  the  following  dream  : — He  saw  a  man  stand  at  his  bedside,  who  had  a  long 
beard ;  shoes  rounded  at  the  toe,  and  large  bows  at  the  instep  ;  large  full  breeches,  a 
doublet  with  slashed  sleeves,  stiff  collar,  and  a  hat  with  pointed  crown  and  broad 
brim.  This  person  bowed  to  M.  Bach,  and  spoke  as  follows : — '  The  spinette  that 
you  possess  belonged  to  me.  It  frequently  served  me  to  entertain  my  master.  King 
Henry  III.  When  he  was  very  young  he  composed  an  air  with  words,  which  he  was 
fond  of  singing,  and  which  I  frequently  played  to  him.  This  air  and  these  words  he 
composed  in  memory  of  a  young  lady  that  he  once  met  with  in  a  hunt,  and  of  whom  he 
became  deeply  enamoured.  They  took  her  away,  and  it  is  said  that  she  was  poisoned, 
and  that  the  King  was  deeply  distressed  at  the  circumstance.  Whenever  he  was  sad 
he  hummed  this  song ;  and  then,  to  divert  his  mind,  I  played  on  my  spinette  a  sara- 
band of  my  composition,  which  he  much  loved.  Thus  I  came  to  confound  together 
these  two  pieces,  for  I  was  continually  playing  them  one  after  the  other.' 

"  Then  the  man  of  the  dream  approached  the  spinette,  and  played  a  few  notes, 
and  sung  the  air  with  such  expression,  that  M.  Bach  awoke  in  tears.  He  lit  a  candle, 
noticed  the  hour — two  o'clock — and  again  fell  asleep.  Now  it  was,  that  the  extra- 
ordmary  scene  took  place.  In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  M.  Bach  was  no  little 
surprised  to  find  on  his  bed  a  page  of  music  covered  with  very  fine  writing  and  notes 
quite  microscopic.  It  was  with  difficulty  that  he  could  decipher  them  by  the  aid  of 
his  eyeglass,  for  he  is  very  near-sighted. 

"  He  then  tried  the  air  on  the  spinette.  The  song,  the  words,  and  the  saraband 
were  exactly  as  the  person  of  the  dream  had  represented  them.  Now  M.  Bach  is  no 
somnambulist ;  has  never  written  a  verse  in  his  life,  and  is  a  complete  stranger  to  the 
rules  of  prosody. 

"  Here  are  the  three  couplets  as  we  have  copied  them  from  the  MS. : — 

"  Une  jour  pendant  une  chasse  lointaine, 
Je  aper9us  pour  la  premiere  fois. 
Je  croyois  voir  un  ange  dans  la  plaine 
Lors  je  devins  le  plus  heureux  des  roys  ! 

"  Je  donnerois  certes  tout  mon  royaume 
Pour  la  revoir  encor  un  seul  instant ; 
Pres  d'elle  assis  dessous  un  humble  chaume 
Pour  sentir  mon  cceur  battre  en  I'admirant. 

"  Triste  et  cloistree,  oh  !  ma  pauvre  belle, 
Fut  loin  de  moy  pendant  ses  derniers  jours. 
EUe  ne  sent  plus  sa  peine  cruelle  ; 
Icy  bas,  helas !  je  souffre  toujours. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  77 

"  In  this  plaintive  song,  as  well  as  in  the  joyous  saraband  which  follows,  the 
musical  orthography  is  not  less  archaic  than  the  literary  orthography.  The  notes  are 
of  a  form  different  from  those  of  the  present  day.  The  basse,  is  written  in  one  key  and 
the  song  in  another.  M.  Bach  has  obliged  me  by  playing  to  me  these  two  pieces, 
which  have  a  melody  simple,  naive,  and  penetrating. 

"The  Journal  de  VEto He  S3.y 5  that  Henry  III.  had  a  great  passion  for  Marie  de 
Cleves,  the  Marchioness  d'Isles,  who  died  in  the  flower  of  her  age  in  a  convent,  the 
15th  of  October,  1574.  Was  she  'la  pauvre  belle  triste  et  cloistree,'  who  is  mentioned 
in  these  verses  ?  The  same  journal  says  that  an  ItaUan  musician,  named  Baltazarini, 
went  to  France  at  that  epoch,  and  became  one  of  the  favourites  of  the  King.  Did 
not  the  spinette  belong  to  Baltazarini?  Was  it  not  the  spirit  of  Baltazarini  who 
wrote  the  song  and  the  saraband." 

The  necessity  of  passing  on  to  other  scenes  compels  us  to  limit  the 
closing  notices  of  this  chapter  to  two  or  three  extracts,  for  which  we  are 
indebted  to  the  columns  of  the  journal  once  so  admirably  conducted  by 
the  late  M.  Pierart,  La  Revue  Spiritualiste  :— 

"  Paragraph  i.  M.  Debray  writes  us  from  Noce  (Orne)  that  Spiritualism  in  the 
experimental  mode  is  making  rapid  progress.    There  are,  he  says,  several  circles  held, 

at   one  of  which — Mdlle.   Hermione  P being   the  medium — direct  writing   is 

obtained  from'  spirits  who  address  each  of  the  company  by  name,  and  write  in  small 
but  almost  perfectly  finished  characters,  resembling  copper-plate. 

"  Paragraph  2.  At  the  trial  of  Jean  Lamenire,  for  forgery,  the  Judge  gave  sentence 
against  the  prisoner,  but  our  friends  at  the  Bordelaise  circle,  on  the  previous  night  had 
spelled  out  the  exact  words  in  which  the  sentence  was  given,  and  the  number  of  years 

of  the  conviction.     Our  medium  Catalina  N was  present  with  us  ;   could   the 

Judge  have  read  our  minds  ? 

"  (Signed)  Dr.  J.  Vernay. 

"  Paragraph  3.  Our  old  friend  Jobard  writes  from  Metz — '  I  cautiously  sounded 
my  host  as  to  whether  there  was  any  table  talking  there.'  '  Certainly,'  was  the  answer. 
'  Metz  is  a  second  Paris  for  novelties  ;  we  have  here  several  Nobles,  Professors,  and 
other  celebrities,  who  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  be  believers  and  practisers  too  of  the 
table  talking  art.'  Even  old  pupils  of  the  Ecole  Polytechnic,  finished  mathematicians, 
and  others,  who  have  never  before  shown  signs  of  mental  derangement,  turn  religious, 
and  put  up  prayers  to  God  to  send  them — what  would  you  think  ?—good  spirits  to  be 
their  guardian  angels  !  What  are  we  coming  to  next  ?  Some  of  us  may  be  heard  by- 
and-bye  talking  of  the  Spirit  land  instead  of  Heaven  or  Hell,  and  inviting  our  deceased 
ancestors,  to  a  dejeuner  a  la  fourchette." 

Continuing  to  write  of  the  Metz  Spiritualists  M.  Jobard  says  : — 

"A  collection  of  communications  received  by  these  Metz  Spiritualists  is  just  pub- 
lished.    The  tract  I  speak  of  will  give  you  an  elevated  idea  of  the  mediums  here. 

"  Spiritualism  has  made  an  opening  at  Havre,  the  medium  being  a  young  American 
lady.  In  Belgium  we  have  two  excellent  mediums  now — one  French,  the  other 
English. 

"Among  other  interesting  particulars  in  the  correspondence  of  the  Revue  is  the 
following : — 

" '  Phenomena  of  an  eminently  spiritual  order  have  been  long  observed  in  the 
religious  community  of  La  Souterraine  (Creuse).  Madame  Dubourg,  the  venerable 
superior,  while  at  prayer,  is  often  raised  above  a  foot  from  her  Prie  Dieu,  remaining 
suspended  in  an  ecstatic  state  and  unconscious  for  several  minutes.  She  was  raised 
in  this  way  one  day  while  receiving  the  communion,  to  the  dismay  of  the  priest,  who 
could  not,  for  his  agitation,  finish  the  celebration  of  the  office.  Other  facts  of  a  similar 
character  take  place  in  this  establishment,  but  they  are  kept  concealed  as  much  as 
possible,  so  as  not  to  attract  a  crowd  of  curious  people  to  the  place. 

"  At  la  Chatre  (Indre),  in  the  Ursuline  community,  one  of  the  sisters  was  disabled 
with  hip  disease,  in  which  there  was  dislocation  from  disorganization  of  the  joint. 
She  has  long  been  laid  up,  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Vergne  and  others.  Given  up  by 
them,  the  lady  superior  had  recourse  to  prayer.  A  neuvaine  was  commenced  ;  on  the 
last  nine  days,  the  patient,  worn  out  with  her  long  suffering  and  prolonged  recumbent 
position,  was  carried  on  her  couch  into  the  chapel.     There,  in  the  presence  of  the 

78  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

statue  of  St.  Joseph,  and  after  prayer,  the  superior  cried  out  in  an  inspired  tone — '  In 
the  name  of  St.  Joseph,  arise  and  walk ! '  The  sister  arose  and  walked  perfectly 
healed. 

"  Dr.  Vergne  first  denied  the  possibility ;  but  upon  seeing  that  the  girl  is  well,  he 
attributes  the  necessary  healing  and  reduction  to— emotion  /"' 

As  an  evidence  of  the  wide  popularity  to  which  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism  had  attained  in  1869,  M.  Pierart  quotes  in  one  of  his 
numbers  of  that  year,  an  article  from  the  Siede,  a  leading  paper,  but  one 
which  had  hitherto  contained  many  notices  inimical  to  Spiritualism.  The 
writer,  M.  Eugene  Bonnemere,  says  : — 

"  Although  Somnambuhsm  has  been  a  hundred  times  annihilated  by  the  Academy 
of  Medicine,  it  is  more  alive  than  ever  in  Paris  :  in  the  midst  of  all  the  lights  of  the 
age  it  continues,  right  or  wrong,  to  excite  the  multitude.  Protean  in  its  forms,  infinite 
in  its  manifestations,  if  you  put  it  out  of  the  door,  it  knocks  at  the  window  ;  if  that 
be  not  opened  it  knocks  on  the  ceiling,  on  the  walls ;  it  raps  on  the  table  at  which 
you  innocently  seat  yourselves  to  dine  or  for  a  game  of  whist.  If  you  close  your  ears 
to  its  sounds,  it  grows  excited,  strikes  the  table,  whirls  it  about  in  a  giddy  maze,  lifts 
up  its  feet  and  proceeds  to  talk  through  mediumship,  as  the  dumb  talk  with  their 
fingers. 

"  You  have  all  known  the  rage  for  table-turning.  At  one  time,  we  ceased  to  ask 
after  each  other's  health,  but  asked  how  your  table  was.  'Thank  you,  mine  turns 
beautifully  ;  and  how  goes  yours  on  ? '  Everything  turned  ;  hats  and  the  heads  in 
them.  One  was  led  almost  to  believe  that  a  circle  of  passengers  being  formed  round 
the  mainmast  of  a  ship  of  great  tonnage,  and  a  magnetic  chain  thus  established,  they 
might  make  the  vessel  spin  round  till  it  disappeared  in  the  depth  of  the  ocean,  as  a 
gimlet  disappears  in  a  deal  board.  The  Church  interfered  ;  it  caused  its  thunders  to 
roar,  declaring  that  it  was  Satan  himself  who  thus  raised  the  devil  in  the  tables,  and 
having  formerly  forbade  the  world  to  turn,  it  now  forbade  the  faithful  to  turn  tables, 
hats,  brains,  or  ships  of  huge  size.  But  Satan  held  his  own.  The  sovereign  of  the 
nether  world  passed  into  the  new  one,  and  that  is  the  reason  that  America  sends  us 
mediums :  beginning  so  gloriously  with  the  famous  Home,  and  ending  with  the 
brothers  Davenport.  One  remembers  with  what  a  frenzy  every  one  precipitated  him- 
self in  pursuit  of  mediums.  Every  one  wished  to  have  one  of  his  own  ;  and  when 
you  introduced  a  young  man  into  society,  you  did  not  say,  '  He  is  a  good  waltzer  ; ' 
but  '  He  is  a  medium.'  Official  science  has  killed  and  buried  this  Somnambulism  a 
score  of  times  ;  but  it  must  have  done  it  very  badly,  for  there  it  is  as  alive  as  ever, 
only  christened  afresh  with  a  new  name." 

Amongst  the  many  distinguished  adherents  of  Spiritualism  in  the  depart- 
ment of  French  Hterature,  none  have  more  bravely  asserted  and  defended 
their  belief  than  Camille  Flammarion,  the  celebrated  astronomer,  Messrs. 
Victor  Hugo,  Alexandre  Dumas,  and  Victorien  Sardou,  the  renowned 
writer  of  French  comedy.  M.  Sardou  has  been  himself  a  medium  of  sin- 
gularly happy  endowments.  Some  years  ago  he  executed  a  number  of 
curious  drawings,  purporting  to  represent  scenes  in  the  spirit  world,  amongst 
which  was  an  exquisite  and  complex  work  of  art,  entitled  "  The  House  of 
Mozart." 

As  the  author  is  the  fortunate  possessor  of  a  fine  etching  taken  from  this 
drawing,  we  may  venture  to  say  it  is  at  once  a  design  of  singular  imagina- 
tion and  extraordinary  execution.  The  ^ot(f  ensetnble  of  the  sketch  suggests 
the  face  of  a  highly-ornamented  organ,  every  marking,  to  the  finest  hair- 
lines, being  made  up  of  musical  notes,  bars,  and  staves.  The  effect  of 
the  whole  is  striking,  original,  and  highly  suggestive. 

As  a  writer  of  comedy,  the  following  tribute,  copied  from  the  Cornhill 
Magazine,  will  give  an  idea  of  Sardou's  ability,  and  the  mode  in  which 
his  successes  have  been  aided  by  invisible  dramatists  : — 

"  M.  Victorien  Sardou  is  known  to  many  as  the  drawing  medium,  through  whom 
were  produced,  many  years  back,  the  Maison  de  Mozart,  and  several  other  curious 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  79 

drawings.  Since  that  time  he  has  become,  perhaps,  the  most  successful  and  celebrated 
of  modern  dramatists  in  Paris.  The  court  of  France  is  at  this  moment  entertaining 
a  distinguished  company  at  Compiegne,  where  a  series  of  theatrical  representations 
are  given,  and  the  first  play  selected,  entitled  La  Familk  Benoiton,  has  been  written 
by  the  hand  of  Sardou.  He  has  publicly  announced  that  not  a  line  of  his  comedy  is 
the  genuine  production  of  his  own  brain,  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  asserts  that  it  is 
entirely  the  inspiration  of  the  spirits  of  departed  dramatic  celebrities,  with  whom  he 
is  in  constant  communication.  If  this  were  not  true,  why  should  he  deprive  himself 
of  the  honour  of  being  the  author  of  the  most  successful  of  modern  dramas,  as  La 
Famille  Benoiton  has  proved  to  be  ?  " 

We  cannot  draw  this  chapter  to  a  better  close  than  by  quoting  the  noble 
words  of  M.  Jaubert,  Vice-President  of  the  Civil  Tribunal  of  Carcassonne, 
in  a  letter  written  by  him  to  the  editor  of  La  Verite,  in  reference  to  some 
scandalous  slurs  cast  upon  Spiritualism  by  the  Bishop  of  Barcelona.  The 
letter  is  dated  September,  1864,  and  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  I  have  lately  read  the  charge  of  the  new  Bishop  of  Barcelona  on  Spiritualism 
which  contains  amongst  others  the  following  passage : — '  It  is  thus  that  we  come  to  create 
a  religion  which,  renewing  the  wild  errors  and  aberrations  of  paganism,  threatens  to  conduct 
Society — greedy  of  marvels — to  madness,  extravagance,  and  a  filthy  obscenity.' 

"  If  I  had  the  honour  of  speaking  with  the  Bishop  of  Barcelona  I  would  say  to 
him, '  Monseigneur,  permit  me  to  cast  a  glance  backward,  perhaps  it  may  carry  us  a 
step  forward.  Spiritualism  has  launched  itself  into  space  ;  it  has  passed  the  sea  on  a 
ray  of  light.  France  has  received  its  cradle.  I  have  had  the  honour  to  assist  at  some 
of  its  first  rockings.  I  have  seen  it  lisp  by  aid  of  that  instrument  known  under  the 
name  of  the  table  parlante.  It  has  spelt  through  the  planchette;  to-day  it  writes  with 
a  pen  which  is  at  your  service  and  mine.  It  writes  sufficiently  well,  though  it  has  not 
been  spared  chastisement ;  the  child  has  been  mocked,  buffeted,  covered  with  mud, 
crowned  with  thorns.  The  hatred  shown  it,  has  produced  a  monstrous  alhance,  such 
an  one  as  history  has  not  recorded  the  like.  The  Materialists  and  the  "servants  of 
God  "  are  leagued  together,  the  first  to  disdain  or  deny  it,  the  second  to  affirm  it,  but 
only  to  spit  in  its  face,  and  endeavour  to  strangle  it. 

"  '  And  the  child  has  nevertheless  suffered  no  injury.  It  plants  one  foot  on  each 
world.  It  embraces  in  its  little  arms,  France  and  her  colonies  ;  Belgium,  England, 
Russia,  Germany,  Italy,  and  even  Spain.  It  has  its  organs  multiplied  in  Paris, 
Bordeaux,  Lyons ;  Antwerp,  Turin.  The  domestic  hearth  serves  as  a  sure  and  impene- 
trable asylum  to  myriads  of  its  friends. 

"  '  In  your  turn,  Monseigneur,  enter  the  lists  against  it ;  teach  all  the  world  that 
Spiritualism  is  only  a  resume  of  filthy  obscenity.  Ah  !  without  doubt,  the  evil  is 
immense.  Descend  with  us,  Monseigneur,  into  the  reformatories  and  the  prisons. 
The  picture  of  our  miseries  is  vast ;  4,990  accused  before  our  courts  of  assize ; 
176,456  prisoners  judged  by  our  correctional  tribunals ;  3,767  suicides,  and  every  year 
the  same  gulf  is  opened  to  receive  its  fresh  prey.  Spain  undoubtedly,  in  this  point  of 
view,  has  no  reason  to  envy  us.  Behold  the  filthy  obscenity  !  but  believe  me, 
Monseigneur,  the  Spiritualists  are  not  there  ! 

''  Do  you  wish  to  learn  the  cause  of  all  these  evils  ?  I  will  tell  you.  I  do  not  draw 
my  proofs  from  anger  nor  from  vain  declamation,  I  find  them  in  the  general  account 
of  the  administration  of  our  criminal  justice.  Misery,  reverse  of  fortune,  loss  of 
employ,  losses  at  play,  sorrow  caused  by  the  ingratitude  and  misconduct  of  children, 
adulteries,  jealousy,  debauch,  drunkenness,  idleness,  disgust  of  life,  immoderate  desire 
of  riches,  political  exaltations,  love  of  power,  ambition,  religious  terrors.  Do  you 
comprehend,  Monseigneur  ?  This  leprosy  which  dooms  us.  Spiritualism  destroys  ;  it 
does  what  you  have  not  been  able  to  do.  You  know  very  well  that  Spiritualism  is  not 
a  religion, — it  leaves  all  religions  just  where  they  were.  The  great  mission  of  the 
dead  is  to  prove  that  they  are  not  dead ;  that  they  live  and  influence  our  actions. 
The  spirit  is  certain  of  its  future  life  ;  it  expects  from  the  Eternal  that  justice  due  to 
all  his  works ;  it  combats  his  enemies  not  by  crushing  them  but  by  raising  and  loving 
them.  It  does  not  sacrifice  to  the  kingdom  of  this  world.  Anxious  to  discharge  all 
its  duties,  it  gives  to  Caesar  the  things  which  are  Caesar's,  and  to  God  the  things 
which  are  God's.  It  conspires  not  in  the  dark,  but  in  full  daylight,  and  for  the 
happiness  of  mankind. 

" '  Reassure  yourself,  Monseigneur  of  Barcelona  ;  reassure  your  friends  in  France  ! 
In  your  turn  become  a  Spiritualist  !     Affirm  to  your  people  that  man  never  dies,  that 

8o  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

his  immortality  is  proved,  not  by  books,  but  by  material  and  tangible  facts,  of  which 
everyone  can  convince  himself;  that  anon,  and  our  houses  of  correction  and  our 
prisons  will  disappear ;  suicide  will  be  erased  from  our  mortuary  tables,  and  nobly 
borne,  the  calamities  of  earth  shall  no  longer  produce  madness.  But  if  you  prefer  it, 
Monseigneur,  persist  in  your  insults,  strive  not  to  teach  as  to  forget  then,  the  treasures 
of  love  and  charity."  ' 

CHAPTER  XI. 

SPIRITUALISM       IN      FRANCE      (CONCLUDED). 

The  two  extraordinary  narratives  we  are  now  about  to  present  to  our 
readers  are  furnished  by  A.  J.  Riko,  Esq.,  of  the  Hague,  and  although 
their  substance  is  to  be  found  in  several  printed  records,  Mr.  Riko's  plain 
unvarnished  descriptions  correspond  so  closely  with  the  accounts  given  orally 
to  the  Author  by  an  eye-witness,  that  we  prefer  to  transcribe — as  far  as 
possible — our  kind  correspondent's  own  words.    The  first  case  is  headed  : — 

"  TAe   Phenomena  at  the  Abbey  of  Prunois-som-Ablis — Arrondisement  of 
Rambouillet — France. 

"  One  of  the  most  interesting  records  extant  on  the  subject  of  Spirit  power  is  an 
account  of  the  disturbances  which  took  place  at  the  above-named  Roman  Catholic  Abbey 
in  the  year  1835.  On  October  1st  at  eight  o'clock  in  the, evening,  a  great  many  stones 
were  thrown  at  the  window  of  the  Presbytery.  Several  witnesses  were  present,  and 
numbers  of  others  were  called  by  the  priest  to  watch  the  proceedings.  The  stones 
were  thrown  by  no  visible  agency,  and  struck  the  window  panes  in  showers,  without 
breaking  any. 

"  October  2nd.  A  box  filled  with  dirt  and  refuse,  was  found  in  the  place  usually  kept 
for  the  bread,  which  was  thrown  on  the  ground  close  by.  Stones  were  thrown  aU  that  day 
at  intervals,  but  though  the  windows  were  struck  in  showers,  no  glass  was  broken. 

"  October  3rd.  At  three  in  the  afternoon,  all  the  doors  of  the  Abbey  being  shut,  a 
quantity  of  ashes — salad  plants,  spoons,  coals,  and  rotten  fruit — fell  about  the  floor  and 
furniture  of  the  Presbytery,  also  in  several  of  the  other  rooms,  every  door  and  window 
being  shut.  The  showers  continued  falling  till  ten  o'clock,  when  one  of  the  witnesses, — 
the  Cure  of  Alix,  said  jokingly,  that  money  would  have  been  more  welcome  than  stones. 
As  he  spoke,  every  one  in  the  room  was  pelted  with  '  Hards.' 

"  October  4th.  The  fire  irons — brought  without  noise  from  the  Priest's  private  room — 
were  found  in  a  locked  chest.  Pieces  of  butter  and  knives  used  in  the  larder,  were  found 
in  another  locked  chest.  As  the  Abbe  was  passing  out  to  go  to  service,  a  pot  full  of  sand 
was  tossed  into  a  pail  of  water  before  his  eyes.  No  disturbance  took  place  in  the  church, 
but  when  he  returned,  chalk  from  the  walls  and  ceiling,  coals,  ashes,  fruit,  bread,  and  all 
sorts  of  objects  were  thrown  hither  and  thither  through  the  house,  and  the  stones  were 
flung  from  outside  against  the  windows  all  day. 

"  October  6th. — The  bedclothes  in  the  Priest's  room,  and  those  of  several  of  the  inmates, 
were  pierced  with  round  holes,  and  the  pieces  taken  out  were  found  in  distant  closed 
rooms. 

"  October  7th. — At  nine  o'clock  the  servant  maid  retired  to  her  room,  but  found 
everything  displaced,  and  the  furniture  in  such  disorder  that  she  swooned  from  fear. 
That  night  one  of  the  Priest's  relatives  whom  he  requested  to  pass  the  night  in  the  same 
room  with  liim,  called  out  in  great  terror,  that  his  legs  were  being  tied  together.  When 
the  Priest  succeeded  in  getting  a  hght,  he  found  the  young  man  thrown  into  a  corner, 
with  his  legs  tightly  bound  together  above  the  knees  with  a  cord  nine  feet  in  length. 

"October  14:th. — The  cook  found  pieces  of  coal,  sweepings,  dust  and  filth  in  every 
article  she  was  using  to  prepare  the  meals,  in  fact  she  could  not  put  a  dish  or  saucer  out 

^ 

WlLLIAM     HOWITT 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  8i 

of  hei'  hand,  but  what  it  was  instantly  but  noiselessly  filled  with  rubbish.  The  same  was 
found  in  all  the  pots  and  kettles.  Watchers  stationed  in  all  directions  failed  to  find  any 
visible  agent. 

"October  17th. — Stones  were  thrown  in  larger  numbers  and  more  incessantly  than 
ever.  Fires  were  lighted  on  hearths  in  empty  rooms.  The  young  man  before  mentioned — 
the  priest's  relation — had  his  cap  taken  from  his  head  and  it  was  afterwards  found  in  a 
chimney  in  a  distant  part  of  the  house. 

"October  18. — A  violent  noise  being  heard  in  the  Presbytery,  the  party  who  rushed 
to  the  spot  found  a  ball  of  paper  containing  a  large  quantity  of  gunpowder.  The  ball 
was  tied  with  a  string,  and  a  hole  was  cut  in  the  wrapping  ;  close  by  was  a  match.  Soon 
after  this  the  disturbances  increased,  and  the  garden  walks  were  found  indented  with 
marks  of  huge  claws,  not  belonging  to  any  known  animal.  Heavy  blows  and  sounds  as  of 
tramping  feet  were  now  heard  during  the  night  in  the  corridors.  As  a  large  number  of 
watchers  were  stationed  day  and  night  within  and  without  the  Abbey,  it  soon  transpired 
that  similar  disturbances  had  occurred  several  times  within  the  last  thirty  years,  though 
never  with  such  violence  as  now. 

"  October  22nd. — The  cook  was  pelted  with  stones,  coal,  &c.,  wherever  she  went — 
nothing  struck  her,  though  objects  fell  in  showers  around  her.  The  Priest,  on  going  to 
bed,  found  the  wood  which  had  been  laid  in  the  grate  ready  for  lighting,  taken  out  and  all 
arranged  on  his  bed  in  the  form  of  a  cross.  In  the  morning,  his  clothes  were  found  stufied 
tightly  in  a  large  pitcher  full  of  water — and  this,  though  the  door  was  locked  inside,  and 
the  window  made  fast." 

Mr.  Riko  follows  up  this  narrative  with  a  long  list  of  witnesses'  names, 
many  of  whom  were  persons  of  high  respectability,  holding  official  situa- 
tions. It  may  be  added,  that  in  the  course  of  three  months,  the 
disturbances  died  out,  though  no  cause  could  ever  be  discovered  for  their 
occurrence.  M.  Riko's  next  narrative  is  the  well-known  case  of  the  dis- 
turbances at  Cideville — Seine  Inferieure,  France.  The  author  is  in 
possession  of  two  French  newspapers  containing  reports  of  the  trial  in  this 
celebrated  case.  To  save  the  necessity  of  a  fresh  translation,  we  will 
again  resort  to  M.  Riko's  concise  narrative.     He  says  : — 

"In  the  spring  of  the  year  1849,  the  Curate  of  Cideville  having  called  to  see  one  of 
his  parishioners  who  was  sick  and  confined  to  his  bed,  found  at  the  bedside  a  man  who 
had  the  reputation  in  the  neighbourhood  of  being  a  "Sorcerer,"  and  was,  besides,  a 
fellow  of  very  bad  character.  As  a  friend  of  the  Curate's  had  been  attended  by  him  and 
died  under  his  hands — as  the  neighbours  alleged,  by  evil  practices — the  Curate  di-ove  him 
from  the  house  and  warned  him  not  to  return  again.  Soon  after  this  "the  Sorcerer" 
was  arrested  for  some  mal-practice,  and  thrown  into  prison.  There  he  uttered  fierce 
menaces  against  the  Curate,  and  swore  he  would  be  revenged,  ascribing  his  misfortunes 
wholly  to  the  priest's  enmity.  Shortly  after  this,  two  boys,  who  were  placed  with  the 
Curate  for  education,  happening  to  be  at  an  auction,  met  there  Thorel,  a  shepherd,  who 
was  a  friend,  and  said  to  be  "a  disciple"  and  follower  of  the  Sorcerer.  Thorel  had  been 
heard  to  swear  he  would  have  revenge  for  his  master's  imprisonment.  When  he  met 
the  children  at  the  auction,  he  approached  them,  and  it  was  affirmed  at  the  trial,  laid  his 
hands  on  one  of  their  heads,  and  muttered  words  they  did  not  understand. 

"  Immediately  after  their  return  to  the  Abbey,  violent  poundings  were  heard  on  the 
walls,  floors,  ceilings,  passages,  and  in  every  part  of  the  building.  Sometimes  these 
blows  were  so  heavy  as  to  make  the  inhabitants  fear  the  walls  would  be  demolished. 
Numbers  of  persons  passing  near  the  Abbey  stopped  to  inquire  what  was  the  matter. 
After  these  blows  had  been  given  for  several  days,  and  crowds  surrounded  the  building 
day  and  night,  it  was  found  that  the  thumpings  would  keep  time  to  music,  and  beat 
correctly  the  measure  of  any  tune  asked  for.  Windows  that  could  not  be  reached  from 
without  were  smashed,  crockery  broken,  and  furniture  hurled  "hither  and  thither  with 
frightful  force. 

"  Officers  of  justice  were  sent  for,  and  police  stationed  everywhere.  The  furniture 
flew  around  them  and  piled  up  into  curious  forms  before  their  very  eyes.  Some  of  the 
heavy  furniture  seemed  to  be  lifted  about  as  lightly  as  feathers.  Other  things  were 
broken  into  the  smallest  fragments,  and  no  one  was  hurt  except  the  Mayor  of  Cideville, 
who  on  one  occasion  was  struck  so  heavily  on  the  leg,  that  he  feared  the  bone  was  broken. 
As  he  sat  down,  he  felt  a  soft  hand  stroking  and  patting  the  affected  part,  and  the  pain 
ceased  instantly. 
6 

82  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"Several  of  the  visitors  had  their  dresses  pulled,  and  their  arms  and  faces  gently- 
patted.  M.  de  Mirville,  who  often  attended  these  wUd  weird  scenes,  could  hold  quite 
intelligent  conversations  with  the  invisible  knockers,  and  get  them  to  answer,  or  to  move 
any  object  he  wished.  All  this  was  done  in  the  light,  and  in  the  presence  of  crowds  of 
witnesses.  Meantime  the  child  who  had  been  touched  by  the  shepherd,  was  always 
complaining  of  the  shadow  of  a  man  following  him,  and  several  others  described  a  hand 
of  a  grey  colour,  which  seemed  to  be  busy  amongst  the  moving  objects.  Very  often 
visitors  would  ask  the  knockers  to  spell  out  their  names,  ages,  and  anything  they  wished 
to  say  ;  and  they  afterwards  testified  in  court,  the  intelligence  thus  rendered  was  always 
correct.  In  course  of  time,  wreaths  of  smoke  were  seen  winding  through  the  rooms,  and 
disappearing  as  suddenly  as  they  came.  Footsteps,  and  the  rustling  of  silk  were  the  next 
sounds  heard.  One  day,  the  child  touched  by  Thorel  screamed  out  that  there  v*as  a  black 
hand  coming  down  the  chimney, — no  one  saw  it  but  the  boy,  but  all  in  the  room  heard  a 
smart  smack,  and  the  child's  face  remained  red  for  a  long  time  afterwards.  Some  one 
suggested  that  pointed  irons  should  be  driven  into  the  walls  at  every  place  where  the 
blows  were  heard.  A  large  jDarty  proceeded  to  follow  this  advice.  With  every  blow  a 
stab  was  made.  Immediately  upon  this,  flames  burst  out  from  every  hole,  together  with 
such  thick  smoke,  that  the  witnesses  were  obliged  to  open  doors  and  windows  to  get  rid 
of  it,  and  desist  from  all  farther  attempts  of  the  kind.  All  the  party  there  assembled 
testified  that  they  distinctly  heard  the  word  '  pardon '  cried  out  in  a  piteous  voice. 

"  That  night  all  was  quiet.  The  next  day,  Thorel  came  to  the  door  of  the  Presbytery, 
and  asked  to  see  the  priest. 

"  His  behaviour  was  humble,  his  words  embarrassed ;  he  tried  to  hide  with  his  hat 
bleeding  wounds  in  his  face.  The  child  saw  him  and  cried,  "  That  is  the  man  who  perse- 
cutes me."  The  priest  asked  him  from  whence  came  the  wounds  he  had  in  his  face. 
Thorel  refused  to  answer,  but  the  priest  forced  him  to  fall  on  his  knees  and  ask  pardon, 
which  he  at  length  did  ;  at  the  same  moment  he  tried  to  get  hold  of  the  child's  frock,  in 
which  he  succeeded.  The  priest  made  him  promise  to  go  to  the  Mayor,  and  there  Thorel 
in  presence  of  many  witnesses  fell  again  on  his  knees  and  asked  for  pardon,  trying  at  the 
same  time  to  touch  the  priest,  who,  in  order  to  defend  himself,  struck  the  sheiAerd  with 
his  stick.  Thorel  on  a  subsequent  occasion  confessed  that  his  master  the  sorcerer  was 
the  cause  of  the  disturbances  at  the  Abbey,  and  that  he  hated  the  priest  because  he  had 
chased  him  away  from  a  patient ;  but  he  offered  to  dehver  the  Abbey  of  all  further  dis- 
turbances if  the  priest  would  offer  him  something.  This  was  refused,  and  then  Thorel 
prosecuted  the  priest  for  the  strokes  he  had  given  him  in  legitimate  self-defence.  It  was 
on  that  trial  that  aU  the  mysterious  phenomena  at  the  Abbey  of  Cideville  became  generally 
known,  and  was  commented  on  in  the  newspapers  of  the  day.  The  priest  was  acquitted 
and  Thorel  condemned  in  all  the  costs.  This  verdict  was  given  after  the  learned  discourses 
of  the  well-known  advocates  Vaquier  du  Traversain  for  the  priest,  and  Fontaine  for 
Thorel.  The  latter  did  not  appeal.  Several  other  strange  feats  performed  by  Thorel 
were  brought  to  light  during  the  trial.  He  predicted  several  things  which  happened  as 
he  had  announced  ;  he  walked  through  the  field  with  another  witness,  and  said  to  him, 
"  Every  time  I  shall  strike  my  basket  with  my  fist  you  will  fall,"  and  every  time  Thorel 
did  so,  the  witness  was  seized  at  the  throat  by  an  invisible  grip,  and  thrown  to  the 
ground.  Others  declared  that  when  passing  Thorel  on  the  road,  they  were  persecuted  by 
stone  throwing,  the  stones  flying  towards  them  from  diff'erent  directions  by  invisible 
power,  but  falling  directly  before  their  feet  without  injuring  them.  The  phenomena 
began  on  November  26th,  1850,  and  ended  on  February  15th,  1851,  at  which  date  the 
Bishop  ordered  the  two  children  to  be  taken  away  from  the  Abbey.  In  the  judicial  verdict 
passed  against  Thorel,  the  judge  in  summing  up  says  that  '  the,  cause  of  the  extraordinary 
facts  ivhich  occurred  at  the  Abbey  of  Cideville,  as  very  clearly  stated  by  the  testimony  of  all 
the  ivitnesses  heard,  has  remained  unknown.' 

"  It  was  very  remarkable  to  note  the  uniformity  with  which  the  witnesses  related  the 
diff'erent  strange  phenomena  observed  by  them.  Some  testified  with  all  the  simplicity  of 
peasants,  others  with  all  the  exactness  of  highly  educated  people  ;  but  the  facts  were 
given  by  all  as  identical.  Though  some  of  the  sceptical  newspapers  declared  all  the  twenty- 
five  witnesses  to  be  hallucinated,  etc.,  not  one  had  the  courage  to  indicate  them  as  hars  ; 
their  good  faith  was  acknowledged  by  all. 

"The  phenomena  at  the  Abbey  of  Cideville  stand  as  one  of  the  best  established 
incidents  of  the  work  of  an  invisible  world  in  our  days." 

Narrative  translated  from  the  Journal  Indre-ei-Loire,  dated  July  29th, 
1882  :— 

"  A  shower  of  stones  has  fallen  at  intervals  during  the  past  sixty  days,  upon  the  farm- 
house of  Lioniere,  near  Montbazon  (Indre-et-Loire).  This  farm-house,  situated  in  an  open 
field,  is  prominent  to  view,  and  is  approached  by  two  broad  thoroughfares,  over  which 
persons  cannot  travel  without  being  se^n. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  Z^ 

"  The  stones  begin  to  fall  at  dusk,  and  the  shower  continues  until  morning.  They  seem 
to  come  from  all  directions,  and  their  collision  leaves  deep  indentations  upon  the  walls 
and  doors  of  the  farm-house.  No  one  has  ever  been  wounded  by  them,  however,  and  the 
intention  seems  to  frighten  rather  than  to  seriously  injure. 

"  The  rural  guards  and  the  armed  police  of  Montbazon  have  for  many  nights  watched 
in  ambush  around  the  Lioniere  without  discovering  any  marauders.  The  stones  fell  around 
them  in  the  darkness  in  their  hiding-places.  One  of  the  police,  who  was  crouched  upon 
the  roof  of  the  house,  was  hit  upon  the  shoulder,  though  very  lightly.  Companies  have 
been  organised,  with  the  assistance  of  the  farm  hands  and  neighbours,  to  thoroughly  beat 
about  and  search  the  place.  Nearly  a  hundred  persons  gathered  at  the  farm  and  scoured 
it  in  every  direction.  Nothing  suspicious  has  been  seen.  During  the  going  and  coming, 
the  projectiles  have  not  ceased  to  whistle  by  the  ears  of  the  investigators. 

"  The  dwellers  at  the  farmhouse  of  Fontaines,  commune  of  Rouziers,  have  been  awakened 
almost  every  night  by  singular  and  varied  noises.  Sometimes  it  is  like  the  noise  of  a 
heavily-laden  wagon.  The  jolting  of  the  wheels  in  the  ruts  of  the  road,  the  clash  of  the 
iron  tires  against  the  stony  obstructions  are  heard,  as  also  the  prolonged  cracking  of  the 
whip.     The  walls  of  the  house  tremble  as  by  the  passing  of  some  heavy  vehicle. 

"  Sometimes  dancing  music  is  heard — sound  of  a  violin  accompanied  with  stamping,  like 
the  noise  made  by  iron-nailed  boots  striking  against  the  floor  in  beating-time.  Again  a 
noise  is  heard  in  the  well,  hke  the  fall  of  some  heavy  body,  that  on  striking  the  surface  of 
the  water  chops  and  spatters  it  about  with  a  splashing  sound,  but  no  one  has  ever  been 
able  to  discover  the  cause  of  these  noises.  In  vain  have  the  fai'm  people,  reinforced  by 
their  neighbours,  placed  themselves  upon  the  watch  at  night — in  vain  have  they  used 
every  strategy  they  can  invent ;  they  are  still  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  their  annoyance, 
The  manager,  M.  Ronnin,  who  has  been  but  a  short  time  in  this  part  of  the  country 
assures  us  that  he  used  to  hear  the  same  noises  and  sounds  in  Vendee." 

"  An  extraordinary  medium  has  been  found  at  Agen.  She  is  quite  young — is  a  Mdlle. 
Honorine — and  when  the  spiritualistic  phenomena  occur  through  her,  her  liands  are  tied, 
together  with  a  handkerchief  and  she  is  placed  upon  a  bed.  Cards  are  placed  under  her 
pillow,  or  are  pinned  to  the  bed-curtains,  and  mental  questions  are  asked,  with  the  desire 
that  the  answer  shall  appear  on  said  cards  ;  and  there  indeed  the  correct  answer  is  found. 
The  '  Marseillaise '  is  then  drummed  out,  the  '  Dame  Angot,'  the  '  Chant  clu  Depart,'  the 
^Retreat' — in  fact,  anything  called  for.  The  sound  of  the  horses'  feet  as  the  cavalry 
retreat,  is  perfectly  represented.  Musical  instruments  are  played  upon  and  carried  about 
the  room.  An  officer  of  the  army  placed  a  ribbon  under  the  pillow,  and  invisible  fingers 
tied  a  knot  in  it.  Money  laid  outside  of  a  closed  tobacco-box  was  found  within  it.  The 
bed  was  drawn  across  the  room,  or,  as  the  child-medium  said,  '  ^as,  pushed.'  The  direct 
writing  obtained,  manifested  familiarity  with  the  pen,  whereas  Honorine  can  scarcely  write 
or  read." — Revue  Spirite,  December,  1881. 

"  The  Revue  Spirite  has  from  time  to  time  made  mention  of  a  young  girl  residing 
at  Saint  Marie-de-Campan,  in  the  province  of  Bagneres-de-Bigorre,  among  the  Pyrenees 
mountains,  under  whose  mediumship  wonderful  phenomena  have  taken  place,  and  which 
have  attracted  the  attention  of  the  French  secular  press  generally." 

M.  Aviragnet,  writing  to  the  Editor  of  the  Revue  Spirite,  says  : — 

"On  the  21st  of  January,  1882,  the  young  gu-1  from  Ste  Marie-de-Campan,  Marie 
Alexandrine  Torne,  of  whom  we  have  spoken,  and  who  has  created  a  sensation  in  all  this 
Department,  came  to  me  and  is  with  me  still.  She  reads  a  book  without  looking  at  it  ; 
she  plays  dominoes  with  her  eyes  closed.  I  had  hardly  formed  an  idea  of  tying  her  hands 
behind  her  back  than  they  were  tied  and  untied  by  invisible  hands.  I  desked  to  have 
something  brought  to  me,  and  yesterday  evening  I  was  presented  with  a  flower  that  does 
not  grow  in  our  gardens.  They  (the  spirits)  have  manufactured  for  me  a  .flower  of  a 
beautifiil  red  colour,  and  to-day  after  dinner,  the  young  girl  came  to  my  bedside  with  a 
flower  in  her  hand,  which  immediately  disappeared." 

It  must  be  stated  that  M.  Aviragnet  was  a  chronic  invaUd  and  had  been 
confined  to  a  bed  of  sickness  for  a  long  time.  The  general  impression  of 
tliis  excellent  gentleman's  friends  was,  that  the  medium — quite  a  young 
child — who  came  of  her  own  accord  to  the  house,  was  sent  to  redeem  a 
promise  of  M.  Aviragnet's  spirit  guides  that  they  would  cure  him.  M. 
Aviragnet  continues  his  narrative  as  follows  : — 

"  Marie  Alexandrine  returned  to  her  home  shortly  after  the  phenomena  that  I  have 
detailed  to  you.     At  the  end  of  some  six  days,  having  received  the  order  to  come  to  me 

84  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

again  for  an  urgent  necessity,  she  set  out  before  day,  quite  uneasy,  fearing  to  be  too  late 
for  the  operation,  which  consisted  in  removing  other  parasites  from  my  ear.  On  Sunday 
morning  she  came  to  my  bed,  and  a  hand  was  formed  in  her  presence.  She  made  passes 
over  my  heart,  and  infused  a  mild  fluid  into  my  ear  and  over  my  eyes.  ...  On  Monday 
the  medium  was  forbidden  to  eat  anything.  She  was  ordered  to  fast  for  three  days  and 
two  nights,  and  she  gave  herself  up  to  prayer.  I  was  told  not  to  be  uneasy,  that  the  child 
would  be  in  no  danger  ;  that  the  angels  would  sustain  her.  I  would  fain  have  shared 
tha  sufferings  of  the  child,  but  lovid  knocks  upon  the  table  made  by  the  friends  said  '  No.'  " 
"  On  Tuesday  evening  at  seven  o'clock  the  child  was  permitted  to  take  refreshment. 
Vaporous  forms  became  manifest  all  around  her.  These  forms  approached  me,  took  me 
by  the  hand,  patted  my  face  and  my  breast." 

Without  following  out  M.  Aviragnet's  diary  any  farther,  it  is  enough  to 
say  he  was  raised  from  the  sick  bed  he  had  so  long  and  hopelessly  occupied, 
and  testified  before  a  number  of  officials  in  his  district  that  without  the  aid 
of  medicines,  or  any  other  means  than  the  presence  of  this  extraordinary 
medium  and  her  attendant  spirits,  he  was  entirely  restored  to  health.  In 
the  issue  of  Za  Revue  Spirite,  of  December,  1880,  is  the  following ; — 

"A  new  writing  medium  has  appeared  in  France,  in  the  Gironde,  who  attracts  no 
little  attention  from  the  fact  that,  of  himself,  he  knows  nothing  about  the  art  of  penman- 
ship. Our  friend  and  brother  in  the  faith  does  not  know  how  to  write,  and  in  opposition 
to  his  parents  in  1867  he  was  incited  to  write  mediumistically  through  the  spirits 
two  letters  which  contain  forty-eight  lines,  have  many  antique  words,  and  combination 
of  words  that  must  awaken  interest,  while  their  sentiments  are  lofty  and  impressive.  It 
seems  also  that  he  now  speaks  as  if  learned,  and  has  the  gift  of  healing." 

"  A  new  i-apping  medium  has  also  been  discovered  in  the  village  of  Chauvirey,  Cote 
d'Or — a  little  girl  about  thirteen  years  of  age.  The  noise  begins  when  she  retires  to  bed  ; 
sometimes  it  is  like  a  scratching  with  the  finger  naUs  ;  then  it  increases  in  volume  till  it 
resembles  the  sound  of  revolving  mill-wheels.  The  clergy  and  gendarmes  have,  as  usual, 
been  called  in,  but  cannot  account  for  the  phenomenon — which  continues  when  the  feet 
and  hands  of  the  girl  are  held  fast,  and  which  has  now  for  about  two  months  and  a  half 
defied  the  scrutiny  of  all  her  visitors." 

In  the  same  journal,  of  date  1877,  we  find  a  large  number  of  cases 
describing  various  kinds  of  phenomenal  mediumship.  Amongst  them  the 
following : — 

"  The  spirits  of  the  people  of  the  '  barricades '  seem  not  to  forget  in  the  spirit  world 
those  exciting  scenes  by  which,  some  of  them  at  least,  passed  beyond  the  confines  of  our 
sphere  ;  indeed  it  is  in  France,  above  all  other  coimtries  with  which  we  are  acquainted, 
stone-throwing  by  the  invisibles  is  most  common.  Some  years  ago  in  Paris,  near  the 
Pantheon,  as  reported  by  the  police,  a  house  was  pelted  with  stones,  some  of  which  were 
so  large  that  the  doors  and  windows,  secured  by  heavy  timbers,  were  demolished.  The 
missiles  descended  with  mathematical  precision,  but  whence  could  not  be  discovered  by 
the  police,  though  stationed  on  housetops  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.  Quite  a 
number  of  like  cases  I  have  since  recorded.  Now,  M.  Par  jade  writes  that  at  Omet 
(Haute  Garonne),  at  the  house  of  M.  Vimeney,  the  same  phenomena  have  been  taking 
place ;  the  furniture,  crockery,  cooking  utensils  were  tumbled  into  confusion,  whUe 
stones  flew  in  every  direction.  '  These  facts,'  says  the  writer,  '  have  excited  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  canton,  but  no  one  but  the  Spiritualists  could  discover  the  cause ;  they 
are  identical  with  those  of  Tabanac  in  the  year  1872.' 

" '  The  Spiritualists  of  this  region,'  he  continues,  '  evoked  the  spirits  and  reasoned  with 
them ;  the  daughter  of  M.  Vimeney  was  restored  to  health,  and  the  phenomena  dis- 
appeared. ' 

"  In  confirmation  of  the  above,  Mons.  Vimeney  wrote  himself  to  the  editor  of  the  Revue, 
and  says  :  '  By  our  appeal  and  by  prayer,  these  spirits  came  to  us  and  promised  to  listen 
to  our  counsel ;  my  daughter  has  become  perfectly  well,  and  the  disturbances  have  ceased 
completely.'     The  letter  is  signed  by  sixteen  witnesses." 

The  Revue  of  October,  1880,  gives  an  interesting  account  of  still  another 
physical  medium,  quite  celebrated  in  the  Spiritualist  circles  of  Paris,  but 
Icnown  only  under  the  sobriquet  of  Amelie. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  85 

The  phenomena  obtained  in  the  presence  of  this  young  girl  are  very 
varied.  The  following  is  a  brief  narrative  of  one  seance  detailed  by  Dr.  G. 
L.  Ditson,  the  foreign  correspondent  of  the  American  Banner  of  Light. 
This  gentleman  says  : — 

"  In  June,  1875,  at  a  stance,  the  spii'its  caused  the  musical  box  to  play,  stopping  and 
starting  it  at  will.  When  visiting  a  Mme.  X.,  a  letter  which  should  have  been  sent  to 
Lim  some  time  previous,  but  had  been  lying  in  a  receptacle  with  many  others,  was  brought 
by  the  invisibles  and  placed  in  his  hands 

"One  evening,"  he  says,  "Amelie's  hands  were  drawn  behind  her  and  fastened  very 
firmly  with  a  cord,  whose  ends  were  carried  down  and  '  fixed  solidly '  to  the  leg  of  her 
chair.  The  spirits  also  essayed  a  duo  on  the  harmonica  and  tambour,  and  themselves  gave 
the  signal  for  applause  produced  seemingly  by  the  hands  of  little  children.  The  fol- 
lowing was  given  by  direct  writing :  '  We  love  these  stances,  and  will  do  our  best  to 
materialize.'  In  the  next  month  flowers  were  broiight  by  the  spirits — xme  masse  des  2^etites 
plantes—  blue  flowers,  moist,  with  fresh  earth.  Their  name  however  had  been  forgotten. 
Amelie  took  a  pencil  and  wrote  :  '  Forget  me  not.'  " 

Dr.  Ditson  adds  the  two  following  narratives,  translated  from  the  Revue 
Spirite  of  the  same  date  as  above  : — 

"Of  Mme.  Sardou' in  lethargic  sleep  and  her  voyage  in  space  I  must  quote  a  little. 
Mme.  S.,  sixty-two  years  of  age,  made  the  following  statement  to  the  narrator  : — 

" '  About  twelve  years  since  I  was  in  the  hospital  at  Lyons,  and  died,  to  all  appearances, 
and  so  remained  for  twenty -four  hours.  I  had  no  consciousness  of  what  was  passing 
around  me.  During  this  time  I  went  up,  up,  till  the  earth  appeared  blue,  like  the 
heavens,  and  then  was  out  of  sight.  On  I  went.  Finally  I  arrived  in  front  of  a  magnificent 
chapel,  gleaming  with  indescribable  beauty,  and  in  which  there  was  a  light  of  surpassing 
brilliancy.  Attempting  to  enter,  I  was  warned  that  I  was  not  yet  pure  enough ;  that  I 
had  to  return  to  the  earth  and  suffer  much,  and  then  I  should  be  admitted  to  this 
I^aradise.  I  then  went  on  without  knowing  what  impelled  me,  till  I  looked  upon  a  vast, 
arid,  boundless  field.  There  I  saw  a  prodigious  quantity  of  persons  all  bent  towards  the 
ground,  which  they  were  scratching  vigorously  with  their  two  hands,  as  a  dog  scratches 
with  his  paws.  I  saw  here  priests  of  all  ranks  ;  people  well  and  ill-dressed.  I  was 
astonished.  Looking  on  one  side  I  saw  une  dame  blonde  ;  it  was  a  very  beautiful  woman. 
There  is  none  upon  earth  like  her.  She  did  not  speak  to  me,  so  I  said  :  '  Madame,  what  is 
this,  all  this  multitude?'  'My  child,'  she  replied,  'this  is  Purgatory.'  'Where  then  is 
heU  ? '  I  asked.  '  There  is  none,'  was  the  reply  ;  '  it  is  here  that  penitence  is  made.  See, 
my  child,  these  had  upon  the  earth  all  they  needed,  but  were  never  satisfied,  wanting  always 
more,  and  never  doing  any  good  to  their  fellows.  Look  yonder,'  she  said,  extending  her 
arm,  '  see  those  down  there,  down  there  afar  off ;  it  is  two  thousand  years  they  are  there, 
two  thousand  years  ! '  When  some  dissent  was  expressed  to  Mme.  Sardou  respecting  her 
vision,  she  replied  with  much  vivacity,  '  Oh  !  hut  I  saw  it ! '  (She  had  once  before  made 
a  like  asservation  when  some  doubt  had  been  expressed.) 

"  These  earnest  replies,"  continues  the  writer,  "  prove  abundantly  the  sincerity  of  her 
recital.  When  the  spirit  of  Mme.  Sardou  returned  to  her  body  and  awoke  it,  she  found 
her  friends  were  about  enwrapping  it  for  its  final  disposition.  She  screamed  and  drew 
many  persons  about  her  bed.  To  these  she  related  her  voyage  and  experience,  and  she  was 
assured  that  she  had  seen  the  Virgin  Mary.  She  suffers,  as  was  predicted  by  the  angel ; 
and,  not  unmindful  of  her  vision,  she  says  sadly,  when  she  sees  a  person  in  affluence  with- 
holding a  farthing  from  the  needy,  'See  still  another  who  is  going  to  scratch  the 
earth.'     .... 

"  Suffice  it  to  say,  the  woman  was  persecuted  for  her  faith,  and  even  threatened  by  the 
clergy  ;  and  her  house,  No.  54,  Rue  de  la  Heine,  was  named  the  '  Folle  Bretonne.'  " 

Within  the  last  two  or  three  years  a  young  person  who  will  quite  compare 
with  any  of  the  most  powerful  physical  mediums  of  America  or  London, 
has  come  prominently  before  the  Spiritual  investigators  of  Paris,  by  name 
"  Madame  Babelin."  From  a  large  number  of  reports  of  seances  with  this 
medium,  we  select  the  account  given  by  Dr.  G.  L.  Ditson,  who  writes  as 
follows  to  the  Banner  of  Lights  of  October,  1882  : — 

"  Last  week,  at  a  Mme.  BabeKn's,  where  I  was  introduced  by  the  courtesy  of  Mme. 
Leymarie,  I  was   very  satisfactorily  entertained.      About  fifteen  of  us,  joining  hands, 

86  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

encircled  Mme.  B.,  the  medium,  who,  at  her  own  request,  was  tied  to  her  chair,  '  Universal 
scepticism,'  she  said,  'requiring  it.'  The  medium's  hands  were  intricately  bound,  and  as 
intricately  secured  to  the  chair,  the  ends  of  the  cord  being  taken  by  one  of  the  circle, 
which  formed  itself  around  the  table,  the  medium  sitting  near  it.  On  the  table  were  two 
musical  boxes,  three  fans,  a  hand-bell,  a  child's  whistle,  a  toy  barking-dog,  and  a  box  of 
lozenges.  On  taking  seats  the  candle  was  extinguished,  the  circle  interlinked  little  fingers 
and  sang.  After  a  little,  there  were  vai-ious  manifestations,  more  than  one  always  occuri-ing 
at  the  same  time  ;  detonations  in,  on,  or  under  the  table  ;  overhead  were  heard,  moving 
hither  and  thither,  the  musical  boxes,  the  bell,  whistle,  and  barking  toy,  all  in  rhythm  ; 
the  air  was  kept  in  motion  by  the  fans,  which  were  also  rubbed  against  our  heads  ;  our 
faces,  shoulders,  and  hands  were  patted  with  soft  warm  hands. 

"  Each  one  was  also  favoured  with  a  large  bunch  of  wild  flowers.  A  bunch  of  them 
was  forcibly  arranged  beneath  my  vest,  and  later  some  were  put  between  my  neck  and 
collar.  Phosphoric  lights  were  then  seen  floating  about,  coming  sometimes,  as  it  were, 
from  under  the  table  and  going  into  the  laps  of  diiSferent  parties.  There  was  also 
seemingly  an  attempt  to  iUumine  a  figure  that  stood  close  to  me — at  least,  some  drab 
drapery  was  near  me,  enveloping  apparently  a  human  form.  This  efl"ort  was  unsuccessful. 
A  small  part  of  a  human  figure  was  however,  quite  well  developed,  and  there  was  a  per- 
sistence in  showing  me  this.  At  first  I  thought  that  only  a  simple  ball  of  phosphoric 
light  was  before  me,  but  as  its  action  was  peculiar,  I  regarded  it  attentively,  and  saw 
unmistakable  fingers  of  two  hands  that  were  manipulating  the  phosphoric  ball,  taking 
light  from  it  to  show  themselves.  When  I  expressed  aloud  to  my  neighbour  the  fact,  the 
two  hands  separated,  one  going  to  the  right  of  the  circle,  the  other  to  the  left — an 
unmistakable  proof  that  they  pertained  to  no  human  being.  In  response  to  a  mental 
request,  some  fingers  pressed  my  forehead,  and  on  asking  the  question  mentally,  if  a 
loved  deceased  cousin  were  present,  my  cheek  was  several  times  smoothed  as  if  by  the 
gentle  hand  of  aSection. 

"At  a  sitting  last  evening,  at  Mme.  Huet's,  where  I  had  been  presented  by  M.  Lacroix, 
we  had  the  levitation  of  a  heavy  table,  and  those  unmistakable  raps  which  are  so  very 
characteristic  of  the  Fox  sisters'  circles. 

"At  a  seance  at  Mme.  Chavee's  we  were  also,  through  raps,  favoured  with  several 
interesting  messages  from  the  '  promised  land.'  Though  a  stranger  to  almost  every  one 
present,  I  received,  in  English,  the  first  communication.  My  brother,  who  died  in  Natchez 
in  1833,  not  only  spelled  out  his  entire  name,  but  expressed  ys  relationship  to  and  super- 
vision of  my  son,  in  such  terms  as  to  make  it  a  moral  certainty  that  no  other  than  my 
brother  William  was  actually  giving  the  welcome  sentences  that  at  this  moment  so  unex- 
pectedly were  being  recorded  by  one  (a  French  lady)  who  knew  nothing  of  the  meanuig 
of  the  words  she  penned. 

"  Paris,  France,  Oct.  6th,  1882.  G.  L.  Ditson." 

Dr.  Ditson  subsequently  adds  the  following  translation  from  the  Revue 

Spirite  : — 

"  Dr.  Chazarain  resolved,  in  order  to  add  to  the  weight  of  his  testimony,  to  hold  his 
future  seances  at  his  own  home,  with  his  family  and  friends,  Madame  Babelin  still  being 
the  medium. 

"At  his  first  home  seance,  fourteen  in  the  circle,  on  the  light  being  extinguished  the 
medium  described,  in  mmute  detail,  the  appearance  of  a  spirit,  whose  wife  and  daughter 
were  present ;  he  had  also  been  weU  known  to  Dr.  Chazarain. 

"  '  The  medium,'  says  he,  '  passed  then  into  the  trance  ;  after  some  rapping  sounds, 
hands  touched  and  pressed  us  all,  the  objects  placed  upon  the  table  floated  over  our 
heads,  the  musical  instruments  sounding  ;  fresh  flowers  were  laid  upon  our  hands.  There 
were  no  flowers  in  the  house  before  the  seance.  Then  phosphorescent  hands  gradually 
developed  themselves  as  I  previously  described.  The  form  of  a  child  was  then  seen  upon 
the  table,  visible  by  its  own  light.  It  moved  about,  kissed  its  hands  to  us  all ;  we  heard 
the  kisses;  and  as  the  fingers  left  contact  with  the  lips  they  emitted  a  soft  light  and 
whitish  vapour.  The  child  disappeared  and  reappeared  three  times,  but  was  visible 
altogether  for  about  ten  minutes.  When  I  afterwards  showed  the  photograph  of  my  httle 
Marie  all  recognised  it  as  that  of  the  cluld-spirit. 

Then  by  my  side,  appeared  the  well-defined  face  of  my  mother,  deceased  at  seventy- 
five. 

"  '  I  felt  then  a  large  hand  laid  upon  my  head  ;  in  reply  to  the  question,  mentally  put. 
Are  you  he  of  whom  I  am  thinking  ?  the  hand  gave  three  taps.  My  thoughts  were  of 
my  deceased  brother,     Then  came  sounds  of  the  pencil ;  these  ceasing,  we  lighted  up  and 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  87 

foimd  a  little  writing  on  two  pieces  of  paper  ;  on  one,  "  My  beloved  sisters,  I  am  with  you 
and  shall  be  your  guardian. — Marie."  On  the  other,  "  Seek  not  thy  brother  on  earth  ;  he 
is  in  God's  immensity.  I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  be  with  you. — Paul."  This  was  the 
naine  of  my  brother.  He  was  in  the  Army  of  Reserve  in  1870.  After  the  battle  of 
Chateauneuf  no  news  ever  came  from  him  ;  his  name  was  neither  in  the  returns  of  killed 
nor  of  prisoners.  A  spontaneous  communication  had  been  received  by  me  through  another 
medium,  to  the  effect  that  he  had  been  killed  for  plunder  by  some  dissolute  men  of  his 
company.  I  had  thereupon  written  to  the  authorities  to  know  how  I  might  direct 
inquiries  among  the  men  of  his  company  at  that  period.  As  if  in  reference  to  my  letter 
came  another  scrap  of  paper,  "  No  vengeance,  expiation."  I  received  this  as  a  lesson  on 
which  I  pondered.' " 

In  an  article  written  for  a  scientific  paper  of  Paris,  by  M.  Chas.  Hue, 
editor  of  the  journal — Prosperite  Agricole  et  Commerciale — there  is  a  long 
account  of  a  mediumistic  couple  who  have  lately  excited  much  interest  in 
Parisian  circles.  M.  and  Mdme.  d'Alesi  are  the  parties  alluded  to,  and 
M.  Hue  says,  writing  of  the  husband  : — 

"The  medium  is  a  young  Hungarian  of  brUliant  education,  but  who,  through  many 
misfortunes,  has  been  reduced  to  poverty.  His  young  and  estimable  wife  shares  with 
him  heroically  his  ill-starred  existence,  and  when  under  magnetic  influence,  proves  to  be 
also  a  clairvoyant,  able  to  see  and  describe  spirits  and  give  good  medical  advice.  M.  Hugo 
d'Alesi  sits  at  a  table  in  a  room  so  dark  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  see  the  figure  he 
is  sketching.  He  seems  to  pay  but  little  attention  to  what  he  is  doing,  executing  rapidly, 
and  in  the  space  of  a  few  minutes  accomplishes  a  remarkable  work — the  head  of  a  woman, 
for  instance — wonderful  in  respect  to  finesse  d'execution.  He  has  thus  in  pastel  produced 
a  striking  likeness  of  Pius  IX.,  and  in  aquarelle  a  magnificent  landscape.  The  latter 
bore  the  signature  of  Diaz,  a  fine  artist,  who  passed  away  about  a  year  since.  Most  of 
M.  d'Alesi's  productions  bear  the  initials  T.  D.,  which,  on  account  of  the  general  style,  are 
attributable  to  Donato,  who  contributed  in  his  day  largely  to  the  resurrection  of 
sculpture  in  Italy." 

It  was  in  the  summer  of  1882,  that  the  author,  then  a  guest  of  Madame 
La  Duchesse  de  Pomar  (Countess  of  Caithness),  at  Paris,  had  the 
pleasure  of  witnessing  M.  d'Alesi's  remarkable  mediumship  as  an  instru- 
ment for  artistic  spirits.  The  seance  was  given  in  a  brilliantly  lighted 
library,  in  presence  of  about  half  a  dozen  persons,  including  the  Due 
and  Duchesse  de  Pomar,  the  author,  Dr.  Britten,  Madame  and  Mdlle. 
Leymarie.  M.  d'Alesi  occupied  about  ten  minutes  in  sketching  a  large 
crayon  drawing.  During  the  performance  he  was  engaged  in  lively 
conversation  with  the  company  who  stood  around  him,  and  the  author 
and  her  friends  can  all  testify  that  he  scarcely  ever  glanced  at  his  drawing, 
his  hands  appearing  to  move  with  lightning  speed  and  occasionally  with 
some  violent,  though  unknown  impulse,  without  any  apparent  volition  of 
his  own.  When  the  drawing  was  finished,  M.  d'Alesi  gracefully  presented 
it  to  the  noble  mistress  of  the  mansion,  the  Duchesse  de  Pomar.  On  first 
regarding  this  sketch,  nothing  was  discoverable  but  a  mass  of  uncouth 
crayon  scratches  without  apparently  a  vestige  of  design.  On  placing  the 
paper  against  a  distant  wall,  the  rude  scratches  resolved  themselves  into  a 
fine  and  spirited  likeness  of  the  beautiful  Marie  Stuart,  whom  the  Duchesse 
de  Pomar  not  only  resembles  strikingly  in  person,  but  who  has  been 
reported  through  numerous  sources  to  be  the  "guardian  angel"  of  the 
Duchesse.  This  lady  had,  during  the  day,  expressed  to  the  author  her 
earnest  wish  that  the  gracious  Scottish  Queen  would  favour  her  with  her 
likeness  through  the  artistic  medium  who  was  that  evening  expected ;  but 
this  wish  was  entirely  unknown  to  M.  d'Alesi,  neither  could  he  have  had 
the  slightest  idea  of  the  spiritual  relations  existing  between  the  Duchesse 
and  her  much-loved  spirit  guide. 

88  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

During  a  recent  visit  to  Paris,  the  author  had  the  privilege  of  inspecting 
the  fine  collection  of  spirit  drawings,  and  the  splendid  library,  possessed 
by  the  "Psychological  Society  of  Paris,"  and  arranged  at  their  rooms  by 
M.  and  Madame  Leymarie,  with  the  taste  and  elegance  peculiar  to  the 
French  character.  Many  of  the  drawings  are  as  wonderful  for  their 
artistic  excellence  as  for  their  occult  mode  of  production.  Amongst  these 
are  the  drawings  of  M.  d'Alesi,  and  those  of  M.  Fabre,  formerly  a  black- 
smith, who,  with  a  marvellous  gift  for  spiritual  art,  and  a  romantic  history 
too  long  to  cite  in  this  place,  has  produced,  amongst  other  marvels  of 
spirit  influence,  a  splendid  copy  of  Raphael's  famous  Bataille  de  Cofistantifi, 
the  original  of  which  is  now  in  the  Vatican.  When  it  is  remembered  that 
the  Medium,  "  Fabre,"  was  an  uneducated  blacksmith,  who,  by  no  possi- 
bility could  ever  have  seen  Raphael's  magnificent  picture,  and  that  the 
work  executed  by  this  man  is  an  almost  faultless  copy  of  the  grand  original, 
something  of  its  real  merit  may  be  conceived.  The  author  has  only  to 
add,  that,  through  the  courtesy  of  M.  Leymarie,  one  of  M.  d'Alesi's 
wonderful  crayon  sketches,  and  a  fine  photograph  of  Fabre's  Bataille  de 
Constajitin,  now  grace  the  walls  of  the  study  where  these  lines  are  being 
penned. 

The  mention  of  M.  Leymarie's  name,  calls  for  some  notice  of  the 
invaluable  services  rendered  to  the  cause  of  Spiritual  progress  in  France  by 
that  gentleman  and  his  noble  wife.  Although  the  author  by  no  means 
sympathises  with  the  teachings  of  Allan  Kardec  on  the  subject  of  Re- 
incarnation, no  candid  mind  can  deny  the  vast  ability  displayed  by  that 
eminent  man,  nor  the  wide-spread  influence  which  his  writings  have 
diffused  over  the  Continent  of  Europe. 

The  Society  founded  by  M.  Kardec,  and  the  paper  which  he  so  ably 
conducted,  entitled  La  Revue  Spirite,  are  now  in  charge  of  M.  Leymarie, 
and  it  must  be  owned,  that  the  followers  of  Allan  Kardec  have  been  fortu- 
nate in  securing  such  a  successor  to  their  great  leader  in  his  immense 
work.  M.  Leymarie  is  a  man  of  the  most  undoubted  probity  and  sincerity. 
Pure  minded,  unselfish,  wholly  devoted  to  his  work  of  propagandism  and 
the  best  interests  of  what  he  believes  to  be  right,  a  nobler  or  more  self- 
sacrificing  evangelist,  does  not  live  than  M.  Leymarie,  and  even  the  most 
determined  opponents  of  his  behef,  among  whom  the  author  is  one,  find 
their  hands  stayed,  when  they  would  raise  them  to  strike  a  blow  at  what 
they  deem  to  be  a  stupendous  fallacy  for  fear  of  wounding  the  admirable 
spirit  of  the  Re-incarnationist  leader  M.  Leymarie.  It  is  wortliy  of  note 
that  this  noble  gentleman  has  himself  been  called  upon  to  suffer  martyrdom 
in  the  trial  for  fraud,  in  producing  spirit  photographs,  by  a  certain  pair  of 
conspirators,  one  of  whom  claimed  to  be  a  medium  for  spirit  photography. 
Writing  on  the  subiect  of  his  trial  before  its  conclusion,  the  Hon.  J.  L.  L. 
O'Sullivan,  formerly  U.  S.  Consul  at  Madrid,  who  was  in  Paris  at  the  time, 
and  warmly  interested  in  Mons.  Leymarie,  gives  the  following  version  of 
the  case  to  the  London  Spiritualist : — 

"  My  previous  letters  will  have  prepared  your  readers  for  a  very  mockery  of  justice  in 
the  trial  of  our  friend  Leymarie  before  the  Seventh  Chamber  of  Correctional  Police,  but 
not  for  the  length  to  which  it  has  been  carried.  Leymarie,  that  devoted  and  conscientious 
Spiritualist,  successor  of  Allan  Kardec  as  editor  of  La  Revue  Spirite,  and  managing 
director  of  the  Societe  cles  Sinrites,  has  been  sentenced  to  a  year's  imprisonment.  Leymarie's 
crime  is  the  prominence  of  his  position  in  Spiritualism,  his  zeal,  activity,  and  the  useful- 
ness of  his  labours,  to  the  cause  to  which  his  soul  is  devoted.  Happily,  imprisonment  for 
opinion  and  its  propagation  is  too  common  in  France,  and  has  been  the  penalty  paid  by 
too  many  honourable  men  for  the  social  crime  of  having  a  conscience  and  a  fearless  spirit, 
to  involve  any  real  disgrace, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  89 

"  Lachaud's  speech  in  his  defence  was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  and  convincing  efforts 
of  forensic  pleading  I  have  ever  listened  to.  His  thesis  was  simple.  Leymarie  was  a 
sincere  zealot,  deceived  by  Buguet,  and  honestly  parading  in  his  Review,  as  proofs  of  his 
doctrine  and  cause,  the  spirit  photographs  produced  in  hundreds  of  which  the  resemblance 
was  recognised  and  attested  by  the  sitters.  He  had  no  complicity  with  Buguet,  and  it  is 
impossible  to  condemn  him  on  the  authority  of  such  a  manifest  liar  saying  that  he  had. 
This,  I  repeat,  was  a  simple  thing,  and  it  was  developed  in  a  most  masterly  manner  by 
Lachaud.  He  exhibited  the  man  living  an  honest  and  honourable  life,  labouring  from 
rise  of  sun  till  the  hours  of  sleep,  on  a  mere  pittance  of  income ;  blameless  in  all 
domestic  relations  as  husband  and  father,  working  off  a  balance  of  debt  resting  on  him 
from  an  old  failure  in  business  which  had  grown  solely  out  of  a  too  confiding  character, 
and  having,  with  aid  from  his  family,  nearly  accomplished  it,  and  allowing  himself  no 
personal  indulgence  till  he  should  have  fully  done  so.  He  then  showed  how  he  had  not 
accepted  Buguet's  spirit  photographs  until  he  had  put  them  and  him  through  a  series  of 
test  investigations  with  the  aid  of  persons  the  most  competent  to  detect  fraud  or  error. 
He  referred  to  the  hundreds  of  letters  of  attestation  of  resemblances  from  sovereign 
princes  down  to  the  humbler  strata  of  society,  all  of  which  continued  to  confirm  Leymarie 
in  his  sincere  conviction  of  the  genuineness  of  Buguet's  pictures.  And  finally  he  pro- 
duced a  series  of  letters  from  Buguet  himself  the  very  day  before  his  arrest,  on  the 
face  of  which  stood  manifest,  as  though  in  large  print,  Leymarie's  perfect  good  faith 
and  total  absence  of  any  sort  of  complicity  in  deception.  And  yet  with  all  this,  Leymarie 
is  sentenced  for  swindling,  to  the  penalty  of  a  year's  imprisonment !  It  is  enough  to 
take  one's  breath  away  in  the  telling  of  it.  I  have  never  known  anything  more  monstrous 
in  the  worst  courts  of  injustice." 

[The  prosecution  was  initiated  by  the  police,  and  none  of  Buguet's  customers  or  dupes 
appeared  in  support  of  it.  M.  Leymarie  had  recently  written  some  severe  criticisms  on  the 
Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  and  many  think  this  had  something  to  do  with  his  persecution. 
The  general  opinion  amongst  Spirituahsts  is,  that  some  of  the  earlier  photographs  pro- 
duced by  Buguet  were  genuine,  but  a  desire  to  make  money  prompted  him  to  commence 
the  manufacture  of  fictitious  ones. — Ed.  Spiritualist^ 

Our  review  of  French  Spiritualism  must  end  here.  Mediums  still 
continue  to  arise,  and  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  European  conserva- 
tism thousands  of  eminent  persons  become  indoctrinated  with  the  truths 
of  Spiritualism,  who  still  shrink  from  giving  their  testimony  to  the  world. 

La  Revue  Spirife,  like  the  American  Banner  of  Light  and  Religio 
Philosophical  Journal,  holds  its  own  against  all  comers,  and  many  another 
journal  appears  and  disappears  on  the  hemisphere  of  public  opinion,  when 
its  work  is  demanded  and  its  mission  is  fulfilled.  There  are  at  this  present 
time  of  writing,  about  ten  Spiritual  journals  published  in  the  French 
language,  but  there  are  many  more  that  have  been  the  useful  and  influen- 
tial ephemera  of  the  hour.  It  seems  certain  that  M.  Leymarie's  paper, 
La  Revue  Spirite,  will  never  go  out  in  darkness,  however  much  it  may  be 
eclipsed  by  circumstances  and  the  force  of  public  opinion,  so  long  as  its 
noble  and  self-sacrificing  editor  remains  on  earth  to  print  and  distribute  it. 

The  waves  of  human  thought  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  continue  to 
rise  and  fall,  as  it  is  the  nature  of  elastic  fluids  to  do ;  but  no  ebb  has  yet 
set  in  from  the  shores  of  earth,  and  when  it  does,  all  things  seem  to 
predicate  that  it  will  only  return  with  additional  force,  to  ebb  and  flow 
between  the  coast  lines  of  mortality  and  immortality,  till  time  shall  be  no 
more. 

It  may  be  asked  why  in  this  review  of  French  Spiritualism  we  have 
omitted  to  notice  the  illustrious  name  of  EHphas  Levi  {the  Abbe  Constant) 
and  his  magnificent  contributions  to  the  realm  of  occult  literature  such  as 
the  great  work  on  Haul  Magique,  &c.,  &c.  The  attempts  which  have 
lately  been  made  by  many  writers  of  eminence  to  draw  sharp  and  even 
impassable  lines  of  demarcation  between  the  facts  and  teachings  growing 
out  of  spirit  communion,  and  the  theories  put  forth  in  the  name  of  "  occul- 
tism "  render  it  impossible  for  the  author  to  combine  the  two  subjects  in 
this  work. 

90  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Through  teachings  received  also  from  individuals,  who  of  all  others, 
merited  the  name  of  occult  adepts,  the  author  has  been  led  to  consider 
that  Occultism  is  in  theory  the  revealment  of  that  which  was  hidden,  or  the 
occult  powers  and  potencies  in  the  animate  and  inanimate  realms  of  being  ; 
whilst  Spiritualism  is  the  demonstration  of  the  same  occult  forces  mani- 
fested from  a  super-mundane  state  of  existence.  The  modern  writers  who 
have  assumed  for  themselves  the  name  of  "  Occultists,"  are  not  contented 
with  this  position. 

Their  interpretation  of  what  and  who  "Spirits"  are,  and  what  is  the 
work  which  this  volume  has  been  written  to  record,  will  be  briefly 
described  in  our  section  on  India ;  it  must  suffice  for  the  present  to  say, 
that  the  author's  definitions  would  appear  in  connection  with  the  theories 
of  "  the  Occultists,"  as  worthless  and  shadowy  as  the  spirits  of  whom  we 
write  appear,  in  comparison  with  the  inconceivably  high  presences,  or 
"  144th  embodiments"  of  exalted  "egos,"  of  whom  the  "Occultists"  write. 
Eliphas  Levi,  without  soaring  into  the  extraordinary  flights  of  revelation 
assumed  to  be  authoritative  by  these  same  modern  "  Occultists "  still 
occupies  ground  that  takes  no  direct  part  with  the  spontaneous  develop- 
ments of  spirit  power  manifested  in  the  modern  outpouring,  nor  yet  with 
the  simple  formulas  of  the  spirit  circle. 

The  day  will  come  when  true  Occultism  and  "common  place  Spiritual- 
ism," will  be  recognized  as  being  built  upon  earth  and  founded  in  man 
himself;  leading  to  heaven,  and  culminating  in  the  personaHty  of  angels. 

In  that  day.  when  theories  shall  be  scientifically  formulated  from  facts, 
and  facts  will  not  be  scornfully  derided  to  suit  theories,  Eliphas  Levi  and 
many  another  profound  writer,  whose  words  are  now  "Kabbala"  to  the 
multitude,  will  be  recognized  as  the  prophets  of  the  grand  Spiritual  science 
of  the  future.  Till  then,  it  would  be  unphilosophical  to  give  "  that  which 
is  holy  to  the  dogs." 

CHAPTER    XII. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN     GREAT     BRITAIN. 

One  of  the  chief  difficulties  which  besets  a  writer  who  would  attempt  to 
give  a  faithful  account  of  the  Spiritual  movement  in  Great  Britain,  is  the 
very  "embarrassment  of  riches"  with  which  the  subject  is  loaded, 
Spiritualistic  experiences  having  become  so  universal  that  the  author's 
requisition  for  evidence  is  met  by  an  influx  of  responses  which  make  the 
task  of  selection  too  herculean  for  the  purposes  of  this  volume.  Still 
another  subject  of  perplexity  arises  from  the  characteristic  reserve  of  those 
with  whom  the  phenomena  of  SpirituaHsm  are  very  generally  associated  in 
this  country. 

In  America,  where  the  sources  of  popular  power  are  derived  from  the 
people,  SpirituaHsm  may  be  found  more  generally  represented  by  the  rank 
and  file  of  Society,  than  among  the  wealthier  classes. 

J,^ 

The    Countess    of    Caithness 
duchesse    de    pomar . 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  91 

In  Europe  on  the  contrary,  where  the  governing  power  centres  in  an 
hereditary  and  influential  aristocracy,  the  people  derive  their  opinions  as 
they  do  their  laws  and  fashions,  from  the  ruling  classes,  and  it  is  chiefly 
amongst  these  that  Spirituahsm  flourishes. 

It  is  not  claimed  that  this  wonderful  movement  is  confined  to  any  class 
in  either  hemisphere.  It  will  be  found  in  the  hut,  and  the  palace  ;  in  the 
mining  camp,  and  the  halls  of  legislation.  Nevertheless  its  greatest 
prevalence  is  ever  with  the  ruling  power.  Since  then  Spiritualism  in 
Europe  takes  the  deepest  hold  of  those  whose  rank  and  station  induces 
them  to  shrink  from  subjecting  their  personal  experiences  to  pubHc 
criticism,  the  author  too  frequently  becomes  the  recipient  of  valuable 
testimony  which  cannot  be  made  available,  because  the  communicants 
insist  on  withholding  their  true  names  and  addresses.  "  Miss  E."  and 
"  Mrs.  D.  ; "  "  Captain  A."  and  "  My  Lord  X.  Y.  Z."  are  impersonals, 
whom  no  one  puts  any  confidence  in.  There  is  no  satisfaction  in  offering 
such  shadowy  testimony  to  those  who  are  asked  to  believe  in  occurrences 
of  an  unprecedented  and  often  startling  character.  Resolving  as  we  have 
done,  not  to  demand  credence  for  phenomenal  incidents  upon  any 
testimony  open  to  the  charge  of  unreliability,  we  feel  obliged  to  relegate  an 
immense  mass  of  interesting  matter  of  this  kind  to  the  obscurity  which 
unauthorised  statements  justly  incur. 

It  would  seem  as  if  the  Spiritual  founders  of  the  great  outpouring  had 
been  experimenting  with  the  forces  at  their  command,  and  seeking  to  open 
up  communion  with  the  two  worlds  in  many  places,  before  they  succeeded 
in  systematizing  the  direct  telegraphy  which  has  marked  the  American 
phase  of  the  movement. 

Those  who  have  perused  the  author's  work  entitled,  "  Modern  American 
Spiritualism,"  will  remember  that  a  statement  to  this  effect  was  made 
through  the  lips  of  an  entranced  subject  magnetized  by  Dr.  Hallock,  of 
New  York.  If  this  hypothesis  is  admitted,  it  would  account  for  the  great 
prevalence  of  Spiritual  phenomena  which  has  marked  this  century  in  many 
parts  of  the  world,  prior  to  the  disturbances  in  America  known  as  "  The 
Rochester  Knockings."  Thus  it  seems  that  Scientific  Spirits,  desirous  of 
founding  a  Spiritual  telegraph  between  the  mortal  and  immortal  realms  of 
being,  were  instrumental  in  promoting  the  phenomena  which  occurred 
at  Epworth  Parsonage,  in  the  family  of  John  Wesley,  and  influencing 
Mesmer  and  his  followers  in  the  discovery  of  the  life  principle  of 
magnetism. 

The  wonderful  "  preaching  epidemic  in  Sweden ; "  the  obsessions  in 
Morzine;  the  uprising  of  Mormonism,  Shakerism,  the  gift  of  tongues 
amongst  the  Irvingites,  and  the  great  revivals  in  Ireland,  are  all  unmistakable 
fruits  of  the  same  mighty  contagion  of  Spiritual  forces,  surging  through  an 
age  specially  prepared  for  their  reception. 

Let  any  candid  student  of  Pneumatology  peruse  with  attention  the  array 
of  facts  collected  by  Kerner  in  Germany,  Cahagnet  in  France,  and  Mrs. 
Catherine  Crowe  in  her  English  work,  "The  Night  Side  of  Nature."  Let 
him  remember  that  these  eminent  writers  contributed  their  vast  mass  of 
Spiritualistic  testimony  in  advance  of  the  "  Rochester  Knockings,"  and  it 
will  be  impossible  to  evade  the  conclusion,  that  the  widely  separated  lines 
of  evidence  all  diverge  from  one  powerful  spiritual  centre.  Commending  to 
our  readers'  attention  Howitt's  exhaustive  "  History  of  the  Supernatural," 
the  writings  of  R.  D.  Owen,  Thomas  Brevior,  Kerner,  Ennemoser,  and  Mrs. 
Catherine  Crowe,  for  a  wealth  of  detail  not  attainable  in  this  work,  we  shall 

92  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

now  lay  before  our  readers  some  of  those  striking  spiritual  way  marks 
which  antedate  the  introduction  of  the  modern  spiritual  telegraph  in 
England. 

The  first  representative  case  of  spontaneous  spiritual  manifestations  we 
select,  occurred  in  the  village  of  Sandford  near  Tiverton  in  Devonshire, 
about  the  year  1812.  Quoting  from  an  account  published  by  the  author 
some  years  ago,  the  particulars  of  which  were  derived  partly  from  the 
newspaper  reports  of  the  time,  but  chiefly  from  the  testimony  of  Mrs. 
Floyd — the  author's  venerable  mother  who  was  an  eye  witness  of  the  scenes 
described,  we  call  attention  to  the  following  details  which  we  give  in  the 
language  before  published. 

"It  was  about  the  year  1812  when  my  mother,  then  a  young  single  lady,  went  with 
her  parents  to  visit  friends  at  the  town  of  Tiverton,  Devonshire. 

"  It  was  summer  time,  and  during  her  first  evening's  residence  she  remarked,  with 
surprise,  the  throng  of  private  carriages  which  aU  seemed  to  be  passing  one  way,  and 
coming  forth  at  one  special  time.  Upon  inquiry  she  learned  that  the  object  of  this 
remarkable  exodus  was  to  proceed  to  a  village  some  four  or  five  miles  distant,  where  a 
number  of  clergymen — of  whom  there  were  many  residing  in  the  town — together  with  the 
mayor  and  the  principal  physician  of  the  place  (both  personal  friends  of  my  mother's 
f amUy)  were  going  to  '  lay  the  ghost '  which  had,  for  a  long  time,  haunted  a  certain  old- 
fashioned  residence  in  the  village  of  Sandford .  The  '  trouble  '  which  attached  itself  to 
this  house,  consisted  in  unaccountable  noises,  the  ringing  of  bells,  pattering  of  footsteps, 
lights  proceeding  from  no  human  source,  and  other  forms  of  preternatural  disturbance. 

"  The  house  had  been  occupied  for  many  years  past  by  diflerent  tenants,  none  of  whom 
had  been  able  long  to  endure  the  terrors  of  their  weird  surroundings.  Every  effort  made 
by  the  owner  of  the  property  to  detect  a  mundane  source  for  these  annoyances  had  proved 
unavailing.  At  the  period  when  my  mother  visited  the  neighbourhood,  the  house  was 
tenanted  by  a  family  who  had  been  induced  to  occupy  it  rent  free,  and  who  devoted  the 
lower  part  to  the  business  of  a  general  shop. 

"  The  presence  of  this  family,  however,  seemed  to  have  no  effect,  for  the  disturbances 
were  as  constant  as  ever.  Even  in  open  day  passers-by  could  'hear  the  knocking  resound- 
ing '  like  the  tap  of  a  shoemaker's  hammer.'  After  nightfall  the  timid  inhabitants  of  the 
vUlage  carefully  avoided  even  the  precincts  of  the  place,  whilst  doctors,  divines,  politi- 
cians, and  officers  from  the  neighbouring  garrison,  assembled  nightly  to  hold  colloquies 
with  the  invisible  tormentors. 

"  It  seems  that  the  order  of  these  midnight  conclaves  was  as  follows.  A  large  wooden 
table  was  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  room  wliich  the  ghosts  most  commonly  affected. 
Round  this  the  assembled  company  would  seat  themselves,  and  question  the  rapper  in 
much  the  same  manner  as  we  adopt  in  our  modern  investigations. 

"  For  example :  Several  coins  would  be  placed  upon  the  table,  and  their  number  be 
indicated,  wpon  demand,  and  alivays  correctly,  by  knocks.  At  times  the  number  of  persons 
present,  even  their  ages  and  professions,  would  be  correctly  told  by  signal  raps.  Had  the 
sitters  of  seventy  years  ago  been  instructed  how  to  anticipate  the  formula  of  the  modern 
spu-it  circle,  they  could  not  have  depicted  its  modus  operandi  more  faithfully.  Through 
the  medium  of  certain  signal  raps,  the  sitters  were  always  informed  that  the  knocker  was 
a  spirit,  a  female,  and  one  who  had  terminated  an  evil  career  by  a  violent  death. 

"  Now  although  the  united  wisdom  of  a  neighbourhood  famous  for  its  learning  and 
piety  pronounced  through  the  press  the  solemn  verdict,  that  '  a  tremendous  imposture 
existed  someivhere,'  yet  for  ten  years,  during  which  the  house  perpetually  changed 
inhabitants,  and  was  the  subject  of  unceasing  examination,  the  said  '  imposture '  was  never 
brought  to  hght,  nor  could  any  mundane  origin  for  the  mysterious  disturbance  be 
detected. 

"The  mixture  of  ignorance  and  conservatism  which  prevailed  amongst  those  who 
investigated  this  subject  may  be  judged  of  from  the  following  circumstances. 

"  Mr.  Colton,  a  clergyman  well  known  in  the  literary  world  as  the  author  of  '  Lacon ' 
and  other  metaphysical  works,  had  been  a  constant  attendant  upon  the  ghostly  seances, 
and  finally  gave  it  as  his  opinion  '  that  the  affau"  could  never  be  cleared  up  on  mundane 
grounds.'  No  sooner  was  this  statement  circulated,  than  the  journals  of  the  day  inferred, 
that  Mr.  Colton  must  know  something  more  of  the  causes  than  he  chose  to  tell ;  in  fact,  who 
hiew  hut  luhat  the  ivhole  thing  might  have  proceeded  from  him,  as  a  clever  ventriloquist  ?  Not 
until  Mr.  Colton's  departure  for  a  foreign  land,  and  the  continuance  of  the  hauntings, 
was  the  theory  abandoned,  that  he,  who  dared  to  hint  at  a  super-mundane  origin  of  the 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  93 

mystery  must  himself  be  its  source.  Again,  the  magnates  of  Tiverton  pitched  upon  a 
poor  soldier  of  somewhat  questionable  character,  who  had  returned  from  the  war  and  was 
glad  to  share  with  his  parents,  the  shelter  of  a  place  obtainable  rent  free,  as  the  cause  of 
the  trouble.  These  wiseacres  forgot  that  the  disturbances  had  preceded  the  soldier's 
presence  for  two  years  ;  however,  in  order  to  test  the  validity  of  their  theory,  they  spirited 
him  out  of  the  village,  and  shipped  him  to  a  foreign  land.  But  all  was  in  vain.  Neither 
the  absence  of  the  learned  scholar  nor  the  ignorant  soldier  affected  the  Sandford  invisibles 
except — as  if  in  mockery — to  increase  the  force  of  their  harassing  demonstrations. 

"The  tenants  who  had  been  found  bold  enough  to  occupy  the  haunted  mansion  at  the 
period  when  my  mother's  family  came  to  visit  Tiverton,  were  a  poor  shopkeeper  with  his 
wife  and  several  children. 

"  Amongst  the  latter,  a  little  girl  of  about  ten  years  of  age  seemed  to  be  the  special 
theme  of  the  ghost's  malevolence. 

"  The  child  often  complained  of  an  ugly  old  ivoman  whom  she  could  see  crouching  in  a 
corner  of  the  room,  making  faces  at  her,  and  who  would  wake  her  up  at  night,  and  almost 
scare  her  into  fits.  One  day  this  child  was  found  lying  dead  upon  the  hearthstone.  A 
coroner's  inquest  was  held,  and  the  verdict  of  the  jury  left  it  doubtful  whether  the  poor 
little  creature  had  been  struck  by  lightning,  died  in  a  fit,  or  by  the  visitation  of  God.  One 
thing  was  certain,  namely,  that  the  child  had  perished  in  the  haunted  room,  and  that  she, 
above  all  the  rest  of  the  household,  had  been  the  victim  of  the  ghost's  malignity.  A 
calamity  of  such  a  nature  was  too  much  even  for  the  hardihood  of  the  present  tenant. 
He  resolved  upon  an  immediate  removal,  and  would  have  put  his  determination  into 
effect,  had  he  not  been  delayed  by  the  premature  confinement  of  his  wife,  whose  period  of 
trial  was  hastened  by  the  tragic  circumstances  of  her  little  girl's  decease. 

"  Pending  the  recovery  of  the  sick  woman,  the  physician,  at  whose  house  my  mother 
and  her  family  were  temporary  visitors,  was  called  in  to  attend  the  woman.  He  was  also 
requested  to  send  a  nurse  competent  to  assist  in  such  a  case.  Dr.  Guffet,  although  well 
acquainted  in  his  professional  capacity  with  all  the  poor  women  of  the  neighbourhood,  was 
unable  to  induce  any  one  however  necessitous  to  take  service  in  the  '  haunted  house.' 

"  Having  at  length  obtained  a  suitable  attendant  from  a  long  distance  off,  the  doctor 
flattered  himself  that  his  patient's  case  was  progressing  favourably.  He  soon  found  how- 
ever that  he  was  reckoning — in  this  instance  at  least,  without  his  ghost — for  it  became 
evident  that  the  stranger  nurse  was  as  much  an  object  of  the  invisible's  malignity  as  the 
deceased  child  had  been. 

"Having  been  put  to  sleep  for  convenience  in  the  room  where  the  child  had  so 
mysteriously  died,  she  became  the  target  for  an  incessant  system  of  persecution.  She  was 
unable  to  obtain  rest  by  day  or  night,  and  one  morning  when  Doctor  Guffet  was  sum- 
moned to  attend  her,  he  found  her  confined  to  her  bed,  from  the  effects  of  the  severe 
beating  she  had  received  during  the  night  from  invisible  hands.  Her  body  was  com- 
pletely black  with  bruises,  and  these  she  testified  before  a  magistrate,  she  had  sustained 
from  some  invisible  source  which  came  and  went  without  any  known  means  of  access  to 
the  chamber.  The  woman  affirmed,  that  she  felt  a  hand  belabouring  her,  as  if  with  a 
stone.  The  room  was  uncurtained,  and  the  brightly  shining  moon  made  it  as  light  as 
day.  She  testified  upon  oath  in  her  examination,  that  no  human  being  was  in  the  room, 
nor  could  she  discern  a  single  creature  near  her.  When  at  length  her  cries  for  help 
aroused  the  other  inmates,  and  brought  them  to  her  room,  the  whole  party  heard  a  heavy 
bumping  sound,  as  if  something  was  falling  off  the  bed,  and  moving  of  its  own  volition  across 
the  room,  out  at  the  door  and  down  the  stairs.  The  chief  witness  to  the  truth  of  this 
strange  story  was  the  doctor  himself,  who  not  only  testified  to  the  pitiable  condition  in 
which  he  found  the  poor  nurse's  body,  but  he  added,  '  the  woman  whom  I  sent  to  that 
house,  hale,  hearty,  and  stout,  only  a  fortnight  ago,  is  now  an  emaciated  object,  worn  to 
a  very  shadow,  and  so  distraught  by  fear  that  it  would  be  murder  to  keep  her  there  one 
hour  longer.' 

"  The  next  incident  which  I  have  to  record  of  this  terrible  abode,  occurred  at  the  sale 
of  furniture  which  ensued,  the  very  first  hour  that  the  mother  of  the  family  became 
convalescent. 

"The  auctioneer,  who  was  related  to  Dr.  Guffet,  with  whom  my  mother  and  her 
parents  were  visiting,  informed  them  that  as  he  was  making  an  inventory  of  the  goods, 
previous  to  the  sale,  he  passed  into  the  '  haunted  chamber '  about  noon,  and  there 
found  an  old  lady  rummaging  a  wardrobe  which  stood  partly  open  near  the  door. 
Deeming  it  one  of  the  members  of  the  family,  although  her  dress  pointed  her  out  to  be  a 
person  of  some  distinction,  he  proceeded  with  his  work  for  some  minutes,  until  he  heard 
the  voice  of  the  landlord  calling  to  him  to  come  to  dinner.  Bowing  to  the  old  lady  as  he 
passed  her,  he  stood  at  the  door  to  see  if  she  would  go  first ;  but  as  she  continued  her 
occupation  without  noticing  him,  he  descended  the  stairs,  and  having  taken  the  seat 
placed  for  him,  proceeded  with  a  courtesy  peculiar  to  himself,  to  put  another  chair  for 

94  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  lady  whom  he  had  noticed  above.  On  being  questioned  why  he  did  so,  explanations 
followed,  and  the  family  in  haste  ascended  the  stairs  to  see  if  any  hviman  being  could 
jeally  be  found.  All  was  in  vain.  Every  nook  and  corner  was  searched  without  result, 
and  when  the  auctioneer,  at  request,  described  the  appearance  of  the  strange  visitor,  it 
was  universally  admitted  that  the  description  corresponded  exactly  to  the  detestable 
vision  which  had  tormented  the  poor  deceased  child. 

"After  these  persons  quitted  the  house  it  remained  tenantless  for  many  months. 
The  noises  could  be  heard  for  a  considerable  distance,  and  lights  were  seen  flashing  at 
the  ^vindows  at  all  hours  of  the  night. 

"  Workmen  were  employed  to  rip  up  the  floors  and  pull  down  the  walls,  in  the  hope 
of  discovering  concealed  siDrings  and  trap  doors.  All  was  to  no  purpose,  however. 
During  these  researches,  two  windows  at  opposite  ends  of  the  long  chamber — the 
principal  scenes  of  the  hauntings — were  pierced  by  a  bidlet  or  missile  of  some  kind, 
projected  with  such  skill,  that  two  perfectly  round  holes  were  found  in  corresponding 
panes  of  glass.  The  wind  was  felt  of  the  passing  missile,  and  the  shiver  of  the  glass 
heard  by  the  workmen,  yet  nothing  was  seen,  and  as  the  room  was  on  the  second  storey, 
Avithout  a  ledge  or  the  slightest  foothold  for  any  human  being  -without,  it  might  be 
inferred  that  the  haunters  desired  to  prove  that  no  human  agency  could  be  at  work  in 
these  manifestations.  At  length  the  sounds  became  so  frightful  that  neither  free  tenants 
nor  workmen  would  enter  the  place  by  day  or  night.  It  was  ultimately  abandoned,  fell 
into  decay,  and  what  remained  of  it  was  pulled  down.  The  papers  of  the  time  were  full 
of  reports,  doubtless  much  exaggerated.  Sages  and  scientists  were  alike  baffled. 
Magistrates  blustered  and  threatened,  and  several  officers  of  the  army,  who  had 
volunteered  to  sit  up  during  the  night,  abandoned  their  watch,  end  refused  again  to 
enter  such  a  'veritable  Inferno.''" 

Remembering  how  many  respectable  witnesses  testified  to  these  facts, — 
how  many  years  their  continuance  was  a  source  of  horror  to  a  whole 
neighbourhood,  and  loss  to  the  proprietor  of  a  once  splendid  mansion, 
recollecting  moreover,  that  one  of  the  eye-witnesses  is  now  living,  and  is 
a  venerable  lady  incapable  of  falsehood,  we  have  as  good  a  right  to  admit 
this  narrative  into  the  category  of  historical  records,  as  any  well  attested 
event  of  ancient  or  modern  times. 

We  now  turn  to  another  form  of  haunting,  selected  from  nmnerous  other 
cases,  because  some  of  the  witnesses  are  still  living,  and  holding  positions 
of  the  highest  resi^ectability.  We  refer  to  the  unaccountable  and  persistent 
ringing  of  bells,  which  occurred  in  the  house  of  Major  Moor,  a  gentleman 
till  lately  residing  at  Great  BeaUng,  near  Woodbridge.  These  disturbances 
commenced  on  February  2nd,  1834,  and  continued  at  intervals  with  more 
or  less  violence  till  March  27th.  The  phenomena  consisted  of  incessant 
ringing,  sometimes  of  two  or  three,  and  not  unfrequently  of  a  whole  row  of 
nine  bells  at  the  same  time — they  rang  day  and  night ;  at  times  when  Major 
Moor,  his  servants,  and  friends,  were  facing  them,  when  the  doors  were 
locked  within,  and  the  house  was  guarded  without;  when  the  wires  of 
communication  were  cut,  and  nothing  but  the  bells  remained.  The  ceiling 
and  walls  were  dented  by  the  violence  with  which  the  bells  were  dashed 
against  them,  and  despite  the  stringent  measures  taken  to  discover 
imposture  or  trick,  this  strange  disturbance  continued  without  evidence  of 
human  interference,  for  a  period  of  fifty-three  days.  At  the  end  of  that 
time,  it  stopped  as  suddenly  as  it  had  originated,  leaving  its  cause  involved 
in  impenetrable  mystery.  From  a  pamphlet  published  by  Major  Moor 
on  this  subject,  entitled  "  Bealing  Bells,"  also  from  some  accounts  printed 
in  the  Ipswich  and  other  journals,  we  learn,  that  during  the  continuance  of 
this  persecution.  Major  Moor's  investigations  were  assisted  by  several  of  his 
brother  officers,  some  scientific  gentlemen,  and  not  a  few  clergymen  who 
were  attracted  by  the  accounts  which  appeared  in  the  papers  of  the  day. 

Amongst  the  persons  who  addressed  letters  to  Major  Moor,  alleging  that 
similar  phenomena  had  occurred  in  their  own  houses,  were  families  in 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  95 

Cambridge,  Ramsgate,  London,  Oxford,  Windsor,  Ipswich,  and  numerous 
other  places.  Mr.  Wm.  Felkin,  Mayor  of  Nottingham,  and  Mr.  Ashwell,  a 
gentlemen  of  high  standing  in  Chesterfield,  gave  accounts  of  the  mysterious 
bell  ringings  occurring  at  their  residences.  But  one  of  the  most  marked 
cases  reported  by  Major  Moor,  in  addition  to  his  own  experience,  was  that  of 
Lieutenant  Rivers,  one  of  the  officials  of  Greenwich  Hospital.  This  witness 
stated  that  he  had  detailed  thirty-seven  watchers  by  day  and  night  in  the 
attempt  to  detect  fraud  in  vain.  He  employed  a  bellhanger  and  his  assistant 
to  cut  the  wires  of  every  bell  in  and  about  his  premises,  and  then,  in  the 
face  of  the  men  and  the  presence  of  many  neighbours  who  had  come  in  to 
witness  the  wonder,  the  entire  set  of  bells  all  over  the  house  began  ringing 
at  once,  and  kept  up  incessant  peals  for  several  hours.  The  bells  in  some 
of  the  other  officers'  apartments  in  the  Hospital  were  rung  in  the  same  way, 
and  when  Major  Moor  himself  visited  the  place,  he  not  only  received  the 
personal  testimony  of  a  large  number  of  witnesses,  but  examined  carefully 
the  locality,  and  was  made  aware  of  the  impossibility  of  the  ringing  being 
effected  by  any  human  agency. 

The  publicity  which  Major  Moor  gave  to  these  circumstances,  called  forth 
a  flood  of  testimony  to  events  of  a  preternatural  character,  from  various 
sections  of  the  country.  Then  it  appeared  that  bell-ringing  was  not  the 
only  form  of  disturbance  prevailing.  Hauntings  not  unlike  in  character 
those  of  the  "  Sandford  Ghost,"  were  reported  from  many  quarters. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Stewart,  Incumbent  of  Sydensterne  near  Fakenham, 
Norfolk,  wrote  in  a  letter  to  Major  Moor  : — 

"  Our  noises  are  of  a  graver  character.  Successions  of  rappings,  groans,  cries,  sobs, 
heavy  trampings,  and  thundering  knocks  in  all  the  rooms  and  passages,  have  distressed  us 
here  for  a  period  of  nearly  nine  years,  during  the  occupancy  of  my  cure.  They  still 
continue,  to  the  annoyance  of  my  family,  and  the  alarm  of  my  servants.  I  am  enabled  to 
trace  the  existence  of  these  disturbances  during  a  period  of  sixty  years  past." 

Mr.  Stewart  said  that  in  1833  and  1834,  his  predecessors  in  that  house 
opened  the  doors  to  all  respectable  persons  who  desired  to  satisfy  their 
curiosity  or  wished  to  investigate  the  hauntings,  but  he  adds:  "Their 
kindness  was  abused,  their  motives  misinterpreted,  and  even  their  characters 
maligned.  We  therefore,"  he  says,  "  shut  our  doors,  and  they  remain 
hermetically  sealed." 

In  closing  these  curious  narratives  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  give  a  few 
extracts  from  the  records  of  a  spirit  circle  which  was  held  not  long  since, 
in  which  some  parties  present  were  commenting  severely  on  the  "  unmean- 
ing character  of  such  manifestations  as  bell-ringing  and  knocking."  At  this 
juncture  one  of  the  communicating  spirits  interrupted  the  conversation  with 
the  following  pertinent  questions  : — 

"  Sjiirit — Pray,  sir,  what  do  you  do  when  you  want  to  enter  a  house  and  find  the  door 
closed  ? 

''  Mortal — Well  !     If  we  really  want  to  get  in  we  knock  or  ring. 

"  Spirit — Then,  don't  yciu  suppose  it  probable  that  those  who  have  been  knocking  and 
ringing  in  your  houses  for  the  past  half  century  are  trying  to  get  in  too  ? 

"  Mortal— 'Whj,  what  can  spirits  want  to  get  into  our  houses  for  ?  Having  left  the 
earth,  it  seems  strange  that  they  should  want  to  get  back  to  it  again. 

"  Spirit — Most  of  those  who  knock  and  ring  in  your  houses  have  never  left  the  earth, 
and  would  far  rather  get  away  from  it  than  remain  in  it.  But  higher  and  wiser  spirits 
wish  to  call  the  world's  attention  to  the  actual  facts  of  spiritual  existence,  and  the  real 
conditions  under  which  life  beyond  the  grave  is  continued.  Spirits  of  a  very  ethereal 
nature  cannot  affect  material  substances,  and  yet,  in  order  to  call  the  world's  attention, 

96  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

and  waken  humanity  up  to  what  they  have  to  say,  they  use  the  methods  so  familiar  to 
yourselves — thty  hnock  and  ring  ;  and  those  who  cannot  do  this  for  themselves  influence 
the  earthbound  spirits,  who  are  magnetically  chained  to  the  scenes  of  their  earthly  mis- 
deeds, to  do  this  for  them. 

"  MoHal — May  we  regard  these  hauntings,  then,  as  transpiring  under  the  direction  of 
superintending  spiritual  wisdom  ? 

"  Spirit — Everything  in  the  univei'se  outworks  the  conditions  of  the  being  that  belong 
to  its  state,  and  providential  wisdom  avails  itself  of  different  states  to  convert  evil  into 
good,  and  evolve  uses  out  of  the  worst  of  abuses.  Ten  thousand  preachers  on  the  human 
plane  of  existence  could  not  demonstrate  the  fact  of  spiritual  existence  so  conclusively  as 
a  spirit  who  rings  a  bell  in  response  to  a  human  voice,  or  answers  a  question  by  JcnocJcs,  when 
no  mortal  is  near  to  produce  the  sounds  heard."     Verbum  sap. 

As  a  final  example  of  hauntings,  especially  of  that  kind  which  subse- 
quently connected  itself  with  the  intelligence  manifested  at  Spirit  circles, 
we  shall  cite  a  history  furnished  to  the  author  some  years  ago  by  a  party 
of  her  personal  friends,  amongst  whom  was  a  gentleman  of  probity  and 
scientific  acumen,  well  remembered  amongst  dramatics  writers  and  musi- 
cians, as  Mr.  Lenox  Home.  This  gentleman  being  in  somewhat 
embarrassed  circumstances  about  the  year  1829,  took  up  his  abode 
temporarily  in  apartments  offered  to  him  at  a  very  moderate  rent  in  an  old 
house  near  Hatton  Garden,  long  since  pulled  down.  At  the  period  of 
which  we  write  the  house  was  large,  the  rooms  spacious,  especially  one, 
supposed  to  have  been  a  banqueting  chamber,  which  Mr.  Home  used  as 
a  music  room.  As  all  the  lower  chambers  were  either  appropriated  to  the 
storing  of  goods,  or  rented  to  legal  gentlemen  as  offices,  there  were  no 
persons  sleeping  in  the  house  except  Mr.  Home  and  a  porter,  who  occupied 
a  small  room  on  the  ground  floor.  The  building  had  long  borne  the 
reputation  of  being  haunted ;  it  was  fast  falling  to  decay,  and  the  former 
occupants  of  Mr.  Home's  chambers  were  seldom  known  to  remain  long 
within  the  gloomy  precincts.  Report  alleged  that  the  place  had  once  been 
the  residence  of  Sir  Christopher  Hatton,  and  the  weird  reputation  that 
attached  to  the  antique  domicile,  connected  itself  with  the  magical  practices 
attributed  to  his  unfortunate  lady. 

Mr.  Home  had  tenanted  these  apartments  some  months  before  he  was 
aware  of  the  phenomena  occurring  within  his  own  premises.  At  length  he 
was  apprised  by  Mr.  March,  a  police  officer  with  whom  he  was  acquainted, 
that  for  several  consecutive  nights  he  and  a  number  of  persons  invited  to 
share  his  watch,  had  remarked  that  long  after  the  hour  when  Mr.  Home 
was  accustomed  to  retire  to  rest,  the  great  banqueting  room,  which  he  had 
no  means  of  fighting  up,  and  therefore  never  entered  except  in  daylight, 
could  be  seen  from  the  court  below  brilliantly  illuminated.  Whilst  acknow- 
ledging that  he  had  often  been  disturbed  by  strange  noises,  odd  music, 
loud  laughter,  and  footsteps,  for  which  he  could  not  account,  Mr.  Home — 
at  once  the  most  fearless  and  least  superstitious  of  beings — strenuously 
combated  the  idea  of  the  lights,  and  it  was  only  when,  after  watching  for 
several  nights  with  March  and  his  associates,  he  himself  beheld  every 
window  of  his  own  apartment,  one  that  he  had  left  closed,  locked,  and  in 
total  darkness,  lit  up  as  if  by  a  multitude  of  gas  jets,  that  he  could  be 
brought  to  befieve  in  the  story  his  friends  narrated  to  him.  On  several 
succeeding  occasions  the  same  party  beheld  this  spectacle  repeated,  and 
whilst  some  of  their  number  remained  below  to  watch  that  no  intruder 
passed  out  from  the  one  entrance  of  the  house,  the  others  would  hasten  to 
examine  the  apartment,  to  find  it  enveloped  in  thick  darkness.  One  of 
the  curious  features  of  this  appearance  was,  the  invariability  with  which  the 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  97 

lights  disappeared  from  the  eyes  of  the  watchers  below,  at  the  moment 
when  the  apartment  was  opened  by  the  searchers  above.  Only  on  one 
occasion  was  this  rule  reversed,  and  that  was  on  a  certain  night  in  February, 
when  a  larger  number  of  persons  than  usual  had  assembled  in  the  court 
below  to  watch  for  the  phantom  lights. 

They  blazed  out  suddenly  and  in  fall  radiance  about  one  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  when,  after  observing  them  for  some  five  minutes,  Mr.  Home, 
Mr.  March,  and  a  nobleman  whose  name  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  mention, 
determined  to  ascend  the  stairs  and  open  the  door  of  the  haunted  room  ; 
and  as  they  did  so  they  agreed  to  give  the  signal  of  a  whistle  to  those  in 
the  court  below.  At  the  moment  when  Mr.  Home  threw  open  the  large 
door  of  the  room  in  question,  he  and  his  companions  were  thunderstruck 
to  perceive  that  it  was  full  of  company. 

One  of  the  three  observers  had  given  the  signal  agreed  upon  of  the 
whistle  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  as  he  gazed  upon  the  extraordinary 
scene  that  met  the  eye.  The  vast  company  seemed  to  be  in  the  act  of 
dancing.  They  represented  ladies  and  gentlemen,  arrayed,  not  in  the 
Elizabethan  style  attributed  to  the  Hatton  period  of  the  mansion,  but  in 
the  costume  of  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  and  the  whole  air  seemed 
to  be  full  of  waving  plumes,  fluttering  ribbons,  and  sparkling  jewels.  The 
three  witnesses,  who  subsequently  compared  notes  with  each  other,  and 
found  their  own  observations  fully  corroborated  by  those  of  the  others, 
affirmed,  that  the  particulars  of  the  whole  scene  as  above  related  were 
plainly,  clearly  defined,  in  addition  to  which,  all  three  declared  that  every 
one  of  these  splendidly  attired  revellers  wore,  or  appeared  to  wear,  a  mask., 
resembling  some  disgusting  atiimal. 

Before  the  astounded  witnesses  could  sufficiently  collect  their  senses  to 
take  any  action  on  what  they  saw,  the  lights  began  to  pale  and  shimmer, 
the  whole  scene  quivered,  melted  out  slowly  and  gradually,  as  in  a 
dissolving  view,  and  at  length,  that  is,  in  the  space  of  a  few  minutes,  the 
apartment  was  seemingly  empty  and  in  total  darkness.  The  watchers 
below  reported  to  those  above,  when  at  last  they  had  sufficiently  collected 
themselves  to  descend,  that  the  lights  were  stationary  for  about  five 
minutes  after  the  whistle  sounded,  and  disappeared  more  gradually  than 
usual. 

Immediately  after  this  vision,  the  house  became  wholly  uninhabitable 
even  to  Mr.  Home,  and  the  two  friends  who  volunteered  to  share  his 
quarters  with  him. 

Heavy  poundings  were  often  heard  during  the  day,  for  which  no  account 
could  be  given.  But  these  were  nothing  to  the  Saturnalia  which  ensued  as 
soon  as  darkness  had  set  in.  Tramping  of  feet,  clashing  of  arms,  the 
clinking  of  glasses,  the  crash  of  broken  china ;  all  the  sounds  attending 
drunken  revels,  rude  brawls,  and  even  murderous  fights,  were  heard,  at 
times  with  horrible  distinctness.  Low  moans,  wails,  and  bitter  sobs,  were 
still  more  frequent,  and  the  rushing  as  of  blasts  of  winds,  from  unknown 
sources,  was  a  frequent  feature  of  these  frightful  disturbances. 

The  witnesses,  and  they  were  many,  represented  their  experiences  to 
their  friends  only  to  encounter  the  usual  sneer  of  incredulity  and  scornful 
derision.  Two  or  three  clergymen  volunteered  to  offer  prayers,  and  one 
zealous  Catholic  went  through  the  formulae  of  exorcism  in  the  possessed 
mansion ;  but  always  to  encounter  such  a  storm  of  blows,  laughter,  and 
hideously  derisive  sounds,  as  drove  them  in  horror  from  the  place,  a  retreat 
in  which  they  were  shortly  imitated  by  the  tenants,  who  never  after 
7 

98  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

recurred  to  their  painful  experiences  without  a  TeeHng  of  deep  awe, 
solemnity,  and  an  earnest  entreaty  that  their  narration  should  not  be  met 
with  the  ordinary  methods  of  rude  denial,  and  insulting  jest. 

Despite  what  he  had  already  witnessed,  Mr.  Home  had  no  knowledge  of, 
or  behef  in,  the  reputed  modern  Spiritual  manifestations,  the  spread  of 
which,  since  the  year  1848,  he  had  noticed  but  never  investigated. 

About  the  year  1853,  being  invited  to  spend  the  evening  with  some 
musical  friends  residing  in  Hollo  way,  London,  Mr.  Home  was  there 
introduced  to  Madame  Albert,  a  French  lady  who  was  accompanied  by 
her  little  daughter,  a  child  of  some  eleven  years  of  age.  During  the  evening, 
the  hostess  proposed  that  they  should  try  the  the  experiment  of  "table 
turning,"  which  was  at  that  time,  the  technical  expression  used  for  evoking 
Spiritual  manifestations.  Madame  Albert  had  it  seemed  become  developed 
for  mediumistic  powers,  whilst  little  "Josephine,"  was  reported  to  be  a  fine 
somnambulist  or  trance  medium.  When  the  seance  was  first  proposed,  Mr, 
Home  laughingly  alleged  his  entire  ignorance  of  the  subject,  but  at  once 
placed  himself  in  position  at  the  table,  under  the  direction  of  the  attendant 
Sybils,  "  to  see  what  would  come  of  it."  No  sooner  were  the  party  seated, 
than  Mdlle,  Josephine  seizing  the  pencil  and  paper  which  had  been  placed 
on  the  table,  wrote  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time,  in  a  large  bold 
hand,  the  following  communication,  addressed  "  To  Mr.  Lenox  Home," 
a  name  which  the  child  up  to  that  moment  had  never  heard.  The  writing 
was  given  in  English,  a  language,  it  must  be  remembered,  of  which  the  Uttle 
medium  was  entirely  ignorant. 

"  You  say  you  know  notliing  of  spiritual  existence  or  the  soul's  power  to  return  to 
earth.  Oh,  my  friend  !  Why  will  you  reject  the  light  that  has  already  dawned  upon 
you  ?  In  your  own  house,  you  have  heard  the  sounds,  and  seen  the  sights,  which  bore 
witness  to  the  presence  of  human  spirits.  Have  you  forgotten  the  phantom  dancers, 
whom  you  and  your  companions  thought  wore  animal  masks  ?  Thise  dancers  were  my 
cempanions  in  vice  and  wickedness.  They  and  I  lived  amidst  scenes  of  revelry  too 
shameful  to  be  detailed.  We  were  associates  of  the  frivolous  roue,  that  occupied  the 
throne  of  England, — Charles  the  Second,— and  in  the  house  where  you  found  shelter,  we 
often  iised  to  hold  such  revels  as  demons  alone  could  take  pleasure  in.  When  we  became 
spirits,  the  base  passions  with  which  our  lives  on  earth  were  animated,  became  so  engraved 
upon  our  spirits,  that  all  who  looked  upon  us  from  a  higher  plane,  beheld  us  transfigured 
into  the  semblance  of  the  animals  whose  natures  we  partook  of.  Shocking  as  this 
disclosure  of  our  true  natures  may  be,  it  haply  may  help  future  generations  to  account 
for  the  idea  of  the  doctrine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls.  Unhappily,  that  doctrine  is 
not  true.  We  might  be  happier  as  the  animals  whose  limited  instincts  we  represent,  but 
oh,  unhappy  that  we  are !  we  are  at  once  the  human  beings  we  ever  were,  with  the 
additional  humiliation  of  knowing  that  we  take  to  others  the  semblance  of  the  lower 
creatures,  whose  passions  we  have  imitated.  Friend  Horne  !  Our  hell  is,  not  to  pass  into 
other  states,  but  to  live  in  our  oivn,  and  by  the  knowledge  of  what  we  have  made  our- 
selves, to  grow  into  higher  conditions.  You  thought  we  wore  masks.  Alas  !  We  had 
only  dropped  them,  and  exchanged  the  mask  of  seeming  for  the  face  of  reality.  In  the 
sf)irit  world,  all  its  inhabitants  are  known  for  what  they  are,  and  the  soul's  loves  take  the 
shape  of  angelic  beauty,  or  brutish  ugliness,  according  to  the  tendencies  of  the  life  within. 
On  the  night  when  you  beheld  our  revels,  we  were  obliged,  by  the  law  of  our  being,  to  go 
through  the  earthly  scenes  which  we  had  taken  too  much  delight  in.  On  earth  such 
revels  were  our  heaven  ;  in  the  spheres  they  are  our  hell.  Their  enforced  enactment  was 
part  of  our  penance  ;  but  thank  God  !  I  have  seen  the  erroi-s  of  the  past,  and  hencefor- 
ward I  am  atoning  for  it,  and  living  my  wasted  life  over  again.  I  am  on  the  road  of 
progress,  and  even  this  humiliating  confession  will  help  me  forward,  and  aid  me  to 
become  stronger  to  save  others  and  myself  from  the  vices,  the  memories  of  which  still 
cling  to  me  like  a  garment.  Farewell !  My  earthly  mission  is  done ;  there  will  be  no 
more  haunting  spirits  in  the  old  house  in  Hatton  Garden." 

The  signature  to  this  singular  communication  was,  "  One  who  was  known 
in  the  day  and  time  of  Charles  Stuart  as  the  finest  woman  of  her  age — Lady 
Castlemaine." 

D.DuNGLAS  Home 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  99 

Appended  to  Mr.  Home's  manuscript,  entrusted  to  the  author  some 
years  ago  with  a  view  of  publication,  were  the  following  words  : — 

"  Great  Heaven  !  If  this  be  indeed  a  true  picture  of  the  life  hereafter,  should  it  not 
make  us  afraid  of  doing  wrong  ?  But,  above  all,  what  a  wicked  and  soul-destroying  delu- 
sion has  been  the  clerical  farce  of  salvation  by  a  vicarious  atonement ! — L.  H." 

CHAPTER  Xni. 

EARLY  SPIRITUALISM  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN  (CONTINUED). 

Representative  Cases  Considered. 

The  circumstances  of  the  following  narrative,  although  they  have  been 
frequently  referred  to  in  other  publications,  are  too  nearly  related  to  the 
early  history  of  Spiritualism  in  Great  Britain  to  be  omitted.  They  bear, 
moreover,  so  closely  upon  the  hypothesis  that  wise  Spirits  have  been 
experimenting  during  this  century  in  many  directions,  with  a  view  of 
establishing  telegraphic  communications  between  the  two  worlds,  that  our 
present  recital  seems  peculiarly  apposite  to  this  portion  of  the  work. 

It  seems  that  a  young  girl  of  about  13  years  of  age,  the  daughter  of  Mr. 
John  Jobson,  a  resident  of  Bishop  Wearmouth,  near  Sunderland,  sometime 
during  the  year  1839  became  the  subject  of  a  severe  but  inexpUcable 
illness. 

Mary  Jobson  had  been  a  strong  healthy  girl  up  to  the  period  named, 
when  she  suddenly  seemed  to  collapse  under  an  attack  which  confined  her 
to  her  bed  for  over  seven  months,  during  which  she  became  blind,  deaf, 
and  dumb.  From  time  to  time  numerous  physicians  were  called  in,  by 
whose  directions  the  poor  patient  was  subjected  to  all  the  penalties  of  the 
"  heroic  "  system  of  treatment. 

Her  case  was  described  as  "  an  abscess  on  the  brain,"  but  whatever  the 
malady  might  have  been,  it  was  obviously  increased  by  the  applications 
resorted  to  by  her  medical  attendants. 

Soon  after  the  most  serious  features  of  this  case  became  developed,  it 
was  remarked  that  the  whole  house,  and  especially  the  sick  girl's  chamber, 
resounded  with  unaccountable  sounds,  consisting  of  heavy  poundings, 
pattering  of  feet,  the  ringing  of  bells,  and  the  clashing  of  metallic  substances. 

As  the  girl's  disease  progressed  in  violence,  these  disturbances  grew  more 
marked  ;  there  were  times  however  when  they  changed  to  soft  and  delightful 
music  which  centred  in  the  invalid's  chamber,  yet  resounded  through  every 
part  of  the  dwelling.  Sometimes  it  would  seem  as  if  a  vast  crowd  of 
people  were  ascending  the  stairs  and  thronging  into  the  room.  Even  the 
■wind  that  might  be  occasiojied  by  passing  bodies  was  felt,  when  no  one  but 
the  ordinary  attendants  were  visible.  During  the  progress  of  these  phenomena, 
the  tones  of  a  human  voice  were  frequently  heard  protesting  against  the 
application  of  leeches  and  blisters,  and  recommending  mild  herb  drinks, 
which,  when  tried,  invariably  alleviated  the  poor  patient's  sufferings.  On 
one  occasion  when  several  members  of  the  family,  together  with  Drs.  Clanny 

loo  NINETEENTH    CENTURA    MIRACLES. 

and  Embleton,  were  present,  this  voice  spoke  clearly  and  said ;  "  Your 
appliances  will  never  benefit,  but  materially  injure  the  girl.  She  will  recover, 
but  by  no  human  means."  On  several  occasions  the  glasses  containing 
medicines,  together  with  blisters  and  leeches,  were  snatched  out  of  the 
attendant's  hands,  and  thrown  to  distant  parts  of  the  room.  Not  unfre- 
quently  a  crooning  tone  was  heard,  as  of  a  mother  soothing  a  sick  child,  and 
the  poor  girl's  hair  was  put  back  and  smoothed  by  tender  invisible  hands. 
Dr.  Beattie  who  witnessed  many  of  these  scenes,  affirms,  that  it  would  be 
impossible  either  to  describe  or  forget,  the  angelic  expression  of  the  invalid's 
face  at  the  time  when  the  manifestations  of  invisible  presence  were  most 
evident. 

About  the  sixth  month  of  this  strange  drama,  the  ceiling  of  the  room  in 
which  Mary  Jobson  lay,  was  suddenly  found  adorned  with  a  beautifully 
painted  representation  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars. 

The  father  of  the  patient — who  from  the  first  had  been  determinately 
hostile  to  the  invisible  actors,  alleging  that  they  were  "  demons,"  and  the 
cause  of  his  child's  sickness^no  sooner  perceived  this  fresh  proof  of 
spiritual  agency,  than  he  proceeded  to  obliterate  the  paintings  with  a  thick 
coat  of  whitewash.  His  work  was  in  vain  however,  for  the  obnoxious 
paintings  re-appeared  as  soon  as  the  whitewash  was  dry,  only  fading  out 
when  the  child's  recovery  was  established. 

On  June  22nd,  1840,  Mary  Jobson  regained  her  speech,  hearing,  and 
sight,  as  suddenly  as  she  had  lost  them.  Her  strength  too  returned,  and  in 
a  few  days,  without  any  apparent  cause  for  the  change,  she  was  entirely 
restored  to  her  usual  health  and,  spirits.  For  several  weeks  the  occasional 
sounds  of  music,  voices,  knockings,  and  the  movement  of  bodies  continued, 
but  these  phenomena  ultimately  ceased,  and  have  never  since  returned. 

The  chief  witnesses  to  this  wonderful  history  Were  the  girl's  parents, 
numerous  friends  and  neighbours;  Doctors  Embleton  and  Beattie;  also 
Dr.  Drury,  Messrs.  Torboch  and  Ward,  eminent  surgeons,  and  Dr.  Reid 
Clanny,  F.R.S.,  physician  in  ordinary  to  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  and  at  the 
time  of  these  occurrences,  senior  physician  of  the  Sunderland  Infirmary. 

Dr.  Reid  Clanny,  who  was  not  professionally  called  in  to  attend  the 
child,  became  informed  of  her  case  through  the  reports  that  were  in  circula- 
tion concerning  it.  Like  a  true  and  candid  scientist,  this  gentleman,  heedless 
of  all  the  wild  rumours  that  reached  him,  called  on  the  parents,  and  subse- 
quently followed  up  the  case  with  the  closest  scrutiny,  often  witnessing  the 
phenomena  described,  and  satisfying  himself  according  to  his  own  published 
statement,  "  that  the  power — come  from  whence  it  may — was  not  only  kind 
and  beneficent,  but  that  it  manifested  all  the  tokens  of  human  intelligence, 
and  was  better  able  to  prescribe  remedies  and  delineate  the  course  of  the 
disease  than  any  of  the  attendant  physicians." 

These  admissions  were  made  in  an  account  of  the  case  which  Dr.  Clanny 
pubhshed  in  pamphlet  form,  and  though  he  staked  his  reputation  upon  the 
truth  of  his  statements,  and  cited  the  testimony  of  numerous  respectable 
witnesses,  including  Doctors  Drury,  Embleton,  Ward,  and  Torboch,  his 
fearless  and  timely  publication  was  met  by  the  scoff  of  the  press>  the  ridicule 
of  those  scientists  ivho  had  not  witnessed  the  phenomena  described,  and  the 
special  denunciation  of  the  learned  and  pious. 

The  pamphlet,  nevertheless,  was  eagerly  bought  up,  and  a  second 
edition  soon  called  for.  In  this  Dr.  Clanny  bravely  maintained  his  position, 
adding  the  following  earnest  words  from  Mr.  Torboch,  one  of  the  surgeons 
who  followed  the  case  throughout : — 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  loi 

"  I  have  had  lengthened  and  serious  conversations  at  different  times  with  nearly  all  the 
persons  who  have  borne  testimony  to  this  miraculous  case,  and  I  am  well  assured  they 
are  religious  and  trustworthy,  and,  moreover,  that  they  have  faithfully  discharged  their 
duty  in  this  important  affair  between  God  and  man." 

Since  the  above  account  was  \A'Titten  the  author  has  been  favoured  with 
a  perusal  of  Dr.  Clanny's  pamphlet,  from  which  the  following  few  additional 
details  are  gathered.  After  commenting  on  the  pecuUarity  of  the  voice 
heard  speaking  in  Mary's  chamber,  Dr.  Clanny  says  : — 

"  The  phenomena  of  human  voices  speaking,  did  not  seem  to  be  special  to  the  sick 
girl's  chamber.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Gauntlett,  a  schoolmistress,  was  suddenly  startled  by 
hearing  a  voice  crying  to  her,  'Mary  Jobson,  one  of  your  scholars,  is  ill  ;  go  and  see  her, 
it  will  be  good  for  you.'  This  person,  the  child's  school  teacher,  did  not  know  where  she 
lived,  but  finding  the  address,  she  went  as  directed,  and  was  called  by  the  voice  in  a  loud 
tone,  audible  to  all  those  in  the  house,  to  come  upstairs.  On  her  second  visit,  delightful 
music  filled  the  room,  and  was  heard  by  sixteen  persons. 

"  The  voice  often  declared  the  child  did  not  suffer,  her  spirit  being  away,  and  her  body 
being  sustained  by  guardian  spirits.  These  voices  told  many  things  of  distant  persons 
and  scenes  which  came  true. 

"  Before  the  girl  lost  her  speech  she  affirmed  that  she  was  often  visited  by  *  a  divine 
being  who  looked  like  a  man,  only  exceedingly  heavenly  and  beautiful.'  Mr.  Joseph 
Slagg,  and  Mrs.  Margaret  Watson,  friends  of  the  family,  who  often  visited  the  sick  gM, 
alleged  that  each  of  them  had  at  different  times  beheld  the  same  divine  apparition,  and  had 
been  assured  by  it  that  the  girl  would  recover.  On  several  occasions  '  the  voice '  desired 
that  water  should  be  sprinkled  on  the  floor,  and  when  the  sceptical  father  refused  com- 
pliance, water  from  some  unknown  source  fell  in  showers  around  the  witnesses. 

"  On  the  22nd  of  June,  when  the  poor  child  seemed  to  be  in  the  last  extremity,  the 
family  assembled  round  her  bed  united  in  prayer  that  God  would  be  pleased  to  take  her 
and  terminate  her  sufferings.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  voice  cried  out, 
'  Prepare  the  girl's  clothes,  and  let  every  one  leave  the  room  except  the  baby.'  This  was 
a  little  child  of  two  yeai's  and  a  half  old,  who  was  playing  about  near  the  window.  When 
the  family  at  length  most  reluctantly  obeyed,  they  remained  outside  the  closed  door  for 
fifteen  minutes  ;  they  then  heard  a  voice  calling  out,  "  Come  in,"  and  when  they  entered 
they  found  Mary  quite  well,  sitting  in  a  chair  with  the  baby  on  her  knee,  smiling  and 
happy." 

The  report  adds  : — 

"Up  to  this  time,  January  30th,  1841,  no  relapse  has  taken  place,  and  Mary  Jobson 
seems  as  well  as  girls  of  her  age  ordinarily  are." 

Dr.  Drury,  Dr.  Clanny,  and  Mr.  Torboch  all  assert  that  many  persons 
ot  rank  and  some  ministers  of  the  Established  Church  visited  Mary 
Jobson,  and  unreservedly  testified  to  the  truth  of  Dr.  Clanny's  published 
report. 

Few  seekers  into  the  evidences  which  cluster  around  the  history  of 
Spiritualism  in  England  will  forget  the  law  suit  instituted  by  a  Mr.  Webster, 
the  proprietor  of  a  house  at  Trinity,  Edinburgh,  for  damages  done  to  his 
property  by  Captain  Molesworth,  a  gentleman,  who  with  his  family,  rented 
Mr.  Webster's  house,  and  was  accused  of  causing  extensive  dilapidations 
therein,  by  his  attempts  to  discover  the  secret  of  the  terrible  hauntings 
which  beset  the  place. 

Captain  Molesworth  entered  upon  possession  of  the  house  in  question 
in  June,  1835.  Shortly  after  this,  one  of  his  daughters  died,  leaving  a 
sister  of  about  thirteen  years  old.  This  young  lady  soon  after  fell  into 
ill  health,  took  to  her  bed,  and  after  some  months  of  a  strange  and 
unaccountable  illness,  died. 

Tt  was  generally  asserted  that  the  cruel  suspicions  and  harassing  investi- 
gations, that  followed  upon  the  disturbances,  the  principal  scene  of  which 

I02  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

was  the  poor  invalid's  chamber,  did  more  to  hasten  her  decease,  than 
either  the  phenomena,  or  the  course  of  the  disease.  In  this  case  as 
in  that  of  Mary  Jobson,  dehghtful  music,  and  audible  human  voices  from 
unknown  and  invisible  sources  were  constantly  heard  around  Miss  Moles- 
worth's  bed. 

In  other  parts  of  the  house,  heavy  poundings,  loud  enough  to  be  heard 
in  the  street,  together  with  groans,  cries,  footsteps,  and  rustlings,  were  of 
frequent  occurrence. 

The  sleepers  were  awakened  at  night  by  the  beds  being  heaved  up,  and 
rappings,  which  would  respond  by  given  signals  to  questions  asked  by  the 
family. 

In  Mrs.  Catherine  Crowe's  "Night  Side  of  Nature,"  it  is  stated,  that 
carpenters,  masons,  city  officials,  justices  of  the  peace,  and  the  officers  of  the 
regiment  quartered  at  Leith  who  were  friends  of  Captain  Molesworth,  all 
came  to  aid  in  his  investigations,  in  the  hope  of  detecting  imposture,  or 
exorcising  his  tormentors,  in  vain. 

Cordons  of  guards  were  stationed  round  the  house  by  day  and  night, 
whilst  the  poor  invalid,  whose  room  seemed  to  be  the  chief  centre  of  the 
hauntings,  was  not  only  carefully  watched,  bat  even  tied  up  in  a  bag,  and 
subjected  to  all  sorts  of  harassing  annoyances  to  make  sure  that  she  had 
no  hand  in  producing  the  disturbances. 

Absurd  and  vexatious  as  these  suspicions  were,  they  were  soon  put  to 
flight  by  the  suffering  girl's  decease.  Meantime,  the  evidence  called  forth 
by  the  trial  for  damages  done  to  Mr.  Webster's  house,  conclusively  enough 
proved  to  the  world  the  supramundane  character  of  the  hauntings,  and  the 
impossibility  of  any  human  agency  accounting  for  them. 

The  case  of  Elizabeth  Squirrel,  the  vision  seeress  \  of  the  haunted  house 
at  Willington — still  in  possession  of  its  spiritual  occupants,  as  the  latest 
reports  from  Newcastle  testify — together  with  many  hundreds  of  well-attested 
instances  of  hauntings,  ghost  seeing,  visions,  wraiths,  and  divers  other 
forms  of  Spiritual  manifestations,  occurring  in  Great  Britain  during  this,  and 
the  preceding  century,  have  been  so  minutely  described  in  the  works 
already  alluded  to,  that  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  add  to  the  examples 
already  cited. 

In  reviewing  the  narratives  thus  presented,  there  will  invariably  appear 
to  be  many  striking  points  of  resemblance  amongst  them.  For  instance  ; 
they  will  most  generally  be  found  to  represent  the  spirits  of  human  beings, 
and  to  manifest  human  intelligence.  Invisible  though  they  may  be  to 
mortal  eyes — except  in  rare  instances — the  actors  seem  to  take  cognizance 
of  persons  and  things  in  the  material  world  ;  to  hear  speech  addressed 
to  them,  and  to  respond  intelligently  by  signal  sounds  or  motions. 

In  some  cases — as  in  that  of  the  "  Sandford  ghost"— the  invisible 
presence  seems  to  be  malign  and  mischievous — in  others,  as  illustrated 
by  the  bell-ringing  at  Great  Bealing,  the  demonstrations  appear  to  be 
simply  meaningless  and  silly. 

Intelligence,  skill,  and  kindness,  marked  the  action  of  the  invisible 
presence  that  attended  Mary  Jobson,  and  lessons  of  deep  import  and 
suggestion  grew  out  of  the  hauntings  detailed  by  Mr.  Lenox  Home. 

Could  all  Spiritual  manifestations  have  been  thoroughly  sifted,  and  direct 
question  and  answer  have  taken  the  place  of  the  foolish  exorcisms,  threats, 
and  denunciations,  with  which  these  hauntings  were  formerly  received, 
might  they  not  have  been  explained  upon  the  same  hypotheses  which  are 
revealed  to  humanity  in  the  open  communion  that  now  exists  between  the 
Spiritual  and  natural  worlds  ? 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

[03 

By  these  we  learn,  that  haunting  spirits  are  magnetically  fettered  to  the 
scene  of  their  earthly  crimes ;  that  the  sounds  and  sights  heard  and  seen 
in  such  places,  are  projected  from  the  spirit  world  into  the  earth's  atmos- 
phere by  unhappy  spirits;  the  remembrance  of  their  former  evil  deeds 
becoming  their  hell,  in  which  they  are  compelled  to  re-enact  the  deeds 
that  continually  recur  to  their  minds. 

Other  spirits  of  a  higher  grade  with  better  intentions,  and  better  guidance, 
ring  and  knock  to  attract  attention,  and  compel  enquiry ;  and  still  again 
others,  whose  love  for  humanity  prompts  them  to  become  the  guardian 
spirits  of  dear  relatives  still  remaining  on  earth,  endeavour  to  make  their 
watch  and  word  known,  as  in  the  cases  of  Mary  Jobson  and  Matilda 
Molesworth,  by  acts  of  beneficence  and  tokens  of  tender  ministration. 

Could  every  demonstration  of  Spiritual  presence,  whether  it  comes  in 
the  form  of  haunting  or  loving  ministry,  be  thoroughly  investigated,  whilst 
its  phenomena  would  unquestionably  afford  to  mankind  the  indication  of 
Spiritual  laws  now  unknown,  it  would  also  resolve  itself  into  such  strictly 
human  intelligence,  that  we  should  marvel  how  we  could  have  ever  rele- 
gated it  to  the  dreary  horrors  of  a  weird  supernaturalism, 

Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  the  venerable  editor  of  the  Art  Joiirtial,  was  the 
first  writer  we  believe  who  contributed  to  the  literature  of  SpirituaHsm  the 
well-known  narrative  of  the  spirit  calling  himself  "  Caspar." 

This  denizen  of  the  other  world  seemed  compelled,  in  his  first  attempts 
to  communicate  with  earth,  to  manifest  his  presence  by  the  usual  array  of 
terrifying  sounds  and  movements  which  accompany  supernatural  agencies  ; 
in  process  of  time  however  he  was  enabled  to  converse  with  the  family  to 
whom  he  was  attracted,  through  the  methods  of  ordinary  human  speech. 
For  over  three  years  this  Spirit  took  part  in  the  daily  life,  interests,  and 
welfare  of  his  human  friends;  talking  with  them,  advising,  and  counselling 
them,  with  all  the  wisdom  and  affection  of  a  beloved  member  of  their 
household,  and  when  at  last  he  left  them,  in  pursuance  of  some  Spiritual 
conditions  which,  as  he  alleged,  would  aid  his  progress,  but  deprive  him 
of  the  power  to  hold  farther  audible  intercourse  with  them,  they  felt  "  as  if 
they  had  lost  their  best  friend,"  and  could  hardly  be  reconciled  to  his 
absence. 

Nothing  can  more  conclusively  prove  that  the  darkest  shadows  of 
"  Supernaturalism  "  have  become  dissipated,  and  given  place  to  light  and 
reason,  than  the  present  open  communion  with  the  Spirit  world.  In  this, 
we  recognize  the  men,  women,  and  children  of  this  world  over  again  ;  the 
good  ascending  into  angel-hood,  the  indifferent  still  lingering  on  the  threshold 
of  the  earth,  with  which  their  affections  have  been  ail  too  closely  inter- 
woven,— and  the  evil-minded,  either  exhibiting  the  first  monitions  of 
remorse  which  impel  them  forward  on  the  path  of  progress,  or  the  same 
hardened  adherence  to  criminal  tendencies  which  await  the  softening 
influences  of  penitence,  to  lead  them  into  the  way  of  reform. 

The  great  American  Seer  A.  J.  Davis,  describes  in  one  of  his  works,  a 
visit  he  made  to  the  bedside  of  a  man,  suffering  under  an  aggravated  attack 
of  delirium  tremens. 

On  entering  the  room,  Mr.  Davis  beheld  the  apparition  of  a  beautiful 
female  Spirit  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  scattering  visionary  flowers 
over  the  coverlid,  and  endeavouring  by  magnetic  passes  of  her  fair  hands, 
to  soothe  the  sufferer's  fever-haunted  condition. 

Oh  describing  this  celestial  visitant  to  the  family  present,  she  was  at  once 
recognized  as  a  departed  relative,    whose  pure  life  corresponded   to  her 

T04  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

angelic  appearance.  It  seemed  however  that  the  spiritual  perceptions  of 
the  unfortunate  patient  were  sufficiently  awakened  to  be  conscious  of  the 
presence,  although  not  of  its  beneficent  character,  for  in  the  midst  of  his 
frantic  ravings,  he  was  perpetually  complaining  of  a  demon,  who  stood  at  the 
foot  of  his  bed,  stinging  him  with  thorns,  a?id  throwing  off  fire  from  her 
hands.  He  often  appealed  to  those  around,  asking  if  they  could  not  see 
this  demon,  whose  frightful  appearance  filled  him  with  horror.  Is  not  the 
delirium  of  ignorance  and  superstition  just  as  capable  of  transforming 
angels  into  demons,  as  the  delirium  of  drunkenness? 

We  must  now  invite  the  reader  to  consider  in  some  detail,  the  signifi- 
cance of  four  well-known  movements,  each  of  which,  by  the  wide-spread 
influence  they  have  exercised  over  their  votaries,  demands  recognition  and 
earnest  attention  from  the  students  of  psychological  philosophy.  These 
are  Mormonism ;  Shakerism,  the  sect  known  as  Irvingites,  and  the  Irish 
Revivals  ;  of  course  the  two  former,  although  largely  recruited  from  British 
sources,  belong  to  the  history  of  American  Spiritualism.  Neither  of  these 
movements  may  be  commended  to  public  acceptance,  for  their  beneficial 
influence  upon  mankind. 

But,  though  the  cui  bono  of  the  subject  is  not  the  point  with  which  the 
facts  of  history  are  called  upon  to  deal,  it  will  become  self-evident  to 
thoughtful  students,  that  there  is  something  wonderfully  significant  in  the 
lessons  which  these  singular  and  exceptional  movements  teach  us.  For 
example ;  Mormonism,  which  originated  through  the  Spiritual  Mediumship 
of  Joseph  Smith,  illustrates  with  overwhelming  force  the  depravity  into 
which  human  beings  may  be  plunged,  by  seeking  authority  for  their 
religious  beliefs,  in  the  days  of  ancient  barbarism;  and  setting  up  for 
modern  example,  the  old  Jehovah  system,  which  not  only  sanctioned,  but 
even  enjoined  the  horrors  of  relentless  warfare,  'and  the  infamies  of 
Polygamy. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  religion  of  Anne  Lee,  the  spiritually- 
inspired  founder  of  Shakerism,  rushing  into  that  opposite  extreme  of 
excessive  asceticism,  which,  if  Shaker  life  and  practice  could  prevail  over 
the  earth,  would  depopulate  it  in  a  single  generation. 

Both  these  movements  owe  their  origin  to  spiritually-inspired  founders  ; 
both  are  advent  footprints  in  the  wilderness  of  modern  materialism ;  but 
whilst  Mormonism  illustrates  the  futility  of  looking  to  the  past,  to  find 
authority  for  our  religious  beliefs,  Shakerism  equally  proves  the  imbecility 
of  attempting  to  inaugurate  in  the  earthly  present,  a  system  of  asceticism 
which  only  belongs  to  our  condition  as  pure  spirits,  in  the  future. 

THE    IRVINGITES. 

The  third  movement  to  which  allusion  was  made  above,  is  the  wonderful 
Pentecostal  outpouring  which  fell  on  certain  members  of  a  church  presided 
over  by  the  Rev.  Edward  Irving,  from  whom  the  aff"ected  persons  were 
called  by  the  name  of  "  Irvingites."  The  following  brief  summary  of  this 
remarkable  demonstration,  is  gathered  chiefly  from  the  history  of  Edward 
Irving  by  Mrs.  Oliphant,  published  in  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter's  excellent 
account  of  Spiritual  manifestations,  entitled  "  The  Two  Worlds,"  and  a  small 
volume  on  "  The  Revivals,"  written  by  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq.,  solicitor, 
of  Lincoln's  Inn,  London. 

The  latter  in  introducing  his  subject  says  : — 

"  Of  Mr.  Irving  himself,  it  is  only  necessary  to  say  that  he  believed  and  preached  that 
the  Church  might  and  ought  to  have  a  restoration  of  the  divine  gifts  which  are  promised 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  105 

in  the  gospels,  and  that  the  not  having  such,  was  a  sign  of  its  low  state  and  was  in  fact 
its  condemnation. 

"  "Whatever  may  be  thought  of  his  theory,  he  was  a  great  and  good  man,  as  all  who 
knew  him  testify. 

"  Carlyle,  who  knew  and  loved  him,  says  of  him — '  He  was  the  freest,  brotherliest, 
bravest  human  soul  mine  ever  came  in  contact  with. 

"  '  I  call  him  on  the  whole  the  best  man  I  have  ever,  after  trial  enough,  found  in  this 
world,  or  ever  hope  to  find.'  " 

One  thing  is  certain,  that  panegyrists  and  detractors  ahke,  attribute  to 
Mr.  Irving  a  character  of  singular  purity  and  rectitude,  whilst  it  is  univer- 
sally admitted,  that  his  eloquence,  and  the  marvellous  power  he  exerted 
over  his  immense  and  fashionable  congregations,  were  as  remarkable  even 
before  the  Spiritual  outpouring  with  which  his  name  is  associated,  as  any 
phenomena  which  occurred  during  that  wonderful  visitation. 

It  was  in  the  magnificent  church  in  Regent  Square,  erected  at  a  cost  of 
fifteen  thousand  pounds  expressly  for  Mr.  Irving — then  the  most  popular 
preacher  in  London — that  the  outpouring  of  "  the  gift  of  tongues  "  occurred. 

It  seems  that  the  first  manifestation  of  this  singular  power,  commenced 
in  Port  Glasgow  sometime  in  1830. 

Mr.  Irving,  a  Scotchman  by  birth,  had  commenced  his  ministerial  career 
in  Glasgow,  and  as  the  reputed  demonstrations  were  of  the  character  which 
he  himself  alleged  the  Church  of  Christ  should  possess,  he  became  strongly 
interested  in  the  tidings  that  reached  him,  and  forthwith  sent  one  of  the 
elders  of  his  own  church  to  enquire  into,  and  report  upon  the  matter. 

The  following  extracts  are  condensed  from  Mr,  Irving's  own  narra- 
tive of  the  "gift  of  tongues,"  published  va.  Eraser's  Magazine  (vol.  iv.),  in 
which  is  embodied  the  report  of  the  agent  above  alluded  to.  The  latter, 
writing  to  his  Pastor,  Mr.  Irving,  says  : — 

"About  this  time  (1830),  in  the  death-bed  experiences  of  certain  holy  persons,  there 
appeared  many  and  very  wonderful  instances  of  the  power  of  God's  Spirit,  both  in  the  way 
of  discernment  and  utterance.  They  were  able  to  know  the  condition  of  God's  people  at  a 
distance.  In  one  instance,  the  countenance  shone  with  a  glorious  hrightness,  as  if  it  had 
heen  the  face  of  an  angel ;  they  spoke  much  of  a  bright  dawn  about  to  arise  in  the  Church  ; 
and  one  of  them,  just  before  death,  signified  that  he  had  received  the  knowledge  of  the 
thing  ahoid  to  ie  manifested.     ,     .     . 

"  In  March,  1830,  on  the  evening  of  the  Lord's  Day,  the  gift  of  speaking  with  tongues 
was  restored  to  the  Church.  The  handmaiden  of  the  Lord,  of  whom  He  made  choice  on 
that  night  to  manifest  forth  in  her  His  glory,  had  been  long  afHicted  with  a  disease  which 
the  medical  men  pronounced  to  be  a  decline.  It  was  on  the  Lord's  Day,  and  one  of  her 
sisters,  along  with  a  female  friend  who  had  come  to  the  house  for  that  end,  had  been 
spending  the  whole  day  in  fasting  and  prayer  before  God,  with  a  special  respect  to  the 
restoration  of  the  gifts.  They  had  come  up  in  the  evening  to  the  sick  chamber  of  their 
sister,  and,  along  with  one  or  two  others  of  the  household,  were  engaged  in  prayer,  when 
the  Holy  Ghost  came  with  mighty  power  upon  the  sick  woman  as  she  lay  in  her  weakness, 
and  constrained  her  to  speak  at  great  length,  and  tvith  superhuman  strength,  in  an  unknoivn 
tongue,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  who  heard.  She  has  told  me  that  this  first  seizure  of 
the  Spirit  was  the  strongest  she  ever  had  ;  and  that  it  was  in  some  degree  necessary  it 
should  have  been  so,  otherwise  she  would  not  have  dared  to  give  way  to  it. 

"  The  editor  of  the  Morning  Watch  *  writes  :  '  We  have  seen  eight  different  individuals 
who  have  been  eye-witnesses  of  these  manifestations,  and  who  are  unanimous  in  their 
testimony  to  the  supernatural,  holy,  and  influential  energy  of  what  they  there  ivitnessetV 
We  subjoin  the  testimony  of  one  of  these,  Mr.  John  B.  Cardale,  who  is  now  the  head  of 
the  church.  He  was  specially  sent  by  Mr.  Irving  to  make  enquiry,  with  five  others,  into 
these  alleged  tongues,  and  he  thus  gives  their  observations  : — '  During  our  stay,  four 
individuals  received  the  gift  of  tongues.  The  tongues  spoken  by  aU  the  several  persons 
who  had  received  the  gift  are  perfectly  distinct  in  themselves  and  from  each  other. 
J.  M'D.  speaks  two  tongues,  both  easily  discernible  from  each  other.     J.  M'D.  exercises  his 

*  A  periodical  established  mainly  as  an  organ  of  the  Irvingites. 

io6  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

gift  more  frequently  than  any  of  the  others  ;  and  I  have  heard  him  speak  for  twenty 
minutes  together,  with  all  the  energy  of  voice  and  action  of  an  orator  addressing  an 
audience.  The  language  which  he  uttered  is  full  and  harmonious,  containing  many 
Greek  and  Latin  radicals,  and  with  inflexions  resembling  those  of  the  Greek  language. 
The  only  time  I  ever  had  a  serious  doubt  whether  the  unknown  sounds  which  I  heard 
on  these  occasions  were  parts  of  a  language,  was  ivhen  Mr.  M'D.'s  servant  spoke  during  the 
first  evening.  When  she  spoke  on  subsequent  occasions  it  was  invariably  in  one  tongue, 
which  was  not  only  perfectly  distinct  from  the  sounds  she  uttered  at  the  first  meeting, 
but  was  satisfactorily  estabhshed,  to  my  conviction,  to  be  a  language. 

" '  One  of  the  persons  thus  gifted  we  employed  as  our  servant  while  at  Port  Glasgow. 
She  is  a  remarkably  quiet,  steady,  phlegmatic  person,  entirely  devoid  of  forwardness  or 
enthusiasm,  and  with  very  little  to  say  for  herself  in  the  ordinary  way.  The  language 
which  she  spoke  was  as  distinct  as  the  others,  and  it  was  quite  evident  the  language 
spoken  at  one  time,  was  identical  with  that  spoken  at  another  time. 

" '  The  chanting  or  singing  ivas  also  very  remarhable.  J.  M'D.'s  ordinary  voice  is  in 
singing,  harsh  and  unpleasing ;  but  when  thus  singing  in  the  Spirit,  the  tones  are  perfectly 

harmonious.     On  the  morning  after  the  day  on  which  Mrs.  received  the  gift   of 

tongues,  I  heard  her  singing  stanzas  with  the  alternate  lines  rhyming.  The  tune  was  at 
first  slow,  but  she  became  more  and  more  rapid  in  her  utterance,  until  at  last,  syllable 
followed  syllable  as  rapidly  as  was  possible,  and  yet  each  syllable  distinctly  enunciated. 

" '  These  persons,  while  uttering  the  unknown  sounds,  as  also  while  speaking  in  the 
Spirit  in  their  own  language,  have  every  appearance  of  being  under  supernatural  direction. 
The  manner  and  voice  are  difi'erent  from  what  they  are  on  ordinary  occasions. 

"  '  Their  whole  deportment  gives  an  impression  not  to  he  conveyed  in  words,  that  their 
organs  are  made  use  of  by  supernatural  power.  M.  M'D.  one  morning,  having,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  severe  cold,  so  entirely  lost  the  use  of  her  voice  as  to  be  unable  to  speak  out 
of  a  whisper,  yet,  on  a  sudden,  commenced,  and  from  ten  a.m.  to  two  p.m.  continued 
speaking  in  a  loud  voice — sometimes  in  intercessory  prayer  in  the  Spirit,  sometimes  in 
denouncing  the  coming  judgments,  and  occasionally  speahing  in  an  unknown  tongue — 
and  at  the  end  of  that  time  she  relapsed  exactly  into  her  former  state.' 

"  When  this  messenger  returned  to  London  with  his  tidings,  it  was  to  find  the  tongues 
of  flame  sitting  on  his  oivn  ivife  and  daughters.  StiU,  not  rashly,  nor  arrogantly,  was 
the  marvel  proclaimed  to  the  world.  For  some  time,  only  in  private  meetings  was  the 
'  gift  invited  to  manifest  itself.'  There,  philological  learning^  pronounced  the  utterances 
something  more  than  jargon,  and  observation  failed  to  detect  imposture.  Prayer- 
meetings  were  then  held  every  morning  at  the  church  in  Eegent-square,  and  were 
numerously  attended.  At  these  meetings,  exhortations  would  be  uttered  in  the  '  tongue ' 
by  one  person,  and  the  interpretation  chanted  in  English  by  another.  Warnings  and  pre- 
dictions were  sometimes  given.  On  Sunday  morning,  October  16th,  a  'sister'  {Miss Hall) 
hurst  forth  in  the  open  congregation  ivith  an  utterance  in  the  tongue.  I  calmed  the  1,500  or 
2,000  people  who  had  risen  in  alarm,  bade  the  sister  console  herself — for  she  had  struggled 
with  the  power  that  had  possession  of  her,  and  hastened  her  into  the  vestry  of  the  church, 
there  to  give  it  speech — and  expounded  to  the  congregation  the  14th  chap,  of  the  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  as  explanatory  of  the  occurrence.  In  the  evening  a  '  brother  ' 
produced  even  greater  excitement  than  the  morning  speaker.;  and  in  the  course  of  the 
week  all  London  was  talking  of  this  new  phase.  The  '  unknown  tongues '  continued  in 
the  church,  and  other  '  utterances  in  the  Spirit '  were  also  given  ;  and  remarkable  cases 
of  healing  by  spiritual  power  occurred. 

"  Those  who  speak  in  the  tongue  always  declare  '  that  the  words  uttered  in  English 
are  as  much  by  power  supernatural  as  the  words  uttered  in  the  language  unknown.'  But 
no  one  hearing  and  observing  the  utterance  could  for  a  moment  doubt  it,  inasmuch  as 
the  whole  utterance,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  it,  is  ^vith  a  potver,  and  strength, 
and  fulness,  and  sometimes  rapidity  of  voice  altogether  different  from  that  of  the  person's 
ordinary  utterance  in  any  mood ;  and  I  would  say,  both  in  its  form  and  in  its  effects  upon 
a  simple  mind,  evidently  supernatural.  There  is  a  poiuer  in  the  voice  to  thrill  the  heart  and 
overawe  the  spirit  after  a  manner  which  I  have  never  seen." 

Besides  "the  tongues,"  the  gift  of  heahng  became  manifested  in  the 
church,  and  the  power  extended  to  other  congregations. 

At  Liverpool  and  Baldock  in  Hertfordshire,  manifestations  similar  in 
character  to  those  of  the  churches  in  Port  Glasgow  and  Regent  Square, 
became  openly  displayed. 

Mr.  Irving  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of  many  interested  persons,  wrote 
accounts  of  the  manifestations  which  were  published  in  Eraser'' s  Magazine 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  107 

(vols.  iv.  and  v.) ;  he  also  contributed  largely  to  the  columns  of  the  Morning 
Watch,  a  quarterly  magazine  in  which  the  facts  and  philosophy  of  the 
strange  movement  were  freely  discussed. 

Mr.  Irving  very  highly  commends  the  manner  and  forms  of  this  "  divine 
speech,"  and  by  abundant  and  earnest  reasonings,  endeavoured  to  show 
that  it  was  a  renewal  of  Apostolic  gifts  and  powers.  After  some  two  years 
continuance  of  these  manifestations,  certain  members  of  Mr.  Irving's 
congregation  began  to  utter  loud  complaints  of  the  disorders  that  had  arisen, 
the  result  of  which  was,  that  a  charge  of  heresy  was  ultimately  preferred 
against  him. 

At  the  trial  that  ensued  "  an  utterance  in  power  "  came  from  Mr.  David 
Dow,  charging  those  who  were  faithful  to  arise  and  depart,  whereupon  Mr. 
Irving  and  Mr.  Dow  made  their  way  out  of  church,  and  sentence  against 
the  pastor  was  formally  pronounced. 

Besides  this  ruinous  division  in  the  excellent  and  amiable  clergyman's 
congregation,  there  were  other  causes  of  disunion  at  work  with  the 
Revivalists  themselves,  which  militated  against  the  subject,  and  tended  to 
bring  it  into  ill  odour  with  the  world.  The  principal  causes  of  this  division 
originated  with  Mr,  Robert  Baxter,  once  an  enthusiastic  subject  of  the 
lingual  gift,  and  subsequently  a  disbeliever  in  the  divine  origin  of  the 
power  which  he  himself  had  manifested. 

This  secession  from  the  Irvingite  ranks,  was  announced  by  Mr.  Baxter 
himself  in  a  tract  which  he  published  entitled,  A  narrative  of  facts 
characterizing  the  supernatural  manifestations  in  the  members  of  Mr.  Irving s 
co?igregation,  and  other  individuals  in  England  and  Scotland,  and  formerly  in 
the  w titer  himself 

As  no  description  of  the  subject  can  depict  it  in  the  same  vivid  light  that 
it  borrows  from  the  testimony  of  witnesses  and  participators,  we  shall  give 
the  following  quotations  from  Mr.  Baxter's  pamphlet  as  the  best  illustra- 
tion on  record  of  "  the  power,"  and  a  subsequent  condition  of  disenchant- 
ment. 

Mr.  Baxter  says,  writing  of  himself  sometimes  in  the  third  person,  and 
again  in  the  first : — 

"He  had  heard  many  particulars  of  the  extraordinary  manifestations  which  had 
occurred  at  Port  Glasgow,  and  thought  that  there  were  sufficient  grounds  in  Sci-ipture 
to  warrant  a  fair  investigation  of  them.  Being  called  up  to  London  in  August,  1831,  he 
'  had  a  strong  desire  to  attend  the  prayer-meetings  which  were  then  privately  held  by 
those  who  spoke  in  the  power  and  who  sought  for  the  gifts.'  Having  obtained  an  intro- 
duction, he  attended,  and  heard  '  the  utterances,'  both  in  the  unknown  and  in  the 
English  tongue.  In  the  latter  there  was,  he  says,  '  a  cutting  rebuke  to  all  who  were 
present,  and  applicable  to  my  own  state  of  mind  in  particular.  In  the  midst  of  the  feeling 
of  awe  and  reverence  which  this  produced,  I  was  myself  seized  upon  by  the  poiver  ;  and  in 
much  struggling  against  it,  was  made  to  cry  out,  and  myself  to  give  forth  a  confession  of  my 
own  sin  in  the  matter  for  which  loe  were  rehuTced.  There  was  in  me  at  the  time  of  the 
utterance,  very  great  excitement,  and  yet  I  was  distinctly  conscious  of  a  power  acting 
upon  me  beyond  excitement.' 

"  From  this  period,  for  the  space  of  five  months,  I  had  no  utterances  in  public  ;  though 
when  engaged  alone  in  private  prayer,  the  power  would  come  down  upon  me,  and  cause 
me  to  pray  ivith  strong  crying  and  tears  for  the  state  of  the  church.  On  one  occasion,  whilst 
in  my  study,  endeavouring  to  hft  up  my  soul  in  prayer,  the  power  came  upon  me,  and  I 
found  myself  lifted  up  in  soul  to  God,  and  by  a  constraint  I  cannot  describe  I  was 
made  to  speak  a  prayer  that  the  Lord  would  deliver  me  from  fleshly  weakness,  and  graciously 
bestow  upon  me  the  gifts  of  his  Spirit.  This  prayer  was  so  loud,  that  I  put  my  handker- 
chief to  my  mouth  to  stop  the  sound,  that  I  might  not  alarm  the  house.  When  I  had 
reached  the  last  word,  the  power  died  off  me,  and  I  was  left  as  before,  save  in  amazement 
at  what  had  passed. 

io8  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  In  January,  1832,  when  I  again  visited  the  brethren  in  London,  the  gifts  in 
Mr.  Irving's  church  were  now  being  exercised  in  the  public  congregation.  The 
day  following  my  arrival,  being  called  upon  by  the  pastor  to  read,  I  opened  upon 
the  prophet  Malachi,  and  read  the  fourth  chapter.  As  I  read,  the  power  came 
upon  me,  and  I  was  made  to  read  in  the  power.  My  voice,  raised  far  beyond  its  natural 
pitch,  with  constrained  repetition  of  parts,  and  with  the  same  inward  uplifting  which  at 
the  presence  of  the  power  I  had  always  before  experienced.  When  I  knelt  down  to  pray. 
/  was  carried  out  to  pray  in  the  poiver  for  the  presence  and  blessing  of  God  in  the  midst 
of  the  church  ;  in  all  this  I  had  great  joy  and  peace,  without  any  of  the  strugglings 
which  had  attended  my  former  utterances  in  the  power. 

"  On  the  Sunday  following,  the  power  came  in  the  form  of  revelation  and  opening  of 
scripture  ;  and  as  I  read,  the  opening  of  it  was  just  as  light  fiittiag  across  the  mind.  A 
passage  would  be  opened  in  the  clearest  manner,  until  portion  after  portion  having  been 
opened,  and  an  interpretation  given  ivhich  I  not  only  had  never  thought  of,  hut  tvhich  was 
at  variance  ivith  my  previous  systematic  construction  of  it. 

"  If  it  were  convenient  here  to  make  particular  mention  of  men's  names,  I  could  name 
you  many,  who  of  late  years  have  received  such  strange  preservations,  even  against  the 
common  course  of  nature,  that  might  convince  an  Atheist  of  the  finger  of  God  therein. 

''  It  hath  been  my  oion  case  more  than  once,  twice,  or  ten  times.  When  means  have  all 
failed  and  the  highest  art  has  senteaced  me  hopeless,  I  have  been  relieved  by  the  preval- 
ence of  fervent  prayer." 

During  the  prevalence  of  "the  power,"  a  large  number  of  seemingly 
miraculous  cases  of  healing  occurred  with  those  upon  whom  the  spiritual 
gifts  were  poured  out.  Among  the  most  notable  was  the  cure  of  a  Miss 
Macdonald,  an  invalid  of  many  years  standing,  who  was  entirely  restored  to 
health,  by  the  touch,  prayer,  and  command  to  "  arise  and  walk,"  of  her 
brother  James,  one  of  the  Port  Glasgow  subjects  of  the  "supernatural 
power."  This  same  man,  after  raising  his  sister  from  the  sick  bed  to 
which  she  had  been  confined  for  years,  addressed  a  letter  to  a  dear  friend, 
a  Miss  Mary  Campbell,  who  had  just  been  given  up  to  die  by  the  doctors. 
In  this  letter,  James  Macdonald  informed  the  sick  lady,  she  must  instantly 
arise  and  go  forth  to  testify  for  the  Lord.  Without  the  least  help,  "  the 
dying  girl"  arose,  dressed  herself,  walked  down  to  the  meeting-room,  and 
entered  upon  a  career  which  lasted  for  many  months  as  a  prophetess  of  the 
new  church. 

Mrs.  Oliphant  in  her  life  of  Irving,  also  mentions  a  sister  of  Mary 
Campbell's — Isabella,  who  was  cured  in  the  same  way  and  with  the  same 
results. 

Still  more  renowned  was  the  case  of  Miss  Fancourt^  the  daughter  of  a 
clergyman,  who  for  eight  years  had  been  a  helpless  cripple,  and  whom  her 
father's  congregation  had  been  accustomed  to  see  carried  to  church  in  the 
arms  of  attendants  and  laid  on  her  back  in  her  pew  during  the  service. 
The  wonderful  cure  of  Miss  Fancourt  was  effected  iji  a  single  minute  by 
the  prayers  of  an  eminent  subject  of  the  gifts,  Mr.  Greaves.  As  the  cure 
has  been  reported  at  length  in  numerous  religious  as  well  as  secular  publi- 
cations, we  must  close  our  notice  of  it  with  a  brief  extract  from  a  letter 
written  by  the  lady's  father,  the  Rev.  T.  Fancourt,  to  the  Christian 
Observer.)  of  November,  1831  : — 

"  Her  backbone,  which  was  curved  before,  is  now  perfectly  straight,  and  her  collar-bones 
are  quite  equal,  whereas  one  of  them  was  previously  much  enlarged.  It  is  four  years 
since  she  walked  at  all,  and  then  it  was  but  for  a  short  time  with  the  assistance  of  a  stick, 
and  subject  to  a  pain  in  her  hip.     She  now  walks  stoutly  and  free  from  all  pain." 

It  is  almost  unnecessary  to  add,  that  whilst  the  fact  of  these,  and  many 
other  equally  marvellous  cures  could  not  be  disputed,  the  invariable  tone 
of  explanation  adopted   by   the  religious  journals   was,    that   "the  cures 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  109 

were  wholly  wrought  by  the  name  of  Jesus ;  "  and  "  faith  in  the  Lord 
Christ,"  &c.,  &c.  These  religious  writers  then,  as  now,  forgot  to  explain 
why  the  millions  of  earnest  Christians  that  have  been  done  to  death  and 
tortured  barbarously  by  other  Christians,  during  the  ages  of  Christian 
warfare  and  persecution,  were  neither  saved  from  death  at  the  stake,  or 
mutilation,  by  faith  in  the  name  of  Christ.  John  Huss,  Latimer,  Ridley, 
Joan  of  Arc,  and  tens  of  thousands  of  devout  Christians,  have  called  upon 
the  name  of  their  Lord  in  their  hour  of  anguish  in  vain.  If  the  prayer  of 
faith  was  all  that  was  necessary  to  save  from  death  and  agony,  why  were  the 
Misses  Campbell  and  Miss  Fancourt  cured,  and  ten  thousand  Christian 
martyrs  unregarded?  An  equally  pertinent  question  arises  in  reference 
to  the  thousands  of  cures  which  have  transpired  amongst  the  modern 
Spirituahsts,  many  of  which  are  recorded  in  their  literature,  and  some  few 
referred  to  in  this  volume.  The  prayer  of  faith  in  these  instances  is  wanting, 
and  the  name  of  Christ  is  seldom  or  ever  used.  Can  our  Christian  friends 
explain  the  modus  operandi  of  these  anti-Christian  healing  exploits  ?  Even 
Mr.  Baxter,  after  abandoning  the  Christian  solution  of  his  problematical 
state,  does  not  deny  the  facts  of  healing  of  which  he  was  an  eye-witness, 
and  a  subject  himself  Can  the  "  Satanic  "  theory  upon  which  this  eminent 
witness  falls  back,  cover  the  ground  of  Spiritual  healing  as  well  as  the 
name  of  Christ  ?  If  so,  can  our  Christian  friends  explain  the  difference  of 
the  power,  and  the  superiority  of  one  source  over  the  other? 

As  the  limitations  of  our  space  will  permit  of  no  more  extended  notice 
of  this  remarkable  movement,  nor  of  the  vast  multitude  of  witnesses  whose 
testimony  was  rendered  to  the  facts  of  healing  as  well  as  of  tongues,  we  must 
conclude  with  the  following  brief  extract  from  the  life  of  Edward  Irving  by 
Mr.  Wilks,  one  of  his  admiring  followers. 

This  writer,  after  detailing  the  circumstances  of  Mr.  Irving's  trial,  and 
final  withdrawal  from  the  church,  concludes  with  the  following  touching 
remarks  : — 

"  His  public  work  was  over.  His  flesh  became  wan  ;  his  raven  hair  hoary  as  with 
extreme  age.  His  eye  gleamed  with  au  unquiet  light,  and  the  hectic  spot  on  his  pale 
cheek  betrayed  the  fire  burning  at  his  heart.  On  December  the  8th,  1834,  he  passed  to 
that  rest  for  which  his  weary  spirit  longed.  The  last  words  he  was  heard  to  utter  were 
'  If  I  die  I  die  unto  the  Lord.     Living  and  dying  I  am  the  Lord's.'  " 

It  would  be  needless  to  pursue  in  farther  detail  the  course  of  the  Catholic 
Apostolic  CJmrch,  an  organization  which  claims  the  noble-minded  and 
devoted  Edward  Irving  as  its  founder,  although  it  neither  adopts  his  name, 
nor  conserves  "  the  power"  which  made  that  name  during  four  short  years 
a  milestone  on  the  highway  of  immortality. 

Numerous  records  of  kindred  powers  are  to  be  found  in  the  history  of 
Spiritualism,  but  those  which  distinguished  the  uprising  at  Port  Glasgow,  and 
the  Irvingites  in  London,  undoubtedly  owe  a  large  share  of  their  world-wide 
renown  to  the  talents,  eloquence,  and  unspotted  life  of  the  brave  and 
devoted  gentleman  who  gave  all  he  was,  and  all  he  had,  even  to  his  very 
life,  to  uphold  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the  mighty  outpouring  with  which 
his  name  is  associated. 

It  is  one  of  the  triumphs  as  well  as  the  consolations  of  Spiritualism,  to  be 
assured,  that  Edward  Irving  still  lives,  and  though  removed  from  the  scenes 
of  earthly  trial  in  which  his  pure  life  was  consumed,  "  he  being  dead,  yet 
speaketh ! " 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER    XIV. 

EARLY   SPIRITUALISM   IN   GREAT   BRITAIN   (CONTINUED). 
The   Irish   Revivals. 

The  fourth  and  last  great  movement  of  a  Pentecostal  character  to  which 
we  can  call  attention  as  occurring  during  the  present  century,  has  been 
named  "  The  Irish  Revival,"  and  though  we  have  no  direct  account  of  its 
unfoldment  before  1857 — nine  years  after  the  commencement  of  "  Modern 
Spiritualism  "  in  America,  the  scenes  of  the  Irish  drama  were  so  distant 
from  and  unconnected  with  other  European  centres  wherein  "spirit  circles" 
were  generally  held,  and  the  people  upon  whom  "  the  power  "  fell,  were  so 
far  removed  in  rank  and  national  isolation  from  the  cultured  classes 
amongst  whom  Spiritualism  in  Great  Britain  for  the  most  part  took  root, 
that  there  does  not  seem  even  a  possibility  of  tracing  any  connexion 
between  the  two  movements,  unless  we  admit  the  hypothesis  of  a 
universal  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  all  over  the  world  and  one  moving  in 
psychological  currents  of  influence  from  all  points  of  the  compass. 

In  commencing  our  necessarily  brief  review  of  the  Irish  Revivals,  we  must 
give  some  account  of  the  place  as  well  as  the  persons  with  whom  they 
originated,  and  this  we  do  in  the  words  of  William  Arthur,  A.M.,  a  learned 
gentleman  who  published  several  voluminous  tracts  on  this  subject. 

After  speaking  of  the  colonies  of  Protestants  from  England  and  Scotland 
who  peopled  Ulster,  and  whose  descendants  form  now  its  main  population, 
Mr.  Arthur  says  : — 

"  The  people  are  notoriously  cool,  practical,  money -making,  strong-willed,  and  fond  of 
disputation. 

"  None  of  the  popular  rehgious  delusions  which  took  effect  in  other  places  found  their 
way  into  Ulster.  Spiritual  life  was  low,  but  the  exaggerated  crimes  which  prevailed  in 
Eomish  parts  of  the  land  were  rare.  Still  many  forms  of  vice  were  very  prevalent. 
DrunJcenness  raged  like  a  plague  ;  swearing,  cockfighting,  gambling,  and  large  numbers  of 
illegitimate  births,  formed  its  natural  train.  A  policeman  on  the  streets  of  Belfast  told 
us  that  he  had  lived  in  Ahoghill  for  two  years,  and  that  it  was  the  '  worst  wee  place  in 
the  world.'  On  a  day  when  a  funeral  took  place,  he  said,  there  was  so  much  drinking 
and  fighting,  that  the  lock-up  was  always  full  ;  and  on  a  fair  day  you  could  not  go  many 
yards  without  hearing  drunken  men  cursing  the  Pope. 

"  The  origin  of  the  present  movement  is  clearly  traced  to  Connor,  a  parish  seven  miles 
long,  peopled  by  small  farmers,  weavers,  and  linen  manufacturers,  nearly  all  Presby- 
terians, mixed  only  with  a  handful  of  Church  people,  and  scarcely  any  Eoman  Catholics. 

"  There  was  a  young  man  residing  at  Ballymena,  a  few  miles  away,  who  was  zealous 
for  religion  after  his  manner,  and  stood  in  his  own  eyes  as  a  Christian.  But  he  heard  a 
lady  from  England  conversing  with  some  young  women,  and  describing  true  conversion. 
Her  words  reached  the  heart  of  the  young  man.  He  sought  the  inward  and  holy  power 
of  religion,  and  found  clear  and  joyful  acceptance  with  his  Father  in  heaven.  Full  of  this 
new  happiness,  he  returned  to  his  own  parish. 

"In  the  month  of  September,  1857,  he  and  three  other  young  men  joined  together  in 
secret  felloivship,  to  pray  for  Ood's  special  blessing  on  the  people  around  them. 

"  Three  months  later  what  is  called  '  The  Spring  Communion'  came.  The  parish  had 
been  more  or  less  filled  with  tidings  of  the  prayers  that  were  being  offered,  and  of  the 
happy  conversions  which  had  taken  place.  Their  minister  had  been  preaching  on  the 
subject  of  a  great  revival,  and  telling  what  the  Lord  was  doing  for  his  vineyard  in  America, 

.       NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  tii 

■with  a  strong  desire  for  the  like  at  home.  The  services  of  the  Communion  were  crowned 
with  unwonted  influence.  Life,  inquiry,  deep  convictions,  strong  crying  and  tears — these 
became  the  familiar  tidings  of  that  favoured  parish.  Prayer  meetings  sprang  up  on  every 
hand,  and  wonderful  was  it  to  the  staid  Presbyterian  folk  to  hear,  out  of  the  lips  of  the 
unlearned  and  the  ignorant,  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  suckUngs  in  religion,  prayers 
of  deep  import  and  heavenly  power." 

After  many  fervent  expressions  of  thankfulness  for  the  conversions 
effected  as  above  shown,  Mr.  Arthur  goes  on  to  say  : — 

"  At  a  prayer  meeting  in  the  meeting-house  there  were  about  three  hundred  persons. 
All  were  unexcited,  though  earnest.  At  the  call  of  the  minister,  a  young  man,  one  of  the 
recent  converts,  read  a  portion  of  Scripture,  and  delivered  a  short  exhortation.  Then  the 
minister  called  on  them  to  spend  a  little  time  in  silent  prayer.  At  first  it  seemed  as  if  the 
moments  would  pass  in  deep  silence  ;  but  after  a  while,  breathings  began  to  be  heard, 
loiv,  subdued,  but  earnest — no  voice,  no  tone,  tw  words  ;  but  a  breathing  throughout  the  place, 
as  if  each  one  apart  was  breathing  out  the  soul  to  God.  That  strange  sound  rose  and  came 
quicker  till  it  almost  rushed,  and  the  place  seemed  all  astir  ivith  suppressed  but  ouibursting 
prayer." 

Very  different  results  soon  grew  out  of  these  peaceful  "unexcited" 
prayer  meetings,  as  the  reader  will  perceive  if,  passing  over  a  few  pages 
filled  with  descriptions  of  similar  scenes  and  individual  experiences,  he 
takes  up  the  thread  of  Mr.  Arthur's  narrative  in  June,  1859,  two  years  later 
than  the  first  "conversion"  alluded  to.  We  resume  our  extracts  at  the 
following  point  of  advance  : — 

"  One  who  had  felt  the  joy  of  pardoning  love  filling  his  own  soul,  and  opening  in  his 
breast  a  little  heaven,  longed  to  see  his  mother,  who  lived  in  a  neighbouring  parish.  He 
got  one  of  his  comrades  to  join  him  in  earnest  prayer  for  her  conversion.  After  this,  he 
went  home  to  see  if  prayer  had  had  any  effect,  and,  to  his  joy  and  wonder,  found  that 
just  loliile  they  had  been  praying,  deep  conviction  had  fallen  up)onhis  mother's  soul ;  she  had 
sought  mercy,  and  was  now  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  This  triumph  of 
prayer  was  no  sooner  won  than  came  the  question,  Where  was  his  brother  ?  Aioay  at  a 
cockfight.  Thither  he  followed  him  :  there  he  found  him,  and,  seizing  him,  he  said,  '  I 
have  a  message  for  you  from  the  Lord  Jesus.'  This  went  to  his  heart ;  he  too  fled  for 
refuge  to  the  open  arms  of  the  crucified  Redeemer.  His  burden  fell  off,  joy  and  peace 
took  possession  of  his  soul,  and  he  rushed  away  to  his  minister,  exclaiming,  '  I  am  saved  ! 
I  am  saved  ! ' 

"  Converts  from  Connor  then  came  to  tell  the  people  of  Ahoghill  what  the  Lord  had 
done  for  their  souls.  It  was  a  strange  thing  to  hear  weavers,  and  stone-breakers,  and 
butchers,  and  others  unskilled  in  speech,  pouring  forth  reverent  and  thoughtful  prayers. 
It  was  more  wonderful  still  to  hear  them  tell  how  the  Lord  had  sent  his  arrows  through 
their  souls. 

"  '  You  ask,'  cries  a  convert,  '  if  you  did  find  mercy,  how  you  would  know  it  ?  Ah, 
you  would  know  it  very  well,  you  would  feel  it.'  And  there  his  argument  ended.  But 
something  was  in  these  new-born  souls — which  tvent  further  than  ten  thousand  arguments. 
The  power  of  the  blessed  Spirit  attended  them.  And  then  began  those  ovenvhelming  affec- 
tions of  body  and  mind  together,  which  have  resounded  through  the  world,  and  made  the 
Ulster  Revival  notorious  to  the  religious  and  the  curious  alike. 

"  In  an  opposite  direction  to  Ahoghill  lies  the  town  of  Ballyclare.  There,  one  fair  day, 
a  slater  coming  home  to  dinner,  was  told  by  his  \vife  that  there  ^oas  a  man  in  the  fair  ivho 
had  lost  his  reason  ;  for  on  the  '  fair  hill,'  in  his  cart,  he  was  praying  aloud,  and  crying 
for  mercy  to  his  soul.  The  man  went  to  see,  and  found  it  even  so  :  it  was  a  man  from 
the  neighbourhood  of  Broughshane,  where  the  Revival  had  now  begun  ;  and,  as  he  came 
into  the  fair,  such  deep  conviction  of  sin  seized  upon  him,  that  he  cared  not  for  the  eye 
of  the  crowd  or  the  course  of  business,  but  felt  he  was  going  down  into  the  gulf  ;  and  he 
cried,  '  Lord,  save,  I  perish  ! '  There  ivas  something  in  the  cry  which  went  to  the  soid  of  the 
slater,  who  had  come  to  see  the  man  '  out  of  his  mind.'  He  felt.  It  is  time  for  me  to  seek 
mercy  too. 

"  And,  as  if  the  Lord  had  said,  '  Return  to  thine  house,  and  show  what  great  things 
the  Lord  had  done  unto  thee,'  he  did  return,  and  told  his  tale  of  redeeming  love,  and 
speedily  the  holy  flame  was  lighted  up  in  Ballyclare. 

112  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  At  Hyde  Park,  a  village  a  few  miles  from  Belfast,  I  had  the  happiness  of  witnessing 
a  wonderful  work  of  revival,  and,  on  inquiry  as  to  its  origin,  found  it  traced  to  a  lad  from 
Ballyclare.  He  told  how  the  Lord  had  converted  him,  and  seeing  a  boy  impressed  by  it, 
fell  upon  liis  neck,  and  '  the  affection  of  this  boy  seemed  to  break  down  the  hearts  of  the 
people.'  HowsHght  a  cause  is  followed  by  wonderful  effects,  when  a  mighty  power  of  the 
Sj^irit  operates  ! 

"  After  nearly  txoo  years  the  first  converts  are  steadfast,  and  the  original  seat  of  the 
revival  more  and  more  alive.  Only  within  the  last  two  months  has  it  attracted  public 
notice  ;  but  in  that  time  it  has  spread  Hke  fire,  among  country  districts,  market  towns,  and 
considerable  cities.  From  Belfast  to  Coleraine,  I  have  been  permitted  to  see  its  effects, 
with  wonder  and  deep  adoration.  I  never  read  of  anything  equal  at  once  in  extent  and 
transforming  power,  and  hereafter  it  wUl  be  my  endeavour  to  trace  the  work  through 
some  of  those  stages  in  which,  instead  of  the  tranquil  and  gradual  progress  which  marked 
its  early  course,  it  burst  forth  with  such  manifestations  as  filled  the  newspapers,  and 
became  the  all-absorbing  topic  of  the  country." 

As  Mr.  Arthur's  views  of  revival  practices  are  evidently  dictated  more 
in  the  spirit  of  orthodox  sympathy  with  the  actors  than  that  of  philosophic 
and  deliberate  investigation,  we  now  tarn  to  the  testimony  of  a  still  more 
impartial  collator  of  revival  incidents,  in  the  person  of  Dr.  Massie,  a  writer 
of  eminence,  whose  excellent  account  of  the  Irish  Revivals  is  thus  rendered 
in  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson's  volume  on  this  subject  before  alluded  to.  Dr. 
Massie  says : — 

"  We  may  remark,  that  the  first  noticeable  cases  of  decided  impression  appeared  in 
Ballymena,  on  the  morning  of  Monday,  the  16th  of  May ;  and,  up  till  noon  of  the  fol- 
lowing Wednesday,  the  entire  number  was  about  thirty.  These  cases  occurred  chiefly  in 
streets  of  an  inferior  description,  and  among  the  lower  classes  of  the  population.  It 
would  be  impossible  to  ascertain  the  exact  number  so  visited  within  the  town — for  cases 
are  now  to  be  found  in  every  street,  among  all  classes  of  the  people.  We  know  of  one 
house  wherein  seven  persons  were  impressed  in  the  usual  mysterious  manner  in  the  course 
of  a  single  evening  ;  and  the  total  number  in  BaUymena  alone  cannot  be  reckoned  at  less 
than  three  hundred.  On  the  evening  of  Thursday,  the  19th  instant,  the  public  excite- 
ment, particularly  in  SpringweU  Street,  was  intense  ;  and  we  visited  that  locality  for  the 
express  purpose  of  witnessing  and  reporting  upon  the  phenomena.  On  one  portion  of  the 
street  we  found  an  assemblage  of  at  least  two  thousand  people  engaged  in  services  of 
prayer  and  praise  under  the  leader shii^  of  laymen,  six  or  seven  houses  elsewhere  in  the 
same  street  were  crowded  with  people  in  every  spot  Avhere  standing  room  could  be 
obtained.  The  doors,  and  in  some  cases  the  windows,  were  open,  and  besieged  by  a  throng 
of  all  classes  anxious  to  hear  the  proceedings  within.  These  houses  we  found  to  be  the 
homes  of  '  stricken '  parties,  who  were  then  labouring  under  the  influence  of  the  shock  in 
sundry  stages  of  its  operation.  Some  were  in  a  state  of  very  great  weakness  and  partial 
stupor  ;  some  were  dreadfuUy  excited,  calling  upon  God  for  mercy,  with  an  earnestness 
of  which  no  intelligent  investigator  could  doubt  the  reaUty  for  a  single  moment ;  some 
were  uttering  exclamations  of  despairing  agony ;  others  were  pouring  forth  accents  of 
heart-touching  and  adoring  gratitude.  In  all  cases  they  were  surrounded  by  crowds  of 
friends  or  comforters.  They  were  prayed  over,  in  some  cases  by  a  single  leader,  in  others 
by  several  persons  at  the  same  moment,  the  stricken  person  sometimes  uniting  with  them 
in  language  of  glowing  and  continuous  eloquence,  and  at  other  times  by  inter jectional  ex- 
clamations of  doubt,  hope,  faith,  or  joy  unspeakable.  During  the  earlier  paroxysms  the 
sufferers  generally  experienced  considerable  relief  from  sacred  music;  and  hence  the 
devotional  exercises  were  frequently  varied  by  the  singing  of  psalms,  in  which  all  who 
were  vsdthin  heai'ing  appeared  to  join  most  cordially.  This  description  of  the  proceedings 
in  one  house  may  be  regarded  as  applicable  to  all  the  others—for  we  visited  them  all,  and 
were  favoured  with  opportunities  for  investigation  in  seventeen  different  cases. 

"  In  the  course  of  the  evening  we  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  cases  of 
'  impression '  in  the  earlier  stages,  the  scene  at  one  of  which  we  shall  attempt  to  describe. 
Having  made  our  way  up  a  narrow  stau-case,  crowded  with  anxious  listeners,  we  entered 
a  small  apartment  in  which  about  twenty  people  of  both  sexes  were  grouped  in  various 
attitudes  of  deep  attention  or  devotion.  A  neatly-attired  young  woman,  apparently 
about  twenty- two  years  of  age,  had  been  stricken  an  hour  previously,  and  was  supported 
in  the  arms  of  an  elderly  female,  who  was  seated  upon  a  low  stool.  The  person  impressed, 
appeared  to  be  in  a  state  of  partial  stupor,  from  which  she  was  occasionally  roused  into  a 
feeling  of  mental  agony,  depicted  in  heart-rending  expressions  of  the  countenance,  and 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  113 

deep,  low  wailings  of  terrible  despair.  Her  face  was  deadly  pale,  and  her  eyelids  closed, 
except  when  partially  raised  by  a  convulsive  paroxysm,  and  even  then  no  part  of  the  eye 
was  visible,  except  a  narrow  line  of  white.  Her  pulse  was  intermittent  and  feverish,  and 
her  face  and  hands  covered  with  perspiration.  Occasionally  she  extended  her  arms  with 
an  action  as  if  groping  in  the  air,  and  at  other  times  they  were  elevated  high  overhead, 
the  hands  clasped,  and  her  features  rigidly  fixed  into  an  expression  of  supplication,  of 
which  no  language  could  convey  an  adequate  idea.  Her  utterance  was  inter jectional  and 
incoherent,  mingled  with  sobs,  moans,  and  agonizing  expressions  of  despair,  like  the  fol- 
lowing : — ■'  Is  there  no  hope  ? '  '  Oh,  my  heart,  my  heart ! '  *  Pardon,  pardon  ! '  '  Oh, 
Jesus,  save  me  ! '  '  Oh,  God,  have  mercy  ! '  Beside  this  poor  girl  two  men  were  standing 
and  praying  aloud  alternately. 

"  In  other  portions  of  the  room  hands  were  clasped,  and  tears  silently  streaming  from 
many  an  eye,  but  our  attention  was  irresistibly  attracted  to  the  movements  of  a  young 
woman,  evidently  of  the  lower  classes,  who  had  been  '  stricken  '  two  days  previously,  but 
had  now  recovered,  and  was  bending  over  the  sufferer  with  emotions  exhibiting  the 
deepest  and  most  affectionate  solicitude.  She  told  her  of  Jesus,  who  was  ever  willing  to 
save  ;  she  repeated  passages  of  Scripture  that  spoke  of  hope  and  consolation  to  the  peni- 
tent ;  and  then  burst  forth  into  a  lengthened  and  apparently  impulsive  prayer,  well 
expressed  and  perfectly  intelligent,  but  chiefly  inter  jectional. 

"  Now,  it  may  be  asked,  who  was  this  earnest  suppliant  for  peace  and  consolation  to 
the  afflicted  sufferer  ?  Four  days  previous  to  the  evening  of  which  we  write,  she  was  a 
reckless  and,  apparently,  God-forsaken  young  woman — a  common  street  prostitute  in  Bally - 
mena  !  Before  we  left  the  scene  which  we  had  thus  attempted  to  describe,  the  impressed 
person  had  obtained  considerable  relief,  and,  at  intervals,  we  observed  that  her  lips  were 
silently  moving,  as  if  in  inward  prayer. 

"  In  the  meantime  the  movement  was  'progressing  with  rapidity  in  every  district  of  the 
surrounding  country.  Soon  after  breakfast  hour  on  Saturday  morning,  six  or  seven  young 
women  became  suddenly  affected  with  all  the  usual  symptoms,  while  engaged  at  work  in 
the  spinning  factory  at  Eaceview.  Intense  excitement  immediately  ensued,  the  alarm 
soon  became  general,  and  within  an  hour  twenty  or  thirty  people  of  both  sexes  were  found 
prostrate.  The  business  of  the  entire  estabhshment  was  interrupted,  and,  as  a  matter  of 
necessity,  the  factory  was  closed  at  twelve  o'clock.  It  was  re-opened  on  Monday,  but 
nearly  half  the  ordinary  number  of  hands  were  absent,  and  we  understand  that  the  busi- 
ness of  Ballygarvy  bleachworks  has  been  seriously  impeded,  owing  to  a  similar  course. 
About  six  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  Sunday  week,  a  congregation,  numbering  fully  four 
thousaad  people,  assembled  in  the  open  air,  in  front  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  at 
Broughshane,  where  services  were  conducted  by  the  Eev.  Mr.  Robinson  and  a  number  of 
Revival  converts  from  other  localities.  Numerous  and  strongly-marked  cases  of  sudden 
'  conviction  '  occurred  among  the  audience,  and  several  persons  were  carried  into  the 
church,  from  which  place  they  were  not  in  a  condition  for  removal  till  midnight.  The 
total  number  of  persons  affected  on  that  occasion  has  been  estimated  at  more  than  one 
hundred.  On  the  same  evening  open-air  prayer-meetings  were  held  at  Cullybackey  and 
Straid.  At  Carniney,  about  a  mile  from  Ballymena,  the  assemblage  numbered  fully  two 
thousand,  and  they  separated  into  large  groups,  for  each  of  which  there  was  a  speaker. 
Numerous  impressions  occurred,  and  some  of  the  parties  so  affected  were  removed  from 
the  ground  on  cars,  followed,  in  some  cases,  by  ranks  of  people  singing  psalms." 

"  Dr.  Massie  gives  the  following  extracts  from  a  Ballymena  correspondent  :  '  Last  night, 
at  a  prayer  meeting  in  Wellington  Street  Church,  so  crowded  that  the  doors  and  win- 
dows were  surrounded  by  a  multitude  who  could  not  obtain  admission,  scenes  occurred 
which  bowed  the  heart  with  awe  and  solemn  fear,  as  if  the  invisible  world  was  opening  to 
view.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  describe  such  scenes,  but  no  one  can  describe  them, 
they  must  be  witnessed.  During  the  time  that  Mr.  Shaw  was  speaking,  a  person  labour- 
ing under  strong  convictions  of  sin  was  carried  out  into  the  session-room.  He  was  a 
person  who  had  had  convictions  before,  but  on  this  occasion  they  returned  in  a  manner 
most  distressing  to  witness.  He  was  a  strong,  middle-aged  man  ;  but  in  the  mysterious, 
half-conscious  state  in  which  he  was,  his  soul  actually  seemed  to  the  beholders  as  the 
battle-ground  between  the  powers  of  light  and  darkness,  filling  his  body  with  agony  un- 
utterable. His  cries  for  mercy,  for  salvation  from  Satan,  and  from  his  former  sins,  at 
first  inarticulate,  but  at  last  so  loud  as  to  be  heard  over  the  body  of  the  house — his  clasped 
hands,  as  he  knelt  in  prayer,  with  his  face  turned  upwards,  his  eyes  shut,  every  vein 
swelled  almost  to  bursting,  and  the  perspiration  streaming  down  his  face — his  becoming 
calmer  while  listening  to  singing,  and  at  last  the  torrents  of  tears  running  down  his  face, 
as  he  asked  the  116th  Psalm  to  be  sung,  showed  the  agonizing  conflict  that  had  been 
going  on.  Would  that  sceptics  and  those  at  a  distance  would  at  least  suspend  judgment 
until  they  saw  one  such  case  as  this  !  I  would  venture  to  say  that  if  they  had  stood  over 
that  man  in  his  agony  and  listened  to  his  unutterable  groanings  for  pardon  and  for  peace, 
8 

114  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

if  not  convinced  themselves,  they  would  speak  of  the  present  movement,  not  with  sneers  or 
mockery,  but  with  solemn  and  reverential  awe.  Further,  with  respect  to  this  man,  he 
has  shown  one  of  the  best  tests  of  sincerity,  in  giving  up  a  lucrative  business,  when  first 
convinced  of  sin,  about  three  weeks  ago.  He  feels,  as  many  now  do,  that  a  Christian  and 
a  whiskey-seller  are  not  compatible  terms.  During  the  time  that  this  man  was  suffering 
so  much  last  night,  others,  all  children,  were,  irought  in,  or  ivere  seized  with  convictions  in 
the  room.  The  same  cries  for  mercy,  for  deliverance  from  Satan,  were  repeated.  During 
this  scene  in  the  session-room,  the  vast  crowd  in  the  church,  led  by  one  of  the  ministers, 
were  praying,  great  mimbers  of  them  audibly,  for  those  under  convictions.' " 

"  On  the  18th  of  June,  the  Observer  of  Ballymena  remarks — '  In  the  town  and  neigh- 
bourhood of  Ballymena  the  mysterious  influence  continues  in  unabated  operation  ;  and 
numerous  cases,  accompanied  by  all  the  wonderful  phenomena  so  frequently  described, 
are  occurring  daily.  At  the  Presbyterian  church,  the  congregation  was  so  numerous  on 
Sunday  last,  that  many  persons  were  unable  to  obtain  admittance,  and  four  or  five  new 
cases  of  "conviction"  occurred  during  pablic  worship.  In  the  evening  an  immense  con- 
course of  the  community  assembled  for  united  prayer  in  a  grass  park  to  the  west  of  the 
Galgorm  Road.  All  the  churches  in  Ballymena  would  not  have  contained  the  number 
present ;  and  the  spectacle  was  one  of  the  most  solemn  we  have  ever  vritnessed. 

" '  The  services  were  opened  by  the  Rev.  S.  J.  Moore  ;  after  which  addresses  followed  in 
succession  from  four  or  five  lay  converts.  Their  language  was  characterized  by  the 
unpolished  but  effective  eloquence  of  nature,  for  they  were  thoroughly  in  earnest.  Several 
strongly-marked  cases  of  sudden  conviction  occurred,  while  these  exhortations  were  in 
progress  ;  but  the  parties  had  been  carried  to  a  remote  corner  of  the  enclosure.  The 
services  were  brought  to  a  conclusion  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Moore  ;  but  the  audience  did  not 
separate,  for  strange  and  most  exciting  scenes  immediately  ensued.  Suddenly  one  person, 
and  then  another,  and  another,  in  rapid  succession,  fell  to  the  ground  with  piercing  cries  of 
mental  agony.  The  mysterious  iniluence  loas  at  xoorh.  It  spread  still  further  among  the 
assemblage  ;  and  within  half-an-hour  we  found  not  fewer  than  twenty  human  beings 
stretched  upon  the  grass,  exhibiting  emotions,  both  of  soul  and  body,  sufficient  to  appal 
the  stoutest  heart.  In  all  cases  it  appeared  as  if  every  fibre  of  the  heart,  and  every  muscle 
of  the  body  were  im^ung  ivith  some  excruciating  torture.  Then  followed  loud  cries  for  the 
Redeemer's  mercy,  expressed  in  tones  of  anguish  which  no  imagination  can  conceive  or 
pen  describe. 

"  'By  some  intelligent  investigators  it  is  believed  that  just  in  proportion  to  the  fairness 
or  immox'ality  of  previous  character  the  visitation  is  more  or  less  severe.  The  correctness 
of  that  opinion  is  liable  to  considerable  doubt ;  but  we  know  that,  from  whatever  cause, 
there  is  a  great  variety  in  the  extent  of  suSering.  Some  cases  are  comparatively  mild. 
But  the  majority  of  the  cases  of  this  evening  were  among  the  severest  that  we  ever 
witnessed — and  we  have  now  seen  hundreds  of  them.  In  general,  the  stricken  parties 
were  carried  out  from  the  pressure  of  the  thronging  multitude,  to  localities  where  they 
became  objects  of  solicitude  to  smaller  groups  in  other  portions  of  the  enclosure.  At 
about  half -past  ten  o'clock  we  reckoned  nine  circles  or  assemblages  of  this  nature,  in  a 
single  one  of  which  we  found  eleven  prostrate  penitents,  smitten  to  the  heart,  and  fervently 
suptplicating  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  to  pardon  their  iniquities. 

" '  Over  these  parties,  pious  bystanders  or  some  of  the  converted  offered  prayer.  Other 
circles  laboured  to  console  the  sufferers  by  singing  appropriate  hymns  or  psalms.  In  one 
of  the  circles  we  noticed  a  case  of  terrible  severity,  one  in  which  visions  of  unspeakable 
horror  must  have  been  pictured  to  the  imagination  of  the  unhappy  sufferer.  A  young 
woman  lay  extended  at  full  length,  her  eyes  closed,  her  hands  clasped  and  elevated,  and 
her  body  curved  in  a  spasm  so  violent  that  it  appeared  to  rest,  arch-like,  upon  her  heels  and 
the  back  portion  of  her  head.  In  that  position  she  lay  without  speech  or  motion  for  several 
minutes.  Suddenly  she  uttered  a  terrific  scream,  and  tore  handfuls  of  hair  from  her  un- 
covered head.  Extending  her  open  hands  in  a  repeUing  attitude  of  the  most  appalling 
terror,  she  exclaimed,  "  Oh  that  fearful  pit ! — Lord  Jesus  save  me  !"  "I  am  a  sinner,  a  most 
unAvorthy  sinner — but  oh,  Lord,  take  him  away,  take  him  away  !"  "  Oh,  Saviour  of 
sinners,  remove  him  from  my  sight  I "  During  this  paroxysm  three  strong  men  "were  hardly 
able  to  restrain  her.  She  extended  her  arms  on  either  side,  clutching  spasmodically 
at  the  grass,  shuddering  with  terror,  and  shrinking  from  some  fearful  inward  vision  ;  but 
she  ultimately  fell  back  exhausted,  nerveless,  and  apparently  insensible.  How  long  she 
remained  in  that  condition  we  are  unable  to  say ;  but  we  understand  that  she  was  treated 
with  Christian  sympathy,  and  removed  from  the  field  in  safety  before  midnight. 

"  '  This  was  an  extreme  case — not  vrithout  parallel,  but  certainly  the  most  frightful 
that  we  have  ever  witnessed.  We  may  remark  that,  three  days  afterwards,  that  woman 
was  visited  by  a  Christian  friend,  who  had  been  a  witness  of  her  agony.  He  found  her 
weak  in  body,  but  her  mind  was  thoroughly  composed,  She  was  a  new  creature.  The 
light  of  peace  and  love  was  beaming  from  her  countenance,  and  joy  reflected  in  her  eyes  as 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  115 

she  told  him  of  her  perfect  reconciliation  with  God,  and  her  unwavering  faith  in  the 
Redeemer.  Now  we  do  not  pretend  to  explain  the  moving  cause  of  these  mysterious  con- 
victions ;  but  we  feel  bound  to  say  that  such  have  been  the  results  in  every  case  brought 
under  our  notice  during  the  last  two  months.  In  that  respect  there  is  not  the  slightest 
perceptible  distinction  in  the  influence,  whether  upon  the  old  or  the  young,  the  rich  or 
the  poor,  the  learned  or  the  unlearned.  Whether  the  agonies  are  brief  or  lengthened, 
moderate  or  severe,  the  e/ec<  is  invariably  the  same — the  fruit  is  love,  peace,  joy,  tem- 
perance, and  humility.  Some  of  the  "  impressed  "  recovered  ability  to  walk,  but  the 
greater  number  were  supported  by  their  friends,  or  carried  away,  and  the  ground  was 
entirely  vacated  about  half-past  eleven  o'clock.'  " 

Painful  as  it  is  to  narrate,  and  call  upon  common-sense  readers  to 
follow  these  narratives,  it  is  imperatively  necessary  that  the  philosophic 
student  of  psychology  should  trace  out  the  workings  of  the  wonderful 
modern  Spiritual  outpouring,  in  all  its  various  phases.  It  is  not  an  unin- 
teresting subject  of  consideration  moreover,  to  observe  how  the  same 
influx  operating  upon  different  grades  of  rehgious  thinkers,  is  estimated  by 
the  ruling  powers  of  modern  society.  When  an  ignorant  and  half-savage 
multitude  screams  and  writhes,  and,  in  convulsive  agonies,  only  to  be  paralleled 
in  the  cells  of  Bedlam,  howls  forth  supplications  "that  God  will  pardon  them" 
for  imaginary  crimes,  the  clergy  fold  their  hands,  look  reverently  on,  and 
cry,  "  Behold  the  work  of  the  Lord  ! "  When  a  broken-hearted  mother 
listens  to  the  telegraphic  signals  which  assure  her  the  child  she  mourns  as 
lost,  still  lives  and  blooms  in  Paradise,  and  she  dries  her  tears,  and 
calmly  goes  forth  to  proclaim  in  m.odest  and  eloquent  terms,  the  fact  of 
immortality  demonstrated — that  same  clergy  holds  up  its  hands  in  holy 
horror,  and  cries,  "  Behold  the  work  of  Satan  ! " 

It  is  time  that  a  discerning  public  should  have  the  opportunity  of  pro- 
nouncing judgment  upon  both  sides  of  these  pictures,  and  of  comparing  the 
theologic  with  the  Spiritual  influences  prevaiHng  during  the  psychological 
upheavals  of  this  century. 

With  this  view  we  shall  present  a  few  more  examples  of  the  celebrated 
Revival  movement  in  Ireland. 

A  Belfast  paper,  speaking  of  Messrs.  Ewart's  mill,  Crumhn  Road,  says  : — 

"  On  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  in  one  of  the  departments  of  a  manufacturing  concern, 
which  employs  a  vast  number  of  workers,  male  and  female,  nearly  twenty  girls  were  struck 
down,  each  in  an  instant,  at  their  work,  several  becoming  apparently  insensible  at  once, 
and  others  uttering  agonizing  cries  for  mercy.  The  scene  produced  the  greatest  excite- 
ment throughout  the  entire  works,  and  not  a  little  alarm.  Cars  were  provided  for  those 
who  could  not  otherwise  be  removed  to  their  homes,  and  the  rest  were  assisted  out  of  the 
premises,  and  taken  to  their  respective  places  of  abode.  Orders  were  given  that  the  work- 
rooms should  be  closed  for  the  day  ;  hut  some  additional  cases  of  visitation  occurred  efoen  as 
the  young  women  were  leaving  the -place  and  passing  down  stairs.  Some  of  those  attacked, 
have  not  yet  been  able  to  return  to  work.  In  most  cases,  on  reaching  home,  the  persons 
afifected,  or  their  friends,  sought  spiritual,  and  some  of  them  medical  advice  ;  and  when 
prayer  had  been  offered  up,  in  a  majority  of  instances,  speedy  relief  both  from  physical 
and  mental  sufiPering  appeared  to  be  produced.  Several  of  the  young  women,  we  have 
been  informed,  have  found  peace,  and  a  number  are  earnestly  seeking  it  in  prayer." 

"  The  Rev.  J.  O'Bi-ien,  writing  to. the  Dublin  Express,  says  : — 

"  '  Mrs.  Connor  has  been  one  of  the  most  striking  cases  I  have  seen.  Her  bodily  affec- 
tion was  very  severe.  She  screamed  so  as  to  be  heard  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off.  She  said 
"  she  had  felt  heavy  for  some  days,  and  had  to  hold  up  her  heart,'^  putting  her  hands  to  her 
.stomach.  She  was  still  in  a  very  weak  state.  Her  husband,  who  had  been  a  man  of  very 
bad  character,  had  been  converted  also,  but  was  now  able  to  return  to  his  work,  and  spent 
all  his  spare  time  in  trying  to  convert  others.'  " 

"  '  He  speaks  of  another  who  "  complained  of  a  burning  from  her  throat  down  to  the 
bottom  of  her  heart,  and  said  that  none  but  God  could  do  her  any  good.'  ' 

"  The  editor  of  the  Ballymena  Observer  writes  : — 

ii6  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

" '  We  went  to  Ballyclare  last  night  to  attend  a  revival  prayer-meeting,  and,  truly,  I 
cannot  understand  it.  I  can  only  say  that ''  it  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  marvellous  in  our 
eyes."  The  scene  when  we  arrived  baffles  all  description.  Imagine  a  large  meadow,  with 
an  immense  multitude  of  people  in  all  attitudes— some  praying,  weeping,  and  cryipg  for 
mercy  ;  others  lying  in  utter  helplessness,  only  able  to  utter  feebly  their  entreaties  for 
pardon,  surrounded  by  groups  of  friends  and  strangers,  all  interceding  for  them,  and  urg- 
ing them  to  call  on  Christ  ;  and  again,  others  with  their  faces  beaming  with  a  more  than 
earthly  light,  listening  to  the  speaker,  with  rapture,  eloquently  praising  God  ;  fathers  and 
mothers,  tender  children  and  strong  men,  the  infant  of  a  feio  years,  &nd  the  grey-haired 
woman,  all  equally  struck,  all  equally  earnest  and  eloquent.  I  saw  stalwart  men  led  away 
as  if  they  were  helpless  childi-en  ;  and  during  the  singing  of  one  of  the  Psalms,  a  man 
beside  us  suddenly  burst  out  into  the  most  terrific  cries,  running  round  and  round  in 
circles  in  such  a  wild  manner  that  it  was  dangerous  tc  be  in  his  way — -when  his  cries 
changed  suddenly  into  calls  on  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  in  a  few  minutes,  after  the  most 
awful  suffering,  he  fell,  unable  to  stand  or  even  speak.  The  public-houses  are  empty,  all 
through  the  town.  There  is  a  prayer-meeting  in  almost  every  second  house.  Groups 
about  the  streets  are  praying  or  conversing  on  the  all-engrossing  topic.  Public  works  are 
stopped  in  consequence  of  this  strange  and  awful  manifestation.  All  places  are  alike  ; 
people  are  struck  do-wn  while  following  their  daily  avocations,  resting  on  their  beds,  or 
traversing  the  streets.  Among  the  people  the  visitation  is  sudden.  The  prayers  and 
supplications  for  mercy  by  and  for  the  afflicted  are,  oh,  how  awfully  solemn  and  earnest  ! 
From  being  one  of  the  wildest  toiuns  in  the  neighbourhood,  Ballyclare  has  become  one  of  the 
most  religious.'  " 

"  Dr.  Carson,  of  Coleraine,  who  has  written  an  excellent  pamphlet  on  the  Physical 
side  of  the  Manifestations,  gives  the  following  :  — 

"  '  A  poor  child,  I  think  about  seven  or  eight  years  of  age,  came  to  my  house  one  night 
at  a  late  hour,  and  asked  to  see  Mrs.  Carson,  who  had  gone  to  her  bedroom.  The  inter- 
view was  readily  gi-anted.  The  child  became  affected.  Her  imploring  and  heart-rending 
cries  for  mercy,  for  she  said  she  was  a  sinner  on  the  brink  of  Hell,  were  so  absolutely  dis- 
tressing that  I  had  to  leave  the  house  for  a  time,  as  I  could  not  bear  to  listen  to  the 
melancholy  tones  of  her  infant  voice.  The  expressions  of  deep  despair  on  her  countenance 
could  not  be  imitated  by  the  best  actor  I  ever  saw  on  the  stage.  It  was  a  dreadful  scene. 
In  a  few  hours,  the  poor  child  got  the  most  perfect  relief,  and  her  countenance  appeared 
almost  superhuman  with  delight.  She  then  began  to  pray,  and  her  prayer  would  have 
melted  the  heart  of  a  rocL  It  was  so  jDOwerful,  so  fluent,  and  so  full  of  thought,  that  it 
almost  looked  like  inspiration  in  a  child  so  very  young.'  " 

"The  Rev.  Dr.  Spence,  of  the  Poultry  Chapel,  giving  the  results  of  his  personal 
experience,  says  : — 

"  '  I  saw  by  the  countenance  of  many  of  them  that  they  were  conscious  of  an  unusual 
joy.  I  spoke  to  several  of  them  individually  about  their  spiritual  change  and  their 
Christian  hope.  In  some  cases  I  could  find  nx)  intelligent  foundation  for  their  joy  beyond 
the  simple  fact  that  they  had  been  "struck,"  and  by-and-by  had  found  happiness  ;  but  in 
other  cases  I  found  the  most  profound  sense  of  sinfulness,  and  the  most  loving  reliance  on 
the  Lord.  I  endeavoured,  when  I  was  brought  into  contact  with  those  who  had  been 
"  struck,"  to  test  in  every  case  the  character  of  the  change  which  had  been  experienced.  The 
result  was  various.  Sometimes  I  could  find  no  solid  scriptural  basis  for  the  transition  from 
sadness  to  joy ;  often,  on  the  other  hand,  was  my  own  soul  refreshed  by  the  simple  narra- 
tive of  a  deepening  sense  of  personal  unworthiness,  and  a  growing  experience  of  the 
Saviour's  grace.  There  may  be  ground,  however,  to  fear  that  in  not  a  few  cases  feeling 
alone  had  to  do  with  the  change.'  " 

"  Dr.  Massie  relates  of  '  M.  Napoleon  Eoussel,  who  came  to  see  the  revival,  that  he  was 
full  of  mistrust,  and  that  he  had  decided  "  to  surrender  his  judgment  only  to  evidence,  to 
let  no  one  know  his  intention  of  publishing."  He  describes  the  physical  crisis  much  as  I 
saw  it ;  in  general  consisting  '  in  wringing  of  the  hands,  raising  the  arms,  moving  the 
limbs,  or  holding  the  stomach  in  the  hands,  in  a  state  of  violent  despair,  or  at  least  of  great 
excitement  under  a  sense  of  sin.' '' 

"The  Rev.  Mr.  Tocock  writes  : — 

"*I  was  requested  to  come  to  a  young  boy,  in  a  most  frightful  state,  stricken  in  a 
moment,  and  fearfully  distracted,  throwing  out  his  arms,  and  kicking/  toith  his  feet,  and 
dancing  and  shaking  in  great  agitation.  I  told  him  to  be  a  little  calmer,  for  he  would 
displease  the  Lord  by  his  conduct ;  urged  him  to  look  to  Jesus,  and  to  pray  for  pardon  ; 
engaged  with  him  in  prayer,  he  repeating  the  words  ;  then  we  sung,  and  being  aided  by 
tivo  young  converts,  he  came  to  Jesus,  and  found  peace  very  soon  afterwards.'  " 

"  From  BaUibay  it  is  written  : — 

"  '  The  church  ministers  are  beginning  to  join  us.  Twenty-five  fell  in  one  church  along 
with  the  minister.  In  another  church,  there  is  a  hundred  of  the  congregation  and  the 
minister  converted.'  " 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  117 

"  The  Rev.  Mr.  Steel,  of  Dairy,  describing  a  meeting  at  Glengarnock,  says  : — 

" '  About  ten  o'clock,  a  person  rose  and  said  that  we  ought  to  kneel  and  engage  in 
prayer.  A  working  man  then  rose,  and,  with  a  heart  like  to  burst,  poured  out  a  most 
earnest  prayer  to  Almighty  God.  At  the  close  of  the  prayer,  the  whole  meeting  seemed 
to  be  moved  by  an  invisible  power.  Here  and  there  were  persons  crying  out  for  mercy, 
and  strong  men  crying  in  such  a  manner  as  I  had  never  heard  before.  I  have  seen 
persons  suffering  under  various  stages  of  cholera — I  have  seen  much  agony  in  my  day, 
but  never  such  a  sight  as  this.'  " 

''The  Ballymena  Observer,  describing  similar  cases,  says  : — 

" '  On  Sunday  evening  last,  an  assemblage  numbering  2,000  people,  many  of  them  from 
Ballymena,  congregated  at  a  prayer  meeting  in  the  open  air  near  KUconriola.  The  third 
speaker  had  nearly  concluded  his  exhortations,  when  a  case  of  sudden  impression,  with  all 
the  ordinary  symptoms,  occurred  among  the  audience.  The  patient  was  a  young  woman 
of  the  neighbourhood,  who  had  been  slightly  affected  some  evenings  before,  at  a  meeting 
near  Carncoagh.  Some  excitement  immediately  ensued,  and  other  cases  folloived  in  rapid 
succession.  Within  half  an  hour  fully  twenty  people  of  the  audience  were  laid  prostrate  ; 
some  of  them  utterly  helpless,  and  for  a  time  unable  to  utter  anything  but  incoherent 
expressions  of  bodily  pain  and  mental  agony.  The  excitement  now  became  intense,  and 
the  scene  that  ensued  baffles  all  power  of  description.'  " 

"  Mr.  Wilkinson,  on  p.  91  of  his  volume,  '  The  Revivals,'  says  : — '  Let  us  read  the 
following,  which  we  quote  from  the  Ballymena  Observer : — 

"  '  The  most  extraordinary  event  of  that  evening  occurred  in  the  case  of  a  mere  child, 
only  seven  years  of  age  ;  a  poor  barefooted  girl,  cleanly  but  indifferently  clothed.  Without 
the  slightest  appearance  of  any  previous  agitation,  she  was  struck  prostrate  in  a  single 
moment.  For  a  time  her  body  was  found  to  be  perfectly  rigid,  and  her  face  colourless.  On 
partial  recovery  she  clasped  her  hands,  and,  looking  up,  exclaimed  in  low  accents,  "  Lord 
Jesus,  have  mercy  upon  me,  and  bring  me  to  the  foot  of  thy  cross  !  "  For  a  considerable 
time  she  continued  to  repeat — but  in  an  undertone,  "  Jesus  !''  "Jesus  !"  "Jesus  !"  Her 
fascinated  and  soul-absorbing  look  was  fixed,  far  away  beyond  all  spheres  ;  and  the  mild, 
unclouded  spiritual  light  of  that  unwavering  gaze  into  the  heavens  will  never  be  forgotten 
by  those  who  witnessed  it.  We  certainly  never  saw  any  condition  so  manifestly  preter- 
natural ;  nor  any  result  so  nearly  approaching  to  a  practical  illustration  of  the  poet's 
beautiful,  though  fanciful,  idea  of  the  "  Angel's  whisper  to  a  slumbering  baby."  The 
trance-like  attitude  of  body,  and  the  rapt  expression  of  her  eye,  appeared  to  favovtr  the 
supposition  that  a  world  of  glory,  invisible  to  other  mortals,  had  been  unveiled  to  her  inner 
sight,  and  that,  for  a  temporary  'period,  she  had  been  admitted  to  communion  ivith  the  spirits 
of  the  just  made  perfect.  We  understand  that  the  girl  was  restored  to  nearly  her  ordinary 
condition  in  about  an  hour.  Phenomena  analogous  to  the  foregoing  came  under  our 
personal  observation  at  a  house  in  Alexander  Street,  in  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday  last — 
and  it  is  worthy  of  special  notice  that  the  party  affected  had  never  been  at  any  of  the 
revival  meetings.  We  there  found  an  interesting  girl,  less  than  eight  years  of  age,  and  we 
ascertained  that  her  general  character  is  that  of  a  shy,  intelligent,  and  truthful  child — 
that  she  is  a  pupil  in  the  infant  department  of  Guy's  free  school.  When  we  first  saw  her 
she  was  extended  upon  a  pallet,  and  slowly  recovering  from  a  somnambulic  trance,  into 
which  she  had  been  instantaneously  stricken  about  five  hours  previously  when  in  the  act 
of  preparation  for  school.  For  some  time  subsequently  to  the  visitation,  her  eyes  were 
fixed  on  vacancy,  her  hands  clasped,  and  her  lips  moving  as  in  silent  prayer.  Her  arms 
were  frequently  elevated,  as  if  to  grasp  some  object  immediately  in  view  ;  and,  on  one 
occasion,  she  clasped  her  father's  hands,  and  pointing  upward,  motioned  him  to  look  and 
pray.  At  another  time  she  called  upon  the  bystanders  to  raise  her  up,  in  order  that  she 
might  take  hold  of  some  glorious  object  presented  to  her  imagination.  On  recovery  from 
this  state,  she  insisted  that  she  had  been  in  the  company  of  superhuman  beings  in  a  world 
of  light  and  blessedness  ;  and,  to  the  utter  amazement  of  her  parents,  she  affirmed  that  she 
had  there  intuitively  recognized  her  infant  brother,  who  had  died  eleven  months  after  his 
birth,  and  Jive  years  before  she  ivas  born  ! '  " 

"  The  following  remarkable  case  is  given  in  a  Coleraine  paper  about  the  same  time.  It 
occurred  at  Kilconriola  : — 

" '  The  person  affected  was  a  mamed  woman,  of  middle  age.  She  appeared  to  be  greatly 
excited  and  feverish ;  her  pulse  was  quick,  there  was  a  hectic  tinge  upon  the  cheeks,  her 
eyes  were  bloodshot,  and  her  face  was  streaming  with  perspiration,  and  for  the  space  of  fifty- 
six  hours  she  was  unable  to  taste  anything  but  water.  After  the  first  four  hours  of  rack- 
ing pain  and  incessant  cries  for  mercy,  she  remained  prostrate  for  nearly  three  days  in  the 
condition  which  we  have  described.  During  the  prostration  of  this  woman  her  house  was 
visited  by  hundreds  of  the  neighbouring  people.  She  had  never  been  taught  to  read  or 
pray,  and  was  unable  to  distinguish  one  letter  of  the  alphabet  from  another,  yet  she  prayed 
with  intense  fervency,  and  exhorted  the  people  to  repentance  with  astonishing  fluency  and 

ii8  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

accuracy  of  speech.  This  case,  like  many  others,  was  accompanied  by  visionary  scenes^ — 
illusions,  certainly,  but  of  a  very  extraordinary  character.  Among  other  things  she  main- 
tained that  a  Bible,  traced  in  characters  of  light,  was  open  before  her,  and,  that,  although 
unable  to  read,  a  spiritual  poioer  had  endowed  her  with  capacity  to  comprehend  the  meaning 
of  every  word  in  it.  It  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  she  repeated  with  literal  accuracy,  and 
as  if  reading  from  the  volume,  a  very  large  number  of  quotations  from  the  Old  and  New 
Testament,  applying  them  in  an  appropriate  manner  in  connection  with  the  prayers  wherein 
she  was  engaged  !  but  these  perceptions  gradually  faded  in  her  progress  towards  recovery, 
and  entirely  disappeared  on  restoration  to  her  ordinary  health.'  " 

"  The  Rev.  J.  Marrable  narrates  the  following,  as  occurring  under  his  own  eyes  : — 
"  '  I  was  particularly  struck  with  the  following  case  :  N.  C.,  not  eighteen  years  of  age, 
was  in  the  act  of  holding  a  conversation  ivith  an  invisible  Being  tvhom  she  called  an  "angel." 
I  shall  not  attempt  to  describe  this  scene,  or  the  words  she  uttered  ;  but  when,  in  about 
half  an  hour,  she  awoke  out  of  the  trance,  to  see  many  faces  looking  in  amazement  at  her, 
with  tears  flowing  from  all  eyes,  her  tongue,  which  could  scarcely  articulate  plainly  before, 
became  loosened,  and  in  the  most  eloquent  manner  she  addressed  all  present  on  the  subject 
of  salvation,  with  an  expression  of  holy  joy  and  gratitude  beaming  in  her  intelligent  coun- 
tenance. She  continued  for  several  minutes  in  such  eloquent  strains  that  all  present  were 
compelled  to  admit  that  they  had  never  seen  or  heard  anything  like  it  before.  I  ivould 
myself  have  gone  a  thousand  miles  to  see  this  one  case,  and  did  not  think  it  possible  that  the 
human  countenance  could  be  lit  up  with  so  sweet  and  happy  an  expression  of  delight.'  " 
"  Dr.  Massie  introduces  the  following  narrative  in  these  words  : — 
"  '  On  Monday  evening  we  called  to  visit  a  little  girl  in  the  Commons,  called  M.  E.  R. 
(aged  fourteen),  who  had  been  labouring  under  conviction  for  some  days  previous.  We 
found  her  in  a  melancholy,  depressed  state,  and  after  conversing  with  her  for  a  little,  we 
intimated  that  we  would  engage  in  singing  and  prayer  before  leaving  her.  While  singing, 
she  fell  speechless  at  our  feet,  when  it  was  evident  to  all  that  she  had  been  deprived  of 
both  speech  and  sight ;  her  mind,  however,  was  active  as  ever,  and  her  sense  of  hearing 
unimpaired.  During  the  forenoon,  Drs.  Macaldie  and  Clarke  visited  her,  and  expressed 
their  opinion  that  none  could  heal  her  but  the  Physician  of  souls.  Later  in  the  day,  the 
dispensary  doctor  visited  her,  and  endeavoured  to  restore  her  by  applying  remedies  to  the 
body,  but  without  effect.  About  half- past  three  in  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  we  again 
visited  her,  and  sung,  "  Lo  !  He  comes  with  clouds  descending,"  and  ere  this  hymn  was 
finished,  her  tongue  was  loosed,  he  reyes  we  reopened,  and  she  joined  us  in  praising  God, 
This  was  about  four  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  Tuesday — she  having  been  eighteen  hours 
deprived  of  sight  and  speech.'  " 
"  Dr.  Massie  proceeds  : — 

"  '  In  compliance  with  numerous  appHcations  upon  the  subject,  we  proceed  to  notice 
other  recent  phases  of  manifestation  not  less  astonishing.  Two  young  unmarried  women 
(whom  we  shall  call  Jane,  aged  eighteen,  and  Ellen,  aged  twenty-three)  reside  at  a  locality 
about  two  miles  distant  from  Ballymena,  and  within  three  hundred  yards  of  each  other. 
Both  were  apparently  in  good  health  ;  and  about  a  month  ago  they  were  stricken  with 
"  conviction,"  accompanied  by  agonies  of  conscience  and  nervous  excitement.  It  would 
appear,  that  a  species  of  sympathy  became  established  between  them  in  such  a  manner, 
that  whatever  affected  the  one  party  was  sure  to  exercise  a  corresponding  influence  upon 
the  other.  On  Monday,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  Ellen,  whilst  busily  engaged 
at  work  in  her  own  house,  suddenly  exclaimed  that  Jane  had  become  ill — said  that  her 
mind  told  her  so,  and  that  she  must  go  and  visit  her.  With  that  intent  she  left  the  house  ; 
and  on  entering  that  of  her  companion,  found  that  she  had  just  fallen  into  a  trance — 
deaf,  dumb,  and  motionless.  Within  a  minute  afterwards,  Ellen  had  fallen  upon  the 
floor  in  a  precisely  similar  condition,  and  both  remained  in  that  state  and  -position  for  fully 
three  hours.  Both  recovered  at  the  same  moment,  and  immediately  on  their  recovery  they 
were  separated  ;  Ellen  being  forthwith  taken  to  her  own  house,  where  she  feU  upon  her 
knees,  and  was  engaged  in  prayer  for  half  an  hour.  To  the  great  surprise  of  her  relatives, 
she  then  affirmed  that,  precisely  at  four  o'clock  on  the  following  evening,  she  would 
become  deaf,  dumb,  blind,  and  without  power  of  motion  in  one  side  of  her  body,  for  the 
space  of  six  hours,  and  that  she  should  be  restored  to  her  natural  condition  at  ten  o'clock. 
On  being  asked  how  she  could  know  that  she  would  be  visited  in  such  a  manner,  she 
replied,  "  I  cannot  explain  how  I  know  it ;  but  my  mind  tells  me  that  it  will  surely  be  as 
I  have  said."  Every  effort  was  made  to  remove  the  impression  from  the  mind  of  the 
party  thus  affected  ;  and  care  was  taken  that  Jane  should  have  no  information  of  what 
had  been  predicted  in  reference  to  her  companion.  Ellen  continued  at  her  ordinary  work, 
and  apparently  in  her  usual  health,  throughout  the  forenoon  of  Tuesday  ;  and  the  hand 
of  the  house  clock  was  secretly  put  back  fifteen  minutes  in  the  course  of  the  day. 
Precisely  at  the  moment  when  the  clock  indicated  that  it  wanted  a  quarter  to  four,  but 
when  the  real  tinae  was  fifteen  minutes  later,  Ellen's  arms  dropped,  her  eyes  closed,  and  she 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

119 

fell  from  her  chair  without  speech  or  motion,  and  in  a  state  of  absolute  insensibility  ! 
She'  was  carefully  laid  upon  a  bed  ;  and  on  examination  it  was  found  that  the  joints  of  her 
right  arm  and  leg  were  perfectly  immovable,  and  rigid  as  iron.  The  excitement  among 
the  people  of  the  house  was  naturally  very  great ;  but  it  was  doubled  in  intensity  when 
intelligence  arrived  that  Jane  had  fallen  into  a  state  exactly  resembling  that  of  Ellen, 
precisely  at  the  same  moment  that  Ellen  had  been  thus  affected. 

"  '  In  this  abnormal  condition  both  women  remained  for  a  period  of  six  hours,  and  both 
awoke  to  consciousness,  and  in  the  full  possession  of  all  their  faculties,  precisely  at  the 
same  moment.  At  five  minutes  before  ten,  Ellen's  rigid  arm  regained  its  natural  condition, 
and  she  was  observed  to  raise  her  hand  and  lay  it  gently  across  her  breast  ;  but  up  till 
the  stroke  of  the  predicted  hour,  no  other  change  became  perceptible.  Before  the  remain- 
ing strokes  of  ten  had  sounded  from  the  clock,  she  was  fully  awake  ;  and  her  first  excla- 
mation, amid  a  house  then  crowded  with  anxious  visitors,  was,  ''  Christ  is  my  Saviour  ! 
He  is  all  and  in  all  !  "  It  may  appear  incredible,  but  the  fact  is  established  beyond  all 
controversy,  that  these  identical  words  were  the  first  uttered  by  Jane  in  her  own  house, 
three  hundred  yards  distant,  as  she  awoke  to  consciousness  at  the  same  moment !  '  " 

Dr.  Massie  relates  with  great  minutiae  of  detail,  many  additional  cases  of 
a  similar  character  to  those  already  given,  together  with  instances  in  which 
the  "  stricken  ones,"  both  male  and  female,  were  poor  ignorant  people — 
some  of  them  very  yomig  children, — servants,  and  workmen, — who  could 
neither  read  ?ior  write,  yet,  these  persons  in  their  "  trances,"  did  intelligently 
read  out  consecutive  verses,  and  sometimes  whole  chapters  of  the  Bible, 
and  exhort,  pray,  and  sing,  with  a  fervency  and  eloquence,  not  to  be  equalled 
by  the  best  cultured  ministers  of  religion.  The  last  cases  which  we  can 
cite  are  as  follows  : — 

"The  Rev.  R.  Gemmell,  after  saying,  'With  regard  to  the  bodily  manifestations,  I  can 
give  no  opinion,  nor  do  I  like  to  hear  any  opinion,  as  I  beheve  no  man  can  give  any  satis- 
factory explanation,'  gives  the  following  : — 

"  '  A  young  lad  about  sixteen  years  of  age  was  struck  down  in  his  own  house.  It  took 
four  strong  men  to  hold  him,  to  prevent  him  from  dashing  his  brains  out  on  the  floor.  He 
continued  in  this  state  for  several  hours.  When  he  recovered,  he  had  lost  the  poiver  of 
one  of  his  sides,  and  ivas  unable  to  titter  a  word  distinctly.  The  third  day  after,  I  visited 
him,  about  three  o'clock  ;  he  was  still  in  the  same  state,  but,  to  my  utter  astonishment, 
when  standing  at  the  door  at  seven  o'clock,  he  came  running  forward,  and  shook  hands 
with  me,  and  said,  "  0  Sir,  I  am  now  quite  well  !"  '  " 

"  Dr.  Massie  says  : — 

"  '  One  fearful  case  was  specified  to  me  of  an  infatuated  scoffer,  who  professed  to  fall 
down  as  an  awakened  and  stricken  sinner,  while  a  companion,  as  depraved,  ran  to  request 
the  attendance  of  a  servant  of  God.  When  they  came  to  the  spot  where  the  feigned 
penitent  was  lying,  they  found  him  dead.' " 

"  The  Rev.  Mr.  Moore  says  : — 

" '  In  my  own  congregation  five  or  six  cases — and  some  of  them  very  painful — have 
occurred.  We  hear  occasionally  of  dreams  and  visions — the  mere  drapery  of  the  ivorlc, 
and  the  effect  of  its  deep  and  intense  reality — but  though  beautiful  and  interesting  in 
themselves,  such  things  are  not  made  much  of  here,  and  the  less  the  better.'  " 

"  At  Paisley,  in  September,  similar  cases  were  frequent.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Macgregor 
says  : — 

"  '  Among  the  young  women  affected,  two  were  for  a  time  deaf  and  dumb,  and  while 
in  this  state,  their  countenances  indicated,  from  their  expression,  the  most  joyous 
happiness.  Many  of  them  had  been  dreaming  dreams  and  seeing  visions.  It  was  the 
case  that,  tvherever  the  revivals  had  arisen,  they  had  dreams  and  visions,  and  they  were 
to  be  regarded  as  evidence  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit.'  " 

"  The  Rev.  Hugh  Hunter  writes  : — 

" '  It  is  now  nearly  five  weeks  since  the  Lord's  work  commenced  in  good  earnest  in 
this  neighbourhood.  It  was  going  on  amazingly  in  the  neighbouring  county  of  Antrim. 
Every  day  brought  new  tales  of  trances,  sleeps,  visions,  dreams  and  miracles  ;  such  as,  that 
persons  ivho  never  Jcneio  a  letter  of  the  alphabet  when  aivake  coidd  read  the  Bible  distinctly, 
sing  psalms  and  hymns,  preach,  atud  pray  with  ease,  eloquence,  and  fluency.'  " 

"  The  Rev.  J.  Whitsitt,  of  Drum,  Monaghan,  writes  to  a  friend  : — 

"  '  It  was  true  the  report  which  you  heard.  At  one  of  our  meetings  for  prayer,  at 
which  there  were  a  number  of  convictions,  a  dark  cloud  formed  on  the  ceUing,  and,  in  the 

I20  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

course  of  a  few  minutes,  a  number  of  forms  burst  out.  One  in  particular  was  of  human 
appearance,  which  passed  and  repassed  across  all  the  lights,  and  descended  to  the  pew  in 
which  a  young  woman  was  rejoicing.  The  appearance  lasted  for  three  minutes,  or  more, 
produced  no  terror,  but  joy,  especially  among  the  converts.  All  present  did  not  see  it. 
Perhaps  300  saw  it,  and  can  testify  to  the  reality.  I  cannot  tell  what  it  was  ;  the 
substance  is  in  heaven,  and  will  not  be  visible  until  the  time  when  "  every  eye  shall 
see  Him." '  " 

CHAPTER  XV. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    (CONTINUED). 

Summary  of  Conflicting  Opinions  Concerning  the  Irish  Revivals. 

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  mighty  wave  which  had  surged  over  the 
"stricken"  subjects  of  the  Irish  Revival,  could  pass  away  without  calling  forth 
an  immense  array  of  diverse  opinions  from  various  leading  minds,  concern- 
ing the  origin  and  significance  of  the  wonderful  movement. 

As  a  general  rule  the  attempts  to  find  an  adequate  cause  for  the  marvels 
which  flooded  the  land,  during  the  Revival  frenzy,  may  .be  classified  thus : — 

1.  The  work  proceeds  from  "the  Devil." 

2.  From  the  Holy  Ghost. 

3.  From  interested  and  artful  professional  Revival  preachers. 

4.  From  mesmerism,  hysteria,  and  other  unknown  physical  agents. 
About  the  time  when  the  Irish  Revivals  were  at  their  height,  some  scenes 

of  a  kindred  character,  though  conducted  on  a  more  limited  scale,  and 
promptly  checked  by  the  officiating  ministers  of  the  time,  were  proceed- 
ing in  some  of  the  rural  districts  of  England,  and  amongst  the  lowest  of 
the  East-end  ragged  schools  of  the  metropolis.  An  able  writer  in  the 
London  Sunday  Times  thus  comments  on  scenes  of  this  character,  of  which 
he  claims  to  have  been  an  eye-witness  in  a  ragged  school  in  St.  Giles'  on 
the  preceding  Sunday. 

"  Here  are  one  hundred  and  fifty  ragged,  ill-fed,  uneducated  little  boys  and  girls,  from 
six  to  fourteen,  kept  until  after  ten  at  night  to  listen  to  a  '  deeply  impressive '  account  of 
the  doings  in  Ireland,  in  all  their  agonising  details.  "Was  there  no  mercy  in  the  heart  of 
the  speaker  ?  No  sense  of  childhood's  weakness  ?  No  thought  of  the  Divine  Justice  ? 
And  there  they  were  rolling  upon  the  floor,  crying  out  until  two  in  the  morning  about 
their  sins.  Great  God  !  how  art  thou  insulted.  Their  sins  !  Why  surely,  if  God  arose 
in  His  anger  it  would  be,  not  to  crush  down  and  agonise  these  little  friendless,  hungry, 
orphaned  children,  only  six  years  old,  who  cannot  comprehend  the  meaning  of  such 
subjects,  but  He  would  rise  against  the  high  and  the  mighty,  the  men  of  wealth  and 
statesman  power,  who,  through  neglecting  their  duty,  have  left  these  little  ones  to  become 
the  victims  of  hunger  and  cold,  and  hence  also  the  victims  of  our  hard  laws,  and,  to  them, 
cruel  institutions.     Comments  upon  such  mockery  and  cruelty  are  needless." 

And  again  : — "  I  am  not  dealing  unjustly  in  thus  speaking.  I  see  the  poor  little  girl 
crying  in  the  Irish  churchyard  ;  I  see  the  young  women  rolling  in  agony  upon  the  Irish 
meadows  ;  I  see  the  ignorant  men,  the  hysterical  women,  and  the  fear-struck  children  in 
the  Irish  churches,  with  horrible  anxiety  pictured  upon  their  terror-stricken  countenances  ; 
and  I  see  the  poor  little  boys  and  girls  in  the  St.  Giles'  refuge  rolHng  upon  the  floor,  then- 
young  hearts  filled  with  fear  through  the  story  of  Irish  madness  which,  without  stint  or 
mercy,  had  been  poured  into  their  ears.     Yes,  I  see  all  this,  and  more  than  this — more 

v^ 

? 

THE    Brothers    Ira  &  W¥  Davenport 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  121 

than  can  now  be  told  ;  and  then,  while  listening  to  the  wild  screams  which  burst  from 
the  agonized  hearts  of  an  ignorant  and  frenzied  people,  I  hear  also,  and  blended  with  the 
screams,  the  voices  of  the  '  holy  men  ' — voices  of  the  leaders  and  teachers  in  our  spu-itual 
Israel — raised  as  in  thanksgiving  to  God  for  aU  this  agony,  which,  either  in  their  blindness 
or  through  their  hypocrisy,  they  dare  to  call  '  His  great  mercy.'  I  hear  them  pray  that 
the  same  '  blessing '  may  be  granted  unto  us  ;  and,  from  aU  this,  what  is  it  possible  to 
conclude  other  than  that,  if  they  are  in  earnest,  then  are  they  blind  also  ?  but,  whether 
earnest  or  not,  they  are  endeavouring  to  inflict  upon  England  one  of  the  heaviest  curses 
that  could  descend  upon  a  people  whose  ancestors  won  freedom  alike  on  the  fields  of  civil 
and  ecclesiastical  conflict." 

Mr.  Wilkinson,  in  his  excellent  work  on  "  The  Irish  Revivals,"  says  : — 

"  Archdeacon  Stopford  of  Meath  is  the  champion  of  the  physical  mode  of  accounting 
for  the  Revival,  whose  arguments  are  the  best  poised,  and  sufficiently  comprehend  those  of 
others  having  the  same  views.  He  does  not,  however,  fail  to  see  'much  good  in  the 
movement.'  He  says,  '  Even  a  stranger  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  earnest  concern 
about  religion  which  appears  to  pervade  the  people  ;  as  I  listened  to  a  street  preacher — the 
best  sermon  which  I  heard  in  Belfast — it  was  impossible  not  to  be  impressed  with  the 
earnest  and  reverent  expression  of  countenance  in  all  the  working  men  and  lads  who 
gathered  round,  perhaps  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  number  ;  faces  so  earnest  I  never  saw 
before  in  any  congregation.     From  house  to  house  I  saw  much  of  the  same  feeling.'  " 

The  question  of  hysteria  has  been  so  widely  canvassed,  that  it  is  worth 
while  to  present  the  argument  as  it  appears  in  one  of  Dr.  Carson's 
excellent  letters.     Dr.  Carson  says  : — 

"  I  see  a  good  deal  of  time  and  labour  have  been  spent  in  asserting,  over  and  over 
again,  that  the  physical  manifestations  are  neither  more  nor  less  than  hysteria.  Were  it 
not  that  the  public  might  be  misled  by  the  plausible  and  ostentatious  statements  which 
have  been  put  forward  on  the  subject,  I  would  not  think  of  occupying  time  with  its 
consideration. 

"  There  is  no  reason  why  the  country  should  be  free  from  hysterical  cases  now,  more 
than  at  any  other  time.  Hence,'as  might  be  anticipated,  some  cases  of  hysteria  are  to  he  met 
ivith  in  every  district  ivhere  the  Revival  has  appeared.  But  the  man  who  will  confine  his 
observations  to  these  cases,  or  confound  them  with  the  Revival  manifestations,  has  but  a 
poor  capacity  for  the  observation  of  facts.  The  fact  is,  the  Revival  and  hysteria  have 
scarcely  any  symptoms  in  common.  Any  person  in  the  Revival  district  may  easily  convince 
himself  of  this  fact  by  turning  to  the  article  '  Hysteria,'  in  the  first  work  on  the  'Practice 
of  Medicine '  he  can  lay  his  hands  on.  To  enter  fully  into  the  distinguishing  marks  of 
these  two  affections  would  extend  this  letter  to  an  unreasonable  length  ;  but  there  are 
two  or  three  features  which  require  to  be  noticed,  and  which  are  capable  of  being  judged 
by  all  parties.  .  .  .  Hysteria  is  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  female  sex.  It  is  very 
common  in  the  female,  but  so  extremely  rare  in  the  male,  that  the  late  Dr.  Hooper,  and 
the  present  Dr.  Watson,  of  London,  in  their  immense  practice,  have  seen  only  three  cases 
each,  which  they  could  at  all  compare  to  hysteria,  and  these  cases  occurred  in  debilitated 
subjects.  ...  In  regard  to  the  Revival,  it  occurs  chiefly  amongst  the  lower  and 
middle  classes  of  society,  who  are  obliged  to  earn  their  subsistence  by  their  daily  labour. 
It  is  to  be  found  as  readUy  amongst  the  hardy  inhabitants  of  country  parishes  and  moun- 
tain districts,  as  in  towns  and  sities.  If  all  ages  are  included,  there  are  very  nearly  as 
many  males  aff'ected  by  it  as  females.  I  have  seen  and  known  of  an  immense  number  of 
instances  in  which  the  strongest,  the  stoutest,  most  vigorous,  healthy,  and  lion-hearted  men  in 
the  country  have  been  struck  doivn  like  children,  and  have  called,  with  the  most  agonising 
entreaties,  for  mercy  for  their  souls.    How  could  all  this  be  hysteria  1  " 

Dr.  Watson,  an  eminent  medical  practitioner  of  London,  who  spent 
some  time  in  personally  examining  the  condition  of  many  of  the  Revivalists, 
arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  the  principal  source  of  the  movement  is  a 
physical,  though  unknown  agent,  and  his  views  are  given  in  the  following 
remarks  : — 

"  I  now  fearlessly  state,  that,  in  my  opinion,  there  is  a  physical,  as  well  as  a  Spiritual, 
agent  concerned  in  the  Revival.    There  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  any  other  rational  way 

122  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

of  accounting  for  the  facts.  Whatever  I  may  have  been  disposed  to  think  at  first,  I  am 
now  fully  satisfied  the  symptoms  of  a  Revival  case  do  not  correspond  to  the  efiects  which 
are  manifested  as  the  result  of  mere  mental  impressions.  The  unearthly  tone  of  subdued 
entreaties,  and  the  partial  prostration  of  muscular  power  in  the  individual  afiected,  are 
very  different  from  the  wild  screams,  and  convulsive  paroxysms,  which  arise  from  sudden 
mental  anguish ;  and  we  cannot  consistently  refer  them  to  a  sudden  view  of  spiritual 
danger,  because  the  same  siidden  view  of  spiritual  matters  has  been  revealed  to  thousands  of 
individuals  of  different  constitutions,  at  different  periods  of  the  history  of  the  ivoiid,  without 
prod/iicirCg  the  like  results. 

"  The  explanation  by  mere  mental  impressions  will  not  satisfy  a  close  thinker  in  regard 
to  them.     There  must  be  a  special  physical  agent  concerned. 

"  This  view  is  greatly  strengthened  by  the  way  in  which  the  Eevival  has  travelled.  It 
has  foUowed  a  steady,  gradual,  and  uninterruped  course  from  parish  to  parish,  and  district 
to  district.  It  has  travelled  almost  like  a  loave.  Again,  it  was  observed  that  the  most 
illiterate  convert,  ivho  had  himself  been  physically  affected,  had  far  more  poiver  in  producing 
the  manifestations  in  the  audience,  than  the  most  eloquent  speaker  who  could  address  them. 
There  did  not  seem  to  be  any  proportion  between  the  words  uttered  by  the  speakers  and 
the  results  produced.  It  looked  more  like  a  physical  effect  produced  by  individual  on 
individual  than  anything  else. 

"  The  idea  of  exclusive  spii-ituality  in  the  Revival  would  involve  us  in  endless  diffi- 
culties^ which  can  all  be  avoided  by  the  simple  idea  of  the  double  agency.  If  we  do  not 
adopt  this  view,  what  are  we  to  do  with  those  cases  of  deafness,  dumbness,  blindness, 
extraordinary  visions,  and  prophesying,  wliich  have  occurred  in  some  localities  ?  They 
are  not  either  directly  or  indirectly  the  effects  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  are  entirely 
owing  to  the  effects  of  the  physical  agent  on  the  brain  and  nervous  system. 

"  In  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  physical  agent,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  acknowledging 
my  utter  ignorance.  I  know  of  nothing  to  correspond  exactly  with  it  in  the  whole  range 
of  philosophy. 

"No  person  but  the  man  who  has  witnessed  them  could  have  any  idea  of  the  awful 
effects  produced  by  a  number  of  Revival  cases.  A  scene  like  the  one  which  took  place  on 
the  night  in  which  the  new  hall  in  Coleraine  was  first  fiUed  with  these  cases  has,  perhaps, 
never  been  equalled  in  the  world.  It  was  so  like  the  day  of  judgment,  when  sinners 
would  be  calling  on  the  mountains  and  the  rocks  to  hide  them  from  the  storm  of  God's 
wrath,  that  it  struck  terror  to  the  heart  of  the  most  hardened  and  obdurate  sinner." 

As  the  Evangelical  views  of  the  causes  operating  to  produce  these  Revivals, 
have  already  been  sufificiently  hinted  at  to  make  the  reader  aware  that  a  large 
number  of  Ministers  of  the  Gospel  attributed  the  above  movement  to  the 
direct  action  of  the  "  Holy  Ghost,"  it  only  remains  to  call  attention  to  the 
very  suspicious  way  in  which  those  peculiar  demonstrations  were  received, 
which  in  the  form  of  trances,  dreams,  visions,  and  prophecies,  seemed  to  be 
all  too  dangerously  allied  to  the  M^e  noir  of  every  denomination,  namely 
modern  Spiritualism,  a  development  which  might  well  have  been  unknown 
to  the  poor  illiterate  subjects  of  the  Irish  Revivals,  but  which  was  by  no 
means  either  neiv  or  strange  to  the  better-informed  Doctors,  Lawyers, 
Divines,  &c.,  &c.,  who  watched  the  Spiritual  epidemic  of  the  unmanageable 
Irish  Revivals. 

Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson  opens  up  this  question  with  significant  force  when 
he  says  : — 

"  What  are  we  to  think  of  that  class  of  phenomena,  of  wliich  there  are  so  many 
instances,  in  which  the  converts  have  fallen  into  swoons  and  trances,  and  into  those 
peculiar  states  of  the  organism  in  which  they  have  seen  and  described  visions  of  angels 
and  devils — of  heaven  and  of  hell — and  which  were  so  common,  '  that  almost  every  girl 
now  struck  in  Belfast  had  visions,  and  would  be  greatly  disappointed  if  she  had  not.' 
'  There  are  also  very  many  astonishing  statements  and  events  which,  some  years  ago,  and 
in  other  circumstances,  would  have  been  called  clairvoyance  by  those  who  believed  that 
there  was  such  a  mode  of  obtaining  knowledge.'  Others,  again,  who  could  not  read  a 
word  in  their  ordinary  state,  had  a  faculty  or  power,  when  in  this  wondrous  state,  of 
perceiving  in  letters  of  light,  and  reading  whole  pages  from  the  Bible  ;  others  of  seeing 
things  and  persons  at  distances  beyond  the  ken  of  natural  eyes.     .     .     . 

"  Now,  how  it  has  come  about  we  know  not,  but  thesi3  phenomenal  aspects  of  the 
Revival  have  brought  down  upon  it,  its  bitterest  opponents,  and  in  view  of  them,  the 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  123 

whole  movement  has  been  characterised  by  some  reUgious  critics  as  the  direct  work  of 
Satan,  and  by  the  more  sceptical  as  a  work  of  imposture,  or  as  the  product  of  diseased 
imagination.  Here,  again,  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  at  first  there  are  not  so  many  words 
used  against  the  calm  and  quiet  part  of  the  awakening  ;  but  when  it  came  to  pass  that 
its  subjects  were  seers  and  seeresses  no  words  are  strong  enough  for  its  condemnation." 

Again,  Mr.  Wilkinson  in  commenting  on  the  pyschical  aspect  of  this 
movement,  and  the  various  phenomena  (far  too  numerous  to  admit  of 
farther  description)  which  corresponded  with  the  manifestations  of 
Spiritualism,  says  ; — 

"  In  attempting  to  gather  up  facts  of  this  nature  at  a  distance  from  the  places  of  their 
occurrence  we  find,  of  all  those  who  could  not  in  fairness  omit  noticing  them,  there  is  not 
one  who  gives  them  a  kindly  welcome.  Several  suppress  them  altogether,  the  others  have 
to  apologize  for  them  in  the  best  way  they  can. 

"  The  excellent  Minister  at  Connor,  when  in  the  great  excitement  of  prostrations  and 
ecstatic  phenomena,  some  similar  cases  were  threatened  amongst  his  flock,  set  his  face 
against  them  altogether.  Others  are  blamed  for  not  having  followed  his  plan,  which  had 
the  good  efiect  of  preventing  them.  We  shall  see  that  they  were  amenable  to  this  treat- 
ment, and  it  is  a  suggestive  fact  for  our  consideration. 

"  In  the  early  days  of  the  excitement  arising  from  these  cases,  some  were  made  public 
through  the  newspapers,  and  there  are  others  to  be  found  in  some  of  the  narratives,  but 
every  day  they  become  more  difficult  of  access,  as  mention  of  them  is  seldom  made,  and 
it  is  only  from  occasional  glimpses  that  we  see  how  common  they  were — so  common, 
indeed,  that  they  occurred  in  the  majority  of  the  stricken  cases,  and  those  who  did  not 
have  visions,  or  some  of  the  other  extraordinary  phenomena  accompanying  their  pros- 
tration, complained  of  the  deficiency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  feared  that  their  conversion 
was  not  complete.     .     .     . 

"  We  could  have  wished  that  these  cases  had  been  as  fully  stated  and  as  largely 
investigated  as  the  others,  for  they  form  a  chapter  in  the  book  of  man  that  is  worthy  the 
most  serious  and  earnest  consideration." 

We  have  already  extended  the  notices  of  this  singular  movement  to  so 
great  a  length,  that  we  turn,  though  most  reluctantly,  from  the  many 
suggestive  arguments  adduced  by  the  author  of  "  The  Revival "  to  show 
that  a  great  magnetic  wave,  contagious  as  magnetism  ever  is  in  its  effects, 
world-wide  in  its  centres  of  evolution,  and  purely  spiritual  in  its  source, 
underlies  these  Irish  Revivals,  just  as  surely  as  it  does  the  doings  of  the 
Polter  Gheist  in  Germany,  the  manifestations  of  clairvoyance  in  France,  or 
the  Rochester  Knockings  in  America. 

Who  can  doubt  that  if  this  Revival  had  occurred  on  Mahometan  ground, 
the  visionists  would  have  seen  Houris  and  paradises  ;  screamed  for  Mahomet, 
and  sought  through  him  reconciUation  with  Allah  ?  Occurring  in  a  land, 
the  very  atmosphere  of  which  was  saturated  with  Calvinistic  ideas,  and 
governed  by  a  Calvinistic  priesthood,  the  great  magnetic  influx  which  poured 
into  the  hearts  and  minds  of  a  naturally  impulsive  and  susceptible  race  of 
people,  inevitably  partook  of  the  dominant  religious  idea ;  and  this  was  so 
strengthened  by  the  powerful  influence  of  Revival  preachers,  that  it  was 
only  now  and  then  that  angel  faces  could  look  through  the  theological  veil 
of  terror,  in  which  the  peasantry  were  enshrouded,  or  in  rare  cases,  that 
true  Spiritual  mediumship  could  be  unfolded,  and  triumph  over  the 
unreasoning  ecstasies  of  religious  gloom  and  mystery. 

The  sunbeam  which  gives  life  to  the  rose  and  lights  up  the  blue  eye  of 
the  violet,  quickens  the  heap  of  corruption  into  the  life  of  the  foul  reptile, 
and  stinging  insect.  The  sun  of  spiritual  existence  shines  on  the  just  and 
the  unjust,  and  quickens,  but  creates  nothmg. 

Thus  we  may  realise  by  careful  research  into  the  fanaticisms  of  the 
Irvingites,  the  abominations  of  Mormonism,  the  unnatural  asceticisms  of 
Shakerism,  and  the  frenzied  agonies  of  Irish  Revivalism  that  "  all  are  but 
parts  of  one  stupendous  whole" — differences  of  adjni?iistration,  but  the  same 
spirit  ivorki?ig  in  all. 

124  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER    XVI. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN    GREAT    BRITAIN. — SECOND    PERIOD. 

In  searching  amongst  the  scattered  records  of  Spiritual  manifestations  in 
England,  the  historian  cannot  fail  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  are 
two  well-defined  sources  of  power  which  antedated  in  point  of  time  the 
introduction  of  that  systematic  mode  of  telegraphy  practised  by  the 
American  mediums  who  commenced  to  visit  this  country  in  1852. 

The  first  of  these  was  the  very  general  outpouring  of  Spiritual  manifesta- 
tions noted  in  preceding  chapters,  and  occurring  in  the  form  of  haunting 
isolated  phenomena,  and  Religious  Revivals. 

The  second  was  Animal  Magnetism,  which,  by  preparing  the  world  for 
the  study  of  occult  phenomena,  and  unfolding  in  many  organisms  the 
potencies  of  clairvoyance  and  other  Spiritual  endowments,  paved  the  way 
for  the  more  pronounced  and  comprehensive  demonstrations  of  Spiritual 
Mediumship. 

From  the  year  1820  to  1840,  numerous  gentlemen  of  learning  and  high 
social  standing,  openly  avowed  themselves  disciples  of  Mesmeric  philo- 
sophy, and  practised  with  success  healing  by  Animal  Magnetism. 

As  experiments  of  this  character  were  very  often  productive  of  clair- 
voyance, prevision,  trance  speaking,  and  even  Spiritual  seership,  a  wide- 
spreading  interest  began  to  arise  concerning  these  mysterious  potencies. 
About  the  year  185 1,  a  Mesmeric  Infirmary  was  estabUshed  in  Wimpole 
Street,  of  which  Drs.  EUiotson,  Ashburner,  Wilson,  Haddock,  Mrs.  De 
Morgan,  and  numerous  other  ladies  and  gentlemen  became  patrons  and 
supporters.  In  this  institution,  patients  were  treated  by  magnetic  pro- 
cesses, and  in  many  instances  cures  were  effected  of  cases  deemed  hopeless 
by  the  ordinary  methods  of  medical  practice. 

For  some  years  previous  to  the  formation  of  this  establishment,  the 
advocates  of  Mesmeric  philosophy  had  conducted  an  excellent  periodical 
entitled  the  Zoist,  in  which  hundreds  of  notable  experiments  were  recorded, 
and  the  phenomena  as  well  as  the  facts  of  magnetic  practices  were 
carefully  detailed. 

In  view  of  the  persistence  with  which  the  columns  of  the  secular  journals 
are  open  to  all  manner  of  communications  antagonistic  to  new  discoveries, 
and  new  ideas,  and  closed  against  their  advocates,  the  publication  of  the 
Zoist  which  was  continued  for  many  years,  and  supported  by  an  able  staff 
of  editors  and  contributors,  will  be  understood  to  have  been  the  principal 
means  of  widening  the  sphere  of  knowledge  on  occult  subjects,  and 
preserving  many  valuable  records  which  would  otherwise  have  been  lost  to 
the  world. 

In  the  initiatory  numbers  of  this  journal,  Dr.  ElHotson,  one  of  its  earliest 
and  most  distinguished  supporters,  alleges,  that  Mesmerism  as  a  recognised 
"science,"  was  first  established  in  England  in  1828,  through  the  influence 
of  an  Irish  gentleman,  a  Mr.  Chevenix,  who  after  a  long  residence  in  Paris, 
where  he  had  witnessed,  and  personally  assisted  at  a  number  of  experiments. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  .125 

finally  began  to  practise  on  his  own  account  in  Ireland,  where  he  found  a 
fine  field  for  his  operations  amongst  the  susceptible  peasantry  of  that 
country. 

Drs.  McKay,  Peacock,  Cotter,  Gooch ;  Mr.  Smith,  surgeon  to  the 
Coldstream  Guards  ;  Professor  Gregory  of  Edinburgh,  Drs.  Elliotson  and 
Ashburner  of  London,  Dr.  John  Wilson,  physician  at  Middlesex  Hospital, 
and  many  gentlemen  of  equal  standing  in  their  profession,  who  had  avowed 
themselves  advocates  of  Mesmeric  practices,  succeeded,  both  in  creating  a 
wide-spread  public  interest  in  their  philosophy,  and  in  awakening  the  most 
relentless  spirit  of  antagonism  from  those  who  thought  proper  to  range 
themselves  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  question. 

To  those  who  realise  with  the  author,  that  Mesmerism  has  been — humanly 
speaking — the  corner-stone  upon  which  the  Temple  of  Spiritualism  was 
upreared,  the  following  notice  of  some  of  the  curious  experiments  recorded 
in  the  early  numbers  of  the  Zoist,  will  be  of  interest. 

Dr.  Ashburner,  in  reviewing  a  pamphlet  written  by  Dr.  John  Wilson  of 
Middlesex  Hospital  entitled,  "  Trials  of  Animal  Magnetism  on  the  Brute 
Creation/'  says  : — 

"  Dr.  Wilson  successfully  magnetized  fish,  birds,  and  savage  beasts.  I  was  with  him 
on  one  occasion  at  the  Surrey  Zoological  Gardens  while  honest  Mr.  Cross  was  proprietor 
of  the  menagerie.  The  great  male  elephant  was  put  into  a  deep  sleep  by  the  strenuous 
and  energetic  passes  of  my  colleague.  The  keeper  told  me,  *  The  Doctor  off  with  his  coat, 
wrought  like  a  Trojan,  and  got  the  old  animal  into  a  sound  sleep  and  no  mistake.' 

"  Mr.  Cross  had  a  very  savage  and  irascible  hyena.  Dr.  Wilson  mesmerised  him,  and 
it  was  amusing  to  see  the  delight  of  the  fierce  creature  at  the  Doctor's  approach." 

In  the  pages  of  the  Zoist  will  be  found  an  answer  to  the  sneer  with  which 
those  readers  will  peruse  the  above-named  experiments  who — having  found 
their  efforts  to  stamp  out  unwelcome  facts  ineffectual — proceed  to  depreciate 
their  value  by  the  imbecile  query,  "What  is  the  use  of  it?"  The  icse  of 
Mesmerism  is  shown,  even  in  the  early  stage  of  the  movement  of  which  we 
are  writing,  by  the  facts  that  the  Mesmerisers  recorded  ;  namely ;  well 
attested  cures  of  typhus  fever  in  its  last  and  most  hopeless  stages;  con- 
sumption, dropsy,  bronchitis,  all  manner  of  nervous  disorders,  besides  many 
surgical  cases. 

Amongst  the  latter,  is  described  the  perfect  cure  of  a  woman,  employed 
in  the  Hospital  at  Hoddesden,  superintended  by  the  celebrated  writer 
Mrs.  Ellis, — who  was  suffering  from  a  severe  case  of  ovarian  tumour,  for 
which  in  fact  she  was  on  the  point  of  submitting  to  a  dangerous  and 
doubtful  operation.  Dr.  Ashburner  hearing  of  her  dilemma,  persuaded 
her  to  try  Mesmerism,  through  the  instrumentality  of  which,  she  became 
entirely  cured.  Several  other  instances  of  a  similar  kind  are  recorded  in 
the  Zoist,  including  one,  of  malignant  cancer., — a  cure  so  thoroughly  well 
proved,  and  of  such  a  remarkable  character,  that  we  would  refer  the  curious 
reader  to  its  full  details,  which  may  be  found  given  by  Dr.  ElHotson  in  the 
6th  volume  of  the  Zoist,  page  213.  Mesmeric  practices  received  a  strong 
impulse,  especially  in  the  unfoldment  of  remarkable  psychological  powers, 
in  the  year  1849,  by  the  visit  to  England  of  two  renowned  French  clair- 
voyants, Messrs.  Alexis  Didier,  and  Marcellet. 

Through  numerous  experiments  conducted  with  these  gentlemen,  the 
Magnetizers  were  enabled  to  prove,  not  only  that  disease  could  be  cured, 
but  that  mental  power  of  a  highly  exalted  and  wonderful  character  could  be 
evolved  in  the  magnetic  sleep. 

126  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  French  clairvoyants  were  adepts  in  the  examination  of  obscure 
diseases,  in  tracing  lost,  hidden,  and  distant  objects,  also  in  the  faculty  of 
mind  reading. 

The  powers  thus  displayed  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  were  found  to  be  more 
general  than  had  hitherto  been  supposed ;  hence,  clairvoyance,  in  addition 
to  the  healing  faculty,  became  another  horn  of  the  dilemma  with  which  the 
materialistic  opponents  of  the  new  philosophy  found  themselves  compelled 
to  do  battle. 

To  the  voluminous  writings  of  Mr.  Henry  Thompson,  Professor  Gregory, 
Mrs.  De  Morgan,  Drs.  Earth,  Dixon,  Elliotson,  Ashburner,  and  Haddock, 
Mr.  Joseph  Hands,  and  above  all,  to  the  experiences  of  Drs.  Deleuze  and 
Eisdale,  in  India,  we  must  refer  the  readers,  desirous  to  acquaint  themselves 
in  farther  detail,  concerning  the  origin,  practices,  and  results  of  Mesmerism 
in  Great  Britain. 

Quite  recently — that  is,  at  the  present  date  of  writing — the  practice  of 
Mesmerism,  whether  as  a  curative  process,  or  an  agent  for  the  unfoldment 
of  marvellous  psychologic  powers,  has  received  a  most  favourable  impulse 
from  the  writings,  lectures,  and  private  practice  of  Miss  Chandos  Deigh 
Hunt  (now  Mrs.  Wallace),  a  lady  who  has  thoroughly  and  philosophically 
mastered  as  much  of  the  subject  as  can  at  present  be  known  or  experi- 
mented with.  In  a  scholarly  and  exhaustive  treatise  written  by  this  lady 
on  the  Science  and  Art  of  Organic  Magnetism,*  the  powers  and  possibilities 
of  this  wonderful  mesmeric  force  are  admirably  described,  and  the  immense 
range  of  operations,  both  curative  and  psychologic,  which  the  talented 
authoress  delineates,  renders  it  now,  as  heretofore,  a  reproach  to  the  age, 
that  no  philanthropic  as  well  as  philosophic  associations  should  be  formed 
for  the  study  of  the  stupendous  principles  suggested  by  Mrs.  Wallace's 
writings,  and  practically  taught  by  her,  to  all  who  are  interested  enough  to 
put  vague  theory  into  the  form  of  demonstrable  proof. 

Another  valuable  work  treating  of  the  results,  though  not  of  the  modus 
operandi  of  Mesmerism,  is  Mrs.  De  Morgan's  work,  written  quite  early  in 
the  advent  of  the  Spiritual  movement,  entitled,  "  From  Matter  to  Spirit." 
Our  learned  authoress  says  : — 

"Every  wonderful  effect  produced  by  mesmerism,  has  since  found  its  explanation  or 
its  counterpart  in  the  spiritual  phenomena,  so  that  had  unseen  powers  been  working  for 
our  instruction,  they  could  not  have  taken  a  better  method  of  giving  the  needful 
elementary  knowledge,  than  by  making  us  acquainted  with  the  processes  and  results  of 

Mrs.  De  Morgan  in  illustrating  the  statement  given  above,  cites 
numerous  examples,  amongst  others,  the  following  experience,  recorded  by 
Dr.  Jacob  Dixon  in  his  published  manual,  entided  "  Hygienic  Medicine." 
This  author  says  : — 

"  Persons  in  some  of  the  highest  mesmeric  states,  appear  to  have  gained  an  insight 
into  the  world  of  spirit.  Of  this  I  had  striking  experiences  long  iefore  the  time  of  raps, 
seeing  mediums,  and  mysteries  of  the  present  day. 

"  Although  I  had  too  many  instances  of  earthly  clairvoyance  to  remain  sceptical  in  that 
direction,  yet  I  held  all  belief  in  intercourse  with  spirits  to  be  a  delusion.  This  scepticism 
was  first  shaken  by  the  following  occurrence. 

*  Private  Practical  Instructions  in  the  Science  and  Art  of  Organic  Magnetism.  By  Miss  Chandos 
Leigh  Hunt.  Philanthropic  Beform  Publishing  Office,  2,  Oxford  Mansion,  Oxford  Circus, 
London,  W. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  127 

"  Being  invited  to  see  a  young  lady  in  a  clairvoyant  state,  in  which  she  professed  to 
see  and  converse  with  spiritual  beings,  I  entered  the  room  after  she  had  been  put  in  the 
mesmeric  state,  whilst  my  name  was  not  even  mentioned  or  my  presence  known.  .  .  . 
At  length  my  friends  asked,  whether  she  could  look  for  any  spirit  for  the  party  sitting 
beside  her.  She  would  try.  I  mentioned  two  names  without  giving  age,  sex,  or  relation- 
ship to  myseK. 

"  She  then  said  :  '  /  mn  now  in  a  garden  quite  fvU  of  flowers.     There  is  a  group  of 

children} Ttoo  come  oid  of  the  group.     The  girl  is  the  oldest.     They  are  ten  and 

eight  years'  old.'  She  then  described  perfectly  eveiy  feature  of  the  two  children  I  had 
asked  for,  dwelling  with  animation  on  their  beautiful  appearance  and  surroundings.  The 
ages  she  mentioned,  however,  were  much  in  advance  of  the  reality. 

"  When  I  remarked  this  she  said  :  '  They  say  that  I  see  them  as  they  are  now,  you  must 
remember,  that  they  have  been  here  some  time.' " 

The  writer  adds — 

"  It  then  appeared  that  the  ages  she  mentioned  woxild  have  been  exactly  correct  had 
the  two  remained  on  earth." 

In  the  year  185 1,  there  was  a  society  organised  in  England  for  the  purpose 
of  collecting  and  examining  evidence  into  the  alleged  facts  of  "  Supernatural- 
ism."  In  relation  to  this  society,  called  in  the  usual  tone  of  popular 
derision,  "  The  Ghost  Club,"  Mr.  Robt.  Dale  Owen  in  his  exhaustive  work, 
"  Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  Another  World,"  speaks  as  follows  : — 

"  A  society  was  formed  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1851  at  Cambridge,  by  certain 
members  of  the  University,  for  the  purpose  of  instituting,  as  their  circular  expresses  it, 
*  a  serious  and  earnest  enquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  phenomena  vaguely  called 
supernatural.'  The  society  included  some  of  the  most  distinguished  members  of  the 
University,  most  of  them  clergymen  and  fellows  of  Trinity  College,  and  almost  all  of  them 
men  who  had  graduated  with  the  highest  honours. 

"  The  names  of  the  more  active  amongst  them  were  kindly  furnished  to  me  by  the 
son  of  a  British  peer,  himself  one  of  the  leading  members. 

"  To  him  also  I  am  indebted  for  a  copy  of  the  printed  circular  of  the  Society,  an  able 
and  temperate  document,  which  will  be  found  at  length  in  the  Appendix.*  " 

Mr.  Owen  adds  in  a  footnote  to  page  34  : — 

"  The  Society  popularly  known  as  '  The  Ghost  Club,'  attracted  a  good  deal  of  attention 
outside  its  own  circle.  Its  nature  and  object  came  to  my  knowledge  through  the  Bishop 
of  ,  who  took  an  interest  in  its  proceedings,  and  bestirred  himself  to  obtain  contribu- 
tions to  its  records." 

Although  we  may  often  encounter  in  future  chapters  some  of  the 
individual  members  of  this  association  of  investigators,  our  notice  of  their 
combined  researches  must  terminate  here,  hence  we  deem  it  not  entirely 
out  of  place  to  anticipate  by  a  few  years  the  effect  which  those  researches 
must  have  produced  upon  some  at  least  of  its  members,  when  we  give  as 
the  addenda  to  the  subject,  the  following  extracts  from  the  London 
Sp'rifua/is^  nev/spa,per,  dated  April  nth,  1879  : — 

"An  Address  by  Mr.  James  Campbell. — Mr.  J.  A.  Campbell,  President  of  the  Cam- 
bridge University  Society  for  Psychological  Investigation,  will  read  a  paper  next  Monday 
week,  April  21st,  at  one  of  Mrs.  Makdougall  Gregory's  evening  receptions.  There  wiU  be 
a  large  and  influential  gathering  of  Spiritualists  and  non- Spiritualists,  the  latter  of  whom 
will  have  an  opportunity  of  learning  that  Spiritualism  is  not  what  it  is  represented  to  be 
by  daily  newspapers.  The  title  of  Mr.  Campbell's  address  will  be,  '  The  Record  of  the 
Seers  concerning  the  Great  Change.'  " 

.  *  Appendix.    Note  A.     "  Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  another  World."    By  R.  D.  Owen. 

128  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

In  the  Spiritualist  of  the  same  date,  is  an  address  from  Mr.  Camp- 
bell entitled : — The  history  of  the  movement  known  as  Modern 
Spiritualism,  and  the  facts  and  theories  connected  with  it,  by 
J.  A.  Campbell ;  President  of  the  Cambridge  University  Society  for 
Psychological  Investigation.  Mr.  Campbell's  speech,  although  a  most 
excellent  one,  would  only  anticipate  statements  which  the  progress  of  the 
history  itself  must  unfold — but  its  presentation  some  twenty  years  or  more 
after  the  formation  of  the  society  of  which  he  was  and  we  believe  is  still 
the  honoured  President,  is  noticed  now  to  show  that  the  subject  has  not 
proved  an  evanescent  one,  or  unworthy  the  consideration  of  eminent  and 
learned  scholars  during  a  period  of  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

spiritualism       in      great      BRITAIN. 

second  period  (continued). 

American  Spirit  Mediums  in  England. 

Hitherto  our  history  of  the  Spiritual  movement  in  Great  Britain  has 
followed  the  waymarks  made  by  an  invisible  host  in  the  production  of 
spontaneous  and  unsought  phenomena.  We  must  now  proceed  to  consider 
those  results  which  grew  out  of  the  invocatory  processes  of  the  Spirit  circle, 
and  the  agency  of  acknowledged  Spirit  Mediumship. 

Long  before  the  rumour  reached  England  of  the  American  disturbances 
called  the  "  Rochester  Knockings,"  the  practices  of  "  table  turning "  by 
what  was  supposed  to  be  will  power,  were  quite  popular  in  many  a  fashion- 
able circle.  That  these  curious  evidences  of  an  unknown  force  had  any 
connection  with  the  agency  of  "disembodied  spirits"  never  seemed  to 
enter  the  imagination  of  "  table  turning "  experts,  until  the  advent  in 
England  of  Mrs.  Hayden,  an  American  lady,  who  came  to  this  country  on 
a  professional  tour,  in  company  with  her  husband  and  a  business  agent — as 
an  avowed  medium  for  comviujzications  between  earth  and  the  world  of 
disembodied  spirits. 

Very  shortly  after  the  advent  of  the  "  Rochester  Knockings  "  in  New  York 
State,  America,  Mrs.  Hayden,  the  wife  of  a  respectable  journalist,  found 
herself  the  subject  of  the  same  strange  rappings  connected  with  intelli- 
gence, which  distinguished  the  earUest  American  Mediums.  Having  been 
induced  to  sit  for  the  public  as  a  professional  Medium,  Mrs.  Hayden  was 
visited  by  a  Mr.  Stone,  an  English  gendeman  on  a  tour  through  the  United 
States. 

Mr.  Stone  received  such  striking  tests  of  Spirit  presence  through  Mrs. 
Hayden's  mediumship,  that  in  1852  he  persuaded  her  to  accompany  him 
to  England,  never  doubting  that  his  own  countrymen  would  become  as 
much  interested  in  the  results  of  her  marvellous  gifts  as  he  himself  had 
been. 

■^ 

K 

Alfred   Russell  Wallace,    f.r.gs. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  129 

In  all  the  accounts  published  of  early  Spiritualism  in  England,  Mrs. 
Hayden  is  mentioned  as  the  Medium  who  first  introduced  the  American 
system  of  communicating  with  Spirits  through  the  alphabet  and  rappings, 
and  strange  as  it  may  appear  to  thoughtful  minds  that  any  human  beings 
could  do  otherwise  than  hail  with  delight  a  system  of  telegraphy  which 
restored  to  the  mourner  his  beloved  dead,  and  converted  the  mere  hope 
of  immortality  into  demonstrated  proof,  it  is  nevertheless  an  historical  fact, 
that  an  avowed  Medium  for  Spiritual  communications  no  sooner  appeared 
on  the  scene,  than  the  leaders  of  the  press,  pulpit  and  college,  levelled 
against  her  a  storm  of  ribaldry,  persecution  and  insult,  alike  disgraceful 
to  themselves,  and  humiliating  to  the  boasted  liberalism  and  scientific 
acumen  of  their  age.  From  the  author's  personal  knowledge  of  Mrs. 
Hayden,  she  is  convinced  that  her  gentle  womanly  spirit  must  have  been 
deeply  pained,  and  the  harmony  of  mind  so  essential  to  the  production  of 
good  psychological  results  constantly  destroyed,  by  the  cruel  and  insulting 
treatment  she  received  at  the  hands  of  many  of  those  who  came,  pretending 
to  be  investigators,  but  in  reality  burning  to  thwart  her,  and  laying  traps  to 
falsify  the  truths  of  which  Mrs.  Hayden  professed  to  be  the  instrument. 
Sensitively  alive — as  all  mediumistic  persons  are — to  the  animus  of  her 
visitors,  she  could  feel,  and  often  writhed  under,  the  crushing  force  of  the 
antagonism  brought  to  bear  upon  her,  without, — at  that  time — knowing 
how  to  repel' or  resist  it. 

In  those  early  days  of  the  movement,  the  Mediums  had  neither  the 
advantage  of  experience  nor  precedent  in  such  embarrassing  circumstances. 
Oppressed  as  they  were  by  the  opposing  force  which  was  purposely  arrayed 
against  them,  their  distress  of  mind  only  served  to  complicate  the  mental 
inharmony  of  the  surroundings,  and  make  it  most  difficult  for  Spirits  to 
construct  those  delicate  psychologic  batteries,  upon  which  the  success  of  the 
communion  depends. 

We  all  acknowledge  that  the  most  carefully  prepared  and  chemically 
adapted  elements  are  necessary  to  evolve  the  force  of  electricity,  and 
promote  a  perfect  result  from  the  formation  of  a  battery,  yet,  we  overlook 
the  fact,  that  the  mental  and  spiritual  telegraph  must  work  through  laws 
just  as  absolute,  and  whilst  men  ruthlessly  invade  those  laws  and  destroy 
the  equilibrium  under  which  that  battery  works,  they  triumphantly  regard 
failure  as  an  evidence  that  no  such  battery  was  in  existence  at  all. 

We  not  only  know  better  now,  but  with  all  that  tendency  to  exaggeration 
which  marks  the  crises  of  man's  ignorance  and  fanaticism,  too  many 
Spiritualists  of  the  present  day  rush  into  the  opposite  extreme,  and 
endeavour  to  palliate  the  most  daring  frauds,  by  pretending  that  sceptical 
minds  and  antagonistic  forces  have  compelled  detected  impostors  to  prepare 
masks  and  other  paraphernalia  to  personate  spirits,  when  injurious  conditions 
prevented  their  materializing,  &c.,  &c.  That  the  real  truth  lies  between 
the  extremes  of  antagonism  on  the  one  hand,  and  wilful  imposture  on  the 
other,  none  can  doubt.  In  Mrs.  Hayden's  time,  there  is  good  reason  to 
believe  that  the  occasional  failures  which  occurred  at  her  circles,  were  the 
result  of  cunningly  prepared  traps  to  involve  the  inexperienced  medium  in 
contradictory  statements,  and  when  once  the  would-be  detectives  thought 
they  had  succeeded  in  these  notable  plots,  the  columns  of  the  public 
journals  were  filled  with  triumphant  accounts  of  "  the  entire  collapse  of 
the  Spirit  rapping  delusion." 

As  an  illustration  both  of  the  spirit  of  the  times,  and  the  manifest  injury 
to  Mediumship,  which  determined  antagonism  can  exercise,  we  give  a  few 
9 

I30  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

extracts  from  a  little  work  which  the  writer  has  wisely  bequeathed  to 
posterity  in  an  ajionymous  form.  Doubtless  "he  builded  wiser  than  he 
knew,"  and  whilst  his  evil  record  serves  the  purpose  of  preserving  both 
sides  of  the  shield  of  history,  he  is  spared  the  disgrace  of  sending  down  his 
name  to  posterity,  branded  with  the  tokens  of  folly  his  writings  display. 

The  title  of  the  work  is  "  Spirit  Rapping  in  England  and  America,"  and 
the  author  after  a  derisive  and  perverted  account  of  the  American  manifes- 
tations, goes  on  to  detail  the  incidents  of  a  seance  which  he  professes  to 
have  held  with  Mrs.  Hayden  shortly  after  her  arrival  in  London  in  1852. 

Let  the  reader  picture  to  himself  the  poor  Medium,  leaving  the  pleasant 
homes  of  New  England,  and  establishing  herself  in  the  proverbially  cold 
and  cheerless  shelter  of  a  London  lodging-house,  in  the  "pea  soup" 
atmosphere  of  a  London  November,  and  amongst  a  people  not,  at  thai 
time,  particularly  in  favour  of  "  Yankee  speculators." 

Sneering  scoffers  of  the  "  gent "  order,  as  described  by  the  late  witty 
writer,  Albert  Smith  3  insolent  aristocrats  seeking  for  a  new  sensation  and 
dividing  their  interest  between  wrenching  off  door-knockers  at  night,  and 
Yankee  Spirit  rappers  "  by  day ;  ghb  press  men  bound  to  supply  a  funny 
item,  and  not  caring  if  the  fun  is  made  out  of  the  souls  of  their  ancestors, 
so  long  as  they  were  employed  to  indite  journalistic  satire  against  an 
unpopular  thing — these  were  amongst  the  daily  visitors  of  the  poor  foreigner, 
whose  power  to  satisfy  their  demands  depended  upon  the  most  peaceful 
and  harmonious  conditions  of  mind  and  body.  When  we  add  to  this,  that 
the  Medium  herself  was  as  much  a  tyro  in  the  means  of  producing  success- 
ful manifestations,  as  those  who  sought  her,  the  marvel  is  that  any  Spirit 
short  of  a  Mephistopheles  or  Lucifer,  could  be  enabled  to  rap  out  names 
and  dates  correctly  at  all.  If  the  reader  has  fully  possessed  himself  of  the 
conditions  under  which  the  first  Spiritual  telegraphic  messages  were  pro- 
duced in  London,  he  need  not  be  surprised  at  the  results  obtained,  as 
narrated  in  the  anonymous  work  which  we  are  now  about  to  quote. 
After  a  great  deal  of  circumlocution  of  an  unimportant  character,  the  reader 
is  informed  that  the  visitors  were  "Brown  "  and  "Thompson;"  names  no 
doubt  meant  to  imply  that  they  were  assumed  to  mask  two  very  illustrious 
personages.  After  all  sorts  of  derisive  remarks  about  the  Medium's  lodging 
and  surroundings,  these  gentlemen  proceeded  to  hold  a  seance,  of  which  the 
following  extract  is  a  specimen : — 

"  At  length,  getting  too  weary  of  the  scene  to  pursue  it  farther,  '  I  wish,'  said  Brown, 
'  to  ask  some  questions  concerning  the  future  ;  can  the  spirits  answer  them  without  your 
knowing  what  they  are  ? '  'If  they  cannot,  they  will  be  silent,'  said  the  medium,  ' some- 
times they  do  so.  Try.'  '  As  they  are  questions  which  I  should  not  like  to  ask  in  public, 
will  they  see  them  written  on  paper?'  '0  yes.'  Brown  wrote  down  very  clearly: 
'  Shall  I  soon  be  married  ? '  '  Will  the  spirits  answer  this  question  ? '  Rat-tat-tat.  '  Is 
"  yes  "  the  answer  ? '  Rat-tat-tat.  '  How  many  children  shall  I  have  1 '  was  written  next. 
Brown  saying  '  This  is  a  question  that  must  be  answered  in  numbers.  Does  the  spirit  see 
it  ? '  Rat-tat-tat.  '  Can  it  answer  me  ? '  Rat-tat-tat.  And  so  the  spirit  answered  by 
the  usual  process,  'One  hundred  and  thirty-six.'  When  the  1  was  obtained,  and  then 
the  3  to  go  next  to  it,  and  then  the  6  to  go  after  that,  the  rapid  growth  of  Brown's 
family  amused  Thompson,  and  the  imminent  carrying  on  of  the  sum  into  thousands  was 
prevented  by  his  ill-timed  mirth.  The  production  of  children  by  Brown  stopped,  therefore, 
prematurely,  at  the  number  of  one  hundred  and  thirty-six. 

"  The  medium,  who  always  asked  whether  the  answers  fitted,  and  who  did  not 
clearly  know  whether  she  might  not  be  succeeding  vastly,  although  she  evidently  felt  a 
little  puzzled  by  the  sense  that  she  was  not  doing  so  well  as  might  be  expected,  was  now 
re-assured  by  the  reverent  tone  in  which  the  too  explosive  Thompson  asked  whether 
the  spirits  of  his  sisters  were  in  the  room.  His  only  sister  being  in  vigorous  health,  he 
did  not  expect  her  ghost ;  but  it  was  there,  and  very  prompt  to  answer  him.  How  long 
had  she  been  dead  ?     Two  years. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  131 

"  So  the  dreary  labour  was  continued  ;  but  we  cannot  fatigue  our  readers  with  the 
whole  monotony  of  a  sitting  that  was  not  enlivened  by  one  happy  guess." 

"Brown"  cursorily  remarks,  among  other  contemptuous  comments  on 
this  scene,  that  Mr.  Stone,  the  party  who  had  undertaken  the  management 
of  the  seances,  enquired  if  they  were  satisfied,  and  offered  if  otherwise  to  give 
another  seance  free,  to  which  the  said  Brown  only  adds  in  his  gracious  way, 
"  But  we  had  seen  enough,"  and  so  there  was  nothing  more  to  do  than  to 
show  up  the  whole  thing  as  "a  humbug,  through  the  medium  of  the  press." 

The  late  Judge  Edmonds,  of  New  York,  assured  the  author,  that  he  did 
not  dare  to  make  up  his  mind  definitively  upon  so  unprecedented,  and 
important  a  subject,  until  he  had  attended  at  least  one  hundred  circles, 
and  seen  some  fifty  Mediums  for  various  forms  of  Spiritual  power.  "  It 
was  through  such  methods  of  investigation  as  these,"  said  this  learned 
'jurist,  "that  I  at  length  became  convinced  of  the  fact  that  the  soul  of  man 
is  immortal,  can  and  does  communicate,  and  that  we  are  even  now  standing 
in  the  dawn  of  a  great  and  wonderful  day  of  Spiritual  science.  This  know- 
ledge so  invaluable,  and  opening  up  possibilities  so  unUmited,  is  surely 
worth  more  than  the  cost  of  one  hundred  hours  out  of  any  man's  life, 
however  exigea?it  the  demands  upon  his  time  may  be." 

"  But  Judge  Edmonds  was  a  crazy  SpirituaHst,"  answers  Brown. 
"Thompson  and  I  spent  one  hour  with  a  mejiuni,  and  found  it  all  false  ; 
what  are  his  hundred  hours'  experiences  compared  to  our  one  ?  " 

Shortly  after  this,  a  favourable  report  appeared  in  the  Leader,  in  which 
a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  who  had  engaged  Mrs.  Hayden  to  attend 
in  their  own  house,  bore  testimony  to  her  entire  honesty,  the  excellence  of 
the  tests  they  had  received,  and  the  utter  impossibility  of  her  agency  in 
producing  either  the  sounds,  movements,  or  intelligence  ;  whereupon 
certain  gentlemen  of  the  press,  who  seemed  to  have  made  it  their  special 
duty  "  to  explode  the  thing,"  proceeded  to  the  accomplishment  of  their 
creditable  work  in  the  way  recorded  as  follows.  "  Mr.  Lewes,"  the 
Leader's  editor,  or  representative,  was  the  party  from  whom  the  annexed 
report  proceeded.  He  says,  in  the  work  on  "  Spirit  Rapping,"  above 
alluded  to  : — 

"  Before  I  had  witnessed  these  '  astounding  phenomena,'  I  had  formed  an  hypothesis 
of  the  whole  process,  which  turned  out  to  be  accurate.  It  did  not  seem  in  the  least  sur- 
prising to  me  that  the  questioner  should  be  correctly  answered,  even  when  asking 
questions  mentally,  of  which  no  living  soul  but  his  own  knew  the  answer.  I  invariably 
said  :  '  The  cause  of  your  delusion  is  that  you  direct  your  attention  to  the  i  king  said, 
and  not  to  the  loay  in  which  it  is  said.  Whatever  the  trick  may  be,  it  will  be  just  as 
easy  to  answer  a  question  of  one  kind  as  of  another — the  nature  of  the  question  has 
nothing  to  do  with  it.  If  you  ask  where  your  grandfather  died,  his  death  being  a 
mystery  to  the  whole  world,  the  answer  is  as  easy  as  if  you  ask  where  Napoleon  died  ; 
because  as  it  is  you  who  really  give  the  answer,  not  the  medium,  what  you  have  in  your 
mind  is  what  will  turn  out  to  be  the  answer.  You  assure  me  solemnly  that  you  do  not 
tell  the  medium  anything  ;  I  declare  unequivocally  that  you  do.  It  is  the  same  in  cases 
of  clairvoyance  :  you  tell  all,  and  fancy  you  are  told.  You  do  not  tell  it  in  so  many 
words,  but  unconsciously  you  are  made  to  communicate  the  very  thing  you  believe  is 
communicated  to  you.'     .     .     . 

"  I  had  formed  an  hypothesis,  and  according  to  that  hypothesis  I  framed  certain  traps 
into  which  the  medium  would  infallibly  fall  if  my  supposition  were  correct ;  the 
hypothesis  and  the  traps  I  explained  to  certain  friends  before  the  experiment  was  made, 
and  the  result  not  only  fully  confirmed  expectation,  but  showed  what  was  certainly  not 
anticipated — viz.,  that  the  trick  was  a  miserably  poor  one. 

"  Our  party  comprised  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Masters,  Sir  WilKam,  Mr.  Purcell,  and  myself  (for 
obvious  reasons,  the  names  given  are  fictitious,  except  my  own).  It  was  after  dinner,  and 
we  were  smoking  our  cigars,  when  the  footman  announced  that  Mrs.  Hayden  was  in  the 

132 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

drawing-room.  "We  soon  joined  her  there,  and  found  her  talking  to  Mrs.  Masters  about 
the  '  spirits,'  in  the  most  easy,  familiar  way — indeed,  she  always  spoke  of  them  without 
awe,  but  with  implicit  confidence — as  if  they  had  been  pet  monkeys.  The  conversation 
soon  became  general,  as  we  formed  a  circle  round  the  table.  It  of  course  turned  upon 
the  '  Manifestations,'  and  Mrs.  Hayden  was  copious  ia  anecdotes  (adroitly  mingled  with 
aristocratic  and  well-known  names)  of  the  surprising  success  which  had  attended  her. 
At  last,  the  rappings  having  announced  that  the  ghosts  were  impatient  to  do  something 
for  the  money  jjaid,  we  took  our  cards,  on  which  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  the 
numerals  from  one  to  ten,  were  printed,  and  the  seance  began. 

"  Sir  William  was  the  first.  He  thought  of  one  dead.  On  asking  whether  the  person 
he  was  then  thinking  of  was  present,  an  alacrity  in  rapping  assured  him  of  the  fact.  He 
took  his  card  ;  the  raps  were  distinct ;  but  the  letters  were  all  wrong.  He  tried  another 
spirit — again  the  letters  indicated  were  wrong.  He  tried  a  third,  but  a  third  time  nothing 
came  right.  I  was  beginning  to  get  anxious  lest  repeated  failures  should  alarm  the 
medium,  and  make  her  give  some  evasive  excuse  ;  so  I  suggested  that  Mr.  Masters  should 
try.  He  tried — but  with  the  same  desperate  ill  success.  It  was  now  my  turn.  Let  me 
pause  here  to  remark  that  both  Sir  William  and  Mr.  Masters  were  determined  to  give  no 
clue  whatever — they  remained  purely  passive,  awaiting  a  result  ;  they  passed  their 
pencils  along  the  alphabet  with  such  terrible  uniformity  that  the  medium  was  reduced 
to  vague  guessing,  and  of  course  in  each  guess  it  was  thirty-five  to  one  against  her.  This 
was  what  I  had  anticipated  ;  but  it  was  only  negative  evidence,  and  I  was  to  elicit  some- 
thing positive. 

"  I  thought  of  a  relative  of  mine,  and  said  aloud,  '  I  should  Hke  to  know  if  she  is 
present.'  Rapping  answered  '  Yes.'  Observe,  the  person  I  thought  of  was  a  real  person — 
I  was  planning  no  trap  this  time,  because  the  experiment  was  to  be  every  way  conclusive. 
I  passed  my  pencil  equally  along  the  alphabet  without  once  lingering,  until  after  I  had  passed 
the  letter  J,  with  which  her  name  began.  Finding  that  I  was  not  to  have  the  real  name, 
I  thought  I  would  try  if  I  could  not  make  the  raps  answer  where  I  pleased.  I  chose  N. 
Eaps  came  ;  N  was  written  down.  What  name,  thought  I,  shall  it  be  ?  Naomi  or 
Nancy  ?  Before  I  had  finally  settled,  my  pencil  had  passed  A,  and  as  I  saw  E,  I 
determined  E  should  be  the  letter,  and  E  was  indicated.  N  E,  of  course,  would  do  for 
Nelly,  and  Nelly  was  spelled  !  Then  came  the  surname,  which  ought  to  have  begun  with 
H  ;  but  as  my  pencil  did  not  linger  at  H,  on  we  passed  until  we  came  to  S,  which  was 
indicated  without  any  intention  on  my  part.  I  had  then  to  inyent  some  name  beginning 
with  S,  which  was  not  done  at  once,  from  the  very  embarras  de  richesses ;  however,  I 
thought  0  would  do,  and  0  was  indicated  ;  then  E, ;  and  after  that  I  resolved  the  name 
should  be  Sorel.  It  is  unnecessary  to  follow  further  thus  in  detail  my  first  trial  ;  enotigh 
if  I  add,  that  Nelly  Sorel  informed  me  she  died  in  1855,  leaving  six  children,  two  of  whom 
were  boys,  the  eldest  fourteen — every  answer  beiag  ludicrously  wrong,  but  declared  by 
me  to  be  '  astonishing,'  which  declaration  was  accepted  in  perfect  faith  by  the  medium, 
who  thought  she  had  got  one  good,  credulous  listener,  at  all  events.  That  was  my 
object — to  make  her  fall  into  my  trap  it  was  necessary  she  should  believe  I  was  her  dupe. 

"  As  far  as  my  hypothesis  went,  it  was  confirmed  by  this  conversation.  I  knew  that 
it  was  the  questioner  who  suppHed  the  answer,  and  I  made  the  answer  turn  out  whatever 
I  pleased— not,  be  it  remembered,  having  that  answer  originally  in  my  mind,  so  as  to 
admit  of  any  pretended  'thought  reading' — but  framing  the  answer  according  to  the 
caprice  of  the  moment,  and  invariably  receiving  the  answer  I  had  resolved  on.  Now  you 
have  only  to  replace  acted  creduhty  by  real  credulity,  and  the  trick  is  explained.  What 
I  did  consciously,  the  credulous  do  unconsciously.  I  spelled  the  words,  so  do  they. 
The  medium  knows  nothing  ;  she  guesses  according  to  the  indications  you  give,  and  only 
guesses  right  when  you  give  right  indications  ;  therefore,  if  you  ask  what  you  and  you 
alone  can  answer,  she  will  answer  it  only  on  the  supposition  that  you  indicate  by  your 
manner  what  the  answer  is.  But  if  any  doubt  lingers  in  your  mind,  let  this  my  second 
trial  suffice. 

"  To  show  how  completely  the  answers  are  made  at  random,  when  no  clue  is  given,  but 
only  a  '  yes '  or  '  no '  is  required,  here  are  four  questions  I  wrote  on  a  piece  of  paper,  and 
the  answers  I  received  : — 

" '  Had  the  ghost  of  Hamlet's  father  seventeen  noses  ? '     Yes. 

" '  Had  Semiramis  ? '     Yes. 

"  '  Was  Pontius  Pilate  an  American  ? '     No. 

" '  Was  he  a  leading  tragedian  ? '     Yes. 

"  I  thought  Mr.  Purcell  would  have  had  a  stroke  of  apoplexy,  when  I  showed  him 
these  questions  ;  how  he  restrained  the  convulsion  of  laughter  is  a  mystery  ! 

"  Let  me  not  forget,  that  when  Mr.  Purcell  caUed  up  a  spirit,  the  answers  were 
tolerably  correct,  not  quite,  but  stUl  near  enough  to  be  curious  to  one  unsuspicious  ;  he 
confessed  afterwards,  however,  that  he  had  semi-consciously  assisted  the  medium  ;  but,  in 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  133 

his  second  conversation,  he  called  up  the  spirit  of  an  old  family  servant,  who,  at  an 
advanced  age,  married  an  elderly  woman,  and  who  subsequently  drowned  himself.  These 
were  the  questions  and  answers  as  written  down  : — 

"  '  Does  James  miss  his  children  ? '     Yes.     (Never  had  any.) 

"  '  How  many  had  he  ? '     Yes. 

"  '  How  many  boys  ? '     Yes. 

"  '  What  did  he  die  of  ? '      Wafer. 

"  To  explain  this  '  wafer,'  it  may  be  observed,  that  Mr.  Purcell  meant  the  death  to  be 
called  water  on  the  chest,  which  was  his  fallacious  hint  by  way  of  an  explanation  of 
drowning  ;  and,  when  he  said  aloud  that  the  word  was  incorrectly  spelled  wafer,  whereas 
it  ought  to  have  been  '  water  on  the  chest,'  Mrs.  Hayden  pointed  triumphantly  to  the 
accuracy,  '  Only  one  letter  wrong,  you  see ;  tvafer  instead  of  water  !  '  and  she  referred  to 
this  several  times  in  the  course  of  the  evening. 

"  I  have  not  half  exhausted  my  stock  of  questions  and  answers  written  down  at  the 
time  ;  but  the  foregoing  will  surely  suffice  ;  and,  should  they  be  deemed  inconclusive, 
perhaps  this  one  will  close  the  question.  As  I  had  been  so  very  successful  in  getting 
correct  answers,  and  was  evidently  regarded  by  the  spirits  with  singular  partiality,  they 
never  declining  to  answer  any  question  I  put,  it  occurred  to  me  to  write  this  question  ou 
my  paper,  which  I  showed  to  Mr.  Purcell : — 

" '  is  Mrs.  Hayden  an  imjpostor  ? ' 

"An  unequivocating  Tes,  was  the  answer  ;  and,  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  Mr. 
Purcell  affected  not  to  hear  that  answer  ;  so  we  repeated  the  question,  and  again  were 
assured  that  she  was  an  impostor.  This  was  the  most  satisfactory  answer  of  the  evening, 
and  I  felt  very  sorry  that  the  medium  was  a  woman—not  a  man,  to  whom  I  could  have 
said,  '  I  asked  the  spirits  if  you  were  an  impostor,  and  you  hear  them  declare  you  to  be 
one.'  For  I  must  plainly  say,  that  a  more  ignoble  imposture  than  this  spirit  manifestation 
never  came  before  me — and  that  was  the  opinion  of  the  whole  party.  It  is  easy  for  the 
reader  to  convince  himself  of  this  by  a  similar  process." 

"  In  the  following  number  of  the  Leader  the  editor  observed  :  '  Iconoclasts  are 
generally  welcomed  with  abuse  from  devotees.  Entering  the  temples  of  superstition  and 
charlatanism,  they  smite  the  hideous  idols  from  their  pedestals,  amidst  the  bowlings  of 
indignant  worshippers.  It  was  to  be  expected,  therefore,  that  in  exposing  the  imposture 
of  spirit  manifestations  which  America  has  shipped  for  our  guUible  market,  we  should 
have  to  bear  hard  words  and  worse  insinuations  from  indignant  dupes  ;  and  what  we 
expected  we  have  received.' 

■' '  Dr.  Ashburner,  for  example,  has  felt  himself  personally  insulted,  and  has  written 
an  insulting  letter,  complaining  of  the  "  flippant  "  treatment  this  "  very  sacred  subject  " 
received  at  our  hands,  but  as  he  opposes  our  experimental  ^roo/ by  nothing  stronger  than 
his  own  emphatic  assertion,  he  cannot  expect  those  who  reason,  to  attach  much  weight  to 
mere  declarations.'  " 

The  portion  of  Dr.  Ashburner's  letter  above  alluded  to,  quoted  by  the 
veracious  editor  of  the  Leader,  reads  as  follows  : — 

"Sex  ought  to  have  protected  her  from  injury  if  you  gentlemen  of  the  press  have  no^ 
regard  to  the  hospitable  feelings  due  to  one  of  your  own  cloth,  for  Mrs.  Hayden  is  the 
wife  of  a  former  editor  and  proprietor  of  a  journal  in  Boston,  having  a  most  extensive 
circulation  in  New  England.  I  declare  to  you  that  Mrs.  Hayden  is  no  impostor,  and  he 
who  has  the  daring  to  come  to  an  opposite  conclusion  must  do  so  at  the  peril  of  his 
character  for  truth.  I  defy  Mr.  Lewes  or  any  one  else  to  prove  the  acts  of  imposition  or 
fraud  in  the  phenomena  that  require  the  presence  of  such  a  medium  as  Mrs.  Hayden  for 
their  development.  I  have  calmly,  deliberately,  and  very  cautiously  studied  this  subject. 
It  may  please  superficial  thinkers  to  treat  it  as  they  long  treated  Mesmerism  and  clair- 
voyance. The  fire  from  the  Zoist,  the  researches  of  Baron  Von  Reichenbach,  Mr.  Butter's 
important  discovery  of  the  magnetescope,  have  settled,  for  posterity,  the  questions  scouted 
by  the  twaddling  physiologists  of  this  generation.  A  battle  is  to  be  fought  for  the  new 
manifestations.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that,  much  as  I  have  seen  of  Mesmerism 
and  of  clairvoyance — grand  as  were  my  anticipations  of  the  vast  amount  of  good  to  accrue 
to  the  human  race,  in  medical  and  physical  improvement,  from  the  expansion  given  to 
them  by  the  cultivation  of  their  extensive  relations — all  sink  into  shade  and  comparative 
insignificance,  in  the  contemplation  of  those  consequences  which  must  result  from  the 
spirit  manifestations.  This  is  a  very  serious  truth,  and  must  and  will  force  its  way. 
Animal  magnetism  and  its  consequences  appeared  marvellous  to  petty  minds.  The  spirit 
manifestations  have,  in  the  last  three  weeks,  produced  miracles,  and  many  more  will,  ere 
long,  astound  the  would-be  considered  philosophers,  who  may  continue  to  deny  and  sneer 
at  the  most  obvious  facts.  I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

"York  Place,  March  14th,  1853."'  "John  Ashburneb. 

134 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

No  reformers  who  have  attempted  to  present  a  new  idea  to  the  world^ 
and  been  compelled  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  ignorance  and  prejudice,  will 
fail  to  acknowledge  that  antagonism  is  as  necessary  to  ultimate  success,  as 
ready  acceptance. 

So  did  it  prove  in  the  case  of  Spiritualism  and  "  the  American  Medium." 
The  attacks  upon  her  so  deliberately  planned,  carried  out  with  utter  dis- 
regard to  all  psychological  influence,  and  subsequently  so  rudely  and 
inhospitably  trumpeted  abroad  as  the  blow  which  was  for  ever  to  crush  out 
of  existence  the  supernaturalism  of  thousands  of  years,  had  the  effect  which 
wise  invisible  ivire  puller?,  might  possibly  have  foreseen.  It  called  into  print 
a  perfect  flood  of  testimony  of  a  totally  opposite  character,  and  so  far 
from  crushing  out  the  "  delusion  "  by  one  fell  swoop  of  the  editorial  pen,  it 
became  a  hydra-headed  messenger  of  an  established  Spirit  telegraphy,  to 
thousands  of  persons,  who  would  otherwise  have  never  known  of  its  existence. 

From  multitudes  of  letters  which  poured  in  from  every  quarter  in  favour 
of  the  truth  of  the  manifestations,  letters  which  the  press  were  at  that  time 
compelled  to  place  side  by  side  with  the  opposing  testimony,  we  select  the 
following  as  specimens  of  what  calm  deliberative  minds  were — even  in  that 
early  day — impelled  to  think  of  the  newly-developed  telegraphy.  Both  the 
following  letters  were  printed  in  the  Leader.,  in  connection  with  reiterated 
charges  on  the  part  of  the  editor,  against  "  the  fraudulent  practices  of  the 
American  Medium." 

"  Sir, — Having  observed  in  your  journal  of  the  5th  instant  a  statement  respecting  the 
alleged  spirit  manifestations,  from  a  correspondent  who  appears  to  have  but  partially 
investigated  the  matter,  I  take  the  liberty  of  transmitting  to  you  a  few  additional 
particulars. 

"  I,  upon  the  iirst  occasion,  called  the  spirit  of  an  old  servant  —the  experiment  was 
unsatisfactory  ;  I  then  attempted  to  help  him,  but  got  on  with  difficulty  ;  had  I  had 
the  inclination,  I  feel  confident  answers  could  have  been  obtained  equally  absurd  as 
those  your  correspondent  prides  himself  with  having  so  ingeniously  succeeded  in  obtaining. 

"  I,  however,  did  not  throw  discredit  on,  or  treat  with  scorn,  the  experience  of  others ; 
I,  therefore,  determined  to  try  again  the  nest  evening,  believing  that  the  failure  rested 
either  in  myself  or  some  other  unknown  cause.  I  called  the  spirits  of  two  of  my  own 
nearest  relations,  who  might  naturally  be  supposed  to  be  more  intimately  connected  with 
myself  ;  they  both  presented  themselves,  giving  proofs  of  their  identity  which  could 
never  have  occurred  to  me  to  seek.  I  tested  them  in  various  ways.  I  was  also  anxious 
to  ascertain  whether  by  willing  strongly,  and  dwelling  upon  wrong  letters,  I  could  obtain 
false  answers,  but  failed  to  influence  them  in  any  way  whatever,  whether  the  alphabet 
was  placed  upon,  or  concealed  under,  the  table,  and  at  each  of  the  several  successive 
interviews  the  rapport  appears  to  be  more  thoroughly  established  ;  whether  I  ask 
questions  audibly  or  mentally,  concise  and  clear  answers  are  given,  excepting  in  some 
few  instances  when  no  reply  can  be  obtained. 

"  So  far  as  the  moving  of  the  table  is  concerned,  I  obtained  my  request,  during  the 
second  interview,  in  so  satisfactory  a  manner,  that  I  consider  time  may  be  more  profit- 
ably employed  than  in  seeking  a  repetition  of  it ;  it  moved  out  of  reach  of  Mrs.  Hayden, 
and  soon  after  suddenly  regained  its  former  position  ;  it  also  moved  upon  its  axis  in  a 
peculiarly  smooth,  gliding  manner  ;  not  the  top  only,  but  the  whole  table,  as  I  particularly 
observed,  commencing  with  an  almost  invisible  motion  until  it  gained  a  rapid  pace,  and 
stopped  suddenly.  I  immediately  endeavoured  myself  to  produce  a  similar  motion,  but 
was  unable. 

"  I  will  conclude  by  stating,  that  I  have  reason  to  consider  Mrs.  Hayden  to  be  a  lady 
possessed  of  courage,  but,  having  a  delicate  and  sensitive  mind,  any  insults  directed 
against  her,  whether  personally  or  through  the  medium  of  the  press,  may  be  likely  to 
have  a  tendency  to  disarrange  and  interrupt  that  subtle  and  mysterious  agency  so 
intimately  connected  with  our  higher  nature.  May  I  venture  to  recommend  those  who 
determine  to  investigate  for  themselves,  to  refrain  from  publishing  the  crude  ideas  of  one 
hour's  experience,  especially  should  they  arrive  at  conclusions  opposite  to  those  of 
the  thousands  who  have  been  making  the  subject  their  earnest  and  constant  study  during 
the  past  five  years  ?  I  am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

"March  21,  1853."  "  C.  F.  I.* 

'^'  Sir  Charles  Isham. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  135 

Another  letter  makes  us  acquainted  with  a  novel  mode  of  Spirit  writing 
by  medium  intervention  : — 

"  Sir, — Permit  me,  if  you  conveniently  can,  the  opportunity  of  affording  Mr.  Lewes  a 
peg  on  which  to  hang  a  few  shreds  of  additional  comments,  in  defence  of  his  '  hypothesis' 
relative  to  the  spirit-rapping  '  imposture.'  Mr.  Lewes  does  not  hesitate  to  impute,  by 
anticipation,  imposture  to  others,  nor  to  '  act '  an  imposture  himself  ;  why  should  '  the 
spirits '  be  denied  their  revenge  upon  him  ?  Are  there  no  wags  out  of  the  body  as  well 
as  in  it  ?     Are  we  to  dictate  to  the  wag  above  how  he  is  to  treat  the  wag  below  ? 

"  But,  further,  Mr.  Lewes's  hypothesis  does  not  cover  the  whole  facts  of  the  pheno- 
mena. It  does  in  no  way  explain  the  unexceptionably  attested  cases,  recorded  in  the 
American  literature  on  the  subject,  and  in  the  records  of  private  investigation,  into 
which  the  vulgar  notion  of  imposture,  besides  being  excluded  by  the  very  nature  of  the 
occurrences  described,  is,  on  other  grounds,  wholly  inadmissible.  How,  for  instance,  does 
it  apply  to  the  following  case  ? — A  pair  of  scissors  is  held,  by  the  points,  by  a  •  medium,' 
over  a  sheet  of  writing-paper.  One  of  the  persons  present  drops  a  pencil  into  the  thumb- 
hole  of  the  scissors.  Presently,  the  pencil  stands  apart  from  the  steel,  begins  to  move, 
and  the  hand  of  the  medium  is  carried  across  the  paper,  and  the  signature  of  a  person 
known  to  be  dead  appears  !  The  father,  or  other  near  relative  of  the  person  is  present, 
and,  from  some  peculiarity  in  it,  disputes  the  genuineness  of  the  signature.  The  recent 
letters  of  the  person  are  appealed  to,  and  there  the  very  same  peculiarity  is  found,  and 
the  exact  correspondence  of  the  two  signatures  demonstrated. 

"  This  case  Ls  reported  in  Horace  Greeley's  paper,  the  Tribime,  and  he  voiiches  for  the 
honour  and  capacity  of  his  correspondent,  who  gives  the  original  letter  of  the  father,  or 
relative  of  the  alleged  spirit  writer,  I  mention  it  from  memory,  but  am  certain  the 
main  facts  of  the  record  are  as  stated.  "  A.+ 

"  Liverpool,  March  21,  1853." 

The  next  sword  that  was  aimed  against  the  new  faith  was  drawn  from 
an  unexpected  quarter,  namely,  by  the  hand  of  Dr.  Elliotson,  one  of  the 
most  prominent  writers  in  the  Zot'sf,  and  a  gentleman  whose  extensive 
experiences  in  mesmeric  and  psychologic  phenomena  suggested  the  expec- 
tation, that  he  would  be  prompt  to  welcome  a  phase  of  power  so  nearly 
related  to  many  of  the  mental  revealments  that  must  have  come  under  his 
own  observation. 

We  do  not  pause  upon  the  stern  and  relentless  acts  of  warfare  which  this 
gentleman  directed  against  the  American  Medium,  nor  is  it  necessary  to 
say  that  his  adherence  to  the  ranks  of  the  opponents  was  all  the  more 
eagerly  welcomed  by  them,  because  they  had  anticipated  from  Dr.  Elliot- 
son's  antecedents,  a  totally  different  result.  It  is  a  far  pleasanter  task  to 
the  author  to  record,  instead  of  the  harsh  diatribes  pubHshed  in  the  Zot's^ 
by  this  ever  faithful  soldier  of  what  he  beUeved  to  be  the  truth,  a  delightful 
interview  which  she  enjoyed  with  this  venerable  gentleman  when,  nearly 
sixteen  years  after  the  period  now  under  consideration,  Dr.  Ashburner 
invited  the  author  to  call  with  him  upon  an  aged  and  infirm  gentleman 
unable  himself  to  go  through  the  ceremony  of  the  first  call,  but  who,  as  a 
warm  and  devoted  Spiritualist  of  ma?iy  years  stafiding,  was  all  anxiety  to 
welcome  and  co?iverse  with  Mrs.  Emma  Ilardinge,  or  any  of  the  ivell-knowfi 
American  Mediums  of  the  holy  faith. 

This  "  aged  and  infirm  gentleman "  was  Dr.  Elliotson,  once  the  bitter 
foe,  now  the  warm  adherent  of  Spiritualism,  a  faith  which  the  venerable 
gentleman  cherished  as  the  brightest  revelation  that  had  ever  been  vouch- 
safed to  him,  and  one  which  finally  smoothed  the  dark  passage  to  the  life 
beyond  and  made  his  transition,  a  scene  of  triumphant  faith  and  joyful 
anticipation. 

t  Mr.  Andrew  Leighton, 

136  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER   XVIII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT    BRITAIN    (CONTINUED). 

Besides  the  Leader.,  Zoist,  and  Household  Woi^ds,  the  columns  of  several  of 
the  London  journals  began  to  be  filled  with/r<?  and  con  articles  on  the  subject 
of  Spiritualism,  soon  after  Mrs.  Hayden's  visit  had  opened  up  that  topic  as 
a  theme  of  pubhc  discussion.  Amongst  other  leading  papers  in  which  each 
side  of  the  vexed  question  was  allowed  a  fair  representation,  was  ihe  Critic, 
a  journal  to  which  Mr.  Spicer,  the  well-known  author  of  "  Sights  and 
Sounds,"  contributed  a  series  of  articles  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism, 
from  which  we  give  the  following  excerpts :  — 

"  As  Sir  Charles  Isliam  has  already  given  his  public  testimony  to  the  facts  witnessed 
by  himself,  I  need  not  hesitate  to  say  that  I  received  from  him,  and  other  members  of  his 
family  (including  the  rector  of  a  parish  in  Nottinghamshire),  the  most  explicit  and  positive 
assurance  that  they  all,  together  with  several  others,  heard  these  mysterious  sounds  at 
Lamport  Hall,*  in  a  perfectly  private  family  circle  (neither  Mrs.  Hayden  nor  any  other 
professional  medium  being  present).  They  all  assured  me  that  there  could  be  no  mistake 
or  delusion  about  it.  The  rector  alluded  to  also  mentioned  several  satisfactory  tests  to 
which  he  had  subjected  Mrs.  Hayden's  spirits — receiving  correct  answers,  through  another 
gentleman  present  (who  held  the  alphabet),  to  questions  which  nobody  present  could  have 
known  by  any  ordinary  mode.  I  have  also  received  letters  from  a  gentleman  of  the  very 
highest  reputation  and  authority  in  the  scientific  world,  and  with  whose  writings  and 
character  my  Cambridge  studies  have  long  ago  made  me  familiar,  as  those  of  the  most 
cautious  reasoner  whom  I  know.t  He  is  professor  of  mathematics  in  a  well-known 
college  ;  is  recognised  as  one  of  the  first  mathematicians  in  England  ;  and  is  pre-eminent 
for  the  profound  and  cautious  scrutiny  of  principles  and  reasonings  which  characterises 
his  writings.     .     .     .     Well,  thus  he  writes  to  me  : — 

"  '  Those  who  can  set  it  down  as  easily  explicable  by  imposture,  are  among  the  easiest 
believers  I  know — if  they  know  anything  of  such  facts  as  I  know  from  a  pluraUty  of 
witnesses  to  each.' 

"  The  founder  of  Sociahsm — the  celebrated  Eobert  Owen — has  been  converted  by  these 
rappings,  to  a  belief  in  a  spiritual  world,  and  a  future  state.  He  has  published  a  manifesto 
to  that  effect.  I  met  him  one  day  last  week  at  Mrs.  Hayden's,  and  heard  from  his  own 
lips  the  statement  of  several  of  the  facts  which  had  produced  this  conviction  in  him. 
This,  of  itself,  is  a  curious  fact,  which  I  presume  even  the  sapient  writer  of  the  Zoist  will 
not  deny.  2nd.  The  excitement  on  the  subject  in  the  United  States,  having  already 
existed  nearly  five  years,  is  so  far  from  subsiding  or  dying  away,  that  it  is  increasing  and 
spreading  wider  and  faster  every  day.  Only  a  month  or  two  ago,  a  Dr.  Tyng,  one  of  the 
episcopal  clergy  in  New  York,  preached  a  sermon,  at  the  usual  time  and  place,  warning  his 
congregation  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  these  spirits.  The  preacher  did  not  for  a  moment 
pretend  to  deny  or  doubt  the  facts  ;  but,  like  the  Rev.  Hugh  M'Neile  in  this  country  with 
regard  to  Mesmerism,  he  considered  them  of  Satanic  origin. 

"  The  thing  has  scarcely  begun  in  England  as  yet ;  but  already,  within  the  few  months 
since  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hayden  arrived  in  London,  it  has  spread  like  wild-fire,  and  I  have  good 
reason  for  saying  that  the  excitement  is  only  commencing.  Persons  who  at  first  treated 
the  whole  affair  as  a  contemptible  imposture,  on  witnessing  these  strange  things  for  them- 
selves, become  first  startled  and  astonished,  then  rush  bHndly  into  all  sorts  of  mad  con- 
clusions— as  for  instance,  that  it  is  all  the  work  of  the  devil,  or  (in  the  opposite  degree) 
that  it  is  a  new  revelation  from  Heaven.     .    .    .    That  it  is  not  imposture  I  feel  perfectly 

*  Lamport  Hall,  Northampton.     Seat  of  Sir  Chas.  Isliam. 
t  Professor  De  Morgan. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  137 

and  fully  convinced.  In  addition  to  the  tests,  etc.,  above  named,  I  had  a  long  conversa- 
tion in  private  with  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hayden,  separately,  and  everything  they  said  bore 
the  marks  of  sincerity  and  good  faith.  Of  course  this  is  no  evidence  to  other  people,  but 
it  is  to  me.     If  there  is  any  deception,  they  are  as  much  deceived  as  any  of  their  dupes. 

"A  word  or  two  as  to  its  being  a  money-exhibition.  In  the  first  place,  there  are,  to 
my  certain  knowledge,  several  persons  who  are  mediums  in  private  life,  who,  so  far  from 
making  it  public  and  getting  money  by  it,  are  only  too  anxious  to  keep  it  quiet ;  but,  of 
course,  such  things  cannot  be  altogether  hushed  up.  Of  these,  one  at  least  is  a  lady  of 
rank  (whose  name  I  could  give,  if  necessary),  and  others  are  in  a  position  which  renders 
all  such  charges  as  imposture  and  money-exhibitions  perfectly  out  of  the  question. 

"  In  the  present  state  of  public  opinion,  however,  nobody  cares  to  avow  their  belief 
in  these  sort  of  things,  unless  they  have  a  particular  wish  to  be  set  down  by  their  friends 
as  lunatics,  or  are  desirous  of  profiting  by  it  in  a  pecuniary  way.  But  even  these  are  not 
fairly  dealt  with,  I  think,  Mr.  Hayden  held  a  respectable  position  in  America  as  editor  of 
a  newspaper  of  good  repute  and  circulation  ;  and  if  he  and  Mrs.  H.  believed  (as  they  state) 
that  it  was  advisable  to  come  over  and  make  these  things  known  here,  why  should  they 
not  be  paid  for  their  time  and  trouble  ?  But  this,  of  course,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
main  point — '  Are  these  rappings  what  they  profess  to  be — the  work  of  spirits  ? ' " 

The  "manifesto"  of  Robert  Owen,  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  com- 
niLinication,  says  :— 

"  I  have  patiently,  with  first  impressions  against  the  truthfulness  of  these  manifesta- 
tions, investigated  their  history,  and  the  proceedings  connected  with  them  in  the  United 
States — have  read  the  most  authentic  works  for  and  against  them  ;  and  although  I  long 
continued  to  doubt,  and  thought  the  whole  a  delusion,  1  have  been  compelled  to  come  to  a 
very  different  conclusion."  "  While  conversing  with  Mrs.  Hayden,  and  while  we  were  both 
standing  before  the  fire,  suddenly  raps  were  heard  on  a  table  at  some  distance  from  us,  no 
one  being  near  it.  I  was  surprised  ;  and  as  the  raps  continued,  and  appeared  to  indicate 
a  strong  desire  to  attract  attention,  I  asked  what  was  the  meaning  of  the  sounds.  Mrs. 
Hayden  said  they  were  spirits  anxious  to  communicate  with  some  one,  and  she  would 
inquire  who  they  were.  They  replied  to  her  by  the  alphabet  that  they  were  friends  of 
mine,  who  were  desirous  to  communicate  with  me.  Mrs.  Hayden  then  gave  me  the 
alphabet  and  pencil,  and  I  found,  according  to  their  own  statements,  that  the  spirits  were 
those  of  my  mother  and  father.  I  tested  their  truth  by  various  questions,  and  their 
answers,  all  correct,  surprised  me  exceedingly."  "In  mixed  societies  with  conflicting  minds, 
I  have  seen  very  confused  answers  given  ;  but  I  believe,  in  all  these  cases,  the  errors  have 
arisen  from  the  state  of  mind  of  the  inquirer." 

It  would  be  impossible  in  this  merely  compendious  notice  of  Spiritual 
progress  in  Great  Britain,  to  pursue  the  course  of  Mr.  Owen's  investiga- 
tions in  farther  detail ;  suffice  it  to  say,  they  were  followed  out  in  the  most 
thorough,  calm,  and  deliberate  spirit  of  enquiry. 

Mr.  Owen  lived  to  reaUze  many  corroborative  proofs  of  Spirit  intercourse 
from  other  sources  than  Mrs.  Hayden's  Mediamship,  and  in  his  last  days 
was  often  heard  to  declare,  the  sum  of  his  whole  life-long  endeavour  to 
bless  and  improve  the  condition  of  his  fellow  men,  paled  before  that  mighty 
illumination  which  brought,  to  him,  but  especially  to  earth's  toiling  martyrs, 
the  assurance  of  immortality,  and  the  certainty  of  reunion  with  all  we  have 
loved  and  lost  on  earth,  "  in  another  and  a  better  world." 

Very  shortly  after  the  advent  of  Mrs.  Hayden  in  England,  the  public 
were  privileged  to  witness  another  phase  of  Spirit  power  in  the  person  of 
Miss  Emma  Frances  Jay,  a  young  lady  who  had  quite  recently  become 
developed  as  a  trance  medium  in  America,  in  fact  the  first  phenomenon 
of  this  kind  that  had  as  yet  appeared  upon  the  public  rostrum. 

Miss  Jay's  Mediumship  consisted  of  speaking  with  extraordinary  elo- 
quence on  metaphysical  subjects.  She  also  concluded  her  addresses  by 
singing  ;  both  words  and  music  being  improvisations  of  remarkable  beauty 
and  sweetness. 

138  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

These  exhibitions,  although  singularly  interesting,  did  not  furnish  the 
indisputable  proof  of  a  Spiritual  origin  for  which  the  sceptics  of  the  time 
were  seeking ;  nevertheless,  the  wonderful  improvisations  poured  forth  by 
this  gifted  young  sybil,  might  have  convinced  any  experienced  psychologist, 
that  she  was  controlled  by  some  power  far  transcending  her  normal  capacity. 

After  a  few  months  spent  amongst  the  aristocratic  circles  of  England, 
wherein  Miss  Jay's  interesting  phase  of  Mediumship  rendered  her  the 
centre  of  universal  admiration,  she  returned  to  America,  and  as  Mrs. 
Bullene  soon  became  one  of  the  most  popular  speakers  of  the  American 
rostrum. 

But  the  great  era  in  English  Spiritualism,  from  which  may  be  dated 
unnumbered  conversions,  was  inaugurated  by  the  visit  of  Mr.  D.  D.  Home, 
who  though  of  European  birth,  was  brought  up  by  relatives  in  America, 
from  which  circumstance  he  was  at  first  generally  spoken  of  as  an 
"  American  Medium."  As  Mr.  Home's  wonderful  gifts  have  exercised  an 
unbounded  influence  upon  European  society,  and  his  whole  career  forms 
an  epoch  in  human  history — the  effect  of  which  can  never  be  blotted  out, 
we  must  claim  the  privilege  of  dwelling  somewhat  minutely  upon  his  first 
introduction  to  England,  and  although  his  own  published  biography, 
together  with  a  whole  encyclopaedia  of  press  notices,  are  already  before  the 
world,  the  history  of  the  Spiritual  movement  in  Europe  would  be  inex- 
plicable, were  we  to  omit  due  notice  of  so  important  a  link  in  the  chain  of 
cause  and  effect  as  Mr.  Home,  and  his  marvellous  Mediumistic  career.  It 
has  been  alleged  that  Mr.  Home  came  to  England  in  the  spring  of  1855 
for  the  benefit  of  his  health,  which,  his  friends  deemed  as  a  last,  but 
almost  hopeless  chance,  might  be  restored  by  an  European  trip.  He  was 
at  this  time  about  twenty-two  years  of  age ;  had  been  studying  for  the 
medical  profession,  and  though  already  celebrated  in  New  England  for 
his  wonderful  medial  powers,  he  would  have  devoted  himself  entirely  to 
the  practice  of  medicine,  had  not  the  development  of  consumptive  tendencies, 
compelled  him  to  comply  with  the  wishes  of  his  friends,  and  seek  health  in 
entire  relaxation  from  his  professional  studies. 

Mr.  Home  never  practised  his  Mediumship  professionally.  He  seldom, 
if  ever,  sat  in  dark  circles ;  never  refused  to  submit  to  any  tests  demanded 
of  him  ;  was  very  careful  not  to  sit  in  any  such  positions  as  to  warrant 
the  idea  that  he  exercised  any  personal  effort  in  producing  the  manifesta- 
tions, often  drawing  away  from  contact  with  the  table,  whilst  a  large 
amount  of  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  produced  in  his  presence 
occurred  without  the  agency  of  tables  at  all.  He  never  refused  to  submit 
to  personal  examinations,  to  prove  that  he  carried  no  concealed  apparatus 
before  the  commencement  of  his  seances,  and  in  every  word  and  act,  mani- 
fested a  spirit  of  candour  and  sincerity,  which  none  but  the  most  prejudiced 
and  illiberal  bigots  could  have  misconstrued. 

We  have  already  given  some  account  of  Mr.  Home's  wonderful  Medium- 
istic endowments  in  our  French  section,  and  the  reader  will  find  further 
illustrations  of  this  gentleman's  marvellous  gifts  in  the  reports  of  seances  in 
succeeding  pages  ;  it  need  only  be  added  that  Mr.  Home's  witnesses  range 
from  monarchs,  princes,  statesmen,  scientists,  and  potentates,  down  to  the 
professional  and  private  grades  of  life,  and  throughout  them  all,  it  is 
impossible  to  find  any  proven  account  of  fraud,  or  deception. 

It  was  this  marvellous  phenomenal  being  that  came  in  the  year  1855  to 
visit  London,  and  became  a  guest  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cox,  the  noble-hearted 
proprietors  of  a  fashionable  hotel  in  Jermyn  Street,  St.  James'.     Amongst 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

•39 

the  many  distinguished  personages  that  Mr.  Home  met  at  Mr.  Cox's  was 
the  late  Lord  Brougham,  who  having  became  greatly  interested  in  the 
marvellous  phenomena  exhibited  through  the  young  American,  asked 
permission  to  bring  his  friend  Sir  David  Brewster  to  witness  the  new  and 
mysterious  power. 

As  the  correspondence  which  grew  out  of  this,  and  a  second  visit  which 
Sir  David  paid  Mr.  Home,  when  the  latter  became  a  guest  of  Mr.  Rymer 
at  Ealing,  exercised  a  manifest  influence  upon  the  progress  of  Spiritualism 
in  England  in  divers  ways,  at  the  risk  of  inflicting  upon  our  readers, 
passages  which  have  already  attained  to  a  wide-spread  notoriety,  we  must 
here  give  a  few  extracts  that  will  present  a  summary  of  the  case  in  question. 

It  would  seem  that  the  correspondence  arose  from  the  circumstance  of 
the  sea?ice  being  reported  in  an  American  paper,  from  whence  it  was  copied 
into  the  London  Morning  Advertiser.,  and  this  called  forth  from  Sir  David 
Brewster  the  following  remarks,  from  which  we  only  excise  some  unimportant 
preliminary  words  addressed  to  the  editor. 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Morning  Advertiser. 
"  Sir, — It  is  quite  true  as  stated  by  Mr.  Home,  that  I  wrote  an  article  in  the  North 
British  Review  in  which  I  have  denounced  '  table-moving  and  spirit-rapping '  in  the 
strongest  terms,  and  it  is  also  true  that  I  saw  at  Cox's  Hotel,  in  company  with  Lord 
Brougham,  and  at  Ealing,  in  company  with  Mrs.  Trollope,  several  mechanical  effects 
which  I  was  unable  to  explain.  But  though  I  could  not  account  for  all  these  effects,  I 
never  thought  of  ascribing  them  to  spirits  stalking  beneath  the  drapery  of  the  table,  and 
I  saw  enough  to  satisfy  myseK  that  they  could  all  be  produced  by  human  hands  and  feet, 
and  to  prove  to  others  that  some  of  them  at  least,  had  such  an  origin." 

The  letter  concludes  with  a  strong  adjuration  to  Mr.  Home  to  announce 
himself  as  the  Wizard  of  the  West  instead  of  "insulting  religion,  common- 
sense,  &c.,  by  ascribing  his  power  to  the  sacred  dead." 

To  this  epistle  immediately  succeeded  the  following  answers  from  Mr. 
Cox  and  Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman.  Mr.  Cox,  who  had  been  present  during 
Sir  David's  first  investigation,  after  alluding  to  his  surprise  at  the  letter  in 
the  Advertiser,  and  quoting  several  of  its  allegations,  says  : — 

"  Without  unnecessarily  alluding  to  what  I  understand  you  saw  at  the  house  of  an 
equally-disinterested  investigator — for  be  it  remembered  all  who  have  received  Mr.  Home 
in  this  country  are  above  suspicion,  and  desire  to  arrive  only  at  the  truth — I  beg  to  recall 
to  your  memory  what  took  place  at  my  house  when  Lord  Brougham  and  you  did  me  the 
favour  to  accept  my  invitation,  and  I  will  appeal  to  your  candour  to  say  whether  there 
was  a  possibility  of  the  various  acts  being  effected  by  the  hands  or  feet  of  anyone  present. 

"  I  have  a  distinct  recollection  of  the  astonishment  which  both  Lord  Brougham  and 
yourself  expressed,  and  your  emphatic  exclamation  to  me — '  Sir,  this  upsets  the  philosophy 

of  fifty  yeo'i's: 

"  If  the  subject  be  beyond  your  powers  of  reasonable  explanation,  leave  it  to  others  ; 
for  it  is  not  just  or  generous  to  raise  the  cry  of  imposture,  in  a  matter  you  cannot  explain, 
taking  advantage  of  your  character  to  place  humbler  men  in  a  false  jDosition,  by  allowing 
the  world  to  think  they  were  by  ignorance  or  design  parties  to  so  gross  and  impudent  a 
fraud. 

"  I  am,  Sir  David, 

"  Your  obedient  servant, 
"  Cox's  Hotel,  Jermyn  Street,  October  4,  1855."  William  Cox." 

Mr.  Benjamm  Coleman — a  gentleman  of  wealth  and  high  social  standing — 
one  who  subsequently  figured  largely  in  the  Spiritual  movement  and 
against  whose  honesty,  integrity,  and  acumen  as  a  keen  observer,  even  Sir 
David  Brewster  could  bring  no  allegation,  next  takes  up  the  cudgels  by 
addressing  a  letter  to  the  Morning  Advertiser,  to  the  following  effect : — 

I40  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  Sir,—  Sir  David  Brewster  has  addressed  a  letter  to  you,  attributing  the  phenomena 
which  he  witnessed  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Home,  to  mechanical  agency. 

"  Sir  David,  although  he  had  at  least  two  interviews,  and  was  invited  to  further 
investigation,  failed  to  discover  the  mechanism  by  which  these  marvels  were  produced. 

"  I  am  one  of  a  hundred,  who  have  recently  witnessed  these  manifestations  at  the  house 
of  a  friend,  and  I  am  sure  that  they  were  neither  effected  by  trick,  nor  were  we  under  a 
delusion.  ...  I  was  as  much  astonished  at  what  I  saw  in  Mr.  Home's  presence  as 
any  man,  and  when  I  found  that  Sir  David  Brewster  had  been  a  witness  of  similar 
phenomena,  I  called  upon  Sir  David,  and  in  the  course  of  conversation  he  said,  that  what 
he  and  Lord  Brougham  saw,  was  marvellous,  quite  unaccountable. 

"  I  then  asked  him  ;  '  Do  you  think  these  things  were  produced  by  trick  ? ' 

'' '  No,  certainly  not,'  was  his  reply. 

"  '  Is  it  delusion,  think  you  ? ' 

"  '  No,  that  is  out  of  the  question.' 

"  '  Then  what  is  it  ? ' 

"  To  which  he  replied,  '  I  don't  know,  but  Spirit  is  the  last  thing  I  will  give  in  to.' 

"  Sir  David  then  told  me  what  he  and  Lord  Brougham  had  witnessed  :  'The  table — 
a  large  dinner  table — moved  about  in  the  most  extraordinary  manner,  and  amongst  other 
things,  an  accordion  was  conveyed  by  an  invisible  agency  to  his  hand,  and  then  to  Lord 
Brougham's,  in  which,  held  by  his  Lordship's  right  hand,  apart  from  any  person,  it  played 
an  air  throughout'  Mr.  Coleman  adds  :  '  Is  it  reasonable — astounding  as  the  fact  may 
be — to  attribute  such  a  performance  to  mechanical  agency  beyond  detection,  or  that  it 
should  have  been  effected  by  Mr.  Home's  foot  ? '  " 

After  the  perusal  of  this  letter,  Sir  David  published  an  answer,  either 
denying  in  Mo  Mr.  Coleman's  statements,  or  shuflSing  out  of  them  in  the 
following  way.  After  alluding  to  the  conversation  which  Mr.  Coleman  had 
with  him  at  the  Athenaeum  Club,  he  says  : — 

"  I  may  once  for  all  admit,  that  both  Lord  Brougham  and  myself  acknowledged  that 
we  were  puzzled  with  Mr.  Home's  performances,  and  could  not  account  for  them. 

"  Neither  of  us  profess  to  be  expounders  of  conundrums,  whether  verbal  or  mechanical, 
but  if  we  had  been  permitted  to  take  a  peep  beneath  the  drapery  of  Mr.  Cox's  table,  we 
should  have  been  spared  the  mortification  of  this  confession." 

As  specimens  of  the  form  of  denials  which  Sir  David  gave  to  the 
allegations  of  Mr.  Coleman,  the  following  items  may  serve  : — 

'■  When  all  our  hands  loere  upon  the  table,  noises  were  heard  ;  rappings  in  abundance, 
and  when  we  rose  up,  the  table  actually  rose,  as  appeared  to  me,  from  the  ground.  This 
result  I  do  not  pretend  to  explain,  but  rather  than  bdieve  that  spirits  made  the  noises,  I 
will  conjecture  that  the  raps  were  produced  by  Mr.  Home's  toes — or  as  Dr.  Schiff  has 
shown,  '  hy  the  repeated  displacement  of  the  tendon  of  the  peroneus  longus  muscle,  in  the 
sheath  in  which  it  slides  behind  the  external  malleolus,  and  rather  than  believe  that  spirits 
raised  the  table,  I  wiU  conjecture,  that  it  was  done  by  the  agency  of  Mr.  Home's  feet 
which  were  always  below  it." 

It  seems  sad,  nothing  short  of  humiliating  indeed,  to  find  a  man  like 
Sir  David  Brewster — one  who,  as  a  scientist  himself,  should  have  been  the 
first  to  give  a  hospitable  welcome  to  a  set  of  phenomena  which  involved 
so  many  hitherto  unknown  phases  of  science,  as  sounds  and  motions  by 
invisible  agency — driven  to  such  rude  uncourteous  denials,  or  evasions 
unworthy  of  his  character  either  as  a  gentleman  or  a  man  of  learning,  in 
order  to  dispose  of  facts  which  transcended  the  sum  of  Ms  behef,  and  Ms 
knowledge. 

The  whole  correspondence  however — which  we  may  add  was  pursued 
on  both  sides  of  the  question,  in  the  same  spirit  as  the  above,- — was  shortly 
after  summed  up,  at  least  as  far  as  the  impartial  portion  of  the  public  were 
concerned  —  by  a  letter  from  Mr.  T.  A.  Trollope,  a  gendeman  whose 
position  in  the  literary  and  social  world  is  quite  as  pronounced  as  that 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  141 

of  Sir  David  Brewster  himself.  It  was  addressed  to  Mr.  J.  S.  Rymer  of 
Ealing,  and  was  afterwards  published  in  the  papers  in  connection  with 
the  entire  correspondence.     It  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Florence,  October  23,  1855. 

"  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  read  with  much  regret  the  letters  from  Sir  David  Brewster 
printed  in  the  Morning  Advertiser,  to  which  you  have  called  my  attention  ;  and  although 
it  is  extremely  painful  for  me  to  come  out  from  my  tranquil  obscurity  into  the  noise  and 
wholly  inconclusive  bickerings  of  paper  warfare,  it  is  impossible  for  me  when  called  on, 
to  refuse  my  testimony  to  facts  of  which  I  was  a  witness. 

"  Sir  David  writes — that  when  he  was  present  together  with  Lord  Brougham  and  Mr. 
Cox  at  Cox's  Hotel — it  was  not  true  that  a  large  dining-table  was  moved  about  in  a  most 
extraordinary  manner.  Further  on  he  states  that — '  the  table  was  covered  with  copious 
drapery  beneath  which  nobody  was  allowed  to  look.'     These  italics  are  Sir  David's.* 

"  I  declare  that  at  your  house  at  Ealing,  on  an  evening  subsequent  to  Sir  David's 
meeting  with  Mr.  Home  at  Cox's  Hotel,  in  the  presence  of  Sir  David,  myself,  and  of  other 
persons,  a  large  and  very  heavy  dining-table  was  moved  about  in  a  most  extraordinary 
manner  ;  that  Sir  David  was  urged  both  by  Mr.  Home  and  by  yourself  to  look  under  the 
cloth  and  under  the  table,  that  he  did  look  under  it,  and  that  whilst  he  was  so  looking,  the 
table  ivas  much  moved,  and  ^ohile  he  was  looking,  and  while  the  table  was  moving,  he  avowed 
that  he  saw  the  movement. 

"  Sir  David  Brewster  further  writes,  that  on  this  same  evening  the  spirits  were  very 
active,  prolific  of  raps  of  various  intonations,  making  tables  heavy  or  light  at  command, 
tickling  knees,  male  and  female,  but  always  on  the  side  next  the  Medium.  I  was  repea- 
tedly touched  on  either  knee,  and  on  the  lower  leg,  but  I  experienced  no  sensation  at  all 
akin  to  '  tickling,'  neither  did  any  of  those  present,  who  were  similarly  touched  say  that 
they  were — or  give  any  token  of  being  '  tickled.'  Moreover  I  affirm  that  Sir  David 
Brewster,  who  sat  next  to  me,  declared  to  me  at  the  time  of  being  touched  that  he  was 
touched  on  both  knees.     .     .     .     Nor  did  he  then  speak  of  being  '  tickled.' 

"  Indeed  the  phraseology  of  this  part  of  his  letter  is  matter  of  the  greatest  astonish- 
ment to  me.  For  it  should  seem  wholly  impossible  that  a  man  of  Sir  David  Brewster's 
character,  standing,  and  social  position,  in  the  grave  and  public  examination  of  a  question 
on  which  a  young  man's  honour  and  character  depend,  if  no  yet  higher  interests  are  con- 
cerned, should  intentionally  seek  to  prejudic(;  the  issue  in  the  minds  of  his  readers,  by  a 
vulgar  jest,  puerile  to  those  earnest  enquirers  who  disbelieve  the  Spiritual  origin  of  these 
phenomena,  inexpressibly  revolting  to  those  who  believe  therein,  and  which,  falling  from 
less  respected  lips,  would  by  all  be  termed  mere  ribaldry. 

"  I  must  add  one  more  remark  on  other  passages  of  Sir  David's  letter.  '  The  party 
present  at  Mr.  Cox's,'  he  writes,  'sat  down  to  a  small  table,  Mr.  Home  having  previously 
requested  us  to  examine  if  there  was  any  machinery  about  his  person,  an  examination 
however  which  we  decHned  to  make.'  A  few  lines  further  on  he  says,  with  reference  to 
the  phenomena  which  then  occurred,  '  I  conjectm-e  that  they  might  be  produced  by  machinery 
attached  to  the  loioer  extremities  of  Mr.  Home.'  Now  I  submit,  that  these  two  statements 
should  not  stand  together.  It  appears  to  me  both  morally  unjust,  and  philosophically 
unsound,  in  the  examination  of  evidence,  first  to  decline  the  proferred  means  of  ascertain- 
ing the  absence  of  machinery,  and  then  to  assume  its  presence. 

"  I  should  not,  my  dear  sir,  do  all  that  duty  I  think  requires  of  me  in  this  case,  were  I 
to  conclude  without  stating  very  solemnly,  that  after  many  opportunities  of  witnessing 
and  investigating  the  phenomena  caused  by,  or  happening  to,  Mr.  Home,  I  am  wholly 
convinced  that  be  what  may  their  origin,  and  cause,  and  nature,  they  are  not  produced  by 
any  fraud,  machinery,  juggling,  illusion,  or  trickery  on  his  part. 
"  I  am,  my  dear  Sir, 

"  Always  most  faithfully  yours, 

"T.  Adolphus  Teollope. 

"  To  John  Smith  Rhymer,  Esq.,  Ealing." 

Here  this  episode  in  connection  with  Sir  David  Brewster  must  rest.  It 
is  of  importance  that  it  should  be  recorded  in  this  place  for  several  reasons. 
First — Although  the  correspondence  might  with  more  justice  to  the  young 
gentleman  so  harshly  attacked  and  condemned  without  trial  or  evidence, 

*  This  statement  is  emphatically  denied  by  Mr.  Cox  in  letters  preceding  Mr.  Trollope's. 

142  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

have  been  maintained  in  private,  its  publication  served  to  obtain  for 
Spiritualism,  hundreds  of  investigators,  few  if  any  of  whom  could  be  found 
to  duplicate  Sir  David  Brewster's  views  of  common  sense,  morality,  or 
justice.  Next — The  position  occupied  by  the  disputants,  commanded  a 
notoriety  for  the  case  which  it  could  scarcely  have  else  obtained,  and  finally, 
the  palpable  animus  which  could  have  induced  a  man  in  Sir  David  Brewster's 
position,  to  descend  to  misrepresentation,  evoked,  as  it  deserved,  a  sentiment 
of  indignation,  which  operated  most  favourably,  both  for  Mr.  Home,  and 
the  cause  he  represented.  The  young  Anglo-American  became  all  the 
fashion.  Feted  by  potentates  and  nobles,  courted,  honoured,  and  sought  for 
in  every  direction,  it  is  not  too  much  to  allege,  as  the  author  can  confidently 
do  from  many  years'  knowledge  of  this  famous  medium,  that  he  preserved 
under  all  circumstances,  his  integrity  and  singleness  of  purpose.  He  sought 
no  favours,  accepted  no  fees  (though  he  became  the  recipient  of  princely  gifts 
and  tokens  of  royal  munificence).  He  was  never  vain-glorious,  conceited, 
nor  presumptuous.  At  times  he  was  what  he  himself  called  "  out  of  power," 
and  though  these  seasons  of  incapacity  to  produce  phenomena,  sometimes 
lasted  for  weeks,  the  author  can  positively  assert  on  her  own,  as  well  as 
on  the  testimony  of  hosts  of  the  most  authentic  witnesses,  that  he  was  never 
known  to  supplement  these  mediumistic  recessions  by  the  smallest  attempt 
at  fraud  or  deception.  Thus,  though  he  became  the  subject  of  universal 
attack  from  those  whose  interest  or  predilection  determined  their  antago- 
nistic attitude  towards  Spiritualism,  he  also  became  the  centre  of  attraction 
to  vast  multitudes,  who  ow^ed  to  him  their  first  demonstrable  proofs  of  the 
soul's  immortality,  and  restoration  to  those,  whom  bereaved  mourners  had 
deemed  for  ever  lost  to  them. 

CHAPTER    XIX. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT    BRITAIN    (CONTINUED). 
Mr.  D.  D.  Home's  Manifestations. 

It  may  appear  strange  to  those  who  consider  how  unprecedented  in  modern 
experience  all  the  phenomena  of  Spirit  communion  are,  that  their  recital 
excites  so  little  attention  and  the  repetition  of  spiritualistic  narratives  so 
soon  palls  upon  the  minds  of  the  recipients  ;  but  the  truth  is,  there  exists 
too  little  variety  amongst  these  phenomena  to  render  reiteration  tolerable. 

Then  again,  Spirit  communications  are  for  the  most  part  addressed  to 
individuals,  and  the  innate  selfishness  of  humanity  renders  personal  matter 
wholly  uninteresting  except  to  the  parties  immediately  concerned. 

As  the  intention  of  this  work  is  to  prepare  a  record  for  the  use  of  future 
generations,  we  feel  compelled  to  avoid  the  tedium  of  useless  repetition  on 
the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  to  send  down  to  posterity  a  complete 
set  of  such  representative  cases  as  will  display  the  nature  of  the  spiritual 
phenomena  manifested  in  the  nineteenth  century.  •  It  is  with  this  view  that 
we  select  a  few  of  Mr.  D.   D.  Home's  remarkable  manifestations,  as  repre- 

S  .  C  .  Hall 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  143 

sentative  cases  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  transcend  in  interest.  The 
following  narrative,  pubUshed  in  the  London  Spiritualist  of  March  30th, 
1877,  was  communicated  by  the  charming  authoress,  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  and 
reads  as  follows  : — 

EASTER      EVE — IN      1867. 
BY   MRS.    S.    C.    HALL. 

"  The  near  approach  of,  perhaps,  the  happiest  of  our  Festivals,  sends  my  memory  back 
to,  I  think,  the  most  marvellous  of  all  my  experiences  in  Spiritualism :  there  may  be 
among  your  readers  some  vi^ho  will  thank  me  for  preserving  and  publishing  a  record  of  it. 

"  I  did  not  write  concerning  it  at  the  time  it  occurred  ;  yet  I  can  recall  vividly  every 
one  of  the  remarkable  incidents  :  they  are  as  fresh  in  my  mind  to-day  as  they  were  ten 
years  ago,  for  they  '  happened  '  on  the  Easter  Eve  of  the  year  1867  :  and  the  Easter  Eve 
of  1877  is  now  nigh  at  hand. 

"Although  my  recollection  of  the  scene  and  circumstances  is  very  vivid,  I  remembered 
that  my  friend  Mrs.  Henry  Senior  (the  widow  of  Colonel  Senior)  had  made  some  notes 
concerning  them.  I  wrote  to  her  on  the  subject,  and  the  letter  she  has  written  in  reply 
I  ask  you  to  print  in  the  number  of  your  publication  that  you  will  issue  on  the  Easter 
Eve  of  the  present  year. 

"  I  need  do  little  more  than  endorse,  which  I  do,  every  sentence  in  her  letter.  1  have 
had  more  startling  experiences  in  Spiritualism  ;  but  none  at  once  so  wonderful  and  so 
beautiful,  so  intensely  convincing,  so  happy  in  comforting  assurance  of  its  holy  truth, 
■thoroughly  upholding  and  confirming  the  faith  that  has,  thank  God,  been  my  blessing 
through  the  whole  of  a  long  life. 

"  It  was  not  a  dark  sitting,  but  the  light  was  subdued,  and  for  a  few  minutes  entirely 
excluded,  when  an  absolute  blaze  of  light  filled  the  conservatory.  We  saw  shadows  (but 
having  forms)  pass  and  repass  repeatedly,  brought  out  into  distinctness  by  the  brilliancy 
of  the  light.  When  Mr.  Home  was  '  raised '  (as  he  was  twice)  the  gas  in  the  chandelier 
was  lit  :  although  reduced,  it  was  quite  strong  enough  to  mark  his  gradual  progress 
upwards  from  the  chair  to  the  ceiling." 

Then  follows  Mrs.  Senior's  paper,  which  is  quoted  verbatim,  with  a  few 
unimportant  excisions  : — 

"  5,  Prince  of  Wales's  Terrace,  Tuesday. 
"  Last  Saturday  (Easter  Eve)  we  had  a  most  wonderful  smncc  at  Mr.  Hall's.  I  had 
long  been  telling  him  that  I  was  convinced  that  allowing  scoffers  and  unbelievers  to  come 
to  our  stances  spoiled  them,  and  that  if  he  would  but  harden  his  kind  heart  for  once,  and 
allow  us  to  have  a  seljisl-i  seance,  I  was  sure  it  would  be  good — and  last  week  he  said  to 
me  laughingly  that  I  should  have  my  wish  before  I  returned  to  Ireland,  that  Daniel  had 
promised  to  come  to  them  on  Saturday,  and  that  there  should  be  no  one  asked  but 
myself  and  Lady  Dunsany — and  so  it  was  arranged.  Lady  Dunsany  called  for  me  on  her 
way.  We  found  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall  alone,  but  Daniel  arrived  soon  after,  and  said  when 
he  entered  the  room  that  he  had  a  very  bad  headache,  which  would,  he  feared,  spoil  our 
seaTice  ;  however,  he  sat  down  and  chatted  a  little,  and  I  then  asked  him  to  come  over  to 
the  piano  and  ''  croon,"  as  I  called  it,  as  I  had  observed  that  his  doing  so  always  gave  us 
a  good  stance.  He  played  and  sang  several  things,  and  then  Lady  Dunsany  asked  him 
for  a  soft  Russian  air  of  his  wife's.  He  had  not  been  playing  it  more  than  a  minute,  when 
a  chair,  which  was  at  some  distance  from  the  piano,  slid  up  to  it,  and  placed  itself  beside 
him.  I  was  sitting  close  to  the  piano  on  the  other  side,  and  saw  it  move  before  he  did — 
'  Oh  !'  he  said — '  Here  is  Sacha'  (his  wife,  who  had  left  earth),  and  he  went  on  playing 
some  time  longer,  though  his  hands  became  perfectly  stiff,  and  it  was  evident  that  they 
were  not  moved  by  his  own  volition.  After  a  time  his  hands  were  withdrawn  from  the 
piano,  and  he  became  entranced,  turned  round  the  piano  stool,  and  knelt  down,  and  with 
hands  clasped,  poured  forth  a  most  beautiful  prayer.  .  .  .  Mr,  Home  then  came  out 
of  his  trance,  quite  refreshed  and  pleased,  and  asked  us  to  sit  down  at  the  table,  which  at 
once  began  to  vibrate  and  '  tremble,'  whilst  loud  and  heavy  knocks  were  heard  upon  it, 
upon  the  floor  and  the  furniture.  Presently  the  accordion  was  touched,  and  by  the 
alphabet  was  spelt  out  '  We  wiU  play  the  earth-life  of  one  who  was  not  of  earth.'  Mr. 
HaU  said  '  That's  nonsense,'  but  I  answered,  '  It  must  be  our  Lord's  life,'  and  so  it 
proved.  First  we  had  sweet,  soft,  simple  music,  like  a  lullaby,  for  a  few  minutes, 
then  it  became  intensely  sad  for  some  time,    and   then    we  distinctly   heard   through 

144  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  music  the  regular  tramp  of  a  body  of  men  marching,  and  we  exclaimed, 
'  The  march  to  Calvary.'  Then  the  tapping  sound  of  a  hammer  on  a  nail,  the 
ringing  sound  of  metal  upon  metal,  then  a  pause,  and  afterwards  came  a  crash,  and 
a  burst  of  wailing,  which  seemed  to  fill  the  room  and  the  house  ;  it  was  followed  by 
the  most  glorious  triumphal  music  we  any  of  us  had  ever  heard  ;  it  thrilled  to  all  our 
hearts,  and  we  were  in  tears  when  it  was  over — it  certainly  was  not  of  earth.  It  evidently 
meant  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  We  stiU  sat  at  the  table,  but  nothing  more  was  done 
for  some  time  ;  then  the  mushn  curtains  were  draped  round  Mr.  Home  ;  and  he  was 
raised  from  the  ground  in  them.  .  .  .  Then  Mr.  Hall's  face  and  chest  shone  like 
silver,  and  they  spelled  out,  '  He  who  giveth  shall  receive  light.'  The  accordion  was 
carried  round  the  circle,  played  on  Mr.  Hall's  head,  then  placed  on  my  shoulder  next  it, 
and  went  to  Mrs.  Hall,  on  my  right  hand,  and  played  on  her  head  ;  then  played  in  the  air 
round  the  circle  (Mr.  Home's  hand  not  being  near  the  instrument)  '  The  Last  Rose  of 
Summer,'  and  several  other  ahs.  Afterwards  a  great  deal  of  martial  music  was  played  by 
a  cousin  of  Lady  Dunsany's,  who  had  been  in  the  Dragoons,  and  who  had  '  passed  away ' 
in  India,  and  who  always  comes  to  her.  After  this  the  spirit  of  a  child,  whose  mother  had 
sent  Mrs.  Hall  flowers  that  morning,  came  and  gave  us  each  a  flower.  Mr.  Home  was  then 
lifted  to  the  ceiling.  We  heard  his  nail  against  it,  and  he  said,  '  Oh,  I  wish  I  had  a  pencil 
to  make  a  mark.'  However,  he  then  came  down,  and  Mr.  Hall  handed  him  a  pencil,  in 
case  he  should  be  again  raised  ;  and  five  minutes  afterwards  ho  was  again  lifted  up,  and 
made  a  mark  on  the  ceiling,  which  will  remain  there  as  a  proof  of  what  was  done.  When 
Mr.  Home  returned  to  the  table  we  were  all  toiiched  by  hands  on  our  brows  and  on  our 

hands.    Sacha  gave  each  of  us  her  peculiar  little  pinch,  and  I  was  touched  by  both  H 

and  E ,  and  Lady  Dunsany's  cousin  flipped  all  our  hands  with  a  flower.    After  a  little 

time  the  spirits  spelled  out,  '  We  can  do  no  more.  Good  night.  God  bless  you  ; '  and 
we  heard  the  knocks  and  sounds  die  away  in  the  distance  out  of  doors,  and  ive  felt  that  it 
was  all  over.  We  were  all  beyond  measure  grateful  for  being  allowed  to  witness  what  we 
could  never  forget  as  long  as  our  lives  lasted.  That  burst  of  music  was  still  thrilling  in 
all  our  hearts — nothing  composed  by  mortal  could  ever  touch  it.  I  should  have  said  that 
just  before  Mr.  Home  was  hfted  up  to  the  ceiling  the  first  time,  his  face  and  his  chest 
shone  with  a  sUvery  light,  as  Mr.  HaU's  had  done.  But,  indeed,  I  have  not  told  many  of 
the  minor  things  that  took  place.     It  was  an  evening  of  wonders." 

The  next  illustrative  seance  which  we  deem  it  necessary  to  associate  with 
this  record  is  supplied  by  the  late  Henry  D.  Jencken,  Esq.,  barrister— a 
gentleman  too  well  known  in  the  elite  of  London  professional  society  as 
well  as  among  the  Spiritualistic  ranks,  to  need  any  additional  proof  of  the 
authenticity  of  his  narrative. 

Mr.  Jencken  himself  was  a  witness  of  the  facts  narrated,  and  we  may  here 
add  that  Professor  William  Crookes  in  his  published  work  entitled  "  Pheno- 
mena of  Spiritualism,"  alludes  to  the  seance  about  to  be  detailed,  affirming 
that  he  received  the  narrative  from  the  lips  of  three  of  the  witnesses, 
namely,  Lord  Lindsay,  the  Earl  of  Dunraven,  and  Captain  Wynne.  . 

Mr.  Jencken,  writing  for  the  February  number  of  Human  Nature,  says : — 

"manifestations  through   MR.    HOME." 

"  Mr.  Home  had  passed  into  the  trance  still  so  often  witnessed  ;  rising  from  his  seat,  he 
laid  hold  of  an  arm-chair,  which  he  held  at  arm's  length,  and  was  then  lifted  about  three 
feet  clear  off  the  ground  ;  travelling  thus  suspended  in  space,  he  placed  the  chair  next  Lord 
Adare,  and  made  a  circuit  round  those  in  the  room,  being  lowered  and  raised  as  he  passed 
each  of  us.  One  of  those  present  measured  the  elevation,  and  passed  his  leg  and  arm 
underneath  Mr.  Home's  feet.  The  elevation  lasted  from  four  to  five  minutes.  On  resum- 
ing his  seat,  Mr.  Home  addressed  Captain  Wynne,  communicating  news  to  him  of  which 
the  departed  alone  could  have  been  cognisant. 

"  The  spirit  form  that  had  been  seen  reclining  on  the  sofa,  now  stepped  up  to  Mr. 
Home  and  mesmerised  him  ;  a  hand  was  then  seen  luminously  visible  over  his  head, 
about  18  inches  in  a  vertical  line  from  his  head.  The  trance  state  of  Mr.  Home  now 
assumed  a  different  character  ;  gently  rising  he  spoke  a  few  words  to  those  present,  and 
then  opening  the  door  proceeded  into  the  corridor  ;  a  voice  then  said — '  He  will  go  out  of 
this  window  and  come  in  at  that  window.'  The  only  one  who  heard  the  voice  was  the 
Master  of  Lindsay,  and  a  cold  shudder  seized  upon  him  as  he  coni^emplated  the  possibihty 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  145 

of  this  occurring,  a  feat  which  the  great  height  of  the  third  floor  wiudows  in  Ashley  Place 
rendered  more  than  ordinarily  perilous.  The  others  present,  however,  having  closely 
questioned  him  as  to  what  he  had  heard,  he  at  first  repHed,  '  I  dare  not  tell  you  ; '  when, 
to  the  amazement  of  all,  a  voice  said,  '  You  must  tell  ;  tell  directly.'  The  Master  then 
said,  '  Yes  ;  yes,  'terrible  to  say,  he  will  go  out  at  that  window  and  come  in  at  this  ;  do 
not  be  frightened,  be  quiet,'  Mr.  Home  now  re-entered  the  room,  and  opening  the 
drawing-room  window,  was  pushed  out  demi-horizontally  into  space,  and  carried  from  one 
window  of  the  drawing-room  to  the  farthermost  window  of  the  adjoining  room.  This 
feat  being  performed  at  a  height  of  about  60  feet  from  the  ground,  naturally  caused  a 
shudder  in  aU  present.  The  body  of  Mr.  Home,  when  it  appeared  at  the  window  of  the 
adjoining  room,  was  shunted  into  the  room  feet  foremost — the  window  being  only  18 
inches  open.  As  soon  as  he  had  recovered  his  footing  he  laughed  and  said,  '  I  wonder 
what  a  policeman  would  have  said  had  he  seen  me  go  round  and  round  like  a  teetotum  ! ' 
The  scene  was,  however,  too  terrible — too  strange,  to  elicit  a  smile  ;  cold  beads  of  per- 
spiration stood  on  every  brow,  while  a  feeling  pervaded  all  as  if  some  great  danger  had 
passed  ;  the  nerves  of  those  present  had  been  kept  in  a  state  of  tension  that  refused  to 
respond  to  a  joke.  A  change  now  passed  over  Mr.  Home,  one  often  observable  during  the 
trance  states,  indicative,  no  doubt,  of  some  other  power  operating  on  his  system.  Lord 
Adare  had  in  the  meantime  stepped  up  to  the  open  window  in  the  adjoining  room  to  close 
it — the  cold  air,  as  it  came  pouring  in,  chilling  the  room  ;  when,  to  his  surprise,  he  only 
found  the  window  18  to  24  inches  open  !  This  puzzled  him,  for  how  could  Mr.  Home  have 
passed  outside  through  a  window  only  18  to  24  inches  open.  Mr.  Home,  however,  soon  set  his 
doubts  at  rest ;  stepping  up  to  Lord  Adare,  he  said,  '  No,  no  ;  I  did  not  close  the  window  ; 
I  passed  thus  into  the  air  outside.'  An  invisible  power  then  supported  Mr.  Home  all  but 
horizontally  in  space,  and  thrust  his  body  into  space  through  the  open  window,  head  fore- 
most, bringing  him  back  again  feet  foremost  into  the  room,  shunted  not  unlike  a  shutter 
into  a  basement  below.  The  circle  rotmd  the  table  having  re-formed,  a  cold  current  of 
air  passed  over  those  present,  like  the  rushing  of  winds.  This  repeated  itself  several 
times.  The  cold  blast  of  air,  or  electric  fluid,  or  call  it  what  you  may,  was  accompanied 
by  a  loud  whistle  Uke  a  gust  of  wind  on  the  mountain  top,  or  through  the  leaves  of  the 
forest  in  late  autumn  ;  the  sound  was  deep,  sonorous,  and  powerful  in  the  extreme,  and 
a  shudder  kept  passing  over  those  present,  who  all  heard  and  felt  it.  This  rushing  sound 
lasted  quite  ten  minutes,  in  broken  intervals  of  one  or  two  minutes.  All  present  were 
much  surprised  ;  and  the  interest  became  intensified  by  the  unknown  tongues  in  which 
Mr.  Home  now  conversed.  Passing  from  one  language  to  another  in  rapid  succession,  he 
spoke  for  ten  minutes  in  unknown  languages. 

"  A  spirit  form  now  became  distinctly  visible  ;  it  stood  next  to  the  Master  of  Lindsay, 
clad,  as  seen  on  former  occasions,  in  a  long  robe  with  a  girdle,  the  feet  scarcely  touching 
the  ground,  the  outline  of  the  face  only  clear,  and  the  tones  of  the  voice,  though 
sufiiciently  distinct  to  be  understood,  whispered  rather  than  spoken.  Other  voices  were 
now  heard,  and  large  globes  of  phosphorescent  lights  passed  slowly  through  the  room." 

Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken,  in  the  March  number  of  Human  Nature,  continues 
his  interesting  account  of  the  spirit  manifestations  through  the  mediumship 
of  Mr.  D.  D.  Honle,  as  personally  witnessed  and  carefully  examined  by 
himself  and  other  competent  investigators.  He  narrates  an  instance  of 
the  elongation  of  Mr.  Home's  body,  and  gives  the  measurements  (care- 
fully made  at  the  time)  of  the  elongation  of  each  part  of  the  body.  The 
most  unique  and  striking  portion  of  the  phenomenon  in  this  instance  was 
the  elongation  and. shortening  of  the  hand.     Mr.  Jencken  says  : — 

"As  the  weight  of  the  testimony  depends  much  upon  the  accuracy  of  the  tracing 
taken,  I  will  describe  my  method  in  making  the  outline.  I  caused  Mr.  Home  to  place  his 
hand  firmly  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  and  then  carefully  traced  an  outline  of  the  hand.  At  the 
wrist  joint  I  placed  a  pencil  against  the  '  trapezium,'  a  small  bone  at  the  end  of  the 
phalange  of  the  thumb.  The  hand  gradually  widened  and  elongated  about  an  inch,  then 
contracted  and  shortened  about  an  inch.  At  each  stage  I  made  a  tracing  of  the  hand, 
causing  the  pencil  point  to  be  firmly  kept  at  the  wrist.  The  fact  of  the  elongating  and 
contracting  of  the  hand  I  unmistakably  estabUshed,  and,  be  the  cause  what  it  may,  the 
fact  remains  ;  and  in  giving  the  result  of  my  measurements,  and  the  method  adopted  to 
satisfy  myself  that  I  had  not  been  self -deceived,  I  am,  I  believe,  rendering  the  first 
positive  measurement  of  the  extension  and  contraction  of  a  human  organism. 

"  The  phenomenon  of  elongation  I  am  aware  has  been  questioned,  and  I  do  not 
quarrel  with  those  who  maintain  their  doubt,  despite  all  that  may  be  affirmed.  In  my 
lO 

146  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

own  experience  I  have  gone  through  the  same  phases  of  doubt,  and  uttered  disbelief  of 
what  I  was  seeing.  The  first  time  I  witnessed  an  elongation,  although  I  measured  the 
extension  of  the  wrist,  I  would  not,  could  not,  credit  my  senses ;  but  having  witnessed 
this  fact  some  ten  or  twelve  times,  and  that  in  the  presence  of  fifty  witnesses,  from  first 
to  last,  who  have  been  present  at  these  stances  where  those  elongations  occurred,  all 
doubts  have  been  removed  ;  and  that  the  capacity  to  extend  is  not  confined  to  Mr.  Home, 
was  shown  some  months  ago  at  Mr.  Hall's,  where,  at  a  seance  held  at  his  house,  both  Mr. 
Home  and  Miss  Bertolacci  became  elongated.  The  stretching  out  and  contracting  of  the 
limbs,  hands,  fingers,  above  described,  I  have  only  witnessed  on  this  one  occasion,  and  I 
was  much  pleased  to  have  a  steady  Oxonian  to  aid  me  in  making  the  measurements 
above  detailed." 

Mr.  Jencken  also  relates  the  following  incident  of  this  seance: — 

"  Mr.  Home  (in  trance),  now  took  a  violet  and  a  few  leaves,  and,  kneeling  down  at  the 
hearth,  stirred  the  fire  with  his  hand.  He  then  showed  us  the  flower,  and  seizing  it  with 
the  fire-tongs,  placed  it  in  the  fire.  I  distinctly  saw  the  leaves  burn  away,  and,  on  with- 
dravsdng  the  fire-tongs,  only  the  stem  was  left.  Twice  he  repeated  the  burning  of  the 
flower,  then,  handing  the  fire-tongs  to  Miss  Bertolacci,  he  stepped  on  one  side,  and  we  saw 
the  flower  being  replaced  between  the  nippers  of  the  fire-tongs.  I  asked  whether  they  had 
re-formed  the  flower,  to  which  he  replied,  '  No  ;  the  flower  has  never  been  burnt,  only 
shielded,  protected  from  the  fire  ;  the  freshness  of  the  flower  has,  however,  been  destroyed.' 
He  then  handed  me  the  violet  and  leaves,  which  Miss  Bertolacci  took,  and  I  believe  has 
preserved.  Mr.  Home  then  showed  his  hands,  which  felt  harsher  and  harder  than  in 
their  normal  state." 

Mr.  Jencken  adds  that  at  a  recent  seance  with  Mr.  Home,  tongues  of 
fire  formed  in  an  irregular  circle  round  Mr.  Home's  head,  flickering  in  fits 
and  starts,  from  one  to  three  inches  long. 

The  "author  would  only  add  in  this  connection  that  she  has  herself 
witnessed  Mr.  Home's  elongation  several  times  in  circles  held  at  the  resi- 
dence of  John  Luxmoore,  Esq.,  i6,  Gloucester  Square,  Hyde  Park, 
London,  and  also  been  present  on  occasions  when  Mr.  Home  laid  his  head 
on  a  blazing  coal  fire  without  injury,  handled  blazing  coals  and  placed  the 
same  in  the  hands  of  John  C.  Luxmoore,  Esq., — the  host — Professor 
Plumtree,  Madame  Maurigy,  of  51,  Albion  Street,  Hyde  Park,  and 
the  author. 

We  might  enlarge  this  hst  of  wonderful  phenomena  to  the  dimensions  of 
a  thick  volume  and  still  fail  to  relate  all  the  marvels  that  Spirits  have  been 
enabled  to  display  through  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  D.  D.  Home.  We 
must  however  conclude  our  notices  of  his  remarkable  powers  by  the 
following  extracts  from  the  work  already  referred  to,  namely  "  Researches 
in  the  Phenomena  of  SpirituaUsm,"  by  Wm.  Crookes,  F.R.S. 

This  emment  scientist  was  not  only  for  some  time  an  industrious  investi- 
gator into  the  phenomena  of  Spirit  communion,  but  he  was  bold  enough 
to  publish  the  result  of  those  researches,  and  to  maintain  the  purely  occult 
origin  of  the  manifestations  he  witnessed,  in  lengthy  controversies  with 
his  fellow  scientists,  and  divers  members  of  the  journalistic  fraternity. 

Professor  Crookes  was  aided  and  sustained  in  his  brave  and  unconserva- 
tive  position,  by  Dr.  Higgins,  Sergeant  Cox,  and  others  of  an  equally 
eminent  rank  in  the  realms  of  science. 

Professor  Crookes'  papers  were  first  published  in  the  Quarterly  Journal 
of  Science,  but  it  is  from  the  volume  of  his  collected  articles  that  the 
following  excerpts  are  now  taken.     He  says  : — 

"  That  certain  physical  phenomena,  such  as  the  movement  of  material  substances  and 
the  production  of  sounds  resembling  electric  discharges,  occur,  under  circumstances  in 
which  they  cannot  be  explained  by  any  physical  law  at  present  known,  is  a  fact  of  which 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  147 

I  am  as  certain  as  of  the  most  elementary  fact  in  chemistry.  My  whole  scientific  educa- 
tion has  been  one  long  lesson  in  exactness  of  observation,  and  I  wish  it  to  be  distinctly 
understood  that  this  firm  conviction  is  the  result  of  most  careful  investigation." 

"Among  the  remarkable  phenomena  which  occur  under  Mr.  Home's  influence,  the 
most  striking,  as  well  as  the  most  easily  tested  with  scientific  accuracy  are,  first,  the 
alteration  in  the  weight  of  bodies  ;  and  second,  the  playing  tunes  on  musical  instruments 
(generally  the  accordion  for  convenience  of  portability)  without  direct  human  interven- 
tion, under  conditions  rendering  contact  or  connection  with  the  keys  impossible.  Not 
until  I  had  witnessed  these  facts  some  half-dozen  times,  and  scrutinised  them  with  all  the 
critical  acumen  I  possess,  did  I  become  convinced  of  their  objective  reality.  StUl,  desiring 
to  place  the  matter  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt,  I  invited  Mr.  Home  on  several  occasions 
to  come  to  my  own  house,  where,  in  the  presence  of  a  few  scientific  inquirers,  these  pheno- 
mena could  be  submitted  to  crucial  experiments." 

Mr.  Crookes  then  proceeds  to  detail  with  unnecessary  accuracy  the  pre- 
cautions he  used  to  surround  his  experiments  with  indubitable  proofs  that 
Mr,  Home  had  no  agency  in  their  production. 

The  substance  of  the  experiments  was  as  follows.  In  a  large  room  well 
lighted  with  gas,  a  wire  cage  was  used  in  which  the  accordion  could  freely 
expand  and  contract  without  the  possibility  of  human  contact,  with  the 
single  exception  that  it  was  held  suspended  in  the  cage  by  one  of  Home's 
hands  extended  over  and  resting  upon  the  upper  wire  of  the  cage.  This 
was  under  the  table,  but  in  such  a  position  that  the  company  could  witness 
all  the  proceedings ;  Professor  Crookes's  assislant  being  permitted  even 
to  go  under  the  table  and  give  an  accurate  report  of  what  was  going 
on.  In  this  position  there  was  first  the  regular  accordion  movements  and 
sounds  with  the  instrument  suspended  from  Home's  hand ;  then  it  was 
taken  out  and  put  in  the  hand  of  the  next  sitter,  still  continuing  to  play  ; 
and  finally,  after  being  returned  to  the  cage  it  was  clearly  seen  by  the 
company  generally,  moving  about  with  no  one  touching  it.  The  final 
paragraph  of  this  description  we  give  in  the  language  of  Mr.  Crookes 
himself : — 

"The  accordion  was  now  taken  without  any  visible  touch  from  Mr.  Home's  hand, 
which  lie  removed  from  it  entirely,  and  placed  upon  the  table,  where  it  was  taken  by  the 
person  next  to  him,  and  seen,  as  were  now  both  his  hands,  by  all  present.  I  and  two 
others  present  saw  the  accordion  distinctly  floating  about  inside  of  the  cage  with  no 
visible  support.  This  was  repeated  a  second  time  after  a  short  interval.  Mr.  Home 
presently  re-inserted  his  hand  in  the  cage  and  again  took  hold  of  the  accordion.  It  then 
commenced  to  play,  at  first  chords  and  runs,  and  afterwards  a  well-known  sweet  and 
plaintive  melody,  winch  it  executed  perfectly  in  a  very  beautiful  manner.  Whilst  this 
tune  was  being  played,  I  grasped  Mr.  Home's  arm  below  the  elbow,  and  gently  slid  my 
hand  down  it  until  I  touched  the  top  of  the  accordion.  He  was  not  moving  a  muscle. 
His  other  hand  was  on  the  table,  visible  to  all,  and  his  feet  were  under  the  feet  of  those 
next  to  him." 

Prof.  Crookes  occupies  quite  a  considerable  amount  of  his  work  by 
republishing  the  vigorous  lines  of  defence  he  was  compelled  to  take  up 
against  his  brother  scientists,  whose  virulent  opposition  was  awakened  by 
the  immense  importance  attached  to  his  (Prof.  Crookes')  statements,  con- 
sequently also  to  the  influence  which  the  obnoxious  and  unquenchable 
facts  of  Spiritualism  derived  from  the  allegations  of  so  cautious  and  capable 
an  investigator. 

On  the  multitude  and  variety  of  his  researches  he  says  : — 

"  I  may  at  once  answer  one  objection  which  has  been  made  in  several  quarters,  viz.  ; 
that  my  results  would  carry  more  weight  had  they  been  tried  a  greater  number  of  times, 
ard  with  other  persons  besides  Mr.  Home.     The  fact  is,  I  have  been  working  at  the  subject 

148  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

for  two  years,  and  have  found  nine  or  ten  different  persons  who  possess  psychic  power  in 
more  or  less  degree  ;  but  its  development  in  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  is  so  powerful  that  having 
satisfied  myself  by  careful  experiment  that  the  phenomena  observed  were  genuine,  I  have, 
merely  as  a  matter  of  convenience,  carried  on  my  experiments  with  him,  in  preference  to 
working  with  others  in  whom  the  power  existed  in  a  less  striking  degree.  Most  of  the 
experiments  I  am  about  to  describe,  however,  have  been  tried  with  another  person  other 
than  Mr.  Home  and  in  his  absence." 

It  vsrould  be  unnecessary  to  follow  out  these  experiments,  with  the  result 
of  which  most  Spiritual  investigators  are  familiar ;  we  would  only  show  how 
thorough  they  were  by  the  following  remarks  : — 

"  My  readers  will  remember  that,  with  the  exception  of  cases  especially  mentioned,  the 
occurrences  have  taken  place  in  my  own  house,  in  the  light,  and  with  only  private  friends 
present  besides  the  medium. 

"  I  have  seen  luminous  points  of  Hght  darting  about  and  settling  on  the  heads  of 
different  persons ;  I  have  had  questions  answered  by  the  flashing  of  a  bright  light  a 
desired  number  of  times  in  front  of  my  face.  I  have  seen  sparks  of  light  rising  from  the 
table,  and  again  falling  upon  the  table,  striking  it  with  an  audible  sound.  I  have  had  an 
alphabetical  communication  given  by  luminous  flashes  occurring  before  me  in  the  air, 
whilst  my  hand  was  moving  about  amongst  them.  I  have  seen  a  luminous  cloud  floating 
upwards  to  a  picture.  Under  the  strictest  test  conditions,  I  have  more  than  once  had  a 
solid,  self-luminous,  crystalhne  body  placed  in  my  hand  by  a  hand  which  did  not  belong 
to  any  person  in  the  room.  In  the  light  I  have  seen  a  luminous  cloud  hover  over  a 
heliotrope  on  a  side  table,  break  a  sprig  off,  and  carry  the  sprig  to  a  lady  :  and  on  some 
occasions  I  have  seen  a  similar  luminous  cloud  visibly  condense  to  the  form  of  a  hand  and 
carry  small  objects  about. 

"  The  forms  of  hands  are  frequently  felt  at  dark  seances,  or  under  circumstances  where 
they  cannot  be  seen.  More  rarely  I  have  seen  the  hands.  I  will  here  give  no  instances  in 
which  the  phenomenon  has  occurred  in  darkness,  but  wUl  simply  select  a  few  of  the 
numerous  instances  in  which  I  have  seen  the  hands  in  the  Hght. 

"  A  beautifully  formed  smaU  hand  rose  up  from  an  opening  in  a  dining-table  and  gave 
me  a  flower  ;  it  appeared,  and  then  disappeared  three  tim'es  at  intervals,  affording  me 
ample  opportunity  of  satisfying  myself  that  it  was  as  real  in  appearance  as  my  own. 
This  occurred  in  the  light,  in  my  own  room,  whilst  I  was  holding  the  medium's  hands 
and  feet. 

"  On  another  occasion  a  small  hand  and  arm  like  a  baby's  appeared,  playing  about  a 
lady  who  was  sitting  next  to  me.  It  then  passed  to  me,  and  patted  my  arms  and  pulled 
my  coat  several  times. 

"  At  another  time  a  finger  and  thumb  were  seen  to  pick  petals  from  a  flower  in  Mr. 
Home's  button-hole  and  lay  them  in  front  of  several  persons  who  were  sitting  near  him. 

"The  hands  and  arms  do  not  always  appear  to  me  to  be  solid  and  life-like.  Some- 
times, indeed,  they  present  more  the  appearance  of  a  nebulous  cloud  partly  condensed  into 
the  form  of  a  hand 

"  To  the  touch,  the  hand  sometimes  appears  icy  cold  and  dead,  at  other  times  warm  and 
life-like,  grasping  my  own  with  the  firm  pressure  of  an  old  friend. 

"  I  have  retained  one  of  these  hands  in  my  own,  firmly  resolved  not  to  let  it  escape. 
There  was  no  struggle  or  effort  made  to  get  loose,  but  it  gradually  seemed  to  resolve  itseK 
into  vapour,  and  faded  in  that  manner  from  my  grasp. 

"  On  one  occasion  I  witnessed  a  chair,  with  a  lady  sitting  on  it,  rise  several  inches  from 
the  ground.  On  another  occasion,  to  avoid  the  suspicion  of  this  being  in  some  way  per- 
formed by  herself,  the  lady  knelt  on  the  chair  in  such  a  manner  that  its  four  feet  were 
visible  to  us.  It  then  rose  about  three  inches,  remained  suspended  for  about  ten  seconds, 
and  then  slowly  descended.  At  another  time  two  children,  on  separate  occasions,  rose 
from  the  floor  with  their  chairs,  in  full  daylight,  under  (to  me)  most  satisfactory  con- 
ditions ;  for  I  was  kneehng  and  keeping  close  watch  upon  the  feet  of  the  chair,  and  observ- 
ing that  no  one  might  touch  them. 

"The  most  striking  cases  of  levitation  which  I  have  witnessed  have  been  with  Mr. 
Home.  On  three  separate  occasions  have  I  seen  him  raised  completely  from  the  floor  of 
the  room,  once  sitting  in  an  easy  chair,  once  kneeling  on  his  chair,  and  once  standing  up. 
On  each  occasion  I  had  a  full  opportunity  of  watching  the  occurrence  as  it  was  taking  place. 

"As  in  the  former  case,  Mr.  Home  was  the  medium.      A  phantom  form  came  from  a 
corner  of  the  room,  took  an  accordion  in  its  hand,  and  then  glided  about  the  room,  playing 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

[49 

the  instrument.  The  form  was  visible  to  all  many  minutes,  Mr.  Home  being  seen  at  the 
same  time.  Coming  rather  close  to  a  lady  who  was  sitting  apart  from  the  rest  of  the 
company,  she  gave  a  slight  cry,  upon  which  it  vanished." 

Such  are  some  of  the  phenomena  obtained  by  a  gentleman  who  pledges  a 
name  and  fame  standing  as  high  as  that  of  any  scientist  in  the  nineteenth 
century  for  the  truth  of  all  he  alleges ;  who  backs  up  his  own  testimony 
with  that  of  numerous  other  equally  reliable  and  eminent  witnesses,  all  of 
whom  have  everything  to  lose,  and  nothing  to  gain  by  the  assertions  they 
make.  It  only  needs  to  add,  that  all  the  phenomena  above  alluded  to  were 
produced  in  the  light,  in  private  houses,  and  under  circumstances  which 
rendered  the  interposition  of  human  agency  impossible. 

If  the  Spiritualists  themselves  would  but  remember  that — until  Spirit 
communion  is  the  common  experience  of  the  race — the  world  at  large, 
and  investigators  seeking  for  truth  in  especial,  have  the  right  to  demand 
that  the  records  of  phenomena  shall  be  placed  on  equally  unquestionable 
bases,  the  columns  of  the  Spiritual  journals  would  no  longer  be  desecrated 
by  the  unseemly  charges  of  bare-faced  fraud  from  one  party  and  savage 
recriminations  from  another.  Spiritualism  would  ascend  to  the  majestic 
pedestal  of  immutable  truth  like  a  phoenix  rising  out  of  the  ashes  of  dead 
faiths  and  fleeting  superstitions,  and  ere  long  it  would  compel  the  acknow- 
ledgment of  humanity  that  it  was  the  divine  science  of  soul,  and  the  reUgion 
of  science.* 

CHAPTER  XX. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    (CONTINUED). 

The  effect  of  Mr.  Home's  presence  in  England,  the  wide-spread  reports  of 
the  marvels  occurring  through  his  mediumship,  combined  with  the  furious 
journaUstic  warfare  which  these  reports  elicited,  acted  like  firebrands  thrown 
into  the  midst  of  combustible  materials,  the  sparks  from  which  filled  the 
air,  and  set  the  entire  mental  atmosphere  ablaze  with  Spiritual  influences. 

True  it  is,  that  the  young  medium's  marvellous  gifts  were  displayed  only 
amongst  that  high  class  of  society  in  which  circumstances  had  contributed 
to  cast  his  lot,  and  through  whose  personal  interest  he  became  the  guest  of 
many  of  the  nobles  and  notables  of  the  day. 

Still  the  contagion  of  the  Spiritual  outpouring  was  in  the  air,  and  vast 
numbers  of  persons  to  whom  Mr.  Home's  seances  were  but  a  report,  became 
stimulated  to  the  endeavour  to  obtain  manifestations  through  private  experi- 
ments in  their  own  families.  The  result  was — as  all  experienced  Spiritualists 
would  anticipate,  that  demonstrations  of  medial  power  began  to  arise  in 
vast  numbers  of  family  circles,  and  those  who  could  not  enjoy  the  privilege 
of  investigating  through  the  Transatlantic  medium,  were  soon  enabled  to 
prove  for  themselves  the  wonderful  facts  of  which  rumour  had  informed 
them. 

*  For  further  account  of  Mr.  Home's  mediumship  and  special  ikmccs,  consult  his  own  biography 
entitled  "  Incidents  of  my  Life :  By  D.  D.  Home,"  files  of  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  Owen's 
"Footfalls  on  the  Boundaries  of  Another  World,"  and  other  EngUsh  Spiritual  publications  of  this 
century.— (Author.) 

I50  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

The  chances  are,  that  we  should  very  generally  find  the  modus  operandi 
of  individual  investigation  exemplified  by  the  experience  of  Mrs.  De 
Morgan — the  wife  of  the  celebrated  mathematical  professor — who,  having 
been  assured  by  Spirit  friends  communicating  through  Mrs.  Hayden,  that 
she  could  have  equally  good  manifestations  with  those  she  then  witnessed 
in  her  own  house,  at  once  proceeded  to  put  in  practice  the  instructions 
given,  and  form  circles,  the  result  of  which  soon  became  apparent  in  the 
development  of  remarkable  medial  powers  in  Mrs.  De  Morgan  herself,  in 
some  members  of  her  household,  her  friends,  and  not  a  few  of  her 
servants. 

Experiences  of  this  character  soon  began  to  multiply.  Professor  De 
Morgan,  although  not  avowedly  interested  to  the  same  extent  as  his 
estimable  lady,  candidly  rendered  his  testimony  to  the  occurrence  of  the 
marvellous  phenomena  which  proved  Spirit  communion.  In  a  short  space 
of  time  after  the  advent  of  Mr.  Home  in  England,  the  circles  known  to  be 
held  constantly,  in  various  famihes,  might  be  numbered  by  the  thousand, 
and  those  who  publicly  ranged  themselves  as  advocates  of  the  truth  of  the 
communion,  included  some  of  the  most  distinguished  and  noteworthy 
persons  of  the  day.  Amongst  the  latter,  and  especially  remarkable  as 
being  the  earliest  of  the  avowed  believers  of  Spiritualism  in  England,  may 
be  named,  Mary  and  William  Howitt  and  Samuel  Carter  and  Maria  Hall ; 
all  authors  celebrated  for  their  admirable  writings,  and  ladies  and  gentlemen 
as  much  esteemed  for  their  irreproachable  private  lives  as  for  their  eminent 
literary  abilities — Dawson  Rogers  ;  a  gentlem.an  of  high  social  standing  and 
influential  press  associations — the  Countess,  now  Duchesse  de  Pomar,  and 
Countess  of  Caithness,  a  lady  who  takes  the  highest  rank  both  as  an 
authoress  and  leader  of  aristocratic  European  society  ;  T.  P.  Barkas, 
F.R.S.  ;  Lady  Otway,  Frederick  Tennyson,  Robert  Owen,  and  his  son, 
Robert  Dale  Owen ;  Lord  Brougham,  Lord  Ly(  ton.  Archbishop  Whateley, 
the  Earl  of  Dunraven,  Lord  A  dare,  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  Lady  Shelley, 
Mr.  Sergeant  Cox  ;  Wm.  Wilkinson,  Esq.,  the  eminent  soUcitor,  and  other 
members  of  his  family ;  Sir  Edwin  Landseer  ;  more  than  one  member  of 
the  eminent  literary  family  of  the  Trollopes ;  Mrs.  Browning,  the  celebrated 
poetess;  George  Thompson,  the  well  known  philanthropist ;  Major  Drayson 
the  eminent  astronomer  ;  Benjamin  Coleman,  Esq.,  and  his  amiable  wife 
and  daughter ;  John  Jones,  Esq.,  of  Enmore  Park,  Norwood  ;  Sir  Chas. 
Isham,  Bart.,  of  Lamport  Hall,  Northampton;  the  Countess  of  Paulett; 
Mrs.  McDougall  Gregory,  widow  of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Gregory  of  Edin- 
burgh ;  Lady  Dunsany,  Lady  Helena  Newenham,  J.  C.  Luxmoore,  Esq.  ; 
Professor  A.  R.  Wallace,  the  celebrated  naturalist ;  Cromwell  Varley,  F.R.S.; 
the  renowned  electrician  ;  W.  F.  Barrett,  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Royal 
College  of  Science,  Dublin  ;  Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Physics, 
Cambridge  University ;  the  Earl  of  Crauford  and  Balcarres,  F.R.S.,  President 
of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society ;  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson,  F.R.S.,  Editor, 
Journal  of  Science ;  Drs.  Ashburner  and  EUiotson,  Dr.  George  Wylde, 
Dr.  Robert  Chambers,  F.R.S.  ;  Professor  Cassel,  LL.D. ;  Captain  R.  F. 
Burton,  the  celebrated  traveller ;  Dr.  Fenton  Cameron,  Henry  D.  Jencken, 
barrister ;  Professor  Crookes,  the  renowned  chemist ;  Mrs.  Anna  Cora 
Ritchie,  Thos.  Shorter,  Esq.,  known  under  the  nom  de  plume  of  "Brevior ;" 
Dr.  Jacob  Dixon,  the  eminent  homceopathist ;  Wm.  Tebb,  Esq.,  and  his 
lady;  Gerald  Massey,  the  renowned  poet;  C.  C.  Massey,  the  barrister; 
Hon.  J.  L.  O'SuUivan,  Rev.  Sir  Wm.  Topham,  A.  Gooch,  M.P. ;  Dr.  Gully, 
of  Malvern  ;  Chas.  Blackburn,  Esq.,  of  Parkfield,  Didsbury,  Manchester ; 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  151 

Jno.  Fowler,  Esq.,  of  Liverpool,  and  Jas.  Wason,  Esq.,  barrister,  of  the 
same  place  ;  Mrs.  Honeywood,  of  Warwick  Square,  Belgravia  ;  Dr. 
Hitchman,  LL.D.,  John  Scott,  Esq.,  of  Belfast;  John  Rymer,  Esq.,  of 
Ealing;  M.  and  Madame  Maurigy ;  W.  Cox,  Esq.,  Jermyn  Street,  St. 
James',  and  a  long  hst  of  other  ladies  and  gentlemen  whose  names  we  are 
not  privileged  to  mention — to  say  nothing  of  hundreds  of  persons  in  the 
middle  ranks  of  life,  whose  advocacy  was  of  equal  credit  to  the  cause. 

It  need  hardly  be  added  that  since  the  above-named  ladies  and  gentle- 
men contributed  their  influence  and  honourable  names  to  bear  the  heat 
and  burden  of  the  early  days  of  spiritual  warfare,  hundreds  of  others, 
scarcely  less  eminent  or  noteworthy,  have  graced  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism. 
Those  who  have  become  associated  with  the  moving  incidents  of  the  grand 
historical  drama  will  of  course  be  mentioned  hereafter,  but  a  still  larger 
number  must  necessarily  be  excluded,  though  most  reluctantly  on  the 
author's  part,  from  this  over-crowded  record. 

We  recall  the  few  names  already  cited,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  showing 
the  class  of  individuals  against  whom  the  small  wits  of  English  journalism 
amused  themselves  by  directing  the  shafts  of  ridicule  and  contempt,  and 
that  simply  because  they  chose  to  beUeve  what  the  testimony  of  their  own 
senses  proved  to  be  truth.  For  this  cause  and  for  this  only,  the  above-named 
parties  were  virtually  branded  either  as  fools.,  incapable  of  forming  correct 
opinions,  or  knaves  wicked  enough  to  join  in  a  world-wide  system  of 
imposition  upon  others.  No  doubt  the  critics  had  hardly  calculated  the 
sum  of  the  insolence  of  which  they  were  guilty;  still  its  substance  meant 
neither  more  nor  less  than  the  assertion  that  the  believers  in  Spiritualism — 
be  they  whom  they  may — were  either  all  deluded  or  all  deluders,  however 
wise  or  honest  they  may  have  been  on  every  other  subject  but  Spiritualism. 

Now  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  neither  the  gifts  nor  the  messages  of 
Spiritualism  were  limited  to  the  aristocratic  circles  of  Great  Britain. 

In  a  great  many  cases  it  was  found,  that  some  of  the  best  Mediums  were 
developed  amongst  the  poor  patients  who  sought  aid  at  the  Mesmeric 
Infirmary.  The  servants  in  great  famiUes  also,  who  were  often  summoned 
to  attend  the  circles  of  their  masters  and  mistresses,  at  the  suggestion  of  the 
communicating  Spirits,  frequently  proved  to  be  endowed  with  remarkable 
mediumistic  powers,  and  these  carried  the  tidings  of  the  new  revelation  to 
persons  of  their  own  class,  by  whom  quiet  unostentatious  methods  of 
enquiry  into  Spiritualism  were  proceeding,  with  far  more  abundant  results 
than  the  world  at  large  was  at  all  prepared  for. 

Still  there  were  circumstances  tending  to  limit  the  earlier  manifestations 
of  Spirit  power  in  Great  Britain  to  private  families,  and  the  isolation  of 
individual  experiences.  In  the  first  place,  there  were  no  professional 
Mediums  in  England,  but  such  as  came  from  America,  for  some  years. 

When  European  Mediums  were  either  called  upon  or  compelled — as  was 
often  the  case — to  abandon  all  other  modes  of  gaining  a  livelihood,  to 
devote  themselves  entirely  to  the  exercise  of  their  Spiritual  gifts,  it 
became  an  inevitable  necessity  that  they  should  be  recompensed  for  the 
time  and  labour  involved  in  their  services.  It  is  only  just  to  say,  that  in 
America — where  every  description  of  labour  normal  to  the  individual  per- 
forming it,  is  recognised  as  natural  and  honourable — Mediumistic  power 
was — -from  the  incipiency  of  the  movement — classified  with  every  other 
faculty,  and  as  such  acknowledged  to  be  a  legitimate  means  of  earning  a 
liveUhood. 

In  Great  Britain  the  attempt  to  establish  a  pharisaical  distinction  between 

152  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

what  is  sacred  and  secular,  ever  has,  and  still  does,  stigmatize  professional 
mediumship  as  "a  desecration,"  &c.,  &c.  Making  all  due  allowance 
for  the  fraudulent  spirit  so  common  to  human  nature,  and  therefore,  so 
certain  to  be  found  in  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism  as  well  as  amongst  all  other 
classes  of  society,  we  have  yet  to  see  why  professional  mediumship  is  not  as 
legitimate  an  occupation  as  professional  editorship,  or  professional  work 
done  in  any  other  capacity  for  which  the  Creator  has  fitted  the  creature. 

We  have  yet  to  learn  what  gifts  are  specially  sacred  and  what — by  con- 
verse— are  profane.  When  we  have  sufficiently  proved  these  distinctions, 
•we  may  be  in  a  position  to  denounce  the  Mediums  who  claim  the  labourers' 
hire  for  their  work.  It  is  but  justice  to  the  sticklers  for  "  sacred  and  pro- 
fane" gifts  in  humanity,  to  add,  that  they  never  affix  these  awkward  lines 
of  demarcation  to  the  workers  of  any  other  denomination  than  those  of 
Spiritualism ;  the  clergy  as  a  body — from  the  archbishop  who  receives  his 
twenty-five  thousand  pounds  a  year  for  Spiritual  ministrations,  to  the  poor 
curate  upon  his  stipend  of  one  hundred  per  annum  —  being  deemed 
legitimately  entitled  to  receive  whatever  they  caji  get,  unrebuked  and  un- 
■questioned.  Whether  we  are  to  consider  the  clerical  calling  as  "  profane  " 
and  therefore  entitled  to  recompense,  or  ^'■too  sacred"  to  be  called  in 
question  at  all,  we  have  not  yet  been  able  to  ascertain,  but  we  do  know  for 
an  absolute  fact,  that  many  an  Englishman  who  does  not  hesitate  to  pay  his 
quota  of  heavy  rates  to  support  the  Church,  has  shrunk  back  in  holy  horror 
from  paying  a  sixpenny  fee  to  hear  a  fine  Spiritual  lecture,  and  excused 
himself  on  the  ground  that  Mediumship  was  a  "  sacred  gift,"  and  should  not 
be  made  the  subject  of  mercenary  traffic,  &c.,  &c.  Whether  these  asser- 
tions are  designed  to  insinuate,  that  the  Spirit  Medium's  gifts  are  from  the 
Lord,  and  should  not  be  paid,  and  those  of  the  Bench  of  Bishops  are  from 
the  other  party,  and  may  therefore  become  the  subje'ct  of  traffic,  we  cannot 
exacdy  determine.  The  inference  is  strong  that  way,  and  therefore,  were 
it  only  for  the  sake  of  resisting  the  wholesale  insult  which  this  line  of 
argument  hurls  against  the  clergy  of  all  denominations,  we  ought  to  dis- 
regard such  distinctions,  or  at  least  hold  them  in  abeyance,  until  the  Hne 
between  the  sacred  and  profane  in  human  endowments  is  clearly  defined. 
Meantime,  the  results  of  these  curious  opinions  were  not  favourable  to  the 
general  dissemination  of  Spiritualism  in  Great  Britain.  For  many  years 
the  behef  was  a  close  communion  affair ;  the  luxurious  entertainment  of 
those  who  could  afford  to  encourage  Transatlantic  Mediums  as  their  guests, 
or  devote  leisure  time  to  the  culture  of  spiritual  gifts  in  small  retired  family 
circles. 

For  a  long  time,  the  attempt  to  disseminate  the  knowledge  thus  obtained 
by  aid  of  professional  mediumship  was  so  severely  frowned  down,  that  its 
earliest  public  exhibitions — as  in  the  case  of  the  Davenport  Brothers — 
became  occasions  ■  for  the  display  of  violence  and  ruffianism  that  would 
have  disgraced  the  darkest  of  ages.  We  may  also  understand  why — with 
an  immense  array  of  titled  names  and  distinguished  literary  and  scientific 
celebrities  as  its  patrons — Spiritualism  remained  for  many  years  unrepre- 
sented by  any  public  demonstration. 

In  1859,  Mr.  RolHn  Squire,  the  young  American  gentleman  mentioned 
in  our  French  section,  paid  a  brief  visit  to  Europe,  for  the  purpose  of 
recruiting  his  health  and  enjoying  a  holiday  tour. 

Both  in  this  country  and  on  the  Continent,  Mr.  Squire  exercised  his 
medial  powers  for  the  edification  of  large  circles  of  admirers.  Still,  like 
Mr.    Home,    Mr.  Squire  was  only  known  within  the  charmed  limits  of 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  153 

aristocracy,  or  such  journalistic  commentators  as  were  from  time  to  time 
invited  as  witnesses  of  the  marvels  enacted  in  his  presence.  Mr.  P.  B. 
Randolph,  an  eccentric  trance  speaker,  and  Mrs.  A.  E.  Newton,  a  vision 
seeress  and  clairvoyant,  were  also  received  amongst  the  haut  ton  of 
European  Spiritualism,  and  each  contributed  their  quota  as  honoured 
American  visitors,  in  disseminating  spiritual  light  amongst  the  more 
favoured  part  of  the  community.  In  1864  the  far-famed  Davenport 
Brothers  visited  England  for  the  first  time.  They  were  the  only  Mediums 
except  the  trance  speakers,  who  had  yet  appeared  in  Europe  through  whom 
manifestations  of  spirit  power  could  be  given  in  public  audiences. 

Professional  Mediumship  as  above  suggested,  was  at  that  time  regarded 
with  so  much  unreasoning  distrust,  that  the  announcement  that  what  had 
hitherto  been  regarded  as  the  "  most  sacred  of  gifts,"  was  now  to  be  made 
the  subject  of  paying  exhibitions,  caused  a  thrill  of  horror  to  pervade  even 
the  minds  of  Spiritualists  themselves.  It  was  in  deference  then  to  this 
orthodox  view  of  spiritual  power  and  gifts,  that  the  Davenports  and  their 
Entrepreneur,  were  induced  at  first  to  tender  their  inaugural  manifestations 
in  private  circles,  or  gatherings  convened  according  to  custom,  at  the 
houses  of  the  privileged  few. 

As  we  feel  justified  in  asserting  that  no  subsequent  phases  of  medium- 
ship  exhibited  on  public  platforms,  have  ever  equalled  in  test  conditions 
and  clearness,  the  manifestations  produced  through  the  Davenport  Brothers 
in  the  early  days  of  their  public  career,  we  deem  it  a  necessary  part  of  the 
present  record,  to  give  a  brief  account  of  the  phenomena  which  ordinarily 
transpired  in  their  presence,  and  this  we  prefer  to  do,  by  reiterating  a  pub- 
lished statement  attested  by  a  large  number  of  respectable  witnesses,  rather 
than  offer  the  author's  own  unsustained  views  of  these  young  men's 
Mediumship. 

Dr.  Nichols,  author  of  a  sketch  of  the  Davenport  Brothers,  during  the 
very  early  portion  of  their  career,  says  :  "  On  the  night  of  October  nth, 
1864,  a  very  distinguished  company  assembled  at  the  residence  of  Mr. 
Dion  Boucicault  to  witness  the  manifestations  which  are  given  in  the 
presence  of  the  Brothers  Davenport."  An  account  of  the  proceedings 
which  transpired.  Dr.  Nichols  alleges  to  have  been  drawn  up  and  published 
by  Mr.  Boucicault  himself.  The  following  is  a  verbatim  copy  of  the  report 
in  question  : — 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  'Daily  News.' 

"  Sir, — A  stance  by  the  Brothers  Davenport  and  Mr.  W.  Fay,  took  place  in  my  house 
yesterday  in  the  presence  of  Lord  Bury,  Sir  Charles  Nicholson,  Sir  John  Gardiner,  Sir  C. 
Lennox  Wyke,  Rev.  E.  H.  Newenham,  Rev.  W.  Ellis,  Captain  E.  A.  Inglefield,  Mr.  Chas. 
Reade,  Messrs.  Jas.  Matthews,  Algernon  Borthwick,  T.  Willes,  H.  E.  Ormerod,  J.  W. 
Kaye,  J.  A.  Bostock.  H.  J.  Rideout,  Robt.  Bell,  J.  N.  Mangles,  H.  M.  Dunphy,  W.  Tyler 
Smith,  M.D.,  E.  Tyler  Smith,  T.  L.  Coward,  John  Brown,  M.D.,  Robert  Chambers,  LL.D., 
and  Dion  Boucicault. 

"  The  room  in  which  the  meeting  was  held  is  a  large  drawing-room,  from  which  all  the 
furniture  had  been  previously  removed  excepting  the  carpet,  a  chandelier,  a  table  and 
sofa,  and  twenty-six  cane-bottomed  chairs. 

"  At  two  o'clock  six  of  the  above  party  arrived,  and  the  room  was  subjected  to  careful 
scrutiny. 

"  It  was  suggested  that  a  cabinet  to  be  used  by  the  Brothers  Davenport,  but  then 
erected  in  an  adjacent  room,  should  be  removed  into  the  front  room,  and  placed  in  a  spot 
selected  by  ourselves. 

"  This  was  done  by  our  party,  but  in  the  process  we  displaced  a  portion  of  this  piece 
of  furniture,  thus  enabling  us  to  examine  its  material  and  structure  before  we  mended  it. 
At  three  o'clock,  our  party  was  fully  assembled  and  continued  the  scrutiny.      We  sent  to 

154  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

a  neighbouring  music  seller  for  six  guitars  and  two  tambourines,  so  that  the  implements 
to  be'  used  should  not  be  those  with  which  the  operators  were  familiar.  At  half -past 
three  the  brothers  Davenport  and  Mr.  Fay  arrive.d  They  found  we  had  altered  their  arrange- 
ments by  changing  the  room  which  they  had  previously  selected  for  their  manifestations. 

"The  siance  then  began  by  an  examination  of  the  dress  and  persons  of  the  Davenports, 
and  it  was  certified  that  no  apparatus  or  other  contrivance  was  concealed  on  or  about  their 
persons.  They  entered  the  cabinet,  and  sat  facing  each  other.  Captain^  Inglefield  then 
with  a  new  rope,  provided  by  ourselves,  tied  Mr.  W.  Davenport  hand  and  foot,  with  his 
hands  behind  his  back,  and  then  bound  him  firmly  to  the  seat  where  he  sat.  Lord  Bury 
in  like  manner  secured  Mr.  Ira  Davenport.  The  knots  on  these  ligatures  were  then 
fastened  with  sealing  wax  and  a  seal  affixed.  A  guitar,  violin,  tambourine,  two  bells,  and 
a  brass  trumpet  were  placed  on  the  floor  of  the  cabinet. 

"  The  doors  were  then  closed,  and  a  sufficient  light  was  permitted  in  the  room  to  enable 
us  to  see  what  followed. 

"  I  shall  omit  any  detailed  account  of  the  Babel  of  sounds  which  arose  in  the  cabinet, 
and  the  violence  with  which  the  doors  were  repeatedly  burst  open  and  the  instruments 
expelled,  the  hands  appearing  as  usual  at  a  lozenge-shaped  orifice  in  the  centre  door  of  the 
cabinet     The  following  incidents  seem  to  us  particularly  worthy  of  note. 

"While  Lord  Bury  was  stooping  inside  the  cabinet,  the  door  being  open,  the  two 
operators  seen  to  be  seated  and  bound,  a  detached  hand  was  clearly  observed  to  descend 
upon  him,  and  he  started  back  remarking  that  he  had  been  struck. 

"  Again,  in  the  full  light  of  the  gas  chandelier,  and  during  an  interval  in  the  se'cmce, 
the  doors  of  the  cabinet  being  open,  and  while  the  ligatures  of  the  brothers  were  being 
examined,  a  very  white  thin  female  hand  and  wrist  quivered  for  several  seconds  in  the 
air  above.  > 

"  This  apj)earance  drew  a  general  exclamation  from  all  the  party.  Sir  Charles  Wyke 
now  entered  the  cabinet  and  sat  between  the  two  young  men,  his  hands  being  right  and 
left  on  each,  and  secured  to  them.  The  doors  were  then  closed  and  the  Babel  of  sounds 
recommenced.  Several  hands  appeared  at  the  orifice,  amongst  them  the  hand  of  a  child. 
After  a  time.  Sir  Charles  returned  amongst  us  and  stated  that  whUe  he  held  the  two 
brothers,  several  hands  touched  his  face,  and  pulled  his  hair  ;  the  instruments  at  his  feet 
crept  up,  played  round  his  body,  and  over  his  head,  one  of  them  lodging  eventually  on 
his  shoulders.  During  the  foregoing  incidents  the  hands  which  appeared  were  touched 
and  grasped  by  Captain  Inglefield,  and  he  stated  that  to  the  touch  they  were  apparently 
human  hands,  though  they  passed  away  from  his  grasp. 

"  I  omit  mentioning  other  phenomena,  an  account  of  which  has  been  rendered  elsewhere. 

"  The  next  part  of  the  seance  was  performed  in  the  dark.  One  of  the  Messrs.  Daven- 
port and  Mr.  Fay  seated  themselves  amongst  us.  .  .  .  Two  ropes  were  thrown  at 
their  feet,  and  in  two  minutes  and  a  haK  they  were  tied  hand  and  foot,  their  hands 
behind  their  backs,  bound  tightly  to  their  chairs,  and  their  chairs  bound  to  an  adjacent 
table.  While  this  process  was  going  on,  the  guitar  rose  from  the  table  and  swung  or 
floated  round  the  room  and  over  the  heads  of  the  party,  slightly  touching  some.  Now  a 
phosphoric  light  shot  from  side  to  side  over  our  heads,  The  hands  and  shoulders  of 
several  were  simultaneously  touched  or  struck  by  hands,  the  guitar  meanwhile  sailing 
round  the  room,  now  near  the  ceihng,  now  scuffling  on  the  head  and  shoulders  of  some 
luckless  wight.  The  bells  whisked  here  and  there,  and  a  Kght  murmuring  was  maintained 
on  the  violm. 

"  The  two  tambourines  were  rolled  hither  and  thither  on  the  floor,  now  shaking 
violently,  now  visiting  the  knees  and  hands  of  our  circle,  all  these  foregoing  incidents 
being  simultaneous.  Mr.  Rideout,  holding  a  tambourine,  requested  it  might  be  plucked 
from  him,  when  it  was  almost  instantaneously  taken.  At  the  same  time  Lord  Bury  made 
a  similar  request,  and  a  forcible  attempt  was  made  to  pluck  a  tambourine  from  his  grasp, 
which  he  resisted. 

"  Mr.  Fay  then  asked  that  his  coat  should  be  removed. 

"  We  heard  a  violent  twitch  and  here  occurred  a  most  remarkable  fact.  A  light  was 
struck  before  the  coat  had  quite  left  Mr.  Fay's  person,  and  it  was  seen  quitting  him,  and 
plucked  off  him  upwards. 

"  It  flew  lip  to  the  chandelier,  where  it  hung  for  a  moment  and  then  fell  to  the  ground. 
Mr.  Fay  was  seen  meanwhile  bound  hand  and  foot  as  before.  One  of  our  party  now 
divested  himself  of  his  coat,  and  it  was  placed  on  the  table.  The  hght  was  extinguished 
and  this  coat  was  rushed  on  to  Mr.  Fay's  back  with  equal  rapidity. 

"  During  the  above  occurrences  in  the  dark,  we  placed  a  sheet  of  paper  under  the  feet 
of  the  two  operators,  and  drew  with  a  pencil  an  outhne  around  them,  to  the  end  that  if 
they  moved  it  might  be  detected. 

"  They  of  their  own  accord  offered  to  have  their  hands  filled  with  flour,  or  any  similar 
substance  to  prove  they  made  no  use  of  them,  but  this  precaution  was  deemed  unnecessary  ; 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  155 

we  required  them  however  to  count  from  one  to  twelve  repeatedly  that  their  voices  con- 
stantly heard  might  certify  to  us  that  they  were  in  the  places  where  they  were  tied.  Each 
of  our  own  party  held  his  neighbour  so  firmly  that  no  one  could  move  without  two  adjacent 
neighbours  being  aware  of  it.  At  the  termination  of  this  seance,  a  general  conversation 
took  place  on  the  subject  of  what  we  had  witnessed. 

"  Lord  Bury  suggested  that  the  general  opinion  seemed  to  be  that  we  assure  the 
Brothers  DavenjDort  and  Mr.  Fay  that  after  a  very  stringent  trial  and  strict  scrutiny  of 
their  proceedings,  the  gentlemen  present  could  arrive  at  no  other  conclusion  than  that 
there  was  no  trace  of  trickery  in  any  form,  and  certainly  there  were  neither  confederates 
nor  machinery,  and  that  all  those  who  had  witnessed  the  results  would  freely  state  in  the 
society  in  which  they  moved  that  so  far  as  their  investigations  enabled  them  to  form  an 
opinion,  the  phenomena  which  had  taken  place  in  their  presence  were  not  the  product  of 
legerdemain.     This  suggestion  was  promptly  acceded  to  by  all  present. 

"  Before  leaving  this  question,  in  which  my  name  has  accidentally  become  mixed  up,  I 
may  be  permitted  to  observe  that  I  have  no  belief  in  what  is  called  '  Spiritualism,'  aud 
nothing  I  have  seen  inclines  me  to  believe  in  it — indeed  the  puerility  of  some  of  the 
demonstrations  would  sufficiently  alienate  such  a  theory,  but  I  do  believe  that  we  have 
not  quite  explored  the  realms  of  natural  philosophy — that  this  enterprise  of  thought  has 
of  late  years  been  confined  to  useful  inventions,  and  we  are  content  at  least  to  think  that 
the  laws  of  nature  are  finite,  ascertained,  and  limited  to  the  scope  of  our  knowledge.  A 
very  great  number  of  worthy  persons,  seeing  such  phenomena  as  I  have  detailed,  ascribe 
them  to  supernatural  agency  ;  others  wander  round  the  subject  in  doubt,  but  as  it 
seriously  engages  the  feeling  and  earnest  thought  of  so  large  a  number  in  Europe  and 
America,  is  it  a  subject  which  scientific  men  are  justified  in  treating  with  the  neglect  of 
contempt  ? 

"  I  am,  &c., 

"Dion  Boucicatjlt. 
"  Regent  Street,  October  12,  1864." 

It  may  be  asked  with  some  point,  why  we  republish  accounts  of 
phenomena  so  well  known  and  which  have  long  since  been  put  into  the 
shade — in  the  opinion  of  many  Spiritualists — by  the  marvels  of  what  they 
term  "  form  materializations  ?  "  On  the  other  hand,  there  has  been  a  kind 
of  fashion  in  the  assertion,  both  within  and  without  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism, 
that  the  Davenport  Brothers  are  "impostors,"  and  many  assume,  without 
any  known  grounds  for  the  assumption,  that  they  have  been  proved  to  be 
impostors.  To  all  classes  of  objectors  we  would  carefully  commend  a 
perusal  of  the  seance  reported  above.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  it  is 
written  by  one  who  only  admits  that  his  name  is  "  accidentally  "  mixed  up 
in  the  affair,  and  who  guards  that  name  with  unnecessary  caution  from  the 
charge  of  being  a  Spiritualist. 

All  those  who  have  witnessed  the  Davenports'  seajices  know,  that  their 
phenomena  were  performed  with  lightning  speed ;  that  no  singing  was 
called  for — "loud,  louder,  louder  still" ;— during  the  dreary  waiting  time 
when  Spirits  are  "  materializing,"  and  all  who  read  the  report  of  these  press 
men,  scientists,  and  sceptics,  will  observe,  how  often  they  insist  upon  their 
own  caution  in  examining,  and  of  the  utter  impossibiUty  of  their  detecting 
fraud,  or  the  personal  agency  of  the  Mediums  in  the  phenomena. 

Now,  uninteresting  as  the  facts  themselves  may  be,  the  above  report 
shows  a  set  of  conditions  under  which  human  agency  or  contrivance  was 
simply  iiNiPOSSiBLE.  Our  aim  in  dwelling  upon  this  seance  is  to  show,  that 
in  the  case  of  the  Davenports,  as  in  those  so  often  described  as  occurring 
with  Mr.  Home,  stringent  tests  do  not  hinder  the  manifestations,  neither 
does  the  presence  of  sceptics  destroy  them. 

Here  are  conditions  under  which  conjurers  may  be  defied  and  scepticism 
baffled ;  and  though  imposture  is  impossible,  true  Mediumship  could  not 
fail  to  come  out  of  such  trials  triumphant  and  unimpeachable.     But  these 

156  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

conditions  are  "  too  degrading  for  sensitive  Mediums  to  submit  to,"  urge 
their  apologists,  "and  you  who  demand  it  of  them,  are  no  true  Spirit uaUs ts ; 
you  are  Spirit  grabbers,  Mediums'  enemies,  the  worst  foes  of  SpirituaHsm," 
&c.,  &c.,  &c.  To  this  class  of  talkers  and  writers,  we  have  no  answer  to 
make,  neither  desiring  nor  intending  to  hold  intercourse  with  them ;  but  to 
the  confiding  victims  whose  heart  strings  are  wrung,  and  whose  pockets  are 
so  often  robbed  to  sustain  impostors,  we  would  say.  See  what  Spirits  could 
do,  and  did  do,  through  the  mediumship  of  the  Davenports,  and  have  no 
hesitancy  in  refusing  to  accord  faith  to  any  professions  of  Spiritual  agency 
that  are  not  equally  well  guarded  round,  against  possibility  of  human 
interference  and  deception. 

That  the  poor  Davenports  were  often  inhumanly,  and  even  brutally 
treated,  we  not  only  admit,  but  are  about  to  demonstrate  ;  but  the  tests 
appUed  by  the  party  whose  record  we  have  given,  neither  degraded  nor 
insulted  the  Mediums ;  on  the  contrary,  they  submitted  to  them  cheerfully, 
and  often,  to  the  author's  personal  knowledge,  suggested  still  more  stringent 
tests,  with  which  their  manifestations  could  readily  be  given. 

The  truth  is,  the  Davenports  have  seldom  been  fairly  dealt  with.  The 
people  that  could  not  explain  their  manifestations,  have  contented  them- 
selves, like  Mr.  Boucicault,  by  denying  that  they  could  be  "Spiritual," 
because  they  were  too  puerile,  whilst  multitudes  of  Spiritualists  who  will 
gaze  with  rapture  upon  the  tinsel  ornaments  sewed  on  to  cheap  finery  by 
Mediums,  whilst  their  masked  dummies  are  contemplated  with  awe, 
stretched  out  on  sofas,  will  turn  with  disgust  from  the  obvious  and  unmis- 
takeable  proofs  of  Spirit  power,  furnished  through  the  Davenports,  because 
they  come  from  "  such  very  low  Spirits  ! "  Had  we  an  opportunity  of 
questioning  Mr.  Boucicault  concerning  his  opinion  as  to  what  becomes  of 
the  great  mass  of  mankind  that  sit  nightly  to  watch  his  dramas,  perhaps 
we  might  be  in  a  position  to  show  that  the  taste  of  the  majority  inclines 
to  puerility  only,  and  that  anything  that  was  not  puerile,  would  not 
represent  the  vanished  millions  that  have  passed  through  the  gates  of  death 
to  the  life  beyond,  where  it  is  exceedingly  doubtful,  if  puerile  Spirits  become 
wise  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  or  low  men  and  women  suddenly  become 
exalted  angels.  Meantime  the  question  is  not  one  of  quality  but  kind. 
Were  the  manifestations  recorded  above,  made  by  the  Davenports,  if  not,  by 
whom  and  what? 

These  are  the  real  questions  at  issue,  and  those  manifestations  can  no 
longer  be  called  "  puerile,"  which  defy  the  whole  realm  of  science  to  explain, 
nor  those  Spirits  be  tabooed  as  "  too  low  "  for  pious  company,  which  prove 
the  fact  of  man's  spiritual  existence,  better  than  all  the  sermons  that  were 
ever  preached  from  the  mere  standpoint  of  belief  without  knowledge. 

Following  immediately  upon  the  seance  recorded  above,  with  the  Daven- 
ports, were  others  of  a  more  or  less  wonderful  nature. 

These  exhibitions  were  at  first  confined  to  private  circles  held  in  the 
houses  of  the  nobility,  or  of  scientific  persons ;  at  length  however,  the 
Mediums  enlarged  their  borders,  and  appeared  at  the  Queen's  Concert 
Room,  Hanover  Square,  attracting  select  and  distinguished  audiences,  by 
whom  they  were  still  esteemed  as  entirely  free  from  all  shadow  of  fraud  or 
suspicion.  For  some  time  the  gentlemen  of  the  press,  especially  those 
who  were  favoured  with  invitations  to  attend  the  more  exclusive  circles, 
were  fair  and  candid  in  their  statements  concerning  what  they  had  witnessed. 
No  sooner  did  it  appear  however  that  the  Mediums  seemed  in  a  fair  way 
to  remunerate  themselves  for  time  and  service  by  successful  public  exhibi- 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  157 

tions,  than  the  press  suddenly  became  alive  to  the  "  impiety,"  "  American 
audacity,"  &c.,  &c.,  of  the  whole  affair. 

Dr.  Nichols  in  his  biography  of  the  Davenport  Brothers  quotes  the  press 
utterances  of  this  character  at  large,  and  to  judge  by  their  general  tone, 
the  Davenports  had  become  unmistakably  popular,  and  were  very  generally 
feted  and  patronised  by  the  highest  rank  of  society,  whilst  their  success  in 
"  making  money  "  by  their  public  exhibitions,  and  baffling  all  attempts  of 
the  scientific  or  learned  to  "  find  them  out,"  very  naturally,  and  very  Justly, 
merited  the  united  storm  of  journalistic  indignation  from  all  parts  of  the 
country,  and  the  united  "  anathema  maranatha"  of  every  pious  professor  of 
Spiritual  doctrines,  who  could  not  prove  what  they  professed,  quite  as  well 
as  the  Davenports.  So  the  storm  raged,  and  so  the  enemies  of  the  cause 
contributed  to  feed  the  flame  by  the  virulence  of  the  persecution  directed 
against  it.  The  culminating  point  of  these  proceedings  however  was 
reached,  in  a  demonstration  o{  popular  sentimejit  displayed  towards  the 
Davenports  on  the  occasion  of  their  visit  to  the  north  of  England.  Although 
the  character  of  this  incident  is  such  an  one  as  no  English  writer  would 
care  much  to  descant  upon,  we  feel  obliged,  in  the  interests  of  truth, 
to  give  the  narrative  in  all  its  ugly  details ;  still  we  prefer  to  let  others  tell 
the  tale.  We  shall  therefore  place  it  before  the  reader  in  the  language  of 
the  parties  most  nearly  concerned,  and  as  the  following  letter  from  the 
Brothers  Davenport  contains  published  facts  which  for  many  years  have 
remained  uncontradicted,  we  cannot  do  better  than  reprint  it  in  their 
own  words. 

The  following  quotation,  explanatory  of  the  letter,  is  written  by  the  Rev. 
J.  B.  Ferguson,  A.M.,  LL.D.,  a  gentleman  from  one  of  the  Southern  States 
of  America,  who  having  become  well  acquained  with  the  Davenports,  and 
placing  implicit  faith  in  their  honesty,  and  the  thoroughly  Spiritual  nature 
of  their  endowments,  had  consented  to  accompany  them  to  England,  as  a 
travelling  companion,  and  was  well  advised  of  all  the  facts  which  were 
pubUshed  indeed  under  his  own  supervision. 

Writing  to  the  author  Mr.  Ferguson  says  : — "  The  Brothers  Davenport 
have  been  subjected  to  a  series  of  extraordinary  outrages  in  some  of  the 
provincial  towns  of  England,  which  show  that  the  spirit  of  opposition 
manifested  by  a  portion  of  the  public  press  is  likely  to  take  more  violent 
form  when  it  falls  into  a  lower  stratum  of  society.  The  facts  connected 
with  the  riots  at  Liverpool,  Huddersfield,  and  Leeds  are  very  clearly  stated 
in  the  following  address  of  the  Brothers  Davenport  to  the  British  public, 
which,  as  a  portion  of  the  history  of  the  movement,  deserves  a  place  in 
these  records  : — " 

"the   brothers    davenport   to   the    BRITISH    PUBLIC. 

"  We  appeal  to  the  free  press  and  the  enlightened  and  fair-dealing  people  of  the  British 
Empire  for  a  candid  consideration  of  the  following  statement,  and  for  the  even-handed 
justice  usually  given  in  this  country  to  all  persons,  rich  or  poor,  citizens  or  strangers. 
We  ask,  also,  as  a  matter  of  justice,  that  journals  which  have  published  accounts  of  the 
recent  riots  at  Liverpool,  Huddersfield,  and  Leeds,  of  which  we  were  the  victims,  should 
also  give  the  facts  contained  in  this  statement. 

"  We  beg,  furthermore,  most  respectfully  to  commend  to  the  consideration  of  the  Eight 
Honourable  Sir  George  Grey  and  the  magistracy  and  police  authorities  of  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  fact  that  within  two  weeks,  in  three  of  the  most  important  provincial  towns 
in  England,  without  any  fault  of  our  own,  transgressing  no  law  of  the  realm,  and  offering 
no  violence  or  injury  to  any  person,  we  have  been  made  to  suJfFer  in  property,  and  have 
been  menaced  with  extreme  personal  injury,  with  apparent  danger  to  our  lives,  as  will 
appear  by  the  following  statement  of  facts  : — 

158  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"After  having  given  over  two  hundred  public  and  private  seances,  or  exhibitions  of 
physical  phenomena,  such  as  have  been  described  in  all  the  leading  journals  of  Europe  and 
America,  and  in  our  published  biography,  at  the  Queen's  Concert  Rooms,  London,  and  the 
mansions  of  the  nobility  and  gentry  of  England,  we  visited  Liverpool  on  the  13th  of 
February,  and,  as  is  our  custom,  gave  a  private  seance,  to  which  the  members  of  the  press 
and  others  were  invited,  who  reported  the  satisfactory  character  of  the  exhibition. 
February  14th  we  gave  two  public  seances  at  St.  George's  Hall  vnth  like  results  ;  a  private 
seance  at  a  gentleman's  mansion  and  a  public  morning  performance  on  Tuesday  were 
alike  satisfactory. 

"  On  Tuesday  evening  we  were  proceeding  with  another  exhibition,  when  two  persons, 
a  Mr.  Hulley  and  a  Mr.  Cummins,  acting  as  a  committee  from  the  audience,  in  attempting 
to  tie  our  wrists,  caused  so  much  pain  that  we  were  compelled  to  protest  against  the 
torture  they  were  inflicting.  We  were  willing  to  be  tied  with  entire  security,  as  we  have 
been  many  hundreds  of  times  by  riggers,  sailors,  engineers,  and  other  skilled  persons,  or  to 
give  any  reasonable  test  in  proof  that  we  have  no  active  part  in  the  phenomena  witnessed 
in  our  presence  ;  we  had  no  fear  of  a  '  Tomfool  knot,'  or  of  any  mode  of  fastening  that 
did  not  inflict  unbearable  torture.  We  declined  to  be  bound  by  a  committee  whose  unfair- 
ness and  even  brutality  were  soon  manifest.  Hulley  and  Cummins  refused  to  retire  and 
give  place  to  another  committee  ;  the  audience  was  made  to  believe  that  it  was  the  form 
of  a  particular  knot,  and  not  the  cruelty  of  its  appUcation,  to  which  we  objected,  and  we 
were  compelled  by  an  unappeasable  tumult  to  return  the  money  taken  for  tickets,  and 
postpone  further  proceedings. 

"  On  the  following  evening  printed  regulations  were  given  to  every  person  entering  the 
hall,  and  read  from  the  platform,  in  which  we  distinctly  claimed  the  right  of  rejecting  any 
person  on  a  committee  whom  we  should  find  acting  vsdth  unfairness.  This  would  be  our 
right  were  we  criminals  on  trial  for  felony.  Before  commencing,  we  invited  all  persons 
who  were  not  satisfied  with  these  regulations  to  retire  from  the  hall,  and  receive  the 
money  they  had  paid  for  entrance. 

"  Messrs.  Hulley  and  Cummins,  backed  by  a  crowd  of  their  friends,  came  again  upon 
the  platform,  and,  from  their  previous  unfairness,  were  promptly  rejected  by  us  as  a 
committee.  They  insisted  upon  tying  us,  and  appealed  to  the  audience  to  support  them- 
in  their  demand.  They  refused  to  leave  the  platform  when  requested,  took  possession  of 
our  cabinet,  and  in  various  ways  excited  violent  manifestations  in  the  audience. 

"  We  were  then  assured  by  a  gentleman  of  Liverpool  that  unless  we  submitted  to  the 
demands  of  these  men  there  would  be  a  furious  riot.  He  promised  that  they  should  not 
be  permitted  to  injure  us,  and  we  finally  yielded  to  his  assurances.  But  they  had  no 
sooner  placed  the  cords  upon  our  wrists  than  they  inflicted  a  degree  of  pain  which  could 
not  be  endured.  We  protested  against  this  violence,  but  in  vain,  and,  refusing  to  submit 
to  it  longer,  had  the  cords  cut  from  our  wrists,  and  left  the  platform,  which  was 
instantly  invaded  by  the  mob  ;  our  cabinet  was  broken  in  pieces,  and  Hulley  and 
Cummins,  the  heroes  of  this  assault  of  some  hundreds  of  brave  Englishmen  upon  four 
unarmed,  unoffending,  and  unprotected  foreigners  were  borne  from  the  hall  upon  the 
shoulders  of  their  friends,  apparently  proud  of  their  triumph. 

"  Our  cabinet  destroyed  and  our  business  interrupted,  with  heavy  pecuniary  damage 
in  Liverpool,  we  returned  to  London,  had  a  new  cabinet  constructed,  and  on  the  following 
Monday  returned  to  Halifax,  where  we  gave  our  usual  public  and  private  exhibitions 
without  interruption. 

"  Our  next  engagement  was  at  Huddersfield,  February  21st.  On  our  arrival  we  were 
informed  that  Hulley  and  Cummins,  the  heroes  of  the  Liverpool  mob,  had  been  telegraphed 
to,  and  were  coming  with  a  strong  deputation  from  that  town,  to  break  up  our  exhibition. 
The  infuriated  mob  was  the  common  talk  of  the  town.  We  appealed  to  the  police,  and 
we  axe  happy  to  say  that,  in  this  instance,  a  sufiicient  force  was  promptly  sent  to  the  hall 
for  our  protection.  The  crowd  that  assembled  gave  many  indications  of  being  prepared 
for  violence.  When  our  representative  had  stated  the  regulations  adopted,  and  that  we 
proposed  simply  the  presentation  of  certain  facts,  without  any  theory,  and  asked  for  the 
appointment  of  a  committee,  two  gentlemen,  instructed,  it  was  said,  by  Hulley  and  Cum- 
mins, came  upon  the  platform  and  commenced  to  tie  our  wrists  together  behind  us,  which 
they  did  with  needless  severity.  We  Jbore  the  pain,  however,  until  carrying  the  ropes 
thraugh  the  hole  in  the  seat,  they  drew  the  backs  of  our  hands  down  upon  it  with  such 
violence  as  to  threaten  dislocation,  placing  their  knees  upon  the  seat,  and  in  one  instance 
upon  the  hands  of  one  of  us  to  give  them  greater  purchase.  This  torture,  deliberately, 
and  to  all  appearance  maliciously  inflicted,  we  of  course  could  not  bear,  and  at  our  demand 
the  cords  were  instantly  severed.  We  exposed  our  livid  wrists,  in  which  every  strand  of 
the  cord  was  visibly  imprinted,  to  the  audience,  who,  to  the  credit  of  their  humanity, 
cried  out  '  Shame  !'  But  the  mob  organized  to  break  up  our  exhibition  had  no  such 
feeling,  and  made  a  simultaneous  rush  for  the  platform,  where,  however,  an  efl&cient  police 

Charles    Blackburn    Esq. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  159 

force  saved  our  property  from  destruction  and  us  from  a  violence  which,  under  the  stimu- 
lating addresses  of  the  heroes  of  the  Liverpool  outrage,  expended  itself  in  hootings  and 
howlings. 

"  We  had  engagements  for  two  nights  at  Hull,  but  on  our  arrival  we  were  informed  by 
the  gentleman  who  had  engaged  us,  the  chairman  of  the  hall  committee,  and  the  police 
superintendent,  that  there  were  such  indications  of  a  violent  mob,  that  we  could  not  be 
permitted  to  give  our  exhibition,  and  we  received  from  the  gentleman  chiefly  interested 
the  following  note  : — 

"  '  Music  HaU,  Jarret  Street,  Hull, 

'"  22nd  February,  1865. 

"  '  Sir, — As  I  believe  there  is  reason  to  apprehend  a  disturbance  at  the  hall  this  evening, 
if  the  seance  of  the  Davenport  Brothers  takes  place,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it 
would  be  advisable  to  postpone  the  seance.  I  am  sorry  to  do  this,  particularly  as  yourself 
and  the  Messrs.  Davenport  have  arrived  in  Hull,  and  are  ready  to  fulfil  your  engagement ; 
but  I  am  driven  to  do  so  by  the  organized  attack  which  I  am  given  to  tmderstand  is  in 
preparation.  I  am  also  urged  to  do  so  by  the  proprietors  of  the  hall,  who  are  alarmed 
lest  their  property  should  be  damaged  by  any  disturbance. 
"  '  I  remain,  yours  faithfully, 

" '  Egbert  Bowser. 

"'Rev.  Dr.  Ferguson,  Royal  Station  Hotel,  Hull.' 

"  Falling  to  find  at  Hull  that  protection  in  our  legal  rights  which  we  had  supposed  was 
extended  to  every  man  on  English  ground,  we  went  to  meet  our  next  engagement  at  Leeds, 
where  the  scenes  of  Liverpool  and  Huddersfield  were  re-enacted  with  increased  violence. 
We  were  met  by  an  organized  mob,  and  were  refused  the  protection  of  the  police  when  it 
was  demanded.  When  the  ringleaders  or  agents  of  the  mob,  taking  possession  of  the 
stage,  had  subjected  us  to  the  same  violence  that  had  been  planned  and  practised  upon  us 
at  Liverpool  aud  Huddersfield — the  mob  again  destroying  our  property,  smashing  the 
cabinet  and  breaking  up  or  purloining  our  musical  instruments,  and  we  were  protected  from 
personal  violence,  amid  the  smashing  of  door  panels  and  the  howling  of  an  enraged 
populace,  by  the  tardy  arrival  of  a  detachment  of  police  and  the  brave  and  firm  conduct 
of  one  of  its  members — our  agent,  contrary  to  all  justice,  was  compelled  to  order  the 
return  of  the  admission  money  paid  by  those  who  had  come  for  the  very  purpose  of 
making  the  riot  from  which  we  sufiered.  On  the  same  day  we  had  given  a  pubKc  seance, 
attended  by  the  members  of  the  press  and  some  of  the  most  respectable  citizens  of  Leeds, 
in  which  the  famous  '  Tom-fool  knot '  was  used,  and  in  which,  so  far  as  we  were  able  to 
judge,  the  phenomena  exhibited  gave  entire  satisfaction. 

"  It  remains  but  to  state  two  or  three  facts  which  may  throw  further  light  on  these 
proceedings. 

"  In  Liverpool,  as  reported  in  the  Mercury,  Mr.  HuUey,  when  accused  of  acting 
unfairly  to,  and  being  an  enemy  of  the  Davenports,  said,  '  I  avow  it.  I  am  a  bitter  foe 
to  the  Davenports.'  After  such  an  avowal,  what  right  had  he  to  act  on  a  committee 
whose  duty  was  strict  impartiality  ? 

"  We  wish  to  be  just  to  the  police.  At  Huddersfield,  though  they  could  not  give  us 
order,  we  were  protected  from  actual  violence.  At  Leeds  such  protection  was  withheld 
until  too  late  to  save  our  property. 

"  At  Liverpool  the  Mercury  says  : — 

"  '  The  appearance  of  Inspectors  Valentine  and  Southwell,  with  a  force  of  thirty  men, 
did  not  stop  the  process  of  demolition.  The  police,  indeed,  did  not  attempt  to  interfere  so 
long  as  only  the  'property  of  the  Davenports  was  threatened.' 

"The  Leeds  Mercury,  reporting  the  violent  proceedings  against  us  at  Huddersfield, 
says  : — • 

"  '  Mr.  Walker,  not  considering  that  his  hands  could  pull  the  rope  tight  enough,  used 

his  Jcnee  to  assist  him,  and  the  brother  he  was  operating  on  again  protested 

Several  persons  had  at  that  time  gone  to  the  cabinet,  and  Davenport  showed  his  wrist  to 
some  of  them.  It  had  a  livid  mark  fringed  with  red,  about  the  breadth  of  a  finger,  and  in 
the  holloiv  of  this  mark  there  ivere  the  marks  of  the  individual  strands  of  the  rope.' 

"  Yet  some  have  been  found  to  insist  on  inflicting  this  brutal  torture  upon  us,  with 
howling  mobs  to  back  them,  as  if  we  were  malefactors  or  wild  beasts.  It  may  be  doubted 
if  such  an  amount  of  violence,  wrong,  and  outrage  has  been  inflicted  on  any  unoffending 
men  in  England  since  Clarkson  was  mobbed  by  the  slave-traders  of  Liverpool,  and  Priestly 
by  the  mad  bigots  of  Bhmingham.     .     .     . 

"  (Signed) 

"  Ira  Erastus  Davenport. 
"  William  Henry  Davenport. 
"  William  M.  Fat." 

i6o  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER       XXI 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    (CONTINUED). 

Another  of  the  abnormal  personages  who  made  a  deep  mark  upon  the 
faith  of  European  society,  was  Miss  Nichol,  better  known  as  Mrs.  Guppy,  the 
wife  of  a  gentleman  of  wealth  and  good  social  position,  who  previous  to  his 
union  with  Miss  Nichol,  had  become  remarkable  in  the  Spiritualistic  ranks 
as  the  author  of  a  singular  book  entitled  "  Mary  Jane."  The  speciality  of 
this  publication,  which  was  issued  in  two  handsome  volunies,  was  to  this 
effect. 

Previous  to  the  decease  of  his  first  wife,  Mr.  Gappy's  attention  had  been 
drawn  towards  a  succession  of  extraordinary  disturbances  occurring  in  his 
own  house,  and  which  continued  for  many  months,  in  the  form  of  rappings, 
movements  of  furniture,  direct  writings,  and  at  last,  when  advised  by 
Spiritualistic  friends  to  try  and  obtain  communications  with  the  unseen 
tormentors  through  the  ordinary  methods  of  the  Spirit  circle,  the  manifesta- 
tions changed  to  intelligent  question  and  answer,  rendered  through 
rappings,  table  tilting,  and  planchette  writings.  Being  of  a  somewhat 
materialistic  turn  of  mind,  and  greatly  interested  in  the  study  of  the  natural 
sciences,  Mr.  Guppy — whilst  compelled  to  admit  the  supra-mundane 
character  of  the  new  development  in  his  household — attributed  it  to  a 
species  of  aromal  force,  given  off  unconsciously,  from  certain  human  organisms, 
and  combining  itself  into  a  sort  of  magical  impersonal  personality,  to  which 
he  gave  the  anomalous  designation  of  "  Mary  Jane."  As  the  said  "  Mary 
Jane"  manifested  a  remarkable  amount  of  intelligence,  often  transcending 
that  of  any  member  of  the  household,  and  betrayed  moreover,  tokens  of  a 
strong  will  of  her  own,  Mr.  Guppy  conceived  such  an  amount  of  respect  for 
his  "  Ariel,"  that  he  proceeded  to  write  her  history,  and  completely  filled 
the  two  volumes  above  alluded  to,  with  accounts  of  her  strange  freaks, 
varied  accomplishments,  and  demonstrations  of  preternatural  power. 

After  the  death  ot  his  first  wife,  Mr.  Guppy  being  introduced  to  Miss 
Nichol,  found  in  that  lady's  Mediumship,  a  very  striking  counterpart  of  his 
invisible  friend  Mary  Jane's  performances.  The  interest  thus  excited,  not 
only  ended  in  Mr.  Guppy's  complete  conversion  to  Spiritualism,  but  also  in 
the  transformation  of  Miss  Nichol  into  the  wife  of  the  wealthy  scientist,  in 
which  position,  as  a  nonprofessional  Medium,  Mrs.  Guppy  was  enabled 
to  exert  a  widespread  influence  both  in  England  and  many  of  the  Conti- 
nental cities. 

As  Mrs.  Guppy's  Mediumship  is  of  that  representative  character  which  it 
is  the  aim  of  this  work  to  depict,  we  avail  ourselves  of  the  accounts  given  of 
Mr.  Guppy's  seances,  pubhshed  by  several  authoritative  witnesses. 

The  first  whose  testimony  we  cite,  is  the  late  eminent  jurist,  Serjeant 
Cox,  who,  in  a  paper  read  before  the  Psychological  Society  of  Great 
Britain,  relates  in  very  minute  detail,  how  he  one  day  called  at  Mrs. 
Guppy's  residence  at  Highbury,  and  soHcited  the  favour  of  her  company  at 
a  Spiritual  circle,  to  be  held  that  evening  at  his  own  residence.     Serjeant 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  i6i 

Cox  candidly  states,  that  he  desired  to  take  Mrs.  Guppy  unaware  of  his 
invdtation,  and  the  lady  in  her  own  simple  and  amiable  way,  immediately 
complied  with  the  request  preferred. 

It  was  winter  time,  and  the  ground  was  covered  with  snow.  Mrs.  Guppy 
having  arranged  her  dress,  entered  the  hired  cab  which  Serjeant  Cox  had 
brought,  and  drove  with  him  some  four  miles  to  his  residence.  From  the 
time  of  her  arrival  at  his  house,  till  the  period  of  the  seance,  about  five  hours 
later,  Serjeant  Cox  or  the  ladies  of  his  family  never  for  one  moment  lost 
sight  of  Mrs.  Guppy,  and  yet  within  three  minutes  of  the  time  that  the  circle 
had  assembled,  in  a  room  which  had  been  thoroughly  searched,  the  one 
door  locked,  and  the  key  deposited  in  Serjeant  Cox's  pocket,  when  the  light 
was  extinguished,  heavy  thuds  were  heard  on  the  table,  the  lights  were  called 
for  by  signal,  and  the  table  w^as  found  to  be  covered  with  heaps  of  pure 
white  snow.  When  this  unwelcome  freight  of  matter  had  been  removed, 
the  party  re-formed,  and  the  gas  extinguished,  more  deposits  were  heard 
falling,  fresh  signals  were  made  for  lights,  and  the  table  was  found  literally 
piled  up  with  lovely  hothouse  flowers,  arranged  with  exquisite  taste  mto 
divers  fanciful  groups. 

The  author  on  one  occasion,  in  a  locked  room,  too  thoroughly  searched 
to  admit  of  the  concealment  of  a  single  article  however  small,  was  pre- 
sented, at  her  own  request,  with  a  live  pigeon,  which  fluttered  down  upon 
her  lap,  almost  as  soon  as  asked  for.  The  bird  being  released,  and  flowers 
asked  for,  when  the  signal  was  given  for  lights,  an  immense  pyramid  of 
flowers  was  found  tastefully  built  up  around  a  pot  of  tulips.  The  lights — 
at  the  request  of  the  Spirits—  being  again  put  out,  the  flowers,  including 
immense  branches  of  ferns,  were  so  completely  hidden  or  removed  from  the 
room,  that  though  the  one  door  was  locked,  and  the  key  in  the  pocket  of 
one  of  the  company,  the  strictest  search  failed  to  reveal  a  single  leaf.  All 
that  was  left  was  the  pot  of  tulips,  on  which  was  found  a  paper  with  very 
small  writing,  presenting  the  tulips  as  a  gift  to  the  author,  "  from  the 
Spirits." 

One  of  the  most  curious  narratives  in  connection  with  this  lady's 
Mediumship,  is  given  in  the  following  account,  which  was  published  as  the 
statement  of  a  seance,  in  which  a  gentleman  present  was  suddenly, 
mysteriously,  and  unconsciously  transferred  from  the  locked  circle  room 
of  Mr.  Guppy's  house,  to  the  locked  and  closed  premises  of  a  friend  of 
his,  two  miles  distant.  Quite  twenty  reliable  witnesses  at  the  two  ends 
of  the  line,  signed  their  names  to  an  attestation,  one  party  declaring  the 
gentleman  was  in  their  midst  at  nine  o'clock  p.m.  in  a  locked  room,  the 
key  of  the  only  door  being  in  the  pocket  of  one  of  the  company,  and  the 
other  party  witnessing  that  the  same  gentleman  suddenly  made  his  appear- 
ance, at  nine  o'clock  also,  in  a  yard,  locked,  shut  up,  and  enclosed  on  every 
side  against  the  possibility  of  entrance,  except  by  the  locked  and  barred 
gate  \  also,  that  on  that  night,  zvhen  the  rain  was  pouring,  and  the  streets 
were  covered  with  mud,  this  transfer  of  a  human  being,  through  two  miles 
of  space,  was  made,  without  leaving  one  trace  of  dampness  or  mud  upon 
his  clothing. 

The  names  of  the  twenty  witnesses  are  those  of  well-known  and  respecta- 
ble persons,  but  as  the  gentleman  himself  would  not  allow  his  name  to  be 
published  in  connection  with  the  circumstance,  we  simply  allude  to  it,  with- 
out ranging  it  in  the  category  of  the  narratives  given-  in  this  volume ;  indeed 
we  only  reprint  thus  much  of  the  details  because  the  account  which  was 
sent  to  several  London  papers  for  publication,  was  prefaced  by  a  concise 

1 62  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

summary  of  a  similar  event  occurring  in  the  experience  of  Mrs.  Guppy,  of 
which  the  most  exaggerated  accounts  have  been  put  in  circulation. 

The  following  brief  statement  has  been  pronounced  to  be  so  reHable  and 
accurate  by  all  parties  concerned,  that  we  deem  it  in  order  to  republish  it. 
It  must  be  understood,  that  it  was  printed  in  connection  with  the  narrative 
ofthe  gentleman  before  alluded  to,  in  the  New  York  Sun,  from  which  we 
give  the  following  extract : — 

"  Before  entering  upon  particulars,  it  is  desirable  to  advert  to  a  somewhat  similar 
circumstauce  that  took  place  on  June  3rd,  1871,  upon  which  occasion  Mrs.  Guppy,  the 
famous  medium,  was  conveyed  instantaneously  from  her  breakfast  parlour  at  Highbury 
(where  she  was  engaged  making  up  her  housekeeping  accounts)  to  a  locked  room  at  61, 
Lamb's  Conduit  Street,  where  she  was  suddenly  found  in  a  state  of  trance  or  unconscious- 
ness, upon  a  table  around  which  ten  persons  were  sitting  for  the  investigation  of  alleged 
spiritual  phenomena,  in  the  presence  of  Messrs.  Heme  and  Williams,  the  widely  known 
professional  mediums.  A  minute  and  circumstantial  report  of  this  event  appeared  in  the 
current  spiritual  journals,  as  well  as  in  several  newspapers,  attesting,  not  only  her  unex- 
pected arrival,  but  also  the  fact,  amongst  many  others,  that  she  held  in  her  hand  her 
housekeeping  book  and  pen  with  the  ink  still  liquid— such  report  being  signed  by  all 
present  at  the  seance  in  question — viz.,  N.  Hagger,  46,  Moorgate  Street ;  Caroline  Edmiston, 
Beckenham  ;  C.  E.  Edwards,  Kilburn  Square,  Kilburn  ;  Henry  Morris,  Mount  Trafford, 
Eccles,  near  Manchester  ;  Elizabeth  Guppy,  1,  Morland  Villas,  Highbury  Hill  Park,  N.  ; 
Ernest  Edwards,  Kilburn  Square,  Kilburn  ;  Henry  CUfford  Smith,  38,  Ennis  Road,  Stroud 
Green  ;  H.  B.  Husk,  26,  Sandwich  Street,  W.C.  ;  Charles  E.  Williams,  61,  Lamb's  Conduit 
Street ;  W.C. ;  F.  Heme,  61,  Lamb's  Conduit  Street,  W.C.  ;  W.  H.  Harrison,  Wilmm 
Villa,  Chaucer  Road,  S.E.  Three  members  of  this  party  (as  a  deputation),  to  fully  test 
the  circumstance  and  to  prevent  collusion,  escorted  Mrs.  Guppy  home,  and  took  the 
testimony  of  Mr.  Guppy  and  Miss  Neyland  to  the  fact  of  Mrs.  Guppy's  presence  in  her 
home  at  Highbury,  immediately  preceding  her  appearance  at  Lamb's  Conduit  Street." 

In  this  case  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  Mr.  Guppy — a  gentleman  of 
unquestionable  probity — his  housekeeper,  and  Mrs.  'Guppy's  maid,  testified 
to  her  presence  in  her  house  at  Highbury  about  half-past  eight  in  the 
evening,  and  at  or  about  the  same  time,  ten  persons  sitting  in  a  third  floor 
room,  locked  and  bolted,  in  Lamb's  Conduit  Street,  a  distance  of  at  least 
four  miles,  holding  a  dark  circle,  with  the  window  closed,  the  one  door 
locked,  and  the  key  in  the  pocket  of  one  of  the  sitters,  hearing  a  sudden 
noise  on  the  table — struck  a  light,  and  found  Mrs.  Guppy  in  a  state  of 
partial  consciousness,  arrayed  in  a  loose  morning  gown,  housekeeping  book 
in  hand,  sitting  in  their  midst,  on  the  table. 

Let  it  be  noted  also,  that  the  whole  of  the  witnesses  were  credible, 
respectable  persons,  and  though  their  testimony  was  received  with  the  fool's 
argument  of  ridicule,  and  bald  denial,  it  was  o'f  a  reliable  character,  and 
from  persons  whose  witness  thus  given,  would  have  been  received  in  any 
court  of  judicature  as  undeniable. 

The  next  and  last  account  we  can  give  of  Mrs.  Guppy's  Mediumship  is 
one  published  by  Miss  Houghton  in  her  "Record  of  Spirit  Seances,"  and 
confirms  numbers  of  other  and  similar  statements  made  by  Professors 
Wallace,  Varley,  Serjeant  Cox,  the  late  King  Victor  Emanuel  of  Italy, 
General  Garibaldi,  Prince  George  of  Solms,  Mr.  R.  D.  Owen,  and 
numerous  other  notables  for  whom  Mrs.  Guppy  often  sat,  and  who  have 
freely  testified  to  manifestations  occurring  in  their  presence  of  exactly  the 
same  character  as  the  following  extract  from  Miss  Houghton's  book : — 

"  In  October,  1868,  a  seance  was  held,  at  which  eighteen  persons  were  present.  Miss 
Nichol  being  the  chief  medium.  Each  of  the  sitters  vrished  for  fruit,  the  wish  being  in 
every  instance  granted.  The  following  were  brought  and  dropped  on  the  table  around 
which  the  company  sat :  A  banana,  two  oranges,  a  bunch  of  white  grapes,  a  bunch  of  black 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  163 

grapes,  a  cluster  of  filberts,  three  walnuts,  a  dozen  damsons,  a  slice  of  candied  pine  apple, 
three  figs,  two  apples,  some  almonds,  dates,  pears,  a  pomegranate,  two  greengages,  a  pUe 
of  currants,  a  lemon,  a  bunch  of  raisins,  which,  as  well  as  the  figs  and  dates,  were  quite 
plump,  as  if  they  had  never  been  packed,  but  brought  direct  from  the  drying  ground. 
While  the  wishing  was  in  progress  a  lady  said,  '  Why  does  not  some  one  wish  for 
vegetables,  such  as  a  potato  or  an  onion  ? '  and  even  while  she  was  speaking  a  potato 
and  an  onion  fell  into  her  lap." 

In  recalling  the  phenomenal  personages  who  between  the  years  i860  and 
1880  have  contributed  most  liberally  to  the  diffusion  of  Spiritual  light  and 
knowledge,  it  would  be  ungenerous  to  omit  a  notice  of  Mr.  David  Duguid, 
of  Glasgow,  a  young  man  occupying  the  humble  position  of  an  industrious 
mechanic,  and  one  whose  limited  means  of  education  entirely  precluded  the 
expectation  of  an  exhibition  of  his  powers  in  the  direction  of  the  fine  arts. 
The  following  account  however,  furnished  to  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine 
by  Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman,  one  of  the  most  persevering  as  well  as  dis- 
interested observers  of  Spiritual  phenomena,  will  give  a  fair  illustration  of 
the  modes  by  which  Spirit  influence  can  evolve  latent  faculties  and  cultivate 
unknown  germs  of  talent,  even  from  the  most  unpromising  sources. 

In  the  Spiritual  Magazine  of  June,  1866,  Mr.  Coleman  writes  : — 

"  There  are  several  other  mediums  in  Glasgow,  one  among  them,  Mr.  David  Duguid, 
a  working  cabinet-maker,  is  likely  to  be  distinguished  as  a  drawing  medium;  One  very 
remarkable  and  interesting  fact  connected  with  this  young  man  it  is  my  purpose  to 
relate,  which  I  do  upon  the  authority  of  Mr.  H.  Nisbet  and  Mr.  James  Nicholson,  vrith 
whom  I  had  the  pleasure  of  becoming  acquainted  whilst  in  Glasgow. 

"  After  David  had  been  recognised  as  a  medium  for  the  ordinary  manifestations,  he 
developed  as  a  drawing  medium,  but  made  little  progress  at  first  without  the  aid  of  a 
young  lady  who  formed  one  of  the  circle.  When  she  placed  her  hand  on  the  back  of  his, 
it  would  move  with  great  facility,  and  at  this  stage  his  left  hand  only  was  used. 

"  At  the  third  sitting  David  became  entranced  vdth  his  eyes  shut  before  commencing 
to  draw.  At  each  succeeding  seance  his  powers  increased  as  the  trance  condition  became 
more  intense,  and  his  eyes  more  firmly  closed. 

."  The  objects  usually  drawn  at  first  were  human  heads  and  flowers ;  but,  when  a 
certain  proficiency  was  obtained,  flowers,  fruits,  and  a  rough  landscape  were  done  in 
colours,  the  pencils  and  brushes  being  now  taken  in  his  right  hand. 

"At  the  fifth  sitting,  a  remarkable  painting  in  water-colours  was  commenced  and 
finished,  representing  the  entrance  to  an  arcade,  the  archway  being  surmounted  by  the 
figure  of  Justice,  standing  upon  a  globe,  around  which  a  serpent  is  coiled,  with  the 
figures  on  either  side  of  Hope  and  Charity.  These  figures  are  very  masterly  in  concep- 
tion. The  interior  of  the  arcade  is  panelled  with  niches,  in  which  figures  and  vases  of 
flowers  are  placed.  The  floor  is  carpeted,  and  at  the  extreme  end  there  is  a  rotunda,  in 
the  centre  of  which  a  cross  is  placed.  The  picture  is  a  transparency,  and,  when  held  up 
to  the  light  the  cross  dissolves  into  a  throne,  upon  which  a  figure  is  seated  with  a  halo  of 
glory  surrounding  the  head,  supported  by  twelve  figures,  six  on  each  side.  Those  present 
were  anxious  to  hno^o  the  name  of  the  artist,  hut  he  declined  fw  the  present  to  satisfy  them, 
giving  as  a  reason  that  he  would  ultimately  give  them  the  means  of  establishing  his  identity. 
Subsequently,  they  were  told  that  he  was  an  artist  of  celebrity,  who  had  lived  in  the 
seventeenth  century  ;  that  he  was  born  in  1635,  and  died  in  1681 ;  and  that  he  was  con- 
temporary with  Steen,  the  celebrated  Dutch  painter  ;  that  he  had  not  been  accustomed 
to  paint  figures,  but  that  his  delight  had  been  to  represent  Nature,  and  that  he  would 
attempt  at  their  next  sitting  a  sketch  of  one  of  his  paintings — his  masterpiece. 

"  Accordingly,  on  the  evening  of  the  18th  of  April  the  promised  sketch  was  pencilled 
out,  and  on  the  21st  it  was  finished  in  water-colours,  in  the  short  period  of  four  hours, 
and  in  the  left  hand  corner  the  initials  "J.  R"  were  placed.  This  painting  is  considered 
a  very  able  production. 

"  Up  to  this  time,  none  of  the  party  had  the  least  idea  of  the  name  of  the  spirit-artist, 
and  their  curiosity  was  unsatisfied  until  Mr.  Logan  brought  an  artist  friend  to  see  the 
picture,  who  was  much  struck  with  it,  and  said  he  was  sure  he  had  seen  the  painting 
somewhere,  though  he  could  not  at  the  moment  name  the  painter. 

"  A  day  or  two  after,  Mr.  Logan's  friend  informed  him  that  he  had  made  the  desired 
discovery,  and  showed  Mr.  Logan  a  volume  of  Cassell's  Art  Treasures'  Exhibition,  where, 

1 64  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

at  page  301,  there  is  an  engraving,  nearly /ac  simile  of  the  spirit  drawing,  from  a  painting 
of  '  The  Waterfalls,'  by  Jacob  Ruysdael,  acknowledged  to  be  his  chef  d'ceuvre. 

"  This  circumstance  was  communicated  to  the  persons  forming  the  circle  ;  but  they 
determined  to  keep  the  medium  in  ignorance  of  the  fact,  being  satisfied  that  in  his 
normal  condition  he  knew  nothing  of  it. 

"  At  the  next  sitting,  on  the  28th  April,  David  became  deeply  entranced,  and  after 
the  usual  short  conversation  between  him  and  the  spirit-ai-tist,  the  latter  spoke  through 
the  medium,  and  informed  the  company  that  he  was  aware  of  the  discovery  they  had 
made  'that  his  name  was  Ruysdael.'  They  then  placed  before  the  medium  Cassell's 
volume,  which  also  contains  a  portrait  of  the  painter,  and  invited  the  spirit's  inspection 
of  it.  The  spirit  remarked  that  the  engraving  of  the  picture  was  a  good  coiDy,  and  the 
likeness  tolerable  when  at  the  age  of  thirty.  They  then  pointed  the  spirit's  attention  to 
the  absence  of  figures  in  the  new  drawing  which  were  in  the  original.  The  spirit 
replied,  '  That  the  figures  in  his  paintings  were  not  by  himself,  but  were  put  in  by  an 
artist  friend  ! '  which,  upon  reference  to  a  biography  of  Ruysdael,  they  found  to  be 
correct. 

"  It  remains  to  be  stated  that  Mr.  David  Duguid,  the  medium,  has  no  knowledge 
whatever  of  drawing,  and  that  he  is,  as  I  have  already  said,  a  plain  working  man  ;  that 
the  drawing  was  executed  in  the  presence  of  several  persons,  including  those  I  have 
named,  in  four  hours,  whilst  the  medium's  eyes  were  fast  closed  ;  and,  further  to  satisfy 
the  scepticism  of  some  of  those  present,  there  was  a  bandage  put  over  them  during  part 
of  the  time.  The  medium  declares  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  existence  of 
Ruysdael' s  picture,  nor  that  such  an  artist  had  ever  lived,  and  there  is  no  reason  to 
doubt  his  asseverations." 

For  the  satisfaction  of  those  who  deem  that  the  inipelUng  motive  with 
humanity  in  general,  and  Spirit  Mediums  in  particular,  is  "  the  greed  of 
gain,"  and  the  desire  "  to  make  capital "  out  of  the  world's  interest  in 
Spiritual  phenomena,  we  must  here  state,  that  David  Duguid,  although 
pursuing  steadily  the  cultivation  of  his  mediumship  for  many  years — up  to 
the  time  indeed  of  this  present  writing — has  never  done  so  professionally, 
but  still  lives  by  his  mechanical  labours,  following  out  his  simple  unosten- 
tatious career,  producing  in  the  brief  leisure  hours  he  can  afford  to  give  to 
his  mediumship,  hundreds  of  paintings,  drawings,  and  sketches,  some  of 
rare  merit  and  others  more  indifferently  executed,  but  all  without  the  slightest 
attempt  to  convert  his  extraordinary  gift  to  the  same  means  of  compensa- 
tion, which  would  be  freely  accorded  to  any  other  form  of  artistic  production. 

We  shall  conclude  this  brief  notice  of  our  excellent  and  self-sacrificing 
Medium's  career,  with  the  following  short  excerpt,  the  nature  of  which  speaks 
for  itself.  It  is  taken  from  T/te  North  British  Daily  Mail  (Glasgow)  of 
March,  1870,  and  reads  thus  : — 

"  So  much  has  been  said  and  done  lately  regarding  'the  exposure  of  Spiritualism,'  that  a 
few  notes  may  be  of  interest  as  to  what  the  writer  witnessed  the  other  night  at  a  private 
stance  given  by  Mr.  David  Duguid.  This  gentleman  was  comparatively  unknown  untU 
publicly  challenged  by  Mr.  Bishop  during  his  recent  'exposure  of  Spiritualism.'  Mr. 
Duguid  has  never  courted  publicity,  but  at  the  same  time  he  has  always  been  very  willing 
to  give  every  information  regarding  his  manifestations.  The  seance  took  place  in  his 
parlour,  and  was  attended  by  ten  gentlemen,  five  of  whom  were  rank  heretics  regarding 
all  Spii'itualistic  phenomena.  Immediately  on  Mr.  Duguid  taking  his  seat  at  a  small 
table  he  went  into  a  trance  condition,  his  eyes  closing  and  a  smile  playing  on  his  counte- 
nance. A  piece  of  cardboard,  about  six  inches  by  nine  inches,  which  had  been  previously 
examined  by  the  company,  was  then  handed  to  him.  After  breathing  on  it  Mr.  Duguid 
made  a  rough  pencil  sketch,  and  then  picking  up  his  palette  and  brushes  commenced  to 
paint  a  landscape  with  his  eyes  firmly  sealed.  To  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  a  hand- 
kerchief was  firmly  bound  across  his  eyes,  but  he  did  not  appear  to  be  the  least  incon- 
venienced by  this  arrangement,  and  painted  away  quite  briskly,  first  rubbing  in  the  sky, 
and  then  the  faint  outline  of  the  distant  mountains  ;  and  finally  boldly  dashing  in  the 
foreground  with  a  few  vigorous  strokes.  At  the  suggestion  of  a  gentleman  present  the 
light  was  put  out,  but  this  made  no  difference,  the  action  of  the  brushes  being  quite 
audible  in  the  darkness.  After  the  expiry  of  half  an  hour  the  sketch  was  complete,  and 
was  a  most  remarkable  picture  to  be  produced  under  such  peculiar  conditions.     What  in 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  165 

Spiritualistic  circles  is  called  a  '  direct  drawing '  was  then  attempted.  A  common  card, 
coated  with  iodine,  was  placed  on  the  table  before  Mr.  Duguid,  whose  hands  and  feet 
were  firmly  secured  with  silk  handkerchiefs.  The  gas  was  turned  oif,  and  the  company, 
joining  hands,  sang  the  100th  Psalm.  After  the  lapse  of  about  five  minutes  a  rap  was 
heard  on  the  table,  and  on  the  gas  being  lit  Mr.  Duguid  was  found  sitting  as  firmly  bound 
as  before,  and  on  turning  up  the  card  on  the  table,  a  nice  little  miniature  landscape  was 
observed,  the  colours  being  quite  wet  and  newly  painted.  Without  attempting  to  give 
an  opinion  or  explain  how  such  manifestations  could  be  accomplished,  we  simply  narrate 
the  circumstances  of  the  seance  as  they  occurred." 

Besides  the  remarkably-endowed  Mediums  above  mentioned,  a  large 
number  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  moving  in  various  distinguished  circles  of 
Great  Britain  have  manifested  extraordinary  spiritual  gifts  and  exercised 
them  freely,  in  a  non-professional  way,  for  the  beneiit  of  their  friends  and 
acquaintances.  Medium  power  indeed  has  been  exhibited  in  every  class  of 
society  throughout  the  United  Kingdom,  and  for  some  years  it  would  have 
been  impossible  to  visit  any  town  or  hamlet,  without  discovering  way-marks 
of  Spiritual  power  in  the  form  of  healings,  trance  speaking.  Spirit  drawing, 
writing,  seership,  or  physical  force  manifestations. 

Besides  the  large  number  of  private  Mediums,  of  whose  gifts  we  are  not 
privileged  to  speak,  except  in  these  general  terms,  there  are  a  great  many 
excellent  and  disinterested  labourers  in  the  Spiritual  vineyard,  who  give 
their  services  to  the  public  in  the  capacity  of  clairvoyants,  and  trance 
speakers.  Very  few  of  these  persons  will  receive  compensation  for  their 
services,  and  many  of  them — especially  in  the  North  of  England — voluntarily 
travel  from  place  to  place  each  Sabbath  day,  incurring  a  vast  amount  of 
fatigue  and  freely  bestowing  time  and  service,  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
seminating the  glad  tidings  of  Spiritualism,  to  all  who  will  come  to  hear 
them.  Throughout  the  large  and  thickly-populated  districts  of  Yorkshire, 
Lancashire,  Durham,  and  Northumberland,  scores  of  these  self-sacrificing 
missionaries  may  be  found.  Many  of  them  are  miners,  pit  men,  weavers 
and  factory  hands,  who,  notwithstanding  the  unceasing  toils  of  the  week, 
cheerfully  devote  themselves  to  the  duties  of  the  Spiritual  rostrum  on  the 
Sunday;  and  though  they  are  simply  "children  of  the  people,"  and  wholly 
untrained  to  such  work,  their  rude  natural  eloquence,  heightened  by  the 
afflatus  of  the  spirit  intelligences  that  speak  through  their  lips,  produces 
a  much  deeper  influence  upon  audiences  of  their  own  class,  than  the 
metaphysical  arguments  of  more  polished  speakers  could  do.  The  very 
fact  too,  that  wholly  uneducated  men  and  women  can  give  correct  diagnoses 
of  disease,  make  cures  that  the  medical  faculty  could  never  succeed  in,  and 
pour  forth  moving  strains  of  exalted  eloquence,  far  in  advance  of  their 
normal  capacity,  clearly  proves  the  control  of  some  outside  power,  and 
brings  conviction  to  many  minds,  that  could  not  be  reached  by  all  the 
subtle  logic  of  well-trained  orators. 

We  are  not  pleading  in  this  category  either  for  the  expediency  of  non- 
professional Mediumship,  or  advising  the  exercise  of  inspirational  powers 
upon  the  public  rostrum,  which  are  liable  to  be  marred  in  transmission 
through  ilhterate  channels,  but  in  reporting  the  status  of  SpirituaUsm  as  it 
really  exists,  we  should  omit  one  of  the  most  important  factors  in  Spiritual 
progress  amongst  the  rank  and  file  of  society,  if  we  failed  to  render  justice 
to  the  self-devoted  labourers  who  throughout  England,  but  especially  in  the 
North,  have  for  years  rendered  invaluable  services  as  healers  and  speakers, 
with  few  to  thank,  and  none  to  compensate  them,  save  the  consciousness  of 
the  good  they  have  performed,  and  the  approbation  of  the  angels  whose 
servants  they  are.      If  any  readers  are  curious  to  learn  who  these  self- 

1 66  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

sacrificing  individuals  are,  let  them  turn  to  the  plan  of  speakers  for  the 
Yorkshire  districts  as  advertised  in  the  Medium  and  Daybreak,  the 
reports  from  the  Lancashire,  Durham,  and  Northumberland  towns  and 
mining  districts,  together  with  a  few  reports  from  the  South  and  West,  and 
they  will  there  find  a  list  of  humble  names  recorded,  whose  place  will 
surely  be  found,  in  the  day  when  the  Master  of  Life  "  numbers  up  his 
jewels." 

Before  quitting  the  subject  of  non-professional  Mediumship  in  England, 
we  must  call  attention  to  the  inestimable  services  rendered  in  higher  and 
more  influential  grades  of  society  than  those  above  named — in  fact,  amongst 
the  most  distinguished  and  aristocratic  circles  of  the  metropolis— by  Mrs. 
Everitt,  a  lady  of  independent  position  now  residing  at  Hendon,  formerly 
of  Islington,  London.  Mrs.  Everitt's  Mediumship  has  been  distinguished 
by  the  variety  and  intellectual  character,  no  less  than  the  force  of  the 
manifestations  given  in  her  presence.  Besides  loud  rappings  and  the 
movement  of  heavy  bodies  which  have  been  brought  through  closed  doors 
and  carried  hither  and  thither  in  broad  light,  often  without  Jmman  contact, 
Mrs.  Everitt  is  a  remarkable  Medium  for  the  production  of  the  direct  Spirit 
voice,  and  writings  executed  in  the  most  minute  form  of  caligraphy,  in  an 
almost  incredibly  short  period  of  time.  The  illustration  (given  on  another 
page)  of  these  spirit  writings,  purported  to  come  from  Dr.  Burns,  a  clergy- 
man of  London,  and  one  eminent  alike  for  his  noble  character,  his 
eloquence  as  a  preacher,  and  the  fearless  candour  with  which  he  avowed 
his  belief  in  Spirit  communion.  Dr.  Burns  granted  the  use  of  his  Church 
to  Dr.  Newton  for  the  purpose  of  practising  therein  his  marvellous  gift  of 
healing.  He  attended  several  of  Mrs.  Everitt's  circles  ;  publicly  expressed 
his  entire  belief  in  their  supra-mundane  character,  a.nd  after  passing  into 
spirit  life,  returned  to  those  circles,  to  add  his  testimony  as  a  spirit,  to  that 
which  he  had  borne  on  earth  as  a  mortal.  The  writing,  of  which  a  facsimile 
is  given,  was  produced  in  nine  seconds  upon  a  piece  of  marked  paper — in 
the  presence  of  some  ten  witnesses — honoured  guests  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Everitt. 

Mr.  Everitt  has  in  his  possession  hundreds  of  similar  writings — most  of 
them  produced  under  the  most  crucial  test  conditions.  The  writing  here 
exemplified  was  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  one  well  known  to  the  parties 
present,  and  is  of  a  thoroughly  characteristic  style. 

Sometimes  the  house  in  which  the  seances  were  in  session  has  been 
shaken  as  in  an  earthquake.  On  other  occasions  the  circle  room  has  been 
filled  with  delicious  perfumes  or  strong  currents  of  air. 

The  intelligence  rendered  by  the  direct  writings,  no  less  than  the  Spirit 
voices  conversing  with  the  company,  is  for  the  most  part  of  a  religious  or 
moral  character.  The  writings  have  not  unfrequently  been  given  in  Greek, 
Latin,  and  Oriental  languages,  all  of  which  are  totally  unknown  to  Mrs. 
Everitt.  As  an  example  of  the  preternatural  mode  in  which  these  writings 
are  produced,  the  following  incident  may  be  narrated.  At  a  seance  held  in 
a  semi-darkened  drawing-room,  with  closed  doors,  and  a  company  of  some 
twenty  persons  assembled,  a  very  large  and  splendidly  illustrated  book 
with  paper  covers,  suddenly  fluttered  down  from  the  ceiling  and  dropped 
in  view  of  all  present  on  the  table  in  their  midst. 

The  book  had  been  kept  for  many  previous  months  in  a  locked  drawer, 
in  a  room  above  that  wherein  it  now  appeared,  and  no  human  being  at  that 
time,  could  have  had  access  to  the  place  from  which  it  was  taken. 

This  book  was  passed  round  amongst  the  company,  of  whom  the  author 
was  one,  and  the  illustrations  being  very  fine,  it  was  examined  with  so  much 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  167 

attention  by  all  parties  present,  that  not  a  leaf  coald  have  escaped  observa- 
tion. Whilst  the  visitors  were  commenting  on  the  astonishing  though  by  no 
means  unprecedented  manner  in  which  this  manifestation  had  occurred, 
the  Spirits  spelled  out  by  rappings  the  request  that  the  lights  should  be 
put  out.  This  was  prompdy  done^  but  in  less  than  twenty  seconds  another 
well-known  signal  was  given  for  the  restoration  of  the  lights.  Deeming 
that  Some  preliminary  had  been  forgotten  which  the  Spirits  wished  attended 
to,  the  chandelier  was  hurriedly  relighted,  when  it  was  found  that  the 
margins  of  two  leaves,  at  the  place  where  the  book  was  lying  open,  were 
covered  with  very  fine  pencilled  writing.  On  further  examination,  it 
appeared  that  over  twenty  of  the  leaves  were  similarly  marked,  thus  making 
in  all,  nearly  three  hundred  words  inscribed  upon  paper,  that,  sixteen  seconds 
previously,  had  been  proved  to  be  entirely  blank. 

It  must  be  added,  that  although  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Everitt's  position  in  the 
social  scale  placed  them^  on  an  equality  with  all  their  guests,  this  excellent 
lady  has  ever  cheerfully  submitted  to  the  most  exigeant  demand  for  tests, 
and  furnished  opportunities  for  thorough  and  searching  investigation  as 
gracefully,  as  if  she  had  been  a  professional  medium,  or  had  not  been  in 
her  own  estimable  character  beyond  all  possibility  of  doubt  or  suspicion. 
For  many  years  she  devoted  her  varied  gifts  to  the  service  of  her 
friends,  and  such  guests  as  could  obtain  an  introduction  to  her  delightful 
seances.  Here  the  noble,  the  scientific,  and  the  learned,  no  less  than  the 
plain,  untitled  citizen,  were  freely  welcomed,  and  ever  hospitably  enter- 
tained by  the  master  and  mistress  of  the  mansion,  and  the  author  is  in  a 
position  to  affirm,  that  thousands  of  persons  in  this  generation,  owe  their 
assurances  of  immortality,  and  their  happiest  hours  of  pure  communion 
with  blessed  ascended  ones,  to  the  inimitable  gifts  of  Mrs.  Everitt,  and  the 
genial  hospitality  of  her  noble  husband. 

Mrs.  Everitt  was  also  a  seeress,  and  could  readily  receive  impressions  by 
mental  telegraphy,  from  her  friends. 

The  author  has  often  exchanged  messages  with  this  lady,  when  separated 
by  miles  of  distance,  such  messages  being  invariably  found  subsequently  to 
be  correct.  In  Mr.  Everitt,  the  cause  of  Spirituafism  has  found  an  equally 
indefatigable  and  able  champion,  Mr.  Everitt's  eloquent  expositions  of 
Spiritualism  upon  every  available  opportunity  having  attracted  large 
audiences,  and  respectful  consideration,  whenever  presented. 

If  we  speak  somewhat  in  the  past  tense  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Everitt,  it  is  not 
because  their  devotion  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  has  waned,  or  the  lady's 
Spiritual  gifts  have  failed,  but  in  the  retirement  of  the  family  from  the  busy 
metropolis  to  the  seclusion  of  a  suburban  residence,  the  opportunides  for 
the  exercise  of  Mediumship  to  all  comers,  have  necessarily  become  very 
infrequent,  and  it  is  now  only  in  the  family  circle  and  its  immediate  visitors, 
that  Mrs.  Everitt's  charming  phases  of  mediumship  can  be  witnessed. 

We  shall  now  direct  the  reader's  attention  to  another  wonderful  display 
of  Sibylline  power  manifested  in  the  family  of  Mr.  Bertolacci,  a  gentleman 
too  well  known  and  esteemed  by  his  wide  circle  of  friends,  to  incur  the 
slightest  shadow  of  suspicion,  either  in  respect  to  the  disinterestedness  of 
his  motives,  or  the  truth  of  his  statements.  As  Mr.  Bertolacci  was  very 
free  in  placing  the  Mediumistic  power  of  his  family  at  the  service  of 
numerous  credible  witnesses,  his  testimony  is  susceptible  of  full  verification 
in  every  particular. 

After  eleven  years  of  astounding  and  continuous  demonstrations  of  Spirit 
power,   Mr.    Bertolacci  • —  at  the   instance   of  his   friends   and   numerous 

1 68  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

interested  witnesses,  —  consented  to  embody  his  experiences  in  a  small 
volume,  which — in  deference  to  his  devoted  adherence  to  the  tenets  of  the 
Christian  religion,  or,  it  may  be  assumed,  as  a  line  of  demarcation  between 
himself  and  less  orthodox  believers  in  Spirit  communion — he  entitled  as 
follows  : — Christian  Spiritualism :  Wherein  is  sheivn  the  Extension  of  the 
Human  Faculties  by  the  Application  of  Modern  Spiritual  Phenomena, 
according  to  the  Doctrine  of  Christ.  By  William  Robert  Bertolacci. — 
Pubhshed  by  Emily  Faithfull. 

The  following  extracts  are  taken  from  a  fine  analytical  review  of  Mr. 
Bertolacci's  work  by  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter,  the  learned  author  of  "  The  Two 
Worlds,"  editor  of  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  &c,,  &c.  Mr.  Shorter 
introduces  his  subject  in  these  words : — 

"  The  experiences  of  M.  Bertolacci  extend  over  a  period  of  eleven  years,  and  this  little 
volume  must  be  regarded  as  only  a  synopsis  or  sample  rather  than  a  complete  and  elaborate 
history  of  them.  Previously  thereto,  M.  Bertolacci  was,  he  informs  us,  a  'complete  dis- 
believer in  all  miracles,'  and  he  adopted  the  popular  talk  of  'laws  of  nature,"  'priest- 
craft,' and  'weak-minded  credulity,'  as  aU-sufficient  to  explain  them.  Under  the 
influence  of  these  derided  manifestations  this  unhappy  attribute  and  tone  of  mind  has 
become  changed  to  one  of  earnest  and  devout  Christian  assurance,  as  this  book  sufficiently 
evinces.     But  to  come  to  the  facts.     M.  Bertolacci  says  : — 

" '  "We  have  produced  most  of  the  manifestations  witnessed  in  other  circles,  such  as 
table-turnings,  and  tiltings,  raps  and  many  sorts  of  sounds  in  different  parts  of  the  house. 
Tables  and  other  objects  have  been  raised  from  the  ground  without  contact ;  and  have, 
when  in  the  air,  resisted  the  efforts  of  a  strong  man  to  force  them  down  again.  Tables 
have  been  made  to  adhere  so  fixedly  to  the  ground  as  to  resist  every  endeavour  to  raise 
them  ;  and  in  more  than  one  instance,  when  five  or  six  persons  have  combined  their  whole 
strength,  the  wooden  top,  fixed  on  with  strong  screws,  has  been  wrenched  completely  off, 
while  the  light  framework  and  legs  have  remained  adhering  to  the  ground  ;  whereas  these, 
immediately  after,  have  risen  quietly  up  into  the  air  without  being  touched  on  being  told 
to  do  so.     Clocks  have  passed  the  hour  without  striking  it  on  being  told  not  to  do  so.     . 

'"In  one  circumstance,  we  obtained  direct  writing  by  placing  a  clean  sheet  of  paper  in 
a  drawer  overnight,  the  drawer  and  room  being  locked  and  secured,  so  that  no  one  could 
obtain  access  to  them.  The  next  morning,  was  found  written  on  the  paper,  as  had  been 
foretold  through  the  planchette,  "  Christ  soil  avec  vous,"  "  Christ  be  with  you.' "' 

"  The  raps  on  the  table  being  too  slow  a  process  for  communicating  information,  the 
use  of  the  planchette  had  been  indicated. 

"By  means  of  the  planchette  the  author, has  thus  obtained  some  1,200  or  1,400 
pages  of  manuscript  in  English  and  French, *^ncluding  a  work  of  500  or  600  pages, 
explanatory  of  phenomena  of  which  these  writings  form  a  part. 

"  The  seances  have  not  been  confined  toi«j|hysical  manifestations,  such  as  have  been 
already  named,  nor  has  the  attendance  at'  them  been  limited  to  M.  Bertolacci  and  his 
family  ;  intimate  friends  were  at  first  ad^nitted,  and  these  introduced  others,  and  the- 
attendance  so  increased  that  after  a  short  time  it  became  requisite  to  appoint  reception 
days,  and  on  these  occasions  to  hold  both  morning  and  evening  meetings.  These  witnesses 
are,  therefore,  additional  evidence  to  the  facts  certified  by  M.  Bertolacci. 

"  The  proceedings  of  the  stances  were  regulated  by  the  planchette  writing  ;  and  we 
learn  that — 

" '  If  among  those  present  any  one  was  ailing,  or  in  a  state  of  ill-health,  they  were 
generally  singled  out,  and  desired  to  come  to  the  table.  When  there,  they  would  often  be 
told  what  their  sufferings  were,  how  long  they  had  been  ill,  &c.,  although  no  previous 
mention  had  been  made  of  the  subject,  and  while  under  the  surprise  which  these  unex- 
pected communications  generally  created,  they  would  be  told  that  if  they  had  faith  in 
Christ  they  should  be  cured,  which  was,  in  several  instances,  realized  immediately. 

"  '  At  other  times,  the  seance  would  begin  by  first  one  person  and  then  another  being 
selected  among  the  company,  and  each  in  their  turn  being  conversed  with  by  means  of  the 
planchette-writing.  Then,  to  the  astonishment  of  many  present,  persons  appearing 
amongst  us  for  the  first  time  would  be  called  by  their  Christian  names,  and  others  by 
their  famihar  nicknames,  telling  them  their  peculiarities  of  disposition,  their  favourite 
pursuits,  and  their  thoughts  at  the  very  moment.  It  has  constantly  occurred  that  at  the 
very  time  this  was  going  on,  the  table  on  which  the  planchette  was  writing  would  be  seen 
to  rise  into  the  air,  all  its  four  legs  being  a  foot  or  more  from  the  ground.'     .     .     , 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  169 

"  Contagious  maladies,  and  even  the  action  of  poison,  have  been  arrested,  and  organic 
disease  successfully  treated.     The  following  is  an  instance  : — 

" '  At  one  of  our  receptions,  a  Madame  G a,  of   Pontoise,  was,  by  appointment, 

introduced  by  mutual  friends.     The  assembly  was  very  numerous — some  twenty  persons 

being  present.     Madame  G a  had,  for  eleven  months  previous,  lost  the  use  of  her  legs 

from  a  paralysis  which  extended  from  her  waist  downwards,  resulting  from  a  premature 
confinement.  It  was  with  difficulty  she  could  move  about  on  crutches  upon  very  even 
ground,  and  she  had  to  be  carried  from  the  carriage  which  had  conveyed  her  from  the 
railway  station  to  our  reception  room  on  the  first  floor,  in  the  arms  of  her  friends. 

'"The  siance  was  a  very  animated  one.  Many  wonderful  things  occurred;  the 
planchette  had  written  at  once  under  the  hands  of  persons  who  had  never  witnessed 

anything  of  the  sort  before,  &c.,  &c.     Madame  G a  was  then  selected,  and  during 

fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  she  had  it  all  to  herself,  much  in  the  same  way  as  it  occurred 

with  Mrs.  K d  previously  to  her  being  cured.    Many  tears  were  shed  by  Madame  G a, 

who  was  deeply  affected  by  the  words  of  kind  and  gentle  sympathy  and  of  encouraging  hope 
addressed  to  her  by  the  sublimely  inspired  phrases  written  under  the  planchette.  While 
this  was  going  on,  the  rest  of  the  company  were  conversing  quietly  among  themselves  in 
undertones.  Then,  all  present  being  desired  to  give  their  whole  attention,  we  were  exhorted 
to  join  our  hearts  in  an  act  of  inward  and  fervent  communion,  and  implore  God  to  show 
His  mercy  upon  our  suffering  sister.  During  the  total  silence  which  ensued,  a  short  and 
impressive  prayer  was  rapidly  written  under  the  planchette,  which  was  read  aloud,  then 

the  Spirit  through  the  planchette,  addressing  Madame  G a,  wrote,  "  Do  you  believe  in 

Christ's  invariable  goodness  and  power  ? "  to  which  she  answered,  "  Yes,  truly  I  do." 
While  she  was  answering,  the  planchette  was  writing,  "  Then  stand  upright  !  "  As  though 
recollecting  her  weakness,  for  a  moment  she  seemed  to  look  round  for  assistance,  and  at 
the  same  instant  the  words,  "Alone  in  Jesus  Christ's  name!"  were  written  with  such 
rapidity,  that  they  seemed  as  if  they  had  been  struck  off  upon  the  paper  ;  and  they  had 

not  time  to  be  read,  when  Madame  G a  sprang  on  her  feet,  and  she  was  no  longer  a 

paralytic.  She  was  then  told  to  walk  up  and  down  the  room,  which  feat  she  accomplished 
with  unhesitating  firmness  and  perfect  ease,  and  was  after  that  sent  downstairs  to  walk, 
accompanied,  but  unassisted,  by  my  wife,  for  five  minutes  round  the  garden,  where  she 
was  all  the  time  in  full  view  of  the  company  assembled  on  the  balcony  and  clustered  round 
the  windows  ;  and  having  come  up  again,  she  expressed  her  gratitude  towards  God  for  the 
mercy  she  had  received,  amidst  the  congratulations  of  all  parties,  who  by  that  time  had 
begun  to  be  sufficiently  recovered  from  their  first  surprise  to  reflect  upon  and  appreciate 
the  miracle  which  had  been  performed.    We  resumed  our  places.    A  thanksgiving  to  God 

was  written  through  the  planchette,  and  an  hour  afterwards,  Madame  G a's  carriage 

having  been  previously  discarded,  she  returned  vfith  the  rest  of  the  company,  going  on 
foot  to  the  railway  station,  about  a  mile  from  our  house,  and  was  perfectly  cured  of  her 
paralysis.'* 

"  Surgical  cases  were  treated  in  like  manner  and  with  Uke  results.  M.  Bertolacci 
says  : — 

" '  When  any  of  my  girls  cut  themselves  or  met  with  any  other  accident,  such  as 
bruises,  sprains,  &c.,  not  only  is  all  pain  immediately  taken  away,  but  indeed  the  healing 
is  almost  as  rapid.  One  day,  one  of  them,  in  cutting  a  loaf  of  bread,  gave  herself  a  deep 
gash  across  the  left  hand,  an  inch  long.  The  blood  was  flowing  very  copiously  and  had 
quite  wetted  a  towel,  which  she  had  wrapped  round  it,  through  and  through  many  folds, 
by  the  time  she  came  to  me,  though  she  lost  no  time,  however,  in  so  doing.  The  towel 
was  taken  off,  and  I  held  the  lips  of  the  wound  together,  while  those  present  joined  us, 
during  eight  or  ten  seconds,  in  communion,  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  having  been 
invoked.  The  blood  ceased  to  flow,  and  the  wound  was  closed.  Not  more  than  four 
hours  afterwards,  some  friends  having  come  to  pass  the  evening  with  us,  she  played 
several  long  pieces  on  the  pianoforte,  and  had  totally  forgotten  that  she  had  cut  herself 
in  the  day.  Nevertheless,  the  wound  was  sufficiently  severe  to  leave  a  scar  still  very 
plainly  to  be  seen,  although  it  is  now  somewhere  about  seven  years  since  the  accident 
occurred.  On  another  occasion  since  that,  one  of  her  sisters  cut  the  top  of  her  thumb 
from  one  side  to  the  other,  down  to  the  very  bone,  and  was  cured  in  the  same  manner,  as 
completely  and  as  instantaneously. 

" '  I  have  mentioned  these  two  cases  in  particular  to  give  my  reader  a  notion  of  the 
efficacy  of  the  cures  ;  but,  indeed,  it  is  almost  of  daily  occurrence  with  us,  either  for  one 
thing  or  the  other— a  cut,  a  bruise,  and  the  blistering  of  an  arm  from  the  effects  of  a 
poisonous  plant,  having,  the  very  day  on  which  I  \\n:ite  this  narration,  been  cured,  each  in 
the  space  of  eight  seconds.     A  few  days  back,  it  was  a  hand  and  wrist  which  had  been 

*  Compare  this  case  with  the  analagous  and  equally  remarkable  one  of  Miss  Fancourt,  as  given 
in  Brevier's  "Two  "Worlds,"  pp.  230-235. 

I70  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  ^MIRACLES. 

pretty  smartly  scalded  with  boiling  water.  Toothaches  and  caries  are  as  effectually 
stopped,  even  to  the  destroying  of  the  nerve,  in  order  to  obviate  any  recurrence  of  the 
pain  from  extraneous  causes.  On  one  occasion,  when  the  request  was  ma^de  that  the 
nerve  should  be  destroyed,  the  most  complete  insensibility  immediately  succeeded  ;  but 
we  were  told,  that  as  the  tooth  was  only  slightly  attacked,  if  it  were  stopped  within  a 
few  days,  in  order  to  keep  the  air  and  moisture  from  it,  it  would  be  preserved  ;  but  that, 
if  that  were  not  done,  in  ten  days  it  would  begin  to  fall  to  pieces.  It  was  not  done,  and 
on  the  tenth  day,  a  large  portion  of  the  tooth  fell  off,  and,  in  a  very  few  days  more, 
nothing  but  the  bare  root  was  left,  which,  however,  was  very  easily  extracted  without 
occasioning  the  least  pain.' 

"  There  can  be  no  mistake  about  cases  like  these,  the  facts  are  recent,  and  are  pub- 
lished to  the  world  ;  the  witnesses  are  living,  and  well  known  as  persons  of  credit  and 
integrity.  The  faculty  and  the  press  may  ignore  or  deny  the  facts  ;  from  their  ante- 
cedents it  may  be  expected  that  they  will  do  so  ;  but  this,  though  it  should  affect  their 
own  credit,  will  not  affect  the  facts,  which  are  neither  made  nor  destroyed  by  the 
opinions  which  may  be  formed  about  them. 

"We  omit,  from  want  of  space,  the  magnetic  and  clairvoyant  phenomena  related,  but 
the  spiritual  education  of  his  family,  as  M.  Bertolacci  relates  it,  is  something  so  unique 
that  notwithstanding  our  already  copious  extracts  we  quote  it  in  extenso.  After  a  chap- 
ter on  '  Initiation,'  he  proceeds  : — 

"  '  With  this  foundation  to  work  upon,  and  confiding  in  the  revelations  and  spiritual 
guidance  by  which  we  had  already  attained  the  degree  of  spiritual  strength  shewn  in  the 
preceding  narration,  I  boldly  withdrew  my  two  younger  daughters  from  the  school  they 
daily  attended  ;  and  in  spite  of  the  opposition  and  common-place  arguments  of  other 
parties,  began  their  new  mode  of  education  in  the  manner  indicated  by  our  invisible 
spiritual  conductor,  which  was  pursued  much  in  the  following  order  : — 

"  '  Lessons  were  learnt  by  heart  by  reading  to  my  students  in  theie  magnetic 
SLEEP,  ordering  them  to  retain  in  their  memory  when  they  awoke,  all  they  had  heard. 
Lessons  were  next  learnt  by  heart  by  the  pupils  reading,  themselves,  once  over,  in 
their  magnetic  sleep,  one  or  more  pages  of  a  book.  When  this  began  to  become 
familiar,  and  the  organs  of  memory  showed  that  they  were  in  a  fit  state  of  rapid  obedi- 
ence, the  action  of  the  organs  of  outward  perception  upon  the  memory  was  submitted  to 
the  strong  developing  power  of  the  soul's  direct  influence,  and  lessons  were  learnt  by 
THE  simple  inspection  OF  (or  staring  at)  the  open  page  op  a  book, — the  students 
being  in  their  normal  waking  state.  In  the  beginning,  the  inspection,  or  staring,  was 
made  to  last  a  certain  number  of  seconds,  and  that  number  being  gradually  reduced, 
after  a  short  space  of  time,  the  duration  of  a  single  second  or  a  mere  glimpse  at  the  page 
was  sufficient  for  the  pupils  to  retain  in  their  memory  the  whole  contents  of  it. 

"  '  In  this  manner  and  in  the  following,  the  daily  lessons  of  my  children,  equal  at  times 
to  a  week's  corresponding  school  tasks,  were  learnt  in  the  space  of  a  few  seconds  ;  lessons 
that  take  hours  to  interrogate  them  upon,  with  any  degree  of  detail.     Lessons  are  also 

LEARNT   by   A   SIMPLE   ACT   OF   PIOUS   CONCENTRATION   FROM   BOOKS   CLOSED   OR   TOTALLY  OUT 

OF  SIGHT.  In  this  case,  we  have  usually  named  the  page  where  the  beginning  of  the 
lesson  is  to  be  found,  for  we  have,  as  yet,  had  recourse  to  the  process  less  as  a  matter  of 
immediate  utility  than  as  a  jDractice  of  the  powers  of  distant  clairvoyance.  It  will  be 
easily  conceived  that  by  a  slight  extension  of  this  faculty,  or  rather  by  the  special  direc- 
tion being  given  to  it,  it  may  be  applied  to  obtain  references  from,  and  even  the  perfect 
knowledge  of,  works  one  does  not  oneself  possess,  but  which  are  known  to  exist  in 
certain  libraries  and  other  places,  rendered  either  by  their  distance,  our  own  want  of 
time  or  otherwise,  inaccessible  to  us, 

" '  DICTATION. 

" '  Dictations  were  given  by  the  teacher  reading  from  a  book  in  the  ordinary 
MANNER  ;  but  WITHOUT  NAMING  THE  STOPS  OR  ANY  OF  THE  OTHER  SIGNS,  these  being  seen  by 
the  students  through  their  pre-acquired  clairvoyant  capacities,  the  phrases  becoming 
visible  to  them  as  soon  as  they  are  dictated.  The  mental  dictations. — In  this  case  the 
pupils  are  made  acquainted — by  the  hnoioledge  of  their  "  inner  man"  and  the  perfected 
obedience  of  the  organs  of  their  "  outer  man,"  with  the  contents  of  the  page  held  open  in  a 
position  visible  alone  to  the  eyes  of  the  teacher- — and  as  the  latter  desires  to  communicate 
a  phrase  to  the  pupils,  they  hear  a  voice  dictating  it  aloud  to  them  in  the  air,  although 
no  person  is  speaking  at  the  time. 

"  '  HISTORY. 

" '  The  direct  clairvoyance  gives  the  student  a  correct  sight,  with  regard  to 
THE  historical  PERSONS  AND  PACTS  treated  of  in  the  lessons  learnt  by  the  inspection  of 
books,  either  open,  closed,  or  at  a  distance — as  explained  in  the  foregoing. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  171 

'"natural  history  and  philosophy. 

" '  The  sight  of  the  plants,  flowers,  minerals,  animals,  &c.,  described  or 
mentioned  in  their  books,  as  also  such  other  useful  details  as  may  have  been  omitted  by 
the  author,  or  belong  to  a  more  minute  study  of  the  subject,  is  enjoyed  in  the  same 
manner. 

"  '  GEOGRAPHY  AND  ASTRONOMY. 

"  '  Geographical  and  Astronomical  Studies  from  Charts  or  Globes. — When  a 
locality  is  named  by  the  teacher,  or  is  to  be  designated  for  any  purpose  in  the  course  of 
study,  the  forefinger  of  the  pupil  is,  hy  iiispiration,  instantaneously  drawn  to  the  exact 
spot  of  the  map  or  globe  where  it  is  to  be  found.  This  action  takes  place  before  the 
reason  of  the  students  can  have  given  them  the  slightest  notion  of  the  relative  position 
or  bearing  of  the  place,  the  head  following  the  movement  of  the  hand,  instead  of  directing 
it.  The  students  are  also,  by  the  facility  they  acquire  for  receiving  inspirations, 
so  perfectly  identified  with  everything  belonging  to  the  places  spoken  of  in  their 
study  of  geography,  that  they  feel  as  though  they  were  on  the  spot.  So 
correct  are  the  impressions  made  by  the  ubiquitous  power  of  their  souls  on  all  the  organs 
of  the  body  in  their  temporarily  perfected  condition,  that  they  appear  to  themselves  to  be, 
not  where  the  lessons  are  going  on,  but  in  the  very  places  therein  referred  to  ;  seeing, 
hearing,  and  feeling  all  that  they  are  required  or  desirous  to  see,  hear,  or  feel.' 

"  M.  Bertolacci  has  written  in  a  tone  of  moderation  and  a  religious  spirit ;  and  he 
disclaims  all  idea  '  that  there  is  any  peculiarity  in  his  nature  or  that  of  his  children,  by 
which  they  are  exceptionally  qualified  for  the  attainment  of  the  gifts  they  have  received.'  "* 

Whilst  no  persons  who  have  ever  become  acquainted  with  Mr.  Bertolacci, 
or  conversed  with  his  witnesses — of  whom  hundreds  are  still  living — are 
capable  of  questioning  his  veracity  or  impugning  his  statements,  we  know 
we  are  drawing  heavily  on  the  faith  of  those  readers  who  are  not  personally 
cognizant  of  the  overwhelming  mass  of  testimony  which  surrounds  the  case 
and  its  narration. 

Perhaps  in  future  ages,  the  substance  of  what  we  are  now  so  reticent  in 
offering  to  the  acceptance  Of  modern  readers  may  be  deemed  trivial  or 
insignificant,  in  comparison  with  the  soul  growth  to  which  humanity'may 
have  then  attained — meantime,  where  does  our  duty  lie  ?  Why,  even  in 
turning  to  the  motto  of  this  volume,  and  accepting  practically  as  well  as 
theoretically  the  charge  to  proclaim  "The  truth  against  the  world." 

CHAPTER    XXII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    (CONTINUED). 

Besides  the  merely  phenomenal  phases  of  Spiritualism  illustrated  by  the 
narratives  given  in  the  last  few  chapters,  the  message  which  relates  to  the 
conditions  of  life  hereafter,  and  the  religious  element  which  grows  out  of 
Spiritual  communion,  has  not  been  lacking  in  its  full  share  of  representa- 
tion, in  England,  although  there  was  a  strong  desire  manifested  on  the 
part  of  some  of  those  who  stood  in  the  position  of  "  I-eaders  "  in  the  ranks 
of  English  Spiritualism,  to  keep  all  questions  of  a  religious  and  controversial 
nature  in  the  background. 

The  author's  experience  has  ever  been  in  this,  as  in  all  other  departments 
of  human  thought  and  interests,  when  connected  with  Spiritualism,  that 
Spirits  themselves  are  at  the  helm  of  the  new  movement,  and  with  or  with- 
out the  sympathy  of  mortals,  they  will  raise  up  instruments,  and  create 

*  This  review  may  be  found  in  full  in  the  London  SpiritvM  Magazine  for  October,  18(35. 

172  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

opportunities  for  the  impartation  of  whatever  ideas  they  may  determine  to 
communicate.  Thus  it  was,  that  whilst  certain  believers  in  Spirit  com- 
munion, who  were  still  steadfast  in  their  adhesion  to  the  Christian  Church, 
and  its  belongings,  were  constantly  deprecating  the  attempt  to  incorporate 
religious  ideas  with  Spirituahsm,  and  protesting — often  in  no  measured 
terms — against  the  "  infidelities "  of  the  American  trance  speakers,  the 
Spirits  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  were  opening  up  opportunities,  and 
presenting  impelling  motives  to  those  very  speakers,  to  visit  the  mother 
country,  and  widen  the  borders  of  Spiritualism  from  its  conservative  position 
in  private  families,  to  the  more  diffusive  arena  of  the  public  rostrum. 

It  has  been  quite  a  common  practice  amongst  many  European  Spiritual- 
ists, to  endeavour  to  narrow  down  the  diffusion  of  Spiritualism  to  the  private 
circle,  or  the  perusal  of  such  "  well  digested  "  literature,  as  was  specially 
prepared  to  warn  preaching  Spirits  off  the  sacred  preserves  of  orthodoxy. 

All  would  not  do  however.  The  stream  whose  sources  are  not  on  earth, 
has  made  its  own  channels,  and  swept  away  all  barriers  that  intervened  to 
check  the  course  laid  out  for  its  flow,  by  higher  wisdom  than  that  of 
humanity. 

It  was  under  this  special  guidance,  and  in  virtue  of  her  commission 
from  a  well-tried  band  of  Spiritual  guides  that  the  author — a  Medium  for 
many  phases  of  Spirit  communion,  but  chiefly  recognised  as  a  speaker 
under  Spiritual  influence,  was  impelled  after  many  years'  pilgrimage  in  the 
New  World  to  return,  with  her  venerable  mother,  to  settle  once  more  in  her 
native  city  of  London.  Mrs.  Hardinge*  reached  England  in  the  fall  of  the 
year  1865,  a  period  that  may  truly  be  called,  the  blossoming  time  of 
Spiritualism  in  Great  Britain.  Her  intention  was  to  retire  from  her  long 
and  toilsome  career  as  a  public  speaker  into  the  qi^iet  of  home  and  literary 
occupations,  but  her  arrival  had  been  already  anticipated  by  generous 
notices  m  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  and  immediately  on  landing, 
she  found  herself  surrounded  by  hosts  of  warm  sympathizers,  who  although 
strangers — in  the  ordinary  sense  of  social  relations — were  still  one  in  heart 
with  the  new  comer,  in  the  desire  to  promote  the  interests  of  a  much  loved 
cause.  It  was  in  this  spirit  that  Mrs.  Hardinge,  soon  after  her  arrival  in 
London,  found  herself  compelled  to  abandon  her  projected  seclusion,  and 
once  more  to  enter  upon  the  vortex  of  effort  to  promulgate  the  truths  of 
Spiritualism,  by  means  of  rostrum  addresses. 

Early  in  the  winter  succeeding  Mrs.  Hardinge's  arrival,  a  series  of 
"  winter  soirees"  were  inaugurated,  chiefly  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Benjamin 
Coleman,  Mr.  William  Wilkinson,  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter,  and  other  leaders 
of  the  Spiritual  cause,  interested  in  the  promulgation  of  its  philosophy. 

The  scene  of  these  gatherings  was  the  Beethoven  Rooms,  Harley  Street, 
Cavendish  Square,  where  a  splendid  suite  of  salons,  capable  of  seating 
several  hundred  persons  was  engaged,  and  where  the  guests  were  admitted 
in  evening  costume,  by  subscription  tickets,  or  introductions  permitted  by 
the  Committee. 

The  company  included  many  persons  of  the  highest  rank  or  eminence 
in  literature  and  science,  and  at  these  gatherings  Mrs.  Hardinge  gave 
weekly  addresses  in  her  capacity  as  an  inspirational  speaker  during  a  period 
of  many  months. 

The  subjects  of  the  lectures  were  most  generally  selected  by  the  audience, 
and  questions  on  all  manner  of  abstruse,  scientific,  and  metaphysical 
points,  were  answered  at  the  close  of  the  addresses. 

*  Now  Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  173 

The  proceedings  were  received  with  tokens  of  the  highest  interest,  and  at 
the  close  of  each  series  announced,  Mrs.  Hardinge  was  induced  to  renew 
her  lectures,  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of  the  friends  of  the  movement. 

How  gladly  the  chief  promoters  of  these  meetings  welcomed  the  oppor- 
tunity of  extending  phenomenal  Spiritualism  into  the  realms  of  philosophy 
and  mental  science,  may  be  gathered  from  the  glowing  accounts  that  were 
published  from  time  to  time  in  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine^  especially 
the  numbers  for  1865-6.  However  gratifying  these  eulogimns  might  have 
been  to  the  speaker,  they  can  find  no  place  here,  and  are  only  alluded  to 
in  order  to  mark  the  deep  interest  which  inspirational  addresses  awaken, 
even  in  the  minds  of  those  least  disposed  to  sympathize  with  the  speaker's 
views,  and  to  show  how  the  cause  progressed  from  phenomenal  to  intellectual 
phases  of  the  movement. 

During  her  long  and  arduous  career  as  a  speaker  in  America,  Mrs. 
Hardinge,  having  taken  special  interest  in  tendering  the  consoling  doctrines 
of  Spiritualism  to  the  masses,  was  unwilling  to  narrow  down  her  ministry 
to  the  exclusive  and  aristocratic  listeners  of  the  Harley  Street  soirees.  She 
therefore  proposed  to  her  friends,  that  public  meetings  of  a  more  general 
character  should  be  inaugurated,  the  first  to  consist  of  three  lectures  on 
"  America,"  to  be  given  in  St.  James's  Hall,  the  next  to  enter  at  once  and 
publicly  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  in  a  course  of  Sunday  evening 
addresses  of  the  same  character  as  those  given  at  the  winter  soirees,  to 
which  all  classes  of  the  public  should  be  admitted.  To  both  these 
propositions  Mrs.  Hardinge's  Spiritualistic  friends  lent  their  wilUng  and 
generous  aid. 

The  secular  lectures  were  at  once  undertaken,  and  called  forth  even  from 
the  London  Times  wonderfully  complimentary  notices  of  the  lady  lecturer 
and  her  pretensions  ;  in  fact,  as  these  addresses  were  totally  unconnected 
with  the  obnoxious,  and  all  too  popular  Spiritual  bete  noir  of  the  age,  they 
were  received  with  the  most  laudatory  notices  from  the  press  in  general ; 
so  enthusiastic  indeed  was  the  tone  of  commendation  adopted  by  the 
leading  journals  of  the  metropolis,  that  Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman,  a  Machiavelh 
of  strategy,  as  well  as  an  indomitable  general  of  strategical  forces,  collected 
these  reports  from  the  various  papers,  and  published  them  in  pamphlet 
form  for  general  distribution. 

As  the  very  next  appearance  of  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge's  name  in  the 
public  journals  was  an  announcement  of  her  Sunday  evening  Spiritual 
lectures,  Mr.  Coleman  was  generally  thought  to  have  stolen  a  march  on 
the  secular  press,  which  might  have  induced  them  to  regret  that  they  had 
contributed  so  large  a  share  of  advertising  to  "  the  Spiritualists'  new  Pythia," 
as  one  of  the  repentant  journals  now  designated  the  lady,  who  but  a  short 
time  ago  had  been  the  subject  of  unqualified  laudation. 

Not  any  longer  from  the  columns  of  the  secular  press,  but  in  the  London 
Spiritual  Magazine  came  the  announcement  of  the  next  move  on  the 
Spiritual  chessboard,  which  was  to  the  effect  that  the  Sunday  evening 
lectures  were  attracting  such  immense  and  enthusiastic  audiences,  that  they 
would  be  continued  for  an  indefinite  period,  or  at  least,  as  long  as  the 
speaker  could  remain  in  the  country  to  give  them. 

About  this  time  a  valuable  impulse  was  communicated  to  the  Spiritual 
movement  by  the  publication  of  a  new  paper  called  The  Medium  and  Day- 
break— started  by  Mr.  James  Burns,  now  so  well  known  in  connection  with 
this  and  other  periodicals,  as  well  as  being  the  founder  of  the  Spiritual 
Institution,    Southampton   Row,    Bloomsbury.      The  assistance  which  an 

174  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

editor  of  ability  and  a  devoted  Spiricualist  like  Mr.  Burns  was  able  to  render, 
in  publishing  and  distributing  Mrs.  Hardinge's  lectures,  can  scarcely  be 
estimated.  The  secular  journals  had  obviously  entered  into  a  conspiracy 
of  silence  in  regard  to  meetings  which  were  attracting  immense  and  over- 
flowing audiences  every  Sunday. 

In  this  juncture  Mr.  Burns — of  whom  we  shall  have  more  to  say  here- 
after— devoted  himself  heart  and  soul  to  the  work  of  publishing  the 
addresses,  which  were  issued,  some  in  the  columns  of  The  Medium, 
others  in  tract  and  pamphlet  form,  whilst  the  Harley  Street  lectures  were 
collected  into  small  volumes,  and  distributed  broadcast  by  hundreds, 
and  on  special  subjects  by  thousands.  By  the  indomitable  energy  of  Mr. 
Burns,*  the  press  found  themselves  defeated  by  their  own  weapons,  and 
from  the  time  when  this  spirited  publisher  commenced  in  earnest  his  work 
of  literary  propagandism,  the  movement  acquired  a  diffusive  popularity 
which  made  a  deep  mark  upon  public  opinion  both  in  the  metropolis  and 
in  the  provinces. 

Hitherto,  circumstances  had  not  favoured  the  dissemination  of  Spiritual 
teachings  through  the  platform. 

Enghsh  Spiritualists  had  been  honoured  with  a  visit  from,  the  celebrated 
American  inspirational  speaker  and  poet,  the  Rev,  T.  L.  Harris,  known  in 
the  Spiritual  ranks  as  "  The  Medium,"  through  whom  was  communicated 
the  charming  poems  entitled,  "A  Lyric  of  the  Morning  Land,"  and  "An 
Epic  of  the  Starry  Heavens." 

Unfortunately,  Mr.  Harris's  visit  failed,  to  promote  any  interchange  of 
kindly  sentiment  between  the  American  and  English  SpirituaUsts,  the  former 
having  incurred  Mr.  Harris's  wrath  for  refusing  to  install  him  into  the 
position  of  a  settled  ministry.  The  results  of  this  disappointment  he  ex- 
pressed in  his  English  addresses,  wherein  his  former  associates  and  fellow 
labourers  were  so  roundly  abused,  that  it  was  evident  to  his  grieved  listeners 
that  the  ex-reverend  gentleman  was  afflicted  with  a  very  unspiritual  form  of 
Spiritualism ;  hence  his  ministrations  served  rather  to  retard  than  advance 
the  cause  in  England.  Mr.  B.  P.  Randolph,  another  American  Spiritual 
lecturer,  had  also  essayed  the'  platform,  but  failed  to  reconcile  his  hearers 
to  his  marked  eccentricities.  A  far  more  satisfactory  expositor  of  the 
Spiritual  doctrines  had  been  found  in  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Peebles,  formerly  an 
American  clergyman,  but  then  a  speaker  on  Spiritualism,  whose  eloquence 
created  a  deep  impression  on  audiences  gathered  to  hear  him,  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic.  At  the  time  of  Mr.  Peebles'  first  visit,  however, 
there  was  no  available  organization  to  give  effect  to  his  public  efforts,  hence, 
however  valuable,  they  were  not  appreciated  as  they  should  have  been.  On 
several  subsequent  occasions  Mr.  Peebles'  platform  addresses  were  listened 
to  with  deep  interest,  and  his  visits  to  England  welcomed  with  tokens 
of  high  appreciation.  Time  and  circumstances  combined  to  favour  the 
effect  of  Mrs.  Hardinge's  advent  in  London,  hence  the  results  of  her 
inaugural  meetings  were  most  influential  in  opening  up  opportunities  for 
platform  work  in  other  directions. 

Although  Mrs.  Hardinge  could  never  reconcile  herself  to  a  permanent 
residence  in  England,  and  for  the  last  fifteen  years  has  only  revisited 
the  country  for  limited  periods  of  time,  the  kind  greetings  and  cordial 
farewells — often  accompanied  by  substantial  tokens  of  interest — which  these 
flying  visits  called  forth,  served  to  create  pleasant  "  revivalisms,"  which 
heightened  the  effect  and  popularity  of  her  labours. 

One  of  the  most  talented  of  the  lecturers  that  succeeded  Mrs.  Hardinge 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  175 

during  her  absence  in  the  United  States  was  Mrs.  Cora  Tappan,  a,  lady 
whose  high  reputation  as  an  able  and  eloquent  expositor  of  the  Spiritual 
philosophy,  stands  unrivalled  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic. 

Mrs.  Tappan's  lectures  were  not  only  pronounced '  to  be  miracles  of 
eloquence  by  the  elite  of  the  London  Spiritualists,  but  by  her  efificient 
missionary  labours  in  the  provinces,  she  succeeded  in  awakening  a  wide- 
spread interest  in  Spirituahsm  throughout  the  country. 

We  have  already  alluded  to  the  remarkable  test  facts  of  Spirit  presence, 
afforded  by  the  visit  of  Mr.  Charles  Foster,  an  American  medium  renowned 
for  exhibiting  names  of  deceased  persons,  and  test  facts  of  Spirit  presence, 
by  writings  in  raised  letters,  on  the  arm.  Besides  this  remarkable  personage, 
England  was  visited  by  Messrs.  Redman,  J.  B.  Conklin,  and  Colchester, 
all  powerful  physical  test  mediums. 

The  fact  that  they  were  professional  mediums  and  demanded  liberal  fees 
for  their  services,  was  of  course  a  subject  of  reproach,  which  the  opposition 
could  not  afford  to  pass  by  unheeded.  Not  that  the  English  people  are 
grudging'in  their  dealings,  whether  in  trade,  commerce,  or  art ;  but,  as  we 
have  already  noted,  the  orthodox  method  of  regarding  Spiritual  gifts  as 
"  Divine  endowments,"  which  must  not  be  desecrated  by  association  with 
"  filthy  lucre,"  threw  an  absurd  and  superstitious  glamour  over  the  subject, 
which  exempted  it  from  the  ordinary  methods  of  justice  and  common  sense. 
When  this  unreasonable  spirit  was  met  on  its  own  ground,  and  mediums, 
visiting  the  country  from  foreign  lands,  refused  to  take  compensation  for 
their  services,  rich  presents  were  often  pressed  upon  them  in  greater  prodi- 
gality than  their  services  could  have  commanded  as  payment,  but  when  set 
fees  were  required,  the  whole  community  was  aroused  to  the  iniquity  of 
making  God-like  gifts  the  subject  of  traffic,  &c.,  &c. 

We  shall  devote  the  remainder  of  this  chapter  to  a  brief  notice  of 
another  Transatlantic  visitor  whose  reputation  for  the  beneficent  use  he 
made  of  his  marvellous  powers  of  healing  by  touch,  had  long  preceded 
him;  we  speak  of  Dr.  J,  R.  Newton  of  Rhode  Island,  U.S.,  who  arrived 
in  this  country  for  a  second  visit  during  the  month  of  May,  1870. 

Stimulated  by  the  reports  of  his  many  wonderful  cures,  the  leading 
Spiritualists  of  London  met  together  at  the  "Beethoven  Rooms,"  Harley 
Street,  on  Thursday,  May  12th,  to  tender  to  Dr.  Newton  a  cordial  welcome 
in  the  form  of  a  public  reception. 

The  meeting  was  not  only  a  representative  one,  the  Spiritualists  of  eminence 
from  the  provinces  as  well  as  from  the  metropolis  flocking  in  from  all  parts 
of  the  country,  but  those  who  attended  were  prompt  to  bear  testimony  to  the 
excellent  services  of  their  distinguished  guest,  by  relating  several  incidents 
in  connection  with  his  powers  as  a  healer,  the  recital  of  which  must  serve 
in  this  place,  as  a  sample  of  the  good  work  performed  by  Dr.  Newton 
during  his  brief  residence  in  England. 

In  the  course  of  their  several  addresses,  Messrs.  Coleman,  Tebb,  Shorter, 
the  Rev.  J.  M.  Peebles — who  happened  to  be  in  England  at  the  time— 
and  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  gave  pointed  and  interesting  delineations  of  the  real 
status  of  English  Spiritualism  at  the  period  in  question,  and  the  unpre- 
meditated testimony  borne  by  these  gentlemen  at  a  time  when  their 
utterances  were  not  given  for  effect  on  the  outside  world,  may  be  received 
as  of  more  value  than  any  elaborately  prepared  statements. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman,  the  chief  promoter  of  the  meeting,  was  unani- 
mously called  upon  to  preside,  and  the  exercises  of  the  evening  proceeded  as 
follows.     The  Chairman,  after  stating  that  the  object  of  the  meeting  was  to 

176  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

give  Dr.  Newton  a  hearty  welcome,  closed  a  pertinent  speech  on  the  value 
of  the  healing  power  with  the  following  remarks : — 

"  In  America  Dr.  Newton  stands  pre-eminent  for  his  healing  powers,  as  proved  by- 
recorded  facts  spread  over  the  last  fourteen  years,  and  many  of  the  cures  effected  by  him 
were  of  a  very  wonderful  description.  When  in  New  York  and  Boston,  I  heard  of  Dr. 
Newton's  powers  in  this  respect.  One  gentleman  told  me  of  a  case  where  Dr.  Newton  had 
restored  sight  to  a  blind  man,  who  had  been  unable  to  see  for  seven  or  eight  years 
previously,  and  who  was  cured  by  Dr.  Newton  in  a  few  minutes.  Dr.  Newton  only  arrived 
in  Liverpool  last  Saturday,  May  7th,  and  he  was  asked  to  go  on  the  following  day  and  see 
Mr.  Ashley,  of  that  town,  who  had  been  afflicted  with  a  very  serious  illness  for  some  time, 
and  Mr.  Wason,  who  is  present,  has  given  me  the  following  statement  of  what  took 
place  : — 

"  '  Mr.  Ashley  resides  at  5,  Catherine  Street,  Liverpool.  On  the  27th  December  last  he 
was  at  Oxford  and  broke  a  blood-vessel  in  the  lungs.  A  leading  medical  man,  Mr.  Freeborn, 
was  called  in,  who  prepared  Mrs.  Ashley  for  the  worst,  and  told  her  that  there  was  no 
hope  ;  that  her  husband  would  go  off  in  a  rapid  consumption,  and  none  could  say  how 
soon  ;  he  advised  that  he  should  not  be  removed  to  Liverpool,  as  his  strength  was  not 
equal  to  the  journey.  Mrs.  Ashley  prayed  fervently  for  Divine  aid,  that  she  might  be 
comforted  and  directed  according  to  her  trial,  feeling  assured  that  her  husband  would 
shortly  depart — and  turning  to  her  Bible,  opened  it  at  a  venture,  and  found  her  finger,  she 
knows  not  how,  on  the  text  in  St.  John,  where  Jesus,  speaking  of  Lazarus,  says,  "  This 
sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  for  the  glory  of  God."  From  that  moment  she  felt  assured 
that  her  husband  would  not  die,  and  she  told  Dr.  Freeborn  her  strong  impressions.  Some 
nttle  time  after  this  Mr.  Ashley  was  removed  to  Liverpool  on  a  bed  fitted  up  in  a  railway 
carriage.  For  about  five  months  he  was  confined  to  his  room,  no  one  expecting  his  recovery 
except  his  wife.  Once  Mr.  Gardiner  carried  him  like  a  child  down  stairs,  and  had  great 
difiiculty  in  getting  him  back,  and  fears  were  entertained  that  he  would  not  recover  the 
shock.  Last  Saturday,  May  7th,  Dr.  Simmons  prepared  Mrs.  Ashley  for  the  worst,  and 
intimated  that,  the  great  change  might  take  place  at  any  moment.  Last  Sunday,  the  8th 
of  May,  Dr.  NevH:on  and  myself  went  in  a  cab  to  Mr.  Ashley's  ;  the  Doctor  went  upstairs 
to  Mr.  Ashley's  sick-room,  requesting  that  none  should  follow  but  Mrs.  Ashley.  In  about 
five  or  six  minutes.  Dr.  Newton  brought  Mr.  Ashley  down  stairs,  and  took  him  into  the 
open  air  and  said  he  was  cured  ;  he  told  him  that  he  coidd  walk  a  mile  and  a  half,  which 
he  urged  him  to  do,  and  to  eat  a  beefsteak  and  drink  a  pint  of  ale  for  dinner — although 
his  doctor  had  fed  him  on  slops  for  the  last  five  months.  Mr.  Ashley  came  to  the  evening 
service  and  stood  alone  a  considerable  time,  whilst  Dr.  Newton  told  the  audience  of  the 
case,  which  Mr.  Ashley  confirmed  in  all  respects.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ashley  gave  me  this 
account  yesterday  (Monday),  at  their  house,  after  Mr.  Ashley  had  been  out,  and  eaten  a 
mutton  chop  with  pudding  and  ale,  and  after  a  long  walk.  .  .  .  Previous  to  Dr.  Newton's 
seeing  him,  Tie  had  not  been  out  of  his  bed  for  five  months,^  " 

Mr.  Coleman  then  went  on  to  say  : — 

"  I  cannot  in  this  short  address  give  one-hundredth  part  of  the  cases  on  record,  some 
of  which  have  taken  place  very  recently.  Mr.  Watson,  who  has  come  over  from  America 
with  Dr.  Newton,  told  me  that  he  had  lost  the  sight  of  one  eye,  in  consequence  of  a  piece 
of  steel  getting  into  it  by  accident ;  inflammation  set  in,  and  he  lost  the  sight  of  the  other 
eye.  Two  years  ago  his  wife  was  impressed  to  induce  her  husband  to  go  with  her  to 
Montreal  from  New  York,  to  visit  Dr.  Newton.  They  arrived  in  Montreal  as  Dr.  Newton 
was  on  the  point  of  leaving  it,  and  directly  Dr.  Newton  saw  the  patient,  whose  eyes  were 
covered  with  a  bandage,  he  told  him  that  he  would  do  good  to  one  of  them,  thereby 
showing  a  knowledge  that  both  of  them  were  not  in  the  same  state.  He  then  removed 
the  bandage,  and  said,  '  You  can  see,  can't  you  ?'  and  althoiigh  he  had  only  been  in  the  room 
seven  minutes,  he  found  that  he  could  read  small  print.  Mr.  Watson  is  present,  and  can 
testify  to  the  truth  of  these  facts. 

"  In  London  Dr.  Newton  will  doubtless  encounter  plenty  of  opposition  ;  if  he  does  not 
succeed  the  medical  profession  will  call  him  a  sharper,  and  if  he  does  succeed  they  will 
call  him  a  lunatic  ;  they  are  sure  to  say  that  he  is  mad,  because  he  has  announced  his 
intention  not  bo  charge  a  fee  to  anybody  during  his  stay  in  England. 

"  I  do  not  beUeve  that  Dr.  Newton  will  cure  everybody,  nor  indeed  half  of  those  who 
call  upon  him,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  can  efiect  very  wonderful  cures,  and  that  he 
has  a  great  work  to  do  in  this  country." 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  177 

After  the  reading  of  a  cordial,  and  scholarly  address,  from  the  pen  of 
Mr.  Thos.  Shorter,  that  gentleman  was  called  upon  to  speak,  which  he  did 
in  substance  as  follows  :— 

"  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  make  the  personal  acquaintance  and  friendship  of  Dr. 
Newton  on  the  occasion  of  a  brief  visit  he  paid  to  this  country  in  the  autumn  of  1864. 
I  was  then  deeply  impressed,  as  I  think  all  who  know  him  must  be  impressed,  with  his 
great  simplicity  and  gentleness  of  character — his  ingenuousness  of  disposition,  singleness 
of  purpose,  and  entire  disinterestedness.  I  allude  to  this,  not  for  the  purpose  of  compli- 
ment, but  because  I  believe  that  these  qualities  of  character — this  large-heartedness  and 
quick  active  sympathy  has  had  much  to  do  with  the  marked  success  as  a  healer  which 
Dr.  Newton  has  achieved.  On  the  occasion  of  that  visit,  as  but  little  previous  notice  of 
it  had  been  given,  and  it  was  at  the  time  of  year  when  most  of  our  friends  were  absent 
from  town,  there  were  but  few  to  meet  him  and  hold  out  to  him  the  hand  of  welcome. 
However,  a  genuine  man  with  a  high  sense  of  duty,  and  who  delights  in  the  execution  of 
a  noble  mission,  is  not  easily  discouraged,  and  I  am  glad  to  find  that  the  untoward 
circumstances  to  which  I  have  referred,  have  not  deterred  Dr.  Newton  from  repeating  his 
visit  under  happier  auspices,  and  I  hope  it  will  be  found  with  more  satisfactory  results. 
During  the  interval  that  has  elapsed  since  his  first  visit  the  position  of  Spiritualism  in 
England  has  changed  very  much  for  the  better  ;  pubhc  opinion  on  the  subject  has  grown 
and  ripened  ;  publications  and  books  devoted  to  its  exposition  and  advocacy  have 
multiplied  ;  the  platform,  too,  as  well  as  the  press,  has  been  called  into  requisition — 
lectures  have  been  dehvered,  conferences  held,  Sunday  services  established,  various  forms 
of  associative  effort  instituted,  and  societies  and  individuals  have  been  stimulated  to  its 
investigation  ;  and  thus  conviction  has  spread,  and  a  better  understanding  of  the  subject 
has  been  reached  ;  and  to-night,  instead  of  the  few  friends  who  welcomed  Dr.  Newton 
on  his  first  visit,  I  am  glad  to  see  so  goodly  an  assemblage.  I  trust  that  the  work  which 
Dr.  Newton  has  begun  so  well  in  Liverpool  will  be  continued  in  London,  and  that  he  will 
be  as  successful  in  curing  disease  in  England  as  he  has  been  in  America.  Many  no  doubt 
will  think  him  mad,  but  looking  at  the  results  of  this  so-called  insanity,  I  can  only  hope 

that  it  may  soon  become  contagious Some  four  or  five  years  since,  when 

Dr.  Newton  was  in  Philadelphia,  he  was  brought  before  a  magistrate  on  some 
trumpery  charge  at  the  instigation  of  the  doctors.  Those  whom  he  had  cured, 
naturally  indignant  at  the  treatment  of  their  benefactor,  came  forward  unsolicited 
to  the  number  it  is  said  of  about  fifteen  hundred,  thronging  the  court  and  all  its 
avenues,  eager  to  tender  their  unsought-for  evidence  of  the  reality  of  their  cure  — 
these  included  the  cures  of  blindness,  deafness,  lameness,  paralysis,  and  other  chronic 
maladies,  seemingly  incurable.  Of  course  the  charge  was  summarily  dismissed.  I  will 
refer  to  one  other  case  nearer  home.  The  Rev.  Frederick  Rowland  Young,  pastor  of 
the  Free  Christian  Church,  Swindon,  was  not  only  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  but  a 
believer  in  the  gracious  word  of  the  Master,  '  The  works  that  I  do  shall  ye  do 
also,'  and  when  evidence  was  brought  before  him  of  the  cures  wrought  by  Dr.  Newton 
in  America,  so  strong  was  his  faith,  that  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  be  cured  by 
him.  His  faith  was  rewarded  by  an  immediate  cure.  Not  only  did  he  return  cured  of 
the  neuralgia  with  which  he  had  been  afiiicted  for  many  years,  and  which  physicians  had 
been  unable  to  remove,  but  he  himself  received  through  Dr.  Newton  the  gift  of  healing, 
which  he  has  freely  exercised  in  his  own  town  and  neighbourhood,  as  well  as  for  the 
benefit  of  persons  living  at  a  greater  distance.  Last  summer,  while  at  Swindon  for  a  few 
days,  I  heard  much  of  these  cures,  and  one  case  came  under  my  notice  of  a  poor  woman 
who  had  lost  her  eyesight  for  many  years  who  had  been  cured  by  Mr.  Young  by  the  simple 
laying  on  of  hands  and  prayer  ;  and  she  was  then  going  about  her  ordinary  household 
occupations.  Whether  Dr.  Newton  will  be  as  successful  here  as  in  America  I  cannot  say. 
When  I  consider  the  educated  prejudice  and  indurated  scepticism  with  which  he  will 
have  to  contend,  I  confess  my  expectations  are  greatly  moderated.  All  the  more  credit 
to  Dr.  Newton,  who,  knowing  all  this,  and  in  the  face  of  these  repellent  influences,  has 
ventured  again  to  come  amongst  us.  The  least  we  can  do  is  to  acknowledge  his  great 
kindness  in  doing  so,  and  by  our  sympathy  and  co-operation  to  aid  him  all  we  can  in  the 
great  and  good  work  in  which  he  is  engaged — the  relief  of  suffering  humanity,  irrespective 
of  all  considerations  of  sect,  party,  country,  class,  or  creed." 

"  Mr.  William  Tebb  said  :  '  I  do  not  rise  to  make  a  speech  :  there  are  those  here,  some 
of  whom  have  already  addressed  you,  who  are  accustomed  to  speak  in  public  assemblies, 
and  I  am  not.  I  cannot,  however,  refrain  from  expressing  my  concurrence  with  the 
sentiments  contained  in  the  address  just  read,  and  my  satisfaction  in  seeing  so  many 
assembled  here  this  evening  to  do  honour  to  so  distinguished  a  philanthropist  as  Dr. 
Newton.  It  is  related  of  Faraday,  that  when  he  made  a  new  discovery  he  would  show 
12 

178  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

it  and  explain  it  to  his  friends,  evincing  a  delight  which  they  could  not  always  appreciate, 
and  the  question  was  frequently  put  to  him,  "  What  is  the  use  of  it  ?"  To  which  the 
Professor  would  reply,  ''  Wait,  and  we'll  find  some  use  for  it."  Now,  this  question  is 
frequently  put  with  regard  to  Spiritualism,  and  I  confess  that  if  it  was  confined,  as  many 
seem  to  suppose,  to  the  phenomena  of  raps,  table-tipping,  and  the  like,  one  might  be 
puzzled  to  answer  the  question  satisfactorily.  But  when  it  is  shown  there  is  a  continuous 
influx  from  the  spiritual  world,  which  is  manifested  in  all  the  variety  of  forms  witnessed 
in  the  Apostolic  age,  in  healing  the  sick,  as  illustrated  by  our  gaest  Dr.  Newton  ;  in 
inspirational  speaking,  so  powerfully  instanced  in  this  hall  by  Mrs.  Hardinge  ;  in  the 
power  to  cast  out  evil  spirits  ;  and  when  the  facts  of  modern  Spiritualism  demonstrate 
the  truth  of  all  the  most  cherished  beliefs  of  humanity,  showing  the  ever- watchful  interest 
which  those  who  have  gone  before  take  in  those  that  remain,  and  giving  us  clearer  and 
better  views  of  the  future  as  well  as  of  the  present  life,  I  think  we  may  affirm  that  the 
good  is  unquestionable.  I  do  not,  however,  intend  to  pursue  this  subject,  but  permit  me 
before  taking  my  seat  to  assure  Dr.  Newton  that  the  kindly  feehngs  he  has  expressed  in 
his  letters  to  Spiritualists  in  this  country  are  reciprocated  by  Spirituahsts  here  towards 
himself  and  his  fellow-workers.  We  in  England  owe  a  deep  debt  of  gratitude  to  the 
earlier  advocates  of  the  movement  in  America,  to  public  men  like  Governor  Tallmadge, 
of  Wisconsin,  and  Judge  Edmonds,  of  New  York  ;  to  clergymen  like  the  late  Rev.  John 
Pierpont,  of  Boston,  the  successor  of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Channing,  and  Adin  Ballou  ;  to 
men  eminent  in  the  scientific  world,  like  the  late  Professor  Mapes,  and  Dr.  Hare,  of 
Philadelphia  ;  to  men  like  Dr.  Willis,  and  A.  E.  Newton,  who  for  their  faith  as  Spiritualists 
have  been  expelled  from  college  and  from  church,  and  many  others — with  noble  women 
not  a  few,  who  have  borne  the  loss  of  worldly  position,  the  ridicule,  vituperation,  and  all 
that  general  hostility  which  ever  seems  to  follow  those  whe  identify  themselves  with  the 
advent  of  unpopular  truths.' 

"Mr.  J.  M.  Peebles  said  :  '  I  feel  some  embarrassment  in  making  any  remarks,  as  this 
is  a  meeting  of  noble-hearted  Englishmen  to  welcome  a  distinguished  friend  of  my  own 
from  America.  I  am  exceedingly  happy  to  be  in  your  midst,  and  especially  to  be  upon 
this  platform  alongside  a  friend  and  brother  whom  I  have  known,  loved,  and  respected 

for  many  years Truly  it  is  often  asked,  "  What  good  does  Spiritualism  do  ?" 

It  gives  demonstration  of  a  future  existence,  for  even  now  clear-headed  men  often  ask  the 
question,  "  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ? "  Once,  as  a  minister,  I  attended  a  funeral 
of  an  only  child.  My  text  was  "  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  Me,  and  forbid  thern 
not,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The  whole  of  m;^  sermon  was  about  "  faith," 
but  as  the  mother  baptized  the  coffin  with  her  tears,  she  turned  and  said  to  me,  ''  Tell  me 
what  you  know  about  the  immortal  world  ;  my  aching  heart  asks  for  more  than  faith — for 
knowledge."  She  added,  "  Tell  me  what  you  know  of  that  world  ;  shall  I  know  my  child  ? 
Will  my  child  know  me  ?" — and  1  was  dumb.  But  now,  since  I  have  talked  with  the  angels, 
and  have  heard  their  lute-like  voices,  I  no  longer  talk  only  about  ''faith,"  for  now  "We 
know  that  we  have  a  house  eternal  in  the  heavens."  Spiritualism  teaches  us  and  proves 
that  there  is  an  immortal  life  beyond  the  tomb.  Spiritualism  is  spreading  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth.  I  found  its  phenomena  in  Smyrna,  in  Constantinople,  in  Athens,  and  upon 
the  Pacific  coast ;  in  fact,  wherever  thinking  men  are  found,  there  is  this  living  truth 
proclaimed.  I  know  much  of  Dr.  Newton,  for  hundreds  have  clasped  my  hand  who  have 
been  healed  by  him.  To  pick  out  sohtary  instances  from  among  the  large  number  is  like 
trying  to  select  some  specially  bright  star  from  the  thousands  in  the  midnight  heavens. 
In  Buffalo,  several  years  ago,  I  was  present  at  the  house  of  Dr.  Newton,  when  a  gentleman 
was  brought  in  upon  his  bed,  who  for  years  had  had  paralysis  ;  Dr.  Newton  looked  at  him, 
simply  laid  his  hands  upon  him,  and  said,  "  Disease,  I  bid  you  depart  !  Arise  !  you  are 
well ; "  and  the  man  left  the  bed  and  crossed  the  room,  then  stood  before  Dr.  Newton 
weeping  with  joy.  "  Stop,"  said  Dr.  Newton,  "it  is  not  I ;  it  is  the  spirit  power  of  which 
I  am  but  the  humble  instrument."  On  another  occasion  a  lady  could  not  get  near  him, 
and  Dr.  Newton  was  impressed  to  say,  "  It  does  not  matter,  she  is  well,"  and  she  was 

cured.     He  has  cured  the  lame,  the  dumb,  and  the  blind As  Mrs.  Hardinge 

stands  at  the  head  of  American  inspirational  speakers,  so  Dr.  Newton  stands  at  the  head 
of  all  the  healing  mediums  connected  with  the  movement.  Before  him  disease  departs, 
and  when  it  does  not  depart  at  once,  it  sometimes  departs  very  shortly  afterwards,  because 
of  its  cause  being  removed — a  stream  will  flow  for  a  little  time  after  its  sources  of  supply 
have  been  cut  off.  I  have  great  faith  in  Dr.  Newton's  cures,  far  more  faith  than  has  been 
expressed  by  some  of  those  who  have  spoken  before  me,  because  I  have  seen  more  of  Dr. 
Newton's  work  than  they  have.  I  know  that  Dr.  Newton  will  nobly  do  his  work,  and 
that  he  will  be  blessed  by  God  and  His  holy  angels  :  I  trust  that  all  present  will  extend 
to  him  love  and  warmth  of  soul.  Personally,  the  more  time  I  spend  in  England,  the 
better  I  comprehend  and  love  Englishmen,  and  I  wish  to  bespeak  for  Dr.  Newton  cordial 
welcomes  and  greetings  while  he  remains  in  this  country.' 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  179 

"  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton  then  rose  amid  loud  and  continued  applause.  He  spoke  under 
spirit  influence,  with  slowness  and  frequent  pauses,  and  said  :  '  I  feel  overwhelmed  by 
your  cordial  welcome.  I  stand  before  you  as  a  plain  man,  and  feel  like  a  Utile  chUd.  I 
am  a  practical  Christian,  and  am  ready  at  any  time  to  make  a  sacrifice  of  myself  for  the 
sake  of  Christianity.  It  is  a  wonder  to  me  that  few  men  ever  try  to  live  daily  as  Jesus 
lived.  When  I  became  Chiistian  in  life,  spiritual  gifts  were  showered  upon  me,  and  this 
was  as  wonderful  to  myself  as  to  those  whom  I  address.  I  believe  in  spirit  communion, 
and  I  even  know  the  names  of  some  of  the  spirits  who  control  me  in  the  exercise  of  my 

gifts As  to  the  power  of  healing,  it  is  merely  an  illustration  of  the  power  of 

love.  When  any  sick  person  comes  before  me,  I  lay  my  hands  on  that  person  and  feel 
that  I  love  him,  and  if  the  patient  is  not  antagonistic,  he  is  almost  sure  to  be  healed  ; 
tell  them  I  love  them,  and  when  this  opens  their  hearts  to  me,  the  disease  must 
depart.     I  make  no  profession  to  be  a  public  speaker.    I  am  entirely  under  the  control  of 

the  spirits I  cannot  say  that  I  have  come  to  England  at  any  sacrifice,  because 

it  was  the  will  of  my  Father  that  I  should  come.  I  have  not  come  to  London  to  make 
money,  and  I  shall  receive  rich  and  poor  alike.  The  welcome  I  have  received  prevents  me 
from  speaking  as  freely  as  I  wish  to  do.    I  have  much  to  say,  but  I  feel  overwhelmed  at  the 

reception  you  have  given  me.     I  am  heart  and  soul  with  you It  is  not  a 

matter  of  belief  with  me  that  spirits  control  me — it  is  knowledge.  Pythagoras,  Socrates, 
and  Plato  walk  the  earth  to-day,  and  so  do  all  the  great  and  good  men  wh'b  have  gone 
before  us.  I  shall  meet  you  again  next  Sunday,  and  wish  you  all  well,  with  many  thanks 
and  blessings  for  your  kind  attention.' 

"  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  said  :  Before  the  meeting  closes,  I  should  like  to  say  a  few  words  of 
congratulation  to  Dr.  Newton.  I  believe  that  I  express  the  sentiments  of  all  Spiritualists 
when  I  say  that  it  is  their  desire  to  give  a  cordial  greeting  to  all  Americans  ;  and  that  it 
is  a  great  duty  to  bring  Americans  and  Englishmen  closer  together,  that  they  may  under- 
stand each  other  better  than  they  have  done.  I  should  not  have  risen  at  all  except  to  call 
attention  to  one  point.  I  want  to  tell  Dr.  Newton  that  Spiritualism  is  making  great 
progress  in  this  country  among  great  men  and  great  thinkers,  and  men  who  will  become 
great  authorities.  I  rejoice  to  tell  him  that  a  Society  the  other  day  called  vsdtnesses  before 
them,  and  made  clear  and  close  inquiry  ;  that  that  Society  is  about  to  send  forth  a  report 
which  will  do  much  good  among  outsiders.  ...  I  believe  that  the  report  of  the 
Dialectical  Society  will  go  far  towards  the  removal  of  the  chief  obstacles  in  the  path  of 
Spiritualism,  and  make  it  easier  to  help  on  our  divine  belief.  We  shall  then  be,  I  trust, 
the  humble  instruments  in  God's  hands  of  destroying  the  Materialism  of  the  present  age, 
for  this  I  consider  to  be  the  great  purpose  of  Spiritualism.  ...  I  have  myself  full 
knowledge  of  the  truth  of  Spirituahsm,  and  I  hope  that  many  who  are  not  Spiritualists 
will  take  my  testimony  as  worth  something  when  I  express  that  certainty  of  belief.  The 
more  Spiritualism  has  been  inquired  into,  the  more  its  truth  has  been  exhibited  ;  I  thank 
God  for  having  given  us  "opportunities  of  proving  that  which  we  now  believe  and  know. 
Dr.  Newton  has  reached  London  at  a  good  time,  with  less  difficulties  than  of  old  to 
encounter,  and  with  less  probability  of  being  considered  mad  or  dishonest.' 

"  Thanks  having  been  voted  to  the  Chairman,  the  business  part  of  the  meeting  then 
came  to  a  close,  and  it  assumed  the  character  of  a  conversazione."    .     .    . 

"  DR.    NEWTON   AT   THE    CAVENDISH    ROOMS. 

"  On  Sunday  evening  at  the  close  of  the  service,  and  after  a  very  excellent  discourse 
by  Mr.  Peebles,  Dr.  Newton  invited  all  who  wei-e  afflicted  with  disease  or  pain  to  come 
forward.  Many  did  so  ;  and  declared  themselves  either  cured  or  greatly  benefited  by  the 
Doctor's  treatment.  These  included  headache,  deafness,  stammering,  neuralgia,  heart 
disease,  &c.  His  success  in  one  case  was  very  marked  ;  that  of  the  son  of  Mr.  F.  Cowper, 
388,  Edgware  Road,  who  had  been  unable  to  walk  without  crutches  for  eight  years  past. 
After  Dr.  Newton's  treatment,  the  lad  was  able  to  walk  home — a  distance  of  about  two 
miles.  On  Monday  he  attended  at  the  Cambridge  Hall,  and  had  his  spine  straightened, 
which  has  made  him  measure  about  four  inches  taller.  He  now  walks  with  a  stick,  and 
improves  daily.  On  Sunday,  May  22nd,  a  similar  scene  was  witnessed,  and  on  both 
occasions  the  hall  was  densely  crowded." 

''  DR.    NEWTON    AT   THE   CAMBRIDGE   HALL. 

"  The  Medium  says  :  *  Dr.  Newton  commenced  a  regular  course  of  treatment  of  the 
poor  on  Monday  morning.  May  16th,  in  the  Cambridge  Hall,  Newman  Street,  Oxford 
Street.  He  attends  between  the  hours  of  nine  and  twelve,  and  will  accept  no  money  for 
his  services.     A  large  number  came  to  be  healed,  and  they  have  steadily  increased  each 

i8o  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

day.  Many  remarkable  cures  have  been  made.  It  would  be  of  little  use  to  fill  our  columns 
with  an  account  of  the  remarkable  instances  of  benefit  which  could  be  culled  from  the 
Doctor's  treatment  on  one  morning  only.  Dr.  Newton  commenced  on  "Wednesday  morning 
by  removing  a  curvature  from  the  spine  of  a  young  lady,  the  daughter  of  Lady  Helena 
Newenham.  A  lad  who  had  not  spoken,  except  in  a  whisper,  for  three  years,  was  enabled 
to  speak,  so  as  to  be  heard  distinctly  over  the  hall.  Mr.  Hubbard,  of  Rathbone  Place,  was 
cured  of  asthma  of  long  standing.  Mr.  Watts,  Rathbone  Place,  was  cured  of  lameness 
from  wounds.  Mr.  Charles  Clutterbuck,  74  years  of  age,  had  been  totally  blind  for  six 
years  ;  after  treatment,  he  could  see  faces  and  tell  the  colour  of  Mr.  Watson's  beard. 
Mrs.  Anna  Crisp,  23,  King  Street,  had  been  paralyzed  for  three  years  ;  cured  by  one 
treatment.  She  had  been  affected  on  one  side  throughout.  Robert  Andrews,  151, 
Metropolitan  Meat  Market,  was  blind  of  one  eye,  and  had  pains  in  the  head  and  hand  ; 
after  treatment  he  pronounced  himself  "  all  right."  James  Armstrong,  44,  Brindley 
Street,  Harrow  Road,  was  afflicted  with  paralyzed  legs  for  nearly  two  years.  He  could 
walk  with  difficulty  on  a  pair  of  crutches,  but  he  went  away  with  his  crutches  over  his 
shoulder.  Many  who  were  not  perfectly  cured  were  much  relieved.  Some  were  pro- 
nounced absolutely  incurable.  "  It  would  be  as  easy  to  make  new  eyes  as  to  cure  you," 
said  the  Doctor  to  several  who  were  entirely  past  recovery.  Others  were  benefited,  and 
some  were  told  to  come  again  ;  others  that  their  diseases  were  mitigated,  and  would  pass 
away  in  a  few  weeks.'  " 

"  DR.    NEWTON   AND   MR.    ASHLEY. 

"  Since  the  foregoing  was  in  type,  we  have  received  the  following  communication  : — 

" '  To  the,  Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine. 

"'May  23rd,  1870. 
" '  Sir, — I  have  received  a  letter  this  morning  from  Mr.  Wm.  Ashley,  of  Liverpool, 
whose  case  I  alluded  to  at  Harley  Street,  and  which  was  the  first  case  upon  which  Dr. 
Newton  tried  his  healing  power  after  his  arrival  in  England.     Mr.  Ashley  now  writes  : 

"  May  22nd. 
"  You  will  be  pleased  to  hear  that  I  am  gaining  strength  daily.     I  generally  walk  out 
one  or  two  hours  when  the  weather  permits,  either  alone  or  with  my  wife.     I  enjoy  my 
food  as  much  as  ever  I  did,  and  have  no  doubt  but  in  a  sliort  time  I  shall  be  in  robust 
health — thanks  to  dear  Dr.  Newton." 

''  *  You  can  make  whatever  use  you  please  of  this  communication. 
" '  You  will  see  that  the  press  is  in  full  blast  against  the  Doctor  ;  the  Telegraph  of 
this  day  being  most  violent  ;  the  Echo  of  Saturday  pubHshing  a  letter  from  a  patient  who 
was  not  healed  ;  the  Advertiser  denouncing  him  as  a  humbug. 

"  The  only  fair  account  was  given  in  the  Daily  News  of  Saturday  ;  but  the  writer  did 
not  half  state  the  facts  he  witnessed.  I  was  there,  and  many  cases  were  marvellous — 
unmistakable  !  "  Yours  truly, 

"  Benj.  Coleman." 

"dr.    NEWTON    AND   THE   PRESS. 

"  The  Liverpool  Mercury  has  a  long  article  on  Dr.  Newton's  proceedings  in  Liverpool. 
On  Sunday,  May  8th,  he  attended  two  meetings  and  operated  on  from  thirty  to  forty 
persons,  and  all,  it  is  admitted,  with  one  exception,  professed  themselves  benefited,  A 
portion  of  the  London  press  has  begun  to  Telegraph  false  reports  and  Echo  dirty  insinua- 
tions. "Tis  easy  as  lying,'  said  Shakespeare,  and  newspaper  scribes  well  know  how  easy 
that  is. 

"  The  Daily  News  in  a  long  article  gives  a  tolerably  fair  account  of  some  of  the  pro- 
ceedings during  what  the  writer  calls  Dr.  Newton's  morning  performance,  and  this  toler- 
able fairness  was  so  much  a  surprise  to  Dr.  Newton,  amidst  the  furious  blasts  of  others  of 
the  press,  that  he  had  the  innocence  to  thank  the  Daily  News  and  even  to  '  bless '  the 
editor.  This  was  too  much  for  the  editor,  and  he  has  hastened  to  repudiate  the  blessing, 
and  to  withdraw  all  his  fairness,  saying,  with  great  truth,  that  such  a  thing  was  never  in 
his  mind.  A  great  deal  more  of  this  is  of  course  in  store  for  Dr.  Newton,  and  he  has 
made  up  his  account  to  meet  it.  Perhaps  the  source  of  the  Doctor's  power  to  heal  may 
itself  render  him  not  the  most  philosophic  or  prudent  person  in  speaking,  and  he  may  not 
be  a  good  exponent  of  the  philosophy  of  the  subject.  In  this  way  additional  difficulties 
may  be  thrown  in  his  own  way,  and  in  that  of  the  public,  to  prevent  their  understanding 
the  rationale  of  this  power,  even  to  the  small  extent  to  which  it  can  be  understood.  .  . 
....  But  apart  from  this,  we  should  be  glad  to  know  why  a  benevolent  gentleman 
cannot  assert  this  power  in  his  own  person,  and  endeavour  to  exercise  it  at  his  own  cost. 

\ 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  i8i 

without  drawing  down  on  himself  the  blind  ferocity  of  the  press  and  the  public.  We  do 
not  know  why  he  should  be  called  a  blasphemer  and  an  impostor,  and  have  the  whole 
pack  of  the  press,  like  so  many  hounds,  yelping  at  his  heels.  In  America,  where  we  hav? 
watched  his  course  for  many  years,  he  has  relieved  and  cured  thousands,  and  is  a  poorer 
man  to-day  than  he  was  five  years  ago,  though  his  powers  of  healing  are  said  to  be  greater. 
Already  he  has  been  the  means  of  curing  many  in  England  during  this  short  visit ;  and 
we  should  have  thought  the  wise  plan  would  have  been  to  watch  the  result  and  tabulate 
his  work,  and  see  what  it  comes  to  before  becoming  abusive.  It  suits  the  temper  of  the 
press,  and  its  ignorance  of  such  matters,  to  begin  by  abuse  ;  and  so  we  must  be  content 
to  let  them  go  on  in  their  own  way.  Anything  above  mere  physics  always  produces  this 
unholy  rage.     We  wish  that  some  healer  could  be  found  who  could  cure  this  public 

Our  Spiritualistic  readers  have,  no  doubt,  like  the  author  herself,  too 
often  heard  the  parrot  cry  of  Cui  bono  to  marvel  why — even  with  all  the 
excisions  of  extraneous  matter  we  have  made — we  should  have  published 
the  above  account  in  extenso  from  the  pages  of  the  London  Spiritual 
Magazine  of  Uecemher,  1870. 

To  non-spiritualistic  readers  who  may  perchance  glance  over  these 
pages  we  would  say,  "Eead,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest"  the  above 
account,  before  you  again  ask  the  ten  thousand  times  answered  question, 
"  What  is  the  use  of  Spiritualism  ?  " 

CHAPTER    XXIII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    (CONTINUED). 

Of  Spiritual  Associations, 

In  1865  an  association  was  formed  under  the  name  and  style  of  "The 
Association  of  Progressive  Spiritualists  of  Great  Britain,"  and  the  following 
is  a  brief  summary  of  its  aims  as  reported  in  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine 
for  December,  1865  : — 

"  The  '  Association  of  Progressive  Spiritualists  of  Great  Britain,'  which  recently  held 
its  first  convention  at  Darlington,  has  issued — '  A  circular  respectfully  addressed  to  the 
friends  of  Spiritualism  and  the  public  generally  ; '  in  which,  accepting  as  their  definition 
of  Spiritualism  the  motto  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  they  state  that  : — 

" '  The  principal  objects  we  have  in  view,  are,  as  an  association,  to  meet  once  a  year,  or 
oftener,  if  it  be  deemed  advisable,  for  the  purpose  of  social  communion,  interchange  of 
sentiment ;  to  record  our  united  experiences,  and  the  progress  which  Spiritualism  is 
making  in  and  around  us  ;  to  devise  means  for  difi"using  among  our  fellow  men  and 
women  the  principles  of  this  Divine  philosophy,  by  the  distribution  of  the  best  tracts  and 
books  we  have  upon  the  subject,  and  the  delivery  throughout  the  kingdom  of  lectures  by 
persons  of  approved  character  and  abihty.' 

"  A  second  convention  is  announced  for  the  last  week  in  July,  1866,  at  Newcastle-on- 
Tyne.     The  secretary  of  the  Association  is  Dr.  McLeod,  of  Newcastle." 

Of  the  Convention  announced  as  above,  the  reports  were  scarcely  as 
favourable  as  could  have  been  desired.  A  general  lack  of  unity  seemed 
to  pervade  the  assembly  and  the  papers  presented  were  not  calculated  to 
edify  those  outside   the   ranks  of  Spiritualism,    however   interesting  they 

i82  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

might  have  been  to  the  writers.     The  following  remarks  conclude  a  report 
of  this  gathering  furnished  by  the  London  Spiritual 

"  Amid  much  that  is  crude  and  undigested  in  the  papers  and  speeches  here  reported, 
there  are  some  well  worthy  a  better  companionship,  especially  one  by  Mr.  Etchells,  on 
'  The  Atmosphere  of  Intelligence,  Pleasure,  and  Pain  ;  or  a  Chapter  from  the  Harmony  of 
Matter,  as  unfolded  in  the  Circles  of  Spiritualists  who  meet  at  Brothers  Chapman,  Varley, 
and  Etchells',  Huddersfield.'  This  paper  has  evidently  been  prepared  with  great  care  ; 
the  facts  it  relates,  especially  those  concerning  the  phenomena  of  '  the  Double,'  are  of  great 
interest ;  and  the  circles  named  by  Mr.  Etchells  can  hardly  be  better  employed  in  the 
interest  of  Spiritualism  than  in  the  further  prosecution  of  these  investigations." 

For  a  few  succeding  years,  conventions  were  held  either  in  London  or  the 
provinces,  but  these  gatherings  were  seldom  participated  in  by  the  majority 
of  the  English  Spiritualists,  nor  were  they  conducive  to  any  very  important 
results. 

Conventions  appear  to  be  more  in  harmony  with  the  genius  of  American 
than  English  Spiritualism,  and  we  have  but  few  evidences  that  their  action 
in  England  has  promoted  the  progress  of  the  cause  or  the  spirit  of  unity 
amongst  its  supporters. 

The  invariable  struggle  between  the  extremes  of  RadicaHsm  and 
Conservatism  which  so  often  disturbs  the  harmony  of  associative  bodies,  is 
a  prevaiHng  condition,  of  which  the  Spiritualists  have  had  to  learn,  by 
painful  experience. 

One  of  their  most  severe  lessons  in  this  direction  was  read  to  them  in  the 
determined  opposition  manifested  by  "The  Royal  Society  of  Great 
Britain,''  against  the  admission  of  ''  Spiritualism  "  as  a  theme  of  discussion 
worthy  the  attention  of  that  august  body.  Several  of  the  Fellows  were 
earnest  believers  in  Spiritualism,  and  thinking  they  perceived  in  its 
phenomena,  subjects  quite  as  worthy  the  attention  of  eminent  scientists  as 
the  genesis  of  a  worm  or  the  precise  number  of  markings  on  a  fossil  trilo- 
bite,  they  made  strenuous  efforts  to  introduce  papers  on  the  subject  of  the 
marvellous  demonstrations  of  unknown  force  which  the  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism  display.  It  was  in  the  amazing  assumptions  of  contempt  and 
indifference  with  which  these  propositions  were  repelled,  that  the  Spiritualists 
were  led  to  believe  that  Societies  in  general  are  banded  together  for  the 
defence  of  the  old  against  the  innovations  of  the  new,  and  those  who 
presume  to  try  and  enhghten  the  said  Societies  upon  the  subject  of  new  ideas, 
must  be  taught,  that  anything  a  very  learned,  especially  a  Royal  Society, 
does  not  already  know,  cannot  exist,  or  if  it  presume  to  maintain  an 
existence  without  the  pale  of  such  an  authoritative  body,  cannot  be  worth 
knowing. 

It  was  doubtless  under  the  influence  of  this  high-toned  monopoly  of  all 
knowledge  worth  the  having,  that  Professor  Tyndall,  Mr.  Palgrave,  and 
other  members  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Great  Britain,  maintained  a  long 
and  acrimonious  correspondence  with  Mr.  William  Wilkinson,  Professors 
Wallace  and  Cromwell  Varley,  Sir  J.  E.  Tennant,  and  others,  on  the  question 
of  bringing  the  phenomena  claimed  to  be  "  Spiritual,"  before  the  members 
of  the  Royal  Society,  and  although  the  Mediumship  of  Mr.  D.  D.  Home 
was  courteously  tendered  as  an  illustration  of  the  assertions  made  by  the 
SpirituaUsts,  the  scornful  rejection  of  this  offer  seemed  necessary  to  con- 
vince the  zealous  propagandists,  how  useless  it  is  to  try  and  convince 
those,  who  neither  desire  nor  intend  to  be  convinced  of  any  facts  they  do 
not  originate,  or  any  truths  they  do  not  themselves  already  know. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  183 

Although  the  action  of  Societies  as  a  general  rule  appears  to  be 
ephemeral  in  connection  with  Spiritualism,  its  use  being  simply  available 
for  temporary  purposes  of  propagandism,  there  have  been  a  vast  number  of 
attempts  at  organization  in  the  ranks  of  Spirituahsm.  One  of  the  most 
permanent  and  influential  associations  that  has  ever  been  formed  in  Great 
Britain  has  been  known  under  the  name  of  "  The  British  National  Associ- 
ation of  Spiritualists."  It  may  not  be  generally  understood  that  this 
organization  owes  its  first  foundation  in  the  metropolis  to  the  steadfast 
though  quiet  and  unobtrusive  efforts  of  Mr.  Dawson  Rogers,  of  .Rose  Villa, 
Finchley.  This  gentleman — one  of  the  veteran  Spiritualists  of  London — 
has  for  many  years  laboured  unceasingly  to  promote  the  interests  of 
Spiritualism,  and  both  by  purse  and  person  has  maintained  every  good 
work  which  has  tended  to  advance  "  the  cause."  Besides  devoting  himself 
with  tireless  energy  to  the  foundation  and  conduct  of  the  "  British  National 
Association  of  Spiritualists,"  the  movement  owes  to  Mr.  Dawson  Rogers 
the  foundation  of  the  admirable  periodical  entitled  Light.  With  the  excep- 
tion of  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine.,  Light  is  unquestionably  the  highest 
toned,  and  most  scholarly  periodical  that  has  ever  issued  from  the  Spiritual 
Press,  and  Mr.  Dawson  Rogers's  good  services  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism 
have  been  for  many  long  years  pursued  so  faithfully,  so  effectively,  yet  with 
such  a  total' absence  of  personal  display,  that  we  feel  but  too  happy  in 
offering  this  humble  tribute  to  one,  whose  way  marks  in  the  path  of  progress 
have  been  far  more  prominent,  than  his  honoured  name.  To  return  to 
Mr.  Rogers's  first  great  public  effort  in  promoting  the  foundation  of  the 
British  National  Association  of  Spiritualists.  In  a  brief  sketch  of  this 
important  movement  published  a  few  years  since  in  the  London  Spiritualist., 
the  editor  says  : — 

"  Some  time  in  1873  it  was  resloved  to  form  a  national  organisation  of  Spiritualists  in 
Great  Britain.  This  was  done  at  a  meeting  at  Liverpool,  to  which  everybody  had  been 
invited  by  means  of  advertisements  and  special  letters  to  well-known  men.  Thus  was 
the  standard  raised  of  "Friendly  union  among  SpirituaKsts."  Fierce  attempts  were 
made  to  kill  the  organisation,  more  especially  by  the  press,  but  the  workers  fought  their 
way,  and  succeeded  in  planting  a  central  establishment  in  London,  and  in  doing  some 
public  work  in  addition,  more  especially  the  founding  of  fortnightly  meetings  to  consider 
public  questions  relating  to  Spiritualism." 

Soon  after  its  first  inauguration,  the  Society  issued  a  well-prepared  tract, 
in  which  was  published  the  list  of  distinguished  persons  who  became  its 
members  and  associates.  Although  it  would  be  impossible  to  give  in  extenso 
a  Ust  which  includes  more  than  a  hundred  names  and  addresses,  it  may 
not  be  out  of  place  to  make  the  following  selection  from  amongst  the  most 
noteworthy  personages  of  the  association  : — 

"BRITISH    NATIONAL   ASSOCIATION    OF    SPIRITUALISTS    (ESTABLISHED    1873.) 

Alexander  Calder,  Esq.,  1,  Hereford  Square,  West  Brompton,  S.W. 

VICE-PRESIDENTS. 

Blackburn,  Charles,  Parkfield,  Didsbury,  Manchester. 

Coleman,  Benjamin,  1,  Bernard  Villas,  Upper  Norwood. 

Fitz-Gerald,  Mrs.,  19,  Cambridge  Street,  Hyde  Park,  W. 

Fitz-Gerald,  Desmond  G.,  M.S.Tel.E.,  6,  Loughborough  Road  North,  Brixton,  S.W. 

Gregory,  Mrs.  Makdougall,  21,  Green  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  W. 

Honywood,  Mrs.,  52,  Warwick  Square,  S.W. 

1 84  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

viCE-PBEsrDENTs — Continued. 

Jencken,  Henry  D.,  M.R.I.,  Barrister-at-Law,  Goldsmitli  Buildings,  E.G. 

Massey,  0.  C,  Barrister-at-Law,  96,  Portland  Place,  W. 

Rogers,  E.  D.,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N. 

Speer,    Stanhope    Templeman,    M.D.,    Douglas    House,    13,    Alexandra    Road,   South 

Hampstead,  N.W. 
Wyld,  Geo,  M.D.,  12,  Great  Cumberland  Place,  Hyde  Park,  W. 

Isham,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  Lamport  Hall,  Northampton. 
Ivimey,  Joseph,  Berkeley  Mansion,  64,  Seymour  Street,  W. 
Joy,  Algernon,  M.I.C.E.,  Jimior  United  Service  Club,  S.W. 
Stock,  St.  George  W.,  M.A.,  Queen  Street,  Oxford. 
Theobold,  Morell,  30,  Mark  Lane,  E,C. 

HONORARY   OR    CORRESPONDING    MEMBERS. 

His  Imperial  Highness  Nicholas,  Duke  of  Leuchtenburg,  St.  Petersburg,  Russia. 

Prince  Emile  de  Sayn  Wittgenstein,  Lieutenant- General,  Aide-de-Camp  General  de  S.M.I. 

I'Empereur  de  Russie,  Vevey,  Switzerland. 
Ahmed  Rassim  Pacha,  Khan  de  Rassim  Pacha  a  Bahdj^  Capoussou,  Constantinople. 
The  Baron  Von  Vay,  President  of  the  Spiritual  Society  at  Pesth. 
The  Baroness  Adelma  Von  Vay,  Gonobitz,  bei  Potschach,  Styria,  via  Gratz,  Austria. 
The  Baroness  Guldenstubbe,  29,  Rue  de  Trevise,  Paris. 
Colonel  Don  Santiago  Bassols  y  Folguera,  Madrid. 
El  Visconde  de  Torres-Solauot,  Madrid. 
The   Hon.   Alexandre  Aksakof,   Russian   Imperial  Councillor,  Nevsky  Prospect,  6,  St. 

Petersburg. 
The  Baron  von  Dirckink-Holmfeld,  Pinneberg,  Holstein. 
M.  Gustave  de  Veh,  Bischoffsberger  ViUa,  Interlaken,  Switzerl9,nd. 
Mme.  de  Veh,  Bischoffsberger  Villa,  Interlaken,  Switzerland. 
Signor  Sebastiano  Fenzi,  Banca  Fenzi,  Florence,  Italy. 
Baboo  Pearychand  Mittra,  7,  Swallow  Lane,  Calcutta. 
James  Mylne,  Esq.,  Beheea,  East  Indian  Railway,  Bengal. 
A.  J.  Riko,  Esq.,  Gude  Molstraat,  the  Hague,  Holland. 
M.  C.  Constant,  Smyrna,  Turkey  in  Asia. 

Dr.  Maximilian  Perty,  Professor  of  Natural  Science,  Berne,  Switzerland. 
Dr.  Franz  Hoffmann,  Professor  of  Philosophy,  Wurzburg  tjniversity,  Germany. 
Gregor  C.  Wittig,  Esq.,  Kornerstrasse  2b,  Leipsic,  Germany. 
W.  H.  Terry,  Esq.,  84,  Russell  Street,  Melbourne,  Victoria,  Australia. 
M.  Leymarie,  7,  Rue  de  Lille,  Paris. 
Epes  Sargent,  Esq.,  Box  2,985,  Boston,  U.S.A. 
H.  T.  Child,  Esq.,  M.D.,  634,  Race  Street,  Philadelphia,  U.S.A. 
E.  Crowell,  Esq.,  M.D.,  196,  Clinton  Avenue,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  U.S.A. 
M.  F.  Clavairoz,  Consul-General  de  France,  Trieste,  Austria. 
G.  L.  Ditson,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Albany,  New  York,  U.S.A., 
W.  L.  Sammons,  Esq.,  Cape  Town,  South  Africa. 
J.  H.  Gledstanes,  Esq.,  Merignac,  Gironde,  France. 
Rev.  Samuel  Watson,  Memphis,  Tennessee,  U.S.A. 
Luther  Cobby,  Esq.,  9  Montgomery  Place,  Boston,  U.S.A. 
M.  de  Bassompierre,  285,  Chaussee  St.  Pierre,  Etterbeck,  Brussels. 
M.  A.  Anthleme  Fritz,  President  de  I'Union,  67,  Rue  du  Midi,  Brussels 
Lieut.-Col.  P.  Jacoby,  11,  Rue  de  Vienne,  Brussels. 
Le  Comte  de  Bullet,  Hotel  de  I'Athenee,  Rue  Scribe,  Paris. 
Captain  R.  F.  Burton,  F.R.G.S.,  H.M.  Consul,  Trieste,  Austria. 
A.  R.  Wallace,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rosehill,  Dorking. 
Isaac  B.  Rich,  Esq.,  9,  Montgomery  Place,  Boston,  U.S.A. 
W.  S.  Godbe,  Esq.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A. 
Dr.  Grunhut,  Waitzner  Boulevard,  57,  Buda-Pesth,  Hungary. 
Dr.  A.  E.  Nehrer,  Eperjes,  Hungary. 
Signor  Damiani,  Salita  Pontecorvo,  60,  Naples. 
Berks  T.  Hutchinson,  Esq.,  2,  New  Street,  Cape  Town,  South  Africa. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  185 

ALLIED    SOCIETIES, 

The  Liverpool  Psychological  Society.     Secretary,  S.  Pride,  Esq.,  8,  Grampian  Road,  Edge 

-     Lane,  Liverpool. 
L'Union  Spirite  et  Magnetique.      Secretary,  M.  Charles  Fritz,   121,  Rue  de  Lou  vain, 

Brussels. 
The  Brixton  Psychological  Society.     Hon.  Sec,  H.  E.  Frances,  Esq.,  22,  Cowley  Road, 

Brixton,  S.W. 
The  Spiriter-Forscher  Society,  Buda-Pesth.     Secretary,  M.  Anton  Prochaszka,  Josefstadt 

Erzherzog  Alexander -gasse,  23,  Buda-Pesth,  Hungary. 
Dalston  Association  of  Enquirers  into  Spiritualism.     Hon.  Secretary,  T.  Blyton,  Esq., 

74,  Navarino  Road,  Dalston,  E. 
Cardiff  Spiritual  Society,     Hon.  Sec,  Mr.  A.  J.  Smart,  3,  Guildford  Street,  Cardiff. 
Sociedad  Espiritista  (.Espanola,  Cervantes  34,  28,    Madrid.     President,  El  Visconde  de 

Torres-Solanot. 
Sociedad  Espirita  Central  de  la  Republica  Mexicana.   President,  Senor  Refugio  T.  Gonzalez, 

7,  Calle  de  Amedo,  Mexico. 
Sociedad  Espirita  di  Bogota,   Colombia,   South  America.        President,  Senor  Manuel 

Jose  Angarita. 

For  several  years  this  Association  has  maintained  its  meetings,  established 
a  library,  held  soirees,  investigating  circles,  and  social  gathings,  with  an 
amount  of  fidelity  specially  commendable  in  a  movement  so  fluctuating  as 
Spiritualism.  Many  internal  changes  have  of  course  taken  place,  especially 
in  its  officers  and  directors.  Many  of  its  once  prominent  members  have 
been  removed  by  transition  to  a  higher  life ;  others  have  been  impelled  to 
withdraw  from  personal  motives,  and  still  many  eminent  persons  not 
enumerated  in  the  first  list,  have  become  affiUated  with  the  organization. 
So  much  influence  for  good  however  has  been  exerted  by  the  persistent 
energy  of  its  leaders,  that  we  feel  pleasure  in  adding  a  notice  of  the  last 
change  that  has  been  effected  in  its  arrangements.  The  excerpt  we  are 
about  to  subjoin  was  only  published  in  May,  1882,  and  is  taken  from 
Light. 

The  annexed  report  is  the  last  announcement  of  the  British  National 
Association  of  Spiritualists  under  that  name,  the  society  being  henceforth 
destined  to  be  known  as  "The  Central  Association  of  Spiritualists." 

The  article  is  headed  : — 

"  BRITISH    NATIONAL   ASSOCIATION    OF    SPIRITUALISTS. 

"  Annual  Meeting. — The  annual  general  meeting  of  this  Association  was  held  on 
Tuesday  evening  last,  at  38,  Great  Russell  Street,  Mr.  E.  Dawson  Rogers,  vice-president, 
in  the  chair.  The  principal  business  of  the  meeting  was  to  receive  the  annual  report  of 
the  Council  and  statement  of  accounts,  and  to  consider  a  recommendation  involving  a 
change  in  the  name  and  constitution  of  the  Association.  The  report  was  unanimously 
adopted,  as  was  also  a  proposition  in  favour  of  the  adoption  of  the  name  '  The  Central 
Association  of  Spiritualists,'  by  which  designation,  therefore,  the  Association  will  hence- 
forth be  known .  The  change,  we  think,  is  a  wise  one  ;  but  after  eight  years'  famiharity 
with  the  title  of  the  '  B.N.A.S.,'  we  give  it  up  with  some  regret." 

Then  follows  an  elaborate  report  of  the  Council,  by  which  it  appears  that 
the  society  is  stiff  in  a  ffourishing  condition.  The  following  items,  however, 
may  possess  some  interest  to  the  reader,  because  they  allude  to  the  depart- 
ture  of  more  than  one  honoured  friend  of  the  Spiritual  cause,  and  give 
further  particulars  of  the  status  of  the  association  under  its  new  designation 
in  1882.     The  report  concludes  thus  : — 

"  The  following  is  a  concise  summary  of  the  history  of  the  Association  since  the  last 
annual  meeting  : — 

1 86  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

''  Changes  in  the  Membership. — Number  of  new  members  elected,  52  ;  number  of 
resignations  16.  Deaths  during  the  year — M.  Leon  Favre,  Prof.  Friedrich  Zollner,  Rev. 
Sir  Wm.  Dunbar,  H.  D.  Jencken,  M.R.I.,  Alex.  Thorn,  Mrs.  Hook,  A.  E.  Hunter,  B.A. 
(Cantab).     Present  number  of  honorary  and  subscribing  members,  294. 

"Allied  Societies. — The  Gateshead  Society  for  the  Investigation  of  Spiritualism,  the 
South  African  Spiritual  Evidence  Society,  and  the  Paris  Psychological  Society  have  allied 
themselves  to  the  Association  during  the  year,  making  a  total  number  of  sixteen  in 
friendly  union. 

"Work  of  the  Association. — A  series  of  Discussion  and  Social  Meetings  has  been 
kept  up  through  the  season.     Many  of  these  have  been  highly  interesting  and  successful. 

"  Mr.  T.  P.  Barkas,  F.G.S.,  was  appointed  as  a  representative  of  the  Association  at 
the  discussion  on  Spiritualism  at  the  Church  Congress  held  in  October  of  last  year.  This 
discussion,  and  the  extent  to  which  the  report  of  it  was  circulated,  has  done  much  to 
raise  the  position  which  the  whole  subject  of  Spiritualism  occupies  in  the  public  mind. 

''  On  the  5th  and  6th  of  January  last,  conferences  of  an  excedingly  interesting 
character  were  held  in  the  rooms  of  the  Association,  on  the  invitation  of  Professor  Barrett, 
of  Dublin.  These  conferences  have  resulted  in  the  formation  of  a  '  Society  for  Psychical 
Research,'  which,  while  working  to  some  extent  on  similar  lines  to  those  of  the  B.N.A.S., 
does  not  commit  itself  to  a  belief  in  Spiritualism,  but  aims  at  approaching  the  inquiry 
solely  from  a  scientific  standpoint.  The  Council  feels  that  there  is  abundant  room  for 
such  a  society  without  in  any  way  affecting  the  necessity  for  a  Central  Association 
avowedly  for  the  investigation  and  propagation  of  Spiritualism.  " 

The  new  organization  alluded  to  in  the  last  report  sufficiently  indicates 
its  aims  by  its  nomenclature — namely,  "  The  Society  for  Psychical 
Research." 

The  announcements  put  forth  by  this  Society  point  to  the  Unes  of  de- 
marcation which  separate  it  from  any  thoroughly  pronounced  Spiritual 
organizations ;  in  fact,  the  addresses  of  its  President  and  Members  on  the 
occasion  of  its  first  general  meeting,  which  took  place  in  July,  1882, 
clearly  show,  that  though  Spiritualists  may  and  do  take  part  in  its 
researches,  a  belief  in  Spirit  communion  is  by  no  means  the  leading  prin- 
ciple upon  which  the  association  is  based.  To  illustrate  this  position  still 
more  forcibly,  we  append  a  note  which  the  Society  print  in  connection 
with  their  prospectus.     It  reads  as  follows  : 

"  To  prevent  misconception,  it  is  here  expressly  stated  that  Membership  of  this  Society 
does  not  imply  the  acceptance  of  any  particular  explanation  of  the  phenomena  investi- 
nated,  nor  any  belief  as  to  the  operation,  in  the  physical  world,  of  forces  other  than  those 
recognised  by  Physical  Science." 

After  publishing  the  list  of  eminent  literary  and  scientific  ladies  and 
gentlemen  who  compose  the  officers  and  members  of  this  association,  the 
prospectus  gives  the  following,  which  may  present  a  satisfactory  synopsis  of 
the  subjects  of  proposed  research. 

"  (1)  Committee  on   Thought-reading  ;    Hon.  Sec,  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,    18, 

Belgrave  Square,  Monkstown,  Dublin. 
"(2)  Committee  on  Mesmerism  :   Hon.  Sec,  Dr.  Wyld,  12,  Great  Cumberland  Place, 

London,  W. 
"  (3)  Committee  on  Reichenbach's  Experiments  ;  Hon.  Sec, '^Walter  H.  Coffin,  Esq., 

Junior  Athenseum  Club,  London,  W. 
"(4)  Comrnittee   on  Apparitions,   Haunted   Houses,    &c.  ;    Hon.    Sec,   Hensleigh 

Wedgwood,  Esq.,  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  London,  W. 
"  (5)  Committee  on  Physical  Phenomena ;   Hon.  Sec,  Dr.  C.  Lockhart  Robertson, 

Hamam  Chambers,  76,  Jermyn  Street,  S.W. 
"  (6)  Literary  Committee,  Hon,  Sees.,  Edmund  Gurney,  Esq.,  26,  Montpelier  Square, 

S.W.  ;  Frederic  W,  H.  Myers,  Esq.,  Leckhampton,  Cambridge." 

Besides  these  well  selected  subjects  for  consideration,  and  the  marked 
ability  of  the  gentlemen  who  have  consented  to  aid  in  their  investigation, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  187 

the  success  of  the  undertaking  is  guaranteed  by  the  high  standing  and 
hterary  attainments  of  the  parties  under  whose  direction  the  work  is 
announced  to  proceed.  Any  committee  of  investigators  into  psychic 
phenomena  which  includes  the  names  of  the  subjoined  officers  and 
Council  can  scarcely  fail  to  command  the  respect  of  the  community  at 
large  and  the  sympathy  of  every  earnest  investigator  into  the  subjects 
under  consideration  : — 

President. 

Henry  Sidgwick,  Esq.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

Vice-Presidents. 

Arthur  J.  Balfour,  Esq.,  M.P.,  4,  Carlton  Gardens,  S,W. 

W.  F.  Barrett,  Esq.,  F.R.S.E.,  18,  Belgrave  Square,  Monkstown,  Dublin. 

John  R.  Holland,  Esq.,  M.P.,  57,  Lancaster  Gate,  London,  W. 

Richard  H.  Hutcon,  Esq.,  Englefield  Green,  Staines. 

Rev.  W.  Stainton-Moses,  M.A.,  21,  Birchington  Road,  London,  N.W. 

Hon.  Roden  Noel,  57,  Anerley  Park,  London,  S.E. 

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  Owens  College,  Manchester. 

Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  Esq.,  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  London,  W. 

Council. 

W.  P.  Barrett,  18,  Belgrave  Square,  Monkstown,  Dublin. 

Edward  T.  Bennett,  8,  The  Green,  Richmond,  near  London. 

Mrs.  Boole,  103,  Seymour  Place,  Bryanston  Square,  London,  W. 

Walter  R.  Browne,  38,  Belgrave  Road,  London,  S.W. 

Alexander  Calder,  1,  Hereford  Square,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W. 

Walter  H.  Coffin,  Junior  Athenaeum  Club,  London,  W. 

Desmond  G.  FitzGerald,  6,  Akerman  Road,  Brixton,  S.W. 

Edmund  Gurney,  26,  Montpelier  Square,  London,  S.W. 

Charles  C.  Massey,  1,  Albert  Mansions,  Victoria  Street,  London,  S.W. 

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton,  Cambridge. 

Francis  W.  Pereival,  28,  Savile  Row,  London,  W. 

Frank  Podmore,  16,  Southampton  Street,  Fitzroy  Square,  London.  S.W. 

C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.,  Hamam  Chambers,  76,  Jermyn  Street,  S.W. 

E.  Dawson  Rogers,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N. 

Rev.  W.  Stainton-Moses,  21,  Birchington  Road,  London,  N.W. 

Morell  Theobald,  62,  Granville  Park,  Blackheath,  S.E. 

Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  London,  W. 

G.  Wyld,  M.D.,  19,  Great  Cumberland  Place,  London,  W. 

Many  other  associations  besides  those  already  named  have  been  formed 
with  kindred  aims.  Some  have  maintained  a  more  or  less  permanent 
existence — but  whether  they  still  survive  or  have  passed  out  of  being, 
all  have  achieved  some  use  as  temporary  levers  in  the  spiritual  progress  of 
the  race. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER   XXIV. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN     GREAT     BRITAIN     (CONTINUED). 

Spiritualism  and  the  London  Dialectical  Society. 

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  give  a  brief  account  of  a  movement  which 
has  exerted  a  marked  influence  over  the  progress  of  SpirituaHsm  in  Great 
Britain,  namely,  the  investigations  and  pubhshed  report  of  "  The  London 
Dialectical  Society,"  the  action  of  which  in  connection  with  Spiritualism 
arose  thus.  In  January  of  the  year  1869,  an  association  composed  of 
ladies  and  gentlemen  distinguished  for  their  literary  and  scientific  attain- 
ments, entitled  "The  Dialectical  Society,"  determined  to  investigate  the 
subject  of  modern  Spiritualism. 

The  minute  of  the  proceedings  which  inaugurated  this  investigation 
reads  in  their  published  report  as  follows  : — 

"At  a  meeting  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society,  held  6th  of  January,  1869,  Mr.  J. 
H.  Levy  in  the  chair,  it  was  resolved, — '  That  the  Council  be  requested  to  appoint  a 
Committee  to  investigate  the  phenomena  alleged  to  be  Spiritual  manifestations,  and  to 
report  thereon.'  " 

In  consequence  of  this  resolution,  the  members  issued  a  circular  couched 
in  courteous  terms,  inviting  the  leading  Spiritualists  of  England  to  assist 
them  by  personal  or  written  testimony  in  the  investigations  they  proposed 
to  pursue. 

One  of  the  first  respondents  to  the  call  issued  by  the  Council  was  the 
author  of  this  work,  who  happened  at  that  time  to  be  in  England,  and  who, 
in  company  with  J,  C,  Luxmoore,  Esq.,  of  Gloucester  Square,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Everitt,  and  a  few  other  Spiritualistic  friends,  waited  on  the  Society  at  a 
meeting  appointed  for  that  purpose  on  the  evening  of  March  i6th,  1869. 
After  offering  such  testimony  as  she  felt  to  be  apposite  to  the  place  and 
time,  Mrs.  Hardinge  gave  a  long  address  upon  the  main  features  of  the 
Spiritualistic  movement,  the  characteristics  of  Mediumship,  the  Spirit 
circle,  and  the  difficulties  which  beset  the  path  of  the  investigator,  all 
of  which  will  be  found  duly  recorded  in  the  printed  report  of  the  Society, 
The  address  closed  with  a  strong  recommendation  to  the  Society  to  con- 
duct their  investigations,  not  in  general  sessions  of  the  whole  body,  but  to 
form  themselves  into  groups  or  sub-committees,  of  from  four  to  eight,  or  at 
most  ten  persons ;  selecting  the  members  of  these  groups  on  the  principle 
of  mutual  goodwill,  or  such  cordial  relations  with  each  other,  as  would  be 
most  likely  to  produce  harmony  of  feeling,  and  psychological  equilibrium. 

In  answer  to  various  queries  propounded  by  members  of  the  Committee 
at  this  stage  of  the  proceedings,  Mrs.  Hardinge  described  in  detail  the 
best  and  most  approved  methods  of  forming  circles,  founding  her  advice 
not  on  her  own  opinions,  but  on  the  well  proved  experiences  of  the 
Spiritualists  with  whom  she  had  been  associated  for  many  years. 

During  the  entire  course  of  this  address,  which  was  occasionally  inter- 
rupted by  appropriate   questions,   listened  to  with  deep   attention,  and 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  189 

responded  to  by  a  cordial  vote  of  thanks,  the  Spirits,  or  invisible  audience 
present,  availed  themselves  of  the  Mediumship  of  Mrs.  Everitt,  who  was 
one  of  the  party,  to  emphasize  the  entire  speech  with  loud  clear  raps  which 
resounded  in  unmistakable  cadence  to  every  sentence,  on  the  uncovered 
library  table,  at  which  the  Committee  were  seated. 

Both  Mrs.  Everitt  and  the  speaker  were  too  far  from  the  table  to  give 
rise  to  the  supposition  that  they  had  any  agency  in  producing  the  sounds, 
yet  these  manifested  an  intelligence  which  was  so  unmistakable  that  it  must 
have  appeared  astounding  to  the  sceptics  present.  On  some  occasions,  the 
invisibles  emphasized  the  utterances  with  the  customary  signals  for  "  yes  " 
and  "no,"  joining  in  most  vociferously  with  the  applause,  and  taking  part 
throughout  the  proceedings  with  a  force,  spontaneity,  and  independence, 
which  was  as  amusing  to  the  Spiritualists  as  it  was  startling  and  unexpected 
to  the  rest  of  the  party. 

After  the  official  work  of  the  evening  was  ended,  the  company  amused 
themselves  for  some  time  by  questioning  the  invisible  rapper,  and  though 
the  meeting  did  not  in  any  way  assume  the  form  of  a  seance,  or  commit 
itself  by  making  any  report  of  this  informal  action  of  their  invisible  atten- 
dants, the  curious  proceedings  obviously  made  a  deep  impression  upon 
some  of  those  present,  whilst  it  called  forth  from  others  that  involuntary 
spirit  of  denial,  which  would  rather  discredit  the  testimony  even  of  the 
senses  than  recede  from  the  standard  of  obstinate  and  preconceived  opinions. 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  out  of  the  large  number  of  circulars  which 
were  sent  to  other  well-known  Spiritualists  besides  Mrs.  Hardinge,  not  one 
failed  to  produce  a  response  of  more  or  less  interest  to  the  investigators. 

Amongst  those  respondents  whose  names  will  be  found  in  the  Society's 
published  report,  and  who  attended  in  person,  to  give  oral  evidence  of  their 
faith,  are  the  following  persons : — Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge,  Mr.  H.  D. 
Jencken,  M.R.1. 3  Mrs.  Honeywood,  Mr.  T.  M.  Simkiss,  Mr.  E.  Laman 
Blanchard,  Mr.  J.  Murray  Spear,  Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman,  Mr.  George 
Childs,  artist;  Mr.  J.  Enmore  Jones,  Miss  Alice  Jones,  Miss  Douglass, 
Lord  Borthwick,  Mr.  James  Burns,  Mr.  Thomas  Sherratt,  Professor  Crom- 
well F.  Varley,  Miss  Houghton,  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter,  Mr.  Manuel  Eyre, 
Mr.  Lowenthal,  Mr.  Hockley,  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  Mrs.  Cox,  Signer  Damiani, 
Lord  Lindsay,  Mr.  Chevalier,  Mr.  Percival,  Miss  Anna  Black  well,  &c.,  &c. 

Letters  .in  response  to  the  Society's  circular  were  received  from — Mr. 
George  H.  Lewes,  Mr.  Wm,  Wilkinson,  solicitor ;  Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson, 
M.D.  ;  Dr.  Davey,  Dr.  J.  Dixon,  Mr.  Wm.  Howitt,  Lord  Lytton,  Mr. 
Newton  Crosland,  Mr.  Robert  Chambers,  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson,  Dr. 
Charles  Kidd,  Mr,  Edwin  Arnold,  Mr.  J.  Hawkins  Simpson,  Mr.  A. 
Glendinning,  Mr.  T.  A.  TroUope,  M.  Leon  Favre,  Mrs.  L.  Lewis,  The 
Countess  (now  Duchesse)  de  Pomar,  M.  Camille  Flammarion,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

Papers  also,  though  of  an  antagonistic  character,  were  received  and 
published  from  Profs.  Huxley  and  Tyndall,  Dr.  Carpenter,  Mr.  Bradlaugh, 
and  others. 

It  would  be  impossible  without  giving  the  substance  of  a  volume  of  some 
400  pages  published  by  the  Dialectical  Society  as  their  ultimate  report,  to 
convey  to  the  reader  the  least  idea  of  the  candour  and  zeal  with  which  this 
investigation  was  pursued,  nor  the  vast  sum  of  testimony  which  resulted 
from  it;  in  short,  without  any  such  intention  on  the  part  of  its  authors,  the 
Dialectical  Society's  report  forms  one  of  the  best  collections  of  test  facts  and 
irrefragible  testimony  in  favour  of  the  Spiritual  hypothesis,  that  has  yet 
issued  from  the  nineteenth-century  press. 

I90  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

It  seems  that  the  General  Committee,  acting  on  the  suggestions  before 
named,  organized  themselves  into  six  groups  or  sub-committees,  at  which 
Mr.  Home  and  other  well-known  Mediums  lent  valuable  assistance,  whilst 
on  many  occasions,  phenomena  of  a  very  convincing  character  were 
evolved,  no  recognised  Medium  being  present.  The  reports  of  the  Sub- 
Committees  in  fact,  when  read  and  candidly  considered  in  detail,  are  fully 
sufficient  to  establish  the  fact  of  an  unknown  super-sensuous  and  intelligetit 
power  communicating  with  mortals  both  by  physical  and  intellectual  modes, 
and  that  without  atiy  additional  testimony  from  any  other  sources T 

"The  Dialectical  Society's  Report  on  Spiritualism,"  was  first  published 
by  the  Society,  and  subsequently  reprinted  (by  permission)  with  additional 
matter,  by  Mr.  Jas.  Burns,  15,  Southampton  Row,  Holborn,  London, 
where  the  curious  reader  can  obtain  it.  Meantime,  the  following  excerpts 
from  the  introductory  portion  of  the  work  will  be  perused  with  interest. 

The  General  Council  of  the  Sub-Committee,  addressing  the  Society  at 
large,  report  as  follows  : — 

"  Your  Committee  have  held  fifteen  meetings  at  which  they  received  evidence  from 
thirty-three  persons  who  described  phenomena  which  they  stated  had  occurred  within 
their  own  personal  experience. 

'  Your  Committee  have  received  written  statements  relating  to  the  phenomena  from 
thirty-one  persons. 

"  Your  Committee  invited  the  attendance,  and  requested  the  co-operation  and  advice 
of  scientific  men  who  had  pubhcly  expressed  opinions  favourable  or  adverse  to  the 
genuineness  of  the  phenomena. 

"  Your  Committee  also  specially  invited  the  attendance  of  persons  who  had  publicly 
ascribed  the  phenomena  to  imposture  or  delusion. 

"  Your  Committee  however,  while  successful  in  procuring  the  evidence  of  believers  in 
the  phenomena  and  their  supernatural  origin,  almost  wholly  failed  to  obtain  evidence 
from  those  who  attributed  them  to  fraud  or  delusion. 

"As  it  appeared  to  your  Committee  to  be  of  the  greatest  importance  that  they  should 
investigate  the  phenomena  in  question  by  personal  experiment  and  test,  they  resolved 
themselves  into  sub-committees  as  the  best  means  of  doing  so. 

"  Six  sub-committees  were  accordingly  formed. 

"  All  of  these  have  sent  in  reports  from  which  it  appears  that  a  large  majority  of  the 
members  of  your  Committee  have  become  actual  vsdtnesses  to  several  phases  of  the 
phenomena,  without  the  aid  or  presence  of  any  professional  medium,  although  the  greater 
part  of  them  commenced  their  investigations  in  an  avowedly  sceptical  spirit. 

"  These  reports  hereto  subjoined,  substantially  corroborate  each  other,  and  would 
appear  to  establish  the  following  propositions  :— 

"  1.  That  sounds  of  a  very  varied  character,  apparently  proceeding  from  articles  of 
furniture,  the  floor  and  walls  of  the  room — the  vibrations  of  which  are  often  distinctly 
perceptible  to  the  touch — occur,  without  being  produced  by  muscular  action  or  mechani- 
cal contrivance. 

"  2.  That  movements  of  heavy  bodies  take  place  without  mechanical  contrivance  of 
any  kind  or  adequate  exertion  of  muscular  force  by  the  persons  present,  and  frequently 
without  contact  or  connection  with  any  person. 

"  3.  That  these  sounds  and  movements  often  occur  at  the  times,  and  in  the  manner 
asked  for  by  persons  present,  and  by  means  of  a  simple  code  of  signals,  answer  questions 
and  spell  out  coherent  communications. 

"  4.  That  the  answers  and  communications  thus  obtained  are  for  the  most  part  of  a 
commonplace  character  ;  but  facts  are  sometimes  correctly  given  which  are  known  to  one 
of  the  persons  present. 

"  5.  That  the  circumstances  imder  which  the  phenomena  occur  are  variable — the 
most  prominent  fact  being,  that  the  presence  of  certain  persons  seems  necessary  to  their 
occurrence,  and  that  of  others,  generally  adverse — but  this  difference  does  not  appear  to 
depend  upon  any  belief  or  disbelief  concerning  the  phenomena. 

"  6.  That  nevertheless  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomena  is  not  induced  by  the  presence 
or  absence  of  such  persons  respectively." 

Thus  far  the  sub-committees'  personal  experiences  alone  are  touched 
upon.     The  report  next  proceeds  to  deal  with  the  testimony  of  the  various 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  191 

witnesses  who,  orally  or  by  written  statements — received  as  indisputable,  in 
view  of  the  character  and  standing  of  the  deponents — gave  in  a  vast  mass  of 
testimony  from  which  the  following  numbered  extracts  are  selected  : — 

"  1.  Thirteen  witnesses  state  that  they  have  seen  heavy  bodies — in  some  instances 
men — rise  in  the  air,  and  remain  there  for  some  time  vsrithout  visible  support. 

"  2.  Fourteen  witnesses  testify  to  having  seen  hands  or  figures  not  appertaining  to  any 
human  being,  but  life-like  in  appearance  and  mobility,  which  they  have  sometimes  touched 
or  even  grasped  and  which  they  were  therefore  convinced  were  not  the  result  of  illusion 
or  imposture.     .     . 

"  4.  Thirteen  witnesses  declare  they  have  heard  musical  pieces  well  played  upon 
instruments  not  manipulated  by  any  ascertainable  agency. 

"  5.  Five  witnesses  state  that  they  have  seen  red-hot  coals  applied  to  the  hands  or 
heads  of  several  persons  present  without  producing  pain  or  scorching,  and  three  witnesses 
state  that  they  have  had  the  same  experiment  made  upon  themselves  v?ith  the  like 
immunity. 

"  6.  Eight  witnesses  declare  that  they  have  received  precise  information  through 
rappings,  writings,  and  in  other  ways,  the  accuracy  of  which  was  unknown  at  the  time  to 
themselves  or  any  persons  present,  and  which  on  subsequent  enquiry  was  found  to  be 
correct." 

"  9.  Six  witnesses  declare  they  have  received  information  of  future  events,  and  that  in 
some  cases  the  hour  and  minute  of  their  occurrence  have  been  accurately  foretold,  even 
days  and  weeks  before." 

In  addition  to  the  above,  evidence  was  given  of  gratuitously  false 
statements  alleged  to  come  from  spirits ;  of  spirit  drawings  produced  under 
conditions  which  rendered  "  human  agency  impossible,"  also  of  "  trance 
speaking,  healing,  automatic  writing,  the  introduction  of  flowers  and  fruit 
into  closed  rooms  ;  of  voices  in  the  air,  visions  in  crystals  and  glasses,  and 
the  elongation  of  the  human  body. 

After  a  careful  and  almost  exhuastive  review  of  the  whole  subject, 
notices  of  the  literature,  and  the  various  hypotheses  put  forth  by  way  of 
attempted  explanation,  the  preliminary  report  of  the  General  Committee 
concludes  with  the  following  remarks  : — 

"  In  presenting  their  report,  your  Committee,  taking  into  consideration  the  high 
character  and  great  intelligence  of  many  of  the  witnesses  to  the  more  extraordinary  facts, 
the  extent  to  which  their  testimony  is  supported  by  the  reports  of  the  sub- committees, 
and  the  absence  of  any  proof  of  imposture  or  delusion  as  regards  a  large  portion  of  the 
phenomena  ;  and  further,  having  regard  to  the  exceptional  character  of  the  phenomena, 
and  the  large  number  of  persons  of  every  grade  of  society  and  over  the  whole  civiUsed 
world  who  are  more  or  less  influenced  by  a  belief  in  their  supernatural  origin,  and  to  the 
fact  that  no  philosophical  exj^lanation  of  them  has  yet  been  arrived  at,  deem  it  incum- 
bent upon  them  to  state  their  conviction  that  the  subject  is  worthy  of  more  serious 
attention  and  careful  investigation  than  it  has  hitherto  received." 

With  a  recommendation  that  the  entire  report  together  with  the  detailed 
reports  of  the  Sub-Committees  should  be  printed,  here  concludes  one  of  the 
most  remarkable,  candid,  and  noteworthy  summaries  of  a  series  of  investi- 
gations into  the  phenomena  of  modern  Spiritualism  that  the  records  of 
that  movement  can  display. 

The  very  popularity  of  "the  cause,"  the  many  honourable  and  distinguished 
patrons  which  it  had  attracted  to  its  ranks,  and  the  possibility  of  making 
easy  profits  by  simulating  its  phenomena,  have  doubtless  been  the  super- 
inducing motives  which  have  caused  such  a  vast  flood  of  imposture,  fraud 
and  pretension  to  disgrace  its  honoured  name,  si7ice  the  Dialectical  Society 
issued  their  report     Still  that  volume  remains,  and  the  high  character  of 

192  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

those  who  constituted  the  witnesses,  their  entire  disinterestedness  and 
freedom  from  bias  or  motive  to  pervert  the  truth,  and  the  care,  caution, 
and  indefatigable  energy  with  which  the  research  was  pursued,  will  out- 
weigh with  the  capable  thinker  the  adverse  witness  of  determined  prejudice, 
or  even  the  soil  of  ten  thousand  impure  and  fraudulent  hands  laid  upon  the 
fair  form  revealed  by  the  investigations  of  this  brave  band  of  truth  seekers. 
It  is  only  to  be  regretted  that  the  report  of  the  Dialectical  Society  has  not 
attained  to  a  far  wider  circulation  than  it  has  hitherto  enjoyed — still  more 
that  other  associations  composed  of  individuals  as  authoritative  in  name 
and  place,  as  capable  of  judging  righdy,  and  as  faithful  in  seeking  for  and 
sifting  evidence,  have  not  followed  so  laudable  an  example,  and  by  thus 
formulating  and  publishing  abroad  all  that  was  found  valuable  and  important 
in  the  movement,  they  would  have  tended  to  repress  the  atrocious  licence, 
absurd  fanaticism,  and  audacious  frauds,  that  have  been  foisted  upon  the 
name  and  fame  of  modern  Spiritualism. 

CHAPTER    XXV. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    (CONTINUED.) 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  course  of  Spiritualism  in  Great  Britain 
moved  on  to  the  achievement  of  its  many  conquests  over  materialism  and 
unbelief,  without  battles  to  fight,  and  obstacles  to  overcome.  Besides  the 
persistent  opposition  directed  against  this  movement  from  the  enemies  who 
may  be  classified  as  the  would-be  monopolists  of  all  knowledge,  in  religion, 
science,  and  literature,  many  and  injurious  have  been  "the  foes  of  its  own 
household,"  with  which  Spiritualism  has  had  to  contend. 

Whether  excessive  vanity  or  mercenary  motives  have  been  the  causes 
which  induced  certain  individuals,  professing  to  be  Mediums  for  Spiritual 
phenomena,  to  supplement  the  lack  of  natural  endowments  by  artifice,  it 
matters  not  now  to  enquire;  but  it  is  an  assured  fact,  that  few  well-informed 
Spiritualists  would  venture  to  deny,  that  many  manifestations  have  been 
exhibited,  both  by  private  and  professional  Media,  more  or  less  garbled  by 
fraud,  and  interpolated  by  human  contrivance. 

As  our  work  is  understood  to  record  what  Spiritualism  is,  not  what  it  is 
not,  we  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  dilate  farther  on  the  performances  of 
tricksters  than  to  note  the  fact  of  their  interference,  and  the  injurious  effect 
they  have  had  upon  the  progress  of  the  Spiritual  cause. 

It  must  suffice  to  say,  that  Spiritualism,  like  every  other  movement  in 
human  life  worth  counterfeiting,  has  had  to  endure  its  share  of  hindrance 
and  disgrace  from  the  camp  followers  who  are  ever  found  in  the  wake  of 
the  armies  of  progression. 

We  know  it  is  constantly  alleged  by  detected  impostors,  that  the  frauds 
they  can  no  longer  conceal,  were  undertaken,  "  under  the  influence  of  evil 
spirits"  generally  those,  who  were  attracted  to  the  circle  by  some  evil- 
minded  sceptic.  As  to  themselves — poor  innocents  ! — they  were  wholly 
unconscious,  and  should  be  regarded  merely  as  victims,  not  as  offenders. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  193 

To  account  for  the  prepared  paraphernalia  with  which  their  frauds  were 
perpetrated,  they  generally  fall  back  upon  the  theory  of  conspiracies  to  ruin 
them,  amongst  the  very  sitters  whom  they  have  attempted  to  cheat, 
&c.,  &c.  To  expla7iations  of  this  character,  alike  insulting  to  common 
sense,  and  common  honesty,  no  answer  can  be  made.  Unfortunately  how- 
ever, the  heartless  impostors  who  have  no  scruple  in  robbing  their  victims, 
and  imposing  on  the  holiest  emotions  of  the  heart,  generally  find  hosts  of 
apologists,  who  not  only  seek  to  excuse  their  turpitude  by  the  miserable 
platitudes  suggested  above,  but  follow  up  the  detection,  with  torrents  of 
abuse  against  those  who  will  not  tamely  submit  to  be  imposed  upon. 

"  Hard  words  break  no  bones,"  says  the  Spanish  proverb.  That  may  be 
true,  nevertheless  they  are  exceedingly  hurtful  to  the  feelings,  and  hence  it 
is,  that  many  an  audacious  cheat  has  been  permitted  to  perpetrate  his  foul 
work  unrebuked,  for  fear  of  the  clamorous  attacks  with  which  the  exposer 
is  sure  to  be  met  by  ill-judged  partisanship,  or  fanatical  credulity. 

True  Mediums,  whether  professional  or  otherwise,  deserve  the  most  kind 
consideration  and  courteous  treatment ;  but  that  is  a  poor  rule  which  does 
not  apply  both  ways,  and  therefore  the  same  consideration  and  courtesy  is 
due  to  the  investigator,  especially  when  it  is  remembered  that  such  investi- 
gations are  generally  made  under  the  impulse  of  the  most  sacred  affections, 
and  therefore  deserve  to  be  treated  with  reverence  and  respect. 

Still  the  effect  of  detected  imposture  has  been  most  injurious  to  the  pro- 
gress of  Spiritualism,  and  though  its  publicity  may  have  served  the  purpose 
of  stimulating  the  investigator  to  more  caution  in  his  researches,  it  has 
turned  back  many  an  one  from  seeking  divine  truth,  in  a  path  bristling  with 
the  way  marks  of  deceit  and  lies. 

Other  causes  too,  conspired  to  produce  reactionary  tides  in  public  opinion, 
unfavourable  to  Spiritualism. 

Mr.  Sothern,  a  popular  actor,  who  under  the  alias  of  "  Stuart,"  had  once 
been  the  conductor  of  the  well-known  "  miracle-circle"  of  New  York,  thought 
proper  to  amuse  his  English  associates  by  contriving  all  sorts  of  caricature 
performances  calculated  to  bring  ridicule  and  discredit  upon  Spiritualism, 

Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman  in  his  zeal  for  the  cause  he  espoused,  in  exposing 
Mr.  Sothern's  performances,  unfortunately  republished  certain  statements 
copied  from  the  New  York  papers,  which  gave  the  pretext  for  a  prosecu- 
tion on  the  ground  of  libel.  A  trial  ensued.  The  well-known  aphorism 
that  "truth  is  a  libel"  obtained  with  unmistakable  force  in  this  case,  and 
Mr.  Coleman  and  his  publisher,  the  editor  of  the  paper  called  The 
Spiritual  Times,  were  mulcted  in  heavy  damages. 

It  is  worth  while  in  this  connection  to  give  a  curious  episode  which  may 
not  be  unimportant  in  weighing  the  statements  of  those,  who — because 
they  find  fraud  in  one  direction — pass  a  wholesale  verdict  of  condemnation 
against  the  reliability  of  all  phenomena. 

A  report  has  often  gained  currency,  that  there  was  somewhere,  though 
rumour  never  condescended  to  be  expUcit  on  the  actual  whereabouts,  a 
mechanic  who  had  been  employed  to  manufacture  apparatus  by  which  a 
machine,  concealed  about  the  person,  could  produce  the  phenomena  known 
as  "Spirit  rapping.*' 

More  than  one  of  the  antagonists  to  Spiritualism  have  made  allusion  to 
this  floating  rumour,  treating  it  as  a  well  proven  fact,  and  alleging  that  it 
fully  explained  the  entire  formulae  of  the  (assumed  Spiritual)  rappings. 

Now   these   allegations   have   always   been   made   with   an   amount   of 
indefiniteness  which  has  deprived  them  of  credit,  whether  with  the  advocates 
13 

194  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

or  opponents  of  Spiritualism.  For  the  benefit  of  both  classes,  we  shall 
now  proceed  to  give  the  floating  rumour  a  clear  and  legitimate 
parentage. 

During  the  investigations  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  there  was  a  general 
flutter  of  opinion  on  the  part  of  the  antagonists  to  Spiritualism  lest  those 
who  were  heretofore  sceptics,  might  prove  too  much  and  not  improbably 
become  themselves  converted. 

In  this  direful  contingency  some  one  (whom  this  record  does  not  care  to 
immortalize)  procured  the  attendance  before  the  Dialectical  Society's 
Council,  of  one  Mr.  William  Faulkner,  of  Endell  Street,  London,  who  gave 
evidence  in  respect  to  certain  magnets  which  he  claimed  to  have  manu- 
factured, by  means  of  which  "  artificial  raps  could  be  produced,"  whilst  the 
magnets  were  concealed  about  the  person  of  "the  Medium," 

Being  closely  plied  with  questions  by  the  Spiritualists  present,  this  gentle- 
man was  unable  to  show  that  he  had  ever  supplied  these  magnets  to  a  single 
Medium  known  to  any  one  in  the  Spiritual  ranks  save  a  Mr.  Addison,  the 
accomplice  of  Mr.  Sothern,  and  the  gentleman  at  whose  residence  all  the 
tricks  were  performed,  which  Mr.  Coleman  exposed. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  Messrs.  Sothern  and  Addison  made  it  their 
business  to  bring  Spiritualism  into  ridicule  and  contempt  by  first  pretend- 
ing to  produce  phenomena  and  then  showing  that  it  was  only  the  result  of 
trickery  and  deception.  It  was  in  aid  of  this  notable  work  that  Mr. 
Faulkner's  magnets  were  manufactured,  and  in  this  way  that  Mr.  Faulkner's 
testimony  was  expected  to  bring  discredit  on  the  entire  mass  of  Spiritual 
phenomena ;  in  a  word,  those  who  contrived  to  cite  this  person,  before  the 
Dialectical  Society's  Council,  evidently  meant  to  show  that  because  Mr. 
Addison's  house  was  fitted  up  with  artificial  magnets  designed  to  deceive 
the  unwary  and  bring  SpirituaHsm  into  ridicule,  so' all  "Spirit  rappings," 
whether  occurring  in  the  palaces  of  emperors  and  princes,  or  the  homes 
of  clowns  and  harlequins,  must  be  produced  by  magnets  manufactured  by 
Mr.  Faulkner,  of  Endell  Street,  London  ! 

Comment  upon  this  very  flimsy  attempt  to  destroy  a  world-wide  truth 
with  a  harlequin's  bat  and  ball  is  unnecessary;  in  short,  a  subject  so  justly 
relegated  to  oblivion  would  not  be  recalled  at  this  time,  were  it  not  desirable 
to  observe,  to  what  desperate  and  puerile  methods  of  warfare,  the  opponents 
of  this  great  cause  have  been  driven. 

Shortly  after  the  Coleman  prosecution,  -another  of  a  still  more  complex 
and  damaging  character  arose,  in  connection  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  and 
an  old  lady  by  the  name  of  Lyon. 

Although  the  details  of  this  case  may  be  fresh  in  the  memory  of  readers 
of  the  present  generation  it  is  necessary,  for  the  benefit  of  posterity,  to  give 
the  following  brief  abstract  of  its  salient  points. 

It  seems  that  Mrs.  Lyon,  an  eccentric  old  lady,  took  a  sudden  and  violent 
fancy  to  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  and  being  a  widow  with  a  large  fortune  at  her 
own  disposal,  she  induced  the  young  Medium  to  become  her  adopted  son 
and  heir.  Settlements  were  made,  and  Mr.  Home's  name  was  changed  to 
Lyon,  by  a  formal  parliamentary  act. 

For  a  time  all  seemed  to  promise  well  for  the  future  happmess  of  the 
contracting  parties.  At  length  however,  the  lady  grew  exacting,  the 
adopted  son  restive ;  she  wearied  of  her  fancy,  he  of  his  gilded  chains. 
Disputes  arose ;  then  estrangement,  and  th&  finale  was,  a  demand  on  the 
part  of  the  lady,  for  release  from  all  her  promises,  and  an  immediate 
restitution  of  the  gifts  she  had  bestowed  on  the  creature  of  her  whim. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  195 

Unfortunately  for  Mr,  Home,  the  last-named  demand  implied  an  impossi- 
bility with  which  he  could  not  comply.  Failing  to  obtain  her  exorbitant 
demands,  the  whilom  tender  mother  had  the  son  arrested,  and  then 
commenced  a  vigorous  prosecution  against  him  for  the  restitution  of  all 
the  gifts  she  had  bestowed,  on  the  plea,  that  Mr.  Home  had  worked  upon 
her  feelings,  and  induced  her  to  consent  to  the  act  of  adoption  by 
;pretended  Spiritual  manifestations. 

A  long  trial  ensued,  in  the  published  reports  of  which,  not  one  tittle  of 
evidence  could  be  adduced  in  support  of  the  lady's  allegation ;  on  the 
contrary,  her  witnesses  discredited  and  contradicted  each  other,  and  her  own 
testimony  was  so  silly  and  unsupported,  that  the  judge  was  frequently  obliged 
to  advise  her  to  be  silent,  as  "  her  statements  were  too  contradictory  to  be 
accepted."  On  the  other  hand  it  was  shown  by  an  immense  number  of 
the  most  respectable  witnesses,  that  Mr.  Home  yielded  to  this  lady's  offers 
slowly  'and  reluctantly,  and  that  he  even  sent  his  friend  and  legal  adviser 
Mr.  William  Wilkinson  to  call  on  her ;  to  place  before  her  the  magnitude  of 
her  undertaking,  and  beseech  her  to  take  time  and  good  counsel,  before 
consummating  her  hasty  proposal. 

During  the  entire  progress  of  this  protracted  trial,  the  balance  of  evidence 
was  all  on  the  side  of  the  unfortunate  Medium,  and  judging  purely  by  the 
testimony  adduced,  not  a  doubt  existed  in  the  pubhc  mind,  that  Mr.  Home 
would  be  honourable  acquitted,  and  the  prosecution  anything  but  honour- 
ably quashed. 

But  great  are  the  uncertainties  of  the  law  !  Mr.  Home  was  found  guilty 
of  exerting  undue  influence  over  the  mind  of  an  innocent  aged  lady,  and 
ordered  to  give  back  all  that  he  could  restore,  and  so  the  matter  was 
supposed  to  end.  End  there  however  it  did  not.  So  long  as  the  details 
of  the  case  were  fresh  in  the  public  mind,  Mr.  Home  was  regarded  as  the 
victim  of  a  very  unjust  verdict,  whilst  Mrs.  Lyon  was  regarded  as  very 
much  more  of  a  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing,  than  as  the  representative  of  her 
kingly  name  When  the  real  facts  at  issue  slipped  out  of  the  versatile 
memory  of  "  the  dear  public  "  however,  and  ancient  prejudice  was  permitted 
to  re-assume  her  sway,  the  Spiritualists  were  constantly  reproached  with 
the  acts  of  "  that  wicked  Mr.  Home,"  and  the  wrongs  of  that  amiable  and 
truthful  old  lady,  Mrs.  Lyon.  Nay,  the  author  in  her  wide  wanderings  over 
the  world  has  frequently  been  reminded  "how  that  dreadful  Mr.  Home 
had  been  imprisoned  for  life,  for  plundering  and  imposing  upon  his  bene- 
factress,, and  how  that  dreadful  delusion  of  Spiritualism  was  all  exploded 
in  consequ^ence."  It  was  of  no  avail  to  urge  that  Mr.  Home  was  at  that 
very  time  the  honoured  guest  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  Spiritualism 
exerting  more  power  and  influence  over  the  masses  than  ever.  The 
slanderers  "  knew  all  about  it,"  for  did  not  every  one  "  say  so,"  and  was  it 
not  enough  that  it  was  testified  of  by  the  authoritative  tongue  of  common 
report  ? 

At  a  still  later  date,  other  trials  and  other  convictions  occurred,  and  in 
more  than  one  instance  frauds  and  adventurers  received  their  deserts,  and 
suffered  penalties  which  Spiritualists  were  as  ready  to  pronounce  well 
merited  as  were  their  opponents.  Still  the  result  of  any  judicial  trials  in 
which  Spiritualism  was  concerned,  invariably  ended  unfavourably  for  the 
cause,  whatever  the  merits  of  the  case  might  be. 

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  then,  that  antagonistic  individuals  availed 
themselves  of  this  mockery  of  justice  in  connection  with  an  unpopular 
movement,  and  scrupled  not  to  call  in  the  aid  of  the  law  to  punish  the 
believers  whose  faith  they  could  not  change. 

196  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Whatever  the  present  generation  may  allege,  posterity  will  surely  reahze 
that  it  was  the  prevalence  of  an  unjust  and  bigoted  public  sentiment,  and 
the  certainty  that  the  law  would  uphold  that  sentiment,  which  stimulated 
the  vexatious  prosecution  that  was  quite  recently  instituted  against  the 
celebrated  American  Medium,  Mr.  Henry  Slade,  who,  during  a  brief  visit 
to  this  country  en  route  to  fulfil  an  engagement  in  Russia,  was  becoming 
all  too  popular  with  the  visitors  whom  his  limited  time  permitted  him 
to  receive. 

It  was  no  doubt  in  view  of  this  "perversion  of  public  feeling"  and  "in 
the  highest  interests  of  moraUty  and  religion  "  that  two  self-styled  scientific 
gentlemen  called  on  the  American  Medium,  and  aftef  endeavouring  in 
every  possible  way  to  entrap  him  into  some  suspicious  act,  they  openly 
accused  him  of  fraud,  caused  his  arrest  and  entered  upon  a  vigorous  and 
relentless  prosecution  against  him. 

Again  the  details  of  the  trial  were  utterly  barren  of  proof  that  the 
charge  was  true.  Except  that  the  prosecution  could  not  account  for  the 
phenomena  produced,  and  therefore  trumped  up  an  imaginary  and  totally 
impractical  hypothesis  as  to  how  it  anight  or  must  have  been  done,  there 
was  not  a  shadow  of  evidence  to  prove  fraud  on  the  part  of  the 
Medium. 

For  the  defence,  a  large  number  of  distinguished  and  respectable  persons 
tendered  their  witness  in  favour  of  Slade's  honesty,  and  the  unmistakable 
character  of  the  supra-mundane  phenomena  occurring  in  his  presence. 
Only  four  of  these  favourable  witnesses  were  allowed  to  testify,  one  of  them 
being  the  celebrated  author  and  naturalist,  Professor  A.  R.  Wallace, 
Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  magistrate  before  whom  the  case  was 
tried,  was  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  the  evidence  in  Slade's  favour  "  was 
overwhelming,"  after  a  most  "  Dogberry  "  like  summing  up,  he  sentenced 
Mr.  Slade  "under  the  fourth  section  of  the  Vagrant  Act,"  to  three  months' 
imprisonment  with  hard  labour,  ''''for  using  subtile  crafts  and  devices  by 
palmistry  or  otherwise  to  deceive^''  Sic,  &c.  This  notable  conviction  was 
soon  after  "  quashed"  on  appeal  to  the  Middlesex  Sessions,  for  a  formal 
error  in  the  conviction. 

But  the  enemy  was  not  to  be  deprived  of  his  "pound  of  flesh."  "In 
the  interests  of  science  " — as  the  prosecutors  alleged — they  commenced  a 
fresh  attack,  and  although  the  victim  of  this  pitiful  warfare — broken  down 
in  health  and  spirits  by  the  cruel  persecution  directed  against  him — 
insisted  upon  meeting  whatever  further  proceedings  might  be  taken,  his 
medical  attendant  declared  that  "any  further  attempt  to  face  the  storm 
would  kill  him  outright,"  and  his  numerous  friends  and  supporters  absolutely 
forced  him  to  proceed  on  his  way  to  the  Continent,  to  meet  the  engagement 
for  which  he  had  come  to  Europe. 

It  is  but  justice  to  add,  that  when  Mr.  Slade's  health  became  sufficiently 
restored,  he  wrote  to  one  of  his  scientific  accusers,  offering  to  return  to 
England  at  his  own  expense,  to  give  him  six  seances  at  any  place  he  might 
choose,  under  any  reasonable  conditions  he  might  dictate,  entirely  free  of 
charge  and  for  the  purpose  of  proving  the  absence  of  fraud  on  his  part. 
This  letter,  long,  clear,  and  manly  as  it  was,  the  scientific  and  gentleman- 
like accuser  doubdess  deemed  it  "  in  the  interests  of  science "  utterly  to 
disregard,  even  by  a  single  word  of  reply.  The  unprejudiced  reader  may 
satisfy  himself  concerning  the  entire  candour  and  honesty  of  this  letter  by 
perusing  it  on  page  36  of  Professor  ZoUner's  work,  "  Transcendental 
Physics." 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  197 

It  might  be  worth  while  to  compare  the  facts  thus  briefly  summarized, 
from  already  published  accounts,  with  "  the  lying  tongue  of  rumour,"  from 
which  source  the  author  has  frequently  heard,  that  "Slade  had  been  caught 
in  the  act  of  trickmg  a  party  of  celebrated  professors  ;  tried,  condemned, 
imprisoned,  and  that  hence,  the  monstrous  delusion  of  Spiritualism  was  all 
exposed  and  for  ever  exploded  ! " 

For  the  rest  of  Mr.  Slade's  Continental  experiences  the  reader  is  referred 
to  the  section  on  "  Spiritualism  in  Germany,"  and  the  report  of  his  seances 
with  the  Leipzig  professors. 

It  only  remains  to  notice  one  more  result  of  the  prosecution,  or  more 
strictly  speaking,  the  persecution.,  to  which  Mr.  Slade  was  subject,  and  this 
was,  the  circulation  of  a  memorial  to  the  British  Home  Secretary,  a  few 
extracts  from  which  will  close  this  chapter. 

The  Spiritualists  of  Great  Britain  probably  never  expected  any  other 
official  result  from  their  memorial  than  a  silent  smile  of  contempt  from  the 
party  whose  duty  it  would  be  to  consign  it  to  the  Governmental  waste 
basket — nevertheless  they  felt  that  its  distribution  would  serve  the  purpose 
of  registering  the  Spiritualists'  version  of  their  case,  and  give  the  too-trusting 
public  to  understand  that  the  Bow  Street  magistrate's  unfavourable  verdict, 
had  not  yet  become  the  funeral  sermon  of  Spirituahsm,  also  that  this 
irrepressible  cause  still  maintained  a  vigorous  state  of  being,  in  which  new 
conversions  were  effected  with  each  succeeding  day  and  hour. 

The  Religio  PhilosopJiical  Journal.,  an  old  established  and  excellent 
Spiritual  periodical  published  at  Chicago,  U.S.,  reprinted  the  above-named 
memorial,  the  main  points  of  which,  together  with  the  editor's  comments, 
we  give  in  the  following  extract : — 

"  The  British  National  Association  of  Spiritualists  has  prepared,  and  is  circulating  a 
memorial  to  the  Home  Secretary  of  the  British  Government,  asking  that  the  construction 
heretofore  put  upon  an  Act  for  the  Suppression  of  Vagrancy,  whereby  it  is  made  a  means 
of  maintaining  criminal  pi-osecution  against  Mediums,  may  be  corrected.  The  fourth 
section  of  the  act  classes  as  vagrants,  '  Every  person  pretending  or  professing  to  tell  for- 
tunes, or  using  any  subtle  craft,  means  or  device  by  palmistry  or  otherwise,  to  deceive  or 
impose  upon  any  of  his  majesty's  subjects.'  It  was  under  this  clause  that  Henry  Slade 
was  prosecuted,  and  concerning  his  prosecution  the  memorial  says  : 

"  '  As  an  instance  in  point  your  memorialists  would  refer  to  the  case  of  Henry  Slade, 
an  American  Medium,  charged  at  Bow  Street  Police  Court  in  the  year  ]  876,  under  the 
fourth  section  of  the  said  Act.  For  the  defence  the  magistrate  allowed  to  be  called  as 
vritnesses  four  gentlemen,  one  of  them  of  great  scientific  eminence,  who  were  experts  in 
the  investigation  of  Spiritualism,  and  who  had  especially  tested  the  Mediumship  of  the 
defendant  on  many  occasions.  These  gentlemen  gave  evidence  of  facts  wholly  inconsistent 
with  the  supposition  that  the  defendant  was  an  impostor — evidence  which  the  magistrate 
himself  declared  from  the  bench  to  be  "  overwhelming."  In  attendance  were  other 
witnesses  prepared  to  give  similar  testimony.  Yet  the  magistrate  refused  to  allow  them 
to  be  called  :  and,  in  giving  judgment  against  the  defendant,  he  avowedly  put  the  evi- 
dence, which  he  had  described  as  above,  altogether  out  of  consideration,  expressly  declar- 
ing that  he  based  his  decision  "  according  to  the  known  course  of  nature."  The  law,  it  is 
true,  does  not  expressly  sanction  any  presumption  against  the  existence  of  agencies  in 
nature  other  than  and  surpassing  those  generally  known^ — and  these  it  is,  and  not 
"  miraculous  "  or  "  supernatural  "  powers  that  Spiritualists  allege — but  the  persons  who 
administer  the  law  are  unavoidably  bounded  by  this  common  knowledge  in  dealing  with 
evidence  and  the  probabilities  arising  therefrom.  It  results  then,  that  the  magistrate  who 
adjudicates  "according  to  the  known  course  of  nature  "  in  respect  to  phenomena  which  do 
not  conform  to  such  "  known  course  "  as  interpreted  by  him,  finds  it  practically  unneces- 
sary to  hear  evidence  beyond  the  mere  proof  of  the  alleged  occurrence  of  the  phenomena 
in  question  in  the  presence  of  a  certain  individual,  when  no  other  person  also  present  can 
be  taken  to  have  produced  them.  The  case  is  therefore  prejudged  ;  and  the  examination 
of  witnesses  to  prove  that  any  alleged  act  of  imposture  was  not  really  of  that  character 
is  a  superfluous  mockery  and  pretence.     It  is  upon  this  fact  that  no  tribunal,  without 

198  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

going  into  an  exhaustive  and  impracticable  inquiry  upon  an  unfamiliar  subject,  can  do 
other  than  take  its  own  knowledge  and  experience  as  the  standard  of  probability,  that 
your  memorialists  chiefly  rest  their  statement  of  the  unavoidable  injustice  and  prejudicial 
character  of  these  prosecutions.'  " 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT    BRITAIN    (CONTINUED), 

Concerning   the    Literature    of   English    Spiritualism. 

The  first  periodical  issued  in  England  in  connection  with  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism  was  The  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph.  When  seeking  for 
authentic  information  on  this  pioneer  work,  the  author  was  referred  to  the 
following  article  which  appeared  in  the  year  1882  in  the  columns  oi  Light; 
and  its  perusal  will  perhaps  give  a  better  idea  than  could  otherwise  be 
obtained  of  the  regard  with  which  the  promoter  of  this  periodical  is  still 
remembered  : — 

"  keighley, 

"  An  event,  unique  in  character,  has  recently  transpired  in  this  cosy  little  Yorkshire 
town,  which  wHl  long  be  remembered  with  pleasure  by  all  concerned,  marking  as  it  did 
the  thirtieth  anniversary  of  the  introduction  of  Sjiiritualism  into  this  country.  The 
celebration,  for  such  in  character  was  the  event  alluded  to,  was'  conceived  and  executed 
by  the  committee  and  friends  of  the  Keighley  '  Spiritual  Brotherhood,'  Mr.  John  Pickles, 
the  chairman,  working  energetically  to  that  end,  and  being  ably  assisted  by  Mr.  J.  Smith, 
the  hon.  secretary.  Indeed,  so  earnestly  did  all  work  that  a  most  successful  issue  was 
achieved.  The  proceedings  consisted  of  a  public  tea  and  meeting  on  Saturday,  July  8th. 
The  objects  the  committee  had  in  view  were  the  presentation  of  the  portraits  of  the  three 
pioneer  workers  in  the  movement,  viz.,  Messrs.  John  Wright,  Abraham  Shackleton,  and 
David  Weatherhead  ;  the  two  first-named  persons,  and  the  family  of  the  last-named 
gentleman,  who  has  passed  hence,  being  the  recipients  of  the  gifts.  In  1853  Mr.  David 
Eichmond,  from  the  Shakers,  of  America,  brought  the  particulars  of  Spirit  phenomena 
with  him  to  this  country,  and,  paying  a  visit  to  Keighley,  called  upon  Mr.  David  Weather- 
head  to  present  the  matter  to  the  attention  of  that  gentleman.  As  a  result  of  the 
interview,  a  public  meeting  was  held,  at  which  table  manifestations  were  obtained,  thro'  gh 
mediums  discovered  in  the  audience,  by  Mr.  Richmond,  who  delivered  an  explanatory 
address.  Mr.  Weatherhead  became  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Spirit  intercourse,  and  at 
once  entered  heartily  into  the  matter,  sparing  neither  time,  pains,  nor  purse  in  his  zeal. 
He  established  the  first  printing  press  in  the  movement,  printed  the  first  English  Spiritual 
periodical,  the  Yorkshire  Spiritual  Telegraph,  and  caused  the  circulation  of  innumerable 
tracts,  pamphlets,  &c.,  throughout  the  kingdom,  and  subsequently  erected,  at  his  own 
expense,  the  comfortable  and  commodious  building  used  by  the  society  at  the  present 
time.  He  contentedly  bore  all  the  expenses  involved,  and  during  his  residence  in  the 
flesh  was  a  true  pillar  of  the  cause.  Messrs.  Wright  and  Shackleton  were  the  two  trance 
mediums  developed  in  the  early  days  ;  they  have  literally  grown  grey  in  the  work.  Their 
labours  have  been  free  of  price,  and  as  speakers,  healers,  and  clairvoyants  they  have 
rendered  valuable  service  to  the  cause.  To  do  honour  to  these  workers,  and  to  express 
the  high  esteem  in  which  they  were  held,  the  recent  presentation  was  arranged. 
On  Saturday  the  proceedings  were  opened  by  a  tea,  at  which  a  very  large  company  sat 
down.  At  seven  o'clock  the  pubhc  meeting  was  opened  by  the  chairman,  Mr.  J.  Clapham, 
who  said  :  '  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  met  here  to-night  to  show  our  gratitude  to  the 
late  Mr.  Weatherhead,  and  also  to  Mr.  Shackleton  and  Mr.  Wright,  for  their  past  services. 
Keighley  was  the  place  where  Spiritualism  was  first  promulgated  in  this  country,  being 
introduced  to  us  by  Mr.  David  Richmond,  of  Darlington,  who,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr. 

\/—a-u^ 

' ^rm^    <fa^-tf^ 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

199 

Weafcherhead,  was  enabled  to  deliver  three  lectures  upon  the  subject  in  the  Working 
Men's  Hall,  in  June,  1853.  The  issues  were,  that  Mr.  Weatherhead  took  steps  which 
resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  society  which  exists  at  the  present  time  ;  and  soon  after- 
wards the  mediums  named  were  developed,  and  they  are  still  serving  us  to-day.  These 
gentlemen,  with  Mr.  Weatherhead,  were  the  mainstays  of  the  cause,  and  Mr.  Weatherhead, 
during  his  life  here,  spared  neither  time  nor  means  in  spreading  abroad  this  grand  truth. 
It  was  he  who  established  the  first  printing  press,  and  distributed  tracts,  pamphlets,  and 
other  literature  broadcast,  the  materials  for  which  were  largely  obtained  through  medium- 
ship.  He  it  was  who  bore  the  entire  expense  of  the  erection  of  the  Lyceum  Buildings, 
and  in  many  other  ways  testified  his  earnestness  and  devotion  to  the  cause.  The  outcome 
of  his  labours  has  been  that  to-day  we  have  here  a  society  in  a  flourishing  condition, 
having  one  hundred  and  fifty  members  on  the  roll,  some  five  or  six  active  mediums 
constantly  ministering  to  us,  and  a  Sunday  School  composed  of  upwards  of  a  hundred 
members.  As,  therefore,  a  slight  mark  of  esteem  and  appreciation  to  these  our  pioneer 
workers,  we  are  to-night  to  present  to  them  the  portraits  before  us,  and  all  will  join  with 
me  in  saying  they  are  most  heartily  deserved.'  The  portraits,  in  oils,  which  are  excellent 
specimens  of  the  painter's  art,  were  then  presented.  That  to  Mr.  Wright  was  presented 
by  Mr.  John  Scott,  of  Belfast  ;  that  to  Mr.  Shackleton  by  Mr.  D.  Richmond,  of  Darlington  ; 
and  that  of  Mr.  Weatherhead  to  his  family,  by  Mr.  J.  J.  Morse,  of  London  ;  and  suitable 
acknowledgments  were  made  in  each  case.  The  proceedings  were  varied  by  some  excellent 
singing  and  reciting  by  a  glee  party  and  several  friends,  and  altogether  the  event  was 
marked  by  a  hearty  enthusiasm  which  evidenced  the  full  sympathy  of  all  present  in  the 
event  of  the  day. 

"  The  series  of  meetings  were  held  in  the  large  Auction  Hall  of  Mr.  William  Weather- 
head, who  very  kindly  placed  it  at  the  disposal  of  the  society  free  of  cost.  The  above 
events  will  be  long  remembered  by  all  present,  and  constitute  an  occasion  that  will  be 
historical  in  its  relations  to  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  Great  Britain." 

None  but  the  pioneer  of  an  unpopular  cause  can  understand  the  value  of 
the  good  work  effected  by  Mr.  David  Weatherhead^  or  the  amount  of 
martyrdom  he  must  have  incurred  in  its  performance. 

In  his  time,  the  publication  of  a  Spiritual  journal,  and  the  dissemination 
of  Spiritual  literature  was  only  repaid  by  public  odium  and  social  ostracism. 

Mr.  David  Weatherhead,  as  the  first  pubUsher  of  the  first  Spiritual  journal 
issued  from  the  English  press,  undoubtedly  courted  the  martyr's  cross  that 
was  put  upon  him ;  but  who  can  doubt  that  he  is  now  reaping  the  reward  of 
the  martyr's  crown  in  the  better  life  to  which  his  brave  spirit  has  attained  ? 

After  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  the  oldest  and  most  important  work  of  the 
movement  was  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  which,  during  a  period  of 
nearly  twenty  years,  sent  forth  its  monthly  record  of  Spiritual  work  and 
progress  in  Great  Britain  in  choice  language  and  scholarly  form.  This 
magazine  was  pubUshed  by  the  accompUshed  writer  Wihiam  Wilkinson,  Esq., 
solicitor,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  a  gentleman  who  contributed  his  wealth  and  high 
social  position  to  the  advancement  of  Spiritualism  and  the  promulgation  of 
its  teachings,  without  fear  of  or  favour  from  men.  Mr.  Wilkinson's  under- 
taking was  promoted  and  ably  sustained  by  the  literary  assistance  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Shorter,  who — under  the  mm  de plume  oi  ''  Bxqviox" — has  written, 
lectured,  and  laboured  for  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  with  a  devotion  and 
zeal  that  entitle  him  to  the  gratitude  of  every  spiritualist  in  this  generation. 
Quite  early  in  the  history  of  the  modern  movement,  Mr.  Shorter  published 
an  admirable  and  compendious  work  on  the  Spiritualism  of  all  ages  and 
times,  entitled  "The  Two  Worlds."  The  production  of  this  lucid,  and 
charmingly  written  work,  would  in  itself  have  been  sufficient  to  elevate  its 
author  to  a  high  rank  in  the  world  of  letters  had  the  subject  been  any  other 
than  Spirituahsm.  Working  on  unceasingly,  Mr.  Shorter  never  paused  to 
enquire  whether  the  sublime  truths  he  promulgated  met,  or  opposed  the 
popular  taste.  From  the  first  opening  of  the  immortal  gates  to  the  eyes  of 
humanity  in  this  century,  up  to  the  truly  dark  day,  when  the  irreparable  loss 

200  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

of  sight  fell  like  a  pall  across  the  noble  gentleman's  way,  he  has  laboured 
with  tongue,  pen,  and  influence,  to  help  to  plant  the  standard  of  the  faith  and 
illuminate  the  path  of  others  with  the  radiance  of  that  better  world,  which 
alone  remains  to  guide  his  darkened  way  on  earth. 

Even  since  the  affliction  of  bhndness  has  fallen  upon  him,  Mr.  Shorter 
has  not  relapsed  his  efforts  to  steady  the  ark  of  progress  as  it  moves  on  its 
way.  His  fearless  testimony  is  ever  ready,  and  his  clear  voice  is  heard  at 
every  public  gathering  of  Metropolitan  Spiritualists.  A  fine  collection  of 
choice  poems  has  lately  been  issued  by  him,  for  the  consolation  and 
instruction  of  those  who  ca7i  see  to  read  them, — and  Mr.  Shorter's  career 
gives  promise  of  closing  like  that  of  the  good  sentinel  of  Pompeian 
celebrity  who  died  at  his  post — "faithful  unto  death." 

In  addition  to  the  invaluable  services  of  Messrs.  Wilkinson  and  Shorter, 
the  London  Spiritual  Magazine  numbered  amongst  its  staff  of  contributors 
the  flower  of  European  Spiritual  literati. 

Pre-eminent  above  all  others,  stands  out  the  noble  name  of  William 
Howitt,  an  author  whose  works  are  the  pride  of  every  well-informed  English 
reader;  a  gentleman  whom  to  know  was  to  love  and  honour,  and  a 
Spiritualist  whose  fearless  advocacy  shed  lustre  on  his  cause,  and  became  a 
tower  of  strength  to  his  co-workers.  Happily  for  the  better  appreciation  of 
Mr.  Howitt  and  his  wonderful  literary  labours,  a  faithful  transcript  of  his 
life  is  just  now  passing  through  the  press  in  a  volume  entitled  "The 
Pioneers  of  the  Spiritual  Reformation."  Mr.  Howitt's  biography  forms  the 
opening  chapters  of  this  interesting  work,  and  how  full  of  valuable  informa- 
tion the  volume  itself  will  be,  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact,  that  it  is 
written  by  the  daughter  of  Mary  and  William  Howitt,  Mrs.  Watts, — a  lady 
whose  charming  contributions  to  Spiritual  literature  have  already  become 
familiar  to  admiring  readers  over  the  signature  of  "  A.'M.  H.  W,"  It  may 
not  be  inappropriate  in  this  place  to  give  an  excerpt  from  the  London 
Spiritual  Magazine  in  which  Mr.  Howitt  defines,  in  his  own  forcible 
language,  the  nature  of  some  of  his  spiritual  experiences.     He  says  : — 

"  We  liave  seen  tables  often  enough  lifted  by  invisible  power  from  the  floor  ;  seen  them 
give  answers  to  questions  by  rising  and  sinking  in  the  air  ;  we  have  seen  them  in  the  air 
keep  time  by  their  movements  to  a  tune  playing  on  a  piano  ;  seen  them  slide  about  the 

floor  of  a  room,  laying  themselves  down  when  touched We  have  heard  bells 

ring  in  the  air,  and  seen  them  thus  ringing  move  about  a  room  ;  seen  flowers  broken  from 
plants,  and  carried  to  different  persons,  without  any  visible  hand  ;  seen  musical  instru- 
ments play  correct  airs  apparently  of  themselves,  and  even  rise  up,  place  themselves  on  a 
person's  head,  and  play  out  a  well-known  air  in  fine  style.  We  have  heard  remarkable 
predictions  given  through  mediums,  and  which  have  come  literally  to  pass  ;  heard  wonder- 
ful descriptions  of  scenes  in  the  invisible  world  made  by  persons  in  clairvoyant  trance, 
which  would  require  the  highest  imaginative  genius  to  invent  or  embody  in  words  ;  have 
seen  writing  done  by  pencils  laid  on  paper  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  not  within  reach  of 
any  person  present,  and  innumerable  such  things." 

And  in  speaking  of  the  drawings  made  by  Madam  Hauffe  under  spirit- 
influence,  he  takes  occasion  to  make  the  following  statement  of  his  own 
experience  as  a  spirit-medium  : — 

"  Having  myself,  who  never  had  a  single  lesson  in  drawing,  and  never  could  draw  in 
a  normal  condition,  had  a  great  number  of  cii^cles  struck  through  my  hand  under  spirit- 
influence,  and  these  filled  up  by  tracery  of  ever  new  invention,  without  a  thought  of  my 
own,  I,  at  once,  recognise  the  truth  of  Kerner's  statement.  The  drawings  made  by  my 
hand  have  been  seen  by  great  numbers  of  persons,  artists  as  well  as  others,  and  remain  to 
be  seen,  though  the  power  is  again  gone  from  me.  Giotto,  or  any  pair  of  compasses,  could 
not  strike  more  perfect  circles  than  I  could  under  this  influence,  with  nothing  but  a  piece 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  201 

of  paper  and  a  pencil.  No  inventor  of  tracery  or  patterns  could  invent  such  original  ones 
as  were  thrown  out  on  the  paper  day  after  day,  with  almost  lightning  speed,  except  with 
long  and  studious  labour,  and  by  instrumental  aid.  At  the  same  time  the  sketches  given 
through  me  are  not  to  be  named  with  the  drawings,  both  in  pencil  and  colours,  produced  in 
this  manner  through  others  who  are  well  known." 

As  an  example  of  the  logical  yet  religious  tone  of  Mr.  Howitt's  philo- 
sophical articles  on  this  subject  we  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  subjoined 
passages,  taken  from  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine  of  April,  1863  : — 

"And  all  this  time,  in  England,  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  were  daily  sitting 
down  in  their  families  and  circles  of  intimate  friends,  and  quietly  and  successfully  testing 
those  angels  under  their  own  mode  of  advent,  and  finding  them  real.  And  both  in 
America  and  here,  as  well  as  in  most  of  the  Continental  nations,  this  has  been  the  great 
mode  of  enquiry  and  convincement.  Public  mediums  have,  in  reahty,  only  inaugurated 
the  movement :  it  has  been,  of  necessity,  carried  on  by  private  and  family  practice.  In 
this  domestic  prosecution  of  Spiritualism,  equally  inaccessible  to  the  vulgar  sorcerer  and 
the  interested  impostor — where  every  person  was  desirous  only  of  truth,  and  many  of 
them  of  deep  religious  truth — the  second  stage  of  Spiritual  development,  the  more  interior 
and  intellectual,  has  been  reached  by  a  very  large  community.  For  there  is,  indeed,  a 
very  large  section  of  society  who  are  sick  of  empty  profession,  or  disgusted  with  the 
dreary  cheat  of  scepticism,  and  who  have  been  long  yearning  for  some  revelation  of  the 
immortal  hopes  of  earlier  years,  in  some  substantial  and  unmistakeable  form .  They  have 
found  this  in  the  daily  visits  of  their  departed  friends,  coming  to  them  with  all  their  old 
identities  of  soul,  taste,  or  memory  of  annouucements  of  Christian  truth,  and  of  God's 
promised  felicity.  They  have  listened  again  and  again  to  the  words  of  their  beloved  ones, 
bidding  them  take  courage,  for  there  was  no  death,  but  that  around  them  walked  their 
so-called  departed,  ready  to  aid  and  comfort  them  in  their  earth  pilgrimage,  and  to 
receive  them  to  immediate  and  far  more  glorious  existence." 

Besides  the  voluminous  mass  of  historical  and  descriptive  writings  for 
which  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howitt  have  attained  a  world-wide  celebrity, 
Mrs.  Howitt  has  enriched  the  repertoire  of  Spiritual  literature  with  a  fine 
translation  of  Enmemoser's  "  History  of  Magic,"  whilst  Mr.  Wm.  Howitt's 
"  History  of  the  Supernatural,"  in  two  volumes,  and  his  splendid  magazine 
articles,  are  acknowledged  to  be  amongst  the  best  standard  works  of  which 
the  Spiritual  cause  can  boast. 

Amongst  the  many  popular  and  distinguished  writers  of  the  day  who 
have  fearlessly  avowed  their  interest  in  SpirituaHsm  and  contributed  talent 
and  reputation  to  its  advocacy,  were  Mr,  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  the  former 
well-known  as  the  editor  of  the  London  Art  Journal,  whilst  Mrs.  Hall's 
charming  works  of  fiction,  and  other  writings,  have  procured  for  her  a 
world-wide  celebrity.  It  would  be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  valuable 
influence  exercised  by  this  accomplished  couple  upon  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism. 

Moving  in  the  highest  ranks  of  European  society,  their  residence  was  the 
scene  of  delightful  reunions,  where  gifted  Mediums  and  persons  of  the 
highest  literary  and  scientific  culture  were  brought  together  and  combined 
to  send  forth  an  influence  which  permeated  the  ranks  of  the  most 
intellectual  classes  of  Europe.  It  is  but  a  few  short  years  since  the  fair 
form  of  the  talented  authoress,  Maria  S.  C.  Hall,  vanished  from  her  wide 
circle  of  admirers  and  passed  to  the  land  of  light  to  which  her  hand  had 
already  pointed  so  many  of  earth's  weary  pilgrims.  And  thus  after  fifty 
years  of  heart  and  soul  companionship,  the  noble  octogenarian,  S.  C.  Hall, 
was  left  alone  on  earth,  at  least  so  far  as  mortal  sight  is  concerned  ;  never 
have  the  triumphs  of  Spiritualism  become  more  manifest  than  in  the 
fortitude  with  which  this  truly  "  Christian  "  gentleman  sustains  the  tempo- 
rary separation  between  the  mortal  and  the  immortal.  At  a  crowded 
reception  tendered  to  the  author  by  the  Central  Association  of  Spiritualists, 

202  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

a  few  months  since,  on  the  occasion  of  her  visit  to  London,  Mr.  S.  C. 
Hall — then  over  eighty  years  of  age — made  the  speech  of  the  night,  and 
in  a  strain  of  glowing  eloquence  that  thrilled  every  heart,  and  brought 
tears  to  every  eye,  he  declared  that  the  grave  had  not  separated  him  from 
his  angel  wife.  Her  constant  communications  cheered  his  loneliness,  he 
said ;  guided  his  mortal  footsteps  and  gave  him  unceasing  assurance  that 
she  in  heaven  and  he  on  earth  were  now  as  ever  one  in  heart,  life 
interest,  and  undying  interchange  of  loving  communion.  .  .  .  What  a 
triumphant  illustration  of  immortal  life  over  mortal  death,  and  of  the  value 
of  the  much  derided  facts  and  philosophy  of  Spiritualism  ! 

In  addition  to  these  eminent  writers,  many  others  of  scarcely  less  celebrity 
assisted  in  making  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine  a  work  as  valuable  in 
an  aesthetic  point  of  view,  as  it  was  interesting  to  the  believers  in  Spirit 
communion. 

One  of  the  first  volumes  published  in  the  interests  of  Spiritualism,  and 
still  a  standard  work  with  those  who  desire  to  trace  out  the  movement  from 
its  incipiency,  is  Mrs.  De  Morgan's  excellent  sketch  of  her  own  experiences, 
entitled  "  From  Matter  to  Spirit." 

Another  valuable  and  timely  compendium  of  Spiritual  facts  and  philo- 
sophy is,  "The  Natural  and  Supernatural,"  written  at  an  early  period  of 
the  movement  in  England,  by  J.  Enmore  Jones,  Esq.,  of  Norwood. 

Mr.  D.  D.  Home  has  pubUshed  two  interesting  volumes  at  different  times, 
the  one  called  "Incidents  of  My  Life,"  the  other  "  Lights  and  Shadows  of 
Spiritualism." 

Omitting  the  long  list  of  smaller  volumes,  tracts,  pamphlets,  leaflets, 
&c.,  &c.,  which  swell  the  mass  of  English  Spiritual  literature,  we  next  call 
attention  to  an  admirable  work — "  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism," 
written  by  the  celebrated  author  and  naturalist.  Professor  A.  R.  Wallace. 
For  the  unpretentious  size  of  this  volume  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  any 
work  which  presents  a  more  unanswerable  array  of  facts,  logic,  and  scientific 
deductions ;  in  short,  it  is  in  every  way  worthy  to  be  regarded  as  a  Spirit- 
ualistic manual,  of  equal  value  to  the  well-informed  Spirituahst,  and  the 
earnest  investigator. 

Besides  the  intrinsic  value  of  Professor  Wallace's  admirable  work,  the 
public  have  appreciated  it  all  the  more,  from  the  fact  that  it  emanates  from 
the  pen  of  one  so  highly  honoured  in  the  ranks  of  science  and  literature  as 
Alfred  Russell  Wallace.  Dividing  honours  with  the  alleged  founder  of  the 
famous  doctrine  of  "  evolution  " — Charles  Darwin — a  world-wide  traveller, 
naturalist,  and  distinguished  author,  Professor  Wallace  has  never  hesitated 
to  contribute  his  honoured  testimony  to  the  much-abused  cause  of  Spirit- 
uahsm.  His  clear  logical  speeches,  unanswerable  magazine  and  journalistic 
articles,  and  his  noble  defence  and  exposition  of  true  Spiritualism,  when 
and  wherever  opportunity  has  permitted,  all  have  combined  to  render 
Professor  Wallace's  adherence  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  a  tower  of 
strength  which  can  never  be  too  gratefully  remembered. 

Professor  Crookes's  record  of  experiments  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  Miss 
Cook,  and  other  Media  \  Professor  Zoellner's  "  Transcendental  Physics," 
and  the  "  Report  of  the  Dialectical  Society,"  have  been  already  noticed. 

One  of  the  most  esteemed  and  gifted  writers  in  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism 
is  the  gentleman  known  by  the  no7?i  de  plume  of  "  M.  A.,  Oxon." 

Amongst  this  truly  inspired  author's  collected  writings,  the  most  popular 
are,  the  four  volumes  entitled  severally,  "  Psych ography;"  "  Spirit  Identity  \ " 
"The  Higher  Aspects  of  Spiritualism  ; "  and  "Spirit  Teachings." 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  203 

.Nothing  in  the  whole  realm  of  occult  literature  can  surpass  the  deep 
insight,  and  profound  mastery  of  Spiritualistic  problems,  manifested  in  these 
works.  And  yet  they  are  but  a  small  part  of  "  M.  A.,  Oxon's  "  contribu- 
tions. His  fine  magazine  and  journalistic  articles  are  to  be  found  in  most 
of  the  high-toned  periodicals  of  the  last  few  years,  whilst  his  well-known 
signature  invariably  attracts  every  thoughful  reader  who  desires  to  be 
instructed,  as  well  as  interested. 

Three  of  the  most  remarkable  volumes  that  have  of  late  issued  from  the 
English  Spiritual  press,  are  those,  circulated  chiefly  amongst  the  publisher's 
personal  friends,  entitled,  "  Angelic  Revelations."  They  are  a  collection  of 
communications  given  through  the  Mediumship  of  a  lady  in  private  life, 
and  received  by  a  circle  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  whose  sessions  were 
continued  for  several  years  in  the  city  of  Manchester.  The  seances  were  of 
the  most  exclusive  character,  and  were  only  participated  in  by  such  persons 
as  the  controlling  intelligences  elected  to  receive.  Each  of  these  favoured 
individuals  was  named  by  the  presiding  '*  angels,"  according  to  the 
qualities  of  mind  that  distinguished  them.  To  Mr.  William  Oxley,  the 
well-known  and  highly-esteemed  Spiritualistic  author,  was  assigned  the 
onerous  task  of  recording  the  communications  spoken  in  trance  by  the 
Medium. 

Thus  the  whole  of  the  three  volumes  above  named,  have  been  written  out 
and  prepared  for  the  press,  and  published  in  the  highest  form  of  mechanical 
art,  by  Mr.  Oxley  "  the  Recorder,"  with  the  permission  of  the  controlling 
intelligences,  and  under  the  auspices  of  the  Manchester  circle,*  No 
comment  can  do  justice  to  the  ecstatic  style  or  remarkable  views  of  the 
future  life,  indicated  in  these  volumes.  They  must  be  read  to  be  appre- 
ciated, and  then  they  form  but  one  fragment  of  the  innumerable  and 
diverse  revealments  of  the  after  life,  and  man's  spiritual  genesis  and  exodus, 
which  the  trance  utterances  of  the  present  dispensation  have  furnished  us 
with.  The  volumes  above  mentioned  are  not  the  only  ones  for  which  the 
world  is  indebted  to  their  accomplished  publisher, 

Mr.  William  Oxley  has  written  a  remarkably  fine  poetical  adaptation  of 
the  celebrated  Hindoo  Baghavat  Gita ;  an  excellent  metaphysical  work 
entitled  "The  Philosophy  of  Spirit;"  and  he  is  now  enriching  the 
columns  of  the  Medhmi  and  Daybreak  with  a  graphic  account  of  the 
ancient  monuments  of  Egypt,  which  he  describes  and  comments  upon  in 
the  progressive  spirit  of  an  advanced  thinker,  and  from  the  standpoint 
of  his  own  personal  knowledge,  obtained  during  a  recent  visit  to  the 
wonderful  old  land  of  the  Pharaohs.  Mr.  Oxley's  name  has  become  so  long 
familiarized  to  every  reader  of  the  best  Spiritual  literature,  by  noble  and 
high-toned  articles,  that  many  will  rejoice  in  the  opportunity  of  becoming 
better  acquainted  with  their  favourite  author,  through  the  accompanying 
fine  illustrations.  The  introduction  to  the  facsimiles  of  the  spiritually  pro- 
duced flower  and  the  spirit  foot  are  too  graphically  recorded  in  Mr.  Oxley's 
own  words  to  need  any  other  comment  than  their  perusal  will  suggest. 

Mr.  Oxley,  addressing  the  author  of  this  volume,  says  : — 

"  To  Mrs.  Britten, — I  have  the  pleasure  to  furnish  you  with  engravings  of  a  materialised 
spirit's  foot,  which  represents  with  perfect  exactitude  the  plaster  cast,  moulded  by  a 
professional  artist,  from  the  paraffin  was  envelope.  Apart  from  any  suggestions  of 
trickery  and  collusion  the  cast  itself  tells  its  own  tale,  for  it  has  the  cuticle  marks  .in  the 
crucial  parts,  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  produce  \mder  any  circumstances  without  a 

*  "  Angelic  Revelations,  concerning  the  origin,  ultimation,  and  destiny  of  the  Human  Spirit,  &c., 
may  be  had  from  T.  Gaskell,  69,  Oldham  Road,  Manchester. 

204  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

mould  formed  of  many  parts,  as  any  mechanician,  or  even  ordinary  person  can  see  at  a 
glance.  The  cast  foot  is  eight  inches  long  by  three  inches  in  the  smallest  part,  and  nine 
inches  in  the  widest  part.  The  opening  at  the  top  of  the  foot  is  2  J  inches  diameter. 
And  yet  through  this  opening  the  foot  was  instantaneously  withdrawn.  The  medium 
was  Mrs.  Firman  (now  deceased).  The  modus  operandi  was  as  follows :  I  prepared  the 
melted  hot  liquid  paraffin,  into  which  the  little  spirit  form  dipped  her  foot  several  times, 
so  as  to  make  it  of  sufficient  thickness  to  maintain  its  figure.  After  this  operation  the 
spirit  form — known  to  us  as  Bertie — put  out  her  foot  ^vith,  the  wax  mould  upon  it,  and 
asking  me  to  take  hold  of  it,  which  I  did,  the  foot  was  withdrawn  (or  dissolved,  I  know  not 
which)  and  the  mould  left  in  my  hand.  This  was  at  the  house  of  a  friend  in  Manchester, 
April  11th,  1876,  and  next  morning  I  took  the  wax  mould  to  Mr.  Bernaditto,  who  filled 
it  with  plaster,  and,  after  melting  the  wax  from  the  plaster,  the  result  was  a  beautiful 
feminine  human  foot,  of  which  the  illustration  is  a  faithful  copy.  The  crucial  test  of 
this  wondrous  phenomenon  is  seen  by  reference  to  Figure  II.  The  ball  of  the  toe 
(see  D  c),  half  an  inch  thick,  had  to  be  drawn  through  an  opening  only  a  quarter-inch  deep 
(see  B  a),  which  of  course,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  is  a  physical  impossibility, 
without  destroying  the  fine  bridge  (see  a  c),  and  it  is  exactly  on  this  bridge  that  the 
cuticle  marks  are  delineated  as  perfectly  as  on  the  human  foot.  Your  space  will  not 
permit  me  to  give  the  means  employed  to  eliminate  anything  Uke  fraudulent  action  on 
the  part  of  the  medium,  neither  is  it  necessary  to  do  so,  as  the  cast  itself — stiU  in  my 
possession — leaves  its  own  stamp  of  genuineness,  for  there  is  not  a  single  mark  that 
betokens  anything  contrary  to  what  it  really  is,  viz.,  a  cast  from  a  whole  and  perfect 
mould,  without  a  division  ;  and  I  challenge  the  world  to  produce  the  like,  otherwise  than 
by  similar  agency.  I,  myself,  made  the  so-called  cabinet,  which  was  the  recess  of  a  bay 
window,  into  which  nothing  could  get  without  being  seen  by  ten  pairs  of  watchful  eyes 
(there  was  a  good  light  all  through  the  seance).  The  medium,  who  was  a  woman  of 
great  size,  went  inside,  and  in  the  course  of  some  fifteen  minutes,  the  little  psychic 
form  of  Bertie  presented  herself,  and  went  through  the  operations  as  described  above. 
After  the  performance  she  disappeared,  and  in  a  moment  or  two  I  drew  the  curtain  aside, 
and  there  was  Mrs.  Firman  entranced,  and  the  sole  occupant.     Where  was  Bertie  ? 

"  The  other  illustration  is  from  a  photograph  of  a  plant  with  flower,  produced  through 
the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Esperance,  at  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  August  4th,  1880.  The 
reader  must  take  all  accessories  for  granted,  as  it  is  superfluous  to  enumerate  all  the 
precautionary  measures  to  ensure  genuine  phenomena. 

"  The  cabinet  was  a  plain  wooden  box,  five  feet  high,  closed  at  top  aud  bottom,  with  a 
gauze  division  in  the  centre,  and  a  curtain  covering  the  whole  front,  about  six  feet  wide. 
The  medium  sat  in  one  compartment,  and  the  company  (about  twenty  persons)  sat  round 
in  horse-shoe  fashion.  In  a  short  time,  a  little  figure,  draped  in  white,  known  as  Yolande, 
emerged  from  the  other  (empty)  compartment.  That  it  was  not  the  medium  was  evident 
from  the  fact  of  the  figure  being  much  less  in  size,  and  different  in  outline,  and  I  heard 
Mrs.  E.  breathing  hard  while  the  figure  was  outside.  Yolande  requested  my  friend, 
Reimers,  to  get  a  glass  water-bottle,  and  some  sand  and  water,  which,  when  mixed,  he  put 
into  the  bottle,  and  returned  to  his  seat.  Yolande  then  made  a  few  passes  over  the  bottle, 
and  actually  created  a  white  gauzy  cloth  before  our  very  eyes.  She  then  retired  about  a 
yard  from  the  bottle,  and  sat  down  on  the  floor.  Presently  we  saw — for  there  was  sufficient 
light  to  clearly  distinguish  the  operation — the  gauze  veil  gradually  rising,  as  if  there  was 
something  moving  it  upwards.  In  about  two  minutes,  after  rising  about  sixteen  inches, 
Yolande  rose  to  her  feet  and  went  to  the  bottle,  from  which  she  removed  the  covering,  and 
lo  !  there  was  a  plant  with  green  leaves  grown  out  of  the  bottle,  with  its  roots  in  the  sand  : 
but  there  was  no  flower  on  it.  After  we  had  somewhat  recovered  from  our  astonishment, 
Yolande  took  it  up,  bottle  and  all,  and  gave  it  into  my  hands.  She  then  retired  into  the 
cabinet.  After  the  company  had  inspected  it,  I  placed  it  at  my  feet,  and  waited  for  what 
should  come  next.  In  a  few  minutes  raps  were  heard,  and  then  the  alphabet  was  used. 
'  Look  at  your  plant '  was  spelt  out,  and  taking  it  up  I  found,  not  only  that  it  had  grown 
very  considerably  in  size,  but  there  was  a  beautiful  flower  about  four  inches  diameter  on 
it.  This  was  produced  while  it  tvas  between  my  feet.  I  took  it  to  my  hotel,  and  next 
morning  had  it  photographed,  of  which  the  engraving  is  an  exact  copy.  The  next  night 
Yolande  gave  me  a  small  rosebud  on  a  short  stalk,  with  not  more  than  two  leaves  on.  This 
1  put  in  my  bosom,  and  kept  it  there  during  the  time  that  the  seance  lasted  ;  but  having 
the  impression  that  something  was  going  on,  I  put  my  hand  to  feel  it,  and  noticing  that  it 
felt  different  I  kept  my  own  counsel  and  did  not  disturb  it.  When  the  stance  was  drawing 
to  a  close,  I  drew  forth  my  rosebud,  when,  strange  to  relate,  it  had  developed  into  a  bunch 
of  three  large  full-hlown  roses,  with  a  hud  as  well  I     These  I  also  put  away  with  the  plant. 

"  Extensive  as  has  been  my  experience — now  ranging  over  many  years — with  psychic 
sensitives,  there  have  been  no  results  more  satisfactory  and  pleasing — i.e.,  on  the  physical 
plane — than  the  above  which  I  have  narrated,  and  curtailed,  so  as  to  give  only  the  bald 

PLASTER  CAST  OF  RIGHT  FOOT. 

OF    A    MATEEIALTSED  PSYCHIC  FOEM 
Known  as  "BERTIE." 

The  Paraffin  Wax  Mould  was  presented  by  the 
Form  while  still  on  her  foot  to  Wm.  Oxley,  who 
took  hold  of  it,  when  the  foot  was  instantaneously 
withdrawn.  Produced  in  Manchester  (England) 
April  nth,  1876. 

PLANT   WITH    FLOWER. 

(IXOKA    CEAETA^ 

Produced  by  the  Materialised  Psychic  Form 
Yolaade,  which  grew  out  of  a  glass  water 
bottle  in  the  presence  of  20  witnesses  at 
Newcastle-on-Tyne,  England,  Aug.  4th,  1880. 

From  Photograph  taken  next  day  in  possession 
of  William  Oxley,  Manchester. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  205 

facts.  The  top  leaves  (six  inches  long),  with  a  part  of  the  stalk  and  remains  of  flower 
plant  (preserved  under  glass),  together  with  the  foot^along  with  other  hand  casts — pro- 
duced under  similar  circumstances  as  told — are  before  me  as  I  write,  and  I  trust  that  they 
may  be  kept  for  ages  to  come  as  souvenirs,  or  first  fruits  of  that  mighty  spiritual  force  and 
movement — now  in  its  commencement — which  is  destined  to  change  the  face  of  the  whole 
earth,  both  as  a  physical  orb,  and  also  the  social  status  of  humanity  that,  from  generation 
to  generation,  will  live  and  move  upon  its  surface.  Without  trespassing  further  on  your 
time  and  space,  allow  me  to  congratulate  you  on  the  part  which  you  have  been  destined  to 
play  in  this  wondi'ous  drama  ;  and  unless  I  grievously  err,  the  time  will  come — and  at  do 
very  distant  date — when  this  new  volume,  which  you  are  now  giving  to  the  world,  will  be 
recognised  and  appreciated  at  its  vastly  more  than  mere  money  value.  Each  pioneer  has 
his  or  her  own  specific  work  to  perform  ;  and  amongst  these,  none  have  laboured  more 
assiduoiisly,  and  more  unselfishly,  than  the  gifted  editress  of  'Art-Magic'  ;  'Ghost  Land' : 
and  the  authoress  of  the  '  History  of  the  Modern  Spiritual  Movement  all  over  the  Earth.' 
So  states 

"  Your  Fellow  Workman, 

"  William  Oxley. 
"  Manchester,  August  15th,  1883." 

Another  of  the  writers  who  in  any  department  of  human  thought  rather 
than  that  of  the  "  occult,"  would  have  achieved  a  world-wide  celebrity,  is 
the  noble  Countess  of  Caithness,  now  Duchesse  de  Pomar.  Besides  many 
fugitive  contributions  to  the  journalistic  literature  of  the  day,  this  accom- 
plished authoress  has  written  two  remarkable  works  all  too  little  known ; 
the  one,  a  volume  of  nearly  500  pages,  entitled  "  Old  Truths  in  a  New 
Light,"  the  other,  "  Serious  Letters  to  Serious  Friends."  These  publications 
are  no  mere  poetical  effusions  of  a  high-born  lady,  but  the  brilliant,  sterling, 
and  philosophic  arguments  of  a  master  mind,  enclosed  in  one  of  Nature's 
fairest  and  most  womanly  forms.  Soaring  far  above  her  compeers  in  the 
gay  and  fashionable  world,  this  truly  noble  woman  maintains  her  lead  in 
the  most  aristocratic  European  salons,  and  yet  dares  avow  herself  an 
"occultist"  in  the  profoundest  sense  of  the  term.  In  the  midst  of  princes 
and  potentates,  this  brave  lady  hesitates  not  to  appear  in  loving  companion- 
ship with  the  spirit  mediums  whom  she  honours  with  her  friendship,  and 
whilst  many  of  the  gay  butterflies  who  crowd  her  Parisian /^/^j-  are  spending 
their  time  in  councilling  how  to  adorn  themselves  with  modistes  and 
friseurts,  this  high-minded  and  indefatigable  labourer  in  God's  vineyard,  is 
penning  sublime  Unes,  which  Hft  the  soul  up  to  heaven,  and  forge  the 
golden  links  of  an  universal  Brotherhood,  for  all  humanity.  Amongst  the 
lesser  works  that  have  fallen  from  the  Countess  of  Caithness's  pen,  is  a 
charming  brochure  entitled  '•  A  Midnight  Visit  to  Holyrood."  It  is  founded 
upon  the  singular  relations  which  attach  this  lady  to  her  much-beloved 
guardian  spirit,  the  fair  and  hapless  "  Marie  Stuart,  Queen  of  Scots."  At 
the  request  of  this  angelic  guide,  the  Countess  paid  a  midnight  visit  to 
Holyrood,  there  to  listen  to  the  spirit  voice  of  her,  whose  sighs  of  anguish 
had  been  borne  on  many  a  wailing  breeze  through  those  grim  and  mournful 
towers. 

We  would  fain  linger  on  the  Countess's  thrilling  description  of  her  inter- 
view with  the  presiding  genius  of  the  scene,  did  space  permit.  Failing 
this,  we  must  still  offer  a  brief  extract  from  this  fascinating  little  work,  were 
it  only  to  give  the  world  —profoundly  ignorant  of  true  spiritual  ethics — 
some  idea  of  the  tone  in  which  purified  spirits  commune  with  mortals,  and 
the  character  of  the  advice  which  the  solemn  pedagogues  of  the  pulpit  so 
irreverently  assure  their  gaping  listeners,  proceed  from  "  demons  !  " 

The  modes  in  which  the  spirit  and  the  mortal  hold  communion  is  thus 
described  by  the  Countess  of  Caithness.     She  says  : — 

2o6  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"It  is  now  nearly  eight  years  since  I  was  first  made  aware  of  her  (Marie  Stuart's)  con- 
nection with  me ;  or  rather,  perhaps,  I  should  better  describe  our  relations  as  my  con- 
nection with  her — but  only  three,  since  I  have  enjoyed  the  happiness  of  communion  with 
her.  I  often  feel  her  presence.  She  makes  it  known  to  me  in  many  different  ways  ;  and 
the  oral  communications  I  have  received  from  her,  and  taken  down  at  various  times  to 
the  best  of  my  ability,  have  swollen  into  the  size  of  a  small  volume,  These  interviews 
have  generally  taken  place  in  the  quietude  of  my  own  room,  and  during  the  calm  silence 
of  the  midnight  hour.  But  she  has  also  come  to  me  amongst  the  wild  hiUs  of  Scotland, 
or  when  seated  on  the  high  chffs  of  Caithness  overlooking  the  stormy  Pentland  Firth  ; 
but  only  when  its  wild  waves  have  been  comparatively  at  rest,  and  reflecting  the  intense 
blue  of  the  sky  as  serene  as  that  which  usually  overarches  the  sunny  Mediterranean,  and 
when  there  has  been  no  sign  of  life  around  save  the  white  sea-gull  sailing  majestically 
overhead  between  the  earth  and  sky,  and  the  crisp  Uttle  white  crested  waves  called  '  The 
Merry  Men  of  Mey'  tumbling  over  one  another  as  if  in  mad  glee  at  my  feet — have  I  felt 
her  gentle  presence,  which  is  ever  bright  and  soothing  as  a  sunbeam,  and  heard  her 
precious  words,  which  have  appeared  to  me  sublime  in  their  beauty,  and  in  their  intent, 
ever  urging  me  onward  in  the  path  of  truth  and  progress,  and  opening  out  fresh  vistas  to 
me  of  my  pathway  in  the  future." 

As  a  specimen  of  the  communication  above  referred  to,  we  commend 
the  following  excerpt  from  Marie  Stuart  to  Marie  Caithness  : — ■ 

"  Go  not  alone  to  the  Word  for  Hfe,  but  also  to  those  who  gave  it,  for  they  have  added 
knowledge  which  is  more  appropriate,  and  better  adapted  to  the  present  hour  of  spiritual 
growth  and  unfoldment.  Reverently  use  the  Bible  for  guidance  and  instruction.  Use 
Nature's  great  Bible  even  as  reverently,  but  remember  that  the  passive  soul-inspired  one 
will  rise  even  to  the  beatitudes,  gathering  new  thought- germs,  watching  the  opening  bulb 
and  seed  of  original  heaven-inspired  ideas  ;  proving  all  things,  holding  fast  unto  that  which 
will  bear  all  the  light  which  science,  art,  and  reason  can  bring  to  bear  upon  them.  You, 
my  child,  have  a  mind  capable  of  grasping  truths  that  are  destined  to  make  all  nations 
free  and  inspired.  Aye  !  and  this  is  accomplishing  even  now.  Stand  out  before  the 
world  as  one  who  dares  think — one  who  courts  the  wisdom  of  the  ages,  and  grasps  the 
hght  of  the  universe  to  guide  humanity  forward.  The  sweet,  ever-living  truths  given  to 
the  world  by  its  inspired  ones  are  to  be  revered,  but  let  us  not  go  backward  with  un- 
covered heads  asking  wisdom  ;  let  us  rather  press  forward  even  into  the  inner  courts 
of  the  temple  where  Deific  harmonies  lull  the  soul  into  conditions  of  mind  that  admit  of 
communion  with  the  Builder  of  all  worlds,  the  Origin  of  all  hfe,  all  forms.  Let  us  rise 
even  to  the  holy  altar  where  a  John  carried  his  gifts,  and  became  fiUed  with  power." 

There  is  yet  another  literary  work  by  the  Countess  of  Caithness,  to  which 
we  only  call  attention,  without  attempting  in  the  present  historical  com- 
pendium to  analyze  its  nature,  or  do  justice  to  its  merits.  It  was  during 
the  closing  weeks  of  the  year  1880,  that  the  Countess  of  Caithness  contri- 
buted a  remarkable  series  of  papers  to  the  London  Medium  and  Daybreak, 
on  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  the  occult  prophecies  which,  from  the  most 
remote  ages,  had  pointed  to  this  period.  The  inspired  writer  gave  an 
elaborate  review  of  the  Cabalistic  interpretation  of  the  Biblical  writings. 
She  reviewed  the  Apocalyptic,  prophetic,  and  Pythagorean  systems  of 
numbers,  and  connected  them,  and  the  veiled  significance  of  the  mediaeval 
mystical  writings  with  the  present  discoveries  which  are  revealing  the  occult 
meanings  in  Oriental  monuments  and  myths.  From  all  these  sources  the 
the  learned  writer  drew  the  conclusion  that  the  year  1880  completed  one 
of  those  cycles  of  time  known  to,  and  defined  by  the  ancient  prophets, 
whilst  the  year  1881  might  be  regarded  as  the  commencement  of  an 
entirely  new  era,  and  one  which  physically,  mentally,  politically,  and 
religiously,  was  destined  to  be  regarded  by  future  ages  as  the  opening  up  of 
a  new  dispensation.  The  Bible,  especially  the  Apocalypse  and  prophetic 
writings,  was  treated  of  in  these  remarkable  essays,  and  their  mystic  mean- 
ings interpreted  and  brought  to  bear  upon  the  present  singularly  disturbed 
condition  of  human  thought,   especially  in  respect  to  religious  opinions. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  207 

In  testimony  of  her  own  implicit  faith  that  a  great  world  dispensation 
closed  in  1880,  and  another,  foretold  by  seers  and  prophets,  inscribed  in 
the  ancient  pyramid  of  Cheops,  and  manifest  in  the  universal  upheaval  of 
human  opinions  to-day,  was  inaugurated  in  1881,  the  Countess  has  adopted 
the  date  of  the  new  era  together  with  divers  occult  emblems  on  her  letter 
paper,  and  in  not  a  few  of  the  ornaments  which  adorn  her  toilet,  and  the 
furniture  of  her  mansion. 

When  the  mists  of  the  new  dawn  shall  have  melted  into  the  sunlight  of 
noonday  truth,  and  the  cyclic  progress  of  the  race  shall  be  fully  understood, 
especially  in  reference  to  the  present  transitional  and  catastrophic  period, 
the  essays  of  Lady  Caithness,  though  they  are  now  "cabala"  to  the 
unthinking  multitude,  will  be  then  recalled  and  honoured  as  the  advent 
voice  which  proclaimed  the  coming  of  the  new  Messiah,  the  dispensation 
of  peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  to  all  men. 

Another  remarkable  addition  to  the  occult,  if  not  the  Spiritual  literature 
of  the  times,  has  been  made  by  the  son  of  the  noble  lady  of  whom  we 
have  been  writing — formerly  the  Count,  now  the  Duke  de  Medina  Pomar, 
This  gentleman  whilst  yet  in  his  teens,  became  the  author  of  two  beauti- 
fully written  works  of  fiction  designed  to  illustrate  the  doctrine  of  re-incarna- 
tion, a  belief  with  which  his  mind  is  strongly  imbued,  and  one  which  finds 
a  more  plausible  and  fascinating  illustration  in  the  young  Duke  de  Pomar's 
writings,  than  in  any  of  the  abstract  treatises  yet  produced  on  this  subject. 
The  names  of  the  works  in  question  are  "The  Honeymoon"  and  "Through 
the  Ages."  Both  these  novels  are  full  of  exalted  sentiment,  vivid  descrip- 
tion, and  thrilling  interest.  Both  are  designed  to  present  in  the  form  of 
what  in  ancient  time  would  have  been  termed  "  parables,"  and  in  our  own 
age  are  simply  ''works  of  fiction,"  grand  lessons  of  ideality  and  Spiritual 
philosophy.  "  The  Honeymoon  "  is  a  veritable  dream  of  beauty ;  visionary, 
pathetic,  powerful,  and  enthralHng.  If  not  a  direct  inspiration,  it  is  such  a 
marvellous  feat  of  writing  for  a  mere  boy,  that  it  forms  to  the  candid 
reader  a  far  better  proof  of  an  invisible  thinker  guiding  the  pen  of  a  mortal 
scribe  than  many  a  voluminous  mass  of  "communications,"  labelled  with 
the  authorship  of  "the  mighty  dead."  "Through  the  Ages"  is  a  novel 
which — as  its  name  implies — traces  the  progress  of  a  Spirit  through  all 
those  phases  of  mortal  trial  and  discipline,  which  the  re-incarnationists 
affirm  to  be  essential  to  round  out  the  full  perfection  of  the  soul  through 
human  experiences. 

It  ever  stern  facts  could  be  superseded  by  the  sophistry  of  undemonstrated 
theories,  it  would  be  through  the  fascinating  influences  of  a  pen  so  facile, 
and  an  imagination  so  vivid  as  that  of  the  Duke  de  Medina  Pomar.  The 
pictures  are  simply  perfect,  and  if  ever  re-incarnation  could  be  proved,  this 
brilliant  writer's  "  Through  the  Ages "  would  be  a  veritable  modern  Iliad 
of  the  faith. 

Since  the  production  of  these  chefs  d'czuvre,  the  Duke  de  Pomar  has 
published  several  dashing  works  of  fiction  in  which  his  brilliant  pen  has 
been  more  prompt  to  lash  the  vices  and  folUes  of  society,  than  to  renew  his 
earlier  and  more  exalting  task  of  lifting  up  the  unthinking  multitude  to  a 
higher  standard  of  life  and  action  Though  still  a  very  young  man,  the 
Duke  has  dropped  his  prolific  pen,  and  to  the  deep  regret  of  his  many 
admirers,  he  floats  on  the  surface  of  society,  but  writes,  for  the  present,  no 
more.  Like  all  subjects  of  inspiration  the  fire  of  his  special  literary  epoch 
is  burnt  out,  but  that  it  will  be  rekindled  again  none  who  have  studied 
his  peculiarly- sensitive  nature  can  question.     Whatever  the  future  may  call 

2o8  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

forth,  none  who  read  the  young  Duke  de  Pomar's  first  literary  productions, 
can  hesitate  to  pronounce  them  the  work  of  a  very  talented  man,  or  a 
phenomenally  inspired  boy.  If  years  are  to  decide  the  question,  the 
latter  position  is  the  only  solution  of  which  his  writings  are  susceptible. 

CHAPTER    XXVII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    GREAT    BRITAIN    (CONTINUE]!. ) 

Still  More   Concerning  the  Literature  of  Spiritualism  in  England. 

Amongst  the  most  important  of  the  contributions  that  have  been  made  to 
the  Uterature  of  English  SpirituaHsm  are  the  writings  of  Mr.  John  Farmer, 
whose  name  has  achieved  a  wide-spread  popularity  on  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic,  as  the  author  of  "  A  New  Basis  of  Belief  in  Immortality,"  and  the 
admirable  pamphlet  entitled,  "  How  to  Investigate  Spiritualism."  In  both 
these  works  Mr.  Farmer  has  dealt  with  his  subjects  in  an  equally  scholarly 
and  exhaustive  mode.  Both  have  commanded  the  respectful  notice  of  the 
secular  press,  and  hold  a  deservedly  high  place  in  the  estimation  of  every 
reader  of  Spiritual  literature. 

It  may  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Farmer's  "  New  Basis  of  Belief  in 
Immortality,"  was  deemed  worthy  of  being  alluded  to  in  terms  of  warm 
commendation  by  one  of  the  great  religious  dignitaries  of  the  late  Eccle- 
siastical Congress  assembled  at  Newcastle.  We  do  not  cite  this  as  praise 
of  any  extraordinary  value,  but  simply  to  show  that  the  religious  tone  and 
authoritative  character  of  that  work  could  command  the  respect  of  such 
men  as  Canon  Wilberforce,  Dr.  Thornton,  &c.,  &c. 

One  of  the  most  candid  and  capable  critics  of  the  present  day,  the  book 
reviewer  of  the  Truthseeker,  says  of  this  volume  :  — 

"  This  is  an  exceedingly  thoughtful  book  ;  temperate,  earnest,  and  bright  with  vivid 
and  intelhgent  love  of  truth.  Mr.  Farmer  is  no  fanatic,  if  we  may  judge  of  him  by  his 
book,  but  a  brave  seeker  after  the  truth.  Incidentally,  he  conveys  a  vast  amount  of 
information  concerning  what  are  called  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism — what  these 
phenomena  are,  under  Vfhat  conditions  they  are  obtained,  and  to  what  they  lead  ;  but  his 
main  purpose  is  to  show  how  Spiritualism  explains  the  Bible,  supplies  the  key  to  not  a 
little  that  is  mysterious  in  '  historical  Christianity,'  and  furnishes,  as  he  says,  '  a  new 
basis  of  belief.'  We  commend  his  book  to  the  attention  of  aU  who  are  prepared  to  give 
serious  attention  to  a  very  serious  subject." 

To  the  above-quoted  opinions  every  intelligent  reader,  whether  Spiritualist 
or  opponent,  must  say  Amen. 

In  noticing  the  two  most  popular  works  that  have  emanated  from  Mr. 
Farmer's  pen,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  these  are  his  only  contributions 
to  the  realm  of  Spiritual  literature. 

Mr.  Farmer  is  the  author  of  a  fine  metaphysical  essay  on  "  Present  Day 
Problems,"  and  a  work  on  Mesmerism,  the  modest  title  of  which — "Hints 
on  Mesmerism " — bears  no  proportion  to  the  valuable,  and  truly  practical 
matter  it  contains.  It  was  to  the  zeal  and  enterprise  of  this  gentleman  also, 
that  the  excellent  monthly  periodical  entitled  The  Psychological  Review, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  209 

after  an  interregnum  of  many  months,  was  revived  in  July,  1881,  and  carried 
forward  to  the  current  year  of  1883, 

Since  the  suspension  of  this  magazine  became  inevitable,  Mr.  Farmer  has 
given  time  and  indomitable  effort  to  the  editorial  management  of  the  fine 
journal  so  often  referred  to  in  this  volume,  called  Light. 

Mr.  Farmer's  devoted  and  untiring  services  in  the  cause  of  SpirituaHsm 
have  been  rendered  in  so  quiet  and  unostentatious  a  manner,  and  his  name 
has  obtained  so  little  prominence,  except  as  the  author  of  the  popular 
works  above  referred  to,  that  the  reader  may  be  surprised  to  learn  how 
largely  the  present  literary  standing  of  the  movement  is  indebted  to  him ; 
indeed  it  is  with  the  view  of  "  rendering  honour  where  honour  is  due,"  that 
the  author  tenders  this  brief  but  well-merited  tribute  of  acknowledgment 
to  one  of  the  best  and  most  philosophic  writers,  as  well  as  one  of  the  most 
efficient  and  faithful  workers  in  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism. 

Of  the  other  periodicals  connected  with  the  movement,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  say,  the  first  metropolitan  journal  that  was  issued  as  a  weekly 
organ  was  published  by  Mr.  Robert  Cooper,  and  called  The  Spiritual  Ti7nes. 

The  unfortunate  prosecution  incurred  by  Mr.  Coleman,  involving  in  its 
results  the  publisher  of  this  paper,  occasioned  its  suspension  after  a  short- 
lived existence.  About  1870,  Mr.  James  Burns  commenced  the  publica- 
tion of  an  able,  well  written  weekly  paper  entitled  The  Medium  and  Day- 
break. Still  later  the  enterprising  editor  started  a  fine  monthly  magazine 
called  Human  Nature, 

This  periodical — although  filled  with  the  articles  of  able  contributors — 
maintained  only  an  ephemeral  existence  compared  to  its  cotemporary 
The  Medium,  which  has  continued  through  a  period  of  thirteen  years,  and 
still  holds  its  own  against  the  claims  of  younger  rivals.  Its  editor,  like 
many  of  the  prominent  workers  in  the  divided  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  has 
incurred  some  amount  of  both  ban  and  blessing  from  his  fellow  labourers. 
Amongst  his  most  determined  antagonists  however,  none  will  deny  him  the 
credit  of  indomitable  energy,  perseverance,  and  a  determination  to  uphold 
his  paper,  and  all  that  he  conceives  to  be  his  special  work  in  connection 
with  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  at  any  sacrifice.  Mr.  Burns  is  a  clever, 
lucid,  and  interesting  speaker,  besides  being  an  expert  phrenologist.  His 
lectures  on  phrenology,  temperance,  vegetarianism,  hygiene,  &c.,  &c.,  are 
as  creditable  to  his  advanced  thought  as  a  practical  reformer,  as  they  have 
been  instrumental  in  lifting  up  humanity  to  higher  motives  of  life  and 
action  throughout  Great  Britain.  In  an  excellent  speech  made  at  the 
anniversary  celebration  of  the  31st  of  March,  1882,  Mr.  Burns  gives  the 
following  graphic  account  of  his  first  attempt  at  Spiritual  journalism  : — 

"  Twelve  years  ago  the  Movement  was  expectant  of  a  change — a  widening  out  of  its 
sphere  of  action.  Some  autumn  seed  had  been  sown  to  prepare  for  the  harvest  of  the 
year  just  closed.  Daybreak  had  been  in  existence  as  a  monthly  paper,  and  the  Spiritualist 
had  been  commenced  fortnightly.  To  our  great  regret  it  was  not  weekly,  as  we  shrank 
from  the  task  of  taking  up  the  burden  of  a  weekly  paper,  and  hoped  the  Spiritualist 
would  step  in  and  save  us.  Sunday  services  had  been  started  at  Cavendish  Rooms 
by  Mr.  Peebles,  and  a  penny  hymn  book  had  been  piinted.  The  Spiritual  Institution 
was  at  work,  and  means  for  bringing  the  phenomena  before  the  public  were  in  operation. 
There  was  at  that  time  no  public  movement ;  but  the  elements  of  such  a  thing  were  in 
a  state  of  combination  and  development. 

"The  experienced  journalist  will  smile  when  told  that  when  we  set  about  the  first 
number  of  the  Medium  we  had  no  contributors,  no  means,  no  experience,  no  ambition, 
no  end  to  serve.  The  spirit  world  required  a  '  medium '  of  the  press,  and  we  gave  it 
one,  by  the  aid  of  a  kind  lady,  now  in  the  spirit- world,  who  came  in  and  laid  a  £5  note 
on  the  counter.     Like  a  httle  stream  at  its  fountain  head,  our  first  number  was  insignia 

14 

2IO  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

ficant,  and  contained  no  specious  promises  for  the  future.  We  felt  tlie  shadow  of  years 
of  suffering  and  toil  enveloping  us,  and  moved  in  our  vcork,  as  the  hands  do  on  the  face  of 
the  clock,  with  no  purpose  of  their  own,  but  obedient  to  the  unseen  power  within." 

Through  good  and  evil  report,  Mr.  Burns  has  carried  his  enterprise 
forward  with  unflagging  energy,  and  with  the  exception  of  the  London 
Spiritual  Magazine  no  other  EngHsh  periodical  has  bravely  weathered  so 
many  storms,  or  maintained  the  flag  of  the  movement  it  advocates  for  so 
long  a  period,  and  that  under  the  pressure  of  the  severest  trials. 

The  Spiritualist  newspaper  mentioned  by  Mr.  Burns,  and  often  referred 
to  in  these  pages,  was  a  very  scholarly  journal  representing  the  scientific 
aspect  of  Spiritualism,  and  for  several  year^  was  ably  conducted  by  Mr. 
Wm.  Harrison. 

Notwithstanding  the  unbounded  generosity  with  which  Charles  Black- 
burn, Esq.,  of  Didsbury,  Manchester,  contributed  to  the  support  of  this 
paper,  it  was  quite  recently  suspended,  and  perhaps  forms  another  evidence, 
that  when  the  purposes  of  the  Spirit  world  are  accomplished,  the  instruments 
are  laid  aside,  and  a  fresh  set  of  influences  are  brought  to  bear  upon  the 
progress  of  a  movement — of  unmistakably  supra-mundane  power  and 
purpose. 

At  the  time  when  this  volume  was  commenced,  there  were,  unfortunately 
for  the  best  interests  of  each  individual  enterprise,  four  Spiritual  journals 
put  before  the  English  public,  namely,  the  two  already  mentioned,  The 
Herald  of  Progress,  published  at  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  and  the  latest  and 
one  of  the  finest  of  the  Spiritual  journals,  called  Light^  formerly  conducted 
by  Mr.  Dawson  Rogers,  and  now  under  the  editorship  of  Mr.  John  Farmer. 
Like  the  Spiritualist ;  Light  represents  the  scientific  and  metaphysical 
phases  of  the  Spiritual  movement,  and  its  articles — especially  those 
contributed  by  "  M.  A.,  Oxon,"  and  Mrs.  A.  H.  M.  Watts,  are  of  the  highest 
interest  and  value. 

With  such  a  corps  of  contributors  as  "  M.  A.,  Oxon,"  Hon.  Roden  Noel, 
Mr.  Spicer,  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  Prof  Barratt,  Dr.  Wylde,  and  many 
other  writers  of  no  less  ability,  but  above  all,  with  Mr.  John  Farmer  in 
the  editorial  chair,  Light,  like  its  veteran  cotemporary,  The  Medium, 
ought  to  be  as  nobly  sustained  as  it  deserves,  and  compensate  for  many  of 
the  evanescent  ephemera  of  past  years,  by  an  unquenchable  and  permanent 
existence.  Since  this  volume  was  commenced,  another  monthly  journal 
entitled  The  Spiritual  Record,  has  been  issued  by  the  indefatigable 
veteran  pubHsher  of  Glasgow,  Mr.  Hay  Nesbit.  Report  speaks  highly  of 
this  new  venture,  and  Mr.  Nesbit's  long  and  gallant  services  in  the  cause 
of  Spiritualism,  should  alone  be  sufficient  to  recommend  any  publication 
to  which  his  honoured  name  and  skilful  directorship  is  attached.  The 
mention  of  Mr.  Nesbit's  much  respected  name  will  necessarily  call  forth  the 
desire  to  know  how  the  movement  progresses  in  the  city  where  his  valuable 
services  are  so  faithfully  rendered. 

Although  Spiritualism  in  its  two  well-defined  phases  of  religious  belief, 
and  phenomenal  demonstration,  has  permeated  every  part  of  the  United 
Kingdom  and  found  acceptance  from  all  classes,  from  the  palace  to  the 
hut,  it  has  made  little  or  no  distinctive  mark  anywhere  as  a  public  movement 
except  in  England.  The  following  notices  concerning  the  status  of  the 
cause  in  Glasgow  may  furnish  some  evidence  of  exception  to  this  rule, 
hence  their  introduction  in  this  place. 

In  the  year  1867,  the  few  beUevers  in  spirit  intercourse  resident  in 
Glasgow,  solicited  the  author  to  pay  them  a  visit  in  her  capacity  of  a 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  211 

Spiritual  lecturer.  It  was  represented  to  her  that  the  unusual  phenomenon 
of  a  lady  speaking  on  religious  subjects  in  the  city  of  John  K?iox,  might 
awaken  popular  sentiments  of  an  antagonistic  character,  especially  as 
Spirit  communion  was  to  be  the  theme ;  one  which,  though  well  known 
and  practised  largely  in  private  circles,  had  hitherto  borne  but  an  evil 
name  in  the  censorship  of  Glasgow  public  opinion.  Altogether  the  pro- 
spects were  not  very  encouraging,  but  as  the  author  had  ever  been 
accustomed  to  make  choice  of  such  scenes  for  her  public  efforts,  as  her 
wise  and  far-seeing  Spirit  Guides  advised,  she  yielded  to  their  persuasions, 
and  proceeded  to  fulfil  the  proposed  engagement. 

The  visit  was  made;  more  lectures  were  demanded  than  had  been 
covenanted  for ;  and  a  far  more  satisfactory  impression  was  produced  than 
could  have  been  anticipated. 

Several  curious  phenomenal  occurrences  marked  this  visit,  which  neither 
time  nor  place  now  permit  us  to  notice. 

At  the  risk  of  incurring  the  charge  of  egotism  however,  we  deem  it 
necessary  to  the  progress  of  the  history,  to  give  the  following  excerpt  from 
the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  of  December,  1867,  as  it  records  the 
commencement  of  an  era  in  Glasgow  Spiritualism  which  our  next  quotation 
will  bring  down  to  the  present  day. 

The  first  notice  is  headed  : — 

"  EMMA    HARDINGE   IN   SCOTLAND. 

"  Mrs.  Hardinge  has  been  delivering  a  course  of  lectures  at  Glasgow,  under  the  auspices 
of  the  Association  of  Spiritualists  in  that  city,  and  she  seems  to  have  created  quite  a 
sensation  in  Glasgow,  and  to  have  won  the  hearts  of  all  who  heard  her.  The  newspapers, 
to  their  credit,  whilst  asserting  that  they  do  not  agree  with  all  she  said,  have  not  pub- 
lished, I  believe,  a  word  in  derogation  of  the  subjects  of  her  discourses,  and  in  some 
instances  they  commend  her  eloquence  in  unstinted  terms  of  praise.  The  Christian 
News  says : —    .     .     .    .  " 

[Then  follows  a  series  of  highly  eulogistic  personal  notices,  of  no 
moment  in  the  present  record.] 

'■  At  the  close  of  her  course  of  lectures,  the  members  of  the  Glasgow  Association  of 
Spiritualists  presented  Mrs.  Hardinge  with  a  souvenir  as  an  additional  mark  of  their 
respect,  and  as  Mrs.  Hardinge  has  found  a  new  field  by  this  visit  to  Scotland  for  the 
ex«rcise  of  her  great  gifts,  I  feel  sure  it  will  be  improved  on  a  future  occasion,  and  will 
lead  to  a  more  general  understanding  of  the  truths  of  Spiritualism." 

Since  the  author's  first  and  only  visit  to  Glasgow,  Mr.  J.  J.  Morse,  one  of 
the  most  brilliant  and  eloquent  trance  speakers  of  the  new  dispensation,  and 
Mr.  Wallis,  another  very  able  and  interesting  Spiritual  lecturer,  have  from 
time  to  time  filled  the  rostrum  most  acceptably.  The  sensationalism 
awakened  by  the  first  public  acts  of  propagandism — especially  in  con- 
sideration of  the  propagandist  being  a  lady — has  of  course  died  away,  but 
a  steady  and  healthful  growth  of  public  sentiment  in  favour  of  the  noble 
philosophy  enunciated  from  the  Spiritual  rostrum  has  manifested  itself  in 
Glasgow,  and  still  maintains  its  hold  upon  the  hearts  of  a  large  number  of 
the  population. 

The  indefatigable  efforts  of  Mr.  Hay  Nesbit,  the  well  known  printer  and 
publisher,  and  the  sterhng  work  of  a  large  number  of  brave  men  and 
women  who  have  formed  and  held  circles,  organized  public  meetings,  and 
given  platform  addresses,  have  kept  the  lamps  which  light  poor  blind 
mortals  to  the  higher  life,  well  trimmed  and  burning.     And  this  has  been 

212  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

done  too,  at  much  disadvantage,  the  distance  of  Glasgow  from  the  English 
metropolis  and  the  places  where  Mediumistic  effort  is  most  rife,  rendering 
the  expenses  of  transit  very  heavy,  and  the  time  consumed  in  making  the 
journey  an  obstacle  not  easily  overcome.  The  following  communication  t& 
the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal  of  America^  by  one  of  its  most  esteemed 
contributors,  will  give  some  interesting  facts  concerning  the  progress  of 
Spiritualism  in  Glasgow  : — 

"  A  Lyceum  was  started  here  last  year,  and  is  continued  each  Sunday  afternoon  under 
the  supervision  of  the  present  writer.  The  library  of  the  society  is  well  stocked  with  the 
literature  of  the  movement,  both  English  and  American,  and  is  largely  taken  advanlage 
of.  ...  Through  the  kindness  of  one  of  our  most  enthusiastic  and  generous  members,  Mr. 
James  Bowman,  the  public  library  in  our  city  has  also  been  supplied  with  many  volumes 
bearing  on  the  subject.  .  .  .  Meetings  are  held  in  the  room  on  several  of  the  week  nights, 
Friday  evening  being  devoted  to  Mr.  David  Duguid,  so  well  known  for  his  varied  forms 
of  mediumship  so  ably  set  down  by  Hay  Nisbet,  in  his  introduction  to  the  volume  "Hafid, 
Prince  of  Persia."  .  .  .  Mr.  Duguid  is  one  of  the  most  retiring  of  men,  working  every  day  at 
his  business  of  a  photographer,  and  giving  largely  of  his  spare  moments  to  those  who  are  in 
earnest  to  investigate  the  subject.  Numbers  come  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  who  carry 
with  them  mementos  of  their  visit  in  the  shape  of  those  marvellous  productions,  the  little 
direct  paintings  which  are  sent  forth  as  missionaries  over  the  world.  .... 

'■  Only  lately  we  had  a  visit  from  Irving  Bishop,  a  conjuror  of  some  note  from  your 
side,  and  this  gentleman  was  taken  in  hand  by  all  the  professors  of  the  Universities  of 
Glasgow  and  Edinburgh,  who  presented  him  with  an  elaborate  address,  because  he  had 
exposed  Spiritualism.  Exposures  have  been  most  prolific  in  directing  men  and  women  to 
the  subject,  and  Mr.  Irving  Bishop's  visit  was  no  exception  to  this. 

"  Mr.  Alexander  Duguid,  of  Kirkcaldy,  and  a  brother  of  Mr.  David  Duguid,  the  trance 
painting  medium,  is  among  the  more  recent  platform  workers,  and  does  yeoman's  service. 
In  his  private  sittings,  which  have  extended  over  many  of  the  towns  in  Scotland,  his 
clairvoyant  powers  have  been  most  successful  in  bringing  the  fact  of  Spirit  communion 
home  to  many  hearts.  He  is  largely  sought  after,  and  appreciated  for  his  quiet,  iinas- 
suming  manners  and  hopeful,  manly  life  ;  recently  he  has  been  in  London  for  the  first 
time,  where  he  met  with  warm  reception  from  the  friends  there,  speaking  at  Gospel  Hall 
services,  with  '  M.  A.,  Oxon  '  in  the  chair. 

"  Professor  James  Coates,  who  has  resided  in  Glasgow  for  over  eighteen  months,  has 
been  quite  a  tower  of  strength  to  the  movement  since  his  arrival,  ably  filling  this  platform 
on  many  occasions,  acting  as  secretary  and  energetically  promoting  the  progress  of  the 
movement  in  many  ways.  Mr.  Coates  is  a  phrenologist  and  mesmerist,  who  has  worked 
up  a  great  reputation  in  circles  outside  the  spiritual. 

"  In  Dundee  the  cause  has  taken  firm  root  among  a  great  number  of  families.  .  .  . 
The  Secretary  of  the  Glasgow  Association  is  Mr.  John  Munro,  12,  Govanhill-street,  Glasgow; 
the  president,  James  Walker,  a  veteran  in  the  cause.  "  J.  R." 

"  Glasgow,  Scotland." 

It  has  often  been  questioned  why  Glasgow,  a  merely  commercial  centre 
and  by  no  means  remarkable  for  its  tendencies  to  metaphysical  speculations, 
should  have  taken  the  palm  over  Edinburgh,  the  reputed  seat  of  science, 
learning,  and  as  might  be  expected  from  such  a  reputation,  of  good  breeding 
also.  Whether  the  above-named  desirable  elements  are  peculiar  to  Univer- 
sity men  in  their  presence  or  absetice,  the  following  excerpts  written  by  Mr. 
J.  Greenwell,  now  of  London,  a  well  known  and  reliable  correspondent  of 
the  Medium,  and  a  gentleman  incapable  of  falsehood  or  exaggeration,  will 
sufficiently  prove.     Mr.  Greenwell,  writing  to  the  Medium  about  1878,  says  : 

"  Some  time  ago,  Mr.  Morse  lectured  at  Edinburgh,  and  his  merits  were  recognised  by 
one  eminent  gentleman,  whose  words  of  commendation  we  quoted  from  the  newspapers. 
As  the  gentleman  in  question  contrasted  Mr.  Morse's  abilities  in  the  trance  with  those  of 
men  who  are  public  teachers  of  the  fashionable  stamp,  it  might  be  imagined  that  revenge 
would  be  taken  sooner  or  later.  Reports  in  the  Review  and  Scotsman  have  reached  us  of 
the  meeting  held  in  Upper  Oddfellows'  Hall,  Forrest  Road,  Edinburgh,  on  Friday,  June  6, 
at  which  Mr.  Morse  was  advertised  to  speak  on  a  subject  to  be  chosen  by  the  audience.  A 
botanical  term  was  voted  for  by  the  students,  and  they  would  have  no  other.     ,     .     , 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  213 

"  As  a  supplement  to  the  report,  I  must  say  that  it  was  the  most  disgraceful  meeting 
of  any  description  that  it  has  been  my  lot  to  attend.  About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before 
the  lecture  was  to  commence,  100  students,  at  the  very  least,  came  trooping  into  the  hall, 
with  the  avowed  intention  of  breaking  up  the  meeting,  for  as  soon  as  they  gained 
admission,  they  began  their  ungentlemanly  operations  of  throwing  peas,  singing  songs,  aud 
performing  on  tin  whistles,  &c.  Thinking  they  would  probably  quiet  down  when  the 
lecturer  appeared,  Mr.  Morse,  with  Mr.  J.  T.  Rhodes  as  chairman,  made  their  way  on  to 
the  platform  ;  when,  instead  of  abating,  the  noise  was  resumed  with  increased  vigour,  and 
neither  the  chairman  nor  Mr.  Morse  were  allowed  to  speak,  owing  to  the  unearthly  yells 
issuing  from  the  very  refined  students,  Mr.  Morse,  in  the  trance  state,  was  Lhen  proceeding 
to  deliver  his  lecture  on  '  Is  Man  Material  or  Spiritual  after  Death?'  when  the  interruption 
broke  out  afresh,  and  continued  for  two  hours,  Mr.  Morse  under  control  all  the  time.  The 
guides  then  declined  to  proceed  further,  and  left  the  medium. 

"The  meeting  was  then  declared  closed,  when  the  students  in  a  body  made  for  the 
platform,  and  commenced  to  hustle  Messrs.  Morse,  Rhodes,  and  myself  most  unmercifully, 
throwing  the  table  from  the  platform,  and  smashing  a  form.  Some  one  then  got  Mr.  Morse 
into  the  ante-room,  where  I  found  him  a  few  minutes  afterwards  quite  overcome  and  in 
violent  convulsions,  which  continued  for  almost  an  hour.  It  is  really  difficult  to  realise 
such  a  state  of  things  in  a  free  and  Christian  country  in  the  nineteenth  century,  but  such 
is  the  case  ;  and  I  feel  more  fully  persuaded  than  ever  that  the  power  is  only  wanted  to 
put  the  existing  will  in  force,  and  we  should  soon  see  the  ancient  stake,  or  something  more 
torturing,  revived  for  the  benefit  of  Spiritualists  and  Free-thinkers. 

"  I  know  full  well  the  feelings  of  indignation  that  will  be  evoked  from  the  many  friends 
of  Mr.  Morse,  owing  to  the  cruel  treatment  he  has  suffered  here  ;  consequently  I  need 
not  remind  those  friends  that  increased  sympathy  towards  him  is  necessary  on  this 
occasion,  the  first  instalment  of  which  I  feel  sure  would  be  accorded  to  him  when  he 
arrived  in  Glasgow.     ... 

"  I  am,  yours  in  the  cause  of  truth, 

"Jos.  N.  Geeenwell. 

"  Edinburgh,  June  7." 

It  is  satisfactory  to  remember  that  the  scenes  described  above  took  place 
some  six  years  ago — since  when,  the  general  tides  of  progress  may  have 
even  had  a  contagious  influence  upon  the  gentlemejz  of  the  Edinburgh 
University,  and  inspired  them  with  a  higher  tone,  both  in  the  realm  of 
morals  and  manners. 

In  the  British  metropolis,  many  of  the  well-known  Mediums  of  past 
years  have  retired  from  public  life,  Mrs.  Mary  Marshall,  the  well-known 
test  and  rapping  Medium,  being  almost  the  only  one  remaining.  Mr. 
Cecil  Husk,  a  new  Medium  for  the  production  of  materiahzed  forms,  is 
highly  reported  of;  and  Mr.  Towns,  a  veteran  seer,  still  astonishes  the 
strangers  who  visit  him  with  revelations  of  their  most  secret  thoughts. 

Miss  Lottie  Fowler,  the  inimitable  clairvoyant,  trance  and  test  Medium 
from  America,  and  Mrs.  Kate  Jencken  {nee  Katy  Fox) — a  name  inscribed 
on  the  warmest  spot  of  every  true  Spiritualist's  heart — are  also  ministering 
most  successfully  to  the  investigators  who  seek  for  test  facts  of  Spirit 
communion.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  cause  of  phenomenal 
Spiritualism  has  suffered  a  great  loss,  in  the  retirement  into  private  life  of 
Mr.  Eglinton,  a  young  gentleman  who,  though  not  classed  as  a  professional 
Medium,  was  the  subject — a  few  years  since — of  manifestations,  the  marvel 
of  which  has  resounded  through  many  countries  of  the  earth. 

The  Calcutta  Indian  Daily  News  publishes  in  its  issue  of  January  28th, 
1882,  the  following  striking  communication  concerning  Mr.  Eglinton's 
Mediumship  :— 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Indian  Daily  News. 

"  Sir, — In  your  issue  of  the  13th  January,  I  stated  that  I  should  be  glad  of  an  oppor- 
tunity of  participating  in  a  seance  with  a  view  of  giving  an  unbiased  opinion  as  to  whether, 
in  my  capacity  of  a  professional  Prestidigitateur,  I  could  give  a  natural  explanation  of 
effects  said  to  be  produced  by  spiritual  aid. 

214  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  I  am  indebted  to  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  Eglinton,  the  Spiritualistic  Medium  now  in 
Calcutta,  and  of  his  host,  Mr.  J.  Meugens,  for  affording  me  the  opportunity  I  craved. 

■'  It  is  needless  to  say  I  went  as  a  sceptic ;  but  I  must  own  that  I  have  come  away 
utterly  unable  to  explain,  by  any  natural  means,  the  phenomena  that  I  witnessed  on 
Tuesday  evening.     I  will  give  a  brief  clescription  of  what  took  place  :  — 

"  I  was  seated  in  a  brilliantly-lighted  room  with  Mr.  Eglinton  and  Mr.  Meugens.  We 
took  our  places  round  a  common  teak- wood  table,  and  after  a  few  minutes  the  table  began 
to  sway  violently  backwards  and  forwards,  and  I  heard  noises  such  as  might  be  produced 
by  some  one  thumping  under  the  table.  I  tried  to  discover  the  cause  of  this  movement, 
but  was  unable  to  do  so.  After  this  Mr.  Eglinton  produced  two  common  school  slates, 
which  I  sponged,  cleaned,  and  rubbed  dry  with  a  towel  myself.  Mr.  Eglinton  then 
handed  me  a  box  containing  small  crumbs  of  slate-pencil.  I  selected  one  of  these  and  in 
accordance  with  Mr.  Eglinton's  directions,  placed  it  on  the  surface  of  one  of  the  slates, 
placing  the  other  slate  over  it.  I  then  firmly  grasped  the  two  slates  at  one  of  the  corners. 
Mr.  Eglinton  then  held  the  other  corner,  our  two  free  hands  being  clasped  together.  The 
slates  were  then  lowered  below  the  edge  of  the  table,  but  remained  in  full  view  (the  room 
remaining  lighted  all  the  time).  Instantaneously  I  heard  a  scratching  noise,  as  might  be 
produced  by  writing  on  a  slate.  In  about  fifteen  seconds  I  heard  three  distinct  knocks  on 
the  slates,  and  I  then  opened  them  and  found  the  following  writing : 

" '  My  name  is  Geary.  Don't  you  remember  me  ?  We  used  to  talk  of  this  matter  at 
the  St.  George's.     I  know  better  now." 

"  Having  read  the  above,  I  remarked  that  I  knew  of  no  one  by  the  name  of  Geary. 

"  We  then  placed  our  hands  on  the  table,  and  Mr.  Eglinton  commenced  repeating  the 
alphabet  until  he  came  to  the  letter  '  G,'  when  the  table  began  to  shake  violently.  This 
process  was  repeated  till  the  name  of  Geary  was  spelt. 

"  After  this  Mr.  Eglinton  took  a  piece  of  paper  and  a  pencil,  and  with  a  convulsive 
movement,  difficult  to  describe,  he  wrote  very  indistinctly  the  following  words  : 

"  '  I  am  Alfred  Geary,  of  the  Lantern  ;  you  know  me  and  St.  Ledger.' 

"  Having  read  this,  I  suddenly  remembered  having  met  both  Mr.  Geary  and  Mr. 
St.  Ledger  at  Cape  Town,  South  Africa,  about  four  years  ago,  and  the  St.  George's  Hotel 
is  the  one  I  lived  at  there.  Mr.  Geary  was  the  editor  of  the  Cwpe  Lantern,  I  believe  he 
died  some  three  years  ago.  Mr.  St.  Ledger  was  the  editor  of  the  Cape  Times,  and  I  believe 
is  so  stUl.  Without  going  into  details,  I  may  mention  that  subsequently  a  number  of 
other  messages  were  written  on  the  slates,  which  I  was  allowed,  to  clean  each  time  before 
they  were  used. 

"  In  respect  to  the  above  manifestations  I  can  only  say  that  I  do  not  expect  my 
account  of  them  to  gaia  general  credence.  Forty-eight  hours  before,  I  should  not  have 
believed  any  one  who  had  described  such  manifestations  under  similar  circumstances.  I 
still  remain  a  sceptic  as  regards  Spiritualism,  but  I  repeat  my  inability  to  explain  or 
account  for  what  must  have  been  an  intelligent  force,  that  produced  the  writing  on  the 
slate,  which,  if  my  senses  are  to  be  relied  on,  was  in  no  way  the  result  of  trickery  or 
sleight-of-hand. — Yours,  &c.,  "  Hakbt  Kellab. 

"  Calcutta,  January  25th,  1882." 

Without  commenting  on  the  illogical  position  assumed,  not  alone  by 
Mr.  Kellar,  but  by  hundreds  of  others  who  are  compelled  to  admit  both  the 
supra-mundane  character  of  the  phenomena  and  intelligence  displayed,  and 
then  wind  up  by  denying  emphatically  that  "  either  can  be  Spirits,"  it  is 
enough  to  say  that  Mr.  Kellar,  the  professional  conjurer,  duplicates  the 
assurance  of  his  Italian  confrere,  Signor  Bellachini,  in  respect  to  Mr.  Slade's 
manifestations  at  Leipzig.  When  two  thoroughly  skilled  professional  jugglers 
acknowledge  that  they  cannot  simulate  by  trickery,  the  demonstrations 
performed  through  Media  without  any  trickery,  is  it  not  time  that  the 
flimsy  pretence  of  Spiritual  phenomena  being  all  trickery  and  fraud, 
should  be  abandoned  by  travelling  exposers,  even  though  the  petty  set  of 
shams  they  exhibit,  of  which  any  tenth  rate  juggler  would  be  ashamed, 
were  patronized  by  Scottish  Lord  Provosts  and  English  Right  Reverend 
Lord  Bishops  ? 

Another  remarkably-endowed  Medium  for  physical  manifestations  who 
has  till  recently  exercised  her  Mediumship  successfully  in  many  parts  of 
England  is  Miss  Wood,  a  young  lady  who  was  developed  in  private  circles 
at  Newcasde-on-Tyne,   and  subsequently  became  professionally  engaged 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  215 

by  the  "  Newcastle  Spiritual  Evidence  Society,"  to  give  seances  at  their 
rooms  for  "form  materializations."  During  her  sittings  with  the  Newcastle 
Society,  Miss  Wood  cheerfully  submitted  to  the  most  exacting  tests,  and 
amongst  the  numerous  testimonials  that  were  rendered  to  the  integrity  of 
her  Mediumship,  are  the  following — the  first  being  from  Mr.  H.  Kersey, 
then  Secretary  to  the  Society,  and  the  other  from  the  well-known  scientist, 
Mr.  T.  P.  Barkas,  F.G.S. 

Mr.  Kersey  says,  in  writing  to  the  Medium^  Oct.  25th,  1878  : — 

"  This  morning,  Oct.  20,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  witnessing  some  very  convincing  form 
manifestations  through  the  medial  power  of  Miss  C.  E.  Wood,  at  the  Newcastle  society's 
rooms.  I  will  spare  unnecessary  detail,  and  shortly  say  that  the  cabinet,  which  con- 
sisted of  a  curtain  suspended  across  the  corner  of  the  room,  was  inspected  by  myself  and 
others,  both  previous  to  and  after  the  seance.  The  medium  sat  outside  the  cabinet  in  full 
view  of  all  the  sitters,  numbering  nineteen,  tbe  whole  of  the  time,  and  was_  never  once 
out  of  their  sight.  Three  forms  successively  appeared,  the  first  a  woman,  who,  after 
several  efforts,  walked  out  of  the  cabinet  and  passed  around  the  medium,  and  re-entered 
the  cabinet  on  the  other  side  of  her.  At  the  solicitation  of  the  sitters  she  repeated  this. 
The  next  form  was  a  child,  who  came  out  of  the  cabinet,  and  succeeded  in  getting  about 
two  feet  clear  of  the  medium,  but  could  not  get  around  her.  The  last  form  was  a  large 
one,  that  of  a  man,  but  did  not  succeed  in  getting  far  out. 

" '  Pocka '  controlled  and  spoke  through  the  medium  whilst  the  last  two  forms  were 
out.     Now  the  value  of  this  to  me.  Sir,  is  that  I  never  lost  sight  of  the  medium  from  first 
to  last,  and  I  am  certain  none  of  the  sitters  left  their  seats  and  went  into  the  cabinet. 
I  am,  Sir,  yours  truly, 

"  Newcastle-on-Tyne.  "  H.  A.  Kjebset. 

"  We,  the  undersigned,  testify  to  the  correctness  of  the  above  report : — 

"  John  Hare,  Chester  Crescent. 

"  Martha  Hare,  „ 

"  Nellie  Hare,  „ 

"  H.  Norris,  59,  Newgate  Street. 

"  E.  Sanderson,  „ 

"  Jane  Hammarbon,  Northumberland  Street. 

"  Jno.  Mould,  12,  St.  Thomas  Crescent. 

"  James  Cameron,  Gallowgate  Steam  Mills. 

"  W.  C.  Robson,  8,  Brandling  Place." 

Mr.  Barkas,  writing  to  the  same  paper  about  a  year  previously,  gives  a 
slight  account  of  Spiritualism  in  Newcastle  and  the  formation  of  the  first 
society  there.     He  says  : — 

"  Spiritualism  had  been  investigated  in  Newcastle-on-Tyne  for  twenty-five  years. 
Prior  to  1872  tbe  manifestations  had  taken  place  in  private  houses  and  before  select 
circles.  In  that  year  a  society  was  formed  for  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena,  and 
in  a  few  months  several  members  of  the  society  became  developed  as  mediums.  In  the 
year  1873  it  was  discovered  that  two  yoimg  ladies  had  very  great  mediamistic  power. 
The  one.  Miss  Wood,  was  at  that  time  eighteen  years  of  age,  and  the  other,  Miss  Fairlamb, 
was  about  a  year  younger.  For  some  trifling  remuneration  as  a  compensation  for  much 
time  spent  in  the  interests  of  the  society,  the  young  women  devoted  themselves  to  the 
work,  and  soon  there  were  not  only  trance  controls,  but  extraordinary  movements  of 
tables,  chairs,  bells,  and  other  articles  of  furniture  and  musical  instruments  took  place  in 
the  dark,  under  test  conditions.  In  1874  spectral  forms  of  human  faces  and  hands  pre- 
sented themselves  at  the  openings  of  the  cabinet  in  which  the  mediums  were  enclosed. 
Then  fully  developed  forms  ;  and,  to  make  certain  of  the  genuineness  of  these  phenomena, 
private  seances  were  organised  in  the  houses  of  well  known  gentlemen.  Rigid  but  friendly 
tests  of  many  kinds  were  tried,  and  the  result  was  that  materialisations  took  place,  which 
nothing  but  a  stubborn  prejudice,  perfectly  inaccessible  to  the  logic  of  facts,  could  resist 
or  gainsay. 

"  I  have  seen  through  the  mediumship  of  Miss  Wood,  in  a  private  house,  living  forms 
walk  from  the  curtained  recess,  which  it  was  utterly  impossible  for  her  to  simulate.  I 
have  seen  children,  women,  and  men  of  various  ages,  walk  forth  under  her  mediumship. 

2i6  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

I  have  seen  a  materialised  form  and  the  medium  at  the  same  time.  I  have  had  through 
her  mediumship  a  child-like  form  standing  beside  me  for  about  half  an  hour  together  ; 
the  child  has  placed  its  arms  around  my  neck,  and  permitted  me  at  the  same  time  to 
place  my  arm  around  her  neck,  and  has  laid  its  cheek  against  miue,  breathed  upon  my 
face,  and,  in  f^ct,  caressed  me  precisely  as  a  child  would  do  its  parent  or  guardian.  This 
was  not  in  darkness,  but  in  light,  and  in  the  presence  of  professors  and  fellows  of  one  of 
the  leading  universities  in  the  kingdom.  I  have,  under  these  conditions,  and  after  having 
handled  the  psychic  form,  seen  it  gradually  vanish  or  dematerialisej  and  become  invisible 
in  the  middle  of  the  room." 

A  full  and  elaborate  account  of  Miss  Wood  and  the  phenomena  occurring 
in  her  presence  has  been  published  in  pamphlet  form  by  W.  P.  Adshead, 
Esq.,  of  Belper,  a  wealthy  and  intelligent  gentleman,  who  sent  for  Miss 
Wood  to  his  own  house,  wherein  he  set  up  a  wire  cage,  constructed  for  the 
purpose,  in  which  the  Medium,  firmly  secured,  was  placed,  during  a  given 
number  of  experimental  seances. 

The  marvellous  phenomena  of  many  different  materialized  forms  appear- 
ing under  these  circumstances,  is  fully  detailed  by  Mr.  Adshead,  but  as  the 
manifestations  present  little  or  no  variety  in  effect  from  those  already 
alluded  to,  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  describe  them  any  further.  We 
would  commend  Mr.  Adshead's  methods,  however,  to  the  attention  of  the 
various  contending  parties  who  now  make  the  subject  of  "tests"  the  theme 
of  warfare — the  one  side  alleging  that  tests  "  degrade  the  Medium,"  and 
"ruin  the  conditions  under  which  spirits  manifest;"  the  other  equally 
pertinaciously  insisting  that  no  Medium  should  claim  credence  for  extra- 
ordinary or  unusual  occurrences  without  tests  of  the  most  crucial  and  con- 
vincing character.  Miss  Wood  was  Mr.  Adshead's  guest  for  some  time. 
The  manifestations  were  given  in  his  own  house,  in  the  presence  of  scores 
of  the  most  inveterate  sceptics,  and  under  the  extraordinary  conditions 
stated  above. 

Yet  Miss  Wood  felt  no  degradation  in  submitting  to  the  tests  imposed, 
and  often  invited  them,  nor  did  they  spoil  or  even  interfere  with  the  mani- 
festations, numerous  attestations  to  that  effect  being  given  and  signed  by 
the  parties  who  attended  the  seances.  The  following  paragraph,  taken  from 
page  24  of  Mr.  Adshead's  pamphlet,  offers  perhaps  what  the  world  would 
deem  one  of  the  most  striking  proofs  that  can  be  rendered  of  Mr.  Adshead's 
unassailable  position  in  reference  to  these  manifestations.     Be  says  : — 

"  For  the  medium  to  liberate  herself  from  her  bondage,  and  place  herself  in  such  a 
position  that,  had  she  the  necessary  skill  and  appliances,  she  could  represent  the  different 
forms  we  had  looked  upon,  and  then  return  to  the  condition  in  which  we  left  her — the 
cage,  tapes,  and  seals  being  found  as  when  the  seance  commenced — would,  to  me,  be  almost 
as  great  a  marvel  as  anything  else  which  could  be  done.  Indeed,  so  profoundly  impressed 
am  I  with  the  impossibility  of  this  being  done,  that  unless  those  who  have  boasted  that 
it  is  their  mission  to  stamp  out  the  '  imposture  of  Spiritualism,'  of  '  their  great  charity,' 
are  moved  to  take  the  scales  from  our  eyes,  I  have  to  say,  I  am  prepared  to  write  a  cheque 
for  two  hundred  and  fifty  guineas,  and  my  friend,  Mr.  A.  Smedley,  will  write  one  for  a 
similar  amount,  and  the  five  hundeed  guineas  shall  at  once  be  paid  to  any  person  who 
will,  under  similar  conditions  to  those  described  above,  produce  phenomena  which  shall  in 
all  respects  be  like  those  of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  and  so  distinctly  explain  the  method 
by  which  they  are  produced  that  the  person  to  whom  the  method  is  made  known,  or  any 
other  person  or  persons  to  whom,  in  turn,  the  said  method  may  be  made  known,  will  be 
able  at  any  time,  or  in  any  place,  to  produce  exactly  the  same  kind  of  phenomena  as  those 
which  appeared  when  Miss  Wood  was  screwed  up  in  the  cage.  If,  as  is  claimed,  the 
marvels  are  simply  clever  conjuring,  the  above  conditions  will  not  be  regarded  as  too 
stringent.  It  is  also  to  be  understood  that  those  who  accept  this  challenge  forfeit  a  like 
sum  in  the  event  of  failing  to  produce  the  phenomena  under  the  conditions  named  above." 

Despite  all  the  blatant  pretensions  of  conjurers  and  their  clerical  sup' 
porters,  Mr.  Adshead's  cheque  so  freely  proferred,  still  remains  unclaimed. 

LE  Due  DE  MEDINA  POMAR. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  217 

In  Cardiff,  South  Wales,  for  several  years  past,  circles  have  been  held  by 
a  party  of  earnest  Spiritualists,  amongst  whom  was  developed  Mr.  Spriggs, 
a  non-professional  Medium  for  the  production  of  "  form  materiahzations." 
As  Mr.  Spriggs  is  now  in  Australia,  placing  his  phenomenal  powers  at  the 
service  of  the  "  Victorian  Association  of  Spirituahsts,"  we  reserve  all 
further  accounts  of  his  demonstrations  for  our  Australian  section. 

In  the  direction  of  healing,  there  are  still  a  much  larger  number  of 
excellent  phenomenal  individuals  engaged,  than  we  have  space  to  particu- 
larize. Not  one  of  the  least  remarkable,  is  Mrs.  Illingworth,  the  celebrated 
seeress  and  medical  trance  Medium  of  Bradford,  Yorkshire.  Although 
entirely  uneducated,  and  the  wife  of  a  plain  Yorkshire  mechanic,  this 
wonderful  clairvoyant  can  trace — even  by  a  lock  of  hair  taken  from  the 
head  of  strangers  at  any  distance — the  most  obscure  diseases,  prescribing 
under  the  influence  of  medical  Spirits  the  most  effective  remedies  for  all 
complaints  of  a  curable  nature.  And  good  Mrs  Illingworth  is  only  cited 
as  a  representative  of  many  others  whose  beneficent  labours  are  carried 
forward  with  eminent  success  throughout  the  North  of  England.  Another 
of  these  highly  gifted  seers  practises  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
author's  residence  near  Manchester,  and  scores  of  Nicodemuses  who  would 
treat  the  openly  avowed  claim  of  Spiritual  influence  with  holy  horror  or 
scornful  derision,  resort  privately  to  Mr.  Edward  Gallagher*  to  be  treated 
for  complaints  that  baffle  all  the  skill  of  the  faculty — even  to  trace  out — 
much  less  to  cure.  Many  are  the  laudations  that  the  author  hears  passed 
upon  this  quiet  unassuming  gentleman,  who  as  a  "clairvoyant"  is 
permitted  to  describe  hidden  diseases  and  cure  them  by  occult  power, 
until  his  fame  fills  the  country  round  and  attracts  even  the  sacred  presence 
of  the  very  "  divines "  who  devote  their  next  Sabbath's  sermons  to 
unsparing  diatribes  against  the  impious  practices  of  Spiritualism. 

In  the  metropohs,  Dr.  Mack,  the  renowned  Spiritual  healer ;  Mr. 
Younger,  the  fine  mesmerist;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hagon,  Mr.  Omerin,  and  Mr. 
Hawkins,  all  pursue  their  beneficent  work  with  many  a  secret  blessing, 
and  many  a  public  ban,  as  the  reward  of  their  services.  These  are  all 
professional  healers  and  their  services  are  offered,  and  their  addresses 
registered  in  the  Medium,  and  that,  much  to  the  scandal  of  those  who 
would  cheerfully  pay  their  twenty  guineas  to  a  solemn-visaged  physician 
who  gives  a  rough  guess,  and  often  an  erroneous  one,  at  the  seat  of  their 
disease,  and  yet  shrink  with  horror  at  the  idea  of  paying  a  modest  fee  to 
the  clairvoyant  and  healer  because  the  truths  they  tell,  and  the  relief  they 
impart,  are  "  the  gifts  of  God,  and  should  not  be  made  the  subject  of 
mercenary  traffic."  And  thus  it  is,  that  w^hen  capable  Mediums,  and  highly 
gifted  seers  and  seeresses  are  starved  out  of  their  spheres  of  usefulness,  and 
the  sound  of  their  good  report  is  hushed,  and  for  very  sordid  need  of  bread 
they  are  driven  to  abandon  their  Mediumistic  calling,  the  world  cries 
"  See  how  this  delusion  of  SpirituaHsm  has  died  out,"  and  the  Pharisees 
rejoice  that  they  have  succeeded  in  "  crushing  out  professional  Mediumship.' 

Mr.  E.  Gallagher,  Greenfield  Villa,  Bloomfield  Road,  Heaton  Chapel,  Manchester. 

2i8  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER    XXVIII. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     GREAT     BRITAIN     (CONCLUDED). 

In    the    Provinces. 

Since  it  has  been  the  custom  to  create  an  aristocracy  of  places  as  well  as 
of  classes ;  to  talk  of  London  as  the  geographical  apex  from  whence  the 
traveller  goes  down  to  every  part  of  England,  whether  to  the  north  or 
south ;  it  has  also  followed,  that  prestige  in  every  direction  must  originate 
in  the  metropolis,  in  order  to  fall  into  line  with  the  subservience  of  public 
opinion. 

Whether  the  immense  growth  of  many  of  the  large  provincial  towns 
justifies  this  traditionary  reverence  for  metropolitan  lead,  we  do  not  care  to 
enquire.  Certain  it  is,  that  Spiritualism  is  one  of  the  iconoclasts,  that  has 
boldly  defied  this  proscriptive  deference  to  "  the  hub "  of  the  British 
kingdom,  for  it  has  taken  a  far  deeper  hold  on  the  common  sense  and 
intelligence  of  thoughtful  minds,  and  exercised  a  far  wider  influence  on  the 
masses  in  the  provinces,  than  it  has  done  in  the  great  Modern  Babylon. 

Whether  this  may  be  considered  matter  of  praise  or  blame,  the  Modern 
Babylonians  themselves  may  determine ;  the  fact  remains  nevertheless,  and 
we  are  now  about  to  speak  in  illustration  of  this  position,  by  citing  the  ex- 
periences of  individuals  as  well  as  societies,  who  have  only  as  yet  attained 
to  the  distinction  of  being  classified  as  provincial  Spiritualists. 

At  the  beautiful  estate  of  Parkfield,  Didsbury,  near  Manchester,  till  quite 
recently,  resided  Mr.  Charles  Blackburn,  a  gendeman  who  by  his  unnumbered 
acts  of  private  and  public  munificence,  has  exerted  a  widespread  influence 
upon  the  growth  of  English  Spiritualism.  Whilst  there  are  but  few  of  the 
leading  Spiritualists  who  have  not  become  familiar  with  the  lineaments  of 
his  kind  cheery  face,  and  exchanged  pleasant  greetings  with  him  in  circles, 
social  gatherings,  and  beneath  his  own  hospitable  roof,  there  are  not  many 
who  know  as  well  as  the  author,  how  much  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  is 
indebted  to  Mr.  Blackburn  for  timely  aid  in  periods  of  trial. 

Mr.  Blackburn's  generous  contributions  were  the  chief  support  of  the 
excellent  periodical  entitled  The  London  Spiritualist.  Professor  Crookes  in 
the  closing  Hues  of  his  authoritative  work,  entitled  "  Phenomena  of 
SpirituaHsm,"  when  writing  of  his  experiences  with  the  celebrated  Medium, 
Miss  Florence  Cook,  says : — 

"  My  thanks,  and  those  of  all  Spiritualists,  are  also  due  to  Mr.  Charles  Blackburn, 
for  the  generous  manner  in  which  he  has  made  it  possible  for  Miss  Cook  to  devote  her 
whole  time  to  the  development  of  these  manifestations,  and  latterly  to  their  scientific 
examination." 

Few  and  simple  as  these  words  are,  their  significance  is  immense  to  those 
who  follow  out  in  detail,  experiments  which  have  obtained  a  world-wide 
celebrity,  and  are  still  of  the  highest  authority  as  scientific  testimony. 

Had  Mr.  Charles  Blackburn's  munificence  taken  no  other  shape  than 
that  of  upholding  the  usefulness  of  a  fine  Spiritual  journal,  and  enabhng 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  219 

Professor  Crookes,  and  through  him,  the  entire  generation,  to  profit  by  the 
wonderful  Mediumship  of  a  young  lady  in  Hmited  circumstances,  this 
Manchester  gentleman  has  done  enough.  But  the  waymarks  of  Mr. 
Blackburn's  good  services  are  to  be  found  in  many  other  directions — 
amongst  scores  of  poor  Mediums,  and  struggling  societies  whom  he  has 
aided.  The  investigator  will  remember  him  for  the  ingenious  machines 
for  weighing  "  materialized  "  Spirits  which  he  has  had  constructed  ;  in  the 
famous  Newcastle  "  Blackburn  Cabinet,"  and  all  the  associative  efforts  to 
which  his  name  has  been  given,  and  on  which  his  benefactions  have  been 
bestowed. 

Family  cares  and  bereavements  have  thickened  around  this  worthy 
gentleman's  path  of  late,  and  compelled  his  withdrawal  from  the  scenes  in 
which  he  has  so  long  and  faithfully  laboured,  but  he  carries  with  him  into 
his  retirement,  a  philosophy  which  will  be  a  quenchless  light  in  the  darkest 
hour  of  trial,  whilst  he  leaves  behind  him  "  on  the  sands  of  time  "  footprints 
of  good,  that  can  never  be  erased  from  the  grateful  memories  of  men  or 
the  imperishable  records  of  eternity. 

Another  of  the  brave  "provincial"  Spiritualists,  whose  fearless  advocacy 
has  "  helped  to  shake  the  world,"  is  Mr.  John  Fowler,  of  St.  Ann's,  Sefton 
Park,  Liverpool,  a  gentleman  whose  wealth,  and  influence,  have  been 
freely  devoted  to  the  advancement  of  the  Spiritual  cause. 

Mr.  Fowler's  name  became  memorable  in  the  first  instance,  by  the 
uncompromising  faith  in  Spirit  power  which  led  him  to  stake  the  sum  of 
one  thousand  pounds,  against  the  ability  of  one  Cumberland — an  itinerant 
conjurer  and  "  exposer  of  Spiritualism  " — to  imitate  by  trickery,  the  manifes- 
tations which  are  produced  by  Spirit  power  alone,  through  Mediums.  It 
need  hardly  be  stated,  that  Cumberland,  like  the  rest  of  his  craft,  had  taken 
ample  care  to  make  his  appearance  as  an  "exposer,"  just  at  the  time  when 
there  were  no  public  Mediums  at  hand  to  compete  with  him.  As  it  is  well 
known  that  very  few  Mediums  are  so  peculiarly  endowed  as  to  be  able  to 
meet  large  heterogeneous  audiences,  or  furnish  the  force  necessary  for 
Spirits  to  produce  phenomena  requiring  the  most  finely  balanced  psycho- 
logical conditions  in  the  rude  arenas  of  public  antagonism,  so  Cumberland 
could  safely  retort  Mr.  Fowler's  challenge,  with  the  counter  demand  to 
place  his  Mediums  and  Spiritual  manifestations  on  the  same  platform  with 
his  (Cumberland's)  alleged  exposures. 

As  this  very  indifferent  trickster  was  actually  supported  by  the  Lord 
Bishop  of  Liverpool,  and,  besides  a  right  reverend  chairman,  claimed  and 
advertised  the  "  moral  support "  of  hosts  of  other  clergymen  and  church 
dignitaries,  who,  it  thereby  appeared,  had  been  unable  to  find  any  other 
means  of  putting  down  the  beh  noir  of  their  cloth — Spiritualism — so  Mr. 
Fowler,  perhaps  moved  to  a  higher  concern  for  the  honour  of  his  "  Dio- 
cesan," than  that  right  reverend  gentleman  manifested  for  himself,  addressed 
a  letter  to  his  Lordship  through  the  public  journals,  advising  him  that  he 
was  only  being  made  a  tool  of  by  an  indifferent  conjurer,  and  that  the  petty 
tricks  Cumberland  could  display,  bore  no  sort  of  relation  to  the  manifold 
and  inimitable  phenomena  produced  by  Spirits. 

Encouraged  by  the  rich  harvest  which  the  poorest  tricksters  can  reap 
from  the  "  moral  support  "  of  English  bishops  and  clergy  when  they  come 
before  the  public  under  the  pretence  of  destroying  that  cause  which  a 
whole  bench  of  bishops  could  not  otherwise  assail,  soon  after  Cumberland's 
disappearance  from  the  scene,  still  another  "exposer"  hastened  to  Liverpool 
to  secure  its  clerical  patronage  and  pocket  the  coin  of  its  gullible  citizens. 

2  20  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  new  "  exposer  "  was  Irving  Bishop,  of  American  notoriety.  Once 
again  Mr.  Fowler  tried  by  the  offer  of  the  thousand  pounds  bait  to  tempt 
this  adventurer  into  exposing  anything  that  Spirits  could  do,  under  precisely 
similar  conditions.  This  time  the  trickster's  chairman  and  "moral  supporter" 
was  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Skewes,  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,  who 
after  Bishop  had  utterly  failed  to  expose  anything  but  the  credulity  of  his 
audiences,  changed  the  base  of  his  attack  to  his  pulpit,  where  he  treated 
his  congregation  to  a  succession  of  sermons  on  the  demoniac  character  of 
Spiritual  manifestations  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and  their  angelic  nature 
thousands  of  years  ago,  in  illustration  of  which,  amongst  other  notable 
instances  of  divine  power,  he  cited  the  case  of  Jonah's  living  in  the  "  cold, 
damp,  and  uncomfortable  habitation  of  the  whale's  interior  for  three  days 
and  three  nights." 

Although  there  were  few  platform  orators  of  any  standing  in  the  ranks  of 
Spiritualism,  who  would  not  have  desired  to  measure  swords  with  an 
antagonist  of  a  somewhat  different  description  to  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Skewes, 
Mr.  Fowler's  determination  to  put  clerical  assumptions  to  the  test,  was 
indomitable,  and  as  the  author  of  this  volume  was  engaged  periodically  to 
lecture  for  the  SpirituaUsts  of  Liverpool,  Mr.  Fowler  caused  answers  to  Mr. 
Skewes  to  be  announced,  for  two  successive  Sunday  evenings,  by  Mrs. 
Britten.  Mr.  Fowler  then,  by  a  series  of  letters  published  in  the  Liver- 
pool papers,  endeavoured  to  induce  the  reverend  opponent  to  meet  Mrs. 
Britten  in  public  debate.  Finding  all  his  attempts  in  this  direction 
only  met  with  repeated  evasions,  Mr.  Fowler  requested  Mrs.  Britten  to 
write  out  the  replies  given  to  Mr  Skewes,  the  authenticity  of  which  could 
be  easily  tested  by  the  witness  of  the  immense  audiences  assembled  to  hear 
them. 

These  replies  were  subsequently  published  in  several  papers,  and  by  the 
liberality  of  Mr.  Fowler,  thousands  of  copies  were  scattered  broadcast 
through  various  English-speaking  countries. 

The  special  circumstances  which  called  forth  these  lectures,  were  stated 
in  an  introductory  note  which  is  republished  below,  as  the  final  conclusion 
of  the  whole  matter  :— 

"  MRS.    HARDINGE    BRITTEN   AND   THE   REV.    J.    H.    SKEWES. 

"  By  information  received  from  my  Spiritualistic  friends  in  Liverpool,  I  learn  that  the 
faith  they  profess,  and  of  which  I  am  one  of  the  public  exponents,  has  been  repeatedly 
attacked  by  certain  members  of  the  clergy  of  that  city,  in  sermons  denunciatory  of 
Spiritualism,  and  by  the  openly  avowed  '  moral  support '  rendered  to  those  travelling 
conjurers  who  profess  by  the  exhibition  of  a  few  clumsy  tricks  to  imitate  and  explain  the 
modus  operandi  of  Spiritual  phenomena.  The  last,  and,  as  I  understand,  the  most  per- 
tinacious of  the  clerical  assailants  above  named,  is  a  '  Rev.  J.  H.  Skewes.' 

"Within  the  last  few  weeks,  two  sermons  have  been  delivered  by  this  gentleman, 
reported  in  a  paper  called  the  Protestant  Standard,  under  the  several  (editorial)  titles  of 
'  Death-Blow  to  Spiritualism,'  and  '  Spiritualism  in  its  Coffin  ! — Nailing  Down  the  Lid  !  ! ' 
It  being  the  desire  of  my  committee  in  Liverpool  that  I  should  answer  these  discourses,  I 
proceeded  to  do  so  in  two  lectures,  given  at  Rodney  Hall,  on  the  Sunday  evenings  of 
February  18th  and  March  4th,  1883. 

"  As  Mr.  Skewes  stated  in  his  second  sermon  that  there  were  still  many  points  in 
Spiritualism  that  he  had  not  noticed,  my  committee  followed  up  my  lectures  by 
challenging  him  to  debate  the  subject  with  me  on  a  public  platform,  on  conditions 
honourable  to  him  and  beneficial  to  the  charities  of  Liverpool.  In  answer  to  the 
repeated  invitations  to  accept  this  challenge,  addressed  to  Mr.  Skewes  both  by  public  and 
private  correspondence,  the  reverend  gentleman  declines,  on  the  ground  that  he  has  had 
no  fair  report  of  my  Answers  to  his  Sermons. 

"  As  the  only  report  that  has  been  given  of  my  lectures  is  a  series  of  paragraphs,  headed 
*  Howlings  from  the  Pit,'  put  forth  by  the  Protestant  Standard,  a  report  which  is  not 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  221 

only  interpolated  by  rude  and  unworthy  personal  remarks,  but  is  most  imperfect,  and 
scarcely  touches  on  half  the  matter  contained  in  my  first  lectures,  my  committee  have 
urged  Mr.  Skewes  to  debate  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  either  from  the  stand-points 
assumed  in  his  sermons,  or  any  fresh  ones  he  might  be  able  to  allege  against  the 
Spiritual  movement.  As  Mr.  Skewes  continues  to  base  his  refusal  upon  the  absence  of 
any  authentic  report  of  my  Answer  to  his  Sermons,  I  deem  it  my  duty  to  the  cause  I 
represent,  to  place  my  Answer  to  Mr.  Skewes's  attack  on  record,  and  in  such  a  form  as 
cannot  be  mistaken.  It  is  with  this  view  that  I  put  the  annexed  statements  before  the 
tribunal  of  public  opinion. 

"  Before  entering  upon  my  task,  I  wish  it  distinctly  understood  that  I  make  no  pro- 
fession to  repeat,  except  in  general  terms,  the  lectures  given  by  me  at  Rodney  Hall,  in 
answer  to  Mr.  Skewes's  sermons.  I  am  not  ashamed  to  avow  that  I  speak  in  public  under 
the  inspiration  of  those  whom  I  deem  to  be  good  spirits,  whose  wisdom  supplies  me  with 
the  ideas  most  appropriate  to  the  occasion,  and  whose  power  far  transcends  my  own  to 
meet  the  demands  which  the  spiritual  rostrum  makes  upon  me.  Under  these  conditions 
I  find  it  impossible  to  recall  my  lectures  by  memory,  or  to  transcribe  them,  as  they  were 
originally  delivered. 

"  The  following  Answer  will,  however,  embody  the  sum  of  the  arguments  before  used, 
and  I  have  only  to  add,  that,  for  any  further  elucidation  of  the  question  at  issue,  I  still  hold 
myself  ready  to  meet  Mr.  Skewes  in  public  discussion,  under  such  conditions  as  may  be 
agreed  upon  between  him  and  my  Liverpool  Committee  of  Spiritualists. 

"Emma  Haedinge  Britten." 

It  must  be  added  that  the  lectures  referred  to,  being  a  complete  expo- 
sition of  what  Spiritualism  is— and  what  it  is  not.^  Mr.  Skewes's  action, 
supplemented  by  Mr.  John  Fowler's  indomitable  enterprise,  has  undoubtedly 
aided  in  bringing  Spiritualism  to  the  notice  of  vast  numbers  of  the  com- 
munity who  would  otherwise  have  remained  in  profound  ignorance  of  its 
verities. 

Mr.  Fowler  also  was  the  only  individual,  outside  the  ranks  of  the  clergy, 
privileged  to  bear  testimony  to  the  faith  of  Spiritualism,  before  the  English 
Church  Congress,  held  in  1881,  at  Newcastle-on-Tyne.  On  this  occasion, 
one  or  two  of  the  clerical  speakers  present  bore  witness  to  the  tone  and 
temper  of  the  times,  by  speaking  unreservedly  in  favour  of  Spiritualism, 
whilst  others  exhibited  the  rancour  and  bitterness  which  this  all  too  popular 
element  had  excited,  by  vituperation  of  a  high  ecclesiastical  order. 

Whilst  we  could  wish  that  Mr.  Fowler's  necessarily  brief  but  compen- 
dious paper  could  be  read  by  thinkers  of  every  shade  of  faith,  we  can  only 
find  space  for  the  following  excerpts  from  his  brave  utterances  : — 

"  Every  man  must  observe  the  present  indifferent  state  of  the  intelligent  public  to  the 
service  and  doctrines  of  the  Church.  Those  who  have  had  opportunities  of  observing  the 
intellectual  state  of  the  country  say  that  infidelity  is  on  the  increase.  Now,  what  does 
the  Church  propose  to  do  in  this  matter  ?  Of  its  seriousness  proof  is  offered  by  the  fact 
of  this  discussion.  Until  the  facts  of  spiritual  existence  have  been  demonstrated,  like 
Peter,  who  denied  his  Master,  we  want  evidence,  and,  like  Thomas,  we  want  to  put  our 
fingers  into  the  prints  of  the  nails.  If  demonstration  was  needed  to  establish  the  faith  in 
the  hearts  of  the  disciples,  demonstration  is  as  much  needed  to-day,  to  establish  its  claims 
in  the  experience  of  the  present  generation.  The  fabric  cannot  be  maintained.  It  will 
fall  to  pieces  without  the  interior  leavening  power  of  the  Spirit.  Narrow  creeds  and 
ceremonies  cannot  impose  on  and  influence  for  ever  the  minds  of  men.  Therefore,  Modern 
Spiritualism  has  appeared  as  a  Divine  necessity  of  the  times.  It  does  not  come  to  destroy 
the  law  and  the  prophets,  but  to  establish  that  which  came  aforetime,  and  to  make  the 
possibilities  of  spiritual  growth  and  strength  in  the  heart  of  man  more  possible.     .     .     . 

"  Therefore  we  say  that  a  case  has  been  made  out  on  behalf  of  Modern  Spiritualism  to 
be  recognised  and  utilised  by  the  Church  itself,  that  it  may  become  strong  to  defeat  its 
own  doubts,  and,  in  the  full  reliance  of  its  hope,  do  battle  with  the  hard  foes  who  deny 
the  immortality  of  the  soul.  If  Spiritualists  do  not  universally  retain  their  allegiance  to 
the  doctrines  of  the  Church  of  England,  it  matters  but  very  little.  The  Church,  by 
fairly  and  squarely  investigating  the  alleged  facts,  will  bring  together  into  one  focus 
philosophers  and  thinkers  who  otherwise  might  have  remained  outside  the  pale  of  the 
Church.  To  shelve  the  question  by  saying  that  Spiritualism  is  an  imposition  displays 
either  presumption  or  ignorance,"     .     .     . 

222  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

The  example  above  given  of  Mr.  Fowler's  address,  is  sufficient  to 
demonstrate  its  admirable  lines  of  argument.  The  effect  produced  upon 
the  community  has  been  marked  and  healthful.  A  far  more  respectful 
sentiment  has  been  manifested  towards  Spiritualism  by  the  thinking  classes, 
since  the  Church  Congress  was  in  session,  whilst  the  impulse  given  to  the 
cause  in  Liverpool,  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  large  numbers  who  gather 
together  each  Sunday  to  attend  the  Spiritualists'  services.  For  the  present 
these  meetings  are  held  in  Rodney  Hall,  under  the  management  of  an 
efficient  committee,  and  the  presidency  of  John  Lamont,  Esq.,  a  gentleman 
held  in  the  highest  estimation  by  all  classes  of  his  fellow-citizens,  besides 
being  a  seer  and  inspirational  speaker  of  remarkable  power.  Mrs.  Hardinge 
Britten  is  the  regular  lecturer  of  the  Society  for  two  Sundays  in  each  month 
during  the  present  season ;  Mr.  W.  J.  Colville,  from  America,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Wallis,  Mrs.  Groom  and  other  speakers  of  pronounced  excellence 
filling  the  rostrum  on  alternate  Sundays. 

In  Belper,  Derbyshire,  the  Spiritualists  enjoy  the  privilege  of  holding 
their  Sunday  services  in  the  pleasant  and  commodious  hall  built,  and 
generously  placed  at  the  disposal  of  his  Spiritualist  friends  and  associates, 
by  Mr.  W.  P.  Adshead,  the  gentleman  before  mentioned  in  connection 
with  Miss  Wood's  seances. 

The  kindly  sentiments  which  prevail  amongst  the  Spiritualists  of  Belper, 
and  the  many  acts  of  beneficence  towards  the  poor  which  are  practised 
in  their  hall,  fill  the  place  with  a  high  and  holy  influence,  and  fittingly 
consecrate  it  to  the  ministry  of  angels,  on  earth  as  in  heaven. 

In  Bradford,  Yorkshire,  a  large  and  zealous  society  of  working  men 
and  women  have  combined  to  hire  a  good  hall,  which  they  entitle  the 
Walton  Street  Church,  and  here,  as  in  Belper,  the  exalting  influence  of  a 
specially-consecrated  place,  and  the  effect  of  well  conducted  and  orderly 
services  is  felt  by  every  sensitive  who  visits  the  meetings.  Two  other 
well  attended  meetings  are  held  every  Sunday  in  Bradford,  besides  what 
may  be  emphatically  called  "  mass  meetings  "  in  one  of  the  largest  halls  in 
the  town,  when  the  author,  or  other  speakers  from  a  distance,  are  engaged, 
by  the  energetic  and  self-sacrificing  Bradford  Spiritualists. 

A  special  hall  has  also  been  built  and  devoted  to  the  Spiritual  Sunday 
services,  at  Sowerby  Bridge,  Yorkshire,  where  a  fine  and  well-trained  choir 
of  young  people  adds  the  charm  of  excellent  singing  to  the  elevating 
influences  which  pervade  the  place. 

Those  who,  like  the  author,  have  realised  with  painful  sensibility  the 
injurious  or  favourable  effects  produced  by  the  different  places  where 
Spiritual  services  are  conducted,  will  be  ready  to  join  with  her  in  the 
fervent  wish  that  wealthy  Spiritualists  would  emulate  the  example  of  good 
Mr,  Adshead,  and  provide  in  every  town  and  hamlet  of  Great  Britain  a 
true  Spiritual  home  for  the  people,  and  a  fitting  scene  in  which  to  invite 
the  angels  to  come  and  participate  in  holy  Spiritual  exercises.  If  there  be 
any  truth  in  Spiritual  revelations  at  all,  those  who  would  make  such  an 
use  of  the  means  committed  to  their  stewardship  on  earth,  would  certainly 
find  that  they  had  been 

"  Fitting  up  a  mansion 
Which  eternally  will  stand." 

In  Leeds,  Halifax,  Keighley,  Bradford,  and  nearly  all  the  principal  towns 
and  villages  of  Yorkshire,  well  conducted  Sunday  meetings  are  held,  some- 
times aided  by  renowned  speakers  from  a  distance,  but  in  general  ministered 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  223 

to  by  resident  Mediums,  most  of  whom — under  trance  conditions — 
give  discourses  far  beyond  the  average  of  their  normal  capacity.  The 
speakers  are  for  the  most  part  such  devoted  men  and  women  as  good 
faithful  Joseph  Armitage  of  Batley  Carr  ;  Mrs.  Dobson,  Mrs.  Illingworth ; 
Misses  Hance,  Shipley,  and  Harrison  ;  Mrs.  Wilson,  Mrs.  Greig  ;  Messrs. 
Wilson  Oliffe,  Blackburn,  and  many  others  too  numerous  to  mention. 
All  these  are  working  people,  toiling  during  the  week  in  their  several 
vocations,  but  giving  cheerfully,  without  stint,  and  often  at  the  cost  of 
labour  and  fatigue  to  themselves,  their  best  service  every  Sunday  to  plat- 
form utterances,  and  that  most  commonly  with  little  or  no  remunera- 
tion. 

In  the  meantime,  such  noble  gentlemen  as  Mr.  John  Culpan  of  Halifax, 
a  Spiritual  veteran  who  for  thirty  years  has  given  means,  untiring  service, 
and  an  honoured  name  to  the  advancement  of  the  cause.  Mr.  B.  Lees, 
Mr.  John  Ilhngworth,  Mr.  Etchells,  of  Huddersfield,  David  Richmond,  the 
veteran  Spiritualist  of  Darlington,  Dr.  Brown,  of  Burnley,  Mr.  Foster,  of 
Preston,  good  John  Harwood,  of  Littleborough,  and  Peter  Lee,  of  Roch- 
dale, splendid  representatives  of  Yorkshire  and  Lancashire  Spiritualism — 
these,  and  hosts  of  others,  with  not  a  few  faithful  and  zealous  ladies,  devote 
themselves  by  purse  and  person  to  the  best  Interests  of  humanity  through 
the  noble  cause  of  Spiritualism. 

In  a  crowded  record  of  this  character,  many  a  good  and  honoured  name 
must  necessarily  be  omitted,  but  none  can  doubt  that  they  are  all  engraved 
in  the  imperishable  types  of  the  higher  life  to  which  their  noble  services  so 
effectually  point  the  way. 

In  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  the  residence  of  the  esteemed  scientist  T.  P. 
Barkas,  a  "  Spiritual  Evidence  Society"  has  been  formed,  which  has  done 
good  service  by  maintaining  Sunday  meetings,  and  promoting  seances  for 
the  culture  of  Spiritual  gifts,  and  the  investigation  of  phenomena. 

It  was  at  these  circles  that  Miss  Wood — the  celebrated  physical  medium 
mentioned  in  a  former  chapter — was  developed. 

The  Newcastle  Society  has  moreover  exercised  a  fostering  influence  upon 
that  large  section  of  country  in  the  vicinity,  devoted  to  the  industries  of 
coal  mining.  Here,  as  in  Yorkshire,  local  Mediums  and  trance  speakers 
keep  alive  the  interest  of  their  various  districts,  with  addresses  which  produce 
a  deep  and  favourable  impression  on  their  listeners. 

The  author  has  herself  visited  two  or  three  of  these  collieries,  and  was 
deeply  moved  by  the  sight  of  the  earnest-looking  sons  of  toil  massed  in 
serried  groups  around  her.  When  no  strangers  visit  them,  they  are 
addressed  by  some  of  the  inspirational  speakers  who  abound  in  these 
districts.  One  of  the  most  eloquent,  sincere,  and  popular  lecturers  of  the 
Northumberland  meetings  is  Mr.  Henry  Burton,  a  good  and  true  man, 
whose  life  and  preaching  are  both  well  calculated  to  demonstrate  the  exal- 
ting influence  of  Spirit  teachings. 

The  large  manufacturing  county  of  Lancashire,  though  by  no  means  as 
thickly  studded  with  zealous  Spiritual  communities  as  Yorkshire  or  Northum- 
berland, is  nevertheless  a  stronghold  of  the  faith.  Liverpool  has  already  been 
noticed  ;  meantime  Rochdale,  Oldham,  Manchester,  Burnley,  Blackburn, 
and  numerous  other  places  of  importance  maintain  Sunday  meetings,  where 
vast  multitudes  Hsten  with  profound  interest  to  the  consoling  doctrines  of 
Spiritualism,  taught  by  the  zealous  local  Mediums  who  are  to  be  found  in 
those  districts. 

In  the  last  named  place,  Blackburn,  a  large  and  busy  manufacturing 

.  224  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

town,  the  author  was  instrumental  in  forming  the  excellent  "  Psychological 
Society,"  which  now  holds  regular  Sunday  meetings  there. 

After  the  occasion  of  Mrs.  Britten's  first  visit,  the  secretary  of  the 
Society  sent  a  report  to  the  Medium  which  is  reprinted  for  the  sake  of 
the  declaration  of  principles  it  contains — one  which  might  be  profitably 
adopted  by  other  religious  societies  besides  the  Spiritualists  of  Blackburn. 
Our  correspondent  says  : — 

"  Spiritualism  is  looking  up  at  present  in  Blackburn.  During  the  last  few  months  we 
have  had  Mrs.  Britten  two  Sundays  occupying  the  platform  of  the  Exchange  :  afternoon 
and  evening  each  visit.  The  room  will  hold  from  1,200  to  1,800  people,  and  was  packed 
at  each  of  the  four  lectures.     .     .     . 

"  We  have  also  opened  rooms  for  Sunday  evening  lectures,  at  the  School  of  Science. 
There  seem  to  be  plenty  of  fresh  faces  every  Sunday  come  to  listen  to  what  is  said.  We 
have  a  very  nice  meeting  room,  and  best  of  all  is,  that  everything  is  paid  for  ;  we  mind 
that,  whatever  comes  or  goes  not  to  run  in  debt.  We  are  very  strong  Trinitarians,  but 
the  Trinity  we  believe  in  is,  '  One  God  ;  no  Devil,  and  twenty  shillings  to  the  pound.' 

"  We  feel  confident  if  we  only  had  real  good  speakers  like  Mrs.  Britten,  we  could 
without  any  fear  take  the  Exchange  every  Sunday.  We  make  no  charge  for  tickets  or 
admission,  but  trust  to  the  voluntary  offerings  of  the  people,  and  strange  to  say  that 
although  not  making  much  more  than  bare  expenses,  we  have  never  come  short  of  meeting 
the  expenses.  The  people  are  thhsting  for  more  knowledge  on  the  subject ;  the  pity  is 
we  have  no  one  to  give  them  the  knowledge. — Yours,  etc., 

"R.   WOLSTBNHOLME," 

In  Macclesfield,  an  earnest  and  united  Society  of  believers  in  Spiritualism 
have  hired  and  furnished  a  pleasant  little  hall,  where  services  are  generally 
conducted  by  the  Rev.  Adam  Rushton,  an  estimable  gentleman,  formerly 
a  Unitarian  Minister,  but  one  who  gave  up  sect,  and  even  the  goodwill  of 
friends  and  kindred,  to  throw  in  his  lot  with  those  who  believed  in  the  faith 
of  which  he  became  convinced,  and  to  which,  in  his  modest  and  unosten- 
tatious way,  he  gives  his  life  and  able  services. 

A  similarly  self-sacrificing  profession  of  the  Spiritual  faith  has  been  made 
by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Stoddart  of  Middlesboro',  near  Stockton-on-Tees.  This 
gentleman  was  also  an  Unitarian  Minister,  but  one  whose  persecutions  for 
the  sake  of  his  faith  have  not  as  yet,  been  attended  with  a  setdement  as 
peaceful  as  that  which  Mr,  Rushton  finds  in  his  little  Macclesfield  Society. 
Mr.  Stoddart  however  is  bound  to  make  his  mark,  and  the  good  angels 
he  serves  have  obviously  not  forgotten  their  charge  over  their  faithful  soldier. 

In  Nottingham,  Mr.  Wm.  Yates,  a  gentleman  of  fine  culture,  and  indom- 
itable energy,  together  with  a  few  ladies  and  gendemen  of  superior 
intellectual  attainments,  have  struggled  bravely  to  sustain  an  unsectarian 
representation  of  Spiritualism.  Mr.  Yates  has  also  commenced  the  practice 
of  medical  electricity  combined  with  magnetism,  under  the  direction  of 
beneficent  healing  Spirits,  and  report  speaks  in  enthusiastic  terms  of  the 
brilliant  conquests  he  is  effecting  over  otherwise  incurable  forms  of  disease. 

In  Birmingham,  resides  Mrs.  Groom,  an  indefatigable  trance  speaker, 
healer,  and  seeress,  who  adds  to  her  interesting  Sunday  lectures,  the  faculty 
of  seeing  and  describing  the  spirit  friends  of  persons  in  her  audience.  The 
labours  of  this  excellent  Medium  have  effected  an  immense  amount  of  good 
in  the  places  she  visits. 

In  Birmingham,  Walsall,  Leicester,  and  other  Midland  towns  and 
villages,  small  Sunday  meetings  are  held,  which  promise,  with  good  speakers 
and  good  maiiagement,  to  swell  to  large  gatherings. 

In  the  West  and  South  of  England,  less  public  evidence  of  progress  is 
demonstrable,  although  there  are  many  places  where  it  is  generally  known 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  225 

that  good  Spiritual  meetings  have  been  held,  and  large  numbers  of  private 
circles  are  in  session. 

One  of  the  most  prosperous  Spiritual  societies  in  the  South-west  of 
England,  is  that  established  at  Plymouth,  where  many  private  circles  are 
held,  and  regular  Sunday  services  are  at  present  conducted  with  great 
acceptance  by  Mr.  Clarke,  an  excellent  inspirational  speaker. 

The  formation  of  the  Plymouth  Society,  as  well  as  much  of  the  good 
work  which  it  has  achieved,  is  due  to  the  labours  of  the  Rev.  C.  Ware,  but 
as  this  gentleman's  experience  is  modestly  narrated  in  his  own  statement 
recently  published  in  the  Society's  report  of  their  first  anniversary  cele- 
bration, we  cannot  do  better  than  give  the  account  which  we  find  printed 
in  a  recent  issue  of  Light,  and  which  is  to  the  following  effect : — 

"PLYMOUTH. — THE   FREE    SPIRITUAL    SOCIETY. 

"  The  Free  Spiritual  Society  of  Plymouth  last  evening  celebrated  its  anniversary  at 
Richmond  Hall,  Richmond  Street,  it  being  exactly  twelve  months  since  its  origin.  The 
Rev.  C.  Ware,  having  laboured  for  two  years  in  this  town  as  a  minister  of  one  of  the 
Methodist  bodies,  was  suspended  in  January  of  last  year  on  account  of  his  belief  in 
Spiritualism  ;  but  a  number  of  persons  holding  similar  views  having  formed  themselves 
into  a  Society,  invited  him  to  become  their  minister,  in  which  capacity  he  has  since 
acted.  The  Society  during  the  year  has  considerably  increased  its  membership  and 
extended  its  operations,  and  now  claims  to  enjoy  the  patronage,  sympathy,  and  support 
of  many  influential  friends  beyond  its  formal  membership.  The  proceedings  last  evening 
afi'orded  a  fair  indication  that  the  community  is  in  a  flourishing  condition  ;  about  eighty 
sat  down  to  tea,  and  at  the  public  meeting  that  followed,  presided  over  by  Mr  W.  T. 
Rossiter,  of  Torquay,  addresses  were  delivered  by  several  gentlemen  from  the  town  and 
neighbourhood.     Several  mediums  also  toi.k  part  in  the  meeting. 

"  The  Rev.  C.  Ware,  after  making  reference  to  the  general  aspects  of  Spiritualism, 
said  it  was  pretty  well  known  that  he  had  laboured  in  this  town  for  two  years  as  a 
minister  of  one  of  the  Methodist  bodies.  During  that  time  he  became  acquainted  with 
Spiritualism,  and  at  the  outset  it  presented  itself  to  him  as  an  astounding  and  glorious 
reality.  Because  he  would  not  deny  what  he  knew  to  be  the  truth,  and  forego  the  study 
of  the  profoundest  subject  that  could  occupy  the  mind  of  man,  he  was  suspended  from  the 
denominational  pulpit.  There  were  those,  however,  who  refused  to  submit  to  ecclesiastical 
tyranny  and  mental  slavery,  and  these  formed  themselves  into  a  Free  Spiritual  Society, 
and  invited  him  to  become  their  minister.  The  Society  was  formed  twelve  months  ago 
in  the  house  of  one  of  their  friends  ;  a  few  days  afterwards  they  secured  a  room  at  the 
Octagon,  and  took  their  stand  as  a  religious  body.  Soon  after  this  they  removed  to  their 
present  hall.  They  had  had  to  encounter  great  difficulties  and  various  forms  of  opposition. 
In  September,  a  conjurer,  called  Irving  Bishop,  came  to  Plymouth  to  give  the  '  death  blow 
to  Spiritualism.'  For  a  time  the  subject  was  in  everybody's  mouth,  and  of  course  '  every- 
body'  went  to  hear  him  ;  for  a  time  Spiritualists  seemed  to  be  objects  of  commiseration 
until  Irving  Bishop  proved  himself  a  cheat,  by  failing  to  exhibit  a  single  phase  of 
Spiritualism.  A  correspondence  thereupon  commenced  in  the  Western  Daily  Mercury,  in 
which  a  whole  galaxy  of  writers  took  part ;  for  a  time  the  battle  was  tremendous,  but  he 
thought  they  could  say  without  boasting  that  they  poured  into  the  enemy's  ranks  such  a 
fire  of  stubborn  facts  as  to  leave  their  opponents  '  without  a  leg  to  stand  upon.'  It  was 
impossible  for  him  to  give  them  an  idea  of  the  advantage  their  cause  derived  from  this 
controversy  ;  it  was  certainly  the  best  work  ever  done  for  it.  Since  the  year  commenced 
they  had  placed  a  splendid  harmonium  in  the  hall,  and  he  was  pleased  to  tell  them  that 
the  past  week  was  a  worthy  climax  to  the  year's  work,  for  he  had  not  seen  such  vitality 
manifested  at  any  time  during  the  year.  The  fact  was  that  no  cause  ever  had  a  brighter 
outlook  than  theirs.  They  had  no  creed,  except  the  Fatherhood  of  God  and  the  brother- 
hood of  humanity  ;  and  they  enjoyed  perfect  liberty,  their  motto  being  to  think  and 
allow  others  to  thank  ;  their  aim  being  simply  the  natural  de\elopment  of  each  individual 
human  soul.  They  could  reckon  amongst  their  company  that  evening  some  ten  mediums, 
and  ere  the  meeting  closed  they  would,  no  doubt,  hear  some  of  them  speak  in  the  trance 
state,  expressing  the  thoughts  of  their  invisible  friends." 

Of  the  few  professional  speakers  who  are  from  time  to  time  engaged  in 
the  work  of  Spiritual  revivalism,  the  limitations  of  space  will  only  allow  us 
to  make  very  brief  mention, 

15 

226  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wallis  of  Walsall  are  both  highly  gifted  trance  speakers, 
and  their  eloquent  ministrations  are  warmly  appreciated  wherever  they 
go.  Of  unblemished  character  and  moral  worth,  the  very  lives  of  this 
noble  couple  form  a  sermon,  of  which  any  religious  denomination  might 
be  proud.  Mrs.  Groom  has  already  been  noticed.  Several  other  acceptable 
speakers  of  the  Spiritual  rostrum  might  take  exception  to  being  classified  as 
professionals,  consequently,  in  addition  to  the  author  of  this  volume,  it  only 
remains  to  notice  Mr.  J.  J.  Morse,  a  most  admirable  lecturer,  and  a  gen  de- 
man  who  has  rendered  himself  worthy  of  that  designation,  by  Spiritual 
culture  alone. 

When  the  author  first  knew  Mr.  Morse,  he  had  risen  from  an  obscure 
position  of  drudgery,  to  one 'but  little  better,  as  the  shopman  at  Mr.  Burn's 
Spiritual  Institution.  Here  his  marvellous  powers  as  a  trance  Medium 
became  unfolded,  until  at  length,  by  virtue  of  being  made  the  instrument 
of  exalted  and  philosophic  Spirits,  he  grew  nearer  to  their  level ;  became 
one  with  them  instead  of  simply  their  automatic  mouthpiece,  and  finally, 
by  force  of  these  educational  processes,  and  his  own  indomitable  perse- 
verance, Mr.  Morse  has  risen  to  a  position  of  honourable  eminence  in  the 
realm  of  Spiritual  literature,  and  occupies  the  rank  of  one  of  the  most 
attractive  trance  speakers  of  the  day. 

In  a  cause  which  is  still  hi  trajisitu,  and  amongst  a  vast  number  of 
moving  forms  who  are  still  making  history,  it  would  be  as  unwise  to  find 
fault  with  methods,  and  criticize  the  action  of  individuals,  as  to  complain 
of  the  variable  clouds  which  may  disappear  to-morrow,  or  the  oppressive 
sunshine  which  may  be  modified  in  the  course  of  a  single  hour.  Every 
movement  in  Spiritualism  is  at  present  transitional ;  nearly  all  the  efforts 
at  propagandism  now  conducted  by  Spiritualists,  are  expedients  of  the 
hour,  whilst  to-morrow  may  call  for  a  widely  different  course  of  action.  It 
need  be  no  matter  of  surprise  therefore,  that  the  traditional  grumbler  finds 
ample  food  for  his  discontent  to  prey  upon,  whilst  the  enthusiast  hails  every 
gleam  of  sunshine  that  glances  across  his  path,  as  the  advent  of  the  long 
looked  for  millennium.  On  the  mountain  top,  or  in  the  valley,  still  we 
repeat  we  are  but  in  transitu,  and  whilst  we  pause  to  criticize,  dogmatize, 
or  even  attempt  to  organize,  the  occasion  which  seemed  to  call  for  our 
special  line  of  conduct  will  have  passed  away,  and  sweep  us  along  with  the 
current  to  meet  a  new  emergency  of  the  times. 

It  is  under  these  ever-changing  aspects  of  the  Spiritual  cause,  that  the 
author's  pen  has  been  again  and  again  suspended  by  an  invisible  but  ever 
present  monitor,  when  she  would  have  applied  in  her  human  blindness, 
words  of  censure  in  one  direction,  and  urgent  counsels  in  another.  "  God 
understands,"  murmurs  the  angel  of  guidance  in  the  ear  of  the  scribe. 
"  Write — Behold  I  make  all  things  new  I "  cries  another  angelic  teacher. 
Satisfied  that  the  movement  which  seems  so  confused  and  heterogeneous 
in  the  dazzled  eyes  of  humanity,  is  dictated  by  divine  wisdom,  ruled  by 
Almighty  power,  and  working  together  for  supreme  good,  our  part  is  to 
keep  our  lamps  trimmed  and  burning  and  wait  for  the  coming  of  the 
Heavenly  Bridegroom  whose  name  is — Divine  Order. 

:is5*i*  - 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  227 

CHAPTER    XXIX. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     AUSTRALIA. — PART     L 

Spiritualism  in  Australia,  like  that  which  pervades  the  whole  world  in 
this  modern  outpouring,  has  both  a  public  and  private  representation.  The 
latter  is  far  more  general  than  the  former  in  every  country  except  America, 
but  although  demonstrations  of  Spirit  power  are  more  commonly  known  in 
Australia  amongst  individuals  and  families,  than  on  the  rostrum,  or  through 
the  columns  of  the  journals,  they  are  less  available  for  the  purposes  of 
historical  record. 

The  author  is  in  possession  of  hundreds  of  accounts  of  personal  expe- 
riences and  home  circles,  whilst  ream  upon  ream  of  alleged  Spirit  com- 
munications have  been  tendered,  for  insertion  in  this  volume. 

It  must  of  course  become  obvious  to  every  sensible  reader,  that  records 
of  this  character  have  no  interest  for  the  public,  however  valuable  they  may 
be  to  individuals. 

As  Spiritual  phenomena  are  for  the  most  part  limited  to  a  few  general 
methods,  and  family  communications — so  interesting  to  the  recipients — 
become  monotonous  in  recital  to  others,  it  would  be  useless  to  reproduce 
them  in  pages  designed  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  at  large. 

At  the  risk  therefore  of  disappointing  hundreds  of  well-meaning  corre- 
spondents who  have  sent  matter  for  pubUcation,  which  the  repertoire  of 
thousands  of  Spiritualists  could  duplicate,  we  must  dismiss  this  branch  of 
our  subject,  with  the  acknowledgment  that  Spirit  power  has  been  far 
more  widely  diffused  than  the  pubhc  in  general  is  apprised  of,  and  that  if  a 
tithe  of  its  doings  were  given  to  the  world,  they  would  suffice  to  furnish  the 
shelves  of  an  extensive  library. 

Aboriginal  Spiritualism  in  Australia  has  many  features  of  interest,  were 
it  within  the  scope  of  this  volume  to  notice  it.  As  this  would  not  be 
possible,  we  must  content  ourselves  by  observing  modern  Spiritual  develop- 
ment amongst  the  white  settlers  of  Australia. 

It  seems  that  many  Australian  colonists  had  heard  of  the  Spiritual  move- 
ment before  visiting  the  country,  and  on  their  arrival,  pursuing  the 
customary  methods  of  unfoldment  through  the  Spirit  circle,  a  wide-spread 
interest  was  awakened  long  before  public  attention  was  called  to  the 
subject.  In  Sydney,  Melbourne,  Ballarat,  Geelong,  Brisbane,  and  numerous 
other  towns  and  mining  districts,  communion  with  Spirits  was  successfully 
practised  in  circles  and  families,  up  to  about  1867.  After  that  epoch  it 
seems  to  have  become  the  subject  of  various  journalistic  reports  of  the 
usual  adverse,  eulogistic,  or  non-committal  character.  At  or  about  that 
period,  a  large  number  of  influential  persons  became  interested  in  the 
matter,  and  not  a  few  whose  names  were  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  their  good 
faith,  began  to  detail  wonderful  experiences  in  the  columns  of  the  public 
journals.  The  debate  and  denial,  rejoinder  and  defence,  called  forth  by 
these  narratives,  served  as  propaganda  for  the  movement,  and  rendered 
each  freshly  recorded  manifestation,  the  centre  of  an  ever-widening  circle 
of  interest, 

228  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  ^ 

In  Victoria,  a  gentleman  of  considerable  wealth  and  learning,  writing 
under  the  nom  de  plume  of  Schamlyn,  entered  into  a  warm  controversy  w^ith 
the  editor  of  the  Collingwood  Advertiser,  in  defence  of  Spiritualism.  This 
brave  advocate  of  the  faith  defines  his  position  in  unmistakable  characters 
in  a  letter,  from  which  we  make  the  following  pungent  extract : — 

"  I  don't  like  to  conclude  without  adverting  to  that  boast  of  the  editor  of  the  Collingwood 
Advertiser — '  That,  as  he  had  initiated  the  controversy,  he  did  not  intend  to  withdraw  from 
the  arena  until  he  had  thoroughly  exposed  the  delusion  or  trickery,'  and  until  he  has  shown 
that  all  spiritual  publications  are  '  sublime  rot,'  I  wish  him  to  be  informed  that  the  moment 
he  has  accomplished  the  feat  he  has  so  magnanimously  undertaken,  he  can  draiv  upon  me 
for  five  hundred  pounds  sterling,  which  sum  I  have  offered  for  twelve  months  past  (as 
our  mutual  friend  Francis  Waller  can  testify)  to  any  person  in  or  out  of  the  colony,  who 
can  do  what  he,  the  editor  of  the  Collingwood  Advertiser,  in  his  issue  of  the  21st  inst.,  has 
ofered  to  do.  The  money  is  in  the  Union  Bank  of  Australia,  Melbourne.  The  savans  of 
the  world  will  have  nothing  to  say  to  it ;  they  will  not  examine  it ;  which  is  a  strong  sign 
that  they  don't  believe  it  can  be  accounted  for  by  any  known  laws  of  natural  science  ;  the 
clergy  are  frightened  of  it ;  it  is  apt  to  let  too  much  light  into  the  laity  ;  and  the  com- 
monality pitch  into  it  venomously,  because  it  pleases  their  pastors,  and  gives  an  occasion 
for  displaying  their  orthodoxy.     Yours  ever  truly, 

"  Walwa,  25th  November,  1868.  Schamltn." 

This  letter  and  many  others  by  the  same  able  writer,  replete  with  sound 
sense  and  unanswerable  logic,  will  be  found  printed  in  the  appendix  to  a 
small  volume  entitled  "  Spiritual  Communications."  These  were  given 
through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Armstrong,  a  lady  who  resides 
at  Melbourne,  and  in  her  capacity  of  clairvoyant  physician,  has  wrought 
multitudes  of  cures  which,  under  any  other  name  than  Spiritualism,  would 
have  been  deemed  "miraculous." 

At  the  time  when  the  spirit  communications  were  given  which  form  the 
subject  of  the  above-named  volume,  Mrs.  Armstrong  was  one  of  the  subjects 
whom  "  Schamlyn,"  a  gentleman  devoted  to  scientific  research,  and  a  friend 
of  the  family — magnetized  by  way  of  experiment.  In  the  trance  condition 
thus  induced,  Mrs.  Armstrong's  hand  was  moved  to  write  messages,  some  of 
a  wonderful  test  character  from  spirit  friends  of  those  around  her — others 
in  various  foreign  languages  utterly  unknown  to  the  simple  country- 
bred  Medium,  and  others,  ranging  through  the  highest  flights  of  science, 
philosophy,  and  metaphysics,  but  all  in  a  style,  entirely  beyond  the  normal 
capacity  of  the  Medium.  To  sum  up  these  remarkable  productions,  we 
here  reprint  the  short  preface  of  the  compiler,  the  gentleman  who  some- 
times signed  his  articles  by  his  own  initials  S.,  G.  W.,  and  sometimes 
"  Schamlyn."     It  is  as  follows  : — 

'■  The  following  communications  purport  to  be  messages  of  love  and  instruction  from 
departed  spirits,  who,  in  giving  them,  have  used  the  hand  and  mouth  of  Mrs.  Armstrong 
mechanically ;  in  every  instance  involuntarily,  and  often  in  spite  of  herself,  and  of  her 
persevering  resistance  to  their  control.  Almost  all  of  them  were  written  in  the  presence 
of  witnesses  ;  many,  unconsciously  to  herself,  when  in  trance  or  asleep  ;  and  some  were 
found  written  in  her  book,  no  one  knowing  when  they  were  written.  Some  also  in  short- 
hand, no  variety  of  which  had  she,  or  I,  or  any  of  our  acquaintance,  any  knowledge  of 
whatever.  These  communications  are  given  originally  in  a  great  number  of  handwritings, 
exactly  according  to  the  number  of  spirits  who  have  influenced  her ;  and  whatever 
peculiarity  of  style,  chirography,  and  signature  has  been  adopted  by  the  unseen  agent — 
claiming  to  be  a  s  irit — ^in  his  or  her  first  communication  through  the  hand  of  Mrs.  Arm- 
strong, has  been  uniformly  maintained  throughout.  None  of  the  original  writings  are  in 
her  own  hand.  The  quotations  in  Greek,  Hebrew,  Syriac,  and  Arabic,  are  given  in  their 
respective  characters."       .... 

The  author  of  this  work — whilst  a  resident  in  Melbourne — enjoyed  the 
privilege  of  an   intimate   acquaintance   both   with   the   clairvoyant,  Mrs, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  229 

Armstrong,  and  the  gentleman  whose  initials  are  given  above.  From  these 
parties  she  learned  that  the  Medium's  unfoldment  did  not  proceed  very 
smoothly,  she  being  violently  opposed  to  the  controlling  power,  to  which  in 
fact  she  was  only  induced  to  succumb  by  personal  methods,  of  which  we 
give  the  following  curious  examples,  extracted  from  "Schamlyn's"  book, 
page  106  : — 

"  Every  night,  for  weeks  past,  Mrs.  A.  has  been  visited  by  a  spirit  whom  she  knew  in 
his  earth  life ;  he  moves  the  chairs  and  bed  about — pulls  her  out  of  her  bed,  bedclothes 
and  all — takes  the  comb  out  of  her  hair  sometimes,  and  makes  her  hair  a  tangled  mass. 
One  comb  has  been  taken  away  about  ten  days  ago,  and  she  was  told  that  when  they,  the 
spirits,  are  satisfied  with  her  conduct,  the  comb  will  be  replaced  in  her  hair," 

And  again  : — 

"  Wednesday,  15th. — Excepting  Mrs.  A.'s  nightly  trances,  there  has  been  nothing  done 
since  last  writing.  I  mean  nothing  that  I  can  report  from  personal  observation.  But 
every  night  for  a  month  past,  she  has  been  visited  by  a  spirit,  who  pulls  her  out  of  bed, 
sometimes  head  first,  oftener  feet  first,  bedclothes  and  all ;  this  sometimes  is  done  four 
times  in  one  night.  She  can  give  no  reason  for  such  apparently  violent  conduct,  except 
her  constant  refusal  to  do  what  he  desires  her  ;  and  the  most  unaccountable  thing  about 
the  matter  is,  that  spirits  with  whom  we  have  long  been  conversant,  and  in  whom  we 
have  learned  to  trust,  from  their  uniform  goodness  and  patience,  second  the  advice  of  the 
nightly  visitant.         .... 

"  Friday,  24th. — The  nightly  visits  to  Mrs.  A.  continue,  and  accompanied  with  the 
same  apparently  unnecessary  violent  movements  of  furniture,  and  pullings  of  clothes,  &c., 
and  still  urging  her  to  obey  his  behests,  which  she  still  refuses  to  do.  The  only  writing 
that  has  been  done,  through  Mrs.  A.'s  hand,  for  the  last  week  has  been  the  following  : — 
'  Did  you  know  how  important  to  your  development  is  every  hour  you  are  losing  by  your 
indecision,  all  your  hesitation  would  very  soon  cease  ;  and  however  revolting  to  your  soul 
the  irrevocable  step  may  appear,  do  not  let  it  stand  in  your  way,  or  you  will  one  day 
bitterly  repent  having  done  so.  We  are  waiting  for  you  ;  so  hasten  on.  Why  do  you 
keep  lingering  on  your  road  ?     Be  brave,  and  let  no  fear  daunt  your  onward  progress.'  " 

If  the  restoration  of  hundreds  of  suffering  mortals  to  health  can  be 
accepted  as  sufficient  motive  to  justify  months  of  similar  persecution  on 
the  part  of  spirits  towards  their  recusant  Medium,  then  the  strange  nature 
of  Mrs.  Armstrong's  development  is  explained,  and  the  aphorism — "  the 
end  justifies  the  means" — must  be  accepted  in  her  remarkable  experiences. 

Another  influential  supporter  of  the  Spiritual  cause  who  was  an  early 
convert,  and  for  a  time  became  a  pillar  of  strength  in  its  maintenance,  was 
a  gentleman  connected  with  the  editorial  department  of  the  Melbourne 
Argus,  one  of  the  leading  journals  of  Victoria,  and  an  organ  well  calculated 
to  exert  a  powerful  sway  over  the  minds  of  its  readers. 

As  this  early  friend  of  the  cause  has  subsequently  retreated  from  its 
general  advocacy,  and  allied  himself  v/ith  a  small  society  banded  together 
under  an  influence  inimical  to  the  interests  alike  of  society  and  Spiritualism, 
we  only  allude  to  his  adherence  in  the  incipiency  of  the  movement  as  one 
of  the  subtle  springs  by  which  its  onward  march  became  so  marvellous  a 
success. 

As  the  tides  of  public  opinion  moved  on,  doctors,  lawyers,  merchants, 
and  men  of  eminence  began  to  join  the  ranks.  Tidings  of  phenomena  of 
the  most  astounding  character  poured  in  from  distant  towns  and  districts. 
Members  of  the  press  began  to  share  the  general  infection,  and  though 
some  would  not,  and  others  could  not  avow  their  convictions,  their  private 
prepossessions  induced  them  to  open  their  columns  for  debate  and  cor- 
respondence on  the  subject.  To  add  to  the  stimulus  thus  imparted,  many 
of  the  leading  colonial  journals  indulged  in  tirades  of  abuse  and  misrepre- 
sentation, which  only  served  to  increase  the  contagion  without  in  the  least 

2  30  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

diminishing  its  force.  At  length  the  clergy — moved  from  their  customary 
apathy  by  the  tidings  of  conversions  amongst  their  own  best  supporters,  and 
the  obvious  fact  that  the  stream  of  public  sentiment  was  leaving  the  dull 
platitudes  of  old  theology  far  in  the  rear,  began  to  arouse  themselves  and 
manifest  their  interest  by  furious  abuse,  biblical  thunders,  and  ecclesiastical 
"  anathemas."  All  would  not  do.  Denunciation  provoked  retort ;  discus- 
sion compelled  investigation ;  the  results  of  which  were,  triumphant  victories 
for  the  FACTS  of  Spiritualism.  In  New  South  Wales,  as  in  Victoria,  the 
illumination  of  supernal  fires  blazed  forth — unlit  by  mortal  hands,  from  every 
prominent  centre. 

In  Sydney,  many  converts  of  rank  and  influence  suddenly  appeared  upon 
the  scene. 

One  of  the  noblest  and  best  of  men,  one  whom  all  classes  and  shades  of 
opinion  had  been  accustomed  to  look  up  to,  honour  and  respect,  now  to 
be  named  alas,  as  the  late  Hon.  John  Bowie  Wilson,  Land  Minister,  and  a 
valiant  champion  of  temperance  and  every  good  thing  that  can  reform 
mankind,  became  an  open  convert  to  Spiritualism,  and  by  his  personal 
influence,  no  less  than  his  public  defence  of  the  cause  made  converts 
unnumbered,  and  sustained  the  work  with  the  grasp  of  a  colossus. 
Amongst  the  many  others  whose  names  have  also  graced  the  ranks  of 
Spiritualism  in  Sydney,  may  be  mentioned  Mr.  Henry  Gale,  an  unswerving 
and  self-sacrificing  friend  both  of  Spiritualism  and  Spiritualists.  Mrs. 
Wilson  and  Mrs.  Gale,  Mrs.  WooUey  and  Mrs.  Greville,  besides  a  number 
of  other  ladies  whose  names  we  scarcely  feel  privileged  to  mention  thus 
openly  ;  Mr.  Greville,  M.P.,  and  several  other  members  of  the  New  South 
Wales  Parliament  and  Cabinet ;  Hon.  J.  Windeyer,  Attorney-General  of  the 
Colony,  subsequently  one  of  the  judges  ;  Mr.  Alfred  De  Lissa,  an  eminent 
barrister;  Mr.  Cyril  Haviland,  a  literary  gentleman  of  high  standing;  Mr. 
Macdonald,  Captain  Barron  and  his  amiable  lady  ;  Mr.  Milner  Stephen,  a 
barrister  of  eminence,  his  lady  and  family,  and  many  other  ladies  and 
gentlemen  of  the  first  standing,  joined  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  and  proved 
themselves  as  faithful  in  its  defence,  as  they  were  honourable  in  avowing 
their  unpopular  (?)  faith. 

We  must  now  call  attention  to  a  convert  who,  though  neither  an  M.P. 
or  aristocrat,  as  regards  social  position,  has  yet  done  as  much,  we  might 
say  more,  to  advance  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,,  and  crystallize  its  scattered 
fragments  into  concrete  strength,  than  any  other  individual  in  the  ranks. 
We  speak  of  Mr.  Wm.  Terry,  the  well-known  and  enterprising  editor  of  the 
Melbourne  Harbinger  of  Light,  the  oldest  and  best  Spiritual  organ  of 
Australia. 

Although  biographical  details  in  general  are  too  prolix  and  personal  for 
these  pages,  Mr.  Terry's  adherence  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  became  an 
event  of  such  marked  importance,  and  he  has  so  long  and  indefatigably 
identified  himself  with  its  progress,  that  we  deem  it  in  this  instance  only 
just  to  depart  from  the  plan  of  this  work  and  give  the  following  biographical 
notice  of  Mr.  Terry,  as  prepared  for  one  of  the  English  Spiritual  papers 
by  Hudson  Tuttle,  of  America. 

This  eminent  and  careful  writer  says : — 

"Mr.  Terry  was  born  in  London  in  1836,  and  in  1857  emigrated  to  Melbourne, 
Australia.  He  was  early  tbrowu  upon  the  world,  and  compelled  to  labour  for  a  sub- 
sistence, and  had  little  opportunity  for  literary  culture.  The  boy  of  seventeen  buffetted 
his  way  in  the  rough  colonial  world  almost  alone  and  single-handed.  After  the  usual 
vicissitudes  incident  to  the  state  of  society  during  the  early  developments  of  the  gold 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  231 

field,  he  established,  in  connection  with  his  brother,  a  general  store  at  Remington,  near 
Melbourne,  on  the  main  road  to  the  principal  gold  diggings.  It  was  here,  in  the  year  1859, 
that  his  attention  was  first  drawn  to  Spiritualism.  It  is  of  deep  interest  to  trMce  his 
cumulative  experience,  and  the  character  of  the  phenomena  presented  to  him,  for  they  are 
parallel  and  identical  in  character  with  those  so  widely  witnessed  in  this  country,  showing 
a  common  origin.  The  reading  of  the  work  by  Judge  Edmonds  and  Dr.  Dexter  on 
'  Spiritualism,'  which  chanced  to  fall  into  his  hand,  interested  him  so  much  in  the  subject, 
that  he  began  to  inquire  if  there  were  investigators  in  the  colony.  Hearing  that  there 
were,  and  that  they  held  seances  in  East  Melbourne,  he  obtained  permission  to  attend. 
Arriving  rather  late,  he  found  twelve  persons  seated  around  a  large  loo-table.  He  took  his 
seat  at  a  small  table  at  the  extremity  of  the  apartment,  and  carefully  watched  the  pro- 
ceedings. He  found  the  people  more  than  usually  intelligent,  and  after  a  time  the  table 
moved  and  answered  questions.  Thus  he  had  at  once  given  him  a  fact  to  begin  with. 
He  says  : — 

"  '  A  supermundane  power  acted  upon  the  table.  The  next  thing  was  to  ascertain  the 
origin  and  nature  of  that  power.  With  that  view  I  obtained  an  introduction  to  a  private 
circle,  the  members  of  which  consisted  of  one  family.  I  found  them  firm  believers ;  their 
conduct  was  kindly  and  straightforward,  and  whilst  ofiering  us  every  opportunity  to 
investigate,  they  did  not  seem  anxious  to  proselyte.  When  we  sat  at  a  low  table,  it  soon 
began  to  move  and  respond  to  the  alphabet,  to  the  questions  of  our  hostess.  .  .  .  The 
table  then  began  to  imitate  the  motions  of  a  ship  at  sea,  and  on  inquiring,  the  name  of  a 
friend  who  had  been  lost  at  sea  was  given.  He  was  asked  to  point  out  any  passHge  in  the 
Bible  which  would  indicate  the  circumstances  of  his  death,  and  the  chapter  and  verse  were 
indicated.  Altogether  the  manifestations  were  demonstrative  of  an  unseen  intelligence 
controlling  them.  Their  respectability  and  the  absence  of  any  motive  for  deception, 
forbade  the  idea  of  collusion  or  trickery  ;  moreover  our  friends  were  most  desirous  that 
we  should  examine  everything  for  ourselves,  and  we  availed  ourselves  of  the  permission. 

"  '  Never  shall  I  forget  the  eventful  night  when  I  realized  the  grand  truth  of  man's  con- 
tinuous sensuous  existence  after  death.  I  felt  the  presence  of  my  brother,  and  it  was 
indeed  a  happy  reunion.  Death  had  lost  its  sting,  the  grave  its  victory.  My  soul  was 
filled  with  inexfiressible  joy,  and  as  I  wended  my  way  homeward  to  tell  the  glad  tidings, 
I  could  scarcely  feel  the  ground  under  my  feet.  Shortly  after  this  I  was  informed  by  my 
spirit  friends  that  I  should  become  a  writing  medium.  I  accordingly  sat  alone,  and 
watched  events.  The  first  sensation  experienced  was  a  numbness  of  the  hand  and  arm  ; 
then  a  current,  as  of  mild  electricity,  passed  through  it,  and  my  hand  began  to  rotnte, 
drawing  circles  on  paper,  and  after  a  considerable  time  the  letters  S.  B.  were  written. 
These  I  recognized  as  the  initials  of  a  spirit  who  had  communicated  before  with  us  by 
means  of  the  table.  In  a  few  days  the  influence  increased,  and  several  messages  were 
written  and  signed  by  my  brother  and  many  others  whom  I  had  known  and  loved  while 
in  the  body. 

" '  About  this  time  one  of  our  circle  received  a  letter  from  England,  informing  him 
that  a  ship  named  the  "  City  of  New  York,"  on  which  an  intimate  friend  of  his  was  an 
officer,  was  long  overdue  and  supposed  to  be  lost.  At  our  first  meeting  afterwards  a 
communication  was  written  through  my  hand  giving  an  account  of  the  foundering  of  the 
steamship  ''  City  of  Boston." 

"  '  We  said  it  was  the  "  City  of  New  York"  that  was  supposed  to  be  lost,  but  the  spirit 
adhered  to  what  he  had  written,  and  when  the  next  mail  arrived  from  England  the  papers 
contained  an  account  of  the  loss  of  the  "  City  of  Boston."  '  " 

Passing  over  the  narrative  of  many  years  of  steady  growth  in  various 
phases  of  mediumship  we  resume  our  extracts  at  the  time  when  Mr.  Terry's 
powers  were  specially  unfolded  for  the  diagnosis  and  cure  of  disease. 

After  describing  in  graphic  terms  the  commencement  and  progress  of 
Mr.  Terry's  work  as  a  Clairvoyant  and  Medical  Medium,  the  biographer 
says  : — 

"About  1869  the  necessity  for  a  Spiritualistic  journal  was  impressed  deeply  on  the 
mind  of  Mr.  Terry.  He  could  not  cast  it  off',  but  pondered  over  the  enterprise.  At  this 
time,  an  exceedingly  sensitive  patient  desciibed  a  spirit  holding  a  scroll  on  whicli  was 
written,  '  Harbinger  of  Light,'  and  the  motto,  '  Dawn  approaches,  error  is  passing 
away  ;  men  arising  shall  hail  the  day.'  This  influenced  him,  and  in  August,  1870,  he  set 
to  work  to  prepare  the  first  number,  which  appeared  on  the  1st  of  September  of  that 
year,  and  has  continued  to  be  regularly  issued  to  the  present. 

"  There  was  no  organisation  in  the  Australian  colony,  and  Mr.  Terry  aa,7f  the  advantage 
and  necessity  of  associative  movement.     He  consulted  a  few  friends,  and  in  November, 

232 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

1870,  he  organised  the  first  Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists.  A  hall  was  rented,  and 
Sunday  services,  consisting  of  essays  and  readings  by  members,  enlivened  by  appropriate 
hymns,  were  held.  In  October,  1872,  impressed  with  the  desirability  of  forming  a 
Lyceum,  he  called  together  a  few  willing  workers,  and  held  the  first  session  October  20th, 
1872.  It  is,  and  has  been  from  the  first  in  a  flourishing  condition,  numbering  one 
hundred  and  fifty  members,  with  a  very  handsome  and  complete  outfit,  and  excellent 
library.  He  has  remained  an  officer  ever  since,  and  conductor  four  sessions.  He  assisted 
in  the  establishment  of  the  Spiritualist  and  Free-thought  Association,  which  succeeded 
the  original  one,  and  was  its  first  president.  He  has  lectured  occasionally  to  appreciative 
audiences,  and  his  lectures  have  been  widely  circulated.  His  mediumship,  which  gave 
such  fair  promise,  both  in  res;ard  to  writing  and  speaking,  became  controlled  especially  for 
the  relief  of  the  sick.  Without  the  assistance  of  advertising  he  has  acquired  a  fine 
practice.  With  this  he  combines  a  trade  in  Reform  and  Spiritualistic  publications,  as 
extensive  as  the  colony,  and  the  publication  of  the  Harbinger  of  Light,  a  Spiritual  journal 
that  is  nn  honour  to  the  cause,  and  well  sustains  the  grand  philosophy  of  immortality. 
No  man  is  doing  more  for  the  cause,  or  has  done  more  efficient  work." 

A  short  but  interesting  summary  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  Spiritualism 
in  Australia  is  given  in  the  American  Banner  of  Light  of  i88o,  in  which 
Mr.  Terry's  good  service  is  again  alluded  to,  and  placed  in  line  with  several 
other  pioneers  of  the  movement,  of  whom  mention  has  not  as  yet  been 
made.     The  sketch  reads  as  follows  : — 

"the   rise   and    progress    of   spiritualism    in   AUSTRALIA. 

"  The  Harbinger  of  Light,  published  at  Melbourne,  Australia,  furnishes  a  review  of  the 
origin  of  its  publication  and  the  work  it  has  accomplished  during  the  ten  years  just  closed. 
At  its  advent  in  1870,  considerable  interest  had  been  awakened  in  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism,  by  tlie  lectures  of  Mr.  Nayler  in  Melbourne,  and  Mr.  Leech  at  Castlemaine. 
The  leaders  of  the  church  became  disturbed,  and  seeing  their  gods  in  danger,  sought  to  stay 
the  progress  of  what  would  eventually  lessen  their  influence  and  possibly  their  income.  But 
Mr.  Nayler  spoke  and  wrote  with  more  vigour  ;  the  addresses  of  Mr.  Leech  were  published 
from  week  to  week  in  pamphlet  form  and  widely  distributed.  At  the  same  time,  Mr. 
Charles  Bright,  who  had  published  letters  on  Spiritualism  in  the  Argus,  over  an  assumed 
name,  openly  identified  himself  with  the  movement  and  spoke  publicly  on  the  subject. 
Shortly  after,  eleven  persous  met  and  formed  an  association,  which  soon  increased  to 
eighty  members.  A  hymn  book  was  compiled  and  Sunday  services  began.  As  elsewhere, 
the  press  ridiculed,  and  the  pulpit  denounced  Spiritualism  as  a  delusion.  A  number  of 
articles  in  the  Argus  brought  some  of  the  facts  prominently  before  the  public,  and  the 
growing  interest  wan  advanced  by  a  public  discussion  between  Messrs.  Tyerman  and 
Blair.  In  1872,  a  Sunday  school  on  harmonial  principles  was  established,  Mr.  W.  H. 
Terry,  the  proprietor  of  the  Harbinger,  being  its  first  conductor.  Almost  simultaneously 
wi^h  this  was  the  visit  of  Dr.  J.  M.  Peebles,  whose  public  lectures  and  work  in  the  Lyceum 
served  to  consolidate  the  movement.  A  controversy  in  the  Age,  between  Rev.  Mr.  Potter, 
Mr.  Tyerman  and  Mr.  Terry,  brought  the  facts  and  teachings  of  Spiritualism  into  further 
notice. 

"  Soon  came  Dr.  Peebles,  Thomas  Walker,  Mrs.  Britten  and  others,  who  widened  the 
influence  of  the  spiritualistic  philosophy,  and  aided  the  Harbinger  in  its  efibrtsto  establish 
Spiritualism  on  a  broad,  rational  basis.  Mr.  W.  H.  Terry  is  deserving  of  all  praise  for  his 
unselfish  and  faithful  exertions  in  carrying  the  Harbinger  through  ten  years  of  as  hard 
labour  as  ever  befell  any  similar  enterprise,  and  we  bespeak  for  him,  in  his  continued 
effi)rt8  to  make  known  the  evidences  of  a  future  existence  and  the  illuminating  truths  of 
Spiritualism,  the  hearty  co-operation  and  sympathy  of  all  friends  of  the  cause." 

The  "  Mr.  Nayler"  alluded  to  in  the  above-quoted  article,  as  well  as  his 
estimable  wife,  proved  invaluable  pioneers  in  the  cause  of  progress  as 
Mediums  for  speaking,  drawing,  and  other  gifts.  Both  have  now  passed  to 
their  well-earned  rest,  but  the  record  they  have  left  behind  will  never  pass 
out  of  grateful  remembrance  in  this  generation,  whilst  the  effects  of  their 
good  service  will  endure  for  all  time. 

In  the  palatial  Melbourne  residence  of  Mr.  William  Stanford,  an 
American  gentleman  who  has  devoted  time,  wealth,  and  noble  service  to 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  233 

the  advancement  of  Spiritualism,  one  room  is  entirely  hung  with  Mrs. 
Nayler's  Spirit  drawings,  and  the  hospitable  master  of  the  mansion,  scorns 
not  to  rank  amongst  his  costliest  works  of  art,  the  Spirit  drawings  and 
paintings  of  the  poor  Medium.  Mr.  Stanford  never  descants  more 
enthusiastically  on  the  glorious  pictures  which  adorn  his  walls,  nor  appears 
in  more  admirable  relief  to  the  time-serving  throng  with  whom  the  Spirit 
world  and  its  work  is  a  tabooed  subject,  than  when  he  conducts  his  visitors 
into  the  cabinet  chamber  gemmed  with  the  artistic  work  of  the  "ancient" 
lady,  now  a  blessed  Spirit,  and  describes  the  marvels  which  attended 
the  production  of  this  complete  picture  gallery  of  Spirit  art. 

Amongst  the  distinguished  workers  in  early  Colonial  Spiritualism,  we 
must  not  omit  to  mention  the  Rev.  John  Tyerman,  formerly  a  clergyman 
of  the  Church  of  England. 

Writing  to  the  Banner  of  Light  on  the  subject  of  Mr.  Tyerman's 
accession  to  the  Spiritual  ranks,  an  esteemed  American  correspondent 
says : — 

"  The  Rev.  J.  Tyerman,  of  the  Church  of  England,  resident  in  one  of  the  country 
districts,  boldly  declared  his  full  reception  of  Spiritualism  as  a  great  fact,  and  his  change 
of  religious  faith  consequent  upon  the  teachings  of  Spirits.  Of  course  he  was  welcomed 
with  open  arms  by  the  whole  body  of  Spiritualists  in  Melbourne,  the  only  city  where 
there  was  any  considerable  number  enrolled  in  one  association.  He  soon  became  the 
principal  lecturer,  though  not  the  only  one  employed  by  the  Association,  and  well  has  he 
wielded  the  sword  of  the  new  faith.  He  is  decidedly  of  the  pioneer  stamp,  a  skilful 
debater,  a  fluent  speaker,  ready  at  any  moment  to  engage  with  any  one,  either  by 
word  of  mouth  or  as  a  writer.  So  widely,  indeed,  did  he  make  his  influence  felt,  and  so 
individual  was  it,  that  a  new  society  grew  up  around  him,  called  the  Free-Thought  and 
Spiritualist  Propaganda  Society,  which  remained  in  existence  till  Mr.  Tyerman  lemoved 
to  Sydney,  when  it  coalesced  with  the  older  Association  under  the  combined  name  of 
Melbourne  Spiritualist  and  Free-Thought  Association." 

Mr.  Tyerman  is  acknowledged  to  have  wrought  well  and  faithfully  for 
the  cause  of  Spiritualism.  Though  now  removed  by  the  Death  Angel 
to  the  farther  shore,  his  good  service  is  held  in  grateful  remembrance  by 
many  of  those  who  were  first  stimulated  to  investigate  Spiritualism,  through 
his  trenchant  arguments  and  fearless  example.  Like  all  public  labourers 
in  an  unpopular  cause,  Mr.  Tyerman  had  to  do  battle  with  personal  enemies 
both  within  and  without  the  camp,  and  even  now  his  name  is  often  used 
as  a  byword  of  reproach  against  SpirituaHsm.  And  yet — "  He  being  dead 
yet  speaketh  " — and  surely  "His  works  do  follow  him." 

Another  valuable  convert  to  the  cause  of  SpirituaUsm  at  a  time  when  it 
most  needed  good  service,  was  Mrs.  Florence  Williams,  the  daughter  of 
the  celebrated  English  noveUst  G.  P.  R.  James,  and  the  inheritor  of  his  talent, 
originality  of  thought,  and  high  culture.  This  lady  for  a  long  time  officiated 
at  the  first  Spiritual  meetings  convened  for  Sabbath  Day  exercises,  as  an 
acceptable  and  eloquent  lecturer,  and  her  essays  would  have  formed  an 
admirable  epitome  of  Spiritual  revelations  at  the  time  in  which  they  were 
delivered. 

The  visits  of  several  zealous  propagandists  have  been  alluded  to  in 
previous  quotations,  amongst  whom  must  be  named  one  of  the  first  to 
break  ground  as  a  public  exponent  of  Spiritualism,  the  Rev.  j.  M.  Peebles, 
formerly  a  minister  of  Battle  Creek,  Michigan.  Mr.  Peebles  was  well 
known  in  America  as  a  fine  writer  and  lecturer,  and  as  such  was  justified 
in  expecting  courteous,  if  not  eulogistic  mention  from  the  press  of  a  foreign 
country,  with  whom  his  own  was  on  terms  of  amicable  intercourse.  How 
widely   different   was    the  journalistic  treatment  he  experienced  may  be 

234  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

gathered  from  his  own  remarks  addressed  to  the  Banner  of  Light  some 
five  years  after  his  first  visit,  and  describing  in  graphic  terms  the  changed 
spirit  which  marked  aUke  the  progress  of  the  movement  and  the  alteration 
in  the  tone  of  pubUc  opinion. 
Mr.  Peebles  says  : — 

"  Relative  to  Spiritualism  and  its  divine  principles  public  sentiment  has  changed  rapidly, 
and  for  the  better,  during  the  past  five  years.  Upon  my  late  public  appearance  in  Melbourne, 
the  Hon.  John  Mcllwraith,  Ex-mayor  of  the  city,  and  Commissioner  to  our  Centennial 
Exhibition,  took  the  chair,  introducing  me  to  the  audience.  On  my  previous  visit  some 
of  the  Spiritualists  seemed  a  little  timid.  They  preferred  being  called  investigators, 
remaining  a  good  distance  from  the  front.  Then  my  travelling  companion,  Dr.  Dunn, 
was  misrepresented  and  meanly  vilified  in  the  city  journals  ;  while  I  was  hissed  in  the 
market,  caricatured  in  Punch,  burlesqued  in  a  theatre,  and  published  in  the  daily  press 
as  an  "ignorant  Yankee,"  an  "American  trickster,"  a  "long-haired  apostate,"  and  a 
"  most  unblushing  blasphemer  !  "  But  how  changed  !  Eecently  the  secular  press 
treated  me  fairly.  Even  the  usually  abusive  Telegra'ph  published  Mr.  Stevenson's  article 
assuring  the  Rev.  Mr.  Green  that  I  was  wilhng  to  meet  him  at  once  in  a  public  discussion. 
The  Melbourne  Argus,  one  of  the  best  daily  papers  in  the  world,  the  Australasian,  the 
Herald,  and  the  Age,  all  dealt  honourably  by  me,  reporting  my  lectures,  if  briefly,  with 
admirable  impartiality.  The  press  is  a  reflector  ;  and  those  audiences  of  2,000  and  2,500 
in  the  great  Opera  House  on  each  Sunday  for  several  successive  months  were  not  without 
a  most  striking  moral  significance.  It  seemed  to  be  the  general  opinion  that  Spiritualism 
had  never  before  occupied  so  prominent  yet  so  favourable  a  position  in  the  eyes  of  the 
public.     ..." 

That  Australia  might  not  be  wanting  in  phenomenal  proofs  of  the  Spiritual 
authority  upon  which  the  doctrines  of  the  rostrum  were  promulgated,  the 
invisible  powers  through  whose  resistless  influence  the  movement  has  been 
conducted,  impelled  the  Davenport  Brothers,  and  Charles  Foster,  the 
celebrated  test  and  physical  Medium,  to  visit  the  Colonies  on  different 
occasions,  subsequently  to  the  establishment  of  the  Harbinger  of  Light  in 
1870.  It  was  fortunate  for  the  best  interests  of  truth  that  this  was  the  case, 
as  Mr.  Terry's  plain  account  of  the  phenomena  as  they  really  occurred 
through  these  Mediums,  was  essential,  to  counteract  the  wilful  spirit  of 
misrepresentation  indulged  in  by  a  large  portion  of  the  Colonial  press. 
The  reader  must  now  be  familiar  with  the  several  phases  of  Spirit  power 
displayed  through  the  Davenports  and  Charles  Foster ;  descriptions  of 
what  transpired  in  their  presence  therefore  would  be  unnecessary.  It  is 
worthy  of  note  however,  that  William  Davenport,  the  younger  of  the  cele- 
brated brothers,  closed  a  life  of  unnatural  toil,  cruel  persecution,  and  hard- 
ship, in  Melbourne,  sinking,  to  what  none  can  doubt  to  be  his  well-earned 
rest,  under  the  premature  decay  of  a  worn-out  constitution. 

To  commemorate  the  blessed  transition  from  the  chilling  airs  which  had 
blighted  the  young  life  of  his  brother,  and  sped  him  all  too  soon  to  the 
land  of  never  setting  suns,  poor  Ira,  the  lonely  brother  still  left,  a  stranger 
so  far  distant  from  home  and  friends,  determined  to  leave  behind  him  such 
a  memento  of  his  departed  companion,  as  should  (to  his  conception  at  least) 
worthily  commemorate  the  life-long  service  to  which  his  brother  had  fallen 
a  sacrifice. 

For  this  purpose,  he  devised  a  tombstone,  on  which  he  caused  to  be 
engraved,  the  representation  of  the  cabinet,  ropes,  and  other  paraphernalia, 
which  constituted  the  two  brothers'  stock-in-trade.  But  when  this  strange 
device  was  about  to  be  set  up,  the  reverend  gentleman  who  claimed  rule 
over  the  sacred  "  city  of  the  dead,"  powerless  as  he  might  be  to  influence 
the  destiny  of  the  enfranchised  soul,  protested  against  such  a  heathenish 
record  being  introduced  into  sacred  ground.      In  a  word,  Christian  piety 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  235 

was  deeply  scandalized  at  Ira's  ingenious  method  of  honouring  his  poor 
brother,  and  the  holy  man  in  question  ruled  the  unsanctified  tombstone 
out  of  the  cemetery. 

It  was  nothing  that  stony  voices  on  every  side  proclaimed  such 
heathenish  falsehoods,  as  "gone  to  God;"  "sleeping  in  the  ground;" 
"  waiting  for  the  last  trump  to  sound,"  &c.,  &c.  These  caricatures  of  the 
departed  soul's  condition,  were  strictly  in  Christian  order,  but  to  tell  the 
actual  story  of  Willie  Davenport's  life  in  truthful  marble  was  too  direct  a 
perversion  of  Christian  order  to  be  permitted,  and  so  the  tombstone  was 
ruled  out,  and  so  it  would  have  remained  had  not  a  sentiment.of  reactionary 
common  sense  and  good  feeling  so  prevailed,  that  it  was  ultimately  set  up 
in  a  little  nook  railed  off  from  the  sacred  dust,  and  yet  sufficiently  near  to 
suggest  the  inference,  that  in  some  distant  angehc  resurrection  day,  even 
Willie  Davenport  might  creep  into  heaven  through  some  small  side  door 
whose  hinges  were  oiled  by  the  sanctified  remains  near  which  his  unsanc- 
tified dust  was  laid  to  rest.  That  Willie  Davenport's  bright  and  progressed 
spirit  has  whispered  into  his  bereaved  brother's  ear  many  a  time,  Laertes' 
bitter  rebuke  to  the  "  churlish  priest "  whom  Shakespere  represents  as 
cutting  short  poor  Ophelia's  funeral  rites,  we  have  good  reason  to  believe  ; 
enough  that  the  curtain  has  fallen  on  what  might  have  been  esteemed  a 
tragedy,  had  not  the  cant  of  Christian  ecclesiasticism  turned  it  into  a  farce. 
When  that  curtain  rises  again  on  Spirit  life,  we  may  find  Willie  Davenport 
and  the  "  churlish  priest"  have  changed  places. 

Of  Charles  Foster's  work  in  Australia,  we  can  only  offer  one  representative 
extract.  Though  written  in  the  Harbinger  of  Light  in  1881,  it  refers  to  a 
scene  which  transpired  eight  years  previously.  The  author,  ,Mr.  H.  J. 
Browne,  of  Melbourne,  is  a  gentleman  whose  wealth,  influence,  and 
distinguished  literary  abilities,  have  been  nobly  devoted  to  the  advance- 
ment of  every  good  work  in  Spiritualism.  Beloved  and  admired  by  all 
who  knew  them,  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Browne  have  been  pillars  of  strength 
to  the  cause  in  Melbourne. 

Besides  being  the  author  of  several  volumes,  pamphlets,  and  well-written 
articles,  on  the  facts  and  philosophy  of  Spiritualism,  Mr.  Browne  has 
gallantly  maintained  the  cause  in  public  as  well  as  in  private  debate.  If 
Charles  Foster  had  made  no  other  converts  than  this  gentleman  and  his 
fair  wife,  his  visit  to  Australia  would  not  have  been  in  vain.  In  one  of  his  . 
"  familiar  letters,"  published  in  the  Harbinger  of  Light,  Mr.  Browne 
describes  his  first  interview  with  Mr.  Foster  and  its  consequences,  as 
follows  : — 

"  My  first  decided  experience  of  practical  Spiritualism  was  connected  with  the  exposi- 
tion of  the  phenomena  by  Mr.  Foster,  in  Melbourne,  seven  or  eight  years  ago.  I  received 
so  many  assurances  of  the  powerful  and  convincing  nature  of  his  exhibitions  from  friends 
who  had  visited  him  in  Spring  Street,  that  I  was  induced,  in  company  of  a  friend,  to 
interview  him ;  and  I  must  confess  I  did  so  with  a  very  strong  impression  that  his 
exhibitions  were  based  on  mere  trickery,  and  that  those  who  visited  him  were  the  victims 
of  delusion.  However,  the  evidence  he  afiforded  me,  the  names  he  mentioned  of  friends  who 
had  been  dead  years  and  years,  the  messages  which  came  through  him  to  me,  stamped  with  a 
particularity  which  carried  the  evidence  with  them,  could  not  be  explained  away.  I  could 
not  conceive  that  by  any  process  of  mind-reading  Mr.  Foster  could  teU  me  circumstances 
of  a  private  nature,  and  which  for  the  time  had  faded  from  my  memory,  or  indeed  that  he 
could  tell  the  name  of  my  father,  for  I  myself  was  a  perfect  stranger  to  him,  and  he  had 
no  opportunity  of  making  enquiry.  But  in  addition  to  this,  he  not  only  quoted  names, 
and  gave  the  cause  of  the  death  of  several  friends  long  in  the  spirit-world,  describing 
their  characteristics,  but  I  distinctly  saw,  in  the  front  of  Ids  face,  the  materialised 
featiires  of  a  friend  who  had  been  dead  some  little  time,  and  of  whom  he  could  by  no 
possibility  have  known  anything." 

236  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Mr.  Browne  sums  up  a  long  account  of  phenomena,  very  wonderful  in 
itself,  but  too  familiar  to  need  re-iteration,  with  the  following  urgent 
question  : — 

"  Is  it  not  sufficient  that  names,  characteristics,  appropriate  messages,  and  most  accu- 
rate description  of  friends  who  have  been  in  the  spirit-world  for  so  long  a  time  are  thus 
given  with  accuracy  ?  " 

CHAPTER    XXX. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   AUSTRALIA. — PART    II. 

We  must  now  call  attention  to  the  efficient  service  rendered  to  the  cause 
of  Spiritualism  by  Mr.  Thomas  Walker,  a  young  Englishman  first  intro- 
duced in  the  Colonies  by  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Peebles,  in  whose  company  Mr. 
Walker  for  some  time  travelled. 

Alleging  himself  to  be  a  "  trance  speaker  "  under  the  control  of  certain 
Spirits  whom  he  named,  Mr.  Walker  lectured  acceptably  in  Sydney,  Mel- 
bourne, and  other  places  in  the  Colonies  on  the  Spiritual  rostrum.  At  the 
period  of  the  author's  visit  to  Australia  in  March,  1878,  Mr.  Walker  was 
maintaining  a  public  debate  with  a  Mr.  M.  W.  Green,  a  minister  of  a 
denomination  termed  "the  Church  of  Christ."^  This  gentleman  had 
acquired  some  reputation  in  the  Colonies  as  a  preacher,  and  as  one  who  had 
bitterly  opposed,  and  taken  every  possible  opportunity  to  misrepresent 
Spiritualism. 

The  debate,  which  was  held  in  the  Temperance  Hall,  Melbourne,  had 
attracted  large  audiences,  and  been  extended  for  several  nights  beyond 
the  period  originally  agreed  upon. 

At  the  time  when  the  author  arrived  in  Melbourne,  a,nd  was  taken  by 
her  new  friends  to  hear  the  closing  arguments,  it  was  evident  that  Mr. 
Green  had  in  a  great  measure  abandoned  the  ground  originally  assumed  for 
debate — namely,  the  relative  principles  of  Christianity  and  Spiritualism — 
and  was  now  entering  upon  that  most  objectionable  system  of  warfare 
which  consists  of  personal  invective,  against  the  characters  of  those  who 
espoused  the  cause  which  he  opposed. 

This  was  all  the  more  injurious,  as  Mr.  Green's  attacks  were  chiefly 
levelled  against  the  American  Spiritualists,  and  the  scandalous  stories  he 
retailed  were  not  likely  to  be  familiar  enough  to  English  listeners  to  enable 
them  to  judge  of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  his  allegations. 

It  was  in  pursuance  of  this  very  honourable  mode  of  warfare,  that  on  the 
last  night  but  one  of  the  debate,  Mr.  Green,  towards  the  close  of  the  pro- 
ceedings, launched  what  he  evidently  intended  to  be  a  final  thunderbolt 
against  the  whole  rank  and  file  of  the  Spiritualists,  by  reading  a  letter,  full 
of  the  bitterest  denunciations  against  Spiritualism  and  the  vilest  charges 
against  Spiritualists — which  letter  Mr.  Green  affirmed,  emanated  "  from  a 
physician  of  high  standing  in  the  City  of  New  York."  For  the  original  of 
this  document  the  reader  is  I'eferred  to  the  printed  report  of  the  Green 
and  Walker  debate  published  in  Melbourne  and  sold  by  Mr.  Terry. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  237 

It  is  only  necessary  to  say  to  the  well-informed  American  reader,  that 
the  said  physician  in  high  standing — whose  name  would  disgrace  these 
pages,  was  the  notorious  individual  who  was  cited  by  his  hapless  young 
wife — one  of  the  most  celebrated  trance-speaking  Mediums  of  America — 
to  answer  for  his  shameful  misdeeds  in  a  New  York  court  of  justice;  that 
in  passing  a  sentence  which  freed  the  suffering  lady  from  the  power  of  the 
infamous  husband,  the  latter  was  branded  with  a  character  so  vile,  that  he 
was  virtually  expelled — not  only  from  association  with  every  Spiritual 
society  in  America — but  also  from  the  notice  of  any  respectable  members 
of  the  community. 

It  was  in  revenge  for  the  odium  and  disgrace  thus  stamped  upon  him 
that  the  New  York  physician  of  high  standing  wrote  and  printed  a  vengeful 
tract,  bitterly  denouncing  the  Spirituahsts  who  had  repudiated  him ;  and  it 
was  this  notable  and  authoritative  document  by  which  Mr.  Green  proposed 
to  deal  the  final  blow  that  should  demolish  Spiritualism  all  over  the  world. 

Although  this  letter  bore  in  its  very  wording,  evidence  of  the  reckless 
mendacity  and  malignity  which  had  dictated  it,  Mr.  Green  read  it  out  with 
an  assumption  of  deep  regret  that  he  had  been  forced  to  this  course  "  in  the 
best  interests  of  society,  morality,  duty,"  &c.,  &c.  The  reading  of  such  a 
document  to  an  audience  totally  unacquainted  with  the  circumstances 
under  which  it  was  written,  of  course  fell  like  a  thunderbolt  on  the 
astonished  listeners,  and  produced  a  feeling  of  discouragement  even 
amongst  the  SpirituaUsts  present,  which  Mr.  Walker  could  not  dispel.  But 
whilst  Mr.  Green  was  felicitating  himself  on  the  immense  advantage  his 
mode  of  attack  had  procured  for  him,  he  was  entirely  unconscious  of  the  fact, 
that  two  newly  arrived  strangers  from  America  were  in  the  audience,  who 
did  know  the  character  of  the  witness,  he  had  so  recklessly  cited.  Those 
strangers  were  the  author  and  her  husband,  and  when  on  the  next  evening 
the  closing  proceedings  of  the  debate  were  opened,  Mr.  Walker  and  his 
committee  were  in  possession  of  a  letter  signed  in  full,  and  stating  clearly, 
the  real  character  and  standing  of  Mr,  Green's  "  New  York  physician." 
The  circumstances  under  which  this  man  was  universally  tabooed  by  the 
American  Spiritualists  were  fully  detailed,  and  the  vengeance  which 
animated  him  to  retaliate  upon  them  in  Mr.  Green's  famous  document, 
made  thoroughly  manifest.  Furthermore,  the  writer  offered  in  proof  of  her 
veracity,  to  refer  a  committee  of  enquiry  to  twelve  respectable  residents  of 
New  York  City.  It  may  well  be  supposed,  the  reading  of  this  letter, 
signed  as  it  was  by  a  party  then  present  in  the  audience,  created  a  sensa- 
tion which  fully  equalled,  if  it  did  not  exceed  that  of  the  former  occasion. 
It  is  enough  to  say,  the  debate  on  this  evening  was  neither  as  extended 
nor  yet  as  spirited  as  formerly.  Every  listener  felt  doubtless  with  the 
minister  and  his  party,  that  the  matter  had  gone  quite  far  enough,  and  the 
result  was,  the  affair  closed  in  the  usual  parliamentary  w^ay,  that  is  to  say, 
hollow  courtesies  were  exchanged,  the  debatants  mutually  complimented 
each  other;  votes  of  thanks,  and  a  general  hand-shaking  ensued,  and  so  the 
proceedings  terminated. 

Following  upon  this  debate,  the  author  proceeded  to  fill  an  engage- 
ment to  deliver  Sunday  evening  lectures  at  the  Melbourne  Opera  House, 
during  a  period  extending  over  several  months.  As  the  audiences  at  these 
meetings  scarcely  ever  numbered  less  than  two  thousand  persons,  it  may  be 
supposed  that  the  interest  as  well  as  antagonism  they  excited,  was  very 
marked.  In  this,  both  press  and  pulpit  played  their  accustomed  role. 
The  columns  of  the  journals  became  the  arena  of  a  perfect  guerilla  warfare, 

238  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

and  the  author's  pen  was  kept  constantly  busy,  in  refuting  erroneous 
statements,  and  answering  antagonistic  opponents.  Some  of  these  attacks 
necessitated  answers  from  the  rostrum,  which  were  not  unfrequentlj  printed 
and  distributed  abroad,  as  Spiritual  propaganda. 

Meantime  the  pulpits  thundered  forth  their  customary  denunciations, 
although  a  few  of  the  more  liberal  preachers  of  the  day,  bore  testimony  to 
the  immense  impulse  that  Spiritualism  had  communicated  to  popular 
sentiment. 

Week  evening  meetings  also  were  organized  in  the  Melbourne  Athenaeum 
and  many  of  the  adjacent  towns  and  districts. 

During  the  author's  visit  to  Australia  she  was  induced  to  publish  several 
lectures,  tracts,  and  two  volumes  of  a  still  more  important  character. 
These  works  were  issued  by  the  large  and  influential  publishing  house  of 
Messrs.  Robertson  and  Co.,  Melbourne,  and  though  several  editions  were 
run  through,  they  were  so  eagerly  bought  up,  that  they  are  now  out  of 
print  and  unobtainable.  The  first  volume  published  was  a  manual  of 
Spiritualism  designed  for  the  use  of  investigators,  called  "  On  the  Road ; " 
the  second  was  entitled  "  The  Faith's  Facts  and  Frauds  of  Religious 
History." 

Both  will  be  republished  when  time  and  opportunity  serves  for  a  future 
issue. 

Mrs.  Britten's  time  being  limited,  and  pressing  demands  calling  her  away 
to  other  countries,  her  stay  in  Australia  was  comparatively  short  and 
terminated  in  about  fourteen  months,  Mr.  Walker,  however,  remained  to 
reap  the  fruit  of  his  labours,  and  after  an  absence  of  some  months  in  South 
Africa,  has  returned  to  Melbourne,  as  a  lecturer  on  avowedly  "  Free  Thought 
subjects." 

It  was  about  this  time  that  the  celebrated  test  and  physical  Medium,  Dr. 
Slade,  arrived  in  the  Colonies,  and  the  marvellous  proofs  of  Spirit  power 
that  were  exhibited  in  his  presence,  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  rapid 
growth  of  a  deep  and  intelligent  interest  in  Spiritualism. 

How  far  the  insults  and  sneers  of  the  press  had  become  modified  to  fair 
and  candid  reports  of  what  was  transpiring,  may  be  gathered,  from  the 
following  extracts,  taken  from  the  Melbourne  Age,  one  of  the  leading  daily 
journals  of  the  city.     They  are  dated  August  20,  1878,  and  read  thus  : — 

"  A    STANCE   WITH   DR.    SLADE. 

"  Spiritualism  is  just  now  very  much  to  the  front  in  Melbourne.  The  lectures  of 
Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge-Britten,  delivered  to  crowded  audiences  at  the  Opera  House  every 
Sunday  evening,  have  naturally  attracted  a  sort  of  wondering  curiosity  to  the  subject, 
and  the  interest  has  probably  been  intensified  by  the  strenuous  efforts  that  are  being 
made  in  some  of  the  orthodox  pulpits  to  prove  that  the  whole  thing  is  an  emanation  from 
the  devil.  The  announcement  that  the  famous  Dr.  Slade  had  arrived  to  strengthen  the 
ranks  of  the  Spiritualists  has  therefore  been  made  at  a  very  critical  juncture,  and  I  should 
not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  consequence  will  be  to  infuse  a  galvanic  activity  into 
the  forces  on  both  sides.  Though  I  do  not  profess  to  be  a  Spiritualist,  I  own  to  having 
been  infected  with  the  fashionable  itch  for  witnessing  '  physical  manifestations,'  as  they 
are  called,  and  accordingly  I  have  attended  several  circles  with  more  or  less  gratification. 
But  Dr.  Slade  is  not  an  ordinary  medium,  even  amongst  professionals.  The  literature  of 
the  Spiritualists  is  full  of  his  extraordinary  achievements,  attested  to  all  appearance  by 
credible  witnesses,  who  have  not  been  ashamed  to  append  their  names  to  their  statements. 
.  .  .  I  see  that  on  one  occasion,  writing  in  six  dififerent  languages  was  obtained  on  a 
single  slate,  and  one  day,  accompanied  by  two  learned  professors,  Dr.  Slade  had  a  sitting 
with  the  Grand  Duke  Constantine,  who  obtained  writing  on  a  new  slate  held  by  himself 
alone.  From  St.  Petersburg  Dr.  Slade  went  to  Berlin,  where  he  is  said  to  have  obtained 
some  marvellous  manifestations  in  the  house  of  Professor  Zollner,  and  where  he  was 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  239 

visited  by  the  court  conjurer  to  the  Emperor,  Samuel  Bellachini.  .  .  .  My  object  in 
visiting  Dr.  Slade  can  be  understood  when  I  was  introduced  to  him  with  my  friend,  whom 
I  shall  call  Omega,  and  who  was  bent  on  the  same  errand.  Dr.  Slade  and  Mr.  Terry 
constituted  the  circle  of  four  who  sat  around  the  table  in  the  centre  of  the  room  almost 
as  immediately  as  we  entered  it.  There  was  nothing  in  the  room  to  attract  attention.  No 
signs  of  confederacy,  human  or  mechanical.  The  hour  was  eleven  in  the  morning.  The 
window  was  unshuttered,  and  the  sun  was  shining  brightly.  The  table  at  which  we 
sat  was  a  new  one,  made  especially  by  Wallach  Brothers,  of  Elizabeth  Street,  of  polished 
cedar,  having  four  slight  legs,  one  flap,  and  no  ledges  of  any  kind  underneath.  As  soon 
as  we  examined  it  Dr.  Slade  took  his  seat  on  one  side,  facing  the  window,  and  the  rest  of 
us  occupied  the  other  three  seats.  He  was  particularly  anxious  that  we  should  see  he 
had  nothing  about  him.  It  had  been  said  that  he  wrote  on  the  slate  by  means  of  a  crumb 
of  pencil  stuck  in  his  finger-nails,  but  his  nails  were  cut  to  the  quick,  while  his  legs  and 
feet  were  ostentatiously  placed  away  from  the  table  in  a  side  position,  exposed  to  view 
the  whole  time.  He  first  produced  a  slate  of  the  ordinary  school  size,  with  a  wet  sponge, 
which  I  used  to  it.  A  chip  uf  pencil  about  the  size  of  a  grain  of  wheat  was  placed  upon 
it  on  the  table  ;  we  joined  hands,  and  immediately  taps  were  heard  about  the  table,  and 
in  answer  to  a  question — '  Will  you  write  ?'— from  Dr.  Slade,  three  raps  were  given,  and 
he  forthwith  took  up  the  slate  with  the  pencil  lying  on  it,  and  held  half  of  it  under  the 
table  by  his  finger  and  thumb,  which  clasped  the  corner  of  the  half  that  was  outside  the 
table,  and  was  therefore  easily  seen  by  all  present.  His  left  hand  remained  near  the 
centre  of  the  table,  resting  on  those  of  the  two  sitters  on  either  side  of  him.  Several 
convulsive  jerks  of  his  arm  were  now  given,  then  a  pause,  and  immediately  the  sound  of 
writing  was  audible  to  every  one,  a  scratching  sound  interrupted  by  the  tap  of  the  pencil, 
which  indicated,  as  we  afterwards  found,  that  the  t's  were  being  crossed  and  the  i's 
dotted.  The  slate  was  then  exposed,  and  the  words  written  were  in  answer  to  the 
question  which  had  been  put  by  Omega  as  to  whether  he  had  psychic  power  or  not.  I 
pass  over  the  conversation  that  ensued  on  the  subject,  and  go  on  to  the  next  phenomenon. 
To  satisfy  myself  that  the  '  trick '  was  not  done  by  means  of  sympathetic  writing  on  the 
slate,  I  had  ten  minutes  previously  purchased  a  slate  from  a  shop  in  Bourke  Street,  con- 
taining three  leaves,  and  shutting  up  book  fashion.  This  I  produced,  and  Dr.  Slade 
readily  repeated  his  performance  with  it.  It  was  necessary  to  break  the  pencil  down  to  a 
mere  crumb,  in  order  to  insert  it  between  the  leaves  of  the  slate.  This  done,  the  pheno- 
menon at  once  recurred,  with  this  rather  perplexing  difference,  that  the  slate,  instead  of 
being  put  half  under  the  table,  forced  itself  by  a  series  of  jerks  on  to  my  neck,  and 
rejDosed  quietly  under  my  ear,  in  the  eyes  of  every  one  present.  The  scratching  then 
commenced  ;  I  heard  the  t's  crossed  and  the  i's  dotted  by  the  moving  pencil,  and  at  the 
usual  signal  I  opened  the  slate,  and  found  an  intelligible  reply  to  the  question  put.  .  . 
.  .  The  next  manifestation  was  the  levitation  of  one  of  the  sitters  in  his  chair  about  a 
clear  foot  from  the  ground,  and  the  levitation  of  the  table  about  two  feet.  I  ought  to 
have  mentioned  that  during  the  whole  of  the  seance  there  was  a  good  deal  of  by-play 
going  on.  Everyone  felt  the  touch  of  hands  more  or  less,  and  the  sitters'  chairs  were 
twice  wrenched  from  under  them,  or  nearly  so,  but  the  psychic  could  not  possibly  have 
done  it.     .     .     ." 

As  the  messages  that  were  obtained,  though  of  a  remarkable  test  character, 
would  be  of  no  interest  to  the  reader,  we  omit  them.  The  writer  sums  up 
the  result  of  his  visit  with  a  candid  reiteration  of  all  the  conditions,  and 
acknowledges  the  utter  impossibility  of  attributing  the  phenomena  produced 
to  fraud,  collusion,  or  any  known  mundane  causes. 

As  personal  details  are  more  graphic  than  the  cold  narrations  of  passing 
events,  we  deem  it  expedient  in  this  place  to  give  our  readers  an  inside  view 
of  Spiritualism  in  Australia,  by  republishing  one  of  the  many  articles  sent 
by  the  author  to  the  American  Spiritual  journals  during  her  sojourn  in 
the  Colonies.  The  following  excerpt  was  written  as  the  result  of  personal 
experience,  and  at  a  time  when  Spiritualism,  in  the  usual  inflated  style  of 
journalistic  literature,  was  "  in  the  zenith  of  its  triumphs."  It  is  addressed 
to  the  Editor  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  and  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  Spiritualism  in  these  Colonies  finds  little  or  no  public  representation  outside  of 
Melbourne  or  Sydney,  nevertheless  warm  friends  of  the  cause  are  scattered  all  over  the  land, 
and  endeavours  are  being  made  to  enlarge  the  numerous  circles  into  public  meetings,  and 
the  fugitive  efforts  of  whole-hearted  individuals  into  associations  as  powerful  as  that  which 

240  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

exists  in  Melbourne.  At  present,  the  attempt  to  effect  missionary  work  in  any  portions 
of  Australia  outside  Sydney  or  Melbourne,  becomes  too  great  a  burden  to  the  luckless 
individual,  who  has  not  only  to  do  the  work,  but  to  bear  the  entire  cost  of  the  under- 
taking, as  I  have  had  to  do  in  my  visits  to  various  towns  in  Victoria.  Expenses  which  are 
cheerfully  divided  amongst  the  many  in  the  United  States,  become  all  too  heavy  for 
endurance  when  shouldered  upon  the  isolated  workers  ;  hence  the  paucity  of  public  repre- 
sentation, and  the  impossibility  of  those  who  visit  the  Colonies,  as  I  have  done,  effecting 
any  important  pioneer  work  beyond  the  two  great  centres  I  have  named.  Mr.  Walker  at 
Sydney,  and  I  at  Melbourne,  have  been  favoured  with  the  largest  gatherings  ever 
assembled  at  Colonial  Sunday  meetings. 

"  Having,  by  desire  of  my  spirit  guides,  exchanged  rostrums,  he  filling  my  place  at 
Melbourne,  and  I  his  at  Sydney,  we  find  simultaneously  at  the  same  time,  and  on  the 
same  Sundays,  the  lessees  of  the  two  theatres  we  occupied  raising  their  rent  ujDon  us  one 
hundred  and  fifty  per  cent.  The  freethinkers  and  Spiritualists  had  occupied  the  theatre 
in  Sydney  four  years  at  the  rate  of  four  pounds  per  Sunday.  For  my  benefit  the  landlord 
raised  the  rent  to  ten  pounds,  whilst  the  same  wonderful  spirit  of  accordance  caused  the 
Melbourne  manager  to  increase  upon  Mr.  Walker  from  eight  pounds  to  a  demand  of 
twenty.  With  our  heavy  expenses  and  small  admission  fees  this  was  tantamount  to 
driving  us  out  altogether.  Both  of  us  have  succeeded  after  much  difficulty,  and  fighting 
Christian  warriors  with  the  Christian  arms  of  subtlety  and  vigilance,  in  securing  other 
places  to  lecture  in  ;  and  despite  the  fact  that  the  press  insult  us,  the  pulpit  curse  us,  and 
Christians  generally  devote  us  to  as  complete  a  prophecy  of  what  they  would  wish  us  to 
enjoy  everlastingly  as  their  piety  can  devise,  we  are  each  attracting  our  thousands  every 
Sunday  ni^ht,  and  making  such  unmistakable  marks  on  public  opinion  as  will  not  easily 
be  effaced  again.     .     .     . 

"  Dr.  Slade's  advent  in  Melbourne  since  last  September  has  been  productive  of  an 
immense  amount  of  good.  How  far  his  labours  here  will  prove  remunerative  I  am  not 
prepared  to  say.  Frankly  speaking,  I  do  not  advise  Spirit  Mediums  or  speakers  to  visit 
these  colonies  on  financial  advancement  intent.  There  is  an  abundant  crop  of  Medium 
power  existing,  interest  enough  in  the  cause,  and  many  of  the  kindest  hearts  and  clearest 
brains  in  the  world  to  be  found  here  ;  but  the  lack  of  organisation,  to  which  I  have  before 
alluded,  and  the  imperative  necessity  for  the  workers  who  come  here  to  make  their 
labours  remunerative,  paralyses  all  attempts  at  advancement,  except  in  the  sensation  line. 
Still  I  feel  confident  that  with  united  action  throughout  the  scattered  force  of  Spiritualistic 
thought  in  these  Colonies,  Spiritualism  might  and  would  supersede  every  other  phase  of 
religious  thought  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time.  I  must  not  omit  to  mention  that 
the  friends  in  every  place  I  have  visited  have  been  more  than  kind,  hospitable,  and 
appreciative.  The  public  have  defied  both  press  and  pulpit  in  their  unstinted  support  of 
my  lectures.  The  press  have  been  equally  servile,  and  the  Christian  world  equally 
stirred,  and  equally  active  in  desperate  attempts  to  crush  out  the  obvious  proofs  of 
immortality  Spiritualism  brings. 

"  In  Melbourne,  I  had  to  fight  my  way  to  comply  with  an  invitation  to  lecture  for  the 
benefit  of  the  City  Hospital.  I  fought  and  conquered  ;  and  the  hospital  committee 
revenged  itself  for  a  crowded  attendance  at  the  Town  Hall  by  taking  my  money  without 
the  grace  of  thanks,  either  in  public  or  private,  and  the  simply  formal  acknowledgment 
of  my  services  by  an  official  receipt.  In  Sydney,  where  I  now  am,  I  was  equally  privileged 
in  lecturing  for  the  benefit  of  the  Temperance  Alliance,  and  equally  honoured,  after  an 
enthusiastic  and  successful  meeting,  by  the  daily  press  of  the  city  in  their  utter  silence 
concerning  such  an  important  meeting,  and  their  careful  record  of  all  sorts  of  such  trash 
as  they  disgrace  their  columns  with.     So  mote  it  be.     The  wheel  will  turn  some  day ! 

"  Sydney  is  deepening  from  a  lovely  spring  to  a  warm  summer,  just  as  you  in  America 
are  collapsing  into  a  freezing  winter.  Some  time  soon  after  Christmas  (Midsummer  here) 
I  expect  we  shall  begin  to  turn  our  thoughts  westward,  where  home  duties  and  private 
interests  imperatively  summon  us  ;  if  not  early  in  the  spring,  not  later  than  the  ensuing 
early  summer.  "  Emma  Habdinge  Bkittbn. 

"  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  November,  1878." 

During  the  years  1881  and  82  the  AustraUan  colonists  were  favoured  with 
visits  from  three  more  well-known  American  Spiritualists.  The  first  of 
these  was  Professor  Denton,  an  able  and  eloquent  lecturer  on  geology,  and 
one  who  never  fails  to  combine  with  his  scientific  addresses,  one  or  more 
stirring  lectures  on  SpirituaUsm.  The  second  propagandist  was  Mrs.  Ada 
Foye,  one  of  the  best  test,  writing,  rapping,  and  seeing  Mediums,  that  has 
ever  appeared  in  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  whilst  the  third  was  Mrs.  E.  L. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  241 

Watson,  a  charming  trance  speaker,  and  a  lady  as  much  admired  for  her 
spotless  life  and  amiable  manners  as  for  her  eloquent  addresses. 

Mrs.  Watson's  stay  in  the  Colonies,  like  that  of  Mrs.  Foye,  was  very  brief, 
yet  quite  long  enough  to  create  a  profound  impression  upon  her  large 
audiences  and  establish  her  memory  in  the  hearts  of  hosts  of  friends. 

Professor  Denton's  lectures  created  a  wide-spread  interest  amongst  all 
classes  of  listeners.  Even  the  most  hypercritical  scientists  were  compelled 
to  admit  his  claim  to  equality  with  themselves. 

He  lost  caste  it  is  true,  when  his  fearless  advocacy  of  SpirituaHsm  followed 
up  his  scientific  lectures  ;  but  even  his  enemies  acknowledged  the  resistless 
influence  of  his  eloquence,  and  the  public  gladly  lent  an  ear  to  his  common- 
sense  arguments  and  commanding  powers  of  expression. 

Mrs.  Foye  is  one  of  the  few  test  and  physical  Mediums  whose  manifesta- 
tions can  be  exhibited  in  a  public  audience.  For  upwards  of  twenty-five 
years,  this  lady  has  given  her  wonderful  demonstrations  of  Spirit  power 
in  the  presence  of  immense  audiences  in  brilliantly-lighted  halls,  and 
under  conditions  so  entirely  free  from  the  possibility  of  fraud  that  none  but 
the  most  determined  of  antagonists  could  question  her  good  faith.  Calm, 
dignified,  and  self-possessed,  she  asks  no  conditions  but  quiet  attention 
and  keen  scrutiny.  A  Medium  of  such  rare  and  exceptional  powers  as 
this  lady  possesses,  needs  none  of  the  apologetic  writing  and  controversial 
discussion  devoted  to  so  many  of  her  compeers,  hence  it  is  seldom  that  her 
name  is  micntioned  in  the  Spiritual  journals.  It  might  be  better  for  ''the 
cause"  were  it  otherwise.  As  it  would  be  a  disgrace  alike  to  the  movement 
and  the  generation,  to  let  both  pass  away  without  some  honourable  mention 
of  a  Medium  whose  manifestations  have  proved  convincing  to  thousands, 
and  are  unassailable  in  any  direction,  whilst  volumes  are  written  on  the 
merits  of  those  whom  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  community  denounce 
as  "  frauds,"  we  have  much  satisfaction  in  giving  space  to  a  few  reports  on 
Mrs.  Foye's  work  during  her  short  visit  to  Australia. 

The  first  extract  is  copied  from  the  New  Zealand  Echo,  and  reads  as 
follows  : — 

"  Another  visitor  (from  San  Francisco)  that  gave  us  a  flutter  was  Mrs.  Ada  Foye,  the 
celebrated  Californian  test-medium.  Mrs.  Foye  is  a  remarkable  woman.  Evidently 
•without  education,  she  evinces  in  her  addresses  a  faculty  of  clear  statement,  and  a 
quickness  and  aptness  of  repartee  quite  refreshing  to  listen  to.  Her  public  seances  at  the 
School  of  Arts  were  a  great  success,  and  it  is  a  pity  she  only  gave  three,  as  she  was  but 
just  beginning  to  get  known.  Her  method  is  as  follows  :  Anyone  who  chose  among  the 
audience — and  nearly  every  one  appeared  to  choose — writes  the  name  of  some  departed 
friend  on  a  small  piece  of  paper,  aud  rolls  it  up.  These  pellets  are  then  placed  on  a  small 
table  on  the  stage,  and  make  a  pile  half  a  foot  high.  Mrs.  F.  then  takes  a  handful  of 
them,  and  asks,  '  Is  there  present  any  spirit  whose  name  is  on  one  of  the  papers  in  my 
hand?'  If  there  is  no  answer,  she  takes  another  handful  and  repeats  tbe  question.  If 
raps  are  given,  she  desires  one  of  the  audience  to  hold  the  pellets,  and  when  an  affirmative 
rap  is  given,  she  desires  the  spirit  to  give  the  name,  the  paper  being  held,  still  rolled  up, 
by'  the  party  who  undertook  this  part  of  the  proceeding.  The  answer  is  sometimes 
spelled  out  by  raps,  sometimes  Mrs.  F.  sees  it  written  in  the  air,  and  sometimes  it  is 
whispered  to  her,  or  is  written  automatically.  She  then  desires  the  holder  of  the  pellet 
to  open  it  and  see  if  the  name  is  correctly  given.  Tlae  writer  of  the  name  is  then  asked 
to  declare  himself,  and  to  put  to  the  spirit  any  questions  be  chooses.  Not  a  single 
mistake  was  made,  and  when  it  is  said  that  thirty  or  forty  spirits  answered  each  evening, 
it  must  be  admitted  that  the  seances  are  very  wonderful.  All  possibility  of  collusion  is 
entirely  out  of  the  question,  as  Mrs.  F.  was  only  in  Sydney  two  or  three  days  before  the 
seances,  and  nearly  all  those  receiving  answers  were  well-known  citizens,  while  each  time 
the  peUets  were  held  by  a  different  individual,  most  of  them  also  well-known  people. 
Mrs.  Foye  is  now  in  Melbourne,  and  returns  immediately  to  California  without  visiting 
New  Zealand,  having  taken  the  trip  for  the  benefit  of  her  health," 
16 

242  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

As  it  is  quite  possible  that  few  of  our  readers  have  ever  seen  any  one 
who  can  equal  Mrs.  Foye  as  a  test  Medium  and  it  may  be  long  before  we 
shall  look  upon  her  like  again,  at  least  in  this  generation,  we  crave  permission 
to  occupy  more  space  than  has  been  usually  devoted  to  individuals  in  this 
record  and  give  a  summary  of  the  proceedings  of  Mrs.  Foye's  opening 
meeting  as  reported  in  the  Harbinger  of  Light  of  August,  1881  : — 

"MRS.    ADA   foye's    PUBLIC   TEST   STANCES. 

"  Mrs.  Ada  Foye,  a  lady  who  has  attained  a  considerable  degree  of  fame  in  America  in 
consequence  of  the  striking  tests  of  Spirit  presence  and  identity  given  in  public  through 
her  Mediumship,  has  lately  favoured  this  colony  with  a  visit,  and  gave  the  first  public 
demonstration  of  her  powers  in  Melbourne  at  the  Lower  Temperance  Hall  on  the  evening 
of  Wednesday,  the  16th  November.  The  proceedings,  which  were  conducted  by  the  lady 
herself  in  an  admirably  cool  and  collected  way,  comprised  two  portions ;  first,  a  brief 
address  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  including  an  account  of  the  development  of  her 
Mediumship  ;  secondly,  a  series  of  tests  given  to  various  members  of  the  audience. 

The  chairman,  W.  B.  Bowley,  Esq.,  J. P.,  having  in  a  few  words  introduced  Mrs.  Foye 
to  her  audience,  she  gave  the  following  interesting  account  of  the  development  of  her 
mediumistic  powers  : — 

"  '  At  the  age  of  twelve  and  a  half  years  I  was  living  in  the  suburbs  of  Boston  (my 
native  city).  Both  my  father  and  mother  were  very  earnest,  devoted  Christians,  and, 
at  my  mother's  knee,  night  after  night  was  I  taught  my  prayers  ;  and  I  thank  God  for 
it.  My  father  being  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  church,  I  was  brought  up  very  strictly, 
and  was  taught  to  believe  that  when  the  spirit  left  this  world  it  went  either  up  or  down, 
and  there  it  stayed.  This  will  show  how  little  prepared  I  was  to  believe  in  anything  like 
spiritual  manifestations.  At  the  time  that  I  became  aware  I  was  a  Medium,  my  father 
and  myself  were  both  singing  in  the  church  choir,  in  Boston,  and  a  lady  who  was  singing 
with  us,  after  the  service,  said,  "  Mr.  Hoyt  "  (my  father's  name),  "  Suppose  I  go  home  to 
tea  with  you  to-night.  I  have  been  to  Rochester,  and  have  heard  what  they  call  the 
Rochester  knockiugs."  (They  were  creating  a  good  deal  of  excitement  at  that  time.)  "I 
have  witnessed  those  manifestations,"  continued  she,  "  and  the  spirits  there  said  I  was  a 
Medium,  and  they  could  communicate  with  me,  provided  I  would  sit  at  home.  After  I 
got  home  from  Rochester  I  sat  at  the  table,  and  sure  enough  I  got  the  raps.  Now  if  you 
would  like  to  hear  them,  we  will  have  a  sitting  before  the  evening  service."  ' 

"  After  describing  the  seance  that  followed,  and  the  amazement  which  the  rappings 
and  the  intelligence  they  gave,  created,  Mrs.  Foye  went  on  to  say  : — 

"  '  When  I  was  a  little  girl,  I  used  to  see  spirits  beside  me,  and  play  with  them  and 
talk  with  them.  I  would  give  strange  ideas  to  the  people  about  me,  and  they  used  to  say 
I  was  precocious,  and  going  to  die.  From  that  time  the  manifestations  continued  by 
rappings  and  the  moving  of  the  table,  chairs,  and  articles  of  furniture.  These  movements 
continued  for  two  years,  and  after  that  they  began  taking  my  hand  to  write  messages. 
I  could  not  enumerate  all  the  various  phases  of  Mediumship  that  were  developed  day  by 
day  and  year  after  year.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  I  came  before  the  public  when  about 
thirteen,  and  since  then  have  been  giving  sdances  nearly  all  over  the  United  States,  and 
for  the  last  fourteen  years  in  California.  For  two  years  after  I  became  aware  I  was  a 
Medium,  I  did  not  believe  the  manifestations  were  produced  by  spirits.  This  shows  that 
it  is  not  necessary  to  be  a  believer  to  be  a  Medium.  I  was  very  young,  and  was  constantly 
sitting  with  men  of  science,  religious  men,  and  people  who  were  forming  circles  to 
investigate  these  matters,  and  I  was  expecting  every  day  to  get  the  whole  thing  explained 
on  some  other  hypothesis.  The  scientific  men  would  say  that  it  was  electricity.  They 
placed  the  legs  of  the  chairs  and  tables  in  tumblers  ;  stretched  batteries  across  the  table, 
and  completely  insulated  the  table,  so  that  if  any  raps  were  produced  they  would  not  be 
electricity,  but  still  they  rapped  on.  The  more  batteries  they  put  the  louder  they  would 
rap.  Then  the  ministers  came  to  pray  with  me,  and  to  exorcise  the  spirits,  and  upon 
one  occasion  our  good  clergyman  in  East  Boston  came  with  two  or  three  of  the  pious 
brethren,  and  we  all  knelt  in  prayer,  to  see  if  we  could  not  stop  the  rapping  ;  but  the 
louder  Brother  Sandford  prayed  the  louder  the  spirits  rapped.  So  the  scientific  men 
could  not  explain  it,  the  religious  people  could  not  "  lay  "  it ;  and  after  two  years  of 
earnest  mvestigation,  not  only  by  myself,  but  by  scientific  and  religious  men  and  women 
from  all  parts  of  the  country,  I  made  up  my  mind  they  were  produced  by  departed 
spirits,  and  when  any  person  once  makes  up  their  mind  in  this  matter,  after  careful 
investigation,  there  is  no  backsliding.  From  that  time  I  have  been  an  earnest  worker  in 
the  cause.     I  see  spirits,  hear  them,  feel  them  about  me,  knoiv  that  they  are  with  me. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  243 

Some  persons  may  say,  "  You  are  crazy."  If  I  am,  there  is  method  in  my  madness.  If 
you  would  only  candidly  investigate  the  subject,  you  would  find  something  beyond 
explanation  by  chicanery,  delusion,  or  even  the  devil. 

"  I  do  not  know  what  will  be  done  here  to-night  any  more  than  you  do.  The  pheno- 
mena which  usually  occur  are  rapping,  writing,  seeing,  and  hearing.  I  sit  quietly  and 
passively.  The  raps  will  be  produced  upon  the  platform,  the  table,  the  wall,  the  chairs, 
or  somewhere  round  about  the  table.  I  do  not  know  where  they  will  rap.  In  writing, 
spirits  take  possession .  of  my  hand,  and  write  upside  down,  from  right  to  left,  also  in 
other  languages,  although  I  know  none  except  Entjlish.  As  to  seeing  ;  the  spirits  some- 
times write  in  the  air.  The  letters  look  like  letters  of  gold  to  me.  You  cannot  see  them, 
but  the  proof  that  I  do  is  because  the  names  and  the  answers  to  questions  are  given 
correctly.  As  to  hearing,  the  spirits  whisper  to  me,  and  tell  me  what  they  want  to  tell 
you,  and  what  they  tell  is  always  pertinent  and  appropriate  to  the  circumstances.' 

"  The  speaker  concluded  her  remarks  by  stating  that  the  only  condition  she  imposed 
upon  her  audience  was  that  of  perfect  stillness.  The  crying  of  a  child,  whispered  conver- 
sation, or  the  rustling  of  persons  moving  about,  would  interfere  with  the  manifestations. 
She  then  requested  each  person  to  write  on  a  slip  of  paper  the  name  of  some  departed 
friend  or  relative  whom  they  wished  to  hear  from,  and  fold  the  shp  up.  These  were 
collected,  forming  a  large  number,  and  placed  upon  the  table  before  the  Medium.  The 
following  are  selected  as  the  best,  or  rather  the  most  striking,  since  there  could  hardly  be 
any  '  best '  where  there  was  not  a  single  failure  or  inaccuracy,  of  the  tests  given  : — 

"  '  Are  any  friends  here  present  ? — if  so,  please  rap  to  us.'  Mrs.  Foye  touched  each  of 
the  folded  slips  or  pellets  in  rapid  succession,  asking,  'Is  this  one  here  ?  this  ?  this  ? '  until 
three  raps  (for  Yes)  responded.  The  raps  during  the  whole  evening  could  be  distinctly 
heard  throughout  the  hall,  proceeding  from  the  table  or  platform.  Mrs.  Foye  :  '  Will 
some  one  take  this  paper,  please,  and  keep  it  closed  ?  I  see  the  name  Reeds  ;  open  the 
paper.'  The  paper  was  opened  by  the  gentleman  who  held  it,  who  read  the  name,  '  Robert 
B.  Reeds.'  '  Did  anyone  know  that  person  ?'  A  gentleman  from  the  audience  replied  in 
he  affirmative.  Mrs.  Foye  :  '  Ask  him  any  question ;  his  age,  for  instance.  Call  over 
several  numbers,  including  the  right  one  among  them.'  The  gentleman  responded.  Mrs. 
Foye  :  '  Between  25  and  26  ;  I  see  those  numbers  right  over  your  head.'  The  gentleman 
replied  that  this  was  correct.  '  Now  the  cause  of  death  ;  call  over  some  diseases.'  Gen- 
tleman :  '  Heart  complaint  ?'  One  rap  (No).  'Dropsy?'  One  rap.  'Apoplexy?'  Mrs. 
Foye  :  '  Wait  ;  they  are  going  to  write.'  The  Medium's  hand  was  controlled  to  write 
rapidly  the  following  message,  upside  down  :  '  I  think  it  was  apoplexy  ;  my  departure 
was  sudden.'  The  gentleman  in  the  audience  replied  '  Yes  ;  it  was  sunstroke.'  '  What 
part  of  the  world  did  he  die  in  ?'  He  called  over  the  names  of  a  few  places.  '  Melbourne?' 
One  rap.  '  Geelong  ?  One  rap.  '  Ballarat  ? '  One  rap.  '  Sydney  ?'  Three  rups  (Yes). 
The  gentleman  stated  this  was  correct.  In  answer  to  our  reporter's  inquiry,  this  gentle- 
man stated  that  he  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Foye  before  that  evening. 

"  '  Some  one  is  going  to  write  in  the  air  ;  I  can  see  the  lines  going  to  form,  and  then 
they  go  into  letters.  I  can  see  the  name  Robert  John  Williams.'  This  was  recognised 
by  a  lady  in  the  audience,  Mrs.  Foye  asked  her,  '  Are  you  acquainted  with  me  ?'  The 
reply  was  in  the  negative.  '  Ask  what  age'  (at  time  of  death).  The  lady  called  over — 
'  Eight  months  ?'  No.  '  Nine  months  ?'  No.  Mrs.  Foye  said,  '  This  spirit  cannot  write; 
will  some  spirit  write  for  him  ?'  '  Eight  months  twenty-two  days.'  The  lady  who 
recognised  the  spirit  confirmed  this." 

Although  the  tests  given  on  that  and  other  occasions  were  very  various, 
and  the  author  has  heard  hundreds  of  test  questions  of  a  striking  nature 
answered  through  Mrs.  Foye's  mediumship,  the  above  examples  are  all  that 
can  now  be  quoted. 

It  is  but  justice  to  this  admirable  Medium  and  the  effect  produced  by 
her  flying  visit  to  the  Australian  colonies,  to  give  the  following  brief  extract 
from  the  Harbinger  of  Light  concerning  her  farewell  meeting  : — 

"  On  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  the  23rd  November,  Mrs.  Foye  gave,  in  the  Tempe- 
rance Hall,  the  last  of  her  public  seances,  the  proceeds  of  which  by  her  desire  were  to  be 
devoted  to  the  funds  of  the  Victovian  Association  of  Spiritualists.  The  inclemency  of 
the  weather  prevented  quite  as  large  an  attendance  as  on  the  previous  occasion.  W.  B. 
Bowley,  Esq.,  J.P.,  presided.  Mrs.  Foye  opened  with  a  few  remarks,  on  the  conclusion 
of  which  Mr.  W.  H.  Terry,  on  behalf  of  the  Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists,  read 
the  following  address  ; — 

244  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

"'VICTORIAN   ASSOCIATION    OF   SPIRITUALISTS. 

"  '  84,  Eussell  Street,  Melbourne,  November,  1881. 
"  '  To  Mrs.  Ada  Fote. 
"  '  Dear  Madam, — On  behalf  of  the  Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists,  we  desire  to 
congratulate  you  on  the  success  of  your  work  during  your  brief  stay  in  Victoria.  The 
able  expositions  of  the  philosophy  of  Spiritualism  which  have  been  delivered  in  this 
city  by  such  talented  speakers  as  Dr.  Peebles,  Mrs.  E.  H.  Britten,  and  Mr.  Thomas  Walker, 
supplemented  by  the  efforts  of  local  workers,  have  stimulated  a  spirit  of  inquiry  and 
created  a  craving  for  phenomena  demonstrative  of  the  alleged  facts  of  Spiritualism,  which 
for  some  time  past  we  have  been  unable  to  supply.  Youi-  advent  amongst  us  has  there- 
fore been  particularly  opportune,  and  the  conclusive  tests,  which  your  truly  wonderful 
mediumistic  power  has  enabled  you  to  give  before  large  and  intelligent  audiences,  have, 
to  our  certain  knowledge,  brought  conviction  of  the  grand  truth  of  Spirit  communion  to 
many  minds. 

"  '  Those  who  have  had  the  pleasure  of  personal  intercourse  with  you  during  your 
brief  sojourn,  are  unanimous  in  their  appreciation  of  your  earnestness  and  social  worth, 
whilst  your  last  act  of  placing  your  valuable  services  at  the  disposal  of  this  Association 
and  donating  the  receipts  of  this  large  house  to  the  advancement  of  its  objects,  displayed 
a  generosity  which  is  not  common. 

" '  Wishing  you  a  safe  and  prosperous  voyage,  and  hoping  that  circumstances  will 
enable  you  ere  long  to  pay  us  a  more  prolonged  visit, 
"  '  We  are.  Dear  Madam,  yours  fraternally, 

"  '  W.  B.  BowLET,  President. 
'"S.  G.  Watson,   \   ^t     -n     •■,     . 
«'E.  PUETON,         1   Vice-Presidents. 

"  '  W.  H.  Terry,  Treasurer. 

" '  A.  VAN  Etn  van  Alkemade,  Hon.  Sec' 

["  This  address  was  subsequently  beautifully  illuminated  by  Messrs.  Fergusson  and 
Mitchell,  of  Collins  Street,  and  forwarded  to  Mrs.  Foye  at  Sydney.] 

'■  Mrs.  Foye  replied  in  a  most  pertinent  speech.  She  thanked  the  members  of  the 
Association  from  the  bottom  of  her  heart  for  their  kindness.  Coming  amongst  them  as 
a  stranger,  she  had  found  herself  received  with  warm  hearts  and -open  hands.  She  would 
bear  back  to  America  pleasant  remembrances  of  her  sojourn  here,  and  tell  the  people 
there  of  the  kind  reception  she  had  met  with.  She  expressed  a  hope  to  hear  good  news 
of  the  Association,  and  to  find,  on  her  return  to  these  colonies,  that  it  had  doubled  its 
numbers.  She  had  never  experienced  a  prouder  or  happier  moment  in  her  life  than  this  : 
standing  before  the  Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists. 

"  A  very  beautiful  piece  of  music  was  then  rendered  by  the  choir  of  the  V.  A.  S.,  after 
which  the  stance  took  place  in  the  manner  and  with  the  results  before  described." 

It  is  only  necessary  to  add  that  during  a  period  of  a  few  weeks'  residence 
in  Australia,  several  hundreds  of  persons,  all  of  whom  were  total  strangers  to 
Mrs.  Foye,  received  tests  of  a  similar  character  to  those  already  mentioned. 
The  narration  of  these  seances  cannot  seem  otherwise  than  cold,  dry,  and  un- 
interesting. There  is  nothing  to  fix  the  attention  of  the  reader  in  names, 
dates,  and  figures  ;  and  even  the  messages  that  are  frequently  written  by 
Mrs.  Foye's  hand,  or  perceived  by  her  in  phantom  writing,  are  too  personal 
to  the  individuals  addressed  to  be  of  the  smallest  interest  in  recital.  But 
let  the  reader  put  himself  in  the  place  of  the  recipients  of  these  messages. 
Let  him  enter  a  large  thronged  public  hall,  and  in  imitation  of  hundreds 
of  strangers  around  him,  write  on  a  piece  of  paper  the  name  of  the  most 
beloved  being  he  has  ever  known,  one  whose  form  has  been  mouldering  in 
the  silent  tomb  for  over  a  quarter  of  a  century,  and  of  whose  continued 
existence  the  whole  universe  has  never  given  the  slightest  token.  Let  him 
watch  whilst  that  name,  so  tightly  folded  up,  that  the  writer  himself  could 
not  pick  it  out  from  the  heap  of  similar  pellets  before  him,  is  yet  singled 
out  by  a  stranger  and  without  even  being  touched  by  the  Sybil,  the  name 
is  loudly  proclaimed.  The  relationship,  mode  and  place  of  death,  and 
events   occurring  during  the  long  years  that  have  since  elapsed  are  told 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  245 

with  unerring  accuracy,  and  perhaps,  some  message  is  added,  which  none 
bat  the  vanished  dead  could  give;  and  then — the  Sybil  passes  on  to 
another  and  another — all  is  told — all  are  lost  in  wonderment ;  but  to  you — 
you,  who  have  gone  into  that  place  a  stranger,  to  find  there — in  those  few 
seconds,  and  by  those  few  commonplace  tokens  of  identity — your  dead 
alive  again,  and  the  whole  problem  of  immortality  solved  beyond  a  shadow 
of  doubt  or  denial ! !  What  are  not  such  commonplaces  worth  to  those  who 
receive  them ! ! 

In  the  course  of  her  public  and  private  Mediumship,  Mrs.  Foye — who  it 
may  easily  be  perceived — speaks  only  American-English — and  that  in  the 
least  adorned  methods  of  phraseology ;  has  written  in  ten  different  foreign 
languages — including  even  the  Sanscrit,  Kanaka,  and  Chinese  characters. 
She  has  given  hundreds  of  thousands  of  well-recognised  test  communica- 
tions, and  besides  the  incalculable  blessings  she  has  showered  upon  the 
world  by  her  marvellous  Mediumship  she  is  well  known  in  her  own  private 
circle  of  loving  friends,  as  a  noble  and  beneficent  woman — a  good  wife  and 
a  faithful  mother. 

True  she  is  only  one  of  the  much-despised  class  of  "  Spirit  Mediums," 
but  in  that  day  when  the  books  of  life  are  all  laid  open  and  each  one  will 
be  known  for  what  they  are,  not  for  what  they  seem,  who  would  not  wish 
they  could  present  as  glorious  a  record  as  that  which  will  be  found  inscribed 
in  the  archives  of  eternity,  by  Ada  Foye,  the  Spirit  Medium  ? 

The  latest  sensation  in  the  phenomenal  Une  in  Australia  has  been  created 
by  Mr.  Spriggs,  for  some  years  the  non-professional  Medium  of  "  The  Circle 
of  Light "  held  at  Cardiff,  South  Wales,  from  whence  the  remarkable  mani- 
festations of  "  Spiritual  materialization,"  alleged  to  be  produced  in  this 
gentleman's  presence,  have  been  reported,  in  terms  of  high  eulogy,  in  the 
colums  of  the  English  Spiritual  journals  by  various  correspondents. 

Mr.  Spriggs  did  not  appear  to  have  been  known  by  name  in  England, 
nor  to  have  given  sittings  outside  the  Cardiff  circle. 

Mr.  Terry's  arrangements  with  this  Medium  are  claimed  in  the  Harbinger 
of  Light  to  be  wholly  independent  of  what  some  of  the  Spiritualists  are 
pleased  to  term,  "filthy  lucre,"  "the  greed  of  gain,"  &c.,  &c. 

Without  attempting  in  this  place  to  question  why  the  use  of  time,  service, 
and  faculties,  as  a  means  of  living,  should  be  branded  with  opprobrium  in 
Spiritualism,  but  be  recognized  as  legitimate  and  commendable  in  every 
other  department  of  human  life,  it  is  enough  to  render  Mr.  Spriggs  all  the 
justice  claimed  for  him  by  his  Australian  friends,  and  record  him  as  a 
strictly  non-professional  Medium. 

According  to  reports  published  from  time  to  time  in  the  Harbinger  of 
Lights  Mr.  Spriggs's  seances  took  place  at  Mr.  Terry's  office  in  Russell 
Street,  an  arrangement  which  Mr.  Terry's  well-known  probity  rendered 
highly  satisfactory  to  the  sitters.  These  latter  were  reported  as  being  few 
in  number,  and  elected  beforehand  by  a  committee  appointed  for  that 
purpose.  The  manifestations  were  of  the  same  character  as  those  so 
frequently  recorded  in  the  Spiritual  journals  under  the  caption  of  "  Furm 
materialization,"  &c.,  &c.  Not  on  account  of  their  rarity  or  novelty,  but  as  a 
matter  of  history,  we  give  the  following  extract  from  a  report  of  one  of 
those  seances  as  published  in  the  Harbinger  of  Light. 

We  may  add,  one  of  its  most  special  points  of  recommendation  to  the 
attention  of  the  reader,  is  the  fact  that  the  report  is  given  by  Mr.  H.  J. 
Browne,  for  whose  veracity  as  a  gentleman,  and  capacity  as  an  observer, 
almost  every  Australian  Spiritualist  would  be  willing  to  vouch.  Mr.  Browne 
says  : — 

246  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLE:^ 

"  I  will  now  relate  the  particulars  of  another  stance  at  which  I  was  present  lately,  and 
at  which  I  saw  materialised  forms  walk  about,  and  do  several  things  which  are  common 
to  intelligent  human  beings.     .     .     . 

''  This  seance  was  held  in  a  room  containing  only  ordinary  office  furniture.  Across 
one  corner,  damask  curtains  were  hung  so  as  to  open  in  the  middle  and  at  each  end. 
Behicd  tht-se  curtains  there  was  only  a  chair  standing  in  the  corner  of  the  recess  faced  by 
the  audience.  There  were  present  on  this  occasion  seven  persons  in  addition  to  myself 
and  the  medium,  Mr.  Spiiggs.  The  only  light  in  the  room,  a  candle,  was  shaded,  but 
leaving  sulficient  light  to  see  objects.  We  had  the  fullest  evidence  that  behind  the 
curtain  there  was  only  the  medium,  seated  on  the  chair,  with  no  appliances  to  enable  him 
to  personate  others  ;  and  during  the  seance  we  hau  opportunity  for  seeing  the  medium  on 
the  chair  at  the  same  time  that  the  materialised  forms  stood  before  us.     .     .     . 

"  The  seance  lasted  about  two  hours,  and  during  that  time  five  different  forms  came 
out  from  behind  the  curtain  ;  figures  of  different  sizes,  and  having  a  different  appearance. 
One  of  the  forms  moved  a  cbak,  shook  hands  with  one  of  the  audience,  and  spoke  to  him. 
Another,  taking  a  bunch  of  flowers  from  the  chair,  divided  them  among  the  visitors, 
shaking  hands  with  a  lady  next  to  myself.  Another  form,  that  of  a  man,  walked  before 
us,  and  had  the  appearance  of  a  perfect  human  body,  rendering  by  its  opaqueness  the 
objects  on  the  other  side  from  myself  invisible.  ...  I  know  that  it  has  been  said 
these  forms  are  no  less  than  the  medium  in  changed  clothes,  thus  accounting  for  the 
naturalness  of  the  whole  appearance.  I  can  only  reply  th  it,  for  myself,  I  am  quiiie  con- 
vinced that  while  the  form  stood  before  me,  the  medium,  in  his  usual  clothing,  was 
behind  the  curtain  in  an  unconscious  state.  ...  I  was  quite  satisfied  that  the 
medium  could  not,  under  the  circumstances,  personate  the  departed." 

The  next  report  of  a  seance  with  Mr.  Spriggs  is  writcen  about  a  year  after 
the  commencement  of  the  Medium's  acquaintance  with  his  Australian 
friends,  and  evidently  testifies  to  the  progress  that  had  been  made  in  the 
Spirit  control  exercised.     It  is  an  editorial  report  headed  : — 

"  MR.    GEORGE    SPRIGGS'    MATERIALISATION    SEANCES. 

"  The  sittings  during  the  past  month  have  presented  the  usual  features  with  which  our 
readers  are  familiar,  and  also  some  new  and  important  ones.  At  the  sitting  immediately 
following  the  close  of  our  last  month's  report,  a  lady  and  gentleman  from  Chiltern  were 
among  the  visitors.  The  Indian  spirit,  Ski-wau-kie,  who  speaks  'broken'  English  in 
what  is  known  as  the  'direct'  voice,  informed  the  lady  that  there  was  with  her  a  'squaw,' 
or  female  spirit-friend,  who  had  passed  over  a  long  time  since,  and  wlio  was  related  to  her, 
of  the  name  of  Isabella.  The  lady  recognised  an  aunt  of  that  name,  who  had  passed 
away  some  28  years  ago,  and  considered  it  an  excellent  proof,  as  no  one  present  but 
herself  knew  that  she  had  had  an  aunt  of  that  name.  'Ski'  also  told  the  gentleman  his 
father  was  present  with  him,  and  gave  the  name  correctly. 

"  Geordie  has  manifested  with  his  customary  power,  in  the  fuU  glare  of  the  light, 
walking  about  freely,  approaching  the  sitters,  and  placing  his  face  within  a  few  inches  of 
the  eyes  of  the  visitors. 

"  The  earlier  sittings  of  the  month  were  marked  by  an  occurrence  as  striking  as  any 
that  have  been  recorded  during  the  progress  of  these  manifestations.  This  was  the 
recognition,  by  five  different  sitters  simultaneously,  and  independently  of  each  other,  of 
a  spirit-form  as  being  that  of  an  old  colonist  and  well-known  pioneer  in  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism,  who  passed  over  some  five  years  ago.  Amongst  those  who  recognised  this 
spirit  were  his  son,  daughter,  and  nephew.  He  came  on  two  occasions,  and  displayed 
considerable  emotion  at  being  able  thus  visibly  to  manifest  his  presence  to  his  relatives 
and  friends.  On  the  second  occasion  he  shook  hands  with  Mr.  Carson,  who  stood  up  for 
the  purpose,  and  who  consequently  had  a  better  view,  not  only  of  the  full  form,  but  also 
of  the  wrinkled  features,  and  thin  beard .  The  same  spirit  afterwards  transmitted  a  few 
words,  using  the  identical  phrase  which  was  specially  characteristic  of  him  to  those  who 
knew  him  in  earth-life,  and  mentioning  (correctly)  the  incident  which  led  to  his 
investigation  of  Spiritualism." 

Several  accounts  are  published  of  these  seances  at  which  the  forms 
presented  were  "weighed  and  measured." 

For  reasons  with  which  many  careful  investigators  will  sympathize,  we  do 
not  attach   as  much  importance   to   this   proceeding  as   to  .some   other 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  247 

methods  of  testing  the  phenomena.  The  extract  already  given,  may  be 
accepted  as  a  fair  sample  of  the  general  class  of  manifestations  witnessed  at 
Mr.  Spriggs's  circles. 

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  speak  of  one  of  the  most  high-handed  and 
arbitrary  acts  of  tyranny  on  the  part  of  the  Victorian  Government  towards 
Spiritualism  which  the  records  of  the  movement  can  show.  This  was  the 
interdict  promulgated  by  "  the  Chief  Secretary  "  against  the  proprietor  of  the 
Melbourne  Opera  House,  forbidding  him  to  allow  the  Spiritualists  to  take 
money  at  the  door  for  admission  to  their  services,  and  in  effect,  forbidding 
them  to  hold  services  there  at  all.  A  similar  interdict  had  been  issued  in  ■ 
the  case  of  Mr.  Proctor,  the  celebrated  English  lecturer  on  astronomy. 
The  excuse  for  this  tyrannical  procedure  in  Mr.  Proctor's  case,  might  have 
been  justified  on  the  ground,  that  the  Chief  Secretary  was  entirely  ignorant 
of  the  fact,  that  astronomy  had  anything  to  do  with  religion,  or  that  it  was 
not  orthodox  to  talk  about  the  celestial  bodies  on  a  Sunday,  except  in 
quotations  from  Genesis,  or  Revelations ;  but  in  the  case  of  "  the  Victorian 
Association  of  Spiritualists  "  it  was  quite  another  point.  Spiritualism  was 
their  religion,  and  Spiritual  lectures  their  Sabbath  Day  exercises,  Messrs. 
Walker,  Peebles,  and  Mrs.  Britten,  had  occupied  the  Opera  House  for 
months  together,  and  admission  fees  had  been  charged  at  each  of  their 
Sunday  services,  without  let  or  hindrance.  It  was,  and  is,  a  well-known 
fact,  that  the  Roman  Catholics  in  most  places  where  their  services  are 
conducted,  charge  a  tariff  for  seats,  varying  according  to  the  opportunities 
afforded  for  witnessing  the  ceremonies. 

It  was,  and  is,  also,  well  known,  that  pews  in  churches  are  a  matter  of 
barter  and  sale,  and  a  thriving  trade  is  driven  in  the  buying  and  selling  of 
"livings,"  otherwise  called  "rectorships,"  &c.,  &c.  Besides  all  these  prece- 
dents, any  or  all  of  which  might  have  been — it  was  thought — of  sufficient 
force  to  justify  the  Spirituahsts  in  charging  modest  fees  for  the  seats  which 
cost  them  a  considerable  rent  to  hire,  it  might  also  have  been  remembered 
that  archbishops,  bishops,  and  all  the  sacred  hierarchy  of  Christendom,  preach 
for  hire,  and  that  too,  at  very  costly  figures.  Not  a  Christian  sermon  is 
preached,  that  does  not  cost  so  much  a  word ;  hence,  if  the  ministry  of  the 
Christian  Church  be  a  trade,  or  to  put  it  in  its  mildest  form,  a  lucrative 
profession,  the  only  conceivable  difference  between  the  Christian  and  the 
Spiritual  Church  becomes  reduced  to  the  fact,  that  the  Christians  do  their 
work  on  the  Sunday  but  take  their  p4y  on  the  week  days,  whilst  the 
Spiritualists  do  theirs  on  the  Sunday,  but  take  their  pay  as  they  go.  Pew 
rents  and  livings  it  is  true  are  auctioned  on  week  days,  not  Sundays,  but 
the  proceeds  of  this  trade  all  centre  on  Sunday  work,  whilst  the  sale  of 
Spiritualists'  pew  rents  depends  not  on  the  puff  of  the  auctioneer,  but  on  the 
real  value  of  what  the  people  are  going  to  hear. 

In  the  case  under  consideration  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  Chief  Secre- 
tary was  a  shrewd  gentleman — one  who  could  read  the  signs  of  the  times, 
and  mark  with  sorrow  the  deluded  multitudes  who  left  the  Church  pews 
vacant,  to  throng  the  seats  at  the  Spiritualists'  place  of  meeting.  What  better 
tactics  could  any  Chief  Secretary  pursue  than  to  force  the  deluded  multi- 
tudes back  again  by  closing  up  the  attractions  of  the  Spiritualists'  meeting  ? 
The  expediency  of  the  thing  lay  in  a  nutshell.  The  people  wouldn't  go  to 
Church,  and  would  go  to  Spirituahsts'  meetings.  Close  up  the  latter,  and 
the  people  may  (?)  perhaps,  turn  on  their  footprints,  and  go  back  to  the 
Churches,     A  doubtful  issue,  but — worth  the  trial. 

Yet  heaven    forefend  that  we   should   attribute   any   such    far   sighted 

248  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

policy  to  an  Australian  Chief  Secretary.  What  that  gentleman's  motives 
really  were,  and  how  patiently  his  Australian  fellow-citizens  endured  his 
policy,  will  best  be  understood  by  the  following  excerpts,  taken  from  the 
Harbinger  of  Light,  February,  1882  : — 

"  THE   OPERA   HOUSE   DIFFICULTY. 

"  Government  Interference  with  the  Sunday  Services. 

"  Intimation  having  reached  the  officers  of  the  Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists 
too  late  for  advertisement  in  the  papers  of  Saturday,  February  7th,  that  the  Opera  House 
would  be  closed  against  them  the  following  day,  some  handbills  were  hastily  printed  for 
distribution  amongst  the  congregation  who  began  to  assemble  outside  the  Opera  House 
at  about  half-past  six  p.m.  on  Sunday.  In  these  they  were  invited  to  come  up  to  Mr. 
Terry's  Place  in  Russell  Street,  from  the  verandah  of  which  Mr.  Walker  would  explain 
the  reason  of  the  doors  being  closed  against  them.  Accordingly,  by  seven  p.m.,  about 
800  people  were  congregated  on  the  road  and  pavements  waiting  anxiously  for  an  explana- 
tion of  the  difficulty.  At  that  hour  Mr.  Walker  emerged  from  the  window,  and  requesting 
the  audience  to  remove  from  the  footpaths  to  the  road,  and  to  do  nothing  illegal,  briefly 
explained  that  through  a  threat  from  the  Government  the  Opera  House  Company  were 
constrained  to  refuse  the  use  of  their  house  for  Sunday  services.  He  therefore  requested 
them  to  walk  iu  an  orderly  manner  to  the  Horticultural  Hall,  where  he  would  more  fully 
explain  the  position.  The  progress  of  this  large  boJy  through  the  streets  naturally 
caused  considerable  excitement,  doors  and  windows  along  the  route  being  crowded  by  the 
inmates  of  the  houses,  curious  to  know  the  import  of  it.  In  a  few  minutes  the  hall  was 
densely  packed — aisles,  platform,  and  ante-rooms  being  crowded,  and  a  large  number 
being  unable  to  find  even  standing  room.  Mr.  Walker,  who  was  greeted  with  applause, 
reviewed  the  circumstances  which  led  up  to  the  present  difficulty,  characterising  the 
interference  as  a  blow  at  Freethought  and  freedom  of  speech,  and  urging  them  to  resist 
it  by  all  legitimate  means.  The  audience  heartily  applauded  the  speaker's  remarks,  and 
an  indignation  meeting  being  suggested,  it  was  announced  that  one  would  be  held  during 
the  ensuing  week  ;  and  after  a  few  concluding  remarks  from  Mr.  Walker,  the  meeting 
dispersed. 

"  A  public  meeting  was  held  at  the  Temperance  Hall,  Melbourne,  on  Thursday  evening, 
February  16th,  to  protest  against  the  interference  of  the  Government  with  the  Sunday 
lectures.  Upwards  of  nine  hundred  persons  were  present.  The  chairman  was  supported 
by  representatives  of  both  the  Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists  and  the  Freethought 
Society." 

The  speeches,  resolutions,  &c.,  which  transpired  at  this  meeting  were  of 
course  strongly  denunciatory  of  the  tyrannical  procedure  of  the  Victorian 
Government.  Attempts  were  made  to  extenuate  this  action  on  the  part  of 
some  of  the  speakers,  but  the  general  sense  of  the  meeting  may  be  gathered 
from  the  following  extract  taken  from  Mr.  Terry's  report  :— 

''  Mr.  T.  Walker  moved  the  first  resolution,  which  read  as  follows  \— 

"  '  That  this  meeting  expresses  its  indignation  at  the  recent  action  of  the  Government, 
which  is  calculated  to  suppress  freedom  of  speech  by  interfering  with  the  Sunday  evening 
lectures.' 

"  The  chairman  considered  the  word  '  indignation '  to  be  '  rather  strong,'  but  numerous 
cries  of  '  No,  no '  from  all  parts  of  the  audience  indicated  the  contrary. 

"Mr.  Thos.  Walker  said  he  was  pleased  to  see  that  the  meeting  agreed  with  the 
wording  of  the  resolution,  and  were  disposed  to  consider  it  expedient  that  the  word 
'  indignation '  should  be  retained.  When  were  they  to  express  their  indignation  if  not 
at  the  suppression  of  their  liberties  ?  This  was  a  matter  that  affected  all  who  had  an 
opinion  to  give  that  might  difier  from  the  reigning  power.  He  did  not  think  that  anyone 
could  become  acquainted  with  the  facts  of  the  case  without  concluding  that  they  had 
suffered  an  injustice.     ..." 

The  final  result  of  this,  and  other  gatherings  to  the  same  effect,  may  be 
judged  of  by  a  perusal  of  the  following  paragraph  published  in  the 
Harbzuger  0/ Lig/if  ofMarch,  1882: — 

HON^.":^  J.  BOWIE  Wilson. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  249 

"  RESUMPTION    OF   THE   OPERA   HOUSE   SERVICES. 

"  On  Friday  last  a  letter  was  received  from  the  Government,  by  the  Executive  of  the 
Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists,  intimating  that  the  former  had  no  desire  to  suppress 
the  lectures,  but  endorsed  the  permit  of  May,  1879.  The  directors  of  the  Opera  House 
Company  were  interviewed,  and  on  the  understanding  that  no  money  be  taken  at  the  doors, 
consented  to  the  opening  of  the  House.  The  fact  being  announced  in  Saturday's  papers 
drew  a  large  audience  to  hear  Mr  Walker's  lecture  on  Sunday,  'Lord  Macaulay  on 
Eoman  Catholicism.'  The  services  will  be  continued  as  heretofore,  Seats  in  dress  circle 
or  stalls  may  be  hired  by  month  or  quarter,  at  W.  H.  Terry's,  84,  Russell  Street." 

It  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  that  if  measures  at  once  so  oppressive, 
vindictive,  and  narrow-minded  as  those  directed  by  the  Victorian  Govern- 
ment against  the  Spiritualists,  had  been  levelled  against  any  of  the  thousand 
and  one  sects  of  Christianity,  the  "  indignation  meetings  "  resulting  there- 
from, would  have  included  all,  and  not  a  petty  few  of  the  citizens  of 
Melbourne,  whilst  the  Chief  Secretary  would  have  had  to  learn  that  he  was 
the  servant,  and  not  the  slave-driver  of  the  people ;  but  the  cause  at  issue 
was  one  which  had  emptied  the  pews  of  many  a  church  and  threatened  an 
impending  crisis  in  which  the  very  services  of  the  Church  might  ultimately 
be  dispensed  with  altogether.  What  was  to  be  done  ?  The  Church  had 
cried  long  enough  "  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  ! " — but  still  the 
contumacious  people  wouldn't  worship  the  Ephesian  Diana,  What  more 
fitting  in  such  a  fearful  crisis  for  highly-paid  ecclesiastics,  than  to  call  in 
the  authority  of  the  State,  to  aid  the  effete  power  of  the  Church?  And  thus 
it  was,  that  Church  and  State  combined  to  do  that  noble  work  which  single- 
handed  they  have  heretofore  been  powerless  to  effect.  They  have  wrought 
some  harm  to  the  SpirituaUsts,  but  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  value 
of  their  own  pew  rents  has  been  raised  in  the  market. 

CHAPTER   XXXI. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    AUSTRALIA — PART   11.    (CONTINUED). 

In  concluding  our  notices  of  AustraUan  Spiritualism  we  must  call  attention 
to  a  few  more  noteworthy  features  of  the  movement,  leaving  the  minor 
details  in  this,  as  in  the  Spiritual  records  of  other  countries  to  cluster 
around  the  representative  cases. 

A  somewhat  unlooked-for  episode,  of  recent  date  in  Colonial  Spiritualism, 
has  been  the  development  of  remarkable  healing  powers  in  the  person  of 
Mr.  George  Milner  Stephen,  a  gentleman  of  mature  age,  the  father  in  fact 
of  a  family  of  adults,  residing  at  Sydney. 

To  the  amiable  wife  of  Mr.  Stephen  the  author  is  indebted  for  a  pamphlet, 
written  by  his  son  Mr.  Harold  Stephen,  in  which  a  detailed  account  is  given 
of  Mr.  Stephen's  family,  Spiritual  development,  and  marvellous  cures,  the 
chief  circumstances  of  which  will  be  found  summed  up  in  the  following 
extracts,  taken  from  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal : — 

250  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

"  GEORGE   MILNER   STEPHEN — THE   NEW   SPIRIT   HEALER. 

"  The  people  in  Australia,  and  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sydney,  are  greatly 
astounded  at  the  cures  which,  within  the  year  past,  have  begun  to  be  performed  by  a 
barrister,  Mr.  George  Milner  Stephen,  Mr.  Stephen  is  highly  connected,  a  fact  which  will 
go  far  to  call  attention  to  his  remarkable  powers.  His  father  was  first  Puisne  Judge 
at  Sydney  ;  his  uncle  was  a  member  of  Parliament  and  Master  in  Chancery  in 
England,  &c.,  &c.     .     .     . 

"  George  Milner  Stephen  entered  early  on  official  life  in  the  Colonies,  first  as  Clerk  of 
the  Supreme  Court  at  Hobarton,  Tasmania,  then  as  Advocate-General  in  South  Australia, 
and  for  a  brief  period  as  Acting  Governor,  in  which  capacity  he  received  the  thanks  of 
Her  Majesty's  Government,  and  complimentary  addresses  from  the  colonists.  Soon  after, 
in  1840,  he  returned  to  England,  married  the  daughter  of  Sir  John  Hindmarsh,  acted  as 
Secretary  to  the  Government  of  Heligoland,  and  after  pursuing  his  terms  at  the  Middle 
Temple,  was  called  to  the  Bar.  Refusing  the  Colonial  Secretaryship  of  New  Zealand,  he 
entered  on  the  practice  of  law  as  a  barrister,  first  at  Adelaide  and  afterwards  at  Melbourne. 
He  was  Chairman  of  the  Society  of  Fine  Arts  and  first  Vice-President  of  the  Geological 
Society.  In  1853  he  returned  and  settled  in  London,  interesting  himself  in  Art  and 
Mineralogy.  He  was  an  honorary  member  of  several  Continental  scientific  societies,  and 
withal  was  an  accomplished  musician  and  painter.  Returning  to  Melbourne  in  1856,  he 
resurued  his  practice  as  a  barrister,  sat  in  Parliament  for  Collingwood,  and  finally  settled 
in  Sydney,  where  he  now  resides. 

"  He  was  a  member  of  the  Established  Church,  and  had  the  usual  horror  of  all  new 
and  eccentric  opinions,  until  a  few  years  ago,  when  he  came  into  contact  with  certain 
spiritual  phenomena,  and  after  protracted  study,  was  satisfied  of  the  spiritual  philosophy 
which  lay  behind  them.  Mr.  Stephen's  son  has  printed  a  pamphlet  containing  an  account 
of  his  numerous  cures. 

"  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  while  Mr.  Stephen  remained  an  Episcopalian,  he  could 
exercise  no  healing  power  whatever ;  for  on  several  occasions  the  spirits  having  announced 
that  they  were  about  to  use  him  in  some  great  work,  he  tested  his  powers  as  a  healer 
upon  various  persons  and  produced  no  efl'ect.  It  was  not  until  he  had  thrown  orthodox 
Epis  opalianism  to  the  winds,  and  became  a  free  Spiritualistic  thinker  that  the  power 
which  Jesus  promised  to  believers  of  the  truth  came  to  him.  He  had  expected  from  his 
previous  training  as  a  barrister  and  speaker  that  he  would  be  used  as  a  speaker.  The 
comiuK  of  bis  gift  as  a  healer  was  a  surprise. 

"  The  following  may  serve  as  a  sample  of  Mr.  Stephen's  mode  of  healing,  Mr.  Max  L. 
Kreitmayer,  of  the  Waxworks,  writes  to  the  Melbourne  Argus  as  follows  : — 

"  '  Shortly  after  entering  a  saloon  carriage  on  a  trip  to  Sandhurst,  on  Saturday,  April 
17,  a  man  was  carried  in  by  a  clergyinan  and  another  gentleman,  and  laid  on  the  seat. 
After  his  friends  left  him  I  entered  into  conversation  with  him  concerning  his  malady. 
He  informed  me  that  he  had  been  thrown  out  of  a  buggy  some  two  months  before,  and 
had  his  spine  injured  ;  that  a  week  previously  he  took  a  Turkish  bath,  and  in  walking 
afterwards  in  Collins  Street  staggered  and  fell,  and  from  that  time  had  lost  the  use  of  hie 
legs  ;  that  he  was  going  to  Castlemaine  to  get  buried  or  cured,  as  his  friends  lived  there. 
I  gave  one  of  his  legs  a  good  pinch,  and  he  assured  me  that  he  did  not  feel  it  ;  and  conse- 
quently I  put  his  case  down  as  a  decided  case  of  paralysis.  I  noticed  that  when  he  wished 
to  raise  himself  a  little  he  had  to  hold  on  to  the  rack  above,  and  on  several  occasions  I 
lifted  the  legs  off  and  on  the  couch,  to  change  his  position.  At  Gisborne  Station  Mr. 
George  Milner  Stephen  (whom  I  knew  by  sight  many  years  ago)  entered  the  carriage,  and 
had  to  sit  close  to  the  sick  man  for  want  of  room.  He  offered  his  rug,  to  ensure  more 
comfort,  and  naturally  asked  what  was  the  matter.  The  man  repeated  his  story,  and  Mr. 
Stephen,  in  a  decided  tone  said,  '  I  can  cure  you.'  My  curiosity  was  aroused  to  fever 
heat,  and  I  watched  events.  Mr.  Stephen  asked  the  patient  to  lie  on  his  face,  and  after 
making  a  few  passes  and  breathing  on  the  supposed  injured  spot,  he  told  him  '  to  rise,' 
which  summons  he  obeyed  with  slight  success,  and  he  dropped  on  the  seat  again,  saying 
that  the  pain  seemed  considerably  less.  He  then  rose  and  walked.  After  the  lapse  of 
some  minutes,  and  after  undergoing  a  similar  process  as  before,  the  command  was  given 
by  Mr.  Stephen  '  to  rise  and  walk  across  the  carriage,'  which  he  instantly  did,  and  returned 
again  to  his  place  without  any  support.  In  thirty-four  minutes  after  leaving  Gisborne, 
at  Kyneton,  I  left  the  carriage  for  a  few  minutes,  and  on  returning,  to  my  astonishment 
the  patient  had  gone.  Looking  out,  I  found  him  on  the  platform,  walking  about  very 
carefully,  and  -on  arrival  at  Castlemaine  he  took  his  luggage  and  walked  away.  Altogether 
the  affair  has  been  so  vividly  impressed  upon  my  mind  that  I  can  recall  the  most  trifling 
conversation  or  incident  on  this  ever-memorable  journey.' 

"  The  following  from  the  Sjdnej' Daily  Telegraph,  of  24th  July  last,  is  less  graphic 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  251 

than  some  of  the  more  minute  descriptions,  but  will  suffice  to  show  how  strongly  the 
community  are  stirred  by  Mr.  Stephen's  cures  : — 

"  '  The  scene  at  the  Temperance  Hall  yesterday  afternoon,  both  inside  and  in  the 
street,  defies  description.  When  Mr.  Milner  Stephen  arrived,  shortly  after  two  o'clock, 
there  was  a  dense  crowd  collected  on  the  pavement  for  some  yards  ou  either  side  of  the 
door,  which  was  closed,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  he  could  make  his  way  through 
the  mass  of  people  who  had  been  eagerly  awaiting  his  appearance.  The  lower  hall  having 
been  taken  for  the  Canary  Show,  the  upper  hall  was  given  for  the  scene  of  his  operations. 
As  on  previous  occasions,  there  was  a  gathering  of  the  "incurables"  of  the  metropolis 
and  suburbs,  including  "  the  lame,  the  halt,  and  the  blind."  Many  sufiFering  pains  more 
or  less  violent  were  clamorously  invoking  Mr.  Stephen's  power  to  relieve  their  agonies. 
He  appeared  to  be  in  great  force,  as  he  literally  "  ordered  "  pains  away  rij?ht  and  left ;  and 
as  the  various  subjects  of  his  benevolence  invoked  blessings  upon  his  head,  we  may 
reasonably  assume  that  they  experienced  relief.  The  afflicted  reached  their  arms  on  to 
the  platform,  praying  him  "  only  to  touch  them,"  which  he  did,  and  invariably  received 
the  grateful  acknowledgments  of  the  sufferers.  In  most  of  the  cases  Mr.  Stephen  simply 
placed  his  hands  upon  the  people's  heads  to  drive  away  rheumatism  or  rheumatic  gout, 
or  the  other  ills  from  which  they  were  suffering.  Bystanders  of  all  ranks  were  looking 
on  astonished  as  people  made  their  way  througli  the  crowded  hall  to  the  platform,  and 
as  they  left  after  being  treated  by  Mr.  Stephen,  many  eager  questions  were  asked  as  to 
the  number  of  years'  suffering  they  had  endured,  whether  all  their  pains  had  disappeared, 
and  the  like.  In  all,  about  fifty  people  were  thus  sent  away,  expressing  their  belief  that 
they  were  cured,  and  their  astonishment  at  the  wonderful  power  of  the  healer.' 

"  This  is  probably  the  first  instance  in  the  history  of  the  world  in  which  one  born  a 
gentleman,  all  of  whose  associations  are  aristocratic,  whose  mind  is  not  only  cultured  but 
rare  in  its  diversity  of  accomplishment,  and  whose  whole  life  has  been  a  social  success, 
has  become  a  minister  of  healing  to  the  poor." 

The  editor  of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Jourrial  is  in  error  in  respect  to  the 
statement  contained  in  his  closing  paragraph.  The  experiences  of  Prince 
Hohenlohe  as  detailed  in  the  section  on  Germany,  of  Madame  Saint 
Amour  in  France;  of  the  late  Mr.  J.  C.  Luxmoore,  of  London,  and 
numerous  other  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  rank  and  high  standing,  known  to 
the  author  as  healers  of  great  power,  but  whose  unostentatious  benevolence 
is  not  publicly  recorded — except  in  rare  instances — prove  that  the  gift  of 
healing  is  not  limited  to  either  sex  or  station,  but  exists — like  all  other 
gifts — as  an  attribute  of  specially  endowed  individuals. 

The  residents  of  Melbourne  have  not  yet  forgotten  the  astounding  cures 
of  blindness  from  birth,  and  of  some  deaf  and  dumb  lads,  who  had  been 
born  so — effected  by  Mr.  T.  W.  Singleton,  of  Melbourne,  a  gentleman  of 
good  professional  and  social  standing.  The  above-named  cures  were  never 
designed  by  Mr.  Singleton  to  be  brought  before  the  public,  and  they  never 
would  have  been  so,  had  they  not  obtained  inevitable  notoriety  from 
the  following  circumstances  : — The  cures  in  question  had  been  performed 
on  patients,  some  of  whom  were  inmates  of  the  Melbourne  Blind  Asylum. 
Early  in  September,  1877,  the  editor  of  the  Melbourne  Age,  with  great 
humanity  as  well  as  courage,  brought  forward  the  fact  that  one  or  more  of 
the  young  men  who  had  been  thus  marvellously  benefited  by  Mr.  Singleton 
had  been  maltreated  and  injured  by  the  asylum  superintendent. 

The  scandal  of  such  a  report  compelled  a  public  investigation,  the 
details  of  which  do  not  belong  to  this  history,  except  inasmuch  as  the 
proceedings  called  forth  a  letter  from  Mr.  J.  VV.  Singleton,  published  in  The 
Age  of  September  12th,  1877,  in  which  will  be  found  a  concise  account  of 
the  cures  effected  on  subjects  horn  bli7id,  deaf,  aftd  dumb. 

Mr.  Singleton's  letter  is  as  follows  : — 

"  To  the  Editor  of  The  Age. 

"  Sir, — In  justice  to  myself  and  some  of  the  unfortunate  inmates  of  our  Asylum  for 
the  Blind,  there  is  necessity  to  reply  to  some  uncharitable  remarks  made  respecting  me  at 

252  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

yesterday's  meeting.  On  the  22nd  April  last  I  applied  to  the  committee  for  permission 
to  continue  the  treatment  of  an  inmate  named  Helen  Latimer,  who,  at  her  friends' 
request,  was  treated  by  me  during  her  holidays  last  December.  The  rapid  improvement 
in  her  case  caused  a  very  natural  desire  to  complete  the  cure,  and  accomplish  so  much 
good  to  a  suffering  fellow-creature.  I  offered  at  the  same  time  to  treat  any  other  inmate 
the  committee  selected  gratuitously,  wishing  them  to  visit  me  under  care  of  an  attendant. 
I  invited  one  or  aU  the  committee,  which  included  Dr.  Rudall,  to  my  house  to  inspect  the 
mode  of  treatment  by  the  magnetic  process,  and  its  result  on  some  of  my  patients  ;  Alex. 
Wilson,  in  particular,  who  was  well  known  to  Mr.  Moss,  the  secretary  of  the  Deaf  and 
Dumb  Institute,  as  having  been  an  inmate  for  many  years,  and  was  born  deaf  and  dumb. 
This  patient  could  neither  hear  nor  speak  until  treated  by  me,  and,  although  twenty-two 
years  qf  age,  can  hear,  speak  and  read  aloud  now.  After  two  months'  consideration  I  was 
informed  that  my  offer  was  respectfully  declined.  Shortly  after  my  application  I  was 
visited  by  one  of  the  inmates,  who  asked  my  opinion  on  his  case,  being  blind  from  birth, 
who  expressed  a  wish  to  prove  for  himself  whether  the  deaf  heard  and  the  dumb  spake, 
which  he  proved  the  following  evening ;  and  the  fact  of  his  telling  his  companions  of  this 
made  them  naturally  desire  to  try  if  they  could  be  cured.  Many  came  to  me,  but  I  only 
treated  the  first  eight  that  came,  on  the  understanding  that  Dr.  Rudall  was  not  doing 
anything  for  them  ;  in  fact,  that  they  were  all  incurables.  The  results  were  particularly 
gratifying  to  me  and  joyful  to  the  boys,  as  they  will  state  for  themselves,  "Walker  being 
able  to  read  part  of  the  newspaper,  see  pictures  and  objects  a  mile  off,  before  he  was 
struck  in  the  eye  by  the  superintendent ;  and  Cockburn  could  see  his  way  about,  tell 
colours,  see  large  letters,  and  was  progressing  well  before  Mr.  Lovell  struck  him.  The 
other  boys  have  each  made  more  or  less  progress.  I  refute  Mr.  Moss's  imputation  of 
inveigling  the  boys  to  my  house.  They  came  of  their  own  accord,  as  any  other  of  my 
patients,  and  were  made  aware  that  I  practised  as  a  magneti?  healer  or  psycopath.  Walker 
and  Cockburn  were  among  my  free  patients,  and  I  think  it  cruelly  hard  on  them  to  forbid 
the  completion  of  their  cure  because  they  have  no  friends,  or  that  Dr.  Rudall  forbids  it. 
Should  the  committee  desire  it,  I  will  attend  on  Friday  next  and  answer  any  fair  and 
straightforward  questions.  I  have  only  been  actuated  by  pure  motives  and  real  sympathy 
for  the  poor  young  sufferers,  and  herewith  renew  my  application  to  the  committee  to  allow 
me  to  treat  ten  out  of  the  110  inmates,  and  let  Dr.  Rudall  operate  on  the  balance.  My 
own  conviction,  from  the  knowledge  of  the  magnetic  power,  is  that  fully  one-half  of  the 
inmates  can  be  cured,  or  partially  so.  With  apologies  for  occupying  both  time  and  space, 
and  admiration  for  your  noble  action  in  protecting  the  helpless,  I  am,  &c., 

"  Simpson  Street,  East  Melbourne.  J.  W.  Singleton." 

Mr.  Singleton's  methods  of  cure  were  practised  quietly  and  without  any 
attempts  to  bring  them  before  the  public,  in  the  privacy  of  his  own  ofifice. 
He  himself  assured  the  author  the  publication  of  the  above  letter  was 
enforced  upon  him  by  the  attendant  circumstances,  but  he  expressed  a  wish 
that  the  reprint  of  his  letter  as  a  mere  matter  of  history  should  be  the  only 
notice  given  of  his  beneficent  work. 

As  Mr.  Stephen's  pamphlet  fortunately  places  the  cures  he  has  effected 
before  the  world  without  restriction,  we  are  free  to  add  one  or  two  more 
extracts,  and  these,  the  reader  will  observe,  only  refer  to  cases  wherein  the 
names  and  addresses  of  the  parties  benefited  are  given  in  full  :— 

"  To  the  Editor  of  The  Sydney  Morning  Herald. 

"  June  10th,  1880. 
"  Dear  Sii*, — Mr.  G.  MUner  Stephen  has  asked  me  to  state  the  circumstances  of _  his 
late  instantaneous  cure  of  my  attack  of  gout,  which  I  had  been  suffering  from  ever  since 
laying  the  foundation-stone  of  the  new  lighthouse,  South  Head,  on  the  1 8th  of  April  last. 
My  knees  were  so  very  weak  that  I  could  not  get  up  from  a  seat  without  the  assistance  of 
my  hands  ;  and  on  sitting  upon  a  log  with  a  friend  the  same  morning,  at  Balmain,  whilst 
waiting  for  the  steamer,  I  could  not  rise  without  assistance.  Whilst  sitting  in  a  chair  in 
Mr.  G.  R.  Dibbs's  room,  in  presence  of  Captain  Hixson,  R.N.  (the  President  of  the  Marine 
Board),  Captain  Heselton,  and  another  gentleman,  Mr.  Stephen  entered  the  room,  and 
after  some  joking  on  my  part  as  to  his  healing  power,  he  stooped  down  and  breathed  into 
each  of  my  knees,  and  then  made  a  pass  across  them  (as  if  driving  away  the  disease), 
saying,  '  Gone  ! '  I  instantly  rose  from  the  chair  without  the  slightest  difficulty,  and  to 
the  astonishment  of  myself  and  friends,  I  sat  down  and  got  up  on  several  chairs  in 
succession,  and  then  sat  down  on  the  ground  and  got  up  without  any  assistance.     After 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  253 

lunch,  the  same  day,  at  the  Royal  Hotel,  I  raced  Mr.  J.  Pope  down  the  stairs  and  back 
again,  taking  two  steps  at  a  bound.  On  the  24th  of  last  month  the  stiffness  returned  for 
a  short  time,  but  I  am  now  as  well  as  I  have  been  for  years. 

"  I  am,  &c. , 
"  125,  Sussex  Street,  Sydney,  June  3.  John  Broomfield." 

"  We  witnessed  the  occurrence  referred  to,  and  were  assured  by  Captain  Broomfield 
that  he  experienced  instant  relief  from  a  complaint  in  the  knee-joints  he  had  been 
suffering  from. 

"  Francis  Hixson,  Thomas  Heselton, 
R.  Dibbs,  John  Pope." 

"  Manly,  19th  June,  1880. 

"  My  dear  Sir, — At  your  request  I  have  much  pleasure  in  stating  the  particulars  of  my 
deafness,  and  the  effects  of  your  treatment  for  the  relief  of  it.  For  20  years  I  have  been 
almost  stone  deaf  with  one  ear,  and  I  had  become  so  deaf  in  the  other  that  even  with 
the  use  of  a  long  telephone  tube,  I  could  only  distinguish  loud  speaking,  and  could  not 
hear  a  sound  of  music  ;  and  indeed  I  was  obliged  to  relinquish  a  valuable  appointment  in 
consequence.  Since  your  operation  upon  both  ears  I  am  enabled  to  enjoy  the  softest  tones 
of  the  harp  when  played  by  my  daughter  ;  and  the  clearness  with  which  I  heard  the 
conversation  you  addressed  to  me,  without  even  putting  a  hand  to  my  ear,  in  the  presence 
of  Messrs.  R.  Want  and  A.  Allen,  the  well-known  solicitors,  and  Mr.  Larnach,  proves  the 
great  benefit  I  have  thus  far  obtained.  To  myself  and  friends  it  is  most  astounding  and 
gratifying,  as  at  my  age  I  could  not  have  expected  such  a  wonderful  improvement  in  my 
stone  deaf  ear.  I  have  also  been  suffering  from  asthma  a  long  time,  but  since  you 
breathed  into  my  chest  I  have  been  very  greatly  relieved.  Your  simple  yet  effective  mode 
of  operation — viz.,  the  laying  on  of  hands,  and  breathing  into  each  ear — proves  the  curative 
power,  or  whatever  it  may  be  termed,  to  be  most  extraordinary,  and  well  deserving  the 
careful  study  of  all  scientific  men.  I  hope  your  good  and  disinterested  labour,  to  do  good 
and  benefit  others,  may  be  a  source  of  happiness  and  blessing  to  yourself. 

"  Yours,  &c.,  Charles  Kent, 

"  P.S. — I  omitted  to  state  that  within  five  minutes  after  laying  on  of  your  hands  I 
heard  you  speak  distinctly  with  the  stone  deaf  ear.  Mr.  Russom,  J.P.,  was  present  at  the 
time. — G.  Milner  Stephen,  Esq." 

Besides  an  immense  number  of  similar  cases  reported  in  Mr.  Harold 
Stephen's  pamphlet,  several  of  the  Australian  secular  papers  as  well  as  the 
Harbinger  of  Li^ht  report  numerous  others  equally  well  attested.  The 
reader's  attention  is  more  especially  solicited  to  these  instances  of  cure  by 
the  laying  on  of  hands,  first,  because  Mr.  Stephen  himself  reverently 
attributes  them  "  to  the  divine  agency  of  good  spirits,  and  angels," 
operating  through  his  willing  instrumentaUty;  next,  because  they  form  a 
curious  commentary  upon  the  position  assumed  by  one  of  the  leaders  of 
the  Christian  Clergy,  in  the  person  of  Dr.  Moorhouse,  the  present  Bishop 
of  Melbourne.  In  the  Melbourne  Argus  of  March  13th,  1880,  a  sermon 
preached  by  Bishop  Moorhouse  is  reported,  in  which  the  following  sentence 

"  The  sacred  writer,  Saint  James,  directs  that  the  elders  of  the  church  shall  anoint  the 
sick  and  pray  over  them,  encouraging  the  practice  by  the  example  of  Elijah.  But  it  is 
obvious  that  in  an  age  when  miraculous  healing  was  a  common  gift,  such  direction  was 
reasonable,  and  such  an  illustration  apposite.  Does  any  sober  Christian  believe  in  the 
continuance  of  these  miraculous  gifts  ?  If  they  do  not  so  believe,  then  how  can  either 
the  exhortation  or  the  illustration  apply  to  the  present  time  ?  " 

In  a  small  pamphlet  sent  to  the  author  within  the  current  year  (1883), 
entitled  "Apparitions  and  Miracles  at  Knock,"  ihe  compiler  quotes  from 
the  diary  of  Archdeacon  Cavanagh — an  eye  witness  of  what  he  records — a 
list  of  nearly  300  cases  of  divers  diseases  "  miraculously,"  and  in  some 
instances  "instantaneously  cured,"  at  the  Knock  Chapel.  Are  Archdeacon 
Cavanagh  and  Mr.  MacPhilpin,  the  compiler  of  this  book,  "sober  Christians," 
or  what  else  would  Bishop  Moorhouse  term  them  ? 

ii 

254  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  author  is  in  possession  of  over  5,000  certificates  of  cures  effected  by 
the  laying  on  of  hands  through  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  and  other  magnetic 
healers  of  America,  very  many  of  the  patients  being  as  "  sober.- Christians " 
as  Dr.  Moorhouse. 

But  as  Ireland  and  America  may  be  deemed  by  Dr.  Moorhouse  too  far 
away  to  enable  him  to  accept  of  testimony  from  thence  in  so  grave  a  matter, 
here  are  cases  of  what  in  olden  times  would  have  been  termed  "  miraculous 
cures,"  going  on  within  his  own  diocese,  through  Mr.  Milner  Stephen,  and 
at  the  very  time  when  he  is  preaching  denials  of  their  possibility  !  Is  it 
worthy  of  a  Christian  Bishop  to  close  his  eyes  determinedly  to  great  and 
important  facts,  because  they  happen  to  conflict  with  his  preconceived 
opinions?  or  are  there  no  Christians  amongst  his  hearers  sober  enough  to 
advise  him  against  "  wresting"  and  perverting  texts  of  scripture  to  suit 
those  very  erroneous  allegations  ? 

There  is  scarcely  a  Colonial  paper  now  published  but  what  has  had,  or 
still  has,  some  new  cases  of  cure  effected  by  Mr.  Milner  Stephen — and  these 
cases  involve  the  published  testimony  of  hundreds  of  living  men  and  women 
as  sober  and  trustworthy  as  Bishop  Moorhouse  himself.  How  can  he 
dispose  of  all  these  on  his  hypothesis  ? 

There  is  yet  another  point  of  testimony  to  be  offered  on  this  subject 
which  proves  how  determinedly  the  Schools  as  well  as  the  Church  repel  all 
attempts  at  innovation  upon  old  established  forms,  and  cry,  "Great  is 
Diana  of  the  Ephesians!"  when  they  find  their  craft  in  danger.  It  appears 
that  Mr.  Milner  Stephen  tendered  service  to  the  Hospital  Committee  of 
Sydney,  offering  to  treat  a  given  number  of  obdurate  cases  by  his 
perfectly  innoxious,  but  often  efficacious  methods  of  cure. 

As  Mr.  Milner  Stephen  did  not  make  this  proposal  until  he  had  publicly 
demonstrated  to  the  satisfaction  of  hundreds  of  irespectable  witnesses  his 
ability  to  perform  what  he  undertook,  it  was  an  insult  alike  to  the 
community,  and  the  cause  of  humanity,  as  well  as  to  the  gentleman  who 
tendered  his  services  in  that  cause,  when  the  Hospital  Committee  returned 
a  sneering  answer  to  the  effect  that  the  proposal  in  question  was  too  absurd 
to  be  entertained.  Regretting  that  we  cannot  devote  more  space  to  the 
beneficent  work  reported  of  Mr.  Stephen,  we  must  pass  on  to  notice  other 
representative  phenomena  occurring  in  the  Colonies. 

At  a  private  circle  held  in  New  South  Wales  by  a  party  of  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  some  of  whom  were  operators  in  the  Magnetic  Telegraph  Office, 
the  controlling  Spirits  had  been  frequently  asked  if  they  could  not  give 
communications  through  telegraphic  signals.  An  affirmative  promise  having 
been  obtained,  at  the  period  set  for  the  experiments,  the  following  results 
ensued,  for  the  strict  veracity  of  which  the  author  has  the  testimony  of  a 
number  of  respectable  witnesses  : — 

"  Friday,  August  20th,  1880. — 'Met  pursuant  to  adjournment  same  circle,  consisting 
of  four  sitters.  After  sitting  around  the  table,  placing  oui-  hands  on  it  for  fifteen  minutes, 
the  key  of  the  instrument  was  used.  All  the  signals  that  were  given  were  the  same  as 
used  in  New  South  Wales,  Victoria,  and  Queensland,  and  were  quite  correct.  Mr. 
Johnston  named  every  letter  in  the  alphabet,  which  were  given  through  the  instrument 
quite  correct.     Meeting  adjourned  to  Tuesday.' 

"Tuesday,  24th  August,  1880. — 'Met  again  to-night,  half -past  eight  o'clock;  same 
circle,  same  room,  instrument  in  its  usual  place.  Sat  an  hour  and  a  half.  Soon  after 
taking  our  seats,  the  armature  at  the  instrument  commenced  working  ;  the  name  of 
Edward  Erskine  was  spelled  out — Mr.  Cane  says  very  correctly.  There  were  also  very 
strong  raps  or  knocks  given  on  the  table.  Darkness  was  asked  for,  and  given,  when 
strong  manifestations  ensued ;  spirit  lights  appeared  near  the  key  of   the  instrument ; 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

'55 

hard  slaps,  which  all  could  hear,  were  given  to  three  of  the  sitters  several  times  ;  Mr. 
Johnston  was  touched  on  the  knee,  arm,  and  head.  At  this  time  all  hands  of  the  sitters 
were  joined  ;  a  fur  cap  was  also  carried  from  one  part  of  the  room  and  put  down  in  front 
of  Mr.  J.,  passing  his  face,  and  falling  between  his  feet  ;  also  a  chair,  away  from  any  of 
the  sitters,  removed  and  upset.  Most  of  this  time  the  armature  at  the  instrument  was 
working,  making  considerable  noise.'  " 

Between  this  date  and  September  14th,  little  progress  was  made;  but  on 
that  occasion  the  record  says  : — 

"  Circle  met  to-night  at  half-past  eight ;  all  the  members  present.  Within  one  minute 
after  taking  our  seats  at  the  table,  raps  and  loud  knocks  were  given  ;  the  armature  at  the 
instrument  commenced  to  work  strongly,  rapidly,  and  well,  spelling  the  alphabet  down  to 
the  letter  K  quite  correctly  ;  then  a  sound,  known  as  a  laugh  ;  then  a  short  message  was 
given — '  We  are  sorry  we  could  not  be  present  the  last  two  ; '  then  we  asked  if  the  word 
'  nights '  was  meant ;  three  loud  raps  were  given  in  response.  Question  asked — '  Would 
they  be  able  to  work  the  instrument  perfectly  ? '     Answer,  '  Yes.' " 

The  next  excerpt  records  an  experiment  in  Spirit  photography,  the  value 
of  which  must  not  be  estimated  by  the  slight  results  obtained,  but  by  the 
crucial  test  conditions  under  which  the  operations  were  conducted,  and  the 
unimpeachable  veracity  of  the  parties  concerned. 

The  narrator  is  Mr.  Cyril  Haviland,  a  gentleman  resident  in  Sydney  ;  one 
well  known  for  his  literary  ability  and  unexceptionable  social  standing. 
Mr.  Haviland's  testimony  carries  deep  weight  with  all  his  large  circle  of 
acquaintances.      Writing   to  the  Harbinger  of  Light  of  April,    1882,   he 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  append  for  publication  a  copy  of  declaration  made  by  me  of  the  par- 
ticulars surrounding  the  fact  of  my  taking  a  photograph  of  a  spirit,  and  as  that  will 
explain  the  details  I  need  say  no  more  thun  this,  that  after  my  lecture  on  Tuesday  night 
last,  in  Sydney,  on  '  Spiritualism  as  a  Science,'  in  accordance  with  an  ofifer  made  by  me  to 
go  to  anyone's  house  for  the  purpose  of  trying  to  get  spirit  photographs,  two  ladies 
oflfered  to  sit,  one  having  been  promised  such  proof  by  her  spirit  friends,  and  the  other 
stating  she  had  obtained  them  some  years  ago  in  Victoria. 

"  This  latter  lady  I  appointed  to  meet  on  Saturday  afternoon  last,  at  her  own  home, 
and  I  took  with  me  my  own  camera,  lenses,  plates,  and  apparatus.  I  exposed  eight  plates, 
and  on  the  third  only  obtained  anything  beyond  those  visibly  present  in  the  room. 

"  On  this  plate  appears  most  distinctly  a  baby,  about  two  years  of  age,  well  dressed, 
with  a  toy  trumpet  in  his  hand. — Yours  faithfully, 

"E.  Cyril  Havujand. 

"  Sydney,  N.S.  Wales,  25th  April,  1882." 

The  declaration  referred  to  only  reiterates  in  detail  the  substance  of 
what  is  given  above,  though  it  is  reported  that  numerous  other  experiments 
of  a  still  more  important  nature  in  Spirit  photography  are  now  in  progress. 
The  parties  concerned  being  in  private  life,  and  unwilling  to  allow  their 
names  to  appear  in  full,  we  can  only  allude  hopefully  to  the  fact,  although 
we  cannot  report  it  authoritatively. 

The  following  extracts  are  reports  of  different  writers  concerning  the 
progress  of  Spiritualism  in  their  various  districts.  They  are  all  taken  from 
the  Harbinger  of  Light : — 

"  Murrurundi,  N.  S.  W.,  May  2nd,  1877. 
"  In  January  last,  I  and  a  few  friends  formed  a  circle  for  investigation.  We  sat  for 
perhaps  more  than  a  week  without  any  result,  and  were  beginning  to  despair  of  having 
any  manifestations,  when  we  were  blessed  with  results  that  thoroughly  convinced  us  all  of 
the  truth  of  spirit-communion.  We  have  now,  at  every  sitting,  some  very  remarkable 
evidences  of  spirit  power.  In  one  instance,  we  had  a  message  in  direct  writing  from  a 
spirit  giving  the  name  of  'Flora.'     Flowers  have  been  laid  upon  the  table  on  several 

256  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

occasions,  and  beautiful  lights  float  about  the  room.  I  am  already  somewhat  developed 
as  a  writing  medium,  and  receive  some  very  intelligent  and  useful  messages  from  various 
spirits  through  the  planchette.  But  the  most  remarkable  thing  in  regard  to  my  medium- 
ship,  is  the  writing  of  messages  in  French  and  German — languages  of  which  I  am  entirely 
ignorant,  and  which  messages  have  to  be  translated  for  me  by  those  present,  who  under- 
stand those  languages.  We  have  had  rappings  on  the  top  of  the  table  in  good  lamplight ; 
chairs  have  moved  about  the  room  without  human  contact,  and,  on  the  whole,  we  have, 
for  a  young  circle,  witnessed  some  very  wonderful  phenomena.  At  our  last  sitting  we 
had  a  perfect  volley  of  small  pebbles  showered  about  our  heads,  and  some  beautiful 
lights.  I  may  state  that  these  things  have  been  witnessed  among  a  circle  of  honest 
investigators,  when  there  could  not  be  the  slightest  chance  of  trickery  or  deception  of  any 
kind. — I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  fraternally, 

"P.  Jefferson  Wallace." 

"  THE    CHILTERN    CIRCLE. 

"Those  who  read  my  experiences  of  Spirituahsm  in  England,  published  in  the  Harlinger 
of  1873,  will  remember  that  I  narrated  some  very  extraordinary  phenomena  occurring 
in  the  presence  of  private  and  public  mediums.  I  have  had  the  pleasure  lately  of  being 
present  at  the  above  circle  by  invitation  of  the  spirits  themselves.  Our  medium  is  a 
young  married  man  with  a  family.  He  is  an  engineer,  and  is  employed  by  the  Chiltern 
Valley  Gold  Mining  Company.  His  mediumship  came  upon  him  unsolicited.  The 
intelligence  manifesting  through  him  professes  to  be  his  brother  '  George,'  whose  earthly 
life  was  cut  short  by  being  killed  in  the  mine  at  which  Eobert  is  now  engineer.  Other 
spirit  friends  co-operate  with  him  at  seances.  The  circle  is  generally  composed  of  personal 
friends  and  relatives,  but  the  same  people  do  not  always  sit  together,  nor  do  they  retain 
particular  seats.  They  have  changed  their  place  of  meeting  repeatedly  without  any 
cessation  of  the  phenomena.  The  medium,  Mr.  Robert  Brown,  is  a  steady  sober  man, 
and  his  wife  is  a  firm  believer  in  his  wonderful  intercommunication  with  the  other  world. 
He  and  wife  and  two  children  accompanied  us  to  the  house  where  they  have  sat  for  some 
time. 

"  We  had  hardly  seated  ourselves,  all  holding  hands,  when  loud  raps,  as  with  knuckles, 
were  heard  from  the  table.  The  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  '  sing '  was  elicited.  Merry 
songs  were  sung  the  whole  evening,  and  seemed  to  elicit  manifestations  of  the  best  kind. 
I,  who  had  been  seated  outside  the  circle,  was  now  made  to  take  a  particular  seat  by  the 
spirit  voice.  Lights  like  glow-worms  flickered  about  over  our  heads.  The  medium  was 
ordered  to  stand  on  the  table,  and  several  voices  seemed  vieing  with  one  another  as  to 
who  could  speak  loudest. 

"  The  singing,  whistling,  and  shouting,  and  all  communications  were  in  loud  tones,  and 
each  diSerent  from  another.  We  were  all  called  by  name,  and  towards  the  end  Mr. 
Pringle,  who  was  present  with  his  wife,  was  addressed  by  '  George,'  who,  as  I  have  already 
said,  was  buried  in  the  mine.  The  spirit  said,  '  Keep  the  laths  well  ahead,  Pringle,  for 
the  ground  is  flaky.'  The  kind  spirit  did  not  desire  that  Mr.  Pringle  should  leave  his 
family  prematurely,  and  this  caution  was  given  because  he  saw  the  danger,  and 
remembered  his  own  untimely  end. 

"  After  all  this  had  been  repeated  again  and  again,  George  said,  '  I  will  tell  you  the 
time  if  you  strike  a  light.  It  is  four  minutes  to  ten  o'clock.'  A  match  was  struck,  and 
the  clock  on  the  chimney-piece  pointed  to  the  exact  minute  named. 

"  AU  present  heard  the  time  given,  and  saw  the  hands  of  the  clock  when  the  match 
was  struck 

"  Chatern,  July,  1877.  "  W.  L.  R." 

In  the  Harbinger  of  Light  and  some  of  the  Australian  secular  papers, 
accounts  are  given  of  powerful  physical  manifestations  obtained  through 
the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Paton,  of  Castlemaine.  As  in  the  case  of  Mr. 
Robert  Brown,  the  demonstrations  through  this  lady  occur  in  the  dark, 
but  the  doors  are  invariably  closed  and  locked,  and  every  precaution  taken 
to  avoid  the  shadow  of  suspicion  or  the  chances  of  deception.  Besides  the 
usual  manifestations  of  fruit,  flowers,  and  other  objects  being  introduced 
through  the  well-secured  door — on  one  occasion,  a  burning  hot  flat  iron  was 
brought  in,  apparently  from  the  kitchen,  the  only  room  in  the  house  where 
a  fire  was  kindled.  The  seance  was  being  held  at  a  considerable  distance 
from  the  kitchen  ;  the  iron  was  far  too  hot  to  be  touched  by  any  one  present, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  257 

and  yet  the  one  door  of  the  apartment  was  carefully  locked,  and  the  key 
inside  the  pocket  of  one  of  the  sitters. 

Much  ridicule  was  levelled  against  this  manifestation  by  the  editors  of 
certain  journals  in  which  it  had  been  reported  as  a  remarkable  phenomenon. 
These  sneering  critics  however  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  the  real  question 
at  issue  was  not  the  dignity  of  the  manifestation,  but  the  utter  impossibiUty 
of  any  human  agency  in  its  production. 

A  curious  phase  of  Spiritual  writing  is  reported  from  Clear  Creek, 
Yackandandah,  by  a  reliable  observer,  and  correspondent  of  the  Harbinger^ 
Dr.  A.  Mueller,  who  in  describing  the  seances  of  a  young  lady  in  private 
life,  Miss  Elizabeth  H.,  says  : — 

"  Miss  Elizabeth  H.  is  a  bright  unsophisticated  girl  of  fifteen,  whose  mediumistic  gifts 
for  automatic  and  direct  writing  are,  considering  the  short  period  of  her  development,  of 
a  very  high  order.     I  availed  myself  of  Mr.  Chappell's  kind  invitation  to  his  house  on  the 

29th  of  last  month,  and  again  on  Saturday  the  19th  instant I  purchased  a 

pair  of  slates  on  my  way  to  Mr.  C.'s  house,  where  I  found,  at  8  p.m.,  the  medium  with 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Chappell,  a  brother  of  the  latter,  and  Mr.  Crambrook,  with  his  daughter, 
awaiting  my  arrival.  Evidently  to  make  things  as  congenial  as  possible  to  the  medium, 
we  sat,  at  the  special  request  of  the  controlling  spirit,  in  a  back  room  of  the  house,  used 
alike  as  kitchen  and  dining-room,  The  medium  took  her  seat,  facing  the  brightly  burning 
wood  fire,  whilst  in  writing  through  her  the  spirit  directed  me  to  sit  beside  her,  thus 
enabling  me  to  observe  her  closely,  even  after  the  candle  was  put  out." 

After  descriptions  of  several  seances  in  which  the  ordinary  forms  of  slate 
writing  were  produced,  together  with  pertinent  answers  to  questions  and 
messages  from  deceased  friends,  the  following  extraordinary  results  were 
reported  by  Dr.  Mueller  as  occurring  at  a  recent  circle.     He  says  : — 

"  Placing  an  open  book  reversed  before  the  medium  I  asked  her  to  put  the  point  of  her 
left  index  finger  at  random  on  a  line  of  the  print,  whilst  her  right  hand  held  the  slate 
underneath  the  table  as  usual,  and  then  shading  the  page  with  my  own  hand,  I  requested 
that  the  word  covered  by  the  medium's  fiuger  might  be  written  on  the  slate.  We  heard 
the  writing  sound  almost  immediately,  and  on  the  slate  being  raised  found  the  word  '  of ' 
written  on  it.  On  referring  to  the  book,  on  which  the  medium's  finger  had  never  moved, 
we  found  that  '  of  '  was  the  word  immediately  before  the  point  of  the  finger  in  the  same 
line..  The  experiment  was  repeated  a  second  time  in  the  same  manner,  and  the  word 
'for'  found  to  correspond  on  the  slate  and  in  the  book.  In  the  same  manner  the  words 
'spirit,'  and  'period,'  were  written  correctly  and  rapidly.  I  then  changed  the  experiment 
by  taking  the  medium's  hand  and  having  mentally  selected  the  words  '  the  warrior  prince,' 
placing  her  finger  on  'warrior,'  but  at  the  same  time  keeping  my  own  hand  between  <  er  and 
the  piiut  in  order  to  preclude  even  the  possibility  of  her  seeing  it.  Though  passive  as  she 
was  throughout  the  evening,  I  felt  convinced  that  she  never  even  attempted  to  read,  and 
having  her  right  hand  fully  employed  in  holding  a  heavy  slate  horizDntally  under  a  deep- 
framed  table  without  any  support,  could  not  possibly  write  on  it  at  the  same  time  with  the 
point  of  the  small  pencil.  The  words  'the'  and  'prince'  came  out  in  succession  on  the 
slate  ;  but  simultaneously  with  the  latter,  and  immediately  below  it,  a  plainly-written 
'  good-night '  announced  the  conchzsion  of  the  sitting.  Looking  at  my  watch  I  found  it 
was  then  exactly  10  o  clock,  the  very  hour,  either  by  coincidence,  or  a  kind  regard  for  my 
wishes  on  the  part  of  our  invisible  guest,  beyond  which,  I  resolved  on  sitting  down,  not 
to  prolong  the  seance,  though  deeply  interested  as  I  was,  I  had  forgotten  both  my 
resolve  and  the  lupse  of  time. 

"  Yackandandah,  22nd  October,  1877." 

The  same  respected  and  capable  observer,  Dr.  Mueller,  gives  several  other 
accounts  of  circles  which  he  attended  in  different  districts,  in  Victoria,  and 
New  South  Wales.  As  a  final  representation  of  how  circles  were  formed 
and  conducted  in  Australia  and  how  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  became 
popularized  in  the  absence  of  organized  means  of  propagandism,  we  give 
the  following  extracts  from  Dr.  Mueller's  account  of  The  Barnawartha 
Circle.  He  writes  thus,  in  1876  ; — 
17 

258  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  The  Banawartha  Circle  has  now  been  in  existence  for  nearly  three  years.  Some 
experiments  in  table-turning  instituted  for  mere  amusement's  sake  at  a  social  meeting  of 
two  families,  the  members  of  which  are  all  more  or  less  mediumistic  and  now  form  the 
majority  of  the  circle-  gave  the  first  rise  to  it.  They  knew  nothing  of  Spiritualism 
except  by  hearsay,  but  the  results  at  their  first  impromptu  seance  unmistakeably  pointed 
to  some  intelligence  not  their  own  having  been  among  them.  They  sat  again  with  even 
increased  manifestations,  and  then  having  become  acquainted  with  the  mode  of  conduct- 
ing Spirit  circles,  they  determined  on  following  up  the  subject,  and  sat  regularly  twice 
a  week.  The  physical  manifestations  assumed  in  the  course  of  the  development  of  the 
circle  a  very  violent  character.  At  almost  every  sitting  the  round  table — no  matter  how 
tightly  fastened  to  the  frame  and  legs — was  broken  asunder,  and  whilst  the  latter  were 
left  on  the  floor,  the  round  leaf,  made  of  thick  pine  boards,  was  whirled  about  the  room 
over  the  heads  of  the  sitters,  and  often  out  of  their  reach  though  standing  on  tip  toe. 
No  injury  was  ever  inflicted  on  any  of  the  members  by  this  quasi  animated  piece  of 
furniture  careering  about  the  room,  but  on  one  occasion,  whilst  rather  noisy  manifesta- 
tions were  going  on,  a  curious  neighbour  had  slipped  into  the  room  unobserved  and 
crouched  down  in  a  corner.  He  had,  as  he  confessed  subsequently,  scarcely  settled  in  his 
supposed  hiding  place,  when  the  table  pounced  down  upon  him  from  the  ceiling,  where  it 
had  been  suspended,  and  belaboured  his  skull  and  back  so  eflectively  that  he  had  to  cry 
for  mercy  and  beat  a  precipitate  retreat.  For  a  long  time  manifestations  of  this  kind, 
convincing  certainly,  though  not  very  elevating,  were  carried  on,  varied  at  times  by 
levitations  of  a  lady  medium.  The  circle  was  also  much  retarded  in  its  development,  and 
at  one  time  nearly  broken  up  by  the  exigencies  of  life  calling  away  some  of  its  members. 
Now,  however,  they  are  all  together  again,  and  the  manifestations  have  entirely  changed 
in  character  through  the  accession  of  another  and  very  powerful  medium.  This  change 
was  announced  by  the  long  and  ardently  desired  spirit  raps  greeting  the  circle  at  the  very 
first  stance  the  new  medium  attended.  They  were  muflied  and  scarcely  audible  at  first, 
but  are  now  clear  and  ringing,  and  by  means  of  them  and  the  alphabet  a  running  con- 
versation is  carried  on  between  the  circle,  and  its  mysterious  invisible  guests.  Then  came 
spirit  lights  floating  about  the  room,  shedding  a  faint  whitish  light  on  the  objects  nearest 
to  them.  Soft,  velvety,  touches,  gliding  along  the  heads  and  faces  of  the  sitters  will  send 
a  thrill  of  delight  through  their  frames,  hands  warm  and  life-like  will  grasp  theirs.  The 
latest  phase  of  development  is  the  production  of  the  spirit  voice." 

After  describing  these  and  the  ordinary  physical  manifestations  which 
occur  at  circles  of  this  character,  Dr.  Mueller  gives  an  account  of  one  seance 
worth  narrating,  as  involving  a  circumstance  by  no  means  of  an  ordinary 
character.  The  wife  of  the  principal  Medium  before  referred  to,  Mr.  Robert 
Brown,  being  present  with  her  baby  in  her  arms,  the  following  scene  took 
place  : — 

"  All  at  once,  Mrs.  Brown  complained  that  the  blanket  the  baby  was  wrapped  up  in 
was  being  tugged  and  pulled  away  from  it,  and  suspecting  this  to  be  done  with  a  view  of 
taking  the  child  from  her,  declared  that  she  would  not  let  it  out  of  her  arms  for  fear  of 
its  being  hurt.  Raps  now  came  for  the  alphabet,  and  the  words,  "  Baby  will  be  given  to 
father  "  were  spelled  out.  Still  Mrs.  B.  hesitated,  when  her  head  and  face  were  touched 
and  stroked  so  caressingly  that,  as  she  stated,  almost  involuntarily  she  had  to  loosen  her 
hold  of  the  child.  Immediately  she  felt  the  blanket  pulled  and  the  child  taken  from  her, 
and  whilst  she  exclaimed,  '  It  is  gone,'  I  felt  the  little  head  pass  my  arm  in  an  upward 
direction.  Gone  certainly  the  child  was  ;  but  where  ?  The  father  declared  that  it  had 
not  been  brought  to  him,  and  for  a  few  moments  all  was  silence  and  anxious  suspense. 
We  then  heard  a  faint  baby's  cry  coming  from  the  far  corner  of  the  room,  and  high  under 
the  ceiling,  and  after  that  sounds  as  if  kisses  were  being  showered  upon  the  child,  seemed 
to  accompany  it  in  an  aerial  flight  all  round  the  room  above  our  heads,  the  sounds  inter- 
mingled with  a  snuffling  noise,  evidently  made  by  the  child,  coming  from  different  and 
opposite  directions  successively.  Suddenly  I  felt  the  little  body  pressed  against  my  face,  and 
passing  on  in  the  direction  of  the  lady  on  my  left,  who  also  felt  it  distinctly  brush  her  face, 
and  immediately  afterwards  the  father  announced  that  the  child  had  been  safely  deposited 
in  his  arms.  Having  watched  the  development  of  this  circle  for  some  years  with  much 
interest,  and  being  personally  acquainted  with  its  members,  it  appears  to  me  the  height 
of  absurdity  to  suppose  that  these  people  should  have  met  for  three  years  twice  a  week 
for  the  purpose  of  practising  how  most  effectually  to  deceive  each  other,  or  an  occasional 
visitor.  So  far  from  inviting  people  to  their  meetings,  they  are  tardy  in  admitting 
strangers,  after  having  been  told  over  and  over  again  by  their  spirit  friends,  that  the 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  259 

presence  of  most  visitors  disturbs  the  harmony  and  retards  the  development  of  the  circle. 
To  gain  notoriety  in  an  unpopular  cause,  which  must  be  anything  but  favourable  to 
their  worldly  interests,  could,  therefore,  scarcely  be  alleged  as  the  object  they  have  in 
view  in  practising  fraud.  Moreover,  one  cannot  converse  vtith  them  for  many  minutes, 
see  their  genuine  enthusiasm  for  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  their  firm  conviction  of  the 
reality '  of  the  spirit  world,  and  of  their  intercourse  with  it,  observe  how  cordially  they 
are  united  together  by  the  common  cause  all  have  so  deeply  at  heart,  and  then — however 
suspicious  of  human  nature — harbour  another  thought  of  their  producing  by  deception 
the  marvellous  phenomena  one  witnesses  at  their  meetings." 

In  Sandhurst,  the  old  mining  district,  once  so  familiarly  known  as 
"  Bendigo,"  a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  whose  characters  are  beyond 
reproach  or  suspicion  have  met  together  to  hold  periodical  seances  under 
the  cognomen  of  "  The  Energetic  Circle  of  Sandhurst."  How  far  this 
gathering  has  succeeded  in  enhsting  the  respect  and  good  will  of  the 
outside  world  may  be  learned  from  the  following  brief  paragraph  published 
in  the  Melbourne  Argus,  as  an  account  of  an  entertainment  given  by  the 
members  of  the  circle  above  named.     The  editor  says  : — 

"  The  Sandhurst '  Energetic  Circle '  of  Spiritualists  gave  an  entertainment,  under  the 
name  of  'An  Evening  at  Home,'  at  the  Masonic  Hall  last  evening,  which  was  of  a  most 
enjoyable  nature,  over  300  guests  being  present,  who  appeared  to  enter  heartily  into  the 
spirit  of  the  hour,  and  went  in  with  a  keen  relish  for  the  good  things  and  various  sources 
of  amusement  provided  for  them,  imder  the  ardent  and  courteous  direction  of  the 
honorary  secretary,  W.  D.  C.  Denovan.*  The  '  Circle,'  which  ranks  among  its  members 
many  well-known  citizens,  is  a  private  one,  the  '  Medium'  being  a  non-professional.  There 
is  nothing  sectarian  in  its  composition,  and  therefore  last  night  their  '  evening  at  home ' 
was  attended  by  persons  professing  all  shades  of  religious  belief,  with  whom  the  circle  are 
popular  on  account  of  their  quiet  unobtrusiveness  and  good  fellowship.  Those  invited  by 
the  circle  pay  a  small  amount  for  their  tickets,  which  is  for  the  most  part  devoted  to  the 
local  charities.  Their  entertainments,  therefore,  are  deservedly  in  favor,  combining,  as 
they  do,  amusement  for  their  friends,  and  contributing  also  to  works  of  charity." 

Then  follows  a  list  of  the  visitors  present,  amongst  whom  are  named 
some  of  the  most  influential  and  even  aristocratic  citizens  of  Sandhurst  and 
its  vicinity,  including  members  of  Parliament  and  their  families,  and  a  con- 
siderable number  of  literary  and  political  Australian  celebrities. 

In  the  conservative  and  influential  city  of  Adelaide,  the  late  Rev.  John 
Tyerman  succeeded  in  waking  up  a  considerable  amount  of  interest  by  his 
stirring  lectures,  public  debates,  and  newspaper  discussions. 

In  Brisbane,  a  still  more  pronounced  public  interest  has  been  manifested, 
resulting  in  the  formation  of  an  excellent  and  flourishing  "Psychological 
Society."  From  Albury,  Newcastle,  Beechworth,  Ballarat,  Geelong,  and 
numerous  other  places,  the  author  has  accounts  of  well  established  circles 
in  several  of  which  good  Mediums  have  been  developed,  and  fine  phenomena 
obtained. 

We  must  conclude  however  with  a  brief  recurrence  to  the  status  of 
Spiritualism  in  Sydney,  of  which  place,  as  yet,  only  incidental  mention  has 
been  made. 

The  principal  levers  for  the  promotion  of  SpirituaHsm  in  this  fair  and 
beautiful  city  have  been  the  unselfish  and  indefatigable  labours  of  a  few 
noble  propagandists,  foremost  of  whom  will  ever  be  gratefully  remembered 
the  late  Hon.  John  Bowie  Wilson,  a  gentleman  whom  all  classes  of  the 
community  united  to  praise,  and  whom  Spiritualists  in  especial,  regarded, 
as  the  father  of  their  cause  in  New  South  Wales. 

*  Since  this  section  was  written,  Mr.  W.  C.  D.  Denovan  has  published  a  most  excellent,  scholarly, 
and  interesting  volume,  including  many  of  his  own  remarkable  experiences.  It  is  entitled  "  Evidences 
of  Spiritualism,"  and  emphatically  redeems  the  cla,im  of  its  title 

26o  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

With  open  purse,  hand,  and  door,  seconded  by  his  charming  wife  and 
sweet  family,  this  gentleman  has  supported  Spiritualism  and  all  its  worthy 
adherents,  until  his  very  name  became  a  pillar  of  strength  to  "the  cause,"  in 
Sydney.  Uncounted  numbers  owed  their  first  introduction  to  the  hght  and 
life  of  Spiritualism  to  him.  Wayfarers  from  foreign  lands  have  ever  found 
in  his  home  a  shelter,  and  in  his  association  a  friend  ;  whilst  the  oppo- 
nents of  the  cause  have  realized  in  him,  an  unassailable  garrison  against 
whom  their  batteries  have  been  levelled  in  vain.  In  all  ways  he  has  been 
the  stronghold  of  the  faith,  and  men  and  angels  "  rise  up  and  call  him 
blessed." 

During  the  author's  flying  visits  to  Sydney,  the  Hon.  J.  Bowie  Wilson 
generally  officiated  as  the  chairman.  The  public  loved  to  see  him  in  that 
post,  and  listen  to  his  plain  speech  and  rugged  eloquence ;  and  the 
speakers  felt  as  if  no  harm  coujd  befal  them,  whilst  under  his  protection. 
Next  in  fidelity,  and  the  performance  of  important  public  service^  has  stood 
the  good  and  respected  friend  of  Spiritualism,  Mr.  Henry  Gale.  It  is  not  too 
much  to  say  of  this  excellent  gentleman,  as  of  John  Bowie  Wilson,  that  all 
his  good  and  unselfish  work  for  an  unpopular  cause,  has  been  nobly 
seconded  by  his  estimable  wife";  and  in  both  famihes,  the  holy  fruits  of 
Spiritualism  have  borne  practical  as  well  as  theoretical  evidences  of  their 
divine  influence. 

Many  others,  some  of  whom  have  been  already  named,  have  contributed 
invaluable  aid  to  the  cause  of  Spiritual  progress  in  Sydney,  but  the  named 
and  the  unnamed,  will  never  murmur  because  Dr.  Wilson,  and  Mr.  Gale, 
have  been  selected  as  the  representative  men  of  their  cause. 

During  Dr.  Slade's  visit  to  Sydney,  a  very  able  and  energetic  worker 
in  Spiritualism  became  convinced  of  its  truth,  in  the  person  of  Mr.  E. 
Cyril  Haviland,  the  author  of  two  excellent  pamphlets  and  many  articles, 
tracts,  and  good  Hterary  contributions  on  this  subject.  Mr.  Haviland,  Mr. 
Harold  Stephen,  and  several  other  gentlemen  of  literary  repute  in  Sydney, 
combined  during  the  author's  last  visit,  to  form  a  "  Psychological  Society," 
the  members  of  which,  like  the  parties  above  named,  represented  some  of 
the  most  accomplished  writers  and  advanced  thinkers  of  the  city. 

Mr.  L.  E.  Harcus,  an  able  and  fluent  writer,  furnished  a  report  of  the 
origin  and  growth  of  this  society  for  the  £an?ier  of  Light  of  March,  1880, 
a  few  extracts  from  which  may  not  be  uninteresting,  as  bearmg  upon  the 
present  status  of  the  movement  in  Sydney. 

They  read  thus  : — 

"  The  annual  meeting  of  the  Psychological  Society  took  place  a  few  days  ago,  when 
the  following  report  was  submitted  and  adopted  : — 

'annual  report  of  the  psychological  society  for  1879. 

'  When  Mrs.  Britten  was  in  Sydney  the  formation  of  a  Psychological  Society  was 
suggested ;  the  suggestion  meeting  a  favourable  reception,  a  list  of  names  for  a  committee 
was  proposed  and  adopted.  This  committee  afterwards  met  at  Mr.  Alfred  De  Lissa's 
rooms,  and  being  materially  assisted  by  Mrs.  Britten,  they  drew  up  a  code  of  rules  and 
did  much  other  work  which  has  been  of  great  value  to  the  society.  The  committee  then 
began  to  form  an  association,  which  now  numbers  nearly  eighty  members.  I  think  we 
owe  much  to  that  original  committee,  of  which  the  office-bearers  were  Mr.  Wilson  (then 
absent  from  the  colony),  as  president ;  Mr.  Greville,  M.P.,  vice-president  ;  Mr.  MacDonnell, 
treasurer  ;  Mr.  Haviland,  secretary  ;  and  Mr.  Hosier,  librarian. 

'  Mrs.  Britten  undertook  to  give  the  lecture  for  the  first  evening,  which  she  did  at  the 
New  Temperance  Hall,  which  was  engaged  for  the  meetings  of  the  society. 

'  Of  the  meetings  before  April  I  have  no  record.      On  the  21st  of  that  month  Mr, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  261 

Haviland,  the  then  secretary,  resigned  office,  and  the  society  was  good  enough  to  entrust 
me  with  that  office. 

'  With  your  leave  I  will  now  make  a  few  extracts  from  the  minutes,  as  they  will  afford 
the  best  insight  into  the  work  done  by  and  the  progress  of  the  society  during  the  year. 

'April  21st,  1879  — Mr.  Munro  read  a  paper  on  clairvoyance,  and  the  president,  Mr. 
Wils'in,  read  from  the  Banner  of  Light  a  lecture  by  Dr.  Buchanan,  the  subject  being;  the 
discussion,  medical  and  otherwise,  on  the  peculiar  and  wonderful  powers  of  Miss  Molly 
Fancher. 

'  May  5th. — Some  very  interesting  incidents  were  related  in  connection  with  clair- 
voyance. At  this  meeting  the  first  honorary  member,  Mr.  Bright,  was  elected.  As  the 
society  had  then  more  than  £31  in  hand,  £11  lis.  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  sub- 
committee for  the  purchase  of  books.  After  the  meeting  a  number  of  tracts  and  pamphlets, 
which  had  been  presented  to  the  society  by  Mr.  Haviland,  were  gratuitously  distributed. 

'  May  19th  and  June  2nd. — At  these  meetings  Mr.  Bright  read  an  extremely  interesting 
series  of  papers  on  "Magnetic  Education,"  as  received  by  himself  at  several  sittings  in 
the  presence  of  Mrs.  Jackson,  of  Melbourne. 

'  June  16th.— At  this  meeting  several  members  recorded  interesting  instances  of  spirit 
manifestations. 

'July  7th. — The  business  assumed  a  conversational  character,  and  many  interesting 
experiences  were  related.  At  this  meeting  Mr.  Greville  presented  the  society  with  the 
complete  works  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis. 

'August  18th. — First  meeting  to  which  the  public  were  admitted.  The  hall  was 
crowded,  and  more  than  sixty  people  standing.  The  lecture  was  "  Spiritualism  in  its 
Eolation  to  Psychology,"  and  the  lecturer  Mr.  Bright. 

'September  15th. — Again  a  public  meeting,  with  a  thoroughly  successful  lecture  by 
Mr.  Harold  Stephen,  entitled  "  The  Philosophy  of  Spiritualism.' ' 

'  October  20th. — A  public  meeting,  at  which  the  president  gave  the  lecture,  "  Some 
Proofs  of  the  Reality  of  Spirit  Intercourse." 

'  November  3rd. — This  evening  Mr.  Haviland  read  a  paper,  "Mesmerism,  its  Uses,  and 
some  Hints  for  its  Study,"  and  afterwards  showed  the  way  to  mesmerize  and  demesmerize. 

'  November  17th. — Public  meeting,  at  which  Mr.  Cavenagh  gave  a  lecture,  ''  Spiritualism 
and  its  Future  Possibilities,"  the  attendance  being  nearly  two  hundred. 

'  December  1st. — This  evening  Mr.  Kice,  the  "  brain  reader"  (from  America),  gave  the 
society  some  very  interesting  tests  of  his  wonderful  powers. 

'  J.  Bowie  Wilson,  Chairman.' 
"  The  following  officers  were  elected  for  the  year  :  President,  Hon.  J.  Bowie  Wilson, 
re-elected;  vice-presidents,  Milner  Stephen,   F.G.S.,  &c.,  &c.,  Hugh  Patersou  ;  treasurer, 
C  Cavenagh  ;  librarian,  F.  Hosier,  re-elected  ;  secretary,  Hugh  Paterson,  jun.,  re-elected; 
and  a  comnaittee  of  ten. 

"  The  retiring  officers  were  given  a  vote  of  thanks,  and  a  very  successful  session 
closed. 

"L,  E.  Haecus. 
"Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  January  19th,  1880." 

Should  this  volume  survive  the  present  generation  even  such  simple 
records  as  the  above  may  prove  milestones  on  the  highway  of  a  great  and 
wonderful  movement,  the  full  understanding  of  which,  will  be  aided  by  the 
mere  re-echo  of  the  name  of  those  who  were  its  earliest  standard  bearers. 
If  we  now  close  our  notice  of  Spiritualism  on  this  great  Australasian 
continent,  it  is  for  lack  of  space,  not  of  abundant  materials  foi  a  far  more 
extended  report.  Perhaps  we  should  add,  that  no  country  of  the  earth 
proves  more  conclusively  than  Australia  how  much  is  due  to  the  unselfish 
efforts  of  individuals.  To  speak  of  Spiritualism  in  that  country,  is  to  speak 
of  the  indefatigable  labourers  who  have  given  it  form  and  direction. 

The  all-seeing  Spirit  alone  can  determine  the  future  of  the  movement 
there,  as  elsewhere,  but  if  ever  it  fails  in  Australia,  it  will  be  because  future 
generations  are  not  worthy  of  it,  and  fail  to  produce  new  recruits  equal  in 
courage,  devotion,  and  abiUty,  to  the  now  fast-thinning  ranks  of  the  "  old 
guard,"  to  whose  gallant  endeavour  and  noble  service,  the  present  status  of 
Spiritualism  in  Australia  is  due. 

262  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER    XXXII. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     NEW     ZEALAND. 

Ere  we  quit  the  Southern  waters  which  lave  the  vast  seaboard  of  Australia, 
we  must  take  a  cursory  glance  at  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  the  fair 
islands  which  form  the  brightest  gem  of  the  Pacific  Ocean — New  Zealand. 
Here,  as  in  Australia,  Spiritualism  has  made  a  deep  mark,  and  one  that 
promises  to  be  very  permanent ;  but  though  the  plan  of  this  work  does  not 
admit  of  oar  lingering  upon  any  nation's  Spiritual  experiences  antecedent 
to  the  present  century,  we  are  disposed  to  impinge  upon  this  set  purpose, 
in  favour  of  the  fine  and  singular  race  whom  the  white  pioneers  of  the  land 
found  in  its  possession,  and  who  are  now  known  as  the  "  Maoris." 
Spiritualism  has  not  only  been  the  religion  of  this  people  from  time  imme- 
morial, but  this  belief  still  prevails  amongst  the  broken  remnants  of  the 
tribes  which  inhabit  the  land.  There  are,  moreover,  so  many  features  of 
resemblance  between  the  Maoris'  modes  of  spirt  communion,  and  those 
with  which  the  Spiritualists  of  the  New  Dispensation  are  familiar,  that  we 
deem  a  few  items  of  information  on  this  subject  may  be  acceptable,  and  in 
harmony  with  our  Nineteenth  Century  Spiritual  revelations. 

In  their  ideas  of  Creation,  the  Maoris  are  essentially  evolutionists,  and 
Darwin  would  have  found  a  mental  field  amongst  them,  fully  prepared  for 
the  reception  of  his  plausible  philosophy  of  the  ascent  of  man. 

The  following  curious  examples  of  Maori  poetry,  although  greatly  marred 
by  translation,  will  give  an  approximate  idea  of  the  methods  of  classifying 
the  order  of  unfoldment  as  it  appeared  to  the  savage  mind  of  uncounted 
ages  ago.  The  words  are  given  by  the  Tohungas  or  Priests  amongst  the 
tribes,  and  after  having  been  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation, 
are  translated  by  the  various  white  missionaries  who  have  become  familiar 
with  their  language.  We  can  only  give  the  following  brief  extracts  from  a 
vast  mass  of  similar  legendary  recitations  : — 

"of  the  beginning. 

"  From  the  conception,  the  increase; 
From  the  increase,  the  thought ; 
From  the  thought,  the  remembrance  ; 
From  the  remembrance,  the  consciousness  ; 
From  the  consciousness,  the  desire." 

OF   THE   FIRST   LONG,    LONG,    NIGHT. 

'  The  word  became  fruitful ; 
It  dwelt  with  the  feeble  glimmering. 
It  brought  forth  night ; 
The  great  night,  the  long  night, 
Night,  blackness,  evermore  ; 
The  lowest  night,  the  lofty  night ; 
The  thick  night  to  be  felt ; 
The  night  to  be  touched  ; 
The  night  not  to  be  seen  ; 
The  night  of  death,  yet  alive  ; 
No  eyes  yet  in  the  world." 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  263 

''when  the  light  comes  first, 

"  From  the  nothing,  the  begetting. 
From  the  nothing,  the  increase  ; 
From  the  nothing,  the  abundance  ; 
The  power  of  increasing  ; 
The  living  breath, — the  world. 
The  living  breath  ;  it  dwelt  with  the  empty  space, 
And  thence  came  the  air  : 
The  air  above,  around,  the  all  ; 
The  atmosphere,  which  floats  above 
The  great  firmament ;  the  early  dawn, 
The  glimmering  growing  light ; 
The  atmosphere  dwelt  with  the  heat, 
And  thence  proceeded  the  mighty  sun  ; 
And  the  moon  sprung  forth. 

And  the  chief  eyes  of  Heaven,  the  stars  came  out. 
Then  the  Heavens  became  hght ; 
Then  the  grey  earth  became  light ; 
The  early  dawn  came,  the  day  was  born  ; 
The  mid  day, — the  blaze  of  day  from  the  sky." 

"  The  fourth  period,"  gives  the  names  of  islands,  and  the  places  which 
were  the  cradle  of  the  race  of  men. 

The  land  being  formed,  "  the  fifth  period  "  produces  the  gods  of  many 
things,  and  many  creatures.  "  The  sixth  period,"  is  assigned  to  the  pro- 
duction of  men.  Amidst  an  immense  store  of  legendary  description  of  the 
heavens,  seas,  gods,  and  other  evoluted  forms,  there  is  another  "  song," 
descriptive  of  liow  the  earth  changed  from  its  ancient  condition  of 
barrenness : — 

"  The  earth's  skin  was  once  the  tutu. 
Her  garment  was  the  weAe  weAe. 
Her  mantle  was  the  bramble, 
The  coarse  stinging  nettle. 

Don't  grieve  that  the  earth  is  covered  with  water. 
Don't  lament  for  the  length  of  time. 
The  ocean's  reign  shall  be  broken. 
The  ocean's  surface  shall  be  rough 
With  the  lands  springing  up  in  it ; 
With  mountains  very  high, 
Girdling  round  the  sea. 

Yes,  round  the  sea,  and  rising  through  the  waves. 
The  waves  shall  wash  their  feet ; 
The  high  mountains  full  of  fire. 
Broken  up  shall  you  be,  oh  earth  ; 
Pierced  thro'  you  white  waves  ; 
Grieve  not  earth  for  your  water  covered  head. 
Lament  not  seas  for  your 
Mountains  springing  up  ; — 
Lament  not  !" 

It  would  require  a  volume  to  describe  the  intricacies  of  Maori  mythology, 
in  which  gods,  men,  demons,  monsters,  heroes,  and  spirits  of  the  dead,  are 
the  actors.  The  mythology  of  these  islanders  is  not  less  diffuse  or  compli- 
cated than  that  of  the  ancient  Greeks.  But  the  vivid  ideaUty  and  poetic 
fantasies  of  the  Greek  mind,  are  no  marvel,  because  they  e??ianaie  from  the 
Greeks. 

The  endless  convolutions  of  uncurbed  fancy  by  which  the  Greeks  imper- 
sonated the  powers  of  nature,  are  of  course  admirable,  because  they  originate 
in  Grecian  ideality,  and  are  labelled  "  classical  lore." 

2  64  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  Maori  sings,  believes,  and  teaches,  all  that  the  Greek  classics 
enshrine,  but  alas  !  his  legends  only  bear  the  opprobrious  name  of  "savage 
superstitions."  Read  however  the  Rev.  Richard  Taylor's  Te  Tka  a  Maui, 
from  which  our  extracts  are  taken,  and  the  difference  between  "classical 
lore"  and  "savage  superstitions"  will  seem  very  slight;  in  fact,  the  greatest 
marvel  of  all  is,  where  either  Greek  or  Maori  got  their  idedity  from? 
Amidst  the  mythological  personages  of  New  Zealand,  "  the  Spirits  of  the 
dead  "  ever  play  a  very  prominent  part,  and  our  chief  interest  in  noticing 
the  Maoris  at  all,  lies  in  the  fact,  that  belief  in,  and  open  communion  with 
these  Spirits,  still  exists.  The  priests  or  "  Tohungas  "  are  unmistakably 
"  Mediums,"  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  term.  Sometimes  they  are  born 
with  their  gift,  and  sometimes  they  are  devoted  to  the  priestly  office  by 
their  parents,  and  acquire  their  powers  after  the  fashion  of  Eastern  ecstatics, 
by  prayer,  fasting,  and  contemplation. 

That  good  prophets  exist  amongst  the  Maoris  has  been  abundantly 
proved,  even  to  the  cold  materialistic  government  that  has  absorbed  their 
country.  During  the  time  when  Great  Britain  busied  herself  in  appro- 
priating New  Zealand,  on  the  plea  of  a  "  discovery,"  her  officials  frequently 
wrote  home,  that  the  Maori  would  never  be  conquered  wholly  ;  information 
of  the  parties  sent  out  to  attack  them  ;  the  very  colour  of  the  boats,  and  the 
hour  when  they  would  arrive ;  the  number  of  the  enemy,  and  all  particulars 
essential  to  their  safety,  being  invariably  commmiicated  to  the  tribes  before- 
hand,  by  their  prophets  or  Tohungas. 

The  state  of  preparation  in  which  the  English  found  "  the  savages,"  fully 
verified  this  claim,  and  proved  the  fact  of  prevision,  affirmed  to  exist 
amongst  them. 

The  best  natural  prophets  and  seers  amongst  the  Maoris  are,  as  amongst 
the  Spiritualists,  of  the  female  sex ;  and  although  the  missionaries  try  to 
account  for  the  marvellous  powers  they  exhibit,  above  all,  for  the  sound  of 
the  Spirit  voice,  which  is  a  common  phase  in  their  communion  with  the 
dead — on  the  hypothesis  that  the  women  who  practise  "  the  arts  of 
sorcery,"  are  ventriloquists — this  attempted  explanation  rarely  covers  the 
ground  of  the  intelligence  which  is  received. 

The  author  has  herself  had  several  proofs  of  the  Mediumistic  power 
possessed  by  these  ^^  savages  "  but  as  her  experiences  may  be  deemed  of  too 
personal  a  character,  we  shall  select  our  examples  from  other  sources. 
One  of  these  is  furnished  by  a  Mr.  Marsden,  a  person  who  was  well  known 
in  the  early  days  of  New  Zealand's  colonial  history,  as  a  miner,  who  grew 
rich  "through  Spiritual  communications."  Mr.  Marsden  was  a  gentleman 
who  had  spent  much  time  amongst  the  Maoris,  and  who  still  keeps  a 
residence  in  "  the  King  country,"  that  is — the  district  of  which  they  hold 
control, 

Mr.  Marsden  informed  the  author,  that  his  success  as  a  gold  miner,  was 
entirely  due  to  a  communication  he  had  received  through  a  native  woman, 
who  claimed  to  have  the  power  of  bringing  dowjt  Spirits — the  Maoris, 
be  it  remembered,  always  insisting  that  the  Spirits  descend  through  the  air 
to  earth,  to  visit  mortals. 

Mr.  Marsden  had  long  been  prospecting  unsuccessfully  in  the  gold 
regions.  He  had  a  friend  in  partnership  with  him,  to  whom  he  was  much 
attached,  but  who  had  been  accidentally  killed  by  a  fall  from  a  cliff. 

The  Spirit  of  this  man  came  unsolicited,  on  an  occasion  when  Mr, 
Marsden  was  consulting  a  native  seeress,  for  the  purpose  of  endeavouring 
to  trace  out  what  had  become  of  a  valuable  watch  which  he  had  lost. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  265 

The  voice  of  the  Spirit  was  first  heard  in  the  air,  apparently  above  the 
roof  of  the  hut  in  which  they  sat,  calling  Mr.  Marsden  by  his  familiar 
name  of  "Mars.''  Greatly  startled  by  these  sounds,  several  times  repeated, 
at  the  Medium's  command,  he  remained  perfectly  still  until  the  voice  of  his 
friend  speaking  m  his  well-remembered  Scotch  accent  sounded  close  to  his 
ear,  whilst  a  column  of  grey  misty  substance  reared  itself  up  by  his  side. 
This  apparition  was  plainly  visible  in  the  subdued  light  of  the  hut,  to  which 
there  was  only  one  open  entrance,  but  no  window.  Though  he  was  much 
startled  by  what  he  saw  and  heard,  Mr.  Marsden  had  presence  of  mind 
enough  to  gently  put  his  hand  through  the  misty  column  which  remained 
intact,  as  if  its  substance  offered  no  resistance  to  the  touch.  Being 
admonished  by  an  earnest  whisper  from  the  Maori  woman,  who  had  fallen 
on  her  knees  before  the  apparition,  to  keep  still,  he  obeyed,  when  a  voice — 
seemingly  from  an  immense  distance  off — yet  speaking  unmistakably  in  his 
friend's  Scotch  accents,  advised  him  to  let  the  watch  alone — for  it  was 
irreparably  gone — but  to  go  to  the  stream  on  the  banks  of  which  they  had 
last  had  a  meal  together ;  trace  it  up  for  six  miles  and  a  half,  and  then,  by 
following  its  course  amidst  the  forest,  he  would  come  to  a  pile,  which  would 
make  him  rich,  if  he  chose  to  remain  so. 

Whilst  he  was  waiting  and  listening  breathlessly  to  hear  more,  Mr. 
Marsden  was  startled  by  a  slight  detonation  at  his  side.  Turning  his  head 
he  observed  that  the  column  of  mist  was  gone,  and  in  its  place,  a  quick 
flash,  like  the  reflection  of  a  candle,  was  all  that  he  beheld.  Here  the 
seance  ended,  and  the  astonished  miner  left  the  hut,  convinced  that  he  had 
heard  the  Spirit  of  his  friend  talking  with  him.  He  added,  that  he  followed 
the  directions  given  implicitly,  and  came  to  a  mass  of  surface  gold  lying 
on  the  stones  at  the  bottom  of  the  brook  in  the  depth  of  the  forest.  This 
he  gathered  up,  and  though  he  prospected  for  several  days  in  and  about 
that  spot,  he  never  found  another  particle  of  the  precious  metal.  That 
which  he  had  secured,  he  added,  with  a  deep  sigh,  was  indeed  enough  to 
have  made  him  independent  for  life,  had  it  not  soon  been  squandered  in 
fruitless  speculations. 

Several  accounts  are  extant  of  Spiritualism  amongst  the  Maoris,  one  of 
the  most  curious  and  graphic,  being  a  personal  narrative,  written  by  General 
Cummings,  in  a  small  volume  called  "  Old  New  Zealand." 

The  party  who  lent  this  work  for  perusal  to  the  author,  was  well  acquainted 
with  General  Cummings,  and  vouched  for  his  truth  and  reUability  in  every 
particular.  Although  the  narrative  we  are  about  to  quote  has  often  been 
retailed  in  magazines  and  other  periodicals,  it  was  so  thoroughly  authenti- 
cated by  the  author's  friend  thai  we  give  it  place  once  more  in  this 
volume,  as  an  example  of  the  kind  of  SpirituaHsm  practised  amongst  the 
Maoris. 

A  popular  young  chief  who  had  acquired  a  fair  knowledge  of  the  English 
language,  and  with  whom  General  Cummings  was  very  intimate,  had  been 
appointed  registrar  of  births  and  deaths. 

General  Cummings  occupied  a  portion  of  his  office,  but  they  were  about 
to  remove  to  a  more  convenient  place,  when  the  young  Maori  encountered 
a  violent  death.  In  changing  the  office,  the  book  of  registries  was  missing, 
and  much  inconvenience  was  occasioned  by  its  loss.  A  short  time  after 
the  decease  of  his  friend.  General  Cummings  was  informed  that  his  relatives 
intended  to  invoke  his  spirit,  and  that  as  the  "  Pakeha "  (white  man)  had 
been  much  beloved  by  him,  he  might  if  he  chose,  be  present. 

Notwithstanding  his   inveterate   scepticism,  the  General   accepted  this 

2  66  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

invitation,  mentally  resolving  "  to  keep  his  ears  and  eyes  wide  open."     The 
narrator  then  continues  as  follows  : — 

"The  appointed  time  came.  Fires  were  lit.  The  Tohunga  repaired  to  the  darkest 
corner  of  the  room.  All  was  silence,  save  the  sobbing  of  the  sisters  of  the  deceased 
warrior-chief.  There  were  thirty  of  us,  sitting  on  the  rush-strewn  floor,  the  door  shut, 
and  the  fire  now  burning  down  to  embers.  Suddenly  there  came  a  voice  out  from  the 
partial  darkness,  'Salutation,  salutation  to  my  family,  to  my  tribe,  to  you,  palceha,  my 
friend  !'  Our  feelings  were  taken  by  storm.  The  oldest  sister  screamed,  and  rushed 
with  extended  arms  in  the  direction  from  whence  the  voice  came.  Her  brother,  seizing, 
restrained  her  by  main  force.  Others  exclaimed,  '  Is  it  you  ?  is  it  you  ?  truly  it  is  you  ! 
aue  !  aue  ! '  and  fell  quite  insensible  upon  the  floor.  The  older  women,  and  some  of  the 
aged  men,  were  not  moved  in  the  slightest  degree,  though  believing  it  to  be  the  spirit  of 
the  chief. 

"  Whilst  reflecting  upon  the  novelty  of  the  scene,  the  '  darkness  visible,'  and  the  deep 
interest  manifest,  the  spirit  spoke  again, '  Speak  to  me,  my  family  ;  speak  to  me,  my  tribe  ; 
speak  to  me,  the  pakeha  ! '  At  last  the  silence  gave  way,  and  the  brother  spoke  :  '  How  is  it 
with  you  !  Is  it  well  with  you  in  that  country  ? '  The  answer  came,  though  not  in  the 
voice  of  the  Tohunga-medium,  but  in  strange,  sepulchral  sounds  :  '  It  is  well  with  me  : 
my  place  is  a  good  place.  I  have  seen  our  friends  :  they  are  all  with  me  !'  A  woman 
from  another  part  of  the  room  now  anxiously  cried  out,  '  Have  you  seen  my  sister  ? ' — 
'  Yes,  I  have  seen  her  :  she  is  happy  in  our  beautiful  country.' — '  Tell  her  my  love  so 
great  for  her  will  never  cease.' — 'Yes,  I  will  bear  the  message.'  Here  the  native  woman 
burst  into  tears,  and  my  own  bosom  swelled  in  sympathy. 

"  The  spirit  speaking  again,  giving  directions  about  property  and  keepsakes,  I  thought 
I  would  more  thoroughly  test  the  genuineness  of  all  this  ;  and  I  said,  '  We  cannot  find 
your  book  with  the  registered  names  ;  where  have  you  concealed  it  ? '  The  answer  came 
instantly,  '  I  concealed  it  between  the  tahuhu  of  my  house,  and  the  thatch  ;  straight  over 
you,  as  you  go  in  at  the  door.'  The  brother  rushed  out  to  see.  All  was  silence.  In  five 
minutes  he  came  hurriedly  back,  with  the  book  in  his  hand  !     It  astonished  me. 

"  It  was  now  late  ;  and  the  spirit  suddenly  said,  '  Farewell,  my  family,  farewell,  my 
tribe  :  I  go.'  Those  present  breathed  an  impressive  farewell ;  when  the  spirit  cried  out 
again,  from  high  in  the  air,  '  Farewell  ! ' 

"  This,  though  seemingly  tragical,  is  in  every  respect  literally  true.  But  what  was  it  ? 
ventriloquism,  the  devil,  or  what !     .     .     ." 

The  Rev.  Richard  Taylor,  a  good  and  learned  missionary,  one  who,  after 
many  years'  residence  amongst  the  natives,  wrote  a  valuable  treatise  on  their 
lives,  traditions,  and  customs,  entitled  Te  Tha  a  Maui,  dilates  most 
ingenuously  on  the  striking  similarity  of  the  Maoris'  spells,  enchantments, 
&c.,  &c.,  with  those  practised  by  the  ancient  Hebrews.  He  likens  the 
scene  of  destruction  by  which  a  once  celebrated  Wharekura,  or  Temple, 
was  demolished,  and  the  worshippers  scattered,  to  the  destruction  of  the 
Tower  of  Babel.  His  descriptions  of  the  tapu,  or  curse,  which  attached  to 
certain  things  and  places  forbidden  to  be  touched  or  entered,  reads  like 
Leviticus  and  Deuteronomy,  and  precisely  resembles  the  taboo  of  the 
Hebrews,  by  which  certain  objects,  food,  and  persons,  rendered  those  that 
came  in  contact  with  them  "  unclean." 

Their  prophets  officiate  and  speak  oracularly,  like  the  prophets  of  Israel. 
They  have  multitudes  of  Karakias,  or  spells — designed  to  act  as  curses  or 
blessings,  the  translations  of  which  read  strangely  like  the  dying  words  of 
Israel  to  his  sons,  or  the  curse  and  blessing  on  "Ebal  and  Gerizim." 
Maoris  go  up  to  enquire  of  the  gods,  precisely  as  the  Israelites  "  enquired 
of  the  Lord,"  and  the  Tohungas,  or  priests,  answer  them,  in  the  name  of 
the  gods,  by  staves,  by  stones,  by  lots,  by  arrows,  and  a  voice,  exactly  as  the 
priests  of  Israel  did,  as  described  in  Godwyn's  "Antiquities  of  the  Jews." 
This  is  neither  the  time  nor  place  to  enquire  whence  this  wonderful  parity 
of  customs,  traditions,  and  modes  of  religious  observance  arose,  between 
nations  as  widely  separated  by  oceans  and  continents,  as  by  epochs  of  time ; 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  267 

but  one  of  the  curious  circumstances  in  this  connection  which  does  belong  to 
our  own  time,  is  the  mode  in  which  reverend  Christian  missionaries  com- 
ment on  these  marvellous  resemblances,  invariably  referring  the  customs, 
invocations,  sacrifices,  and  other  formulse  practised  by  the  Hebrews  to 
Divine  command,  whilst  the  almost  identical  rites  and  ceremonies  practised 
by  a  far  distant  race  of  Savages,  are  regarded  as  evidence  of  their  utter 
degradation  and  barbaric  superstition. 

We  regret  being  unable  to  pursue  the  subject  of  New  Zealand  Spirituality 
or  Superstitio7i — let  the  reader  adopt  whichever  term  his  predilections  incline 
him  to — any  farther.  Mysterious  in  their  origin,  and  strongly  indicative 
in  their  present  application  of  a  beHef  in  the  potencies  of  "  magnetism  " 
and  "psychology,"  this  interesting  people  illustrate  fully,  to  the  very  few 
who  are  enabled  to  gain  an  inside  view  of  their  real  lives  and  customs, 
the  astounding  fact  that  the  modern  SpirituaUsm,  which  seems  to  have 
fallen  upon  this  century  as  a  new  revelation,  not  only  finds  a  parallel  in 
the  Biblical  account  of  the  Jewish  nation,  but  in  its  more  subtle  phases  of 
science  through  magnetism  and  psychology,  has  been,  and  still  is  un- 
consciously practised  by  those  children  of  nature  whom  we  contemptuously 
call  "heathens"  and  "savages."  If  it  be  a  subject  quite  worthy  of 
philosophic  research  to  endeavour  to  find  a  common  origin  for  language, 
how  much  more  so  would  it  be  to  endeavour  to  find  the  true  root  of  all 
religious  or  Spiritual  ideas  and  customs  ! 

If  animal  magnetism  or  the  transference  of  invisible  force  and  influence 
from  body  to  body  be  a  proven  fact,  and  psychology,  or  the  impress  of 
mind  upon  mind  be  a  truth,  which  the  poorest  experimenter  in  "  electro 
biology  "  can  demonstrate,  then  would  it  not  be  a  subject  well  worthy  the 
attention  of  the  scholar,  especially  the  psychologist,  to  trace  out  the  source 
from  whence  savage  nations  have  learned  the  use  of  these  sovereign 
potencies,  and  that  without  books,  written  language,  or  philosophic  under- 
standing of  what  they  do  ? 

Whilst  every  phase  of  Spiritual  power  now  recognised  by  Spiritualists 
and  attributed  to  the  influence  of  deceased  human  beings  is  known  and 
practised  more  or  less  inteUigently  by  the  New  Zealand  Maoris,  their 
Spiritual  beliefs,  although  not  eradicated,  are  measurably  modified  by  the 
new  doctrines  introduced  amongst  them  by  Christian  missionaries.  A 
remarkable  example  of  the  grafting  process  by  which  new  forms  are  being 
welded  into  ancient  ideas,  is  found  in  the  person  of  the  celebrated  Maori 
Prophet,  "  Te  Whiti." 

This  remarkable  personage  still  exercises  unbounded  influence  over  the 
tribes  amongst  whom  he  resides,  in  fact  he  is  considered  by  them  very 
much  in  the  same  Hght  as  Christians  esteem  the  Founder  of  their  faith. 
His  word  is  law,  his  command  is  regarded  as  nothing  short  of  divine,  and 
his  prophecies  are  to  the  Maori,  as  the  word  of  fate.  We  shall  conclude 
this  chapter,  the  only  one  we  can  devote  to  the  Spiritualism  of  a  so-called 
"  savage  people,"  with  a  brief  account  of  Te  Whiti,  published  in  a  San 
Francisco  paper,  the  closing  paragraphs  of  which,  in  especial,  we  commend 
to  the  candid  thinker's  consideration.  The  sketch  is  dated  August^  1879, 
and  reads  thus  : — 

"  A  MAORI  PROPHET  LEADER. 

"  Erueti,  now  known  as  Te  Whiti,  is  the  grandson  of  Paora  (Paul)  Kukutai,  who  was 
chief  of  the  Pautukai  tribe  when  this  district  was  first  occupied  by  European  settlers. 
The  chief  of  the  tribe  now  is  Ruakeri,  also  a  grandson  of  the  old  chief,  though  his  influ- 
ence is  but  nominal,  being  overshadowed  by  that  of  the  great  prophet  leader  Te  Whiti. 

268  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

Erueti  was  in  Ms  youth  a  pupil  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Riemensehneider,  head  of  the  now  defunct 
Wesleyan  mission- station  at  Warea,  and  ib  was  here  that  he  obtained  his  intimate  know- 
ledge of  the  Bible,  which  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  he  knows  'oy  heart,  and  his  thorough 
acquaintance  with  which  he  displays  with  so  much  effect  in  his  public  manifestos  and 
orations.  He  was  looked  upon  by  Mr.  Riemensehneider  as  an  earnest  Chris  ian,  and 
when  his  pupilage  ended,  the  rev.  gentleman  presented  him  with  a  large  Bible,  which  he 
stiU  possesses. 

"  He  first  came  prominently  into  notice  as  a  leading  man  among  his  people  in  1862,  on 
the  occasion  of  the  wreck  of  the  steamship  "Lord  Worsley,"  in  Te  Namu  Bay,  Opunake. 
It  was  chiefly  through  the  exertions  of  Erueti  that  the  passengers  were  allowed  to  pro- 
ceed to  New  Plymouth,  and  also  1,500  ounces  of  gold  on  board  the  ship  were  given  up. 
Soon  after  this  Erueti  changed  his  name  to  Te  Whiti ;  after  an  old  Pah  of  the  tribe, 
situate  in  the  vicinity  of  New  Plymouth,  near  the  feugarloaf  Peak. 

"  In  1868,  Mr,  Parris,  then  civil  commissioner,  had  an  interview  with  him.  Mr.  Parris 
stated  that  the  Parihaka  natives  were,  without  exception,  Kingites,  and  Te  Whiti  was 
looked  up  to  by  them  as  being  little,  if  at  all,  inferior  to  the  king ;  that  all  he  uttered  was 
spoken  in  a  very  calm  manner,  though  the  man  was  evidently  deeply  convinced  that  he 
was  under  supernatural  influence,  no  doubt  the  result  of  the  secluded  life  he  had  then 
been  leading  for  some  years. 

"  Such  is  the  man  who,  at  the  time  the  Grey  Government  was  trying  to  purchase  the 
adherence  of  Tawhaio  and  Rewhi,  again  lifted  his  voice  and  called  on  all  Maoris  to  rally 
round  him,  and  said  that  their  lands  should  be  returned  to  tbem,  stUl  protesting  against 
fighting,  but  announcing  that  the  settlers  would  be  removed  by  some  supernatural  means. 
When  the  survey  of  the  Waimate  plains  was  commenced,  it  was  thought  that  Te  Whiti 
would  make  some  demonstration,  but  he  still  confined  himself  to  prophecy  ;  though, 
when  Maclean,  the  cook  to  one  of  the  survey  parties  in  the  Waitoturu  district,  was  mur- 
dered by  Hiroki,  and  the  murderer  took  refuge  at  Parihaka,  Te  Whiti  sheltered  him  and 
refused  to  allow  him  to  be  given  up  ;  and  on  the  chief  of  the  tribe  to  which  Hiroki 
belonged,  proceeding  with  some  of  his  men  to  Parihaka  to  demand  that  he  should  be 
surrendered  to  them  and  given  over  to  take  his  trial,  Te  Whiti  ordered  that  all  the  party, 
with  the  exception  of  a  European  who  accompanied  them,  should  be  killed  if  they  did  not 
at  once  retire.  In  March  last  the  Hon.  Mr.  Sheenan,  native  minister,  went  to  the  Pari- 
haka meeting  and  demanded  the  surrender  of  the  murdei'er.  Te  Whiti's  reply  was  that 
Hiroki  was  not  so  guilty  as  the  Government ;  he  had  only  killed  a  man,  while  they  had 
killed  the  land.  He  therefore  refused  to  allow  Hiroki  to  be  given  up,  and  Mr.  Sheenan 
left  Parihaka.  The  very  next  day  Te  Whiti  issued  orders  to  his  natives  to  remove  all  the 
surveyors  and  their  gangs  from  the  Waimate  Plains,  but  without  any  shedding  of  blood, 
which  was  accordingly  done,  men  and  instruments  being  carted  across  the  Waingogoro 
river.  Parihaka  is  now  in  Alsatia,  where  any  murderer  or  other  criminal  of  the  Maori 
race  is  secure  from  the  arm  of  the  law,  Te  Whiti  having  proclaimed  it  a  city  of  refuge. 
The  place  is  only  five  miles  from  the  main  south  road,  and  barely  six  miles  from  the 
European  settlers  at  Okato.  In  a  speech  which  Te  Whiti  delivered  at  Parihaka  in  June 
last,  he  said  that  the  Government  would  send  large  forces  to  Parihaka,  and  take  him  (Te 
Whiti)  and  crucify  him.  He  says  he  will  not  offer  any  resistance  to  the  soldiers  when 
they  come,  but  that  he  will  gladly  be  crucified.  He  also  states  that  the  Government  are 
determined  to  put  surveyors  on  the  plains  ;  but  he  will  not  fight  them.  Te  Whiti  further 
stated  that  he  received  a  telegram  from  Sir  George  Grey  on  the  I7th  of  June,  proposing 
to  send  a  commission  to  investigate  the  claims  of  the  natives  to  the  confiscated  lands, 
inviting  him  (Te  Whiti)  to  employ  a  lawyer  to  look  after  his  interests,  the  Government 
paying  all  the  expenses.  Te  Whiti  said  his  answer  was  that  the  matter  had  been  delayed 
too  long  ;  that  the  end  of  all  things  was  at  hand,  courts  and  commissions  included.  He 
added  :  '  When  I  speak  of  the  land,  the  survey,  the  ploughing,  and  such  matters  of  little 
consequence  their  (the  reporters')  pencils  fly  with  the  speed  of  the  wind  ;  but  when  I 
speak  of  the  words  of  the  Spirit,  they  say,  "  This  is  the  dream  of  a  madman."  They  are 
so  intent  on  accumulating  wealth,  that  nothing  appears  to  interest  them  except  what  is  in 
some  way  connected  with  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  The  storekeeper  who  has  succeeded 
in  acquiring  wealth  by  short  weight  and  inferior  articles,  and  the  numerous  ways  of 
picking  and  stealing  known  only  to  the  initiated — the  men  who  steal  the  land  of  the 
Maori  and  acquire  flocks  of  sheep  and  herds  of  cattle — the  men  who  would  take  the  bread 
out  of  the  mouths  of  the  widow  and  fatherless,  and  acquire  great  riches  by  so  doing,  are 
all  looked  upon  as  gentlemen  of  property,  while  the  humble  seeker  after  truth  is  passed 
by  unknown  and  unheeded.  The  time  is  at  hand  when  their  goods  will  rot  in  their  stores, 
their  ships  will  rot  in  their  harbours  for  want  of  sailors  to  work  them,  the  merchants  will 
wring  their  hands  in  despair  when  they  see  all  their  accumulation  of  riches  melt  away 
like  the  morning  mist  before  the  rising  sun.' " 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  269 

CHAPTER    XXXIII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    NEW   ZEALAND    (CONCLUDED.) 

We  must  now  call  attention  to  the  earliest  attempts  of  a  few  earnest  inves- 
tigators in  New  Zealand,  to  promote  the  knowledge  of  the  modern  move- 
ment known  as  "  Spiritualism." 

.  The  first  efforts  in  this  direction  were  made  by  those  who  had  brought 
with  them  from  older  countries,  the  tidings  of  the  great  Spiritual  outpouring. 

By  these  pioneers,  circles  were  formed  in  private  families  with  the  usual 
results  of  Mediumistic  unfoldment.  Amongst  the  earliest  investigators  in 
Dunedin,  one  of  the  largest  and  most  flourishing  cities  in  the  islands — 
was  a  gentleman  who  now  holds  a  prominent  and  influential  position  in  the 
community,  Mr.  John  Logan.  Before  this  esteemed  citizen  had  become 
publicly  identified  with  the  cause  of  Spirituahsm,  an  association  had  been 
formed,  the  members  of  which  steadily  pursued  their  investigations  in 
private  circles  and  semi-public  gatherings.  One  of  the  most  marked 
events  in  connection  with  the  early  development  of  Spiritualism  in  Dunedin 
however,  was  the  arraignment  and  church  trial  of  Mr.  Logan,  the  circum- 
stances of  which  may  be  briefly  summed  up  as  follows.  This  gentleman, 
although  holding  a  high  and  dignified  position  in  the  first  Presbyterian 
church  of  the  city,  had  not  only  dared  to  attend  circles  and  witness 
Spiritualistic  phenomena,  but  it  was  currently  reported  that  one  of  his  own 
near  relatives  was  a  very  remarkable  Medium. 

Having  become  interested  in  the  movement  through  various  influences, 
Mr.  Logan  completed  the  list  of  his  enormities  in  the  eyes  of  his  Christian 
brethren,  by  attending  the  lectures  of  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Peebles,  and  actually 
appearing  with  that  arch-heretic  on  the  stage  of  the  Princess  Theatre,  on 
"  the  Lord's  day,"  as  the  complaint  against  him  set  forth.  To  make  matters 
worse,  the  offender  would  neither  express  penitence  nor  promise  to  desist 
from  his  desperate  acts  of  heresy  for  the  future,  to  the  committee  of  church 
dignitaries  who  waited  on  him,  with  a  view  of  remonstrating  on  the  atrocity 
of  his  conduct.  On  the  contrary,  the  sturdy  Scotch  gentleman,  afi&rmed 
his  right  to  visit  Spiritual  or  any  other  meetings,  when  and  where  he 
pleased,  whether  on  the  Lord's  Day,  or  any  other  day,  in  public  or  in 
private. 

What  was  to  be  done  ?  Mr.  Logan  was  rich  and  powerful.  He  had 
been  a  pillar  in  the  church,  and  his  example  and  influence  could  not  fail 
to  lead  other  sheep  astray,  besides  involving  the  entire  church  in  the  awful 
scandal  of  his  ovvn  dereliction  ! 

On  the  19th  of  March,  1873,  Mr.  Logan  was  summoned  to  appear  before 
a  Church  Convocation,  to  be  held  for  the  purpose  of  trying  his  case,  and  if 
necessary,  dealing  with  his  grave  dehnquency. 

Up  to  this  time,  the  noble  wife  of  the  accused  gentleman  had  not  followed 
him  in  his  Spiritual  researches  ;  in  fact,  she  had  manifested  no  sympathy  in 
the  subject  to  which  they  related.  In  the  trying  hour  of  her  good  husband's 
arraignment  however,  she  was  by  his  side,  and  listened  attentively  to  the 
entire  conduct  of  the  high-handed  procedure  of  which  he  was  the  victim. 

2  70  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  farce  of  a  modern  "  star  chamber "  trial  ended,  as  might  have  been 
expected,  by  Mr.  Logan's  conviction,  and  excommunication  from  the  heavenly 
benefits  and  heavenly  hopes  of  which  the  Presbyterian  Synod  claimed  to 
be  the  appointed  dispensers.  Before  the  final  breaking  up  of  this  most 
reverend  and  fraternal  assembly  of  Christians,  Mrs.  Logan,  moved  by  those 
tender  feminine  impulses  which  rendered  the  severance  of  once  cherished 
ties  of  friendship  and  religious  communion  very  painful  to  her,  rose  up  in 
her  place,  and  with  all  the  dignity  and  earnestness  which  mark  this  estimable 
lady,  she  asked  in  thrilling  tones,  if  there  was  no  one  there  to  speak  for  John 
Logan  ?  No  voice  responded.  Of  all  the  former  friends  and  associates 
who  had  been  bound  to  John  Logan  by  ties  of  gratitude,  as  well  as  com- 
panionship in  a  foreign  land,  not  one  held  out  a  hand  to  sustain  him,  not 
one  breathed  a  word  to  mitigate  the  insensate  tyranny  of  the  sentence 
pronounced  upon  him  !  It  seemed  as  if  the  ice  bolts  of  a  hard  and  savage 
theology  had  shut  humanity  out  of  the  hearts  of  those  present,  even  as 
they  would  have  shut  a  good  man  out  of  heaven,  for  daring  to  follow  the 
dictates  of  his  conscience. 

Again  and  yet  again  the  sweet  voice  of  the  brave  lady  rang  through  the 
stillness  of  that  guilty  crowd,  in  the  pathetic  question,  "  Is  there  no  one 
here  to  speak  a  word  for  John  Logan?"  When  it  was  fully  shown  that 
not  one  recreant  man  present  dared  to  break  that  solemn  silence,  the 
devoted  wife  taking  her  husband's  arm,  passed  out  from  amongst  them, 
saying  as  she  went,  in  her  own  calm  and  touching  tones,  "This  is  no 
place  for  us  ;  let  us  go  hence."  And  thus  they  went  forth,  that  good  John 
Logan  and  his  noble  wife  ;  out  from  the  stifling  atmosphere  of  man-made 
and  cruel  sectarianism,  into  the  free  air  of  Spiritual  life,  light,  truth,  and 
reason  ;  out  from  the  night  of  bigotry  into  the  sunlight  of  God's  truth, 
never  more  to  return,  but  still  better,  never  more  to  tread  separate  paths 
in  life  again.  From  that  hour,  Mrs.  Logan  resolved  to  enquire  into  the 
faith  that  had  enabled  her  husband  to  withstand  the  multitude,  and  prove 
how  one  man  in  a  good  cause,  is  mightier  than  a  host.  Struck  with  the 
base  ingratitude  of  those  who  had  deserted  him,  and  ashamed  of  the  faith 
which  thus  disgraced  its  members  in  attempting  to  disgrace  their  friend, 
Mrs.  Logan  sought,  and  found,  the  source  of  her  brave  companion's 
strength,  and  not  only  found  it  to  be  true  and  good  and  rational,  but  she 
herself  came  to  be  a  minister  of  its  divine  afflatus,  and  when  the  author 
visited  Dunedin  in  1879  she  found  Mrs.  Logan,  not  only  firm  in  the  faith 
of  Spiritualism,  but  one  of  its  most  marked  evidences  in  her  own  beautiful 
and  convincing  phases  of  Mediumship. 

With  the  increase  of  population  and  development  of  civilized  life  in  the 
beautiful  islands,  even  so  has  Spiritualism  grown.  It  has  had  its  opponents 
from  without,  who,  by  slander,  ridicule,  and  open  persecution,  have 
endeavoured  to  crush  its  rising  influence.  It  has  also  had  to  contend — as 
usual — with  "  many  foes  of  its  own  household."  Some  of  its  propagandists, 
stirred  with  temporary  enthusiasm,  have  acted,  like  many  other  injudicious 
new  converts,  with  an  amount  of  fanaticism  which  has  laid  them  open  to  the 
charge  of  folly.  Unbalanced  minds  have  ridden  it  as  a  hobby  to  the  verge 
of  lunacy.  The  avaricious  have  sought  to  make  capital  out  of  it,  and  failing 
to  do  so,  turned  to  revile  it ;  and  still  others  have  sought  to  make  it  the 
stalking  horse  to  shield  their  vicious  proclivities,  or  furnish  excuses  for  the 
indulgence  of  their  evil  propensities ;  in  a  word,  human  nature  has  been 
represented  amongst  New  Zealand  Spiritualists,  as  fully  as  elsewhere. 
Being  so  remote  and  self-centered,    shut  in  as  it  were  by  its  own  vast  sea- 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  271 

board,  New  Zealanders  are  more  liable  to  regard  each  others  failings,  than 
a  more  cosmopolitan  population ;  hence,  whatever  shortcomings  poor 
human  nature  has  put  upon  this  noble  cause  in  New  Zealand,  have  had 
more  than  the  ordinary  share  of  comment.  Still  "  the  cause  "  has  grown 
mightily,  and  wherever  good  lecturers  have  appealed  to  the  candid  portion 
of  the  community,  they  have  succeeded  in  awaking  a  deep  and  permanent 
interest. 

In  many  of  the  principal  towns  besides  Dunedin,  circles  held  at  first  in 
mere  idle  curiosity,  have  produced  their  usual  fruit  of  Medium  power,  and 
this  again  has  extended  into  associative  action,  and  organization  into  local 
societies. 

For  over  a  year,  the  Spiritualists  and  Liberalists  of  Dunedin  were 
fortunate  enough  to  secure  the  services  of  Mr.  Charles  Bright  as  their 
lecturer. 

This  gentleman  had  once  been  attached  to  the  editorial  staff  of  the 
Melbourne  Argus,  and  had  obtained  a  good  reputation  as  a  capable  writer, 
and  liberal  thinker.  Mr.  Bright's  lectures  in  Dunedin  were  highly  appre- 
ciated, and  by  their  scholarly  style,  and  attractive  manner,  served  to  band 
together  the  Hberal  element  in  the  city,  stimulate  free  thought,  and  do 
good  in  every  direction. 

In  Auckland,  the  principal  town  of  the  North  Island,  the  same  good 
service  was  rendered  to  the  cause  of  the  religious  thought,  by  the  excellent 
addresses  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Edgar,  a  clergyman  whose  unconservative  and 
Spiritualistic  doctrines,  had  tended  to  sever  him  from  sectarian  organiza- 
tions, and  draw  around  him,  the  SpirituaUsts  and  liberal  thinkers  of  the 
town. 

Besides  the  good  work  effected  by  these  gentlemen,  the  occasional  visits 
of  Messrs.  Peebles,  Walker,  J.  Tyerman,  and  the  effect  of  the  many  private 
circles  held  in  every  portion  of  the  islands,  all  have  tended  to  promote  a 
general,  though  quiet  diffusion  of  Spiritual  thought  and  doctrine,  through- 
out New  Zealand. 

During  the  author's  visit  to  Dunedin,  her  lectures  were  given  every 
Sunday  evening  in  the  Princess  Theatre,  and  on  week  evenings,  in  the 
Athenseum,  and  those  were  attended  for  several  months,  with  appreciative 
audiences,  filling  the  buildings  to  their  utmost  capacity.  Amongst  other 
incidents  of  this  visit,  was  an  extended  series  of  newspaper  discussions, 
not  only  with  numbers  of  correspondents  whose  antagonism  to  the  Spiritual 
doctrines  was  manifested  in  the  ordinary  journalistic  fashion,  but  there 
were  many  writers,  whose  fierce  diatribes  manifested  so  obviously  their 
fidelity  to  the  founders  of  their  faith,  John  Knox,  and  John  Calvin,  that 
the  author  frequently  had  cause  to  felicitate  herself  upon  the  fact,  that  she 
did  not  live  in  the  days  of  those  respected  ecclesiastics,  or  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinage  of  the  onz^fmnous  Spanish  Inquisition. 

Amongst  the  most  keen  and  persistent  of  her  journalistic  denouncers, 
was  the  irrepressible  M.  W.  Green,  "minister  of  the  Church  of  Christ," 
who  had  somehow  managed  to  close  his  career  in  Melbourne  and  turn  up 
at  Dunedin,  just  in  time  to  hurl  his  javelins  once  more  at  Spiritualism,  in 
the  height  of  its  success  and  popularity. 

Mr,  Green  adopted  many  modes  of  attracting  to  himself  the  attention  of 
a  community,  which  had  hitherto  been  all  too  unconscious,  that  they  had 
so  remarkable  a  personage  in  their  midst.  He  persisted  in  writing  to  the 
papers,  under  his  full  name  and  style,  challenging  every  statement  made 
at  the  author's  lectures,  in  which  he  thought  he  could  pick  a  flaw,  and 

2  72  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

when  the  pubUc  began  to  be  tired  of  him,  and  the  columns  of  the  daily 
journals  became  "  too  full,"  to  admit  of  any  more  of  his  prosy  anathemas 
against  Spiritualism,  he  hired  an  immense  new  hall,  and  advertised  a  series 
of  lectures  to  "  expose  Spiritualism,"  in  which  a  whole  nation  of  lawyers 
might  have  found  employment  in  Hbel  suits,  had  not  his  flaming, advertise- 
ments been  too  rude  and  scandalous  to  render  them  worthy  of  honourable 
mention,  or  notice.  Still  the  "  Free-thought  committee,"  under  whose 
auspices  Mrs.  Britten's  lectures  were  given,  deemed  the  gentleman  had 
gone  far  enough,  if  not  a  great  deal  too  far,  and  though  his  atrocious  sensa- 
tional advertisements  were  obviously  put  forth  to  compel  notice,  the  committee 
deemed  their  honour  involved  in  putting  a  stop  to  them.  The  result  was, 
that  the  same  hall  was  hired  in  which  Mr  Green's  denunciations  had  been 
poured  out  to  the  listening  few.  On  this  occasion,  the  building  was 
crowded  to  suffocation.  The  Hon.  Robert  Stout,  Attorney-General  and 
M.P.  for  Dunedin,  was  Mrs.  Britten's  chairman,  and  a  large  company  of 
sympathizers  surrounded  the  minister  of  the  "  Church  of  Christ,"  a 
company  who  distinguished  themselves  by  hissing,  hooting,  and  stamping, 
at  the  close  of  every  sentence,  no  matter  whether  their  uproar  was  in  or 
out  of  place. 

Once  more  we  deem  it  in  order  to  give  an  extract  from  the  author's 
American  correspondence  in  which  this  coup  d'etat  of  the  "Christian 
minister  "  is  disposed  of  in  all  the  paragraphs  it  merits.     It  reads  thus : — 

"Mr.  M.  W.  Green,  one  of  the  most  persistent  and  unscrupulous  of  clerical  opponents, 
gave  and  published,  a  series  of  scandalous  and  disgraceful  lectures  on  the  fruits  of 
Spiritualism,  and  in  proof  of  his  theory  of  'Satanic  A.gency,'  drew  the  entire  of  his 
charges  from  the  lives,  writings,  opinions  and  practices  of  certain  so-called  Spiritualists 
themselves.  His  collection  of  garbage,  under  the  title  of  '  The  DevU's  Sword  Blunted,'  is 
now  before  the  world.  The  course  I  finally  adopted  unde'r  the  advice  and  guidance  of 
good  and  wise  friends  from  the  shores  beyond,  I  mean  to  stand  by.  .  .  .  That  course 
was  as  follows  : — We  procured  the  largest  and  finest  hall  in  Dunedin.  The  Hon.  Eobert 
Stout,  our  honoured  and  talented  Attorney- General,  was  my  chairman,  and  to  a  mob  of 
howUng  Christian  followers  of  my  reverend  opponent,  in  his  own  white,  or  rather  livid 
face,  and  surrounded  by  a  jammed  and  almost  frantic  crowd  of  excited  multitudes,  I  gave 
the  following  definitions  of  my  religion  and  faith  in  Spiritualism  : — 

"  1st.  Spirituahsm  proves  by  a  set  of  obviously  supermundane  phenomena,  that  a  world 
of  invisible  intelligence  is  communicating  with  us. 

"  2nd.  It  demonstrates  by  an  immense  array  of  test  facts  given  all  over  the  world,  under 
circumstances  that  forbid  the  possibility  of  collusion  or  human  contrivance,  that  the  com- 
municating intelligences  are  identical  with  the  souls  of  mortals  who  once  lived  on  earth. 

"  3rd.  It  shows  by  universal  coincidence  in  the  communications,  that  every  living  soul 
is  in  judgment  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  and  reaps  the  fruits  of  its  good  or  evil 
life  on  earth,  in  happiness  or  suffering  hereafter. 

"  4th.  All  the  communicating  spirits  coincide  in  declaring  that  the  life  succeeding 
mortal  dissolution,  is  not  a  final  state,  but  one  which  manifests  innumerable  conditions  of 
progress.  .  .  .  and  these  four  propositions  I  emphatically  protest  are  the  all  of  spiritual 
facts  we  know,  the  all  that  are  absolutely  proved.  ...  or  upon  which,  all  the  immense 
varieties  of  persons  that  make  up  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  can  absolutely  agree. 

"  The  whole  of  my  lecture,  printed  under  the  title  of  '  Spiritualism  Vindicated  and 
Clerical  Slanders  Refuted,'  is  now  in  the  hands  of  thousands  of  Colonists,  and  bitter  as 
the  occasion  was  that  demanded  it,  I  thank  the  Great  Spirit,  whose  instrumentality  called 
forth  so  trenchant  a  plea,  for  a  cause  so  eminently  worthy." 

As  it  will  appear,  even  from  this  short  extract,  that  the  sole  aim  of  Mr. 
Green  now,  as  in  the  debate  with  Mr.  Walker,  was  to  shoulder  upon 
Spiritualism  the  shortcomings,  follies,  and  errors  of  its  world-wide 
followers,  and  the  basis  of  Mrs.  Britten's  lectures  was  to  present  the  princi- 
ples of  Spirituahsm,  and  redeem  them  from  the  misrepresentation  which 
ever  obscures  any  new  movement  when  it  is  confounded  with  the  irrespon- 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  273 

sible  doings  of  its  heterogeneous  followers,  it  will  readily  be  perceived  that 
the  Christian  minister  was  trumpeting  forth  to  the  world  the  shortcomings 
of  Spiritualists ;  whilst  the  author  insisted  upon  recalling  him  to  the  only- 
legitimate  ground  of  discussion,  namely,  the  doctrines  and  principles  of 
Spiritualism.  No  further  explanation  of  these  movements  and  counter 
movements  are  necessary,  and  Mr.  Green's  action  was  generally  recognized 
as  the  old  strategic  method  of  theological  warfare,  ever  employed  by 
unscrupulous  and  desperate  attacking  parties. 

Now  although  neither  Mr.  Green  nor  his  followers  could  justify  an  attack 
on  a  great  cause  by  assailing  the  characters  of  those  who  believe  in  it, 
especially  in  a  new  movement,  the  wide-spread  notoriety  of  which  has 
necessarily  attracted  to  its  ranks  all  the  scum  of  society,  Mr.  Green  having 
been  industrious  enough  to  hunt  up  all  the  scandals  which  had  been  cast 
upon  the  cause  by  its  camp  followers,  had  of  course  many  facts  on  his 
side ;  facts  as  cogent  to  prove  the  disorder  which  licentious  people  can 
attach  to  any  cause  that  attracts  them,  as  the  records  of  the  Inquisition, 
the  torture  chamber,  or  the  night  of  St.  Bartholomew,  could  prove 
murder,  and  barbarity,  against  Christians.  Just  in  as  far  as  monsters  of 
cruelty  have  disgraced  Christianity,  so  have  examples  of  vulgarity  and 
profanity,  disgraced  SpirituaHsm.  When  the  day  comes,  in  which  the 
community  recognizes  that  principles  are  eternal  truths,  and  personalities, 
the  transient  representatives  of  certain  states  of  society,  such  orators  as  Mr. 
Green  will  find  their  occupation  gone,  and  stick  to  the  endeavour  to  prove 
their  own  forms  of  belief,  instead  of  throwing  mud  against  the  beliefs  of  others. 
During  Mrs.  Britten's  course  of  Dunedin  lectures,  the  Hon.  Robert  Stout, 
as  Attorney-General  of  New  Zealand,  and  member  for  Dunedin,  deemed 
himself  called  upon  to  oppose  with  all  his  wide-spread  influence,  and 
hberaUty  of  sentiment,  the  introduction  of  the  Bible  in  the  public  schools 
as  a  necessary  element  of  education.  The  partisans  of  this  movement  had 
been  strenuous  in  their  efforts  to  effect  such  an  introduction.  The  oppo- 
nents, headed  by  their  popular  leader  Mr.  Stout,  had  been  equally  persis- 
tent in  their  opposition,  and  it  was  in  this  state  of  divided  opinion,  that  the 
Committe  of  the  "  Free-thought  Association  "  of  whom  Mr.  Stout  was  the 
president,  solicited  Mrs.  Britten  to  give  a  lecture  on  the  subject.  The 
attendance  on  this  occasion  was  overwhelming.  The  question  under 
consideration  was,  of  course,  treated  from  the  Liberahsts'  standpoint,  but 
the  main  feature  of  the  occasion  was  the  citation  of  the  Bible  itself,  as  its 
own  witness.  This  was  done,  by  the  simple  presentation  of  about  seventy 
or  eighty  quotations,  in  which  the  character  and  consistency  of  the  Jewish 
Jehovah,  the  morality  and  humanity  of  the  commands  issued,  and  the 
agreement  of  the  passages  cited  with  science  and  chronology  were  fully 
displayed,  and  that  on  BibHcal  testimony  alone,  without  comment  or 
criticism.  At  the  close  of  the  lecture  it  was  determined  to  print  and 
circulate  gratuitously,  ten  thousand  copies  of  the  Biblical  quotations,  and 
this  was  done  without  any  other  notice  of  the  texts  presented,  than  the 
simple  headings  which  the  extracts  illustrated.  The  sensation  produced  by 
this  procedure,  increased  the  effect  of  the  newspaper  and  rostrum  discus- 
sions, and  when  the  author  was  finally  compelled  to  quit  Dunedin  to  fill 
other  engagements,  the  ladies  who  had  been  her  most  staunch  friends  and 
supporters,  organized  a  farewell  meeting,  at  which  they  presented  her  with 
a  splendid  set  of  ornaments  formed  from  the  jade  or  "green  stone"  so 
highly  prized  by  the  natives,  as  to  be  deemed  "  sacred,"  set  in  pure  New 
Zealand  gold. 

274  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Even  now,  though  time  and  distance  have  mellowed  the  enthusiastic 
influences  prevailing  on  this  occasion  to  regretful  and  tender  memory,  the 
heart  swells,  the  eyes  fill,  and  the  hand  of  the  writer  becomes  nerveless 
with  emotion,  as  the  astral  light  in  which  all  things  are  engraved,  reveals 
once  more,  the  images  of  the  beloved  faces  gazing  so  earnestly  upon  the 
one,  and  recalls  the  pressure  of  the  kind  outstretched  hands,  so  prompt  to 
sustain,  and  so  loath  to  unclasp  the  farewell  pressure  ! 

In  Wellington,  Nelson,  and  Auckland,  important  places  successively  visited 
by  the  author,  warm  friends  of  the  cause  were  found,  many  private  circles 
held,  and  a  vast  amount  of  public  interest  manifested.  Fierce  newspaper 
controversies  still  raged,  but  these  only  served  to  increase  the  depth  of 
public  sentiment,  and  stimulate  investigation. 

The  great  deficiency  of  railroad  accommodation,  the  remoteness  of  this 
lovely  land,  and  its  isolation  in  the  midst  of  the  lonely  Pacific  waters — 
floating  as  it  were  on  the  tossing  billows  which  lave  its  rugged  volcanic 
mountain  seaboard ;  sometimes  lashing  the  rocks  with  heaving  fields  of 
white  breakers,  and  sometimes  spouting  high  in  air  under  the  influence  of 
submarine  disturbances  ;  all  these  physical  features  of  its  environment  tend 
to  isolate  New  Zealand  from  casual  intercourse  with  the  outer  world, 
limit  its  population,  and  render  it  far  less  known  than  the  more  distant 
continent  of  Australia,  Still  its  internal  growth  is  marvellous,  and  when 
the  natural  charm  of  its  delightful  soil,  climate,  and  scenery,  shall  have 
produced  their  legitimate  effects  upon  the  characteristics  of  its  inhabitants, 
New  Zealand  ought  to  be,  the  Paradise — physically,  mentally,  and  morally, 
of  the  Southern  Seas.  Since  the  author's  visit  in  1879,  two  marked  events 
have  transpired  in  the  history  of  New  Zealand  progressive  thought. 

One  of  these,  is  the  publication  of  a  bright  -spirited  "  Free-thought " 
paper,  called  The  Echo,  in  the  columns  of  which,  Mr.  Robert  Stout's 
incisive  logic,  forcible  argument,  and  scholarly  research,  finds  frequent 
expression.  Besides  this.  The  Echo  is  graced  with  numerous  scientific  and 
able  writers  on  Free-thought  and  Spiritualism.  The  second  subject  for 
gratulation  by  all  liberal  minds,  is  the  foundation  of  a  noble  hall  built  by 
free-thinkers,  and  dedicated  to  the  exposition  of  scientific  and  progressive 
subjects.     Meetings  are  now  held  every  Sunday  in  this  hall. 

Its  plan  and  execution  are  reported  to  be  alike  creditable  to  its  founders, 
and  the  noble  purposes  to  which  it  is  devoted.  A  progressive  Lyceum  or 
Sunday  school,  conducted  on  the  principles  taught  by  Andrew  Jackson 
Davis,  the  "  harmonial  philosopher  "  of  America,  meets  in  this  hall  every 
Sunday,  when  both  children  and  adults  participate  in  the  exercises.  Fine 
music  forms  part  of  the  religious  worship  of  these  Dunedin  Liberalists,  and 
already  the  roof  has  re-echoed  to  more  sweet  strains,  elevated  thoughts, 
fine  literature,  and  broad  progressive  teaching,  than  has  ever  been  heard 
within  the  walls  of  New  Zealand  ecclesiastical  edifices. 

With  an  account  of  the  memorable  scene  during  which  the  foundation 
stone  of  this  fine  edifice  was  laid,  our  summary  of  the  New  Zealand 
Spiritual  movement  must  terminate.  The  day  has  not  yet  come — and 
heaven  grant  that  it  never  may  1 — when  sharp  lines  of  demarcation  will  be 
drawn,  for  the  purpose  of  dividing  the  ranks  of  "  Free-thinkers "  and 
"  Spirituahsts."  Whatever  the  former  class  may  profess  to  accept  or  reject, 
the  latter  are  Free-thinkers,  with  religion  elevating  their  free-thought 
to  heaven,  and  carrying  their  progress  on  to  a  life  beyond  the  grave.  In  all 
else,  none  can  transcend  the  breadth  of  their  thought,  or  the  freedom  of  its 
flight.     Pending  the  dark  day  when  this  scope  of  thought  shall  be  deemed 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

275 

too  narrow,  although  the  hall  of  which  we  have  been  writing  was  avowedly 
dedicated  to  "Free-thought,"  we  dare  as  Spiritualists  to  claim  the  deepest 
possible  interest  in  its  erection  and  the  uses  to  which  it  is  applied,  in  token 
of  which,  we  gladly  record  the  fact,  that  the  corner-stone  was  laid  by  a 
ministering  angel  on  earth,  and  one  who  confidently  hopes  and  expects  to 
continue  that  ministry  in  a  higher  hfe,  the  Mrs.  John  Logan,  of  whom 
mention  has  been  made  in  earlier  pages  of  this  chapter. 

The  following  extracts  from  the  report  of  the  ceremony  in  question  are 
taken  from  the  New  Zealand  Echo  of  October,  1881  : — 

*'  THE    LYCEUM    HALL. 

"LAYING    THE     FOUNDATION     STONE. 

"  The  fifteenth  of  October,  1881,  will  ever  be  a  memorable  day  in  the  annals  of  Free- 
thought  in  these  Southern  Colonies.  On  that  day  was  laid  the  foundation-stone  of  the 
first  hall  in  the  colonies  wholly  devoted  to  Freethought,  and  it  was  laid  with  more  eclat 
than  any  foundation-stone  ever  laid  in  Dunedin.  The  morning  was  bright,  but  rain 
seemed  threatening,  and  about  eleven  o'clock  it  began  to  rain.  At  twelve  there  was  a 
steady  downpour,  and  many  of  the  committee  were  afraid  that  the  ceremony  would  have 
to  be  postponed.  Between  twelve  and  one  o'clock,  however,  it  cleared  up,  and  after  that 
there  was  no  shower  till  late  in  the  evening.  The  warm  weather  and  the  breeze 
soon  dried  up  the  streets,  and  from  3  p.m.  to  4.30  p.m.  the  weather  was  all  that  could 
have  been  wished.  Two  platforms  were  erected  on  the  site — one  for  the  band,  and  one 
for  the  children  and  ladies  and  the  F.  T.  Choir.  Near  the  north-eastern  corner  a  small 
space  was  fenced  off,  carpeted,  and  a  drawing-room  suite  placed  in  it.  Around  the  stone 
and  the  front  of  the  platform  there  were  numerous  flowers  and  trees  in  pots,  and  flags 
were  hung  from  poles,  and  evergreen  decorations  were  around  the  front  of  the  main  plat- 
form. Mr.  Thompson  had  taken  great  trouble  in  decorations,  and  arranging  these 
nothing  could  have  been  better  done.  Shortly  before  three,  a  large  crowd  gathered  in 
Dowling  Street,  and  the  main  platform  was  soon  filled  with  Lyceum  children,  the  choir, 
and  ladies  and  gentlemen  About  three  hundred  were  on  the  platform.  At  three  Mrs. 
John  Logan  arrived,  and  on  her  stepping  on  the  platform  Mr.  Thompson  presented  htr 
with  a  splendid  white  camelia,  and  she  and  some  other  ladies  were  placed  near  the  stone. 
The  band  arrived,  numbering  about  forty  performers,  many  musicians  having  kindly  lent 
their  assistance  to  the  Freethought  band,  and  then  the  ceremony  began.  The  crowd  at 
this  time  was  not  less,  we  believe,  than  3,000  people.  The  band  played  the  "  Star  of 
England  Polka,"  with  cornet  solos,  Mr.  Chapman  leading,  and  Mr.  Parker  conducting. 
The  music  was  excellently  rendered,  Mr.  Chapman  ably  executing  the  cornet  solos.  The 
choir  and  Lyceum  children  then  sang  the  following  version  of  the  "  New  Zealand  National 
Anthem,"  composed  by  Mr.  Bracken,  one  of  the  members  of  the  Association,  namely  : — 

"  God  of  Nations  !  at  thy  feet, 
In  the  bonds  of  love  we  meet. 
Hear  our  voices,  we  entreat, 

God  defend  our  Freeland  ! 
Guard  Eacific's  triple  star, 
From  the  shafts  of  strife  and  war, 
Make  her  praises  heard  afar, 
God  defend  New  Zealand  ! 

"  Men  of  every  creed  and  race. 
Gather  here  before  thy  face. 
Asking  thee  to  bless  this  place, 

God  defend  our  Freeland  ! 
From  dissension,  envy,  hate, 
And  corruption,  guard  our  State  ; 
Make  our  country  good  and  great, 

God  defend  New  Zealand  • 

276  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

"  Let  our  Love  for  thee  increase, 
May  thy  blessings  never  cease, 
Give  us  plenty,  give  us  peace, 

God  defend  our  Freeland  ! 
From  dishonour  and  from  shame, 
Guard  our  country's  spotless  name, 
Crown  her  with  immortal  fame, 

God  defend  New  Zealand  ! 
"  May  our  mountains  ever  be, 
Freedom's  ramparts  on  the  sea. 
Make  us  faithful  unto  thee, 

God  defend  our  Freeland  ! 
Guide  her  in  the  Nations'  van, 
Preaching  love  and  truth  to  man. 
Working  out  thy  glorious  plan, 

God  defend  New  Zealand  ! 

"  Mr.  Braithwaite,  as  Chairman  of  the  Building  Committee,  then  stepped  forward,  and, 
handing  Mrs.  Logan  a  handsome  silver  trowel,  said  :  I  have  the  honour  to  ask  you  to  lay 
in  the  customary  fashion  the  foundation-stone  of  a  building  to  be  called  the  Lyceum, 
which,  when  erected,  is  to  welcome  within  its  walls  people  of  all  shades  of  opinion,  and  to 
be  dedicated  to  freedom  of  conscience,  to  intellectual  and  social  hberty,  and  to  that  higher 
morality  which  we  believe  results  from  obeying  the  laws  of  Nature.  As  Freethinkers,  we 
naturally  feel  proud  of  the  event  that  brings  us  together,  which  in  some  respects  is  an 
auspicious  one.  To-day  we  are  to  lay  the  foundation-stone  of  the  first  Freethought  Hall 
in  the  Australasian  colonies.  Old  and  young  are  here  to  take  part  in  the  ceremony,  each 
feeling  hopeful  of  the  ultimate  results  of  such  an  unusual  occurrence.  We  have  with  us — 
making  glad  the  scene  with  their  clear,  ringing,  merry  voices — the  children  of  the  first 
Lyceum  started  in  New  Zealand,  an  institution  fraught  with  the  deepest  interests  to  our 
movement.  We  have  also  with  us  most  of  the  members  who  in  years  gone  by  initiated 
and  sustained  in  season  and  out  of  season  the  Dunedin  Freethought  Association,  the  first 
of  its  kind  in  this  colony.  Yourself  and  your  worthy  husband  are  two  of  the  number. 
What  more  fitting,  then,  than  that  you  should  lay  the  foundation  stone  of  a  hall  to  be 
used  for  the  dissemination  of  principles  for  which  you  have '  ardently  laboured  ?  I  take 
great  pleasure,  then,  on  behalf  of  the  Freethoiight  Association,  in  presenting  you  with 
this  silver  trowel  to  perform  the  work  for  which  we  have  met.  It  bears  the  following 
inscription  : — '  Presented  by  the  members  of  the  Freethought  Association  to  Mrs.  John 
Logan  on  the  occasion  of  laying  the  foundation-stone  of  the  Lyceum.  October  15,  1881.' ' 

Following  upon  the  ceremonial  thus  auspiciously  commenced,  were  a 
number  of  excellent  speeches,  the  most  stirring  and  brilliant  of  which  was 
one  from  the  President  of  the  Free-thought  Society,  the  Hon.  Robert  Stout. 
In  this  address  Mr.  Stout  defined  the  noble  and  unsectarian  purposes  to 
which  the  hall  was  to  be  devoted,  and  in  a  most  eloquent  and  masterly 
style,  drew  pictures  of  the  narrow  creeds  which  chain  the  soul  and  erect 
cruel  lines  of  demarcation  between  man  and  man,  and  the  unbounded 
aspirations  for  light,  love,  truth,  and  kindness,  which  answer  the  Free- 
thinkers' demand  for  a  real  religion  of  life,  &c.,  &c. 

Mr.  Stout's  address  deserved  to  be  written  in  letters  of  gold.  It  is 
something  however  to  know  that  its  characters  of  ink  have  met  thousands 
of  eyes,  and  made  a  deep  and  healthful  ijnpression  upon  thousands  of 
earnest  readers,  and  now  it  only  remains  to  add,  that  the  "  Free-thought 
Hall,"  soon  developed  its  handsome  proportions  above  the  foundation-stone 
laid  by  the  honoured  hands  of  Mrs.  Logan.  By  this  time  it  has  echoed 
and  re-echoed  to  the  eloquent  strains  of  many  an  inspired  speaker.  It  has 
witnessed  weekly  gatherings  of  joyous  children,  gifted  teachers,  keen 
debaters,  and  unanswerable  logicians.  Noble  strains  of  music  have 
resounded  through  its  walls,  and  the  place  fully  realizes  the  spirit  of  its 
dedication,  and  forms  one  of  the  grandest  mementos  of  the  value  of 
practical  religion  stimulated  by  the  exercise  of  "  Free-thought,"  at  present 
greeted  in  any  part  of  the  world. 

! 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  277 

CHAPTER     XXXIV. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   THE    POLYNESIAN    AND   WEST    INDIA    ISLANDS. 

Whilst  it  would  be  in  vain  to  seek  for  open  evidence  of  the  modern 
Spiritual  movement  amongst  the  Polynesian  races  who  inhabit  the  extensive 
groups  of  the  Pacific  Islands,  it  is  equally  certain  that  Spiritualism  is  known, 
and  its  phenomenal  modes  of  communion  more  or  less  practised  by  the 
few  white  settlers  who  reside  there.  Doubtless  the  behef  has  been  imported 
with  the  tides  of  immigration,  for  few  voyagers  visit  these  islands  without 
reporting  that  Spiritual  circles  are  commonly  known  wherever  a  white 
population  is  settled.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  still  greater  prevalence 
amongst  the  aborigines,  of  that  kind  of  Spiritualism  of  which  we  gave  a 
representative  sketch  in  our  last  chapter. 

With  varieties  special  to  the  natives  of  various  islands,  the  Spiritualism 
of  the  New  Zealand  Maoris  illustrates  that  of  the  Kanakas  of  the  Sand- 
wich Islands ;  the  Samoans,  Fijieans,  natives  of  the  Solomon,  Navigator, 
and  other  Pacific  groups.  Senor  Gamboa,  a  Spanish  gentleman,  having 
possessions  in  the  Marshall  Islands,  assured  the  author  that  the  chief 
feature  in  the  religion  of  the  natives  was  belief  in  many  gods,  and  the 
influence  of  the  Spirits  of  deceased  ancestors.  When  accident  or  disease 
overtook  them,  they  chanted  prayers  to  some  deceased  priest  who  had  been 
known  as  a  healer,  or  some  near  and  well-beloved  relative;  then  hiding 
presents  of  shells  or  other  ornaments  near  the  sick  people,  they  left  them 
for  so  many  hours,  in  order  that  the  Spirit  invoked  might  come  and  disclose 
in  a  dream,  or  by  whispered  communications,  the  best  method  of  cure. 
Senor  Gamboa  declared,  he  had  witnessed  remarkable  cures  made  in  this 
way,  amongst  his  own  servants.  One  of  these,  a  cook,  had  broken  his  arm 
by  a  fall;  he  insisted  on  being  carried  to  a  native  settlement  near  his 
master's  residence,  and  though  the  fracture  was  a  severe  one,  he  returned 
home  in  a  week,  his  arm  bound  up  neatly  and  skilfully  with  herbs,  but  so 
far  healed  that  he  could  use  it,  and  never  after  suffered  inconvenience 
from  it.  On  being  questioned  as  to  the  mode  of  cure  he  said,  his  friends 
the  natives  had  sung  him  to  sleep,  from  which  he  did  not  wake  for  three 
days.  During  the  interval  he  dreamed  that  his  mother,  long  dead,  but  one 
who  had  been  a  famous  "  medicine  woman  "  in  her  life,  had  come  and  bound 
up  his  arm  just  as  he  found  it  on  awakening. 

When  asked  who  had  done  this,  his  friends  said  they  had  found  him  so, 
and  no  doubt  *' the  Spirits  had  healed  him."  Spirits  in  these  islands  are 
invoked  to  bless  the  plantations ;  curse  enemies,  give  victory,  heal  the  sick, 
and  reveal  the  future.  Mr.  James  Anson,  a  good  Spiritualist,  residing  in 
the  Fijis,  says: — "It  is  of  no  use  to  try  and  convert  the  natives  to  Christianity, 
so  long  as  the  missionaries  deny  them  their  Spiritualism.  They  will  promise 
for  a  time  to  abandon  it,  but  when  trouble  or  danger  comes  upon  them, 
they  will  invoke  the  aid  of  their  ancestral  Spirits." 

Mr.  Taylor,  the  missionary,  says  that  when  he  reproached  those  who 
had  "  gone  back  "  to  their  consultation  with  Spirits,  that  they  were  devils, 

2  78  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

and  it  was  forbidden  in  scripture  to  have  anything  to  do  with  them,  the 
savage  to  whom  he  spoke  replied,  "  They  make  our  hearts  light,  and  tell  us 
how  to  be  good ;  that  scripture  is  a  fool,  and  do  not  know  how  to  tell  bad 
devil,  from  good  spirit.  We  know  difference ;  leave  bad  devil  alone,  but 
keep  good  spirit  always." 

In  the  Fiji  and  Sandwich  Islands  are  scattered  many  white  residents  who 
are  good  Spiritualists  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  term.  Some  of  these 
worthy  friends  have  sent  the  author  accounts  of  the  phenomena  which 
occur  at  their  circles,  and  although  it  is  not  sufficiently  varied  to  interest 
the  reader,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  several  ladies  and  gentlemen  in  both 
groups  of  islands,  speak  of  the  remarkable  Mediumistic  powers  of  the 
natives,  and  express  hopes  that  when  they  become  civilized,  and  can  be  made 
to  act  in  concert  with  their  white  employers,  through  their  finely  adapted 
organizations.  Spiritual  phenomena  of  a  very  striking  character  can  be 
unfolded  amongst  them. 

One  gendeman  cultivating  sugar,  and  employing  a  large  number  of 
Kanakas  on  his  plantation  says  : — "  Our  circles — at  which  six  of  my 
Kanakas  sit  regularly  —  are  favoured  with  manifestations  of  the  most 
stupendous  physical  force  I  have  ever  witnessed.  Spirits  appear  bodily  in 
our  midst ;  lift  the  children  up  to  the  ceiling,  tossing  them  about  like 
nurses.  They  bring  in  good-sized  bushes,  uprooted  from  the  garden,  and 
dash  them  down  in  our  midst,  but  never  so  as  to  hurt  us."  ....  He 
adds,  "  If  we  could  but  succeed  in  uprooting  the  manifold  wild  superstitions 
with  which  these  Kanaka  heads  are  crowded ;  and  substitute  the  calm 
rational  doctrines  which  our  white  spirit  visitants  teach,  the  magnetic 
organizations  of  these  natives  make  them  such  splendid  Mediums,  that  we 
might  have  amongst  them  a  glorious  stronghold  of  the  Spiritual  faith. 
Some  of  my  white  neighbours" — he  adds — "think  I  practise  magic,  and 
are  ready  to  denounce  me  to  the  authorities,  and  this  reminds  me,  how 
much  we  have  to  do  in  converting  Christians  back  to  the  teachings  of 
their  Master,  as  well  as  heathens  forward  to  the  same  God." 

In  the  West  India  Islands,  some  of  which  have  been  visited  by  the 
author,  we  find  the  belief  in  Spiritual  existence  prevailing  it  is  true,  but  it 
takes  a  far  lower  and  more  degraded  form  amongst  the  native  negro 
population  than  amongst  the  high  spirited,  independent  races  of  the 
Polynesian  Isles.  The  whites  are  for  the  most  part,  too  indolent,  luxurious, 
and  enervated  by  the  influence  of  their  tropical  climate,  to  care  for  any 
ideas  of  a  Spiritual  character,  except  such  as  are  thought  out  for  them  by 
their  ministers. 

Here  and  there  a  few  Spiritualists  of  the  European  type  may  be  found, 
but  how  much  they  have  to  contend  with,  may  be  noted  from  the  following 
paragraph  taken  from  the  American  Banner  of  Light: — 

"  Much  interest  exists  in  Havana  in  Spiritualism,  but  the  opposition  to  the  printing  and 
publishing  of  anything  in  connection  with  it  acts  as  a  hindrance  to  the  extension  of 
knowledge  respecting  it.  Lately  a  box  of  books  sent  to  M.  Joseph  Mauri  was  received  by 
him  and  heavy  duties  paid  on  them.  They  were  then  submitted  to  the  press  censorship, 
and  were  ordered  to  be  returned  whence  they  came,  because  they  were  adverse  to  the 
reHgion  of  the  State  and  denied  the  divinity  of  Christ.  M.  Mauri  undertook  to  issue  a 
journal,  La,  Lumitre  d' Outretomhe  ;  but  its  publicatioQ  was  interdicted  by  the  authorities. 
Yec  these  efforts  to  stay  the  tide  of  liberalism,  and  shut  out  the  light  of  spiritual  truth, 
produce  results  far  different  from  what  were  intended,  and  Spiritualism  is  progressing 
with  marvellous  rapidity  in  Cuba,  the  number  of  converts  being  constantly  on  the  increase. 
Several  clairvoyant,  trance  and  writing  mediums  are  on  the  Island,  and  their  services  in 
great  demand." 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  279 

Cuba  as  a  favourite  resort  of  valetudinarians  from  European  countries, 
fares  better  than  some  of  the  other  West  India  Islands,  where  the  inveterate 
beUef  of  the  black  population  in  "  Duppies "  or  spirits  of  deceased  persons 
who  are  supposed  to  live  in  the  houses  they  formerly  inhabited,  and  interfere 
in  every  thing,  communicates  an  ill  odour  to  the  idea  of  things  spiritual, 
which  repels  the  proud  aristocrats  of  the  islands  from  "  such  vulgar 
themes." 

These  negroes  also  practise  "  Obi,"  and  all  manner  of  Fetish  rites,  and 
they  cannot  be  persuaded  out  of  them  by  the  commands  of  their  masters, 
or  the  teachings  of  the  missionaries.  A  San  Domingo  priest,  a  coloured 
man,  and  a  most  eloquent  preacher,  told  the  author,  that  from  childhood 
he  had  been  subject  to  trances,  dreams,  and  visions.  When  he  preached, 
he  said,  he  could  not  even  look  at  his  notes,  but  poured  forth  the  thoughts 
that  rushed  into  his  mind  unbidden.  He  invariably  saw  the  church  full  of 
Spirits,  both  black  and  white.  White  Spirits  of  most  beautiful  and  exalted 
appearance  often  brought  large  bands  of  dark  degraded-looking  beings  to 
the  church,  to  hear  the  preaching,  and  he  knew  he  was  inspired  by  a  circle 
of  Spirits,  whose  radiant  heads  he  could  see  filling  the  air  around  him ; 
"  in  short,"  he  added,  "  I  preach  to  two  congregations,  and  have  known 
from  childhood,  that  the  Spirit  world  was  all  around  us  and  the  veil  is 
very  thin  which  separates  us.  I  regard  this  Spirit  world,  as  the  soul  world 
of  this  earth,  and  deem  we  could  no  more  subsist  without  it,  than  the  body 
could  exist  without  soul.  When  therefore  my  poor  parishioners  tell  me 
they  see  the  '  Duppy,'  and  that  '  Duppies,'  who  were  their  fathers,  mothers, 
and  children,  inhabit  their  houses,  and  work  with,  and  talk,  and  help  them, 
my  lips  are  sealed.  I  believe  them,  and  cannot  tell  a  lie  simply  because — 
as  a  Christian  minister — I  ought  not  to  encourage  Spiritualism." 

Such  is  an  inside  view  of  the  beliefs  which  prevail  amongst  some  of  the 
most  intelligent,  and  least  intelligent,  of  the  West  Indian  native  islanders. 
The  superstitions  of  the  lower  classes  are  as  gross,  wild,  and  fetish,  as  those 
of  their  African  progenitors,  but  Spiritualism  is  slowly  but  surely,  creating 
a  deep  impress  upon  the  minds  of  the  higher  classes,  and  converting  the 
disgust  and  contempt  they  formerly  felt  towards  the  superstitious  rites  of 
the  people,  into  a  philosophic  realization  that  Spiritualism  is  one,  and 
Spiritualists  many ;  the  manifestation  of  the  power,  taking  the  form  and 
expression  of  the  nation  and  caste,  by  whom  it  is  manifested. 

The  ancestors  of  the  West  Indian  negroes,  the  inhabitants  of  Central 
Africa,  and  Guinea,  believe  in  Spirits,  but  with  them,  all  Spiritual  beings, 
even  the  souls  of  their  fathers  and  mothers,  when  disembodied,  are  "  devils," 
and  must  be  propitiated,  to  prevent  their  working  harm  ;  hence,  burnt 
offerings,  sacrifices,  and  even  the  immolation  of  human  beings. 

To  the  Guinea  negro  then,  the  Spirits  of  ancestors  are  real,  but  they  are 
"  devils,"  only  to  be  feared.  To  the  West  Indian  negro,  they  are  "  duppies," 
household  deities,  half  feared,  and  half  loved,  and  treated  respectfully,  in 
view  of  what  they  might  do.  In  New  Orleans,  the  negro  Vaudoo  men  and 
women  summon  "the  Spirits,"  to  heal  the  sick,  and  giv^e  "good  luck,"  as 
well  as  to  work  harm  to  enemies.  In  Baltimore  and  Washington,  educated 
and  intelligent  coloured  men  and  women  (still  negroes)  hold  circles,  invoke 
Spirits  as  they  would  call  upon  beloved  friends  and  relations,  and  regard 
the  Spirit  world  in  exactly  the  same  light  as  did  the  coloured  preacher  of 
San  Domingo,  whose  words  were  quoted  above. 

We  must  now  take  a  glance  at  the  Spiritualism  which  prevails  in  South 
Africa,  a  section  of  country  which  has   been  bridged  over  in  point  of 

28o  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

remoteness,  by  the  visits  of  several  good  Mediums  and  Spiritual  Propa- 
gandists from  Europe  and  America. 

For  some  years  past,  the  open  communion  with  Spirits  practised  in  the 
modern  circle  seems  to  have  been  anticipated  by  reports  of  "  hauntings," 
and  supernatural  disturbances  in  various  South  African  districts.  Whether 
attention  was  drawn  to  this  subject  by  the  contagion  of  Spiritualism  in 
the  air,  or  the  controlling  Spirits  of  the  new  movement  adopted  this 
method  of  attracting  public  notice,  we  need  not  pause  to  enquire ;  it  is 
enough  that  the  rumour  of  "  supernatural  disturbances "  began  to  be 
circulated  in  many  of  the  principal  towns  and  villages  as  early  as  1870. 
The  following  sketches,  detailing  the  methods  of  investigation  pursued,  in 
the  early  days  of  South  African  Spiritualism,  may  prove  of  some  interest 
to  the  reader,  especially  as  they  are  related  by  Aylward  in  his  popular 
work  entitled,  "  The  Transvaal  of  To-day."  This  author  says  there  was  a 
certain  house  in  Natal,  from  which  several  families — who  had  successively 
tried  to  inhabit  it — had  been  driven,  by  the  prevalence  of  unaccountable 
and  persistent  disturbances.  Officials  of  high  position  had  been  called 
upon  to  assist  in  unravehing  the  mystery,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  At  length, 
a  party  of  persons,  some  of  whom  the  author  hints  were  Spiritualists,  others 
being  experienced  "  exorcists,"  and  mere  lookers  on,  determined  to 
visit  the  house  in  set  form,  and  endeavour  to  "  exorcise  "  the  ghostly 
inhabitants.  Aylward  gives  the  following  account  of  the  proceedings 
that  ensued  : — 

"  On  the  arrival  of  the  party  of  investigators  and  exorcists,  an  armed  watch  was  placed 
around  the  house  outside.  The  guard  being  posted,  seven  men  entered  and  carefully 
fastened  all  the  doors  and  windows .  The  candles  were  lighted  and  in  deep  silence  the 
watch  was  commenced.  Ten  minutes  after  the  arrival  of  ^  the  guests  the  se'awce  com- 
menced by  the  fall  of  half-a-dozen  pomegranates  on  the  table.  This  was  succeeded  by  a 
shower  of  gravel,  the  small  stones  of  which  I  had  the  curiosity  to  inspect.  No  pebbles  of 
a  similar  nature  were  to  be  found  within  ten  miles  of  the  place.  One  of  the  guards  got 
up  to  examine  the  pomegranates.  He  had  no  sooner  left  his  chair  than  it  was  flung  with 
great  violence  after  him ;  then  lumps  of  ironstone,  the  smallest  of  which  weighed  ten  pounds, 
began  dropping  from  unexpected  places,  and  a  mass  of  clay  appeared  to  tumble  through 
the  roof,  breaking  and  scattering  about  the  floor,  as  if  it  had  come  from  a  considerable  height. 
The  remarkable  feature  about  the  whole  affair  was  that  not  one  missile  struck  or  injured 
any  of  the  large  party  now  assembled  in  the  small  room.  Their  excitement  was  increased 
by  hearing  a  violent  banging  at  one  of  the  shuttered  openings,  but  which,  as  we  after- 
wards learned,  attracted  no  attention  from  the  outside  guard.  McCormyck,  who  is  still  a 
living  witness  of  the  facts  of  this  entertainment,  being,  after  his  own  fashion,  a  pious 
man,  determined  to  show  the  power  of  his  faith  and  the  strength  of  the  exorcisms  at  his 
command.  He  stood  up  with  uncovered  head  and  boldly  addressed  the  ghost  in  Irish, 
ordering  it  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  and  by  the  most  sacred  influence  known  to 
Christians,  to  retire  to  where  the  wicked  ought  to  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary 
are  presumed — by  all  but  Spiritualists — to  take  their  rest.  Whether  led  on  by  his 
subject  he  went  too  far  or  not  I  cannot  say  ;  but  he  was  stopped  in  the  midst  of  a  torrent 
of  eloquence  by  what  he  afterwards  described  as  a  '  kick  from  a  three- year-old  ; '  in  fact,  a 
'  young  paving  stone '  brought  him  to  his  senses  and  his  seat  at  the  same  time.  This 
violent  counter-attack  was  too  much  for  the  visitors  ;  already  in  a  state  of  high  alarm, 
they  flung  open  the  doors,  and  dashed  out  into  the  moonlight,  followed  by  showers  of 
stones,  mealie  cobs,  potatoes,  pomegranates,  oranges,  and  all  the  handy  weapons  of  South 
African  Spiritual  warfare  that  the  deceased  had  accumidated — where  ?" 

Mr.  Aylward  adds  another  sketch  of  an  adventure  occurring  in  the  same 
weird  neighbourhood  to  one  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  from  whom  he 
received  an  account  of  the  occurrence,  and  for  whose  veracity  and  the 
unquestionable  reliance  that  might  be   placed   upon  his  statement,   Mr. " 
Aylward  strongly  vouches.     He  says  : — 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  281 

"  My  friend  was  riding  one  day  on  a  road  skirted  on  the  left  by  high  embankments, 
while  the  right  sloped  away  into  grassy  meadows,  when  a  thunderstorm  coming  up  from 
behind,  caused  him  to  look  back,  that  he  might  calculate  whether  he  could  reach  the 
town,  two  miles  in  front  of  him,  without  being  caught  in  the  rain.  The  horse,  as  horses 
will,  looked  around  and  backward  at  the  same  time.  In  a  moment  the  brute  was  madly 
plunging,  striving  to  bolt  up  the  high  bank,  and  endeavouring  with  evident  terror,  to  get 
away  from  some  fearful  thing.  ...  It  was  4  p.m.  on  an  ordinary  summer  after- 
noon ....  Strongly  interested  by  the  fear  so  palpably  exhibited  by  his  horse,  .  .  . 
the  rider  again  turned  has  eyes  towards  the  rapidly  approaching  storm.  ...  He  was 
not  a  superstitious  man,  he  was  not  drunk,  or  suffering  from  low  spirits,  or  '  want  of 
spirits,'  and  yet  he  saw  in  the  broad  daylight,  coming  floating  towards  him,  with  out- 
stretched arms  in  front  of  the  moving  mass  of  rain,  but  several  feet  raised  from  the  earth, 
a  young,  fair,  ethereal,  golden-haired  female,  whose  robes  of  glittering  white  trailed  just 
over  the  highest  points  of  the  grass.  She  spoke  not,  but  came  steadily  down  upon  him  in 
advance  of  the  storm.  His  horse  now  kicked  and  plunged  more  madly  than  ever,  and  at 
length,  wild  with  terror,  snapped  the  strong  bridle  reins  into  pieces,  and  tore  away  in 
headlong  flight  straight  down  the  roadway  to  the  distant  village.  .  .  .  Twice  during 
the  headlong  gallop,  the  rider  turned  his  head  to  watch  the  swiftly  following  rain,  which 
was  still  preceded  by  the  fair  girl  and  her  outstretched  arms.' ' 

CAPE   TOWN. 

The  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  this  remote  quarter  of  the  globe,  strikingly 
illustrates  the  possibilities  which  grow  out  of  the  efforts  of  one  determined 
and  earnest  mind  when  bent  upon  carrying  its  purpose  into  practical 
effect.  Spiritualism  in  Cape  Town  owes  its  first  unfoldment  entirely  to  the 
energetic  leadership  of  Mr.  Berks  T.  Hutchinson,  a  name  equally  well 
known  and  esteemed  now,  in  the  annals  of  the  cause,  whilst  this  gentleman's 
conversion  to  the  belief  is  due,  according  to  his  own  statement,  to  what  the 
world  would  call  a  mere  passing  incident,  but  one  which  the  Spiritualist 
recognises  as  a  link  in  the  chain  of  concerted  action  forged  by  the  guardian 
spirits  of  this  mundane  sphere. 

Mr.  Hutchinson  informed  the  author,  that  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  was 
first  brought  to  his  notice  by  an  American  gentleman,  a  Dr.  Wilson,  who, 
on  his  way  to  the  diamond  fields  in  the  year  1872,  chanced  to  make  Mr. 
Hutchinson's  acquaintance.  Being  an  enthusiastic  beUever  in  Spiritualism, 
Dr.  Wilson  had  much  to  say  on  the  subject  to  Mr.  Hutchinson,  and  at 
parting  with  him,  strongly  urged  him  to  subscribe  to  the  Banner  of  Lights 
one  of  the  chief  organs  of  the  cause  in  America.  Before  Mr.  Hutchinson's 
interest  in  Dr.  Wilson's  tidings  had  time  to  cool,  another  earnest  propa- 
gandist called  at  Table  Bay,  in  the  person  of  Mr.  Holmes,  photographer  of 
the  United  States  gunboat  Swatara.  By  this  new  ally  Mr.  Hutchinson  was 
induced  to  experiment  in  the  formation  of  circles,  at  one  of  which  Mr.  H.'s 
sister  became  developed  as  a  fine  rapping  test  Medium.  Hence  arose  the 
means  of  furnishing  evidence  which  not  only  convinced  the  members  of  the 
experimental  circles,  but  many  others  outside  their  ranks,  of  the  truth  of 
Spirit  communion. 

Mr.  Hutchinson  says  of  his  own  sentiments  at  this  time  : — 

"  Being  naturally  of  an  enthusiastic  turn  of  mind,  I  believed  that  every  one  would  leap 
for  joy  at  the  glad  tidings  I  had  to  communicate,  but  to  my  great  sorrow  and  surprise 
I  found  myself  shunned  and  avoided  by  my  nearest  and  dearest  friends,  and  none  but 
those  who  have  experienced  a  similar  fate  can  imagine  the  pain  I  experienced  at  being 
tabooed  and  reviled  for  proclaiming  my  honest  convictions,  and  that  on  so  noble  and 
glorious  a  revelation  as  immortality  demonstrated." 

Mr.  Hutchinson's  gallant  defence  of  his  newly  found  religion,  and  the 
devotion  with  which  he  promulgated  it,  may  be  judged  of  by  the  fact,  that 

282  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

he  built  a  fine  hall  capable  of  accommodating  some  500  persons,  solely 
for  the  purpose  of  holding  Spiritual  meetings  ;  that  he  organised  a  psycho- 
logical society,  and  indefatigably  promoted  the  formation  of  circles,  at 
which  several  good  physical  Mediums  were  developed.  In  addition  to 
these  untiring  and  costly  efforts  to  promote  the  advancement  of  the  great 
truth  he  realised,  Mr.  Hutchinson  started  a  paper  devoted  to  the  interests 
of  Spiritualism,  and  although  its  career  was  short  lived  for  lack  of  adequate 
support,  it  was  a  well  written  and  interesting  publication,  and  at  a  later 
period  in  the  history  of  Colonial  SpirituaUsm  would  have  doubtless  proved 
a  genuine  success. 

Undaunted  by  the  vast  financial  outlay  which  his  efforts  entailed  upon 
him,  Mr.  Hutchinson  succeeded  in  procuring  the  services  of  the  Rev.  J. 
M.  Peebles,  who  in  a  fine  series  of  lectures  on  the  Spiritual  philosophy, 
did  much  to  enlighten  his  audiences  on  the  sublimity  and  high  import 
of  SpirituaUsm.  Mr.  Hutchinson  made  a  trip  to  England  in  1877, 
and  being  greatly  struck  with  the  manifestations  of  physical  power  exhibited 
through  the  Mediumship  of  Mr.  Eglinton,  a  young  gentleman  much 
esteemed  and  admired  by  the  Spiritualists  of  London,  he  induced  him 
to  come  to  Cape  Town,  for  the  dual  purpose  of  benefiting  a  fragile 
constitution  and  affording  the  inhabitants  of  The  Cape  opportunities  of 
witnessing  his  (Mr.  EgUnton's)  unrivalled  mediumistic  endowments. 

Before  concluding  our  brief  notice  of  Cape  Town  Spiritualism,  it  may 
interest  the  reader  to  peruse  at  least  one  thoroughly  well-attested  account 
of  Mr.  EgUnton's  seances.  It  must  be  added  that  although  the  manifesta- 
tions of  Spirit  power  through  that  excellent  instrument  were  very  varied, 
and  included  nearly  every  form  of  intelligence  as  well  as  physical  power 
known  in  the  modern  dispensation,  our  space  only  admits  of  one  narrative, 
and  this  must  be  taken  as  representative,  not  only  of  Mr.  EgUnton's 
Mediumship  generally,  but  also  of  the  crucial  modes  in  which  his  powers 
were  tested.  The  Spiritualists  of  Cape  Town  published  amongst  many 
other  accounts  of  Mr.  EgUnton's  seances  the  following  report  in  the  London 
Spiritualist  of  January,  1879 : — 

"  When  tlie  reports  from  Amsterdam  reached  this  town,  the  local  papers  of  course, 
made  the  most  of  them,  and  were  not  choice  in  their  expressions  about  the  deceivers  and 
the  deceived.  Some  Spiritualists  even  wavered  in  their  belief ;  but  the  seance  now 
described  has  served  to  bind  them  together  more  firmly  than  before.  Mr.  Eglinton  had 
ceased  to  be  a  professional  medium,  and  was  not  in  any  way  identified  with  our  society. 
It  was  proposed  to  ask  him  to  give  a  seance  on  purpose  to  make  known  if  he  produced 
his  materialisations  as  these  exposers  would  have  us  believe.  Not  that  we  doubted  him, 
for  he  had  been  giving  stances  with  unvarying  success  ever  since  he  landed  here,  and  his 
demeanour,  candour,  and  honesty  had  much  endeared  him  to  us.  We  kept  our  purpose 
entirely  quiet,  and  not  until  the  circle  (a  select  party  of  Spiritualists)  had  met,  and  the 
medium  arrived,  did  we  place  our  object  before  him. 

"  We  desired  that  a  committee  of  three  should  search  him,  to  which  he  at  first 
demurred,  but  when  we  explained  that  it  was  the  wish  of  his  guides  that  we  should  do 
so,  he  immediately  consented.  The  room  was  thoroughly  scrutinised,  and  we  aver  that 
there  were  no  cupboards  or  carpets  to  conceal  any  articles,  and  the  most  rigid  search 
failed  to  reveal  anything  concealed  on  his  person.  The  cabinet  was  simply  formed,  by 
suspending  two  curtains  made  of  black  silesia  across  a  corner  of  the  room,  the  walls  of 
which  are  very  solid,  the  floor  uncarpeted,  and  without  trap  doors.  The  medium,  never 
leaving  our  sight,  retited  into  the  cabinet,  seating  himself  on  a  chair  provided  for  the 
purpose.  The  sitters,  sixteen  in  number,  were  arranged  in  the  form  of  a  double  horse« 
shoe  around  the  cabinet.  Shortly  after  prayer  had  been  offered  and  a  voluntary  played 
on  the  harmonium  by  our  organist,  the  tall  and  graceful  form  of  Abdullah  was  seen  in 
strong  gaslight,  clothed  in  a  profusion  of  snowy  drapery,  his  sparkling  jewels  flashing 
out  to  us  the  scintillating  rays  of  light.  He  bowed  gracefully  to  the  sitters,  came  out 
from  the  cabinet,  and  walked  close  up  to  us.     He  is  apparently  five  or  six  inches  taller 

^NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  283 

than  Mr.  Eglinton,  slight  in  figure,  with  only  one  arm,  and  of  wholly  different  physique 
to  the  mediam. 

"  Next  there  appeared  in  front  of  the  cabinet  a  small  portion  of  white  drapery,  and 
above  it  a  head.  It  was  most  strange  and  weird- like  to  see  nothing  but  an  apparently 
human  head  moving  about.  Very  soon  two  Hands  materialised,  and,  taking  hold  of  the 
white  drapery,  commenced  shaking  it  out,  a  voice  keeping  up  an  animated  conversation 
all  the  time.  Gradually  the  mass  of  drapery  grew  more  profuse,  and  we  noticed  that  the 
head  then  placed  itself  upon  a  neck,  which  soon  connected  itself  with  a  body,  rising,  as  it 
were,  out  of  the  drapery.  It  was  the  form  of  our  dear  friend  and  worker  '  Joey,'  who 
remarked,  '  There,  that's  the  way  I  build  myself  up.'  Thus  he  appeared,  formed 
seemingly  out  of  nothing,  in  the  light,  and  without  the  slightest  attempt  at  concealment 
or  mystification,  thus  solving,  to  our  unbounded  satisfaction,  one  of  the  most  momentous 
problems  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Joey's  form  is  wholly  unlike  that  of  the  sensitive, 
being  smaller,  slighter,  and  of  weaker  physique  altogether.  The  next  form  was  that  of 
a  tall,  graceful,  good-looking  lady,  clothed  from  head  to  foot  in  a  flowing  garment,  not 
unlike  a  fine  Indian  mull  muslin,  and  very  different  in  texture  to  that  of  the  preceding 
figures.  She  moved  out  of  the  cabinet,  and  was  plainly  seen  by  all,  and  clearly  recognised 
by  several  as  a  Miss  Georgina  Handley,  formerly  a  sister  of  mercy  in  this  town.  The 
fourth  figure  proved  to  be  that  of  a  male,  stepping  out  immediately  after  the  last  figure. 
He  was  recognised  as  the  father  of  one  of  the  sitters,  and  the  loved  husband  of  another.  A 
marvellous  manifestation  now  took  place,  for,  after  bowing  to  the  sitters,  he  retired  to  the 
cabinet,  and  with  the  aid  of  another  male  spirit,  brought  the  medium  right  out  of  the 
cabinet  into  full  view  of  the  sitters,  so  that  the  medium  and  two  male  spirits  were  distinctly 
seen  at  the  same  time.  They  then  took  Mr.  Eglinton  back  again  to  the  cabinet,  and  throw- 
ing back  the  curtains  showed  him  reclining  in  his  chair,  deeply  entranced.  The  curtains 
closed  on  these  marvels,  and  almost  instantly  the  petite  form  of  '  Lily,'  the  much-loved 
and  last  plucked  flower  of  our  friend,  Mr.  Hutchinson,  came  into  the  circle,  and,  in  child- 
like confidence,  placed  her  tiny  hand  on  the  knee  of  one  of  the  sitters,  and  looked  up  into 
his  face  with  the  touching  appeal  of  "  Do  you  know  me?"  On  her  retiring,  another 
female  figure  appeared  of  medium  height,  with  flowing  garments  and  light  hair,  but  only 
for  a  moment,  and  was  instantly  recognised  as  the  sister  of  a  sitter.  The  difference 
between  this  figure  and  that  of  Miss  Handley  was  striking,  one  being  tall  with  somewhat 
dark  hair  ;  the  other  considerably  shorter  and  fairer.  Six  forms  had  already  appeared, 
yet  our  friends  had  not  quite  done,  for  suddenly  Abdullah  drew  aside  the  curtain,  and 
we  witnessed  the  wondrous  phenomenon  of  'Lily'  retiring  apparently  into  the  form  of 
Miss  Handley,  who  in  turn  retired  into  the  body  of  our  faithful  medium,  followed 
instantly  by  the  disappearance  of  Abdullah  ;  and  thus  ended  the  most  marvellous 
manifestation  of  power  and  conclusive  evidence  of  Spirit  presence  and  identity  yet  seen 
in  Southern  Africa.  Let  who  will  deny  these  facts,  there  they  remain,  and  if  the 
evidence  of  sixteen  respectable,  intelligent,  and  sane  persons,  who  would  unhesitatingly 
expose  trickery  (were  it  possible),  is  of  any  value,  then  we  say  we  have  scored  a  triumph 
which  no  amount  of  deceit  or  fraud  can  ever  undo. 

"  That  this  report  is  correct  we  aflirm  and  declare,  as  witness  our  signatures  : — 

"Berks  T.  Hutchinson,  E.  Hammick, 

Carrie  J,  Hutchinson,  F.  Williams, 

Helenk  Otto,  J.  F  Marshall, 

M.  F.  KoHLER,  E.  Kingsch, 

George  Silver,  S.  T.  Marchant." 
"Cape  Town,  South  Africa,  Dec.  3rd,  1878." 

We  present  this  statement  without  comment,  except  a  strong  asseveration 
of  the  entire  honesty,  good  faith,  and  rehability  of  the  esteemed  narrator, 
Mr.  Hutchinson,  and  the  well-known  respectability  of  his  fellow  witnesses. 

Of  course  it  will  be  understood  that  Mr.  Hutchinson  has  secured  many 
noble  and  effective  allies  in  his  arduous  undertakings.  Mr.  Alfred  Teague, 
Mr.  Marchant,  Mr.  C.  M.  Cogm,  and  Mr.  Simkiss,  the  latter  once  known  as  a 
devoted  advocate  of  Spiritualism  in  Wolverhampton,  England  ;  these  gentle- 
men and  many  others  of  good  repute  and  standing  bravely  uphold  the  flag 
of  the  cause  in  Cape  Town,  and  amidst  disadvantages  which  the  cosmo- 
politan of  other  countries  can  nei^er  even  dream  of,  maintain  its  advocacy 
after  the  fashion  of  a  single  warrior  against  a  host.  Mr.  Berks  T.  Hutchin- 
son concludes  a  brief  and  modest  sketch  of  his  own  share  in  the  work  of 

284  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

propagandism  as  follows  : — "  For  the  last  few  years,  for  various  reasons  I 
have  taken  no  active  part  in  spreading  the  truth,  but  I  never  let  an  oppor- 
tunity pass  of  ventilating  the  subject  or  lending  works  out  of  my  library. . 
.  .  .  We  have  a  new  Mesmeric  and  Psychological  Society  of  which  I 
am  a  member.  .  .  .  The  light  of  Spirit  communion,"  he  adds,  "  will 
never  go  out  in  this  sunny  land  " — a  conclusion  in  which  he  is  confirmed  by 
many  of  the  faithful  and  self-sacrificing  men  and  women  whose  good  names 
and  good  services  for  Cape  Town  Spiritualism  we  have  been  unable  to 
report,  but  whose  efficient  labours  we  feel  entire  confidence  will  be  found 
inscribed  in  the  archives  of  the  still  brighter  land  whose  sun  will  know  no 
setting. 

CHAPTER    XXXV. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    SOUTH   AMERICA,    MEXICO,    &C. 

To  the  author's  work  on  "  Modern  American  Spiritualism,"  about  the  470th 
page,  will  be  found  a  series  of  communications  by  Mr.  Seth  Driggs  giving 
accounts  of  circles  held  at  Caracas,  Venezuela,  together  with  numerous  details 
concerning  the  status  of  Spiritualism  in  the  South  American  Republic. 
These  communications  are  dated  1865-6,  and  refer  to  scenes  enacted  at  a 
still  earlier  period.  Great  changes  have  been  wrought  during  the  succeed- 
ing eighteen  years,  in  the  Spiritual  progress  of  South  America,  as  the 
following  pages  of  this  chapter  will  show. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   MEXICO. 

For  many  graphic  accounts  of  Spiritual  progress  in  Mexico,  the  author 
is  indebted  to  the  report  of  Don  A.  Gamboa,  a  gentleman  residing  near  the 
town  of  Acapulco,  and  one  who  although  generally  too  reserved  to  make 
his  opinions  known,  has  quietly,  and  generously  devoted  many  years  of  his 
life  and  much  of  his  means,  to  the  advancement  of  the  cause  of  SpirituaUsm. 
Don  Gamboa  affirms,  that  there  are  many  earnest  and  aristocratic  supporters 
of  Spirituahsm  in  Mexico,  amongst  whom  he  names,  General  Gonzales, 
Don  Antonio  Santago,  the  president  of  the  Spiritual  Society,  numbering 
over  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  members  ;  Don  E.  Alvarez,  Don  S.  Sierra, 
and  Don  J.  Cordero,  an  eminent  advocate,  and  the  esteemed  editor  of  an 
excellent  paper  published  in  the  Spanish  language,  entitled  La  Illustradon 
Espirita. 

Amongst  the  contributors  to  this  journal  are  several  ladies  and  gentlemen 
of  rank  and  literary  ability^  whilst  the  circles  held  in  different  parts  of  the 
country,  although  strictly  private,  are  very  numerous,  and  display  Medium- 
ship  of  a  high  order,  especially  when  the  Media  are  ladies— or  as  it  often 
happens — very  young  persons. 

Don  Gamboa  is  himself  fortunate  in  possessing  a  Medium  in  his  own 
family,  in  the  person  of  his  Httle  daughter,  a  young  girl  of  fifteen,  who, 
though  unfortunately  a  cripple,  and  confined  to  her  lonely  plantation  home 
by  a  severe  affection  of  the  spine,  is  still  a  remarkable  clairvoyant,  seeress, 
and  Spirit  Medium.     Under  influence,  this  young  lady  can  read  through 

M.^?    Ada    Foye 

ill 

Jl 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  285 

closed  books,  tell  the  nature  and  colour  of  any  object  presented  to  her 
blindfolded,  has  described  distant  scenes  and  places,  though  she  has  never 
quitted  Mexico,  and  always  predicts  correctly  what  visitors  are  coming,  or 
any  event  of  importance  about  to  occur  in  the  family. 

On  account  of  her  invalid  condition,  the  parents  refuse  to  allow  their 
daughter  to  be  visited,  or  to  exhibit  her  wonderful  powers  to  any  but 
intimate  friends,  but  as  her  governess  is  an  excellent  planchette  writer  and 
rapping  Medium,  Don  Gamboa  says — to  use  his  own  words — "  We  have 
for  years  been  living  more  in  heaven  than  on  earth,  surrounded  and 
ministered  unto  by  angels,  and  so  radiantly  happy,  that  we  shrink  from 
contact  with  the  hard  cold  world,  just  as  our  Amalia  mourns  and  shivers 
when  her  Spirit  friends  return  her  from  flights  in  the  sunny  skies,  and 
fragrant  airs  of  the  glorious  summer  land,  to  the  dull  grey  mists  of  this 
weary  earth," 

Don  Gamboa  permits  the  author  to  mention  the  fact  of  the  supernal 
revelations  given  to  his  highly -favoured  family,  but  desires  it  to  be  added, 
that  no  correspondence  is  answered,  nor  are  visits  received  from  curious 
enquirers  outside  his  own  immediate  circle.  He  mentions  Mr.  Simonson 
as  a  good  writing  and  impressional  Medium  of  Panama ;  Senora  Dolores 
Portugal,  as  a  fine  trance  and  magnetic  Medium ;  Signor  Silvio  Pellico, 
and  several  other  good  writing  Mediums,  and  quite  a  number  of  others 
distinguished  for  their  various  gifts  as  trance  speakers,  pantomimic, 
tipping,  and  seeing  Media. 

Don  Gamboa's  commercial  pursuits  have  frequently  called  him  to  the 
United  States,  where  he  has  seen  much  of  American  Spiritualism. 

He  complains  of  the  cold  materialistic  way  in  which  circles  are  conducted 
there,  and  contrasts  them  with  the  solemnity  and  respect  with  which 
Mexican  Spiritualists  invoke  the  presence  of  their  "honoured  dead."  He 
says :  "  Our  circles  never  begin  without  heartfelt  prayers,  then  invocations 
to  Spirits,  spoken  or  sung,  with  skill  and  artistic  taste.  Sometimes 
voluntaries  are  played  on  the  harmonium,  harp,  or  other  instruments, 
manipulated  with  sufficient  good  taste  to  satisfy  the  elevated  inhabitants  of 
a  higher  region;  after  which,  to  the  ringing  of  a  sweet-toned  bell,  the 
members  of  the  circles  compose  themselves  to  receive  messages  from 
Spirits,  in  the  accustomed  way." 

From  a  number  of  communications  on  "The  divine  harmony  of  the 
superior  regions,"  given  in  the  Mexican  circles,  we  select  one  which  is  a 
striking  confession  of  a  Spirit,  who  says  in  reference  to  the  immoral  life  he 
had  lived  on  earth  : — 

"  On  entering  the  spirit  world  the  first  remembrance  that  assailed  me  was  of  the 
■woman  whom  I  had  injured.  I  returned  to  the  abode  of  my  unhappy  victim,  and  saw 
her,  pale  and  sad,  bending  over  the  cradle  of  our  child.  Deeply  penitent,  I  asked 
forgiveness  and  sought  with  tenderness  to  assuage  her  tears.  I  madly  fondled  the  little 
one  I  had  left  upon  the  earth  without  a  name.  But  all  was  silence.  No  one  heard  or 
heeded  me.  Always  at  her  side  and  hearing  her  murmur  my  name  between  her  sobs 
and  tears,  but  my  penitence  and  grief  reaches  her  not,  and  I  must  seek  the  aid  of  the 
good  who  practise  their  virtues  in  silence  and  know  something  of  the  life  beyond  the 
tomb.  Could  Spiritualists  realize  that  in  our  selfishness  we  are  making  for  ourselves  a 
bed  that  our  morally  mutilated  forms  must  fit,  perhaps  the  gauge  of  virtue  would  be 
more  closely  watched." 

We  now  avail  ourselves  of  Dr.  G.  L.  Ditson's  scholarly  articles  prepared 
each  week  for  the  Banner  of  Light  to  give  a  farther  account  of  the  literature 
as  well  as  the  Spiritual  status  of  the  cause  in  Mexico,  and  other  strongholds 
of  "  the  faith  "  in  South  America. 

2  86  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Writing  in  1880  of  Don  Gonzales'  excellent  paper,  published  in  Mexico 
City,  Dr.  Ditson  says  : — 

"Notwithstanding  the  troubled  waters  of  the  ever  unfortunate  Mexico,  her  able 
exponent  of  Spiritualism,  La  lUustracion  Espirita  (August  number),  has  reached  me  in 
due  time.  Don  Gonzales's  rich,  attractive  magazine  gives  no  evidence  that  the  political 
turmoil  surrounding  him  has  reached  his  sanctum,  for  his  pages  are,  as  usual,  aglow  with 
all  that  is  valuable  to  investigators  in  the  realm  of  our  faith  and  inviting  to  the  scholar 
who  would  penetrate  the  deeper  mysteries  that  underlie  the  mind's  progress. 

"  The  lUustracion  before  me  opens  with  a  learned  consideration  of  the  '  Doctrine  of 
the  Trinity,'  by  Don  Juan  Cordero — its  literary,  historical,  and  religious  aspect.  In  the 
course  of  his  remarks  Don  Cordero  says  :  '  From  a  historical  point  of  view  the  dogma  in 
question  is  a  step  backward  in  the  career  of  progress.  .  .  .  Why  reject  the  Olympus 
of  the  Greeks  if  you  are  to  substitute  for  it  the  Olympus  of  the  Romans  ?  .  .  .  Why 
condemn  as  absurd  the  avatars  of  Vishnu,  yet  proclaim  the  incarnation  of  the  Divine 
Word  ?  For  what  and  why  laugh  at  a  God  with  three  faces  (although  monstrous),  to 
substitute  one  God  composed  of  three  Gods,  an  individual  composed  of  three  individuals 
distinct  in  themselves  ?  Why  condemn  the  adoration  of  the  stars  and  substitute  for  them 
a  piece  of  wood  ? '  After  referring  to  what  has  been  established  by  religious  councils 
the  writer  says  :  '  Without  doing  injustice  to  the  true  value  of  those  venerable  "  ConcUios," 
we  vdll  cite  as  a  simple  contemporaneous  appreciation  of  them  a  passage  from  a  letter 
directed  to  Procopius  by  San  Gregorio  Nazianceno,  who  presided  at  the  Grand  Council 
of  Constantinople  (A.  D.  851)  :  "I  have  fear  of  these  Councils.  I  have  not  seen  one 
that  has  not  done  more  evil  than  good,  or  had  a  good  end ;  the  spirit  of  disputation, 
vanity,  and  ambition  dominates  them,  and  he  who  among  them  proposes  a  reformation 
of  abuses  runs  the  risk  of  being  accused  without  correcting  them."  '  " 

We  conclude  this  brief  notice  of  Spiritualism  in  Mexico  with  an 
extract  from  a  late  number  of  the  American  Boston  Herald^  in  which 
we  find  the  following  account  of  a  tribe  of  Indians  located  at  New  Mexico, 
and  claiming  to  be  the  direct  descendants  of  the  most  ancient  Aztecs, 
whose  customs,  traditions,  and  ceremonials,  they  affirm  they  religiously 
cherish.  The  accounts  of  these  people,  called  the  "Zuni  Indians,"  are 
furnished  by  a  Mr.  Gushing,  a  gentleman  who  was  sent  out  by  the  Smith- 
sonian Institution  of  Washington,  America,  to  report  upon  the  condition  of 
the  Indian  tribes  of  New  Mexico,  and  who  is  now  adopted  among  the 
Zuiiis. 

The  Editor  of  the  Boston  Herald,  commenting  on  Mr.  Gushing's  corres- 
pondence, says  : — 

"  Having  made  the  religion  of  the  Zunis  a  subject  of  close  study  he  has  learned  that 
the  worship  and  traditions  of  Montezuma — so  long  accepted  in  all  accounts  of  the  Aztecs — 
have  no  foundation  in  fact.  He  has  found  the  existence  of  twelve  sacred  orders,  with 
their  priests,  and  their  secret  rites  as  carefully  guarded  as  the  secrets  of  Freemasonry,  an 
institution  to  which  these  orders  have  a  strange  resemblance.  Into  several  of  these  orders 
he  has  been  initiated,  and  has  penetrated  to  their  inmost  secrets,  obtaining  a  knowledge 
of  ceremonials  both  beautiful,  pi  ofound  and  grotesque  in  character.  '  But,'  adds  this 
correspondent,  '  the  most  marvellous  discovery  he  has  made  in  connection  with  their 
religion  is  the  grand  fact  that  their  faith  is  the  same  thing  as  Modern  Spiritualism.  The 
Zunis  have  their  circles,  their  mediums,  their  communications  from  the  spirit-world, 
their  materializations — precisely  like  those  of  the  Spiritists  of  civilised  life.  Their  stances 
are  often  so  absorbing  that  they  are  kept  up  all  night.  Their  belief  in  the  phenomena 
explains  many  strange  things  about  their  religion  which  Mr.  Gushing  was  unable  to 
account  for  until  he  hit  upon  it — they  had  kept  it  carefully  guarded  months  after  he  was 
on  most  intimate  terms  with  them — by  telling  them  about  certain  spiritistic  phenomena 
he  had  himself  witnessed,  thus  gaining  their  sympathy  as  apparently  a  fellow  believer.' 

"  The  Zunis  have  religious  ceremonials,  sacred  orders  and  public  festivals,  in  which  songs 
and  prayers  are  employed  that  have  been  handed  down  for  very  many  generations  with- 
out the  changing  of  a  single  word.  Mr.  Cushing's  adopted  father  is  the  second  priest  of 
the  tribe,  a  man  of  a  beautifully  loving  and  gentle  nature.  Upon  the  return  of  one  of 
their  number  from  a  dangerous  expedition,  the  following  prayer  was  offered  by  him  : 

NIjyETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  287 

"  '  All  spirits  !  we  ask  for  your  light.  Far  and  in  parts  unknown,  where  the  world  is 
filled  with  danger,  where  things  forbidden  and  the  unknown  are,  thence  ye  have  brought 
back  our  child.  We  thank  ye  !  In  spite  of  all  danger,  we  now  speak  to  each  other  again. 
We  now  see  one  another  again.  Thanks.  Therefore  your  light  we  ask,  and  we  will 
meet  ye  with  your  own  blessing.'  " 

Dr.  Ditson  says  in  connexion  with  the  Revista  Espiritista  of  1877  : — 

"  Revista  Espiritista,  of  Monte  Video.  This  is  the  oldest,  I  think,  of  South  American 
periodicals,  and,  though  containing  but  eight  pages,  overflows  with  fraternal  good  will, 
plain  truths,  such  as  we  need  and  love,  and  such  as  its  editor,  Don  Justo  de  Espada, 
invites  us  to  as  to  a  grateful  feast."     .... 

"The  Revista  Espiritista,  of  Monte  Video,  has  always  some  valuable  sentiments  from 
its  editor,  Don  Espada,  and  the  Angel  Guardian;  it  also  in  the  present  issue  quotes 
from  the  '  Lerida  (suppressed)  Sentido  "  what  the  Bishop  of  that  district  has  been  doing  ; 
but  says  that  after  his  severe  anathemas  against  this  publication  and  all  Liberals,  the 
subscriptions  to  the  Sentido  had  increased,  and  even  a  serenade  had  been  given  to  the 
Liberals  of  Bilboa."     .... 

In  1878  Dr.  Ditson  says  of  this  same  paper  : — 

"  The  editor  of  this  pioneer  in  our  cause,  in  a  land  where  Catholicism  has  held  undis- 
puted sway  for  centuries,  has  doubtless  up-hill  work,  with  not  many  assistants  ;  yet  he 
seems  to  be  a  host  in  himself,  and  brings  out  regularly  his  heraldic  Revista,  a  kind  of  red 
flag,  such  as  is  used  in  the  arena  in  the  favourite  Spanish  amusement  of  bull-baiting. 
He  relies  principally  upon  his  own  pen,  though  he  has  other  able  contributors,  such  as 
Dona  Amalie  Soler,  who  in  the  present  number  writes  of  '  What  am  I  ? '  There  is  also  an 
article  from  a  Belgian  paper,  which,  with  the  Revista,  still  dwells  much  upon  '  objections 
to  paid  mediumship.' "    .     .     .     . 

Of  the  leading  Spiritual  paper  of  Buenos  Ayres,  Dr.  Ditson  gives  a 
number  of  laudatory  notices,  and  as  they  contain  some  interesting 
mementos  concerning  the  Spiritualistic  doings  of  that  important  town,  we 
shall  give  some  extended  excerpts  from  the  collection  in  our  possession. 

The  first  of  1880  reads  thus  : — 

"  Though  Mexico  formerly  furnished  us  with  the  finest  magazines  and  spiritualistic 
literature  anywhere  to  be  found,  she  seems  to  have  abandoned  the  field  to  the  Spanish- 
speaking  people  of  the  South.  Buenos  Ayres,  which  now  produces  the  Consiancia,  has  not 
neglected  her  opportunity,  and  the  periodical  in  hand  from  that  fair  city  vies  with  our  very 
best.  Some  remarks  on  Allan  Kardec  ;  a  short  discourse  delivered  by  Don  H.  Mayor  before 
the  '  Constancia  Society,'  '  Observations  on  Magnetism,'  or  odic  force,  in  which  Baron 
Reichenbach  is  frequently  referred  to,  and  '  Materialization/  are  the  first  articles  that  claim 
attention  in  the  present  issue.     .     .     . 

"  Following  an  article  on  '  What  there  is  Positive  Respecting  Astrology,'  and  in  which 
the  most  gloomy  forebodings  are  entertained  respecting  our  immediate  future,  M.  Clavairoz, 
formerly  a  French  Consul-Qeneral,  says  :  '  The  Mother  Shipton  evoked  by  the  London 
Spiritualist  declares  that  at  this  moment  there  is  not  a  single  true  astrologer  upon  the  face 
of  the  earth.  Now  this  name  of  Mother  Shipton  was  the  pseudonym  under  which  the 
celebrated  Roger  Bacon  concealed  himself  ;  this  encyclopedic  genius,  whose  investigations 
in  the  thirteenth  century  elicited  the  admiration  of  his  contemporaries  who  were  occupied 
with  astrology,  .  .  .  was  in  accord  with  Nostradamus  when  he  said  that  the  world 
would  come  to  an  end  in  1881.  But  it  is  understood  that  the  end  of  the  world  refers 
wholly  to  a  moral  state  ;  that  it  signifies  the  advent  of  a  new  reign  ;  but  it  is  curious  to 
observe  at  least  the  coincidence  of  all  these  prophecies  ;  and  the  conjunction  of  the  four 
planets.     .     .     . 

"  Quoting  from  the  Gaulois  of  May  16th,  1869,  the  Constancia  has  the  following  :  A 
young  lawyer  going  from  Paris  to  Piedmont  was  assassinated  ;  but  of  this  terrible  afiair, 
or  the  whereabouts  of  the  body,  nothing  was  known  till  a  clairvoyant  was  consulted.  This 
psychic  gave  a  description  of  the  place  where  the  deed  was  committed,  and  described  the 
assassin,  a  well-dressed  man  who  travelled  with  his  victim.  The  murderer  and  the 
murdered  youth  were  thus  discovered,  and  aU  the  minute  particulars  were  verified." 

288  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Another  journalistic  notice  of  La  Constancia  is  given  in  a  recent  number 
of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  of  Chicago,  and  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Constancia  is  a  monthly  Spiritual  review,  published  in  Buenos  Ayres,  and  is  now  in 
its  fourth  year.  The  September  number  has  reached  us,  and  we  find  it  to  be  the  most  satis- 
factory publication  of  the  kind  that  we  have  ever  seen  from  our  sister  continent.  Twenty- 
four  pages  of  the  thirty-two  which  it  comprises,  are  devoted  to  a  discourse  pronounced 
against  Spiritualism  by  Prof,  D.  Miguel  Puiggari,  and  its  refutation  by  Senor  Hernandez, 
which  latter  is  the  most  searching  and  powerful  document  that  we  have  ever  seen  from 
any  source,  and  we  only  wish  that  we  had  time  and  space  to  reproduce  it." 

"  The  Constancia  is  not  the  only  Spiritual  journal  published  in  Buenos  Ayres,  for  it 
returns  the  salutation  of  a  new  contemporary  called  La  Fraternidad  in  the  following 
graceful  terms  : — 

"  '  We  accept  the  salutation  with  a  joyful  heart,  for  we  feel  the  necessity  of  publications 
of  this  sort  in  a  centre  so  vast  as  this  in  order  that  it  may  not  be  supposed  that  the 
number  of  believers  is  small,  but  that  there  are  readers  for  the  grand  philosophy  which 
we  have  embraced  and  that  the  number  of  followers  is  already  legion.'  " 

Writing  of  Spiritualism  in  South  America  in  October,  1881,  the  editor  of 
Light  (London),  says  : — 

"  The  Constancia,  a  monthly  Spiritualist  review  of  Buenos  Ayres,  dated  30th  of  July 
last,  contains  the  report  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Buenos  Ayres  Spiritualist  Society, 
including  the  President's  address  in  which  he  urges  the  members  of  the  society  not  to 
neglect  their  attendance  at  the  different  meetings,  but  each  to  do  his  share  in  adding  to 
the  brilliancy  of  Spiritual  light.  '  The  Spirits,'  he  says,  '  understand  us  thoroughly,  and 
ask  our  continual  assiduous  assistance.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  comprehend  our 
own  selves,  while  imprisoned  in  this  obscure  corporeal  dungeon.  Let  us  then  accede  to 
the  request  of  those  invisible  brothers  who,  with  so  much  interest,  invite  us  to  attend 
these  reunions.' 

"  Then  follows  the  account  of  the  work  done  by  the  various  sections  of  the  society,  and 
short  reports  of  trance  speeches,  magnetic  sessions,  &c.  A  number  of  healing  prescrip- 
tions are  mentioned  as  having  been  given  through  the  mediumship  of  Donna  Juana  de 
Navajas,  a  well-known  local  medium.  A  series  of  monthly  conferences  are  held  under  the 
auspices  of  the  society,  the  subject  in  July  being  the  Theory  of  Spontaneous  Physical 
Manifestations.  The  subjects  down  for  discussion  in  August  were  :  '  Bi-corporeity  and 
Transfiguration,'  '  Laboratory  of  the  Invisible  World,'  '  Places  visited  by  Spirits,'  '  Nature 
of  the  Communications,  &c.,  &c.  A  paragraph  follows  copied  from  the  Heraldo  de  San 
Nicolas,  of  the  28th  June,  1881,  reporting  the  speech  of  Don  Rafael  Hernandez,  a  leading 
Spiritualist,  at  the  anniversary  banquet  of  the  '  Union'  Masonic  Lodge.  The  oration  was 
equally  Spiritualistic  and  Masonic,  and  was  full  of  sublime  sentiments. 

"  The  number  before  us  also  contains  a  communication  from  the  eloquent  pen  of  Amalia 
Domingo  y  Soler,  a  writer  and  authoress  well  known  to  all  SpirituaHsts  who  are  acquainted 
with  the  work  in  Spain.  The  article  was  originally  written  in  the  Luz  del  Porvenir  (Light 
of  the  Future),  edited  by  Madame  Domingo  y  Soler,  and  claims  for  woman  her  proper 
position  in  society  ;  to  attain  which  her  Spiritual  education  should  be  taken  in  hand,  and 
the  blossom  of  truth  gradually  unfolded  before  her  eyes." 

"  THE   BRAZILIAN    SPIRITUAL   PRESS. 

"  The  foUovnng  Spiritualistic  papers  have  been  published  from  time  to  time  in  various 
parts  of  the  Brazilian  empire: — In  the  Province  of  Bahia,  1865,  0  Monitor  de  Alem 
Tumulo — (The  Monitor  from  Beyond  the  Tomb) — a  monthly  journal  ;  at  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
in  1875,  the  Revista  Espirita  (Spiritual  Review),  monthly ;  in  1881,  the  Revista  da 
Sociedade  Academica ;  in  San  Pablo,  at  the  city  of  Areas,  the  Uniao  e  Cronca  (Union  and 
Chronicle)  ;  at  Pernambuco  in  the  city  of  Recife,  A  Cruz  (The  Cross)  ;  and  we  are  told 
that  there  will  shortly  be  published  in  this  city  an  organ  for  the  Spiritual  circles  of  the 
municipality. — Revista,  of  Rio  de  Janeiro." 

The  promise  contained  in  the  above  paragraph,  taken  from  one  of  the 
secular  papers  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  was  soon  after  its  pubhcation  realised  by 
the  appearance  of  La  Revista,  a  title  so  common  amongst  these  South 
American  journals  that  their  number  is  hardly  appreciated  in  the  confusion 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  289 

of  names.     Dr.  Ditson  notices  one  of  the  best  of  these  journals,  published 
in  the  Portuguese  language,  as  follows  : — 

"The  Revista  da  Sociedade  Academica,  No.  7,  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  in  the  Portuguese 
language,  has  come  to  hand.  It  is  a  very  handsome  magazine  of  upwards  of  thirty  pages, 
and  contains  many  articles  of  the  first  importance.  ...  It  was  in  1865,  in  the  city 
of  S.  Salvador,  capital  of  the  province  of  Bahia,  that  the  first  Society  of  Spiritualists, 
with  a  written  constitution,  was  formed  ;  and  for  eight  years,  animated  by  the  salutary 
doctrines  of  Spiritualism,  it  worked  and  fought  for  the  cause.  In  1869  it  published  a 
journal  entitled,  Echo  from  Beyond  the  Tomb.  In  1872  a  new  society  was  formed  for 
the  exclusive  scientific  investigation  of  Spiritualism,  and  was  called  the  "  As»ociacion 
Spiritica  Brazileira."  It  adopted  as  a  basis  of  operations  Allan  Kardec's  works.  It 
started  a  periodical  and  a  library.  In  1880  in  Campos,  a  flourishing  city  in  the  province 
of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  there  was  formed  another  society — the  S.  Campista  de  Estudos  Spiritas, 
and  many  members  were  added  to  it,  &c.,  but  they  had  to  withstand  the  usual  amouut 
of  calumnies. 

"  La  Luz  de  Sinn  is  the  name  of  a  spiritualistic  periodical  published  at  Bogota,  in  the 
United  States  of  Colombia.  It  has  very  attractive  matter  taken  from  the  work,  '  Roma 
and  the  Evangelic  ; '  some  '  Letters  of  Lavater,'  and  some  miscellaneous  articles. 

"  La  Revelacion,  of  Buenos  Ayres,  reappears  again,  '  after  a  suspension  caused  by  the 
Jesuits,  the  principal  barriers  to  modern  progress,'  says  a  European  paper. 

"  La  Ley  de  Amor,  of  Merida,  Yucatan  (July  16th  and  August  1st),  has  also  reached  me. 
A  very  sensible  article  fiom  the  '  Circle  Peralta '  on  the  historical  and  present  daily  prot)fs 
of  Spiritualism,  opens  the  July  number.  The  Ley  also  says  '  that  there  have  been 
established  in  our  state  various  ''circles"  for  spiritualistic  studies.'  From  To basco  have 
been  received  notices  of  the  'rapid  advance  of  the  consoling  doctrine  of  Spiritualism.' 
At  the  '  circle '  of  La  Cruz  they  have  a  valuable  medium,  a  somnambule  lucida,  who  has 
made  some  remarkable  cures." 

Another  notice  of  this  paper  says  : — 

"  La  Ley  de  Amor,  of  Yucatan.  I  have  in  hand  three  numbers  of  this  interesting 
little  journal,  bearing  dates  October  9th  and  25th  and  November  10th.  The  first  article 
that  claims  attention  is  from  the  graceful  pen  of  the  poetess,  Donna  Amalia  Soler. 
Briefly  I  will  report  her  as  saying  :  '  In  a  reunion  of  Spiritualists  an  elegant  youth 
presented  himself,  but  expressed  his  incredulity  in  the  alleged  phenomena  occurring 
among  them  ;  still  he  would  put  a  mental  question.  A  young  girl  took  a  pencil  and 
wrote  some  lines  in  a  large  hand,  exclaiming  in  innocent  surprise  :  "  Oh,  what  a  reply  ! 
What  nonsense  ! "  The  young  man  took  it  and  read,  growing  sober  and  pale  as  he  did 
so  ;  " En  el  claustro  materno.  "  It  is  true,'  he  said,  'for  I  came  into  the  world  three 
months  after  the  death  of  my  father  ;  and  my  question  was,  "  Where  was  I  at  that 
solemn  event  ?  "  At  another  spiritualistic  gathering  was  an  Englishman  who  maintained 
a  kind  of  stolid  indifference  to  all  that  occurred,  but  finally,  with  the  rest,  promised  to 
attend  mass  the  next  day  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  church  of  St.  Paul.  All  went,  and  while 
the  rest  of  the  party  were  grouped  around  the  high  altar,  he  retired  to  a  side  aisle,  where, 
seated  on  a  bench,  he  read  a  book  which  he  took  from  his  pocket.  At  the  seance  on  the 
following  evening  the  Englishman  said  to  the  spirits  (supposed)  :  "  Were  you  content  to 
see  us  all  at  the  appointed  place  ?  "  "  Yes,"  was  the  reply,  '•  and  I  felt  very  grateful  that 
you  prayed  for  me,  but  my  satisfaction  was  lessened  by  seeing  one  of  your  number 
perform  an  irreligious  act — retiring  to  read  a  licentious  novel."  The  English  gentleman 
arose  as  pale  as  a  corpse  and  said  it  was  even  as  stated  ;  and  then  and  there  confessed 
that  there  must  be  a  spirit  that  could  see  and  feel  even  as  we  do,  &c.  Henceforth  he 
was  an  earnest  Spiritualist.  '  Laugh  if  you  will,'  says  our  authoress,  '  but  that  does  not 
destroy  facts.'  So  she  continues  :  '  A  physician,  a  materialist,  called  on  a  young  man,  a 
medium,  and  found  that  he  had  written  quite  a  learned  treatise,  much  above  his  normal 
capacity,  on  pulmonary  affections.  "  I  will  believe  in  this  thing,"  said  he,  "  if  my  deceased 
wife  will  come  and  in  her  own  handwriting  will  state  to  me  something  <f  a  private  nature 
that  occurred  between  us."  The  medium  soon  wrote  :  ''  Spirits  are  not  in  the  habit  of  satis- 
fying puerile  curiosity,  but  because  of  my  love  of  you  when  on  the  earth  I  will  give  you  the 
evidence  you  seek  :  As  a  pledge  of  my  affection,  in  your  secretary  you  have  kept,  now 
yellowed  by  time,  the  first  letter  I  ever  wrote  to  you.  Some  of  its  lines  are  now  very 
faint,  but  the  medium  will  copy  them."  .  .  .  Julian  hastened  home  and  found  the 
original,  as  copied,  that  he  had  preserved  for  more  than  twenty  years,  saying,  ''I  lament 
the  time  that  I  have  lost  in  not  devoting  myself  to  Spiritualism."  '  " 
19 

290  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  The  Siglo  XIX.,  of  Guadaloupe,  reports  in  a  jesting  manner  a  Spiritual  manifesta- 
tion which  occurred  to  a  young  girl,  religious  and  much  respected,  and  of  a  good  family  in 
Gaudaloupe.  The  little  medium  experienced  certain  phenomena  which  were  augmented 
till  she  saw  and  heard  the  phantom  of  her  godmother,  or  guardian,  who  came  to  reproach 
herself  for  not  having  had  the  child  baptized,  and  to  have  the  ceremony  performed. 
Other  manifestations  occurred  in  the  child's  presence,  such  as  the  flying  open  of  doors, 
which  doubtless  aided  in  convincing  the  bishop,  to  whom  the  affair  was  named,  that  there 
was  something  in  it.  The  baptism  took  place,  and  during  the  ceremony  the  girl  and  she 
who  was  serving  as  godmother  saw  the  attending  spirit." 

"  La  Aurora,  of  Brazil,  and  La  Revista,  of  Santiago  de  Chile,  have  also  such  communi- 
cations as  tend  to  enlighten  '  all  those  who  through  fear  and  ignorance  are  still  found  under 
the  clerical  yoke.'  Don  Eafael  Molina  in  the  University  has  delivered  a  discourse 
demonstrating  the  truths  of  Spiritualism,  as  well  as  the  heresies  of  the  Church  of  Rome, 
which  has  ehcited  much  comment." 

Writing  of  Spiritualism  in  Puerto  Rico  in  November,  1881,  Dr.  Ditson 
says  : — 

"  El  Pelegnno  is  a  quarto  of  eight  pages,  and  unfurls  the  banner  of  our  faith  with  such 
a  firm  hand  and  such  force  of  character  that  one  cannot  but  heed  and  respect  its  preten- 
sions. I  have  three  numbers,  dating  to  September  8th,  and  I  only  regret  that  space  will 
limit  me  to  a  brief  notice  of  its  forcible  articles.  One,  headed  '  El  cura  de  Utuado,'  states 
that  the  dead  body  of  Don  E.  Vargas  was  refused  admittance  to  the  Catholic  church 
because  Don  V.  had  been  a  Spiritualist ;  and  that  when  the  friends  had  taken  it  to  the 
cemetery,  there  intolerance  again  met  them,  and  it  was  refused  a  resting-place  in  the 
so-called  sacred  ground.  Again,  the  conduct  of  the  curate  of  Caguas  in  refusing  to  baptize 
the  child  of  a  Spiritualist  is  commented  upon  at  great  length,  and  most  judiciously." 

In  the  January,,  1882,  number  of  Light,  we  find  the  following  article, 
which  we  give  as  our  closing  notice  of  Spiritualism  in  those  vast  regions 
where  internal  interests  are  so  inevitably  focalized  by  distance  from  other 
Spiritual  centres,  that  they  seem  almost  tefra  i?icdgnita,  the  fraternal  spirit 
and  enterprise  which  marks  the  propositions  about  to  be  quoted,  are  equally 
worthy  of  respectful  attention  and  sympathetic  response,  from  all  quarters 
of  the  globe. 

They  are  introduced  by  the  editor  of  La  Revue  Spirite  thus  : — 

"  HOW   SPIRITUALISM    IS   WORKING    IN   BRAZIL. 

"  Under  the  heading  of  '  Universalisation  of  Spiritualism,'  in  its  December  number, 
the  Revue  Spirite  invites  attention  to  an  announcement  in  the  Revista  da  Sociedade 
Academica,  whose  publishing  office  is  No.  54,  Praga  d'Acclama9ao,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil. 
The  Revista  is  the  organ  of  the  Brazilian  Society  of  Spiritualists,  naively  calling  itself  here 
the  Brazilian  group  of  the  human  family.  Having  the  object  in  view,  it  says,  of  drawing 
more  closely  together  the  bonds  of  fraternal  action  among  Spiritualists,  it  proposes  to 
exchange  the  Revista  and  all  its  publications  for  the  organ  and  publications  of  any  and 
every  other  Spiritualist  society,  wishing  to  place  them  on  the  bookshelves  and  reading 
tables  of  the  library  of  the  Society,  which  is  open  to  the  public. 

"  Competitive  Theses. 

"  Further,  in  order  to  attract  the  attention  of  all,  down  to  Materialists,  to  the  study  of 
the  Spiritual  world,  we  invite — it  says — theses  to  be  sent  in  :  the  subject  to  be — Ood,  the 
human  soul  and  its  immortality  scientifically  demonstrated.  As  an  extra  inducement  to 
engage  in  this  work,  the  Society  ofiers  the  sum  of  two  contos  de  Reis  (about  5,000  francs) 
to  the  writer  of  the  accepted  thesis,  in  addition  to  the  prize  awarded  by  the  Academy. 
(What  the  prize  is,  is  not  here  specified.)     This  is  the  programme  : — 

"  '  1 .  Every  thesis  sent  in  to  be  distinguished  by  a  motto,  and  accompanied  by  a  letter 
containing  a  duplicate  of  the  motto,  and  the  name  of  author,  date,  and  abode.  Theses 
are  receivable  up  to  December  31st,  1882. 

"  '  2.  Theses  written  in  a  foreign  language  to  be  accompanied  by  a  translation  in 
Portuguese.  (Translators  may  be  found  at  any  Brazilian  or  Portuguese  legation  or 
consulate.) 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  291 

"  '  3.  The  thesis  accepted  will  be  printed  at  the  expense  of  the  Society.  Those  written 
in  foreign  languages  can  be  pubhshed  with  the  translation. 

"  '  4.  Every  thesis  will  be  numbered  correspondingly  with  the  registration  of  the  letters 
accompanying  the  theses,  which  letters  will  be  kept  inviolable. 

"  '  5.  A  council  will  be  appointed,  consisting  of  representatives  of  the  scientific  and 
philosophic  schools,  in  due  time,  which  will  examine  and  report  upon  the  theses. 

"  '  6.  After  discussing  the  council's  report,  the  Academy  will  appoint  a  time  for  opening 
the  letter  corresponding  to  the  thesis  most  approved. 

"  '  At  a  formal  meeting  of  the  Academy,  the  author  of  the  thesis  most  approved,  or  his 
representative,  will  be  invited  to  receive  the  prize  awarded  by  the  Academy.  In  addition 
he  will  receive  from  the  Society  the  sum  before  mentioned.' 

"  The  Society  will  forward  a  historical  summary  of  Spiritualism  in  Brazil  to  every 
Spiritualist  centre  which  communicates  with  it,  and  in  this  matter  reciprocity  is  expected 
because  the  interest  is  the  same  on  both  sides.  '  This  would  lead,'  it  says,  '  to  a  veritable 
Spiritualist  congress.  Animated  by  the  same  sentiments,  true  Spiritualists  have  little  need 
to  meet  within  four  walls  for  agreement,  for  generalising  an  idea ;  being  one  in  spirit,  and 
bound  together  by  the  same  mission,  they  ought  to  interchange  thought  in  whatever  part 
of  the  world  they  may  be."  " 

CHAPTER    XXXVI. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   THE   EAST    INDIES,    CHINA,    INDIA,    &C.,    &C. 

Spiritualism  in  China, 

The  Spiritualistic  beliefs  and  practices  of  nearly  all  Oriental  nations  com- 
mence with  their  recorded  history,  and  while  they  assimilate  in  quality 
and  style  of  phenomena  with  the  modern  methods  of  Spirit  communion, 
there  are  lines  of  demarcation  in  the  processes  of  invocation^  and  the  uses 
to  which  that  communion  is  applied,  which  separate  the  East  and  West, 
and  do  not  seem  likely  to  be  overcome  or  united. 

In  a  work  entitled  "Art  Magic,"  edited  and  published  by  the  author  of 
this  volume,  and  written  by  a  learned  gentleman,  who  had  personally 
witnessed  all  he  described,  vivid  accounts  are  given  of  Spiritual  manifes- 
tations amongst  the  Mongolians,  including  narratives  of  the  marvellous 
powers  exercised  by  certain  "  Lamas,"  or  religious  devotees,  in  cutting  and 
mutilating  their  bodies,  and  restoring  them  again  without  signs  of  injury, 
in  a  single  minute. 

M.  Le  Hue,  and  Mr,  McGowan,  the  well-known  Jesuit  and  Scotch 
missionaries,  testify  to  having  witnessed  similar  performances,  and  both 
add  extraordinary  narratives  of  the  power  acquired  by  some  of  the  Mongol 
priests  and  ascetics  in  the  production  of  phenomena  which  transcend 
description  or  belief.  Besides  feats  of  this  astounding  character,  many  of 
the  Chinese  practise  modes  of  Spirit  communion  by  rapping,  writing,  the 
movement  of  inanimate  bodies ;  through  trances,  prevision  and  clair- 
voyance. One  of  the  simplest  methods  employed  in  communicating  with 
Spirits  is  described  by  M.  Le  Hue  as  follows  : — 

"  As  a  vehicle  for  spirit  communications  the  Chinese  strew  a  table  with  sand  and  on 
this  the  written  characters  are  traced  by  means  of  a  pencil  made  from  the  twig  of  a 
peach  tree.  It  is  said  that  '  the  motions  of  the  pencil  are  quite  extraordinary,  and  appa- 
rently not  produced  by  the  medium,  on  whose  open  palms  the  handle  of  the  pencil  rests.' 
Irreverent  lookers-on  are  sharply  rebuked  by  the  ministering  spirit.     After  each  sentence 

292  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  sand  has  to  be  smoothed,  and  while  this  is  being  done,  the  whole  company  unite  in 
praising  the  poetical  talents  of  the  spirit,  which  responds  by  tracing  on  the  sand  the  char- 
acters which  constitute  the  message.  When  wearied  it  '  jots  down  as  if  in  a  great  hurry 
the  two  characters,  "  Excuse  me,  I  am  off ;  "  '  whereupon  the  company  say,  '  If  there  was 
any  want  of  respect  or  attention,  great  spirit,  we  beseech  thee  forgive  us  this  sin,'  after 
which  the  stance  comes  to  an  end." 

In  a  recent  number  of  the  Banner  of  Light ^  an  able  correspondent  writes 
an  account  of  a  seance  which  so  nearly  resembles  the  descriptions  given  by- 
many  travellers  and  missionaries,  that  we  transcribe  a  portion  of  the  narra- 
tive, as  it  will  illustrate  phenomenal  methods,  very  common  in  China  : — 

"  The  temple  of  Loi-Sun-Yaong  at  Canton  is  one  of  the  many  places  to  which  the 
people  resort  to  receive  communications  by  means  of  mediumistic  writing,  and  may  be 
described  as  an  illustration  of  all.  In  the  temple  is  an  altar  at  which  a  monk  presides. 
The  petitioner  for  a  communication  kneels  with  the  monk  in  front  of  the  altar,  and  both 
engage  in  earnest  supplications.  Beside  the  altar  stands  another  monk,  in  front  of  whom 
is  a  large  board  covered  with  sand.  There  is  another  officiator  near  by  with  pen  and 
paper,  prepared  to  copy  the  message  when  it  appears,  and  still  another  whose  office  it  is  to 
explain  it.  The  writing  is  done  vsrith  a  stick  made  of  white  wood,  about  one  foot  long, 
resembling  a  large  pen-holder,  from  the  under  side  of  which,  when  it  is  in  position  to  use, 
projects  a  small  piece  of  wood  which  writes  on  the  sanded  board.  Mrs.  Gray,  the  widow 
of  Archdeacon  Gray,  for  many  years  a  missionary  in  China,  states  that  on  one  occasion 
she  visited  the  temple  to  witness  the  manner  of  proceeding,  remarking  that  for  many 
centuries  spiritual  manifestations  have  been  known  and  believed  in,  in  that  empire. 

"  At  the  time  Mrs.  Gray  and  her  husband  visited  the  temple,  they  were  informed  that 
a  devotee  who  was  present,  was  impatient  to  obtain  a  written  message,  and  supposing 
they  came  for  a  similar  purpose,  the  person  in  charge  begged  them  to  wait.  After  the 
prayers  at  the  altar,  the  stick  of  white  wood  was  taken  by  the  chief  officiator,  balanced  on 
his  two  fore-fingers,  and  thus  held  above  the  sanded  board.  In  a  few  moments  it  began 
to  move,  tracing  large  characters  in  the  sand.  When  the  surface  had  been  entirely 
covered,  the  writing  was  transcribed  on  paper.  The  sand  was  then  shaken  so  that  it  pre- 
sented an  even  surface,  and  the  board  was  again  placed  ready  for  use.  This  was  done  three 
times.  The  fourth  time,  the  lightly  balanced  wooden  instrument  refused  to  move,  and 
the  holder  of  it  said  the  communicator  had  left. 

"  Table-moving  has  long  been  known  and  practised  in  China.  On  one  occasion  some 
missionaries  had  a  medium  in  their  own  house.  A  large  round  table  was  brought  and 
placed,  feet  upwards,  on  the  floor.  Four  of  their  servants  were  called  in,  and  each  was 
told  to  place  one  of  his  hands  on  a  foot  of  the  table.  The  medium  then  began  to  walk 
around  it  with  slow  and  measured  steps,  holding  lighted  joss  sticks  in  his  hands  and 
invoking  the  presence  of  unseen  powers.  In  a  few  moments,  the  table  began  to  revolve 
slowly.  Then  the  medium  increased  his  speed,  and  the  table  tui'ned  more  swiftly,  until 
both  table  and  medium  ran  round  with  great  velocity.  Of  course  the  hands  of  the 
servants  were  not  now  upon  it.  They  stood  speechless  in  amazement.  At  length,  ex- 
hausted, the  man  stood  still,  and  the  table  ceased  to  move.  He  was  asked  how  he 
accomplished  the  feat  ?  In  a  low,  subdued  voice,  he  replied  :  '  It  is  Joss  that  does  it ;  I 
pray  to  him.'  It  was  doubtless  a  manifestation  of  some  spirit,  but  the  ascribing  it  to 
'  Joss '  was  in  keeping  with  the  scriptural  accounts  of  similar  events,  in  which  they  were 
said  to  be  performed  by  God. 

"  These  manifestations  have  existed  among  the  Chinese  for  ages,  probably  to  an 
extent  greater  than  among  us,  for  the  reason  that  a  belief  in  the  possibility  of  their  occur- 
rence has  formed  the  primitive  or  spontaneous  faith  of  the  people." 

From  the  author  of  "  Art  Magic,"  Captain  Thomas  Hunt,  of  Salem,  U.S., 
and  the  Hon.  Charles  Bradley,  all  of  whom  have  been  residents  in  China, 
as  well  as  from  her  own  Chinese  servants  in  California,  the  author  has 
learned  that  manifestations  of  similar  character  to  those  above  detailed,  as 
well  as  feats  of  physical  strength,  and  mental  forms  of  intelligence,  have 
been  common  amongst  the  Chinese,  ages  before  modern  Spiritualism  was 
known. 

The  latter  is  practised  at  times  amongst  the  white  residents,  and  the 
modes  are  founded  upon  European  and  American  experiences;   but  the 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  293 

Spiritualists  of  the  white  and  yellow  races,  despite  their  significant  resem- 
blance, do  not  blend,  and  the  Chinese — especially  the  better  educated 
portions  of  the  community — regard  the  matter  of  fact,  and  only  partially 
successful  practices  of  the  whites,  with  some  contempt.  Dr.  Ah  Sin,  a  very 
well  educated  and  intelUgent  medical  practitioner  of  Australia,  said  to  the 
author  when  conversing  on  these  subjects : — "  You  are  really  behind  the 
times,  and  ought  to  call  SpirituaUsm  no  longer  modern,  but  ancient. 
Sounds  and  motions  are  only  made  by  Spirits  to  attract  notice,  but  true 
communion  is  by  words,  writings,  and  speech,  such  as  is  uttered,  when  the 
Spirit  enters  the  body  of  another.  All  this — besides  sie  fa  (evil  power) 
which  enables  men  to  cut  and  hack  their  bodies,  and  cure  them  again  on 
the  instant — the  Chinese  have  had  amongst  them  from  the  beginning  of 
time,  certainly  since  the  days  of  Lao  Kuin." 

Lao  Kuin — the  intelligent  reader  will  remember — was  a  cotemporary  of 
Confucius.  The  latter  was  only  a  philosopher  and  a  compiler ;  Lao  Kuin 
was  a  "  saint,"  an  ascetic,  a  wonder  worker. 

He  was  the  founder  of  the  sect  Tao  tse,  the  votaries  of  which  are  all 
Spiritualists.  It  is  said  by  Chinese  traditions,  that  after  Lao  Kuin  had 
left  the  earth, — "  being  translated  bodily  to  heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fire,"  one 
morning,  there  was  found  hanging  on  a  tree  in  the  Emperor's  garden,  a 
wonderful  book  full  of  magical  rites,  invocations  of  Spirits,  wise  sayings, 
and  divine  revelations.  The  emperor  himself  carried  this  book  in  solemn 
procession,  and  with  high  ceremonial  rites,  to  the  principal  monastery,  and 
from  thence,  guidance  and  direction  in  all  that  belongs  to  Spirit  power  and 
communion,  has  been  received  for  ages.  This  book  is  said  by  some  to  have 
been  burned,  other  authorities  claim  Lao  Kuin  as  its  author,  and  declare  it 
is  still  the  Bible  of  the  Tao  tse.  Dr.  Ah  Sin  showed  the  author  a  finely 
illuminated  work  which  is  the  "  Spirit  book  "  of  the  Lamasery  in  which  as  a 
youth  he  had  been  educated.  In  this  work  are  forty-six  modes  of  invoking 
Spirits  (gods)  for  different  purposes,  and  with  different  powers  and  functions. 
Amongst  these  modes,  are  the  burning  of  incense,  fragrant  herbs,  gums, 
paper  images,  gilt  flowers,  and  pungent  perfumes.  Sometimes  the  votaries 
employ  motions,  such  as  dancing,  whirling,  and  spinning  ;  at  others,  they 
resort  to  the  beating  of  drums  and  ringing  of  bells  to  induce  the  "mantic 
ecstasy  "  or  to  invoke  certain  orders  of  Spirits.  The  most  approved  modes 
of  summoning  "  high  and  holy  Spirits,"  are  those  employed  by  religious 
ascetics,  such  as  prayer,  fasting,  and  silent  contemplation. 

Spells,  enchantments,  and  amulets  are  also  considered  efficaciousj  but 
ascetic  and  devotional  processes  are  preferred  above  all  others,  that  is,  in 
high  ceremonial  rites. 

Bamboo  sticks  placed  on  newly  strewn  sand  or  fine  ashes,  are  often  used 
by  Spirits  through  Chinese  Media,  to  draw  characters,  figures,  and  land- 
scapes. They  have  modes  of  drawing  lots,  also  of  tossing  up  shells,  shoot- 
ing arrows,  setting  up  staves,  and  making  circles  on  the  ground,  in  which 
objects  thrown,  and  falling  in  certain  directions,  are  accepted  as  good  or 
evil  auguries.  The  reader  curious  in  these  rites  and  ceremonies  need  only 
consult  Godwyn's  curious  treatise  on  The  Antiquities  atid  Divination  of  the 
Hebrews'*'  to  find  numbers  of  the  modes  practised  by  the  Chinese,  but 
claimed  by  them  to  be  derived  from  antique  sources,  which  far  antedate  the 
appearance  of  the  Jews  on  the  page  of  history. 

*  "(Moses  and  Aaron)— Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  Rites  of  the  Ancient  Hebrews."  By  Thomas  Godwyn, 
B.D.,  1628. 

294 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Amongst  the  Chinese,  as  with  every  other  people,  women  are  considered 
now — although  not  in  past  times — to  be  the  best  diviners,  augurs,  and 
prophets.  Their  services  in  these  directions  are  much  more  in  demand 
than  formerly,  and  in  this  respect  it  is  probable  that  the  practices  of  modern 
Mediumship  have  tended  to  produce  this  result,  even  amongst  the  con- 
servative Clainese. 

It  would  be  unnecessary  to  refer  to  the  religious  doctrines,  or,  if  it  may 
be  so  termed,  the  theology  of  the  Mongol  tribes.  It  is  enough  to  say  that 
modern  Spiritualism  honeycombs  their  ranks,  wherever  white  men  appear, 
or  have  settlements.  This  movement  makes  no  visible  progress  amongst 
the  yellow  races,  simply  because  they  have  Spiritualism  already,  and  that  in 
forms  better  adapted  than  ours,  to  the  idiosyncracies  of  the  people,  and  to 
their  apprehension,  far  more  effective  and  powerful. 

Whilst  the  Siamese,  Japanese,  and  indeed  all  the  Mongolians  indulge  in 
great  varieties  of  speculative  doctrines,  all  are  more  or  less  practical 
Spiritualists,  and  believe  in  communion  with  the  souls  of  ancestors. 

The  opinion  of  many  intelhgent  persons  who  have  resided  amongst  these 
people  is,  that  their  communications  transcend  in  directness,  good  counsel, 
and  prevision,  any  that  are  manifested  amongst  the  Europeans  or  Americans, 
and  the  reasons  assigned  are,  because  the  modes  of  invocation  are  more 
real  and  devotional,  the  trance  more  profound,  and  the  preparation  for 
such  conditions,  more  in  harmony  with  physiological  and  psychological 
laws. 

Our  highly-advanced  civilians  would  rush  through  a  dozen  Spirit  circles, 
whilst  the  Chinese  monk  was  reverently  preparing  himself  for  one.  Fasting, 
asceticism,  silent  contemplation,  ablutions,  prayers,  and  all  the  formulae  so 
faithfully  observed  by  these  "heathens,"  would  hardly  suit  the  luxurious 
habits  or  feverish  whirl  of  life  to  which  civilized  nations  are  habituated ; 
hence  modern  Spiritualists  from  Europe  and  America,  are  no  more  likely 
to  convert  the  Spiritualists  of  China,  Thibet,  Siam,  &c.,  than  the  Christian 
missionary  is  likely  to  convert  the  true  and  earnest  Buddhist.  The  world 
mowts  forward,  not  backward,  and  Spiritualism  and  theology  move  along 
with  it. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    INDIA. 

In  the  present  section  of  our  matter  of  fact  history  we  must  not  be 
expected  to  catalogue,  much  less  to  define,  the  various  doctrinal  theories 
that  prevail  in  India,  nor  yet  to  enter  at  any  length  upon  those  subjects  of 
discussion  which  have  of  late  years  occupied  the  attention  of  widely-differing 
parties,  under  the  several  captions  of  "Occultism"  and  "SpirituaHsm." 
Something  of  both  these  subjects  we  shall  have  to  touch  upon  briefly  in 
this  very  chapter;  for  the  present  however,  we  must  call  attention  to  the 
definitions  under  which  Spiritual  beliefs  and  doctrines  in  India  may  be 
classified. 

As  a  general  rule,  the  white  population  settled  in  India  rank  themselves 
under  the  appellation  of  "  Christians,"  and  believe  or  deny,  only  that  which 
their  special  sect  teaches. 

There  are  in  these  ranks,  some  few  Spiritualists,  and  some  Secularists, 
but  metaphysical  thinking  in  India  is  fatiguing ;  hence  the  rule  is,  to  think 
only  through  a  paid  and  duly  appointed  religious  teacher,  and  leave 
metaphysics  and  all  its  ramifications  to  Fakirs,  Yogis,  and  restless 
reformers. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  295 

Amongst  the  native  Hindoos,  there  is  almost  as  great  a  diversity  of 
opinion  upon  the  questions  of  religion  or  theology,  as  in  the  ranks  of 
Christianity. 

The  beliefs  of  the  villagers  and  lower  classes  generally,  tend  to  gross 
forms  of  "  supernaturalism,"  but  the  religious  devotees  of  various  grades, 
often  attain  to  high  conditions  of  Spiritual  exaltation,  and  by  the  pecuUar 
practices  enjoined  upon  them  in  processes  of  initiation,  achieve  the 
power  of  working  what  in  olden  time  would  have  been  deemed  miracles, 
but  what  is  now  understood  to  be  the  control  of  matter  and  material 
things,  by  mental  and  Spiritual  forces. 

Some  of  the  far-famed  religious  ascetics  of  India,  are  members  of  secret 
associations  and  fraternities ;  many  of  them  belong  to  religious  orders,  and 
some  few  are  isolated  students  of  occult  power,  who  have  acquired  their 
magical  potency  by  research  and  observance  of  those  practices,  which  even 
the  highest  adept  must  pass  through,  if  he  desires  to  attain  to  complete 
mastery  over  the  realm  of  sensuous  existence. 

In  the  immense  wave  of  immigration  which  political  changes  have  cast 
on  Hindoo  soil  during  the  last  century,  many  things  have  come  to  hght 
in  connection  with  this  ancient  land,  which  have  created  a  deep  impression 
on  public  opinion.  The  partial  translation  of  once  unknown  and  "  sacred" 
books  mto  European  languages,  has  revealed  the  fact  that  India  has  been 
the  cradle  of  all  known  theological  beUefs.  The  examination  of  the  wonderful 
archseological  remains  of  vast  temples  with  which  the  land  is  studded,  have 
tended  still  further  to  confirm  the  truth  of  these  revelations,  whilst  the 
actual  marvels  wrought  by  reHgious  ascetics,  in  the  realms  of  matter  and 
force,  have  opened  up  a  new  and  highly  suggestive  page  in  the  study  of 
Occultism  and  Psychology. 

As  before  remarked,  the  upper  classes  of  the  white  population  in  British 
India  are  for  the  most  part  too  much  enervated  by  the  influence  of  its  tropical 
climate  to  concern  themselves  very  deeply  with  metaphysical  subjects. 
The  continued  effort,  the  patient  attention  and  aspiration  required  at  the 
Spirit  circle,  is  so  rarely  attainable  amongst  the  luxurious  residents  of 
British  India,  that  the  few  Spiritualists  with  whom  the  author  is  in  commu- 
nication, express  grave  doubts  if  "  modern  Spiritualism  " — in  the  European 
sense  of  the  term — will  gain  any  considerable  foothold  in  India  during  this 
generation.  The  religious  enthusiast,  or  even  the  specious  impostor,  is 
sure  to  command  his  share  of  following  from  all  classes,  but  when  the 
more  intelligent  Anglo-Indians  wish  to  be  informed  concerning  the  alleged 
possibilities  of  intercourse  with  the  Spiritual  realm  of  being,  rather  than 
subject  themselves  to  the  trouble  of  personal  investigation,  they  send  for  a 
Hindoo  "  wonder  worker,"  and  whether  he  be  a  genuine  Yogi,  or  a  cunning 
conjurer,  it  makes  but  little  difference.  Provided  he  can  amuse,  as  well  as 
astonish  his  employers,  the  purpose  is  answered;  and  as  far  as  his  feats 
bear  upon  Spiritual  verities,  the  witnesses  may  be  more  or  less  inclined  to 
accept  of  the  generic  explanation  of  a  Spiritual  agency.  There  have  been  of 
late  several  movements  of  a  semi-spiritual,  as  well  as  religious  or  meta- 
physical character  attempted  in  India,  and  as  one  in  which  a  large 
number  of  European  and  American  Spiritualists  have  taken  a  deep  interest, 
and  with  which  many  have  entered  into  ties  of  affiliation,  it  is  in  order  at 
this  point,  to  give  some  brief  notice  of  "The  Theosophical  Society"  of 
Bombay,*  the  city  in  which  that  society  has  established  its  headquarters, 

*  Since  this  chapter  was  first  indited,  the  Theosophical  Society's  headquarters  are  announced  as  having 
,  been  removed  to  Madras. 

2  96  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

and  from  which  it  issues  its  chief  literary  organ,  namely,  The  Theosophist,  a 
monthly  journal,  avowedly  devoted  to  an  exposition  of  "theosophy,"  and 
kindred  subjects. 

As  offering  the  most  impartial  information  concerning  the  origin  of  this 
Society,  that  can  be  laid  before  the  reader,  the  following  extract  is 
given  from  one  of  the  New  York  daily  journals,  subsequently  reprinted  in 
the  Boston  Spiritual  Scientist  of  1876.     It  reads  as  follows  : — 

"a  theosophical  society. 

"  One  movement  of  great  importance  has  just  been  inaugurated  in  New  York,  under 
the  lead  of  Colonel  Henry  S.  Olcott,  in  the  organization  of  a  society  to  be  known  as  '  The 
Theosophical  Society.'  The  suggestion  was  entirely  unpremeditated,  and  was  made  on  the 
evening  of  the  7th  instant,  in  the  parlors  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  where  a  company  of 
seventeen  ladies  and  gentlemen  had  assembled  to  meet  Mr.  George  Henry  Felt,  whose 
discovery  of  the  geometrical  figures  of  the  Egyptian  Cabbala  may  be  regarded  as  among 
the  most  surprising  feats  of  the  human  intellect.  The  company  included  several  persons 
of  great  learning  and  some  of  wide  personal  influence.  The  managing  editor  of  two 
religious  papers  ;  the  co-,editors  of  two  literary  magazines  ;  an  Oxford  LL.D.  ;  a  venerable 
Jewish  scholar  and  traveller  of  repute  ;  an  editorial  writer  of  one  of  the  New  York  morning 
dailies  ;  the  president  of  the  New  York  Society  of  Spiritualists  ;  Mr.  C  C.  Massey,  an 
English  visitor  ;  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  and  Dr.  Britten  ;  two  New  York  lawyers, 
besides  Colonel  Olcott ;  a  partner  in  a  Philadelphia  publishing  house  ;  a  well-known 
physician  ;  and,  most  notable  of  all,  Madame  Blavatsky  herself,  comprised  Mr.  Felt's 
audience. 

"  After  his  discourse,  an  animated  discussion  ensued.  During  a  convenient  pause  in  the 
coiiversation,  Colonel  Olcott  rose,  and  after  briefly  sketching  the  present  condition  of  the 
Spiritualistic  movement,  the  attitude  of  its  antagonists,  the  materialists  ;  the  irrepressible 
conflict  between  science  and  the  religious  sectaries ;  the  philosophical  character  of  the 
ancient  theosophies,  and  their  sufficiency  to  reconcile  all  existing  antagonisms,  and  the 
apparently  sublime  achievement  of  Mr.  Felt  in  extracting  the  key  to  the  architecture  of 
Nature  from  the  scanty  fragments  of  ancient  lore  left  us  by  the  devastating  hands  of  the 
Moslem  and  Christian  fanatics  of  the  early  centuries,  he  proposed  to  form  a  nucleus  around 
which  might  gather  all  the  enlightened  and  brave  souls  who  were  willing  to  work  together 
for  the  collection  and  diffusion  of  knowledge.  His  plan  was  to  organise  a  society  of 
occultists  and  begin  at  once  to  collect  a  library,  and  diffuse  information  concerning  those 
secret  laws  of  nature  which  were  so  familiar  to  the  Chaldeans  and  Egyptians,  but  are 
totally  unknown  by  our  modern  world  of  science. 

"  Mr.  Felt  said,  in  reply  to  questions,  that  communion  of  mortals  with  the  dead,  and  the 
reciprocal  intervention  of  each  in  the  affairs  of  the  other,  was  not  a  mere  conjecture  among 
the  ancient  Egyptians,  but  reduced  to  a  positive  science,  and  he  himself  had  been  able  to 
cause  the  materialization  of  human  forms  in  full  daylight,  by  magical  appliance. 

"  It  was  unanimously  voted  to  organise  the  proposed  society  forthwith.  Colonel  Olcott 
was  elected  temporary  president,  and  a  committee  was  appointed  to  draft  a  constitution 
and  by-laws. 

"  We  hail  the  movement  with  great  satisfaction,  as  likely  to  aid  in  bringing  order  out 
of  our  present  chaos,  furnish  us  a  true  philosophy  of  spirit-intercourse,  and  afford  a 
neutral  ground  upon  which  the  tired  wrestlers  of  the  Church  and  College  may  rest  from 
their  cruel  and  illogical  strife." 

Shortly  after  the  first  formation  of  this  Society,  in  which  all  the  parties 
alluded  to  above  took  part,  and  filled  offices,  it  was  deemed  desirable  to 
conduct  the  proceedings  on  the  basis  of  a  secret  society,  from  which  time, 
the  Fellows  of  the  New  York  Theosophical  Society  were  known  to  each 
other  by  the  usual  formulae  of  passwords,  grips,  signs,  &c.  In  this,  as  in 
all  other  associations  banded  together  for  the  study  of  occult  subjects,  it 
may  be  naturally  supposed  there  are  esoteric,  as  well  as  merely  exoteric 
degrees^  and  results  attainable  only  to  those  who  could,  and  would  pursue, 
their  studies,  to  the  innermost  depths  of  nature's  laboratories. 

Of  the  original  group  of  New  York  Theosophists,  several  have  seceded. 
Some  were  removed  by  mortal  death,  and  others  by  absence.  Madame 
Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott,  the  founders  of  the  Society,  themselves  passed 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  297 

on  to  England,  and  after  remaining  there  a  short  time,  and  inaugurating  a 
branch  Society  which  still  holds  its  sessions  in  London,  they  took  up  their 
residence  in  India,  from  whence  their  influence  still  ramifies  to  other 
branch  Theosophical  Societies,  established  in  different  parts  of  the  world. 
The  Theosophist — the  monthly  journal  before  mentioned — published  at 
Madras — has  now  entered  upon  the  sixth  year  of  its  circulation,  and  the 
parent  Society  is  presided  over  in  person  by  its  founders. 

There  are  still  many  points  connected  with  this  Society,  of  which  even 
its  avowed  disciples  seem  to  be  ignorant. 

Questions  are  constantly  propounded  concerning  the  aims.,  powers^  and 
scope  of  the  Association,  and  it  is  in  view  of  some  misunderstanding  that 
prevails  on  these  pomts,  that  we  shall  give  the  substance  of  a  correspondence 
published  in  The  Theosophist  of  October,  1881,  the  nature  of  which  speaks 
for  itself. 

It  commences  thus  : — 

"fragments  of  occult  truth. 

"  We  have  received  from  our  esteemed  Australian  brother  theosophist,  W.  H.  Terry, 
Esq.,  the  following  interesting  and  temperate  note  on  some  supposed  errors  of  Occultists, 
when  dealing  with  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  The  subject  is  -one  of  universal 
interest,  and  we  shall  require  therefore  no  apology  either  for  reproducing  our  good 
brother's  communication  in  extenso,- or  for  appending  thereto  some  few  fragments  of  the 
lessons  taught  us  in  the  occult  schools,  which  may  possibly  both  help  to  remove  his  per- 
sonal difl&culties,  and  tend  to  convey  to  Spiritualists  generally,  a  clearer  conception  of  the 
causes  of  many  of  the  phenomena  of  which  they  have  had  experience." 

Then  follows  a  long  letter  written  by  Mr.  Terry,  editor  of  the  Australian 
Harbinger  of  Light.,  complaining  that  he,  being  like  a  very  large  number  of 
other  Spiritualists  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  a  member  of  the  Theo- 
sophical Society,  and  a  reader  of  the  Society's  alleged  organ.  The 
Theosophist,  finds  the  agency  of  disembodied  human"  spirits  ignored  as 
factors  in  the  production  of  modern  Spiritual  manifestations  by  the  leading 
writers,  of  The  Theosophist.,  and  the  phenomena  which  Spiritualists  are  accus- 
tomed to  attribute  to  the  agency  of  Spirit  friends,  who  present  the  most 
conclusive  tokens  of  their  identity,  referred  to  "  elementaries,  geister, 
shells,"  &c.,  &c.  Mr.  Terry  cites  a  number  of  cases  occurring  in  his  own 
experience,  and  that  of  numerous  friends,  clairvoyants,  and  mediums,  all 
tendmg  to  prove  the  agency  of  intelligent,  Hving,  spirit  individualities. 
After  dwelling  at  great  length  upon  these  points,  and  summing  up  his  testi- 
mony in  a  very  clear  and  logical  manner,  Mr.  Terry  desires  to  be  informed, 
what  other  explanation  than  the  agency  of  spirits  identical  with  the  men 
and  women  who  have  once  lived  on  earth,  the  editor  of  The  Theosophist 
can  offer  him. 

To  this  very  reasonable  request,  the  editor  appealed  to  answers,  in  an 
article  so  long,  verbose,  and  incomprehensible,  that  the  author,  judging  of 
the  majority  of  her  readers  by  herself,  fears  it  may  be  "  defining  night  by 
darkness  "  to  attempt  reprinting  the  same  in  its  entirety. 

The  following  extracts,  however,  apply  to  the  most  salient  points  of  the 
whole  subject,  and  as  they  are  given  with  sufficient  definiteness  of  expression 
to  be  fairly  understood,  they  are  earnestly  commended  to  the  readers 
attention : — 

"  It  is  but  fair  that  we  should  meet  the  charge  brought,  and  iu  the  same  friendly  and 
frank  spirit  shown  in  his  letter  by  our  esteemed  Australian  brother  Theosophist.  Until 
some  one  more  competent  enters  the  arena  of  discussion  to  pick  up  the  glove  flung  by 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

Spiritualism  to  Theosophy  across  the  oceans,  we  will  take  the  liberty  of  saying  a  few 
words — not  in  our  defence — but  as  a  matter  of  courtesy  to  our  correspondent. 

" '  Those  Theosophists  who  deny  to  disembodied  spirits  a  legitimate  share  in  the 
marvellous  phenomena '  are  few,  indeed,  for  the  great  majority  of  Theosophists  concern 
themselves  luith  Spiritualism  very  little — if  at  all*  Indeed,  our  members  may  be  divided 
into  five  principal  classes  and  described  as  follows  : — 

"1.  Men  profoundly  concerned  ia  the  revival  of  their  respective  religious  philosophies 
in  all  their  pristine  purity — Buddhist  devotees  outnumbering  all  others.  These  neither 
know  of,  nor  do  they  care  for,  Spiritualism.     (?) 

"  2.  Students  of  various  philosophies,  searchers  after  truth,  whencesoever  it  may 
come.  They  neither  believe  nor  disbelieve  in  spirits.  They  are  open  to  conviction  in 
any  way,  but  will  accept  nothing  on  second-hand  testimony. 

"  3.  Materialists,  Freethinkers,  Agnostics,  who  care  as  little  for  Occultism  as  they  do 
for  Spiritualism.  Their  only  concern  is  to  free  the  masses  from  the  fetters  of  ignorance 
and  superstition,  and  educate  them.     ... 

"  4.  Spiritualists  and  Spiritists  who  could  not  weU  be  accused  of  any  such  '  heresy.' 
And  finally, 

"  5.  Occultists,  who  do  not  number  half  a  per  cent,  in  the  Theosophical  Society. 

"  These  latter  are  the  only  '  Theosophists '  who  are  really  open  to  our  correspondent's 
accusation,  and  even  these,  if  we  look  beyond  the  veil  of  words  which  more  or  less 
conceals  the  ideas  of  both  Spiritualists  and  Occultists,  will  prove  to  differ  less  widely  on 
these  points  from  our  correspondent  than  he  seems  to  suppose,  .  .  .  and  here  the 
confiict  of  opinions  between  Spiritualists  and  Occultists  is  solely  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  former  (who  overrate  their  quality  and  character)  dignify  by  the  name  of  '  spirits ' 
certain  reliquiae  of  deceased  human  beings,  while  the  Occultists  reserve  the  name  of  Spirit 
for  the  highest  principle  of  human  nature  and  treat  these  relijuice  as  mere  eidolons,  or 
astral  simulacra,  of  the  real  spirit. 

"  In  order  to  understand  clearly  the  view  of  the  Occultists,  it  is  necessary  to  glance 
at  the  constitution  of  the  living  human  being.  Even  the  spiritual  theory  teaches  that 
man  is  a  trinity,  composed  of  (1)  a  higher  spirit,  or  the  "Spiritual  Soul"  as  ancient 
philosophers  designated  it  ;  (2)  its  envelope — the  etherial  form  or  shadow  of  the  body — 
and  (3)  the  physical  body. 

"  Although  from  one  point  of  view  this  is  broadly  correct,  yet,  according  to  Occultists, 
to  render  our  conceptions  of  this  truth  clearer  and  follow  successfully  the  course  of  man 
after  death,  it  is  necessary  to  subdivide  further  these  three  entities  and  resolve  them 
into  their  constituent  principles.  This  analysis  being  almost  wholly  unknown  to 
Western  nations,  it  is  difficult  in  some  cases  to  find  any  English  words  by  which  to 
represent  the  Occult  subdivisions,  but  we  give  them  in  the  least  obscure  phraseology 
that  we  can  command. 

SUBDIVISIONS  OF  THE  OCCULTISTS. 

f  1.  The  Physical  body,  composed  wholly  of  matter  in 

I  its  grossest  and  most  tangible  form. 

-{  2.  The  Vital  principle,  a  form  of  force,  indestructible, 

DIVISIONS  OF  THE  SPIRITUALISTS. 

1.  The  Body. 

2.  The  Animal  Soul  or  Perisprit. 

and  when  disconnected  with  one  set  of  atoms, 
becoming  attracted  immediately  by  others. 

3.  The  Astral  body,  composed  of  highly  etherialized 
matter  ;  in  its  habitual  passive  state,  the  perfect 
but  very  shadowy  duplicate  of  the  body ;  its 
activity,  consolidation,  and  form  depending 
on  the  Jcama  rupa. 

i.  The  Astral  shape  {kama  rupa)  or  body  of  desire, 
a  principle  defining  the  configuration  of — 

5.  The  animal  or  physical  intelligence  or  consciousness 
or  Ego,  analogous  to,  though  proportionately 
higher  in  degree  than,  the  reason,  instinct, 
memory,  imagination,  &c.,  existing  in  the  higher 

3.  The  Spiritual  Soul  or  Spirit. 

6.  The  higher  or  Spiritual  intelhgence,  or  consciousness, 

or  Spiritual  Ego,  in  which  mainly  resides  the 
sense  of  consciousness  in  the  perfect  man, 
though  the  lower  dimmer  animal  consciousness 
exists  in  No.  3. 

7.  The   Spirit — an  emanation  from  the  Absolute  ; 

uncreated,  eternal ;  a  state  rather  than  a  being. 

*  Italics  are  the  author's  throughout. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  299 

"Now  the  change  that  we  call  death,  only  immediately  affects  the  first  three  con- 
stituents ;  the  body  decomposes  to  enter  into  new  combinations,  and  the  vital  force  is 
dissipated  to  help  animate  new  organisms,  and  the  astral  human  form  dies  with  the  body. 

"  There  remain  four  principles.  As  a  rule  (we  except  the  case  of  the  higher  adepts) 
one  of  two  things  occurs  in  accordance  with  the  universal  law  of  affinity.  If  the  spiritual 
Ego  has  been  in  life  material  in  its  tendencies,  placing  its  main  enjoyment  in  the 
gratification  of  its  earthly  desires,  then  at  death  it  continues  to  cling  to  the  lower  elements 
of  its  late  combination,  and  the  true  Spirit  severs  itself  from  these  and  passes  away 
elsewhere.  To  follow  its  course  is  beside  the  present  question,  since  the  remaining 
principles  in  which  personal  or  aninjal  consciousness  remain  have  farted  with  it  for 
ever.  .  .  .  Suffice  it  to  say  now,  that  it  passes  away,  talcing  with  it  no  fragment  of 
the  individual  consciousness  of  the  man  with  which  it  was  temporarily  associated.     .     .     . 

"But  if  on  the  other  hand,  the  tendencies  of  the  Ego  have  been  towards  things 
spiritual  .  .  .  then  will  it  cling  to  the  Spirit,  and  with  this  pass  into  the  adjoining  (so 
called)  world  of  effects  (in  reality  a  state  not  a  place),  and  there  purified  of  much  of  its 
still  remaining  material  taints,  evolve  out  of  itself  by  the  Spirit's  aid  a  new  Ego,  to  be 
reborn  after  a  brief   period  of   freedom  and  enjoyment  in  the  next  higher  world  of 

"  Now  neither  during  its  gestation  in  the  subjective  world  of  effects,  nor  after  its 
entry  on  rebirth  into  the  higher  objective  world  of  causes— caw  the  Ego  re-enter  this 
present  world.  ...  It  cannot,  even  if  it  would,  span  the  abyss  that  separates  its  state 
from  ours.  .  .  .  Once  reborn  into  the  higher  world  and  (independent  of  the  physical 
impossibility  of  any  communication  between  its  world  and  ours,  to  all  but  the  very 
highest  adepts)  the  new  Ego  has  become  a  new  person  ;  it  has  lost  the  old  consciousness, 
linked  with  earthly  experiences,  and  has  acquired  a  new  consciousness  which,  as  time  rolls 
on,  will  be  interpenetrated  by  its  experiences,  in  that  higher  sphere.     .     .     . 

"  Therefore  it  is  that  the  Occultists  maintain  that  no  Spirits  of  the  departed  can  appear 
or  take  part  in  the  phenomena  of  the  seance-room.  To  what  can  appear  and  take  part  in 
these  the  Occultists  refuse  the  name  of  Spirits.* 

"  But  it  may  be  said — what  is  it  that  ca,n  appear  ?  We  reply — merely  the  animal  soul 
or  perisprit  of  the  deceased.  .  .  .  Immediately  on  the  severance  of  the  Spirit — 
whether  at  death  or  before  death — the  spiritual  Ego  is  dissipated  and  ceases  to  exist.  .  .  . 
Thus  ahke  in  all  cases  that  remain,  all  that  can  appear  are  the  shells  of  the  deceased,  the 
two  principles  which  we  call  the  animal,  or  surviving  astral  souls,  or  animal  Ego.  But 
there  is  this  to  be  noted.  As  the  clay,  as  Sadi  says,  long  retains  traces  of  the  perfume  of 
the  roses,  which  once  honoured  it  with  their  companionship,  so  the  etherialized  matter 
which  has  been  in  combination  with  spirit,  long  retains  a  power  of  resisting  disintegration. 
The  more  pure  the  spiritual  Ego,  the  less  of  the  matter  which  in  combinabion  with  the 
Spirit  went  to  form  it,  does  it  leave  behind  clinging  to  the  two  principles ;  the  more 
impure,  the  greater  the  mass  of  such  spirit-vitalized  matter  which  remains  to  invigorate 
the  reliquice. 

"  Thus  it  follows  that  in  the  case  of  the  pure  and  good,  the  shells  rapidly  disintegrate, 
and  the  animal  soul  having  ever  been  kept  in  subjection  is  feeble  and  will-less,  and  it  can 
very  rarely,  if  ever,  happen  that  such  should  voluntarily  appear  or  manifest  themselves — 
their  vitality,  desires  and  aspirations  almost  exclusively  existed  in  what  has  passed  away. 
No  doubt  a  power  exists  which  can  compel  even  these  to  appear,  a  power  taught  by  the 
evil  science  of  necromancy,  rightly  denounced  by  all  good  men  of  old.  But  why  evil  it 
may  be  asked  ?  Because  until  these  shells  have  dissipated,  a  certain  sympathy  exists 
between  them  and  the  departed  spiritual  Ego  which  is  gestating  in  the  fathomless  womb 
of  the  adjoining  world  of  effects,  and  to  disturb  the  shells  by  necromantic  sorcery  is 
at  the  same  time  to  disturb  the  fcetal  spiritual  Ego. 

"We  said  that  these  shells  in  such  cases  rapidly  decay,  the  rapidity  being  exactly 
proportional  to  the  purity  of  the  departed  spiritual  Ego  ;  and  we  may  add  that  similarly 
the  rapidity  of  gestation  of  the  new  Ego  is  proportional  to  the  purity  of  the  old  Ego  out 
of  which  it  is  evolved.  Happily,  necromancy  is  unknown  to  modern  Spiritualists,  so  that 
it  is  next  to  impossible  that  the  reliquiae  of  the  good  and  pure  should  ever  appear  in  the  seance- 
room.  No  doubt,  the  simulacra  of  some  spiritual  Egos  whose  fate  trembled  in  the  balance, 
whose  affinities,  earthwards  and  heaven-wards,  to  use  the  popular  phraseology,  were  nearly 
equal,  who  have  left  too  much  of  the  matter  behind  that  has  been  in  combination  to  form 

*  And  who  may  the  OccultiHs  be  who  "refuse"  to  give  names  and  definitions  deemed  to  be  correct 
by  millions  of  their  fellow-mortals?  The  author  of  this  volume  claims  to  be  an  "  Occultist" — and 
that  with  as  good  a  right  to  the  cognomen  as  the  editor  of  The  Theosophist,  and  yet  she  insists 
that  the  entire  mass  of  theory  presented  in  these  extracts,  is  theory  only — and  remains  wholly 
undemonstrated,  whilst  the  facts  of  Spirit  communion,  the  identity  of  the  Spirit,  the  full  pre- 
servation of  that  identity,  continued  progress  in  sphere  life,  and  all  the  tokens  of  individuality  that 
made  the  man,  woman,  or  child  of  earth,  are  testified  to,  and  corroborated  by  tens  of  thousands 
independent  and  reliable  communications  given  in  every  country  of  civilization. — Author. 

30O  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

them,  who  will  lie  long  in  foetal  bonds  before  being  able  to  develop  the  new  Ego -hood  ; 
no  doubt,  we  say  such  simulacra  may  survive  longer  and  may  occasionally  appear  under 
excepti(jnal  conditions  in  sea?ice-rooms,  with  a  dim-dazed  consciousness  of  their  past  lives. 
But  even  this,  owing  to  the  conditions  of  the  case,  will  be  rare,  and  they  will  never  be 
active  or  intelligent,  as  the  stronger  portions  of  their  wills — the  higher  portions  of  their 

intelligence — have  gone  elsewhere Broadly  speaking,  as  a  law,  it  is  only  the 

reliquice  of  non-spiritually-minded  men,  whose  spiritual  E<os  have  perished,  that  appear  in 
seance-rooms,  and  are  dignified  hy  Spiritualists  with  the  title  of  '  Spirits  of  the  departed.' 

"  These  shells,  these  animal  souls,  in  whom  still  survive  the  major  portions  of  the  intel- 
ligence, will-power,  and  knowledge  that  they  pos^ssed  when  incorporated  in  the  human 
combination,  invigorated  too  by  the  re-assimilation  of  the  spirit-vitalized  matter  that  once 
combined  with ,  the  spirit  to  compose  their  spiritual  Ego,  are  often  powerful  and  highly 
intelligent,  and  continue  to  survive  for  lengthened  periods,  their  intense  desire  for  earthly 
life  enabling  them  to  seize  from  the  decaying  simulacra  of  the  good  and  feeble  the  material 
for  prolonged  existence. 

"  To  these  eidolons.  Occultists  are  used  to  give  the  name  of  elementaries,  and  these  it 
is  that  by  the  aid  of  the  half -intelligent  forces  of  nature  which  are  attracted  to  them, 
perform  most  of  the  wonders  of  the  se'ance-rooms.  If  to  these  shells,  these  eidolons,  which 
have  lost  their  immortality,  and  whence  the  Divine  essence  has  for  ever  departed,  our 
brothers,  the  Spiritualists,  insist  on  applying  the  title  of  'spirits  of  the  dead,'  well  and 
good — they  are  not  spirits  at  all,  they  are  of  the  earth,  earthy,  all  that  remains  of  the 
dead  when  their  spirits  have  flown — but  if  this  be  understood,  and  it  be  nevertheless 
considered  desirable  to  call  them  that  to  which  they  are  the  precise  antitheses — it  is  after 
all  merely  a  case  of  misnomer. 

"  But  let  there  be  no  mistake  as  to  what  they  are ;  hundreds  and  thousands  of  lost 
and  ruined  men  and  women  all  over  the  globe  attest  the  degradation  to  which  constant 
subjection  to  their  influence  in  mediumship,*  &c.,  too  generally  leads,  and  we  who  know 
the  truth  should  ill  discharge  our  duty  if  we  did  not  warn  all  Spiritualists  in  the  strongest 
terms  possible,  against  allowing  this  misuse  of  terms  to  mislead  them  as  to  the  real  nature 
and  character  of  the  disembodied  entities  with  which  they  so  constantly  and  confidingly 
deal. 

"  Now  probably  Spiritualists  will  admit  that  our  views  would  explain  the  vast  mass  of 
trash,  frivolous  nonsense  and  falsehood  communicated  through  mediums,  as  also  the 
manner  in  which  so  many  of  these,  good  and  honest  to  begin  with,  gradually  grow  into 
immoral  impostors.  But  many  objections  will  be  raised.  One  man  will  say — '  I  have 
repeatedly  conversed  with  my  late  father — abetter,  kinder-hearted,  morespiiitual-minded 
man  never  lived — and  on  one  occasion  he  told  me  a  fact,  unknown  to  me,  and  I  believe  to 
every  one  living,  which  I  subsequently  verified.' 

"  Nothing  is  simpler— the  father's  image  was  in  the  son's  mind.  Thus  put  en  rappm-t, 
the  disembodied  elementary  which,  if  of  one  of  the  more  intelligr-nt  classes,  has  glimpses 
of  things  in  the  astral  lii;ht,  and  can  here  and  there  dimly  distinguish  the  pictures  which 
record  every  deed,  word,  and  thought  (pictures  which  we  are  all  unconsciously  incessantly 
evolving,  pictures  which  survive  long  after  those  who  originated  them  have  passed  away), 
the  elementary,  we  say,  scanning  these,  easily  picks  up  sufficient  facts  for  its  purpose,  and 
by  its  will  materialises  itself,  partly  out  of  matter  drawn  from  the  medium's  body,  partly 
out  of  inert  kosmic  matter  drawn  to  it  by  the  help  of  the  elementals  or  half-blind  forces 
of  nature  which  it,  and  probably  the  medium  also,  has  attracted  and  stands  forth  the 
counterpart  of  the  dead  father  and  talks  of  things  known  only  to  that  dead  father.t 

"  And  it  must  be  remembered  that  these  apparently  strong  and  perfect  cases  are  very 
rare,  and  that  the  elementaries  who  come  as  A.  or  B.,  usually,  if  they  personate  people  of 
any  note,  make  gross  blunders  and  almost  without  exception  betray  their  falsehood  in 
one  way  or  another,  Shakespeare  and  Milton  dictating  trash,  Newton  grossly  ignorant  of 
his  own  Principia,  and  Plato  teaching  a  washed-out  Neo-platonic  cu7n  sentimental 
Christian  philosophy,  and  so  on.  At  the  same  time  undoubtedly  in  rare  cases  the  ghostly 
relics  of  very  clever,  very  bad  and  very  determined  men  constitute  disembodied  entities 
of  high  intelligence,  which  survive  for  a  lengthened  period,  and  the  wickeder  and  more 
material  they  are  in  all  thei/r  tendencies,  the  longer  do  they  escape  disintegration.t 

*  A  monstrous  libel  on  unnumbered  good  and  true  men  and  women.— Author. 

t  If  the  father  was  "the  spiritual-minded  man"  represented  above)  how  comes  he  to  be  an 
"  elementary?"  And  again— is  not  the  above  process  rather  too  clever  a  proceeding  for  a  "shell"*- 
with  nothing  in  it— a  perfume  which  a  flower  has  left  behind  ? 

X  Marvellous  philosophy !  which  attributes  all  the  "  trash,"  &c,,  to  the  third,  fourth,  or  fifth  part 
of  a  man  whose  life  was  tolerably  good,  and  all  the  high  intelligence  to  the  emanations  of  a  man  whose 
life  was  very  wicked  !  1  ! 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  301 

*'  Naturally  now  some  Spiritualists  will  object  that  this  cannot  be  true  since  despite  the 
mass  of  folly  and  gibberish,  or  worse,  often  heard  in  se'ance-rooms,  the  purest  sentiments 
and  really  lofty  ideas  and  teachings  are  not  so  very  rarely  expressed  through  mediums. 

"  Several  points  have,  however,  to  be  borne  in  mind.  In  the  first  place,  though  proved 
unfit  for  further  development,  and,  therefore,  doomed  in  most  cases  by  the  eternal  law 
of  the  survival  of  the  fittest  to  be  disintegrated  and,  losing  personal  consciousness,  to  he 
worked  up  again  in  the  lower  worlds  into  new  combinations,  all  elementaries  are  by  no 
means  actively  wicked  all  round.  On  the  balance,  their  whole  natures  proved  to  have  a 
greater  affinity  to  matter  than  to  spirit,  and  they  are,  therefore,  incapable  of  further  pro- 
gress, but  when  dealing  with  a  pure  circle  and  speaking  through  a  still  pure  medium 
(very  few  mediums,  indeed,  continue  thus  after  a  long  course  of  mediumskip)  the  better  and 
less  degraded  side  of  their  nature  comes  out,  and  it  is  quite  possible  for  elementaries  to 
have  a  perfect  intellectual  knowledge  and  appreciation  of  virtue  and  purity  and  enlightened 
conceptions  of  truth,  and  yet  be  innately  vicious  in  their  tendencies. 

"  Now  it  must  not  for  a  moment  be  supposed  that  all  we  hear  comes  from  elementaries. 
In  the  first  place,  a  great  many  well-known  mediums  are  clever  impostors.  There  are 
notorious  trance  mediums,  especially  women,  who  steadily  work  up  for  their  so-called 
trance  orations,  and  these  being  really  clever  and  working  at  good  books,  deliver  essays  of 
a  respectable  and  at  times  almost  first-class  character.  There  is  no  spiritual  influence  at 
work  here,  the  only  apparently  abnormal  feature  in  these  cases  is  that  persons  possessing 
such  fair  abilities  should  be  willing  thus  to  prostitute  them,  and  that  people  who  can  talk 
so  well  and  touchingly  of  truth  and  purity,  should  yet  live  such  lives  of  falsehood  and 
immorality.  Alas  !  Tneliora  videor  proboque  deteriora  sequor,  has  ever  found  a  response  in 
too  many  human  hearts  and  has  in  all  ages  rung  the  annihilation-knell  of  too  many  Egos.* 

Many  other  similar  attempts  to  account  for  all  the  good  in  trance 
mediumship  are  put  forth — such  as  "  a  seventh  principle "  being  "  in 
rapport"  with  something,  somewhere,  and  a  "  sixth  principle"  fishing  up 
knowledge  "  out  of  the  astral  light,"  &c.,  &c.,  but  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted 
that  the  reader  is  thoroughly  surfeited  with  such  fantastic  metaphysics,  and 
such  grossly  ungenerous  and  unfounded  attacks  upon  a  class  of  persons 
who  have  done  more  to  reform  the  age,  and  teach  the  elements  of  a  pure 
practical  religion,  than  all  the  hazy  metaphysicians  that  have  essayed  to 
found  new  sects,  on  the  basis  of  tobacco,  hasheesh,  and  opium  visions. 
As  a  final  fling  at  "  the  Mediums,"  and  a  gentle  hint  at  the  only  road  by 
which  heaven  can  be  attained,  and  final  extinction  be  averted,  we  commend 
a  study  of  the  closing  paragraphs.     This  modest  writer  adds  : — 

"  In  truth,  mediumship  is  a  dangerous,  too  often  a  fatal  capacity,  and  if  we  oppose 
Spiritualism,  as  we  have  ever  consistently  done,  it  is  not  because  we  question  the  reality 
of  their  phenomena,  which  we  know  can  and  do  occur  (despite  the  multitudes  of  fraudu- 
lent imitations),  and  which  our  adepts  can  reproduce  at  willi  without  danger  to  themselves, 
but  because  of  the  irreparable  spiritual  injury  (we  say  nothing  of  the  mere  physical 
sufferings)  which  the  pursuit  of  Spiritualism  inevitably  entails  on  nine-tenths  of  the  mediums 
employed.  We  have  seen  scores,  nay  rather  hundreds  of,  so  to  say,  good,  pure,  honest 
young  men  and  women,  who  but  for  the  cultivation  of  this  evil  capacity  for  the  reception 
of  impressions  by  elementaries,  might  and  would  in  all  probability  have  lived  lives  leading 
to  higher  things,  but  who  through  the  gradual  pernicious  influence  of  these  low,  earth- 
bovmd  natures  have  sunk,  from  bad  to  worse,  ending,  often  prematurely,  lives  that  could 
lead  but  to  spiritual  ruin. 

"  That  men  bewildered  amidst  the  crumbling  ruins  of  effete  religions  should  madly 
grasp  at  every  clue  by  which  there  seems  some  faint  hope  of  penetrating  the  cloud- 
shrouded  labyrinth  of  the  mystery  of  the  universe,  is  neither  wondeif ul  nor  reprehensible, 
but  it  is  not  through  mediums,  the  prey  of  every  idle  spook  and  elementary  that  the  great 
truth  is  to  be  reached,  but  by  that  rigorous  course  of  study,  self-discipline  and  self- 
purification  which  is  taught  in  the  temple  of  Occultism  to  lohich  Theosophy  is,  in  the  present 
day,  the  high  road."     (?) 

■*  On  what  possible  authority  could  any  writer  presume  to  bring  such  allegations  against  vast 
numbers  of  honourable  and  highly-gifted  persons,  except  he  writes  from  the  reflection  of  a  treacherous 
and  deceptive  nature  ?  and  having  been  an  impostor  himself,  deems  every  one  else  on  the  same  plane. 

t  Why  does  not  this  Editor  produce  his  adepts  ? 

302  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

There  only  seems  to  need  one  more  item  added  to  save  the  race  from 
final  extinction,  and  the  destroying  influence  of  Spiritualism,  which  is,  to 
give  in  full,  the  terms  of  the  initiation  fee  and  membership  to  the  "  Theoso- 
phical  Society,"  and  the  price  of  subscription  to  the  Theosophical  Journal. 
Do  this  !  and  humanity  may  be  redeemed — Fail !  and  the  world  will  be 
fall  of  empty  "  shells,"  and  heaven  a  private  reserve,  inhabited  only  by  the 
very  high  adepts  who  have  graduated  from  the  schools  of  Theosophical 
Occultism.  In  all  seriousness  however,  it  must  be  said  that  if  the  author 
had  any  other  interests  to  serve  than  those  of  truth,  or  if  she  could  believe 
that  unsustained  and  audacious  assertions  could  subvert  well-demonstrated 
truths,  she  would  never  have  wearied  her  readers  with  the  "  fragments  of 
Occultism  "  contained  in  the  above-quoted  extracts.  They  liave  been  intro- 
duced however  for  many  reasons,  one  of  which  is,  that  the  terms  "  Theoso- 
phy,"  and  "Occultism,"  have  of  late  been  repeatedly  paraded  before  the 
readers  of  the  Spiritual  journals,  and  that  with  the  apparent  view  of  claiming 
those  words  as  the  synonym  of  divers  strange  doctrines,  the  special  views 
put  forth  above  being  one. 

If  to  be  a  "  Theosophist,"  means  to  have  been  or  still  be  a  member  of  the 
Theosophical  Society,  then  the  present  writer  might  make  that  claim,  seeing 
that  she  was  one  of  the  first  members  ;  that  the  first  meetings  of  the  original 
Theosophical  Society  were  held  in  her  house  in  New  York,  and  as  long  as 
the  Society  existed  in  that  city  07i  its  original  lines,  the  author's  name  was 
retained  as  a  member  of  the  first  council. 

If  to  be  an  "Occultist"  means  to  be  a  member  of  a  fraternity  that  attempts 
by  study  and  practice,  to  discover  and  apply  the  occult  forces  of  the 
Universe,  then  has  the  author  as  good  a  right  to  be  termed  an  Occultist  as 
any  of  the  "  half  per  cent  "  which  the  editor  above  quoted  claims  to  exist 
in  the  Theosophical  Society.  And  yet  with  some  not  inconsiderable  share 
of  esoteric  knowledge  concerning  Theosophy  and  Theosophists,  as  well  as 
Occultism  and  Occultists,  the  author  of  this  volume,  whether  as  a  "  Theoso- 
phist" or  "Occultist,"  not  only  repudiates  belief  in  every  word  of  the  above 
article,  but  insists  that  it  libels  most  unjustly  and  unwarrantably  a  large 
number  of  respectable  persons,  practising  "Mediumship"  in  different 
countries  of  the  earth,  and  grossly  misrepresents  the  general  aims  and 
worth  of  the  entire  movement  known  as  "  Spiritualism." 

The  author  does  not  propose  to  make  these  pages  the  arena  of  discussion 
for  the  propositions  put  forth  by  the  Theosophical  editor,  because  it  would 
be  tresspassing  on  space  that  should  be  better  employed,  wearying  the 
reader,  and  pitting  a  stereotyped  volume  against  the  unlimited  power  of 
retort  which  the  editor  of  a  periodical  possesses,  and  which  very  few 
persons  in  such  a  position  fail  to  turn  to  their  own  advantage. 

The  article  in  question  has  been  reprinted,  first,  as  an  item  of  informa- 
tion concerning  the  environment  of  the  movement  which  this  work  is 
designed  to  describe. 

Next  that  the  readers  of  the  Spiritual  journals  who  must  have  seen  many 
"fragments  "  of  so-called  "Occultism  "  forced  on  their  attention,  might  derive 
from  a  sufficiently  clear  statement,  a  knowledge  of  what  "Theosophical 
Occultists  "  teach  ;  and  next,  to  warn  the  practical  seeker  for  truth  to  besvare 
how  he  leaves  the  foundation  of  well-demonstrated  facts,  to  launch  out  on 
the  ocean  of  vague,  speculative  theory. 

For  the  first  time  in  the  recorded  history  of  the  race,  a  systematic  and 
practical  mode  of  communicating  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  life  beyond 
the  grave  has  been  achieved.     All  the  conditions  necessary  to  establish  the 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  303 

identity  of  the  communicating  intelligences  with  the  people  that  once  lived 
on  earth,  have  been  manifested  to  tens  of  thousands  of  living  and  respect- 
able witnesses.  But  one  millionth  part  of  the  proof  of  this  position 
furnished  by  modern  Spirituahsm,  would  be  accepted  as  reliable  testimony 
by  all  the  courts  of  judicature  in  the  world.  Even  the  very  mass  of  trashy 
falsehood,  &c.,  which  The  Theosophist  speaks  of,  as  being  communicated 
through  Mediums,  is  another  proof  of  the  strict  humanity  of  the  source 
of  many,  though  by  no  means  all,  of  the  communications.  Without  advert- 
ing to  the  false  and  most  ungenerous  way,  in  which  this  writer  attempts  to 
slur  over  the  better  part  of  the  communications,  it  is  enough  to  point  to 
the  fact,  apparent  to  the  most  superficial  thinker,  that  if  the  ninety  per  cent 
of  the  communications  between  man  and  man  which  any  modern  city  could 
afford,  were  gathered  up,  and  compared  with  the  mass  of  "  trash,"  &c.,  &c., 
claiming  a  Spiritual  origin,  the  balance  would  inevitably  be  found  quite 
sufficiently  manifest  in  favour  of  "  the  Spirits,"  to  show,  that  they  had 
advanced,  to  some  degree  at  least,  beyond  the  status  of  humanity,  by 
their  residence  in  the  Spirit  world.  One  thing  is  certain ;  less  presump- 
tuous, and  something  more  acute  writers  than  this  Theosophist,  have 
agreed,  that  the  bulk  of  the  communications,  whether  for  good  or  evil,  or 
both,  are  still  strictly  human  and — in  at  least  one-third  of  their  number — 
are  identical  with  the  individuals  who  have  once  lived  on  earth,  and  whose 
personalities  they  represent. 

But  all  this  is  beneath  the  "  Theosophist's "  notice,  or  if  touched  on  at  all 
is  contemptuously  disposed  of  according  to  his  ipse  dixit — which  consists 
of  a  mass  of  metaphysical  theorems  as  trashy  as  any  Spirit  communications 
he  can  point  to,  and  as  false  to  the  probabilities  of  natural  law,  as  they  are 
irreconcilable  with  the  observed  facts  of  Spiritualism.  And  finally,  the 
author's  sense  of  self-respect  and  desire  to  do  justice  to  hundreds  of  her 
fellow  labourers,  impels  her  to  protest  emphatically  against  the  editor's 
assertions  concerning  "the  mental  and  physical  degradation"  which  he 
alleges  ensues  from  the  practice  of  Mediumship.  In  contradiction  of  this 
unfounded  statement,  and  for  the  information  of  the  candid  truth-seeker, 
the  author  claims  that  Mediumship  falls  on  all  classes  alike;  includes  the 
pure-minded  and  the  vicious,  the  healthful  and  the  sick ;  that  it  creates 
nothing,  but  simply  externalizes  the  latent  germs  of  individual  character, 
also  that  multitudes  of  sane,  pure-minded,  and  healthful  men  and  women, 
are  now  living,  to  testify  by  their  good  and  virtuous  conduct,  and  their  high 
reverence  for  their  Mediumistic  gifts,  the  wholesale  slander  hurled  against 
them,  by  this  Theosophical  editor. 

As  for  the  theories  he  sets  forth,  the  answer  in  brief  is,  that  they  are  all 
wholly  ufiproved — in  short,  that  there  is  not  a  statement  contained  in  the 
article  in  question,  susceptible  of  verification ;  not  one  but  what  is  made 
on  its  writer's  own  responsibility,  or  at  most,  on  the  authority  of  a  "  band 
of  brothers,"  who  are  of  no  more  authority  than  any  other  band  of  brothers, 
of  whom  there  are  hosts  in  the  East,  as  elsewhere,  and  who  singly  or 
severally  are  only  authoritative — beyond  their  particular  sphere  of  disciple- 
ship — in  as  far  as  their  teachings  correspond  to  such  laws,  principles,  and 
facts,  as  are  already  proven,  or  are  capable  of  being  proven. 

All  knowledge  of  science  has  been  derived  from  observation,  or  when 
revealed  to  man  by  higher  intelligences  than  those  of  earth,  is  susceptible 
of  proof  by  corroborative  testimony.  Why  should  Spiritualism — the 
science  of  sciences — be  exempt  from  the  same  reasonable  standards  of 
demonstration  ?     It  cannot  be  alleged  that  we  have  no  means  of  observing 

304  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

Spiritual  facts,  or  obtaining  corroborative  testimony  of  Spiritual  teachings. 
To  deny  this,  is  but  the  ruse  of  theological  dogmatists.  We  have  had 
in  all  ages  of  the  past,  and  we  have  still  more  abundantly  in  the 
present,  opportunities  both  for  observing  Spiritual  facts  and  testing 
Spiritual  revelations  by  corroborative  proof;  and  it  is  because  the  Theoso- 
phist  and  his  "  band  of  brothers  "  would  have  us  depart  from  these  rational 
standards  of  judgment,  and  put  unquestioning  faith  in  what  they  say,  no 
matter  how  far  it  may  conflict  with  what  you  have  observed,  or  what  ten 
thousand  Spirits  have  told  you,  that  none  should  accept  their  statements 
without  severely  testing  and  proving  the  authority  upon  which  they  are 
based.  There  seems  but  little  difference  between  "  Believe,  or  go  to  eternal 
perdition,"  and  "Believe,  or  go  to  eternal  extinction."  Such  dogmatic 
threats  have  been  the  curse  of  the  race,  and  mankind  gains  but  little  in 
changing  the  base  of  these  utterances  from  an  ecclesiastical  hierarchy  to  a 
band  of  brothers,  whose  very  existence  is  still  to  many  minds  a  question  of 
doubt.  But  it  may  be  urged  that  belief  with  the  ecclesiastic  was  enforced 
by  torture  and  the  stake,  whilst  with  the  Theosophist  it  is  optional  and  free. 
To  this  we  respond,  that  "Theosophy"  and  "  Occultism,"  are  terms  of  world- 
wide import,  and  when  employed  to  endorse  statements  which  aim  at 
destroying  the  very  corner-stones  of  proof  concerning  immortality  and  the 
conditions  of  the  Hfe  hereafter  upon  which  millions  of  persons  in  the  present 
generation  base  their  faith,  they  cannot  remain  unchallenged.  If  they  are 
true,  Spiritualism  is  the  mightiest  and  foulest  delusion  that  has  ever  fallen 
upon  the  earth.  Better  that  we  should  believe  that  those  who  have  come 
to  us,  doing  us  good,  watching  over,  and  guarding  us  like  angels,  who  have 
for  years  been  our  best  friends,  counsellors,  and  guides  ;  who  have  come 
with  all  the  tokens  of  identity  borne  by  our  fathers,  mothers,  children,  and 
best  beloved,  should  turn  out  to  be  the  "devils"  of  ^ecclesiastical  teachings, 
than  the  "  ghouls,"  "  gheists,"  "  empty  shells,"  and  loathsome  reliquice.  of 
dead  bodies,  as  taught  in  Theosophical  Occultism.  Not  to  question  such 
doctrines  is  to  assume  that  there  are  no  sane  human  beings  to  be  led  away 
by  them.  But  when  they  come  upon  our  own  camp  ground  and  affect  to 
correct  the  fallacies  into  which  we  as  Spiritualists  have  fallen,  it  not  only 
becomes  our  right,  but  our  duty  to  question  them.     And  what  is  the  result  ? 

If  we  approach  the  mouthpieces  of  these  invisible,  and  only  elect,  "  adepts," 
to  enquire  about  our  own  destiny,  we  are  told,  that  at  death,  we  are  chopped 
up  into  seven  parts,  with  a  million  chances  to  one  against  any  one  of  the 
seven  being  rescued  from  annihilation. 

If  we  enquire  for  the  fathers  and  mothers,  husbands  and  children,  that 
were  dearer  to  us  than  life,  we  are  told,  that  they  have  already  melted  out, 
or  else,  that  their  graveyard  emanations  have  been  very  busy,  striving  to 
drag  us  down  into  mental  corruption,  and  Spiritual  ruin  ! !  Are  we  to 
receive  this,  as  the  culmination  of  all  the  long-hidden  wisdom  of  the 
Orient  ?  Or,  supposing  we  venture  to  defer  to  such  monstrous  assevera- 
tions, question  their  authenticity,  and  ask  for  proof . 

One  answers  us,  "  The  venerable  chief  of  our  Band  of  Brothers  says  so." 
Another,  "  The  God  within  me  affirms  it."  Still  another,  "  Gautama 
Buddha  says  so,"  or  "  Very  high  intelligences  have  revealed  this  to  mCc" 
If  you  humbly  question,  why  "  very  high  intelligences  "  cannot  come  to  you, 
as  well  as  to  your  Occultist  informant,  you  have  answers  which  strongly 
savour  of  that  ancient  pharisaism,  which  would  say,  if  it  dared,  "Stand 
by;  I  am  holier  than  thou."  And  if  all  these  are  not  answers  enough 
you  are  overwhelmed  with  the  opinions  of  Hindoo,  Egyptian,  Aryan,  and 

Cha?   Foster    and    a    Spirit 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  305 

Greek  sages,  whose  opinions  are  worth  about  as  much,  without  corroborative 
testimony  to-day,  as  the  opinions  of  any  other  men-,  whether  they  Hved  in 
the  days  of  antiquity  or  in  the  nineteenth  century. 

That  which  the  Spiritualist  asks  is  reasonable  enough.  He  says  :  "  Give 
me  one  shadow  of  proof  to  convince  me,  that  the  pure  and  holy  spirit  with 
whom  I  have  been  conversing  is  a  '  shell,'  '  a  gheist,  a  reHqziia.  of  the 
dead,'  and  not  my  mother  herself :  give  me  proofs  as  strong  as  I  can  bring 
to  show  that  it  is  my  mother  herself;  that  death  has  had  no  power  over 
her,  and  that  with  all  the  difficulties  under  which  the  Spiritual  telegraph 
works,  there  is  not  one  shadow  of  evidence  to  doubt  that  it  is  my  real 
veritable  mother.  Bring  me  proof  for  proof ;  and  testimony  for  testimony ; 
or  set  my  facts  against  your  theories,  and  see  which  will  weigh  the 
strongest ;  especially  when  my  facts  are  duplicated  by  the  facts  of  millions 
of  others  and  your  theories  have  yet  to  produce  one  demonstrable  fact  to 
rest  upon."  The  story  of  Elijah  and  the  priests  of  Baal  may  be  only  an 
allegory,  and  one  which  either  party  might  claim,  were  it  not  that  Elijah 
gained  his  victory  by  virtue  of  a  demonstrated  fact,  while  the  priests  of 
Baal  worshipped  their  ideal  only.  Time,  the  great  touchstone  of  truth,  sifts 
all  that  comes  before  his  tribunal,  but  whether  by  the  force  of  a  deific  will 
or  because  truth  is  the  only  imperishable  element  in  existence,  certain  it  is 
that  all  great  truths  redeem  themselves,  and  only  require  time  to  shake  off" 
the  mists  of  error,  and  take  their  place  as  the  fundamental  principles  upon 
which  the  Universe  is  builded.  To  this  unerring  touchstone  the  author 
can  afford  to  commit  the  all  of  the  present  question.  Meantime,  at  the 
risk  of  the  threatened  extinction  with  which  grovelling  minds  are  liable  to 
be  visited  who  cannot  ascend  to  the  airy  heights  of  Theosophical  utterances, 
the  author  counsels  all  readers  of  these  passages,  "  to  prove  all  things  " — 
and  then,  but  not  till  then,  will  they  be  in  a  position  to  "  hold  fast  by  that 
which  is  good." 

CHAPTER   XXXVII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    INDIA    (CONTINUED). 

Passing  from  the  realm  of  controversial  discussion  concerning  the  condition 
of  the  soul  hereafter,  we  proceed  to  consider  the  status  of  opinion  on  this 
subject  indicated  by  the  prevailing  superstitions  amongst  some  of  the  lower 
classes  of  India. 

It  will  be  seen  that  whilst  their  ideas  of  spiritual  existence  partake  largely 
of  ancient  superstitions,  they  still  recognize  the  actuality  of  intercourse  with 
deceased  persons ;  in  fact,  this  acceptance  of  spiritual  interposition  in  human 
affairs  on  the  part  of  the  souls  of  men,  supersedes  in  many  respects  the 
common  belief  in  Providential  agency.  The  natives  of  India  of  low  castes, 
worship  the  gods  whom  their  Brahminical,  Buddhistic,  or  Mahometan  teachers 
instruct  them  of,  but  implicit  faith  in  the  direct  action  and  influence  of  human 
spirits,  especially  those  whose  tendencies  are  mischievouSj  is  the  paramount 
feature  of  belief. 

The  villagers  or  dwellers  in  rural  districts,  are  evidently  more  susceptible 
of  being  ruled  by  fear,  than  love.     At  certain  periods  they  hold  festivals  in 

3o6  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

honour  of  the  Deities,  and  the  good  and  true  who  have  passed  "  into  the 
paradises  of  the  blessed,"  but  they  dwell  chiefly  on  the  deeds  of  evil  doers 
whom  they  believe  still  preserve  their  former  interest  in  humanity,  and  take 
every  opportunity  of  renewing  their  earthly  propensities  to  sin  and  wrong. 

They  assume  that  the  habitations  of  these  spirits  are  near,  and  sometimes 
upon  the  earth  ;  that  they  haunt  desolate  places,  scenes  where  great  crimes 
have  been  committed,  deep  forests,  and  lonely  dells._  They  divide  these 
weird  beings  into  three  principal  grades,  the  first  of  which  they  call  Bhutas. 
These  are  sometimes  the  spirits  of  celebrated  personages,  notorious  male- 
factors, or  even  kings,  provided  they  were  tyrants,  or  led  very  wicked  lives, 
but  the  last  qualification  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  the  office  of  a  Bhuta.  They 
deem  these  ghosts  capable  of  working  -inimitable  evil  to  those  over  whom 
they  rule,  and  think  the  greatest  aim  of  mortals  should  be  to  placate  them 
by  all  the  means  they  can  devise. 

The  second  class  are  Pretas — supposed  to  be  the  spirits  of  children  who 
have  either  been  deformxcd,  monstrous,  or  in  some  way  imperfect  in  mind  or 
body.  These  beings  are  represented  as  frightful,  misshapen,  and  exceed- 
ingly mischievous;  not  unlike  in  fact,  "the  goblin  page"  of  Walter  Scott, 
or  "  CaUban"  of  the  enchanted  isle,  so  marvellously  imaged  forth  in 
Shakespeare's  "Tempest." 

The  third  class,  called  Fisacha,  are  supposed  to  be  the  spirits  of 
maniacs,  drunkards,  idiots,  or  such  as  represent  conditions  of  mental 
imbecility. 

All  these,  and  others  too  numerous  to  particularise  are  often  called  by 
the  generic  name  of  "  Bhuta;"  all  are  deemed  to  be  fearsome,  more  or  less 
monstrous  in  appearance,  and  constantly  disposed  to  work  ill  to  man. 

It  would  scarcely  be  possible  to  believe  that  rational  beings  in  the 
nineteenth  century  could  associate  such  an  array  of  frightful  superstitions  as 
these  Hindoos  indulge  in,  with  the  spirits  of  those  who  were  once  men  and 
women  like 'themselves.  Such  is  the  prevalent  behef  however,  and  in  con- 
firmation of  these  statements,  we  shall  give  a  few  extracts  from  a  work  on 
"  Devil  Worship  in  Western  India,"  by  Judge  Walhouse,  F.R.A.S.,  an 
eminent  writer,  and  one  who  long  filled  high  office  in  Indian  Courts  of 
Judicature. 

Mr.  Walhouse  says,  in  part  ist  of  his  work  above  named  : — 

"  The  edifices  and  observances  connected  with  Bhuta  worship  are  both  domestic  and 
public.  In  villages,  and  very  generally  in  towns,  there  is  in  every  house  a  wooden  cot  or 
cradle,  placed  on  the  ground,  or  suspended  by  ropes  or  chains,  and  dedicated  to  the  Bhuta 
of  the  spot.  On  these  are  placed  a  bell,  a  knife,  or  sword,  and  a  pot  filled  with  water,  all 
which  are  collectively  called  the  Bhandara  of  the  Bhuta,  and  kept  either  in  a  part  of  the 
house  itself,  or  in  a  small  separate  building.  The  idea  seems  to  be  of  placating  the  spirit 
that  haunts  the  spot  by  making  a  sort  of  abode  for  it,  much  in  the  same  way  as  the  cream- 
bowl  was  nightly  set  for  the  "  drudging  goblin,"  or  brownie,  in  England.  On  the  last 
day  of  every  lunar  month  flowers  are  laid  on  the  cot,  and  perfume  burnt  before  it ;  and 
once  a  year,  towards  the  end  of  April,  a  ceremony  called  Tambila  is  performed.  First,  a 
fire  is  lit  on  the  spot  where  the  cot  and  paraphernalia  stand,  to  make  it  "  shoodha,"  i.e., 
clean  ;  then  fried  rice,  mixed  with  coarse  sugar  and  grated  cocoanut  kernel,  is  heaped  on 
two  plantain  leaves,  which  are  placed  on  the  cot,  together  with  some  young  cocoanuts, 
pierced  ready  to  drink  from.  A  ball  is  then  formed  of  boiled  rice,  coloured  yellow  with 
turmeric,  and  laid  on  a  piece  of  plantain  leaf  on  a  small  stool,  which  is  placed  before  the 
cot,  and  a  lighted  torch  stuck  on  it.  A  fowl  is  held  above  the  rice-ball  and  torch,  its 
throat  cut,  and  the  blood  let  drop  upon  the  ball ;  some  perfume  is  burnt,  and  the  cere- 
mony ends.  The  cocoanuts  placed  on  the  cot  are  then  taken  and  dashed  on  the  ground, 
or  cloven  in  half.  If  the  pieces  fall  with  the  kernel  upward,  it  signifies  the  Bhuta  is 
pleased  with  the  oflfering  ;  if  with  the  kernel  downward,  the  reverse.  Should  a  member 
of  the  family  be  stricken  with  any  unusual  attack,  such  as  apoplexy,  paralysis,  cholera,  &c., 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  307 

or  should  disease  break  out  amongst  the  cattle,  it  is  at  once  ascribed  to  the  anger  of  the 
Bhuta,  and  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  is  offered.  A  fowl  is  turned  three  times  round  before 
the  patient's  face,  its  neck  then  twisted,  and  the  blood  let  fall  ixpon  him,  and  some  rubbed 
on  his  forehead  and  joints,  the  meaning  being  to  offer  life  for  life — the  fowl  in  lieu  of  the 
man.  Powdered  sandal-wood  is  then  sprinkled  over  the  Bhuta's  cot,  and  water  from  the 
pot  kept  there  dashed  upon  the  sick  man's  forehead  and  eyes.  The  family  priest  is  then 
consulted,  who,  after  much  grave  meditation,  usually  recommends  alms  to  be  given  to 
himself  to  satisfy  the  hostile  stars,  with  a  promise  to  perform  a  special  ceremony  to  the 
Bhuta,  and  give  a  banquet  to  all  the  patient's  castemen  should  he  recover.  Medicine  is 
not  neglected,  but,  in  event  of  recovery,  the  credit  is  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  the 
Bhuta. 

"  The  general  buildings  dedicated  to  these  demons  are  called  Bhutastans,  and  when 
dedicated  to  one  of  the  superior,  or  very  popular  Bhutas,  sometimes  of  considerable  size  ; 
but  far  more  commonly  a  small  plain  structure,  four  or  five  yards  deep,  by  two  or  three  wide, 
with  a  door  at  one  end,  covered  by  a  portico  supported  on  two  pillars,  with  a  thatched 
roof,  and  windowless.  In  front  of  it  there  are  usually  three  or  four  T  -shaped  pillars,  the 
use  of  which  is  not  clear.  They  are  said  to  denote  that  the  building  is  a  Bhutastan,  and 
flowers  are  placed,  and  cocoanuts  broken  on  them  at  ceremonies.  It  may  be  worth 
noticing  that  pillars  of  exactly  the  same  shape  are  found  accompanying  the  mysterious 
Balearic  Talyots,  the  purpose  of  which  has  hitherto  baffled  antiquaries.  Inside  the 
Bhutastan  there  is  usually  a  number  of  images  roughly  made  in  brass  in  human  shape,  or 
resembling  animals,  such  as  pigs,  tigers,  fowls,  &c.  These  are  brought  out  and  worshipped 
as  symbols  of  the  Bhutas  on  various  ceremonial  occasions.  The  Bhutas  themselves  are 
usually  represented  by  mere  rough  stones.  Brass  basins,  bells,  a  peculiarly-shaped 
sword,  and  some  other  articles  used  at  ablutions  are  also  kept  within.  These  rustic  fanes 
are  thickly  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  country  in  very  various  situations — under  a 
green  tree,  on  hill-sides,  down  in  hollows,  in  jungles,  on  plains,  by  road-sides,  in  villages, 
amid  rice-fields,  but  always  on  a  small  plot  of  waste  ground,  which  is  kept  uncultivated. 

"  Once  a  year  a  festival  called  KoUa  is  held  at  the  village  Bhutastan,  in  honour  of  the 
local  Bhuta,  at  which  all  the  villagers  attend.  There  is  no  fixed  time  for  this,  but  the 
village  priest,  after  consulting  with  the  pi-incipal  inhabitants,  determines  an  auspicious 
day.  This  being  settled,  a  tall  pole  is  fixed  upright  in  the  ground  before  the  Bhutastan, 
and  a  flag,  that  is  always  kept  within,  hoisted  upon  it.  The  Bhuta's  Bhandara,  or 
paraphernalia,  and  the  images,  &c.,  are  brought  out  and  cleaned,  and  a  large  fire  kindled 
to  purify  the.spot.  The  festival  always  takes  place  at  night,  and  about  nine  o'clock  all  the 
villagers  assemble  in  their  best  attire,  the  women  wearing  all  their  ornaments,  and  thek 
heads,  as  well  as  often  the  men's,  thickly  garlanded  with  flowers.  Tom-toms  and  drums 
are  beaten,  and  the  Pujari,  or  Priest,  takes  the  Bhuta-sword  and  bell  in  his  hands,  and 
whirls  round  and  round,  imitating  the  supposed  mein  and  gestures  of  the  demon.  But  he 
does  not  aspire  to  full  possession,  which  in  aboriginal  rites  like  these,  is  only  given  to  a 
representative  of  the  aboriginal  tribes,  now  the  lowest  castes.  A  Dher,  one  of  the  slave 
caste,  at  other  times  regarded  with  contempt,  but  now  advanced  to  the  foremost  post, 
comes  forward  naked,  save  a  waist-band,  and  with  all  his  head  and  body  grotesquely  and 
frightfully  besmeared  with  white,  yellow,  and  red  paint.  Over  his  head,  and  tied  to  his 
back,  there  is  a  sort  of  an  arch,  termed  Ani,  made  of  green-cocoa-tree  leaves,  with  their 
ends  radiating  out.  For  some  time  he  paces  up  and  down,  within  a  ring  formed  by  the 
crowd,  flinging  about  his  arms,  gesticulating  wildly,  leaping,  and  shaking  his  body 
furiously.  Meanwhile  a  dozen  or  more  tom-toms  and  drums  are  beaten  incessantly  and 
stunningly,  with  a  continually  increasing  din ;  and  the  Dher  presently  breaks  into  a 
maniac  dance,  capering,  bounding,  and  spinning  vehemently  whilst  the  instruments 
redouble  their  noise,  the  power  of  the  Bhuta  being  estimated  by  the  fury  and  per- 
sistence with  which  the  Dher  dances.  The  multitude  around  joins  in  raising  a  long, 
monotonous,  howling  cry,  with  a  peculiar  vibration.  At  length  the  Dher  stops,  he  is  full 
of  the  demon,  and  stands  fixed  and  rigid,  with  staring  eyes.  Presently  he  speaks,  or 
rather  the  demon  speaks  from  him,  in  loud,  hoarse,  commanding  tones,  wholly  unlike  his 
own,  or  indeed  any  natural  voice.  He  addresses  the  head  man  of  the  village  first,  and 
then  the  p^ncipal  inhabitants  in  due  order,  for  any  neglect  of  etiquette  on  this  point  by 
the  Bhuta  would  infallibly  give  rise  to  great  resentment.  After  thus  speaking  to  the 
principal  villagers  and  asking  whether  all  the  people  are  present,  the  possessed  Dher  goals 
on  to  say  that  the  Bhuta  is  pleased  with  the  performance  of  the  ceremony,  and  exhorts  all 
the  people  to  behave  justly  and  charitably  to  one  another.  Various  disputes  and  litigated 
matters,  especially  when  evidence  and  ordinary  means  of  adjustment  fail,  are  then  brought 
forward  and  submitted  to  the  decision  of  the  Bhuta,  and  his  award,  pronounced  through 
the  Dhdr,  is  generally,  though  not  always,  submitted  to.  After  this  the  demon  desires  to 
have  food,  and  the  Dh^r  eats  fried  rice,  and  drinks  the  milk  of  young  cocoa-nuts  ;  or  if 
the  demon  he  represents  be  one  of  low  degree,  he  eats  animal  food  and  drinks  arrack.    He 

3o8  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

then  distributes  areca  flowers  and  pieces  of  cocoa-nut  to  all  assembled  in  due  order  of 
precedence,  and  the  Bhuta  passes  away  from  him,  he  loses  his  commandiag  mien  and 
tones,  and  relapses  into  the  servile  drudge.  The  assembly  then  addressee  itself  to 
festivity  ;  there  is  much  drinking  of  arrack,  the  drumming  and  wild  music  go  on 
vehemently,  interminable  songs  are  sung,  and  at  the  first  dawn  the  people  disperse  on  all 
sides  to  their  homes." 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Caldwell,  who  has  written  an  extended  account  of  his 
mission  in  Southern  India  and  Siam,  gives  the  following  sketch  of  rites 
something  similar  to  the  above,  enacted  amongst  the  natives  of  Tinnevelly. 
He  says  : — 

"  I  have  witnessed  oracular  responses  given  under  the  supposed  control  of  a  demon, 
after  gesticulatory  dances  amongst  the  Todas  of  the  Nilgiri  HUls.  In  Siam  spirit-dances 
are  held  in  a  shed  built  for  the  purpose,  in  which  offerings  are  set  out  for  the  demon, 
who  is  invited  by  the  usual  wild  music  to  come  down  to  the  dance  ;  but  there  is  this 
peculiarity,  that  there  the  demon  always  enters  a  woman,  which  is  scarcely  ever  heard  of 
in  India.  She  herself  does  not  dance,  but  bathes  and  rubs  herself  with  scent,  dresses  in 
a  red  waistcloth  and  dark  silken  jacket,  and  awaits  the  descent  of  the  demon,  who  is 
incited  to  come  by  redoubled  din  of  music  and  chanted  incantations.  ■V^^^en  he  comes 
she  shakes  and  trembles,  and  then,  assuming  the  airs  and  manners  of  a  great  personage, 
all  present  worship  and  pay  her  homage.  Sometimes  the  spirit  of  one  of  their  ancestors, 
sometimes  a  foreign  demon,  is  supposed  to  have  taken  possesion  of  her  body.  She 
answers  questions,  and  gives  commands  and  directions  in  a  haughty,  imperative  tone, 
and  all  her  words  are  humbly  Hstened  to,  and  afterwards  she  prrtakes  of  the  offerings 
provided  for  the  demon.  An  old  woman  usually  plays  the  part,  and  after  the  influence 
has  left  her,  she  declares  she  knows  nothing  of  what  took  place,  or  what  she  may  have 
said." 

Although  the  methods  of  inducing  trance  amongst  the  ignorant  inhabi- 
tants of  remote  Eastern  districts,  and  the  cold  unimpassioned  dwellers  of 
European  cities,  are  widely  different,  it  is  not  uninteresting  to  note  the 
points  of  similarity  which  obtain  in  the  trance,  or  during  the  period  when 
the  Mediums  of  both  quarters  of  the  globe  are  under  the  controlling 
influence  of  the  Spirits,  Change  Mr.  Caldwell's  nomenclature  of  "  the 
obsessing  demon,"  for  the  more  familiar  phrase  "  the  Spirit  control,"  and 
we  have  no  very  marked  difference  between  the  above  description,  and 
that  of  an  American  or  European  trance  Medium — save  in  the  matter 
of  costume,  appearance,  and  general  intelligence.  Judge  Walhouse's  work 
on  "Devil  Worship,"  contains  so  many  suggestions  concerning  disturbances 
and  hauntings,  quite  familiar  amongst  more  civilized  peoples  than  the 
villagers  of  India,  that  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  follow  up  his 
descriptions  in  the  subjoined  extracts  : — 

''  Besides  numberless  local  Bhutas,  there  are  some  thirty  especially  feared  in  Canara, 
possessing  temples  and  shrines  in  various  parts  of  the  province  ;  several  are  females.  The 
most  dreaded  and  malignant  amongst  them  is  Kalkatti,  or  the  Stonecutter,  reputed  to  be 
the  spirit  of  Jackanachari,  a  famous  stone-mason  and  architect,  who,  between  four  and 
five  centuries  ago,  built  most  of  the  exquisitely  beautiful  Jaina  temples  that  exist  in 
Canara.  Much  legend  has  gathered  about  him,  but  he  undoubtedly  lived,  and  must  have 
been  a  craftsman  of  marvellous  skUl.  The  tradition  runs  that  he  and  his  wife,  having 
quarrelled  with  their  son  respecting  a  temple  then  in  process  of  building,  they  both  com- 
mitted suicide,  and  became  Bhutas  so  malign  and  feared,  that  none  dare  Etttempt  an 
exorcism  when  their  presence  is  suspected.  The  next  most  dreaded  Bhuta  is  Panjurli, 
i.e.,  pig-rider,  whose  origin  is  forgotten,  but  is  probably  the  perturbed  spirit  of  some  one 
once  notorious.  Quliga  is  regarded  as  an  aboriginal  or  earth-born  demon,  and  has  power 
during  certain  minutes  on  certain  days  to  pass  through  the  air,  and  strike  those  he  meets 
with  a  rod,  thereby  causing  fits,  paralysis,  or  even  death.  His  glance  also  causes  sick- 
ness, but  the  hours  in  which,  in  Shakspeare's  sense,  he  can  take  or  injure  are  limited. 
Chamundi,  signifying  mistress  of  death,  is  a  female  earth-spirit,  and  when  the  KoUa 
ceremony  is  offered  to  her,  a  large  pile  of  wood  is  kindled,  and  after  it  has  become  a  heap 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  309 

of  glowing  embers,  the  Dhdr  who  represents  and  is  possessed  by  her,  dances  and  rolls  upon 
them  for  some  minutes  without  injury.  Munditaya  is  the  ghost  of  a  Balala  or  high  caste- 
man,  who  died  by  some  accident,  and  is  reputed  very  troublesome ;  sandal-wood  powder 
and  water,  taken  from  the  cot  hung  up  to  him,  are  however  believed,  when  rubbed  on,  to 
cure  snake-bites  without  further  remedy.  Most  Bhutas  haunt  large  trees,  and  it  is  of 
this  last  one,  I  think,  that  a  story  is  told  regarding  a  large,  solitary  Banian  tree,  near  a 
village  in  the  province.  A  demon  was  said  to  live  in  its  branches,  and  none  dare  climb 
it.  Some  Mussulmans,  however,  laughed  at  the  story,  and  one  of  them  climbed  up,  but 
when  he  had  got  well  up  in  the  branches  the  goblin  was  suddenly  revealed  to  him  in  a 
monstrous  and  frightful  shape,  on  seeing  which  he  screeched,  let  go  his  hold,  fell  to  the 
ground,  and  remained  raving  with  terror. for  three  days ;  his  back  was  injured  by  the 
fall,  and  he  remained  humpbacked,  but  lived  to  be  ninety,  and  would  often  tell  the 
story.  The  tree  is  now  half  dead,  and  limbs  and  branches  often  fall  from  it,  but  none 
will  go  near  or  pick  them  up." 

In  the  third  part  of  his  work  Judge  Walhouse  says 

"  The  Dharmastal  Temple,  situated  in  a  wild  forest  track  in  Canara,  is  one  of  the  most 
famous  in  all  that  part  of  the  peninsula,  and  is  the  abode  of  seven  or  eight  very  powerful 
Bhutas,  who  are  so  dreaded  that  none  will  assume  their  names.  In  civil  suits,  when  the 
evidence  is  balanced  or  hopelessly  contradictory,  it  is  very  usual  for  one  of  the  parties  to 
offer  to  decide  it  by  taking  an  oath  as  to  the  justice  of  his  contention  before  one  of  the 
Dharmastal  deities  ;  this,  when  accepted  and  done  with  certain  formalities,  is  always  held 
satisfactory  and  decisive ;  for  the  htigants  know  well  that  no  one  dare  risk  abiding  the 
vengeance  of  those  terrible  Bhutas  by  a  false  adjuration.  With  respect  to  assuming  their 
names,  it  may  be  explained  that  it  is  very  common  to  name  children  after  any  Bhuta  who 
may  be  very  popular  at  the  time,  probably  with  the  idea  that  the  compliment  might 
induce  him  to  regard  the  child  and  family  with  favour.  I  remember  that  a  good  many 
years  ago  a  notorious  and  greatly  dreaded  dacoit  was  hung  in  Trichinopoly,  who  after  death 
became  so  fashionable  a  Bhuta  that  for  some  time  half  the  children  born  were  named  after 
him.  I  may  perhaps  mention  two  or  three  out  of  the  instances  of  the  belief  in  Bhutas 
that  came  before  me  officially  as  judge.  In  a  trial  for  murder  before  the  Sessions  Court, 
the  prisoner  was  charged  with  having  intentionally  caused  the  death  of  his  younger 
brother,  whom  he  struck  down  as  they  were  ploughing.  In  defence  the  prisoner  stated, 
through  his  vakil,  or  pleader,  that  the  deceased,  whilst  at  work  in  the  field,  was  struck  by 
the  eye  of  a  Bhuta,  of  which  he  died  ;  and  his  witnesses  deposed  that  they  had  known 
similar  instances.  In  another  murder  case  the  evidence  of  a  material  witness  was  objected 
to  because  he  was  well  known  to  be  under  the  curse  of  a  Bhuta,  and  in  consequence  a 
desperate  man,  whose  statements  could  not  be  believed.  Again,  a  Potel,  or  village  head- 
man, was  charged  with  having  entered  the  death  of  a  boy  in  his  register  as  natural  when 
he  had  really  committed  suicide  ;  in  defence  the  Potel  asserted  that  the  boy  had  died  from 
a  blow  by  the  village  Bhuta,  and  named  several  instances.  On  being  punished  by  the 
magistrate,  he  appealed  to  the  Sessions  Court,  reasserting  his  plea,  and  desiring  to  call 
witnesses  to  prove  it.  These  men  were  far  from  unintelligent,  and  the  vakils,  or  native 
pleaders,  acute  and  well  able  to  conduct  a  legal  argument.  But  we  can  hardly  ridicule 
them  much,  when  we  reflect  that  within  the  last  eighteen  months  a  young  farmer  was 
sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment  at  Dorchester  for  savagely  beating  an  old  woman 
because  she  '  hag-rode '  him  :  another  man  in  Somersetshire  was  charged  for  twice 
stabbing  a  woman  who  had  '  over-looked '  him,  that  he  might  break  the  spell  with  her 
blood  ;  and  there  were  four  other  convictions  in  Somersetshire  and  Devonshire  alone,  for 
assaults  committed,  or  payment  taken,  on  account  of,  or  to  cure,  having  been  bewitched  : 
and  all  the  persons  connected  may  presumably  have  been  at  school,  and  attended  some 
church  or  chapel. 

"  Very  often  Bhutas  become  a  sort  of  house  spirits,  such  as  are  heard  of  in  many- 
popular  mythologies,  more  or  less  mischievous,  and  delighting  in  Robin  Goodfellow's 
pranks.  Howlings  and  unearthly  shrieks  and  noises  that  cannot  be  traced  are  attributed 
to  them.  Household  utensils  are  thrown  about,  and  stones  flung  by  invisible  hands, 
and  pots  and  cooking  vessels  found  filled  with  dirt.  Women  put  away  their  best  clothes 
carefully,  and  in  the  morning  find  them  unaccountably  on  fire  and  smouldering  away. 
All  these  are  ascribed  to  the  Bhuta,  as  well  as  what  would  now  be  called  a  kind  of  levita- 
tion,  which  is  declared  to  be  very  frequent.  Infants  are  missed  from  their  cradles,  and 
presently  heard  crying  in  the  loft  of  the  house,  or  on  stacks  of  straw  outside.  Once 
riding  through  a  village  I  found  the  people  in  great  excitement  at  a  prank  played  by  a 
Bhuta  two  days  before.  A  woman  lying  apart  in  her  room  expecting  her  confinement, 
was  suddenly  missed,  and  could  nowhere  be  found,  till  some  cliildren  heard  her  voice 

3IO  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

proceeding  from  a  dry  well  in  a  field  hard  by.  She  was  drawn  up  with  considerable 
trouble,  quite  unhurt,  and  safely  confined  the  same  day.  She  said  she  found  herself  all 
at  once  at  _the  bottom  of  the  well,  but  could  not  in  the  least  tell  how  she  came  there. 
The  people  insisted  on  showing  me  the  well,  which  was  about  100  yards  from  the  house, 
large  and  square,  one  used  for  irrigation,  but  then  dry,  and  from  20  to  25  feet  deep. 
Roman  Catholics  are  very  numerous  in  Canara,  but  quite  as  subject  to  these  demoniacal 
annoyances  as  the  Hindus.  One  clerk  of  the  civil  court,  a  grave,  elderly  man,  affirmed 
to  me  that,  when  passing  at  evening  along  a  lane  near  a  Bhutastan,  he  encountered  a 
dark,  monstrous,  shadowy  shape,  which  grew  larger  and  larger,  on  which  he  uttered 
some  religious  verses,  when  it  gradually  diminished  and  disappeared.  Another  story  was 
the  talk  of  the  town,  and  the  parties ,  concerned  assured  me  of  its  truth.  Two  high 
native  officials,  both  Roman  Catholics,  were  sitting  at  noonday  in  the  verandah  of  the 
house  of  one  of  them,  when  ashes  and  earth  came  pouring  in  quantities  from  the  roof. 
The  master  of  the  house  exclaimed  the  Bhuta  was  repeating  his  tricks,  and,  bringing  a 
gun,  fired  it  in  the  air  to  frighten  the  goblin  away,  when  instantly,  as  if  in  answer, 
a  quantity  of  powder  was  exploded  in  the  midst  of  the  open  yard  before  them,  and 
immediately  stones  and  pebbles  were  flung  by  invisible  agency  towards  the  house  from 
without.  These  fell  on  the  verandah,  and  then,  my  informant  asseverated,  went 
"  leaping  like  frogs  "  into  the  house,  to  the  great  amusement  of  the  children  who  had 
assembled,  and  who  would  cry  out,  "  one  more  !  "  when  another  stone  would  instantly 
fall  and  go  hopping  in  !  This  sort  of  Bhuta  annoyance  was  declared  to  be  not  at  all 
unfrequent.  It  is  curious,  anthropologically  speaking,  to  observe  how  general  this 
strange  belief  in  a  grotesque  sort  of  goblin,  rejoicing  in  a  particular  kind  of  odd, 
mischievous  pranks,  has  been  in  widely  separated  countries  and  ages.  In  China  such 
disturbances  are  common,  and  ascribed  to  '  kitchen  gods  ; '  in  Arabia  and  Egypt  to  the 
jinee  or  genii,  who,  Mr.  Lane  says,  are  believed  to  throw  stones  a.nd  fiirniture  about  in 
houses.  He  also  relates  that  pious  and  and  learned  Muslims,  on  locking  the  doors  of 
their  houses,  storerooms,  and  apartments  when  going  out,  habitually  repeat,  '  In  the 
name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful,'  to  secure  their  property  during  their 
absence  from  the  mischief  and  depredations  of  the  Jinn." 

We  must  now  notice  a  phase  of  Spiritualism  which  seems  to  be  even 
more  special  to  Oriental  nations  than  the  hauntings  above  described ;  this 
is  the  power  acquired  by  some  of  those  rehgious  ascetics  called  "  Fakirs," 
"Yogis,"  &c.,  &c.  There  are  certain  individuals  styling  themselves 
"  Occultists,"  in  contradistinction  to  the  term  "  Spiritualists,"  who  claim 
that  the  wonder-working  powers  exhibited  by  these  Eastern  magicians,  are 
entirely  under  their  own  control  and  proceed  from  the  results  of  initiation 
into  divers  human  "  Brotherhoods." 

The  author  of  "  Art  Magic,"  who  spent  many  years  amongst  rehgious 
ascetics  in  India,  and  was  himself  a  proficient  in  their  practices,  insists, 
that  the  Yogis,  Fakirs,  and  wonder  workers  of  India  are  assisted  by  the 
spirits  of  ancestors,  whom  they  call  "  Pitris,"  and  whom  they  almost  always 
claim  to  be  instrumental  in  the  production  of  their  marvellous  feats  of 
magical  power.  M.  Jacolliot,  for  many  years  a  resident  in  India,  makes 
the  same  allegation,  and  M.  Le  Hue,  besides  other  writers  of  eminence 
on  East  Indian  magic,  confirms  these  statements. 

M.  Jacolliot's  articles  on  "  Manifestations  with  the  Fakirs  of  India," 
translated  by  Dr.  Maximilian  Perty,  of  Leipzig,  will  be  found  to  contain  a 
great  deal  of  interesting  matter  on  these  subjects. 

In  a  series  of  papers  written  for  the  German  Spiritual  paper,  Psychic 
Studien,  M.  Jacolliot  speaks  of  a  Fakir  named  Covindasamy  with  whom 
he  became  acquainted  under  special  circumstances,  and  through  whom  he 
witnessed  manifestations  of  power  and  marvel  which  almost  surpass  belief. 

Conversing  with  this  wonderful  personage  on  a  certain  occasion,  M. 
Jacolliot  said  :  "  Dost  thou  know  whether  any  force  is  developed  in  thee 
when  these  phenomena  are  produced,  and  dost  thou  never  feel  any  peculiar 
sensation  in  brain  or  muscles  ?  " 

"  It   is   no   natural   (or  bodily)   force   which   is    at    work,"    answered 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  311 

Covindasamy.  *'  /  call  on  the  souls  of  77iy  forefathers^  and  it  is  they  who  use 
their  power,  and  whose  ifistrument  I  am."  Dr.  Perty  says  :  "  Various 
Fakirs  whom  JacoUiot  had  questioned  on  the  same  point  gave  nearly  the 
same  answers." 

Subjoined  will  be  found  one  of  the  experiments  recorded  by  Dr.  Perty 
as  occurring  with  this  Fakir  and  M.  JacoUiot : — 

''  JacoUiot  had  seen,  with  some  of  the  fakirs,  objects  raised  from  the  ground,  and  asked 
Covindasamy  for  this  manifestation.  The  fakir  took  an  iron  wood  stick,  which  JacoUiot 
had  brought  from  Ceylon,  rested  his  right  hand  upon  the  knob,  cast  down  his  eyes,  and 
began  his  evocations,  when  gradually,  still  leaning  one  hand  upon  the  stick,  and  with  his 
legs  crossed  in  oriental  fashion,  he  rose  about  two  feet  from  the  ground,  and  remained 
immovable,  in  a  position  similar  to  that  of  the  bronze  Buddhas  which  tourists  bring  from 
the  far  East.  JacoUiot  could  by  no  means  comprehend  how  the  fakir  could  remain  over 
twenty  minutes  in  a  position  entirely  contravening  the  law  of  gravitation.  When  he  took 
leave  of  JacoUiot  that  day,  he  informed  him  that  at  the  moment  when  the  sacred  elephants 
in  Siva's  pagoda  should  strike  the  midnight  hour  on  the  copper  saucers,  he  would  caU  on 
the  familiar  spirits  of  the  Franguys  (Frenchmen),  who  would  then  manifest  their  presence 
in  JacoUiot's  bedchamber.  In  order  to  secure  himself  against  deception,  JacoUiot  sent 
both  his  servants  to  spend  the  night  in  the  dingui,  with  the  cercar  (boatman)  and  other 
attendants.  The  palace  of  the  Peishwa  has  windows  on  the  Ganges  side  -only,  and  consists 
of  seven  stories,  whose  rooms  open  on  to  covered  terraces  and  galleries.  The  stories  com- 
municate with  each  other  in  a  peculiar  way  ;  from  the  ground  floor  a  staircase  leads  to 
the  first  story,  and  at  the  further  end  of  this  is  another  flight  of  steps  to  the  next  above, 
and  so  on  to  the  sixth,  from  which  a  movable  flight,  attached  with  chains  like  a  draw- 
bridge, leads  to  the  seventh  story,  which  is  furnished  half  in  oriental,  half"  in  European 
style,  and  is  generally  reserved  for  the  foreign  guests  of  the  Peishwa. 

"  After  JacoUiot  had  carefully  searched  his  rooms,  and  pulled  up  the  drawbridge,  all 
communication  with  the  outer  world  was  cut  off.  At  the  given  hour  he  heard  two  distinct 
raps  on  the  wall  of  his  room,  and  as  he  went  towards  the  spot,  a  rapping  noise  seemed  to 
come  from  the  glass  bell  that  protected  the  hanging  lamp  from  mosquitoes,  then  a  noise 
in  the  cedar  beams  of  the  roof,  and  all  was  still.  He  then  walked  to  the  end  of  his 
terrace  ;  it  was  one  of  those  silvery  nights,  unknown  to  our  climates.  The  Ganges  lay 
Uke  a  broad  carpet  at  the  foot  of  the  sleeping  city,  and  on  one  of  its  steps  a  dark  figure 
was  visible  ;  it  was  the  fakir  of  Trivanderam,  praying  for  the  repose  of  the  dead. 

"  JacoUiot  could  not  feel  convinced  that  the  theory  of  the  Hindoos,  that  the  pheno- 
mena which  he  had  now  so  often  witnessed  were  produced  by  the  spirits  of  their  ancestors, 
was  in  any  sense  proved  ;  but  he  was  equally  certain  that  no  one  in  Hindostan  understood 
by  what  means  these  enchanters  operated  ;  he  saw  that  the  Hindoos  do  not  separate 
material  phenomena  from  rehgious  belief.  He  said  to  the  fakir,  when  he  appeared  the 
next  evening,  '  The  sounds  which  you  announced  were  reaUy  to  be  heard  ;  the  fakir  is 
very  skilful.'  '  The  fakir  is  nothing,'  answered  Covindasamy,  quite  calmly  ;  '  he  says  his 
mentrams,  and  the  spirits  hear  him.  It  was  the  manes  of  thy  French  forefathers  who 
visited  thee.'  '  Thou  hast  power  also  over  foreign  spirits  ?'  '  No  one  can  command  the 
spirits.'  '  I  mean,  how  can  ^e  souls  of  the  Franguys  hear  the  prayers  of  a  Hindoo  when 
they  are  not  of  thy  caste  ?  '  There  is  no  caste  in  tlie  world  beyond.'  It  was  impossible, 
as  at  all  other  times,  to  shake  Covindasamy 's  conviction. 

"  He  took  a  little  bamboo  stool,  without  further  ado,  and  seated  himself  with  his  legs 
crossed  Moslem  fashion,  and  his  arms  across  his  breast.  The  servant  had  lighted  the 
terrace  to  the  brightness  of  day,  and  presently  JacoUiot  saw,  after  the  motionless  fakir 
had  apparently  concentrated  his  will-power,  the  bamboo  stool  begin  to  glide  along  the 
ground,  and  in  about  ten  minutes  arrive  at  the  end  of  the  terrace,  and  then  return  back- 
wards to  its  former  place.  This  happened  three  times,  in  accordance  with  JacoUiot's 
wish  ;  the  fakir's  legs  being  raised  above  the  ground  to  the  level  of  the  seat  of  the  stool. 
The  heat  was  on  this  day  unusually  great,  the  cool  evening  breeze  from  the  Himalayas 
not  having  yet  set  in,  and  the  cook  was  working  with  all  his  bodily  force,  by  means  of 
a  cocoanut  fibre  string,  an  enormous  punkah,  a  sort  of  movable  fan,  which  was  fixed  to 
an  iron  pole  in  the  centre  of  the  terrace.  The  fakir  took  hold  of  the  string,  placed  both 
hands  upon  his  forehead,  and  crouched  beneath  the  punkah,  which  soon  began  to  swing, 
without  any  movement  on  Covindasamy's  part,  first  gently,  then  more  and  more  rapidly, 
as  when  moved  by  a  human  hand.  If  the  enchanter  let  the  string  go,  the  punkah  moved 
more  and  more  slowly,  tUl  at  last  it  stood  still.  Covindasamy  next  chose  one  of  three 
flower  pots  on  the  terrace,  which  were  so  heavy  that  a  man's  whole  strength  was  necessary 
to  lift  one  ;  he  laid  the  points  of  his  fingers  on  its  edge,  causing  a  regular  pendulum-like 

312 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

motion  of  the  base,  and  at  last  the  pot  seemed  to  JacoUiot  to  rise  off  the  ground,  and  to 
follow  the  will  of  the  fakir  in  any  direction,  a  phenomenon  that  JacoUiot  had  often  seen 
in  broad  daylight." 

The  easiest  way  for  sceptics  to  dispose  of  these  statements  is,  to  deny 
their  authenticity  or  their  narrator's  veracity  in  toto.  As  we  are  not  pre- 
pared to  deal  in  this  summary  way  with  the  testimony  of  a  respectable  and 
learned  witness,  especially  as  his  account — however  incredible  to  those 
who  have  not  familiarized  themselves  with  the  records  of  East  Indian 
Spiritualism — is  verified  by  nearly  every  writer  who  has  examined  the 
subject,  we  shall  present  another  extract  from  Dr.  Perty's  translation  of 
JacoUiot's  Hindoo  experiences.     It  is  as  follows  : — 

"  At  ten  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  this  day,  Covindasamy  came  silently,  as  usual,  into 
JacoUiot's  room,  having  left  behind  him  on  the  flight  of  steps  his  languty  or  small  gar- 
ment which  was  his  only  clothing,  and  having  fastened  his  seven-jointed  bamboo-stick  to 
one  of  his  long  plaits  of  hair.  '  Nothing  impure,'  said  he,  '  must  touch  the  body  of  the 
invoker,  when  he  wishes  to  come  effectually  into  communion  with  the  spirits.'  The 
thought  struck  JacoUiot  at  this  moment  whether  the  Gymnosophists  of  the  Indus  were 
not  similar  to  Covindasamy. 

"  The  experiments  were  conducted  that  evening  on  the  terrace  and  in  JacoUiot's  bed- 
room, both  of  which,  communicating  together,  were  effectually  closed  from  vsdthout ;  in 
each  was  a  hanging  lamp  of  cocoa-nut  oil,  enclosed  in  a  glass  globe.  All  Indian  houses 
are  provided  with  little  copper  vessels,  always  filled  with  glowing  coal,  in  which  at 
intervals  it  is  customary  to  throw  a  fragrant  powder  of  sandal- wood,  orris  root,  myrrh, 
and  incense.  The  fakir  placed  a  similar  vessel  in  the  centre  of  the  terrace,  and  beside  it  a 
copper  plate  covered  with  powder  ;  he  then  cowered  down  in  his  usual  manner  with  crossed 
arms,  and  began  a  long  incantation  in  an  unknown  language,  repeated  his  mentrams,  and 
remained  immovable,  with  his  left  hand  upon  his  heart,  and  the  right  leaning  on  his 
staff ;  from  time  to  time  he  raised  his  hand  to  his  forehead,  as  if  to  clear  his  brain  by 
passes.  Suddenly  JacoUiot  trembled,  for  a  faintly  luminous  cloud  began  to  form  in  his 
chamber,  from  which  hands  rapidly  came  out  in  all  directions,  and  returned  to  it  again  ; 
presently  some  of  the  hands  lost  their  shadowy  look,  and  appeared  more  human  and 
material  ;  others  became  more  luminous  ;  the  first  were  opaque  and  cast  shadows,  the 
others  so  transparent  that  objects  could  be  seen  through  them  ;  altogether  JacoUiot 
counted  sixteen.  JacolUot  asked  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  touch  one  of  the  hands  ; 
scarcely  had  he  done  so,  when  one  left  the  group,  floated  towards  him,  and  pressed  his 
ofiered  hand  ;  it  was  small,  moist  and  supple,  and  like  the  hand  of  a  young  woman. 
'  The  spirit  is  there,  although  only  one  of  its  hands  is  visible,'  said  Covindasamy ;  'thou 
canst  converse  with  it  if  thou  wUt.'  JacoUiot  asked  playfully  if  the  spirit,  to  whom  this 
charming  hand  belonged,  would  leave  him  a  souvenir  ;  thereupon  he  felt  the  hand  melt 
away  from  his,  saw  it  float  to  a  bouquet  of  flowers  and  break  off  a  rosebud,  which  it  threw 
at  his  feet ;  it  then  vanished.  For  two  whole  hours  things  occurred  enough  to  bewUder 
the  strongest  mind  ;  hands  stroked  JacoUiot's  face,  or  fanned  him  with  a  fan,  showered 
flowers  all  over  the  room,  or  wrote  fiery  letters  in  the  air,  which  disappeared  as  soon  as 
the  last  was  made  ;  and  flashes  as  of  lightning  passed  along  the  terrace  and  through  the 
chamber.  Two  of  the  Sanscrit  phrases,  which  JacolUot  had  written  first  with  a  pencil, 
had  this  meaning — /  have  taken  on  a  fluidic  hody ;  and  thereupon  the  hand  wrote — thou 
wilt  attain  happiness,  when  thou  art  freed  from  this  perishable  body.  By  degrees  the  hands 
vanished,  the  mass  of  cloud  in  which  they  seemed  to  have  been  materiaUzed  was  partially 
dissipated  ;  and  in  the  place  where  the  last  hand  had  faded  away,  they  found  a  wreath  of 
those  strongly  scented  yellow  immortelles,  which  the  Hindoos  use  in  their  ceremonies. 

"  A  moment  afterwards,  whilst  the  faku-  was  stUl  earnestly  engaged  in  invocation,  a 
darker  cloud  formed  near  the  pan  of  coals,  which  JacoUiot,  at  the  fakir's  wish,  had  kept 
replenished  ;  gradually  this  cloud  took  a  human  form,  and  appeared  as  the  phantom  of 
an  old  Brahmin,  kneeling  and  offering  sacrifice.  He  had  the  sacred  sign  of  Vishnu  on  his 
forehead,  and  the  threefold  cord  of  the  priestly  caste  round  his  body  ;  his  hands  were 
joined  above  his  head,  and  his  lips  moved  as  if  in  prayer.  At  a  particular  moment  he 
took  a  pinch  of  the  sweet-smelling  powder  and  threw  it  into  the  glowing  coal,  at  which  a 
thick  smoke  filled  the  air  ;  when  it  had  dispersed,  JacoUiot  saw  the  phantom  at  two 
steps  from  him,  holding  out  its  withered  hand  ;  JacoUiot  took  it  in  his  own,  and  found  it 
warm  and  living,  though  hard  and  bony.  '  Art  thou  also,'  he  said  aloud,  '  a  former 
inhabitant  of  this  earth?"  The  question  was  scarcely  put  when  he  saw  in  phosphoric 
light  on  the  phantom's  breast  the  word  Am  (Yes)  come  and  go.      And  when  JacoUiot 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  313 

asked  him,  '  Wilt  thou  give  me  a  tokeu  of  thy  passing  visit  V  the  spirit  tore  off  his  girdle, 
made  of  a  triple  woollen  twist,  and  vanished  where  he  stood. 

"  Jacolliot  thought  the  sitting  was  ended,  but  the  fakir  appeared  to  have  no  thought 
of  leaving  his  place.  Suddenly  a  strange  melody  was  heard,  which  seemed  to  proceed 
from  the  harmonica  previously  used,  but  which  the  Peishwa  had  had  taken  away  the 
evening  before,  and  which  was  no  longer  in  Jacolliot's  apartments.  The  tones  at  first 
sounded  as  if  at  a  distance,  afterwards  nearer,  and  lastly,  as  if  in  the  bedroom  ;  but  pre- 
sently Jacolliot  perceived  the  shadow  of  a  pagoda  player  glide  along  the  wall,  holding  a 
harmonica,  from  which  were  proceeding  the  monotonous,  plaintive  tones  peculiar  to  the 
religious  music  of  the  Hindoos. 

"  The  phantom  glided  through  the  room  and  along  the  terrace,  and  vanished,  leaving 
behind  him  the  instrument,  which  was  in  fact  the  harmonica  belonging  to  the  rajah,  and 
yet  the  doors  were  effectually  closed.  Covindasamy  now  stood  up,  bathed  in  perspira- 
tion, exhausted  in  the  last  degree.  In  a  few  hours  he  was  to  begin  his  journey.  "  I 
thank  thee,  Malabarer,"  said  Jacolliot,  addressing  him  in  the  name  of  his  beloved  country, 
"  and  may  He  who  unites  the  three  mysterious  powers  in  his  own  person  (the  Brahminical 
Trinity)  protect  thee  in  thy  journey  to  the  lovely  southern  land,  and  mayst  thou  find 
that  peace  and  happiness  have  dwelt  in  thy  home  during  thine  absence  !  "  The  fakir 
replied  with  still  more  emphatic  words,  took  the  offered  present  without  looking  at  it,  or 
returning  thanks,  paid  his  last  melancholy  greetings,  and  disappeared  as  silently  as  was 
his  wont.  When  Jacolliot  looked  out  on  the  river  in  the  early  morning  he  saw  a  black 
spot,  and  by  means  of  the  telescope  discovered  it  to  be  the  fakir  who  was  crossing  the 
Ganges  on  his  way  to  Trivanderam,  to  the  blue  sea,  the  cocoa  palms,  and  his  own  hut,  of 
which  he  had  so  often  spoken.  After  a  few  hours'  sleep  in  his  hammock,  the  past  night 
appeared  to  him  as  a  dream  and  a  hallucination,  but  the  harmonica  was  still  there,  the 
flowers  still  strewed  the  terrace,  the  wreath  of  immortelles  lay  vipon  the  divan,  and  the 
words  he  had  seen  in  the  writing  of  flame  were  written,  as  at  first,  upon  the  slate. 
Jacolliot  could  discover  as  little  deception  as  the  Abb^  Hue  had  been  able  to  do  in  Thibet." 

As  a  corollary  to  the  various  accounts  which  flood  the  columns  of 
the  Spiritual  papers  of  '''fonn  materialization  "  obtained  only  in  cabinets, 
dark  seances,  or  under  conditions  which  place  the  sitter  wholly  at  the  mercy 
of  all  and  sundry  who  choose  to  practise  on  his  credulity,  the  description 
of  the  above  seance,  and  the  conditions  under  which  the  phenomena 
occurred,  may  prove  as  suggestive  as  marvellous. 

The  different  degrees  of  initiation  through  which  the  religious  ascetics  of 
India  pass,  to  attain  to  the  highest  conditions  of  spiritual  power,  have  too 
often  been  described  by  modern  travellers,  and  are  to  be  found  too  gener- 
ally scattered  through  the*  pages  of  popular  literature,  to  need  reiteration 
here;  suffice  it  to  say,  the  wonder  workers  of  India,  despite  the  halo  of 
extreme  sanctity  which  is  traditionally  thrown  around  them,  are  by  no 
means  the  beau  ideal  of  sublimity  and  exaltation  that  they  appear  in  the 
light  of  poetical  or  fervid  imagery.  Even  those  who  do  not  attempt  to 
work  upon  public  sentiment  by  converting  themselves  into  monsters  of 
deformity,  are  for  the  most  part,  lean,  emaciated,  and  unearthly-looking 
beings ;  repulsive  in  aspect,  and  so  utterly  abstracted  from  the  objects  of 
sense,  that  they  move  amongst  their  fellow-men,  more  Hke  phantoms,  or 
creatures  whose  only  concern  with  earth  is  to  linger  upon  its  surface  as  a 
penance  for  deeds  done  in  some  former  state  of  existence,  than  mortals 
having  concern  with  mortal  affairs.  There  are  others,  and  these  form  the 
principal  sum  of  the  wonder-working  devotees,  of  whom  Major  Colebrooke, 
a  long  resident  in  India,  and  one  who  has  written  extensively  on  its  modern 
aspects,  says  : — 

"The  Fakirs  are  ignorant,  insolent,  and  loathsome.  The  Yogis,  who  are  supposed 
to  give  themselves  up  to  meditation,  are  merely  ignorant  and  superstitious  men.  There 
may  be,  there  probably  are,  exceptions,  but  from  a  religion  whose  high  morality  and 
spirituality  is  lost  and  buried  under  a  mass  of  degrading  superstitions,  what  holiness  can 
be  expected  ?  A  man  who  thinks,  or  is  supposed  to  think,  incessantly  of  one  subject, 
even  the  highest,  only  stultifies  himself,  he  cannot  evolve  out  of  his  own  nature  anything 

314  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

which  that  nature  does  not  contain.  The  proof  is  in  the  result.  The  Yogees  or 
Suniassis,  do  nothing  to  make  the  people  better.  They  receive  gifts,  and  strengthen  the 
dark  superstitions  which  prevent  India  from  rising." 

Of  modern  Spiritualism,  as  represented  by  the  Mediums  of  Europe, 
there  is  but  little  to  report  except  in  a  few  special  places.  Private  circles 
have  been  successfully  established  amongst  some  of  the  white  residents  of 
British  India,  and  one  at  least  eminent  Medium  has  visited  the  country, 
in  the  person  of  Mr.  Eglinton,  from  London.  Of  this  gentleman's  powers 
as  a  Medium  mention  has  already  been  made  in  connection  with  his 
visit  to  South  Africa.  During  a  brief  residence  amongst  Spiritual  friends 
in  Calcutta,  Mr.  Eglinton  made  many  converts,  and  was  honoured  by 
various  eulogistic  notices  of  his  Mediumship  in  the  public  journals.  The 
two  following  excerpts  will  suffice  as  an  example  of  these  notices.  The 
first  is  taken  from  the  Indiafi  Daily  News,  and  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  At  Calcutta,  Mr.  Eglinton's  seances  are  attended  by  the  most  intelligent  classes,  and 
manifestations  occur  that  perfectly  astound  spectators.  On  one  occasion  two  'materialized 
spirits '  appeared  in  the  light— one  of  a  Hindu  lady,  and  the  other  a  Hindu  gentleman, 
father  and  mother  respectively  of  two  of  the  sitters.  The  Indian  Mirror  of  December 
I7th,  says  : — 

"  '  One  of  the  sitters  was  requested  to  write  the  name  of  a  departed  relative.  The 
name  was  not  shown  to  Mr.  Eglinton,  nor  did  he  know  it,  or  was  likely  to  know  it.  The 
bit  of  paper  on  which  the  name  was  written  was  then  folded  up  and  handed  over  to  Mr. 
Eglinton,  who,  as  soon  as  he  received  it  in  its  folded  state,  burnt  it  in  the  flame  of  the 
lamp  before  which  he  sat.  It  was  immediately  reduced  to  ashes,  and  Mr.  Eglinton  then 
rubbed  the  ashes  over  one  of  his  arms,  which  was  laid  bare  and  found  to  be  quite  clear, 
s.ndi  free  from  any  loriting  at  all.  But  scarcely  had  Mr.  Eglinton  rubbed  the  ashes  over 
his  arm,  when  the  name  of  the  departed  relative  of  the  sitter  appeared  in  a  minute 
or  so  in  distinctly  legible  characters  over  the  very  arm,  spelt  similarly  as  on  the  bit  of 
paper  itself.  But  the  most  striking  thing  was  this.  When  the  materialized  spirits 
had  disappeared,  a  distinct  sound  of  writing  was  heard  in  the  dark  for  two  or  three 
seconds  and  immediately,  when  a  light  was  brought,  a  card  was  found  stuck  up  on  the 
edge  of  a  book,  near  a  certain  distinguished  sitter,  and  the  following  Sanskrit  text 
appeared  on  it  in  pencil,  in  pure  and  excellent  Bengali  handwriting,  with  the  initials 
in  English  of  one  "P" — "  Tapasha  Braham  hijigya  s'U7?i&o,"  which,  when  rendered  into 
English,  runs  as  follows :  "By  devotion  and  knowledge  of  God  a  person  is  united  with 
Him,  i.e.,  he  attains  salvation."  ' " 

For  the  second  extract  we  are  indebted  to  the  Harbinger  of  Light, 
Melbourne.     It  is  headed — 

"another   conjuror   nonplussed. 

"  Many  of  our  readers  will  remember  '  Kellar,'  the  illusionist,  who  performed  very 
cleverly  the  '  Cabinet  Trick '  and  a  number  of  other  imitations  of  spiritual  phenomena 
at  St.  George's  Hall,  a  few  years  since.  The  following  letter,  extracted  from  the  Indian 
Daily  News  of  January  26th,  contains  Mr.  KeUar's  admission  of  the  distinctive  nature  of 
spiritual  phenomena. 

'Mr.  Kellar  and  the  Spirits. 
'  To  the  Editor  of  the  Indian  Daily  News, 

'  Sir,  —  In  your  issue  of  the  13th  January,  I  stated  that  I  should  be  glad  of  an 
opportunity  of  participating  in  a  seance  with  a  view  of  giving  an  unbiased  opinion  as  to 
whether,  in  my  capacity  of  a  professional  prestidigiteur,  I  could  give  a  natural  explana- 
tion of  effects  said  to  be  produced  by  spiritual  aid. 

'  I  am  indebted  to  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  Eglinton,  the  spiritualistic  medium  now  in 
Calcutta,  and  of  his  host,  Mr.  J.  Meugens,  for  affording  me  the  opportunity  I  craved. 

'  It  is  needless  to  say  I  went  as  a  sceptic,  but  I  must  own  that  I  haVe  come  away 
utterly  unable  to  explain,  by  any  natural  means,  the  phenomena  that  I  witnessed  on 
Tuesday  evening.     I  will  give  a  brief  description  of  what  took  place  : — 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.'  315 

I  was  seated  in  a  brilliantly  lighted  room  with  Mr.  Eglinton  and  Mr.  Meugens  ; 
we  took  our  places  round  a  common  teak-wood  table,  and  after  a  few  minutes  the  table 
began  to  sway  violently  backwards  and  forwards,  and  I  heard  noises  such  as  might  be 
produced  by  some  one  thumping  under  the  table.  I  tried  to  discover  the  cause  of  this 
movement  but  was  unable  to  do  so.  After  this,  Mr.  Eglinton  produced  two  common 
slates,  which  I  sponged,  cleaned,  and  rubbed  dry  with  a  towel  myself.  Mr.  Eglinton 
then  handed  me  a  bos  containing  small  crumbs  of  slate  pencil ;  I  selected  one  of  these, 
and  in  accordance  with  Mr.  Eghnton's  directions,  placed  it  on  the  surface  of  one  of  the 
slates,  placing  the  other  slate  over  it.  I  then  firmly  grasped  the  two  slates  at  one  of  the 
corners  ;  Mr.  Eglinton  held  the  other  corner,  our  two  free  hands  being  clasped  together. 
The  slates  were  then  lowered  below  the  edge  of  the  table,  but  remained  in  full  view  (the 
room  remaining  lighted  all  the  time) ;  instantaneously  I  heard  a  scratching  noise,  as  might 
be  produced  by  writing  on  a  slate.  In  about  fifteen  seconds  I  heard  three  distinct 
knocks,  on  the  slate,  and  I  then  opened  them  and  found  the  following  writing  :  — 

' "  My  name  is  Geary.  Don't  you  remember  me  ?  we  used  to  talk  of  this  matter  at 
the  St.  Qeorge's.     I  know  better  now." 

'  Having  read  the  above,  I  remarked  that  I  knew  no  one  by  the  name  of  Geary. 

'  We  then  placed  our  hands  on  the  table,  and  Mr.  Eglinton  commenced  repeating  the 
alphabet  until  he  came  to  the  letter  G,  when  the  table  began  to  shake  violently.  This 
process  was  repeated  till  the  name  of  Geary  was  spelt. 

'  After  this,  Mr.  Eglinton  took  a  piece  of  paper  and  a  pencil,  and  with  a  convulsive 
movement  difficult  to  describe,  he  wrote  very  indistinctly  the  following  words  : — 

'  "  I  am  Alfred  Geary,  of  the  Lantern  ;  you  know  me  and  St.  Ledger.' 

'  Having  read  this,  I  suddenly  remembered  having  met  both  Mr.  Geary  and  Mr.  St. 
Ledger  at  Cape  Town,  South  Africa,  about  four  years  ago,  and  the  St.  George's  Hotel  is 
the  one  I  lived  at  there.  Mr.  Geary  was  the  editor  of  the  Oape  Lantern.  I  believe  he 
died  some  thi-ee  years  ago.  Mr.  St.  Ledger  was  the  editor  of  the  Cape  Times,  and  I  believe 
is  so  still.  Without  going  into  details,  I  may  mention  that  subsequently  a  number  of 
other  messages  were  written  on  the  slates,  which  I  was  allowed  to  clean  each  time  before 
they  vt'ere  used. 

'  In  respect  to  the  above  manifestations  I  can  only  say  I  do  not  expect  my  account  of 
them  to  gain  general  credence.  Forty-eight  hours  before  I  should  not  have  believed  any 
one  who  had  described  such  manifestations  under  similar  circumstances.  I  still  remain  a 
sceptic  as  regards  Spiritualism,  but  I  repeat  my  inability  to  explain  or  account  for  what 
must  have  been  an  intelligent  force  that  produced  the  writing  on  that  slate,  which,  if  my 
senses  are  to  be  relied  on,  was  in  no  way  the  result  of  trickery  or  sleight  of  hand. — 
Yours,  &c., 

'  Calcutta,  January  25th,  1882."  '  Hajbry  Kkllar.'" 

The  above  letter  needs  no  comment  to  the  intehigent  Spiritualist.  Any 
other  readers  may  dispose  of  its  contents  after  their  own  fashion. 

Of  religious  movements  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  give  even  a  list, 
so  numerous  are  the  cases  of  enthusiasm,  or — as  must  be  admitted  in  some 
instances — imposture  which  lead  to  the  formation  of  new  sects.  One  of 
the  latest,  in  which  the  founder  claims  to  act  under  Spiritual  guidlance  and 
inspiration  is  that  headed  by  the  well-known  leader  of  the  Bramoh  Somaj, 
Keshub  Chunder  Sen.  This  noteworthy  personage,  although  most  highly 
lauded  by  some  and  regarded  by  his  immediate  followers  as  something  litde 
less  than  an  Avatar,  but  still  far  beyond  the  ordinary  grade  of  poor 
mortality,  is  nevertheless  equally  unpopular  in  other  directions,  and  Jay  many 
writers  is  denounced  as  an  audacious  impostor. 

In  a  wild  rambling  discourse  given  recently  to  about  1,200  persons  in 
the  Town  Hall  of  Calcutta,  Baboo  Keshub  Chunder  Sen  took  for  his 
text  the  self-propounded  question,  "  Am  I  an  inspired  prophet  ?"  Although 
a  full  report  of  his  own  answer  to  his  own  question  is  in  print  and  before 
the  world,  no  reader  seems  yet  able  to  determine  whether  that  answer  was 
given  in  the  negative  or  affirmative.  The  speaker  represented  himself  as 
being  in  direct  communication  with  John  the  Baptist,  Jesus,  and  Paul, 
whose  spirits  he  alleged  he  had  met  and  conversed  with,  and  from  whom 
he  received  his  commission  to  lead  mankind  into  the  truths  of  the  rehgion 
he  professes  to  teach.     In  some  respects  this  is  broad  and  unsectarian,  but 

3i6  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

in  others,  the  introduction  of  his  own  veiled  Messiahship,  and  the  strange 
commixture  of  old  Aryan  philosophy,  with  modern  superstition,  is  curious 
and  perplexing. 

The  New  York  Sun  gives  the  following  notice  of  the  Hindoo  Prophet 
and  his  self-appointed  mission  : — 

"  Kesub  Chunder  Sen,  a  high  caste  Bi-ahminwho  for  some  time  has  been  a  rising  light 
in  India,  has  cast  aside  appearances  and  become  a  founder  of  a  new  sect.  Possibly  no 
man  exerts  so  wide  an  influence  religiously  in  India  to-day  as  this  Hindoo  reformer.  He 
was  formerly  at  the  head  of  the  Bramoh  Somaj,  but  has  progressed — at  least  so  he  thinks, 
beyond  them.  If  to  converse  with  spirits  makes  a  man  a  Spiritualist,  then  Chunder  Sen 
is  a  Spirituahst,  for  he  avows  in  the  most  positive  manner  that  Jesus,  John  the  Baptist, 
and  Paul  have  appeared  to  and  conversed  with  him.  He  is  considered  by  his  admirers 
not  only  as  a  great  reformer,  but  a  prophet  sent  of  God.  He  has  long  and  earnestly 
protested  against  the  superstition  of  his  own  country,  and  at  times  the  hearts  of  mis- 
sionaries were  gladdened  by  his  praise  of  their  works,  and  his  seeming  acceptance  of  the 
doctrines  of  Christ.  To  establish  Christianity,  however,  was  not  his  object.  He  claims 
to  be  a  re-incarnation  of  the  divine  Bhakti,  under  the  name  of  Chaitauya,  and  that  he  is 
commissioned  to  establish  the  church  of  the  future.  He  is  the  Prophet  Nadiya  ;  an 
organization  has  been  completed  at  Calcutta  ;  and  the  apostles,  '  a  preaching  army,'  have 
been  sent  forth  on  their  mission  to  convert  the  world.  This  army  moves  from  place  to 
place  with  banners  flying  and  music,  and  so  great  is  the  enthusiasm  that  devotees  roll 
themselves  in  the  dust  before  it. 

"  The  object  of  the  new  prophet  is  to  deliver  his  country  from  dry  rationalism  and 
supply  a  living  faith.  "Whatever  the  results  may  be,  the  movement  is  of  deep  interest  to 
the  student  of  religious  history,  as  an  illustration  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  sects.  Kesub 
Chunder  Sen,  with  his  pretence  of  being  a  re-incarnation,  in  the  light  of  the  present,  is  a 
sham  and  a  farce  ;  removed  two  thousand  years  into  the  past,  and  a  few  wonder  works, 
wotild  have  made  good  his  pretence,  and  untold  millions  would  have  received  him  as  God." 

A  Still  more  detailed  description  of  the  Prophet  was  recently  published 
in  the  Cindmiati  Commercial  oi  July,  1880,  by  Moncure  D.  Conway,  from 
which  the  following  extracts  may  serve  to  give  a  graphic  idea  of  the  Prophet 
and  his  pretensions.     Mr.  Conway  says  : — 

"It  would  be  worth  while  for  a  student  of  psychology,  or  of  abnormal  religious 
excitements,  to  visit  India  just  now.  The  minister  of  the  Brahmos,  Keshub  Chunder 
Sen,  seems  to  have  had  his  head  somewhat  turned  by — or  at  any  rate  since — his  visit  to 
England,  and  the  marriage  of  his  daughter  to  a  prince.  He  has  built  a  splendid  house  in 
Calcutta,  and  atones  for  that  worldliness  by  ascetic  mortifications." 

"  He  has  announced  that  he  is  a  special  agent  of  Providence  ;  he  is  not  an  incarnation 
of  any  deity  ;  he  is  not  a  prophet ;  but  he  is  something  different  from  other  men.  His 
recent  course  and  preaching  have  been  fruitful  of  discord  and  agitations.  The  more 
educated  of  his  followers,  who  have  favoured  the  Brahmo  movement  as  at  once  a  protest 
against  idolatry  and  a  refined  theism,  have  become  disgusted  and  left  the  church.  A 
large  number  of  the  lower-class  converts  have  been  offended  by  the  marriage  of  his 
daughter  with  a  prince,  and  they  have  abandoned  him.  And  this  parting  with  the 
elements  of  rational  restraint  and  coolness  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  humility  on  the  other, 
appears  to  have  been  the  means  of  revolutionizing  a  movement  to  which  some  had  looked 
for  great  and  beneficial  changes  in  India." 

"  Keshub  Chunder  Sen  and  his  followers  seem  to  have  taken  hints  from  the  revivalists 
of  the  West,  and  formed  something  like  a  '  Salvation  Army.'  They  are  replacing  their 
lost  adherents  with  fanatics  gathered  in  the  highways  and  byways,  the  survivals  of  extinct 
excitement,  and  adopting  their  wild  manners  and  customs,  their  pilgrimages,  shrieks, 
dances,  and  superstitions,  they  are  calling  the  grand  totality  a  '  new  dispensation.'  But 
from  the  mass  of  evidence  before  me  I  should  say  their  star  of  Bethlehem  has  a  chance 
of  guiding  them  to  Bedlam,  or  the  places  in  India  corresponding  thereto.  Sen  himself 
has  got  so  far  in  that  direction  as  accepting  a  sort  of  worship  from  disciples  kneeling 
around  him  (on  the  ground  that  he  did  not  wish  to  stop  the  flow  of  bhatki — that  is, 
devotion  or  enthusiasm),  and  holding  personal  interviews  with  Jesus,  Paul,  and  John. 
One  consequence  of  this  outbreak  of  fanaticism  is  the  loss  of  many  of  the  educated  ;  but 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  317 

it  has  secured  the  results  which  manifest  to  Sen  a  '  new  dispensation.'  That  is,  he  has 
raised  public  curiosity  ;  thousands  go  to  hear  him,  and  by  using  Christian  phrases  in  his 
own  sense  he  has  roused  the  missionaries  and  made  a  sensation.  They  are  denouncing 
him  on  one  side,  while  the  educated  theists  denounce  him  on  the  other  ;  and  the  result 
is  that  on  a  recent  occasion  as  many  as  five  thousand  people  went  to  hear  him.  The 
discourses  he  now  delivers  are  quite  valueless  for  any  moral  or  religious  teaching  ;  they 
are  merely  frantic  ejaculations  about  God  and  the  prophets,  among  which  Jewish, 
Christian,  and  pagan  are  found  oddly  mixed." 

"  The  last  phase  upon  which  this  now  wild  movement  has  entered  appear  to  be  the 
dance  and  the  pilgrimage.  They  lately  organised  a  pilgrimage  to  '  Sinai.'  On  the  22nd 
of  February  they  all  bathed,  put  on  clean  clothes,  and  followed  the  minister  up  into  the 
•  sanctuary  ; '  here,  if  one  is  to  believe  reports,  they  passed  eight  days  and  nights,  and 
communed  with  Moses,  reading  over  the  Pentateuch  and  spiritualising  each  verse  :  so 
that  on  the  last  day  Moses  is  said  to  have  spoken  to  them  in  some  mysterious  way  ; 
whether  he  spoke  from  a  burning  bush,  or  whether  he  materialized  personally,  cannot  be 
gathered  from  the  mystical  narratives  of  the  pilgrims. 

"  The  revelation  made  by  Moses  included  a  transcription  of  the  Ten  Commandments, 
and  a  proclamation  to  the  modern  Israel,  in  which  he  stated  that  Jehovah's  voice  was 
his  only  guide,  his  only  book  of  wisdom,  the  only  Scripture  of  salvation  ;  and  promised 
that  '  the  Almighty  shall  lead  Bengal  out  of  the  bondage  of  superstition  and  idolatry 
into  a  city  overflowing  with  milk  and  honey  of  purity  and  joy.'  " 

Amongst  the  recent  literary  productions  which  bear  testimony  to  the 
spread  of  the  Spiritual  faith  in  India,  no  writings  are  more  highly  esteemed 
than  those  of  Peary  Chand  Mittra. 

Besides  a  number  of  excellent  magazine  articles  contributed  by  this 
gentleman  to  the  different  Spiritual  periodicals  of  England  and  America, 
Mr.  Mittra  has  written  an  interesting  brochure  entitled  "  Spiritual  Stray 
Leaves,"  and  a  still  more  profound  work  on  "  The  Soul ;  its  nature  and 
development."  In  the  appendix  to  this  publication,  there  is  an  announce- 
ment of  a  society  recently  formed  in  Calcutta  for  the  study  of  Spiritual 
subjects.  The  author  speaks  in  hopeful  terms  of  the  Spiritual  outlook 
in  that  city,  and  predicates  a  grand  harvest  for  "the  cause"  when  the 
chaotic  elements  that  beset  it  are  sifted  away,  and  Spiritualism  can  command 
true  Spiritualists  for  its  votaries. 

Another  talented  native  Spiritualist  is  Shibchunder  Deb,  a  gentleman 
who  has  contributed  to  the  stock  of  Spiritual  literature  an  excellent 
compilation  from  the  works  of  the  best  American  authors.  Amongst  other 
undertakings  of  this  character,  Shibchunder  Deb  has  translated  the  ten 
Spiritual  Commandments,  given  by  the  Spirits  through  the  Mediumship 
of  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  at  one  of  her  London  lectures,  into  the 
Bengalese  dialect.  These  commandments,  hung  up  in  hundreds  of  houses 
as  Spiritual  texts  in  England  and  America,  are  now  circulated  in  India  as 
a  valuable  missionary  tract. 

Besides  these  signs  of  growing  interest  in  the  unfoldment  of  Spiritual 
doctrines,  Mr.  Mittra,  in  a  letter  to  the  editor  of  the  London  Medium 
and  Daybreak  of  February,  1881,  gives  the  following  items,  concerning  the 
present  status  of  Spiritualism  in  Calcutta.     He  says  : — 

"  I  have  found  that  any  one  praying  and  sitting  quietly  with  slate  or  paper  and  pencil 
in  hand,  and  thinking  of  the  departed  friend,  is  gradually  developed  as  a  medium.  He 
must  not  will  to  move  his  hand,  but  it  will  be  moved  by  the  controlling  spirit.  At  first 
dots  and  strokes  will  be  formed  and  replies  to  questions  given.  Sometimes  instructions 
will  be  given.  In  my  family  there  are  several  writing  mediums.  After  prayer  we  have 
had  sometimes  writing  on  the  slate,  from  the  spirit  of  one  of  my  sons,  which  was  of  a 
very  soothing  nature,  and  the  instruction  of  my  son,  who  was  a  Brahmo,  was  to  dedicate 
ourselves  to  God,  as  there  was  no  other  means  to  elevate  ourselves  or  to  enjoy  true 
feUcity. 

"  The  rapid  sale  of  my  '  Spiritual  Stray  Leaves  '  is  a  convincing  proof  of  the  growing 
appreciation  of  Spiritualism  in  India.    Efl"orts  are  being  made  by  certain  friends  interested 

3i8  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

in  Spiritualism  to  get  a  practised  raediura  from  England,  which  -will  take  time.  An 
European  brother  Spiritualist  (who  will  be  happy  to  give 'further  particulars  of  other 
experiences  to  any  earnest  investigator),  sent  a  letter  to  the  under-mentioned  medium 
•under  seal  to  the  address  of  the  spirit  of  his  mother.  This  letter  was  not  opened.  It 
has  come  back  with  a  reply  to  every  question  from  the  spirit  of  the  lady  who  died  five  and 
thirty  years  ago,  and  the  reply  bears  internal  evidence  of  her  identity. 

"  Another  friend  has  sent  a  letter  to  Mr.  Mansfield  to  the  address  of  his  father's  spirit. 
We  are  waiting  for  the  reply.  The  European  brother  Spiritualist  above  referred  to  is 
Mr.  J.  Gr.  Meugens,  Member  of  Messrs.  W.  Moran  and  Co.,  of  this  city,  whose  letter 
published  since  in  the  Banner  of  Light  of  the  22nd  ultimo  is  reproduced  : — 

"  '  I  wish  to  bear  testimony  to  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  J.  V.  Mansfield,  of  New  York. 
Mr.  Mansfield  is  an  absolute  stranger  to  me,  and  all  I  know  of  him  was  from  what  I  had 
seen  reported  in  your  paper.  I  wrote  a  letter  to  my  mother,  who  has  been  in  spirit-life 
over  thirty  years,  asldng  her  a  number  of  questions  that  only  my  mother  could  answer  ; 
and  this  letter  I  put  in  a  thick  envelope,  which  I  carefully  gummed,  and  sealed,  and 
addressed  :  "  To  my  Mother."  I  enclosed  it  in  a  note  to  Mr.  Mansfield,  simply  asking 
him  to  let  me  have  a  reply  if  he  could  get  one.  Last  mail  brought  me  a  communication 
from  the  doctor,  returning  my  letter  addressed  to  my  mother,  with  the  seal  unbroken,  and 
in  precisely  the  same  condition  that  I  sent  it,  together  with  a  long  reply  purporting  to 
come  from  my  mother,  addressing  me  by  my  Christian  name,  which  Mr.  Mansfield  could 
have  no  means  of  knowing,  and  which  is  a  very  uncommon  one,  and  answering  every  one 
of  the  questions  put  to  her.  I  have  met  with  a  good  many  tests  during  my  investigations 
when  in  England,  but  I  do  not  know  of  any  more  convincing  than  this. 

'"I  wish  we  had  a  good  medium  of  Mr.  Mansfield's  stamp  out  here,  for  in  that  case 
possibly  we  might  manage  to  excite  a  little  intelligent  interest  in  this  grand  philosophy, 
for  it  is  lamentable  to  witness  the  utter  ignorance  and  apathy  displayed  towards  the 
subject  in  this  part  of  the  world. 

"  '  J.  H.   Meugens. 

"  '3,  Church  Lane,  Calcutta,  March  24th,  1880.' 

"  My  friend.  Baboo  Poorna  Chunder  Mokerjea,  Solicitor  of  the  High  Court,  has 
received  from  the  spirit  of  his  brother  a  reply  to  his  letter  sent  to  Mr.  Mansfield.  The 
letter  was  not  opened.  The  reply  is  satisfactory.  Other  friends  are  about  to  place  them- 
selves in  communication  with  Mr.  " " 

Mr.  Meugens  adds  a  list  of  Mediums  and  works  on  Spiritualism,  after 
which  he  thus  concludes  : — 

"  There  are  a  great  many  metaphysical,  theological  works,  and  works  on  Buddhism  and 
on  the  ancient  literature  of  India,  which  are  well  worth  reading.  They  are  to  be  found  in 
the  Calcutta  Public  Library." 

Now  and  then  a  new  sensation  such  as  a  public  debate,  and,  not  unfre- 
quently,  the  unjust  and  illiberal  action  of  some  interested  antagonist,  stirs 
the  sluggish  waters  of  mentality  when  they  are  disposed  to  settle  in  India, 
as  in  other  great  centres  of  modern  thought  and  civilization.  An  example 
of  this  kind  was  afforded  by  the  attack  of  the  notorious  Reverend  Joseph 
Cook,  of  Boston,  mentioned  in  an  earlier  chapter  of  this  work,  and  renowned 
for  his  furious  onslaught  upon  the  Spiritualists,  after  having  committed  him- 
self by  parading  forth  to  Boston  audiences,  the  inexplicable  marvels 
wrought  through  Slade's  and  Watkin's  mediumship. 

Mr.  Cook  has  followed  up  this  raid  on  every  possible  occasion,  deter- 
mining, as  he  himself  announced  in  the  attack  above  referred  to,  "  to  put 
himself  right  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism."  How  he  succeeded  in  this 
attempt  during  a  recent  visit  to  India,  where,  in  his  diatribes  against 
Spiritualism  he  took  pains  to  insult  some  of  the  most  respectable  and  influ- 
ential of  his  listeners,  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  letter,  published 
in  several  European  journals  : — 

"  Joseph  Cook  has  been  in  India.  There,  as  at  home,  he  created  considerable  commo- 
tion. He  seems  to  be  so  organized  that  whenever  he  presents  himself,  agitation  of 
thought  follows,  and  great  good  is  accomplished  thereby,  for  the  friction  caused,  exposes  the 

A    Hindoo    Fakir 

WORKING     MAGIC     SPELLS 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  319 

errors  of  the  reverend  gentleman,  and  aids  at  the  same  time  in  bringing  to  the  front 
liberal  thoughts,  which  otherwise  might  have  remained  obscured.  The  following  letter 
alludes  to  some  of  his  doings  in  India  : — 

"  '  To  the  Editor  of  the  Eeligio-Philosophical  Journal. 

" '  If  you  will  kindly  refer  to  the  supplement  to  the  current  month's  number  of  the  Theo- 
sophist,  you  will  find  therein  some  account  of  Mr.  Cook's  visit  to  Bombay.  You  will  also  learn 
how  he  ran  down  our  society  and  the  founders,  and  how  he  denounced  Spiritualism.  There 
will  also  be  found  the  challenge  issued  by  us  to  him,  and  an  account  of  his  backing  out.  The 
meeting  referred  to  in  the  challenge,  was  held  here  on  the  20th  ultimo.  After  addressing 
the  meeting  and  convincing  the  audience  about  our  society  and  ourselves,  Col.  Olcott 
defended  Spiritualism.  A  pamphlet  containing  a  report  of  the  meeting  is  being  printed. 
As  soon  as  it  is  published,  it  will  be  sent  you.  In  the  meantime,  Col.  Olcott  found  in 
the  '  Scientific  Basis  of  SpirituaUsm,'  a  published  testimony  signed,  amongst  others,  by 
Mr.  Joseph  Cook,  vouching  for  cei'tain  phenomena  '  not  explicable  by  any  theory  of 
fraud.'  It  was  arranged  to  have  it  sent  immediately  to  the  Bombay  Gazette,  an  influential 
daily  Anglo-Indian  journal  here.  z^-- 

"' Bombay,  India.  Damodar  K.  Mavalankar.  " 

The  editor  of  Izghf  introduces  a  notice  of  Colonel  Olcott's  pamphlets 
with  the  following  remarks : — 

"  Colonel  Olcott  sends  two  pamphlets  from  Bombay.  One  gives  '  The  whole  truth 
about  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  its  Founders.'  It  is  the  outcome  of  some  slanders 
put  about  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  Cook,  of  Boston.  A  specimen  of  these  is  the  statement 
that  Colonel  Olcott  and  Madam  Blavatsky  had  '  come  to  India  to  study  the  ancient 
system  of  magic  and  sorcery  to  return  to  the  United  States  to  teach  tricks  to  mediums 
already  exposed  !  '  Mr.  Cook  is  one  of  the  worst  products  of  that  offensive  alliance 
between  sensationalism  and  a  pseudo-scientific  theology  which  a  craving  for  novelty  on 
the  part  of  audiences  and  for  notoriety  at  any  price  on  the  part  of  a  few  professors  of  the 
flatulent  style  of  oratory  has  produced.  He  seems,  however,  to  have  been  thoroughly 
driven  out  of  the  field,  smitten  hip  and  thigh  from  Dan  even  iinto  Beersheba — from 
Bombay  to  Poena.  Poor  man  !  he  gave  the  Society  the  largest  gratuitous  advertisement 
in  his  power  ;  and  it  is  open  to  a  casuist  to  contend  that  he  ought  to  have  had  a  vote  of 
thanks,  instead  of  being  'posted  as  a  coward  and  a  slanderer.' " 

Regretting  that  so  much  space  has  been  necessarily  devoted  to  so  un- 
worthy a  subject  as  Mr.  Joseph  Cook's  doings,  we  are  happy  in  bidding 
him  farewell,  and  now  close  our  summary  of  the  present  status  of 
Spiritualism  in  India  with  the  following  expressive  lines  from  "Art 
Magic : "  — 

"  Spiritism  ever  has,  and  ever  will  find  its  most  fertile  soil  in  the  magical  East ;  that 
land  of  Prophets,  Saviours,  Avatars,  and  Oriental  Mystics  !  That  land  where  matter 
bends  and  sways  in  the  grasp  of  mind  as  a  pigmy  writhes  in  the  clutch  of  a  giant ;  a  land 
where  magic  shoots  up  in  every  plant ;  gleams  forth  in  many  coloured  fires  from  lustrous 
gems  and  glittering  minerals  ;  where  the  stars  tell  their  tale  of  eternity  undimmed  by  the 
thick  vaporous  airs  of  equatorial  skies,  and  the  sun  and  moon  imprint  their  magical 
meanings  and  solemn  glories  in  beams,  the  radiance  of  which  goes  direct  to  the  inner 
consciousness  of  awe  struck  worshippers. 

'•  Let  the  magic  of  the  Orient  combine  with  the  magnetic  spontaniety  of  Western 
Spiritism,  and  we  may  have  a  religion  whose  foundations  laid  in  science,  and  stretching 
away  to  tlae  heavens  in  inspiration,  will  revolutionize  the  opinions  of  ages,  and  establish  on 
earth  the  reign  of  the  true  Spiritual  kingdom." 

NINETEENTH    CENTURA    MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER   XXXVIII. 

R]&SUM]E    OV   SPIRITUALISM    IN    THE   EAST. 

Although  the  modern  works  which  contain  descriptions  of  Oriental  magic 
are  too  numerous  to  catalogue,  it  is  still  essential  to  the  completion  of  this 
compendium  to  give  a  brief  resume  of  the  magical  (i.e.,  the  Spiritual) 
practices  now  prevailing  throughout  some  of  the  most  generally  known 
districts  of  the  Orient. 

The  methods  of  inducing  the  state  in  which  feats  of  super-mundane 
power  can  be  accomplished,  have  already  been  shown  to  be  dependent  in 
part  upon  processes  of  culture  which  the  subject  himself  can  put  in  practice. 
The  results  thus  achieved  might  with  propriety  be  termed  "  magic,"  and  it 
is  questionable  whether  the  entire  of  the  marvels  exhibited  in  ancient 
times  under  this  formidable  name,  might  not  be  resolved  into  arts  in  which 
psychology  and  magnetism  were  the  principal  factors. 

The  antithesis  to  the  condition  attained  by  the  Eastern  yogi,  or  ecstatic, 
through  processes  of  self-culture,  is  that  of  the  modern  Spirit  Medium, 
whose  powers  are  alleged  to  require  no  culture,  no  self-induced  states 
of  preparation,  nothing  in  short  but  utter  passivity,  and  dependence 
upon  a  Spiritual  controlling  influence.  Whether — as  suggested  in  the  last 
chapter — the  clue  to  a  true  Spiritual  science  may  not  yet  be  found  in  a 
judicious  combination  of  both  methods,  will  soon  be  the  question  of  the 
age,  and  on  the  answer  it  receives  from  capable  psychologists,  will  the 
future  status  of  SpirituaUsm  depend. 

Amidst  the  vague  and  unproved  theories  of  the  day,  it  is  often  alleged 
that  the  passive  •'  Medium"  holds  himself  in  subjection  only  to  beings,  who 
in  reaUty  have  no  being;  "shells,"  '■'■  reliqiiice  of  the  dead,"  the  cast-off 
garment  composed  of  some  imponderable  element  the  Spirit  has  worn,  but 
which  is  now  represented  as  being  a  mere  "ghoul;"  at  once  intelligent 
and  powerful  enough  to  deceive  and  work  all  sorts  of  evil,  but  yet  having 
no  distinct  intelligence  for  anything  good;  a  something  and  a  nothing, 
which  will  presently  fade  out  and  become  extinct.  In  connection  with  a 
theory  so  astonishing  to  the  millions  of  Spiritualists  who  have  fondly  beheved 
they  were  holding  communion  with  precisely  the  same  individualized  men 
and  women  they  had  known  on  earth,  and  from  whom  moreover  they 
persist  in  affirming  they  have  received  untold  good,  and  very  little  evil, 
comes  another  theory,  to  the  effect,  that  all  that  the  Spirituahsts  attribute 
to  the  agency  of  their  "  Spirit  friends,"  together  with  feats  of  a  still  more 
marvellous  character,  can  be  produced  by  the  direct  action  of  the  spirit 
within  man,  that  is,  provided  that  Spirit  be  still  embodied,  its  disembodied 
state  being  subject  to  a  series  of  mysterious  subdivisions,  the  only  portion 
which  can  be  known  to  man,  being  the  malicious,  evil  disposed,  and 
evanescent  "  reliquicB,"  aforesaid.  Of  course  it  will  be  understood  that 
assertions  of  so  extraordinary  a  character  as  these,  cannot  be  accepted  upon 
assertion  only,  and  as  the  proof  of  their  truth  or  falsity  has  yet  to  be  shown, 
the   experienced  Spiritualists'  faith  in  the  human    attributes  of  his  Spirit 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY    MIRACLES.  321 

communicants,  remains  unshaken.  Meantime,  and  pending  the  produc- 
tion oi  proof,  of  more  weight  and  worth  than  individual  assertion,  it  is 
necessary  to  remind  the  reader,  that  up  to  this  point,  even  the  mere 
compendium  of  the  world's  latest  Spiritual  experiences  which  we  have  been 
able  to  offer  in  this  volume,  bears  witness  to  the  universal  belief  of  mankind 
in  the  strict  humanity  of  the  Spirits  that  communicate  with  earth,  and  their 
agency  for  great  good,  as  well  as  for  great  evil.  Of  course  it  must  be 
apparent  that  there  is  a  wide  line  of  demarcation  between  the  simply 
passive  Medium  who  makes  no  effort  to  cultivate  the  powers  of  his  own 
spirit,  and  the  ecstatic  who  devotes  his  life  to  that  culture.  The  former 
may  be  termed  a  "  SpirituaHst,"  the  other  an  "  Occultist,"  and  both  terms 
may  be  used  in  derision  or  reproach  by  opposing  theorists ;  but,  if  instead 
of  laying  down  theories,  and  then  distorting  the  obvious  nature  of  facts  to 
suit  them,  we  were  first  carefully  to  formulate  our  facts,  and  then  deduce 
logical  theories  from  thence,  might  we  not  find  Spiritualism  and  Occultism 
to  be  convertible  terms,  and  the  accomplished  Yogi  to  be  only  a  highly 
endowed  Medium,  whose  gifts  had  been  exalted  by  processes  of  mental 
and  physical  training  ? 

As  it  is,  vague  theories  are  becoming  more  and  more  divergent  from 
proven  facts,  and  in  the  attempt  to  make  them  cohere,  such  wild  and 
incoherent  views  of  Spiritual  existence  are  being  promulgated,  that  the 
world  is  sinking  into  grosser  darkness  and  confusion  from  the  perversion 
of  Spiritual  facts,  than  ever  prevailed  before  those  facts  were  demonstrated. 

Advising  our  readers  to  recall  the  accounts  of  phenomena  produced  in 
the  East,  as  given  by  Le  Hue,  McGowan,  Nevius,  Sir  J.  Barrows,  Lane, 
Salt,  Jacolliot,  and  other  writers,  we  proceed  to  gather  up  a  few  more 
crumbs  of  Spiritual  evidence,  from  the  well-spread  board  which  Oriental 
history  furnishes  forth. 

On  one  occasion  when  the  author  was  invited  to  attend  a  Chinese  funeral, 
it  was  a  remarkable  sight  to  observe  the  total  apathy  on  the  subject  of  death, 
displayed  by  those  who  were  known  to  be  loving  and  affectionate  relatives 
of  the  deceased. 

An  intelligent  Chinese  merchant  present,  pointed  to  the  number  of  gar- 
ments in  which  the  deceased  was  arrayed,  in  evidence  that  the  Spirit  was 
supposed  to  derive  assistance  from  them  in  the  new  country  to  which  he 
had  passed. 

Like  the  rice,  and  other  edibles  which  the  Chinese  place  on  the  tombs 
of  their  friends,  these  garments  are  not  assumed  to  be  appropriated 
materially.  It  is  believed  that  the  spiritual  part  of  all  earthly  substances 
is  of  service  to  departed  ancestors,  and  by  them  assimilated  in  their  new 
state  of  being,  as  a  welcome  tribute  of  earthly  remembrance. 

It  is  proper  here  to  mention,  that  the  MongoHans  believe  in  various 
spheres  of  Spiritual  existence  after  death. 

A  very  intelligent  Japanese  gentleman,  a  priest,  and  writer  of  school  books, 
informed  the  author,  that  the  general  opinion  amongst  Mongohans  was, 
that  the  Spirits  who  throw  stones,  knock,  disturb  houses,  and  haunt  trees 
and  woods,  are  evil  minded  earth  bound  souls,  who  did  mischief  on  earth, 
and  still  continue  to  practice  it.  Those  who  play  on  instruments,  write 
in  sand,  appear  as  apparitions,  and  give  good  counsel,  are  Spirits  whose 
affections  and  interests  still  draw  them  to  the  earth.  The  very  high  Spirits, 
such  as  Fo,  or  Joss,  Buddha,  Lao-Tze,  &c.  are  souls  of  men  who  have  risen 
by  virtue  and  purification  on  earth,  to  become  saints  and  gods.  In  that 
phase  of  doctrine  termed  "  Lamaism,"  it  is  firmly  believed  that  the  Grand 

322  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Lama  is  an  incarnation  of  Buddha  himself;  thus  with  the  exception  of 
"  the  great  celestial  Emperor  of  Heaven,"  the  unknown  and  unknowable  of 
all  religions,  the  Mongolians  generally  believe  that  the  souls  of  men  consti- 
tute an  essential  part  of  the  Hierarchy  of  Spiritual  existence  by  which  the 
government  of  the  universe  is  conducted.  They  do  not  teach  that  the 
higher  intelligences  can  communicate,  except  through  inspiration,  and  the 
agency  of  lower  Spirits,  although  they  do  sometimes  say  they  see  the  gods 
in  the  form  of  brilliant  lights,  or  divine  apparitions  too  glorious  for  mere 
mortals  to  gaze  upon.  Messrs.  Nevius,  Doolittle,  and  other  authoritative 
writers,  concur  in  affirming  that  the  Chinese  believe  all  their  gods,  except 
"the  Supreme  Emperor"  were  once  men,  from  the  idle  "kitchen  gods," 
who  delight  in  fun  and  mischief,  to  the  inspiring  deities  who  rule  our 
mundane  sphere. 

This  deeply  rooted  faith  in  human  Spiritual  agency,  is  actually  assigned 
as  one  reason  why  polygamy  has  been  practised  in  Mongolian  lands.  Dr. 
Eitel,  a  well-known  Christian  missionary  of  Hong  Kong,  declares,  that 
when  he  remonstrated  with  his  converts  against  this  custom,  they  pleaded 
for  its  continuance  on  the  ground,  that  it  was  necessary  to  provide  an  ample 
posterity  to  do  them  honour,  and  worship  them,  when  they  themselves 
should  be  Spirits.  The  same  plea  was  alleged  by  a  man  in  the  service  of 
Captain  Thomas  Hunt  of  Salem,  Massachusetts.  He  had  taken  a  second 
wife  whilst  his  first  was  yet  living,  and  when  Captain  Hunt  reproved  him, 
he  alleged  that  as  his  first  wife  had  borne  no  offspring,  he  must  take  a 
second,  or  if  necessary  a  third  or  fourth,  otherwise  he  should  leave  no  one 
on  earth  to  offer  him  fruits  and  flowers,  or  welcome  him  back  when  he 
wished  to  revisit  the  earth  as  a  spirit. 

THE   KARENS. 

Amongst 'the  once  unknown  people  of  the  far  East,  with  whom  the 
facilities  of  modern  travel  have  made  the  Western  nations  acquainted,  is  a 
quiet  peaceful  tribe  of  Burmese,  called  "  Karens." 

The  author  of  "  Art  Magic,"  who  spent  some  time  in  their  villages,  gives 
accounts  of  their  Spiritual  belief,  from  which  we  make  the  following 
extract : — 

"  In  the  mountain  regions  of  Burmah  reside  a  people  called  *  Karens,'  who  dwell  in 
small  settlements  or  villages,  and  pass  lives  of  singular  purity,  temperance,  and  honesty. 
Their  religious  teachers  are  called  Bokoors,  and  their  office  is  to  inculcate  moral  principles, 
predict  the  future,  and  interpret  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being  to  man. 

"  Besides  these,  there  is  an  inferior  class  of  prophets,  called  Wees,  or  wizards,  who  cure 
the  sick  by  spells  and  charms,  fly  through  the  air,  bewitch  cattle,  exorcise  the  evil  spirit 
out  of  them,  and  perform  many  other  wonderful  things.  .  .  .  Their  faith  in  the 
presence  and  ministry  of  the  spirits  of  their  ancestors  is  immovable.  They  declare  they 
often  see  them  by  night  as  well  as  by  day  ;  they  converse  freely  with  them  by  signal  knock- 
ings,  voices,  the  ringing  of  bells,  and  sweet  singing.  They  perform  good  of&ces,  and  warn 
their  friends  of  danger,  sickness,  and  death.  .  .  .  The  Karens  believe  that  the  spirits 
of  the  dead  are  ever  abroad  on  the  earth  !  '  Children  and  grandchildren,'  say  the  elders, 
'  the  dead  are  among  us  !  Nothing  separates  them  from  us  but  a  white  veil.  They  are 
here,  but  we  see  them  not ;  only  a  few  gifted  ones  have  eyes  to  see  into  the  spiritual 
world,  and  power  to  hold  converse  with  particular  spirits.     .     .     .  '  " 

Many  writers  of  eminence  have  given  accounts  of  ancient  magic  in  Egypt, 
though  but  few  have  written  on  its  present  status.  In  Mr.  Peebles'  inte- 
resting sketchy  work  "  Around  the  World,"  we  have  the  following  items 
concerning  this  subject : — 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  323 

"The  gods,  the  guardian  angels  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  were  once  mortal  men. 
Sanchoniathon,  whom  accredited  historians  place  before  the  time  of  Moses,  wrote  in  the 
Phoenician.  Philo  of  Byblus  translated  a  portion  of  his  works  into  Greek.  [Here  follow 
a  few  Hnes.]  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians  accounted  those  the  greatest  gods  who  had 
found  out  things  most  necessary  and  useful  in  life,  and  who  had  been  benefactors  of 
mankind !  Hermes  Trismegistus  acknowledged  that  the  gods  of  Egypt  were  the 
souls  of  dead  men  ;  and  Plutarch  informs  us  that  the  Egyptian  priests  pointed  out  where 
the  bodies  of  their  gods  lay  buried.  Cicero  wrote  :  '  The  whole  heaven  is  almost  entirely 
filled  with  the  human  race  ;  even  the  superior  order  of  gods  were  originally  natives  of 
this  world  !  ' 

"  And  with  these  gods,  angels,  and  spirits,  the  Egyptians  of  remotest  antiquity  held 
constant  converse.  .  .  .  On  their  tombs,  towers,  and  obelisks,  are  pictured  mes- 
merists in  the  act  of  pathetising  subjects,  .  .  .  The  angel  of  Spirituahsm  has  sounded 
the  resurrection  trumpet  of  a  future  existence  in  every  land  under  heaven.  Madame 
Blavatsky,  assisted  by  other  brave  souls,  formed  a  society  of  Spiritualists  in  Cairo  about 
three  years  since.     They  have  fine  writing  mediums  and  other  forms  of  manifestation," 

From  the  once  beautiful  city  of  Alexandria,  so  recently  reduced  to 
ruins  by  the  barbarisms  of  war,  the  author  has  received  a  number  of 
interesting  communications  from  the  family  of  Mr.  Marcus  Temple,  a 
European  SpirituaUst,  several  of  whose  children  became  Mediums  for 
different  phases  of  Spirit  power.  This  gentleman  represented  the 
Medium  power  manifested  in  various  families  of  his  acquaintance  as 
quite  remarkable,  but  added,  that  public  opinion  was  against  them,  most 
of  the  Europeans  residing  in  Alexandria  being  accustomed  to  associate  all 
subjects  of  a  super-mundane  character,  with  the  orgies  of  howHng  Dervishes, 
snake  charmers,  and  the  practices  of  religious  mendicants.  He  fully  con- 
firms the  descriptions  of  native  Spiritualism  as  given  in  "  Art  Magic,"  and 
the  sketches  of  Messrs.  Salt,  Lane,  Mrs.  Poole,  Miss  Martineau,  and  other 
writers  on  Eastern  customs. 

The  tribes  of  Dervishes  in  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Arabia,  are  generally  divided 
into  twelve  grades,  all  of  whom  are  more  or  less  trained  systematically, 
and  all  of  whom  profess  to  practise  magical  arts  in  connection  with  super- 
mundane or  Spiritual  powers.  Their  modes  of  culture  include  the  methods 
already  described,  such  as  silent  contemplation,  fasting,  ablutions,  asceticism, 
chastity,  whirling,  spinning,  violent  motions,  the  use  of  noise,  music,  and 
narcotics.  The  Dervishes,  besides  these  well-known  modes  of  inducing 
ecstacy,  have  many  traditionary  customs  of  extreme  antiquity,  the  modus 
operandi  of  which  is  known  and  handed  down  orally  from  generation  to 
generation,  but  never  committed  to  writing  or  inscription.  Sometimes  those 
destined  for  this  strange  Ufe  pass  their  initiatory  processes  in  companies  ruled 
over  by  one  highly  experienced  teacher  j  sometimes  they  become  solitary 
Santons,  and  frequent  deserts,  mountain  passes,  savage  wilds,  or  lonely 
hermitages,  from  which  they  only  emerge  on  self-imposed  missions,  or  for 
special  purposes.  Many  of  these  solitary  Santons  as  well  as  individuals 
amongst  the  associated  companies,  are  evidently  natural  Mediums,  seers, 
prophets,  and  clairvoyants,  and  these  always  become  the  best  wonder- 
workers. They  live  on  the  simplest  fruits,  roots,  and  herbs,  and  except  for 
the  purposes  of  stimulating  themselves  to  mantic  frenzy,  use  tio  intoxicating 
drinks,  or  "pleasant  food."  The  five  principal  classes  into  which  the 
Dervishes  are  resolved,  out  of  the  twelve  grades  which  are  their  religious 
subdivisions,  are  as  follows  : — The  dancing,  whirling,  or  spinning  Dervishes. 
The  howlers,  shouters,  singers,  or  criers.  The  fire  eaters ;  the  snake 
charmers,  and  the  illusionists.  All  these  performers  save  the  two  last 
named,  work  themselves  up  to  frenzy  by  their  peculiar  modes,  in  which 
condition  they  prophesy,  see  visions,  predict  the  future,  find  lost  or  hidden 

324  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

things,  and  work  marvellous  feats.  The  snake  charmers  and  illusionists 
are  unmistakable  magnetizers,  and  exert  their  powers  over  the  lower 
animals  or  man  himself,  on  the  principle  of  electro-biology.  Their  powers 
oi  fascination,  are  simply  marvellous,  and  it  is  by  these  that  many  seemingly 
impossible  feats  of  wonder  are  apparetitly  effected,  before  multitudes  of 
people.  There  are  some  good  healers  amongst  them,  and  some,  who  like 
the  Tartar  Lamas,  can  mutilate  their  bodies,  and  restore  them  instantly. 

There  are  story  tellers — or  improvisatores — also  in  their  ranks,  poets,  and 
visionists.  They  are  skilful  in  discovering  lost  property,  and  very  often 
good  diviners.  Their  prayers,  cries,  motions,  music,  and  mentrams  are  but 
means  of  inducing  the  psychic  state ;  but  question  them,  and  they  will  one 
and  all  declare  they  are  assisted  by  the  gods,  and  Spirits  of  ancestors. 

Ennemoser  in  his  "  History  of  Magic,"  gives  graphic  descriptions  of  how 
the  Lapps  and  Siberian  Schamanns  stimulate  themselves  to  the  mantic 
frenzy,  by  noise,  the  beating  of  drums,  cries,  leaping,  dancing,  spinning, 
&c.,  &c.  Precisely  similar  rites  are  attributed  by  Godwyn  to  the  ancient 
Hebrews,  in  their  various  methods  of  enquiring  of  the  Lord. 

The  glamour  of  sectarian  superstition,  entirely  obscures  the  reason  of 
devout  Christians,  when  the  rites  of  the  Hebrews  are  brought  into  question, 
otherwise,  they  would  long  since  have  seen  the  parity  of  these  Arabian 
magical  practices,  with  David's  "leaping  and  dancing  before  the  Ark;" 
Saul  catching  the  contagion  of  prophecy  when  he  met  a  company  of 
prophets  coming  down  with  tabret  and  harp,  &c. ;  David  expeUing  the 
spirit  of  evil  from  Saul  by  playing  on  the  harp  ;  Elisha  calling  for  a 
minstrel,  when  he  wished  to  prophesy,  and  hundreds  of  other  obscure 
customs,  and  rites  alluded  to  in  the  Bible,  which  have  been  piously  left 
untouched,  and  unspeculated  upon,  but  which,  in  the  light  of  modern 
travel  and  observation  become  too  intimately  associated  with  other  magical 
customs  of  Oriental  ecstatics,  to  be  longer  misunderstood. 

In  the  modern  matter  of  fact,  and  very  often  coldly-material  Spirit  circle, 
the  use  of  music  as  a  means  of  promoting  power,  has  become  too  famihar 
to  need  remark.  No  philosophical  attempt  is  ever  made  to  explain  the 
connection  of  music  with  the  production  of  phenomena,  although  elaborate 
treatises  are  written  upon  the  nature  of  "  Akasa,"  or  the  wonder-working 
life  principle  which  the  Eastern  ecstatic  claims  to  accumulate,  dispense,  and 
manipulate  with  as  much  certainty  as  the  electrician  can  evolve  force,  by 
setting  his  battery  in  action. 

It  is  well  known  by  the  friends  of  the  Davenport  Brothers  that  their 
controlling  Spirit  "  Morgan,"  used  frequently  to  beat  them,  and  compel 
them  to  wrestle  and  struggle  with  him,  when  he  wanted  to  exhibit  power 
through  them  of  an  unusual  character.  In  Mrs.  Hardinge's  "  Modern 
American  Spiritualism,"  a  weird  character  is  described  in  the  section  on 
Spiritualism  at  St.  Louis  as  "  The  Color  Doctor."  This  personage,  who  is 
known  to  have  effected  the  most  incredible  cures  simply  by  will,  the  effect 
of  his  presence,  or  the  laying  on  of  hands,  was  always  accustomed  to 
dance  and  spin  round,  and  perform  extraordinary  gyrations,  before  pro- 
ceeding to  operate  on  his  patients.  Sometimes  he  threw  himself  on  the 
ground  and  called  upon  those  he  intended  to  heal  to  jump  upon  him, 
stamp  on  his  ribs,  with  all  the  weight  of  powerful  men,  and  these  tremen- 
dous feats — often  performed  in  the  author's  presence — never  seemed  to  pro- 
duce any  other  than  beneficial  effects  on  both  patient  and  operator.  The 
incredulous  reader  will  remember  similar  performances  recorded  by  the  most 
trustworthy  narrators,  as  occurring  in  the  cures  effected  at  the  tomb  of  the 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  325 

Abb6  Paris,  amongst  the  convulsionnaires  of  St.  Medard.  Frail  women  would 
implore  stout  armed  men  to  beat  them  with  heavy  mallets,  or  huge  blocks  of 
wood,  often  screaming  out,  "  Heavier  still,  good  brother ;  heavier  still,  for 
tJie  love  of  God,"  All  these  items  of  occult  power  and  possibility  have  yet 
to  be  studied,  systematized,  and  their  true  philosophy  discovered,  before 
the  first  clue  is  obtained  to  a  true  Spiritual  science. 

When  those  who  claim  to  be  the  depositories  of  all  wisdom,  and  able  to 
enlighten  mankind  on  all  mysteries,  refuse  to  do  so,  because  their  know- 
ledge is  too  sacred  to  be  entrusted  to  any  but  the  initiated,  humanity  is  provi- 
dentially perhaps  thrown  upon  its  own  resources,  instructed  in  the  worth- 
less egotism  of  assertion  without  proof,  and  taught  to  analyze  facts,  before 
venturing  to  hypothecate  theories. 

It  seems  clear  then  from  the  well-proven  and  world-wide  facts  of  modern 
Spirit  communion  that  the  occult  power  by  which  unseen  beings  can  mani- 
fest force,  intelligence,  and  all  that  constitutes  humanity,  through  a  passive 
and  automatic  Medium,  is  just  as  wonderful  as  that  which  enables  the 
Fakir  to  make  sticks  and  stones  come  and  go  at  his  bidding.  The  power 
which  floated  Mr.  Home  out  of  one  window,  and  in  at  another,  in  the 
presence  of  half-a-dozen  unimpeachable  witnesses,  is  no  more  to  be 
despised  or  derided,  as  the  work  of  "  shells,"  or  the  "  cast-off  garments  of 
the  dead,"  than  the  power  that  enabled  Covindasamy  to  raise  himself  in 
the  air,  before  the  eyes  of  M.  Jacolliot. 

No  theorists  can  explain  away  such  phenomena  without  discrediting  all 
the  rules  upon  which  human  testimony  is  received,  neither  can  they  pretend 
to  attribute  different  causes  to  similar  results,  until  they  are  prepared  to 
show  cause  for  their  allegations  and  prove  their  statements  by  their  facts. 

Whatever  is  possible  to  one  human  being  through  laws  and  forces 
inherent  in  nature  is  possible  to  all  through  the  operation  of  similar  laws. 
But,  when  humanity  is  transcended  and  a  super-human  world  of  existence 
enters  upon  the  scene,  human  laws  are  of  little  or  no  avail,  either  to  prevent, 
produce,  or  account  for  what  is  effected.  And  this  is  precisely  the  position 
in  which  the  thoughtful  SpirituaUst  is  now  placed. 

He  sees  the  Medium  wholly  passive  and  inoperative,  and  yet  all  the 
phenomena  which  demonstrate  human  intelligence,  although  invisible,  are 
moving,  acting,  and  manifesting  around  him.  He  sees  the  Fakir  enacting 
even  greater  marvels,  and  claiming  to  do  part  by  his  own  power,  and  part 
by  the  same  Spiritual  aid  which  operates  through  the  Medium.  He  hears 
the  blatant  assertion  of  the  theorist  that  he  knows  all  about  it;  "that  the 
Medium  is  only  operated  upon  by  dead  nieji^s  emanations ;  a  something 
which  is  nothing ;  whilst  the  Fakir  effects  all  his  marvels  through  his  own 
Spirit.  If  the  SpirituaUst  asks  for  proof  of  these  assertions,  the  theorist 
closes  down  upon  him  with  the  contemptuous  assurance  that  these 
mysteries  are  only  for  "  the  initiated,"  and  unless  he  were  "  an  adept,"  he 
must  be  content  to  swallow  whatever  "adepts"  choose  to  affirm,  with 
unquestioning  reverence. 

It  would  be  an  insult  to  common  sense  to  offer  any  commentary  on  such 
a  position,  although  many  a  really  intelligent  seeker  for  Spiritual  truth,  is 
obliged  to  stand  in  this  category,  and  be  derided  as  "  only  a  Spiritualist," 
by  the  advanced  minds  who  were  once  in  the  ranks  with  him.  To  such  we 
would  say,  take  heart !  The  world  en  7nasse,  no  less  than  the  "  advanced 
ones  "  in  their  own  esteem,  are  but  as  yet  standing  in  the  dawning  light  of 
the  great  day  when  Spiritual  science  is  beginning  to  illuminate  the  earth. 
Continue  to  seek  for  your  facts,  before  you  attempt  to  found  systems,  or 

326  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

build  up  theories.  Somewhere  the  point  of  contact  will  be  found  between 
the  apparently  unrelated  extremes  of  the  passive  Medium,  and  the  whirling 
ecstatic.  "  Spiritualism  and  Occultism  "  may  yet  prove  to  be  one,  and  the 
Spirit  embodied  and  disembodied,  may  but  represent  different  degrees  of 
power  common  to  both  states,  when  speculation  gives  place  to  knowledge, 
and  assertion  to  proof. 

CHAPTER    XXXIX. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   HOLLAND. 

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  desire  to  study  the  literature  of  Spiritualism 
under  all  aspects  of  national  variety,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  a  knowledge 
of  the  Dutch  language  is  so  limited. 

Besides  the  record  of  numerous  Spirit  circles  extending  over  a  period  of 
many  years,  there  have  been  works  of  rare  interest  on  this  subject,  published 
in  the  Dutch  language,  which  are  unattainable  to  readers  not  familiar  with 
that  tongue. 

It  may  seem  surprising  to  those  who  are  accustomed  only  to  regard  the 
unimpassioned,  even  phlegmatic  element  in  the  Dutch  character,  to  learn 
that  Spiritualism  has  made  a  deep  mark  upon  the  people,  both  in  Holland 
and  its  colonies.  Such  is  the  fact  however,  whether  the  cause  is  to  be 
found  in  some  peculiarity  of  physique,  or  climatic  influence,  favourable  to 
the  production  of  psychic  phenomena. 

For  the  records  which  follow,  concerning  Spiritualism  in  Holland,  the 
author  is  chiefly  indebted  to  four  good  friends  whose  unsupported  state- 
ments alone  would  be  sufficient  to  satisfy  any  enquirer  who  had  the  privilege 
of  their  acquaintance  \  besides  which,  the  author  has  spared  no  pains  to 
authenticate  every  narrative,  both  from  public  and  private  sources,  of  the 
most  veracious  character. 

It  only  remains  to  add,  that  three  contributors  to  the  following  pages, 
for  personal  reasons,  have  deemed  it  necessary  to  withhold  their  names ; 
the  fourth,  M.  A.  J.  Riko,  has  generously  placed  his  name  and  a  mass 
of  valuable  information  at  the  author's  disposal  for  public  use,  a  favour 
which  both  compiler  and  reader  cannot  too  gratefully  acknowledge. 

As  M.  Riko's  contributions  are  rendered  into  very  readable  EngHsh 
phraseology  we  shall  commence  our  present  section  by  giving  the  opening 
sketch  as  nearly  as  possible  in  his  own  words. 

SPIRITUALISM   IN   HOLLAND. 

"  The  introduction  of  SpirituaUsm  in  Holland  is  due  to  that  well-known 
supporter  of  the  cause  both  in  England  and  on  the  Continent,  Mr.  J.  N. 
T.  Marthese.  This  gentleman  being  by  birth  a  Dutchman,  naturally 
desired  to  aid  his  countrymen  in  studying  the  interesting  facts  of  Spirit- 
ualism. 

"  For  this  purpose  he  revisited  his  native  country  in  1857-8,  bringing  with 
him  the  young  American  Medium,  Mr.  Daniel  D.  Home.  Besides  giving 
several  private  seances  at  the  Hague,  Mr.  Home  was  introduced  at  court, 
and  gave  seances  to  the  late  lamented   Queen  Sophia,  for  which  he  was 

^K^fe^?t*V     1^%^ 

W.J.  COLYILLE 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  327 

presented  with  a  splendid  ring.  Mr.  Home  also  gave  a  semice  to  a  society 
of  Free-thinkers,  the  publishers  of  the  Dageraad,  a  journal  devoted  to  free- 
thought  subjects.  This,  and  many  other  seances  given  to  distinguished 
persons  at  the  Hague,  created  a  wide-spread  public  interest." 

Before  proceeding  further  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  give  Mr.  Home's 
account  of  his  seance  with  the  amiable  royal  lady  above  named,  especially 
as  the  communication  sent  to  the  London  Spiritual  Magazi?ie  is  written 
in  the  modest  and  unassuming  tone  which  generally  pervades  Mr.  Home's 
statements  of  personal  experiences.     He  says  : — 

"  In  the  month  of  January,  1858,  Mr.  Tiedman  Marthese,  whose  name  is  so  well 
known  in  connection  with  Spiritualism,  invited  me  to  accompany  him  to  Holland.  He 
hoped  to  arouse  the  attention  of  his  countrymen,  and  lead  them  to  investigate  the 
important  truths  which  he  had,  after  careful  scrutiny,  proven  to  be  realities.  It  is  to  him 
that  the  advent  of  Spiritualism  in  Holland  is  due. 

"  The  day  following  our  arrival  at  the  Hague,  a  message  was  sent  from  the  Queen 
requesting  my  presence  the  same  evening  at  the  palace.  I  went  as  desired  at  eight  o'clock, 
and  as  I  write  to-day  the  memory  of  that  chill,  dreary  palace  stands  before  me  like  some 
weird  dream.  I  was  shown  into  a  drawing-room.  On  entering,  a  lady  met  me,  and  in 
the  purest  of  English  accents,  bade  me  welcome.  Supposing  this  to  be  a  lady-in-waiting, 
I  said,  '  I  believe,  Madame,  that  the  Queen  is  expecting  me.'  If  dark  and  chill  stands  the 
memory  of  the  palace,  in  bright  contrast,  and  as  a  ray  of  blessed  sunshine,  will  ever  live 
the  music  of  that  sweet  voice,  so  recently  hushed  by  the  birth  of  her  pure  spirit  into  the 
realms  of  endless  day,  as,  with  a  merry  laugh,  she  replied,  *  I  am  the  Queen.' 

"  It  was  proposed  to  have  a  seance,  and  after  nearly  ten  hours  of  patient  expectation  not 
the  shghtest  result  had  been  obtained.  The  next  evening,  and  indeed  six  or  seven  suc- 
ceeding evenings,  were  passed  in  like  manner,  and  I  began  to  fear  that  for  some,  to  me 
unknovra  cause,  there  would  be  an  entire  failure.  The  last  evening  but  one  her  Majesty 
said  to  me,  '  Mr.  Home,  I  have  but  an  imperfect  idea  of  the  conditions  necessary  for  what 
is  termed  a  seance,  but  I  am  convinced  that  your  surroundings  the  past  evenings  have  not 
been  congenial.  I  think  if  you  vsdll  follow  me  we  will  find  just  what  is  required.'  Taking 
a  light,  the  Queen  had  passed  through  two  rooms,  and  was  about  to  unlock  the  door  of  a 
third,  when  I,  as  it  were  involuntarily,  said,  '  It  is  there  the  next  stance  is  to  be  held.' 
Unlocking  the  door  and  handing  me  the  light,  the  Queen  said,  "  I  well  knew  it  would  be 
in  that  room  ;  go  in  and  see  my  treasures.'  Dimly  though  it  was  lighted,  I  saw  at  a 
glance  that  it  had  been  a  room  where  a  child  or  children  had  been,  for  in  one  corner  was 
a  broken  toy  cart,  and  near  it  a  toy  drum.  Other  toys  were  strewn  here  and  there,  as  if 
the  little  ones,  weary  with  play,  had  left  the  room  for  a  time,  and  as  if  the  silence  would 
soon  again  be  broken  by  their  presence.  At  last  my  eyes  rested  on  a  bunch  of  faded 
flowers,  and  these  betokened  a  lapse  of  months,  or  even  years,  as  having  been  undisturbed. 
The  Queen  informed  me  that  this  had  been  the  playroom  of  her  child,  now  in  heaven, 
and  that  every  object  had  remained  just  as  he  left  it.  The  flowers  alone  had  been  added, 
and  these  had  been  near  the  little  form  after  the  change  we  term  death, 

"  The  next  evening  a  stance  was  held  there,  and  that  sorrowing  mother  was  granted 
the  most  perfect  and  convincing  proof  that  her  loved  one  was  still  near  her.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  give  the  details  of  what  took  place,  for  they  were  of  a  nature  so  intimate  to  the 
one  person,  that  to  recapitulate  them  to  the  public  would  seem  almost  sacrilegious. 
There  were  present  relatives  of  her  Majesty  and  one  maid  of  honour,  who,  as  well  as 
myself,  were  witnesses,  and  they  cannot  have  forgotten  the  tears  of  joy  shed  by  that 
most  noble  and  highly-gifted  woman  as  she  bowed  her  head  in  thankfulness  to  God  for 
the  solace  sent  to  cheer  her. 

"  Taking  a  sapphire  and  diamond  ring  from  her  finger  she  placed  it  on  mine,  and  on  a 
scrap  of  paper  in  my  possession,  and  of  far  greater  value  to  me  than  gold  or  precious 
stones,  is  this  simple  memento,  whereon  is  written  :  '  /  will  ever  remember  with  gratitude 
the  siance  with  Mr.  Home. — Sophie.' 

"No.  6,  Nevsky  Prospective,  St.  Petersburg,  June  6th,  1877." 

If  the  reader  of  the  above  letter  chance  to  be  an  ordinary  marvel  seeker, 
he  will  be  astonished  to  find  a  lady,  whose  rank  and  station  had  familiarized 
her  with  an  ever-ready  and  prompt  compliance  with  all  her  wishes,  patiently 
waiting  for  many' successive  evenings  to  obtain  something,  which  after  all, 
might,  prove  of  little  value  to  her.     Still  more  remarkable  will  appear  the 

328  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

simple  statement  of  a  renowned  Spirit  Medium,  that  royalty  had  to  wait 
through  seven  seances  before  an  exhibition  of  his  powers  could  be  given. 
To  the  true  and  philosophic  Spiritual  investigator  Mr.  Home's  conduct, 
and  candid  acknowledgments,  will  suggest  the  earnest  wish  that  every 
Spirit  Medium  would  imitate  his  example ;  then  would  fraud  be  at  an  end, 
and  the  world  might  indeed  obtain  a  clue  to  a  true  Spiritual  science. 

After  Mr.  Home's  departure  from  the  Hague,  family  circles  began  to  be 
formed ;  many  Mediums  were  developed,  who  obtained  remarkable  phe- 
nomena, so  that  in  process  of  time,  the  sitters  were  favoured  with  Spirit 
voices,  speaking  audibly,  direct  writing,  touches  by  Spirit  hands,  musical 
performances  by  Spirits  on  various  instruments,  together  with  the  movement 
and  transport  of  ponderable  bodies  from  place  to  place.  These  phenomena 
were  given  most  freely  in  the  house  of  Mr.  T.  D.  Van  Herwerden,  "Ancient 
Resident,"  of  the  Indian  Government  at  Java.  The  Medium  in  this  family 
was  a  very  ignorant  Javanese  boy,  named  "  Aridjan,"  of  whom  further 
mention  will  be  made  hereafter.  Mr.  Van  Herwerden,  a  gentleman 
universally  respected,  published  a  work  on  his  wonderful  experiences  in 
Spiritualism  illustrated  by  numerous  photographs  and  fac-similes  of  Spirit 
writing,  which  was  privately  circulated  amongst  his  friends  and  connec- 
tions. Remarkable  phenomena  were  obtained  in  many  other  families  besides 
Mr.  Van  Herwerden's,  and  in  many  places  besides  the  Hague,  but  as  there 
were  no  professional  Mediums  in  Holland,  and  the  manifestations  could 
only  be  witnessed  in  private  famihes,  the  names  of  the  parties,  and  the 
marvels  enacted  in  their  homes,  have  been  only  known  by  report. 

Notwithstanding  the  reticence  attending  the  investigations,  they  excited 
so  much  interest  in  the  best  society,  that  fresh  circles  were  continually 
forming,  and  several  associations  began  to  arise  for  the  more  orderly  and 
scientific  study  of  the  subject.  One  of  the  oldest  and  most  numerously- 
attended  of  these  associations  was  founded  by  Major  J.  Revius,  a  warm 
friend  of  Mr.'Marthese  before  alluded  to.  Major  Revius  entered  into  the 
investigation  of  SpirituaUsm,  with  great  earnestness,  and  devoted  himself 
for  many  years  to  its  advancement.  He  it  was  who  founded  the  society 
called  "  Oromase  "  (or  Ormuzd),  of  which  physicians,  officers,  government 
officials,  and  many  distinguished  persons  formed  the  members.  The  aim 
of  this  association  was  to  study  the  phenomena  and  the  laws  of  their 
production,  Avithout  any  attempt  to  fasten  upon  them,  creeds,  or  religious 
doctrines.  The  first  regular  meeting  of  this  society  was  inaugurated  at 
the  Hague  on  the  evening  of  December  2nd,  1859.  Careful  minutes  of 
the  proceedings  were  written  down,  and  entered  upon  the  society's  books. 

The  "  Oromase "  archives  contain  many  interesting  records,  and  the 
meetings  were  presided  over  by  Major  Revius  until  the  year  1871,  when 
he  was  removed  from  his  sphere  of  mundane  usefulness,  to  the  higher  life 
beyond. 

We  are  informed  by  one  of  Major  Revius's  warm  friends  and  admirers, 
that  he  was  a  man  universally  beloved ;  one  who  was  respected  even  by 
his  opponents  in  belief  He  was  buried  with  military  honours.  The 
royal  band  of  the  King's  Guard  rendered  the  music,  and  a  funeral  oration, 
which  our  informant — who  was  present — assures  us  was  a  most  eloquent 
and  touching  tribute  to  the  worth  of  the  deceased,  was  spoken  on  the 
occasion  by  Monsieur  A.  J.  Riko,  the  secretary  of  the  "Oromase  Society." 
This  was  the  first  occasion  on  which  Spiritualism  was  openly  discoursed  of 
at  the  Hague,  and  its  introduction  at  so  solemn  a  scene,  created  not  a  litde 
interest  and  sensation. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

329 

To  return  to  M.  Riko's  own  narrative,  he  says  : — "  The  Oromase  Society 
celebrated  its  three  hundredth  meeting  by  a  social  gathering  and  supper  on 
February  25th,  1876."  He  adds  :  "  Besides  holding  seances,  the  theoretical 
side  of  the  important  subject  has  not  been  neglected.  '  Oromase '  possesses 
a  really  splendid  Hbrary  of  the  principal  standard  works  on  Spiritualism  in 
different  languages,  and  an  interesting  collection  of  American,  English, 
French,  German,  and  other  national  periodicals,  devoted  to  the  subjects  of 
Spiritualism,  mesmerism,  psychology,  &c." 

Amongst  the  numerous  societies  for  the  study  of  Spiritualism  founded 
in  Holland  was  one  in  Amsterdam  called  "  Veritas,"  which  commenced  its 
sessions  in  1869.  This  society  seems  to  have  specially  cultivated  trance 
speaking  and  Spirit  communications  obtained  through  writing  Mediums. 
The  doctrines  advocated  therein,  inchned  to  the  belief  in  re-incaruation, 
as  taught  by  Allan  Kardec,  and  in  this  respect  it  differed  from  "  Oromase,"  at 
which  the  members  were  more  concerned  with  scientific  and  inductive 
methods;  hence,  although  the  investigators  of  both  societies  were  on 
friendly  terms  with  each  other,  the  diversity  of  opinions  was  fully  realized. 
The  society  at  Amsterdam,  like  that  at  the  Hague,  kept  records  of  its  doings, 
and  distributed  "leaves,"  containing  the  Mediumistic  communications 
given  at  the  seances. 

At  Rotterdam,  there  existed  a  small  society,  the  cognomen  of  which, 
translated,  was — Research  after  Truth.  The  association  did  not  last  long  in 
session,  but  its  members  have  steadily  pursued  their  researches  in  private 
family  circles.  The  same  course  is  adopted  in  Haarlem,  Amsterdam,  and 
many  other  towns  in  Holland,  besides  at  the  Hague,  and  everywhere,  these 
seances  are  crowned  with  more  or  less  success. 

Although  there  has  been  a  general  unfoldment  of  all  the  phenomenal 
powers  witnessed  in  England  and  America,  except  form  materialization,  there 
seems  to  be  a  great  desire  for  physical  phenomena,  and  an  absence  of  well- 
developed  local  Media  for  that  phase  of  power. 

The  Hague,  Rotterdam,  and  other  large  towns  have  been  visited  by 
foreign  celebrities  such  as  Henry  Slade,  the  Davenports,  Bastian  and 
Taylor,  Miss  Lottie  Fowler,  Mrs.  Margaret  Fox  Kane ;  Williams,  Heme, 
Eglinton,  .Rita,  "  the  Bamford  Boys,"  Miss  Cook,  and  several  others ;  in 
fact,  during  the  last  few  years,  Holland  has  formed  an  invariable  scene  of 
attraction  to  the  American  and  English  Mediums  visiting  the  Continent. 

So  long  as  Spirit  circles  were  held  in  private  families,  wherein  many  of 
the  Mediums,  especially  at  the  Hague  and  in  Amsterdam — were  ladies  and 
gentlemen  of  high  social  standing,  little  notice — save  in  the  way  of  furtive 
allusion — was  taken  of  the  subject  by  the  press,  but  when  foreign  Mediums 
— especially  those  who  made  the  subject  their  profession — came  before  the 
people,  the  columns  of  the  newspapers  were  filled  with  articles  written  in 
the  usual  spirit  of  ridicule,  denunciation,  or  grave  scepticism. 

Respondents  were  not  wanting.  Newspaper  correspondence,  magazine 
articles,  and  pamphlets,  were  published  in  defence  of  "  the  cause."  Much 
talent  was  called  forth,  and  many  admirable  expositions  of  what  Spiritualism 
really  was  and  is,  arose  out  of  these  newspaper  discussions,  which  else 
would  never  have  been  brought  before  the  world.  M.  Riko  in  giving  some 
account  of  these  skirmishes,  writes  in  his  own  quaint  way  thus  : — 

"  The  defenders  however  were  not  lazy  in  sharpening  their  pens,  and  many  replies  to 
attacks  besides  pamphlets  and  books  appeared.  Amongst  the  most  able  of  the  defenders 
was  Mr.  H.  G.  Becht,  a  surgeon  ;  a  logical  thinker  of  very  positive  mind  and  one  whose 
pamphlets  are  amongst  the  best  products  on  Spiritualism   which  ever  saw  the  light. 

330  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Further  we  had  Eoorda  van  Eysinga  who  is  publishing  still  a  periodical  devoted  to  the 
religious  side  of  Spiritualism  (or  rather  Spiritism),  an  ex-clergyman  of  great  capacity  and 
a  very  elegant  author.  The  communications  through  the  medium  Rose,  an  honourable  aged 
man,  form  the  greater  part  of  this  periodical.  Then  we  have  our  admirable  and  talented 
authoress,  well  known  for  her  other  literary  works,  Madame  Elise  van  Calcar  who  publishes 
also  a  monthly  periodical.  She  chiefly  defends  the  study  of  Spiritualism  on  biblical  and 
religious  grounds. 

"  Other  defenders  of  Spiritualism  and  Mesmerism  in  our  country  were  Mr.  A.  Hoch, 
surgeon  ;  Eutgers  van  der  Loeff,  ex-clergyman  ;  Dr.  Polah,  doctor  in  philosophy  ;  not  to 
forget  Major  Revius,  who  first  of  all  put  liis  name  to  his  pamphlets  on  Spiritualism. 
A.  J.  Riko  published  a  history  of  Spiritualism  on  the  Continent,  an  analysis  of  the  different 
explanations  of  the  scientific  world,  a  collection  of  facts,  rules  for  investigators,  etc." 

We  shall  have  more  to  say  about  the  literature  of  Spiritualism  in  Holland, 
especially  of  the  work  effected  by  Madame  Elise  Van  Calcar,  at  the  close 
of  this  section ;  meantime,  we  may  add,  as  soon  as  the  subject  began  to 
be  canvassed  abroad  in  the  journals,  whether  the  reports  were  favourable 
or  antagonistic,  the  dissemination  of  Spiritual  ideas  received  an  immense 
impulse.  Another  great  factor  for  moving  public  opinion  was  the  transla- 
tion into  the  Dutch  language  of  the  Spiritualistic  works  of  Professors 
Wallace,  Crookes,  and  Varley.  These  logical  writings,  illustrated  by 
engravings,  diagrams,  and  extracts  from  other  authoritative  writers,  were 
published  in  a  volume  of  about  four  hundred  and  sixty  pages  by  the 
liberality  of  the  Hague  Spiritualists,  whose  names  have  already  figured  in 
this  chapter.  Some  five  lectures  too  were  given  at  the  Hague  by  MM. 
Riko  and  Wasch,  whilst  other  speakers  did  good  service  in  various  direc- 
tions; in  short,  propagandism  once  commenced,  proceeded  in  earnest,  and 
had  the  foreign  Media  who  visited  the  country,  all  been  as  free  from 
reproach,  and  selfish  aims,  as  the  Dutch  Spiritualists  themselves,  the  cause 
would  now  hold  a  triumphant  empire  over  the  intellectual  minds  of  Holland 

A  field  so  inviting  as  Spiritualism,  has  of  course  been  traversed  by  its 
base  imitators,  and  Holland  has  been  no  more  lacking  in  its  "  Bishops," 
"  Baldwins,"  and  other  itinerant  "  exposers  "  (of  their  own  tricks)  than  has 
England  or  America.  The  Dutch,  it  must  be  remembered,  are  neither 
easily  moved  to  belief,  or  unstable  when  once  convinced. 

They  are  not  to  be  imposed  upon  by  pretenders,  within  or  without  the 
ranks,  and  hence  imported  frauds,  and  local  "  exposers,"  have  never 
shaken  the  well-grounded  faith  of  the  Dutch  Spiritualists.  Of  the  colonies, 
or  Dutch  Indies,  it  is  enough  for  the  present  to  say  the  impulse  to  regard 
"  supernaturalism  "  in  the  light  of  modern  Spiritualism  was  communicated 
by  several  persons  of  note  who  were  sent  by  the  Government  from  Holland 
to  fill  official  positions  in  the  colonies.  The  prevailing  superstitions  very 
much  resembled  those  of  the  Hindostan  provinces,  and  the  introduction  of 
Spiritualism  in  its  modern  sense,  has  effected  a  most  beneficial  influence ; 
substituting  a  rational  and  scientific  system  of  communion  with  beloved 
Spirit  friends,  for  the  fantasies  of  demonism,  and  the  worship  of  heroes  and 
ancestors. 

Hauntings,  stone  throwing,  and  other  preternatural  disturbances  have  for 
many  years  previous  to  the  introduction  of  modern  Spirituahsm,  been 
popularly  known  in  Java,  Sumatra,  Madura,  and  other  districts  of  the 
Dutch  Archipelago. 

A  detailed  notice  of  the  disturbances  occurring  at  the  house  of  M.  Van 
Kesslinger,  the  Assistant  Resident  at  Bandong,  will  hereafter  be  given, 
together  with  the  official  report  of  the  same  preserved  in  the  state  archives 
of  the  Colonial  Government. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  331 

Several  well-skilled  mesmerists  have  visited  different  towns  of  Holland, 
and  given  exhibitions  of  "animal  magnetism"  through  susceptible  subjects. 
One  of  the  most  popular  lecturers  on  this  subject  who  visited  the  Hague, 
was  a  Signor  Donato,  who  did  much  to  awaken  the  attention  of  the 
thoughtful  to  the  intimate  connection  betwen  the  powers  and  potencies  of 
the  embodied  mind,  as  displayed  by  the  magnetizers,  and  those  of  the 
disembodied,  as  manifested  in  the  phenomena  of  Spirit  communion. 

Many  remarkable  cases  of  haunted  houses  have  become  notorious  of  late 
in  Holland,  some  at  the  Hague,  others  in  Friesland,  Amsterdam,  &c.,  «S:c. 
The  manifestations  in  the  instances  alluded  to,  precisely  resembled  those 
common  in  Europe  and  America ;  in  fact,  their  sameness  proves  that  they 
emanated  from  sources  universal  throughout  all  countries. 

For  the  present,  all  reports  agree,  that  there  is  a  quiet  steady  interest 
prevaihng  through  the  different  towns  and  amongst  the  circles  where 
Spiritualism  has  been  made  manifest  in  Holland,  still  public  interest  is  but 
little  stirred  on  the  subject. 

The  same  unanimity  of  opinion  prevails  on  the  belief  that  the 
unmistakable  frauds  that  have  been  perpetrated  by  certain  English  and 
American  Mediums  visiting  the  country,  have  served  to  bring  Spiritualism 
into  public  disrepute,  and  to  check  the  tendency  to  private  investigation 
amongst  the  unconvinced. 

One  of  our  correspondents,  a  gentleman  holding  a  high  official  position 
in  Holland,  writes  with  equal  frankness  and  reason  on  this  subject,  to  the 
following  effect : — 

"  Whilst  it  has  been  due  only  to  interest  and  influence  in  high  quarters  that  we  could 
get  a  hearing  through  the  journals  for  our  well-attested  facts,  the  rumour  of  a  medium 
being  caught  in  the  very  act  of  tricking  runs  like  a  conflagration  through  every  newspaper, 
and  spreads  poison  through  the  whole  community  against  us.  .  .  .  Yet  even  this  we 
could  endure  patiently,  because  it  is  the  work  of  our  antagonists,  and  just  what  we  may 
expect ;  but  the  worst  stab  our  cause  can  receive  is  dealt  by  the  foes  of  our  own  household  ; 
those  spiritual  editors  who,  the  moment  their  tinsel  medium  is  caught  at  one  circle  in  the 
act  of  imposing,  straightway  begin  to  defend  him,  and  fill  their  columns  with  accounts 
of  aU  the  good  things  he  did  at  some  other  circle  !  What  sort  of  logic  is  this  ?  If  these 
impostors  were  true  on  other  occasions,  why  do  they  prepare — for  they  must  first  make 
their  preparations — to  cheat  us  ?  But  still  worse.  We  who  have  spent  our  time,  money, 
and  risked  our  good  names,  to  uphold  this  cause  are  by  these  editors  reviled  and  abused 
for  exposing  the  frauds.  Here  in  Holland,  though  the  stufied  gloves,  wigs,  masks,  and 
phosphorus  of  these  deceivers  are  in  our  possession,  we  who  bring  them  here  at  much 
expense  to  prove  our  faith,  are  actually  accused  of  a  conspiracy  to  ruin  it !  What 
insanity  is  this  !  Can  we  wonder  that  our  local  press  assume  that  the  editors  of  spiritual 
journals  are  simply  frauds  paid  to  defend  frauds,  and  that  we  the  believers  are  in  league 
with  them,  or  else  are  lunatics  incapable  of  judgment. 

"  If  there  is  yet  another  thrust  which  pierces  the  heart  of  Spiritualism  to  the  quick 
it  is  that  excuse  of  which  we  read  so  much  in  your  English  papers,  which  says  that  when 
the  pretended /o?'»i  is  seized  at  a  materialization  seance,  it  must  always  be  the  form  of 
the  medium,  as  the  spirit  must  needs  melt  bach  into  the  medium's  body.  This  is  a  very 
fine  excuse,  no  doubt,  but  can  those  who  know  this  result  so  well,  inform  us  why  the 
wigs,  masks,  phosphorus,  and  drapery  so  often  used  on  these  occasions  don't  melt  back 
also  into  the  mediums'  bodies  ?  Let  them  explain,  moreover,  when  the  '  form  '  and 
medium  happens  to  be  a  lady  why  she  does  not  melt  back  into  her  clothes,  she  being 
very  generally  found  in  one  place  and  her  clothes  in  another  !  I  learned  in  your  country, 
dear  madame,  a  saying  with  which  I  beg  to  close — it  is,  *  Tell  that  to  the  marines,  but 
not  to  a  Dutchman  ! '  "     .    .     . 

As  an  evidence  that  the  shrewd  writer  of  this  communication  has  never 
been,  and  is  not  now,  inimical  to  true  and  genuine  professional  Mediums, 
it  should  be  added,  that  he  has  been  largely  instrumental  in  procuring 
their  services  in  Holland,  and  forwarded  with  the  above,  several  laudatory 

332  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

press  notices  of  the  Davenports,  Slade,  Foster,  and  others,  the  reprint  of 
which  would  convey  no  new  impression  of  those  fine  Mediums'  powers. 
The  following  letter,  however,  from  Ira  Davenport  to  Mr.  Robert  Cooper, 
of  Eastbourne,  is  copied  from  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  to  show  the 
kindly  impression  that  honest  Mediums  have  received  from  the  true- 
hearted  SpirituaUsts  of  Holland.     It  runs  thus  : — 

"  La  Haye,  Oct.  7,  1866. 

"Friend  Cooper, — In  my  last  letter  I  promised  to  write  you  again  shortly.  We 
returned  here  yesterday  from  Rotterdam,  where  we  gave  three  public  stances  to  very  large 
and  respectable  audiences.  The  people  who  came  to  see  us  were  the  first  people  of  the 
city.  The  admission  was  four  and  a  half  francs.  Previous  to  going  to  Rotterdam  we 
gave  two  seances  in  this  place,  which  is  the  Brighton  of  Holland.  Here,  too,  the  people 
who  came  were  all  of  the  first  society,  and  were  highly  pleased  with  the  manifestations — 
so  much  so,  that  we  have  been  invited  through  the  newspapers  of  the  town  to  return  and 
give  more  seances,  as  many  persons  wish  to  see  us  who  could  not  avail  themselves  of  the 
previous  opportunity.  So,  on  the  whole,  we  have  concluded  to  repeat  our  stances  here  for 
two  nights  more. 

"  About  a  week  since  we  had  a  paper  sent  to  us,  containing  an  announcement  of  some 
sleight-of-hand  man  ;  that  he  was  in  possession  of  our  '  secret,'  and  intended  to  give 
public  explanations  and  illustrations.  I  immediately  wrote  a  reply,  warning  the  public 
to  be  careful  in  paying  their  money  to  this  man  until  he  had  proved  himself  worthy  of 
their  patronage,  by  accei^ting  a  challenge  to  meet  us  for  five  thousand  florins  a  side,  and 
making  good  his  pretensions.     We  have  heard  nothing  from  the  gentleman  since. 

"  On  the  whole,  we  are  very  well  satisfied  with  our  experience  in  Holland  so  far.  The 
probability  is,  that  we  shall  stay  in  this  country  two  months  yet. — Yours  truly, 

"I.  E.  Davenport." 

In  a  still  earlier  number  of  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  in  the  year 
i86i,  the  veteran  SpirituaUst,  Major  Revius,  gives  the  following  interesting 
account  of  his  son's  mediumship.  After  describing  the  young  man's  powers 
which  were  similar  and  scarcely  inferior  to  those  of  Mr.  Home,  the  Major 
says  : — 

"  After  Mr.  Home's  departure  from  the  Hague,  my  son  attended  many  stances  among 
our  friends,  and  other  mediums  were  developed.  At  one  of  these  stances,  at  the  house  of 
a  physician,  the  spirits  of  the  late  Monsieur  and  Madame  G.  announced  their  presence. 
Monsieur  G.  had  possessed  a  considerable  fortune,  which  he  had  bequeathed  in  a  way  dis- 
appointing to  the  expectations  of  the  doctor  and  his  family.  After  the  doctor  had  expressed 
his  feelings  of  dissatisfaction  on  this  jjoint,  he  asked  what  they  wanted  there  ?  The  answer 
was- — '  To  seek  a  reconciliation  with  you.'  '  Then  you  go,  G.'  said  he,  '  and  let  your  wife 
speak  ;  I  never  thought  very  well  of  you  ;  let  her  tell  me  the  reason  of  your  leaving  the 
property  as  you  did.'  '  You  had  enough,'  was  the  answer,  '  and  so  I  persuaded  my 
husband  to  dispose  of  it  in  favour  of  my  own  family,  which  needed  it.'  '  Ah  !  another 
proof  of  your  selfishness,'  said  the  doctor,  '  of  which  you  gave  so  many,  that  nobody 
regrets  you,  nor  cares  to  remember  you.'  '  You  mistake  there,'  was  the  reply  :  'there  is 
a  poor  widow,  now  living  in  — —  Street,  who  remembers  me  for  acts  of  kindness.'  '  Well,' 
the  doctor  said,  '  we  forgive  everything  ;  it's  all  over  now.'  Upon  which  the  table  pressed 
itself  obliquely  against  the  breast  of  the  doctor,  and  others  of  his  family  who  were  sitting 
round  it.     The  communications  in  this  stance  were  by  the  alphabet. 

"  The  next  day,  two  of  the  company,  determining  to  enquire  into  the  facts,  found  out 
the  street  so  mentioned.  It  was  a  small  one,  inhabited  by  poor  people.  The  gentlemen 
ultimately  found  a  widow,  who  said  that  she  had  known  Madame  G.,  who  had  been  dead 
so  many  years,  for  which  she  was  sorry,  as  she  had  often  received  from  her  the  tickets  of  a 
charity,  by  which  she  obtained  bread,  clothing,  and  fuel.  She  said  that  she  lived  in 
another  street  in  the  lady's  lifetime. 

"  At  a  seance  at  my  own  house,  two  generals,  my  friends,  were  of  the  company  :  they 
wanted  proof  that  they  were  not  under  any  biological  influence  or  hallucination.  The 
table  round  which  we  were  seated  was  strong,  and  weighed  a  hundred  and  ten  pounds. 
At  my  request,  the  spirits  raised  the  table  free  from  the  ground,  and  let  it  fall  in  such  a 
way  as  to  break  the  pediment.  The  gentlemen  came  the  next  day,  to  see  if  the  table  was 
actually  broken,  as  it  appeared  to  be  the  night  before  ; — for  my  part,  I  had  still  further 
evidence  of  it  in  the  cabinet  maker's  bill. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  333 

"  The  large  table  being  tlius  broken,  we  moved  to  a  smaller  one.  General  M.  V.  asked 
if  this  lighter  table  could  turn  itself  upside  down  ?  The  table  replied  by  the  alphabet — 
'  Turn  upside  down  yourself.'  To  the  General's  question,  '  Did  you  ever  know  me  ?'  the 
answer  was — 'Yes,  at  Bergen-op-Zoom,  forty  years  ago,  when  you  were  a  subaltern.' 
The  General  said  this  was  according  to  fact.  At  my  request  the  spirits  made  this  little 
table  feel  so  heavy,  that  we  could  not  raise  it  by  our  united  efforts,  and  then  so  light  that 
we  could  lift  it  with  the  little  fingers 

"  We  have  a  Medium  here,  a  little  girl  of  ten  years  of  age.  On  a  recent  occasion  at  a 
siance  where  this  Medium  was  taken,  the  spirit  of  the  hostess's  brother  announced  his 
presence.  This  brother  was  captain  of  a  merchant  vessel,  which  had  not  been  heard  of 
since  the  10th  of  October,  1854.  Through  the  young  Medium's  hand  it  was  written  that 
his  ship  was  '  wrecked  on  the  English  coast,  on  the  14th  of  October,  1854,  and  all  on  board 
perished.'  The  lady  asked  as  a  proof  that  he  would  write  his  name  by  the  hand  of  this 
chUd-medium.  The  lady  was  a  perfect  stranger  to  the  Medium.  After  some  letters  were 
begun  and  as  often  rubbed  out,  the  signature  of  the  captain  was  written,  perfectly 
corresponding  to  signatures  in  letters  from  him,  and  wliich  she  had  carefully  preserved. 

"  A  few  months  ago,  my  wife,  myself,  and  son  were  passing  the  evening  at  a  friend's ; 
several  young  people  there  proposed  to  amuse  themselves  by  turning  the  table.  They 
went  into  an  adjoining  room  and  soon  returned  with  the  news  that  they  had  turned  a 
work-table  and  now  proposed  to  try  their  hands  at  the  large  one  in  the  mlon.  Observing 
twitchings  of  the  hand  in  one  of  the  young  ladies,  I  got  pencil  and  paper  and  proposed 
that  she  should  hold  the  pencil  as  if  to  write.  After  some  objections,  she  took  the  pencil, 
and  at  the  instant  of  holding  it  as  if  to  write,  fell  into  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  thus  wrote 
with  closed  eyes  four  full  pages,  in  which  a  spirit  expressed  its  happiness  at  being  able  by 
this  means  to  assure  his  protegee  that  he  was  always  watching  over  her.  That  the  young 
lady  was  in  the  magnetic  sleep  I  assured  myself,  by  holding  a  sheet  of  paper  between  her 
face  and  the  pencil,  which  did  not  prevent  the  Unes  from  being  straight  and  equidistant ; 
the  letters  were  large  and  like  those  of  a  person  not  in  the  habit  of  writing.  It  was 
subsequently  found  that  the  signature  to  this  singular  writing  was  that  of  an  ancestor  of 
the  Medium  on  the  mother's  side,  a  Professor  of  the  University  of  Gronigen,  two 
centuries  ago." 

In  the  same  commanication  as  the  above,  Major  .Revius  furnishes 
another  incident  of  a  circle  in  which  he  was  himself  present,  although  it 
occurred  at  Antwerp,  and  a  report  of  the  occurrence  was  subsequently 
published  in  the  Monde  Musical,  of  Brussels,  Jan.  22,  1865.  Major  Revius 
describes  it  thus  : — 

"  A  few  evenings  ago  several  persons  were  at  a  seance  at  the  house  of  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  inhabitants.  Some  of  them  seated  at  a  small  table  waited  gravely, 
and  with  confidence  that  an  inmate  of  the  other  world  would  deign  to  come  and  communi- 
cate. All  at  once  the  table  was  agitated  ;  there  was  a  spirit.  '  My  friends,'  said  the 
invisible  visitant  to  the  attentive  group,  '  I  come  to  offer  you  the  means  of  doing  a  good 
action  and  of  comforting  the  unfortunate.  In  the  street  La  Cueller,  there  is  a  narrow 
lane,  terminating  in  a  cul  de  sac.  In  this  lane,  on  the  first  floor  of  a  house.  No.  12,  you 
will  find  the  family  of  Charles  Sorels.  Four  children,  of  whom  the  oldest  is  but  thirteen 
years,  scarcely  covered  by  some  wretched  rags,  are  lying  in  a  corner,  trembling  with  cold, 
on  some  straw.  A  fifth  child,  nearly  naked,  is  pressed  by  its  mother  against  her  breast, 
dried  up  by  sufiering  and  want — such  is  the  spectacle  which  I  have  witnessed.  Hasten 
to  relieve  them,  you  have  not  a  minute  to  lose  !     This  is  why  I  have  come  to  you." 

"  Every  one  was  astounded  by  this  message,  and  could  scarcely  credit  it.  Nevertheless, 
interest,  curiosity,  commiseration  excited  them  to  the  highest  degree.  Some  of  them 
were  quickly  on  the  way.  They  soon  found  the  narrow  street,  of  which  before  they  had 
scarcely  suspected  the  existence,  and  then  the  blind  alley,  more  squalid  stUl.  On 
enquiring  for  Charles  Sorels,  they  were  soon  shown  the  house,  where  they  found  the 
f  amUy  exactly  in  the  miserable  condition  described  by  the  spirit.  Need  we  relate  the 
rest  ?  The  family  of  Charles  Sorels,  at  the  moment  that  I  write  these  lines,  is  snatched 
from  want,  and  relates  its  providential  rescue  to  all  who  wish  to  hear  it." 

The  same  circumstance  will  be  found  detailed  by  M.  A.  Malibran  m  the 
London  Spiritual  Magazine,  of  July,  1865.  Happily  for  the  belief  in 
Spirits  versus  " astrals,  shells,  reliquice  of  the  dead,  &c.,"  "who  never  tell 
anything  but  lies,  or  do  anything  but  mischief,"  a  large  number  of  such 

334  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

occurrences  are  recorded  in  the  history  of  American  SpirituaHsts  at  the 
New  York  Conferences,  and  in  the  experiences  of  Judge  Edmonds,  Mrs. 
E.  J.  French,  and  many  another  who  firmly  beUeved  in  the  agency  of  good 
and  kind  human  spirits  before  theories  arose  to  sweep  them  away  into  the 
limbo  of  Ghouls  and  Hobgoblins. 

CHAPTER  XL. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    HOLLAND    (CONTINUED). 

Narratives  of  Personal  Experiences. 

As  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  Holland  has  been  chiefly  confined  to 
private  family  circles,  select  associations,  and  occasional  notices  of  literary 
works,  the  exceptions  being  the  publicity  obtained  by  the  visits  of  foreign 
professional  Mediums,  it  may  be  expected  that  we  should  give  a  detailed 
account  of  a  disgraceful  exposure  of  two  Englishmen  professing  to  belong 
to  the  latter  class,  for  whom  their  friends  and  apologists  still  claim  "  remark- 
able Medium  powers."  In  this  connection  we  have  only  to  reaffirm  the 
purpose  announced  in  our  opening  chapter,  whilst  promising  to  give  as 
faithful  an  account  as  possible  of  such  manifestations  as  belong  to  the 
history  of  Spiritualism,  we  altogether  decline  to  devote  time  or  space  to  its 
base  counterfeit. 

What  is  not  Spiritualism  will  find  no  place  in  these  pages.  It  must 
suffice  then  to  allege  that  on  more  than  one  occasion  the  Dutch  Spiritualists 
have  been  plagued  with  these  pests  of  every  great  cause,  the  tricksters  who 
are  ready  to  become  "  Mediums  for  Spirits,"  or  their  own  sham  imitations, 
whichever  is  found  to  pay  best.  It  is  due  to  the  Dutch  Spiritualists  to 
state,  that  they  themselves,  having  nothing  to  fear  but  falsehood,  became 
the  exposers,  nor  did  they  shrink  from  the  ridicule  heaped  upon  them  and 
their  cause,  by  their  exultant  enemies  through  the  columns  of  the  secular 
press. 

In  Holland,  as  in  every  other  place  where  the  veritable  truths  of  Spirit- 
ualism have  been  made  manifest  beyond  a  shadow  of  question,  the  defalca- 
tions of  unworthy  pretenders,  and  the  lampoons  of  the  press,  have  never 
affected  the  conduct  of  those,  whose  faith  has  deepened  into  knowledge. 
Thus  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  interposition  of  the  counterfeit  and 
its  discovery,  would  not  have  affected  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  injuriously, 
provided  the  SpirituaUsts  themselves  had  united  in  a  stern  denunciation  of 
such  practices;  but  unfortunately,  the  ranks  of  the  movement  include  a 
number  of  worthy  persons  who  in  their  exceeding  charity  endeavour  to 
account  for  what  they  call  the  appearance  of  fraud  on  the  hypothesis  of 
"  transformation,  transfiguration,"  &c.,  &c.,  making  a  compound  of 
philosophy  and  miracle,  of  a  far  more  astounding  character  than  all  the 
phenomena  of  genuine  Spiritualism. 

It  is  under  such  circumstances  as  these,  that  public  interest  in  the  cause 
of  Spirit  communion  has  obviously  declined  in  Holland,  although  the 
belief,  founded  upon  unimpeachable  proofs,  cherished  by  the  "  old  line  " 
SpirituaUsts,  remains  unshaken. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  335 

To  the  world — which  in  future  generations  at  least — -may  be  disposed  to 
pass  judgment  uninfluenced  by  "  the  passion  and  prejudice  of  that  partisan- 
ship "  which  mars  the  accuracy  of  philosophic  opinion,  we  now  offer  a 
statement  of  the  following  facts,  all  of  which  the  author  has  carefully 
.  scrutinized,  proved,  and  feels  justified  in  recording  as  testimony  founded 
upon  the  rock  of  truth. 

The  first  case  to  be  cited  is  a  notice  of  the  manifestations  which  occurred 
in  the  family  of  M.  Van  Brussel,  a  gentleman  of  independent  means,  and 
highly  respectable  standing,  residing  at  the  Hague. 

For  some  time,  M.  and  Mdme.  Van  Brussel  had  noted  the  occasional 
production  of  sounds,  and  the  spontaneous  movements  of  ponderable 
objects,  occurring  in  the  vicinity  of  their  daughter  Albertine — a  sweet  girl, 
about  fifteen  years  of  age — when  the  attention  of  the  family  was  first  drawn 
to  Spirit  manifestations.  After  they  had  become  convinced  that  this  young 
lady  was  a  Medium  they  communicated  the  following  occurrences  to  the 
"  Oromase  "  Society. 

On  a  certain  night,  the  father  being  awake,  observed  that  the  bed  in 
which  his  daughter  was  sleeping — in  the  same  room  with  her  parents — was 
moved  from  its  place.  The  time  was  mid-summer,  and  the  nights  were 
quite  light.  On  the  following  night  both  the  father  and  mother  were 
awakened  by  an  unusual  noise,  when  they  observed  that  the  footboard  of 
their  daughter's  bed  was  taken  away,  and  placed  at  some  distance  against 
the  wall  of  the  chamber.  As  Albertine  was  apparendy  sound  asleep,  no 
notice  was  taken  of  this  circumstance  to  her;  but  the  father,  the  next  day, 
not  only  replaced  the  footboard,  but  tied  that  and  the  other  parts  together 
with  strong  cords. 

The  next  night  the  parents  were  awakened  by  still  more  violent  noises, 
when  they  perceived  the  cords  were  being  untied  by  invisible  hands,  and 
the  pieces  of  the  footboard  were  placed  against  the  wall.  Heavy  rappings 
accompanied  these  movements  through  all  of  which  the  young  girl  slept 
soundly.  Besides  the  sounds  above  described,  the  alarmed  parents  heard 
the  soughing  of  a  wind  which  seemed  to  be  moaning  through  all  the  apart- 
ments on  that  floor.  Very  shortly  after  the  commencement  of  these  scenes, 
the  beloved  young  daughter  passed  to  the  land  of  Spirits,  leaving  her 
loving  parents  almost  inconsolable  for  her  loss.  Very  soon  after  this  sad 
change  in  the  little  household,  manifestations  began  to  occur  which 
became  obviously  identified  with  the  Spirit  of  the  loving  child  they  had 
lost.  Portfolios  and  other  objects  which  had  belonged  to  her  were  carried 
about,  and  her  books  were  moved  before  the  parents'  eyes. 

In  1873,  some  few  years  after  their  daughter's  departure,  a  book  in  which 
as  a  child  she  had  studied,  and  which  was  reverently  cherished  by  the 
mourning  parents,  dropped  into  the  mother's  lap,  and  on  opening  it  she 
read  in  the  daughter's  well-krtown  handwriting,  the  words  clearly  and 
freshly  written,  of  which  the  following  is  the  translation  : — "  Dear  Father, 
although  dead,  I  live  near  the  good  God.  When  dear  mother  weeps,  oh 
comfort  her  by  remembering  my  blessed  lot."  Within  a  few  years,  both 
the  good  father  and  mother  passed  on  to  their  peaceful  rest,  but  during  the 
brief  period  of  their  sojourn  on  earth,  their  bereaved  hearts  were  comforted 
with  unnumbered  such  instances  of  their  child's  presence  and  sympathy 
as  those  related  above. 

Monsieur  A.  J.  Riko  gives  the  following  account  of  the  movement  of 
ponderable  bodies  occurring  in  the  presence  of  a  mesmerized  subject.  M. 
Riko  had  become  much  interested  in  mesmeric  practices,  and  was  himself 
a  successful  operator. 

336  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Calling  upon  a  lady  of  his  acquaintance  one  day,  at  the  Hague,  she 
asked  him  to  mesmerize  her,  alleging  that  she  could  give  no  reason  for  the 
request,  except  a  strong  impression  that  she  ought  to  do  so.  There  were 
present  besides  this  lady,  her  daughter  and  a  cousin,  and  ^this  is  what 
ensued : — 

The  lady  was  no  sooner  placed  by  passes  under  the  mesmeric  influence, 
than  the  large  table  which  stood  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  moved  wholly 
without  contact,  and  placed  itself  against  the  arm  of  the  chair  in  which 
the  mesmerized  subject  was  sitting.  The  hour  was  about  three  o'clock 
p.m.,  the  room  well  lighted,  and  the  whole  scene  witnessed  by  three  sane 
persons.  It  ought  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  this  connection,  that  the  Baron 
Dupotet,  and  M.  Billot,  the  eminent  magnetizers  of  Paris,  published, 
even  before  the  year  1848,  accounts  of  the  movement  of  chairs,  tables,  and 
other  ponderable  bodies  in  the  presence  of  their  magnetized  subjects. 

Dr.  Ashburner  and  Mr.  J.  C.  Luxmoore  of  England,  both  gentlemen  of 
learning,  research,  and  non-professional  magnetizers,  have  affirmed  that  the 
same  phenomena  often  occurred  in  the  presence  of  their  magnetic  subjects. 

These  gentlemen  were  of  opinion  that  the  magnetism  they  gave  out  in 
their  passes,  was  analogous  in  quality  to  the  "  force  "  derived  by  Spirits  from 
their  Mediums,  and  that  its  diffusion  in  the  atmosphere,  enabled  Spirits 
to  make  the  manifestations  so  often  observed  in  the  presence  of  mesmerized 
subjects. 

M.  Riko,  desiring  to  prove  the  intimate  connection  between  "the  force" 
employed  in  mesmeric  passes  and  Mediumisra,  cites  an  example  which  may 
be  selected  from  many  others  for  its  suggestiveness. 

M.  Siemelink  of  Amsterdam,  well  known  in  Holland  as  the  author  of  an 
excellent  Spiritual  work,  entitled,  "Immortality  Unveiled,"  to  which  the 
good  Queen  Sophia  was  the  first  subscriber — was  well  known  for  his 
remarkable  power  as  a  healer  by  mesmerism. 

One  of  his  patients,  a  young  lady  of  aristocratic  rank,  residing  at  the 
Hague,  he  could  readily  affect  by  passes  made  at  Amsterdam.  The  father 
of  this  patient,  a  gentleman  of  unimpeachable  veracity,  kept  a  careful 
record  of  the  phenomena  which  occurred  at  the  times  when  M.  Siemelink 
projected  this  power  from  a  distance  on  his  patient.  The  exact  time  when 
the  operations  began  and  ended,  were  noted,  and  always  found  to  corres- 
pond with  the  patient's  magnetic  sleep.  Moreover,  the  young  lady 
noticed,  that  a  Spirit,  whom  she  accurately  described,  and  who  was  found 
to  have  been  M.  Siemelink's  brother,  was  always  present  on  these  occa- 
sions, and  showed  himself  in  the  act  of  manipulating  the  fluid  or  force 
projected  from  the  mortal  magnetizer.  And  here  it  is  proper  to  remark, 
that  the  author — who  on  several  occasions  consented  to  be  the  magnetic 
subject  of  Drs.  EUiotson,  Ashburner,  and  Mr.  Luxmoore,  of  London  — 
always  saw  Spirits  assisting  in  the  manifestations,  and  as  these  Spirits  were 
strangers  to  the  seeress,  but  were  invariably  recognized  by  their  description 
as  friends  of  the  parties  present,  it  is  fair  to  infer,  that  the  assertions  so 
often  made  by  magnetized  subjects  is  true,  and  that  kind,  disembodied 
Spirit  friends,  especially  physicians  and  scientists,  assist  in  these  experi- 
ments, and  materially  aid  the  operations  of  human  magnetizers.  The  Spirit 
of  Benjamin  Franklin,  speaking  through  Mrs.  E.  J.  French,  of  New  York, 
and  confirming  his  statements  through  the  lips  of  the  entranced  Medium 
by  loudrappings,  alleged  that  the  force  which  forms  the  life  principle  of  the 
mortal  magnetizer,  is  the  Spiritual  body  of  the  enfranchised  soul — one  and 
the  same  element — only  that,  with  the  Spirit,  it  is  finer,  more  subtle,  and 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  337 

penetrating,  than  when  in  the  mortal  body ;  hence,  that  the  force  of  the 
magnetizer  on  earth,  and  in  the  Spirit  world,  are  one  and  the  same  thing, 
differing  only  in  degree,  and  only  requiring  special  subjects  to  act  upon, 
and  special  qualities  in  the  subject,  in  order  to  produce  analogous  mani- 
festations. 

At  the  house  of  Mr.  H.  C.  Becht,  a  medical  gentleman,  well-known  and 
respected  at  the  Hague,  but  one  who  at  the  time  of  the  occurrences  about 
to  be  detailed,  had  by  no  means  yielded  up  his  full  belief  to  a  Spiritual 
origin  for  the  phenomena,  a  seance  was  held  when  the  medium  was  Mr.  G., 
a  Government  telegraph  officer,  whose  full  name  it  is  not  deemed  expedient 
to  give.  This  gentleman  had  often  obtained  direct  writing  for  his  friends, 
and  at  the  commencement  of  the  seance  in  question,  was  promised  strong 
manifestations.  Presently  M.  Becht,  as  the  greatest  sceptic  of  the  party, 
was  invited  to  say,  what  manifestations  he  liked  best,  and  he  expressed 
a  desire  for  direct  Spirit  writing.  After  this  the  Medium  wrote,  that  it 
should  be  found  in  the  porcelain  cup  on  the  small  table  between  the 
windows. 

M.  Riko  says  : — 

"  Now  our  friend  Becht,  left  the  table ;  went  and  inspected  the  small  table  and  its 
immediate  surroundings,  after  which,  he  took  his  place  opposite  the  medium  with  the 
company.  He  requested  every  one  in  the  room  to  remain  quietly  at  his  or  her  place,  which 
was  done.  After  this  he  put  a  question  on  which  he  desired  the  answer  by  direct  writing. 
It  was  a  question  in  respect  to  a  history  unknown  to  the  medium,  in  fact  M.  Becht's 
private  affair.  The  medium  went  on  to  write  automatically,  and  spoke  with  the  company. 
After  a  few  minutes  the  medium  wrote  that  the  direct  writing  was  done.  Nobody  had 
left  his  or  her  place  and  the  surgeon  had  his  eyes  continually  on  the  medium  and  the  cup. 
Then  M.  Becht  went  himself  to  the  small  table  and  took  out  of  the  cup  a  long  piece  of 
paper  rolled  together,  on  which  was  written  20  lines,  giving  a  perfect  answer  to  the 
question  which  he  had  put.  It  looked  as  if  it  were  written  with  lead  pencil,  but  no  paper 
or  lead  pencil  had  been  near  the  cup  or  table.  On  that  same  evening  two  more  pieces  of 
direct  writing  were  obtained,  while  the  company  named  the  place  where  it  must  be 
found,  viz. — once  in  a  hat  on  the  piano  and  the  second  time  outside  the  room,  before  the 
door  of  another  room.  The  hat  was  first  inspected,  the  door  of  the  room  shut  after 
inspection  of  the  corridor.  Both  times  the  direct  writing  was  found  at  the  desired 
spots."     .     .     . 

"  Spirit  lights  were  very  frequently  observed  at  the  Hague.  At  a  dark  circle  at  M. 
Becht's,  these  lights  appeared  at  spots  indicated  beforehand  by  one  of  the  sitters,  while 
nobody  left  his  place.  Once  they  came  on  the  chimney  at  the  greatest  distance  from  the 
medium,  where  three  lights  shone  for  some  minutes  observed  by  all. 

"  Keport  26,  October  1st,  1869,  of  '  Oromase '  describes  light  phenomena  on  the  hands 
of  a  lady.     It  appeared  on  request  several  times  in  the  same  way." 

"Different  sounds  from  instruments  came  under  our  personal  observation.  In  a 
company  of  several  persons  we  once  obtained  the  playing  of  a  small  harp  in  a  degree  of 
light  which  permitted  every  one  to  see  the  instrument  upright  on  the  table,  and  swaying 
in  different  directions  while  nobody  touched  it." 

"  Report  16  B,  March  4th,  1869. — Duets  were  played  with  an  ^olian  harp,  lying 
on  the  table,  and  some  porcelain  plates  shut  in  a  chest  near  one  of  the  walls  in  the 
dining-room  of  Hotel  Keisershof,  at  the  Hague,  moving  in  time,  and  very  strongly,  to 
the  tune  played  on  the  harp.  The  medium  through  which  these  things  happened  was 
a  young  blacksmith." 

"At  Rotterdam,  M.  Wasch  obtained  a  great  variety  of  manifestations.  Rappings, 
playing  on  musical  instruments  ;  tying  and  untying  through  the  invisibles  ;  light  pheno- 
mena, trance  speaking,  &c." 

"  In  '  Oromase,'  at  the  Hague,  where  M.  Wasch  was  received  as  a  friend,  several 
stances  were  held  with  him.  Once  the  medium  was  levitated  to  a  considerable  height 
while  he  was  held  at  both  hands — at  one  side  M.  P.,  an  officer  in  the  army,  and  at  the 
other  through  me.  We  were  obliged  to  climb  on  our  chairs  in  order  not  to  let  the 
floating  medium  slip,  and  several  of  us  felt  the  soles  of  his  boots  rest  on  their  heads, 
Another  time  the  spirit  moved  freely  round  with  a  phosphorus  light,  which  we  had 
provided  for  the  occasion.  In  the  family  circle,  M.  Wasch  obtained  still  stronger 
manifestations." 

338  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Several  of  our  kind  Dutch  correspondents  furnish  us  with  accounts  of 
haunted  houses  in  different  towns  and  cities  of  Holland,  but  whilst  we 
take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  them  for  their  trouble  in  these  trans- 
scriptions,  we  do  not  find  enough  diversity  from  other  familiar  accounts  of 
the  Polter-Gheist  to  warrant  our  making  use  of  their  several  narratives. 
The  exception  to  this  rule,  will  be  found  in  the  following  chapter,  in  which 
we  give  a  condensed  report  of  the  manifestations  occurring  in  the  Dutch 
Indies  and  the  official  examination  into  the  affair  conducted  on  the  part 
of  the  Government. 

Before  inviting  the  reader  to  follow  us  in  the  perusal  of  this  account, 
we  may  relieve  our  text  from  the  quotation  of  various  authorities  by  stating 
that  the  narrative  is  condensed  from  the  writings  of  Mdme.  Ida  Pfeiffer, 
Professor  A.  Wallace,  Dr.  Hatton,  an  eye-witness  of  the  scenes  described, 
and  a  surgeon  of  a  military  station  in  Java,  M.  Riko,  and  other  corres- 
pondents of  a  trustworthy  character. 

CHAPTER    XLL* 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    HOLLAND    (CONTINUED). 

The  following  introduction  will  serve  to  show  the  quality  and  standing  of 
the  parties  whose  experiences  will  form  the  subject  of  this  chapter. 
M.  Riko  says  : — 

"  Among  tlie  first  manifestations  observed  in  Holland,  those  occurring  in  the  family  of 
M.  Van  Herwerden  at  the  Hague,  belong  to  the  most  remarkable,  and  merit  to  be 
preserved  for  the  history  of  the  movement  in  Europe.  M.  Van  Herwerden  himself  was 
a  highly  esteemed  man  who  during  many  years  occupied  with  honour  the  office  of 
President  of  our  Government  in  one  of  the  principal  districts  of  the  Isle  of  Java.  Like 
many  of  our  Indian  officials  he  after  a  long  service,  asked  his  dismissal,  and  settled  at  the 
Hague.  The  family  was  received  among  the  best  classes  at  the  Hague.  M,  Van  Herwerden 
himself  was  a  very  positive  thinker,  an  exact  observer — in  short,  a  man  not  to  be  deceived. 
The  manifestations  occurred  in  his  own  house,  through  the  mediumship  of  a  young 
Javanese  boy,  named  Aridjan,  14  years  old,  ignorant  as  the  Javanese  are  at  that  age,  and 
incapable  of  forming  any  idea  about  spiritual  manifestations.  He  inhabited  the  house  in 
the  quality  of  a  servant ;  was  very  kindly  treated,  and  felt  thoroughly  happy.  The 
phenomena  lasted  several  years,  and  were  witnessed  by  hundreds  of  the  developed  class  ; 
including  professors,  clergymen,  physicians,  etc.  M.  Van  Herwerden  at  the  repeated 
solicitations  of  acquaintances  interested  in  Spiritualism,  published  a  volume  of  notes  at 
his  own  cost  for  private  use  of  his  friends." 

It  would  seem  that  strange  disturbances  in  the  house  and  in  the  vicinage 
of  the  boy  Aridjan  had  attracted  attention,  and  suggested  the  idea  of  a 
Spiritual  agency  for  many  months  prior  to  the  time  when  the  circles 
commenced.  The  first  sitting  was  proposed  by  friends  of  the  family  who 
had  been  apprised  of  the  disturbances,  and  was  held  on  the  evening  of 
March  i6th,  1858.  At  first  the  manifestations  were  slight  and  unimportant. 
Still  they  were  sufficiently  marked  to   prove   that  some  foreign  though 

*  Our  readers  will  kindly  bear  in  mind  the  sources  claimed  for  the  narratives  given  In  this  and 
the  preceding  chapters  on  Dutch  Spiritual  Manifestations.  In  order  to  preserve  the  simplicity  and 
point  to  the  good  faith  so  clearly  manifested  in  the  several  translations  herewith  submitted,  the 
author  has  preferred  to  retain  as  much  as  possible  her  correspondents'  own  phraseology. 

Hon.  Alexander  Aksakof, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  339 

invisible  power  was  present,  and  that  the  boy  Aridjan  supplied  the  force 
by  which  the  unseen  operators  manifested.  At  the  seventh  seance  loud 
rappings  were  heard,  and  intelligent  answers  were  spelled  out  by  the 
alphabet.  The  table  at  which  the  stances  were  held  was  a  large  one,  and 
a  lamp  was  kept  burning  in  the  room  by  Spirit  direction.  The  Javanese 
Medium  could  neither  read,  write  nor  spell,  and  sat  perfectly  still  in  the 
chair  provided  for  him,  unless  moved  about,  as  was  often  the  case,  by 
Spirit  power.  For  the  rest  of  the  details,  we  shall  refer  the  reader  to  M. 
Van  Herwerden's  diary,  which  was  published  under  the  title  oi Experie?ices 
and  Communication  on  a  still  Mysterious  Territory. 

This  book  numbers  over  200  pages,  and  is  profusely  illustrated  by 
diagrams  and  fac  similes  of  spirit  writing,  drawing,  &c.,  &c.  Only  a  few 
extracts  from  M.  Riko's  translation  of  this  curious  record  can  be  given, 
but  they  will  suffice  to  show  the  general  character  of  what  occurred. 

"  8th  July,  1858. — A  young  lady  got  at  request  strong  blows  on  the  table,  in  the 
presence  of  two  servants  who — after  being  called  in  the  circle  room — gave  their  testimony. 
A  little  later,  the  door  of  the  room  opened  ;  rappings  on  the  table  and  scratching  at  the 
back  of  a  paper  the  lady  had  in  her  hand,  were  followed  by  distinct  touchings  on  her  face. 
Aridjan  remained  in  another  room,  and  no  manifestations  occurred  there  in  the  lady's 

"  23rd  August,  1858. — A  frivolous  spirit  manifested,  and  one  of  the  ladies  present 
exhorted  him  about  his  conduct.  The  table  moved  very  quickly  in  the  lady's  direction 
and  obliged  her  to  retire  to  the  wall  by  pressing  with  force  against  her. 

"  25th  Augiist,  1858. — Besides  Aridjan,  another  medium  was  present.  Rappings  and 
strong  blows  all  round  the  room.  It  seemed  the  spirits  attracted  by  the  two  mediums, 
did  not  sympathise,  for  the  noise  and  moving  of  furniture  indicated  clearly  a  fight 
between  two  spirits.  Even  the  mediums  were  shaken  and  their  chairs  rocked.  Once 
Aridjan  was  thrown  to'  the  floor  with  chair.  At  last  Aridjan's  friend  seemed  to  get  the 
victory  ;  he  showed  this  by  giving  a  tremendous  blow  on  the  table,  followed  by  a  strong 
grip  on  the  keys  of  the  piano  which  stood  at  some  distance  behind  the  medium.  After  this 
all  remained  quiet. 

"22nd  September,  1858. — At  a  stance  held  in  another  family  M.  Van  Herwerden  had 
made  acquaintance  with  a  spirit  calling  himself  Paurellus,  and,  claiming  to  have  been  a 
Spanish  monk  who  was  assassinated  in  one  of  the  cloisters  of  this  city,  about  300  years 
ago,  performed  a  series  of  very  remarkable  manifestations.  This  evening  Paurellus  wanted 
the  lamps  to  be  taken  out  of  the  room,  and  paper  and  pencil  put  on  the  table.  After 
about  20  minutes  writing  was  heard  on  the  paper,  after  which  the  paper  flew  like  a  bird 
round  the  circle,  which  made  Aridjan  scream  for  fear.  The  paper  was  then  thrown  on  the 
table  and  the  lead  pencil  flew  to  the  other  side  of  the  room.  On  getting  the  lamp  again, 
some  Spanish  words  were  found  on  the  paper.  There  was  also  direct  writing  in  a  tongue 
unknown  to  all  in  the  circle.  After  this,  Paurellus  wrote  some  words  in  Dutch,  "  Faith, 
hope,  charity,"  and  other  small  sentences.  In  the  subsequent  s^a?ices,  the  writing  developed 
more  and  more,  as  will  be  illustrated. 

"  16th  October,  1858. — Aridjan  wrote  by  means  of  a  planchette,  a  series  of  extraordinary 
hieroglyphs,  which  showed  a  great  likeness  to  the  spirit  writing  published  by  Kerner  in 
his  '  Seeress  of  Prevorst.'  Of  course  the  ignorant  Javanese  boy  knew  nothing  about  this 
■work  published  in  German  and  not  translated  in  Dutch.  After  this,  Paurellus  touched 
the  keyboard  of  the  piano  which  he  had  often  done  before.  ...  In  the  course 
of  this  month  very  interesting  communications  in  French  were  obtained  through  the 
planchette,  by  a  spirit  signing  herself  Aurelie  de  B -. 

"3rd  November,  1858.— Some  days  previous  to  this  sitting,  M.  Van  Hewerden  had 
put  on  the  table  a  kind  of  child's  accordion.  Paurellus  had  tried  it,  but  soon  threw  it 
away.  Another  accordion,  much  better,  was  provided.  At  Paurellus'  request  the  lamp 
was  taken  to  another  room  and  the  piano  opened,  after  which,  the  company,  with  the 
boy  Aridjan,  seated  themselves  at  one  side  of  the  table,  in  close  proximity  to  each  other. 
Aridjan  got  sleepy,  but  Paurellus,  who  didn't  like  this,  kept  him  perfectly  awake  by 
heavy  blows  under  his  chair,  or  by  shaking  him  now  and  then  with  force,  a  perfect 
remedy  against  sleep.  After  having  knocked  at  different  distances  on  the  furniture, 
Paurellus  gave  several  rappings  on  the  instrument  with  the  decided  wish  to  have  the 
attention  of  the  sitters  fixed  on  it,  after  which,  he  took  the  accordion  and  began  to  play. 
Now  he  floated  the  instrument  high  above  the  heads  of  the  sitters,  then  again  he  swiftly 

340  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

moved  it  near  the  floor.  Sometimes  he  played  with  full  force,  and  then  again  in 
beautiful  pianissimo.  After  having  finished  this  performance,  he  put  the  instrument 
on  the  table.  Four  times  he  resumed  his  music,  and  sometimes  held  the  instrument 
directly  at  the  ears  of  the  sitters,  as  if  he  were  afraid  to  have  them  miss  one  tone.  In 
the  pauses  of  his  music,  he  took  the  piano  tabouret  and  placed  it  on  the  table  ;  opened 
one  of  the  music  books  and  played  a  slow  melody  on  the  piano.  To  finish  the  performance 
of  this  evening,  Paurellus  lifted  the  heavy  table  several  times  as  high  as  the  sitters'  eyes. 

"  12th  November,  1858. — Paurellus  began  to  show  for  a  moment  behind  the  medium 
a  column  of  light,  but  it  was  still  weak.  After  this  he  showed  several  times  small  but 
brilliant  lights  in  different  parts  of  the  room.  By  direct  writing  he  produced  two  verses 
of  a  religious  hymn  of  the  Dutch  Protestants. 

"  29th  November,  1858. — One  of  the  sitters  mentally  wished  Paurellus  to  lift  the 
table  and  touch  the  piano,  without  uttering  a  single  word  about  it.  After  a  few  minutes 
the  table  was  Hfted  very  high,  and  directly  the  keys  of  the  piano  resounded  with  force. 

I  "18th  December,  1858. — M.  V.  H.  had  made  a  pair  of  pasteboard  speaking  tubes, 
which  were  put  on  the  table  beside  the  accordion  paper  and  pencU.  Paurellus  came  at 
the  hour  he  had  announced  at  a  previous  sitting,  he  being  always  punctual  He  played 
first  the  accordion.  Then  he  placed  a  chair  at  the  free  side  of  the  table,  always  kept 
ready  for  him,  after  which  he  took  one  of  the  tubes  and  spoke  through  it  to  each  of  the 
sitters.  But  the  excitement  of  the  latter  at  this  first  hearing  of  the  direct  voice,  and  the 
faintness  of  the  sounds,  rendered  what  the  good  Paurellus  said  not  understood.  Still 
it  was  learned  that  he  promised  to  bring  on  a  following  occasion  some  good  spirits  to 
assist  him.  He  touched  the  sitters  with  the  tube,  and  gave  rappings  on  it  to  prove  that 
it  was  he  who  held  it  himself. 

"  7th  February,  1859. — At  a  previous  sitting,  Paurellus  had  promised  to  give  direct 
writing  in  a  shut  room.  This  evening  Paurellus  said  this  had  been  done.  One  of  the 
ladies  took  a  lighted  candle  and  the  door  key  and  went  upstairs  to  the  room  which  had 
been  set  aside.  However,  the  paper  on  the  table  was  untouched,  and  the  lady  let  it 
remain  where  it  was,  with  the  pencil.  On  leaving  the  room  she  heard  the  rusthng  of  a 
paper,  and  her  dress  was  pulled.  On  looking  on  the  floor,  she  found  a  sheet  of  paper  on 
which  several  characters  of  spirit  writing  were  found.  This  manifestation  was  repeated 
on  the  11th  of  February,  when  the  paper  was  found  covered  with  a  drawing  representing 
a  human  figure  besides  some  hieroglyphs. 

"  19th  February,  1859. — This  evening  Paurellus  played  the  guitar  while  another  spirit 
accompanied  him  on  the  piano,  which  stood  at  its  ordinary  place  against  the  wall.  After 
a  while,  on  Pailrellus's  request,  one  of  the  company  'in  the  flesh'  played  the  guitar,  a 
lady  the  mouth  harmonica,  one  of  the  spirits  the  piano,  while  Paurellus  himself  took  his 
accordion  and  managed  the  performance.  At  the  same  time  many  spirit  lights  danced  to 
the  measure  of  the  tune  round  the  Medium  Aridjan.  After  this  Paurellus  asked  one  of 
the  ladies  in  French  'Jouez  encore  une  fois,'  and  after  this  had  been  done,  with  an 
accompanying  song,  he  said,  '  Merci,  jolie  chanteuse.'  " 

"16th  May,  1859. — In  the  meantime  Paurellus  had  succeeded  in  materializing  his 
hands,  and  very  often  he  touched  the  sitters  or  laid  his  hand  in  theirs.  He  had  succeeded 
also  in  playing  a  pair  of  castagnettes  to  an  accompaniment  of  the  piano. 

"  20th  May,  1859. — Paurellus  was  presented  vrith  a  new  and  beautiful  mouth  harmonica ; 
there  was  no  end  of  his  playing  this  evening.  Once  he  accompanied  a  quatre  main  by 
the  invisibles  on  the  piano.  By  direct  writing  he  thanked  for  the  new  instrument.  A 
lady  gave  Paurellus  a  sealed  letter.  He  took  it  gently  from  her,  broke  the  sealing  wax, 
after  which  he  wrote  for  a  moment,  and  placed  the  answer  in  the  lady's  hand.  Nobody 
knew  the  contents  of  the  letter  besides  the  writer,  and  the  answer  was  correct.  The  lady 
had  asked  how  she  could  vanquish  her  fear  of  the  spirits,  and  Paurellus  answered  she 
could  do  this  by  praying  to  God. 

"  23rd  May,  1859. — Paurellus  spoke  this  evening  very  distinctly  and  slow,  and  on  one 
occasion  a  religious  song  executed  on  the  piano  was  accompanied  by  sweet  spirit  singing. 

"  1st  September,  1859. — One  of  the  ladies  sat  at  the  piano.  Mrs.  Van  Herwerden 
expressed  a  wish  to  have  her  eau  de  cologne  flagon.  Paurellus  took  it  from  her,  opened 
first  the  golden  and  then  the  glass  stopper,  which  he  put  on  the  table.  He  moistened  his 
hand  and  rubbed  one  of  the  gentlemen's  foreheads,  then  he  sprinkled  the  lady  at  the  piauo 
with  the  scent,  and  put  the  glass  stopper  under  Aridjan's  nose. 

"  3rd  November,  1859. — This  evening,  the  light  streaming  in  from  cracks  in  the  bUnds 
Was  sufficient  to  distinguish  the  furniture  in  the  room,  the  pictures  on  the  wall,  etc.  The 
usual  manifestations  went  on,  but  no  forms  could  be  seen  who  did  them.  This  was  also 
the  case  on  January  14th,  1860,  when  the  accordion  was  seen  floating  through  the  room 
sustained  by  nothing.  On  the  same  evening,  Paurellus  made  a  lady  feel  the  sleeve  of  his 
dress,  which  she  described  as  very  vsdde  and  soft. 

"  16th  February,  1860. — Paurellus  wished  from  one  of  the  ladies  a  lesson  on  the  piano. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  341 

He  took  her  by  the  hand  and  conducted  her  to  the  instrument,  after  which  he  put  his 
hands  on  the  key-board.  The  lady  directed  this  spirit  hand,  and  put  the  fingers  on  the 
right  keys.     This  evening  he  sang  also  more  than  once. 

"  29th  March,  1860. — By  the  light  coming  in  through  cracks  in  the  door  of  the  room, 
a  tall  form  in  long  drapery  was  seen  moving  through  the  room. 

"  11th  May,  1860. — Paurellus  asked  for  ink,  which  was  given  him,  and  produced  a 
direct  writing  in  Spanish — a  language  unknown  to  the  whole  family.  The  writing  finished 
with  the  words  (translated) :  "  Don't  believe  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they 
are  from  God." 

"31st  May,  1860. — This  evening,  two  spirits  were  seen  in  the  room,  who  seemed  to  be 
holding  an  interesting  conversation,  as  could  be  perceived  by  their  quick  gestures, 

"  15th  June,  1860. — Paurellus  showed  a  luminous  hand. 

"13th  July,  1860. — Mr.  D.  G played  a  grand  air  from  'Martha'  on  the  piano, 

accompanied  by  Paurellus,  who  moved  very  quickly,  now  in  the  bass,  then  in  the  descant, 
often  between  the  hands  of  the  player,  along  the  key -board, 

"  23rd  March,  1861, — The  lamp  remained  in  the  room  where  it  was  put,  in  a  corner 
behind  a  table  cloth.  By  this  dim  light  the  accordion  was  played,  and  the  opening  of 
the  keys  seen,  without  a  hand  touching  it. 

"  30th  May,  1861. — Paurellus  took  the  large  table  from  the  circle,  and  placed  it  near 
the  door,  at  a  distance  of  10  or  12  feet.  A  little  one  was  then  put  by  him  in  the  circle. 
Some  moments  later  two  gentlemen  were  lifted  with  chairs  and  all,  and  turned  in  different 
directions,  Paurellus  wrote  with  ink  at  the  large  table,  at  a  considerable  distance  from 
the  sitters,  Paurellus  played  the  accordion  under  the  table,  and  touched  the  sitters 
with  it.  The  heavy  table  floated  through  the  room  at  a  height  of  3  or  4  feet,  while 
Aridjan  remained  in  his  chair, 

''3rd  April,  1862. — Within  some  days  we  go  to  the  south  of  Italy.  I  told  this  to 
Paurellus,  and  he  wrote  directly,  '  I  wish  you  a  good  voyage,  God  be  with  you  !  I'll 
come  whenever  you'll  call  me.'     Aridjan  will  accompany  us. 

"  8th  July,  1862. — Paurellus  manifested  every  time  during  our  voyage  we  sat  for  mani- 
festations. On  our  return  to  Paris,  he  told  us  one  of  the  servants  at  home  had  been  ill. 
This  was  verified  at  our  arrival  at  the  Hague.  Last  months  of  1862,  Paurellus  manifested 
only  occasionally.  He  told  us  that  he  in  the  future  wanted  permission  from  higher, 
spirits  to  come.  At  the  same  time  Aridjan  became  suffering,  so  that  we  had  to  cease 
our  sittings. 

"  So  far  the  few  and  incomplete  extracts  from  Mr.  V.  H.'s  diary.  They  are  sufficient 
to  show  the  gradual  developing  of  the  manifestations  from  rappings  to  playing  of  different 
instruments,  direct  speaking,  singing  and  writing,  spirit  Kghts,  mind  reading,  material- 
isation, etc.  The  drawings  also  executed  through  the  spirit,  showed  a  great  progress. 
First  he  made  rough  and  childish  sketches,  but  after  some  exercise  very  good  drawings." 

CHAPTER    XLII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   THE   DUTCH    INDIES. 

All  observers  who  have  had  an  opportunity  of  investigating  Spiritual 
phenomena  in  countries  where  an  aboriginal  population  is  still  found,  will 
realize  the  fact,  that  the  coloured  races  seem  to  be  largely  endowed  with 
that  pecuhar  force  through  which  Spirits  from  the  life  beyond  can  communi- 
cate with  mortals.  That  which  we  now  call  "  Mediumistic  power,"  appears 
to  prevail  so  largely  in  the  organisms  of  aboriginal  people,  that  spontaneous 
manifestations  of  Spirit  presence  are  far  more  abundant  amongst  them,  than 
with  Europeans, 

It  is  doubtless  the  extent  and  spontaniety  of  this  force  amongst  savage 
races,  which  gives  rise  to  the  opinion  that  they  are  "  very  superstitious,"  and 
that  the  phenomena  which  actually  occur,  are  due  to  the  effects  of  ignorance 
and  hallucination. 

342  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  time  is  not  far  distant  when  such  opinions  will  be  visited  on  the 
propounders,  and  "ignorance"  in  connection  with  Spiritual  manifestations 
will  consist  of  incredulity,  rather  than  honest  belief  in  facts.  Still  other 
noteworthy  features  in  aboriginal  Spiritualism  are  violent  disturbances  and 
manifestations  of  a  mischievous  nature.  It  need  hardly  be  pointed  out, 
that  such  specialities  are  only  in  accordance  with  the  obviously  human 
character  of  the  source  from  whence  these  manifestations  come. 

The  lower  and  more  degraded  a  human  being,  or  Spirit  may  be,  the 
more  he  rejoices  in  mischief,  and  delights  to  rule  by  fear,  and  the  exercise 
of  tyrannical  power. 

It  must  also  be  remembered  that  the  white  races  have  generally  acted  as 
the  oppressors  of  weaker  and  less  civilized  nations  than  themselves ;  hence, 
the  harassing  disturbances  attributed  by  white  settlers  to  aboriginal  Spirits, 
may  not  improbably  arise  from  a  sentiment  of  racial  enmity,  and  desire  for 
retribution,  and  although  Spirits  are  rarely  if  ever  known  to  inflict  bodily 
injury  upon  those  whom  they  harass,  and  this,  when  it  is  evident  from 
their  feats  of  strength  and  dexterity  that  they  have  the  ability  to  do  so, 
it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  they  may  take  pleasure  in  the  performance 
of  such  mischief  as  will  astonish  and  annoy  the  people  whom  they  regard 
as  the  enemies  of  their  race.  There  are  some  noble  exceptions  to  this 
rule,  as  in  the  case  of  many  negro  slaves  whose  Spirits  often  return  to  do 
good  to  the  families  of  their  white  owners.  Still  more  remarkable  is  the 
exception  afforded  by  the  North  American  Indians ;  "  the  hapless  red  man," 
whose  wrongs,  inflicted  at  the  hands  of  his  white  oppressors,  exceed  all 
possibility  of  belief.  And  yet  the  Spirits  of  these  high-souled  savages  have 
ever  been  prominent  in  returning  good  for  the  evil  inflicted  upon  them. 
In  the  modern  Spiritual  dispensation  it  is  well  known  that  there  is  scarcely 
an  American  Medium  who  has  not  been  attended  and  generously  served  by 
a  kind  Indian,  Spirit.  These  children  of  nature  bring  their  knowledge  of 
the  healing  properties  of  roots  and  herbs,  to  the  aid  of  afliicted  humanity. 
Wise  in  counsel,  strong  in  physical  force,  and  beneficent  in  healing,  the 
Red  Indians  hold  a  special  place  in  the  history  of  modern  Spiritual  mani- 
festations, which  it  would  be  the  height  of  ingratitude  to  deny  or  repudiate. 
The  reader  is  kindly  invited  to  consider  these  remarks,  before  entering 
upon  the  details  of  the  following  narratives.  They  are  offered  as  a  necessary 
introduction,  to  account  in  some  measure  for  the  strange  and  apparently 
malignant  manifestations  which  are  to  be  described  in  the  ensuing  pages. 

Spiritualism  has  always  been  rife  in  the  Dutch  Indies.  As  the  people 
with  whom  its  phenomena  have  occurred,  invariably  attribute  them  to  an 
evil  and  revengeful  spirit,  although  a  human  one,  and  fear  to  provoke  acts 
of  retaliation  by  complaint,  they  are  very  loath  to  speak  of  these  things, 
especially  to  those  who  try  to  investigate  them.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
writers  in  the  different  Colonial  journals,  who  are  apprised  of  supernatural 
disturbances  through  popular  report,  are  apt  to  dismiss  the  subject  with 
flippant  comments  on  the  "  superstition  of  the  lower  classes,"  or  ridiculous 
travesties  of  the  occurrences  in  question.  The  tone  of  public  opinion  has 
undergone  so  great  a  change  since  those  who  are  in  the  high  places  of 
society  have  condescended  to  investigate,  and  in  many  instances  to  endorse, 
the  fact  of  Spirit  communion,  that  people  in  the  middle  ranks  of  life  are 
encouraged  thereby  and  no  longer  feel  ashamed  to  acknowledge  that  which 
their  senses  have  borne  testimony  to,  and  hence,  we  are  flooded  with 
accounts  of  what  has  occurred  through  Spirit  power  in  the  Dutch  Indies. 
From  a  vast  multitude  of  records  we  select  the  following. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  343 

A  gentleman  holding  a  high  official  position  in  Java,  writes  to  the  author, 
describing  several  rural  districts  that  have  been  completely  abandoned  in 
consequence  of  certain  disturbances  which  the  country  people  attribute  to 
a  Gendarola  or  Spirit  of  an  evil  human  being. 

Our  correspondent  says : — 

"In  1834,  at  Saehapoesa,  there  was  a  much  respected  family  by  the  name  of  Teisseire. 
Mr.  T,  was  a  government  inspector  of  indigo.  One  day,  while  dining,  stones  fell  upon  his 
table,  and  for  a  fortnight  fell  in  every  chamber  of  his  house. 

"  Some  years  after  the  above  took  place,  similar  phenomena  were  again  recorded  at 
Bandong  while  M.  V.  Van  Gaasbeck  was  there  as  'assistant  resident.'  The  civilized 
Javanese  regents  and  the  native  chiefs  affirm  that  these  things  often  occur  in  the  '  colonies,' 
but  that  the  Indians  seldom  mention  them,  because  they  are  ridiculed  by  the  *  skeptical 
Neerlandaii.' 

"  At  one  time  there  came  the  bones  and  at  another  the  whole  head  of  a  buffalo.  The 
Regent  of  S.,  wishing  himself  to  know  about  these  strange  occurrences,  came  to  pass  the 
night  there,  but  when  he  put  himself  on  the  bed  it  was  so  shaken  and  finally  lifted  from 
the  floor,  that  he  quit  at  once.  Tkere  was  a  light  burning  in  the  room,  and  the  Regent's 
son  and  servants  were  about  him.  What  was  especially  wonderful  was  that  the  stones, 
which  were  marked  with  a  cross  or  otherwise,  and  thrown  into  the  torrent  of  Tjilandoog, 
which  ran  near  the  house  and  was  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  deep,  were  in  less  than  a 
minute  thrown  back  again. 

"  A  M.  Ament,  in  the  district  of  Beranger,  an  inspector  of  the  culture  de  cafS,  states 
that  there  was  a  gendarola  in  a  little  house  at  Bandong,  which  manifested  as  follows  : 
The  police  having  been  placed  within  and  without,  an  old  woman  led  the  way  to  it  by 
its  only  approach,  a  narrow  lane.  She  was  followed  by  M.  A.,  an  assistant,  and  the 
Regent,  but  the  moment  she  crossed  the  sill  of  the  door  she  was  seized  by  the  legs,  thrown 
down,  and  dragged  away  by  invisible  hands.  M,  Ament,  entering  the  premises,  received 
on  his  breast  a  quantity  of  sand  thrown  with  such  force  that,  while  telling  of  the  affair 
in  1870  in  Batavia,  he  declared  he  did  not  wish  again  a  like  experience. 

"In  1825,  M.  Mertins  was  Governor  of  the  Moluccas.  At  Amboina,  during  his 
administration,  in  the  Fort  Victoria,  near  the  close  of  the  day,  a  multitude  of  stones  fell 
from  the  air.  The  fort  was  so  far  from  any  inhabited  spot,  that  the  missiles  could  not 
have  come  thence.  The  soldiers  were  called  to  arms,  but  this  did  not  prevent  the  shower 
of  stones  and  plaster.  This  was  several  times  repeated,  but  not  a  person  was  hit.  In 
Banda,  in  1842,  this  same  thing  was  witnessed." 

M.  Riko  describes  some  manifestations  in  the  Dutch  Indies  a  few 
years  ago,  through  the  Mediumship  of  an  itinerant,  who  went  from 
place  to  place  exhibiting  phenomena  which  he  declared  were  produced  by 
Spirits,  and  for  which  no  other  account  could  be  rendered. 

This  man,  a  half  breed,  or  descendant  from  mixed  castes,  would  roll 
up  his  lithe  form  into  a  complete  ball.  In  this  state  a  committee 
of  sceptics  previously  chosen,  would  bind  him  with  cords  and  knots 
impossible  for  mortals  to  loosen,  and  then  sew  him  up  in  a  strong  linen 
bag.  A  sheet  was  then  thrown  over  the  immovable  mass,  but  in  less 
than  sixty  seconds  the  man  would  be  invariably  free,  and  enierge  unbound 
from  the  sheet.  This  performance  was  given  as  above  stated  in  numerous 
towns  and  districts  of  the  colonies,  in  the  light,  and  in  presence  of 
hundreds  of  spectators. 

As  an  example  of  the  power  of  the  Sefan,  or  Gendarola,  whose  tricks  are 
so  constantly  performed  in  the  Dutch  Indies,  M.  Riko  gives  the  following 
narrative : — 

"  Another  remarkable  history  happened  in  the  dessa  Ngalian  Regentship,  Boys  Lalie, 
Soeraharta.  The  Javanese  Karis  Minto,  an  old  weak  man,  went  in  December,  1877,  on 
a  certain  evening  to  a  short  distance  from  his  house,  on  some  domestic  business.  On  his 
way  home  he  met  with  a  Gendarola,  who  took  hold  of  him  and  put  him  in  less  than  a 
second  in  a  very  high  naugha  tree,  where  he  fixed  the  man  between  the  branches,  with 
bis  own  sarong.    The  man  told  a,fterwards  that  he  could  not  call  for  assistance  while  the 

344  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Oendarola  was  busy  with  him.  After  having  spent  nearly  two  hours  in  this  disagreeable 
position,  his  wife  and  friends  being  frightened  by  his  prolonged  absence,  provided  them- 
selves with  an  '  obor '  (light),  and  found  him  in  the  position  above  described.  He  could 
only  be  liberated  by  means  of  a  very  high  ladder,  and  after  much  trouble.  Similar 
phenomena  have  been  observed  in  different  parts  of  the  Indian  Archipelago." 

The  following  case  was  communicated  to  the  author  by  a  Javanese 
gentleman  of  strict  probity.  The  circumstances  were  published  in  all  the 
Javanese  papers,  but  as  it  involved  the  credit  of  a  well-known  citizen  of 
Madiven,  the  initials  of  the  parties'  names  were  all  that  the  author  was 
privileged  to  publish.  It  may  be  stated  however  that  the  facts  as  now 
related,  were  translated  from  the  Malay o  of  1878  : — 

"  On  the  evening  of  October  7th,  Gretchen,  the  little  seven  years'  old  daughter  of  M. 

and  Madame  S came  in  from  the  garden  seemingly  tired  of  play.     In  an  instant  she 

fell  on  the  haU  haU  (couch)  and  became  unconscious.  The  parents  could  not  awaken  the 
little  one,  and  neighbours  were  hastily  summoned.  One  of  them  advised  the  calHng  in 
of  old  Anne,  who  was  esteemed  in  that  neighbourhood  as  a  nurse,  doctor,  and  something 
of  a  good  witch. 

"  Anne  comes,  when  lo  !  the  child  sits  up  and  speaks,  though  not  with  consciousness, 
nor  in  her  own  voice,  but  in  that  of  a  man.  The  nurse  takes  an  herb  and  puts  it  into  the 
child's  mouth,  and  says  :  '  Setan,  where  do  you  live  ?'     The  child  answers  immediately, 

'  I  live  eastward  in  the  kampong  B ,  and  my  father's  name  is  S .'     The  old  woman 

replies,  '  Then  go  away  ;  you  have  nothing  to  do  here.'  The  child  cries  ;  '  I  will  not 
return,  as  long  as  the  man  who  lives  here  does  not  pay  the  debt  he  owes  to  my  father.* 
The  inhabitant  of  the  house  is  thunderstruck  !     He  owes  since  some  time  a  sum  of  money 

to  S ,  and  promises  to  pay  it  the  following  day.     The  child  gives  them  the  directions 

to  burn  some  perfume,  after  which  she  awakes  without  remembering  anything  of  what 
had  happened." 

Numerous  cases  of  stone  throwing  and  the  projection  of  missiles  by 
invisible  hands  have  been  sent  to  the  author.  The  most  remarkable 
however,  because  the' one  best  sustained  by  unquestionable  evidence,  is 
that  of  the  disturbances  which  occurred  in  the  house  of  M.  Van  KessUnger 
of  Java.  M.  Riko  having  kindly  sent  a  good  translation  of  the  ofiScial 
reports  printed  at  the  time,  we  shall  again  take  advantage  of  his  graphic 
pen,  only  premising  that  the  reader  may  compare  the  narrative  here 
subjoined,  with  accounts  of  the  same  disturbances  described  in  the  London 
Spiritual  Magazine  of  1868  (February  number),  by  Professor  A.  R. 
Wallace — mentioned  also  in  Madame  Pfeiffer's  **  Second  Voyage  Round 
the  World,"  and  several  other  cotemporaneous  publications.  M.  Riko 
says  : — 

"  Amongst  the  spiritualistic  phenomena  the  throwing  of  stones  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable.  A  very  interesting  example  occurred  on  the  Isle  of  Java.  An  official  report 
was  drawn  up  about  the  history,  and  deposited  in  the  government  archives  of  the 
Netherlands.  The  report  was  made  by  the  Assistant  Resident  and  addressed  to  the 
General  Governor  of  the  Dutch  East  Indian  Colonies,  J.  C.  Band. 

"  I  begin  with  the  document  and  translate  it  verbatim. 

"  '  1831.  To  his  Excellency  the  General  Governor  ad  interim  of  the  Dutch  Indies. 
"  '  On  February  4th,  coming  home  from  an  inspection,  I  saw  at  a  distance  my  house 
surrounded  by  a  large  number  of  people.  Unable  to  understand  what  that  meant,  my 
vnfe  told  me  after  I  had  entered,  that  in  the  interior  gallery  and  room,  there  fell  a  large 
number  of  stones,  and  that  it  was  impossible  to  discover  from  whence  they  came.  Hearing 
this,  I  got  a  little  angry,  saying,  that  a  person  with  healthy  eyes  certainly  could  see 
through  whom  the  stones  were  thrown.  I  went  to  the  interior  gallery  where  most  of  the 
stones  had  fallen,  and  was  soon  convinced  that  it  could  not  be  done  by  human  hands, 
because  the  stones  fell  sometimes  perpendicularly  just  before  my  feet,  without  moving 
further,  and  while  nobody  was  near.  I  then  inspected  the  boards  and  the  ceiling  and 
found  them  all  fixed  and  joined  together  without  any  opening.     After  this,  I  assembled 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  345 

all  persons  living  in  or  near  the  house  on  an  open  place  before  the  house,  and  had  them 
watched  by  some  policemen.  After  I  had  shut  all  the  doors  and  windows  I  went  in  again, 
accompanied  by  my  wife.  But  then  the  disturbances  began  still  more  vehemently  and  the 
stones  came  flying  from  every  direction,  so  that  I  soon  was  obliged  to  reopen  the  doors 
and  windows.  This  continued  during  16  days  ;  sometimes  there  fell  in  one  day  about  a 
thousand  stones,  amongst  which  there  were  some  of  9  pounds  weight.  I  must  not  forget 
to  state,  that  my  house  is  constructed  of  boards  of  dry  djatiewood,  the  windows  were 
also  shut  by  a  lattice  work  in  wood  with  spaces  of  about  2  inches.  The  throwing  began 
commonly  about  6  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  continued  till  about  11  in  the  evening.  I 
pass  silently  the  particularity  that  the  stones  fell  mostly  near  an  Indian  girl  about  11 
years  old,  and  seemed  to  follow  that  child  ;  this  is  indifferent  to  the  case,  and  would  make 
this  report  too  long  to  dwell  upon. 

"In  confirmation  of  these  facts,  I  give  some  names  of  credible  persons  who  were 
witnesses  of  the  affair,  and  who  will  give  their  statements  under  oath : — Michiels,  lieutenant- 
colonel,  aide-de-camp ;  Ermantinger,  ex-inspector  of  the  coffee  culture  ;  Dornseiff,  owner 
of  an  inn  at  Sumadan  ;  Born,  surveyor ;  Adi  Path^  Soeria  Laga,  ex-regent ;  Eomman- 
gong  Soeria  Laga,  now  Regent  of  Sumadan  ;  Soeria  Laga,  chief  djaksa ;  and  several 
district  chiefs. 

"  (Signed)  V.  Kesslingeb. 

For  literal  copy, 
"  (Signed)  J.  Van  Swibten. 

"Batavia,  30th  December,  1831. 

"  So  far  the  report.  The  Assistant-Resident  Van  Kesslinger  lived  at  Sumadan,  in  the 
Preanger  districts.  The  General-Major,  A.  V.  Michiels,  was  invited  also  by  the  Governor- 
general  to  hold  an  inspection  in  loco,  which  he  did  with  much  care.  He  was  a  positive 
minded,  and  highly  esteemed  officer.  He  asserts  amongst  other  points,  that  he  shut 
himself  up,  only  accompanied  by  the  child  named  in  the  report,  in  the  room,  while  nobody 
else  was  admitted.  He  placed  himself  against  the  wall  and  took  the  child  near  him.  In 
this  position  he  observed  the  fall  of  the  stones  during  several  hours  consecutively.  They 
came  mostly  when  his  attention  was  fixed  especially  on  the  child.  They  fell  perpendicu- 
larly very  near  her,  but  never  hurt  or  touched  her.  The  girl  was  not  in  the  least  afraid  or 
astonished.  In  the  Indian  Archipelago  the  inhabitants  generally  believe  the  stone  throwing 
by  spirits  to  be  a  fact.     The  Javanese  call  it  Oendarola. 

h.  "  Mr,  Van  Kesslinger  had  no  children.  His  vrife  was  an  Indian  lady,  and  the  girl's 
father  was  the  cook  of  the  family.  The  house  was  a  service-dwelling.  On  February  the 
3rd,  1831,  the  child  played  in  the  room  near  Mrs.  Van  Kesslinger  ;  the  husband  was  then 
travelling.  All  at  once  the  girl  sprang  towards  Mrs.  Van  KessHnger,  and  showed  her 
white  kabaai  (an  Indian  dress),  on  which  a  red  siri  spittle  was  seen.  The  chewing  of  siri 
is  very  common  in  the  Indies  ;*  the  lady  thought  at  first  it  might  have  been  done  by  one 
of  the  servants.  The  girl  was  given  a  fresh  kabaai,  and  the  affair  seemed  ended.  But  a 
moment  afterwards  the  child  was  again  bespit,  and  at  the  same  moment  a  shower  of  the 
yolk  of  an  egg  fell  directly  before  Mrs.  Van  Kesslinger's  feet.  This  was  repeated  several 
times,  so  that  the  lady  sent  for  the  Regent  Eadeen,  Natto  Koesomo.  This  government 
officer  was  an  intelligent  and  honest  man.  He  came  and  witnessed  the  fall  of  the  stones. 
He  had  the  house  surrounded  by  his  people,  and  sent  everybody  outside.  The  siri  spittle 
appeared  just  the  same,  and  the  stones  fell  also  ;  no  cause  could  be  discovered.  At  length 
it  was  resolved  to  fetch  an  Indian  priest  to  exorcise  the  spirit.  He  came  in  the  twilight, 
set  himself  on  the  floor,  with  a  lamp  near  him,  and  opened  the  Koran,  Just  as  he  began 
to  read  he  got  such  a  heavy  blow  from  an  invisible  hand  that  the  lamp  flew  to  the  left  and 
the  holy  book  to  the  right'side  of  the  room.  Mrs,  Van  Kesslinger  feared  to  pass  the  night 
in  the  house,  and  went  with  the  girl  to  the  Regent's  wife.  That  night  all  remained 
quiet.  The  following  morning,  as  soon  as  the  lady  re-entered  her  house  with  the  girl, 
the  stone  throwing  began  again,  till  Mr.  Van  Kesslinger's  return.  Very  seldom  there  fell 
stones  in  the  night,  and  the  bespitting  with  siri  happened  only  in  daytime.  When  Mr. 
Michiels,  on  invitation  of  the  Governor-general,  made  his  investigation  on  the  spot,  he 
sent  every  one  away  ;  placed  men  on  the  roof  and  even  in  the  trees  in  the  neighbourhood. 
He  ordered  the  inner  room  to  be  entirely  covered  with  linen.  He  remained  with  the 
child  alone  in  the  house,  but  the  phenomena  went  on  just  the  same.  The  stones  were 
such  as  are  found  on  the  roads.  Wlien  the  sun  shone  they  were  warm,  and  when  it 
rained  they  were  wet.  Commonly  five  or  six  fell  directly  one  after  the  other,  and  this 
was  repeated  with  short  intervals.  No  opening  was  ever  made  ia  the  linen  with  which 
the  walls  and  ceiling  were  covered.  The  stones  became  visible  at  the  distance  of  about 
six  feet  from  the  floor.     Several  trunks  were  filled  with  them.     Once  a  papaya  fruit  was 

*  "  Chewing  of  siri  "—chewing  the  hetel  nut. 

346  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

thrown,  which  after  inspection  was  found  to  have  been  plucked  from  a  high  tree  near  the 
house  ;  at  other  times  chairs,  glasses,  plates,  &c.  were  moved,  without  anybody  touching 
them.  At  last  the  impression  of  a  wet  hand  was  seen  on  a  looking-glass  which  hung  on 
the  wall.  Mr.  Michiels  remained  several  days  at  Sumadan,  and  he  also  sent  in  a  report, 
likewise  deposited  in  the  archives  of  the  government. 

"  The  history  remains  till  this  day  a  profound  mystery,  and  no  cause  was  ever  detected, 
even  after  large  sums  had  been  offered  several  times  to  the  person  who  could  throw  light 
on  the  affair. 

"  General  Michiels  spoke  very  seldom  about  his  experiences.  In  1847  at  a  dinner  the 
guests  invited  him  to  tell  them  the  history.  After  some  hesitation  he  did  so.  General 
Van  Gagern,  who  was  at  the  table,  began  to  laugh  about  it,  when  a  vehement  scene 
occurred  in  which  General  Van  Gagern  was  obliged  to  withdraw  his  remarks  'and 
apologise.' '' 

M,  Riko  concludes  his  narrative  with  the  following  remarks  : — 

"In  Europe,  this  rain  of  stones  has  often  occurred.  In  the  street  ciw  Bacm  1858, 
and  in  the  street  des  Grhs,  in  1849,  in  Paris  ;  and  in  1871  I  know  myself  what  happened 
at  the  Hague.  Capt.  0.  E.  K.  occupied  the  second  story  of  a  house  in  the  street  Van 
Hogendorp.  A  rear  room  looked  out  on  the  dwellings  of  an  adjoining  street.  After  a 
residence  there  of  some  weeks,  one  afternoon  a  stone  struck  the  window  of  said  chamber. 
This  was  repeated  for  several  days,  generally  between  2  and  4  o'clock  p.m.  Pieces  of 
brick,  plaster,  coal,  pottery,  and  mud  enclosed  in  paper  came  with  such  force  that  the 
chamber  was  a  mass  of  ruins.  The  window  curtains  were  torn,  and  the  glass,  the 
window  frames,  all  the  decorations  were  in  pieces.  The  missiles  came  over  the  environing 
houses,  and  as  if  from  a  distance.  The  police  were  actively  employed  in  the  matter  for 
several  days,  and  '  sergents  de  ville  '  were  stationed  on  the  tops  of  the  dwellings,  but  the 
source  of  the  mischief  was  never  found  out." 

It  would  be  impossible  to  offer  any  satisfactory  comments  on  the  above 
narrative.  The  Polter  Gheist  of  Germany,  and  the  haunting  Spirits  of 
America  and  England,  furnish  striking  parallels  to  the  stone  throwers  of 
Java ;  but  for  the  philosophy  involved  in  the  phenomena  itself,  i.e.^  the 
passage  of  stones  through  a  closed  room  lined  with  linen,  in  which  no 
abrasion  or  rent  could  be  discovered,  and  the  sudden  appearance  of 
material  objects  at  points  where  no  human  hands  could  have  placed  them, 
all  this  involves  modes  of  procedure  which  belong  only  to  the  realms  of 
being  invisible  to  man,  and  laws  of  which  we  are  at  present  profoundly 
ignorant.  As  to  the  impelling  motives  of  such  manifestations,  they  are  not. 
so  difficult  of  solution.  Idle  and  mischievous  mfen  and  women,  boys  and 
girls,  abound  in  every  city  and  hamlet  of  civilization,  and  such  persons  as 
delight  in  ringing  door  bells,  breaking,  windows,  and  pelting  inoffensive 
passengers  with  mud,  &c.,  are  not  likely  to  become  suddenly  reformed  by 
the  casting  off  their  outer  garments  in  the  material  disintegration  called 

death.     If  the  renowned  English  Marquis  of  W ,  whose  chief  delight  it 

was  to  scare  respectable  citizens  out  of  their  beds  by  midnight  pranks,  or 
upset  helpless  old  costermongers'  stores,  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the 
distress  thus  occasioned,  had  happened  to  have  become  a  disembodied 
Spirit  in  the  plenitude  of  his  exemplary  modes  of  passing  his  time,  there  is 
no  doubt  that  he  would  have  rejoiced  in  associating  himself  with  a  company 
of  Polter  Gheists  or  Gendarolas,  and  thrown  stones,  broken  plates  and 
dishes,  or  spat  on  little  girls'  clean  aprons,  to  his  heart's  content. 

The  world  of  matter  has  yet  to  learn  that  good  and  evil,  mischief  and 
kind  service,  are  the  promptings  of  the  Spirit,  not  of  the  body,  and  until  the 
demons  of  our  city  streets  are  converted  into  angels,  demons  they  will  still 
remain,  whether  on  earth,  or  in  the  Spirit  world. 

When  those  who  denounce  all  Spirits  as  demons,  can  find  a  worse  demon 
than  a  bad  man,  we  shall  be  ready  to  join  in  the  cry  that  *' SpirituaHsm  is 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  347 

all  diabolism ; "  until  we  can  find  this  rara  avis,  we  would  counsel  those 
who  object  to  the  return  of  "  demons  "  from  the  other  life,  to  beware  how 
they  manufacture  demoniac  characters  on  earth. 

We  must  again  call  attention  to  the  fact,  that  although  much  property 
was  damaged,  and  many  persons  were  annoyed  and  terrified  in  these  curious 
Javanese  manifestations,  no  one  was  hurt,  and  the  stones  hurled  at  property, 
•were  never  laujiched  against  life.  Would  we  could  say  as  much  for  the 
malignant  Spirits,  who  haunt  our  earthly  homes,  still  clothed  in  the  panoply 
of  flesh. 

It  now  only  remains  to  notice  a  few  of  the  honoured  names  which  have 
come  prominently  before  the  public  in  connection  with  the  Spiritual  move- 
ment in  Holland.  The  first  and  most  worthy  of  notice  is  that  of  Major 
Revius,  to  whose  good  service,  attention  has  already  been  called,  as  well  as 
to  those  of  several  of  his  confreres  and  fellow-workers ;  MM.  Van  Herwer- 
den,  N.  T.  Marthese,  and  A.  J.  Riko,  whose  valuable  contributions  to  this 
volume  are  already  known  to  the  reader — in  fact  the  names  and  services  of 
the  eminent  Spiritualists  already  noted,  need  not  be  reiterated.  Mention  has 
been  made  of  Madame  Elise  Von  Calcar,  well-known  and  highly  esteemed 
throughout  Holland,  not  only  for  her  literary  labours,  but  also  for  the  high 
and  spotless  reputation  which  she  has  so  fearlessly  devoted  to  the  service  of 
SpirituaUsm.  This  lady,  whose  name  and  fame  is  calculated  to  shed  lustre 
on  any  cause,  has  given  her  best  endowments  for  many  years  to  Spiritualism. 
One  of  her  ablest  novels  has  embodied  the  current  ideas  of  the  movement 
in  terse  yet  eloquent  language,  and  in  the  shape  of  a  fictional  work,  entitled, 
in  translation,  "  Children  of  the  Age,"  she  has  enlisted  the  minds  of  her 
readers  in  the  interests  of  Spiritualism  far  more  forcibly  than  she  could 
have  done  by  any  abstract  essays. 

Another,  and  a  still  more  valuable  contribution  to  the  literature  of 
Spiritualism,  is  the  well-known  journal  conducted  by  Madame  Von  Calcar, 
namely,  a  monthly  organ  (large  book  size)  of  over  thirty-two  pages,  called 
"  Op  de  Grenzen  van  twee  Werelden,"  "  On  the  Boundaries  of  Two  Worlds." 

This  fine  periodical  has  been  published  during  the  five  past  years,  and 
its  completed  volumes  contain  a  mass  of  literature  of  the  most  important 
character,  including  descriptions  of  Spiritual  manifestations  in  every  country 
of  the  earth.  The  seers  of  every  age,  from  Apollonius  of  Tyana  to  Andrew 
Jackson  Davis ;  from  Hermes  Trismegistus  to  Jacob  the  Zouave,  are 
described  with  graphic  force  and  pleasing  ideality.  This  lady's  residence 
too  on  Willemstraat,  the  Hague,  where  with  her  husband  she  receives  the 
best  literary  and  Spiritualistic  society  of  the  day,  forms  a  rallying  point  for 
those  in  sympathy  with  her  peculiar  views,  and  promotes  that  friction  of 
mind  with  mind,  which  is  so  valuable  a  result  of  well  organized  social 
reunions. 

At  Amsterdam,  amongst  many  Spiritualists  of  good  position  and  earnest 
devotion  to  the  cause,  may  be  named,  Mr.  J.  V.  Maurik  and  his  amiable 
lady.  Mr.  Maurik  has  won  a  distinguished  place  for  himself  as  an  author 
and  dramatist,  but  is  now  better  known  amongst  SpirituaHsts,  as  a  warm 
supporter  of  their  cause. 

Dr.  H.  de  Grood,  one  of  the  professors  at  the  Groningen  University; 
Dr.  I.  Van  Velzen,  secretary  of  the  Synod ;  Dr.  R.  Van  der  Loef,  and 
Herr  Schimmel,  well-known  authors,  are  names  honourably  identified  with 
the  advocacy  of  Spiritualism  in  Holland.  Many  other  gentlemen,  besides 
several  ladies  distinguished  in  literary  and  aristocratic  circles,  have  been 
reported  to  the  author  as  possessing  fine  Mediumistic  gifts,  or  as  being 

348  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  advocates  of  Spiritualism  in  the  seclusion  of  their  own  homes. 
Not  having  the  privilege  of  citing  these  parties  as  avowed  disciples  of 
the  belief,  we  can  only  cursorily  refer  to  the  fact  that  a  far  larger  number 
of  persons  of  position  in  Holland  believe  in  Spiritualism,  than  those  that 
are  willing  to  incur  reproach  and  public  ridicule  for  its  sake.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  the  cause  and  its  disciples  in  the  Dutch  Indies. 

When  it  is  remembered  that  the  oificial  investigation  detailed  above, 
concerning  the  disturbances  in  Java,  occurred  nearly  twenty  years  before 
the  advent  of  Modern  Spiritualism  in  America,  it  is  no  marvel  that  their 
cause  was  wholly  misunderstood,  and  their  possible  significance  disregarded 
both  by  the  witnesses  and  the  journalistic  recorders. 

As  SpirituaHsm  in  its  modern  sense  began  to  be  known,  its  phenomena 
discussed  and  practised  in  aristocratic  circles,  and  its  Mediums  patronized 
by  the  leading  classes  of  society,  the  tone  of  newspaper  criticism  became 
gradually  changed,  and  even  the  counterfeit  pretences  of  itinerant  exposers, 
began  to  be  regarded  in  their  true  light,  namely,  as  an  evidence  that  there 
must  be  something  of  genuine  worth,  to  call  forth  the  base  imitation,  also 
as  a  proof  how  desperate  must  be  the  cause  of  those  who  vehemently  oppose 
Spiritualism,  when  they  can  find  no  better  weapons  wherewith  to  do  battle 
against  it  than  the  tricks  of  poor  conjurers. 

Spiritualism  in  Holland,  as  in  every  other  great  centre  of  civilization, 
seems  to  have  done  the  work  of  ploughing,  harrowing,  and  preparing  the 
ground  for  the  reception  of  the  seeds  of  truth  and  Spiritual  unfoldment. 

Thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  invisible  hands  have  been  busy  in 
scattering  that  seed  and  pressing  visible  workers  into  the  same  beneficent 
service. 

Despite  of  man's  impatience  to  reap  the  harvest  before  the  seed  has  had 
time  to  germinate,  the  Spiritualists  find  themselves  compelled  to  watch  and 
wait  for  the  natural  development  which  time,  and  the  favouring  harvest 
seasonj  alone  can  bring  forth. 

Few  there  are  however  who  feel  that  what  has  been  done  has  been  in 
vain.  The  marked  change  which  public  opinion  displays  on  all  subjects 
relating  to  Spiritual  existence  here  or  hereafter,  is  the  best  proof  that  the 
work  of  mortals  has  been  to  sow  the  seed  as  they  have  received  commis- 
sion, and  trust  that  the  Lord  of  the  Harvest  will  come  in  the  fulness  of 
time  to  do  the  rest.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,"  is  the  watchword  which 
every  true  Spiritualist  obeys,  confident  that  the  work  well  done  on  earth,  is 
done  for  all  eternity. 

"     CHAPTER  XLHI. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN      RUSSIA. 

Nothing  can  be  more  difficult  to  an  uninformed  observer  than  the  attempt 
to  ascertain  the  real  status  of  the  Spiritual  cause  in  Russia.  On  the  one 
hand,  witnesses  of  acknowledged  credit  affirm,  that  Spirit  Communion  is  a 
belief  prevailing  largely  amongst  both  the  ignorant  peasantry  and  the  highest 
nobles.  In  the  rural  districts  it  is  alleged  that  every  village  entertains  its 
pantheon  of  spectral  agencies,  whilst  the  Schamanns,  or  prophet  priests  of 

Professor   Boutlerof. 
OF   THE    University  of   ST  Petersburg 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  349 

Siberia,  have  proverbially  obtained  for  their  wonder-working  powers  a  world- 
wide celebrity.  Amongst  the  higher  classes,  one  need  but  cite  the  well- 
known  opinions  of  the  noble  gentleman  who  but  lately  ruled  the  land, 
Alexander  IL,  who — together  with  many  princely  members  of  his  family — 
was  known  to  have  been  a  warm  friend  of  Spirituahsm  and  Spiritualists. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  advised  by  those  who  claim  to  speak  with 
authority,  that  Spiritualism  has  no  open  or  public  recognition  in  Russia, 
and  that  the  only  journal  printed  in  its  interest  by  a  native  Russian,  is 
obliged  to  be  published  in  the  German  language.  The  following  statement 
lately  given  in  the  Reime  Spirite  of  Paris,  is  also  cited  as  an  evidence  of 
the  ill  odour  in  which  subjects  of  an  occult  character  are  held  in  Russia. 
The  Revue  says  : — 

"  Professor  Wagner  has  lately  been  giving  a  series  of  lectures  in  St.  Petersburg  on 
the  subject  of  '  Animal  Magnetism.'  His  audiences  numbered  about  five  or  six  hundred 
persons,  the  chief  of  whom  were  physicians,  university  students,  or  literary  men.  He 
had  great  difficulty  in  gaining  permisssion  to  give  these  lectures,  as  they  approached  a 
subject  which  has  been  condemned  alike  by  clerical  and  scientific  authorities,  the  former 
attributing  all  psychical  phenomena  outside  of  the  church  to  Satan,  and  the  latter  to 
physiological  disturbance,  to  be  rectified  by  orthodox  medication.  To  gain  his  hearing 
Professor  Wagner  called  animal  magnetism  by  the  less  disagreeable  name  of  '  hypnotism.' 
He  quoted  facts  of  history  from  ancient  times  dovs^n  to  the  present,  noticing  the  disco- 
veries of  Van  Helmont,  Mesmer,  Reichenbach,  Dupotet,  and  others,  not  forgetting  Braid, 
the  introducer  of  the  term  hypnotism.  Professor  Wagner  solved  all  the  mysteries  of  the 
subject  by  introducing  a  psychic  principle,  not  a  resultant  of  the  organism,  but  a  force 
having  individuality  and  consciousness,  whose  vehicle  is  the  nerve  fluid  within  the 
organism  and  the  ether  of  space  without.  The  lectures  were  well  received,  and  were 
frequently  interrupted  by  earnest  applause.  Professor  Wagner  concluded  by  recom- 
mending the  constitution  of  a  society  for  the  investigation  of  psychical  research." 

It  is  added  as  a  comment  on  the  covert  form  in  which  Wagner  attempted 
to  awaken  interest  in  occult  subjects,  that  the  formation  of  any  society  for 
psychic  investigation  will  be  sternly  prohibited.  Undoubtedly  there  must 
be  a  median  line  between  the  two  opposing  views  of  the  subject  stated 
above. 

To  arrive  at  this,  we  shall  cite  the  opinions  of  some  of  the  most  reliable 
authorities  who  have  written  concerning  Spiritualism  in  Russia,  and  the 
first  quotations  will  be  from  letters  addressed  to  the  Revue  Spirite,  by 
Prince  Adeka,  of  Russia.  This  gentleman,  an  accomplished  scholar,  a 
warm  Spiritualist,  and  a  member  of  the  royal  family  of  Russia,  writes  as 
follows : — 

"Spiritualism,  as  a  doctrine,  was  introduced  into  Russia  in  1854,  by  M.  Boltine  and 
some  others  who  had  witnessed  Spiritual  phenomena  abroad,  and  had  become  acquainted 
with  the  works  of  Allan  Kardec.  These  prepared  the  way  for  the  visit  of  Mr.  D.  D. 
Home  to  Petersburgh  about  1861.  The  wonderful  manifestations  through  his  medium- 
ship  in  the  Imperial  Palace,  as  well  as  in  those  of  some  of  the  Russian  aristocracy,  gave 
an  impetus  to  inquiry,  and  this  was  strengthened  by  Mr.  Home  being  received  as  son-in- 
law  into  a  good  Russian  family. 

"  Unhappily  however,  Russia  not  being  yet  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  free  press,  the  advo- 
cates of  Spiritualism  have  had  to  keep  in  the  background  with  the  public.  The  State 
Church  does  not  allow  the  publication,  in  the  Russian  language,  of  any  books,  pamphlets, 
or  printed  matter  discussing  it ;  it  is  therefore  only  a  sulaject  of  private  discussion 
among  those  who  know  other  languages  besides  that  of  their  own  country. 

"  Russia  has  a  penal  code  in  Which  any  Russian  who  steps  outside  the  pale  of  the  Greco- 
Russian  Church,  or  who  attempts  to  teach  doctrines  contrary  to  it,  is  punishable  by  exile 
to  Siberia.  Such  is  the  legal  situation  of  the  various  sects  in  Russia.  Happily,  however, 
laws  there  are  laxly  observed.  The  dogmas  of  the  State  Church  are  by  the  mass  of  the 
people  assented  to  chiefly  as  a  means  of  keeping  themselves  clear  of  the  police.  But  very 
many,  as  opportunity  comes,  throw  aside  the  mask  and  join  some  sect ;  and  sects  in 
Russia  are  numerous. 

3 so  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  Three  years  ago,  M.  Aksakof,  who  is  editor  of  fthe  Psychische  Studien,  which  he, — a 
Russian  of  high  position,  socially  and  officially,  must  write  in  a  foreign  language  and 
publish  in  a  foreign  country, — invited  a  good  many  scientific  men  attached  to  the 
University  to  witness  a  demonstration  of  some  psychical  phenomena,  with  the  object  of 
getting  them  to  acknowledge  their  reality  ;  but  nothing  came  of  it.  The  gentlemen  of 
science  seemed  to  fear  conversion  from  old  opinions.     .     ,     . 

"  But  a  few  professors  of  the  University  did  join  M.  Aksakof,  and  in  1880  the  project 
of  a  society  was  drawn  up,  having  for  its  object  the  study  of  psychic  science,  &c.  To  this 
project  the  authorisation  of  the  Government  was  formally  applied  for,  and  would  have 
been  given  had  not  the  Church  interposed  on  the  ground  that  no  science  was  wanted  to 
prove  the  power  of  Satan,  and  that  the  Church  needed  no  help  in  proclaiming  the 
immortality  of  the  soul. 

•'  Spiritualists  in  Petersburg  are  necessarily  of  the  educated  classes  only.  They  may 
be  divided  into  two  categories  :  1,  those, who  accept  the  doctrine  of  Re-Incarnation,  from 
having  studied  the  works  of  Allan  Kardec  ;  and  2,  those  who  belong  to  the  American  or 
EngHsh  school.  M.  Aksakof  belongs  to  the  second  category,  which  occupies  itself  wioa 
experiments  in  mediumship  and  physical  manifestations,  without  concerning  itself  with 
the  question  of  Re-Incarnation. 

Besides  these  two  categories  there  are  very  many  individuals  who,  so  k)  speak,  hang  on 
to  Spiritualism  ;  who  go  to  seances  as  to  an  entertainment.  There  are  also  many  others 
to  whom  Spiritualism  is  a  demonstrated  science,  who  study  its  doctrines  and  practise  its 
morality.     Many  of  these  are  foreign  residents. 

"  My  remarks  have  had  reference  to  Spiritualism  as  it  is  in  the  capital,  but  there  is 
plenty  of  evidence  that  it  is  studied  all  through  the  provinces." 

Prince  Adeka  writes  at  a  still  later  date,  namely,  April,  1882,  to  the 
Revue  Spirite  thus  : — 

"  Since  my  last  communication  upon  the  position  of  SpirituaUsm  in  Russia,  it  has 
evidently  made  favourable  progress  in  the  most  influential  quarters.     The  censorship  has 

f'ven  its  sanction  to  the  publication  of  a  weekly  paper,  the  editor  of  which  is  Captain 
erbikof,  of  the  Imperial  navy,  who  makes  no  secret  of  his  being  a  Spiritualist.  I  may 
say  that  his  wife  is  an  excellent  medium  for  physical  manifestations.  They  belong  to  the 
school  of  Spiritualism  which  we  here  call  the  American,  which  does  not  concern  itself 
about  Re-Incarnation.  The  EeMs,  for  such  is  the  title  of  the  paper,  has  been  out  now 
for  six  months.  Not  wishing  to  jeopardise  it,  the  editor  hitherto  has  dealt,  with 
Spiritualism  only  in  an  incidental  way,  having  regard  to  the  nominal  interest  of  the 
paper,  which  is  understood  to  be  in  the  discussion  of  rebuses,  charades,  &c.  It  announces 
that  the  profits,  if  any,  are  to  go  to  the  funds  of  a  benevolent  institution  founded  last 
year  by  Madame  Perbikof.  This  may  have  smoothed  away  some  of  the  difficulties 
encountered  by  Captain  Perbikof  in  obtaining  the  sanction  to  publish.  It  may  also 
account  for  the  fact  that  one-half  of  the  subscribers  to  the  paper  belong  to  the  clerical 
ranks.     Whatever  the  reason,  the  fact  is,  under  all  circumstances,  significant. 

"Here  is  another  item  of  significance.  The  Novoe  Vremya  {The  New  Time),  a  news- 
paper of  large  circulation,  is  admitting  a  series  of  articles  based  upon  R.  Dale  Owen's 
'  Debateable  Land.'  These  articles  are,  under  the  pseudonym  of  Poliansky,  written  by 
Professor  Wagner,  who  is  an  earnest  Spiritualist  and  close  friend  of  the  Academician 
Boutlerof,  one  of  our  most  eminent  savants.  M.  Wagner's  articles  are  headed,  '  Between 
Two  Worlds.'  Th(j  censorship  has  used  its  scissors  more  freely  than  we  like,  but  it  is  a 
welcome  surprise  to  Spiritualists  that  it  permits  so  much  to  appear  in  the  Russian 
language.     The  articles  are  making  quite  a  sensation  among  our  rising  young  men. 

But  I  have  yet  another  welcome  piece  of  news  for  you  ;  the  interdict  against  trans- 
lations of  Allan  Kardec's  books  into  Russian  has  been  removed  so  far  as  to  allow  the 
publication  of  his  '  What  is  Spiritualism  ? '  The  MS.  of  the  translation  has  passed  the 
censorship,  and  is  now  passing  through  the  printer's  office.  This  gives  great  cause  for 
congratulation,  for  nothing  has  hitherto  been  published  in  the  Russian  language  having 
the  least  reference  to  the  rational  foundation  of  Spiritualism.  The  censorship  cut  out 
the  second  part,  and  insisted  that  Kardec's  name  should  not  appear,  for  that,  it  seems, 
would  be  too  much  for  our  '  Holy  Synod '  to  bear  !" 

The  next  quotation  is  taken  from  the  correspondence  of  Prince  Emil 
Sayn  Wittgenstein  (late  aide-de-camp,  and  trusted  friend  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander  II.),  and  the  author  of  this  work. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  351 

In  a  private  letter  to  Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten,  dated  1876,  Prince  Emil 
Wittgenstein  says  : — 

"  The  Emperor  and  most  of  his  household  save  ...  are  not  only  Spiritualists  in 
belief,  but  they  would  be  partisans  of  the  faith,  did  circumstances  permit. 

"  Since  Mr.  D.  D.  Home's  first  visit  in — I  think— 1861,  His  Majesty  has  never  doubted 
the  truth  of  spirit  communion, — and  the  rich  presents  and  special  favour  he  has  bestowed 
on  Mr.  Home,  is  proof  positive  of  the  royal  acceptance  of  his  Mediumship.  .  ,  .  The 
great  enemy  of  Spiritualism  in  Eussia  however  is  the  Church.  I  think  myself  it  should 
be  the  friend  of  this  power, — for  without  it,  the  Church  may  say,  but  it  cannot  prove 
anything,  and  vdth  it,  it  is  built  upon  facts  which  no  rival  Church  can  disprove.  .  .  . 
Perhaps  you  know  that  any  writing,  printing,  or  words  spoken  publicly,  which  offend 
against  the  articles  of  state  reUgion,  are  punishable  by  the  heaviest  penalties — in  some 
cases  by  exile  to  Siberia. 

"  Sects  may  arise  and  do,  but  they  are  offshoots  if  not  actually  a  part  of  the  Church, — 
but  as  for  Spiritualism — why,  Great  Heaven  !  it  loosens  the  chains  of  ecclesiastical 
tyranny  ;  breaks  open  the  doors  of  the  Inquisition,  puts  out  its  fires,  or  uses  them  to 
burn  up  priestly  passports  to  heaven  or  hell,  besides  making  of  every  one  his  own  priest. 
Of  course  this  won't  suit  the  ecclesiastics  who  live  by  the  people's  slavery  ;  not  their 
freedom, — hence,  although  Spiritualism  is  known  and  believed  in,  alike  by  peer  and 
peasant,  it  must  be  believed  in  against  authority, — and  be  assured,  my  friend,  it  has  a 
warm  place  in  the  hearts  of  thousands  whd  dare  not  openly  avow  tbeir  convictions." 

From  similar  friendly  communications  from  Prince  Emil  Wittgenstein, 
the  author  learned  that  the  late  Emperor  of  Russia  possessed  the  most 
complete  library  of  Spiritual  works  that  the  literature  of  many  nations 
could  supply.  This  noble  gentleman  was  one  of  the  earliest  subscribers  to 
a  work  translated  and  edited  by  the  author,  entitled  "  Art  Magic,"  and 
in  an  autograph  letter  addressed  to  the  writer  of  that  work,  he  declared, 
"  that  he  esteemed  it  as  his  most  sacred  authority,  and  carried  it  everywhere 
with  him." 

Thus,  although  Spiritualism  has  obtained  wide  recognition  in  Russia  in 
the  hearts  and  consciences  of  the  thinking  classes,  its  denunciation  as  a 
revolutionist,  by  the  Church-ridden  members  of  the  community,  is  quite 
sufficient  to  account  for  the  paucity  of  its  literature  in  the  language  of  the 
country. 

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  at  this  point,  to  give  a  few  extracts  from 
Mr.  Home's  autobiography — "  Incidents  of  My  Life,"  in  reference  to  his 
first  introduction  at  the  Russian  Court.  In  order  to  fulfil  his  marriage 
contract  with  the  fair  Russian  lady  who  subsequently  became  his  first  wife, 
Mr.  Home  left  Paris  for  St.  Petersburg  in  company  with  M.  Alexandre 
Dumas,  the  celebrated  novelist,  who  had  promised  to  officiate  as  godfather 
on  the  occasion. 

Mr.  Home  says  (p.   128) : — 

"  An  amusing  account  of  our  journey  may  be  read  in  Dumas'  book,  entitled  '  De  Paris 
k  Astrachan.' 

"  On  reaching  St._  Petersburg,  I  was.  honoured  by  a  kind  invitation  to  be  received  by 
the  Emperor,  but  which  I  was  obHged  to  decline,  not  being  in  power  at  the  time,  and  his 
Majesty  having  most  graciously  sent  to  me  to  say,  that  under  any  circumstances  he  would 
be  pleased  to  see  me,  I  excused  myself  on  the  plea  of  having  so  much  to  attend,  previous 
to  my  marriage.  A  month  after  this,  certain  difficulties  having  arisen,  and  the  papers 
which  were  necessary  not  being  forthcoming,  the  marriage  seemed  on  the  point  of  being 
postponed. 

"  I  had  had  no  manifestations  for  several  months,  but  on  this  evening^  I  was  told  by 
the  spirit  of  my  mother  to  inform  the  Emperor  the  next  day  that  my  power  had 
returned. 

"  I  did  80,  and  was  received  by  his  Majesty  at  the  Palace  at  Peterhoff,  where  I  spent 
a  week,  and  all  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  my  marriage  wete  removed  by  his  most 

352  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

gracious  Majesty,  who  upon  this,  as  upon  every  occasion,  has  shown  me  the  greatest 
kindness.  I  have  the  highest  veneration  for  him,  not  only  as  a  monarch,  but  as  a  man  of 
the  most  kind  and  generous  feelings." 

In  the  following  chapter  Mr.  Home  gives  some  interesting  details  of  his 
manifestations  whilst  residing  in  Russia,  up  to  the  time  when  his  eldest 
child  was  born  ;  one  remark  is  so  pertinent  to  the  diverse  opinions  that  are 
afloat  concerning  the  appearance  of  materialized  hands,  that  we  quote 
Mr.  Home's  words  i)i  extenso.  He  says  (p.  132), — "One  evening  one  of 
my  friends  was  converted  from  his  previous  unbelief,  by  seeing  a  hand 
visible  to  all  of  us  in  the  room,  slowly  forming  in  the  air,  a  few  inches 
above  the  table,  until  it  assumed  the  apparent  materiality  of  a  real  hand." 
This  hand — apparently  that  of  a  female — took  up  a  pencil  from  the  taljle 
and  wrote  a  communication  which  deeply  affected  Mr.  Home's  visitor,  who 
recognized  it  as  being  from  his  mother.  Mr.  Home  adds — "  The  general 
belief  is,  that  spirit  hands  always  appear  from  beneath  the  table,  already 
fo7-med, — but  this  is  incorrect,  for  on  many  occasions  in  the  presence  of 
several  persons  at  a  time,  they  are  seen  to  be  formed  in  the  manner  I  have 
described,  and  to  melt  away  in  the  same  way.  Often  too  they  have  been 
seen  to  form  high  above  our  heads,  and  from  thence  to  descend  to  the  table 
and  disappear." 

As  Spiritualism  in  Russia  owes  its  status  entirely  to  the  individuals  who 
have  aided  in  its  promulgation,  and  the  history  of  their  personal  efforts  is 
that  of  the  movement  also,  we  shall  now  call  attention  to  the  self-sacrificing 
and  influential  labours  of  a  gentleman  to  whom  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  is 
more  indebted  than  to  any  other  person  in  Northern  Europe — namely,  the 
Hon.  Alexander  Aksakof,  the  talented  editor  of  the  monthly  magazine 
published  at  Leipsig,  devoted  to  the  interests  of  Spiritualism  and  entitled — 
Psychische  Studien. 

As  it  would  be  impossible  to  arrive  at  a  just  estimate  of  Spiritual  progress 
in  Russia  without  including  the  effect  of  the  vast  influence  exerted  by  the 
indefatigable  efforts  and  high  social  standing  of  M.  Aksakof,  the  following 
brief  extracts  concerning  this  gentleman's  life  and  labours,  taken  from  a 
sketch  written  for  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  of  America  by  Mr. 
Hudson  Tuttle,  cannot  but  prove  of  interest  to  the  reader. 

Mr.  Tuttle's  article  was  written  in  1881,  and  headed — 

"spiritualism    in   RUSSIA. 

"Alexander  Aksakof,  the  Pioneer  Spiritualist  of  Eussia, 

"  To  American — and  we  may  add  English  Spiritualists  as  well,  the  name  which  stands 
at  the  head  of  this  article  is  familiar,  and  all  who  know  something  of  the  unwearied 
efforts  of  this  eminent  man  to  bring  to  Europe  the  knowledge  of  Spiritualism.  .  .  . 
We  have  noble  and  devoted  Spiritualists  in  America,  but  none  who  can  exceed  him.  He 
has  counted  rank  and  position  as  nothing,  and  without  a  thought,  has  sacrificed  his 
health,  feeling  more  than  repaid,  if  the  cause  he  loved  prospered,  and  bestowed  on  others 
the  happiness  he  had  found. 

"  Alexander  Aksakof  was  born  in  the  year  1832  at  Repiofka,  an  estate  the  property  of 
his  father  in  the  government  of  Penza,  Russia.  After  completing  his  course  of  studies 
at  the  Imperial  Lyceum  of  St.  Petersburg,  an  institution  privileged  to  the  ancient  nobility 
of  Russia,  he  entered  the  service  of  the  government,  in  which  with  but  httle  interruption 
he  has  remained  to  the  present." 

Mr.  Tuttle  then  goes  on  to  notice  in  detail  too  diffuse  for  this  place,  how 
M.  Aksakof,  from  becoming  acquainted  with  the  writings  of  Swedenborg, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

353 

gradually  began  to  study  them  with  an  interest  so  profound,  that  in  course 
of  time  they  took  a  deep  and  permanent  hold  upon  his  mind. 

After  describing  at  length  the  earnestness  with  which  M.  Aksakof  studied 
the  Hebrew  and  Latin  languages,  the  better  to  qualify  himself  for  following 
Swedenborg  through  his  wonderful  doctrine  of  correspondences,  the 
biographer  says  : — 

"  The  grand  design  to  which  all  his  studies  converged,  philological  and  theological, 
was  the  translation  of  Swedenborg's  '  Heaven  and  Hell '  into  the  Russian  language.  In 
1863,  his  translation  of  this  work  was  published  in  Leipzig,  but  is  compelled  to  wait  for 
more  propitious  times  for  its  appearance  in  Eussia. 

"  Swedenborg  being  the  greatest  of  seers,  it  was  natural  that  M.  Aksakof  should  take 
up  the  study  of  animal  magnetism,  and  enjoy  all  works  on  spiritual  revelations  obtained  in 
this  manner,  agreeing,  as  they  all  did,  in  essential  points  with  Swedenborg.  In  1854, 
while  searching  the  libraries,  he  came  unexpectedly  on  '  Nature's  Divine  Revelations,'  by 
A.  J.  Davis.  The  title  did  not  attract  his  attention,  but  the  qualification  of  the  author — 
'  The  Seer  and  Clairvoyant' — at  once  impressed  him.  He  was  rejoiced  to  find  most 
remarkable  proofs  of  the  principal  points  in  the  revelation  of  Swedenborg  concerning  the 
Spirit  world.  These  authors  differed  in  dogmas  concerning  Christianity,  it  was  true, 
while  they  agreed  in  the  great  facts  of  Spirit  existence. 

"  In  order  to  form  a  correct  judgment  of  both  physiological  and  psychological  pheno- 
mena, M.  Aksakof  at  once  saw  the  necessity  of  a  better  understanding  of  the  exact 
sciences  ;  the  perfect  comprehension  of  the  spiritual  man,  necessitated  the  understanding 
of  man  physically.  With  this  object  in  view,  in  1855,  he  inscribed  himself  as  free 
student  of  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  of  the  University  of  Moscow,  and  for  two  years 
pursued  the  studies  of  anatomy,  physiology,  chemistry,  and  physics.  He  soon  departed 
from  the  restraints  imposed  by  scientific  authority,  the  result  of  his  experiments  in 
human  magnetism  being  a  translation  into  Russian,  and  publication  in  St.  Petersburg, 
in  1863,  of  Count  Szapary's  work  entitled,  '  Magnetic  Healing.' 

"  He  readily  comprehended  in  all  their  bearings,  the  accounts  he  received  of  '  Spiritual 
Manifestations '  in  America.  The  first  book  on  that  subject,  which  reached  him  was 
Beechers's  'Review  of  Spiritual  Manifestations,'  in  1855.  He  there  received  palpable 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  grand  doctrine  he  had  accepted  by  intuition.  This,  with 
the  French  works  on  magnetism,  gave  him  the  first  information  of  the  spiritual  move- 
ment in  America,  and,  with  his  accustomed  habit,  he  at  once  sought  all  works  treating 
on  the  subject ;  but  found  in  Russia,  great  difficulty  in  procuring  them.  Not  until  the 
end  of  1857,  did  he  obtain  the  works  of  Edmonds,  Hare,  and  the  '  Gt.  Harmonia '  of 
Davis. 

"  He  studied  with  particular  attention  the  works  on  magnetism  and  spiritualism  of 
Cahagnet,  whom,  in  1861,  he  met  in  Paris.  The  perusal  of  the  consecutive  volumes  of 
Davis,  and  the  grand  works  on  Spirituahsm,  completed  the  emancipation  of  his  mind.  .  .  . 

'"The  following  is  an  extract  from  M.  Aksakof 's  preface  to  the  translation  of 
Swedenborg  : — 

"  '  The  theological  works  of  Swedenborg  have  engendered  a  sect — a  common  occurrence, 
and  unfortunate  for  the  transmission  of  great  ideas — so  much  does  man  love  the  "  jurare 
in  verba  magistri."  Notwithstanding  all  the  spirituality  and  broadness  of  his  philosophy, 
his  disciples  rest  with  the  letter  ;  astounded  by  the  immensity  of  his  revelations  they 
will  not  go  farther  ;  for  them  it  is  not  a  step  advancing  to  higher  altitudes,  but,  a  finality. 
In  the  present  work  the  theologico-dogmatic  side  is  not  presented,  but  the  more  important 
information  given  by  Swedenborg  in  regard  to  his  personal  experience  in  the  spirit- 
world  ;  for  us  he  is  not  a  theologian,  but  a  seer  and  medium.' 

"  This  preface  drew  on  M.  Aksakof  from  the  little  circle  of  devotees  to  the  doctrines 
of  Swedenborg — of  whom  he  had  been  a  member — the  most  violent  recriminations.  He 
was  thus  compelled  most  exphcitly  to  give  the  reasons  for  his  apostacy.  The  result  of 
this  discussion  was  the  publication  of  '  The  Rationalism  of  Swedenborg  :  a  criticism  of  his 
doctrines  on  the  Bible.  Leipsic,  1870.'  To  this  work  was  attached  as  an  appendix,  '  The 
Gospel  according  to  Swedenborg,  five  chapters  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  and  an 
exposition  of  their  Spiritual  Sense  according  to  the  Doctrine  of  Correspondences.'    .     .     . 

"  With  all  his  studies  of  Swedenborg  M.  Aksakof  did  not  cease  to  investigate  the 
fundamental  principles  of  religion  and  psychology.  One  thuig  he  regarded  as  incontestable, 
that  if  the  mystery  which  shrouds  the  human  soul  was  ever  penetrated,  and  the  fact  oi 
individual  immortality  admitted  by  science,  it  must  be  by  the  study  of  the  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism. 

"  The  works  of  Kardec  began  to  penetrate  Russia,  and  although  in  a  foreign  language 
they  had  a  wide  circulation. 
23 

354 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  M.  Aksakof  wished  to  give  his  countrymen  something  more  positive.  The  material- 
istic tendency  of  the  age  led  him  to  place  a  higher  value  on  facts.  With  this  object  he 
translated  Professor  Hare's  work  and  published  it  in  Leipzig  in  1866.  Through  this 
means  he  discovered  the  translator  of  Davis's  works,  Herr  Wittig,  who  at  the  prompting 
of  the  eminent  naturalist  and  philosopher  Von  Esenbeck,  had  translated  many  of  Davis's 
works  though  he  had  not  yet  found  a  publisher. 

"  The  impossibility  of  promoting  Spiritualism  in  his  own  country  induced  M.  Aksakof 
to  oflfer  M.  Wittig  to  publish  some  of  his  translations,  and  thus  began  his  efforts  to 
propagate  Spiritualism  in  Germany." 

Mr.  Tuttle  then  gives  a  list  of  the  works  published  at  various  times  as 
follows: — Davis's  "Reformer,"  "The  Magic  Staff/'  "Nature's  Divine 
Revelations,"  "  The  Physician" — the  principal  works  of  Hare,  Crookes, 
Edmonds,  and  Owen,  and  the  "  Report  of  the  Dialectical  Society." 

In  1874  M.  Aksakof  commenced — in  addition  to  all  his  other  magnificent 
undertakings  of  a  literary  character — the  publication  of  the  admirable 
monthly  magazine,  the  PsycJiische  Studien,  a  work  which  still  continues  to 
hold  its  place  as  one  of  the  finest  periodicals  devoted  to  psychological 
subjects. 

M.  Aksakof  experienced  no  obstruction  from  the  Russian  censor  in 
promulgating  Spiritualism  through  works  or  journals,  in  the  German 
language,  and  thus  it  was  that  he  attracted  attention  from  Mr.  Yowskevitch, 
an  ardent  Spiritualist  and  a  great  admirer  of  Davis's  writings.  This  gen- 
tleman was  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Moscow,  and  he 
was  fearless  and  candid  enough  to  proclaim  his  convictions  in  public  as 
well  as  in  private,  and  urge  the  importance  of  investigating  psychological 
subjects  to  his  colleagues  in  the  university. 

When  this  brave  and  noble  gentleman  departed  from  this  sphere  to  the 
higher  life,  M.  Aksakof  paid  a  well-deserved  tribute  to  his  memory  in  an 
article  published  in  the  Revue  Ricsse  in  1876,  under  the  title  of  "  Medium- 
ship  and  Science."     Continuing  Mr.  Tuttle's  narrative,  we  find  that — 

"In  1870,  M.  Aksakof  proposed  to  M.  Boutlerof,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the 
University  of  St.  Petersburg — whose  sister-in-law,  the  cousin  of  M.  Aksakof,  manifested 
some  degree  of  mediumship — to  form  a  circle  for  the  investigation  of  Spiritualism  in 
an  experimental  manner.  The  circle  included  the  Professor,  his  sister-in-law,  Madame 
Aksakof,  who  was  endowed  with  remarkable  mediumistic  power,  and  M.  Aksakof.  The 
result  of  twenty  seances  attended  by  M.  Boutlerof  was  the  admission  by  him  of  the  reality 
of  the  phenomena. 

"In  1871  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  arrived  at  St.  Petersburg.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life 
did  M.  Aksakof  obtain  evidence  of  grand  and  beautiful  Spiritual  manifestations.  .  .  . 
He  was  not  tardy  in  furnishing  M.  Boutlerof  with  an  opportunity  to  assist  at  similar 
seances,  and  one  seance  by  Mr.  Home  to  the  professors  of  the  University  of  St.  Petersburg. 

"When  Mr.  Crookes  published  his  experiences  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science, 
M.  Aksakof  immediately  translated  them,  and  after  long  weary  years  of  waiting,  had  the 
pleasure  of  presenting  the  Kussian  public  with  the  iirst  book  on  Spiritualism,  entitled 
'  Spiritualism  and  Science.' 

"  In  1874  a  zealous  Prussian  Spiritualist,  M.  Lyof,  engaged  M.  Bredif,  a  French  medium, 
to  visit  St.  Petersburg.  M.  Aksakof  arranged  weekly  seances  for  himself,  to  which  Pro- 
fessor Boutlerof  invited  his  friend  and  colleague  Professor  Wagner  to  participate.  After 
some  mouths  Professor  Wagner,  impelled  by  the  force  of  evidence,  opened  the  campaign 
by  his  celebrated  letter,  published  in  the  April  number  (1875)  of  the  Revue  de  L'Europe, 
one  of  the  best  class  of  Russian  monthlies. 

"  Great  offence  was  taken  by  the  press,  and  the  University,  which  impelled  the  Society 
Physique  to  nominate  a  committee  to  investigate  the  phenomena  of  mediumship. 

"  The  honour  of  the  nomination  of  the  first  committee,  strictly  scientific,  for  the 
investigation  of  this  question,  belongs  to  Russia.  This  committee,  fully  confiding  in  the 
abiUty  of  M.  Aksakof,  invited  him  to  make  the  necessary  arrangements  for  them.  He 
was  thus  made  to  act,  somewhat,  the  role  of  Dr.  Gardner  before  the  famous  Harvard 
committee  ;  only  far  more  difiicult,  on  account  of  the  total  absence  of  mediums,  proper 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

355 

to  bring  before  such  a  body.  He  visited  England  in  the  autumn  of  1875,  but  was  not 
fortunate  in  finding  mediums  whom  he  considered  sufficiently  remarkable  and  reliable. 

"Hearing,  however,  favourable  reports  of  the  mediumship  of  the  Petty  family  at 
Newcastle-on-Tyne — the  manifestations  occurring  behind  a  pendant  curtain,  in  front  of 
which  the  mediums  were  seated — he  visited  the  family,  and  liis  experiences  were  so 
satisfactory  that  he  engaged  the  father  and  two  sons.  Unfortunately — by  the  change  of 
conditions  and  the  absence  of  the  mother,  who  was  the  principal  medium  —  the 
mediumistic  forces  were  not  sufficiently  powerful  to  produce  any  result.  After  four 
siances,  M.  Aksakof,  seeing  the  hopelessness  of  the  attempt,  discontinued  the  seances  and 
returned  the  medium's.  He  then  engaged  an  English  lady,  with  remarkable  mediumistic 
faculties,  and  offered  her  services  to  the  committee.  T.iis,  lady,  not  being  a  professional 
medium,  desired  to  remain  unknown,  and  she  was  presented  to  the  committee  under  the 
name  of  Mrs.  Clayer.  Mr.  Crookes,  on  pages  38-39  of  his  'Researches'  relates  his  ex- 
periences with  this  lady  ;  at  his  residence,  M.  Aksakof  had  the  pleasure  of  making  her 
acquaintance.  The  production  of  the  physical  manifestations  in  the  plain  light  wholly 
answered  his  expectations,  and  he  at  last  thought  that  the  necessary  medium  for 
presentation  to  the  committee  had  been  found.  She,  at  first,  declined  the  offer,  but 
yielded  to  his  urgent  solicitation,  and  arrived  in  St.  Petersburg  in  mid-winter,  accom- 
panied by  her  two  daughters,  whom  she  would  not  trust  to  the  hands  of  strangers.  This 
was  a  most  meritorious  act,  one  which  the  history  of  Spiritualism  in  general,  and 
Spiritualism  in  Russia,  in  particular,  should  not  ignore. 

"  The  second  series  of  official  seances  commenced,  before  the  committee,  in  January, 
1876.  The  manifestations  began  at  the  first  seance.  The  rappings  were  plain  and 
distinct,  and  of  the  same  character  as  those  which  first  arrested  the  attention  of  the 
world,  at  Rochester,  in  1848,  in  the  presence  of  the  Fox  family,  and  witnessed  in  London, 
by  M.  Aksakof,  at  the  home  of  Mrs.  Kate  Fox-Jencken.  The  tipping  and  levitation  of 
the  table  were  also  produced  before  the  committee,  being  everything  he  expected  for  the 
commencement.  Professor  Boutlerof,  and  M.  Aksakof,  attended  these  seances  for 
the  purpose  of  witnessing  the  procedures,  and  being  near  the  medium  ;  but  alas  !  in 
this  case,  from  the  beginning,  instead  of  impartial  scientific  investigation,  the  committee 
were  determined  to  prove  that  phenomena  of  mediumship  had  no  existence.  Their  action 
put  to  shame  even  the  methods  of  the  Harvard  committee.  The  medium,  in  the  words  of 
the  judges — who  had  passed  judgment  before  they  met  at  the  first  seance — -made  all  the 
manifestations,  and  Professor  Mendeleyef,  one  of  the  principal  personages  of  the  com- 
mittee, declared  that  the  medium  had  an  instrument,  concealed  by  her  skirts,  to  which 
she  resorted.     Thus  terminated  the  scientific  history  of  Spiritualism  in  Russia. 

"  Awaiting  the  report  of  the  committee,  M.  Aksakof  continued  his  negotiations  with 
different  mediums,  which  resulted  in  bringing  Dr.  Slade  from  London  to  St.  Petersburg, 
in  December,  1878  ;  but  when  he  arrived,  the  committee  had  ceased  to  exist,  and  Russia 
was  engaged  in  war  with  Turkey.  The  public  mind  was  occupied  with  other  subjects. 
Although  Slade's  visit  to  St.  Petersburg  was  not  as  productive  as  it  might  have  been,  his 
sojourn  in  Germany  and  its  results  form  a  memorable  epoch  in  the  history  of  Spiritualism. 
The  experiences  of  Professor  Zollner,  and  many  other  celebrated  men  of  science  with 
him  were  most  marvellous,  and  are  already  known  round  the  world.  .  ,  .  This 
success  fully  repaid  M.  Aksakof  for  all  the  sacrifice  he  had  made  in  Russia,  and  the  long 
and  patient  labours  by  which  he  had  prepared  the  way  in  Germany  for  this  gratifying 
result. 

"  When  we  consider  the  great  efforts  of  Professor  Zollner  ;  the  advocacy  of  Professors 
Perty,  of  Berne,  Hoffman,  of  Wurzhurg,  and  of  Fichte,  who  not  only  publicly  defended 
the  phenomena,  but  also  the  doctrines  of  Spiritualism,  we  feel  that  M.  Aksakof  must 
enjoy  a  deep  satisfaction  in  a  result  to  which  he  has,  more  than  any  one  else,  contributed. 

"  After  having  completed  his  work  with  the  committee,  M.  Aksakof  demanded,  in 
1876,  permission  to  publish  in  St.  Petersburg  a  Russian  monthly  journal,  A  Review  of 
Mediumship.     This  was  refused  by  the  Minister  of  the  Interior,  Timaschef. 

"  M.  Aksakof  was  not  idle,  but  prepared  a  reply  to  the  report  of  M.  Mendeleyef  entitled 
'  Materials  by  which  to  judge  Spiritualism,'  a  mass  of  ironical  commentaries  in  which  he 
ridiculed  Spiritualism  in  general,  and  his  colleagues — Professors  Boutlerof,  Wagner, 
and  M.  Aksakof — in  particular.  On  the  appearance  of  this  document,  M.  Aksakof — 
taking  into  consideration  the  bad  spirit  in  which  the  investigation  was  conducted — 
prepared  a  reply  under  the  title  :  *  A  Monument  of  Scientific  Prejudice.'" 

Thus  far  Mr.  Hudson  Tattle ;  and  it  may  be  quite  worth  while  to 
compare  the  noble  record  of  literary  labour  undertaken  in  -the  interests  of 
Spiritualism  as  thus  narrated  with  the  simple  unaffected  account  which 
Mr.  Aksakof  gives  of  his  own  share  in  Spiritual  propagandism  in  a  paper 

356  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

prepared  by  him  to  be  read  at  the  English  International  Conference  of 
1869.  This  paper  was  admirably  translated  by  Signor  Damiani,  a  well- 
known  and  scholarly  Italian  gentleman  now  residing  in  London,  and  pub- 
lished in  Human  Nature,  from  the  columns  of  which  are  selected  the 
following  extracts  : — 

"  As  a  representative  of  Eussia  I  ought  to  give  to  you  a  few  words  concerning  the  state 
of  SpirituaUsm  in  my  country.  There  it  is  known  by  the  name  of  Spiritism,  because  it 
reached  us  through  the  works  of  Allan  Kardec,  who  has  systematised  and  made  that 
doctrine  popular  in  France,  and  who  has  given  it  this  name  in  order  to  distinguish  it 
from  that  which  is  generally  comprehended  under  the  denomination  of  Spiritualism.  Its 
followers  call  themselves,  regardless  of  all  etymological  rules,  Spirites,  instead  of  Spiritists. 
Their  number  in  Russia,  or  rather  in  the  two  centres  of  our  civilisation,  Moscow  and 
St.  Petersburg,  can  only  be  counted  by  dozens  ;  they  certainly  would  have  been  more 
considerable  if  we  were  not  deprived  of  the  means  offered  by  the  press  to  express  publicly 
our  opinions  on  this  subject.  One  of  the  most  zealous  representatives  of  Spiritualism  at 
St.  Petersburg  is  General  Apollon  Boltin.  He  has  translated  into  the  Russian  language 
the  principal  works  of  Kardec,  and  has,  besides,  written  much  himself  upon  this  matter, 
but  has  not  had  the  privilege  of  being  able  to  print  his  works.  Among  the  co-operators  of 
the  Revue  Spirite  we  have  here  General  Foelkner,  whose  translation  of  the  '  Letters  of 
Lavater  to  the  Empress  Marie  of  Russia,'  was  published  at  Paris  at  the  International 
Library,  and  also  M.  H.  Stecki,  who  published  at  the  same  library  an  essay  entitled 
'Spiritism  in  the  Bible,'  We  have  here,  as  well  as  at  Moscow,  several  writing  mediums 
and  others,  but  as  to  physical  manifestations,  we  are  quite  wanting  in  them.  By  way  of 
recompense  however,  we  have  at  Moscow,  in  the  person  of  M.  Artemovsky,  a  very  good 
healing  medium.  "What  seems  extraordinary  to  us  is,  that  he  holda  his  sSances  publicly, 
having  had  the  good  luck  to  receive  permission  from  the  authorities.  Some  mediums 
here,  whose  curing  functions  had  commenced  to  attract  sick  people  to  them  in  crowds, 
did  not  meet  with  the  same  success  ;  the  police  interfered,  and  these  gentlemen  were 
obliged  to  confine  themselves  to  practising  in  private. 

"  Regarding  our  Spiritism  from  within,  I  do  not  see  enough  union  among  its  followers, 
without  which  no  doctrine  can  become  a  social  and  reforming  power.  If  we  are  going  to 
seek  the  causes  of  this  disunion,  we  shall  find  it  in  the  two  following  facts  : — In  the  first 
place  stands  the  onesided  study  of  the  subject,  inevitable  in  consequence  of  its  being 
derived  from  the  one  source — the  works  of  Allen  Kardec  and  his  Review — a  partiality 
excusable  for  the  Russians,  who  generally  know  French  and  not  English,  and  in  conse- 
quence imitate  the  intellectual  movement  of  Europe  by  the  production  of  French 
literature  ;  but  wholly  inexcusable  for  Kardec,  who  holds  his  lectures  exclusively  within 
the  limits  of  his  circle,  and  not  only  ignores  that  which  is  done  out  of  France,  but  ignores 
even,  or  feigns  to  ignore,  what  is  done  in  France  by  that  circle  of  Spiritualists  whose  organ 
is  the  Revue  Spiritualiste,  by  Pierart. 

"  This  pretence  of  ignoring  is  carried  to  such  a  point  that  M.  Kardec,  whilst 
announcing  upon  the  wrapper  of  his  review  the  Spiritualistic  periodicals  appearing  in 
Germany  and  Italy,  does  not  even  mention  M.  Pierart's  journal,  and  this  for  the  reason 
that  the  Spiritualists  do  not  accept  the  doctrine  of  re-incarnation,  as  if  the  source  from 
whence  Kardec  had  derived  his  system  had  been  another  and  more  authentic  one  than 
that  of  Pierart.  Thus  it  is  that  dogmatism,  that  eternal  source  of  discord  in  religion, 
threatens  to  invade  Spiritualism,  one  of  whose  principal  merits  is  having  avoided  the  rock 
of  sectarianism  and  not  having  wished  to  form  a  written  and  obligatory  confession  of 
faith.     .     .     . 

"  In  the  second  place  we  are  disunited  and  weak  because  we  are  deprived  of  liberty  of 
speech  and  denied  any  representation  through  the  press.     .     .     . 

"  The  civil  censor  has  received  special  instructions  not  to  let  anything  appear  that 
relates  to  Spiritualism. 

" '  A  fool  throws  a  stone,'  says  the  proverb,  '  and  seven  wise  men  cannot  recover 
it.'     ... 

"  Allow  me  to  tell  you  a  few  words  about  myself  in  particular.  Desiring  to  make  the 
Russian  public  acquainted  with  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  I  had  chosen  for  that 
purpose  the  work  of  Professor  Hare,  and  I  had  extracted  that  which  principally  related  to 
the  experimental  part  of  the  question.  But  the  censor  remained  inexorable,  and  I  have  been 
obliged  to  have  my  translation  printed  at  Leipzig,  where  it  remains  buried  in  the  ware- 
house of  M.  Wagner,  suffering  the  same  fate  as  a  Russian  translation  of  Swedenborg's  ( 
work  '  Heaven  and  Hell,'  which  I  had  printed  some  years  before.  That  our  learned  men 
are  not  behind  yours  in  their  contempt  for  Spiritualism  I  can  show  by  the  following 
example  : — We  have  at  the  University  here  a  Professor  of  Logic  and  Psychology  in  theperson 

NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES.  357 

of  M.  Vkdislavef — translator  into  Eussian  of  Kant's  Critique  de  la  Eaison  Pure,  author  of 
Doctrines  Psychologiques  Contemporaines,  Sec,  &c.  Wishing  to  direct  his  attention  to  the 
psychological  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  I  gave  him  my  Russian  translation  of  Hare, 
some  numbers  of  Suvian  Nature,  and  the  autobiography  of  A.  J.  Davis  in  German. 
Reading  this  enraged  him  so  much  that  he  could  hardly  speak.  '  All  that  is  only 
detestable  humbug,'  he  said  to  me  ;  '  Davis  is  an  impudent  man,  Hare  an  unknown 
person.  When  I  read  it  I  believed  I  was  in  a  tavern.'  This  reply  deserving  immortaUty, 
I  record  it 

"  How  much  we  are  restrained  in  our  literary  pursuits,  I  can  again  show  you  by  the 
following  anecdote  : — 

"  Lately  I  have  been  occupied  in  writing  a  critique  on  Swedenborg's  '  Doctrine  of  the 
Scriptures.'  When  I  had  presented  my  manuscript  to  the  spiritual  reviser  he  sent  me  to 
the  civil  reviser,  because  I  do  not  examine  Swedenborg's  system  from  an  orthodox  point 
of  view,  but  only  from  the  logical  side,  like  all  other  philosophical  systems  ;  and  when  I 
gave  my  manuscript  to  the  civil  reviser,  he  sent  me  to  the  spiritual  censor,  because  my 
work,  from  the  first  page  to  the  last,  only  treated  of  Holy  Scripture. 

"  Convinced  by  my  own  experience  and  that  of  others,  of  the  impossibility  of  serving, 
at  least  for  the  present,  the  cause  of  SpirituaHsm  in  my  own  country,  I  found  I  had 
nothing  better  to  do  than  to  transport  my  activity  to  a  foreign  land.  In  1863  I  learnt 
for  the  first  time  that  a  German  translation  of  the  works  of  A.  J.  Davis  had  been  under- 
taken by  Mr.  Von  Esenbeck  and  his  associate  Mr.  Wittig;  but  all  my  attempts  at 
having  more  information  about  this  enterprise  were  fruitless  until  1866,  when  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  becoming  personally  acquainted  with  Mr.  Wittig,  and  the  displeasure  of 
learning  aU  the  difficulties  he  met  with  during  the  publication  of  his  translations.  I 
then  offered  to  become  the  editor  of  them,  and  immediately  we  set  ourselves  to  the  task. 
In  1867  appeared  '  The  Reformer,"  in  1868  '  The  Magic  Stafi",'  and  in  1869  '  The  Divine 
Revelations,'  printed  by  Mr.  Wagner  at  Leipsic.  It  might  appear  strange  to  have 
commenced  the  publication  of  '  The  Reformer,'  without  following  the  chronological  order, 
upon  which  Davis  himself  insisted  ;  but  it  is  because  nearly  all  the  manuscripts  were  at 
Bremen  with  Mr.  Ruthman,  who  had  begun  talking  about  their  publication,  without 
having,  however,  caused  the  enterprise  to  advance  during  many  years.  This  is  why  we 
commenced  by  that  which  was  ready  at  Mr.  Wittig's,  It  is  only  lately  that  we  have 
obtained,  not  without  trouble  and  expense,  possession  of  the  manuscripts,  and  henceforth 
their  pubKcation  can  be  re-estabhshed  in  chronological  order.  What  reception  the 
German  public  will  give  them,  the  future  alone  can  decide.  The  prejudice  of  German 
science  against  animal  magnetism  and  Spiritualism,  and  its  materiahstic  tendencies,  are,  at 
present,  too  strong  for  us  to  expect  a  serious  and  impartial  critique.  On  the  other  hand, 
silence  still  less  attains  our  end,  and  our  first  duty  is  to  extricate  the  public  from  the 
ignorance  in  which  they  live  as  to  the  real  value  of  modern  Spiritualism.  To  attain  this 
result,  the  works  of  Davis  appear  to  me  the  most  suitable.  Germany  requires  a  philo- 
sophical system,  which  should  be  in  a  state  to  present  not  only  an  accordance  of  facts 
with  a  given  doctrine,  but  even  with  the  exigencies  of  actual  science.  From  this  point 
of  view  the  harmonial  philosophy  has  appeared  to  me  worthy  of  the  attention  of  German 
thinkers.  Many  persons,  knowing  the  works  of  Davis,  have  expressed  sympathy  with 
their  publication  in  Germany.  Thus,  one  of  the  best  known  and  most  respectable 
followers  of  spiritualism  in  America,  Judge  Edmonds,  in  a  letter  that  he  wrote  me  in 
March,  1869,  expresses  himself  on  this  matter  in  the  following  manner  : — '  In  one  respect 
A.  J.  Davis  and  I  differ  ;  he  looks  upon  Spiritualism  rather  as  a  philosophy,  while  I  regard 
it  as  a  rehgion.  Therefore  it  is  that  his  works  must  be  more  valuable  in  Germany  than 
mine  can  be.  With  us  and  our  impulsive  nature  the  religious  aspect  is  the  most 
important ;  in  Germany  the  rationalistic  must  be.'  As  a  psychological  phenomenon,  the 
person  of  Davis  offers  us  one  of  the  most  remarkable  types  of  the  modern  spiritualistic 
movement,  and  under  this  head  deserves  to  be  deeply  studied.  In  the  German  edition 
of  his  '  Principles  of  Nature,'  I  made  it  a  duty  to  collect  all  the  proofs  which  had  come  to 
my  own  knowledge  to  establish  the  mesmeric  origin  of  this  work,  and  the  further 
self-development  of  Davis,  by  way  of  pure  intuition,  like  an  incontestable  psychological 
fact.     ,     .     ." 

We  can  only  regret  that  the  limitations  of  space  preclude  the  possibility 
of  giving  more  of  M.  Aksakof  s  philosophic  and  interesting  comments  on 
the  cause  he  has  served  so  well.  Enough  has  been  stated  however  to 
show  the  importance  Of  the  work  which  one  individual  alone  can  effect, 
when  animated  by  devotion  to  a  noble  cause,  and  inspired  by  the  love  of 
humanity  rather  than  the  desire  for  fame,  or  self-aggrandisement. 

3^58  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

Just  as  this  volume  is  going  to  press,  we  hear  that  M.  Aksakoi's  promised 
work  has  been  produced,  under  the  title  of  "  A  Monument  of  Scientific 
Prejudice — being  {a  history  of  the  committee  appointed  by  the  Physical  Society 
of  the  U?iiverslty  of  St.  Petersbiirgh  for  the  Investigation  of  so-called  Mediutn- 
istlc  phenomena,  with  all  the  minutes  of  the  pj'oceedlngs  and  other  remarks P 

The  volume  above  named  has  not  only  passed  through  the  press,  but 
portions  of  it  have  been  freely  commented  on  by  the  English  and  German 
Spiritual  press,  and  it  is  quite  evident,  that  though  the  reader  may  form  some 
fair  conclusions  concerning  the  action  of  that  committee  which  pledged 
itself  to  \io\6.  forty  Spiritual  seances,  and  dismissed  the  subject  after  rushing 
through  eight,  they  can  form  bat  httle  notion  without  reading  M.  Aksakof's 
work,  of  the  noble,  manly,  and  philosophic  way  in  which  the  accomplished 
writer  has  dealt  with  his  subject.  Another  sign  of  the  times,  and  one  which 
promises  hopefully  for  the  progress  of  psychological  science  in  Russia,  is 
the  fact,  that  the  same  indomitable  and  devoted  worker,  Alexander  Aksakof 
is  even  now  pubhshing  in  the  Russian  language  (! !)  a  translation  from  the 
German  of  Baron  Lazarus  Hellenbach's  works,  in  which — as  every  scholar 
acquainted  with  this  great  philosopher's  writings  must  know — Spiritual 
ideas  and  teachings  play  a  distinguished  part.  Truly  hberty  of  thought  and 
speech  has  "moved  on"  in  Russia  even  within  the  last  decade  of  months, 
and  the  noble  triad  of  Freedom's  standard-bearers,  Aksakof,  Boutlerof,  and 
Wagner,  may  yet  tread  with  mortal  feet  the  promised  land  of  Spiritual  life 
and  light,  to  which  their  untiring  efforts  have  helped  to  conduct  the  long 
enslaved  consciences  of  their  countrymen. 

CHAPTER     XLIV. 

SPIRITUALISM   IN   RUSSIA   (CONCLUDED). 

Before  dismissing  the  subject  of  "  the  Russian  scientific  commission,"  for 
the  investigation  on  Spiritualism,  instituted  chiefly  at  the  suggestion  of  the 
Hon.  Alexander  Aksakof,  and  reported  upon  most  unfavourably  by  M. 
Mendeleyef,  it  may  serve  the  interests  of  truth  as  well  as  justice  to  repubUsh 
"the  protest  which  answered  the  said  report.  The  reader  is  particularly 
urged  to  notice  what  conditions  the  "  scientific  commission  "  was  pledged  to 
observe,  and  how  far  the  pledge  was  not  redeemed.  The  protest  was 
published  in  the  Journal  de  St.  Petersbtu'g  of  May  i8th,  1877,  and  was 
signed  by  one  hundred  and  thirty  names  of  influential  persons. 
It  reads  as  follows  in  translation  : — 

"  The  Scientific  Committee  formed  for  ttie  examination  of  medial  phenomena  had  for 
its  object,  if  we  may  judge  by  a  communication  from  M.  Mendeleyef,  published  in  La  Voix, 
No.  137,  '  to  study  with  precision '  these  phenomena,  and  to  '  render  also  important  public 
service.'  M.  Mendeleyef  informs  us  that  at  the  sittings  the  following  phenomena  were  to 
be  the  immediate  objects  for  study  on  the  part  of  the  commission  : — '  The  movement  of 
inanimate  objects  produced  without  contact  with  human  hands  ;  the  floating  of  these 
objects  in  the  air  ;  variations  in  the  weight  of  objects  ;  movements  or  noises  produced  in 
the  said  objects,  and  having  the  character  of  being  governed  by  intelligence,  as  exemplified 
by  the  giving  of  messages  or  the  answering  of  questions  ;  writing  by  inanimate  objects, 
or  psychographic  phenomena  ;  lastly,  the  complete  or  partial  presentation  of  human 
bodies,  or,  in  other  words,  materialization  phenomena.' 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  359 

"  The  committee  promised  to  hold  at  least  forty  stances  to  study  these  various  pheno- 
nomena.  To-day  the  committee  declares  that  its  investigations  are  at  an  end,  that  '  its 
object  has  been  attained,'  and  that  it  has  arrived  unanimously  at  the  following  conclusions  : 
'  That  Spiritualistic  phenomena  are  the  result  of  unconscious  movements  or  of  conscious 
imposture,  and  that  the  doctrine  of  Spiritualism  is  a  superstition.' 

"  This  decision  of  the  committee  is  based — as  stated  in  its  report — upon  eight  seances. 
in  the  iirst  four  of  which  no  medial  phenomena  were  obtained,  and  in  the  last  four  of 
which  the  committee  saw  several  movements  of  the  table  and  heard  several  raps.  But 
where  are  the  observations  of  the  committee  upon  the  movement  of  objects  without 
contact  with  the  hands  ;  on  the  change  of  the  weight  of  bodies  ;  on  conversational  pheno- 
mena ;  and  on  psychographic  and  materialization  manifestations  ? 

"  The  committee  has  not  carried  out,  it  will  be  seen,  a  quarter  of  the  programme  wliich 
it  had  laid  down  for  itself,  but  it  has  decided,  without  any  evidence  in  that  direction, 
against  the  spiritual  '  doctrine  ; '  a  question  which  had  never  been  placed  in  its  programme 
for  consideration.  The  undersigned  think  it  their  duty  to  declare  that,  by  an  examination 
so  superficial  and  so  rapid,  the  object  of  the  researches  of  the  committee  has  not  been 
attained,  and  that  the  committee  has  not  fulfilled  its  task.  It  is  evident  that  it  has  not 
collected  enough  information  either  to  affirm  or  to  deny  the  existence  of  the  medial 
phenomena.  After  it  had  sat  out  eight  seances,  the  committee  did  not  hesitate  to  declare 
that  its  observations  were  at  an  end,  although  it  had  no  right,  upon  the  evidence 
collected  during  those  eight  seances,  to  come  to  any  absolute  decision.  The  committee 
undertook  its  examination  in  the  name  of  the  interests  of  a  portion  of  the  public,  and  it 
has  failed  to  guard  those  interests.  It  has  left  the  public  in  the  same  doubt  as  before  in 
relation  to  these  medial  phenomena,  which  are  so  well  attested  by  people  of  influence  and 
of  good  faith. 

"  The  undersigned,  consequently,  think  that  they  have  a  right  to  express  the  hope 
that  the  examination  of  medial  phenomena,  which  has  been  begun  in  the  name  of  science, 
will  be  continued  in  harmony  with  the  usual  methods  of  science,  and  not  by  persons  who 
have  even  given  a  verdict  against  that  which  they  have  not  seen — against  phenomena 
which  have  been  verified  by  others  after  long  and  minute  study.  It  is  not  by  a  partial 
examination  like  this  that  an  '  important  public  service  '  can  be  rendered.     ..." 

Then  follow  the  signatures  of  one  hundred  and  thirty  Russian  names,  the 
transcription  and  reading  of  which  would  scarcely  repay  either  author  or 
reader. 

As  a  sort  of  corollary  to  this  report,  and  in  evidence  first;  that  each  Spiritual 
seajice  should,  be  studied  on  its  ozcjji  me^'its,  and  not  on  the  report  of  previous 
occasions ;  next,  that  nothing  but  long-continued  and  patient  investigation 
can  discover  the  procedures  of  a  movement  so  ill  understood  as  that  of 
Spirit  communion ;  and  finall}^,  that  the  most  candid  and  unprejudiced 
frame  of  mind  is  necessary  to  the  elucidation  of  truth  in  the  matter  of 
Spiritual  phenomena — we  shall  republish  the  particulars  of  some  seances 
held  by  Messrs.  Boutlerof  and  Aksakof  with  the  English  Medium  Williams  ; 
so  often  accused  of  "  fraudulent  practices,"  and  yet,  so  inevitably  endowed 
with  rare  Mediumistic  power. 

The  article  which  follows  was  published  in  M.  Aksakofs  fine  journal 
Psychische  Shidien,  and  has  been  extensively  recopied  in  other  Spiritual 
papers.     It  is  headed 

"spiritualism    in   RUSSIA — EXPERIENCES   OF   PROFESSOR   BOUTLEROF. 

"  After  describing  the  room  (an  ordinary  hotel  apartment  without  cupboard  or 
wardrobe),  M.  Boutlerof  says  : — 

"  '  I  will  not  describe  every  seance  in  detail,  but  will  relate  only  the  most  striking 
manifestations.  While  we  sat  at  the  table,  holding  Williams  fast,  various  objects  were 
brought  to  us  from  a  chest  of  drawers  in  the  room,  which  stood  behind  Williams,  at  a 
distance  of  about  four  feet,  Williams  remaining  meanwhile  immovable.  Even  if  he  had 
had  his  hands  free,  the  objects  would  have  been  beyond  his  reach.  At  the  first  sitting 
M.  Aksakof  and  myself  were  both  touched  on  the  face  with  something  soft.  This,  as  we 
afterwards  learned,  was  M.  Aksakofs  silk  scarf,  which  was  lying  in  his  hat  on  the  drawers, 
and  had  been  brought  to  us  with  the  hat.     Immediately  afterwards  the  hat  itself  was 

36o  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

crushed  down  on  M.  Aksakof's  head,  and  then,  at  my  expressed  wish,  also 
placed  upon  my  head.  At  another  sitting,  we  being  all  in  the  same  position 
as  before,  a  musical  box,  which  was  playing  on  the  table,  was  raised  in  the  air,  and  wafted 
to  and  fro,  as  we  could  tell  distinctly  by  the  sound.  Presently  the  box  was  placed  for  a 
moment  on  my  right  shoulder,  next  to  Williams,  while  I  still  contiaued  to  hold  him  fast. 
Another  time  various  articles  were  brought,  and  placed  upon  our  table  or  in  our  hands, 
such  as  a  match-box,  which  was  also  opened,  a  clothes  brush  and  a  travelling  strap. 

"  '  When  Williams  was  placed  bound  in  the  cabinet,  or  rather  behind  my  plaid,  which 
was  suspended  like  a  curtain,  the  phenomena  were  more  powerful,  especially  at  the  two 
last  seances.  As  we  sat  at  the  table  we  heard  the  voices  of  Peter  and  of  John  King,  This 
latter  personage  is  a  well-known  apparition  at  Williams's  circles,  and  manifests  both 
audibly  and  visibly.  Peter's  voice  is  quite  different  from  that  of  King,  who  speaks  in  a 
deep  bass  and  very  quickly.  These  voices  suggested  that  we  should  have  a  cabinet  seance. 
We  lighted  a  candle  for  a  few  minutes,  while  Williams  placed  himself  behind  the  curtain. 
In  these  last  sittings  we  screwed  an  iron  staple  into  the  wall  ;  a  long  tape  was  fastened 
round  the  medium's  neck,  and  another  piece  was  passed  three  times  round  the  wrists, 
which  were  drawn  together  and  securely  tied.  The  long  ends  of  both  tapes  were  then 
threaded  through  the  iron  staple,  and  drawn  across  to  our  table,  where  I  held  them  all 
through  the  sitting  with  my  left  hand.  After  each  sitting  the  tapes  were  found  intact 
throughout  their  length  ;  and  I  was  able,  while  holding  the  tapes,  to  feel  the  slightest 
motion  on  the  part  of  the  medium.  Only  at  the  beginning  did  Williams  draw  in  his 
hands  a  little,  apparently  as  he  was  passing  into  the  mediumistic  sleep.  Later  on,  while 
the  phenomena  were  taking  place,  he  did  not  stir  in  the  slightest  degree.  We  sat  at  the 
table,  on  the  side  furthest  from  the  cabinet,  with  our  faces  turned  towards  it,  at  a 
distance  of  about  three  feet  from  the  curtain. 

"  I  will  relate  a  few  characteristic  occurrences  of  the  last  sitting.  After  the  light  was 
put  out,  we  again  heard  the  voices  of  Peter  and  John.  These  voicss  appeared  to  come 
from  various  parts  of  the  room  ;  at  one  moment  they  were  close  to  us,  at  another  further 
off,  and  often  on  the  side  opposite  to  that  on  which  the  medium  sat.  Presently  phos- 
phorescent lights  were  floating  in  the  air,  and  immediately  the  form  of  John  King  became 
visible.  This  apparition  is  accompanied  by  a  greenish  phosphorescent  light,  which 
increases  in  brightness,  lighting  up  John's  bust.  It  is  then  seen  that  this  light  comes 
from  a  luminous  substance  which  the  form  holds  in  its  hand.  The  manly  face,  with  a 
thick  black  beard,  is  tolerably  distinct ;  the  head  is  draped  with  a  white  turban,  and  the 
upper  part  of  the  body  mth  white  garments.  The  form  was  outside  the  cabinet,  and 
near  to  us.  We  only  saw  it  for  a  moment  at  a  time,  the  light  vanished,  and  the  form 
retreated  into  the  darkness,  but  reappeared  again  as  quickly.  John  asked  us  what  he 
should  do  for  us.  M.  Aksakof  begged  that  he  would  rise  to  the  cleiling  and  say  a  few 
words  to  us  in  that  position.  Accordingly  we  saw  the  form  appear  just  over  our  table, 
and  then  gradually  rise  upwards  to  the  ceiling,  which  became  visible  in  the  light  pro- 
ceeding from  the  luminous  object  in  the  hand  of  the  figure.  While  up  there,  John  called 
out  to  us—'  Will  that  do  ? '  {1st  es  so  recht  ?) 

"  Peter,  in  the  meantime,  although  invisible,  was  busy  and  loquacious  in  the  darkness, 
moving  various  objects  through  the  air  and  touching  us  with  them.  As  before  mentioned, 
we  sat  on  the  side  of  the  table  furthest  from  the  curtain  ;  behind  our  backs,  about  four 
feet  distant,  stood  the  washstand,  on  which  were  a  water-bottle  and  glass.  Suddenly  we 
heard  the  ringing  of  glasses  over  our  heads,  as  if  two  pieces  were  being  struck  together. 
Then  followed  a  rapid  pouring  of  water  into  the  glass  ;  the  glass  was  handed  to 
M.  Aksakof,  the  bottle  to  myself.  As  it  stood  in  my  hand,  I  felt  sensibly  that  another 
hand  was  holding  it  above.  At  this  moment  we  heard  the  medium  move  and  groan,  and 
the  voice  of  Peter  exclaiming  that  he  wanted  to  give  '  his  medium '  something  to  drink. 
The  water-bottle  floated  away  from  my  hand,  we  heard  the  movement  and  inarticulate 
murmuring  of  the  awakening  medium,  mingled  with  the  voice  of  Peter :  then  the 
gurgling  of  water  from  the  bottle,  and  in  another  instant  I  received  the  bottle  back  into 
my  hand.  During  all  that  I  have  described,  and  indeed  throughout  the  sitting,  we  were 
satisfied — so  far  as  our  hearing  could  perceive — that  Williams  remained  in  his  corner, 
while  the  voices  of  John  and  Peter  were  speaking  near  to  us  outside  the  cabinet ;  occasionally 
also  the  sounds  proceeding  from  the  medium,  and  the  speaking  of  John  and  Peter,  were 
almost  simultaneous. 

"  In  conclusion  let  me  remark  that  it  is  quite  natural  if  other  Russian  inquirers 
regard  these  phenomena  with  suspicion.  Owing  to  the  scarcity  of  mediums  in  our 
country  they  have  had  at  present  few  opportunities  of  observing  them  ;  nevertheless  they 
have  not  held  back  altogether,  but  took  up  the  investigation  so  soon  as  some  of  their 
colleagues  announced  seriously  that  they  had  really  Avitnessed  the  manifestations.  On 
the  whole  American  and  EngUsh  men  of  science  have  furnished  the  most  remarkable 
examples  of  prejudice  and  obstinacy.    It  is  easy  enough  for  them  to  convince  themselves 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  361 

of  the  objective  reality  of  the  phenomena  ;  they  have  powerful  mediums  always  at  hand, 
and  yet  with  a  few  honourable  exceptions  they  prefer  to  ignore  the  existence  of  these 
facts,  and  to  treat  as  unworthy  of  credit  the  testimony  of  such  men  as  Hare,  De  Morgan, 
Wallace,  Crookes,  Varley,  and  others.  In  no  far-ofif  future  such  conduct  as  this  will  be 
pointed  at  as  a  glaring  example  of  scientific  prejudice  and  superstition.  I  am  aware  that 
these  words  can  hardly  be  allowed  to  appear  in  conjunction  ;  the  adjective  '  scientific,' 
however,  does  not  refer  to  true  science,  which  knows  neither  prejudice  nor  superstition,  but 
only  to  such  men  who  may  belong  to  its  ranks  on  the  one  hand,  but  who  do  not  work  in 
the  true  spirit  of  science  so  long  as  they  pretend  to  serve  the  cause  of  human  knowledge 
by  ignoring  facts." 

"  May  the  scales  soon  fall  from  their  eyes,  and  may  they  soon  enter  on  the  only  path 
to  truth,  namely,  the  path  of  experiment ! " 

"I  feel  constrained  to  add  my  testimony  to  that  of  my  valued  friend.  Professor 
Boutlerof,  in  respect  of  the  manifestations  which  we  witnessed  in  the  presence  of  Williams. 
Besides  this,  I  can  testify  to  having  received  the  confirmation  of  the  appearance  of  John 
King  from  Mr.  Crookes  in  his  own  house,  Mrs.  Crookes's  hand  being  on  Williams's 
shoulder,  while  he  was  asleep  behind  the  curtain ;  also  that  in  the  house  of  Mrs. 
Macdougall  Gregory,  the  curtain  behind  which  Williams  was  placed,  was  nailed  over  the 
embrasure  of  a  window  so  closely  that  the  medium  was  in  a  niche  almost  hermetically 
sealed  ;  and  that  yet  John  King  appeared  above  the  table,  round  which  the  company  were 
assembled  in  front  of  the  curtain  !  ^ 

"  Alexander  Aksakof." 

No  less  striking  than  the  above  is  the  account  published  in  M.  Aksakof's 
journal  in  1875  of  Professor  Wagner's  experiences  with  the  French  Medium 
Bredif.  The  sitters  were  M.  and  Madame  Aksakof,  and  other  friends, 
besides  Professor  Wagner,  who  himself  wrote  the  account  and  published  it 
over  his  own  signature.  At  the  seances  in  question  the  Medium  willingly 
submitted  to  be  tied  and  tested  by  methods  far  more  crucial  than  any  of 
those  practised  in  American  or  English  circles. 

M.  Bredif  never  complained  of  being  "  degraded  "  by  these  tests,  nor  did 
they  seem  to  interfere  in  the  least  with  the  phenomena  produced,  in  fact 
their  only  result  was  to  assure  Professor  Wagner  and  his  friends  beyond  a 
peradventure  that  intelligent  beings  claiming  to  be  Spirits  did — and  M. 
Bredif  did  not — make  the  manifestations  observed. 

They  consisted  of  the  usual  results  of  physical  seances  such  as  direct 
voices ;  writings  of  a  test  character ;  the  formation  of  hands  ;  playing  musi- 
cal instruments  and  feats  of  strength  accompanied  with  intelligence. 

M.  Aksakof  complains  that  as  yet  physical  phenomena  have  been  wanting 
amongst  native  Russian  Media,  although  the  more  intellectual  phases  of 
"  the  power "  have  been  widely  manifested  in  private  circles.  This  may 
quite  possibly  be  the  case  in  a  country  where  the  free  investigation  of 
Spiritualism  has  to  be  conducted  under  such  stupendous  difificulties. 

That  physical  phenomena  are  not  entirely  wanting  in  Russia  as  in  other 
countries,  there  is  abundant  evidence  to  show,  and  in  proof  thereof  we  cite 
the  accounts  which  have  quite  recently  appeared  in  the  columns  of  the 
Novoye  Vreniya.  The  following  extract  from  the  above-named  journal  of 
January,  1881,  has  been  translated  by  a  Russian  gentleman  well  acquainted 
with  Madame  Beetch,  and  one  who  has  had  many  opportunities  of 
witnessing  the  phenomena  he  describes.  The  report  in  the  Novoye  Vremya, 
after  enlarging  upon  the  great  sensation  existing  amongst  all  classes  of  the 
community  on  the  case  reported  of,  goes  on  to  say  :— 

"  Not  far  from  Petersburg,  in  a  small  hamlet  inhabited  by  three  families  of  German 
colonists,  a  widow,  named  Margaret  Beetch,  took  a  little  girl  from  the  House  of  Found- 
lings into  her  service.  The  little  Pelagueya  was  liked  in  the  family  from  the  first  for  her 
sweet  disposition,  her  hard-working  zeal,  and  her  great  truthfulness.     She  found  herself 

362  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

exceedingly  hcappy  in  her  new  home,  and  for  several  years  no  one  ever  had  a  cross  word 
for  her.  Pelagueya  finally  became  a  good-looking  girl  of  seventeen,  and  was  beloved  in 
the  house.  Notwithstanding  her  good  looks,  no  village  youth  ever  thought  of  offering 
himself  as  a  husband.  The  young  men  said  she  '  awed '  them.  They  looked  upon  her 
as  people  look  in  those  regions  upon  the  image  of  a  saint.  So  at  least  say  the  Russian 
papers  and  the  district  police  officer  sent  to  investigate  her  case,  which  is  as  follows  : — - 

"  November  3,  1880,  accompanied  by  a  farm-servant,  she  descended  into  the  cellar 
under  the  house  to  get  some  potatoes.  Hardly  had  they  opened  the  heavy  door,  when 
they  found  themselves  pelted  with  vegetables.  Believing  some  neighbour's  boy  must 
have  hidden  himself  on  the  wide  shelf  on  which  the  potatoes  were  heaped,  Pelagueya, 
placing  the  basket  upon  her  head,  laughingly  remarked,  '  Whoever  you  are,  fill  it  with 
potatoes  and  so  help  me  !'  In  an  instant  the  basket  was  filled  to  the  brim.  Then  the 
other  girl  tried  the  same,  but  the  potatoes  remained  motionless.  Climbing  upon  the 
shelf,  to  their  amazement  the  girls  found  no  one  there.  Having  notified  the  widow  Beetch 
of  the  strange  occurrence,  the  latter  went  herself,  and  unlocking  the  cellar,  which  had 
been  securely  locked  by  the  two  maids  on  leaving,  found  no  one  concealed  in  it.  This 
event  was  but  the  precursor  of  a  series  of  others.  During  a  period  of  three  weeks  they 
succeeded  each  other  with  incredible  rapidity.  When  the  girl  approaches  the  well,  the 
water  begins  rising,  and  soon  overflowing  the  sides  of  the  cistern  runs  in  torrents  to  her 
feet ;  does  she  happen  to  pass  near  a  bucket  of  water,  the  same  thing  happens.  Hardly 
does  she  stretch  out  her  hand  to  reach  from  the  shelf  some  needed  piece  of  crockery,  than 
cups,  tureens  and  plates,  as  if  snatched  from  the^r  place,  begin  to  Jump  and  tremble,  and 
then  fall  with  a  crash  at  her  feet.  One  day  Pelagueya  having  gone  to  the  shed  to  do  her 
usual  evening  work  of  feeding  the  cattle,  was  preparing  to  leave  with  two  other  servants, 
when  the  cows  and  pigs  seemed  to  become  suddenly  possessed.  The  former,  frightening 
the  whole  village  with  the  most  infuriated  bellowing,  tried  to  climb  the  mangers,  while 
the  latter  knocked  their  heads  against  the  walls,  running  around  as  if  pursued  by  some 
wild  animal.  Pitchforks,  shovels,  benches,  and  feeding  trough  pursued  the  terrified  girls, 
who  escaped  by  violently  shutting  and  locking  the  door  of  the  stables. 

"  All  this  phenomena  took  place  not  in  darkness,  but  in  daytime,  and  in  full  view  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  httle  hamlet ;  moreover  they  were  always  preceded  by  extraordinary 
noises  hke  cracking  in  the  walls,  and  rajDS  in  the  window-frames  and  glass.  A  panic 
seized  the  household  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  hamlet,  which  went  on  increasing  at  every 
new  manifestation.  A  priest  was  called,  but  vrith  no  good  results  ;  a  couple  of  pots 
danced  a  jig  on  the  shelf,  an  oven-fork  went  stamping  on  the  floor,  and  a  heavy  sewing 
machine  followed  suit.  The  news  ran  round  the  whole  district.  Men  and  women  from 
neighbouring  villages  flocked  to  see  the  marvels.  The  same  phenomena  took  place  in 
their  presence.  Once  when  a  crowd  of  men  upon  entering,  placed  their  caps  upon  the 
table,  every  one  of  these  jumped  from  it  to  the  floor,  and  a  heavy  leather  glove,  circling 
round,  struck  its  owner  on  his  face.  Finally,  notwithstanding  the  affection  the  widow 
Beetch  felt  for  the  poor  orphan,  towards  the  beginning  of  December,  Pelagueya  and  her 
boxes  were  placed  upon  a  cart,  and  after  many  a  tear  and  warm  expression  of  regret,  she 
was  sent  off  to  the  Superintendent  of  the  Foundling  Hospital — the  institution  in  which 
she  was  brought  up.  This  gentleman  returning  with  the  girl  on  the  following  day;  was 
made  a  witness  to  the  pranks  of  the  same  force,  and  calling  in  the  police,  after  a  careful 
inquest  had  a  proces  verial  signed  by  the  authorities,  and  departed." 

Accounts  of  the  ofiEicially  noted  facts  above  detailed,  have  appeared  in 
most  of  the  Russian  daily  organs.  Professor  Boutlerof  also  furnishes  a 
long  and  graphic  narrative  of  Pelagueya  and  her  weird  Mediumship  for  the 
columns  of  the  Psychische  Stiidien.  He  gives  an  account  of  the  official 
investigation,  and  adds  that  one  half  the  wonderful  things  done  in  the 
presence  of  the  poor  Medium  are  not  stated  in  the  declaration — all  parties 
however  he  says  attribute  these  occurrences  to  the  agency  of  evil  Spirits, 
with  whom  every  district  in  Russia  is  said  to  be  haunted. 

Amongst  the  many  notable  personages  who  aided  to  maintain  the 
prestige  of  Spirituahsm  in  Russia,  not  only  by  his  admirable  life,  but  also 
by  his  openly  avowed  interest  in  the  movement,  and  the  unbounded  influence 
which  he  exercised  over  the  mind  of  his  friend  and  master  the  late  Czar, 
was  Prince  Emil  de  Sayn  Wittgenstein.  This  noble  gentleman  not  only 
held  high  rank  in  the  Russian  army  and  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  the 
Emperor   during   the   unhappy  war   with   Turkey,  but  few  of  those  who 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  363 

approached  His  Imperial  Majesty's  person,  enjoyed  the  royal  confidence 
in  the  same  degree.  In  a  correspondence  maintained  during  some  years 
with  the  author  of  this  volume,  Prince  Emil  asked  for  and  obtained  a 
number  of  volumes  of  the  best  American  literature  for  the  Emperor's  library. 
Previous  to  the  fatal  war  with  Turkey  the  Emperor  and  Prince  Wittgen- 
stein both  received  assurances  through  Mrs.  Britten's  Mediumship  that  their 
lives  would  be  spared  during  the  conflict,  but  be  sacrificed — the  one  to  the 
insurrectionary  spirit  at  home,  the  other  to  the  feverish  effects  of  the  deadly 
campaign,  into  which  he  was  about  to  plunge.  Both  these  gentlemen 
placed  implicit  faith  in  these  prophecies,  and  Prince  Wittgenstein,  in 
acknowledging  them  to  the  author,  declares — in  a  letter  still  cherished  in 
remembrance  of  her  esteemed  correspondent — ■'  that  the  Emperor  antici- 
pated his  fate  and  was  resigned;"  whilst  he — Prince  W. — should  do  the 
best  he  could  to  set  his  house  in  order,  aiid  make  provision  for  his  beloved 
wife  and  children. 

These  passages  are  not  introduced  to  discuss  the  ratmiak  of  prophecy, 
which  every  experienced  Spirituahst  must  know  to  be  a  demonstrated  truth, 
and  one,  which  seems  to  be  singularly  rife  in  Mediumship,  but  Ihey  are 
named  to  show  that  a  deep  and  abiding  faith  in  Spiritualism,  was  cherished 
by  men,  whose  talents,  education,  and  political  influence,  placed  them 
before  the  world  as  exemplars  of  their  time.  We  may  conclude  a  notice 
which  would  be  far  more  extended  did  it  not  involve  personal  statements 
on  the  part  of  the  author,  which  she  is  determined  as  far  as  possible  to 
avoid,  by  giving  a  brief  notice  of  the  departure  of  good  Prince  Wittgenstein 
within  a  few  months  after  the  close  of  the  Turco-Russian  war.  The  lines 
in  question  were  written  to  the  "  Spiritualist "  journal  of  London,  by  Miss 
Kislingbury,  and  speak  for  themselves.     This  lady  says : — 

"  To  the  Editor  of  '  The  Spiritualist.' 

"  Sir, — I  have  had  sorrowful  news  this  morning.  The  Baroness  von  Vay  writes  to  me : 
'  Our  dear,  good  friend,  that  excellent  and  warm  Spiritualist,  the  Prince  Emil  de  Sayn- 
Wittgenstein,  has  changed  his  earthly  body  for  a  heavenly  one.' 

"  Having  had  the  pleasure  of  close  personal  acqaintance  with  the  Prince  during  the 
ten  days  that  I  was  his  guest  at  St.  Valery  two  years  ago,  I  wish  to  add  my  tribute  of 
regard  in  respect  to  his  fine  social  and  domestic  qualities,  in  addition  to  those  military 
honours  which,  won  in  fair  fight,  are  a  public  and  standing  witness  to  his  valour: 

"  In  affability  and  courtesy  I  may  say  that  I  never  met  his  equal,  and  these  were 
evident  not  only  in  his  treatment  of  strangers,  but  shone  the  most  brightly  in  every 
detaQ  of  his  home-life,  in  his  affection  for  his  wife  and  little  children,  by  whom  I  need 
not  say  he  was  adored,  and  who  have  indeed  suffered  an  irreparable  loss.  The  Prince's 
ofiicial  relations  with  the  Russian  Court  were  supplemented  by  familiar  friendship  and 
intercourse  with  the  Imperial  Royal  family,  and  often,  as  we  sat  sipping  our  coffee  on  the 
balcony  in  an  evening,  he  would  amuse  us  with  little  anecdotes  about  the  childhood  of 
the  present  Duchess  of  Edinburgh,  or  harrow  us  with  incidents  of  skirmishes  between 
Turks  and  Cossacks,  in  which  he  had  borne  part,  long  before  there  was  a  thought  of  the 
late  war.     .     .     . 

"  No  doubt  there  are  other  English  Spiritualists  who  have  experienced,  as  weU  as  myself, 
the  Prince's  urbanity  and  kindness.  I  only  wish  to  add  my  testimony,  from  personal 
knowledge,  to  that  of  many  who  will  sincerely  applaud  and  deeply  lament  a  man  whose 
benevolence  was  only  equalled  by  his  prowess.  "  Emily  Kislingbuey." 

Whilst  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  has  lost  both 
in  Prince  Wittgenstein  and  his  illustrious  master,  warm  friends  and  patrons, 
it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  interest  awakened  by  these  royal  converts 
was  confined  to  themselves  or  their  immediate  circle  of  adherents.  Spirit- 
ualism has  a  strong  and  deep  foothold  in  .Russia.  It  may  take  the  form  of 
the  grossest  superstition  amongst  the  ignorant  classes,  but  its  fa^s  are  too 

364  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

deeply  rooted  in  their  experiences  to  be  ignored,  even  if  they  mistake  the 
source  of  the  demonstrations  and  pervert  the  modes  in  which  it  should  be 
dealt  with.  The  influence  of  such  men  as  Aksakof,  Boutlerof,  and  Wagner, 
makes  public  opinioji,  and  it  only  requires  time  to  bring  the  seeds  of  know- 
ledge they  have  sown,  to  ample  fruition.  Spiritualism  too,  still  maintains 
its  place  "  at  Court,"  as  the  following  brief  but  significant  extracts  will  show. 
The  first  is  from  the  Mediu?n  of  May  of  this  year,  1883,  and  reads  thus  : — 

"The  Czar  of  Russia  has  become  a  partial  convert  to  the  faith  of  modern  Spirit- 
ualism. It  came  about  in  this  way.  When  the  Czar  was  in  some  perplexity- 
respecting  the  measures  to  be  taken  for  the  safe  conduct  of  the  coronation  cere- 
monies, it  was  suggested  to  him  that  he  should  'ask  counsel  of  the  spirits'  at  the 
hands  of  a  lady  medium  who  has  been  practising  for  some  years  in  London.  The  lady 
(who  is  an  American)  was  accordingly  sent  for  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  gave  a  '  sitting'  to 
the  Czar.  The  result  of  the  seance  was  so  satisfactory  that  the  preparations  for  the 
coronation  were  hurried  forward  with  greater  enei-gy  than  before,  haste  being  recom- 
mended with  much  emphasis.  Everything  having  passed  off  extremely  Avell  in  Moscow, 
the  Czar  has  come  to  think  that  'there  may  be  something  in  Spiritualism  after  all ;"  and 
the  lady,  on  her  part,  is  said  to  be  extremely  well  satisfied  with  the  results  of  her  visit  to 
the  Russian  autocrat. — We  may  add  that  the  medium  in  question  is  evidently  Mrs.  Kate 
Fox- Jencken,  who  advertises  as  having  recently  returned  from  St.  Petersburg.  The  spirits 
seem  to  take  a  great  interest  in  the  Czar.  At  a  circle  in  Chelsea,  messages  have  been 
frequently  received  relative  to  precautions  necessary  to  be  taken  during  recent  events, 
which  have  happily  passed  off  without  any  calamity  occurring.  The  spirits  state  that  the 
Czar  stands  between  two  spiritual  forces :  if  he  incline  to  the  lower,  and  prove  oppres- 
sive, he  is  in  danger ;  if  he  inchne  to  liberal  reforms  his  reign  will  be  established,  and 
the  higher  influenc^es  will  shield  him  from  danger." 

The  second  notice,  which  is  from  the  honoured  pen  of  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall, 
speaks  with  less  confidence  of  the  real  mission  of  "  the  American  Medium" 
to  Russia,  but  gives  a  satisfactory  inside  view  of  Spiritual  progress  in  St. 
Petersburgh.     It  is  as  follows : — 

"  THE   VISIT   OF    MRS.    FOX   JENCKEN   TO    RUSSIA. 

Mat,  1883. 

"Mrs.  Fox  Jencken  has  returned  in  good  health  from  her  visit  to  Russia,  where  she 
had  been  invited  by  M.  Aksakof,  by  whom  all  her  arrangements  for  '  sittings '  were  made. 
Her  residence  in  St.  Petersburg  lasted  for  seven  weeks,  on  every  day  of  which  she  met 
some  persons  (most  of  them  of  high  social,  professional,  or  political  rank)  to  whom  she 
manifested  the  marvels  of  Spiritualism.  Her  mission  was  entirely  successful,  although  it 
does  not  appear  that  any  peculiar  '  novelties '  attended,  or  arose  out  of  it.  The  result 
was,  however,  to  convince  the  hundreds  who  attended  her  sittings  ;  and,  undoubtedly, 
belief  in  Spiritualism  and  thoroughly  confirmed  faith  in  the  verity  of  the  phenomena, 
have  resulted  from  the  lady's  visit  to  the  Imperial  city. 

"  Mrs.  Jencken  expresses  warm  gratitude  to  M.  Aksakof.  Rooms  were  provided  for 
her  at  the  principal  hotel ;  a  carriage  was  placed  at  her  disposal ;  her  two  orphan  boys, 
who  accompanied  her,  were  placed  at  a  temporary  school ;  her  daily  callers  were  very 
numerous ;  in  a  word,  the  result  was  far  more  than  merely  satisfactory  to  her,  while 
gratifying,  convincing,  and  happy  to  her  sitters,  on  every  occasion  for  which  appointments 
and  arrangements  had  been  made. 

"  The  manifestations  were  sometimes  by  night  and  as  often  by  day — in  full  light  : 
forms  were  occasionally  visible,  messages  were  written  in  Russian,  both  by  the  hand  of 
Mrs.  Jencken  and  in  '  direct  writing.'  Several  names  were  communicated  of  persons 
'  gone  before.'  The  raps  on  the  table,  floor  and  walls  were  even  more  than  usually  loud 
and  strong  :  lights  were  seen  in  various  parts  of  the  room  :  a  small  bell  was  rung 
repeatedly  in  various  parts  of  it  :  palpable  'touchings'  were  numerous,  with  clear 
evidence  as  to  the  identity  of  the  '  touchers  : '  in  short,  all  the  usual  phenomena  famUiar 
to  advanced  SpirituaKsts,  were  communicated  to  the  sitters — such  evidence  being  fully 
and  entkely  accepted  by  several  of  the  most  learned  professors  of  the  Russian  capital. 
And,  although  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any  marked  or  peculiar  manifestations. 

N.  Wagker  . 
Professor  of  Zoology  at  the  University  of  ST  Petersburg  . 

NINETEENTH   CENTURV   MIRACLES.  365 

the  result  was  eminently  and  entirely  satisfactory,  confirming  the  very  general  belief  in 
Spiritualism  that  prevails  in  the  great  city  of  Northern  Europe  :  the  acceptance  of 
Spiritualism  as  a  solemn,  impressive,  and  happy  truth " 

To  the  Lord  of  the  Harvest  whose  work  Spiritualism  is,  in  Russia,  as  in 
every  other  country,  we  may  confidently  commit  the  results  of  all  that  has 
been  said,  and  done,  and  striven  for,  by  ministering  angels  both  on  earth, 
and  in  heaven;  in  God's  time,  if  not  in  man's,  the  seeds  sown  by  the 
hands  of  His  faithful  labourers  will  bring  forth  all  the  fruit  which  His 
divine  wisdom  deems  necessary  for  the  sustenance  of  His  children  in  the 
land  of  the  North,  as  in  all  other  climes  and  nationalities. 

CHAPTER     XLV. 

SCANDINAVIAN    FRAGMENTS   OF   MODERN    SPIRITUALISM. 

Were  this  work  devoted  to  the  record  of  ancient  Spiritual  beliefs  and 
manifestations,  it  would  be  found  that  no  portion  of  the  earth  affords  richer 
fields  of  observation  than  the  northern  lands  included  under  the  generic 
term  of  Scandinavia. 

In  Sweden  and  Norway  the  Scandinavian  cult  is  so  deeply  interpenetrated 
with  a  sort  of  Spiritualism  corresponding  in  many  respects  to  that  which 
took  form  in  America  about  1848,  and  there  are  such  frequent  reports 
from  those  countries  of  direct  interposition  on  the  part  of  human  spirits 
with  human  affairs,  that  the  study  of  this  subject,  from  the  "supernatural" 
and  traditional  point  of  view  would  open  up  a  valuable  and  instructive 
theme  of  research. 

During  the  present  century  there  seems  to  be  but  little  or  no  concerted 
mode  of  action  for  the  promulgation  of  Spiritual  doctrines,  or  the  study  of 
Spiritual  phenomena  in  Scandinavia.  Such  manifestations  as  have  occurred, 
appear  to  be  of  the  same  spontaneous  character  as  those  described  in  Mrs. 
Catherine  Crowe's  "  Night  Side  of  Nature." 

Apparitions,  hauntings,  healing  by  occult  methods,  and  second  sight,  are 
of  common  occurrence  in  Scandinavia,  but  the  organized  modes  of  actipn 
practised  by  the  Spiritualists  of  America  and  some  countries  of  Europe,  are 
unknown  in  Sweden  and  Norway,  except  in  rare  instances. 

The  study  of  magic  antedates  the  earliest  records  of  Scandinavian  history. 

Permeating  all  the  popular  traditions,  whether  of  history,  religion,  or 
social  life,  Scandinavian  supernaturalism  is  inextricably  interwoven  with  the 
nature  of  the  people. 

As  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  magic  was  studied 
as  an  art,  and  in  still  earlier  times  it  was  taught  as  an  accepted  branch  of 
learning. 

Within  the  last  half  century,  more  enlightened  and  philosophical  views 
of  occult  power  and  phenomena  have  been  accepted.  It  is  now  generally 
belie \^ed  that  the  spirits  of  mortals  play  a  more  important  part  in  occult 
manifestations  than  the  "  nature  spirits,"  gods,  and  demons,  to  whom — in 
past  ages — all  inexplicable  phenomena  were  attributed. 

It  is  realized  also,  that  "  the  true  magician  is  "• — as  Cornelius  Agrippa 
asserts — "  born  so ; "  in  other  words,  that  the  seer,  prophet,  and  modern 
"  Medium,"  is  one  originally  endowed  by  nature  or  inheritance,  and  that 

366  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

magic — 'as  an  art — only  supplements  what  nature  bestows  upon  certain 
exceptional  individuals  in  the  form  of  Spiritual  gifts.  In  writing  of  the 
magical  practices  still  common  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  remote  districts 
in  Sweden  and  Norway,  Herr  Hansen  says  : — 

"The  most  essential  implement  in  the  performance  of  magical  rites  is  the  famous 
quoldas,  or  kettledrum.  This  is  cut  from  the  stem  of  a  tree  of  the  required  size.  The 
inside  is  then  carefully  hollowed  out,  and  covered  with  the  dried  skin  of  some  animal, 
from  which  the  fur  has  been  removed.  This  skin  is  painted  with  images  of  gods,  demons, 
angels,  heavenly  scenes,  and  even  fantastic  symbols  of  the  Deity.  When  the  sorcerer  is 
called  upon  to  exercise  his  art,  he  attaches  a  mass  of  bangles  or  metallic  rings  to  his  drum  ; 
then  kneels  on  the  ground,  offers  invocations  to  his  chosen  saints,  and  commences  to  beat 
his  drum — at  first  gently  and  with  slowly  marked  rhythm.  As  he  proceeds  his  strokes  fall 
thicker  and  heavier,  until  he  seems  impelled  to  strike  in  the  direction  of  some  one  of  the 
scenes,  images,  or  figures  painted  on  the  drum  ;  finally  he  leaps  up,  shouts,  sings,  tosses 
his  drum  in  the  air,  and  strikes  it  against  his  head.  A  chosen  circle  of  his  friends  gather 
round  him,  catch  his  infection  ;  dance,  leap,  sing,  and  shriek  with  him,  until  one  or  more, 
and  sometimes  the  whole  party,  fall  to  the  earth  in  trance  or  ecstasy.  When  the  enchanter 
himself  sinks  down,  the  bystanders  continue  to  mutter  round  him  a  sort  of  rhythmical 
incantation  until  he  regains  consciousness,  when  the  visions  that  have  flitted  before  his 
entranced  eyes,  or  the  scenes  which  his  liberated  spirit  has  beheld,  are  deemed  to  be 
oracular," 

Sturleson,  Zeigler,  Magnus,  and  other  authentic  writers  on  Scandinavian 
lore,  confirm  Hansen's  statement,  and  allege  that  the  most  marvellous  facts 
of  second  sight,  prophecy,  and  clairvoyance  are  revealed  in  these  modes 
by  Lapp  and  Finnish  sorcerers.  The  methods  of  incantation  are  not  always 
as  elaborate  as  those  described  above,  and  may  be  conducted  by  the 
enquirer  and  sorcerer  alone,  but  the  professional  respondent  always  con- 
sults his  drum,  and  always  claims  to  be  directed  to  some  of  the  images 
painted  upon  it,  which  are  used  in  modes  not  unlike  the  spots  in  which 
fortune-tellers  by  cards  claim  to  find  direction,  Herr  Magnus,  a  Swedish 
gentleman  of  considerable  learning,  connected  with  Scandinavian  journalism, 
has  assured  the  author,  that  natural  clairvoyance,  the  faculty  of  second 
sight,  and  the  power  of  prophesying  by  unpremeditated  speech,  is  far  more 
universal  in  Norway,  Sweden,  and  Iceland,  than  in  any  other  countries  he 
has  visited  in  long  years  of  travel.  His  own  young  daughter,  sent  him  from 
Stockholm  to  Cahfornia,  a  perfect  description  of  "  the  ranche"  at  which  he 
was  staying  as  a  visitor.  She  added,  that  two  of  the  cows  were  sick  or 
would  be  so,  when  her  letter  arrived,  and  if  the  proprietor  (also  a  Swede) 
would  bind  on  their  foreheads  two  scraps  of  paper  she  enclosed,  covered 
with  little  drawings,  using  them  as  spells,  the  animals  would  recover  in 
three  days.  The  little  girl's  letter  was  dated  twenty  days  before  its  delivery 
in  California,  Herr  Magnus  showed  that  letter  to  the  author  one  week 
later,  during  which  time,  the  sick  animals  had  been  treated  as  the  child  had 
directed,  and  their  recovery  took  place  without  the  aid  of  any  other  medi- 
cation, just  as  she  had  predicted. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  give  any  other  name  than  "  Magnetism "  to  the 
healing  power  thus  curiously  displayed,  whilst  the  prevision  of  the  sickness 
and  recovery  of  the  animals,  might  certainly  come  under  the  category  of 
*'  clairvoyance." 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    SWEDEN. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Upsala  in  Sweden,  was  the  birthplace  of 
the  most  highly-endowed  seer  of  modern  ages,  namely,  Emanuel  Sweden- 
borg.  Whilst  the  limited  character  of  our  record  forbids  any  detailed 
account  of  Swedenborg's  remarkable  experiences  and  doctrines,  we  should 

NIlStETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  367 

fail  to  do  justice  to  the  Spiritualism  of  Sweden  were  we  to  omit  the  fact 
that  it  gave  birth  to  one  whose  name  occupies  so  distinguished  a  place  in 
the  shining  roll  of  immortality. 

We  must  also  call  attention  to  a  curious  phase  of  Spiritualism  occurring 
in  Sweden  during  the  dark  and  iniquitous  trials  for  "  Witchcraft "  in  the 
middle  ages. 

Any  of  our  readers  who  may  be  fortunate  enough  to  possess  a  copy  of  the 
celebrated  work  on  Witchcraft  written  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  Glanvil,  chaplain- 
in-ordinary  to  Charles  II.  of  England,  will  find  in  his  collection  of  narra- 
tives the  following  striking  title-page,  printed  in  clear  old  English 
characters: — '■^  An  Accotint  of  what  Happened  i7i  the  Kingdom  of  Sweden 
in  the  years  1669  aiid  1670  in  Relation  to  the  Persons  Accused  of  Witch- 
craft Tried  and  Executed  by  the  King's  Command.  Printed  at  first  in  the 
Swedish  dialect  by  aicthority ;  then  translated  into  divers  other  lajiguages, 
atid  notv,  upon  the  request  of  some  friends,  done  into  English.  By  Anthony 
Horneck,  Preacher  at  the  Savoy.     LONDON,  printed  1681." 

The  details  of  the  scenes  that  follow,  bear  a  striking  similarity  to  those 
of  the  New  England  and  Scotch  trials  for  witchcraft,  and  tend  to  show, 
that  the  unhappy  victims  who,  under  the  compulsion  of  torture,  threats,  or 
delirium,  confessed  to  wild  and  impossible  practices  in  the  name  of  witch- 
craft, were  still  participators  in  some  acts  which  proved  them  to  be  uncon- 
sciously to  themselves  magnetizers  and  psychologists. 

The  horrible  rumours  of  what  witchcraft  could  effect,  were  in  the  air,  and 
ignorant  though  susceptible  individuals  who  felt  themselves  possessed  of 
the  power  to  impress  others  for  good  or  evil,  often  exerted  it  without  any 
distinct  realization  of  what  they  did.  On  the  other  hand,  the  parties 
affected,  were  involuntarily  made  aware  of  the  impressions  they  received 
and  in  some  instances  "the  spectre,"  or  living  Spirit  of  the  magnetizer 
became  so  palpable  to  sensitive  subjects  that  the  phenomena  thus  mutually 
produced,  ended  in  accusations  and  confessions  of  the  most  perplexing 
character. 

A  careful  study  of  the  marvels  of  psychology  and  magnetism,  especially 
when  these  potential  forces  are  exercised  under  the  direction  of  concen- 
trated WILL,  may  be  found  to  underhe  many  of  the  mysteries  ignorantly 
denominated  "Witchcraft,"  and  will  afford  a  clue  to  explain  the  stupendous 
difficulties  which  beset  the  conduct  of  those  who  were  called  to  sit  in  judg- 
ment upon  accused  parties.  It  is  obvious  also  that  some  of  the  victims 
executed  for  the  imaginary  crime  of  witchcraft,  were  genuine  somnambulists, 
or  trance  Mediums,  whilst  others  again,  especially  the  unfortunate  children 
implicated  in  the  general  horror,  shared  in  the  contagion  of  a  deep 
universal  superstition,  actually  confessing  to  participation  in  rites  of  which 
they  had  heard  or  dreamed,  until  their  susceptible  minds  succumbed  to  the 
delirium  of  the  times,  and  they  came  to  believe  as  real,  the  horrible  fictions 
which  popular  opinion  attributed  to  them. 

It  may  be  asked  what  could  the  unhappy  accused  parties  confess  to 
have  done  or  said  that  should  make  them  worthy  of  death  ?  In  a  word,  in 
what  was  the  crime  of  witchcraft  supposed  to  consist? 

It  is  certainly  far  easier  to  propound,  than  to  answer  this  question. 

The  trials  for  witchcraft  in  Scotland,  New  England,  as  in  Sweden,  abound 
with  such  monstrous  tales  of  compacts  and  intercourse  with  demons,  and 
the  details  of  the  horrible  rites,  said  to  have  been  enacted,  are  recorded  in 
verbiage,  at  once  so  revolting  and  absurd,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to 
transfer  them  to  pages  designed  for  the  edification  of  modern  readers.     As 

368  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

some  examples  of  the  style  and  tone  in  which  the  witchcraft  accusations 
were  framed,  may  be  instructive  to  the  student  of  occultism,  in  the  nineteenth 
century,  we  offer  the  following  selections  from  Horneck's  translation. 
He  says : — 

"  The  news  of  this  Witchcraft  coming  to  the  King's  ear,  his  Majesty  was  pleased  to 
appoint  Commissioners,  some  of  the  Clergy  and  some  of  the  Laity,  to  make  a  journey  to 
the  village  of  Mohra  to  examine  into  the  whole  business.  The  examination  was  ordered 
to  be  on  the  13th  of  August,  1669,  and  the  Commissioners  met  at  the  Parson's  house,  to 
whom  both  the  minister  and  several  people  of  fashion  came  and  complained  with  tears  in 
their  eyes  of  the  miserable  condition  they  were  in,  begging  them  (the  said  Commissioners) 
to  think  of  some  way  whereby  they  might  be  delivered  from  their  Calamity. 

"  They  gave  the  Commissioners  very  strange  instances  of  the  Devil's  tyranny  among 
them  ;  how  by  the  help  of  Witches  he  had  drawn  some  hundreds  of  children  to  him  and 
made  them  subject  to  his  power  ;  how  he  hath  been  seen  to  go  in  a  visible  sbape  through 
the  country,  and  appeared  daily  to  the  people  ;  how  he  had  wrought  upon  the  poorer 

sort  by  presents  of  meat  and  drink The  inhabitants  of  the  village  added, 

with  great  lamentations,  that  though  their  children  had  told  all,  and  sought  God  earnestly 
by  prayer,  they  were  carried  away  by  him,  and  therefore  begged  the  Lords  Commissioners 
to  root  out  these  Witches,  that  they  may  regain  their  former  rest  and  quietness,  the 
rather,  because,  the  children  which  used  to  be  carried  awayjn  Elfsborg,  since  the  witches 
had  been  hurnt,  remained  unmolested." 

Then  follows  a  long  account  of  trials,  in  which  obscene  details,  horrible 
rites,  and  utterly  impossible  crimes  were  attributed  sometimes  to  adults 
said  to  be  witches,  and  sometimes  to  children,  too  young  in  inany  instances 
even  to  speak  plaiiily.  It  is  alleged  that  nearly  all  the  accused  persons  con- 
fessed to  that  with  which  they  were  charged,  or  rather,  that  which  the 
ignorant  and  superstitious  imagination  of  their  judges  suggested  to  them  as 
the  crimes  that  they  were  supposed  to  have  committed. 

The  only  sanity  manifested  in  this  reign  of  lunatic  superstition,  is  in  the 
official  summing  up  of  the  trials,  which  reads  thus  :  — 

"  The  confession  which  the  Witches  made  in  Elfsborg  to  the  judges  there,  agreed  with 
the  confessiori  made  at  Mohra,  and  the  chief  things  they  confessed  to,  consisted  in  these 
three  points  : — 

"1st.  Whither  they  used  to  go. 

"  2nd.  What  kind  of  place  it  was  they  went  to,  called  by  them  Blockula,  where  the 
Witches  and  the  Devil  used  to  meet. 

"  3rd.  What  evil  or  mischief  they  had  either  done,  or  designed  there." 

Then  followed  confessions  equally  disgusting  and  absurd,  as  to  how  they 
(the  Witches)  would  go  by  night  to  appointed  places,  wherein  by  incanta- 
tions they  would  summon  the  Devil,  who  carried  them  on  brooms,  in  sieves, 
on  goats'  backs,  spits,  &c.,  &c.,  to  Blockula;  how  they  generally  saw 
their  bodies  left  behind^  or  something  left  in  their  homes  resembling  them ; 
also,  how  in  compUance  with  the  Devil's  demand,  they  were  obliged  to 
furnish  so  many  children  to  accompany  them. 

Amongst  the  horrors  of  these  details,  appears  now  and  then  a  sentence 
which  speaks  of  a  redeeming  touch  of  sanity  such  as,  "  What  the  real 
manner  of  their  journey  was,  God  alone  knows  ! "  The  only  marvel  is^  how 
men — professing  to  be  Christians,  could  use  the  name  of  God  at  all  in  such 
a  record. 

Of  the  nature  of  the  most  readable  of  the'confessions,  the  following  para- 
graph is  an  illustration : — 

"  One  little  girl,  of  Elfsborg,  confessed  that,  naming  Jesus  as  she  was  carried  away, 
she  instantly  fell  to  the  ground,  and  got  a  great  hole  in  her  side,  which  the  Devil 
presently  healed  up  again,  and  away  he  carried  her  ;  and  to  this  day  the  girl  confessed 
ehe  had  exceeding  great  pain  in  her  side. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  369 

"  Of  Blockxjla. 

"They  unanimously  confest  that  BlochvZa  is  a  large  deKcate  meadow  whereof  you 
can  see  no  end. 

"  The  house  they  met  at  had  before  it  a  gate  painted  with  divers  colours.  Through 
this  gate  they  went  into  a  little  meadow,  where  the  Beasts  went  that  they  used  to  ride  on. 
But  the  men  whom  they  rode  upon  in  their  journey  stood  in  the  house  by  the  gate  in  a 
slumbering  posture,  sleeping  against  the  wall.  ...  In  a  huge  room  of  this  house 
they  said  stood  a  long  table  at  which  the  witches  sat  down  ;  and  that  hard  by  was  a 
chamber  where  there  were  lovely  and  delicate  beds. 

"  The  first  thing  they  must  do  at  Blockula  was  that  they  must  deny  all  else  ;  devote 
themselves  body  and  soul  to  the  Devil  and  promise  to  serve  him  faithfully,  and  confirm 
all  this  with  an  oath.  Hereupon  they  cut  their  fingers,  and  with  their  blood  writ  their 
names  in  his  book.  They  added,  that  he  caused  them  to  be  baptized  by  such  priests  as 
he  had  there,  and  made  them  confirm  them  confirm  their  baptism  with  dreadful  oaths 
and  imprecations " 

Then  follow  descriptions  of  their  monstrous  rites ;  the  evils  that  the 
Devil  commanded  them  to  do,  or  that  they,  the  witches,  asked  permission  to 
do  against  those  they  disliked ;  accounts  of  their  horrid  feasts,  dances,  &c., 
&c.,  for  all  of  which  consult  Goethe's  "Walpurgis  Night,"  "The  Witches' 
Sabbath  at  Blocksberg,"  or  the  annals  of  Bedlam  ! 

What  sane  minds  in  this  age  cannot  discover,  that  some  malignant  atmos- 
pheric epidemic  had  fallen  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  districts  said  to  be 
possessed  ? — that  in  a  certain  state  of  physical  weakness  and  disabihty,  a 
contagious  condition  of  delirium  set  in,  seizing  upon  all  those  who  were 
most  negative  or  most  susceptible,  such  as  children,  weak,  old,  or  infirm 
men  and  women,  and  that  in  this  state,  the  wild  and  ghastly  legends  of 
witchcraft  which  for  centuries  had  prevailed  as  an  article  of  superstitious 
belief  amongst  the  peasantry  of  Europe,  became  the  distinguishing  mental 
feature  of  their  enfeebled  minds — that  is  to  say,  that  some  epidemic  dis- 
order was  in  the  air,  and  the  result  was  an  universal  monomania,  of  which 
the  belief  in  Satanic  possession  and  traditional  witchcraft  were  the  distin- 
guishing marks  ? 

The  introduction  of  little  children  into  these  horrible  scenes,  especially 
some  of  an  age  so  tender,  "  that  they  could  not  even  speak  plainly  enough 
to  answer  the  simplest  questions  put  to  them,"  of  course  complicates  the 
horror  of  the  popular  madness,  and  rendered  it  in  the  period  of  its  enact- 
ment, still  more  difi&cult  to  deal  with. 

Herr  Christian  Rumpt,  Resident  for  the  States-General  in  Stockholm,  in 
a  narrative  of  some  of  the  ghastly  scenes  of  the  time  alleges,  that  he  was 
obliged  to  send  away  his  little  son  to  Holland,  lest  he  too  should  catch  the 
general  infection,  and  become  possessed  by  the  prevailing  Satanic  agency. 
Herr  Rumpt  says,  the  accused  children  were  carried  away  by  the  witches  to 
Blockula,  sometimes  by  force,  and  occasionally  by  promises  of  fine  presents 
and  the  prospect  of  marvellous  sights. 

Many  of  the  children,  he  adds,  confessed  to  participation  in  the  horrible 
rites  they  were  questioned  about,  and  most  of  them  volunteered  to  tell  how 
"  when  they  were  carried  away  they  saw  their  own  bodies  lying  in  their  beds 
seemingly  sound  asleep.''^ 

Report  adds,  that  in  several  of  the  districts  in  the  province  of  Elfsborg 
the  possessed  children  would  at  times  form  themselves  into  groups  and 
march  through  the  streets  and  lanes,  walking  solemnly,  praying  and  preach- 
ing with  wonderful  fervour,  and  in  a  style  far  beyond  the  years  of  the  oldest 
of  them.  Sometimes  they  would  speak  in  the  purest  Latin,  Greek,  and 
Hebrew,  much  to  the  confusion  and  terror  of  the  grave  divines  who  heard 
24 

370  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

and  understood  them.  The  same  reports  alleged,  that  "  the  Devil,  their 
master,  would  even  let  them  (the  children)  heal  sick  folk,  and  prophesy  of 
coming  events  correctly,  the  more  surely  to  win  over  the  souls  of  the 
people  to  the  service  of  Satan,  and  persuade  them  the  children  were  not 
possessed  by  demons."  Anthony  Horneck's  translation  of  the  Swedish 
narrative  winds  up  with  the  statement  that,  "  by  order  of  His  Majesty,  the 
convicted  ones  were  sentenced  as  follows  : — Twenty-three  adults,  and 
fifteen  children  were  co7idenined  and  executed;  six-and-thirty  children  between 
nine  and  sixteen,  less  guilty  than  the  rest,  were  condemned  to  run  the 
gauntlet ;  twenty  more  were  lashed  with  rods  at  the  church  door  for  three 
Sundays,  and  another  band  of  thirty  were  lashed  each  Sunday  for  a  whole 
year."  Amidst  the  unspeakable  horrors  of  these  scenes,  wherein  brutality 
and  ignorance  seemed  to  be  struggling  for  the  mastery,  it  is  refreshing  to 
read  one  beautiful  and  suggestive  paragraph.  Horneck  says: — "Some  of 
the  children  talked  much  of  a  white  angel,  which  used  to  forbid  them  doing 
what  the  Devil  had  bid  them  do,  and  told  them,  that  those  doings  should 
not  last  long  :  what  had  been  done  had  been  permitted  because  of  the 
wickedness  of  the  people,  and  the  carrying  away  of  the  children  should  be 
made  manifest;  and  they  added  that  this  white  angel  would  place  himself 
sometimes  at  the  door  betwixt  the  Witches  and  the  children,  and  when  they 
came  to  Blockula  he  pulled  the  children  back,  but  the  Witches  they  went  in." 

Ever  a  white  a?igel  to  arrest  the  steps  of  the  helpless  or  faltering  from 
treading  the  path  of  evil,  if  we  will  but  listen  to  his  warnings  ! 

As  a  corollary  to  this  shameful  narrative,  the  writer  adds  : — "  The  number 
of  the  seduced  children  were  about  three  hundred.  ...  On  the  25th 
of  August,  1670,  execution  was  done  upon  the  notoriously  guilty,  the  day 
being  bright  and  glorious,  and  the  sun  shining.  Some  thousands  of  people 
were  present  at  the  spectacle  ! " 

The  heart  revolts,  the  senses  sicken,  and  the  mind  staggers  before  the 
awful  tale,  and  all  that  it  involves  !  We  gladly  close  the  page,  and  with 
convulsive  shudders  for  what  has  been,  thank  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  all 
times  and  countries,  that  we  do  not  live  in  an  age  so  sunk  in  ignorance  and 
steeped  in  barbarity  as  that  in  which  such  scenes  could  have  been  enacted. 

In  closing  the  detail  of  this  remarkable  episode,  we  acknowledge  that 
some  explanation  is  due  to  the  reader  for  introducing  records  of  a  period 
which  antedates  the  century,  to  the  annals  of  which  this  volume  is  devoted, 
by  at  least  two  hundred  years. 

For  an  anachronism  of  so  marked  a  character,  we  have  only  to  plead  that 
our  tale  of  mystery  is  as  yet  but  half  told.  Passing  over  two  hundred  years 
after  the  trials  above  noted,  we  find  another  scene  enacted  on  Swedish 
ground,  which  only  presents  varying  features  in  view  of  the  different  stand- 
points of  civilization  from  which  the  two  narratives  are  considered.  It  is 
chiefly  to  show  how  the  same  influences  may  recur  at  different  epochs  of 
time  and  how  surely  we  imprint  the  characteristics  of  our  own  ignorance 
or  enlightenment  upon  all  that  befalls  us,  that  we  have  dwelt  so  much  at 
length  on  an  illustration  of  how  Spiritual  influences  were  misunderstood  in 
the  seventeenth  century,  and  forces  that  must  now  inevitably  take  their 
place  in  the  category  of  natural  law,  may  be  transformed  by  the  glamour  of 
ignorance  and  superstition  into  unmixed  evil  and  diabolism.  The  case 
which  is  designed  to  prove  this  position  and  act  as  a  notable  corollary  to 
Spiritual  influences  in  Sweden  will  be  found  detailed  in  the  succeding 
chapter. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  371 

CHAPTER    XLVI. 

SCANDINAVIAN    FRAGMENTS    OF   MODERN    SPIRITUALISM    (CONTINUED). 

The  Preaching  Epidemic   in  Sweden. 

For  a  graphic  summary  of  the  singular  movement  which  has  received  the 
above  caption — a  movement  which  took  place  nearly  on  the  same  ground 
as  that  traversed  in  the  last  chapter,  though  it  occurred  about  two  hundred 
years  later  in  time — we  shall  avail  ourselves  of  the  description  given  by 
Ennemoser,  in  his  "  History  of  Magic,"  translated  by  Mrs.  Mary  Howitt. 
The  narrative  commences  as  follows,  and  is  headed 

"the   PREACHING   EPIDEMIC    OF    SWEDEN. 

"  That  portion  of  Southern  Sweden,  formerly  called  Smaland,  now  comprising  the 
provinces  of   Kalmar,  Wexis,  and  Joukoping,  though  one  of  the  poorest  parts  of  the 

kingdom,  is  inhabited  by  a  laborious,  contented,  and  deeply  religious  people 

In  1843,  Dr.  J.  A.  Butsch,  Bishop  of  Skara,  wrote  a  long  letter  to  the  Archbishop  of 
Upsala  concerning  the  scenes  of  which  he  was  an  eye-witness,  then  transpiring  in 
his  own  diocese,  and  popularly  termed  by  the  amazed  communities  amongst  whom 
they  occurred  'the  preaching  epidemic'  The  manifestations  described  in  Dr.  Butsch's 
letter  were  not  confined  to  the  districts  he  visited  and  wrote  of,  but  extended  throughout 
a  large  part  of  Sweden,  especially  in  the  provinces  named  above.  The  reader  will 
naturally  ask,  as  the  Bishop  does  himself,  what  is  the  preaching  epidemic  ?  .  .  .  The 
Bishop  was  of  opinion  that  it  was  a  disease  originally  physical,  but  afifecting  the  mind 
in  a  peculiar  way  ;  he  arrived  at  this  conclusion  by  attentively  studying  the  phenomenon 
itself.  At  all  events,  bodily  sickness  was  an  ingredient  in  it,  as  was  proved  from  the  fact 
that  although  every  one  affected  by  it,  in  describing  the  commencement  of  their  state, 
mentioned  '  a  spiritual  excitement '  as  its  original  cause,  close  examination  proved  that 
an  internal  bodily  disorder  attended  by  pain  had  preceded  or  accompanied  this  excitement. 

"  Besides,  there  were  persons  who,  against  their  own  will,  were  affected  by  the  quaking 
fits,  which  were  one  of  its  most  striking  early  outward  symptoms,  without  any  previous 
religious  excitement,  and  these,  when  subjected  to  medical  treatment  soon  recovered, 

"The  Bishop  in  his  letter  above-named,  expresses  his  opinion  that  the  disease  cor- 
responds very  much  with  what  he  has  heard  and  read  respecting  the  effects  of  animal 
magnetism.  .  .  .  Speaking  of  the  effect  of  sulphur  and  the  magnet  on  the  sick 
persons,  he  says  :  '  In  these  cases  there  was  an  increased  activity  of  the  nervous  and 
muscular  systems  ;  and  further,  heaviness  in  the  head,  heat  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach, 
prickling  sensation  in  the  extremities,  convulsions,  quakings,  and  finally  the  falling  with 
a  deep  groan  into  a  profound  fainting  fit  or  trance.' 

"  In  this  trance,  the  patient  was  so  insensible  to  outward  impressions,  that  the  loudest 
noise  would  not  awaken  him,  nor  would  he  feel  a  needle  thrust  deeply  into  his  body. 
Mostly  however,  during  this  trance,  he  would  hear  questions  addressed  to  him,  and  reply 
to  them  ;  and,  which  was'extraordinary,  invariably  in  these  rephes,  applied  to  every  one 
the  pronoun  thou.  The  power  of  speech  too  in  this  state  was  that  of  great  eloquence, 
lively  declamation,  and  the  command  of  purer  language  than  was  usual  or  apparently 
possible  for  him  in  his  normal  state.  The  invariable  assertions  of  all  patients  when  in 
this  state  were,  that  they  were  exceedingly  well  ;  and  that  they  had  never  been  so  happy 
before  ;  they  declared  that  the  words  they  spoke  were  given  to  them  by  some  one  else 
who  spoke  by  them.  Their  disposition  of  mind  was  pious  and  calm ;  they  seemed  dis- 
posed for  visions  and  predictions.  Like  the  early  Quakers,  they  had  an  aversion  to  certain 
words  and  phrases,  and  testified  in  their  preaching  against  places  of  amusement,  gaming, 
drinking,  maypole  festivities,  gay  dress,  and  vanity  and  display.  There  was  in  some 
famiHes  a  greater  tendency  to  this  influence  than  in  others  :  it  was  greater  in  children 
and  females  than  in  adults  and  men,  and  amongst  men,  prevailed  with  the  sanguine 
temperament. 

372  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

"  The  patients  invariably  showed  a  strong  desire  to  be  together,  and  seemed  to  feel  a 
sort  of  spiritual  attraction  to  each  other.  In  places  of  worship,  they  would  aU  sit 
together  and  when  questioned  they  answered  we  instead  of  /.  .  .  .  With  respect  to 
the  conduct  and  conversation  of  the  patients  during  the  time  of  their  seizure,  the  Bishop 
says,  he  never  saw  anything  improper.  ...  In  Elf  sborg,  where  the  disease  prevailed 
to  a  great  extent,  bands  of  children  under  the  influence  went  about  singing  what  are 
called  Zion's  hymns,  the  effect  of  which  was  singularly  striking,  even  affecting.  The 
Bishop  says,  that  to  give  a  complete  and  detailed  description  of  the  nature  of  the  disease 
would  be  impossible,  because,  like  animal  magnetism,  it  seems  to  be  infinite  in  its 
modification  and  form.  .  .  .  The  quaking  of  which  so  much  has  been  said,  appears 
to  have  been  the  first  outward  sign,  the  inward  vision  and  preaching  being  its  con- 
summation ;  though  when  this  was  reached,  the  fit  mostly  commenced  by  the  same  sign. 
In  some  patients,  the  quakings  seem  to  have  come  on  at  the  mention  of  certain  words, 
the  introduction  of  certain  ideas,  or  the  proximity  of  certain  persons  or  things,  which  in 
some  mysterious  manner  appeared  to  be  inimical  to  the  patient.  .  .  .  One  of  the 
patients  explained  some  of  these  anomalous  conditions  thus — that  according  as  his 
spiritual  being  advanced  upwards,  he  found  that  there  existed  in  him,  and  in  the  world, 
many  things  which  were  worse  than  that  which  he  had  previously  considered  the  worst — 
and  vice  versa  of  better  things.  In  some  cases  the  patients  were  violently  affected  by  the 
simple  words  yes  and  no — the  latter  word  in  particular  was  most  painful  and  repulsive  to 
them,  and  ha^been  frequently  described  by  them  as  one  of  the  worst  demons  tied  in  the 
chains  of  darkness  in  the  deepest  abyss. 

"  It  was  remarked  also  that  they  frequently  acted  as  if  they  had  a  strong  temptation 
to  speak  falsehood,  or  to  say  more  than  they  were  at  liberty  to  say.  They  would  frequently 
exhort  each  other  to  speak  the  truth,  and  so  frequently  answered  dubiously  and  even 
said — they  did  not  know,  leaving  the  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  listeners,  either 
that  untruthfulness  or  hesitation  was  a  peculiarity  of  the  disease.     .     .     . " 

If  our  readers  have  followed  Ennemoser's  transcript  of  the  Bishop's  letter 
thus  far  intelligently,  they  will  perceive  that  the  "  patients"  described  above, 
were  unmistakeably  magnetic  subjects ;  that  they  were  clearly  in  magnetic 
states,  though  the  magnetizers  were  invisible  beings.  Furthermore,  that 
the  influence  was  mixed,  being  both  good  and  bad,  truthful  and  untruthful, 
the  one  often  prevailing  over  the  other.  Also,  that  all  the  descriptions 
given  ab6ve  correspond  first  to  the  magnetic  states  described  by  Kerner, 
Cahagnet,  Deleuze,  Ashburner,  Elliotson,  &c.,  &c. ;  next,  that  they  tally 
in  wonderful  parallel  lines  with  the  trance  Mediums,  and  especially  the 
inspirational  states  of  the  platform  speakers  of  the  modern  Spiritual  move- 
ment. Those  silly  uninformed  materialists  who  are  so  fond  of  taunting  the 
Spiritual  speakers  with  the  question,  IVAaf  proof  can  you  give  of  your 
abnormal  or  Spiritually  controlled  condition  ? — if  they  have  not  the  oppor- 
tunity of  studying  the  works  written  by  experienced  magnetizers,  might 
profitably  read  the  records  of  the  Irish  revivals,  or  the  Swedish  preaching 
epidemic,  of  which  we  are  writing.  They  might  believe  in  the  possibility 
of  an  abnormal  Spiritual  intelligence  prevailing  with  the  poor  and  unlearned 
inhabitants  of  Elfsborg,  when  their  case  is  graphically  described  in  the 
correspondence  between  a  bishop  and  archbishop,  even  if  they  scornfully 
ignore  the  testimony  of  parallel  cases  presented  before  their  own  eyes. 
Both  examples  occur  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and  no  doubt  explain  every 
other  similar  visitation  recorded  as  happening  at  earlier  epochs  of  human 
history. 

There  are  one  or  two  other  points  in  the  testimony  presented  by  the 
Bishop  of  Skara  to  which  we  cannot  omit  drawing  attention. 

The  Bishop  insists  upon  calHng  the  subjects  of  the  power  "patients," 
affirms  that  "  bodily  sickness  "  is  an  ingredient  in  it,  and  enumerates  a  few 
symptoms,  not  one  of  which  indicates  any  particular  form  of  bodily  sickness, 
though  all  are  more  or  less  suggestive — as  he  himself  allows — of  the  trance 
condition  induced  by  magnetism.      Without  reiterating  the  summary  of 

JOHN   S.   FARMER, 

EDITOR   OF    "light,"   AND   AUTHOR   OF    "a   NEW    BASl.S    U.-    i-l^i 

imrioktality,"  "how  to  investigate  spiritualism, 

"present  day  prohlemsT^" hints  on 

mesmerism,"  etc.  etc. 

WM.    P.    ADSHEAD. 

From  a  Negative  by  J.  Schmidt,  Bdper. 

J\ 

■'>l 

?l, 

E.  DAWSON  ROGERS, 

",■  /afe  President  of 
'.':.':: )iiver  of  iJu 
i.^SLCirch,  ore. 

by  Henderson,  49,   King  William  Street,   Lcndon,  E.G. 

V/v/    V-z-fO^'V-V 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  373 

results  which  ensue  from  the  Bishop's  so-called  condition  of  "  sickness,"  it 
must  certainly  strike  any  candid  observer  that  such  forms  of  sickness  are 
worth  cultivating,  when  they  will  produce  in  the  patients,  sentiments  of 
unwonted  happiness ;  make  them  feel  better  in  health  than  they  ever  felt 
before,  enable  them  to  hear  and  answer  questions,  and  discourse  with  an 
amount  of  power  and  eloquence  utterly  foreign  to  their  normal  state. 
Those  "  patients  "  too,  were  always  represented  as  being  in  a  pious  frame  of 
mind  \  of  denouncing  drinking,  gaming,  and  other  popular  vices.  They  all 
exhibited  the  appearance  of  speaking  the  words  of  others,  and  not  their  own, 
and  manifested  such  remarkable  grace,  dignity,  and  exaltation  that  the  disease 
might  as  well  be  cultivated  as  an  art  of  deportment,  as  for  its  singular 
faculty  of  making  orators,  preachers,  moralists,  and  saints,  out  of  boorish 
peasants,  and  uneducated  rustics  ! 

In  fine,  it  seems  almost  providential  that  this  "  disease  "  only  appears  at 
rare  intervals,  and  that  generally  in  places  removed  from  the  large  centres 
of  civilization.  Were  it  otherwise,  our  clergymen,  statesmen,  and  orators 
would  have  to  resort  to  the  hospitals  to  study  eloquence  from  the  victims 
of  the  epidemic ;  our  fine  ladies  would  have  to  watch  "  fits,"  to  learn  the 
finest  graces  of  deportment,  and  moral  philosophers  would  sit  around 
"  patients "  to  discover  the  true  secrets  of  reform,  and  derive  hints  of 
practical  virtue,  eliminated  from  diseased  organisms  ! 

In  the  hope  that  other  bishops  besides  Dr,  J.  A.  Butsch  may  study  and 
apply  the  lessons  enforced  by  this  remarkable  and  strictly  novel  phase  of 
"  disease,"  we  commend  the  above-named  learned  gentleman's  remarks  to 
the  attention  of  the  reader  for  what  they  are  worth. 

We  now  resume  Ennemoser's  narrative  in  which  the  following  descriptions 
are  drawn,  as  before,  chiefly  from  the  Bishop  of  Skara's  letter  : — 

"The  Bishop  said  he  had  seen  several  persons  fall  at  once  into  the  trance  without  any 
premonitory  symptom. 

"  Sometimes  the  parties  preached  with  their  eyes  open  and  standing,  and  sometimes 
closed,  and  in  a  recumbent  posture.  He  gives  an  account  of  three  preaching  girls  in  the 
parish  of  Warnham,  of  ages  varying  from  eight  to  twelve.  It  was  shortly  before  Christ- 
mas, 1842,  when  he  went,  in  company  with  the  Rev.  Mr.  Zingrist,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Smedmark, 
and  a  respectable  farmer,  his  friend,  to  visit  the  cottage  where  these  children  lived.  Many 
strangers  besides  the  Bishop's  party  were  present.  The  children,  though  peasants,  were 
well  informed,  and  could  read  ;  they  were  good  and  well  disposed,  and  since  their  seizure 
were  remarkably  gentle  and  quiet.  In  their  normal  state  they  were  bashful  and  timid. 
When  in  the  trance  they  declared  they  were  quite  well,  and  had  never  been  so  happy 
before.  When  awakened,  they  complained  of  headache,  pains  in  the  limbs,  and  weakness, 
&c.  In  the  case  of  one  of  the  children,  her  symptoms  commenced  with  a  violent  trembling, 
and  she  fell  backwards  so  heavily  as  to  alarm  the  spectators,  though  no  injury  seemed  to 
ensue.  The  trance  lasted  several  hours,  and  divided  itself  into  two  stages.  In  the  first 
she  rose  up  violently,  and  caught  at  the  hands  of  the  people  round  her.  Some  she  instantly 
flung  aside,  as  if  repugnant  to  her  ;  others  she  held,  gently  patted,  and  rubbed  softly  ; 
these  are  called  '  good  hands."  Sometimes  she  made  signs  as  if  she  were  pouring  out 
something  which  she  appeared  to  drink,  and  her  father  and  others  present  said  she  could 
detect  any  one  in  the  company  who  was  a  dram  drinker,  and  even  indicate  the  number  of 
glasses  he  had  taken.  She  went  through  the  mimic  operation  of  loading,  presenting,  and 
firing  a  gun  ;  performed  most  dramatically  a  pugUistic  combat,  and  went  through  the 
action  of  a  person  dressing " 

The  Bishop  and  his  commentator,  Ennemoser,  express  the  utmost 
bewilderment  concerning  the  meaning  of  these  signs.  Those  who  have 
ever  seen  "  the  pantomimic  Mediums"  of  the  modern  dispensation,  and 
remember  how  graphically  they  would  represent,  under  the  influence  of 
Spirits,  the  characteristics,   or  special  scenes  in  the  lives  qf  deceased 

H 

374  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

persons,  will  be  at  no  loss  to  understand  what  this  little  one's  "  control " 
desired  to  depict.     The  good  but  uninformed  narrator  says  : — 

"  What  rendered  all  this  so  extraordinary  was,  that  although  she  was  but  a  simple, 
bashful  peasant  child,  clothed  in  a  sheepskin  jacket,  yet  all  her  actions  were  free,  full  of 
dramatic  effects  ;  vigorous  when  representing  manly  action,  and  so  indescribably  graceful 
and  full  of  sentiment  when  personating  female  occupations,  as  to  amaze  the  more  culti- 
vated spectators.  She  seemed  to  be  far  more  like  an  image  in  a  dream,  than  a  creature  Qf 
flesh  and  blood.  The  child  next  passed  into  the  second  stage  of  the  trance,  which  was 
characterized  by  a  beautiful  calmness  and  quiet.  With  her  arms  meekly  folded  she  began 
to  preach.  Her  manner  was  that  of  the  purest  oratory  ;  her  tones  earnest  and  solemn, 
and  the  language  of  a  high  and  exalted  character,  impossible  for  her  to  have  used  when 
awake.  Her  appearance  was  saint-like,  and  her  voice,  which  in  her  natural  state  was 
hoarse  and  harsh,  had  a  brilliancy  and  clearness  of  tone  wonderful  to  listen  to.  Many  of 
the  assembly  wept,  and  all  observed  the  profoundest  silence.     .     .     .  " 

Ennemoser  adds : — 

"  The  number  of  persons  affected  in  the  Bishop's  province  of  Skaraborg  alone,  where 
'  the  disease '  did  not  prevail  as  generally  as  in  other  places  was,  in  1843,  upwards  of 
3,000  !  .  .  .  The  clergy  and  doctors  used  all  their  endeavours  to  extinguish  the  move- 
ment, and  by  the  end  of  1843  it  had  almost  ceased.  Nothing  of  the  kind  has  since 
appeared,  but  the  good  effects  it  produced  on  the  mind  of  many  a  hardened  sinner  remains 
to  testify  to  its  truth  and  reality,  although  no  one,  whether  learned  in  the  science  of 
physical  or  spiritual  life,  can  yet  explain  the  cause  and  nature  of  this  extraordinary 
mental  phenomena." 

So  writes  Ennemoser  in  1855,  giving  in  the  same  work  several  pages  to 
descriptions  of  phenomena  in  the  United  States  which  in  thousands  of 
instances  paralleled  the  preaching  epidemic  of  Sweden  and  ocher  cases 
with  which  his  two  volumes  are  full.  The  good  Bishop  of  Skara  called 
"  the  power,"  disease.  Ennemoser  asserts  that  "  neither  physical  nor 
mental  science  can  explain  it."  "The  power"  in  America  and  Europe  calls 
itself  Spiritual  influence,  and  though  this  assertion  is  positively  demon- 
strated by  uncounted  test  facts,  identifying  the  said  power  with  the  Spirits 
of  men  and  women  who  have  once  lived  on  earth,  fke  clergy  and  doctors 
now,  as  in  1843,  "  use  all  their  efforts  to  extinguish  the  movement,"  and  the 
fact  that  they  cannot  succeed  as  well  with  calm,  sane,  and  scientific  investi- 
gators, as  they  did  when  dealing  with  the  simple-minded  unlettered 
peasantry  of  Skara,  is  an  additional  proof  that  "  the  power  "  is  an  intelli- 
gent one,  and  something  too  mighty  to  be  extinguished  by  the  particular 
crafts  which  it  happens  to  interfere  with. 

In  closing  our  notices  of  these  curious  Swedish  phenomena,  we  have  only 
to  point  out  the  numerous  records  of  kindred  occurrences  in  different 
countries  at  different  periods  of  time,  and  suggest  the  probability,  that  there 
are  mental  upheavals  which  move  with  as  much  regularity,  and  appear  and 
disappear  in  connection  with  unknown  laws  of  magnetism,  just  as  inevitably 
as  those  physical  disturbances  or  atmospheric  storms  which,  from  time  to 
time,  alter  the  face  of  our  planet.  Were  the  entire  scheme  known,  and  the 
laws  of  mutual  interdependence  between  mind  and  matter  fully  understood, 
we  might  prepare  for  these  mental  convulsions  and  Spiritual  manifestations, 
with  the  same  certainty  that  we  expect  the  trade  winds,  or  the  equinoctial 
storms. 

With  a  few  isolated  accounts  of  the  phenomena  which  are  recorded  from 
time  to  time  as  occurring  in  certain  families  in  Sweden  and  Norway,  our 
notices  of  Scandinavian  Spiritualism  must  be  brought  to  a  close. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  375 

One  sanguine  writer  in  the  London  Medium  and  Daybreak,  gives  the 
following  encouraging  notice  of  Swedish  Spiritualism  as  a  movement,  in 
1878.     He  says  : — 

"WASA,    FINLAND. 

"  It  is  about  a  year  and  a  half  since  I  changed  my  abode  from  Stockholm  to  this  place, 
and  during  that  period  it  is  wonderful  how  SpirituaHsm  has  gained  ground  in  Sweden. 
The  leading  papers,  that  used  in  my  time  to  refuse  to  publish  any  article  on  Spiritualism 
excepting  such  as  ridiculed  the  doctrine,  have  of  late  thrown  their  columns  wide  open  to 
the  serious  discussion  of  the  matter.  Many  a  Spiritualist  in  secret,  has  thus  been 
encouraged  to  give  publicity  to  his  opinions  without  standing  any  longer  in  awe  of  that 
demon,  public  ridicule,  which  intimidates  so  many  of  our  brethren.  Several  of  Allan 
Kardec's  works  have  been  translated  into  Swedish,  among  which  I  may  mention  his 
*  Evangile  selon  le  Spiritisme '  as  particularly  well  rendered  in  Swedish  by  Walter 
Jochnick.  A  Spiritual  Library  was  opened  in  Stockholm  on  the  1st  of  April  last,  which  will 
no  doubt  greatly  contribute  to  the  spreading  of  the  blessed  doctrine.  The  visit  of  Mr. 
Eglinton  to  Stockholm  was  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  the  cause.  Let  us  hope  that  the  stay 
of  Mrs.  Esperance  in  the  south  of  Sweden  may  have  an  equally  beneficial  efi'ect.  Notwith- 
standing all  this  progress  of  the  cause  in  the  neighbouring  country.  Spiritualism  is  looked 
upon  here  as  something  akin  to  madness,  but  even  here  there  are  thin,  very  thin  rays, 
and  very  wide  apart,  struggling  to  pierce  the  darkness." 

The  author  is  in  possession  of  a  large  number  of  cases  of  alleged 
haun tings,  some  being  attached  to  houses  and  others  to  places,  but  none  of 
them  offer  features  of  sufficient  diversity  from  the  ordinary  run  of  similar 
narratives  to  make  their  insertion  worth  the  reader's  attention.  The  same 
may  be  said  on  the  subject  of  dreams,  visions,  and  second  sight. 

All  these  phenomena  prevail  amongst  the  Swedes,  and  the  tendency  to 
fairy  lore  manifested  in  their  literature  undoubtedly  arises  from  their  senti- 
ment of  close  proximity  to  "the  border  land."  Frederika  Bremer,  the 
celebrated  novelist,  during  a  tour  through  the  New  England  States, 
frequently  alluded  to  her  faculty  of  dreaming,  and  prevision.  This  lady, 
though  neither  a  Spiritualist  nor  in  sympathy  with  the  Spiritual  movement 
at  the  time  of  her  visit  to  America,  was  undoubtedly  a  Medmm  of  a  high 
order.  She  related  at  a  party  given  by  some  warrn  Spiritualists,  in  her 
honour  at  Boston,  how  often  she  saw  "  the  images "  of  her  friends  at  long 
distances  off,  engaged  in  scenes  which  she  afterwards  found  to  have 
actually  transpired.  She  said  that — as  in  the  experience  of  Hans  Christian 
Andersen — the  plot  and  framework  of  many  of  her  stories  pressed  in  upon 
her  brain,  and  haunted  her,  until  she  wrote  them  down,  and  she  often  felt 
as  if  she  was  rather  transcribing  something  from  memory,  than  composing, 
when  she  wrote  her  works  of  fiction.  The  following  short  notice  of  her 
decease,  pubHshed  in  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine  of  1866,  may  possess 
some  interest  for  the  admirers  of  this  lady's  writings.     The  editor  says  : — 

"  The  celebrated  Swedish  novelist,  Fredrika  Bremer,  passed  away,  in  consequence  of  a 
cold,  which  ended  in  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  at  three  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning,  the 
last  day  of  the  old  year,  at  the  seat  of  Arsta,  in  the  parish  of  Osserhamminge,  some 
eighteen  miles  south-east  of  Stockholm. 

"  Fredrika  Bremer  was  born  at  Abo,  in  Finland,  in  August,  1801,  and  had  consequently 
attained  her  sixty-fourth  year.  She,  herself,  expected  to  die  before  the  end  of  1865, 
owing  to  a  dream  which  she  dreamed  thirty  years  since,  and  which  had  left  an  indelible 
impression  on  her  mind.  It  was  partly  owing  to  this  that  she  removed  to  Arsta,  the  old 
home  of  her  youth  and  early  womanhood,  in  the  course  of  last  summer,  and  there  she 
quietly  spent  her  remaining  days,  in  cheerful,  resigned  preparation.  She  enjoyed  her 
usual  good  health  to  within  a  week  of  her  decease,  and  her  friends  in  no  wise  shared  her 
presentiment.  She  gave  a  Christmas  tree  to  the  children  on  the  estate,  on  Christmas  eve, 
and  attended  service  at  the  Church  of  Osserhamminge,  on  Christmas  Day,  when  she  took 
the  chill  which  ended  fatally, 

376  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  Her  writings,  which  are  especially  distinguished  for  their  accurate  pictures  of  family 
life,  and  for  their  genial,  happy  spirit,  have  made  her  name  known  far  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  her  native  land,  and  are  translated  into  the  principal  European  languages. 

"  In  the  closing  portion  of  her  life  she  became  much  interested  in  SpirituaHsm,  and 
read  'From  Matter  to  Spirit'  vdth  intense  emotion.  She  says  of  it,  'It  is  the  look  I 
needed  to  enter  fully  into  the  interest  and  understanding  of  Spiritualism  in  its  recent 
form  as  a  science.  It  is  certainly  an  admirable  work,  as  to  its  mind  and  spirit.  Its 
theory  and  exposure  of  the  natural  laws,  working  in  this  class  of  phenomena,  deserve  the 
highest  attention  and  appreciation  of  every  intelligent  and  truth-loving  mind.'  Still  some 
'buts'  arose  in  her  mind  against  Spiritualism  as  the  basis  for  a  science  and  religion.  These 
were  fully  and  ably  answered  last  autumn,  by  various  deep-thinking  Spiritualists.  Her 
acceptance  of  their  views  has  not,  however,  become  known,  but  of  this  we  are  certain,  that 
her  mind  was  thoroughly  open  to  conviction  ;  a  great  step — since  she  had  been  prejudiced 
by  some  of  the  manifestations  she  witnessed  in  America,  and  which  made  her  declare  '  that 
the  spiritual  world  had  its  "  humbugs,"  even  as  our  world  has,'  and  it  did  not  seem  to  her 
extraordinary  that  they  endeavoured  to  make  fools  of  us." 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   NORWAY. 

Amongst  a  large  mass  of  literature  sent  to  the  author  concerning  the 
traditions,  fairy  lore,  and  mythology  of  Norway,  Iceland,  the  Faroe  Isles, 
&c.,  there  is  little  or  no  evidence  that  the  inhabitants  of  these  northern 
lands  turn  their  natural  Spiritual  endowments  to  account,  or  attempt  to 
systematize  their  powers  by  holding  circles,  or  taking  part  in  the  modern 
phenomenal  movement.  The  author  of  "  Art  Magic,"  who  visited  Norway, 
Iceland,  Finland,  and  other  portions  of  the  northern  coast  during  several 
summers,  considers  that  the  superstitious  beliefs  of  the  inhabitants  in  sea 
gods,  sea  kings,  and  the  monsters  said  to  haunt  the  wild  caverns  and 
basaltic  ranges  that  fringe  the  coast  lines,  render  it  difficult  to  separate  the 
facts  of  direct  Spiritual  origin,  from  the  legendary  lore  in  which  the  people 
of  these  countries  delight.  This  writer  says  :  "  The  galleries  of  mental  art 
are  filled  with  the  images  of  half-formed  elementary  existences  which  float 
like  many  coloured  bubbles  over  the  surface  of  the  mirror  in  which  Spirit 
friends  attempt  to  reflect  their  well  remembered  faces.  The  people  are  truly 
Mediumistic,  sensitive,  high  strung,  and  nervous,  as  the  result  of  the  climate 
in  which  they  dwell ;  poetical  and  imaginative,  in  accordance  with  their  clear 
skies,  studded  over  with  blossoms  of  fire,  and  the  wild,  rugged  scenery  amidst 
which  they  pass  untravelled  lives.  Still  it  is  almost  impossible  to  receive 
a  plain  narrative  of  Spiritual  actualities  from  their  lips,  without  finding  it 
embellished  with  the  mirage  of  an  unformulated  supernaturalism.  Hanno 
Steere,  the  keeper  of  a  lighthouse  perched  like  an  eye  of  fire  on  a  mass  of 
towering  crags  overlooking  the  wildest  waves  that  ever  swept  a  fated  ship 
to  doom,  assured  me  the  voice  of  his  father,  now  a  Spirit,  who  kept  that 
tower  of  warning  before  him,  never  failed  to  call  him  thrice  and  with  solemn 
earnestness  cry  '  The  lifeboat !  the  lifeboat ! '  before  every  storm  that  beat 
on  that  coast.  And  though  the  sea  might  be  like  glass  and  the  winds 
sighing  as  softly  as  an  infant's  breathing,  the  voice  of  that  Spirit  never  called 
for  the  lifeboat  in  vain.  *  Sure  to  be  in  demand,  it  is  unmoored  when  the 
soul  of  my  father  has  passed  by,'  said  the  old  man;  'and  thus  have  I  been 
warned  to  save  unnumbered  lives.' "  A  bright  young  shepherd  living  in  a 
lonely  mountain  pass  near  Bergen,  showed  the  author  above  quoted  the 
cavern  where  he  used  to  go  to  consult  a  Spirit  who  appeared  to  him  in  the 
form  of  a  white  bird,  when  he  had  lost  any  of  his  flock,  or  needed  advice 
in  an  emergency. 

He  said  he  had  always  been  directed  right  j  that  the  voice  that  spoke 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  377 

had  warned  him  again  and  again  of  the  approach  of  robbers ;  directed  him 
how  to  find  lost  articles ;  when  and  how  to  buy,  sell,  and  trade. 

For  miles  round,  the  simple  country  people  came  to  consult  the  white 
Spirit  through  this  lad.  None  could  hear  the  voice  but  himself,  and  though 
he  acknowledged  that  it  exactly  resembled  that  of  his  dead  mother,  the  boy 
was  quite  sure  it  proceeded  from  "  the  white  bird,"  a  large  white  owl  that 
dwelt  in  that  cavern. 

Many  of  the  peasantry  can  really  prophesy  correctly  and  speak  oracularly 
by  listening  to  the  murmur  of  the  winds  in  the  pine  forests,  or  the  tinkling 
of  small  cascades  falling  over  the  broken  rocks.  Ask  them  the  secret  of 
their  prevision,  and  they  will  tell  you,  they  hear  words  spoken  by  fays  or 
kelpies.  Amidst  the  hoarse  roar  of  the  waves  lashed  into  fury  by  northern 
storms,  the  Icelandic  fisherman  hears  the  shout  of  the  ancient  Viking,  or 
the  wail  of  the  Nixie,  murmuring  a  requiem  for  the  ship  that  shall  presently 
be  engulphed  in  the  remorseless  ocean  grave.  The  woods,  the  grasses,  the 
flowers,  are  full  of  fairy  people  to  the  Norwegian  peasant  girl,  and  storm 
Spirits  ride  on  every  meteor  that  flashes  through  the  blazing  midnight  skies, 
in  the  imagination  of  every  fisher  lad.  Do  they  believe  in  apparitions,  the 
return  of  the  souls  of  those  who  loved  and  left  them  a  while  ago  ?  "  Oh 
yes  !  they  all  do  that — m.ore  or  less — but  spirits  of  the  dead  hover  round 
churchyards  they  think,  light  up  the  churches  in  the  still  hours  of  night,  or 
linger  around  the  scenes  where  deeds  of  darkness  have  been  performed," 

These  Northmen  and  women  would  make  rare  clairvoyants  and  seers  of 
wonderful  lucidity,  provided  they  were  trained  ;  reserved  for  occult  experi- 
ments, and  could  carry  their  atmosphere,  scenery,  and  surroundings  with 
them.  Remove  them  from  these,  and  they  are  but  dull,  stolid,  unimaginative 
peasants  after  all. 

Within  the  last  if^  years  some  attempts  have  been  made  to  interest  the 
well  educated  inhabitants  of  Norwegian  towns  in  reports  of  the  Spiritual 
movement.  Several  ladies  and  gentlemen  who  have  become  readers  of 
the  Spiritual  papers,  have  formed  private  circles,  and  evolved  many  satis- 
factory phases  of  Mediumship.  A  few  American  professional  Mediums 
have  visited  Bergen  and  Christiansund,  and  the  phenomena  exhibited 
through  them  has  made  many  converts,  although  there  are  few  bold  enough 
to  openly  avow  their  convictions. 

One  brave  gentleman.  Professor  H.  Starjohann,  frequently  favours  the 
Spiritual  journals  of  Europe  and  America  with  words  of  encouragement 
concerning  the  progress  of  the  faith  in  which  he  is  himself  so  deeply 
interested. 

We  shall  conclude  this  necessarily  brief  notice  of  Spiritualism  in  Norway 
with  extracts  from  two  communications  addressed  by  this  gentleman,  the 
one  to  the  Banner  of  Light,  the  other  to  the  Revue  Spirite.  The  first, 
dated  Christiansund,  1880,  reads  thus  : — 

"Spiritualism  is  just  commencing  to  give  a  sign  of  its  existence  herein  Norway.    The 

newspapers  have  begun  to  attack  it  as  a  delusion,  and  the  '  ex'posi '  of  Mrs.  C ,  which 

recently  took  place  at  38,  Great  Russell  Street,  London,  has  made  the  round  through  all  the 
papers  in  Scandinavia.  After  all,  it  must  sooner  or  later  take  root,  as  in  all  other  parts  of 
the  world.  Mr.  Eglinton,  the  English  medium,  has  done  a  good  work  in  Stockholm, 
showing  some  of  the  great  savants  a  new  world  ;  and  a  couple  of  years  ago  Mr.  Slade 
visited  Copenhagen.  The  works  of  Mr.  Zollner,  the  great  astronomer  of  Leipzig,  have 
been  mentioned  in  the  papers  and  caused  a  good  deal  of  sensation. 

"  Of  mediums  there  are  several  here,  but  all,  as  yet,  afraid  to  speak  out.  One  writes 
with  both  hands  ;  a  gentleman  is  developing  as  a  drawing  medium.  A  peasant,  who  died 
about  five  years  ago,  and  lived  not  far  from  here,  was  an  excellent  healing  medium  ;  his 

378  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

name  was  Kniid,  and  the  people  had  given  him  the  nickname  of  Vise  Knud  (the  wise 
Knud)  ;  directly  when  he  touched  a  patient  he  knew  if  the  same  could  be  cured  or  not, 
and  often,  in  severe  cases,  the  pains  of  the  sick  person  went  through  his  own  body.  He 
was  also  an  auditive  medium,  startling  the  people  many  times  by  telling  them  what  was 
going  to  happen  in  the  future ;  but  the  poor  fellow  suffered  much  from  the  ignorance  and 
fanaticism  around  him,  and  was  several  times  put  in  prison. 

"I am  doing  aU  I  can  to  make  people  acquainted  with  our  grand  cause." 

The  second  and  more  hopeful  letter  of  1881,  addressed  to  the  editor  of 
the  Revue  Spirite,  is  as  follows  : — 

"  My  dear  Brothers, — Here  our  science  tidvances  without  no'ise.  An  excellent  writing 
medium  has  been  developed  among  us,  one  who  writes  simultaneously  with  both  hands  ; 
while  we  have  music  in  a  room  where  there  are  no'  musical  instruments  ;  and  where  there 
is  a  piano  it  plays  of  itself.  At  Bergen,  where  I  have  recently  been,  I  found  mediums 
who,  in  the  dark,  made  sketches — were  dessinateurs — using  also  both  hands.  I  have 
seen,  also,  with  pleasure,  that  several  men  of  letters  and  of  the  sciences  have  begun  to 
investigate  our  science  spirite.  The  pastor  Eckhoff,  of  Bergen,  has  for  the  second  time 
preached  against  SpirituaHsm,  'this  instrument  of  the  devil,  this  psychographie ' ;  and  to 
give  more  of  eclat  to  his  sermon  he  has  had  the  goodness  to  have  it  printed  ;  so  we  see  that 

the  spirits  are  working.     The  suit  against  the  medium,  Mme.  F ,  in  London,  is  going 

the  rounds  of  the  papers  of  Christiania  ;  these  journals  opening  their  columns,  when 
occasion  offers,  to  ridicule  Spiritualism.  We  are,  however,  friends  of  the  truth,  but  there 
are  scabby  sheep  among  us  of  a  different  temperament.  From  Stockholm  they  write  me 
that  a  library  of  spiritual  works  has  been  opened  there,  and  that  they  are  to  have  a 
medium  from  Newcastle,  with  whom  seances  are  to  be  held." 

The  reader  must  not  suppose  that  the  few  fragmentary  notices  we  have  been 
able  to  give  of  Scandinavian  Spiritualism,  especially  that  which  has  occurred 
in  the  nineteenth  century,  includes  even  a  tithe  of  what  can  be  gleaned 
on  the  subject.  In  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine  of  May,  1865,  is  a  long 
and  interesting  paper  on  Swedish  SpirituaHsm,  by  William  Howitt,  in  which 
he  gives  quite  a  notable  collection  of  narratives  concerning  Phenomenal 
Spiritual  Manifestations  in  Sweden,  most  of  which  were  furnished  by  an 
eminent  and  learned  Swedish  gentleman — Count  Piper.  The  public  have 
become  so  thoroughly  sated  with  tales  of  hauntings,  apparitions,  prevision, 
&c,  that  Count  Piper's  narrations  would  present  few,  if  any  features  of 
interest,  save  in  justification  of  one  assertion,  that  Spiritualism  is  rife  in 
human  experience  everywhere,  even  though  it  may  not  take  the  same  form 
as  a  public  movement,  that  it  has  done  in  America  and  England. 

As  early  as  1864,  a  number  of  excellent  leading  articles  commending  the 
belief  in  Spiritual  ministry,  and  the  study  of  such  phenomena  as  would 
promote  communion  between  the  "two  worlds,"  appeared  in  the  columns 
of  the  A/ton  Blad,  one  of  the  most  popular  journals  circulated  in  Sweden. 
As  a  specimen  of  the  style  in  which  a  rational  and  deliberate  mode  of 
investigating  Spiritual  phenomena  is  commended  to  the  readers  of  the 
Afton  Blad,  we  cannot  do  better  than  close  this  chapter  by  the  following 
extract  from  that  paper,  written  by  the  celebrated  German  author, 
Hoffmann  : — 

"  The  mysterious  spirit  world  cannot  be  denied,  for  it  surrounds  us,  and  is  continually 
revealing  itself  to  us  by  strange  tones  and  marvellous  visions.  Such  tones  and  visions, 
and  all  narratives  of  the  kind,  are  gUbly  got  rid  of  under  the  name  of  superstition. 

"  But  this  is  a  silly  way  of  proceeding.  Superstition  is  only  the  proper  name  for  weak 
credulity.  But  does  it  not  often  happen  that  people  include  under  the  general  term — 
superstition — numbers  of  things  which  they  neither  understand,  nor  are  capable  of  under- 
standing ?  The  very  knowing  ones  think  nothing  has  ever  happened  which  has  not 
happened  to  them,  and  nothing  exists  which  they  have  not  had  betwixt  their  fingers  and 
thumbs.    But  how  far  does  the  circle  of  man's  senses  extend,  and  how  imperfect  is  his 

Luther   Colby 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  379 

knowledge  even  within  that  circle  ?  If  then  he  does  not  comprehend  his  own  wonderful 
existence,  how  does  he  presume  to  dogmatize  on  the  eternal  laws  which  are  destined  by 
Eternal  Wisdom  for  the  spirit-world  and  its  operations  ? 

"  In  our  day,  even  learned  people  treat  everything  beyond  their  own  immediate  sphere 
of  enquiry  as  matters  of  sickly  fancy  and  folly,  and  thereby  betray  their  ignorance.  Such 
men  will  never  solve  the  great  problem  of  the  universe  ! " 

CHAPTER    XLVIL 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    SWITZERLAND. 

Whilst  Spiritualism  prevails  in  every  land  with  more  or  less  phenomenal 
power,  it  has  assumed  no  place  as  a  public  movement  anywhere,  save  in 
America,  England,  Australia,  France,  and  to  a  certain  extent  in  Spanish 
America.  In  Switzerland — where  a  large  number  of  visitors  annually  throng 
the  most  attractive  spots,  in  pursuit  of  health,  rest,  and  enjoyment — an 
universal  under-current  of  Spiritualistic  belief  prevails  with  the  floating 
population,  although  this  sentiment  with  the  peasantry,  takes  the  shape  of 
superstitious  beliefs  or  religious  enthusiasm. 

Experience  has  shown,,  that  mountain  regions,  and  the  clear  electric 
atmosphere  of  elevated  sites,  are  highly  favourable  to  the  development  of 
Spiritual  gifts,  hence  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find  Mediums  of  various  endow- 
ments, especially  vision  seers  and  healers,  amongst  the  natives  of  the  Swiss 
mountains.  The  circumstances  to  which  we  shall  devote  this  chapter 
however,  are  of  a  far  more  remarkable  character  than  the  phenomena 
evolved  in  the  familiar  Spirit  circle.  Two  cases  of  Spiritual  outpouring  have 
occurred  in  the  Swiss  Cantons  during  the  present  century,  of  so  starthng  a 
nature,  as  to  attract  the  eyes  of  all  Europe,  and  to  baffle  every  attempt  at 
explanation  from  any  other  than  a  Spiritual  hypothesis. 

These  cases  are  first,  the  tremendous  and  universal  obsession,  which  fell 
upon  the  inhabitants  of  Morzine ;  the  other,  an  almost  unparalleled  instance 
of  persecution  from  the  Folter-Gheist,  or  haunting  Spirits.  Both  circum- 
stances have  been  narrated  in  many  leading  publications  of  Europe,  and 
though  treated  from  different  points  of  view,  the  very  diversity  of  opinions 
that  prevail  on  these  subjects,  enables  the  candid  historian  to  arrive  at  a 
vast  array  of  facts,  which  do  not  necessarily  require  the  statement  of 
opposing  theories. 

The  following  brief  summary  of  the  Morzine  epidemic  is  collated  from 
the  pages  of  the  Cornhill  Magazine,  two  or  three  of  the  London  daily 
journals,  the  Revue  Spirite,  and  Mr.  William  Howitt's  magazine  article 
entitled,  "  The  Devils  of  Morzine."  The  period  of  the  occurrence  was 
about  i860;  the  scene,  the  parish  of  Morzine,  a  beautiful  valley  of  the 
Savoy,  not  more  than  half  a  day's  journey  from  the  Lake  of  Geneva.  The 
place  is  quiet,  remote,  and  had  been  seldom  visited  by  tourists  before  the 
period  above  named.  Being  moreover  shut  in  by  high  mountains,  and 
inhabited  by  a  simple,  industrious,  and  pious  class  of  peasantry,  Morzine 
might  have  appeared  to  a  casual  visitor  the  very  centre  of  health,  peace, 
and  good  order. 

The  first  appearance  of  an  abnormal  visitation  was  the  conduct  of  a  young 
girl,  who,  from  being  quiet,  modest,  and  well-conducted,  suddenly  began  to 

38o  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

exhibit  what  her  distressed  family  and  friends  supposed  to  be  symptoms  of 
insanity.  She  ran  about  in  the  most  singular  and  aimless  way ;  climbed 
high  trees,  scaled  walls,  and  was  found  perched  on  roofs  and  cornices,  which 
it  seemed  impossible  for  any  creature  but  a  squirrel  to  reach.  She  soon 
became  wholly  untractable ;  was  given  to  fits  of  hysteria,  violent  laughter, 
passionate  weeping,  and  general  aberration  from  her  customary  modest 
behaviour.  Whilst  her  parents  were  anxiously  seeking  advice  in  this 
dilemma,  another  and  still  another  of  the  young  girl's  ordinary  companions 
were  seized  with  the  same  malady. 

In  the  course  of  ten  days  the  report  prevailed,  that  over  fifty  females — 
ranging  from  seven  years  of  age  to  fifty — had  been  seized,  and  were  exhibit- 
ing symptoms  of  the;  most  bewildering  mental  aberration.  The  crawling, 
climbing,  leaping,  wild  singing,  furious  swearing,  and  frantic  behaviour  of 
these  unfortunates,  soon  found  crowds  of  imitators. 

Before  the  tidings  of  this  frightful  affliction  had  passed  beyond  the  district 
in  which  it  originated,  several  hundreds  of  women  and  children,  and  scores 
of  young  men,  were  writhing  under  the  contagion. 

The  seizures  were  sudden,  like  the  attacks;  they  seldom  lasted  long,  yet 
they  never  seemed  to  yield  to  any  form  of  treatment,  whether  harsh  or  kind, 
medical,  religious,  or  persuasive. 

The  first  symptoms  of  this  frightful  malady  do  not  seem  to  have  been 
noted  with  sufficient  attention  to  justify  the  historian  in  giving  details  which 
could  be  considered  accurate.  It  was  only  when  the  number  of  the 
possessed  exceeded  two  thousand  persons,  and  the  case  was  attracting 
multitudes  of  curious  enquirers  from  all  parts  of  the  Continent,  that  the 
medical  men,  priests,  and  journalists  of  the  day,  began  to  keep  and 
publish  constant  records  of  the  progress  of  the  epidemic. 

One  of  the  strangest  features  of  the  case,  and  one  which  most  constantly 
bafiled  the  faculty,  was  the  appearance  of  rugged  health,  and  freedom  from 
all  physical  disease,  which  distinguished  this  malady.  As  a  general  rule, 
the  victims  spoke  in  hoarse,  rough  tones  unlike  their  own ;  used  profane 
language,  such  as  few  of  them  could  have  ever  heard,  and  imitated  the 
actions  of  crawling,  leaping,  climbing  animals,  with  ghastly  fidelity.  Some- 
times they  would  roll  their  bodies  up  into  balls .  and  distort  their  limbs 
beyond  the  power  of  the  attendant  physicians  to  account  for,  or  disentangle. 

Many  amongst  them  were  levitated  in  the  air,  and  in  a  few  instances,  the 
women  spoke  in  foreign  tongues,  manifested  high  conditions  of  exaltation, 
described  glorious  visions,  prophesied,  gave  clairvoyant  descriptions  of 
absent  persons  and  distant  places,  sang  hymns,  and  preached  in  strains  of 
sublime  inspiration.  It  must  be  added,  that  these  instances  were  very  rare, 
and  were  only  noticeable  in  the  earher  stages  of  the  obsession.  Considered 
as  a  whole,  the  scenes  enacted,  and  the  mental  states  manifested,  were  only 
worthy  of  originating  in  Pandemonium. 

It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that  the  tidings  of  this  horrible  obsession 
attracted  immense  multitudes  of  witnesses,  no  less  than  the  attention  of  the 
learned  and  philosophic.  When  the  atttempts  of  the  medical  faculty,  the 
church,  and  the  law,  had  been  tried  again  and  again,  and  all  had  utterly 
failed  to  modify  the  ever-increasing  horrors  of  this  malady,  the  Emperor  of 
the  French,  the  late  Louis  Napoleon,  under  whose  protectorate  Morzine 
was  then  governed,  yielding  to  the  representations  of  his  advisers,  actually 
sent  out  three  military  companies  to  Morzine,  charged  with  strict  orders  to 
quell  the  disturbances  "  on  the  authority  of  the  Emperor,  or  by  force  if 
necessary."     The  result  of  this  high-handed  policy  was  to  increase  ten-fold 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  381 

the  violence  of  the  disease,  and  to  augment  the  numbers  of  the  afflicted,  in 
the  persons  of  many  of  the  very  soldiers  who  sank  under  the  contagion 
which  they  were  expected  to  quench. 

The  next  move  of  the  baffled  French  Government,  was  a  spiritual  one ; 
an  army  of  priests,  headed  by  a  venerable  Bishop,  much  beloved  in  his 
diocese,  being  despatched  in  the  quality  of  exorcists,  at  the  suggestion  of 
the  Archbishop  of  Paris.  Unhappily  this  second  experiment  worked  no 
better  than  the  first. 

Respectable-looking  groups  of  well-dressed  men,  women,  and  children, 
would  pass  into  the  churches  in  reverent  silence,  and  with  all  the  appearance 
of  health  and  piety ;  but  no  sooner  was  the  sound  of  the  priest's  voice,  or 
the  notes  of  the  organ  heard,  than  shrieks,  execrations,  sobbings,  and  frenzied 
cries  resounded  from  different  points  of  the  assembly.  Anxious  fathers  and 
husbands  were  busy  in  carrying  their  distracted  relatives  into  the  open  air, 
and  whether  in  the  church  or  the  home,  every  attempt  of  a  sacerdotal 
character,  was  sure  to  arouse  the  mania  to  heights  of  fury  unknown  before, 

On  many  occasions,  the  priests  and  their  sacred  paraphernalia  were  driven 
off  by  the  obsessed,  and  forced  to  retreat  in  fear  of  bodily  harm.  Leaping 
walls,  scaling  terrific  heights,  and  mocking  the  exorcists  with  fierce  oaths  or 
frantic  sobbings,  the  last  state  of  these  unhappy  ones  seemed  considerably 
worse  than  the  first.  The  children  affected,  acted  more  like  apes  than 
human  beings,  and  although  now  and  then  there  were  signs  of  exaltation, 
and  the  interference  of  high  angelic  influences,  the  general  tone  of  this 
horrible  infection  was  lunatic,  mischievous,  and  profane. 

Sometimes  indeed,  the  women  arose  in  the  churches,  and  prayed  with  a 
fervour  and  eloquence  which  wrung  every  heart,  and  filled  the  hsteners' 
eyes  with  tears,  but  even  then,  the  petitions  put  up  were  obviously  uttered 
by  an  vci^f^\x2X\0K\  foreign  to  the  speaker,  and  pleaded  in  the  most  pathetic 
and  moving  terms  for  aid  in  conquering  the  evil  powers  that  then  held 
sway. 

The  time  came  at  length,  when  the  good  old  Bishop  thought  by  a  coup 
de  grace,  to  achieve  a  general  victory  over  the  adversary.  He  commanded 
that  as  many  as  possible  of  the  afflicted  should  be  gathered  together  to  hear 
high  mass,  when  he  trusted  that  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion  would  be 
sufficient  to  defeat  what  he  evidently  believed  to  be  the  combined  forces  of 
Satan. 

Our  space  does  not  permit  the  quotation  of  the  Bishop's  letter  addressed 
to  the  French  Archbishop ;  the  gist  of  the  document  is  however,  to  report 
an  entire  failure  of  his  scheme.  According  to  the  description  cited  by 
William  Howitt  in  his  paper  on  "  The  Devils  of  Morzine,"  the  assemblage 
in  question,  including  at  least  two  thousand  of  the  possessed,  and  a  number 
of  spectators,  must  have  far  more  faithfully  illustrated  Milton's  description 
of  Pandemonium  than  any  mortal  scene  before  enacted.  Children  and 
women  were  leaping  over  the  seats  and  benches ;  clambering  up  the  pillars, 
and  shrieking  defiance  from  pinnacles  which  scarcely  admitted  of  a  foothold 
for  a  bird. 

Men  beat  their  breasts,  tore  their  hair,  and  moaned  as  if  in  mortal  agony. 
One  young  man  was  endeavouring  with  eyes  streaming  with  tears  and  face 
pale  as  marble,  to  hold  back  his  young  bride  from  ascending  a  fluted 
column,  whilst  she  broke  from  his  grasp,  scaled  the  giddy  height,  and 
perching  herself  on  the  carved  capital,  broke  forth  into  peals  of  laughter, 
which  froze  the  blood  of  every  mortal  to  listen  to.  Whole  knots  of  women, 
who  in  their  own  homes  seemed  to  be  healthy,  happy,  and  strictly  modest 

382  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

matrons,  were  lying  on  the  ground  with  dishevelled  hair,  and  rent  garments, 
or  dancing  on  tombs,  and  monuments,  like  incarnate  fiends. 

The  poor  Bishop's  letter  contains  but  one  remark  which  seems  to  offer 
a  clue  to  these  scenes  of  horror  and  madness.  He  says :  "  When  in  my 
distress  and  confusion  I  accidentally  laid  my  hand  on  the  heads  of  these 
unfortunates,  I  found  that  the  paroxysm  instantly  subsided,  and  that  how- 
ever wild  and  clamorous  they  may  have  been  before,  the  parties  so 
touched,  generally  sunk  down  as  it  were  into  a  swoon,  or  deep  sleep,  and 
woke  up  most  commonly  restored  to  sanity,  and  a  sense  of  propriety." 

Good  old  man  !  unconsciously  to  himself  a  powerful  magnetizer.  Had 
the  clue  thus  furnished  been  followed  out,  the  whole  tribe  of  obsessing 
demons  might  have  been  conquered,  and  their  power  replaced  with  a 
pure,  holy,  and  healthful  influence,  which  would  have  held  possession 
of  the  frenzied  crowd,  until  they  could  have  been  restored  to  sanity  and 
individuahsm. 

An  earnest  and  philosophical  observer  of  this  frightful  drama,  a  gentleman 
commissioned  by  one  of  the  Brussels  journals  to  report  what  was  trans- 
piring, writes  of  the  closing  scenes  as  follows  : — 

" '  I  stayed  at  Morzine  until  Monseigneur  left,  that  is  to  say,  till  half -past  six  in  the 
evening.  The  poor  bishop  was  utterly  dispirited.  Two  or  three  '  possedees '  were  bi-ought 
to  him  in  the  sacristy,  but  he  could  do  nothing.  On  my  return  I  found  one  by  the  side 
of  the  road.  I  questioned  her  also  in  a  foreign  language,  but  she  got  angry,  and  replied 
by  a  handful  of  gravel,  which  she  flung  in  my  face,  telling  me  that  I  only  went  once  a 
year  to  mass,  and  that  I  was  a  busybody.' 

"  The  complete  failure  of  episcopal  influence  threw  the  Government  back  on  the  help 
of  medical  science.  Dr.  Constans  had,  since  his  first  visit,  published  a  report,  in  which 
he  held  out  hopes  of  cure  if  his  advice  were  strictly  followed.  He  was  again  commissioned 
to  do  what  he  could  for  Morzine.  Armed  with  the  powers  of  a  dictator  he  returned  there, 
and  backed  by  a  fresh  detachment  of  sixty  soldiers,  a  brigade  of  gendarmes  and  a  fresh 
cure,  he  issued  despotic  decrees,  and  threatened  lunatic  asylums,  and  in  any  case 
deportation  for  the  convulsed.  He  fined  any  person  who  accused  others  of  magic,  or  in 
any  way  encouraged  the  prevalent  idea  of  supernatural  evil.  He  desired  the  curi  to 
preach  sermons  against  the  possibility  of  demoniacal  possession,  but  this  order  could  not 
well  be  carried  out  by  even  the  most  obedient  priest. 

"  The  persons  affected  with  fits  were  dispersed  in  every  direction.  Some  were  sent  to 
asylums  and  hospitals,  and  many  were  simply  exiled  from  Chablais.  They  were  not 
allowed  to  revisit  even  for  a  day  their  homes,  except  by  very  special  favour.  The  existing 
health  of  the  exiles  is,  of  course,  not  well  known,  but  we  have  heard  of  many  who  have 
attacks  even  now  when  they  are  far  from  Morzine.  Four  or  five  who  were  unfortunately 
kept  together  in  an  Annecy  hospital,  set  on  the  chaplain,  a  priest  who  attempted  to 
exorcise  them,  and  ill-treated  him  after  the  fashion  in  which  they  had  dealt  with 
his  bishop. 

"  Whether  fear  has  helped  to  stay  the  spiritual  plague,  as  undoubtedly  fear  helped 
to  produce  it,  remains  to  be  proved  ;  at  present  the  urgent  pressure  put  by  the 
French  Government  on  the  people  of  Morzine  seems  to  have  scotched  the  snake.  There 
have  been  no  cases  of  convulsion  for  four  months.  The  soldiers  have  been  withdrawn. 
Visitors  to  the  place,  curious  of  information,  are,  we  think  wisely  discouraged ;  quacks 
and  charlatans  are  not  allowed  admission  to  the  commune." 

We  should  not  care  to  conclude  this  horrible  and  apparently  incredible 
narrative  without  citing  some  additional  testimony  of  a  corroborative  and 
authentic  character.  We  will  therefore  give  a  few  extracts  from  Mr.  William 
Howitt's  excellent  paper  on  "  The  Devils  of  Morzine,"  published  in  the 
London  Spiritual  Magazine,  which  read  as  follows  : — 

"  We  need  not  point  to  the  salient  facts  of  our  narrative,  or  discuss  the  various  theories 

that  have  been  invented  to  account  for  them It  is  impossible  not  to  see  the 

resemblance  of  the  Morzine  epidemic  with  the  demonopathy  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and 
the  history  of  the  Jansenist  and  Cevennes  convulsionnaires.     .     .     .     Some  of  the  facts 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  z'^z 

we  have  related  were  often  observed  in  the  state  o  /hypnotism,  or  nervous  sleep,  with 
which  physicians  are  familiar.  The  hallucinations  of  which  we  have  given  instances  are 
too  common  to  astonish  us.  But  the  likeness  of  this  epidemic  to  others  that  have  been 
observed,  does  not  account  for  its  symptoms. 

"  The  resemblance  of  one  set  of  phenomena  to  another  does  not  explain  any 

In  this  narrative  we  notice,  that  like  all  the  revival  and  other  epidemic  phenomena,  this 
of  Morzine  began  with  one  person,  who  communicated  the  infection  to  her  companions. 
At  the  commencement,  it  seemed  as  if  it  was  about  to  be  a  religious  revival,  but  the  evil 
spirits  soon  got  the  better  and  thenceforth  maintained  their  ground.  The  extreme 
similarity  in  small  points,  such  as  running  up  trees  and  houses,  will  be  best  seen  by  giving 
some  other  instances  of  similar  epidemic  phenomena  which  occurred  at  convents  and 
schools  in  France,  Holland,  and  Germany  during  upwards  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  years, 
breaking  out  from  the  year  1494  to  the  year  1652,  each  attended  with  convulsive  spasms 
of  the  body  and  mental  characteristics,  simUar  in  many  respects  to  those  of  the  Morzine 
possession.  It  is  noticed  in  that  of  the  nuns  at  Wertet  that  it  commenced  in  a  notion  of 
witchcraft,  and  that  they  were  seized  with  violent  fits  of  sadness  and  paroxysms  of  an 
hysterical  kind  ;  that  they  fell  suddenly  to  the  ground  as  if  dead,  ivhilst  others  scrambled 
up  trees,  clamhering  with  their  feet  like  cats.  Mr.  Madden,  in  his  '  Phantasmata,'  gives  a 
description  of  these  cases,  and  describes  that  of  the  nuns  of  Kintorp  as  follows  : — -'At  first 
a  few  only  were  seized  with  convulsions  and  hallucinations.  The  symptoms  seemed  to  be 
communicated,  it  is  said,  by  contact ;  but  perhaps  it  would  be  more  correct  to  say,  by 
close  intercourse  and  sympathy.  When  the  attack  burst  out  they  raved,  uttered  cries 
imitating  the  shrieks  and  screams  of  animals,  felt  a  strong  desire  to  bite,  and  became 
frightfully  contorted.'  At  the  convent  of  Cologne  in  1564,  it  began  with  one  nun,  and 
was  by  her  communicated  to  the  one  whose  bed  was  next  to  her,  and  immediately  after 
to  the  whole  convent.  In  1566,  the  foundling  children  at  Amsterdam  were  attacked  with 
convulsions  and  delirium,  during  which  '  they  spoke  foreign  languages,  and  knew  what  was 
passing  elsewhere,  even  in  the  great  council  of  the  city  ;  and  they  even  clambered  along  walls 
like  cats,  and  along  the  roofs  of  houses.'  The  same  had  happened  in  Rome  in  1555,  in  the 
Orphan  Asylum  in  that  city,  where  it  is  said  '  about  seventy  young  girls  became  demoniacs, 
and  continued  in  that  state  more  than  two  years.'  Of  the  Sisters  of  St.  Bridget,  who 
had  the  disease  for  ten  years,  all  had  the  faculty  of  improvising  long  discourses  under 
inspirational  influence. 

"  The  nuns  at  Loudun  suffered  from  '  frightful  disquietude  of  mind ;  hysterical 
symptoms,  convulsions  of  extreme  violence,  producing  singular  contortions,  catalepsy,  and 
hallucinations  all  bearing  on  subjects  of  religious  enthusiasm.  As  to  their  cries,  it  was 
what  might  be  conceived  of  the  bellowing  of  the  condemned.'  They  also  spoke  in  foreign 
tongues  with  which  they  were  not  previously  acquainted,  and  by  that  we  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  a  curious  portion  of  the  Roman  ritual,  by  which  they  were  tried,  to  '  find 
any  of  the  three  symptoms  required  by  it  as  a  sign  of  being  truly  possessed  by  the  Devil ; 
and  which  are,  divination,  the  understanding  of  languages  which  the  person  has  not  learned, 
and  a  supernatural  strength  of  body.'  Six  of  the  clerical  and  magisterial  functionaries 
who  had  been  brought  into  contact  with  the  nuns  as  judges,  caught  the  disease.  There 
was  an  unusual  exaltation  of  some  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  a  power  of  improvising, 
and  of  inner  vision  or  thought  reading,  as  to  wliich  Mr.  Madden  observes,  '  that  they 
differ  in  no  respect  from  the  phenomena  of  magnetism.' 

"  The  cases  were  all  more  or  less  connected  with  religious  ideas,  but  were  also  much 
mixed  up,  as  we  might  expect,  with  the  prevalent  middle  age  notions  of  diabolic  possession. 

"  A  case  similar  to  those  occurring  in  the  middle  ages  amongst  the  children  of  Amster- 
dam and  the  nuns  in  the  convents,  happened  within  the  last  seven  years  in  Piedmont, 
and  went  through  the  Continental  papers — '  A  number  of  young  girls  in  the  district  all 
at  once  left  their  schools  and  homes  and  went  into  the  fields  and  woods,  roaming,  and 
behaving  in  the  wildest  way.  Exhortations  to  return  being  insufficient,  the  clergy  were 
called  to  exorcise  the  poor  girls,  who  repelled  them,  calling  them  devils  and  sorcerers  ; 
many  of  them  got  up  trees  and  on  the  roofs  of  houses,  and  refused  to  come  down.' 

"  Dr.  Kerner  relates  that,  '  At  the  village  of  Neuhutte,  in  Wurtemberg,  which  is  situate 
among  the  mountains,  a  sort  of  St.  Vitus'  dance  becomes  epidemic  chiefly  amongst  young 
people,  so  that  all  the  children  of  the  place  are  seized  with  it  at  the  same  time.  Like 
persons  in  a  magnetic  state,  they  are  aware  of  the  precise  moment  that  a  fit  will  seize  them, 
and  if  they  are  in  the  fields  they  hasten  home  and  immediately  fall  into  a  convulsion,  in 
which  condition  they  will  move  for  an  hour  or  more  with  the  most  surprising  regularity, 
keeping  measure  like  an  accomplished  dancer,  after  which  they  awake  as  if  out  of  a 
magnetic  sleep." 

Mr.  Howitt  very  justly  complains  that  "  the  resemblance  of  one  set  of 
phenomena  to  another  does  not  explain  any."    What  then  ?    Is  there  no 

384  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

explanation  to  be  rendered  of  states  so  utterly  abnormal  to  all  known 
procedures  of  natural  law  ?  Speaking  authoritatively,  we  must  answer — 
in  our  present  utter  ignorance  of  Spiritual  science  and  its  laws — No  ;  but 
judging  analogically  from  what  we  do  know  of  Spiritual  potencies,  we 
deem  it  quite  possible  that  there  are  mental  and  magnetic  storms, 
contagions,  and  epidemics,  generated  by  conditions,  and  proceeding  upon 
laws  of  which  at  present  we  are  in  total  ignorance,  but  which  assuredly 
originate  in  planetary  and  geologic  changes,  with  just  as  much  regularity 
and  order  as  do  contagious  maladies  and  epidemic  diseases.  The  very 
fact  that  they  prevail  in  special  districts  proves  that  they  obey  some 
unknown  but  potential  physical  law  ;  whilst  the  invariability  with  which 
they  propagate  their  effects  by  contact,  proves  that  the  affection  is  of  a 
nervous,  and  from  thence  of  a  mental  type,  and  that  the  malarmtn,  or 
pabulum  of  infection  is  a  magnetic  one.  Awaiting  the  day  when  the  physiology 
of  mind  shall  be  as  carefully  studied  and  its  healthful  or  diseased  states  as 
scientifically  dealt  with  as  the  physiology  of  the  material  body,  we  must 
for  the  present  quit  the  realm  of  hypothesis,  and  pass  on  to  notice  the  next 
representative  case  of  Swiss  Spiritualism. 

The  narrative  we  are  now  about  to  cite  has  been  published  in  many 
languages  and  widely  circulated  through  the  Continental  journals  of  the 
period,  1862-3.  The  best  and  most  impartial  summary  of  the  case  is  to 
be  found  in  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine  of  February,  1864,  written  by 
Mr.  WilHam  Howitt,  under  the  caption  of — 

"persecution   and   expulsion   from    his   patrimonial  house  of  m. 
joller,  of  the  swiss  national  council,  by  disorderly  spirits." 

The  extracts  which  we  find  most  pertinent  to  this  case,  taken  from  Mr. 
Howitt's  narrative,  commence  as  follows  : — 

"  In  the  third  volume  of  this  magazine,  p.  499,  the  reader  will  find  an  article  headed 
'  Manifestations  at  Lucerne.'  This  article  consists  of  extracts  from  difi'erent  Swiss  news- 
papers, giving  an  account  of  the  extraordinary  appearances,  noises,  and  other  annoyances 
going  on,  from  the  autumn  of  1860  to  that  of  1862,  in  the  house  of  M.  Joller,  at  Stans, 
a  village  on  the  borders  of  the  Lake  of  Lucerne.  Some  of  these  newspapers,  in  the  usual 
style  of  such  journals,  were  inclined  to  be  witty,  if  not  wise,  over  these  occurrences  ;  but 
a  correspondent  well  known  to  us,  and  one  of  our  most  valued  contributors,  had  taken  the 
trouble  to  go  himself  to  Stans,  and  ascertain  what  were  the  facts  on  the  spot.  He  tells  us 
that  he  found  M.  Joller,  a  lawyer,  a  man  of  middle  age,  having  several  children,  his  eldest 
son  being  about  twenty.  That  he  bore  an  excellent  character,  and  was  well  known 
throughout  the  country.  He  found  Stans  a  village  about  an  hour's  sail  by  steamboat 
from  Lucerne,  standing  in  a  charming  valley  one  or  two  miles  from  the  shore,  fruitful, 
well  peopled,  by  no  means  sombre  or  solitary,  and  surrounded  by  magnificent  mountains. 
M.  Joller  confirmed  the  supernatural  facta  which  have  proved  so  startling  to  the  public, 
and  so  grievous  to  him.  The  letter  of  our  correspondent  is  dated  the  4th  of  October, 
1862.  On  the  22nd  of  the  same  month,  or  only  eighteen  days  later,  M.  Joller  was  com- 
pelled by  these  unpitying  poUer-geister  to  abandon  his  hereditary  home,  with  all  his 
family. 

"  M.  Joller  has  now  published  the  story  of  his  unmerited  sufferings  and  banishment 
from  his  natal  hearth  by  these  troublesome  intruders,  in  a  small  brochure  of  ninety-one 
pages.  This  little  book  now  lies  before  us,  and  certainly  no  more  extraordinary  case  of 
supernatural  persecution  has  yet  been  put  on  record. 

"  Every  one  familiar  with  the  Lake  of  Lucerne,  must  have  a  pretty  good  idea  of  the 
situation  of  Stans,  when  it  is  said  that  from  M.  JoUer's  house.  Mount  Pilatus  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  Rigi  on  the  other,  are  in  full  view.  This  house  and  property,  M.  Joller 
informs  us,  had  been  in  the  possession  of  his  family  for  about  a  hundred  years. 

"  It  was  in  this  house  that  M.  Joller,  an  active  and  popular  lawyer,  and  member  of 
the  national  council,  lived  from  the  death  of  his  father  in  1845,  to  the  summer  of  1862,  in 
peace  and  happiness.     Then,  suddenly,  in  the  autumn  of  1860,  uncanny  sounds  and 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  385 

sights  began  to  show  themselves  to  the  astonishment  of  all,  and  for  some  time  to  the  per- 
severing disbelief  of  M.  Joller,  '  In  my  house,'  he  says,  '  bloomed  seven  healthy  children, 
four  boys  and  three  girls.  In  our  abode  superstition  ever  had  been  a  rejected  thing  ; 
and  I  may  assert  that  scarcely  any  family  had  been  brought  up  with  so  little  fear  of 
ghosts  as  mine.' 

"  The  troublesome  visitations  made  their  dehM  by  first  rapping  on  the  bedstead  of  the 
servant-maid,  raps  which  she  said  she  not  only  heard  but  felt,  one  night  in  the  autumn 
of  1860.  She  immediately  expressed  her  belief  that  this  was  the  token  of  an  approaching 
death  in  the  family.  The  maid  slept  in  a  room  on  the  third  story,  so  that  it  could  not 
well  be  any  mischievous  person  playing  a  trick  ;  but  M.  Joller  strictly  commanded  her  to 
keep  her  superstitious  notions  to  herself,  and  ascribed  the  raps  to  the  girl's  own  imagina- 
tion, which  she  would,  however,  on  no  account  admit.  The  rapping  was  not  again  repeated 
for  some  weeks,  but  after  that  interval  M.  Joller  came  home  from  a  temporary  absence 
and  found  his  family  in  great  alarm.  His  wife  and  second  daughter,  sleeping  in  his  own 
room,  had  been  awaked  by  loud  rappings  on  a  table  in  the  room.  On  demanding  if  it 
were  any  living  agent,  that  it  should  rap  again,  it  did  so  promptly.  They  also  now 
entertained  the  notion  that  it  was  the  messenger  of  death,  and  a  letter  informing  them  in 
a  few  days  of  the  decease  of  a  friend,  confirmed  that  idea.  They  were  soon,  however,  to 
be  convinced  that  it  was  nothing  temporary.  In  June,  1861,  one  of  the  boys,  nine  years 
of  age,  being  in  a  wood-chamber  on  the  third  story,  was  found  in  a  swoon.  As  he  was  a 
stout  and  fearless  lad,  great  was  the  wonder,  and  on  coming  to  himself,  he  said  as  he  was 
in  the  chamber  he  heard  knocks  on  the  door,  of  which  he  took  no  notice,  but  immediately 
afterwards  a  white  indistinct  figure  opened  the  door  and  entered,  when  he  lost  con- 
sciousness. This  M.  Joller  endeavoured  to  account  for  by  the  erudite  solvent  of  all 
difficulties — imagination.  But  M.  Joller  was  not  to  be  let  off  so  easily.  The  other  boys 
in  their  bedroom  heard  noises  in  the  night  in  the  rooms  above  and  below  them,  and  called 
out  to  know  who  was  making  the  noise.  M.  Joller  endeavoured  to  persuade  them  that 
they  were  cats  or  rats,  or  birds  that  made  the  noises  ;  and  yet  he  now  recollected  to  have 
heard  similar  sounds  on  his  own  writing  table,  and  that  frequently,  two  years  ago. 

"  In  the  autumn  of  1861,  the  maid  renewed  her  complaints.  She  said  she  was  afraid 
of  remaining  alone  in  the  kitchen.  As  she  cleaned  the  shoes  in  an  evening  on  the  steps 
near  the  kitchen  door,  grey  shapes  appeared  from  the  cellar  below.  They  came  upstairs 
into  her  chamber,  and  she  heard  them  sobbing  in  the  fourth  story,  which  was  a  lumber 
room.  Mrs.  Joller  scolded  her  for  her  fancies.  But  the  same  things  appeared  to  the 
children,  and  the  youngest  daughter  about  eleven  years  old,  at  her  studies  in  the  day, 
saw  a  child  enter,  walk  up  to  her,  and  vanish.  The  maid-servant  was  dismissed  in 
October  of  1862,  and  a  girl  of  only  thirteen  taken  in  her  place  to  do  the  more  common 
work  of  the  house,  the  mother  and  daughters,  in  Swiss  fashion,  undertaking  the  rest. 
From  that  time  to  the  summer  of  1862  all  was  quiet,  the  medium  seemed  to  have  gone 
in  the  maid ;  but  this  was  not  the  case,  for  two  of  the  boys  who  slept  in  a  chamber 
leading  by  a  terrace  into  the  garden,  declared  that  they  still  heard  at  nights  knocking  on 
the  'walls  ;  others  said  that  they  heard  in  the  rooms  above  a  going  to  and  fro  as  of  a  heavy 
dog,  and  knockings  on  the  walls  and  the  floors.  Still  M.  Joller  endeavoured  to  persuade 
his  family  that  these  sounds  proceeded  from  merely  natural  causes. 

"  On  the  15th  of  August,  M.  Joller  had  occasion  to  visit  Lucerne,  with  his  wife  and 
eldest  son,  and  on  his  return  the  rest  of  the  children  had  relations  of  fresh  apparitions  to 
make.  This  time  he  threatened  them  sternly  with  the  rod  if  he  heard  any  more  '  such 
nonsense  ; '  and  the  children  complained  sorrowfully  that  '  their  father  would  believe 
nothing.'  But  the  very  same  forenoon  the  children  were  frightened  out  of  the  house  by 
knockings,  and  as  they  sat  down  on  the  doorsteps  leading  to  the  gardens,  a  pebble  the 
size  of  a  man's  fist  was  thrown  from  somewhere  above  or  from  the  house,  and  fell 
betwixt  two  of  them.  Returning  to  the  house  they  found  all  the  doors  of  the  rooms, 
drawers,  and  cupboards  standing  open.  These  they  closed  and  locked,  only  to  see  them 
fly  open  again.  They  then  locked  the  door  of  the  chamber  adjoining  the  sitting-room, 
and  bolted  it  with  the  night  bolt,  but  notwithstanding  both,  it  was  thrown  open,  and  all 
the  windows  and  doors  standing  open  were  as  suddenly  closed.  Hearing  also  a  heavy 
step  on  the  stairs,  though  nobody  was  visible,  they  flew  again  into  the  garden.  Return- 
ing at  noon  to  dinner,  they  saw  a  strange  spectre  on  the  staircase,  and  hurried  once 
more  into  the  garden  with  the  dinner  apparatus,  and  took  refuge  under  a  large  walnut 
tree.  As  the  girl  carried  the  plates  out  from  the  kitchen,  she  saw  doors  still  opening  and 
shutting  and  the  children  from  the  garden  saw  all  the  windows  open. 

"  The  disturbances  now  came  thicker  and  faster.  The  humming  of  spinning-wheels 
was  heard  in  the  house  ;  occasionally  a  strange  music  ;  furniture  began  to  move  about ; 
then  the  music  was  accompanied  by  the  audible  singing  in  a  melancholy  tone,  of 
Camilla's  prayer  in  Zampa,  '  Oleiches  Loos,'  &c.,  and  a  voice  said  in  the  Nidwalden  patois, 
'  Wenn  au  gar  niemer  umen  isch  /  '     '  If  I  should  never  come  again  ! '     Still  more  extra- 

25 

386  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

ordinary,  not  only  they,  but  the  woman  of  the  adjoining  house,  saw  on  the  house  floor, 
drawn  with  the  accuracy  of  an  engraving,  a  snow-white  figure  with  a  death's  head,  which 
they  watched  for  some  time  till  it  faded  quite  out.  The  same  evening,  on  a  fire  being 
kindled  in  the  ground  story,  called  the  hut,  a  conical  figure  surrounded  by  flames,  came 
down  the  chimney,  and,  dissolving  into  water,  drowned  the  fire  out,  and  raised  a  wild 
cry  from  the  maid  and  children,  which  brought  down  the  mother,  who  found  the  group 
sitting  in  the  abutting  house  of  the  tenant  weeping  in  terror. 

"  M.  JoUer  now  received  information  of  like  things  going  on  in  other  places,  from 
persons  of  education  and  intelligence,  but  he  still  persisted  in  ascribing  these  things  to 
natural  causes.  But  the  time  was  now  come  for  him  to  meet  the  enemy  face  to  face. 
On  the  19th  of  August,  as  he  arrived  at  home  in  the  evening,  his  wife  called  him  into  the 
house  passage  to  hear  the  knocking  going  on.  Then  he  soon  had  ample  evidence  that  the 
stories  of  the  maids  and  children  had  foundation  enough.  The  knocking  went  on  briskly 
on  the  wall  before  him  ;  then  in  the  scullery.  He  followed,  putting  his  ear  close  to  the 
place,  and  pretending  that  it  must  be  a  rat,  struck  some  heavy  blows  on  the  wall  to 
frighten  the  rat  away.  To  his  astonishment,  the  blows  were  returned  with  equal  vigour 
and  in  equal  number.  He  then  called  for  a  candle,  and  examined  the  passage  and 
scullery  closely.  In  vain  ;  so  he  summoned  his  family  to  the  sitting-room,  declared  he 
would  find  it  all  out  next  morning  ;  and  bringing  Zschokke's  '  Book  of  Family  Worship,' 
began  to  read  aloud  his  28th  chapter,  namely,  '  On  the  Power  of  Superstition.' 

"  The  spirit,  however,  cared  neither  for  M.  Joller  nor  Zschokke,  but  began  pounding 
on  the  room  door  so  vigorously,  that  his  reading  was  soon  brought  to  an  end,  and  the 
children  asked  triumphantly,  '  Is  that  a  rat,  then  ? ' 

"  Incensed  at  this,  and  strongly  persuaded  that  some  one  was  playing  the  fool  with 
him,  he  seized  a  candle,  armed  himself  with  a  stiletto,  and  sallied  forth  to  hunt  out  the 
villain.  The  outer  doors  and  windows  being  fast,  he  felt  sure  that  he  must  soon  detect 
him.  He  descended  to  the  cellar,  made  a  vigorous  search  amongst  ^he  barrels  and  behind 
the  door.  Nothing  there  !  but  above  his  head  the  knocking  was  now  going  on  blithely. 
He  ascended,  followed  the  sound  from  place  to  place  ;  sometimes  with  his  candle,  some- 
times without  it,  stealing  along  in  the  dark  to  pounce  on  the  rogue.  Talking  nothing  by  his 
motion,  however,  he  ordered  all  to  bed.  The  noises  nevertheless  became  such,  that  the 
whole  family  had  flown  together  into  one  room,  and  there  the  knocking  came.  The 
bedstead  was  seized  and  banged  against  the  wall  till  the  whole  bed  shook.  M.  Joller 
examined  under  the  bed  and  into  every  corner  of  the  room,  but  in  vain,  though  he  found 
the  doors  and  windows  all  fast.  As  he  was  thus  employed,  he  heard  raps  on  the  chairs, 
and  felt  a  soft  stroking  on  the  forefinger  of  his  left  hand. 

"  From  this  time  till  that  when  the  family  was  driven  from  the  house,  the  haunting 
was  almost  incessant ;  and  the  knockings,  the  throwing  about  of  furniture,  the  visible 
presentment  of  spirits  has  rarely  had  a  parallel  in  the  history  of  such  phenomena.  There 
might  have  been  room  to  suppose  that  the  maids  and  children  had  given  way  to  imaginary 
fears,  but  from  this  time  forward  the  disorders  became  the  subject  of  incessant  pubUc 
observation.  The  news  flew  about,  spite  of  all  M.  Joller's  endeavours  to  keep  it  at  home; 
and  hundreds  and  thousands  of  people  flocked  from  the  country  round  to  witness  the 
proceedings — and  did  witness  them  in  crowds 

"  The  next  morning  he  kept  his  word,  and  made  a  thorough  examination  of  the  house; 
and  the  spirits  gave  him  the  amplest  opportunity  to  try  his  skill.  They  knocked  every- 
where, till  he  saw  the  very  wainscot  bend  beneath  their  blows.  As  he  was  bom  in  the 
house,  and  as  an  inquisitive  lad,  had  watched  all  repairs  going  on  at  diflerent  periods,  he 
says  there  was  not  a  handbreadth  of  its  wall  or  roof  that  was  not  familiar  to  him.  The 
knockings  were  everywhere.  Now  thumping  on  a  door,  he  opened  it,  and  held  it  fast  in 
his  hands,  when  the  knocks  were  given  on  each  side  at  once.  On  one  occasion  he  stood 
with  a  chamber  door  ajar,  and  suddenly  pulling  it  open  as  the  first  knock  fell  on  it,  saw  a 
dark  figure  outside  ;  but  before  he  could  spring  forward,  his  wife  and  a  daughter  who  were 
in  the  room,  simultaneously  cried  out  that  they  saw  a  brown  bony  arm  at  the  moment 
withdrawn  from  the  door.  They  did  this  so  completely  together  that  he  was  convinced 
that  each  saw  the  same  thing.  The  servant  flew  upstairs  to  say  that  she  had  heard 
something  come  down  the  stairs,  and  three  times  groaningly  exclaim,  '  Take  pity  on  me  !' 
She  added  that  she  looked  eagerly,  but  could  see  nothing  ;  yet  soon  after  she  saw  a  grey 
transparent  Httle  cloud  float  in  at  the  kitchen  window,  and  pass  with  a  vibrating  motion 
to  the  chamber  door,  where  it  had  knocked  loudly. 

"  Driven  to  a  late  conviction  of  what  he  had  to  deal  with,  M.  Joller  hastened  to  beg 
the  Commissary  Niederberger  to  come  and  see  these  things  ;  but  he  being  absent,  Father 
Guardian  came,  and  watched  the  phenomena  with  deep  interest,  but  without  being  able 
to  suggest  a  solution  of  the  cause.  He  thought  an  investigation  by  men  of  authority 
should  take  place  ;  but  M.  Joller,  dreading  the  consequences  of  publicity,  for  the  present 
hesitated.    The  Father  bestowed  the  usual  blessing  on  the  house  and  withdrew.     The 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  387 

bewildered  M.  Joller  then  drew  out  his  dust-covered  college  notes  on  experimental  physics, 
made  at  Munich,  while  attending  the  class  of  Professor  Sieber,  but  they  afforded  him 
no  light. 

"  Neither  the  blessing  of  the  reverend  Father,  nor  the  philosophical  enquiry  suspended 
the  disturbances  for  an  instant.  The  next  day,  as  the  Court  of  Justice  was  sitting  at 
Lucerne,  he  was  obliged  to  attend  on  busines,  but  he  was  sent  for  before  the  Court  rose, 
the  house  at  home  being  in  the  most  frightful  uproar.  Arriving,  he  found  all  his  family 
in  the  open  air,  not  daring  to  stay  under  the  roof.  Numbers  of  people  were  collected  on 
the  high  road  looking  at  the  house,  in  great  excitement.  Having  no  fear,  he  entered  the 
house,  and  found  the  doors  madly  flying  open  and  then  banging  to  with  a  violence  that 
threatened  to  demolish  them.  In  the  kitchen  he  found  the  glasses,  bottles,  and  earthen- 
ware standing  on  the  table  ringing  as  if  struck  mth  a  metallic  instrument.  The  knockings 
were  in  so  many  parts  of  the  house  at  once,  that  had  it  been  men  who  did  it,  it  would 
have  required  four  or  five,  yet  not  a  man  was  in  the  house  except  himself.  He  here  called 
in  an  old  friend,  the  Councillor  Zimmermann,  Dr.  K.  von  Deschwanden,  an  accomplished 
natural  philosopher  ;  the  President  of  the  Court  of  Justice,  Obermatt,  Judge  Schallberger, 
Master  Builder  Aloys  Amstad,  and  Drawing  Master  Obermatt.  These  gentlemen  wit- 
nessed with  astonishment  the  phenomena.  They  sought  everywhere  for  some  physical 
cause,  and  propounded  many  theories  of  Vulcanism,  magnetism,  galvanism,  electricity, 
&c.  But  at  length  they  went  away  as  much  puzzled  as  many  other  scientific  men  had 
been  in  like  circumstances. 

"  The  next  day,  Mr.  President  Obermatt  brought  other  gentlemen  to  witness  the  dis- 
turbances, and  one  of  these  suggested  whether  it  might  not  be  some  electrical  machine 
on  the  premises  which  was  grown  thus  riotous,  when  the  eldest  son  of  M.  Joller,  who  had 
been  cautioned  by  his  father  to  be  secret  on  the  real  cause,  coucediugly  observed  that  it 
might  be  so.  This  was  enough.  It  does  not  appear  that  there  was  any  electrical  machine 
on  the  premises,  but  the  frolics  of  the  spirits  went  on  with  a  violence  that  no  twenty 
electrical  machines  in  the  house  could  account  for.  Doors  were  fiercely  flung  open,  bolts 
and  bars  dashed  vehemently  back.  Figures  were  seen  by  different  people,  and  the  second 
son  fainted  and  fell  at  the  sight  of  one.  The  house  was  now  rarely  unoccupied  by  crowds 
of  people,  before  whom  the  manifestations  went  on  in  full  force  and  vai'iety.  Before  the 
Land-Captain  Zelger,  the  Director  of  PoHce  Jann,  Dr.  Christen,  the  President  of  the  Court 
of  Justice  again,  and  many  other  persons  of  condition,  the  Episcopal  Commissary 
Niederberger,  and  Father  Guardian  made  a  very  vigorous  examination  of  the  house,  and 
retired  advising  a  thorough  physical  commission  of  inquiry ;  but  believing  its  origin  to 
be  still  beyond  the  scope  of  such  a  commission. 

''Something  was  become  highly  necessary  ;  the  house  was  crowded  from  morning  to 
night ;  some  talked  of  and  hunted  for  the  electrical  machine  ;  others  challenged  the  devil 
to  come  out ;  and  others,  who  had  happened  to  hear  that  the  eldest  son  of  M.  Joller  had 
been  seen  speaking  with  an  actor  in  the  streets  of  Lucerne,  declared  that  it  was  all  sorcery, 
and  that  young  Joller  had  learned  it  of  the  player.  The  police-director,  Jann,  sent  in  two 
policemen  to  keep  watch  that  the  house  was  not  plundered  by  thieves  amongst  the  crowds. 
As  the  conduct  of  the  visitors,  both  in  the  flesh  and  out  of  it,  grew  every  day  more  out- 
rageous, though  a  number  of  watchers  were  maintained  throughout  the  nights  ;  as  the 
spirits  grew  bolder  and  showed  themselves  more  openly  ;  and  as  M.  Joller  feeized  one  of 
the  hands  of  the  spirits  and  felt  distinctly  the  thumb  and  fingers,  which  soon,  however, 
drew  themselves  away  ;  he  went  and  demanded  a  formal  examination  of  the  house  by  the 
police  authorities.  This  was  accorded,  and  three  of  the  heads  of  the  police  were  appointed 
to  prosecute  the  inquiry.  Up  to  this  moment  the  disturbances  continued  in  full  play. 
The  directors  of  police  ordered  M.  Joller  to  withdraw  with  his  whole  family  from  the 
house,  and  take  up  their  quarters  elsewhere.  They  were  then  left  to  themselves  and 
profound  silence  for  sis  days.  No  knock  was  heard,  no  ghost  appeared,  no  door  or  window 
opened  or  shut  of  itself.  The  profound  Dogberries  of  the  police,  therefore,  drew  up  a 
report  that  there  was  nothing  at  aU  amiss,  and  returned  to  Lucerne  in  the  pride  of 
ignorance  of  aU  psychology,  and  of  having  shown  up  the  whole  affair.  These  worthy 
souls  knew  nothing  at  all  about  mediums.  M.  Joller  did  not  even  understand  that  he  had 
carried  the  mediums  along  with  him  ;  but  he  knew  the  moment  that  he  recrossed  his  own 
threshold  that  the  old  ghostly  power  was  there  in  all  its  force. 

"  The  tide  of  popular  ridicule  was  now  let  loose  against  the  unfortunate  Joller.  The 
Press  was  in  a  heaven  of  triumph  over  the  follies  of  this  superstitious  man.  Though 
thousands  had  seen  the  very  things  that  he  asserted  to  exist ;  though  police-director  Jann, 
judges,  magistrates,  and  dignified  clergy  had  all  witnessed  the  phenomena,  poor  Joller  and 
his  family  were  treated  as  little  less  than  lunatics.  The  thing  was  the  talk  of  all 
Switzerland,  and  what  wounded  M.  Joller  most  deeply  was,  that  all  his  political  services 
and  sacrifices  to  liberal  opinion  were  at  once  forgotten.  His  own  party,  to  a  man,  joined 
in  deriding  him  ;  even  those  with  whom  he  had  stood  side  by   side  in  battle  against 

388  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

political  corruptions,  threw  their  sarcasms  at  him.  As  is  so  often  the  case,  however,  some 
of  his  political  opponents,  whom  he  had  hit  the  hardest  and  spared  the  least,  now  stood 
nobly  forward  and  defended  him,  as  an  honourable,  meritorious,  and  trustworthy  man. 

"  In  vain  did  M.  JoUer  protest  against  the  injustice  of  his  neighbours  :  in  vain  did  he 
insist  on  another  poHce  examination  conducted  in  whatever  manner  the  authorities 
pleased,  so  that  the  family  should  be  in  the  house  :  the  one  already  made  was  held  to 
settle  the  whole  question.  On  the  contrary,  however,  the  annoyances  held  their  uninter- 
I'upted  course  from  this  time,  the  4th  of  September,  to  the  22nd  of  October,  when  they 
finally  drove  him  and  his  family  out.  It  is  still  a  long  story,  but  we  can  only  notice  a  few 
of  the  most  striking  phenomena.  Chairs  and  other  furniture  continued  to  change  their 
places,  apparently  at  their  own  pleasure.  Broken  pots  and  glass,  an  old  axe,  cobs  of 
Indian  corn,  a  sickle,  a  great  iron  ring,  were  repeatedly  brought  out  of  the  kitchen  and 
cellar,  and  thrust  into  a  stove  in  a  chamber,  locked  up  and  the  key  in  possession  of 
M.  Joller.  In  full  sunshine  at  noon,  the  eldest  daughter  saw  in  the  garden,  as  she  thought, 
the  maid  servant  climbing  the  lattice-work  on  the  house  side  to  gather  grapes.  She  saw 
her  dress  so  distinctly,  her  hair  net,  smooth  hair,  and  dark  neckerchief,  that  she  called 
aloud  to  her,  when  to  her  astonishment  she  saw  the  maid  issue  from  the  kitchen  below  to 
see  what  was  wanted  :  and  the  figure,  as  if  crouching  under  the  vine  leaves,  disappeared. 
"  For  some  days  there  had  been  a  plucking  of  leafy  branches  and  flinging  of  them  into 
the  chamber  windows,  or  upon  the  heads  of  persons  passing  below,  when  on  the  12th  of 
September,  as  the  whole  family  sat  at  coffee  at  half -past  two  in  the  day,  three  students 
being  present,  and  the  maid  in  the  room,  a  great  noise  was  heard  in  the  salon  above.  All 
rushed  up  and  saw  the  room  in  singular  disorder.  From  the  wall  on  the  left  hand  a  large 
engraving  was  taken  down  and  laid  on  the  floor.  Two  pier  glasses  were  taken  from  the 
wall  and  laid  down  in  like  manner,  A  parasol  that  had  stood  in  a  corner  was  spread  out 
over  an  ornamental  hanging  lamp.  Stools  and  curtains  were  thrown  confusedly  on  a 
heap  ;  and  all  the  chairs  were  heaped  one  upon  another  around  the  table.  Everything 
being  restored  to  order,  and  the  room  carefully  locked,  the  next  morning  early,  the  room 
was  found  in  a  still  greater  state  of  chaos,  as  well  as  an  adjoining  chamber. 

"  M.  Joller  having  to  go  to  Lucei-ne  to  pay  in  some  money,  heard,  on  his  return,  from 
his  family,  that  they  had,  in  an  adjoining  chamber,  heard  the  distinct  counting  out  of 
money,  piece  by  piece,  and  the  rolls  of  it  successively  pushed  aside,  so  that  they  were 
inclined  to  believe  that  there  must  be  somebody  there  so  engaged.  On  looking,  however, 
they  found  nobody.  On  mentioning  the  time  he  found  it  agree  exactly  with  that  in 
which  he  was  then  counting  his  money  at  the  bank.  At  another  time,  as  he  was  then  at 
some  distance  on  the  estate,  watching  the  felling  and  cutting  up  of  timber,  his  wife  and 
children  at  home  heard  the  chopping  and  splitting  of  wood  in  the  cellar.  On  the  16th  of 
September  they  were  astonished  by  the  hopping  and  daricing  of  an  apple,  which  came 
flying  downstairs  against  the  house  door,  and  passed  by  M.  Joller  in  the  passage  at  several 
bounds  into  the  kitchen.  The  servant,  busy  at  her  cooking  stove,  seized  it,  and  laid  it  on 
the  kitchen  table,  when  it  soon  sprung  away  and  hopped  into  the  passage.  The  girl 
seized  it  again,  and  flung  it  through  the  window,  but  it  soon  came  flying  back  through  the 
same  window,  bounded  on  the  table,  thence  into  the  passage,  the  sitting-room,  and  finally 
into  the  adjoining  chamber,  when  it  flew  into  a  corner  and  remained  quiet.  A  pear 
descended  from  the  ceiling,  near  M.  Joller,  with  such  force  as  to  lie  smashed  on  the  floor. 
Other  pieces  of  pear  were  flung  at  the  girls  while  at  work,  and  hung  in  their  hair  nets. 

"  The  family  were  repeatedly  assailed  with  showers  of  stones,  both  in  the  house  and  in 
the  garden.  At  twelve  o'clock  in  the  day,  while  at  the  well,  a  shower  of  stones  fell  round 
one  of  the  daughters  without  any  striking  her,  and  at  the  same  time  a  sharp-edged  wall 
stone  fell  down  the  kitchen  chimney,  striking  the  lid  of  a  pan  on  the  fire,  and  then  falling 
to  the  floor  without  bringing  a  trace  of  soot  with  it.  A  knitting  needle  took  to  flying 
about  from  room  to  room,  and  being  thrown  out  into  the  garden,  it  flew  back  again. 
There  were  continually  sounds  of  humming  and  spinning  wheels,  and  the  drawing  up  of 
clock  chains.  On  the  16th  of  September  a  voice  deep  and  groaning,  said  distinctly,  as  out 
of  the  wall :  "  Jetzt  homme  ich  nimmer  " — "  Now  I  come  no  more  !  "  but  it  did  not  keep 
its  word,  or  other  actors  stayed  behind,  for  more  variety  of  annoyances  were  played  off 
than  can  be  here  enumerated. 

"  During  all  this  time  the  unceremonious  intrusion  of  people  continued,  so  that  there 
could  be  no  domestic  privacy,  neither  could  the  family  affairs,  or  the  legal  business  of  M. 
Joller  go  on.  He  was,  therefore,  compelled  to  seek  another  home,  and  abandon  this,  his 
natal  one,  on  the  22nd  of  October,  1862. 

"  Sach  is  a  brief  notice  of  M.  Joller's  case,  undoubtedly,  taken  altogether,  the  most 
extraordinary  which  has  occurred  of  late  years.  In  closing  it,  he  says,  that  a  great  many 
similar  ones,  but  none  so  outrageous  have  been  brought  to  his  knowledge  by  persons  of 
the  moat  unquestionable  character.  That  he  could  cite  a  long  catalogue  of  witnesses  of 
his  unhappy  spirit-persecution,  but  that  it  is  too  notorious  to  need  it.    The  house,  he  says. 

NINE  TEE  NTH  _  CENTUR  V   MIR  A  CLES.  389 

stood  empty  till  the  following  spring,  when  he  succeeded  in  letting  it,  and  that  up  to 
the  time  of  his  writing  this  account,  nothing  particular  had  disturbed  the  new  tenant, 
nor  had  the  troublers  followed  him.  It  may  be  conceived  what  a  serious  affair  it  had 
proved  to  him  in  interruption  of  business  and  family  life,  in  loss  of  peace  of  mind,  and  in 
infliction  of  censorious  remarks.  The  nuisance  of  the  invading  crowd  must,  of  itself,  have 
been  intolerable  ;  for  when  compelled  to  lock  his  doors  against  them,  they  procured 
ladders  and  broke  in  at  his  chamber  window. 

"  The  most  striking  feature  of  M.  Joller's  case  is  the  entire  ignorance  of  the  nature  of 
haunting  spirits  both  by  M.  Joller,  the  police,  and  the  clergy  of  the  neighbourhood.  As 
for  M.  Joller,  evidently  a  Catholic  by  faith,  he  seems  to  have  had  no  idea  of  getting  rid  of 
his  persecutors  by  prayers  and  earnest  appeal  to  the  God  of  all  spirits.  A  worthy  man, 
he  goes  on  suffering,  and  is  actually  driven  from  his  home,  without  an  idea  that  these 
troublesome  guests  might  have  been  sent  away  instead.  These  were  evidently  unhappy 
spirits  seeking  aid  from  the  first  mediums  they  could  meet  with.  They  found  these  in  M. 
Joller's  house  ;  but  they  were  mediums  without  that  knowledge  which  mediums  instructed 
by  Spiritualism  possess.  These  unhappy  souls  were  repeatedly  heard  sobbing  and  groaning 
and  exclaiming,  ' Erbarmet  euch  meiner /'  'Have  mercy  on  me  !'  They  wanted  the 
prayers  and  good  offices  of  M.  Joller  and  his  family,  and  failing  to  make  them  comprehend 
this,  they  grew  desperate  ;  the  worst  instead  of  the  best  feelings  of  then*  natures  were 
excited,  and  in  their  rage  at  being  able  to  make  these  mediums  perceive  but  not  to  under- 
stand them,  they  grew  to  resemble  fiends  in  their  wild  passions  rather  than  miserable 
supplicants.  The  consequence  was  that  instead  of  being  soothed  by  sympathy  and  gently 
dismissed  on  an  upward  course,  as  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst  often  dismissed  such,  M.  Joller 
was  most  unnecessarily  driven  from  his  own  long-loved  hearth.  M.  Joller,  with  all  his 
worth  and  secular  knowledge,  is,  in  fact,  the  victim  of  ignorance — and  a  standing  warn- 
ing to  men  of  education  to  pay  some  little  attention  to  the  psychological  facts  that  are 
daily  rising  around  them. 

"  It  is  satisfactory  to  see  that  a  learned  professor  of  one  of  the  Swiss  Colleges  has 
prefaced  M.  Joller's  pamphlet  by  an  assertion  of  the  truth  and  the  real  nature  of  these 
phenomena,  and  contends  that  it  is  the  duty  of  psychology  and  natural  science,  not  to 
ignore  these  frequent  facts,  but  to  throw  fresh  light  on  them  by  honest  enquiry." 

CHAPTER     XL  VIII. 

SPIRITUALISM.  IN      ITALY. 

Were  Spirit  communion  still  fettered  by  the  chains  of  superstition  thrown 
around  it  during  the  early  and  middle  ages  of  human  history,  no  land  would 
afford  a  wider  or  fairer  field  Jor  occult  research  than  beautiful  Italy. 

The  sunny  skies,  lovely  scenery,  and  memorable  history  of  Italy,  naturally 
impress  its  people  with  a  sentiment  of  romanticism  peculiarly  favourable  to 
the  reception  of  Spiritualistic  beliefs  and  teachings. 

In  all  lands  too,  overlaid  with  the  vestiges  of  ancient  civilizations  there 
seems  to  be  an  imperishable  aura  of  Magnetism  which  renders  the  very 
ground,  and  every  object  it  sustains,  Mediumistic. 

Every  foot  of  Italian  soil  is  charged  with  the  emanations  of  vanished 
generations.  Rome  has  her  catacombs  in  the  streets  as  well  as  beneath 
them,  Milan,  Pisa,  Florence,  once  stately  Venice,  and — in  a  word — every 
city  and  town  of  this  memorable  country,  is  a  "psychometric"  record 
engraved  with  -images  conserved  in  "  the  Astral  light,"  which  has  been 
accumulating  during  the  succeeding  generations  of  more  than  two  thousand 
years. 

It  scarcely  needs  the  clear  eye  of  the  Spirit  to  recall  these  images  into 
undying  existence.  Their  mark  remains  in  the  conglomerate  sphere  which 
pervades  the  air,  and  vibrates  beneath  every  footfall.  Well  may  the  modern 

39° 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

traveller  feel  the  impress  of  ancient  Italy  closing  around  him,  and  envelop- 
ing him  in  the  mysterious  shadows  of  the  past ;  and  this,  even  when  his  own 
imaginative  nature  affords  him  no  scope  for  expressing  the  strange  mournful 
influences  which  weigh  upon  his  spirit,  or  the  awe  which  possesses  him  as 
the  forms  which  he  knows  to  be  commingled  with  the  dust  beneath  his  feet, 
seem  to  start  into  life  from  every  gray  ruin,  and  reappear  in  the  indelible 
photography  impressed  on  every  vestige  of  the  past,  by  the  sunbeam  of 
long  succeeding  ages. 

Our  part  in  this  volume  however  is  to  deal  with  the  mere  actualities  of 
life,  both  here  and  hereafter,  as  revealed  through  the  rifts  of  that  veil  of 
mystery — now  happily  rent  in  twain — which  has  so  long  enshrouded  the 
soul's  destiny  beyond  "  the  valley  of  the  shadow." 

Speaking  then  only  of  the  Italy  of  to-day,  we  find  that  the  phenomena 
of  modern  Spiritualism  were  believed  in  amongst  many  well  informed 
Italians,  long  before  any  notice  was  called  to  the  subject  in  the  public  press. 
It  would  be  difficult  at  this  time  to  say  when  or  with  whom  modern 
Spiritualism  originated  in  Italy,  but  one  of  the  earliest  public  accounts  that 
was  given  of  its  progress  was — as  usual — a  bulletin  issued  from  the  enemies' 
camp. 

This  appeared  in  the  form  of  an  article  printed  in  the  well-known 
Roman  journal.  La  Civitta  Catholica. 

The  article  in  question  was  entitled,  "Modern  Necromancy,"  and  after 
describing  with  remarkable  candour  the  wide-spread  influence  which  the 
said  necromantic  practices  had  obtained,  and  that,  "  in  the  best  society  of 
Italy,"  the  editor  proceeded  to  draw  the  conclusions,  of  which  the  following 
is  an  almost  literal  translation  : — 

"1st.  Some  of  the  phenomena  may  be  attributed  to  imposture,  hallucination,  and 
exaggeration  in  the  reports  of  those  who  describe  it,  but  there  is  a  foundation  of  reality 
in  the  general  sum  of  the  reports  which  cannot  have  originated  in  pure  invention  or  be 
wholly  discredited  without  ignoring  the  value  of  universal  testimony. 

"  2nd.  The  bulk  of  the  theories  offered  in  explanation  of  the  proven  facts,  only  cover 
a  certain  percentage  of  those  facts,  but  utterly  fail  to  account  for  the  balance 

"  3rd.  Allowing  for  all  that  can  be  filtered  away  on  mere  human  hypotheses,  there 
are  still  a  large  class  of  phenomena  appealing  to  every  sense  which  cannot  be  accounted 
for  by  any  known  natural  laws,  and  which  seem  to  manifest  the  action  of  intelligent 
!,"  &c.,  &c. 

In  the  summary  drawn  from  these  and  similar  propositions,  the  editor 
satisfies  hwiself  at  least  that  the  agency  at  work  in  the  production  of 
modern  Spiritualism  is  supra-mundane.  Spiritual,  and  diabolic;  that  "the 
author  is  Satan,  and  the  agents  his  accredited  legions,"  &c.,  &c.  Now 
whilst  this  Italian  editor's  theory  had  not  even  the  merit  of  novelty  to 
recommend  it,  certain  it  is,  that  its  publication  was  most  apropos  and 
subserved  all  the  purpose  that  the  warmest  Spiritual  propagandist  could 
desire.  It  was  copied  into  most  of  the  leading  journals  of  Italy,  and  formed 
the  best  circulating  Medium  that  the  occasion  could  have  called  for. 

In  all  probabihty  the  diatribes  of  the  aforesaid  editor  were  principally 
directed  against  the  friends  and  converts  of  the  celebrated  European 
Medium,  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  who  had  visited  Italy  in  1854,  and  after 
spending  some  time  in  Florence,  Rome,  and  Naples,  had  been  feted, 
courted,  and  honoured  by  many  of  the  most  distinguished  royal  and  noble 
potentates  of  the  land. 

Although  Mr.  Home  does  not  dwell  on  his  Italian  experiences  at  any 
great  length  in  his  autobiography,  the  influence  he  exerted  made  a  deep 
and  permanent  mark  upon  the  society  he  left  behind. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  391 

Shortly  after  Mr.  Home's  departure,  circles  were  formed  in  numeroQS 
families  of  distinction.  Societies  for  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena 
were  organized,  in  which  many  persons  renowned  for  learning  and  Hterary 
attainments  took  part,  whilst  Mr.  Home's  friends  and  enemies  both 
became  entangled  in  journalistic  controversies,  which  kept  the  subject 
constantly  before  the  public.  Meantime,  reports  of  strange  phenomena 
occurring  spontaneously  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  filled  the  columns 
of  the  journals,  and  continued  to  keep  interest  in  the  sulDJect  at  fever  heat. 
Within  the  very  shadow  of  the  Pontifical  walls  at  Rome,  a  notorious  case 
of  bell  ringing  occurred  which  baffled  all  the  efforts  of  the  police  to  account 
for.  When  the  law  failed,  priestly  exorcism  was  tried  and  proved  equally 
inefficacious.  The  annoyance  ceased  as  mysteriously  as  it  commenced, 
but  was  immediately  succeeded  by  reports  of  unaccountable  stone  throwings 
occurring  in  three  different  parts  of  the  city  of  Rome,  and  on  the  premises 
of  persons,  whose  good  standing  in  society,  precluded  all  idea  of  deception 
or  fraud.  Whilst  the  public  mind  was  being  strongly  exercised  on  these 
disturbances,  whilst  priestly  exhortations  were  contributing  to  excite  attention 
by  imploring  the  people  "  to  resist  the  wiles  of  Satan,"  and  tidings  were 
circulated  of  similar  occurrences  at  Naples,  Palermo,  and  Florence,  a 
strong  Spiritual  impulse  was  given  to  the  subject  by  the  publication  of  a 
paper  issued  at  Geneva  by  Dr.  Pietro  Gatti  and  Signor  B.  E.  Manieri, 
entitled  //  A?nore  del  Vero. 

In  this  journal  the  editors  republished  accounts  of  the  Spiritual  move- 
ment, as  it  was  transpiring  in  America,  France,  and  England. 

As  Dr.  Gatti,  the  chief  editor,  was  known  to  be  a  man  of  probity  and 
sound  sense,  holding  moreover  the  responsible  position  of  director  of  the 
Homoeopathic  Hospital  at  Geneva,  the  immense  flood  of  testimony  that  was 
disseminated  through  his  journal,  served  materially  to  deepen  public  interest 
on  the  subject  of  Spiritual  manifestations. 

Against  this  tide  of  constantly  increasing  enthusiasm,  the  anathemas  of 
the  Church  and  the  sneers  of  the  press  made  no  headway ;  in  point  of  fact, 
the  reiterated  thunders  of  ecclesiasticism  only  served  to  awaken  the  people 
to  a  sense  of  its  imbecihty,  and  show  the  resistless  strength  of  the  power 
against  which  the  clergy  launched  their  impotent  threats. 

Those  who  have  beheld  with  astonishment,  the  political  battle  for  freedom 
waged  so  successfully  on  Itahan  soil,  little  know  that  some  of  the  noblest 
soldiers  in  this  grand  patriotic  warfare,  were  Spiritualists,  and  that  it  was 
from  the  communications  of  mighty  and  exalted  Spirits,  that  such  men  as 
Victor  Emmanuel,  Garibaldi,  and  their  compatriots,  received  some  of  their 
wisest  and  most  encouraging  counsels.  It  is  now  no  longer  a  secret,  that 
many  eminent  Italian  reformers  of  the  day  were  and  are  Spiritualists. 
When  the  eye  of  the  soul  shall  behold  no  longer  "as  in  a  glass  darkly  "  but 
face  to  face  with  actual  truth,  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  great  lever  of  all  the 
reforms  that  are  agitating  the  social,  political,  and  religious  arenas  of  human 
thought,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  has  been  SpirituaUsm,  and  that  in  its 
subtle  but  irresistible  appeals  to  consciousness  and  reason,  the  age  has 
moved  forward  centuries  in  advance  of  the  past. 

In  the  spring  of  1863,  a  society  was  formed  at  Palerm.o,  entitled  //  Societa 
Spiritista  di  Palermo.  The  president  was  Signor  J.  V.  Paleologo.  Signor 
Paolo  Morello,  professor  of  history  and  philosophy,  became  with  many 
others  of  equal  standing,  members  of  this  society,  and  a  regular  organ, 
besides  many  publications  of  interest,  were  put  forth  under  its  auspices. 

In  March,  1864,  the  attention  of  the  Genevese  public  was  attracted  to 

392  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  case  of  a  young  girl  residing  in  Hospital  Street,  who  for  several  weeks 
was  followed  by  the  phenomena  of  loud  poundings  and  stone  throwing. 
The  police  were  appealed  to.  The  house  was  guarded  within  and  without, 
and  though  the  spectators  who  watched  the  girl's  residence  from  the  roofs 
of  adjoining  houses,  could  see  the  stones  flying,  and  those  within  the  dwel- 
ing  were  pelted  with  them,  the  agents  were  all  invisible  and  never  discovered. 
As  is  customary  in  such  cases,  the  daily  publication  of  the  attendant 
circumstances,  drew  forth  accounts  of  similar  occurrences  all  over  Italy. 
Dr.  Gatti  called  attention  in  his  journal  to  one  phenomenon  however,  which 
we  venture  to  allege  accompanies  nearly  every  well  authenticated  narrative 
of  stone  throwing,  and  that  was  the  total  absence  of  any  personal  injury 
occurring  from  the  missiles  thrown.  "Whilst  the  stones  were  flying  thickly 
in  every  direction,"  says  Dr.  Gatti,  "no  one  was  struck,  although  the  said 
stones  often  fell  within  a  few  inches  of  the  observers."  The  church  may 
scream  "  Demoniac  !"  as  long  as  it  will.  Let  it  point  to  any  mob  of  human 
stone  throwers  who  would  be  thus  careful  to  avoid  injury  to  their  fellow 
mortals  ;  or  any  mortal  ruffian  who  would  not  aim  the  stone  for  the  express 
purpose  of  committing  injury  rather  than  avoiding  it  ! 

If  this  be  so,  and  the  histories  of  Spiritualism  and  humanity  running  in 
parallel  lines  clearly  prove  it,  then  let  the  Church  graciously  inform  us 
which  class  best  deserves  the  name  of  "  demons,"  the  Christian  rioters  who 
throw  stones  for  the  purpose  of  murder,  or  the  Spirits  whose  only  object  is 
to  compel  attention  to  the  fact  of  their  existence  ?  If  the  Church  had  only 
had  a  few  facts,  as  tangible  as  the  falling  of  a  pebble,  to  prove  its  assertions 
instead  of  making  assertions  without  a  particle  of  fact  to  prove  them,  it 
would  not  require  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  world  to  offer  such  striking 
proofs  of  their  continued  existence,  as  stone  throwing. 

It  was  about  the  autumn  of  1864,  that  lectures  were  first  given  on 
Spiritualistic  subjects  in  Italy.  They  were  started  in  Leghorn  and  Messina, 
and  though  bf  a  very  mixed  character,  and  often  partaking  largely  of  the 
lecturer's  peculiar  idiosyncrasies  on  religious  subjects,  they  served  to  draw 
attention  to  the  upheaval  of  thought  going  on  in  all  directions,  in  connec- 
tion with  the  revelations  from  the  Spirit  world.  It  could  not  be  expected 
that  a  movement  so  startling  and  unprecedented  as  that  which  opened  up 
a  direct  communion  between  the  natural  and  the  Spiritual  worlds  could 
gain  ground  in  public  acceptance  without  waking  up  all  the  latent  elements 
of  enthusiasm,  fanaticism,  ignorance,  and  bigotry,  which  prevailed  in  the 
Italian  as  in  every  other  community.  In  a  word,  Spiritualism  seems  to 
have  acted  like  the  summer  sunbeam,  stirring  up  malaria  and  fever  from 
the  fetid  dust  heap,  and  kindUng  into  bloom  and  beauty  the  slumbering  life 
of  the  blossom.  "  It  is  a  hothouse  process,"  says  the  author's  most  trusted 
Spirit  guide,  "  which  creates  nothing,  but  quickens  into  abnormal  activity, 
the  latent  germs  of  all  that  is  in  humanity  whether  for  good  or  evil." 

In  the  year  1870,  there  had  been  over  a  hundred  different  societies 
formed,  with  varying  success,  in  different  parts  of  Italy.  Two  of  the  most 
prominent  flourishing  at  that  date  were  conducted  in  Naples,  and  according 
to  the  French  journal,  the  Revue  Spirite,  represented  the  two  opposing 
schools  which  have  prevailed  in  Continental  Spiritualism,  namely,  the  "  Re- 
incarnationists "  whom  we  have  before  classified  as  "  Spiritists,"  and 
the  *•  Immortalists,"  or  those  known  in  America  and  England  merely  as 
"  Spiritualists." 

About  1868,  an  immense  impulse  was  communicated  to  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism— at  least  in  the  higher  strata  of  Italian  society — by  the  visit  of 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  393 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Guppy  to  Naples,  at  which  place  they  took  up  their  residence 
for  two  or  three  years. 

Mrs.  Guppy — nee  Miss  Nichol — of  London,  was  renowned  throughout 
Europe  for  her  marvellous  powers  as  a  "  physical  force  Medium,"  and  as 
Mr.  Guppy's  wealth  and  social  standing  enabled  him  to  place  his  gifted 
wife's  services  at  the  command  of  the  distinguished  and  princely  visitors 
who  crowded  his  salons,  it  soon  became  a  matter  of  notoriety  that  the 
highest  magnates  of  the  land,  including  King  Victor  Emmanuel  and  many  of 
his  nearest  friends  and  counsellors,  had  yielded  conviction  to  the  truth  of 
the  astounding  phenomena  exhibited  through  Mrs.  Guppy's  Mediumship. 

It  was  about  the  year  1863,  that  Spiritualism  began  to  enjoy  the  advan- 
tage of  fair  and  honourable  representation  in  the  columns  of  a  new  paper 
entitled,  the  Annali  dello  Spiritismo,  or  "  Annals  of  Spiritualism."  This 
excellent  journal — now  in  its  twentieth  or  twenty-first  year — was  commenced 
at  Turin,  and  published  by  Signor  Niceforo  Filalete,  with  all  the  liberality, 
energy,  and  talent  worthy  alike  of  the  subject  and  its  noble  editor. 

From  the  columns  of  the  Annali  we  learn  that  a  Venetian  Society  of 
Spiritualists,  named  "  Atea,"  elected  the  illustrious  General  Giuseppe  Gari- 
baldi their  honorary  president,  and  received  the  following  reply  by  telegraph 
from  the  distinguished  hero,  the  liberator  of  Italy  :  "  I  gratefully  accept  the 
presidency  of  the  Society  Atea.     Caprera,  23rd  September." 

The  same  issue  of  the  Annali  contains  a  verbatim  report  of  "  a  grand 
discourse  "  given  at  Florence,  by  a  distinguished  literary  gentleman,  Signor 
Sebastiano  Fenzi,  in  which  the  listeners  were  considerably  astonished  by  a 
rehearsal  of  the  many  illustrious  names  of  those  who — in  Europe — openly 
avowed  their  faith  in  Spiritualism. 

The  years  1863-4  appear  to  have  been  rich  in  Spiritualistic  efforts.  Besides 
a  large  number  of  minor  associations,  the  existence  of  which  was  recorded 
from  time  to  time  in  the  early  numbers  of  the  Annali  and  Revue  Spirite,  a 
society  which  continued  for  a  long  time  to  exSrt  a  marked  influence  in 
promoting  the  study  of  occult  forces  and  phenomena,  was  formed  about 
this  time  in  Florence,  under  the  caption  of  "The  Magnetic  Society  of 
Florence."  The  members  of  this  association  were  without  exception 
persons  remarkable  for  literary  and  scientific  attainments,  or  those  of  high 
influential  position  in  society. 

The  following  is  a  fair  translation  of  the  rules,  &c.,  which  were  printed 
and  circulated  in  all  directions  : — 

"  The  object  of  the  Society  is  to  aid  in  the  study  and  application  of  animal  magnetism, 
and  of  all  that  is  connected  with  it. 

"  The  Society  does  not  wish  to  occupy  itself  in  persuading  the  incredulous,  in  exposing 
theories,  or  in  polemical  discussions.  It  only  offers  a  po'actical  field  where  each  one  may 
verify  and  produce  for  himself  the  well-known  phenomena  of  magnetism,  and  apply  them 
gratuitously  to  the  moral  and  physical  relief  of  mankind.  Assembling  without  any 
ambition,  and  under  the  form  of  simple  conversation,  it  will  not  have  any  permanent 
ofl&cer,  excepting  a  general  secretary  to  keep  the  minutes  of  the  association,  to  direct 
the  correspondence,  and  to  receive  subscriptions. 

"  The  subscription  will  be  two  livres,  Italian  money,  per  month  for  each  member, 
leaving  him  free  to  continue,  to  suspend,  or  to  renew  his  subscription. 

"  In  each  week  two  meetings  will  be  held,  the  first  exclusively  for  the  study  and 
application  of  magnetism,  the  second  for  the  study  and  development  of  so-called 
Spiritualism  by  the  help  of  all  that  occurs  in  magnetism. 

"  Those  who  desire  instruction  in  the  practice  of  magnetism  will  have  it  under  the 
direction  of  an  experienced  magnetizer. 

"  When  they  have  acquired  the  necessary  power  to  exercise  it  freely,  a  certificate  to 
that  effect  will  be  given  by  a  committee  to  be  appointed  for  the  purpose. 

"  All  who  wish  for  consultation,  or  to  seek  a  cure  by  means  of  magnetism  under  the 

394  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

direction  of  a  medical  man  chosen  by  themselves,  will  have  gratuitous  attendance.  As 
soon  as  there  shall  be  a  sufiBcient  number  of  members,  the  Society  will  be  formed,  and 
each  will  receive  a  letter  of  invitation  for  the  first  meeting. 

"  All  demands  for  admission  and  for  further  information  must  be  directed  per  letter, 
post  free,  to  '  La  Societk  Magnetica  di  Fiorenze.'  May,  1863." 

At  this  time  there  resided  in  Florence,  a  gentleman  whose  name  was 
very  famiUar  to  the  early  investigators  in  Spiritualism,  Mr.  Seymour  Kirkup. " 
Mr.  Kirkup's  communications  and  records  of  phenomena,  especially  such 
as  were  frequently  printed  in  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine,  will  ever  be 
remembered  with  interest  and  admiration. 

Mr.  Kirkup  was  a  profound  student  of  magnetism  some  years  in  advance  of 
the  Magnetic  Society's  formation  at  Florence,  and  as  his  experiences  graphi- 
cally delineate  the  gradations,  from  human  to  Spiritual  magnetism, 
and  the  unfoldment  of  that  higher  clairvoyance,  which  quits  the  realms  of 
earth  to  ascend  into  those  of  the  life  beyond,  we  shall  give  the  reader  the 
benefit  of  one  of  Mr,  Kirkup's  instructive  papers,  written  for  the  London 
Spiritual  Magazine  in  1863.     The  writer  says  : — 

"  The  following  is  my  first  perfect  and  convincing  proof  of  the  existence  of  spirits : — 
"  My  medium  had  been  about  two  months  in  training  as  a  somnamhule,  when  she  was 
alarmed  by  a  vision,  although  one  very  beautiful — the  figure  of  a  young  child  floating  in 
the  air.  Her  alarm  was  owing  to  its  coming  too  close  to  her.  Dr.  Barzellini  and  Professor 
Verati,  who  were  with  me,  and  gave  me  instructions  in  magnetizing,  drove  it  away 
by  transverse  passes  and  blowing.  They  said  that  such  fantastic  dreams  would  be 
injurious  to  her  lucidity.  This  happened  two  or  three  times,  but  one  day  when  they  were 
not  present,  I  asked  her  if  it  really  could  do  harm,  for  I  suspected  that  my  professor's 
judgment  might  be  less  certain  than  her  own,  which  had  already  begun  to  be  very  clair- 
voyant. She  answered  no,  and  on  the  contrary,  it  would  be  a  great  assistance,  and  as  her 
fears  had  left  her,  I  determined  to  encourage  and  assist  the  visits  of  this  spirit,  who 
declared  himself  to  be  her  angelo  custode — and  so  he  proved.  This  was  on  the  27th  of 
July,  1854.  On  the  5th  of  January  the  following  year,  Professor  Puliti  was  present  whilst 
she  slept,  making  some  experiments  on  her  with  galvanism  ;  I  asked  him  if  he  had  heard 
of  the  rappings  in  America,  android  him  I  was  in  doubt  respecting  some  noises  in  my  own 
house,  and  I  related  what  had  happened,  as  foUows : — One  day,  wliile  I  was  writing, 
Regina  and  her  httle  sister  came  running  in  from  the  next  room,  where  they  were  sitting 
at  work  :  they  were  in  the  greatest  alarm  from  a  noise  of  blows  against  the  door  of  an  ante- 
room, which  was  closed,  and  they  feared  thieves  were  in  the  house.  We  opened  the  door, 
and  examined  every  corner  in  the  room,  and  the  rest  of  the  house,  under  all  the  furniture, 
inside  closets,  and  even  drawers,  behind  doors,  &c.  ;  nothing  was  discovered,  and  I  tried 
to  persuade  them  they  were  deceived,  and  that  the  noise  was  in  the  street,  or  some  other 
part  of  the  house.  I  did  not  succeed,  and  they  remained  positive.  However,  Regina  was 
twice  alarmed  at  her  mother's  house  shortly  afterwards.  I  told  the  professor  all  this  ;  he 
said,  '  Why  do  you  not  ask  her  and  her  spirit,  now  that  she  is  in  the  magnetic  sleep  ? '  I 
told  her  to  ask  her  guardian-spirit :  she  did  so.  '  Eccolo,  behold  him,'  he  said.  She 
declared  that  she  saw  a  man — certainly  a  Florentine — she  thought  she  knew  his  face,  but 
could  not  recal  him  to  her  memory.  '  Ask  him  his  name.'  No  answer.  'Ask  your  angel.' 
He  answered,  '  Giuseppe.'  The  truth  struck  my  mind,  but  not  hers.  I  told  her  to  ask 
his  surname,  as  Giuseppe  is  so  common.  She  did,  and  kept  looking  up  intently  ; 
presently  she  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears,  throwing  up  her  arms,  as  about  the  neck  of  the 
person  she  saw  in  the  air.  '  Oh,  it  is  my  father,  my  poor  father  ! '  She  did  not  remember 
him  at  first.  He  had  been  murdered  in  the  street  six  years  before,  when  she  was  a  child, 
and  she  thought  him  much  changed  and  thinner.  The  crying  brought  on  convulsions, 
and  we  wanted  to  send  him  away  ;  she  begged  us  not,  but  as  he  promised  to  return  and 
the  convulsions  increased,  I  dismissed  him.  When  she  recovered  I  awoke  her  ;  she 
remembered  nothing,  and  we  did  not  tell  her.  The  next  day  her  spirit  was  accompanied 
by  her  father,  whom  she  now  knew,  and  saw  without  her  former  excessive  grief.  She 
asked  him  if  it  was  he  who  had  rapped  at  that  door — 'Yes' — and  why  ?  He  wanted  to 
speak  to  her.  Why  did  he  not  ?  Because  she  was  so  frightened.  '  Will  you  knock  again 
if  I  am  not  alarmed?'  'Yes.'  '  And  in  the  presence  of  Seymour  ? '  'Yes.'  'When?' 
'  On  Thursday.'  '  And  at  what  hour  ?'  'At  the  Ave  Maria.'  When  she  awoke  I  did  not 
tell  her  of  this,  for  fear  she  should  mention  it  to  the  Italians,  and  in  order  not  to  alarm 
her  at  the  idea  of  a  ghost.      Up  to  this  time  I  had  no  belief  in  the  existence  of  spirits. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  395 

Her  visious  might  be  mere  dreams  or  imposture  for  what  I  could  tell ;  my  own  experience 
had  reached  nothing  beyond  witnessing  the  phenomena  common  to  magnetism,  very 
wonderful  certainly,  but  not  owing  to  the  agency  of  spirits.  I  was  curious  to  see  whether 
her  father  would  keep  his  promise  to  me,  but  I  did  not  much  expect  it.  I  went  into  the 
room  appointed,  having  thoroughly  searched  the  room  adjoining,  and  bolted  every  door, 
and  so  secured  them  all  that  no  person  could  possibly  enter .  I  was  fully  aware  that  any 
imperfect  precaution  made  the  experiment  entirely  useless.  I  asked  her  to  come  and  sit 
down  at  a  distance  from  the  door  at  the  other  end  of  the  room,  which  is  very  large,  above 
30  feet  square  ;  I  had  a  paper  to  make  notes,  and  a  candle,  as  it  was  getting  dusk.  I  was 
placing  it  on  the  table  near  the  door,  expecting  nothing  at  that  moment,  as  I  believed 
I  was  some  minutes  too  soon,  when  I  was  startled  by  a  tremendous  blow  on  the 
door  close  to  me  ;  it  was  as  loud  as  a  gun.  Regina  ran  out  of  the  room  screaming. 
I  followed  her,  and  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  persuading  her  to  return,  which 
at  last  she  did  with  me,  but  she  cried  with  terror.  I  brought  her  to  the  dreaded 
door  with  safety,  and  we  listened — she  said,  ' Sento  gente'  (I  hear  people.)  I  told 
her  to  ask  who  was  there — if  her  angel  ? — no  answer — if  her  father  ?  '  Yes.'  'Why  did 
you  knock V  'I  wished  you  to  hear  me  and  to  tell  you  something.'  '  Can  you  tell 
me  now?'     'No.'     I  had  told  her  what  to  ask,  and  she  told  me  the  answers.     I  heard  the 

sound  of  his  voice,  but  could  not  distinguish  all  the  words,  being  partially  deaf 

The  spirit  gave  her  his  message  ;  it  was  to  tell  her  brother  to  treat  their  poor  old  mother 
with  more  respect  and  kindness,  and  to  leave  off  swearing.      He  was  a  mauvais  sujet,  aa 

bad  as  Regina  was  good.     I  afterwards  had  manifestations  by  hundreds My 

Journal  has  been  continued  to  the  present  day,  and  it  now  fiUs  six  volumes.  Many 
prodigies  have  taken  place  in  my  house  ;  the  spirits  of  four  living  persons  have  appeared. 
Some  spirits  have  been  seen  by  my  mediums  awaJce  as  well  as  asleep,  and  some  by  myself. 
But  the  most  remarkable  of  these  manifestations  are  the  numerous  Apports,  as  the  French 
call  them,  which  have  taken  place  here — presents  of  all  sorts,  which  we  value  highly, 
brought  to  us  and  preserved  by  us  with  care,  and  others  which  we  gave  in  return — rings, 
lockets,  &c.,  which  have  been  carried  away  out  of  inaccessible,  locked-up,  and  sealed  rooms 

(only  a  window  open),  and  brought  back  by  appointment  by  the  spirits 

"  1,309,  Ponte  Vecchio,  Florence."  "Seymohe  Kibkup." 

Mr.  Kirkup's  experiences  were  continued  through  many  years  and  their 
publication  was  always  a  source  of  instruction  as  well  as  pleasure  t"o  his 
readers. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  however  that  our  space  forbids  further  reprints  of  his 
valuable  contributions. 

About  ten  years  after  the  establishment  of  the  Magnetic  Society  of 
Florence,  another  was  formed  in  the  same  city,  chiefly  by  the  efforts  of  the 
Baron  Guitera  de  Bozzi,  an  eminent  and  enthusiastic  Spiritualist,  who 
conducted  the  affairs  of  the  society  with  zeal  and  energy  until  the  period  of 
his  decease.  This  association  bore  the  pretentious  title  of  T/te  Pneumato- 
logical  Psychological  Academy  of  Florence. 

After  the  departure  of  the  moving  spirit  for  the  higher  Hfe,  the  most 
strenuous  efforts  were  made  to  maintain  the  ''Academy"  on  its  former 
flourishing  basis,  but  though  Signer  Fenzi  and  many  earnest  Spiritualists 
exerted  themselves  to  this  effect,  "the  Florentine  Academy"  became  a 
thing  of  the  past,  although  as  z.  piece  de  circonstance,  its  actual  value  to  the 
movement  was  timely  and  effective. 

The  following  slight  sketch  of  Spirit  circles  in  Italy  will  be  read  with 
interest,  first,  because  it  may  be  taken  as  a  representation  of  the  mode  in 
which  the  belief  was  propagated  in  private  gatherings,  and  next  because  it 
displays  in  its  best  form,  the  cherished  doctrine  of  the  "  Re-incarnationists," 
whose  curious  beliefs  obtained  much  favour  amongst  those  Continental 
"  Spiritists,"  who  could  find  little  or  no  other  literature  in  the  French 
language,  save  the  writings  of  Allan  Kardec. 

The  sketch  was  written  by  the  Reverend  Thomas  Colley,  whose  lucid 
and  valuable  contributions  to  the  English  Spiritual  journals  cannot  be  too 
gratefully  acknowledged.     Mr.  Colley's  paper  is  headed 

396  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  SPIRITUALISM    IN    ITALY. 
"  BY   THE    REV.    THOMAS   COLLEY,   TEMPORARY   CHAPLAIN   AT   NAPLES, 

"Temporarily  acting  as  English  chaplain  here  at  Naples,  I  have  the  pleasure  of 
studying  Continental  Spiritualism  through  the  kindness  of  Signor  Damiani,  at  whose 
house  weekly,  and  sometimes  oftener,  we  meet  the  Baroness  Cerrapica,  a  very  gifted 
trance  medium,  with  whom  the  tSignor  has,  during  the  course  of  eight  years,  had  upwards 
of  seven  hundred  sittings. 

"  Our  circle  is  a  small  one,  but  almost  always  includes  a  dignitary  of  the  Roman 
Church,  who,  with  our  host,  takes  an  active  part  in  social  converse  with  the  invisible 
powers  that  speak  through  the  Baroness.  These  are  numerous  beyond  calculation,  and 
as  varied  as  they  are  many  ;  and  the  linguistical  endowments  of  the  Signor,  and  the 
classical  attainments  of  the  Canon,  are  frequently  in  demand  to  put  the  circle  intelligently 
en  rapport  with  the  mental  identities  that  speak  through  the  medium.  Three  of  the 
domestics  also  of  the  Signer's  household  are  mediums,  and  one,  when  present,  sometimes 
clairvoyantly  perceives,  and  in  a  whisper  describes,  the  control  that  is  about  to  manifest 
through  the  Baroness. 

"  One  peculiarity  about  this  lady's  mediumship  is,  that  the  voices,  mind,  inner  thought, 
and  outer  manner  of  persons  yet  living  sometimes  come  through  her — the  dramatic 
creation  to  the  Ufe  of  persons  she  has  never  known. 

"  Another  characteristic  is,  that  unhappy  spirits  are  suEfered  to  take  control,  and  state 
their  miserable  case  ;  and  then  the  Canon,  leading  them  in  prayer,  directs  their  minds 
upward,  so  that  they  appear  manifestly  to  progress,  and  after  two  or  three  devotional 
seances  are  marvellously  changed. 

"  But  controls  of  the  highest  order,  sublime  in  look  and  manner,  with  sweetness  and 
dignity  combined,  have  the  normal  possession  of  our  friend.  Conversation  with  them  is 
sweet  indeed,  and  most  instructive.  The  problems  of  this  'and  the  higher  life  are 
canvassed,  and  a  record  is  kept  of  thesa  voices  from  beyond  (which  I  trust  Signor  Damiani 
will  publish)  ;  the  wisdom  they  convey  is  in  diction  perfect,  and  the  language  is  such  as 
Dante  might  have  used  or  Cicero  speak,  if  at  any  time  re-incarnated. 

"  For  I  must  not  omit  to  notice  that  the  doctrine  of  re-incarnation  is  upheld  and  taught 
here,  by  spirits  both  in  and  out  of  the  flesh.  The  utmost  unanimity  prevails  regarding 
this.  The  controls  through  the  Baroness  are  sometimes  astonished  to  see  in  the  person  of 
some  living  member  of  the  circle  the  re-incarnated  spirit  of  one  who  was  perhaps  their 
earth  companion  ages  back.  I  have  been  greeted  by  classical  speaking  controls,  now  as  a 
Roman  warrior  (Aniceto),  and  now  as  a  Greek  philosopher  ;  and  one  of  the  controls  was 
sorely  puzzled  a  few  weeks  ago  to  see,  in  one  of  our  company,  the  spirit  of  Aristides  the 
Just  still  tangled  up  in  parcels  of  fibrine,  albumen,  and  phosphates,  that  have  conspired 
to  build  up  the  body  of  our  living  friend  ;  and  when  the  question  was  put  as  to  the  need 
of  one  so  just  to  be  re-incarnated,  the  answer  was,  that  though  well-nigh  morally  perfect, 
yet  intellectually  it  was  to  his  benefit  that  he  should  thus  return  to  earth  once  more,  to  see, 
investigate,  apprehend,  sift,  and  mentally  develope  those  powers  that  should  balance,  with 
masculine  reason,  the  more  feminine  qualities  of  his  former  virtues.  But  this  question 
grows  under  my  hand,  and  I  must  stop  ;  for  though  it  is  a  most  interesting  speculation 
that  the  re -incarnation  of  Elijah  in  St.  John  the  Baptist  should  make  us  deal  with 
patiently  and  modestly,  yet  as  it  is  only  a  speculation  (inasmuch  as  it  lacks  the  physical 
demonstration  which  other  phases  of  Spiritualism  do  not  lack),  I  forbear. 

"  Since  writing  the  above,  and  after  our  usual  seance  with  the  Baroness  to-night,  a 
remarkable  matter  transpired.  Some  short  time  ago,  a  rustic,  patois-speaking  spirit 
manifested  through  her,  and  gave  the  name  of  Zappacosta,  saying  that  he  had  been  a 
peasant  living  on  the  estate  of  a  gentleman  present  at  our  circle,  Baron  de  Riseis.  The 
name  Zappacosta  is  as  strange  and  unusual  in  Italian  as  Hedgedigger  would  be  in  English 
(which,  by  the  way,  is  its  literal  translation  and  meaning)  and  the  Baron  knew  none  of 
his  dependents  of  such  a  name.  But  the  circle  was  further  astonished  when  the  control 
declared  that  he  had  just  been  murdered  by  his  own  brother,  at  a  place  named  on  the 
Baron's  estate  near  Chiete,  and  begged  that  our  friend  would  write  to  ascertain  the  truth 
of  his  statement.  Baron  de  Riseis  did  so,  and  this  evening,  just  as  our  sitting  was  over, 
he  came  in  vsdth  the  answer  received,  giving  an  account  of  the  sad  occurrence,  which  was 
found  to  agree  most  exactly  with  what  the  control  had  affirmed,  all  being  literally  correct. 
Then,  naturally  full  of  the  subject,  as  we  were  talking  about  it  during  supper,  the 
medium  was  again  suddenly  controlled  by  the  same  power,  and  a  request  was  preferred 
that  intercession  might  be  made  to  the  authorities  on  behalf  of  his  murderer,  and  our 
prayers  also  were  asked  on  behalf  of  the  murdered  man.  Saints  Camillus  and  Urban 
were  named  as  propitious  and  helpful  to  the  control  (suggestive  to  the  thoughtful  of  how 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  397 

the  creedal  mind — in  this  case  Roman  Catholic — survives  the  dissolution  of  the  mind's 
physical  organism),  and  the  Baron  recognised  these  as  the  patron  saints  of  the  place  where 
the  man  was  killed.  His  estate  is  across  country,  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles 
from  here,  and  the  circumstance  could  not,  unconsciously  or  otherwise,  in  any  way  have 
been  known  to  our  friend  the  medium,  the  Baroness  Cerrapica. 

"Thomas  Colley. 
"Casa  Grifeo,  Eione  Amedeo,  Naples,  July  19th,  1877." 

One  of  the  most  accomplished  as  well  as  earnest  Spiritualists  of  the 
present  day  in  Italy  is  Signor  S,  Fenzi,  a  gentleman  whose  scholarly  com- 
munications and  earnestness  in  the  cause  of  human  progress,  have 
rendered  his  name  as  familiar  and  as  much  honoured  by  English  and 
American  Spiritualists  as  by  those  of  Italian  nationality.  Besides  this 
gentleman's  reports,  the  author  has  received  from,  a  large  number  of  private 
sources,  records  of  interesting,  but  by  no  means  rare  phenomena  occurring 
in  various  families  of  distinction  in  Italy.  The  strict  charge  accompanying 
these  letters  to  withhold  the  real  names,  and  publish  initials  only,  renders 
them  wholly  unsuiled  to  a  work  of  the  nature  guaranteed  to  the  world  by 
the  author. 

A  few  noble  gentlemen  like  Count  Caprera,  of  Naples  ;  Signori  Damiani 
and  Sebastiano  Fenzi;  Count  Ricardo  of  Rome,  Viscount  Solanot,  and 
others  of  similar  charcter  and  standing,  hesitate  not  to  avow  the  belief 
which  they  know  to  be  divine  truth. 

Whatever  motives  may  prevail  to  the  contrary,  those  who  recognize 
Spirituahsm  as  the  pearl  of  price  for  which  they  can  afford  to  sacrifice 
all  the  world  besides  are  the  only  witnesses  whose  testimony  we  consider 
worth  acceptance. 

One  of  the  last  accounts  of  an  authentic  character  that  we  can  offer  to 
our  readers,  is  contained  in  a  letter  from  Count  Santini,  who  relates  many 
extraordinary  things  of  a  youth  in  whom  he  takes  a  great  interest,  named 
"  Gino  Fanciullacci,"  whom  the  Count  designates  as  an  extraordinary  writing 
Medium.  Two  or  three  less  enthusiastic  but  equally  reliable  correspon- 
dents of  the  Revue  Spirite  and  London  Mediu?n,  have  also  written  of  this 
young  "  psychic,"  and  as  their  accounts  are  more  in  accordance  with  the 
plain  statements  essential  to  deliberate  investigation  we  give  them  the 
preference  in  quotation. 

"  Senex,"  the  London  correspondent,  writes  thus  : — 

"  I  lately  told  you  of  a  young  Italian,  a  Florentine,  named  Gino  Fanciullacci,  who  had 
written  a  long  Dantesque  poem  in  the  sight  of  others,  in  broad  daylight,  '  without  blot- 
ting out  a  line,'  like  Shakespeare  with  his  plays,  as  Ben  Jonson  tells  us.  I  have  just  got 
the  book.  In  the  commencement  he  makes  the  following  '  Declaration  to  the  Reader  : — 
I  cannot  claim  the  paternity  of  this  poem,  although  it  was  written  by  me.  It  was 
dictated  to  me  by  a  spirit. — Gino  Fanciullacci.' 

"  This  book  contaias  more  than  four  hundred  pages.  It  is  written,  not  in  blank  verse, 
like  Milton's  great  works,  but  in  '  terza  rima '  or  triplet  rhyme  throughout,  like  the  works 
of  Dante.  I  have  had  a  letter  from  this  wonderful  young  medium,  who,  in  answer  to  my 
playfully  telling  him  that  he  should  not  have  told  the  world  about  the  source  of  hia 
poem,  for  that  the  world  only  likes  inspiration  at  a  distance,  returns  me  the  following 
well-deserved  and  pertinent  rebuke  : — 

'' '  I  beg  you  not  to  write  of  my  ingenuousness  in  having  announced  the  work  as  the 
product  of  a  spirit,  it  was  my  duty  to  speak  the  truth,  the  judgment  of  others  being  of 
little  importance  to  me  whether  favourable  or  unfavourable  ;  and  besides  imagine  the 
ridicule  that  it  might  have  brought  upon  me.' 

"  He  tells  me  that  he  has  '  written  other  vi'orks  waiting  to  be  published,  obtained  by  the 
means  of  other  medianity.' 

"In  the  Revue  Spirite  for  June,  1881,  there  was  a  critique  on  this  poem  by  Signor 
Tremeschini,  an  Italian  engineer  and  astronomer  at  the  Pantheon  in  Paris.     He  says  :-^ 

398  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

" '  One  half  of  this  poem  is  golden,  struck  with  the  seal  of  Dante  ;  a  quarter  is  silver  ; 
an  eighth  is  aluminium  ;  the  other  eighth  is  of  clay.  As  a  whole  it  is  an  immortal  work. 
I  defy  contradiction.' " 

The  Revue  SpiriU  gives  the  following  in  connection  with  this  same 
Medium : — 

"  A  young  Florentine,  Gino  Fanciullacci,  born  of  poor  parents,  and  with  no  literary 
education,  has  lately  written  and  published  a  volume  in  Dantesque  metre,  called  'A 
Pilgrimage  in  the  Heavens.'  He  is  employed  in  the  shop  of  a  French  antiquary,  who  has 
become  a  Spiritualist  through  witnessing  Fanciullacci  writing  day  after  day  from  twelve 
o'clock  till  half  past  one,  this  '  wonderful  production,'  as  it  is  said  to  be,  '  without  ever 
altering  a  word ;  "  because,  as  he  declares,  '  he  simply  writes  down  what  he  distinctly 
hears  dictated  to  him.'  According  to  literary  men,  this  volume  is  excellent  as  regards 
capacity  and  power,  and  its  prosody  is  irreproachable.  It  is  well  to  remark  that  this 
young  man  is  said  to  understand  his  own  language  well.     Spirits  prefer  good  tools. 

"  Strange  to  relate,  the  young  sister  of  Gino  Fanciullacci  has  lately  proved  herself,  in 
another  way,  a  medium  of  as  wonderful  capacity  as  her  brother.  This  young  girl,  who 
has  never  played  a  bar  of  music  in  her  life,  was  told  by  the  spirits  to  seat  herself  at  the 
piano  ;  and  she  then  played  and  continues  to  play  the  most  elaborate  pieces  of  Beethoven, 
Mendelssohn,  &c.,  with  the  mastery  of  a  Thalberg  or  a  Prudent." 

Independent  of  the  various  groups  of  persons  who — under  the  afflatus  of 
the  modern  Spiritual  movement — combine  to  form  societies,  which  in  truth 
represent  various  phases  of  thought  on  Spiritual  subjects,  rather  than  the 
direct  teachings  of  the  Spirits  in  the  new  dispensation,  there  are  many 
persons  who  firmly  believe  that  David  Lazaretti,  the  enthusiast  who 
appeared  about  ten  years  ago  in  Italy,  and  claimed  to  be  a  re-incarnation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  was  indeed  a  divinely  inspired  personage,  commissioned  to 
re-establish  primitive  Christianity  all  over  the  face  of  the  earth. 

The  untimely  death  of  this  self-styled  Messiah  in  1879 — he  being  shot 
in  a  colUsion  with  the  Pontifical  authorities— served  to  cool  the  faith  of 
his  adherents,  especially  as  no  one  of  sufficient  power  and  influence  to 
carry  forward  his  mission,  has  arisen  to  succeed  him.  There  are  no  doubt 
many  features  of  psychological  interest  to  be  derived  from  a  study  of 
Lazaretti  and  his  pretensions.  Our  space  however  forbids  any  further 
notice  of  the  singular  movement  promulgated  under  Lazaretti's  leadership. 

For  the  last  twenty  years,  the  labours  of  Signor  Niceforo  Filalete,  the 
indefatigable  editor  of  the  Annali  dello  Spiritismo  of  Turin,  have  been 
continued.  The  devotees  of  phenomenal  SpirituaHsm  may  have  been 
disappointed  to  find  in  his  admirable  pages  but  little  to  gratify  their  taste 
for  the  wonderful,  but  the  scholars  into  whose  hands  his  work  has  passed, 
have  accepted  with  delight,  the  learned  and  philosophical  articles  with 
which  those  pages  have  been  crowded,  and  which  have  contributed  largely 
to  liberahzing  human  thought  and  promote  the  noblest  views  of  religion, 
science,  and  morality.  Amongst  the  many  profound  and  instructive  contri- 
butions to  the  Annali,  none  has  attracted  more  respectful  attention  than 
the  series  of  articles  by  Viscount  Solanot,  on  "  Catholicism  before  Christ." 

The  extracts  with  which  these  writings  abound,  are  taken  from  the 
Hindoo  scriptures,  together  with  an  immense  mass  of  Egyptian,  Chaldaic, 
and  other  ancient  traditional  lore.  The  whole  series,  though  by  no  means 
a  novelty  to  the  student  of  ancient  rehgious  history,  is  still  a  marvel  of 
learning  and  fearlessness,  proceeding  as  it  does,  from  the  priest-ridden 
centre  of  Catholicism,  Italy. 

Had  the  writer  of  the  above-named  articles  entitled  them  Christianity 
"  before  Christ,"  they  would  have  had  a  still  deeper  significance  for  those 
who  in  our  time,  dare  to  do  their  own  religious  thinking,  and  base  their 
beliefs  upon  the  authority  of  truth. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  399 

Much  of  the  reading  matter  of  the  Annali  is  borrowed  from  the  French, 
German,  Spanish,  American,  and  English  Spiritual  literature.  It  is  none 
the  less  valuable  however  on  that  account,  and  independent  of  the  scholarly 
articles  above  referred  to,  besides  others  of  kindred  character  contributed 
by  excellent  writers,  a  complete  file  of  the  Anna/i,  during  its  twenty  years 
of  vigorous  life,  would  form  a  compendious  history  of  the  Spiritual  movement. 

The  lack  of  any  considerable  amount  of  phenomenal  record  is  due  to 
other  causes  than  the  editor's  unwilhngness  to  print  such  details. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  there  are  few  if  any  professional  Mediums 
in  Italy,  and  the  manifestations  which  transpire  at  private  circles,  or  such 
as  arise  spontaneously  in  the  seclusion  of  the  home,  are  deemed  either  too 
sacred  or  too  personal  to  be  paraded  before  the  public.  Spiritualism  in 
Italy  also,  has  made  a  deeper  mark  upon  the  higher  classes  of  society  than 
amongst  the  rank  and  file ;  hence  there  are  a  sufficient  number  of  reasons  for 
the  exclusion  of  such  records  from  the  columns  which  are  supposed  to  be 
open  to  vulgar  eyes,  as  well  as  to  those  of  society's  "  upper  crust." 

Amongst  the  notices  of  phenomenal  Spiritualism  which  have  been 
mentioned  in  the  An?iali,  the  following  excerpts  may  be  considered  as  of  a 
representative  character.  They  are  taken  from  a  series  of  articles  written 
by  an  esteemed  correspondent  of  the  Magazine,  Signor  Seffoni,  and  are 
entitled,  Vendetta  D"  Outre  Toniba,  "  Vengeance  beyond  the  Tomb." 

Signor  Seffoni  says : — 

"  In  February,  1827,  Sr.  A.  P.,  whom  I  did  not  know,  came  to  me  recommended 
by  a  friend,  to  ask  my  counsel  and  advice  concerning  a  very  serious  affair  in  his  family. 
He  had  two  children — a  daughter,  Carlotta,  between  sixteen  and  seventeen  years  of  age, 
and  a  son  between  thirteen  and  fourteen.  His  wife  being  dead,  he  let  a  part  of  his 
house  to  an  elderly  woman,  a  Marzia  N. ,  who  was  regarded  as  a  neighbour.  She  was 
not  an  educated  person,  nor  yet  wholly  ignorant,  but  frank  and  resolute,  and  had  a  certain 
faith  in  fortune-telling  by  playing-cards  in  respect  of  matrimony  and  the  like.  Though 
only  hospitably  received,  she  sought  at  once  to  have  a  legitimate  title  as  godmother  of  the 
family,  and  there  arose  an  unfriendly  feeling  between  herself  and  Mdlle.  Carlotta.  It  was 
finally  necessary  to  tixrn  Madame  Marzia  from  the  house.  Not  long  after  she  sickened 
and  died.  Soon  after,  Carlotta,  who  had  always  possessed  good  health,  became  very 
nervous,  and  ere  long  had  convulsive  symptoms.  There  came  great  difficulty  of 
breathing,  and  a  feehng  as  if  there  was  a  quantity  of  hair  in  her  throat.  [The 
writer,  here  digressing,  with  an  apology,  refers  to  a  similar  case  reported  in  the 
Annali  of  1878,  page  241,  which  had  been  confirmed  to  him  by  the  attending 
physician.  The  narration  appeared  under  this  heading  :  Obsession  or  Hysterics  ?]  "  Car- 
lotta suffered  unremittingly  with  this  terrible  sensation  of  hairs  in  the  throat.  Without 
mentioning  to  any  one  anything  of  this  matter,  I  requested  the  father  to  come  to  my 
house  on  a  certain  evening,  when  I  would  have  a  sonnambule  present  whom  I  had  known 
to  have  good  and  clear  communications  with  the  spirits  of  the  departed.  The  somnam- 
bulist came  with  her  magnetizer,  and  was  put  into  a  magnetic  sleep.  The  hair,  carefully 
wrapped  up  in  paper,  was  placed  in  her  hand,  and  she  was  asked  to  state  what  she  held. 
'  Heavens  !  .  .  hair  !  .  .  but  I  cannot  comprehend  it.'  '  Open  the  paper,'  I  said, 
'  and  examine  the  contents  attentively,  and  tell  me  of  the  person.'  '  But  ...  I  do 
not  understand.  Not  of  a  sick  person,  not  of  a  man.  .  ,  .  Oh,  my  God  !  what  is  it  ? 
Ah  !  .  .  .  this  hair  is  not  like  other  ;  it  comes  from  the  mouth.'  '  But  of  whom  is  the 
hair  ? '  I  asked.  '  It  is  of  one  dead,  frankly.  See.'  She  then  went  on  and  described  the 
figure  of  Madame  Marzia,  and  related  the  enmity  that  existed  between  her  and  Carlotta. 
The  father  recognized  it  all  as  correct.  It  seemed  clearly  a  case  of  obsession.  A  purely 
moral  course  of  treatment  was  recommended,  and  with  care,  and  with  good  spiritual 
influences,  a  good  result  was  anticipated." 

In  a  still  later  issue  of  the  Annali,  Signor  Seffoni  gives  the  following 
additional  particulars  of  the  case  above  mentioned.     He  says  :— 

"  Our  readers  will  call  to  mind  the  young  girl  Carlotta,  the  victim  of  a  malign  influence, 
thrown  over  her  by  a  wicked  woman,  lately  deceased,  who  had  been  ejected  from  her 
(Carlotta's)  father's  house.     At  a  stance  at  Sr.  Scofini's,  subsequent  to  the  one  reported, 

400  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  young  girl  was  invited  to  attend  with  her  father,  as  there  were  to  be  present  several 
mediums  of  no  little  experience  and  power.  Among  the  latter  was  Madame  Maddalena 
Cartoni,  who  had  performed  some  wonderful  cures  ;  and  a  young  man  named  Luciano, 
who  was  greatly  respected  for  gentleness  and  beauty  of  character.  During  the  evening 
Madame  Maddalena  essayed  to  bring  under  her  influence  Mademoiselle  Carlotta,  but  pro- 
duced only  sighs  or  groans.  Luciano  evoked  the  perturbing  spirit,  but  it  manifested,  when 
it  came,  only  an  evil  disposition  toward  all  present.  A  captain  in  the  Roman  army,  a 
member  of  the  Turin  Society  of  Spiritualists,  a  man  who  had  a  special  gift  in  ameliorating 
refractory  spirits,  took  the  matter  in  hand,  and  by  showing  the  bad  aspect  of  malevolence, 
by  persuasive  logic,  by  virtue  of  what  is  right,  the  efficacy  of  his  reasoning  (received  at 
first  spitefully),  took  effect  little  by  little,  till  a  yielding  was  manifest ;  still  it  seemed 
rather  a  confusion  than  a  conviction.  In  the  meantime,  a  seeing  medium,  a  member  of 
the  household  of  the  proprietor,  saw  clearly  the  spirit  of  the  malicious  Marzia,  and 
described  her  so  exactly,  every  physical  outline,  that  Carlotta's  father  confirmed  the 
identity.  With  this  the  seance  closed.  At  a  subsequent  seance,  after  the  usual  invoca- 
tion, Marzia  came,  and  through  Luciano  made  a  voluntary  confession.  To  the  seeing 
medium  she  also  presented  a  very  different  aspect  from  that  borne  at  the  first  interview. 
Almost  covered  by  a  veil,  she  seemed  dejected,  mortified,  and  nearly  weeping.  She  asked 
pardon  of  the  family  which  she  had  so  greatly  afflicted  through  the  child,  and  with 
remorse  of  conscience  begged  the  prayers  of  the  sitters  to  obtain  from  Omnipotence  the 
necessary  force  to  keep  her  resolution  to  do  no  more  evil." 

Spiritualism  in  Italy  at  the  present  date  presents  less  distinctive  marks 
of  general  interest  than  evidences  of  an  intention  on  the  part  of  "the 
powers  that  be,"  in  the  Spirit  world,  to  revive  attention  to  the  pheno- 
mena. Accounts  are  often  given  of  young  peasant  girls  and  people  of  the 
lower  classes,  manifesting  those  gifts  of  the  Spirit  that  have  been  hereto- 
fore cultivated  chiefly  by  more  refined  and  educated  personages. 

The  Uterature  of  the  subject  is  less  earnestly  studied  and  phenomenal 
powers  are  more  regarded.  In  this,  as  in  other  countries,  Spiritualism  as  a 
movement  is  unquestionably  in  a  transitional  stage,  and  whatever  the  next 
move  on  the  great  chessboard  of  divinely  guided  destiny  may  be,  none  can 
doubt,  who  attentively  consider  the  signs  of  the  times,  that  Spiritualism  has 
effected  for  the  consciences  of  the  Italian  people,  what  the  illustrious 
Garibaldi  has  achieved  for  their  political  status. 

And  still  the  noble  work  of  freedom  has  but  as  yet  begun.  In  the  harvest 
day,  when  the  fruits  of  true  religious  and  political  liberty  shall  be  garnered 
up  for  the  behoof  of  posterity,  the  Spirits  of  such,  heroes  as  Garibaldi,  the 
Italian,  and  Abraham  Lincoln,  the  American,  will  be  recognized  as  having 
aided  to  finish  the  work  of  emancipation  for  the  souls  of  men,  which  they 
began  on  earth  for  their  material  welfare. 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN      SPAIN, 

Whilst— what  our  American  cousins  would  denominate  as — the  peculiar 
institutions  of  Spain,  render  it  impossible  to  record  public  meetings  or 
public  gatherings  for  the  promotion  of  Spiritual  progress  in  Spain — the 
historian  of  this  volume  has  been  favoured  with  minutes  of  a  vast  number 
of  private  circles,  and  evidences  of  a  wide-spread  interest  on  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism  existing  in  nearly  all  the  large  centres  of  Spanish  civilization. 
Without  referring  to  the  superstitious  beliefs  still  prevailing  amongst  the 

Isaac    B  .  Rich 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  401 

peasantry  and  lower  classes,  in  that  relic  of  barbarism  styled  "  witchcraft," 
with  all  its  attendant  circumstances  of  spells,  enchantments,  signs,  tokens, 
&c.,  &c.,  it  is  enough  to  say,  the  people  of  Spain  generally,  cherish  a 
broader  faith  in  Spiritual  verities  than  is  taught  in  the  "communion  of 
saints,"  or  other  church  dogmas.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  also,  that  in  a 
literary  point  of  view  few  if  any  lands  can  excel  Spain  in  the  high  tone  and 
abundance  of  its  SpirituaHstic  writings. 

For  causes  that  will  become  sufficiently  apparent  even  in  this  brief  notice, 
Spanish  Spiritual  literature  is  largely  tinctured  with  the  belligerent  spirit 
called  forth  by  clerical  aggressions,  but  independent  of  this,  few  countries 
can  boast  of  a  finer  corps  of  Spiritual  journalists  than  Spain, 

An  esteemed  writer  in  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  says  on  this 
subject : — 

"The  language  that  furnishes  the  largest  number  of  periodicals  devoted  to  the 
dissemination  of  the  doctrine  and  philosophy  of  modern  Spiritualism,  is  the  Spanish. 
This  statement  will  be  somewhat  surprising  to  many  of  our  readers,  for  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  look  upon  the  Spaniards  as  non-progressive  and  conservative  in  the 
extreme.  Spain,  untU  within  a  few  years,  has  always  been  intolerant  of  any  religions 
except  the  Eoman  Catholic,  and  was  the  latest  of  European  nations  to  yield  to  the  spirit 
of  religious  progress.  Protestantism  has  with  the  greatest  difficulty  obtained  a  foothold 
in  that  country  within  the  last  few  years,  but  it  has  been  attended  with  annoying  restric- 
tions and  persecutions,  while  its  progress  has  been  exceedingly  slow  and  discouraging. 

"  The  Hispano-American  States  have  been  but  little  behind  the  mother  country  in 
their  lack  of  rehgious  toleration.  They  have  been  liberal  in  everything  else  more  than  in 
matters  of  conscience,  the  Romish  yoke  having  been  too  firmly  pressed  about  their  necks 
to  yield  to  innovations  of  any  sort.  But  within  the  last  decade  a  great  change  has  taken 
place,  and  in  nothing  is  toleration  more  manifest  than  in  the  progress  that  Spiritualism 
has  made  among  them.  The  religion  of  Spiritualism  appeals  more  directly  to  the  Spanish 
heart  than  does  Protestantism,  and  hence  its  greater  success.  In  the  Spanish  dominions 
and  the  Hispano-American  Republics,  there  are  no  fewer  than  seventeen  different  spiritual 
publications,  issued  at  stated  intervals,  in  the  Spanish  language.  There  are  five  at  least 
in  the  Republic  of  Mexico  ;  several  in  Spain  ;  one  in  Cuba  ;  one  in  each  of  the  Republics 
of  Peru,  Chili,  and  Uruguay;  two  in  the  Argentine  Republic,  and  others  in  various 
Spanish  speaking  countries." 

The  above  statement  speaks  within  limit.  On  the  author's  desk  at  the 
present  moment,  lay  specimens  of  twenty-five  journals  published  in  the 
Spanish  language,  and  devoted  to  the  exposition  of  Spiritualism.  There 
may  have  been  yet  more,  for  several  Spiritual  periodicals  have  been  imperi- 
ously suspended  in  Spanish-America  by  ecclesiastical  authority,  and  at 
present  copies  of  these  ephemera  are  difficult  to  procure.  We  shall  how- 
ever have  occasion  to  allude  to  them  as  we  proceed. 

Spiritualism  in  Spain  commenced,  as  in  many  other  lands,  with  a  series 
of  disturbances,  which  took  place  in  a  family  residing  in  the  outskirts  of 
Cadiz.  Stone  throwing,  bell  ringing,  and  other  preternatural  annoyances 
were  the  first  means  of  awakening  attention  to  the  subject,  and  as  they 
occurred  at  the  house  of  a  Spanish  gentleman  who  had  just  returned  from 
the  United  States,  full  of  the  marvels  of  "  the  Rochester  knockings,"  circles 
were  at  once  formed,  intelligent  responses  by  rappings  obtained,  and  a  foot- 
hold gained,  upon  which  the  edifice  of  Spiritual  progress  was  upreared. 
So  rapidly  did  the  interest  thus  awakened  spread,  that  the  first  promulgators 
were  soon  lost  sight  of,  and  as  early  as  1854,  a  society  was  formed  at  Cadiz, 
which  was  organized  for  the  sole  purpose  of  publishing  the  communications 
received  from  "  the  Spirits,"  during  two  preceding  years.  A  copy  of  the 
tract  thus  issued  is  now  before  us,  but  its  manner  and  matter  are  so  purely 
rudimental,  that  the  translation  would  fail  to  interest  any  well-informed 
reader.  • 
26 

402  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

From  1854  to  1860,  Spiritualism  spread  through  the  principal  towns  and 
villages  of  Spain  in  the  usual  fashion.  Circles  were  held  in  private 
families,  and  an  endless  number  of  "  societies  "  were  formed  and  dissolved, 
according  to  the  exigencies  of  the  time. 

One  of  the  first  public  events  of  note  in  connection  with  Spanish  Spirit- 
ualism, was  of  so  remarkable  a  character,  that  it  deserves  special  mention. 
This  was  no  other  than  an  Auto-da-fe,  perpetrated  under  the  auspices  of 
that  Church,  so  well  qualified  by  centuries  of  experience  to  preside  at  such 
scenes.  The  only  difference  between  the  occasion  under  consideration  and 
the  fiery  executions  of  olden  times  being,  that  the  victims  were  formerly 
human  beings,  whereas,  in  the  present  instance,  they  were  all  the  books, 
pamphlets,  and  works  of  a  Spiritualistic  character  that  could  be  procured  at 
that  period  of  the  movement. 

Amongst  the  pile  thus  offered  up  on  the  altar  of  religious  enlightenment, 
were  the  writings  of  Kardec,  Dufau,  Grand,  and  Guldenstubbe  ;  some  copies 
of  English  and  American  Spiritual  papers,  and  a  large  collection  of  tracts 
issued  by  the  Spiritualists  of  Spain.  This  memorable  scene  occurred  on 
the  morning  of  the  9th  of  October,  1861,  at  the  Esplanade,  Barcelona. 

The  executioners  were  a  couple  of  priests,  with  torches,  crosses,  and 
other  "sacred"  objects  belonging  to  their  occupation,  a  public  scribe  and 
clerk,  and  several  of  the  city  functionaries.  The  act  was  performed  at  the 
especial  command  of  the  Bishop,  and  an  immense  gathering  of  the  popu- 
lace stood  around  the  blazing  pile. 

If  the  enactment  of  such  a  scene  late  in  the  nineteenth  century  may  be 
regarded  as  one  sign  of  the  times  in  a  religious  point  of  view,  it  must  not 
be  forgotten  that  another  sign  was,  the  murmur  of  deep  indignation  that 
first  disturbed  the  ominous  silence  of  the  assembled  crowd,  and  finally 
broke  into  a  roar  of  execrations  and  cries  of  "  Away  with  the  inquisitors," 
as  the  priests  somewhat  hastily  gathered  up  their  ecclesiastical  paraphernalia, 
and  disappeared  from  the  scene  more  rapidly  than  they  came.  Whilst  the 
pile  was  yet  blazing,  the  mob  began  to  scatter  the  burning  wreck,  and  not 
a  few  of  the  bystanders  gathered  up  shrivelled  fragments  to  carry  away  with 
them  in  memory  of  the  nineteenth  century  Auto-da-fe. 

Judging  by  the  results  that  followed,  the  chief  actors  in  this  remarkable 
scene  might  have  been  Mediums,  and  influenced  directly  by  those  powers 
who  have  the  Spiritual  movement  in  charge,  so  rapid  and  efficacious  did  it 
become  as  an  instrument  of  propagandism.  "  What  is  Spiritualism  ? " 
"  What  have  the  Spiritualists  done  ?  "  and  "  Where  and  how  can  we  investi- 
gate the  subject?"  were  the  questions  with  which  all  Spain  was  ringing 
immediately  after  the  act  above  described, 

Amongst  the  well-known  residents  df  Barcelona,  was  a  Senor  Navarez, 
whose  daughter  Rosa  had  for  many  years  been  the  subject  of  frightful 
spasmodic  attacks,  called  by  the  Catholic  clergy  "  the  obsession  of  demons" 
— by  the  medical  faculty,  an  aggravated  condition  of  epilepsy.  Within  two 
years  after  the  Auto-da-fe,  Madlle.  R.osa  was  pronounced  entirely  cured,  by 
the  magnetic  passes  of  a  gentleman  who  was  the  Medium  of  a  private  circle 
held  in  the  city.  Shortly  after  this,  Barcelona  could  boast  of  its  well- 
approved  Spiritual  organs,  numerous  societies  for  investigation,  and  several 
Mediums,  who  from  their  exclusive  position  in  private  life,  would  object  to 
their  names  being  mentioned. 

Up  to  the  present  date,  two  of  the  most  progressive  papers  in  the  Spanish 
language  are  pubUshed  in  Barcelona.  These  are  La  Lux  del  Porvenir  and 
Revista  de  Estudios  Psicologicos. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  403 

The  former  paper — La  Lux — is  edited  by  Donna  Amalia  y  Soler,  an  able 
and  brilliant  writer,  who  in  addition  to  her  arduous  editorial  labours,  and 
the  delivery  of  many  fine  orations  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  has  contri- 
buted with  her  tireless  pen,  elegant  diction,  and  broad  humanitary  articles, 
to  embellish  as  well  as  establish  more  than  a  score  of  the  journals  and 
magazines  pubUshed  in  the  Spanish  language.  Indeed,  it  is  enough  to 
mention  Madame  Soler's  honoured  name  to  call  forth  a  note  of  admiration 
from  every  Spanish  Spiritualist.  El  Eco  de  la  Verdad  is  another  well- 
written  paper  published  at  Barcelona.  It  will  readily  be  perceived  there- 
fore that  the  Bishop's  famous  Auto-da-fe  was  so  effective  in  throwing  light 
upon  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  that  it  might  be  desirable  to  have  a 
repetition  of  the  scene  in  all  the  great  centres  of  civilization. 

About  1868,  there  appeared  at  Madrid,  an  excellent  journal  entided  El 
Criteria  (The  Critic).  At  the  present  date,  the  editors  dare  to  add  a  title 
deemed  too  dangerous  to  assume  in  its  earlier  issues,  namely,  El  Criteria 
Espiriiista.  The  journal  was  published  by  Senor  Alcantara,  and  was 
warmly  supported  by  the  Viscount  de  Torres  Solanot,  and  numbers  of 
other  leaders  of  science  and  literature  in  Spain. 

By  this  pubUcation  the  opponents  of  Spiritualism  were  amazed  to  learn  of 
the  immense  progress  the  cause  was  making,  and  the  number  of  distin- 
guished persons  who  assembled  nightly  in  circles  to  promote  investigation. 
As  an  evidence  of  the  enthusiastic  spirit  which  pervaded  the  various 
"  groups,"  into  which  the  Spanish  Spiritualists  began  to  resolve  themselves, 
we  may  call  attention  to  the  following  circular  issued  by  the  Viscount 
Solanot  in  1875.  It  is  to  the  following  effect,  and  was  distributed  broad- 
cast through  Europe  in  different  languages  : — 

"  The  great  International  Exhibition  of  Philadelphia,  1876,  calls  together  all  the  efforts 
made  towards  improving  the  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral  condition  of  man.  Among 
these  efforts  there  is  none  at  the  present  day  so  powerful  and  efficient  as  that  which 
SpirituaUsm  offers,  and  for  this  reason  we  deem  that  we  answer  the  call  of  duty  in  having 
Spirituahsm  there  exhibited  in  all  its  Providential  phases,  for  the  enlightenment  of  the 
human  race.  And  in  order  to  ensure  Spiritualism  the  due  rant  to  which  it  aspires  from 
the  influence  which  it  exercises  in  the  world,  the  efforts  and  co-operation  of  all  the 
Spiritualists  of  this  planet  are  necessary. 

"  Stimulated  by  this  idea,  we  take  the  liberty  of  calling  your  attention  to  this  subject, 
sure  that  if  we  can  realise  our  project,  according  to  our  conception,  it  will  assist  great  and 
transcendent  triumphs  for  the  truth  which  we  defend 

"  The  moment  has  arrived  for  forming  ourselves  into  one  group,  so  as  to  constitute 
with  the  unity  of  doctrine  the  unity  of  instruction 

"  We  should  present  to  this  generation,  in  order  to  improve  and  ameliorate  life,  our 
communications  with  the  invisible  world,  full  of  hope  for  the  future,  full  of  bright 
promises  for  work,  for  virtue  and  for  knowledge.  We  will  exhibit  our  books,  pamphlets, 
and  journals  ;  urge  the  co-operation  of  all  the  great  mediums  and  orators,  and  spread  the 
light  as  it  ought  to  be  spread,  lifting  it  aloft  that  all  may  see  it 

"  For  the  accomplishment  of  our  object  we  have  already  addressed  ourselves  to  the 
Spiritualists  of  Philadelphia,  from  whom  all  initiatory  action  should  arise  ;  and  we  purpose 
calhng  upon  all  Spiritualist  societies  to  second  our  proposal  to  march  united  to  the  great 
meeting  to  which  we  are  summoned  by  the  superior  intelligences  which  from  other  spheres 
watch  over  the  moral  and  intellectual  progress  of  the  planet  we  inhabit. 

"  The  committee  of  the  society  appointed  to  promote  the  Spanish  co-operation  to  the 
Spiritualist  exhibition  earnestly  beseech  the  brothers  of  every  country  to  receive  this 
idea  with  enthusiasm,  so  that  in  our  united  strength  we  may  present  in  Philadelphia  the 
progress  accomplished  by  the  sublime  and  consoling  doctrine  which  at  the  present  day 
offers  the  most  powerful  impulse  in  the  philosophical,  intellectual,  and  moral  improvement 
of  humanity. 

"Towards  God,  by  Charity  and  by  Science.  Madrid,  31st  March,  1875. — Viscount 
Torres- Solanot,  Manuel  Corchado,  Dr.  Huelbes  Temprado,  Guillermo  Martorell,  Daniel 
Suarez,  Francisco  Migueles,  Pablo  Gonzalvo,  Sanchez  Escribano,  Eugenio  Gouillaut,  Jose 
Agramonte. 

404  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  generous  and  warm-hearted  authors  of  this  circular,  met  with  no 
response  worthy  of  their  fraternal  intentions.  It  might  have  been  difficult 
to  define  exactly  what  the  Spanish  brethren  proposed  to  do,  or  wished 
others  to  unite  with  them  in  doing ;  certain  it  is,  that  no  tangible  results 
could  be  expected  to  follow  from  a  very  transcendental  address  to  the 
scattered  ranks  of  a  movement,  whose  motto  might  well  be  Liberty, 
Inequality,  and  Disintegration  !  "  Our  Spanish  friends  mean  well,  but  is  it 
possible  there  can  be  unity  enough  amongst  them  to  send  a  delegation  to 
America?"  asked  one  of  the  shrewdest  of  Yankee  Spiritualists  on  perusing 
this  grandiloquent  circular. 

Nothing  daunted  by  the  impossibility  of  getting  an  International  repre- 
sentation worthy  of  the  cause  at  Philadelphia,  the  noble  and  energetic 
Viscount  Solanot  again  agitated  the  subject  previous  to  the  Paris  Exposi- 
tion of  1878. 

In  the  articles  written  for  El  Criterio  on  this  proposition,  the  Viscount 
names  amongst  those  societies  of  Spiritualists  prepared  to  promote  an 
International  representation,  "  La  Federation  Espirita,"  of  Belgium ;  "  The 
British  National  Association  of  Spiritualists,"  England ;  "  La  Sociedad 
Central  Espirita,"  of  the  Republic  of  Mexico ;  and  "  El  Central  General 
del  Espiritismo,"  in  Spain.  Notice  is  also  taken,  and  with  a  hope  of  its 
ultimate  success,  of  the  attempt  to  form  a  national  association  and  unite  all 
the  discordant  elements  under  the  one  broad  banner  of  simple  Spiritualism. 

OF   SPANISH   MEDIUMS. 

In  Spain,  as  in  Italy,  a  considerable  amount  of  attention  has  been 
directed  towards  the  unfoldment  of  Mediumistic  power  by  means  of 
Magnetism.  Magnetic  societies  abounded  in  Spain  up  to  within  the  last 
few  years,  when  many  elements  of  internal  discord  prevailed  in  the  ranks, 
and  succeeding  in  dissolving  the  bonds  which  had  united  flourishing  associa- 
tions. Amongst  the  amateur  mesmerists  of  Spain  may  be  mentioned  Don 
Juan  Escudero,  of  Madrid,  a  gentleman,  who  having  witnessed  some  experi- 
ments in  "  animal  magnetism  "  in  CaHfornia,  resolved  to  try  its  effects  in  his 
own  family. 

On  returning  to  Spain  in  1870  from  the  United  States,  he  found  two 
little  twin  daughters  of  eight  years  old,  suffering  from  what  was  pronounced 
to  be  diphtheria  of  a  malignant  and  incurable  type.  Before  the  afflicted 
father  allowed  himself  time  to  exchange  greetings  with  the  rest  of  the  family, 
he  commenced  making  magnetic  passes  over  the  Httle  sufferers.  The  effect 
was  almost  electrical.  Donna  Isabella,  their  mother,  at  first  deemed  the 
children's  hapless  state  had  driven  their  father  insane,  but  when  she  saw 
them  sink  into  a  peaceful  slumber,  fever  subsiding,  and  ultimately  every 
symptom  of  disease  disappear,  she  became  a  convert  to  the  efficacy  of  her 
husband's  apostolic  gift. 

After  the  children's  recovery,  which  was  rapid  and  uninterrupted,  the 
delighted  parents  agreed  to  hold  circles  on  the  approved  American  fashion. 
It  was  soon  found  that  the  two  Httle  girls  were  physical  Mediums,  and 
their  little  brother,  a  child  of  only  five  years  old,  was  developed  as  a  clair- 
voyant and  seer  of  extraordinary  lucidity. 

Don  Juan  Escudero,  writing  to  the  author  of  the  seances  that  transpired 
in  his  house,  says  : — 

"  Heaven  has  descended  upon  us.  We  have  no  more  dead.  All  whom  we  have  ever 
known  and  loved  fill  our  house  with  tokens  of  their  angelic  presence.  Their  voices  are 
heard  rebuking  our  children  when  they  are  fractious ;  joining  in  our  evening  hymns  ; 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  405 

bringing  us  fruit,  flowers,  and  presents  on  our  file  days  and  holidays,  and  by  thousands 
of  signals  convincing  us  how  near  they  are  to  us,  and  how  constantly  they  watch,  guard, 
and  bless  us.  What  is  to  others  the  faith  of  angel  ministry  is  to  us  assured  knowledge 
of  angel  presence. 

This  gentleman  adds  : — 

"  My  dearest  wife,  who  accuses  herself  of  having  been  of  a  nervous,  irritable  temper,  is 
now  the  most  gentle  and  amiable  of  women.  She  says  she  must  live  for  heaven  upon 
earth,  and  so  she  will  commence  building  up  her  heaven  now.  My  children  are  veritable 
little  saints  under  the  counsels  of  their  beloved  guides, — and  for  myself, — all  I  can  say  is, 
if  I  am  not  a  better  man  under  the  discipline  of  this  angelic  teaching, — I  ought  to  be." 

From  a  number  of  private  circles  held  in  different  Spanish  towns,  the 
author  has  received  immense  files  of  communications,  some  given  under 
trance  conditions,  some  rapped  out,  or  written  through  the  planchette.  All 
partake  of  high  and  elevated  sentiments,  although  they  are  in  general  of  too 
personal  a  character  to  interest  others  than  the  recipients. 

Don  Escudero  mentions  a  man  who  supplied  his  family  with  vegetables, 
whose  wife  complained,  that  directly  after  the  birth  of  her  baby,  she  and 
the  neighbours  were  continually  disturbed  with  loud  and  incessant  rappings, 

Having  heard  marvellous  reports  of  Senor  Escudero's  gift  of  heaUng,  and 
finding  the  priest  of  the  vicinity  unable  to  quell  the  disturbances  by  virtue 
of  holy  water,  the  poor  man,  Miguel,  solicited  the  good  Senor's  advice  and 
assistance. 

After  calling  on  his  gardener,  and  ascertaining  for  himself  the  preter- 
natural character  of  the  knockings,  Don  Escudero  and  a  few  friends  held 
a  strictly  private  circle  in  Miguel's  dwelling.  On  attempting  to  communi- 
cate with  the  knockings  by  the  alphabet,  the  first  sentence  spelled  out  was 
a  charge  to  bring  "  the  sister  babe  "  in  her  cradle,  and  place  it  upon  the 
table.  This  was  done,  when  the  table  rocked  to  and  fro  like  a  ship  at  sea, 
and  the  knockings  spelled  out,  that  the  infant  of  six  weeks  old  was  the 
Medium ;  that  the  communicating  Spirit  was  a  sailor  boy,  the  child  of 
Miguel  by  a  first  wife ;  that  he  had  been  drowned  at  sea,  and  his  principal 
object  was,  to  inform  his  poor  father,  who  had  once  been  well  off  in  the 
world,  that  his  brother,  a  rich  planter  of  Buenos  Ayres,  had  died  without  a 
will,  and  his  father  must  immediately  put  in  his  claim  for  the  property,  as 
the  Church  already  held  possession  of  it.  Pending  the  legal  steps  which 
the  astonished  gardener  proceeded  to  take  in  this  matter,  it  may  be  stated 
that  all  the  information  thus  conveyed  was  strictly  true. 

It  seems  however,  that  the  family  were  so  delighted  at  the  working  of  the 
Spiritual  telegraph  through  the  new  born  babe,  that  they  insisted  upon 
continuing  the  circles  night  after  night,  even  after  they  had  been  strictly 
enjoined  by  the  Spirits  to  desist. 

The  result  was,  as  the  Spirits  had  warned  them  it  would  be,  that  the  life 
principle  of  the  little  one  became  exhausted,  and  drawn  off  by  the  exercises 
of  the  eager  investigators.  The  circles  which  would  have  been  healthful 
and  normal  to  an  adult,  well-developed  Medium,  nearly  proved  fatal  to  the 
growing  infant.  As  the  Spirits  prophesied,  the  little  Medium  became  a 
mere  handful  of  skin  and  bones,  and  was  obviously  fast  fading  away. 
Don  Escudero  then  took  the  case  in  hand ;  commenced  magnetizing  the 
babe,  and  enforcing  the  commands  of  the  sailor  boy,  to  hold  no  more 
circles  with  "  the  sister  babe."  Senor  Escudero  concludes  this  little  narra- 
tive by  saying,  "  Marietta,"  the  infant  of  this  adventure,  "  is  now  a  bonny 
girl  of  ten  years  old,  and  is  playing  with  my  little  ones  in  the  garden  below 

4o6  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

my  window.  Her  father  has  recovered  a  small  part  of  his  brother's 
property  in  Buenos  Ayres,  and  very  much  against  my  advice,  is  contesting 
with  the  Church  for  the  rest.  For  my  part  I  would  sooner  trust  to  the 
truth  and  justice  of  our  rapping  Spirits,  than  to  all  the  reverend  fathers  in 
Spain." 

Amongst  the  numerous  circles  or  "  groups "  formed  in  the  different  parts 
of  Spain  for  the  study  of  Spiritualism  and  its  phenomena,  is  one  of  long 
standing  at  Tarragona  called  "  The  Christian  Circle."  Quite  recently  the 
President  of  this  circle  sent  the  following  communication  to  the  Revue 
Spirite  of  Paris  : — 

"  The  convict  prison  here  in  Tarragona  has  800  inmates  sentenced  to  forced  labour 
By  some  means,  Spiritualist  books  have  been  introduced  among  the  prisoners.  The 
circulation  of  these  books  among  them  has  been  the  means  of  bringing  seventy  or  eighty 
of  them  to  be  believers  in  our  doctrine.  These  converts  have  ceased  to  regard  their 
miserable  position  from  their  old  point  of  view  ;  they  no  longer  entertain  schemes  of 
revolt  against  the  authorities.  They  endure  their  lot  with  resignation  under  the  influence 
of  the  teaching  that  this  world  is  but  a  preliminary  stage  to  another,  where,  if  repentant 
of  the  ill  they  have  done,  and  seeking  the  good  of  others,  they  will  be  better  off  than  here. 

"  Not  long  since  one  of  these  men  died  ;  at  his  death  he  declined  the  established  offices 
of  the  prison  priest,  on  the  ground  that  he  was  a  SpirituaHst  and  did  not  need  them.  The 
priest  then  discovered  that  Spiritualism  was  a  subject  of  discussion  with  many  of  the 
prisoners.  He  made  a  representation  of  the  matter  to  his  bishop,  who  made  formal 
complaint  of  it  to  the  commandant  of  the  prison,  and  the  commandant  made  an  investi- 
gation. In  the  end  a  particular  prisoner  was  selected  for  punishment  in  the  form  of  an 
additional  weight  of  fetters.  This  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Spiritualists  of 
Tarragona,  Barcelona,  and  Lerida,  they  had  a  meeting  upon  the  subject  and  delegated  one 
of  their  number,  a  man  of  position,  to  the  commandant.  The  representations  which 
he  made,  led  the  commandment  to  cancel  his  order  as  to  the  additional  fetters.  The 
bishop's  censure  against  Spiritualist  books  placed  them  under  prohibition,  which  was 
maintained.  It  is  known,  however,  that  although  never  found  by  gaolers,  the  books  are 
still  there. 

"  A  communication  has  been  written  through  the  hand  of  a  medium  of  the  Circle  of 
Christian  Spiritualists  of  Tarragona  by  the  Spirit  of  the  prisoner  whose  death  is  mentioned 
above  ;  it  is  as  follows  : — 

" '  My  Brethren, — Whatever  your  burdens  may  be  they  are  light  compared  to  those 
who  suffer  under  the  heavy  penalties  of  the  law  :  wearing  fetters,  enduring  indescribable 
hardships  and  the  brutalities  of  coarse  and  cruel  gaolers  ;  heavy  indeed  are  the  burdens 
of  those  who  have  so  violated  Society's  laws  as  to  find  themselves  inmates  of  the  galleys  ! 
But  is  Society  always  equitable  ?  Does  it  not  sometimes  provoke  men  into  criminahty  ? 
Does  it  not  sometimes  create  the  evils  which  it  punishes  men  for  doing  ?  And  how  many 
are  there  who,  if  equity  ruled,  would  have  similar  sentences  passed  upon  them  ?  They 
seem  to  escape  being  called  on  to  pay  their  moral  debts,  but  the  time  vrill  come  when 
they  will  have  to  do  so.' 

"  Did  I  know  the  meaning  of  the  word  Love  ?  Towards  my  earthly  end  I  learned 
through  the  works  of  Spiritualism  to  have  charity  for  my  enemies — aye,  even  to  love 
them.  Death  released  me  after  the  new  Hght  had  penetrated  the  darkness  of  the  past. 
By  this  light  I  was  warned,  prepared,  and  now  realise  the  truths  of  all  it  taught  me. 
Brethren  of  the  terrible  fetters,  have  charity  for  your  gaolers.  When  they  would  goad 
you  to  rebelUon  conquer  them  by  charity  if  you  can — if  not,  conquer  yourselves.  So  will 
you  help  to  plant  goodness  in  humanity  and  raise  for  yourselves  steps  unto  heaven.  I 
pray  you  cherish  ever  the  spirit  of  Love.     Love  is  God. — Adieu  !" 

Such  are  some  of  the  teachings  that  the  Church  dominant  in  Spain 
continues  year  by  year  to  denounce  with  ever  increasing  bitterness.  Com- 
plaints are  often  made  that  "  Spiritualism  is  aggressive  towards  the  Church." 
Had  the  church  performed  its  duty  towards  Spiritualism,  from  its  first 
appearance  as  a  supra -mundane  fact,  Spiritualism  would  now  be  the 
CORNER  STONE  OF  FACT,  on  which  the  Church  would  rest  secure  from  all 
attacks. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  407 

At  any  rate,  as  the  assumed  pattern  of  all  mental,  moral,  and  religious 
graces,  ev^en  Spiritualists  have  the  right  to  look  to  the  Church  as  its  exemplar. 
Amongst  the  multitudinous  examples  which  Catholicism  in  Spain  sets  to 
those  whom  it  considers  to  be  stray  sheep  from  its  own  heavenly  fold,  the 
following  article  from  one  of  the  late  numbers  of  the  Turin  journal,  the 
Annali  dello  Spiritismo,  will  afford  a  startling  specimen.  The  editor  of  the 
Religio  Philosophical  Journal  gives  the  translation  in  an  issue  of  1882,  as 
follows  ; — 

'*  In  the  Annali  dello  Spiritismo  we  find  nothing  of  interest  pertaining  especially  to 
Italy,  but  we  make  an  extract  relating  to  matters  in  Spain,  where  spiritual  and  liberal 
papers  are  objects  of  great  displeasure  to  the  Bishops,  and  which  have  had  the  following 
anathema  thundered  against  their  devoted  heads  : — 

"  '  The  Bishop  of  Santander  has  demonstrated  that  in  Spain  one  may  go  a  little  too  far 
in  the  expression  of  hberal  sentiments,  and  has  launched  forth  an  excommunication 
against  all  the  liberal  journals  of  his  diocese,  the  literal  text  of  which  is  this  :  "  May  God 
omnipotent  and  all  the  saints  curse  them  with  eternal  maledictions,  and  may  they  be 
hurled  to  the  devil  and  his  angels  ;  may  they  be  damned  with  Judas  the  traitor  and  with 
Julian  the  apostate  ;  may  the  Lord  judge  them  as  Dathan  and  Abiram  were  judged,  and 
may  they  be  swallowed  up  alive  in  the  earth ;  may  the  few  days  of  their  existence  be 
miserable  ;  may  they  succumb  to  the  horrors  of  famine,  thirst,  nakedness,  and  all  sorts 
of  evils  ;  may  they  suffer  want,  degrading  infirmities,  and  every  species  of  torment  ;  may 
everything  they  possess  be  accursed  ;  may  they  enjoy  no  blessing  nor  be  benefited  by  any 
prayer,  and  may  these  rather  be  turned  into  curses  ;  may  they  be  cursed  in  sleeping  or 
in  waking,  cursed  in  fasting,  eating,  and  drinking  ;  cursed  in  speaking,  and  in  keeping 
silence  ;  cursed  in  doors  and  out  of  doors  ;  cursed  upon  the  land  and  upon  the  water  ; 
cursed  from  the  crown  of  their  heads  to  the  soles  of  their  feet ;  may  their  eyes  be  blind 
and  their  ears  deaf  ;  may  their  mouths  become  mute  and  their  tongues  cleave  to  their 
jaws  ;  may  their  hands  be  palsied  and  their  feet  unable  to  walk  ;  may  all  the  members 
of  their  bodies  be  accursed  ;  may  they  be  accursed  while  standing  up  or  lying  down  ;  may 
they  be  cursed  from  to-day  to  aU  eternity  ;  in  the  final  day  of  judgment  may  their 
light  be  extinguished  before  the  Lord  ;  may  their  sepulture  be  that  of  the  dogs  and 
asses  ;  may  their  corpses  be  devoured  by  ravenous  wolves  ;  and  may  their  eternal  com- 
panionship be  that  of  the  devil  and  his  angels." '  " 

No  comments  are  offered,  none  are  needed  we  presume  on  the  language 
of  this  extract.  It  is  enough  to  ask,  what  can  we  expect  from  a  community 
whose  religious  teachers  are  represented  in  the  above-quoted  language  ? 

How  different  are  the  utterances  of  the  poor  prisoner's  enfranchised  Spirit 
given  above  !  How  different  the  following  quotation  from  the  Madrid 
paper  El  Crilerio,  in  an  article  from  Senor  M.  Gonzales  on  true  religion  ! 
He  says  : — 

"  Religion  was  bom  with  man,  and  man  was  boi'n  with  reHgion  .  .  .  That  religion 
ought  to  be  the  love  of  all  that  is  beautiful,  good  and  harmonious — thus  approaching 
God,  the  author  of  all  good.  .  .  .  Religion  demands  a  clean  heart,  but  here  on  earth 
it  seems  that  nearly  every  heart  is  as  black  as  a  coal.  It  requires  a  tranquil  conscience  ; 
but  on  this  globe,  in  almost  every  conscience  there  is  a  desolating  tempest.  It  requires 
an  immense  love  ;  but  here  we  can  but  barely  tolerate  each  other." 

Commenting  too  on  the  ceaseless  war  directed  by  the  clergy  against  the 
Spiritualists,  Madme.  Soler  writes  in  her  delightful  Barcelona  paper  of  what 
Spain  has  been  and  might  now  be,  telling  us  of  what  Spain  has  done  for  the 
world,  of  her  ancient  splendour,  power,  learning,  but  now  of  her  degeneracy, 
attributable  to  priestcraft — page  after  page,  in  fact,  that  must  stir  to  their 
very  depths  the  hearts  of  all  Spain's  children  not  dead,  not  too  deeply 
steeped  in  ignorance  and  bigotry. 

Meantime  the  work  progressed  bravely  under  all  the  opposition  brought 
to  bear  upon  it.  In  April,  188  r,  the  editor  of  the  Madrid  El  Criteria 
says  : — 

4o8  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  That  great  progress  has  been  made  in  Madrid  in  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  ;  that  the 
hall  of  meeting  of  the  Spiritual  Society  '  is  completely  full  every  Thursday  evening,'  and 
is  not  now  large  enough  '  to  hold  the  public  who  come  to  the  sessions '  ;  that  Dr. 
Merschejewski  has  called  the  attention  of  the  University  of  St.  Petersburg  to  a 
psychometric  phenomenon  of  much  importance  ;  to  wit :  A  young  man,  deemed  from 
childhood  to  be  an  idiot,  who  will  in  some  seconds  solve  any  mathematical  problem,  while 
if  a  poem  be  read  to  him,  even  of  many  hundred  verses^  he  will  repeat  the  whole  of  it 
without  failing  in  a  single  word." 

Senor  Manuel  Lopez  in  the  same  issue  of  El  Criterio  says,  speaking  of 
the  progress  of  a  society  of  Spiritualists  in  Madrid  : — 

"  We  have  received  a  mediumistic  work  of  extraordinary  merit,  executed  by  a  medium 
of  the  '  Society  of  Spiritualists '  of  Zaragoza.  It  consists  of  a  portrait  of  Isabel  the 
Catholic,  made  with  a  pencil,  and  is  a  work  truly  admirable.  It  is  said  by  intelligent 
persona  who  have  examined  it  to  be  an  exact  copy  of  one  preserved  in  the  Royal  Museum 
of  Painters  of  this  Court.  Many  thanks  are  tendered  to  the  Zaragozan  Society  for  this 
highly  appreciated  present. 

"  From  Corunna  is  announced  the  formation  of  a  new  spiritualistic  association. 

"  Under  the  title  of  '  Nicodemo,'  Don  Josd  Amigo  has  published  a  work  that  is  destined 
to  do  a  great  deal  of  good  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism." 

It  was  about  the  end  of  the  year  1880,  that  the  Spiritualists  of  Spain 
sustained  another  series  of  attacks  from  the  Church  of  a  highly  characteristic 
nature. 

The  first  of  these  was  the  refusal  of  the  clergy  to  accord  the  customary 
rites  of  interment  to  the  remains  of  two  ladies,  both  of  irreproachable 
character,  and  good  standing  in  society,  but  both  guilty  of  the  crying 
iniquity  of  having  believed  in  Spiritual  manifestations. 

The  honoured  form  of  one  of  these  ladies  had  to  be  carried  back  to 
the  dwelling  of  her  distracted  husband,  and  await  such  concessions  as 
could  be  made,  before  the  Church's  vengeance  against  the  silent  dead  could 
be  appeased  From  Alcoy,  Seville,  Ubeda,  and  numbers  of  other  places 
came  letters  of  condolence  with  the  bereaved  families  whose  feelings 
had  been  thus  outraged,  whilst  indignant  protests  of  citizens  from  all 
quarters  were  made  against  what  was  considered  to  be  a  violation  alike  of 
decency,  humanity,  and  the  noble  principles  of  religion.  Of  course  the 
Spiritualists  did  not  fail  to  make  good  use  of  this  case,  and  shocked  as  they 
were  at  the  pain  and  insult  inflicted  upon  the  survivors,  they  improved  the 
occasion  to  call  attention  to  the  character  of  the  sacerdotal  institutions,  to 
whom  the  people  entrusted  their  eternal  welfare,  besides  urging  forward  the 
demand  for  civil  jurisdiction  in  the  matter  of  interment,  or  the  still  more 
satisfactory  way  of  disposing  of  decaying  mortality  by  cremation. 

Dr.  Ditson,  in  reporting  the  remarks  of  the  different  Spanish  Spiritual 
papers  on  this  subject,  gives  the  following  comments  on  Donna  Soler's 
article  in  El  Criterio.     He  says  : — 

"  El  Criterio  Espvritista  of  Madrid  contains  several  contributions  of  much  interest  and 
importance.  Mme.  Domingo  y  Soler's  caustic  pen  revels  here  in  another  attack  upon  the 
Church  for  assuming  the  right  to  consecrate  certain  parts  of  God's  earth  and  hold  the 
power  to  exclude  from  it  certain  dead  bodies — making  in  one  specified  instance  a  cruel 
assault  upon  a  family  by  obliging  it  to  retransport  to  its  old  home  a  decaying  form  and 
keep  it  there  for  days  ;  hence  the  necessity  of  civil  interments,  a  subject  which  she 
illustrates  with  power.  The  dignity,  beauty,  and  pathos  which  breathe  through  all 
Mme.  S.'s  paragraphs  are  something  admirable.  A  Bishop  of  Barcelona  (to  whom  she 
refers)  addressing  the  clergy  and  urging  them  to  '  arrest  the  current  of  civilization  that 
like  an  impetuous  torrent  penetrates  every  portion  of  the  earth,'  adds  :  '  It  is  one  of  the 
true  traditions  which  is  in  the  consciences  of  generations  that  the  cadavers  are  a  property 
of  the   Church ' ;   or,  strictly  rendered,  '  a  projariedad  de  la  religion.'      *  Yes,'  replies 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  409 

Mme.  S.,  '  you  are  very  reasonable,  Sir  Bishop  ;  the  religions  are  the  cadavers  of  the  ages, 
and  it  is  just  that  the  bodies  of  the  defunct  should  have  the  same  resting-place.'  Further 
on  among  other  articles  of  interest  is  one  on  "  Civil  Interments.'  It  was  written  because 
another  worthy  citizen  had  been  refused  sepulture  in  a  Catholic  burying-ground,  on 
account  of  his  advocacy  of  Spiritualism.  Mme.  Soler  then  takes  occasion  to  describe  what 
she  saw  and  heard  on  the  18th  of  May  last  at  a  grave  where  Don  Miguel  Vives  pronounced 
a  memorable  and  fitting  discourse.  It  being  on  a  holiday  many  citizens  came  out  of  an 
idle  curiosity  ;  but  it  seems  that  the  sound  words  of  the  orator  were  largely  approved — 
he  'demonstrating  the  conveniencia  of  civil  interments,  for  it  was  now  an  era  when 
humanity  was  shaking  off  the  yoke  of  the  religions  of  the  past  and  adopting  a 
rational  faith.  He  explained  that  Spiritualism  was  a  school  of  philosophy  racionalista, 
demonstrating  to  man  that  only  by  his  good  works  would  he  be  saved.'  .  .  .  And 
these  cemeteries  the  authoress  regards  as  only  to  be  required  for  a  short  time  more,  for 
cremation  with  its  sanitary  issues  is  to  make  them  tenantless." 

The  second  raid  which  the  Church  in  Spain  perpetrated  about  this  time 
to  the  prejudice  of  the  Spirituahsts,  was  the  suppression  of  a  well-written 
Spiritual  paper  published  at  Lerida,  entitled  E/  Biien  Sentido.  The  Bishop 
of  Lerida  had  long  threatened  this  step,  and  warned  the  fearless  editor  to 
beware  how  he  presumed  to  allow  any  writings  reflecting  upon  clerical 
doings  to  appear  in  his  columns.  As  some  of  the  principal  contributors 
were  Madame  Soler,  Mdlle.  Sans,  Don  Murillo,  and  others  equally  capable 
of  arraigning  the  intolerant  acts  which  Church  policy  seemed  determined  to 
push  against  the  Spiritualists,  it  was  scarcely  likely  that  the  Bishop's  threats 
would  produce  much  eifect,  or  induce  El  Buen  Sentidds  contributors  to 
pronounce  the  black  doings  of  the  clergy  to  be  white. 

The  last  article  which  seemed  to  inflame  the  oppressors  to  retaliate  was 
an  indignant  protest  which  appeared  in  the  columns  of  this  paper  on 
the  condemnation  of  a  working  man  to  three  years'  imprisonment,  leaving 
a  family  of  children  destitute,  and  all  for  speaking  in  public  against  the 
intolerance  of  the  Church. 

This  was  enough.  To  arraign  the  Church  was  to  deserve  the  moral 
death  which  the  time  permitted,  in  lieu  of  the  physical  death  which  only 
two  centuries  before,  would  have  certainly  ensued,  and  so  El  Buen  Sentido 
was  put  to  ecclesiastical  torture  and  death,  In  a  fine  article  written  on 
this  subject  by  the  editor  oi  El  Espiritisia  of  Zaragoza  it  is  said  : — 

"  Some  ten  years  since  the  respectable  head  of  a  family  visited  Barcelona,  where  he 
became  convinced  of  the  realities  of  our  faith.  On  his  return  he  called  his  family  (all  of 
age)  together,  and  told  them  of  the  rapid  spread  of  Spiritualism  in  the  aforesaid  capital 
since  the  auto  da  fe,  made  by  the  order  of  a  bishop,  of  the  works  of  Allan  Kardec.  .  .  , 
And,  as  has  been  expressed  by  the  spirit  of  Marietta,  in  her  immortal  book  written  in 
Zaragoza,  the  thoughts  that  arose  from  these  flames  have  been  spread  by  the  winds  over 
the  earth.  .  .  .  and  thus  little  by  little  an  air  will  be  created  in  which  all  can 
freely  breathe.  ...  In  the  family  above  referred  to  were  developed  several  mediums, 
and  all  became  enthusiastic  Spiritualists." 

As  an  evidence  that  the  tactics  of  the  clergy  of  all  denominations,  and 
in  all  countries,  are  ever  the  same,  when  their  craft  is  in  danger,  the 
reader  may  see  in  the  following  extract  from  a  Madrid  secular  paper  how 
the  cry  of  the  American  and  English  clergy,  to  the  effect,  ''  that  SpirituaHsm 
is  all  the  work  of  Satan  and  his  imps  "  is  either  borrowed  from,  or  repeated 
by,  the  clerical  savants  of  Spain.  El  Criterio,  the  journal  in  question, 
says : — 

"  Spiritualism  is  true  enough  ;  but  its  facts  all  proceed  from  a  class  of  fallen  reprobate 
spirits,  who  try  by  every  seductive  art  to  alienate  Christians  from  their  church,  and  thus 
eternally  to  destroy  their  souls.  In  our  day,  these  devils  assume  the  names  and  per- 
sonalities of  our  dearest  friends,  and  by  working  upon  the  minds   of  educated  and 

4IO  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

intelligent  converts,  thus  effectually  seek  the  destruction  of  nations  as  well  as  individuals. 
Like  atheism,  Spiritualism  leads  directly  to  hell,  and  mere  attendance  at  a  seance  is  a 
mortal  sin," 

The  editor  of  the  Spiritual  E/  Cn'ferio,  after  a  most  pungent  review  of 
this  stuff,  says  : — 

"  In  Madrid  they  have  put  upon  the  stage  (at  the  theatre  Variedades)  a  play  called 
*  Arturo,  the  Spiritualist.'  This,  like  several  that  were  presented  last  year  at  the  minor 
theatres  under  the  title  of  'The  Spirits,'  and  '  The  Spirit  Lover,'  are  of  course  simply  to 
ridicule  our  cause  ;  but  they  in  reality  aid  it  wonderfully,  for  only  something  of  moment 
is  worth  such  effort." 

In  the  same  number  of  EI  Criterio,  dated  1881,  is  a  letter  from  Don 
Migueles,  in  which  he  gives  a  somewhat  discouraging  account  of  "the 
cause  "  as  it  recently  existed  in  Spain.     The  editor  says : — 

"  Don  Migueles  visited  many  cities  to  examine  into  the  state  of  affairs  of  a  spiritua 
nature,  but  found  many  who  were  only  to  be  enticed  by  physical  phenomena,  caring 
nothing  for  the  esoteric  beauties  of  our  faith  ;  many  who  were  convinced  that  they  knew 
all  there  was  to  be  known  concerning  it,  and  others  who  were  timid,  fearing  the  dis- 
approval of  neighbours.  In  some  places,  however,  excellent  mediums  were  discovered. 
In  Santiago,  in  Oviedo,  in  Corunna  and  Valladohd,  an  exceptional  interest  was  manifest. 
Near  Santiago  there  was  a  young  girl  possessed  of  wonderful  faculties,  Two  bars  of 
magnetized  iron  held  over  her  horizontally,  half  a  metre  distant,  were  sufficient  to  suspend 
her  body  in  the  air. 

"  The  proceedings  of  the  Spanish  Society,  under  the  name  of  the  sesiones  de  Oontroversio, 
in  the  month  of  April  last,  are  spoken  of  in  the  Critic  as  markedly  impressive  on  account 
of  the  lofty  sentiments  maintained  throughout  the  discussions,  by  the  various  speakers. 
'  In  the  past  month  were  given  also  very  interesting  conferencias  by  our  illustrious 
brothers,  the  Sres.  EeboUedo  and  Huelbes.'  The  able  engineer  and  inventor,  belonging 
to  the  Society  of  Santiago  de  Chili  and  fotmder  of  that  of  Lima,  D.  E.  Caruana  y  Berard, 
has  just  arrived  in  Madrid.  The  Revista  Espiritista  of  Barcelona  mentions  the  visit  which 
its  editor  has  made  to  the  central  societies  of  Spiritualists  of  Sabodell  and  Tarrasa,  where 
'  a  great  number  of  brethren  were  assembled  on  the  occasion,  and  which  will  result  in 
great  good  to  the  doctrine.'  " 

The  Barcelona  Lux,  of  date  i88x,  gives  encouraging  accounts  of  seances 
held  at  Cordova,  Tarragona,  Seville,  and  many  other  places.  The  editor, 
Mad3.me  Soler,  also  refers  to  the  prohibition  to  Catholics,  by  an  archbishop 
to  have  or  to  read  the  Spiritualistic  work  of  Niram  Aliv;  of  the  "Society 
of  Spiritualists  "  of  Tarrasa ;  of  the  circle  of  Santa  Cruz  of  Tenerif ;  of  that 
of  "  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,"  of  Andujar,  and  of  St.  Vincent  de  Bogota. 
Here  is  also  a  brief  statement  of  the  intimacy  that  existed  between  the 
widow  of  Baron  Van  de  Weyer  (daughter  of  the  late  Mr.  Bates  of  the  firm 
of  Baring  and  Co.)  and  the  Queen  Victoria.  Lady  Van  de  Weyer  lived  in 
a  magnificent  chateau  near  Windsor  Castle,  and  it  is  said  that  no  day 
passed  in  which  Lady  de  W.  and  the  Queen  were  not  together  ;  that,  as 
they  both  believed  in  Spiritualism,  they  counselled  each  with  their  respec- 
tive departed  husbands. 

The  editor  also  gives  extracts  from  a  new  Spiritual  catechism  which  has 
been  published  by  one  of  the  circles  in  Barcelona  entitled  El  Frogresso 
Moral. 

Spiritualism  in  the  States  of  Spanish-America  has  already  been  touched 
upon  in  a  former  chapter.  No  new  features  of  interest  have  altered  the 
status  of  "  the  cause  "  in  South  America.  Two  or  three  of  the  journals 
published  in  the  interest  of  Spiritualism  have  been  obliged  to  surrender  to 
the  clerical  ban.     The  brave  editors  of  the  Buenos  Ayres  Constancia  still 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  411 

hold  their  own,  and  tidings  come  from  Caraccas,  Venezuela,  Mexico,  and 
many  other  places  that  the  organs  of  the  faith  still  live,  and  Mediumistic 
power  is  rapidly  on  the  increase. 

Considering  the  large  share  of  popular  attention  bestowed  by  the  Euro- 
pean and  American  nations  upon  their  recent  visitor,  his  Majesty  of 
Brazil,  Dom  Pedro  de  Alcantara,  and  more  especially  bearing  in  mind  the 
reputation  generally  accorded  to  that  illustrious  personage  for  liberality  of 
sentiment  and  enlightenment  of  mind,  the  reader  may  peruse  with  some 
interest  and  not  a  little  surprise,  the  following  report  of  a  scene  which 
occurred  as  late  as  the  spring  of  1882,  the  particulars  of  which  were  trans- 
lated into  English  for  the  columns  of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  of 
Chicago,  and  read  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Academic  Society  of  Spiritualists  holding  session  in  Brazil,  have  lately  suffered 
much  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the  Brazilian  authorities.  By  a  public  mandate,  the 
society  and  all  branches  thereof,  were  forbidden  to  hold  any  more  meetings  from  and 
after  the  date  of  the  ordinance,  on  pain  of  chastisement.  Recourse  was  had  to  his 
majesty,  the  Emperor  Dom  Pedro  de  Alcantara,  wii^h  whom  the  following  short  dialogue 
took  place,  one  of  the  commissioners  detailed  by  the  society  acting  as  spokesman  : — 

'  Speaker. — The  management  of  the  Sociedade  Academica  beg  leave  to  place  in  your 
hands  this  exposition,  corroborated  by  the  numbers  of  their  organ,  the  Revista,  which 
have  been  published  up  to  to-day,  desiring  the  wise  counsel  of  your  majesty. 

'  Emperor.  I  do  not  believe  in  Spiritism  ;  I  am  in  accord  with  the  ideas  of  the 
Councillor  of  State. 

'  Speaker. — We  are  convinced  that  your  majesty  will  protect  the  Academic  Society 
which  is  suffering  persecution  on  account  of  its  investigation  of  Spiritism. 

'  Emperor. — I  do  not  consent  to  any  persecution,  but  I  only  protect  the  ideas  with 
which  I  sympathise. 

'  Speaker. — We  ask  your  majesty's  protection  by  causing  to  be  recognised  and 
respected  the  right  of  investigation  which  belongs  to  us. 

'  Emperor. — You  have  the  right,  gentlemen,  to  investigate  everything  ;  but  I  would 
advise  you  to  investigate  something  else  [than  Spiritism]. 

'  Speaker. — We  do  investigate  everything,  including  even  the  Constitution  of  the 
Empire.' 

"  Other  conversation  ensued  between  his  majesty  and  different  members  of  the 
committee,  and  the  conference  terminated — the  former  promising  to  read  the  '  exposition,' 
and  the  latter  that  after  fifteen  days  they  would  return  to  receive  the  Emperor's  '  wise 
counsel.'  At  the  end  of  fifteen  days  the  delegation  from  the  society  again  sought  the 
presence  of  his  majesty,  when  the  following  conversation  occurred  : — 

'  Speaker. — Sire,  we  come  to  receive  the  wise  counsel  which  we  had  the  honour  of 
soliciting  from  your  imperial  majesty  in  behalf  of  our  rights. 

'  Emperor. — Seek  the  Minister  of  the  Empire  and  have  an  understanding  with  him. 

'  Speaker. — Among  the  petitions  which  we  have  addressed  to  the  government 
demanding  the  guarantees  which  the  law  concedes  to  us,  some  have  been  treated  vdth 
indifference  and  others  have  received  but  slow  attention  ;  and  now,  as  some  days  since  we 
came  to  consult  vsdth  your  majesty,  the  Chief  of  Police  judged  himself  authorised  to 
impose  upon  us  a  suspension  of  our  labours.  Until  then  the  persecution  was  dissembled  ; 
but  it  has  now  become  manifest,  and  violence  has  been  employed  against  an  association 
which  is  beneficent  and  orderly  as  all  its  acts  will  prove. 

'  Emperor. — But  what  is  it  that  the  gentlemen  desire  ?  Do  they  wish  the  approbation 
of  the  statutes  ?     I  agree  with  the  idea  of  the  Parecer  (some  ordinance  or  legal  opinion). 

'  Speaker. — Your  majesty  will  pardon  us,  but  we  have  demonstrated  in  the  Revista,  a 
collection  of  which  accompanied  the  representation,  that  we  had  the  honour  of  handing 
to  your  majesty,  that  that  Parecer  is  not  applicable  to  this  society  ;  and  we  only  ask  the 
approbation  of  the  statutes.  .  .  .  The  right  of  re-union  is  guaranteed  to  us  as  a 
scientific  society  by  the  law  of  December  19th,  1860,  which  regulates  scientific  and  literary 
societies. 

'  Emperor. — But  spiritism  is  not  a  science. 

'  Speaker. — We  beg  that  your  majesty  consider  that  all  the  phenomena  of  the  universe 
being  susceptible  of  observation,  and  scientific  analysis,  are  facts,  and  the  spirit  phenomena, 
although  qualified  as  metaphysical  and  supernatural,  are  none  the  less  facts,  and  being 
submitted  to  investigation  by  the  experimental  method,  lead  us  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
laws  which  govern  them,  and  that  constitutes  spiritual  science. 

412  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

'  Emperor. — Oh  !  yes,  in  that  way,  but  it  is  better  to  occupy  your  time  with  other 
studies. 

'  Speaker. — We  come  to  ask  your  majesty,  zealous  of  the  prerogatives  of  your  subjects 
and  the  first  to  give  an  example  of  obedience  to  the  law,  that  you  protect  us  against 
persecution. 

'  Emperor. — Nobody  shall  persecute  you,  but — you  do  not  wish  to  be  martyrs  now. 

'  Speaker.  —  We  believe  that  in  this  enlightened  century  there  is  no  room  for 
martyrdom.  We  have  no  desire  to  pose  as  martyrs,  but  we  ask  and  demand  tolerance  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  decree  2711. 

'  Emperor. — The  Minister  of  the  Empire  is  in  possession  of  your  papers  which  I  sent 
him.     He  wiU  give  a  solution.' 

"  The  commission  took  leave  of  his  majesty,  convinced  that  they  would  have  to  appeal 
to  the  legislative  body  to  have  the  rights  of  Brazilian  Spiritualists  recognized.  By  this 
conversation  they  were  satisfied  that  the  Emperor  is  opposed  to  Spiritism,  and  if  so,  that 
he  will,  perhaps,  wish  to  embarrass  the  progress  of  the  Sociedade  Academica,  '  but  we  do 
not  suppose  he  will  do  it  openly,'  says  the  editor  of  the  Revista,  '  for  by  declaring  himself 
frankly  against  us  he  wUl  turn  over  to  our  camp  not  only  all  who  are  averse  to  imperialism, 
but  besides  aU  the  malcontents  of  every  sort. 

"  The  Revista  will  continue  to  be  published,  and  by  some  provision  of  the  law,  meetings 
of  the  Society  and  its  branches  will  continue  to  be  held  provided  no  more  than  twenty 
persons  assemble  in  one  place." 

The  editor  of  the  Chicago  journal  containing  this  report  adds  in  con- 
clusion : — 

"  The  Spiritists  of  Brazil  may  be  assured  of  the  sympathy  of  20,000, oOO  of  Spiritualists 
in  the  United  States  and  of  all  the  other  millions  scattered  over  the  whole  globe,  upon 
whom  the  sun  never  sets.  Dom  Pedro  wUl  come  to  his  senses  one  of  these  days  and  see 
the  error  of  his  ways.  The  obstacles  in  the  way  of  spiritual  progress  are  only  apparent, 
and  the  advance  of  the  cause  will  prove  to  have  been  all  the  greater  in  the  end." 

To  this  conclusion  there  are  but  few  of  our  readers  who  will  not  cordially 
say  Amen  ! 

As  a  closing  salute,  and  to  show  that  the  unhappy  warfare  waged  by  the 
clergy  and  the  Spiritualists  of  Spain,  proceeds  from  the  very  source  in  which 
Spiritualism  should  have  found  its  warmest  friends  and  supporters,  we  give  a 
paragraph  which  has  now — in  1883 — been  going  the  round  of  most  of  the 
European  Spiritual  journals.     It  is  as  follows  : — 

"  El  Iris  de  Paz,  of  Huesca,  March  25th,  '  supplement.'  This  little  sheet  is  nearly  all 
taken  up  with  the  document  (and  response)  of  the  Bishop  of  Huesca,  which  is  a  '  fulmi- 
nation  of  excommunication  pronounced  against  all  Spiritualists  and  all  subscribers  to  and 
readers  of  spiritualistic  papers.'  " 

"  Whom  the  Gods  would  destroy  they  first  make  mad,"  says  the  classic 
proverb.  If  that  be  true,  then  may  the  mad  fury  of  the  Spanish  Catholic 
clergy  be  considered  as  ilruly  divine. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  413 

CHAPTER  L. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN      EUROPE      (CONCLUDED.) 

Austria,  Belgium,  and  Turkey. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN      AUSTRIA. 

[Writien  expressly  for  '•  Nineteenth  Cefitury  Miracles  "  dy  the  Baroness  Adelma  Von  Vay.] 

When  "  American  Spirit  rapping,  and  table  turning  "  was  first  talked  of  in 
Austria,  we  also  commenced  to  experiment.     Everybody  tried  it. 

I  was  at  that  time  a  mere  child,  but  I  remember  well  how  splendidly  we 
children  could  make  the  table  dance ;  also,  that  my  help  was  always  required 
to  produce  this  manifestation.  On  one  occasion  during  the  table  turning 
I  was  seized  with  a  swoon,  after  which  the  practice  was  forbidden  in  my 
parents'  house. 

I  had  a  cousin  who  was  a  wonderful  "Medium."  She  wrote  with  a 
small  table,  the  fourth  leg  of  which  was  a  pencil  (Planchette). 

The  table  would  write  the  contents  of  sealed  letters  correctly ;  discover 
thefts,  and  gave  the  best  possible  tests.  That  young  lady  was  endowed 
with  so  much  magnetic  force  that  the  piano,  a  heavy  dining  table,  or  other 
large  bodies,  would  move,  by  her  simply  touching  them  with  one  finger. 

In  her  presence  also  Spirit  forms  and  lights  were  seen — still  neither  she 
nor  her  family  knew  anything  about  Spiritualism. 

After  my  cousin  married,  she  conceived  an  aversion  to  Spiritual  manifes- 
tations, and  when  still  later,  I  urged  her  to  read  Allan  Kardec's  writings 
she  declared  such  studies  always  made  her  faint. 

In  Austria,  Spiritualism  was  first  promulgated  by  M.  Constantine  Delby 
of  Vienna.  He  was  a  warm  adherent  of  Allan  Kardec's,  and  founded  a 
society  under  legal  auspices,  besides  starting  a  Spiritual  journal.  The 
society  numbered  but  few  members,  in  fact  Spiritualism  never  obtained 
much  foothold  in  Vienna.      A.t  Buda-Pesth  it  was  quite  otherwise. 

About  1867,  there  resided  in  Buda-Pesth  a  poor  woman  who  had  a 
daughter  who  was  evidently  a  fine  trance  Medium.  This  girl,  when  about 
thirteen  years  of  age,  would  fall  into  trances  spontaneously,  during  which 
she  would  speak  eloquently,  and  converse  on  many  subjects  most  wonder- 
fully. About  this  time,  too,  a  woman  who  had  resided  many  years  in 
America  returned  to  Buda-Pesth,  and  hearing  of  the  young  trance  Medium, 
called  upon  her.  "  The  American,"  as  she  was  called,  was  only  in  humble 
circumstances,  but  she  had  seen  much  of  Spiritualism,  and  subscribed  to 
the  Banner  of  Light  from  her  small  earnings,  as  a  teacher  of  English. 
Obscure  as  these  beginnings  were,  they  soon  attracted  a  large  number  of 
observers.  Many  people  went  to  hear  the  somnambule,  and  talk  with  "  the 
American"  about  SpirituaUsm. 

In  a  short  time  a  considerable  amount  of  interest  was  awakened,  and 
many  persons  of  note  began  to  take  part  in  the  circles  that  were  being 
formed,  amongst  these  were  Mr.  Anton  Prohasker,  and  Dr.  Adolf  Griinhut, 
who  was  a  friend  of  ours  and  had  become  an  ardent  Spiritist  through  my 
influence. 

414  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

At  length  a  society  was  formed,  legalized  by  the  State,  of  which  my 
husband,  Baron  Edmund  Vay,  was  elected  president. 

Mr.  Lishner,  of  Pesth,  built  a  handsome  seance  room  which  the  society 
rented.  At  the  present  time,  we  have  one  hundred  and  ten  members, 
many  of  them  being  Hebrews,  though  all  are  believers  in  Jesus  Christ,  and 
better  Christians  than  many  other  so-called,  and  professing  to  be  Christians. 
My  husband.  Baron  Vay,  is  now  the  honorary  president.  Dr.  Griinhut  is 
the  active  president,  and  these  together  with  myself  and  Mr.  Prohasker 
were  amongst  the  most  devoted  and  faithful  workers. 

The  principles  of  the  society,  indeed  the  basis  of  it  are — Geist  Kraft 
Staff  (Baroness  Adelma  Von  Vay)  and  the  works  of  Allan  Kardec — purely 
Christian  Spiritism.  We  never  encouraged  paid  Mediumship — nobody 
takes  a  fee  in  our  society.  All  the  officers  are  voluntary  and  honorary. 
We  have  no  physical  Medium,  but  good  trance,  writing  and  seeing 
Mediums,  and  a  spirit  of  true  Christian  charity  and  love  binds  our 
members  together.  We  lost  our  dear  good  worker  the  excellent  Mr. 
Prohasker  in  1879 — ^  great  loss  indeed  it  was  to  our  society.  The  earnest 
mind  and  noble  spirit  of  Dr.  Griinhut  and  his  indefatigable  labours  for 
truth  and  progress  are  deserving  of  all  praise. 

In  my  book,  "Studien  liber  die  Geisterwelt,"  I  related  how  I  myself 
became  aware  of  my  Mediumistic  powers. 

I  had  been  married  some  years  and  was  an  ardent,  and  I  believe  a  pious 
Catholic,  when  Dr.  Griinhut,  who  was  a  great  mesmerist,  came  to  our 
house.  He  told  me  that  he  saw  the  word  seership  imprinted  on  my  brow, 
and  urged  me  to  sit  for  automatic  writing.  At  first  I  refused,  but  after  a 
time  curiosity  prompted  me  to  try  the  experiment.  Immediately  my  arm 
was  shaken  by  a  strange  force,  after  which  I  began  to  write  automatically 
some  wonderful  information  which  was  soon  verified.  As  my  husband  and 
mother-in-law  were  deeply  interested  I  tried  again,  all  the  while  knowing 
nothing  about  Spiritism.  It  was  "  the  saints  "  who  wrote.  They  told  me 
about  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation,  and  wrote  homoeopathic  prescriptions 
for  the  poor  and  suffering,  I,  at  that  time,  knowing  nothing  of  homoeopathy. 
Very  soon  my  husband  and  I  became  the  medical  attendants  of  all  the 
people  around,  mesmerizing  and  curing  them  with  the  aid  of  homoeopathy. 
The  Church  remonstrated,  but  we  would  not  discontinue  our  practice. 
Whilst  we  were  living  on  our  estate  in  Hungary,  I  was  called  on  by  a  Mr. 
Piko  who  presented  me  with  a  copy  of  Kardec's  "  Livre  des  Esprits." 
Soon  after  that,  I  began  taking  the  Ba?iner  of  Light.  My  first  publication 
was  a  prayer-book  "  Betracht  fiir  Alle,"  then  came  "Geist  Kraft  Stofif;" 
"Studien  fiber  die  Geisterwelt ;"  "  Visionen  im  Wasserglas  ;"  "Eugahlun- 
gen  des  Ewigem  Mfitterlains ; "  and  now  "  Tagebuch  eines  Kleinem 
Madchens." 

Conjointly  with  two  other  Mediums  I  published  "The  Four  Evangels — 
An  Explanation  by  the  Spirits."  Its  title  "  Reformirende  Blatter,"  published 
by  Waigner,  Boulvard  21,  Buda-Pesth. 

After  the  publication  of  my  books,  the  Catholic  priests  would  no  longer 
give  me  absolution.  They  pronounced  me  a  heretic,  and  would  excom- 
municate me,  upon  which,  I  forthwith  became  a  Protestant,  the  faith  of  my 
mother,  husband,  and  his  family ;  his  Excellency  the  Baron  Nicholas  Von 
Vay,  being  the  head  of  the  Calvinist  Church  in  Hungary. 

This  is  but  a  brief  account  of  Spiritualism  in  Austria  and  Hungary. 

The  many  readers  of  the  Spiritual  journals  in  America  and  Europe  who 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  415 

have  become  familiar  with  articles  pr  quotations  from  the  writings  of  the 
Baroness  Adelma  Von  Vay — read  and  been  struck  with  their  purity  of  tone 
and  exalted  religious  spirit,  however  much  they  may  disagree  with  the 
amiable  and  devoted  lady,  in  minor  points — will  take  no  exception  to  the 
publication  of  her  simple  sketch  with  scarcely  any  alteration  of  the  diction. 
The  firmness  and  consistency  with  which  a  person  in  her  position,  with 
her  education  and  surroundings,  yielded  to  her  honest  convictions,  and 
despite  the  ban  of  the  Church  she  had  been  taught  to  reverence,  faithfully 
gave  to  the  world  the  published  results  of  her  newly-born  faith,  are  circum- 
stances which  can  only  be  fully  appreciated  by  those  who  can  or  will — 
"  put  themselves  in  her  place." 

As  the  Baroness's  modesty  prevents  her  from  dwelling  upon  one  feature 
of  her  life  which  in  itself  would  be  more  than  sufficient  to  atone  for  any 
diversities  of  opinion  on  doctrine  or  theoretical  beliefs,  we  supplement  her 
little  sketch  with  a  brief  extract,  the  nature  and  authorship  of  which  speaks 
for  itself.     It  is  as  follows  : — 

"the  baroness  adelma  von  vay  a  healing  medium. 

"  Our  daily  programme,  although  always  diversified,  was  made  up  of  riding,  driving, 
walking,  paying  visits,  entertaining,  and  last,  but  not  least,  for  the  Baroness  is  a  veritable 
humanitarian,  comforting  the  afflicted  and  distressed. 

"  The  peasant  population  maintain  an  implacable  faith  in  her  power  to  alleviate  pain. 
From  far  and  near,  they  bring  their  sick  for  her  tender  ministration ;  and,  in  her  boudoir, 
I  found  many  an  offering  in  token  of  some  great  good  she  had  done,  some  rich  blessing 
she  had  wrought  for  those  who,  if  poor  in  purse,  were  rich  in  gratitude  towards  their 
noble  benefactress. 

"  It  was  touching  to  see  this  beautiful,  high-born  lady,  tending  some  poor  unfortunate 
creature,  bent  and  racked  with  pain.  It  was  gratifying,  too,  to  remark  the  growing  light 
come  into  the  hollow,  sunken  eyes,  as  they  followed  each  movement  of  their  'Frau 
Grafin,'  whilst  busy  preparing  that  which  would  bring  relief  to  the  sufferer.  Besides  this, 
the  Baroness's  bright  face  is  ever  a  welcome  sight  in  all  the  homesteads  of  the  poorest 
and  lowliest  in  the  district,  and  many  lips  breathe  blessings  upon  her  for  her  goodness 
and  generosity. — My  Visit  to  Styria,  by  Caroline  Cobner." 

spiritualism    in    BELGIUM. 

Spiritualism  in  Belgium  seems  to  have  proceeded  from  much  the  same 
cause,  and  moved  onward  under  the  same  impulses  as  those  which  have 
been  already  noticed  in  other  European  countries. 

Being  chiefly  under  Catholic  domination,  the  Spiritualists  of  Belgium 
have  had  to  contend  incessantly  against  the  antagonism  of  that  persecuting 
sect.  Still  much  progress  has  been  made,  and  systematic  investigation  has 
been  carried  on  very  faithfully,  whilst  the  literature  of  the  subject,  both  in 
quantity  and  quality,  may  be  considered  as  on  a  par  with  that  of  any  other 
country. 

M.  Jobard,  director  of  the  Miisee  de  V  Industrie  at  Brussels,  whose  name 
is  honourably  known  to  all  European  Spiritualists,  has  for  many  years  past 
exerted  himself  indefatigably  both  as  a  writer  and  personal  propagandist, 
in  the  cause  of  Spiritualism.  In  the  early  days  of  the  movement,  Mesmerism 
was  largely  practised  in  Belgium,  and  by  many  it  was  regarded  as  a  stepping' 
stone  to  Spiritualism,  and  a  more  reliable  mode  of  obtaining  occult  know- 
ledge, than  through  the  invocatory  processes  of  the  Spirit  circle.  Our  readers 
will  doubtless  remember  the  case  of  "Louise  Lateau,"  the  so-called  "ecstatic," 
a  young  girl  in  the  humblest  ranks  of  life,  upon  whose  person^  periodical 
representations  of  the  stigmata  were  found  to  appear.     As  this  was  the  first 

41 6  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

notorious  case  of  the  kind  that  was  known  in  Belgium,  and  the  clergy  were 
of  opinion  that  it  was  in  order,  to  call  the  manifestation  a  miracle,  and 
attribute  its  occurrence  to  the  interposition  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  interest 
it  excited  was  very  favourable  to  the  subject  of  Spiritual  manifestations. 
Whilst  a  warm  controversy  was  proceeding  between  the  clergy  and  the 
medical  faculty,  the  former  crying  "  Miracle,"  and  the  latter  "  Mesmerism,". 
— although  in  point  of  fact  the  girl  had  never  been  mesmerized  at  all — 
several  kindred  cases  began  to  occur  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  under 
circumstances  that  put  both  the  above-named  attempts  at  explanation, 
hors  de  combat. 

One  of  these  "  ecstatics,"  was  thus  reported  of,  in  La  Gazette  Fetrus,  from 
which  we  give  the  following  translation  : — 

"  In  the  commune  of  Vallengreville  there  is  a  young  girl  eighteen  years  of  age  who 
carries  the  stigmates  du  Christ.  The  feet,  the  hands,  the  side,  the  forehead  are  pierced, 
leaving  wounds  two  centimetres  long  by  half  of  one  wide.  Her  head  bears  the  imprint  of 
the  crown  of  thorns.  These  wounds  bleed  on  Friday  at  3  o'clock,  and  the  girl  suffers 
intensely.  Physicians  have  interested  themselves  in  this  matter,  and  found  that  for  three 
weeks  the  girl  took  not  a  particle  of  food  :   that  she  could  seemingly  fast  indefinitely." 

Very  soon  after  the  pubUcation  of  this  item,  the  different  journals  of 
Belgium  became  flooded  with  accounts  of  "  ecstatics "  and  fasting  girls, 
from  a  large  number  of  which  we  select  the  following,  as  being  the  best 
authenticated. 

Professor  Lasagne  reported  in  the  Nationale  the  case  of  a  servant  girl 
in  his  own  family  of  whom  he  says  : — "  Her  lower  limbs  became  paralyzed, 
her  skin  became  insensible,  and  she  fell  into  a  trance  (une  espece  de  somno- 
lence), and  so  remained  for  three  months  without  taking  other  nourishment 
than  tea.  She  recovered  quite  recently,  and  is  now  in  her  usual  state  of 
rugged  health." 

The  editor  of  Z'  Univers,  a  strictly  Catholic  organ,  not  to  be  outdone  by 
a  simply  scientific  report  of  an  "  ecstatic  "  character,  immediately  followed 
up  Professor  Las6gue's  statement  with  the  following  narrative  of  religious 
ecstacy : — 

"  The  Holy  Virgin  has  appeared  anew  this  year  to  two  women  of  Dietrichswald, 
Prussia.  The  vision  remains  only  eight  or  nine  minutes,  during  which  time  these  two 
persons  are  in  a  complete  state  of  extase,  pale,  insensible  as  statues.  The  priests  and 
other  pilgrims  pass  to  them  pieces  of  folded  paper  containing  questions  addressed  to  the 
Virgin.  These  they  read  without  opening  (one  in  her  normal  state  knows  not  how  to 
read)  and  transmit  the  response  of  the  Virgin,  which  is  always  strictly  in  accord  with  the 
questions,  and  often  surpasses  enormously  the  level  of  the  intelligence  of  these  women." 

The  Messager  of  Liege,  an  excellent  Spiritual  paper,  in  commenting  on 
this  case,  shrewdly  remarks  that  the  subjects  are  evidently  "Mediums," 
whilst  the  "visions"  they  behold  are  mainly  characterized  by  the  religious 
influences  that  surround  them. 

Anticipating  the  date  of  our  record  by  a  few  years,  we  may  add  to  our 
notice  of  Belgium  "  ecstatics,"  a  description  given  in  a  thoughtful  and 
scholarly  work  issued  in  i88o,  by  Dr.  J.  Theyskeus,  under  the  title  of 
"  On  the  Abuse  of  the  Supernatural." 

It  should  be  stated  that  Dr.  Theyskeus  has  held  the  post  of  inspector  of 
hospitals  for  the  insane  in  the  Arrondissement  of  Malines,  and  though  not 
exactly  yielding  to  the  SpirituaHsts'  behef  of  obsession  by  Spirits,  he  seems 
to  think  that  a  great  number  of  those   persons  incarcerated  under  the 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.     \        417 

sobriquet  of  "  lunatics,"  are  in  conditions  of  hypochondria,  which  clPsely 
conform  to  what  ecclesiastics  call  "ecstacy,"  and  Spiritualists  "obsession." 
The  special  case  mentioned  in  Dr.  Theyskeu's  work,  to  which  attention 
may  be  profitably  called,  reads  in  translation  as  follows  : — 

"  Marie  van  Regemortel,  a  girl  of  twenty  years,  inhabitant  of  Dussel,  near  Antwerp, 
after  some  hysterical  manifestations  of  great  intensity,  had  frightful  fantastic  visions, 
then  tableaux  of  beauty ;  a  state  of  syncopy  supervening  that  continued,  without  her 
taking  any  food,  for  weeks.  For  the  last  year,  however,  this  invalid  has  had  no 
hysterics,  properly  so  called,  nor  hallucinations,  but  represents  now  the  phenomenon  of  a 
double  life.  There  is  in  her  actually  two  intellectual  existences  well  separated  ;  one  normal, 
ordinary,  and  another  that  may  be  named  a  second  state.  When  one  pays  her  a  visit,  no 
matter  at  what  hour  of  the  day,  she  is  always  found  in  the  second  state,  which  has  now 
become  the  habitual  one.  Persons  not  in  the  habit  of  seeing  her  cannot  think  that  she  is  ill. 
She  converses  perfectly  well,  reasons  as  do  others,  and  writes  better  than  in  her  normal 
state.  She  executes  marvellous  work  with  the  crochet  needle,  which  she  had  never 
learned  and  could  not  do  in  her  former  ordinary  life.  Her  hearing  is  also  excessively 
acute.  In  a  word,  her  sense  and  intelligence  are  intact.  A  peculiar  symptom  accom- 
panies this  condition  ;  she  absolutely  cannot  swalloxo  any  liquid,  and  with  difficulty 
solids.  The  oesophagus  seems  also  completely  paralyzed.  On  the  other  hand,  in  her  first 
condition,  she  is  more  sad,  more  prostrated  ;  but  she  can  swallow  liquids  and  solids, 
though  she  absolutely  cannot  utter  a  word.  The  paralysis  is  moved  from  the  oesophagus  to 
the  larynx.  She  rephes,  by  writing,  to  questions  put  to  her.  In  this  state  she  has  no 
recollection  of  what  has  passed  in  the  other,  and  in  the  latter  nothing  of  what  occurred 
in  the  former.  En  risumi,  there  are  with  this  girl  two  perfectly  distinct  existences,  and 
they  are  never  confounded.  In  the  one  she  recalls  perfectly,  and  no  matter  at  what 
epoch,  what  had  transpired  in  the  same  state  previously,  no  matter  if  weeks  or  months 
have  intervened.  ...  If  asked  which  of  these  is  her  real  normal  physiological  state, 
one  supposes  that  the  second  is,  in  which  she  talks  and  reasons  lucidly  ;  and  this  as  she  has 
an  aptitude  she  has  not  in  her  normal  state  ;  here,  too,  her  esprit  is  more  vivacious,  her 
look  more  piercing,  her  language  more  animated  than  before  her  illness.     .     .     ." 

Quite  recently  the  author  has  received  from  M.  Dijon,  a  surgeon  of  some 
eminence  at  Marseilles,  though  now  residing  at  Brussels,  accounts  of  two 
of  his  patients,  sisters,  and  daughters  of  a  leading  public  functionary  in 
Belgium,  the  particulars  of  which  closely  correspond  with  those  above 
detailed. 

The  girls  are  twins  of  about  fourteen  years  of  age.  They  have  suddenly 
given  themselves  over  to  prolonged  fasts,  some  of  which  last  for  twelve  or 
even  fifteen  days.  When  separated  at  the  suggestion  of  their  medical  atten- 
dants, their  fasts  and  vision-seeing  states,  exactly  correspond  with  each 
other  in  point  of  time  and  manner. 

Sometimes  they  speak  in  unknown  tongues  with  great  volubility.  Some- 
times they  not  only  declare  they  see  "the  saints  in  glory,"  but,  says  M. 
Dijon,  "  they  affect  to  perso7iate  these  saints,  and  preach  in  the  most  subhme 
and  exalted  strain  as  if  they  were  the  holy  personages  whose  names  they 
borrow." 

To  the  author's  suggestion  that  these  young  ladies  may  be  "  Mediums," 
and  if  questioned  in  their  trances,  might  confirm  this  statement,  or  explain 
their  own  case,  the  worthy  surgeon  replied,  that  the  parents  were  rigid 
Catholics,  and  by  the  advice  of  their  priests,  treated  the  patients  to  holy 
water  and  penitential  psalms,  whilst  he  himself  prescribed  alternations  of 
blue  pill  and  iron  tonics. 

M.  Dijon  adds: — "You  would  be  astonished,  Madame,  to  know  the 
number  of  cases  to  which  I  have  been  called  in  Catholic  families,  termed 
by  the  priests  'demoniacal  obsession,'  by  you  Spiritualists  ' Mediumship,' 
and  by  my  medical  associates  'hysteria.'  I  am  quite  aware  that  neither 
the  first  nor  the  last  terms  mean  more  than  words.  When  I  have  seen  more 
27 

41 8  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

of  Sjiritualism,  I  may  find  the  solvent  in  your  phraseology  of  Mediumship, 
an/ if  I  do,  I  shall  consider  it  to  be  a  disease,  with  which  one-third  of  the 
X),ang  women  in  Catholic  countries  are  affected.     .     .     ." 

About  1870,  an  important  impulse  was  communicated  to  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism  in  Belgium,  by  the  first  publication  of  the  excellent  Spiritual 
journal  known  as  Le  Messager.  Since  that  event,  several  other  Spiritual 
periodicals  have  been  started,  all  of  which  have  contributed  to  the  dissemi- 
nation of  Spiritual  knowledge.  At  present,  besides  La  Messager,  there  are 
four  other  journals  devoted  to  this  subject,  namely.  La  Moniteur,  of 
Brussels  ;  Le  Galileen  and  De  Rots,  of  Ostend ;  and  Le  Moniteur  de  la 
Federatio?i  Beige.  Although  the  Spiritual  papers  of  Belgium  deal  more 
with  the  literature  of  the  subject  than  with  records  of  phenomena,  their 
scholarly  style,  and  the  indefatigable  efforts  that  have  been  made  to  sustain 
them,  reflect  the  highest  credit  upon  the  Belgian  Spiritual  Brotherhood. 

Amongst  the  distinguished  American  Mediums  who  have  visited  Belgium, 
none  have  excited  a  greater  interest  than  Mr,  Slade,  whose  arrival  in  1877, 
brought  forth  the  usual  amount  of  controversy  from  the  opponents  and 
defenders  of  the  cause,  and  in  this  sense,  in  addition  to  his  striking 
Mediumship,  performed  the  good  service  of  wide-spread  propagandism. 

The  following  notice  from  Le  Moniteur  oi  Brussels,  of  the  year  1880, 
will  show  some  of  the  real  workings  of  those  means  by  which  itinerant 
conjurers  pretend  to  expose  Spiritualism,  when  they  find  that  exhibitions  of 
true  Spiritual  phenomena  do  not  pay. 

Taking  advantage  of  the  eagerness  with  which  the  clergy  seize  hold  of 
any  and  every  occasion,  however  small,  or  any  means,  however  contempti- 
ble, to  deride  and  misrepresent  Spiritualism,  many  an  unprincipled  adven- 
turer, endowed  with  veritable  Medium  power,  has  succeeded  in  gaining 
that  amount  of  remunerative  attention  from  the  public,  under  clerical 
patronage,  which  they  could  not  secure  under  the  clerical  ban.  Very  few 
of  these  accommodating  itinerants  possess  the  courage  or  conscientiousness 
that  marks  the  action  of  Mr.  Verbeck — the  subject  of  the  succeeding 
extract.  The  reader  may  judge  for  himself  how  closely  this  exhibitor's  case 
fits  that  of  many  others,  by  perusing  the  Moniteur' s  account  as  follows  : — 

"  Mons.  J^supret,  writing  from  Douai  concerning  an  exhibition  given  there  by  a  Mr. 
Verbeck,  '  a  prestidigitateur,'  says  that  he  operates  without  preparation,  without  boxes 
with  a  double  bottom,  with  sleeves  drawn  back,  and  that  his  direct  writing  is  his  most 
surprising  feat.  He  first  sends  a  single  pair  of  folding  slates  among  the  audience,  that  all 
may  see  that  they  are  wholly  free  from  any  marks  or  characters  whatever.  Then  ten 
persons,  known  to  be  of  honourable  reputation,  are  severally  asked  to  write  a  question, 
and  place  it  in  an  envelope.  The  ten  envelopes  being  collected  are  presented  to  some 
lady  who  is  requested  to  take  one  au  hasard,  and  keep  it.  Of  the  other  nine  he  gives 
account,  which  is  recognized  by  each  of  the  writers.  The  slates,  which  have  not  left  the 
audience,  are  requested  to  give  answer  to  the  question  involved  in  the  letter  that  had  been 
taken  by  the  lady  ;  and  Mr.  V.  then  reads  it  aloud  :  '  What  is  the  name  of  the  most  cele- 
irated  enchanter  ? '  One  of  the  most  estimable  of  citizens,  placing  a  bit  of  pencil  between 
the  slates,  closing  them,  and  holding  them  up  so  that  all  can  see  them,  hears  writing 
within  ;  then,  after  a  little  shock  announcing  the  completion  of  the  writing,  the  slates  are 
opened,  and  the  following  found  therein  :  '  The  name  of  the  most  celebrated  of  enchanters 
is  Merlin,  of  Douai,  celebrated  jurisconstil,  born  at  Arteux  in  1754,  died  in  1838,  Minister 
of  Justice.'  The  astonishment  of  the  audience  at  the  response  obtained  under  such  con- 
ditions cannot  be  described.  Mr.  Verbeck,  with  whom  the  writer  was  during  the 
exhibition,  declared  to  me,  he  says,  '  that  the  writing  was  not  the  result  of  his  talent,  but 
most  assuredly  the  work  of  spirits  ;  that  he  was  a  medium,  and  a  Spiritualist ; 
that  for  three  years  he  had  thus  been  favoured  with  communications  ;  that  lately  at  Lille, 
among  intimate  friends  (afterwards  confirmed  by  them)  he  had  obtained  like  results. 
Indeed,  Verbeck  declared  publicly  that  the  slate-writing  was  not  caused  by  his  ad/resse.' 
Mons.  J^supret  adds  that  his  father,  and  his  friend  Bonnefont,  had  given  a  private  '  con- 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  419 

ference '  at  Vitry-en-Artois,  and  were  much  commended  ;  and  that  a  wealthy  proprietor, 
whom  they  did  not  know,  had  offered  to  them  a  large  hall,  where  they  could  give  a  jpublic 
lecture  on  Spiritualism." 

Still  another  case  of  well-known  and  even  acknowledged  Mediumship  was 
ostentatiously  announced  as  an  unexplained  mental  phenomenon  by  the 
Btlgxc  Journal  des  Beaux  Arts  in  the  following  terms  : — 

''  There  is  at  Bruges  a  wonderful  httle  girl,  a  child,  Louise  Van  de  Kirkhove,  who 
paints  with  such  marvellous  skill  and  rapidity  that  she  attracts  vast  crowds  to  her  studio. 
In  the  presence  of  more  than  two  hundred  individuals  who  came  to  see  her  and  be  con- 
vinced of  her  powers,  she  has  produced  her  beautiful  works,  and  nearly  all  her  visitors 
have  received  some  souvenir  of  her  genius." 

It  may  not  be  amiss  at  this  point  to  call  attention  to  a  curious  incident 
which  has  been  going  the  round  of  the  Spiritual  papers,  copied  from  a 
quite  new  journal  started  by  Dr.  B.  Cyriax,  of  Leipzig,  entitled  Spiritual- 
istische  Blatter.  A  notice  of  Dr.  Cyriax's  admirable  paper,  together  with  the 
item  in  question,  would  have  appeared  in  the  German  section  of  this  work, 
had  not  the  latter  been  completed  before  the  item  was  published.  It  is 
now  given  in  a  condensed  form,  and  is  suggestive  of  many  cases  which 
might  run  in  parallel  lines  were  there  many  other  professional  conjurers 
as  conscientious  as  Herr  Weder.  The  May  number  of  Light  for  1883  has 
the  following  report : — 

"a    stance   at    LEIPZIG. 

"  A  new  German  journal,  the  Spiritualistische  Blatter,  devoted  to  popularising  and 
elucidating  the  reality  of  modern  Spiritualism,  contains  in  a  recent  number  the  letter  of 
a  medium  to  the  editor,  relating  the  way  by  which  he  was  led  to  discover  his  gift.  He 
says  : — 

"'I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Fox,  the  prestidigitateur,  at  Berlin,  in  1882.  He 
said  he  was  desirous  of  extending  his  professional  operations.  His  representations  led  me 
to  become  his  partner,  I  bringing  in  10,000  marks  (£500).  His  intention  was  to  make  an 
extensive  anti-spiritualist  tour  armed  with  all  the  latest  secrets  of  the  Spiritualists  which, 
he  said,  we  could  obtain  from  dealers  in  conjurors'  tricks,  but  at  high  prices.  This  I 
found  to  be  the  case,  for  the  charge  for  the  cord  with  which  to  do  what  is  called  the  rope- 
trick,  with  the  secret  how  to  use  it,  was  300  marks,  and  so  in  proportion  for  other  more 
elaborate  contrivance. 

"  '  At  the  end  of  six  months  all  was  arranged,  manager  and  assistants  were  engaged, 
when  I  met  an  old  acquaintance,  Herr  Troll,  who  had  been  manager  to  Herr  Hansen,  the 
Danish  professor  of  magnetism  :  he  told  me  of  a  genuine  spiritualist  seance  at  Leipzig, 
the  medium,  whom  he  knew,  being  E.  Schraps.  I  determined  to  go,  for  neither  I  nor  my 
partner  had  ever  been  to  such  a  seance.  1  had  assumed  with  him  that  what  were  called 
spiritual  phenomena  were  conjuring  tricks.  I  went  with  Herr  Troll.  Before  the  stance  I 
was  invited  to  examine  the  medium.  At  my  request  he  stripped  completely,  and  I  found 
that  beyond  ordinary  coat,  waistcoat,  trousers  and  socks,  he  had  nothing  upon  him  except 
watch  and  chain.  His  boots  were  put  outside  the  room.  I  was  appointed  to  tie  him, 
which  I  did  effectively  while  Jie  sat  in  an  ordinary  cane  chair.  He  was  tied  and  the  cords 
sealed  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  all  present.  His  manager  was  placed  in  the  centre  of 
those  present,  bound  with  a  cord,  the  ends  of  which  were  held  by  an  inquirer  like  myself, 
whose  passivity  we  also  made  sure  of.  I  surveyed  everything  and  was  satisfied.  The  light 
was  then  turned  off. 

"  '  Presently  the  medium's  watch  and  chain  were  flung  into  the  circle  without  being 
injured  ;  then  followed  in  succession  his  coat  and  his  waistcoat  ;  and  finally  the  medium 
himself  was  dropped  into  our  laps.  After  each  separate  manifestation  light  was  struck 
that  the  knots  aud  seals  might  be  examined.  They  were  all  intact.  The  medium  was 
apparently  unconscious  and  perfectly  passive.  His  manager  said  he  was  in  a  trance.  He 
was  carried  and  placed  in  his  chair. 

"  '  During  these  manifestations  phosphoric  lights  moved  about ;  there  were  raps  more 
or  less  loud  in  different  parts  of  the  room  ;  a  musical  box  was  whirled  rapidly  about 
overhead  with  other  musical  instruments  playing. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

hand  touched  mine  ;  I  took  hold  of  it ;  it  was  certainly  a  living  hand,  but  it 
away  in  my  grasp. 
Then  I  had  the  irresistible  conviction  that  there  were  forces  of  which  I  did  not 
^derstand  the  cause  and  effect. 

On  reaching  my  hotel  with  Herr  Troll,  raps  sounded  about  the  table,  the  bed,  the 
waU,  everywhere.  I  went  out  of  the  room  and  ascertained  that  the  noises  accompanied 
me  to  any  part  of  the  building.  And  it  was  not  illusion,  for  they  also  who  were  with  me 
heard  them.  I  became  thus  aware  that  I  was  myself  a  medium.  Subsequently  I  learnt 
that  I  could  hold  communication  with  my  departed  relatives. 

" '  I  communicated  these  experiences  to  my  partner  in  Berhn,  and  asked  him  to  come 
to  Leipzig,  that  he  might  have  the  same.  He  came  and  saw  similar  phenomena  to  those 
which  I  have  described.  He  said  they  were  beyond  his  comprehension,  but  could  not 
believe  them  to  be  spiritual.  I  asked  him  to  reproduce  them.  He  said  he  could  not. 
Before  the  public  he  goes  on  acting  upon  the  assumption  that  Spiritualism  is  trickery, 
without  which  assumption  he  could  not  maintain  his  position.  Of  course  my  partner- 
ship with  Mr.  Fox  is  dissolved  at  the  loss  of  my  money.  But  I  am  the  gainer  in  happiness, 
and  in  the  conviction  of  the  truth  of  spiritual  and  immortal  existence. 

"  '  The  magnetic  gift  with  which  God  has  endowed  me  I  purpose  to  employ  in  relieving 
and  healing  my  suffering  brethren. 

"  '  Chemnitz,  Saxony.  "  '  Wilhblm  Weder.'  " 

We  shall  conclude  our  notice  of  Belgic  Spiritualism  by  giving  a  few 
extracts  from  the  journal  of  M.  Henry  Lacroix,  a  French-Canadian  gentle- 
man, whose  views,  though  eccentric,  and  not  in  favour  with  some  classes 
of  Spiritualists,  nevertheless  do  not  affect  the  truth  and  integrity  of  his 
statements. 

The  author  has  known  M.  Lacroix  for  many  years,  and  can  thoroughly 
vouch  for  the  reliability  of  the  following  extracts,  printed  in  the  Banner  of 
Light  oi\%%\  :— 

"the   cause   in    BELGIUM. 

"  A  small  monthly  sheet,  Le,  Moniteur,  is  published  in  Brussels  ;  Mr.  de  Turck  is  the 
editor.  The  headquarters  for  meetings,  etc.,  are  in  Rue  de  VEmpereur,  21.  Mr.  V.  Beyns, 
the  generous  proprietor,  there  attends  zealously  to  all  wants,  and  exerts  elsewhere  a  good 
influence.  His  reception  was  most  cordial,  and  I  cannot  but  praise  his  warm  heart  and 
devotedness  to  the  cause.  There  are  several  other  Oroupes,  in  Brussels,  beside  many 
private  circles  ;  one  is  named  '  Paix  entre  Nous,'  or  '  Peace  between  Us,'  established  since 
1870.  It  is  composed  of  twenty-nine  members,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  stance-hall  is 
RueDupout,  21,  in  suburb  Schaerbeck — meetings  twice  a  week.  Direct  writing  in  a  closed 
book  was  once  obtained  at  this  circle.  I  spent  an  evening  at  the  regular  stance,  and  was 
influenced  to  organize  the  members  into  different  groups,  assigning  to  each  medium  a 
suitable  rdle.  I  recounted  some  of  my  experience,  and  showed  them  the  American  way  of 
proceeding,  whereby  practical  results  are  obtained.  In  that  consists  mainly  the  object  of 
my  two  years'  mission  to  Europe  ;  and,  at  the  very  start,  I  can  say  that  my  endeavours 
are  being  crowned  everywhere  by  a  good  cordial  reception  and  a  decided  will  to  set  to  work 
in  the  proper  way.     .     .     . 

"  On  Sunday,  14th  August,  I  left  Brussels  for  Eoux,  etc.,  on  a  spiritual  expedition.  I 
was  accompanied  by  Mr.  Alfred  Crignier,  of  Brussels,  a  most  zealous  Spiritist.  We  passed 
by  the  battlefield  of  Waterloo,  and  saw  there  some  Englishmen,  probably,  who  were 
climbing  up  the  mound  on  which  is  erected  the  famous  English  lion.  At  the  village  of 
Roux,  about  thirty  miles  south  from  Brussels,  we  were  warmly  greeted,  and  walked  to  a 
scattered  neighbouring  town,  called  Gohyssart-Jumet,  where  I  was  expected  to  address,  in 
French,  an  audience  of  about  four  hundred.  This  place  is  in  the  province  of  Hainaut, 
and  the  majority  of  the  people  are  employed  in  coal-pits,  numerous  here,  glass  factories 
and  foundries,  which  are  many  and  extensive.  In  the  afternoon  I  was  escorted  by  a  group 
of  friends  to  a  nice,  clean  hall,  and  soon  after  Mr.  Crignier  introduced  me  to  the  audience 
as  '  an  American  medium  who  had  come  to  teach  them  the  American  way  of  proceeding, 
etc'  For  two  hours  I  stood  on  the  rostrum,  addressing  listening  ears  and  eyes  that 
sparkled  with  lively  interest.  .  .  .  Mr.  B.  Martin,  of  Brussels,  comes  periodically  to 
address  these  people,  and  as  he  is  an  able  lecturer  he  has  done  much  toward  keeping  the 
ball  roUing.  But  the  real  soul  of  this  organization  is  Mr.  Alfred  Crignier,  my  companion 
and  friend.  After  the  conference  we  went — quite  a  number  of  us — to  the  house  of  Mr. 
Emile  Lefebre,  who  will  assuredly  become  a  successful  spirit-photographer.     He  showed 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  421 

me  several  plates,  on  which  were  very  good  beginnings  of  faces,  etc.  ...  I  found 
here  good  elements  to  develop  a  materializing  medium,  and  described  a  person  suited  for 
such  development  so  accurately  that  she  was  recognized  at  once — the  spirits  requiring 
that  ahient  person  as  their  medium  for  that  purpose.  At  this  gentleman's  house  the 
table  was  laid  and  all  present  partook  of  the  warm,  brotherly  fare.  These  Walloons  are 
an  intelligent  people,  the  Yankees  of  Belgium.  On  leaving  I  was  surprised  to  find  that  my 
hotel  bill  had  been  paid,  and  I  was  forced  to  accept  the  amount  of  fare  from  and  to 
Brussels — it  being  a  rule  so  to  do  toward  all  who  come  to  these  friends  to  address  them. 

"  I  went  next  with  friend  Crignier  to  another  group,  which  he  established  and 
patronizes.  It  was  on  our  way  back  to  Brussels,  at  a  village  called  Mont  St.  Guibert. 
We  were  expected,  and  escorted  to  the  sennce-hall  by  six  members  of  the  Fraternity. 
Here  I  addressed  some  thirty  people  for  about  two  hours,  and,  as  at  Roux,  I  found  good 
elements  of  mediumship,  which  I  individually  surveyed  and  described — to  the  satisfaction 
of  all — and  established  several  circles  on  a  new  plan,  with  music,  which  is  generally 
omitted  in  Europe.  While  we  were  entertained  at  supper  at  Mr.  Boufiioux's  house,  I  was 
influenced  to  sketch  a  spirit- picture,  which  was  fully  recognized.  It  startled  and  pleased 
every  one.  The  people  here  are  poor,  but  very  tidy.  A  cotton  factory  gives  employment 
to  a  few  hundred.  The  mechanical  overseer  of  it  is  our  host,  Mr.  Bouffioux,  who  is  a 
warm  intelligent  brother,  and  a  ^reat  mechanical  genius. 

"  At  Mr.  Crigniei  's  residence,  in  Brussels,  I  organized  the  select  circle  held  there  on  a 
new  and  quite  successful  basis,  as  remarkable  manifestations  occurred  at  the  second 
seance.  Two  American  spirits,  one  '  Charlie  '  (coloured)  and  '  Red-Skin  '  (Indian),  were 
brought  forward  before  my  vision  as  immediate  controls  of  this  circle.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Verheyen,  at  whose  house  this  circle  is  held,  are  heart  and  hand  in  the  cause,  and  so  is 
Mr.  R.  C.  Van  Prehn-Wiese,  a  gentlemanly  Hollander  residing  in  Brussels.  From  what  I 
have  seen  I  feel  confident  that  the  cause  will  gain  much  in  Belgium,  when  circle-holders 
and  Spiritualists  at  large  are  made  to  understand  proper  conditions.     .     .     ." 

In  reference  to  the  present  status  of  Spiritualism  in  Belgium,  the  reader 
will  find  a  perfectly  reliable  summary  of  the  subject  in  the  two  following 
extracts,  the  first  being  taken  from  Ze  Messager,  the  second  from  Le 
Moniieur,  both  of  date  1882  : — 

"  The  number  of  those  who  come  out  each  day  from  the  clouds  of  error  to  enter  by 
degrees  into  the  light  of  spiritual  truth  is  relatively  so  great  that  the  most  obstinate  of 
our  opponents  will  soon  be  under  the  necessity  of  making  a  note  of  it.  ,  .  .  Three 
years  ago  the  annual  general  meeting  of  Spiritualists  at  Brussels  numbered  only  fifty ; 
this  year  a  meeting  called  in  the  same  manner  was  attended  by  nearly  a  thousand.  The 
largest  proportion  came  from  the  great  mining  district  of  Charleroi." 

■'Mons.  J^supret,  writing  from  Douai,  says  :  '  The  ideas  philosophiques  of  our  beloved 
doctrine  have  made  great  progress  in  our  land,  where  one  can  now  say  that  he  is  a 
Spiritualist  without  the  fear  of  being  ridiculed  by  those  gentlemen  who  think  so  much  of 
themselves,  but  are  generally  of  no  great  account.  The  question  of  Spiritualism  is  largely 
agitated  among  us,  awakening  public  attention,  while  the  press  is  discreetly  silent.'  Mons. 
J^supret  has  been  invited  to  lecture  in  quite  a  number  of  towns  of  considerable  popu- 
lation, Vitry,  for  instance.  Vis-en- Artois  and  Louvain." 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    TURKEY. 

Before  closing  our  compendium  of  European  Spiritualism,  we  must  call 
attention  to  the  first  unfoldment  of  the  modern  Spiritual  movement  in 
Constantinople. 

It  was  as  early  as  1854,  when  Mr.  Lenox  Home,  the  author,  whose 
experiences  were  touched  on  in  our  section  on  EngUsh  Spiritualism, 
returned  from  a  sojourn  of  some  months  at  Constantinople,  whither  he  had 
been  called  on  commercial  business.  It  was  from  Mr.  Home's  lips,  in  the 
city  of  London,  that  the  author  of  this  work  heard  for  the  first  time  of 
table  turning,  and  it  was  in  the  residences  of  Mr.  Home's  Turkish  associates 
that  he  himself  first  witnessed  this  phenomenon.  By  some  of  the  Turkish 
merchants  residing  at  Constantinople  with  whom  Mr.  Home  had  business 
relations  he  was  invited  to  witness  a  scene  which  was  then  as  perplexing 

42  2  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

as  it  was  unprecedented ;  this  was  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  rockings, 
spinnings,  and  apparently  spontaneous  movements  of  tables  and  other 
inanimate  bodies  which  occurred  at  times  in  the  houses  of  different  indi- 
viduals, and  that  without  any  oth^  visible  cause  than  the  presence  of  any 
one  of  three  young  lads  who,  in  some  unknown  and  mysterious  way, 
seemed  to  be  connected  with  these  motions.  The  "  living  principle,"  or 
whatever  it  was,  that  set  chairs  and  tables  dancing  was  communicated  as 
Mr.  Home  found,  sometimes  by  slight  contact  between  the  children's 
hands  and  the  object  moved,  and  sometimes  when  there  was  no  contact  at 
all,  and  the  boys  were  several  feet  from  the  moving  mass. 

On  one  occasion  when  all  the  boys  were  present,  and  a  perfect  saturnalia 
was  going  on  amongst  articles  of  furniture  which  up  to  that  moment  had 
been  perfectly  well  behaved  and  quiescent,  the  youngest  of  the  boys  was 
suddenly  lifted  up  to  the  ceiling,  and  after  floating  for  a  few  seconds  above 
the  heads  of  about  a  dozen  astonished  witnesses,  was  seen  to  descend  and 
lie  at  full  length  upon  one  of  the  divans.  Mr.  Home  remarked,  that 
throughout  this  wonderful  act  of  levitation,  the  child  was  sustained  as  if  he 
were  carried  in  invisible  arms.  He  was  manipulated  with  the  utmost 
gentleness,  declared  that  his  sensations  v,  ere  full  of  delightful  calmness  and 
peace,  and  that  he  distinctly  felt  the  touch  of  warm,  soft  hands  lifting  him 
up,  and  at  times  kindly  patting  him.  One  of  the  merchants  present  declared 
that  what  they  had  witnessed  was  nothing  new,  for  that  he,  a  resident  of 
Athens,  and  a  traveller  through  the  East,  had  heard  of,  and  in  some 
instances  beheld,  similar  marvels  enacted  in  the  residences  of  friends  in  all 
directions. 

He  added,  that  report  had  alleged  these  manifestations  to  be  peculiar  to 
females  chiefly,  and  as  Eastern  etiquette,  especially  in  Turkey,  forbade  the 
intrusion  of  foreign  gendemen  into  the  sacred  precints  of  female  society, 
Mr.  Homeland  his  friends  were  obliged  for  some  time  to  be  contented 
with  the  phenomena  produced  through  the  agency  of  the  boys  before 
alluded  to.  An  opportunity  at  length  occurred,  which  enabled  Mr,  Home 
to  witness  these  new  marvels  under  another  aspect. 

Having  mentioned  the  facts  above  narrated  to  Signor  Orsini,  an  Italian 
gentleman,  residing  in  a  beautiful  villa  on  the  Bosphorus,  Mr.  Home,  one 
of  his  Turkish  friends,  and  his  little  son,  the  child  who  had  been  levitated, 
were  courteously  invited  to  visit  the  Orsini  family,  amongst  whom  three  of 
the  daughters  were  reputed  to  have  the  faculty  of  making  tables  or  any 
other  inanimate  objects  dance  to  any  tune,  or  in  any  time,  which  they  might 
sing  or  play.  Several  seances  v/ere  held  with  the  Orsinis,  in  which  the 
facts  above  stated  were  not  only  verified,  but  wonders  of  a  far  more 
astounding  character  were  displayed. 

On  one  occasion  when  the  party — fourteen  in  number — were  seated 
around  a  table,  a  pencil  which  had  been  previously  laid  on  some  sheets  of 
paper  in  the  centre  of  the  group,  rose  up  of  itself,  and  after  some  effort  as 
it  would  appear,  of  an  invisible  hand  to  steady  it,  wrote  in  bold  characters 
the  words — "Good  evening,  friends.  Carl  Maria  Von  Weber."  The 
pencil  then  dropped,  and  no  more  writing  was  produced  again  that  evening. 
One  of  the  young  ladies,  who  from  special  circumstances  had  the  privilege 
of  a  frequent  enirie  to  the  Royal  Harem,  declared  that  the  ladies  of  that 
estabhshment  amused  themselves  night  after  night  with  these  wonderful 
practices,  and  that  it  was  from  them  that  the  daughters  of  Signor  Orsini  had 
learned  the  formulae  of  sitting  round  a  table  with  pencils  and  paper  to 
procure  Spirit  writing 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  423 

Mr.  Home's  departure  from  the  East  terminated  for  him  the  privilege  of 
attending  any  more  of  these  weird  seances,  but  he  found  on  returning  to 
London  that  the  wonder-working  power  was  more  universal  than  he  had 
deemed,  for  tables  not  only  turned  and  kept  time  to  tunes  in  solitary 
instances,  but  soon  began  to  dance  all  over  London,  and  that  to  the 
clarion  notes  which  heralded  in  modern  Spiritualism. 

The  following  account  furnished  by  Monsieur  A.  J.  Riko,  of  the  Hague, 
will  give  corroborative  details  of  Mr.  Home's  narrative  of  early  Spiritualism 
in  Turkey.     Monsieur  Riko  says  :— - 

"  At  Constantinople,  M.  Eepos,  a  well-known  advocate,  was  for  several  years  a  warm 
spiritualist,  medium,  and  zealous  defender  of  the  faith  of  Sijiritualism. 

"  About  1860-61,  during  seances  held  at  his  residence,  loud  rappings,  movements, 
writings,  trance,  and  other  communications,  besides  levitations  and  floating  in  the  air, 
were  manifested  with  remarkable  power. 

"T«o  young  ladies  of  M.  Repos'  circle  were  developed  as  healing  mediums,  and 
performed  ncany  cures.  They  had  a  very  remarkable  drawing  medium  too,  who  produced 
life-sized  heads  without  ever  having  learned  drawing  ;  an-other  composed  songs  and  music 
under  influence. 

"  Mons.  P.  Vallarie  was  also  a  staunch  Spiritualist  at  Constantinople.  At  his  house 
strong  physical  m mifestations  occurred  in  1862.  When  all  sat  at  a  distance  from  the 
table,  in  an  ordinary  lighted  room,  it  answered  by  raps,  and  even  by  lifting  itself  without 
contact,  in  view  of  all  the  assistants.  A  certain  evening  a  visitor  frou]  Alexandria,  who 
came  with  a  walking  stick  seen  by  several  of  the  witnesses,  missed  his  stick  at  the  close 
of  the  sitting.  On  arrival  at  his  hotel  he  found  it  under  his  bed  covers,  in  the  closed 
room.  When  he  got  to  bed  he  was  drawn  by  the  spirits  at  his  request  halfway  out  of 
the  bed.  Another  evening  the  spirits  carried  off  the  key  of  his  hotel  room  from  his  pocket. 
On  coming  home  he  was  forced  to  share  the  room  of  a  friend.  After  a  while  they  found 
the  key  under  the  candlestick,  and  on  opening  his  room  the  gentleman  found  everything 
out  of  place  ;  the  bed  covers,  &c.  being  thrown  in  a  heap  in  the  middle  of  the  apartment. 
Other  similar  pranks  were  often  played  by  the  spirits  in  this  gentleman's  presence,  making 
it  evident  that  he  was  what  is  now  called  a  strong  physical  medium. 

"  In  May,  1863,  an  exposjtion  of  pictures  was  opened  at  Constantinople.  Among  other 
works  of  art  was  a  picture  represeting  a  fine  collection  of  flowers,  which  attracted  general 
attention  by  the  following  inscription  :  '  Mediumistic  drawing  executed  through  M.  Paul 
Lombardo,  of  Constantinople,  unacquainted  with  the  arts  of  drawing  and  painting.'  It 
was  one  of  the  productions  of  a  medium  then  sitting  with  the  circle  of  M.  Repos.  Among 
the  pictures  exhibited  none  was  more  generally  admired  or  more  eagerly  purchased. 

"  In  the  capital  of  the  Turkish  empire,  like  other  places,  the  newspapers  were  filled 
with  controversies  about  Spiritualism.  In  March,  1864,  the  Constantinople  journal 
opened  its  columns  for  the  defenders,  and  a  protest,  signed  '  The  Spiritualists  of  Con- 
stantinople,' appeared  against  unworthy  attacks " 

In  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine  of  May,  i86i,  there  is  another  brief 
sketch  of  Spiritualism  in  Turkey  from  the  pen  of  the  gentleman  named  by 
M.  Riko,  and  as  it  is  pertinent  to  the  same  seances  mentioned  above,  we 
shall  give  it  in  M.  Repos's  own  words.     He  says  : — 

"  Constantinople,  May  1,  1861. 

"  Our  experiments  become  daily  more  interesting.  We  hold  several  seances  weekly, 
sometimes  at  one's  house,  sometimes  at  another's.  Every  day  new  believers  are  made. 
Tables  rise  into  the  air,  and  the  spirits  begin  to  raise  persons.  Our  most  remarkable 
mediums  are  two  young  ladies,  whom  the  spirits  magnetize  direct,  and  through  them  they 
play  at  the  piano — duets  sometimes — the  music  being  of  wonderful  harmony.  Then  we 
have  trances,  visions,  and  self -magnetizations,  the  subjects  themselves  knowing  nothing  of 
magnetic  science.  We  cannot  make  known  the  subject  so  much  as  we  would,  for  these 
young  ladies  are  in  a  profession  which  brings  them  under  the  influence  of  the  clergy  ;  and 
the  priests  among  us,  as  elsewhere,  are  inimical  to  Spiritualism. 

"  Some  of  us,  from  table  mediums,  have  become  writing  mediums.  I  am  one  of  these  ; 
and,  under  Spiritual  influence,  I  play  music  ;  I  being  ignorant  of  even  the  notes  in  my 
ordinary  state.  I  enclose  you  a  piece  recently  composed  through  me.  The  Spirits  call 
the  air  the  '  Song  to  Eternal  Love,' 

424  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  One  of  the  spirits  of  our  circle  names  herself  Sophia.  At  our  request  she,  through 
my  hand  (though  natiu-ally  I  know  not  a  line  of  drawing),  has  executed  her  portrait.  It 
is  a  fine  head,  and  is  admired  by  all,  meeting  every  requirement  of  artists  to  whom  it  has 
been  shown.  It  has  been  lithographed  by  our  friend  Montani.  He  is  also  a  medium  of 
the  highest  order.  The  spirit  Sophia  has  thanked  him  for  his  execution  of  his  part  of  the 
work.    At  the  first  opportunity  I  shall  send  you  a  few  copies  of  the  portrait  bo  produced. 

"  To  tell  you  what  we  have  obtained  in  writing  is  not  possible  in  a  letter.  I  must 
content  myself  with  informing  you  that  Sophia  is  writing  'The  Theory  of  Spirits,'  a 
magnificent  work  which  she  commenced  a  year  ago.  Other  scientific  treatises  are  in 
course  of  composition — '  The  Harmony  of  Colours,'  '  Musical  Harmony,'  &c.  All  intended 
to  form  a  compact  whole,  and  showing  the  direct  relation  of  Spiritualism  to  external 
things,  and  through  it  an  ultimate  resolution  into  universal  harmony. 

"A  spirit  of  our  circle,  who  is  named  Angelica,  and  who  is  recognised  by  the  other 
spirits  as  the  head  of  the  spiritual  manifestations  with  us,  always  addresses  us  in  verse. 
She  has  dictated  an  Ode  to  Garibaldi.  We  forwarded  it  to  him  three  weeks  ago  :  since 
then  she  has  dictated  the  words  and  music  of  a  Hymn  to  Garibaldi. 

"  This  spirit  spoke  prophetically  in  June,  1860,  of  Garibaldi  in  connection  with  the 
events  of  Italy.     "Three  fourths  of  the  prediction  are  already  fulfilled. 

"B.  Eepos,  Jun." 

It  can  scarcely  be  said  that  there  is  anything  very  striking  or  novel  in  the 
above  details,  and  were  we  to  enlarge  upon  them  by  adding  records  of 
circles  held  in  Algeria,  Alexandria,  Cuba,  Jamaica,  Yeddo,  Hong  Kong, 
and  in  many  other  distant  parts  of  the  world  where  European  and 
American  civilization  prevails,  we  should  simply  weary  the  reader  with 
narratives,  any  score  of  which  would  prove  representative  of  every  other 
score,  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  they  might  have  occurred. 

And  here  we  must  be  permitted  to  say  that  this  very  circumstance,  or  the 
fact  that  the  generahty  of  Spiritual  phenomena  consist  of  a  series  of — 
what  the  superficial  observer  would  call — the  same  platitudes,  is  one  of  the 
most  marvellous  features  of  the  entire  movement,  for  it  is  the  one  above  all 
others  which  proves  that  there  is  a  common  origin  for  the  manifestations, 
and  that  thejr  appearance  and  reduplication  in  various  countries,  separated 
from  each  other  by  distance,  varieties  of  language,  religious  beliefs,  social 
customs,  and  public  interests,  proves  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  movement 
cannot  have  originated  in  human  contrivance,  or  been  propagated  by  human 
agency.  Any  natural  products,  physical  changes,  atmospheric  disturbances, 
or  even  mental  impressions,  might  be'  traceable  to  mundane  causes,  pro- 
vided always  any  mundane  conditions  were  ever  known  to  affect  the  entire 
surf  ace  of  the  globe  and  all  its  inhabitants  at  or  about  the  same  time.  But 
the  phenomena  now  under  consideration,  do  not  come  within  any  of  the 
above  suggested  categorical  means  of  explanation.  The  power  exhibited 
is  obviously  exerted  by  some  force  without,  above,  or  below  the  mundane 
sphere,  and  not  in  or  of  it.  In  all  authentic  cases,  it  is  accompanied  by 
intelligence,  and  in  at  least  half  the  well-attested  instances  on  record,  that 
intelligence  transcends  the  knowledge  of  the  human  beings  concerned,  and 
in  every  case  refers  itself  to  the  Spirits  of  those  the  world  calls  "  dead." 
When  the  thoroughly  supra-mundane  character  of  the  phenomena  and  the 
inteUigence  is  considered,  and  it  is  remembered  that  the  demonstrations 
occur  apparently  and  spontaneously,  at  or  about  the  same  time  in  all  the 
countries  of  Europe,  all  the  States  of  North  and  South  America;  in  the 
East  and  West  Indies,  Australasia  and  all  the  centres  of  civilization  in 
Asia  and  Africa,  what  candid  mind  can  evade  the  conclusion  that  their 
source  is  one  though  the  manifestations  are  various,  and  that  this  same 
source  is  at  once  powerful,  intelHgent,  and  supra-mundane? 

The  "demoniacal"  theory,  so  persistently  and  stupidly  alleged  by  the 
clergy,  is  almost  too  silly  to  combat  any  further,  and  is  at  once  put  to 

^ 

•^v 

■^- 

M^?    Fanny   Conant 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

425 

flight  by  observing  that  the  Spiritual  authors  of  the  movement,  work  for  the 
most  part  for  good,  truth,  religion,  and  morality,  and  where  unmistakable 
mischief  or  annoyance  is  manifest,  it  never  seems  to  be  permitted  to  cause 
injury  to  human  beings  or  prove  inimical  to  human  life.  How  different 
this  to  the  conduct  of  those  human  fiends  whom  a  corrupt  and  evil-minded 
condition  of  society  tends  to  manufacture  in  our  city  streets  !  So  far  from 
equalling  humanity  in  cruelty,  malevolence,  and  wickedness,  there  is  not  a 
single  Spiritual  communication  ever  made,  that  rivals  in  malignity  the 
Bishop  of  Santander's  savage  "  anathema,"  cited  in  our  section  on  Spanish 
Spirituahsm,  whilst  the  entire  history  of  Spiritualism  fails  to  produce  any 
criminal  record  that  can  match  in  magnitude  the  list  of  crimes  reported  in 
a  single  issue  of  our  London  daily  journals  !  It  must  be  added,  that  the 
constant  use  of  the  term  "demons,"  by  the  clergy,  when  they  would 
describe  the  authors  of  Spiritual  manifestations,  is  merely  a  7-use  to  scare 
the  vulgar  mind.  They  strive  to  make  the  word  odious  by  associating  it 
with  "  diabolism,"  when  they  well  know — unless  they  are  too  ignorant  for 
the  position  they  hold — that  it  signifies  only  the  souls  of  dead  men,  with- 
out reference  to  moral  qualities  at  all. 

If  Spirits  are  indeed  "  demons  "  in  the  clerical  and  erroneous  sense  of 
the  term,  they  are  demons  in  a  state  of  progression,  or  the  souls  of  bad 
men  and  women  no  longer  in  a  condition  to  work  the  same  evils  they 
effected  whilst  Spirits  incarnated  in  mortal  bodies. 

Regarded  merely  as  a  matter  of  testimony,  we  have  no  apologies  to  make 
for  the  reiteration  of  phenomena  occurring  in  many  lands ;  in  fact,  as 
above  stated,  it  is  our  best  witness  for  the  homogeniety  of  the  power  all  over 
the  world  ;  for  the  strictly  human  character  of  the  Spirits  concerned  in  the 
manifestations ;  for  the  evidence  that  those  Spirits  are  either  in  a  state  of 
progression,  or  that  their  power  for  evil  is  limited  by  higher  laws  than  those 
that  prevail  on  earth,  and  that  the  whole  movement  may  be  looked  upon 
as  a  handwriting  on  the  wall  of  Ecclesiasticism,  in  which  the  world  can  read 
what  the  clergy  seem  to  be  wilfully  blind  to — the  words  "  Mene,  Mene, 
Tekel,  Upharsin." 

CHAPTER    LI. 

SPIRITUALISM   IN   AMERICA. 
Retrospective. 

It  is  now  about  twenty  years  since  the  author  of  these  pages  received  a 
series  of  communications  from  some  of  her  most  honoured  Spirit  guides, 
charging  upon  her  to  collect  from  every  available  source,  the  materials  for 
a  compendious  and  authentic  work  on  the  history  of  Modern  Spiritualism. 
Preliminary  sketches  of  what  that  work  was  to  be,  were  given  from  time  to 
time,  but  it  was  not  until  the  year  1867  that  the  intention  was  declared  of 
giving  to  the  world  a  record  of  the  first  twenty  years  of  the  Spiritual  move- 
ment as  it  had  transpired  in  America. 

To  the  author's  objection  that  such  a  record  might  seem  premature,  and 
imply  the  completion  of  a  history  still  in  progress,  the  communicating 
Spirits  answered  by  urging  many  reasons  for  the  adoption  of  their  plan. 

Amongst  these  reasons  they  alleged  that  the  first  twenty  years  of  Spirit- 
ualism  in  America  would  complete   a   special  cycle  in  the  movement. 

426  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

During  thai  period  it  was  said,  the  work  of  the  Spiritualists  would  be  to 
conduct  a  stern  and  unyielding  warfare  against  the  world  without,  to 
revolutionize  old  ideas,  uproot  stereotyped  errors,  and  do  battle  with  priest- 
craft and  Schoolcraft,  ignorance,  and  bigotry;  and  at  the  close  of  that 
epoch  it  was  asserted,  that  during  the  ensuing  fifteen  years  many  marked 
changes  of  a  discouraging  character  would  overshadow  the  cause,  but  that 
these  would  proceed  chiefly  from  within,  rather  than  from  without  the  ranks. 
The  worst  foes  of  Spiritualism  wonld  be  those  of  its  own  household,  and  the 
cruellest  stabs  directed  against  it,  would  be  dealt  by  the  hands  of  Spiritualists 
themselves. 

Still  another  fifteen  years  would  be  required — said  the  guides — before  the 
first  principles  of  a  true  science  could  be  evolved.  During  that  period,  the 
phenomena  of  Spirit  communion  would  be  silendy  yet  surely  wrested  from 
the  hands  of  the  spoiler,  and  its  religious  teachings  be  rescued  from  the 
vagaries  of  speculative  theorists  in  order  to  ground  it  on  the  rock  of  immut- 
able and  well  proven  truth.  At  the  close  of  this  third  epoch,  modern 
Spiritualism  would  celebrate  its  year  of  jubilee,  and  triumphantly  enter 
upon  its  possession  of  the  promised  land,  wherein  the  unity  of  science  and 
religion  should  be  fully  demonstrated.  "There  will  be  few,  if  any,  of  the 
veterans  of  the  old  guard" — said  the  communicating  Spirits — "who  will 
remain  on  earth  to  celebrate  the  fiftieth  birthday  of  Spiritualism,  and  the 
marriage  day  of  the  long  divorced  elements  which  constitute  the  Bible  of 
Creation,  namely,  religion  and  science.  Like  Moses  of  old,  many  of 
those  who  have  led  the  modern  Israel  through  the  wildernesses  of  super- 
stition and  ignorance,  may  be  permitted  to  behold  the  Spiritual  Canaan 
from  the  far  off  peaks  of  distant  mountains,  but  few — if  any  of  them — will 
ever  tread  its  pleasant  paths  with  mortal  feet." 

Such  were  the  counsels  under  which  the  author  was  influenced  to  write 
the  history  of  the  first  twenty  years  of  "  Modern  American  Spiritualism ; " 
such  the  continuous  guidance  by  which  she  has  almost  completed  the 
record  of  thirty-five  years  of  the  Spiritual  movement  throughout  the 
civilized  world,  and  now  essays  to  resume  the  broken  thread  of  the 
American  record.  With  an  earnest  prayer  that  the  prophecy  of  the  Spirit 
seers  may  be  as  surely  fulfilled  in  the  promised  day  of  "jubilee,"  fifteen 
years  hence,  as  it  has  been  in  the  night  of  darkness  that  has  prevailed 
during  the  past  fifteen  years,  we  resume  the  American  Spiritual  history 
from  the  point  where  it  was  temporarily  suspended  by  the  publication  of  the 
first  twenty  years'  history.* 

As  that  work  is  still  in  print,  and  fully  accessible  to  the  student,  we  make 
no  apologies  for  introducing  its  claims  to  attention,  and  commending  its 
careful  study  to  those  who  desire  to  acquaint  themselves  with  the  full  sum  of 
the  American  record. 

Now,  as  in  the  earlier  portions  of  this  work,  we  remind  the  reader  that 
though  fidelity  to  the  integrity  of  history  will  oblige  the  author  to  point  to 
the  dark  as  well  as  the  bright  features  of  the  landscape,  and  uncompromis- 
ingly to  adhere  to  the  facts  of  the  narrative  whether  they  tell  for  or  against 
its  value  to  mankind,  no  prominence  will  be  given  to  those  names  that  have 
left  the  stain  of  human  error  and  corruption  on  a  movement  that  but  for 
them,  might  have  been  counted  as  purely  divine. 

None  can  follow  steadfastly  the  course  of  this  wonderful  history  without 

*  "  Modem  American  Spiritualism,"  a  twenty  years'  record  of  the  communion  between  mortals  and 
Spirits.  Published  by  Colby  and  Rich,  office  of  the  Batmer  of  Light,  Boston,  Massachusetts,  TJ.S 
America. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  427 

perceiving  that  thousands  of  angular  one  idead  "  reformers  "  (?)  have  thrust 
themselves  into  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  because  they  perceived  that  it 
was  strong,  world-wide,  and — as  they  deemed — popular  enough  to  carry  all 
the  little  hobbies  which  human  pride  and  egotism  desired  to  harness  to  its 
mighty  car. 

When  Spirits  first  manifested  their  presence  amongst  men,  their  power 
and  functions  were  so  little  known,  that  mortals  feared  to  tamper  with  them, 
or  pervert  their  work  to  human  ends  or  personal  aggrandisement.  In 
course  of  time  the  awe  engendered  by  the  unprecedented  character  of  the 
new  movement  wore  off,  and  Spiritualism,  hke  charity,  became  the  con- 
venient cloak  which  was  to  cover  all  the  sins  which  its  assumed  adherents 
chose  to  put  upon  it.  When  this  line  of  policy  failed,  an  equally  profitably 
one  opened  up  in  the" trade  of  "Spiritual  exposers."  Those  who  had  once 
been  in  the  ranks,  of  course  possessed  the  knowledge  of  how  to  work  the 
oracle,  and  if  Spiritualism  could  not  be  coined  into  money  and  reputation, 
its  alleged  exposure  could,  and  seeing  that  the  enemies  of  Spiritualism  found 
themselves  so  constantly  baffled  by  its  almost  illimitable  means  of  demon- 
stration, these  accommodating  exposers  gladly  availed  themselves  of  the 
eagerness  with  which  antagonism  clutched  even  at  their  contemptible 
agency  to  destroy  the  credit  or  pervert  the  facts  of  Spiritualism.  And  thus, 
this  great  cause,  like  many  another  of  the  world's  purest  Messiahs,  has  been 
lifted  up  on  the  cross  of  martyrdom  between  the  thieves  of  licentiousness 
and  cupidity,  and  if  its  quenchless  vitality  has  been  again  and  again  mani- 
fested in  countless  resurrections,  it  is  not  for  lack  of  every  available  effort 
on  the  part  of  humanity  to  sap  its  integrity  by  internal  corruption,  as  well 
as  by  external  antagonism. 

As  any  narrative  of  events  which  involve  the  personal  action  of  the  narra- 
tor must  to  some  extent  demand  the  fidelity  of  autobiographical  details,  the 
reader  must  be  prepared  in  the  passages  which  immediately  follow,  to  regard 
with  leniency  the  seeming  egotism  of  personal  testimony,  and  do  justice  to 
the  statements  of  an  actor  in  the  scenes  described. 

It  was  in  the  year  1871  that  the  author  returned  to  America  from  a  short 
visit  to  her  native  country  in  company  with  her  beloved  life  companion,  and 
with  the  addition  of  "Britten"  to  her  former  sobriquet  of  "Emma  Hardinge." 

Mrs.  Britten  soon  realized  that  which  she  had  long  anticipated,  namely, 
that  what  had  been  entitled  the  philosophy  or  doctrine  of  "social  freedom" 
had  expanded  from  an  incipient  germ  to  the  full  maturity  of  a  wide-spread 
movement.  As  the  first  promoters  of  what  has  been  emphatically  called 
"  Free  Loveism"  in  America,  were  a  concrete  order  amongst  themselves,  and 
only  incidentally  numbered  a  few  Spiritualists  in  conjunction  with  persons 
of  many  other  denominations  in  their  ranks,  there  seemed  no  just  cause 
for  associating  beliefs  and  practices  as  warmly  repudiated  by  many  Spirit- 
ualists as  by  any  other  class  of  religionists,  with  Spiritualism  at  all.  On 
the  contrary,  as  Spiritualism  enjoined  upon  its  followers  the  solemn  fact  of 
personal  responsibility  for  all  human  shortcomings  in  the  life  hereafter,  and 
offered  no  excuse  or  evasion  for  sin,  sternly  alleging  that  every  soul  must 
pay  the  penalty  of  its  own  transgressions,  it  might  have  been  expected  that 
Spiritualists  of  all  other  classes  of  the  community,  would  be  the  most 
scrupulous  of  moralists  and  the  first  to  set  the  example  of  purity  and  virtue 
in  thought,  word,  and  deed. 

The  monstrous  flood  of  licentious  doctrine,  often  illustrated  by  mon- 
strous licentiousness  of  life  and  conduct,  which  for  a  certain  period  of  time 
spread  like  an  evil  contagion  throughout  the  United  States,  and  included 

428  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

in  its  poisonous  breathings  a  certain  number  of  prominent  Spiritualists, 
put  the  above  stated  propositions  to  flight  in  the  opinion  of  the  public  at 
large,  and  cast  a  most  unjust  and  ruinous  ill  odour  over  the  reputation  and 
belief  of  tens  of  thousands  of  innocent  persons,  who  loathed  the  tendencies 
of  the  new  philosophy  all  the  more,  because  they  were  Spiritualists,  and  as 
such,  felt  horror  and  aversion  at  all  that  could  lower  the  standard  of  purity 
in  morals  or  religion. 

To  account  for  the  epidemic  of  madness  which  ruled  the  time  of  which 
we  speak,  and  connected  itself  so  injuriously  with  the  name  of  Spiritualism, 
it  must  be  stated,  that  the  questions  of  social  evil  and  hereditary  criminality, 
together  with  the  abuses  which  grow  out  of  ill-assorted  marriages,  had  long 
been  the  theme  of  public  discussion,  and  had  enlisted  many  earnest  and 
capable  minds  in  the  effort  to  devise  reformatory  measures  of  a  salutary 
character. 

It  was  from  about  1850  to  1870  that  several  worthless  and  licentious 
individuals  thrust  themselves  prominently  before  the  world  in  the  attitude 
of  "great  reformers,"  and  as  some  of  the  iconoclasts  who  screamed  the 
loudest  for  "  social  freedom,"  the  abrogation  of  the  marriage  law,  and  the 
subsiitution  of  licentious  will  for  the  restraints  of  law  and  order,  sought  to 
strengthen  their  case,  by  the  audacious  assumption  of  being  inspired  by 
"great  Spirits,"  the  world  eagerly  caught  at  the  idea  that  the  whole  move- 
ment was  the  work  of  Spiritualists,  and  that  the  mass  of  scum  and  corrup- 
tion that  ultimately  swept  like  a  desolating  wave  over  the  realm  of  public 
opinion  was  the  instigation  of  demoniac  spirits^  and  owed  its  detestable 
prominence  to  the  action  of  "  the  Spiritualists."  Reviewing  this  movement 
not  only  from  the  standpoint  of  bitter  experience  of  the  ruin  and  desola- 
tion it  effected,  but  also  from  the  immense  mass  of  literature — now  in  the 
author's  possession — which  recorded  the  headlong  expressions  of  opinion 
that  were  put  forth  by  many  who  were  perhaps  maddened  by  the  evil  spirit 
of  the  time,  we  may  clearly  perceive  that  there  were  three  distinct  parties 
in  this  ill-omened  work,  the  true  nature  of  which  could  not  be  sufficiently 
discerned  in  the  fever  of  the  hour. 

The  first  of  these  was  a  small  number  of  audacious  and  lawless  persons, 
a  few  of  whom  were  endowed  with  sufficient  ability  to  make  a  mark  on 
public  opinion.  This  band  of  would-be  revolutionists  were  ready  for  any 
change  that  would  bring  them  into  notice,  promote  their  favourite  views  of 
unbridled  licence,  and  dignify  infamy  with  the  specious  name  of  philosophy. 

The  author  is  in  actual  possession  of  evidence  to  show  that  some  of  these 
persons  were  sustained  by  certain  members  of  the  clergy,  and  by  them 
induced  to  promulgate  their  atrocious  doctrines  in  the  name  of  Spiritualism, 
and  put  forth  in  blatant  and  unblushing  language,  the  assertion  that  the 
spirits  of  once  pure  women  and  holy  men,  were  the  promulgators  of  the 
infamies  taught  in  some  of  their  published  manifestos. 

The  second,  and  by  far  the  largest  class,  were  earnest,  pure  minded,  and 
often  estimable  persons,  who,  having  regarded  the  many  evils  that  afflict 
humanity  in  its  social  relations,  conscientiously  believed  that  the  new  move- 
ment— of  which  they  knew  but  little  except  by  report — was  really  a 
heaven-born  inspiration,  designed  to  reform  the  wrongs  under  which  society 
laboured. 

The  third  class,  one  which  included  the  author  of  these  pages,  was 
constituted  of  persons  who,  having  assured  themselves  that  the  tree  from 
which  the  assumed  reform  was  to  spring  was  wholly  corrupt,  never  expected 
it  to  yield  good  fruit ;    and  hence  opposed  with  all  the  power  they  were 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  429 

possessed  of,  the  entire  movement,  and  above  all,  determined  to  repudiate 
the  connection  of  its  name,  fame,  and  teachings  with  the  great  Spiritualistic 
movement.  With  this  view,  lectures  were  given,  and  articles  were  pub- 
lished, which  called  forth  angry  rejoinders  and  vituperative  denunciations. 

Meantime,  this  unhappy  warfare  was  eagerly  fed  and  stimulated  by  the 
craft  of  worldly  antagonism.  As  an  evidence  of  the  use  which  the  clergy 
made  of  the  deplorable  divisions  which  this  terrible  fever  of  wrong  occa- 
sioned in  the  Spiritual  ranks,  it  may  be  mentioned,  that  when  the  author 
some  years  after  the  period  under  consideration  was  lecturing  in  New 
Zealand  in  her  accustomed  capacity  of  a  Spiritualistic  propagandist,  Mr.  M.  W. 
Green,  the  minister  of  the  "  Christian  Disciples"  Church  of  Dunedin — men- 
tioned in  our  New  Zealand  section — made  the  following  use  of  the  all-too- 
notorious  "  Free  Love  movement."  This  reverend  gentleman  collected  with 
assiduity  a  number  of  printed  resolutions  in  which  some  of  the  Spiritualist 
societies  who  opposed  the  author's  views,  denounced  her  course,  and  voted 
her  steady  opposition  to  associating  the  titles  of  *'  Spiritualistic"  and  "  Social 
freedom"  together,  as  the  result  of  envy,  jealousy,  and  "  desire  for  rule." 

Constantly  tormented  with  the  idea  that  those  who  express  opinions 
opposed  to  each  other,  are  prompted  by  the  wish  to  become  "  leaders,"  and 
— to  use  their  favourite  expression — "  rule  or  ruin,"  many  Spiritualists  in 
the  above-named  crisis,  affected  to  believe  that  the  author  opposed  the 
"new  philosophy"  in  the  spirit  of  jealous  enmity  to  its  founders,  and  desire 
for  personal  leadership.  Articles,  resolutions,  and  denunciations  to  this 
effect  were  freely  circulated  at  the  time,  causing  unspeakable  grief,  heart- 
break, and  mischief.  Regarded  now  as  the  effervescence  of  partisanship, 
and  the  fever  heat  of  an  unseemly  contest,  they  are  harmless,  and  only 
calculated  to  inspire  lessons  of  moderation  and  charity.  It  would  be 
impossible  to  describe  the  evil  use  which  Mr.  M.  W.  Green  sought  to  make 
of  these  documents,  although  none  of  his  listeners  could  fail  to  note  the 
craft  with  which  he  had  collected  them,  and  carefully  excised  every  word 
which  would  serve  to  represent  the  other  side. 

With  due  respect  to  the  author's  position  amongst  hosts  of  influential 
friends,  Mr.  Green  affected  to  sympathize  with  the  martyrdom  Mrs.  Britten 
had  endured  from  her  "corrupt  and  infamous  associates,"  and  whilst  pointing 
"  to  the  7ioble  statid  she  had  taken  in  withdrawing  from  them,"  drew  from 
thence  the  inference  that  the  entire  doctrines  of  Spiritualism  were  con- 
demned and  repudiated  by  the  very  individual  who  was  then  publicly 
advocating  them.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  sophistry  of  so  flimsy  and  one- 
sided a  character  was  not  difficult  to  expose  and  defeat,  but,  if  it  could  be 
made  available  for  the  purpose  of  antagonism  in  after  years,  it  may  well  be 
supposed  that  those  who  at  the  time  when  the  battle  was  raging  were  in 
terrible  earnest  to  put  down  Spiritualism  at  any  cost,  did  not  fail  to  make 
effective  use  of  the  weapons  which  Spiritualists  thus  furnished. 

The  author  still  retains  the  literature  of  this  unhappy  period,  and  those 
who  may  deem  that  even  these  superficial  allusions  to  the  subject  are 
exaggerated,  may  not  only  inform  themselves  to  the  contrary  by  consulting 
those  documents,  but  would  read  with  astonishment  the  evidences  of  cruel 
enmity,  bitterness,  and  fierce  antagonism  which  they  display.  No  candid 
mind  could  examine  the  Hterature  of  this  terrible  time  without  coming  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  same  Spirit  that  lighted  the  fires  of  the  aiito-da-fe 
and  directed  the  horrible  mutilations  of  the  torture  chamber  in  past  ages, 
burned  just  as  fiercely  in  the  hearts  of  humanity  at  that  day,  and  was  just  as 
ready  to  extinguish  its  foes  in  moral  fires,  or  torture  its  enemies  by  mental 
racks,  as  it  was  five  hundred  years  ago. 

430  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

There  is  one  result  however  growing  out  of  this  evil  time  too  remarkable 
to  be  overlooked.  For  a  while  Spiritualism  seemed  to  furnish  its  foes  with 
the  very  weapons  which  had  hitherto  been  most  wanting.  But  as  strangely 
and  suddenly  as  the  warfare  had  arisen  so  did  it  die  away.  The  first 
promoters  have  sunk  into  that  obscurity  to  which  society  inevitably  con- 
demns those  who  would  sap  the  foundations  of  its  law  and  order.  From 
time  to  time  they  make  spasmodic  irruptions  into  temporary  notoriety,  but 
their  sting  has  been  drawn  by  experience,  and  in  this  generation  they  will 
hurt  no  more. 

The  true  reformers  of  the  second  class,  whilst  realizing  their  mistake  in 
employing  impure  tools  to  effect  pure  objects,  still  watch  and  wait  for  the 
institution  of  salutary. reforms,  when  tim*e  and  means  shall  be  more  favour- 
able. Amazed  by  the  mischief  and  wild  licence  provoked  by  what  they 
deemed  would  have  been  a  valuable  and  philosophic  movement,  they  have 
not  abandoned  their  aim  of  promoting  true  social  reforms,  but  they  have, 
as  many  an  one  has  assured  the  author,  learned  not  to  look  for  roses  from 
thisdes,  nor  to  expect  to  gather  fruit  from  thorns.  The  most  wonderful  result 
of  all  however,  and  the  one  which  excites  most  astonishment  from  all 
classes,  is  to  see  how  bravely  and  powerfully  Spiritualism  has  survived  the 
blows  that  have  been  levelled  against  it  from  friends  and  foes  alike. 

The  oft-reiterated  cry  of  the  clergy,  "  'Ware  Spiritualism  !  It  is  all  free 
love,"  &c.,-  &c.,  has  utterly  lost  its  force,  and  the  steadfast  adhesion  of 
fathers  and  mothers,  husbands  and  wives,  of  famihes  living  in  peaceful 
unity,  and  characters  beyond  reproach,  seems  to  have  quietly  but  irrevocably 
drowned  the  voice  of  slander,  and  testified  to  the  utter  fallacy  of  attempting 
to  fasten  on  Spiritualism  a  stigma  which  belongs  to  all  classes  of  individuals, 
but  to  no  special  class  of  scientists  or  religionists.  In  a  word,  the  "  Free 
Love"  scare  is  ended,  and  although  its  foundations  are  far  too  deeply  rooted 
in  the  corruptions  of  society  to  be  destroyed  by  any  exhibition  of  its 
ugliness,  it  has  been  compelled  by  a  power — assuredly  not  of  earth — to  stand 
aside,  whilst  Spiritualism  passed  by,  and  shook  its  skirts  free  of  the 
reproach  which  never  in  the  remotest  sense  belonged  to  the  movement,  or 
could  have  grown  out  of  its  pure  and  elevating  teachings. 

CHAPTER    LII. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN       AMERICA      (CONTINUED.) 

Physical  and  Spiritual  Conflagrations. 

It  was  in  the  winter  of  the  year  1872  that  the  terrible  conflagration  ensued, 
which  swept  over  a  large  portion  of  the  city  of  Boston,  destroying  whole 
streets,  and  desolating  the  wealthiest  and  most  crowded  districts  of  the  city 
proper. 

In  the  overwhelming  ravages  of  this  terrible  fire,  the  premises  occupied 
by  the  oldest  Spiritual  paper  then  in  existence,  the  Ba^tner  of  Light, 
together  with  all  the  stock,  valuable  hbrary,  and  other  property  belonging 
to  the  publishing  office  were  destroyed. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  431 

It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal^  of  Chicago, 
a  paper  which  occupies  in  the  West  the  same  position  as  the  Banner  of  Light 
in  the  East,  had  also  suffered,  and  that  quite  recently,  in  the  same 
calamitous  way  by  the  ravages  of  fire. 

When  the  great  north-western  city  of  Chicago  was  in  flames,  and  the  very 
site  once  occupied  by  the  office  of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Jourjial  wa? 
obliterated,  the  enterprising  proprietor  of  the  paper,  Mr.  S.  S.  Jones, 
together  with  his  high-spirited  colleague  and  son-in-law,  Colonel  Bundy, 
set  up  their  "  shingle  " — to  use  a  familiar  American  term  for  sign — in  the 
very  midst  of  the  smoking  ruins,  announcing  that  the  business  of  the  publish- 
ing-house would  be  carried  on  as  usual — an  announcement  which  was 
actually  verified  by  the  issue  of  the  next  and  following  week's  papers,  which, 
though  mere  sheets,  were  sufficient  to  represent  the  indomitable  spirit  of 
the  editors,  and  convey  the  assurance — since  amply  fulfilled — of  carrying 
the  journal  forward  on  its  triumphant  mission  of  enlightening  the  world,  in 
all  its  former  fair  proportions. 

Scarcely  had  the  gallant  Chicago  editors  resumed  work,  and  the  Religio 
Philosophical Jour7ial  smiled  in  the  faces  of  its  friends,  in  a  new  and  hand- 
some dress,  than  the  report  of  the  Boston  fires  sent  a  thrill  of  horror 
through  the  various  Spiritual  societies  which  recognized  these  two  papers 
as  the  chief  standards  of  their  faith.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Western  fires, 
the  Spiritualists  soon  began  to  rally  from  the  shock  of  this  new  calamity, 
and  once  more  testified  their  high  appreciation  of  the  work  performed  by 
their  well-tried  organ,  by  pouring  in  contributions  with  unstinted  liberality. 
The  steadfast  energy  which  enabled  the  citizens  of  Boston  to  rise  above 
their  great  losses,  and  phcenix-like  to  erect  a  new  and  far  more  beautiful 
city  amidst  the  still  smouldering  vestiges  of  devastation,  seemed  to  be  fully 
emulated — if  it  were  not  actually  led — by  the  resolute  publishers  of  the 
Barmer  of  Light,  for  their  work  was  resumed  before  it  could  be  missed,  and 
very  soon,  large  and  commodious  offices  were  estabhshed  at  No.  9,  Mont- 
gomery Place,  Tremont  Street,  in  which  locality  the  Banner  and  its  pub- 
lishers have  organized  headquarters  of  a  satisfactory  and  permanent 
character. 

It  was  some  six  months  before  the  date  of  the  Boston  fires  that  the 
author  became  associated  with  a  few  ladies  and  gentlemen,  residents  like 
herself  of  that  city,  in  the  publication  of  a  new  monthly  Spiritual  magazine 
entitled,  The  Western  Star. 

The  motives  which  impelled  this  publication  and  the  basis  on  which  it 
was  founded,  may  be  best  understood  by  a  perusal  of  the  following  extracts 
from  the  prospectus,  in  which  it  was  said  :  — 

"  The  principal  features  aimed  at  in  this  undertaking  are : — First.  To  present  the 
matter  contained  in  each  number  in  such  form  and  size  that  any  or  all  the  articles  can  be 
preserved  and  bound  in  ordinary  Library  volumes .  Secondly.  To  establish  a  record  of 
the  deeply  momentous  events  connected  with  modern  SpuituaHsm,  and  to  gather  up  and 
preserve  such  material  as  cannot  be  included  in  the  columns  of  the  weekly  journals 
devoted  to  Spiritualism.  Thirdly.  To  ojjen  up  opportunities  for  a  free  and  fraternal 
interchange  of  facts  and  opinions  with  the  Spiritualists  of  foreign  countries.  Fourthly. 
To  treat  all  topics  of  current  interest  from  a  purely  Spirituahstic  stand-point. 

In  each  succeeding  number  of  The  Western  Star,  a  summary  of  passing 
events  in  the  Spiritual  arena,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  was  given,  under 
the  caption  of  The  Garland,  and  as  this  record  was  designed  to  carry 
forward  the  historical  thread  of  American  Spiritual  history  from  the  point 
where  it  was  interrupted  in  the  publication  of  the  author's  twenty  years' 

432  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

record,  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  quote  a  few  such  extracts  as  will  renew 
the  memory  of  those  who  formerly  constituted  the  dramatis  personos  of  the 
great  American  Spiritual  movement : — 

"  The  anniversary  festivities  of  this  season  were  less  universally  observed  and  largely 
attended  than  at  the  celebrations  of  four  years  ago.  The  most  interesting  meetings  have 
been  held  at  Boston,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Providence,  Cincinnati,  Cleveland,  Chicago, 
Waukegan,  Vineland  (graced  by  the  presence  of  A.  J.  Davis)  and  Terra  Haute,  presided 
over  by  the  Hon.  R.  D.  Owen 

"  The  Boston  anniversary  was  chiefly  remarkable  for  the  appearance  on  the  Spiritual 
rostrum  of  Mrs.  Conant,  the  inspired  medium  of  the  Banner  of  Light  communications, 
and  Professor  Denton,  the  veteran  war-horse  of  scientific  theology.  The  Spiritualists  of 
Terre  Haute  were  favoured  by  the  presence  of  Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  whose  anniversary 
address  was  a  masterpiece  of  logical  oratory 

"  The  Binghampton  Daily  Republican  reports  the  doings  of  a  negro,  whom  the  editor 
graphically  describes  as  "a  black  salamander."  This  man  is  said  to  walk  on  and  handle 
red-hot  iron  plates  with,  as  much  impunity  as  other  persons  touch  the  green  turf.  The 
Republican  gives  the  following  item  as  the  account  rendered  by  the  man  himself,  of  his 
own  phenomenal  gifts  : — 

'  Coleman  says  that  he  is  no  worldly  man.  Once,  while  walking  in  the  woods,  near  the 
Natural  Bridge  in  Virginia,  meditating  upon  the  greatness  of  the  Supreme  Being,  a  small 
still  voice  spoke  to  him  from  above,  saying  :  "  Now  will  I  show  this  unbeUeving  age  a 
miration  !  I  caused  Shadrach,  Meshac,  and  Abed-nego  to  walk  through  the  fiery  furnace 
and  I  will  give  you  the  power  to  walk  on  hot  iron. 

'  Coleman  thought  the  voice  was  trying  to  get  him  into  a  muss,  and  he  had  much 
hesitancy  about  trying  any  experiments  to  test  the  reality  of  the  "  miration,"  but  he 
finally  ventured  upon  hot  pigs  of  iron  from  a  furnace,  and  unlike  unbelieving  Peter,  he 
did  not  sink.' 

"  The  Religio- Philosophical  Journal  reports  that  a  veritable  case  of  a  spirit  portrait 
appearing  spontaneously  on  a  pane  of  window  glass,  has  occured  in  Virginia  City,  Nevada. 
Various  other  new  developments  are  reported  from  different  parts  of  the  United  States, 
amongst  them  the  advent  of  a  little  trance  medium  of  six  years  old,  who  resides  in  the 
City  of  Cincinnati,  and  who,  for  the  last  seven  months,  every  night  on  going  to  bid  her 
father  and  mother  good-night,  has  been  suddenly  entranced,  and  delivered  '  poetic  ser- 
mons,' which,  as  her  father  asserts,  for  sublimity  and  piety,  he  has  never  heard  excelled. 
This  little  lady  is  a  seeing  medium,  also,  arid  frequently  pauses  in  her  work,  play,  or 
studies,  to  describe  '  the  angels  '  whom  she  sees  in  the  air.  These  descriptions  have,  in 
every  instance,  been  recognised  as  applying  to  some  deceased  person 

"  Mr.  Thomas  McGinn,  writing  from  St.  Louis,  details  a  case  of  singular  persecution 
on  the  part  of  a  '  talking  spirit,'  who  persists  in  following  about  his  little  girl  Rosa,  aged 
ten  years,  and  in  her  presence,  but  not  through  her  organs,  uttering  profane  and  some- 
times pious  language,  purporting  to  come  from  a  negro  who  was  formerly  a  slave  in  his 
family,  of  imbecile  mind  and  habits  of  speaking  exactly  similar  to  the  words  which  are 
heard  in  the  presence  of  the  child. 

"  Mr.  McGinn  adds,  like  our  Cincinnati  correspondent,  that  though  they  communicate 
these  facts  for  the  benefit  of  Spiritual  science,  they  are  unwilling  to  call  the  attention  of 
the  public  to  their  little  mediums,  rationally  fearing  the  effect  which  crowds  of  hetero- 
geneous minds  may  have  upon  their  tender  youth  and  susceptible  organisms. 

"  In  the  realm  of  spirit  art,  the  veteran  mediums  already  before  the  public  are  making 
steady  advances.  The  most  satisfactory  accounts  are  given  of  pictures  produced  through 
the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Blair,  N.  B.  Starr,  Wm.  Mumler,  WilUs,  of  Indiana,  and  others, 
whose  gifts  lie  in  that  peculiar  direction. 

"  The  Davenport  Brothers  have  been  exposed  again  for  the  hundredth  time,  and  for  the 
hundredth  time  the  esposers  have  been  proved  to  be  themselves  the  humbugs. 

"  A  long  and  brilliant  list  of  speaking  mediums  report  their  good  work  and  indefa- 
tigable labours  through  the  columns  of  the  Spiritual  papers.  Thomas  Gales  Forster,  one 
of  the  earliest  and  most  esteemed  for  high  Spiritual  endowments,  has  accepted  a  call  to 
occupy  the  New  York  platform  for  one  year,  commencing  from  last  January. 

"  Mrs.  Nellie  T.  Brigham  occupies  the  Spiritual  rostrum  at  Hartford  for  the  same 
period  of  time.  J.  M.  Peebles  has  been  established  at  Troy,  N.Y.,  and  the  general  ten- 
dency to  a  more  stable  and  permanent  order  of  things  amongst  the  committees  having 
charge  of  the  Spiritual  rostrums,  is  everywhere  becoming  more  and  more  apparent.    .   .    . 

"  Several  publications  of  value  have  been  added  to  the  repertoire  of  Spiritual  literature 
quite  recently.  The  most  remarkable  of  these  are  Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen's  'Debatable 
Land  ; '  '  The  Spiritual  Pilgrim,'  by  J.  M.  Peebles; '  '  Looking  Beyond,'  by  J.  0.  Barrett ; 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  433 

and  'Flashes  of  Light  from  the  Spirit  Land,'  a  collection  of  communications  given 
through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  J.  H.  Conant,  the  celebrated  medium  for  the  Banner  of 
Light  circles.  Mean  time,  the  columns  of  the  Spiritual  periodicals  are  ghttering  with  a 
long  list  of  works  comprising  tracts,  essays,  poems,  and  treatises,  from  A.  J.  Davis,  Lizzie 
Doten,  Prof.  Denton,  Maria  King,  Hudson  Tuttle,  Emma  Hardinge  Britten,  G.  L.  Ditson, 
etc.,  that  would  reflect  lustre  on  any  set  of  special  people  and  special  thinkers 

"  A  German  Spiritual  paper,  of  high  Hterary  tone,  has  recently  been  established  in 
Washington,  by  Dr.  Schiicking,  entitled  The  Round  Table.  The  brilhant  ability  of  its 
editor,  and  the  splendid  staff  of  contributers  who  grace  its  columns,  are  sufficient  guarantee 
for  its  superior  merits."     .... 

"  August,  1872. — "  Since  our  last  issue  we  have  received  from  England,  through  a 
private  source,  a  package  of  what  purports  to  be  photographs  of  spirits,  taken  through  the 
mediumship  of  a  photographer  of  London,  and  a  request  accompanies  the  package,  that 
the  editors,  'having  had  the  advantage  of  American  experience  in  such  pictures,'  would 
furnish  their  European  readers  with  some  opinions  thereon.  With  this  request  we  are 
unable  to  comply,  seeing  that  our  American  experiences  furnish  us  with  nothing  that 
bears  the  least  similarity  to  the  pictures  received.  Some  of  them  are  placed  directly  at 
the  side  of  the  sitters,  and  present  an  appearance  strictly  human,  and  except  the  fact 
that  they  are  for  the  most  part  veiled,  and  bear  a  striking  resemblance  to  one  uncomely 
model,  there  is  nothing. to  distinguish  them  from  an  ordinary  attempt  to  represent  two 
figures  on  the  same  plate.  In  a  review  of  the  subject  in  the  British  JoumaPof  Photograghy, 
dated  May  24th,  1872,  we  find  the  following  remarks  :  " — 

"  '  We  confess  to  a  feeling  of  surprise  how  any  photographer  could  be  so  blinded  as  not 
to  see  that  such  productions  would  be  certain  to  provoke  a  perfect  storm  of  hostile 
criticism,  for  more  reckless  indifference  to  the  necessity  for  removing  those  features  from 
which  photographers  of  ordinary  intelligence  were  certain  to  deduce  imposture,  we  have 
never  seen.' 

"  Cordially  endorsing  the  above  sentiment,  and  being  unacquainted  with  any  facts 
which  might  modify  such  an  opinion,  we  should  here  close  our  remarks  on  the  subject, 
did  we  not  observe  a  tendency  in  the  European  Spiritual  periodicals  to  associate  these 
pictures  with  those  of  Mr.  Wm.  Mumler  of  Boston,  Mass,  a  photographer  of  spiritual 
forms,  whose  mediumship  has  come  out  triumphantly  through  the  most  severe  crucial 
tests  that  were  ever  applied  to  any  of  the  alleged  Spiritual  phenomena. 

"  Our  space  does  not  allow  us  to  go  into  details,  but  it  is  but  justice  to  Mr.  Mumler  to 
remind  our  readers  that  the  best  proof  that  can  be  brought  forward  of  a  genuine  character 
in  spirit  photography,  is  that  which  so  especially  distinguishes  his  pictures  :  namely,  that 
hundreds  of  them  have  been  recognised  as  portraits  of  deceased  persons,  and  that  by 
strangers  visiting  Mr.  Mumler's  studio  for  the  first  time.  During  Mr.  Mumler's  trial  in 
New  York,  and  all  through  the  bitter  persecution  which  antagonism  to  his  remarkable 
gift  called  forth,  a  perfect  cloud  of  witnesses,  including  many  of  the  most  respectable  and 
veracious  persons  in  America,  came  forward  to  bear  testimony  to  the  fact,  that  they  had 
received  correct,  and  clearly  defined  portraits  of  their  departed  friends,  and  that,  when 
the  medium  could  not  have  any  knowledge  of  them. 

"  Another  specialty  in  the  Boston  pictures,  and  one  which  often  occurs  is,  that  some 
portion  of  the  shadowy  spirit  form  is  seen  behind,  and  another  part  in  front  of  the  sitter. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  splendidly  developed  picture  of  Beethoven  as  a  spirit,  standing 
behind  Emma  Hardinge  Britten,  enclosing  her  with  shadowy  arms,  and  placing  before 
her  a  small  lyre  wreathed  with  flowers.  This  visionary  looking  lyre  is  actually  seen,  as  if 
under  the  lady's  watch  chain.  Her  dress  is  visible  too,  through  the  shadowy  arms  in 
front  of  her,  whilst  the  noble-looking  form  and  head  stands  clearly  erect  behind  her. 

"  The  last  great  sensation  in  English  Spiritualism  has  been  the  course  of  spiritual 
lectures  delivered  by  the  renowned  poet,  Gerald  Massey,  at  St.  George's  Hall,  London. 
Mr.  Massey  acted  as  chairmfc  af  the  splendid  conversazione  convened  to  bid  farewell  and 
present  a  noble  testimonial  to  Emma  hardinge  Britten,  on  her  departure  from  England 
to  America,  last  fall.  Gerald  Massey's  appearance  in  such  a  scene  and  situation, 
surrounded  by  the  noblesse  of  the  land,  and  supported  by  a  crowd  of  eminent  scientists, 
literati,  and  leading  men  and  women,  fell  like  a  thunderbolt  upon  the  gaping  toadies  who 
are  so  eager  to  echo  the  question,  '  What  great  ones  of  earth  believe  in  Spiritualism  ? ' 
But  that  Mr.  Massey  should  follow  up  this  debut  by  a  course  of  Spiritual  lectures  has 
been  almost  as  much  of  a  blow  to  the  fossilized  leaders  of  royal  associations  for  the  con- 
servation of  opinions  and  the  exclusion  of  ideas,  as  to  see  Professors  Wallace,  Varley,  and 
Grookes  putting  on  the  whole  armour  of  Spiritual  faith,  and  publicly  advocating  its  truth.' 

September,    1872. — After   excising    all   the   American    notices  of  the 
September  month's  "  Garland,"  which  are  only  of  personal  and  temporary 
28 

434  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

interest,  we  find  the  following  extract  from  the  Cincitinati  Commercial  of 
July  20  registered  as  "from  an  esteemed  correspondent" : — 

"Mrs.  Hollis,*  wife  of  Capt.  E.  J.  HoUis,  of  Louisville,  Ky.,  says  the  correspondent, 
visited  his  residence  several  weeks  ago,  and  stances  of  a  remarkable  character  took  place, 
the  manifestations  at  which  he  described  in  a  series  of  letters  to  the  Commercial.  He 
invited  a  large  number  of  people  to  view  them,  his  visitors  being  representatives  from  the 
most  refined  circles  in  the  social  life  of  Cincinnati,  several  holding  high  official  positions. 
The  most  remarkable  manifestations  occurring  during  her  first  visit  were,  slate-writing 
in  the  light,  of  which  the  narrator  says,  '  Hundreds  of  communications  have  been  written 
in  my  presence,  in  Latin,  Greek,  Hebrew,  German,  Italian,  French,  Welch,  and  English ; 
the  showing  of  spirit  hands — from  three  to  five  materialized  hands  being  seen  at  one 
time,  in  a  room  sufficiently  light  to  read  in  ;  and  the  hearing  of  audible  spirit  voices.  In 
proof  of  this  latter  phase  the  writer  avers  that  his  mother  spoke  to  him  in  a  strongly 
defined  voice  : — '  If  that  voice  had  simply  pronounced  my  name,  I  should  have  fixed  it 
as  my  mother's.  It  is  only  four  years  since  I  heard  it  from  her  mortal  lips.  I  know  it 
was  the  voice  of  my  mother.'  Again  it  is  said  ; — '  The  table  upon  which  the  music-box 
was  placed  stood  about  ten  feet  from  the  cabinet  door.  After  winding  it  up,  I  was  turn- 
ing to  resume  my  seat  in  the  circle,  in  doing  which  I  faced  the  aperture  in  the  cabinet, 
when  to  my  utter  surprise,  /  beheld  my  mother's  face  at  the  opening.  '  Why,  mother,'  I 
exclaimed,  '  is  it  possible  ?'  She  smiled,  spoke  my  name,  and  retired.  The  materialization 
continued  for  the  space  of  ten  or  fifteen  seconds.  All  in  the  room  saw  the  dear  face,  the 
Quaker  cap,  and  heard  the  name  pronounced.  I  was  within  two  feet  of  the  aperture, 
and  others  not  ten  feet  off.  Not  doubting  her  identity,  still  I  said,  '  Mother,  dear,  can 
you  materialize  your  left  hand,  and  show  it  at  the  ajjerture  ?'  In  less  than  a  minute  the 
left  hand  was  presented  for  my  inspection.  I  was  close  to  it.  Th^  forefinger  was  perma- 
nently closed  by  contraction  of  the  tendon,  from  a  burn  received  in  childhood.  The  hand 
presented  had  the  same  peculiarity.  The  faces  of  '  Jimmy  Nolan,'  and  those  purporting 
to  be  Ney  and  Josephine,  together  with  several  unrecognised  spirits,  were  shown  at  the 
cabinet  aperture.  In  dark  stances,  held  by  direction,  Mrs.  Hollis  was  frequently  carried 
over  the  heads  of  the  party  present ;  and  on  one  occasion,  being  provided  with  a  pencil, 
traced  the  course  of  her  aerial  journey  along  the  ceiling — the  walls  having  previously 
been  examined,  and  no  pencil-marks  found  thereon — the  lead  being  worn  down,  and  the 
hand  of  the  medium  covered  with  lime-dust  by  the  operation." 

October,^  1872. — Besides  noticing  the  suspension  of  two  Spiritual  papers, 
T^e  American  Spiritualist  and  Lyceum  Banner,  the  writer  of  the  "  Garland" 
adds  : — 

"  The  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  gives  several  interesting  descriptions  of  the  circles 
held  in  Chicago,  for  physical  manifestations.  The  most  candid  and  intelligent  of  these 
reports,  are  from  the  pen  of  Mrs.  Annie  Lord  Chamberlain,  herseK  one  of  the  most  gifted 
physical  mediums  in  the  world,  and  one  whose  generous  recognition  of  the  merits  of 
others  speaks  more  loudly  for  the  nobility  of  soul  which  inspires  her  than  all  the  lauda- 
tions which  could  be  pronounced  upon  her.  Some  of  Mrs.  Chamberlain's  facts  are  in 
advance  even  of  the  experiences  of  those  most  familiar  with  the  power  of  the  invisible 
world ;  for  example,  she  reports  that  the  spirits  who  keep  watch  and  ward  over  the 
wonderful  Bangs  family,  have  ministered  to  the  good  mother  in  her  domestic  duties, 
laying  her  cloth,  preparing  her  meals  when  indisposed,  and  then  serving  up  the 
various  condiments,  cooked  in  the  most  approved  fasluon. 

"  One  of  the  most  interesting  reports  of  Chicago  Spiritualism,  gives  a  detailed  account 
of  a  siance  with  Mrs.  Maud  Lord,  during  which  the  reporter  of  the  Chicago  Tribune,  three 
other  members  of  the  editorial  staff,  and  a  Baptist  minister  were  present.  Besides  the 
display  of  lights,  the  sound  of  voices,  demonstrations  of  spirit  music,  and  the  usual  con- 
comitants of  a  dark  circle,  several  of  the  witnesses  (including  the  Tribune  reporter,  who 
testifies  of  the  fact  in  the  Tribune)  were  favoured  by  the  clasp  of  spirit  hands  which  came 
and  melted,  formed  again,  and  again  melted  in  the  grasp  of  the  narrators,  giving  tests  of 
spiritual  agency,  which  put  the  theories  of  stuffed  gloves  or  mediumistic  trickery  out  of 
the  pale  of  possibility.  Manifestations  of  a  similar  kind  are  increasing  on  every  side.  It 
is  scarcely  possible  to  note  how  numerous  and  forcible  are  the  proofs  which  crowd  the 
columns  of  the  Spiritual  papers  throughout  the  American  continent.  Like  the  miracles 
witnessed  by  St.  Augustine,  'they  are  so  common  that  they  are  hardly  worth  recording.' 

*  Now  Mrs.  Billings,  the  well-known  and  admired  physical  medium,  of  New  York. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  435 

"December,  1872. — The  Boston  Music  Hall  free  meetings  were  inaugurated  the 
first  Sunday  in  October,  by  a  lecture  from  Miss  Lizzie  Doten,  whose  high  reputation  as  a 
poetess  and  inspirational  speaker  gained  more  in  this  one  splendid  discourse  than  by  any 
of  her  previous  fine  efforts. 

"  Her  subject  was  the  '  Celestial  Alphabet,'  or  a  description  of  the  immutable  fidelity 
with  which  nature's  language  is  represented  in  creation,  and  the  laws  which  underHe  all 
her  forms  and  forces 

"  Physical  maaifestations  seem  to  be  gaining  in  power  with  each  returning  day.  Mrs, 
Britten's  chapter  on  physical  demonstrations  m  ikes  mention  of  a  Mrs.  Libby  White,  of 
Sodus  Point,  N.  Y.  In  the  narrative  of  that  lady's  mediumship  several  novel  phenomena 
are  described 

"  Not  only  are  spirit  faces  and  forms  seen,  and  that  in  a  lighted  room,  but  visitors 
have  the  privMege  of  shaking  hands  with  their  beloved  spiritual  visitants,  whilst  warm 
kisses  are  pressed  on  their  brows,  and  kind  words  of  greeting  are  interchanged  as  in  the 
days  of  mortal  communion 

"  From  Moravia,  New  York,  Boston,  Chicago,  and  every  section  of  the  land,  media 
like  Dr.  Slade,  Mrs.  Andrews,  the  Bings  family,  Annie  Lord  Chamberlain,  Jennie  Webb, 
Maud  Lord,  Mrs.  Hollis,  iVIr.  Charles  Foster,  and  hosts  of  others,  eliminate  through  their 
mediumship  more  marvels  in  ten  minutes  than  scientists  could  explain  in  ten  years  ;  and 
yet  one  of  the  representative  men  of  the  'scientific'  ranks  complains  that  ' for  his  part 
he  never  can  see  anything  in  Spiritualism  worthy  of  investigation  or  notice.' 

"  This  great  transatlantic  luminary  seems  to  be  well  up  in  the  nature  and  properties  of 
metals.  We  wonder  how  he  would  explain  the  action  of  iron  under  the  following 
circumstances. 

"  The  Religio  Philosophical  Journal,  giving  a  description  of  Captain  Winslow,  a  new 
physical  medium,  writes  as  follows  : — '  We  had  the  pleasure,  a  few  evenings  since,  of 
attending  a  seance,  at  which  Captain  Winslow  was  the  medium.  The  manifestations 
were  very  fine.  07ie  very  remarkable  feat  is  the  union  of  two  solid  iron  rings,  leaving  them 
thus  interlinlced,  and  yet  the  metal  perfectly  sound.' 

"  Something  of  a  scene  occurred  in  Chicago  a  few  days  ago,  when  Mrs.  Sawyer,  a 
physical  force  medium,  of  that  city,  was  summoned  to  appear  before  Mayor  Medill,  to 
show  cause  why  she  should  not  be  taxed  and  compelled  to  pay  a  license,  like  other 
'  exhibitors  and  vendors  of  wares  ;'  indeed,  the  mayor  seemed  to  think  the  payment  of  a 
one  hundred  and  twenty  dollar  license  was  only  due  to  the  city  authorities  for  the 
privilege  of  allowing  mourners  to  converse  with  their  '  dead,'  or  the  exercise  of  the  gifts 
which  the  founder  of  the  Christian  religion  charged  upon  Mayor  Medill,  in  common  with 
all  his  other  followers.  How  the  Spiritualists  resisted  and  acted  upon  this  demand  may 
be  gathered  from  a  report  in  the  Chicago  Times,  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract : — 

"  '  A  day  or  two  since  a  medium  named  Mrs.  Sawyer  was  brought  before  the  mayor, 
and  warned  by  that  gentleman  that  if  she  did  not  take  out  a  license  she  would  be 
arrested.  Mr.  J.  E.  Hoyt,  of  No.  341,  West  Madison  Street,  was  present,  and  declared  he 
would  continue  his  seances,  his  sweet  communings  with  angel  land,  despite  the  mayor  or 
his  staS".  Last  night  was  the  first  occasion  on  which  a  stated  seance  has  taken  place  since 
the  mayor  gave  his  warning.  There  was  considerable  excitement  over  the  question 
whether  the  mayor  would  seek  to  carry  out  his  threat,  but  the  seance  proceeded  as  usual, 
and  no  blue  coat  made  his  appearance.  The  spirits  that  manifested  themselves  were  in 
great  good  humour,  and  seemed  to  be  as  little  afraid  of  Mr.  Medill  as  the  temperance 
committee  or  the  Spiritualists  are  of  his  logic' 

"  The  Massachusetts  Supreme  Court  has  given  the  ignorant  and  unprogressive  officials 
of  Chicago  a  good  illustration  of  the  advanced  condition  of  public  opinion  on  the  subject 
of  Spirituahsm  in  the  "Athens  of  America,"  as  the  following  excerpt  from  the  Banner  of 
Light  will  show. 

'"a  right  decision. 

"  '  The  Supreme  Court  of  Massachusetts  has  reached  a  just  decision  in  the  case  of  Mrs. 
A-  J.  Feital,  who  had  recovered  five  thousand  dollars  damages  from  the  Middlesex  Horse 
Railroad  Company,  in  requital  of  injuries  received  while  on  the  cars  of  that  company  on 
a  certain  Sunday,  returning  from  a  Spiritualist  open-air  meeting  at  Maiden.  The 
company  contested  her  claim  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not  responsible  for  damages 
received  at  their  hands  on  Sunday,  the  contract  on  that  day  with  passengers  being  illegal. 
It  further  maintained  that  a  Spiritualist  meeting  wa,s  in  no  sense  religious,  and  therefore 
that  the  plaintiff  had  no  good  ground  for  even  a  Sunday  case. 

" '  It  was  bold,  if  not  worse,  ground  for  a  public  corporation  to  assume  in  its  defence  ; 
and  having  been  assessed  in  five  thousand  dollars  damages,  the  Middlesex  Company 
thought  they  would  resist  to  the  last  rather  than  pay  the  amount.  Hence  the  hearing 
before  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Commonwealth.     But  justice  was  not  to  be  thus  ba£0[ed. 

436  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

An  appeal  to  its  highest  seat  only  brought  out  its  voice  with  the  utmost  possible  authority. 
The  Supreme  Court  has  decided  that  the  company  was  obligated  to  carry  the  plaintiff, 
and  indeed  all  other  passengers,  with  as  much  care  on  Sunday  as  on  any  other  day  ;  and 
also  that  a  meeting  of  Spiritualists  is  as  much  a  religious  meeting  for  such  as  subscribe 
to  Spiritualism,  a^  any  called  orthodox.'  "   !   !  ! 

With  the  above  extract  there  falls  from  the  editor's  palsied  hand  the  last 
"  Garland"  that  was  ever  woven  from  the  blossoms  of  Spiritual  truth  for  the 
pages  of  The  Western  Star.  The  relentless  action  of  the  Boston  fires  swept 
off  amongst  other  ravages  the  warehouses  and  property  not  only  of  the 
parties  who  stood  related  to  The  Western  Star  as  its  proprietors  and  financial 
guarantors,  but  also  reduced  to  temporary  ruin  a  large  number  of  its  past 
and  prospective  subscribers.  In  this  crisis  the  author  issued  a  circular 
notice,  the  following  extracts  from  which  will  speak  for  themselves  : — 

*  'special   notice. — THE   BOSTON    FIRES   AND    TH[E    INEVITABLE   SUSPENSION 
OF    *THE    WESTERN    STAR.'" 

"  It  is  with  the  deepest  regret  that  I  am  compelled  to  announce  to  the  friends  and 
patrons  of  this  magazine  the  urgent  necessity  of  suspending  its  publication, — at  least  for 
the  present, — in  consequence  of  the  heavy  losses  incurred  by  its  financial  supporters  in 
the  late  calamitous  Boston  fires.     ' 

"  As  it  could  not  be  expected  that  a  new  and  wholly  experimental  work  could  secure  a 
subscription  list  adequate  to  its  support  for  the  first  few  months,  the  actual  expenses  were 
guaranteed  by  the  payment  of  certain  sums  as  shares,  with  a  promise  that  any  deficit 
which  might  remain  at  the  end  of  the  year  should  be  provided  for  by  parties  interested 
in  the  enterprise 

"  Although  I  have  refrained  from  publishing  any  of  the  highly  laudatory  letters  I  have 
received  in  commendation  of  this  magazine,  they  have  been  so  numerous  and  flattering 
that  I  could  not  question  but  that  a  steady  increase  in  the  subscription  list,  would  have  left 
it  at  the  end  of  the  year  on  a  firm  and  well  established  foundation,  but  pending  a  climax 
which  I  could  only  hope  to  arrive  at  as  a  process  of  growth,  all  my  resources  and  those  of 
my  friends  and  supporters  are  swept  away  by  the  overwhelming  losses  accruing  from  the 
Boston  fires. 

"  My  shareholders'  and  guarantors'  property  have  alike  been  destroyed. 

"  I  cannot  add  to  their  heavy  losses  by  pressing  my  claims,  small  though  they  seem  in 
comparison  ;  and  a  large  number  of  my  books  have  also  been  destroyed. 

"  Considerable  sums  due  on  the  sale  of  magazines  cannot  now  be  collected  from 
creditors  more  distressed  than  myself.  The  superior  claims  of  The  Banner  of  Light,  for 
so  many  years  the  justly  esteemed  standard  of  the  Eastern  Spiritualists'  faith,  now  crushed 
into  overwhelming  ruin,  render  all  minor  claims  on  the  Spiritualists  for  aid,  insignificant 
and  almost  unworthy. 

"  My  own  resources  have  been  drained  to  support  this  (to  me)  noble  labour  of  love 
until  nothing  more  is  left  to  give.  I  have  bestowed  all  my  time,  night  and  day,  health, 
rest,  ceaseless  energy,  and  every  available  dollar  on  the  work ;  and  though  I  deem  the 
high  eulogies  that  have  been  passed  upon  it  a  meed  worth  labouring  for,  these  have  been 
the  sole  recompense  I  have  derived.  I  can  scarcely  deem  that  any  one  will  read  this  frank 
and  straightforward  statement  and  yet  attribute  blame,  incompetency,  or  lack  of  faith  to 
me  when  I  say  the  work  must  now — for  the  present  at  least — suspend " 

The  next  step  in  the  great  Spirituahstic  movement  which  claims  attention 
was  the  first  openly  recognized  dawning  of  a  movement  which  has  generally 
obtained  the  name  of  "  Occultism,"  although  in  reality  that  term — as  now 
understood — perverts  rather  than  interprets  its  true  significance,  or  that 
which  it  at  first  promised  to  unfold. 

Mrs.  Britten  had  changed  her  place  of  residence  after  the  suspension  of 
The  Western  Star  from  Boston  to  New  York,  and  in  that  city  occupied 
herself  in  translating  and  editing  a  work,  since  widely  known,  under  the 
title  of  "Art  Magic."     The  author  of  this  book,  being  a  life-long  and  highly- 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  437 

honoured  friend  of  Mrs.  Britten's,  but — as  a  foreigner — not  qualified  to 
produce  a  work  in  the  English  language,  had  induced  Mrs,  Britten  to 
undertake  the  task  of  preparing  it  for  the  press.  Amongst  other  conditions 
which  this  gentleman  insisted  on,  before  he  would  consent  to  publish  his 
book,  was  the  stipulation  that  the  real  author  should  remain  unknown,  also 
that  the  circulation  should  be  so  limited  as  merely  to  pay  expenses,  and 
so  prevent  his  recondite  work  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  such  hetero- 
geneous readers,  as  he  felt  confident  would  misunderstand,  or  perhaps 
pervert  its  aims  to  evil  uses. 

One  of  the  features  of  this  work  was  indicated  in  its  second  title,  namely, 
"  Mundane,  Sub-mundane,  and  Super-mundane  Spiritualism."  It  professed 
to  explain  the  origin  of  creation ;  of  all  religious  systems  ;  tracing  them  out 
from  Solar  and  Sex  worship  to  sects  and  modern  creeds.  It  defined  the 
Occultist's  belief  in  Snb-mu7idane  or  Elementary  Spirits  ;  in  Super-mundane 
or  Planetary  Spirits,  and  ranged  between  them,  the  realm  of  humanity  with 
its  spheres  of  communicating  human  Spirits,  revealed  through  the  order 
of  Nature  and  Providence  in  the  beneficent  Spiritual  outpouring  of  the 
nineteenth  century.  A  few  examples  of  ancient,  mediaeval,  and  present 
day  Oriental  magic  were  given,  not  as  subjects  for  imitation,  but  rather  as 
warnings  of  what  to  avoid,  and  in  striking  contrast  to  the  naturalness  and 
order  of  the  modern  Spiritual  methods  of  communion. 

As  the  mechanical  details  of  the  publication  were  likely  to  be  very  costly, 
and  the  limited  circulation  rendered  it  un remunerative,  the  editor  (Mrs. 
Britten)  sent  out  preliminary  notices  inviting  subscriptions,  to  which  nearly 
four  thousand  answers  were  sent  in,  from  different  parts  of  the  world.  As 
the  circulation  was  not  to  exceed  a  few  hundreds,  with  the  addition  of  a 
certain  number  of  copies  to  be  prepared  as  equivalent  for  losses,  &c.,  it 
might  have  been  hoped  that  there  was  little  scope  for  blame  or  reproach, 
singular  as  the  undertaking  might  have  appeared  to  those  who  knew 
nothing  of  "  Occultism." 

Far  otherwise  however  were  the  results.  From  the  first  day  when  the 
preliminary  notices  were  issued,  the  author's  motives  were  assailed  by  a 
veritable  storm  of  misrepresentation  and  insult.  Articles,  prints,  and 
tracts  were  circulated  to  warn  the  public  against  patronizing  the  intended 
work.  The  unwary  were  assured  it  was  *'  a  plot  of  Jesuits,"  and  nothing 
less  than  "  a  cunning  conspiracy  to  uproot  Spiritualism,  and  place  Catho- 
licism, witchcraft,  magic,  and  diablerie  in  general,  in  its  place.  It  would  be 
almost  humiliating  to  recall  the  folly  and  absurdity  exhibited  by  the  attack- 
ing party. 

Never  in  the  course  of  a  long  career  of  devotion  to  the  service  of 
humanity,  had  the  author  witnessed  such  a  rain  of  illogical  and  causeless 
persecution ;  never  had  she  expected  to  be  requited  for  such  service,  after 
such  a  fashion.  And  all  this  while,  it  must  be  remembered,  the  book  was 
yet  unpublished,  and  except  by  its  author,  editor,  and  a  few  private  friends,  not 
a  line  of  its  MSS.  was  known,  or  had  ever  met  the  eye  of  a  single  creature 
that  denounced  it !  It  seems  to  have  been  the  facts  that  the  author  insisted 
on  remaining  anonymous,  wrote  on  subjects  of  which  the  attacking  parties 
were  ignorant,  and  hmited  his  circulation  to  "  a  worthy  few,"  which  excited 
the  wrath  of  the  belligerents,  unless  indeed  a  certain  number  gladly  availed 
themselves  of  this  opportunity  to  retaliate  upon  Mrs.  Britten,  the  opposi- 
tion they  had  endured  from  her,  on  the  subject  of  the  infamous  "Social 
freedom  "  doctrine. 

Meantime  it  would  be  ungrateful  indeed  not  to  acknowledge,  that  there 

438  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

was  another  side  to  this  curious  warfare.  Those  who  had  personally  known, 
and  hundreds  of  others  who  had  followed  Mrs.  Britten  during  her  long 
public  career,  poured  in  upon  her  the  most  cordial  and  generous  assurances 
of  confidence.  Unlimited  promises  of  support  and  offers  of  assistance  also 
were  volunteered  from  countless  sources.  When  at  length  the  object  of 
this  remarkable  warfare  was  produced,  its  owners  as  a  genjeral  rule  had 
scarcely  completed  its  perusal  ere  they  poured  in  upon  the  much-abused 
editor,  letters  of  the  highest  eulogy  and  thankfulness.  The  receipt  of  those 
letters,  and  the  fact  that  several  hundred  of  such  are  now  in  the  edittsr's 
possession,  have  more  than  compensated  her  for  the  birthpangs  through 
which  this  highly-lauded  and  greatly-abused  volume  was  produced. 
Amongst  other  illustrious  European  potentates  who  sought  and,  in  some 
instances  only,  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession  of  this  book,  were  the 
late  unfortunate  Czar  of  Russia  and  his  noble  aide-de-camp,  the  much- 
beloved  friend  of  Spiritualism,  Prince  Emil  de  Sayn  Wittgenstein.  These 
gentlemen  were  amongst  the  first  European  subscribers  who  applied  for 
"  Art  Magic,"  and  Mrs.  Britten  rejoices  in  the  possession  of  autograph 
letters  from  them,  not  only  thanking  her  for  being  the  instrument  of  pub- 
lishing "  so  glorious  a  work,"  but  adding  commendatory  notices  of  too 
personal  a  character  to  transcribe  in  this  place. 

Prince  Emil  Wittgenstein,  who  was  one  of  the  Russian  Emperor's 
lieutenant  generals  in  the  late  unhappy  Turkish  war,  wrote  to  Mrs.  Britten 
that  he  regarded  that  book  as  his  "  bible,"  carried  it  with  him  wherever  he 
went,  and  had  "  often  derived  consolation  and  harmony  of  spirit  from  its 
noble  teachings  in  moments  embittered  by  the  fever  of  war,  and  the  cares 
of  State."  Many  similar  tokens  of  admiration  from  some  of  the  best  minds 
of  the  age,  soon  sufficed  to  wipe  out  the  stains  of  mud  hurled  against  the 
publication  by  those  who  knew  not  what  they  did,  or  whom  they  denouticed. 

Had  this  episode  been  of  the  purely  personal  character  hitherto  detailed, 
it  would  have  found  no  place  here,  except  indeed  to  demonstrate  the  fact 
that  many  of  those  who  call  themselves  Spiritualtists,  and  claim  to  be  "  the 
friends  of  progress,"  have  not  outgrown  the  spirit  of  ancient  bigotry,  and 
are  \  ust  as  ready  to  put  those  who  dififer  with  them  to  moral  death  or 
Spiritual  torture  as  if  they  were  the  most  zealous  adherents  of  orthodox 
creeds.  The  publication  of  "Art  Magic"  synchronizes  so  closely  in  point 
of  time  with  the  first  awakening  interest  manifested  in  occult  subjects  and 
especially  with  the  foundation  of  the  celebrated  "  Theosophical  Society,"  of 
which  the  author  was  one  of  the  first  members,  that  it  becomes  an  act  of 
justice  due  to  both  subjects,  to  show,  that  they  were  totally  unrelated,  and 
that  the  impression  which  seems  to  have  prevailed  to  the  contrary,  simply 
arose  from  the  fact  that  "Art  Magic"  was  published  about  the  time  when 
the  Theosophical  Society  was  founded.  As  there  were  many  persons  who 
— when  "Art  Magic"  was  published  and  the  "Theosophical  Society" 
formed — without  having  the  smalle-st  knowledge  of  the  facts,  rushed  into 
print  to  explain  to  others  what  they  did  not  understand  themselves,  and 
especially  to  show,  that  the  authors  in  both  cases  were  combined,  and  both 
in  a  conspiracy  to  sweep  Spiritualism  out  of  existence,  and  substitute  for 
it  Jesuitism,  and  the  black  art,  Mrs.  Britten  was  often  compelled  to  answer 
these  wild  and  far-fetched  attacks  by  counter  statements,  one  specimen  at 
least  of  which  will  do  more  to  enlighten  the  reader  on  the  true  state  of  the 
case  than  all  that  the  lying  tongue  of  rumour  could  disclose.  The. article 
which  follows,  was  printed  in  the  Boston  Spiritual  Scientist,  and  is  prefaced 
by  the  following  editorial  remarks  : — 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  439 

"'art   magic' 

Emma  Habdinge  Britten  replies  to  the  important  caution  issued  by  Dr.  B- 

against  the  proposed  work  on  "  art  magic,"  advertised  in  another  column  of  this  paper. 
His  insinuations,  concerning  the  unknown  author,  and  also  the  other  objections  urged  by 
him,  are  ably  answered.     She  says  : — 

" '  If  the  Spiritualists  think  they  know  everything  that  is  to  be  known,  of  course  they 
need  to  hear  or  to  read  no  more.  For  the  few  who  think  with  me  that  we  need  "  light, 
more  light "  ;  to  those  who  are  not  satisfied  that  twenty-five  years  of  communion  with 
our  beloved  ones  gone  before  has  explained  all  of  the  twenty-five  thousand  years  of  life 
that  has  gone  behind,  nor  yet  exhausted  the  fountains  of  revelation  on  all  spiritualistic 
subjects  that  may  unfold  themselves  in  the  future,  I  say,  press  on !  search  on  !  and  take 
the  very  Kingdom  of  Heaven  by  violence,  sooner  than  sit  down  in  the  apathetic  rust  of 
"I  know  enough  !"     .     .     . 

"  '  To  all  whom  it  may  concern,  but  in  strict  justice  to  Col.  Olcott,  Madame  Blavatsky, 
and  any  who  may  unwittingly  be  confounded  with  this  matter,  I  emphatically  protest 
that  they  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  it.  That  the  two  movements,  namely,  the 
publication  of  my  friend's  advertisement  and  the  formation  of  the  Theosophical  Society, 
most  strangely  took  place  at  or  about  the  same  time,  in  fact,  within  twenty -four  hours  of 
each  other,  is  a  truth  which  I  admit,  but  cannot  account  for. 

"  '  About  twelve  hours  after  I  had  posted  the  advertisement  to  the  Banner  of  Light, 
announcing  that  a  book  on  "Art  Magic,"  &c.,  was  to  be  published.  Col.  Olcott  and  I  met 
for  the  first  time  in  several  years.  An  old  acquaintance  was  renewed,  an  introduction  to 
Madame  Blavatsky  took  place,  and  then,  but  not  till  then,  did  I  learn  the  views  of  these 
friends,  respecting  a  concerted  effort  to  study  faithfully  the  science  which  underlies  the 
principles  of  spirit-communion.  So  amazed  and  struck  was  I  with  the  coincidence  of 
pv/rposes  expressed  in  the  inauguration  of  the  "  Theosophical  Society,"  at  which  I  was 
present,  with  some  of  the  ideas,  put  forth  in  my  friend's  work,  that  I  felt  it  to  be  my 
duty  to  write  to  the  President  of  that  Society,  enclose  a  copy  of  the  advertisement,  and 
explain  to  him  that  the  publication  of  the  book  in  question  anticipated,  without  concert 
of  action  or  even  personal  acquaintance  with  the  parties  concerned,  whatever  of  Cabalistic 
lore  or  revelation  the  said  "Theosophical  Society"  might  hereafter  evolve.  Whilst  my 
Theosophical  friends  and  myself  have  both  been  greatly  struck  with  the  remarkable 
coincidence  of  the  two  movements,  chiming  in  at  precisely  the  same  stroke  of  the  dial 
from  points  of  action  removed  from  and  at  the  same  time  unknown  to  each  other,  we 
neither  desire  to  damage  the  work  of  the  other  by  being  mistaken  for  or  confounded 
together.  The  author  of  "Art  Magic"  prepared  the  material  for  his  work  many  years 
ago  in  Europe,  and  is  a  total  stranger  to  Col.  Olcott  or  Madame  Blavatsky.  Praise  or 
blame  us  all  not  for  each  other's  sake,  but  for  our  own.'  " 

At  this  point  it  may  be  necessary  to  explain  that  the  Spiritual  Scientist.,  in 
which  the  above  letter  appeared,  was  a  most  excellent  and  scholarly  paper 
published  in  Boston  by  Mr.  E.  Gerry  Brown,  and  although  this  gentleman 
never  espoused  in  especial  the  views  of  the  "  Occultists,"  his  unconservative 
columns  were  ever  open  to  all  who  had  truths  to  tell,  wrongs  to  right,  or 
information  to  impart.  It  was  in  this  generous  spirit,  that  Mr.  Brown 
reprinted  from  the  columns  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  a  letter  from  Colonel 
Olcott  in  answer  to  the  many  absurd  tirades  that  were  levelled  against  him 
as  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society  on  the  subject  of  "  Occulti.sm." 
Like  the  Spiritual  Scientist,  the  editors  of  the  Banner  had,  without  ever 
writing  a  word  in  favour  of  Occultism,  generously  opened  their  columns  to 
both  sides  of  the  question ;  a  magnanimous  line  of  conduct  which  warmly 
commends  itself  to  the  imitation  of  all  seekers  for  truth.  Colonel  Olcott 
says  ; — 

''  Occultism  is  something  that  can  be  tested  and  proven  by  all  '  competent '  persons, 
and  is  not  a  mere  tangle  of  assertions  and  theories 

"  Do  you  want  me  to  name  over  the  authors  who  corroborate  my  statement  ?  It 
would  nearly  fill  every  column  of  this  issue  of  the  Banner.  Do  you  complain  that  I  have 
given  the  public  no  proofs  of  the  existence  of  elementary  spirits,  and  their  subjection  to 
human  control  ?  I  could  occupy  your  paper  a  whole  year  without  exhausting  the  acces- 
sible supply  of  anecdotes.     If  you  want  a  perfect  reservoir  of  authenticated  cases   of 

440  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

magic,  read  Des  Mousseaux's  series  of  volumes  in  the  French  language.  If  you  wish  to 
know  what  the  Chinese  and  Thibetan  thaumaturgic  priests  perform,  read  Hue  and 
Schlangentweit.  If  you  would  know  of  the  power  of  man  to  change  his  corporeal  form 
and  assume  whatever  shape  he  chooses,  read  the  memoirs  of  Simon  Magus  (who  is  men- 
tioned by  St.  Luke),  and  of  ApoUonius ;  read  Pierre  Manor's  treatise  against  the 
sorcerers  ;  Henry  de  Coulogue's  '  De  Lamoeis  ; '  the  '  Vie  des  Peres  du  Desert ; '  read  the 
stories  of  magic  and  sorcery  brought  back  from  Mexico  and  Central  America  by  M. 
Brasseur  de  Bourbourg  ;  read  about  the  occultism  of  the  ancient  Peruvians,  in  Prescott 
and  Tscuddi.  If  you  wish  evidence  of  ancient  occulist  practices,  read  Pausanias,  Plato, 
Cicero,  lamblichus,  Tacitus,   Herodotus,   Manetho,   Sanchoniaton,   the  Sohar,  and  the 

Egyptian  and  Jewish  Kabbalas 

"  Says  Eliphas  Levi — '  There  is  a  true  and  a  false  science,  a  divine  magic  and  an 
infernal  magic.  The  magician  must  be  distinguished  from  the  sorcerer,  the  adept  from 
the  charlatan.  The  magician  disposes  of  a  force  that  he  knows,  the  sorcerer  endeavours 
to  abuse  that  of  which  he  is  ignorant.  The  '  devil '  submits  to  the  magician  ;  the 
sorcerer  gives  himself  up  to  the  devil.  The  magician  is  the  sovereign  pontiff  of  Nature  ; 
the  sorcerer  only  its  profaner.  Magic  is  the  traditional  science  of  the  secrets  of  Nature, 
which  came  to  us  from  the  Magi.' 

In  view  of  the  statements  concerning  the  character  and  identity  of  the 
communicating  Spirits  of  the  new  dispensation,  as  defined  in  that  number 
of  the  Theosophist  quoted  in  our  section  on  India,  the  reader's  attention  is 
particularly  called  to  the  ensuing  paragraph  of  Colonel  Olcott's  letter  : — 

"  Occultism  does  not  rob  Spiritualism  of  one  of  the  comforting  features,  nor  abate  one  jot 
of  its  importance  as  an  argument  for  immortality.  It  denies  the  identity  of  no  real  human 
spirit  that  ever  has  or  ever  will  approach  an  inquirer*  It  simply  shows  that  we  are  liable 
to  the  visits,  often  the  influence,  and  sometimes  the  absolute  control,  of  a  class  of 
invisible  but  very  powerful  spirits,  whose  existence  I  am  the  first  of  American  spiritual- 
istic investigators  to  warn  the  sect  against.  Its  philosophy  clashes  in  no  sense  against  the 
basic  discoveries  of  modern  science,  but,  on  the  contrary,  rounds  out  and  completes  what 
without  it  is  a  crude  magma  of  the  Known  and  the  Unknowable.  It  completes  the 
demonstration  of  the  law  of  evolution,  and  supplies  the  link  that  has  hitherto  been 
missing  from  the  chain  that  our  philosophical  contemporaries  have,  with  so  much  patience, 
constructed.  Its  mission  as  regards  Spiritualism,  is  to  filter,  purge,  classify,  and  explain, 
not  to  play  the  part  of  the  iconoclast  or  the  Vandal.  Through  my  unworthy  mouth  it, 
for  the  moment,  asks  recognition,  but  soon  it  will  compel  the  attention  of  every  man 
capable  of  thinking  for  himself,  and  be  taught  in  every  corner  of  the  world  by  a  host  of 
apostles' and  propagandists." 

It  would  be  needless  to  dwell  further  upon  the  "new  departures  "  which 
divided  sentiment  upon  the  now  mooted  question  of  "Occultism." 

As  a  sample  of  the  absurdities  that  were  perpetrated  by  those  who  in 
utter  ignorance  of  Occultism,  Theosophy,  or  their  aims,  wantonly  resorted 
to  the  schoolboy  trick  of  pelting  them  with  ridicule  and  insult,  we  reprint 
an  article  sent  by  the  author  to  the  Banner  of  Light  on  the  occasion  of  the 
funeral  of  the  Baron  de  Palm,  a  Hungarian  nobleman  who  was  associated 
with  Mrs.  Britten,  as  a  member  of  the  first  council  estabhshed  by  the 
Theosophical  Society  in  New  York.  The  funeral  services  took  place  on 
Sunday  afternoon  May  28th,  1876,  and  the  lampoons  and  satirical  notices 
of  the  secular  press,  and  the  reticent  brief  paragraphs  of  the  Spiritual  press, 
called  forth  from  the  author  the  following  article,  which  was  published  in 
the  columns  of  the  Banner  of  Light : — 

"  THE    LATE    BAEON    DE   PALM    AND    THE    NEW    YORK    THEOSOPHICAL    SOCIETY. 
,  "  To  the  Editor  of  the  '  Banner  of  Light.' 

"  In  your  issue  of  June  3rd,  I  see  a  very  brief  notice  of  the  funeral  obsequies  of  the 
late  Baron  de  Palm,  conducted  under  the  auspices  of  the  Theosophical  Society.     As  the 

*  Italics  by  the  author. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  441 

New  York  secular  papers  have  done  us  the  honour  of  devoting  many  columns  of  their 
'invaluable  journals'  in  contemptuous  ridicule  of  these  two  subjects,  and  as  they,  with 
their  usual  spirit  of  fairness  fail  to  afford  us  any  opportunity  of  representing  ourselves  in 
contradiction  to  the  foolish  rumours  and  childish  criticisms  volunteered  about  us,  it  has 
seemed  meet  to  the  few  Spiritualists  connected  with  the  Theosophical  Society,  especially 
those  who  were  engaged  in  conducting  Baron  de  Palm's  funeral  obsequies,  to  ask  if  we 
cannot  have  a  moderate  amount  of  space  in  the  columns  of  our  chief  organ  of  thought 
for  a  more  fair  and  complete  representation  than  interested  scandal-mongers  have  hitherto 
afforded  us.  The  Theosophical  Society  took  its  rise  in  the  interest  manifested  by  a  party 
of  ladies  and  gentlemen  who  had  assembled  one  evening  in  the  parlours  of  Madame 
Blavatsky  to  hear  a  reading  from  Mr.  George  H.  Felt,  the  Egyptologist,  and  interpreter  of 
the  figures  of  the  Egyptian  Cabala.  I  have  already  stated,  whilst  defending  myself 
through  the  courteous  use  of  your  columns,  from  the  extraordinary  attacks  made  upon 
me  for  the  publication  of  '  Art  Magic,'  that  at  the  reading  to  which  I  refer  I  met 
Madame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Felt  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  and  that  it  was  the  aston- 
ishment which  my  husband  and  I  both  felt  in  hearing  from  the  discourse  we  listened  to 
on  the  Cabala,  so  much  similarity  of  ideas  and  aims  to  those  which  we  were  then  busy  in 
translating,  and  were  about  to  publish  in  the  work  of  an  esteemed  friend,  that  induced  us 
to  urge  forward  the  formation  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  connect  ourselves  with  it,  and 

.  do  all  we  could  to  promote  its  welfare The  initial  meetings  of  the  Society 

took  place  as  before  stated  at  the  rooms  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  subsequently  at  my  own 
house,  and  after  our  organisation  had  been  completed  at  the  Mott  Memorial  Hall.  As  the 
most  concise  and  yet  comprehensive  definition  I  can  render  of  the  aims  with  which  this 
society  entered  upon  a  concrete  existence,  I  commend  to  the  slanderer  and  candid  querist 
alike,  a  careful  perusal  of  the  following  extracts  from  the  printed  preamble  and  by-laws 
which  we  have  put  forth  : 

"  '  The  title  of  the  Theosophical  Society  explains  the  objects  and  desires  of  its  founders  ; 
they  seek  "  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  attributes  of  the  Supreme  Power  and 
of  the  higher  spirits  hy  the  aid  of  -physical  processes."  In  other  words,  they  hope,  that 
by  going  deeper  than  modern  science  has  hitherto  done,  into  the  esoteric  philosophies  of 
ancient  times,  they  may  be  enabled  to  obtain,  for  themselves  and  other  investigators, 
proof  of  the  existence  of  an  "  Unseen  Universe,"  the  nature  of  its  inhabitants,  if  such 
there  be,  and  the  laws  which  govern  them  and  their  relations  with  mankind. 

"  '  Whatever  may  be  the  private  opinions  of  its  members,  the  society  has  no  dogmas  to 
enforce,  no  creed  to  disseminate.  It  is  formed  neither  as  a  Spiritualistic  schism,  nor  to 
serve  as  the  foe  or  friend  of  any  sectarian  or  philosophic  body.  Its  only  axiom  is  the 
omnipotence  of  truth,  its  only  creed  a  profession  of  unqualified  devotion  to  its  discovery 
and  propagation. 

"  'The  Theosophical  Society  has  been  organized  in  the  interest  of  religion,  science  and 
good  morals.     .     .     . 

"  '  The  founders  being  baffled  in  every  attempt  to  get  the  desired  knowledge  in  other 
quarters,  turn  their  faces  toward  the  Orient,  whence  are  derived  all  systems  of  religion 
and  philosophy.  They  find  our  ancestors  practising  important  arts  now  lost  to  us.  They 
discover  them  dealing  with  forces  whose  very  names  are  now  unknown,  and  the  simplest 
demonstration  of  whose  existence  is  impossible  to  our  scientists.  In  the  Bible  occurs  a 
multitude  of  passages  which  corroborate  inferences  deducible  from  the  picture-writings 
on  the  architectural  remains  of  the  ancient  nations  ;  while  every  important  museum  of 
antiquities  augments  the  proof  of  their  wisdom  and  enlightenment. 

"  '  The  Theosophical  Society,  disclaiming  all  pretension  to  the  possession  of  unusual 
advantages,  all  selfish  motives,  all  disposition  to  foster  deception  of  any  sort,  all  intent  to 
wilfully  and  causelessly  injure  any  established  organization,  invites  the  fraternal  co- 
operation of  such  as  can  realize  the  importance  of  its  field  of  labour,  and  are  in  sympathy 
with  the  objects  for  which  it  has  been  organised.     .     .     .' 

"  In  concluding  my  necessarily  brief  notice  of  this  movement,  I  have  only  to  add,  our 
little  gathering  has  had  to  contend  with  all  those  obstacles  which  ordinarily  hang  upon 
the  footprints  of  new  movements.  We  have  been  misrepresented  in  many  quarters,  not 
excepting  those  from  whom  we  had  the  most  right  to  expect  sympathy  and  support.  We 
have  been  sneered  at  as  '  attempting  to  revive  the  superstitions  of  the  dark  ages,  and  roll 
back  the  car  of  progress,'  &c.,  &c.  With  the  same  justice  that  the  author  of  'Art  Magic' 
has  been  denounced  as  a  Jesuit  and  a  Catholic,  because  he  cited  as  an  illustration  of 
mediaeval  magic  the  formulce  of  Catholic  magicians,  our  society  has  been  denounced  as 
antagonistic  to  truth  and  progress,  because  we  are  aiming  to  discover  the  clue  to  ancient 
sciences,  as  a  basis  for  modern  improvements  ;  hence  we  had  trials  to  encounter,  com- 
pelling us  at  last  to  shield  the  truths  we  could  not  endure  to  see  misrepresented,  by 
making  our  organization,  if  not  actually  a  secret  society  in  its  fullest  sense,  at  least  an 
exclusive  one,  reserving  all  knowledge  of  pur  deliberations  and  proceedings  to  our  own 

442  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

members,  except  where  we  decided  amongst  ourselves  to  give  them  publicity.  An  occasion 
of  this  character  occurred  in  the  demise  of  one  of  our  esteemed  associates,  the  Baron  de 
Palm^  whose  expressed  wish  that  his  obsequies  should  be  conducted  under  the  auspices  of 
the  Theosophical  Society,  and  as  far  as  possible  in  accordance  with  Oriental  customs, 
obliged  us  to  present  ourselves  before  the  world  as  a  subject  for  such  criticism  as  it  has 
deemed  fitting  and  decent  to  accord  to  funeral  rites,  conducted  on  a  little  out-of-the- 
common-order  plan.  The  necessary  haste  in  which  this  ceremonial  was  got  up,  and  the 
fact  that  by  the  absence  of  a  great  many  of  the  fellows  of  the  society,  nearly  all  the 
onerous  duties  attending  this  effort  devolved  upon  our  esteemed  president.  Colonel  Olcott, 
were  circumstances  which  materially  interfered  with  the  full  representation  of  our  ideas 
which  we  so  earnestly  desired.  As  it  was,  on  arriving  at  New  York  on  the  Sunday 
morning,  the  day  fixed  for  the  obsequies,  I  found  every  journal  full  of  funny  writing  on 
the  funny  scene  that  was  expected  to  take  place  that  afternoon,  in  the  form  of  a  '  Pagan 
funeral,'  and  Colonel  Olcott  harassed,  overworked,  and  thoroughly  worn  out,  first  with 
the  severe  task  of  attending  his  dying  friend,  and  next  with  the  still  severer  duties  which 
devolved  upon  him  in  the  attempt  to  carry  out  that  friend's  last  wishes. 

"  As  to  the  scene  which  the  outside  of  the  grand  Masonic  Temple  presented  some  two 
hours  before  that  fixed  for  the  ceremonial,  it  baffles  all  description.  Thanks  to  the  volun- 
tary advertisements  which  the  comic  writers  of  the  city  thought  proper  to  bestow  upon  us, 
the  Sunday  idlers  of  New  York  had  assembled  in  vast  multitudes  to  beguile  their  leisure 
with 'something  scarcely  less  entertaining  than  Barnum's  Hippodrome,  or  Moody  and 
Sankey's  hysterical  votaries  at  their  confessions.  The  quiet  dignity  with  which  our 
president  reminded  the  vast  assemblage  who  finally  succeeded  in  pressing  into  the  hall, 
that  they  must  remember  '  they  were  in  the  presence  of  death,'  no  doubt  had  its  effect  in 
converting  the  expectations  of  fun  and  frolic  promised  them  by  their  leading  journals 
into  a  spirit  of  grave  and  respectful  attention.  For  a  further  account  of  the  Baron  de  Palm, 
and  the  ceremonials  which  actually  took  place  on  the  occasion,  I  refer  the  reader  to  the 
following  quotations  from  the  New  York  Tribune  and  World,  both  of  which  journals  did 
sufficient  justice  to  the  historical  features  of  the  scene  : — 

"  '  BARON   DE   palm's   FUNERAL— SERVICES   OF   THE   THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY. 

"  '  At  the  Roosevelt  Hospital  in  this  city,  on  Saturday,  May  21,  a  man  died  whose  life, 
character,  and  religious  belief  the  singular  funeral  services  performed  yesterday  at  the 
Masonic  "Temple  bring  into  prominence.  Baron  Joseph  Henry  Louis  de  Palm,  formerly 
Chamberlain  of  the  Duke  of  Bavaiia,  was  born  at  Augsburg,  May  10,  1809,  and  was 

descended  from_  an  old  baronial  family  dating  back,  it  is  said,  to  the  year  832 

The  Baron  de  Palm  was  educated  in  diplomacy,  for  which  his  talents  fitted  him,  and  for  a 
long  time  he  was  in  the  German  diplomatic  service.  He  lived  for  years  gaily  and 
extravagantly  in  the  capitals  of  Europe,  but  at  last  abandoning  a  life  which  had  become 
wearisome  to  him,  he  came  to  America  in  1862,  and  spent  a  considerable  time  among  the 
Indian  tribes  in  the  far  West.  He  often  spoke  of  the  time  he  passed  among  the  Indians 
as  the  pleasantest  period  of  his  life.  Last  November,  hoping  to  find  in  the  Theosophical 
Society  of  this  city  a  system  of  religious  belief  which  would  commend  itself  to  his 
judgment  and  experience,  he  joined  himself  to  that  organization,  to  which  he  willed  his 
property,  and  under  its  direction  his  funeral  services  were  conducted  yesterday. 

" '  The  body  of  Baron  de  Palm  was  embalmed  immediately  after  death,  and  has  been 
lying  at  the  Roosevelt  Hospital,  whence  it  was  brought  by  the  undertaker,  unaccom- 
panied by  either  priest  or  pall-bearers,  to  the  Masonic  Temple.  The  casket  was  of 
rosewood,  with  plain  silver  trimmings,  and  rested  upon  a  simple  undecorated  catafalque 
upon  the  platform  in  the  large  hall.  Black  tickets  of  admission  were  issued  in  sufficient 
numbers  to  fill  the  hall  with  people,  but  as  many  who  received  them  did  not  attend,  the 
multitude  were  allowed  to  rush  into  the  empty  seats  just  after  the  beginning  of  the 
service.  Upon  the  coffin  and  on  each  side  of  it  were  placed  Oriental  symbols  of  the  faith 
of  the  dead  man,  and  over  the  upper  end  hung  the  medals  and  insignia  of  the  Baron's 
diplomatic  service,  and  his  patent  of  nobility.  Seven  candles  of  different  colours  burned 
upon  the  coffin,  and  these,  with  the  brazier  of  incense  placed  at  the  left,  symbolized  fire- 
worsbip.  Upon  the  right  stood  a  cross  with  a  serpent  about  it,  the  cross  typifying  the 
creative  principle  of  nature,  and  the  serpent  the  principle  of  evolution. 

"  '  At  four  o'clock  a  solemn  voluntary  was  played  upon  the  organ,  and  a  few  minutes 
later,  the  seven  members  of  the  Society  who  had  been  selected  to  perform  the  service 
appeared  upon  the  platform  in  black  robes,  and  carrying  in  their  hands  twigs  of  palm, 
which,  according  to  Oriental  belief,  are  instrumental  in  warding  off  danger  and  misfortune. 
Henry  S.  Olcott,  president  of  the  Society,  upon  whom  devolved  all  preparations  for  the 
funeral,  and  who  afterward  delivered  the  funeral  discourse,  advanced  to  the  front  of  the 
platform  and  requested  those  present  to  remember  they  were  in  the  presence  of  death, 

COL'r     JnO.    C.    BuNDY 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  443 

and  that  as  nothing  sensational  would  occur  in  the  funeral  services,  the  Society  expected 
from  them  a  respectful  silence.  He  disclaimed  all  connection  with  the  Masonic  fraternity, 
and  said  that  the  service  was  not  to  be  conducted  according  to  the  Egyptian  ritual  except 
in  so  far  as  the  symbols  of  immortality  were  concerned.  A  choir  of  three  persons  then 
sang  an  Orphic  hymn  to  organ  accompaniment,  and  this  was  followed  by  the  invocation, 
pronounced  by  T.  Frederick  Thomas.  After  the  prayer  came  organ  music  again,  and 
then  the  Theosophic  Liturgy,  Colonel  Olcott  asking  the  questions,  &c.,  which  were 
answered  by  his  assistants  in  the  service.  The  liturgy  was  followed  by  another  Orphic 
hymn,  and  then  Colonel  Olcott  advanced  to  pronounce  the  funeral  oration. 

"  '  After  describing  the  life  and  general  characteristics  which  marked  his  deceased 
friend  and  associate,  the  Baron,  the  President  went  on  to  speak  of  the  Society  which  he 
then  represented,  and  denounced  in  fearless  terms  the  gross  misrepresentations  with 
which  the  press  had  endeavoured  to  mislead  the  public  mind,  both  in  regard  to  the 
ceremonials  now  being  enacted,  and  the  end  and  aims  of  the  Theosophists  themselves. 
He  described  the  organization  and  aims  of  the  Society  in  substance  pretty  much  as  I  have 
given  it  above,  and  concluded  a  long,  bold,  and  very  eloquent  address  in  the  following 
terms,  which  I  quote  from  the  Ne.w  York  World : — 

" '  There  in  that  cofl&n  lay  a  Theosophist.  Should  his  future  be  pronounced  one  of 
unalloyed  happiness  without  respect  to  the  course  of  his  life  ?  No  ;  but  as  he  had  acted  so 
should  he  suffer  or  rejoice.  If  he  was  a  sensualist,  a  usurer,  or  a  corrupter,  then  the 
divine  first  cause  could  not  forgive  him  the  least  of  his  offences,  for  that  would  be  to 
plunge  the  universe  into  chaos.  There  must  be  compensation,  equilibrium,  justice. 
Ancient  theosophy  held  immovably  to  two  ideas — the  existence  of  a  first  cause,  and  the 
immortality  of  the  soul.  The  soul  was  believed  to  have  emanated  from  the  central  soul, 
and  the  body  had  to  be  subjugated  to  the  spirit.  It  was  no  more  thought  that  one  could 
suffer  for  another's  sins  than  for  another's  gluttony  or  other  physical  wrong  doings.  The 
opposite  belief  was  responsible  for  the  condition  of  the  world  to-day.  The  scaffold  teemed 
with  ruffians  whose  sins  it  was  believed  muttered  words  would  wash  away. 

"  '  Another  Orphic  hymn  followed.  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  then  made  a  brief 
address,  in  which  she  declared  that  she,  as  one  who  had  spoken  with  the  arisen  souls  of 
the  dead,  proclaimed  by  the  revelation  of  the  Great  Spirit  and  his  ministering  angels,  that 
the  dead  brother,  though  enfranchised  into  the  higher  life,  was  with  his  friends  yet. 
They  who  were  searching  for  the  great  mystery  of  life  and  death,  had  been  reviled  and  scoffed 
at,  but  here,  standing  among  the  emblems  of  sacred  beliefs,  they  ought  to  be  safe  from 
slanderous  revilings  and  unkind  jests.  Mrs.  Britten  thought  that  in  this  centennial  year, 
when  human  enfranchisement  was  being  celebrated,  none  should  attempt  to  impose  chains 
on  the  human  soul.  Then  turning  toward  the  coffin  she  extended  her  hands  bearing 
flowers,  and  exclaimed  :  "Speed  home,  friend  and  companion  !  Thou  hast  not  left  us. 
We  know  that  thou  hast  passed  the  goid«n  gates  wherein  sorrow  eutereth  not,  and  we  bid 
thee  God  speed  to  thy  home  of  light.  Although  the  golden  bowl  is  broken,  and  the  silver 
cord  is  loosed,  we  put  on  no  weeds  of  mourning,  and  we  offer  thee  symbols  of  fiUl-blown 
human  life  in  these  flowers." 

"'The  High  Priest  then  pronounced  the  obsequies  finished,  and  the  audience  slowly 
dispersed.  The  coffin  was  left  on  the  platform,  and  long  after  all  the  spectators  and 
members  of  the  Society  had  gone  away,  it  remained  alone,  stripped  of  its  decorations,  and 
with  only  the  roses  Mrs.  Britten  had  scattered  on  it,  and  three  or  four  green  palm  branches 
lying  upon  it,  as  if  to  keep  the  wood  nymphs  near  and  protect  the  dead  Baron  from  the 
dreaded  elemental  spirits.  Toward  nightfall  it  was  taken  by  the  solitary  undertaker  to  its 
temporary  resting-place  in  a  vault  of  the  Lutheran  cemetery. 

"  '  Trusting  that  the  admission  of  these  statements,  Mr.  Editor,  will  have  the  desirable 
effect  of  subduing  the  tone  of  rancour,  contempt,  and  unworthy  misrepresentation  which 
some  of  our  Spiiitualistic  brethren  have  thought  proper  to  adopt  towards  us  poor  Theo- 
sophists, I  take  my  leave,  and  as  one  of  the  Council  of  the  Society,  in  the  name  of  the 
President  and  the  Fellows  of  that  Association,  tender  you,  Mr.  Editor,  our  sincere  thanks 
for  the  space  allotted  to  us  in  these  columns 

"  '  Very  faithfully  yours, 

"  '  Emma  Hardinge  Britten.'  " 

All  that  now  remains  to  be  said  on  this  subject  is  that  to  the  author's 
thinking  any  knowledge  that  can  be  gleaned  from  true  "  Occultism  "  ought 
to  be  faithfully  studied  by  those  who  desire  to  become  scientific  Spiritualists, 
and  any  good  that  has  been  taught  by  "  Theosophy,"  as  represented  in  this 
chapter,  is  equally  essential  to  round  out  the  life  here,  and  prepare  for  the 
life  hereafter,  in  the  religion  of  a  true  Spiritualist. 

444  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER    LIII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    AMERICA    (CONTINUED). 

'■  Passed  Away  !  " 

It  was  in  the  fall  of  1870,  that  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  sustained  an 
irreparable  loss  in  the  departure  for  the  higher  life  of  Mrs.  Fanny  Conant, 
for  many  years  the  Medium  through  whom  were  given  those  communica- 
tions from  all  classes  of  stranger  spirits  that  have  formed  a  leading  feature 
in  the  columns  of  the  Banner  of  Light. 

It  was  mainly  through  the  influence  of  wise  Spirits  communicating  through 
Mrs.  Conant,  that  the  Banner  of  Light  y^zs  established  at  all,  and  it  was  these 
same  far-seeing  intelligences  who  sustained  the  harassed  spirits  of  its  editors, 
when  the  cares  and  embarrassments  of  its  pioneer  work  would  have  well  nigh 
overwhelmed  them.  It  was  Mrs.  Conant  also  who  founded  the  celebrated 
Banner  of  Light  circle,  at  which  so  many  thousands  of  Spirits  sent  messages 
of  love  and  consolation  to  bereaved  friends,  and  afforded  the  world  indis- 
putable proofs  of  the  soul's  immortality.  This  gifted  and  versatile  Medium 
had  lived  to  see  her  brother,  Mr.  Crowell,  one  of  the  earliest  assistant 
editors  of  the  Banner,  Wm.  Berry  and  Wm.  White,  each  in  turn,  editors 
and  part  proprietors  of  the  paper,  pass  on  to  the  higher  life,  leaving  herself 
and  Mr.  Colby  all  that  remained  of  the  original  founders  of  this  onerous 
undertaking.  The  time  came  at  length  when  these  faithful  allies  were  to 
part,  when  the  veteran  editor  Luther  Colby  was  to  see  the  last  of  his  early 
associates  vanish  from  his  side,  whilst  Fanny  Conant,  so  well  beloved 
throughout  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  gave  up  her  twenty  years'  trust  of 
the  Spiritual  standard ;  and  in  the  words  of  the  poet — 

"  Folded  her  pale  hands  so  meekly, 
Spake  with  us  on  earth  no  more." 

When  the  first  shock  of  this  transition  was  over,  the  following  correspon- 
dence ensued  in  the  columns  of  the  paper  so  long  associated  with  Mrs. 
Conant's  name.  We  give  it  in  full,  as  it  speaks  in  far  more  graphic 
language  than  we  could  command,  of  the  esteem  with  which  the  inesti- 
mable services  of  the  departed  lady  were  remembered  by  some  of  Boston's 
most  respected  and  prominent  merchants : — 

"the   late   MRS.    J.    H.    CONANT.       MEMORIAL    SERVICE    IN    MUSIC   HALL, 
BOSTON,    OCTOBER    lOTH. 

"  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten, — Madam :  The  undersigned,  friends  of  the  late  Mrs. 
J.  H.  Conant,  appreciating  her  faithful  services  in  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  so  many  years 
a  prominent  medium  of  rare  power,  estimable  character,  and  of  unquestioned  honesty,  feel 
as  if  something  of  the  character  of  a  Memorial  Service  would  be  but  a  fitting  tribute  to 
her  worth,  as  well  as  a  gratification  to  us,  and  to  her  friends  in  general,  who  are  the  body 
of  Spiritualists  all  over  the  world. 

"  Knowing  you  to  be  one  of  our  most  gifted  speakers  and  a  sister  medium,  who  knew  her 
well,  we  have  thought  it  would  be  a  pleasure  to  you,  as  well  as  to  her  friends  in  general,  to 
undertake  such  a  service,  and  we  therefore  invite  you  to  deliver  an  oration  upon  her  life 
and  work  as  you  are  qualified  to  give  on  such  an  occasion. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  445 

"  You  will  please  select  such  time  as  will  be  most  agreeable  to  you,  and  when  informed 
we  will  make  all  the  necessary  arrangements  suitable  for  such  a  service.     Hoping  this  will 
meet  with  your  approval  and  acceptance, 
"  We  remain,  most  truly  yours, 

"Allen  Putnam,         J.  S.  Ladd, 
"  John  Wetherbee,    Phineas  E.  Gat, 
"  Daniel  Farear,       Anson  J.  Stone, 
"David  Wildee,         L.  A.  Bigelow, 
"  J.  F.  Alderman,       M.  V.  Lincoln, 
"  Fred.  A.  Godld,       G-eorge  W.  Smith, 
"R.  H.  Spalding,       George  A.  Bacon. 
"Boston,  September  17th,  1875." 

"  To  Messrs.  Allen  Putnam,  Judge  Ladd,  and  others, 

"  Gentlemen, — Your  favour  of  the  I7th  inst,  has  been  received  by  me  with  feelings  of 
unmixed  gratification  and  interest.  From  the  time  when  our  most  excellent  and  esteemed 
co-worker,  Mrs.  J.  H.  Conant,  closed  her  mortal  pilgrimage  amongst  us  I  have  felt  for 
myself,  and  all  who  have  participated  in  the  new  hght  and  life  that  Spiritualism  has 
brought  us,  a  sense  of  pain  and  humiliation  at  our  lack  of  opportunity  to  testify  to  the 
whole  world  how  gratefully  we  remembered  her  invaluable  services,  how  tenderly  we 
appreciated  the  martyrdoms  her  mediumistic  life  had  imposed  upon  her,  and  how  strongly 
our  sympathies  were  moved  by  the  obvious  fact  that  in  the  prime  of  her  early  womanhood 
the  faithful  and  self-sacrificing  labourer  has  sunk  beneath  the  cross  she  bore,  and  all  too 
soon  for  us  and  for  the  world,  has  left  us  to  shoulder  the  burden  too  heavy  for  her  to 
endure  longer. 

'■  When  some  years  since  I  had  the  honour  of  representing  Spiritualism  in  the  memorial 
services  held  in  this  city,  in  memory  of  the  venerable  John  Pierpont,  one  of  the  leading 
journals  commented  somewhat  severely  on  the  fact  that  this  act  of  grateful  reverence  to  a 
*  Spiritualistic  notable '  was  remarkable  for  its  rarity  on  the  part  of  Spirituahsts. 

"  I  rejoice  to  beUeve  that  the  proposed  tribute  to  one  so  eminently  worthy  as  Mrs. 
Conant  may  afford  us  the  opportunity  of  wiping  away  this  reproach,  and  I  am  especially 
grateful  for  the  selection  which  confers  on  me  the  gracious  task  of  tendering  to  the 
ascended  spirit  of  our  beloved  friend  a  just  and  well-merited  recognition  of  the  life-long 
work  of  devotion  she  has  performed  amongst  us.  However  incompetent  I  may  deem 
myself  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  great  demand  you  make;  upon  me,  I  shall  not 
hesitate  for  one  moment  to  do  your  bidding.  I  feel  as  if  every  true  and  honest  Spu-itualist 
in  America  must  be  with  us,  and  if  not  in  person,  at  least  in  the  spirit  of  love  and 
sympathy,  so  many  grateful  thousands  will  join  in  this  memorial  service,  that  my  short- 
comings will  be  forgotten  in  the  intention  of  so  memorable  an  occasion. 

"  Holding  myself  and  my  services  entirely  at  your  disposal,  gentlemen,  in  the  order  of 
the  exercises  you  propose,  and  only  suggesting  that  you  should  name  the  time  most 
suitable  for  convening  an  assemblage  worthy  the  subject  of  the  meeting,  I  am,  very 
faithfully  yours,  "  Emma  Haedinge  Britten. 

"  206,  West  38th  Street,  New  York,  September  18th,  1875.' 

"  The  persons  moving  in  this  matter  of  memorial  service  have  arranged  to  have  it  take 
place  on  Sunday  afternoon,  October  10th,  at  2|  o'clock,  in  Music  Hall,  to  which  the  public 
are  invited  free.  "  John  Wetherbee,  for  the  Committee. 

"  Boston,  September  29th,  1875." 

Several  of  the  daily  journals  of  Massachusetts  gave  brief  but  respectful 
notices  of  *'the  memorial  service"  which  took  place  in  the  Boston  Music 
Hall  in  the  presence  of  about  three  thousand  deeply  moved  and  interested 
auditors.  The  following  excerpt  from  the  Boston  Herald  is  a  fair  specimen 
of  the  press  notices  which  the  occasion  called  forth : — 

"  SPIRITUALISM. 

"  Services  in  memory  of  the  late  Mrs.  Fanny  Conant  were  held  at  Music  Hall  yesterday 
afternoon.  There  was  a  large  attendance  of  the  Spiritualists  of  Boston  and  vicinity. 
The  platform  was  decorated  with  flowers  and  autumn  leaves.  Mr.  John  Wetherbee 
presided,  and  introduced  the  orator  of  the  occasion  (Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten)  in  a 
few  felicitous  words.     Mrs,  Britten  commenced  by  reciting  an  eloquent  invocation  given 

446  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Conant,  and  then  gave  a  brief  biographical  sketch  of  the 
departed.  Although  her  life  was  a  protracted  martyrdom,  it  had  been  continuously 
devoted  to  the  service  of  humanity.  As  the  Banner  of  Light  medium  for  about  twenty 
years,  she  had  been  the  instrument  of  receiving  more  than  10,000  communications  from 
the  spirit  world,  the  genuineness  of  many  of  them  having  been  tested  iu  the  most  conclusive 
manner.  To  her  was  due  the  origin  of  the  Banner,  and  largely  to  her  the  moral  support 
which  gave  strength  to  the  faltering  hands  of  its  proprietors  and  enabled  them  to  continue 
their  great  work  for  Spiritualism  and  humanity.  Mrs.  Britten,  who  was  frequently 
applauded,  closed  with  an  eloquent  tribute  to  '  dear,  brave  little  Fanny  Conant.'  The 
speaker  is  a  noble-looking,  gracious-mannered  lady,  with  a  style  of  oratory  at  once  brilliant, 
pathetic,  and  powerful." 

To  Mr.  Allen  Putnam's  charming  biography  of  Fanny  Conant,  and  the 
book  of  her  recorded  communications  entitled  "  Flashes  of  Light,"*  we 
must  refer  the  reader  for  more  minute  details  concerning  the  life  and 
services  of  this  admirable  Medium.  The  writer  who  tenders  her  memory 
this  imperfect  but  heartfelt  tribute  of  affection  can  well  say  of  Mrs.  Conant 
what  many  others  all  over  the  world  have  felt,  that  in  this  generation  at 
least,  "  we  ne'er  shall  look  upon  her  like  again." 

It  would  seem  almost  superfluous  in  this  connection  to  add  expressions 
either  of  eulogy  or  explanation  concerning  the  journal  quoted  in  nearly 
every  chapter  of  this  volume,  the  name  of  which,  the  Banner  of  Light,  has 
become  a  household  word  on  the  lips  of  every  Spiritualist ;  and  yet  for  the 
sake  of  that  posterity  to  which  we  dare  believe  this  work  will  descend,  we 
deem  it  fitting  to  add  a  few  brief  paragraphs  on  a  subject  which  now  needs 
no  other  comment  than  its  name  affords.  For  a  period  of  over  a  quarter 
of  a  century,  the  Banner  of  Light  has  redeemed  its  significant  title  by  carry- 
ing the  glad  tidings  of  immortality  to  every  land  of  civilization.  Its  articles 
have  been  translated  into  every  written  language,  and  its  glorious  standard 
has  been  raised  wherever  reading  men  and  women  have  congregated 
together  in  this  nineteenth  century. 

Of  all  th.e  original  staff  that  first  constituted  its  strength,  and  founded  its 
illimitable  usefulness,  Luther  Colby,  its  veteran  editor,  alone  remains.  An 
experienced  "  press  man,"  in  the  outset  of  the  Ba?mer's  career,  Mr.  Colby 
knew  how  to  place  it  before  the  world  in  a  practical  and  acceptable  point 
of  view. 

It  has  changed  its  external  appearance  from  time  to  time,  but  always 
risen  in  the  scale  of  mechanical  excellence  and  editorial  completeness. 

It  has  changed  its  corps  of  editors  and  contributors  many  times,  for  the 
harvest  angel  of  death  has  swept  his  sickle  through  the  field  of  effort  and 
transplanted  many  a  shining  head  from  the  dull  glare  of  the  lamps  of  earth 
to  the  star  roads  of  eternity  ;  but  Luther  Colby  has  still  kept  his  place  at 
the  helm,  firm,  faithful,  unswerving,  in  whatever  he  may  have  considered  to 
be  his  path  of  duty.  Many  have  differed  from  him ;  many  condemned  his 
course;  and  many  exalted  it  to  the  skies.  Unmoved  by  praise  or  blame, 
the  gallant  old  standard-bearer  has  unfurled  his  flag  to  the  breeze,  and 
waited  till  the  storm  passed  by,  but  never  departed  from  the  course 
suggested  to  him  through  his  own  Mediumship,  or  that  of  the  associates  in 
whom  he  has  placed  confidence. 

Mr.  Isaac  Rich,  the  second  proprietor  of  this  grand  old  paper,  with  Mr. 
Colby,  although  he  takes  but  little  part  in  its  editorial  conduct,  is  well- 
known  throughout  the  Spiritual  book  trade  for  the  two  great  though  too 
often  dissevered  elements,  honour  and  enterprise.  Both  these  noble  qualities 
have  distinguished  Mr.  Rich  in  his  world-wide  dealings.     Who  then  can 

*  Published  by  Colby  and  Rich,  Banner  o/  Light  Office,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  447 

take  exception,  if  the  Banner  of  Light,  with  its  well-matched  associates  and 
a  well-tried  corps  of  assistants,  does  not  always  represent  the  opinions  of 
this  or  the  other  party  ?  Mr.  Colby  and  a  large  majority  of  his  contributors 
have  incurred  the  censure  of  many  prominent  and  earnest  Spiritualists,  for 
what  they  deem  to  be  the  all  too  embracing  spirit  of  charity  with  which 
the  Banner  staff  have  excused  the  errors  and  frailties  of  many  a  defaulting 
Medium.  Whilst  the  author — besides  those  above  alluded  to— has  taken 
exception  to  this  position,  she  knows  beyond  a  peradventure,  that  it  has 
been  assumed  in  the  strictest  integrity  of  purpose  by  the  kind-hearted  editor 
and  his  friends,  and  that  sooner  than  see  those  whom  they  regard  as  "  the 
pillars  of  their  faith" — the  Mediums— ^' 2ih\ised"  they  would  err  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  question,  and  regard  their  shortcomings  with  even  too 
much  leniency  in  consideration  of  their  actual  Mediumistic  endowments. 

Notwithstanding  the  wide  differences  of  opinion  on  this  subject  that 
have  arisen  between  the  editors  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  their  collaborateurs, 
and  others,  every  Spiritualist  in  the  ranks  must  admit  that  the  good  name 
of  the  house  so  honourably  represented  by  Mr.  Rich,  and  the  long  and 
invaluable  years  of  service  and  devotion  contributed  by  Mr.  Colby,  call  for 
an  earthly  acknowledgment,  and  one  which  the  writer  firmly  beUeves  is 
but  the  faint  shadow  of  that  immortal  record  wherein  the  Baniier  of  Light, 
and  the  names  of  its  devoted  upholders,  will  be  found  inscribed  in  letters 
of  imperishable  gold. 

Whilst  our  attention  is  attracted  to  the  journalistic  department  of  the 
movement,  we  must  remind  our  readers  of  an  event  which  happily  finds  no 
parallel  in  the  entire  thirty-five  years'  history  of  modern  Spiritualism — that 
is  to  say,  not  in  connection  with  any  of  the  immediate  actors  in  that  mighty 
drama.  It  was  on  the  15th  of  March,  1877,  that  the  tidings  flashed  over 
the  wires  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  United  States,  that  Mr.  S. 
S.  Jones,  the  enterprising  and  well-known  proprietor  of  the  Religio  Philo- 
sophical Journal,  had  been  cruelly  murdered  in  his  own  office  in  the  city  of 
Chicago,  and  that  the  perpetrator  of  the  foul  deed  had  surrendered  himself 
into  the  hands  of  justice. 

The  circumstances  of  this  tragic  event  are  so  clearly  detailed  in  the 
Banner  of  Light  of  the  3i3t  of  March,  1877,  that  we  cannot  do  better  than 
follow  the  record,  which  reads  thus  : — 

"At  little  past  the  hour  of  noon  on  the  15th  inst.,  William  C.  Pike  called  at  the 
Harrison  Street  Police  Station  and  surrendered  himself  as  the  murderer  of  Stevens  S. 
Jones,  whose  body,  he  said,  they  would  find  struggling  in  death  at  his  office,  in  room  16. 
in  the  Religio  Philosophical  Publishing  House  Building,  No.  394,  Dearborn  Street,  Chicago. 
An  officer  was  sent  to  the  office  in  question,  examined  the  premises,  found  the  assassin's 
words  were  true,  and,  after  assisting  to  remove  the  corpse  from  the  floor,  where  it  had 
fallen  from  the  chair  in  which  the  murdered  man  sat  when  he  was  approached  from 
behind  and  shot  dead  without  even  a  warning  of  danger,  returned  and  reported  the 
startling  truth  at  the  station. 

"  On  post  mortem  examination  two  bullet  wounds  were  found  in  the  body ;  one  bullet 
entered  the  medulla  oblongata  at  the  junction  of  the  spinal  cord,  passed  upward  and 
forward,  and  lodged  against  the  as  frontis.  The  ball  was  found  to  fit  the  pistol  given  up 
by  the  assassin  ;  the  other  bullet  entered  the  lower  portion  of  the  right  shoulder,  pa  ^sing 
upward,  and  lodged  in  the  muscles.  Dr.  Holden  testified  that  consciousness  must  bave 
ceased  on  the  very  second  in  which  the  shot  was  fired.  The  assassin  claims  to  be  a 
phrenologist,  and  had,  if  the  daily  papers  may  be  believed,  boasted  that  his  knowledge 
as  such  enabled  him  to  select  that  particular  point  at  which  to  place  his  pistol  (for  it  was 
sufficiently  close  to  burn  the  hair  upon  the  neck)  and  insure  the  accomplishment  of  this 
most  foul  murder  against  all  chance  of  failure. 

"  According  to  the  indications  this  sad  catastrophe  was  the  result  of  an  effiart  at  black- 
mailing, at  which  the  high  spirit  of  Bro.  Jones  rebelled.     It  is  a  singular  index  in  this 

448  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

direction,  says  the  Religio's  account,  that  but  a  few  moments  previously  to  the  murder, 
Mr.  Jones  '  passed  into  the  business  office,  and  procured  a  note  of  24  dollars,  made  by  the 
assassin,  and  that  note  has  never  been  seen  since,  unless  by  its  maker.' 

"  The  following  is  the  verdict  of  .the  jury  summoned  by  the  coroner  in  view  of  the 
lamentable  occurrence  :— 

" '  We,  the  jury,  find  that  Stevens  S.  Jones  came  to  his  death  on  the  15th  day  of  March, 
1877,  at  the  Religio  Philosophical  Publishing  House  Building,  No.  127  4th  Avenue,  in  the 
city  of  Chicago,  by  two  pistol  shot  wounds,  one  through  the  head,  and  the  other  through 
the  right  shoulder,  at  the  hands  of  Wm.  C.  Pike,  premeditatedly,  deliberately,  and  mali- 
ciously, and  find  it  murder  in  the  first  degree  ;  we  also  find  evidence  to  satisfy  us  that 
Genevieve  Pike,  his  reputed  wife,  should  be  held  as  an  accessory  before  the  fact,  and 
recommend  that  both  persons  be  held  for  the  action  of  the  Grand  Jury,  without  bail.' 

"  The  account  proceeds,  with  the  parenthetical  remark,  to  the  sentiment  of  which  all 
lovers  of  humanity  will  accede  a  willing  agreement : — 

"  '  It  may  be  proper  to  say  in  this  connection,  that  the  family  and  friends  of  the  man 
so  cowardly  assassinated  do  not  desire  the  blood  of  the  assassin,  nor  that  of  the  woman 
Genevieve,  and  beyond  an  honest  endeavour  to  arrive  at  all  the  truth  (by  which  they  are 
sure  the  entire  innocence  of  the  murdered  man  of  the  charges  preferred  against  him  will 
be  estabhshed),  they  are  satisfied  the  law  shall  take  its  course,  and  infiict  such  reasonable 
punishment,  short  of  the  death  penalty)  as  may  be  thought  necessary  to  protect  society.'  " 

On  Saturday,  March  17th,  the  funeral  obsequies  of  the  murdered  gentle- 
man were  conducted  at  his  late  residence  by  his  numerous  and  attached 
friends,  and  the  members  of  the  Masonic  and  Oddfellow  lodges  to  which  he 
had  belonged.  The  Rev.  R.  L.  Herbert  and  Mrs.  Cora  Richmond  were 
the  officiating  ministers  on  the  occasion,  and  the  latter,  by  the  pathos  and 
eloquence  of  her  address,  served  to  deepen  the  impression  which  the  truly 
Spiritual  services  produced  upon  the  assembled  multitude.  It  was  after 
giving  a  detailed  account  of  these  interesting  services,  that  the  editor  of  the 
Banner  of  Light  proceeded  in  the  issue  above  quoted  from,  to  render  a  just 
tribute  to  his  talented  Spiritual  collaborateur  in  a  biographical  notice,  from 
which  we  select  the  following  noteworthy  items  : — 

"  BIOGRAPHICAL    SKETCH    OF   THE    DECEASED. 

"  Stevens  S.  Jones,  the  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  Eeligio  Philosophical  Journal,  a 
weekly  newspaper  devoted  to  the  promulgation  of  Liberalism  and  Modem  Spiritualism, 
and  the  Little  Bouquet,  a  monthly  magazine  adapted  to  the  minds  of  children  and  youth, 
promulgating  the  same  doctrine,  was  born  in  Barre,  Vt.,  on  July  22nd,  1813.  His  parents 
were  intelligent,  liberal-minded  people.  His  father  was  a  farmer  in  moderate  circum- 
stances  

"  At  the  age  of  nineteen  Mr.  Jones  entered  upon  the  study  of  the  law,  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  practice  at  the  November  term  of  Court,  He  entered  upon  a  successful  practice 
of  his  profession  in  Hyde  Park  soon  after  he  was  admitted,  and  remained  there  until  his 
removal  to  St.  Charles,  HI.,  in  the  spring  of  1838 

''  For  many  years  Mr.  Jones  confined  himself  to  his  profession,  and  ranked  high  as  a 
lawyer.  He  was  twice  elected  Judge  of  the  Kane  County  Court,  and  discharged  the 
duties  of  the  office  to  the  general  satisfaction  of  the  pubhc. 

''At  an  early  day  in  the  history  of  railroads  of  the  Northwest,  Mr.  Jones  was  actively 
engaged  as  a  railroad  man 

"  Mr.  Jones  always  belonged  to  the  Liberal  school  in  religion.  His  parents  were  Univer- 
salists,  and  he,  for  many  years  after  arriving  at  manhood,  was  an  active  member  of  that 
sect.  He  was  generally  the  presiding  officer  at  the  State  conventions,  associations,  and 
representative  gatherings  of  the  order  during  the  first  fifteen  years  of  their  history  in  the 
State  of  Illinois. 

"  He  dates  his  conversion  to  Modern  Spiritualisn  mainly  to  the  perusal  of  that  remark- 
able work  given  through  the  early  mediumship  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  called  '  Nature's 
Divine  Revelations,  and  a  Voice  to  Mankind.' 

"  The  perusal  of  that  work  soon  after  its  publication  prepared  his  mind  for  the  recep- 
tion of  the  truth  of  spirit  communion  as  given  through  the  mediumship  of  the  '  Fox  girls.' 

"  Once  having  been  convinced  of  the  truth  of  spirit  communion,  he  fearlessly  pro- 
claimed it  on  all  proper  occasions,  never  obtruding  his  views,  however,  upon  unwilling 
ears. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

449 

"  Often  was  he  heard  to  speak  incidentally  of  the  assurance  given  him  by  communica- 
ting spirits  that  he  would,  at  no  remote  time,  be  as  deeply  engrossed  in  promulgating  the 
truths  of  spirit  intercourse,  and  the  philosophy  of  life,  as  he  was  then  in  his  professional 
business.  But  not  until  the  spring  of  1865  did  he  fully  realise  the  truth  of  that  oft- 
repeated  assurance.  Then  it  was  that  he  found  himself  fully  committed  to  the  work  of 
promulgating  the  philosophy  of  life  through  the  columns  of  the  Religio  Philosophical 
Journal. 

"  Mr.  Jones's  publishing  house  was  entirely  consumed  in  the  great  Chicago  fire  of  Oct. 
9th,  1871.  His  loss  was  very  heavy,  and  he  received  nothing  from  insurance  companies. 
Some  small  sums  were  loaned  him,  but  all  was  refunded  within  sis  months  afterwards. 

"  Most  vigorously  did  he  go  to  work  to  restore  his  publishing  business.  His  paper  for 
the  week  of  the  fire,  fortunatelj',  was  maUed,  and  on  its  way  to  the  subscribers,  when  the 
'  fire-fiend '  did  its  work.  While  the  fire  was  yet  raging  he  wrote  the  matter  for  a  new 
issue — smaller  in  size — and  had  it  printed  and  mailed  in  advance  of  time,  assuring  his 
subscribers  that,  although  burned  out  clean,  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  would  be 
continued  without  unnecessary  delay. 

"  He  then  went  directly  to  New  York  and  purchased  an  entire  new  outfit,  and  in  five 
weeks  had  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal,  full  size,  in  the  United  States  mails  on  its 
way  to  its  subscribers.  In  the  meantime,  between  the  fire  and  the  printing  of  the  paper 
in  its  new  dress — full  size— he  every  week  greeted  his  subscribers  with  the  Religio  Philo- 
sophical Journal,  small  in  size,  that  they  might  not  be  in  the  dark  as  to  the  progress  being 
made  by  him  to  reinstate  his  publishing  house.     None  of  the  publishers  in  Chicago  on 

that  memorable  occasion  excelled  him  in  enterprise 

-   "  Mr.  Jones,  although  his  locks  were  whitened  with  age,  was  in  full  vigour  of  manhood, 
and  devoted  his  whole  time  to  conducting  his  business  financially  and  editorially.     .     .  " 

The  charge  of  the  Religio-Philosophical  Jo2irnal  was  at  once  assumed  on 
Mr.  Jones's  decease  by  his  son-in-law  and  former  business  manager  Colonel 
Bundy,  and  as  this  gentleman  still  continues  his  great  and  onerous  work, 
and  no  single  individual  in  the  ranks  has  ever  made  a  deeper  and  more 
healthful  mark  upon  the  reputation  of  the  Spiritual  movement,  both  as  a 
man  and  an  editor,  it  seems  in  order  at  this  point  to  give  an  outline  of  the 
special  place  in  the  work  of  journalistic  propagandism  which  Colonel  Bundy's 
paper  occupies.  We  have  now  before  us  some  printed  sheets  issued  from 
the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal  ofhce,  which  broadly  define  the  general 
tone,  aim,  and  purpose  of  that  excellent  periodical : — 

"platform  of  the  'religio  philosophical  journal.' 

''  The  old  readers  of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  know  our  aims  and  efforts  in  the 
past,  and  can  judge  of  our  future,  but  a  few  words  may  be  due  to  the  new  readers  of  the 
enlarged  list  that  our  reduction  of  terms  is  bringing.  We  shall  hold  steadily  on,  '  'bating 
no  jot  of  heart  or  hope,'  as  brave  John  Milton  said  when  defending  liberty  of  thought, 
yet  enlarging  our  scope  and  enriching  our  pages  as  the  way  opens.  We  shall  advocate 
the  Sphitual  Philosophy,  with  its  bright  outlook  toward  the  life  beyond,  undimmed 
by  any  haze  or  darkness  of  Materialism  ;  yet,  while  holding  firmly  to  our  own 
ideas,  and  criticising  others  fairly,  frankly,  and  strongly  if  need  be,  we  shall  respect  all 
honest  opinions,  give  them  fair  hearing,  and  so  aim  to  win  the  respect  of  those  from 
whom  we  may  differ.  . 

"  Holding  that  Spiritualism  in  its  broad  meaning  is  The  Science  op  Life,  we  shall  aim 
to  supply  its  facts  in  a  direct  and  practical  way.  Such  temperance,  self-control,  and 
knowledge  of  physiological  law  as  shall  help  us  to  prepare  healthy  bodies  fit  for  pure 
spirits  to  use  and  inhabit,  through  long,  useful,  and  happy  lives  on  earth,  we  shall  urge  as 
of  high  importance.  The  equality  of  woman  in  her  social  and  pohtical  relations,  in  mar- 
riage, in  the  home,  and  in  public  affairs,  as  indispensable  to  a  better  state  of  society  and 
a  higher  civilisation,  we  shall  continue  to  advocate.  The  taxation  of  church  property, 
the  remanding  of  Bible  reading  and  sectarian  prayer  from  our  public  schools  to 
the  church,  the  home,  and  the  Sxinday  school,  where  there  will  be  no 
infringement  on  the  consciences  of  others  ;  and  all  that  helps  a  total  separa- 
tion of  Church  and  State,  and  the  truest  freedom  of  thought  and  conscience, 
we  shall  persistently  stand  for.  '  Liberty,  but  not  Libertinism,'  is  a  good  motto,  and  it 
will  be  our  aim  to  disapprove  all  vulgar  or  immoral  writings,  especially  if  in  the  guise  of 
pretended  reform  or  progress.     The  pathway  of  reform  must  be  clean,  and  true  progress 

29 

45° 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

leads  to  purity  and  self-conquest.  In  the  light  of  immortality  our  daily  conduct  has 
a  new  and  larger  significance.  The  facts  and  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  coming  mostly, 
of  course,  through  mediumship,  are  of  priceless  value  and  transcendent  interest,  and  the 
wisest  and  kindest  of  efforts  are  needed  to  aid  and  encourage  true  mediums.  While 
charitable  to  the  frailties  which  they  have  in  common  with  others,  we  have  ever  held  that 
persistent  and  habitual  fraud  should  be  exposed,  and  that  those  who  practise  it  are  un- 
worthy of  support  and  confidence. 

"  Such  frauds  we  have  opposed,  and  shall  continue  to  do  so,  and  our  course  has  not 
only  been  approved  by  a  majority  of  the  best  Spiritualists,  but  by  a  goodly  number 
of  the  best  and  most  reliable  mediums,  as  their  testimonials  in  our  columns  during 
the  past  year  show. 

"  Care,  accuracy,  and  truthfulness  are  indispensable  in  the  investigation  of  spirit 
manifestations.  We  have,  therefore,  urged  that  good  mediums  should  at  times  sub- 
mit to  thorough,  yet  fair,  test  conditions,  asked  and  granted  in  a  spirit  of  mutual 
good  faith  and  goodwill,  and  such  as  many  of  our  best  mediums  have  most  willingly 
granted  ;  and  this  not  only  for  the  satisfaction  of  inquirers,  but  for  the  good  repute 
of  mediums. 

"  The  cry  that  we  are  an  enemy  of  mediums  is  of  no  consequence  to  us,  and  will 
not  turn  us  a  hair's  breadth  from  our  course.  We  shall  go  on  in  the  exposure  of  all 
persistent  fraud,  and  in  the  effort  to  uphold  and  befriend  real  mediumship  and  good 
mediums.     ..." 

"  While,  no  doubt,  persons  not  of  high '  moral  qualities  may  sometimes  be  good 
instruments  for  spirits  to  use,  yet  sincerity  lies  at  the  base  of  the  finest  spiritual 
gifts.  Without  willingness  to  give  test-conditions,  we  can  hope  for  little  respect  from 
others,  and  for  little  success  in  convincing  careful  investigators. 

"  We  feel  and  are  earnestly  assured  by  thousands  that  our  timely  exposures  of 
fraud  have  helped  to  save  the  great  and  precious  Spiritual  Movement  from  peril  and 
degradation,  and  shall  go  on,  if  necessary,  in  that  part  of  our  work,  trusting  to  gain 
in  uncompromising  fidelity  and  '  in  malice  toward  none  and  charity  to  all.'  " 

From  a  large  number  of  press  comments  which  Colonel  Bundy's  unsparing 
denunciations  of  fraud  and  counterfeit  Spiritualism  has  called  forth,  both 
from  friends  and  foes,  the  following  is  selected  as  a  fair  representative 
example  : — 

"The  Religio  Philosophical  Journal,  of  Chicago,  as  its  name  implies,  is  a  weekly  pub- 
lication, exclusively  devoted  to  religion  and  philosophy,  and  is  recognized  among  its  many 
readers  as  the  boldest,  as  well  as  the  most  sincere  and  able,  journal  published  in  the  West, 
and  has  for  its  motto — '  Truth  wears  no  mask,  bows  at  no  human  shrine,  seeks  neither 
place  nor  applause  ;  she  only  asks  a  hearing.' 

"  While  the  journal  is  published  mainly  in  the  interest  of  Spiritual  philosophy,  it 
shows  no  quarter  to  mediums  who  will  not  submit  to  the  most  scrutinizing  tests  of  their 
genuineness.  It  will  not  tolerate  humbugs,  or  recommend  any  travelling  mediums,  who 
do  not  court,  and  submit  to,  absolute  test  conditions,  in  their  exhibitions  of  mediumship. 
This  rigid  scrutiny  over  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  has  raised  up  to  the  journal  some 
enemies  of  the  gullable  kind,  but  at  the  same  time  it  has  done  more  to  call  attention  to, 
and  establish  the  truth  of  the  phenomena  than  all  the  other  journals  together.  It  is  a 
good  and  ably  edited  paper,  bold  and  outspoken  on  all  subjects,  but  treating  mainly  upon 
philosophy,  science,  and  religion,  so  far  as  religion  can  be  reduced  to  philosophy  and 
science. 

"It  has  been  a  welcome  weekly  visitor  to  our  desk  for  several  years  past,  and  we 
propose  to  so  continue  it  at  whatever  coat.— Democrat  News,  Xenia,  Ohio." 

During  the  author's  far  and  wide  wanderings  round  the  world  as  a  Spiritual 
propagandist,  no  charge  has  been  more  universally  preferred  against  the 
cause  of  Spiritualism  than  that  of  being  allied  to  the  odious  doctrines  of 
"  Free  love." 

We  have  already  made  our  readers  aware  of  the  utter  falsity  of  this  charge 
and  the  concatenation  of  circumstances  which  gave  the  antagonists  of 
Spiritualism  an  opportunity — which  they  eagerly  embraced — of  shouldering 
the  daring  licentiousness  of  the  few,  upon  the  entire  rank  and  file  of  the 
Spiritualists, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  451 

In  foreign  lands  however,  and  especially  when  lacking  those  literary 
references  which  would  have  enabled  her  to  furnish  abundant  counter  state- 
ments, the  author's  denials  of  this  abhorrent  stain  would  have  found  but 
slight  chance  of  acceptance,  had  she  not  been  nobly  sustained  by  the 
uncompromising  denunciations  of  *'  Free  love  "  and  all  its  propagandists, 
which  filled  the  columns  of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  during  the 
entire  period  that  this  madness  ruled  the  public  mind.  Here  was  a  well 
recognized  and  leading  organ  of  Spiritualism  disclaiming  all  fellowship  with 
the  promoters  of  this  doctrine,  and  protesting  against  its  abominable 
practices  with  a  trumpet  tongue  which  could  neither  be  mistaken  nor  denied. 

The  author  is  under  a  debt  of  deep  gratitude  to  Colonel  Bundy  for  the 
triumphant  refutation  which  his  journal  has  afforded  against  the  groundless 
charge  that  there  ever  was,  or  could  be,  the  smallest  links  of  connection 
between  the  doctrines  of  true  Spiritualism  and  "  Free  love."  Allied  to  the 
daughter  of  the  late  Mr.  S.  S.  Jones,  a  lady  whose  brilliant  talents  "^ell 
fitted  her  to  be  the  companion  of  a  leading  journalist,  and  whose  em^  nt 
virtues,  noble  character,  and  sweetness  of  disposition,  are  calculated  <^o 
make  her  husband's  home  a  paradise,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  editor  of 
the  Religio  is  not  competent  to  judge  of  the  urgent  necessity  to  reform  the 
wrongs  that  ensue  from  unhappy  marriages  or  the  miseries  of  discordant 
homes. 

In  answer  to  this  plea  it  has  been  abundantly  shown  that  the  Religio  has 
ever  been  the  champion  of  true  reforms.  Its  special  aim  has  been  to  draw 
the  impassable  line  of  demarcation  between  liberty  and  licence,  moral  law  and 
immoral  lawlessness,  true  love  and  true  licentiousness.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  its  columns  have  redeemed  Spiritualism  from  the  fc  ^s  of  its  own  house- 
hold, and  furnished  the  author  on  countless  occasions  with  a  sword  which 
has  slain  the  very  arguments  that  would  otherwise  have  slain  Spiritualism. 

Another  speciality  of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  has  been  its 
editor's  fearless  exposure  of  the  frauds  practised  in  the  name  of  Spiritualism 
and  the  resolute  protection  which  he  has  extended  not  only  to  genuine 
Mediums,  but  also  to  earnest  investigators  by  his  unsparing  denuncia- 
tion of  sham  manifestations,  and  attempts  to  simulate  genuine  Spirit 
Mediumship. 

Before  dismissing  these  journalistic  notices,  it  should  be  added,  that  the 
excellent  little  paper  to  which  frequent  allusion  has  been  made.  The  Spiritual 
Scientist^  so  ably  edited  by  Mr.  Gerry  Brown,  as  well  as  the  bright  Cleve- 
land paper  entitled  The  American  Spiritualist,  established  by  A.  A. 
Wheelock,  were  both,  after  many  severe  struggles  on  the  part  of  their 
editors,  compelled  to  suspend  for  want  of  adequate  support. 

An  admirable  journal  started  in  New  York  by  the  learned  writer  Dr. 
Eugene  Crowell,  entitled,  The  Two  Worlds,  has  also  shared  the  same 
discouraging  fate.  At  present,  besides  the  two  great  Eastern  and  Western 
journals,  the  Banner  and  Religio,  the  Ba7iner  of  Light  advertises  the 
existence  of  the  following  papers  devoted  to  the  propagandism  of  the 
Spiritual  cause  : — The  Spiritual  Offering,  published  in  Iowa  by  Messrs. 
Fox  and  Wilson;  Light  for  All,  San  Francisco;  Miller's  Psychometric 
Circular,  New  York ;  and  the  Voice  of  Angels,  claimed  to  be  edited  by  the 
spirit  of  its  late  editor,  D.  C.  Densmore.  Quite  recently,  two  new 
Spiritual  publications  have  been  added  to  this  list,  the  titles  of  which  speak 
for  themselves.  The  one  is  called  The  Mediunis  Friend,  pubUshed  at 
Terre  Haute,  Indiana,  proprietor,  George  R.  Moore ;  and  Light  for 
Thinkers,  Atlanta,  Georgia,  Messrs.  Kates  and  Bowman,  editors. 

452  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

We  are  not  prepared  to  state  what  amount  of  support  is  extended  to 
these  several  periodicals',  but  none  who  have  entered  upon  such  a  field  of 
effort  can  mistake  the  fact,  that  they  can  only  be  conducted  by  an  amount 
of  self-sacrifice  and  personal  effort,  which  amply  deserves — even  if  it 
cannot  command — success. 

Many  volumes  of  interest  have  passed  through  the  Spiritual  press  since 
the  publication  of  "  Modern  American  Spiritualism,"  the  most  admired  and 
important  of  which  is — in  point  of  scientific  research  and  exhaustive  scope 
— Dr.  Eugene  Crowell's  "Primitive  Christianity  and  Modern  Spiritualism." 
Dr.  Crowell's  honoured  name  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  excellence  of 
this  work ;  it  is  only  necessary  to  add  therefore  that  the  student  will  find 
in  its  two  handsome  volumes  a  complete  treasury  of  those  facts,  ancient 
and  modern,  which  represent  the  Spiritual  progress  of  humanity. 

Amongst  the  very  last  works  that  have  come  "as  a  light  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles "  of  modern  times,  is  a  book  purporting  to  emanate  from  the 
greatest  and  most  exalted  of  Spirits,  through  the  automatic  Mediumship  of' 
Dr.  Newborough,  of  New  York,  entitled,  "Oahspe."  It  is  claimed  to  be 
"  a  new  bible  "  and  to  give  an  account  of  the  human  race,  its  origin,  crea- 
tion, and  history,  for  twenty-four  thousand  years,  together  with  a  synopsis 
of  what  happened  during  sixteen  cycles  or  forty -eight  thousand  years 
previous.  Antedating  the  production  of  this  volume,  and  amongst  a  collec- 
tion of  others  which  would  require  many  pages  to  enumerate,  are  three 
which  the  author  names  with  a  pang  of  human  regret,  as  they  recall  the 
memory  of  her  most  esteemed  friends  Robert  Dale  Owen,  Epes  Sargent, 
and  Professor  S.  B.  Brittan. 

The  most  recent  works  of  value  bequeathed  by  these  esteemed  scholars 
to  the  world,  are  Owen's  "  Debatable  Land,"  Sargent's  "  Proof  Palpable  of 
Spiritualism,"  and  Brittan's  "  Battle  Ground  of  the  Spiritual  Reformation." 

Though  we  cannot  introduce  any  lengthened  biographical  notices  into 
this  volume,  we  should  be  unfaithful  to  the  integrity  of  history  if  we  failed 
to  recall  some  items  of  the  life  work  of  such  eminent  champions  as  in 
themselves  make  history. 

The  best  tribute  we  can  off'er  to  Mr.  Owen  at  present  then  is  to  select 
from  the  eulogistic  notices  which  followed  him  to  the  life  beyond  from  every 
part  of  Europe,  America,  and  the  Colonies,  the  following  brief  extracts  from 
the  English  and  i\merican  Spiritual  journals. 

The  Banner  of  Light  says  : — 

"decease   of    ROBERT   DALE    OWEN. 

"  On  Sunday  morning,  the  24tli  inst .,  our  old  friend  and  valued  co-worker  passed  to 
the  reward  which  surely  awaited  him  (as  it  does-  all  who  labour  for  the  advancement  of 
every  phase  of  truth  on  earth)  in  the  land  of  souls. 

"  Mr.  Owen  was  in  character  singularly  simple,  straightforward,  and  refined,  and  he 
enjoyed- the  esteem  and  friendship  of  a  large  number  of  men  prominent  in  literature  and 
public  hfe,  outside  of  as  weU  as  within  the  ranks  of  the  spiritual  believers.  He  was  a 
man  of  unusually  vigorous  intellect,  honest  beyond  all  question,  and  animated  by  a  noble 
desire  to  benefit  the  human  race  and  promote  sound  principles. 

"  Robert  Dale  was  born  at  Glasgow,  Scotland,  November  7th,  1801,  and  spent  his  early 
years  at  New  Lanark,  under  the  care  of  a  private  teacher.  He  subsequently  studied  for 
three  years  at  Hofwyl,  in  Switzerland,  and  in  1823  came  to  this  country  with  his  father. 
He  lived  several  years  at  New  Harmony,  Indiana,  where  his  father  was  engaged  in  an 
efibrt  to  build  up  a  community  in  accord  with  his  theories,  but  from  1828  to  1831  was  in 
New  York,  conducting  a  weekly  paper  called  The  Free  Enquirer,  in  partnership  with  Miss 
Frances  Wright.  He  returned  to  New  Harmony  in  1832,  after  his  marriage  with  Mary 
Jane  Robinson^  daughter  of  Samuel  Robinson,  a  prominent  merchant  of  New  York. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  453 

"  Mr.  Owen  after  settling  at  New  Harmony,  had  considerable  experience  in  public  life. 
He  served  in  the  Indiana  Legislature  and  in  Congress.  He  introduced  the  bill  organising 
the  Smithsonian  Institution,  and  in  1846  became  one  of  its  regents  and  chairman  of  its 
Building  Committee.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  Convention  in  Indiana  in 
1850,  and  both  in  the  Convention  and  the  Legislature  endeavoured  to  secure  the  adoption 
of  measures  granting  independent  rights  of  property  to  women.  He  was  appointed 
Charge  d' Affaires  at  Naples  in  1853  and  Minister  in  1855,  and  remained  there  until  1858. 
For  the  last  few  years  Mr.  Owen  was  engaged  mostly  in  literary  work. 

"  His  investigations  in  Spiritualism  began  some  twenty  years  ago  or  more,  and  he  be- 
came a  devout  believer  in  its  philosophy  and  phenomena,  passing  out  of  the  form  in  the 
full  assurance  of  its  truth.  His  first  important  work  on  the  subject  was,  "  Footfalls  on 
the  Boundaries  of  Another  World,"  pubhshed  in  1860,  and  in  1872  appeared  "  The  De- 
batable Land  Between  This  World  and  the  Next."  In  these  two  books  an  account  is 
given  of  his  studies  and  observations  with  mediums,  and  many  marvellous  experiences 
are  related. 

"  He  published  several  books  prior  to  1860,  including  a  historical  drama,  entitled, 
"  Pocahontas,"  and  "  Hints  on  Public  Architecture,"  and  in  1870  appeared  a  novel  under 
the  title,  "  Beyond  the  Breakers."  Previous  to  his  illness  in  1875  he  was  engaged  on  an 
autobiography,  portions  of  which  appeared  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly.  Mr.  Owen  devoted 
much  thought  to  social  and  philosophical  questions,  and  was  a  vigorous  writer  and 
attractive  speaker. 

"  Within  a  few  years  he  again  entered  the  marriage  state,  residing  with  the  lady  who 
linked  her  fortunes  with  his,  at  Lake  George,  N.Y.,  up  to  the  time  of  his  decease.  The 
army  of  progress  on  earth  has  lost  the  material  presence  of  a  vahant  soldier,  but  the 
workers  in  the  sphere  of  causation  have,  in  his  transition,  won  a  powerful  recruit." 

"MR.    ROBERT   DALE    OWEN'S    LAST   SEAN'CE. 

The  Boston  Herald  says  : — 

"  It  was  the  writer's  good  fortune,  while  on  a  visit  to  a  prominent  Spiritualist  in 
Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  three  weeks  ago,  to  meet,  for  the  first  time,  Mr.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  and 
to  dwell  under  the  same  roof  with  him  for  several  days.  At  the  same  residence  was  an 
excellent  private  medium,  and  once  or  twice  a  day  circles  would  be  held.  So  marked 
were  the  demonstrations  that  other  members  of  the  circle  could  not  help  becoming  sen- 
sible that  the  gathering  was  one  that  awaited  his  coming  in  the  other  life,  The  writer 
fancies  that  even  Mr.  Owen  so  interpreted  it,  for  at  times  the  language  was  unmistakable. 
Among  others  who  came  was  one  who  announced  himself  as  "  Commodore  S.,  who  knew 
Mr,  Owen  in  Naples,  and  had  many  a  good  time  with  him."  Mr.  Owen  asked  for  the  fuU 
name,  and  it  was  given — "  Commodore  Stringham."  "  That  is  very  good,"  said  Mr.  Owen, 
"and  I  know  to  what  he  refers.  Has  he  anything  to  say  to  me  ?"  The  reply  came — 
"  Yes,  you  can't  row  your  boat  much  longer ;  it  is  time  for  you  to  go  into  the  cabin." 
Mr.  Owen  seemed  disposed  to  take  the  communication  literally,  and  alluded  to  his  boat  at 
home  on  Lake  George  ;  but  the  control  interrupted,  saying,  "  No,  that  is  not  meant ;  you 
have  sailed  a  good  ship  ;  you  have  kept  a  straight  course  ;  the  voyage  is  nearly  ended, 
and  you  will  soon  come  to  an  anchor.  Then  I  shall  meet  you  on  the  shore  in  company 
with  your  other  friends  and  relatives  who  wait  your  coming.  Do  you  understand  ?  Mr. 
Owen  replied  that  he  did,  and  for  a  time  a  feeling  of  sadness  fell  on  the  little  company, 
for  they  knew  that  Mr.  Owen  was  soon  to  exchange  the  corruptible  for  the  uncorruptible, 
and  the  mortal  would  put  on  immortality.  At  a  later  seance,  when  Mr.  Owen  was  taking 
an  afternoon  rest  on  one  of  the  warm  summer  days  in  early  June,  the  intelligence  was 
communicated  that  his  mission  was  nearly  ended,  and  before  the  autumn  leaves  fell  he 
vyould  be  among  those  in  the  spirit  whom  he  longed  to  greet.  This  was  Mr.  Owen's  last 
seance,  and  a  pleasant  one  it  was.  As  a  prominent  author  was  also  present,  it  will, 
undoubtedly,  at  some  time  be  presented,  with  all  its  details." 

Dr.  Brittan,  one  of  the  earhest,  most  faithful,  and  most  able  champions 
of  which  the  new  faith  has  had  reason  to  boast,  seems  to  have  parted  from 
us  but  yesterday,  and  so  vast  is  the  void  that  he  has  left  unfilled  that  we 
cannot  even  yet  "  make  him  dead,"  or  realize  that  we  can  no  longer  appeal 
to  him  as  a  tower  of  strength  in  our  hours  of  trial  and  discipline. 

Dr.  Brittan's  earthly  pilgrimage  closed  in  the  beginning  of  the  present 
year,  and  on  the  9th  of  January,  1883,  his  funeral  obsequies  were  celebrated 

454  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

at  the  residence  of  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Stryker,  in  Newark,  New  Jersey, 
Amongst  the  distinguished  friends  who  pronounced  addresses  of  eulogy  and 
farewell  on  that  memorable  occasion  were  Mrs.  Cora  L.  V.  Richmond,  the 
celebrated  trance  speaker;  Dr.  J.  .R.  Buchanan,  the  great  writer  and  anthro- 
pologist ;  Mr.  A.  A.  Wheelock ;  Mr.  Henry  Kiddle,  ex-school  superinten- 
dent of  New  York ;  and  Mr.  Charles  Partridge,  Dr.  Brittan's  early  friend 
and  associate  in  the  publication  of  the  first,  and  still  one  of  the  very  best 
Spiritual  papers  ever  printed,  namely  the  grand  old  Spiritual  Telegraph, 
of  New  York.  As  a  clear  and  concise  account  of  Dr.  Brittan's  earliest 
labours  and  first  connection  with  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  when  he  was  the 
Rev.  S.  B.  Brittan,  an  Universalist  clergyman,  will  be  found  in  the  twenty 
years'  "  History  of  Modern  American  Spiritualism,"  we  cannot  give  a  more 
fitting  resume  of  his  later  years,  than  that  detailed  in  the  speech  of  his 
friend,  Mr.  Charles  Partridge,  which  we  reprint  from  the  report  in  the 
Banner  of  Light  in  full.     Mr.  Partridge  said  : — 

"  Mr.  Chairman  aud  Friends  :  I  have  been  delighted  in  being  here  this  afternoon,  for  I 
know  that  what  has  been  said  of  our  departed  friend,  Brittan,  is  true.  1  was  associated 
with  him  as  a  partner  in  1852,  and  some  years  afterward,  in  the  publishing  of  the 
Spiritual  Telegraph,  the  SheJcinah,  and  various  books  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism, 
written  by  men  who  were  early  investigators  of  the  phenomena.  Dr.  Gray,  Judge 
Edmonds,  and  Dr.  Hallock  were  generally  with  us.  We  were  satisfied  that  Spiritualism 
is  true  ;  that  spirits  communicated  with  us.  And  when  we  became  thus  satisfied,  we 
engaged  mediums,  and  the  doors  were  open,  free  of  charge  to  anybody  who  desired  to 
come  and  investigate  the  subject  ;  and  thousands  did  so.  Many,  however,  who  after 
investigating  exclaimed  :  '  Oh  !  I  never  can  doubt  again,'  often  doubted  before  they 
reached  the  next  corner.     As  soon  as  their  prejudices  returned,  the  truth  had  to  go. 

"  Dr.  Buchanan  has  described  to  you  pretty  fully  the  prejudice  of  the  people  against 
new  things.  What  do  you  think  it  must  have  been  when  we  investigated  the  fact  that 
spirits  communicated  with  mortals,  and  pronounced  it  true  ?  All  the  churches  without 
exception  denied  it,  and  alleged  every  kind  of  evil  of  it,  and  of  us.  It  was  a  fraud,  or  of 
the  devU.  They  had  an  abundance  of  devils  then  to  whom  to  attribute  anything  they  did 
not  accept,  and  they  had  no  mercy  on  Spii'itualism.  But  more  recently  some  have  lost 
the  chief  of  that  society  ;  the  devil  has  been  expelled  from  many  of  the  churches,  and 
they  cannot  thus  dispose  of  the  truths  that  spirits  communicate. 

"  You  may  understand,  after  hearing  Dr.  Buchanan,  what  the  early  Spiritualists  had 
to  meet.  You  cannot  understand  it  fully,  but  you  can  get  an  idea.  Why  !  our  friends 
discarded  us  ;  they  did  not  desire  our  acquaintance  in  society  or  in  business  ;  and  even 
the  banks  did  not  want  our  accounts  any  more.  If  they  were  asked  if  such  a  one's  credit 
was  good,  they  would  say  :  '  Well,  it  used  to  be  ;  but  he  is  one  of  these  Spiritualists,  and 
we  would  rather  not  say  anything  about  it.'  That  was  particularly  the  case  in  this  city. 
Dr.  Brittan  stood  firmly  throughout,  as  well  as  all  of  the  others  that  I  have  named,  with 
many  others.  As  to  myself,  I  never  cared  what  people  said  about  me,  and  I  do  not  now. 
I  often  said  to  them  :  '  If  your  slanders  do  you  any  good,  go  on  ;  they  do  not  hurt  me.' 

"  At  present  you  can  see  what  Spiritualism  has  done  in  the  world — what  reforms  are 
going  on  in  the  religions  of  the  time,  wherever  the  people  are  free  to  think  for  themselves 
without  being  condemned  as  lunatics.  See  what  freedom  Spiritualism  has  brought  into 
the  world  already  ;  and  it  will  accomplish  still  more. 

"  I  want  to  refer  to  the  practical  lesson  which  this  calling  us  together  presents  to  my 
mind.  It  has  been  said,  and  truly,  that  Dr.  Brittan  was  distinguished  as  an  author  :  he 
answered  very  many  objections,  especially  those  that  came  from  intelligent  sources — 
clergymen,  infidels,  and  materialists — and  I  think  he  never  answered  them  without  satis- 
fying their  authors  that  they  were  wrong.  He  was  a  host  against  all  opponents,  for  he 
piled  fact  upon  fact,  while  he  had  an  extensive  experience  of  his  own  to  present,  which 
could  not  be  denied.  But  here  is  the  lesson  that  I  wish  to  present  :  You  go  out  into 
the  world  and  find  antagonism  among  almost  all  persons  ;  there  is  very  little  sociability, 
very  little  care  for  you  among  your  neighbours — very  little  kindness  or  courtesy — but  if 
you  look  through  the  published  writings  and  speeches  of  Dr.  Brittan  I  think  you  will 
never  find  a  line  or  a  word  that  is  not  gentle,  respectful,  and  truthful,  and  yet  forcible  and 
earnest.  That  was  peculiarly  his  character.  He  was  peculiarly  social,  remarkably  genial ; 
and  this  trait  of  character  entered  into  all  his  writings — indeed,  into  everything  that  he 
said  and  did.  He  was  a  practical  man  ;  and  with  all  the  bitterness  that  was  heaped  upon 
us  while  we  were  associated,  I  never  heard  an  unkind  word  from  his  lips. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  455 

'Now  here  is  a  lesson  for  us,  and  I  hope  that  every  one  of  us  will  receive  it  and 
appropriate  it,  for  it  is  needed,  especially  at  this  time.  We  are  not  living  under  the  old 
dispensation,  in  which  men  are  condemned  to  burn  for  ever  if  they  don't  accept  church 
dogmas.  We  live  under  the  dispensation  of  love  and  kindness,  which  requires  us  to 
endeavour  to  benefit  our  brother  and  our  sister  everywhere.  To  be  free  and  to  be  happy, 
that  is  the  new  dispensation.  We  are  witnessing  the  old  Pentecostal  manifestations  at 
this  time  throughout  the  world.  How  have  they  spread  throughout  the  world  ?  Through 
our  efforts  ?  No  !  They  have  spread  because  spirits  have  opened  communion  with 
mortals  throughout  the  entire  world,  and  in  the  short  space  of  about  thirty  years.  You 
can  scarcely  find  a  record  in  any  part  of  the  civilized  world  which  does  not  show  that 
spirit  influence  is  potent  among  the  people.  What  are  we  to  do  ?  These  truths  are 
passing  into  general  belief,  and  they  must  be  reduced  to  practice.  This  is  inevitable. 
Spirits  are  not  here  simply  to  talk,  but  to  spiritualize  the  words  and  acts  of  men  ;  we 
should  take  in  their  spirit  as  far  as  we  can,  and  emulate  the  spirit  of  him  whom  we  have 
gathered  here  to  commemorate." 

We  shall  conclude  ihis  humble  tribute  to  the  memory  of  a  true  and  brave 
soldier  of  the  Spiritual  army  by  a  few  extracts  from  a  letter  addressed  to 
the  president  of  the  occasion  by  Mr,  Henry  J.  Newton,  also  one  of  Dr. 
Brittan's  earliest  friends,  most  constant  fellow-labourer,  and  the  present 
honoured  president  of  the  first  Spiritual  Society  of  New  York,  Mr.  New- 
ton writes : — 

"  Henry  Kiddle,  Esq.,  President  American  Spiritualist  Alliance. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  regret  that,  in  consequence  of  physical  indisposition,  I  was  prevented 
from  doing  the  part  assigned  me  by  the  Committee  of  Arrangements  for  the  memorial 
services  in  memory  of  our  brother  and  co-worker,  Dr.  S.  B.  Brittan. 

"  My  intimate  acquaintance  and  friendly  relations  with  Dr.  Brittan  for  many  years 
were  of  such  a  character  that  I  felt  it  a  duty  which  I  owed  to  his  honoured  memory  to 
contribute  my  testimony  publicly,  on  that  occasion,  to  his  worth  and  many  virtues. 

"  When  a  man  of  genius,  and  a  luminary  so  brilliant,  goes  down  into  the  valley  and  the 
deep,  dark  shadow,  and  we  lose  sight  of  his  genial  and  inspiring  presence,  we  seem  called 
upon  to  bring  into  active  application  all  our  philosophy  and  knowledge  to  prevent  our 
being  overwhelmed  with  gloom  and  sadness.  The  first  impulse  is  to  censure  Providence, 
who  at  such  a  time  has  bereaved  us  of  a  dear  associate,  and  when  to  us,  short-sighted  as 
we  are,  it  would  seem  he  could  not  be  spared  from  his  earthly  work.  But  when  we 
reflect  how  little  we  know  what  is  best,  that  our  beloved  brother  is  at  rest,  not  from  labour, 
but  from  the  torturing  cares  and  trials  which  beset  him  here,  we  must  bow  in  humble 
submission  to  the  will  of  Infinite  Wisdom,  and  try  not  to  complain. 

"  It  is  rare  that  Nature  has  been  so  generous  of  her  gifts — of  the  qualities  that  consti- 
tute a  pei'fect  man — as  she  was  in  those  which  she  bestowed  upon  our  friend  and  brother. 
Dr.  Brittan.  In  him  was  exhibited  our  ideal  of  a  perfect  gentleman,  as  understood  in  our 
free  country,  where  no  inherited  title  forms  the  whole  or  any  part  of  what  is  essential  to 
the  .meaning  of  that  term.     .     .     . 

"The  heroism  of  our  brother  was  made  conspicuous  by  his  daring  to  face  the 
frowns  and  censure  not  only  of  the  pubhc,  but  also  of  his  best  and,  at  the  time,  of 
his  dearest  friends.  What  he  sacrificed  was  not  that  he  might  gain  renown  and 
honour ;  those  gilded  treasures,  usually  so  much  sought  for  and  coveted,  were  wholly 
laid  upon  the  altar,  and  ofiered  up  in  testimony  of  his  devotion  to  the  truth  of  his 
faithfulness  to  his  convictions  and  principles.     ... 

"  With  the  exception  of  a  few  of  his  most  intimate  and  confidential  friends,  none 
knew  the  thorny  path  he  travelled.  A  nature  like  his,  sensitive  in  a  marked  degree, 
made  capable  of  suffering  more  keenly  than  ordinary  men  by  his  peculiar  organism — 
who  can  describe  his  sufferings  at  times  ?  It  almost  seemed  sometimes  that  Providence 
was  unfavourable  to  him  and  to  the  cause  which  he  had  espoused,  so  greatly  was  he 
tried.  His  four  sons  were,  one  after  the  other,  stricken  down,  torn  away  from  him,  and 
their  beloved  forms  laid  away  in  the  cheerless  cemetery.  One  of  the  brightest  jewels  of 
his  household,  the  one  of  whom  he  was  especially  proud,  was  offered  up  a  sacrifice  upon 
the  altar  of  his  country  in  the  war  of  the  rebellion.  Yet  no  word  of  complaint  was  ever 
heard  to  pass  his  Hps  ;  indeed,  the  power  with  which  he  at  all  times  controlled  the  fearful 
tide  of  emotion,  when  seemingly  overwhelmed  with  disaster  and  sorrow,  appeared 
almost  superhuman. 

"  He  was   sustained  by    an   unbounded,    unfaltering   faith   and   confidence   in   the 

456  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

goodness  of  his  heavenly  Father.  This  faith  never  forsook  him ;  it  was  the  rock  to 
which  he  seemed  securely  anchored,  and  from  which  no  storm  nor  tempest,  however 
fierce  or  rude,  could  for  a  single  instant  move  him.  "  Yours  truly, 

"  Henry  J.  Newton. 
"New  York,  Jan.  24th,  1883." 

And  last  of  all,  amidst  many  columns  of  inspiring  records  devoted  to  S. 
B.  Brittan's  memory  by  the  editor  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  the  foUow^ing 
lines  seem  to  form  a  fitting  summary  of  all  that  human  language  has  to 
tell  :— 

"  What  Dr.  S.  B.  Brittan  wrote  of  William  White  at  the  time  of  his  sudden  tran- 
sition may  now  be  aptly  applied  to  himself  :  '  As  we  look  around  us,  we  miss  a 
faithful  soldier  who  wore  the  armour  of  Kght.  "  The  sword  of  the  Spirit "  was  in  his 
hand,  and  he  was  always  on  duty.  To-day  his  post  seems  to  be  deserted.  But  when 
the  roll  of  the  faithful  is  called  he  still  answers  to  his  name,  and  we  learn  that  he 
has  been  promoted  from  the  ranks  of  mortals.  It  is  well.  A  worthy  champion  of 
the  Right  and  a  true  lover  of  his  Race — worn  with  the  strife  and  weary  with  the  march — 
rests  from  his  labours.'  " 

CHAPTER  LIV. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    AMERICA    (CONTINUED.) 

In  Memoriam. 

As  in  our  last  chapter  we  entered  upon  the  painful  task  of  noting  the 
departure  of  two  of  the  best  and  bravest  generals  who  have  marshalled  the 
Spiritual  army  forward  through  the  wildernesses  of  superstition  and 
materialism,  it  may  be  in  order  to  add  to  the  list  already  commenced,  the 
names  of  some  few  others  of  those,  once  so  familiar  in  the  public  records 
of  Spiritualism,  but  now  only  mementos  of  vacant  places  which  none  have 
arisen  to  fill.  Amongst  those  whose  absence  has  left  a  deeply-felt  void  in 
his  wide  circle  of  usefulness,  is  Dr.  H.  F.  Gardner,  of  Boston,  so  often 
mentioned  in  the  twenty  years'  "  History  of  Modern  American  Spiritualism  " 
as  the  enterprising  manager  of  the  Boston  Sunday  meetings,  the  undaunted 
champion  of  Spiritualism  throughout  Massachusetts,  and  the  gentleman  who 
gave  the  celebrated  challenge  which  compelled  certain  of  the  Havard 
professors  to  institute  an  investigation  into  Spiritual  phenomena,  the 
promised  report  on  which,  the  said  professors  have  never  thought  fit  to 
publish. 

Soon  after  the  departure  of  this  noble  veteran  to  his  well-earned  reward, 
he  was  joined  in  the  higher  life  by  a  pioneer  of  no  less  worth  and  celebrity, 
Mr.  Horace  H.  Day,  of  New  York,  a  gentleman  whose  many  disinterested 
services  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  can  hardly  be  suificiently  eulogized. 

Mr.  Day  founded,  and  for  some  years  sustained  by  his  own  munificence, 
a  library,  several  circle  rooms,  and  a  paid  Medium,  Miss  Kate  Fox,  at  a 
building  hired  by  himself  at  553,  Broadway,  and  entitled,  "The  Society  for 
the  Promotion  of  Christian  Spiritualism." 

Mr.  Day  also  published  one  of  the  earliest  Spiritual  papers  at  that  build- 
ing, and  there,  public  circles — held  at  this  gentleman's  expense— -were  free 
to  all  who  chose  to  attend  them. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  457 

Long  after  the  occupancy  of  the  building  was  resigned,  Mr.  Day  continued 
to  devote  his  means,  time,  and  influence  to  the  service  of  SpirituaHsra,  with 
an  amount  of  generosity  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  movement. 

Another  bright  star  that  has  disappeared  from  the  Spiritual  hemisphere 
was  E.  V.  Wilson,  the  celebrated  seer,  test  Medium,  writer,  and  lecturer. 

It  is  not  too  much  to  assert,  that  thousands  of  persons  have  been  con- 
vinced of  the  soul's  immortality  and  the  facts  of  Spirit  communion  by  the 
indefatigable  labours  of  E.  V.  Wilson.  Worn  out,  even  in  the  meridian  of 
life,  by  the  ceaseless  energy  with  which  he  followed  up  his  career  of  speak- 
ing, writing,  and  test  Mediumship,  the  brave  soldier  presented  arms  for  the 
last  time  to  the  assembled  multitudes  at  Lake  Pleasant  camp  meeting,  his 
favourite  sphere  of  summer  labour;  then  shouldering  the  musket  of  duty,  he 
gained  his  Western  home  in  time  to  say  farewell  to  earth,  leaving  a  monu- 
ment behind  him  inscribed  in  the  grateful  hearts  of  thousands  of  his  fellow 
mortals.  And  still  another  noble  worker  gone  home  was  the  Rev.  Thos. 
Benning,  a  pioneer  Spiritualist  as  pure,  guileless,  kind,  and  true  as  any  that 
the  ranks  of  Spiritualism  could  boast  of.  Many  an  one  has  missed  his 
kind  face  from  the  New  York  public  gatherings  of  Spiritualists,  wherein  for 
more  than  twenty  years  his  wise  counsels  and  fearless  testimony  were 
esteemed  by  every  listener  as  bulwarks  of  the  faith. 

Good  and  much-beloved  Thomas  Benning  was  soon  followed  by  his  old 
friend  and  fellow-labourer  Dr.  John  F.  Gray,  of  whom  the  Banner  of  Light 
reports  as  follows  : — 

"  A    BRAVE    SPIRIT    RELEASED. 

"  Dr.  John  Franklin  Gray  passed  to  spirit-life  June  5th,  at  the  Fifth  Avenue  Hotel, 
New  York  City,  after  an  illness  of  several  weeks'  duration.  He  was  boi-n  in  Sherbourne, 
N.Y.,  September  23rd,  1804  ;  entered  the  College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  in  1824, 
and  obtained  his  degree  in  182'5.  He  soon  afterward  heard  of  the  system  of  Hahnemann, 
and  upon  due  experimentation  and  inquiry  becoming  satisfied  of  the  superiority  of  the 
Homeopathic  method,  he  gave  in  his  adhesion  to  it,  being  the  first  '  regular '  physician  in 
America  who  did  so. 

"  The  same  degree  of  manly  independence  which  led  him  by  embracing  Homeopathy 
because  it  appeared  the  nearest  the  truth  to  him  to  give  up  a  profitable  practice,  and  all 
his  professional  friends,  operated  to  make  him  equally  bold  in  his  religious  convictions, 
and — though  we  have  seen  no  mention  of  it  in  several  notices  of  his  death  in  the  columns 
of  the  daily  press — he  became  a  convert  to  Spiritualism,  being  at  one  time  a  prominent 
leader  among  the  friends  of  the  cause  in  New  York.  E.  Edson,  M.D.,  of  White  Plains, 
N.Y.,  states  that  Dr.  Gray  '  hired  the  first  public  speaker  on  Spiritualism  in  New  York — 
hired  and  paid  for  a  hall,  and  warmed  and  lighted  the  same  gratuitously.  He  was  an 
eminent  physician,  and  acknowledged  he  was  assisted  by  the  direction  of  spirit  influences 
in  his  practice.'  He  has  passed  from  this  sphere  of  action,  where  it  was  his  lot  to  endure 
ostracism  and  hardship  because  of  his  championship  of  medical  and  spiiitual  reform,  to  a 
rich  reward  in  the  world  of  spirits — the  world  that  rights  all  wi'ongs." 

As  the  procession  of  the  mighty  dead  of  earth  moves  on  to  the  realms  of 
life  eternal,  another  illustrious  worker  appears,  one  whose  name  has  been 
sounded  as  loudly  in  the  ranks  of  American  and  European  commercial 
enterprise,  as  in  that  of  the  Massachusetts  Spiritual  ranks.  This  is  none 
other  than  Alvin  Adams,  the  founder  of  the  famous  Adams  Express 
Company,  and  one  of  the  most  liberal  and  untiring  friends  of  Spirituahsm. 

From  a  long  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Adams,  the  author  is 
able  to  testify  that  this  gentleman  frequently  acknowledged  his  deep  indebt- 
edness to  Spiritualism,  both  for  his  religious  convictions  and  worldly 
prosperity.  Mr.  Adams  on  several  occasions  has  detailed  to  the  author 
how  in  a  great  crisis  in  the  affairs  of  the  immense  Express  Company,  of 

458  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

which  he  was  the  principal,  he  was  sent  for,  in  the  name  of  his  old 
college  companion  and  early  friend,  Daniel  Webster,  then  a  Spirit,  and 
advised,  as  he  valued  his  name,  fame,  and  fortune,  to  call  upon  Mrs. 
Mettler,  a  celebrated  seeress  and  clairvoyant  of  Hartford,  Connecticut. 

As  Mr.  Adams  at  that  time  had  no  knowledge  of  Spiritualism,  and  Mrs. 
Mettler's  name  was  utterly  unknown  to  him,  he  at  first  disregarded  these 
warnings.  In  the  course  of  time  however  they  became  so  urgent  that  he 
took  an  opportunity  of  calling  on  Mrs.  Mettler,  and  entering  her  presence 
as  a  total  stranger,  and  unannounced,  was  greeted  by  what  purported  to  be 
the  Spirit  of  his  old  friend  and  legal  adviser  Webster,  and  assured  that  he 
had  only  just  come  in  time  to  save  his  aifairs  from  ruinous  entanglements, 
and  perhaps  irretrievable  loss. 

The  entranced  Medium  was  then  influenced  to  enter  into  business  details, 
known,  as  Mr.  Adams  supposed,  to  no  earthly  being  outside  of  his  own 
official  circle.  During  this,  and  many  subsequent  interviews,  the  Spirit  ot 
Daniel  Debster  counselled  Mr.  Adams,  with  more  than  the  legal  skill  and 
acumen  he  had  exhibited  in  earth  life,  and  Mr.  A.  asserted  that  he  beheved 
he  owed  to  that  providential  interposition,  much  of  the  success  and 
prosperity  that  placed  him  on  the  pinnacle  of  financial  prosperity.  Mr. 
Adams  on  this,  and  every  other  phase  of  Spiritualism,  spoke  with  perfect 
freedom,  candour,  and  gratitude. 

Although  of  late  years  he  took  a  less  active  interest  in  the  maintenance 
of  the  Spiritual  meetings  in  Boston  than  formerly,  we  have  the  assurance 
that  his  reticence  was  the  result  of  ill  health  and  increasing  infirmities, 
rather  than  any  diminution  of  interest  in  a  cause  to  which  he  had  so  often 
and  so  openly  owned  his  deep  indebtedness.  The  following  brief  extract 
will  suffice  to  show  how  the  secular  papers  noticed  the  well-known  fact  of 
Mr.  Adams's  long  years  of  connection  with  Spiritualism  in  Boston.  It  is 
from  the  Batiner  of  Light,  and  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  DECEASE    OF   ALVIN    ADAMS. 

"  This  gentleman,  whose  name  is  a  household  word  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States, 
because  of  his  prominence  in  a  widely  useful  department  of  mundane  business  activities, 
passed  on  from  his  residence  in  Watertown,  Mass.,  Saturday  evening,  September  1st,  aged 
73  years.  He  was  born  in  Andover,  Vermont,  on  the  10th  of  June,  1804.  The  success 
of  the  wide  and  comprehensive  system  of  transportation  known  as  the  Adams  Express 
Company  was  in  great  jjart  due  to  Mr.  Adams's  tact  and  management.  His  disease  was 
known  to  physicans  as  hydro-thorax.  He  leaves  two  sons  and  one  daughter.  We  have 
failed  to  see  in  any  of  the  city  papers  which  have  chronicled  his  death,  reference  to  his 
being  a  Spiritualist  in  behef,  but  such  is  the  fact,  as  we  have  had  the  assurance  from  him 
personally,  during  his  life,  and  he  has  for  years  past  taken  occasion  to  practically  prove 
the  force  of  his  faith  through  pecuniary  gifts  to  assist  media,  subscribing  liberally  toward 
carrying  on  spiritual  lectures  in  this  city,  etc." 

For  many  years  the  Spiritualists  of  Boston  will  remember  the  delightful 
soirees  attended  by  the  elite  of  the  faith  that  were  held  in  Mr.  Adams's 
palatial  residence  ;  gatherings  made  memorable,  not  only  by  the  hospitality 
of  the  host,  but  also  by  the  kindness  and  geniaUty  of  the  lady  of  the  house, 
the  well-beloved  wife  of  Mr.  Adams.  For  a  very  brief  period  only,  this 
much-attached  couple  survived  each  other.  In  the  touching  words  of  the 
poet  Wordsworth — 

"  He  first  deceased  ; — 
She  tried  to  live  without  him  ; 
Liked  it  not,  and  died." 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  459 

Another  venerable  pilgrim  who  has  passed  to  the  life  beyond  during  the 
last  fifteen  years  was  Dr.  Eliakim  Phelps,  the  Congregationalist  minister,  in 
whose  house  at  Stratford,  Connecticut,  during  the  very  earliest  days  of  the 
Spiritual  movement,  occurred  those  tremendous  manifestations,  in  the 
shape  of  hauntings,  and  disturbances,  that  transcended  in  power  and 
continuity  any  that  have  been  recorded  in  the  history  of  Spiritualism. 

Dr.  Hare,  Epes  Sargent,  Owen,  and  others,  have  given  vivid  accounts  of 
these  weird  manifestations,  but  the  author  has  often  been  assured  by  the 
venerable  gentleman  himself  that  no  verbal  description  could  do  justice  to 
the  stupendous  force  exhibited  by  the  invisible  powers  that  for  ten  'months 
possessed  his  dweUing,  causing  horror  and  amazement  to  the  harassed 
inhabitants,  and  producing  awe  and  consternation  amongst  thousands  of 
persons  who  visited  his  premises  during  those  stormy  times.*  As  some 
members  of  Dr.  Phelps's  family,  connected  with  high  orthodox  institutions, 
have  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  reverend  gentleman  before  his  decease 
had  renounced  all  interest  in  Spiritual  manifestations,  and  regarded  his  past 
experiences  only  as  a  proof  of  Satanic  agency,  we  deem  it  due  aUke  to  the 
best  interests  of  truth,  and  to  the  character  of  Dr.  Phelps  himself,  whose 
memory  the  author  cherishes  as  that  of  an  esteemed  friend  and  frequent 
correspondent,  to  give  place  to  the  following  extracts  taken  from  the  Boston 
Evening  Trmiscript  oi  February,  1881,  and  written  by  a  gentleman  well- 
known  and  highly  esteemed  in  the  Spiritual  ranks,  Dr.  A.  S.  Hayward : — 

"the     late     dr.      eliakim      PHELPS. 
"  To  the  Editor  of  '  The  Transcript.' 

"  This  earnest  labourer  in  the  Christian  ministry  passed  to  spirit-life  from  Weehawken, 
N.  Y.,  December  29th,  at  the  rij^e  age  of  ninety  years.  His  son  Professor  Austin  Phelps, 
of  Andover,  Mass.,  has  printed  in  the  Congregationalist,  for  some  three  weeks  past,  a 
series  of  articles,  under  the  caption,  "A  Pastor  of  the  Last  Generation,"  intended  as  a 
sketch  of  his  father's  life-work,  religious  opinions,  etc.,  and  in  the  course  of  which  he  pays 
his  father's  memory  a  high  tribute  of  respect  for  ability,  honesty  of  purpose,  and  all  that 
goes  to  make  up  a  great  and  good  man.     .     .     . 

"  In  Part  III.  he  speaks  of  his  father's  belief  in  Spiritualism  in  a  manner  that  does  not 
seem  to  me  to  convey  the  views  of  that  gentlemen  correctly,  and  having  had  myself  some 
facts  from  Dr.  Phelps  (the  father)  as  late  as  1875 — which  facts  Professor  Phelps  (the  son) 
had  no  means  of  knowing — and  believing  that  they  should  be  madepubhc  at  this  time,  in 
order  that  he  (Dr.  Phelps)  should  be  put  on  record  coi-rectly,  and  that  Spiritualism  may  have, 
openly,  the  benefit  of  this  good  man's  privately  cherished  opinions,  concerning  its  truth- 
fulness and  use,  I  desire  that  you  will  do  me  the  favour  of  giving  these  facts  publicity  in  your 

columns I  do  not  think  that  Dr.  Phelps  was  bold  in  advocating  his  convictions 

as  to  the  truthfulness  of  Spiritualism,  especially  among  those  opposed  to  it ;  therefore  it  is 
not  strange  that  his  son,  the  professor,  did  not  know  to  what  extent  his  father  embraced 
the  Spiritual  Philosophy  and  acknowledged  the  verity  of  the  phenomena  ;  but  if  the 
professor  had  been  present,  as  I  have,  at  the  s6ances  attended  by  his  father,  and  had 
witnessed  with  what  gratification  he  recognised  his  spirit-friends,  he  might  have  been  led 
to  the  use  of  different  language  regarding  the  views  of  the  deceased  than  he  has  of  late 
given  expression  to.     .     .     . 

"  Dr.  Phelps  no  doubt  looked  upon  the  manifestations,  as  his  son  states,  as  'a  visitation 
from  God,'  but  instead  of  bowing  to  them  as  an  affiiction  '  in  sorrow  and  prayer,'  he 
considered  that  he  was  happily  blessed  with  spii'it  manifestations  of  a  most  remarkable 
character,  which  convinced  him  that  the  two  worlds — the  material  and  the  spiritual — were 
one  unbroken  whole,  and  that  communion  between  the  two  spheres  of  existence  was  a 
fixed  fact  in  the  nature  of  things.  His  conversion  to  a  belief  in  Modern  Spiritualism  was 
of  a  similar  character  with  that  of  St.  Paul's  conversion  to  Ancient  Spiritualism — the 
result  of   suddenly  presented  and   overwhelmingly  satisfactory  proofs  in  the  premises. 

^For  a  full  description  of  these  manifestations  see  Dr.  Hare's  work  on  "  Spiritualism  Scientifically 
Demonstrated." 

46o  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

What  Dr.  Phelps  says  himself  is  quite  essential  upon  the  point  at  issue,  therefore  we  will 
quote  his  own  words  as  follows  :  '  I  have  seen  things  in  motion  more  than  a  thousand 
times,  and  in  most  cases  when  no  visible  power  was  exerted  by  which  the  motion  could 
be  produced.  There  have  been  broken  fi-om  my  windows  seventy-one  panes  of  glass  — 
more  than  thirty  of  which  I  have  seen  break  with  my  own  eyes.  I  have  seen  objects, 
such  as  brushes,  tumblers,  candlesticks,  snuffers,  etc.,  which  but  a  few  moments  before  I 
knew  to  be  at  rest,  fly  against  the  glass  and  dash  it  in  pieces,  when  it  was  utterly  impos- 
sible from  the  direction  in  which  they  moved  that  any  visible  power  could  have  caused 
the  motion.  As  to  the  reality  of  these  facts,  they  can  be  proved  by  testimony  a  hundred- 
fold greater  than  is  ordinarily  required  in  our  courts  of  justice  in  cases  of  life  and 
death.' 

•'  I  met  Dr.  Phelps  at  the  residence  of  Dr.  Munn,  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  some  twenty 
years  ago.  He  then  and  there  related  to  myself,  and  others,  his  experience  in  spirit 
manifestations,  and  said  that  the  amount  of  property  destroyed  by  the  invisible  powers 
was  nothing  to  him  compared  to  the  great  benefit  he  received  by  and  through  them  ;  and 
that  after  becoming  convinced  of  the  verity  of  spirit  communion,  guidance,  and  pro- 
tection, he  had  preached  it.  '  But.'  said  he,  '  if  I  had  called  it  Spiritualism,  I  should  not 
have  received  support  or  gained  hearers ;  while  as  long  as  I  did  not  call  it  by  its  right 
name  it  was  received  as  beautiful  teachings.' 

"  In  1874  Dr.  Phelps  wrote  to  me,  from  New  Jersey,  asking  me  to  consult  a  medium 
for  him ;  adding  that  he  had  not  for  the  past  year  had  an  opportunity  to  visit  one — 
the  last  one  being  in  Andover — and  desii-ing  that  I  would  request  that  one  (if  she  still 
continued  her  mediumship)  to  enquu'e  if  any  of  his  spirit  friends  had  any  messages  for 
him.  He  then  remarked  :  '  I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  Judge  Edmonds,  and  other 
prominent  Spiritualists  now  in  spirit  life.' 

"He  further  spoke  of  his  spirit  relatives,  and  said  they  used  to  keep  him  apprised  of 
important  events,  sometimes  years  before  they  took  place.  He  closed  his  letter  by  s^i^ying  : 
'  If  she  should  obtain  anything,  and  write  me,  she  will  confer  on  me  a  special  favour.' 
I  laid  the  doctor's  petition  before  a  highly  sensitive  medium,  with  the  following  result." 

It  would  be  needless  to  give  the  communication  which  followed,  and 
which  Dr.  Phelps  acknowledged  to  be  characteristic  of  its  alleged  Spiritual 
source.     Dr.  Hayward's  letter  to  the  Transcript  concludes  thus  : — 

"  In  the  year  1871,  Dr.  Phelps  wrote  an  interesting  essay  for  publication  upon  the 
practical  value  of  clairvoyance  in  detecting  disease,  and  the  practice  of  '  laying  on  of 
hands,'  or  magnetic  treatment,  to  eradicate  diseased  conditions  from  the  human  system. 
I  caused  the  essay  to  be  printed,  with  his  consent,  but  the  authorship  was,  at  his  request 
— as  far  as  the  public  was  concerned — to  remain  a  secret  until  he  had  joined,  by  decease, 
the  loved  ones  in  the  spirit- world. 

"  If  Dr.  Phelps  had  been  brave  enough  to  stem  the  tide  of  opposition,  and  had  declared 
boldly  his  views  to  the  world,  it  might  have  been  better  ;  but  still,  his  blameless  life  and 
(acknowledged)  marked  experiences  may,  after  all,  constitute  an  incentive  to  inquiry  into 
the  important  matter  which  interested  him  so  much,  on  the  part  of  other  religious 
teachers  who  have  the  courage  '  to  face  a  frowning  world '  in  defence  of  whatever  con- 
victions they  may  arrive  at."  "A.  S.   Hayward." 

"  Boston,  Mass." 

Dr.  J.  Bryant,  a  celebrated  Spirit  Medium  and  healer  ;  Mrs.  H.  M-  F. 
Brown,  the  well-known  and  talented  editor  of  the  Cleveland  Agitator ; 
David  C.  Densmore,  the  indefatigable  proprietor  of  the  paper  called  The 
Voice  of  Angels  ;  Mrs.  M.  A,  Amphlett,  an  excellent  pioneer  trance  speaker ; 
Colonel  Danskin,  the  father  of  Baltimore  Spirituahsm,  and  one  of  the 
most  philosophic  thinkers  and  writers  in  the  ranks  ;  kind,  good,  hospitable 
Mrs.  Maynard,  the  Medium's  friend,  in  whose  genial  home  in  Buffalo  every 
toiler  in  the  Spiritual  vineyard  found  a  mother's  greeting ;  good  Charles 
Levy,  the  devoted  friend  of  Spiritualism  in  St.  Louis ;  and  Willie  Daven- 
port— poor,  tired,  over-worked,  and  much-abused  Willie  Davenport ;  these 
are  but  a  few  of  the  transfigured  ones  who  now  begin  to  muster  in  serried 
lines,  and  pass  in  the  phantom  panoramas  of  memory  before  their  saddened 
friends'  eyes,  leaving  the  ineffaceable  marks  of  their  mortal  footprints  upon 
the  age,  although  their  well-remembered  forms  lie  mouldering  in  the  grave  ! 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  461 

Sometimes  one  or  two  of  these  heroic  Spirits  fall  out  of  line,  and  stand 
like  a  Colossus  alone  amidst  the  thronging  hosts;  and  then  we  pause  to  note 
the  speciahties  that  distinguish  them,  and  marvel  if  we  who  are  left  behind, 
shall  ever  look  upon  their  like  again.  We  are  thus  attracted  to  Willie 
Davenport,  the  youngest  of  the  celebrated  brothers  so  often  written  of,  so 
often  misunderstood,  and  misrepresented.  He  passed  away  in  Sydney, 
New  South  Wales.  His  lonely  brother  Ira,  had  much  difficulty  to  obtain 
leave  to  erect  a  monument  to  his  dear  companion's  memory,  because  he 
determined  to  have  upon  it  a  sculptured  device  representing  the  time- 
honoured  cabinet  and  other  paraphernalia  which  recalled  poor  Willie's 
earthly  work  and  frequent  .martyrdoms.  Ira  succeded  at  last,  but  he 
might  have  spared  himself  the  contest.  The  young  man's  monument  is 
already  set  up  in  the  ineffaceable  lines  which  Spiritualism  has  made  on  public 
opinion. 

Hear  what  his  fellow-labourers  reported  of  Willie  Davenport  in  the 
Spiritual  journals  : — 

"  William  H.  Davenport  numbered  an  earth-life  of  thirty-six  years  to  the  present  time, 
and  has  been  a  medium  for  the  past  twenty-three  years.  In  company  with  his  brother  Ira, 
under  the  name  and  style  of  the  '  Davenport  Brothers,'  or  '  Boys,'  they  have  traversed 
nearly  every  quarter  of  the  globe :  Europe,  the  East  and  West  Indies,  South  America, 
Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  other  widely  separated  points  being  marked  on  the  chart  of 
their  wanderings,  while  there  is  scarcely  a  town  of  any  size  in  the  United  States  where 
they  have  not  given  practical  witness  of  the  gifts  they  possessed.  We  have  had  frequent 
occasion  to  call  the  attention  of  the  public  to  the  achievements  of  these  media  in  the 
past,  and  at  a  time  when  in  all  probability  the  hand  of  physical  change  is  about  to  close 
their  labours,  at  least  conjunctively,  it  is  but  just  to  briefly  revert  to  that  which  they 
have  been  privileged  to  accomplish. 

"  They  have  appeared  successfully  before  the  kings,  queens,  and  great  ones  of  the  Old 
World,  and  have  created  among  them  a  marked  impression,  which  has  in  some  instances 
been  outwrought  in  action  ;  they  have  sowed  seeds  of  truth  in  the  minds  of  the  common 
people  which  have  borne  fruit  in  many  cases  of  more  than  an  hundred  fold  ;  thousands 
having  been  converted  through  their  mediumship  to  a  belief  in  sjjirit  return,  and  a 
knowledge  of  the  future  life  awaiting  every  human  soul.  As  an  evidence  of  the  con- 
vincing character  of  their  mediumship  it  is  necessary  only  to  refer  to  the  back  files  of  this 
paper,  and  particularly  to  the  account  of  the  bigoted  and  violent  treatment  dealt  out  to 
them  in  England  on  their  first  visit,  when  they  were  under  the  charge  of  Rev.  Jesse  B. 
Ferguson,  of  Tennessee  (since  deceased),  as  agent,  and  the  triumphant  victory  which  they 
attained  at  last.  May  those  intelligences  with  whom  he  has  so  long  regarded  himself  as  a 
co-worker — notwithstanding  all  rejjorts  to  the  contraiy — be  with  the  departing  member 
of  this  celebrated  fraternity,  and  lead  his  weary  footsteps  along  the  green  pastures  and  by 
the  still  waters  of  spiritual  peace  ! " 

Two  more  of  the  earHest  pioneers  of  the  great  movement  pass  singly  in 
the  procession  of  mighty  ones,  each  too  distinguished  as  individualized 
workers,  to  be  lost  in  the  crowd.  They  are  the  Rev.  William  Fishbough 
and  Dr.  Robert  Hallock.  The  last  that  was  heard  of  good  Mr,  Fishbough 
on  earth,  were  these  words  ///  memoriam. 

"dr.    WILLIAM    FISHBOUGH. 

"Funeral  services  over  the  earthly  remains  of  Dr.  Fishbough  took  place, at  his  late 
residence,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  on  the  evening  of  Monday,  May  23rd.  The  Times  of  that  city 
states  that  although  it  had  been  announced  that  the  funeral  was  to  be  a  private  one,  the 
many  personal  friends  of  the  deceased  crowded  the  house  to  overflowing.  Among  well- 
known  citizens  present  were  Rev.  Mr.  Gunnison,  ex-Superintendent  Kiddle,  and  other 
friends  from  New  York  and  Brooklyn  ;  and  a  delegation  of  forty  ladies  and  gentlemen, 
members  of  Phoenix  Division  Sons  of  Temperance,  of  which  deceased  had  been  chaplain 
for  some  years  past.  The  floral  tributes  were  very  handsome,  a  pillow  of  roses  with  the 
word  '  Father '  being  at  the  head  of  the  casket  ;  another,  the  ofi'ering  of  the  Division, 

462  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

having  tlie  words  '  Our  Chaplain.'  There  was  also  a  column  of  flowers  upon  which  a  star 
shone  prominently,  and  at  the  foot  were  three  sheaves  of  wheat,  emblematic  of  the 
deceased's  age  and  life. 

"  We  are  indebted  to  Mr.  S.  B.  Nichols  for  the  following  tribute  to  the  memory  of  our 
departed  friend  and  co-worker,  and  report  of  remarks  made  on  the  occasion  of  his  funeral 
obsequies  : — 

"'in   MEMOEIAM — DB.   WILLIAM   FISHBOUGH. 

" '  Another  veteran  Spiritualist,  Dr.  William  Fishbough,  passed  on  to  the  immortal 
home,  suddenly  and  under  peculiar  circumstances,  Friday  evening.  May  20th.  He  passed 
the  evening  away  from  home,  and  his  wife  on  retiring  for  the  night  left  a  light  burning 
in  the  front  basement.  On  waking  in  the  morning  she  found  that  he  had  not  returned, 
and  on  going  to  the  front  basement  door  she  found  his  lifeless  form.  Coming  home  late 
he  had  made  a  miss-step  and  fell,  striking  his  head  against  the  window  sill  and  crushing 
his  skull — a  sad  and  mournful  ending  of  a  long  and  useful  life.  On  Friday  morning 
when  he  came  to  the  breakfast  table  he  told  a  curious  dream  that  he  had  had  in  the  night. 
He  said  he  dreamed  that  the  point  of  his  gold  pen  that  he  used  for  his  writing  was  worn 
out  so  that  he  could  not  use  it  any  more  ;  and  I  am  informed  that  he  never  did  write 
another  stroke.     Was  this  a  premonition  of  his  sudden  transit  to  the  spirit- world  ?'  " 

Amongst  many  another  v^^ord  of  warm  eulogy  from  friends  who  had  known 
and  loved  this  truly  good  man  none  can  render  him  more  justice  than  the 
statement,  that  he  was  the  scribe  that  wrote  down  the  famous  work  of  A.  J. 
Davis,  then  a  rustic  uneducated  lad  of  sixteen  years — "  Nature's  Divine 
Revelations  ; "  that  he,  William  Fishbough,  was  one  of  the  most  patient 
and  able  sub-editors  of  the  first  Spiritual  paper  ever  pubhshed,  the  New 
York  Spiritual  Telegraph  ;  he  was  also  the  author  of  the  noble  and  philo- 
sophic work  "  The  Macrocosm  and  Microcosm,"  besides  innumerable  maga- 
zine articles,  all  redolent  of  the  scholarly  intellect  and  pure  spirit  of  a  wise 
and  good  man, 

To  do  justice  to  Dr.  Hallock,  his  life  of  devotion  and  splendid  service  to 
the  cause  of  SpirituaHsm,  would  be  an  attempt  so  difficult,  that  we  shall 
leave  his  name  as  we  find  it — enshrined  in  the  hearts  of  the  multitudes 
who  loved  and  admired  him.  A  few  lines  of  obituary  notice  we  will  how- 
ever reprint  from  the  London  Medium^  Dr.  Hallock  being  scarcely  less 
known  and  appreciated  in  England  than  amongst  his  own  American 
countrymen.     The  Medium  of  February  19th,  1879,  says: — 

"  IN    MEMORIAM. ROBERT    T.    HALLOCK,    M.D. 

"  Translated  from  Earth  to  the  Higher  Life  of  Spirit,  January  \ith,  1879, 

"  One  more  of  the  little  band,  who  have  laboured  in  the  Cause  of  Spiritualism,  and 
whose  names  were  associated  with  the  inception  of  the  Movement  at  the  time  of  the 
'  Rochester  rappings,'  has  been  gathered  to  his  home.  Full  of  years  and  full  of  honour, 
revered  and  beloved  by  all  who  knew  him,  our  departed  brother  has  left  behind  him  the 
blessed  memory  of  the  just,  and  the  memorial  of  a  blameless  and  well-spent  life. 

"Dr.  Hallock  was  born  seventy -three  years  ago,  of  Quaker  parentage,  at  Milton,  on' 
the  Hudson — his  father  and  grandfather  being  preachers  in  the  Society.  In  that  faith 
he  was  nurtured,  but  its  rigid  tenets  proved  unacceptable  to  his  progressive  spirit,  and  on 
his  arrival  at  manhood,  he  cast  them  aside,  and  the  reaction  landed  him  in  Materialism. 
He  was  too  essentially  spiritual,  however,  to  find  any  rest  in  negation,  and  in  due  time, 
as  his  powers  developed,  SpirituaHsm  claimed  him,  almost  naturally,  as  an  adherent  of 
its  elevating  philosophy. 

"  In  1851,  having  then  moved  from  Utica,  where  he  had  practised  medicine,  to  New 
York,  he  joined  Robert  Dale  Owen,  Judge  Edmonds,  Dr.  Gray,  and  Mr.  Charles  Part- 
ridge in  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena  which  are  known  to  history  as  the  '  Rochester 
knockings.'  He  gave  to  the  subject  the  patient  and  intelligent  care  which  it  was  his 
habit  to  bestow  on  everything  that  engaged  his  attention,  and  became  convinced  that  he 
had  found  the  light  for  which  his  spirit  longed.  From  that  time  to  the  day  when  he  was 
emancipated,  by  a  painless  and  blessed  change,  from  the  prison-house  of  the  body,  he  was 
a  staunch  and  consistent  Spiritualist. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  463 

"  He  founded  the  first  Spiritualist  Society  of  New  York,  of  which  he  was  president, 
and  the  Spiritual  Conference,  from  which,  during  his  residence  in  New  York,  he  was 
seldom  absent,  and  where  his  vacant  chair,  draped  in  black,  tells  eloquently  of  him,  who, 
'  being  dead,  yet  speaketh.'  His  sympathies  were  not  bounded  even  by  the  wide  field  so 
open  to  them.  He  was  a  powerful  anti-slavery  advocate,  and  a  founder  and  prominent 
member  of  the  Liberal  Club,  up  to  the  time  when  the  summons  came  to  him  at  its  meet- 
ing on  the  I7tli  of  January  last. 

"  In  his  efi"orts  for  the  emancipation  of  the  slave  he  stood  by  the  side  of  "Wendell 
Phillips,  Gerrit  Smith,  and  William  Lloyd  Garrison — names  that  the  world  has  learnt  to 
honour  as  foremost  in  the  rank  of  humanitarian  effort. 

"  The  method  of  his  departure  was  sudden,  and  not  unaccompanied  by  circumstances 
of  peculiar  distress  to  his  sorromng  relatives.  He  had  attended  the  Friday  evening 
meeting  of  the  Liberal  Club,  and  left  his  place  before  the  discussion  commenced.  In  the 
ante-room  he  was  heard  to  fall,  and  medical  assistance  was  at  once  forthcoming  from  some 
members  in  the  audience.  He  was  suffering  from  a  sudden  spasm  of  the  heart,  a  malady 
to  which  he  was  liable.  He  was  conveyed  to  his  home,  and  everything  that  loving  care 
could  do  was  gladly  ministered. 

"  All,  however,  was  in  vain,  and  in  a  few  hours  he  had  quitted  the  sufiering  body  and 
was  free."  . 

Still  the  procession  of  dearly-remembered  faces  moves  on,  and  now 
another  star  of  the  brilliant  galaxy  shoots  up  rays  of  light  far  above  the 
level  of  the  passing  groups,  challenging — nay,  compelling  attention.  The 
name  of  the  shining  Spirit  is  Epes  Sargent. 

Fortunately  or  unfortunately  for  Mr.  Sargent,  his  connection  with 
modern  literature  both  in  the  departments  of  prose  and  poetry,  procured 
for  him  so  many  complimentary  notices  from  the  press  of  Europe  as  well 
as  of  America,  in  which  his  Spiritualistic  works  were  as  carefully  ignored,  as 
his  secular  writings  were  faithfully  chronicled,  that  his  name  requires  the 
aid  of  two  sets  of  biographers  to  render  it  full  justice.  Several  interesting 
notices  of  Mr.  Sargent's  life  work  and  varied  abilities  have  appeared  since 
he  passed  from  our  midst,  none  of  which  equals  in  eloquence  and  fidelity 
that  given  by  the  celebrated  English  writer  "  M.  A.,  Oxon,"  in  the  London 
Psychological  Review. 

As  this  admirable  sketch  cannot  possibly  be  transferred  in  extenso 
to  these  columns,  we  must  content  ourselves  with  a  concise  summary  of 
Mr.  Sargent's  eminent  life  services,  as  published  in  the  London  Spiritualist 
of  May,  1.870.     The  editor  says  : — 

"  Mr.  Epes  Sargent,  whose  name  has  long  been  in  the  list  of  our  correspondents,  was 
a  native  of  Gloucester,  a  picturesque  maritime  town,  twenty-eight  miles  from  Boston, 
U.S.A.  While  he  was  yet  a  child  he  entered  the  Public  Latin  School,  where,  in  the  study 
of  Latin  and  Greek,  he  stayed  five  years,  with  the  exception  of  six  months  which  he 
passed  in  making  a  visit  with  his  father  to  Denmark  and  Russia. 

"  Returning  to  America,  he  resumed  his  place  at  the  Latin  School,  and  soon  afterwards 
was  admitted  a  student  of  Harvard  College.  He  did  not,  however,  remain  there  till 
graduation,  but  accepted  a  situation  as  assistant  in  the  editorial  department  of  The 
Advertiser,  a  Boston  daily  paper.  Subsequently  his  services  were  transferred  to  the  Daily 
Atlas,  where  he  had  opportunities  of  passing  a  part  of  the  year  at  Washington,  during 
the  sessions  of  Congress,  as  political  correspondent.  Here  he  was  admitted  to  the 
familiar  personal  acquaintance  of  Webster,  Ciay,  Calhoun,  Preston,  Chief  Justice  Marshall, 
and  other  eminent  public  men.  With  Mr.  Clay,  senator  from  Kentucky,  and  candidate 
for  the  Presidency,  his  relations  were  especially  intimate,  and  he  wrote  a  life  of  him, 
which  was  largely  circulated,  and  edited  with  additions  by  Mr.  Sargent's  early  friend, 
Horace  Greeley.  Journalist  and  man  of  letters,  Mr.  Sargent  seemed  now  to  have  chosen 
his  career.  He  was  for  some  years  a  resident  of  New  York,  where  he  edited  The  Mirror, 
The  Neio  World,  and  other  publications  quite  flourishing  in  their  day.  He  also  wrote  and 
edited  several  works  for  the  Messrs.  Harper,  which  had  good  success,  and  led  to  pleasant 
relations  with  that  house.  He  was  on  friendly  terms  with  Poe,  Bryant,  Halleck,  Wash- 
ington Irving,  N.  P.  Willis,  Longfellow,  and  also  with  Charles  Dickens  during  the  latter's 
sojourn  there. 

464  NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

"  Mr.  Sargent  wrote  several  plays  which  achieved  a  fair  share  of  success.  He  edited 
the  Boston  Daily  Transcript  several  years,  and  the  Modern  Standard  Drama.  He  put 
forth  the  Standard  Speaker,  with  three  supplementary  books  of  elocutionary  selections 
and  translations,  the  success  of  which  was  very  marked.  These  were  followed  by  three 
series  of  reading-books,  a  book  of  original  dialogues,  and  a  much-praised  work  on 
etymology,  forming  twenty-two  volumes  in  all.  They  are  still  largely  in  use  in  American 
schools. 

"  During  the  civil  war  he  appeared  for  the  first  time  as  a  public  speaker,  and  made 
some  spirited  speeches,  which  were  widely  copied,  and  served  a  pati-iotic  purpose.  They 
drew  forth  letters  of  warm  congratulation  from  Charles  Sumner,  one  of  the  friends  of 
his  boyhood.  Mr.  Sargent  also  wrote  a  popular  novel,  entitled  Peculiar,  published  by 
Carleton,  New  York,  and  of  which  sixteen  thousand  copies  were  sold. 

"In  1868,  having  suffered  from  a  bronchial  affection,  Mr.  Sargent  was  advised  by  his 
physician  to  pass  the  winter  in  the  south  of  France  ;  and  he  established  himself  at  Cannes, 
on  the  Mediterranean.  During  his  brief  stay  in  England  he  made  the  personal  acquaint- 
ance of  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter,  Lady  Caithness,  Mr.  William  White, 
Dr.  Ashburner,  and  other  prominent  Spiritualists.  He  also  renewed  his  acquaintance 
with  Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman  and  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  the  distinguished  medium.  Professor 
Francis  W.  Newman,  author  of  many  much  esteemed  works,  who  had  long  been  his 
correspondent,  was  also  now  personally  sought  out  and  greeted. 

"  To  Spiritualists  Mr.  Sargent's  connection  with  the  modern  Spiritual  movement 
will  be  perhaps  of  more  interest  than  his  literary  career.  His  attention  was  drawn 
to  Mesmerism  about  the  year  1837,  when  he  was  in  his  twenty-fourth  year.  He  had 
witnessed  in  Boston  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Collyer.  Soon  afterwards,  in  New  York, 
he  had  opportunities  of  studying  the  subject  in  his  own  way.  Dr.  Channing,  a  well- 
known  physician,  introduced  him  to  a  sensitive,  the  phenomena  in  whose  presence  he 
studied  for  two  years  under  circumstances  that  precluded  the  possiMlity  of  deception. 
By  the  exercise  of  his  own  volition  he  satisfied  himself  of  the  mesmeriser's  power  over 
his  subject.  Of  clairvoyance,  thought  reading,  insensibility  to  pain,  through  Mesmerism, 
he  also  became  fully  convinced.  .  When  the  phenomena  at  Hydesville  broke  out  in  1847, 
he  was  editing  the  Boston  Transcript,  and  through  its  columns  did  much  to  direct  public 
attention  to  the  subject. 

"  Having  thus  become  finally  convinced  of  the  basic  truth  of  Spiritualism,  he  omitted 
no  opportunity  of  passing  on  the  truth-torch  to  others.  In  1867  he  published  a  succinct 
history  of  Modern  Spiritualism,  under  the  title  of  "  Planchette  ;  or.  The  Despair  of 
Science,"  a  title  which  hardly  does  justice  to  a  work  so  earnest  and  couiprehensive  as  this 
really  is.  In  spite  of  its  title,  however,  it  has  passed  through  four  editions,  and  is  still  in 
demand.  The  Rev.  Austin  Phelps,  D.D.,  refers  to  it  as  '  written  by  the  most  scholarly  of 
the  American  defenders  of  Spiritualism.'  Mr.  William  Crookes  wrote  of  it  in  1874, 
"  Planchette ' '  was  the  first  book  I  read  on  Spiritualism,  and  it  still  remains,  in  my  opinion, 
the  best  work  to  place  in  the  hands  of  the  uninitiated.' 

"  In  1875,  Mr.  Epes  Sargent  put  forth  '  The  Proof  Palpable  of  Immortality,'  a  volume 
of  238  well-filled  pages,  devoted  chiefly  to  the  materialization  phenomena,  but  also  to  the 
discussion  of  moral  and  religious  questions  pertaining  to  Spiritualism.  In  1876  he  wrote 
a  reply  to  Professor  Tyndall's  severe  attack  on  Spiritualism,  a  reply  which  attracted  great 
attention  in  America,  and  was  hailed  as  'the  right  word  at  the  right  time.'  He  also 
wrote  (1877)  the  article  on  Spiritualism  for  Appleton's  new  'Encyclopaedia.' 

"  These  works  give  but  an  imperfect  idea  of  Mr.  Sargent's  activity  in  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism.  By  his  contributions,  some  under  his  own  name,  but  most  of  them 
anonymous,  in  various  journals,  English  and  American,  and  by  a  very  extensive  cor- 
respondence, he  has  been  indefatigable  in  his  attempts  to  convince  an  unwilling  world 
that  there  is  in  and  around  us  something  more  than  Materialists  would  have  us  to 
believe." 

Such  a  record  as  this  needs  no  comment ;  it  is  one  of  which  any  indi- 
vidual might  be  proud  ;  one  which  reflects  lustre  on  any  cause  graced  with 
such  an  adherent,  and  which  should  for  ever  hush  the  rude  tongue  of  those 
who  virtually  say  the  Spiritualists  are  all  fools  and  beUeve  in  a  delasion,  or 
all  knaves,  combined  in  the  effort  to  delude  the  world. 

Last  but  not  least  of  the  shining  throng  whose  name  makes  many  a  heart 
stir  with  loving  and  regretful  memory  is  the  kind  and  gentle  wife  of  the 
celebrated  Spirit  postmaster,  Dr.  J.  V.  Mansfield. 

It  seems  but  yesterday  since  the  author  parted  from  this  dear  friend,  then 
in  the  prime  of  a  life  devoted  to  unnumbered  deeds  of  good  and  use.     This 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  465 

last  February,  1883,  brings  the  tidings  that  she  has  passed  on,  ere  the  spring 
flowers  could  shoot  up  to  adorn  her  silent  bier.  She  will  be  missed  in  the 
places  of  gathering,  in  the  dwelHngs  of  the  poor,  in  the  home  she  loved  so 
well,  and  in  the  hearts  of  hundreds,  who  whilst  following  her  bright  Spirit 
to  the  better  world,  will  realize  a  void  left  on  earth  that  none  can  fill. 

Of  Mrs.  Mansfield  more  perhaps  than  of  thousands  better  known,  though 
not  less  highly  appreciated,  the  homely  lines  may  most  truthfully  be  said — 

"  Earth  has  one  angel  less. 
Heaven  one  angel  more." 

It  is  only  now,  as  these  pages  are  going  to  press,  that  we  hear  through  a 
private  source  of  the  apotheosis  of  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  the  greatest  magnetic 
healer,  and  one  of  the  best  men  that  ever  wrote  his  life  work  on  the  flesh 
and  blood  tablets  of  grateful  loving  human  hearts. 

Extended  notices  of  this  beneficent  being's  manifold  services  to  humanity 
will  be  found  in  another  chapter,  and  presently  every  Spiritual  paper  in 
every  land  of  civilization  will  teem  with  eulogies  upon  his  name.  But 
neither  single  notices,  nor  world-wide  eulogies  can  chronicle  the  boundless 
good  that  Dr.  Newton  has  done.  A  mortal  pen  may  record  how  many 
bhnd  eyes  he  has  opened,  how  many  crippled  limbs  he  has  straightened,  and 
how  many  diseases  that  flesh  is  heir  to  have  departed  at  his  bidding,  but  to 
sum  up  the  joy  and  gratitude  with  which  he  has  filled  thousands  of  human 
hearts  in  this  generation,  would  require  the  pen  of  eternity's  recording 
angels — none  else  should  essay  the  task.  It  is  enough  to  say  he  passed 
away  in  a  ripe  old  age — ministered  to  by  the  most  loving  of  human  com- 
panions, and  his  soul  has  ascended  to  the  spheres  of  eternal  light  freighted 
with  the  blessings  of  uncounted  multitudes. 

After  numbering  up  the  leaders  of  the  Spiritual  army  who  have  disappeared 
from  our  mortal  eyes  during  the  last  fifteen  years,  and  allowing  for  many 
more,  less  known,  whom  we  cannot  catalogue,  some  of  those  secular  readers 
whose  eyes  we  confidently  expect  to  glance  over  these  pages,  may  enquire, 
after  what  fashion  the  Spiritualists  are  accustomed  to  celebrate  those 
obsequies  which  they  claim  rather  to  be  birthdays  of  the  soul  into  a  higher 
life,  than  ceremonials  darkened  with  hopeless  gloom  or  mysterious  dread. 

As  a  sample  of  these  services,  which  time,  place,  and  circumstance  of 
course  may  often  modify,  we  shall  terminate  this  chapter — written  strictly 
in  tnemoriam — with  an  account  of  an  obituary  ceremony  which  will  be  long 
remembered  in  San  Francisco,  California. 

The  subject  of  this  memorable  occasion  was  Captain  Francis  Connor, 
commodore  of  the  line  of  steamers  plying  between  San  Francisco  and 
Oregon,  a  brave  and  gallant  officer,  who,  though  not  himself  a  Spiritualist, 
was  blest  with  a  fair  wife  who  was,  and  still  is,  one  of  the  most  devoted 
advocates  of  the  Spiritual  cause. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1880,  Captain  Connor  accompanied  his  wife 
to  Charter  Oak  Hall,  San  Francisco,  to  attend  the  Sunday  lectures  of  Mrs. 
Hardinge  Britten.  On  quitdng  the  hall,  after  the  evening  service,  Captain 
Connor  said  to  his  wife,  "  If  Mrs.  Britten  should  be  anywhere  accessible 
when  I  die,  I  should  like  her  to  preach  my  funeral  sermon," 

Within  a  few  weeks  from  the  time  when  this  remark  was  made,  the  life- 
less form  of  Captain  Connor  was  brought  into  San  Francisco  harbour,  by 
the  boat  that  he  had  commanded,  on  board  of  which  he  had  suddenly 
breathed  his  last,  on  his  homeward  voyage,  after  a  few  hours'  illness. 

The  high  character  of  this  noble  gentleman,  the  respect  and  esteem  that 
30 

466  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

he  had  won  from  all  classes,  but  especially  from  the  steamship  company  of 
which  he  had  been  one  of  the  bravest  and  most  devoted  captains,  were 
circumstances  that  created  so  deep  an  impression  upon  the  citizens  of 
San  Francisco,  that  every  craft  in  the  harbour  lowered  its  flag  half-mast 
high,  and  the  citizens  shut  their  shops,  and  draped  their  doors  with  mourn- 
ing emblems,  as  the  procession  which  bore  the  remains  of  the  gallant 
commodore  passed  through  the  streets. 

In  a  few  days,  the  devoted  and  high-souled  wife  of  Captain  Connor,  had 
applied  for,  and  obtained,  the  use  of  the  splendid  Unitarian  Church,  built 
for  the  late  Rev.  Thomas  Starr  King,  of  which  Captain  Connor  had  been 
an  honoured  member,  as  a  fitting  place  in  which  to  celebrate  his  obsequies. 
Mrs.  Connor,  without  reserve,  announced  her  intention  of  fulfilling  her 
beloved  husband's  wish  to  the  letter,  by  engaging  Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten  to 
conduct  the  services.  In  deference  to  the  kindness  of  the  trustees  in 
granting  the  use  of  the  church,  the  regular  pastor  was  invited  to  assist  in 
the  ceremonial,  but  as  sickness  confined  this  gentleman  to  his  bed,  he  sent 
a  letter  of  condolence  to  the  noble  widow,  and  appointed  the  Rev,  Mr, 
Kraig  as  his  substitute. 

At  the  close  of  the  services,  the  congregation,  numbering  some  three 
thousand  persons,  according  to  the  custom  prevalent  in  America,  walked  in 
orderly  procession  round  the  church  so  as  to  pass  the  bier  and  altar,  both' 
of  which  were  covered  with  floral  emblems  and  devices  wrought  with 
immense  masses  of  the  choicest  flowers. 

Thus  the  procession  moved  on,  enabling  each  one  to  take  a  farewell  look 
at  the  calm  features  of  the  gallant  sailor.  When  the  long  files  had  passed 
out  of  the  church,  vast  throngs,  to  the  number  of  four  thousand  persons, 
who  had  been  unable  to  obtain  admittance,  were  marshalled  in  order,  and 
permitted  to  walk  round  the  church,  pass  through  the  area  filled  with 
blossoms,  and  silently  greet  the  well-known  features  of  the  peaceful  dead. 
Never  was  such  a  procession  on  such  an  occasion  gathered  together  before 
in  San  Francisco.  Never  a  more  orderly  or  deeply-moved  crowd  marched 
through  those  long  aisles,  or  lingered  in  regretful  silence  around  the  remains 
of  mortaUty. 

Thus  ended  one  of  the  most  impressive  funeral  services  ever  remembered 
in  San  Francisco,  the  only  one  wherein  the  scene  was  a  popular  church, 
the  ofliciating  minister  a  woman,  and  the  day  of  death  celebrated  as  the 
day  of  new  birth. 

The  following  press  report  of  the  ceremonial  and  the  address  delivered 
by  Mrs.  Britten  was  published  in  the  San  Francisco  Daily  Chronicle,  and 
is  given  now  as  a  sample  of  a  Spiritual  funeral  address  : — 

"spiritual   services. — FUNERAL   OF   THE   LATE   COMMODORE   FRANCIS 
CONNOR,    AT   SAN    FRANCISCO,    CAL. 

"  Eloquent  oration  delivered  hy  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten. 

"  On  March.  28th  the  remains  of  Commodore  Francis  Connor,  of  the  Oregon  steam- 
ship line,  were  borne  into  the  First  Unitarian  church  by  eight  uniformed  officers  of  the 
steamship  Oregon  and  deposited  in  front  of  the  pulpit,  amid  a  white  sea  of  choice  and 
fragrant  floral  wreaths  and  emblems,  among  which  was  a  steamship,  constructed  of  heho- 
trope  and  violets — emblematic  of  his  inviolate  devotion  to  his  calling. 

"  Eev.  Dr.  Kraig  read  selections  of  Scripture,  promising  spiritual  immortality,  and 
the  choir  chanted  Psalm  xxiii., '  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd.'  Then  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge 
Britten,  standing  in  front  of  the  pulpit,  at  the  head  of  the  casket,  offered  this  earnest 
invocation  for  divine  help  and  guidance,  after  which  she  delivered,  under  inspiration,  the 
following  deeply  impressive  and  touchingly  eloquent  spiritual  address  : — 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  467 

" '  0  Thou  Infinite  and  Eternal  Spirit ;  Father,  God ;  Lord  of  life  and  death  ;  author 
and  finisher  of  being  !  Lo,  Thine  hand  is  heavy  on  us  in  this  trying  hour.  As  we  stand 
in  the  valley  of  the  shadow,  we  hear  Thy  voice  calling  home  our  heart's  beloved,  and  our 
spirits  faU  us,  as  we  listen  to  the  summons  which  removes  from  our  mortal  vision  the 
father,  friend,  the  strength,  the  consolation  of  many  a  pilgrim  in  eart.h's  rough  and  rugged 
pathways.  Bat  even  now,  as  we  bend  beneath  the  v^eight  of  our  mighty  sorrow,  whilst 
our  strength  is  laid  low,  and  the  voice  that  has  spoken  the  word  of  power  to  the  weak, 
and  comfort  to  the  helpless  is  hushed  for  ever,  oh,  teach  us  that  Thou  art  stUl  the 
strength  of  our  weakness,  light  to  our  blindness,  the  true  and  unfailing  consolation  of 
every  heart  that  trusts  Thee.  We  know  it  is  Thy  voice  that  speaks  to  us  through  the 
eternal  silence  that  has  closed  these  mortal  lips,  bidding  us  pause  and  consider  the  solemn 
lessons  which  death  alone  can  teach.  Oh,  trusted  but  most  eloquent  Teacher  !  As  we 
stand  in  the  presence  of  Thy  white  angel,  Death,  and  still  the  throbbings  of  our  beating 
hearts,  to  hear  the  message  that  he  brings,  we  uplift  our  souls  to  Thee,  Thou  only 
strength  and  consolation,  and  learn  to  lay  the  burden  of  our  cares  and  griefs  on  Thee,  who 
alone  canst  bear  them.  Help  us,  oh,  heavenly  Father  !  and  clear  away  the  mists  of  sorrow 
from  our  eyes,  that  we  may  discern  the  footprints  of  the  beloved  one,  in  his  pathway  to 
the  land  of  light.  Help  us  to  retread  the  tracks  of  honor,  truth,  and  duty  that  he  has 
left  behind.  Captain  of  our  salvation  !  Pilot  of  souls  !  Thou  who  hast  steered  Thy 
beloved  one's  barque  to  the  port  of  eternal  safety,  be  with  us  now  ! 

" '  We  see,  with  streaming  eyes  and  arms  outstretched  in  pain,  the  receding  light  of 
the  white  and  flowing  sails  as  his  ship  of  earthly  life  is  fast  drifting  out  of  view.  The 
thickening  mists  of  death  have  closed  around  him,  and  we  are  left  alone,  straining  our 
faUing  sight  to  catch  faint  ghmpses  of  the  glory  in  which  our  vanished  friend  has  cast 
eternal  anchor.  Oh,  thou  great  spirit !  Pole  star  of  every  drifting  craft  freighted  with 
frail  humanity  !  Teach  us  how  to  cry  out  to  thee  with  heart  and  voice.  We  trust  thee, 
oh,  our  father,  in  life  as  in  death,  in  darkness  as  in  light,  in  this,  our  home  of  hximan  grief 
and  weakness,  as  in  the  more  peaceful  days  of  life's  full  blossoming.  We  know  that  all 
is  well  with  him  who  has  gone  before.  We  know  that  he  has  gained  the  shores  of  endless 
day  and  waves  aloft  the  banner  of  immortal  triumph  over  death.  The  veil  of  mortal 
being,  so  dense  to  us,  is  luminous  to  him,  and  from  the  Mount  of  Vision  we  know  that  he 
still  watches,  -with  an  angel's  tender  pity,  the  bereaved  and  mourning  friends  who  linger 
yet  behind  and  bear  the  burdens  he  has  dropped.  We  know  the  Immortal  stiU  loves,  and 
that  He  is  all — aye,  more  than  all—  he  ever  was  or  could  be  to  those  who  love  him  still. 
Thou,  who  dost  make  the  very  roses  thy  preachers,  help  these  faltering  lips  to  tell  of  the 
joy  and  glory  he  has  gained.  Show  to  those  mourning  ones,  the  radiant  mountain  of 
transfiguration  to  which  the  angel  Death  has  raised  him.  Help  us  to  kiss  and  bless  the 
rod  that  smites  the  human  heart,  but  sets  the  Immortal  free,  and  once  more  teach  us  aU 
to  cry  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  '  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  for  ever  and 
for  ever.' 

"  '  Friends,  we  meet  this  day  to  celebrate  the  birthday  of  a  soul  into  the  life  immortal. 
Fifty -three  years  ago  there  was  a  birthday  of  another  sort  iu  the  home  where  this  ascended 
soul  first  saw  the  light  as  a  helpless,  wailiug  babe.  Born  into  the  Life  of  earth,  where  care 
and  toil  are  the  milestones  at  every  step  of  the  weary  way  ;  with  all  the  bitter  pangs  of 
humanity's  stupendous  warfare  looming  up  before  him,  still  he  was  ushered  into  being 
without  one  tear  or  sigh  to  mar  his  welcome.  No  prophetic  voice  of  warning  spoke  of  the 
thorny  road  those  infant  feet  must  tread.  The  mother's  heart  was  full  of  joy,  and  rejoic- 
ing friends  hailed  the  young  stranger's  advent  on  life's  stormy  sea,  without  one  sad 
misgiving. 

" '  And  now,  when  we  know  how  well,  how  nobly  life's  battle  has  been  fought  and 
won,  how  gallantly  he's  run  the  race  God  set  before  him,  and  gained  the  victor's  prize  of 
a  well-earned  immortality,  shall  we  fail  to  bid  the  triumphant  soul  God  speed,  or  stay 
with  a  single  murmur  the  hand  of  the  liberty  angel  that  sets  the  ripened  spirit  free  ? 
Kather  let  us  strive  to  follow  the  shining  sails  of  his  true  life's  ship  to  that  glorious  port 
of  rest  where  the  storm  is  hushed  for  ever  and  the  sun-Ut  waves  of  joy  are  beating  on  the 
shores  of  eternal  Hght.  Whilst  he  who  is  transfigured  from  the  clay  of  earth  to  the 
spiritual  glorj  which  oiir  dim  mortal  sight  cannot  penetrate,  the  mute  and  touching 
eloquence  of  the  form  we  have  beheld  in  all  the  panoply  of  life  and  strength  so  strangely 
still,  so  dumb  and  sUent  now — all,  in  short,  of  the  solemn  mysteries  of  death — prompt  us 
us  to  inquire  their  meaning  and  pause  in  the  giddy  rush  of  life  to  ask  of  God,  the  quiet 
dead,  and  one  another.  What  has  death  done  to  this,  our  friend  and  brother  ?  The  ways 
of  the  Infinite  One  must  ever  be  mysterious  to  the  minds  of  His  finite  creatures,  but  in 
His  mercy  he  has  taught  us  enough  by  that  we  do  know  to  trust  Him  in  all  things  of 
which  we  are  yet  ignorant,  and  amongst  the  brightest  revelations  of  our  present  day  and 
hour  are  those  that  have  stripped  the  grave  of  all  its  teiTor,  death  of  its  awe  and  mysteryj 
and  shown  to  the  weeping  eyes  of  bereaved  humanity  its  precious  dead  in  aU  the  glorious 

468  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

reality  of  life  immortal,  and  death  itself  to  be  but  the  archway  to  the  higher,  better, 
happier  spirit  land.  Another  of  our  Father's  gifts  to  man  has  been  the  message  of  love 
brought  by  the  very  beings  nearest  to  us.  They  point  to  the  wealth  we  gather  upon 
earth,  the  splendour  that  we  fondly  lavish  upon  the  crumbling  dust  of  those  we've  loved, 
and  remind  us  that  all  must  be  left  behind,  and  that  the  spirit  takes  not  with  him  the 
value  of  death's  shroud  in  material  treasure.  And  yet  it  is  given  to  us  to  know  there  are 
many  mansions  in  our  Father's  house ;  wealth  and  possessions  there  ;  power  and  strength 
and  noble  work  to  do  ;  joyful  duties  to  fulfil,  and  Hfe,  with  all  its  glorious  energies  and 
powers,  continuing  the  woof  of  being  from  the  point  where  death  has  snapt  it.  If  this 
be  so,  and  these  revelations  of  the  Hfe  beyond  are  now  re-echoing  through  the  wide,  wide 
world,  truly  we  may  lift  up  our  hearts  in  joy  and  triumph  when  we  recall  the  noble  record 
that  our  friend  has  made  and  count  up  the  freight  of  duties  well  performed  with  which 
his  gallant  ship  has  sailed  away  to  heaven.  Besides  the  early  years  of  his  brave  and 
useful  pubhc  service,  the  Hves  of  thousands  have  been  entrusted  to  his  skill  and  care,  and 
the  fortunes  no  less  than  the  safety  of  countless  multitudes,  have  hung  upon  the 
faithful  performance  of  his  untiring  watch  and  ward. 

" '  The  captain  of  many  a  ship  destined  to  plough  its  way  on  the  roughest  seas  and 
brave  dangers  which  none  but  the  weU-skilled  mariner  could  conquer,  none  but  those 
"  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships  "  and  track  their  way  through  the  pathless  wastes  of 
ocean  can  understand  the  perils  of  the  deep — the  ceaseless  cares  and  toils,  the  sleepless 
vigils  of  the  stormy  night,  passed  neath  the  rayless  skies,  'midst  the  howling  tempest, 
drenching  rain  and  piercing  cold,  whilst  the  lives  of  multitudes  were  hanging  in  the 
balance  on  the  captain's  skill  and  care.  And  yet  we  know  that  out  of  Ms  brave  hands  no 
single  life  was  ever  lost.  In  Ms  clear  record  there's  no  black  mark  of  duties  unfulfilled, 
no  employer  wronged,  no  murmuring  crew  oppressed,  no  friend  forsaken,  no  stranger  left 
unaided. 

"  '  Not  one  soul  he  ever  knew  or  served  with  but  what  would  have  united  in  crying, 
"  God  speed  our  gallant  captain  to  his  well-earned  rest.  If  ever  seaman  ploughed  his  way 
to  heaven  he  is  the  man  !  "  Staunch  and  true  !  Brave  man,  great  heart,  gallant  sailor, 
faithful  servant  of  the  King  of  kings  !  He  watched  and  waked  while  others  calmly  slept. 
He  thought  and  thought,  and  battled  with  the  stormy  seas,  and  wrestled  with  the 
elements  until  they  became  his  subjects  ;  and  whilst  the  fiery  scriptures  of  the  skies 
stretched  out  above  his  head  their  canopy  of  glory,  he  read  their  solemn  lessons  in  tireless 
duty,  and  worshipped  his  Creator  in  noblest  service  to  his  fellow  men.  My  friends,  the 
last,  best  lesson  which  this  wondi-ous  preacher.  Death,  has  taiight  is,  as  we  thus  render 
the  noble  record  of  this  gallant  life,  to  emulate  its  beauty,  retread  the  deep,  strong  foot- 
prints he  has  made — not  in  the  "  sands  of  time,"  but  in  the  hewn-out  rock  of  grand 
en  eavour  ;  and  the  last  best  lesson  which  the  great  outpouring  of  the  spiritual  hosts  have 
brought  us,  is  the  sweet,  consoling  truth,  that  nothing  that  is  good  and  true  and  beautiful 
in  manhood  can  ever  be  marred  by  death. 

"  '  God  gathers  up  the  beautiful,  and  He  who  cares  for  the  falling  sparrow  and  clothes 
these  blossoms  with  their  wondrous  beauty,  has  treasured  up  the  blossoms  of  his  noble 
life,  and  only  left  the  dross  and  dust  to  death.  "We  cannot  make  him  dead,"  the  gallant 
sailor  !  For  mates,  companions,  friends,  he  is  still  the  same,  though  a  watcher  now  on  a 
fairer,  calmer  sea.  For  the  dear  companion,  he  is  still  the  tender  guardian  of  her  precious 
life  ;  for  the  earth  and  man  and  all  he's  lived  and  toiled  for,  he's  a  guardian  angel  now,  a 
ministering  spirit,  making  our  path  more  bright,  our  way  more  plain,  our  lives  more  holy 
and  nearer  heaven,  because  a  good  and  faithful  man  has  lived  and  died.  He  may,  he 
must,  have  left  a  void  which  none  can  fill  again.  Many  will  miss  his  helpful,  outstretched 
hand,  and  she — his  best  beloved  one — will  miss  the  coming  foot  that  was  ever  prompt  to 
hasten  to  her  side  ;  but  she  knows,  as  we  do,  he  lives  and  loves  and  watches  over  her  now. 

"  '  The  veil  of  earth,  transparent  to  the  eye  of  spirit,  is  only  dense  to  us  who  linger  yet 
behind  it,  but  when  we  know,  as  God  in  His  mercy  shows  us  through  His  angels  risen, 
that  the  form  that  sleeps  the  sleep  that  knows  no  waking,  is  not  the  man  we've  loved — 
that  death  has  no  power  upon  him,  that  he  lives  and  stands  in  our  midst  this  very  hour, 
with  all  that  made  the  man,  and  the  added  glory  of  life  immortal,  why  should  we  weep  or 
sigh,  or  put  on  the  weeds  of  mourning  ?  Why  should  we  wish  him  back,  or  stay  the  hands 
that  lay  away  the  garments  in  the  grave,  and  leave  the  guardian  angel  of  the  home  behind  ? 
Remembering  all  we  do  know  of  the  shining  seas  our  loved  ascended  brother  is  sailing 
over  now,  surely  we  can  trust  our  Heavenly  Father  in  the  yet  veiled  realms  of  mystery 
hidden  from  our  yiew.  ''  He  doeth  all  things  well,"  and  though  the  golden  bowl  of  mortal 
life  is  broken,  the  silver  cord  of  earthly  duty  loosed,  the  pitcher  broken  at  the  fountain 
and  the  wheel  broken  at  the  cistern,  we  can  bow  and  lean  in  calm  submission,  look  back 
in  high  emulation  at  the  record  of  a  well  spent  life,  and  forward  with  triumphant  joy  that 
he's  reached  the  goal,  from  which  his  loving  hand  will  beckon  us  to  follow  onward.  Oh, 
niay  the  memory  of  this  hour  be  ever  green  amongst  us  !      May  the  record  he  has  made, 

HoNB^?  S.S.Jones,     Chicago,  u.s 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  469 

the  wealth  of  freight  with  which  his  ship  of  Hfe  was  laden  be  a  never  dying  remembrance 
to  us  to  strengthen  us  in  the  hour  of  trial  ;  encourage  us  to  speed  on  amidst  thorns  and 
briars  to  the  goal  of  victory  he  has  gained,  until  we  meet  and  greet  him  in  the  land  where 
the  angels  have  welcomed  him  with  the  glorious  cry.  "  Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful 
servant,  enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  And  now  it  but  remains  to  put  away  with  all 
reverence  the  faded  garments  an  immortal  soul  has  worn.  Lay  down  to  rest  the  crumbling 
form  of  clay.  With  tender  reverence  give  back  to  earth  the  pale,  white  form  of  earth. 
Put  out  the  earthly  lamp  ;  he  will  not  need  it  more.  Quench  the  dying  flame.  Nor  heat 
shall  burn  nor  biting  frost  consume  the  happy  dwellers  of  the  summer  land.  Let  dust  and 
blossoms  sleep  in  the  tranquil  gi-ave,  while  the  shining  soul  inhales  the  deathless  perfume 
of  the  flowers  that  bloom  in  the  land  of  never  setting  suns.  The  last  rites  paid,  the  last 
farewell  *aid,  the  honoured  dust  closed  up  from  mortal  sight,  commit  we  all  that's  left  to 
the  silent  grave,  and  bid  God  speed  to  the  new-born  son  of  heaven  with  the  sweet,  familiar 
closing  words  of  love :  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name.  Thy 
kingdom  come,  thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 
bread,  and  forgive  us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us.  And 
lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  evil.  For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the 
power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen."  ' 

"  After  the  hymn,  'Rock  of  Ages,'  by  the  choir,  Mrs.  Britten  again  said  :  'Before  we 
listen  to  the  benediction,  which  closes  these  sacred  rites,  in  the  name  of  the  wife  and 
friends  of  the  good  and  true  man  whose  spiritual  birth  we  celebrate,  I  tender  earnest  and 
heartfelt  thanks  for  the  deep  reverence,  earnest  feeling,  and  kindly  sympathy  manifested 
by  every  friend  and  stranger  gathered  together  in  this  hallowed  ceremonial.  Above  aU,  I 
offer  on  my  own  behalf,  and  that  of  those  nearest  and  dearest  to  our  beloved  commander, 
our  grateful  thanks  to  the  trustees  of  this  church,  who,  in  their  kindness  and  generosity, 
have  granted  us  the  use  of  this  sacred  place  for  the  performance  of  our  last  and  holiest  duty 
to  our  honoured  dead. 

"  '  Whilst  memory  lasts  we  shall  ever  cherish  the  tokens  of  deep  sympathy,  which,  for 
one  brief  hour  at  least,  have  bound  together  this  vast  multitude  in  the  ties  of  a  common 
humanity.  I  know  it  has  been  to  you,  as  to  me,  and  aU  of  us,  a  grateful  task  to  r'  ^er 
the  best  tribute  in  our  power  to  the  memory  of  a  great,  good  man.  Your  presence  jd 
kindly  feeling  have  helped  to  strengthen  me  in  the  performance  of  a  sad,  though  pleasi"  ^ 
duty,  and  almost  changed  bereavement  into  gladness.  Let  us  all  go  hence  cherishing  in 
our  hearts  the  memory  of  the  brave  and  true  ;  seeking  to  shape  our  lives  like  his  to  the 
line  of  duty  ;  striving  to  bring  home  to  earth's  last  waymark  a  record  as  clear  and  true 
as  his  has  been,  and  commending  ourselves  to  the  Father  of  all  with  the  reverent  cry, 
"  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  now  and  ever  more."  ' 

"  The  services  closed  with  the  recitation  of  a  poem,  and  the  benediction  by  the  Rev. 
Dr.  Kraig." 

CHAPTER    LV. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   AMERICA    (CONTINUED). 

Spiritualism  in  the  Law  Courts. 

We  must  now  call  attention  to  a  few  cases  in  which  prominent  Mediums 
and  Spiritualists  were  cited  to  appear  before  those  tribunals,  too  often 
/a/j-<?/>' called  "the  bar  of  justice."  The  two  instances  narrated  in  this 
chapter  are  the  trial  of  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  the  renowned  Spiritual  healer, 
on  the  charge  of  "malpractice,"  and  that  of  Mr.  William  Mumler,  who  was 
tried  for  "  fraud,"  alleged  to  have  been  practised  in  the  production  of  "  Spirit 
photographs." 

The  circumstances  which  led  to  the  charge  against  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton 
were  these. 

It  seems  that  a  little  girl  who  had  been  carried  to  Dr.  Newton's  office 

470  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

during  his  visit  to  Philadelphia  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  relief  for  a  chronic 
affection  of  the  spine,  had  been  instantaneously  cured,  but  on  quitting  the 
good  doctor's  presence,  she  became  so  excited  with  the  dehght  of  her 
marvellous  restoration,  that  in  running  down  stairs  her  foot  slipped,  she 
fell,  and  at  the  same  time  sustained  a  fresh  injury  to  the  spine. 

It  was  rumoured  that  some  of  the  child's  nearest  relatives  were  bitterly 
opposed  to  Dr.  Newton's  method  of  cure,  and  had  been  heard  to  declare, 
that  they  would  rather  see  her  in  her  grave  than  cured  by  this  Satanic  agency. 
Whether  the  good  healer's  numerous  opponents  in  the  medical  profession 
availed  themselves  of  this  opportunity  to  press  home  a  charge  that  they 
could  not  have  attempted  to  make  with  more  sympathetic  persons  than 
those  above  alluded  to,  we  need  not  pause  to  enquire ;  certain  it  is,  that 
the  occasion  was  used  by  certain  members  of  the  faculty  for  instituting  a 
prosecution  against  the  all  too  celebrated  and  popular  healer  on  the  charge 
of  "malpractice." 

The  true  animus  which  stimulated  this  absurd  and  wholly  untenable 
charge  was  soon  apparent  enough  to  the  whole  community  and  the  matter 
would  have  terminated  with  the  slight  annoyance  inflicted  upon  the  benefi- 
cent healer,  had  it  not  been  evident  that  the  mighty  powers  who  have  the 
Spiritual  movement  in  charge,  used  this  opportunity  to  produce  results  as 
acceptable  to  the  friends,  as  they  were  unforeseen  by  the  enemies  of 
Spirituahsm. 

Before  the  case  was  concluded,  the  magistrate  in  attendance  was  com- 
pletely besieged  with  witnesses  who  poured  in  from  all  parts  of  the  United 
States  to  the  number  of  many  hundreds,  volunteering  testimony  to  the 
marvellous  cures  that  had  been  effected  in  their  own  persons,  or  those  of 
their  friends,  by  the  divine,  rather  than  the  mc/-practice  of  Dr.  J.  R. 
Newton.  The  court-room,  the  street,  and  at  last  the  very  city  itself,  was 
thronged  with  these  unsolicited  and  deeply-grateful  witnesses,  and  where 
personal  attendance  was  impossible,  hundred  of  affidavits  testifying  to  Dr. 
Newton's  marvellous  cures,  were  sent  in.  Weeks  and  even  months  would 
have  been  required  to  receive  the  evidence  thus  volunteered.  A  summary 
termination  of  the  vexatious  prosecution  was  of  course  imperatively 
necessary.  Before  it  could  close  however,  the  papers — in  reporting  the 
evidence  received — had  pubHshed  long  lists  of  cures  which  but  for  this 
malignant  attack  might  have  remained  unrecorded  for  ever,  except  in  the 
experience  of  private  famiUes  and  individuals. 

With  the  accounts  of  these  cures,  came  reports  of  the  numerous  bene- 
factions which  the  good  healer  had  performed,  many  poor  people  clamour- 
ing to  be  heard,  and  relating  how  he  had  added  gifts  of  money  to  his 
healing  powers,  in  cases  where  the  recipients  had  scarcely  dared  to  expect 
that  so  great  and  celebrated  a  man  would  even  notice  them. 

We  have  suggested  that  the  "flood  of  testimony  thus  cited  must  have  been 
unforeseen  by  the  prosecutors.  We  may  venture  to  add,  that  it  must  also 
have  caused  the  blush  of  shame  to  mount  to  many  a  cheek  when  it  was 
found  that  the  very  plot  designed  to  crush  the  great  healer  was  the  means 
of  recording  his  good  deeds  to  an  age  that  would  otherwise  have  been 
ignorant  of  them. 

Although  it  would  be  impossible  in  this  volume  to  give  more  than  a  very 
small  percentage  of  Dr.  Newton's  wonderful  achievements,  the  full  details 
of  which  are  in  the  author's  possession,  we  select  from  the  Ust  of  affidavits 
printed  on  the  occasion  above  alluded  to,  a  few  brief  representative 
examples  such  as  the  following : — 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  471 

"  I,  Mary  Ann  Rumer,  testify  and  say  that  I  am  twenty-nine  years  of  age,  and  live  in 
Unionville,  Chester  County,  Pennsylvania  ;  that  for  eleven  and  a  half  years  I  had  been 
troubled  with  a  spinal  affection,  which,  with  a  complication  of  other  diseases,  confined  me 
to  my  bed,  and  during  the  whole  time  I  was  a  great  sufferer  from  constant  pain.  For  the 
last  two  years  I  subsisted  almost  entirely  on  water  gruel.  I  had  been  treated  by  several 
physicians  without  any  permanent  benefit.  On  the  22nd  of  October,  1862,  I  was  brought 
to  Dr.  Newton  on  a  litter,  in  so  feeble  a  condition  that  it  was  thought  by  my  friends  I 
could  not  live  to  reach  the  house.  I  was  entirely  unconscious,  and  I  was  so  low  that  I 
could  not  be  carried  to  the  Doctor's  room,  so  he  treated  me  at  first  in  the  hall.  I  was 
then  carried  to  his  room,  and  within  half  an  hour  I  was  able  to  walk  around  the  room  and 
down  stairs.  The  next  day  I  was  treated  again  by  Dr.  Newton,  and  a  perfect  cure  effected. 
From  the  time  I  had  the  first  operation,  my  appetite  has  been  perfectly  good,  and  I  have 
ever  since  been  able  to  eat  heartily,  and  am  now  in  good  health.  I  have  come  to  this  city 
expressly  to  bear  testimony  to  the  wonderful  cure  of  myself,  for  the  benefit  of  suffering 
humanity,  MARr  A.  Rumee. 

"  Affirmed  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  5th  day  of  March,  1863. 

"  Wm.  p.  Hibberd,  Alderman," 

"  I,  John  Corkery,  testify  and  say  that  I  am  72  years  of  age,  and  live  at  No.  1013, 
Carpenter  Street,  Philadelphia.  I  have  been  partially  blind  for  22  years ;  one  eye  I  could 
not  open  at  all,  with  great  inflammation  of  the  lids.  My  eyes  had  been  operated  upon  by 
eminent  physicians  several  times  with  absolute  injury,  until  I  became  almost  entirely 
blind,  when,  in  the  month  of  October,  1862,  I  heard  of  the  wonderful  cures  of  the  eyes 
made  by  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  and  was  induced  to  visit  him,  when,  after  two  or  three  opera- 
tions, the  inflammation  entirely  disappeared,  and  I  was  able  to  open  my  eyes  and  could 
see  as  well  as  most  men  of  my  age.  He  also  restored  my  heai-ing,  which  I  was  fast  losing, 
and  I  am  now  able  to  see  and  hear  as  well  as  most  folks,  and  my  general  health  has  im- 
proved astonishingly,  so  that  I  appear  twenty  years  younger  than  I  did  four  months  ago. 

John  Coekeht. 

"Affirmed  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  5th  day  of  March,  1863, 

"Wm.  p.  Hibbeed,  Alderman." 

"  My  daughter,  twelve  years  of  age,  had  lost  the  use  of  her  Umbs  from  scarlet  t  *  er  ; 
she  was  perfectly  paralyzed.  When  I  took  her  in  my  arms  her  head  and  feet  hung  per- 
fectly useless,  powerless.  I  brought  her  to  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton.  With  three  treatments  of 
less  than  one  hour  altogether,  she  was  perfectly  restored  to  health,  and  jumped  rope,  and 
came  to  her  mind  and  intelligence  as  well  as  ever.  She  had  many  physicians  of  all 
kinds  of  practice,  and  I  paid  them  a  great  deal  of  money,  but  they  could  not  restore  her. 
During  her  paralysis  she  could  not  keep  any  food  upon  the  stomach,  she  is  now  in  perfect 
health.     I  live  near  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  and  came  here  to  give  my  testimony. 

"  Saeah  E,  Tueqtjand. 

"  Sworn  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863, 

"  Wm.  p.  Hibbeed,  Alderman." 

"I  reside  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.  ;  have  been  afflicted  with  rheumatism  since  1820;  part 
of  the  time  have  been  so  bad  that  I  was  drawn  quite  crooked  ;  the  least  cold  I  took  would 
so  affect  me  with  lameness  that  I  was  obliged  to  use  two  canes  to  enable  me  to  walk.  I 
was  also  afflicted  with  internal  bleeding,  and  after  every  other  practice  had  failed  of  giving 
me  any  relief,  I  was  induced  to  place  myself  under  the  treatment  of  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton, 
which  I  did  on  the  26th  of  November,  1862,  from  which  time  I  have  enjoyed  perfect 
health.  He  also  cured  me  of  varicose  veins  at  a  subsequent  treatment,  and  at  this  time 
there  is  no  appearance  of  any  return  of  the  above  afflictions. 

"  I  have  also  witnessed  a  number  of  cures  performed  upon  others  while  I  was  under 
his  treatment.  One  case,  where  a  man  came  on  crutches,  in  a  miserable  condition,  in  less 
than  fifteen  minutes  he  was  able  to  walk,  and  in  twenty  minutes  he  ran  across  the  floor 
and  down  stairs,  leaving  his  crutches  with  the  doctor, 

"  Another  case  :  A  coloured  female  was  cured  of  paralysis,  her  hand  being  entirely 
useless.  In  less  than  ten  minutes  she  was  entirely  restored,  being  able  to  hft  a  chair 
above  her  head  with  ease.  "  C,  F,  MuENCH, 

"  Sworn  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863. 

"  Wm.  p.  Hibbeed,  Alderman," 

"I  live  in  Woodbury,  New  Jersey.     On  the  21st  of  August,  1862,  I  was  advised  by 
Dr.  Gardiner  to  call  and  see  Dr.  Newton  for  a  cancer  on  the  cheek,  just  below  the  eye. 

472  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

I  did  call  as  directed,  and  the  doctor  (Newton)  treated  me  for  it,  and  it  is  now  perfectly- 
cured.  I  had  the  cancer  eleven  years,  and  suffered  pain  all  the  time  ;  now  there  is  not 
even  a  scar  remaining.  "  William  V.  Mankin. 

"  Affirmed  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863. 

Wm.  i*.  HiBBERD,  Alderman." 

"  John  Herbert  sworn  :  I  am  forty-sis  years  of  age,  and  reside  in  West  Philadelpliia  ; 
am  engineer  at  the  Blockley  Almshouse.  I  suffered  for  weeks  at  a  time  with  inflammatory 
rheumatism ;  for  the  last  two  years,  at  times,  could  not  turn  in  bed ;  suffered  severe 
pain  ;  it  would  pass  from  one  part  of  my  body  to  another  ;  had  a  number  of  physicians, 
but  had  no  permanent  relief,  my  feet  much  swollen.  In  ten  minutes'  treatment  by  Dr. 
Newton  the  swelling  left  my  feet,  and  I  was  reUeved  of  all  pain  and  swelling.  This  was 
in  December  last ;  I  had  a  second  operation  of  about  the  same  time  in  the  fore  part  of 
February,  I  think,  and  since  that  have  been  entirely  well,  and  have  no  return  of  the 
disease.  "John  Herbeet. 

"  Sworn  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863. 

"  Wm.  p.  Hibberd,  Alderman." 

"  My  son,  William  Gary,  son  of  Marmaduke  Watson,  Principal  of  the  Price  Grammar 
School,  was  for  some  time  afflicted  with  spinal  curvature,  being  unable  to  walk  without 
great  difficulty.  His  limbs  were  very  much  swollen,  and  he  was  rapidly  getting  worse, 
until  he  saw  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  who  operated  upon  him  and  perfectly  cured  him.  He  can 
now  walk  six  miles  without  pain  or  inconvenience. 

"Mary  E.  Watson,  No.  1766,  Frankford  Road. 
"  Affirmed  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863. 

''Wm.  p.  Hjbberd,  Alderman." 

"March  4th,  1863. 
"  Andrew  J.  Hay  :  Live  at  Manayunk ;  my  wife  for  three  years  was  unable  to  read, 
write,  sew,  or  anything  of  the  kind,  by  reason  of  debility  of  the  optic  nerve.  Some  time 
in  November,  1862,  I  took  her  to  see  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  who  operated  upon  ber  eyes. 
Before  leaving  his  room  she  read  several  verses  of  Scripture,  and  has  been  able  to  read 
and  write  ever  since  ;  her  general  health  being  also  much  improved. 

"  Andrew  J.  Hat,  Pastor  First  Baptist  Church. 
"  Affirmed  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863. 

Wm.  p.  Hibberd,  Alderman." 

"  Peter  Manning,  being  sworn,  deposes  and  says  :  I  live  at  Bordentown,  New  Jersey. 
On  the  30th  of  October,  1862,  I  called  on  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton.  I  was  blind  two  years  and 
three  months.  When  I  came  to  Dr.  Newton  I  was  so  bad  that  I  could  not  see  a  gashght 
in  front  of  me  ;  after  ten  minutes'  treatment,  without  pain,  I  was  enabled  to  see  to  read 
and  write,  and  have  kept  my  own  books  ever  since.  "  Peter  Manning. 

"  Sworn  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863. 

Wm.  p.  Hibberd,  Alderman." 

"  David  AUen,  being  affirmed,  deposes  and  says  :  I  live  in  the  city  of  Burlington,  N.J. ; 
am  in  my  67th  year  of  age.  I  have  been  troubled  many  years  with  spine  disease  ;  and  in 
February,  1861,  I  had  a  fall  and  broke  my  hip  ;  had  been  under  the  care  of  an  eminent 
physician  for  six  months  ;  for  a  year  and  nine  months  could  not  walk  without  a  crutch  ; 
the  hmb  was  stiff,  and  painful  to  move.  After  fifteen  minutes'  treatment  by  Dr.  J .  R. 
Newton  I  could  use  the  limb  as  well  as  the  other,  and  have  never  used  the  crutch  since. 

David  Allen. 
"Affirmed  and  subscribed  before  me,  this  4th  day  of  March,  1863. 

"  Wm.  p.  Hibberd,  Alderman." 

We  would  ask  our  readers  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  cases  cited  above  and 
selected  at  random  from  one  of  the  Philadelphia  papers,  only  constitute 
about  one  per  cent  of  the  records  now  in  print,  many  of  which — in  the 
author's  possession — relate  to  persons  still  Hving,  or  those  whose  relatives 
are  ready  to  give  sworn  testimony  of  the  most  authentic  character.  We 
have  already  alluded  to  Dr.  Newton's  beneficent  work  in  England,  and 
must  now  leave  to  other  records  a  more  detailed  account  of  this  great 
healer's  marvellous  acts  of  use  and  blessing  to  suffering  humanity. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  473 

The  next  instance  in  which  all  the  powers  of  wealth,  position,  and  public 
influence  could  be  brought  to  bear  against  Spiritualism  and  its  representa- 
tives, was  in  the  prosecution  of  the  well-known  Spirit  photographer,  Mr. 
WiUiam  Mumler,  at  the  instance  of  the  proprietors  or  editors  of  a  New 
York  journal,  entitled,  The  World. 

As  the  details  of  this  trial,  besides  being  reported  in  full  in  the  Spiritual 
journals,  were  given  "  as  a  curious  item  of  news,"  in  hundreds  of  the  leading 
journals  of  America,  we  present  to  our  readers  a  brief  summary  of  the  case, 
as  reported  in  one  of  the  most  authoritative  and  widely-circulated  of  the 
American  "  dailies,"  namely,  the  New  York  Tribune.  The  article  quoted 
dated  April,  1869,  commences  thus  : — 

"  In  all  the  annals  of  criminal  jurisprudence,  there  has  seldom,  if  ever,  been  recorded 
a  case  analagous  to  that  just  tried  before  Justice  Dowling,  in  the  Tombs  Police  Court, 
in  which  the  People  were  the  prosecutors,  and  Wm.  H.  Mumler,  of  No.  630,  Broadway, 
the  defendant.  The  specific  charge  against  Mumler  was,  that  by  means  of  what  he  terms 
Spiritual  photographs,  he  has  swindled  many  credulous  persons,  by  leading  the  victims 
to  believe  it  was  possible  not  only  to  bring  back  the  departed  spirit,  but  to  photograph 
their  immaterial  forms.     ... 

"  The  apnouncement  that  the  examination  of  the  case  would  be  continued  on  Monday 
last,  drew  together  a  large  and  miscellaneous  audience,  including  a  number  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished of  the  believers  in,  and  propagators  of,  the  doctrines  of  SpirituaHsm,  many 
legal  gentlemen,  curious  to  note  the  points  of  law  wliich  might  arise  during  the  trial,  and 
a  sprinkling  of  ladies,  believers  evidently,  who  watched  the  proceedings  with  an  interest 
scarcely  exceeded  by  that  of  the  party  principally  concerned.  The  examination  was  held 
in  the  Special  Sessions  Court  Room  ;  members  of  the  bar,  distinguished  Spiritualists 
(among  them  Judge  Edmonds  and  Mr.  Mc  Donald),  and  the  ladies,  being  accommodated 
with  seats  inside  the  railing. 

"  The  principal  defendant,  Mr.  Mumler,  a  man  of  about  40  years  of  age,  with  dark  hair, 
beard,  and  eyes,  and  olive  complexion,  was  seated  next  to  his  counsel,  Messrs.  J.  T. 
Townsend,  and  A.  Day,  and  appeared  perfectly  calm  and  self-possessed,  ready  at 
a  moment's  notice  to  whisper  to  his  counsel  a  question  touching  some  important 
point  which  he  desired  to  elicit  from  the  witness.  Mumler's  face  is  one  of  the  few 
from  which  one  fails  to  gather  any  trace  of  character.  It  is  calm  and  fathomless,  and 
although  it  would  be  harsh  to  say  that  it  is  unprepossessing,  it  is  yet  a  face  which  one 
would  scarcely  be  able  to  believe  in  at  first  sight. 

"  The  People  were  represented  by  Mr.  Eldridge  Geary,  and  the  first  witness  called  was 
Marshall  Joseph  H.  Tooker,  through  whose  instrumentality  the  spiritual  photograph 
business  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  authorities.  He  deposed  that  in  consequence 
of  information  from  Mr.  P.  V.  Hickey,  of  The  World,  the  Mayor  had  ordered  him  to 
'  look  up  '  the  case,  which  he  did  by  assuming  a  false  name,  and  having  his  photograph 
taken  by  Mumler.  After  the  taking  of  the  picture  the  negative  was  shown  him,  with  a 
dim,  indistinct  outline  of  a  ghostly  face,  staring  out  of  one  corner,  and  he  was  told  that 
the  picture  represented  the  spirit  of  his  father-in-law.  He,  however,  failed  to  recognize 
the  worthy  old  gentleman,  and  emphatically  declared  that  the  picture  neither  resembled 
his  father-in-law,  nor  any  of  his  relations,  nor  yet  any  person  whom  he  had  ever  seen  or 
known.  The  other  portions  of  Marshall  Tooker's  testimony  were  published  in  The  Tribune 
at  the  time  of  the  alleged  swindle,  and  therefore  it  would  be  useless  to  recapitulate. 
With  this  testimony  the  prosecution  rested.     .     .     . 

"  In  the  first  part  of  the  defence,  several  photographic  experts  were  called,  who  testi- 
fied that  without  choosing  to  avow  themselves  Spiritualists,  or  having  any  interest  in 
defending  Mumler,  they  had  received  spirit  photographs  from  him,  and  could  not  either 
account  for  the  pictures  of  deceased  friends  they  had  received,  or  find  any  reason  for 
accusing  him  of  fraud  or  deception.  One  of  the  most  notable  witnesses  summoned,  was 
Judge  Edmonds,  who  gave  his  testimony  to  the  following  eSect : — 

" '  I  have  known  Mr.  Mumler  some  two  or  three  weeks.  On  the  occasion  of  my 
becoming  acquainted  vdth  him,  I  had  gone  to  his  gallery  with  Dr.  John  F.  Gray  and  a 
Mr.  Hunt,  on  the  invitation  of  the  former,  to  have  my  photograph  taken.  I  had  two 
pictures  taken — [Two  photographs  shown.  The  photographs  were  very  fair  pictures  of 
the  Judge,  each  having  near  the  upper  right  hand  corner,  a  dim  outline  of  a  female  face, 
sufficiently  distinct,  however,  to  shew  that  the  lady  was  very  beautiful.  It  would  appear 
that  spiritual  manifestations  abounded  on  that  occasion,  for  the  faces  on  these  pictures 
are  entirely  different,  although  both  are  charmingly  pretty.] '    Judge  Edmonds  here  became 

474  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

retrospective,  and  detailed  several  facts  and  circumstances  relative  to  spiritual  pKoto- 
grapliy  which  had  come  to  his  knowledge  many  years  ago.  Eeturning  to  Mumler  he 
said  :  '  I  know  a  great  many  persons  who  have  visited  Mumler,  some  of  whom  have  met 
with  astonishing  success  in  procuring  spirit  pictures  of  departed  friends.  Mr.  Livermore, 
of  Wall  Street,  has  been  pecuKarly  successful.'  [Another  photograph  shown,  this  time  a 
fine-looking  young  man,  seated  in  a  pensive  attitude,  with  his  eyes  cast  downward. 
Behind  his  chair,  and  leaning  over  his  head,  is  the  spectral  white-clad  form  of  a  lady, 
whose  hands  rest  on  his  shoulder.  This  is  the  most  remarkable  of  the  photographs 
exhibited  in  court,  from  the  fact  that  the  photographers  present  declared  that  by  no 
means  known  to  them,  other  than  the  bodily  presence  of  some  one  behind  the  chair, 
could  the  picture  of  the  lady's  hand  be  produced.]     .... 

"  Cross-examined :  '  At  the  time  my  picture  was  taken  there  were  present  Messrs. 
Gray,  Hunt  and  Mumler.  I  watched  the  operator  closely  while  he  was  taking  the 
picture,  but  could  detect  no  fraud.  I  believe  that  the  camera  can  take  a  photograph  of  a 
spirit,  and  I  believe  also  that  spirits  have  materiality — not  that  gross  materiality  that 
mortals  possess,  but  stUl  they  are  material  enough  to  be  visible  to  the  human  eye,  for  I 
have  seen  them.  Only  a  few  days  since  I  was  in  a  court  in  Brooklyn,  when  a  suit  against 
a  life  assurance  company  for  the  amount  claimed  to  be  due  on  a  certain  policy  was  being 
heard.  Looking  toward  that  part  of  the  court-room  occupied  by  the  jury,  I  saw  the 
spirit  of  the  man  whose  death  was  the  basis  of  the  suit.  The  spirit  told  me  the  circum- 
stances connected  with  the  death  ;  said  that  the  suit  was  groundless,  that  the  claimant 
was  not  entitled  to  recover  from  the  company,  and  said  that  he  (the  man  whose  spirit 
was  speaking)  had  committed  suicide  under  certain  circumstances.  I  drew  a  diagram  of 
the  place  at  which  his  death  occurred,  and  on  showing  it  to  the  counsel,  was  told  that  it 
was  exact  in  every  particular. 

" '  I  had  never  seen  the  place  nor  the  man,  nor  had  I  ever  heard  his  name  until  I 
entered  that  court-room  ;  the  appearance  of  the  spirit  was  shadowy  and  transparent.' 

"Mr.  Jeremiah  Gurney,  of  No.  707,  Broadway,  testified  :  'I  have  been  a  photographer 
for  28  years.  I  have  witnessed  Mumler's  process,  and  although  I  went  prepared  to 
scrutinize  everything,  I  could  find  nothing  which  savoured  of  fraud  or  trickery  ;  it  was 
the  usual  process  of  preparing  a  plate  for  taking  a  photograph,  the  only  thing  out  of  the 
usual  routine  being  the  fact  that  the  operator  kept  his  hand  on  the  camera.' 

"  Mr.  James  E.  Gilmore,  an  author  whose  no^m  de  plume  is  '  Edmond  Kirk,'  was  next 
called.  He  testified :  '  During  last  month  I  was  requested  by  the  author  of  Harper's 
Weekly  to  investigate  this  spiritual  photography  afiair,  and  write  an  article  regarding  it. 
I  called  on  Mr.  Mumler,  stated  my  business  and  desired  to  investigate  the  workings  of  his 
process.' 

"  The  witness  then  describes  Mumler's  method  of  taking  pictures,  and  concluded  by 
saying  : — '  I  could  detect  nothing  unusual  in  Mumler's  operations,  though  I  watched  him 
closely  while  preparing  the  plates  and  the  camera,  and  finally  went  with  him  into  the 
darkened  room  where  the  pictures  were  developed.'  "  [This  witness  received  three  spirit 
photographs.] 

Mr.  Elmer  Terry,  and  Mr.  Jacob  Kingsley,  were  the  next  witnesses 
examined,  and  both,  after  the  most  severe  cross-examination  testified  to 
Mr.  Mumler's  entire  candour  in  submitting  to  be  watched  at  every  turn, 
and  to  the  production  of  Spirit  portraits  on  their  photographic  plates,  both 
visiting  the  artist  as  total  strangers. 

Mr.  Paul  Bremond,  a  well-known  writer,  and  a  gentleman  who  has  held 
many  responsible  public  positions  in  the  West  and  South;  Mr.  David 
Hopkins,  a  manufacturer  of  railway  machinery,  and  a  great  many,  other 
witnesses  of  respectability  and  good  standing,  then  testified  to  the  receipt 
of  Spirit  portraits  recognized  by  their  friends  as  well  as  themselves,  and  all 
described  the  searching  investigations  to  which,  in  their  presence,  Mr. 
Mumler  not  only  cheerfully  submitted,  but  often  invited.  One  of  the  most 
interesting  pieces  of  testimony  afforded  in  this  trial  was  that  rendered  by 
Mr.  Charles  F.  Livermore,  a  gentleman  of  wealth  and  high  social  standing 
in  New  York,  and  one  whose  evidence  seemed  all  the  more  independent 
from  the  fact  that  he  was  not  an  avowed  Spiritualist.  Mr.  Livermore  said, 
in  the  course  of  his  examination  : — 

"  '  I  sat  five  times  in  succession.  I  think  that  the  first  two  sittings  amounted  to  nothing 
but  a  shadowy  background.     I  made  the  same  examination  that  I  had  previously  ;  I 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  475 

found  a  scrjeen,.  made  I  should  think,  of  white  cloth,  standing  about  two  feet  from  the  side 
of  the  wall.  I  went  behind  it,  but  there  was  no  one  there.  The  screen  was  directly 
behind  me  when  I  sat  down.  Mumler  was  in  the  room ;  I  accompanied  him  before  the 
operation  into  the  dark  room,  and  saw  him  pour  the  collodion  upon  the  plate.  I  changed 
my  position  each  sitting.  One  showed  the  picture  of  a  lady  standing  behind  me,  bearing 
a  bunch  of  iiowers  in  her  right  hand,  which  was  resting  upon  my  shoulder.  ,  .  .'  He 
then  showed  another,  which,  in  answer  to  the  counsel,  he  said  he  recognized  ;  [continuing] 
'  I  examined  the  camera  after  this,  but  could  see  nothing  out  of  the  way.  ...  I  did 
not  discover  auy  fraud  or  deception,  or  anything  that  looked  like  it.  I  was  cautioned 
against  him  as  a  trickster  by  some  friends  in  Boston.  Mr.  Mumler  was  very  pohte  and 
gave  me  every  chance  of  investigation  ;  he  said  he  could  not  guarantee  anything.' 

"  To  Mr.  Geary  :  '  I  paid  Mr.  Mumler  $20  ;  he  only  charged  me  SlO,  but  I  gave  him 
$20  because  I  was  so  satisfied.  These  pictures,  so  far  as  their  identity  goes,  are  satis- 
factory.    It  is  a  very  remarkable  phenomenon.' 

"  Q.  Who  is  this  figure  on  the  picture  ? — A.  It  is  my  wife  ;  she  died  eight  years  ago. 
I  have  a  picture  of  her  in  my  possession,  and  I  may  have  seen  the  picture  every  day.  It 
is  hanging  up  in  my  bedroom  ;  but  not  in  that  form.  It  is  a  plain  figure.  I  have  two 
portraits  besides.     I  see  them  every  day. 

"  Q.  Do  you  see  anything  to  cause  an  identity,  except  the  faces  ? — A.  Nothing,  except 
the  general  size. 

"  Q.  Do  you  recognize  any  peculiar  expression  about  the  face  ? — A.  Nothing  more  than 
the  general  one — nothing  more  than  the  general  outhne  ;  the  third  picture  was  taken  a 
few  minutes  after  the  others. 

"  What  do  you  recognize  in  this  ? — A.  It  is  unmistakable  ;  the  recognition  was  perfect, 
not  only  with  myself,  but  with  all  my  friends." 

Several  other  witnesses  were  called,  both  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Their 
testimony  was  all  to  the  same  effect  as  that  quoted  above.     After  which, 

"  Mr.  Day  said  :  We  can  produce  many  others  to  show  an  identification  of  friends,  and 
that  there  is  no  deception,  but  I  suppose  there  is  no  necessity  for  bringing  forward  any 
more. 

"  At  the  next  sitting  of  the  Court  Mr.  Mumler  read  the  following  statement  : — 
"  'In  1861,  in  the  City  of  Boston,  while  engaged  in  business  as  an  engraver,  I  was  in 
the  habit  of  visiting  a  young  man  who  was  employed  in  a  photographic  gallery  kept  by  a 
Mrs.  Stewart,  on  Washington  Street.  Occasionally  I  would  experiment  with  the  instru- 
ment and  chemicals.  One  Simday,  while  entirely  alone  in  this  gallery,  I  attempted  to 
get  a  picture  of  myseK,  and  then  it  was  that  I  first  discovered,  while  developing  it,  that  a 
second  form  appeared  on  the  plate.  At  this  time  I  had  never  heard  of  spirit  pictures, 
althotigh  I  had  been  somewhat  interested  in  the  doctrine  of  Spiritualism.  At  first  I 
laboured  under  what  is  now  the  general  impression — that  the  plate  upon  which  the  picture 
was  taken  could  not  have  been  clean,  and  that  the  form  which  showed  itself  beside  my 
own  must  have  been  left  on  the  glass  ;  and  I  so  stated  to  my  employers  and  others.  Sub- 
sequent attempts,  however,  made  under  cii'cumstances  which  preclude  such  a  possibiUty 
have  confirmed  me  in  the  belief  that  the  power  by  which  these  forms  are  produced  is 
beyond  human  control,  and  the  experts  that  have  been  called  by  the  People  have  failed  to 
produce  a  picture  made  in  that  manner.  I  wish  to  state  that  at  the  time  I  developed  the 
shadow  or  form  above  aUuded  to,  I  was  a  complete  novice  in  the  art  of  photography,  and 
had  no  experience  whatever  in  the  composition  of  chemicals  used  in  the  business,  and 
that  my  use  of  them  in  my  experiments  at  that  time  was  simply  in  conformity  with 
what  I  had  seen  my  friend  do,  while  himself  engaged  in  his  business.  After  getting  the 
form,  at  the  suggestion  of  several  friends  to  whom  I  showed  the  plate,  I  made  other 
attempts,  and  generally  with  most  remarkable  results  ;  I  then  determined  to  leave  my 
own  business  and  devote  myself  to  photography  ;  before  long  the  subject  of  spirit-pho- 
tography, and  particularly  my  success,  became  the  theme  of  every  tongue,  and  I  was 
overrun  with  enquiries,  and  obliged  to  go  over  and  over  again  the  routine  of  taking  and 
developing  the  pictures.  For  a  long  time  I  never  refused  any  person  who  came  to  in- 
vestigate :  it  soon  became  apparent,  however,  that  I  must  either  stop  or  cease  to  support 
myself,  for,  as  a  general  thing,  these  savants,  while  greedy  themselves  for  intellectual  food, 
seemed  entirely  obHvious  to  the  fact  that  I  myself  was  a  material  body.  (Laughter.) 
However,  I  can  truly  say  that  I  have  never  refused,  intentionally,  any  person  who  desired 
to  have  a  picture  taken  from  making  every  examination  they  chose  to  make,  and  had  I 
been  allowed  to  have  produced  evidence  fi'om  abroad,  I  could  have  sho%vn  by  scientific 
men,  whose  names  would  have  satisfied  every  one,  that  the  most  careful  and  minute 
examinations  have  often  been  made  into  all  the  details  of  my  business  while  I  have  been 

470  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

engaged  in  taking  pictures  ;  I  solemnly  assert  here  that  I  have  now  but  comparatively 
little  knowledge  of  photogi-aphy  or  chemicals,  or  science  of  any  kind,  further  than  is 
absolutely  needed  to  take  ordinary  photographic  pictures  ;  I  positively  assert  that  in  taking 
the  pictures  on  which  these  forms  appear,  I  have  never  used  any  trick  or  device,  or  availed 
myself  of  any  deception  or  fraud  in  producing  them  ;  that  these  forms  have  appeared  in 
each  and  every  instance  when  they  have  been  presented  without  any  effort,  except  my 
wiU-power  to  produce  them. 

"  '  As  to  my  refusal  to  entertain  propositions  from  the  self-appointed  committee  of 
photographers  who  appeared  in  my  room  since  my  arrest,  and  who  desired,  as  I  am  in- 
formed by  Mr.  Gray,  to  make  me  take  pictures  for  them,  whether  I  would  or  not,  I  have 
only  to  say  that  since  my  arrest  I  have  placed  myself  entiiely  in  the  hands  of  my  counsel, 
and  have  been  guided  by  his  advice.  One  of  the  first  cautions  he  gave  me  was  to  refrain, 
during  the  examination,  from  being  led  into  any  trap  of  that  kind  ;  having  been  charged 
with  a  crime  which,  temporarily  at  least,  placed  me  before  the  pubhc  in  the  same  category 
with  gamblers  and  men  of  that  ilk,  I  have  been  dei^rived  of  the  privilege  of  having  my 
utensils  examined  at  the  time  of  my  arrest.'  (Here  Judge  Dowling  said  :  I  was  applied  to 
to  have  your  tools  seized,  but  refused  to  have  it  done  because  I  disapproved  of  such  pro- 
ceedings.) Mr.  M.  continued  :  '  If  I  had  been  engaged  in  such  nefarious  proceedings  as  I 
am  charged  with,  the  implements  themselves  would  have  been  the  strongest  evidence 
against  me.  They  have  stood  ever  since  in  the  position  they  have  always  occupied  in  my 
gallery.' 

"  Mr.  Townsend,  on  behalf  of  the  defendant,  first  addressed  the  Court.  After  an  able 
introduction,  Mr.  Townsend  directed  his  Honour's  attention  to  what  appeared  to  be  the 
legal  aspect  of  the  case.  He  then  entered  into  the  evidence  given  by  the  respective 
witnesses  for  the  defence.  '  Mr.  Mumler  has  obtained  spirit  pictures  in  strange  places,  on 
other  instruments,  and  Tsith  strange  chemicals.  The  pictures  thus  obtained  have  been 
recognized  by  the  sitters,  in  many  instances,  as  deceased  friends  and  relatives.  Mr.  Gray 
has  been  present  many  times  when  they  were  recognized.  Judge  Edmunds  recognized 
one.'  (Here  the  learned  counsel  gave  a  synopsis  of  the  testimony,  making  commentaries  as 
he  proceeded.)  He  continued  :  'Five  hundred  persons  could  have  given  similar  testimony 
to  those  who  had  been  called  for  the  defence.  Mr.  Mumler  has  been  here  but  a  few 
months,  and  it  is  wonderful  that  so  many  respectable  people  would  come  vdthout  demand. 
He  obtained  pictures  of  persons  dead,  who  had  no  pictures  taken  during  life.  He  took 
these  pictures  sometimes  without  even  touching  the  camera.  He  took  his  pictures  through 
a  yellow  Hght,  with  no  gas.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Mumler  pretended  to  do  what  he 
knew  to  be  false,  and  consequently  the  whole  element  of  the  crime  is  wanting.  Mumler 
may  be  wrong  in  saying  he  can  give  a  spirit  picture,  but  that  does  not  constitute  a  crime, 
unless  he  knew  he  could  not  give  one.  Upon  the  prosecutor's  own  showing,  this 
case  must  be  dismissed.  It  will  not  change  a  believer,  or  prevent  one  from  believing. 
Spiritualists  will  stand  by  him  at  all  hazards  to  the  utmost  extremity.  The  case  in  a 
Court  of  Justice  should  be  looked  upon  simply  as  one  of  law.  But  suppose  these  defences 
should  fail,  we  come  to  our  af&rmative  defence,  namely  (1),  that  spirit  pictures  can  be 
taken.  It  has  been  proved  that  pictures  of  the  dead  have  been  taken.  (2)  That  such 
pictures  have  been  taken  where  there  was  no  picture  of  the  deceased  in  existence .  These 
two  things  have  been  distinctively,  positively  sworn  to  by  unimpeachable  witnesses,  and  in 
a  judicial  proceeding  such  as  this,  that  testimony  must  control,  unless  it  has  been  over- 
borne by  countervailing  evidence.  Now  let  us  look  at  this  countervailing  evidence.  It  is 
proved  that  shadowy,  ghost-like  pictures  can  be  produced  by  other  photographers.  Every- 
body acquainted  with  photography  knows  that  to  be  so  ;  it  has  never  been  denied  by  us  ; 
Mumler' s  circular  says  that.  But  stiQ  the  question  remains — and  it  is  the  real  question 
in  the  case — can  such  shadowy  pictures  as  produced  by  others  be  pictures  of  the  dead  ? 
But  even  against  the  testimony  for  the  prosecution,  which  was  theory,  we  have  direct 
practical  evidence ' 

"  Mr.  Townsend  then  remarked,  that  if  all  Spiritualists  were  insane,  there  must  be  a 
great  deal  of  insanity  in  America,  for  statistics  showed  that  in  the  United  States  there 
were  11,000,000  of  ^Spiritualists  to  10,000,000  of  other  denominations.  After  pursuing 
his  arguments  in  a  theological  light,  Mr.  Townsend  concluded  his  most  able  and  eloquent 
peroration. 

"  Mr.  Geary  then  rose  ;  and  after  expressing  his  admiration  of  his  adversaries'  argu- 
ment, said  :  '  This  is  no  private  prosecution.  One  of  the  gentlemen  connected  with  a 
public  journal  of  this  city  examined  into  these  so-called  spirit  photographs,  satisfied  that 
a  large  swindle  was  being  perpetrated  ;  he  called  to  it  the  attention  of  the  Chief  Magis- 
trate of  this  city,  who  at  once  directed  his  Chief  Marshal  to  make  a  personal  investigation. 
Hence  any  assertion  that  private  malice  instigated  these  charges  is  as  baseless  as  it  is 
untrue.'     He  then  elaborately  reviewed  the  whole  of  the  evidence  for  the  defence. 

"  After  criticising  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses,  Mr.  Geary  continued  :  '  Now  what 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  477 

does  all  this  prove  ?  Why,  that  the  trick  was  so  cleverly  done  that  not  even  photo- 
graphers could  discover  how  it  was  done.  That  very  many  persons  of  ordinary  intellect, 
competent  to  conduct  the  every-day  business  of  life,  went  to  the  prisoner,  paid  their 
money,  received  these  spirit  photographs,  and  (Polonius  Hke)  fancied  they  recognized 
likenesses  of  their  departed  friends,  and  therefore  believed  the  prisoner's  statement. 
There  is  no  proof  of  any  spiritual  agency,  only  evidence  that  certain  persons  believe  it  to 
exist.  Man  is  naturally  superstitious,  and  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  impostors  and  cheats 
have  taken  advantage  of  credulity  to  impose  on  their  fellows  less  sharp  than  themselves.' 
Mr.  Geary  then  accounted  for  the  testimony  of  Judge  Edmonds  and  Paul  Bremond  on 
the  theory  of  hallucinations,  which  aifected  Lord  Byron,  Cowper,  and  Goethe.  He  then 
showed  the  application  of  the  principle  in  the  present  case.  He  asserted  that  probable 
cause  had  been  shown  to  warrant  the  commitment  asked  for. 

"At  the  close  of  the  address  the  Judge' said,  after  careful  attention  to  the  case,  he  had 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  prisoner  should  be  discharged.  He  would  state  that 
however  he  might  believe  that  trick  and  deception  had  been  practised  by  the  prisoner, 
yet  as  he  sat  there  in  his  capacity  of  magistrate,  he  was  compelled  to  decide  that  he  should 
not  be  justified  in  sending  the  defence  to  the  grand  jury,  as,  in  his  opinion,  the  prose- 
cution had  failed  to  prove  the  case." 

The  following  letters  have  appeared  in  the  Tribune  on  the  same  subject: — 
"can  a  spirit  be  photographed? 

To  the  Editor  of  the  Tribune. 

"  Sir, — It  is  sometimes  a  thankless  task  to  expose  villany.  It  is  always  a  thankless 
task  to  throw  yourself  against  a  popular  belief  with  nothing  in  your  hand  but  a  new 
truth.  Mr.  Mumler  may  be  a  villain.  I  do  not  know  the  man.  I  never  saw  him.  If 
he  is  a  trickster  his  villany  is  of  the  darkest  hue,  for  he  speculates  on  the  holiest  instincts 
of  men.  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  Mr.  Mumler.  He  may  be  honest,  or  the  court  may 
find  him  a  swindler.  The  questions  raised  in  this  trial  do  not  turn  on  the  innocence  or 
guUt  of  one  man. 

"  Can  a  spirit  be  photographed  ?  Whether  Mumler  be  acquitted  or  convicted,  most 
intelligent  men  wUl  say  'No.'  Ask  them  why,  and  they  cannot  tell  you.  They  have 
certain  vague  ideas  of  a  spirit  as  something  incorporeal.  They  dismiss  the  question  with 
an  d,  priori.  One  day,  in  a  conversation  with  Herbert  Spencer,  I  told  him  of  certain  facts 
which  had  led  Alfred  Wallace  to  a  belief  in  the  nearness  of  a  world  of  spirits,  and  the 
communion  of  spirits  with  mortals.  Mr.  Spencer  met  the  facts  by  saying  that  he  had 
settled  the  question  on  a  priori  grounds.  Wallace  is  one  of  the  first  naturalists  of  Europe. 
He  tells  me  he  has  seen  and  heard  certain  things  ;  and  I,  making  my  own  experience  a 
measure  of  the  universe,  dismiss  his  testimony  as  contradicting  nature.  Is  that  the 
method  of  modern  philosophy  ?     .     .     .     . 

"In  February,  1867,  I  formed  the  acquaintance  of  a  photographer  living  in  the  Con- 
necticut Valley.  I  had  gone  to  his  rooms  for  a  photograph.  While  sitting  for  the  pic- 
ture, I  saw  that  the  artist  was  strangely  agitated.  When  the  plate  was  developed  a 
bright  but  vapory  female  form  appeared,  standing  at  my  side.  I  had  never  heard  of 
Mumler  or  spirit  photography.  I  asked  the  photographer  how  that  form  got  on  the 
plate  ;  he  did  not  know  ;  he  could  only  say  that  while  he  was  photographing  me  he  saw 
that  woman  standing  at  my  side.  He  did  not  want  the  picture  taken  from  his  gallery, 
and  wished  me  not  to  speak  of  it.  He  told  me  that  now  and  then,  for  years,  he  had 
taken  such  pictures  ;  that  they  came  through  no  agency  of  liis  ;  that  he  could  take  them 
almost  any  time  by  yielding  to  the  control  of  beings  which  he  believed  to  be  spirits,  but 
he  wanted  nothing  to  do  with  it.  '  He  would  not  have  his  name  mixed  up  with 
Spiritualism  in  any  form.' 

"  I  had  such  confidence  in  my  friend's  honesty,  that  I  wished  to  make  an  investiga- 
tion of  this  strange  power.  It  was  only  after  many  interviews  and  much  urging  that  he 
consented  to  give  me  sittings,  and  yield  to  the  'invisibles.'  I  ofiered  to  pay  him  gene- 
rously for  his  time,  but  he  declined  any  consideration,  saying  that  he  could  not  be 
tempted  to  use  this  mysterious  gift  for  gain.  He  gave  me  every  facility  in  making  the 
investigation.  I  took  a  friend  to  assist  me.  We  had  his  time  for  four  afternoons.  We 
had  the  utmost  confidence  in  him,  but  made  the  investigation  as  if  he  were  a  trickster. 
I  assisted  in  preparing  the  plates,  and  stood  by  while  the  pictures  were  developed.  We 
took  every  precaution  to  prevent  or  detect  trickery.  At  almost  every  sitting  we  got  the 
photograph  of  a  woman — the  same  bright,  vapory  form  that  appeared  when  I  went  alone, 
or  thought  I  was  alone  !      And  at  almost  every  sitting  the  photographer  was  partially 

478  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

entranced.  What  shall  we  say  ?  He  is  a  man  of  position  and  character.  I  would  as 
soon  think  of  flinging  the  charge  of  falsehood  against  the  Chief  Justice.  He  had  no 
motive  to  deceive.  He  would  not  sell  his  gift  for  money.  If  I  believed  him  capable  of 
falsehood,  still  I  should  be  unable  to  account  for  the  pictures The  photo- 
grapher, myself,  and  my  friend  were  the  only  persons  in  the  room.  Could  we  have 
been  deceived  for  four  days  by  shallow  tricks  ?  And  if  we  were  deceived,  how  did  the 
confederate  who  personated  the  spirit  make  herself  transparent  ?  How  did  she  suspend 
herself  in  the  air  ?  for  one  of  these  photographs  is  the  picture  of  a  woman  floating  down 
through  the  air.     .     .     . 

"  Another  case  came  under  my  notice.  A  young  girl  in  Chelsea  called  on  one  of  the 
leading  photographers  of  the  city  to  have  some  tintypes  taken.  He  was  about  to  close  his 
rooms  for  the  day.  The  girl  sat,  and  while  the  picture  was  taking,  she  felt  a  blur  coming 
over  her  eyes.  She  sjDoke  of  it  to  Mr.  A.,  who  was  standing  by  the  camera.  He  told 
her  she  might 'wink,  but  she  must  sit  still.  When  he  developed  the  plate,  a  pair  of  hands 
appeared  on  each  face  !  There  were  eight  faces  on  the  sheet.  This  photograph  is  very 
remarkable.  I  have  examined  four  of  the  impressions,  and  have  one  of  them  in  my 
possession.  The  hands  are  clasped  around  the  girl's  neck.  They  are  shown  up  to  the 
wrist,  where  they  fade  away  into  a  formless  vapor.  They  are  transparent.  One  hand 
comes  down  over  the  girl's  chin,  and  you  see  right  through  it  the  perfect  outlines  of  the 
chin.  There  is  a  wonderful  family  likeness  to  all  these  pictures.  Judge  Edmonds  testi- 
fies that  the  spirits  he  sees  are  transparent  ;  and  one  of  the  leading  Doctors  of  Divinity 
of  New  England  (Orthodox)  tells  me  that  he  sees  spirits  in  the  same  way. 

"  Now  you  cannot  sujDpose  that  these  hands  had  been  photographed  on  the  tin  before. 
The  photographer  tells  me  that  he  used  a  new  sheet.  Suppose  I  do  not  believe  him.  How, 
then,  did  the  hands  appear  over  the  face  ?  Can  you  suppose  the  hands  wer*  photographed 
after  the  girl  ?  You  will  see  that  the  little  finger  and  the  ring  finger  on  the  left  hand  are 
thrust  under  the  girl's  collar.  You  must  say,  then,  that  the  girl  and  hands  were  all 
taken  together.  And  now,  did  some  one  steal  in  and  clasp  her  hands  around  the  girl's 
neck,  and  still  elude  the  eye  of  the  artist  ?  He  tells  me  that  no  one  was  in  the  room  but 
himself  and  the  girl.  Suppose  some  one  did  steal  in — how  did  she  make  her  hands 
transparent,  and  conceal  the  rest  of  her  body  ?  The  photographer  is  a  man  whose  word 
no  one  will  doubt.  He  tells  me  that  he  had  never  thought  of  spirit  photography  ;  that 
he  has  no  theory  ;  that  he  only  knows  the  hands  came  through  no  agency  of  his. 

"  Now,  gentlemen — you  have  not  settled  these  questions  on  a  •priori  grounds — can  you 
escape  the  conclusion  to  which  I  have  been  driven  ? 

"  That  men  and  women — spirits,  but  not  incorporeal — can,  under  certain  conditions, 
clothe  their  persons  with  elements  sufficiently  tangible  to  reflect  light. 

"  While  reading  a  report  of  the  the  trial  of  Mumler,  and  finding  lawyers  trying  to 
break  the  testimony  of  witnesses  because  of  their  belief  in  spirits,  I  thought  of  the  words 
of  a  living  German  philosopher  :  '  No  one  who  has  eyes  to  see  can  fail  to  remark  that  the 
belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  has  long  been  efi'aced  from  ordinary  Hfe.'  We  swear 
a  witness  on  the  Bible,  and  then  impugn  his  testimony  if  he  believes  in  spirits  ! — beheves 
that  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  were  not  mistaken  when,  on  almost  every  page, 
they  speak  of  spirits,  and  admonish  us  '  to  try  the  spirits  !'  Whither  are  we  drifting  ? 
How  would  an  item  like  this  appear  in  The  Tribune  ? 

" '  The  Bishop  of  Khode  Island  has  written  to  the  Bishop  of  New  York  that  three  men 
whom  he  had  known  in  Providence  appeared  to  him,  and  talked  with  him,  after  their 
decease.  The  Rhode  Island  Bishop  thinks  that  bad  spirits  can  personate  good  ones  and 
deceive  us  ;  but  he  is  confident  these  three  spirits  were  really  his  friends. 

"Our  table-talk  over  such  an  item  would  be  a  measure  of  our  departure  from  the 
faith  of  primitive  Christianity.  For  the  Bishop  of  Rhode  Island  put  Exodius,  a  Bishop 
in  Africa,  and  for  the  Bishop  of  New  York  put  Augustine,  and  for  the  nineteenth  put  the 
fourth  century,  and  you  have  an  historical  truth."  "  W.  D.  L. 

"Boston,  Mass.,  April  26,  1869." 

The  closest  attention  is  called  to  the  following  still  more  important 
letter  :— 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  '  Tribune.' 

"  Sir, — The  question  has  been  frequently  asked  during  the  Mumler  trial,  '  Why,  if 
it  be  not  a  deception,  cannot  he  produce  his  pictures  in  some  other  establishment  than  his 
own  ?' 

"  In  answer,  I  beg  space  for  a  brief  statement  of  facts  within  my  own  knowledge  and 
experience.  With  a  desire  to  fully  investigate  this  subject,  I  invited  Mr.  M.  to  visit 
Poughkeepsie.     He  accepted,  and  on  the  30th  of  March  last  came  to  our  rooms. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  479 

"  I  had,  previous  to  his  visit,  made  every  arrangement  possible  for  a  full  investigation, 
removing  all  old  negatives  from  my  operating  rooms,  preparing  fresh  plates  from  glass 
never  before  used,  and  putting  everything  in  a  shape  to  prevent  or  detect  any  attempt  at 
imposture.  A  reward  of  $50  was  offered  by  me  to  any  of  our  employes  who  should 
succeed  in  detecting  any  trickery  or  deception. 

"  Mr.  M.  entered  our  operating  room  without  any  previous  preparation  or  appliances 
whatever,  and  with  the  camera,  chemicals,  &c.,  in  daily  use  by  us,  and  under  the  closest 
scrutiny  of  my  operator  and  myself,  produced  at  once  his  so-called  spirit  pictures.  In 
three  instances  during  our  experiments  my  operator  performed  all  the  manipulations  him- 
self, from  the  coating  of  the  plate  to  the  developing  of  the  pictures  ;  the  result  in  each 
case  being  the  same,  a  second  figure  appearing  upon  the  plate.  In  one  instance  the  camera 
was  taken  into  the  developing  room  by  him,  the  plate-holder  there  removed  and  thoroughly 
examined,  and  the  picture  developed.  Result  the  same,  no  second  negative  or  mechanical 
arrangement  whatever  being  discovered.  One  fact  is  worth  more  as  evidence  than  all  the 
theories  in  existence,  and  it  is  a  fact  that  Mr.  Mumler's  pictures  were  produced  in  our 
rooms,  with  our  instruments,  chemicals,  &c.,  without  his  touching  the  plates  or  taking 
any  part  in  their  jDroduction  whatever  ;  save  only  that  of  laying  his  hand  upon  the  camera 
box  during  the  time  of  exposure.  Tke  theories  advanced  by  so-called  experts  all  involve 
previous  preparation  of  cameras,  plate-holders,  &c.,  none  of  which  was  it  possible  for  Mr.  M. 
to  have  made  upon  this  occasion.  The  different  processes  described  by  them,  by  which 
Mr.  M.'s  pictures  may  be  imitated,  are  known  to  most  photographers.  They  may  prove  a 
satisfactory  explanation  to  the  minds  of  said  experts,  none  of  whom  have  investigated 
Mr.  M.'s  operations  themselves,  but  are  far  from  satisfying  those  who  have.  Messrs. 
Gilmore,  Gurney,  Silver,  and  myself,  with  a  host  of  others,  know  they  utterly  fail  to 
afford  a  solution  of  the  problem,  or  account  for  the  facts  within  our  knowledge.  I  wUl 
pay  $100  to  any  exjiert  who  will  come  to  my  rooms,  and  under  the  same  circumstances 
that  Mr.  Mumler's  pictures  were  produced  there,  do  the  same  by  natural  means  without 
detection.  If  he  succeeds,  and  can  give  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  matter,  I  will 
promptly  acknowledge  the  fact  to  the  world,  and  thank  him  for  the  solution  of  a  mystery 
beyond  my  comprehension. 

"  My  operator  was  present  at  the  trial  on  Friday  last,  ready  to  give  his  sworn  testimony 
to  the  facts  stated.  His  testimony  was  not  admitted,  on  the  ground  that  what  occurred 
in  Poughkeepsie  was  foreign  to  the  case  ;  and  yet  the  question  is  asked,  why  cannot 
Mumler  produce  his  pictures  in  some  other  gallery  than  his  own  ?  It  would  seem,  if  the 
desire  was  to  arrive  at  the  facts  in  the  case,  and  not  to  condemn  the  man,  innocent  or 
guilty,  that  any  evidence  tending  to  a  solution  of  the  matter  should  not  have  been  ruled 
out  upon  mere  technical  grounds.  A  sworn  statement  of  the  facts  mentioned  has  been 
made  by  my  operator,  and  is  now  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  M.'s  counsel.  Mr.  M.,  whDe  here, 
was  not  only  thoroughly  watched  by  those  immediately  about  him,  but  also  by  our 
printers,  who,  stimulated  by  the  reward  offered,  and  believing  the  whole  thing  a  deception, 
had  loopholes  prepared,  looking  from  the  printing  room  above  into  the  developing  and 
dark  rooms  below  ;  and  during  the  little  time  Mr.  M.  was  left  unwatched,  or  supposed 
himself  to  be,  his  every  movement  was  noted  by  them.  They  failed  to  detect  anything 
in  his  operations  different  from  the  ordinary  process.  I  have  no  personal  interest  in  Mr.  M., 
and  had  no  acquaintance  with  him,  previous  to  a  casual  visit  made  to  his  rooms  in  New 
York,  where,  at  his  invitation,  on  learning  I  was  a  photographer,  I  investigated  the 
subject  as  far  as  possible,  Not  being  fully  satisfied  there,  although  unable  to  detect  any 
sign  of  imposture,  I  induced  him  to  visit  my  rooms,  with  the  above  result. 

"  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.  "VVm.  P.  Slee." 

The  editor  of  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine^  in  the  issue  of  June,  1869, 
says  of  this  case  : — 

"  We  observed  that  several  of  the  London  daily  papers  published  with  great  alacrity 
the  report  of  the  early  days  of  the  trial,  but  so  far  as  we  have  seen,  not  one  has  pubhshed 
the  conclusion  of  the  case,  which  ended  in  the  acquittal  of  Mr.  Mumler.  The  evidence 
given  on  his  behalf  is  most  interesting,  and  appears  to  be  of  the  strongest  kind  to  prove 
the  facts.    We  invite  the  London  press  to  pubhsh  this  evidence,  and  the  Judge's  decision." 

As  well  recognized  photographic  portraits  of  deceased  persons  form  one 
of  those  phases  of  Spiritual  phenomena  which  itinerant  conjurers  cannot 
expose  by  jugglery,  and  priestcraft  cannot  anathematize  by  biblical  quota- 
tions, as  Mr.  Mumler  in  especial  has  been  one  of  the  most  candid  Mediums 
for  the  production  of  this  interesting  phenomenon,  and  one  who  seemed 

48o  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  last  person  to  become  open  to  the  charge  of  trickery  or  deception,  we 
deem  it  not  out  of  place  to  cite  still  another  witness  to  the  test  facts  which 
generally  accompanied  the  production  of  his  Spirit  photographs.  The 
testimony  with  which  we  propose  to  close  our  case  is  an  excerpt  from  a 
letter  written  by  the  author  herself  to  her  friends  in  England,  when  com- 
plying with  their  request  to  send  them  some  specimens  of  American  Spirit 
photographs. 

The  letter  is  dated  from  Chicago,  January  20th,  1872,  and  was  published 
in  the  columns  of  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal.  The  extract  pertinent 
to  our  case  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  In  1870,  during  a  brief  residence  in  London,  I  was  engaged  to  write  a  series  of  musical 
articles,  amongst  which  was  an  analysis  of  Beethoven's  celebrated  C  Minor  Symphony. 
Whilst  I  was  occupied  in  this  work,  I  was  made  aware  that  the  spirit  of  the  noble  com- 
poser was  present,  and  that  he  desired  me  to  frame  my  analysis  after  a  certain  fashion, 
the  specialities  of  which  he  himself  undertook  to  dictate.  1  had  always  been  a  passionate 
admirer  of  Beethoven's  music,  and  as  I  was  frequently  called  upon  to  write  analyses  of  his 
works,  I  must  admit  that  I  was  too  much  disposed  to  become  enthusiastic  in  my  methods 
of  expression  to  suit  my  matter  of  fact  employers. 

"  I  had  been  warned  previous  to  the  occasion  of  which  I  write,  not  to  indulge  in  any 
'  high-flown  strains  of  eulogy,'  but  the  presence  of  the  grand  old  master's  spirit  seemed  so 
completely  to  conquer  all  tendencies  to  common-place  expression  that,  forgetful  of  the 
warning  I  had  received,  I  wi-ote  out  the  spirit's  ideas  in  language  of  my  own,  and  that  of 
a  character  which  on  any  other  occasions  I  shovild  have  been  certain  would  be  rejected 
for  its  unqualified  and  enthusiastic  tone  of  eulogy.  When  my  work  was  ended,  the  keen- 
sighted  spirit,  addressing  me,  said  :  '  Presently,  when  I  am  gone,  you  will  doubt  my 
identity  and  rebuke  yourself  for  fancying  that  Beethoven  has  been  your  visitor.  I  will 
give  you  three  convincing  tests  of  my  presence,  the  first  of  which  is,  that  your  employer 
shall  accept  your  article  and  declare  it  is  the  best  you  have  ever  written  on  this  subject. 
The  other  two  tests  will  come'  Test  number  one  was  realised  that  very  same  day,  my 
employer  expressing  unusual  satisfaction  with  my  article,  and  declaring  it  to  le  the  best 
I  had  ever  ivritten,  &c.,  &c. 

"  The  following  evening  I  had  the  privilege  of  being  one  of  a  party  of  twelve  persons 
who  were  holding  a  stance  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  Mr.  D.  D.  Home 
being  the  medium.  During  the  progress  of  the  manifestations,  which  were  very  powerful 
and  interesting,  I  suddenly  beheld  the  spirit  of  Beethoven  standing  by  my  side,  and  heard 
clairaudiently  the  words,  '  I  have  come  to  give  you  the  second  test.'  No  one  saw  the 
spirit  or  heard  the  voice  but  me,  and  whilst  I  was  relating  to  the  company  what 
I  had  seen  and  heard,  and  the  circumstances  which  rendered  the  presence  of  that  spirit 
peculiarly  significant,  an  accordion,  which  was  lying  on  the  table,  was  carried  by  unseen 
hands  beneath  it,  and  instantly  was  played  in  clear  and  stately  measures  a  remarkable  and 
very  prominent  passage  in  the  C  Minor  Symphony.  It  is  necessary  to  remember  that  this 
passage  is  repeated  in  every  movement  of  the  Symphony,  and  it  is  rendered  stiU  more 
memorable  from  the  fact  that  when  Ferdinand  Reis,  Beethoven's  pupil,  commented  upon 
its  frequent  recurrence  to  the  composer,  the  latter  seized  a  pen  and  wrote  beneath  the 
passage  in  question  in  the  German  language  :  'So  knocks  fate  at  my  door.'  These  words 
will  be  found  in  the  original  score  in  Beethoven's  handwriting,  and  from  this  circumstance 
the  name  of  ''  The  Geist  Symphony"  has  been  commonly  given  to  this  magnificent  work 
All  this  I  had  commented  upon  in  the  analysis  before  referred  to.  The  passage  itself- 
played  by  no  mortal  hands,  was  at  once  recognized  by  several  of  the  party  present  besides 
myself,  and  hence  formed,  as  may  be  imagined,  a  second  and  striking  test  of  the  identity 
of  the  great  master's  spirit.  A  few  weeks  after  the  occurrence  of  this  circumstance,  I 
was  in  Boston,  America,  and  a  few  days  after  I  had  landed  a  lady  friend  called  on  me  and 
asked  if  I  would  accompany  her  to  the  spirit  photographer's  (Mr.  Mumler).  As  we  were 
both  entirely  unacquainted  with  Mr.  Mumler,  we  deemed  that  our  improvised  visit  might 
be  the  means  of  ehciting  some  good  tests.  After  waiting  a  considerable  time  to  take  our 
turn  we  were  admitted,  and  my  friend,  who  was  the  first  sitter,  was  overjoyed  by  procur- 
ing a  striking  spirit  photograph  of  her  deceased  brother.  I  had  no  intention  of  sitting 
at  the  time  when  I  entered  the  room  ;  indeed  Mr.  Mumler  had  remarked  that  it  was  so 
late  that  he  would  rather  make  a  fresh  appointment  with  us  than  give  a  sitting  at  that 
time.  But  this  we  were  resolved  not  to  do  ;  we  would  have  our  sitting  then  or  never. 
After  my  friend's  sitting  was  ended,  Mr.  Mumler,  addressing  me,  said  he  very  much 
wished  I  would  let  him  take  my  picture.      There  seemed  to  be  such  a  strong  spirit 

Wf  Emmette  Coleman 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  481 

influence  present,  he  said,  that  he  would  rather  take  my  picture  without  payment  than 
suffer  me  to  depart.  Thus  urged,  I  sat  down  before  the  camera  entirely  unprepared  as  I 
was.  Whilst  Mr.  Mumler  was  developing  the  plate,  which  he  did  in  our  presence,  we 
having  accompanied  him,  by  his  own  request,  to  the  darkened  room,  I  heard  the  voice  of 
the  spirit  Beethoven  saying,  'I  have  come  to  give  you  the  third  test.'  When  Mr. 
Mumler  withdrew  the  negative  from  the  bath,  we  all  remarked  a  large  head  on  the  plate, 
and  the  appearance  of  a  lyre  composed  of  flowers,  held  before  me.  I  observed  that  I 
thought  the  spirit  must  be  a  musician,  and  that  the  head  resembled  that  of  Handel, 
Immediately  upon  this  Mr.  Mumler  caught  up  a  pencil  and  wrote  the  name  Beethoven. 
I  have  only  to  add  that  my  custom  of  writing  musical  articles,  or  being  in  any  way 
interested  in  musical  matters,  was  at  that  time  unknown  to  my  friends  in  America, 
This  fact,  together  with  the  circumstances  attending  my  unprepared  visit  to  the 
photographer,  and  his  entire  ignorance  of  my  name,  should  all  be  considered  as  hnks  in 
the  chain  of  evidence,  tending  to  prove  that  the  veritable  spirit  of  Beethoven  was  the 
agent  in  producing  the  whole  series  of  tests,  the  last  of  which  so  transcendently  proves 
the  genuine  character  of  Mr.  Mumler's  mediumship.  Permit  me  to  add  that  I  have  had 
many  tests  through  this  same  medium  subsequently  ;  also,  that  I  am  cognisant  of 
numerous  parties  who  have  received  well-defined  spirit  portraits  of  their  deceased  friends 
through  Mr.  Mumler,  but  I  do  not  remember  any  case  that  demonstrates  more  con- 
clusively the  agency  of  an  individualised  spirit  than  the  incident  I  have  narrated,  taken 
in  relation  to  all  its  attendant  circumstances." 

CHAPTER     LVI. 

SPIRiraALISM    IN    AMERICA    (CONTINUED.) 

The  next  case  in  relation  to  Spiritualism  before  the  bar  of  human  judica- 
ture which  we  propose  to  notice,  forms  a  marked  example  of  the  mode  in 
which  medical  monopolists  endeavour  to  stamp  out  of  existence  the 
beneficent  gift  of  healing  by  the  laying  on  of  hands ;  a  power — which  of 
all  others — should  be  manifested  by  those  who  rejoice  in  the  tide  of 
Christians,  and  claim  to  be  followers  of  the  Great  Healer  of  Nazareth, 

The  subject  of  the  trial  we  are  about  to  describe  was  Dr.  J.  D,  Mac- 
Lennan,  a  gendeman  who  was  first  widely  known  as  a  healer,  by  the 
marvellous  cure  which  he  effected  of  Dr,  Slade,  when  the  latter  was  carried 
to  his  office  paralyzed  and  helpless. 

The  celebrity  which  this  case  obtained  was  amply  justified  by  Dr,  Mac- 
Lennan's  subsequent  successes,  and  the  invariable  kindness  and  liberality 
with  which  his  great  gift  was  exercised. 

The  nature  of  the  charges  brought  against  Dr.  MacLennan  will  be  best 
understood  by  perusing  the  following  summary  of  the  trial  to  which  he  was 
subjected,  the  report  being  taken  from  the  San  Francisco  Evening  Post^ 
dated  March  22nd,  188 1.     It  is  headed 

"magnetic   healing. — TRIAL   OF  J.    D,    MACLENNAN   FOR   MISDEMEANOR 
IN   PRACTICING   IT, 

"  There  was  a  very  interesting  case  on  trial  in  the  Police  Court  yesterday  afternoon 
before  Judge  Rix.  In  December  last  J.  D.  MacLennan,  the  magnetic  healer,  whose  office 
is  at  114,  Geary  Street,  was  arrested  at  the  instance  of  A.  A.  Stoneburger,  charged  with 
violating  section  11  of  the  law  regulating  the  practice  of  medicine  in  this  state.  There 
were  quite  a  large  number  of  ladies  present ;  also  the  officers  and  many  of  the  members 
of  the  First  Spiritual  Union,  who  seemed  to  take  great  interest  in  the  case.  It  was 
claimed  by  the  prosecution  that  Mr,  MacLennan  was  a  physician  and  practiced  as  such, 

31 

482  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

and  should  procure  a  certificate  to  practice  from  one  of  the  three  examining  boards  ap- 
pointed under  the  law.  The  defendant  claimed,  on  the  contrary,  that  he  was  no  doctor, 
but  was  a  healer,  alleviating  pain  and  disease  by  God-given,  vital  magnetic  force.  The 
complaining  witness,  Stonebiirger,  who  is  a  medical  student  at  the  Medical  College  of  the 
Pacific,  when  sworn,  related  how,  on  the  20th  of  December  last,  provided  with  money 
given  him  by  Dr.  Plummer,  he  had  sought  Mr.  MacLennan's  office,  then  on  Stockton 
Street,  and  pretended  to  be  seeking  reUef  for  an  affection  of  the  spine.  Dr.  Plummer 
had  cautioned  this  stool-pigeon  to  be  sure  and  address  Mr.  MacLennan  as  '  Doctor,' 
which  he  did  ;  and  the  healer,  not  noticing  that  he  was  so  addressed,  allowed  Stoneburger 
to  use  that  title.  The  witness  related  how  the  defendant  had  assured  him  that  he  was 
suffering  from  rheumatism  (which  proved  to  be  the  case),  and  then  assured  him  that  he 
could  cure  him  in  three  weeks.  Stoneburger  agreed  to  the  terms  mentioned,  and  gave 
the  healer  three  dollars  of  the  money  provided  by  Dr.  Plummer.  He  was  then  subjected 
to  a  course  of  manipulation  by  hand-rubbing,  which  the  witness  was  forced  to  acknow- 
ledge had  a  very  salutary  effect  on  him.  When  cross-examined  by  Daniel  J.  Murphy  and 
Judge  CoUins  for  the  defence,  Stoneburger  admitted  that  the  money  paid  MacLennan 
came  from  the  college  where  he  was  studying,  and  that  he  went  to  the  healer's  office 
simply  to  'put  up  a  job'  on  him.  The  witness  did  not  see  any  medical  appliances  in  the 
healer's  room,  his  process  of  curing  being  simply  by  manipulation  ;  was  not  offered  any 
medicine,  nor  did  the  healer  use  any  ointment  or  oils.  Witness  felt  a  slight  shock  during 
the  manipulation.  He  thought  it  was  not  electricity.  Witness  was  positive  that  it  could 
not  have  been  electricity  ;  yet  when  asked  if  he  knew  the  difference  between  electricity 
and  animal  magnetism  said  that  there  was  none  !  After  thus  leading  off  weakly,  the 
prosecution  called  Dr.  C.  M.  Bates,  who  defined  ponderable  and  imponderable  elements 
of  medicine. 

"  The  witness  defined  the  difference  between  electricity  and  animal  magnetism.  The 
former  could  be  generated — the  latter  was  that  force  in  a  person  which,  when  he  has  a 
positive  individuality,  he  can  produce  and  use  to  alleviate  pain  in  others.  After  adroitly 
getting  this  acknowledgment  from  the  witness,  Mr.  Murphy  put  this  question  to  him. 

"  Q.  This  principle  of  relieving  pain  by  rubbing  has  existed  for  all  time,  has  it  not  ? — 
A.  Yes. 

"  Q.  Now,  then,  would  you  call  every  mother  who  uses  these  methods  to  relieve  pain 
in  her  children  a  practitioner  ? — A.  No  ;  for  sometimes  they  fail  to  relieve  pain, 
"  Mr.  Murphy  :  And  do  not  your  medicines  sometimes  fail  ? 

"  This  was  a  poser,  and  the  witness  was  obliged  to  confess  that  they  sometimes  did. 
Witness  admitted  that  rheumatism  could  often  be  cured  by  the  application  of  hands,  and 
he  did  not  deny  that  some  people  were  endowed  with  this  mysterious  gift, 
"  Mr.  Murphy  :  What  is  medicine,  doctor  ? 

"  Dr.  Bates  :  Medicine  is  anything  that  will  cure  disease  or  reheve  pain.  A  practitioner 
can  use  any  and  all  means  to  alleviate  pain  or  cure  disease. 

"  After  this  witness  had  claimed  that  a  mother  giving  her  child  a  mustard  bath,  or 
rubbing  its  body,  or  a  barber  brushing  a  customer's  hair,  to  alleviate  pain,  was  a  practitioner 
and  '  M.D.,'  Dr.  EUinwood  was  called  for  the  prosecution. 

"  Witness  knew  that  there  was  such  a  force  as  animal  magnetism,  but  could  not  define 
what  it  was.  It  was  something  no  one  could  understand.  He  defined  it  as  something 
like  heat.  He  thought  that  the  appUcation  of  this  magnetism  was  practicing  medicine. 
'Anything,'  said  the  witness,  '  used  to  alleviate  pain  or  cure  disease  is  a  medicine.' 

"  Mr.  Murphy  :  Then,  doctor,  everything  and  anything  that  has  healing  properties — such 
as  the  air,  light,  heat,  the  sun's  rays — all  belong  to  the  medical  fraternity? — A.  Well, 
yes  ;  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  word. 

"  Mr.  Murphy :  Then  anything  that  has  curative  properties  is  medicine  ?  Witness 
(promptly)  :  Yes,  sir. 

"  Q,  And  any  one  who  uses  these  to  benefit  others  is  a  physician  ?    A.  Yes,  sir, 
"  Q.  Well,  then,  if  I  should  take  a  man  out  of  a  dungeon,  where  he  was  dying  for  want 
of  air  and  sunlight,  and  bring  him  out  into  the  light,  I  would  be  giving  him  medicine — 
I  would  be  practicing  medicine  ? 

"  Witness  (after  a  pause) :  Well,  I  think  that  you  would  be.     (Suppressed  merriment.) 
"Mr.  Murphy:   That's  all,  doctor.     I  do  not  know  what  the  honorable  fraternity 
would  not  claim  after  that  ! 

"  The  prosecution,  seeing  how  they  had  utterly  failed  to  make  out  their  case,  had 
little  argument  to  make.  Judge  Collins,  for  the  defence,  asked  the  court  to  instruct 
the  jury  to  acquit  the  defendant,  as  the  prosecution  had  failed  utterly  to  show  that 
Mr.  MacLennan  had  practiced  medicine.  In  support  of  the  motion  he  defined  the  term 
physician,  as  meant  by  the  law.  It  was  that  any  person  shaU  be  regarded  as  practicing 
medicine,  within  the  meaning  of  the  act,  who  shall  publicly  profess  to  be  a  physician,  or 
shall  append  '  M.D,'  to  his  name,     '  No  proof,'  said  Judge  ColUns, '  has  been  adduoed  that 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  483 

our  client  has  professed  to  be  a  physician  or  a  doctor,  nor  has  he  prescribed  medicine,  as 
it  is  ordinarily  understood,  for  any  one.  The  section  that  covers  the  case  of  the  defendant 
reads  as  follows  :  "  Any  itinerant  vendor  of  drugs,  nostrums,  ointments,  or  appliances 
tending  to  cure  disease,  or  any  person  who  shall,  by  the  use  of  any  writing,  printing,  or 
by  manipulation,  profess  to  cure  disease,  shall  pay  a  license  of  $100  per  month."  That 
is  where  the  defendant  comes  in.  He  does  not  profess  to  be  a  physician,  but  he  does 
profess  to  cure  disease  by  this  animal  magnetism,  by  the  laying  on  of  hands.  No  medical 
board  can  order  him  to  procure  a  doctor's  certificate.  How  can  he,  when  he  has  not 
studied  medicine?' 

"Mr.  Murphy  :  'This  clause  in  the  law,  requiring  a  license  and  not  a  certificate,  was 
made  for  that  class  of  men  who  can  throw  the  powers  of  the  unseen  world  into  others. 
When  a  man  has  this  God-given  gift  would  you  bar  him  out  from  benefiting  mankind  ? 
The  men  that  would  do  this  would  have  prosecuted  Christ  for  healing  the  sick  and  for 
raising  the  dead.'  After  making  a  very  able  and  logical  argument,  Mr.  Murphy  again 
asked  the  court  to  instruct  the  jury  to  acquit.  At  the  conclusion  of  Mr.  Murphy's 
remarks.  Judge  Rix,  addressing  the  jury,  said  :  '  The  prosecution  has  failed  to  show  that 
the  defendant  claims  to  be  a  physician.  They  only  show  that  he  professes  to  be  a  healer. 
He  himself  admits  and  claims  that  he  is  a  healer  by  animal  magnetism.  I  think  that  the 
prosecution  have  failed  to  substantiate  this  charge,  and  therefore  will  instruct  you  to 
acquit.'  When  the  jury  promptly  returned  a  verdict  of  not  guilty,  the  many  friends  of 
Mr.  MacLennan  crowded  around  him  and  congratulated  him  on  so  ably  proving  to  all  that 
while  he  did  heal  the  sick  by  his  great  powers,  those  powers  were  ia-born,  God-given,  and 
that  no  college  of  medicine  could  debar  him  from  using  them  for  the  benefit  of  sufiering 
humanity.  0  wing  to  the  granting  of  the  motion  to  dismiss,  a  large  number  of  witnesses 
for  Mr  MacLennan,  who  had  volunteered  in  his  behalf,  were  not  called  upon  to  testify." 

It  need  hardly  be  added  that  there  were  more  persons  than  the  parties 
named  above  who  were  personally  rejoiced  in  the  issue  of  this  trial ;  the 
principles  of  liberty  and  equity  being  even  more  deeply  involved  in  its 
results  than  the  simple  fact  that  justice  was  due  to  the  benevolent  healer 
who  was  the  enforced  defendant  in  the  case.  It  is  worth  while  also  to 
take  note  of  the  arguments  used  by  the  prosecution,  and  observe  how 
grossly  ignorant  the  present  generation  appear  to  be  on  the  subject  of 
Spiritual  gifts,  and  powers  in  general. 

We  call  attention  to  this  case,  not  only  because  the  verdict  established 
the  rights  of  the  Spirituahsts  in  the  above-mentioned  directions,  but  because 
it  affords  a  noteworthy  illustration  of  the  wide  difference  in  the  administra- 
tion of  justice  between  the  courts  of  judicature  in  England  and  America, 
In  every  instance  in  which  Spiritualists  have  been  cited  to  appear 
before  the  tribunals  of  justice  (?)  in  England,  the  verdicts  have  been  given 
against  them,  and  yet  none  can  ever  peruse  the  trials  of  Sothern  versus 
Coleman,  and  Lyons  versus  Home,  without  coming  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  most  flagrant  injustice  was  exercised  in  each  case  by  verdicts  against 
the  defendants. 

It  will  be  remembered  also,  that  when  the  Australian  Spiritualists 
petitioned  through  the  "Victorian  Association  of  Spiritualists,"  for  leave  to 
take  a  modest  admission  fee  at  the  door  where  their  religious  exercises 
were  held  Sabbath  by  Sabbath;  where  hymns  were  sung,  prayers  said,  and 
no  perversion  of  bigotry  could  twist  the  exercises  into  an  appearance  of 
show,  or  attempt  at  gain,  the  Government  unrelentingly  forbade  the  continu- 
ance of  the  meetings,  so  long  as  the  admission  fee  was  taken,  and  that 
notwithstanding  the  fact,  that  the  same  Government  tolerated  a  regular 
tariff  of  payment  for  seats  in  every  Catholic  place  of  worship,  and  allowed 
church  pews,  aye,  and  the  sacred  office  of  rectorship  to  be  sold  by  auction 
to  the  highest  bidders  in  the  reverend  (?)  State  Church  of  England. 

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  refer  to  a  matter  that  has  hitherto  been 
left  to  oral  representation  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  no  representation  at 
all,  save  such  as  originated  with  the  "  lying  tongue  of  rumour."    This  is, 

484  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

the  amount  of  influence  said  to  be  exerted  by  Spirits  upon  the  mind  of  the 
martyred  President,  Abraham  Lincoln,  in  issuing  the  famous  "  emancipa- 
tion proclamation,"  by  which  the  chains  of  that  slavery — so  disgraceful  to 
the  nation  in  which  it  was  practised — were  struck  from  the  necks  of  four 
millions  of  human  beings. 

The  narrative  in  substance  was  given  to  the  author,  together  with  the 
several  printed  extracts  quoted,  by  Colonel  Kase,  one  of  the  principal 
actors  in  the  scenes  which  follow.  It  should  be  stated,  that  Colonel  Kase 
is  a  noble-hearted,  philanthropic  gentleman,  whose  warmest  efforts  have 
ever  been  given  to  the  advancement  of  Spiritualism,  and  whose  residence 
in  Philadelphia  is  open  to  all  comers  who  plead  "  Spiritualism "  as  their 
claim  for  hospitality.  It  cannot  be  expected  but  that  this  munificent 
spirit  is  often  abused  by  the  unworthy.  Colonel  Kase  however,  as  well  as 
his  amiable  wife,  evidently  deems  that  it  is  "  better  to  be  the  wronged,  than 
the  wronger." 

Meantime,  to  return  to  Colonel  Kase's  part  in  the  famous  deed  which 
caused  the  whole  world  to  ring  with  blessings  on  the  name  of  Abraham 
Lincoln. 

It  was  during  the  progress  of  the  fatal  civil  war  which  raged  in  America 
from  [861  to  four  years  later,  that  Colonel  S.  P.  Kase,  of  Philadelphia, 
being  deeply  interested  in  railroad  undertakings,  was  compelled  to  visit  the 
Capitol  in  1862,  with  a  view  of  making  interest  in  Congress  in  favour  of 
some  of  his  enterprises.  Whilst  Colonel  Kase  was  one  day  strolling  in  the 
Capitol  grounds,  his  eyes  were  attracted  to  a  house  where  he  had  formerly 
boarded,  and  on  which  he  now  saw  the  sign  of  "  J.  B.  Conklin,  writing  and 
test  Medium."  Colonel  Kase  had  some  slight  knowledge  of  this  Medium, 
then  widely  celebrated  as  one  of  the  most  reliable  of  instruments  for  Spirit 
communications.  To  continue  the  narrative  in  the  Colonel's  own  language. 
He  says  : — 

"  Just  as  the  name  attracted  my  attention  I  heard  a  voice  at  my  right  side  say  :  '  60 
see  him  :  he  is  in  the  same  room  you  used  to  occupy.'  I  looked  to  see  who  spoke,  but  there 
was  no  human  being  within  a  hundred  yards  of  me.  The  question  passed  through  my 
mind — '  Who  knows  that  I  ever  occupied  a  room  in  this  house  ? '  Twelve  years  had 
passed  since  that  time.  An  indescribable  feehng  came  over  me  ;  I  seemed  rivetted  to  the 
spot.  It  was  only  the  work  of  a  moment.  However,  I  concluded  to  enter  the  building, 
and  upon  ascending  the  stairway,  passed  into  the  room  which  had  been  occupied  by  me  in 
1850,  and  here  Mr.  Conkling  sat,  just  having  finished  a  letter  to  President  Lincoln,  and 
which  he  was  enclosing  as  I  entered.  '  Here,  Mr.  Kase,'  said  Mr.  Conkling,  '  I  want  you 
to  take  this  letter  to  the  President ;  you  can  see  him,  but  1  can't.'  '  0,  sir/  I  replied  ; 
'  I  cannot  take  your  letter  ;  send  it  by  mail ;  I  have  just  arrived  in  this  city  and  am  not 
acquainted  with  the  President ;  besides,  I  am  here  on  important  business  and  must  be 
formally  introduced  to  him.  I  cannot  take  your  letter.'  Mr.  Conkling  said  :  '  You  must 
take  this  letter  ;  you  are  here  for  this  purpose  ;  i£  you  do  not  take  it  he  will  never  see 
it.'  At  this  moment  a  voice  again  said  to  me  :  '  Go  and  see  ivhat  will  come  of  this.'  This 
voice  seemed  just  behind  me.  I  was  startled,  dumbfounded  ;  I  stood  fixed  to  the  spot. 
Finally  I  said  :  '  Give  me  the  letter.'  '  Will  you  go  along  ? '  '  Yes  ;  but  I  can't  see 
him.'  'You  can,'  was  the  medium's  reply.  '  Well,  here's  an  omnibus  just  turning  ; 
we'll  get  in  that.'  The  sun  was  just  then  setting  behind  the  distant  hills.  We  arrived 
at  the  Presidential  mansion  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening  ;  rang  the  bell  ;  a  servant  appears. 
'  Is  the  President  in  ? '  '  Yes,'  was  the  reply,  'he  is  at  tea.'  '  Can  I  see  him  ? '  'What 
is  the  name  ? '  I  gave  him  my  name.  He  soon  returned,  saying,  '  The  President  will  see 
you  after  tea.  Step  up  iato  the  gentlemen's  parlour.'  Conkling  and  myself  seated  our- 
selves in  the  parlour  to  which  the  servant  had  directed  us.  Soon  after  the  servant 
appeared  at  the  door,  beckoning  me  forward,  and  opening  a  door  leading  to  the  President's 
room.  The  President  was  approaching  the  door  as  I  entered.  He  stopped,  somewhat 
disappointed,  and  stepped  back  one  or  two  steps  as  I  approached,  I  saying  to  him,  '  My 
name  is  S.  P.  Kase,  of  DanvUle,  Pa.'  '  The  President  expected  to  meet  S.  P.  Chase,  then 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,'  his  response  was,  'you  are  from  Pennsylvania,'  showing  me  to 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  485 

a  chair  upon  the  opposite  side  of  a  long  table.  He  took  a  seat  directly  opposite,  and  for 
some  time  drew  me  out  respecting  Pennsylvania.  I  told  him  that  I  lived  in  the  town 
where  the  first  anthracite  pig-iron  was  manufactured,  and  where  the  first  T  rail  was  made 
in  the  United  States.  And  for  a  full  half -hour  various  questions  pertaining  to  the  war 
and  the  prosperity  of  Pennsylvania  were  discussed,  when  I  handed  him  the  Conkling 
letter.  He  broke  it  open,  read  it,  and  seemed  a  little  surprised,  saying  ;  '  What  does  this 
mean  ? '  My  reply  was,  '  I  do  not  know  what  the  letter  contains,  but  I  have  no  doubt 
that  it  means  just  what  it  says.'  '  You  do  not  know,'  responded  the  President,  '  what 
this  letter  is,  and  yet  you  think  it  means  just  what  it  says  ?'  'Yes,  sir,  I  think  so,'  I 
replied.     '  Well,  then,'  said  the  President,  "  I  will  read  it  for  you.'     Here  is  the  letter  : 

"  '  I  have  been  sent  from  the  city  of  New  York  by  Spiritual  influence  pertaining  to  the 
interest  of  the  nation.     I  can't  return  until  I  see  you.     Appoint  the  time.    Yours,  etc., 

"  '  (Signed)  J.  B.  Conklinq.' 

" The  President  then  said,  '  What  do  you  know  about  Spiritualism  ? '  'I  know  very 
little,  but  what  I  do  know  you  are  welcome  to.'  '  Let  me  hear.'  I  then  rehearsed  my 
first  interview  in  New  York,  in  the  year  1858,  as  hereafter  stated." 

It  would  be  unnecessary  to  follow  Colonel  Kase's  narrative  which, 
though  sufficiently  interesting  to  be  worthy  of  recital,  has  been  doubtless 
duplicated  in  every  Spiritualistic  reader's  experience  many  times  over. 

It  must  be  observed  however,  that  although  the  President  of  the  United 
States  was  not  at  that  time,  and  is  not  now,  easily  accessible  to  strangers, 
there  were  special  circumstances  attending  Colonel  Kase's  visit,  which  were 
peculiarly  favourable  to  the  interview  in  question. 

In  the  first  place,  he  was  no  doubt  admitted  because  his  name  was  mis- 
taken for  that  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 

When  he  met  the  President  he  was  at  once  known  as  a  gentleman  of 
influential  position,  whose  connection  with  railroads — then  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  the  Government  in  the  transport  of  troops — secured  atten- 
tion for  whatever  he  might  have  to  say.  It  must  be  added,  that  no  stranger, 
however  high  his  position  may  be,  who  once  looks  into  the  kind  face  and 
clear  honest  eyes  of  Colonel  Kase,  can  treat  him  with  hauteur^  or  even 
indifference.  There  are  some  individuals  whose  very  presence  is  a  letter  of 
recommendation.  Such  an  one  is  Colonel  Kase,  and  as  such,  the  reader 
must  remember,  that  the  Spirits  full  well  understood  the  characteristics  of 
the  messenger  they  had  selected  to  do  their  work.  At  the  conclusion  of 
Colonel  Kase's  narrative  of  personal  experiences,  he  adds : — 

"  President  Lincoln  seemed  very  much  interested  and  said  :  '  Tell  Mr.  Conkling  that 
I  will  see  him  on  Sunday,  between  9  and  10  a.m.'  '  Oh,  no,'  was  my  reply  ;  '  write  him  a 
letter.'  '  Very  well,  I  will  write  him  a  letter,'  was  the  reply  of  the  President.  I  then 
said  I  thought  my  mission  was  ended — shook  hands,  and  left ;  called  for  Conkling  in 
the  gentlemen's  parlour,  and  we  returned  to  our  respective  lodgings." 

In  a  condensed  account  of  what  followed  this  interview,  the  editor  of 
the  Spiritual  Scientist  says  :— "For  four  succeeding  Sundays  Mr.  Conkhng 
was  a  guest  at  the  Presidential  mansion."  Mr.  Conkling  has  himself 
alleged  to  the  author,  that  the  Spirits  not  only  urged  the  subject  of  the 
emancipation  proclamation,  but  that  they,  in  the  name  of  the  Independence 
Fathers,  spelled  out,  letter  by  letter,  the  preliminary  draft  of  that  famous 
document.  The  result  of  these  interviews  was  the  President's  proposition 
to  his  Cabinet  to  issue  such  a  proclamation,  and  the  final  success  of  the 
stupendous  work,  as  recorded  in  the  national  archives  of  the  country.  The 
influence  exerted  by  the  celebrated  test  Medium  Conkling,  was  not  the  only 
one  brought  to  bear  upon  the  good  President,  as  the  following  incident 
will  show.  Again  we  give  it  in  the  simple  words  of  Colonel  Kase,  as 
narrated  to  the  editor  of  the  Spiritual  Scientist,  and  confirmed  through  his 
own  lips,  in  recent  interviews  with  the  author.     He  says : — 

486  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  Four  weeks  after  I  first  carried  the  Conkling  letter  to  President  Lincoln,  I  was  stand- 
ing in  the  gallery  of  the  House,  when  I  saw  an  old  lady  leave  her  seat  and  come  walking 
across  the  gallery  toward  me  ;  and  as  she  got  opposite  me  she  turned  and  handed  me  her 
card,  saying,  '  Call  when  it  suits  you,'  and  immediately  turned  and  went  back  to  her  seat. 
I  stood,  thinking  it  very  strange  that  a  lady  I  had  never  seen,  should  give  me  her  card  and 
tell  me  to  call.  In  looking  around  I  saw  Judge  Wattles,  and  immediately  inquired  of  him 
who  that  lady  was.  He  replied,  '  That  is  Mrs.  Laurie.'  '  And  who  is  Mrs.  Laurie  ? '  was 
my  quick  response.  '  She  gave  me  her  card  and  said  I  should  call.'  The  judge  replied, 
'  She  is  a  medium.  I  have  been  twice  to  her  house  ;  she  lives  in  Georgetown,  and  has  a 
daughter  who  plays  the  piano  with  her  eyes  closed,  and  the  piano  raises  up  and  beats  time 
on  the  floor  as  perfectly  as  the  time  is  kept  upon  the  instrument,  and  they  call  it 
Spiritualism.'  I  rephed  I  would  hke  to  witness  that  very  much.  '  Well,  you  have  a 
card  of  invitation,  if  you  wish  I  will  go  with  you  this  evening.' 

"  The  arrangement  being  perfected  we  went,  and  arrived  there  about  eight  o'clock  in 
the  evening.  Who  should  we  meet  there  but  President  Lincoln  and  his  lady.  After 
passing  the  courtesies  of  the  day,  perhaps  ten  minutes  intervening,  I  saw  a  young  girl 
approaching  the  President,  with  a  measured  step,  with  her  eyes  closed,  and  walking  up 
to  the  President,  accosted  him  as  follows  :  '  You,  sir,  as  President  of  the  Republic,  are 
called  to  the  position  you  occupy  for  a  very  important  purpose.  The  world  is  not  only 
groaning  under  the  weight  of  mental  and  spiritual  bondage,  but  four  millions,  made  in 
God's  image,  are  enduring  physical  slavery.  Their  yokes  must  be  broken,  the  fetters 
must  be  severed,  and  the  physically  enslaved  must  be  set  free,  before  your  nation  can  be 
restored  to  its  proper  station.  Freedom  was  germinally  planted  in  the  forest  lands  of  the 
West  in  Washington's  time,  and  is  now  about  to  bud  and  bear  precious  fruitage.  This 
Republic  has  heretofore  led  the  van  of  nations  in  its  line  of  free-thought,  but  the  dark 
plague-spot  of  slavery  stains  its  banner.  This  national  evil  must  be  removed.  There  is 
a  spiritual  congress  supervising  the  affairs  of  this  nation.  This  civil  war  will  never  cease ; 
the  shout  of  victory  will  never  ring  through  the  North,  will  never  reverberate  along  the 
valleys  of  the  South ;  the  oHve-branch  of  peace  will  never  wave  over  your  fields,  and 
lakes,  and  mountains,  till  you  issue  a  proclamation  of  freedom — a  proclamation  that 
shall  set  for  ever  free  the  enslaved  millions  of  your  distracted  country." 

These  were  only  the  opening  words  of  an  address  which  Colonel  Kase 
comments  on  in  the  following  terms : — 

"  This  being  her  text,  she  lectured  the  President  for  a  full  hour  and  a  half  upon  the 
importance  of  emancipating  the  slave,  saying  that  the  war  could  not  end  until  slavery 
was  abohshed  ;  that  God  destined  all  men  to  be  free,  that  they  may  rise  to  their  proper 
status.  Her  language  was  truly  sublime  and  full  of  arguments,  grand  in  the  extreme  ; 
that  from  the  time  his  proclamation  of  freedom  was  issued  there  would  be  no  reverses  to 
our  army.  As  soon  as  this  young  girl  (who  I  thought  could  not  be  out  of  her  teens,  but 
who  I  afterwards  understood  was  the  celebrated  trance  medium,  Nettie  Maynard,  of  New 
York  State)  came  out  of  the  trance,  she  ran  off,  frightened  to  think  that  she  had  been 
talking  to  the  President." 

Colonel  Kase's  description  of  what  followed  this  remarkable  speech  is 
too  naive  to  be  omitted.     He  says  : — 

"  Immediately  Mrs.  Miller  commenced  playing  the  piano,  and  the  front  side  of  it  com- 
menced to  beat  the  time,  by  raising  off  the  fioor  and  coming  down  with  a  heavy  thud.  I 
got  up  and  requested  the  privilege  of  sitting  on  it  that  I  might  verify  to  the  world  that 
it  moved.  Yes,  the  medium  says  :  '  You  and  as  many  more  as  see  proper  may  get  on  it.' 
Judge  Wattels,  the  two  soldiers  who  accompanied  the  President,  and  myself,  got  on  the 
instrument ;  the  medium  commenced  to  play,  the  instrument  commenced  to  go  vsdth  all 
our  weight  on  it,  raising  four  inches  at  least ;  it  was  too  rough  riding,  so  we  got  off  it, 
whilst  the  instrument  beat  the  time  until  the  tune  was  played  out.  This  brought  11 
o'clock  and  we  all  returned  to  our  respective  homes.  Two  evenings  after,  I  went  back  to 
Mrs.  Laurie's  and  again  I  met  the  President  and  his  lady  there.  Again  the  medium  was 
entranced  and  lectured  the  President  upon  the  same  subject,  for  a  full  hour  and  a  half, 
when  Mrs.  Miller  played  the  piano,  and  the  time  beat  as  before  described  in  the  presence 
of  the  President  and  his  lady  and  a  number  of  persons  who  were  in  attendance.  Thus  it 
was  that  President  Lincoln  was  convinced  as  to  the  course  he  should  pursue  ;  the  com- 
mand coming  from  that  all-seeing  angel  world,  was  not  to  be  overlooked  ;  so  like  a  faith- 
ful servant,  when  convinced  of  his  duty,  he  feared  not  to  do  it,  and  to  proclaim  freedom 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  487 

by  the  Emancipation  Proclamation  to  four  millions  of  slaves.  That  proclamation  was 
issued  on  September  22,  1862,  to  take  effect  the  First  day  of  January,  1863.  In  the 
intermediate  time  the  Union  army  had  in  divers  places  twenty-six  battles,  every  one  of 
them  was  a  success  upon  the  Union  side.  Thus  the  prediction  of  the  medium  waa 
verified." 

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  take  a  general  review  of  the  phenomenal 
facts  that  have  occurred  in  America  since  the  publication  of  the  work  so 
often  referred  to  as  the  history  of  the  first  twenty  years  of  the  movement. 
In  so  doing,  we  shall  step  aside  to  a  certain  extent  from  the  plan  of  con- 
fining our  notices  to  the  last  fifteen  years,  the  author  having  collected  a 
large  mass  of  material  for  the  compilation  of  a  second  volume  of  the 
American  Spiritual  History,  some  of  which  is  too  remarkable  to  be  con- 
signed to  obUvion,  even  though  it  may  be  out  of  the  chronological  order 
adopted  in  this  section  of  the  work.  The  first  narrative  seems  strangely 
enough  to  form  a  well-defined  corner  stone  for  uprearing  the  structure  of 
"Nineteenth  Century  SpirituaUsm,"  as  it  dates  back  to  the  year  1800,  and 
in  this  respect,  no  less  than  in  its  marvellous  character,  forms  the  basis  of 
a  distinct  epoch  in  the  history  of  what  has  been  called  "Supernaturalism." 

We  shall  give  the  narrative  with  some  excisions,  as  it  was  printed  by  the 
author  in  the  pages  of  the  Western  Star  magazine.    The  article  is  headed 

WONDERFUL  SPIRITUAL  MANIFESTATIONS  IN  MAINE  IN  THE  YEARS  l8oO-l8o6' 

One  of  the  most  extraordinary  manifestations  of  Spirit  communion  that 
is  to  be  found  on  authentic  record  occurring  in  America  prior  to  the  date 
of  the  Rochester  knockings,  took  place  in  the  year  1800,  in  the  State  of 
Maine,  and  a  general  account  is  given  of  it  in  a  pamphlet  written  by  the 
Rev.  Abraham  Cummings,  an  eye-witness  of  the  phenomena  he  describes. 
The  title  of  the  pamphlet  is  "  ImmortaUty  proved  by  the  Testimony  of 
Sense,"  etc.  The  publisher  adds  on  a  fly  leaf:  "Immortahty  proved  by 
phenomena  that  were  witnessed  by  hundreds  in  the  town  of  Sullivan, 
Maine,  in  the  year  1800.  Published  by  an  eye-witness,  the  Rev.  Abraham 
Cummings,  a  man  eminent  in  learning  and  piety ;  a  graduate  of  Harvard 
University." 

The  pamphlet,  which  is  a  series  of  letters,  arguments,  allusions  to  portions 
of  the  history  supposed  to  be  already  known  to  the  reader,  and  affidavits  of 
various  witnesses — contains  circumstantial  details  of  the  apparition  of  a 
Mrs.  Butler,  who  manifested  her  presence  to  hundreds  of  people  by 
rappings,  preternatural  lights,  singing,  speaking  with  an  audible  voice,  and 
frequent  appearances  in  her  own  as  well  as  other  forms. 

Besides  Mr.  Cumming's  pamphlet,  the  author  has  gathered  up  a  mass  of 
information  on  this  subject  from  various  publications  of  the  time,  as  well  as 
the  oral  testimony  of  several  persons  whose  nearest  relatives  were  residents 
in  Sullivan,  and  themselves  eye-witnesses  of  the  extraordinary  scenes  here 
related.  From  all  these  sources,  it  appears  that  a  certain  Captain  Butler, 
residing  near  Sullivan,  Maine,  married  Miss  Nelly  Hooper,  who,  ten  months 
after  her  marriage,  gave  birth  to  one  child,  and  passed  with  her  infant  into 
the  spirit  world.  Shortly  after  this  lady's  decease,  Captain  Butler  became  the 
accepted  lover  of  a  Miss  Blaisdell,  whose  father,  like  his  own,  was  violently 
opposed  to  the  match. 

In  this  state  of  things,  and  whilst  the  lovers  were  vainly  attempting  to 
soften  the  obduracy  of  their  parents,  the  spirit  of  Mrs.  Nelly  Butler  became 
an  active  participator  in  the  scene.     She  manifested  herself  in  the  various 

488  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

modes  before  described,  in  the  houses  of  Mr.  Blaisdell,  Mr.  Butler,  and  her 
own  father,  Mr.  Hooper.  She  appeared  to,  and  audibly  conversed  with  her 
mother  and  sisters;  urged  her  father  to  visit  Mr.  Butler,  with  a  view  of 
persuading  him  that  the  manifestations  that  now  began  to  astound  the  whole 
country,  were  not,  as  he  wilfully  persisted  in  asserting,  the  artful  contri- 
vance of  Miss  Blaisdell,  but  were  in  reality  produced  by  herself,  the  spirit 
of  his  daughter.  Her  father,  mother,  and  sisters,  became  so  entirely  con- 
vinced of  the  spirit's  identity  that  they  published  circumstantial  details  of 
her  visitation,  attested  by  their  solemn  affidavits.  One  of  the  purposes 
alleged  by  the  spirit  to  have  influenced  her  appearance,  was  to  procure  the 
consent  of  the  parents  to  the  marriage  of  her  late  husband  with  Miss 
Blaisdell.  To  the  latter  she  seemed  to  manifest  an  extraordinary  attach- 
ment, and  constantly  declared  that  the  union  was  destined  by  Heaven,  and 
should  take  place. 

It  appears  that  after  the  decease  of  Mrs.  Nelly  Butler,  strong  suspicions 
were  entertained  of  foul  play,  and  a  trial,  attended  with  circumstances  of 
much  suspicion  and  many  curious  allegations,  took  place,  to  ascertain  the 
manner  of  her  death.  The  "spectre"  herself,  as  the  phrase  went,  made 
several  communications  to  different  parties  on  the  subject,  and  the  general 
impression  which  prevailed  in  the  community  was,  that  the  frequent  appari- 
tion of  this  unresting  spirit  was  attributable  to  the  fact  that  her  Hfe  was  cut 
short  by  violence. 

As  the  immediate  descendants  of  the  three  families  involved  in  this  dark 
scandal  are  still  living,  and  reside  at  the  scene  of  the  hauntings,  we  do  not 
feel  justified  in  entering  into  any  further  details.  The  Rev.  Abraham 
Cummings  alludes  but  slightly  to  the  trial,  the  decision  of  the  grand  jury, 
and  the  persecutions  which  attended  the  various  members  of  the  families 
connected  with  the  entire  transactions. 

One  thing  is  certain  :  the  lapse  of  over  seventy  years  since  the  period  of 
these  strange  occurrences,  has  not  been  sufficient  to  erase  the  impression 
that  Mrs.  Nelly  Butler  was  murdered,  and  that  to  this  cause  was  attributable 
her  pertinacious  visitations  to  the  scene  of  her  earthly  wrongs. 

Mrs.  Butler's  spirit  often  walked  by  the  side  of  Miss  Blaisdell  in  the  light 
of  day,  and  the  full  sight  of  astonished  witnesses.  She  was  frequently  seen 
in  the  fields,  lanes,  and  woods,  besides  the  houses  which  she  frequented, 
where  she  would  pass  from  room  to  room,  and  when  the  inmates,  terrified 
by  her  apparition,  fled  from  the  apartment,  she  would  kindly  assure  them 
she  would  not  intrude  upon  their  presence,  but  meet  with  them  whenever 
they  wished  to  see  or  converse  with  her  in  the  cellars  of  their  dwellings. 
In  the  cellar  of  Mn  Blaisdell's  house  she  conversed  for  several  hours  on 
different  occasions  with  the  crowds  who  flocked  thither  to  witness  the 
manifestations.  Sometimes  she  appeared  to  a  number  of  persons  at  a  time, 
occasionally  in  the  likeness  of  her  former  self,  but  still  oftener  in  a  fleecy 
mass  of  white  shadowy  light.  When  the  parents  of  the  lovers,  awed  by  the 
preternatural  interference  of  this  wonderful  apparition,  finally  gave  their 
consent  to  the  union,  the  spirit  presented  herself  at  the  wedding  festivities, 
and  there  foretold  the  death  of  the  bride  within  ten  months,  together  with 
the  birth  and  death  of  one  child.  These  dark  predictions,  like  many  other 
of  her  prophecies,  proved  correct,  but  the  decease  of  the  second  Mrs.  Butler 
seems  to  have  had  no  effect  in  laying  the  spirit  of  her  predecessor.  From 
the  pertinacity  with  which  she  urged  on  the  marriage,  and  her  frequent 
appearance  in  the  house  and  about  the  person  of  Miss  Blaisdell,  suspicion 
had  attached  to  the  latter  as  having  simulated  the  phenomena   for   the 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  489 

purpose  of  effecting  a  union  with  Captain  Butler ;  but  when  it  was  found  that 
her  appearances  after  the  marriage  were  more  frequent  than  before,  whilst 
her  visitations  continued  with  equal  force  and  intensity  after  the  second 
Mrs.  Butler's  death,  this  hypothesis  became  untenable ;  neither  would  the 
facts  of  the  case  conform  with  the  assumption  that  Miss  Blaisdell's  medium- 
ship  was  essential  to  the  production  of  the  phenomena,  which  continued, 
as  we  have  stated,  long  after  her  decease. 

Mention  is  made  in  Mr.  Cumming's  pamphlet  of  a  singular  act,  enjoined 
in  the  most  solemn  manner  by  the  "  spectre,"  namely,  the  digging  up  and 
re-interment  of  her  child's  body,  which  she  desired  to  be  buried  in  a  different 
place.  At  the  re-interment,  which  caused  great  scandal  in  the  neighbourhood, 
the  spirit  attended  in  person,  singing  and  chanting  in  a  voice  which  was 
audible  to  over  eighty  people  who  were  present  at  the  ceremony.  She 
appears  to  have  been  very  piously  disposed,  singing  hymns,  quoting 
Scripture,  praying,  exhorting,  and  representing  herself  as  "  in  heaven,  with 
Jesus  and  the  angels."  Hundreds  of  witnesses  saw  and  heard  this  spirit, 
many  of  them  people  of  the  first  standing,  whose  veracity  and  candor  was 
unquestioned ;  notwithstanding  this,  the  three  families  chiefly  concerned 
became  the  subject  of  the  most  cruel  calumnies,  bitter  persecutions,  and 
finally  of  the  trial  above  alluded  to,  during  the  course  of  which  upwards  of 
forty  affidavits  were  given  by  some  of  the  most  respectable  persons  in  the 
community,  confirmatory  of  the  statements  above  alleged,  and  descriptive 
of  the  various  modes  in  which  the  "spectre"  had  manifested  herself  As 
the  Rev.  Abraham  Cummings  has  given  several  very  interesting  and  minute 
details  of  the  modes  in  which  the  ghostly  visitant's  presence  was  regarded, 
besides  having  published  in  full  the  affidavits  of  the  whole  forty  witnesses 
examined  on  the  trial,  we  shall  refer  our  readers  to  the  following  quotations 
from  this  pamphlet,  for  the  better  understanding  of  the  marvellous 
circumstances  narrated : — 

"  The  times,  places,  and  modes  of  her  appearing  were  various.  Sometimes  she  appeared 
to  one  alone,  sometimes  to  two  or  three,  then  to  five,  six,  ten,  or  twelve,  again  to  twenty, 
and  once  to  more  than  forty  witnesses.  She  appeared  in  several  apartments  of  Mr. 
Blaisdell's  house,  and  several  times  in  the  cellai-.  8he  also  appeared  at  other  houses,  and 
in  the  open  fields.  There,  white  as  the  light,  she  moved  like  a  cloud  above  the  ground  in 
personal  form  and  magnitude,  and  in  the  presence  of  more  than  forty  people.  She  tarried 
with  them  till  after  daylight,  and  vanished  ;  not  because  she  was  afraid  of  the  sun,  for 
she  had  then  several  times  appeared  when  the  sun  was  shining.  Once  in  particular,  when 
she  appeared  in  the  room  where  the  family  were,  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  day,  they  all 
left  the  house  ;  but  convinced  of  the  impropriety  of  their  conduct,  they  returned. 

"  At  another  time,  when  several  neighbours  were  at  the  house,  and  were  conversing  on 
these  remarkable  events,  a  young  lady  in  the  company  declared  that,  though  she  had 
heard  the  discourse  of  the  spectre,  she  would  never  believe  that  there  had  been  a  spectre 
among  us,  unless  she  could  see  her. 

"  In  a  few  minutes  after,  the  spectre  appeared  to  several  persons,  and  said  she  must 
come  into  the  room  where  the  company  was.  One  of  those  who  saw  her,  pleaded  that  she 
would  not.  The  spectre  then  asked,  '  Is  there  a  person  here  who  desires  to  see  me  ? ' 
The  young  lady  was  then  called,  who,  mth  several  others,  saw  the  spectre.  '  Here  I  am,' 
said  she,  '  satisfy  yourselves.'  The  lady  owned  that  she  was  satisfied.  It  was  now  about 
two  o'clock  in  the  day.  In  short,  the  ghost  appeared  or  conversed  almost  as  frequently 
in  the  day  as  in  the  night. 

"  In  all  the  appearances  of  the  spectre  she  was  as  white  as  the  light,  and  this  white- 
ness was  as  clear  and  visible  in  a  dark  cellar  and  dark  night,  as  when  she  appeared  in  the 
open  field  and  in  the  open  day.  At  a  certain  time,  August  9th,  she  informed  a  number 
of  people  that  she  meant  to  appear  before  them  (for  she  frequently  conversed  without 
appearing  at  all),  that  they  must  stand  in  order,  and  behave  in  a  solemn  manner  :  '  For 
the  Lord,'  said  she,  '  is  a  God  of  order.'  Accordingly  she  appeared  and  vanished  before 
them  several  times.  At  first  they  saw  a  small  body  of  light,  which  continually  increased 
till  it  formed  the  shape  and  magnitude  of  a  person. 

490  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  This  personal  shape  approached  so  near  to  Captain  Butler,  that  he  put  his  hand  upon 
it,  and  it  passed  down  through  the  apparition  as  throus;h  a  body  of  light,  in  the  view  of 
thirteen  persons,  who  all  saw  the  apparition,  which  rose  into  personal  form,  face  and 
features,  in  a  moment ;  returned  to  a  shapeless  mass,  resumed  her  personality,  and  vanished 
again  directly.  They  saw  that  which  was  not  afraid  to  be  handled  by  them,  for  she 
passed  slowly  by  them,  near  enough  for  that  purpose. 

"  As  to  the  witnesses,  not  one  of  them  has  ever  been  accused  or  even  suspected  of 
being  concerned  in  an  artifice.  Some  of  them  are  aged,  others  young.  They  had,  and 
still  have,  professions,  employments,  and  interests  widely  different,  and  belong  to  different 
families 

"  She  mentioned  several  incidents  of  her  past  life,  known  only  to  her  husband,  as  he 
declared,  and  asked  him  if  he  remembered  them.  He  said  yes.  She  asked  him  if  he  had 
told  them.  He  answered  no  ;  and  of  such  a  nature  were  those  incidents  as  to  render  it 
utterly  improbable  that  he  ever  should  have  mentioned  them  before.  This  was  at  the 
time  when  he  attempted  to  handle  the  apparition. 

"  Once,  when  she  conversed  with  about  fourteen  persons,  Mr.  Blaisdell,  having  heard 
that  his  father  was  sick,  asked  the  spectre  whether  she  knew  anything,  or  not,  concerning 
him.  'Your  father,'  she  replied,  'is  in  heaven,  praising  God  with  the  angels.'  He  after- 
wards found  that  his  father,  two  hundred  miles  distant,  died  three  days  before  this 
answer  of  the  ghost,  and  his  friends  at  York,  where  his  father  lived,  utterly  deny  that 
they  sent  the  news  in  the  course  of  these  days 

"  At  the  time  when  fifty  people  heard  her  discourse,  while  more  than  forty  saw  her, 
to  some  of  them — who  no  more  believed  these  extraordinary  events  than  mankind  now 
do  in  general — she  mentioned  several  occurrences  of  her  past  life,  known  to  them  and 
her,  in  order  to  satisfy  them  that  she  was  the  very  person  she  professed  to  be.  Almost 
all  this  company  had  been  acquainted  with  her  in  her  life-time,  and  a  considerable 
number  of  them  very  intimately.  She  desired  that  any  of  them  would  ask  what  ques- 
tions they  pleased,  for  the  removal  of  any  doubts  respecting  her.  Accordingly  certain 
persons  did  propose  several  questions  respecting  a  number  of  events  in  her  past  life.  To 
all  these  inquiries,  she  gave  completely  satisfactory  answers. 

"  She  foretold  what  the  opinion  and  conduct  of  mankind  would  be  with  regard  to  her, 
and  the  ill-treatment  which  Mr.  Blaisdell's  family  would  receive  on  her  account.  She  not 
only  declared  the  necessity,  but  foretold  the  certainty  of  the  marriage  at  an  hour  when 
both  the  parties  and  both  the  families  opposed  it. 

"Within  thirty  hours  after  Mrs.  Butler's  marriage,  the  spectre  predicted  that  she 
would  become  the  parent  of  but  one  child,  and  then  die.  Ten  mouths  after  this  her  child 
was  born,  and  ^he  died  the  next  day.  The  safe  return  of  one  bound  to  the  West  Indies 
was  also  foretold  and  accomplished. 

"  These  predictions  are  all  fulfilled,  and  were  previously  and  sufficiently  known  in  this 
vicinity  for  evidence  that  they  were  such.  She  uttered  several  other  predictions  now 
accomplished 

"Some  time  in  July,  1806,  in  the  evening,  I  was  informed  by  two  persons  that  they 
had  just  seen  the  spectre  in  the  field. 

"About  ten  minutes  after,  I  went  out,  not  to  see  a  miracle,  for  I  believed  that  they 
had  been  mistaken.  Looking  towards  an  eminence  twelve  rods  distant  from  the  house,  I 
saw  there,  as  I  supposed,  one  of  the  white  rocks.  This  confirmed  my  opinion  of  their 
spectre,  and  I  paid  no  more  attention  to  it.  Three  minutes  after,  I  accidentally  looked  in 
the  same  direction,  and  the  white  rock  was  in  the  air  ;  its  form  a  complete  globe,  white, 
with  a  tincture  of  red,  like  the  damask  rose,  and  its  diameter  about  two  feet. 

"  Fully  satisfied  that  this  was  nothing  ordinary,  I  went  toward  it  for  more  accurate 
examination. 

"  While  my  eye  was  constantly  upon  it,  I  went  on  four  or  five  steps,  when  it  came  to 
me  from  the  distance  of  eleven  rods,  as  quick  as  lightning,  and  instantly  assumed  a 
personal  form  with  a  female  dress,  but  did  not  appear  taller  than  a  girl  seven  years  old. 
While  I  looked  upon  her,  I  said  in  my  mind,  '  You  are  not  tall  enough  for  the  woman 
who  has  so  frequently  appeared  among  us.'  Immediately  she  grew  up  as  large  and  as  tall 
as  I  considered  that  woman  to  be.  Now  she  appeared  glorious.  On  her  head  was  the 
representation  of  the  sun  diffusing  the  luminous  rectilinear  rays  everywhere  to  the  ground. 
Through  the  rays  I  saw  the  personal  form,  and  the  woman's  dress.  Then  I  recollected 
the  objection  of  the  EncyclopsBdia,  that  'ghosts  always  appear  to  one  alone.'  Now,  said 
my  mind,  I  see  you  as  plainly  as  ever  I  saw  a  person  on  earth  ;  but  were  I  to  converse 
with  you  an  hour,  what  proof  could  I  produce  that  I  ever  conversed  with  you  at  all  ? 
This,  with  my  fear,  was  the  reason  why  I  did  not  speak  to  her.  But  my  fear  was  con- 
nected with  ineffable  pleasure. 

"  Life,  simplicity,  purity,  glory,  all  harmonizing  in  this  celestial  form,  had  the  most 
delightful  effect  on  my  mind.     And  there  appeared  such  a  dullness  afterwards  upon  all 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  491 

corporeal  objects  as  I  never  perceived  before.  I  went  into  the  honse  and  gave  the  in- 
formation, not  doubting  that  she  had  come  to  spend  some  time  with  us,  as  she  had  before. 
We  went  out  to  see  her  again ;  but  to  my  great  disappointment,  she  had  vanished.  Then 
I  saw  one  of  the  great  errors  of  my  life.  That  I  had  not  spoken  to  her,  has  been  the 
matter  of  my  regret  from  that  hour  to  this." 

"Some  time  in  March,  1806,  she  talked  a  few  minutes  without  appearing,  at  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  promised  to  come  again  that  day  ;  at  two  o'clock  she  per- 
formed her  promise,  and  talked  with  four  people  two  hours.  It  was  then  she  uttered 
these  words  :  'Though  my  body  is  consumed,  and  all  turned  to  dust,  my  soul  is  as  much 
alive  as  before  I  left  the  body.'  This  conversation  was  indeed  in  the  cellar,  but  the  place 
was  enlightened  with  her  radiance. 

"May  21st. — At  ten  o'clock,  she  appeared  to  two  persons,  and  sent  a  message  to 
another. 

"  May  25th. — Ten  o'clock.  Appeared  and  conversed  with  two  witnesses,  while  a  third 
person  heard  the  conversation  ;  and  revealed  that  by  which  the  same  was  proved  to 
others. 

"  May  26th. — She  appeared  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  talked  with  four 
persons  an  hour  and  a  half.  In  half  an  hour  after,  she  appeared  and  talked  with  the 
same  four  persons,  while  two  others  heard  a  voice,  without  knowing  what  was  said. 

"  May  27th. — Talked  with  two  persons,  and  promised  to  be  present  at  a  meeting  of 
about  twenty  people,  which  was  to  be  held  the  next  day  in  the  evening.  Accordingly  she 
appeared  at  this  meeting  to  persons  who  were  ignorant  of  the  promise.  The  assembly 
was  immediately  interrupted  by  the  declaration  that  'the  spirit  is  come.'  The  next 
evening  after,  she  conversed  with  a  couple  of  persons,  and  told  them  by  her  inimitable 
voice  to  whom  she  had  appeared.     .     .     . 

"Her  conversation  was  always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt,  very  affecting  and 
delightful. 

"August  13th. — At  ten  o'clock,  she  talked  with  three  persons  invisibly.  At  two 
o'clock  the  same  day,  she  appeared  and  talked  to  three  people  in  the  hearing  of  five 
other  persons." 

"Of  forty  depositions  and  affidavits  given  by  as  many  different  persons  in  reference  to 
this  remarkable  affair,  we  insert  the  following  as  specimens.  The  first  is  from  one  who 
appears  to  have  been  constitutionally  sceptical,  and  whose  very  circumstantial  testimony 
is  on  that  account  all  the  more  valuable. 

"TESTIMONY   OF   MISS   HANNAH   BATCOMB. 

"  August  9th,  10th. — I  was  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Blaisdell  by  the  persuasion  of  others  ; 
for  as  to  myself,  I  made  very  light  of  the  matter,  supposing  that  the  whole  was  the  con- 
trivance of  certain  persons. 

"  We  heard  rappings,  and  these  sounds  were  spoken  to,  but  no  answer  obtained.  After 
much  altercation  (which  is  needless  to  rehearse),  we  all  came  out  of  the  cellar,  and  all  went 
off,  except  a  few  persons,  of  whom  I  was  one.  Some  of  Mr.  Blaisdell's  family  uttered 
severe  expressions  against  those  vsho  went  off  and  did  not  believe.  '  What  do  you  want 
they  should  believe,'  said  I ;  '  for  my  part,  I  see  nothing  to  believe.'  Immediately  Mrs. 
Butler  came  in  from  the  entry,  very  much  afirighted.  '  If  any  one  desires  to  be  con- 
vinced,' said  she,  '  let  him  look  there  in  the  entry.'  I  looked  there  and  saw  nothing. 
Soon  after  this,  while  Mrs.  Butler  was  sitting  on  the  foot  of  a  bed,  we  heard  a  sound  right 
against  her  on  the  outside  of  the  house.  Mr.  Butler  told  her  to  speak  to  it.  At  first  she 
refused.  They  told  her  she  must.  Then  she  said  to  it,  '  If  I  am  guilty,  stay  away  ;  if  I 
am  clear,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  clear  me.'  The  spirit  then  rapped  very  hard,  so  as  to 
shake  the  house.  Some  of  the  company  said  she  must  go  into  the  cellar.  '  So  I  must,' 
said  she  ;  '  if  I  do  not,  she  will  come  into  the  room  ;  and  if  she  does,  I  shall  die.     W^o 

will  go  with  me  ?'      D A said  she  would  go.      They  went,  and  soon  after  we  all 

went  down.  Then  I  plainly  heard  the  voice  say  to  Mrs.  Butler,  '  Go  up,  that  the  people 
may  not  think  it  is  you  who  speak.'  I  saw  her  go  up  into  the  room,  and  heard  at  the 
same  time  the  voice  in  the  cellar.  Mr.  Blaisdell  asked  the  spirit  whence  she  came.  She 
answered,  '  I  am  from  heaven.  I  am  with  God  and  Christ,  angels  and  seraphim,  praising 
God.     Glory,  glory,  glory  ! ' 

"  Mr.  Blaisdell  asked  why  she  did  not  manifest  herself  in  the  forepart  of  that  night 
to  all  the  people.  She  answered,  "  I  was  not  permitted  to  come  where  there  was  so 
much  sin.' 

"  The  spirit  then  said  to  Mr.  Blaisdell,  '  Ask  the  people  if  they  are  convinced.' 

''  He  did  so  ;  and  I  among  the  rest  answered  that  I  was. 

492  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  Then  the  spirit  said,  '  I  must  appear  ; '  and  by  her  direction  we  placed  ourselves  in 
order.  Then  I  saw  a  white  appearance,  at  first  not  more  than  a  foot  in  height,  but  it 
appeared  larger  and  larger,  and  more  plainly  ;  and  when  it  came  nearer  to  me,  I  was  struck 
with  fear,  and  left  the  cellar  ;  but  others  told  me  that  afterwards  they  saw  the  spirit 
plainly. 

"August  13th,  14th. — I  again  went  to  Mr.  Blaisdell's  with  forty-seven  persons. 

"  The  spirit  now  told  us  again  that  she  was  from  heaven,  and  that  she  was  once  Nelly 
Hooper.  After  much  conversation,  the  spirit  said  that  some  of  the  "people  were  faint, 
and  could  not  hear  all  that  was  to  be  said,  and  that  we  must  go  up  and  refresh  ourselves. 

"  '  You  must  go  with  me  to  two  places  this  night,'  said  she,  '  and  you  must  be  ready 
at  one  o'clock.' 

'' '  What  o'clock  is  it  now  ? '  said  Mr.  Blaisdell. 

"  She  said,  '  Twelve,  twelve,  twelve  ! ' 

"  We  went  up  immediately  and  looked  on  the  watch,  and  it  was  exactly  twelve. 

"  In  a  short  time,  hearing  the  usual  sign,  we  returned.  Among  many  other  words 
which  I  do  not  remember,  Mr.  Downing  asked  the  spirit  if  she  knew  him  ;  she  answered, 
*  Yes,'  and  called  him  by  name.  He  asked  her  if  she  was  ever  at  his  house.  She  answered 
that  she  had  been  once  there  with  her  mother.  At  length  she  told  us  that  we  must  go 
up,  and  she  would  walk  with  us  behind,  with  Mrs.  Butler.  '  But  you  must  walk  in 
order,  two  and  two,'  said  she,  '  singing  a  psalm  ;  for  God  is  a  God  of  order.'  Some 
person  asked  when  she  would  be  ready.     She  said,  '  I  will  let  you  know.' 

'■  Some  person  again  asked  what  o'clock  it  was.  She  answered  one.  We  went  up  and 
again  looked  on  the  watch,  and  it  was  one.  We  attended  prayer,  and  immediately  after 
she  knocked.  A  psalm  was  chosen,  which  the  greatest  number  of  us  could  best  remember, 
and  it  was  sung  as  we  walked.  I  was  now  far  forward,  and  did  not  see  the  spirit.  When 
we  came  to  Captain  Millar's  the  spirit  rapi^ed  there,  and  Captain  Millar,  with  Captain 
Paul  Blaisdell,  and  some  others,  went  into  the  cellar,  and  I  heard  them  talk,  but  could 
not  understand  what  was  said  to  them.  Then  word  came  to  us  that  we  must  stand  out  in 
the  field  before  the  house — that  she  would  appear  before  us,  and  walk  with  Mrs.  Butler, 
that  the  people  might  be  convinced  that  Mrs.  Butler  had  told  the  truth  in  relating  that 
she  had  walked  with  her  before.  Then  we  all  stood  before  the  house.  Mrs.  Butler  put 
on  a  black  cloak,  and  when  she  had  walked  a  little  distance  from  us,  as  before  directed 
by  the  spirit,  I  heard  her  groan  bitterly,  and  soon  after  I  saw  the  appearance  of  a  woman 
in  white  walking  with  her.  Suddenly  Mrs.  Butler  sung  a  part  of  that  hymn  called  '  New 
Jerusalem.'  Then  she  came  to  us,  and  we  all  went  back  in  order  to  Mr.  Blaisdell's.  I 
then  looked  back  and  saw  a  person  in  white,  walking  with  Mrs.  Butler.  After  we 
returned  to  the  house,  Mrs.  Butler  ajjpeared  very  weary  and  exhausted. 

"  I  asked  her  at  what  time  the  spirit  came  to  her.  She  told  me  it  was  after  she  had 
walked  a  little  distance  from  the  people.  '  When  you  heard  me  groan,'  said  she,  '  then  I 
saw  it  coming  towards  me  ;  I  am  always  more  afraid  when  I  only  see  it  than  I  am  after 
it  has  spoken  to  me  ;  and  she  then  told  me  not  to  be  scared,  that  she  was  not  come  to 
hurt  me,  and  that  if  I  would  sing  a  hymn  it  would  expel  my  fears.' 

"  The  following  is  the  testimony  of  Captain  Millar,  whose  house  was  the  scene  of  the 
remarkable  visitation  above  mentioned  : — 

"testimony   of   captain   JAMES   MILLAB. 

"  August  7th. — Mr.  Blaisdell  came  to  my  house,  and  desired  me  to  go  to  his  own, 
where  I  might  hear  and  see  for  myself.     He  also  went  to  Capt.  Samuel  Simson's  with  the 

same  request.     Capt.  Simson  and  his  wife,  S B ,  and  N G ,  who  were 

there,  came  with  him  to  my  house,  and  we  all  went  to  Mr.  Blaisdell's.  When  we  had 
been  there  some  minutes,  Capt.  Simson,  by  desire,  prayed.  His  prayer  was  immediately 
followed  by  a  knocking,  and  we  all  went  into  the  cellar.  Mr.  Blaisdell  asked  what  was 
wanted,  and  who  it  was.  It  answered,  '  I  was  once  Nelly  Hooper.'  I  asked,  '  How  was 
man  made  ?'  '  Out  of  the  dust,'  said  the  voice  ;  '  dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou 
return.  You  have  the  Bible,  and  that  is  God's  truth,  and  do  you  abide  by  it.  Love  God, 
and  keep  His  commandments.'  After  some  conversation  with  Mrs.  Simson  and  others, 
she  said,  '  I  must  go,'  and  we  heard  no  more.  It  was  now  broad  daylight,  the  outer 
cellar  door  being  open,  and  utterly  impossible  that  any  living  person  should  be  there  but 
those  whom  we  could  see  and  know.     The  voice  was  about  six  feet  from  me. 

"  August  9th. — I  went  to  that  house  with  many  people,  among  whom  I  observed  much 
disorderly  behaviour.  The  spirit  spoke  but  little,  and  I  returned  with  a  resolution  to  go 
no  more  to  that  house  on  such  an  errand. 

"  August  14th.— Just  before  daylight,  I  heard  singing  as  I  lay  in  bed,  approaching  to 
my  house.  Presently,  by  my  leave,  my  house  was  filled  with  people,  and  I  heard  knock- 
ings  on  the  floor.     By  the  desire  of  certain  persons,  I  went  into  the  cellar  with  Capt. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  493 

Paul  Blaisdell.  After  some  discourse  of  the  voice  with  him,  which  I  understood  not,  I 
heard  sounds  of  knocking  near  me.  I  asked,  '  What  do  you  want  of  me  ?'  It  answered, 
'  I  have  come  to  let  you  know  that  I  can  speak  in  this  cellar  as  well  as  in  the  other.  Are 
you  convinced  ?'  I  answered,  '  I  am.'  '  Now,'  said  the  voice,  '  the  company  must  be 
solemn,  and  stand  in  order  before  your  door  ;  I  am  going  to  appear.  Now,  do  you 
remember  that  I  was  once  Nelly  Hooper  ?'  We  went  up,  and  complied  with  her  direction, 
and  I  saw  a  personal  shape  coming  towards  us,  white  as  the  light.  By  the  spectre's  order, 
as  I  was  informed,  Mrs.  Butler  went  towards  her,  '  Lydia,'  said  the  spectre,  '  you  are 
scared,  you  must  sing.'  Then  she  sung  a  hymn.  The  spirit  came  almost  to  us,  then 
turned,  and  Mrs.  Butler  with  her,  and  went  several  rods  towards  Capt.  Simson's,  and 
appeared  to  take  her  by  the  hand,  to  urge  her  on  further,  and  disappeared  in  our  sight. 
Mrs.  Butler  returned,  and  informed  the  company,  as  I  was  told,  that  if  they  would  walk 
to  Mr.  Blaisdell's  solemnly,  as  to  a  funeral,  the  spirit  would  walk  with  Mrs.  Butler, 
behind  them.     The  company  did  so.     But  I,  being  far  forward,  saw  nothing. 

"James  Millar." 
testimony  of  mrs.  mart  jordan. 

"  On  the  4th  of  August,  1800,  about  two  hours  before  daylight,  while  I  slept  at  Mr. 
Blaisdell's  house,  I  was  awaked  by  the  sound  of  knocking.  I  got  up,  and  with  about 
twenty  others  went  into  the  cellar.  There  I  heard  a  voice  speaking  to  us,  as  I  never 
heard  before  nor  since.     It  was  shrill,  but  very  mild  and  pleasant. 

"  Mr.  Blaisdell,  addressing  the  voice,  said  that  several  persons  (of  whom  I  was  one) 
had  come  from  a  distance  to  obtain  satisfaction,  and  desired  that  she  would  tell  us  who 
she  was,  and  the  design  of  her  coming.' 

"  She  answered  that  she  was  once  Nelly  Hooper,  and  after  she  was  married  became 
Nelly  Butler. 

"  After  much  conversation  of  a  religious  nature,  she  appeared  to  us.  At  first  the 
apparition  was  a  mere  mass  of  light  ;  then  it  grew  into  a  personal  form,  about  as  tall  as 
myself.  We  stood  in  two  ranks,  about  four  feet  apart.  Between  these  ranks  she  slowly 
passed  and  repassed,  so  that  any  of  us  could  have  handled  her.  When  she  passed  by 
me,  she  was  so  near  that  if  she  liad  been  a  substance  I  should  certainly  have  felt  it.  The 
apparition  had  a  constant  tremulous  motion.  At  last  the  personal  form  became  shapeless, 
expanded  every  way,  and  vanished  in  a  moment. 

"  Nothing  more  being  now  seen  or  heard,  we  were  moving  to  go  up,  when  the  voice 
desired  us  to  tarry  longer. 

"  We  did  so,  and  the  spirit  talked  with  us  another  hour,  even  till  broad  daylight.  She 
mentioned  to  us  the  ill-treatment  which  Mr.  Blaisdell's  family  had  suffered  by  reproach 
and  false  accusation,  and  told  us  they  Wbuld  on  her  account  be  yet  more  despised  and 
ridiculed. 

"  Her  discourse  concluded  by  a  solemn  exhortation.  After  speaking  much  more  that  I 
cannot  remember,  she  sang  praises,  and  left  us.  Her  notes  were  very  pleasant.  Her 
words  were  no  higher  than  common,  yet  they  were  exceedingly  impressive. 

"  Mary  Jordan." 

"  testimony  op  mrs.  wentworth  (sister  op  the  apparition). 

"On  the  2nd  of  January,  1800,  Hannah  Blaisdell  came  to  Mr.  Butler's  house,  and 
informed  me  that  the  extraordinary  voice  which  they  had  heard,  had  declared  itself  to  be 
that  of  my  sister,  and  that  I  must  go  to  her  father's  house. 

"  I  replied  to  her  face  that  I  did  not  beUeve  it.  The  next  day  I  received  the  same 
message  from  three  other  persons  of  other  families,  to  whom  I  returned  the  same  answer. 

"  Nevertheless,  I  was  at  last  persuaded,  and  accompanied  Capt.  Butler  and  my  husband 
to  Mr.  Blaisdell's  house.  Capt.  Butler  and  I  examined  the  cellar  with  a  candle.  Capt. 
Simson  and  some  other.s  went  with  us. 

"  I  held  Lydia  (Mrs.  Butler)  by  the  arm,  when  we  heard  a  loud  knocking,  and  the 
sound  of  a  voice  which  brought  fresh  to  my  mind  my  sister's  voice. 

"  This  voice  spoke  several  sentences,  which  were  such  as  my  sister  used  to  utter,  and 
from  this  time  I  cleared  Lydia  of  the  voice,  and  accused  the  devil. 

"  August  8th. — Was  there  again  with  about  thirty  others,  and  heard  much  conversation. 
The  voice  was  still  hoarse  and  thick,  like  that  of  my  sister  on  her  deathbed,  but  more 
hollow.     Sometimes  it  was  clear  and  pleasant. 

"  August  14th. — I  heard  the  same  voice  in  the  same  place,  and  did  then  believe  it  was 
my  sister.  She  talked  much  with  Capt.  Simson,  and  exhorted  the  people.  I  heard  a 
private  conversation  which  I  had  with  my  sister  in  her  life-time,  and  which  I  had  never 
repeated  to  any  one.  We  were  alone  together  ;  but  may  it  not  have  been  overheard  by 
some  evil  spirit  who  now  personates  my  sister  ?    I  know  of  no  reason  for  her  coming. 

"Sally  Wentwobth," 

494  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  TESTIMONY   OP   MR.    JAMES   SPRINGER. 

"August  13th,  1800. — After  much  conversation  with  the  spectre,  she  told  us  that  she 
must  talk  and  appear  at  the  house  of  Capt.  MiUar,  because  he  had  reported  that  she 
could  not  be  anywhere  but  at  Mr.  Blaisdell's  house.  '  And  Lydia  must  walk  with  me,' 
she  said,  '  that  you  may  all  see  that  she  is  one  person,  and  I  another.' 

"  We  walked  in  order,  two  and  two,  to  the  house,  and  I  saw  the  spirit  appear  and  dis- 
appear several  times. 

"  Whilst  we  were  at  Capt.  Millar's  house,  we  stood  in  the  field,  whilst  Mrs.  Butler,  in 
great  fear,  walked  with  the  spirit,  before  our  eyes,  a  few  rods  towards  Mr.  Simson's. 

"  Then  Mrs.  Butler  came  to  us  and  said  we  must  return  to  her  father's  house,  two  and 
two,  singing  a  hymn,  and  she  and  the  spectre  would  walk  with  us.  We  did  so.  Mr.  Paul 
Simson  and  I  walked  behind,  if  possible  to  see  the  apparition.  When  we  had  walked 
about  fifteen  rods,  I  saw  a  white  appearance  to  the  left  hand.  As  we  passed  it,  it  fell 
into  rank,  and  walked  with  Mrs.  Butler.  Mr.  Downing  and  I  turned  and  looked  upon 
them,  and  heard  them  talk.  We  kept  walking  on,  then  stopping  to  look  at  them,  all  the 
way.  We  heard  them  speaking  all  the  time,  but  in  a  low  voice.  The  spirit  appeared  in 
a  jiersonal  form,  with  arms  locked,  as  white  as  snow,  and  about  as  tall  as  Mrs.  Butler. 

"  Soon  after  daybreak  I  saw  it  plainly  vanish.  "James  Springer." 

Most  of  the  affidavits  are  to  the  same  effect  as  the  above.  Many  of 
them  state  that  the  spirit  often  appeared,  bearing  a  very  small  child  in  her 
arms.  That  the  particles  of  luminous  matter  that  seemed  to  compose  her 
were  tremulous,  in  constant  motion,  presented  no  resistance  to  the  touch, 
and  were  always  white  and  shining. 

All  the  witnesses  saw  her  with  more  or  less  distinctness,  and  all  heard 
her  voice,  and  bore  testimony  to  its  remarkable  shrillness,  and  "  inimitable  " 
peculiarity. 

Mr.  Cummings'  pamphlet  concludes  with  the  following  summary  of  the 
manifestations. 

"  At  first,  the  terror  of  the  persons  who  beheld  her  was  excited  by  the  idea  of  be- 
holding a  '  ghost,'  yet  after  a  little  discourse  with  her,  their  fears  were  entirely  dissipated, 
and  succeeded  by  a  singular  pleasure,  so  delightful  was  the  mode  of  her  address  and 
conversation 

"  The  spirit  was  always  extremely  disposed  to  piety  ;  sang  hymns,  uttered  prayers, 
exhorted,  quoted  Scripture,  and  joined  with  her  wonderfully  sweet  but  indescribable 
voice  in  the  singing  of  hymns  with  others. 

"  This  same  voice,  though  inimitable,  most  nearly  resembled  her  own  as  she  was 
remembered  when  she  lay  dying. 

"  This  apparition  impressed  all  witnesses  with  feelings  of  pleasure  and  reverence, 
except  in  rare  instances,  one  of  which  occurred  at  that  assembly  held  in  the  cellar  on  the 
night  of  August  9th,  when,  as  I  have  said,  there  were  gathered  some  of  the  best  of  people, 
who  conducted  themselves  with  order  and  reverence  ;  but  others  there  were,  who  uttered 
such  profanity  and  derision  as  rendered  them  unworthy  to  obtain  conviction  ;  and  there- 
by, as  the  spirit  afterwards  declared,  she  could  not  manifest  herself  amongst  them,  so 
that  save  some  knockings  and  a  few  sentences  spoken,  no  tokens  of  her  presence  could  be 
given. 

"  The  spectre  gave  a  number  of  extraordinary  messages,  of  which  the  marriage  was  but 
one,  and  that  a  subordinate  one  to  other  ends  of  far  superior  magnitude  and  importance. 

"  These  superior  ends  you  will  know  hereafter,  but  they  cannot,  they  must  not  be 
written " 

No  doubt  can  exist  that  if  the  parties  interested  in  these  strange  pheno- 
mena could  have  considered  and  investigated  them  with  the  same  practised 
coolness  that  characterizes  the  visitors  of  our  modern  spirit  circles,  most 
valuable  and  important  views  of  spirit  life,  its  laws  and  conditions,  might 
have  been  gathered  from  such  unusual  opportunities  for  the  enquiry ;  but 
amidst  the  fear,  ignorance,  and  superstition  which  have  for  centuries 
obscured  man's  views  of  spiritual  existence,  it  was  next  to  impossible  that 
even  one  risen  from  the  dead  should  be  able  to  bring  conclusive  evidence 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  495 

of  her  presence,  or  inform  the  prejudiced  and  bigoted  concerning  the  true 
conditions  of  spirit  life. 

StilL,  the  details  of  this  remarkable  case  are  too  circumstantial  and  well 
attested  to  leave  room  for  doubt  concerning  its  main  facts,  and  they 
unquestionably  form  one  of  the  most  singular  and  authentic  evidences  of 
direct  spirit  communion  that  the  annals  of  history  can  furnish  in  America, 
prior  to  the  great  outpouring  from  which  the  modern  movement  of 
Spiritualism  dates  in  1848. 

CHAPTER    LVIL 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     AMERICA      (CONTINUED). 

Further  Accounts  of  Early  Manifestations  in  the  Nineteenth  Century, 

The  following  case  though  well  known,  and  frequently  cited  in  the 
literature  of  Supernaturalism,  may  not  be  deemed — in  a  condensed  form — 
out  of  place  in  this  record  : — 

"  A   TRANCE    SPEAKER. 

"In  1811,  'Miss  Rachel  Baker,  the  Sleeping  Preacher,'  recorded  at  the  time  as  'a 
remarkable  case  of  Devotional  Soinnism,'  attracted  much  attention.  While  sitting  in  a 
chair,  apparently  iisleep,  she  began  to  sigh  and  groan,  as  if  in  excessive  pain.  She  talked 
incoherently.  These  conditions  came  at  brief  intervals  for  two  months.  The  talking 
then  became  understandable.  The  account  says  :  '  Her  body  is  as  motionless  as  a  statue. 
The  only  motion  the  spectator  perceives  is  that  of  her  organs  of  speech.  She  commences 
and  ends  with  an  address  to  the  throne  of  grace,  consisting  of  proper  topics  of  acknow- 
ledgment, submission,  and  reverence ;  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  and  of  prayer  for 
herself,  her  friends,  the  church,  the  nation,  for  enemies,  and  the  human  race  in  general. 
Between  these  is  her  sermon  or  exhortation.  She  begins  without  a  text,  and  proceeds 
with  an  even  course  to  the  end  ;  embellishing  it  sometimes  with  fine  metaphors,  vivid 
descriptions,  and  poetical  quotations.'  These  'fits,'  as  the  entrancements  were  then 
termed,  occurred  always  at  night.  They  each  continued  from  thirty-five  to  ninety-eight 
minutes.  At  the  close  of  the  address  follows  '  a  state  of  body,'  continues  the  account, 
'  like  groaning,  sobbing,  or  moaning  ;  and  the  distressful  sound  continues  from  two  minutes 
to  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  This  agitation,  however,  does  not  wake  her  ;  it  gradually  sub- 
sides, and  she  passes  into  a  sound  and  natural  sleep,  which  continues  during  the  remainder 
of  the  night.  In  the  morning  she  wakes  as  if  nothing  had  happened,  and  entirely  ignorant 
of  the  scenes  in  which  she  has  acted.  She  declares  she  knows  nothing  of  the  nightly 
exercises,  except  from  the  information  of  others.'  But  they  did  not  look  upon  these 
things  in  those  days  as  they  do  in  our  own  more  enlightened  time.  Every  conceivable 
form  of  medical  treatment  failed  to  '  cure '  her,  until,  in  1816,  Dr.  Sears  of  New  York 
drugged  her  so  completely  with  opium  that  he  put  a  stop  to  her  power  to  pray,  preach, 
and  exhort." 

The  voucher  for  the  next  narrative  being  "  the  Rev.  Giles  B.  Stebbins," 
a  name  recognized  by  American  Spiritualists  as  a  synonym  for  judgment 
and  acumen,  as  well  as  the  strictest  integrity,  needs  no  other  introduction 
than  Mr.  Stebbins's  own  words.     Writing  to  the  Detroit  Fosf  he  says : — 

"  The  following  narrative  of  a  wonderful  experience  I  noted  down  carefully  when  it 
was  related  to  me  by  Henry  Willis,  of  Battle  Creek,  whom  I  have  known  for  years  as  a 
man  of  integrity,  uncommon  energy  in  business,  clear  intellect,  strong  nerve,  and  fine 
physical  health.  He  came  from  Pennsylvania  to  oversee  the  building  of  the  Michigan 
Oentral  Railroad,  has  been  well  known  in  this  region   since,   enjoys  good  health  at 

496  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

seventy  years  of  age,  as  a  result  of  his  Quaker  temperance,  and  has  a  fair  competence, 
which  might  have  been  much  larger  had  not  his  hospitality  and  pubUc  spirit  been  gener- 
ous and  active.  The  reference  to  well-known  residents  of  this  city  makes  this  narrative 
of  additional  interest.  M.  W.  Baldwin  was  the  first  locomotive  builder  in  America,  and 
gave  name  to  the  great  locomotive  works  of  Baldwin  and  Co.,  in  Philadelphia.  He  was 
an  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Willis  all  his  life,  connected  with  him  in  business,  and  on  cordial 
and  familiar  terms.  I  give  the  words  of  Henry  "Willis  as  given  to  me  by  himself.  He 
has  seldom  told  this  strange  story,  and  could  only  be  induced  to  allow  its  publicity  as  a 
possible  help  to  psychological  and  spiritual  research.     He  said  : 

"  '  In  July,  1838,  M.  W.  Baldwin,  of  Philadelphia,  Penn.,  came  with  me  to  Detroit, 
intending  to  start  a  branch  locomotive  shop  on  Cass  wharf.  We  remained  nearly  three 
weeks  in  Detroit  altogether.  I  was  at  that  time  engaged  to  build  a  railroad  from  Kala- 
manzoo  to  Allegan.  I  think  it  was  on  a  Thursday  morning  I  left  my  friend  Baldwin  for 
Allegan  ;  he  was  to  leave  by  a  steamboat  at  ten  o'clock  of  the  same  day  for  his  home.  As 
I  passed  through  Marshall  on  Friday,  Ketchum  requested  me  to  go  to  Sandusky,  Ohio, 
and  purchase  provisions  for  our  railroad  men,  as  there  were  none  to  be  had  on  our  route, 
the  country  being  new.  I  came  on  and  stopped  at  Battle  Creek  to  visit.  On  Saturday 
and  Sunday  I  became  very  uneasy.  I  was  frequently  asked  if  I  was  unwell.  My  mind 
was  much  depressed,  but  I  bore  up  and  endeavoured  to  be  cheerful,  and  after  meeting  left 
for  Sandusky  in  company  with  friends  living  near  Adrian.  At  Tecumseh  I  stopped  to 
take  the  stage,  and  paid  my  fare  to  Sandusky.  The  stage  drove  up  within  fifteen  or 
twenty  feet  of  the  door  of  the  hotel.  I  handed  the  driver  my  carpet-bag  ;  and  as  I  put 
my  foot  on  the  step  to  get  in  I  felt  a  heavy  blow  on  the  back  of  my  neck,  and  the  words, 
"  Go  to  Detroit  "  were  as  audibly,  but  inwardly,  heard  as  I  ever  heard  anything.  I  turned 
to  see  who  struck  me.  No  one  except  the  driver  before  me,  was  nearer  than  the  hotel, 
twenty  feet  off.  I  stood  astonished,  and  passengers  and  driver  shouted,  "  Why  don't  you 
get  aboard  ? "  I  said,  "  Driver,  h^ind  me  my  bag."  I  took  it,  went  to  the  hotel,  and  asked 
the  landlord  who  it  was  that  struck  me  on  the  back  of  my  neck.  "I  saw  you,"  said  he, 
"  give  a  bound  as  you  put  your  foot  on  the  step,  but  no  one  struck  you,  I  know,  for  I  was 
looking  directly  at  you.  What  is  the  matter  ?  "  he  asked.  "  I  must  go  to  Detroit,"  I  said, 
"and  cannot  imagine  why,  or  for  what.  I  have  no  business  there."  The  Chicago  stage 
drove  up  in  a  moment  or  two.  I  mounted  the  seat  with  the  driver,  handed  him  fifty 
cents  to  drive  as  fast  as  he  could.  I  repeated  it  with  the  next  diiver.  I  felt  as  though  I 
wanted  to  fly,  so  anxious  was  I  to  reach  the  station.  As  we  turned  out  of  Main  Street  I 
saw  an  engine  on  the  track.  The  engineer  said  to  the  fireman,  as  I  afterwards  learned, 
"  Let  us  go  ;  we  can't  find  Willis."  The  fireman  looked  around,  saw  the  stage,  and  said  : 
"  Stop  ;  Willis  must  be  in  that  stage."  He  jumped  down,  ran  and  met  us  some  300  feet 
off.  I  knew  him  and  said  :  "  Why,  Jack,  what  on  earth  is  the  matter  ? "  and  he  answered  : 
"  Baldwin  fell  down  sick  in  the  hotel  two  or  three  hours  after  you  left  last  Thursday. 
His  great  wish  has  been  to  have  you  with  him.  We  have  been  out  for  days  to  try  and 
find  you.  This  morning  when  we  left  it  was  doubtful  if  he  lived  till  night."  We  went 
to  Detroit  as  fast  as  the  engine  could  go.  I  ran  to  the  hotel,  and  as  1  reached  the  head 
of  the  stairs  the  landlord  and  wife,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wales,  Dr.  Hurd,  and  five  or  six  of  the 
servants  were  at  the  door.  Dr.  Hurd  said,  "  He  is  gone."  I  pushed  into  the  room,  threw 
off  my  coat,  and  applied  my  hands  over  his  head  and  down  the  sides  of  his  face  and  neck 
as  vigorously  as  I  could  for  some  five  or  six  minutes,  when  he  spoke  :  "  Henry,  where  have 
you  been  ?  where  have  I  been  ?  Oh,  how  much  I  have  wanted  you  with  me  !  "  Dr.  Hurd 
said,  "  Well,  if  that  is  not  bringing  a  man  to  life,  what  is  ? "  This  action  of  mine,  like 
magnetizing,  I  cannot  account  for.  I  never  did  it  before  or  ever  saw  it  done.  He  was  in 
a  trance  or  spasm,  but  not  dead.  Dr.  Hurd  told  me  his  symptons  were  those  of  a  dying 
man.  I  remained  seven  weeks  with  him,  never  sleeping  in  all  that  time  on  a  bed,  except  about 
four  or  five  hours  when  0.  C.  Trowbridge  and  Augustus  Porter  relieved  me.  I  took  him 
home  on  a  cot  to  his  family  in  Philadelphia,  he  not  having  been  able  to  sit  up  for  some 
eight  or  nine  weeks.  I  think  it  was  in  1844  or  1845  I  was  at  work  in  my  nursery  of  fruit 
trees,  at  Battle  Creek,  with  my  mind  then,  as  it  often  had  been,  on  this  strange  and  to  me 
unaccountable  matter — how  I  was  some  sixty  miles  from  Detroit,  going  directly  away  to 
the  South,  and  on  important  business ;  and  why  I  should  have  changed  my  course,  and 
a  voice  said  to  me  :  "  The  spirit  of  Baldwin's  father  was  after  you  to  go  and  save  his  son 
and  take  him  to  his  family."  Down  to  this  time  I  had  never  told  a  living  being  about 
this  singular  affair,  not  even  Baldwin  himself.  From  the  moment  that  I  was  thus  notified 
in  my  nursery  why  I  went  to  Detroit,  I  ceased  to  wonder,  and  was,  and  still  am,  convinced 
that  there  was  an  invisible  power  that  followed  me  from  the  time  I  arrived  at  Battle 
Creek  until  I  took  Baldwin  to  his  home.' 

"  Any  comments  on  these  remarkable  facts  would  be  superfluous.  They  give,  surely, 
abundant  food  for  thought. 

"  Detroit,  March  27,  1877.  "  G,  B,  Stebbins," 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  497 

Whilst  making  collections  of  narratives  in  New  York  city  some  years  ago, 
the  author  was  favoured  with  the  receipt  of  the  following  account,  furnished 
by  a  gentleman  of  the  strictest  veracity  and  a  man  "  whose  word  has  been 
as  good  as  his  bond,"  for  over  half  a  century  of  time  to  all  his  friends  and 
neighbours.  The  account  is  given  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Mitchell,  of  New  York, 
and  has  recently  been  admitted  into  ''  Day's  Historical  Collections  of 
Pennsylvania."     It  runs  as  follows  : — 

"Meadville,  Penn.,  June  21st,  1816." 

"  Dear  Sir  : — I  now  give  you  an  account  of  a  very  singular  case ;  possibly  you  may 
have  met  with  something  analogous  to  it  in  your  researches,  but  so  far  as  my  inquiries 
have  extended,  it  is  without  parallel. 

"  Mr.  Wm.  Reynolds,  his  wife  and  children,  a  respectable  family,  originally  citizens  of 
Birmingham,  in  Great  Britain,  settled  in  the  vicinity  of  Oil  Creek,  twenty-seven  miles 
from  this  village,  in  the  year  1797.  Miss  Mary  Reynolds,  one  of  his  daughters,  is  the 
subject  of  this  communication,  upon  which  I  shall  be  happy  to  see  your  animadversions. 
For  five  years,  she  has  exhibited  the  phenomenon  of  a  person  vested  with  two  distinct 
consciousnesses.  I  became  acquainted  with  Miss  Reynolds  soon  after  my  removal  to  this 
place,  in  May,  1815,  when  she  was  in  exercise  of  her  original  consciousness,  the  last  even- 
ing of  which  she  spent  at  my  house.  The  following  evening  I  was  at  her  brother's, 
where  there  was  considerable  companji,  of  which  she  was  one.  To  my  surprise,  when  I 
spoke  to  her,  she  had  no  knowledge  of  me  ;  I  was,  therefore,  introduced  to  her  anew.  My 
curiosity  was  excited  ;  and  it  was  gratified  by  a  history  of  her  singular  case. 

"  After  arriving  at  adult  age,  she  was  occasionally  afflicted  with  fits.  In  the  spring  of 
1811,  she  had  a  very  severe  visitation  of  this  kind  ;  her  frame  was  convulsed,  and  she  was 
extremely  ill  for  several  days,  when  she  became  totally  blind  and  deaf.  During  twelve 
weeks  she  continued  in  a  very  feeble  state  ;  but  at  the  end  of  five  weeks,  the  use  of  her 
visual  and  auditory  faculties  was  perfectly  restored.  A  little  before  the  expiration  of  the 
twelve  weeks,  one  morning  when  she  awoke,  she  appeared  to  have  lost  all  recollection  of 
everything  which  she  ever  knew. 

"Her  understanding,  with  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  speech,  remained;  but  her 
father,  mother,  brothers,  sisters  and  neighbours,  were  altogether  strangers  to  her.  She 
had  forgotten  the  use  of  written  language,  and  did  not  know  a  single  letter  of  the 
alphabet,  nor  any  domestic  employment,  more  than  a  new  born  babe  ;  she,  however, 
presently  began  to  regain  various  kinds  of  knowledge.  She  continued  five  weeks  in  this 
way  when  she  suddenly  passed  from  this  '  second  state '  (as  for  distinction  it  may  be 
called)  into  her  first.  All  circumstances  of  the  five  weeks  just  elapsed,  were  totally  gone, 
and  her  original  consciousness  was  fully  restored  ;  now  the  cloud  which  had  overspread 
her  mental  hemisphere,  was  dissipated  ;  her  kindred  and  friends  were  all  Mt  once  recog- 
nized. Every  kind  of  knowledge  which  she  had  ever  acquired  was  as  much  at  her  com- 
mand as  at  any  former  period  of  her  life,  but  of  the  time  and  of  all  events  which  had 
transpired  during  her  second  state,  she  had  not  the  most  distant  idea.  For  three  weeks 
she  continued  in  her  first  state,  but  in  her  sleep  the  transition  was  renewed,  and  she 
awoke  in  her  second  state.  As  before,  so  now,  all  knowledge  acquired  in  her  first  state 
was  forgotten,  and  of  the  circumstances  of  her  three  weeks  lucid  interval,  she  had  no 
conception ;  but  of  the  small  fund  of  knowledge  she  had  gained  in  the  former  second 
state,  she  was  able  to  avail  herself,  and  she  continued  from  day  to  day  to  add  to  this. 

"  From  the  spring  of  1811  Miss  Reynolds  has  been  in  this  wonderful  condition,  frequently 
changing  from  her  first  to  her  second,  and  from  her  second  to  her  first  state  ;  more  than 
three-quarters  of  her  time  she  has  been  in  her  second  state.  There  is  no  periodical 
regularity  as  to  the  transition.  Sometimes  she  continues  several  months  and  sometimes 
a  few  weeks,  a  few  days,  or  only  a  few  hours  in  her  second  state,  but  in  the  lapse  of  five 
years  she  has  been  in  one  instance  more  than  twenty  days  in  her  first  state.  Whatever 
knowledge  she  has  acquired  at  any  time  in  her  second  state  is  familiar  to  her  whenever 
in  that  state  ;  and  now  she  has  made  such  proficiency,  she  is  as  well  acquainted  with 
things,  and  is  in  general  as  intelligent  in  her  second  as  in  her  first  state.  It  is  about 
three  years  since  an  attempt  was  first  made  to  reteach  her  chirography.  Her  brother 
gave  her  a  name,  which  he  had  written,  to  copy.  She  readily  took  a  pen,  agreeable  to 
his  request,  and  it  is  a  fact  that  she  actually  began  to  write  it,  though  in  a  very  awkward 
manner,  from  the  right  to  the  left  in  the  Hebrew  mode.  It  was  not  long  before  she 
obtained  a  tolerable  skill  in  penmanship,  and  in  her  second  state  often  amused  herself  by 
writing  poetry,  yet  in  her  first  state  this  is  an  exercise  which  she  seldom  if  ever  attempts. 
It  may  be  remarked  that  she  acquires  all  kind  of  knowledge  in  her  second  state  with 
much  greater  facility  than  would  a  person  never  before  instructed.    In  her  second  state 

33 

498  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

she  has  now  been  introduced  to  many  persons  whom  she  always  recognizes  when  in  that 
state,  and  no  one  appears  to  enjoy  the  society  of  friends  better  than  this  young  lady  ; 
but  if  ever  so  well  known  to  her  in  her  first  state,  she  has  no  knowledge  of  them  in  her 
second  till  an  acquaintance,  de  novo,  is  formed  ;  and  in  like  manner,  all  acquaintances 
formed  in  her  second  state,  must  be  formed  in  her  first  also,  in  order  to  be  known  in  that. 

"  This  astonishing  transition,  scores  of  times  repeated,  always  takes  place  iu  her  sleep. 
In  passing  from  her  second  to  her  first  state  nothing  is  particularly  noticeable  in  her 
sleep  ;  but  in  passing  from  her  first  to  her  second  state,  her  sleep  is  so  profound  that  no 
one  can  wake  her,  and  it  not  unfrequently  continues  eighteen  or  twenty  hours.  She 
generally  has  some  presentiment  of  the  change,  and  frequently  for  several  days  before  the 
event.  Her  sufi'erings  formerly,  in  the  near  prospect  of  the  transition  from  either  th©  one 
or  the  other  state,  were  extreme.  When  in  one  state,  she  had  no  consciousness  of  ever 
having  been  in  the  other  ;  but  of  the  wonderful  fact  she  was  persuaded  on  the  representa- 
tion of  her  friends,  hence  when  about  to  undergo  the  transition,  fearing  she  would  never 
revert  so  as  to  know  again  in  this  world  those  who  were  dear  to  her,  her  feelings  in  this 
tespect  were  not  unlike  the  feelings  of  one  entering  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death ; 
but  she  has  now  so  often  passed  from  one  state  to  the  other,  that  she  does  not  anticipate 
the  change  viTith  that  horror  or  distressing  apprehension  with  which  for  a  considerable 
time  she  used  to  do. 

"  As  an  evidence  of  her  ignorance  in  her  second  state,  at  an  early  period,  she  was 
once  walking  at  a  Kttle  distance  from  her  father's  house,  and  discovered  a  rattlesnake. 
She  was  delighted  at  the  beautiful  appearance  of  this,  to  her  unknown,  dangerous 
reptile,  and  sprang  forward  to  catch  it.  Fortunately,  the  serpent  lay  near  a  hole  under  a 
log,  and  as  she  seized  it  by  its  rattle  it  thrust  its  head  in,  and  she  was  not  able  to  draw 
it  out.  At  another  time  she  was  riding  in  a  narrow  path  alone  in  the  woods,  and  met  a 
bear,  which  did  not  seem  disposed  to  give  her  the  path.  She  boldly  rode  up  to  the  huge 
animal,  and  in  a  very  imperious  style  ordered  him  out  of  her  way  ;  and  she  was  upon 
the  point  of  dismounting  to  belabour  him  with  her  whip  when  he  peaceably  '  cleared  off.' 

"  This  young  lady  is  naturally  of  a  cheerful  disposition,  but  thoughtful.  In  her  second 
state  her  imagination  glows,  her  wit  is  keen,  her  remarks  are  often  shrewd  and  satirical, 
and  her  prejudices,  conceived  without  cause,  against  her  best  friends,  are  sometimes  very 
strong.  "Timothy  Aldbn." 

As  it  may  assist  the  student  of  psychological  physiology  to  observe  the 
relations,  as  well  as  the  differentiation  of  two  very  remarkable  instances  of 
abnormal  existence,  we  shall  introduce  in  this  place  a  brief  notice  of  a  case 
which  has  excited  the  attention  of  thousands  of  persons  both  within  and 
without  the  ranks  of  the  medical  profession,  and  one  which  has  called  forth 
more  remarks  from  the  secular  papers,  than  any  other  instance  of  the  kind 
known  to  modern  science. 

We  speak  of  Miss  MoUie  Fancher,  of  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  whose  condition 
may  be  found  summarized  in  the  following  extracts  from  the  columns  of 
the  London  Spiritualist  oi  June,  1879.  The  details  are  given  in  a  letter 
addressed  to  a  lady  from  Dr.  C.  E.  West,  of  Brooklyn  Heights  Seminary, 
the  former  preceptor  of  the  unfortunate  invalid.     Dr.  West  says  : — 

"Brooklyn,  October  8th,  1878." 
"  Dear  Madam, — You  request  me  to  write  a  brief  sketch  of  Miss  MoUie  Fancher,  in 
answer  to  the  many  inquiries  which  have  been  made  by  those  who  have  examined  the 
beautiful  specimens  of  her  needlework  sent  to  your  loan  exhibition,  and  which  were 
wrought  during  a  most  extraordmary  illness  of  more  than  twelve  years'  duration.  To 
give  anything  like  an  adequate  account  of  this  remarkable  girl  would  require  a  treatise. 
This  I  cannot  attempt. 

"Miss  Mary  J.  Fancher  was  born  in  Attleboro',  Mass.,  Aug.  16th,  1848,  and  was  edu- 
cated at  the  Brooklyn  Heights  Seminary  under  my  care.  She  was  a  sweet  girl,  of  delicate 
organization  and  nervous  temperament,  and  was  highly  esteemed  for  her  pleasing  manners 
and  gentle  disposition.  She  was  an  excellent  scholar,  excelling  in  hdlcs  lettres  studies ; 
but  her  delicate  health  led  to  her  removal  from  school  a  short  time  before  the  graduation 
of  her  class  in  1864.  For  three  years  I  lost  sight  of  her,  till  I  learned  from  a  Brooklyn 
paper  of  her  singular  condition,  which  resulted  from  a  remarkable  accident. 

"  Her  aunt  soon  after  called  and  invited  me  to  visit  '  Mollie,'  as  she  is  familiarly  called. 
I  did  so,  March  4th,  1867,  and  from  that  time  until  the  present  I  have  been  an  intimate 
visitor  of  the  family.     I  have  kept  a  journal  of  my  visits  and  noted  all  that  was  important 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES. 

499 

which  came  under  my  observation,  I  have  used  all  the  sagacity  I  possess  to  discover  any 
fraud  or  collusion  ;  but  I  have  never  seen  anything  to  excite  my  suspicion  or  shake  my 
confidence  in  her  integrity.  She  is  a  Christian  girl,  and  shrinks  from  any  public  exhibi- 
tion of  herself.  Spiritualists  and  curiosity-seekers  have  sought  access  to  her,  but  have 
failed.  The  power  of  discriminating  character  is  so  great  that  she  is  rarely  ever  imposed 
upon. 

"  The  facts  to  which  attention  is  called  can  be  fully  verified.     They  are  as  follows  : — 

"May  10th,  1864. — She  was  thrown  from  a  horse  and  severely  injured. 

"June  8th,  1865. — In  attempting  to  leave  a  street  car  her  skirt  caught,  and  she  was 
dragged  for  a  block  over  the  pavement. 

"  Feb.  2nd,  1866. — She  was  taken  seriously  ill.  Her  nervous  system  was  completely 
deranged.  Her  head  and  feet  coming  together,  she  would  roll  like  a  hoop.  She  would 
also  stand^n  her  toes  and  spin  like  a  top.  Several  persons  were  required  to  prevent  her 
from  doing  personal  injury  to  herself. 

"  Feb.  8th,  1866. — She  went  into  a  trance,  and  was,  to  all  appearance,  dead, 

"  Feb.  17th. — She  lost  her  eyesight. 

"  Feb.  18th. — She  lost  her  speech. 

"  Feb.  1 9th. — She  lost  her  hearing. 

"  Feb.  22nd. — She  saw,  she  spoke  and  heard  for  half-an-hour,  and  then  for  a  time  she 
lost  these  faculties, 

"  Feb.  23rd. — She  lost  the  sense  of  sound, 

"  Feb.  24th.— The  fingers  closed, 

"  Feb.  25th.— The  jaws  locked. 

"  Feb,  26th.— The  legs  took  a  triple  twist, 

"  March  7th. — The  spasms  were  violent. 

"May  20th,  1866. — She  asked  for  food,  ate  a  small  piece  of  cracker,  and^took  a  tea- 
spoonful  of  punch — it  being  the  first  food  she  had  taken  in  seven  weeks. 

"May  27th,  1866. — She  was  shocked  by  thunder,  and  again  lost  her  speech. 

"May  28th,  1866. — She  went  into  a  rigid  trance  at  2.80  o'clock,  which  lasted  till 
11.30  A.M.,  the  next  day.     She  then  passed  into  a  trance  till  June  1st, 

"June  2nd,  1866. — ^Nourishment  was  forced  by  a  pump  into  her  stomach,  which  threw 
her  into  convulsions.  She  was  unconscious  and  sufi'ered  intensely  till  Sunday  evening, 
June  3rd,  when  her  throat  closed,  and  she  was  unable  to  take  any  nourishment  or  utter  a 
sound. 

"  These  items  are  taken  from  the  diary  of  Mollie's  aunt,  who  made  a  daily  record  of 
her  condition.  I  have  copied  but  a  few  of  them,  to  show  the  beginning  of  her  remark- 
able illness. 

"My  first  visit,  as  I  have  said,  was  March  4th,  1867.  I  found  her  lying  on  her  right 
side,  with  her  right  arm  folded  under  her  head.  Her  fingers  were  clenched  in  the  palm  of 
her  hand.  The  right  hand  and  arm  were  paralyzed,  as  was  her  body  generally,  excepting 
her  left  arm.  She  was  in  a  trance,  and  seemed  to  be  in  pain.  She  remained  in  this  trance 
till  the  8th,  a  shorter  time  than  usual  at  this  period  of  her  illness,  her  trances  often  last- 
ing from  ten  to  twelve  days 

''  I  now  speak  of  her  physical  condition.  For  twelve  years  she  has  lain  in  one  position 
on  her  right  side.  For  nine  years  she  was  paralyzed,  her  muscles  only  relaxing  under 
the  influence  of  chloroform.  For  the  last  three  years  her  muscles  are  so  relaxed  that  her 
limbs  can  be  moved  without  the  aid  of  chloroform.  While  passing  into  this  state  her 
sufferings  were  intense.  For  days  it  did  not  seem  possible  that  she  could  live.  Her 
eyes  were  open  and  staring.  For  nine  years  they  had  been  closed.  Now  they  were  open, 
never  closing  day  nor  night.  They  were  sightless.  She  could  swallow,  but  take  no  food  ; 
even  the  odour  of  it  was  oflensive.  During  these  twelve  years'  illness  there  have  been 
times  when  for  many  days  together  she  has  been  to  all  appearance  dead.  The  slightest 
pulse  could  not  be  detected — there  was  no  evidence  of  respiration.  Her  Umbs  were  as 
cold  as  ice,  and  had  there  not  been  some  warmth  about  her  heart  she  would  have  been 
buried.  During  all  these  years  she  has  vii'tually  lived  without  food.  Water,  the  juice  of 
fruits,  and  other  liquids  have  been  introduced  into  her  mouth,  but  scarcely  any  of  them 
ever  make  their  way  ti)  her  stomach.  In  the  early  part  of  her  illness  it  collapsed,  so  that 
by  placing  the  hand  in  the  cavity  her  spinal  column  could  be  felt.  There  was  no  room 
for  food.  Her  throat  was  rigid.  Her  heart  enlarged.  When  I  first  saw  her  she  had  but 
one  sense — that  of  touch.  With  that  she  could  read  with  rapidity.  This  she  did  by 
running  her  fingers  over  the  printed  page.  With  the  finder  she  could  discriminate  the 
photographs  of  pei-sous,  the  faces  of  callers,  &c.  She  never  sleeps,  her  rest  being  taken  in 
trances.  The  most  delicate  work  is  done  iu  the  night.  The  circulation  is  sluggish,  and, 
as  a  consequence,  there  is  very  little  animal  heat.  She  longs  to  die,  but  says  she  cannot, 
as  there  is  nothing  to  die.     Such  is  a  brief  statement  of  her  bodily  condition. 

"To  me  her  mental  state  is  m^re  extraordinary.     Her  power  of  clau-voyance,  or  second 

500  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

sight,  is  marvellously  developed.  All  places  in  whicli  she  takes  any  interest  are  open  to 
her  mental  view.  Distance  imposes  no  barriers.  No  retirement,  however  secluded,  but 
yields  to  her  penetrating  gaze.  She  dictates  the  contents  of  sealed  letters  which  have 
never  been  in  her  hands  without  the  slightest  error.  She  visits  the  family  circles  of  her 
relations  and  acquaintances  in  remote  places,  and  describes  their  attire  and  their  occupa- 
tions. She  points  out  any  disorder  of  dress,  however  slight,  as  the  basting  thread  in  the 
sleeve  of  a  sack  which  to  ordinary  sight  was  concealed  by  the  arm.  Any  article  which 
has  been  mislaid  she  sees  and  tells  where  it  may  be  found.  She  discriminates  in  darkness 
the  most  delicate  shades  of  colour  with  an  accuracy  that  never  errs.  She  works  in 
embroidery  and  wax  mthout  patterns.  She  conceives  the  most  beautiful  forms  and 
combinations  of  forms.  She  never  studied  botany  or  took  a  lesson  in  waxwork,  and  yet  ■ 
she  never  mistakes  the  forms  of  leaf  or  flower.  Holding  a  pen  or  pencil  in  her  left  hand, 
she  writes  with  extraordinary  rapidity.  Her  penmanship  is  handsome  and  legible.  She 
once  wrote  a  poem  of  ten  verses  in  as  many  minutes — her  thought  flowing  vsdth  the 
rapidity  of  lightning.  In  cutting  velvet  leaves  for  pin-cushions,  Uke  the  sample  sent  you, 
she  held  the  scissors  by  the  knuckles  of  thumb  and  fore-finger  of  the  left  hand,  and 
bringing  the  velvet  with  thumb  and  finger  of  her  right  hand,  she  cut  the  leaves  as  shapely 
and  without  ravel,  as  though  they  had  been  cut  with  a  punch.  These  leaves  do  not 
difier  in  size  or  form  more  than  leaves  growing  on  tree  or  shrub.  In  the  early  part  of  her 
sickness  she  cut  more  than  two  thousand  such  leaves.  In  April,  1875,  she  worked  up 
2,500  ounces  of  worsted ;  to  December,  1875,  she  had  written  6,500  notes  and 
letters.  She  has  kept  an  account  of  all  the  expenses  of  the  family  during  her  sickness. 
She  keeps  a  daily  journal  except  when  in  trances  of  longer  duration  than  twenty-four 
hours.  In  passing  into  the  new  condition  three  years  ago,  of  which  I  have  spoken,  she 
forgot  everything  that  had  occurred  in  the  previous  nine  years.  When  she  was  able  to 
speak,  she  inquired  about  matters  that  occurred  at  the  beginning  of  her  illness — the  nine 
intervening  years  were  a  perfect  blank  to  her. 

"  But  I  must  take  leave  of  this  subject.  The  incredulous  will  not  accept  it — and  it  is 
not  surprising.  Miss  Fancher  is  not  be  judged  by  ordinary  laws.  The  state  is  abnormal — 
a  species  of  modified  catalepsy,  which  has  deranged  the  ordinary  action  of  mind  and  body. 
It  is  a  rich  mine  for  investigation  to  the  physiologist  and  the  psychologist,  and  with  them 
I  leave  the  case.  "  Very  respectfully, 

"  Charles  E.  West." 

The  following  additional  particulars  of  this  wonderful  case  have  since 
been  published  by  Dr.  West's  permission  in  several  of  the  local  papers. 
We  commend  them  to  the  Spiritualistic  reader  as  being  specially  worthy  of 
attention. 

In  a  conversation  between  Dr.  West  and  a  party  of  Brooklyn  clergymen, 
the  former  says  : — 

"  To  my  knowledge  she  never  has  made  a  penny  by  her  gifts,  although  having  many 
opportunities  to  do  so.  .  .  .  She  knows  who  her  visitors  are  long  before  they  are 
ushered  into  the  hall  below,  and  she  allows  them  to  see  her,  or  refuses,  just  as  the  whim 
takes  her.  I  took  Kossuth's  sister  there  just  before  her  departure  for  the  Old  World. 
Miss  MolHe  refused  to  see  her.  Afterward  I  asked  Mollie  for  an  explanation.  '  Why,  I 
didn't  like  her  looks  when  she  entered  the  door,'  was  the  reply.  The  door  is  on  the  floor 
below.  Another  time  I  took  a  gentleman  of  reputation  as  a  scholar.  She  directed  that 
he  be  kept  from  her  room,  for  the  same  reason — she  did  not  like  his  looks.  While  she 
was  blind  I  took  a  large  man  with  a  great  black  beard  to  her,  and  said,  '  What  do  you 
think  of  this  little  man  with  a  smooth,  sharp  chin  ? '  and  without  turning  her  face,  which 
was  from  us,  she  answered,  '  He  is  very  large,  and  has  full  whiskers.  I  can  see  him.' 
She  knows  what  is  going  on  all  over  the  country,  but  whether  from  her  marvellous  sight- 
seeing, or  because  she  reads  it,  I  am  unable  to  say.  She  is  not  willing  to  talk  to  visitors 
about  her  gifts.  The  topic  is  painful  to  her.  "To  her  friends,  however,  she  is  more  free, 
and  she  is  quite  willing  at  times  to  explain  her  sensations.  She  tells  them  where  she 
goes  and  what  she  sees. 

"  To  the  question  asked  by  Dr.  Channing,  then  present — '  Does  she  see  friends  who 
have  gone  before  her  ?' — the  answer,  given  with  great  apparent  reluctance,  was  ;  '  Yes  ; 
she  sees  many  of  them.  She  sees  her  mother  ;  she  longs  to  be  with  her  mother.  She 
says  her  mother  comes  to  her.' " 

The  following  extract  from  the  Western  Times  refers  to  the  testimony  of 
a  physician  well  known  in  New  York  and  highly  esteemed  for  learriing  and 
truthfulness  :— - 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  501 

"From  the  first,  Dr.  E.  Fleet  Speir,  of  162,  Montague  Street,  Brooklyn,  has  been  Miss 
Fancher's  physician.  He  has  watched  her  case  with  unrelenting  vigilance,  and  has  made 
full  memoranda  of  every  symptom  and  every  change.  After  she  had  declared  that  she 
could  not  partake  of  food,  that  it  was  nauseating  and  distasteful,  he  introduced  nourish- 
ment through  a  silver  tube.  When  she  was  to  all  appearances  dead,  he  worked  over  her 
and  restored  her.  One  day  he  received  a  note  from  this  curious  patient,  warning  him 
that  an  attempt  was  to  be  made  to  rob  him.  He  paid  not  more  than  passing  attention  to 
it  ;  but  the  next  day  some  one  entered  his  house  and  took  therefrom  a  valuable  case  of 
surgical  instrument's.  When  he  has  rung  the  door  bell  Miss  Fancher  has  almost  invariably 
called  out :  '  Aunt,  please  go  down  and  let  in  the  doctor.'  Once  or  twice  he  has  halted 
on  the  landing  at  the  stair  top,  while  some  other  visitor  who  accompanied  him  entered 
the  room  with  Mrs.  Crosby.  Miss  Fancher,  after  gi-eeting  the  new-comer,  has  said  : 
'  Why  does  the  doctor  wait  outside  ?  Ask  him  to  come  in."  She  has  been  aware  of  his 
presence  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  has  told,  when  he  was  starting  from  his  Montague 
Street  residence,  a  mile  away  from  her,  that  he  was  going  to  call  upon  her.  Dr.  Speir  has 
taken  Dr.  Mitchell,  Dr.  Kissam,  Dr.  Crane,  Dr.  Ormiston,  and  many  others  of  Brooklyn's 
best  known  physicians  to  see  Miss  Fancher. 

"  It  was  Dr.  Speir  who,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  Miss  Fancher's  illness,  tested  whether 
she  had  partaken  of  food  by  going  in  suddenly  upon  her  and  administering  an  emetic. 
The  drug  gave  her  much  pain,  while  the  result  was  convincing  that  her  stomach  was 
empty.  The  nature  of  the  medicine  was  well  known  to  Miss  Fancher,  although  it  had 
been  carefully  kept  from  her.  This  event  was  just  before  she  went  into  the  rigid  condition 
that  lasted  nine  years.  As  soon  as  she  emerged  from  this  condition  into  that  of  relaxa- 
tion, three  years  ago,  her  memory  of  the  nine  years  was  gone,  and  she  remembered  only 
incidents  of  previous  years.  So  nine  and  a  half  years  after  the  administering  of  the  test, 
as  Dr.  Speir  entered  the  room  Miss  Fancher  broke  out  with  :  '  You  thought  I  didn't  know 
why  you  gave  me  that  medicine,  but  I  did.  You  wanted  to  see  whether  food  was  in  my 
stomach,  and  you  learned  that  none  was  there.     You  won't  do  so  again,  will  you  ? ' 

The  editor  of  the  Western  Times  adds : — 

"  Miss  Fancher  longs  to  die,  yet  she  tells  her  friends  she  is  afraid  she  cannot  die. 
'  There  is  nothing  of  me  to  die,'  she  says.  Once,  after  a  most  death-like  trance,  in  which 
it  required  hours  of  vigorous  efforts  to  restore  her,  she  uttered  :  '  Why  did  you  not  let  me 
alone  ?     I  think  I  might  have  died,  had  you  allowed  me  to.'     .     .     . 

"  Some  of  her  friends  have  seriously  said  :  '  If  death  is  the  parting  of  the  spirit  from 
the  body,  and  if  Miss  Mollie's  spirit  has  been  released  from  the  bondage  of  the  flesh,  can 
she  indeed  ever  die  ? '  " 

That  which  the  above  narrative  ought  to  suggest  to  every  inteUigent 
reader  is  the  revelation  which  Miss  Fancher's  condition  makes,  of  the 
latent  po^yers  within  every  human  soul.  The  Spiritual  powers  manifested 
by  this  poor  invaUd  must  necessarily  prove  what  is  the  normal  condition  of 
the  Spirit,  when  the  abnormal  state  of  the  physique  permits  that  Spirit  to 
act  alone  or  in  a  manner  independent  of  the  body.  Let  it  be  observed  that 
most  of  the  effects  manifested  in  Miss  Fancher's  case,  are  often  witnessed 
in  mesmerized  or  entranced  subjects.  Miss  Fancher  exhibits  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  when  the  physical  organism  is  subdued  by  sickness.  The 
mesmerized  subject  displays  the  same  Spiritual  powers  when  his  body  is 
controlled  by  the  magnetic  fluid  of  a  human  operator,  whilst  the  automatic 
trance  Medium  exhibits  kindred,  if  not  precisely  similar  states,  when  his 
mortal  body  is  put  to  sleep  by  the  magnetism  of  an  invisible  Spirit. 

These  states  are  all  graduated  degrees  of  one  condition  ;  to  wit,  the 
temporary  suspension  of  bodily  powers  and  the  exaltation  of  the  Spirit,  or 
— as  in  the  latter  case — the  substitution  of  a  foreign  intelligence  for  that 
of  the  entranced  subject.  It  is  unphilosophical  on  the  part  of  the  many 
scientific  observers  who  have  visited  Miss  Fancher,  that  they  do  not  search 
out  and  examine  kindred  cases  amongst  the  mesmerists  and  Spiritualists. 
The  correllation  of  a  multitude  of  cases  drawn  from  different  sources,  would 
do  far  more  to   promote   the   best  interests  of  science,  and  explain   the 

502  NIXETEENTH    CEXTURY  MIRACLES. 

mysteries  of  soul  life  and  powers,  thaa  ever  can  result  from  the  childish 
experiments  now  so  rife  amongst  would-be  scientists  called  "thought  read- 
ing." It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  to  see  a  traveUing  mountebank  who 
offers  "  to  expose  Spiritualism,"'  placed  on  a  rostrum  with  a  lord  bishop  for 
his  chairman,  and  a  party  of  grave  deans  and  vicars,  &rc.,  (Sec,  as  his  "moral 
supporters." 

Presently,  one  of  the  grave  ministers  of  Christ  is  requested  to  hide  a  pin, 
a  child's  doll,  top,  or  ball,  or  some  such  respectable  toy,  when  the  mounte- 
bank seizing  hold  of  his  reverence,  drags  him  hither  and  thither  in  the 
dignified  attitude  of  a  pair  of  schoolboys  playing  at  hide-and-seek,  and 
when  the  mountebank  succeeds  in  finding  the  toy,  a  large  audience  of 
grave  professors  cry,  "  Oh,  how  wonderful  I "  and  a  chorus  of  pious 
Christians  send  up  hjTnns  of  praise  to  God  because  Mumbo  Jumbo  has 
exposed  that  wicked  Spiritualism  that  has  emptied  the  pews  of  the  churches, 
and  done  so  much  harm  to  the  world  by  telling  it,  that  it  would  have  to 
atone  for  its  own  sins,  instead  of  having  "a  Saviour"  to  make  atonement 
for  it 

Poor  Miss  Fancher  !  Her  life  is  in  truth  but  a  living  mart}Tdom,  but  if 
science  demands  its  martyrs,  and  this  poor  girl's  case  is  properly  considered 
by  science,  when  she  herself  becomes  an  enfranchised  Spirit,  she  will 
scarcely  deem  that  she  has  paid  too  heavy  a  penalty  for  her  glorious  crown. 

Returning  once  more  to  the  few  additional  narratives  we  can  give  of 
Spiritualism  in  America  prior  to  the  Rochester  knockings,  we  invite  our 
readers'  attention  to  the  following  extracts  from  the  August,  1872,  number 
of  the  Western  Star. 

The  following  narrative,  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  Joseph  Warren,  D.D.,  of 
Tennessee,  is  not  only  vouched  for  on  the  authoritj-  of  its  venerable  author, 
but  has  been  carefully  investigated  and  testified  to  by  several  U-ving 
witnesses,  one  of  whom  (Squire  Fisher)  was  actually  present  at  the  sea?ices 
described  in  the  narrative.  Dr.  Warren,  now  a  resident  at  Rome,  favours 
the  author  with  permission  to  publish  his  narrative  in  full,  reserving  only 
the  real  name  of  the  family  chiefly  interested,  for  reasons  which  will  appear 
sufficiently  ob\ious  to  every  intelligent  reader. 

We  shall  endeavour  to  presen-e,  as  far  as  possible,  the  phraseology  of  our 
esteemed  correspondent;  but  as  the  narrative  occupies  more  space  than 
would  conform  to  the  limits  of  om:  record,  we  must  content  ourselves  by 
giving  such  quotations  as  will  be  found  of  the  most  interesting  character. 

It  was  in  the  year  1830  that  Dr.  Warren  was  solicited  to  fill  the  pulpit  of 
a  dear  old  friend,  and  former  college  companion  of  his,  who  had  been 
suddenly  struck  with  paralysis.  The  doctor  had  secluded  himself  from  his 
ministerial  duties  for  several  months  from  an  ardent  desire  to  devote 
his  time  to  literary  pursuits  ;  but  deeming  that  the  change  from  his  city 

residence  in  N ,  to  the  quiet  of  his  friend's  country  parsonage  might 

prove  congenial  to  his  present  condition,  he  determined  to  comply  with  the 
invitation  in  question. 

The  Rev.  ]SIr.  W ,  the  friend  whom  he  designed  to  oblige,  had  been 

the  father  of  a  son,  whose  wild  and  dissolute  career  had  recently  been 
terminated  by  self-destruction.  Rumour  alleged  that  if  the  unhappy  young 
man  had  not  put  an  end  to  his  life  by  a  deed  of  \iolence,  the  law  was 
prepared  to  avenge  upon  him  more  than  one  act  of  murder,  perpetrated,  as 
it  was  currently  reported,  on  the  victims  of  his  lawless  passions.  It  was  the 
shame  and  anguish  of  mind  occasioned  by  the  iniquitous  career  of  this 
wretched  son,  that  had  reduced  Mr.  W to  that  condition  of  helpless- 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  503 

ness  in  which  the  aid  of  his  kind  and  sympathizing  friend,  Dr.  Warren,  had 
been  soUcited. 

On  arriving  at  the  scene  of  his  intended  labours,  Dr.  Warren  found  that 

the  mansion  and  grounds  formerly  occupied  by  Mr.  W 's  family  had 

been  abandoned  since  the  tragic  death  of  his  son  ;  in  fact,  the  parent  and 
child  had  long  been  estranged  from  each  other,  and  the  latter  had  pursued 
his  course  of  riot  and  dissipation  in  the  once  stately  family  mansion,  whilst 
his  justly  offended  father  had  removed  to  a  small  cottage,  situated  as  far  as 
possible  from  the  home  thus  desecrated. 

Here  Dr.  Warren  took  up  his  abode,  and  here  for  some  months  he  con- 
tinued to  minister  to  his  suffering  friend,  and  rural  parishioners,  with  ever 
increasing  acceptance.     Dr.  Warren  goes  on  to  say  : — 

"  After  a  few  weeks'  residence  in  the  pariah  which  I  had  taken  under  my  care,  I  began 
to  be  aware  that  strange  rumours  were  prevalent  concerning  the  house  formerly  occupied 
by  my  old  friend,  and  of  late  abandoned  to  the  occupancy  of  his  profligate  son.  I  was 
informed  that  the  most  unaccountable  sounds  and  ghostly  sights  had  been  recently 
manifested  there.  The  house  was  a  large,  handsome  Southern  residence,  closely 
embosomed  in  thick  pine  woods,  and  removed  about  two  miles  from  any  other  habitation. 
"Despite  its  secluded  situation,  and  the  evil  reputation  which  attached  to  it,  the 
lovely  woods  and  shady  forest  paths  that  surrounded  it  had  become  a  favourite  resort  of 
the  children  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  and  it  was  from  the  fearful  distsrbances  that  they 
encountered  in  their  sports  near  the  mansion,  that  the  first  tidings  of  hauntings  had 
been  derived. 

"  In  a  little  while  the  rustics,  who  had  occasion  to  pass  through  the  woods,  and  now 
and  then  the  sportsmen  pursmng  their  game  in  its  well-stocked  preserves,  encountered, 
as  they  alleged,  ghostly  forms  and  fearful  apparitions,  whilst  shrieks,  groans,  and 
concussive  sounds  of  tremendous  power,  echoed  and  re-echoed  from  the  path-like 
avenues  that  surrounded  the  building,  '  making  night  hideous,'  and  compelling  a  strict 
but  fruitless  search  to  discover  the  source  of  these  disturbances.  On  more  than  one 
occasion  I  was  informed,  by  reliable  witnesses,  that  the  mansion  had  been  seen  through 
the  woods  at  night  brilliantly  illuminated  ;  figures  had  been  discerned  passing  before 
the  windows,  and  fiitting  along  the  terraces  ;  but  when  a  determined  body  of  the 
villagers  sallied  forth  to  ascertain  who  had  thus  invaded  the  solitude  of  the  place,  the 
lights  vanished,  the  forms  disappeared,  and  the  most  profound  stillness  succeeded  to  a 
loud  hum  of  voices,  and  a  chorus  of  sobs.  '  The  next  morning,  when  I  and  four  of  my 
most  sceptical  acquaintances  visited  the  house,'  added  one  of  my  informants  (Deacon 
Harvey),  '  I  pledge  my  honour  there  was  not  a  footprint  to  be  found  in  the  dust  that 
covered  the  rooms,  passages,  and  stairways,  and  that,  too,  in  the  very  chambers  and 
galleries  which  I  had  with  my  own  eyes  seen  blazing  with  lights,  and  crowded  with  forms 
of  men  and  women  passing  and  repassing.' 

"  As  time  rolled  on,  the  re^jorts  of  the  hauntings  became  more  frequent  and  circum- 
stantial. Numbers  of  persons,  in  whose  good  sense  and  veracity  I  had  entire  confidence, 
visited  the  place,  and  gave  me  accounts  of  their  alarming  experiences.  The  affair  at 
length  began  to  assume  a  serious  aspect,  and  this  was  confirmed  by  a  cautiously  written 

account  which  appeared  in  the  G Citizen,in  which ihe  editor  detailed  his  experiences 

in  visiting  the  possessed  mansion,  in  company  with  Reuben  Jacobs,  Esq.,  a  magistrate, 
and  Mr.  Stephen  Moss,  an  engineer.  As  both  these  gentlemen  were  personally  kiio-UTi  to 
me,  and  their  statements  respecting  the  sights  and  sounds  they  had  encountered  were 
boldly  affirmed  over  their  own  signatures,  I  began  to  attach  a  degree  of  importance 
to  the  case  which  I  should  never  else  have  associated  with  a  tale  of  the  so-called 
'  supernatural.'  My  final  resolve  to  enter  upon  an  investigation  of  these  mysteries  for 
myself,  was  confirmed  by  an  account  given  me  of  several  days'  exploration  in  the  haunted 

dwelling,  by  my  friend  and  parishioner,  Mr.  Fisher,  ex-mayor  of  N ,  and  a  man  upon 

whose  calm  judgment  and  power  of  observation  I  felt  able  to  rely.     This  gentleman 

assured  me  he  had  several  times  confronted  the  spirit  of  young  W ,  and  the  forms 

of  two  girls  supposed  to  have  been  murdered  by  him,  and  that  in  the  open  light  of  day, 
and  with  a  tangibility  of  appearance  which  admitted  of  no  doubt  or  question.  He 
affirmed  that  he  himself,  with  Reuben  Jacobs,  and  Deacon  Harvey,  had  sat  in  a  deserted 
chamber,  and  all  of  them  had  simultaneously  seen  two  women,  in  garments  stained  with 
blood,  rise  up  from  the  floor  and  flee  across  the  apartment,  pursued  by  the  shadowy  form 

of  young  W .     As  the  apparition  disappeared,  the  loud  report  of  a  musket  was  heard, 

and  that  not  only  by  themselves,  but  also  by  a  crowd  of  persons  who  had  followed  the 

504 

NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

gentlemen  to  tlie  house,  but  feared  to  enter  with,  thenl.  They  added,  that  as  they  sat  on 
that  floor,  they  heard  many  knocks,  the  number  of  which  they  counted,  sounding  on  the 
very  planks  beneath  them,  and  proceeding  with  just  as  much  force  when  they  stationed 
Squire  Fisher  in  the  room  below,  in  which  he  and  two  other  watchers  testified  that  they 
heard  the  knocks  but  could  not  find  any  cause  to  account  for  them 

"  Now,  although  I  heard  all  this,  and  more  to  the  same  effect,  from  persons  whose 
veracity  I  esteemed  at  the  same  rate  as  my  own,  I  determined  to  visit  the  scene  of  the 
hauntings,  and  investigate  their  nature  alone,  before  I  felt  justified  in  abandoning  what  I 
deemed  to  be  the  safe  ground  of  increduhty,  on  the  possibility  of  the  dead  revisiting  the 
earth  and  causing  their  presence  to  be  known  through  the  strange  and  occult  means  here 
detailed. 

"  As  a  minister  of  religion  myself — as  one  who  had  ventured  to  assert  the  fact  of  man's 
immortality,  but  who  could  only  prove  it  from  the  traditions  of  the  past  or  the  hearsay 
of  the  fathers,  I  deemed  it  my  solemn  duty  to  avail  myself  of  any  clue  which  could  open 
up  to  me  an  assurance  of  the  doctrines  I  taught,  and  transmute  faith  into  actual  know- 
ledge. Besides  these  pleadings  of  duty,  I  remembered  mth  some  awe,  and  perplexity, 
certain  experiences  I  had  gone  through  in  a  visit  to  Europe,  amongst  some  French  savants, 
much  given  to  the  practices  of  animal  magnetism.  These  gentlemen,  at  a  pleasant  assem- 
blage where  occult  philosophy  was  the  theme  of  our  conversation,  had  assured  me  I  was  a 
'  fine  magnetic  subject,'  and  begged  me  to  allow  myself  to  be  put  into  the  mesmeric  sleep. 
As  a  mere  matter  of  curiosity,  I  consented  to  their  request ;  but  the  results  were  such  aa 
I  little  anticipated,  and  can  never  forget.  I  became  lost  to  this  earth  and  its  surroundings, 
and  found  myseK  in  realms  of  beauty,  joy,  and  harmony,  the  memory  of  which  I  can 
never  recall  even  now  without  tears.  On  every  side  of  me  I  saw  multitudes  of  radiant 
people  with  glorious  forms,  shining  ajDparel,  and  beautiful  faces.  Some  of  these  divine- 
looking  beings  I  perceived  wore  the  identity  of  those  I  had  once  known  on  earth,  but  whom 
I  had  long  since  regarded  as  dead.  Amongst  them  was  the  form  of  my  blessed  and  much 
loved  mother ;  also  a  lovely  little  sister,  who,  marvellous  to  relate,  still  preserved  her 
identity,  and  was  known  to  me,  although  she  had  grown  up  into  a  peerless  and  angelic- 
looking  woman.  There  were  several  other  well-remembered  and  dearly  loved  sojourners 
of  earth,  none  of  whom  I  should  have  ever  looked  to  meet  again. 

"  These  glorious  beings  filled  me  with  a  wondrous  sense  of  delight,  and  one  or  two  of 
them  spoke  to  me,  though  it  was  the  misfortune  of  my  after  life  that  I  could  not  remember 
what  they  said.  I  beheld  one  wonderful  thing  in  this  scene  of  paradise  which  perplexed 
me  more  than  all  others.  At  times  I  saw  human  beings  of  a  most  horrible  and  repulsive 
appearance,  and  of  different  degrees  of  blackness  and  density.  These  wretched-looking 
objects  were  all  surrounded  by  an  atmosphere  which  seemed  to  correspond  in  color  and 
thickness  to  their  own  bodies  ;  and  what  was  most  astonishing,  was  the  fact  that  I  often 
saw  them,  and  the  bright  beings  surrounded  by  light  and  bloom,  advance  towards  each 
other  with  inconceivable  swiftness,  and  such  a  terrific  momentum,  that  I  looked  to  see 
them  shivered  to  pieces  by  the  shock ;  but  instead  of  this,  I  perceived  that  they  hterally  passed 
thrpugh  each  other's  forms,  and  that  without  betraying  the  least  consciousness  of  meeting, 
seeing,  or  even  being  aware  of  the  others'  presence 

"  In  subsequent  seances  —for  I  practiced  with  these  mesmerists  for  several  months — 
I  saw  the  solution  of  this  singular  problem.  I  perceived  that  the  degrees  of  density  of 
every  world  or  atmosphere  corresponded  to  the  beings  who  dwelt  within  it,  and  that  finer 
and  more  sublimated  spheres  and  spirits  penetrated  and  inhabited  the  grosser  and  denser  ; 
thus  a  vast  number  of  spheres  and  spirit  people  inhered  together,  invisible  to  each  other, 
yet  related  Hke  water  in  a  crystal, .  microscopic  creatures  in  water,  gases  in  the  creatures, 
electricity  in  the  gases,  and  the  innermost  invisible  life  principle  in  all.  I  could  see  world 
within  world,  spheres  of  sublimated  refinement,  brightness,  and  beauty,  penetrating 
within  and  within  and  still  within  the  grosser  and  denser.  I  could  see  the  forms  of  the 
dwellers  in  these  interlacing  atmosphei'es  piercing  each  other,  in-sasible  all  to  each  other ; 
but  for  me  to  look  upon  them  in  this  interior  unfoldment,  was  very  wonderful  and  very 

awful But  to  return.     It  was  on  a  quiet  summer's  evening  that  I  found 

myself,  after  a  long  ramble  in  the  pine  woods,  standing  before  a  melancholy-looking, 
deserted  mansion,  the  park-like  approach  to  which,  with  its  broad  verandahs,  open  courts, 
and  shattered  appearance,  convinced  me  I  had  chanced  upon  the  very  spot  which  I  had  so 
often  designed  to  visit. 

"  The  occasion  seemed  propitious ;  and  as  no  hiiman  being  appeared  to  be  within  or 
about  the  place,  I  resolved  to  explore  it  at  once,  and  to  do  so  in  the  thorough  spirit  of  a 
fearless  investigator. 

"  I  had  no  sooner  made  my  way  through  the  open  doors  and  halls  into  a  suite  of  apart- 
ments which  had  once  been  used  as  reception  rooms,  than  I  experienced  a  sensation  of 
fear,  dislike,  and  repulsion,  which  I  had  never  known  before.  A  sudden  chill  pervaded 
my  whole  frame,  and  a  strongly-defined  impression,  almost  as  clear  as  a  voice,  bore  these 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  505 

words  in  upon  my  mind  :  There  is  a  gulf  between  the  living  and  the  dead  which  humanity 
cannot  endure  to  fathom. 

"  Again  I  thought,  or  something  seemed  to  make  me  think :  How  terrible  is  the 
approach  of  unbodied  spirit !  The  mortal  cannot  stand  in  the  presence  of  the  immortal 
and  live.  Such  sentiments  as  these  oppressed  me  with  a  nameless  and  indescribable  sense 
of  horror.  I  would  have  given  all  I  possessed,  aye,  even  years  of  my  life,  to  fly  the  place, 
and  yet  I  could  not  move.  The  whole  atmosphere  seemed  to  be  full  of  s-pirit,  and  that 
of  a  horrible  and  repulsive  character.  '  How  dreadful  is  this  place  ! '  was  the  thought 
which  at  length  shaped  itself  into  words,  and  with  their  shuddering  utterance,  I  knew  that 
I  had  broken  some  spell.  Instantly  I  perceived  that  a  woman,  young,  once  fair,  but 
hateful  and  antagonistic  to  my  mortal  being,  had  entered  the  haU  and  was  gliding  swiftly 
towards  me.  Had  no  relief  interposed  to  save  me  from  waking  conscious  contact  witla 
this  being,  the  horror  of  that  moment  would,  I  am  certain,  have  terminated  my  earthly 
existence  ;  but  just  then,  as  if  by  a  providential  interposition,  three  gentlemen  of  the 
neighbourhood,  one  of  whom  was  my  intimate  friend.  Squire  Fisher,  entered  the  apart- 
ment from  a  long  gallery  which  they  had  been  traversing  on  the  ojDposite  side  to  that  from 
which  the  spirit  had  borne  down  upon  me.  The  pang  of  horror  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
relief  of  mortal  companionship  on  the  other,  served  to  produce  a  shock  which  threw  me 
instantly  into  the  mesmeric  condition  to  which  I  have  above  alluded,  and  one  which  my 
French  experiences  had  rendered  familiar  to  me. 

"  My  friends  subsequently  informed  me  they  were  horror-struck  to  perceive  me  lying 
on  the  ground  cold,  and  as  they  at  first  deemed,  lifeless,  but  when  one  of  the  party  strove 
to  raise  me,  I  threw  him  off,  and  standing  upright,  I  began  to  speak  in  a  decided  and  un- 
familiar manner,  bidding  them  have  no  fear,  for  that  I  was  'entranced,'  and  should 
converse  with  the  spirits  who  inhabited  that  possessed  mansion.  By  my  command,  some 
rude  seats  were  improvised,  and,  lighted  only  by  the  rays  of  the  full  moon  streaming  in 
brightly  through  the  broken  panes  of  the  shattered  windows,  the  amazed  visitors  re- 
mained listening  to  the  revelations  which  I  poured  forth  under  what  purported  to  be  the 
influence  of  the  risen  soul  of  the  unhappy  suicide,  the  son  of  my  friend  Mr.  W . 

"  Speaking  not  as  myself  (Dr.  Warren),  but  as  Marcus  W ,  I  declared  that  I  was  as 

much  a  living  man  as  I  had  ever  been,  and  moreover  that  I  dwelt  in  that  same  house  still, 
and  should  continue  to  do  so  until  my  spirit  was  freed  from  the  bonds  which  chained  me 
to  it.  I  desired  my  visitors  to  speak  to  me,  and  when,  in  awe  and  confusion,  they  at  first 
began  imperfectly  to  question,  but  finally  to  press  their  queries  with  eagerness  and 
intelligence,  they  learned  from  me,  still  speaking  as  the  spirit  of  the  unfortunate  suicide, 
that  there  is  no  real  death,  only  a  change  of  bodies,  or  outward  coveiings  to  the  soul  ; 
that  with  every  one  of  these  changes  the  soul  enters  upon  an  inner  sphere  to  the  place, 
scene,  and  surroundings  which  it  formerly  occupied  ;  that  its  ubility  to  change  its  locale, 
or  place  of  abode,  depended  wholly  upon  the  power  it  had  acquired  in  its  previous  state  of 
existence.  That  where  the  moral  excellence  of  the  soul  was  great  and  exalted,  its  condi- 
tion was  correspondingly  pure,  beautiful,  and  refined  ;  that  where  the  spirit  was  mighty 
in  intellectual  and  moral  worth,  its  powers  were  almost  iinbounded  ;  whilst  its  capacity  to 
roam  through  and  master  the  various  conditions  of  many  spheres  of  being  were  so 
enlarged,  that  such  spirits  appeared  to  men  like  gods,  and  were  in  reality,  tutelary  spirits, 
or  '  Guardian  Angels.' 

"  Being  urgently  questioned  why  the  spirit  of  Marcus  W continued  to  haunt  and 

disturb  that  place,  I  replied,  in  his  name,  that  /  was  compelled  to  clo  so.  That  the 
strongest  part  of  my  earthly  magnetism  had  been  poured  out  in  that  place  ;  that  crime 
was  strong  passion  ;  strong  passion  ever  liberated  strong  magnetism  ;  and  that  human 
magnetism  formed  '  tractors,'  or  magnetic  points,  which  drew  the  spiritual  body  and 
bound  it  as  forcibly  as  chains  forged  of  the  magnetism  of  the  universe.  They  asked  of 
the  possessing  spirit  if  it  had  companions,  and  who  were  the  female  forms  so  often 
described  by  affrighted  watchers  ;  also  what  produced  the  frightful  noises  that  pierced  the 
awful  solitude.  The  possessing  spirit  replied  that  thousands  of  wretched  beings  like  him- 
self were  attracted  to  his  society,  and  that  it  was  a  part  of  the  law  of  their  lives  that,  as 
the  remembrance  of  their  crimes  returned  to  them  (and  when  was  it  ever  absent  ?)  they 
were  suiTounded  by  the  images  called  up  by  their  thoughts,  and  seemed  madly  impelled 
to  deal  blows  at  those  images,  and  repeat  again  and  again,  in  frenzied  misery,  all  the 
scenes  which  crowded  in  upon  their  minds.  It  was  at  such  times,  he  said,  that  their 
cries,  gi-oans,  and  acts  resounded  through  the  heavy  atmosphere  of  their  prison  house  into 
the  atmosphere  of  earth,  and  became  palpable  alike  to  the  sense  of  sight  and  hearing. 

"  When  asked  if  he  was  sorry  for  the  wrongs  he  had  committed,  he  replied  he  was, 
sometimes,  but  at  other  times  he  was  possessed  by  an  uncontrollable  desire  to  repeat  it  all 
again  and  again,  and  that  that  was  hell,  and  he  could  not  escape  from  it.  Here  he  was 
questioned  as  to  whether  the  Catholic  idea  had  any  foundation  in  fact  that  prayers  and 
penances  performed  by  others  could  avail  him.     He  answered  eagerly  in  the  affirmative, 

5o6  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

assuring  his  hearers  that  the  strong  sympathy  of  human  spirits,  when  directed  towards 
the  earth-bound  soul,  gave  it  psychologic  strength,  and  aided  it  to  pray  for  itself,  and 
ultimately  to  repent,  and  rise  out  of  its  bonds  into  a  condition  of  change  analogous  to 
death  ;  that  when  the  imprisoned  spirit  had  passed  through  this  second  death,  it  entered 
into  a  finer,  purer,  inner  sphere,  and  he  believed  would  have  the  opportunity  to  pi  ogress, 
as  he  had  been  told,  eternally  ;  but  he  didn't  know  ;  he  was  not  ready  for  death  for  his 
part.  He  kept  on  repeating  and  repeating  the  scenes  of  earth,  and  he  supp  sed,  until  he 
had  outgrown  them,  he  could  not  escape  from  the  horrid  necessity  of  going  over  them. 
He  only  knew  he  was  infinitely  wretched,  and  longed  for,  but  could  not  die,  this  second 
death. 

"  One  of  the  interlocutors  here  asked  if  he  and  the  unhappy  spirits  around  him  had 
any  teachers  with  them,  any  guardian  angels  to  help  them  progress.  Here  a  violent 
shuddering  shook  my  frame,  and  the  obsessing  spirit  replied,  with  bitter  curses,  that  often 
and  often  they  saw  bright  lights  flashing  amidst  them,  and  they  knew  they  were  the 
spirits  of  purer  and  better  spheres,  come  to  try  and  reform  them.  Sometimes,  he  added, 
they  heard  celestial  voices  urging  them  to  pray,  and  strive  to  banish  the  horrid  desires 
that  oppressed  them. 

"  There  were  some,  the  spirit  added,  who  followed  these  Hghts  with  weeping,  wailing, 
and  penitential  tears  ;  then  they  laid  down  to  sleep,  and  melted  out  of  that  sphere — that 
is,  they  passed  on  higher.  But  others,  like  himself,  saw  the  lights,  and  heard  the  voices  ; 
and  though  for  a  moment  they  felt  remorse,  and  a  wild  aspiration  to  overcome  their 
miserable  propensities,  they  generally  returned  to  them  with  added  fury,  and  then  they 
mocked  and  gibed  at  the  angels,  and  bid  them  go  hence  with  curses.  He  added,  all  such 
angels  as  penetrated  into  the  sphere  iu  which  he  dwelt  were  called  '  Christs,'  but  he 
believed  they  were  only  good  and  pure  souls  of  men  and  women  that  had  once  lived  on 
earth,  and  many  ^vi3e,  though  wicked  spirits  he  conversed  with  had  said  that  was  what 
'  Christ,'  '  Mediator,'  and  '  Saviour '  meant ;  also  that  the  great  love  and  pity  which  good 
men  felt  towards  poor  earth-bound  spirits  did  at  last  give  them  strength,  and  help  them 
to  rise  ;  '  and  so,'  said  this  intellectual  but  morally  degraded  spirit,  'this  is  what  is  meant 
by  a  Saviour,  bearing  the  transgressions  of  many,  and  thus  it  is  that  "  with  His  stripes  we 
are  healed." '     .     .     .     . 

"  It  was  far  in  the  night  when  I  awoke  in  that  place  of  dread.  My  three  friends  were 
kneeling  around  me,  praying  fervently,  with  streaming  eyes,  and  hearts  wrung  with 
anguish,  for  pity  on  the  miserable  spirits  who  were  there  bound  in  the  prison-house  of 
their  earthly  crimes.  As  for  me,  I  neither  comprehended  their  pious  occupation,  nor  my 
own  share  in  the  terrible  revelations  to  which  they  had  been  listening.  They  led  me  to 
my  home,  but  it  required  several  days  of  rest,  and  calm  communion  with  my  deeply- 
moved  companions,  to  restore  my  mind  to  its  wonted  peace,  and  make  me  apprehend  the 
fuU  force  of  what  had  transpired,  the  memoranda  of  which  they  had  made  from  their 
joint  recollections  of  the  scene. 

"  The  fearful  and  loathsome  impression  produced  upon  me  by  that  one  night's  inter- 
course with  '  the  spirits  in  prison '  never  became  modified,  or  faded  out  of  memory. 
Within  a  few  days  of  its  occurrence,  I  succeeded  in  procuring  a  substitute,  and  imme- 
diately upon  his  ari'ival  I  quitted  the  neighbourhood  of  the  hated  dwelhng.  The  friends 
who  had  been  sharers  in  my  painful  experiences  in  vain  urged  me  to  renew  them,  and 
devote  myself  to  the  reform  of  the  unhappy  spirits  who  dwelt  in  the  bonds  of  earthly 
crime  within  that  awful  mansion.  No  sense  of  duty,  however  strong,  could  persuade  me 
again  to  renew  the  loathsome,  and  as  I  still  deem  it,  unnatural  intercourse  between  the 
mortal  and  the  spirit.  I  know  that  what  I  have  written  is  true.  I  know  that  the 
experiences  and  revelations  of  the  movement  known  as  modern  Spiritualism  can  add 
nothing  to  the  terrible  revelations  of  that  night  of  horror  ;  but  though  I  believe  in  the 
truth  of  spirit  communion,  and  doubt  not  that  the  intercourse  with  purer  spheres  and 
higher  existences  may  be  fraught  with  pleasure  and  instruction,  I  can  never  again  consent 
to  place  myself  in  such  a  position  as  to  overstep  the  boundaries  of  the  sphere  in  which  I 
have  been  mercifully  limited  by  the  providence  of  my  all- wise  Creator." 

The  narrative  of  Dr.  Joseph  Warren  proves  to  us  conclusively  that  there 
are  certain  grand  central  truths,  revealed  to  us  through  Spirit  communion, 
concerning  the  condition  of  the  soul  hereafter,  which  do  not  change  nor 
become  modified  by  time,  place,  nor  Mediumistic-  idiosyncracies.  If  the 
above  narration  contains  no  philosophy  starding  from  its  novelty,  it  impresses 
us  forcibly  with  the  fact  that  prior,  as  well  as  subsequent  to,  the  celebrated 
era  we  designate  the  Rochester  knockings,  well  attested  communications 
from  the  realm  of  soul  life  invariably  teach  the  stupendous  lesson  that  we 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  so? 

carry  our  own  doomsday  book  within  us,  and  that  life  hereafter  is  not  only  a 
continuation,  but  an  inevitable  result  of  the  good  or  evil  deeds  we  have 
sown  in  the  rudimental  sphere  of  mortality. 

Of  the  following  two  cases  (the  first  occurring  in  1834,  the  second  in  1836) 
a  vast  mass  of  published  testimony  exists,  variously  written,  and  profusely 
attested. 

The  most  concise  and  authentic  accounts  that  we  can  select,  are  to  be 
found  in  a  httle  volume  written  by  Mr.  Henry  Spicer,  entitled  "  Sights  and 
Sounds,"  and  published  in  England,  in  1853. 

This  work  is  professedly  an  account  of  "  all  the  modern  Spiritual  mani- 
festations "  which  have  occurred  in  America ;  and  one  of  its  chief  points  of 
interest  is  derived  from  the  exceeding  care  which  the  author  has  taken  to 
verify  all  he  relates. 

"The  first  regularly  recorded  American  manifestations  commenced  in  the  year  1834, 
at  Canandaigua,  New  York,  and  recurred  in  1836,  in  various  parts  of  Pennsylvania, 

"  It  is  stated  that  the  witnesses,  now  living,  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  attest  the 
details  which  follow,  are  numerous  and  respectable,  besides  being  persons  who  were  in  the 
highest  degree  incredulous,  and  who  repaired  to  the  theatre  of  operations  in  order  to 
detect,  if  possible,  the  means  by  which  they  were  effected. 

"  Mr.  Dods  was  a  resident  in  the  village  of  Levant,  Penobscot  County,  Maine.  The 
first  intimation  that  gentleman  or  his  family  received,  that  they  were  to  be  made  the 
subject  of  any  unusual  manifestation,  was  conveyed  in  certain  rappings,  sometimes  on  the 
outside  door  of  his  house,  sometimes  within,  on  the  walls,  in  the  chambers,  in  fact,  in 
every  part  of  his  dwelling.  Coming  from  the  village  late  one  evening,  he  observed  the 
school-house  brilliantly  lighted,  and  forms  of  men  and  women  moving  to  and  fro.  As  he 
drew  near,  the  lights  were  suddenly  extinguished.  Fancying,  however,  that  the  scholars 
had  assembled  for  a  dance,  he  crept  silently  to  the  door,  and,  opening  it  suddenly,  stepped 
within.     All  was  darkness  and  silence — not  a  human  being  was  to  be  found  ! 

"On  other  occasions,  noises  like  the  rolling  of  a  heavy  metal  ball  were  heard  to 
reverberate  from  one  end  of  the  house  to  the  other ;  bedsteads  were  lifted  and  turned 
round,  tables  moved  across  the  room,  lights  danced  up  and  down  the  road  before  the  house, 
or  assembled  in  an  open  space,  and  then  mingled  in  what  suggested  to  the  astonished 
watchers  the  idea  of  some  fantastic  dance  ! 

"  The  scene  of  these  extraordinary  phenomena  was  visited  by  so  many  persons,  that 
the  clerk  of  the  county  courts  deemed  it  his  duty  to  visit  the  spot,  with  his  assistant,  and 
endeavour  to  detect  and  expose  the  trick. 

"  Mr.  Dods  was  perfectly  willing  to  receive  them,  and  permitted  them  to  select  their 
own  apartment,  to  which,  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  they  withdrew. 

"  They  fastened  the  door,  secured  the  windows,  searched  the  room,  closet,  and  bed,  and 
were  confident  that  no  human  being  was  in  the  room,  or  conld  get  in  without  their 
knowledge.     Placing  the  candle  on  the  table,  unextinguished,  they  went  to  bed. 

"  Soon  after  they  retired,  they  felt  the  bedclothes  move.  They  immediately  caught 
hold  of  the  quilts,  and  braced  themselves  against  the  footposts  of  the  bedsteads.  The 
clothes  continued  to  move  iintil  they  relaxed  their  hold,  when  the  quilts  and  sheet 
hopped  six  feet  from  the  bed  on  to  the  floor.  The  candle  was  burning,  but  no  visible 
power  could  be  detected.  The  bed  was  again  searched,  but  nothing  was  found.  They 
replaced  the  clothes,  and  once  more  got  into  bed. 

"  In  a  very  few  moments  the  feather-bed  started  out  from  under  them,  and  fell  on  the 
floor,  notwithstanding  their  united  exertions  to  retain  it  in  its  place. 

"  The  adventurers  never  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  slightest  clue  to^these  disturbances. 
The  like  fortune  attended  other  inquirirg  friends  of  Mr.  Dods. 

"  At  length,  a  company  of  gentlemen  from  various  parts  of  the  country,  assembled  at 
the  house,  in  the  hope  of  witnessing  the  manifestations.     Nor  were  they  disappointed. 

"  They  were  conversing  freely  on  various  topics,  when  a  noise  was  heard,  like  the 
rumbling  of  distant  thunder.  It  continued  to  increase  in  loudness,  drawing  nearer  and 
nearer,  and  at  last  burst  directly  over  the  house,  shaking  the  whole  structure  to  its  very 
foundation.  This  took  place  in  winter,  and  the  stars  shown  out  clear  and  cold.  Soon 
after  this,  a  noise  was  heard  in  the  attic  Uke  the  trundling  of  iron  balls,  and  it  continued 
for  ten  minutes,  when  the  company  were  startled  by  a  heavy  weight  falling  apparently 
from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor.  It  immediately  commenced  rolling  about  the  room  ;  would 
glide  under  the  chairs  without  touching  them,  jump  over  the  table,  strike  the  four  sides 
of  the  room,  bounding,  Avithout  touching  the  floor,  and  at  last  it  hopped  upon  a  bed  which 
stood  in  one  corner  of  the  room,  and  moved  from  the  head  to  the  foot. 

5o8  NTNETEENTH  CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"  The  clothes  were  distinctly  seen  to  settle  under  it,  as  if  some  heavy  weight  was 
pressing  them  down,  A  gentleman  in  the  room  walked  towards  the  bed,  with  the 
seeming  intention  to  take  hold  of,  or  arrest  its  progress  ;  but  one  of  the  company  caught 
hold  of  his  arm,  and  said,  '  Do  not  touch  it  for  your  life.'  It  then  dropped  on  the  floor, 
and  rolled  out  of  the  side  of  the  house. 

"  During  all  these  phenomena  nothing  could  be  seen.  That  which  made  the  noise  was 
invisible. 

"  It  would  appear  that  the  spirit  was  by  no  means  of  a  communicative  disposition,  since, 
after  indulging  in  many  similar  manifestations,  it  ultimately  withdrew  from  the  house 
and  neighbourhood,  leaving  all  parties  in  total  ignorance  as  to  its  character  and  object. 

"  Eighteen  years  since,  in  1834,  the  Newark  Advertiser  published  a  curious  narrative  of 
a  rapping  case,  into  the  truth  of  which  its  agents  had  previously  inquired. 

"  It  appeared  that  on  a  certain  night  the  family  of  a  Mr.  Joseph  Barron,  Hving  in  the 
township  of  Woodbridge,  about  three  miles  from  Rahway,  Newark  County,  were  alarmed, 
after  they  had  retired,  by  a  loud  thumping  against  the  house.  Mr.  Barron's  first  impres- 
sion was,  that  some  person  was  attempting  to  break  in  ;  but  further  observation  soon 
undeceived  him.  The  thumping,  however,  continued  at  short  intervals,  until  the  family 
became  so  alarmed,  that  Mr  Barron  called  in  some  of  his  neighbours,  who  remained  up 
with  the  family  until  daylight,  when  the  thumping  ceased. 

"  The  next  evening,  after  nightfall,  the  noise  recommenced,  when  it  was  ascertained  to 
be  mysteriously  connected  with  the  movements  of  a  servant  girl  in  the  family,  about 
fourteen  years  of  age. 

"  When  passing  a  window  on  the  stairs,  for  example,  a  sudden  jar,  accompanied  with 
an  explosive  sound,  broke  a  pane  of  glass,  the  girl  at  the  same  moment  being  seized  with 
a  violent  spasm.  This,  of  course,  very  much  alarmed  her,  and  a  physician  (Dr.  Drake) 
was  sent  for,  came,  and  bled  her.  The  bleeding,  however,  produced  no  apparent  effect. 
The  noise  still  continued  as  before,  at  intervals,  wherever  the  girl  went,  each  sound 
producing  more  or  less  of  a  spasm  ;  and  the  physician,  with  the  family,  remained  up 
during  the  night.  At  daylight  the  thumping  ceased  again.  On  the  third  evening  the 
same  thing  was  repeated,  commencing  a  little  earlier  than  before,  and  so  every  evening. 

"  The  circumstance  rapidly  spread,  and  produced  a  vast  excitement,  the  house  being 
filled  and  surrounded  from  morning  till  night.  All  imaginable  means  were  resorted  to 
in  order  to  unravel  the  phenomenon.  At  one  time  the  girl  would  be  removed  from 
one  apartment  to  another  without  effect.  Wherever  she  was  placed,  at  uncertain  intervals, 
the  thumping  noise  would  be  heard  in  the  room. 

"  She  was  taken  to  a  neighbour's  house ;  the  same  result  followed.  When  carried 
out  of  doors,  however,  no  noise  was  heard. 

"  Dr.  Drake,  who  had  been  constant  in  his  attentions  during  the  whole  period,  on  one 
occasion,  in  company  with  the  agents  of  the  paper,  made  a  variety  of  experiments  with 
the  girl,  who  was  j^laced  in  an  upper  room  with  some  members  of  the  family.  The  noises 
would  be  produced  five  or  six  times  in  succession,  jarring  the  house,  ceasing  a  few  minutes, 
and  then  resuming  as  before.  The  girl  appeared  to  be  in  perfect  health,  cheerful,  and 
free  from  everything  like  the  apprehension  she  had  on  former  occasions  exhibited.  The 
noise,  however,  continued  ;  and  in  order  to  ascertain  more  satisfactorily  that  she  was  not 
herself  the  author  of  it,  she  was  placed  on  a  chair  upon  a  blanket,  in  the  centre  of  the 
room,  the  chair  being  bandaged  with  cloth,  the  girl's  feet  fastened,  and  her  hands  confined. 

"  AH  these  precautions  produced  no  change,  the  thumping  continuing  as  before,  though 
the  girl  moved  neither  limb  nor  muscle. 

'"  She  was  then  placed  in  the  doorway  of  a  closet,  the  door  being  ajar.  In  less  than  a 
minute  it  flew  open,  as  if  violently  struck  with  a  mallet,  accompanied  with  precisely  such 
a  noise  as  would  be  produced  in  such  a  case." 

The  records  of  this  century,  and  the  experience  of  numerous  persons  still 
Uving,  furnish  many  more  cases  strictly  analogous  to  that  of  the  modern 
movement,  yet  lacking  the  scientific  explanation  which  has  been  so  generally 
received  since  1848. 

Spiritual  beings  who  appeared  eighteen  centuries  ago  are  regarded  by 
modern  Christianity  as  "  Angels,"  sometimes  as  "  God  "  in  person  ;  while 
trance  speakers  of  the  same  period  are  spoken  of  as  "  Prophets,"  "  Men  of 
God,"  and  considered  to  be  plenarily  inspired  by  the  Almighty  himself. 

The  very  same  persons  who  make  these  enormous  claims  for  ancient 
Spiritualism,  write  of  Spiritual  appearances  in  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth 
centuries  as  necessarily  being  the  work  of  human  imposture,  or  if  genuine, 

D^  E  .Y.Mansfield 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  509 

at  the  very  most,  of  "  evil  spirits,"  while  the  trance  speakers  whose  utterances 
they  can  neither  ignore  nor  account  for,  they  pertinaciously  denounce  as 
"diseased"  or  ''insane." 

It  is  to  mark  the  vast  and  important  change  in  public  opinion  which  the 
advent  of  modern  Spiritualism  with  all  its  scientific  facts  has  wrought,  and 
show  the  flood  of  light  which  it  has  poured  upon  the  subject  of  man's 
Spiritual  nature  and  life  beyond  the  grave,  that  we  have  ventured  to  inflict 
upon  the  reader  narratives  with  which  the  experiences  of  the  last  twenty- 
five  years  have  completely  familiarized  us. 

"  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  "  have  indeed  "  seen  a  great  light ;  " 
and  nothing  more  conclusively  proves  this  truth,  so  wonderfully  illustrated 
in  our  own  time,  than  these  brief  notices  of  the  early  Spiritualism  of  the 
nineteenth  century. 

CHAPTER     LVIII. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN      AMERICA     (CONTINUED). 

Wonderful  Phenomenal  Manifestations. 

\\VYitUn  by  the.  Auihor  of  "Nineteenth  Century  Miracles,"  atid  Jirst  published  in  the 
''  Western  Star,"   Boston.'} 

Passing  on  to  the  manifestations  which  succeeded  the  famous  "  Rochester 
knockings"  in  1848,  and  selecting  from  hundreds  of  wonderful  narratives  a 
few  only,  of  what  may  be  considered  as  representative  cases,  we  call  atten- 
tion to  two  or  three  well-attested  examples  of  the  direct  Spirit  voice.  The 
first  notice  cited,  is  borrowed  from  the  June  number  of  Mr.  Stephen  Albro's 
excellent  Spiritual  journal  entitled  The  S^oibeaui.*  In  this  Mr  Albro  gives 
a  condensed  account  of  certain  manifestations  transpiring  at  Medina,  the 
report  of  which  was  of  so  extraordinary  a  character,  that  Mr.  Albro  was  at 
much  pains  to  ascertain  the  real  facts.  The  result  of  his  enquiries  he 
publishes  as  follows  : — 

"  Our  informants  are  several  of  the  most  respectable  inhabitants  of  Medina,  amongst 
them  a  young  lady,  educated,  intelligent,  and  truthful,  who  visits  in  a  wealthy  and 
distinguished  family  who  are  constantly  annoyed  with  the  presence  of  a  badly  brought  up, 
uncivil  '  spirit. '  This  spirit  began  to  '  cut  up  '  about  two  years  since.  First  it  commenced 
'  rapping '  in  the  bedroom  of  two  young  ladies,  members  of  the  family.  It  '  rapped  '  on 
the  walls,  the  floor,  the  ceiling,  above,  below,  all  around,  and  finally  commenced  pulling 
the  bedding  from  the  bed.  The  young  ladies,  nearly  frightened  out  of  their  senses,  ran 
do^vn-stairs  and  reported  the  terrible  phenomenon  to  their  parents.  The  spirit  followed, 
and  the  entire  household  were  smitten  with  terror. 

"  But  after  they  had  become  satisfied  that  the  noise  and  other  demonstrations  proceeded 
from  a  '  spirit,'  and  when  their  excitement  had  partially  subsided,  they  determined  to  hold 
a  circle  by  way  of  ascertaining  who  their  invisible  tormentor  might  be.  No  sooner  did  they 
commence  their  enquiries,  than  to  their  horror  they  received  vocal  responses. 

"  The  si^irit  informed  them  in  audible,  but  not  very  polished  English,  that  his  name 
was  '  Josh  ;'  that  he  died  about  thirty  years  since  in  South  Carolina  ;  that  when  on  earth 
he  was  ignorant  and  debased,  so  that  when  he  passed  into  the  sjsirit  world  he  was  confined 
to  the  lowest  spheres  ;  that  he  finally  wandered  ofi",  and  had  now  concluded  to  become  a 

*  Published  at  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  now  suspended, 

5IO  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

resident  in  the  family  where  he  made  himself  '  manifest ;'  that  he  should  remain  with 
them,  because  he  found  them  congenial,  and  that  he  intended  to  stay  with  them  for  years 
to  come ;  that  no  power  could  drive  him  away  ;  and  if  he  was  not  used  well  he  would 
'  knock  things  endwise,'  and  make  himself  generally  disagreeable. 

"From  that  time  to  the  present,  'Josh  '  has  been  a  fixture  in  the  family,  and  laughs, 
talks,  cracks  jokes,  etc.,  as  if  he  was  still  occupying  his  fleshly  tenement. 

"  He  is  somewhat  passionate,  and  frequently  breaks  crockery,  or  mars  furniture,  when 
he  is  offended. 

"But  he  is  easily  coaxed.  When  company  is  expected,  'Josh'  is  importuned  to  keep 
quiet.  Upon  one  occasion  the  young  ladies  were  expecting  company,  and  were  particularly 
desirous  that  'Josh'  should  keep  perfectly  still  during  the  sojourn  of  the  visitors. 

"  After  receiving  a  thorough  outlay  of  flattery  and  coaxing,  he  agreed  to  keep  '  mum,' 
'  but,'  said  he,  '  I  shall  remain  here  upon  this  end  of  the  piano.  There  is  no  need  of  my 
leaving  the  room.' 

"  The  next  day  he  stated  that  he  sat  upon  the  piano  during  the  visit,  and  to  prove 
what  he  said,  he  repeated  a  portion  of  the  conversation  between  the  young  ladies  and 
their  '  company.' 

"  At  one  time,  when  the  laundress  was  ironing  in  the  kitchen,  '  Josh '  seized  one  of  the 
flat-irons  and  ran  upstairs  with  it,  where  he  was  heard  in  high  glee  after  the  feat  was 
accomplished.  The  iron  was  very  hot,  and  by  being  placed  momentarily  on  several  of  the 
stairs,  left  its  imprint  wherever  it  stood.  Writing  is  a  favourite  amusement  with  this 
remarkable  '  spirit.'  He  writes  messages  and  throws  them  upon  the  floor  quite  frequently. 
His  chirography  is  awful,  and  his  orthography  of  the  same  pattern. 

"  '  Josh '  is  very  fond  of  children,  and  treats  them  with  becoming  consideration. 

"  When  the  adult  members  of  the  family  leave  the  house,  the  children  are  entrusted 
to  the  special  care  and  guardianship  of  the  said  spirit,  and  he,  hke  a  worthy  ghost,  leads 
them  from  all  harm. 

"  This  is  only  a  meagre  beginning  of  the  story  of  '  Josh,'  the  spirit.  It  comes  direct 
from  a  family  of  the  highest  respectabiUty,  and  is  corroborated  by  the  statements  of 
several  '  neighbours,'  who  have  also  been  favoured  with  frequent  conversations  from  the 
disembodied  individual  above  described." 

The  author  is  in  possession  of  several  other  reports  furnished  by  different 
individuals  who  were  moved  by  curiosity  to  visit  the  haunted  family  at 
Medina,  but  as  they  contain  but  little  variety,  and  the  head  of  the  family 
at  last  emphatically  declined  to  furnish  any  farther  information  on  the 
subject,  the  above  extract  will  suffice.  About  the  same  time  as  these 
marvels  were  transpiring  in  Medina,  a  similar  visitation  occurred  at  Williams- 
port,  Penn.,  and  the  extraordinary  resemblance  that  appears  between  the 
two  cases  has  led  to  the  supposition  that  they  both  referred  to  the  same 
phenomena. 

The  author's  personal  knowledge  of  the  family  who  were  the  subjects  of 
the  following  details,  enables  her  to  refute  this  statement,  and  to  allege  that 
the  Williamsport  talking  Spirit  was  known  and  listened  to  by  hundreds  of 
curious  visitors,  and  that  the  witnesses  of  this  fact  are  numerous,  respectable, 
and  still  living.  We  shall  cite  the  report  furnished  by  the  Penn.  Bulletin 
of  June  i6,  1859. 

"  TALKING   SPIRITS. 

"  Williamsport  has,  through  all  times  of  excitement  on  Spiritualism,  remained  quiet 
and  undisturbed.     But  our  city  is  destined  to  have  its  share,  even  on  this  subject.    .    .    . 

"  We  suppress  names  for  the  present,  because  the  family  do  not  wish  to  be  troubled  by 
being  made  the  centre  of  curiosity,  or  to  have  people  rushing  in  at  all  hours  to  learn  the 
truth.  The  facts  are  briefly  these  :  In  the  west  ward  of  this  city  reside  a  quiet  family, 
exemplary  in  all  respects,  the  heads  of  which  are,  and  have  been  for  a  long  time,  members 
of  the  Pine  Street  M.  E.  Church.  A  short  time  ago  they  were  surprised  at  certain,  or, 
perhaps  we  should  say,  very  uncertain  sounds,  as  of  rapping  with  the  fingers  or  knuckles, 
and  sometimes  a  scraping  or  scratching  noise  on  the  floor  or  wall. 

"  These  sounds  seemed  to  follow  a  young  girl,  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  a  daughter 
of  the  gentleman  of  the  house.  For  a  time  they  paid  no  attention  to  them  ;  but  they 
increased  in  such  a  manner  as  to  compel  attention,  and  were  apparently  determiued  to  be 
heard,     What  was  more  strange,  was  the  fact  that  the  spirit — or  whatever  it  is — ngw 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  511 

speaks  in  an  audible  voice.  At  first  it  called  the  name  of  the  young  girl,  and  of  other 
persons.  The  pious  head  of  the  family  betook  himself  to  prayer  in  order  to  lay  the  spirit, 
but  it  would  not  down. 

"  On  Saturday  evening  last  the  pastor  was  sent  for,  and  he,  after  convincing  himself 
that  there  was  no  fraud  on  the  part  of  the  family,  called  in  another  aged  and  well-known 
clergyman.  They  both  prayed,  and  the  unseen  visitant  spoke  audibly  during  the  prayers 
of  each.  On  Sunday  morning  the  girl  attended  church  with  the  family.  There  the 
rapping  was  heard  by  several,  and  the  girl's  name  was  called.  Fearing  to  attract  attention, 
she  left  the  church.     At  a  class-meeting,  the  same  day,  the  same  phenomena  occurred. 

"  This  much  and  a  great  deal  more  had  occurred  up  to  Sunday  morning  last.  It  seems 
to  follow  the  girl,  yet  some  demonstrations  have  occurred  when  she  was  out  of  the  house. 
They  have  talked  and  rapped  at  her,  or  with  her,  while  in  the  street,  and  on  the  gate,  the 
door-steps,  and  other  places  ;  and,  aa  we  understand,  the  talking  has  continued  while  the 
gii-l  was  absent  from  the  house. 

"  The  members  of  the  familj^,  with  whom  we  conversed,  say  they  are  all  satisfied  that 
there  is  no  possibility  of  trick  or  collusion  in  the  matter  on  the  part  of  any  human  being. 
The  two  clergymen  pronounce  the  whole  thing  entirely  inexplicable,  and  we  are  told  that 
they  also  are  satisfied  that  no  member  of  the  family  has  any  agency  in  producing  the 
sounds  or  the  talking. 

"  The  parties  are  too  respectable  to  admit  of  the  theory  of  collusion.  Indeed,  they  are 
all  greatly  pained  at  the  occurrences,  and  would  gladly  be  rid  of  them. 

"  We  await  further  developments,  and  will  report  if  anything  more  definite  transpires." 

In  the  West  Branch  Bulletin  of  Williamsport,  of  February,  i860,  are 
the  following  additional  particulars  :  - 

"  MORE   ABOUT   THE    '  TALKING   SPIRITS.' 

"  We  have  taken  some  trouble  to  ascertain  the  facts  connected  with  the  singular  case 
of  noises  and  strange  sounds  which  we  reported  last  week.  It  seems  that  the  girl,  who 
appears  to  be  the  medium  for  these  manifestations,  is  not  of  a  robust  constitution,  but  is 
quite  nervous,  and  has,  at  times,  been  extremely  ill. 

"  About  a  year  ago  she  was  playing  with  another  girl  about  her  own  age,  when  both 
fell  into  a  well.  The  subject  of  the  present  excitement  was  rescued  ahve  ;  but  the  other 
lost  her  life.  The  voice  which  speaks  to  the  medium  makes  frequent  allusions  to  this 
circumstance,  generally  in  a  trifling  and  taunting  way.  It  will  say,  '  How  would  you  like 
to  be  down  in  that  well  again  ? '  or  '  How  did  you  like  it  when  you  fell  into  the  well  ? ' 

"  After  the  family  had  been  greatly  annoyed  by  strange  sounds,  knocking,  thumping,  etc., 
for  several  days,  the  girl  said  :  '  In  the  name  of  God,  what  do  you  want  ? ' 

"  To  their  utter  consternation,  a  voice  replied,  plainly  and  distinctly  :  '  You,  you,  you  ! 
I  want  you  ! '  and  from  this  time  talking  was  common. 

"  Not  only  would  it  follow  the  girl,  but  when  she  was  up-stairs,  and  the  other  part  of 
the  family  down,  and  in  a  diiferent  part  of  the  house,  the  voice  would  speak  to  them. 
.  This  seems  to  preclude  the  hypothesis  of  some  specialty  attaching  to  this  girl.  Men  of 
candour  and  judgment,  who  were  there  and  heard  for  themselves,  have  no  idea  that  there 
was  a  possibility  of  any  deception  on  the  part  of  any  of  the  family.  If  it  is  a  spirit,  it 
must  be  a  mischievous  one,  or  be  among  what  Swedenborg  calls  the  'infernals.'  At  one 
time  it  said :  '  I  was  in  heaven  once,  but  I  did  not  like  it  there.  I  climbed  over  the 
battlements  and  came  down  here  ;  I  am  in  hell  now,  and  will  have  you  there.  We  have 
to  gnash  our  teeth  some,  but  that  don't  hurt ;  anybody  can  do  that.' 

"  When  a  clergyman  was  spoken  of,  it  expressed  great  contempt  for  him,  and  paid  very 
little  respect  to  him  while  in  the  attitude  and  act  of  prayer,  in  which  all  the  family  joined, 
as  the  voices  and  talking  were  irreverently  continued. 

"  It  said  if  the  clergyman  came  again  it  would  show  him  a  cloven  foot. 

"  We  have  conversed  with  a  gentleman  who  sat  near  the  '  medium '  in  church  on 
Sunday  morning  week.  He  says  the  sounds  were  as  loud  as  if  made  with  a  mallet,  and 
the  calling  of  the  medium's  name  was  heard  by  all  in  that  part  of  the  church.  The 
officiating  clergyman  also  heard  the  sounds  at  the  same  time. 

"  Since  that  Sunday  evening  or  the  Monday  morning  following,  we  learn  that  there 
have  been  no  manifestations.  The  girl,  from  the  effects  of  fright,  and  other  exciting 
causes,  is  prostrated,  and  her  case  is  considered  very  critical." 

The  following  narrative  is  equally  well  known,  and  has  been  thoroughly 
investigated  by  the  author.  It  is  on  the  subject  of  the  life,  times,  and 
doings  of  Bill  Dole,  both  as  a  mortal  and  a  Spirit,  and  we  are  furnished 

512 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

with  numerous  affidavits  from  the  parties  who  have  conversed  with  his 
invisible  ghostship  by  the  hour  together.  We  have  visited  the  scene  of 
the  hauntings  too,  and  though  the  parties  in  whose  house  the  marvels 
occurred  have  moved  away,  numerous  residents  of  Logansport  still  bear 
their  testimony  to  the  facts,  which  we  must  briefly  sum  up  as  follows  : — 

It  was  very  soon  after  the  first  commencement  of  the  disturbances  at 
Hydesville  that  a  family  named  Lewis,  German  by  birth,  residing  at  Logans- 
port,  were  annoyed  by  singular  and  unaccountable  noises  and  erratic  move- 
ments of  their  furniture.  A  sound  too  was  often  heard  in  their  midst  like 
the  whining  of  a  small  animal,  and  this  would  taper  off  (to  use  their 
own  expression)  into  low  whisperings.  The  family  were  reUgiously  disposed 
persons,  and  at  no  time  were  favourable  to  the  idea  of  Spirit  communion. 

Greatly  disliking  publicity,  and  repelled  from  every  attempt  to  communi- 
cate with  their  invisible  tormentor,  they  endured  these  hauntings  for  some 
time  without  mentioning  their  occurrence,  until,  as  the  newspaper  accounts 
relate,  they  were  startled  with  distinctly  audible  vocal  sounds. 

At  first  their  names  only  were  called,  then  connected  sentences  were 
spoken,  and  finally  an  invisible  personage  established  himself  in  the  family, 
conversing  with  them  as  freely  as  any  mortal  inmate  could  do,  and  though 
annoying  them  greatly  in  respect  to  his  supermundane  character  and 
ubiquitous  presence,  yet  manifesting  all  the  attributes,  predilections,  and 
characteristics  of  a  regular  member  of  the  family.  His  own  account  of 
himself  was,  that  he  had  been  in  earth  life  a  tailor  by  trade,  his  name  William, 
or  as  he  chose  to  style  himself,  "  Bill  Dole." 

Some  accounts  represent  him  as  having  been  a  man  addicted  to  drink, 
and  dying  under  the  influence  of  delirium  tremens ;  but  the  most  authentic 
history  of  his  exit  from  the  mortal  sphere,  represents  it  as  occurring  through 
an  act  of  suicide  by  drowning. 

He  affirmed  that  he  had  dwelt  some  time  in  the  Spirit  world,  but  found 
his  positioh  there  very  far  from  satisfactory ;  in  fact,  so  contrary  to  his 
inchnations,  that  he  had  resolved  not  to  stay  there,  and  finding  from  some 
power  in  and  about  that  family  that  he  was  unable  to  define,  that  he  could 
make  himself  at  home  amongst  them,  he  had  resolved  to  take  up  his  resi- 
dence there ;  and  "  there  he  meant  to  stay,"  and  did  stay,  for  a  period 
extending  over  upwards  of  two  years. 

Bill  Dole's  adventures  in  his  self-elected  home  would  occupy  volumes,  but 
we  need  not  dwell  on  details  which  present  a  very  great  similarity  of 
character,  save  to  notice  that  the  invisible  performer  was,  as  in  each  of  the 
preceding  instances,  a  person  of  entirely  different  habits  and  temper  from 
his  earthly  associates.  Bill  Dole  interlarded  his  conversation  with  rude 
oaths  and  profane  remarks,  besides  manifesting  extreme  self-will,  and  when 
thwarted,  propensities  to  violence,  and  even  mischief.  He  would  knock, 
pound,  stamp  his  feet,  run  about  the  house  with  a  great  clatter,  and  "knock 
things  around  generally."  He  manifested  a  great  contempt  for  orthodox 
religion,  and  on  one  occasion,  when  a  clergyman,  who  frequently  conversed 
and  remonstrated  with  the  Spirit,  offered  up  a  fervent  prayer  in  his  behalf, 
Bill  Dole  called  out,  in  hearing  of  the  minister  and  all  assembled,  "  Well, 
I  don't  feel  a  d d  bit  better  for  that." 

On  two  or  three  occasions  he  accompanied  the  family  to  church,  where 
his  remarks  were  clearly  heard  by  the  whole  congregation,  who  affirm  that 
he  pronounced  the  sermon  preached  at  him,  "  all  d d  stuff." 

On  other  occasions  he  was  heard  to  vociferate  "  Amen  ! "  and  "  Good  for 
you,  old  fellow  !  "  (meaning  the  clergyman)  with  great  unction, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  513 

Generally  however,  during  religious  service,  at  church  or  "  to  hum,"  as 
he  called  the  house  he  favoured  with  his  presence,  he  contented  himself 
with  making  tremendous  poundings,  always  giving  two  knocks  for  "Amen," 
or  else  calling  out  the  Christian  names  of  the  lady  or  her  daughters  who 
were  supposed  to  be  the  Mediums. 

At  times  the  cloth  and  every  article  necessary  for  a  meal  was  laid 
suddenly,  whilst  the  family  were  absent  from  the  dining-room  for  the  space 
of  a  minute  or  two.  Bill  would  sometimes  carry  heavy  loads  about  for 
them,  and  when  in  a  good  humour,  perform  many  little  kindly  offices.  He 
was  especially  fond  of  the  children  ;  would  guard  and  watch  over  them  with 
wonderful  power,  and  obvious  affection  ;  indeed,  their  mother  complained 
that  Bill  spoiled  them,  as  he  would  get  for  them  whatever  they  asked  of  him. 

On  one  occasion,  when  the  mother  was  preparing  their  lunch  to  taV:;  to 
school,  Bill,  in  his  usual  authoritative  way,  desired  that  they  should  ''ave 
some  jam  spread  over  their  bread. 

This  they  had  asked  him  to  procure  for  them,  but  the  mother  refused, 
alleging  that  it  was  not  good  for  them.  Bill  swore  they  should  have  it, 
and  during  the  recess  in  school  time  kept  his  word,  by  dropping  down  a 
pot  of  jam  before  them. 

On  several  occasions  when  one  of  the  daughters,  to  whom  Bill  seemed 
especially  to  attach  himself,  was  indisposed,  he  would  demand,  with  no 
gentle  oaths,  that  she  should  not  be  sent  out  in  the  rain,  or  made  to  exercise 
herself  in  household  work.  On  one  occasion,  when  her  throat  was  tied  up 
with  a  severe  cold.  Bill  lifted  her  into  the  house  from  t'  e  garden,  carried  out 
a  basket,  and  gathered  all  the  fruit  and  vegetables  he  could  lay  hands  on ; 
then  bringing  it  swiftly  into  the  house,  he  set  it  on  the  hearth,  lifted  up  the 
cover  of  a  large  saucepan,  and  tumbled  the  things  he  had  gathered  indis- 
criminately into  the  boiling  water.  At  times  he  would  attend  when  visitors 
were  present,  horrify  them  by  moving  things  around  without  any  visible 
agency,  and  scare  them  almost  into  fits  by  taking  part  in  their  conversation, 
and  reminding  them  that  he  was  the  Bill  Dole  they  had  formerly  known 
when  he  lived  among  them.  On  one  occasion  a  lady,  making  a  visit  to  the 
distressed  family,  incautiously  expressed  her  disgust  that  a  wretch  of  the 
well-known  bad  character  of  Bill  Dole  should,  as  report  alleged,  come  back 
to  make  Spiritual  manifestations. 

She  openly  expressed  her  disbelief  of  the  popular  rumours,  alleging  that  it 
must  be  some  trick  of  the  neighbours,  which  would  ultimately  be  discovered. 
Whilst  speaking,  the  family  became  extremely  uneasy,  judging  from  the 
kicks  and  poundings  on  a  bureau  in  the  apartment  that  the  subject  of  the 
visitor's  unfavourable  criticisms  was  himself  listening  to  them.  Nor  were 
they  mistaken.  In  a  few  minutes  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  was  heard  in  clear 
and  distinct  tones,  saluting  the  visitor  as  "  my  dear,"  and  asking  affectionately 
after  her  little  boy  Arthur,  "whom  you  know,  my  precious  one,"  the  mis- 
chievous imp  added,  "  I  am  the  real  father  of,  though  you  do  try  to  hide  it 
by  abusing  me." 

The  tricks,  gambols,  and  sometimes  the  mischief  enacted  by  this  mon- 
strous persecutor  were  beyond  all  description  weird  and  powerful. 

By  night  and  day  his  pranks  were  continued,  and  though  he  always 
yielded  to  the  remonstrances  of  kindness  or  gentle  entreaty,  opposition  and 
abuse  only  seemed  to  convert  him  into  a  being  little  short  of  a  fiend.  The 
little  ones  of  the  family  dearly  loved  Bill  Dole,  and  some  witnesses  of  the 
scene  informed  the  writer  they  had  seen  the  children  visibly  carried,  lifted, 
danced,  and  jumped  about  by  their  invisible  attendant, 
33 

514  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

Mrs,  Lewis,  or  "mother,"  as  Bill  called  his  hostess,  had  a  log-house  at 
some  distance  from  her  home,  which  was  occupied  by  a  tenant  from  whom 
it  was  impossible  to  obtain  the  rent.  Bill,  who  became  familiar  with  all  the 
family  affairs,  and  volunteered  his  advice  on  all  occasions,  offered  to  clear 
them  out,  if  "  the  mother  "  would  take  him  along  to  pay  them  a  visit.  This 
being  agreed  to,  the  landlady  called  on  her  tenants,  together  with  her 
invisible  ally. 

The  house  had  two  doors  at  opposite  sides  of  the  building,  which  con- 
sisted of  only  one  room.  On  these  doors  Bill  kept  up  alternate  successions 
of  raps  or  poundings,  which  had  no  sooner  summoned  the  inmates  to  one 
door,  than  the  blows  were  exchanged  for  the  other ;  and  in  this  way  he  kept 
up  a  distracting  noise  all  night,  varying  the  performance  by  projecting 
missiles  down  the  chimney,  and  dislodging  portions  of  the  roof. 

The  harassed  inmates,  at  last  comprehending  that  the  "ghost  of  Bill 
Dole"  had  made  a  dead  set  against  them,  consented  to  vacate  the  premises, 
much  to  the  delight  of  the  injured  owner,  who  desired,  next  to  the  payment 
of  her  rent,  that  the  obnoxious  inmates  would  quit. 

Bill  Dole  spent  his  time  in  this  way,  performing  services  for  the  family, 
and  especially  for  the  children,  with  all  the  rough  fidelity  of  a  household 
demon. 

It  seemed  that  the  attachment  he  conceived  for  his  entertainers  might  have 
become  mutual,  and  actually  reconciled  them  to  the  strange  and  mysterious 
guest  who  had  forced  himself  upon  them,  but  the  weird  reputation  which 
"Bill  Dole's  ghost"  brought  on  the  household,  the  influx  of  marvel  seekers 
that  intruded  on  their  privacy,  and  the  scandal  and  reproach  that  the 
circumstances  entailed  upon  them,  at  last  so  wearied  the  family  that  they 
positively  refused  to  communicate  for,  or  with  the  Spirit  any  longer. 

They  broke  up,  and  changed  their  household  and  all  their  plans  of  life, 
until  they  finally  succeeded  in  driving  their  unwelcome  visitor  from  them. 

The  voice  ceased,  and  even  the  loud  knockings  and  erratic  movements 
of  furniture  were  discontinued.  Bill  Dole  was  driven  away,  and  his  weird 
voice  and  mystic  presence  at  last  past  from  human  observance,  but  not 
from  memory.  There  are  still  hundreds  of  persons  in  Logansport  who 
remember  to  have  heard  him  converse,  and  can  contribute  items  of  hearsay 
evidence  to  this  brief  notice,  which  would,  if  published,  swell  the  narrative 
to  the  full  extent  of  the  volume. 

We  have  only  to  add,  that  all  which  our  space  has  permitted  us  to  pub- 
lish can  be  vouched  for  on  the  most  undeniable  authority.  Beyond  this, 
much  more  might  be  given  which  we  cannot  as  readily  prove,  but  which  no 
doubt  would  throw  fight  on  its  extraordinary  details.  Something  of  a 
sequel,  however,  we  will  add  to  the  history  which  may  not  prove  unin- 
teresting. 

After  conversing  with  a  gentleman  from  Logansport  who  was  well 
acquainted  with  the  whole  transaction,  and  had  frequently  held  conversa- 
tions with  "  Bill  Dole,"  a  Spirit  purporting  to  be  that  individual  presented 
himself  one  night  to  the  author,  and  desired  to  make  a  communication  to 
her  concerning  his  present  situation. 

He  affirmed  that  when  driven  away,  as  he  called  it,  from  his  earthly 
refuge,  he  wandered  around  for  a  long  time,  in  the  vain  hope  of  finding 
another  home  in  the  same  sphere.  Not  succeeding,  he  fell  into  a  state  of 
bitter  anguish  of  mind,  during  which  he  received  consolation  and  assistance 
from  kind  and  wise  Spirits,  who  counselled  him  to  lift  his  thoughts  above 
the  earth,  and  strive  to  elevate  his  aspirations  to  the  better  land,  to  which, 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  515 

as  a  Spirit,  he  now  belonged.  At  first  the  task  seemed  hopeless,  as  his 
grovelling  tendencies  and  earth-bound  nature  rendered  aspiration  almost 
impossible.  He  loathed  the  sphere  to  which,  as  a  profane  and  undeveloped 
Spirit,  he  had  formerly  gravitated,  and  yet,  though  longing  for  a  higher 
condition,  he  found  it  almost  impossible  to  earn  admission  to  those  brighter 
realms. 

At  length,  and  by  the  divine  aid  of  blest  angels  from  the  land  of  light,  he 
attained  once  more  to  a  happy  and  peaceful  home,  and  one  moreover 
where  he  was  a  welcome  guest,  and  assimilated  with  the  Spiritual  existence 
of  which  he  was  a  part. 

In  short,  he  had  passed  on  to  a  higher  life,  and  when  idly  solicited  by 
some  who  had  witnessed  his  marvellous  performances  to  repeat  them  for 
their  amusement,  he  gently  but  kindly  replied,  that  though  his  life  was  now 
devoted  to  the  task  of  pleasing  and  obliging  others,  yet  he  had  lost  the 
physical  aura  which  had  once  bound  him  to  earth,  and  enabled  him  in  its 
gross  atmosphere  to  perform  the  material  feats  which  had  distinguished  him 
as  an  earth-bound  Spirit.  "  Bill  Dole,"  such  as  he  was,  exists  no  more. 
The  sunlit  butterfly  has  arisen  from  the  chrysalitic  shell  of  the  earthly 
worm,  and  he  now  "sings  with  the  angels,"  instead  of  astounding  the  marvel 
seekers  of  earth  with  the  dread  sound  of  his  ghostly  merriment  and  terrible 
Spirit  voice. 

The  credibility  of  this  part  of  the  narrative  depends  on  the  fact  that  the 
author's  description  of  the  Spirit's  appearance,  tallied  exactly  with  the  facts, 
and  that  some  tokens  of  identity  were  given  by  her  to  a  party  who  had 
been  personally  acquainted  with  him,  which  rendered  it  more  than  probable 
that  the  above  statements  were  made  by  the  progressed  Spirit  of  the 
terrible  "  Bill  Dole." 

SPIRITUAL    EXPERIENCES    OF   MR.    JOHN    LOWE   OF   MASSILLON,    OHIO. 
CARDS   WRITTEN    UPON    BY   THE    HANDS    OF    SPIRITS. 

In  the  author's  possession  are  some  twenty  or  thirty  small  cards,  ranging 
from  two  to  three  inches,  square  and  oblong  square.  Some  are  plain  white, 
others  pink,  blue,  and  green  enamelled ;  the  white  cards  are  written  upon 
with  a  pencil  or  black  ink,  the  coloured  ones  chiefly  in  silver  or  gold  letters. 
The  writing  consists  of  brief  sentences  containing  words  of  encouragement, 
counsel.  Scriptural  phrases,  prophecy,  and  rebuke.  Occasionally  there  are 
short  communications  addressed  by  name  to  different  members  of  a  circle, 
of  a  personal  and  private  nature,  apropos  to  the  time. 

The  chirography  of  these  cards  is  extremely  fine,  and  executed  appar- 
ently by  the  same  hand.  They  all  purport  to  come  direct  from  Spirits,  and 
were  dropped  under  the  most  convincing  conditions,  in  the  presence  of 
numerous  witnesses,  sometimes,  though  rarely,  in  the  dark,  but  still  oftener 
in  the  broad  day  or  lamp  light.  It  appears  that  these  manifestations 
originated  with  a  circle  of  sincere  and  earnest  believers  in  Spiritualism,  who 
were  in  the  habit  of  holding  private  seances  amongst  themselves  at  Canton, 
Ohio.  Of  the  members  of  this  circle,  the  principal  Mediums  were  Mr. 
George  Baugh,  an  excellent  physical  Medium  now  residing  in  Wilmington, 
Delaware ;  Mr.  John  Lowe,  an  Englishman,  a  good  writing  test  Medium  ; 
and  Mr.  Peter  Jones.  ,  There  were  from  twelve  to  twenty  members  of  the 
original  circle,  and  the  whole  party  consisted  of  honest,  respectable  trades- 
men and  mechanics,  persons  who  had  nothing  to  gain  by  their  reputation 
as  Spiritualists,  but  very  much  to  lose,  in  point  of  custom  and  credit,  with 
their  neighbours. 

516  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

After  two  or  three  years'  session  in  Canton,  some  of  the  members 
removed  to  Massillon,  Ohio,  where  the  circle  was  re-organized,  and  the 
manifestations  continued  with  increasing  success  for  a  considerable  time 
longer. 

The  records  of  these  circles  were  occasionally  published  in  the  local 
papers,  and  contain  accounts  of  truly  astonishing  phenomena,  both  in  the 
direction  of  physical  force,  and  intelligence. 

Mr.  Lowe  and  his  associates  are  well  known  and  highly  esteemed  by  all 
who  know  them. 

They  frankly  admitted  sceptical  inquirers  to  their  sittings,  and  the  author 
has  received  the  testimony  of  over  twenty  of  the  most  prominent  citizens  of 
Massillon  to  the  perfect  good  faith,  sincerity,  and  respectability  of  all  the 
parties  concerned. 

One  or  two  of  these  witnesses  attribute  the  manifestations  to  "evil 
spirits,"  although  they  acknowledge  that  some  of  the  fruit  was  good,  and  all 
"generally  harmless."  Others  say  the  whole  thing  was  fanaticism  and 
delusion,  though  they  exculpate  the  members  of  the  circle  from  the  charge 
of  being  the  deluders,  and  believe  them  to  be  strictly  honest.  Who  the 
real  executants  were,  these  sage  witnesses  cannot  say,  although  they  are 
quite  sure  they  cannot  be  Spirits,  for  the  very  obvious  reason  "  that  they 
don't  believe  in  Spirits;"  further  deponent  sayeth  not. 

In  respect  to  the  manifestations,  we  find  that  besides  the  usual  pheno- 
mena accompanying  physical  force  Mediumship,  the  circle  were  continually 
in  the  habit  of  receiving  cards  written  as  above  described,  and  dropped 
down  on  their  table  whilst  in  session,  or  hidden  away  in  the  most  singular 
and  uncomeatable  places,  where  different  members  of  the  circle  were 
desired  to  look  for  them. 

Sometimes  cards  and  direct  Spirit  writings  would  be  dropped  down  in 
the  stores  or  houses  of  the  sitters. 

A  manifestation  of  this  kind  is  described  by  Mr.  Henry  Schneider,  of 
Massillon,  one  of  the  circle,  who,  though  a  firm  believer  in  the  agency  of 
Spirits,  strangely  enough  deemed  that  they  were  all  evil  in  character,  and 
of  Satanic  origin.  Mr.  Schneider  writes  to  the  author  that  being  one  day 
in  the  store  of  Mr.  Lowe  (who  is  a  tailor),  he  and  another  friend  turned 
the  conversation  upon  his  favourite  theory  of  "  evil  Spirits,"  when,  his 
companions  being  each  quietly  engaged  in  their  several  avocations,  and  all 
in  the  full  light  under  his  own  immediate  observation,  he  saw  a  small  card 
within  a  few  inches  of  the  solid  ceiling,  from  whence  it  fluttered  down 
through  the  air,  falling  on  the  floor  at  Mr.  Schneider's  feet. 

On  one  side  of  the  card  was  written,  "  Be  ye  faithful,  and  ere  long  your 
cause  shall  triumph.  Ye  shall  find  wealth  in  the  earth,  and  wonderful 
revelations  shall  be  made  known  unto  you." 

"Your  'Good  Spirit.'" 

On  the  other  side  of  the  card  were  mystical  characters  claimed  by  the 
Spirits  to  be  Spiritual  language. 

On  another  occasion  a  card  was  dropped  down  before  Mr.  Lowe  on  which 
was  inscribed,  "  Spirits  are  with  you  ;  let  them  communicate." 

This  remark  was  appropriate  to  the  special  occasion,  but  Mr.  Lowe  him- 
self had  some  unpleasant  doubts  respecting  the  identity  of  the  communi- 
cating power. 

He  however  placed  the  card,  after  a  thorough  examination  by  himself 
and  all  present,  in  his  waistcoat  pocket.  On  arriving  at  his  home,  and 
taking  out  the  card  for  the  purpose  of  showing  it  to  others,  he  found  on 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  517 

the  reverse  side,  written  in  the  same  Spiritual  chirography  as  the  rest  of  the 
cards,  "  Lowe's  Spirit." 

This  writing  greatly  perplexed  him.  He  knew  it  had  come  whilst  -he 
carried  it  home,  for  it  had  been  carefully  examined  by  every  one  present  at 
the  circle  before  he  placed  it  in  his  pocket ;  again,  he  questioned  whether 
these  words  might  not  signify  that  his  own  double  or  living  Spirit  was  indi- 
cated by  the  words,  "  Lowe's  Spirit." 

On  a  subsequent  occasion  he  was  informed  that  his  father's  Spirit  was  the 
executant,  and  the  words  were  meant  as  a  rebuke  to  himself  for  question- 
ing the  good  intent  and  individuaUty  of  those  who  made  these  manifesta- 
tions. 

As  a  specimen  of  the  poetry  received  through  these  direct  writings,  we 
quote  the  following  stanzas,  which  purported  to  be  written,  as  well  as 
dictated,  by  the  Spirit  of  the  English  poet,  Cowper: — 

*'  TRUTH. 

"  Truth  is  like  a  ilowing  river, 
Flowing  on  and  flowing  ever  ; 
Ever  spreading,  ever  rising, 
With  its  waves  the  heart  baptizing ; 
Ever  soothing,  ever  heahng, 
Banishing  each  troubled  feeling  ; 
Entering  in  the  willing  soul, 
Making  the  broken-hearted  whole. 

"  Stay  not  thou  the  flowing  tide. 

Turn  not  thou  its  waves  aside  ; 

Let  it  ever  freely  enter 

To  thy  bosom's  inmost  centre, 

Let  it  warm  the  heart  of  ice. 

Purifying  guilt  and  vice, 

Till  the  soul  redeemed  from  sin, 

To  God  and  heaven  shall  enter  in." 

The  chirography  of  this  fragment  is  bolder  and  wholly  different  from  the 
cards,  although  it  is  remarkably  clear  and  elegant. 

It  was  "  fluttered  down  "  from  the  ceiling  in  the  light,  and  in  full  view  of 
the  whole  circle.  We  shall  conclude  by  a  quotation  from  the  Buffalo  Sun- 
beam of  1861,  in  which  the  editor  gives  a  slight  account  of  the  Canton  circle 
and  its  doings,  compiled  by  a  gentleman  whose  prominent  position  as  a 
well-known  editor,  and  strict  truthfulness  of  character,  places  his  statement 
beyond  question. 

The  Canton  editor  says  : — 

"  We  have  long  known  that  our  to%vn  contained  a  large  number  of  downright,  manly, 
and  sincere  Spiritualists,  who  for  years  have  been  pursuing  their  investigations  quietly, 
and  following  their  respective  avocations  in  their  own  way. 

"  We  have  frequently  conversed  with  them  on  the  subject  of  the  spiritual  manifesta- 
tions that  have  from  time  to  time  been  had  during  their  sittings,  and  have  always 
admired  the  truthfulness  of  their  statements,  and  the  sincerity  with  which  they  were 

"  Communications  were  frequently  given  by  writing  on  cards.  We  copy  the  descrip- 
tion of  one  of  the  first  messages  : — 

"  '  On  producing  a  light,  a  card  about  three  inches  in  length,  one  and  one  half  inches  in 
width,  one  side  of  a  light  pink  colour  and  enamelled,  and  the  other  side  white,  was  found 
on  the  table.  On  the  enamelled  side  was  written  in  pencil,  in  skilful  and  dehcate 
chirography  :  "  The  hands  of  spirits  are  now  lifting  the  veil  fold  by  fold.     Be  not  afraid." 

"  On  one  occasion   the  circle,  or  some  members  of  it,  were  sent  to  a  public  haU,  with 

5i8  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

instructions  where  to  find  the  key,  which  no  one  present,  it  is  affirmed,  knew  anything 
about  at  this  time.  The  following  is  tlie  message  written  on  a  card  like  the  one  described 
above : — 

"  '  On  the  south-west  window  of  Madison  Hall  there  is  a  message, — depart  ye  hence 
and  receive  it.  Take  no  light  but  the  Ught  of  your  faith.  The  key  you  will  find  hanging 
on  a  nail  to  the  right,  first  door  entrance,  about  four  feet  from  the  floor.' 

"  Two  persons  went  to  the  place  as  directed  without  a  light,  and  failing  to  find  the 
key,  the  arm  of  one  of  the  parties  was  moved  -without  his  will,  and  his  hand  placed  upon 
it.     We  quote  a  portion  of  the  message  there  found  : — 

"  '  A  Prophecy. — Some  of  you  are  to  be  to  this  earth  as  Elisha  and  Ehjah  were  in 
golden  days  that  long  since  have  flown.  Eeturn  to-morrow  eve,  at  the  same  hour,  half- 
past  eight.' 

"  March  6th. — The  circle  met  at  half -past  eight  o'clock  ;  a  card  was  dropped  on  the 

table  inscribed.     At '  half -past  eight'  Dr.  M ,  Mr.  C ,  and  Mr.  Lowe,  went  to 

Madison  Hall.  Mr.  Lowe  unlocked  the  door  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs  leading  directly  to 
the  hall,  and  the  thi-ee  ascended  the  stairs  to  the  door  opening  into  the  hall,  when  it 
swung  open  uutouched  ;  the  three  were  close  together,  and  all  saw  a  light  in  the  south 
end  of  the  room,  at  a  platform  there  erected,  and  called  the  speaker's  stand  ;  at  seeing 
which  Mr.  Lowe  gave  an  exclamation  of  surprise,  and  immediately  there  arose  at  the  desk 
on  the  speaker's  stand  a  figure  which,  after  the  manner  of  Leigh  Hunt,  we  shall  call  '  a 
presence,'  in  white  drapery,  of  full  size  and  features,  plainly  seen  by  all.  It  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  halo  of  soft  mellow  light,  which  was  so  brilliant  that  Mr.  Lowe  assures  us 
he  could  have  seen  a  half-dime  on  the  floor. 

"  At  this  juncture  Mr.  C became  alarmed,  and  sought  safety  in  flight ;  Mr.  Lowe 

was  about  to  follow,  when  Dr.  M took  him  by  the  collar,  and  told  him  '  he  must  see 

it  through.'  During  aU  this  time  '  the  presence  '  stood  facing  the  visitors,  mth  its  right 
arm  extended,  the  right  hand  clasping  a  roll,  similar  to  a  sheet  of  paper  rolled  to  an  inch 
or  two  inches  in  size. 

"  Immediately  to  the  right  of  '  the  presence,'  and  toward  the  southeast  corner  of  the 
room,  rose  a  second  volume  of  light,  accompanied  with  a  slight  hissing  sound.  As  the 
sound  increased,  the  latter  light  faded  away.  Then  came  a  rumbhng  noise  like  the 
heavy  rolling  of  far-off'  thunder.  On  hearing  that,  Mr.  Lowe  broke  for  the  door,  the 
doctor  following,  and  both  making  the  best  of  the  time. 

"  At  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  on  the  sidewalk,  stood  Mr.  C ,  and  the  thi-ee  went  to 

Mr.  B 's,  aud  resumed  the  sitting.     In  a  short  time  came  another  card  of  the  same 

kind  of  paper,  inscribed,  '  0,  ye  of  little  faith  !  how  it  saddens  our  hearts  that  ye  should 
flee  at  the  critical  moment  when  important  revelations  were  about  to  be  made.'  The 
circle  was  then  informed  that  further  developments  would  be  made  at  some  future  day. 

"  Much  else  is  detailed  of  a  very  interesting  character,  but  we  can  make  room  for  only 
the  following  messages,  the  first  being  given  February  24th. 

"  '  Be  of  good  cheer,  for  brighter  days  are  about  to  dawn,  and  a  new  light  shall  envelop 
the  world.  Prepare  for  the  coming  glory  by  purifying  your  lives  and  conquering  your 
evil  passions.  Let  pure  water  be  your  only  beverage.  Let  your  raiment  be  plain  and 
comfortable,  without  regard  to  fashion.     Truth  is  hght,  and  truth  shall  triumph. 

" '  (Signed)         Mart.' 

"We  copy  from  another  card,  received  by  a  circle  at  Mr.  B 's  on  the  26th  of 

February  : — 

"  '  Be  ye  faithful  and  proclaim  to  the  world  the  things  ye  have  seen  and  heard,  for  in 
the  fulness  of  time  men  will  believe.' 

" '  I  am  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  at  hand.' 

"  The  parties  to  whom  these  messages  were  delivered,  still  doubting  the  propriety  of 
publishing  them,  met  again  on  Thursday  night  the  28th,  at  Mr.  Lowe's,  and  ag  lin  they 
were  ordered  '  to  jjublish  to  the  world  the  things  which  they  had  seen  and  heard,'  as 
appears  from  the  following  message,  which  we  copy  from  the  original,  precisely  as  it  was 
received,  and  which  was  handed  to  us  by  Mr.  Lowe. 

"  '  0,  ye  faithless  ones,  how  long  must  we  bear  with  your  unbelief  ?  Have  we  not 
manifested  ourselves  unto  you  ?  And  have  not  some  of  you  witnessed  things  which  but 
few  mortals  are  permitted  to  behold  ?  And  yet  ye  turned  and  fled  at  the  moment  when 
great  revelations  were  about  to  be  made.  Have  we  not  commanded  you  to  pubhsh  these 
things  to  the  world,  and  ye  have  not  done  it  ? 

"  '  Have  we  not  commanded  other  things  which  ye  have  not  done  ? 

"  '  If  ye  cannot  keep  these  Hght  commandments  how  can  we  trust  greater  ones  to  your 
keeping  ?  Obey  our  directions  at  once,  or  we  must  seek  another  and  more  faithful  circle 
through  which  to  make  our  revelations  to  the  world. 

"  '  (Signed)        YouR  Guaedian  Spirits.'  " 

NINRTEENTH   CENTURY   MIRACLES.  519 

Direct  writing  from  Spirits  is  by  no  means  a  rare  phenomenon,  but  the 
Spirit  cards  presented  to  Mr.  Lowe  and  his  associates  were  continued  for 
such  a  length  of  time  (a  space  of  several  years)  and  occurred,  without  the 
least  shadow  of  suspicion  attaching  to  the  parties  concerned,  in  the  presence 
of  so  many  respectable  witnesses,  that  it  renders  the  whole  transaction  one 
of  peculiar  and  noteworthy  interest. 

The  original  circle  is  now  broken  up,  and  its  members  scattered  far  and 
wide  over  the  country,  but  from  many  of  them  the  author  has  received  the 
assurance  that  the  good  counsel,  directing  wisdom,  comfort,  and  consola- 
tion conveyed  in  those  precious  scraps  of  writing,  formed  a  gift  beyond  all 
price  to  those  who  were  favoured  with  them.  Also,  that  during  the  con- 
tinuance of  these  inestimable  messages,  the  recipients  were  "  all  better  and 
purer  men  ;"  the  time  employed  in  this  communion,  "the  best  spent  of 
their  lives,"  and  the  result,  an  enduring  testimony  in  each  one's  heart  that 
mankind  has  "  entertained  angels  unawares." 

It  has  often  been  asserted  that  the  manifestations  occurring  in  the  form 
of  hauntings,  or  what  the  Germans  call  the  Polter-Gheist  or  the  ghost  ivhich 
thToius,  are  the  work  of  "  evil  Spirits,"  the  result  of  "  Satanic  agency,"  and 
should  be  treated  with  all  the  formulae  of  exorcism,  &c.,  &c.,  but  never 
admitted  as  legitimate  proofs  of  the  relations  subsisting  between  the  mun- 
dane and  super-mundane  spheres  of  being.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that 
these  sage  opinions  are  never  shared  by  the  parties  who  have  received  the 
manifestations.  On  the  contrary,  they  invariably  acknowledge,  as  good  Dr. 
Eliakim  Phelps  has  done  to  the  author,  that  stupendous  and  violent  demon- 
strations of  Spirit  presence  are  doubtless  absolutely  necessary  to  convince 
some  sceptical  minds,  that  many  persons  could  never  be  otherwise  moved, 
and  that  there  seems  no  just  cause  for  supposing  that  the  Spirits  who  are  the 
agents  in  such  riotous  proceedings,  act  without  due  guidance  and  super- 
vision from  higher  intelligences,  in  fact,  there  are  many  careful  observers 
who  contend,  that  without  the  obvious  and  super-mundane  demonstrations 
produced  by  Spirits  of  a  very  corporeal  nature,  the  world  in  this  sceptical 
age  would  never  have  believed  in  the  fact  of  Spirit  communion  at  all. 
The  following  curious  history  was  communicated  to  the  author  by  the 
gentleman  in  whose  experience  it  happened,  and  beneath  the  very  roof 
made  memorable  by  the  occurrences  narrated.  This  gentleman  subse- 
quently embodied  the  main  facts  in  a  small  pamphlet,  entitled,  "The  Oak- 
land Ghost,"  his  aim  in  publication  being,  as  he  stated ;  first,  to  put  on 
record  circumstances  liable  to  be  misrepresented  when  left  to  the  mercy  of 
the  local  press  or  the  tongue  of  rumour;  next,  to  advise  all  who  were 
acquainted  with  him — and,  as  a  public  man,  his  circle  of  acquaintances  is 
a  very  large  one — that  he  was  not  ashamed  to  testify  to  the  truth  as  he 
understood  it;  and  finally,  he  wished  to  draw  a  parallel  between  his  own 
experiences,  with  other  cases  narrated  in  history,  deemed  far  more  authentic 
—because  they  are  antiquated,  and  cannot  be  verified — than  when  they 
occur  under  the  immediate  supervision  of  scores  of  living  and  thorouglily 
reliable  witnesses.  We  shall  avail  ourselves  of  Mr.  Brownell  Clarke's 
pamphlet  to  record  his  statements  rather  than  draw  upon  the  mere  remem- 
brance of  his  oral  descriptions. 

The  occurrences  about  to  be  narrated  took  place  at  the  Clarke  Mansion, 
Oakland,  California,  in  the  month  of  April,  1874. 

The  proprietor  of  the  house  is  a  gentleman  holding  a  high  and  honourable 
official  position,  and  one  who  previous  to  the  ensuing  occurrences,  was  a 
devoted  member  of  a  Christian  church  in  which  his  good  standing  and 

S20  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

that  of  his  family  were  beyond  all  shadow  of  doubt  or  question.  Two 
ladies  and  two  gentlemen  occupied  rooms  in  Mr.  Clarke's  house,  and  as  he 
did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  cite  their  opinions  in  support  of  his  own,  he 
alludes  to  these  parties  only  by  their  initials. 

It  may  be  proper  to  add  however,  that  they  are  all  as  well  known  as  the 
author  of  the  pamphlet,  Mr.  Thomas  Brownell  Clarke,  himself,  and  being 
alluded  to  as  residents  in  his  house,  they  have  had  every  opportunity  of 
refuting  his  published  statements  had  they  been  so  disposed.  We  shall 
now  give  such  quotations  from  Mr.  Clarke's  pamphlet  as  relate  strictly  to 
the  phenomena  occurring,  omitting  for  the  sake  of  brevity  the  observations 
and  reflections  of  the  observers  concerning  those  phenomena  about  which  all 
parties  were  at  that  time  profoundly  ignorant. 

THE    OAKLAND    GHOST ACCOUNT    OF    MANIFESTATIONS. 

\_By  Thomas  Brownell  Clarke.'] 

"  That  the  reader  may  form  an  intelligent  idea  of  the  manifestations,  it  will 
be  necessary  first  to  give  a  brief  description  of  the  house  and  its  occupants. 
It  is  a  one  and  a  half  story  house,  situated  in  Oakland,  California. 
The  first  floor  has  five  rooms — the  second  four.  The  house  for  a  number 
of  years  previous  to  becoming  my  residence,  had  been  occupied  by  a  purely 
orthodox  family.  No  murders  had  ever  been  committed  within  its  walls  at 
the  time  previous  to  these  manifestations.  Myself,  wife,  and  son  of  eight 
years,  occupied  as  private  room,  one  in  the  ell  opening  from  the  dining 

room;  Mrs.  F and  sister  and  my  daughter,  the  two  front  rooms  in  the 

second  story;  Mr.  B and  Mr.  O the  two  in  the  rear.     The  evening 

in  question,  April  23rd,  1874,  the  family  had  been  at  home  as  usual.     Mr. 

B and  Mr.  O had  been  at  a  neighbour's  and  did  not  return  until 

a  quarter  past  eleven  o'clock.  Having  retired,  but  hearing  them  come  in, 
I  requested  them  to  lock  the  doors  and  put  out  the  lights.  When  the 
gentlemen 'had  been  up  stairs  about  fifteen  minutes,  I  heard  a  noise  that 
seemed  to  be  at  the  front  door  as  though  the  gong  upon  it  had  been  lightly 
struck.  I  went  immediately  there,  but  found  no  one.  I  closed  the  door 
and  returned  to  bed.  Hardly  had  I  laid  down,  before  that  same  noise  was 
repeated,  but  much  louder ;  again  I  went  to  the  door,  and  found  no  one — 
I  stepped  out  on  the  porch,  it  being  a  bright  moonlight  night,  looked  in  all 
directions  for  any  one  who  could  have  rung  the  bell,  but  saw  no  one,  and 

so  returned  in  doors — as  I  did  so  I  spoke  to  Mr.  B whose  room  was 

at  the  head  of  the  stairs,  asking  him  if  he  was  making  any  noise  with  his 
clock.  He  replied,  no — and  asked  who  is  ringing  that  bell — I  replied,  that 
is  what  I  wish  to  know.  Immediately  he  came  rushing  down  the  stairs  with 
pistol  in  hand,  and  said  "  that  is  some  boy's  work,"  and  out  of  the  door  he 
went  and  around  the  house,  but  found  no  boy.  When  he  came  in,  we 
had  quite  a  conversation  as  to  who  had  been  the  cause  of  this  sound,  but 
had  to  give  up  any  solution  and  again  retired ;  but  a  few  moments,  and 
there  was  a  tremendous  shaking  of  furniture  in  the  dining-room,  as  though 

some  one  was  rattling  the  upright  piano  that  stood  there.      Mr.  B 

hearing  this,  pistol  in  hand,  came  rushing  down.     We  met  to  see  no  one, 

and   were   still  more  astonished  than  ever.      While  talking,  Mr.  B 

walked  into  the  hall,  and  when  opposite  the  parlour  door,  he  exclaimed  in 
an  excited  manner,  '  Clarke,  bring  a  light,  quick  ! '     I  was  there  in  about 

one  second,  when  Mr.  B rushed  over  behind  the  sofa,  and  then  to  the 

bay  window.     Finding  one  fastening  unclasped,  he  said,   '  That  fellow  has 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY   MIRACLES.  521 

gone  out  at  the  window.'  Turning  around,  and  seeing  a  small  reception 
chair  lying  in  the  centre  of  the  parlour,  I  said,  '  How  came  it  there  ? ' 

B replied,  '  I  know  nothing  about  it,  I  did  not  touch  it,  but  there  was 

a  man  struck  me  on  the  back  when  I  called  you.'  Our  astonishment  is 
better  imagined  than  described.  Meantime  I  had  dressed  myself,  lighted 
some  lamps  ;  the  people  above  were  aroused  and  conversation  as  to  who 
or  what  was  doing  these  things  became  general.  As  we  again  retired  to 
our  separate  rooms,  we  heard  a  loud  rattling  noise  in  the  parlour,  as  though 
bundles  of  sheet  iron  had  been  slammed  down  on  the  floor.  In  about  two 
seconds  I  was  there,  and  only  found  the  blower  lying  in  the  centre  of  the  room. 
The  gentlemen  hearing  the  noise  came  rushing  from  their  rooms,  with  '  What 
made  that  noise  ? '  My  daughter,  who  had  slipped  on  a  morning  dress  and 
come  from  her  room,  stood  talking  to  the  gentlemen,  each  of  whom  had  a 
lamp  in  his  hand ;  I  was  standing  in  the  hall  below ;  she  started  to  come 

down  stairs,  and  when  about  two-thirds  down  Mr.  B saw  a  basket  of 

silver  belonging  to  him,  valued  at  about  three  hundred  dollars,  rise  from  a 
bureau  standing  in  the  extreme  end  of  the  hall.  He  instantly  exclaimed, 
'Take  care,  Nellie!'  Having  some  instinctive  knowledge  of  danger,  she 
screamed,  and  turned  the  newel  post  just  in  tmie  to  escape  the  basket, 
that  coming  down  in  a  half  circle,  fell  with  a  thud  on  the  floor  at  the  foot 
of  the  stairs.  All  supposed  the  silver  ruined  as  a  matter  of  course  ;  I 
picked  up  the  basket  and  contents  and  carried  them  to  the  dining-room, 
where  we  all  assembled  to  examine,  which  we  did,  piece  by  piece,  finding 
no  injury  on  coffee  or  tea  pots,  creamer  or  bowl,  save  only  one  very  thin 
silver  vase  which  was  slightly  bruised. 

"  Presently  Mr.  O went  outside  to  take  a  little  fresh  air,  to  strengthen 

his  nerves,  when  we  heard  a  noise  in  his  room,  directly  over  us  as  though  a 

person  was  jumping  with  all  his  might  upon  the  floor.     Mr.  B and 

myself  rushed  up  into  the  room,  but  found  no  one — neither  anything  dis- 
turbed.    While  there,  Mr.  O- came  up  to  his  room — walked  to  a  chair 

in  which  lay  a  towel  rolled  into  a  bunch.  He  picked  it  up  as  though  to 
wipe  his  hands ;  as  he  did  so,  he,  as  well  as  we,  discovered  his  watch  and 
chain  lying  on  the  chair.  His  amazement  cannot  be  described.  He 
exclaimed,  '  How  came  that  watch  in  the  chair  ? '  I  said,  *  I  suppose  you 
placed  it  there.'  He  said,  'I  tell  you  I  left  it  with  the  chain  run  through 
the  button  hole,  hooked  back  into  the  pocket,  and  on  that  bed.'     As  he 

took  the  watch  from  the  chair  it  sprang  up,  clipping  Mr.  B on  the 

elbow,  and  landed  in  the  centre  of  the  bed.  It  now  seemed  that  wonders 
would  never  cease,  so  we  descended  to  the  dining-room,  and  commenced 
an  inquiry  meeting  as  to  the  causes  of  these  wonderful  phenomena. 

"While  thus  speculating,  one  of  the  solid  oak  chairs  rose  about  one  foot, 
and  with  the  velocity  of  a  boy's  top,  went  revolving  across  the  room  some 
ten  feet,  and  sat  down  as  still  as  though  it  had  never  moved 

"While  still  in  the  dining-room,  there  came  a  great  crash  in  the  hall;  we 
rushed  to  see  what  new  development  had  occurred,  and  found  a  box  15  x 
15  inches  square,  6  deep,  that  had  contained  about  twenty  lbs.  of  coal, 
which  stood  in  the  upper  hall,  had  been  thrown  over  the  baluster  and  down 
stairs.  I  picked  up  the  box  with  what  coal  I  could,  and  carried  them  to  the 
kitchen.  Then  came  another  of  our  scientific  discussions  upon  electrical, 
magnetic,  natural,  supernatural,  and  occult  forces.  While  thus  engaged, 
another  most  frightful  noise  came  from  the  parlour.  Rushing  in  there,  we 
found  the  same  blower  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  room  bottom  up,  which, 
when  I  picked  it  up  previously,  I  had  placed  on  the  hearth  face  downwards. 

522  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES, 

"  Some  one  had  gone  upstairs  to  tell  the  ladies  what  had  happened,  and 
while  thus  talking,  a  large  upholstered  chair,  standing  in  the  hall,  went 
whirling  around,  and  down  in  full  view  of  all.  Hardly  was  this  new  fact 
well  settled,  before  from  the  parlour  came  another  racket.  Upon  going 
there  we  found  the  same  small  reception  chair  that  once  before  had  been 
laid  in  the  centre  of  the  room  again  lying  in  the  same  place.  In  the  mean 
time  the  family  had  assembled  in  the  dining-room,  discussing  this  pheno- 
mena. While  thus  engaged,  another  heavy  oak  chair  rose  and  spinning  like 
a  top,  crossed  the  room  in  a  contrary  direction  from  the  previous  one.     It 

now  being  about  one  o'clock,  Mr.  B had  taken  his  lamp  in  his  hand, 

and  standing  in  the  hall  door  leaning  against  the  casing,  said,  '  Well,  I  am 
going  to  bed,  and  I  won't  get  up  again  if  they  take  the  end  of  the  house 
out.'  No  sooner  had  the  words  ceased  than  a  large  upholstered  chair 
rose  a  few  inches,  and  spinning  around,  fell  out  in  the  middle  of  the  room. 

"After  awhile,  wearied  with  this  display  of  legerdemain  by  an  unseen 
power,  peace  and  quiet  seeming  to  have  come  again,  we  retired  to  our 
various  rooms  in  hopes  to  get  a  little  rest.  We  were  hardly  there,  however, 
when  the  whole  house  was  shaken,  as  by  a  wave  of  the  sea  against  a  ship. 

Mr.  B came  rushing  out,  calling,  '  Was  that  an  earthquake  ? '     While 

we  were  talking  of  this  new  phenomenon,  heavy  raps  began  all  over  the 
house,  which  continued  for  some  minutes,  appearing  to  some  to  be  inside 
the  house,  and  to  the  others  outside.  It  may  well  be  imagined  that  to  a 
sleepy  household  at  that  time  of  night,  the  novelty  soon  wore  off,  and  again 
we  scattered  in  various  parts  of  the  house  with  the  determination  not  to  get 
up  again,  come  whatever  might.  Hardly  had  I  laid  down  when  I  heard  a 
few  low,  sharp  raps,  appearing  to  be  in  the  dining-room.  Mrs.  Clarke  also 
heard  the  same,  and  noticed  them  because  of  their  peculiar  sound.  In  a 
few  moments  more,  we  heard  the  same  kind  of  raps.  As  I  had  made  up 
my  mind  not  to  be  disturbed  any  more,  I  declined  to  get  up,  or  even  look 
to  see  the  cause.  For  a  while  everything  remained  quiet,  and  we  felt 
encouraged  that  peace  had  again  come  to  our  household;  but  in  a  few 
minutes  there  came  a  crashing  sound  from  the  parlour,  as  though  some  one 
was  making  kindling  wood  of  the  furniture.  The  ladies  directly  overhead, 
remarked,  '  There  goes  over  that  marble-top  table  in  the  parlour,  and  every- 
thing upon  it  is  ruined.'  This  noise  brought  me  out  in  about  one  second, 
and  the  gentleman  downstairs  in  the  same  time. 

"We  found,  lying  in  the  centre  of  the  parlour,  that  same  reception  chair, 
for  the  third  time — this  time  a  long  shawl,  that  had  been  folded  and  lying 
in  the  parlour,  was  opened  and  spread  very  carefully  over  the  chair.  Two 
large  upholstered  chairs  had  been  turned  around  and  laid  on  their  backs — 
the  same  blower  was  again  laid  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  a  dining 
chair>  face  down,  was  lying  upon  one  end  of  the  table.  Upon  further 
examination  I  found  another  dining  chair  laid  upon  its  side,  and  a  small 
goblet  I  had  drank  out  of  only  a  short  time  before,  and  set  down  where  the 
chair  now  lay,  had  been  moved  to  the  other  end  of  the  cable,  and  turned 
bottom  up.  There  seemed  to  be  no  end  to  the  diversity  of  demonstrations. 
Being  tired  of  putting  things  to  rights,  which  had  been  my  occupation  now 
about  two  hours,  I  said,  for  the  benefit  of  these  unseen  powers,  that  I  should 
put  up  no  more  furniture,  and  they  could  go  on  and  throw  around  as  much 
as  they  pleased ;  and  thus  I  left  the  furniture  as  it  lay.  As  morning  was 
drawing  near,  all  well  tired  out  one  by  one,  scattered  to  obtain  some 
little  rest.  But  in  a  few  moments  there  came  the  sound  of  a  terrible  crash 
in  the  hall  that  seemed  as  though  Mr.  B 's  request  had  been  granted, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  523 

and  the  end  of  the  house  had  been  torn  bodily  away.  As  quick  as  thought 
I  was  in  the  front  hall.  The  two  gentlemen  made  their  appearance  at  the 
top  of  the  stairs  about  the  same  time.  We  found  the  front  door  had  been 
lifted  or  removed  from  its  hinges  without  withdrawing  the  bolt,  and  now- 
stood  leaning  against  the  newel  post,  and  we  had  the  opportunity  of  looking 
upon  a  beautiful  moonlight  through  where  the  door  ought  to  be.  Locks, 
bolts,  and  even  the  door  itself  seemed  no  impediment  to  this  power.  Thus 
ended  the  first  act  of  occult  demonstrations  in  the  '  Clarke  Mansion.' 

"  The  morning  of  the  24th,  Mr.  B arose  about  half-past  six  o'clock, 

and  went  over  to  his  place  across  the  street  to  attend  to  personal  business 
matters.  My  daughter  came  downstairs  soon  after  and  requested  that  we 
would  let  the  furniture  remain,  as  she  wished  to  go  and  invite  a  neighbour 
to  come  in  and  see  what  had  been  done.  Very  soon  after  we  heard  con- 
siderable noise.  Mrs.  Clarke  went  to  the  kitchen  and  questioned  the  boy 
as  to  whether  or  not  he  had  upset  a  table  or  made  noise  otherwise — find- 
ing nothing  she  returned ;  when  immediately  Miss  B came  in  and 

said,  '  Why,  you  didn't  tell  me  that  the  sofa  had  been  turned  over.'  To 
which  I  replied  neither  has  it.  '  Oh,  yes,  it  has,  and  lies  flat  on  its  back.' 
Upon  going  into  the  parlour,  we  found  not  only  the  sofa  wheeled  around  in 
front  of  the  grate,  and  then  laid  on  its  back ;  but  also  a  zinc  safe  that 
weighed  eleven  pounds,  had  been  taken  from  a  whatnot  and  placed  upon 
the  back  of  one  of  the  chairs  thrown  down  the  night  before.  Three  books 
were  taken  from  the  whatnot  on  the  floor ;  a  pair  of  gloves  were  lying  side 
by  side ;  also  a  small  wooden  puzzle  had  been  moved  to  the  middle  of  the 
room,  and  a  paper  covered  book  was  standing  on  end  among  the  sundries. 
At  about  a  quarter  past  seven  o'clock,  my  daughter  returned  with  her  friends 
to  see  the  midnight  orgies,  but  was  much  astonished  at  the  new  display  of 
furniture  scattered  about  the  floor.  Another  convention  was  held,  including 
our  outside  friends,  which  discussion  culmmated  in  eating  our  breakfast,  and 
enjoining  secrecy  upon  all  within  the  house.  By  some  oversight  the  young 
man  that  came  with  my  daughter  was  not  told  to  keep  silent  on  this  scene, 
so  that  while  we  three  inmates-  of  the  household  passed  to  San  Francisco 
in  silence  about  the  matter,  this  young  man  thought  it  a  good  joke,  and 
going  over  on  the  boat  told  a  few  friends  about  it.  From  this  the  story 
spread.  About  tw^elve  o'clock,  I  was  requested  to  enlighten  a  gentleman 
in  regard  to  it,  but  turned  the  subject  by  telling  him  that  he  w^as  '  sold '  by 
some  one  and  passed  on.  About  two  o'clock  a  reporter  called  to  get 
particulars ;  I  did  not  wish  to  tell  a  falsehood,  and  neither  could  I  imagine 
how  the  rumour  had  got  about  town.  I  said  to  the  reporter  that  it  was 
true  that  a  few  chairs  moved  quite  singularly,  that  I  supposed  that  would 
be  the  last  of  it,  and  I  hoped  they  would  not  give  it  public  notice.  Lest  I 
should  be  visited  by  other  reporters,  I  immediately  left  for  Oakland.  The 
San  Francisco  Chronicle  having  heard  of  the  rumour,  and  as  it  calls  itself 
a  '  live  paper,'  could  not  bear  to  go  to  press  without  improvement  of 
the  opportunity  for  a  sensational  article.  Consequently  one  of  their 
reporters  who  had  a  vivid  imagination,  wrote  a  two-column  article,  in  regard 
to  dancing  silver  ware,  crockery,  furniture,  &c.,  at  the  '  Clarke  mansion,'  in 
Oakland,  which  article  appearing  on  the  morning  of  the  25th,  as  might  have 
been  expected,  set  the  town  in  a  perfect  uproar,  discussing  the  '  Oakland 
Ghost.'     .... 

"  April  24th, — The  family  remained  the  same  as  the  previous  night,  except 

that  I  had  sent  our  litttle  boy  in  the  country.     Mr.  O had  gone  out  to 

spend  the  evening,  and  did  not  return  until  quite  late.     At  about  half-past 

524  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

eight,  while  we  were  sitting  in  the  dining-room,  my  daughter  remarked  that 
after  the  previous  wakeful  night,  she  felt  tired  and  thought  she  would  retire. 
When  she  was  about  half  way  up  stairs,  recollecting  the  scene  of  the  basket 
of  silver  coming  at  her  the  night  before,  I  said  jokingly,  '  Nellie,  look  out  for 
your  head.'  She  replied,  *  Oh  !  it  is  not  time  for  them  to  begin  yet.'  Instantly 
a  large  upholstered  chair  standing  at  the  head  of  the  stairs,  went  revolving  and 
lay  down  across  the  stairway  preventing  her  getting  up.  I  came  to  the  rescue 
immediately,  and  picking  up  the  chair  put  it  again  in  its  place.  The  ladies 
became  very  much  excited,  much  more  so  than  on  the  previous  night,  and 

especially  Mrs.  F ,  who  declared  that  she  could  not  live  through  another 

such  night  of  horror  as  the  previous  one,  especially  as  this  had  commenced 
so  early.     During  our  rambling  conversation  of  what  had  been,  and  what  we 

must  do,  especially  in  regard  to  Mrs.  F ,  Mr.  B came  from  his 

room  and  went  out  of  doors.  While  my  family  were  in  the  dining-room  talk- 
ing of  these  things,  there  came  another  crash  as  though  a  dozen  chairs  had 
been  crushed  in  pieces  in  the  hall.  As  I  reached  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  I 
found  one  of  a  set  of  reception  chairs  that  had  been  standing  in  the  hall 
above.  Upon  examination,  though  a  very  delicate  chair,  I  found  no  injury, 
not  even  a  scratch;  I  then  proposed  to  go  for  a  friend,  but  the  ladies  all  said, 

No,  you  must  not  leave  us  alone.     So  I  waited  for  Mr.  B ,  who  soon 

came  in,  and  while  we  were  standing  near  the  head  of  the  stairs  my  daughter 

stepped  a  short  distance  into  Mr.  O 's  room.     Hardly  had  she  done  so 

when  the  chairs  went  flying  around  that  room.  I  then  left  for  a  friend,  whom 
I  found  at  the  City  Hall.  He  with  four  others  returned  to  the  'haunted 
house,'  where  we  found  everything  had  been  quiet  during  my  absence. 
These  gentlemen  after  sitting  for  about  half-an-hour  began  to  get  tired, 
and  were  about  to  leave,  when  a  rattling  was  heard  at  the  top  of  the  stairs. 
Upon  examination  we  found  that  a  large  upholstered  chair  had  been  going 
through  its  accustomed  evolutions,  and  again  laid  down  on  the  floor.  It 
was  but  a  few  moments  when  there  came  another  crash  in  the  hall,  one  of  the 
gentlemen  exclaiming,  'There  is  a  chair  crushed  all  to  pieces.'  Upon 
examination  they  found  a  duplicate  of  the  chair  that  had  previously  been 
thrown  over  the  balusters  down  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs  entirely  unin- 
jured. Upon  further  examination  they  found  that  when  it  came  over  it 
struck  the  wall  with  such  force  as  to  make  two  indentations  in  the  plastering 
with  the  two  hind  legs.  To  our  agreeable  surprise  this  was  the  last  mani- 
festation of  the  night,  and  though  watching  the  entire  night  no  more 
demonstrations  came. 

"The  sensational  article  appearing  in  the  Chronicle  of  the  25th,  created 
so  much  excitement,  that  our  residence  was  surrounded  by  hundreds  of 
curious  people,  looking  at  the  '  haunted  house,'  during  the  following  day. 
Friends  came  and  went,  wondering  how  and  who,  or  by  what  power  had 
these  things  been  done.  The  '  Oakland  Ghost '  became  the  general  theme 
of  conversation. 

"  Having  remained  at  home,  I  was  visited  by  the  Chronicle  reporter,  who 
had  procured  a  letter  of  introduction  from  a  friend,  and  came  for  further 
information.  Seeing  that  I  was  already  notorious  in  connection  with  this 
mysterious  affair,  T  thought  best  to  tell  him  the  truth  about  it,  and  conse- 
quently, gave  to  the  press  the  items,  as  they  had  occurred. 

"As  evening  came  on,  with  it  also  came  the  crowd  in  increased  force. 

Mr.  B and  Mr.  O— —  went  out  soon  after  dinner,  and  did  not  return 

till  after  ten  o'clock. 

"  Early  in  the  evening,  friends  and  acquaintances  began  to  call,  and  of 
course  every  one  was  anxious  to  know  of  this  new  wonder. 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

525 

"While  sitting  in  the  parlour  engaged  in  conversation  with  various  callers 
from  Oakland  and  San  Francisco,  at  about  nine  o'clock,  we  all  heard  dis- 
tinct rapping,  that  appeared  as  though  the  sills  under  the  dining-room  had 
been  struck  by  a  heavy  sledge-hammer. 

"Upon   going  into  that  room,  we  found  Mrs.  F and  my  daughter, 

quite  excited.      They  said  those  heavy  raps  were  directly  under  Mrs.  F 's 

feet.  As  a  matter  of  course,  this  was  interesting  to  our  visitors,  however 
annoying  it  might  be  to  us.  During  this  examination  we  had  nearly  all 
gone  into  the  dining-room.  One  gentleman  remained,  and  while  standing 
in  the  hall^  the  large  chair  at  the  head  of  the  stairs  went  whirling  around  in 
a  most  mysterious  manner,  and  down  on  its  side  as  on  the  previous  evening. 
This  evolution  was  made  in  full  view  of  the  two  ladies  up  stairs. 

*'  This  renewed  the  interest  of  our  visitors,  and  created  an  intense  excite- 
ment among  the  crowd  outside,  who  had  heard  the  noise  made  by  the 
falling  chair.  Visitors,  in  the  meantime,  had  increased,  and  conversation 
upon  the  new  wonder  became  general.  While  thus  engaged,  a  continuous 
sound,  as  though  proceeding  from  a  silver  tea  bell  in  the  china  closet  in 
the  dining-room,  was  heard  all  over  the  house.  The  sound  continued  for 
a  moment  after  the  door  was  opened,  but  no  striking  of  the  hammer  was 
made. 

"A  few  moments  after  this,  an  old  bell  in  the  kitchen  rang  quite  violently. 
Hardly  had  we  returned  from  the  kitchen,  when  over  the  balusters  was 
thrown  down  into  the  hall,  two  paper  boxes ;  one  empty,  the  other  contain- 
ing a  lady's  hat,  a  covered  willow  basket,  and  a  small  leather  bag,  which 
were  stored  in  the  hall,  making  so  much  noise  as  to  be  heard  outside, 
making  the  crowd  almost  furious  to  get  into  the  house.  The  basket  I  laid 
in  the  hall  below,  and  carried  the  boxes  and  bag  upstairs,  putting  them  on 
the  floor  in  the  hall.  Very  soon  after  this  performance,  one  of  the  small 
reception  chairs  was  thrown  over  the  balusters  and  down  stairs,  without 
harm. 

"  About  this  time  Mr.  B and  Mr.  O came  in. 

"While  people  walked  to  and  fro,  not  knowing  from  where  would  come 
the  next  development,  as  quick  as  a  lightning  flash,  which  was  the  char- 
acter of  all  the  movements,  the  same  upholstered  chair  at  the  head  of  the 

stairs,  went  revolving  in  mid  air  and  down,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  F , 

who  stood  in  Mr.  B 's  door  talking  to  him,  and  in  the  presence  of  Miss 

B ,  who  stood  in  the  door  of  her  room  directly  opposite. 

"A  great  rush  v/as  made  for  this  point  by  the  friends  in  the  house,  not 
even  respecting  the  privacy  of  the  ladies'  room  where  Mrs.  F was  con- 
stantly in  bed.     This  chair  having  been  the  means  of  great  annoyance  to 

us  thus  far,  I  placed  it  in  Mr.  O 's  room  where  it  would  be  less  likely 

to  disturb  us.  The  ladies  at  the  time  protested,  saying  '  If  you  do  not  leave 
it,  who  can  tell  that  they  will  not  throw  the  bureau  down,'  referring  to  a 
large,  old-fashioned  mahogany  bureau  with  mirror  on  top,  that  stood  in  the 
hall  at  the  head  of  the  stairs  close  to  the  wall,  and  close  in  the  corner. 
Quiet  having  followed  this  last  demonstration,  and  the  house  getting  nearly 
full  of  acquaintances,  we  were  compelled  to  have  some  one  constantly  at 
the  door  to  prevent  strangers  from  entering,  for  this  thing  of  having  our 
yard  overrun  with  the  crowd,  and  our  house  overflowing  with  friends  on 
such   an   errand,    was    to  us   a   great  nuisance.      While  the  crowd  were 

scattered  in  parlour,  dining-room,  and  hall,  Mr.  S ,  who  was  standing 

at  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  looking  directly  up  at  the  bureau,  saw  it  begin  to 
jump  about,  and  in  an  instant,  fall  forward,  being  caught  on  the  turn  of 

526  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

the  baluster,  falling  so  hard,  that  it  indented  the  mahogany  rail  a  quarter 
of  an  inch,  and  jarred  the  uprights  of  the  balusters  loose  in  their  sockets, 
making  so  much  noise,  that  it  was  heard  by  the  hundreds  outside.  The 
gentlemen  in  the  hall  rushed  up  to  right  the  bureau  ;  but  before  so  doing, 
were  careful  to  look  for  springs  or  contrivances  of  any  kind,  by  which  this 
could  have  been  done,  and  found  none ;  but  they  did  find  that  this  heavy 
bureau  had  been  moved  forward  about  one  foot,  and  endwise  about  one  foot, 
before  being  tipped;  also,  that  notwithstanding  the  force  that  could  indent 
a  mahogany  rail,  the  marble  of  the  bureau  was  not  broken ;  and  more 
remarkable  still,  the  mirror  upon  the  top  was  unharmed.  * 

"At  this  time,  five  gentlemen  well  known  to  me,  came  to  the  door,  and 
requested  to  be  admitted  with  the  privilege  of  remaining  in  the  house  all 
night.  I  acceded  to  their  request  and  have  their  evidence  to  close  the 
mouths  of  all  vilifiers  of  their  neighbours'  characters.  At  the  request  of  the 
ladies,  I  again  brought  out  the  chair  as  the  lesser  evil,  and  set  it  at  the  end 
of  the  bureau  in  the  hall,  where  it  had  previously  stood,  and  from  whence 
it  had  performed  its  various  evolutions.     As  usual,  between  the  acts,  quiet 

in  good  measure  reigned.     Mr.  S ,  who  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs, 

in  a  few  moments,  saw  this  same  upholstered  chair  going  through  its 
accustomed  evolutions,  but  this  time  it  started  down  stairs,  end  for  end, 
and  was  caught  by  him.  Inthis  descent,  one  of  the  legs  was  broken,  being 
the  first  harm  that  had  happened  to  any  one  or  anything,  save  the  small, 

thin,  silver  vase.     Soon  after  this,  the  chairs  in  Mr.  O 's  room  were 

heard  moving  about,  and  upon  examination  were  found  lying  on  the  floor 
in  a  promiscuous  manner.  As  it  was  getting  late,  one  by  one  our  friends 
were  leaving,  until  the  house  seemed  again  at  rest.     A  number  of  us  were 

sitting  in  the  parlour,  among  them  Mr.  O sitting  in  a  large  Turkish 

chair  reading  a  newspaper.  While  thus  sitting,  to  the  great  astonishment 
of  US  all, -he  sprang  from  the  cha;r,  lauding  on  the  other  side  of  the  room, 
exclaiming,  '  Heavens,  that  chair  was  going  up  with  me  ! '  My  daughter 
saw  the  chair  rise  from  the  floor  before  he  sprang ;  I  saw  it  immediately 

after.     This  was  followed  by  a  good  hearty  laugh  at  Mr,  O for  his 

fright ;  this  being  the  first  time  his  calmness  had  deserted  him ;  in  fact, 

fear  is  not  a  quality  of  any  of  that  household,  including  Mrs.  F ,  the 

invalid,  for  when  she  did  leave,  it  was  that  she  might  get  rest — not  from 

fear.     After  this,  Mr.  O ,  thinking  that  this  thing  would  never  end,  and 

that  he  must  have  rest,  retired  to  his  room  with  the  intent  of  remaining  for 
the  night.  The  balance  of  our  friends,  save  those  expecting  to  spend  the 
night,  had  all  left.  Myself  and  four  of  the  gentlemen  were  seated  in  the 
parlour ;  one  was  standing  in  the  hall.  Almost  imperceptibly  to  us  all,  the 
hat-box  containing  the  lady's  hats  that  I  had  put  on  the  floor  in  the  hall 
above,  was  silently  set  directly  in  the  parlour  door.  Again  I  carried  it  up 
stairs,  but  for  safe  keeping,  placed  it  in  a  ladies'  room.  It  now  being  about 
twelve  o'clock,  the  crowd  outside,  well  tired  of  looking  at  the  •  haunted 
house,'  and  seeing  nothing,  had  nearly  all  left.  Mr,  O ,  feeling  some- 
what nervous  while  in  his  room,  changed  his  mind,  and  concluded  he 
would  not  retire,  but  again  go  down  stairs  and  sit  awhile  longer.  As  he 
came  from  his  room  he  closed  his  door.  Looking  directly  up  the  stair-way, 
to  my  utter  astonishment,  I  saw  a  trunk  strike  the  wall,  fly  past  me,  and  set 

down  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs.      Upon  getting  in  the  hall,   Mr.   O 

exclaimed,  *  That  is  my  trunk.'     I  rushed  upstairs,  found  my  daughter  and 

Mr,  B looking  down,  who  asked  what  it  was  that  had  made  that  noise, 

I  said  it  is  O d's  trunk.     'Nonsense,'  said  Mr.  B ,  *why  his  door 

■     NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  527 

has  not  been  opened.'  My  daughter  repeated  the  same  words,  and  said, 
'  Why,  look  at  the  door ;  it  is  now  closed,  and  has  not  been  opened  since 

Mr.  O went  downstairs.'     Immediately  the  trunk  was  brought  up,  and 

the  door  found  closed,  and  Mr.  O declared  that  he  closed  it  when  he 

went  down  but  a  few  minutes  before.  The  trunk  weighed  ninety  pounds, 
contained  a  large  glass  tube,  a  dozen  small  glass  tubes,  a  quantity  of 
glass  bottles,  containing  artist's  oils,  a  palette,  brushes,  pictures,  papers,  &c., 
and  though  the  trunk  was  quite  upset,  not  a  single  thing  in  the  inside  was 
injured.    In  its  flight  the  trimk  did  not  revolve,  and  was  set  down  at  the  foot 

of  the  stairs  the  same  as  it  had  stood  in  Mr.  O 's  room.    An  afghan,  that 

had  been  spread  over  the  trunk,  was  found  spread  over  the  balusters,  as 
though  it  had  been  left  by  the  trunk  sliding  out  from  under  it.  After  the 
excitement  of  this  last  unexplainable  demonstration  had  died  away,  we  as- 
sembled in  the  dining-room  as  headquarters.  Quiet  continued  for  about  one 
hour,  which  being  longer  than  the  usual  intervals  between  the  manifestations, 
we  had  made  up  our  minds  that  there  would  be  no  more  this  night,  and  one 
by  one  the  chamber  lodgers  had  retired  to  their  separate  rooms,  leaving  Mrs. 

Clarke  upon  the  lounge  in  the  dining-room.     Col.  V ,  C.  T ,  H. 

P ,  F.  P ,  and  myself,  sitting  about  the  dining-room,     Two  of  the 

five  thought  best  to  go  home  after  the  trunk  performance.     I  learned  since 

that  at  that  eventful  moment,  Mr.  B was  nearly  if  not  quite  asleep ; 

Mr.  O stood  with  his  hand  on  the  thumb  screw  of  his  lamp,  having  at 

that  instant  turned  the  hght  out ;  the  ladies  were  all  in  a  semi-sleep — our- 
selves as  above  stated,  when  in  an  instant  the  whole  house  was  illuminated, 
as  by  the  flash  of  a  powerful  drummond  light,  and  there  came  a  long,  terri- 
ble scream  of  a  female  voice,  that  filled  the  whole  house.  It  appeared  to 
me  as  the  last  wail  of  despair  from  the  regions  of  hell  itself.  Every  one  of 
us  were  on  our  feet  instantly,  and  white  with  horror  at  the  sound  of  this 
voice.  Mention  it  to  this  day  to  any  one  who  heard  it,  and  the  cold  chills 
creep  over  their  mortal  frame.  In  a  moment  I  flew  to  the  ladies'  room, 
and  found  them  in  a  state  of  excitement  exceeding  our  own.  My  daughter 
screaming,  'Oh,  that  dreadful  scream  ;  that  horrid  face,' 

*'  The  illumination  seemed  to  have  the  effect  of  causing  the  partitions  of 
the  whole  house  to  vanish  for  all  of  us,  both  up  stairs  and  down ;  the 
centre  of  the  light  was  in  the  hall,  from  which  centre  the  visible  woman 
was  seen,  and  from  which  centre  came  the  scream. 

"  Though  accustomed  to  all  this  for  three  nights ;  regarding  the  revolution 
of  a  chair,  as  calmly  as  the  waving  of  a  tree  in  the  breeze,  our  frames 
trembled,  and  every  face  was  blanched  as  we  saw  and  heard  the  phenome- 
non that  closed  the  scene. 

"  I  have  made  record  of  the  facts.  The  honest  philosopher  that  shall 
investigate  and  give  to  the  world  the  cause,  if  within  material  philosophy, 
can  immortalize  himself. 

"  That  the  reader  may  be  assured  that  I  was  not  deluded  by  the  pheno- 
mena called  modern  Spiritualism,  I  will  give  an  account  of  my  first  seance. 
It  was  held  at  my  residence  in  the  haunted  house,  Sunday  evening,  the 
26th  day  of  April,  1874,  I  returned  from  San  Francisco  at  nine  o'clock, 
finding  my  residence  surrounded  by  about  five  hundred  people ;  inside  the 
house,  some  twenty  or  thirty.  The  dining-room  I  found  occupied  by  a 
Chronicle  reporter,  who,  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Foye,  were  holding  a  seance  for 
the  purpose  of  allowing  the  Spirit  world  to  come  and  control  Mrs.  Foye, 
who  is  a  Spiritual  Medium  of  great  note,  and  explain  all  these  wonderful 
manifestations.     After  I  had  assured  myself  that  there  were  police  enough 

528  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

on  the  outside  to  keep  the  four  or  five  hundred  people  from  destroying  the 
real  property,  garden,  &c. ;  spoken  a  word  or  two  to  the  twenty  or  thirty 
inside,  hunted  up  my  wife  whom  I  found  occupying  an  '  upper  chamber  ' 
(made  vacant  by  the  two  ladies  whom  I  had  taken  to  town,  and  mydaughter, 
who  had  gone  to  a  neighbour's),  I  returned  to  the  dining-room,  and  joined 
the  Spiritual  circle. 

**  We  sat  in  a  quiet  condition  until  twelve  o'clock  without  the  least  mani- 
festation of  Spirits  to  either  move  the  furniture,  or  Mrs.  Foye.  I  then  said 
to  Mrs.  Foye,  that  it  was  a  very  singular  phenomenon ;  that  I  could  always 
bring  spirits,  and  that  she  could  not,  and  that  I  still  had  faith  in  my  ability 
to  continue  to  do  so.  This  made  their  eyes  brighten.  I  remembered 
that  there  was  some  choice  whisky  in  the  closet,  and  being  much  exhausted, 
I  stepped  to  the  closet,  brought  out  the  botde,  some  glasses,  and  a  dish  of 
cake  as  a  real  manifestatipn  of  Spirits.  This  was  all  the  Spirits  we  saw  or 
heard  that  sea?ice.  Justice  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Foye  demands  that  I  add,  that 
neither  touched  the  whisky.  But  it  is  no  slander  to  add,  that  the  reporter 
drank  enough  for  all  three.  It  is  also  justice  to  add,  for  the  honesty  of 
Mrs.  Foye  as  a  Medium,  that  though  her  Spiritual  theory  was  here  put  to  a 
public  test  and  failed,  she  proved  an  honest,  true  woman  and  Medium,  to 
write  only  as  moved  by  the  unseen. 

"  This  account,  I  claim,  should  stand  as  it  came,  as  involving  philosophical 
facts,  capable  of  investigation  upon  the  plane  of  tangible  realities.  There 
was  no  dark  seance,  no  secret,  no  humbug,  no  fraud,  but  eternal  truth,  to 
stand  when  all  the  actors  of  this  day,  shall  have  passed  on " 

The  names  of  the  gentlemen  who  shared  with  the  Clarke  family  the 
horrors  of  the  weird  watch  nights  detailed  above,  although  mentioned  by 
Mr.  Clarke  in  initials  only,  were  soon  revealed  in  the  newspaper  articles 
that  flooded  the  country  for  many  weeks  after  these  startling  occurrences 
had  ceased. 

A  lady  residing  at  Oakland,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  possessed 
mansion,  wrote  to  her  sister  in  New  York,  who,  being  a  Spirituahst,  sent 
the  letter  to  the  Banner  of  Light  for  publication.  As  it  contains  the 
off-hand  observations  of  a  wholly  disinterested  neighbour  of  the  Clarke 
family,  its  perusal  may  be  of  some  interest  to  the  candid  inquirer.  This 
lady,  writing  under  date  of  April  28,  1874,  says  : — 

"  Great  excitement  has  prevailed  here  for  the  past  few  days,  and  people  are  all  waiting 
for  further  developments.  Spirits  have  been  so  unquestionably  at  work  that  I  think 
there  is  hardly  a  person  in  Oakland,  even  the  most  sceptical,  but  admits  that  these 
remarkable  occurrences  are  the  result  of  supernatural  agencies.  Last  Thursday  night 
a  family,  consisting  of  three  or  four  gentlemen  and  as  many  ladies,  living  in  a  house  only 
four  or  five  blocks  from  us,  retired,  as  usual,  and  at  about  one  o'clock  were  wakened  by  a 
noise  as  though  Bedlam  were  let  loose.  The  gentlemen,  going  downstairs  and  lit^hting 
the  gas,  witnessed  the  proceedings.  The  piano,  shut  and  locked,  was  playing  itself,  and 
the  furniture  moving  around  in  the  liveliest  manner.  One  chair  edged  up  to  Mr.  Bayley, 
and,  springing  up,  hit  him  in  the  eye.  Suddenly  they  were  startled  by  a  great  crash, 
and  found  that  the  door,  which  was  strongly  bolted,  had  been  carried  seven  feet  from  the 
doorway,  without  a  single  bolt  being  slid  or  hinge  broken.  Similar  manifestations 
continued  through  Saturday  night.'  On  Friday  a  large  trunk  lifted  itself  over  the 
raiUng  and  came  crashing  down  the  stairs.  Subsequently  several  chairs  came  down  in 
the  same  way.  This  is  no  newspaper  sensation,  for  on  the  second  and  third  nights  a 
great  many  people  were  at  the  house  and  witnessed  these  things.  I  can't  begin  to  tell 
you  all.  Henry  is  acquainted  with  a  good  many  of  the  gentlemen  who  saw  these 
performances — men  who  could  not  have  any  reason  for  making  misstatements.  Saturday 
night  the  phenomena  ended  with  the  most  fearful,  blood-curdling  shriek  that  ever 
greeted  mortal  ears.  Strong  men,  to  whom  fear  was  unknown,  were  perfectly  unmanned, 
and  Mr.  Clarke,  the  tenant  of  the  house,  said   that  if  all  Oakland  were  his  he  would 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  529 

willingly  give  it  for  the  sake  of  having  that  shriek  effaced  from  his  memory,  for 
it  haunted  him  night  and  day.  We  have  heard  no  more  lately,  and  very  likely 
nothing  more  will  happen,  but  this  has  been  enough  to  set  us  all  thinking,  for, 
although  I  have  never  been  a  beHever  in  Spirituahsm,  I  do  think  spirits  have  been  at 
work  here." 

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  a  large  number  of  credible  witnesses  all 
testified  to  the  same  occurrences,  that  those  occurrences  were  calculated 
to  produce  indescribable  distress,  annoyance,  loss,  and  injury  to 
the  subjects  of  them ;  that  their  health  was  affected,  and  their  house 
turned  into  a  Babel  to  which  the  curious  resorted  as  to  a  menagerie  for 
months  after  the  phenomena  had  ceased,  the  papers  soon  began  to  insinuate 
the  old  story  of  trickery,  and  some  even  ventured  to  hint  that  the  whole 
thing  was  got  up  for — none  could  pretend  to  say  why  or  wherefore — but 
still  "got  up,"  because  the  parties  who  said  so  didn't  believe  in  such  things 
themselves. 

We  shall  conclude,  in  justice  to  Mr.  Clarke,  also  as  an  illustration  of  what 
kind  of  a  community  Spiritual  gifts  and  powers  have  been  obliged  to  struggle 
with  to  obtain  acceptance  at  all,  by  a  few  closing  quotations  from  his 
pamphlet. 

Tn  reference  to  the  committee  of  citizens  for  the  investigation  of  the 
subject  alluded  to  above,  Mr.  Clarke  says  :  — 

"  The  evidence,  given  at  the  solicitation  of  respectable  citizens,  was  obtained  only  by 
the  agreement  that  names  should  not  be  made  pubhc  ;  for  every  member  of  the  family 
was  already  disgusted  with  notoriety,  and  only  in  the  interest  of  science  did  we 
consent  to  the  tax  upon  our  time,  and  the  expense  made.  The  gentlemen  selected  to 
make  examination,  and  take  the  evidence  that  could  be  obtained  for  the  purpose  of 
establishing  the  presence  of  a  power  not  known  in  physical  sciences,  consisted  of  the 
Rev.  J.  K.  McLean,  pastor  of  the  First  Congregational  Church  of  Oakland,  Joseph  Le 
Count,  Professor  at  the  University  of  CaUfornia,  and  W.  W.  Crane,  Esq. 

"  The  positions  of  these  gentlemen  seemed  to  guarantee  an  honest  examination,  and  a 
truthful  verdict ;  but  when  this  verdict, '  We  find  the  evidence  insufficient  to  indicate  the 
action  or  presence  of  any  supernatural,  or  of  any  occult  natural  agency  whatever,'  was 
rendered,  Jesus  Christ  was  not  more  surprised  when  Pilate  said,  '  I  find  no  fault  in  this 
man,'  and  yet  ordered  him  to  the  crucifixion,  than  we  and  the  intelligent  people  of 
Oakland  were  on  receipt  of  this  '  Bunsby  '  verdict. 

"  The  witnesses  were  twenty  in  number,  composed  of  gentlemen  holding  the  highest 
offices  of  trust,  foreign  consuls,  doctors  of  divinity,  lawyers,  bankers,  merchants,  and  ladies 
professing  and  living  the  Christian  rehgion. 

"  Every  demonstration  recorded  in  this  volume  was  proved  to  the  entire  satisfaction 
of  the  men  sitting  as  judges.  Each  witness  went  before  them  alone,  and  told  the  story, 
submitting  to  as  mucli  cross-questioning  as  in  the  hardest  contested  case  in  court,  and 
with  no  opposing  council,  until  the  reporter's  volume  reached  the  enormous  amount  of 
three  hundred  and  twenty  pages  ;  to  which  the  committee  added  forty  pages  of  summary, 

endeavouring  to  show  that  Mr.  B was  the  cause  of  all  the  manifestations,  instead 

of  attempting  to  arrive  at  simple  truth." 

Mr.   Clarke   adds  :    "  These  gentlemen,  after  assuring  me  in  the  most 

Christian  spirit  that  they  exonerate  Mr.  O ,  the  ladies,  and  all  my  family, 

and,  at  the  same  time,  knew  that  Mr.  B .  was  absent  during  many  of  the 

manifestations,  still  repeat :  '  We  find  no  evidence  of  a  supernatural  or  of  any 
occult  natural  agency  whatever.' "  If  any  proof  were  wanted  to  show,  that 
Christian  Divines  are  not  always  honest,  or  learned  scientists  not  always 
wise,  the  above  sage  verdict  would  furnish  that  proof,  rendered  as  it  was, 
in  defiance  of  reason,  justice,  probability,  and  all  the  grounds  upon  which 
human  testimony  is  received  by  experienced  juries  all  over  the  world." 

34 

530  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER  LIX. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     AMERICA     (CONTINUED). 

Spiritual  Phenomena  of  Various  Kinds. 

The  following  chapter  will  present  to  the  reader  examples  of  the  phenomena 
still  frequently  occurring  in  different  parts  of  America. 

When  the  manifestations  of  Spirit  presence,  or  the  unfoldment  of  Spiritual 
powers  in  special  directions,  were  first  witnessed  during  the  earlier  periods 
of  the  new  dispensation,  it  was  customary  to  send  full  details  of  the  same 
to  the  Spiritual  journals,  and  thus  it  was  that  phenomenal  demonstrations 
appeared  to  be  more  prevalent  than  at  the  present  time.  We  have  reason 
to  believe  this  is  not  the  case,  but  rather  that  the  exhibitions  of  Spirit  power 
having  become  more  familiar,  excite  less  attention  and  are  less  carefully 
chronicled  than  formerly.  Still  the  records  of  preternatural  events  already 
in  print  are  so  extensive,  that  the  author  finds  her  chief  difliculty  in  selecting 
well-attested  representative  cases  from  the  immense  mass  of  material  in 
her  possession.  Following  out  the  plan  steadily  pursued  throughout  the 
earHer  chapters  of  this  volume,  we  shall  give  invariable  preference  to  those 
narratives  for  which  the  author  can  personally  vouch,  and  relate  such  inci- 
dents as  present  the  most  varied  aspects. 

The  following  sketches  refer  to  a  young  man  who  has  come  forward  as 
a  remarkable  writing  and  test  Medium  within  the  last  few  years  in  America. 

Although  the  author  has  received  personal  evidence  of  Mr.  Phillips' 
Mediumship  of  the  most  convincing  character,  it  may  be  more  satisfactory 
to  offer  the  testimony  of  two  gentlemen  of  such  authoritative  standing  and 
unquestionable  veracity  as  Professor  J.  R.  Buchanan  and  the  Hon.  J.  L. 
O'Sullivan.  It  is  to  the  statements  of  these  gentlemen  therefore  that  we  refer, 
in  the  following  proofs  of  Spirit  agency. 

In  lectures  given  in  aid  of  different  Spiritual  enterprises  by  Mr.  J.  L. 
O'Sullivan  (late  American  Minister  to  Portugal),  that  gentleman  stated,  that  in 
company  with  Professor  Buchanan,  of  New  York,  he  had  had  three  testing 
sittings  with  a  young  man  named  Phillips,  who  was  a  pleasing  honest  youth 
and  afforded  grand  instances  of  psychographic  mediumship.  Writing  was 
plentifully  obtained  on  two  joined  slates  placed  on  the  top  of  the  table 
under  their  hands.  On  one  occasion  the  slates  were  placed  at  a  distance  of 
twelve  feet  from  the  Medium,  and  when  taken  up  contained  six  messages — 
two  in  Latin,  the  rest  in  French,  Italian,  English,  and  Oriental  characters. 

The  first  in  Latin  was :  "  Homines  damnant  quod  non  intelligunt  " 
(Men  condemn  what  they  do  not  understand) ;  the  other  was  a  quotation 
from  Horace  of  the  two  hexameter  lines  : 

"  Rusticus  expectat,  dum  defluat  amnis,  at  ille 
Labitur  et  labetur  in  omne  volubilis  sevum." 

(The  countrymau  looks  on  awaiting  the  flowing  away  of  the  river, 
But  it  flows,  in  its  whirling  course,  and  will  flow  on  for  ever.) 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  531 

After  Mr.  O'Sullivan  had  placed  the  joined  slates  in  position  under  the 
distant  chair  (all  in  full  light),  the  Medium  handed  him  a  paper  containing 
a  quantity  of  corn-flour,  suggesting  to  him  to  place  it  by  the  slates,  as  some- 
limes  it  was  found  strewed  over  them. 

When  the  three  raps  on  the  table  at  which  they  were  sitting  gave  the 
signal  for  examining  the  slates,  the  under  slate  was  found  covered  with 
six  different  communications,  and  also  with  the  impress  in  flour  (over  the 
wiiting)  of  the  ends  of  the  four  fingers  and  thumb  of  a  large  hand.  The 
flour  had  to  be  blown  or  lightly  brushed  away  to  get  fully  at  the  underlying 
writing.  In  the  little  heap  of  flower  in  the  paper  alongside  were  found  the 
corresponding  indentations  left  by  the  invisible  hand.  Both  slates  and  flour 
had  been  under  the  keen  vigilance  of  the  two  gentlemen  who  sat  at  the 
table  with  Mr.  Phillips. 

A  piece  of  paper  was  placed  between  two  slates  on  the  table,  and  there 
was  found  written  on  it  an  elegant  and  almost  literal  Latin  translation  of 
the  well-known  child's  hymn,  "  Twinkle,  twinkle,  little  star."  The  Medium 
does  not  know  a  word  of  Latin,  nor  would  such  knowledge  have  availed  in 
this  case,  as  the  paper  was  inaccessible  to  him,  being  securely  placed 
between  two  slates.  With  Mr.  Phillips  neither  slate  nor  lead  pencil  was 
ever  placed  between  the  slates.  Those  who  did  the  writing  brought  or 
made  their  own  pencils.     The  translation  was  as  follows  — 

"  Mica,  mica,  parva  stella, 
Miror  quanam  sis  tarn  bella, 
Splendens  eminus  in  illo 
Alba  velut  gemma  coelo.'' 

The  small  piece  of  paper  on  which  it  was  written  had  been  torn  by 
Dr.  Buchanan  from  a  large  sheet,  at  the  moment  of  placing  the  slates,  from 
which  the  hands  of  the  sitters  never  stirred.  The  torn  edges,  of  course, 
identified  the  paper.  It  was  said  to  have  been  written  by  Dr.  Buchanan's 
father. 

On  the  third  evening,  a  piece  of  paper  was  placed  by  Mr.  O'Sullivan 
between  slates,  which  were  allowed  to  remain  under  a  chair  some  six  or 
eight  feet  from  the  sitters.  On  examination  after  some  time  no  writing  was 
found  on  either  slate  or  paper. 

It  was  accordingly  removed  by  Mr.  O'Sullivan  (the  medium  never  quitting 
his  seat  at  the  table)  and  the  slates  left  in  the  same  place.  On  being  taken 
up  soon  afterwards  a  large  green  leaf  was  found  between  the  slates,  bearing 
an  inscription  in  Chinese  characters,  written  with  a  reddish  brown  pigment. 

Mr.  O'Sullivan  produced  this  leaf  itself  to  his  audience,  framed  and 
protected  under  glass,  and  bearing  date  "June  14,  1880."  The  leaf  is 
in  a  perfect  state  of  preservation,  and  the  Chinese  characters  are  well- 
formed  and  quite  distinct,  though  now  blackened,  presumably  by  the  action 
of  the  light.  A  Japanese  gentleman  made  the  following  translation : 
"  The  doctrine  of  Christ  is  in  the  centre  of  our  true  heart  and  not  the 
external  adornment." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  from  what  spirit  this  had  proceeded,  the  reply, 
by  psychographic  writing,  was  "Confucius." 

Several  accounts  have  been  written  of  this  remarkable  phenomenon,  and 
the  author  has  been  presented  with  a  fine  copy  of  the  photographed  leaf, 
the  plate  of  which  was  carefully  prepared  by  Mr.  Henry  J,  Newton,  of 
New  York^President  of  the  First  Society  of  Spiritualists,  and  an  amateur 
photographer  of  considerable  skill. 

532  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

The  edges  of  the  leaf,  originally  perfect,  are  now  somewhat  torn,  having 
been  gummed  by  Dr.  Buchanan  to  the  paper  on  which  it  was  laid  when 
framed  under  glass.  The  drying  of  the  leaf  has  also  wrinkled  it  and  torn 
it  a  little  apart  in  one  place.  The  Japanese  gentleman  who  translated  the 
inscription  said  that  the  leaf  was  of  a  tree  from  which  silkworms  are  fed 
in  Japan. 

This  phenomenon  makes  intelligible  and  no  longer  incredible  the  stories 
told  by  travellers  of  the  holy  tree  at  the  sacred  city,  Lassa,  in  Thibet,  the 
leaves  of  which  are  said  to  contain  certain  sacred  names  or  phrases.  Since 
a  Spirit  has  thus  written  on  one  leaf,  why  not  on  many  ? 

Another  phase  of  Spirit  art  quite  as  marvellous  as  the  above,  is  that 
displayed  by  the  Mediumship  of  Mrs.  L.  M.  Blair,  a  lady  who  paints  large 
groups  of  flowers,  shaded  and  coloured  with  remarkable  skill,  whilst  care- 
fully blindfolded  by  sceptical  persons  selected  from  the  audiences  before 
whom  she  exhibits  her  marvellous  powers. 

When  first  the  author  became  a  witness  of  this  lady's  extraordinary 
Mediumship,  she  was  giving  a  public  seance  in  the  town  of  Oswego. 
Entering  the  room  before  the  commencement  of  the  exercises,  Mrs. 
Hardinge  Britten  and  her  party  watched  the  operations  of  the  two  sceptics 
who  had  been  named  by  the  audience  to  blindfold  the  Medium.  This  work 
was  evidently  accomplished  with  a  will  which  left  no  chance  of  admitting 
the  smallest  ray  of  light  to  the  closed  eyes  of  the  entranced  artist.  Directly 
afterwards  Mrs.  Blair  commenced  painting  with  astonishing  rapidity, 
dipping  her  one  brush  now  into  this  colour,  now  into  that,  without  making 
the  smallest  mistake  in  the  selection.  When  the  picture  was  completed, 
the  Medium,  still  entranced,  stated  that  it  was  an  allegorical  representation 
of  the  life  and  work  of  a  lady  then  present,  and  having  explained  in  choice 
language  the  meaning  of  the  flowery  group,  and  detailed  most  minutely  the 
design  expressed  in  every  petal  and  colour,  she  commanded  it  to  be  carried 
"  to  the  stranger  who  sat  so  thickly  veiled,"  in  such  a  part  of  the  hall, 
that  even  had  the  veil  been  raised,  the  distance  from  the  platform  would 
have  utterly  precluded  all  chance  of  recognition.  The  party  who  received 
the  picture  had  never  before  seen  Mrs.  Blair.  The  interpretation  of  the 
allegory  as  given  through  the  entranced  lips  of  the  Medium  exactly  fitted 
the  recipient's  Hfe  woof,  and  as  Mrs.  Blair  has  never  met  that  stranger, 
and  even  the  small  recompense  sent  for  this  wonderful  test  of  Spirit  power 
was  conveyed  anonymously,  the  author  rejoices  in  this  opportunity  of 
doing  justice  alike  to  the  Spirit  friends  and  the  Medium  through  whom  they 
worked,  by  acknowledging,  that  Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten  was  the  well-pleased 
but  greatly  surprised  recipient  of  this  fine  test.  We  deem  it  right  to  add 
another  illustrative  account  of  Mrs.  Blair's  powers,  succinctly  given  in  the 
following  extract  from  a  narrative  furnished  to  the  Banner  of  Light  by  one 
of  its  most  esteemed  and  reliable  correspondents.    This  gentleman  says  : — 

"  It  was  at  Montpelier  I  first  saw  Mrs.  L.  M.  Blair,  now  Mrs.  Murdock,  who  resides 
near  the  village  of  Rockbottom,  some  thirty  miles  west  of  Boston,  Mass.  I  think  she  is 
one  of  the  most  remarkable  mediums  in  this  country.  She  was  deeply  interested  in  our 
s6anees,  and  attended  them  in  Montepelier,  Barre,  and  Northfield,  Vt.  She  was  born  with 
only  one  arm,  and  that  one  is  often  controlled  by  what  claims  to  be  an  Italian  artist  who 
lived  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  passed  to  spirit-life  about  seventy  years  ago. 
I  have  in  my  parlour  a  painting,  some  twelve  by  sixteen  inches.  It  represents  a  delicate 
hand  holding  a  few  branches  of  a  rosebush  which  contain  twelve  full-blown  roses,  a 
number  of  buds,  leaves,  etc.,  so  placed  as  to  partially  cover  a  motto  :  '  We'll  bless  you  for 
ever.'  This  painting  was  executed  by  Mrs.  Blair  while  she  was  effectually  blindfolded, 
and  in  the  brief  time  of  eleven  minutes.     I  have  taken  it  to  at  least  half-a-dozen 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  533 

prominent  artists  in  Boston,  and  asked  them  how  long  it  would  take  them  to  paint  a 
duplicate,  and  the  shortest  time  given  by  any  one  of  them  was  five  hours. 

"  During  the  time  that  her  hand  is  controlled  to  paint,  her  brain  and  vocal  organs  are 
controlled  \y^  another  spirit  who  talks  very  fluently  on  almost  any  subject  you  mention. 
He  said  to  me  that  he  had  to  keep  the  medium  unconscious  during  the  time  the  artist  was 
painting,  as  she  was  so  sensitive  to  any  sceptical  remarks  that  might  be  made  in  her 
presence  that  the  other  spirit  could  not  control  the  hand  satisfactorily. 

"  Her  paintings  are  all  in  water  colors,  and  she,  or  the  spirit,  uses  only  one  brush, 
which  is  cleansed  in  a  tumbler  of  water  as  soon  as  one  color  is  used.  I  have  seen  her 
painting  on  many  different  occasion,  but  I  have  never  seen  her  return  to  the  same  color 
after  she  has  rinsed  the  brush.  AH  the  red,  green,  yellow,  or  other  color  she  uses,  is 
laid  on  before  she  commences  with  another  color,  and  any  of  her  paintings  when  half 
done  are  greater  curiosities  than  when  fully  completed. 

"  One  day  as  I  sat  watching  her,  and  talking  with  the  spirit  that  controlled  her  speech, 
I  called  attention  to  another  part  of  the  room,  and  although  her  eyes  were  blindfolded 
she  turned  her  head  for  a  moment  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  I  picked  up  the  tumbler 
and  held  it  directly  at  the  back  of  her  head.  As  soon  as  it  became  necessary  to  wash  the 
brush  again,  the  controlling  spirit  brought  the  hand  of  the  medium  over  her  shoulder 
and  washed  out  the  brush  as  readily  as  if  the  tumbler  was  in  its  accustomed  place,  and 
proceeded  at  once  with  another  color. 

"While  I  have  been  talking  with  one  of  her  controlling  spirits  the  other  would  answer 
my  questions  in  writing  at  the  same  time.  He  assures  me  that  he  paints  more  beautiful 
pictures  in  the  spirit- world  than  have  ever  been  seen  on  earth.  I  asked  what  use  he 
made  of  paintings  in  his  country,  and  he  replied  that  they  were  used  there,  as  here,  to 
adorn  their  homes  which  are  in  every  respect  as  real  as  are  our  homes  in  this  life." 

We  have  already-given  one  representative  account  of  Spirit  photography,and 
some  of  the  friends  to  whom  these  chapters  have  been  shown,  have  objected 
that  Mr.  Mumler's  case  might  seem  exceptional,  were  it  not  duplicated. 
The  author  is  in  possession  of  a  large  number  of  well-attested  evidences 
that  Spirit  photographs  have  been  taken  under  circumstances  that  admitted 
of  no  chance  for  deception.  Amongst  these — since  it  seems  desirable  to 
duplicate  cases  of  so  remarkable  a  nature — we  offer  the  following  example, 
testified  to  by  witnesses  of  the  most  undoubted  veracity. 

Mr.  Julius  Plaetz,  photographer,  Kansas  City,  Missouri,  writing  to  the 
Spiritual  papers  under  date  March,  1882,  says  : — 

"No.  618,  Main-street,  Kansas  City,  Missouri,  March  11th,  1882. 

"  Concerning  the  phenomena  of  Spirit- Photography,  although  I  do  not  profess  to  be  a 
Spiritualist,  I  deem  it  just  and  right  to  state  that  while  Mrs.  Lizzie  Carter,  the  spirit- 
photographer,  was  taking  spirit-photographs  at  my  gallery,  she  prepared  the  plates  in  my 
presence  and  the  presence  of  my  operators  in  the  same  manner,  using  the  same  chemicals 
as  used  by  myself  in  taking  photographs  ;  she  used  the  same  camera,  the  same  furniture 
which  I  use  daily,  and  which  has  been  used  at  my  gallery  during  the  last  ten  years.  And 
on  all  the  photographs  she  took,  from  two  to  eight  human  faces  and  frequently  full  forms 
besides  that  of  the  sitter  did  appear,  in  fact  two-thirds  of  all  the  plates  she  used  while  at 
my  gallery,  from  January  20th  to  March  6th,  1882,  were  prepared  and  developed  by 
myself  or  my  operators,  always  with  the  same  result. 

"  And  I  desire  to  further  state  that  myself  and  my  operators  have  frequently,  without 
the  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Carter,  tested  her  so-called  mediumship  in  various  ways,  by 
exchanging  plates  wliich  she  had  handled  and  prepared  from  the  plate-holder,  replacing 
others  prepared  by  ourselves  such  as  she  had  never  seen  nor  handled  before,  but  still  the 
result  was  the  same  ;  human  faces  and  forms  would  appear  in  addition  to  the  sitter  on 
every  photograph  she  took.  I  fui'ther  state  that  she  has  taken  photographs  of  a  number 
of  persons  strangers  to  her,  and  known  to  me  to  be  sceptics,  but  still  the  result  was  the 
same — spirit  faces  on  every  photograph. 

"  I  have  been  a  practical  photographer  for  over  twenty  years,  am  well  acquainted  with 
all  the  details  of  the  business,  and  I  declare  that  there  is  no  chemical  process  known  by 
which  the  phenomena,  such  as  produced  by  Mrs.  Carter,  can  be  duplicated. 

"The  only  observable  difference  in  the  process  of  taking  a  photograph  between  Mrs, 
Carter  and  other  photographers  is,  that  Mrs.  Carter  generally  lays  her  hands  on  the 
camera  whUe  she  takes  the  photograph  ;  this,  and  only  this,  is  the  difference  I  have 
been  able  to  discover  in  the  operation  during  about  six  weeks  of  daily  observation  at  my 

534  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

gallery.  Of  course  myself  and  many  other  experts  in  ptiotograpliy,  among  other  experi- 
ments made,  did  not  fail  to  lay  our  hands  on  the  camera,  stood  on  the  same  spot  in  the 
same  position  generally  occupied  by  herself,  &c.,  but  all  was  of  no  avail,  the  spirits  would 
not  and  did  not  come  for  any  or  either  of  us. — Yours,  &c., 

"  Julius  Plaetz,  Photographer." 

In  addition  to  the  statements  of  one  more  Spiritualist,  we  offer  those  of 
a  physician,  a  well-known  and  highly  respected  resident  of  Kansas  City, 
who  writes  to  the  London  Medium  and  Daybreak  in  the  following  terms  : — 

"Kansas  City,  Mo.,  U.S.A.,  March  11th,  1882." 

"  Allow  me  to  state  briefly  through  your  paper  my  experiences,  had  lately,  relative  to 
the  phenomenon  known  as  Spirit-Photography,  through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Lizzie 
Carter,  at  the  Photographic  Gallery  of  Mr.  Julius  Plaetz,  No.  618,  Main  Street,  this  city. 
I  notice  your  comments  in  your  number  of  the  Medium  and  Dayhrealc,  of  February  11th, 
1882,  entitled,  '  Chronicles  of  Spirit-Photography,'  and  as  this  beautiful  phase  of  medium- 
ship  has  recently  elicited  much  interest  among  investigators  of  this  city  and  vicinity 
during  the  last  six  weeks,  it  was  proposed  to  Mrs.  Carter  to  give  a  sitting  under  test 
conditions,  to  wliich  she  cheerfully  consented.  Consequently  on  the  4th  inst.,  Messrs.  W. 
W.  Judson,  Fred  Meyers,  H.  M.  Johnson,  John  E.  Fleming,  and  your  humble  servant 
constituted  ourselves  a  committee  to  investigate  this  phase  of  mediumship,  and  I  take 
pleasure  in  laying  before  your  readers  the  details  of  its  results. 

"  We  procured  a  plate-holder  in  Mr.  Plaetz's  gallery,  fitting  the  camera  through  which 
Mrs.  Carter  took  photographs,  and  proceeded  with  it  to  the  photographic  gallery  of  Messrs. 
Wmiams  and  Thomson,  612,  Main  Street ;  requested  Mr.  Thomson,  one  of  the  proprietors, 
to  place  in  our  presence  a  prepared  plate  for  taking  an  ordinary  photograph  in  that  plate- 
holder.  The  plate  was  prepared  and  placed  in  the  plate-holder,  in  the  dark  room  at  the 
gallery  of  Messrs  Williams  and  Thomson,  in  our  presence,  the  plate-holder  then  wrapped 
in  a  covering  to  exclude  the  light  and  carried  by  Mr.  Thomson  ;  thus  we  returned 
together  to  the  gallery  of  Mr.  Plaetz.  Mr.  Thomson  was  here  introduced  to  Mrs.  Carter 
and  requested  to  hand  her  the  plate-holder.  Mrs.  Carter  requested  that  the  camera  be 
examined,  which  was  accordingly  done  by  Mr.  Thomson,  he  being  an  expert  in  his  profes- 
sion as  photographer,  next  your  humble  servant  was  requested  to  sit  for  a  photograph. 

"  Mrs.  Carter  then  placed  the  camera  in  position,  removed  the  covering  from  the  plate- 
holder  and,  without  opening  the  same,  placed  it  in  the  camera.  After  the  lapse  of  eight 
seconds,  during  which  time  Mrs.  Carter  held  her  hands  on  the  camera,  she  removed  the 
plate-holder  from  the  camera,  aad  without  opening  it,  handed  it  back  to  Mr.  Thomson 
with  the  request  to  go  to  his  gallery  and  develop  the  plate.  The  committee  returned  with 
Mr.  Thomson  to  his  gallery  in  the  dark  room,  when  Mr.  Thomson  handed  the  plate-holder 
to  his  operator,  requesting  him  to  remove  the  plate  and  develop  it  in  our  presence.  The 
operator  admitted  that  this  was  the  same  plate  he  had  placed  in  that  plate-holder  a  few 
minutes  before,  that  it  had  not  been  taken  out,  but  was  there  just  as  he  himself  had 
placed  it. 

"  He  applied  the  necessary  chemicals  generally  used  by  photographers  to  develop  the 
negative  and  nothing  more,  and  on  presenting  the  negative  to  the  light,  there  appeared 
on  it  five  human  faces  distinctly  outlined  in  addition  to  the  face  of  the  sitter.  Mr. 
Thomson  after  making  several  proofs,  delivered  the  negative  to  me,  which  I  handed  to 
Mr.  Plaetz,  to  be  printed. 

"  These  are  the  facts  and  the  result  of  our  investigation,  and  I  lay  them  before  your 
readers  as  they  occurred  in  our  presence. — EespectfuUy  yours,  H.  F.  Bungardt,  M.D. 

'•  The  undersigned  spectators  present  at  the  time  the  photograph  mentioned  was  taken, 
and  members  of  the  committee  as  above  referred  to,  having  carefully  examined  the  fore- 
going statement  of  the  proceedings,  acknowledge  the  same  to  be  true  and  correct  in  every 
particular : — 

Virginia  J.  Judson  ;  W.  W.  Judson  ; 

H.  M.  Johnson;  Justin  Robinson; 

Fred  Meters  ;  John  E.  Flemming  ; 

D.  P.  Thomson,  Photographer ;    Jacob  Sherman. 

Julius  Plaetz,  Photographer." 

Both  the  following  cases  are  well  known  to  the  author,  and  being 
narrated  by  highly  respected  citizens  of  Troy  and  Chicago,  will  be  read 
with  interest  by  the  many  parties  acquainted  with  Mr.  Vosburgh,  and  the 
Rev.  M.  H.  Forscutt 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  535 

The  first  article  is  copied  from  the  Troy  Standard,  and  reads  thus  : — 

"  In  the  year  1850  I  was  engaged  in  business  and  resided  at  "West  Troy.  There  lived 
in  the  town  a  family  named  Thalimer.  The  family  was  composed  of  father,  mother,  three 
sons,  Peter,  James,  and  Henry,  and  Elizabeth,  the  daughter.  James  desired  very  greatly 
to  embark  on  a  sea  voyage.  His  parents  opposed  him  for  some  time ;  but  he  finally, 
without  their  knowledge,  ran  away  one  day  and  shipped  for  a  three-years'  voyage  in  the 
whale  fishery,  from  New  Bedford,  Mass.  About  this  time  the  Fox  girls  visited  Troy,  and 
there  was  considerable  excitement  in  reference  to  the  claims  set  forth  by  them.  The 
opposition  by  the  press  and  people  was  very  marked  against  them.  James  had  been 
absent  about  one  year  and  a  half,  when  Elizabeth,  his  sister,  was  entertaining  a  party 
at  the  family  residence  one  evening. 

"  In  the  midst  of  their  sport  one  of  the  party  said  by  way  of  a  satirical  sally  at 
Spiritualism,  *  Oh,  let's  form  a  circle  ! '  No  sooner  said  than  done  ;  the  table  was  moved 
out  into  the  middle  of  the  room  and  several  of  the  company,  EHzabeth  among  the  number, 
gathered  around  it.  They  had  not  rested  their  hands  on  it  more  than  a  moment  or  two 
when  Elizabeth's  was  seized  by  a  power  foreign  to  her  own,  which  very  much  frightened 
her.  She  tried  to  extricate  herself,  but  without  avail.  The  intelligence  moving  her  hand 
motioned  as  though  it  desired  to  write.  One  of  the  company  procured  paper  and  pencil ; 
her  hand  instantly  caught  up  the  pencil  and  wrote  aa  follows  :  '  I  fell  from  the  yard-arm 
of  the  ship  to  the  deck  and  was  killed  ;  this  will  be  verified  by  letter  from  the  captain  of 
the  ship. — James  Thalimer.' 

"  The  company  was  very  much  excited  and  broke  up  at  once,  going  to  their  respective 
homes.  The  next  morning  Henry  Thalimer,  the  father,  knowing  me  to  be  a  Spiritualist, 
called  on  me  and  related  the  circumstances,  and  wanted  my  opinion.  I  replied  that  I 
honestly  believed  James  had  fallen,  as  stated,  and  that  it  was  a  genuine  spiritual  mani- 
festation. I  advised  him  to  be  patient  and  await  the  verification  which  I  assured  him 
would  no  doubt  come  by  maU.  In  about  ten  days  after,  Mr.  Thalimer  received  a  letter 
from  the  captain  of  the  vessel  confirming  the  truth  of  the  communication  through  his 
daughter's  hand. 

"  After  a  lapse  of  thirty  years,  in  August,  1880,  I  was  at  Lake  Pleasant  camp-meeting. 
One  afternoon  while  seated  on  the  stoop  fronting  the  hotel,  two  Troy  gentlemen  approached 
and  invited  me  to  take  a  walk  mth  them.  I  accepted,  and  we  walked  wherever  inclination 
led  us,  not  having  in  view  any  particular  place  we  desired  to  visit.  We  were  passing  along 
by  what  is  called  the  open  square,  and  discovered  under  a  large  tent  a  great  throng  of 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  who  seemed  intently  interested  in  what  was  taking  place. 
Being  desirous  of  learning  what  it  was,  we  drew  near,  and  discovered  a  lady  under  what 
was  claimed  as  spirit-control,  giving  tests  of  spirit-identity  to  the  people  assembled.  This 
lady,  I  desire  to  state,  neither  my  friends  nor  myself  ever  met  before.  She  was  an  entire 
stranger  to  us.  We  noticed  that  she  gave  a  number  of  tests,  names,  dates,  circumstances, 
and  events  which  were  corroborated  by  different  persons  in  the  audience.  All  at  once  she 
exclaimed  under  great  excitement :  '  I  see  an  immense  ship  nearing  me  ;  this  vessel  seems 
to  be  labouring  in  a  terrible  storm.  It  seems  as  though  this  vessel  would  come  upon  me. 
Now  I  see  a  young  man  going  aloft.  My  God  ! '  she  said,  '  this  man  will  fall  and  will  be 
killed.'  She  watched  him  with  intense  interest,  and  then  she  suddenly  shrieked  so  loud 
as  to  be  heard  in  all  the  surroundings  :  '  Oh  !  my  God  !  he  falls  to  the  deck  and  is  killed.' 
Her  eyes  were  riveted  to  the  spot  for  a  moment  in  perfect  silence. 

"  She  then  said,  '  This  young  man  gives  me  his  name.  He  says  he  is  James  Thalimer, 
of  West  Troy,  N.  Y.'  I  at  once  repKed,  raising  my  hat,  '  Yes,  that  is  correct.'  The  lady 
then  moved  from  the  platform,  and  motioning  with  her  hands  for  the  people  to  make  way 
for  her,  she  came  to  where  I  was  standing,  and  threw  her  arms  around  my  neck,  exclaiming, 
'  Vosburgh,  God  bless  you  !  I  am  glad  to  meet  you  here.  This  is  the  second  time  I  have 
been  able  to  return  and  identify  myself.  First  through  my  sister,  which  you  knew  of, 
and  second  through  this  ladv,  a  stranger  to  us  both.     God  bless  you,  Vosburgh  ! ' 

"  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  4th,'l882.  "  W.  H.  Vosburgh." 

The  Chicago  Times  of  1880,  has  the  following  statement : — 

"  It  will  be  remembered  that  there  was  published  a  few  weeks  since  an  account  of  the 
death  of  Mr.  Frank  Culver,  of  606,  West  Jackson  Street,  who  died  on  July  7th,  from 
sewer  gas  poisoning.  Almost  immediately  after,  Mr.  Culver's  little  daughter  passed  on, 
as  the  medical  attendants  alleged,  from  the  same  cause.  At  the  funeral  of  the  chUd,  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Forscutt,  who  only  a  short  time  previous  had  attended  the  interment  of  Mr. 
Frank  Culver,  made  the  following  remarkable  and  startling  statement.  The  narrative  is 
furnished  by  the  Times  reporter,  who  was  sent  to  call  on  Mr.  Forscutt,  with  a  view  of 

536  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

correcting  any  mistakes  that  might  have  arisen  by  giving  publicity  to  the  subject  on  the 
strength  of  rumour  alone.     The  reporter  says  : — 

"  '  Mr.  Forscutt  was  found  in  his  study  at  No.  619,  West  Lake  Street.  He  had  the 
appearance  of  a  man  who  is  guided  by  plain  common  sense,  and  answered  the  questions 
put  to  him  in  as  matter-of-fact  a  way  as  could  be  desired.  He  said  that  he  was  sitting  in 
his  study  just  one  week  after  the  death  of  Mr.  Culver,  quietly  reading.  His  thoughts 
were  on  a  subject  entirely  foreign  to  anything  pertaining  to  Mr.  Culver,  when  he  was 
suddenly  impelled  to  look  up — Mr.  Culver  stood  before  him,  not  more  than  six  feet 
distant,  and  as  natural  as  he  had  seen  him  dozens  of  times  in  his  study.  It  did  not  occur 
to  him  that  Mr.  Culver  was  dead,  and  that  his  body  had  been  buried.  As  soon  as  he 
looked  up,  Mr.  Culver  said  in  his  familiar  tones,  "  I  want  Pearl.  I  want  her  to  come 
with  me."  Mr.  Forscutt  says  that  he  asked,  "  Do  you  think  it  would  be  better  for  her  to 
go  than  to  stay  here  ?  Have  you  any  knowledge  of  future  evils  which  might  befall  her  on 
earth  ?"  "  No,  I  have  not,"  Mr.  Culver  replied,  "  but  I  want  her  with  me.  I  went  to 
her  to-day  and  called  her,  and  she  lifted  up  her  hands  and  cried  for  '  Papa,'  I  know  she 
wants  to  come." 

"  '  Mr.  Forscutt  says  he  replied  to  the  effect  that  it  was  a  question  which  should 
predominate,  fatherly  or  motherly  affection,  but  he  would  advise  that  the  matter  be 
submitted  to  the  Lord,  and  say,  "  Thy  wiU  be  done."  He  would  go  to  the  mother  and 
encourage  her  to  submit  to  the  affliction  if  it  should  seem  best  for  Pearl  to  die. 

"  '  In  a  moment  the  apparition  was  gone,  and  it  was  not  for  some  minutes  afterwards 
that  Mr.  Forscutt  was  able  to  realize  that  Frank  was  dead,  and  that  it  was  his  disembodied 
spirit  with  which  he  had  been  talking. 

"  *  Pearl,  Mr,  Culver's  httle  girl,  had  been  sick  a  few  days  previous  to  this,  but  it  was 
not  yet  believed  by  any  one  that  she  must  die. 

"  '  The  attending  physician  had  said  nothing  to  indicate  that  she  would  not  recover. 
As  Mr.  Forscutt  realized  what  had  taken  place  in  the  interview  between  himself  and  the 
father,  he  became  convinced  that  the  child's  death  was  assured.  He  put  on  his  hat  and 
went  immediately  to  the  house  of  Mrs.  Culver  to  prepare  her  for  the  worst.  He  called 
her  aside,  and  said  that  he  feared  Pearl  must  go.  Immediately  the  mother  said  :  "  I  am 
afraid  so,  too,  for  Pearl  threw  up  her  hands  this  morning  as  she  lay  in  bed,  opened  her 
eyes,  and  called  '  Papa,  papa,  papa !'  I  believe  she  saw  him,  as  she  seemed  unusually 
pleased." 

"  '  Mr.  Forscutt  then  told  her  that  Frank  had  paid  him  a  visit  and  said  that  he  had 
called  Pearl,  and  that  she  replied  to  him  precisely  as  she  described. 

"  '  The  reporter  called  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Culver,  and  learned  that  the  circumstances 
were  as  Mr^  Forscutt  had  repeated  them.  It  was  also  learned  that  the  child  and  father 
were  very  fond  of  one  another.  Pearl  was  only  14  months  old,  but  was  unusually 
precocious,  and  the  father  had  often  spoken  of  the  pride  he  should  take  in  giving  her 
superior  training.  This  seems,  in  the  mind  of  Mr.  Forscutt,  to  account  for  his  solicitude 
after  his  death. 

"  '  During  the  day  of  the  occurrence  narrated,  the  child  seemed  much  better,  apparently 
happy  over  the  recognition  of  her  father.  On  that  night  and  the  succeeding  days  she 
began  to  grow  worse,  and  died  on  Friday. 

"  '  Mr.  Forscutt  is  pastor  of  a  congregation  which  worships  under  the  appellation  of 
Latter  Day  Saints  in  the  Crystal  block,  at  619,  "West  Lake  Street.  He  beUeves,  in 
accordance  with  his  denomination,  that  spirits  are  permitted  by  God  to  assume  mortal 
shape  and  reveal  themselves  to  their  friends,  but  says  this  is  the  first  experience  of  his  in 
receiving  one  who  had  departed  this  life.  Mr.  Culver  had  come  to  be  quite  intimate  with 
him  before  his  death,  and  on  that  ground  he  accounts  for  his  appearing  before  him.  Mr. 
Forscutt  maintains  that  he  never  had  a  more  real  experience  in  his  life,  and  laughs  at  the 
idea  that  it  could  have  been  imaginary.'  " 

In  several  parts  of  the  United  States  accounts  are  given  of  the  appearance 
of  Spirit-pictures  being  photographed  upon  the  window  panes  of  houses ; 
the  forms  appearing  and  disappearing  so  suddenly  that  the  parties 
to  whom  the  pictures  were  visible  had  scarcely  time  to  call  in  a  sufficient 
number  of  witnesses  to  associate  the  manifestation  with  authentic  testimony. 

About  fifteen  years  ago  the  author  being  engaged  to  speak  at  a  grove 
meeting  held  at  Milan,  Ohio,  under  the  auspices  of  Hudson  Tutde  and  the 
Spiritualists  of  that  district,  was  taken  with  several  other  persons  to  see  the 
pictures  mysteriously  photographed  upon  the  window  panes  of  a  house 
rented  by  a  person  who  stood  high  in  one  of  the  churches  at  Milan,  and 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  537 

who  was  entirely  opposed  in  belief  and  sentiment  to  Spiritualism  and  all  its 
advocates. 

This  person  acknowledged  that  the  pictures  had  come  in  the  most 
mysterious  and  unaccountable  way ;  that  some,  that  had  already  faded  out, 
closely  resembled  relatives  of  his  who — as  he  said — had  "  long  been  in 
their  graves,"  whilst  ihose  yet  remaining  were  recognised  by  scores  of 
residents  in  the  town  as  representing  deceased  parties  well  known  by  many 
who  went  to  investigate  them. 

As  the  proprietor  of  the  house  in  question  only  permitted  the  author  and 
her  friends  to  inspect  the  pictures  on  condition  that  his  name  should  not 
be  reported,  we  feel  obliged  to  keep  faith  in  this  respect,  and  merely  allude 
to  the  fact,  which  will  be  remembered  by  any  readers  acquainted  with  that 
locality.  Another  well  attested  case  of  this  kind  of  phenomenon  was  pub- 
lished in  the  Bafiner  of  Light  of  August,  1875,  by  a  venerable  resident 
of  West  Woodstock,  Vermont,  Mr.  J.  D.  Powers,  who  says  : —  I 

"  The  demonstration  took  place  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Chaney  Richardson,  a  farmer,  now 
seventy-five  years  of  age,  and  who  has  been  a  Spiritualist  for  a  long  time.  It  appears  that 
Mr.  R.  had  retired  to  his  room  during  the  daytime  to  rest,  and  while  lying  on  the  bed, 
wide  awake,  his  attention  was  attracted  to  the  white  curtain  on  the  window  in  his  room, 
which  was  lowered  about  half  way  down  the  window.  At  first  he  noticed  the  gradual 
appearance  on  the  curtain  of  three  dark  lines,  some  two  inches  apart  and  about  six  in 
length.  He  eagerly  began  to  scrutinize  this  strange  circumstance  and  to  observe  what 
followed.  Soon  he  noticed  that  the  spaces  between  the  lines  began  to  fill  up  and  inter- 
blend,  presenting  a  cloudy  appearance,  in  which  immediately  there  came  the  figure  of  a 
child  in  a  laughing  mood.  Mr.  Richardson  arose  and  approached  the  curtain,  when  the 
figure  disappeared,  and  in  the  same  place  he  saw  another  scene,  representing  houses,  and 
men,  women  and  children  in  citizens'  dress.  Mr.  R.  considered  this  singular  phenomenon 
too  good  to  be  enjoyed  by  himself  alone,  so  he  called  in  his  neighbours  as  witnesses,  some 
of  whom  could  see  the  pictures  as  distinctly  as  he  did.  By  invitation  of  my  friend 
Mr.  J.  P.  Cobb,  an  infidel  of  fifty  years'  standing,  I  rode  with  him  to  Mr.  Richardson's  to 
witness  the  unaccountable  occurrence.  He  was  quite  astonished  at  the  result,  for  he  saw 
all  that  any  one  did  ;  but  what  surprised  him  most  was  the  appearance  on  the  curtain  of 
an  officer  whom  he  had  known,  holding  in  his  hand  a  flagstaff'  and  waving  the  flag  to  the 
breeze.  He  disappeared,  and  on  coming  again  the  flag  was  furled.  Still  more  ;  on  his 
arrival  home  he  saw  on  one  of  the  curtains  of  his  own  house,  and  also  on  one  in  hia 
neighbour's  house,  pictures  similar  to  what  he  had  seen  at  Mr.  Richardson's.  I  saw  but 
two  figures  ;  one  was  small  featured  and  wore  spectacles  ;  the  other  was  my  father's  face, 
plainly  daguerreotyped  on  the  curtain 

"  Another  correspondent  writes  :  '  Spirit -photography  without  material  aid  !  A  new 
phase  of  spirit  manifestation  has  appeared  in  Woodstock,  Vt.  Pictures  representing 
men,  women,  and  children,  buildings,  &c.,  have  appeared  on  a  window  curtain.  They 
come  and  go  in  the  presence  of  spectatoi's,  some  of  whom  recognise  genuine  likenesses  of 
deceased  friends.  The  curtain  was  taken  down  and  washed,  but  still  the  phenomenon 
would  occur.  Many  persons  have  visited  the  house  where  the  occurrence  took  place,  but 
no  one  can  account  for  it  except  as  a  phase  of  spirit  power.'  " 

We  frequently  read  accounts  of  "  the  summer  land  "  and  visits  to  the 
bright  spheres  of  the  hereafter,  as  narrated  by  Spirit  Seers  and  Mediums. 
These  accounts  are  so  entirely  in  harmony  with  each  other,  that  it  has  been 
suggested  by  sceptics,  that  if  the  narrators  do  not  actually  repeat  each 
other's  statements,  there  is  at  least  a  cofitagmi  of  psychology  which  is  liable 
to  affect  certain  individuals  whose  minds  come  into  relation  or  mental  con- 
tact with  each  other.  It  is  with  a  view  of  meeting  and  repelling  this  highly- 
strained  hypothesis  that  we  give  place  to  the  following  narrative,  furnished 
by  a  medical  gentleman  well  known  in  the  West,  in  relation  to  a  family  of 
wealth  and  respectability,  whose  statements  speak  for  themselves.  The 
case,  after  being  reported  in  numbers  of  local  papers,  was  republished  in 
the  Harbmger  of  Light,  Melbourne,   in   1879,    ^^d   is   now   cited   as  an 

538  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

independent  and  impartial  witness  for  the  conditions  of  life  in  the  spheres  of 
Spiritual  existence.      The  narrati'/e  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Mrs.  Diana  Powellson,  widow  of  the  late  Thomas  Powellson,  resides  seven  or  eight 
miles  south-west  of  Kansas  City.  She  is  forty-one  years  of  age,  and  the  mother  of  nine 
children.  Up  to  three  years  ago  she  had  been  a  remarkably  vigorous  woman.  On  the 
1st  of  August,  1876,  a  premature  labour  induced  the  disease  which  culminated  in  what 
was  supposed  to  be  death.  At  one  time,  Dr.  Thome,  supposing  his  patient  would  soon 
die,  remained  with  her.  The  symptoms  were  cold,  clammy  perspiration  all  over  the  body ; 
eyeballs  thrown  'upward  ;  no  action  of  the  diaphragm  ;  she  had  been  blind  for  several 
days ;  things  continued  in  this  course  until  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  she  apparently 
died.  A  current  of  electricity  passed  from  the  base  of  the  brain  to  the  lower  portion  of 
the  back  failed  to  revive  her.  She  did,  however,  finally  revive,  and  gave  this  statement  to 
our  reporter,  in  company  with  Dr.  Thorne  : — 

"  '  I  have  been  a  professed  Christian  for  many  years.  Some  time  in  1877  I  joined  the 
Methodist  Church.  I  am  a  full  believer  in  Christianity.  The  statement  that  I  am  about 
to  make  is  stranger  to  ma  than  it  can  be  to  you. 

"  '  On  the  night  I  died,  I  was  so  happy  at  going  ;  felt  no  misery  of  any  kind  ;  pain  in 
the  head  all  gone  ;  it  seemed  that  I  lost  all  consciousness  but  for  a  moment ;  when  I  came 
to  my  senses  again  I  knew  I  was  dead,  but  everything  was  very  dark  to  me.  I  thought  I 
was  still  blind.  I  became  filled~with  terror,  anticipating  the  worst.  My  husband  (who 
died  a  short  time  ago)  soon,  however,  took  hold  of  me.  Others  of  my  departed  friends 
and  family  did  the  same.  The  darkness  suddenly  vanished.  I  saw  all  my  friends  and 
millions  of  others.  I  saw  hills  and  valleys,  trees  and  flowers,  rivers,  seas,  lakes  and  birds, 
and  heard  such  music  as  I  cannot  describe.  The  people  were  not  what  I  expected  to  see. 
They  were  ordinary  men  and  women.  Some  were  bright  and  beautifiil,  and  others  were 
lean  and  miserable  looking.  I  saw  their  homes.  They  lived  in  communities.  AU  were 
much  more  beautiful  than  any  we  have,  but  some  were  not  so  beautiful  as  others.  I  saw 
many  bright  spirits,  but  was  very  much  surprised  that  they  had  no  wings.  My  friends  led 
me  from  the  dark  place  into  the  light.  I  did  not  come  through  this  dark  place  any  more, 
either  in  coming  back  or  returning  at  any  time.  I  saw  many  meetings  or  congregations, 
but  did  not  learn  what  they  were  doing.  I  was  told  that  I  must  return  to  my  body  again. 
My  husband  told  me  this.  I  cried  and  was  very  much  angered  at  him  and  still  am  for 
sending  me  back.  1  long  to  be  in  that  beautiful  home  that  they  told  me  was  mine.  My 
husband  sent  a  message  to  his  son  and  to  my  children  by  me. 

"  '  Messages  were  also  sent  by  many  others.  I  was  afraid  of  some  spirits,  who  looked 
dark  and  forbidding,  while  others  were  bright,  beautiful,  and  kind.  When  I  was  there 
a  large  concourse  gathered  around  me.  I  did  not  know  I  should  return  to  earth  till  I  was 
told  so  by  my  husband.  He  was  sixty-seven  when  he  died,  though  he  now  looks  in  the 
prime  of  life.  My  two  children  were  with  their  father.  I  was  very  much  surprised  at  this  ; 
I  had  known  only  one  ;  one  child  was  born  dead,  prematurely,  in  August,  1876  ;  it  was 
quite  rejoiced  to  see  me.  I  cannot  compare  it  to  any  age,  it  differs  from  earth,  but  is  still  a 
small  child.  I  felt  all  a  mother's  love  for  that  child,  which  I  did  not  think  I  possessed. 
My  boy,  one  year  old,  died  fifteen  years  ago  ;  he  is  now  a  young  man  and  knew  me. 

"  '  Spirits  do  not  sing  like  we  do  ;  much  nicer.  The  clothing  of  all  was  of  the  flowing 
or  robe  kind.  No  voice  is  used  by  spirits.  I  understood  them  more  perfectly  without 
words.  I  read  their  thoughts  ;  it  is  more  perfect  language  than  ours.  They  told  me  to 
come  back  to  earth  for  three  or  four  years  with  my  Httle  children  who  are  here.  I 
promised  to  do  so.  I  expected  to  meet  Christ,  but  did  not  do  so.  They  told  me  that 
this  was  why  I  was  in  the  dark.  I  know  now  that  I  must  depend  upon  myself.  We  are 
over  there  as  we  are  here,  We  make  our  own  happiness.  I  did  not  find  any  heaven  or 
hell,  only  life,  more  perfect  and  beautiful  than  this.  This  is  not  life  at  all.  What  I  now 
relate  is  as  clear  to  my  memory  as  anything  in  life  can  be. 

"  '  In  dying,  I  did  not  lose  consciousness.  I  seemed  to  fade  from  one  life  into  another. 
I  now  often  see  spirits  around  me,  but  cannot  speak  to  them  or  they  to  me.  They  show 
me  flowers  which  are  more  beautiful  than  ours.  Spirits  told  me  that  they  had  to  repent 
of  their  sins  over  there  before  they  could  advance.  Till  they  did  this  they  were  unhappy. 
I  was  much  surprised  when  I  first  went  there  at  seeing  a  spirit  which  I  took  to  be  God, 
and  I  afterwards  supposed  it  was  Jesus  Christ,  but  who  was  only  a  bright  spirit  teaching 
the  others.  I  saw  many  such  afterwards  ;  they  don't  seem  to  belong  to  the  rest  at  all. 
Everybody  is  engaged  in  learning  and  growing  brighter,  so  they  told  me ' 

"The  facts  and  particulars  of  this  strange  death  were  verified  by  the  people  of 
Eosedale  generally.  More  particularly  was  the  account  substantiated  by  Mrs.  Kittle 
Powellson,  sister-in-law  to  the  lady,  and  Miss  E.  Powellson,  the  daughter ;  Mrs.  John 
Haddock,  Mrs.  Jas.  Wilson,  Mrs.  Callenburgher,  Mr.  Baird,  practising  physician  in 
Rosedale,  and  many  others  who  have  been  constantly  attending  her. 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

539 

"  Dr.  Thorne  called  in  consultation  Dr.  Halley,  of  Kansas  City,  who  made  a  thorough 
investigation  of  the  case. 

"  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  July  9,  1879." 

Amongst  the  locally-celebrated  Mediums  of  America  is  a  family  of 
children  residing  at  Chicago  where  their  manifestations,  although  given  in 
the  privacy  of  a  plain  domestic  circle,  and  without  the  slightest  desire  for 
display,  have  yet  attracted  hundreds  of  curious  and  sceptical  investigators, 
not  one  of  whom  has  ever  made  the  least  suggestion  of  fraud  or  failed  to 
bear  testimony  to  the  apparent  truthfulness  of  all  parties  concerned.  The 
following  account  of  this  Mediumistic  household,  now  celebrated  as  "  the 
Bangs  children,"  is  printed  in  the  Religio  Philosophical  Jouriial^  of  1871, 
with  these  editorial  remarks. 

"  We  have  on  three  occasions  been  invited  to  witness  the  wonderful  physical  mani- 
festations of  departed  spirits  in  the  presence  of  the  Bangs  children.  These  manifestations 
take  place  in  a  fully  lighted  room,  and  yet  musical  instruments  have  to  be  enclosed  in  a 
box  or  dark  room,  in  order  to  enable  spirits  to  play  upon  them.  This  family  all  seem  to 
be  mediximistic,  but  two  little  girls,  aged  respectively  eleven  and  seven  years,  are  con- 
sidered the  best  mediums.  The  manifestations  were  so  varied  in  our  presence,  that  we 
can  give  but  a  faint  outline  of  them  in  this  article.  A  long,  heavy,  extension  dining- 
table  is  brought  out,  and  an  ordinary  table  cloth  is  spread  over  it.  The  family  are  seated 
along  on  one  side,  and  as  many  as  is  convenient  fill  up  the  cii-cle  around  the  table, 
excepting  a  space  of  about  three  feet  between  two  of  the  children,  which  is  left  vacant. 
In  this  vacancy  is  placed  a  chair.  The  audience  who  may  be  present  are  seated  around 
the  room.  It  is  then  quite  usual  for  some  one  of  the  family  to  ask  a  little  spu-it — son  of 
the  Bangs  parents — if  all  is  right.  This  little  son  passed  to  spirit-life  when  only  fourteen 
months  old,  but  is  now  plainly  seen  and  talked  with  by  the  other  children.  In  response 
to  that  inquiry,  an  affirmative  or  negative  answer  is  given  by  a  certain  number  of  raps  or 
tips  of  the  table,  or  by  the  tipping  of  the  vacant  chair  above  referred  to.  If  the  answer 
be  in  the  negative,  one  of  the  children  puts  a  slate  under  the  table,  upon  which  a  pencil 
is  laid.  Immediately  the  sound  of  writing  is  heard  on  the  slate,  and  yet  the  hand  of  the 
child  and  the  slate  where  she  holds  it  is  in  plain  sight.  As  soon  as  the  sound  of  writing 
ceases,  the  slate  is  placed  on  the  table,  and  thereon  is  found,  in  plain  English,  such  cor- 
rections as  are  required  to  be  made  in  the  circle  to  improve  conditions  for  better  mani- 
festations. Sometimes,' some  one  plays  the  piano ;  then  the  chair  above  referred  to,  dances 
(apparently  with  delight)  keeping  time  to  the  music  without  anything  or  any  one 
touching  it.  The  table,  also,  often  hops  and  skips  about  hke  an  intelligent  being,  keep- 
ing time  with  delight  to  the  music.  The  children  are  also  clairaudicnt.  They  hear  the 
spirits  talk,  and  give  what  they  say  to  the  members  of  the  stance,  whereupon  the  spirits 
in  return  give  their  assent  to  the  truth  thereof  by  raps  on  the  table,  or  by  forcibly 
tipping  the  vacant  chair.  This  chair  seems  to  answer  a  very  important  purpose.  It  is 
always  ready  to  respond  to  any  one's  inquiries  when  requested.  For  instance,  one  di- 
recting an  inquiry  to  the  chair,  says.  Chair,  is  John  Smith  (or  some  less  noted  character) 
present  ?  The  chair  immediately  responds  by  one,  two,  or  three  emphatic  tips,  which 
are  understood  to  mean  respectively,  no — I  don't  know — yes.  One  wants  to  have  a  spirit 
friend  write  something  on  the  slate,  whereupon  one  of  the  little  girls  holds  the  slate  under 
the  table,  as  before  described,  or  on  the  top  of  her  head.  Immediately  the  pencil  is 
heard  writing,  and  as  soon  as  the  sound  ceases,  she  takes  down  the  slate,  and  the  inquirer 
finds  a  short  message  to  him  or  her,  and  sometimes,  as  is  claimed,  in  the  fac  simile  hand- 
writing of  the  deceased  person  while  in  this  hfe.  In  all  these  cases,  as  hundreds  of 
sceptics  can  testify,  the  writing  is  done  without  the  touch  of  any  mortal  hand. 

"  A  little  box  is  fitted  up,  and  a  number  of  musical  instruments  are  placed  in  the 
same.  One  of  the  little  gkls  will  sit  by  the  side  of  the  box,  with  one  hand  inserted 
through  ahttle  hole,  only  to  the  wrist  joint,  all  in  plain  sight  of  the  audience.  Then  the 
musical  instruments  will  be  played,  several  at  a  time,  keeping  time  with  a  piano  played  in 
the  room.  Dancing  will  also  be  heard,  &c.,  &c.  Hands  are  often  presented  at  a  little 
diamond  shaped  hole  in  the  box,  moving  things  which  have  been  deposited  in  the  box. 
These  last  manifestations  are  most  perfect  when  a  Httle  seven  year  old  girl  is  tied  fast  and 
placed  inside  of  the  box. 

"  Another  most  int^eresting  phase  is  also  witnessed.  While  you  are  looking  right  at  one 
of  these  little  girls,  you  will  hear  her  cry  out,  '  oh  !'  in  a  child-like  voice,  as  if  she  were 
hurt.     She  wiU  push  up  her  sleeve,  and  there  will  be  found  plain  and  deep  indentations 

540  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

in  the  muscle  of  the  arm  of  a  set  of  children's  teeth — upper  and  lower — indeed,  in  some 
iustances,  almost  drawing  blood.  She  will  slip  down  her  sleeve,  and  no  sooner  down  than 
she  cries  out  again  as  before,  and  again  slips  up  her  sleeve,  and  other  indentations  similar 
to  the  first  are  to  be  seen,  and  this  will  be  repeated  for  a  half-dozen  times  or  more,  while 
you  are  looking  right  at  her  all  the  time.  She  says  it  feels  exactly  as  if  she  was  being  bit 
by  a  child,  and,  indeed,  the  arm  presents  that  appearance. 

"  We  might  go  on  and  recite  the  varied  manifestations  which  are  daily  astonishing  the 
beholders,  in  the  presence  of  these  children,  would  space  admit  it.  We  will  content  our- 
selves, for  the  present,  by  giving  the  following  narrative,  written  for  this  paper,  by  Mrs. 
Bangs,  the  mother  of  the  children,  under  the  approval  of  Mr.  Bangs,  their  father. — 

'■  MHS.    bang's   report. 

"  I  will  commence  by  saying  that  up  to  September  30th,  1874,  none  of  our  family  had 
ever  seen  any  spirit  manifestations,  and  were  not  thinking  about  them.  All  at  once,  on 
September  30th,  about  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  bard  coal  was  thrown  in  at  the  door. 
I  thought  it  to  be  the  neighbours'  children,  and  requested  them  to  stop.  They  answered 
that  they  had  not  thrown  any  coal ;  but  of  course  I  did  not  believe  them,  and  closed  the 
door. 

"  The  kitchen  window  was  dropped  about  six  inches  at  the  top,  and  after  I  closed  the 
door,  coal  commenced  to  come  in  at  the  top  of  the  window.  When  my  husband,  Mr. 
Bangs,  came  home  to  supper,  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  told  him  the  children 
had  been  throwing  coal  into  the  house.  While  he  was  at  supper  the  coal  kept  coming  in 
all  the  time.  After  supper  Mr.  Bangs  went  out  around  the  house  and  concealed  himself, 
with  the  expectation  that  he  could  find  out  who  it  was  that  threw  the  coal,  but  failed  to 
see  any  one,  but  he  could  see  the  coal  pass  in  at  the  window,  and  hear  it  fall  on  the  floor. 
It  was  a  pleasant  evening,  and  the  moon  shone  very  bright.  li  there  had  been  any  one 
near  by  he  would  have  seen  them.  Mr.  Bangs  then  came  into  the  house  and  shut  the 
window.  Several  pieces  fell  in  the  room  after  that.  The  next  morning,  about  seven 
o'clock,  coal  commenced  to  come  in  at  the  pantry  window  on  the  other  side  of  the  house, 
and  next  it  came  into  the  dining-room.  From  seven  to  eleven  o'clock  nearly  a  peck  was 
thrown  in.  We  were  not  disturbed  during  meal  hours,  nor  after  eight  o'clock  in  the 
evening.  Coal  continued  to  come  in  for  four  days.  It  made  no  difference  whether 
the  windows  and  doors  were  open  or  not.  One  large  piece  was  dropped  in  the  front 
room,  weighing  eight  to  ten  pounds,  when  all  the  doors  and  windows  were  closed. 
Several  other  large  pieces  were  brought  in  and  scattered  in  different  places.  Several 
of  the  neighbours  were  called  in  and  can  testify  to  the  truth  of  this  statement.  They 
said  it  was  some  evil  spirit  that  had  got  into  the  house. 

"  The  next  day,  chairs  and  other  articles  of  furniture  were  piled  up  together  in  plain 
view  in  a  moment,  and  then  returned  to  their  places  again.  Dishes  were  put  on  the 
children's  heads.  A  brick,  and  a  tumbler  full  of  water,  was  placed  on  the  head  of  one  of 
the  girls  several  times.  Nearly  every  dish  and  small  ai-ticle  in  the  house  was  jDut  on  their 
heads,  and  kept  me  busy  all  day  taking  them  off. 

"  When  evening  came,  they  took  the  ribbon  off  the  eldest  girl's  head,  and  tied  her  fast 
to  the  chair  with  it,  and  did  many  other  things.  They  tipped  the  chair  she  was  sitting  in. 
I  had  the  impression  to  give  her  a  piece  of  paper  and  pencil,  and  I  asked  the  question, 
who  it  was  making  those  demonstrations.  Immediately  they  controlled  one  of  the  girl's 
hands,  and  wrote,  '  good  spirit' — the  girl  not  having  any  control  of  her  hands.  In  a  day 
or  two  after  that,  she  saw  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Bangs'  sister,  and  described  her  form  and 
features  perfectly.  She  never  saw  her  in  life.  The  spirit  spoke  in  an  audible  voice  several 
times,  calling  Mr.  Bangs,  '  Brother  Edward,  brother  Edward  ! '  one  time  when  the  children 
were  not  in  the  house,  at  another  time  when  the  children  were  asleep  in  bed. 

"  The  lamp  was  trimmed  every  day,  for  two  weeks,  by  spirit  hands,  the  wick  being  cut 
each  time.  Dishes  were  washed,  knives  were  scoured  by  them  in  a  few  moments,  and 
beds  were  made.  The  pantry  floor  was  washed,  and  another  floor  was  swept.  One  day 
while  the  eldest  girl,  Elizabeth,  was  ironing  one  part  of  a  garment,  a  spirit  took  another 
iron  and  ironed  the  other  part  and  helped  until  all  the  clothes  were  ironed.  I  saw  the  iron 
move  about  on  the  cloth,  but  could  not  see  the  spirit.  Presents  were  brought  for  the 
girls,  and  carried  into  the  schoolroom  and  given  to  them.  They  had  each  a  new  circular 
comb  and  neck  ribbon  given  to  them  in  the  schoolroom.  The  combs  were  put  in  their 
hair  and  the  ribbons  tied  around  their  necks.  They  did  not  know  anything  about  it  till 
some  of  the  scholars  asked  them  where  they  got  their  new  combs  and  ribbons. 

"  The  spuit  wrote  through  our  daughter  Elizabeth's  hand,  that  she  wanted  our  family 
to  hold  a  circle  every  evening  for  development.  We  did  so.  The  first  evening,  they 
tipped  the  table,  and  telegraphed  by  raps,  our  daughter  hearing  the  voice  of  the  spirit  at 
the  same  time,  giving  directions  what  they  wanted  us  to  do  next.     We  sang,  and  they 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  541 

kept  time  to  the  music,  by  raps  and  dancing  on  the  floor.  We'  heard  the  sound  of  their 
feet  plainly.  That  evening  the  children  saw  other  spirits  of  our  departed  friends.  Among 
them  was  our  little  boy,  who  passed  away  when  only  foui-teen  months  old.  Since  that 
time  he  seems  to  be  constantly  with  us.  He  has  dra\vn  pictirres  on  paper  and  on  the 
slate,  and  writes  on  the  slate  without  the  aid  of  natural  hands,  giving  very  intelligent 
communications.  One  evening,  while  all  the  family  were  sitting  at  the  sujDper  table,  with 
a  full  Hght,  our  little  girl  Mary  had  her  dress  changed  in  a  few  moments  by  spirit  power. 
We  are  all  positive  she  did  not  move  from  her  chair  during  the  meal,  and  yet  her  dress 
was  changed,  and  the  dress  they  took  off  from  her  was  carried  and  hung  up,  in  her  room. 
Quite  often  the  girls  have  had  their  dresses  thus  changed,  and  their  hair*  curled  before  our 
eyes  ;  that  is,  we  could  see  that  their  clothes  were  changed,  and  their  hair  curled,  but 
could  not  see  any  one  doing  it,  but  we  do  know  the  girls  did  not  do  it.  The  spirits  have 
bought  toys  and  other  useful  articles,  and  brought  them  into  the  house.  They  use  then- 
ovra  money.  Several  times  they  have  given  the  children  small  pieces  of  silver  money  and 
currency.  I  said  to  the  spii'its  one  day,  that  I  wished  them  to  put  a  piece  of  money  on 
the  girl's  head,  if  they  could.  I  kept  looking  at  her  all  the  time.  In  a  few  moments 
they  put  twenty-five  cents  on  her  head.  I  know  she  did  not  have  any  money  about  her, 
and  could  not  have  put  it  there  while  I  was  watching.  One  day  I  put  an  apron  in  a 
biu-eau  di-awer,  and  locked  the  drawer.  In  a  few  moments  the  same  article  was  thrown 
out  from  a  little  cabinet  or  box  in  another  part  of  the  sitting-room.  1  put  it  back  in  the 
bureau  drawer,  and  locked  it  in  the  drawer  three  times  in  succession,  with  the  same  result. 
The  spirits  have  written  many  times  on  a  slate  placed  on  the  girl's  head,  without  using 
any  visible  pencil,  or  anything  but  their  own  hands.  Some  of  the  best  communications 
that  we  have  had,  have  been  written  on  the  slate,  as  it  lay  on  the  head  of  the  medium. 
There  are  many  other  manifestations  of  a  startling  nature  which  I  omit  to  mention. 

"  This  article  being  already  longer  than  I  thought  it  would  be  when  I  commenced  it,  in 
conclusion  I  will  say  that  we  have  a  large  band  of  spirits  with  us  all  the  time  —some  of 
them  our  near  relations,  who  seem  ever  ready  to  manifest  their  presence.  They  say  all 
our  family  are  mediums.  I  will  give  the  names  and  ages  of  the  children.  Elizabeth  is 
eleven  ;  Mary  is  eight  ;  WiUiam  is  six  ;  and  Edward  is  fourteen  years  of  age. 

"  Chicago,  March  10th.  Mrs.  M.  L.  Bangs." 

The  author  would  scarcely  have  ventured  to  print  a  narrative  so  full  of 
almost  incredible  com)no?iplaces,  were  it  not  that  several  persons  of 
undoubted  credit  have  testified  to  being  present  in  Mrs.  Bang's  house 
when  invisible  servitors  laid  the  dinner  table,  and  brought  in  one  after 
another  the  articles  necessary  for  the  meals,  whilst  the  witnesses  sat  by  and 
watched  the  proceedings  in  the  full  light  of  day. 

As  in  many  other  instances  on  record,  a  large  number  of  residents  of 
Chicago  who  have  visited  this  wonderful  family  as  mere  acquaintances,  affirm, 
that  the  spontaneous  demonstrations,  occurring  in  the  routine  of  private 
family  life,  are  far  more  wonderful  than  any  which  can  be  obtained  in 
circles,  or  through  processes  of  invocation.  This  is  a  phase  of  phenomenal 
power  testified  to  by  all  who  have  had  the  privilege  of  visiting  Mediumistic 
persons  in  their  own  homes. 

The  act  of  waiting  in  expectancy  of  phenomena,  although  it  is  most 
generally  responded  to  by  the  kind  guardian  spirits  of  circles,  seems  to  be  less 
favourable  to  the  production  of  demonstrations,  than  the  totally  unprepared 
conditions  which  the  routine  of  busy  home  life  furnishes.  Mrs.  Coleman, 
an  authoress  of  repute  from  Massachusetts,  who  made  a  quiet  visit  to  the 
Bangs  family,  under  a  pretext  of  a  slight  business  nature,  reported  that  in 
one  week's  occasional  visitation  in  that  family,  she  saw  more  wonders 
spontaneously  performed  than  she  could  dare  to  pubUsh,  and  far  more  than 
any  related  of  the  circles  wherein  phenomena  were  anticipated.  These 
statements  should  be  remembered,  as  they  tally  closely  with  the  experiences 
of  all  other  cautious  investigators  in  the  modern  Spiritual  movement. 

I 

542  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

CHAPTER    LX. 

SPIRITUALISM   IN   AMERICA   (CONTINUED), 

Spiritual  Camp  Meetings, 

There  are  two  features  of  the  American  Spiritual  movement  both  of  which 
seem  to  have  grown  out  of  local  customs  until  they  have  attained  to  the 
proportions  of  what  are  popularly  called  "American  Institutions."  These 
are,  the  anniversary  celebrations  of  the  famous  "  Rochester  Knockings," 
taking  place  on  or  about  the  31st  of  March,  and  the  annual  gatherings, 
called  "  The  Spiritual  Camp  Meetings."  The  latter  are  generally  held 
about  the  last  of  July  and  extend  through  August,  and  occasionally  up  to 
the  end  of  September. 

The  custom  of  holding  camp  meetings  in  woods  and  rural  scenes  has 
not  originated  with  the  Spiritualists,  many  religious  denominations  having 
instituted  such  assemblages  long  before  Spiritualism  was  known.  It  would 
seem  as  if  the  rigour  of  the  severe  American  winters  and  burning  summers, 
had  rendered  the  custom  of  seeking  a  pleasanter  temperature  in  shady 
groves  or  in  the  vicinity  of  cool  lakes,  in  the  fall  of  the  year,  an  absolute 
necessity  with  the  denizens  of  American  cities.  The  extreme  reserve 
and  caste  spirit  of  Europeans  which  induces  each  family  to  go  forth  in  its 
own  exclusive  circle  for  autumn  recreation,  finds  but  little  favour  in  the 
democratic  life  of  America.  On  the  contrary,  the  first  idea  of  enjoyment 
which  prevails  in  the  land  of  the  West  is  that  of  social  gatherings,  and 
these  have  gradually  grown  from  pleasant  pic-nics  or  grove  meetings  into 
annual  encampments  where  all  the  portable  conveniences  of  city  life  are 
associated  with  the  charms  of  rural  scenery  and  out-of-door  amusements. 

And  thus  it  is,  that  these  assemblages,  so  foreign  to  the  spirit  of  European 
conservatism,  and  so  attractive  to  American  republicanism,  have  been 
adopted  by  the  Spiritualists  until  their  annual  meetings  in  different  sections 
of  the  country  have  far  outstripped  in  magnitude  those  of  any  other  sect  or 
association  in  the  United  States.  The  Spiritual  camp  meetings  also  have 
become  an  integral  part  of  the  movement  in  America,  and  whether  they 
are  open  to  unfavourable  criticism  or  may  yet  become  so,  certain  it  is,  that 
at  this  time  tens  of  thousands  of  persons  sympathising  with  the  belief  in 
Spiritualism  look  forward  every  year  with  as  much  eager  anticipation  to 
these  gatherings,  and  prepare  to  attend  them  with  as  much  regularity,  as 
the  lower  classes  in  England  look  forward  to  the  inevitable  roast  beef  and 
plum  pudding  of  the  Christmas  festivities.  In  many  localities,  Spiritualists 
invest  large  sums  in  the  purchase  of  land  and  build  or  rent  cottages  which 
they  furnish  for  family  use  during  the  camping  season,  and  close  up  for 
the  rest  of  the  year.  Hotels  are  fitted  up  on  the  camp  grounds  for  the 
accommodation  of  transient  visitors,  and  an  immense  trade  is  carried  on 
in  the  hire  of  tents  which  are  put  up  ui  streets,  avenues,  and  squares  in 
regular  city  fashion,  and  named  after  the  thoroughfares  of  the  adjacent 
towns.  In  some  encampments  all  sorts  of  amusements  are  provided. 
Large  halls  or  tents  are  erected  for  dancing,  music,  and  various  exhibitions, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES,  543 

but  the  "auditorium"  or  space  fitted  with  seats,  together  with  a  speaker's 
stand,  and  accommodation  for  a  choir,  form  an  invariable  feature  of  every 
encampment. 

To  a  visitor  who  has  never  before  beheld,  or  taken  part  in  such  a  scene, 
a  Spiritualistic  camp  meeting  produces  an  indescribable  feeling  of  strange- 
ness and  bewilderment,  which  scarcely  allows  him  to  determine  whether  he 
is  under  the  influence  of  pleasure  or  pain.  The  gatherings  are  so  vast,  the 
scenes  so  new,  and  each  member  of  the  busy  crowd  seems  so  intent  on 
pursuing  his  own  special  avocation,  that  a  sense  of  loneliness,  even  of 
desolation,  such  as  is  often  experienced  by  strangers  in  thronged  cities, 
almost  invariably  possesses  the  sensitive  mind.  Gradually,  the  multitude 
of  objects  crowding  in  upon  view  on  every  side,  arrange  themselves  into 
order,  and  then  the  sight  is  one  of  endless  interest  and  amusement.  To 
a  lounger  passing  through  the  various  groups,  some  arranged  in  picturesque 
knots  at  the  tent  doors,  others  reclining  beneath  shady  trees,  or  stretched 
out  upon  grassy  knolls,  the  fragments  of  conversation  that  meet  the  ear 
are  as  curious  and  heterogenous,  as  the  objects  that  appeal  to  the  sense 
of  vision.  From  the  first  peep  of  day,  the  campers  are  astir,  lighting  gipsy 
fires,  preparing  breakfast,  and  trading  with  the  various  hawkers  who  ply 
with  their  provisions  regularly  through  the  white-tented  streets.  After  the 
morning  meal,  visits  are  exchanged,  and  the  business  of  the  day  proceeds 
with  as  much  energy  and  order  as  in  the  cities.  Sailing  parties,  seances^ 
amusements,  and  business,  all  proceed  in  due  course,  until  the  hour  for 
speaking  arrives,  when  thousands  assemble  at  the  speaker's  stand,  to  par- 
take of  the  solid  intellectual  refreshment  of  the  day.  Lectures,  balls, 
parties,  illuminations,  public  discussions,  &c.,  &c.,  fill  up  the  time  until 
midnight,  when  the  white  tents  enclose  the  slumbering  hosts ;  the  fires  and 
lamps  are  extinguished,  and  the  pale  moonbeam  shines  over  rocks,  groves, 
and  lakes,  illumining  scenes  as  strange  and  picturesque  as  ever  the  eye  of 
mortal  gazed  upon.  Resembling  to  some  extent  a  martial  camp,  but 
adorned  with  flowers,  wreaths,  and  emblems  of  taste  and  beauty,  instead  of 
the  grim  paraphernalia  of  war,  the  stern  sentinel  with  musket  in  hand  is 
exchanged  for  watching  angels.  Instead  of  the  savage  password,  "  Death 
and  glory,"  "  Life  eternal "  is  whispered  in  every  breeze  that  stirs  the  tree 
tops,  and  the  white  tents,  instead  of  sheltering  the  fever-racked  forms  of 
mailed  victims,  only  waiting  for  the  shrill  cry  of  the  bugle  to  marshal  them 
to  murder  or  death,  shade  the  peaceful  slumbers  of  those  who  know  no 
death,  and  who  are  tenderly  guarded  by  the  glittering  rank  and  file  who 
have  triumphed  over  the  grave,  and  risen  as  immortal  victors  from  life's 
cruel  battlefields. 

Amongst  those  who  greet  you  as  you  take  your  morning's  walk  from 
street  to  avenue,  or  linger  on  rocky  pinnacles  to  contemplate  the  busy  hive 
of  life  thronging  below,  are  strangers  from  States  a  thousand  miles  off,  and 
rieighbours  from  the  next  village.  You  may  talk  politics  with  a  white- 
haired  knot  of  grandsires  sunning  themselves  on  a  social  bench,  around 
an  ancient  elm  ;  talk  metaphysics  with  a  group  of  lecturers  assembled  "  from 
the  four  corners  of  the  earth,"  hear  some  merry  "  Indian  maid  "  pouring 
out  through  the  lips  of  her  entranced  "  medy,"  shrewd  philosophy,  mingled 
with  clairvoyant  tests,  and  comical  jokes,  interspersed  with  startling  proofs 
of  super-mundane  intelligence.  Glancing  down  the  avenues  of  gaily 
decorated  tents,  with  wreaths,  banners,  inscriptions,  and  all  manner  of 
fanciful  devices  adorning  them,  the  visitor  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the 
multitude  of  signs  which  almost  every  habitation  exhibits.     The  shrewd 

544 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

practical  spirit  of  "  the  Yankee,"  evidently  knows  how  to  combine  business 
with  pleasure,  and  turn  each  shining  hour  into  profit,"  as  well  as  amusenaent. 
Bookstalls  abound,  photographs  of  spirits  and  mortals  are  on  sale,  and 
literature  is  rapidly  changing  hands.  Healing,  trance,  test,  and  physical 
Mediums,  put  out  their  signs,  and  ply  their  professional  avocations  as 
industriously  here  as  at  home.  In  a  word,  every  one  who  has  anything  to 
say,  says  it  here,  and  the  "  dear  public  "  need  be  at  no  loss  to  find  all  they 
want  to  see,  hear,  purchase,  or  take  part  in,  just  as  readily  as  in  the  midst 
of  the  busiest  cities.  The  Spiritual  camp  meetings  are  in  all  respects  such 
thoroughly  practical  illustrations  of  American  life,  that  any  visitor  may 
glean  more  knowledge  of  popular  institutions  in  a  single  day's  ramble 
through  "  Lake  Pleasant,"  than  he  could  gain  in  many  weeks  of  far  and 
wide  travel.  As  a  general  rule,  there  is  a  fine  choir  and  a  good  band  of 
music  engaged  for  the  camping  season.  Most  commonly  too,  besides  an 
efficient  corps  of  officers  and  managers,  there  is  a  staff  of  police  at  hand,  to 
ensure  order.  To  the  credit  of  the  Spiritualists'  gatherings  be  it  said,  this 
last  addendum  is  generally  a  superfluity,  for  unless  some  "  roughs  "  from  the 
"world's  people"  gain  admission,  a  more  orderly  and  generally  well  con- 
ducted set  of  people  cannot  be  found,  than  a  gathering  of  Spiritualists. 
They  are  most  commonly  also  total  abstainers,  and  whatever  their  private 
views  of  morahty  may  be,  they  are  never  permitted,  at  least  on  the  best 
ordered  camp  grounds — like  Lake  Pleasant  for  example — to  pass  obnoxious 
opinions  on  others,  or  work  mischief  and  disorder.  It  must,  of  course, 
be  understood,  that  there  are  many  diverse  views  amongst  people  so  hete- 
rogeneously  brought  together  by  a  few  generic  points  of  agreement ;  but  it 
is  tacitly  resolved  amongst  them,  that  persons  of  widely  different  grades  of 
thought  shall  assemble  themselves  in  different  directions,  and  hold 
gatherings  where  their  special  views  shall  be  permitted  free  expression 
without  infringing  on  the  rights  and  privileges  of  others.  Thus  it  is  quite 
common  i:o  find  those  who  hold  directly  opposing  views,  calling  their 
sympathizers  around  them  in  special  gatherings,  whilst  at  the  very  large  and 
well  conducted  meetings,  ultra-radical  or  obnoxious  opinions  on  any  subject 
are  not  heard. 

Those  who  may  be  curious  to  learn  what  are  the  prevailing  themes  of 
discussion  at  these  meetings  will  soon  find  that  metaphysics  and  personal 
experiences  with  Mediums  are  on  every  lip.  That  scandals  may  abound, 
both  in  speech  and  manner,  among  such  vast  multitudes  none  can  deny, 
but  as  far  as  strict  regulations  can  prevail,  no  such  disorders  are  manifest 
to  the  public  eye  or  ear.  The  visitor  is  never  shocked  by  the  sound  of  the 
profane  oath,  the  ribald  jest,  or  unseemly  language.  Modest  women  may 
walk  the  camp  at  night  without  fear  of  molestation,  and  the  impure  or  dis- 
honest must  at  least  wear  the  mask  of  decent  seeming  before  they  can  be 
permitted  to  remain. 

As  an  example  of  the  wide-spread  popularity  to  which  some  of  these 
Spirituahstic  camp  meetings  have  attained,  the  author  may  cite  her  own 
experience  when  engaged  as  a  speaker  at  Lake  Pleasant,  in  Montague, 
Mass.,  and  at  Neshaminy  Falls,  Pennsylvania,  in  1880.  At  the  first  of  these 
gatherings  Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten  addressed  an  almost  breathlessly  atten- 
tive audience  of  nearly  eighteen  thousand  persons,  and  at  the  second  there 
were  twenty  thousand  people  on  the  ground,  many  of  whom,  of  course, 
could  not  approach  near  enough  to  the  auditorium  to  hear  the  speaker. 

The  usual  number  of  stationary  campers  at  Lake  Pleasant,  Neshaminy 
Falls,  and  other  of  the  largest  gatherings,  varies  from  one  to  ten  thousand 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  545 

persons.  The  officers  in  charge  make  arrangements  with  the  railroad 
companies  to  bring  passengers  at  reduced  rates,  and  on  Sundays  and 
special  excursion  days  the  visitors  often  amount  to  twenty  thousand  per- 
sons. Meantime,  refreshments  are  provided,  and  when  it  is  remembered 
that  means  of  entertainment  both  mental  and  physical  are  arranged  in 
due  proportion  for  such  vast  assemblages,  and  that  the  most  perfect  order, 
harmony,  and  goodwill  invariably  prevail,  too  much  credit  cannot  be  given 
to  the  managers  and  the  denomination  that  can  attract,  and  successfully 
conduct,  such  meetings. 

As  Lake  Pleasant  camp  meeting  is  now  the  oldest,  and,  on  a  general 
average,  the  largest  of  these  gatherings,  we  shall  continue  our  description, 
by  giving  some  extracts  from  the  managers'  circular  put  forth  by  the  Lake 
Pleasant  Camp  Meeting  Association,  in  1880  : — 

"  NEW   ENGLAND    ASSOCIATION   OF    SPIRITUALISTS. 
"  De.  Joseph  Beals,  President. 

"  Lake  Pleasant  is  situated  in  the  town  of  Montague,  Mass.,  on  the  Hoosac  Tunnel 
Line,  six  miles  south-east  of  Greenfield,  and  midway  between  Troy  and  Boston.  Its 
attractions  are  manifold — embracing  every  variety  of  inland  scenery — everything  possible 
for  the  comfort  and  convenience  of  visitors,  and  ample  facilities  for  amusement  and 
recreation.  The  lake  is  a  beautiful  sheet  of  about  one  hundred  and  eight  acres,  an.!  is 
within  a  mile  of  another  lake  of  sixty  acres.  Bath  houses  are  located  at  convenient  jjoints 
on  the  shore,  a  commodious  wharf  lies  near  the  foot  of  the  stairs  leading  to  the  grove 
from  the  railroad  station,  and  a  flotilla  of  boats  is  always  in  readiness  to  take  out  pleasure 
or  fishing  parties.  An  elegant  Pavilion  stands  on  an  elevated  plateau  overlooking  the 
grove  on  the  one  side,  and  the  railroad  station  on  the  othei-,  accessible  from  each  by  easy 
flights  of  stairs.  The  dancing  assemblies  held  here  each  week-day  afternoon  and  evening 
during  the  camjD  meeting,  are  conducted  with  the  utmost  order  and  decorum,  and  have 
become  exceedingly  popular 

"August,  1880." 

Under  the  head  of 

ARRANGEMENTS    FOR    1880. 

The  management  print  a  long  list  of  the  various  railroad  companies — 
whose  lines  run  over  thousands  of  miles — that  are  prepared  to  carry  pas- 
sengers to  and  from  the  camp  at  half-fares,  together  with  directions  for 
bringing  camp  equipage,  and  the  following  curious,  because  eminently 
practical 

"items  op  interest." 

"The  Grocery  Store  this  season  wUl  keep  a  large  line  of  good.s  of  the  best  quality,  in- 
cluding tin  ware,  crockery,  fruits,  vegetables,  etc.,  which  will  be  sold  at  regular  market 
prices.  No  peddling  of  any  kind  will  be  allowed  on  the  grounds,  except  by  permission 
from  the  Committee.  Table  board,  .$4  per  week  ;  dinners,  50  cents.  A  large  stock  of  Ice 
was  stored  on  the  grounds  last  winter,  and  will  be  sold  to  campers  at  reasonable  rates. 
All  Campers  are  requested  to  register  at  the  Secretarj^'s  Tent  on  their  arrival.  Parties 
driving  to  the  Lake  will  find  ample  provisions  for  their  teams.  Lodyings. — Parties  will  be 
prepared  to  furnish  lodgings  in  tents  or  cottages  at  25  and  50  cents  per  night.  Cot  beds, 
mattresses  and  blankets  can  be  hired  on  the  grounds.  The  Post  Ofiice  and  Telegraph 
Office  will  be  opened  on  the  4th  of  August.  Fish,  lobsters,  oysters,  etc.,  \\\\\  be  received 
fresh,  daily,  and  will  be  sold  at  lowest  prices.  Meats  and  poultry  will  be  brought  on  the 
ground  every  morning  by  Montague  and  Turners  Falls  dealers,  and  fresh  vegetables, 
berries,  milk,  etc.,  by  the  farmers  of  the  surrounding  country." 

Then   follows   an  order    of  musical  exercises,  including  the  times  of 
performance  for  the  Fitchburgh  Military  Band  (one  of  the  best  in  the 
country,  by  the  way),  and  the  vocal  exercises  of  the  Grattan  Smith  Family 
35 

5  0  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

a  charming  and  accomplished  choir  of  vocalists,  whose  entertainments  in 
themselves  are  sufficient  to  command  large  and  appreciative  audiences. 

The  following  plan  of  speakers  may  not  be  uninteresting  for  future 
reference  : — 

"  The  first  regular  exercises  will  be  held  on  Sunday,  August  8.  Speakers — Captain 
H.  H.  Brown  and  E.  V.  Wilson  ;  Tuesday,  August  10,  Mrs.  Lizzie  Manchester,  Inspira- 
tional Singer,  Randolph,  Vt. ;  Wednesday,  August  11,  Giles  B.  Stebbins,  Detroit,  Mich.  ; 
Thursday,  August  12,  Mrs.  E.  S.  Watson,  Titusville,  Pa.  ;  Friday,  August  13,  Mr.  E.  A. 
Stanley,  Leicester,  Vt.  ;  Saturday,  August  14,  Bishop  A.  Beals,  Versailles,  N.Y.  ;  Sunday, 
August  15,  Mrs.  E.  S.  Watson  and  Cephas  B.  Lynn  ;  Tuesday,  August  17,  Louis  Ransom, 
Stratford,  N.Y.  ;  Wednesday,  August  18,  Rev.  J.  H.  Barter,  Auburn,  N.Y.,  and  Elder 
Evans,  Mt.  Lebanon,  N.Y.  ;  Thursday,  August  19,  Mrs.  N.  J.  T.  Brigham,  and  Professor 
Henry  Kiddle,  New  York  City  ;  Friday,  August  20,  Dr.  Anna  M.  Middlebrook,  Bridge- 
port, Ct.  ;  Saturday,  August  21,  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  ;  Sunday,  August  22, 
Ed.  S.  Wheeler  and  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  ;  Tuesday,  August  24,  C.  Fanny  Allyn, 
Stoneham,  Mass.  ;  Wednesday,  August  25,  Ed.  S.  Wheeler,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and  Mrs. 
R.  Shepard,  Washington,  D.C.  ;  Thursday,  August  26,  W.  J.  ColvHle,  Boston,  Mass.,  and 
Rev.  Samuel  Watson  ;  Friday,  August  27,  Mrs.  Sarah  Byrnes  ;  Saturday,  August  28, 
Professor  WilKam  Denton ;  Sunday,  August  29,  Dr.  J.  M.  Peebles,  and  Professor  William 
Denton. 

"  Some  of  the  best  Mediums  in  the  country  will  be  present,  and  the  phenomenal  phases 
of  the  Spiritual  Gospel  will  be  invited  to  fuU  manifestations  through  circles  and  stances." 

To  this  list  should  be  added  the  following  names  of  the  officers  for  i88o  : 

"  President  :  Dr.  Joseph  Beals,  Greenfield,  Mass.  Vice-Presidents  :  M.  V.  Lincoln, 
Dr.  H.  H.  Brigham,  and  Mrs.  M.  A.  Lyman.  Clerk  :  J.  H.  Smith,  Springfield,  Mass. 
Treasurer  :  Wm.  C.  Bryant,  Greenfield,  Mass.  Directors  :  Dr.  Joseph  Beals,  M.  H. 
Fletcher,  D.  B.  Gerry,  W.  H.  Gilmore,  Harvey  Lyman,  J.  S.  Hart,  A.  BuUens,  and  W.  F. 
D.  Perkins.  Committee  on  Grounds  and  Tents  :  N.  S.  Henry,  Chairman,  Montague, 
Mass  ;  W.  F.  D.  Perkins,  and  John  Patterson.  On  Transportation  :  J.  H.  Smith,  D.  B. 
Gerry,  and  Dr.  E.  A.  Smith.  On  Speakers  :  Dr.  Joseph  Beals,  Dr.  N.  D.  Ross,  and  Mrs. 
M.  A.  Lyman.  On  Police,  Lights,  and  Sanitary  Regulations  :  J.  S.  Hart,  P.  H.  Babbitt, 
and  T.  T.  Greenwood.  On  Renting  Privileges  :  T.  W.  Coburn,  W.  H.  Gilmore,  and  M. 
H.  Fletcher.     On  Music  and  Dancing  :  Dr.  Joseph  Beals,  J.  H.  Smith,  and  A.  BuUens." 

The  following  summary  of  one  week's  exercises  at  "Lake  Pleasant" 
may  also  prove  acceptable,  especially  as  it  represents  fairly  the  ordinary 
routine  of  camp  life  pursued  at  this  favourite  place  of  resort. 

The  notes  are  taken  from  the  report  of  the  Banner  of  Light  for  August 
28,  1880. 

"  LAKE   PLEASANT   CAMP    MEETING. 

"  This  busy  little  city  among  the  pines  is  the  scene  of  constant  and  varied  attractions. 
The  great  congregation  of  Sunday  dispersed  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  left  the  campers 
to  enjoy  a  quiet  Sunday  evening.  The  addresses  of  the  day  were  discussed,  private 
seances  were  held,  and  fraternal  calls  were  made  among  the  occupants  of  the  camp. 
Following  is  the  record  of  the  week  ending  August  22nd  : — 

"  Monday. — The  officers  and  board  of  directors  were  elected  for  the  ensuing  year.  In 
the  evening,  Lizzie  J.  Thompson,  of  Boston,  gave  a  reading  to  a  select  and  appreciative 
audience. 

"  Tuesday. — Louis  Ranson,  of  Troy,  N.  Y.,  delivered  the  ^regular  address.  He  chose 
for  his  theme  :  "Christianity  as  a  Force  in  Civilisation."  At  3-30  p.m.  Jennie  B.  Hagan's 
friends  convened  in  the  hall  and  were  well  entertained.  Miss  Hagau  improvised  with 
her  accustomed  ability.  In  the  evening  the  Grattan  Smith  family  held  a  concert,  which 
was  largely  attended. 

"  Wednesday. — The  Shakers  were  present  in  force,  and  conducted  the  exercises  both 
morning  and  afternoon.  Elder  Evans,  Elderess  Doolittle,  and  other  members  of  the 
party  spoke.  The  singing  was  a  novel  portion  of  the  exercises.  Elder  Evans  is  a  radical 
speaker,  and  some  of  his  remarks  were  loudly  applauded.  The  audiences  were  very  large 
during  the  day.  Charles  SulHvan's  entertainment  in  the  evening  was  very  successful. 
The  hall  was  crowded,  and  Mr,  Sullivan  was  in  good  'form.'  He  was  enthusiastically 
received, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  547 

"  Thursday. — Rev.  J.  H.  Barter,  of  New  York,  delivered  the  regular  address  of  the 
forenoon  session.  His  wife  read  a  lengthy  poem  (original)  on  'True  Religion.'  Mr. 
Harter  then  proceeded  with  his  sermon.  He  said  substantially  : — ■'  I  was  once  a  member 
of  the  Dutch  Reformed  Church  ;  then  I  changed  to  the  Methodist ;  then  I  moved  forward 
to  the  Universalist ;  my  last  jump  was  into  SpirituaUsm.  I  sing  hosannas  of  praise  for 
Spiritualism.  It  is  a  glorious  religion.  I  shall  preach  a  sermon  on  "Coming,  Doing  and 
Going." '  In  the  afternoon  the  Regular  Address  was  prefaced  by  some  remarks  from  that 
veteran  Camp-Meeting- worker,  Dr.  A.  H.  Richardson,  who  was  cordially  welcomed  by  the 
audience.  Dr.  H.  B.  Storer,  the  well-known  lecturer,  who  has  officiated  in  such  an 
acceptable  manner  at  the  Onset  Bay  meetings  this  summer,  was  next  introduced  by 
President  Beals.  As  Dr.  Storer  advanced  to  the  front  of  the  platform  a  storm  of  applause 
greeted  him.  He  spoke  substantially  as  follows  :— '  I  thank  you,  my  dear  friends,  for  your 
cordial  greeting.  I  have  just  left  Onset  Bay,  where  we  have  had  the  baptism  of  the  spirit. 
We  all  rejoice  at  your  success  here.  May  our  meetings  increase.  One  spirit  animates  us 
all ;  one  impulse  moves  \is  onward.  It  is  a  high  honour  to  be  an  humble  worker  in  this 
great  movement.  Our  veteran  workers  leave  us :  E.  V.  Wilson  has  gone.  Blessed 
thought,  however,  that  our  sainted  and  heroic  dead  are  still  in  sympathy  with  us.  They 
insjiire  us  ;  they  lead  us  on  to  noble  works.'  Mi's.  Nellie  J.  T.  Brigham,  of  New  York 
City,  delivered  the  regular  addi-ess.     Her  topic  was,   '  One  Lord,  one  Faith,  one  Baptism.' 

"  Friday. — Rev.  J.  H.  Harter  of  New  York,  spoke  in  the  forenoon,  continuing  his 
former  address  : — The  Regular  Address  was  delivered  at  1.45  p.m.,  by  Dr.  Anna  M.  Mid- 
dlebrook-Twiss,  of  Manchester,  N.  H.     Her  theme  was  'Fact  and  Philosophy.' 

"  Saturday. — Capt.  H.  H.  ]3rown  spoke  by  special  request  in  the  forenoon.  The  dis- 
course was  preceded  by  a  song  from  Mrs.  Mason  and  daughter  and  Chas.  W.  Sullivan. 
Capt.  Brown's  topic  was  '  The  Mission  of  America,  or  the  Place  of  Spiritualism  in  History.' 
In  the  afternoon  at  1.45  p.m.,  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  delivered  a  splendid  address 
on  'The  New  Bible.'  Mrs.  Britten  is  a  speaker  of  world-wide  celebrity.  Her  discourses 
are  grand  and  lucid,  delivered  with  dramatic  fire,  and  reflect  credit  upon  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism.     She  was  attentively  listened  to  and  loudly  applauded. 

"  Sunday,  Aug.  22nd. — There  never  was  a  fairer  day  than  this.  At  an  early  hour 
crowds  began  to  enter  the  camp  gi'ound.  The  excursion  trains  were  larger  than  ever 
before.  It  was  an  interesting  sight  to  witness  the  arrival  of  the  constantly  incoming  host. 
At  9-30  the  Fitchburg  Baud  began  a  very  fine  concert.  The  vast  amphitheatre  was  well 
filled  witli  an  appreciative  audience.  In  the  afternoon  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge-Bi'itten  was 
greeted  by  an  immense  audience,  which  she  held  spellbound,  as  in  a  stately  and  impressive 
manner  she  replied  to  Joseph  Cook's  recent  coarse  imputations  upon  Spiritualists.  This 
discourse  \\ill  soon  be  issued  in  tract  form,  hence  the  writer  will  not  attempt  to  give  a 
digest  here.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  eminent  and  able  defender  of  Spiritualism, 
Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge-Britten,  who  honours  any  cause  by  her  advocacy  of  it,  subjected 
Joseph  Cook  to  a  scorching  criticism  and  answered  in  a  lucid  manner  the  current  objections 
to  Spirituahsm.  The  lecturer  was  congratulated  by  thousands  at  the  conclusion  of 
her  address. 

"Monday,  Aug.  23rd. — At  1.30  p.m.  a  memorial  service  was  held  in  honour  of 
E.  V.  Wilson,  the  veteran  lecturer,  who  passed  to  spirit-life  Aug.  8th.  The  grand  stand 
was  beautifully  decorated,  and  a  very  large  audience  convened  to  hsten  to  the  speeches. 
President  Beals  said  :  '  We  have  met  to  hold  a  memorial  service  to  our  dear  brother, 
E.  V.  Wilson,  who  has  gone  to  the  spirit-land.  He  was  a  brave  and  noble  worker.  Let 
us  show  our  respect  for  him  to-day.'  Capt.  H.  H.  Brown  was  the  first  speaker.  He  paid 
an  eloquent  tribute  to  the  memory  of  Mr.  Wilson.  Ed.  S.  Wheeler  followed  in  a  touching 
speech,  filled  with  reminiscences  of  personal  relations  ^^ith  IMr.  Wilson.  He  also  made  a 
very  forcible  plea  for  practical  work  in  direction  of  Hquidating  the  indebtedness  upon  the 
home  of  Mr.  Wilson's  family.  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge-Britten  made  the  closing  speech, 
which  was  one  of  great  power.  She  asked  the  question.  What  does  death  do  to  us  ?  and 
proceeded  to  argue  that  death  transfigured  us  ;  that  the  noble  warrior  in  whose  honour 
the  meeting  was  held  had  been  transfigured  since  the  episode  of  death,  which  was,  in 
reality,  his  spiritual  birth.  The  speaker  in  closing  adverted  to  the  question  of  assisting 
the  wife  and  children  of  Bro.  Wilson,  and  directed  President  Beals  to  put  her  name  down 
as  the  first  one  to  purchase  E.  V,  Wilson's  book  :  '  The  Truths  of  Spiritualism.' 

"  Cephas."* 

Having  rendered  all  the  justice  our  space  will  permit  to  the  colossal 
camp  meeting  of  the  present  day,  we  must  follow  with  j  ust  at  least  a  few 

*  Cephas  B.  Lynn,  a  young  and  highly-inspired  speaker,  writer,  and  thinker.  Cephas  Lynn's 
addi-esses  are  amongst  the  briglitest,  most  original,  and  scholarly  that  can  be  heard  on  the  American 
Spiritual  rostrum,  and  his  admirable  reports  for  the  Banner  of  Light  contribute  largely  to  its  popularity. 

548  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

extracts  from  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal  of  August  28th,  1880, 
touching  the  "  Neshaminy  Falls  Camp  Meeting,"a  much  younger  organization 
than  that  of  "  Lake  Pleasant,"  but  one  which  in  point  of  numbers  seems  likely 
to  rival  the  immense  gatherings  of  Massachusetts.  Neshaminy  Falls  is  a 
beautiful  place  about  ten  or  twelve  miles  from  Philadephia,  and  its  attrac- 
tions and  methods  of  management  may  be  gathered  from  the  following 
stirring  remarks  : — 

CAMP   MEETING   OF   THE   FIRST   ASSOCIATION    OF    SPIRITUALISTS    OF 
PHILADELPHIA,    AT   NESHAMINY    FALLS    GROVE. 

"There  were,  as  I  have  informed  you,  some  ten  or  twelve  thousand  persons  at 
Neshaminy  Falls  Grove  on  Saturday,  August  1st,  and,  in  consequence,  Monday  was  a  day 

of  quiet  and  repose  there 

"  On  the  day  to  which  we  refer,  there  was  some  dancing  by  the  regular  citizens  of 
the  camp  in  the  pavilion,  our  orchestra  always  being  ready  to  discourse  sweet  music, 
whenever  the  lads  and  lasses  wish  "to  trip  the  light  fantastic  toe."  which  is  pretty 
often.     By  the  way,  these  small  social  parties,  among  acquaintances,  are  fast  becoming 

very  enjoyable 

"  On  Tuesday,  Mrs.  Shepard,  ever  ready  to  gratify  those  seeking  for  truth  and  instruc- 
tion, answered  questions  from  an  audience  gathered  in  the  pavilion,  the  weather  being 
unfavourable.  In  the  afternoon  H.  H.  Brown  discoursed  upon  the  text  :  "  He  went  up 
into  the  mount  of  Olivet,"  etc.     The  lecture  was  considered  an  excellent  essay  by  those 

who  heard  the  same 

"  On  Thursday,  August  5th,  Mrs,  R.  Shephard  spoke  in  the  forenoon,  in  answer  to 
interrogations  from  her  hearers.  In  the  afternoon,  Mrs.  Emma  Hardiuge-Britten,  so  long 
and  extensively  known  among  Spiritualists  all  over  the  world,  was  the  speaker  announced, 
and  she  came  duly  from  the  scene  of  her  present  labors  in  the  city  of  New  York. 

"  In  order  to  encroach  as  little  as  jDossible  upon  the  time  of  so  busy  a  person  as  Mrs. 
Britten  ever  is,  the  committee  had  engaged  her  to  speak  on  consecutive  days.  And  so 
it  came  about,  that  on  Friday,  August  6th,  Mrs.  Britten  spoke  again.  To  attempt  a 
report  in  half-a-dozen  lines,  would  be  but  an  impertinence  deserving  resentment.  It  is 
better  to  say  the  two  lectures  of  Mrs.  Britten  gave  great  satisfaction,  being  grandly 
instructive,  and  only  made  all  concerned  the  more  regret  the  accident,  which  prevented  us 
from  placing  her  before  our  great  Sunday  audiences.  The  ensuing  Saturday  was  one  of 
our  quiet  days,  such  as  have  been  described  before,  but  the  camp  gradually  filled,  until 
every  nook  was  occupied  and  new  comers  were  quartered  among  hospitable  friends  and 
accommodating  strangers  for  miles  around. 

"  But  Sunday,  August  8th,  was  not  a  quiet  day.  The  morning  dawned  brilliantly. 
The  speakers  were  A.  B.  French,  of  Clyde,  Ohio  ;  Samuel  Watson,  of  Memphis,  Tenn.  ; 
and  Mrs.  R.  Shepard.  By  arrangement  with  the  railroad  company  several  extra  trains 
were  secured,  and,  warned  by  the  immense  throng  of  the  last  Sunday,  other  enlarged 
accommodations  were  provided.  Early  in  the  morning  the  people  began  to  gather,  and 
by  the  time  for  opening  the  meeting  for  the  forenoon  the  camp  had  more  people  than  at 
the  same  time  on  the  Sunday  previous. 

"  A.  B.  French  spoke  to  a  magnificent  audience  upon  the  subject,  '  What  of  Death, 
and  what  of  our  Dead  ?' 

"  Long  before  the  time  for  the  Rev.  Samuel  Watson  to  speak,  it  was  seen  that  the 
audience,  as  on  the  last  Sunday,  must  be  divided.  Two  meetings  were  arranged,  but 
three  were  needed,  as  on  the  former  Sunday,  but  there  were  not  so  many  speakers  at  hand 
competent  for  such  crowds,  and  in  the  evening  a  fine  audience  heard  Mrs.  Shepard  once 
more  upon  'Woman  and  her  relation  to  Spiritualism.'  Last  Sunday  there  were  one 
thousand  or  more  carriages  came  to  this  ground — this  Sunday  the  gatekeepers  told  me 
they  passed  over  fifteen  hundred  teams,  some  of  them  four-in-hand.  There  were  many 
more  cars,  and  all,  as  I  am  informed,  came  full.  There  was  '  a  great  company  which  no 
man  could  number,"  but  order  and  peaceful  enjoyment  reigned  supreme,  without  an 
accident  to  mar  the  occasion  at  Neshaminy." 

Lake  Pleasant  and  Neshaminy  must  suffice  to  inform  our  readers  of  what 
Spiritualistic  camp  meetings  are  like,  and  what  Spiritualists  do  and  talk 
about  when  they  go  into  camp.  There  are  multitudes  of  similar  gatherings  ; 
some  less  it  is  true  in  numbers,  but  not  very  much  less.     Let  the  following 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  549 

list  of  such  gatherings,  selected  like  the  above  extracts,  from  the  Banner^ 
and  the  Religio  Philosophical  Journal^  of  August,  1 880,  speak  for  themselves. 

"  Cape  Cod  Camp  Meeting.  [By  H.  B.  S.]*  The  charm  of  a  delightful  summer 
lingers  in  the  groves  and  over  the  odorous  fields  basking  in  the  sunlight.  The  air  is 
vocal  with  the  twitter  of  birds  and  hum  of  insects,  and  a  morning  walk  over  the  hills 
seems  a  fit  preparatioii  for  that  natural  worship  which  we  hope  to  enjoy  in  larger  measure 
by  the  aid  of  this  first  Sunday's  exercises  at  the  camp.  The  dead  leaves  have  been  swept 
away,  the  speakers'  stand  newly  painted,  and  the  seats,  all  comfortably  backed,  await  the 
coming  audience.  After  the  deluging  rain  of  Saturday,  the  sandy  roads  of  the  Cape  are 
comparatively  hard,  and  on  foot  and  by  vehicles  of  all  sorts,  the  good  people  stream  to- 
ward the  camp.  Baggage  is  unloaded,  and  soon  the  semi-circle  of  cottages  are  occupied 
by  their  annual  tenants,  who  greatly  enjoy  their  social  reunions  under  the  trees." 

"  Lilt  Dale  Camp  Meeting. — The  sessions  of  this  Camp  Meeting  have  been  productive 
of  great  good  in  the  western  portion  of  the  State  of  New  York.  The  principal  speakers 
have  been  Mrs.  Stearns,  Lyman  C.  Howe,  C.  Fannie  Allyn,  Prof.  Wm.  Denton,  Judge 
McCormick,  and  \Y.  J.  Colville.  With  this  array  of  talent  tJae  meetings  have  been  well 
sustained  twice  daily.  In  addition  to  the  regular  exercises,  every  evening  has  been  profit- 
ably employed,  either  by  a  scientific  lecture  or  a  concert.  Prof.  Denton's  geological 
course  has  been  intensely  interesting  and  instructive,  and  Mr.  James  G.  Clarke's  ballad 
concerts  have  been  a  veiy  pleasing  feature." 

"  Buswell's  Grove,  Me. — Mrs.  Mattie  E.  Hull  writes  : — '  Extensive  preparations  are 
going  on  for  the  prospective  camp-meeting  in  Buswell's  Grove,  commencing  the  8th  of 
September.  In  all  probability  it  will  be  the  largest  gathering  of  Sjiiritualists  ever  con- 
vened in  the  State.  The  committee  have  engaged  the  services  of  J.  Frank  Baxter,  Dr. 
H.  P.  Fairfield,  Moses  Hull,  and  the  writer.'  " 

"  Notes  from  Onset  Bat. — Our  camp  meeting  has  had  another  week  of  uninterrupted 
success,  save  by  the  very  dry  weather.  The  meetings  during  the  past  week  have  been 
largely  attended  by  an  eai-nestand  thinking  people,  who  are  ready  for  the  bread  of  life. 
Saturday,  W.  J.  Colville,  of  Boston,  occupied  the  platform  in  the  afternoon,  while  your 
correspondent,  with  the  rest  of  the  Committee  on  Entertainments,  was  busy  in  caring  for 
the  parties  arriving  in  large  numbers  to  spend  Sunday  at  the  grove.  Sunday,  August 
6th,  opened  clear  and  dry,  and  with,  by  far,  the  largest  number  of  people  at  the  grove  that 
ever  stayed  over  night  at  one  time.  The  trains  from  Boston  and  New  Bedford  on  the 
north,  and  the  trains  from  Proviucetown  and  Oak  Blufis  on  the  south,  with  the  steamer 
Monohanset  from  New  Bedford,  aU  came  loaded,  swelling  the  numbers  to  nearly  7,000. 
Mrs.  Sarah  A.  Byrnes,  of  Boston,  spoke  at  10.30  a.m.,  subject,  '  The  Practicality  of 
Spiritualism.'  " 

"  Lake  Champlain  Spiritualist  Camp-Meetino. — To  be  held  at  Queen  City  Park, 
Burlington,  Vt.,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Forest  City  Park  Association.  Commencing 
August  21st,  and  continuing  until  September  11th,  1882." 

"  SuNAPEE  Lake  Spiritualist  Camp-Meeting. — The  Spiritualists  of  New  Hampshire 
will  hold  their  fifth  annual  camp-meeting  at  Blodgett's  Landing,  Newbury,  N.  H.,  com- 
mencing September  8th  and  closing  SejDtember  25th." 

"  Michigan  Camp-Meeting. — There  will  be  a  grand  camp-meeting  at  Lan-sing,  on  the 
Central  Michigan  Fair  Ground,  commencing  August  25th  and  closing  September  4th, 
held  under  the  auspices  of  the  State  Association  of  Spiritualists  and  Liberalists  of 
Michigan." 

"  A  Liberal  League  Convention  and  Spiritualist  and  Secular  Camp-Meetinq, — 
Will  be  held  at  Tama,  Tama  County,  Iowa,  September  7th,  8th,  9th,  and  10th." 

"  The  Annual  State  Camp  Meeting  of  the  Kansas  Liberal  Union  will  begin  on  Sun- 
day, Aug.  27th,  and  continue  till  and  close  on  Sept.  4th,  1882,  at  Bismarck  Grove, 
Lawrence,  Kansas.— Annie  L.  Diggs,  Secretary." 

"  Camp  Meeting  at  Etna,  Me. — The  Spiritualists  of  Eastern  Maine  will  hold  their 
Annual  Camp-Meeting  at  Etna,  Penobscot  Co.,  in  Daniel  Buswell's  Grove,  commencing 
August  25th,  and  continuing  ten  days,  ending  Sunday,  Sept.  3rd,  1882.  Dr.  H.  B.  Storer, 
J.  Frank  Baxter,  Miss  Jennie  B.  Hagan  and  others  are  expected." 

"  The  Adjourned  Meeting  (being  the  first  annual)  of  the  Fourth  District  Spiritual- 
Liberal  Association,  will  be  held  on  Orion  Park  Island,  Saturday  and  Sunday,  Aug.  26th 
and  27th. — Mrs.  F.  E.  Odell,  Secretary,  Farmer's  Creek,  Mich." 

*  Dr.  Stoi-er,  of  Boston, 

550  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

"Gkove  Meeting. — The  Spiritualists  of  Paulding  County,  0.,  and  vicinity,  will  hold 
their  Annual  Grove-Meeting  in  Daniel  Wentworth's  Grove,  north  of  Antwerp,  on  the  19th 
and  20th  of  August. — R.  B.  Champion,  Secretary." 

"The  Niantic  (Ct.)  Camp  Meeting. — The  grounds  will  be  open  on  and  after  June  12, 
1882.  The  regular  Camp  Meeting  will  commence  with  public  speaking,  July  12,  1882, 
and  will  continue  until  August  20th." 

''  Spiritualist  Camp  Meeting. — The  5th  Annual  Solomon  Valley  Spiritualist  Camp 
Meeting  will  be  held  under  the  direction  of  the  Delphos  Society  at  Delphos,  Ottawa 
County,  Kansas,  from  September  22nd  to  October  1st  inclusive." 

'■  The  People's  Camp  Meeting  will  be  held  on  the  grounds  of  the  Cassadaga  Lake 
Free  Association,  from  July  28th  to  August  28th  inclusive." 

"  Spiritualist  Camp  Meeting  at  Lake  George,  N,  Y.,  from  July  15th  to  August  20th." 

Several  new  Camp  Meetings  have  been  started  within  the  last  two  years 
of  which  the  author  has  no  authorized  accounts,  in  addition  to  those 
named  above  ;  nearly  all  of  which  are  old  established  gatherings.  Besides 
these,  there  is  a  long  list  of  Grove  Meetings,  and  Conventions,  announced 
to  continue  for  two,  three,  or  more  days ; — all  and  each  of  which  command 
full  gatherings,  never  falling  below  six  or  seven  hundred,  and  often  reaching 
to  several  thousand  persons. 

Quite  recently,  a  blatant  minister  of  the  Church  of  England,  who  found 
his  pew  rents  like  his  congregation,  sadly  in  need  of  replenishment,  com- 
menced, by  way  of  effecting  his  object,  a  series  of  Sunday  Evening  Ser- 
mons "against  Spiritualism," — to  be  preached  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy 
Trinity,  Liverpool,  England. 

The  religious  paper  that  reported  these  sermons,  announced  them  as 
"  Spiritualism  in  its  coffin  "  ; — "  Nailing  down  the  lid  "  ;  and,  "  Death  blow 
to  Spiritualism,"  &c.,  &c.  One  of  the  correspondents  of  this  same  religious 
paper,  called  upon  the  clergyman  aforesaid,  to  do  his  duty,  and  crush  out 
the  obnoxious  .reptile — Spiritualism — at  once.  Other  writers  followed  in 
the  same  strain ;  but  all  agreed,  that  the  clergyman  in  question,  whose 
name  was  never  heard  till  then  beyond  his  dreary  range  of  empty  pews, 
and  a  few  solemnly  sad  looking  worshippers,  scattered  by  twos  and  threes, 
through  the  church,  could  soon  do  the  business^  and  presently  the  whole  thing 
would  collapse  beneath  the  lightning  of  the  minister's  eye,  and  the  thunder 
of  the  ecclesiastical  sheet  engaged  in  "  Nailing  down  the  lid  "  of  Spiritual- 
ism's coffin. 

Although  Mrs.  Hardinge-Britten  was  called  upon  during  several  weeks  by 
the  Liverpool  Spiritualists  to  answer  this  monstrous  bombast,  her  controls 
never  deemed  it  worth  while  to  do  more  than  use  these  occasions  to 
describe  what  Spiritualism  was  not,  as  well  as  what  it  was. 

Could  the  reverend  orator  and  his  clerical  abettors  have  glanced  over  the 
foregoing  chapter  before  entering  upon  their  pitiful  crusade,  is  it  not  more 
than  probable  that  they  would  have  paused  to  draw  breath  before  they 
entered  upon  their  work  ?  and  measuring  their  own  exceeding  littleness 
against  the  multitude  whom  their  vain  gloriousness  presumed  to  attack, 
would  they  not  have  prudently  waited  until  they  had  found  another 
Samson  before  they  attempted  to  slay  their  thousands  and  tens  of 
thousands  with  "  the  jaw  bone  of  an  ass  ?  " 

H 
X 

H 
C/5 

-^r.^iffry 

^, 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  551 

CHAPTER     LXL 

CONCLUSION. 

It  need  scarcely  be  stated  to  the  readers  of  this  volume,  that  its  limits  no 
more  admit  of  a  record  which  would  include  all  the  memorable  names  which 
have  figured  in  the  history  of  American  Spiritualism,  than  it  would  serve  to 
catalogue  all  the  noteworthy  personages  who  have  been  instrumental  in 
planting  the  standards  of  the  Spiritual  cause  in  other  countries  of  the  earth. 
Of  the  vast  number  of  influential  actors  in  the  great  nineteenth  century 
Spiritual  drama  mentioned  in  the  author's  Twenty  Years'  History  of  Modern 
American  Spiritualism,  few  indeed  are  now  remaining  on  earth.  Amongst 
those  still  spared  to  the  present  generation  are  the  three  Fox  sisters,  whose 
eminent  services  in  founding  the  first  Spiritual  telegraph  of  the  present  age, 
have  been  fully  described  in  "  Modern  American  Spiritualism,"  as  well  as 
every  other  work  written  on  the  subject  of  the  present  Spiritual  dispensa- 
tion. The  eldest  of  the  far-famed  sisters  known  as  "The  Rochester 
Knockers,"  Mrs.  Leah  Fox  Underbill,  though  retired  from  her  long  and 
arduous  duties  as  a  professional  test  Medium,  is  ever  gratefully  remembered 
by  the  Spiritualists  of  this  country,  as  well  as  by  the  many  personal  friends 
who  throng  her  pleasant  salons  in  her  private  New  York  residence. 
Margaretta  Fox — now  the  widow  of  Dr.  Kane,  the  eminent  Arctic  dis- 
coverer— and  Mrs.  Kate  Jencken — also  unfortunately  deprived  by  the 
death  angel  of  her  good  companion  Henry  Jencken,  barrister,  of  London, 
England — still  pursue  their  avocations  as  professional  Mediums,  the  former 
in  America,  the  latter  in  England.  Mrs.  Jencken  is  the  mother  of  two  lovely 
and  promising  boys,  the  eldest  of  whom,  at  the  immature  age  of  five  months, 
whilst  held  in  his  nurse's  arms,  began  toying  with  a  pencil  lying  on  the 
table  near  the  babe,  and  in  the  presence  of  rehable  witnesses,  his  tiny  hand — 
moved  by  an  invisible  but  irresistible  power — wrote  several  hnes  in  clear 
bold  cahgraphy,  the  facsimile  of  which  will  be  found  on  the  opposite 
page. 

Still  another  of  the  most  celebrated  and  esteemed  of  the  Spiritual  "  old 
guard,"  who  remains  at  the  post  of  duty,  is  Mr.  J.  V.  Mansfield,  the  Spirit 
postmaster,  whose  powers  as  an  unrivalled' writing  Medium  will  also  be 
found  described  in  ample  detail  in  "  Modern  American  Spiritualism." 
Though  the  snows  of  many  winters  have  bleached  the  once  raven  locks,  the 
heart  and  hand  of  the  good  "postmaster  "  are  as  devoted  to  the  service  of 
the  angels,  as  in  days  of  yore. 

During  a  period  of  nearly  thirty  years,  Mr.  Mansfield  calculates  that  he 
must  have  written  over  one  hundred  thousand  answers  to  sealed  letters  at 
the  dictation  of  Spirits  !  He  has  seen  one  after  another  of  his  early  friends 
and  associates  vanish  from  his  side,  and  last,  and  best  beloved  of  all,  the 
fair  and  faithful  companion  of  his  youth,  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  his 
mature  age,  has  disappeared  amidst  the  golden  mists  which  enshroud  the 
radiant  summer  land,  from  the  dazzled  eyes  of  mortality ;  but  despite  of 
care  and  change,  bereavement,  and  the  stealthy  approaches  of  life's  wintry 
season,  for  which  earth  knows  no  returning  spring,  James  V.  Mansfield  has 
still  kept  his  seat  at  the  mystic  Spirit  table ;  waiting — and  seldom  in  vain — 
for  the  invisible  dictators  who  should  send  messages  of  consolation  and 
proofs  of  immortality  from  land  to  land,  and  despatch  tidings  from  the 

552  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

post-ofifice  of  the  soul  across  the  silent  sea,  bounded  by  the  coast  lines  of 
earth  and  the  realms  of  immortality. 

In  a  copy  of  the  Banner  of  Light  some  eighteen  years  old,  is  a  long  list 
of  speakers,  healers,  test  Mediums,  &c.,  &c.,  very  few  of  whom  now  remain 
on  earth  to  fill  the  posts  of  duty  they  then  occupied. 

In  the  midst  of  this  decimation  of  the  Spiritual  ranks,  it  is  indeed 
pleasant  to  see  the  standard  of  the  faith  still  upheld  in  the  great  city  of 
New  York,  by  Mr.  Henry  J.  Newton,  a  noble  gentleman,  who,  with  his 
devoted  and  accomplished  wife,  as  far  back  as  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago, 
dared  to  proclaim  himself  a  Spiritualist  in  the  face  of  the  most  bitter  and 
relentless  sentiment  of  public  antagonism  to  the  faith. 

Professional  gentlemen  and  merchants  may  fwiv  walk  the  streets  of  New 
York,  and  though  they  may  be  openly  avowed  Spiritualists,  they  are  no 
longer  in  danger  of  being  mobbed  or  maltreated.  Not  so  when  Mr.  Henry 
J.  Newton  became  a  Spiritualist.  Of  a  rich  and  flourishing  firm  of  piano- 
forte makers,  Mr.  Newton  was  still  dependent  on  public  opinion  for  his 
standing  amongst  his  fellow  men,  and  this,  and  much  more  he  fearlessly 
risked,  for  the  sake  of  the  cause  which  he  had  espoused.  During  all  the 
stormy  scenes  of  warfare  and  persecution  which  Spiritualists  had  to  endure, 
ere  their  faith  could  obtain  general  recognition,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newton 
never  faltered.  Their  hospitable  doors  were  ever  open  to  the  harassed 
Mediums,  and  their  aid,  support,  and  countenance,  ever  extended  to  the 
advocates  of  the  cause.  They  helped  to  sustain  the  public  meetings  both 
with  purse  and  person,  and  Mrs.  Newton's  beautiful  soprano  voice  has  been 
a  feature  of  interest  for  many  a  succeeding  year  in  the  Sabbath  day  gather- 
ings of  the  Spiritualists. 

And  now  this  noble  couple  have  lived  to  realize  the  fruits  of  their  self- 
sacrifice  and  untiring  devotion.  For  many  past  years  Mr.  Newton  has  held 
the  post  of  President  of  the  First  Society  of  Spiritualists  in  New  Yofk,  and 
with  the  admirable  ministrations  of  Mrs.  Nellie  T.  Brigham  as  the  regular 
speaker,  Mr.  Newton  has  had  the  happiness  of  seeing  the  faith  he  advocates 
grow  into  such  honour  and  respect  with  the  pubHc,  that  few  meetings  in 
the  city  are  better  attended,  and  few  Sabbath  day  gatherings  are  more 
prolific  of  divine  and  salvatory  teachings  than  that  presided  over  by  Mr. 
Newton. 

Besides  Mr.  Newton,  Mr.  Charles  Partridge,  the  veteran  father  of  New 
York  Spiritualism,  and  the  founder  of  the  first  and  best  Spiritual  paper  ever 
published.  The  Spiritual  Telegraph,  still  maintains  his  place  in  the  fore- 
most ranks,  as  in  the  respect  and  honour  of  the  New  York  Spiritualists. 
Dr.  J.  M.  Buchanan,  the  learned  and  philosophic  discoverer  of  the  marvellous 
power  of  reading  character  by  touch — a  power  which  he  himself  has  named 
"  psychometry  " — with  his  fair  and  gifted  wife,  one  of  the  best  psychometrists 
of  the  age,  are  also  residents  of  New  York.  There  too  resides  Mr.  Henry 
Kiddle,  ex-school  superintendent  of  New  York,  a  gentleman  who  has 
sacrificed  name,  place,  and  position,  for  the  faith  he  advocates,  and  one 
whose  learning  and  ability  would  reflect  honour  on  any  cause.  It  must  be 
added,  also,  that  although  many  of  the  grand  "  old  guard"  have  performed 
their  last  act  of  good  service  for  Spiritualism  on  earth,  young,  fresh,  and 
aspiring  men  and  women  have  not  been  wanting  to  infuse  new  vitality  into 
the  ever-advancing  march  of  the  army. 

Hosts  of  "  materiahzing  Mediums  "  follow  in  the  track  of  Conklin,  Red- 
man, &c.,  &c.  Mrs.  Richmond,  Lizzie  Doten,  A.  B.  French,  Dr.  Storer, 
and  F.  L.  Willis,  already  stretch  out  the  hand  of  welcome  to  their  younger 

NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES.  553 

sisters  and  brothers  in  the  persons  of  Mrs.  NelUe  T.  Brigham,  Mrs.  Shep- 
herd LiUie,  Mr.  W.  J.  Colville,  Captain  H.  H.  Brown,  and  a  constantly 
increasing  succession  of  brave  Spirits  who  are  springing  up  on  every  side  to 
fill  the  gaps  that  the  death  angel  has  left  in  the  ranks. 

We  cannot  close  these  personal  notices  without  a  few  words  of  grateful 
recognition  of  the  invaluable  services  rendered  to  the  cause  of  truth  and 
knowledge  by  Mr.  WiUiam  Emmette  Coleman,  a  Western  gentleman, 
whose  admirable  and  scholarly  essays  appear  for  the  most  part  in  the 
columns  of  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal.  Mr.  Coleman  has  had  a 
strange  and  varied  life — one  that  will  form  a  deeply  interesting  page  of 
biography  in  some  future  volume  devoted  to  such  records.  Meantime,  it  is 
enough  to  say  at  present,  that  like  many  another  "  self-made "  American, 
this  man,  still  young  in  years,  but  old  in  rich  experience,  has  studied  so 
deeply  and  well  the  lore  of  ancient  myth  and  Oriental  literature,  that  his 
journaUstic  articles  are  a  perfect  treasury  of  research  and  valuable  informa- 
tion. An  untiring  and  devoted  advocate  of  Spiritualism  pure  and  unadul- 
terated, the  shams,  frauds,  and  fanatics  have  found  an  unrelenting  censor 
in  Mr.  Coleman.  Indeed,  if  it  were  not  for  the  well-known  worship  of 
truth  which  animates  his  busy  pen,  his  best  friends  would  regret  the  unspar- 
ing severity  with  which  he  is  prompt  to  rebuke  the  charlatan,  and  expose 
the  pretender.  As  the  hammer  of  the  "  iconoclast "  is  often  more  necessary 
to  shatter  the  idols  within  the  ranks  of  reform  than  without  them,  so  the 
work  of  such  determined  censors  as  Colonel  Bundy  and  his  learned  con- 
tributor, William  Emmette  Coleman,  have  unquestionably  been  equally 
necessary  to  purge  away  the  rank  weeds  of  falsehood  and  sham,  that  have 
grown  up  on  the  fertile  soil  of  Spiritualism.  If  all  things  are  now  being 
brought  into  judgment,  both  old  and  new,  and  "all  that  was  hidden"  is 
at  this  time  destined  to  see  the  light,  and  face  the  broad  sunshine  of  reaHty, 
then  no  one  has  done  a  better  work  in  promoting  such  a  result  than  Mr. 
W.  E.  Coleman,  of  San  Francisco,  California. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  avowed  aim  of  the  author  in  producing 
this  volume  has  been  to  compile  a  compendious  history  of  the  great 
Spiritual  movement,  and  whilst  endeavouring  as  far  as  possible  to  chronicle 
the  leading  events  of  the  moving  drama,  to  limit  the  notices  of  the  indi- 
viduals who  appear  from  time  to  time  upon  the  scene,  to  their  connection 
with  one  or  two  of  those  cases  which  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  chief 
characteristics  of  the  phenomena,  which  make  up  the  sum  of  the  Spiritual 
system  of  telegraphy.  Keeping  this  purpose  strictly  in  view,  the  author  has 
recorded  well-attested  examples  of  every  description  of  phenomena  by  and 
through  which  Spirits  have  manifested  their  presence  on  earth,  but,  both  for 
the  sake  of  brevity,  and  in  accordance  with  the  plans  laid  down  for  her  by  her 
invisible  prompters  and  assistants,  she  has  been  compelled  to  eliminate  all 
merely  personal  histories  or  biographical  details,  save  and  except  such  as 
were  essential  to  the  clearer  understanding  of  the  progress  of  the  move- 
ment. Thus  there  are  at  this  very  period  throughout  America,  scores  of 
admirable  Mediums  for  the  production  of  "form  materialization"  and 
marvellous  dark  circle  phenomena,  whose  faithful  services  keep  alive  the 
world's  faith  in  Spiritual  presence  on  earth,  but  whose  only  record  at 
present  is  to  be  found  in  the  columns  of  the  Spiritual  journals.  To  these 
eminent  workers,  besides  the  numerous  speakers,  writers,  and  faithful 
labourers  in  the  great  vineyard  of  effort,  of  whom  it  would  be  impossible 
now  to  give  detailed  notices,  we  have  only  to  say,  the  plan  of  another  work, 
including  the  biographies  of  Mediums  and  renowned  Spiritualists,  has  been 

554  NINETEENTH    CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

sketched  put  by  the  author's  Spirit  friends  as  her  next  Uterary  undertaking, 
and  will  be  put  into  execution  at  the  earliest  available  opportunity.  Until 
this  arrives,  the  faithful  and  self  sacrificing  labourers  who  toil  so  often  and 
so  long  without  other  reward  than  that  which  scant  courtesy,  a  paltry  meed 
of  recompense,  or  the  satisfaction  which  their  own  consciousness  of  work 
well  done  affords,  must  be  content  to  wait  for  that  earthly  word  of  remem- 
brance which  the  author  herewith  pledges  herself  to  give  them  to  the  utmost 
of  her  power,  in  a  forthcoming  volume. 

One  only  departure  from  the  enforced  silence  of  these  closing  lines  can 
we  now  make,  and  that  is  to  assure  our  readers  that  the  first  as  well  as  one 
of  the  noblest  of  the  phenomenal  personages  who  has  made  this  century 
memorable  with  Spiritual  footprints,  namely,  Mr,  Andrew  Jackson  Davis, 
is  still  in  the  mortal  form,  and  doing  a  noble  and  untiring  work  in  preach- 
ing the  "  harmonial  philosophy  "  to  weekly  gatherings  of  devoted  followers 
in  New  York. 

Those  who  best  know  the  author  of  this  volume  are  aware,  that  there  are 
many  points  of  divergence  between  the  opinions  she  has  received  from  the 
teachings  of  trusted  Spirit  friends,  and  those  enunciated,  and  often  written, 
by  Mr.  Davis ;  but  there  are  none  more  than  the  author,  who  can 
fervently  admire  the  nobility  of  mind,  purity  of  life,  and  wonderful  Spiritual 
endowments  that  have  distinguished  Mr.  Davis's  whole  career,  and  made 
him  and  his  revelations  the  very  corner-stone  upon  which  the  great  Spiritual 
reformation  of  the  nineteenth  century  is.upreared. 

We  have  been  given  to  understand  that  Mr.  Davis  has  quite  recently 
passed  through  a  University  course  which  has  qualified  him  to  take  his 
place  amongst  the  secular  scientists  of  the  day,  as  one  of  the  medical 
faculty,  and  that  he  is  now  Dr.  A.  J.  Davis. 

It  is  indeed  gratifying  to  be  able  to  add  that  the  renowned  and  well- 
beloved  couple  Hudson  and  Emma  Tuttle,  now  in  the  prime  of  hfe, 
continue  to  exercise  their  unmeasured  usefulness  in  every  good  work.  Dr. 
Slade,  Charles  Watkins,  Mrs.  Simpson  and  Maud  Lord,  A.  H.  Phillips,  and 
hosts  of  others  scarcely  less  famous,  maintain  the  phenomenal  department 
of  the  movement  to  admiration,  whilst  as  the  only  representative  of  the 
numerous  corps  of  American  trance  speakers  to  whom  we  can  now  call 
attention,  we  would  name  Mr.  W.  J.  Colville — himself  a  phenomenon  of 
intellectual  SpirituaUty,  never  yet  excelled,  even  if  his  peer  can  be  found 
within  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism.  Petite  in  person,  and  with  no  special 
educational  or  natural  advantages,  this  young  gentleman  when  on  the 
rostrum  and  under  control  of  his  Spirit  friends,  is  capable  of  dealing  with, 
and  mastering  any  point  of  science,  metaphysics,  or  history,  that  may  be 
spontaneously  presented  to  him.  If  the  present  decade  had  produced  no 
other  evidence  of  inspiration  from  supra-mundane  sources  than  Mr.  W.  J. 
Colville,  he  alone  might  suffice  to  prove  its  continued  existence  and 
ministry.  Mr.  Colville  has  quite  recently  made  a  visit  to  England. 
Allusion  has  before  been  made  to  his  invaluable  services  on  the  Spiritual 
rostrum  of  the  old  country  ;  in  fact,  his  marvellous  style  of  oratory,  besides 
his  capacity  to  improvise  poems  on  any  theme  that  his  audiences  may 
suggest,  all  combine  to  render  him  one  of  the  most  remarkable  evidences 
of  Spiritual  influence  that  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism  can  display. 

It  can  scarcely  be  possible  for  any  thinking  person  to  peruse  the  foregoing 
pages,  without  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  movement  they  treat  of 
is  one  of  a  truly  supra-mundane  nature.  Never  before  in  the  history  of  the 
race  has  any  belief  of  a  religious  character  obtained  so  wide  and  deep  a 

NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES.  555 

foothold  amongst  men,  or  established  its  standards  of  faith  at  so  many 
distant  points  at  once,  appealed  successfully  to  so  many  classes  of  society, 
and  wrought  such  a  vast  revolution  in  human  opinion— and  that  in  less 
than  half  a  century  of  time. 

Let  the  reader  consider  the  different  and  widely-separated  nationalities 
treated  of  in  this  record,  the  vast  numbers  already  engaged  in  the  work, 
and  then,  even  without  allowing  for  the  fact  that  where  one  case  has  been 
recorded,  at  least  a  hundred  parallels  remain  untouched,  the  above 
assertions  must  be  accepted  without  reserve  or  qualification. 

Fifty  years  ago,  the  destiny  of  all  the  countless  millions  that  have  vanished 
from  the  earth  through  the  mysterious  portals  of  death,  was  utterly  unknown. 
Whether  they  were  sleeping  in  the  ground,  annihilated,  living,  some  in 
eternal  torment,  others  in  eternal  bliss,  or  when,  or  how,  if  ever,  we  should 
meet  them  again,  was  all  an  unsolved  mystery.  Now  the  sea  has  given 
up  the  drowned  mariner;  the  fire  has  restored  its  perished  myriads; 
the  earth  has  yielded  up  her  buried  treasures ;  the  ages  have  not  blotted 
out  from  view  a  single  creature  that  has  ever  drawn  the  breath  of  life.  On 
the  night  of  the  31st  of  March,  1848,  we  found  beyond  a  shadow  of  doubt 
or  peradventure,  that  death  had  no  power  over  the  Spirit,  could  never 
touch  the  soul,  or  destroy  one  attribute  or  property  of  soul  hfe.  In  a 
word,  we  found  our  so-called  dead  were  all  living,  aye,  and  living  so  near 
to  us,  that  they  breathe  our  very  atmosphere,  share  our  very  thoughts,  and 
do  us  a  thousand  times  more  good  as  blessed  inspiring  guardian  Spirits  than 
they  ever  could  effect  as  poor  weak  mortals  like  ourselves. 

On  the  31st  of  March  1848,  we  discovered  that  we  had  never  lost  a 
friend ;  only  parted  with  those  that  had  vanished  behind  the  veil  of  mortality 
as  far  as  our  mortal  vision  is  concerned.  On  that  momentous  night,  all  our 
vague  dreams  of  "  Supernaturalism  "  were  swept  away  like  cobwebs,  and  in 
their  place  came  the  realities  of  a  rational  living  human  Spirit  naturaUsm. 
All  our  doubts  and  denials  concerning  "  miracles  "  were  blown  to  the  winds, 
and  a  new  and  wonderful  array  of  powers  for  the  soul,  possibilities  for  the 
man  of  the  future,  and  germs  of  new  sciences,  took  their  place.  We  found 
besides  matter  and  force,  a  new  element,  called  "Spirit."  We  discovered 
the  existence  of  a  new  country ;  one  as  much  more  capacious  and  extensive 
than  earth,  as  the  generations  of  the  past  are  more  numerous  than  those  of 
the  present. 

We  were  enabled  to  locate  that  country  and  map  it  out  as  existing  in  and 
about  the  planet,  and  holding  the  same  relation  to  it,  as  our  souls  hold  to 
our  bodies.  We  discovered  that  night,  a  new  phase  of  physiology  in  the 
existence  (in  some  individuals)  of  a  force  which  can  animate  inanimate 
bodies — make  dumb  things  speak,  and  blind  non-intelligent  matter  deliver 
wonderful  messages.  We  saw  founded  that  night,  a  telegraph,  which 
outstrips  that  of  electricity,  and  without  wires,  batteries,  or  needles,  carries 
messages  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  exchanges  ideas  with  all  the 
vanished  ones  of  past  ages  in  the  twinkhng  of  an  eye.  We  found  in  the 
Spirit  rappings,  a  new  page  in  the  science  of  acoustics ;  in  the  apparition 
of  living  Spirit  people,  a  new  page  in  the  science  of  optics.  We  found  in 
"  dancing  tables  "  a  new  motor  power.  We  discovered  in  the  formation  of 
Spirit  hands,  a  page  of  chemistry  that  puts  all  other  chemical  operations 
known  to  man  utterly  in  the  shade  ;  and  above  and  beyond  all  this,  we 
found  the  complete  solution  to  our  own  fate  hereafter.  We  saw  the  judg- 
ment upon  all  our  works,  words,  and  thoughts. 

We  learned  how  to  build  our  own  heaven  or  avoid  our  inevitable  hell. 

556  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  MIRACLES. 

We  saw  the  results  of  every  moment  of  our  lives  in  the  doom  of  those 
that  had  gone  before  us.  Their  past,  and  our  present  and  future  through- 
out all  //;«(?,  if  not  through  eternity,  was  all  so  clearly  revealed  to  us,  that 
henceforth  we  never  need  say  more  "  we  take  our  leap  in  the  dark."  We 
know  we  are  making  or  marring  our  life  hereafter — and  thus  the  chains  of 
fear,  doubt,  error,  ecclesiastical  pretentions,  priestly  ignorance,  with  all  the 
fictions  of  the  past,  and  mysteries  of  the  future,  fall  like  ropes  of  sand  from 
our  necks,  and  we  stand  in  the  light  of  a  scientific  religion  and  a  religious 
science,  emancipated  souls,  newly  born  into  the  divine  and  unshackled 
liberty  of  truth.  For  the  present  the  author  and  reader  must  part  com- 
pany. The  former  will  not  insult  the  intelligence  of  the  latter  by 
pretending  that  she  offers  to  the  world's  acceptance  a  work  upon  which  she 
herself  does  not  set  a  high  value ;  and  yet,  who  can  be  so  conscious  as  a 
patient  world-wide  investigator  into  the  marvels  of  Spiritualism,  how  im- 
possible it  is  for  any  mortal  hand  to  chronicle  one  tithe  of  what  the  Spirits 
have  done  amongst  men  in  this  century,  or  for  any  one  volume  to  contain 
the  record. 

And  still,  humble  and  reverent  acknowledgments  of  human  incapacity 
must  be  accompanied  with  earnest  and  grateful  recommendations  to  study 
out  the  record,  such  as  it  is,  with  all  fidelity,  were  it  only  as  an  incentive  to 
extend  the  field  of  exploration  to  the  end  of  the  reader's  mortal  career. 
Without  attempting  to  shoulder  upon  "  the  Spirits"  the  many  shortcomings 
which  the  execution  of  so  mighty  a  record  as  this  must  necessarily  manifest, 
the  author  can  at  least  claim  that  it  was  undertaken,  and  continuously 
assisted,  by  the  wise  intelligences  by  whom  her  life  labours  have  been  for 
many  years  past  consciously  guided,  and  whether  they  selected  her  as 
their  scribe  from  choice,  or  in  the  absence  of  a  more  suitable  instrument,  it 
is  for  them  alone  to  decide.  It  is  enough  for  the  author  to  claim  that  her 
portion  of  the  work  has  been  fulfilled  with  the  most  inviolable  regard  to 
truth  and  justice,  and  at  the  same  time  in  a  spirit  of  charity  towards  all, 
and  malice  to  none.  For  the  rest — whether  it  concerns  the  opinions  of 
men,  or  the  future  issues  of  her  work,  the  author  rests  secure  upon  the 
strength  of  her  Hfe's  motto — 

God  understands. 

John  Hevwood,  Excelsior  Steam  Printing  and  Bookbinding  Works,  Hulme  Hall  Road,  Manchester.  j 

w^ 

■ 

II 

^ 

Nineteenth 

/v    _  .. 

MlRACL' 

B/?/rr£M 

John  Heywood 

/fAiMCritSTER  &  LONDOl 

'VJ) 

"^  ¥.. 

k>*rt' 

.^Kb 

'^  <  i'' 

mm 

Mi 

i  ^'4 

y^lM 

M 

rw' 

Il1l 

'Mk
