Art Magic
========================================
Emma Hardinge Britten (1876) — Britten's dictated occult treatise — a founding text of American ritual magic, attributed to Cheval Louis de B. Source: https://archive.org/details/artmagicormudane00brit. Public domain.


1


7^  \

r  r4

CQ

o

H
c/)


w

T_

T^7^

ART  MAGIC;

OK,

MUNDANE,  SUB-MUNDANE  AND  SUPER-MUNDANE

SPIEITISM.

A   TEEATISE
IN  THREE  PARTS  AND  TWENTY-THREE  SECTIONS:

DESCRIPTIVE  OF   ART  MAGIC,  SPIRITISM,  THE  DIFFERENT   ORDERS  OF   SPIRITS  IN
THE  UNIVERSE    KNOWN  TO  BE   RELATED    TO,  OR  IN   COMMUNICATION  WITH
MAN  ;   TOGETHER  WITH   DIRECTIONS  FOR   INVOKING,  CONTROLLING,
AND  DISCHARGING  SPIRITS,  AND  THE  USES  AND  ABUSES,  DAN-
GERS AND  POSSIBILITIES  OF  MAGICAL  ART.

I*  UB  L  I  SK  E  r)      B  ^ST     THE      ^^  XJ  T  H  O  R  ,

At  New  York,  Ameeica.

1876.


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1876,  \
By    WILLIAM    BRITTEN,
In  the  Ofl&ce  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington,  D.  C.

TITE  LIBRAUY
liKIGHA  .L\NG  LiNIVERSltV

Wheat  &  Cornett,  PRO  VO       T  ^TT  ^  TT

Book  and  Job  Printers,  *.    ^     ▼  \  /,      \      I      ;  i\

8  Spnico  St.,  N.  Y.

DEDICATION.

cy<i

'♦    ■f^'i^

./f-

T'liine   be   tine  glory,  tliine  the   faine ;
INXirie  be  tine  censiire,   mine  tlie  TDlaine.
If  to   Iviaow^  inore   the   world,  deixtaxitis
Let  it  read,  this—

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

*  Author's  Preface — Editor's  Preface page  7-11

PART    I.

SECTION  I.

Introductory. — DefiDitions — Matter,  Force  and  Spirit — The  Grand
Trinity  of  Being page  13

SECTION  II.

Universal  Belief  in  the  Fall  of  Man — Explanation  of  the  Fall — Original
Condition  of  Spirit — Pre-existence  of  the  Soul — Its  Descent  into
Matter — Spirit  the  Origin   of  Being page  19

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  11.

Opinions  of  the  Hindoos — Extracts  from  the  Vedas — Egyptian  Cosmogony
— Opinions  of  the  Philosophers  of  all  Ages  Concerning  God — Testi-
mony of  Cahaguet's  Somnambules — Hindoo  Child  Medium's  Commu-
nication— On    Divine  Cosmogony,  Men,  Angels,  Spirits page  22

SECTION  IIL

Of  Deity — Man's  Incapacity  to  gauge  the  Infinite  and  Eternal — The
Grand   Spiritual  Sun page  30

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  IIL

Opinions  of  Various  Authorities  Concerning  the  Spiritual  Sun— Hindoo,
Egyptian,  Greek  and  Roman  Theology — Mediaeval  and  Modern
Opinions — Sweedenborg  and  Cahagnet — God  no  Mystery  to  the  An-
cients, How   Known page  33

SECTION  IV.

Of  the  most  Ancient  Worship — The  Sabean  System — Astronomical  Reli-
gion— Solar  and  Astral  Gods — The  History  of  the  Sun  God — His
reappearance  in  every  Form  of  Worship  and  Relation  to  Chris-
tianity  page  43

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  IV.
The  Various  Nations  that  Worshipped  the  Sun  God page  60

SECTION  V.

Sex  Worship — Its  Antiquity  and  Meaning — The  Connection  of  Solar,  Sex
and  Serpent  Worship — The  Spiritual  and  Material  Ideas  of  Ancient
faiths  contrasted — The  Degradation  and  Death  of  Materialistic  Wor-
ship and  Triumph  of  Spiritual page  64

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  V.

Ht .  3  .ar  and  Sex  Worship  came  to  be  Interblended — Origin  of  Serpent
Worship  —  Emblems  of  the  three  Systems  —  Crosses  —  Scriptural
Names  —  Nileometers  —  Exoteric  and  Esoteric  Worship — A  Pro-
phecy  page  75

SECTION  VI.

Of  the  Subordinate  Gods  in  the  Universe — Angels — Spirits — Tutelary
Gods — Souls  and  Elementaries — Jewish  Cabala — Classical  Authorities
— Godwyn  on  the  Tutelary  Spirits  of  the  Romans page  83

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  VI.
Jewish  Cabala — Classical  Authors page  97

PAR.  Til

SECTION  VII.

Spiritism  and  Magic. — Mundane,   Sub-Mundane  and  Super-Mundane
Spiritism -Elementaries,  Human  and  Angelic  Spirits page  102

SECTION  VIII.

Man  the  Microcosm — The  Trinity  of  Elements,  Soul,  Spirit,  Matter — The
Astral  Fluid  and  Astral  Spirit — The  Rosicrucians — Astral  Light — Fire
Philosophers — Ancient  and  Modern  Priests page  114

SECTION  IX.

Ancient  Priests  and  Prophets — Spiritual  Gifts — Woman  as  Priestess  and
Sibyl — Classification  of  Spiritually  Endowed  Persons — Magnetizers
and  Mediums — Boundless  Powers  of  the  Human  Spirit page  132

SECTION  X.

General  Summary  of  the  Conditions  and  Processes  of  Magical
Art page  157

SECTION  XI.

Magic  in  India— Hindoo  Claims  to  priority — Priests — Bramins — Ecstatics
— Fakeers — Initiatory  Rites — Magnetism — Narcotics — Soma  Drink —
The  Pitris — Elementaries — Magic  and  Spiritism p  ige'  174

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XL

Illustrations  of  Magic  in  India — Stupendous  and  awful  Powers  of  the
Ecstatics — The  Lama  Bokt — The  Princess  Belgiojosa's  Experience
with  Ecstatics — Fire-Eaters  in  France — Thibetian  Lama — Horrible
Rites — AH  Achmet's  Mediumship — Summary page  193

SECTION  XII.

Magic  Amongst  the  Mongolians — Magic  and  Spiritism  Contrasted — Trial
of  Strength  and  Agility  by  Spirits — Spirits  Amongst  the  Karenes —
Writing  and  other  Kinds  of  Mediumship page  219

SECTION  XIII.

Magic  in  Egypt — The  Priests — Prophets — Modes  of  Initiation  into  the
Mysteries page  223

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XIII.

The  Great  Pyramid— Its  Probable  Use  and  Object— Extracts  from  Stewart
— Bishop  Russell — Herodotus — The  Author's  Statement page  24G

SECTION  XIV.

Magic  Amongst  the  Jews — Their  Claims  for  Antiquity — Abraham — Moses

— Priests  and  Prophets — The  Cabala — Bible — Infusion  of  Chaldean

and    Persian    Ideas — Jesus — The    Essenes — Superiority  of  Hebrew

Literature page  2f)0

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XIV.
The    Modes    of   Divination,   both    lawful    and    unlawful,   amongst  the
Jews page  277

SECTION  XV.

Magic  amongst  the  Chaldeans — Priests — Soothsayers — Star-gazers — As-
trologers and  Astrology — Why  are  the  Moderns  Inferior  to  the  An-
cients in  Spiritual  Science  ? — Ennemoser  on  the  Lapps  and  Finns —
''  Grhostland  " — Siberian  Schaman page  283

SECTION  XVI.

Magic  amongst  the  Greeks  and  Romans — Samothracian  and  Eleusinian
Mysteries  —  Initiations  —  The  Oracles  —  Pythia  and  Avernian
Sybils page  298

PAR.  Till.

SECTION  XVII.

Elementary  and  Planetary  Spirits — Mundane,  Sub-Mundane  and  Super-
Mundane  Spiritism  —  Salamanders  —  Sylphs —  Gnomes —  Fairies  —
Kobolds — Undines,  &c.,  &;c. — Offices  and  Powers  of  the  Elementaries
— Communion — Its  Uses  and  Dangers— Quotations  from  "Ghost-
land." page  319

SECTION  XVIII.

Spiritism  and  Magic  in  Transitional  Eras — Witchcraft — Persecution  by
the  Christian  Church — Decadence  of  Spiritual  Gifts — Knights  Temp-
lars— Stedinger — Alchemists — Rosicrucians — Philosophers'  Stone  and
Elixir  Vitse page  343

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XVIII.
Alchemists  and  Philosophers  of  the  Middle  Ages — Their  Magical  practices
and  Opinions page  356

SECTION  XIX.
Heptameron. — Magical  Elements  of  Peter  d'Abano page  360

SECTION  XX.
Summary  of  Cornelius  Agrippa's  Philosophy — Paracelsus — On  the  Magnet
and  Power  of  Will — Witchcraft — Its  Possibilities  and  Fallacies — Case
of  Jane  Brooks page  382

SECTION  XXI.

Magical  Elements — Various  kinds  of  Divination — Crystal  Seeing,  &c.,  &c.,

of  Stones — Gems — Colors — Sounds — Noise — Music — Rosicrucian  Ideas

of  Music — The  Color-Doctor — Spells — Charms — Amulets — Talismans

—Witchcraft page  393

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XXI.

The  Magic  Mirror  of  Cahagnet — Method  of  making  and  using  It — Com-
munication from  a  Planetary  Spirit— Formulae  of  Nostradamus — On
the  Invocation  of  Spirits — Call  and  Discharge  for  Spirits  of  the  Crys-
tal and  Mirror page  414

SECTION  XXII.

Magnetism — Psychology — Clairvoyance — Their  Relations  to  Ancient  Magic
— The  Great  Modern  Triad  Paracelsus — Sweedenborg  and  Mesmer —
Correspondence  between  Billot  and  Deleuze — Cahagnet's  Somnam-
bules — Modern  Magic page  424

SECTION  XXIII.
Modern  Spiritism — Its  Literature — The  Harmonial  Philosophy  and  Philos-
opher^A  Sketch — Spiritual   Gifts — The  Decadence  of  Spiritism  and
its  causes — Its  Possibilities  in  the  Future — New  School  of  the  Pro-
phets— Home-Circles — Conditions — Summary page  437

EF^ILOG^UE.
Page 465

AUTHOR'S  PREFACE.

The  following  pages  were  written  at  the  solicitation  of  highly  es-
teemed European  friends,  who  deemed  that  the  author's  long  years
of  experience  as  a  student  and  adept  in  the  Spiritism  of  many  lands
might  furnish  to  the  world  some  valuable  information  concerning  the
mysteries  of  that  spiritual  communion  now  so  prevalent  throughout
the  civilized  world.

In  order  to  gratify  these  too  partial  advisers,  the  author  at  first
collated  his  personal  experiences  into  a  series  of  autobiographical
sketches,  the  few  first  chapters  of  which  were  published  under  the
title  of  "  Ghostland  ;  or,  Researches  into  the  Realm  of  Spiritual
Existence,"  in  Emma  Hardinge  Britten's  high-toned  American
Magazine,  "The  Western  Star."  As  the  calamitous  fires  which
devastated  the  city  of  Boston  some  five  or  six  years  ago  caused  the
suspension  of  Mrs.  Britten's  excellent  periodical,  the  author  deter-
mined to  lay  his  papers  aside,  for  any  use  posterity  might  derive  from
them,  but  the  same  friendly  spirit  of  appreciation  which  had  dictated
the  transcription  of  the  autobiography  subsequently  pleaded  for  its
continuance,  or  the  preparation  of  a  still  more  occult  work,  in  which
the  much  needed  desideratum  of  a  comprehensive  philosophy,  covering
the  principles  which  underlie  spiritual  existence  should  be  given  to
the  world,  as  a  basis  on  which  to  found  the  superstructure  of  spiritual
science.

This  suggestion  was  too  much  in  accordance  with  the  author's
habits  of  thought  to  be  lightly  rejected.  A  hasty  and  fragmentary
sketch  of  the  work  was  drawn  up,  but  when  compared  with  the  vast
fields  of  untrodden  revelation  that  yet  remained  to  be  gleaned,  the
author  would  fain  have  committed  his  abortive  attempt  to  the  flames,
and  trusted  to  time  to  unfold  that  mighty  realm  of  magical  philosophy

8

which  can  never  be  disclosed  in  a  single  life-time,  much  less  condensed
into  one  volume.  But  the  all-too-a,ppreciative  friends  to  whom  the
author's  despair  of  purpose  was  revealed  thought  otherwise.

They  deemed  the  broken  gleams  of  hght  submitted  to  them  were
all-sufficient  for  the  age  in  which  they  were  to  be  given,  and  urged
that  the  suggestions  rendered,  belonged  to  humanity,  and  could  not
fail  to  throw  light  upon  many  of  the  mysteries  of  spiritual  manifes-
tations.

Whilst  wandering  incognito  through  the  cities  of  the  United  States,
still  seeking  to  add  fresh  records  of  spiritualistic  interest  to  an  already
full  treasury  of  facts,  the  author  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  with
his  highly  esteemed  English  friend,  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  Britten.
In  addition  to  urgent  appeals  from  this  authoritative  source  to  pubHsh
his  book  of  magic,  the  author  was  farther  tempted  by  the  generous
promise  that  he  would  be  relieved  of  all  the  vexatious  and  technical
details  of  the  publication.

Shrinking  with  unconquerable  repugnance  from  any  encounter
with  those  butchers  of  human  character,  self-styled  "  critics,"  whose
chief  delight  is  to  exercise  their  carving  knives  upon  the  bodies  of
slain  reputations,  without  regard  to  qualification  for  the  act  of
dissection,  and  equally  averse  to  entrusting  the  dangerous  and  difficult
processes  of  magical  art  to  an  age  wherein  even  the  most  sacred
elements  of  rehgion  and  spiritualism  are  so  often  prostituted  to  the
arts  of  imposture,  or  mean  traffic,  the  author's  reluctance  to  the
proposed  publication,  even  with  all  the  advantages  of  his  English
friend's  invaluable  co-operation,  would  hardly  have  been  conquered,
had  not  loved  and  trusted  spirit  friends  taken  the  helm  of  the  storm-
tossed  mind,  and  advising  the  excision  of  such  passages  as  would  be
dangerous  to  the  half-informed  spirituality  of  the  present  age,  these
well-tried  counselors  themselves  suggested  the  conditions  of  publi-
cation which  they  deemed  most  in  harmony  with  the  author's  wishes
and  position,  conditions  subsequently  embodied  in  the  circular  which
announced  the  publication  of  this  volume.

The  reception  which  that  circular  met  with,  the  unworthy  jibes,
sneers,  and  cruel  insults  which  have  been  leveled  against  the  excellent

9

lady  who  volunteered  to  stand  between  the  author  and  his  shrinking
spirit,  have  caused  him  the  deepest  remorse  for  having  placed  her  in
such  a  position,  and  induced  a  frequent  solicitation  on  his  part  that
the  publication  of  the  book  should  be  abandoned.  In  confiding  the
management  of  this  work  to  his  friends,  the  author  had  entire  confi-
dence that  the  invaluable  services  rendered  by  the  noble  editress  to
the  SpirituaHsts  of  America,  would  have  been  sufficiently  appreciated
*to  protect  her  against  misrepresentation  and  unjust  attack.

That  these  expectations  have  been  so  rudely  disappointed,  only
proves  how  much  better  the  spiritual  intelligences  who  dictated  the
conditions  of  publication  understood  the  elements  to  be  dealt  with
than  the  trusting  mortals  they  counseled.

That  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  has  found  five  hundred  friends  in
America,  who  put  faith  alike  in  her  judgment  and  honesty,  is  deemed
by  her  as  a  sufficient  triumph  for  one  lifetime.  Should  the  author  of
"  Art  Magic  "  find  five  hundred  readers  who  can  appreciate  its  occult
pages,  that  shall  be  esteemed  as  an  equal  meed  of  recompense  for  his
share  of  the  work.

Having  already  made  confession  of  inefficiency  to  cope  with  so  vast
a  subject  in  so  small  a  space,  acknowledging  that  a  mere  sketch  is
here  presented  instead  of  the  full  length  portrait  of  Art  Magic  the
author's  mind  had  conceived,  and  given  to  all  whom  it  may  concern,
the  rationale  of  how  this  publication  came  to  be  launched  upon  the
world,  we  shall  conclude  in  the  quaint  words  of  Robert  Turner,  the
translator  of  Cornelius  Agrippa's  fourth  book  of  "  Occult  Philosophy  "
into  English,  who,  in  presenting  his  introductory  words  to  the  pubhc,
says  :

"  There  be  four  sorts  of  readers — sponges,  which  extract  all,  without

distinguishing  ;   hour-glasses,  which  receive  and  pour  out  as  fast  ;

bags,  which  retain  only  the  dregs  of  spices,  and  let  the  wine  escape  ;

and  sieves,  which  retain  the  best  only.     Soyae  there  are  of  the  last

sort,  and  to  them  I  present  this  Occult  Philosophy,  knowing  that  they

shall  reap  good  thereby."     A  conclusion  in  which  Dr.  Rob't  Turner  is

cordially  joined  by

THE  AUTHOR.

EDITOR'S  PREFACE.

In  presenting  the  following  pages  in  an  English  dress,  I  feel  it
necessary,  in  my  capacity  as  editor,  to  excuse  the  many  shortcomings
to  be  found  in  its  context,  on  the  following  grounds  :

The  author  of  this  work,  although  a  perfect  master  of  the  Enghsh
language  in  conversation,  fails  to  render  his  glowing  thoughts  in
writing  with  equal  perspicuity.

In  preparing  these  writings  for  the  press,  I  found  many  Latin
quotations  and  numerous  foot-notes  encumbering  the  text,  and  to
render  the  first  into  English,  by  the  aid  of  a  better  scholar  than
myself,  and  embody  the  second  into  the  sense  of  the  page,  obliged  me
in  many  instances  to  sacrifice  the  construction  of  the  sentences  I
interpolated.  In  much  of  the  idiomatic  phraseology  which  appears
in  this  work  also,  I  could  have  wished  to  effect  changes,  but  the
pressure  on  my  own  professional  duties  leaving  me  but  httle  time  for
literary  occupation,  and  the  haste  enjoined  upon  me  by  the  author,
who  desired  to  complete  the  work  with  as  little  delay  as  possible,
induced  me  to  trust  that  the'Sublimity  of  the  sentiments,  the  grandeur
of  intention,  and  the  high-toned  philosophy  which  pervades  this  noble
work,  will  make  ample  amends  for  errors  in  orthography,  or  foreign
modes  of  expression.

Trusting,  also,  that  the  warmly  cherished  friends  who  have  so
generously  and  confidingly  stood  by  me  during  the  preparation  of
this  work  will  derive  as  much  pleasure  from  its  perusal  as  the  self-
appointed  critics,  who  have  never  read  it,  seem  to  have  derived  from
attacking  its  unknown  contents  and  weU-known  editor,  I  close  by
commending  it  heartily  to  that  brave  five  hundred  who  dare  advance
without  fear  or  favor  to  the  investigation  of  Art  Magic.

EMMA  HAEDINGE  BRITTEN,

Nev)  York.

e.r  /

V-  /-,

<y\^

t.  ^  ^^

AET    MAGIC.

PART   I.

IlsrTEODUCTOEY

Standing  as  we  do  upon  the  sublime  heights  to  which
the  progress  of  ages  has  elevated  us,  we  are  enabled  to  look
back  upon  the  footprints  left  by  the  ascending  feet  of  those
who  have  preceded  us,  and  take  account  of  every  obstacle
they  have  surmounted,  every  impulse  that  has  swayed  them
to  the  right  or  the  left,  and  almost  hear  the  pulse-beats  of
the  pilgrim  hearts  that  have  throbbed  in  response  to  the  eter-
nal cry  of  Life's  Marshals, ''  Onward  and  Upward  !  "  The
piercing  and  analytical  eye  of  science  can  investigate  these
footprints,  and  determine  almost  with  mathematical  pre-
cision the  physical  charactQristics  of  the  beings  who  have
made  them.  The  species  or  class  to  which  the  toiler  be-
longed, becomes  a  letter  in  that  alphabet,  whereby  science

14

as  clearly  unravels  the  unwritten  past,  as  the  scale  of  a  fish,
or  the  fossil iferous  imprint  of  a  vanished  organism  can  in-
terpret the  species  and  class  to  which  the  relic  belonged ;
but  the  far  more  penetrating  gaze  of  the  soul  looking  into
the  metaphysical  causes  which  underlie  all  physical  effects,
beholds  an  outstretched  panorama  of  being,  which  tran-
scends those  spheres  of  knowledge  bounded  by  physical
\  horizons  ;  hence  it  can  pierce  not  only  the  causes,  but  mas-
q     ter  also  the  ultima tes  and  controlling  forces  of  mortal  exist-
}  ence.

To  arrive  at  a  complete  apprehension  of  truth,  or  that
WHICH  IS,  we  must  call  up  the  witness  of  that  which  was,
•^  that  which  shall  be,  and  that  which  moves,  as  well  as  that
which  is  moved  upon.  Tlie  anatomist  who  numbers  up  the
bones,  recites  the  names  and  describes  the  forms  and  func-
tions of  the  tissues,  organs  and  apparatuses  which  consti-
tute the  physical  structure,  explains  nothing  of  the  true
man  except  the  house  he  lives  in.

The  physiologist  who  explains  the  motions  which  pro-
ceed throughout  the  wonderful  housekeeping  processes  of
human  life,  supplements  in  one  degree  the  science  of  anato-
my, but  does  no  more  than  his  contemporary  by  way_of
unveiling  the  mystery  of  that  being  which  inhabits  the
many-sided  structure.  Oh,  how  long !  how  wistfully,  and
yet  in  what  agonizing  yearning  for  light — light  upon  the
mystery  of  self-knowledge,  light  upon  the  problems  of
who  am  1 1  what  am  I  ?  whose  am  I  ?  whence  do  I
come  ?  and  whither  am  I  bound  ? — has  the  I  am  of  mortal
existence  waited  !  Can  the  answer  ever  be  rendered  ?  If
so,  it  must  come  from  the  realm  of  true  knowledge,  the  esot-
eric innermost,  from  whence  and  to  which  the  exoteric  is
but  a  temporary  pilgrim  !  Those  who  have  stood  face  to
face  with  this  esoteric  sunbeam,  who  have  beheld  it  vanish-
ing behind  the  clouds  of  matter  for  the  span  of  a  mortal

15

term  of  existence,  but  emerging  again  into  the  clear  noon-
day radiance  of  a  day  which  knows  no  night,  a  firmament
whose  unbounded  vistas  enshroud  no  mysteries,  a  realm  of
being  limited  only  by  the  capacity  of  finite  perception —
such  an  one  surely  has  the  right  to  say,  I  know,  and  such
an  one  writes  and  alleges  he  will  reveal  the  order  of  Di-
vine wisdom  as  manifest  in  human  existence,  and  declared
by  the  souls  who  have  lived  and  struggled  behind  the  veil,
broken  their  way  by  the  sword  of  death  through  its  misty
envelopment,  and  finally  attained  to  that  breadth  of  vision
where  cause  and  effect  cohere  like  pearls  on  the  unbroken
thread  of  destiny,  where  past  and  future  lie  outstretched
in  the  boundless  panoramas  of  a  never  beginning,  never
ending  present.

Any  attempt  to  elucidate  the  problems  of  being,  con-
ducted in  one  direction,  and  by  one  method  alone,  must  fail.

Those  philosophers  who  reason  from  induction  alone,
only  arrive  at  a  mayhap  perception  of  truth,  nor  do  they
fare  any  better  who  conduct  their  arguments  through  the
half-declared  processes  of  deduction.  Both  methods  are
essential  to  master  the  entire  situation.

Theory  must  prompt  the  possibility  of  new  discoveries,
and  facts  must  goad  us  on  to  the  evolvement  of  new  theo-
ries— even  phenomena  are  needed  to  startle  our  self-con-
ceit from  the  arrogant  assumptions  of  half-enlightened,
half-blind  belief,  and  failures  must  follow  on  the  heels  of
successes  ere  we  can  presume  to  erect  a  milestone  on  the
path  of  destiny  for  the  guidance  of  others.  When  every
method  has  been  exhausted,  and  all  avenues  to  the  way  of
light  have  been  carefully  traversed,  then,  and  not  till  then,
can  the  soul  of  man  venture  to  affirm,  I  know  ;  then,  and
not  till  then,  are  we  in  a  position  to  challenge  the  bigoted
adherents  of  a  single  school,  or  a  solitary  method,  and  say,
"  1  have  entered  upon  a  grander  vista  of  truth  than  you —

16

follow  me !"  Emerging  from  the  many  branching  avenues
of  knowledge  which  the  study  of  spirit  and  matter,  fact  and
theory,  intuition  and  phenomena  afford,  let  us  lay  out  our
scheme  of  the  Universe,  and  then  proceed  from  its  underly-
ing principles  to  such  results  as  their  action  have  given
shape  and  organic  life  to.

SECTION     I.

The  Constitution  of   the  Solar  Universe.

The  Solar  Universe,  of  which  the  earth  is  a  part,  consists
of  Matter,  Force  and  Spirit.

Matter  is  an  aggregation  of  minute,  indestructible  atoms,
existing  in  the  four  states  known  as  solid,  Huid,  gaseous
and  ethereal.  The  general  attributes  which  distinguish
matter  in  the  three  first  conditions,  are  indestructibility,
extension,  divisibility,  impenetrability,  and  inertia.

By  indestructibility  is  meant  that  property  which  is  the
antithesis  of  annihilation,  and  utterly  prevents  the  as-
sumption that  a  single  atom  of  matter,  however  minute,
whether  in  the  finest  condition  of  air  or  the  hardest  of
crystal,  can  ever  be  wholly  put  out  ol  existence.

Extension  is  the  property  by  which  an  atom  of  matter
can  be  changed  so  as  to  occupy  more  or  less  space.

Divisibility  is  the  property  by  which  an  atom  can  be  di-
vided or  reduced  to  the  smallest  known  particles,  and  yet
each  particle  preserve  some  capacity  for  farther  subdi-
vision.

Impenetrability  implies  the  impossibility  of  one  atom
occupying  the  space  of  another  ;  and  inertia  is  the  tenden-
cy of  matter  to  continue  either  in  that  condition  of  rest  or

/

n

motion  in  which  it  has  once  been  set  by  the  appUcation  of
force,  until  another  force  changes  the  former  direction.
There  are  many  other  definitions  applicable  to  matter ;
such  as  crystalline,  porous,  dense,  elastic,  etc.,  etc.;  but  the
five  general  properties  enumerated  above,  will  sufficiently
explain  its  nature  for  our  present  purpose.

Ether  is  matter  in  so  rare  and  sublimated  a  condition,  (
that  its  divisibility  into  particles  is  no  longer  possible  to
man  in  his  present  stage  of  scientific  attainment.  It  far
transcends  the  rarefaction  of  the  finest  of  gases,  hydrogen,
and  filling  up  every  space  of  the  solar  universe  explored
by  man,  not  occupied  by  particled  matter,  may  with  pro-
priety be  called  unparticled  matter.

Force  is  the  life  principle  of  being.  It  is  the  second  of
the  grand  Trinity  of  elements  which  constitute  existence,
and  ranks,  therefore,  next  to  matter,  which  it  permeates,
vitalizes,  and  moves.  It  is  motion  per  se,  and  though  mat-
ter is  never  exhibited  without  it,  Force,  as  we  shall  here-
after prove,  can  exijtwithout  a  matenal  body  for  its  exhi-
bitioji.

Its  attributes  are  dual,  and  should  be  named  Attraction
and  Repulsion.

The  vast  and  extended  orbits  of  planetary  bodies  are
marked  out  and  regulated  by  Force,  with  its  dual  attri-
butes, now  attracting  the  revolving  satellite  to  the  centre,
now  forcing  it  off  into  a  relative  point  of  distance,  but  al-
ways maintaining  it  in  a  given  path  or  orbit  between  the
oscillations  of  its  contending  motions.

Force  is  the  unresting  life  which  charges  every  atom  of
matter,  and  fits  inorganic  masses  to  become  organic.  It  is
Electricity  in  the  air ;  Magnetism  in  the  earth ;  Galvan-
ism between  different  metallic  particles — cohesion,  disin-
tegration, gravitation,  centripetal  and  centrifugal  forms  of

18

rnotion  ;  Life  in  plants,  animals,  and  men,  the^  aural^  astral^
or  magnetic  huhj  of  spirits.

Spirit  is  the  one  primordial,  uncreated,  eternal,  infinite
Alpha  and  Omega  of  Being.  It  may  have  subsisted  inde-
pendent of  Force  and  Matter,  evolving  both  from  its  own
incomprehensible  but  illimitable  perfection ;  but  Force  and
Matter  could  never  have  originated  Spirit,  as  its  one  sole
attribute  comprehends  and  embraces  all  others,  must  ante-
date, govern,  and  surpass  all  others,  and  is  itself  the  cause^
of  all  effects.     That  attribute  is  Will.//  /

As  there  are  but  two  attributes  ot*  Force,  namely,
attraction  and  repulsion,  yet  many  varieties  of  modes
in  which  attraction  and  repulsion  are  perceived,  so,
whilst  there  is  but_one  attribute  of  Spirit,  namely,  Will,
there  are  many  subordinate  principles  emanating  from
Will.  Such  are  Love,  Wisdom,  Use,  Beauty,  Intelligence,
Skill,  etc.,  etc.  The  most  marked  and  distinctive  proce-
dures are,  however,  nine  ;  namely.  Love,  Wisdom,  and
Power;  Creation,  Preservation,  and  Progress  ;  Life,  Death,
and  Regeneration.

In  Matter,  Force,  and  Spirit,  then,  is  the  grand  Trinity
of  Being,  which  constitutes  the  solar  universe  and  its  in-
habitants.

Reasoning  from  analogy,  and  still  more,  founding  upon
the  assertions  of  wise  teaching  angels  and  the  vague  shad-
ows of  antique  beliefs,  founded  in  a  spiritual  enlightenment
far  in  advance  of  the  present,  we  have  authority  for  sup-
posing that  the  astral,  and  all  other  universes  included  in
the  illimitable  fields  of  being,  may  have  proceeded  from  and
include  the  same  primordial  Trinity  of  elements,  and  that
Spirit,  Force,  and  Matter  form  that  stupendous  Ego,  the
totality  of  which,  to  finite  beings,  is  vaguely  called  God,  the
separated  units  of  which  include  Astral  and  Solar  Systems,
Suns,  Satellites,  Worlds,  Spirits,  Men,  Animate  and  In-
animate Things,  and  Atoms.

19

SECTION    II.

The  Scheme  of  the  Solar  Universe.

All  human  beliefs  that  are  derived  from  oral,  tradition-
al, monumental,  or  sacerdotal  sources,  incline  to  ascribe  the
origin  of  man  to  a  purer  and  more  spiritualized  cause  than
that  of  human  generation.

The  favorite  and  widely  diffused  idea  of  the  ancients,
that  man  incurred  the  penalty  of  mortal  birth  and  the  dis-
cipline of  a  mortal  existence  by  disobedience,  pervades  so
universally  the  foundations  of  all  religious  systems,  that  it
demands  from  philosophy  some  more  rational  explanation
than  the  contemptuous  stigma  of  ''myth."  Whence
comes  myth,  and  can  it  any  more  explain  the  origin  of
ideas  than  a  shadow  can  account  for  form  without  a  sub-
stance 7  We  can  accept  nothing,  learn  nothing,  hope  for
nothing,  from  modern  theology  ;  for  it  teaches  no  philoso-
phy, owns  allegiance  to  no  science,  and  is  amenable  to  no
requirements  of  reason  or  justice.  And  yet  even  she  cher-
ishes, in  her  usual  materialistic  way,  the  dogmas  of  original
sin  and  the  fall  of  man  from  a  state  of  primeval  innocence.

Who  can  render  account  of  these  opinions '?  And  since
time  cannot  quench  them,  nor  the  devotees  of  classical
lore  and  antique  philosophy  blot  them  out  from  ''  the  wis-
dom of  the  ages,"  why  not  seek  to  harmonize  them  with
those  glimpses  of  an  inner  and  higher  life  with  which  all
human  records  are  so  mysteriously  illuminated  1

The  Fall  Pf  ^M^n  is  but  the  shadow  of  a  still  diviner
truth,  the  substance  of  which  is — The  Fall  of  Spirit.  All
existence  originates  in  Spirit.  As  the  curious  mechanism
of  the  clock,  the  ship,  the  steam-engine,  are  all  creations
first  of  the  mechanical  mind,  in  which  their  several  parts

20

are  contained  ere  they  can  become  reduced  to  a  material
expression,  so  the  clockwork  of  the  sideral  heavens,  the
worlds  which  sail  through  the  oceans  of  space,  and  the
mechanism  of  every  organized  form,,  from  the  rounding  of
a  dewdrop  to  the  complicated  structure  of  a  man,  must  have
had  their  origin  in  mind.  Since  mind  is  but  an  attribute
of  Will,  and  Will  is  Spirit,  we  cannot  escape  from  the  con-
clusion that  the  creation  of  the  physical  universe  is  but  the
expression  of  a  spiritual  idea.  The  creation  of  a  physical
man  is  no  more,  no  less.  The  human  race  is  the  external
expression  of  a  spiritual  idea,  because  ideas  must  originate
with  spirit  ere  they  can  be  expressed  in  matter.  The
watch,  the  ship,  the  steam-engine  are  as  much  genuine  cre-
ations of  the  soul  before  as  after  they  are  modelled  out  in
matter.  Should  they  never  be  thus  incarnated,  they  have
been,  and  are,  and  ever  will  remain,  in  the  imperishable
realm  of  spiritual  entities.

Matter  creates  nothing.  It  is  only  the  mould  which
Spirit  uses  to  externalize  its  ideas  for  the  sake  of  external
uses.

The  things  which  will  appear  as  new  inventions,  the
methods  of  science  which  will  take  their  places  as  new
discoveries  on  earth  in  ages  yet  unborn,  are  all  in  imper-
ishable existence  now  and  ever  have  been  in  the  eternal
realms  of  spirit.  Can  man  be  exempt  from  this  universal
law  of  procedure  ?

Man,  who  is  the  microcosm  of  being,  the  conservator  of
all  forms  of  force,  all  varieties  of  matter — can  he  be  the
sole  exception  to  the  all-embracing  order  of  Divine  proce-
dure ?  Only  in  the  superstitious  and  unscientific  belief
of  the  bigot,  or  the  scarcely  less  unreasonable  blindness
of  materialism.  Man  was  a  spirit  ere  he  was  born  into
matter.

In  the  primordial  conditions  of  planetary  life,  creatures
so  finely  organized  as  man  could  not   be  sustained,  hence

21

long  ages  of  preparatory  growth  were  essential  to  fit  this  or
any  earth  for  his  reception.

When  matter  had  been  sufficiently  laborated  by  the  suc-
cessive births  and  destructions  of  millions  of  generations
of  organized  beings  in  the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms,
the  earth  awaited  the  advent  of  a  still  higher  and  nobler
creature  than  any  that  had  yet  appeared ;  one  who  should
in  its  perfection  and  microcosmic  powers  finish  the  work
_of  creation,  cap  the  climax  of  animated  being,  and  close  up
the  succession  of  mortal  forms  by  the  introduction  of  an
immortal  being.  The  earth  called  for  man,  and  he  came.
He  was  already  an  immortal  existence,  a  spirit ;  not  a  per-
fected, self-conscious,  individualized  entity,  but  a  bright
luminous  emanation  of  the  Divine  mind.  He  was  the  Di-
vine idea  in  the  shape  of  the  man  that  should  be.  Angelic
in  essence,  spiritual  in  substance,  he  lived  in  a  paradise
appropriate  to  him,  pure  and  innocent,  but  still  wholly
lacking  in  those  elements  of  love,  wisdom,  and  power
which  can  be  perfected  alone  through  incarnation  in  a  ma-
terial body,  and  progress  through  probationary  states.

That  man  existed  as  a  pure  spiritual  being,  a  sinless
paradisaical  unit,  previous  to  his  incarnation  in  a  material
body,  is  not  only  the  opinion  of  those  sages  of  antiquity
who  studied  from  the  original  books  of  life,  rather  than
from  records  made  and  altered  to  suit  the  purposes  of  suc-
cessive generations  of  interested  priests,  but  it  is  the  wit-
ness of  the  human  spirit  itself  ere  it  became  bent  and  per-
verted by  theological  myths,  or  its  memories  were  dimmed
by  time  and  the  more  vivid  impressions  of  mortal  experi-
ences. In  every  primordial  condition  of  the  human  fami-
ly the  belief  in  a  fall  or  descent  of  the  spirit  from  heaven
to  earth,  from  purity  to  transgression,  is  an  unquenchable
element  in  man's  nature.  Belief  it  can  scarcely  be  called;
it  is  a  memory,  growing  fainter  and  fainter  as  it  recedes

22

from  its  source,  but  still  an  indestructible  link  of  connec-
tion in  that  chain  of  destiny  which  has  finally  incarnated
the  soul  in  a  mortal  body.

We  shall  close  this  section  by  citations  from  some  few-
out  of  the  countless  host  of  authoritative  minds  who  have
favored  the  opinions  herein  announced  as  the  rationale  of
the  first  act  in  the  Divine  drama  of  human  existence.

SUPPLEMENT   TO   SECTION    II.

Being  arguments  derived  chiefly  from  ancient  History  in  sup-
port of  the  philosophy  affirmed  in  the  preceding  pages.

The  oldest  written  scriptures  in  existence  are  supposed
to  be  the  Hindoo  Vedas.

They  repeatedly  affirm  the  original  and  independent  ex-
istence of  spirit  as  the  sole  creative  cause  of  Being,  and
claim  that  man  was  an  emanation  from  this  divine  ele-
ment, that  he  was  originally  pure  and  good,  and  that  his
existence  on  earth  and  his  successive  transmigrations
through  various  animal  forms  are  simply  designed  as  puri-
fications through  which  his  soul  may  regain  that  alliance
with  Brahm,  the  Supreme  Being,  which  he  has  lost  by  a
descent  from  a  spiritual  to  a  material  existence.

Extracts  from  the  Vedas.

"  That  spirit  who  is  not  matter  is  one;  He  is  the  incomprehensible  Being  from
whom  all  proceed,  to  whom  all  must  return.     He  is  Brahm— The  Spirit."

"As  ten  thousand  beams  emanate  from  one  central  fire,  thus  do  ten  thousand
souls  emanate  from  Him,  the  one  Eternal  soul,  and  return  to  Him."

"May  this  soul  of  mine,  which  is  a  ray  of  perfect  wisdom,  pure  intellect,  and
eternal  essence,  which  is  quenchless  light  and  eternal  heat,  fixed  within  a  change-
ful, created  body,  be  re-united  by  devout  meditation  and  divine  science,  with  the
Spirit,  supremely  blest  and  infinitely  wise."

23

In  all  clear  and  thorough  analyses  of  the  Egyptian  mys-
teries, the  corner-stone  of  belief  rests  on  the  assumption  that
the  First  Great  Cause  is  a  Spirit.  That  the  first  and  only
element  of  Being  was  Soul — that  it  existed  eternally,  and
filled  infinity.  By  its_£Ower  of  ^ill  it  separated  itself  into
emanations  and  elements,  and  by  its  own  inherent  capacity
for  creation,  the  unrestihg  element  of  force  was  evolved ;
then  came  matter,  and  by  the  action  of  force  on  matter,
the  unspeakable  wisdom  of  the  uncreated  soul,  moving  on
the  ocean  of  chaos,  created  Form  and  evolved  order.  The^
fiery  particles  of  matter  ascended  to  form  luminous  bodies,
the  heavier  descended  and  aggregated  into  earths,  seas,
plants,  animals,  and  the  bodies  of  men.

From  the  eternal  soul  proceeded  successive  emanations
ol  spiritual  beings,  more  or  less  elevated  according  to  their
status  of  ascent  or  descent  in  the  grand  scale  of  the
Spiritual  Kingdom.

Herodotus  affirms  that  the  Egyptians  were  the  first
people  who  distinctly  taught  the  immortality  of  the  human
Soul,  but  the  same  doctrine,  and  in  all  probability  the
original  of  all  religious  systems,  was  enunciated  in  India,
when  the  Egyptian  Dynasty  was  yet  in  its  infancy.  More
of  the  specialty  of  belief  in  both  these  monumental  nations
will  hereafter  be  given  when  treating  of  their  magical  cere-
monies ;  but  it  is  in  order  to  observe  here,  that  the  foun-
dation of  their  famous  mysteries  was  laid  in  the  belief  that
the  soul  had  fallen  from  an  original  state  of  purity  and  in-
nocence, had  gravitated  from  a  spiritual  essence  to  a  mate-
rial body,  and  that  the  chief  end,  aim  and  scope  of  earthly
being,  was  to  conduct  the  soul  through  successive  stages  of
purification,  back  into  original  alliance  with  Deity.

This  is  the  central  doctrine  of  Plato,  Pythagoras,  Jam-
blichus,  Plutarch,  and,  indeed,  of  all  the  most  renowned
sages,  philosophers,  and  historians  who  flourished  from  the

24

beginning  of  historic  times,  to  those  of  the  early  Christian
fathers.  The  Cabalists,  Gnostics,  Essenes,  Therapeuts,
the  Mystics  of  the  mediaeval  ages,  and  some  of  the  seers
of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries,  cherished  simi-
lar opinions  concerning  the  origin  of  soul,  and  its  proba-
tionary experiences.

In  this  category  of  testimony  we  cannot  exclude  the  wit-
ness of  those,  who,  as  spirits  themselves,  freed  from  the
materialistic  shadows  which  obscure  our  vision  and  darken
our  intuitions,  must  be  more  qualified  than  we  are  to  dis-
close the  realities  of  past  and  future  states  of  spiritual  be-
ing.

Amongst  all  the  latter-day  revelations  claiming  to  origi-
nate with  the  enfranchised  souls  of  those  who  had  once
lived  on  earth,  none  come  to  mortals  with  more  untram-
melled freedom  from  human  intervention,  than  the  revela-
tions of  Kerner's  Seeress,  Madame  Hauife,  commonly  called
"  The  Seeress  of  Prevorst,"  and  the  Somnamhiiles  of  Al-
phonse  Cahagnet,  a  working  man  of  Paris,  once  a  mate-
rialist ;  a  mere  curious  experimenter  in  the  outset,  with
the  modern  marvel  of  animal  magnetism,  but  one  who,  as
an  impartial  and  intelligent  interpreter  of  unlooked-
for  revelations  received  through  the  magnetic  sleep,  con-
stitutes one  of  the  best  and  least  questionable  of  the  wit-
nesses for  spiritual  truth  and  revelation  in  the  nineteenth
century.

About  the  year  1846  or  7,  Mons.  Cahagnet,  having  be-
come very  familiar  with  somnambulistic  revelations  from
the  world  of  spirits,  and  enjoying  the  privilege  of  this  com-
munion through  several  of  the  most  remarkable  and  lucid
subjects  that  the  age  afforded,  received  a  number  of  com-
munications affirming  the  flict  of  the  soul's  existence  an-
terior to  its  appearance  upon  earth.  Whilst  denying  em-
phatically any  belief  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Re-incarnation-

25

ists,  and  declaring  against  it  in  the  most  positive  terms,  the
communicating  spirits  uniformly  alleged  that,  when  freed
from  the  trammels  of  matter,  they  all  remembered  having
lived  in  an  anterior  state  of  purity  and  innocence  as  spirits  ;
that  they  perceived  how  truly  and  wisely  their  earthly
lives  were  designed  for  probationary  purposes,  and  meant
to  impart  vigor  and  knowledge  to  the  soul ;  but  that  once
undergone,  it  was  never  again  repeated,  and  the  return  of
the  soul  to  its  former  spiritual  state  was  never  interrupted
by  re-incarnations  on  earth.  These  spirits,  too,  al-
leged that  the  sphere  of  eternity  afforded  the  souls  of  evil
or  unprogressed  men  all  the  opportunities  necessary  to
purify  them  from  sin  and  its  effects,  through  innumerable
stages  of  progress.

A  witness  so  unexpected  as  these  spirits  afford,  and
revelations  so  full  of  evidence  of  their  genuine  character,
cannot  be  dismissed  without  a  few  examples  of  their  style
of  teaching.

A  spirit  communicating  with  the  ecstatic  Bruno,  says,
''We  are  born  and  die  but  Once  ;  when  we  are  in  heaven,  it
is  for  eternity."  Q.  "Do  we  recollect  our  earthly  exist-
ence?" A.  ^'  Yes,  and  our  anterior  one  also."  Q.  ''  What  an-
terior existence  1"  A.  "Before  appearing  on  earth,  man  lived
in  a  spiritual  world  similar  to  the  one  in  which  he  lives  on
quitting  earth.  Each  awaits  his  turn  in  this  world  to  ap-
pear on  earth,  an  appearance  necessary,  a  life  of  trials  none
can  escape."  Through  the  best  of  all  Mons.  Cahagnet's
Lucicles^  Adele,  in  an  interview  with  the  spirit  of  the  illus-
trious Swedenborg,  these  words  were  given:  "  The  life  an-
terior  which  we  have  all  passed  through,  was,  so  to  speak,  a
life  of  notlnngness,  of  childbirth,  of  happiness  like  that
wEich  we  enjoy  on  our  exit  from  the  earth  ;  but  this  happi-
ness^  cannot  be  comprehended,  because  it  is  not  accompanied
with  sensations  to  prove  its  sweet  reality,  therefore  God  has

26

deemed  fit  that  we  should  pass  through  these  successive
lives,  the  first,  on  the  globes  of  which  I  speak  to  you — a
life  unknown,  of  beatitude,  devoid  of  sensation — the  second,
the  one  you  enjoy,  a  life  of  action,  sensation — a  painful  life
placed  between  the  two,  to  demonstrate  through  its  con-
trast the  sweetness  of  the  third — the  life  of  good  and  evil,
without  which  we  should  not  be  able   to   appreciate   the

happy  state  reserved  for  us." Many  more  spirits

communicating  through  different  media  confirmed  these
opinions  and  elaborated  upon  their  truth  and  reasonable-
ness, but  the  limitation  of  our  space  forbid  further  ex-
tracts

In  one  of  the  principal  cities  of  Hindostan,  there  resides,
in  the  very  focus  of  religious  and  political  conserva-
tism, a  noble  Hindoo,  whose  official  rank  and  standing
is  by  no  means  commensurate  with  his  extreme
poverty.  Bound  by  the  latter  restriction  and  a  careful
observance  of  the  forms  and  ceremonials  which  belong  to
his  nation,  he  is  compelled  to  hide  in  the  depths  of  his
highly  spiritualized  and  intellectual  nature  the  extraordi-
nary revelations  that  have  been  made  to  him  from  invisible
authors  through  the  mediumship  of  his  little  niece,  a  child
of  some  twelve  years  old.  In  the  presence  of  this  little  one,
whole  quires  of  blank  paper  are  rapidly  filled  up  by  no  vis-
ible hands  and  without  even  the  ordinary  appliances  of
pens,  pencils  or  ink.

It  is  enough  to  lay  the  blank  sheets  on  a  tripod,  care-
fully screened  from  the  direct  rays  of  light,  but  still  dimly
visible  to  the  eyes  of  attentive  observers.  The  child  sits
on  the  ground,  and  lays  her  head  on  the  tripod,  embrac-
ing its  supports  with  her  little  arms.  In  this  attitude  she
most  commonly  sleeps  for  an  hour,  during  which  time  the
sheets  lying  on  the  tripod  are  filled  up  with  exquisitely
formed  characters  in  the  ancient  Sanscrit.     Over  four  vol-

27

umes  of  these  writings  have  been  thus  produced,  and  that
in  something  less  than  a  period  of  three  years.

Questions  are  often  laid  in  simple  Hindostanee  on  the
tripod,  when  information  is  sought  by  the  family  of  the
Hindoo,  and  the  responses  are  always  found  embodied  in
some  portions  of  the  next  writings  received.

In  answer  to  several  questions  concerning  the  origin  of
Soul,  and  the  doctrine  of  its  transmigration  through  the
forms  of  animals,  one  of  the  Sanscrit  writings  contained
the  following  sentences :

"  That  the  Soul  is  an  emanation  from  Deity,  and  in  its  original  essence  is  all  purity,
truth,  and  wisdom,  is  an  axiom  which  the  disembodied  learn,  when  the  powers  of
memory  are  sufficiently  awakened  to  perceive  the  states  of  existence  anterior  to
mortal  birth.  In  the  Paradises  of  purity  and  love,  souls  spring  up  like  blossoms,
in  the  all  Father's  garden  of  immortal  beauty.  It  is  the  tendency  of  that  Divine
nature,  whose  chief  attributes  are  Love  and  Wisdom,  Heat  and  Light,  to  repeat  it-
self eternally,  and  mirror  forth  its  own  perfections  in  scintillations  from  itself.
These  sparks  of  heavenly  fire  become  souls,  and  as  the  effect  must  share  in  the  na-
ture of  the  cause,  the  fire  which  warms  into  life  also  illuminates  into  light,  hence
the  soul  emanations  from  the  Divine  are  all  love  and  heat,  whilst  the  illumination  of
light,  which  streams  ever  from  the  great  central  Sun  of  being,  irradiates  all  souls
with  corresponding  beams  of  light.  Born  of  Love,  which  corresponds  to  Divine
heat  and  warmth,  and  irradiated  with  Light,  which  is  Divine  wisdom  and  truth,
the  first  and  most  powerful  soul  emanations  repeated  the  action  of  their  Supreme
Originator,  gave  off  emanations  from  their  own  being,  some  higher,  some  lower,  the
highest  tending  upward  into  spiritual  essences,  the  lowest  forming  particled  mat-
ter. These  denser  emanations,  following  out  the  creative  law,  aggregated  into
suns,  satellites,  worlds,  and  each  repeating  the  story  of  creation,  suns  gave
birth  to  systems,  and  every  member  of  a  system  became  a  theatre  of  subordinate
states  of  spiritual  or  material  existence.

"Thus  do  ideas  descend  into  forms,  and  forms  ascend  into  ideas.  Thus  is  the
growth,  development,  and  progress  of  creation  endless,  and  thus  must  spirit  orig-
inate and  ever  create  worlds  of  matter,  for  the  purposes  of  its  own  progressive
unfoldment.

"  Will  the  mighty  march  of  creation  never  cease  f  Will  the  cable  anchored  in  the
heart  of  the  great  mystery,  Deity,  stretch  out  forever  ?

"  '  Forever !'  shout  the  blazing  suns,  leaping  on  in  the  fiery  orbits  of  their  shining
life,  and  trailing  in  their  glittering  pathway  ten  thousand  satellites  and  meteoric
sparks,  whirling,  flashing  in  their  jeweled  crowns,  all  embryonic  germs  of  new,
young  worlds  that  shall  be."

"  Earths  that  have  attained  to  the  capacity  to  support  organic  life,  necessarily
attract  it.  Earths  demand  it.  Heaven  supplies  it.  From  whence?  As  the
earths  groan  for  the  lordship  of  superior  beings  to  rule  over  them,   the  spirits,  in

28

their  distant  Edens,  hear  the  whispers  of  the  tempting  serpent,  the  animal  princi-
ple, the  urgent  intellect,  which,  appealing  to  the  blest  souls  in  their  distant  para-
dises, fill  them  with  indescribable  longings  for  change,  for  broader  vistas  of  knowl-
edge, for  mightier  powers ;  they  would  be  as  the  gods,  and  know  good  and  evil ;
and  in  this  urgent  appeal  of  the  earths  ibr  man,  and  this  involuntary  yearning  of
the  spirit  for  intellectual  knowledge,  the  union  is  effected  between  the  two,  and
the  spirit  becomes  precipitated  into  the  realms  of  matter  to  undergo  a  pilgrimage  .
through  the  probationary  states  of  earth,  and  only  to  regain  its  paradise  again  by
the  fulfillment  of  that  pilgrimage.

"  When  spirits  lived  as  such,  in  paradise,  emanations  from  a  spiritual  Deific

source,  they  knew  no  sex,  nor  reproduced  their  kind Wheu  they  fell,  and  the

earth,  like  magnetic  tractors  drew  them  within  the  vortex  of  its  grosser  element,
they  became  what  the  earths  compelled  them  to  be.  In  the  earlier  ages  of  these
growing  worlds,  the  conditions  of  life  were  rude  and  violent,  hence  the  creatures  on
them  partook  of  their  nature.  Then,  too,  first  obtained  the  nature  of  sex,  and  the
law  of  generation.  To  people  these  earths,  man,  like  the  other  living  creatures,
must  reproduce  his  kind.  All  things  in  matter  are  male  and  female ;  minerals,
plants,  animals,  and  men.  Spirit,  the  creative  energy,  is  the  masculine  principle
that  creates ;  nature,  the  passive  recipient,  is  that  which  germinates;  hence  crea-
tion.    Man  must  obey  the  law;  hence  sex  and  generation."

"Man  lives  on  many  earths  before  he  reaches  this.  Myriads  of  worlds  swarm
in  space  where  the  soul  in  rudimental  states  performs  its  pilgrimages  ere  he
reaches  the  large  and  shining  planet  named  the  Earth,  the  glorious  function  of
which  is  to  confer  self -consciousness.  At  this  point  only  is  he  man  ;  at  every
other  stage  of  his  vast  wild  journey  he  is  but  an  embryonic  being — a  fleeting,
temporary  shape  of  matter — a  creature  in  which  a  part,  but  only  a  part,  of  the
high  imprisoned  soul  shines  forth;  a  rudimental  shape  with  rudimental  functions,
ever  living,  dying,  sustaining  a  fleeting,  spiritual  existence,  as  rudimental  as  the
material  shape  from  whence  it  emerged  ;  a  butterfly  springing  up  from  the  chryso-
litic  shell,'  but  ever  as  it  onward  rushes,  in  new  births,  new  deaths,  new  incarna-
tions, anon  to  die  and  live  again,  but  still  stretch  upward,  still  strive  onward,  still
rush  on  the  giddy,  dreadful,  toilsome,  rugged  path,  until  it  awakens  once  more —
once  more  to  live  and  be  a  material  shape,  a  thing  of  dust,  a  creature  of  flesh  and
blood,  but  now — a  man.

"  It  is  from  the  dim  memory  that  the  soul  retains,  first  of  its  original  bright-
ness and  fall,  next  of  its  countless  migrations  through  the  various  undertones  of
being  that  antedate  its  appearance  on  this  earth  as  a  man,  that  the  belief  in  the
doctrine  of  the  metempsychosis  (transmigration  of  souls  through  the  animal  king-
dom) has  arisen.

"Yet  it  is  a  sin  against  divine  truth  to  believe  that  the  exalted  soul  that  has
once  reached  the  dignity  and  upright  stature  of  manhood  should,  or  could,  retro-
grade into  the  bodies  of  creeping  things,  or  crouching  animals— ISTot  so,  not  so  !"

"  In  the  fleeting  images  which  antecedent  states  leave  on  the  spiritual  brain,  in
the  half-efi'aced  and  half-imperfect  perceptions  of  existence  which  each  new  stage
of  progress  and  each  successive  journey  through  various  lower  earths  leave,  like  an
unquiet,  ill-remembered  dream  on  the  spirit's  consciousness,  the  past  becomes
confused  with  the  present,  and  something  of  what  we  have  been  imposes  its
shadow  across  the  path  of  the  future,  as  a  dim  possibility  of  what  we  may  be.

"  After  the  soul's  birth  into  humanity,  it  acquires  self-consciousness,  knowledge     j

29

of  its  own  individuality,  and  closing  up  for  ever  its  career  of  material  transform-
ations, with  the  death  of  the  mortal  body,  it  gravitates  on  to  a  fresh  series  of
existences  in  purely  spiritual  realms  of  being.  Here  the  farther  purifications  of  the
soul  commence  anew  ;  commence  with  that  sublime  attribute  of  self-knowledge
which  enables  even  the  wickedest  spirit  to  enjoy  and  profit  by  the  change,  for
memory  supplies  him  with  lessons  which  urge  him  to  struggle  forward  into  con-
quest over  sin,  and  prophetic  sight  stimulates  him  to  aspire  until  he  shall  attain,
by  well-directed  effort,  the  sublime  heights  of  purity  and  goodness  from  which  he
fell,  to  become  a  mortal  pilgrim."

''  The  triumphant  souls  who  enter  Heaven  by  eflfortare  God's  ministering  angels.
Angels  of  power,  wisdom,  strength  and  beauty.  The  dwellers  in  the  primal
states  of  Eden  are  only  Spirits.  The  first  are  God-men — heavenly  men  —
strong  and  mighty  Powers,  Thrones,  Dominions,  "World-Builders,  glorious  hierar-
chies of  Sun-bright  Souls,  who  never  more  can  fall.   Spirits  are  but  the  breath,  the

spark,  the  shadow  of  a  God  ;  Angel's  are  Gods  in  person During  the

various  transitional  states  of  the  soul  in  passing  through  the  myriads  of  forms  and
myriads  of  earths  whereon  their  probations  are  outwrought,  the  changes  are  all
effected  by  a  process  analogous  to  human  death — during  the  period  that  subsists
ere  the  soul,  expelled  from  one  material  shape  enters  another,  the  drifting  spirit,
still  enveloped  by  the  magnetic  aural  body  which  binds  it  to  the  realm  of  mat-
ter, becomes  for  its  short  term  of  intermediate  spiritual  existence  An  Elementary
Spirit."

30

SECTION   III.

Of  Deity — The  Supreme  Being  or  Beings — Is  there  one  or
many  Gods  f  Who  can  know  the  Unknowable  f  or,  May
not  the  Known  lead  up  to  what  has  been  deemed  the  Un-
knowable f

It  is  easier  for  the  imagination  to  rest  upon  the  idea  of
one  God  than  many,  and  still  more  natural  for  the  soul
of  man  to  accept  of  Polytheism  than  Atheism.

The  utter  insufficiency  of  any  argument  which  attempts
to  shut  out  an  idea  because  its  magnitude  baffles  the  finite
mind,  has  never  been  more  completely  demonstrated  than
when  man,  the  puny,  shadowy  phantom  who  flits  through
a  few  sand  grains  of  time,  and  then  disappears  for  an  eter-
nity, attempts  to  argue  against  the  existence  of  any  higher
being  than  himself,  simply  because  he,  by  his  sensuous
perception,  cannot  apprehend  it !

INo  man  can,  by  sensuous  perception,  apprehend  the  exis-
tence of  his  own  soul.  Socrates  well  understood  this  truth
when  he  said,  "  I  respect  my  soul  though  I  cannot  see  it,"
and  the  Apostle  Paul  equally  well  appreciated  its  force
when  he  declared  that  the  spiritual  man  alone  could  judge  of
the  things  of  the  spirit.

From  the  revelations  of  spirits  who  are  in  the  experi-
ence of  spiritual  entities,  and  the  sublime  imaginings  ot
those  who  in  the  childlike  faiths  of  antiquity  were  nearer
to  God  than  are  the  mammon-worshipers  of  to-day,  will
we  erect  our  scheme  of  the  Divine  Godhead,  surrounding
the  noble  temple  with  such  a  scaffolding  of  testimony  as
will  enable  every  reader  to  climb  to  the  highest  pinnacle
of  thought  which  the  finite  mind  can  reach.

31

That  ''  God  is  a  Spirit,"  and  the  eternal,  uncreated,  self-
existent,  and  infinite  realm  of  Spirit  is  God^  none  can  deny
who  profoundly  analyze  the  depths  of  being  pointed  to  in
our  first  two  Sections  ;  but  as  to  the  mode  in  which  God
can  be  apprehended,  or  whether  there  be  one  or  many
Gods,  remain  questions  open  to  much  broader  fields  of  spec-
ulation.

Were  it  not  more  in  the  order  of  these  writings  to  pre-
sent the  results  of  vast  mental  struggles,  and  the  conclu-
sions drawn  from  researches  which  have  only  permitted
the  panting  Soul  to  pause  for  breath  at  the  gates  which
lead  from  one  stage  of  infinity  to  another,  we  should  pre-
cede our  own  definitions  of  Godhead,  by  the  opinions  of
the  authorities  we  propose  to  cite  ;  but  the  responsibility
of  affirmation  is  ours,  and  surrounded  as  we  are  "  by  a  cloud
of  witnesses,"  who  wave  the  lustrous  banners  of  spiritual
truths  above  our  page,  how  can  we  hesitate,  or,  in  the  cold
world's  materialistic  phrase,  why  fear  to  commit  ourselves  to
opinions  we  know  in  our  Soul  to  be  Divine  truth  7

The  Solar  System  of  which  our  earth  is  a  part,  moves
around  the  physical  sun  as  a  centre  of  light,  heat,  and  at-
traction.

By  well  defined  astronomical  laws  we  know  that  this
Solar  System  forms  only  a  part  of  a  larger  and  far  grander
aggregation  of  starry  worlds,  called  the  Astral  System.

The  exact  centre  of  this  System  is  not  arrived  at,  yet
all  the  observations  of  astronomy  point  to  such  a  pivotal
centre,  and  the  known  laws  of  Science  determine  that  in
the  visible  universe,  all  motions  proceed  in  and  are  sus-
tained by  the  dual  modes  of  centrifugal  and  centripetal
force.  That  the  stars  discovered  by  astronomical  Science
are  only  a  part  of  an  array  of  systems  which  occupy  the
spaces  of  infinity,  is  an  axiom  universally  acknowledged ;
hence,  indeed,  the  terms   "  infinity"  and  "  boundless,"  as

32

applied  to  the  sidereal  heavens  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  that
unknowable  which  stretches  away  into  vistas  where  the
glass  of  the  astronomer  cannot  penetrate,  and  the  mind  of
the  most  aspirational  becomes  palsied,  even  there,  the  stead-
fast helm  of  physical  science  guides  the  ship  and  prophe-
sies of  an  inevitable  port  of  knowledge  yet  to  be  reached.

"  The  law  which  rounds  a  dew-drop  shapes  a  world,"
and  the  principles  which  inhere  in  one  System  prevail
throughout  space.  We  cannot  hnd  a  telescope  that  will
pierce  into  the  Astral  Centre,  nor  resolve  all  the  floating
masses  of  nebulae  that  crowd  the  galaxy  into  blazing  Suns  ;
but  we  know  by  analogy  that  that  Centre  and  those  Suns
exist,  and  that  the  only  horizon  that  shuts  them  out  from
human  discovery,  is  human  ignorance  and  incapacity.

In  the  midst  of  all  our  baffled  wisdom  and  enlightened
ignorance,  physical  Science  and  spiritual  revelation  sup-
plementing each  other,  assure  us  there  is  one  grand  central
Sun  of  being.

Physical  science  tells  us  it  must  be  so.  Spiritual  revela-
tion affirms  it  is  so.  That  central  Sun  is  God.  This
perfection  of  being  exists  in  the  form  of  a  globe,  the  only
point  of  union  between  mathematics  and  geometry,  and
occupies  the  centre,  the  only  position  whereby  revolving
universes  can  live,  move,  and  have  their  being  and  life,  be
born,  sustained  and  renewed.

God  is  the  dispenser  of  heat  and  light,  the  two  elements
in  being  which  account  for  generation  and  revelation,  love
and  wisdom,  life  and  sense.  This  Spiritual  Sun  throws  off
from  the  centre  the  elements  of  new-created  worlds  by
centrifugal  force,  and  draws  them  back  and  keeps  them
in  determinate  orbits  by  centripetal  force.  Its  nature  is
Spirit  ;  its  attribute,  Will  ;  its  manifestations,  Love,  Wis-
dom, Power.     This  is  God.

33

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  III.

The  Opinions  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Philosopliers  and
Spiritists  concerning  the  Nature  and  Indimduatity  of
One  Supreme  Being.

The  best  of  Philologists  agree  in  attributing  to  the  na-
tions or  peoples  called  Aryan,  or  Indo-European,  the  first
linguistic  records  we  possess  :

"  Men  do  not  invent  names  for  things  of  which  they
have  no  idea."

''  The  Word  has  always  been  recognized  as  the  fittest
Symbol  of  Truth,  and  the  purest  manifestation  of  Deity."
The  Aryan  name  for  God  was  Div,  which  signifies  The
clear  light  of  day  ;  and  this  word  has  become  the  root-word
of  all  worship  for  untold  ages,  until  we  arrive  at  its  mod-
ern appellative.  Deity.

In  fragmentary  accounts  given  of  the  most  early  his-
toric people,  classified  as  Aryan,  it  is  asserted  that  they
kept  fires  constantly  burning  as  their  chief  element  in  re-
ligious worship.  Fustel  de  Coulanges^  in  his  fine  epic  (for
such  it  is),  entitled  La  Cite  Antique^  published  in  Paris,  in
1 870,  clearly  proves  that  the  Aryan's  religious  belief,  rec-
ognized in  fire  the  symbol  of  God — in  light  his  wisdom —
in  material  forms  an  expression  of  his  potential  word — and

in   Guardian  Spirits  his  Ministering    Angels,    or    tutelary

deities.

When  we  trace  the  early  conceptions  of  the  Hindoos
— that  most  ancient  of  contemplative  men,  those  children
of  the  Spirit,  who  communed  with  Nature's  God  through
the  profoundest  study  of  Nature  herself — we  find  they
cherished  ideas  so  exalted  of  the  First  Great  Cause,  that
they  ventured  not  to  embody  their  thought  of  Him  in  any
form,  symbol,  or  even  to  assign  Him  a  name.

34

The  Supreme  Being  was  with  them,  the  Unknowable,
and  only  became  typified  as  Brahm^  which,  interpreted,
signifies  The  Voidj  The  Silent  Region  which  cannot  be
pierced — the  unfathomable  which  cannot  be  gauged  or  un-
derstood. That  the  human  mind  might  rest  on  a  Provi-
dential scheme,  the  Sages  of  India  taught  that  there  were
three  Subordinate  emanations  from  the  First  Great  Cause,
who  embodied  the  Grand  Trinity  of  his  Deific  attributes.
This  primordial  Trinity  consisted  of  Brahma,  the  Creator;
Vishnu,  the  Preserver;  and  Siva,  tiie  Destroyer  and  Re-
producer.

Each  of  these  Deific  emanations  were  so  intimately  con-
nected in  the  Hindoo  mind  with  the  attributes  of  heat  and
light,  that  the  earliest  Hindostanee  worship  may,  with  truth,
be  assumed  to  have  laid  the  foundation  of  that  stupendous
system  known,  in  later  ages,  as  the  astronomical  religion.
A  large  proportion  of  the  Vedas — the  oldest  of  the  Hindoo
Scriptures — consist  of  epics  in  praise  of  Light ;  accounts  ol
the  miracles  outwrought  by  the  mighty  Sun-God ;  invoca-
tions to  the  spirits  of  the  air,  moon,  stars,  the  sacred  fire,
and  different  elements.  Many  are  the  prayers  addressed
to  Indra,  the  starry-robed  Ruler  of  the  constellated  heav-
ens, as  well  as  to  the  spirits  of  different  departments  ol
the  Universe.  Fire  was  held  sacred  in  every  household,
and  employed  in  all  sacerdotal  rites.  The  very  shape  ol
the  pyramidal  Temples,  or  the  blunted  pylons,  signified
the  all-pervading  reverence  of  the  Hindoo  mind  for  the
symbol  of  the  tapering  flame.

In  one  of  the  most  ancient  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  ad-
dressed to  the  Heranyagarbha,  occurs  the  following  pas-
sages :

"In  the  beginning  there  arose  the  Source  of  golden  light.  He  was  the  only
born  Lord  of  all  that  is.  He  established  the  earth  and  the  sky.  To  what  other
God  shall  we  offer  sacrifice  ?  He  through  whom  the  sky  is  bright,  and  the  earth
is  firm  ;  who  measured  out  the  light  in  the  air.     To  what  other  Grod,  etc.,  etc.

35

'^  Wherever  the  mighty  water  clouds  went ;  where  they  placed  the  seed  and  lit
the  fire  ;  thence  arose  He  who  is  the  only  life  of  the  bright  Gods.  To  what  other
God,  etc.,  etc.

''There  was  neither  entity,  nor  non-entity  then — neither  atmosphere  nor  sky  be-
yond. Death  was  not,  nor  therefore  immortality  ;  nor  day  nor  night.  That  one
breathed  breathless  by  itself.  There  was  nothing  different  from  it,  nor  beyond  it.
The  covered  germ  burst  forth  by  mental  heat  ;  then  first  came  Love  upon  it,  the
Spring  of  mind.  The  rays  shot  across,  and  there  were  mighty  powers  producing
all  things.     N"ature  beneath,  and  Energy  above  "

The  Vedic  hymns  are  nearly  all  invocations  to  the  Solar
and  Astral  sources  of  light  and  heat ;  the  Vedic  philoso-
phy, speculations  on  the  origin  of  Being,  ever  re- affirming
the  influence  of  Solar  and  Astral  agency  in  Creation.

The  following  passage,  descriptive  of  the  Hindoo's  God,
will  convey  an  idea  of  his  sublime  conceptions  of  Deity :

"Heaven is  his  head;  the  sun  and  moon  are  his  eyes;  the  earth  his  feet;  space
his  ears  ;  air  his  breath.  He  is  the  Soul  of  the  Universe.  The  Sun  of  all  lumin-
aries. All  Creation  derives  light  from  him  alone.  The  wise  call  him  the  Supreme
Light-giving  Spirit."

In  the  Egyptian  and  Persian  Theogany,  the  direct  ac-
knowledgment of  one  Supreme  Being  corresponding  to  the
Sun  and  its  attributes,  is  as  marked  as  in  in  the  Aryan  and
Indian  records.  The  elaborate  woof  of  Grecian  and  Ro-
man Mythology  partake  of  the  same  golden  threads  of
belief,  and  whilst  ramifying  into  a  complete  system  of
Polytheism,  still  refer  back  to  the  Indian  and  Egyptian
idea  of  Creation  springing  from  one  Supreme  Source,  and
this  a  spiritual  centre  of  heat  or  creative  energy,  and
light  or  creative  wisdom.

In  the  Orphic  Songs,  the  one  first  Great  Cause  cele-
brated as  Zeus  is  more  completely  associated  with  the
Egyptian  idea  of  a  Sun-God,  a  spirit  "  without  parts  or
passion,  sex  or  nature,"  than  in  the  theories  of  later  phi-
losophers. Orpheus,  the  Sage,  to  whom  the  introduction
of  Egyptian  Theogony  into  Greece  is  mainly  due,  chants
thus  of  the  Supreme  Being :

36

"Zeus  is  male,  Zeus  is  female.  Zeus  is  the  Spirit  of  all  things.  Zeus  is  the
rushing  of  uncreated  fire.  Zeus  is  the  king ;  he  is  the  sun  and  moon.  Zeus  is  the
mighty  power,  the  demon,  the  one  mighty  frame  in  which  this  universe  re-
volves. He  is  fire  and  water,  earth  and  ether,  day  and  night.  All  things  unite
in  the  body  of  Zeus."

Pythagoras,  Plato,  Socrates,  Aristotle,  and  other  of  the
most  distinguished  Grecian  sages,  taught  more  directly  of
God  as  a  Spirit,  and  as  the  source  from  which  all  sub-
ordinate gods  proceeded.

Passing  on  to  the  mediseval,  and  still  later  ages,  we  find
the  most  illuminated  of  the  Mystics  either  reaffirming  the
ancient  beliefs  of  India  and  Egypt  in  the  Great  Central
Sun,  or  claiming  to  receive  confirmation  of  this  truth  from
spiritual  inspiration,  direct  revelations,  or  intercourse  with
superior  orders  of  being.

Cornelius  Agrippa,  Paracelsus,  Jacob  Behmen,  and
Swedenborg,  taught  this  idea  of  Deity  with  more  or  less
distinctness.  Swedenborg,  in  particular,  who  elevates  his
conception  of  Jesus  Christ  into  the  Lord,  from  whom,  and
to  whom,  all  the  activities  of  the  Created  Universe  proceed
and  return — clearly  teaches  that  "the  Lord  "  is  only  seen  as
a  Sun.  In  his  essay  on  "  Creation  by  two  Suns,^^  he  affirms
that  "The  Sun  of  Heaven  is  the  Lord,  the  light  there  is
Divine  truth,  and  the  heat  there  is  Divine  good,  which  pro-
ceed from  the  Lord  as  a  Sun.  From  that  origin  are  all
things  which  exist  and  appear  in  the  heavens."  Again  he
says  :  "  That  the  Lord  actually  appears  in  heaven  as  a  Sun,
has  not  only  been  told  me  by  the  angels,  but  has  also  been
given  me  to  see  several  times,  wherefore  what  I  have  seen
and  heard  concerning  the  Lord  as  a  Sun,  I  would  here  de-
scribe," &c.,  &c.

Of  still  more  recent  date  are  the  teachings  of  certain
spirits  claiming  to  have  had  a  mortal  existence,  many  thou-
ands  of  years  ago,  but  who  found  themselves  impelled  to  re-

37

turn  to  earth  during  the  great  spiritual  outpouring  of  the  last
quarter  of  a  century,  in  the  United  States  of  America.
We  shall  quote  from  those  who  manifested  their  presence
at  the  spirit  house  of  Jonathan  Koons,  a  farmer  residing  in
the  remotest  wilds  of  Athens  County,  Ohio,  and  who  gave
their  testimony,  speaking  through  trumpets  with  an  audi-
ble voice,  under  circumstances  which  defied  the  probability
of  collusion  or  imposture,  and  with  a  power  and  spirituality
of  tone  and  presence  acknowledged  by  all  who  heard  them
to  have  been  truly  sublime  and  authoritative.

The  communications  given  by  these  spirits  orally  were
transcribed  by  those  present,  and  subsequently  corrected
by  themselves — others  were  written  by  spirit  hands  in  the
presence  of  many  witnesses,  or  found  in  locked  drawers.
From  the  MSS.  preserved  of  these  wonderful  writings,  the
history  of  the  Athens  County  manifestations  are  elaborate-
ly described  in  Har dingers  Twenty  Years'  History  of  Modern
American  spiritualism^  and  it  is  from  the  pages  of  this  highly
authentic  work  that  we  submit  the  following  excerpt.

The  author  says:

"These  spirits  declare  that  'there  is  an  electric  element,  divided  through
space  by  another  element,  which  bears  no  affinity  to  it ;  that  spirits,  at  least  such
as  communicate  with  earth,  cannot  themselves  penetrate  this  interior  element ;
in  fact,  to  their  apprehension,  no  one  in  the  universe  can  do  so,  save  only  God ;
and  this  mysterious  innermost,  with  all  its  hidden  and  impenetrable  glories,  is
called  by  spirits  the  '■  subter  fluid.'  They  declare  that  the  electric  element  forms
the  various  paths  in  which  planets  and  all  other  known  bodies  in  space  travel  and
move  in  their  respective  orbits,  but  that  nothing  visible  to  spirits,  or  comprehen-
sible to  them  as  of  an  organic  nature,  can  penetrate  the  realms  of  the  '  subter
fluid/  yet  it  divides  and  permeates  all  space,  and  seems  to  hold  in  control  the  infi-
nite realms  of  the  electric  element.  Rays  of  light/  however,  they  say,  '  can  and
do  penetrate  the  '  subter  fluid,'  as  they  appear  to  issue  from  and  return  to  it  inces-
santly.' Also,  '  There  is  a  graud  central  territory  in  the  universe,  known  to  exist
by  all  spirits,  and  in  all  worlds.  It  embraces  illimitable  though  unknown  realms  ;
yet  its  position  as  a  vast  central  point  is  defined,  from  the  fact  that  from  thence,
and  to  thence,  seem  to  tend  all  the  illimitable  lines  of  attraction,  gravitation,  and
force,  which  connect  terrestrial  bodies,  and  link  together  firmaments  teeming  with
lives  and  systems.  All  the  innumerable  firmaments,  spangled  with  an  infinitude
of  solar  and  astral  systems,  seem  to  revolve  around,  and  derive  attractive  and  liv-

38

ing  forces  from  this  unknown  centre.  Sometimes  it  is  called  Hhe  Celestial
Realm.'  Again  'The  Central  Sun/  '  Heaven/  '  God/  '  The  Infinite  Eealm/  '  The
Eternal  Life  !'  While  firmaments  thickly  sown  with  suns  and  revolving  satel-
lites, appear  but  as  specks  of  light  in  comparison  with  the  inconceivable  vastness
of  this  celestial  laboratory,  invisible  and  boundless  as  it  is,  from  which  flows  out,
through  all  universes,  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  forces  of  being."

In  Cahagnet's  Celestial  Telegraphy  several  spirits,  commu-
nicating through  celebrated  Somnambules,  startled  their
hearer's  preconceived  opinions  on  the  subject  of  Deity,  by
affirming  positively  that  he  was  seen  and  known  by  highly
exalted  angels  as  a  Grand  Central  Spiritual  Sun.

Through  the  ecstatic  Bruno  it  was  asked — ''  Do  angels,
such  as  you  describe  your  Guardian  Gabriel  to  be,  see
God  V  A.  "  Yes."  Q.  "  In  what  form  V  A.  ''  In  that
of  the  Sun."  Q.  ''  Is  it  our  terrestrial  Sun  7"  A.  "  No  ;
there  is  in  the  heaven  of  heavens  but  one  Sun,  which  is
the  Spiritual  Sun,  the  form  in  which  God  appears.  Our
terrestrial  sun  is  but  the  reflection  of  the  rays  dispensed
from  the  great  Central  Spiritual  Sun,  which  is  God."

The  Hindoo  Child  Seeress  Sanoma,  heretofore  referred
to,  also  affirmed,  when  in  ecstatico,  at  the  tender  age  of
five  years,  when  her  infant  mind  had  never  been  impressed
with  one  single  idea  of  theology,  that  the  God  of  the  uni-
verse was  a  Spiritual  Sun,  whilst  all  the  suns  and  stars,
visible  or  invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  derived  their  light
and  heat  only  from  Him.  When  questioned  by  Sir  James
Mackintosh,  the  eminent  astronomer,  whether  the  sun  of
our  solar  system  was  not  an  incandescent  bod}^,  and  the
originator  of  all  the  light  and  heat  received  by  his  satellites,
she  emphatically  denied  that  it  was  so,  and  exposed,  with
wonderful  acumen,  in  her  lisping,  child-like  tone,  but  with
penetrating  scientific  arguments,  the  fallacies  of  those  as-
tronomers who  endeavor  to  defend  the  incandescent  theory
of  the  sun's  body.

This  youthful  ecstatic  affirmed  that  all  the  light  and

heat  in  the  universe  proceeded  from  the  great  Central
Spiritual  Sun,  and  was  reflected  from  thence  to  every  body
in  space,  according  to  its  size,  situation,  and  the  energy
of  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  forces  operating  between
suns,  satellites,  and  systems.

During  an  unbroken  system  of  communion,  extending
over  a  period  of  nearly  half  a  century,  between  the  author
of  these  pages  and  spirits  of  various  degrees — during  per-
ceptions of  angelic  spheres  observed  by  his  liberated  spirit
amongst  the  realms  of  the  wise  and  blest,  similar  testimony
to  the  existence  of  a  Deity  who  is  no  mystery  to  His  crea-
tures, has  been  rendered.

It  seems  strange,  and  not  in  the  order  of  the  Providen-
tial scheme,  that  the  one  sole  mystery  of  the  universe
should  be  the  Being  most  capable  of  originating  revela-
tion, namely,  a  First  Great  Cause.  But  has  this  Supreme
One  been  a  mystery  from  the  beginning  7  or  would  He
have  continued  so,  if  man,  in  his  egotism  and  pride,  had
not  flattered  himself  with  the  assumption  that  subordinate
beings,  tutelary  spirits,  and  even  specially  inspired  men,
were  the  real  Gods  of  the  Universe,  condescending  to  come
and  minister  in  person  to  humanity  ?  Did  not  the  first
men  of  the  earth,  fresh  in  their  primitive  inspiration  from
Deity,  rightly  apprehend  Him  in  the  beginning  7  Have
not  the  Prophets.  Seers,  Magians,  Mystics,  and  modern
Ecstatics,  ever  perceived  and  known  God  in  gleams  of  the
original  brightness,  dimmed  by  ages  of  materialism,  and
perverted  by  gloomy,  earth-made  theologies  7  Wherever
the  voices  of  the  angels  find  reverberating  echoes  in  human
inspiration,  there  this  Great  Mystery  of  God  is  solved  in
the  revealment  of  the  uncreated,  self-existent,  infinite,
and  eternal  Spiritual  Sun,  from  which  emanate,  and  to
which  return,  all  rays  of  life,  light,  heat,  germinative,
creative,  and  sustaining:  power.

40

Wherever  we  see  the  people  of  earth  straying  away  in
search  of  human  idols,  striving  to  discover  in  their  God
man-made,  man-shaped,  and  man-like  personalities ;
wherever  we  see  an  interested,  ignorant  and  selfish  priest-
hood, enslaved  by  their  own  passions  and  prejudices,  aim-
ing to  keep  the  people  enslaved  to  their  opinions — there
look  to  find  the  face  of  the  Infinite  veiled  in  mystery  ;  the
truths  of  Godhead,  natural  science  and  spiritual  inspira-
tion crowded  back  into  the  realms  of  mystery ;  and  mys-
tery, the  mother  of  all  abominations,  setting  up  idols  for
human  worship,  which  change  with  the  customs  of  the
age  and  the  fashion  of  the  hour.  To  .drown  the  voice  of
Spiritual  science,  and  that  reason  which  insists  that  the
most  obvious  existence  in  Creation  must  be  Creation's
Author,  the  epithets  of  ^'  Pagan,  Heathen,  Infidel,  Heretic,
Fire  Worshipper  and  Blasphemer "  have  been  shouted
through  the  highways  of  life's  common  places,  and  still
echo  in  our  ears  even  in  this  analytical  nineteenth  century  ;
for  the  rule  of  Mystery,  Babylon  the  Great,  The  Mother
OF  Harlots  and  Abominations  of  the  Earth,  is  not  yet  bro-
ken, and  until  it  is,  her  votaries  will  fight  for  her,  and  per-
ish soul  and  body  for  her ;  and  all  the  while  the  light  will
be  "  shining  in  the  darkness,  though  the  darkness  compre-
hendeth  it  not."

Man,  in  his  primitive  appearance  on  earth,  came  only
as  a  poor,  untutored  savage,  the  mere  form  of  the  being  he
was  to  become — only  a  prophecy  of  the  Lord  of  Creation
he  should  be.  As  he  emerged  from  savagism  to  the  dawn
of  an  intellectual  morning,  the  perception  of  his  descent
from  an  antecedent  sphere  of  spiritual  existence  possessed
his  memory,  and  a  perception  of  his  return  to  that  blest
state  of  purity  and  happiness  inspired  his  power  of  pre-
vision.

His  gradually  awakening  intellect  taught  him  to  analyze

41

and  understand  himself.  Casting  about  for  the  causes  of
existence,  the  supports  on  which  it  rested  and  the  aims
for  which  he  lived,  man  dedicated  all  his  earliest  powers
of  mind  to  religion.  Even  his  earliest  triumphs  in  the
arts  of  civilization  were  but  used  as  means  to  the  one  end.  Y
His  superb  temples  of  worship,  his  solemn  preparations
for  another  life,  and  his  colossal  monumental  records  of
his  religious  beliefs,  remain  almost  imperishable  evidences
of  his  deep  and  undivided  interest  in  the  problems  of  re-
ligion ;  whilst  of  his  social  and  commercial  pursuits,  only
the  most  fragmentary  and  unimportant  vestiges  can  be
found.  India,  Egypt,  Arabia,  the  recesses  of  the  mighty
Himalayas  and  the  giant  Koh  Kas,  the  lovely  vales  and
smiling  plains  of  Asia — vales  blooming  like  glimpses  of
the  fabled  Eden,  and  savage  wilds,  deserted  now,  desolate
and  ruined — all  bear  vf  itness  to  the  unquenchable  devotion
of  the  early  man  to  his  religious  belief ;  all  are  thickly
strewn  over  with  colossal  remains  of  that  stupendous
system  in  which  that  belief  found  expression.  The
burning  lands  of  the  Orient  are  one  vast  Bible  overwritten
with  distinct  asseverations  that  to  the  early  man  God  was
not  the  Unknowable,  and  religious  faith  was  no  mystery.
Whence  came  this  faith  if  not  from  man's  intuitive  knowl-  '
edge,  and  the  obvious  facts  of  creation  7  Sun,  moon,  stars,
the  constellated  glories  of  the  heavens,  their  eternal  order
and  their  majestic  march  through  infinity — these  were
scriptures  in  which  the  natural  instincts  of  an  unspoiled
nature  recognized  God's  own  writing,  and  interpreted  it
without  failure  or  effort.

The  ancient  man  did  not  vainly  exhaust  his  intellect  to
discover  God.  Untrammelled  by  creeds,  unfettered  by
priestcraft  and  unbiased  by  inherited  predjudices,  he  did
not  seek  God,  he  simply  found  him — knew  him  in  the  love
which  engende      life ;  the  wisdom  that  sustains   it ;  the

42

power  that  upholds  it — knew  him  in  the  sacred  flame,  which
is  heat;  the  splendor  of  light,  which  is  revelation.  He
discovered  the  reflection  of  his  dwelling-place  in  the
majesty  of  the  blazing  sun,  and  perceived  his  own  destiny
— ^God's  Providence  and  Nature's  profoundest  harmonies
— in  the  constellated  paths  of  the  starry  heavens,  and  the
movements  of  the  fiery  legions  of  space.

Priestcraft,  Kingcraft,  Artificial  Civilization,  with  their
long  train  of  crime  and  disease,  want  and  woe — an  over-
strained devotion  to  the  idols  of  ecclesiasticism  and  physi-
cal science,  have  alienated  the  soul  of  man  from  pure,
natural,  spiritual  religion,  interrupted  the  precious  com-
munion which  pure,'  spiritual  natures  alone  can  enjoy  with
angelic  spheres  of  existence,  and  driven  the  soul  ofi*  into
the  baneful  mysticisms  of  idolatrous  faiths  or  blank  ma-
terialism.

It  is  a  hopeful  and  significant  sign  to  behold  the  spiritual
standards  once  more  set  up  on  earth.  It  is  a  hopeful  and
significant  fact  to  note  how  the  best  of  the  modern  Seers
tend  towards  ancient  faith  in  the  Divine  Spiritual  Law  as
the  Author  and  Centre  of  being,  and  the  prophecy  of  a  bet-
ter, more  truthful,  just  and  reasonable  theology  is  continual-
ly renewing  itself  in  the  air,  as  the  lips  of  the  most  inspired
teachers  of  the  time  re-affirm  the  sublime  utterances  of
old  :  "  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  who  worship  him,  must
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."

43

•    SECTION  IV.

Ezekiel's   Wheel.

1.  2.  3.     4.   ;

5  •  ^,— ^

T'ill^S

m

xcrocosmos  Ascending,       -j

^,^^__\       Turning-Point  Libra.

(u\^  ^^X

8-  ^.  10-  11.  12.

Microcosnios  Descending.

Of  the  most  Ancient  Form  of  Worship — The  Astronomical
Religion,  or  the  Sahean  System — Solar  and  Astral  Gods.

The  shelves  of  any  ordinary  sized  library  could  be  en-
tirely filled  with  fragments  of  literature  concerning  the
worship  of  the  ancients,  and  the  peculiar  character  of  those
myths  which  have  been  preserved  from  the  remotest  days
of  antiquity,  and  now  underlie  all  the  present  systems  of
theological  belief  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that,  notwith-
standing the  vast  collection  of  writings  extant  on  this  sub-
ject, there  is  no  one  compendious  and  accessible  text-book
from  which  the  masses  generally  could  derive  reliable
information  and  assimilate  the  knowledge  thus  widely
diffused  ;  and  it  is  no  less  worthy  of  observation  that,
whilst  the  mythical  character  of  early  worship  is  stamped
with  unmistakable  fidelity  upon  every  form  of  modern  the-
ology, this  damaging  fact  seems  to  make  no  difference  in
the  idolatrous  veneration  with  which  the  modern  worship-

44

er  clings  to  the  items  of  his  faith ;  on  the  contrary,  whilst
the  evidence  accumulates  around  him,  that  the  ideas  to
which  he  renders  divine  homage  are  paraphrases  of  an-
cient fictions,  he  all  the  more  sturdily  battles  for  his  idol,
and  denounces  every  attempt  to  shake  the  authenticity  of
legends  which  he  translates  into  divine  revelations.

Perhaps  it  is  for  want  of  an  authentic  text-book ;  per-
haps because  the  literature  of  the  subject  is  too  widely
diffused  and  broken  up  into  too  many  scattered  fragments,
that  this  apathy  of  idolatry  prevails  so  universally,  and
that  the  common  sense  and  intelligence  of  the  nineteenth
century  is  contented  to  bow  down  with  purse  and  person
before  lifeless  husks  from  which  the  spirit  has  departed ;
the  husks  which  at  best  only  contained  in  their  original
form  the  spirit  of  an  impersonated  myth.

It  is  not  for  the  sake  of  converting  one  single  idolator
of  the  nineteenth  century  that  we  now  write.  It  is  not
with  the  desire  of  proving  to  a,ny  sincere  worshipper  of
the  name  of  Christ  that  he  is  adoring  the  Sun-God  of  the
ancients,  that  we  now  collect  the  torn  fragments  of  the
great  Osiric  body,  and  present  a  concrete,  though  necessa-
rily microscopic  view  of  the  original  structure.  When
the  idolatries  of  fire-worship  have  done  their  work,  their
perversions  will  die  the  natural  death  which  the  divine
order  of  the  universe  demands ;  until  that  time  arrives  we
write  for  the  truth's  sake  alone;  let  who  will  accept  or  re-
ject us.  Truth  is  ^^  the  Master's  word,"  which  unlocks  all
mysteries,  furnishes  the  clue  to  all  religious  beliefs,  under-
lies the  magical  history  of  the  race,  and  therefore  its  free
enunciation  is  demanded  in  this  work.

At  what  period  the  early  man  first  commenced  to  wor-
ship the  starry  host  of  heaven,  or  in  what  nation  the  germ
was  first  planted  of  that  stupendous  system  which  over-
laid the  earth  with  temples,  and  survived  all  the  wrecks

45

of  chance,  change,  and  time,  none  can  say.  We  find  the
manifestation  of  its  completeness  only  when  humanity  had
acquired  the  art  of  recording  its  opinons  in  picture  writ-
ing, symbolical  engravings,  hieroglyphical  and  alphabet-
ical Scriptures.

Traditions  come  wafted  down  the  ages  on  the  tongues
of  men  with  an  impress  as  authoritative  as  graven  Scrip-
tures; for,  ere  men  had  learned  to  record  their  thoughts,
they  depended  on  memory  for  their  preservation  ;  hence
they  cultivated  and  strengthened  this  faculty,  held  its  in-
tegrity sacred,  and  hence  the  perpetuity  and  universality
of  oral  traditions.

Tradition  affirms  that  when  the  mind  of  man  rose  out
of  the  lethargy  of  savagism  to  the  dawn  of  reason,  and
became  fired  with  all  those  anxious  inquisitions  into  the
nature  of  cause  and  effect  which  reason  prompts,  he  began
to  perceive  that  all  the  grand  machinery  of  nature  was
coincident  with  the  apparition  and  disappearance  of  the
resplendent  lights  which  spangled  the  canopy  of  the  over-
arching heavens.  The  God  whom  his  earliest  perceptions
recognized  in  the  majestic  Sun,  was  unquestionably  the
source  of  those  climactric  changes  which  formed  the  prin-
cipal theme  of  his  primal  studies.

To  cultivate  the  ground,  feed  and  protect  his  flocks,  and
determine  the  best  times  to  perform  the  simple  duties  of
agriculturist  and  herdsman,  it  became  necessary  to  study
the  succession  of  the  seasons,  and  consider  not  only  the
familiar  alternations  of  night  and  day,  but  the  equally  im-
portant order  which  marked  the  changes  in  tides  and  times,
together  with  all  the  variations  of  climate,  and  their  effects
in  heat  and  cold.

None  could  fail  to  observe  that  every  change  on  the  flice
of  nature  kept  step  with  the  succession  of  certain  solar
and  astral  phenomena.

46

From  the  early  dawn  of  these  perceptions,  up  to  the
maturity  of  the  stupendous  astronomical  religion,  man
learned  to  read  the  fiery  Scriptures  of  the  skies,  and  the
ever  mobile  face  of  nature,  with  a  profound  depth  of  un-
derstanding.

How  many  ages  it  required  to  outwork  a  complete  the-
ology from  the  book  of  nature  and  the  starry  heavens,  man
may  never  determine.

Thought  grows  fast  or  slowly,  according  to  the  amount
of  momentum  that  is  imparted  to  it  The  world  is  very
old  in  relation  to  that  succession  of  changes  we  call  time.

Millions  of  years  have  been  consumed  in  laying  down
the  rocky  walls  that  extend  from  the  circumference  to  the
interior  of  the  earth's  crust.  It  occupied  the  world  build-
ers untold  ages  to  develop  a  spear  of  moss,  or  a  tuft  of
lichen,  from  a  mass  of  primary  granite./^ Time  is  nothing
in  the  issues  of  divine  purposes^ a  second  or  a  billion  of
years  are  but  indices  on  the  dial-plates  which  mark  the
rounds  of  eternal  progress,  and  since  the  first  human  wor-
shipper veiled  his  adoring  eyes  in  the  passion  of  his  soul's
communion  with  the  Spirit  who  dwells  in  the  orbs  of
primal  light,  up  to  the  age  when  reverend  scholarly  men
were  set  apart  by  the  busy  multitude  to  watch  the  order  of
marching  worlds  from  the  high  towers  of  the  early  ''  epis-
copacy," many  successions  of  times,  seasons,  generations  and
ages  had  come  and  gone.  The  constellated  heavens  had
been  studied  out ;  charts  had  been  drawn ;  numerical
Bibles  written.  The  starry  legions  had  been  divided  into
geometrical  proportions,  and  their  motions  calculated  with
mathematical  precision.  Even  the  forward  movement  of
the  entire  solar  system  around  what  science  now  asserts
to  be  an  undiscovered  but  inevitable  centre,  had  been  per-
ceived, and  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  was  under-
stood.    The  whole  grand   scheme,    involving   the   awful

47

majesty  of  the  Sun-God,  the  mild  radiance  of  the  moon,
the  glory  of  the  fixed  stars,  the  erratic  motions  of  the  wan-
dering planets,  the  terrific  apparition  of  fiery  comets,  flash-
ing meteors,  and  the  deep  and  unfathomable  mystery  of  float-
ing nebulae — all  these,  no  less  than  their  influence  upon
the  fair,  green  earth,  with  its  lofty  mountains  and  shore-
less seas,  its  sombre  forests  and  quiet  vales,  its  half-savage,
half- divine  inhabitants — all  this  realm  of  power  and  mys-
tery, sublimity  and  littleness,  solemn  silence  and  rest-
less eloquence,  the  ancient  mind  discovered,  by  thousands
of  years  of  patient  and  untiring  study,  to  he  all  in  motion —
motion  of  one  continuous  and  correspondential  order — mo-
tion which  swept ''  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  all  that
in  them  is,"  through  regions  of  space,  unknown  and  unknow-
able, but  still  defined  to  the  piercing  intelligence  of  the
astronomical  priesthood  as  one  grand  and  interblended
universe  of  Love,  Wisdom  and  Power.

From  the  results  of  our  forefathers'  sublime  discoveries,
from  the  mass  of  varied  records  they  have  left,  and  the
fragmentary  collections  that  we  have  gathered  up  of  their
wisdom,  we  give  in  the  following  pages  a  brief  and  most
imperfect  compendium  of  their  religious  belief  It  is  only
necessary  to  consult  the  diagram  of  the  heavens,  as  mapped
out  on  any  common  almanac,  school  atlas  or  celestial  globe,
to  perceive  that  the  apparent  path  of  the  sun  is  laid  down
in  an  imaginary  waving  track  called  the  Ecliptic.  This
path  (assuming,  as  did  the  ancients,  that  the  sun  moves
around  the  earth),  crosses  the  equator  or  fanciful  belt  en-
circling the  earth  at  two  periods  of  time,  which,  by  the
relative  positions  of  the  sun  towards  the  earth,  divide  up
the  solar  year  into  winter  and  summer,  and  place  the  sun
in  the  aspect  of  south  and  north  towards  the  earth.

The  path  of  the  sun  on  the  Ecliptic  was  defined  by  an-
cient astronomers  between  two  lines,  parallel  to  each  other,

48

»
sixteen  degrees   apart,   the    sun's   march  being   between

them.

This  space  was,  and  still  is,  called  the  Zodiac.  The
Zodiacal  circle  was  divived  into  three  hundred  and  sixtj^
degrees,  these  again  into  four  right  angles  of  ninety
degrees  each,  and  the  whole  into  twelve  signs^  consisting
each  of  thirty  degrees.

These  signs  were,  with  the  ancients,  arbitrary  divisions
of  certain  groups  of  stars  called  constellations.  They  were
named  chiefly  in  accordance  with  the  climactric  changes
transpiring  on  the  earth  at  the  period  when  the  sun  was
passing  through  them.

In  January,  now  called  the  first  month  ol  the  year,  the
sun  passed  through  the  constellation  or  group  of  stars
called,  from  the  season  of  storms  and  heavy  rains  that  then
prevail,  Aquarius,  the  washer,  or  the  Greek  Baptizo.  In
February  he  enters  the  sign  of  Pices,  or  the  Fishes,  a  time
of  famine,  dearth,  and  distress,  when  the  fruits  and  roots
are  consumed,  and  little  is  left  to  the  primitive  man  but  the
spoil  of  the  accumulating  waters.

In  March  the  sun  enters  Aries  the  Lamb,  significant
of  the  young  and  tender  products  of  the  approaching
Spring.  In  April,  when  the  energy  of  the  agricultural  sea-
son is  to  be  typified,  the  constellated  group  through  which
the  sun  passes  is  called  the  Bull.  In  May,  when  Summer
and  Winter  are.  reconciled,  and  the  sweet  genial  period  of
flowers  and  bloom  seem  to  knit  up  the  opposing  seasons
in  fraternal  harmony,  the  constellation  then  prevailing  is
called  Gemini,  or  the  Twins.  In  June,  when  the  sun  ap-
pears to  undergo  a  retrograde  motion  significantly  explained
in  astronomy,  the  sign  in  the  ascendant  is  termed  Can-
cer, or  the  Crab.  In  July,  the  raging  heat  of  the  burning
Summer  suggests  for  the  ascendant  sign  the  significant  ti-
tle of  the  Lion,  whilst  the  Virgin  of  August,  the  Scales  of

49

September,  the  Scorpion  or  great  Dragon  of  October,  the
Archer  of  November,  and  the  Goat  of  December,  are  sup-
posed to  have  somewhat  more  direct  reference  to  fancied
resemblances  in  the  shapes  of  the  constellations,  than  for
the  physical  correspondence  between  their  names  and  the
climactric  conditions  of  the  earth.  Besides  these  subdivi-
sions of  the  Zodiacal  path,  there  were  two  other  methods
of  marking  the  astronomical  year.  The  first  was  the  divi-
sion of  the  whole  twelve  months  into  four  seasons,  each  of
which  contained  ninety  degrees,  and  were  symbolized  by
a  special  emblem,  as — an  Ox,  a  Lion,  an  Eagle,  and  a  Man.
The  Ox  denoted  the  agricultural  pursuits  of  the  Spring,
the  Lion  the  fierce  heat  of  Summer,  the  Eagle  was  adopt-
ed for  certain  symbolical  reasons  as  a  substitute  for  the
Scorpion  of  Autumn,  and  the  Man  was  still  retained  as
the  Winter  emblem  of  Aquarius,  or  the  water-bearer.  Add-
ed to  this  quaternial  division  of  the  year,  were  the  two
primal  and  opposing  conditions  of  Summer  and  Winter,
always  held  significant  by  the  ancients  of  good  and  evil
principles.

The  most  solemn  and  important  periods  of  the  astro-
nomical year  were,  when  the  Sun  descended  from  the  North
at  the  close  of  Summer,  to  cross  the  plane  of  the  autumnal
equinox,  and  that  when  he  ascended  from  the  South  in  the
Spring  to  crossthe  vernal  equinox.  The  first  motion  herald-
ed death  to  the  great  light-bringer,  famine  and  desolation  to
the  earth  ;  the  second  inaugurated  the  rejuvenating  power  of
his  triumph  and  glory  in  the  promise  of  Spring,  and  the
fulfillment  of  Summer.

Slight  as  seems  this  foundation  for  a  theology,  it  is  on
this  only,  that  the  superstructure  of  every  theological  sys-
tem of  the  earth  has  been  upreared.

Besides  the  general  titles  assigned  to  the  twelve  Zodiacal
constellations,  each  separate  star  visible  in  the  heavens.

50

had  its  name,  and  was  supposed  to  exert  an  influence  pe-
culiar to  itself  for  good  or  evil  upon  mankind.  Thus  all
the  stars  through  the  plane  of,  or  near  which  the  sun
passed  in  Summer  were  deemed  to  be  beneficent  and  in
harmony  with  the  celestial  traveller  of  the  skies,  favorable
also  to  the  inhabitants  of  earth  to  whom  they  aided  in  dis-
pensing seed-time  and  harvest,  fruits,  flowers,  and  all  man-
ner of  blessings.  On  the  other  hand,  the  stars  of  Winter
were  assumed  to  exert  a  malignant  influence  not  only  on
the  mighty  Sun-God,  whom  they  opposed,  but  also  upon
man  and  his  planet,  causing  storms,  tempests,  pestilence,
and  famine.  By  these  malignant  astral  influences  the  gra-
cious Sun  was  shorn  of  his  heat-dispensing  powers,  and  the
hours  of  his  illumination  upon  earth  were  shortened.  The
majesty  of  Day  was  so  obscured  by  the  hosts  of  malignant
Spirits,  supposed  to  inhabit  the  wintry  stars,  that  he  vainly
strove  to  contend  against  them.  On  the  opposing  spiritual
forces  inhabiting  the  Summer  and  Winter  constellations,
was  founded  the  apocalyptic  legend  of  "  the  tvar  in  Heaven^''
and  endless  flights  of  visionary  astronomical  myths.

In  this  celestial  scheme  every  star  became  a  symbol  of
some  good  or  evil  genius ;  every  constellation  was  a  realm,
peopled  by  innumerable  legions  of  beneficent  or  malig-
nant angels,  and  the  entire  field  of  the  sidereal  heavens
was  madie  the  battle-ground  of  infinite  squadrons  of  oppos-
ing angelic  influences.

On  earth  the  solar  year  was  mapped  out  into  grand  sub-
divisions of  time,  in  which  the  impersonated  stars  and  their
rival  influences  enacted  a  mighty  drama  with  the  Sun-God
for  its  hero,  the  inhabitants  of  earth  for  an  adoring  audi-
ence, and  a  royal  astronomical  priesthood  for  its  historians.

These  ancient  priests,  called  from  their  custom  of
studying  the  face  of  the  heavens  from  high  watch  towers.
Episcopacy — became    in    ages    of  practice    familiar    with

51

every  phase  of  the  sublime  epic  they  wrote.  They  occu-
pied centuries  in  correcting  their  calendars  and  amending
their  Zodiacal  charts.  They  invented  thousands  and  tens
of  thousands  of  allegorical  fables  descriptive  of  the  scenes^
iacidents,  and  angelic  personages  of  the  celestial  drama.
They  varied  names,  images,  and  symbols  to  suit  the  pro-
gress of  ideas  in  revolving  ages,  and  invested  their  astral
Gods  with  all  the  attributes  which  fervent  Oriental  fancy
could  suggest.

As  an  example  of  the  leading  ideas  which  prevailed
throughout  this  stupendous  system,  it  is  proper  to  recite
some  of  the  main  features  which  clustered  around  the  sup-
postitious  history  of  the  magnificent  Sun-God.  When  this
light-bringing  luminary  entered  the  sign  of  Aries,  or  the
Lamb,  in  March,  he  was  assumed  to  have  crossed  the  ver-
nal equinox  and  become  the  Redeemer  of  the  world  from
the  sufferings  and  privations  of  Winter.  Then  the  earth
and  its  inhabitants  rejoiced  greatly.  The  young  Saviour
had  entered  upon  his  divine  mission,  bringing  the  earth
out  of  darkness  into  light ;  miraculously  healing  the  sick  ;
feeding  starving  multitudes;  and  filling  the  world  with
blessing.

This  triumphant  career  culminated  to  its  fullest  glory
between  the  months  of  July  and  August,  which,  in  the
figurative  language  of  the  astronomical  religion,  was
sometimes  called  the  betrothal  of  the  Virgin, — sometimes
the  marriage  feast  of  the  Lion,  of  July,  and  the  Virgin,  of
August.  This  was  the  season  of  the  grape  harvest,  the
time  when  the  Sun  converted,  by  his  radiant  heat,  the
waters  which  had  desolated  the  earth  in  Winter,  into  the
luscious  wine  of  the  vintage.  Then  it  was,  as  the  ancient
astronomers  proclaimed,  that  the  great  miracle  of  the  solar
year  was  performed,  and  the  Sun  manifested  forth  his  most
triumphant  glory.

52

From  thence  the  constellation  of  the  Scales,  or  the  Bal-
ances, seemed  for  a  time  to  maintain  the  celestial  hero  in  a
just  and  even  path  ;  his  miraculous  power  and  life-giving
presence  was  hailed  with  feasts  and  rejoicings,  which  lasted
until  the  fatal  period  when  the  Great  Dragon  of  the  Skies,
the  mighty  Scorpio,  of  October,  appears  in  the  ascendant.
Then  sorrow  and  lamentation  possessed  the  earth.  The
Saviour  of  men  must  cross  the  autumnal  equinox,  and  from
thence  descend  into  the  South — the  Hades,  Acheron,  Sheol,
Hell,  Pit,  of  many  ancient  nations.

To  announce  the  dire  calamity  at  hand,  the  Dragon,  of
October,  is  preceded  by  a  bright  and  glorious  star  called  in
the  spring  Vesper,  or  the  evening  star ;  in  Autumn,  Luci-
fer, or  ''  the  Son  of  the  morning."  In  the  sweet  vernal
season,  this  splendid  luminary  is  the  herald  of  Summer,
the  brightest  and  most  beautiful  of  all  the  heavenly  host.
Then  it  appears  high  in  the  heavens,  and  occupies  what  is
significantly  called  the  seat  of  pride.  Appearing  in  the
boding  season  of  Autumn,  low  on  the  edge  of  the  horizon,  and
shining  only  in  the  early  dawn,  its  name  is  changed  with  its
station — it  is  now  the  fallen  Angel ;  the  mighty  rebel,
whom,  seduced  by  pride  and  vaulting  ambition,  has  been
dethroned  and  cast  down  to  the  ominous  depths  of  the
lowest  hell."  Transformed  into  Lucifer,  ''  Son  of  the  morn-
ing," this  star  becomes  the  herald  of  the  darkest  ill  that
can  beset  the  path  of  the  celestial  Saviour.  As  it  appears
in  advance  of  the  great  constellation  of  the  Dragon,  it  is
assumed  to  be  the  rebel  Angel  that  incited  ^'  a  third  of
the  host  of  heaven  to  disobedience  ;"  hence  it  is  often  con-
founded with  the  Dragon,  of  which,  however,  it  is  only  the
prototype.

The  constellation  of  the  great  Dragon  is  the  most  pow-
erful of  the  entire  Zodiac.  From  its  peculiar  form,  and  the
immense  group  of  shining  stars  that  extend  in  the  convo-

53

lutions  of  its  resplendent  train,  it  has  been  called  the  Starry
Serpent  of  the  Skies.  Its  attendant  luminaries  are  as-
sumed to  be  that  third  of  the  host  of  heaven  seduced  bj
the  rebel  Angel  from  their  allegiance,  and  its  position  as
the  inaugural  constellation  of  the  much-dreaded  wintry
season  impresses  upon  it  the  ominous  name  of  Satan,  or
the  adversary.  And  thus,  from  the  position  of  a  group  of
stars,  and  their  apparition  in  the  season  deemed  fatal  to  the
prosperity  of  earth  and  its  inhabitants,  has  arisen  that
stupendous  myth,  that  legend  of  world-wide  fear,  the
suppostitious  existence  of  an  incarnate  spirit  of  evil ;  the
Satan  of  the  Persians  ;  the  Typhon  of  Egypt ;  the  Pluto
of  the  Greeks  ;  the  old  Serpent  of  the  Jews  ;  and  the  most
popular  of  all  objects  of  alternate  fear  and  worship,  the
Devil  of  the  enlightened  Christians.

Following  up  the  astronomical  legend,  we  find  the  great
Dragon  of  October  waging  its  annual  war  against  the  Sun-
God.  By  the  influence  of  its  leader,  Lucifer,  the  celestial
Sun-God  has  already  been  put  to  death  in  his  crossification
of  the  autumnal  equinox ;  from  thence  he  is  cast  down
into  the  power  of  the  two  evil  months — November  and
December — who  are  crucified  with  him  on  the  autumnal
equinox.

It  is  just  at  midwinter  when  Capricorn,  the  goat — signi-
fying in  ancient  mythical  language  the  renewer  of  life —
is  in  the  ascendant,  that  the  Sun-God  reappears  as  a  new-
born babe.

In  the  fanciful  imaginings  of  the  astronomical  historians,
the  cluster  of  stars  which  appear  in  the  midwinter  sky
bear  a  resemblance  to  a  manger  or  stable,  whilst  the  fertile
minds  of  the  ''  episcopacy  "  discover  the  reappearance  of  the
Virgin  of  Summer,  with  her  companion,  Bootes,  or  the  con-
stellation called  Joseppe,  or  J  oseph.  For  three  days  at  mid-
winter the  feeble  radiance  of  the  Sun  appears  to  remain  sta-

54

tionary,  yet  so  greatly  obscured,  that  the  legend  declares
he  descends  to  the  nethermost  parts  of  the  universe  and  is
lost  to  sight.

In  the  Greek  theology  this  three  days  of  solar  obscura-
tion is  accounted  for  by  the  descent  of  Orpheus  into  the
realms  of  Pluto,  where,  by  the  magic  of  his  sweet  music,
he  is  supposed  to  rescue  lost  souls  from  the  very  jaws  of
Hades.  In  the  astronomical  legend  the  vanished  God  is
represented  as  going  on  a  mission  of  mercy,  to  illuminate
with  his  radiance  the  darkened  souls  who  have  been  held
captive  in  the  realms  of  perdition.  At  length,  on  the  25th
day  of  December,  he  reappears,  and  amidst  the  figurative
paraphernalia  of  constellated  stars  then  in  the  ascendant,
he  is  declared  to  have  been  born  in  a  manger  through  the
maternity  of  the  Zodiacal  Virgin.

The  women  who  have  wept  for  Tammuz,  the  Syrian
Sun-God,  the  mourners  who  have  lamented  with  Isis  for
the  Egyptian  Osiris,  the  Greeks  who  have  wandered  with
Ceres  in  search  of  the  lost  Proserpina,  the  devotees  who
have  wailed  for  the  slain  Chrishna,  one  of  the  Sun-Gods  of
the  Hindoos,  and  the  Marys  who  weep  at  the  sepul-
chre for  the  Christ  of  the  Jews,  all  the  nations  of  antiqui-
ty, throughout  the  Orient — each  of  whom,  under  many
names  and  in  many  forms,  have  adored  the  Sun-God,  and
believed  in  his  annual  birth,  life,  miracles,  death  and  resur-
rection— all  have  united  to  celebrate  the  new  birth  of  their
idol  on  the  25th  of  December,  the  period  at  which  the
solar  orb  actually  passes  through  the  constellation  of  the
Zodiacal  sign  Capricorn,  or  "  the  renewer  of  life."  After
the  25th  of  December,  the  legend  again  loses  sight  of  its
new-born  Saviour.

In  all  Eastern  theogonies  Egypt  is  represented  as  the
land  of  darkness  and  the  symbol  of  obscurity.  During  the
prevalence  of  the  two  constellations  of  January  and  Feb-

65

raary,  it  is  supposed  that  antagonistic  influences  threaten
the  young  child's  life.  The  royal  power  of  Winter,  with
its  storms  and  tempests,  is  in  the  ascendant,  hence  the
world's  Redeemer  is  in  danger  from  a  mighty  King.  To
avert  the  evil,  the  young  child  is  carried  by  stealth  to
the  land  of  Egypt ;  there  in  concealment  he  remains  until
the  season  of  danger  is  passed,  when  he  re-crosses  the  equa-
tor at  the  vernal  equinox,  ascending  from  the  southern
depth  of  Egypt  into  the  light  and  glory  of  an  acknowl-
edged worker  of  miracles.  Again  the  earth  rejoices  in  the
presence  of  the  young  Lamb  of  spring,  who  ^'  taketh  away
the  sins  of  the  world,"  and  redeems  it  from  the  famine,
desolation  and  evils  of  the  past  Winter.  From  this  time
forth  the  Sun-God  proclaims  ''peace  on  earth,  and  good  will
to  men,"  and  fulfills  his  promise  in  miracles  of  healing,
feeding  the  hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  and  bringing  life
and  plenty  to  all.

On  taking  a  retrospective  glance  at  this  famous  myth,
it  will  be  seen  that  the  Sun-God  is  its  central  figure,  and
his  passage  through  the  constellated  stars  of  the  Zodiac,
together  with  the  peculiar  changes  of  atmosphere,  climate,
and  natural  productions  effected  on  earth  by  solar  and  as-
tral configurations,  form  the  connected  woof  of  the  celestial
drama.

Next  in  impartance  in  the  mythical  history,  is  the  im-
personation of  the  Virgin  Mother  of  the  Sun-God.  This
constellated  figure  is  ass5umed  to  hold  in  her  hand  a  sprig,
flower,  or  fruit,  which  she  extends  in  the  attitude  of  invi-
tation to  a  minor  constellation,  named  Bootes,  Jo-seppe  or
Joseph,  who  from  its  proximity  to  the  Virgin  of  Summer,
is  sometimes  impersonated  as  her  betrothed,  sometimes  as
the  Father  of  men,  Adam,  yielding  to  the  seductions  of
Eve,  tempting  him  by  the  extended  fruit  she  holds  in
her  hand.     The  next,  and  not  least  important  figure  in  the

56

legend,  is  the  impersonation  of  the  evening  star  of  Spring,
transformed  from  an  angel  of  light  into  Lucifer,  the  leader
of  the  rebel  hosts,  and  the  morning  star  of  Autumn.

This  evil  star  is  followed  by  another  important  actor  in
the  Astral  Drama,  namely,  the  great  Dragon,  the  antago-
nistic power  of  all  systems,  by  whom  the  beneficent  Sun-
God  is  put  to  death  on  the  cross  of  the  autumnal  equinox ;
crucified  between  the  two  evil  wintry  constellations  pre-
vailing in  November  and  December.  According  to  an  an-
cient Sabean  tradition,  one  of  these  evil  angels,  symbolized
by  the  Goat  of  December,  repented  him  of  the  wrong  done
to  the  sinless  God  who  was  crucified  with  him,  hence  he
becomes  at  first  the  hoary  sign  of  Winter,  the  Goat,  who
participates  in  the  death  of  the  beloved  Sun,  and  then  the
friend  of  the  dying  God,  sheltering  him  in  his  manger,  and
protecting  the  fruitful  Virgin  in  her  hour  of  parturition.
This  phase  of  the  legend,  like  thousands  of  others,  is  doubt-
less an  attempt  to  reconcile  the  antagonistic  characteristics
of  the  wintry  sign,  during  which  the  Sun  is  lost,  with  the
favorable  aspect  of  the  same  constellation  in  the  last  part
of  his  month  of  power,  when  he  is  represented  as  ushering
the  new-born  God  into  being,  under  the  title  of  the  re-
newer  of  life.

Endless  are  the  fantasies  of  this  kind  interwoven  with
the  Zodiacal  legend.  The  discoveries  of  each  succeeding  age
afforded  to  the  astronomical  priesthood  a  boundless  field
for  the  exercise  of  their  favorite  method  of  symbolical  ex-
pression, thus,  whilst  we  always  find  the  main  ideas  of  the
scheme  preserved  intact,  the  divergent  branches  of  ideality
which  spring  forth  from  the  parent  root  are  in  truth  a  re-
alization of  the  parable  of  the  mustard  seed  of  the  Jewish
Scriptures.  In  the  paraphrase  of  the  Christian  history  of
the  Sun-God,  the  writers  represent  one  of  the  thieves  cru-
cified with  the  Saviour  of  mankind  as  becoming  penitent

57

at  the  last  dread  hour  of  death — Jesus,  in  allusion  to  his
approaching  new  birth,  answers  him,  ''  to-day  shalt  thou  he
with  me  in  Paradise^  This  is  a  highly  ingenious  and
creditable  mode  of  disposing  of  the  difficulty  which  ancient
astronomers  experienced  in  representing  the  constellation
of  December  at  once  antagonistic  and  favorable  to  the
dying  God.  The  Capricorn  of  Winter  shares  the  Sun-God's
evil  fate,  but  becomes  favorable  to  him  in  the  hour  of  his
new  birth  in  "  Paradise."  We  have  now  brought  the
legend  up  to  that  point  when  it  is  to  recommence  with  the
renewal  of  the  Zodiacal  history.

The  Sun  of  righteousness  is  now  to  be  re-born  in  the
stable  of  the  Goat,  through  the  maternity  of  the  immaculate
Virgin,  and  thus  the  light  of  the  world,  the  Lamb  of  Spring,
the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  good  master  of  the  twelve
Zodiacal  Apostles,  is  ever  sacrificed,  that  he  may  take  away
the  sins  of  the  world,  and  ever  restored  to  life,  that  all
may  have  hope  of  immortality  in  his  resurrection,  etc.,
etc.,  etc.

It  would  indeed  be  "  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit"  to
attempt  to  discover  the  exact  order  in  which  the  antique
mind  first  clothed  the  starry  heavens  with  these  fantastic
symbolisms,  and  yet  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  exoteric
meaning  of  which  we  have  given  a  brief  sketch,  is  the  all
of  this  ancient  and  most  wonderful  faith.  Later  on  in  this
volume  we  shall  see  that  every  symbol  has  a  correspond-
ential  spiritual  meaning,  and  that  the  esoteric  philosophy
veiled  under  this  mass  of  symbolism  is  the  real  heart  of  its
religious  significance.  These  explanations,  however,  we
must  reserve  for  the  present.  How  the  ancients  ultimate-
ly evolved  an  exoteric  scheme  from  the  external  face  of
nature  and  its  correspondential  relations  to  the  spangled
heavens,  can  be  no  marvel  to  those  who  will  consider  their
wisest  and  best  minds  as  devoted,  during  the  course  of  thou-

58

sands  of  years,  to  this  one  grand  field  of  observation.  The
origin,  growth,  and  perfection  of  such  a  system  is  far  less
problematical  than  is  the  conduct  of  modern  theologians  in
reference  to  it.  So  long  as  the  famous  astronomical  reli-
gion was  practiced  and  taught  amongst  those  nations  whom
Christians  contemptuously  denominate  '^  the  heathen,"  it
was  denounced  by  them  as  the  vilest  of  idolatries,  but  at
the  point  where  they  attempt  to  build  up  a  theology  of
their  own^  they  first  begin  by  stealing  the  astronomical
myth,  then  transpose  its  origin  to  a  far  later  date,  re-
christen  its  personages,  locate  them  in  fresh  birth-places,
declare  them  to  be  genuine  personalities,  invest  them  with
the  most  sacred  names  and  attributes,  fall  down  and  wor-
ship them,  and  then  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Most  High
God  as  a  witness  to  the  credibility  of  their  audacious  fic-
tions.

In  consideration  of  the  vast  and  cumulative  mass  of  tes-
timony which  the  discoveries  of  archaeology  and  philology
supply  us  with,  concerning  the  foundation  of  all  theolog-
ical systems,  the  idolatry  ot  the  nineteenth  century  puts  to
shame  the  devotion  of  humanity's  infancy  to  myth  and
mysticism.

The  antique  man  would  blush  for  the  mendacity  of  the
modern  Priesthood,  who  not  only  steal  the  images  of  their
forefathers'  creation,  but,  re-clothing  them  with  the  tinsel
and  varnish  of  ecclesiastical  trumpery,  set  them  up  in
shrines  to  worship  as  the  legitimate  offspring  of  divine  in-
spiration.

With  those  who  have  dared  to  dispute  the  authenticity
of  these  monstrous  fabrications,  the  Christian  world  has
ofiered  no  other  arguments  than  fire  and  sword,  torture  and
denunciation ;  and  as  the  culminating  point  of  the  mon-
strous wrong  which  modern  Priestcraft  has  perpetrated  on
the  people,  by  foisting  on  them  the  myths  of  antiquity  as

59

genuine  subjects  for  worship,  it  hesitates  not  to  affix  the
iwiul  name  of  that  God  who  is  a  Spirit^  not  only,  as  above
stated,  in  witness  of  their  blasphemous  plagiarisms,  but  as
in  actual  participator  in  a  Drama  which,  if  removed  from
the  realm  of  myth  to  actuality,  would  subvert  every  law  of
reason,  decency,  justice,  or  morality,  that  has  ever  been
promulgated  since  time  began.

We  commenced  this  section  by  affirming  that  if  all  the
fragments  that  have  been  written  on  the  history  of  the
3un-God  and  the  order  of  the  astronomical  religion  were
gathered  together,  they  would  fill  a  library.

Our  only  regret  is,  that  the  present  hour  does  not  fur-
uish  us  with  the  opportunity  to  give  to  the  world  a  thorough
but  compendious  aggregation  of  these  severed  fragments  in
one  concrete  body  of  testimony.  We  can  only  glance  at
them  now  ;  but  we  may  not  altogether  omit  to  notice  them,
for,  ere  we  can  describe  the  origin,  progress  and  develop-
ment of  the  spiritual  idea  of  which  Art  Magic  is,  in  part,
the  external  form,  we  must  give  the  outlines  of  that  reli-
gious system  in  which  the  human  spirit  took  shape,  as  in  a
matrix ;  in  which  its  conceptions  were  first  unfolded,  and
from  which  its  aspirations  radiated  forth  in  the  insatiate
demand  for  spiritual  bread.  At  this  present  writing,  we
only  feel  justified  in  raising  the  veil  sufficiently  to  show
the  first  point  of  contact  between  God  and  Man,  the  Cre-
ator and  the  Creature,  Religion  the  Body,  and  Spiritualism
the  Soul  of  the  Universe  ;  but  we  reserve  to  ourselves  the
duty  (God  inspiring  and  mortal  span  of  life  permitting)  of
inscribing  a  volume  in  the  future,  wherein  shall  be  shown,
in  its  completeness,  how  the  Teraphim  of  the  ancients  were
fashioned,  and  how  the  moderns  have  stolen  and  worshipped
them :  when,  and  in  what  mode,  ideas  descended  to  man
in  the  past  from  the  starry  heavens,  and  in  what  absurd
perversions  the  Priesthood  of  the  present  endeavor  to  plant

60

those  ideas  in  divine  soil,  until  the  abomination  of  deso
lation  sits  in  the  holy  places  of  human  thought,  and  scien
tific,  reasoning  men,  and  pious,  pure-minded  women,  wor
ship  a  God  whose  example,  if  imitated,  would  fill  the  eartl
with  monsters  of  injustice,  impurity  and  wickedness.

v:

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  IV.

Showing  the  Nations  of  Antiquity  that  have  worshippec
the  Sun-God  as  an  Impersonation^  and  accepted  hii
history  as  displayed  in  the  astronomical  order  oj
the  Starry  Heavens.

The  Hindoos — the  oldest  nation  that  possesses  scriptura"
as  well  as  monumental  records,  dating  back  to  the  highesi
antiquity,  even  to  pre-historic  ages — believed  in  one  Su-
preme Omnific  Central  Source  of  Being,  and  from  Him
descending  emanations  corresponding  in  many  respects  tc
the  mythical  personages  of  the  astronomical  religion.

The  biographies  of  two  of  their  principal  Avatars  or  in-
carnated God-men,  Chrishna  and  Buddha  Sakia,  are  closelj
accordant  with  the  history  of  the  Sun-God.  The  births  oi
these  Avatars  through  the  motherhood  of  a  pure  Virgin,
their  lives  in  infancy  threatened  by  a  vengeful  king,
their  flight  and  concealment  in  Egypt,  their  return  to  work
miracles,  save,  heal  and  redeem  the  world,  suffer  persecu-
tion, a  violent  death,  a  descent  into  Hell,  and  a  reappear-
ance as  a  new-born  Saviour,  are  all  items  of  the  Sun-God's
history,  which  have  already  been  recited,  and  maintain  in
every  detail  the  correspondence  between  the  Hindoo  faith
and  the  Sabean  system.  The  feasts,  fasts,  seasons  of  la-
mentation and  rejoicing,  the  reverence  paid  to  fiire,  flame,
heat,  light,  and  even  the  minutest  details  of  ceremonial
rites  practiced  in  the  most  ancient  astronomical  worship,
are  scattered  through  the  varying  forms  of  Hindoo  theolo-

61

^y,  until  the  parity  of  the  two  systems  cannot  be  ques-
tioned. An  equally  faithful  adherence  to  the  Sabean
legend  is  to  be  found  in  the  story  of  the  Indian  Dyonisius,
mbsequently  repeated  in  Egypt,  and  forming  the  basis  of
the  Osiric  legend.

Egypt  taught  the  Sun-God's  history,  and  that  in  a  series
3f  myths  and  mysteries  still  more  elaborate  than  those  of
[ndia.

The  stories  of  Osiris,  Isis,  Horus  and  Typhon,  are  di-
cect  transcripts  of  the  astronomical  scheme.  The  myths
)f  the  Gods  Zulis  and  Memnon,  the  worship  of  Heliopolis,
the  gorgeous  order  of  the  famous  mysteries,  and  the  mythi-
3al  personages  scattered  throughout  the  wonderful  woof  of
Egyptian  Theogony,  are  but  elaborations  of  the  Zodiacal
[able,  and  the  worship  of  the  powers  of  nature.

The  sublime  system  of  Zoroaster  recites  the  history  of
the  8un-God  in  that  of  Mithra,  finds  in  Arimanes,  the
^reat  Dragon  of  the  skies,  and  in  all  the  sacred  times  and
reasons,  ceremonials  and  traditions,  a  complete  transcript
3f  the  astronomical  religion.

The  Chaldeans,  Ethiopians,  Phoenicians  and  the  most
settled  of  the  Arabian  tribes,  taught  the  same  basic  idea  in
their  varied  systems  of  worship.

The  disinterred  ruins  of  the  once  mighty  city  of  Nine-
veh, is  one  complete  inscription  of  the  Sun-God's  history
and  worship.

The  most  ingenious  and  varied  symbolisms  o±  Astral  and
Solar  worship,  speak  in  unmistakable  tones  of  evidence
from  the  magnificent  remains  of  Babylon,  from  the  ruins
3f  Tadmor  in  the  Desert,  and  in  innumerable  groups  of
once  famous,  though  now  unknown,  vestiges  of  human  habi-
tation, scattered  throughout  Central  Asia.  Even  the  Trog-
lodyte remains  bear  witness  to  the  prevalence  of  Solar
worship,  in  rude  carvings,  and. grotesque  imitations  of  the
heavenly  bodies.

62

From  the  ruins  profusely  scattered  throughout  Asi^
Minor,  from  the  land  of  the  Phascanna,,  Iberians,  Alban
ians,  Phrygians  and  lonians,  the  author  of  this  work  haj
collected  an  immense  number  of  photographic  representa
tions  of  planetary  and  Solar  worship.

The  Scythian  nations  generally  worship  fire,  and  pre
serve  traditions  of  a  crucified  Sun-God.  They  celebrate
the  Sun's  birthday  on  the  25th  of  December,  and  amongsi
some  tribes  of  the  Tartars  the  author  has  attended  al
the  festal  ceremonies  described  as  appertaining  to  the  as-
tronomical religion.

The  religions  of  China  and  Japan  were  originally  found-
ed on  the  mythical  history  of  the  Sun-God.  Many  addi-
tions and  interpolations  upon  the  basic  legend,  hav(
obtained  in  Chinese  and  Japanese  worship,  but  the  founda-
tion is  unique,  and  the  feasts,  ceremonial  rites,  and  seasons
of  observance,  all  prove  the  parity  of  worship  amongsi
these  people,  with  the  Sabean  system.

In  the  Islands  of  Ceylon,  Java,  the  Phillipine  and  Mo-
luccas, various  forms  of  Solar  and  Astral  worship  have  ex-
isted for  ages.

The  Druidical  system  of  worship,  though  largely  inter-
spersed with  other  ideas,  to  be  hereafter  described,  was
firmly  planted  on  the  Sabean  system,  and  recognized  a
Sun-God  Mediator  with  a  complete  Zodiacal  history  in  the
incarnated  deity  they  called  Hesus.

The  entire  of  the  splendid  imagery  of  Grecian  and  Ro-
man mythology  was  but  a  paraphrase  of  Egyptian  Solar
worship,  enlarged,  embellished,  and  beautified  by  the  poetic
mentality  of  Greece  and  Rome.

The  idea  of  the  Great  Spiritual  Sun  of  the  ancients,  the
unknown  and  unknowable,  finds  its  perfect  corresponden  ce
in  the  Greek  Zeus — the  God  who  divells  alone^  and  from
whom  proceed,  as  subordinate  emanations,  all  the  imper-
sonated powers  of  nature,  planetary  and  astral  spirits,  whc

63

igure   in    the

famous  Pantheon.  Apollo,  Mercury,  or
lermes, — Bacchus,  Prometheus,  and  Esculapius  were  Sun-
jrods,  Mediators,  Saviours  ;  Ceres,  Proserpina  and  Pluto
3layed  their  special  parts  in  the  Astral  Drama,  but  all  de-
rive their  names  and  histories  from  the  same  source.
Hindoos,  Egyptians,  Arabians,  Parsees,  Greeks,  and  Ro-
nans,  all  drank  at  the  same  celestial  fountain,  and  only
varied  their  rites,  ceremonials,  names,  and  figures  to  suit
he  ideality  of  the  land  whose  age  or  climactric  influence
ietermined  their  intelligence.

The  Jews,  whose  records  of  war,  bloodshed,  violence,
aws,  customs,  dresses,  upholstery,  and  cuisine^  the  Chris-
dans  hold  sacred  as  the  inspired  word  of  God,  worshipped
I  Deity  who  was  only  one  of  the  Eloihim  or  astral  tutelary
spirits  of  the  Egyptians.  Bel,  Belus,  Baal,  Baalpeor,
Moloch,  Dagon,  Jehovah,  Jah,  I  Am,  etc.,  etc  ,  etc.,  these,
md  the  names  of  the  various  other  Gods,  or  tutelary  Dei-
ties worshipped  by  the  various  nations  of  Arabia  and  Asia
Minor,  including  the  Jews,  are  only  so  many  synonyms  of
bhe  one  Mediatorial  Sun-God,  who,  under  every  conceiv-
able variety  of  form  and  title,  reappears  in  the  stupendous
system  of  Astral  and  Solar  worship,  itself  an  external
expression  of  the  sublime  and  harmonious  order  of  the
universe.

Annuhis — Egyptian  Amulet.

64

SECTION     V

Crux  Ansata.

ISex  Worship — its  antiquity  and  meaning.  The  connec-
tion of  Sex,  Solar  and  Serpent  Worship — the  Spiritual
and  Material  Ideas  of  Antique  Faiths  contrasted — the
degradation  and^  death  of  Materialistic  Worship,  and
the  triumph  of  Spiritual.

Ever  interpenetrating  the  signs  and  symbols  of  the  as-
tronomical religion,  ranging  beside  its  emblems,  yet  never
entirely  losing  its  own  individuality,  or  merging  its  identi-
ty in  that  of  its  companion,  appears  a  system  of  worship,
looming  up  from  the  antique  ages,  whose  origin  and  mean-
ing has,  until  recently,  been  involved  in  mystery.  The
repulsive  nature  of  the  subject  has,  in  all  probability,
caused  even  the  philosophers  who  had  mastered  its  mean-
ing and  understood  its  symbols,  to  shrink  from  exposing
their  knowledge  to  the  vulgar  mind.  This  will  be  better
understood  when  we  intimate  that  the  esoteric  system,
to  which  we  allude,  is  sex  worship^  or  religious  belief
founded  on  the  assumed  sacredness  of  the  order  of  genera-
tion.

Amongst  the  emblems  most  commonly  seen  in  this  con-
nection are  the  Phallus  or  Lingham,  the  Triangle,  all  the
different  methods  of  exhibiting  the  Cross,  the  Serpent  with
his  tail  in  his  mouth,  and  a  vast  number  of  such  geometri-

65

jal  signs  as  include  the  triangle,  cross  and  circle.  Many
earned  archasologists  are  of  opinion  that  sex  worship,  if
t  did  not  actually  antedate,  is  still  of  as  ancient  an  origin
IS  that  of  the  stars.

The  author  of  this  work  deems  that  the  primal  faith  of
lumanity  was  unmixed  solar  and  astral  worship,  but  the
iuthoritative  reasons  for  this  belief  are  of  little  consequence
to  the  general  reader.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  em-
Dlems  of  solar  and  sex  worship  are  so  constantly  combined
n  the  same  monumental  remains,  that  we  must  infer  both
were  understood,  and  in  a  measure  reduced  to  systematic
Bxpresssion,  at  the  earliest  period  when  man  began  to
leave  records  of  his  thoughts.

There  are  no  shadows  without  a  substance,  no  fables
without  a  genuine  idea  to  allegorize  upon.

The  fable  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  the  temptation  and
fall  of  man,  is  very  generally  assumed  by  materialistic
writers  to  have  a  purely  astronomical  origin,  and  to  have
been  founded  on  the  following  astral  order.  The  August
constellation  of  the  Virgin,  represents  a  woman  holding  a
flower,  sprig  or  fruit  in  her  hand,  beckoning  to  Bootes  or
Joseph,  the  constellation  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Virgin,
but  in  close  proximity  to  her.  This  configuration  of  the
heavenly  signs,  it  is  alleged,  may  be  as  often  interpreted
into  the  fabled  relations  of  Adam  and  Eve,  as  the  Virgin
Mary  and  Joseph.  The  radiance,  bloom  and  beauty  of
the  season  in  which  these  constellations  appear,  signifies
the  earthly  Eden.  The  astral  woman  tempts  the  astral
man,  she  herself  is  tempted  by  the  Serpent,  who  presently
appears  in  the  skies  as  the  Great  Dragon.  The  woman
gives  of  the  fruit  she  holds  to  man,  he  eats  and  falls.  The
Cherubim  and  Seraphim  of  the  skies  (the  typical  signs  of
constellated  stars),  drive  them  forth  from  the  Eden  of
Summer  into  the  gloom  and  famine  of  Winter.     To  restore

66

the  fallen  man  to  a  future  paradise,  a  Saviour  must  be
found,  and  this  is  effected  in  the  birth  of  the  Sun-God,  at
midwinter,  and  his  renovating  influence  during  the  suc-
ceeding Spring  and  Summer.

To  accept  of  this  fable  without  allowing  for  a  spiritual
significance  concealed  beneath  it,  is  equivalent  to  the  as-
sumption that  the  ancients  actually  worshipped  the  sun,
moon  and  stars  as  personal  Gods  ;  but  the  ancients  never
enunciated  sacred  ideas  except  in  allegorical  forms  of
speech,  and  never  mapped  out  the  scheme  of  an  allegory
without  a  profoundlj^  spiritual  meaning  veiled  by  it.

"As  it  is  above,  so  is  it  below  " — "  On  the  earth  as  in
the  skies,''  were  the  sentences  by  which  the  mystics  of  old
were  accustomed  to  affirm  the  universal  correspondence
between  the  harmonies  of  the  natural  and  spiritual  in  every
department  of  being.

To  understand  how  the  ancients  interpreted  these  astral
hieroglyphics  into  such  a  system  as  would  explain  the  fall
of  man,  and  yet  preserve  the  correspondence  between  his
estate  on  earth  and  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies,
it  is  necessary  to  revert  to  the  theory  enunciated  in  Sec-
tion I,  where  it  was  shown  that  the  Soul  originally  dwelt
in  a  purely  spiritual  state  of  existence  ;  but  being  tempted
by  the  craving  desire  for  earthly  knowledge,  it  became
attracted  to  this  planet — incarnated  in  the  form  of  man —
and  hence  "  the  fall  "  of  spirit  into  matter.  With  all  that
reverence  which  finite  being  must  feel  when  it  presumes  to
speculate  on  infinity,  we  may  imagine  that  the  form  of  the
highest  spiritual  existences  may  admit  of  no  parts  or
angles,  but  may  be,  indeed,  like  the  perfection  of  the  spirit-
ual Sun,  a  Globe  ;  but  all  organic  forms  are  sections  of  the
perfect  sphere,  and  man  is  obviously  a  complex  assem-
blage of  lines  and  circles,  uniting  in  himself  all  the  details
of  mathematical  proportion,  subordinate  to  the  perfection
of  figure  assumed  to  exist  in  the  Spiritual  Sun.

67

In  taking  on  a  material  existence,  therefore,  and  chang-
ing from  a  purely  spiritual  entity  to  become  an  organized
material  being,  the  first  principle  of  earthly  life  to  be
evolved  must  needs  be  the  means  to  produce  and  repro-
duce it.

This,  in  an  earthly  state  of  beino-,  is  just  as  sacred  and
paramount  a  theme  as  the  formation  of  worlds,  and  the
birth  of  suns  and  systems  in  the  agii;regate  of  the  Universe.

As  the  function  of  creation  is  the  highest  and  most  won-
derful with  which  the  mind  can  invest  Deity,  so  the  imita-
tive law  must  become  the  noblest  and  most  sacred  function
of  God's  creatures.  In  thebegimrngof  earthly  existence,
we  believe  it  was  thus  esteemed,  and  in  those  remote  ages
when  sex  worship  was  incorporated  into  a  religious  system,
the  highest  and  noblest  elements  of  human  thought  clus-
tered around  the  subject  of  generation,  elevating  it  to  the
topmost  pinnacle  of  human  worship.

As  the  clear  intuitions  of  the  early  man  carried  him
back  to  his  state  of  primeval,  spiritual  innocence,  and  rec-
ognized in  his  birth  into  matter  a  descent  in  the  scale  of
being  synonymous  with  the  idea  of  a  fall,  so  he  imagined
he  perceived  the  order  of  this  scheme  mapped  out  in  the
constellated  Zodiac  of  the  skies.  As  he  recognized  the
generative  functions  to  be  the  immediate  means  of  the  Soul's
birth  into  matter,  so  he  elevated  them  into  divine  signifi-
cance, and  set  up  their  emblems  as  fit  subjects  for  religious
reverence.  In  process  of  time  the  instinctive  appetites
of  man's  sensual  nature  stimulated  sex  worship  into  excess,
and  degraded  a  holy  idea  into  gross  licentiousness.  But
this  was  the  abuse,  not  the  true  origin  of  sex  worship.
Physical  generation  was  once  esteemed  as  the  gate  by
which  the  Soul  entered  upon  the  stupendous  pathway  of
progress,  and  became  fitted  for  its  angelic  destiny  in  the
celestial  heavens  ;  but,  like  all  sacred  ideas  when  trans-

68

lated  into  matter,  the  law  of  physical  generation  came
to  be  regarded  as  mere  physical  enjoyment ;  it  sank  into
sensuality,  and  hence  the  necessity  which  the  wise  and
philosophic  priesthood  of  old  perceived,  of  veiling  all  teach-
ings on  this  subject  in  mysteries,  and  expressing  all  ideas
in  its  connection  in  obscure  symbolism.

There  are  marked  evidences  in  the  vestiges  of  antiquity
as  to  how  the  sexual  idea  encroached  upon  the  forms  of
Solar  worship.

The  primitive  conceptions  of  creation  were  exalted,
sublime  ;  but  when  the  idea  of  sex  worship  became  uni-
versal, even  the  Astral  religion  became  imbued  with  its
materialistic  influence.  The  impersonations  of  the  stars  and
the  powers  of  nature  were  divided  into  male  and  female.

The  story  of  creation  was  woven  into  romantic  legends
of  amorous  Gods  and  Goddesses ;  the  emblems  of  genera-
tion were  profusely  interspersed  with  astronomical  signs,
and  any  description  of  animal,  however  loathsome,  so  long
as  it  was  remarkable  for  procreative  power,  became  dei-
fied as  a  type  of  the  creative  energy.

To  those  who  esteem  the  spiritual  idea  as  antagonistic
to  the  material,  and  believe  with  the  most  exalted  of  the
Essenes,  that  in  Heaven,  angelic  essences  are  pure  and  free
from  all  the  impulses  and  attributes  of  matter,  it  must  in-
deed have  seemed  a  fall  for  the  Soul  to  descend  to  earth
and  become  incarnate  only,  through  the  process  of  physi-
cal generation.  And  yet  such  is  obviously  the  law  of  phy-
sical being.  In  the  order  of  the  Universe,  spirit  is  the  pri-
mal essence  in  which  there  is  neither  sex,  age,  sin,  nor  ca-
pacity for  pain.

With  the  descent  of  Soul  into  physical  life,  man  be-
comes dual,  male  and  female,  with  sex  as  the  dividing  line
between  them.  Then  too  ensues  that  mysterious  trans-
formation of  the  soul's  faculties  which  converts  spiritual

69

ove  into  material  passion,  intuitional  knowledge  into  hu-
nan  reason,  boundless  perception  into  dim  memory  and
•^ague  prescience,  eternal  things  into  temporal,  and  a  crea-
ture without  parts  or  passions,  into  one  all  organs,  and
swayed  by  every  emotion  that  ranges  from  the  depths  of
i^ice  to  the  heights  of  virtue.

The  brief  race  on  earth  run,  spiritual  spheres  of  pro-
gress opening  up  fresh  avenues  of  purification  to  the  pil-
grim Soul,  still  preserving  all  the  faculties  acquired  by  its
)irth  and  association  with  matter,  the  celestial  Angel
stands  related  to  the  germ  spirit,  as  the  fully  unfolded
)lossom  to  the  embryonic  seed.  In  this  order  of  progress
t  is  clearly  shown  that  the  means  whereby  the  spirit-
Iweller  of  the  original  Eden,  becomes  the  perfected  Angel
)f  a  celestial  heaven,  are :  mortal  birth,  a  pilgrimage  through
spheres  of  trial,  discipline  and  purification,  and  an  organ-
sm  made  up  of  separate  parts  with  appropriate  functions,
^he  due  and  legitimate  exercise  of  which  constitute  the
nethods  of  progress.  In  such  a  scheme,  every  trial  and
juffering  has  its  meaning,  and  every  passion  (even  the
tendencies  to  vice  and  crime),  their  use, in  shaping  theru-
limental  Angel,  through  remorse  and  penalty,  into  ultimate
5trength  and  divine  proportion.

A  familiar  but  apposite  illustration  of  the  relative
iifference  between  the  germ  spirit  that  descends  from
:'ealms  of  primeval  innocence  to  be  born  into  matter,  and
^hat  same  spirit  unfolded  through  spheres  of  discipline  into
^he  perfected  Angel,  is  found,  if  we  liken  the  two  states
to  those  of  the  acorn  and  the  full  grown  oak.

The  one  is  still  the  oak  in  germ,  but  the  noble  propor-
tions of  the  tree,  its  overshadowing  branches,  the  vast
^irth  of  its  mighty  trunk,  the  splendor  of  its  Briareus
irms  wide-stretched  to  the  winds,  with  its  ten  thousand
leafy  hands  tossed  abroad  on  the  ambient  air  ;  its  rich  bar-

70

vest  of  countless  germs,  and  the  unborn  forests  that  are  to
be  furnished  from  their  reproductive  powers,  all  grow  out
of  the  association  of  the  primal  acorn  with  the  formative
matrix  of  earth.

Even  so  is  it  with  the  Soul.  To  become  an  Angel  it  must
first  be  a  Man,  then  a  Spirit,  struggling  on  through  spheres
of  graduated  unfoldment,  and  when  all  is  done,  the  Soul
originally  expelled  from  its  Eden  of  innocence  and  ignor-
ance will  regain  it  with  the  strength,  wisdom  and  love
which  alone  can  constitute  it  an  Angel  of  God.

It  was  with  this  perception  of  the  Soul's  destiny,  that
the  ancients  esteemed  the  generative  functions  as  divine,
and  the  deification  of  their  emblems  as  an  act  of  religious
duty.  Whilst  we  believe  this  view  of  the  origin  of  sex
worship,  the  true  one,  those  who  regard  it  simply  from  the
standpoint  of  results,  and  contemplate  the  abominations
practiced  in  its  celebration,  might  well  believe  it  to  be  the
offspring  of  man's  merely  animal  and  instinctive  nature  ;
such  it  undoubtedly  became  when  it  sank  into  that  corrup-
tion and  abuse  which  too  often  attends  the  decadence  of
ideas,  however  exalted  in  their  source.  There  was  much,
too,  in  the  Jewish  theogony  to  favor  the  tendency  to
excess  in  sex  worship.

Throughout  the  writings  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  utmost
importance  is  attached  to  the  production  of  offspring.
Every  means  was  adopted  .by  the  priestly  lawgivers  to
promote  the  propagation  of  the  species.

Childless  women  were  branded  with  the  bitterest
reproach.  Eunuchs  or  persons  afflicted  with  personal
blemishes  were  forbidden  to  hold  sacred  offices.  Every
inducement  which  a  stringent  law  could  hold  out,  to  com-
pel the  people  to  "  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth, ^'  was
an  essential  of  the  Jewish  religion.  On  the  other  hand,
the  prophetic  writings  of  the  Jews  abound  with  fulmina-

71

ions  of  the  Divine  wrath  against  those  who  carried  their
ieas  of  sex  worship  to  excess  and  sensualism.  The
nsparing  denunciations  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  against
he  practice  of  sacrificing  to  '^  strange  Gods,"  are  accom-
lanied  by  the  plainest  descriptions  of  what  those  sacrifi-
ial  rites  were,  and  give  color  to  the  belief  that  the  reli-
ious  veneration  which  had  once  sanctified  the  idea  of  the
;enerative  functions  as  a  divine  mystery,  had  sunk  into  an
U-prevailing  and  soul  corrupting  sensualism.

In  comparison  with  Egypt,  Chaldea,  Assyria,  and  Hin-
ostan,  Judea  was  but  a  modern  nation.

The  nomadic  tribes  of  the  Jews  had  made  no  mark  on
he  world's  history  when  Egypt  was  hoary  with  age,  and
ndia  had  recorded  cycles  of  time,  lost  in  the  night  of  anti-
uity.  The  exoteric  remains  of  solar  and  sex  worship,
ogether  with  all  their  signs  and  symbols,  presented  to  the
ews  only  a  dying  vestige  of  faiths  of  whose  resplend-
nt  maturity  no  historic  epoch,  however  remote,  can  show
n  authentic  record.

We  only  know  it  must  have  been  so.  Maps  of  the  heavens,
,nd  perfected  charts  of  astral  motions,  involving  intricate
alculations,  which  must  have  required  thousands  of  years
0  arrive  at,  were  all  handed  down  from  pre-historic,  to  the
ommencement  of  historic  times,  and  that  with  a  complete-
less  which  fully  sustains  the  enormous  claims  of  the  Hin-
ioos  for  the  existence  of  their  dynasty  during  cycles  of
ime  which  baffle  the  human  mind  to  conceive  of.

How  many  times  have  the  silent  but  most  eloquent
atacombs  of  the  old  earth,  in  the  form  of  upturned  plains,
he  beds  of  rivers,  the  depths  of  artesian  wells,  and  the
ecesses  of  newly-discovered  caverns,  brought  to  light  con-
lusive  testimony  that  man  lived,  labored,  wrought  in  clay,
tone,  pottery  and  metals,  tens  of  thousands  of  years  ago,
>n  the  face  of  the  earth  !

72

The  author  has  himself  spent  years  in  India,  studying
out  that  wonderful  system  of  numerals  which  point  to  the
antiquity  of  man,  and  the  fact  that  he  commenced  astro-
nomical calculations  more  than  twenty  thousand  years
ago.  Some  of  these  silent  voices  indicate  axial  changes  in
this  planet  which  could  not  have  transpired  in  less  than  a
hundred  thousand  years.  Others  prove  that  the  Hindoos
clearly  understood  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  ages
before  the  Christian  era.

About  the  commencement  of  that  period,  the  colossal
forms  of  the  mystic  Sphinx  might  have  been  found  in  long
and  majestic  rows  in  the  various  temples  of  old  India,  and
yet  the  mystery  of  the  Sphinx  could  only  have  been  solved
by  a  people  who  had  correctly  understood  the  precession
of  the  equinoxes.  To  effect  a  change  in  the  position  oi
the  sun  in  the  Zodiacal  path  from  one  sign  to  another,
must  occupy  at  least  2140  years  ;  and  yet  such  changes
had  occurred,  been  fully  calculated,  and  recorded  in  the
astronomical  riddle  of  the  Sphinx,  a  composite  figure,  de-
signed to  celebrate  the  sun's  passage  from  the  sign  of  the
Virgin  to  that  of  the  Lion,  when  the  Jews  were  unknown
as  a  people.

What  amount  of  intellectual  power  had  the  mind  of  mar
arrived  at,  ere  these  records  of  astronomical  lore,  mechani-
cal skill  and  artistic  power  were  achieved  ?

The  remains  of  tropical  plants  now  found  amidst  the
awful  desolation  of  the  Arctic  and  Antarctic  regions — the
constant  stream  of  revelation  silently  but  surely  upheav-
ing its  mystic  writings  from  the  superincumbent  debris
under  which  the  earth  of  a  million  years  ago  lies  buried —
the  stony  voices  that  thunder  through  the  colossal  remains
of  ruined  cities,  and  the  swift  but  immutable  footprints  oJ
the  fiery  squadrons  whose  march  through  the  skies,  the
mind  of  man  has  followed  up  through  ages  of  unrecordec

73

time,  all  proclaim  that  the  movements  of  the  Universe
transpire  in  spiral  and  ever-revolving  cycles.

Like  the  path  of  the  sun  on  the  Ecliptic,  now  ascending
on  the  royal  arch  of  the  northern  hemisphere,  now  de-
scending into  the  southern  bow,  but  ever  moving  in  gyra-
ting circles  upward,  typifying  the  march  of  planets,
nations,  ages  of  time  and  human  souls,  so  that  those  who
study  the  part  may  comprehend  the  whole,  all  these  stu-
pendous witnesses  figure  out  the  law  by  which  cycles  of
civilization  are  born,  grow,  ascend  to  their  culminating
point  of  splendor,  then  turn  the  hill  of  time,  descend  lower
and  lower  into  engulfing  depths,  lower  and  lower  into  cor-
ruption, degradation,  death  !  And  yet  they  rise  again,  and,
Phoenix-like,  spring  from  the  funeral  ashes  of  their  pyre,
to  be  reborn  in  nobler,  higher  forms  of  younger  civiliza-
tions.

So  has  it  been  with  man  and  his  religious  beliefs.  Solar
and  sex  worship,  born  of  man's  highest  conceptions  of  the
Divine  plan,  rose  into  an  almost  perfect  science,  the  science
by  which  the  antique  man  perceived  the  correspondence
between  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  the  Creator  and  his
creatures.  This  famous  era  of  ancient  civilization  culmi-
nated, crossed  the  equinox  of  prophetic  death,  descended
into  the  night  of  corruption  and  sensualism,  and  perished
with  the  closing  up  of  Oriental  dynasties.

The  real  spiritual  truths  of  antiquity  have  never  died;
but  yet  their  exhibition  has  only  at  times  illuminated  the
ages  with  corruscations  of  light,  so  little  understood  that
their  holy  radiance  has  been  mistaken  for  the  baleful  glare
of  ''  Supernaturalism."  They  have  never  died ;  but,  as
yet,  they  only  give  promise,  not  a  full  assurance  of  the
resurrection  that  is  at  hand.

Mankind,  absorbed  in  its  devotion  to  the  pursuits  of
material  science,  has  ignored  its  spiritual  interests,  or  care-

74

lessly  committed  them  to  the  charge  of  an  ignorant  and
selfish  Priesthood ;  but  when  the  day  of  true  spiritual
awakening  comes,  when  the  Soul  of  the  Universe  shall  be
known  and  felt  in  the  Souls  of  His  Creatures,  the  light  of
this  Spiritual  revelation  will  shine  upon  husks  and  figments
of  the  dead  past,  of  which  reason,  no  less  than  intuition,
will  be  ashamed.  It  will  show  the  lifeless  bodies  of  ancient
faiths,  from  which  the  soul  has  long  fled,  leaving  nothing
but  dust  and  ashes,  forms  and  ceremonies,  surplices  and
shaven  crowns  behind.

It  will  show  the  painted  Clown  and  many-colored  Harle-
quins of  an  ecclesiastical  circus,  still  performing  thcK
dreary  tricks  in  an  amphitheatre  from  which  the  stately
personages  of  the  grand  Drama  have  vanished,  where  the
curtain  has  fallen,  the  lights  are  quenched,  on  which  the
eternal  midnight  of  a  dead  age  has  set  in,  with  nothing  to
relieve  the  silence  but  the  fluttering  wings  of  the  spectral
ideas  which  already  begin  to  flit  forth  into  the  morning  of  a
new  day,  seeking  the  resurrecting  life  and  light  of  a  new
Spiritual  religion.

Marpocrates  adoring  the  Youi,

75

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  V.

Sistrum — Virgin's  Symbol.

Celestial  Mother.

Showing  Jiow  Solar  and  Sex  Worship  became  interblended;
also,  the  nature  and  origin  of  Serpent  Worship — the
Signs,  Symbols  and  Emblems  of  the  three  Systems —
Scriptural  Names  and  their  Meanings — the  ultimate
degradation  of  Materialistic,  or  Exoteric  Religion,
oMd  the  triumph  of  Spiritual   Worship.

The  explorers  of  ancient  India,  Egypt,  Greece,  and
Rome,  have  wisely  distrusted  the  propriety  of  giving  very
graphic  representations,  or  close  descriptions  of  their
monumental  remains.

Most  of  the  popular  writers  on  these  lands  have  con-
tented themselves  with  hinting  that  Phallic  worship  pre-
vailed amongst  the  ancients,  and  that  its  emblems  are
abundantly  interspersed  with  other  records ;  but  the  truth
is,  that  all  the  records  are  overlaid  with  emblems  of  Phallic
worship,  and  that  there  is  scarcely  a  monument  or  inscrip-
tion of  antiquity  which  does  not,  in  some  form  or  other,
perpetuate  the  idea  of  Solar  or  Sex  worship,  or  both.

76

Nearly  all  the  Scriptural  names  have  a  direct  bearing
upon  sexual  ideas.  Every  title,  including  the  syllables
El,  Om,  On,  Di  and  Mi,  signify  the  same  ideas.  The  titles
ascribed  to  the  Sun  and  the  Generative  Gods  are  mutually
convertible,  and  both  are  continually  bestowed  upon  the
Gods  of  the  ancients.

Adonis,  Elijah,  Elisha,  El,  Bael,  Belus,  Jehovah,  Jah,
Abraham,  Samson,  Jachin,  Boaz,  Adam,  Eve,  Mary,  Esau,
Edom,  Zeus,  Jupiter,  Thor,  Odin,  Sol,  Helios,  Asher,
Dyonisius,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.,  are  all  names  significant  of  sexual
ideas.

Most  of  the  names  bestowed  on  Hindoo,  Egyptian,  Greek,
Roman  and  Hebrew  Gods,  bear  the  same  interpretation,  or
else  are  applicable,  in  a  double  sense,  to  Solar  and  Sex
worship.  The  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  have
direct  reference  to  the  generative  functions  ;  and  thus
are  Bible  names  and  Bible  terms,  put  into  the  mouths  of
innocent,  lisping  children  as  "  the  word  of  God,"  a  word
which,  if  interpreted  in  all  the  fullness  of  its  meaning,
would  crimson  the  cheek  of  every  virtuous  matron  with
shame.

Up  to  the  days  when  European  civilization  prevailed,
and  the  influence  of  a  temperate,  equatorial  climate,  mod-
erated the  excessive  energy  of  that  emotional  nature  which
man  inherits  from  his  association  with  matter,  stimulated
to  immense  activity  in  the  fervid  heat  of  tropical  climes,
his  religious  aspirations  were  all  tinctured  with  the  idio-
syncrasies of  his  physical  nature.  He  deemed  of  his  God
as  of  himself.

The  sublime  beauty  of  the  spangled  heavens,  the  obvi-
ous correspondence  of  heat,  light,  and  planetary  influence
with  his  material  well  being,  and  the  final  mystery  and
power  of  the  generative  functions,  were  the  most  direct
and  natural  appeals  that  he  could  find  in  the  universe  to

77

lis  sense  of  reverence,  and  his  ideas  of  power.  Is  it  any
narvel  that  he  worshipped  the  heavenly  host,  and  deemed
he  laws  of  generation  the  most  direct  representations  of
)eific  action  in  creation  ?

The  chief  symbols  of  these  interblended  systems  are
ound  in  the  various  forms  of  crosses  extant ;  in  the  Phallus
ir  Lingham,  and  the  Yoni,  the  male  and  female  emblems
if  generation ;  in  the  triangle  or  Tau,  the  origin  of  the
TOSS,  the  serpent  who  in  so  many  ways  was  esteemed  as
,  deific  emblem,  and  every  object,  natural  or  artificial,
v^hicli  bore  the  least  resemblance  to  the  figures  enumerated
ibove.

As  regards  the  cross,  it  has  frequently  been  attempted  to
how  that  it  owes  its  sacred  character  to  the  instrument  of
lunishment  upon  which  the  Christian's  God  was  supposed
o  have  suffered  death.

Ages  before  the  Jews  were  known  as  a  nation,  the  cross
ras  regarded  all  through  the  East  as  a  sacred  symbol.

To  remove  the  obscenity  of  the  idea  attached  to  its
•riginal  meaning,  from  the  image,  which  modern  civiliza-
ion  so  devoutly  cherishes,  it  has  been  urged  that  it  was
everenced  by  the  Egyptians,  because  it  was  used  as  a
siileometer  or  measure  of  the  river  Nile.  Granting  this,
nd  admitting  that  the  Nile  was  held  sacred  by  the
Egyptians  as  the  source  of  plenty  and  irrigation,  hence,
hat  the  Nileometer,  with  its  upright  post  and  cross-piece  to
Liark  the  height  to  which  the  waters  attained,  was  also  held
acred  as  an  emblem  of  redemption  from  famine,  or  a  sign
f  possible  destruction,  still  this  does  not  account  for  the
irevalence  of  the  cross,  nor  the  reverence  attached  to  it  in
ands  where  no  Nileometer  was  required,  and  in  distant
ges  ere  Nileometers  were  invented.

Sculptured  over  every  temple  of  the  East,  the  cross  in
lany  forms  was  used  to  signify  the  generative  power.

78

It  was  originally  designed  to  represent  a  Trinity,  and
thus  gave  rise  to  the  sacredness  attached  to  the  number
three,  with  all  its  multiples,  and  in  all  the  varieties  of  form
in  which  the  cross  is  found  from  the  plain  letter  T,  the  Tau
of  the  Scandinavians  or  the  hammer  of  Thor,  to  the  eight-
sided  cross  of  the  Templars,  and  in  all  its  variousness  it
signified  and  does  signify,  nothing  more  or  less  than  the
fertility,  fecundity  and  creative  structure  of  the  mascu-
line principle  of  generation.  The  fact  that  the  sun's  two
chief  incidents  of  Zodiacal  travel  were  the  crossings  of  the
EcHptic  plane  at  Spring  and  Autumn,  deepened  the  rever-
ence which  antique  nations  cherished  for  this  all-prevail-
ing symbol,  but  instead  of  removing  it  from  the  earth  to
the  skies,  it  simply  showed  in  this  dual  significance,  the
unity  of  design  expressed  throughout  the  cosmic  motions
of  the  universe.

The  female  emblem  was  signified  by  an  unit,  a  circle,  a
boat-shaped  shell,  a  lozenge,  or  any  object,  animate  or
inanimate,  that  resembled  these  figures,  or  implied  recep-
tivity, fruitfulness,  or  maternity.  The  union  of  the  female
unit  with  the  male  triad,  was  designated  by  the  sa  cred  and
mystic  number  4,  or  symbolized  by  a  serpent  with  his  tail
in  his  mouth,  two  fishes  bent  to  form  a  circle,  the  rite  of
circumcision,  and  many  other  symbolical  rites  and  figures.

The  origin  of  Serpent  worship  arose  first  from  the  uni-
versal prevalence  of  these  creatures  throughout  the  Orient ;
the  extreme  subtlety  of  their  natures  implying  wisdom,
their  custom  of  casting  their  skins  denoting  renewed  youth
and  immortality,  their  tremendous  and  deadly  powers
of  destruction,  analogous  to  the  ''  wrath  of  God,"  their  sup-
posed healing  virtue  indicative  of  the  life-giving  power  of
the  sun,  the  glory  of  their  shining  scales  imitating  light ;
but,  above  all,  the  Serpent  was  deified  as  the  antagonistic
power  of  the  skies,  defined  in  the  great  constellation  of  the

79

Dragon,  wliicti  did  annual  war  with  the  heavenly  legions
of  the  sun.

Endless  were  the  fables  invented  to  typify  the  wisdom
and  life-giving  properties  of  serpents ;  endless  the  myths
in  which  they  figured  as  the  representatives  of  good  and
evil  Genii.

Serpent  worship  is,  in  all  probability,  as  old  as  Sex  and
Solar  worship,  and  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  three
systems  forms  a  clue  to  all  the  signs,  symbols,  allegories
and  mysteries  of  all  the  ancient  faiths  that  prevailed  be-
fore the  Christian  era.

The  ideas  indicated  by  these  symbols,  and  the  legends
attached  to  them,  underlie  all  those  stupendous  rites,
solemn  mysteries,  and  gigantic  monuments  of  art,  that
have  overlaid  the  once  splendid  Orient  with  ruins  that
will  remain  the  mystery  and  admiration  of  the  race  till
time  shall  be  no  more.  The  myths  and  symbols  of  these
interblended  systems  prevailed  indeed,  long  after  the
Christian  era,  and  were  preserved  by  the  Gnostics,  Mani-
cheans,  Neo  Platonists,  and  many  of  the  early  sects
amongst  Christians  and  Philosophic  Greeks  ;  they  are  pre-
served and  prevail  amongst  the  most  civilized  of  sects  to-
day, but  alas  !  without  any  real  appreciation  of  the  ideas
that  once  vitalized  the  images.

Much  of  the  mysticism  of  the  ''Divine  Plato,"  and  the
numerical  wisdom  of  Pythagoras,  owed  their  ideality  to
the  esoteric  meaning  veiled  in  Oriental  symbolism.

The  famous  mysteries  of  Eleusis,  the  Bacchic  and
Dyonisian  rites,  the  feasts  in  honor  of  Ceres,  the  orgies  of
Cybele,  and  other  mythical  personages  of  the  Greek  Pan-
theon ;  ancient  masonry,  both  speculative  and  operative,
and  its  degraded  and  imbecile  descendant,  modern  masonry,
founded  their  origin  upon  the  basic  principles  of  these
ancient  systems  of  worship,  and  the  mass  of  legendary
lore  to  which  they  gave  rise.

80

Curious  as  would  be  the  tracery  of  these  primitive  roots
through  all  the  tendrils,  branches,  and  reproductive  germs
that  have  overlaid  the  world  with  theological  systems,  the
work  must  be  reserved  for  another  place  and  time,  and
this  part  of  our  subject  must  close  with  a  few  words  in
evidence  of  the  lamentable  tendency  to  degeneracy  which
all  great  ideas  suffer  when  they  outlive  their  day  and  use-
fulness ;  whilst  the  ark  of  the  tabernacle  survives  though
the  sacred  flame  that  of  old  dwelt  between  the  Cherubim
and  Seraphim,  is  quenched  in  eternal  night.

Throughout  the  churches  of  Christendom,  the  name  of
the  Most  High  God,  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  Being,  the
Great  Spirit  who  dwells  alone  and  unknown  in  central
orbs  of  primal  light,  is  scarcely  remembered,  and  ever
subordinated  to  the  worship  of  the  Cross,  with  all  its
varieties  of  expression  and  form.

The  myth  of  the  Sun-God  reappears  in  every  phase  of
the  Christian's  creed.

The  surplices,  robes  and  fantastic  adornments  of  high
ecclesiasticism,  are  simply  imitations  of  the  women's  gar-
ments which  the  priests  of  antiquity  wore  to  indicate  that
God  was  both  male  and  female.

The  bells  and  holy  candles,  the  Lambs,  Bulls,  Eagles,
Men,  Lions  and  twelve  apostolic  personages,  the  Serpents,
etc.,  etc.,  which  cast  their  prismatic  glory  from  costly
painted  windows  on  the  chequered  marbles  of  the  floor
beneath,  are  all  but  so  many  astronomical  signs  of  antique
fire  worship,  or  emblems  of  sexual  religion.  The  very
shape  of  the  steeples  that  crown  the  "  houses  of  God  "  are
mementos  of  the  reverence  accorded  to  the  sacred  flame,
or  veiled  effigies  of  the  "  divine  Lingham."

It  would  be  equally  painful  and  humiliating  to  analyze
the  mythical  character  of  every  sign  and  symbol  of  modern
ecclesiasticism,  were  we  not  deeply,  reverentially  conscious

81

that  the  spirit  that  no  longer  vivifies  the  dead  husks  of  ex-
tinct faiths,  still  pervades  the  earth,  still  manifests  its  un-
dying love  for  poor,  idolatrous  humanity,  still  illumines
the  heart,  and  sustains  the  drooping  tendrils  of  that  re-
ligion which  erects  its  altar  in  the  soul,  and  finds  its  most
imperishable  shrine  in  the  depths  of  man's  spiritual  con-
sciousness.

Witnesses  too — witnesses  on  the  sensuous  plane  of  life
— are  not  wanting  to  the  truth  of  this  undying  spiritual
influx,  permeating  evfery  age,  and  adapting  its  revelations
to  all  forms  of  faith  that  recognize  spiritual  existence.

Like  the  waving  lines  of  the  shining  ecliptic,  ever  bound-
ing yet  ever  sustaining  the  sun-like  progress  of  human
destiny,  comes  down  the  ages  the  tracery  of  an  all-pervad-
ing realm  of  spiritual  existence,  at  once  the  cause  and  effect
of  earthly  being.

Soul  and  spiritual  essence  is  the  God  and  the  proce-
dure, the  Creator  and  the  creature  ;  all  things  else  are
phantasmagoric  shapes,  born  of  the  hour,  as  formative
moulds  in  which  soul  essences  grow,  perishing  with  the
hour  when  their  office  is  ended.

Were  it  not  for  the  assurance  that  there  is  a  realm  of
spirit  adequate  to  produce,  sustain  and  guide  the  tangled
woof  of  creation,  the  pictures  we  have  drawn,  however
faithful  to  the  exoteric  history  of  the  race,  would  be  but
a  temporary  assemblage  of  dust  and  ashes  heaped  together
into  grotesque  and  incomprehensible  images.  With  this
compass  to  steer  our  way  through  the  restless  billows  of
life's  storm-tossed  ocean,  we  may  rise  and  sink,  drift  far
and  wide  of  oar  mark,  stagnate  for  a  while  on  the  sluggish
sea  of  materialism,  or  seem  to  founder  amidst  the  foam-
crested  upheavals  of  convulsed  opinions,  but  we  are  in
the  hands  of  that  Love  that  will  never  forsake  us,  that
Wisdom  that  is  all-sufficient  to  direct  as,  that  Power  that
is  almighty  to  save  us.

82

'^  God  lives  and  reigns  !"  said  stout-hearted  Martin
Luther,  when,  standing  alone,  he  bore  testimony  to  his
faith  before  princes,  potentates  and  the  opposing  force  of
earth's  assembled  great  ones.

His  strength  is  ours,  and  in  that  strength  we  can  afford
to  stand  by  and  watch  the  wreck  of  empires  and  dynasties,
ecclesiastical  faiths  and  man-made  dogmas.

We  are  immortal  parts  of  the  immortal  Soul  of  the  Uni-
verse, and  we  never  can  be  lost,  or  perish  out  of  his  hand.

Fmitagone,

83

SECTION     YI.

Of  the  Subordinate  Gods  in  the  Universe — Angels,  Spirits,
Tutelary  Deities^  Souls  and  Elementary  Sjnrits — Opin-
ions of  the  Ancients — the  Jewish  Cabbala — Classical  Au-
thorities.

When  the  Spiritual  in  human  history  first  dominated
the  mind,  is  as  impossible  to  ascertain  as  who  was  the  first
man.

A  celebrated  materialistic  writer  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury says  :  ^'  The  idea  of  subordinate  Gods  becomes  a  ne-
cessary sequence  to  the  acknowledgment  of  deific  existence
at  all,  and  it  would  be  as  useless  to  search  for  the  country  or
time  when  Gods,  Spirits,  and  Angels  were  first  believed  in,
as  to  attempt  ascertaining  the  locality  and  period  where
and  when  religious  worship  began."  This  is  essentially
true^  though  an  adversary  writes  it.

The  origin  of  man's  belief  in  Deity  must  be  supplement-
ed by  his  acceptance  of  intermediate  spiritual  existences,
for  the  Soul  which  is  the  witness  of  the  one,  proclaims  the
other,  and  the  chief  difference  between  the  opinions  on
these  points  is,  that  whilst  the  deepest  and  most  incommu-
nicable emotions  of  the  Soul  rest  on  its  Author  and  Fin-
isher, Deity,  the  senses  may  bear  witness  to  the  presence
and  operation  of  subordinate  Spiritual  existences  in  the
phenomena  that  attend  their  ministrations.

It  is  enough  to  afiirm  that  the  vestiges  of  humanity
in  every  country  and  age,  bear  testimony  to  man's  belief
in  the  ministry,  and  interposition  in  human  afiairs  of  or-
ders of  beings  both  superior  and  inferior  to  mortals,  oper-
ating  for  good  and   evil,  but    always   through   methods

84

beyond  the  power  of  mortal  achievement,  appealing  to  the
senses  through  modes  of  action  not  possible  to  man  with-
out their  aid,  and  after  a  fashion  which  proves  them  to  be
limited  by  none  of  the  known  laws  of  nature.

From  the  days  when  the  most  ancient  Sanscrit  writings
laid  down  modes  of  invoking  spirits,  described  their  quali-
ties and  influences,  and  prescribed  the  conditions  under  which
mortals  should  hold  communion  with  them,  up  to  the  nine-
teenth century,  when  the  "  Spiritualists  who  permeate
every  land  of  civilization,  print  their  little  tracts  descrip-
tive of  the  best  means  of  forming  '  circles '  for  the  purpose
of  evoking  spirit  presence  and  communion,  there  never  was
an  age  or  time  when  man  in  some  form  or  other  did  not
believe  in  Spiritual  existences  subordinate  to  the  Deity  ;
in  the  means  of  communing  with  them,  and  in  their
influence  on  human  action  for  good  or  evil."

From  the  collected  opinions  of  the  Hindoos,  Chaldeans,
Persians,  Jews,  Hebrew  and  Oriental  Cabbalists,  Talmud-
ists,  Greeks  and  Romans,  as  well  as  from  the  author's  own
personal  experience  with  spirits  of  different  orders  and
grades,  we  present  the  following  general  summary  of  ideas,
concerning  the  various  degrees  of  Spiritual  existences  in
the  Universe.

Whilst  nearly  every  nation  of  antiquity  deemed  of  God
as  the  Demiurgus  ;  neither  male  nor  female,  yet  both ;  as
of  a  Central  Source  of  life,  light,  heat  and  creative  energy,
one  alone,  yet  incomprehensible,  uncreated,  and  indestruc-
tible, all  taught  of  subordinate  procedures  from  Him.  The
first  of  these  was  a  Divine  Being  corresponding  to  the
Bramah  of  the  Hindoo  Trinity,  the  Osiris  of  Egypt,  the
Ormuzd  of  Persia,  the  Logos  of  Philo,  the  Adam  Kadman
of  the  Cabbalists.

The  idea  embodied  in  this  theogony  was,  that  in  the
Deity  resided  the  masculine  principle  of  Power,  and  the

85

feminine  of  Wisdom,  called  by.  the  Cabbalists  En  Soph  and
Sophia.  From  the  incomprehensible  union  of  these  two
proceeded  a  third,  the  Logos,  or  Word,  through  which  the
will  of  God  became  manifest  in  expression — that  is,  in  the
evolution  of  forms — worlds,  suns,  systems,  reproductive
germs,  and  realms  of  progressive  being.  In  this  stupend-
ous system,  the  superior  emanations  were  Gods,  directing
the  birth,  formation  and  destinies  of  worlds ;  then  came
Archangels,  charged  with  missions  of  Almighty  power  and
wisdom.  To  them  succeeded  legions  of  Angels,  some  en-
trusted with  the  direction  of  Planets,  Earths,  Nations,
Cities,  and  Societies,  hence  called  '' Tutelary  Angels,"  and
worshipped  as  Gods.  Others,  exercising  rule  in  specific
groups,  and  classified  by  Hebrew  Cabbalists  as  ^'  Thrones,
Dominions,  Powers."

The  division  of  Angels  and  Spirits  into  grand  Hierar-
chies, Legions,  and  specific  ofiices  of  divine  ministration,
would  occupy  a  volume,  and  give  a  vast  and  exalted  per-
ception of  the  antique  view  of  Spiritual  existence.  De-
scending from  the  grander  scale  of  angelic  ministration
recited  above,  we  notice  that  the  Sages  and  Seers  of  anti-
quity identified  certain  spirits  as  the  inspiring  agencies  of
art,  science,  different  branches  of  industry,  and  all  the  oc-
cupations of  social,  artistic,  and  even  commercial  life.^The
Hebrew  Scriptures  continually  declare  that  God  put  it  into
fhe  heart  of  such  and  such  individuals,  to  work  in  brass  or
wood,  fine  linen,  or  rich  coloring.  In  the  direct  and  in-
tuitional communion  with  Spiritual  existences  enjoyed  by
the  Hebrews,  it  was  assumed  that  all  good  or  exceptionally
great  powers  resulted  from  inspiration,  and,  as  explained
in  the  New  Testament,  those  luere  called  Gods,  to  whom  the
word  of  God  came  ;  so  when  the  terms  God,  or  Lord,  were
made  use  of  to  signify  the  source  of  the  idea.  Spiritual  in-
fluence was  the  kernel  implied  in  the  expression.

86

Below  all  the  inspiring  agencies  for  good  were  assumed
to  exist  legions  of  evil  spirits,  almost  as  numerous,  and
scarcely  less  powerful  to  tempt  and  destroy,  than  good
Angels  were  to  bless.

Between  these  two  realms  of  opposing  powers  were
ranged  human  Souls,  not  only  in  their  incarnate  forms  of
mortal  being,  but  also  as  disembodied  spirits,  vast  realms
of  spiritual  existence  being  assigned  them,  interpenetrat-
ing and  surrounding  the  earth,  through  which,  in  successive
stages  of  growth  and  progress,  the  pilgrim  Soul  was  per-
mitted to  win  its  way  back  to  the  celestial  state  from  which
it  had  fallen  by  mortal  birth.

Every  human  Soul  was  supposed  to  attract  to  itself  from
the  moment  of  birth  two  Spirits,  the  one  powerful  to  in-
fluence for  good,  the  other  for  evil.  These  Spirits  were
called  by  the  ancients,  good  and  evil  Genii ;  and  the  natural
proclivities  to  vice  or  virtue  in  the  individual  to  whom  they
ministered,  were  supposed  to  be  stimulated  or  exalted,
according  as  the  Soul  gave  heed  to  the  inspiration  of  the
tempter,  or  the  counsellor.

Besides  the  realms  of  being  above  enumerated,  it  was
claimed  that  other  orders  existed,  neither  wholly  good  or
purely  evil ;  neither  entirely  spiritual,  nor  actually  material
hi  their  natures  ;  creatures  of  the  elements,  corresponding
in  their  state,  power  and  function,  to  the  different  ele-
ments in  the  universe,  and  filling  up  all  the  realms  of  space
with  uncounted  legions  of  embryonic  and  rudimental  forms.

These  beings  were,  by  reason  of  their  semi-spiritual
nature,  invisible  to  man,  and,  because  of  the  gross  tincture
of  matter  in  their  composition,  unable  to  discern  any  orders
of  being  but  themselves,  except  through  rare  and  excep-
tional rifts  in  their  atmospheric  surroundings.  They  cor-
responded to  the  ether,  air,  atmosphere,  water,  earth,
minerals,  plants,  and  different  elements  of  which  the  earth

87

and  the  universe  generally  is  composed.  Some  of  these
beings  were  malicious  and  antagonistic  to  man,  and  others
harmless  and  good.  All  exerted  power,  especially  in  the
direction  of  the  element  to  which  they  corresponded  ;  they
were  said  to  be  endowed  with  graduated  degrees  of  intelli-
gence, and  to  have  bodies  subject  to  the  laws  of  birth,
growth,  change,  and  death.

From  being  invisible  to  man,  except  through  rare  or  pre-
pared conditions,  they  were  termed  spirits ;  from  being
embryonic,  rudimentary,  and  attached  only  to  certain
fragments  of  the  universe,  they  were  termed  Elementaries.
Every  plant  and  every  world,  every  dew-drop  and  every
sun,  sustained  swarms  of  this  parasitical  life,  so  that  there
was  not  an  atom  of  matter  but  what  was  redolent  of  it.
Had  the  ancients  been  acquainted  with  the  powers  of  the
microscope,  they  would  doubtless  have  classed  the  infu-
soria and  animalcula3  revealed  by  this  wondrous  instrument
with  the  realms  of  elementary  spirits.  Be  this  as  it  may,
it  was  assumed  that,  as  their  existence  was  only  rudiment-
ary, and  the  evidences  of  that  divine  trinity  which  in  man
constitutes  an  immortal  being,  namely,  matter,  force,  and
spirit,  was  lacking,  so  they  had  no  soul,  and  were  not
immortal.  It  was  also  taught  of  the  Elementaries,  that
though  they  propagated  their  species,  were  animated  by
will  and  some  share  of  intelligence,  lived  their  term  of  life,
and  died,  still  they  possessed  no  concrete,  self-conscious
principle  of  being,  sufficiently  developed  to  enable  the
spiritual  essence  that  escaped  at  death  to  become  individu-
alized, and  retain  a  recollection  of  its  past,  or  a  personal
consciousness  of  its  own  identity.  Thence  it  was  taught  that
the  spiritual  essence  of  the  disintegrated  organism,  was
gathered  up  in  death  and  passed  into  some  more  advanced
form  of  being ;  that  each  successive  birth  purified  its  na-
ture, and  enlarged  its  capacity  ;   in  fact,  that  it  was  life.

88

instinct,  and  matter,  in  progressive  stages  of  existence,  and
that  this  progress  continued  until  the  most  rudimental
sparks  of  spiritual  being  expanded  into  fully  developed
spiritual  blossoms,  attained  to  the  glory  and  dignity  of  self-
conscious  spiritual  entities,  gravitated  to  spiritual  spheres,
and  from  thence  became  attracted  to  earth,  entered  into
the  Soul  principle  of  man,  and  thus  united  him  in  essence
with  all  the  lower  forms  of  being,  and  themselves  com-  ^
menced  a  self-conscious  and  immortal  stage  of  fresh  ascend-
ing pilgrimages.

''  The  spheres  of  elementary  existence,  "  says  a  famous
Oriental  Cabbalist,  ''  are  as  numerous,  and  their  orders  as
rife  with  variety  and  function,  as  are  the  earth^s  planets,
suns,  systems,  and  realms  of  ether.

There  cannot  be  a  grain  of  matter  but  has  its  correspond-
ing spiritual  counterpart.  Ranging  from  the  infinitely  large
to  the  infinitely  little,  from  a  world  to  a  monad,  all  things
in  the  universe  of  matter  are  supplemented  by  an  universe
of  spirit,  and  it  is  as  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  mighty
suns  and  resplendent  planets  should  be  destitute  of  Provi-
dential law,  order,  guidance,  and  maintenance,  through
deific  tutelary  Angels,  as  that  a  sand-grain,  or  a  dew-drop
should  be  left  to  the  direction  of  its  own  unaided  and  non-
intelligent  movements.  All,  all,  are  but  external  expres-
sions of  the  immortal  soul,  which,  in  fragments  and  atoms
suited  to  the  thing  it  vitalizes,  animates,  permeates  and
sustains  all  being,  even  as  the  Soul  of  man  vitalizes  his
material  structure.  "

We  have  given  this  teaching  as  a  compendium  of  antique
and  chiefly  of  Oriental  thought;  but  we  now  preface  all
farther  attempts  at  elucidating  the  subject  matter  of  this
work,  by  claiming  every  iota  of  this  philosophy  to  be  the
truth,  as  it  appears  to  the  mind  of  the  author.

From  long  years  of  communion  with  spirits  of  every

89

grade,  high  and  low,  perfected  and  rudimental ;  from  the
privilege  of  wandering  in  their  spheres  in  the  clairvoyant
condition,  from  visits  made  spiritually  to  the  realms  of
elementary  being  where  the  poor,  imperfect  dwellers  beheld
in  the  astral  body  of  their  visitant  an  imaginary  God,
from  dreams,  trances,  visions,  open  and  oral  communion
with  angelic  beings  and  ministering  spirits,  the  author
insists  that  the  doctrines  herein  enunciated  are  transcripts
of  the  order  of  the  Universe,  as  clearly  laid  down  as  the  half-
prophetic,  half-bedimmed  vision  of  humanity  can  appre-
hend it,  and  that,  whether  accepted  or  rejected,  it  contains
holy  truths,  which  belong  to  the  best  interests  of  humanity
to  comprehend  ;  revealments  which  our  fathers  understood,
and  we  have  lost  sight  of,  from  our  undue  devotion  to
material  interests,  and  our  blind  fanaticism  in  ignoring  all
spiritual  research  save  such  as  comes  through  an  effete  and
materialistic  ecclesiasticism.

We  are  quite  aware  that  if  this  volume  should  fall  into  the
hands  of  one-idead,  self-styled  scientists,  the  avowal  of
faith  just  recorded  will  amply  justify  such  readers  in
committing  the  work  to  the  flames  as  the  ravings  of  a
lunatic.  Should  it  be  read  by  any  of  those  presumptuous
and  narrow-minded  Spiritualists  who  assume  that  there  is
no  other  realm  of  spiritual  being  than  that  occupied  by
their  own  particular  familiars,  we  anticipate  the  wail  of
denunciation  they  will  raise,  insisting  that  no  theory  can
be  true,  or  worth  studying,  that  has  not  been  spelled  out  by
their  rapping  spirits,  declared  in  doggrel^  rhymes  through
their  semi-tranced  media,  or  lisped  out  in  comical  broken
Eriglish,  by  the  spirits  of  "  little  Indian  maids, "  or  ^'  big
braves,  "  once  renowned  for  eloquence  and  wisdom,  but
transTormed  through  mediumistic  witchery,  into  imbeciles,
and  buffoons.  Should  it  be  read  by  the  too  devoted
followers  of  the  soul-illumined  Seer  of  Sweden,  who  can-

90

not  admit  of  any  truth  which  the  mind  of  Swedenborg
failed  to  grasp,  they  will  say,  these  writings  are  dictated
by  lying  spirits,  and  that,  because  he,  the  conservator  and
revelator  of  all  truth  to  the  minds  of  the  bigoted,  affirmed,
that  all  angels,  even  the  highest  that  ?mved  around  the  throne
of  God,  "  had  once  been  men.  "

Should  these  pages  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  intelligent
modern  Spiritualist  whose  incessant  watch-word  is  ''  light,
more  light !"  his  comment  will  be,  "  this  mag  be  true  or
false,  but  because  I  don't  know  it  to-day,  I  will  endeavor
to  prove  it  to-morrow,  and  accept  or  reject  it,  only  as  lean
prove  it.'^  ^"*

Should  the  work  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  learned
''Pagan,"  well-read  "  Heathen,"  or  instructed  Orientalist,
he  will  say, ''  Surely  this  writer  has  heard  the  voices  of
the  Oracles ;  beheld  the  glories  of  the  mysteries  ;  and  sat
at  the  feet  of  the  Sages,  who  quaffed  from  the  eternal
fountain  of  revelation  !

He  is  an  Initiate — a  Hierophant — a  Brother  who  speaks
the  word  of  truth  known  onlg  to  the  few; — the  Master's
Word  is  whispered  in  these  pages,  thrilling  through  the  hones
to  the  very  marrow  of  humanity.''''

According  to  some,  but  not  by  any  means  the  most  in-
telligent or  best  educated  of  the  American  Spiritualists,
there  is  no  God  at  all,  only  "  a  principle,"  and  nothing
higher  in  the  scale  of  being  than  the  spirits  of  their  de-
ceased friends  and  kindred  ;  but  these  materialistic  philoso-
phers form  but  a  small  part  of  that  intelligent  nation  of
thinkers,  and  their  teachings  have  but  little  weight  be-
yond a  few  score  of  poor  people,  who  gather  together,  and
in  grandiloquent  phraseology  congratulate  each  other  on
being  the  great  I  Ams  of  the  Universe.

The  majority  of  persons  convinced  by  wonderful  signs
and  tokens  in   America,  that  the  souls  of  men  live   and

91

communicate  to  their  friends  on  earth,  have  seemed  to
the  author,  to  be  waiting  for  some  philosophy  or  revela-
tion that  should  carry  them  beyond  this  one  isolated  fact,
and  reduce  spiritual  existence  and  human  life  to  corres-
pondential  and  appreciable  doctrines  of  science.

Would  that  these  humble  writings  might  aid  to  practi-
calize  their  noble  aspirations  !

The  sacred  books  of  Hermes,  once  supposed  to  have
been  the  most  ancient  writings  in  the  world,  but  now
more  generally  deemed  to  have  been  copies  of  the  Hindoo
Vedas,  transplanted  from  India  into  Egypt,  give  most
elaborate  accounts  of  the  different  orders  of  angelic  beings
in  the  Universe,  and  render  descriptions  of  the  spiritual
counterparts  of  every  plant,  mineral,  rain-drop  or  speck  of
dust  in  the  earth  and  its  atmosphere.

Eusebius,  the  Christian  Bishop  of  Caesarea,  who  wrote
in  the  fourth  century  of  the  Christian  era,  claimed  to  have
been  familiar  with  these  famous  Hermetic  writings.  He
says  they  often  repeat  the  question  :  "  Have  you  not  been
told  that  all  .spirits  are  sparks  from  the  Divine  Soul  of  the
Universe ;  Gods,  Demons,  Souls,  yet  in  their  variousness
all  emanations  from  Him."  ?

Jamblichus,  quoting  from  the  same  source,  writes :
'' From  this  One  came  all  Gods  that  be;  all  souls,  all
spirits,  good  and  bad,  and  many  that  be  neither  very
wicked  nor  yet  good.

"  There  be  many  kinds  of  spiritual  essences  besides  souls,
as  spirits  of  the  earth,  the  sea,  running  waters,  and  even
some  that  do  inhabit  the  holes  of  reptiles  that  live  on  the

banks  of  rivers,  or  the  depths  of  mines Their  abiding

places  cannot  so  much  as  be  named,  without  enumerating

all  the  secret  corners  of  the  earth That  these  spirits

are  often  under  the  dominion  of  man,  is  as  true  as  that
they  may  be  transformed  by  the  arch  enemy  of  mankind

92

into  instruments  of  ill,  to  work  the  deeds  of  darkness,  in
which  he  delights."

Lao-Kiun,  a  cotemporary  of  the  great  Chinese  Sage
Confucius,  founded  a  school,  which,  for  the  spirituality  of
its  doctrines,  far  transcended  the  teachings  of  Confucius.
His  text  of  religious  faith  was — ''  Tao  (meaning  God)  pro-
duced one ;  one  produced  two,  two  produced  three,  and
three  produced  all  things."

During  the  lifetime  of  this  philosopher,  a  book  contain-
ing the  names  and  offices  of  innumerable  companies  of
spirits  was  found,  as  it  was  asserted,  suspended  on  the
royal  gate  of  Pekin,  placed  there  by  no  mortal  hand,  and
supposed  to  be  full  of  direct  revelations  from  Heaven.

This  miraculous  volume  is  said  to  have  contained  magi-
cal formulae  for  the  evocation  and  control  of  spirits  ;  di-
rections how  to  cast  out  devils  and  heal  diseases ;  also  the
profoundest  secrets  of  alchemy,  namely  the  composition  of
the  philosopher's  stone  and  the  elixir  vitae.

To  satisfy  the  bigotry  and  superstitious  fears  of  succeed-
ing generations,  this  book,  together  with  all  other  magical
writings,  was  destroyed.  Still,  it  was  asserted,  that  pri-
vate copies  had  been  made  and  circulated  of  its  contents.
From  a  curious  and  very  ancient  roll  of  MSS.,  in  the  royal
library  of  Pekin,  the  author  has  had  the  privilege  of  copy-
ing a  line  astrological  chart,  and  a  magical  evocation  of
elementary  spirits,  assumed  to  have  been  first  written  in
the  aforesaid  book.

In  Chaldea,  the  only  great  nation  of  antiquity  in  which
Phallic  and  Yonic  emblems  are  not  found.-  proving  by  the
universal  prevalence  of  pure  astronomical  symbols,  the
extreme  antiquity  of  the  worship  there  practiced,  a  belief
in  various  ascending  and  descending  grades  of  spirits  and
angels,  everywhere  speaks  out  from  the  mighty  and  stu-
pendous ruins.     The   same   belief,  only  on  a  much  more

93

elaborate  scale,  was  cherished  amongst  the  Medes  and  Per-
sians, and  taught  in  all  its  minutiae  by  Zoroaster.

The  universal  prevalence  of  image  worship  throughout
the  East,  is  due  to  the  idea  that  the  spirits  of  Stars,  Plan-
ets, Angels,  Seraphs,  Cherubs  and  Elementary  Spirits,
could  be  attracted  to  their  images,  when  consecrated  under
magical  formulae,  and  not  only  fix  the  worshippers'  minds
upon  the  spirits  represented  in  the  images,  but  actually
draw  them  into  those  material  receptacles.  The  strange
and  grotesque  forms  of  consecrated  images  may  thus  be
accounted  for.

The  winged  Bull  of  Nineveh  was  the  personification  of
the  Cherubim. — The  winged  Serpent  represented  the
Seraphim.

The  immense  numbers  of  insects,  birds  and  animals  es-
teemed as  sacred,  and  rendered  homage  to  in  animal  images,
were  all  supposed  to  be  attended  by  spiritual  essences,
whose  power  resided  in  the  particular  shape  of  the  crea-
tures venerated.

The  Persian  Theogony  not  only  includes  all  the  ideas
we  have  dwelt  upon  in  other  systems,  but  is  divided  by
Zoroaster  into  interminable  chains  of  Spiritual  existences,
two  of  whom,  one  good,  and  another  evil,  is  assigned  as  an
Attendant  ^'  Ferver,"  to  every  living  creature.  Besides
these,  are  hosts  of  Elementary  Spirits,  assumed  to  exert  a
beneficent  or  malignant  influence  upon  every  particle  of
the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms.  Zoroaster's  system,
like  that  of  the  ancient  Hindoos  and  Egyptians,  was  full  of
high  moral  teachings,  and,  save  for  the  cruelty  and  reckless
waste  of  life  manifested  in  its  system  of  sacrificial  rites,
forms  a  code  of  ethics  not  inferior  to  the  sweetness  and
beauty  of  the  teachings  ascribed  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth.
Here  as  in  Cabbalism,  Spirit  is  assumed  to  be  a  primal
essence,  containing  the  archetypes  of  all  ideas.     God  is  the

94

one  central  source  of  Light— Ormuzd  the  first  Divine  em-
anation, the  King  of  Light.— Mithra  and  Arimanes,  the
next  procedures,  are  representatives  of  the  resplendent
God  of  Light,  heat,  and  goodness,  and  the  terrific  prince  of
cold,  darkness,  and  evil.— All  created  forms  are  patterned
after  the  archetypal  ideas  existing  in  the  Divine  Mind,  and
endless  chains  of  good  and  evil  Spirits,  Angels,  Genii,  and
Elementaries,  fill  up  all  spaces  in  the  invisible  realms  in
which  matter  floats.

As  in  Chaldea,  the  most  renowned  methods  of  interpret-
ing the  will  of  God  were  by  soothsaying  and  divination,  so
in  Persia  the  favorite  resort  was  to  Astrology.  The  Per-
sians claimed  that  the  Stars  were  divine  Scriptures,  in
which  the  order  of  visible  nature  was  plainly  mapped  out ;
that  the  numerous  changes  and  configurations  of  the  hea-
venly bodies  produced  relative  changes  in  the  simplicity
of  the  scheme  indicated  on  the  path  of  the  Zodiac.  That
each  star  had  its  special  influence  upon  the  plant  or  living
creature  which  was  born  during  its  ascendency.

Minerals,  earths,  waters,  and  places,  were  directly  gov-
erned by  planetary  influence.  The  mind  was  governed
by  the  phases  of  the  moon. — All  colored  objects  or  glitter-
ing stones  by  the  Sun  or  one  of  the  six  planets ;  in  fact,
the  rise  and  fall  of  Nations  and  the  destinies  of  individuals
were  spelled  out  by  Persian  Astrologers  on  the  starry  hea-
vens, and  he  would  have  been  considered  an  ignoramus  or
an  audacious  skeptic,  worthy  of  death,  who  should  presume
to  dispute  the  prophectic  dictum  of  any  well-versed  Per-
sian Astrologer.

The  Priests  of  this  nation  were  called  Magi,  and  it  seems
probable  that  this  term,  signifymg  Wise  men^  was  used  for
the  first  time  in  this  connection.  Besides  the  Art  of  As-
trology and  Soothsaying,  in  which  the  Persian  Magi  were
instructed  as  part  of  their   education,  they  practiced  in

95

later  days  enchantment  and  divination,  and  as  these  arts
began  to  be  used  popularly  in  other  nations,  and  were  often
combined  with  Sorcery,  Necromancy,  and  phases  of  Magic
of  the  most  questionable  character,  the  term  Magician  was
at  length  applied  to  those  who  abused  the  power  of  Magic,
exercised  it  for  unholy  purposes,  or  by  aid  of  evil  spirits.
It  was  in  this  sense  that  the  writers  of  the  Pentateuch
designated  those  Priests  of  Egypt  who  contended  with
Moses.  They  called  them  Magicians^  whilst  Moses  in  their
phraseology  was  the  Servant  of  God.  They  (the  Magi-
cians) acted  under  the  influence  of  "  Demons,"  Moses  un-
der that  of  the  Hebrew's  Tutelary  ''  Deity."  It  is  thus
that  we  learn  how  the  title  of  Magician — originally  syn-
onymous with  superior  wisdom  and  divine  knowledge —
may  be  used  as  a  term  of  reproach  by  rival  practitioners.

To  the  egotistical  translators  of  the  Septuagint,  the  per-
formances of  Moses  with  frogs,  serpents,  lice  and  other
abominations  were  the  work  of  ''  God,"  acting  through  his
chosen  servant ;  that  of  the  Egyptian  Priests,  ''  Magic,"  a
word  as  abominable  in  Jewish  lips,  as  it  was  honorable
amongst  Egyptians  or  Persians.

There  is  a  Sanscrit  word  signifying  worship,  which
somewhat  resembles  Magus,  or  Enchanter,  a  term  synony-
mous in  Ghaldaic,  with  the  Persian  Magian.  The  trans-
lators of  the  Septuagint  allege  that  the  Bayblonian  High
Priest  was  called  Rab  Mog,  or  Mag ;  hence  it  seems  that
Magic,  Magian,  Magician,  and  all  their  derivatives  were,  in
the  first  instance,  significant  of  deep  religious  meaning ;
but  subsequently  became  corrupted  into  base  and  injurious
terms,  by  the  misuse  that  was  made  of  the  power  they
referred  to.

In  a  curious  old  treatise,  by  Godwyn,  on  the  manners,
times  and  theological  worship  of  the  ancient  Romans,  pub-
lished in  1622,  there  are  the  following  items  of  informa-

96

tion  concerning  the  subdivisions  of  their  Gods  and  Spirits,
etc. :

"  Though  Satan  had  much  blinded  the  hearts  of  men  in  old  times,  yet  was  not
the  darkness  so  great,  but  that.they  did  easily  perceive  that  there  was  some  gou-
vernour,  some  first  mover,  as  Aristotle  saith  ;  some  first  originall  of  all  goodnesse,  as
Plato  teacheth ;  so  that  if  any  made  this  question  whether  there  was  a  Grod  or  no,
they  were  urged  to  confess  the  truth  that  there  was  a  God  ;  yet  were  they  very
blind  in  discerning  the  true  God,  and  hence  hath  been  invented  such  a  tedious  cat-
alogue of  Gods,  that,  as  Yarro  averreth,  their  number  hath   exceeded  thirty  thou-

gand The  second  kinde   of  Gods  were  called  Semides  id  est  demi-Gods ;

also,  Indigites  id  est  Gods  adopted  or  canonized,  or,  men  deified.  For,  as  the
Select  Gods  had  possession  of  heaven  by  their  own  right,  so  these  Gods  canonized
had  it  no  other  way  than  by  right  of  donation,  being  therefore,  translated  into
heaven,  because  they  lived  as  Gods  upon  earth." Then  follows  a  descrip-
tion of  the  rites  of  canonization,  unnecessary  to  quote.  The  author  goes  on  to
say  :  "  But  that  we  may  understand  what  is  meant  by  these  Semones  (Gods  of
the  third  order),  we  must  rememeber  that  by  them  are  signified— not  the  Gods
that  appertain  to  us— but  the  necessaries  of  man's  life,  as  his  victuals,  cloathing
and  the  like— to  the  which  well-being  of  man  were  Gods  of  good  and  evil  fortune,
inclining  to  give  or  withhold.

"  We  read,  likewise,  of  divers  names  given  to  many  Gods  who  did  severally  af-
ford help  unto  many,  so  that  they  were  called  tutelares,  such  as  had  undertaken
the  protection  of  any  City  or  Towne,  and  thence  are  named  for  the  City  or  To  wne,
as,  St.  George,  of  England;  St.  Denis,  of  France;  St.  Patrick,  of  Ireland,  etc.,
and  the  Romans,  being  fully  persuaded  of  this  kind  of  guard,  held  by  tutelares,
when  they  went  about  to  beseige  a  Towne  by  certaine  enchantments  or  spells,
they  would  first  call  out  the  Tutelar  God,  because  they  deemed  it  impossible  to
captivate  the  City  as  long  as  these  Gods  were  within,  and  least  others  might  use
the  same  means  in  besieging  Rome,  therefore,  as  divers  authors  have  thought,  the
true  name  of  the  Roman  City  was  never  known,  least  thereby  the  name  of  their  .

Tutelar  God  might  be  descryed And  as  they  supposed  some  Tutelar  spirit

to  have  the  charge  of  whole  countries,  so  did  they  believe  that  others  had  the
charge  of  particular  men,  and  that  so  soon  as  any  man  was  born,  two  spirits  did
presently  accompany  him  invisibly,  the  one  tearmed  the  good  Angell,  or  bonus
Genius,  persuading  him  to  that  which  is  good  ;  the  other  called  the  Malus  Genius,
or  evil  Angell,  tempting  to  that  which  should  be  hurtful,  insomuch  that  they
thought  all  the  actions  of  men  were  guided  by  these  Genii,  so  that  if  any  mis-
fortune befel  a  man  they  would  say,  ^  We  have  grieved  our    Genius,' or,  '  Our

Genius  being  displeased  with  us,  or  opposed  to  us.'" "  These  Genii  were

thought  to  be  a  middle  essence  between  Gods  and  men." "  They  appear  in

divers  forms,  but  oftener  as  a  fierce  tragicall  man,  as  did  the  evil  Genius  who
warned  Brutus  of  his  fate,  or  a  decrepit  old  man,  or  a  sad  one,  or  in  many  such
forms  of  anger  or  woe  as  mankind  doth  assume."

97

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  VI.

Fragments  from  the  Jewish   Cabbala — Quotations  from

Classical  Authors.

One  of  the  most  curious  compendiums  of  ideality  and
truth,  allegory  and  veiled  mysticism  extant,  is  to  be  found
in  the  ancient  Cabbala  of  the  Jews.

This   celebrated    work  is   a  collection  of  writings  and
allusions  to  traditions  of  still  more  authority,  supposed  to
have  been  communicated  by  God  to  Adam,  by  Adam  to
Seth,  by  Seth    lost    or   parted  with  in    some  mysterious
manner,  but  renewed  again  in  oral  teachings  from  the  God
of  Sinai  to  Moses,  from  him  revealed  to  Joshua,  thence
given  to  the  seventy  Elders,  and  thus  transmitted  to  divers  of
the  learned  Jews,  who  dissented  from  the  more  direct  asser-
tions of  the  Talmud.       There  is  another  collection  of  writ-
ings and  traditions  bearing  the  title  of  Cabbala,  attributed
to    Oriental  scholars,  but  as  this   remarkable  work  is  of
little  or  no  value  without  a  key  which  can  only  be  furnished
by  certain  Oriental  fraternities,  its  transcript  would  be  of
no  value  to  the  general  reader.

Passing  over  the  sources  from  whence  the  Jews  pretend
to  derive  their  Cabbala,  it  is  well  to  notice  one  peculiarity
in  its  mode  of  inscription  which  may  serve  to  explain  the
many  confused  and  contradictory  statements  to  which  it
has  given  rise.

The  writers  of  the  Jewish  Cabbala  evidently  labored,
and  with  remarkable  success  too,  to  conceal  the  true  mean-
ing of  what  they  wrote.

Thus  some  letters  are  so  shortened  as  to  leave  the  word
intact,  but  the  meaning  masked  ;  others  are  lengthened,

98

crooked,  or  interpolated  with  seemingly  unmeaning  points,
all  with  the  same  design  ;  for  example,  in  the  sentence,
Abraham  came  to  weep  for  Sara,  the  letter  Caph  is  smaller
than  the  others,  by  which  Cabbalistic  readers  understand
that  as  Sara  was  old,  her  spouse  only  wept  for  her  a  little.

In  a  certain  passage  the  syllables  Isch,  signifying  a  man,
and  Escha,  a  woman,  will  be  found  with  a  point  against  the
word  man,  absent  in  writing  the  word  woman  ;  next  there
occurs  a  point  in  the  word  woman,  lacking  in  writing
the  word  man  ; — when  the  two  points  are  combined  in  the
same  sentence,  they  signify  God  ; — when  one  alone  is
there,  the  word  fire  is  implied.  Without  the  pointing,  the
idea  conveyed  is,  man  and  ivoman  do  agree  well  together.
With  the  interception  of  the  subtle  points  m  the  peculiar
mode  of  Cabbalistic  writings,  the  sentence  would  read.
When  man  and  woman  agree  together .^  God  is  with  them,  when
they  disagree,  fire  is  between  them.

The  study  of  a  life  time  would  fail  to  master  all  the  sub-
tleties with  which  these  writings  abound,  and  the  deter-
mination which  the  authors  of  the  Jewish  Cabbala  mani-
fest to  veil  the  meaning  of  their  sentences  under  the  mask
of  cypher;  and  hence  it  is  doubtful  how  much  the  popular
translations  of  this  celebrated  collection  can  be  relied  on,
especially  when  they  are  given  to  the  world  by  Mystics,
as  much  interested  in  reserving  Cabbalistic  ideas,  as  their
original  authors.

The  Talmud  very  probably  contains  a  fair  digest  of  the
Cabbala,  although  the  latter  is  richer  in  occult  lore.  From
a  comparison  of  the  two  we  may  glean  the  following  sum-
mary of  ancient  Jewish  opinions,  concerning  the  Divine
order  of  cosmogony.

"  God  is  a  Trinity,"  to  wit :  Light,  Spirit  and  Life.  His
first  emanations  are  also  triune,  namely  :  En  Soph,  the
masculine    of  Infinity ;    Sophia,  the  feminine  of   Wisdom

99

and  the  Word,  the  divine  Activity  proceeding  from  the
union  of  the  two.  A  third  triad  of  principles  is  indicated,
namely  :  Matter,  the  formative  mould  ;  Life,  the  active  prin-
ciple of  formation ;  and  Soul,  the  eternal  and  infinite  form
of  Spirit.  Much  stress  is  laid  on  the  ineffable  mystery  of
Triune  being — that  is,  "  Three  in  one,  and  one  in  three;"
also,  on  the  science  of  numerals,  the  exact  principle  of
mathematics,  and  the  immutable  order  by  which  creation
is  designed,  on  geometrical  proportions.  Mathematics  and
geometry  are  as  inextricably  interwoven  with  Cabbalistic
ideas  as  Spirit  and  matter.

The  first  man — Adam  Kadman — is  mysteriously  mixed
up  with  the  Jewish  Christ — the  Adam  of  the  fall ;  King
David^  and  the  original  "  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  It
would  take  all  the  craft  of  the  unscrupulous  Eusebius  to
disentangle  the  exact  relations  of  Adam  Kadman  with
his  subsequent  appearances  on  earth,  and  all  the  faith  of
the  most  unquestioning  of  Christian  believers  to  swallow
the  Cabbalistic  methods  of  interpreting  the  scheme  of  un-
accountable perdition,  and  unaccountable  salvation  lor
man.  There  is  some  probability  that  the  wild  and  unsus-
tained  theories  of  modern  Re-incarnationists  borrow  their
fantasies  from  these  Cabbalistic  ramblings ;  still,  there  is
much  of  beauty,  much  too  of  scientific  value,  in  the  sugges-
tions thrown  out  concerning  the  just  proportions  of  the
universe,  and  the  profound  mathematical  bases  on  which  the
structure  of  creation  rests. — To  a  great  extent  the  scheme  of
descending  emanations  in  creation,  and  ascending  spheres
providing  for  the  progress  of  fallen  spirits  and  elementary
existences,  aoirees  with  the  views  of  other  ancient  Theolo-
gians,  whose  opinions  we  have  cited.  Cabbalistic  writers
are  very  diffuse  in  their  descriptions  of  different  orders  of
"  Resplendent  An<j[;els,"  Tutelary  Spirits,  Guardian  Angels
of    every   grade  and  function.  Souls  of  men.  Spirits,  and

100

legions  of  Elementaries,  filling  all  space,  crowding  all  ele-
ments, and  peopling  the  universe  with  realms  of  Spiritual
existence  correspr)nding  to  the  Archetypes,  Spiritual  prin-
ciples and  ultimates  of  form.

We  shall  have  occasion  to  draw  from  the  Cabbala  again
in  our  sections  on  Magic ;  meantime  we  close  this  brief
notice  by  affirming  that  the  very  best  and  most  reliable
digests  of  Cabbalistic  wisdom  are  to  be  found  in  the  songs
of  Orpheus,  the  philosophy  of  Plato,  the  doctrines  of  Py-
thagoras, Appolonius  of  Tyana,  and  the  modern  mystics,
Van  Helmont  and  Behmen.  Many  others  have  borrowed
fragments  from  this  collection  of  writings,  and  though  we
are  unprepared  to  assert  that  the  celebrated  Greek  sages
named  above  derived  their  ideas  from  the  Cahhala^  we  are
satisfied  that  they  all  and  each  drew  from  the  same  source,
and  that  the  fountains  of  wisdom  that  supplied  them,  poured
forth  their  treasures  from  the  grand  old  ranges  of  the
mighty  Himalayas,  and  trembled  in  the  dewy  chalices  of
the  white  lotuses  that  fringed  the  shores  of  the  sacred  Nile.

The  more  we  pursue  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients,  through
all  their  ramifications  of  varied  speech,  allegorical  forms,
and  symbolic  representation,  the  more  surely  we  shall
come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  all  tributary  streams
from  one  central  source  ;  that  this  source  was  the  Book  of
Nature,  written  over  with  flowers  and  bloom  on  the  fair
green  earth,  with  suns  and  stars  in  the  spangled  vault  of
Heaven, — that  the  great  Schoolmaster,  who  first  instructed
men  and  angels  in  the  letters  of  this  divine  alphabet,  was
God,  the  Father  of  Spirits  ;  that  the  means  of  teaching
were  intuition,  inspiration,  and  direct  communion  with
Angels,  the  messengers  of  God  ; — magic,  as  the  artificer  of  a
new  form  of  communion,  when  the  child-like  early  man
lost  the  power  of  intuition,  and  broke  the  links  of  direct
communion,  by  the  corruptions  of  a  materialistic  civiliza-

101

tion,  and  all  means  combined,  when  the  pure  heart  and
the  clear  brain  can  elevate  the  soul  to  its  native  heavens,
and  learn  to  master  the  occult  forces  of  nature  by  science.
Perhaps  we  may  never  return  to  the  simple  and  child-like
attitude  which  the  early  men  of  the  earth  sustained  to-
wards their  God.

They  conversed  with  their  tutelary  spirits  as  a  man
speaks  with  his  friend.  They  looked,  and  saw  that  God
was.  They  listened,  and  God's  Angels  spoke  to  them  in
voices  as  clear  as  the  sighing  of  the  breeze  or  the  muriuur-
ing  of  the  brook.  They  reflected,  and  their  past  spiritual
origin  and  present  destiny  cast  their  images  on  the  mir-
ror of  their  minds  as  truthfully  as  the  limpid  waters  of  the
lake  reflect  the  lustre  of  the  stars.

Had  you  asked  the  intuitional  man  of  old,  how  he  knew
these  things^  he  would  have  gazed  upon  you  with  astonish-
ment, and  questioned  back,  "  How  is  it  possible  that  you
should  fail  to  know  them  V  Socrates  said,  ''  I  respect  my
own  soul,  though  I  cannot  see  it."

The  men  of  our  purely  materialistic  and  external  age
doubt  the  existence  of  their  own  souls  because  they  cannot
see  them.

How  then  can  they  expect  to  see  spirits,  hear  their  voices,
or  apprehend  the  nature  of  that  God  "  who  is  a  Spirit "  ]

102

PART  II

SECTION    VII.

Spiritism  and  Magic — Mundane,  Sub-Mundane,  and
Super-Mundane  Spiritism.

Man's  earliest  religious  history  is  also  the  history  of
Spiritism,  or  his  communion  with  the  realms  of  Spiritual
existence.

To  effect  this  communion,  the  human  organism  must
be  adapted  to  the  perception  of  Spiritual  entities,  or  else
means  must  be  found  to  promote  this  adaptation.

We  have  mis-spent  our  time  in  sketching  out  the  an-
cient forms  of  religious  belief,  if  we  have  failed  to  show
that  men  once  communed  with  their  Tutelary  Gods  and
ministering  spirits  intuitively,  inspirationally,  and  even
directly,  but  that  in  process  of  time,  either  by  reason  of

103

changes  in  man's  receptivity,  or  from  the  altered  conditions
which  civilization  imposes,  that  communion  became  inter-
rupted, then  more  and  more  difficult ;  in  some  periods  it
ceased  altogether,  and  finally  became  limited  to  a  few  ex-
ceptionally endowed  individuals,  in  which  category  (with
occasional  irruptions  of  a  more  diffusive  character)  it  has
continued,  down  to  the  present  day.

The  spontaneous  and  natural  communion  with  spiritual
beings,  whether  it  be  exercised  by  communities  or  indivi-
duals, we  may  term  Spiritism.  The  arts  by  which  this
communion  is  procured  through  prepared  conditions,  should
with  equal  propriety  be  designated  Magic,  and  whether
these  arts  be  practiced  for  good  or  evil  purposes,  their
methods  must  involve  a  knowledge  of  the  occult  forces  ex-
isting in  nature,  and  the  means  of  calling  them  forth  and
utilizing  them.  If  the  understanding  and  application  of
Nature's  laws  in  any  one  department  of  being  is  a  science,
then  must  all  knowledge  and  all  arts,  which  are  but  the
applications  of  knowledge,  be  included  in  the  term  science,
hence  magic,  however  ominous  its  name  may  sound  in  su-
perstitious ears,  and  however  much  it  may  have  been  per-
verted to  purposes  of  evil,  is  still  a  branch  of  science,  and
as  such,  should  be  studied  and  legitimately  used.

Magic  may  be  termed  the  science  of  Spiritism,  and
whilst  it  would  be  as  idle  to  tender  it  to  the  acceptance  of
those  whose  natural  endowments  supply  them  with  the  art
it  professes  to  teach,  as  to  paint  the  cheek  of  the  rose,  or
blanch  the  lily  white,  its  careful  study  may  furnish  us  with
a  clue  to  the  better  use  and  guidance  of  natural  gifts,  and
where  these  are  lacking,  instruct  us  in  the  methods  of  sup-
plying the  deficiency.  In  order  to  point  out  the  spheres
of  power  in  which  magic  operates,  it  is  necessary  to  define
the  order  of  communion  which  nature  permits,  through  the
exceptional  endowments  of  her  most  highly  gifted  children,
the  world's  Seers,  Prophets,  Sybils,  and  Mediums.

104

The  first  gift  included  in  the  discernment  of  Spiritual
beings  is  that  of  vision,  or  the  faculty  of  seeing  Spirits,  re-
cognizing their  signs  in  aerial  pictures,  their  writings  when
inscribed  in  spiritual  substances,  also  of  perceiving  the
spirits  of  fellow-men,  reading  the  thoughts  and  character-
istics masked  to  the  mortal  eye,  and  taking  cognizance
generally  of  the  spiritual  part  of  things  in  the  Universe.

The  second  gift  of  the  prophetic  order  is,  the  faculty  of
hearing  sounds,  whether  in  the  form  of  spirit  voices,  music,
or  other  vibrations  made  on  the  ethereal  medium  in  which
spirits  live,  rather  than  on  the  atmosphere  which  mortals
breathe  and  dwell  in.

The  power  of  seeing  and  hearing  spirits,  opens  up  two
of  the  principal  avenues  of  intelligence  to  our  Souls,  and  in
like  manner,  the  spiritual  senses  of  smell,  taste,  and  touch
can  be  operated  upon.

Through  one  or  other  of  these  gates  to  the  inner  con-
sciousness, all  spiritualistic  phenomena  must  act,  but  the
phenomena  themselves  are  very  various.

Sometimes  the  Soul  of  man  itself,  looks  forth  through  its
material  encasements,  acting  from  within,  and  sees,  hears,
tastes,  smells,  and  touches  spiritual  entities.

Sometimes  ministering  spirits  produce  effects  acting  from
without  upon  the  inner  senses  of  man.  Both  methods  are
common,  both  belong  to  the  one  gifted  individual.

Sometimes  the  influx  of  spiritual  ideas  is  so  silent,
natural,  and  unmarked  by  physical  disturbances,  that  their
subject  knows  not  that  an  Angel  speaks,  or  that  the  soul
has  transcended  the  laws  of  sensuous  perception,  and  derived
ideas  unconsciously  from  its  near  proximity  to  the  realms
of  spiritual  entities.

To  account  for  the  operation  of  the  powers  described
above,  it  is  necessary  to  revert  to  the  last  section  of  the
First  Part,  and  bear  in  mind,  that  the  realms  of  spiritual

105

being  are  very  near,  in  fact,  all  around  and  about  us  ;  that,
though  spirits  of  every  grade  and  class  swarm  through  the
universe,  ranged  in  their  different  spheres  and  orders,  yet
that  the  ''  spirit  world,"  or  the  spheres  through  which  the
souls  of  men  are  making  pilgrimage  upwards  and  onwnrds
to  heaven,  are  approximate  to  this  earth,  even  as  the  soul
of  man  is  related  to  his  body  ;  that  these  spheres  inter-
penetrate every  atom  of  matter  on  this  globe  with  a  spirit-
ual element,  and  again,  as  the  disembodied  spirits  of  earth
are  in  the  most  direct,  natural,  and  harmonious  proximity
to  their  still  embodied  friends,  it  is  to  the  spirit  spheres  of
humanity,  that  the  most  ready  access  of  the  human  soul  is
obtamed,  and  through  which  the  most  constant  influx  into
the  natural  world  transpires.

To  expect  that  the  realms  of  disembodied  human  spirits
should  be  the  nearest  in  atmospheric  proximity  to  man,  the
most  in  accordance  with  his  grade  of  intelligence,  and  the
most  prompt  to  serve,  bless,  and  instruct  him  by  ties  of
love,  kindness,  and  adaptation,  is  just  as  rational  as  to  sup-
pose that  the  human  mother  would  be  the  first  to  render
aid  to  her  suffering  child,  or  that  the  child  would  be  more
likely  to  appeal  for  that  aid  to  a  tender  parent  than  to
some  unsympathizing  stranger.  This  phase  of  intercourse
between  spirits  and  mortals,  we  distinguish  as  Mundane
Spiritism,  aud  this  we  claim  to  be  the  most  natural,  direct,
and  spontaneous  product  of  that  divine  plan  which  connects
all  conditions  of  being,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  in
one  unbroken  chain  of  love  and  harmony,  the  links  of
which  are  millions  of  spheres  of  super-mundane,  mun-
dane, and  sub-mundane  spiritual  existences.

There  are  but  few  analogies  discoverable  on  the  surface
of  mundane  life,  between  the  laws  which  separately  govern
Spirit  and  matter,  but  the  closer  we  pursue  our  researches,
the  more  clearly  we  recognize  correspondences,  if  not  actual

106

analogies,  between  these  elements.     Amongst  these  are  the
laws  of  physical  and  moral  gravitation.

As  the  heaviest  and  grossest  bodies  sink  to  the  centre,
so  the  least  intelligent  and  exalted  conditions  of  spiritual
being  obey  the  same  law,  and  hence,  sub-mundane  Spirit-
ism consists  in  communion  with  those  lower  orders  of
being,  who  are  in  pomt  of  position  in  the  Universe,  no  less
than  in  moral  and  mental  unfoldment,  lower  than  man,
and  whom  the  philosophers  and  mystics  of  old  have  signi-
ficantly denominated,  "  the  Elementaries."

it  would  be  impossible  to  do  justice  to  the  immense
multitudes  of  those  beings  who  crowd  the  elements,  and
exist  in  all  grades  of  semi-spiritual,  semi-material  bodies,
from  such  progressed,  but  still  rudimental  conditions,
as  almost  impinge  upon  the  perfection  of  manhood,
down  to  the  "  Pigmies,"  who  emerge  from  rude,  almost
inorganic  life,  evolved  from  minerals,  plants,  water,  earth,
atmosphere  and  fire.

There  are  luxuriant  and  enormous  growths,  gigantic
forms,  exceeding  the  proportions  of  humanity,  who  abound
in  forests,  mountains,  hills,  and  desert  places ;  stunted,
dwarfish  beings  who  frequent  mines,  caverns,  and  the
deep  recesses  of  earth,  corresponding  to  the  undeveloped
elements  of  inorganic  nature.

Beautiful,  though  still  embryonic  existences  there  are,
who  belong  to  the  finer  spheres,  corresponding  to  flowers
and  air.  Fantastic  and  difi'usive  shapes  of  elementary  life
crowd  the  waters,  and  resplendent  globular  unparticled
essences  exist,  and  can  be  detected  in  the  realms  of  light
and  heat  represented  by  fire.  All  are  included  in  the  title
of  Elementaries.  All  possess  difi'erent  functions,  exert
power  in  the  particular  elements  to  which  they  belong,
are  neither  good  nor  evil  per  se,  but  malignant  or  benefi-
cent in  part,  to  those  whom  they  ajffect  or  dislike  ;  they

107

possess,  in  short,  varied  powers  and  characteristics,  and
communion  with  them  may  be  classed  in  the  category  of
Sub-Mundane  Spiritism.

Myriads  upon  myriads  there  are  in  whom  special  animal
instincts  prevail,  giving  to  their  embryonic  forms  a  simil-
arity to  the  creatures  whose  natures  they  correspond  to.
These  elementary  spirits  are  all  ranged  and  classed  in  the
divine  order  of  creation,  under  the  same  law  of  adaptation
that  is  manifest  in  the  plants,  animals  and  other  products
of  different  countries  and  climes.  Every  creature  is  as
much  in  its  place,  and  an  inhabitant  of  its  appropriate
sphere,  as  is  the  material  particle  to  which  it  corres-
ponds. Hanging  on  the  same  divine  thread  of  beneficence
which  binds  man  to  the  heart  of  Deity,  these  Elementaries
could  no  more  be  riven  away  from  the  interminable  chain
of  being,  than  the  Planetary  order  of  the  skies  could  af-
ford to  part  with  Mercury,  the  youngest  child  of  the  solar
system,  because  it  is  not  so  perfectly  developed  as  Mars,
nor  yet  cast  out  of  the  shining,  starry  family  that  circles
round  the  parent  sun,  the  planet  Earth,  because  it  has  not
attained  to  the  size,  lustre  and  glory  of  Jupiter.

''  I  number  up  my  Jewels  !"  says  the  God  of  the  spark-
ling sky ;  and  which  of  his  blazing  sons  of  light  could  he
dispense  with,  without  throwing  the  whole  scheme  of  re-
volving worlds  out  of  eternal  harmony  ?

"  I  number  up  my  Jewels  !"  cries  the  Tuletary  Angel  of
Earth,  in  the  tender  and  merciful  tones  of  divine  Father-
hood ;  and  which  of  his  immortal  soul  gems  could  he  afford
to  annihilate  as  his  vision  ranges,  and  his  justice  prevails,
from  the  monarch  on  his  throne,  to  the  dying  wretch  in
the  cell  of  earthly  condemnation  ?

"  I  number  up  my  Jewels !"  cries  the  Archangel  of  the
grand  solar  system,  and  which,  of  his  minutest  sparks  of
spiritual  fire  could  he  afford  to  extinguish,  whether  it

108

blazed  in  the  soul  of  a  Copernicus,  or  glimmered  in  the
uncouth  form  of  a  pigmy  Elementary,  on  the  lowest  round
of  the  ladder  of  sub-mundane  pilgrimage  ?

Oh,  proud,  disdainful  man  !  disdainful  and  proud  only  in
your  ignorance  !  Which  of  you  can  say  from  whence  you
came,  or  deny  what  you  might  have  been,  however  you
may  rejoice  in  the  height  to  which  you  have  now  attained  ;
however  you  may  rest  in  the  assurance  that  there  is  no
such  thing  as  retrogression,  and  that  you  cannot  sink  lower
than  you  will  to  fall  7  Which  of  you,  who  so  cheerfully
accept  that  vague  theory  of  inductive  science,  that  teaches
you  to  believe  men  were  once  apes^  need  shrink  back  with
contempt  from  the  idea  that  your  spirits  were  as  rudimen-
tal  as  your  bodies  7  Which  of  you  that  so  fiercely  reject
the  Darwinian  theory,  yet  offer  no  better  hypothesis  for
human  origin — who  would  rather  fancy  you  were  nothing^
than  anything  lower  than  your  arrogance  deems  worthy  of
you — which  of  you  can  believe  that  from  nothing  sprang
something,  or  that  you  suddenly  appeared  on  the  theatre
of  existence,  a  full-fledged  immortal  Soul,  with  a  whither-
ward^ but  no  whence — a  heavenly  goal  to  attain  to,  but  no
beginning  to  spring  from  7

The  world  that  sees  its  Julius  Caesars  and  Napoleon
Bonapartes  commence  life  as  helpless,  wailing  babes,  and
end  it  as  Masters  of  Europe,  and  Lords  over  millions  of
their  fellow  creatures,  still  scoffs  at  the  idea  that  the  race
of  man  ever  had  a  similar  infancy.

The  full-grown  man  of  the  nineteenth  century  repels
with  indignation  the  idea  that  he  could  have  ever  been
related  to  the  world  of  elementary  being,  and  can  see  no
justice,  divinity,  beauty  or  order  in  the  scheme  that  sows
a  germ  of  spiritual  life  in  the  most  rudimental  of  material
forms,  and  then  expands  it  through  a  natural  series  of
births  and  deaths,  until  it  becomes  fitted  to  take  its   place

109

as  a  purely  perfected  and  self-conscious  spirit  entity,  in
those  realms  where  it  awaits,  in  common  with  myriads  of
other  spirits,  a  mortal  birth  on  this  or  some  other  earth  in
the  Universe.  Yet  such  is  God's  plan,  at  least  such  does  it
appear  to  the  most  patient  of  students ;  those  who  have
toiled  through  the  esoteric  significations  of  human  history,
and  learned  their  spiritualistic  lessons  from  the  very  beings
who  are  in  the  experience  of  the  truths  they  reveal.  Such
is  God's  plan,  unless  the  philosophic  minds,  who  have  gath-
ered up  the  accumulated  wisdom  of  past  ages,  and  studied
nature  and  the  mysteries  of  spiritual  existence  in  their  pro-
foundest  depths,  have  learned  less  than  modern  theorists,
who  never  study  such  subjects  at  alLy

/^  Either  the  wisdom  and   occult   knowledge  of  cycles  of     \
/  ages  is  worth  less  than  the  scornful  denial  of  utterly  unin-     j
[     formed  skepticism,   or  our  brief  review  of  sub-mundane   /
\     Spiritism  is  a  correct  one  as  far  as  it  goes.

Eeserving  more  particular  descriptions  of  the  Elemen-
taries  for  future  sections,  we  now  proceed  to  notice  the
realms  of  super-mundane  Spiritism.

Here,  legions  of  Archangels  and  Angels  throng  the  Uni-
verse, of  whom  the  imagination  may  conceive,  but  to  whose
being  and  nature  the  power  of  language  can  do  no  justice.
In  whatever  realms  of  spiritual  life  the  entranced  soul
of  the  ecstatic  may  wander,  with  whatever  resplendent
beings  that  soul  may  be  permitted  to  hold  converse,  the
mind  is  always  directed  to  higher  states,  and  higher  indi-
vidualities still.  Like  the  revelating  Angel  addressing
the  Apocalyptic  writer  John,  every  Spirit  or  Angel  that
has  ever  communed  with  man,  ignores  worship,  and  as-
cribes all  power  and  all  glory  to  something  still  beyond —
to  Deific  existences,  incomprehensible,  but  ever  felt  in  the
understanding,  and  ever  holding  that  central  point  of  all
devotion  and  worship,  which  we  vaguely  call  God.     Bear

no

this  fact  in  mind,  and  we  shall  be  held  guiltless  of  pre-
sumption when  we  write  of  what  the  eyes  of  Seers  have
beheld,  of  spirits  with  whom  oiu-  fathers,  like  John  of  old,
have  identified  even  the  Lord  of  life  and  light,  and  striven
to  worship  as  God;  of  mighty  Angels,  who,  like  the  spirit
that  spoke  through  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  or  from  the
midst  of  the  burning  bush,  seem  to  man  the  last  apex  of
glory  on  which  the  finite  mind  rested  its  conceptions  of
God.  Hicrher  and  still  hicrher,  ever  stretchincr  awav  where
roads  are  made  of  star  dust,  and  paths  are  strewn  with
glittering  Suns ;  where  time  is  no  more,  and  space  is  lost
in  infinity;  stretching  away  into  hemispheres  where  new
sidereal  heavens  form  the  boundary  walls  and  gateways
to  new  corridors  of  an  Universe  wherein,  end  there  is  none.

Loose  the  reius  of  the  imagination  and  let  the  fiery
steeds  of  a  new  mental  Phoebus  seek  to  traverse  these  hitrh-
roads  of  infinity!  People  them  all  with  Angels  ascending
and  still  ascending  in  the  scale  of  grandeur,  power,  and
immensity,  and  then  question  of  the  highest  still,  and  still
the  choiring  worlds  will  answer,  "  Higher  yet  !  higher  yet!
There  still  are  realms  of  beincc  hicrher  vet !"

We  veil  our  presumptuous  eyeii  against  these  vain  specu-
lations, retreat  to  our  spheres  of  littleness,  content  to  find
that  Angels,  Guardian  spirits,  and  Spirit  friends,  surround
us,  minister  to  our  earthly  powers  and  functions  only  as
our  minds  can  grasp  and  comprehend  them,  and  thus  we
may  concentrate  our  wandering  thoughts  on  the  firm
a.ssurance  that  God  is,  though  man  may  never  know  Him,
and  rest  in  the  certainty  that  all  we  hope  and  strive  for,
will  yet  be  ours,  as  the  heirs  ol  immortal  progress.

Super-mundane  Spiritism  teaches  of  Tutelary  Spirits  or
Gods,  and  Planetary  Angels.

The  Jehovah  of  the  Jews  afibrds  a  well  marked  defi-
nition of  the  ancient  belief  in  Eloihim,  or  Tutelary  Gods.

Ill

The  revelating  Angels  so  often  described  by  the  He-
brew Prophets,  and  He  who  was  claimed  by  the  authors
of  the  Apocalypse  to  have  mapped  out  the  masonic  order
ol  creation  in  that  gorgeous  vision,  said  to  have  been  shown
in  the  Isle  ot  Patmos,  or  the  insolation  of  the  entranced  iSoul,
clearlv  illustrate  the  nature  of  those  celestial  visitants
who  in  the  Oriental  dispensation,  talked  with  men,  face  to
face.  In  our  degenerate  and  unspiritual  age,  we  have  little
to  illuminate  our  prosaic  lives,  save  the  revelations  of  our
Fathers.  From  time  to  time,  bright  beings  tlash  athwart
our  path,  more  glorioas  than  the  forms  of  men  or  spirits,
and  the  as.surance  that  the  realms  of  space  must  be  filled
with  the  messengers  of  God,  induces  us  to  yield  acceptance
to  the  Cabbiilistic  division  of  the  higher  orders  of  Angeb
into  ''  Thrones.  Dominions,  Powers  ; — AngeLs  of  the  Plan-
ets, Tutelary  Spirits.  Guardians  of  >»atiGns,  Cities,  Men,
the  Souls  of  Ancestors,  and  beloved  Spirit  jfrieuds.''  The
reader  will  remember  the  description  so  often  rendered  by
Sweedenborg  in  his  ecstatic  wanderings  thi*ough  Celestial
spheres,  of  his  having  seen  God  as  a  Spiritual  Sun.  The
same  statement  is  made  by  several  of  the  best  modem
Brahmins  who  are  Seers.  It  was  re-affirmed  by  Cahagnets
tSomnamhule-s  under  the  control  of  many  spirits  who  pro-
fessed to  have  beheld  the  glory  of  this  Spiritual  Sun,  and
it  was  stated  in  opposition  to  all  the  preconceived  opinions
of  surrounding  listeners,  by  the  Spirits  who  spoke  with
human  voices  at  Koons's  Spirit  room  in  the  opening  of  the
American  Spiritual  Dispensation.

It  has  trequentlybeen  stated  to  the  author  by  teaching
Spirits,  that  the  Tutelary  Angel  of  every  planet  appears
only  as  a  Spiritual  Sun.  himseh'  deriving  light,  heat,  force,
and  being,  from  the  Central  Sun  of  the  Universe ;  that
these  stupendous  and  sublime  Centres,  the  Spiritual  Suns  of
Earths.   Planets,    and  Satellites,  impart    their  life-giving

112

light,  radiance  and  gravitating  forces  to  the  Physical  Suns
of  the  systems  to  which  they  belong  ;— that  these  Physical
Suns  are  the  most  progressed  aggregations  of  world  mat-
ter in  the  Universe,  hence  become  centres  and  parents
of  revolving  Satellites,  who  derive  a  certain  measure  of
light  and  heat  from  the  Sun  of  their  system,  but  like  that
material  body,  they  would  fade,  perish,  and  dissolve  into
their  original  elements,  were  they  not  vitalized  by  the
Spiritual  Sun,  which  is  to  that  system,  as  the  Soul  to  the
human  body.

To  the  true  Hierophant  who  can  connect  ancient  mys-
teries with  personal  spiritual  endowments,  those  who
wear  the  Prophet's  mantle,  yet  analyze  its  fabric  by  the
light  of  modern  science.  Tutelary  Spirits  and  Planetary
Angels  reveal  themselves  as  distinctly  now,  as  when  they
spoke  from  between  the  Cherubim  and  Seraphim  of  the
"  Ark  of  the  Covenant,"  or  reflected  their  lustrous  rays
from  mimic  skies,  v outstretched  above  the  Hierophants  of
ancient  mysteries.

Planetary  Spirits  respond  to  invocations  from  the  sin-
cere Spiritualist,  and  often  hold  watch  and  ward  over  the
favored  ones  of  earth  to  whom,  through  prepared  conditions^
they  communicate  many  of  the  great  truths  of  the  Uni-
verse unattainable  to  mortals  without  their  aid.  Few  of
them  are  inferior  to  the  highest  of  human  intelligences,
save  the  Spirits  of  Mercury  and  Venus,  who  should  seldom
be  invoked  or  encouraged  to  commune  with  Earth.

Generally  speaking,  the  Planetary  Spirits  are  not  at-
tracted to  earth,  except  on  special  missions,  or  by  evoca-
tions procured  as  above  stated,  through  prepared  conditions,
of  which  more  hereafter.

Ranging  under  the  category  of  Super-mundane  Spiritism,
we  place  the  Souls  of  men  who  have  attained  to  the  high-
est conditions  of  Angelic  exaltation,  and  who  are  attracted

113

to  Earth  as  messengers  of  beneficence,  beauty,  and  good-
ness.

Souls  of  men  that  have  enjoyed  ages  of  progress,  and
attained  to  radiant  conditions  of  celestial  happiness,  some-
times return  to  earth  for  material  knowledge,  to  study
lower  conditions  of  being,  and  gather  elements  of  use,  im-
parting in  return  the  noblest  teachings,  and  very  generally
associating  their  mission  with  some  master  mind  of  earth,
through  whom  they  become,  by  inspiration  and  heavenly
influence,  the  promoters  of  mighty  reforms,  great  upheavals
of  human  thought,  culminating  in  social,  political  or  reli-
gious revolutions.

On  every  round  of  that  visionary  ladder,  whose  foot  is
on  earth,  whose  apex  in  heaven — Angels  who  have  once
been  men.  Spirits  who  have  lived  and  labored  on  earth  and
risen  from  the  ashes  of  death,  victor-browed,  to  a  trium-
phant inheritance  beyond  ;  household  ''  lares  " — heart
loves  who  have  just  left  us,  but  still  hover  on  the  threshold
they  have  crossed,  to  smooth  our  rough  and  rugged  path
over  the  stones  their  torn  feet  have  trod — all  such  minis-
ters of  love  and  blessing  as  these,  ascend  and  descend  on
this  mystic  ladder,  forming  an  interminable  chain  of  love
and  harmony  between  the  highest  and  the  lowest,  connect-
ing each  and  all  by  the  links  of  sympathy,  bearing  up  the
tired  hands  that  are  dropping  life's  burdens  for  very  wear-
iness— catching  at  the  outstretched  arms  that  are  tossed
abroad  in  the  agony  of  frantic  supplication  to  the  God  of
many  creeds  and  nations,  tenderly  wafting  up  to  heaven
the  piteous  prayers  that  long  ago  they  lisped  forth  in  ac-
cents as  faltering  as  our  own,  and  returning  inspiration  for
aspiration,  peace  and  blessing  for  the  incoherent  appeals  of
human  ignorance  and  impotence.

These  are  the  beings  that  fill  up  the  sum  of  man's  limited
and  finite  span  of  knowledge,  concerning  Super-mundane
Spiritism.

114

SECTION  VIll.

Man  the  Microcosm  of  the  Unimrse.—Man  the  Trinity  of
elements;  Soul,  Spirit,  Matter  .—Opinions  of  the  Ancients
concerning  the  Astral  Sp  irit—Bosicrucianism—  The
Astral  Spirit,  Astral  Light— The  Ancient  and  Modern
Priest.

The  modus  operandi  by  which  the  worlds  invisible  to  the
outer  senses  of  man  can  become  so  manifest  as  to  convince
him  of  their  existence,  must  depend  first  on  some  element
resident  in  the  human  organism,  and  next  upon  correspon-
dential  means  operating  upon  man,  from  the  invisible
realms  of  being.

Were   there   not  such   operations    mutually  subsisting
between  the  worlds  of  spirit  and  matter,  all  man's  imagin-
ings however  sublime,  all  his  intuitive  faculties,  however
penetrating,   and    even    the  witness  of  his   own    interior
nature,  would  never  be  susceptible  of  demonstrating  God
in  the  light  of  reason,  never    bring  him  face  to  face    with
Spirit  as  the  absolute  esse  of  being,   never  enable  him  to
construct  such  a  religious  belief  as  the  Father  could  com-
municate to  the  child,  or  the  Priest  impart  to  the  People.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Soul's  deepest  and  most
intuitive    perceptions  of  truth,  are  its  own   most  accept-
able witnesses,   still  these  are  incommunicable,   and   the
spirit's  witness  of  itself,  its  Deity,  and  its  faith  in  immortal-
ity, can  never  be  fully  translated  into  human  speech.  Hap-
pily, however,  for  those  blunted  natures  which  are  not
developed  up  to  transcendent  heights  of  spiritual  truth,  the
realms  of  invisible  being  approximate  to  earth,  have  found
means  to  establish   processes  of  communion  which  place

115

their  existence,  varied  offices  of  ministry,  even  their  very
natures,  beyond  all  shadow  of  doubt  or  denial  to  those  who
care  to  consult  the  occult,  as  well  as  the  material  side  of
human  history.

Setting  the  question  of  evidence  aside  however,  or  leav-
ing it  only  as  a  subject  of  warfare  between  contentious
factions  of  materialists  and  creedists,  our  part  is  to  examine
into  the  methods  by  which  the  communion  between  man
and  the  invisible  worlds  of  being  transpire.

Mere  opinions  concerning  the  facts  of  the  phenomena,
furnish  no  clue  to  their  means  of  occurrence.

Spirits  come  and  go,  apparently  by  no  law  analogous  to
those  which  govern  human  action.

Beings  of  an  order  wholly  different  in  their  essential
nature,  and  similar  only  in  form  and  intelligence  to  man,
interpenetrate  his  atmosphere  like  the  magical  appearance
of  the  lightning's  flash,  and  disappear  in  the  same  inexplic_
able  mystery.

Sounds,  sights,  movements,  impressions,  sometimes
appealing  to  man  with  the  subtle  semblance  of  a  vision,
sometimes  compelling  him  by  a  force  he  cannot  resist,  all
captivate  his  senses,  sway  his  soul,  and  fill  him  with  awe
and  wonder  .

The  commonplace  and  secularizing  modes  of  spiritual
intercourse  that  have  prevailed  throughout  the  second  half
of  our  present  century,  have  doubtless  tended  to  strip  the
world  of  supernaturalism  of  its  terrors,  as  well  as  much  of
its  exaltation  and  spiritual  beauty,  still  it  has  effected  a
wonderful  revolution  in  man's  intellectual  appreciation  of
spiritual  existence,  confirming  him  in  knowledge  upon
subjects  that  were  before  divided  between  myth  and  super-
stitious credulity,  and  bringing  under  the  dominion  of
reason  and  judgment  problems  that  were  deemed  hereto-
fore insoluble  upon  any  other  ground  than  the  assumption
of  miracle .

116

In  treating  of  nature  as  of  the  visible  and  sensuous  uni-
verse, and  super-nature  as  of  the  invisible  and  spiritual,  v^e
are  no  longer  driven  to  the  necessity  of  premising  our  phi-
losophy with  an  if,  such  and  such  events  really  transpired,  or
leaning  upon  the  authority  of  some  great  Sage  or  world
renowned  Pundit,  before  we  can  demand  acceptance  for

our  facts.

However  commonplace  or  even  puerile  many  of  the
phases  of  modern  Spiritual  communion  may  be,  however
foolishly  that  communion  may  have  been  abused,  by  mak-
ing it  the  shibboleth  for  the  introduction  of  all  sorts  of
subversive  ideas  into  social,  religious,  and  even  political
life,  the  immense  flood  of  light  it  has  diffused  upon  the
great  problems  of  life,  death,  immortality  and  the  nature
of  the  human  spirit,  rank  it  as  one  of  the  most  revolution-
ary and  powerful  revelations  that  have  ever  been  vouch-
safed to  man  since  the  closing  up  of  the  Oriental  and
Mythological  Dynasties.

It  is  as  much  by  the  positive,  sensuous  demonstrations
afforded  to  us  in  this  great  modern  Spiritual  outpouring,
as  through  a  study  of  ancient  or  mediaeval  records,  that  we
are  enabled  to  present  the  composite  but  absolute  philoso-
phy of  Spiritism  recited  in  this  Section  ;  but  here  let  us
premise,  that  we  do  not  propose  to  pause  in  our  definitions
to  say — this  is  Artephius,  and  that  is  Plato  ;  thus  argued
the  Fire  Philosophers  of  the  middle  ages,  and  thus  mused
the  Cabbalists  of  antiquity.  Now,  as  heretofore,  our  refer-
ence to  authority  must  be  sought  for  in  the  context  of  the
work,  rather  than  in  the  list  of  names  cited.

Man  is  a  Microcosm  or  Universe  in  little — as  such,  he
is  the  conservator  of  all  forces,  the  image  of  all  objective
forms,  the  embodiment  of  all  subjective  ideas,  and  the  con-
necting link  between  all  existences,  higher  and  lower  than
himself.

117

In  himself,  taken  to  pieces  by  chemistry  and  analyzed
by  the  display  of  his  powers  and  relations  to  the  invisible
world,  he  is  a  trinity  of  elements,  namely :  body,  spirit,
and  soul.  His  body  is  a  conservator  of  all  the  powers  and
functions  of  matter ;  his  spirit,  the  animating  principle,  is
made  up  of  all  the  forces  we  vaguely  call  life ;  his  soul
is  the  pure  Deific,  and  immortal  essence  whose  attribute  is
Will  or  Intelligence.  It  is  the  attempt  to  analyze  these
three  elements,  which  has  formed  a  groundwork  of  philos-
ophy, and  a  theme  of  learned  speculation,  for  thousands  of
years.

Judging  from  effects  rather  than  asumed  causes,  may  we
not  believe  with  the  '^  Fire  Philosophers"  of  the  middle
ages,  that  the  soul  is  like  its  source — the  Central  Sun  of
being — in  its  nature  and  essence  pure,  unalloyed,  Spiritual
Light  "^

That  it  is  the  invisible  and  infinitely  sublimated  Spirit
of  Fire— not  the  gross  visible  element  that  can  be  seen,
felt,  and  apprehended  by  the  senses, — but  that  wonderful
innermost  light,  which,  whilst  it  reveals  and  proves  all
things  in  its  own  manifestation,  is  itself  invisible,  unknown
and  uncomprehended  1

It  is  this  essential,  innermost  and  divine  principle  of
soul  which  survives  all  change,  which  is  neither  subject  to
decay  nor  disintegration  ;  which  is  the  spark  derived  from
Deity— the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  being — and  the  link  which
unites  the  Creature  to  the  Creator.

Encompassing  this  divine  essence  of  soul,  and  clothing
it  as  a  spiritual  body,  is  the  subtle  and  refined  element
which,  in  its  effects,  is  force  ;  in  its  action,  through  or-
ganic bodies,  is  life ;  and  in  its  all-pervading  iniluence
throughout  the  realms  of  space,  is  vaguely  termed  mag-
netism and  electricity.

It  is  the  second  of  that  grand  trinity  of  principles,
whose  union  constitutes  man  a  living  being.

118

It  is  this  element  which  we  described  in  our  first  sec-
tion, as  recognized  throughout  the  Universe,  by  the  appar-
ent duaUty  of  its  modes,  called  attraction  and  repulsion,
or  centrifugal  and  centripetal  force.  As  it  is  in  the  realm  of
this  all-pervading  life  principle  that  we  find  our  sole  expla-
nation of  the  various  magical  operations  of  spirit  power,
we  must  dwell  somewhat  at  length  upon  a  description  of
its  character  and  functions.

It  has  often  been  stated  by  Seers  and  illuminated  "  Sen-
sitives," that  there  were  many  layers  or  strata  of  this
spiritual  body,  of  more  or  less  attenuation,  in  proportion  to
their  distance  from  the  soul,  or  nearness  to  the  physical
body.  These  rings,  or  spheres,  are  called,  collectively,  the
Astral  Spirit,  from  the  fact  that  the  element  itself  is  de-
rived, like  the  pure  essence  of  the  soul,  from  the  great
Spiritual  Sun  of  the  Universe,  from  whom  emanate,  and
to  whom  return  all  rays  of  light,  heat,  force,  motion,
power  and  being  that  fill  the  Universe  of  forms.  This
Astral  Spirit  is  often  mis-called  in  modern  phraseology,  the
"magnetic  body,"  the  "nerve  aura,"  "magnetism,"
"  electricity,"  etc.,  etc.  Paul,  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,
who  writes  equally  in  the  spirit  of  ancient  Cabbalism,  and
still  later  Gnosticism,  terms  this  element  in  man,  "  The
Spiritual  body,"  a  phrase  which  corresponds  well  to  the
still  more  correct  expression  of  "  Fhe  Astral  Spirit."  In
organic  bodies  we  shall  continue  thus  to  term  it ;  in  the
realms  of  space  it  is  more  proper  to  speak  of  it  as  the
"  Astral  light."  It  is  to  the  Universe  of  inorganic  forms,
what  the  Soul  is  to  the  body,  its  spirit — life  or  animating
principle.

The  Rosicrucians — a  sect  who  obtained  much  notoriety
about  the  (ifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  but  of  whose
actual  origin,  tenets  and  very  existence,  no  reliable  infor-
mation  has  ever  been  generally  circulated — maintained

119

that  the  last  analysis  of  the  Supreme  Being  would  fail  to
discover  any  other  existence  than  that  of  a  Central  Spir-
itual Sun — an  Infinite,  Eternal,  uncreated  and  incompre-
hensible One  alone,  whose  attributes  were  light  and  heat,
whose  manifestation  was  the  Universe,  revealed  by  light,
energized  into  forms,  suns,  systems,  worlds,  men  and
things,  by  that  spiritual  heat  whose  last  gross  external
exhibition  is  fire.

In  this  sense,  the  term  repulsion,  which  has  been  treated
as  an  attribute  of  matter,  is  accounted  for  by  the  energy
with  which  heat  burns,  consumes,  disintegrates,  and  drives
off  one  particle  from  another  ;  whilst  attraction,  also  sup-
posed to  be  an  attribute  of  matter,  is  but  the  natural  cohe-
sion of  particles,  upon  which  the  restless  energy  of  heat
either  does  not  act,  or  becomes  modified  by  the  solidarity
of  the  masses  acted  upon.  Thus  then,  repulsion  is  the
ONE  universal  law  of  motion,  which  itself  is  produced  by
heat ;  and  attraction  is  only  the  absence  of  heat,  not  a  true
force.

Inertia  is  the  only  property  of  matter  in  this  category
— heat  or  repulsion  its  counteracting  force — attraction,  the
exhibition  of  the  vis  inertia  of  atoms.

We  do  not  care  to  dismiss  these  propositions  without  a
farther  elaboration  of  their  basic  idea,  and  for  this  purpose
we  propose  to  offer  a  few  excerpts  from  one  of  those  writ-
ers who  has  assumed  the  office  of  describing  the  principles
of  the  Rosicrucian  Brotherhood.  As  far  as  the  opinions
of  this  remarkable  association  can  be  defined  in  lan-
guage, the  quotations  selected  will  give  a  fair  idea  of  their
views  on  the  subject  under  discussion  :

"  If  the  above  abstractions  are  caught  by  the  tliinker,  it  will  appear  no  wonder
that  the  ancient  people  considered  that  they  saw  God,  that  is,  with  all  their  iuner-
most  possibility  of  thought — in  Fire^which  Fire  is  not  our  vulgar,  gross  Fire,
neither  is  it  even  the  purest  material  or  electric  fire,  which  has  still  something  of
the  base,  bright  light  of  the  world  about  it ;  but  it  is  an  occult,  mysterious,  super-

120

natural  Fire— not  magnetic— and  yet  a  real,  sensible  mind.  It  is  the  inner  Light,
the  God,  containing  all  things,  the  soul  of  all  things,  into  whose  inexpressibly  in-
tense, all-consuming,  all-creating,  divine,  though  fiery  essence,  all  the  worlds  in
succession  will  fall ;  back  into  whose  arms  of  Immortal  Light  on  the  other  side,
as  again  receiving  them,  the  worlds  driven  ofi'into  space  and  being  heretofore,  by

the  Divine  energy  will  again  rush  back  to  him."

"  The  hollow  world,  in  which  that  essence  of  things  called  Fire,  plays,  in  its  es-
cape in  violent  agitation— to  us  combustion— is  deep  down  within  us,  deep  sunken
inside  of  the  time  stages  of  which  we  are,  in  the  flesh,  rings  of  being,  subsidences

of  spirit." "  JS'arrowly  considered,  it  will  be  found  that  all  religions

transcend  up  into  this  spiritual  Fire-floor,  on  which,  so  to  speak,  the  phases  of
time  were  laid.  Material  Fire,  which  is  brightness,  as  the  matter  upon  which  it
preys  is  darkness— is  the  shadow  of  the  true  Spirit  Light,  which  invests  itself  in
tire  as  a  mask,  in  which  ahme  it  can  act  possibly  on  matter.  Thus  material  light
being  the  opposite  rather  than  the  expression  of  Grod,  the  Egyptians — who  were
undoubtedly  acquainted  with  the  Fire  revelation — could  not  represent  G-od  as
light— material  light.  They  therefore  expressed  their  idea  of  Deity  by  darkness.
Their  adoration  was  paid  to  darkness,  for  in  this  they  bodied  forth  the  image
of  the  Eternal." "Though  fire  is  an  ele-ment  in  which  everything  in-
heres, and  of  which  it  is  the  life,  still  it  is  itself  an  element  existing  in  a  second
non-terrestrial,  non-physical,  ethereal  fire,  in  which  the  first,  or  terrestrial  coarse
tire,  flickers,  waves,  brandishes,  consumes,  destroys.  The  first  is  natural,  material,
gross  ;  but  this  familiar  element,  seen  and  known  in  the  natural  world  as  fire,  is
contained  in  a  celestial,  unparticled,  infinitely  extended  medium — which  celestial
fire  is  its  matrix,  and  of  which,  in  this  haman  bod3^  we  know  nothing."

We  here  interrupt  these  excerpts — rendered  chiefiy  as
fragmentary  representations  of  Rosicrucian  ideas  on  the
Deity — to  interpret  the  obscure  language  of  the  writer,
and  state  that  the  celestial  fire  referred  to  in  the  above
passage,  is  the  all-pervading  element  we  have  described,
which,  in  its  action  through  space,  is  termed  the  Astral
Light,  and  in  its  investiture  of  the  soul  as  a  spiritual  body,
is  termed  the  Astral  Spirit.  The  innermost  of  the  Rosi-
crucian  Celestial  Fire,  like  that  of  the  human  spirit,  is
the  incomprehensible  essence  of  light,  not  its  substance.
Soul.  Robert  Fludd,  a  Rosicrucian  mystic  of  the  middle
ages,  teaches  that  the  Macrocosmos,  or  great  Universe  of
intelligible  and  intelligent  forms,  is  divided  into  three  prin-
cipal regions,  which  are  denominated  the  Empyreum,  the
^thereum,  and  the  Elementary  regi(m.  Each  are  filled  with
Celestial  Fire,  and  traversed  by  innumerable  oceans  of  As-

121

tral  Light,  but  the  quantity  and  quality  of  these  divine
elements  diminishes  as  these  subdivisions  of  space  recede
farther  from  the  Central  Source  of  all.

It  is  the  union  of  the  Celestial  Fire  and  Astral  Light
which  constitutes  the  Soul  of  the  Universe.

The  Rosicrucian  biographer  proceeds  to  say  :

"  There  are  three  ascending  Hierarchies  of  beneficient  Angels  whose  nature  is  of
the  purer  portion  of  the  Celestial  Fire,  and  these  are  divided  into  nine  orders. —
These  threefold  Angelic  Hierarchies  are  : — The  Teraphim,  the  Cherubim,  and
Seraphim;  also,  there  is  a  correspondential  realm  of  darkness,  divided  into  nine
spheres — the  residuum  of  being,  peopled  with  mighty  but  adverse  Angels,  who
boast  still,  of  the   relics  of  their   lost  or  eclipsed  condition,  once   all  light   and

heavenly  glory." ''The  Elementary  region  includes   the  earth,  man,  and

his  belongings,  also  the  lower  creatures.  This  sphere  is  the  flux,  subsidence,
ashes,  of  the  ethereal  fire,  and  man  himself  is  the  microcosm  or  indescribably
small  copy  of  the  macrocosm,  or  great  world.  This  earth  having  been  produced
by  the  contention  of  light  and  darkness,  has  denseness  in  its  innumerable  heavy
concomitants,  which  contain  less  and  less  of  the  original  divine  light  and  heat,
and  thicken  and  solidify,  until  it  is  rent  apart,  torn,  disintegrated  and  distributed
into  forms,  by  the  still  prevalent  action  of  the  Divine  element  of  invisible  fire.
The  inner  jewel  of  light  is  never  absent,  even  from  the  grossest  atom,  and  though
it  may  take  ages  to  evolve,  still  will  this  divine  light,  ever  tendmg  to  purify,
refine,  and  elevate,  alchemically  convert  base  things  into  fine,  gross  matter  into
ethereal,  and  the  earth  itself  into  a  radiant  and  gloriously  spiritualized  planet.
Unseen  and  unsuspected,  there  is  a  divine  ethereal  spirit,  an  eager  fire,  confined
as  in  a  priscm,  struggling  through  all  solid  objects,  which  are  imbued  with  more
or  less  of  this  sensitive  life,  as  they  are  more  or  less  refined,  through  the  changing
purgations  of  fire.  Thus  all  minerals  in  this  spark  of  light  have  the  rudimentary
possibility  of  plants,  and  growing  organisms  ;  plants  have  rudimentary  sensibili-
ties, which  might  in  distant  ages  transmute  them  into  locomotive  creatures,  and
all  vegetation  might  pass  ofi",  into  new  and  independent  highways  of  being,  as
their  original  spark  of  life-light,  thrills,  expands,  and  urges  nature  forward  with
more  informed  force,  and  directed  by  the  unseen   Angelic  Ministers   of  the   Great

Original  Architect." "  It  is  with  terrestrial  fire  that  the  Alchemist  breaks

asunder  the  atomic  thickness  of  visible  nature,  which,  yielding  up  its  secret
destiny,  of  unlimited  progress,  sinks  into  the  fiery  furnace,  in  its  basest  propor-
tions, to  arise  thrice  purified,  and  forced  upwards  on  the  pathway  of  a  higher  round
of  the  ladder.

"  It  is  with  the  celestial  fire  that  the  Rosicrucian  bursts  asunder  the  bonds  of
error  and  darkness  that  hold  the  soul  in  a  material  prison-house.  He  becomes  the
Pontifex  (bridge  maker),  which  conducts  the  Soul  across  the  dark  waters  of
ignorance  from  the  realms  of  the  known  to  the  unknown,  from  the  gates  of  matter
to  the  bright  roads  of  Spirit ; — from  earthly  blackness  to  celestial  light,  from  the
visible  fires  of  purgation  to  the  invisible  soul  light  of  eternity."

Our  readers  may  pardon  us  for  interblending  so  many

122

fragments  of  Uosicrucian  musings  with  the  practicalities
which  we  profess  to  aim  at,  but  to  the  genuine  student  of
the  occult  sciences,  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  learn
something  of  the  real  opinions  of  a  sect  to  whom  so  much
that  is  false  and  mythical  has  been  attributed.  As  Grod  is
the  solvent  for  all  the  problems  of  pious  ignorance,  so  elec-
tricity plays  the  same  part  in  the  realm  of  unexplained
phenomena.  The  name  of  the  Rosicrucians  seems  to  have
been  borrowed  in  the  same  sense,  and  applied  by  supersti-
tious and  utterly  uninformed  babblers  to  cover  up  all  the
occult  mysteries  which  science  could  not  explain,  and  big-
otry feared  to  tamper  with.

It  is  something  to  know  ourselves — not  less  to  be  truly
known  by  others.

We  do  not  press  these  fragments  of  Rosicrucianism  on
the  reader's  attention  for  the  mere  purpose  of  citing  ab-
stract opinions  with  which  we  have  especial  sympathy,
but  we  feel  that,  to  the  interior  sense  of  the  profound
thinker,  they  have  a  deeper  significance  than  any  other
theories  that  have  yet  been  advanced  concerning  the  won-
derful phenomena  of  Deity,  life  and  being.  Allowing  for
the  varied  modes  of  expression  which  prevail  in  different
countries,  and  at  various  epochs  of  time,  these  opinions
present  a  very  fair,  though  necessarily  condensed  abstract,
of  the  philosophies  of  the  Cabbalists,  Gnostics,  Pythago-
reans, Platonists,  and  many  of  the  most  enlightened  of  the
Greeks,  Romans  and  early  Cliristians.

In  giving  a  brief  and  practical  summary  of  these  theo-
ries, we  find  that,  whilst  the  soul  or  innermost  of  the  man
is  a  Divine  emanation  from  Deity,  the  body  or  outermost
is  an  aggregation  of  material  atoms,  vitalized  by  the  Astral
Spirit,  which  serves  as  the  life  principle  to  the  body,  the
ethereal  body  of  the  soul,  and  forms  the  connecting  link
between  the  soul  and  body.     This  Astral  Spirit  accompa-

123

nies  the  soul  at  Death,  when  the  union  of  the  two  forms
the  spirit.  The  more  sublimated  portions  of  this  Astral
body  adhere  to  the  soul,  the  grosser  and  coarser  layers
form  the  outer  covering  or  body  of  the  spirit.

It  is  in  this  luminous  Astral  Spirit,  this  concentration
of  all  force,  life,  heat,  motion  and  imponderable  essence,
this  invisible,  "  supernatural  fire,"  as  the  ancient  Theoso-
phists  termed  it,  that  the  power  resides  to  make  spirits
visible  to  mortal  eyes,  to  exhale  force,  so  that  they  can
lift  bodies,  make  sounds,  and  produce  all  the  manifesta-
tions by  which  spirits  and  mortals  commune  with  each
other.  The  heat  generated  in  this  Astral  Spirit  gives  life
and  motion  to  the  body  ;  the  light,  which  is  its  substance,
colors  the  various  tissues  and  fluids,  and  causes  them  to
reflect  the  grosser  rays  of  light  in  the  atmosphere,  so  that
they  can  become  visible.

Once  more  we  will  suggest,  that  the  Astral  Spirit  in  the
human  structure  is  analogous,  though  differing  in  degrees
of  attenuation  and  force,  to  the  Astral  light  in  the  realms  of
space. — It  is  the  spiritual  principle  of  the  earth,  galvanism,
magnetism,  motion  throughout  its  rocks,  plants,  minerals,
y/aters,  and  gases.

It  is  the  restless,  ethereal  fire  that  forces  asunder  the
most  mobile  particles  of  fluid,  and  disperses  them  into  gases  ;
— it  separates  the  still  finer  particles  of  gases,  and  dis-
tributes matter  into  ether. — It  is  not,  as  some  have  asserted,
ether  per  se^  but  it  is  the  principle  of  motion  which  rolls
oceans  of  ether  into  undulatory  waves,  and  causes  it  to  be-
come the  carrier  of  light  and  heat. — When  its  swift  winged
rays  encounter  opposite  currents,  when  moving  with  in-
conceivable energy  through  one  body  it  meets  with  its
counterpart  in  opposing  motion,  the  fierce  concussion  re-
sults in  combustion  ;  this  mighty  shock  eliminates  flame
or  lightning,  and  in  the  all-devouring  action  of  the  mate-

124

rial  fire,  the  surrounding  particles  are  consumed.  Destruc-
tion bv  fire,  or  what  is  called  electricity  then,  is  the
material  exhibition  of  two  contending  bodies,  moving  in
opposite  directions  under  the  energetic  action  of  the  spirit-
ual fire. — In  its  primal  condition,  the  Astral  light  of  the
Universe  is  like  that  of  the  Spiritual  body  in  man,  invisi-
ble, latent,  inscrutable,  unknown,  except  by  its  effects  in  life,
warmth,  and  motion.  In  its  external  and  last  analysis,  it
is  the  consuming  fire,  and  its  action  is  to  reduce  all  things
back  again  into  their  own  invisible  essence ;  thus  is  it  the
Alpha  and  Omega  of  being,  the  first  and  the  last ;  Deity.

The  Astral  Spirit  in  man  is  not  a  single  original  element,
like  the  Soul,  it  is  a  combination  of  all  the  imponderables
of  the  Universe.  Its  first  derivation  or  original  essence  is
from  the  Sun  and  planetary  system.  Ether,  air,  atmos-
phere, earth,  with  all  its  freight  of  organic  and  inorganic
life,  combine  to  send  off  emanations  which  make  up  the
sum  of  the  wonderful  structure  called  the  Astral  Spirit  in
man.  It  is  a  true  cosmos  of  the  Universe,  and  upon  its
exterior  form  is  engraved  all  the  sand  grains  of  character,
motives,  powers,  functions,  vices,  virtues,  hopes,  and  mem-
ories, which  the  Soul  has  gathered  up  in  its  process  of
growth  through  the  material  body ;  hence  it  is  as  much  a
perfect  microcosm  of  the  individual's  mind  within,  as  of
the  visible  and  invisible  Universe  without.  Not  a  deed,
word,  or  thought  which  has  helped  to  make  up  the  sum  of
a  human  life,  but  what  is  photographed  upon  the  spiritual
body  ol  the  man,  with  as  much  fidelity  as  the  mind  of  the
Creator  is  written,  in  starry  hieroglyphics  upon  the  glit-
tering skies.  It  keeps  as  faithful  a  record,  as  true  a  dooms-
day book,  and  pronounces  as  sure  a  judgment  upon  human
life  and  conduct  as  ever  the  Egyptian  Osiris  could  have
done,  in  his  sternest  moods  of  God-like  justice.

Its  many  layers  of  graduated  ethereal  essence  are  felt  by

125

Sensitives  as  rings,  or  spheres.  Those  nearest  the  body
are  perceived  as  life  spheres,  and  these  change  with  the
body's  changes,  and  in  its  decay  and  death,  recede,  and
become  the  outermost  of  the  new  born  Soul's  envelope.
Those  most  interior  to  the  body,  and  nearest  the  Soul,  are
the  Sun  spheres,  and  connect  the  Soul  with  the  Solar  and
Astral  influences,  under  which  the  individual  was  launched
into  being.

These  interior  spheres  too,  change  in  reponse  to  Solar
and  planetary  changes,  and  thence  they  affect  the  mind,
influence  the  character,  and  constitute  the  links  of  con-
nection by  which  the  stars  act  upon  the  individuals  des-
tiny. As  man's  Astral  Spirit  is  aggregated  from  so  many
forces  in  the  Universe,  so  it  is  subject  to  the  influence  of
changes  occurring  in  every  department  of  Nature.

The  state  of  the  earth,  atmosphere,  and  aromal  emana-
tions given  off  in  different  seasons  of  the  year — all  these,
with  their  changing  influences,  contribute  to  form  the
essence  of  the  embryonic  being  ere  it  sees  the  light.  The
inherited  tendencies  of  mind,  body  and  spirit  imposed  by
parental  law,  impart  to  the  life  germs  their  own  peculiar
idiosyncrasies.  The  physical  sustenance,  mental  tempera-
ment, the  very  employments  and  thoughts  of  every  moth-
er, combine,  also,  to  impress,  with  fateful  images,  their
unborn  offspring ;  but  above  all,  the  order  of  the  plane-
tary scheme,  and  the  conjunction  which  every  star  sustains,
first  to  the  Sun,  next  to  the  earth,  and  finally  to  each  other
at  the  moment  of  mortal  birth,  must  determine  the  nature
of,  every  spirit,  and  shape  the  springs  upon  which  hinge  the
framework  of  human  character.    -"^^"-"^^

Admitting  then,  the  Soul's  origin  in  Deity,  and  the
Astral  spirit's  origin  in  the  solar  system,  how  vastly  mo-
mentous upon  the  newly-born  being's  character  and  or-
ganization must  be  the  solar  and  planetary  influences  which

126

prevail  in  the  hour  of  the  germ's  inception,  through  every
stage  of  embryonic  life,  and  at  the  very  moment  when,
drawn  hjj  solar  and  planetari/  influence  from  the  darkness  of
itsembrijonic  prison^  it  is  launched  in  space  as  a  living  crea-
ture !

/  Ages  ago,  the  ancient  astronomer  discovered  that  all  the
va  s  crystal  vault  of  the  skies,  the  illimitable  fields  of
space  dotted  over  with  millions  of  fiery  blossoms,  seem-
ingly so  fixed,  so  calm,  so  immobile  in  their  solemn  silence
and  mysterious  beauty,  tvere  all  moving  !  Moving  on  in
constant  but  still  ever-changing  orbits.  The  certainty  of
these  stupendous  changes  was  absolutely  determined  by
the  discovery  of  that  remarkable  motion  called  "  the  pre-
cession of  the  equinoxes,"  a  motion  which,  in  a  given  period
of  time,  varying  between  two  and  three  thousand  years,
swept  the  blazing  sun  of  the  solar  system,  with  all  its  plan-
etary hosts,  from  one  sign  of  the  Zodiac  to  another.  Later
on — in  fact,  up  to  our  own  time — astronomical  observa-
tions have  determined  that  all  the  stars  of  the  sidereal
heavens,  gorgeous  fields  of  space,  filled  with  the  march  of
suns  and  systems,  speed  on  with  a  momentum  so  tremen-
dous, that  the  mind  of  man  shrinks  back,  awe-struck,  at
the  attempt  to  trace,  those  footprints  of  fire  through  spaces,
wherein  millions  of  miles  are  measured  by  hours  and  min-
utes. Whilst  the  external  aspect  of  these  spangled  heav-
ens changes  but  little  to  the  eye  of  the  observer  during
many  centuries  of  time,  the  real  permanence  of  the  scheme
is  only  apparent.  ''Only  constant  in  eternal  unrest,"
might  be  traced  in  every  glittering  point  of  the  sidereal
heavens.  Ever  the  same  in  the  fixidity  of  matchless  order,
ever  changing  in  the  spiral  circles  of  ascending  progress.
If  this  be  so,  as  Science  proves  it  is,  how  inevitably  must
the  endless  changes  of  the  Macrocosm  affect  the  nature  of
the  Microcosm,  and  man,  the  world  in  little,  partake  of  the

127

infinite  variousness  which  discourses  so  eloquently  through
the  epic  of  the  starry  skies  !

'-  There  cannot  be  two  planetary  conjunctions  in  the  field
of  space  which,  in  all  respects,  exactly  duplicate  each
other  ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  those  creatures,  launched
every  second  into  human  life,  under  the  influence  of  ever-
varying  astral  changes,  must  differ  so  widely  from  each
other  in  all  the  essentials  of  physical,  mental,  intellectual
and  spiritual  states.  As  the  planets  seem  to  return  to
stated  points,  and  re-enact  their  mystic  conjunctions  in
the  shining  pathway  of  the  Zodiac,  so  there  seem  to  be
recurrences  of  certain  types  of  character,  and  duplicates
of  certain  facial  lineaments.  "^

Viewing  the  valley  of  the  then  from  the  mountain  heights
of  the  now^  we  are  fain  to  give  up  this  stereotyped  opinion,
and  own  that  history  only  repeats  itself  in  generalities,
not  in  particulars,  and  that  there  is  not  a  wave  which
beats  on  the  shores  of  earth  that  ever  returns  with  just
the  same  force  as  those  that  have  gone  before — no,
never  !  And  all  this  change  in  the  planetary  order  is
effected  by  the  unceasing  energy  of  the  life  that  is  throb-
bing, and  burning,  and  blazing  on  in  its  mad  career  of
eternal  unrest,  in  the  midst  of  every  starry  road,  and  thril-
ling down,  and  pulsating  through  the  very  central  heart  of
every  starry  world ;  and  all  this  ceaseless  movement,  heard
in  the  echoing  feet  of  the  tramping  ages,  is  due  to  that
same  life  spirit,  burning  up,  shrivelling  into  ashes,  and  scat-
tering into  dust  the  forms  of  the  past,  in  order  that  their
liberated  spirits  may  become  incarnate  in  the  fresher,  fairer
forms  of  the  ages  that  are  to  be  !  ^'  ■
X  The  consideration  of  these  diffusive  generalities  are  not
irrelevant  to  our  subject ;  on  the  contrary,  they  need  to  be
thought  out  and  appreciated  ere  the  unaccustomed  thinker
can  apprehend  why  the  motions  of  a  single  point  of  fire,

%

128

o-leaming  through  the  immensity  of  space,  can  affect  the
character  and  destiny  of  an  individual  removed  from  its
orbit  by  incalculable  sums  of  distance ;  why  all  nature,
animate  and  inanimate,  moves,  acts  and  speaks  with  an
universal  chord  of  sympathy  connecting  the  whole  ;  why
flights  of  birds,  wheeling  high  in  air,  the  motions  of  a
dancing  butterfly,  a  quivering  sunbeam,  a  crawling  worm,
humming  insect,  or  even  the  falling  of  a  leaf,  or  the  murmur
of  a  wave,  may  discourse  deep  meanings  in  tiie  ear  of  a
true  student  of  nature,  and  utter  portents  of  immutable
fate  to  illuminated  scholars  who  have  learned  to  interpret
all  the  undertones  of  creation,  and  spell  out  its  hieroglyphi-
cal  inscriptions.

When  we  hear  how  Chaldean  Soothsayers  perceived  the
destinies  of  nations,  in  the  smoking  ashes  of  the  burnt-
offering  ;  how  Roman  Augurs  interpreted  the  issues  of  life
and  death  from  the  flight  of  birds  ;  how  Persian  Magi  read
the  words  of  fate  inscribed  on  the  starry  gages  of  the
skies ;  or  Hebrew  Priests  discovered  mystic  meanings  in
the  glittering  lustre  of  Urim  and  Thummin  ;  we  know
that  these  men  were  simply  natural  philosophers,  and  had
studied  the  occult  side  of  nature  with  as  much  under-
standing, and  perhaps  more  devotion,  than  the  nineteenth
century  Scientists  accord  to  the  mastery  of  the  known  and
the  visible.

For  thousands,  perhaps  for  tens  of  thousands  of  years,
it  was  the  office  of  the  best  and  wisest  men  of  every  suc-
ceeding generation,  to  devote  a  lifetime  to  the  study  of
nature,  and  that  in  her  profoundest  depths,  and  through
all  the  mazes  and  windings  of  her  supernatural  relations
with  the  visible  and  invisible  spheres  of  being  around  her.
Ever  let  it  be  remembered  too,  that  the  ancient  philosopher
brought  to  this  sublime  study  a  body  as  thoroughly  pre-
pared as  a  mind ;  a  physique   fitted  b}-    temperance,  chas-

129

tity  and  purity  to  allow  full  sway  to  the  mind  which  in-
habited it,  and  is  so  often  cramped  by  inharmonious  physi-
cal states.

When  we  come  to  lay  down  the  conditions  under  which
alone  magical  rites  can  become  effective,  and  describe  the
life-long  discipline  which  the  powerful  Magian  must  pur-
sue, in  order  to  become  one,  we  shall  put  to  shame  the
self-indulgent,  intemperate,  and  too  often  dissolute  habits
of  the  present  age — habits  which  not  even  the  sacred  as-
sumption of  the  Priestly  office  seems  always  to  impose  re-
straint upon.  And  yet  this  same  self-indulgent  and  luxu-
riant age,  looks  back  with  contempt  on  the  asceticism  of
the  ancient  Priest,  whilst  those  who  profess  to  believe  in  all
the  miraculous  records  of  Jewish  history,  treat  those  of
every  other  nation  of  antiquity  with  scornful  denial.  As
to  Magic,  why  as  something  which  can  be  taught^  '^  it  may
be  true,"  and  perhaps  even  become  a  fashionable  amuse-
ment, provided  always  that  book-learning,  and  a  super-
ficial digest  of  the  opinions  of  others,  can  point  out  the
royal  road  to  power,  and  convert  tinsel  drawing-rooms  into
the  halls  of  Walhalla,  wine  and  cigars  into  the  Alembic
of  Alfarabi,  gilded  mirrors  into  the  divining  crystal  of
Dee,  and  extrait  de  bouquet  into  the  elixir  vitce  of  St.  Ger-
m;iin.  A  few  pages  of  Cornelius  Agrippa,  which  no  mod-
ern "  Exquisite  "  would  take  the  trouble  to  translate  him-
self, ought,  in  modern  estimation,  to  be  quite  sufficient  to
make  a  magician^  and  teach  fine  ladies  to  summon  Sylphs
and  Undines  for  the  amusement  of  an  idle  hour,  just  as  a
few  figments  of  Latin,  an  essay  done  into  bad  Greek,  and
worse  Hebrew,  by  a  professional  college  drudge,  for  the
benefit  of  his  rich  paying  patron,  is  sufficient  passport  to
those  holy  orders  of  our  modern  Priesthood  in  which  God,
Angels,  Spirits,  the  immortal  soul's  origin,  destiny,  and
powers,  together  with  all  the  glories,   marvels  and   mys-

130

teries  of  the  boundless  and  eternal  Universe,  are  the  themes
which  demand  interpretation.

'The  most  superficial  retrospect  of  the  lives,  education
and  preparatory  methods  of  discipline  enforced  upon  the
ancient  Priesthood,  invest  that  body  with  the  true  dignity
of  men  in  ^'  holy  orders  ;"  but  how  do  these  compare  with
the  careless,  lax  system  of  mere  book-learning,  which  in
our  own  time  is  deemed  all-sufficient  to  grind  out  a  Priest^
the  man  who,  of  all  others,  should  be  bound  by  his  sacred
office  to  interpret  the  mysteries  of  being,  nay,  who  should
be  deemed  unworthy  of  that  office,  so  long  as  mysteries
remain  unsolved.

/•  Nature  has  no  secrets  from  her  true  votaries.  She
sternly  veils  spiritual  entities  from  the  rude  gaze  of  mate-
rialism, and  refuses  to  render  up  any  knowledge  beyond
the  plane  from  which  the  inquiry  originates.  The  Chemist,
Geologist,  Astronomer,  and  other  disciples  of  the  natural
sciences,  coldly  set  to  work  to  examine  Nature  through  her
known  formulae  of  physical  laws ;  aught  that  transcends
these  they  will  none  of,  hence  the  occult  side  of  Nature  is
an  unexplored  realm  to  them,  and  yet  they  are  prompt
enough  to  acknowledge  that  that  occult  side  exists,  though
their  sneer  is  loud  and  long  against  those  who  claim  to
^ve  mastered  its  mysteries.

It  is  because  the  experience  of  past  ages,  conducted
through  thousands  of  years  of  study,  by  aid  of  carefully
prepared  conditions,  has  been  devoted  to  the  occult  in
Nature,  that  the  ancients  transcend  the  moderns  in  this
respect,  as  much  as  modern  science,  in  the  direction  of
utilitarianism,  transcends  the  colossal  but  cumbrous  gran-
deur of  antique  civilization.  There  lives  not  now  upon
the  face  of  the  earth,  one  human  being,  save  perchance,  a
solitary  adept  of  the  old  order,  or  a  very  pure  and  highly
endowed  spirit  medium,  who,  in  respect  to  the  understand-
ing of  true  Theosophy,  Theurgy,  and  every  department  of

131

spiritual  science,  is  fit  to  hold  the  office  of  Priest  to  the
people,  or  instruct  humanity  in  those  grand  truths  which  lie
beyond  the  ken  of  physical  science.  It  is  to  show  the
results  of  opinions  which  arose  from  countless  ages  of  re-
search into  occult  truths,  that  this  section  has  been  written.
It  is  to  present  to  the  candid  and  bold  thinker,  the  fruits
of  that  knowledge  which  was  gathered  in  through  the  dis-
cipline of  asceticism,  fasting,  and  prayer,  and  the  study  of
the  whole  Universe,  not  less  in  the  realm  of  soul  and  spirit,
than  in  body  and  function,  that  we  now  write.  Despise
these  treasures  of  mind,  garnered  up  through  thousands  of
years,  if  ye  will,  but  it  is  thus  alone  that  the  Universe  has
ever  yielded  an  answer  to  the  soul's  urgent  questioning ;
thus  alone  can  man  ever  solve  the  mystery  of  his  being,
and  that  of  his  planet.

To  point  the  way,  we  have  writteu  ;  to  show  the  kernel
of  the  mighty  fruit  of  the  tree  of  occult  knowledge,  will
these  pages  be  devoted.  But  he  who  would  eat  of  that
fruit  understandingly,  must  first  plant  the  tree  with  his
own  hands,  tend  and  culture  it  with  a  philosopher's  pa-
tience, and  then,  and  then  alone,  will  it  yield  to  his  taste
the  true  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  then  only  will  he  eat
for  himself,  and  not  through  the  senses  of  another.

We  shall  conclude  this  section  by  another  brief  excerpt
from  the  pages  of  the  author  whose  definitions  of  Rosicru-
cianism  we  have  given  above  :

"  Is  it  reasonable  to  conclade,  at  a  period  when  knowledge  was  at  the  highest,
and  when  human  powers  were,  in  comparison  with  ours  at  the  present  time,  pro-
digious, that  all  these  indomitable  physical  efforts — such  gigantic  achievements  as
those  of  the  Egyptians,  were  devoted  to  a  mistake?  That  the  myriads  of  the
iSTile  were  fools,  laboring  in  the  dark,  and  that  all  the  magic  of  their  great  men
was  forgery  ?  or  that  we,  in  despising  that  which  we  call  their  superstitious  and
wasted  power,  are  alone  the  wise?  l^ot  so.  There  is  much  more  in  these  old  re-
ligions than  in  the  aadacity  of  modern  denial,  in  the  confidence  of  these  super-
ficial science  times,  and  in  the  derision  of  these  days  without  faith,  we  can  in  the
least  degree  suppose.

''We  do  U(»t  understand  ;  thou  why  sliould  we  venture  to  deride  these  ancient
times?"

132

SECTION  IX.

Ancient  Priests  and  Prophets — Spiritval  Gifts — Woman
as  Priestess  and  Sybil — Classification  of  Sjnritnally
endoioed  persons — Magnetizers^  Mediums,  tlieir  spe-
cicdties^  and  tliep)ower  of  tlie  liuniam,  Spirit — Summary.

The  chief  duties  of  the  ancient  Priesthood  were  first,
to  find  out  the  points  of  contact  or  unity  between  man
and  higher  existences  than  himself:  next,  to  discover  the
laws  of  man's  being,  and  teach  him  to  adjust  his  actions  to
the  will  of  those  higher  existences  ;  and  finally,  to  invoke
or  solicit  their  aid  for  man  in  the  performance  of  his  earth-
ly mission.  These  7vere  the  duties  of  the  ancient  Priest,
and  should  be  no  less  obligatory  upon  officials  of  the  same
order  to-day,  but  whilst  we  see  some  attempt  in  the  external
rites  of  ecclesiasticism  to  perform  the  third  part  of  these
priestly  offices,  we  look  in  vain  to  discover  any  religious
body  which  faithfully  emulates  the  ancient  Priest  in  the
performance  of  the  two  first  named  duties.

It  is  enough  for  the  historian  to  record  that  it  has  been
done,  and  show  that  it  was  upon  the  performance  of  the
solemn  offices  of  spiritual  ministry,  that  the  structure  of
ancient  Priesthood  was  upreared.

Amongst  the  Hindoos,  Egyptians,  Chaldeans,  Persians
and  Hebrews,  frequent  mention  is  made  of  the  Prophets,
as  a  class  distinct  from  the  Priesthood,  although  at  times
associated  with  it.  When  the  Prophets  did  take  part  in
temple  services,  they  were  esteemed  the  most  honored  of
the  Priestly  order,  and  their  dictum  was  received  with  un-
questioning reverence  as  the  voice  of  Deity.

Some  authoritative  writers  intimate  that  it  was  up'jn

133

the  foundation  of  true  prophetic  gifts,  that  the  Priesthood
was  instituted,  and  when  it  was  found  that  Spiritual  gifts
belonged  to  special  individuals — not  to  an  office  or  caste
— artificial  means  were  resorted  to,  to  supply  the  deficiency
of  natural  endowments.  Nature  was  studied  to  find  out
occult  means  of  inducing  vision,  trance,  seership  and  pro-
phecy. The  Priests  were  carefully  instructed  in  astrology,
theurgic  rites,  and  the  occult  virtues  of  drugs,  minerals,
plants,  words  and  ceremonial  observances,  and  hence  arose
the  art  of  magic,  an  art  practiced  simply  as  a  subsitutefor
spiritual  gifts.

Amongst  the  Hebrews,  the  Prophets,  as  a  class,  acted
independently  of  the  Priesthood.  They  were  often  per-
sons outside  of  the  consecrated  tribe  of  Levites,  to  whom
the  Priestl}^  office  was  limited,  when  they  were  not  only  ex-
cluded by  their  birth  from  temple  service,  but  they  fre-
quently acted  in  opposition  to  the  Priesthood,  and  included
them  in  their  bold  and  unsparing  denunciations  against  the
corruptions  of  the  time.  Nothing  can  be  more  aggressive
than  the  diatribes  of  Isaiah,  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  against
the  abominations  sanctioned  by  a  corrupt  and  idolatrous
Priesthood.  Isaiah  particularizes  even  the  ceremonials
of  the  Jewish  faith,  such  as  the  observance  of  new  moons.
Sabbaths,  fasts,  feasts,  times  and  seasons,  as  "  abomina-
tions before  the  Lord,"  when  they  were  practiced  for  impure
or  unholy  purposes.

The  contrast  between  the  bigotry  and  conservatism  of
the  Jewish  Priesthood,  and  the  bold,  high-toned  morality
of  the  Hebrew  Prophets,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable
specialties  of  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  speaks
in  most  significant  language  of  the  universal  faith  in  good
works  inculcated  by  true  Spiritism,  and  the  dependence
upon  magical  rites  of  mere  ceremonial  religions.

It  will  be  observed  that    whilst  several  of  the  most  re-

134

nowned  of  the  Greek  Philosophers,  such  as  Orpheus,
Thales,  Solon,  Pythagoras,  Appolonius,  and  others,
studied  in  Egypt,  or  claimed  to  have  obtained  their  occult
knowledge  in  that  land,  their  biographies  prove,  that  they
were  naturally  endowed  with  the  true  prophetic  afflatus
before  they  graduated  in  Egyptian  Magic,  and  this  is  a
comment  upon  the  difference  between  natural  and  acquired
gifts,  which  we  desire  our  readers  to  bear  in  mind.

The  Greeks  must  have  fully  recognized  the  superiority
of  natural  over  acquired  gifts  of  the  spirit,  when  they  were
so  constant  in  selecting  women  to  serve  as  the  oracles
between  Gods  and  men.  Women  made  famous  the  oracles
of  the  Pythian  Apollo,  and  the  responses  of  Dodona.
Women's  special  gifts,  of  inspiration,  have  transmitted  the
fame  of  the  Sybils  to  all  a2:es,  and  made  their  name
synonymous  with  spiritual  gifts.  Even  amongst  the  con-
servative Jews,  whose  contempt  of  women  is  one  of  the
chief  blots  on  their  national  credit,  women  were  perforce
admitted  to  certain  prophetic  offices  in  the  Temple,  and
several  ladies  of  rank  amongst  the  Romans  and  Egyptians,
including  the  daughter  of  the  famous  Egyptian  Monarch,
Sesostris,  were  renowned  for  their  prophetic  endowments.

The  elevation  of  woman  to  conditionsof  perfect  equality
with  man,  is  now  acknowledged  to  be  the  highest  evidence
of  a  true  and  rational  civilization,  but  whether  we  are  treat-
ing of  ancient  or  modern  conservatism,  God  in  nature  has
proved  through  the  unbroken  lines  of  history,  that  spirit-
ual gifts  are  innate,  intuitional^  and  feminine  in  quality,
and  belong  to  those  more  rare  and  precious  attributes  of
being,  which  particularly  distinguish  the  female  sex.  If
Soul  essence  is  unique,  and  matter  is  shaped  and  determined
chiefly  by  the  energy  and  quantity  of  the  Astral  Spirit,  it
is  to  that  realm  of  being  that  we  must  look,  in  order  to
analyze  the  specialty    that  constitutes    natural   prophetic

135

endowments,  or  spiritual  gifts,  whether  in  the  male  or
female  sex.

At  the  very  autset  of  our  inquiry,  we  find  two  special-
ties of  ori>:anism  which  more  commonly  belong  to  the  male
than  the  female,  the  study  of  which  is  important  to  a  clear
understanding  of  our  subject.  The  first  of  these  represent-
ative physiques,  discloses  an  individual  with  a  compact
self-centred,  well-knit  frame,  inclining  to  the  nutritiv^e  in
temperament,  and  the  adipose  in  tissue.  In  manner  these
individuals  are  generally  straightforward,  somewhat  au-
thoritative, occasionally  egotistic,  and  fond  of  display ;
kind-hearted,  benevolent,  and  especially  attracted  to  sick
persons.

They  generally  have  a  clear  eye,  direct  glance,  and
sometimes  a  piercing  expression  withal. — With  such  pecu-
liarities of  temperament,  the  Astral  fluid  exists  in  excess,
endowing  the  individual  with  good  health,  a  vigorous
frame,  a  moderately  active  mind,  and  a  general  tendency
towards  social  life  and  material  enjoyments.  These  per-
sons are  almost  always  what  is  popularly  termed  ^'  good
magnetizers,"  and  the  excess  of  Astral  fluid  which  develops
itself  in  the  above  described  idiosyncrasies,  ordinarily
induces  the  wish  to  use  their  gift,  and  impels  them  to
magnetize  sick  people.  It  was  from  this  class,  that  the
ancients  selected  their  Therapeutic  healers  and  the  Priests
who  were  employed  in  the  magnetic  healing  rites  of
Temple  service.  The  eye  as  the  window  of  the  Soul,  and
the  hand  as  the  prime  conductor  of  the  Astral  fluid,  are
always  well  developed  in  these  natural  mesmerizers.

Where  the  first  is  full,  clear,  and  luminous,  and  the
second  soft  and  warm,  the  astral  fluid  is  invariably  of  a
healthful  and  vivifying  character.

Where  the  eye  is  piercing,  brilliant,  or  distinguished  by
the  long  Oriental  shape  of  the  almond,  and   the  hand  is

136

damp  and  moist,  or  hard  and  dry,  look  to  find  a  stronger
mental  than  physical  impression  prodnced,  but  in  all
varieties  of  this  type  of  man,  the  person  may  be  esteemed
as  a  good  mesmerizer,  and  the  more  expansive  the  frontal
region  of  the  brain,  the  better  will  be  the  effects,  and  the
more  healthful  the  power  produced.

As  the  magnet  or  loadstone  only  yields  up  its  potency
to  the  direction  of  skill,  so  these  magnetic  structures
require  the  action  of  well-informed  mind,  and  concentrated
will,  to  render  them  serviceable ;  with  these  mental  attri-
butes to  guide  their  powers  and  direct  the  projection  of  the
Astral  fluid,  they  may  become  admirable  healers  of,  the
sick,  or  skillful  "  biologists"  over  sensitive  subjects.

The  second  individuality  to  which  we  would  introduce
our  reader,  is  a  more  concentrated  and  energetic  type  of
the  first,  and  one  in  whom  the  intellectual  temperament
prevails  over  the  nutritive  or  social.

In  the  type  of  man  now  under  consideration,  a  vast
amount  of  the' Astral  fiuid  circulates,  but  it  clusters  chiefly
about  the  crowning  portions  of  the  cerebrum,  elevating  the
cranial  apex  in  a  remarkable  degree.  The  cerebrum  and
nervous  system  absorb  the  surplus  of  the  Astral  fluid,  rath-
er than  the  fibrous  and  muscular  tissues.  Such  persons
exhibit  many  varieties  of  form  and  feature  ;  but  their  speci-
alty is  a  large  and  finely- developed  head.  Persons  of  this
type  become  fine  psychologists,  or  in  ancient  phraseology,
such  are  "  Adepts,  Master  Spirits,  or  Priestly  Hierophants."
In  both  types  described  above,  it  is  the  abundance  of  the
Astral  spirit,  infused  by  inheritance  and  planetary  and
solar  influence  during  embryonic  life,  and  at  the  period  of
birth,  which  determines  their  characteristics  ;  and  it  is  the
distribution  of  J:his  Astral  fluid,  in  the  one,  throughout  the
whole  system,  and  in  the  other,  in  certain  regions  of  the
brain,  which  constitutes  the  difference  between  the  mere

137

magnetic  healer  and  the  psychologist.  Neither  of  these
individuals  may  technically  recognize  the  peculiarities
with  which  they  are  endowed,  but  the  one  will  always
bring  a  powerful  and  soothing  influence  to  the  sick,  and
the  other  prove  a  controlling  and  masterful  mind  in  what-
ever spheres  of  life  he  may  be  placed.  If  these  persons
understand  their  soul's  capacities,  they  will  know  that,
by  mustering  the  excess  of  Astral  fluid,  permeating  their
systems,  to  the  dominion  of  the  will,  they  can  induce  a  self-
magnetized  condition,  in  which  the  body  sleeps,  and  the
soul  goes  forth  and  traverses  space,  as  in  the  phenomenon
of  somnambulism,  natural  clairvoyance,  or  in  the  exit  of
the  spirit  from  the  body  when  it  is  seen  and  termed  the
''  Double,"  or  "  Wraith."  They  can  induce  these  powers  in
others  by  magnetic  and  psychologic  contact,  and  it  only
needs  self-knowledge  and  the  exertion  of  strong  and  con-
centrated will  to  call  them  into  exercise.

There  are  no  phenomena  produced  by  disembodied
spirits,  which  may  not  be  effected  by  the  still  embodied
human  spirit,  provided  a  correct  knowledge  of  these
powers  is  directed  by  a  strong  and  powerful  will.  The
conditions  will  be  described  in  our  sections  on  Art  Magic,
but  the  potency  of  the  will  can  never  be  too  strongly  in-
sisted upon  in  all  spiritualistic  operations.  In  the  physique
above  described  as  No.  1,  the  excess  of  the  Astral  fluid
generally  clusters  around  the  epigastric  and  cardiac  regions,
rendering  the  person  thus  endowed  highly  powerful  in
physical  magnetization  and  healing  operations,  but,  as  be-
fore hinted,  the  cerebral  development  is  rarely  proportion-
ably  marked,  and  the  best  of  physical  magnetizers  are  not
the  giants  of  intellect  and  psychological  control.

The  reverse  of  this  position  obtains  in  the  organisms
classed  as  No.  2.  In  them,  the  Astral  fluid  inheres  more
closely  to  the  soul  than  the  body ;  exalts  the  top  of  the

138

cranium  rather  than  the  front ;  compels  a  predominance
of  the  organs  of  command  and  ideality  ;  projects  its  sphere
of  indomitable  influence  on  all  around,  and  unfolds  the  in-
tellectual faculties  into  singular  prominence,  in  whatever
direction  they  exist,  rendering  the  individual  remarkable
as  a  Statesman,  General,  Author,  Priest,  Physician,  or,  if
devoted  to  the  study,  irresistible  as  an  ''  Adept,"  Magician,
and  controller  of  mundane  and  sub-mundane  spirits.  Such
individuals  are  generally  as  eager  as  they  are  capable  of
penetrating  into  nature's  profoundest  depths.

We  might  rank  the  amiable  and  highly  gifted  Anton
Mesmer  as  a  type  of  the  organism  No.  1.  and  the  noble
Sages  of  Greece,  Apollonius  and  Pythagoras,  as  shining
illustrations  of  the  type  described  as  No.  2.

Prophets,    or    Mediums,    are    persons    in    whom,    from
inherited    causes    and    Astral    influences    prevailing    at
birth,  an  immense  amount  of  the  Astral  fluid  exists,  but
who,  by  the  peculiar  conformation  of  the  tissues  which
make  up  their  physical  structures,  are  too  ready  to  part
with  their  superabundant  life  principle.     In  the  types  of
organism  already  described  as  good  magnetizers  and  pow-
erful psychologists,  the  Astral  fluid  is   concentrated,  the
tissues  of  the  body  firm  and  compact,  and  the  efflux  of
magnetic  power  is  due  only  to  its   superabundance.     The
medium  with  the  same  excess  of  magnetic  force,  is  totally
lacking  in  the  concentration  and  solidarity  which   distin-
guishes the  other  class.    The  one  in  physique  as  in  charac-
ter, is  wholly  positive  ;  the  other  purely  negative.     The  one
the  operator,  the  other  the  subject.     The  physical  structure
of  the  two  may  present  little  or  no  external  signs  of  differ-
ence to  those  who  do  not  study  physiological  types,  rather
than  surface  varieties,  but   the  arrangement  of  the  mole-
cules in  the    two  organisms,  are  structurally  dissimilar,
and  this  dissimilarity  exhibits  itself  thus  :

139

The  magnetizer  imparts  strength  from  the  abundance
of  his  strength.  The  medium  exhales  the  life  principle  to
depletion,  and,  in  the  loss  sustained,  insensibly  draws  upon
the  forces  of  others.  The  medium  is  emphatically  a
"  Sensitive."  Every  nerve  is  laid  bare,  every  pore  is  a
conductor  of  the  too  rapidly  ebbing  life  fluid.  When  the
brain  is  small,  and  the  generating  power  of  this  life  fluid
is  weak  (the  brain  being  its  source),  the  intellectual  flxcul-
ties  are  limited  and  dull ;  the  mind,  incapable  of  drawing
from  the  brain,  becomes  inactive,  and  the  nature  is  stolid
and  unimpassioned.  It  is  from  such  types  as  these  that
the  superficial  remark  has  arisen,  that  media  should  be,  or
always  are,  "  very  passive,"  unintellectual  persons.  These,
however,  are  only  one  type  of  the  class.  A^^reat  many
persons,  highly  charged  with  the  Astral  fluid,  and  losing
it  in  such  rapid  streams  as  to  constitute  them  good  mediums,
are  in  consequence  exceedingly  sensitive,  restlessly  ner-
vous, and  susceptible  to  every  influence  they  come  in  con-
tact with.  The  life  principle  flows  ofl'  all  too  rapidly
through  their  tissues,  leaving  them  irritable,  weak  and
despoiled.

As  nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  these  organisms  necessarily
attract  the  Astral  spirits  of  all  things  and  persons  around
them,  hence  others  in  their  presence  often  experience  a
sensible  diminution  of  strength,  whilst  the  media  them-
selves are  frequently  affected  painfully  or  pleasurably  by
the  mere  approach  of  certain  individuals,  realizing  also  the
special  influences  which  attach  to  scenes,  places,  houses
and  garments,  which  would  produce  no  effect  upon  less
susceptible  persons.  It  is  this  extreme  susceptiblity  and
the  negative  condition  produced  by  the  loss  of  Astral  fluid,
which  renders  such  persons  tine  instruments  for  the  control
of  spirits.

These    beings,  clothed   with  the    same    Astral  element

140

which  forms  the  spiritual  bodj^  of  mortals,  readily  effect  a
rapport  with  the  class  of  organisms  we  have  described.
This  rapport,  however,  most  generally  transpires  between
the  spirits  who  are  in  the  nearest  proximity  to  earth.

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  atmosphere  is  as  full  of
spiritual  life,  as  the  water  is  of  animalculge.  The  Astral
fluid — the  element  in  which  spirits  live,  and  of  which  their
external  bodies  are  composed,  permeates  this  atmosphere,
like  oceans  of  light,  hence  spiritual  life  is  to  this  planet,
what  the  Soul  is  to  the  body,  only  that  the  strata  of  spirit-
ual life  nearest  the  earth  are  graduated  from  the  spirits  of
those  who  are  most  in  rapport  with  earth,  to  elementary
beings,  who  in  reality  constitute  no  inconsiderable  portion
of  the  earth  itself,  hence  it  is,  that  mediumistic  persons —
susceptible  to  the  influences  of  varied  life  that  swarms
around  them — are  often  moved  by  nameless  and  incompre-
hensible monitions  of  danger,  the  presence  of  evil,  or  the
tendency  to  actions  from  which  their  own  better  natures
and  judgment  would  revolt.

The  chief  points  of  difference  between  the  ancient  Pro-
phet, the  Mediaeval  Witch,  and  the  modern  Medium,  con-
sist in  the  aims  and  influences  which  severally  actuated
them,  and  inspired  the  spirits  that  surrounded  them.  The
prophetic  men  and  women  of  old  were  intensely  religious
persons.  They  lived  in  devotional  ages  too,  when  their
exceptional  gilts  marked  them  out  for  a  species  of  rever-
ence which  almost  amounted  to  worship.  Separated  from
their  fellow  men  by  the  peculiar  sanctity  attached  to  the
prophetic  character,  their  religious  aspirations,  and  the
asceticism  of  their  lives,  attracted  to  them  beings  of  a  far
higher  order  than  those  whom  we  now  invoke  in  the  com-
munion with  family  spirits  and  kindred  ties.

Most  of  the  ancient  Prophets,  Seers,  and  Sybils,  prepared
for  the  communion  with  higher  intelligences  than  earth,  by

141

metliods  to  be  hereafter  described,  hence  their  powers  were
more  concentrated,  and  phenomenally  greater  than  those
of  the  work-a-day  trading  media  of  the  present  time.

As  to  the  Spiritism  of  the  mediaeval  ages,  unless  it  ex-
isted in  the  persons  of  learned  mystics,  who  cultured  it
after  the  ancient  fashion,  or  it  fell  as  a  mantle  of  inspira-
tion on  poets,  pointers,  musicians,  inventors,  religious  re-
formers, etc.,  it  degenerated  into  ugly  and  often  injmious
obsession,  by  ignorant  spirits,  attracted  to  media  of  a  char-
acter kindred  with  themselves.  Thus  the  study  of  differ-
ent phases  of  spiritual  influx,  proves,  how  much  its  repre-
sentation is  determined  by  the  age,  spirit  of  the  time,  and
character  of  the  communicating  intelligences.

Europe  and  America  are  at  present  in  the  heyday  flush
of  materialistic  civilization.

Utilitariani*sm  is  the  genius  of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury. If  religion  could  be  put  to  some  practical  use,  or
reduced  to  a  scientific  analysis,  it  would  be  as  much  the
fashion  now  as  it  was  &ve  thousand  years  ago  ;  but  what-
ever comes  in  the  shape  of  religious  belief,  even  scientific
discoveries  concerning  the  occult  side  of  nature,  must  con-
form to  the  materialistic  and  utilitarian  spirit  of  the  age,
or  the  age  will  none  of  it.  Such  is  the  crucible  of  human
opinion  through  which  the  Spiritism  of  this  century  has  to
pass,  and  hence  mediumship  is  a  trade,  an  amusement,  or
a  curiosity  ;  Spiritism,  a  marketable  commodity,  or  a  fash-
ionable mode  of  beguiling  an  idle  hour.  As  inspiration  \
invariably  descends  from  the  same  plane  to  which  aspira-  )
tion  ascends,  spirit  answers  spirit  from  correspondential
realms  of  thought  and  intelligence.

As  it  is  helow^  so  is  it  above  ;  in  the  skies  as  on  the  earth.

Having  briefly  depicted  the  general  characteristics  of
those  through  whom  spirits  communicate,  we  shall  proceed
to  classify  the  groups  into  which  prophetic  or  mediumistic
gifts  resolve  themselves.

142

Premising  that  each  raediumistic  person  is  so  by  inherit-
ance, or  the  awakening  of  latent  but  still  functional  pow-
ers, and  that  we  are  not  now  treating  of  that  magic  which
compensates  by  art  for  the  lack  of  natural  endowments,
we  shall  render  such  definitions  of  our  subject,  as  practi-
cal experience  suggests.
/  The  Trance  state  ranges  from  that  of  Ecstasy,  in  which
visions  of  the  highest  and  most  transcendental  nature  are
revealed,  through  all  the  various  stages  of  Somnambulism,
to  that  semi-conscious  sleep- waking  condition,  in  which  the
ego  is  not  lost,  but  wherein  the  origin  of  the  thought,
whether  from  the  subject's  own  mind,  or  the  impression
of  another's,  is  not  clearly  discerned.

2f  Inspiration  is  the  addition  of  higher  mentality  to  that
of  the  subject's  own  individuality.  It  does  not  necessitate
any  abnegation  of  self-consciousness ;  it  only  stimulates

\'     that  consciousness  to  extraordinary  exaltation.

In  all  these  states  the  influence  of  spirits  is  more  than
likely  to  be  the  superinducing  cause.  That  influence  is
exerted  in  precisely  the  same  fashion  as  the  simply  hu-
man processes  of  electro-biology,  and  by  operators,  who
have  either  practiced  this  method  of  control  on  earth,  or
been  endowed  with  the  power  by  nature  to  do  so.  The
spirit  projects  his  Astral  spirit  in  the  fashion  of  the  earthly
magnetizer  upon  his  mediumistic  subject ;  by  this  fluid  the
system  becomes  charged  and  the  magnetic  sleep,  semi-con-
conscious  trance,  or  the  exaltation  of  inspiration  is  induced.
These  graduated  conditions  represent  the  amount  of
passivity  or  mental  activity  of  the  subject — total  uncon-
sdousness  usually  falling  upon  a  very  receptive  and  passive
mind,  and  inspiration  stimulating  rather  than  subduing  the
powers  of  an  already  highly  unfolded  intellect.  When
the  system  is  sufficiently  saturated  with  the  spiritual  mag-
netizer's  Astral  fluid,  as  to  be  subject  to  control,  the  oper-

143

ator,  by  strong  will,  infuses  his  thought  into  the  subject's
mind  ;  but  whatever  the  specialty  of  thought  may  be,
it  becomes  shaped,  tinctured,  and  not  unfrequently  marred
to  a  greater  or  less  degree  by  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the
medium's  habits  of  speech,  and  methods  of  expression.
There  must  alwa,ys  be  an  adaptation  between  the  subject
on  earth,  and  the  operator  of  the  spheres.  A  spirit  of  a
totally  foreign  and  unsympathetic  nature  to  the  medium
could  not  obtain  control,  except  in  the  case  of  obsession,
and  that  transpires  through  the  brutal  and  resistless  power
of  a  gross,  strong,  earth-bound  spirit,  acting  upon  a  gen-
erally frail,  susceptible  and  most  probably  sickly  organism.

In  the  ordinary  exercise  of  spirit  control,  the  spirit
acting  as  a  good  magnetizer,  chooses  a  well-adapted  subject,
whose  mind  and  physique  are  calculated  to  assimilate  with
his  own,  and  thus  presents  his  ideas  through  the  aid  of  a
borrowed  vehicle  of  thought.  This  mode  of  influence  cor-
responds in  many  respects  to  the  vaticinations  of  the  Sybils
and  Prophetesses  of  old,  only  that  the  utterance  of  the
Spirits  termed  Gods,  or  Demons,  commonly  took  place  in
bodies  which  had  previously  been  prepared,  by  fastings,
iiblutions,  and  sometimes  by  the  inhalations  of  vapors,  which
subdued  the  senses,  stimulated  them  to  "  mantic  frenzy,"
or  prepared  the  system  for  the  infusion  of  a  superior  con-
sciousness to  their  own.

These  modes  of  control  by  spirits,  speaking  through  the
lips  of  entranced  or  inspired  media,  are  not  limited  in  their
effects  to  the  exhibition  of  merely  curious  mental  trans-
formati(ms.  In  ancient,  as  in  modern  times,  these  oracular
utterances  have  been  productive  of  a  far  wider  range  of
good  and  revolutionary  thought,  than  is  dreamed  of  by
those  who  listen,  go  hence,  and  deem  they  have  simply
been  interested  for  the  moment,  and  will  certainly  forget
the  ideas  they  have  heard.

144

The  Soul  never  forgets.  The  over-laden  brain  of  humanity
retains  the  impression  of  every  image  presented  to  it.  As
each  fresh  succession  of  images  photographs  itself  on  the
mind's  tablets,  the  last  seem  to  crowd  out  and  efface  the
impress  of  the  earlier  ones.  They  vanish  from  sight  truly,
but  they  are  still  there,  and  there  they  remain  forever.
Unconsciously  to  their  possessors,  they  enter  into  every
phase  of  character.  They  linger  like  a  subtle  perfume
in  the  sphere  of  unconscious  cerebration,  pervade  the  sen-
timents, enter  into  the  mental  structure,  shape  the  motives,
externalize  themselves  in  words  which  linger  in  others'
ears,  in  deeds  which  affect  others'  destinies,  and  silently
interweave  themselves  into  invisible,  but  indestructible
images,  reflected  upon  the  Astral  light  of  the  Universe. —
Could  this  most  subtle,  but  most  potential  realm  of  being-
be  thoroughly  explored,  all  the  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds,
that  have  ever  moved  the  race  would  be  found  in  ineffaceable
pictures  engraved  upon  the  billows  of  Astral  light  that
heave  and  swell  through  the  oceans  of  infinity.  Nothing-
is  lost  in  nature,  nothing  blotted  out  in  eternity,  and
future  generations,  living,  moving,  and  breathing  in  the
Astral  realms  of  life  imprinted  with  the  Soul  images  of
vanished  ages,  inhale  them,  grow  in  them,  re-combine  them
into  the  elements  of  their  own  characters,  and  thus  live
over  again,  in  ever  rolling,  but  ever  ascending  cycles  of
time,  every  sand-grain  of  ideality  that  has  ever  been
launched  into  space.  Hence  too,  the  universality  of  ideas;
the  spontaneous  affection  of  two  kindred  minds  unknown
to  each  other,  and  removed  apart  by  long  intervals  of
distance,  and  yet  how  often  are  such  at  the  same  moment
of  time  inspired  by  the  same  thought,  moved  to  execute
the  same  work,  and  even  construct  the  same,  yet  apparently
original  piece  of  mechanism ;  write  the  same  stanzas  of
poetry,  or  arrange  the  same  strains  of  melody  into  dupli-

145

cate    forms  !     This   is  the  source   of  thought  epidemics,
mental  contagions,  and  infectious  opinions.

The  gross  atmosphere  of  earth  traversed  by  the  seas  of
Astral  light  cannot  but  become  charged  with  the  images  ,
they  bear,  and  wherever  two  waves  of  this   Astral  fluid  \    /
unite  to  form  an  idea,  some  receptive  mind  seizes  upon  it.
The  wave  flows  on,  the  idea  strikes  another,  and  yet  an-    f  ■
other  mind,  until  the  force  of  one  leading  thought  sweeps
on  its  grand  career  of  influence,  from  pole   to  pole,  and
traverses  the  mental  girth  of  an  age,  although,  perchance,
none  but  the   constructive  genius  of  a  few,  can  assimilate!  /
and  utilize  it.     Trance  mediums  of  the  New  Dispensation
— Prophets  of  the  Old  !     Nothing  is  lost  in  Nature.     Fear
not  for  the  results  of  thy  labors !     Whatever  is  false  or
worthless  will  fade  and  perish — the  beautiful  and  true
never  die  !

The  next  class  of  media  who  represent  the  power  of
spirits  to  communicate  with  earth,  are  those  impressed
with  artistic  and  intellectual  ideas.  They  are  moved  to
draw  strange  patterns,  groups  of  flowers,  portraits  of  de-
ceased persons,  symbolical  or  emblematical  pictures,  to
write  messages,  words  of  love,  poems,  often  containing
tokens  of  memory  which  identify  the  controlling  power
with  some  individual  who  once  inhabited  a  mortal  body.
Music  totally  foreign  to  the  medium's  mind  or  capacity
has  been  thus  given ;  foreign  languges  spoken  and  writ-
ten by  those  unacquainted  with  them  ;  pantomimic  repre-
sentations have  been  made,  depicting  the  peculiarities  of
some  deceased  friend ;  and  thus  every  sense  is  used,  and
every  faculty  brought  into  play,  to  prove  the  presence  and
influence  of  a  world  of  being  rising  up  like  immortal  blos-
soms from  the  ashes  of  the  vanished  dead.

Spirits  making  use  of  the  Astral  light  which  permeates
all  space,  sometimes  impress  upon  it  visionary  pictures  of

146

luture  events  ;  sometimes  shadowy  representations  of  their
own  forms,  and  always  in  such  shape  as  will  identify  them
with  those  who  have  been  deemed  dead,  and  laid  away  in
the  quiet  grave.

Spirits  are  full  of  ingenious  resource,  highly  construct-
ive, and  far  more  widely  informed  upon  the  arcanum  of
nature  than  mortals,  hence  can  produce  a  greater  variety
of  effects,  and  in  much  shorter  periods  of  time  than  we  can
conceive  of,  hence  their  methods  of  representation  strike
us  as  abnormal  and  magical.  They  are  simply  due  to
magnetization  of  the  medium's  spirit  by  the  invisible  opera-
tor, and  psychological  impressions  produced  through  will
upon  the  medium's  spiritual  consciousness.

The  third  order  of  media  who  specially  distinguish
themselves  in  the  modern  spiritual  movement,  are  those
through  whom  strong,  powerful,  earth-bound  spirits  can
act  upon  material  bodies,  and  cause  them  to  become  tele-
graphic signs  of  their  presence.

The  persons  through  whom  these  theurgic  signals  are
made,  for  the  most  part  absorb  the  Astral  fluid  which  is
their  life,  through  the  cerebellum,  the  epigastric  nerves,
and  the  great  solar  plexus.  Though  not  necessarily  defi-
cient in  cerebral  development,  they  are  rarely  distinguished
in  this  region,  and,  in  some  instances,  the  preponderance
of  nervous  force  in  the  ganglionic  or  sympathetic  system
is  greatly  in  excess  of  the  cerebro-spinal,  thus  stimulating
the  instinctive  appetites,  especially  those  which  correspond
to  animal  tendencies.

This  is  not  invariably  the  case,  but  it  has  and  does  char-
acterize much  mediumship  of  this  order.  It  is  also  a  sig-
nificant fact,  and  one  which  should  commend  itself  to  the
attention  alike  of  the  physiologist  and  psychologist,  that
persons  afflicted  with  scrofula  and  glandular  enlargements,
often  seem  to  supply  the  pabulum  which  enables  spirils  to
produce  ponderous  manifestations  of  physical  power.

147

Frail,  delicate  women — persons,  too,  whose  natures  are
refined,  innocent  and  pure,  but  whose  glandular  system
has  been  attacked  bv  the  demon  of  Scrofula,  have  fre-
quently  been  found  sasceptible  of  becoming  the  most
remarkable  instruments  for  physical  demonstrations  by
spirits.  In  some  instances  mediums  for  this  class  of  phe-
nomena are  persons  in  the  enjoyment  of  rude  health  and
vigorous  constitutions.  The  author  has  witnessed  mani-
festations of  the  most  astounding  character  eliminated
through  the  mediumship  of  rugged  country  girls  and  stout
men.  especially  the  natives  of  Ireland  and  Northern  Ger-
many ;  but  a  close  and  careful  scrutiny  of  these  remarkably
endowed  media,  will  often  reveal  a  tendency  to  epilepsy,
chorea  and  ftinctional  derangements  of  the  pelvic  appa-
ratus, which  proves  that  the  cerebellum  and  ganglionic
system  of  nerves  are  unduly  charged,  and  that  the  magnet-
ism of  spirits  of  a  similar  temperament  to  their  own  may
exao:o;erate  these  constitutional  tendencies  into  excess  and
disease.  It  is  a  fact,  which  we  may  \x\  to  mask,  or  the
acknowledgment  of  which  we  may  indignantly  protest
aorainst.  vet  it  is  a  fact  nevertheless,  that  the  existence  of
remarkable  medium  powers,  argues  a  want  of  balance  in
the  system ;  and  whilst  the  theory  of  too  rapid  ebb  of  the
life  forces  and  their  excess,  and  unequal  distribution,  renders
physical  and  scientific  causes  for  this  structural  inhar-
mony,  it  also  proves  what  is  the  character  of  the  pabulum
which  spirits  use  to  produce  the  magnetic,  psychologic  and
physical  eflects  which  are  rendered  through  these  unevenly
balanced  organisms.

It  has  frequenth'  been  asked  whether  there  is  any  phi-
losophy to  explain  these  aberrations  of  nature,  to  which  we
reply,  assuredly  there  is.  The  Astral  fluid  becomes  char-
acterized by  every  material  atom  through  which  it  pas.ses.
It  is  at  once  the  cause  and  effect  of  all  varieties  in  uatui^e.

148

Its  abundance,  and  the  energy  of  its  action,  is  determined
by  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  atoms  through  which  it
flows  ;  but  once  incorporated  in  organic  bodies  as  their
attribute,  its  own  quality  becomes  materially  affected  by
the  quality  of  the  particles  it  vitalizes  ;  and  here  it  is  proper
to  recur  to  the  opinion  of  many  illuminated  Seers,  namely,
that  there  are  several  layers,  or  strata,  of  these  Astral
currents,  forming  as  a  totality  one  spiritual  body.  Those
nearest  the  Soul  are  the  finest  in  quality,  and  represent
the  spheres  related  to  the  Solar  and  Astral  system.
Those  layers  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  spiritual  body,
most  nearly  inhering  to  the  material  atoms,  form  the  life
spheres,  permeate  the  body,  partake  of  its  quality,  deteri-
orate or  improve  with  it,  are  gross,  coarse  or  dense,  as  the
body's  habits  or  mind's  tendencies  characterize  it ;  in  a
word,  it  is  this  portion  of  the  Astral  spirit,  which  streams
forth  from  the  medium  in  a  flood  of  emanation,  and  hence
becomes  the  exact  gauge  of  the  medium's  physical  and
mental  state.  It  is  particles  of  this  latter  description  which
form  the  life  principle  of  plants  and  minerals.

It  is  these  fiery  elements  of  universal  life  force,  which
are  struck  out  in  radiant  sparks  from  the  hard  flinty  rock,
or  crystalline  iron.  Violent  action  will  drive  forth  the  lam-
bent flames  of  life  from  every  solid  body,  and  cause  them
to  quiver  between  the  strokes  of  every  concussion.  They
stream  forth  in  odic  lights  from  shells,  crystals,  magnets,
and  all  magnetic  bodies.  They  reach  out  their  fingers  of
latent  fiery  force,  to  gather  up  kindred  particles  around
the  loadstone.  They  stream  up  in  pencilled  rays  of  many
colored  glory,  painting  over  the  northern  skies  with  gor-
geous illuminations  in  the  wonderful  Aurora  Borealis.
They  form  the  electric  paths  in  which  rolling  worlds,  suns
and  systems  are  held  in  innumerable  lines  of  force.  They
flash  in  the  wild  fires  of  contending  cloud  armies.     They

149

discharge  solemn  peals  of  heavenly  artillery  in  the  roar  of
the  battling  tempest.

They  shout  their  anthems  of  power  in  the  heaving  bil-
lows, and  sob  away  the  last  echoes  of  sound  in  the  murnmr
of  the  half  slumbering  waves.  These  invisible,  latent,  all-
pervading  flames  of  life,  these  direct  emanations  from  the
Central  Sun  of  all  being,  connect  suns  and  planets,  earths
and  satellites,  by  the  stupendous  chains  of  force,  and  fill
all  space  with  oceans  of  invisible,  but  ever  living  fires. —
They  fill  all  creation  with  life,  but  take  on  the  protean
forms  of  every  atom  through  which  their  living  currents  are
forever  ebbing  and  flowing.

Then  need  we  not  marvel  that  the  Astral  fluid  which
flows  through  the  refined  particles  of  a  pure  and  healthful
human  organism,  might  afford  intellectual  spirits  an  oppor-
tunity of  impressing  the  brain  with  high  inspirational  ideas,
yet  fail  to  give  ofl*  that  superabundance  of  quantity  or
denseness  of  quality,  which  is  requisite  to  produce  mani-
festations of  a  ponderable  character — on  the  other  hand,
remembering  the  almost  infinite  varieties  of  exhibition
which  the  Astral  fluid  assumes  in  accordance  with  the
variousness  of  the  particles  through  which  it  flows,  we  need
not  feel  surprised  that  a  human  body  abundantly  endowed
with  this  same  life  fluid,  so  constituted  as  to  eliminate  it
through  every  pore,  but  giving  off*  a  quality  which  is
especially  redolent  of  influences  generated  in  the  vital  and
nutritive  system  of  nerves,  should  furnish  that  pabulum
which  enables  spirits  to  construct  forms,  and  produce  man-
ifestations of  a  purely  physical  character.

In  this  scheme  of  natural  order,  disease  must  impress
itself  upon  every  imponderable  particle  of  the  Astral
sphere,  and  since  the  body  laboring  under  disease  is  really
being  disintegrated,  and  parts  too  rapidly  and  freely  with
its  life  principle,  so  do  sick  persons  give  off*  in  the  most

150

abundance,  and  of  the  most  dense  quality,  the  element
which  spirits  can  use  for  the  production  of  strong  physical
manifestations.

The  same  philosophy  with  certain  modifications,  applies
to  the  mediumship  of  little  children.

Endowed  with  a  superabundance  of  that  vital  force
which  is  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  growth,  young  chil-
dren dispose  of  this  excess  in  general  by  violent  exercise,
exercise  which  would  exhaust  more  mature  bodies,  but
which  nature  impresses  them  to  undertake  as  a  safety-
valve,  for  the  escape  of  the  vital  currents,  with  which  their
young  fresh  frames  are  charged  to  repletion.  Unscrupu-
lous spirits  who  perceive  the  powerful  aromal  essences
which  flow  forth  so  freely  from  the  young,  take  advantage
of  its  existence,  to  produce  manifestations  of  their  presence,
and  thus  it  so  often  happens,  that  children,  like  sick  per-
sons, become  potent  media  for  spirits.  It  should  be  added
that  the  practice  of  permitting  children  thus  to  be  exercised
as  mediums,  should  only  be  indulged  in  to  a  very  limited
extent,  the  excessive  draught  procured  from  their  tender
and  susceptible  frames,  rendering  them  liable  to  lose  health,
strength,  and  perhaps  life  itself,  under  its  action,     r--^

We  do  not  now  enlarge  upon  the  good  or  evil  results  ot
this  kind  of  rapport  between  spirits  and  mortals,  we  simply
write  of  its  modes,  and  the  means  of  ready  access  which
spirits  find  for  its  performance.

The  physical  force  medium  is  often  endowed  with  a
great  variety  of  gifts,  because  the  Astral  fluid,  charging
the  whole  body  to  excess,  and  flowing  through  every  pore
with  a  profuse  expenditure  of  the  life  principle,  constitutes
all  the  organs  mediums.  The  skin  is  charged,  rendering
it  Hable  to  be  impressed  with  fleshly  letters.  The  eye  be-
comes a  ready  conductor  to  the  spiritual  eye  beneath,  im-
parting the  faculty  of  clairvoyance.      The  entire  of  the

151

spiritual  senses  find  ready  expression  through  a  physique
which  is  all  mediuniistic,  and  a  complete  battery  for  the
action  of  controlling  spirits.  Let  it  be  remembered  that
in  all  magnetic  operations  every  particle  of  the  life  fluid  rep-
resents the  whole  ;  thus  a  sensitive  by  coming  in  contact
with  a  lock  of  hair,  a  handkerchief,  or  the  smallest  piece
of  fabric  touched  by  another,  can  psychometrically  discover
the  entire  of  that  other's  nature.  This  alone  would  prove
(were  other  facts  wanting),  that  one  particle  of  the  subtle
fluid  of  life  represents  the  whole,  and  this  can  only  be
accounted  for  by  acknowledging  the  truth  of  a  curious
hypothesis,  presented  to  the  world  by  a  celebrated  physi-
ologist, who  says  :

''  Through  the  perspiratory  ducts,  and  all  the  other  methods  by  which  nature
supplies  to  the  organism  an  apparatus  for  the  dual  functions  of  absorption  and
evaporation,  the  human  body  exhales  the  imponderable  portions  of  blood,  bone,
nervous  and  muscular  tissue,  even  the  efi'ete  exhalations  of  hair  and  nails  which
go  to  make  up  the  totality  of  the  structure.

''All  these  vaporized  elements  are  in  the  atmosphere,  carried  by  the  gases,  ex-
haled from  the  lungs,  and  swept  off  from  the  photosphere  of  the  human  body,  into
the  atmosphere  that  surrounds  it.  If  we  could  arrive  at  any  method  of  separating
the  organic  from  the  inorganic  particles  that  fill  the  air,  and  charge  the  atmosphere
with  living  emanations,  where  human  life  abounds,  we  might  crystallize  them  back
again  into  human  bodies,  and  hence  the  claim  of  the  Spiritualists  to  have  found
in  spiritual  magnetism  that  crystallizing  element  by  which  they  can  re-clothe  the
spirit  with  a  material  body,  gathered  up  from  the  atmosphere  which  surrounds  a
circle  of  investigators,  is  neither  so  wild  or  improbable  after  all."

It  would  be  a  fact  in  spiritual  phenomena,  even  if  it  were
"  wild  and  improbable  "  in  hypothesis  ;  but  to  those  who
are  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  Astral  fluid — its  iden-
tity with  the  universal  element  we  call  force — its  existence
in  man  as  a  spiritual  body,  in  the  spirit's  organism  as  an
external  body,  and  in  the  atmosphere  as  force  per  se ;  it
only  needs  an  appreciation  of  the  physiological  idea  above
suggested,  as  to  the  character  of  our  emanations,  to  under-
stand why  spirits,  having  at  command  a  dense  and  power-
ful stream  of  the  Astral  fluid  exhaled  from  peculiar  organ-

1^

152

isms,  can  easily  use  that  as  a  force  for  crystallizing  the
imponderable  elements,  which  abound  in  the  atmosphere,
into  a  temporary  physical  covering  for  themselves.

The  medium's  very  flesh,  and  all  the  fluids  and  solids
of  his  physique,  are  given  off  by  exhalations,  and  remain
in  the  atmosphere.  These  exhalations  from  the  physical
medium  are  abundant  in  quantity,  powerful  and  magnetic
in  quality,  and  so  long  as  they  can  be  extracted  by  the
magnetism  of  attendant  spirits,  and  sustained  by  the  com-
bined magnetisms  of  other  human  beings,  their  crystaliza-
tion  by  the  aid  of  spiritual  chemistry,  can  be  readily
eflected,  and  spirits  can  thus  temporarily  re-clothe  them-
selves in  atoms  of  actual  flesh  and  blood.  They  pass
sparks  of  electricity  through  these  imponderable  exhala-
tions, just  as  chemists  can  crystalize  gases  into  fluids,  and
fluids  into  solids,  by  the  same  process.  By  aid  of  strong
will,  and  having  all  the  elements  held  in  solution  in  the
atmosphere,  spirits  can  even  communicate  objective  solidity
to  the  images  in  their  minds,  and  thus  present  again  the
ponderable  semblances  of  ornaments,  clothes,  and  other
physical  fabrics  ;  nay  more,  by  imparting  to  these  tempo-
rarily formed  substances  a  sufficient  amount  of  the  Astral
fluid  to  produce  cohesion,  they  can  be  kept  in  being  for  a
considerable  time  after  the  first  formative  process  has  been
effected.

There  is  no  witchcraft  or  sorcery  in  these  transforma-
tions, although  they  may  with  propriety  take  rank  as
spiritual  magic  ;  the  Spirit  is  the  Man;  the  Soul  the  de-
signer ;  the  Astral  body  the  force,  the  mover,  the  motion,
the  executant.

The  material  body  is  only  a  vehicle,  enabling  the  Soul
through  the  Astral  body  or  spirit  to  come  into  contact  with
matter.  In  the  above  necessarily  brief  description  of
spiritual  phenomena,  we  only  touch  on  the  results  of  com-

153

munion  effected  between  spirits  and  mortals,  where  the
former  find  conditions  spontaneously  prepared  by  nature
for  their  use.  We  shall  conclude  this  section  by  reviewing
the  possibilities  which  exist  in  every  human  being  for  pro-
ducing extra-mundane  effects  through  the  application  of
natural  laws  to  spiritual  forces.

The  gifts  of  the  spirit  are  spiritual  sight — hearing,  taste,
smell  and  touch,  wholly  independent  of  the  material  ave-
nues of  sense.  The  power  of  projecting  the  Astral  fluid
from  one  individual  to  the  body  of  another,  through  mag-
netic manipulations,  contact  or  will,  and  the  power  of  im-
pressing the  will  of  one  individual  by  the  superior  force  of
another.  The  soul  also  possesses  the  power  of  so  concen-
trating its  own  Astral  spirit,  as  to  temporarily  subjugate
the  outer  senses,  steep  them  in  forgetfulness,  and  then  with-
draw from  the  body,  wander  forth  at  will,  preserve  the
body  from  death  by  leaving  a  sufficient  portion  of  the
Astral  fluid  to  maintain  its  integrity,  and  subsequently  re-
turn to  and  resume  its  occupancy  of  the  body.  There  are
still  other  powers  of  the  embodied  human  Soul  of  which
we  shall  yet  speak  more  in  detail,  suffice  it  for  the  present
to  sum  up  by  saying  the  Soul  cannot  only  perform  all  the
phenomena  now  executed  by  the  aid  of  disembodied  spirits,
but  it  can  command  the  assistance  of  inferior  grades  to  man^
and  compel  their  aid  in  subjugating  the  forces  of  matter.

Man  can  read  the  hidden  things  of  another's  mind,  and
even  temporarily  obsess  it,  and  by  aid  of  inferior  spirits,
psychologize  many  persons  at  once,  compelling  them  to
see,  hear,  taste  or  feel  the  subjective  images  of  his  creation.

He  can  envelope  some  objects  in  the  Astral  fluid,  render-
ing them  invisible  to  the  material  eye  ;  create  disturbances
in  the  atmosphere,  or  calm  them  by  the  same  means  ;
promote  rapid  and  spontaneous  growth  in  the  vegetable
world ;  wound  the  body  and  heal  it  in  the  same  minute  of

154

time  ;  render  himself  insensible  to  pain,  fire  and  the  effects
of  gravitation,  and  so  float  in  mid-air ;  cause  himself  to  be
buried  alive  during  entrancement,  and  resume  the  func-
tions of  life  when  disinterred.

All  these  things  we  positively  affirm  man  can  do,  through
the  operation  of  his  own  will,  and  the  aid  of  powerful
spirits,  and  all  these  things  the  author  positively  affirms  he
has  witnessed,  and  proposes  in  the  forthcoming  sections,
to  give  the  philosophy  of,  as  gathered  from  personal  expe-
rience, and  the  descriptions  of  Fakeers,  Yogees,  Dervishes,
Bramins,  and  the  adepts  of  Oriental  systems  of  magic.

Whether  our  readers  will  observe  the  conditions  neces-
sary for  the  performance  of  these  extra-mundane  acts  of
spiritual  power,  is  a  question  which  we  do  not  propose  to
decide  upon;  but  we  commend  our  closing  remarks  to
special  consideration.

The  Soul  is  an  emanation  from  Deity  ;  therefore  Deific
in  power  and  attributes.  The  Astral  spirit  which  clothes
the  Soul  and  vitalizes  the  body,  is  a  part  of  the  great  mo-
tor power  of  the  Universe,  the  source  and  cause  of  all
motion.

The  two  combined,  though  temporarily  shrouded  in  mat-
ter, and  limited  by  the  encasements  of  a  material  body,
still  form  a  Deific,  and  therefore  all-powerful  existence,
which  only  requires  the  light  of  spiritual  science  to  render
its  functions  as  Deific  as  its  source.  Something  of  this  is
shown,  when  the  soul  is  emancipated  from  the  body,  and
returns  to  earth  manifesting  its  astonishing  and  extended
powers  through  what  is  called  "  spiritual  phenomena."

Other  glimpses  of  these  powers  shine  forth,  through  the
lives  of  ecstatics,  seers  and  magians  ;  but  what  illimitable
possibilities  yet  remain  unfathomed  and  undreamed  of !

Whojian  say-^where  the  terminal  line  is  drawn  between

155

God  and  His  creatures,  or  why  man  should  not  manifest
as  k  microcosm,  all  the  creative  attributes  which  belong  to
his  Divine  Author,  the  Macrocosm  ]

The  superiority  of  ancient  over  modern  Theosophy,  does
not  arise  from  any  retrogression  in  man  or  his  planet.  It
is  no  arrest  or  backward  step  in  the  march  of  intellect ;
but  it  results  from  the  profound  devotion  with  which  the
ancient  man  regarded  spiritual  things,  and  the  cold  materi-
alism of  the  present  day  ;  from  the  unceasing  aspiration  of
our  forefathers  towards  spiritual  light  and  knowledge,  and  /
the  universal  contempt  or  indifference  with  which  such  j
^subjects  are  regarded  now.

The  people  of  antiquity  generally,  and  the  priesthood  in
particular,  studied  into  the  laws  of  spiritual  forces,  and
spent  generation  after  generation  in  analyzing  their  prin-
ciples, and  the  relations  they  bear  to  visible  nature.

Those  thinkers  of  the  nineteenth  century,  who  strive  to
master  the  occult  in  nature  at  all,  aim  at  doing  so,  by  seek-  ^
ing  for  the  spiritual  through  the  laws  of  the  material,  and
expect  to  push  their  way  upward,  from  the  known,  to  the
unknown,  from  matter  to  spirit.

Let  those  who  would  emulate  the  Divine  plan,  and  work
from  the  centre  to  the  circumference,  from  Deity  to  His
Creatures,  and  from  Soul  essence  to  created  forms,  despise
not  the  results  of  human  experience,  and  the  strivings  of
the  human  mind  for  light  and  knowledge  in  any  age,
ancient  or  modern.  Regarding  the  past  as  a  stepping-
stone  to  the  present,  and  the  lower  chambers  and  galleries
of  the  great  Temple  of  humanity  as  the  foundations  upon
which  the  integrity  of  the  superstructure  depends,  let  us
with  humble  and  reverent  spirits  avail  ourselves  of  the
successes  and  failures  of  our  ancestors,  as  the  warnings  and
encouragements  by  which  our  own  steps  may  be   safely

156

guided;  and  boldly  push  on  in  those  transcendent  paths  of
research,  in  which  Angels  are  our  guides,  ministering
spirits  our  strength,  the  elevation  and  culture  of  the  Divine
Spirit  within  us  our  goal,  and  God  the  Spirit,  the  quench-
less beacon-light,  by  which  our  faltering  footsteps  will  be
ever  illuminated,  until  we  find  our  rest  at  last  in  Him.

%

/

157

SECTION  X.

Art  Magic.

General  Summary  of  the    condition   and  processes  of  Magical

Practices.

We  adopt  the  caption  of  '^  Art  Magic"  for  this  Section,
because  we  desire  to  draw  the  line  between  that  vast
amount  of  speculative  philosophy,  which  is  inextricably
mixed  up  with  ancient  Theosophy,  and  the  occult  practices
which  constitute  much  of  that  Theosophy  in  application.

Hitherto  we  have  written  chiefly  of  the  theories  by
which  the  ancients  explained  the  order  of  being,  and  the
elements  of  life  power  and  motion,  by  which  being  itself
becomes  operative.  Until  the  principles  thus  laid  dov\^n
are  thoroughly  well  digested,  our  attempts  to  show  their
application  to  the  practices  of  magic  will  fail.

With  the  most  sincere  desire  to  explain  the  modes  by
which  artificial  means  can  be  induced  to  evoke  the  occult
powers  in  nature,  or  in  other  words,  to  practice  the  art  of
magic,  our  efforts  will  be  in  vain,  if  the  reader  fails  to
apprehend  what  nature  is  ;  to  comprehend  the  structure  of
man  in  his  threefold  character  as  a  material,  magical,  and
divine  being;  to  follow  us  in  our  definitions  of  the  Astral
fluid  which  vitalizes  all  things  in  nature,  and  the  Astral
spirit,  which  constitutes  the  spiritual  body  of  man  ;  of  the
connecting  links  between  Men^  Angels,  Spirits,  and  Deity,
and  the  difference  between  Prophets  and  Magicians, — the
adept  who  commands  spirits,  and  the  medium  who  is  com-
manded by  them.

Without  these    preparatory  steps  for  acquiring  occult

158

knowledge,  magic  will  remain  magic  in  its  lowest    and
most  obscure  sense,  and  Magic  it  will  be  to  the  end  of  the

chapter.

Magnetism  and  Psychology  are  the  two  pillars  that  sup-
port the  Temple  of  Spiritism.

They  are  the  Herculean  columns  through  which  the  un-
derstandmg  leads  the  soul  into  supernal  realms  of  power  ;
the  ^'  Jachiin  and  Boaz"  by  which  the  over-arching  vault
of  the  heavens  is  upheld,  which  canopies  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Spiritual  Masonry.

By  magnetism  the  imponderable,  all-pervading  life  ele-
ment termed  Astral  fluid  is  communicated  from  one  body
to  another.  By  psychology  the  power  of  one  mind  subju-
gates and  controls  that  of  another,  and  it  is  in  these  two
spheres  of  operation  that  all  the  marvels  of  magic  trans-
pire. The  difhcalties  which  oppose  the  scholar's  mastery
of  this  art,  as  practiced  by  the  ancient  and  mediaeval  phi-
losophers, arise  from  a  concatenation  of  causes,  all  combin-
ing to  darken  knowledge  rather  than  to  promote  it,  and
tending  to  obscure  whatever  light  could  be  thrown  upon
the  subject.

In  the  first  place  the  Priests  of  antiquity,  who  were  the
chief  repositories  of  occult  science,  maintained  their  au-
thority over  the  populace  by  reserving  its  understanding
exclusively  to  their  own  order.  It  was  not  alone  that  they
deemed  such  knowledge  too  high  for  vulgar  minds,  they
felt  that  their  own  exclusive  possession  of  its  secrets  was
essential  to  the  continuance  of  their  authority,  hence  it
would  have  been  suicidal  to  entrust  the  multitude  with
that  reserved  force  by  virtue  of  which  they  held  their
office.

It  has  often  been  alleged  by  modern  writers  that  the
ancient  mysteries  were  the  conservatories  of  all  occult
science,  and  that  those  alone  who  became  Hierophants

159

therein,  could  arrive  at  a  true  understanding  of  Art  Magic.
It  has  lately  become  a  received  opinion  too,  that  a  study
of  the  ancient  Caballaho  of  the  Hebrews  and  Orientals
would  supply  this  much  desired  information,  and  initiate
any  patient  student  of  their  pages  into  the  arcanum  of
magic.  Neither  of  these  positions  is  correct.  The  mys-
teries indoctrinated  their  initiates  into  those  theorems  of
speculative  philosophy  of  which  our  former  sections  have
given  brief  summaries.

The  Caballaho  have  been  perused  and  studied  with  the
most  unwearied  care  by  many  a  learned  scholar,  who  at
the  last  has  utterly  failed  to  enact  one  single  rite  of  magic
successfully.

Let  the  facts  be  plainly  stated.  In  all  the  writings  of
true  and  highly  endowed  Mystics,  whether  ancient  or
modern,  it  is  distinctly  stated  in  the  language  of  Cornelius
Agrippa,  that  "  a  magician  must  be  born  so  from  his
mother's  womb,"  and  that  unless  he  is  so  gifted  by  nature,
the  processes  by  which  real  physiological  changes  are  to
be  wrought  in  his  system  are  slow,  painful,  and  difficult  of
performance.

We  have  written  to  little  purpose  if  we  have  failed  to
impress  upon  our  readers  that  the  source  of  all  spiritual
powers  and  functions  resides  in  that  mysterious  combina-
tion of  imponderable  elements  which  we  have  termed  the
Astral  spirit  or  spiritual  body  of  man  ;  that  it  is  to  the
original  and  constitutional  structure  of  that  Astral  spirit,
that  prophetic  or  mediumistic  endowments  are  due,  and
that  when  these  exist  inherently  in  the  organism,  man  is
a  prophet,  a  medium,  and  can  readily  exalt  his  powers  into
those  of  a  magician.  The  reader  may  inquire  wherein
consists  the  difference  between  a  medium  and  a  magician'^
We  answer,  chiefly  in  degree.  The  medium  is  one  through
whose  Astral  spirit,  other  spirits  can  manifest,  making
their  presence   known  by  various   kinds  of  phenomena.

160

Whatever  these  consist  in,  the  medium  is  only  a  passive
ao-ent  in  their  hands.  He  can  neither  command  their  pres-
ence  nor  will  their  absence  ; — can  never  compel  the  per-
formance of  any  special  act,  nor  direct  its  nature.  The
magician  on  the  contrary,  can  summon  and  dismiss  spirits
at  will ;  can  perform  many  feats  of  occult  power  through
his  own  spirit ;  can  compel  the  presence  and  assistance  of
spirits  of  lower  grades  of  being  than  himself,  and  effect  trans-
formations in  the  realm  of  nature  upon  animate  and  inani-
mate bodies.  He  can  control  his  fellow-men  physically  and
mentally  by  will,  irrespective  of  distance,  and  even  cause
changes  in  the  destinies  of  individuals  and  societies.  These
powers  seem  in  rehearsal  fabulous,  nevertheless,  they  have
been  achieved,  and  we  know  that  they  are  still  attaina-
ble toman.  The  first  great  pre -requisite  however  is  as  above
stated,  a  prophetic  or  naturally  mediumistic  organization,
and  where  this  exists,  culture  will  do  the  rest ;  where  it  is
not  bestowed  by  nature,  the  next  step  is  to  change  the  phy-
sique, and  so  modify  its  inherent  tendencies,  as  to  afford
prepared  conditions  for  the  exercise  of  magical  powers,  and
it  is  the  recital  of  these  conditions  that  will  eno-asfe  our  at-
tention  during  this  and  the  following  few  sections.

In  the  first  place,  let  us  disabuse  the  minds  of  those  who
have  been  informed  that  magical  knowledge  was  to  be  pro-
cured only  through  initiation  into  the  ancient  mysteries,
or  certain  modern  branches  of  those  orders  that  may  still
be  found  banded  together  in  the  Orient.  This  is  emphati-
cally a  mistake,  if  not  a  a  wilful  perversion  of  the  truih^  on
the  part  of  those  who  may  be  still  interested  in  throwing
the  halo  of  mystery  around  their  cherished  pursuits.
There  is  absolutely  nothing  in  the  initiatory  rites  of  any
ancient  order  which  can  promote  magical  powers  or  spirit-
ual afflatus.  It  is  in  the  discipline  enjoined  upon  initiates,
and  the  effects  of  real  physiological  changes  thus  wrought

161

in  their  systems,  that  the  entire  virtue  of  the  initiation
consists ;  furthermore,  if  such  neophytes  as  entered  upon
the  preparatory  degrees  of  their  initiation,  did  not  mani-
fest the  well-known  signs  of  innate  magical  power,  or  if
after  due  preparation,  they  did  not  give  evidence  of  the
possession  of  magnetic  or  mediumistic  faculties,  they
were  never  permitted  to  take  rank  as  Hierophants,  never
elevated  to  that  last  degree  which  constituted  them
Adepts.

To  be  an  '•^  Adept,''  was  to  be  able  to  practice  magic,  and
to  do  this  was  either  to  be  a  natural  prophet,  cultured  to
the  strength  of  a  magician,  or  an  individual  who  had
acquired  this  prophetic  power  and  magical  strength  through
discipline.  The  author  has  passed  many  years  in  India,
Arabia,  China,  and  other  eastern  lands,  and  has  frequently
practiced,  as  well  as  witnessed  the  rites  of  initiation  in  dif-
ferent societies,  formed  for  the  study  of  Magic.

From  these,  and  opportunities  suggested  by  the  history  of
more  remote  times,  we  may  confidently  allege,  that  unless
in  the  persons  of  naturally  endowed  mediums,  or  those  whose
organizations  have  been  changed  by  long  and  persistent
methods  of  discipline,  magical  rites  have  never  successfully
been  enacted,  neither  have  magical  results  been  obtained
by  virtue  of  cabalistic  words,  fumigations,  incantations,
or  other  ceremonies  alone.  There  are  those  now  living,
whose  opinions  are  entitled  to  respect,  who  take  other
ground  than  this,  and  allege  that  the  mere  pronunciation
of  certain  words,  superstitiously  termed  '^  cabalistic,"  is
sufficient  to  summon  spirits  of  an  inferior  order  to  the
speaker's  presence,  and  that  the  possession  of  talismans
and  amulets  will  effect  the  same  results.  The  author
believes  he  shall  be  able  to  sustain  his  own  fixed  opinion
to  the  contrary  of  these  beliefs,  by  citing  the  teachings  of
the  most  authoritative  Mystics  of  ancient  and  modern
times.

162

For  the  present  we  shall  argue  from  the  stand-point
assumed  above,  only  adding  that  from  early  boyhood,  the
author  has  himself  been  both  subject  and  operator  in
magical  practices,  and  though  often  associated  with  noble
minds  fully  skilled  in  the  speculative  philosophy  of  spirit-
ual subjects,  he  has  failed  to  find  any  operators  in  occult
lore,  who  depended  upon  knowledge  alone,  or  who  had  not
qualified  themselves  by  preparatory  discipline,  or  been
prepared  by  inherent  endowments,  for  the  remarkable
achievements  which  constitute  the  Magician.

Anticipating  more  detailed  illustrations  of  this  subject
by  a  few  general  definitions,  we  proceed  to  say,  that  the
first  preparatory  step  for  the  elimination  of  magical  power
is  ABSTINENCE.  Abstinence  not  alone  in  food,  but  from
the  indulgence  of  all  animal  appetites.  If,  for  instance,  the
student  proposes  to  essay  the  performance  of  magical  rites
at  any  given  period,  he  should  set  apart  certain  days  during
several  months,  for  total  abstinence,  and  during  a  set  period
of  probation,  observe  the  strictest  laws  of  temperance  and
chastity.  The  Priests  of  antiquity  were  often  married  men,
but,  as  we  have  before  stated,  they  were  not  always  pro-
phetic men — on  the  other  hand,  the  Prophets  were  almost
invariably  ascetics,  and  that  of  the  strictest  order, — never
indulging  in  the  use  of  wine,  seldom  of  meat,  the  society
of  the  female  sex,  or  the  enjoyment  of  social  and  conjugal
relations.

The  more  utterly  ascetic  they  were,  the  more  exalted
became  their  spiritual  powers,  but  without  a  certain  amount
of  fasting  and  ascesticism,  let  none  expect  to  succeed  in
magical  practices,  for  the  physiological  effects  which  fast-
ing and  asceticism  produce,  are  unalterably  essential  alike
to  the  male  or  female  sex,  in  the  development  of  the  power
under  consideration.

The  North  American  Indians,  no  less  than  the  Charibs

163

and  South  American  tribes  of  poor,  uneducated  aborigines,
compel  their  young  men  to  undergo  probationary  fasts  for
a  period  of  some  eight  or  nine  days,  wandering  meanwhile
through  the  forests,  and  carefully  avoiding  contact  with
any  of  their  fellow-men.  These  ascetic  practices  antedate
their  assumption  of  the  duties  of  manhood,  or  the  positions
of  power  and  trust,  to  which  the  red  men  deem  their  sons
may  become  eligible,  and  it  is  claimed  that  this  discipline
is  necessary  to  enkindle  the  noblest  fires  of  manhood,
quicken  their  powers  of  perception,  accustom  them  to
endurance,  and  above  all,  stimulate  the  latent  spirituality
of  their  Souls  to  perceive  and  commune  with  invisible
Guardian  Spirits.  During  these  probationary  states  it  is
claimed  that  their  Spirit  Guides  appear  to  them,  reveal
their  destiny,  instruct  them  in  their  choice  of  a  mission,
and  establish  a  rapport  between  the  spirit  and  mortal,
which  is  continued  through  life.

Thus  do  these  children  of  nature,  these  poor  savages,  as
the  proud  Civilian  contemptuously  denominates  them,
instinctively  perform  those  initiatory  rites  which  it  was
the  boast  of  the  highest  philosophy  of  antiquity  to  have
instituted.

Every  nation  of  antiquity  practiced  this  species  of  dis-
cipline, previous  to  entering  on  a  career  of  spiritual  prowess.

The  Sybils  of  Greece  and  Rome,  the  Hebrew  prophets,
the  Indian  Ecstatics  and  Egyptian  mystics ;  the  Chaldean
soothsayers  and  Roman  augurs,  the  Medes,  Persians,
Chinese  and  Japanese,  all  taught  these  necessary  modes  of
preparation  for  prophetic  ofiices.

All  the  mystics  of  the  Middle  Ages  exalt  the  practices
of  abstinence,  and  insist  upon  its  necessity.  Of  all  classes
of  religious  thinkers,  the  Christians  should  be  the  most  faith-
ful in  the  observance  of  this  rite,  since  it  was  charged
upon   them   both  by   liie  example  and  precept  of   their

164

founder,  and  prescribed  as  an  essential  of  spiritual  disci-
pline, both  in  the  old  and  new  Testament,  and  yet  the
Roman  Catholics  alone,  of  all  the  "^ects  of  Christianity,
observe  abstinence  as  a  part  of  their  religious  duty  ;  and
perhaps  it  is  to  this  cause  that  we  may  attribute  the  greater
prevalence  of  spiritual  manifestations  amongst  them,  than
with  any  other  religious  thinkers  of  Christendom.  An-
other mode  of  preparatory  exercise  for  spiritual  exaltation
is  prayer.  Prayer,  not  in  the  mere  routine  form  of  verbal
solicitation,  but  sincere  aspiration  of  soul  towards  the  great
Source  of  all  life,  light  and  inspiration.  And  prayer  must
be  supplemented  by  solitary  communion  with  the  inner
consciousness,  long  periods  of  seclusion  from  the  external
world,  and  a  complete  abstraction  of  the  senses  from  all
outward  observances ;  soul  musings  on  the  great  I  Am,  and
that  deep  absorption  of  the  reflective  powers  upon  the
spirit  within  which  constitutes  the  triumph  of  the  Soul
over  matter  and  its  belongings.  Ablution,  too,  is  another
method  of  preparing  the  physique  for  the  flow  of  the  Astral
fluid.  By  frequent  ablutions  the  skin — the  organ  of  the
dual  functions  of  evaporation  and  absorption — is  prepared
for  a  free  transmission  and  reception  of  that  Astral  fluid
which  constitutes  the  magical  element.  During  the  inter-
vals of  fasting,  the  food  should  be  very  light,  consisting
chiefly  of  vegetables  and  fruits,  whilst  all  stimulants  or  sala-
cious substances  calculated  to  excite  the  senses  or  pamper
the  appetites,  should  be  carefully  avoided.  Tea  and  coffee
have  not  only  been  deemed  admissible,  but  taken  in  mod-
erate quantities  are  recommended  by  some  modern  mystics,
although  the  stricter  order  repudiate  their  use.  It  is  quite
evident  that  the  ancients  understood  the  uses  of  animal
magnetism.  The  temples  of  the  east  are  covered  with
representations  of  this  practice  in  the  treatment  of  the
sick,  and  the  constant  allusion  to  it  in  ancient  and  classical

165

writings  leaves  no  doubt  but  that  it  was  the  universal
method  of  therapeutic  practice.

Animal  magnetism  was  also  the  method  by  which  the
highest  rites  of  initiation  into  the  sacred  mysteries  were
completed.  Using  this  term  in  its  modern  sense,  we  find
it  was  the  s]3ecial  virtue  by  which  both  in  ancient  and
modern  mysticism  the  potential  powers  of  the  magical
element  in  man  is  awakened.

The  chief  value  of  the  initiatory  rites  of  all  secret  soci-
eties, lays  in  the  psychological  effect  they  exert  on  the
senses  by  the  fumigations  of  incense,  the  presentation  of
scenic  illusions,  the  performance  of  delightful  music,  no
less  than  the  effect  which  the  rehearsal  of  high  thoughts
and  sublime  ideas  must  produce  on  the  already  over-
wrought mind.  When  to  all  this  is  added  the  magnetic
effect  imparted  by  the  presence  and  manipulations  of  pow^-
erful  adepts,  whose  Astral  fluid,  charged  with  magical
strength,  is  infused  into  the  system  of  the  Neophyte,  it  can
hardly  be  wondered  at  that  the  final  rites  of  initiation  in
such  societies  as  are  banded  together  for  the  purpose  of
discovering  and  practicmg  the  highest  and  most  occult
laws  of  Nature,  cannot  fail  to  send  forth  Hierophants  who
feel  as  did  Pythagoras  when  issuing  from  the  crown-
ing rites  of  Egyptian  mysticism,  "  that  he  had  been  in  the
presence  of  the  Gods,  and  drank  the  waters  of  life  anew
from  divine  chalices."

As  a  special  illustration  of  our  subject,  we  commend
the  following  item  of  philosophy,  extracted  from  ''  Ghost
Land,"  to  the  reader's  attention.  It  refers  to  the  experi-
ences of  the  most  powerful  order  of  magicians  now  in
existence :

''They  acknowledged  that  the  realm  of  spiritual  being  wa,^  ordiuarilj-  invisible
to  the  material,  and  only  known  through  its  effects,  being  the  active  and  con-
trolling principle  of  matter;  but  they  had  discovered,  by  repeated  experiments,
that  spiritual  forms  could  become  visible  to  the  material  under  certain  conditions,

166

the  most  favorable  of  which  was  somnambulism  procured  through  the  magnetic
sleep.  This  state,  they  found,  could  be  induced  sometimes  by  drugs,  vapors  and
aromal  essences ;  sometimes  by  spells,  or  through  music,  intently  staring  into
crystals,  the  eyes  of  snakes,  running  water,  or  other  glittering  substances;  occa-
sionally byintoxication  caused  by  dancing,  spinning  around,  ordistracting clamors;
hut  the  lest  and  most  efficacious  method  of  exaltinq  the  spirit  into  the  superior
world,  and  putting  the  body  to  sleep,  was,  as  they  had  proved,  through  animal
magnetism."

After  an  experience  of  more  than  forty  years  subsequent
to  the  period  when  the  author  learned  the  truth  of  the
above  quoted  fragments  of  philosophy,  he  lives  to  confirm
them  in  every  iota,  and  especially  the  last  sentence  quoted,
which,  to  his  apprehension,  contains  the  true  gist  of  all
magical  experiences.
/-  No  methods  ever  have  been  found  so  potent  for  kindling
up  the  most  exalted  fires  of  the  soul,  or  transmuting  its
latent  powers  into  active  operation,  as  "  the  laying  on  of
hands,"  or  the  magnetic  manifestations  of  powerful,  well-
intentioned  magnetizers,  in  a  word,  the  infusion  of  the  vital
forces  of  a  mighty  and  highly  charged  Adept  into  the
organism  of  a  susceptible  and  receptive  subject.

All  other  modes  are  merely  preparatory,  but  they  can
never  equal  the  effect  of  that  last,  best  magical  change,
which  can  be  wrought  only  by  the  infusion  of  the  Astral
fluid  of  one  organism  into  another.

This  is  the  last  act  of  initiation  in  the  highest  temple
rites  of  old.  This  is  the  potent  spell  by  which  Hindoo
Fakeers  obtain  from  their  master  minds,  the  seal  upon  their
magical  studies.  The  Patriarchal  act  of  blessing,  the
initiatory  rites  of  the  Jewish  Priesthood,  the  Apostolic  law
of  communicating  virtue,  was  all  wrought  by  ''  the  laying
on  of  hands."

The  Pentecostal  gatherings  of  the  early  Christians  were
simply  means  of  magnetizing  each  other  by  accordance  of
a  common  will,  and  the  focalization  of  ideas  to  a  common
subject.

167

Paracelsus,  Van  Helmont,  and  most  of  the  middle  age
mystics,  well  understood  the  virtue  of  magnetic  relations,
whether  between  animate  or  inanimate  existences.  In  the
citations  we  shall  have  occasion  to  make  concerning  their
magical  formulae  and  opinions,  it  will  be  seen  that  they
recognized  '^  magnetism  and  psychology  as  the  two  grand
supports  of  the  Temple  of  Spiritism."

Assuming  that  the  Neophyte,  who  desires  to  exercise
magical  powers,  has  faithfully  prepared  himself  by  the
methods  prescribed  above,  that  he  has  subjected  his  frame
to  tastings,  ablutions  and  strict  abstinence  ;  observed  periods
of  seclusion,  and  disciplined  his  spirit  by  silent  commun-
ings with  Deity,  the  spirit  of  nature,  and  his  own  inner
consciousness,  all  that  remains  for  him  to  do  is  to  seek  out
a  few  harmoniously-disposed  persons,  who,  witli  pure  aims
and  high  aspirations,  shall  join  with  him  in  the  search  for
light  and  knowledge.  Let  these  unite  themselves  into  a
select  society,  and,  after  the  same  order  of  preparation  en-
joined above,  proceed  to  magnetize  each  other,  selecting
for  the  work,  the  most  powerful  and  well- com  posed  of  their
number — in  fact,  the  one  who  most  nearly  conforms  to  the
Pythagorean  type  described  in  the  last  section  as  '•  No.  2."
Should  there  be  no  chance  to  form  such  an  association  as
is  above  suggested,  let  the  Neophyte  seek  until  he  finds  a
magnetizer  who  corresponds  as  nearly  as  may  be  to  the
noble  type  of  manhood  required.  Let  such  an  one  lay  his
hands,  illuminated  with  the  pure,  invisible  essence  of  Soul
fire,  on  the  Neophyte's  head.  Let  manipulations  of  mag-
netic power,  accompanied  by  the  infusion  of  strong  aspira-
tional  will,  be  practiced  at  given  periods  of  time ;  let  these
exercises  be  conducted  uninterruptedly,  steadily,  firmly,
and  with  high  and  noble  intentions,  and  they  cannot  fail
to  perform  the  last  best  work  of  converting  the  Neophyte
into  the  Adept,  the  passive  subject,  into  the  active  operator.

168

In  the  final  formulae  of  evocation,  the  mind  must  be  con-
centrated fully  on  the  purpose  and  presence  most  desired.
Thus,  if  the  object  be  to  summon  the  attendance  of  be-
loved spirit  friends,  the  ordinary  methods  of  waiting,  either
alone  or  in  a  small  harmonious  gathering,  now  so  popu-
larly practiced  amongst  modern  spiritists  in  Europe  and
America,  may  be  suf&cient  to  ensure  the  desired  results.

The  performance  of  very  good  and  spiritually  inspired
music  should  always  precede,  or  rather  form  the  invocatory
process  in  such  circles,  the  effect  of  good  music  producing
as  great  a  difference  in  the  atmosphere  as  on  the  feelings
and  sensations  of  the  listeners.

The  light  on  such  occasions  should  always  be  subdued,  ^
as  light  is  motion  in  the  atmosphere,  and  tends  to  promote    )
an  energy  of  action  which  is  unfavorable  to  the  influence
of  the  Astral  light,  in   which  spirits  live  and  move  and
have  their  being.

Material  light  and  Astral  light  are  as  antagonistic  to
each  other  as  the  north  poles  of  separate  magnets.  They
mutually  repel  each  other ;  hence,  avoid  as  much  as
possible  the  action  of  material  light.  For  obvious  reasons
the  custom  of  sitting  in  total  darkness  should  be  held
equally  objectionable,  except  under  stringent  test  conditions^
and  where  remarkable  evidences  of  physical  power  is  de-
manded.

The  fumigations  of  aromatic  and  fragrant  essences  con-
tribute greatly  to  promote  the  conditions  under  which
Elementary  Spirits  can  manifest,  but  retard  the  approach
of  human  spirit  visitants.  The  introduction  of  streams  of
ozone  into  the  apartment  will  be  found  a  highly  favorable
condition  to  promote  the  communion  between  spirits  of
mortals  and  their  friends  in  the  form.  Besides  this,  the
action  of  a  gentle  current  of  electricity,  evolved  from  an
electro-magnetic  battery,  should  be  infused  into  the  sys-

169

terns  of  the  investigators,  as  it  not  only  increases  the
strength  and  quantity  of  the  Astral  fluid  present  in  each
organism,  but  benefits  the  health,  and  prevents  the  deple-
tion of  vital  force.  The  ethereal  character  of  ozone,  and
the  force  of  electro-magnetism,  are  also  strongly  in  har-
mony with  the  Astral  fluid  which  forms  the  bodies  of
spiritual  beings,  hence  their  use  at  spirit  circles  will  be
found  effective  and  beneficial.

As  the  Spiritists  of  this  a2;e  have  enjoyed  an  extended
experience  in  the  constant  intercourse,  presence^  and  coun-
sel of  their  "  household  Lares,"  it  is  needless  for  us  to  offer
farther  suggestions  on  this  branch  of  our  subject  at  present,
save  to  add  that  the  methods  of  intercourse  with  all  spirit-
ual existences  will  be  found  reduced  to  general  principles
in  this  volume,  and  may  therefore  be  applied  universally
to  all  forms  of  communion  between  the  invisible  and  visi-
ble worlds.

The  means  of  awakening  latent  spiritual  forces,  or  the
processes  of  invoking  and  procuring  the  presence  of  spirits,
may  be  conducted  through  any  of  the  avenues  to  the
material  senses.  For  example :  the  magnetic  sleep  on
the  one  hand,  and  the  "  man  tic  frenzy  "  on  the  other,  may
both  be  produced  by  appeals  to  the  sense  of  hearing.
The  one  is  induced  by  soft  and  delightful  strains  of  music,
the  other  by  noise  and  distracting  clamor.  Civilized
nations  are  naturally  most  satisfactorily  affected  by  the
former  mode  ;  barbarous  or  semi -civilized  peoples  by  the
latter.  Dull,  monotonous,  rhythmical  intonations  act  an
intermediate  part  between  these  two  extremes,  and  are
particularly  favorable  to  the  commencement  of  all  magical
ceremonials.

Appeals  to  the  spirit  can  also  be  successfully  made
through  the  eye.  The  sight  of  frightful  objects  causes  a
revulsion  in  the  entire  circulatory  system,  lowers  its  tone,

170

and  may  even  suspend  its  functions  to  the  point  of  swoon-
ing. The  reverse  of  this  action  is  produced  by  pleasing
objects,  beautiful  colors,  charming  scenes  or  persons,  all  of
which  signs,  stimulate  and  quicken  the  circulation,  tending
to  diffuse  a  soothing  and  healthful  glow  throughout  the
whole  system.

Another  very  effective  mode  of  acting  upon  the  sense  of
vision  results  from  gazing  intently  on  mirrors,  crystals,
precious  stones,  shining  bodies,  or  pure  fluids.  The  mag-
netic rays  which  are  reflected  back  into  the  eye  from  these
objects  pierce  the  brain,  and  charge  it  with  Astral  light,
whilst  the  fixidity  of  the  action  induces  that  self-magneti-
zation which  is  the  first  step  in  somnambulism,  trance,  and
ecstasy.  Still  another  mode  is  in  the  inhalation  of  stimu-
lating narcotics  or  aromatic  vapors.  As  before  remarked,
these  processes  are  essential  to  the  control  of  Elementary
Spirits,  and  produce  no  inconsiderable  effect  upon  the
senses  of  the  magician.

Nitrous-oxide   gas,    ether,  and    other   stimulating   and
anaesthetic  vapors  are  powerful  means  of  inducing  eitlier
the  trance  state  or  "  mantic  frenzy."     For  the   evolution
of  the  latter  condition  no  method  has  proved  so   effective
as  violent  gesticulations,  dancing,  jumping,  leaj)ing,  spin-
ning round  in  circles,  in  a  word,  emulating  the  actions  of
the  Oriental  Ecstatics,  in  whom  the  ''  mantic  frenzy,"  and
the  exhibition  of  the  most  astounding  preternatural  powers
seem  always  to  require  these  preparatory  processes.     And
here  we  must  strictly  impress  on  the  reader's  mind  the
fact,  that  in  describing  these  abnormal  proceedings,  we  do
not  present  them  as  examples  for  imitation^  or  commend
them  as  even  possible  for  the  execution  of  "  well-to-do  "
ladies  and  gentlemen^  moving  in  ihe  first  circles  of  London^
Paris   or   America.      We  are  simply  answering  the  oft-
repeated   question  raised  by  the  admirers  of  Art  Magic,
"What  can  we  do  to  perfect  ourselves  in  its  practice  V

171

We  may  have  conclusions  to  draw  ere  we  close  this
volume,  which  will  induce  the  aspirants  for  magical
powers  to  regard  with  more  interest  and  reverence  the
pearls  of  spiritual  beauty  they  are  constantly  treading
under  foot,  whilst  their  eager  gaze  is  directed  longingly  on
some  glittering  bauble  far  away  up  the  mountain  heights,
whose  rugged  paths  their  daintily  slippered  feet  would
essay  in  vain  to  climb, — but  these  conclusions  can  only  be
understandingly  arrived  at  when  our  work  is  done  ;  to
the  act  of  present  duty,  therefore,  we  must  now  return.

The  use  of  Hasheesh,  Napellus,  Opium,  the  juice  of  the
Indian  Soma,  or  Egyptian  Lotus  plant,  besides  many
other  narcotics  of  special  virtues,  constitute  a  large  portion
of  the  preparatory  exercises,  by  which  Oriental  Ecstatics
produce  their  abnormal  conditions  ;  but  when  we  name  the
last  essential  for  the  due  performance  of  magical  rites,  we
may  confidently  assure  our  readers  we  include  all  lesser
means,  and  are  about  to  disclose  the  true  secret  of  the
Philosopher's  Stone,  and  the  mystic  Elixir  Yitge,  nay,  we
speak  of  an  element  more  potent  than  either,  for  we  point  /l  [s^
to  the  source  and  end  of  all  Deific,  no  less  than  human  ^^^
capacity,  the  all-omnipotent  and  resistless  power  of  Will.

When  the  great  Essenian  Teacher,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  /
assured  his  Disciples,  if  they  had  faith,  as  a  grain  of  mustard
seed,  they  could  move  mountains,  and  cast  them  into  the
sea,  he  uttered  no  myth,  spoke  in  no  parable,  but  enunciated
a  truth  which  the  Adept  of  every  country,  and  every  age,
will  fully  confirm.

The  power  of  faith,  is  the  power  of  will,  the  essence  of
Soul,  and  Soul's  action  in  producing  forms,  and  emulating
the"creative  functions  of  the  Divine  Will.

Will  is  the  purpose  of  the  Eternal  One,  outwrought  in        ^
existence — and  its  operation  in    the  outgrowth  of  more      1^
fully  perfected  mind  ages,  will   elevate  mankind  to    the     ' !
functions  of  Deity,  by  its  triumphs.

172

/     Every  Mystic,  Sage,  Magician,  and  Psychologist,  every

/  student,  ancient  or  modern,  ranges  the  power  of  the  human

/     will  in  the  category  of  all  supreme  intelligence,  and  attri-

\      butes  to  its  exercise,  the  highest  achievements  of  the  true

^     magician.     Still  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  our  present

system  of  abject  subservience  to  the  opinions  of  ourjtellow-

men,  and  our  slavish  dependence  on  popularity  and  custoni,

utterly  neutralizes  this  all-triumphant  and  magicalj^wer

i^      of  Will.

'  In    our  present  condition    of  modern  civilization   the

complete  expansion  of  Will  power  is  simply  impossible.
We  require  several  generations  of  culture,  and  patient  ex-
perience, ere  it  can  attain  to  its  true  proportions,  and  be-
come the  executive  power  it  ought  to  be,  in  human  life.

There  are  some  abnormal  existences  that  can  subsist
without  food,  and  others  in  whom  the  processes  of  educa-
tion are  superseded  by  direct  spirit  teaching,  so  there  are
a  few  highly  endowed  minds  who  attain  to  their  majority
at  birth,  and  who,  like  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  Plato,  or  Py-
thagoras, live  in  the  realm  of  spirit,  from  their  first  entrance
upon  the  sphere  of  immortality,  hence  they  can  exercise
spiritual  functions  with  the  same  ease  that  others  use  the
external  senses  ;  but  these  rarely  endowed  minds  form  the
exception,  not  the  rule  of  human  life.

We  must  not  trust  to  the  possibilities  of  miraculous
changes  in  our  own  natures,  but  work  for  them,  and  in-
dustriously, scientifically,  and  patiently,  pave  the  way  for
their  achievement.  The  culture  of  the  Will  for  the  execu-
tion of  abnormal  acts  of  power  is  to  be  conducted  by  a  regu-
lar series  of  mental  processes,  all  tending  to  the  subjugation
of  the  senses,  and  the  exaltation  of  the  spirit.  Some  of
these  have  already  been  explained  in  this  section,  others
will  be  elaborated  as  we  proceed.  The  generalities  of  the
process  involve  physiological  and  psychological  changes,
the  methods  of  which  have  been  briefly  glanced  at.

173

For  the  processes  by  which  divination  can  be  evolved,
we  refer  the  reader  to  future  sections.  All  shall  be  told  ;
but,  for  the  present,  we  conclude  with  a  tribute  to  the
power  of  the  human  Will.

It  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  this  mortal  life,  as  the
Divine  Will  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  Being.  It  is  the
royal  power  by  which  matter  bends  before  Spirit,  as  the  leaf
bends  and  sways  in  the  rushing  storm.

If  the  result  seems  to  the  student,  who  has  advanced
thus  far,  worth  the  cost,  let  him  proceed.  If  his  heart
begins  to  fail  iiiui  upon  these,  the  first  steps  of  the  mystic
threshold,  how  can  he  hope  to  succeed  in  ultimates  which
cost  the  sages  of  antiquity  years  of  study,  and  half  a  life-
time of  faithful  self-abnegation  to  achieve  ?

The  discouragements  which  arrest  the  first  steps  in  the
path  of  discovery,  are  but  the  first  trials  of  that  stupend-
ous will  power,  upon  the  full  exercise  of  which  the  magi-
cian's triumphs  depend.

Fail  now^  and  you  fail  forever.  Cherish J^ut^f^n^^  spark
of  hope  to  li^'ht  your  way  through  the  labyrinthine  paths
we  are  destined  to  tread  together,  andTevery  mind  of  or-
dmaiy  intelligence  and  indomitable  purpose,  ina}^  by  the

t/  CD  XX.  I        ii^gpwatJ^/

perusal  of  these  pages  become  ain  Adept  in  Art  M;

agic.

c^  r^t  TV-  '^'

Vv.

?

<i

174

SECTION  XI.

Art  Magic  in  India.

India  the  most  ancient  land — Braliminical  Order — Whence
derived — Forest  Anchorites — Foundations  of  the  Priest-
ly order  and  Caste — Rites  of  initiation  and  method  of
preparing  for  Magical  Powers — Snm.mary.

The  very  name  of  Hindostan,  with  its  long  descended
lines  of  Guroos,  Brahmins,  Yogees,  and  Fakeers  ;  initiates
all,  into  the  highest  and  most  potential  of  nature's  occult
powers, — is  itself  suggestive  of  Magic,  and  few  there  are
who  have  glanced  superficially  at  this  subject,  or  read  the
extracts  from  popular  literature  in  the  periodicals  of  the
day  relating  to  it,  who  do  not  regard  India  as  the  birth-
place of  all  that  is  wild,  weird,  and  wonderful,  in  the  oc-
cult side  of  man's  nature.

The  immense  antiquity  of  the  Hindostanee  dynasty,  the
invincible  tendency  of  the  Hindoo  mind  to  regard  the
scheme  of  being  as  fixed  and  unchangeable,  and  the  belief
in  ''  Yugs,"  or  cycles  of  time  through  which  mankind  must
inevitably  pass,  in  the  fulfillment  of  a  destiny  as  immuta-
ble as  the  Will  of  Deity,  have  paralyzed  all  effort  at
advancement,  hence  the  basic  principles  of  the  Hindoo's
belief,  nay,  most  of  their  practices  of  a  Theosophical  charac-
ter, are  as  much  the  stereotyped  copies  of  what  their  an-
cestors believed  and  did  five  thousand  years  ago,  as  are
their  wonderful  temples  and  colossal  images  the  expression
of  the  same  far  distant  period  of  time.  It  is  almost  im-
possible to  separate  the  magical  practices  of  the  Hindoos
from  the  elements  of  their  religion,  and  the  changes  which

175

time  has  wrought  in  the  aspect  of  nature  and  the  political
institutions  which  have  heen  shattered  by  every  descrip-
tion of  national  calamity,  have  failed  to  affect  the  deep
metaphysical  characteristics  which  soil,  scenery,  climate,
and  the  doctrines  of  fatalism,  have  engrafted  on  the  Hin-
doo mind.

Since  the  tone  of  ancient  metaphysics  has  changed  but
little  then  with  the  onward  march  of  the  ages,  the  follow-
ing brief  summary  may  be  regarded  as  a  transcript  of  Hin-
doo magic  both  in  antique  and  modern  times.  Passing
over  the  more  sublime  principles  of  Theism,  the  doctrines
of  the  Trinity,  Incarnation,  Emanations,  the  Transmigration
of  Souls,  etc.,  etc.,  we  come  to  the  direct  practices  which
the  highest  forms  of  religious  belief  imposed  upon  Hindoo
Priests  and  Devotees.

The  laws  of  Caste  assigned  to  the  ancient  Brahmins  the
supreme  control  over  all  other  classes,  and  the  direction
not  only  of  spiritual  ideas  and  teachings,  but  also  gave  them
prerogative  rights  of  succession,  by  which,  through  the
assumed  transmission  of  hereditary  virtues,  their  sacred
Caste  was  to  be  preserved  in  certain  families  and  entailed
upon  long  lines  of  posterity.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
the  Brahminical  order  itself,  sprang  from  the  natural  en-
dowments of  those  ancient  Anchorites,  who  at  the  very
edge  of  historic  times,  and  perhaps  long  before,  had  retired
from  the  busy  hum  of  the  cities,  and  in  the  depths  of  the
wildest  solitudes,  held  communion  with  Nature  and  Na-
ture's God,  and  by  the  practice  of  excessive  devotion  and
rigid  asceticism,  disciplined  both  soul  and  body  into  com-
munion with  the  invisible  worlds  of  being.  The  follow-
ing graphic  description  of  these  ancient  Forest  priests  is
given  in  the  charming  and  truthful  language  of  Mrs.  L.  M.
Child.     This  gifted  Authoress  says  :

"  In  times  Ancient  beyond  conjecture,  there  were  men  who  vvithdrew  altogther
from  the  labors  and  pleasures  of  the  world,  and  in  solitary  places  devoted  themselves

176

to  religious  contemplation.  This  lonely  existence  on  the  silent  mountains,  or  amid
the  darkness  ofinimense  forests,  infested  by  serpents  and  wild  beasts,  and  as  they  be-
lieved by  Evil  Spirits  also,  greatly  excited  popular  imagination.  The  human  soul,
unsatisfied  in  its  cage  of  finite  limitation,  is  always  aspiring  after  the  good  and  the
true,  always  eagerly  hoping  for  messengers  from  above,  and  therefore  prone  to  be-
lieve in  them.  Thus  these  saintly  hermits  came  to  be  objects  of  extreme  venera-
tion among  the  people.  Men  travelled  far  to  inquire  of  them  how  sins  might  be
expiated,  or  diseases  cured;  for  it  was  believed  that  in  thus  devoting  themselves
to  a  life  beyond  the  tumult  of  the  passions,  occupied  solely  with  penance  and
prayer,  they  approached  very  near  to  God,  and  received  direct  revelations  of  his
divine  wisdom."

"In  the  beginning,  these  anchorites  were  d(mbtless  influenced  by  sincere  devo-
tion, and  made  honest  efi"orts  to  attain  what  seemed  to  them  the  highest  standard
of  purity  and  holiness.  Their  mode  of  life  was  simple  and  austere  in  the  extreme.
They  lived  in  caverns,  or  under  the  shelter  of  a  few  boughs,  which  they  twisted
together  in  the  shadow  of  some  great  tree.  Their  furniture  consisted  merely  of
an  antelope  skin  to  sleep  on,  a  vase  to  receive  alms,  a  pitcher  for  water,  a  basket
to  gather  roots  and  wild  berries,  a  hatchet  to  cut  wood  for  sacrifices,  a  stafi"  to
help  them  through  the  forest,  and  a  rosary  made  of  lotus  seeds,  to  assist  in  repeat-
ing their  numerous  prayers.  The  beard  and  nails  were  suffered  to  grow,  and  to
avoid  trouble  with  their  hair,  it  was  twisted  into  peculiar  knots,  resembling  the
close  curls  of  an  African.

"In  later  times, '^ they  shaved  their  heads,  probably  from  motives  of  cleanliness.
However  high  might  have  been  their  caste  in  the  society  of  the  world,  they  re-
tained no  ornament  or  badge  of  distinction.  They  wore  simply  a  coarse  yellowish-red
o-arment  made  of  the  fibre  of  bark.  Their  food  consisted  of  wild  roots,  fruit,  and
grain ;  and  of  these  they  must  eat  merely  enough  to  sustain  life.  They  might  re-
ceive food  as  alms,  or  even  ask  for  it  in  cases  of  extreme  necessit}' ;  but  they  must
strive  to  attain  such  a  state  of  indifi'erence,  that  they  felt  no  regret  if  refused,  and
no  pleasure  if  they  received  it.  They  were  bound  to  the  most  rigid  chastity,  in
thought  as  well  as  deed.  So  far  as  they  coveted  the  slightest  pleasure  from  any
of  the  senses,  so  far  were  they  from  their  standard  of  perfect  sanctity.

"S<mie  made  a  vow  of  continual  silence,  and  kept  a  skull  before  them  to  remind
them  constantly  of  death.

"  In  addition  to  this  routine,  they  prescribed  to  themselves  tasks  more  or  less
severe,  accordiug  to  the  degree  of  holiness  they,  wished  to  attain,  or  had  courage
to  pursue.  Some  fasted  to  the  very  verge  of  dissolution.  In  summer  they  ex-
posed themselves  to  the  scorching  sun,  or  surrounded  themselves  with  fires.  In
winter  they  wore  wet  garments,  or  stood  up  to  the  chin  in  water.  They  went
forth  uncovered  amid  frightful  tempests.  They  stood  for  hours  and  days  on  the
point  of  their  toes,  with  arms  stretched  upward,  motionless  as  a  tree.  They  sat  on
their  heels,  closing  their  ears  tight  with  their  thumbs,  their  eyes  with  the  forefin-
gers, their  nostrils  with  the  middle  fingers,  and  their  lips  with  the  little  fingers  ;
in  this  attitude  they  remained  holding  their  breath  till  they  often  fell  into  a  swoon.

"  These  terrible  self-torments  resulted  from  their  belief  that  this  life  was  merely
intended  for  expiation ;  that  the  body  was  an  incumbrance,  and  the  senses  entire-
ly evil ;  that  relations  to  outward  things  entangled  the  soul  in  temptation  and  sin  ;
that  man's  great  object  should  be  to  withdraw  himself  entirely  from  nature,  and
thus  become  completely  absorbed  in  the  eternal  Soul  of  the  ITniverse,  from  which
his  own  soul  originally  emanated.

177

'*  Peuances  undertaken  for  sins  committed;  were  supposed  to  procure  no  other
advantage  than  the  remission  of  future  punishment  for  those  sins;  but  sufferings
voluntarily  incurred,  merely  to  annihilate  the  body,  and  attain  nearness  to  the
divine  nature,  were  believed  to  extort  miraculous  gifts  from  supernatural  beings,
and  ultimately  enable  man  to  become  G-od.

''Aiming  at  this  state  of  perfection,  they  gradually  attained  complete  indiffer-
ence to  all  external  things.  They  no  longer  experienced  desire  or  disappointment,
hope  or  fear,  joy  or  sorrow.  Some  of  them  went  entirely  naked,  and  were  reputed
to  subsist  merely  on  water.  The  world  was  to  them  as  though  it  did  not  exist.
In  this  state  the  words  they  uttered  were  considered  divine  revelations.  They
were  believed  to  know  everything  by  intuition ;  to  read  the  mysteries  of  past,  pres-
ent, and  future  ;  to  perceive  the  thoughts  of  whoever  came  into  their  presence ;
to  move  from  one  place  to  another  by  simply  willing  to  do  so  ;  to  cure  diseases,
and  even  raise  the  dead.  Some  of  this  marvellous  power  was  supposed  to  be  im-
parted even  to  the  garments  they  wore,  and  the  staffs  with  which  they  walked.
The  Hindoo  Sacred  Writings  are  filled  with  all  manner  of  miracles  performed  by
these  saints.  There  are  traditions  that  some  of  them  were  taken  up  alive  to  hea-
ven ;  and  impressions  on  the  rocks  are  shown,  said  to  be  footprints  the^^  left  when
they  ascended.  By  extraordinary  purification  and  suffering,  some  were  reputed
to  have  attained  such  power,  even  over  the  Gods,  that  they  could  compel  them  to
grant  whatever  they  asked.

''Thus  something  resembling  monasteries,  or  theological  schools,  was  established
in  the  forests  of  Hindostan,  at  a  very  remote  period  of  antiquity.  Seven  of  the
most  ancient  of  these  hermits,  peculiarly  renowned  for  wisdom  and  holiness,
transmitted  their  privileges  to  descendants,  and  thus  became  the  germ  of  seven
classes  in  an  hereditary  priesthood  still  existing  under  the  name  of  Brahmins."

It  has  commonly  been  supposed  that  the  strong  tempta-
tion to  assume  unlimited  power,  and  acquire  unlimited
wealth  which  the  reverence  paid  to  these  old  anchorites
opened  up  to  them,  induced  the  formation  of  a  Priestly
order,  and  the  institution  of  the  law  of  caste,  by  which  the
immunities  and  privileges  they  enjoyed  in  their  own  per-
sons might  be  secured  to  their  posterity.  Be  this  as  it
may,  the  result  was  that  in  process  of  time,  the  Priests,
under  the  title  of  Bramins  (a  name  derived  from  Bramah,
the  first  person  of  the  Hindoo  Trinity),  exercised  unlimited
sway  over  the  entire  nation,  not  even  exempting  princes
or  rulers  of  armies.

The  Bramins  are  still  the  conservators  of  scientific  lore,
political  influence  and  religious  knowledge  to  those  who
have  not  protested  from  their  form  of  belief  Many  sects
have  arisen,  however,  dividing  up  the  religious   world  of

178

India  into  almost  as  many  different  shades  of  opinion  as
Christianity  itself;  still  it  is  a  curious  and  significant  fact
that  no  class  of  the  community,  not  even  the  famed  Bud-
dhist Priests,  ever  attained  as  an  order,  to  such  remarkable
powers  in  the  realm  of  magical  achievements  as  the  mighty
Bramins  of  India.

It  is  not  that  their  creed  teaches  any  special  devotion  to
magical  art,  or  aims  to  develop  miraculous  powers  as  an
essential  of  Braminical  life.  In  this  respect  Braminism
differs  from  Christianity,  whose  founder  repeated li/  demanded
the  'performance  of  wonderful  works  as  a  sign  of  Christian
faith.

No  such  charge  is  enforced  in  the  education  of  the  Bra-
mins ;  neither  are  all  Bramins  wonder-workers  ;  but  the
truth  is  that  the  ascetic  lives  practiced  by  the  strictest
devotees  of  the  order,  their  profound  study  of  nature,  and
obedience  to  nature's  laws  ;  their  contemplative  habits,
purity  of  diet,  simplicity  of  dress,  and  perhaps  the_jnher-
ited  tendencies  bequeathed  to  them  by  a  long  line  of  spir-
itualized ancestors,  all  tend  to  endow  this  caste  of  men
with  the  rare  and  peculiar  gifts  that  distinguish  so  many
amongst  their  ranks.

The  sacred  writings  of  the  Hindoos,  which  are  very
numerous  and  rich  in  sublime  ideality,  contain  many  direc-
tions for  invoking  spirits,  controlling  the  inferior  orders,
and  soliciting  the  aid  and  protection  of  the  superior.

Instructions  also  are  given  for  the  preparation  of  the
body  by  fasting,  chastity,  ablutions  and  self-mortification.
The  spirit  is  to  be  disciplined  by  prayer,  the  singing  of
hymns,  long  periods  of  silent  contemplation,  solitary  com-
munion with  God,  nature,  spirits,  and  perfect  soul  abstrac-
tion from  all  external  things.  Seated  in  peculiar  and  fir
from  luxurious  attitudes,  with  the  eyes  fixed,  and  the  very
respiration  regulated  by  abstract  methods,  the  Atma,  or

179

soul  within,  is  to  be  continually  trained  to  complete  absorp-
tion in  Deific  ideas  to  the  exclusion  of  all  worldly  aims,
desires,  pursuits  or  scenes.

Directions  are  given  in  the  sacred  books  for  the  use  and
preparation  of  the  Soma  drink,  of  napellus,  hasheesh,
opium  and  other  narcotics  by  which  ecstasy  and  trance
are  to  be  induced.  Fumigations,  also,  and  the  use  of  spices,
gums  and  aromatic  herbs,  are  described  ;  still  a  large  por-
tion of  the  initiatory  rites  by  which  magical  powers  are  to
be  evolved,  are  not  committed  to  writing  ;  but  from  time
immemorial,  have  been  orally  communicated  by  Adepts  to
initiates  and  students.

Being  versed  in  those  oral  traditions,  and  sufficiently
informed  upon  the  methods  of  initiation  to  know  how  far
these  rites  can  be  disclosed  without  fear  of  misunderstand-
ing, we  may  venture  to  state  that  every  temple  of  ancient
or  modern  India  abounds  with  crypts  and  secret  chambers,
where  devotees  may  pass  their  time  absorbed  in  silent  com-
munion with  God  and  Angels,  or  engaged  in  waging  fierce
mental  warfare  with  the  Evil  Spirits  who  ever  beset  the
path  of  the  neophyte,  and  strive  to  win  him  from  the  king-
dom of  light  to  the  realms  of  darkness,  in  which  their  own
unblest  natures  most  delight.

To  combat  these  subtle  but  ever-present  enemies,  and
guard  their  wandering  thoughts  against  the  intrusion  of
vain  desires,  also  to  regain  that  ^'  internal  respiration,"
which  tradition  teaches  was  once  the  privilege  of  humanity,
enabling  God  to  fill  the  interior  man,  and  preserve  the
breath  from  pollution  by  admixture  with  the  outer  air,  the
devotee  is  required  to  suspend  his  respiration  and  inwardly
repeat  sixteen  times,  the  sacred  syllable  A  U  M — the  inef-
fable word,  which  contains  the  name  and  attributes  of
Deity, — and  thus,  by  such  methods  of  mental  introversion,
it  is  believed  complete  absorption  in  Divine  things  may  be

180

attained.  Directions  are  often  given  for  the  attitude  to  be
assumed  in  these  exercises.  Sometimes  the  vision  is  to  be
directed  towards  the  end  of  the  nose  ;  sometimes  to  the
region  of  the  heart,  liver,  or  umbilicus.  In  each  of  these
points  it  is  assumed  special  virtues  reside;  these  are
under  the  government  of  certain  planets,  and  the  spirits
who  inhabit  them.

By  sitting  square  on  four  points,  that  is,  resting  on  the
heels,  and  so  fixing  the  thumbs  and  fingers  as  to  exclude
the  action  of  external  sight  and  hearing,  the  soul  concen-
trated on  these  several  centres  of  life  and  Astral  influence,
will  call  down  the  spirits  of  the  planets  who  govern  such
regions  of  the  body,  and  thus  will  be  stimulated  into  super-
mundane force,  the  virtues  which  abound  in  those  mystic
centres  of  creative  force.

Towards  the  middle  ages  a  strange,  peaceful  sect  arose,
who,  from  their  methods  of  completely  abstracting  the
senses  from  all  external  objects,  and  concentrating  their
soul  powers  in  certain  regions  of  the  body,  were  termed
Hesychiasts.  They  took  up  their  abode  in  the  region  of
Mount  Athos,  where,  under  the  direction  of  an  Abbot,  and
laws  founded  upon  the  rigid  discipline  of  monasticism,  they
devoted  themselves  to  acts  of  charity,  the  cure  of  the  sick,
and  the  complete  abstraction  of  all  the  senses  from  mun-
dane things.  Their  mode  of  effecting  this  mental  absorp-
tion, is  thus  stated  by  one  of  their  writers :

"  Sitting  alone  in  a  corner,  observe  what  I  tell  you.  Lock  your  door,  and  raise
your  mind  from  every  worldly  thing.  Then  sink  your  beard  upon  your  breast,
and  fix  your  eyes  upon  the  centre  of  your  body.  Contract  the  air  passages,  that
breathing  may  be  impeded.  Strive  mentally  to  find  the  position  of  the  heart,
where  all  the  mind's  powers  reside.  At  first  yon  will  discover  only  darkness  and
unyielding  density,  but  if  you  persevere  night  and  day,  you  will  miraculously
enjoy  unspeakable  happiness,  for  the  soul  then  perceives  that  which  it  never  saw
before,  the  radiance  in  which  God  resides;  a  great  light  dwelling  between  the
heart  and  the  soul."

The  parity  between  these  instructions  and  those  which

181

occupy  a  portion  of  the  Hindoo  sacred  books,  has  suggested
the  idea  that  this  order  of  ascetics  drew  their  ideas  from
the  Vedic  writings,  especially  those  directions  communica-
ted to  the  neophytes  aiming  to  attain  to  the  exalted  con-
dition called  Nirvana  {the  peace  of  God).  The  Hindoo
teachers  say  :

"  It  is  necessary,  nay  dne  to  the  soul,  to  free  it  from  every  human  desire  ;  to  cut
off'  all  sources  of  delight  save  those  which  it  finds  in  Nirvana.

"Avoid  contact  with  those  of  an  inferior  caste,  the  indulgence  of  vain  thoughts,
or  the  ascendency  of  any  hahit  which  draws  the  soul  down  to  earth,  and  away
from  companionship  with  God.  Obey  without  questioning  thy  teachers,  and  follow
out  each  point  in  thine  initiations,  though  they  seem  to  lead  thee  to  the  feet  of  Siva.
Abate  not  one  moment  of  thine  hours,  nor  let  thy  sight  wander  from  the  points
where  thy  planet  rules,  or  the  beneficent  spirits  of  the  stars  do  dwell  in  thee."

Such  exercises  as  these,  with  incessant  periods  of  fasting,
abstinence,  self-mortification  of  every  kind,  the  severest
penances  for  the  most  trifling  offences,  especially  the  least
infraction  of  probationary  discipline,  lasted  for  years  ere
the  devotee  was  deemed  tit  for  admission  to  the  higher
rites  of  initiation.  These,  too,  were  communicated  very
gradually,  and  occupied  months  or  years,  according  to  the
neophy  te^s  aptness  and  willingness  to  endure  more  personal
suffering  than  the  amount  prescribed.  In  these,  as  in  the
preliminary  rites,  oral  communications  preserved  the  Tem-
ple secrets  from  the  supposed  dangers  of  entrusting  them
to  writing.  Amongst  the  higher  methods  of  preparatory
discipline,  the  scholar  was  required  to  listen  to  recitations
from  the  most  occult  portions  of  the  Yedas.  to  commit
many  of  them  to  memory,  and  repeat  them  constantly.
He  was  also  instructed  in  the  principles,  as  far  as  they
were  known,  of  algebra,  geometry  and  mathematics,
astronomy  and  astrology.  The  Hindoos,  though  not  so
expert  or  devoted  to  the  latter  science  as  the  Chaldeans,
taught  the  influence  of  the  planets  on  certain  days,  months
and  periods  of  time.  They  reduced  tlie  configurations
and  constellated  order  of  the  sidereal  heavens  to  a  stupen-

182

dous  system,  or  at  least  laid  the  foundations  of  that  belief
in  Astral  and  planetary  order,  which  subsequently  ex-
panded into  the  magnificent  astronomical  religion.  They
were  especially  attentive  to  the  phases  of  the  moon,  and
attributed  benign  or  mahgnant  influences  to  the  use  of
herbs,  or  the  wearing  of  certain  colors  or  precious  stones
during  different  phases  of  lunar  increase  or  decrease.

All  herbs  gathered  for  magical  purposes  were  to  be  pre-
pared during  the  moon's  increase.  No  great  undertakings
were  deemed  successful  unless  the  order  of  the  planetary
bodies  was  consulted,  and  their  configurations  pronounced
favorable.  Another  of  the  higher  stages  of  study  in
Priestly  discipline  was  instruction  in  the  use  and  prepara-
tion of  narcotics  as  means  of  procuring  trance  and  divine
ecstasy.  Still  another,  the  exercise  of  the  will  in  subjuga-
ting the  lower  orders  of  spirits,  and  the  occult  forces  in
nature.

They  were  taught  the  magnetic  virtues  of  plants,  min-
erals, precious  stones, — especially  the  loadstone, — the  in-
fluence of  colors,  the  methods  of  healing  by  touch,  will,
charms,  amulets,  and  spells ; — the  virtue  of  words,  the
methods  of  invoking  spirits,  and  finally  that  form  of
manipulation  called  Tschamping,  which  simply  signifies
magnetism,  or  the  infusion  of  "  Akasa,"  the  Astral  Spirit  of
powerful  Adepts,  into  their  subjects  by  passes,  touches,  and
contact,  exactly  on  the  principles  of  modern  mesmerism.

When  the  last  rites  of  initiation  were  effected,  it  was
found  that  the  most  stupendous  physiological  and  psycho-
logical changes  had  been  effected  in  the  Hierophant's
system.  He  had  commenced  as  a  human  being — he  was
now  an  Ecstatic  ;  he  had  been  a  creature  of  parts,  passions,
emotions,  he  was  now  a  machine,  bearing  about  an  emaci-
ated frame  and  an  organism  in  which  the  possessor  moved,
breathed,  spoke,  but  only  as  in  a  dream — yet  he  found  him-

183

self  endowed  with  a  soul  whose  perceptions  were  as  keenly
alive  to  impressions  from  the  invisible  world,  as  his  ex-
ternal senses  had  become  blunted  to  all  earthly  things.

An  Initiate  of  many  years  standing,  just  emancipated
from  training,  having  faithfully  fulfilled  all  that  is  required
of  him,  and  elevated  through  powerful  magnetism,  into  the
position  of  an  Adept,  is  less  of  a  man  than  a  monomaniac,
one  who  deems  himself  dead,  a  Soul  doomed  to  carry  about
with  him  a  lifeless  body.  From  this  supreme  condition  of
ecstasy,  it  is  the  duty  of  his  teachers  and  leaders  to  arouse
him  far  enough  to  confer  upon  him  a  special  mission  in  life.
If  he  is  of  the  highest  order  of  Ecstatics,  he  becomes  a
Yogee,  a  degree  which  excels  all  others  in  magical  power.
He  may  become  a  Bramin  admitted  to  the  first  order  of
Priesthood,  and  be  permitted  to  marry,  and  rear  offspring,
entering  into  all  the  uses  and  duties  which  belong  to  the
priestly  class.  If  his  choice  inclines  him  to  still  higher
realms  of  spiritual  absorption,  if  he  feels  that  the  last  stage
of  divine  union  with  Deity,  called  "  Nirvana" —  is  yet  to
be  reached,  he  must  continue  his  ascetic  practices,  nay
double  and  treble  their  severity,  retire  to  some  dim  for-
est solitude,  deep  cavern,  or  temple  crypt,  and  there  con-
tinue in  the  performance  of  the  most  terrible  austerities,
until  his  purified  spirit  is  no  longer  of  the  earth,  until  he
has  elevated  himself  above  the  necessity  or  desire  for  food,
the  habitudes  of  physical  being,  and  then  will  the  triumph-
ant spirit  spurn  the  dungeon  walls  of  a  material  existence.
The  Angels  of  Siva  will  respond  to  the  Soul's  cry  for
liberty,  the  gates  of  the  emaciated  body  will  fly  open,  and
let  the  purified  Soul  go  free  !

The  narcotics  chiefly  used  by  Eastern  Ecstatics,  to  ele-
vate them  to  the  highest  conditions  of  somnambulism,  are
first ;  the  Soma  drink,  or  Asclepias  acida.

This  plant  is  prepared  by  expressing  out  the  juice  either

184

between  two  stones,  ''braying it  in  a  mortar/'  or  pounding
it  in  prepared  vessels ; — the  liquid  thus  obtained  is  then
carefully  strained,  mixed  with  clarified  butter,  laid  for  a
season  on  fine  fresh  dewy  grass,  then  gathered  up  and
swallowed  as  occasion  requires.  In  preparing  this  drink,
many  magical  ceremonies  are  used,  the  value  of  which  will
be  discussed  in  their  appropriate  place.  Still  it  is  deemed
necessary  to  use  exorcisms  to  evil  spirits,  invocations  to
good,  and  lunar  and  astral  observations  in  the  preparation
of  all  materials  employed  in  magical  rites.  The  Soma
juice,  hasheesh,  opium,  the  napellus,  and  distillations  pro-
cured from  two  or  three  species  of  acrid  fungi,  are  consid-
ered the  most  effective  narcotics  appropriate  for  inducing
the  trance  condition.  A  great  variety  of  anaesthetics  are
now  in  use  in  the  East,  unknown  to  the  ancients.  The
fumigations  made  use  of  were  and  are  very  numerous.
Myrrh,  cassia,  frankincense,  different  preparations  of  lime,
aloes,  aromatic  woods,  gums  and  spices,  as  well  as  amber,
ambergris,  and  other  delicate  perfumes,  constituting  a  large
portion  of  the  medicaments  used.

The  "  Laws  of  Manu,"  one  of  the  Hindoo  sacred  books,
alleges  that  there  are  only  three  states  in  which  human
souls  can  exist  whilst  inhabiting  the  mortal  tenement ;
these  are  alternations  of  "  waking,  sleeping  and  trance."  '
The  waking  state  of  the  body  is  the  soul's  period  of  dark-
ness— material  light  always  being  deemed,  in  Oriental
Theosophy,  the  opposite  of  Divine  light.

In  this  condition,  all  the  evils  which  belong  to  a  material
state  are  perceived  and  have  power  to  operate.  In  sleep
the  soul  oscillates  between  the  attractions  of  matter  pro-
duced by  the  relations  it  sustains  to  the  body,  and  its
natural  tendency  to  ascend  to  its  true  home  in  a  spiritual
state  of  being.

The  more  perfectly  the  senses  of  the  sleeper  have  been

185

subdued  by  discipline,  the  more  does  the  soul  recede  from
the  body  and  gravitate  to  the  Divine  light ;  hence  arise
those  healthful,  dreamless  slumbers  from  which  so  much
strength  and  refreshment  proceeds  ;  but  where  the  body  is
indisposed,  or  binds  the  soul  in  the  chains  of  earthly  attrac-
tion, unquiet  dreams  bear  witness  to  the  struggle  between
the  opposing  forces  of  matter  and  spirit,  and  unless  guar-
dian spirits  induce  the  dream  for  purposes  of  their  own,
the  sleeper  awakes  but  little  refreshed  from  the  mental
strife.

Much  is  written  concerning  the  philosophy  of  sleep
which  we  have  not  space  to  quote.  Trance  is  considered
to  be  the  complete  liberation  of  the  soul  from  the  chains  of
materialism,  as — except  a  small  portion  of  the  Astral  fluid,
which  inheres  to  the  body,  and  maintains  the  action  of
instinctive  life — the  fetters  of  matter  now  become  so  loos-
ened, that  the  soul  can  go  forth,  and  wander  abroad  in
space.  Its  spiritual  senses  have  free  exercise.  It  is  all
eye,  all  ear,  all  perception.  It  can  ascend  to  the  ''  third
heavens,"  traverse  the  spheres,  wander  over  the  earth,  read
the  hidden  things  of  the  heart,  penetrate  into  all  secrets,
behold  the  past,  present  and  future  outstretched  as  in  a  vast
panorama,  in  short,  Atma  (the  Soul),  then  becomes  the
true  spark  of  Divinity,  and  enjoys  unfettered  powers  and
unlimited  functions.

The  full  perfection  of  the  trance  state  is  very  seldom
reached  until  Death  sets  the  soul  at  liberty ;  but  even  an
approximation  to  this  Divine  condition  is  eagerly  coveted
by  illuminated  minds.

Much  stress  is  laid  upon  lunar  influence  in  seeking  to
enter  the  trance  state,  and  hence  the  j-eal  effects  which  the
moon  exerts  on  material  bodies,  especially  in  sleep,  in
lunacy,  and  in  producing  rapid  growth  in  plants,  and  de-
composition in   dead  matter,   form   the  subject  of  much

186

scientific  speculation,  and  afford  matter  for  highly  sug-
gestive thought.

Besides  the  processes  necessary  to  prepare  a  true  Bra-
min,  the  Priesthood  admitted  other  devotees  to  certain
initiatory  rites.  There  were  many  classes  of  ascetics  in
India,  ranging  from  the  High  Priests,  or  Gurooes,  down  to
the  begging  Fakeers,  who  clamor  for  alms  in  every  popu-
lous city.

The  highest  class  of  the  Braminical  order,  the  princely
Gurooes,  are  educated  in  all  the  learning  the  age  can  bestow,
and  besides  being  practiced  in  the  rigid  school  of  asceti-
cism above  described,  are  disciplined  in  the  noblest  of  moral
virtues.

The  severe  discipline  and  frightful  self-mortifications
inflicted  by  fanaticism  upon  the  much-abused  body,  must
not  be  understood  as  enjoined  by  the  sacred  writings  of
India.  These,  in  many  remarkable  passages,  deny  the
efficacy  of  such  outward  observances,  sternly  rebuke  those
who  rely  on  them  for  salvation,  and  abound  with  beauti-
ful hymns,  admirable  precepts  and  recommendations  to  the
practice  of  deeds  of  charity,  kindness,  purity  and  truth.
The  excessive  tendency  to  asceticism  and  self-mortifica-
tion which  has  obtained  for  thousands  of  years  in  India,
results  from  obedience  to  traditional  law,  and  customs
which  have  increased  in  stringency  by  the  imitative  habits
of  the  people,  and  the  examples  of  certain  notable  Saints
and  imaginary  Avatars.  Besides  the  Braminical  Priest-
hood, and  often  excelling  them  in  spiritualistic  endowments,
are  classes  of  Saints  and  Ascetics  known  as  Sanyassis,
Nirvanys  and  Yogys,  or  Yogees.

These  are  emphatically  the  creme-de-la-creme  of  Indian
Spiritism,  and  their  wonder-working  powers  resulting  from
the  most  horrible  self-inflicted  tortures  and  probationary
sufferings,  are  almost  beyond  belief     In  a  free  translation

187

ft

from  the  Dhammapada,  the  work  of  a  Bramin  writer,
who  flourished  in  the  first  century  B.  C,  the  following  de-
scription is  given  of  the  status  of  the  Nirvany,  or  one  of
those  ascetics  who  had  attained  to  the  inconceivable  bliss
and  purity  of  Nirvana — the  state  of  peace  almost  amount-
ing to  absorption  in  Deity.

"  Patience  is  the  highest  Mrvaua.    This  is  the  word  of  the  Buddhas."

"  If,  like  a  trumpet  when  broken,  thou  art  not  roused  to  speech,  thou  art  near
Xirvana.     Anger  is  not  known  in  thee,  or  there  is  no  noisy  clamor  in  thee."

"  He  who  has  deepest  insight — who  knows  all  right  and  all   wrong,  who  has
attained  to  the  highest — Him  call  I  a  Brahmana."

"He  who  has  given  up  all  pain,  all  pleasure,  who  is  without  ground  for  new
birth,  who  has  overcome  matter  and  all  worlds — Him  call  I  a  Brahniana."

Many  writers  are  still  more  enthusiastic  in  praise  of  the
Yogees  than  the  Nirvanys.  The  latter  are  more  specula-
tive, the  former  the  most  accomplished  in  miraculous  gifts
of  the  Hindoo  ascetics.  The  most  exalted  of  the  Yogees
are  selected  as  a  council  of  Elders,  and  their  decrees  are
reverenced  as  the  voice  of  Deity.

They  form  no  inconsiderable  portion  of  those  fanatics,
who,  like  the  Fakeers,  wander  over  the  east,  subjecting
their  bodies  to  every  description  of  unnatural  torture,  that
their  heated  imaginations  can  devise.

It  is  claimed  by  Hindoo  metaphysicians  that  there  exists
in  the  Universe,  a  pure,  all-pervading  fluid,  invisible,  fiery,
radiant,  wholly  divine,  free  from  the  taint  of  matter,  purer
than  ether,  stronger  than  the  loadstone,  mightier  than  the
thunderbolt,  swifter  than  the  winged  lightning.  It  is  heat,
light,  motion,  force  ;  the  Soul  principle  of  being — not  Soul,
but  its  power  of  life,  being  and  motion.  It  connects  Gods
and  Men,  Heaven  and  Earth.  It  is  the  strength,  i.  e.^  cohe-
sive element,  in  minerals  ;  the  growing  power  of  plants ;
the  life  of  men  and  animals — it  is  Akasa,  or,  in  other
words,  the  Astral  fluid,  so  frequently  described  in  former
sections,  which  in    nature  is   Astral   light,  in    animated

188

bodies  the  Astral  spirit — in  substance,  Astral  riuid.  The
theory  upon  which  asceticism  is  so  largely  practiced  is,  that
the  more  the  Soul  isolates  itself  from  sensuous  habits  and
earthly  surroundings,  the  greater  becomes  its  power
of  freeing  Akasa,  and  of  attracting  to  itself  this  divine
fluid  from  all  things  in  nature.  Thus  the  action  of  the
Soul,  using  Akasa  as  its  instrument,  becomes  freed  from
the  entanglements  of  matter ;  whilst  the  quantity,  power
and  quality  of  this  mighty  essence  is  increased  until  the
Saint  becomes  all  Akasa.  He  may,  for  a  short  period  on
earth,  carry  about  with  him  a  poor  emaciated  body ;  but
he  only  uses  this  as  a  vehicle  to  enable  the  Soul  to  come
in  contact  with  matter — it  is  the  last  end  of  the  staff  by
which  the  divine  hand  of  spirit  touches  earth.

"  It  is  through  the  ahuudauce,  power  and  prevalence  of  Akasa  over  matter  that
the  Bokt  can  rip  up  his  abdomen,  withdraw  the  intestines,  and  inspect  tliem  as
calmly  as  the  Priest  examines  the  entrails  of  the  sacrifice  to  discover  oracular
meanings.  It  is  by  Akasa  that  sensation  in  the  slain  body  is  made  void,  and
wounds  are  instantaneously  healed."

''This  slain  Bokt  truly  dies  ;  but  he  feels  nothing.  Akasa  is  too  potent.  The
senses  are  annihilated.  He  replaces  the  intestines  in  order  to  rebuild  the  body  for
another  day's  use.  The  Gods  surround  him.  They  infuse  divine  Akasa  into  his
system.  His  hands  stream  with  the  life  fluid.  His  breath  is  all  Akasa.  He
breathes  on  the  blood ;  it  is  full  of  life ;  it  instantly  coheres;  the  severed  parts
re-unite.  The  Akasa,  which  has  been  displaced,  is  replaced.  What  more  is
needed?  The  body  is  whole  again;  it  cannot  be  hurt,  since  Akasa  makes,  un-
makes and  remakes  again."

In  this  philosophy  be  it  remembered,  Akasa,  which  is
the  Rosicrucian's  Astral fluid^  the  Hebrew's  Life^  the  modern
magnetizer's  Magnetism^  plays  the  part  of  the  creative  prin-
ciple.

It  is  pure  force,  cohesion,  which  divided  by  the  knife
can  be  replaced,  causing  the  particles,  fibres,  and  all  the
severed  tissues  to  cohere  again  exactly  as  before  they  were
severed.

It  is  the  cause  of  growth  in  plants  ;  hence  if  a  heavy
charge  is  poured  out  on  a  seed  or  germ,  it  can  cause  that

189

growth  in  a  few  seconds,  which  a  less  quantity  would  cause
in  the  slower  processes  called  growth.  A  vast  accumula-
tion of  Akasa  can  cause  when  projected  by  will,  the  heavi-
est bodies  even  rocks,  to  move,  transport  them  through  the
air,  dissolve  solids  into  fluids,  fluids  into  airs,  and  recotu-
bine  them  again,  for  it  is  force.  It  can  subdue  the  fierc-
est beasts  by  stupefying  their  senses  ;  fascinate  the  ser-
pent, charm  the  Boa,  and  palsy  the  Cobra  de  Capello.  It
can  be  diffused  like  a  gauzy  veil  all  through  the  atmos-
phere, and  upon  it,  the  will  of  a  powerful  magician  can
paint  any  images  he  pleases,  and  thus  a  whole  assembly
can  see  the  objects  created  by  that  will  at  one  and  the
same  time.  The  magician  can  envelope  himself  in  Akasa,
and  thus  become  invisible  or  visible  at  pleasure.

He  can  ride  upon  it,  sail  in  it,  stand  upon  it ;  use  it  as
the  chemist  uses  airs,  fluids,  solids ;  but  these  stupendous
powers  are  only  given  to  those  who  have  utterly  worn
away  all  bodily  impediments  by  the  severest  fasts  and  pen-
ances, who  are  freed  from  all  entanglements  of  sense  or
sensuous  attractions  ;  whose  souls  can  arise  to  ethereal
spheres  and  communing  with  spirits,  borrow  their  Akasa,
(spiritual  bodies)  to  aid  in  these  operations,  strengthen
their  own  powers  by  those  of  potent  spirits,  and  thus  be-
come at  once  a  man  and  a  spirit.

A  Soul  having  at  command  an  earthly  vehicle  in  which
to  approach  matter,  is  yet,  by  the  subjugation  of  matter
and  the  exaltation  of  Soul,  at  once  a  man,  a  spirit,— a
God.

The  reader  will  now  understand  the  philosophy  of  the
tremendous  discipline  enjoined  and  practiced  b}^  Hindoo
wonder-workers,  yet  if  they  were  not  ^^/zmzVz^  wonder-work-
ers, and  the  author  of  these  pages  had  not  for  years
proved  them  to  be  such,  and  partaken  alike  of  their  disci-
pline and  their  powers,  these  enormous  claims  had  never

/:

190

been  made  for  them,  and  this  exposition  of  their  philoso-
phy had  never  been  written.

*  All  Yogees,  all  Fakeers,  all  miracle-workers  of  every  age,
country,  and  caste,  summon  to  their  aid  the  Pitrls  or  spir-
its of  ancestors.  Bear  this  in  mind,  skeptics  of  every  land,
careless  and  unthinking  Spiritists,  who  so  lightly  regard
the  privileges  you  have  enjoyed,  but  will  soon  forfeit,  if
not  more  reverently  used,  and  more  intelligently  appreci-
ated. These  Pitris  are  generally  loving  spirit  friends^
who  delight  to  answer*  the  summons  of  the  llluminee  and
aid  him  to  ascend  to  their  ow^n  divine  heights  of  beatitude,
or  to  work  those  deeds  of  power  which  prove  the  ascend-
ency of  spirit  over  matter.

The  Fakeers,  amongst  whom  are  far  more  numerous
grades  than  amongst  the  higher  classes  of  ascetics,  under-
go like  them,  the  most  severe  probationary  discipline.
Many  of  them,  inspired  by  ignorant  rather  than  intelligent
enthusiasm,  far  outvie  the  Yogees  in  the  severity  of  their
rites,  the  hideous  and  distorted  attitudes  thev  assume,  and
the  life-long  miseries  to  which  they  condenm  themselves.
Their  revolting  attitudes,  mendicant  habits,  and  disgusting
appearance,  have  too  often  formed  the  theme  of  travellers'
sketches  to  need  description  here.  Still  there  are,  as  be-
fore intimated,  many  grades  amongst  them.  Many  perform
years  of  initiatory  services  in  the  Temples,  and  accomplish
themselves  in  the  learning  of  the  time,  and  speculative
philosophy.

Many  of  them  are  intelligent  and  even  handsome  men,
though  most  generally  lean,  emaciated,  and  erratic.  Some
of  these  men  become  fire-eaters,  serpent  charmers,  magi-
cians, fortune-tellers,  star  gazers,  strikers,  dancers,  thou-
sand-eyed, finders  of  lost  property,  detectors  of  thieves  ; —
exhibitors  of  marvels,  or  mendicants.  As  to  the  wonders
they  perform,  the  greatest  mistake  in  estimating  them,  is  to

191

attribute  their  acts  to  legerdemain.  Tlie  true  Indian  jug-
gler is  a  man  of  an  entirely  different  class.  A  Fakeer  in
his  most  degraded  condition  may  become  a  juggler,  but
jugglers  are  not  necessarily  Fakeers,  and  their  marvellous
powers  are  for  the  most  part  derived  solely  from  the  ex-
altation of  their  "  mediumistic'  or  ''  magnetic"  natures
over  their  sensuous.

They  perform  by  natural  physical  magic,  marvels  which
make  the  myths  of  the  Arabian  tale-teller  pale  before
them,  from  the  act  of  burying  themselves  alive  for  weeks
or  months,  to  performing  musical  symphonies  to  an  admir-
ing audience  of  dancing  Cobras  and  waltzing  Boas.

These  men,  like  the  Yogees,  perform  their  marvels
through  the  abundance  of  the  life  fluid,  their  perfect  con-
trol of  it,  and  the  aid  of  spirits  whom  they  all  insist  they
can  summon  at  pleasure.

They  emphatically  allege  this  spiritual  aid  is  always
present  when  they  perform.  They  deny  that  they  can
work  without  it,  and  though  they  are  often  urged  by  bigot-
ed skeptics,  pious  missionaries,  or  puzzled  materialists,
to  deny  that  they  solicit  or  can  obtain  the  aid  of  spirits,
they  one  and  all  affirm  and  re-affirm  it,  and  insist  that  with-
out the  Pitris  (ancestral  spirits)  they  can  do  little  or  noth-
ing.

And  now,  reader,  how  like  you  the  training  necessary
to  become  an  accomplished  East  Indian  magian  ?  and
which  of  our  European  or  American  aspirants  for  magical
power,  will  subject  themselves  to  the  discipline  above  de-
scribed for  half  a  life-time,  in  order  that  the  other  half
may  be  spent  in  performing  deeds  of  glamour,  deeds  too
that  will  wane  in  power,  without  a  continual  exercise
of  the  same  rigid  asceticism  by  which  the  power  has  been
procured  7  It  will  be  urged  that  similar  if  not  quite  as
powerful  endowments  exist  in  organisms  that  have  not

192

been  thus  trained,  nor  subjected  to  such  frightful  pro-
cesses of  self-abuse  and  sensuous  abnegation.

This  is  undoubtedly  true  of  those  in  whom  nature  has
already  planted  the  seeds  of  ''  mediumistic"  or  magical
powers.  In  those  whom,  as  we  have  shown  in  earlier  sec-
tions^ nature  has  endowed  with  an  abundance  of  the  won-
der-working Astral  fluid,  it  only  requires  skill,  some  culture
and  intelligent  direction,  to  turn  its  exercise  to  such  ac-
count as  the  possessor  desires.  Still  culture  is  needed,
and  where  natural  endowments  utterly  fail,  or  extra-mun-
dane powers  do  not  exist,  art  must  supply  the  deficiency,
and  indicate  the  way.

We  have  only  to  add  that  in  East  Indian  magic  as  in
American  spiritism,  in  ancient  as  in  modern  times,  there
are  good  and  bad  magicians,  pure  and  impure  media.
These  attract  good  and  bad  Pitris,  high  and  low  spirits.
Magic  no  less  than  spiritism  is  divided  into  white  and
black,  good  and  evil.  The  subjects  always  attract  a  class
of  spirits  correspondential  to  the  natures  of  the  operators,
and  to  the  purposes  designed.

The  Hindoos,  from  the  noble  Gurooes,  to  the  abject  beg-
ging Fakeers,  all  believe  in  Elementaries,  and  all  believe
that  they  have  special  power  to  aid  in  sach  operations  as
their  natures  especially  sympathize  with.

There  are  spirits  of  the  earth,  air,  fire  and  water.  They
vary  in  species,  class  and  degrees  of  power  just  as  mortals
do  ;  regard  mankind  as  their  Gods,  and  seek  their  aid  as
means  of  reaching  higher  spheres ;  desiring  to  serve  them
as  opportunities  of  elevating  themselves  to  the  degree  of
immortality,  which  the  souls  of  men  alone  enjoy.  These
poor  embryonic  beings  range  from  the  purely  mischievous
and  evil,  to  the  aspirational  and  good.  They  are  the  Ginn
or  Genii  of  the  Orient,  who  serve  mortals  in  proportion  to
their  power  to  summon  or  command  them,  but  we  conclude

^
;^^

^^•y^

193

with  the  assurance  that — from  the  very  heart  of  the  se-
cret crypts  of  initiation,  from  the  lips  of  noble  Gurooes,
dreamy-eyed  Purohitas,  abstracted  Nirvanys  and  tribes  of
Fakeers,  the  same  tale  is  told.

The  profoundest  mysteries  of  initiation  are  the  evoca-
tion of  those  called  "  dead,"  and  the  power  of  the  mag-
netic touch,  or  the  infusion  of  Astral  fluid  from  one  potent
body  to  another.  Both  methods  combined,  form  the  key-
stone ol  the  arch  which  unites  the  spiritism  of  ancient
and  modern  India  with  that  of  the  whole  civilized  world.

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XI.

Illustrations  of  Magic  in  India,  given  througli  the  narra-
tives of  distinguished  travellers,  and  personal  experi-
ence.

In  the  author's  possession  is  an  immense  mass  of  testi-
mony, suffiicient  indeed  to  fill  many  volumes,  concerning  the
facts  of  extra  mundane  spiritism,  kindred  or  similar  to
those  recited  in  this  section.

As  many  if  not  all  of  these,  seem  to  draw  too  largely  on
the  credulity  of  ordinary  readers,  it  is  our  purpose  with
each  narrative  of  personal  experience,  of  more  than  com-
mon preternaturalism,  to  accompany  it  with  a  state-
ment of  similar  character,  verified  by  some  historical  per-
sonage, in  whom  the  reader  may  have  more  confidence
than  in  an  anonymous  writer.

If  this  method  may  burden  our  work  with  more  illustra-
tions than  seems  necessary,  it  will  at  least  show  how  much
more  universal  are  these  gigantic  products  of  spiritual  power
than  mankind  has  generally  believed.

194

During  the  author's  residence  at  Benares — the  holy  city
of  the  Hindoos — in  the  years  1855  and  '56,  a  party  of  En-
glish gentlemen,  attracted  by  interest  in  Spiritualistic  pur-
suits, frequently  visited  him,  and  assisted  in  experimenting
with  the  swarms  of  Fakeers  who  crowd  the  city,  and  the
numerous  professing  miracle-workers  who  flock  to  Benares
at  certain  seasons  of  periodical  pilgrimage.

One  of  this  English  party,  Capt.  W.,  an  officer  of  esti-
mable character  and  high  culture,  experienced  during  his
stay  in  Benares  some  family  bereavements,  which  fixed  his
mind  with  painful  solicitude  on  the  conditions  of  life  in
the  hereafter.  The  Fakeers,  lying  on  the  banks  of  the
sacred  Ganges,  or  crouching  in  the  city  thoroughfares  in
every  conceivable  attitude  of  disgusting  deformity,  repelled
this  refined  gentleman,  and  he  refused  to  avail  himself  of
their  powers,  as  Ghost  Seers,  deeming  the  condition  of  the
dead  too  sacred  to  be  represented  by  such  unhallowed
interpreters.  In  vain  his  friends  assured  him  these  poor
ascetics  were  merely  instruments  through  whom  the  inhabit-
ants of  other  worlds  might  announce  their  presence,  as
through  the  post-office  or  telegraph.  The  mourner  re-
quired for  the  manifestation  of  an  angelic  presence,  noth-
ing short  of  an  angelic  instrument,  and  insisted  that  if  the
dead  could  return  at  all,  it  must  be  through  means  as  holy
as  their  own  beatified  condition.

One  morning  Capt.  W.  entered  his  friend's  apartment
with  a  countenance  beaming  with  excitement,  and  ex-
claimed :  "  Eureka  !  the  great  object  of  my  search  is
found.  A  mighty  magician  is  coming  to  Benares  who  can
solve  all  my  doubts.  Report  speaks  of  him  as  the  greatest
of  all  wonder-workers ;  the  city  is  alive  with  interest.  A
Sacred  Bokt — a  veritable  Lama,  an  incarnation,  perhaps,  of
the  Divine  Buddha — is  expected,  and  will  arrive  this  very
evening."     Anxious  to  gratify  the  newly-awakened  inter-

195

est  of  their  mourning  friend,  the  party  above  mentioned
made  inquiries,  and  found  that  a  great  Thibetian  Lama
had  indeed  arrived,  and  would  give  exhibitions  of  his  skill
to  whoever  desired  his  services.  Without  inquiring  in
what  this  skill  consisted,  the  party,  all  too  hastily,  en-
gaged the  great  Mystic,  arranging  that  his  first  perform-
ance should  be  given  in  the  private  residence  of  one  of
their  number  in  a  large  Bungalow,  in  the  vicinity  of  the
city.  None  but  invited  guests  were  to  be  present,  but  it
was  not  until  some  few  hours  before  the  ceremonial  was  to
take  place,  that  the  party  of  English  gentlemen  learned  to
what  they  had  committed  themselves,  and  the  true  nature
of  the  horrible  entertainment  they  had  provided  for  a  set
of  extremely  refined  and  intelligent  visitors.  When  the
true  state  of  the  case  was  disclosed,  the  love  of  the  mar-
vellous prevailed  ovei  their  disappointment.  The  Bokt
was  no  necromancer,  no  seer  or  visionist,  but  a  great
ecstatic — a  Lama  of  such  stupenduous  sanctity  that  he
was  about  to  slay  himself,  die,  and  come  to  life  again.
Whatever  he  could  or  could  not  do,  however,  the  engage-
ment had  been  made,  and  must  be  carried  out.

The  presence  of  seventy  Fakeers  of  extraordinary
power  had  been  secured,  an  audience  hall  improvised,
an  altar  erected,  seats  provided,  all  the  arrangements
made,  and  the  Bokt  now  illuminating  the  sacred  city
with  his  presence,  proposed  in  view  of  all  beholders
to  rip  up  the  abdomen,  remove  a  portion  of  the  intestines,
read  in  them  the  decrees  of  fate,  replace  them  again,  and
heal  up  the  wound  inflicted  without  damage  to  the  person
of  the  great  performer.  It  must  be  confessed  that  when
the  full  horror  of  this  revolting  rite  was  understood
some  of  the  party  pleaded  earnestly  that  the  engagement
might  be  cancelled  and  the  scarcely  human  crowd  of  par-
ticipants be  dismissed  with  the  promised  fees ;  but  the  be-

196

lief  in  some  that  the  performance  could  not  be  real,  but
would  end  in  an  act  of  clever  legerdemain,  whilst  the
hope  in  the  minds  of  others  of  witnessing  a  stupendous
triumph  of  spirit  over  matter,  determined  them  all  to
unite  in  suffering  the  ceremonial  to  proceed.  When  the
hour  of  noon  arrived,  the  Lama  appeared  and  took  his
seat  before  the  raised  altar  on  which  candles  had  been
lighted.  Behind  him  was  a  radiant  image  of  the  sun,  and
on  either  side  of  the  altar  were  grim  idols  which  had  been
placed  there  by  the  attendants.

The  Lama  was  in  person  a  small  spare  man,  with  fixed
glittering  eyes,  an  emaciated  frame,  and  an  immense  mass
of  long  black  hair  which  floated  over  his  shoulders.  He
appeared  altogether  like  a  walking  corpse  in  whose  head
two  blazing  fires  had  been  lighted,  which  gleamed  in  un-
natural lustre  through  his  long  almond-shaped  eyes.

He  was  about  forty  years  of  age,  and  report  alleged
that  he  had  already  performed  the  great  sacrificial  act  he
was  now  about  to  repeat  some  four  times  previously.

From  the  moment  this  skeleton  figure  had  taken  his
seat,  the  seventy  Fakeers  who  surrounded  him,  in  a  semi-
circle, began  to  sway  their  bodies  back  and  forth,  singing
meanwhile  a  loud,  monotonous  chant  in  rhythm  w^ith  their
movements.  The  party  of  spectators,  twenty  in  number,
were  accommodated  with  seats  in  a  little  gallery  opposite
the  Lama  and  so  placed  as  to  command  his  every  motion.

In  a  few  minutes  the  gesticulations  of  the  Fakeers  in-
creased almost  to  frenzy ;  they  tossed  their  arms  on  high,
bent  their  bodies  to  the  earth,  now  forward,  now  back-
ward, now  swung  them  round  as  if  thrown  by  the  hands
of  others;  meantime  their  monotonous  chant  rose  into
shrieks  and  yells  so  frightful,  that  the  ears  of  the  listeners
were  deafened  and  their  senses  distracted  by  the  clamor.
On  every  side  of  the  auditorium,  braziers  of  incense  were

197

burning.  Six  Fakeers  swung  pots  of  frankincense,  filling
the  air  with  intoxicating  vapors,  whilst  six  others  stood
behind,  beating  metal  drums  or  clashing  cymbals,  which
they  tossed  on  high  with  gestures  of  frantic  exaltation.
For  some  time  the  howls,  shrieks  and  distracting  actions
of  this  maniac  crew,  produced  no  effect  on  the  immovable
Lama.  He  sat  like  one  dead,  his  fixed  and  glassy  eyes
seeming  to  stare  into  illimitable  distance,  without  heeding
the  pandemonium  that  was  raging  around  him.  '^  Can  he
be  really  living  ?"  whispered  one  of  the  awe-struck  English-
men to  his  neighbor,  but  this  question  was  speedily  an-
swered by  the  series  of  convulsive  shudderings  which  at
length  shook  the  Lama's  frame.  His  dark  eyes  rolled
wildly  and  finally  nothing  but  their  whites  were  to  be
seen,  spasm  after  spasm  threatening  to  shiver  the  frail  tene-
ment and  expel  its  quivering  life.

The  teeth  were  set,  and  the  features  distorted  as  in  the
worst  phases  of  epilepsy,  when  suddenly,  and  just  as  the
tempest  of  horrible  cries  and  distortions  was  at  its  height,
the  Lama  seized  the  long  glittering  knife  which  he  had  laid
across  his  knees,  drew  it  rapidly  up  the  length  of  the  ab-
,  domen,  and  then  displayed  in  all  their  revolting  horror,  the
f  proofs  of  the  sacrifice  in  the  protruding  intestines.

The  crowd  of  awe-struck  ascetics  bent  their  heads  to  the
earth  in  mute  worship  ;  not  a  sound  broke  the  stillness,
but  the  deep  breathings  of  the  spectators.  At  length  one
of  them  who  had  witnessed  such  scenes  before,  addressing
the  living  creature — for  living  he  still  was,  though  he  uttered
no  sound,  nor  raised  his  drooping  head  from  his  breast — and
said — "  Man  !  can  you  tell  us  by  what  power  this  deed  of
blood  is  pertbrmed  without  destruction  of  life  ?  "  "  The
Lama  is  all  Atma  now,"  responded  a  thin  shrill  voice  from
the  bleeding  wreck  before  us.  "  Fo  keeps  the  Manas
(senses),  until  the  work  is  done."     ''  But  why  is  that  work

198

necessary  ?"  rejoined  the  querist, ''  Is  it  right?"  "  To  show
that  life  and  death  is  his,  Fo  can  withdraw  the  Atma
(Soul),  and  give  it  back;  it  is  his  will  to  shoW  his  power."
"  Is  the  Lama  then  dead  now  ?"  "The  City  of  Brahma
(the  body)  is  empty;  Brahma  Atma  has  retreated."  '^  How
long  can  the  Atma  remain  absent  ?"  "  He  returns  even
now.  See,  he  wings  his  way  hither,  and  now  he  must  re-
enter the  City's  gate,  or  it  is  closed  against  him  forever."
"  Yet  a  moment ;  the  Akasa  (life  principle)  has  it  left  the
flesh  that  is  severed — cut?"  ''  Not  yet — try  it — it  is  warm
— but  soon  the  Akasa  will  ebb  away,  if  your  will  detains
the  Pitris  who  guide  home  the  Atma."  The  querist  did
not,  as  invited,  examine  the  wound,  nor  even  approach  the
ghastly  figure,  nearer  than  was  requisite  to  observe  the
anatomy  of  the  intestines  laid  bare.  A  dead  silence  ensued.
The  living  corpse  moves.  It  raises  its  quivering  hands,
and  scoops  up  the  blood  from  the  wound :  bears  it  to  the
lips,  which  breathe  upon  it ;  they  then  return  to  the
wound,  begin  to  press  the  severed  parts  together,  and  re-
make the  mutilated  body.  The  Fakeers  shout,  and  send  up
praises  to  Brahma ;  the  drums  beat,  the  cymbals  clash,
shrieks,  prayers,  invocations  resound  on  all  sides.  The
fragrant  incense  ascends.  The  flute-players,  planted  on  the
outskirts  of  the  estate,  pour  forth  their  shrill  cadence.  \

The  harps  of  some  European  servants,  stationed  in  a
distant  apartment  and  previously  instructed,  send  forth
strains  of  sweet  melody  among  the  frantic  clamor.

The  ecstatic  makes  a  few  more  passes,  and  after  wrap-
ping a  scarf,  previously  prepared,  over  the  body  as  if  to
cleanse  it  from  the  gore  in  which  he  was  steeped,  suddenly
he  stands  upright ;  casts  all  his  upper  garments  from  him,
and  displays  a  body  unmarked  by  a  single  scar.  Gesticula-
tions, cries,  shouts  subside  ;  low  murmurs  of  admiration  and
worship  pass  through  the  breathless  assembly,  and  then  the

I

199

Bokt,  clasping  his  thin  hands  and  elevating  his  glittering
eyes  to  heaven,  utters  in  a  deep,  low  tone,  far  different  to
the  shrill  wail  of  the  half- dead  sacrifice,  a  short  but  fer-
vent prayer  of  thankfulness, — and  all  is  done.

The  man  resumes  his  dress,  accepts  gravely  the  presents
bestowed  upon  him,  dismisses  his  admiring  votaries,  and
walks  away  as  calmly  as  if  he  had  just  parted  from  a  gay
festivity.  Subsequently  questioned  concerning  this
strange  and  hideous  rite,  he  declared,  that  he  had  fasted
for  six  weeks  previous  to  its  performance,  partaking  of  no
other  sustenance  than  bread,  water  and  a  few  herbs.  Dur-
ing the  ceremonial  he  insisted  that  he  felt  nothing,  heard
nothing  ;  stated  that  he  had  been  lifted  up  to  Paradise  and
beheld  beauties  ineffable,  and  partaken  of  joys  which  no
other  mortal  could  ever  know.  When  asked  to  do  so,
he  exhibited  the  parts  that  had  been  severed,  which  only
retained  a  small  ridgy  white  line  about  three  inches  in
length.  This  the  Bokt  assured  the  investigators  was  un-
usual and  might  be  attributed  to  the  excess  of  Akasa  or
life  fluid  which  the  Fakeers  dispensed.  There  were  too
many  of  them  he  thought.  Had  there  been  less,  or
those  present  had  been  less  zealous,  the  parts  would  have
cohered  instantly.  As  it  was,  the  life  fluid  bubbled  up^  and
caused  that  seam  by  its  excess.  He  expected  to  reduce  it
by  manipulations.  Wondering  to  hear  this  man  use  Hin-
doo phrases  and  speak  the  Tamul  language  with  great
purity,  the  inquirers  found  he  had  been  born  a  Hindoo,
graduated  as  a  Fakeer,  and  finally  embraced  the  doctrines
of  Buddha.  It  was  doubtful  whether  he  had  been  a  Lama
at  all,  but  such  was  his  performance.

We  shall,  according  to  promise,  supplement  this  narra-
tive with  another  on  the  same  subject,  published  in  a  work
entitled  :  Souvenirs  D^un  Voyage  dans  La  Tartarie^  et  la
Chine^  par  M.  Hue  Pretre  Missionaire.     Published  at  Paris,

200

1850.  For  the  translation^ot  this  narrative  we  are  indebted
to  an  excellent  periodical,  published  by  Mr.  Jas.  Burns,  of
London,  in  1873,  entitled  "Human  Nature."  The  date  of
the  narrative  is  some  twenty-five  years   earlier.     M.  Hue

says  :

"The  fifteenth  day  of  the  new  moon  we  encountered  several  caravans,  follow-
ing, as  we  did,  the  direction  from  east  to  west.  The  road  was  filled  with  men,
women  and  children,  mounted  on  camels  or  oxen.  They  told  us  they  were  all  going
to  the  lamasery  of  Rache-Tchurin.  When  they  asked  us  if  our  object  was  the  same
as  theirs,  they  appeared  astonished  at  our  negative  response.  Their  surprise
roused  our  curiosity.  At  a  turning  of  the  road  we  overtook  an  old  lama  who  ap-
peared to  walk  with  difficulty,  as  he  had  a  heavy  package  on  his  back.  '  Brother,'
we  said,  '^ thou  art  old,  thy  white  hairs  are  more  numerous  than  the  black;  thou
must  be  fatigued ;  place  thy  burden  on  the  back  of  one  of  our  camels.'  After  the
pilgrim  was  relieved  of  his  load,  when  his  walk  had  become  more  elastic  and  his
countauence  brighter,  we  asked  him  why  all  these  pilgrims  were  pacing  the  desert  ?
'  We  are  all  going  to  Rache-Tchurin,'  they  said,  with  accents  full  of  devotion.
'  Without  doubt  some  great  solemnity  calls  you  to  the  lamasery  V  'Yes,  to-mor-
row ought  to  be  a  grand  day  ;  a  lama  bokt  will  manifest  his  power ;  he  will  kill

himself,  but  will  not  die.' We  at  once  understood  the  kind  of  solemnity

which  had  put  all  these  Tartars  and  Ortous  on  the  move.  A  lama  was  about  to
rip  up  his  stomach,  take  out  his  entrails,  place  them  before  him,  and  then  return
to  his  normal  state.  This  spectacle,  atrocious  and  disgusting  as  it  is,  is  neverthe-
less very  common  in  the  lamaseries  of  Tartary.  The  bokt  who  is  '  to  manifest  his
power,'  as  the  Mongols  express  it,  prepares  himself  for  this  formidable  act  by  many
days  of  prayer  and  fasting.  During  this  time  he  must  forego  all  communication
with  other  men  and  keep  in  absolute  silence.  When  the  day  arrives  the  multitude  of
pilgrims  assemble  in  the  large  court  of  the  lamasery,  and  an  altar  is  raised  in  lixmt
of  the  doors  of  the  temple.  The  hokt  appears.  He  advances  gravely,  the  people
saluting  him  with  loud  acclamations.  He  moves  to  the  altar  and  there  he  sits.
He  draws  from  his  belt  a  long  cutlass  which  he  places  on  his  knees.  At  his  feet  a
number  of  lamas,  arranged  in  a  circle,  raise  loud  invocations.  As  the  prayers
proceed  the  &ofcHs  perceived  to  tremble  in  all  his  members,  and  then  gradually  to
fall  into  phrenetical  convulsions.  The  lamas  become  more  and  more  excited ;  their
voices  are  no  longer  measured  ;  their  chants  become  disorderly,  till  at  length  their
recitations  are  changed  into  bowlings.  And  it  is  now  that  the  bokt  suddenly  casts
ofi"  the  scarf  which  envelopes  him,  detaches  his  belt,  and,  seizing  the  sacred  cut-
lass, cuts  up  his  stomach  through  all  its  length.  While  the  blood  is  flowing  from
every  part,  the  multitude  falling  before  this  horrible  spectacle,  interrogates  the
fauatic  concerning  hidden  subjects,  future  events,  or  the  destiny  of  certain  per-
sons. The  bokt  replies  to  all  these  questions  by  answers  which  are  regarded  as
oracles  by  all.

"  When  the  devout  curiosity  of  the  numerous  pilgrims  is  satisfied,  the  lamas
recommence  the  recitation  of  prayers  with  calmness  and  gravity.  The  bokt  gath-
ers up,  with  his  right  hand,  some  of  the  blood,  carries  it  to  his  mouth,  blows  on  it
three  times,  and  then  casts  it  in  the  air  with  much  clamor.     He  rapidly  passes  his

201

hand  over  the  wound  and  all  returns  to  its  primitive  state,  witiiout  leaving  a  trace
of  this  diabolical  operation  beyond  extreme  languor.  The  &oA;i^  rolls  his  scarf  again
around  his  body,  recites  a  short  prayer  with  a  low  voice,  and  all  is  over.  And  now
the  pilgrims  disperse,  with  the  exception  of  the  most  devout,  who  stay  to  con-
template and  adore  the  blood-stained  altar.  These  horrible  ceremonies  occur  with
suflBcient  frequency  in  the  large  lamaseries  of  Tartary  and  Thibet.

•^All  lamas  have  not  the  power  to  operate  these  prodigies.  Those,  for  example,
who  have  the  horrible  capacity  of  cutting  themselves  open  are  never  found  among
the  lamas  of  higher  rank.  They  are  ordinarily  simple  lamas  of  bad  character,  and
held  in  small  esteem  by  their  colleagues.  The  lamas  who  are  sensible,  generally
asseverate  their  horror  of  spectacles  of  this  descripticm.  In  their  eyes  all  these
operations  are  perverse  and  diabolical.  The  good  lamas,  they  say,  have  it  not  in
their  power  to  execute  things  of  this  kind,  and  are  careful  to  guard  against  seeking
to  acquire  the  impious  talent.

•'•'  The  above  is  one  of  the  most  notable  sie-fa,  I.  e.,  '  perverse  powers'  possessed
by  the  lamas.  Others  of  a  like  kind  are  less  grandiose  and  more  in  vogue.  These
they  practice  at  home  and  not  on  public  solemnities.  They  will  heat  a  piece  of
iron  red  hot  and  lick  it  with  their  tongues.  They  will  make  incisions  in  their
bodies,  and  an  instant  after  not  the  least  trace  of  the  wound  remains,  etc.,  etc.
All  these  operations  should  be  preceded  by  prayers.

In  1870,  being  on  a  visit  to  a  friend  residing  near  Paris,
the  author  was  informed  that  a  party  of  Fakeers  other-
wise called  ''  Fire-eaters,"  who  had  been  denied  the  oppor-
tunity of  exhibiting  their  powers  in  London,  might  be  seen
and  induced  to  give  a  private  performance,  by  application
to  their  leader,  Lala  Pokowra.  These  men  being  known
to  the  author,  had  solicited  him  to  procure  them  such  pa-
tronage as  would  enable  them  to  return  to  their  own  land.
With  this  view  several  gentlemen  united  to  arrange  a
series  of  private  performances,  the  first  of  which  we  pro-
pose to  give  a  brief  transcript  of,  in  the  following  narra-
tive :

Three  of  the  spectators  had  already  become  familiar
with  the  performance  expected,  the  rest  were  entirely
skeptical  as  to  the  reality  of  what  was  described,  especially
Dr.  L.,  a  Corsican  surgeon,  who  insisted  that  he  should
be  able  to  detect  the  trick  by  his  acumen  and  scientific
knowledge.

It  was  evening  before  the  party  reached  the  chateau,
and  then  Mons.  de  L.,  deeming  they  must  be  fatigued,  de-

02

sired  that  they  might  have  refreshments  served  before
commencing.  This  they  all  declined  however,  explaining
that  in  order  to  prepare  for  what  was  to  follow,  it  was  ne-
cessary to  observe  a  strict  fast.

It  was  near  midnight  before  the  arrangements  were
complete,  and  then  all  were  assembled  in  a  large  hall,
which  in  olden  time  had  been  used  as  a  refectory.  The
floor  was  paved  with  black  and  white  marble,  and  for  this
reason  had  been  selected  by  the  exhibitors  in  preference  to
other  rooms  where  the  waxed  floors  and  carpets  might
have  been  injured.

Several  braziers  exhaling  incense  and  aromatic  vapors
were  burning  around  the  hall,  which  was  only  lighted  by  a
bright  fire,  into  which  were  stuck  several  iron  bars,
brands  and  other  substances  destined  for  the  proposed
exhibition.  The  spectators,  amounting  to  about  thirty
gentlemen,  took  seats  on  a  raised  dais  at  one  end  of  the
apartment,  while  the  Corsican  surgeon,  joined  by  two
others  of  the  French  faculty,  stationed  themselves  in  the
most  convenient  position  for  making  their  observations.

When  all  were  seated  the  exhibitors  entered,  consisting
of  six  men,  four  of  whom  were  simply  attired  in  a  tunic
belted  round  the  waist  and  reaching  nearly  to  the  knees,
their  arms,  necks  and  shoulders  remaining  bare.  The  two
others  were  dressed  in  the  ordinary  coarse  attire  of  the
lower  class  of  Fakeers.  These  men  where  all  excessively
emaciated,  and  the  preternatural  glare  of  their  fierce  black
eyes  was  wild  and  repulsive.  There  was  a  seventh  per-
sonage, not  an  Hindoo,  but  an  European  amateur,  who  be-
came for  the  nonce  their  Adept,  Lala  Pokow'ra  yielding  up
this  post  to  him  by  request,  and  taking  a  seat  with  the
spectators  on  the  platform.

The  four  semi-nude  men  at  first  seated  themselves  on
mats  prepared  for  them,  whilst  the  other  two  were  busy  in

203

heating  irons  and  attending  to  the  braziers.  The  smoke
ascending  to  the  high-vaulted  ceiling,  and  the  fitful  glare
of  the  fires  illuminating  the  half-savage  figures  of  the  re-
clining: ecstatics,  produced  a  weird  and  singular  effect  in
this  vast  apartment.  Branching  antlers  of  stags'  heads,
torn  old  banners,  and  dim  armorial  bearings  gleamed  forth
in  the  flickering  light,  contrasting  strangely  with  the  Ori-
ental forms  that  lay  stretched  beneath  them.  For  some
time  they  remained  motionless,  the  two  assistants,  how-
ever, stood  together,  chanting  prayers  in  a  low  monoto-
nous tone,  and  from  time  to  time  striking  in  rhythm  a
pair  of  silver  cymbals.  It  was  not  until  the  Adept  had
sounded  a  few  soft  notes  on  the  flageolet,  that  the  ecstatics
exhibited  any  signs  of  life.

At  the  first  intonation  they  raised  their  heads  like  sleuth-
hounds  scenting  game,  then  began  swaying  their  bodies  in
time  to  the  music.  Shriller,  louder,  quicker,  rang  out  the
tones  of  the  flageolet — fiercer  sounded  the  clashing  cymbals  ;
louder  and  yet  louder  shouted  the  hoarse  voices  of  the
singers,  and  now  upspringing  from  the  ground  the  four  Fa-
keers  are  seen  whirling,  spinning,  each  as  it  were  on  his  own
pivot,  arms  outstretched,  long  hair  flying  in  the  circumfer-
ence of  each  spinning  humn  n  column  like  a  fringe  of  black
cloud  around  a  water-spout  at  sea.  Faster  and  faster  screams
the  flageolet — faster  and  faster  spin  the  human  tee-to-tums,
till  now  first  one,  then  the  second,  at  length  the  third
sink  down  in  rigid  cataleptic  swoons.  The  fourth  still
spins,  when  suddenly,  tossing  one  hand  aloft,  with  a  whoop
that  would  have  thrilled  the  blood  of  a  red  Indian,  he
snatches  with  the  other  a  keen  knife  from  his  girdle,
and  dashes  it  through  the  fleshy  part  of  the  other  extended
arm.  A  torrent  of  blood  follows  the  wound,  but  another
and  another  gash  succeed  in  quick  succession,  until  the
hands,  face,  neck,  breast,  and  arms  are  streaming  from  the

204

open  mouths  of  gaping  wounds.  One  of  the  surgeons
springs  forth  pale  and  trembling,  and  at  a  signal  from  the
Adept,  the  ecstatic  stops,  and  the  man  of  science,  with  a
face  as  white  as  the  driven  snow,  examines  the  hideous
gashes.—''  Great  God !  it  is  all  true !"  he  cries.  A  few
words  in  Hindostanee  from  the  Adept  succeed,  and  now
the  bleeding  creature  stands  motionless,  whilst  the  Adept's
hands  rapidly  pass  from  point  to  point,  pressing  the  wounds
together,  manipulating  them  slightly,  rubbing  them  over,
making  quick  passes  above  them,  and  lo !  the  figure  ap-
pears a  man  again.

All  the  surgeons  come  forward,  even  the  spectators,
those  who  have  not  fled  sickened  and  fainting  from  the
shocking  spectacle,  and  gaze  upon  the  exposed  form  now
intact ;  not  a  gash  left, — not  a  wound  unhealed,  not  a  cic-
atrix remaining.  A  cup  containing  a  stimulating  drink
of  herbs  is  handed  to  the  exhibitor,  who  quietly  wiping  the
still  reeking  gore  from  his  person,  subsides  upon  his  mat
with  an  air  of  stolid  indifference.

Meantime  the  voices  of  the  chanters  have  sunk  to  a  low
monotonous  cadence,  yet  never  ceased.  Now  they  increase
in  volume,  again  the  cymbals  clash,  the  flageolet  gives  out
its  piercing  tones,  when  the  fallen  Fakeers  upspringing
from  their  trance,  commence  to  sway,  dance,  whirl,  spin.

One  darts  to  the  blazing  fire,  and  seizing  a  red  hot  iron,
licks  it  with  extended  tongue ;  another  gathers  up  a  handful
of  burning  coals  and  chews  them  as  a  precious  morsel,  then
whirling  the  lighted  brands  above  his  head,  he  piles  them
up  in  heaps,  lays  on  them,  hugs  them,  presses  them  to  his
naked  breast,  and  dances  with  them  till  he  appears  a  col-
umn of  spinning  fire.  Again  the  knives  flash,  the  blood
springs  from  gaping  wounds,  but  now  appealing  cries  and
even  shrieks  sound  out  from  shivering  spectators.  Shouts
of  "  Stop  this  hellish  play  !"  ring  from  many  voices.    Some

205

fall  insensible,  some  stop  their  ears  and  close  their  eyes,
and  others  stand  like  figures  of"  stone,  petrified  by  some
Gorgon's  head.  All  are  unnerved,  unmanned,  and  some
weep  like  frightened  children.  The  signal  to  suspend  is
given  in  haste  and  pity  ;  pity  not  to  the  reeking  victims,  but
to  the  shocked  spectators.

Again  the  Adept  and  the  two  assistants  busy  themselves
about  the  motionless  figures.  They  stand  as  passive  and
unmoved  as  logs.  The  blood  dries  up  ;  the  wounds  just
breathed  upon  are  pressed  by  busy  hands,  the  bodies
stroked  and  wiped,  are  healed^  and  not  a  scar  is  left.  Up-
right and  motionless  they  stand,  whilst  the  trembling  spec-
tators steal  towards  them,  pass  their  hands  about  them,
and  turning  to  each  other,  exclaim :  ^'  This  is  the  work  of
fiends  and  no  mistake  !"  Aye,  so  it  ever  is.  Any  science
which  transcends  the  power  of  ignorance  to  explain,  is
always  the  devil's  work,  and  horrible,  revolting  to  human-
ity and  every  feeling  of  nature  as  such  exhibitions  are,
it  needs  them  to  convince  the  material  scientist  that  there
is  a  realm  of  spiritualism  more  tremendously  potent  than
any  that  matter  has  yet  revealed,  and  until  this  realm  is
explored,  science  will  be  driven  to  the  ordinary  expedient
of  ignorance  and  superstition,  crying :  ''  This  is  the  work
of  fiends  and  no  mistake  !"

A  narrative  so  appalling  as  the  above,  demands  like  the
former  one,  additional  testimony  to  strengthen  it.  Let  the
reader  find  this  by  perusing  a  sketch  written  by  the  Prin-
cess de  Belgiojosa,  in  her  charming  work,  entitled  Souvenirs
de  Voyage  en  Asie  Mineure  et  en  Syrie.  This  narrative  was
translated  and  published  in  the  London  Spiritual  Magazine
of  1868,  from  the  pages  of  which  we  avail  ourselves  of  an
excellent  translation.

"  Amongst  a  variety  of  other  woudens,  the  Count  de  Gobineau.  the  Ambassador
of  France  to  Persia,  a  rationalist,  but  a  sincere  and  good  observer,  says  that  every-
body in  Persia,  the  Mussulmans  as  well  as  the  rest,  assured  him  that  the  ^ossayris,

206

one  of  the  principal  sects  in  Persia,  perform  the  following  marvels:  They  fill  with
fire  a  large  brazier  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  whilst  a  musician  plays  the  tar,
a  little  drum,  also  called  dombeck,  the  IsTossayri  approaches  the  fire.  He  is  agita-
ted, he  is  exalted,  he  lifts  his  arms  and  eyes  towards  heaven  with  violent  contor-
tions. Then  when  he  is  excited  to  such  a  pitch  that  the  perspiration  pours  from
his  face  and  from  every  part  of  his  body,  he  seizes  aburning  coal,  and  putting  it  in
his  mouth,  blows  it  in  such  a  manner  that  the  flames  issue  from  the  nose.  He  re-
ceives no  injury  whatever  from  it.  He  then  seats  himself  iu  the  midst  of  the  fire,
the  flames  mount  up  and  play  in  his  beard,  and  caress  without  harming  him.  He
is  in  the  middle  of  the  fire,  and  his  dress  does  not  burn ;  finally  he  lays  himself
down  in  the  brazier,  and  receives  no  hurt  from  it.  Others  enter  a  baker's  oven  iu
full  ignition,  remain  there  as  long  as  they  like,  and  issue  again  without  accident.
What  these  people  do  with  fire,  others  do  with  the  air.  They  throw  themselves
from  rocks  with  their  wives  and  children,  without  receiving  any  damage,  from
whatsoever  height  they  fall.  This  is  the  manner  in  which  a  Purzadeh,  or  descend-
ant of  a  Fur,  explained  these  extraordinary  phenomena ;  '  Since,'  he  said  'every-
thing in  nature  is  Grod,  so  everything  contains,  secretly  but  plenarily,  the  omnipo-
tence of  Grod.  Faith  only  is  necessary  to  put  in  motion  and  make  apparent  this
power.  Therefore,  the  more  intense  and  complete  the  faith,  the  more  marvellous
will  be  the  effects  produced.  It  is  not  merely  from  the  air  and  the  fire  that  we
can  draw  prodigies,  but  from  objects  in  appearance  the  most  contemptible.  If  we
wish  to  call  our  interior  virtue,  whatever  it  may  be,  into  action,  we  have  only  to
apply  the  irresistible  instrument  of  faith,  and  then,  nothing  is  impossible.'  Such
are  the  ideas  of  the  N"ossayris.

''  One  fine  morning,  as  reclining  on  my  divan,  I  endeavored,  but  in  vain,  to  shake
off  the  stupor  and  headache  caused  by  the  fumes  of  charcoal  which  issued  from  a
metal  stove,  and  circulated  through  my  closed  room,  I  saw  enter  a  little  old  man
in  a  white  mantle,  with  a  grey  beard,  a  pointed  cap  of  grey  felt  surrounded  by  a
turban  of  green ;  he  had  a  lively  eye,  and  a  countenance  frank  and  good-natured.
The  old  man  announced  himself  as  the  chief  of  certain  Dervishes,  performers  of
miracles,  whom  the  grand  Mupbti  had  sent  to  show  me  their  operations.  I  ofl"ered
him  my  warmest  thanks,  and  expressed  myself  perfectly  ready  to  witness  the  spec-
tacle which  they  proposed.  The  old  man  opened  the  door,  made  a  sign,  and
quickly  reappeared,  followed  by  his  disciples.

''  They  were  eight  in  number,  and  I  must  confess,  that  if  I  had  met  them  on  my
journey,  at  the  corner  of  a  wood,  their  appearance  would  have  given  me  little
pleasure.  Their  clothes  were  in  rags,  their  long  beards  untrimmed,  their  visages
pale,  their  forms  emaciated,  a  something  indescribably  ferocious  and  haggard  in
their  eyes,  all  which  contrasted  singularly  with  the  open,  smiling  countenance
and  somewhat  gay  costume  of  their  chief.  These  men  on  entering,  prostrated
themselves  before  him,  made  me  a  polite  obeisance,  and  seated  themselves  at  a
distance,  awaiting  the  orders  of  the  old  man,  who,  on  his  part,  awaited  mine.  I
experienced  a  degree  of  embarrassment,  which  would  have  been  still  more  painful
had  the  seance  been  of  my  own  ordering.  Happily  I  was  perfectly  innocent,  and
this  consideration  gave  me  a  little  self-composure,  but  I  did  not  dare  to  make  the
sign  for  commencement  of,  I  did  not  know  what.  I  expected  a  scene  of  the  gross-
est imposition,  which  I  should  be  obliged  to  applaud  out  of  politeness,  and  of  which
I  must  show  myself  a  dupe  out  of  good  breeding.

''I  caused  coffee  to  be  served,  to  gain  time,  but  the  chief  only  accepted  it.     The

207

disciples  excused  themselves,  alleging  the  seriousness  of  the  trials  to  which
they  were  about  to  submit  themselves.  I  gazed  at  them  ;  they  were  serious  as
men  who  expected  the  visit  of  a  host  or  rather  of  a  revered  master.  After  a  short
silence,  the  old  man  asked  me  if  these  children  might  begin,  ahd  I  replied  that  it
rested  entirely  with  themselves.  Taking  my  answer  as  an  encouragement,  he
made  a  sign,  and  one  of  the  Dervishes  arose;  he  then  prostrated  himself  before
his  chief  and  kissed  the  earth;  the  chief  placed  his  hands  on  his  head  as  if  to  give
his  benediction,  and  spoke  some  words  in  a  low  voice  which  I  did  not  understand.
Then  arising,  the  Dervish  put  off  his  mantle,  his  goatskin  fur,  and  receiving  along
poignard  from  one  of  his  companions,  the  handle  of  which  was  ornamented  with
little  bells,  he  placed  himself  in  the  middle  of  the  apartment.  Calm  and  self-col-
lected at  first,  he  became  animated  by  degrees  from  the  force  of  an  interior  action.
His  breast  swelled,  his  nostrils  expanded,  and  his  eyes  rolled  in  their  sockets  with
a  singular  rapidity.  This  transformation  was  accompanied  and  aided,  without
doubt,  by  the  music  and  the  songs  of  the  other  Dervishes,  who,  having  com-
menced by  a  monotonous  recitative,  passed  quickly  into  modulated  cries  and  yells,
to  which  the  regular  beating  of  a  tambourine  gave  a  certain  measure.  When  the
musical  fever  attained  its  paroxysm  the  first  Dervish  alternately  raised  and  let
fall  the  arm  whic*li  held  the  poignard,  without  beiug  conscious  of  these  move-
ments, and  as  if  moved  by  a  foreign  force.  A  convulsive  twitching  pervaded
his  limbs,  and  he  united  his  voice  with  those  of  his  confreres  whom  he  soon  re-
duced to  the  humble  role  of  assistants,  so  much  did  his  cries  exceed  theirs.  Dan-
cing was  then  added  to  the  music,  and  the  protagonist  Dervish  executed  such
amazing  leaps  that  the  perspiration  ran  down  his  naked  figure.

"  '  It  was  the  moment  of  inspiration.'  Brandishing  the  dagger,  which  he  never
abandoned,  and  every  motion  of  which  had  made  the  little  bells  resound  ;  then,
extending  his  arm  and  suddenly  retracting  it,  he  plunged  the  dagger  into  his  cheek
so  deep  that  the  point  appeared  in  the  inside  of  his  mouth.  The  blood  rushed  in
torrents  from  both  apertures  of  the  wound,  and  I  could  not  restrain  a  motion  of
my  hand  to  put  an  end  to  this  terrible  scene.

"  '  Madame  wishes  to  look  a  little  closer  V  said  the  old  man,  t)bserving  me  atten-
tively. Making  a  sign  for  the  wounded  man  to  draw  near,  he  made  me  observe
that  the  point  of  the  dagger  had  really  passed  through  the  cheek,  and  he  would
not  be  satisfied  till  I  had  touched  the  point  with  my  finger.

"  '  You  are  satisfied  that  the  wound  of  this  man  is  real  V  he  said  to  me.  '  I  have
no  doubt  of  it,'  I  replied,  emphatically.

"  'That  is  enough.  My  son,'  he  added  to  the  Dervish,  who  remained  during  the
examination  with  his  mouth  open  filled  with  blood,  and  the  dagger  still  in  the
wound,  '  go.  and  be  healed.'

"The  Dervish  bowed,  drew  out  the  dagger,  and  turning  to  one  of  his  compan-
ions, knelt  and  presented  his  cheek,  which  this  man  washed  within  and  without
with  own  saliva.  The  operation  continued  some  seconds,  but  when  the  wounded
man  rose,  and  turned  to  one  side,  every  trace  of  the  wound  had  disappeared.

"  Another  Dervish  made  a  wound  in  his  arm,  under  the  same  ceremonies,  which
was  healed  in  the  same  manner.  A  third  terrified  me.  He  was  armed  with  a  great
crooked  sabre,  which  he  seized  with  his  hands  at  the  two  extremities,  and  applying
the  edge  of  the  concave  side  to  his  stomach  caused  it  to  enter  as  he  executed  a  see-
saw motion.  A  purple  line  instantly  showed  itself  on  his  brown  and  shining  skin,
and  T  entreated  the  old  man  to  allow  it  to  proceed  no  further.     He  smiled,  assuring

208

me  that  I  had  seen  nothing,  that  this  was  only  the  prologue ;  that  these  children
cut  off  their  limbs  with  impunity— their  heads,  if  necessary,  without  causing  them-
selves any  inconvenience.  I  believe  he  was  contented  with  me,  and  judged  me
worthy  to  witness  their  miracles,  by  which  I  was  not  particularly  flattered.

"But  the  fact  is,  I  remained  pensive  and  confused.  What  was  that  ?  My  eyes
had  they  not  seen  them  ?  My  hands,  had  they  not  touched  them  f  Had  not  thii
blood  flowed  f  I  called  to  mind  all  the  tricks  of  our  most  celebrated  prestidigita-
teurs,  but  I  found  nothing  to  be  compared  with  what  I  had  seen.  I  had  had  to  do
with  men  simple  and  ignorant  to  excess;  their  movements  were  made  with  the
utmost  simplicity,  and  displayed  not  a  trace  of  artifice.  I  do  not  pretend  to  have
seen  a  miracle,  and  I  state  faithfully  a  scene  which  I  for  my  part  know  not  how
to  explain.  The  next  day  Dr.  Petracchi,  for  many  years  the  English  Consul  at
Angora,  related  many  such  marvels,  and  assured  me  that  the  Dervishes  possessed
natural,  or  rather  supernatural  secrets,  by  which  they  accomplished  prodigies  equal
to  those  of  the  priests  of  Egypt."

M.  Adalbert  de  Beaumont,  who  visited  Asia  Minor,  in
1852,  asserts  the  reality  of  the  same  wonders  as  the  Coun-
tess de  Belgiojoso.  He  says  when  the  dancing  Dervishes
have  reached  the  paroxysm  of  their  excitement,  they  seize
on  iron  red  hot,  bite  it,  hold  it  between  their  teeth,  and
extinguish  it  with  their  tongues.  Others  take  knives  and
large  needles,  and  pierce  their  sides,  arms  and  legs,  the
wounds  of  which  immediately  heal  and  leave  no  trace.

It  is  time  to  bring  these  extravagant  horrors  to  a  close.
We  shall  offer  only  one  more  example  of  East  Indian
spiritism,  although  our  repertoire  of  similar  facts,  and  that
in  personal  experiences^  would  fill  volumes.

At  Bengal  about  the  year  1860,  there  resided  a  Fakeer,
who  had  obtained  the  name  of  Ali  Achmet  from  a  wealthy
Arab,  in  whose  service  he  had  resided  for  many  years.
He  had  been  a  renegade  to  his  faith  and  was  little  respected
in  a  moral  point  of  view,  but  his  abilities  as  a  wonder-
worker had  gained  him  a  great  reputation  amongst  for-
eigners who  visited  the  city.  At  the  death  of  his  patron,
Ali  claimed  that  his  'father's  spirit"  revisiting  the  scenes
of  earth  he  had  loved  all  too  well,  and  being  bound  to  the
performance  of  certain  good  deeds  that  he  had  left  undone
in  earth  life,  once  more  adopted  his  favorite,  and  informed

209

him,  speaking  tuith  a  voice^  that  he  would  enable  him  to
excel  every  Dervish  in  Arabia,  every  Fakeer  in  Hindo-
stan.  This  spirit  kept  his  word.  Ali  achieved  a  great
reputation  wherever  he  went,  and  being  the  inheritor  of
his  adopted  father's  wealth  he  gave  his  exhibitions  freely,
although  his  excessive  vanity  prompted  him  to  tender
them  wherever  he  could  find  appreciative  witnesses.
Having  conceived  a  whimsical  friendship  for  the  author,
he  spent  much  time  exhibiting  to  him  and  his  friends
his  wonder-working  powers.

In  the  presence  of  this  man  many  spirits  of  deceased
persons  had  actually  appeared  to  their  friends.  Their
forms  had  been  seen  standing  in  the  waning  light  of  evening
with  perfect  distinctness,  and  remaining  long  enough  to  be
fully  recognized.  Spirit  faces,  distant  scenes,  and  the  pre-
sentment of  living  persons  residing  in  foreign  countries
were  frequently  shown  on  the  surface  of  a  mirror  which
the  author  kept  in  his  apartment  devoted  to  that  purpose.
The  ordinary  expedient  of  calling  in  a  boy  from  the
street,  pouring  ink,  walnut  or  fungus  juice  in  his  hand,
and  then  ''biologizing  "  him  to  see  and  describe  the  forms
the  inquirer  wished  to  summon,  were  phases  of  power  too
petty  to  engage  this  Adept's  attention.

After  detecting  thieves,  discovering  lost  property,  being
raised  in  the  air,  carried  through  the  grounds  on  several
occasions,  producing  all  manner  of  sights,  sounds  and
strange  phenomena  familiar  enough  amongst  modern
spiritists,  the  Fakeer  would  often  ask  his  audiences
suddenly,  if  they  would  not  like  some  object  brought  them
from  distant  lands,  and  when  an  affirmative  answer  was
given  and  the  desired  object  named,  a  muttered  prayer,  a
silent  invocation  to  his  beloved  familiar,  or  perhaps  a
low  chanted  song,  was  sure  to  end  in  the  production  of
what  was  required,  though  it  had  to  be  transported  for  a
thousand  miles  or  brought  across  the  ocean.

210

Many  persons  residing  at  Benares  will  still  remember
the  time,  some  thirty  years  ago,  when  this  magician,  ex-
hibiting his  power  before  the  Temple  of  Siva  in  the  pres-
ence of  several  thousand  persons,  caused  three  little  half-
naked  Indian  children  to  climb  up  a  pole  successively,  one
after  the  other,  and  when  they  had  ascended  about  half
the  distance  they  suddenly  disappeared.  In  two  minutes
after  the  last  was  lost  to  sight,  a  shout  from  the  audience
announced  that  the  whole  three  were  found  on  a  plateau
a  hundred  feet  removed  from  the  pole,  and  there  they  had
appeared  suddenly  out  of  vacancy.  The  Fakeer  explained
the  phenomenon  by  declaring  that  when  the  little  climbers
had  ascended  to  a  point  where  he  had  directed  a  circle  of
Akasa  (life  fluid)  to  gird  the  pole,  the  Pitris,  headed  by
the  spirit  of  his  accommodating  friend,  had  caught  them
up,  concealed  them  in  their  own  Akasa  (spiritual  atmos-
phere) and  only  put  them  out  of  it  again  when  they
placed  them  on  the  plateau  above  mentioned.  The  little
ones  were  entranced  and  remembered  nothing  of  their
aerial  flight.

By  sticking  a  twig  broken  from  a  living  tree  into  the
ground,  and  extending  his  hand  over  it,  or  keeping  his  fin-
gers pointed  towards  it,  he  could  cause  a  fresh  tree  to
spring  up  bearing  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit,  in  less  than
twenty  minutes.

This  weird  creature  being  one  day  alone  with  the
author,  was  asked  to  show  something  which  should  prove
to  his  friend,  that  he  spoke  with  no  double  tongue,  practiced
with  no  double  robe  ;  {i.e.^  no  concealed  apparatus. )

"  What  would  my  Brother  choose  to  see  V  inquired  Ali.

"■  What  can  Ali  do  7"  ''  See  !  Ali  wears  no  double  robe,"
cried  the  Fakeer,  casting  away  his  upper  garment  entirely.
"  'Tis  well — proceed  !  Cause  the  Pitris  to  show  their  im-
ages in  yon  vase  of  water."     The  vase  indicated  was  a

211

large  stone  tank  which  stood  in  a  shady  part  of  the  outer
court.  Ali  spoke  not,  but  instantly  pointing  the  staff  he
commonly  carried  towards  the  tank. — it  began  visibly  to
oscillate.  Its  weight  was  immense.  It  could  not  have
contained  less  than  six  gallons  of  water,  yet  as  the  Fakeer's
knotted  staff  was  pointed  towards  it, — it  began  to  slide
along  the  court ;  reach  the  open  glass  doors  which  divided
the  apartment  from  without,  to  close  which,  a  groove  of
metal  intersected  the  floor.

Here  the  stone  traveller  paused  like  a  thing  of  life,  then
as  if  reflection  had  ensued,  it  slowly  but  steadily  floated
up  a  foot  above  the  ground,  sailed  in  through  the  glass
doors,  then  gentl}^  subsided  to  the  ground,  and  still  sliding
on,  stationed  itself  at  the  Fakeer's  feet.  "  Will  my  Brother
give  the  Pitris  sweet  air  to  breathe  ?"  inquired  the  Fa-
keer.  This  remark  referred  to  the  use  of  Ozone,  cur-
rents of  which  passed  through  an  electric  battery  had  fre-
([uently  been  used  in  that  apartment  in  the  evocation  of
spirits.  There  were  several  braziers  too  half  burat  out,
containing  frankincense  and  aromatic  perfumes.  These
were  distributed  in  a  circular  form  around  the  spot  where
the  stone  tank  was  held  stationary.

The  battery  set  in  working  order,  and  the  braziers
lighted,  the  Fakeer  seemed  satisfied,  and  this  is  what  en-
sued. The  fumes  of  the  burning  incense  instead  of  as
usual  ascending  to  vents  prepared  to  receive  them,  seemed
to  be  bent  by  some  outside  power  until  they  concentrated
inwards  towards  the  tank.  The  Fakeer  now  moved  around
this  vessel  several  times,  stretching  both  his  hands  towards
it,  and  murmuring  his  low  chant  in  subdued  tones.  Direct-
ing his  single  witness  to  stand  on  the  north  side  of  the
vase,  but  outside  the  circle  of  braziers,  he  assumed  a  posi-
tion exactly  opposite  to  him,  and  then  both  perceived  that
every  drop  of  the  water  in  the  tank  had  disappeared,  the
tank  was  empty  !

212

Once  more  moving  around  the  vessel  in  circles,  stretch-
ing forth  his  hand  which  to  the  eye  of  clairvoyance
streamed  with  Akasa  (life  fluid)  like  the  shells,  crystals  and
fingers  of  Reichenbach's  sensitives — and  lo!  the  water
came  bubbling  back,  forming  under  the  crystalizing  pro-
cess of  spiritual  life  infused  into  the  empty  vessel,  the
gases  into  which  the  fluid  had  been  resolved,  combining
again,  until  the  pool  reached  the  surface,  and  seemed  to
attain  the  exact  level  it  had  before  occupied.  Again
resuming  his  place  to  the  south  of  the  vessel,  and  beck-
oning his  companion  to  approach  nearer,  one  hand  of  each
being  laid  on  the  edge  of  the  tank,  figures  began  to  appear
on  the  surface  of  the  unruffled  water.  Seventeen  present-
ations of  forms  known  to  the  beholder  appeared  and  dis-
appeared in  slow  succession  on  the  tranquil  mirror  of  the
water.  Most  of  the  apparitions  represented  spirits  who
had  long  been  inhabitants  of  the  silent  land — some,  how-
ever, were  friends  residing  in  distant  lands,  and  these  were
surrounded  with  scenery  appropriate  to  the  position  in
which  they  might  then  most  probably  be  residing.

Every  picture  was  clear,  distinct,  life-like  and  highly
characteristic  of  the  individual  presented,  and  the  whole
phantasmagoria  strikingly  illustrated  those  two  spiritual-
istic aphorisms,  which  have  lately  become  so  popular :
''  There  are  no  dead" — and — "  In  spiritual  existence  there
are  neither  time,  space  nor  obstacles  of  matter."  The  last
forms  seen  were  those  of  the  two  witnesses  themselves.
Neither  of  them,  however,  represented  the  costumes  they
then  wore,  the  one  being  arrayed  in  an  uniform  packed  up
in  a  distant  wardrobe,  the  other — that  of  the  Fakeer —
appearing  in  the  Arab  dress  he  had  long  since  cast  aside.
The  unmistakable  fidelity  of  the  likenesses,  but  the  singu-
lar change  in  the  costumes  thus  presented,  convinced  the
two  observers  that  this  manifestation  was  designed  to  show

213

that  the  whole  series  of  pictures  were  creations  of  the  will
— acts  of  attendant  spirits,  who,  by  exploring  the  minds
of  the  mediums,  shaped  their  representations  in  accord-
ance with  the  images  there  impressed,  or  stereotyped  in
the  memories  of  those  thev  desired  to  serve.

The  letters  of  European  missionaries  from  India,  China,
and  other  eastern  lands,  popular  accounts  of  snake-charm-
ers, Indian  magicians,  &c.,  especially  the  writings  of  Messrs.
Salt,  Lane,  Wolff,  Laborde,  Mesdames  Poole,  Mar-
tineau  and  others,  have  so  familiarized  this  age  with  the
magical  wonders  wrought  in  the  Orient,  that  the  insertion
even  of  the  limited  number  of  narratives  this  section  con-
tains, might  be  deemed  supererogatory,  did  we  not  feel  the
necessity,  in  a  practical  and  affirmative  work  of  this  char-
acter, of  saying,  we  too  have  seen  and  can  testify
of  these  things,  nay  more ;  let  us  add,  we  too  can  perform
them ;  but  again  arises  the  question,  can  such  things  be
done  without  all  the  efforts  and  initiatory  processes  above
described,  or  those  naturally  occult  endowments  so  rarely
conferred  7  Once  more  we  subjoin  a  fragment  of  philoso-
phy on  this  subject  given  by  a  noble  Bramin,  the  lather  of
the  little  Hindoo  girl  Sonoma,  whose  clairvoyance  and
extraordinary  lucidity  has  been  referred  to  in  an  earlier
section.

The  Bramin  of  whom  we  now  speak,  a  native  of  Mala-
bar, was  himself  an  ascetic  and  celibate  up  to  the  age  of
fifty  years,  when  in  the  full  exercise  of  his  wonderful
power,  procured  by  fasting,  abstinence  and  contemplation,
he  became  a  Yogee  of  the  first  degree,  and  one  of  the
Council  of  Elders.

At  times  he  was  not  only  levitated  in  the  air,  but  during
the  performance  of  a  solemn  service  on  the  banks  of  the
Orissa,  he  was  floated  above  the  heads  of  the  multitude  for
a  distance  of  over  a  hundred    vards.     The   Bramin  was

214

moved  in  the  direction  of  the  river,  and  would  doubtless
have  been  carried  across  it,  had  not  the  great  disturbance
in  the  minds  of  the  anxious  spectators  broken  the  currents
of  Astral  fluid  in  which  his  spiritual  conductors  carried
him,  and  compelled  them  to  lay  him  gently  down  on  the
river's  bank.

After  this  aerial  flight,  the  Bramin  withdrew  from  public
life  and  devoted  himself  to  the  duties  of  his  calling  as  a
healer  of  the  sick,  a  work  he  performed  solely  by  the  laying
on  of  hands.  He  frequently  fasted  for  many  hours,  some-
times for  days  together,  for  the  purpose  of  curing  some
notable  case  of  disease,  but  these  self-renunciations  always
produced  their  effect  in  the  inevitable  conquest  the  noble
physician  achieved  over  the  malady,  however  severe.

Being  present  with  the  author  on  one  occasion  when  a
Fakeer  who  had  been  buried  for  eight  weeks,  was  disinter-
red and  restored  to  life,  in  the  perfection  of  health  and
good  spirits,  the  Bramin  was  pressed  by  a  British  officer
whose  soldiers  had  been  appointed  to  keep  guard  over  the
grave,  to  address  the  party  assembled,  and  render  them
some  explanation  of  the  phenomena  they  had  witnessed.
The  Bramin  without  hesitation  answered:  ''  Does  not  God
effect  all  these  ma<>;ical  deeds  every  day  before  your  eyes,
and  yet  you  marvel  not  at  their  occurrence  ?  The  only
difference  between  His  procedure  and  that  of  the  magi-
cians is,  that  God  gives  to  everything  its  due  share  of  life,
sufficient  for  its  growth  or  its  maintenance  in  being.  The
magician  imparts  a  greater  share  of  life  than  originally
belonged  to  the  object,  and  calling  upon  the  help  of  spirits
good  or  bad,  just  as  he  may  himself  be,  they  too  bring  a
share  of  their  life  principle.

"Thus  the  magician's  art  consists  in  accumulating  and  dis-
pensing more  of  the  life  fluid  than  nature  herself  yields  up
without  his  aid.      Whatever  nature  does  slowly  by  process-

215

es  of  growth  and  change,  the  magician  does  rapidly  by  aid
of  his  larger  stock  of  materials  to  work  with."  Here  one
of  the  missionaries  present  inquired  whether  such  per-
formances were  not  in  direct  opposition  to  the  will  of  God,
since  had  he  designed  them  for  the  use  of  man,  he  would
have  himself  effected  them  by  processes  of  change  as  rapid
as  those  which  the  magician  effected.

"  See  yonder  buildings,"  responded  the  Bramin,  pointing
to  the  city  with  its  glittering  domes  and  Temple  orna-
ments flashing  in  the  sunlight.  ''God  made  the  stones  and
the  copper,  the  brass  and  silver,  but  He  did  not  put  them
together,  nor  form  them  into  a  city.  He  gives  the  riches
of  the  earth,  and  by  inspiration  poured  into  the  intellect  of
man,  points  the  way  to  achievement,  but  he  leaves  man
to  do  the  work,  and  whatever  man  can  do,  that  is  not
hurtful  to  his  fellow  man,  he  ought  to  do,  for  the  will  of
man  is  only  a  miniature  reflection  of  the  will  of  God."

"  Look  at  these  roses  !  They  were  once  a  small  shoot,  a
mere  petty  twig,  placed  in  the  ground.  Left  to  the  natural
processes  of  growth,  they  would  slowly  raise  into  the  air,
gather  up  nourishment  from  the  earth,  light  and  heat
from  the  atmosphere.  All  this  they  do  because  their  life
A.kasa  works  within  the  shoot,  and  expands  it  into  a  tree,
the  tree  into  leaves,  branches,  flowers  and  seeds  ;  but  if
that  small  twig,  placed  in  the  earth,  is  fed  and  irrigated
by  the  Akasa  which  men  and  spirits  pour  out  upon  it  in
vast  abundance,  then  it  waits  not  for  the  processes  of  nature,
but  springs  up  at  once,  shoots  flowers,  bears  seed  and  dies,
and  all  within  the  hour,  instead  of  within  the  month,  as
the  slower  growth  of  nature  would  have  ordered." — ''  But
the  buried  Fakeer  7"  questioned  the  officers.

"  He  is  a  man  in  whom  the  body,  reduced  by  fasting  and
years  of  penance,  scarely  inheres  together.  Nothing  but
bone,  sinew  and  attenuated  matter  is  there.     He  is  all

216

Akasa— all  force,  all  life.  When  they  laid  him  in  the
tomb,  his  Soul  was  freed  by  entrancement.  His  body  was
left  alive  'tis  true,  for  a  small  portion  of  Akasa  remained
— enough  to  keep  the  particles  of  matter  together.

"  To  prevent  these  from  being  excited  to  motion,  the
ears,  nostrils  and  mouth  were  stopped  with  wax,  no  air
could  enter,  and  so  the  body  remained  intact ;  its  functions
were  all  suspended  at  a  single  point,  and  no  attrition
could  take  place  between  the  atoms.  It  was  as  if  a
clock  had  been  stopped,  and  then  placed  in  an  exhausted
receiver  where  no  action  of  the  outer  air  could  reach  it  or
cause  its  particles  to  wear ;  remove  it  from  its  encasement,
and  it  resumes  its  action  just  where  it  was  stopped.

''  You  saw  the  Fakeer  exhumed,  the  wax  removed,  and
the  natural  air  admitted  to  the  natural  passages.  The
friction  used,  re-awoke  the  slumbering  functions  ;  the  Akasa
of  those  around  poured  in  in  streams  upon  the  receptive
form.  The  Soul,  warned  of  the  period  when  it  must  return,
is  attracted  back  to  the  uninjured  body,  and  so  re-entering,
the  man  resumes  the  machinery  of  life  just  where  the  clock
was  stopped."  But  the  officers  would  know  if  they  could
be  inhumed  or  any  ordinary  man,  by  such  a  process,  and
then  resume  their  earthly  life  again '?

The  Bramin  smiled,  and  gazing  upon  their  stalwart
forms,  replied :  ''  Their  souls  inhered  too  closely  to  their
bodies.  Their  souls  were  not  half  grown,  their  bodies
overgrown.  No  ;  the  trance  with  them  could  not  be  com-
plete,  and  the  life  principle  of  their  spiritual  bodies  was
so  closely  interwoven  with  the  particles  of  matter,  that
the  soul  could  only  be  completely  removed  from  the  body
by  death,  and  anything  that  closed  up  the  avenues  of  life
in  those  bodies  would  so  injure  them  as  to  crush  out  the  soul
altogether."  "  No  !  no  !  It  was  none  but  the  half  dead
ascetic  to  whom  such  contempt  of  material  laws  was  pos-
sible;'

217

Every  feat  of  magic  was  the  triumph  of  spirit  over
matter.  But  the  spirit  must^  be  very  strong  and  the  hin-
drances of  matter  slight  before  those  triumphs  could  be  at-
tained. The  officers  retired,  but  no  tidings  have  ever  been
circulated  concerning  the  fasts  by  which  any  of  their
number  prepared  themselves  for  living  inhumation.  This
Bramin  teaches  that  for  the  performance  of  gross  ponder-
ous work,  the  more  earthly  and  earth-bound  spirits  are
in  attendance,  whilst  to  aid  in  illusory,  magical  or  ele-
mentary feats  of  power,  such  as  flying,  walking  on  air,
resisting  fire,  producing  metals,  causing  plants  to  spring
up  suddenly,  or  transporting  objects  through  the  air;  ele-
mentary spirits  called  in  the  East  Ginn  or  Genii,  are  al-
ways ready  to  aid,  and  that  the  control  which  man  exer-
cises over  them  and  the  labors  which  they  perform  in  his
service,  benefit  and  aid  them  to  advance  in  the  scale  of
being.

These  beings  abound  in  the  elements,  are  very  strong,
and  prone  to  cling  to  man  as  a  God  and  a  great  Buler.  If
he  delight  in  evil,  the  evil  in  nature  flies  to  him  as  the
needle  springs  to  the  magnet,  whilst  pure  planetary  spirits,
good  angels,  or  souls  of  the  just  and  true,  are  equally  re-
pelled by  the  evil  influences  which  evil  men  give  off.

"  Forsaken  of  God — abandoned  by  my  good  angel !"
cries  the  evil  doer.  Never  so  !  but  evil,  causes  man  to  flee
from  God  and  repels  good  angels  from  him.  He  shuts  the
door  against  them  and  retires  into  the  citadel  built  up  of
his  own  bad  purposes  and  strengthened  by  the  sympathy
of  equally  degraded  natures.  Man  fear  thyself!  and  trem-
ble only  before  the  Devil  of  thine  own  conception  !  All
men,  good  and  evil,  can  attain  to  high  spiritual  powers  by
the  physical  processes  so  elaborately  described  in  this  sec-
tion, but  few  can  attain  to  the  highest  good  which  may
exist  independently  of  spiritual  power  at  all.     Still,  to

218

those  who  desire  it,  the  means  are  herein  made  plain.
No  item  must  be  disregarded  or  thrown  away  as  an  idle
superstition.  Occult  powers  reside  in  planets,  stars,
suns,  systems,  inhere  in  atmospheres,  plants,  stones,  min-
erals, waters,  vapors,  and  living  beings.  Nature  ever  de-
mands an  equilibrium.  Matter  or  spirit  will  ever  be  in
the  ascendant  in  every  human  organism,  and  whichever
prevails  draws  from  all  surrounding  objects  a  quality  of
force  to  match  its  own;

Thus  the  gross  man,  the  coarse  feeder,  the  sensualist,
the  miser,  find  throughout  nature  the  quality  of  element
and  the  character  of  spiritual  life  that  feed  their  specialty
and  pander  to  their  tastes.  The  same  law  applies  to  the
reverse  of  this  position,  and  therefore  it  is,  that  a  saint  or
the  worst  of  sinners  may  each  attain  to  magical  powers  ;
but  magic  is  the  sunbeam  which  gives  life  to  the  blooming
rose  when  it  falls  on  the  rose  germ,  or  quickens  into  being
the  noisome  fungus  when  its  radiance  falls  on  heaps  of  cor-
ruption.

.  The  forces  of  spirit  are  designed  for  good  and  use,  or  they
could  not  be  accessible  to  man.  In  ages  yet  to  come,  when
the  earth  and  its  living  freight  are  all  spiritualized,  that
which  is  magic  now  will  be  ordinary  practice  then.  The
heavens  will  kiss  the  earth,  and  the  thin  veil  which  di-
vides the  inhabitants  of  either  realm  will  become  so  trans-
parent that  every  eye  will  pierce  its  mystery  and  rejoice
in  its  holy  revealments.  Until  then  "  knowledge  is
power,"  and  all  men  by  knowledge  may  achieve  the  power
of  practicing  art  magic.

h

01
01

<  1

9

111  if

219

SECTION   XII.

Magic  Amongst  the  Mongolians.

Few  nations  of  the  East  exhibit  a  greater  amount  of
devotion  to  magic  than  the  Chinese,  a  people  whose  antiqui-
ty is  the  problem  of  history,  whose  priority  of  origin
disputes  the  palm  even  with  India,  yet  as  far  back  as  his-
tory can  trace  or  tradition  bear  witness  of,  up  to  the  pres-
ent day,  China,  with  all  its  surrounding  Mongolian  sister
nationalities,  has  inseparably  blended  its  religious  belief
with  faith  in  spiritism.  Mongolian  spiritism  divides  itself
into  two  kinds ;  the  one  is  the  performance  of  extra  mun-
dane acts  or  feats  of  magical  power,  the  other,  communion
with  spirits  procured  through  what  is  now  understood  to
be  natural  spiritual  endowments.  Although  there  is  the
closest  resemblance  between  the  magical  practices  of  the
Mongolians,  and  the  East  Indians,  it  would  be  impossible
to  overlook  the  spiritism  of  so  vast  a  nation  as  that  of
China,  and  one  in  which  its  practices  are  so  widely  en-
grafted in  the  people's  nature.  The  magic  of  the  Mon-
golians, like  that  of  the  East  Indians,  is  in  a  measure  the
results  of  their  religious  faith.

Buddhism,  the  ruling  faith  of  the  Mongolians,  is  said  to
be  professed  by  over  four  hundred  millions  of  the  world's
inhabitants,  or  about  one-third  of  the  human  race,  and
to  have  been  imported  by  Fo,  from  Thibet,  some  four
thousand  years  ago.  The  doctrines  of  Buddhism  differ
widely  from  Braminism.  It  teaches  the  total  annihilation
of  Caste,  the  unity  of  the  whole  human  family  ;  it  is  kind,
just,  merciful — conservative  of  life — respecting  the  rights
of  every  creature,  from .  the   highest  man  to    the   lowest

220

worm — from  the  mammoth  to  the  animalculae.  It  ad-
mits of  no  superiority  except  in  morals,  no  difterence,  save
in  educational  culture  and  degrees  of  civilization.  Its
sweet  and  gracious  teachings  divide  the  power  with  Bra-
minism  in  India,  where  in  all  probability  it  originated,
and  spread  over  the  territory  inhabited  by  the  Mongol  tribes.
The  Buddhists  allege  that  to  those  who  in  truth,  parity
and  constancy,  put  in  force  the  doctrines  of  Buddha,  the
following  ten  powers  will  be  granted :

1.  They  know  the  thoughts  of  others.  2.  Their  sight,  piercing  as  that  of  the
celestials,  beholds  without  mist  all  that  happens  in  the  earth.  3.  They  know  the
past  and  present.  4.  They  perceive  the  uninterrupted  succession  of  the  Kalpas
or  ages  of  the  world.  5.  Their  hearing  is  so  fine  that  they  perceive  and  can  inter-
pret all  the  harmonies  of  the  three  worlds  and  the  ten  divisions  of  the  universe.
6.  They  are  not  subject  to  bodily  conditions,  and  can  assume  any  appearance  at
will.  7.  They  distinguish  the  shadowings  of  lucky  or  unlucky  words,  whether
they  are  near  or  far  away.  8.  They  possess  the  knowledge  of  all  forms,  and  know-
ing that  form  is  void,  they  can  assume  every  sort  of  form;  and  knowing  that
vacancy  is  form,  they  can  annihilate  and  render  nought  all  forms.  9.  They
possess  a  knowledge  of  all  laws.  10,  They  possess  the  perfect  science  of  con-
templation.

With  all  this  vast  claim  for  occult  power,  their  means  of
attaining  it  are  chiefly  moral,  and  will  be  found  in  the  fol-
lowing transcript  of  their  belief:

"From  its  birth  to  the  present  moment,  true  Buddhism  stands  alone  as  a
religion  loithout  ojferings.  It  is  confined  to  good  works,  to  prayers,  to  charity,  to
meditation,  to  the  presentation  of  fruits  and  flowers  in  the  temples  of  the  Most
High.  Buddhist  priests  perform  few,  if  any  functions  that  are  sacerdotal;  they
are  confraternities  of  pious  men  who  live  on  alms,  who  act  as  patterns  of  the
sternest  forms  of  self-renunciation,  or  as  teachers  of  the  highest  and  purest  mo-
rality. They  are  celibates  who  devote  themselves  wholly  to  religion;  who  ab-
stain from  animal  food,  and  who  drink  only  water ;  who  live  in  nervous  fear  lest
they  may  destroy  even  the  life  of  an  insect."

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  contemplative  life,  the
practices  of  asceticism,  chastity,  purity  and  good  works  are
made  the  foundation  stones  of  the  extraordinary  powers
attained  to  by  numbers  of  the  Buddhist  priests,  no  less
than  subordinate  personages  in  that  beautiful  system  of
belief.

221

The  doctrine  which  assumes  that  the  soul  of  their  great
founder,  Fo,  or  Buddha,  is  not  only  re-incarnated  in  the
great  High  Priest  and  Ruler  of  their  nation,  the  grand
Lama,  but  that  his  divine  spirit  may  also  be  distributed
through  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  such  subordi-
nates as  devote  themselves  to  a  religious  life,  has  flooded
China,  Japan,  Tartary  and  Thibet  with  Lamas,  who
swarm  in  every  district  and  city  of  Mongolian  rule.  Like
the  Fakeers  of  India,  the  Dervishes  of  Egypt,  and  the
Christian  Friars  of  the  middle  ages,  these  Lamas  represent
every  grade  of  intelligence,  every  class,  from  the  richest
to  the  poorest^  and  every  quality  of  character  from  the
most  pious  to  the  most  degraded  and  impious.  Lamase-
ries are  established  all  through  the  Mongolian  Territories,
where  the  good  and  the  true,  no  less  than  the  ignorant  and
vicious,  can  recive  their  education  and  become  fitted  for
the  work,  if  not  the  duties  of  their  semi-priestly  office,  and
thus  it  is  that  thousands  who  are  too  lazy  to  devote  them-
selves to  mechanical  toil,  or  others  who  are  simply  ambi-
tious to  excel  in  the  arts  of  the  magician,  fortune  teller,
or  wonder-worker,  enter  these  lamaseries  and  spend  years
in  the  routme  of  their  discipline,  for  the  sake  of  going
forth  with  the  coveted  prestige  of  Lamaism.  Many  of
these  disciplinarians  prove  themselves  to  be  excellent  me-
diums and  natural  spiritists  ;  a  still  larger  number  endure
frightful  penances,  and  pass  years  in  self-mortification
and  abstinence,  simply  for  the  purpose  of  becoming  great
wonder-workers,  and  earning  a  miserable  and  precarious
living  in  the  arts  described  in  our  last  section,  namely  in
fire-eating,  the  mutilation  of  the  body  without  ultimate
injury  to  the  tissues,  the  execution  of  great  magical  feats,
even  the  power  which  many  of  these  Lamas  actually  possess,
of  transporting  themselves  invisibly  from  place  to  place
through  the  air.    The  capacity  to  work  these  marvels,  like

222

the  most  ponderable  and  astonishing  feats  of  physical  force
effected  in  the  presence  of  modern  spirit  media,  are  never
enacted  through  the  most  refined,  or  philosophical  of  the
great  Brotherhood.  They  are  assumed  to  be  produced  by
strong  and  earth-bound  spirits,  also  by  the  Ginn  or  evil
Elementaries,  who  abound  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,
and  who  delight  to  serve  mortals  as  gross  and  physically
inclined  as  themselves.

During  the  author's  residence  in  Tartary,  he  witnessed
feats  of  magic  which  could  scarcely  be  credited,  yet,  though
the  media  through  whom  they  were  produced,  had  led
ascetic  lives,  and  changed  their  physical  systems  by  long
years  of  self-inflicted  tortures,  they  were  never  highly  in-
tellectual persons,  and  rarely  endowed  with  qualities  which
entitled  them  to  much  respect.

In  the  magical  practices  of  these  lamas  they  generally  use
fumigations  consisting  of  narcotic  or  stimulating  vapors,
and  drinks  of  the  same  character.  Also  they  induce  ec-
stasy by  loud  noise,  the  beating  of  drums,  crashing  of  cym-
bals, braying  of  wind  instruments,  shrieks,  yells,  prayers,
and  invocations,  far  more  calculated  as  one  would  suppose,
to  scare  off  the  Gods,  than  to 'attract  them.  Sometimes
they  dance  in  circles,  or  spin  round  until  they  drop  down
in  foaming  epilepsy,  or  insensibility.

The  Chinese  sacred  books  abound  with  directions  for  the
invocation  of  spirits,  and  the  use  of  talismans,  spells,  amu-
lets, fumigations,  and  other  means  of  inducing  trance,  and
spiritual  vision.

A  vast  number  of  both  males  and  females  in  China  are
natural  mediums.  Writing,  rapping,  seeing,  trance,  and
even  materializing  mediums  abound  in  the  Mongol  Empire,
and  in  nearly  all  the  exhibitions  of  spirit  power,  the  media
are  more  strongly  gifted,  more  honest  and  far  more  reli-
able, than  the  professional  spiritists  of  Europe  and  Amer-
ica.

223

Visitors  in  some  parts  of  the  ''  Celestial  Empire"  are  in-
vited to  witness  trials  of  strength  between  parties  of
spirits  controlling  rival  practitioners.

The  author  was  present  on  an  occasion  when  a  large
eight-oared  boat  being  brought  into  a  public  hall  in  broad
daylight,  where  about  a  hundred  spectators  were  ranged
around  the  sides  of  the  hall,  leaving  the  central  space  free,
four  Lamas  and  their  attendants  followed  the  boat,  and
placed  it  at  one  end  of  the  cleared  space.  One  of  the  party
then  read  aloud  the  names  of  eight  spirits  engraved  on  the
oars,  and  as  each  name  was  pronounced,  that  one  of  the  oars
thus  inscribed  was  tossed  up  in  the  air,  and  then  returned
to  its  appropriate  place  by  invisible  power.

Subsequently,  certain  spirits  responding  to  the  cries
of  the  Lamas  who  invoked  them  by  turns,  began  to
move  the  boat ;  some  sliding  it  the  entire  length  of  the
hall,  others  moving  it  backwards  or  forwards  a  few  feet ;
and  others  only  an  inch  or  two  from  its  place.  After  these
feats  were  ended,  the  four  Lamas  produced  miniature  pa-
godas beautifully  carved  and  fitted  up,  in  which,  as  they
claimed  four  genii  or  familiar  spirits  had  taken  up  their
residences.  These  toy  houses  being  placed  each  on  a  stand,
and  appropriate  invocations  having  summoned  the  invisible
tenants,  one  of  them  commenced  by  swiftly  carrying  his
pagoda  up  to  the  ceiling,  where  it  remained  like  a  fly  ad-
hering to  its  roof  and  pinnacles  for  upwards  of  twenty
minutes,  when  it  was  as  swiftly  and  suddenly  replaced.
At  this  token  of  spiritual  power,  the  other  Lamas  redoubled
their  songs  and  incantations,  calling  upon  their  familiars
by  name,  to  put  their  successful  rival  to  shame  by  their
superior  power.  Moved  as  it  would  seem  by  these  represent-
ations, one  of  the  invisibles  slid  his  house  along  the  floor,
causing  it  to  gyrate  like  a  dancer  ;  still  another  respond-
ed by  jumping  his  house  about  in  the  air,  mimicking  the

224

well  known  movements  of  the  grasshopper,  after  which
creature  the  Ginn  supposed  to  be  operating  was  named.
The  fourth  spirit  who  was  called  after  the  sacred  Stork,
caused  his  mansion  to  float  majestically  some  six  feet  in
the  air ;  there  it  became  balanced,  then  fluttering  like  the
wings  of  a  bird  it  swooped  round  in  a  circle,  and  lighted
back  again  upon  its  stand.

At  the  conclusion  of  each  feat  the  spectators  clapped,
shrieked  and  uttered  yells  of  commendation,  at  which  the
pagodas  were  moved  to  bend  with  all  the  grace  and  aplomb
of  a  popular  dancer  receiving  the  plaudits  of  a  fashionable
assembly.  During  these  performances,  the  Lamas  stood
apart,  each  chanting  his  prayer  or  invocation,  whilst  the
space  devoted  to  the  exhibition  was  parted  ofl*  with  a  rope,
making  it  impossible  for  any  one  to  intervene  with,  or  dis-
turb the  operations  of  the  invisible  performers.

In  the  mountain  regions  of  Burmah,  reside  a  people
called  Karens,  who  dwell  in  small  settlements,  or  villages,
and  live  lives  of  singular  temperance,  purity  and  honesty.
Their  religious  teachers  are  called  Bokoos,  or  Prophets,  and
their  office  is  to  inculcate  moral  principles,  predict  the
future,  and  interpret  the  will  of  the  Great  Spirit.  Besides
these  are  an  inferior  class  called  Wees,  or  Wizards,  who
cure  the  sick  by  spells  and  charms,  fly  through  the  air,
bewitch  cattle  or  exorcise  the  evil  spirit  out  of  them,  be-
sides performing,  or  professing  to  perform,  other  very  won-
derful things.

A  Christian  Missionary,  who  had  long  been  a  resident
amongst  these  simple  mountaineers,  assured  the  author,
their  faith  in  the  presence  and  ministry  of  the  spirits  of
their  ancestors  was  immovable.  They  declared  they  saw
them  by  night  as  well  as  day  ;  they  conversed  freely  with
them  by  signal  knockings,  voices,  the  ringing  of  bells  and
sweet  singing.     They  performed  works  of  good  service  and

225

warned  their  friends  of  danger,  death  and  sickness.  One
of  the  Christian  Missionaries,  writing  to  the  New  York
Examiner^  a  strictly  religions  paper,  says  :

''The  Karens  believe  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  are  ever  abroad  on  the  earth,
'Children  and  great  grandchildren!'  said  the  elders,  'the  dead  are  among  us.
^Tothiug  separates  us  from  them  but  a  white  veil.  They  are  here,  but  we  see  them
not.'  Other  genera  of  spiritual  beings  are  supposed  to  dwell  also  on  the  earth;
and  a  few  gifted  ones  (mediums,  in  modern  language,)  have  eyes  to  see  into  the
spiritual  world,  and  power  to  hold  converse  with  particular  spirits.  One  man  told
my  assistant— he  professed  to  believe  in  Christianity,  but  was  not  a  member  of  the
Church — that  when  going  to  Matah  he  saw  on  the  way  a  company  of  evil  spirits
encamped  in  booths.  The  next  year,  when  he  passed  the  same  way,  he  found  they
had  built  a  village  at  their  former  encampment.  They  had  a  chief  over  them,  and
he  had  built  himself  a  house,  larger  than  the  rest,  precisely  on  the  model  of  the
teacher's  without,  but  within,  divided  by  seven  white  curtains  into  as  many  apart-
ments. The  whole  village  was  encircled  by  a  cheval  defrise  of  dead  men's  bones.
At  another  time,  he  saw  an  evil  spirit  that  had  built  a  dwelling  near  the  chapel  at
Matah,  and  was  engaged  with  a  company  of  dependents  in  planting  pointed  stakes
of  dead  men's  bones  all  around  it.  The  man  called  out  to  the  spirit  :  '  What  do
you  mean  by  setting  down  so  many  stakes  heref  The  spirit  was  silent,  but  he
made  his  followers  pull  up  a  part  of  the  stakes.

"Another  individual  had  a  familiar  spirit  that  he  consulted,  and  wiih  which  he
conversed;  but  on  hearing  the  Grospel,  he  professed  to  become  converted,  and  had
no  more  communication  with  his  spirit.  It  had  left  him,  he  said  ;  it  spoke  to  him
no  more.  After  a  protracted  trial,  I  baptized  him.  I  watched  his  case  with  much
interest,  and  for  several  years  he  led  an  unimpeachable  Christian  life;  but  on  los-
ing his  religious  zeal,  and  disagreeing  with  some  of  the  Church  members,  he  removed
to  a  distant  village,  where  he  could  not  attend  the  services  of  the  Sabbath  ;  and  it
was  soon  after  reported  that  he  had  communications  with  his  familiar  spirit  again.
I  sent  a  native  preacher  to  visit  him.  The  man  said  he  heard  the  voice  which  had
conversed  with  him  formerly,  but  it  spoke  very  differently.  Its  language  was  ex-
ceedingly pleasant  to  hear,  and  produced  great  brokenness  of  heart.  It  said  :  '  Love
each  other.  Act  righteously  ;  act  uprightly,'  with  other  exhortations  such  as  he  had
heard  from  the  teachers.  An  assistant  was  placed  in  the  village  near  him,  when
the  spirit  left  him  again,  and  ever  since  he  has  maintained  the  character  of  a  con-
sistent Christian."

In  a  series  of  articles  written  for  the  North  China  Herald^
by  the  celebrated  eastern  traveler,  Dr.  Macgowan,  there
occurs  the  following  description  of  spirit  writing — a  mode,
let  it  be  remembered,  by  no  means  rare  in  the  present  day
in  China,  Japan  and  Thibet.

"  The  table  is  sprinkled  with  bran,  flour  or  other  powder,  and  two  persons  sit
down  at  opposite  sides,  with  their  hands  placed  upon  the  table.  A  basket,  of
about  eight  inches  diameter,  such  as  is  commonly  used  for  washing  rice,  is  now  re-

226

versed,  and  laid  down  with  its  edges  resting  upon  the  tips  of  one  or  two  fingers  of
the  media.  This  basket  is  to  act  as  penholder ;  and  a  reed  or  style  is  fastened  to
the  rim,  or  a  chopstick  thrust  through  the  interstices,  with  the  point  touching  the
powdered  table.  The  ghost  in  the  meantime  has  been  duly  invoked  with  religious
ceremonies,  and  the  spectators  stand  round  waiting  the  result  in  awe-struck  silence.
The  result  is  not  uniform.  Sometimes  the  spirit  summoned  is  unable  to  wuite,
sometimes  he  is  mischievously  inclined,  and  the  pen— for  it  always  moves— will
make  either  a  few  senseless  flourishes  on  the  table,  or  fashion  sentences  that  are
without  meaning,  or  with  a  meaning  that  only  misleads.  This,  however,  is  com-
paratively rare.  In  general,  the  words  traced  are  arranged  in  the  best  form
of  composition,  and  they  communicate  intelligence  wholly  unknown  Lo  the  opera-
tors. These  operators  are  said  to  be  not  only  unconscious,  but  unwilling  partici-
pators in  the  feat.  Sometimes,  by  the  exercise  of  a  strong  will,  they  are  able  to
prevent  the  pencil  from  moving  beyond  the  area  it  commands  by  its  original  posi-
tion; but,  in  general,  the  fingers  follow  it  in  spite  of  themselves,  till  the  whole
table  is  covered  with  the  ghostly  message."

Numerous  other  modes  of  consulting  Spirits  are  in  vogue
amongst  the  Mongols.  Where  the  Prophet,  or  Bokt,  is
good,  pious  or  sincere,  such  an  one  works  not  for  pay,  and
can  scarcely  be  induced  to  accept  of  the  presents  that  are
tendered  to  him.  A  faithful  devotee  of  this  character
having  been  sent  for  to  cure  a  case  of  obsession  from  an
evil  spirit  that  had  befallen  a  favorite  servant  of  the
author's,  commenced  by  practicing  on  him  with  prayers,
invocations,  and  the  usual  methods  of  exorcism.  Finding
that  the  demon,  who  especially  manifested  his  influence  in
violent  and  dangerous  attacks  of  epilepsy,  resisted  all
the  good  man's  efforts  to  dismiss  him  on  pious  grounds,  this
true  Heathen  (Christian,  of  course,  we  dare  not  call  him)
undertook  to  fast  for  nine  consecutive  days,  in  order,  as  he
said,  that  he  might  expel  the  demon  by  the  sj)irits  of
power  which  Fo  would  only  accord  to  the  self-sacrificing.

For  nine  days  this  angel  of  mercy  shut  himself  up  in  a
remote  chamber,  subsisting  on  very  small  rations  of  bread,
water  and  a  little  rice,  carefully  excluding  the  light  of
day,  and  spending  nearly  the  whole  time,  except  when
sleeping  from  utter  prostration,  in  long  and  endless  repe-
tition of  prayers  suitable  for  his  purpose.  On  the  ninth
night  after  his  voluntary  incarceration,  he  came  forth  with

227

a  stern  countenance,  a  sparkling  glance,  erect  form,  and  ri
voice  which  sounded  strangely  sweet  and  mellow,  as  he
chanted  his  sonorous  litanies  to  his  God.  The  unfortunate
patient  happened  to  be  in  one  of  his  worst  crises  as  the
self-devoted  Physician  made  his  appearance.  Laying  his
hands  on  the  man's  head,  with  a  voice  of  thunder  he  com-
manded the  demon  to  depart  from  him,  and  afflict  him  no
more.  Almost  at  the  instant  this  rite  commenced,  the  suf-
ferer fell  into  a  sound  and  tranquil  slumber,  from  which
he  did  not  awake  till  twelve  hours  afterwards,  when  he
arose  refreshed  and  well,  and  never  from  that  hour  was
troubled  with  his  tormentor  again.

When  will  our  Christian  Physicians  make  similar  sacri-
fices, and  produce  similar  results  to  their  suffering  victims  ?

The  processes  by  which  the  most  stupendous  powers  are
excited  have  been  already  sufficiently  dilated  on.  They
vary  not  in  any  land,  although  in  India  they  become  tinc-
tured with  the  sublime  and  metaphysical  nature  of  a  great
and  elevated  nation  of  thinkers,  whilst  amongst  the  Mon-
gols, the  more  mechanical,  and  even  childlike  characteristics
of  the  people,  lend  to  their  Spiritism  an  air  of  supersti-
tion, or  blemish  it  with  an  appearance  of  legerdemain.
Jugglery  and  sleight  of  hand  are  accomplishments  pecu-
liarly in  accordance  with  the  supple  forms  and  imitative
natures  of  these  ingenious  people,  but  none  can  remain
long  in  their  midst,  or  study  their  historj^  and  manners  at-
tentively, without  perceiving  that  all  the  efforts  of  Chris-
tians to  quench  the  Spirit  that  is  amongst  them,  and  teach
them  to  despise  prophesy ings,  have  failed,  and  will  fail  ever-
more.

Spiritism  ever  has,  ever  will  find  its  most  fertile  soil  in
the  magical  East.  That  land  of  Prophets,  Saviours,
Avatars,  and  Oriental  Mystics — that  land  where  matter
bends   and    sways    in    the    grasp    of    mind    as   a    pigmy

228

writhes  in  the  clutch  of  a  giant ;  a  land  where  magic
shoots  up  in  every  plant ;  gleams  forth  in  many  col-
ored fires  from  lustrous  gems  and  glittering  minerals;
where  the  stars  tell  their  tales  of  eternity  undimmed  by
the  thick  vaporous  airs  of  equatorial  lands,  and  the  sun
and  moon  imprint  their  magical  meanings  and  solemn  glo-
ries in  beams  whose  radiance  goes  direct  to  the  inner  con-
sciousness of  awe-struck  worshippers.

Let  the  magic  of  the  Orient  combine  with  the  magnetic
spontaneity  of  Western  Spiritism,  and  we  may  have  a
religion  whose  foundations  laid  in  science,  and  stretching
away  to  the  heavens  in  inspiration,  will  revolutionize  the
opinions  of  ages,  and  establish  on  earth  the  reign  of  the
true  Spiritual  Kingdom.

229

SECTION    XIII

Magic  in  Egypt.

Sisirtivn — Virgin's  St/nibol.

U
Celestial  Mother.

The  immense  prestige  acquired  by  ancient  Egypt  tor
unapproachable  excellence  in  every  department  of  art  and
science,  has  invested  the  name  and  history  of  this  land
with  a  reputation  for  magical  wisdom  which  raises  expec-
tation to  the  very  highest  pitch.  A  general  impression
seems  to  prevail  moreover,  that  Egyptian  monuments,  in-
comprehensible hieroglyphics,  and  buried  crypts,  conceal
treasures  of  magical  lore  unknown  to  other  nations  and
inaccessible  to  modern  research.  But  assuming,  as  there
is  good  reason  to  do,  that  Hindostan  preceded  Egypt  in
the  dynastic  order  of  ancient  civilization,  India  surviving,
although  Egypt  is  no  more,  still  preserves  the  originals  of
those  splendid  myths  which  became  the  under- tones  of
Egyptian  sacerdotal  science.  And  again  :  how  many  of
the  wisest  and  most  philosophic  minds  of  Greece  visited
the  Egyptian  priests,  sat  at  their  feet,  and  carried  from

230

thence  those  systems  of  esoteric  knowledge  which  became
the  corner-stones  of  Grecian  mysteries  ?  Those  mysteries
are  such  to  us  no  longer,  and  we  lose  nothing  of  Egyptian
wisdom  because  we  find  it  filtered  through  Greek  philoso-
phy. Neither  nmst  we  forget  that  the  founders  of  the
Jewish  nation  were  residents  in  Egypt  during  some  por-
tion at  least  of  her  most  triumphant  periods  of  civiliza-
tion, and  when  this  captive  people  were  led  forth  by
Moses,  he  carried  with  him  as  much  of  the  far-famed  wis-
dom of  the  Egyptians  as  a  well  instructed  Hierophant
could  obtain.

Believing,  as  the  best  authenticated  fragments  of  history
would  imply,  that  this  same  Moses  claimed  by  the  Jewish
people  as  their  own  countryman  was  in  reality  an  Egyp-
tian priest,  and  an  Adept  of  the  famous  school  of  Heliop-
olis,  we  marvel  not  to  find  every  item  of  Jewish  religious
worship  stamped  with  Egyptian  characteristics ;  hence,
too,  we  see  little  ground  for  the  general  belief  that  Egypt
conserved  within  herself  sacerdotal  mysteries  utterly  un-
known to  cotemporary  nations  of  antiquity,  or  that  those
elements  of  mystic  wisdom  for  which  she  became  so  ta-
mous,  perished  with  her,  and  have  been  lost  in  the  night  of
her  antiquity.  We  believe  that  the  veil  of  Isis  concealed
the  mysteries  of  nature  only  from  the  vulgar  who  were
unable  to  comprehend  them,  whilst  the  wisdom  so  her-
metically sealed  against  all  but  the  Initiates,  was  preserved
in  the  sum  of  Grecian  philosophy,  which  is  itself  by  no
means  inaccessible  to  the  student  of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury.

As  to  the  ornaments  of  which  the  Hebrews  spoiled  the
Egyptians  on  the  eve  of  their  exodus,  they  are  perfectly
well  understood  to  signiiy  in  Cabalistic  language,  the
external  rites  and  ceremonies  of  their  religious  worship.
And  all  these  are  as  fully  revealed  in  the  writings   of  the

231

Hebrew  prophets  and  the  Book  of  Revelations,  as  they
were,  when  breathed  into  the  ears  of  trembling  Neophytes
by  the  Hierophants  of  Egypt.  Whilst  therefore,  we  may
admire,  wonder,  philosophize,  and  crown  the  land  of  the
Nile  with  a  mastery  over  arts  and  sciences  unknown  in  any
other  country  or  time,  whilst  we  gaze  on  her  stupendous
ruins  with  an  awe  and  wonder  that  almost  revives  the  be-
lief that,  ihe  Sons  of  God  did  take  them  wives  of  the  daugh-
ters of  men^  and  in  those  datjs  there  were  giants ;  still,  we
cannot  admit  that  the  genius  of  great  Egypt  has  perished,
or  that  her  understanding  of  nature's  most  occult  laws
lays  buried  in  secret  crypts  or  veiled  hieroglyphics,  forever
remaining  the  unsolved  problems  of  history.

The  indisputable  parity  between  Hindoo  and  Egyptian
sacerdotalism,  justifies  the  belief  of  many  eminent  schol-
ars, that  the  famous  books  of  Hermes,  so  pretentiously
heralded  forth  to  all  subsequent  ages  as  the  writing  of
Thoth,  ^'  the  secretary  of  the  Gods,  "  found  their  originals
in  the  still  existing  four  books  of  the  Hindoo  Yedas,  and
that  those  originals  still  exist,  although  the  copies  are  said
to  have  been  lost,  or  only  reproduced  in  fragments,  trea-
sured up  as  the  most  priceless  gems  of  antiquity.  The
books  of  Hermes,  like  the  Yedas,  were  divided  into  four
parts,  and  subdivided  into  forty-two  volumes.

They  treated  of  the  same  subjects,  were  carried  in  pro-
cession in  the  same  order,  and  by  the  same  classes  of
Priests  and  Prophets.  The  treatises  claimed  from  time  to
time  to  be  reproduced  as  Hermetic  wisdom,  are  direct  para-
phrases of  Yedic  writings,  and  the  chief  difference  that  ex-
ists between  them  is  the  value  which  posterity  attaches  to
that  which  is  unattainable,  and  the  indifference  with  which
it  regards  the  treasures  it  still  possesses.  There  can  be  no
question  that  the  Jewish  Ark  of  the  Covenant  found  its
model  in  the  Egyptian  Oracleship  ;  that  the  chest  held  so

232

sacred  as  the  repository  of  nameless  treasures  carried
about  in  the  celebration  of  Bacchic  rites,  is  paraphrased
from  a  similar  instrument  used  in  the  Osiric  mysteries,
whilst  the  resemblance  between  the  solar  and  phallic
emblems,  crosses,  obelisks,  pyramids,  and  temple  services
of  India  and  Egypt,  are  too  obvious  to  escape  the  notice
of  the  most  superficial  observer.  The  sequence  of  descent
from  the  rites  performed  at  Benares  to  those  of  Heliopo-
lis,  and  from  thence  to  Eleuesis,  may  be  clearly  traced ;  in  a
word,  whilst  India  may  be  regarded  as  the  fatherland  ot
myth  and  sacerdotal  mystery,  the  entire  East,  including
great  Egypt,  once  splendid  Babylonia,  Palestine,  Persia,
Greece  and  Rome,  all  may  be  regarded  as  tributary  na-
tions, amongst  whom  the  ages  have  parted  the  garments
of  the  great  Hindoo  Messiah,  the  oft  re-incarnated  original
of  all  the  worshipped  Sun-Gods  of  antiquity.  We  are
aware  that  to  many,  these  assertions  will  be  deemed  worthy
only  of  an  anonymous  writer.  ''  God  understands  !"  And
in  that  brief  sentence  is  our  recompense  for  all  the  misap-
prehension and  wrong  that  our  words  may  suffer  at  the
hands  of  humanity.

The  specialties  of  Egyptian  magic  were  these.  The
Priests  of  Egypt,  who  were  the  sole  conservators  of  all
the  religious,  spiritual,  and  metaphysical  knowledge  of
their  land — were  perfect  Adepts  in  the  two  great  spiritual
forces  now  called  Magnetism  and  Psychology.  In  Egypt
as  in  India,  the  Priestly  Caste  included  many  grades,  the
highest  of  whom  were  the  Prophets,  a  class  who  were  ob-
viously synonymous  with  the  modern  "  Spirit  mediums,"
that  is,  persons  in  whom  the  gifts  of  the  spirit  were  im-
planted by  nature,  and  that  without  processes  of  artistic
culture.

Amongst  the  lower  orders  were  those  wonder-workers
who  have  obtained  the  name   of  magicians,  and  beneath

233

them  again,  and  not  necessarily  included  in  the  Priestly
Hierarchy  at  all,  were  itinerant  ascetics,  who  performed
marvellous  feats  by  reason  of  natural  magical  endowments,
quickened  by  culture  and  abstinent  practices,  called  Der-
vishes, a  class  which  finds  an  abundant  representation
throughout  Egypt  to  this  day.

The  Egyptian  Priest,  although  an  ascetic  and  rigid  disci-
plinarian, did  not  practice  the  life-long  and  abnormal  self-
mortifications  endured  by  the  Fakeers  of  India  and  some
of  the  Lamas  of  China.  They  were  highly  educated  scien-
tific men,  and  learned  by  experience  that  more  potential
virtues  existed  in  nature,  than  were  to  be  eliminated  from
the  human  body  in  a  starved  and  mutilated  condition.  They
understood  the  nature  of  the  loadstone,  the  virtues  of  min-
eral and  animal  magnetism,  which,  together  with  the  force
of  psychological  impression,  constituted  a  large  portion  of
their  theurgic  practices.  They  perfectly  understood  the
art  of  reading  the  inmost  secrets  of  the  Soul,  of  impress-
ing the  susceptible  imagination  by  enchantment  and  fascin-
ation, of  sending  their  own  spirits  forth  from  the  body  as
clairvoyants,  under  the  action  of  powerful  will — in  fact,
they  were  masters  of  the  arts  now  known  as  Mesmerism,
Clairvoyance,  Electro-Biology,  etc.,  etc.

They  also  realized  the  virtues  of  magnets,  gems,  herbs,
drugs  and  fumigations,  and  employed  music  to  admirable
efiect.  The  sculptures,  which  so  profusely  adorn  their
temples,  bear  ample  witness  to  their  methods  of  theurgy
and  medical  practice,  for  which  their  renown  is  immortal.

Their  sacerdotal  system  was  both  exoteric  and  esoteric,
and  divided  into  speculative  philosophy  and  practical
magic.

The  nature  of  their  Theosophy  we  have  already  sketched
out  in  earlier  sections,  treating  of  the  astronomical  reli-
gion and  the  worship  of  the  powers  of  nature,  especially  of
the  generative  functions.

234

In  these  systems  the  whole  arcana  of  Egyptian  wis-
dom was  to  be  found.  Their  hierarchy  of  Gods,  Goddesses,
and  intermediate  spiritual  agencies  were  derived  from
these  systems  of  worship.  All  their  grandest  temples  and
priestly  orders  were  devoted  to  the  worship  of  the  spirit-
ual Sun,  of  whom  the  majestic  god  of  day  was  but  the
external  and  physical  type.

Every  star,  planet  and  element  was  impersonated  in  some
form;  hence,  they  found  that  immense  range  of  corres-
pondences in  nature  which  impressed  a  sacred  idea  on
so  many  animals,  birds,  insects,  reptiles  and  plants.

The  different  powers  and  functions  of  Divinity  that
they  imagined  to  be  manifest  in  these  objects,  excited
their  reverential  feelings,  not  the  objects  themselves.

The  sacred  triangle,  representative  throughout  the  East,
of  the  masculine  principle  of  generation — the  Yoni,  circle,
lozenge,  or  horizontal  line,  significant  of  the  feminine
principle,  these,  with  crosses  of  every  variety,  indicative
of  the  same  generative  functions,  were  esteemed  by  the
Egyptians  as  most  sacred  symbols  and  will  be  found  in-
terspersed in  all  their  sculptures.

Isis,  the  maternal  principle  in  nature,  was  very  com-
monly represented  as  a  hawk-headed  Deity,  from  the  sa-
credness  attached  to  the  idea  that  the  hawk  was  the  bird
of  the  Sun,  could  ascend  to  its  resplendent  heights  and
gaze  with  undimmed  eye  into  its  blazing  beams.  The
serpent  was  esteemed  in  Egypt  as  in  other  oriental  lands,
as  an  emblem  alike  of  the  Deific  principles  of  good,
namely :  immortality,  rejuvenescence,  wisdom  and  health,
and  of  death,  terror,  destruction  and  evil.

The  famous  Anubis,  whose  emblem  so  often  occurs  in
Egyptian  sculptures,  was  derived  from  the  Dog  star,  whose
sign  in  the  ascendant  gave  notice  of  the  rising  of  the  sacred
river  Nile,  worshipped  for  its  beneficence  in  irrigating  the
land.

235

The  Dog  star  on  this  account  was  esteemed  as  the  door-
keeper of  the  house  of  life.  He  held  the  key  of  the  portals
of  immortality.  He  was  the  invarible  attendant  of  Osiris,
the  Sun-God  and  Judge  of  the  Dead ;  hence,  the  dog-
headed  Deity  Anubis  is  so  constantly  seen  in  connection
with  sculptures  of  religious  significance.

Aiiubis — l£gyptian  Amulet.

The  sum  of  Egyptian  Theogony  is  too  well  known  to
need  further  description  here ;  nor  does  it  materially  affect
the  magical  practices  of  this  great  people.  We  shall  only
therefore  allude  to  or  describe  it  inasmuch  as  it  may
throw  light  upon  our  special  subject.

The  belief  in  Gods,  Goddesses,  good  and  evil  spirits,  the
immortality  of  the  human  soul,  and  its  transmigrations  for
purposes  of  probation  and  purification,  the  magical  union
between  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the  influences  of  the  si-
dereal heavens  upon  nature  and  human  destiny,  the  fall  of
the  spirit  from  a  condition  of  innocence  and  bliss,  and  its
ultimate  restoration  through  long  series  of  probationary
states — the  spiritual  powers  once  enjoyed  by  the  primeval
man,  now  lost,  or  held  latent,  and  in  part  only,  restored  by
the  practice  of  a  divine  life  and  initiation  into  the  sacred
mysteries  ;  these  were  the  main  ideas  which  underlaid
J7;gyptian  Theosophy,  and  connected  its  speculative  science
with  its  magical  practices.

236

The  history  of  the  Sun-God,  the  worship  of  the  powers
of  nature,  the  trials,  discipline,  probationary  states,  purifi-
cation of  the  human  soul  and  its  ultimate  restoration  to
Deity,  were  the  doctrines  taught  through  gorgeous  dra-
matic representations,  in  the  famous  mysteries  of  Isis  and
Osiris,  to  obtain  a  complete  knowledge  of  which,  many  a
valuable  life  was  vainly  sacrificed.  The  full  sum  of  magic-
al knowledge  was  limited  to  the  Kings  and  Priests  and
the  latter,  according  to  their  worthiness  and  different  grades
of  rank,  were  instructed  in  all  that  appertained  to  the
subject.  The  rite  of  circumcision  was  an  absolute  pre-
requisite to  initiation,  hence  foreigners,  who  having  ar-
rived at  adult  age  when  this  rite  might,  as  it  often  did,
prove  fatal,  feared  to  encounter  its  hazards,  and  were  sel-
dom admitted  to  the  mysteries.  The  rite  of  circumcision
was  symbolized  by  a  circle,  and  the  Egyptian  priests  wore
a  consecrated  ring  in  memory  of  its  performance.

The  ceremonies  of  initiation  into  these  mysteries,
are  not  as  the  would-be  mystics  of  the  present  day  imply,
so  entirely  unknown  to  this  generation.  Those  who  really
understand  the  esoteric  meaning  of  Free  Masonry  and  the
Apocalypse,  might  discover  therein  a  clue  to  the  ancient
mysteries,  which  few  merely  exoteric  or  superficial  think-
ers dream  of.

In  the  present  limited  treatise  we  can  do  no  more  than
indicate  the  general  tenor  of  their  conduct.  They  were
as  follows :

The  Neophyte  upon  being  presented  to  the  attendant
priest,  after  having  undergone  a  preliminary  series  of  puri-
fications by  bathing,  fasting  and  prayer,  was  conducted
before  a  masked  tribunal,  each  member  of  which  was  ar-
rayed in  funeral  robes.  On  every  side  of  the  vast  hall
of  assemblage  were  emblems  of  death,  and  sculptures
representing  the  judgment  through  which  departed  spirits

237

must  pass,  ere  they  were  permitted  to  quit  the  earth,  and
enter  upon  the  next  stage  of  the  soul's  probation.

The  Neophyte's  conductor  wore  the  Dog's  head  mask  of
Anubis.  The  chief  Judge,  representing  Osiris,  was  sur-
rounded with  his  bench  of  Assessors  after  the  fashion  of  an
actual  judgment,  such  as  was  held  upon  deceased  persons  ere
their  remains  were  consigned  to  the  sepulchre.  After  the
usual  funeral  rites  were  ended,  the  Neophyte  was  advised
that  he  must  now  consider  himself  as  dead  to  the  world.  All
its  pursuits,  pleasures  and  attractions  must  be  renounced
forever,  and  an  emhryotic  life  must  be  entered  upon,  pre-
paratory to  the  expected  new  birth  which  he  was  to  attain
through  a  long  series  of  painful,  fatiguing  and  soul  dis-
tracting probations.

As  an  evidence  of  the  power  his  Judges  exerted  over  him,
the  Neophyte  was  astonished,  and  in  some  instances  hor-
ror-struck to  hear  one  after  another — the  Assessors  starting
forth  as  his  accusers,  each  in  turn  rehearsing  all  the  errors
or  shortcomings  of  his  past  life,  dragging  to  light  even  his
secret  desires,  and  the  hidden  things  of  his  inmost  nature,
thus  proving  the  extraordinary  facility  with  which  these
great  Adepts  could  clairvoyantly  perceive  all  secrets,  and
read  the  characters  of  men.  After  this,  long  list  of  pen-
ances and  acts  of  severest  discipline  were  imposed  upon
him.  During  this  fearful  trial  the  accused  was  not  per-
mitted the  slightest  opportunity  of  rebutting  the  charges
brought  against  him,  the  strictest  silence  having  been
enjoined,  all  save  the  tremendous  oaths  and  self-invoked
penalties  which  he  was  called  upon  to  pronounce,  both  on
entering  and  quitting  the  sacred  presence.

From  this  point  the  Neophyte  was  required  to  abide  in
certain  crypts  sculptured  over  with  animals,  typical  of  the
criminal  propensities  to  which  the  soul  is  addicted,  and
then  instructed  in  the  snares  and  temptations  to  which  the

238

passions  were  liable  to  seduce  him.  Thus  he  was  taught
how  these  passions  might  assail  him,  and  in  what  manner
to  subdue  them  by  penances,  prayers,  and  abstinence.
Long  hours  spent  in  total  darkness,  processes  of  discipline,
and  even  severe  scourgings,  dramatic  scenes  representative
of  passages  in  the  Sun-God's  history,  alternations  of  light
and  darkness,  pleasure  and  pain,  fasting  and  feasting ;  some
scenes  where  the  senses  could  be  indulged,  others  where  the
means  of  gratification  were  presented,  but  the  Initiate's
strength  of  resistance  was  tested  ;  all  these  were  but  pre-
liminary exercises  through  which  the  emaciated  body  and
tortured  soul  was  required  to  pass  ere  he  could  become  a
Priest.

Frequent  appearances  before  the  awful  Assessors  of  the
Soul  tested  the  actual  progress  he  had  made.

Sometimes  the  Neophyte  was  placed  amongst  the  Judges,
and  required  to  pronounce  upon  the  hidden  secrets  of
others'  souls,  thus  calling  forth  his  intuitional  powers  and
strengthening  his  clairvoyant  perceptions.  Periods  arrived
when  the  severity  of  the  discipline  relaxed,  and  the  tired
spirit  was  magnetized  to  the  somnambulic  or  trance  sleep  by
powerful  Adepts,  who,  by  whispering  in  his  slumbering  ear,
caused  him  to  behold  scenes  of  beatific  beauty  and  pro-
phetically pointed  out  the  glory  of  the  heavens  to  which
conquerors  in  these  fearful  scenes  of  trial  would  ultimately
attain.

Although  gleams  of  hope,  visions  of  beauty,  and  short,
fitful  periods  of  rest  were  thus  permitted  to  the  harassed
spirits  of  aspirants  for  Priestly  honors  and  magical  knowl-
edge, there  were  many  who  sank  under  the  tremendous
discipline,  and  passed  to  the  higher  life  of  the  heavens  ere
its  prototype  was  achieved  on  earth.  Those  who  survived
and  triumphantly  endured  to  the  end,  were,  as  it  was
said,  "  often  seen  to  weep,  but  never  to  smile."    Their  youth

239

and  all  its  blossoming  fragrance  was  crushed  out,  and  ever
after  they  were  stern,  abstracted  and  isolated  ascetics.

One  stage  of  the  initiation — probably  its  happiest  phase
— consisted  in  scientific  schooling.

The  Neophyte  having  been  previously  prepared  in
the  elements  of  rudimentary  learning,  was  instructed  in
astronomy,  astrology,  medicine,  mineralogy,  mathematics,
geometry  and  such  arts  and  sciences  as  were  known  to  thnt
age.  Magnetism  and  psychology  were  methods  not  only
practiced  on  himself,  but  every  Initiate  was  required  to
practice  it  on  others,  and  it  was  during  these  processes
that  all  the  latent  powers  of  the  individual  were  expanded
into  stupendous  growths.  If  the  Neophyte  was  found  to
be  possessed  of  natural  prophetic  endowments,  much  of
the  rigor  of  his  probation  was  abated,  and  he  was  rapidly
elevated  to  thnt  higher  rank  amongst  the  Priests  assigned
to  Prophets,  through  whom  the  most  transcendent  spirit-
ual powers  were  exhibited.  Egyptian  scholars  have  stated
to  the  author  that  it  was  because  Joseph,  the  Jew,  was
found  to  possess  normally  the  spiritual  powers  which  the
Priests  were  compelled  to  acquire  by  art,  that  he  was  re-
ceived into  royal  favor,  and  permitted  to  exercise  such
unlimited  command  ;  also,  they  alleged  that  Moses,  or,  in
Egyptian  phraseology,  Mises  (signifying  law-giver),  was  a
Priest  of  Heliopolis,  and  being  naturally  endowed  with
wonderful  medmmistic^  or  spiritual  gifts,  he  had  excited  the
envy  and  jealousy  of  inferior  orders  of  the  Priesthood.  A
great  feud  existed,  they  said,  between  the  Priests  of  differ-
ent  Temples  and  Moses,  in  his  strong  reliance  on  his  in-
vincible powers,  revolted  against  the  arbitrary  authority
of  some  of  his  oppressors,  and  hence  was  banished  to  the
Lepers'  quarter,  a  punishment  so  abhorrent,  that,  in  revenge,
he  made  his  escape,  joined  the  oppressed  Israelitish  cap-
tives, and  retaliated  upon  his  tyrannical  countrymen  by

240

becoming  the  leader  and  deliverer  of  their  unhappy  bond-
men.

One  of  the  chief  duties  of  the  Egyptian  priesthood  was
the  cure  of  the  sick,  and  for  this  purpose  the  Initiates
were  instructed  in  the  simple  arts  of  medicine  then  known
and  the  routine  of  magnetic  manipulations.

Loadstones  were  in  constant  use  in  temple  service,  and
not  a  few  of  the  most  remarkable  feats  of  magic  were  due
to  the  knowledge  of  their  use.

In  therapeutic  rites  they  were  frequently  held  in  the
hands,  applied  to  different  parts  of  the  person,  and  enclosed
in  metal  balls  held  by  the  patients  and  connected  by
chains  and  rings.  Thus  they  were  formed  into  a  kind
of  rude  battery,  in  which  the  moisture  of  the  body  was
deemed  efiicient  in  producing  powerful  magnetism.  Herbs,
drugs,  charms,  amulets,  and  sacred  sentences  inscribed  on
scraps  of  papyrus,  were  often  enclosed  in  metal  balls,  and
applied  to  different  portions  of  the  body.  Not  unfrequently
the  unfortunate  patients  were  treated  to  boluses  made  of
sacred  words  and  occult  sentences.

Sometimes  their  afflicted  members  were  bound  up  with
these  talismanic  papyri  or  their  foreheads  were  sealed
with  them  after  the  fashion  of  the  Pharisaic  phylacteries.

Frequent  bathings,  the  use  of  incense,  spices,  fragrant
fumigations,  herb  drinks,  simple  medicaments,  charms,
amulets,  spells,  but  above  all,  friction  and  magnetic  ma-
nipulations, were  the  means  by  which  the  Egyptians  ac-
quired a  skill  in  the  mastery  of  disease,  which  has  never
been  excelled,  perhaps  never  equalled  in  any  age  or  country
of  the  earth.  One  of  their  most  potential  means  of  cure
was  to  induce  the  flxmous  Temple  sleep  practiced  at  a  later
day  so  successfully  by  the  Greeks.  In  this  condition —
which  was  in  tact  somnambulic  trance,  procured  through
the  magnetism  of  powerful  Adepts — the  sleepers  were  ad-

241

vised  by  whispers  from  the  well-practiced  watchers — to  re-
inember  when  they  awoke  all  that  the  Gods  communicated
to  them.

In  this  way  dreams  were  procured  or  veritable  vision^
seen,  in  which  the  patients  received  prescriptions,  direc-
tions, and  prophetic  revelations  which  the  priests  never
failed  to  apply,  deeming  this  the  most  direct  and  infallible
method  of  communicating  with  the  Gods  and  insuring  a
certain  cure.

We  have  said  at  the  commencement  of  the  second  part
of  this  volume,  that  Magnetism  and  Psychology  were  the
two  great  columns  that  upheld  the  Temple  of  Spiritism.

Never  was  this  sublime  truth  better  understood  and  ap-
preciated than  by  the  Priests  of  Egypt.  Their  manipu-
lations, knowledge  of  the  occult  virtues  of  stones,  plants,
vapors,  and  magnets,  their  psychological  powers  cultivated
up  to  the  very  verge  where  sanity  ends  and  insanity  be-
gins, rendered  them  complete  adepts  in  those  noble  scien-
ces, of  which  we,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  have  but  the
slightest  glimpses,  but  of  w4iich  few  save  the  inspired  Mes-
mer  have  realized  the  full  force  since  the  ancient  days  of
which  we  write.  The  chief  process  of  initiation  into  the
splendid  mysteries  depended  on  these  arts.  Appeals  to  the
senses  through  delightful  music,  gorgeous  scenery,  dazzling
lights,  Cimmerian  darkness,  the  horrors  of  impending  death,
the  appearances  of  frightful  forms  and  ferocious  beasts,  the
compulsion  to  ascend  perilous  heights,  and  descend  into
awful  and  interminable  depths, — the  effects  of  solitude,
fasting,  scourgings,  prayers,  the  sudden  demand  to  explain
the  hidden  thoughts  of  others,  or  execute  deeds  of  daring
and  hardihood, — all  these  terrible  trials  and  soul  disci-
plines, were  means  employed  to  evoke  psychological  pow-
ers of  the  mightiest  kind.  This  was  the  far-iamed  wisdom
of  the  Egyptians,  these  their  means  of  evoking  all  the  latent

242

powers  of  the  mind,  the  triumphs  of  the  spirit,  the  cure  of
the  sick,  and  the  mastery  of  the  occult  forces  of  nature.
It  must  be  admitted  that  in  no  nation  of  antiquity  did  such
severe  discipline  and  such  intense  intellectual  culture  pre-
cede the  initiatory  rites  of  Priesthood.  In  India  the  only
methods  required,  were  the  complete  subjugation  of  the
senses,  and  the  annihilation  of  the  passions,  emotions,  and
attributes  of  matter ;  but  the  Egyptians  were  not  only
taught  to  elevate  the  spirit  above  the  realm  of  matter,  they
were  instructed  how  to  call  its  highest  powers  into  exer-
cise. Their  intellects  were  cultured  by  the  acquisition
of  useful  knowledge.  The  highest  achievements  of  art
were  set  before  them.  Science  was  hunted  down^  cap-
tured, and  forced  to  yield  up  its  most  occult  revealments
to  the  minds  of  these  accomplished  scholars.

Far  deeper  meanings  than  the  multiplication  or  divisions
of  numbers  were  discovered  in  mathematics.

The  Egyptians  determined  accurately  the  numbers  which
expressed  men,  Gods,  the  world  and  all  things  in  the  Uni-
verse. The  occult  principles  in  geometry  were  dragged  from
their  lurking  places  beneath  lines,  circles,  and  angles,  and
the  true  basic  principles  of  world  building  were  revealed.

For  thousands  of  years,  the  more  than  royal  powers  by
which  the  Priests  of  Egypt  ruled  their  land  and  held  other
nations  tributaries  to  their  mental  achievements,  continued
in  full  force.

For  thousands  of  years  this  noble  Caste  retained  their
integrity,  mamtained  their  justly  acquired  reputation  for
wisdom,  and  held  their  position  as  the  guides  of  Kings,
the  counsellors  of  warriors,  the  dictators  of  laws,  the  heal-
ers of  the  sick,  Prophets  of  the  future,  wonder-workers
and  interpreters  of  the  will  of  Deity,  and  the  ministra-
tions of  spirits.

Always  ascetic,  silent,  true  and  faithful ;  their  manners

243

were  reserved  and  taciturn.  They  never  smiled,  nor  par-
took of  the  amenities  of  social  life  and  friendly  intercourse.
Cleanly,  active,  pure  and  industrious  ;  often  tilling  their
own  lands,  and  taking  the  severest  of  exercise  in  sunshine
and  storm,  they  seemed  to  have  completely  ascended  be-
yond the  pains,  penalties  or  interests  of  the  world  in  their
own  persons,  and  only  to  be  concerned  for  the  weal,  woe,
or  elevation  of  their  fellow  creatures.  A  more  exalted
race  of  men  never  won  the  secrets  of  eternity  from  the
Gods,  or  more  completely  took  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by
storm  through  their  own  sublime  powers.

Fascinating  as  are  the  researches  connected  with  Egyp-
tian magic,  it  would  be  useless  to  pursue  them  farther  as
regards  their  performance  in  ancient  days.  Those  who
pin  their  faith  on  Biblical  accounts  of  the  trial  of  magical
power  between  Moses  and  the  Egyptian  magicians,  per-
ceiving in  the  recorded  triumphs  of  the  one,  only  the
interference  of  their  favorite  God,  and  in  the  recorded  fail-
ures of  the  other,  the  displeasure  of  the  same  partial
Deity,  will  arrive  at  a  very  poor  and  imperfect  conception
of  the  truths  which  underlie  the  science  of  Egyptian  magic.
To  the  Priest,  or  in  fact  to  any  well-informed  inhabitant  of
Egypt  at  this  very  day,  the  sudden  visitation  of  lice,
frogs,  red  rain  colored  by  fine  sand  to  the  appear-
ance of  blood,  boils,  blains,  murrain  on  cattle,  or
even  the  rapid  approach  and  disappearance  of  thick  dark-
ness, will  be  no  new  phenomena  nor  require  the  miraculous
intervention  of  a  God  to  induce  them.  They  may  occur
any  day  and  at  all  hours,  and  they  only  require  an  accu-
rate knowledge  of  atmospheric  changes,  and  the  natural
conditions  of  the  land,  to  predict  their  appearance  within
any  given  space  of  time.

Those  who  have  ever  witnessed,  as  they  may  do  any  day
in  the  streets  of  Cairo,  the  marvels  wrought  by   Egyptian

244

serpent  charmers,  those  who  have  seen  these  itinerant
performers  wandering  through  the  cities,  twining  hissing
snakes  round  their  bare  necks  and  arms,  arranging  them  in
dancing  order  and  forming  them  into  quadrille  parties, —
will  not  question  that  Moses  and  Aaron  learnt  quite  enough
of  serpent  proclivities  during  a  very  long  residence  in
ancient  Egypt,  to  contend  successfully  with  serpent
charmers  a  little  inferior  perhaps  to  themselves, — whilst
for  the  story  of  the  slaughter  of  the  first  born  of  Egypt ! —
Pshaw  !  the  tale  is  too  old  and  has  been  repeated  too  often
to  suit  the  purposes  of  rival  sects,  to  be  believed  now  of
any  nation  in  particular.  One  thing  is  certain.  If  the
Pharaoh  of  the  Jewish  history  did  actually  cause  this
hideous  drama  to  be  performed  in  his  own  land,  he  only
paraphrased  an  old  story  long  before  imported  into  his
nation  by  the  Hindoos,  on  whose  most  ancient  temple
walls,  sculptured  representations  of  such  a  massacre  may
be  found,  dating  back  to  periods  long  before  the  Jews  were
known  as  a  people.  The  same  remark  applies  to  a  similar
tragedy  said  to  have  been  enacted  at  a  still  later  date  in
Judea  under  the  reign  of  King  Herod.  If  the  writers  of
the  New  Testament  had  taken  the  trouble  to  acquaint
themselves  with  the  true  origin  of  this  fable,  or  had  had
skill  and  learning  enough  to  have  traced  it  from  Egypt
into  India,  and  from  most  ancient  Indian  sculptures  into
the  realm  of  ancient  mythical  creations,  it  is  doubtful  if
they  would  have  permitted  the  same  audacious  fiction  to
have  been  twice  repeated  in  the  same  volume.

Premising  that  we  shall  continue  to  write  of  Osiric  mys-
teries in  those  of  Eluesis  ;  Egyptian  Astrology  in  its  suc-
cession from  Chaldean  Priests  to  Lilly  and  Dr.  Dee  ;  of
Egyptian  enchantments  and  fascinations  in  the  magnetic
passes  of  Paracelsus  and  Mesmer,  and  of  their  Priests'
clairvoyant  perceptions  of  Heaven  and  earth,  and  all  that

245

in  them  is,  in  the  equally  grand  and  lucid  revelations  of  a
modern  Seer,  whose  name  is  all  too  little  remembered  and
honored  in  his  own  country,  but  who  will  ere  long  be  cited
in  evidence  of  the  undying  perpetuity  of  spiritual  gifts,  we
take  leave  of  a  subject  which  the  progress  of  ages  and  the
divine  economy  of  life  assure  us,  we  can  never  lose  sight  of
in  spirit^  however  the  external  form  of  its  original  may  be
buried  beneath  the  superincumbent  masses  of  ruin  and  de-
cay. The  distinguishing  feature  of  Egyptian  magic,  was
the  union  of  occult  with  natural  science,  the  connection  of
super-mundane  with  mundane  Spiritism.  The  specialties
of  the  Egyptian  Magician  were  patience,  devotion,  and
self-sacrifice,  in  the  acquirement  of  occult  knowledge, —
skill  in  its  use,  purity  of  life,  fidelity  to  his  calling,  and
educational  culture  upreared  on  the  foundation  of  natural
gifts.  These  are  the  elements  by  which  a  true  medium
becomes  an  accomplished  magician  and  it  was  the
Priests  who  rendered  the  name  of  Egypt  famous  through
all  time,  and  their  land  the  synonym  of  all  that  is  wise  in
intellect,  stupendous  in  art,  elevated  in  ideality,  and  divine
in  spiritual  science.

246

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XITI

The  Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt — its  possible  Use  and  Object.

MACROCOSMO

If

DTaqon's  tail

MICROCOSMOS.

Man,  the  Microcosm  of  the  Universe.

Amongst  the  intellectual  triumphs  achieved  by  the
Egyptian  mind,  must  be  reckoned  the  knowledge  of  As-
tronomy, Astrology,  Mathematics,  Geometry,  and  a  percep-
tion of  that  most  profound  of  all  sciences,  namely,  the
universal  law  of  correspondence  existing  between  the  four
branches  of  knowledge  above  named — Heaven,  earth,  man
and  all  created  things.

Those  who  search  Egyptian  records  to  their  full  depths,
and  can  learn  above  all  other  examples,  to  read  perfectly
the  meaning  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  the  object  in  its  erec-
tion, the  principles  upon  which  it  was  built,  and  the  use
for  which  it  was  designed,  will  understand  that  man  and
his  planet  were  fashioned  in  certain  proportions  represented
alike  in  numbers,  colors,  sounds,  forms  and  uses.  Those
who  understand  one  department  of  natural  science,  possess
a  key  which  unlocks  the  whole.  Therefore  this  great
Pyramid,  built  to  illustrate  the  most  perfect  principles  of

247

astronomy,  astrology,  mathematics  and  geometry,  ought
to  possess  an  interest  in  the  eyes  of  the  profound  scholar,
which  removes  it  forever  from  the  common-place  idea  that
this  wonderful  structure  was  erected  merely  as  a  huge
YOJ3I  sepulchre.  The  tomb  of  its  founder  it  undoubtedly
became ;  for,  in  order  to  celebrate  all  the  mysteries  of  life
and  being — the  special  object  for  which  the  great  Pyramid  was
built — death  must  also  take  its  place  ,in  the  pageant,  and
the  stupendous  history  of  the  Soul's  progress  through  the
section  of  eternity  embraced  by  man's  brief  sojourn  on
this  planet,  could  not  be  completed,  unless  the  Angel  of
Death  was  assigned  his  niche  in  the  splendid  shrine

It  would  be  impossible,  without  entering  into  a  labored
and  abstract  description  first,  of  mathematical  principles,
and  next,  of  geometrical  measurements,  disquisitions  which
we  are  assured  would  not  be  acceptable  to  at  least  four
hundred  and  ninety  of  our  five  hundred  readers, — to  ex-
plain the  methods  by  which  the  Egyptians  obviously
arrived  at  the  idea,  that  the  entire  order  of  the  Universe
was  based  on  a  geometrical  figure,  and  included  in  a  math-
ematical sum, — also  that  in  all  departments  of  being,  this
figure  would  be  found,  and  this  sum  would  exist.  In  this
volume,  we  can  but  vaguely  hint  at  this  sublime  discovery,
but  whilst  a  vast  mass  of  Egyptian  vestiges  disclose  its
prevalence,  the  great  Pyramid  is  in  itself  a  complete  illus-
tration of  the  idea.  As  regards  popular  theories  concern-
ing the  design  of  this  vast  monument,  we  must  premise
our  own  statements  of  belief,  by  acknowledging  that  the
number  of  wise  and  learned  men  who  have  devoted  time,
talent  and  indomitable  effort  to  research  in  Egyptology,
have  justly  earned  the  thanks  of  posterity,  and  the  respect-
ful appreciation  of  all  to  whom  their  opinions  have  been
rendered.  It  is  not  with  a  view  of  combatting  the  theories
advanced  by  eminent  Egyptian  discoverers  then,  that  we

248

now  write,  but  in  view  of  the  specialty  of  our  subject  we
believe  we  have  an  interest  in  this  great  Pyramid  which
has  not  been  sufficiently  well  considered  by  others,  and
therefore  we  venture  to  propound  the  subjoined  opinions
concerning  the  uses  for  which  this  marvellous  structure
was  designed.

The  most  ancient  Theosophists,  amongst  whom  we
include  the  Hindoos  and  Egyptians,  taught  that  there
existed  throughout  all  being,  that  universal  law  of  corres-
pondence to  which  we  have  before  alluded.

All  eastern  nations  attributed  the  origin  of  life,  light,
motion,  and  mind,  to  the  action  of  the  Spiritual  vSun,  sym-
bolized by  the  physical  orb  of  day.

Character,  destiny,  physical  form,  and  external  appear-
ances of  all  kinds,  were  determined  principally  by  astral  as
well  as  solar  influences.

Again  it  was  argued,  that  laws  stern  and  immutable,
principles  strict  and  unvarying,  must  underlie  a  scheme  in
which  millions  of  worlds  are  the  actors,  yet  the  whole
drama  is  conducted  in  the  most  unbroken  system  of  har-
mony and  power.  To  arrive  at  any  just  idea  of  causation,
it  was  believed  that  well  defined  mathematical  quantities
and  geometrical  proportions  must  be  the  underlying  prin-
ciples of  this  stupendous  chain  of  being,  all  moving,  living,
and  acting  severally  and  singly  in  the  most  unbroken
power  and  perfection.

Every  sound  in  the  universe  must  conform  to  the  har-
monic rule,  every  shade  of  color  must  combine  to  pro-
duce the  totality  of  pure  white  light.  Every  creature
must  be  a  definite  part,  everything;  an  organ  belong-
ing to  the  vast  whole.  Fanciful  methods  of  interpret-
ing this  gigantic  scheme  by  the  laws  of  correspondence
must  ever  remain  fanciful,  unless  the  key -stone  was  found
which  should    combine  all  the   separated    parts    of   the

249

grand  Temple  of  humanity  by  one  mighty  arch.  This
fair  white  stone  would  he  neither  oval  nor  square^  yet  its  perfec-
tion would  delight  all  eyes^  its  beauty  excite  the  tvonder  of  all
beholders.  In  its  mystic  proportions  would  be  found  the
square,  the  triangle,  the  circle  and  the  line.  In  its  com-
binations would  be  expressed  the  truths  of  Astronomy,  or
the  science  of  Astral  worlds ;  Astrology,  or  the  science
which  connects  the  sum  of  worlds  with  the  units,  and
teaches  how  the  mass  influences  and  disposes  of  the  integral
parts  ;  Mathematics,  or  the  science  which  assigns  to  each
world  its  number,  to  each  component  part  its  unit,  and  finds
in  the  whole  sura  the  just  relations  which  each  unit  sus-
tains to  the  other,  and  to  the  whole.  Fourthly  and  last  is  the
science  of  Geometry,  by  which  the  universe  is  mapped  out
in  lines,  angles,  squares  and  circles,  in  which  all  the  com-
ponent parts  are  arranged  in  just  relations  to  each  other,  and
united  together  in  the  grand  circle  of  Infinity.

Let  not  our  readers  regard  these  words  as  meaningless,
nor  deem  them  the  mere  rhapsody  of  a  transcendental
writer —

The  stone  that  the  builders  reject  becomes  the  head  of  the
corner.

For  ages  the  great  Pyramid  has  been  this  rejected  stone.

The  world  has  not  known  it,  and  the  builders  of  science
have  thrown  it  away  amidst  the  rubbish  of  speculative  pos-
sibilities.

Long  has  it  waited  for  recognition,  and  we  deem  we  do
not  claim  too  much  for  it  when  we  prophesy  it  will  yet  be
read  and  understood,  and  take  its  place  as  the  key-stone
in  the  lost  art,  which  interprets  the  grand  science  of  being
as  a  Masonic  Lodge.  All  creation,  the  Universe  itself,  is
the  Lodge  of  the  Divine  Mason,  in  which  all  the  principles
of  science  are  found,  from  the  smallest  atom  to  an  Astral
system.     All  are  arranged  in  the  exact  order  of  pure  math-

250

ematics  and  geometry,  and  the  great  Pyramid  was  built
to  represent  this  sublime  truth,  to  celebrate  its  mysteries,
and  perpetuate  its  meaning  from  generation  to  generation.

We  shall  now  present  to  the  reader  a  few  excerpts  from
various  authoritative  writers,  whose  opinions  will  strengthen
the  theory  vaguely  intimated  above.

Bishop  Russell,  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford,  England,
—  advancing  the  very  just  and  reasonable  hypothesis  that
the  great  Pyramid  of  Cheops  was  not  built  by  a  descend-
ant of  the  ancient  Egyptian  dynasty,  but  rather  by  one
who  determined  to  illustrate  in  its  erection,  ideas  imported
from  a  still  older  and  more  advanced  civilization — says  in
his  fine  treatise  on  "  Ancient  Egyptian  Monuments :"

"  It  is  manifest  at  first  sight  that  the  dynasty  of  princes  to  whom  these  stu-
pendous works  are  ascribed  were  foreigners,  and  also  that  they  professed  a  reli-
gion hostile  to  the  animal  worship  of  the  Egyptians,  for  it  is  recorded  by  the
historian  (Herodotus)  with  emphatic  distinctness,  that  during  the  whole  period  of
their  domination,  the  temples  were  shut,  sacrifices  prohibited,  and  the  people  sub-
jected to  every  species  of  calamity  and  oppression.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  date
of  the  pyramids  must  synchronize  with  the  epoch  of  the  Shepherd  Kings,  those
mouarchs  who  were  held  as  an  abomination  by  the  Egyptians,  and  who,  we  ma}'
confidently  assert,  occupied  the  throne  of  the  Pharaohs  during  some  part  of  the
interval  which  elapsed  between  the  birth  of  Abraham  and  the  captivity  of
Joseph.  The  reasoning  now  advanced  will  receive  additional  confirmation  when
we  consider  that  buildings  of  the  pyramidal  order  were  not  uncommon  amongst

the  nations  of  the  Bast At  the  present  day  there  are  pyramids  in  India,  and

more  especially  at  Benares An  edifice  of  the  same  kind  has  been  observed

at  Medun,  in  Egypt,  constructed  in  diff'erent  stories  or  platforms,  diminishing  in
size  as  they  rise  in  height  until  they  terminate  in  a  point  the  exact  pattern  of  which
was  supplied  by  the  followers  of  Buddha  in  the  plan  of  their  ancient  pjM-amids,  as
these  have  been  described  by  European  travellers,  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  and
the  Indus."

The  author  of  this  work  has  himself  visited  and  exam-
ined these  Hindoo  structures,  taking  part  in  the  rites  of
initiation  still  practiced  in  their  ancient  crypts,  and  that
after  a  fashion  which  clearly  indicates  that  the  great  Pyra-
mid of  Cheops  was  designed  upon  the  same  model  and  for
the  same  purpose.     Bishop  Russell  adds :

"  Such,  too,  IS  understood  to  have  been  tin-   lorm  of  the  Tower  of  Bal)el,  the

251

object  of  which  may  have  been  to  celebrate  the  mysteries  of  Sabaism  (the  astro-
nomical religion),  the  purest  superstition  of  the  untaught  mind.  Mr.  Wilford  in-
forms us  that  on  his  describing  the  great  Pyramid  to  several  very  learned  Braniins,
they  declared  it  at  once  to  have  been  a  Temple,  and  one  of  them  asked  if  it  had
not  a  communication  with  the  river  Mle.     When  answered  that  such  a  passage

The  Tower  of  Babel.

was  said  to  have  existed,  and  that  a  well  was  to  be  seen  to  this  day,  they  unani-
mously agreed  that  it  was  a  place  appropriated  to  the  worship  of  Padma  Devi,  and
that  the  supposed  tomb  was  a  trough,  which,  on  certain  festivals,  her  priests  used
to  fill  with  water  and  the  sacred  lotus  flowers.

"The  most  probable  opinion  respecting  the  object  of  this  vast  edifice  is,  that  it
combines  the  doable  use  of  the  sepulchre  and  the  temple,  nothing  being  more
common  in  all  nations  than  to  bury  distinguished  personages  in  places  consecrated
to  the  rites  of  worship.  If  Cheops  intended  it  only  ibr  his  tomb,  what  occasion  was
there  for  the  well  at  the  bottom,  the  lower  chamber  with  a  large  niche  in  its
eastern  wall,  the  long,  narrow  cavities  in  the  sides  of  the  large  upper  room,  en-
crusted all  over  with  the  finest  marble,  or  for  the  ante-chambers  and  lofty  gallery
with  benches  on  each  side  that  introduce  us  into  it"?  As  the  whole  of  Egyptian
Theolog}'  was  clothed  in  mysterious  emblems  and  figures,  it  seems  reasonable  to
suppose  that  all  these  turnings,  apartments  and  secrets  in  architecture  were  in-
tended for  some  nobler  purpose,  for  the  catacombs  are  plain,  vaulted  chambers
hewn  out  of  the  natural  rock — and  that  the  Deity  rather,  which  was  typified  in  the
outward  form  of  this  pile,  was  to  he  worshipped  within."

Always  desirous  of  presenting  the  views  of  such  writ-
ers as  may  prove  more  acceptable  to  our  readers  as  aathor-
itjj  than  ourselves,  we  propose  to  render  our  own  opinion  on
this  recondite  subject  in  another  quotation  from  a  curious
little  work  put  forth  by  an  erudite  American  gentleman
by  the  name  of  Stewart,  on  the  subject  of  Solar  worship.
This  author  says :

''It  is  important  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact,  that  formerly  the  history  of  the
lieavens,  and  particularly  of  tlie  sun,  was  written  under  the  form  of  the  history  of
men,  and  that  the  people  almost  universally  received  it  as  such,  and  looked  upon
the  hero  as  a  man.  The  tombs  of  the  Gods  were  shown,  as  if  they  had  really  existed  ;
feasts  were  celebrated,  the  object  of  which  seemed  to  be  to  renew  every  year,  the

252

grief  which  had  been  occasioned  by  their  loss.  Such  was  the  tomb  of  Osiris,  cov-
ered under  those  enormous  masses  known  by  the  name  of  the  Pyramids,  which  the
Egyptians  raised  to  the  star  which  gives  us  light.  One  of  these  has  its  four  sid«s
facing  the  cardinal  points  of  the  world.  Each  of  these  fronts  is  one  hundred  and
ten  fathoms  wide  at  the  base,  and  the  four  form  as  many  equilateral  triangles.  The
perpendicular  height  is  seventy-seven  fathoms,  according  to  the  measurement
given  by  Chazelles,  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences.  It  results  from  these  dimensicms,
and  the  latitude  under  which  this  pyramid  is  erected,  that  fourteen  days  before  the
Spring  equinox,  the  precise  period  at  which  the  Persians  celebrated  the  revival  0/
nature,  the  sun  would  cease  to  cast  a  shade  at  mid-day,  and  would  not  again
cast  it  until  fourteen  days  after  the  autumnal  equinox.  Then  the  day,  or  the  sun,
would  be  found  in  the  parallel  or  circle  of  Southern  declension,  which  answers  to
5  deg.  15  minutes;  this  would  happen  twice  a  year — once  before  the  spring,  and
once  after  the  fall  equinox.  The  sun  would  then  appear  exac^Z^/  at  mid-day  upon
the  summit  of  this  pyramid  ;  then  his  majestic  disk  would  appear  for  some  mo-
ments, placed  upon  this  immense  pedestal,  and  seem  to  res^uponit,  while  his  wor-
shippers, on  their  knees  at  its  base,  extending  their  veiw  along  the  inclined  plane
of  the  northern  front,  would  contemplate  the  great  Osiris — as  well  when  he  de-
scended into  the  darkness  of  the  tomb,  as  when  he  arose  triumphant.  The  same
might  be  said  of  the  full  moon  of  the  equinoxes  when  it  takes  place  in  this  paral-
lel."

"  It  would  seem  that  the  Egyptians,  always  grand  in  their  conceptions,  had  ex-
ecuted a  project  (the  boldest  that  was  ever  imagined)  of  giving  a  pedestal  to  the
sun  and  moon,  or  to  Osiris  and  Isis;  at  mid-day  for  one,  and  at  midnight  for  the
other,  when  they  arrived  in  that  part  of  the  heavens  near  to  which  passes  the  line
which  separates  the  northern  from  the  southern  hemisphere;  the  empire  of  good
from  that  of  evil;  the  region  of  light  from  that  of  darkness.  They  wished  that  the
shade  should  disappear  from  all  the  fronts  of  the  pyramid  at  mid-day,  during  the
whole  time  that  the  sun  sojourned  in  the  luminous  hemisphere ;  and  that  the
northern  front  should  be  again  covered  with  shade  when  night  began  to  attain  her
supremacy  in  our  hemisphere — that  is,  at  the  moment  when  Osiris  descended  into
hell.  The  tomb  of  Osiris  was  covered  with  shade  nearly  six  months,  after  which
light  surrounded  it  entirely  at  mid-day,  as  soon  as  he,  returning  from  hell,  regained
his  empire  in  passing  into  the  luminous  hemisphere.  Then  he  had  returned  to
Isis,  and  to  the  Ood  of  Spring,  Orus,  who  had  at  length  conquered  the  genius  ot
darkness  and  winter.     What  a  sublime  idea  V

That  this  great  Pyramid  was  built  by  those  who  trans-
cended the  ancient  Egyptians  in  sacerdotal  arts,  sublimity
of  conception,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  exact  sciences,
none  can  question.  That  it  was  designed  for  a  Temple  as
well  as  a  tomb,  all  true  Initiates  of  Oriental  Mysticism
will  affirm.  Its  external  form  is  the  purest  example  of
mathematical  rule  and  geometrical  proportion  in  the  world.
The  perfect  square  is  obtained  at  its  base  ;  perfect  trian-
gles at  each  corner,  and  a  perfect  circle  when  it  becomes,  as

253

it  was  designed  to  be,  the  semi-annual  pedestal  of  the  Sun
and  Moon.

According  to  the  hypothesis  of  Prof.  Piazza  Smythe,  the
object  of  this  great  Pyramid  was  to  convert  it  into  a  gran-
ary in  time  of  famine,  and  a  storehouse  for  the  preserva-
tion of  treasures  in  the  event  of  a  general  inundation,  or
other  national  calamity.  Others  imagine  it  to  have  been
simply  designed  as  the  tomb  of  its  founder,  Cheops,  and  a
monument  to  his  memory.  These  and  other  opinions  con-
cerning its  destined  uses  are  supported  with  more  or  less
plausibility,  Prof.  Smythe,  the  chief  supporter  of  the  first
named  hypothesis,  triumphantly  pointing  to  his  wonder-
fully adjusted  scabies  of  measurement,  and  actually  proving
— at  least  to  Ms  own  satisfaction — that  the  huge  porphyritic
coffer,  found  in  the  great  upper  chamber,  lid  less,  open,
empty,  was  designed  for  an  universal  standard  of  measure-
ment, and  that  its  division  into  certain  nicely  calculated
parts,  will  coincide  with  the  standard  of  dry  measure  now
in  common  use  throughout  Europe  and  America  !  A  bet-
ter understanding  of  the  profound  heights  of  metaphysi-
cal speculation  in  which  the  Oriental  mind  employed  itself
would  have  shown  the  learned  Edinburgh  Professor  that  this
vast  edifice  was  designed  as  a  sky  and  earth  meter,  not  a
mere  standard  by  which  farmers  and  market  women  could
adjust  their  bargains  during  centuries  after  the  great  founder
had  ascended  to  his  place  of  recompense  and  rest,  and  that
the  huge  problem  of  scientific  discoverers,  the  mystic,  lid-
less,  wholly  unornamented,  uninscribed  coffer,  in  the  midst
of  the  vast  unornamented  and  uninscribed  chamber,  was  not
intended  as  a  model  for  all  generations  of  succeeding  corn
and  seedsmen,  but  as  a  sarcophagus  for  living  men^  for  those
Initiates  who  were  there  taught  the  solemn  problems  of
life  and  death,  and  through  the  instrumentality  of  that
very  coffer  attained  to  that  glorious  birth  of  the  Spirit —

254

that  second  birth  so  significantly  described  by  the  great
Hierophant  of  Nazareth  when  he  answered  those  who
came  to  inquire  of  him  by  night,  saying:  ''  Except  a  man
he  horn  again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God^

Except  a  man  he  horn  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit^  he  cannot
enter  the  kingdom  of  God.

That  which  is  horn  of  the  flesh  is  fleshy  and  that  which  is
horn  of  the  spirit  is  spirit.

Marvet  not  that  I  said  unto  thee  ge  must  he  horn  again.  .   .

Nicodemus  answered  and  said  unto  liim^ — How  can  these
things  he  ?

Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him^  Art  thou  a  Mustei-  in  Is-
rael and  know  est  not  these  things  ?

We  might  ask  the  same  question  of  the  learned  Profes-
sors, but  the  succession  of  ideas  revealing  the  sublime  meta-
physics of  being,  transmitted  from  God  through  nature  to
his  first  Priests,  the  ancient  Priests  of  the  Aryan  tribes,
from  them  to  the  Hindoos,  on  to  the  Egyptians,  forward
through  Moses  to  the  Hebrews,  the  *'  Masters  in  Israel,"  and
chief  of  them  all,  to  the  Essenes,  of  whom  Jesus  of  Naza-
reth was  the  best  type, — these  items  of  pure  metaphysics,
form  no  part  of  the  learning  oF  great  Edinburgh  Professors,
and  so  the  huge  sarcophagus  of  the  mighty  Temple  of
Cheops,  in  which  Initiates  were  designed  to  be  typically
horn  again  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit ^  became  a  corn  measurer
in  the  eyes  of  the  great  British  mathematician  !  When
an  angel  spoke  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  the  by-standers
said,  "  it  thundered. ^^ — Such  by-standers  are  not  all  dead
yet.

The  time  was  when  Egypt,  the  young  untutored  child  of
the  desert,  was  not  the  Queen  of  arts  and  sciences,  who
sat  enthroned  over  the  intellectual  world.  Then  did  she
become  the  prey  of  the  spoiler.  She  was  invaded  and  con-
quered by   the  "  Pali" — Shepherd  Kings   or    '^  Hyksos,"

255

who,  according  to  Manetho,  overran  the  land,  put  the  in-
habitants to  chains  and  tributary  service,  and  became  for
awhile  the  Rulers  of  Egypt.  What  this  country  was  be-
fore the  advent  of  these  Shepherd  Kings  we  can  hardly
conjecture,  but  after  their  rule,  every  monument,  pyramid,
and  inscription,  bore  the  stamp  of  Oriental  ideality.  It
needs  not  that  we  particularize  the  details  of  these  revcj-
lutionary  changes;  we  only  allude  to  them,  to  account  for
the  wonderful  parity  which  exists  between  the  religious
opinions  which  we  have  enlarged  upon  in  our  descriptions
of  Hindoo  worship,  and  those  which  reappear  in  Egyptian
Theogony.  Let  us,  as  Solomon  says,  consider  the  conclu-
sion of  the  whole  matter.  Cheops,  a  monarch  of  the  in-
vading line,  caused  a  Temple  to  be  erected  in  conformance
with  those  strict  rules  of  science,  revealed  to  the  ancient
Hindoo  metaphysicians,  as  the  mode  in  which   God  worked.

The  external  of  this  ^^orgeous  edifice  was  the  symbolism
of  the  world  ;  built  upon  the  purest  principles  of  Astrono-
my, Astrology,  Mathematics  and  Geometry.

The  interior  was  a  Temple  designed  to  teach  and  illus-
trate those  sciences,  and  as  the  soul  of  man  was  regarded
as  an  emanation  direct  from  Deity,  so  its  progress  through
matter — its  fall  from  spiritual  purity  to  an  alliance  with
gross  matter — its  transmigration  through  various  forms  for
the  purposes  of  probation  and  purification,  its  ultimate
birth  into  manhood  and — provided  the  animal  prevailed  in
its  nature — its  descent  again  into  animal  forms,  and  pro-
vided the  spiritual  prevailed,  its  new  birth  and  final  trans-
formation into  a  pure  spiritual  existence;  these  were  the
stages  of  the  gorgeous  drama  which  the  Temples  were
built  to  display,  and  chiefest  of  all  was  the  great  Temple
of  Cheops,  which  by  profound  and  correct  astronomical
calculations,  the  founders  designed  should  be  the  physical
centre  of  the  world,  so  they  also  metaphysically  designed

256

it  to  be  the  great  centre  of  all  those  sublime  teachings
which,  in  the  form  of  mysteries  too  profound  for  the  vulgar
mind,  they,  the  ancients,  organized  into  Free  Masonry.

The  base  of  this  great  building  occupies  something  over
13  acres  of  land.  Its  base  line  is  764  feet,  and  its  vertical
height  480.  Descriptions  of  its  bewildering  passages,
noble  halls,  chambers,  galleries,  sunken  shafts,  ending  in
secret  crypts,  blocked  up  by  fallen  stones  and  accu-
mulations of  sand,  the  descending  passages  invariably
found  leading  to  all  sepulchral  edifices,  the  ascending  gal-
leries and  noble  chambers  wliich  forbid  the  idea  of  its  being
a  monument  of  death  alone,  its  empty,  lidless  sarcophagus
without  any  signs  of  attachment,  whereby  a  lid  could  ever
have  been  used,  and  the  perfect  absence  in  the  upper  cham-
bers of  all  inscriptions  which  could  declare  the  secrets  of
the  rites  performed  within  it,  all  speak  in  trumpet  tones  to
the  true  and  instructed  masters  in  Israel^  of  the  design  and
scope  of  this  wonderful  building  and  its  actual  nature  as  a
veritable  Lodge  of  Ancient  Free  Masonry.
^  We  must  add,  that  this  dumb  but  most  eloquent  struc-
ture is  full  of  revelation  to  the  true  mystic.  Its  base  is
the  perfect  square  which  symbolizes  in  its  four  corners
the  sacred  number  4,  the  union  of  the  masculine  and  femi-
nine principles.  Its  corners  are  the  perfect  triangle,  the
symbol  so  esteemed  throughout  the  East  as  the  masculine
emblem,  and  significant  of  the  mystic  number  3.  Its  apex
represents  the  Phallus,  the  sign  ever  deemed  throughout
the  East  the  symbol  of  Deity,  or  the  creative  principle.
The  descent  of  the  sun  upon  its  apex  at  the  two  solemn
epochs  of  the  year,  which  signify  life  eternal,  and  death
through  the  ever-constant  adverse  principle  of  evil,  com-
plete the  series  of  allegorical  ideas  which  this  building  was
designed  to  celebrate.  "/

The  different  stages  of  the  mysteries  celebrated  within

257

its  crypts,  tortuous  passages,  large  halls  and  grand  cham-
bers, would  not  now  avail  to  relate,  even  if  we  did  not  feel
bound  in  honorable  promise  to  suppress  them.  But  their
spirit  belongs  to  humanity.  They  are  found  in  the  grand  law
of  universal  correspondence — a  correspondence  which  makes
Geometry  the  plan,  and  Mathematics  the  sum  of  all  things
that  be ;  that  knits  up  color  and  sound,  form  and  function,
matter  and  spirit,  heaven  and  earth,  man  and  his  Creator,
each  planet  with  its  solar  system,  and  the  solar  system  with
the  universe,  in  one  stupendous  scheme  of  harmony — har-
mony in  which,  a  number,  a  sign,  a  color,  a  tone,  or  a  word
will  express  the  whole.  The  number  is  one — the  color
WHITE — the  sound,  the  pure  octave — the  word,  all  the
synonyms  which  relate  to  God — the  sciences,  Astronomy,
Astrology,  Mathematics,  Geometry — the  parts.  Infinity,
the  sum,  Eternity.  Fragments  of  this  sublime  philosophy
have  been  obtained  by  all  the  capable  minds  who  resorted
to  the  Egyptian  Priests  for  information  concerning  their
occult  wisdom.  Parts  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  all  the  dif-
ferent philosophical  systems  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  the
Cabalism  of  the  Jews,  the  mysticism  of  the  mediasval  sects
called  Alchemists  and  Rosicrucians ;  the  fullness  of  An-
cient Masonry,  and  the  effete  exoteric  puerilities  of  modern
Free  Masonry  ;  the  figure  which  typifies  the  perfection
of  this  system  in  geometrical  proportion  is  often  passed  by
unnoticed  in  Egyptian  monuments.

The  word  is  spoken  with  cold,  lifeless,  unsanctified  lips,

and  has  no  effect  on  the  unresponsive  air.

/   The  magnificent  unison  that  strikes  from  the  lowest  to

/the    highest  depths,  including  all  the  tones   of  Creation,

/  sounds  in  vain  in  the  harmony  of  choiring  worlds  upon

)  ears  that  are  dulled  to  every  tone  save  the  clink  of  money,

the  emblem  of  all  materialism  ;  but  amidst  this  eclipse

of  the  true  faith — this  total  darkness  on  the  subject  of  the

258

scientific  religion,  and  the  religion  of  science,  the  grand
old  Pyramid  of  Cheops  stands  grimly  mute — eloquently
speechless,  waiting  for  the  hour  when  the  builders  of  the
new  Temple  of  the  divine  humanity,  missing  the  key-
stone of  the  arch,  which  is  neither  oblong  nor  square^  shall
search  amid  the  rubbish  of  antiquity,  and  finding  the
stone  that  the  builders  rejected,  place  it  as  the  key-
stone in  the  arch  by  which  the  heavens  overshadow  the
earth,  and  constitute  the  universe  the  Divine  Lodge  of  /
the  Master-Builder,  God.

There  is  yet  another  fragment  of  metaphysical  history
to  be  given  ere  we  feel  free  to  close  this  section.

The  Sun-God  to  whose  honor  this  temple  was  dedicated,,
once  in  every  year  dies,  and  descends  into  the  deepest  por-
tions of  the  earth.

So  does  dgath  linger  in  the  lowest  crypts,  in  the  ashes  of  ^j
the  earthly  founder  of  the  building.  The  intricate  pas-
sages, the  narrow,  rough  and  rugged  paths ^  and  the  final
openings  into  the  great  Temple  Hall,  were  only  so  many
practical  types  of  the  Soul's  progress  to  that  of  the  Sun-God
through  the  constellated  Zodiac  of  the  skies.  In  the  great
Hall  to  which  he  at  length  arrives,  the  Neophyte  was  in-
structed in  the  last  great  lesson  of  life  and  death.  Slain
by  violence  and  laid  in  the  coffer,  with  him  is  destroyed  the
Master^s  word  on  which  the  building  of  the  Great  Temple
depends.

The  aroma  of  death  directs  the  searchers  to  the  spot
where  he  lays.

On  the  five  points  of  human  fellowship,  he  is  raised  to
life  again,  and  elevated  to  the  still  higher  degree  of  life
eternal.  Born  Again  ! — now  he  becomes  the  key-stone,
and  is  placed  in  the  royal  arch  which  completes  the  build-
ing of  the  Divine  Temple.  There  the  Sun  of  Heaven  sits
triumphant  on  the  apex  of  the  Pyramid — the  Pyramid
which  in  itself  is  a  sgmhol  of  generative  life.

259

This  temple  was  the  work  of  those  who  lived  5,000  years
ago.  Its  date  is  no  uncertainty.  Names  and  inscriptions
have  been  found  which  justify  this  opinion  inferred  both
by  Manetho  and  Herodotus.  The  rites  celebrated  in  this
grand  old  fane  at  least  2,500  years  ago,  are  not  quite  for-
gotten yet,  nor  are  the  principles  upon  which  they  were
practiced,  blotted  out.  The  moving  Phantasmagoria  which
constituted  the  glory  of  ancient  Egypt  has  disappeared
from  the  scene,  perhaps  never  again  to  be  replaced,  cer-
tainly never  by  a  band  of  actors  as  sublimely  perfect  in  the
highest  realms  of  life's  melodramatic  art  as  those  who
figured  in  the  great  Epic  of  antique  Egypt's  palmy  splen-
dors.

To-day  tribes  of  wandering  Arabs  scarcely  banded  to-
gether, not  ruled  by  some  poor  Sheik,  who  will  perform
magic  for  the  value  of  a  few  English  shillings,  or  a  set  ol
Dervishes  who  will  dance,  whirl,  howl,  or  throw  themselves
into  epileptic  trances,  for  a  few  dollars,  represent  the  chief
of  what  was  once  so  wise,  powerful,  far-seeing,  and  sublime,
in  Egyptian  Spiritism.

Notwithstanding  this  picture  of  external  degradation,
the  spirit  of  ancient  Egypt,  filtered  through  the  epics  of
classic  Greece  and  the  memories  of  stately  Rome,  still  lives,
still  animates  the  earnest  student  and  the  patient  scholar
to  fresh  research  in  the  letter  of  the  dead  Orient,  and  fresh
discovery  in  the  hidden  meaning  of  its  immortal  Soul.
The  day  will  come  when  the  magic  of  the  ancients  will  be
the  Science  of  the  moderns,  and  in  that  morning  light  of
revelation  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Cheops  will  be  known  for
what  it  really  is,  the  alphabet  which  spells  out  the  signifi-
cation of  the  Divine  Drama  of  existence.

260

SECTION  XIV.

Spiritism  and  Magic  amongst  the  Jews.

Antiquity  of  the  Jews  di spitted, — Ahraliaiih^  Moses ^  the
Priests  and  Prophets. — The  Cahala-Bihle. — Infusion  of
Chaldean  and  Persian  Ideas  into  the  Hebrew  writ-
ings.— Personality  of  Jesus. — Superior  claims  of  the
Bible  to  other  writings.

The  Hindoos  and  Jews  are  almost  the  only  ancient  Ori-
ental nations  who  have  left  any  written  records  of  their
religious  belief.

The  Chaldeans  and  Egyptians,  although  disputing  the
palm  of  antiquity  with  India,  have  bequeathed  to  posterity
only  monumental  vestiges  of  their  elaborate  systems  of
worship,  and  the  mysterious  means  by  which  they  pene-
trated into  the  secrets  of  spiritual  existence.

The  sacred  writings  of  the  Hebrew^s  have  been  so  faith-
fully preserved,  and  they  contain  such  a  vast  repertoire  of
spiritualistic  events,  that  they  would  have  furnished  an
invaluable  array  of  testimony  on  this  subject,  had  not  the
excessive  egotism  of  Jewish  historians,  and  the  unques-
tioning veneration  with  which  all  their  statements  were
received  by  succeeding  generations,  intervened  to  throw
doubts  upon  the  credibility  of  much  that  they  affirm.

It  is  now  fully  proved,  that  the  enormous  claims  set  up
by  the  Jews  themselves  for  the  antiquity  of  their  Scrip-
tures, and  the  originality  of  many  of  the  events  related
in  them,  are  totally  at  variance  with  cotemporaneous  his-
tory.

The  allegations  of  Hellenistic  Jews  also,  that  certain
portions  of  Greek  philosophy  were  derived  from  Hebrew

261

writings,  have  been  proved  to  be  false ;  in  fact,  whilst  can-
did students  of  the  Bible  will  find  in  it  an  excellent  tran-
script of  the  manners,  customs,  traditions  and  Spiritism  of
the  Eastern  nations  generally,  they  will  discover  only  a
meagre  account  of  the  actual  characteristics  of  the  Jewish
people,  save  in  respect  to  their  personal  adventures,  and
their  constant  tendency  to  imitate  the  vices  and  idolatries
of  other  nations.

Abraham,  the  father  of  the  Jewish  nation,  was  a  Chal-
dean by  birth,  and  though  he  protested  against  the  idola-
trous practices  of  his  own  land,  and  voluntarily  quitted  it,
to  found  a  purer  and  more  monotheistic  form  of  worship,
still  he  impressed  upon  his  descendants  many  ideas,  derived
from  the  astronomical  religion  of  the  Chaldeans,  especially
their  reverence  for  fire,  the  custom  of  rearing  altars  to
Deity  of  upright  stones,  their  system  of  sacrificial  ofter-
ings  and  direct  communion  with  Tutelary  Spirits,  believed
to  have  special  charge  over  nations  and  peoples.

Josephus  affirms  that  Abraham  went  into  Egypt,  and
there  became  an  auditor  of  the  Priests,  who  greatly  ad-
mired him  for  his  wisdom.  It  was  probably  from  Egypt
that  Abraham  derived  his  ideas  of  the  sacredness  of  cir-
cumcision, a  rite  which  he  enjoined  as  the  most  important
of  all  religious  obligations  upon  his  posterity.  His  imme-
diate descendants  were  only  herdsmen,  and  far  less  in-
structed than  himself,  yet  they  openly  communed  with
spiritual  beings,  and  received  counsel  and  direction  through
dreams  and  visions.

Making  all  due  allowance  for  the  necessity  of  interpret-
ing much  of  the  Bible  by  cabalistic  methods,  that  is  to
say,  by  deeming  the  words  written,  designed  to  veil  rather
than  to  express  their  meaning,  we  must  either  treat  the
existence  of  the  Jews  and  their  whole  history  as  mythical,
or  allow  that  they  form  one  of  the  most  remarkable  speci-

262

mens  of  Theocratic  government  the  world  has  ever  known.

This  people  migrated  and  settled,  directed  their  wander-
ings, even  transacted  their  business,  and  governed  their
Tribes,  under  the  direction  of  Angels  and  the  inspiration
received  through  dreams,  visions  or  oracular  comnmnica-
tions.  With  the  Jewish  Scriptures  so  familiarly  known
to  every  child  in  Christendom,  it  would  be  useless  to  re-
view its  Spiritism  in  detail ;  it  is  enough  to  say  then,  that
every  page  is  a  record  of  super-mundane  signs,  tokens,
open  intercourse  with  spiritual  beings,  and  all  those  phases
so  familiarly  known  in  the  nineteenth  century  as  ''  Spirit-
ualism."

To  judge  of  the  origin  and  characteristics  of  Jewish
Spiritism,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  people  had  been
ruled  over  in  turn  by  the  Kings  of  Mesopotamia,  Moab,
Midian,  Ammon,  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylon,  Persia,  Syria,
Macedonia  and  Rome.

The  various  forms  of  worship  practiced  in  each  of  these
nations,  left  their  impress  on  Jewish  Theogony,  rendering-
it  far  more  a  transcript  of  the  beliefs  then  prevailing
throughout  the  East,  than  a  concrete  system  of  any  one
nation's  religion.

From  the  Jewish  Scriptures  may  be  gathered  much  in-
formation concerning  those  Priestly  rites  and  sacerdotal
ceremonies  borrowed  from  Egypt,  but  of  which  that  land
preserves  no  written  descriptions.  The  early  chronicles  of
the  Hebrews  may  be  regarded  as  a  complete  representa-
tion of  Egyptian  Theosophy,  the  Jehovah  being  one  of  the
Eloihim,  or  Tutelary  Deities  of  Egypt,  their  Tabernacle,
Ark,  Priestly  order,  rites,  ceremonials  and  sacred  garments
being  all  exact  copies  from  Egyptian  models.

During  the  prophetic  dispensation,  an  interregnum  oc-
curs, marked  by  the  struggle  between  a  few  inspired  men
to  restore  a  pure  form  of  Monotheistic  worship,  and  the

26  B

idolatrous  tendencies  of  the  people  to  imitate  their  neigh-
bors, who  throughout  Arabia  and  Syria,  practiced  the  low-
est forms  of  Solar  and  Sex  worship.  The  Babylonish
captivity  leaving  its  strong  admixture  of  Chaldean  ideas,
follows,  -after  which  and  during  the  Roman  rule  arises  that
sublime  form  of  pure  religion,  so  thoroughly  identical  with
the  doctrines  of  the  Essenes,  inaugurated  by  Jesus  of
Nazareth.

Under  this  inspired  and  holy  Teacher,  the  Spiritism  of
his  wonderful  works  became  united  to  the  Spiritualism  of
his  Divine  life  and  doctrines,  and  so  continued  through  the
apostolic  dispensation  of  his  immediate  followers,  although
it  became  modified  by  the  commanding  intellect  of  Paul,
who,  having  been  brought  up  in  the  sect  of  Pharisees,  and
instructed  in  the  subtleties  of  Gnosticism,  introduced  into
his  otherwise  kindly  yet  exalted  Christianity,  much  of  that
ancient  mysticism  which  distinguished  the  schools  in  which
he  had  been  educated.

Amongst  the  Jews,  as  with  all  other  nations  of  antiquity,
the  line  of  demarcation  was  strongly  drawn  between  the
Priests  and  the  Prophets.  Abraham  and  his  descendants
were  evidently  what  would  now  be  termed  "Spirit  Mediums,"
for  their  converse  with  spirits,  their  dreams,  trances  and
visions  are  all  described  as  of  purely  natural  occurrence,
yet  they  added  to  these  gifts  the  practices  of  magic  by
building  altars  for  burnt  offerings  and  other  sacrificial
rites.

Moses  also  was  both  Prophet  and  Priest.  His  extra-
ordinary spiritual  endowments  might  have  been  greatly
exaggerated  by  the  egotistical  style  employed  through-
out the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  still  the  fact  of  his  high
inspiration  and  open  communion  with  the  Tutelary  Deity
Jehovah,  can  hardly  be  doubted,  without  questioning  the
fact  of  his  agency  in  the  Jewish  history  altogether.

11

264

This  admitted,  his  power  as  a  magician  affords  a  stupen-
dous picture  of  that  esoteric  wisdom,  in  which  the  Egyp-
tian Priesthood  were  so  well  versed.  His  contest  with
the  Magians  of  Egypt,  his  seclusion  amidst  the  awful
mysteries  of  Sinai,  his  establishment  of  Priestly  laws,  or-
dinances and  rites  ;  in  a  word,  the  whole  order  of  his  won  -
derful  and  sublime  history,  gives  a  strange  insight  into  the
almost  God-like  powers  with  which  a  Hierophant  of  the
most  ancient  mysteries  becomes  endowed.  Another,  though
a  far  inferior  example  of  the  dual  powers  of  Prophet  and
Magiaii,  is  described  in  the  person  of  Baalam,  who,
though  an  enchanter  and  diviner,  one  who  was  evidentlv
familiar  with  the  magical  arts  then  so  common  in  the
East,  who  was  hired  both  to  curse  and  bless,  or  hij  strong
psjjchological  will  to  procure  good  or  evil  fortune  for  pay,
was  yet  in  modern  phrase  a  Spirit  Medium,  subject  to
trance  and  vision,  and  when  under  the  Divine  Spiritual
afflatus,  one  who  was  compelled  to  speak  as  the  spirit  gave
him  utterance,  though  gold  and  silver  were  offered  as  in-
ducements to  prophesy  to  a  contrary  effect.

The  immense  importance  attached  to  psychological
power  is  manifested  in  numerous  instances  throughout  the
pages  of  the  Bible.  The  curse  and  blessing  so  solemnly
pronounced  by  Moses  on  Mount  Ebal  and  Mount  Gerizim,
were  deemed  as  immutably  prophetic  as  if  they  had  been
the  utterances  of  the  Deity  in  person.  Curses  and  bless-
ings were  considered  so  potent  in  effect,  that  the  trade  of
Baalam  was  commonly  practiced,  and  Prophets  were  either
solicited  or  hired  to  pronounce  words  of  ban  or  blessing
(m  enemies  or  friends,  as  was  most  desired.  In  the  days  of
Samuel,  schools  of  the  Prophets  were  established,  it  being
thought  that  young  persons  by  mere  association  with  those
holy  men,  and  by  ministering  to  them  as  servitors,  might
partake  of  their  Divine  gift,  and  receive  of  their  spirit  by

265

contact,  or  the  laying  on  of  their  hands.  It  was  not  con-
sidered derogatory  in  the  days  of  Samuel,  for  Prophets  to
exercise  their  gifts  of  Seership  for  the  recovery  of  lost
property,  and  the  custom  of  resorting  to  them  for  this  pur-
pose was  considered  just  as  legitimate  as  that  of  seeking
oracular  responses  "  from  the  Lord"  through  Urim  and
Thummim.  On  the  Priestly  modes  of  obtaining  these  re-
sponses, we  shall  speak  in  the  concluding  portion  of  this
section ;  it  is  proper  to  notice  however,  that  whilst  pro-
phetic powers  were  evidently  conferred  upon  certain  indi-
viduals by  natural  endowment,  and  not  by  study  or  art,
the  Prophets  of  Israel  led  exceptional  and  devoted  lives.
They  often  retired  into  wildernesses  apart  from  the  haunts
of  men  ;  they  observed  long  fasts,  and  subjected  them-
selves to  frequent  penances,  the  latter  more  generally  for
the  sins  of  others  than  themselves.  They  wore  rough
garments,  most  commonly  a  mantle  composed  of  the  skins
of  animals.  Some  amongst  them  were  accustomed  to
wound  their  hands  and  rend  their  garments  in  prophetic
frenzy.  They  spent  much  time  in  prayer,  and  were  pas-
sionately addicted  to  the  practice  of  music.  Many  indica-
tions appear  throughout  the  Jewish  Bible  of  the  constant
resort  which  the  Prophets  made  to  music,  as  a  means  of
stimulating  the  prophetic  afflatus,  especially  in  the  exor-
cism of  evil  spirits,  and  the  rites  of  Temple  worship.

There  are  many  commentators  on  the  Hebrew  sacred
writings  who  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm  that  such  person-
ages as  Moses,  Elijah,  Elisha,  and  Jesus  never  existed,
whilst  Samson  has  been  proved  to  be  a  mythical  repre-
sentation of  the  Greek  Hercules,  and  Jeptha  a  paraphrase
of  the  Greek  Agamemnon.

The  audacious  transposition  of  ancient  Heroes  from
their  own  lands  into  that  of  Judea  by  Jewish  historians,
and  the  bold  plagiarisms  of  other  nations'  histories  to  sus-

266

tain  their  own,  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  at  certain
epochs  of  time,  great  and  providential  characters  must  have
flourished  and  acted  something  of  the  parts  set  down  for
them.  Moses,  as  we  have  already  alleged,  we  believe  to
have  been  an  Egyptian  Priest — an  opinion  which  is  sus-
tained by  Manetho,  a  Greek  historian  who  claims  to  have
authentic  knowledge  on  this  subject.  Still  the  part  sus-
tained by  this  remarkable  man  in  the  Jewish  Exodus  from
Egypt,  the  enunciation  of  his  noble  code  of  laws,  his  estab-
lishment of  the  priestly  ordinances,  and  the  extraordina-
ry spiritual  influences  which  attended  him,  and  enabled
him  to  bring  the  Jews  into  direct  and  constant  communion
with  their  Tutelary  Deity,  are  integral  portions  of  his-
tory which  cannot  be  blotted  out.  Elijah,  from  his  name
signifying  one  of  the  houses  of  the  sun,  like  his  follower
Elisha,  has  sometimes  been  deemed  a  mythical  personage,
a  mere  type  of  the  Sun-God.  Even  if  the  personality  of
both  these  exalted  characters  were  to  be  resolved  into
allegory,  it  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  at  certain  periods  of
Jewish  history,  many  wise,  powerful,  and  spiritually  en-
dowed men  arose,  under  whose  scathing  rebukes  and  sub-
lime inspirations,  the  rebellious  people  were  won  back  to
the  worship  of  one  God,  and  the  wise  standards  of  govern-
ment prescribed  by  Moses.

^  In  the  advent  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  a  revolutionary
change  in  Jewish  history  occurs,  which  could  not  have  been
effected  without  the  intervention  of  just  such  a  pure,  high
and  holy  teacher  as  he  is  represented  to  have  been.

From  the  descriptions  given  by  Philo  and  other  cotem-
porary  historians  of  the  Essenes,  a  sect  of  pure  and  holy
men  who  arose  about  one  hundred  years  before  the  advent
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  it  has  often  been  supposed  that  he
was  one  of  their  number.  The  doctrines,  manners  and
customs  of  this  sect  conformed  in  almost  every  particular

267

to  those  of  Jesus  and  his  Disciples.  Even  the  famous  Ser-
mon on  the  Mount  becomes  little  else  than  a  transcript  of
Essenian  aphorisms,  when  the  two  are  carefully  compared.
The  same  extraordinary  similarity  of  doctrine  and  practice
has  been  traced  between  this  sect  and  that  of  the  Sage
Pythagoras,  and  the  universality  of  the  idea  which  marks
the  great  and  inspired  lives  of  the  Jewish  and  Samian
Teachers,  naturally  suggests  that  each  of  them  drew  their
opinions  from  the  same  Essenian  model.

As  to  the  identity  of  the  Jewish  Christ  with  the  popular
myth  of  the  Eastern  Sun-God — we  have  no  opinion  to
offer  in  this  place.

The  truth  that  at  least  twenty  different  incarnate  Gods
were  celebrated  in  the  East,  and  taught  of  in  Greece,  to
each  of  whom  was  attributed  a  history  similar  in  general
details  to  that  of  the  Christian's  Messiah,  but  the  still  more
significant  facts  that  these  various  incarnations  were  all
supposed  to  have  preceded  Jesus  in  point  of  chronology,
and  that  the  miracles  attributed  to  him  had  been  sculptured
in  Temples  gray  with  age  before  the  date  assigned  for  his
birth,  bring  their  own  comment  to  every  mind  not  closed
against  the  light  of  reason  by  bigotry,  or  incapable  of  ap-
preciating the  truths  of  history  from  blind  superstition.

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  worshippers  of  the
Sun-God  in  the  personality  of  the  Jewish  Messiah,  destroy
faith  in  his  very  existence  by  the  wilful  perversity  with
which  they  insist  upon  maintaining  for  him  an  impossible
biography,  the  origin,  growth  and  specialties  of  the  Chris-
tian faith  in  Jerusalem,  demand  the  interposition  of  a  hu-
man founder,  and  point,  with  conclusive  testimony,  to  the
influence  of  a  noble  Essenian  of  precisely  the  character
attributed  to  the  meek  and  gentle  Nazarene.

The  biographies  of  Jesus  were  compiled  long  after  his
decease,  and  were  evidently  the  work  of  men  who,  in  order

268

thai  the  Scriptures  might  he  fulfilled  in  his  person,  inter-
blended  the  records  of  his  pure  and  holj  ministry,  with
the  miracles  of  that  legend,  which — as  the  history  of  the
Sun-God — had  been  so  popularly  engrafted  into  all  religious
systems  throughout  the  East  for  thousands  of  years  before
the  time  of  Jesus.

The  true  founder  of  Christian  Theology  was  Paul.  This
indomitable  Disciple  was  himself  a  Gnostic,  and  wrote  in
the  true  Cabalistic  spirit  of  the  mystery  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.

But  to  the  immediate  followers  of  the  beloved  Master,
to  those  who  had  heard  his  voice,  lived  in  his  holy  pres-
ence, shared  his  sufferings,  and  witnessed  his  exalted  spir-
itual powers,  Jesus  was  no  mystery,  his  existence  no  myth.
They  had  often  marvelled  at  his  words,  and  failed  to  un-
derstand that  when  he  spoke  from  the  simple  stand-point
of  his  humanity,  he  was  one  of  themselves,  and  represented
himself  only  as  an  imperfect  mortal ;  but  when  he  was
''  in  the  spirit,"  as  he  doubtless  often  was,  he  spoke  as  if
he  had  indeed  lived  before  Abraham ;  as  of  ''  the  Son  of
God,"  the  mysterious  and  long-promised  Messiah,  who
temporarily  inspired,  without  being  the  actual  personality
of  the  man  Jesus.  The  devotion  which  rose  to  enthusi-
asm, and  subsequently  to  a  faith  which  has  survived  the
upheaval  of  dynasties,  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  and  the
changes  which  have  revolutionized  the  old  earth  and
builded  and  rebuilded  it  again  and  again,  was  not  founded  /
on  a  myth,  a  mistake,  or  an  idle  superstition.

When  good,  pure,  divinely  inspired  and  divinely  acting-
men  enter  upon  the  scene,  and  this  poor  degraded  human-
ity of  ours  can  look  up  to  such  an  one  and  feel  his  kind
hands  healing  their  sicknesses,  and  hear  his  tender  tones
compassionating  them,  and  bringing  them  very  near  to  the
awful  majesty  of  the  unknown  God,  translating  that  ma-

269

jesty  into  the  pitying  and  strictly  human  character  of  a
Father,  who  can  wonder  that  such  an  one  was  deemed  of
as  a  God,  and  invested  with  all  the   popular  attributes  of
that  mediatorial  Deity,  whose  existence  and  occasional  ap-
pearances on   earth,  incarnate  in   human  form,  had  been
taught  and  believed  in  for  countless  ages  7     The  Jews    {
were  well  acquainted  with  this   popular  idea,  and  their      ;
great    theological    teacher,    Paul,    obviously  favored     it;
hence  it  cannot  excite  surprise  that  many  of  the  early
Christians  were  disposed  to  invest  the  memory  of  their  be-
loved Master  with  the   same  divine  attributes  that  had
been  assigned  to  many  another  great  and  good  man  before.
Whatever  the  simple  followers  of  Jesus  may  have  deemed
of  his  divinity,  it  was  his  gospel  of  love,  his  pure  life,  his
divinely  compassionate  nature,  that  so  endeared  his  mem-       /
ory  to  suffering  human  hearts,  and  sustained  the  faith  of
his  disciples  to  preach  his  gospel  amidst  the  fires  of  perse-    /
cution  and  the  tortures  of  martyrdom.     But  the  simplicity    i
and  practical  beauty  of  this  gospel  of  love  died  out,  when  it
became  entangled  in  the  sophisms  of  learning,  and  identi-
fied with  incomprehensible  systems  of  metaphysical  specu-
lation.

The  early  Christian  faith  taught   by  the  pure  Essenian
Jesus,  perished  about  the  time  when  Constantine  the  Great/
usurped  its  name  and  fame,  in  order  to  justify  his  own  ini-
quities and  atrocious  murders.     Its  crucified  remains  were      ^
buried  under  the  Athanasian  Creed,  and  the  ecclesiastical
fables  of  the  Council  of  Nice,  and  nothing  of  it  was  left  but
the  name;  the  body  without  the  soul,  the  letter  without
the  spirit ;  the  God   without  his  humanity — the  mystery     ^
without  the  meaning — nothing  was  left  of  the  gospel  of    ;
the  loving  Jesus,  but  the  name.X  y

We  have  made  many  allusiolfe  in  this  and  former  sec-
tions, to  the  Jewish  Cabala,  and  it  is  now  in  order  to  give

270

a  brief  notice  of  the  origin  and  genius  of  this  celebrated
work.

Despite  all  the  assertions  of  practical  historians  to  the
contrary,  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  Jewish  sacred  writ-
ings, if  not  wholly  lost  or  destroyed,  were  reduced  to  verj-
few  and  scarce  copies  during  the  different  seasons  of  cap-
tivity that  so  often  overwhelmed  the  nation,  despoiled  the
once  glorious  Temple  of  Solomon,  and  committed  alike  the
books  of  the  law  and  all  the  other  sacred  writings  to  the
flames.  This  spirit  of  devastation  was  especially  manifested
before  the  Babylonish  captivity.  After  the  return  of  the
exiles  to  their  ruined  City  and  desecrated  Temple,  the
solemn  duty  of  re-transcribing  the  Mosaic  law  devolved
upon  Ezra,  a  learned  Priest,  a  most  zealous  Scribe,  and
one  so  highly  esteemed  in  his  generation,  that  he  was
commonly  called  the  second  founder  of  the  law.  Admir-
ing Rabbis  are  still  accustomed  to  say,  ^'  if  Moses  had  not
founded  the  law,  Ezra  was  worthy  to  have  done  so."

In  order  to  fulfill  his  diflicult  task  with  the  most  con-
scientious fidelity,  Ezra  not  only  transcribed  the  laws  of
which  he  had  made  a  deep  study  during  his  period  of  cap-
tivity, but  he  gathered  together  the  ancient  men  of  his  na-
tion, consulted  with  them,  carefully  noted  down  the  tradi-
tions which  they  had  committed  to  memory,  and  sought  in
every  direction  to  improve  upon  his  own  knowledge  by
the  information  thus  acquired  through  oral  tradition..

It  was  from  this  circumstance  that  authoritative  value
came  to  be  set  on  traditional  records.

In  process  of  time,  as  these  traditions  increased  in  num-
ber, and  became  easily  stretched  to  suit  the  imagination
of  the  narrators,  or  the  temper  of  the  times,  the  books
of  the  law  and  the  Prophets  compiled  by  Ezra  sank  into
insignificance  compared  to  the  superstitious  veneration
which  to  some  minds  clustered  around  these  ever-growing

271

traditions,  and  a  sect  of  believers  at  length  arose  called
Separatists  or  Pharisees,  who  absolutely  pinned  their
faith  and  adjusted  their  lives,  manners  and  actions  entirely
on  the  assumed  authority  of  these  traditions.  This  was
the  field  in  which  Persian  myths  and  Chaldean  ideas  were
permitted  to  take  root,  until  they  almost  supplanted  the
stern  Monotheism  of  Abraham  and  Moses.  Jesus  fre-
quently alludes  to  these  traditions  as  making  the  law  of
Moses  of  no  effect.  It  is  from  this  source  that  the  fantas-
tic flights  of  Talmudic  writers  are  drawn,  and  it  is  on  the
strength  of  these  elastic  oral  teachings  that  the  famous
^Cabala  is  founded.  Cabalists  and  devoted  admirers  of
these  writings,  claim  for  them  an  antiquity  ascending  to
Adam,  and  an  origin  stretching  up  to  heaven.  They  trace
the  descent  of  this  book  to  Seth,  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,
Moses,  Joshua,  the  Judges,  and  with  occasional  flying  visits
back  to  Heaven  from  whence  it  came,  straight  on  to  the
possession  of  a  certain  Hellenistic  Jew,  who,  with  a  few
followers  after  having  been  banished  for  sedition  to  Alex-
andria, re-appeared  from  exile  about  a  century  before  the
advent  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.

One  of  the  Cabalistic  collections  is  called  Zohar,  or  the
hook  of  Light,  and  around  this  volume,  the  traditions  clus-
ter with  immense  enthusiasm.

The  nature  of  Cabalistic  writings  we  have  already  ex-
plained. They  are  for  the  most  part,  designed  to  mask,
rather  than  reveal  the  true  sense  of  the  words,  and
this  mystical  style  is  assumed  to  be  necessary  in  order  to
preserve  sacred  ideas  from  the  vulgar,  in  short,  not  '^  to
give  pearls  to  swine,"  a  favorite  expression  of  the  Cab-
alists.

A  collection  of  Cabalistic  writings  was  made  in .  the
second  century,  and  some  rare  copies  are  still  extant ;  from
these  we  find  that  the  writers  enlarge  much  on  the  doc-

272

trines  scattered  throughout  the  East  concerning  Deity,  the
divine  Trinity,  which  in  its  various  phases,  attributes,
powers  and  personalities,  is  exalted  as  the  sublimest  mys-
tery of  being.  The  Cabala  discourses  of  the  various
emanations  from  Deity  commencing  with  Adam  Kadman,
the  Brahma  of  the  Hindoos ;  the  Osiris  of  the  Egyptians  ;
the  Mithra  of  the  Persians ;  the  Logos,  or  Word,  of  the
Greeks ;  the  Divine  Ensoph,  or  masculine  Wisdom  of
Deity;  and  the  Sophia,  or  Feminine  principle  of  Creation.
From  thence  it  teaches  of  Hierarchies  of  celestial  emana-
tions, Angels,  Archangels,  Thrones,  Dominions.  Powers,
Splendors  ;  Fallen  Angels,  Planetary  Spirits,  Evil  Angels,
Demons,  Elementaries,  Men,  Worlds,  Spheres,  and  the  en-
tire order  of  that  creative  scheme,  on  which  Hindoo
Metaphysicians  had  speculated  for  thousands  of  years,  and
which  the  Egyptians  had  inscribed  in  colossal  monuments,
whose  permanence  will  almost  bid  defiance  to  the  destroy-
ing scythe  of  time.

The  Cabalistic  writings,  besides  the  veiled  mysticism
with  which  they  treat  philosophical  theories,  contain
directions  for  healing  the  sick,  exorcising  evil  spirits,  in-
voking good  Angels  and  Planetary  spirits  ;  also,  for  the
exercise  of  magical  powers  over  winds,  waves  and  ele-
ments generally.  These  powers  are  to  be  procured  through
purity  of  life,  conduct  and  thought ;  strict  attention  to
ablutions,  purifications,  prayers,  the  use  of  talismans,  spells,
charms,  ceremonial  rites,  and  other  methods  too  familiar
now  to  the  reader  to  need  farther  recital.  The  Cabalists
pat  implicit  faith  in  the  use  of  sacred  names,  and  the  com-
bination of  certain  numbers.

They  rehearse  seventy- two  names  of  Deity,  and  affirm
that  according  to  the  method  in  which  they  are  written
and  pronounced,  such  will  be  the  amount  of  virtue  evolved
from  their  use.

273

The  system  of  numerals  vaguely  laid  down  in  the  Cabala
is  evidently  a  ray  of  light  derived  from  the  Egyptian  figure
before  alluded  to,  as  manifested  in  the  building  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  but  still  more  lucidly  defined  in  Pythagorean
Philosophy, — whilst  the  allusions  so  often  made  to  the  unity
of  design  manifest  throughout  the  universe,  is  a  mixture  of
ideas  derived  from  Zoroaster,  the  Chaldean  system  of
planetary  correspondences,  and  a  large  infusion  of  Greek
philosophy.  The  Cabala  and  Zohar  are  curious  speci-
mens of  literature ;  compendiums  of  Eastern  ideas,  and
fully  sufficient  examples  of  that  style  of  writing  justly
termed  Cabalistic ^  but  when  the  full  meaning  of  their  obscure
expressions  is  arrived  at,  the  student  will  find  broader,
fairer,  and  more  original  fields  of  study  in  the  elder  nations,
in  their  grand  monuments,  their  most  ancient  writings,  and
above  all,  in  the  stately  and  inspired  utterances  of  the  He-
brew Prophets.  One  chapter  of  the  sublime  Isaiah,  will
convey  a  far  higher  conception  of  the  relations  between  man
and  his  God,  than  whole  pages  of  the  mystic  Zohar,  and
the  books  of  Ezekiel  and  Revelations,  contain  all  the
mysteries  so  elaborately  concealed  in  Cabalistic  writings  ;
in  short,  we  cannot  promise  our  readers  any  higher  results
from  their  study,  than  such  as  may  be  attained  by  the
perusal  of  other  works  on  the  antiquities  of  the  East  or
initiation  into  the  rites  of  modern  Free  Masonry.  In  the
celebrated  Rosicrucian  diagram  of  EzekieFs  wheel,  the
whole  heart  of  the  mystery  is  disclosed.  Therein  will  be
found  the  six  ascending  signs  of  the  Zodiac  representing
Heaven^  Good^  the  ascent  of  the  human  Soul^  the  Universe^  or
Macrocosm  ;  in  the  six  descending  signs  are  all  the  opposite
principles  of  evil,  the  fall  of  man ^  the  descent  of  the  Soul  into
matter,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.  In  this  consists  all  the  mystery  of
Cabalism.

274

EZEKIEL'S     WHEEL

1.  2.  3.     4     5

b.

T«ir"^wm^

Macrocosmos  Ascendiiiff.  ^IT^X    'J^umiHff-Joint  Libra.

^^X

8-'5. 10-  II.  12.

Mierocosmoft  Ucscetidintj.

The  succession  of  ideas  representing  the  sarae  primal
thought  in  the  varied  but  ever  progressive  intelligence  of
different  nations,  in  different  epochs  of  time,  always  pre-
sent old  truths  in  novel  points  of  view.  This  is  essentially
illustrated  in  the  history  of  Spiritism.  The  same  funda-
mental principles  underlie  the  whole  struciTtire  of  human
and  spiritual  intercourse,  and  whether  we  study  the  rela-
tions that  unite  the  two  worlds  from  a  Hindoo  or  Euro-
pean point  of  view,  in  the  year  1  or  our  own  time,  we  shall
find  that  Magnetism  and  Psychology  are  the  only  keys
which  ever  did  or  ever  will  unlock  the  gates  of  the  Spirit-
ual Kingdom,  whilst  the  Spiritism  or  magic  of  different
nationalities  and  times  are  only  rife  with  examples  of  the
various  modes  in  which  these  two  stupendous  attributes  of
body  and  soul  may  be  employed.

Learned  men  spend  years  in  attempting  to  interpret  the
mystic  raptures  of  Cabalism,  whilst  the  stately  old  Jewish
Bible  lies  open  to  their  view,  presenting  an  array  of  curious
and  varied  literature,  which  far  exceeds  in  valuable  sugges-

275

tion  and  breadth  of  information,  every  other  ancient  work
extant  save  the  Hindoo  Vedas,  or  Persian  Zendavesta.
The  direct  simplicity  of  Genesis,  the  elaborate  details  con-
cerning Egyptian  customs,  manners,  and  modes  of  worship
brought  to  light  in  the  other  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  the
startling  accounts  of  angelic  ministry  with  which  every
page  abounds, — the  sublime  imagery  of  the  Hebrew  Pro-
phets, and  the  curious  insight  which  their  denunciations
afford  into  the  nature  and  universality  of  the  idolatrous
practices  they  protest  against ;  the  exquisite  pathos  and
beauty  of  the  New  Testament  teachings,  the  mixture  of
high-toned  morality  and  mystic  Gnosticism  of  the  Epistles,
and  the  clue  to  all  ancient  mysteries  afforded  by  the
writings  of  Ezekiel,  Daniel,  and  John  in  the  Apocalypse,
combine  to  render  the  Hebrew  Bible  one  of  the  most  re-
markable and  notable  specimens  of  ancient  literature  now
extant.

It  is  a  book  which  must  compel  the  skeptic  either  to
pronounce  the  dictum  of  wilful  falsehood  and  causeless
imposture  against  all  ancient  history,  or  else  to  acknowl-
edge that  there  must  in  olden  time,  if  not  now,  have  been  a
substratum  of  truth,  in  the  immense  array  of  spiritual  de-
monstrations claimed  to  have  been  rendered  in  the  days  of
antiquity.  "*"'**""

The  Bible  is  a  book  of  Spiritism  ;  an  Arbatel  of  Magic^  a
storehouse  of  Oriental  knowledge,  and  as  such,  commends
itself  to  the  earnest  seeker  after  magical  lore  and  spiritu-
alistic light.

There  were  periods  in  the  history  of  the  Jews,  when  the
prophetic  afflatus  was  lost,  quenched,  as  it  would  seem,  by
the  idolatrous  perversity  of  the  people  and  their  devotion
to  other  rites  than  those  enjoined  by  their  Priests  and
Prophets.

Such  was  the  interregnum  that  occurred  after  the  death

276

of  Samuel ;  and  again  after  the  closing  up  of  the  Prophetic
era  in  the  person  of  Malachi,  called  trom  thence  '•  the  seal
of  Prophecy."  With  the  advent  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a
new  era  dawned  upon  the  world,  not  only  in  relatitm  to
the  sublime  teachinj^  which  he  inculcated  and  the  2:ood
works  bv  which  he  sealed  his  commission,  but  bv  the
strictly  human  evidences  of  magnetic  and  psychologic
power  which  resulted  trom  his  mission.

All  history  proves  that  there  are  mental  as  well  as  phy-
sical epidemics  ;  contagious  aflections  of  the  mind  as  well
as  of  the  bodv.

When  a  great  reformatory  thinker  appears  in  the  arena
of  human  lite — when  such  an  one  is  endowed  moreover
with  that  mvsterious  charo:e  of  Astral  fluid  which  effects
cures  of  disease,  and  produces  other  magnetic  phenomena  on
all  who  come  within  his  influence,  look  to  see  that  combi-
nation of  mental  and  physical  power  diffiising  itself  far
beyond  the  sphere  of  its  immediate  source.

From  such  magnetic  and  psychologic  influences  arose
that  irresistible  tide  of  religious  opinion  which  spread
throughout  the  East  from  the  minds  of  inspired  teachers
like  Confucius.  Zoroaster.  Buddha  and  Christ.  Such  was
the  source  of  those  mental  and  physical  epidemics  which
imparted  belief  in,  and  power  to  effect,  the  practices  of
witchcraft  in  the  middle  ages ;  which  iofluenced  the  French
Prophets  of  the  Cevennois  with  a  mighty  enthusiasm  equal
in  effect  to  the  ecstasies  of  Indian  Fakeers  ;  which  ani-
mated the  Ecstatics  at  the  tomb  of  the  Abbe  Paris,  and
rendered  the  '*  Convulsionaires  "  insensible  to  pain ;  which
exhibited  itself  in  demoniacal  possessions  in  the  multitudes
who  made  up  the  ghastly  records  of  Witches  and  Wizards
in  Scotland,  New  England,  Sweden,  and  in  later  times,  iu
the  V'alley  of  Morzine — iu  short,  in  all  cases  of  mental
epidemic,  whether  it  take  jthe  shape  of  that  enthusiasm

277

which  enabled  frail  women,  yoimg  children  and  feeble  old
men  to  court  the  ao:onies  of  martyrdom  diu-ino:  the  first
centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  or  that  subjugation  of  sense
and  reason  to  the  control  of  evil  spirits,  which  marked  the
madness  of  witchcraft.

We  shall  conclude  this  section  by  a  supplement  giving
extracts  from  an  old  work  entitled  Moses  and  Aaron ^  or  an
account  of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  rites  of  the  ancient
Hebrews,  bvThos.  Godwyn,  B.  D.,  published  at  London  in
1628.

In  these  curious  excerpts  the  reader  will  find  correct  and
graphic  descriptions  of  the  various  kinds  of  divination,
etc.,  whether  lawful  or  forbidden,  practiced  bv  the  Jews
of  old.

SUPPLEMENT  TO   SECTION   XIY.

Some  of  the  modes  of  Diclnation,  both  laic/ut  and  untaic-
^id,  practiced  amongst  the  Jeics.

"As  Idolatrie  originally  sprang  from  mistaking  of  Scripture,  so  witch-
craft and  sorcen-  seemeth  to  have  had  its  first  beginning  from  an  imita-
tion of  God's  oracles.  God  spake  in  divers  manners.  Heb.  i  :  i  :
but  the  chief  means  of  revealing  himselfe  observed  bv  the  Hebrew
writers  are  foure,  which  they  term  foure  degrees  of  prophecie  or  divine
revelation.

The  first  degree  was  Nebuah.  which  was,  when  God  did  by  certaine
visions  and  apparitions  reveale  his  will.

The  second  was  Ruach  Hacodesch,  or  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
whereby  the  partie  was  enabled,  without  visions  or  apparitions,  to  pro-
phecie. Some,  shewing  the  difference  betweene  these  two,  adde,  that  the
gift  of  prophecie  did  cast  a  man  into  a  trance  or  extasie,  all  his  senses
being  taken  fi-om  him  ;  but  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  withc>ut
any  such  extasie  or  abolition  of  the  senses,  as  appeareth  in  David  and
Daniel.     Both  these  degrees,    as  likewise  Urim  and  Thummim,  ceased

278

in  the  second  Temple,  whence  their  ancient  Doctors  say,  that  after
the  latter  Prophets  Haggai  and  Malachy  were  dead,  the  Holy  Ghost
went  up,  or  departed  from  Israel.  Howbeit  they  had  the  use  of  a  voice
or  eccho  from  Heaven.  In  which  speech  we  are  not  to  understand  that
the  Holy  Ghost  wrought  not  at  all  the  sanctification  of  men,  but  that
this  extraordinary  voice,  enabling  men  to  prophecie  by  the  inspiration  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  then  ceased  ;  and  in  this  sense  the  Holy  Ghost  was
said  to  have  departed  from  Israel.

The  third  degree  was  Urim  and  Thummim.  Urim  signifieth  light,
and  Thummim  perfection.  That  they  were  two  ornaments  in  the  High
Priest's  brest-plate,  is  generally  agreed  upon  ;  but  what  manner  of  or-
naments, or  how  they  gave  answer,  is  hard  to  resolve.  vSome  thinke
them  to  be  the  foure  rowes  of  stones  in  the  brest-plate,  the  splendor
and  brightnesse  of  which  foreshewed  victory,  and  by  the  rule  of  contra-
ries, we  may  gather,  that  the  darknesse  of  the  stones  not  shining  pre-
saged evil.  Others  say  it  was  the  name  Jehovah,  put  in  the  doubling
of  the  brest-plate,  for  that  was  double.  Others  declare  the  manner  of
consulting  with  Urim  and  Thummim  consisted  of  all  the  Tribes'  names,
and  likewise  of  the  Patriarchs,  Abraham,  Isaak  and  Jacob,  so  that  no
letter  of  the  Alphabet  was  wanting.  The  question  being  proposed,
some  say  that  the  letters  which  gave  the  answer  did  arise  and  eminently
appear  above  the  others.  An  example  they  take  from  the  2nd  Sam.
2  :  I.  When  Daniel  asked  the  Lord,  ''  Shall  I  goe  up  into  any  of  the
Cities  of  Judah  .?"  the  Lord  answered,  "Goe  up."  Here  say  they,
that  the  letters  which  represented  the  Oracle,  did,  after  a  strange  man-
ner, joyne  themselves  into  perfect  syallables  and  intire  words,  and  made
the  answer  compleat.  The  fourth  degree  was  Bath  Kol,  ' '  the  daughter
of  a  voice"  or  an  eccho  ;  by  it  is  meant  a  voice  from  Heaven,  declaring
the  will  of  God  ;  it  tooke  place  in  the  second  Temple,  when  the  three
former  degrees  of  prophecie  ceased.

The  several  sorts  of  Dimnation  forbidden.

Wee  shall  find,  Deut.  i8:  lo,  ii,  those  Diviners,  which  are  by  the  law
forbidden,  distinguished  into  seven  kindes,  not  because  there  were  no
others,  bat  they  were  the  most  usual,  ist.  An  observer  of  times.  2d,
An  inchanter.  3d,  A  witch.  4th,  A  charmer.  5th,  A  consulter  with
familiar  spirits.  6th,  A  wizard.  7th,  A  necromancer.  To  these  we
may  adde  an  eighth.  Consulting  with  the  staffe.  And  a  ninth,  A  con-
sulter with  intralls.  The  first  is  ;  An  observer  of  times,  one  that  dis-
tinguisheth  times  and  seasons,  saying,  such  a  day  is  good,  or  such  a  day

279

is  naught,   such  an  houre,  such  a  month  is  luckie,  and  such  and  such

unluckie,  for  such  and  such  businesses The  second  sort  of

unlawful  Diviner  is  also  an  observer  of  times  ;  the  first  drawing  his  con-
clusions from  the  colour  or  motion  of  the  clouds  ;  The  second,  from  his
owne  superstitious  observation  of  good  and  evil  events,  happening  upon
such  and  such  dayes,  such  and  such  times;  the  first  seemeth  to  have
drawne  his  conclusions  a  priori,  from  the  clouds  or  planets,  causing
good  and  bad  events  ;  the  second  a  posteriori,  from  the  events  them-
selves, happening  upon  such  and  such  times.  This  Planetary  observer
when  he  watched  the  clouds,  seemeth  to  have  stood  with  his  face  East-
ward, his  backe  Westward,  his  right  hand  towards  the  South,  and  his  left
hand  towards  the  North.

2.  The  second  is  Menachesch,  rendered  an  Inchanter  ;  it  importeth
rather  an  Augur,  or  Soothsayer.  The  originall  signifieth  such  a  one
who  out  of  his  owne  experience  draweth  observations,  to  foretell  good
or  evil  to  come,  as  Soothsayers  doe  by  observing  such  and  such  events,
by  such  and  such  flying  of  birds,  screechings,  or  kawings.  The  Rab-
bines  speake  in  this  wise.  He  is  Menachesch,  a  Soothsayer,  who  will
say,  because  a  morsell  of  Bread  is  fallen  out  of  his  mouth,  or  his  stafl"e
out  of  his  hand,  or  his  sonne  called  him  backe,  or  a  Crow  kawed  unto
him,  or  a  Goat  passed  by  him,  or  a  Serpent  was  on  his  right  hand,  or  a
Fox  on  his  left  hand,  therefore  he  will  say,  doe  not  this  or  that  to-day.
This  word  is  used  Gen.  30  :  27.  "I  have  learned  by  experience,  saith
Laban,  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  mee  for  thy  sake."  Againe,  Gen.
44  :  5.  "Is  not  this  the  cup  in  which  my  Lord  drinketh  }  and  where  by  in-
deed hee  divineth  ?"  That  is,  proveth  or  maketh  triall  or  experience
what  manner  of  men  yee  are  ;  the  Heathen  people  were  very  supersti-
tious in  these  observations  ;  some  dayes  were  unluckie,  others  luckie  ;
on  some  dayes  they  counted  it  unfortunate  to  begin  battaile,  on  some
months  unfortunate  to  marry.

And  as  they  were  superstitious  in  observing  unluckie  signes,  so  like-
wise in  the  meanes  used  to  avert  the  evil  portended;  the  meanes  were
either  words  or  deeds.  Deeds  :  if  an  unluckie  bird,  or  such  like  came
in  their  way,  they  would  fling  stones  at  it ;  and  of  this  sort  is  the  scratch-
ing of  a  suspected  Witch,  which  amongst  the  simpler  sort  of  people  is
thought  to  bee  a  means  to  cure  Witchcraft.  By  words,  they  thought  to
elude  the  evill,  signified  by  such  signes,  when  they  say  :

''  This  evil  light  on  thine  owne  head."

The  third  is  Mecascheph,  A  Witch,  properly  a  Jugler.  The  originall
signifieth  such  a  kinde  of  Sorcerer  who  bewitcheth  the  senses  and  mindes
of  men,  by  changing  the  formes  of  things,  making  them  appeare  other-

280

wise  than  indeed  they  are.  The  same  word  is  applied  to  the  Sorcerers
in  Egypt,  who  resisted  Moses,  Exod.  7:11.  Then  Pharoh  also  called
Mecaschphim,  the  Sorcerers.  Now  the  magicians  in  Egypt,  they  also
did  in  like  manner  with  their  Inchantments.  This  latter  part  of  the
text  explaineth  what  those  Sorcerers  were.  In  that  they  are  called
magicians,  it  implieth  their  learning,  that  they  were  wise  men,  and
great  philosophers  ;  the  word  inchantments  declareth  the  manner  of  the
delusion,  and  it  hath  the  signification  of  such  a  slight,  whereby  the  eyes
are  deluded,  for  Lahatim,  there  translated  inchantments,  importeth  the
glistening  flame  of  a  fire,  or  sword,  wherewith  the  eyes  of  men  are
dazled.

The  Greeke  version  doth  not  unfitly  terme  them  compounders  of
medicines,  or  if  you  please,  complexion-makers,  such  artisens  who
make  men  and  women  false  complexions.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Apostle
compareth  such  false  teachers,  who  under  a  forme  and  shew  of  godli-
nesse,  leade  captive  silly  women,  to  the  Egyptian  Sorcerers,  Zannes  and
Zambres,  who  assisted  Moses,  2  Tim.  3  :  8.  These  two  were  of  chief
note.     In  the  Talmud  they  are  called  Johanne  and  Mamre.

The  fourth  is  Chober,  a  Charmer.  The  Hebrew  word  signifieth
conjoining  or  consociating;  either  from  the  league  and  fellowship  which
such  persons  have  with  the  Devill,  or  as  Bodine  thinketh,  because  such
kinde  of  Witches  have  frequent  meetings,  in  which  they  dance  and  make
merrie  together.

Onkelos  translateth  such  a  charmer  Raten,  a   Mutterer,  intimating
the  manner  of  these  Witcheries  to  be  by  the  muttering  or  soft  speak-
ing of  some  spelle  or  charme.     The  description  of  a  charmer  is  thus:
Hee  is  a  charmer  who  speaketh  words  of  a  strange  language,  and  with-
out sense,  and  he,  in  his  foolishnesse,  thinketh  that  these  words  are  profit-
able; that  if  one  say  so,  or  so,  unto  a  Serpent  or  Scorpion,  it  cannot
hurt  a  man,  and  he  that  saith  so,  or  so,  unto  a  man,  he  cannot  be  hurt.
Hee  that  whispereth  over  a  wound,  or  readeth  a  verse  out  of  the  Bible,
likewise  he  that  readeth  over  an  Infant,  that  it  may  not  bee   frighted,  or
that  layeth  the  Booke  of  the  Law,  or  the  Philacteries,  upon  a  childe
that  it  may  sleepe,   such  are  not  only  among  Inchanters,  or  Charmers,
but  of  those  that  generally  deny  the  Law  of  God,  because  they  make
the  words  of  the  Scripture  medicine  for  the  body,  whereas  they  are  not,
but  medicine  for  the  Soule.     Of  this  sort  was  that,  whereof  Bodinus
speaketh.     That  a  childe  by  saying  a  certain  verse  out  of  the  Psalmes,
hindred  a  woman  that  shee  could  not  make  her  butter;  by  reciting  the
same  verse  backward,  hee  made  her  butter  come  presently.

The  fifth  Schoel  Ob,  a  consulter  with  Ob,  or  with  familiar  spirits.

281

Ob  signifieth  properly  a  Bottle,  and  is  applied  in  divers  places  of  Scrip-
ture to  Magicians,  because  they  being  possessed  with  an  evil  spirit,
speake  with  a  soft  and  hollow  voice,  as  out  of  a  Bottle.  The  Greek
calleth  them  Ventriloquos,  such  whose  voice  seemeth  to  proceed  out  of
their  belly.  Such  a  Diviner  was  the  Damosell,  Acts  i6:  i6,  in  Saint
Augustin's  judgement,  and  is  probably  thought  so  by  most  Expositors,
who  are  of  opinion,  that  the  spirit  of  Python,  with  which  this  Damosell
was  possessed,  is  the  same  which  the  spirit  of  Ob  was,  amongst  the  He-
brews. Hence  the  Witch  of  Endor,  whom  Saul  requested  to  raise  up
Samuel,  is  said  in  Hebrew  to  have  consulted  with  Ob;  but  among  the
Latine  Expositors,  she  is  commonly  translated  Pythonissa,  one  possess-
ed with  the  spirit  of  Python.  •<.

The  sixth  is  Jiddegnoni,  a  Wizard;  he  is  translated  sometimes  a
cunning  man.  Hee  had  his  name  from  knowledge,  which  either  the
wizard  professed  himself  to  have,  or  the  common  people  thought  him
to  have.  The  Rabbles  say  hee  was  called  in  Hebrew  from  a  certain
beast,  in  shape  resembling  a  man,  because  these  wizards,  when  they  did
utter  their  prophecies,  held  a  bone  of  this  beast  between  their  teeth.
This  haply  might  bee  some  diabolicall  sacrament  or  ceremonie,  used  for
the  confirmation  of  the  league  betweene  Satan  and  the  Wizard.  Pro-
phane  history  mentioneth  divinations  of  the  like  kinde,  as  that  Magi-
cians were  wont  to  eat  the  principall  parts  and  members  of  such  beasts,
which  they  deemed  propheticall,  thinking  thereby  that  the  soule  of  such
beasts  would  be  conveyed  into  their  bodies,  whereby  they  might  be  en-
abled for  prophecy.

The  seventh  is  Doresch  el  hammethim  ;  the  Greeke  answereth  word
for  word — an  enquirer  of  the  dead,  a  Necromancer.  Such  diviners
consulted  with  Satan  in  the  shape  of  a  dead  man.  A  memorable  ex-
ample wee  finde  recorded  ;  i  Sam. :  29.  There  King  Saul,  about  to
warre  with  the  Philistins,  (God  denying  to  answer  him  either  by
dreames,  or  by  Urim,  or  by  Prophets, )  upon  the  fame  of  the  Witch  of
Endor,  he  repaired  to  her,  demanding  that  Samuel  might  bee  raised  up
from  the  dead,  to  tell  him  the  issue  of  the  warre.  Now  that  this  was
not  in  truth  Samuel,  is  easily  evinced,  both  by  testimonies  of  the  learned,
and  reasons :  First,  it  is  improbable,  that  God,  who  had  denied  to  an-
swer him  by  any  ordinary  meanes,  should  now  deigne  him  an  answer
so  extraordinary.  Secondly,  no  Witch  or  Devil  can  disturbe  the  bodies
or  soules  of  such  as  die  in  the  Lord,  because  they  rest  from  their  labors;
Rev.  14:  14.  Thirdly,  if  it  had  beene  Samuel,  he  would  doubtless
have  reproved  Saul  for  consulting  with  Witches.

The  eighth  is  Scoelmakle,    a   consulter  with  his  staffe.     Jerome  saith

282

the  manner  of  this  divination  was  thus :  That  if  the  doubt  were  be-
tweene  two  or  three  cities,  which  first  should  be  assaulted  ;  to  determine
this,  they  wrote  the  names  of  the  cities  upon  certain  staves  or  arrowes,
which  being  shaked  in  a  quiver  together,  the  first  that  was  pulled  out
determined  the  citie.

Others  deliver  the  manner  of  this  consultation  to  have  been  thus  :
The  consulter  measured  his  staflfe  by  spans,  or  by  the  length  of  his  fin-
ger, saying  as  he  measured,  I  will  goe,  I  will  not  goe,  I  will  doe  such  a
thing,  I  will  not  doe  it,  and  as  the  last  spanne  fell  out,  so  he  deter-
mined. This  was  termed  by  the  Heathens,  Divination  by  rods  or  ar-
rowes.

The  ninth  was  Roebaccabed,  a  tiiviner  by  intralls.  Nebucadnezar
being  to  make  warre  both  with  the  Jews  and  the  Ammonites,  and  doubt-
ing in  the  way  against  whether  of  these  he  should  make  his  first  onset  :
First,  he  consulted  with  his  arrowes  and  staves,  of  which  hath  beene
spoken  of  immediately  before  ;  Secondly,  he  consulted  with  the  intralls
of  beasts.  This  practice  was  generally  received  among  the  Heathens,
and  because  the  liver  was  the  principall  member  observed,  it  was  called
Consultation  with  the  liver.  Three  things  were  observed  in  this  kind
of  divination.  First,  the  colour  of  the  intralls,  whether  they  were  all
well-coloured  ;  Secondly,  their  place,  whether  none  were  displaced  :
Thirdly,  the  number,  whether  none  were  wanting.  Among  those  that
were  wanting,  the  want  of  the  liver  or  the  heart  chiefly  presaged  ill.
That  day  when  Julius  Caesar  was  slaine,  it  is  storied,  that  in  two  fat
oxen  then  sacrificed,  the  heart  was  wanting  in  them  both.

283

SECTION  XV.

Magic  and  Spiritism  amongst  the  Okaldeaiis.

C

'Jlte  Tower  of  Babel. \

The  religious  doctrines  of  the  Chaldeans,  varied  from
those  of  the  Hindoos  and  Egyptians  chiefly,  in  their  differ-
ent modes  of  expression,  in  the  name  appropriated  to
different  Deities,  and  the  functions  which  these  mythical
personages  were  supposed  to  be  endowed  with.  The  basic
idea  of  Solar  and  Astral  worship  however  prevailed  in  all
nations  alike,  but  the  absence  of  sexual  emblems  on  Chal-
dean monumental  remains,  seems  to  imply  that  this  peo-
ple adhered  to  the  astronomical  religion,  without  engraft-
ing its  popular  successor.  Sex  worship,  upon  its  purer
Theosophy.  Although  our  only  information  concerning  the
Spiritism  of  Chaidea  is  derived  from  monumental  records,
oral  traditions,  and  cotemporaneous  history,  these  sources
are  abundantly  sufficient  to  testify  to  the  fact  that  Baby-
lon the  great  and  the  Priests  of  Chaidea,  so  widely  re-
nowned for  occult  wisdom,  acquired  this  vast  reputation
principally  for  transcendent  skill  in  the  arts  of  divination,
and  the  methods  of  reading  the  future  by  Astrology.  The
Chaldeans  were  also  celebrated  for  certain  branches  of
chemical  knowledge,  especially  for  the  means  whereby
they  learned  to  resist  the  action  of  fire  and  poisons.

284

Schools  of  the  Magi  were  established  at  Babylon,  and  as
magic  was  deemed  an  essential  item  in  the  art  of  govern-
ing the  nation,  and  conducting  armies  to  victory,  even
Kings,  Statesmen,  and  Warriors,  no  less  than  the  Sons  of
the  Nobles  and  wealthy  Citizens,  resorted  to  these  famous
seminaries  of  occult  learning,  or  sat  at  the  feet  of  the  Magi
to  drink  in  the  elements  of  their  profound  wisdom.  It
was  in  these  schools  that  Daniel  and  some  of  the  hand-
somest and  most  intelligent  of  the  Hebrew  captives  were
placed  for  education  after  the  conquest  of  Judea  by  the
Babylonians.  It  was  from  thence  that  the  remarkable  ad-
mixture of  Chaldean  and  Persian  philosophy  was  derived,
which  marks  the  literature  of  the  Jews  after  the  Babylonish
captivity.  There  are  many  scholars  who  believe — and  that
upon  good  foundation — that  the  writing  of  the  Pentateuch,
the  composition  of  the  Cabala,  and  the  fables  of  the  Tal-
mud, owe  so  much  of  their  peculiar  spirit  to  the  Chaldean
Magi,  that  those  who  are  well  acquainted  with  these  He-
brew writings,  lose  nothing  by  the  total  lack  of  Chaldean
Scriptures.

In  Chaldea,  as  in  other  Asiatic  and  Eastern  nations,  the
connection  between  religious  rites  and  the  art  of  magic
was  inseparable.  The  highest  class  of  the  Priesthood —
those  set  apart  for  Temple  service — were  "  Star  Gazers"  or
Astrologers,  healers  of  the  sick,  by  magnetism,  {i.e.^)  the
laying  on  of  hands — and  even  the  High  Priest  himself —
the  functionary  who  virtually  ruled  the  land  through  his
influence  over  the  reigning  monarch — delivered  oracles,
and  often  practiced  the  highest  form  of  magical  rites.  So
great  was  the  skill  of  the  Chaldean  Magi  in  Astrology,
that  it  has  become  proverbial  in  all  ages  to  attribute  the
invention  of  this  art  to  the  Chaldeans,  and  in  some  lands
the  terms  Astrologer  and  Chaldean  were  held  to  be  sy-
nonymous.

285

The  Babylonish  Priests  were  reputed  to  be  thoroughly
well  acquainted  with  the  occult  virtue  of  stones,  plants,
herbs,  vapors  and  narcotics.  They  claimed  to  be  able  to
cast  spells  on  whole  armies,  arresting  their  progress,  or
paralyzing  their  power  of  action.  They  could  even  cause
the  downfall  of  nations,  though  it  is  obvious  they  had  no
such  power  in  the  preservation  of  their  own  once  splendid
dynasty.  Their  achievements  during  the  flush  of  their
splendor  and  magnificence,  caused  their  vast  claims  for
magical  knowledge  to  be  feared  and  quoted  through  ail
cotemporaneous  nationalities.

Their  methods  of  interpreting  dreams  and  visions,  of
prophesying  or  soothsaying,  and  resisting  the  action  of  fire,
are  significantly  alluded  to  in  the  book  of  Daniel,  wherein
it  clearly  appears  that  the  natural  endowments,  or  in  mod-
ern phraseology,  the  normal  mediumship  of  the  young  He-
brew Captives,  were  found  superior  in  truthful  results  to
the  arts  of  the  instructed  Magians,  and  it  is  quite  probable
that  if  many  of  the  stupendous  claims  set  up  for  the  mag-
ical practices  of  antiquity  could  be  brought  to  a  similar
test,  they  would  be  found  inferior  to  the  true  prophetic
gifts  which  spring  from  natural  endowments.  It  is  well  to
notice  however,  that  Daniel  and  his  companions  practiced
that  strict  regimen  and  remarkable  abstinence  which  has
been  so  universally  found  efficacious  in  promoting  spiritual
afflatus.  Let  not  those  who  rely  solely  on  their  medium-
ship  without  culture^  mistake  this  important  suggestion.

In  ChaldeaT^as  amongst  all  other  ancient  nations,  the
most  honored  class  of  the  Priests  were  true  Prophets^  per-
sons naturally  endowed,  but  these  fortunate  individuals,
like  the  Hebrews,  often  arose  outside  the  priestly  ranks,
and  even  when  within  them,  seldom  accepted  office,  pre-
ferring— as  those  gifted  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  mvari-
ably^do — to  act  independently  of  priestly  organizations.

286

Amongst  the  priests  there  were  three  distinct  classes.  The
first  were  the  Singers,  Musicians,  or  Exorcists,  who  were
commonly  employed  in  exorcising  demons  and  ministering
to  the  sick.  These  by  their  admirable  performances  on  in-
struments or  in  solemn  chants  stimulated  the  minds  of
worshippers  to  devotion,  enchanted  the  listeners,  even  ser-
pents becoming  obedient,  and  ferocious  beasts  yielding
themselves  up  to  the  spell  of  their  delicious  melodies.

The  second  class  were  the  magicians  or  wonder-workers,
through  whom  all  manner  of  soothsaying  was  effected,  also
ordeals  by  fire,  were  shown,  elements  stilled,  or  storms
raised  ;  spells  and  enchantments  procured,  and  divinations
or  auguries  from  entrails,  burnt  offerings,  flights  of  birds,
or  other  natural  objects  obtained.

The  third  and  highest  class  were  the  *'  Star  Gazers,"  for
whom  were  erected  those  gigantic  temples  of  which  the
famous  tower  of  Babel  or  Belus  forms  an  example.  The
exterior  and  apex  of  these  wonderful  monuments  were  used
for  astronomical  observations,  the  interior  for  those  mys-
terious rites  through  which  Initiates  were  taught,  and
Priestly  Hierophants  received  their  education.  As  these
famous  mysteries  were  subsequently  inaugurated  in  Persia
under  the  name  of  Mithraic  rites,  we  learn  from  them  that
the  Chaldean  originals  were  simply  designed  to  teach  the
fundamental  principles  of  Sabaeism,  or  the  most  ancient
astronomical  religion.

Cicero  in  his  treatises  on  Soothsaying  and  Divination,  at-
tributes paramount  excellence  to  the  Chaldeans,  intimating
in  fact  that  to  these  most  ancient  priests  the  origin  of  As-
trological Science  and  magical  art  is  due.  Their  modes
of  initiation  and  study  were  very  severe.  Lives  of  purity
and  asceticism  were  demanded,  but  though  they  were  re-
quired to  abstain  from  wine  and  the  tiesh  of  animals,  they
never  practiced  the  rigid  discipline  enforced  upon  the  Hin-

287

doo  Fakeers,  on  the  contnuy,  they  maintained  that  emaci-
ated bodies  and  enfeebled  frames  were  more  subject  to  the
attacks  of  evil  spirits,  and  less  capable  of  resisting  them,
than  healthy,  pure,  and  well  balanced  organisms.

Although  a  vast  number  of  the  engraved  tablets  found
amongst  the  ruins  of  ancient  Chaldea,  exhibit  zodiacs  and
astronomical  signs  in  abundance,  there  is  no  authentic  rec-
ord of  the  exact  system  of  calculation  upon  which  these
great  Adepts  based  their  methods  of  Astrology.  The
Persians,  Chinese  and  Mediaeval  Professors  of  this  art,
claim  to  be  in  possession  of  correct  Chaldean  schemes,  but
whether  this  be  true  or  false,  the  scientific  astrologer  is
aware  that  the  system  of  calculation  by  which  successful
results  are  to  be  obtained,  is  as  exact  and  unvarying  a  science
as  Astronomy,  and  does  not  change  with  country  or  clime.
Those  who  can  obtain  successful  results  then,  even  in  the
nineteenth  century,  may  assure  themselves  they  are  in  pos-
session of  the  same  rules  by  which  the  Chaldean  Adepts
achieved  their  vast  renown.  As  the  methods  of  Astrology
are  very  elaborate,  and  require  much  more  space  than  we
could  assign  them  in  this  volume,  we  refer  those  who  may
be  disposed  to  study  this  curious  science,  to  the  many
treatises  on  the  subject  that  are  now  extant.  Those  who
desire  to  acquaint  themselves  with  the  most  approved  rules
of  the  art,  should  study  Lilly's  Astrology,  published  in
1647.  Students  well  versed  in  this  branch  of  occultism,
claim  the  work  in  question  to  be  the  most  reliable  and  au-
thentic now  in  print.

It  would  be  useless  to  pursue  our  investigations  into  an-
cient Asiatic  or  African  researches  farther.

The  spiritism  of  the  Jews,  Medes,  Persians,  Gnostics,
Neo-Platonists  and  early  Christians,  with  the  modifications
which  we  so  often  insist  on,  as  the  results  of  growth
through  different  epochs  of  time,  and  changes  induced  by

288

varied  climes  and  scenes — all  proclaim  the  steady  and  un-
broken succession  of  ideas  springing  up  from  one  original
source,  namely,  an  observance  and  worship  of  the  powers
of  nature.  Now,  as  heretofore,  we  claim  that  nothing  is
lost  in  historic  or  in  nature.

However  limited  the  intercourse  between  ancient  nation-
alities might  have  been,  their  frequent  irruptions  into  each
other's  territories,  the  transmission  of  opinions  through
mutual  captivities,  through  commerce,  oral  tradition  and
the  contagion  of  thought^  render  it  certain,  that  the  utter
obliteration  of  ideas  from  any  one  land  by  the  destruction
of  their  Scriptures,  or  the  loss  of  a  key  to  their  hiero-
glyphical  inscriptions  is  simply  impossible.  It  is  the
favorite  opinion  of  modern  students,  especially  those  of  a
romantic  and  naturally  mystical  turn  of  mind,  that  Egypt
and  Chaldea,  the  two  most  antique  nations  of  civilization,
Hindostan  excepted,  conceal  beneath  their  cuniform
characters,  profuse  hieroglyphics  and  singular  tablets,
profound  revelations  in  occultism  that  are  forever  lost  to
mankind,  unless,  indeed,  some  spiritual  "  CEdipus"  of  these
ruined  lands,  should  disclose  their  mysteries  through  the
entranced  lips  of  a  modern  Somnamhule.

With  these  attempts  to  repair  the  breaches  in  that  tre-
mendous veil  of  mystery  which  once  shrouded  the  sacer-
dotal power  of  Babylon  the  great,  hushed  the  voice  of
musical  Memnon,  and  put  the  finger  of  eternal  silence  on
the  stony  lips  of  the  Sphinx,  we  have  no  sympathy,  nor
do  we  offer  any  plea  for  belief  in  such  directions.

We  claim  now,  as  heretofore,  that  we  have  more  of  the
real  spirit  of  antiquity  in  our  midst,  than  the  race  in  this
utilitarian  and  materialistic  age  understands ;  besides,  the
same  imperishable  sources  of  knowledge  from  which  the
ancients  derived  their  opinions  and  framed  their  systems
of  Theosophy,  are  open  to  the  students  of  the  nineteenth

289

century  in  all  their  fullness.  The  starry  Scriptures  of  the
skies  still  unfold  their  pages  of  light  for  the  perusal  of  the
patient  Astrologer.  The  plants  dispense  their  fragrance,
the  herbs  their  virtues,  the  gums  and  spices  stimulate  the
senses  with  aromatic  odor  now,  as  in  olden  times.  The
wonderful  loadstone  and  the  subtle  amber  have  yielded  up
mysteries  to  the  researches  of  modern  Science,  of  which
the  ancients  scarcely  dreamed.  What  oracular  responses
could  now  be  given  by  the  telegraph,  which  would  put  the
magic  of  Dodona  to  shame  !  What  miracles  of  necro-
mancy are  daily  effected  by  the  magic  of  the  photographer,
by  aid  of  the  Egyptian's  Sun-God  !  The  five  hundred
thousand  men  that  were  required  to  drag  stones  over  a
made  road,  and  then  upheave  them  by  clumsy  levers,  to
build  the  pyramid  of  Cheops,  might  now  stand  by  with
their  hands  in  their  pockets,  watching  labor-saving  ma-
chinery, propelled  by  that  mightiest  of  all  magicians,  the
noble  steam  engine,  doing  the  work  a  thousand  times
quicker,  and  a  thousand  times  better,  than  ever  the  poor,
bruised  hands  of  unwilling  captives  could  have  done  !  It
is  not  in  executive  power  in  any  single  direction  that  the
ages  of  antiquity  can  successfully  compete  with  the  scien-
tific triumphs  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when  man's
knowled<>;e  of  how  to  control  the  elements,  and  his  perfect
comprehension  of  imponderable  forces  as  applied  to  me-
chanical uses,  produce  results  in  physical  science,  which
would  make  all  the  Magicians  of  the  East,  and  all  the
wonder-workers  of  antiquity,  give  up  the  ghost  in  envy
and  amazement.  But  it  is  not  in  materialistic  acquire-
ments or  physical  science,  that  the  ancients  transcended
us  or  even  began  to  equal  the  magical  marvels,  which  the
building  and  furnishing  of  one  single  modern  mansion  dis-
plays. It  is  in  the  realm  of  metaphysical  speculation  and
the  utilization  of  Soul  powers,  that  the  ancients  were  our

__^.,^^^^^^^^,_Bj  J *iu»mmm0mr'^rmmHfKr^^^^

290

masters,  and  that  the  moderns  are  wilfully  blind,  and  con-
temptuously determine  to  remain  so^nay  more  :  wlien  the
mere  suggestion  is  thrown  out  that  spiritual  sciences  may
correlate  those  of  physics,  the  scoff,  sneer  and  jeer  of  Sci-
entists, and  the  anathema  maranatha  of  Priests,  effectually
stifles  all  attempts  at  research  save  on  the  part  of  those
who  are  bold  enough  to  face  the  rack  and  thumb  and  screw
of  moral  martyrdom.  Taice  for  instance,  the  correlation  of
astronomy  and  astrology.  Whilst  astronomy  declares  the
mathematics  and  geometry  of  the  sidereal  heavens,  astrol-
ogy defines  the  executive  forces  which  suns,  planets  and
systems  mutually  exercise  upon  each  other,  and  the  influ-
ence which  each  atom  of  matter  exercises  upon  every
other  atom.  Physicists  allow  that  light  and  heat  are  the
two  great  motor  powers  of  form  and  being  ;  yet,  whilst
admitting  that  man  is  the  creature  of  physical  organiza-
tion, that  his  character  and  physique  are  determined  by
the  place  where  he  is  born,  the  ante-natal  influences  which
create  his  special  tendencies,  he  shoots  out  the  lip  of  scorn
when  Astrology  claims  that  the  configuration  of  the  heaven-
ly bodies,  the  original  sources  of  light,  heat,  and  therefore  of
all  subordinate  effects,  have  aught  to  do  with  shaping  man's
destiny,  or  determining  the  career  he  has  to  run.  Nothing
is  so  thankless  and  unprofitable  as  the  attempt  to  pit  spir-
itual phenomena  against  physical  formulae,  or  argue  in-
ductively against  bigotry  and  materialism  ;  but  we  venture
to  assert,  that  if  one  score  of  thoroughly  well-instructed
astrologists,  who  are  both  astronomers  and  mathematicians,
shall  undertake  to  set  up  the  figure  of  one  life  submitted
to  their  methods  for  analysis,  the  results  in  each  instance
shall  be  precisely  the  same,  and  every  leading  feature  of
the  physical  form,  mental  tendency  and  leading  events  of
the  human  pilgrimage,  shall  closely  correspond,  every  one
of  the  twenty  with  the  other.^

291

If  such  a  po.ssibility  as  the  above  does  not  indicate  the
elements  of  "  exact  science,"  we  are  at  a  loss  to  know  the
application  oftKe  wor^sT  Meantime,  the  modern  spirit  me-
dium of  Europe  and  America,  has  within  the  last  quarter  of
a  century  exhibited  natural  gifts  and  spontaneous  powers,
which  put  the  acquired  arts  of  ancient  Magians  into  the
shade.  Why  they  are  not  as  great  as  the  mediums  of  In-
dia, Arabia,  and  Asia  Minor,  is,  because  the  Western  me-
dium depends  entirely  on  the  spirits  to  do  the  work  for
him,  and  offers  no  prepared  conditions,  either  physically,
mentally,  or  in  circumstantial  surroundings,  to  aid  the
spirits,  whilst  the  Asiatic  and  African  medium  fasts,  prays,
think"s7  dresses,  washes,  and  practices  the  spiritualistic  con-
ditions necessary  for  the  highest  gifts,  through  years  of  dis-
cipline. Spiritual  bigotry,  scientific  prejudice  and  popular
indifference  on  religious  subjects,  are  the  underlying  causes
which  have  cast  their  blight  on  Spiritism  and  Magic  in  the
nineteenth  century,  and  cause  these  wonderful  elements  of
knowledge  to  loom  up  from  the  antique  ages,  in  propor-
tions as  stupendous  and  overwhelming  as  the  Pyramid  of
Cheops  compared  to  a  modern  Church,  or  the  cave  Tem-
ples of  Elephanta  and  Ellora,  gauged  by  the  proportions
of  a  London  museum  or  a  Parisian  gallery  of  art.

The  absence  of  magical  art  is  not  the  lack  of  magical
knowledge.  The  spirit  world  will  not  confer  its  prizes  upon
dunces  and  idlers.  The  natural  world  is  the  open  page,
the  heaven,  earth,  and  all  that  in  them  is,  are  the  letters
of  tKe  magical  alphabet,  and  until  man  learns  these,  and
enters  upon  the  spelling  book  of  magnetism,  and  the  gram-
mar of  psychology,  this  pen  of  ours  may  point  the  way,
but  every  pilgrim  foot  must  tread  the  path  for  himself.
Thus,  and  thus  only,  may  we  rival  the  ancient  man  in  the
goal  of  magical  achievements  to  which  he  ascended.

We  shall  conclude  this  section  by  a  few  quotations,  the

292

first  of  which  we  take  from  Ennemoser^s  History  of  Magic^
in  which  he  gives  an  appropriate  sketch  of  the  characteris-
tics of  the  Lapps  and  Finlanders,  whose  spiritism  strongly
illustrates  our  opinion,  that  climate,  soil,  scenery  and  sur-
roundings, exert  remarkable  effects  in  modifying  natural
spiritualistic  endowments,  also  that  these  are  communica-
ted by  the  contagion  of  thought  in  communities  already
predisposed  to  such  affections.

"  The  present  nationRi  of  Asia,  among  whom  ecstatic  states  and  visions  are  to  be
met  with,  are  worthy  of  mention.  Among  them  are  the  Siberian  Schamans,  the
Arabian  Dervishes,  and  the  Samozedes  and  Lapps.  Among  all  these  nations  a
species  of  somnambulism  is  common,  into  which  they  fall,  either  by  means  of
natural  susceptibility,  or  by  peculiar  movements  and  exercises  of  the  body,  and
rarely  by  the  use  of  narcotic  substances.  Among  the  northern  nations,  the  phe-
nomenon of  second-sight  is  said  to  be  frequent.

"Among  the  many  Mongolian  tribes,  and  also  the  Lapps,  particularly  excitable
and  susceptible  persons  are  chosen  as  ghost-seers  a,nd  sorcerers  ;  in  India  as  Jong-
leurs, in  Siberia  as  Schamans.  With  much  natural  disposition,  strengthened  by
practice  and  mode  of  life,  the  majority  require  nothing  more  than  to  shout  vio-
lently, to  storm,  to  dance  and  to  drum,  to  turn  round  in  a  circle,  to  induce  insensi-
bility and  convulsive  rigidity.  Among  the  Siberian  Schamans,  as  we  learn  from
Georgi,  narcotic  substances  are  used,  such  a  decoction  of  fungus  or  other  excit-
ing vegetable  substances  to  produce  visions,  in  which  they  see  and  communicate
with  spirits,  learning  from  them  future  and  distant  events.  They  also  see  distant
countries  and  the  souls  of  the  dead,  to  whom  they  ascend  from  the  body  through
the  air  to  the  seats  of  the  gods,  which  Hogstrom  especially  relates  of  the  Lapps,
among  whom,  such  a  high  degree  of  susceptibility  exists,  that  the  most  remark-
able phenomena  are  witnessed.  If  any  one  opens  his  mouth  or  closes  it,  or  points
to  anything  with  his  fingers,  or  dances,  or  makes  other  gesticulations,  there  are
many  who  will  imitate  all  this,  and  when  they  have  done  so,  inquire  whether
they  have  done  anything  improper,  as  they  knew  nothing  of  what  they  did.  These
Lapps  are  excitable  to  such  a  degree,  that  they  are  thrown  into  insensibility  and
convulsions,  by  the  most  trifling  and  unexpected  occurrence,  such  as  a  sound,  or
a  spark  of  fire.  In  the  church  they  often  fall  into  insensibility  when  the  preacher
speaks  too  loud  or  gesticulates  too  much  ;  while  others,  on  the  contrary,  jump  up
as  if  mad,  rush  out  of  the  church,  knock  down  all  who  oppose  them,  and  even
strike  their  friends  and  neighbors."

"Pallas  relates  that  the  Schamans,  the  Samozedes,  the  Katschinzes  and  other
north  Asiatic  nations,  are  so  extremely  excitable,  that  it  is  only  requisite  to  touch
them  unexpectedly  to  disturb  their  whole  organization,  to  excite  their  imagination
and  make  them  lose  all  self-command.  Each  one  infects  the  person  next  to  him
sympathetically,  so  that  in  this  manner  whole  neighborhoods  fall  into  fear,  uneasi-
ness and  confusion.  Pallas  relates  of  some  girls  among  the  Katschinzes,  that
they  feel  simultaneous  sufi'ering  as  soon  as  one  of  their  number  becomes  ill.  '  For
the  last  few  years,'  says  he^   '  a   species  of   insanity  has  made  its    appearance

293

iunoiig  the  young  girls  of  the  Katschinzes  as  if  by  infection.  When  they  have
these  fits  they  run  out  of  the  villages,  scream,  and  behave  with  the  greatest  wild-
ness,  tear  their  hair,  and  endeavor  to  hang  and  drown  themselves.  These  attacks
last  usually  some  hours,  and  occur  when  their  sympathy  has  been  excited  by  the
sight  of  other  girls  in  a  similar  condition,  without  any  certain  order— sometimes
weekly,  at  other  times  not  appearing  for  months.'  All  these  and  similar  phenom-
ena are  related  by  Georgi  of  the  Mongol  and  Tartar  races,  who  all  have  the  same
common  origin."

Our  next  quotation  will  be  from  a  series  of  autobiograph-
ical sketches,  entitled  ''  Ghost  Land/'  written  by  the  author
of  this  work,  published  by  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  in  her
admirable  American  periodical,  "  The  Western  Star."

''  In  Lapland,  Finland,  and  the  northeastern  part  of
Tlussia,  our  new  acquaintances  had  beheld  so  many  evi-
dences of  inborn  occult  powers  amongst  the  natives,  that
they  had  come  to  a  conclusion  which  the  well  informed
Spiritualist  of  modern  times  will  no  doubt  be  ready  to  en-
dorse, and  that  is,  that  certain  individuals  of  the  race  are
so  peculiarly  endowed,  that  they  live,  as  it  were,  on  the
borders  of  the  invisible  world,  and  from  time  to  time  see,
hear,  act,  and  think  under  its  influence,  as  naturally  as
other  individuals  do  who  are  only  capable  of  sensing  mate-
rial and  external  things.

^'  Moreover,  our  friends  had  arrived  at  the  opinion  that
certain  localities  and  climactric  influences  were  favorable
or  otherwise  to  the  development  of  these  innate  occult  en-
dowments.

"  Experience  had  shown  them  that  mountainous  regions,
or  highly  rarefied  atmospheres,  constituted  the  best  physi-
cal conditions  for  the  evolvement  of  magical  powers,  and
they  therefore  argued  that  the  great  prevalence  of  super-
mundane beliefs  and  legendary  lore  in  those  latitudes
arises  from  the  fact,  that  intercourse  with  the  interior
realms  of  being  are  the  universal  experience  of  the  people,
not  that  they  are  more  ignorant  or  superstitious  than  other
races.     Lord  D had  brouo-ht  to  England  with  him  a

294

''  Schaman,"  or  priest,  of  a  certain  district  in  Russia,
where  he  had  given  extraordinary  evidence  of  his  powers.
This  man's  custom  was  to  arrav  himself  in  a  robe  of  state,
trimmed  with  the  finest  furs  and  loaded  with  precious
stones,  amongst  which  clear  crystals  were  the  most  es-
teemed.

''In  this  costume,  with  head,  arms,  and  feet  bare,  the
Schaman  would  proceed  to  beat  a  magical  drum,  made
after  a  peculiar  fashion,  and  adorned  with  a  variety  of
symbolical  and  fantastic  paintings.

'^  Commencing  his  exercises  by  simply  standing  within
a  circle  traced  on  the  ground,  and  beating  his  drum  in  Ioav,
rhythmical  cadence  to  his  muttered  chantings,  the  Schaman
would  gradually  rise  to  a  condition  of  uncontrollable
frenzy  ;  his  hands  would  acquire  a  muscular  power  and  ra-
pidity which  caused  the  drum  to  resound  with  the  wildest
clamor,  and  strokes  which  defied  the  power  of  man  to
count.

''  His  body,  meantime,  would  sway  to  and  fro,  spin
round,  and  finally  be  elevated  and  even  suspended  several
feet  in  the  air,  by  a  power  wholly  unknown  to  the  wit-
nesses. His  cries  and  gesticulations  were  frightful,  and  the
whole  scene  of  '  manticism  '  would  end  by  the  performer's
sinking  on  the  earth  in  a  rigid  cataleptic  state,  during
which  he  spoke  oracular  sentences,  or  gave  answers  to
questions  with  a  voice  which  seemed  to  proceed  from  the
air  some  feet  above  his  prostrate  form.  During  my  stay
in  England  I  was  present  at  several  experin^ntal  perform-
ances wich  this  Schaman,  and  though  he  could  unques-
tionably predict  the  future  and  describe   correctly  distant

places  and  persons.  Professor  M and  myself  were  both

disappointed  in  the  results  which  we  expected  to  proceed
from  his  very  elaborate  modes  of  inducing  the  '  mantic '
frenzy.     Lord  D accounted  for  the  inferiority  of  his

295

protege's  powers  by  stating  that  the  atmosphere  was  pre-
judicial to  his  peculiar  temperament,  and  though  he  had
striven  to  surround  him  with  favorable  conditions,  it  was
obvious  he  needed  the  specialties  of  his  native  soil  and  cli-
mate for  the  complete  evolvement  of  the  phenomena  he
had  been  accustomed  to  exhibit."

'^  We  found  another  class,  who  seemed  to  have  no  extra-
ordinary endowments  of  a  spiritual  nature,  yet  in  whom
the  most  wonderful  powers  of  inner  light,  curative  virtue,
and  prophetic  vision  could  be  awakened  through  artificial
means,  the  most  potent  of  which  were  the  inhalation  ot
mephitic  vapors,  pungent  essences,  or  narcotics  ;  the  action
of  clamorous  noise,  or  soothing  music  ;  the  process  of  look-
ing into  glittering  stones  and  crystals ;  excessive  and  vio-
lent action,  especially  in  a  circular  direction,  and  lastly,
through  the  exhalations  proceeding  from  the  warm  blood
of  animated  beings.  All  these  influences,  together  with
an  array  of  forms,  rites,  and  ceremonials  which  involve
mental  action,  and  captivate  the  senses,  I  now  affirm  to
constitute  the  art  of  ancient  magic,  and  I  moreover  believe
that  wherever  these  processes  are  systematically  resorted
to,  they  will,  in  more  or  less  force,  according  to  the  suscep-
tibility of  the  subject,  evoke  all  those  occult  powers  known
as  ecstasy,  somnambulism,  clairvoyance,  the  gifts  of  pro-
phecy, healing,  etc.

We  derived  another  item  of  philosophy  from  our  re-
searches, which  was,  that  under  the  influence  of  magical
processes,  the  human  organism  can  not  only  be  rendered
insensible  to  pain,  but  that  wounds,  bruises,  and  even  mu-
tilation can  be  inflicted  upon  it,  without  permanent  injury;
also,  that  it  can  be  rendered  positive  to  the  law  of  gravita-
tion, and  ascend  into  the  air  with  perfect  ease.

Also,  the  body  can  be  so  saturated  with  magnetism,  or
charged  with  spiritual  essence,  that  fire  cannot  burn  it  ;

296

in  a  word,  when  the  body  becomes  enveloped  in  the  inde-
structible essence  of  spirit,  or  the  soul  element,  it  can  be
made  wholly  positive  to  all  material  laws,  transcending
them  in  a  way  astonishing  and  inexplicable  to  all  unin-
structed  beholders.  Of  this  class  of  phenomena,  let  me
refer  to  the  '^  Convulsionaires  of  St.  Medard  ;"  tlie  history
of  the  "  French  Prophets  of  Avignon;"  the  still  more  re-
cent accounts  of  the  frightful  mental  epidemic  which  pre-
vailed in  the  district  of  Morzine  in  1864;  the  now  well
attested  facts  of  supermundane  power  enacted  by  the  Fa-
keers,  Brahmins,  and  ecstatics  of  the  East,  and  many  of  the
inexplicable  physical  and  mental  phenomena  attributed  to
monastic  ecstatics."

''Amongst  the  '  Convulsionaires  of  St.  Medard'  and  the
possessed  peasants  of  Morzine,  one  of  the  most  familiar  de-
monstrations of  an  extra-mundane  condition  was  the  delight
and  apparent  relief  which  the  sufferers  represented  them-
selves as  experiencing,  when  blows  violent  enough,  as  it
would  seem,  to  have  crushed  them  bone  by  bone,  were  ad-
ministered to  them.  At  the  tomb  of  the  Abbe  Paris,  and
amongst  the  frenzied  patients  of  Morzine,  the  most  pathetic
appeals  would  be  made  that  powerful  men  would  pound
their  bodies  with  huge  mallets,  and  the  cries  of  '  Heavier
yet,  good  brother  !  heavier  yet,  for  the  love  of  Heaven !'
were  amongst  the  words  most  constantly  uttered .

"  During  the  fearful  struggle  maintained  by  the  brave  and
devoted  prophets  of  the  Cevennes  against  their  oppressors,
every  history,  whether  favorable  or  antagonistic,  makes
mention  of  the  exhibitions  by  which  Cavillac  and  others  of
'  the  inspired,'  proved  their  ability,  under  the  afflatus  of
ecstasy,  to  resist  the  action  of  fire."

The  ancient  Chaldeans  acquired  this  art  not  by  any
magical  process,  but  by  the  knowledge  of  such  chemicals
as  asbestos,  and  other  substances  which  would  render  the

297

body  fire-proof.  The  French  Prophets,  and  many  spirit
mediums  of  the  nineteenth  century,  have  proved  their
power  to  resist  the  action  of  fire  unde7'  spiritual  afflatus.
Another  example,  if  more  were  wanting,  of  the  superiority
of  natural  spiritualistic  endowments,  over  the  most  occult
methods  of  magical  art.

298

SECTION  XVI.

Magic  amongst  the  Greeks  and  Romans — The  mysteries
of  Samothrace  and  Eleusis — tJte  Grecian  Sybils  and
Delphic  Oracle.

Magic  in  the  classical  lands  of  Greece  and  Rome  be-
comes so  thoroughly  transformed  from  the  solemn  meta-
physics of  India,  the  semi-savagism  of  Arabia,  and  the
profound  mysticism  of  Egypt,  by  the  young  life,  blossom-
ing intellect,  and  love  of  the  beautiful  which  characterized
Grecian  genius,  and  in  a  measure  imparted  its  grace  to  the
sterner  spirit  of  Rome,  that  no  attempt  to  condense  de-
scriptions of  their  spiritism  could  do  justice  to  the  subject.
On  the  other  hand  our  available  space  has  been  too  much
taken  up  with  analyses  of  the  underlying  principles  of  mag-
ical history  in  the  Orient — the  true  fatherland  of  magic —
either  to  permit  of,  or  to  need  our  dwelling  at  any  length
upon  these  fascinating  themes,  so  clearly  defined  as  the
poetry  of  life's  sterner  prose.

Magic,  sorcery  and  the  correspondingly  dark  shades  of
Spiritism,  were  not  in  harmony  with  the  graceful  and  elas-
tic character  of  classic  lands.  Their  peoples  loved  phi-
losophy, and  revelled  in  the  subtleties  of  thought,  as  por-
trayed through  the  brilliant  ideality  of  those  renowned
Sages  who  spangled  over  the  hemisphere  of  Greek  and
Roman  history  with  stars  of  immortal  lustre.

Strictly  speaking,  no  well  marked  systems  of  religious
belief  prevailed  in  Greece  and  Rome.  Their  Pantheon  of
countless  Gods  and  Goddesses  were  too  closely  allied  with
humanity   to   impress  their   votaries  with  the  awe   and

299

majesty  appropriate  to  the  idea  of  Deity,  and  even  their
most  exalted  flights  of  imagination  could  not  embody  the
creative  principle  in  aught  beyond  an  impersonated  Demi-
urgus.

As  we  have  already  premised  that  we  are  not  prepared
in  this  place  to  render  any  justice  to  the  abundant  and
mobile  shapes  in  which  spiritism  was  represented  in  classic
lands,  we  shall  limit  the  present  notice  to  a  brief  account
of  certain  specialties  not  found  in  former  sections,  illus-
trated by  the  famous  mysteries  of  Eleusis,  and  the  Sybil-
line  women  of  Greece.

The  Samothracian  mysteries  date  back  to  the  earliest
periods  of  Grecian  history,  and  attempts  have  been  made
to  show,  that  in  these  veiled  rites  the  use  of  the  loadstone,
the  secret  powers  of  electricity,  and  the  twin  fires  of  mag-
netism were  brought  into  play,  and  hence  arose  the  wor-
ship of  the  constellated  Deities  Castor  and  Pollux.

There  is  little  cotemporaneous  evidence,  however,  to
show  that  the  Samothracians  possessed  any  practical
knowledge  of  mineral  magnetism,  or  understood  the  use
of  the  loadstone,  although  they  cherished  a  deep  and  su-
perstitious reverence  for  its  mysterious  properties  of  attrac-
tion and  repulsion.

The  highest  and  most  elaborate  rites,  a  knowledge  ot
which  has  descended  to  us  from  the  days  of  antiquity,
were  those  of  Eleusis  and  Bacchus  in  Greece,  and  the
Saturnalia  of  Rome.  These,  no  less  than  the  Samothra-
cian rites,  were  unquestionably  derived  from  Egypt,  and
as  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  probably  afford  the  best  repre-
sentation of  their  famous  Egyptian  model,  the  Isic  and
Osiric  mysteries,  it  is  to  a  brief  account  of  this  famous
pageant  that  we  shall  call  our  readers'  attention.  So  much
has  been  written  in  fragments  concerning  these  great
mysteries,  and  the  general   tone  of  every  description    so

300

invariably  pre-supposes  that  the  reader  is  already  ac-
quainted with  the  basic  ideas  upon  which  it  discourses,
that  we  deem  it  not  out  of  place  to  present  a  consecutive
statement  of  the  myth,  as  well  as  the  underlying  princi-
ples upon  which  these  mysteries  were  founded.  For  this
purpose  we  avail  ourselves  of  an  admirable  edition  of
Taylor's  Eleusinian  and  Bacchic  rites,  published  by  Dr.
Alexander  Wilder,  of  New  York,  in  1876.  We  quote
an  abridged  account  of  the  legend  rendered  by  Minutius
Felix,  in  Thomas  Taylor's  translation.  This  author  says :
^'  '  Proserpina,  the  daughter  of  Ceres  by  Jupiter,  as  she
was  gathering  tender  flowers,  in  the  new  spring,  was
ravished  from  her  delightful  abodes  by  Pluto,  and  being
carried  from  thence  through  thick  woods,  and  over  a  length
of  sea,  was  brought  by  Pluto  into  a  cavern,  the  residence
of  departed  spirits,  over  whom  she  afterwards  ruled  with
absolute  sway.  But  Ceres,  upon  discovering  the  loss  of
her  daughter,  with  lighted  torches,  and  begirt  with  a  ser-
pent, wandered  over  the  whole  earth  for  the  purpose  of
finding  her,  till  she  came  to  Eleusis ;  there  she  found  her
daughter,  and  also  taught  to  the  Eleusinians  the  cultiva-
tion of  corn.'  Now  in  this  fable,  Ceres  represents  the  evo-
lution of  that  intuitional  part  of  our  nature  which  we
properly  denominate  intellect^  and  Proserpina  that  living,
self-moving,  and  animating  part  which  we  call  soul.  But
in  order  to  understand  the  secret  meaning  of  this  fable,  it
will  be  necessary  to  give  a  more  explicit  detail  of  the  par-
ticulars attending  the  abduction,  from  the  beautiful  poem
of  Claudian  on  this  subject.  From  this  elegant  production
we  learn  that  Ceres,  who  was  afraid  lest  some  violence
should  be  offered  to  Proserpina,  on  account  of  her  inimit-
able beauty,  conveyed  her  privately  to  Sicily,  and  con-
cealed her  in  a  house  built  on  purpose  by  the  Cyclopes,
while    she  herself  directs    her    course   to    the   temple  of

301

Cybele,  the  mother  of  the  Gods.  Here  then  we  see  the
first  cause  of  the  soul's  descent,  namely  the  abandoning  of  a
life  wholly  according  to  the  higher  intellect,  which  is  oc-
cultly signified  by  the  separation  of  Proserpina  from  Ceres.
Afterward,  we  are  told  that  Jupiter  instructs  Venus  to  go
to  this  abode,  and  betray  Proserpina  from  her  retirement,
that  Pluto  may  be  enabled  to  carry  her  away  ;  and  to  pre-
vent any  suspicion  in  the  virgin's  mind,  he  commands
Diana  and  Pallas  to  go  in  company.  The  three  Goddesses
arriving,  find  Proserpina  at  work  on  a  scarf  for  her
mother ;  in  which  she  had  embroidered  the  primitive
chaos,  and  the  formation  of  the  world.  Now  by  Venus
in  this  part  of  the  narration  we  must  understand  desire^
which,  even  in  the  celestial  regions  (for  such  is  the  resi-
dence of  Proserpina  till  she  is  ravished  by  Pluto),  begins
silently  and  stealthily  to  creep  into  the  recesses  of  the
soul.  By  Minerva  we  must  conceive  the  rational  power  of
the  soidj  and  by  Diana,  nature^  or  the  merely  natural  and
vegetable  part  of  our  composition ;  both  which  are  now
ensnared  through  the  allurements  of  desire.  And  lastly,
the  web  in  which  Proserpina  had  displayed  all  the  fair
variety  of  the  material  world,  beautifully  represents  the
commencement  of  the  illusive  operations  through  which
the  soul  becomes  ensnared  with  the  beauty  of  imaginative
forms.

''  Proserpina,  forgetful  of  her  parent's  commands,  is  rep-
resented as  venturing  from  her  retreat,  through  the  treach-
erous persuasions  of  Venus.

"  After  this   we  behold  her  issuing  on  the  plain  with
'  Minerva  and  Diana,  and  attended  by  a  beauteous  train  of
nymphs,  who  are  evident  symbols  of  the  world  of  genera-
tion, and  are,  therefore,  the  proper  companions  of  the  soul
about  to  fall  into  its  fluctuating  realms.

"  But  the  design  of  Proserpina,  in  venturing  from  her  re-

302

treat,  is  beautifully  significant  of  her  approaching  descent ;
for  she  rambles  from  home  for  the  purpose  of  gathering
flowers  ;  and  this  in  a  lawn  replete  with  the  most  enchant-
ing variety,  and  exhaling  the  most  delicious  odors.  This
is  a  manifest  image  of  the  soul  operating  principally  ac-
cording to  the  natural  and  external  life,  and  so  becoming
effeminated  and  ensnared  through  the  delusive  attractions
of  sensible  form.  Minerva  (the  rational  faculty  in  this
case),  likewise  gives  herself  wholly  to  the  dangerous  em-
ployment, and  abandons  the  proper  characteristics  of  her
nature  for  the  destructive  revels  of  desire.

''  After  this,  Pluto,  forcing  his  passage  through  the  earth,
seizes  on  Proserpina,  and  carries  her  away  with  him,  not-
withstanding the  resistance  of  Minerva  and  Diana.  They,
indeed,  are  forbid  by  Jupiter,  who  in  this  place  signifies
Fate,  to  attempt  her  deliverance.

"  Pluto  hurries  Proserpina  into  the  infernal  regions  :  in
other  words,  the  soul  is  sunk  into  the  profound  depth  and
darkness  of  a  material  nature.  A  description  of  her  mar-
riage next  succeeds  her  union  with  the  dark  tenement  of
the  body.

"  Night  is  with  great  beauty  and  propriety  introduced  as
standing  by  the  nuptial  couch,  and  confirming  the  oblivi-
ous league.  For  the  soul  through  her  union  with  a  mate-
rial body  becomes  an  inhabitant  of  darkness,  and  subject
to  the  empire  of  night ;  in  consequence  of  which  she
dwells  wholly  with  delusive  phantoms,  and  till  she  breaks
her  fetters  is  deprived  of  the  intuitive  perception  of  that
which  is  real  and  true.

"  The  reader  may  observe  how  Proserpina,  being  repre-
sented as  confined  in  the  dark  recess  of  a  prison,  and  bound
with  fetters,  confirms  the  explanation  of  the  fable  here
given  as  symbolical  of  the  descent  of  the  soul ;  for  such,  as
we  have  already  largely  proved,  is  the   condition  of  the

303

soul  from  its  union  with  the  body,  according  to  the  uniform
testimony  of  the  most  ancient  philosophers  and  priests.

"  After  this,  the  wanderings  of  Ceres  for  the  discovery  of
Proserpina  commence.  Begirt  with  a  serpent,  and  bearing
two  lighted  torches  in  her  hands,  she  commences  her  search
by  night  in  a  car  drawn  by  dragons.  The  tears  and
lamentations  of  Ceres,  in  her  course,  are  symbolical  both
of  the  providential  operations  of  intellect  about  a  mortal
nature,  and  ine  miseries  with  which  such  operations  are
attended.

"  These  -sacred  rites  occupied  the  space  of  nine  days  in
their  celebration ;  and  this,  doubtless,  because,  according
to  Homer, "^  this  Goddess  did  not  discover  the  residence  of
her  daughter  till  the  expiration  of  that  period.  Hence  the
first  day  of  initiation  into  these  mystic  rites  was  called
agurmos^  i.  e,  according  to  Hesychius,  an  assembly^  and  all
collecting  together  :

"  After  this,  the  soul  falls  from  the  tropic  of  Cancer  into
the  planet  Saturn  ;  and  to  this  the  second  day  of  initiation
was  consecrated,  when  they  called  '  to  the  sea,  ye  initiated
ones !'  because,  says  Meursius,  on  that  day  the  crier  was
accustomed  to  admonish  the  mystaB  to  betake  themselves
to  the  sea.  Now  the  meaning  of  this  will  be  easily  under-
stood, by  considering  that,  according  to  the  arcana  of  the
ancient  theology,  as  may  be  learned  from  Proclus,  the  whole
planetary  system  is  under  the  dominion  of  Neptune.  Hence
when  the  soul  falls  into  the  planet  Saturn,  which  Capella
compares  to  a  river  voluminous,  sluggish,  and  cold,  she  then
first  merges  herself  into  fluctuating  matter,  of  which  water
is  an  ancient  and  significant  symbol.     But  the  eighth  day

*  Hymn  to  Ceres.  "  For  nine  days  did  holy  Demeter  perambulate  the  earth  .  .
and  when  the  ninth  shining  morn  had  come,  Hecate  met  her,  bringing  news."

Apuleius  also  explains  that  at  the  initiation  into  the  Mysteries  of  Isis  the  candi-
date was  enjoined  to  abstain  from  luxurious  food  for  ten  days,  from  the  flesh  of
animals,  and  from  wine.

304

of  initiation,  which  is  symbolical  of  the  falling  of  the  soul
into  the  lunar  orb,  was  celebrated  by  the  candidates  by  a
repeated  initiation  and  second  sacred  rites  ;  because  the  soul  in
this  situation  is  about  to  bid  adieu  to  everything  of  a  ce-
lestial nature ;  to  sink  into  a  perfect  oblivion  of  her  divine
origin  and  pristine  felicity  ;  and  to  rush  profoundly  into  the
region  of  ignorance  and  error. "^  And  lastly,  on  the  ninth
day,  when  the  soul  falls  into  the  sublunary  world  and  be-
comes united  with  a  terrestrial  body,  a  libation  was  per-
formed, such  as  is  usual  in  sacred  rites.  Here  the  Initiates,
filling  two  earthen  vessels  sacred  to  Bacchus,  they  placed
one  towards  the  east,  and  the  other  towards  the  west.  And
the  first  of  these  was  doubtless,  according  to  the  interpret-
ation of  Proclus,  sacred  to  the  earth,  and  symbolical  of
the  soul  proceeding  from  an  orbicular  figure,  or  divine  form,
into  a  conical  defluxion  and  terrene  situation :  t  but  the
other  was  sacred  to  the  soul,  and  symbolical  of  its  celestial
origin ;  since  our  intellect  is  the  legitimate  progeny  of
Bacchus.  And  this  too  was  occultly  signified  by  the  po-
sition of  the  earthen  vessels  ;  for,  according  to  a  mundane
distribution  of  the  divinities,  the  eastern  centre  of  the  uni-
verse, which  is  analogous  to  fire,  belongs  to  Jupiter,  and
the  western  to  Pluto,  who  governs  the  earth,  because  the
west  is  allied  to  earth  on  account  of  its  dark  and  nocturnal
nature.

"  Again,  according  to  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  the  follow-
ing confession  was  made  by  the  new  Initiate  in. these  sacred
rites,  in  answer  to  the  interrogations  of  the  Hierophant :
<  I  have  fasted ;  I  have  drank  the  Cyceon ;  I  have  taken
out  of  the  Cista,  and  placed  what  I  have  taken  out  into  the
Calathus ;  and  alternately  I  have  taken  out  of  the  Cala-
thus  and  put  into  the  Cista.'

*  The  condition  most  unlike  the  former  divine  estate.

+  An  orbicular  figure  symbolized  the  maternal,  and  a  cone  the  masculine  divine
Energy.

305

''  We  may  easily  perceive  the  meaning  of  the  mystic  con-
fession, /  have  fasted ;  I  have  drank  a  mingled  potion^  etc.;
for  by  the  former  part  of  the  assertion,  no  more  is  meant
than  that  the  higher  intellect,  previous  to  imbibing  of  ob-
livion through  the  deceptive  arts  of  a  corporeal  life,  ab-
stains from  all  material  concerns,  and  does  not  mingle  itself
with  even  the  necessary  delights  of  the  body.  And  as  to
the  latter  part,  it  alludes  to  the  descent  of  Proserpina  to
Hades,  and  her  re-ascent  to  the  abodes  of  her  mother  Ceres :
that  is.  to  the  outgoing  and  return  of  the  Soul,  alternately
falling  into  generation,  and  ascending  thence  into  the  intel-
ligible world,  and  becoming  perfectly  restored  to  her  divine
and  intellectual  nature.  For  the  Cista  contained  the  most
arcane  symbols  of  the  Mysteries,  into  which  it  was  unlaw-
ful for  the  profane  to  look.  As  to  its  contents, "^  we  learn
from  the  hymn  of  Callimachus  to  Ceres,  that  they  were
formed  from  gold,  which,  from  its  incorruptibility,  is  an
evident  symbol  of  an  immaterial  nature.  And  as  to  the
Calathus,  or  basket,  this,  as  we  are  told  by  Claudian,  was
filled  with  the  spoils  or  fruits  of  the  fields  which  are  mani-
fest symbols  of  a  life  corporeal  and  earthly.  So  that  the
candidate,  by  confessing  that  he  had  taken  from  the  Cista,
and  placed  what  he  had  taken  into  the  Calathus,  and  the
contrary,  occultly  acknowledged  the  descent  of  his  soul
from  a  condition  of  being  supra -material  and  immortal,  in-
to one  material  and  mortal ;  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  by
living  according  to  the  purity  which  the  Mysteries  incul-
cated, he  should  re-ascend  to  that  perfection  of  his  nature,
from  which  he  had  unhappily  fallen."

Throughout  this  curious  fable  it  must  be  borne  in  mind

*  A  golden  serpent,  an  egg,  and  the  phallus.  The  epopt  looking  upon  these,  was
rapt  with  awe  as  contemplating  in  the  symbols  the  deeper  mysteries  of  all  life,  or
being  of  a  grosser  temper,  took  a  lascivious  impression.  Thus  as  a  seer,  he  beheld
with  the  eyes  of  sense  or  sentiment ;  and  the  real  apocalypse  was  therefore  that
made  to  himself  of  his  own  moral  life  and  character.

306

that  the  Egypticans,  Greeks,  and  all  ancient  as  well  as
classic  nations  believed  in  the  doctrines  recited  in  the
earlier  sections  of  this  work,  namely  :  that  the  Soul  had
once  existed  in  a  purely  spiritual  state  ;  that,  tempted  by
the  demands  of  sense,  it  had  yearned  for  mortal  birth —
descended  or  fallen  into  an  earthly  condition,  and  by  its
probationary  sufferings  and  trials  on  earth,  regained  the
Paradisaical  bliss  from  which  it  had  fallen  (vide  sections
2  and  3).  These  ideas  are  represented  in  the  myth  of
Proserpine,  and  constituted  the  chief  legend  of  all  the
ancient  mysteries.  At  the  point,  however,  where  our  quo-
tations cease,  it  is  proper  to  state  that  the  drama  proceeds
after  a  fashion,  the  direct  simplicity  of  which  is  a  part  of
that  arcanum  wherein  the  ancients  represented  the  Soul's
alliance  with  and  birth  into  material  form  through  earthly
generation.

The  plainness  of  speech  and  characteristic  nature  of
the  symbols  employed,  would  prove  revolting  to  our  mod-
ern sense  of  propriety  ;  but  most  learned  commentators
admit  that  the  ancients  sought  to  strengthen  the  Soul
against  sensual  indulgence  by  familiarizing  the  mind  with
ideas  and  forms  connected  with  sensual  rites.

Jamblichus  excuses  this  part  of  the  mysteries,  and
especially  the  dramatic  scenes  which  depict  the  descent  of
the  Soul  into  earth  through  human  generation,  by  saying :

"  Exhibitions  of  this  kind  in  the  Mysteries  were  designed
to  free  us  from  licentious  passions,  by  gratifying  the  sight,
and  at  the  same  time  vanquishing  desire,  through  the  awful
sanctity  with  which  these  rites  were  accompanied ;  for  the
proper  way  of  freeing  ourselves  from  the  passions  is — first,
to  indulge  them  with  moderation,  by  which  means  they
become  satisfied  ;  listen,  as  it  were,  to  persuasion,  and  pas-
sion may  thus  be  entirely  removed."

The  mysteries  were  divided  into  two  sections,  of  which

307

the  first  or  lesser  mysteries  were  mere  rudimentary  states,
during  which  the  Neophyte  was  supposed  to  undergo  those
embryonic  conditions  necessary  to  prepare  him  for  the
higher  revelations  of  the  great  mysteries.  In  the  first,
the  candidate  was  called  a  Mysta,  or  ^'  veiled  one  ;"  in  the
second,  he  became  an  Epopta,  or  Seer,  and  was  henceforth
deemed  exalted  to  the  highest  attainable  knowledge  of
human  life  and  destiny,  and  the  highest  condition  of  puri-
ty which  ceremonial  rites  could  typify.

The  chief  aim  in  these  celebrations  was  to  impress  the
Neophyte  throughout,  with  the  sacredness  and  divine  sig-
nificance of  life,  generation,  the  generative  functions,  and
all  the  rites  and  symbols  thereto  belonging.

The  ministering  Priests  were  all  persons  of  the  purest
lives  and  most  ascetic  habits.  Their  garments  and  vessels
were  consecrated,  their  ornaments  of  the  most  splendid
character,  and  ''  their  performances  dignified  with  a  lofty
bearing  impossible  to  be  described."  All  who  took  part  in
these  rites  were  required  to  be  of  pure  life  and  unspotted
name.  No  notoriously  evil  doer  could  be  admitted  even
to  the  lesser  mysteries,  and  every  candidate  was  required
to  observe  long  fasts,  strict  asceticism,  prepare  for  the  cere-
monies by  ablutions,  and  many  purifications,  and  present
themselves  unspotted  in  mind,  body  and  garments,  and
crowned  with  freshly  gathered  wreaths  of  myrtle.

The  Temple  devoted  to  this  purpose  was  vast  and  gor-
geous. It  was  full  of  magnificent  halls,  solemn  crypts,
long  galleries,  winding  passages  ascending  and  descending,
fearful  precipices,  steep  rocks  and  gloomy  caverns.

The  whole  order  of  these  wonderful  buildings  was  de-
signed to  typify  the  procession  of  the  Soul's  spiritual  ori-
gin, descent  into  matter,  its  struggles,  trials,  temptations,
new  birth,  final  regeneration,  and  re-ascent  to  the  supernal
glories  of  the  Elysian  realms,  from  which  it  was  assumed

308

to  have  fallen.  During  the  rites,  the  Neophyte  was  con*
ducted  through  scenes  most  terrible  to  endure,  most  trying
to  all  the  senses.  Sometimes  he  was  enveloped  in  thick
darkness,  and  assailed  with  shrieks,  groans ;  wails  and  lam-
entations, symbolical  of  the  despairing  condition  of  the  lost
Souls  peering  through  flames  and  torments  in  the  realms
of  Pluto.

Peals  of  crashing  thunder  distracted  him  with  terror;
forked  lightnings  gleamed  fltfully  through  darksome  abodes,
revealing  the  forms  of  hissing  serpents,  ferocious  beasts,
and  sheeted  spectres,  doomed  to  perdition.  One  of  the  final
scenes  of  this  tremendous  I)rama,  was  the  descent  of  the
appalled  Neophyte  through  a  rifted  rock  designed  to  typify
the  Yoni,  and  thence  through  a  rough  and  narrow  cleft,
the  struggling  victim  emerged  into  a  fearful  and  unknown
realm,  the  perils  of  which  he  could  only  surmise  by  the
awful  stillness  around  him,  broken  by  low  groans  and  con-
vulsive sobs,  designed  to  signify  the  agonies  oi  new  birth,
and  a  physical  process  of  regeneration.  Drawn  through
the  sacred  waters  of  a  new  baptism,  and  borne  onward  by
invisible  conductors,  the  half  dead  Initiate  was  left  for
awhile  to  repose  after  the  tremendous  struggle  of  final
emergement  through  the  stony  matrix.  It  was  unques-
tionably from  this  great  central  idea  of  the  ancient  myste-
ries that  the  Christians  have  derived  their  doctrines  of  the
new  birth  and  regeneration ;  words  which,  to  all  but  true
Initiates,  are  merely  words,  and  significant  of  nothing  more
than  a  senseless  mystery.

After  the  great  final  trial,  the  Soul,  by  passing  through
the  allegorical  new  birth,  was  deemed  to  have  become  spot-
less and  innocent  as  a  babe.  Holy  hymns  were  chanted,
eloquent  appeals  to  the  Initiate's  constancy  and  virtue
were  uttered ;  he  was  ushered  into  a  magnificent  Temple,
where  a  colossal  image  of  the  glorious   Maternal  Goddess

309

burst  upon  his  sight,  surrounded  with  all  the  pageantry  and
pomp  of  Grecian  luxury,  art,  and  splendor.  Scenes  of
dazzling  beauty  and  supernal  glory  opened  upon  his  rav-
ished vision.  Exquisite  representations  of  the  Elysian
fields  allured  him  to  ramble  amidst  their  flowery  glades.
Forms  of  unearthly  loveliness  surrounded  him  ;  strains  of
delicious  music  and  songs  of  penetrating  sweetness  filled
his  soul  with  rapture,  and  lifted  him  up  to  ecstasy.

Many  of  the  noblest  Sages  of  antiquity  passing  through
these  stupendous  rites,  have  affirmed,  that  their  eyes  be-
held the  forms  of  the  Gods,  looked  upon  heavenly  scenes,
dazzling  suns,  blazing  stars,  and  figures  of  resplendent  glory
that  were  not  of  this  earth.  Visions  of  the  blest  in  their
abodes  of  Paradise  glanced  before  them,  and  triumphant
lyrics  were  heard  chanted  by  no  mortal  lips.  Why  should
we  doubt  these  repeated  assertions  of  the  great,  the  wise,
and  the  inspired  ones  of  old  ?  On  the  contrary,  is  it  pos-
sible to  imagine  that  any  truly  sensitive  nature  could  par-
take of  such  scenes  without  unfolding  to  a  higher  life  and
more  exalted  powers  than  they  had  ever  enjoyed  before  7

The  physical  nature  was  under  complete  subjection.
The  magnetic  life  of  powerful  Adepts  permeated  the  air,
and  filled  the  Temple  with  Astral  light  and  life.

The  invocations,  prayers  and  fervent  aspirations  poured
forth  by  the  Neophytes,  must  have  charged  the  Temple
spaces  with  Soul  aura,  and  transformed  it  into  a  spirit
sphere.  If  there  was  a  spark  of  luminosity  in  the  Souls
of  those  who  toiled  through  these  tremendous  initiatory
processes,  they  must  have  been  enkindled  into  celestial
flame  then  or  never,  and  it  is  equally  impossible  to  con-
ceive of  the  existence  of  spiritual  realms,  and  suppose
their  inhabitants  were  not  attracted  to  their  earthly  loves,
and  the  subjects  of  their  tenderest  care  and  ministry  in
these   hours  of  exaltation  and  trial.      The  Soul's  powers

310

must  have  been  quickened,  the  spiritual  senses  must  have
been  awakened,  and  it  could  not  be  otherwise  than  a
true  season  of  new  birth  or  regeneration.

And  thus  it  was  that  so  many  Initiates  came  forth  from
these  mysteries  changed  both  in  body  and  mind ;  hence,
that  so  many  regarded  them  with  a  reverence  unspeakable,
and  memories  so  hallowed,  that  it  left  an  impress  on  the
entire  of  their  after  lives.  Neither  can  we  wonder  that  it
was  the  policy  of  governments  to  uphold  these  sacred
mysteries;  of  legislators  to  constitute  them  one  of  the
most  essential  portions  of  ancient  theocratic  institutions.

Amidst  all  the  temptations  to  linger  in  description  which
the  graceful  imagery,  sparkling  fancy  and  abundant
Mythology  of  Greek  Spiritism  abounds  with,  we  are  only
privileged  to  pause  for  one  more  notice,  and  that  is  of  the
famous  Sibylline  women  by  whom  the  Oracles  of  Greece
were  delivered  for  so  many  centuries,  and  for  this  purpose
we  select  a  few  excerpts  from  a  comprehensive  and  au-
thentic sketch,  taken  from  the  Western  Star  before  quoted,
and  written  by  the  fluent  pen  of  Emma  Hardin^e  Brit-
ten :

The  Cumcean  Sibyl,  and  the  Pythla  of  DelpJil.

''  Some  classical  authors  have  limited  the  number  of
Sibyls  to  four,  but  the  generality  of  ancient  writers  give  a
list  of  ten.  to  whom  they  assign  names  according  to  the
countries  of  their  birth.     Yarro  thus  enumerates  them  :

"  The  Delphian, — elder  and  younger ;  the  Cimerian,  and
two  Sibyls,  both  named  Erythraen ;  the  Samian,  the  Cu-
maean ;  the  Hellespontian,  the  Phrygian,  and  the  Tiburt-
ine.  Of  all  these,  the  Camgean  and  the  Delphian  have  been
the  most  renowned.  It  is  to  the  Cumaean  Sibyl  that  is  at-
tributed the  authorship  of  the  famous  Sibylline  books,  the
sale  of  which  to  King  Tarquinius,  by  an  unknown  old

311      .

woman  (supposed  to  have  been  the  Sibyl  herself)  all  clas-
sical historians  have  frequently  mentioned.  These  books
were  nine  in  number  when  first  tendered  for  sale  to  the
king.  When  he  refused  to  purchase  them,  the  old  woman
threw  three  of  them  into  the  fire,  and  returning  to  the
king,  demanded  the  same  price  as  before  for  the  remaining
six.  The  offer  being  still  refused,  the  unknown  destroyed
three  more  of  her  singular  wares,  and  again  returning,  de-
manded the  same  price  for  the  three,  which  she  had  asked
in  the  first  instance  for  the  whole  nine.  Struck  with  the
oddity  of  this  proceeding,  Tarquinius  paid  the  price  de-
manded, but  no  sooner  became  possessed  of  the  books,  than
the  old  woman  who  had  sold  them  disappeared.

On  examination,  the  contents  of  the  volumes  proved  to
be  the  vaticinations  of  the  renowned  Sibyls,  and  so  great
was  the  value  set  upon  these  writings,  that  Tarquinius  ap-
pointed two  officials,  especially  charged  with  the  duty  of
guarding  them,  and  only  permitting  them  to  be  inspected
and  consulted  by  duly  constituted  authorities,  in  seasons  of
great  national  emergency.  Notwithstanding  the  high  re-
spect with  which  the  Sibylline  writings  were  regarded,  the
original  volumes  purchased  by  Tarquinius  were  destroyed
by  fire.  Other  monarchs  caused  fresh  collections  to  be
made,  and  the  most  careful  researches  were  instituted  to
gather  up  and  preserve  all  the  Sibylline  writings  extant.
Notwithstanding  this,  several  succeeding  collections  shared
the  fate  of  their  predecessor  ;  so  it  is  lair  to  conclude  that
the  voluminous  mass  of  books  attributed  to  the  Sibyls,  and
quoted  by  the  early  Christian,  as  well  as  heathen  authors,
in  support  of  their  favorite  dogmas,  contained  as  many  in-
terpolations as  genuine  writings  ;  indeed,  it  is  questionable
whether  any  of  the  original  Sibylline  vaticinations  sur-
vived the  wreck  of  fire  and  revolution,  which  consumed
the  most  valuable  records  of  those  stormy  times.     On  the

312

question  of  the  number  of  those  whom  history  has  desig-
nated the  Sibyls,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  many
prophetic  women,  who  succeeded  each  other  in  the  temple
services  of  different  districts,  were  called  by  the  same
name,  so  that,  in  fact,  the  classification  of  Yarro,  given
above,  applies  rather  to  the  places  with  which  they  were
associated,  than  to  the  accual  limitation  of  their  numbers.
There  seems  to  have  been  some  points  of  difference  be-
tween the  Priestesses,  the  Pythia  of  Delphi,  wandering
Prophetesses,  and  the  personages  mentioned  as  Sibyls.  The
fact  that  so  many  women  of  antiquity  manifested  prophetic
powers,  and  were  so  frequently  endowed  with  the  faculty
of  rendering  oracular  responses  under  the  afflatus  of  what
was  deemed  '  Divine  inspiration,  '  renders  it  a  task  of  some
difiiculty  to  discriminate  amongst  the  variety  of  powers
from  which  they  derived  celebrity."

a  Virgil,  in  describing  the  Cumaean  Sibyl,  says  she  was
born  in  the  district  of  Troy,  but  went  to  Italy,  where  for  a
time  she  dwelt  in  a  cavern  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Avernian
lake.

"  She  sometimes  wrote  her  oracles  upon  palm  leaves,
which  she  laid  at  the  entrance  of  her  cave,  suffering  the
winds  to  scatter  them,  and  bear  them  whither  the  Gods
directed.  At  other  times,  she  gave  responses  orallj^  to  those
who  came  to  consult  her,  and  many  chapters  could  be
written  on  the  marvelous  accuracy  of  her  prophecies,  and
the  remarkable  lucidity  with  which  she  delivered  her  de-
scriptions of  distant  persons  and  things.  In  writing  of  this
'  Sacred  Maid,'  as  he  styles  her,  Virgil  gives  the  following
well-known  delineation  of  her  '  Corybantic'  modes  of  pro-
phesying :

"  Aloud  she  cries,
'  This  is  the  time  !  inquire  your  destinies !
He  comes  !     Behold  the  god  V    Thus,  while  she  said,
And  shiv'riug  at  the  sacred  entiy  staid,

313

Her  color  changed,  her  face  was  not  the  same,
And  hollow  groans  from  her  deep  spirit  came  \
Her  hair  stood  up,  convulsive  rage  possessed
Her  trembling  limbs,  and  heaved  her  laboring  breast.
Greater  than  human  kind  she  seemed  to  look,
And  with  an  accent  more  than  mortal  spoke.
Her  staring  eyes  with  sparkling  fury  roll,
And  all  the  Grod  came  rushing  on  her  soul.
Struggling  in  vain,  impatient  of  her  load,
And  laboring  underneath  the  ponderous  God,
The  more  she  strove  to  shake  him  from  her  breast,
"With,  more  and  far  superior  force  he  pressed,
Commands  bis  entrance,  and  without  contest
Usurps  her  organs,  and  inspires  her  soul."

Dry  den's  Translation  of  ^neis,  Book  VI.

'^  This  Cumsen  Sibyl  declares  of  herself:

"  I  am  entirely  on  the  stretch,  and  my  body  is  so  stupefied  that  I  do  not  know
what  I  say,  but  the  God  commands  me  to  speak  :  "Why  must  I  publish  my  song  to
every  one  ?  and  when  my  spirit  rests,  after  the  divine  hymn,  the  God  commands
rae  to  vaticinate  (prophesy)  again.  I  know  the  number  of  the  grains  of  sand,  and
the  measure  of  the  sun.  I  know  the  height  of  the  earth,  and  the  number  of  men,
stars,  trees,  and  beasts."

''  The  Cumaean  Sibyl,  amongst  other  very  important
prophecies,  foretold  that  terrific  eruption  of  Vesuvius,  in
which  Pliny,  the  naturalist,  is  said  to  have  perished,  and
so  many  cites  were  destroyed.  She  wrote,  besides,  many
books  which  were  held  in  the  highest  veneration  by  the
Romans,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  original  of  the
fine  statue  which  was  placed  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capi-
tolinus,  representing  her  holding  one  of  her  famous  Sibyl-
line books  in  her  hand.

''  Passing  over  the  vivid  descriptions  rendered  by  Plu-
tarch, Varro,  Heraclides,  and  others,  of  the  various  Sibyls
of  other  names,  we  must  now  draw  a  slight  sketch  of  the
famous  Pythia  of  Delphi,  who,  whether  one  or  many,  has
been  more  widely  renowned  for  demonstrating  the  fact  of
prophetic  power  than  any  other  name  in  history,  the
Cumaean  Sibyl  alone  excepted.

"  The  small  town  of  Delphi,  in  Phocis,  would  never  have

314

attained  any  celebrity  from  its  situation  or  commercial
importance,  had  it  not  been  the  site  of  one  of  the  most
renowned  of  all  the  Grecian  oracles — that  of  the  Apollo
of  Delphi.

^'  The  site  of  the  once  magnificent  temple,  so  famed  for
its  Pythian  oracle,  is  at  the  northwestern  extremity  of  the
town,  built  on  the  slope  of  the  beautiful  mountain  called
Parnassus.

"  Shutting  in  the  crescent-like  inclosure  which  comprises
the  ancient  site  of  Delphi,  is  a  vast  mountain,  split
asunder,  apparently  by  volcanic  action,  and  pi  esenting  two
high  peaks  or  cliffs,  which  the  Greeks  called  '  The
Brothers.'  It  is  from  this  circumstance  that  the  town  is
supposed  to  have  derived  the  name  of  Delphi  or  Adel-
phus.  From  the  cleft  which  divides  these  two  gigantic
peaks,  flows  out  the  far-famed  Castalian  Spring ;  and  here
tradition  asserts  that  Apollo  and  the  nine  Muses,  to  whom
the  spring  was  dedicated,  endowed  those  who  drank  of,
or  bathed  in  its  cool,  translucent  waters,  with  the  gifts  of
prophecy,  musical  and  poetical  inspiration.

''On  the  spot  which  subsequently  became  the  centre  of
the  gorgeous  temple  of  Apollo,  formerly  yawned  a  deep
cavern,  from  which  issued  those  strange  mephitic  vapors
which  were  supposed  to  exercise  so  powerful  an  influence
in  preparing  the  Pythia  for  the  possession  of  the  oracular
god.  All  authors  of  the  time  declare  that  the  cavern  was
charged  with  vapors  of  that  peculiar  quality  which  excited
a  species  of  frenzy  in  animals,  and  delirious  ecstasy  in  the
human  beings  who  inhaled  it.

"The  discovery  of  these  remarkable  properties  in  the
cavern  was  due,  it  is  alleged,  to  a  goat-herd,  who,  noticing
how  wild  and  frantically  his  flock  leaped  about  after  stray-
ing into  the  entrance,  made  his  way  into  its  recesses,  arid
was  afterwards  found  in  the  frenzied  condition  common  to

315

all  who  ventured  within  its  charmed  precincts.  After  the
spot  had  attracted  general  attention,  and  become  in  that
superstitious  age  venerated  for  its  mysterious  power  of
evoking  the  spirit  of  "  vaticination"  or  prophecy,  it  was
set  apart  as  a  hallowed  place.  The  priests  of  Apollo  de-
clared it  was  the  choice  dwelling-place  of  the  God,  and
that  the  utterance  of  those  who  resorted  thither,  and  came
under  the  influence  of  "  the  divine  fury,"  were  henceforth
to  be  regarded  as  prophetic,  and  their  ravings  received  as
oracular.

''It  must  be  remembered  that  it  was  the  universal  belief
of  the  time,  that  the  ravings  of  lunacy  were  prophetic,
and  denoted  the  possession  of  some  God ;  hence  it  is  not
surprising  that  a  place  capable  of  producing  upon  all
comers  the  afflatus  so  highly  reverenced  should  be  regarded
as  holy,  and  become  the  scene  of  those  superstitious  rites
common  to  the  time  and  country.  As  it  was  found
that  little  else  than  wild  confusion  and  unintelligible
ravings  resulted  from  permitting  the  cavern  to  become  a
place  of  universal  resort,  the  Phocian  authorities  com-
manded that  a  maiden  of  pure  life  and  unspotted  character
should  be  selected,  who  was  brought  to  the  sacred  spot,
immersed  in  the  waters  of  the  Castalian  Spring,  arrayed
in  white,  crowned  with  laurels,  and  required  to  perform
divers  other  ceremonies  of  purification  and  preparation.
When  this  was  done,  the  priests  of  Apollo  held  the
'  Pythia,'  as  she  was  termed,  over  the  entrance  of  the
cavern,  and,  provided  she  could  endure  the  inhalation  of
the  exhalations  without  permanent  loss  of  reason,  or,  as  it
more  than  once  happened,  without  yielding  up  life  itself
in  the  frantic  convulsions  which  sometimes  ensued,  the
novitiate  was  deemed  the  elect  of  the  God,  and  duly  in-
stalled as  his  priestess,  by  taking  her  seat  on  a  tripod  or

316

basin,  with  three  ears  of  gold,  placed  at  the  entrance  to
the  cavern.

''  Plutarch  alleges  that  the  first  and  most  celebrated  Pythia
who  served  the  Delphic  oracle  was  a  beautiful  young  coun-
try girl  named  Sibylla,  from  the  district  of  Libya.  It  is
probable  that  from  this  acient  prophetess  was  derived  the
name  of  Sibyl,  afterwards  conferred  on  all  her  class.  In
later  years  it  was  found  necessary  to  select  women  of
mature,  and  sometimes  of  advanced  age,  to  serve  the  ora-
cle, the  sacred  character  of  their  profession  having  been
found  insufficient  to  protect  the  Pythia  from  the  licentious-
ness of  the  age.  Plutarch,  writing  of  this  inspired  woman,
says :

''  We  derive  immense  advantages  from  the  favor  the  Gods  have  conceded  to  her.
She  and  the  priestess  of  Dodona  confer  on  mankind  the  greatest  benefits,  both
public  and  private.

•'It  would  be  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  instances  in  which  the  Pythia
proved  her  power  of  foretelling  events,  and  the  facts  themselves  are  so  well  and
generally  known,  that  it  would  be  useless  to  bring  forth  new  evidences.  She  is
second  to  no  one  in  purity  of  morals  and  chastity  of  conduct.  Brought  up  by  her
poor  parents  in  the  country,  she  brings  with  her  neither  art  nor  experience,  nor
any  talent  whatever,  when  she  arrives  at  Delphi,  to  be  the  interpreter  of  the  God.
She  is  consulted  on  all  accounts — marriage,  travels,  harvest,  disease,  etc.,  etc.
Her  answers,  though  submitted  to  the  severest  scrutiny,  have  never  proved  false
or  incorrect.  On  the  contrary,  the  verification  of  them  has  filled  the  temple  with
gifts  from  all  parts  of  Greece  and  foreign  countries."

"  A  gentleman,  who  once  resided  at  the  spot*  so  venerat-
ed as  the  seat  of  divine  inspiration,  furnishes  us  with  some
descriptions  of  the  wild  region  which  was  the  scene  of  the
Cumaean  SibyFs  vaticinations.     He  says  :

"  The  Lake  of  Avernus  was  once  the  extinct  crater  of  a  mighty  volcano,  and
the  whole  region,  though  now  fertilized  by  its  waters,  bears  the  marks  of  being
fire-scarred,  and  presents  a  most  gloomy  and  repulsive  appearance.  The  clefts  in
the  savage  rocks  abound  with  caverns  exhaling  mephitic  vapors  and  bituminous
odors.  It  was  in  one  of  the  wildest,  grandest,  yet  most  awe-inspiring  gorges  of
these  mountains,  that  the  cavern  existed  which  tradition  affirms  to  have  been  the
dwelling  of  the  Cumsean  Sibyl.  The  scattered  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding
district  believed  that  this  gloomy  grotto  was  the  entrance  to  the  nether  world ;

»  *  The  author  of  Art  Magic.

817

that  the  hammers  of  the  Titans,  working  in  the  mighty  laboratories  of  the  Plu-
tonic realms,  might  be  heard,  ever  and  anon,  reverberating  through  the  thick  and
sullen  air.  The  dark  waters  of  the  gloomy  lake  were  supposed  to  communicate
directly  with  the  silent  flow  of  the  river  of  death,  the  Lethean  stream,  made
dreadful  by  the  apparitions  of  unblest  spirits  who  floated  from  the  Avernian  shores
to  the  realms  of  eternal  night  and  torture.  Here  dwelt  the  famous  Oumsean  Sibyl,
and  from  the  exhalations  of  those  poisonous  regions,  fatal  to  the  birds  that  at-
tempted to  wing  their  way  through  its  burdened  airs,  or  the  living  creatures  that
strayed  amidst  its  savage  wilds,  this  weird  woman  derived  that  fierce  ecstasy  in
which  she  wrote  and  raved  of  the  destiny  of  nations,  the  fate  of  armies,  the  down-
fall of  kingdoms,  and  the  decay  of  dynasties.

"  Monarchs  and  statesmen  shaped  their  acts  by  her  sublime  counsels.  The  se-
crets of  the  unwritten  future  were  mapped  out  to  her  far-seeing  eyes,  as  on  an
open  page.

''  The  purposes  of  the  Gods  were  made  known  to  her  as  if  she  had  been  their
counselor,  and  the  inexorable  fates  revealed,  through  her  lips,  the  decrees  in  which
thrones  and  empires  crumbled  into  dust,  as  though  she  had  been  the  mouthpiece
of  the  Eternal  One.

"  The  mournful  regions  of  the  Avernian  Lake  were  in  strange  contrast  to  the
equally  celebrated,  but  far  more  attractive  scenes  consecrated  to  the  oracle  of  the
Sun-God,  in  the  delightful  country  of  the  Delphian  Pythia.

"All  travellers  agree  that  the  neighborhood  of  Mount  Parnassus  and  the  beau-
tiful Castalian  Spring  is  of  a  much  more  genial  character,  sparkling,  as  it  is,  with
the  sunlight,  and  fragrant  with  blooin,  yet  there  is,  to  my  mind,  an  evident  con-
nection between  the  influences  of  the  exhalations  derived  from  the  Avernian  and
Delphic  caverns.  The  chasm,  so  famed  as  the  scene  of  the  Pythia's  utterances,  is
now  no  longer  to  be  seen.  The  superb  temple  of  Apollo  was  so  built  as  to  inclose,
aad  secure  it  from  the  approach  of  the  vulgar,  and  at  this  day  no  sign  of  such  a
chasm  is  visible ;  but  there  are  many  clefts  in  the  rocks,  and  one  in  especial,
which  forms  a  deep  cavern,  into  which  I  have  myself  penetrated  as  far  as  I  dared ;
but  as  I  descended,  clinging  to  its  rugged  sides,  with  the  intention  of  exploring  it,
I  noticed  the  exhalations  which  arose  from  it,  and  soon  found  that  they  were  be-
ginning to  produce  upon  me  the  same  effect  as  the  inhalation  of  nitrous  oxide
(laughing)  gas.  The  following  day  I  visited  that  and  two  other  caverns  piercing
the  mountains  in  the  same  direction,  and  by  applying  chemical  tests  to  the  vapors
exhaling  from  within,  I  found  my  suspicions  confirmed,  and  am  convinced  there
are  chemicals  in  these  regions  which  continually  generate  nitrous  oxide  gas.''

"  The  stately  forms  of  the  Sibyls  have  vanished  from  the
earth.  The  white-robed  priest  and  the  vestal  virgin  no
longer  float  through  multitudes  of  adoring  votaries,  as  me-
diums between  a  race  of  Gods  and  men.  The  altar  fires  of
the  temples  are  quenched,  the  colossal  forms  of  marble
deities  overthrown  ;  the  oracles  are  dumb,  and  the  books  of
the  Sib  vis  all  consumed  in  the  whelming  flames  of  time  and
change.

318

''  The  bowers  of  Grecian  myrtle  and  rose  are  choked  up
with  trailing  weeds,  and  the  voluptuous  shade  of  the  lau-
rel groves  are  deepened  into  an  unbroken  night  of  rank
vegetation.  Faded  beauty,  and  living  ugliness,  death,
ruin,  and  decay,  occupy  the  stately  seats  of  ancient  devo-
tion, and  the  sunlight  of  inspiration  seems  to  have  gilded
the  purple  and  gold  peaks  of  Parnassus  for  the  last  time  ;
but  the  cup  of  inspiration,  run  dry  in  classic  Greece,  is
flowing  full  and  abundantly  in  newer,  happier  lands.

''  The  links  which  bind  the  mortal  and  immortal,  torn
asunder  by  the  catastrophies  of  war  and  desolation,  in  an-
cient lands,  have  stretched  out  into  telegraphic  lines  be-
tween the  worlds  of  spirit  and  humanity  ;  and  though  the
modern  medium  can  never  fill  the  place  which  the  Sibyl
of  antiquity  occupied  in  sublimity  of  inspiration,  in  ro-
mantic lore  and  heathen  splendor,  she  is  sufficient  for  the
age  she  lives  in  ;  sufficient  to  bring  to  a  cold  and  material-
istic world  the  undoubted  proofs  of  the  soul's  immortality,
and  the  fatherhood  of  the  one  universal  God  who  is  a
Spirit."

319

PART  III

SECTION  XVII.

Elementary  and  Planetary  Spirits  or  Sub-Mundane  and
Super- Mundmte  Spiritism.

In  entering  upon  the  third  and  concluding  portion  of
this  volume,  it  becomes  necessary  that  we  should  explain
to  our  readers  what  were  the  opinions  cherished  by  the
mystics  of  all  ages,  concerning  the  existence  and  influence
upon  earth  of  other  than  human  spirits.

Ancient  Theosophy  in  every  land  taught  the  existence
of  Spirits,  both  higher  and  lower  than  those  of  earth's
inhabitants.

The  Jewish  Cabala,  which,  as  we  have  before  alleged,
contains  the  sum  of  opinions  derived  from  Persia  and
Chaldea,  and  in  all  probability  from  still  older  lands,
teaches  that  besides  the  Angels  and  Archangels,  who  in-
clude many  celestial  orders,  there    are  between  men  and

320

the  lowest  condition  of  fallen  or  evil  angels  intermediary
Spirits  termed  Schedim^  who  live  in  the  elements,  and  were
divided  into  four  orders  corresponding  to  Fire,  Air,  Earth
and  Water.

The  first  class  belonged  to  the  Fire,  and  in  German
Theosophy  were  termed  ^'  Salamanders."  They  were
supposed  to  be  wise,  powerful  and  prophetic,  partaking
very  nearly  of  the  angelic  nature,  yet  not  sufficiently  ad-
vanced in  the  scale  of  being,  to  become  immortal.  It  was
deemed  that  they  knew  many  of  the  secrets  of  nature,  and
to  those  towards  whom  they  were  beneficently  inclined,
they  would  impart  their  knowledge  freely.  They  were
sometimes  said  to  be  fierce  and  even  terrible  in  their
wrath,  and  hence  were  as  much  dreaded  as  courted  by  the
ancient  Magians.  The  second  class  were  spirits  who  par-
took of  the  fiery  quality  of  the  first  order,  but  were  more
properly,  spirits  of  the  air.  The  Scandinavian  and  Teu-
tonic traditions  simply  define  them  as  spirits  of  the  earth,
but  give  them  a  wide  range  of  class  and  function,  and
represent  them  generally  as  dangerous  and  very  capri-
cious.

It  is  in  this  order  that  mediaeval  Theosophists  ranged
the  sweetest  and  most  popular  of  all  the  Elementaries,
those  of  whom  so  many  poets  have  sung,  and  traditions
celebrated — the  Elves  or  Fairies — those  moonlight  loving
Sprites  whose  tiny  feet  leave  their  imprint  on  the  green
sward  in  magic  rings — those  impersonated  blossoms  of  the
earth  and  air,  on  whose  fantastic  and  half  mythical  exist-
ence so  many  thousands  of  epics  have  been  founded,  so
many  charming  legends  written.  For  ages  these  fascinat-
ing sprites  have  served  as  the  inspiration  of  the  musician's
sweetest  strains,  the  sculptor's  fairest  e  tis.  and  the  paint-
er's chef-cVoeuvres.  Even  the  royal  mind  of  Shakespeare
stooped  to  revel  amidst  the  flowers  and  bloom,   the  meny

321

Puck-like  tricks  and  pretty  vagaries  of  these  moonlight
haunting  phantoms,  and  the  world  of  poetry  and  imagina-
tive literature  will  miss  a  rare  streak  of  sunshine  from  the
dreary  paths  of  dry  matter-of-fact  narrative,  when  plain
common  sense  shall  begin  to  realize  the  duty  of  extinguish-
ing "  the  idle  superstition"  of  Fairy  lore.

Besides  these  charming  "  little  people,"  whole  nations
of  half-aerial,  half-earthly  beings,  of  a  kindred  character,
have  been  ranked  in  the  third  class  of  Elementaries,  espe-
cially by  the  Scots,  North  Britons  and  Scandinavians.  Such
are  the  Trolls,  Nixies'- and  Brownies,  to  say  nothing  of  the
Pigmies,  who  inhabit  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth ;  also
the  Gnomes  and  Kobolds,  a  good-natured  but  very  low
type  of  being,  who  are  said  to  dwell  in  mines,  caverns,
crypts  where  hidden  treasures  abound,  aj;id'  places  where
metals  are  hid.  These  dwarfish  beings  ;|^ere  always  repre-
sented as  kindly- disposed  towards  huma/yity,  and  especially
prompt  to  aid  miners  and  other  treasure-seekers  in  discov-
ering the  object  of  their  search.  -Sometimes  they  were
malign,  and  strove  to  hinder  rather  than  assist  humanity,
guarding  their  earthly  treasures  with  jealous  care,  and
using  mysterious  arts  to  baffle  the  seekers  for  buried  wealth ;
but,  a|  a  general  rule,  all  miners  who  are  not  too  strong-
mindm  to  reject  the  idea  of  such  spirits,  unite  in  declaring
that  these  sub-mundane  dwarfs  actually  exist;  that  the
workmen  often  encounter  them,  and  that  many  of  them
have  been  guided  by  their  friendly  lights,  or  directed  by
the  sounds  of  their  invisible  hammers  to  the  best  mineral
"  leads."  The  author  is  in  possession  of  a  vast  mass  of  testi-
mony on  this  subject,  some  collected  from  experiences  in
Hungarian,  Bohemian  and  Cornish  mines,  in  which  he  has
himself  partaken ;  others  gathered  from  reliable  sources,
containing  narratives  of  the  many  kind  acts  of  warning
against  danger,  and  guidance  for  good,  miners  have  re-
ceived from  these  subterranean  Elementaries.

322

There  are  several  still  lower  classes  of  impish  beings,
who  correspond  to  various  species  of  animals  and  reptiles,
and  these,  though  possessing  hardly  any  traits  of  intel-
ligence— except  such  as  are  peculiar  to  the  creatures  of
whom  they  are  the  spiritual  types — for  the  most  part  de-
light in  mischief,  and  are  ready  when  summoned  to  aid
human  beings,  as  low  in  the  scale  as  themselves,  in  work-
ing ill  to  others.

In  the  ghastly  records  of  mediaeval  witchcraft,  this  class
of  Elementaries  were  known  as  Vampires^  Incuhi  and  8uc-
cubi.  *  ^

They  were  supposed  to  parasite  on  the  bodies  of  the
Witches  whom  they  served,  acting  as  their  '^  Imps  or  Fa-
miliars," hi  return  for  the  nourishment  afforded  them,  and
the  caresses  they  received.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
the  most  absurd  and  wild  exaggerations  have  arisen,  con-
cerning the  supposed  commuliion  between  Demons,  and
poor  degraded  mortals,  whose  ignorance,  helplessness,  and
perhaps  the  involuntary  exercise  of  those  occult  powers,
which  often  manifest  themselves  in  low  types  of  humanitj^,
have  rendered  them  obnoxious  to  the  charge  bf  witchcraft.

To  accept  the  literal  truth,  of  all  the  revolting  tales  of
such  demonic  intercourse,  would  be  a  libel  upon  human
nature,  but  to  deny  that  strong  and  irresistible  sjaiipathies
exist  between  the  visible  and  invisible  realms,  uniting  alike
the  spirits  of  the  lower  as  well  as  the  higher  orders  of  being
with  man,  would  be  to  accept  the  truth  so  flattering  to
pious  egotism,  of  angelic  ministry,  and  blind  our  eyes  to
that  unpleasing  correlative,  which  binds  up  man  with  the
lower  grades  of  being,  and  thus  combines  the  whole  scale  in
one  interblended  chain  of  harmonic  dependency.

As  it  is  above ^  so  it  is  beloiv — On  earth  as  in  the  skies.
The  Universe  is  an  endless  chain  of  worlds  in  which  spi-
ritual spheres  above,   and  semi-spiritual  spheres    below.

323

stretch  away  from  the  lowest  tones  of  being  to  the  highest,
in  which  enibrjonic  life  is  swarming  upwards  to  manhood,
as  man  himself  aspires  to  spiritual  existence  beyond.  In
this  wonderful  Oratorio  of  Creation,  every  key-note  struck
by  man,  finds  an  echo  in  the  cavernous  depths  below,  and
awakens  vibratory  harmonies  in  the  corridors  of  heaven
above.

Spirits  and  angels  are  attracted  to  the  necessities  of  hu-
manity ;  elementaries  reach  up  to  sustain  themselves  by
man's  superior  endowments.  If  on  the  other  hand  he  de-
scends by  the  indulgence  of  animal  passions,  or  sensual  ten-
dencies, to  the  lower  realms  of  being,  can  it  be  questioned
that  the  creatures  who  derive  influence  and  influx  from
man,  should  be  ready  to  respond  to  him  in  those  particular
directions,  to  which  their  own  instincts  and  impulses
point?  The  only  questions  that  can  legitimately  arise  in
this  connection  are  these.  Do  such  beings  as  Elementaries
exist  at  all  ?  and  can  they  communicate  and  hold  inter-
course with  man  ']  If  the  reiterated  assertions  of  Sages,
Seers,  Prophets,  and  Philosophers,  in  the  antique  and  mid-
dle ages,  be  worth  acceptance  as  testimony, — if  the  expe-
rience of  modern  Mystics  and  Seers,  whose  prejudices  do
not  iijferfere  to  prevent  their  reception  of  any  form  of
truth,  deserve  credit,  then  do  these  Elementaries  exist —
swarm  through  all  departments  of  nature,  manifest  their
presence,  and  become  the  willing  subjects  of  human  beings
when  the  conditions  for  intercourse  are  open  to  them.
The  gradations  of  elementary  existence  extend,  as  we  have
before  intimated,  down  to  the  very  lowest  depths.  There
are  beings  whose  rude  embryonic  life  corresponds  to  the
lowest  species  of  plants,  earths,  stones,  metals,  and  miner-
als.

There  are  also  two  classes  of  watery  spirits,  namely  ;
those  who  inhabit  marshy   lands^  stagnant  pools,  ditches,

324

and  still  water ;  and  another  of  a  higher  type  who  govern
rivers,  fountains,  seas,  ocean  depths,  and  all  kinds  of  run-
ning waters.  These  were  anciently  called  '^  Tritons,  Mer-
maids, Mermen,  and  Undines."  The  Earthly  and  Watery
Elementaries  were  assumed  by  the  Cabala  to  be  governed
by  a  powerful  Chief  termed  Asmodi.  They  were  taught
of  in  all  lands  and  in  all  times,  and  though  different  na-
tions assign  to  them  varieties  of  names,  and  functions  as
numerous  as  the  varieties  of  matter,  there  is  in  all  the
legendary  accounts  rendered  of  them,  a  generic  similitude,
which  leaves  no  doubt  that  one  basic adea  prevails  through
all.

As  the  Author  emphatically  renders  in  his  testimony  of
belief  to  the  existence  of  an  intermediary  class  of  beings,
termed  with  great  propriety  Elementaries,  we  shall  drop
the  tone  of  traditionary  description,  and  enter  upon  that
more  suited  to  convey  an  idea  of  actual  realities.

The  Elementaries  are  neither  wholly  spiritual,  nor  en-
tirely material  in  substance.  The  corporeity  of  their
bodies  is  too  dense  to  inhabit  the  spirit  spheres,  or  consort
with  purely  spiritual  existences,  yet  not  sufficiently  palpa-
ble to  become  visible  to  material  eyes,  or  the  external
senses  of  man.  They  inhabit  strata  of  atmospheres  infi-
nitely more  sublimated  than  gases,  yet  far  less  refined
than  pure  Astral  light.  They  correspond  in  the  infinitude
of  their  states  and  functions  to  every  particle  of  matter
that  exists,  from  the  most  solid  crystal  to  the  most  rarefied
gas.  We  claim  in  short,  that  for  every  material  body,
animate  or  inanimate,  organized  or  inorganic,  there  is  a
correspondential  realm  of  spiritual  existence — a  counter-
part in  every  stage  of  being.  The  disembodied  Souls  of
men  are  the  counterparts  to  man  himself — the  Elementa-
ries to  the  world  of  matter,  including  the  animal,  vegeta-
ble and  mineral  kingdoms.     The  two  highest  classes  of

325

these  beings,  possess  a  fine  ethereal  sensitive  spirit,  yet  not
one  whose  organization  is  sufficiently  perfected  to  become
self-conscious,  after  the  span  of   their  earthly  lives  ter-
minates, hence,  they  are  not,  strictly   speaking,  immortal.
The  same  remarks  apply  in  a  measure  to  the  two  lower
classes,  although  their  vital  or  animating  principle  is  infe-
rior to  the  ''  Sylphs  and  Salamanders ;"  in  fact,  they    are
little  more  than  animal,  vegetable  and  mineral  existences,
with  strong  and  powerful  instincts  in  the  special  realms  of
nature  to  which  they  belong,  but  incapable  of  reason,  re-
flection or  self-knowledge.     From  tlie  highest  to  the  low-
est these  beings  are  aware  of  the  existence  of  man  ;  they
honor  and  even  reverence  him  as  a  God,  and  are  drawn  by
a  mysterious  instinct  to  desire  contact  and  association  with
him.     The  highest  orders  understand  the  nature  of  con-
tinued existence,  passionately  long  for  it,  intuitively  hope
for  it  in  some  distant  realms  of  being,  and  closely  connect
the  idea  of  immortality  with  man,  hence  their  yearning
for  intercourse  with  him,  and  their  general  desire  to  serve
and  oblige  him.     There  seems  to  be  a  descending  scale  of
moral  as  well  as  mental  and  physical  inferiority  amongst
these    intermediary  existences,    for   the  finer,  purer  and
more  kindly  traits  of  character  diminish,  and  at  last  utterly
merge  into  ferocity,  mischief  and  soulless  animation,  as  we
descend  through  the  various  grades  of  Elementary  life.

These  beings  are  all  embryotic  and  rudimentary,  but
whilst  the  highest  grades  obviously  prophej^y  of  man —
modelling  after  him,  though  always  lacking  his  complete-
ness, and  always  deficient  in  some  part,  organ,  or  function
— the  lower  we  descend,  the  more  rudimental  becomes
each  type.  It  would  be  difficult  to  convey  an  idea  of  the
localities  occupied  by  this  wonderful  realm  of  existence,  to
those  Scientists  who  are  accustomed  to  divide  the  world  of
matter  into  solids,  fluids,  gases,  ether,  and  perhaps  the  still

326

finer  element  so  vaguely  termed  ''  Electricity  ;"  but  sup-
posing we  were  to  add  to  these  subdivisions  one  hundred,
then  one  thousand  more,  and  then  multiply  that  number
by  the  largest  sum  in  mathematics,  we  might  conclude  by
affirming,  that  Science  had  still  failed  to  find  the  two  ex-
tremes of  solidity  and  rarefaction  any  more  than  the  larg-
est telescope  and  the  most  powerful  microscope  now  in
existence,  have  traced  the  finalities  of  the  infinitely
large,  and  the  infinitely  little,  or  the  gold-beater  with  all
the  tenuity  of  his  finest  work  has  arrived  at  the  last  point
of  divisibility  in  the  atom.

Permeating  all  space,  interpenetrating  even  man's  dense
world  of  solids,  fluids,  and  gases,  is  a  realm  whose  ethereal
sublimations,  the  explorations  of  science  have  never  yet
mastered.  Vitalizing  this  material  world  of  ours  as  the
Soul  animates  the  body,  this  substantial  yet  invisible  spir-
itual kingdom  sustains  all  the  countless  generations  of
numan  souls,  that  have  been  liberated  by  death  Ironi  the
encasements  of  the  mortal  structure.  Between  this  realm
of  pure  Astral  light,  with  all  its  freight  of  living  spirits,
clothed  in  bodies  of  the  same  imperishable  element,  is  a
still  denser  realm,  neither  as  gross  as  the  earth's  atmos-
phere, nor  as  sublimated  as  the  spirit  land,  and  yet  it  par-
takes of  the  quality  and  essence  of  both,  inheres  in  both,
and  is  indissolubly  connected  with  both,  for  between  the
rarefactions  of  the  one,  and  the  density  of  the  other,  float
those  strata  of  element  which  form  the  world  of  the  em-
bryotic  beings  of  whom  we  have  been  writing.

Away  up  beyond  the  sunny  paths  cleft  by  the  wing  of
the  soaring  eagle  ;  deep  down  amidst  the  cities  of  pearl  and
kingdoms  of  coral  that  pave  the  ocean  floor ;  burrowing  in
the  unexplored  depths  of  the  cavernous  rocks  where  mile
upon  mile  of  mountain  limestone  and  crystalline  granite
combine  to  form  the  overarching  roof  of  the  fire  king's  cas-

327

tie  ;  in  all,  through  all,  everywhere,  in  every  unit  of  space,
there  roll  the  waves,  and  float  the  winds  of  the  country  in-
habited by  the  Elementaries,  so  that  could  the  eyes  of  mor-
tality be  opened  as  were  those  of  the  Jewish  boy  of  old,  in
response  to  the  prayer  of  Elisha,  they  would  gaze  upon
oceans  and  seas-  of  living  creatures,  finer  than  the  Infu-
soria, larger  than  the  fabled  giants, — each  in  his  place,  in
his  town,  city,  nation,  divided  off  into  his  peculiar  realm,
inhabiting  each  his  special  portion  of  the  kingdom  to  which
he  belongs,  the  whole  constituting  the  realm  of  the  Ele-
mentaries.

These  creatures  cannot  ordinarily  see  mortals,  any  more
than  they  can  in  turn  be  seen.  Some  amongst  them  en-
dowed with  finer  instincts  than  others,  can  peer  into  the
rifts  and  rents  of  matter,  and  looking  through,  behold  the
God-like  world  of  humanity,  just  as  prophetic  clear-eyed
men  can — at  special  moments  of  lucidity — gaze  upon  spirit
land.  Also  they  can  be  invoked,  much  after  the  fashion
that  mortals  employ  in  summoning  human  spirits.  Magi-
cians— especially  those  who  have  prepared  themselves  for
the  control  of  spirits — can  summon  the  Elementaries  and
cause  them  to  appear  as  readily  as  human  spirits.  The,
powers  of  the  Elementaries  are  limited  to  the  peculiar  de-
partments of  nature  to  which  they  belong.  The  beings
who  inhabit  woods,  forests,  and  rural  scenes,  attach  them-
selves to  huntsmen,  charcoal  burners,  and  others  similarly
employed.

Miners,  fishermen,  sailors,  florists,  metallurgists,  all  in-
dividuals who  find  their  spheres  of  labor,  in  special  depart-
ments of  nature,  are  surrounded  by  Elementary  Spirits  of  a
correspondential  character.  Persons  of  peculiar  tempera-
ments too,  attract  different  grades  of  Elementaries,  and
thus,  some  are  specially  attractive  to  spirits  of  the  fire,
others  to  the  aerial,  earthly,  or  watery  spirits,  just  as  the

328

idiosyncrasies  of  their  organisms  dispose  them.  It  may  be
asked,  how  these  beings  are  attracted  to  mortals,  if  there
is  no  sensuous  perception  between  the  two  worlds.  Again
we  are  at  a  loss  to  find  analogies  by  which  to  explain  to  an
age,  totally  insensible  to  metaphysical  laws,  the  intense
and  irresistible  sympathies  which  bind  up  the  different
objects  in  nature,  prevailing  between  man  and  all  lower  as
well  as  higher  existences,  diffusing  a  kind  of  blind  con-
sciousness even  through  the  lowest  classes  of  inorganic
matter.  How  tenderly  does  the  blossom  turn  to  the  light.
How  will  the  atoms  of  matter  seek  their  chemical  affinities,
exhibiting  even  their  preferences,  dropping  one  c  lass  of
metal,  and  rushing  to  another  as  soon  as  their  favorite  ap-
proaches !

Who  instructs  the  sea-gull  of  the  impending  storm  .^
Who  apprizes  the  terrified  animals  and  fluttering  birds,
that  an  earthquake  is  at  hand,  and  what  kind  hand  closes
up  the  cups  of  the  flowers  when  the  last  sunbeam  has  dis-
appeared, or  warns  them  to  open  their  shining  petals  to
its  return  1  Consider  above  all,  the  nameless  and  inde-
scribable realm  of  antipathies  and  attractions,  between
which  our  whole  system  of  society  and  companionship
oscillates,  and  then  we  may  begin  to  comprehend  how  the
half  spiritual  half  corporeal  creatures  of  the  elements  ap-
prehend the  presence  of  man ;  are  drawn  to  kindred
natures,  or  repelled  from  antagonistic  ones ;  revel  in  the
atmospheres  of  special  temperaments,  and  are  driven  off"
from  others,  as  men  shrink  from  contact  with  uncongenial
companions.  In  the  higher  teachings  of  wise  spirits,
we  learn  that  these  Elementaries  are  born,  and  die,  marry,
propagate  their  species  and  rear  their  young,  even  as  mor-
tals do.  As  they  die  out  of  earth  they  are  born  into  some
other  spheres,  alternating  between  spirit  spheres  and
earths,  until  they  arrive  at  that  state  of  perfect  self-con-

329

sciousness  which  antedates  their  birth  into  those  fully
.completed  organisms  capable  of  maintaining  an  immortal
existence.  Many  of  the  higher  orders  of  Elementaries
attracted  in  the  first  instance  by  sympathy,  have  become
the  tutelary  spirits  of  certain  distinguished  famihes,  and
continue  their  protective  care  for  succeeding  generations.
This  is  the  origin  of  what  has  so  generally  been  deemed
an  idle  superstition — ^like  the  '^  Banshee"  of  Ireland,  the
vision  of  an  armed  knight,  a  weeping  woman,  a  white
spectre,  the  unlooked  for  appearance  of  white  pigeons,
lambs,  or  other  unaccountable  apparitions,  preceding  death,
sickness,  or  calamity,  the  traditions  of  which  have  been
handed  down  through  ail  time,  although  it  has  become
the  fashion  to  sneer  the  actualities  out  of  orthodox  accept-
ance.

The  Red  Indians  of  North  America  are  especially  dis-
tinguished for  guardianship  of  this  character.

Before  entering  upon  the  duties  of  leadership   to  their
tribes,  their  young  men  retire  into  the  wilderness  to  fast
and  pray.     For  the  space  of  nine  dajs  the  bravest  and
best  of  these   wild  races  have  been  accustomed  thus   to
await  in  solemn  preparation,  the  visits   of  their  tutelary
spirits,  and  the  direction  of  their  future  path  in  life.     The
author  has  conversed  with  many  of  the  ancient  men  of
these  Indian  tribes,  and  they  have  invariably  confirmed
the  report   which  all  tradition  alleges  namely  ;  that  the
s|)irits  who  appear  to  the  young  men  during,  or  after  the
probationary  days  of  their  long  fast,  are  seldom  human,  but
thouo:h   thev   connimnicate   after    the  fashion    of  human
speech,  or  else  infuse  thoughts  into  the  mind  by  the  process
of  inspiration,  their  forms  are  generally  those  of  birds,
beasts,  or  some  member  of  the  lower  kingdoms.     During
several  of  their  ceremonial  rites  at  which  the  author  has
been  present,  their  "  Jokassids"  or  Prophets  have  succeeded

330

in  summoning  around  them  powerful  spirits  who  could  play
instruments,  shake  their  lodges,  beat  drums,  and  create  the
wildest  clamor  of  unearthly  voices  ;  and  in  all  such  scenes
the  spiritual  performers  were  scarcely  ever  seen  by
clairvoyants,  or  known  by  mediums,  to  wear  a  human
form.  They  were  often  wise  in  counsel,  always  prophetic,
and  very  mighty  ; — good  to  their  Prophets,  subtle  in  knowl-
edge of  healing,  and  always  faithful  to  those  whom  they
chose  to  protect,  but  still  these  children  of  the  forest  see
them,  hear  their  voices,  and  hold  inspirational  communion
with  them,  not  as  with  the  spirits  of  their  friends  and
kindred,  whom  they  also  profess  to  see  and  converse  with,
but  as  tutelary  spirits — '^  spirits  of  nature  " — or  as  we  pre-
fer to  call  them,  Elementaries.

Another  marked  and  distinctive  sphere  in  which  these
Elementaries  have  played  their  part,  has  been  in  the
scenes  of  mingled  ignorance,  superstition  and  spiritual  af-
flatus, termed  "  Obsession."

During  some  of  those  periods  of  moral  and  mental  epi-
demic in  which  vast  waves  of  Astral  fluid  swept  over  cer-
tain districts,  kindling  up  into  abnormal  prominence  the
latent  powers  of  mediumistic  persons,  and  by  sympathetic
contagion  communicating  their  influence  to  whole  commu-
nities, the  Elementaries,  like  the  spirits  of  Earth,  have
found  themselves  brought  into  direct  and  open  rapport  with
human  beings.

Conditions  already  prepared  broke  down  the  barriers
between  the  three  worlds.

The  Elementaries,  Mortals,  and  Spirits,  steeped  in  cy-
clones of  Astral  light,  blowing  over  the  Earth  •  just  as
storms,  tempests,  and  contagious  airs  traverse  its  surface,
have  become  at  times  so  curiously  interblended,  that  they
could  neither  one  nor  the  other  resist  the  attractions  that
involved  them.     These  were  the  periods  marked  as  the

331

eras  of  witchcraft,  ecstasy,  great  religious  revivals,  or
moral  revolutions.  As  the  aim  of  the  Elementaries  is  ever
to  tend  upwards  towards  man,  so  that  of  man  gravitates
to  the  spirit  world,  and  aspires  to  the  companionship  of
God  and  Angels.

In  these  great  seasons  of  mental  unfoldment  and  spirit-
ual trial,  kindred  natures  attract  each  other,  and  dissimilar
ones  are  violently  repelled ;  yet  out  of  the  frenzy  of  these
stupendous  mental  epidemics  the  races  emerge,  disciplined,
and  informed  of  many  of  the  most  occult  mysteries  of  be-
ing that  would  otherwise  remain  profound  secrets,  and  ut-
terly unknown.

In  the  early  periods  of  the  celebrated  New  England
Witch(jraft,  the  afflicted  children  first  attacked,  manifested
the  most  marked  tendency  to  imitate  the  actions  of  ani-
mals, crawling  round  the  walls  and  cornices  of  houses,
climbing  like  squirrels  up  high  trees,  barking,  crying  and
mimicking  the  voices  of  animals,  with  a  fidelity  as  shock-
ing as  it  was  unaccountable.

Similar  tendencies  to  imitate  animals  and  mimic  their
actions  have  marked  many  other  great  popular  outbreaks
of  spiritual  contagion.  In  Mora,  Sweden,  and  Scotland,
during  the  seventeenth  century ;  at  Morzine  during  the
nineteenth,  these  same  perplexing  features  occurred  in  the
tremendous  fever  of  obsession  that  spread  over  whole  dis-
tricts, causing  many  of  the  unhappy  victims  to  conduct
themselves  more  like  animals  than  human  beings,  during
their  paroxysms.  Many  of  the  features  of  Fetichism  and
Vandooism,  partake  of  these  dark  characteristics,  and
though  the  author  is  of  opinion, — founded  upon  deep  study
of  the  facts, — that  the  majority  of  the  demonstrations  pro-
duced in  Europe  and  America  during  the  great  dispensa-
tion termed  "  Modern  Spiritualism,'' are  produced  by  hu-
man spirits,  though  the  maximum  of  all  testimony  inclines

332

to  prove  that  the  spirits  of  humanity  are  the  nearest  to
mortals,  the  most  ready  to  serve  and  inHiience,  and  the
most  efficient  to  control,  in  fact  that,  wherever  intelli-
gence is  rendered,  it  is  strictly  human,  and  implies  human
spiritual  agency,  still  there  are  some  features  of  medium-
ship,  especially  amongst  those  persons  known  as  "  physi-
cal force  mediums,''  which  long  since  should  have  awak-
ened the  attention  of  philosophical  Spiritualists  to  the  fact,
that  there  were  inflviences  kindred  only  with  animal
natures  at  work  somewhere,  and  unless  the  agency  of  cer-
tain classes  of  Elementar}^  spirits  was  admitted  into  the
category  of  occasional  control,  humanity  has  at  times  as-
sumed darker  shades  than  we  should  be  willing  to  assign
to  it.  Unfortunately  in  discussing  these  subjects,  there
are  many  barriers  to  the  attainment  of  truth  on  this  sub-
ject. Courtesy  and  compassion  alike  protest  against
pointing  to  illustrations  in  our  own  time,  whilst  prejudice
and  ignorance  intervene  to  stifle  enquiry  respecting  pheno-
mena which  a  long  lapse  of  time,  has  left  us  free  to  inves-
tigate.

The  Judges  whose  ignorance  and  superstition  disgraced
the  Witchcraft  trials  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth
centuries,  found  a  solvent  for  all  occult  or  even  suspicious
circumstances,  in  the  control  of  '*  Satan  and  his  Imps."
The  modern  Spiritualists  with  few  exceptions,  are  equally
stubborn  in  attributing  everything  that  transpires  in  Spir-
itualistic circles,  even  to  the  wilful  and  cunningU/  contrived
preparations  for  deception  on  the  part  of  pretended  Media,
to  the  influence  of  disembodied  human  spirits,  good,  bad,
or  indifferent;  but  the  author's  own  experience,  confirmed
by  the  assurances  of  wise-teaching  spirits,  impels  him  to
assert  that  the  tendencies  to  exhibit  animal  proclivities,
whether  mental,  passional,  or  phenomenal,  are  most  gen-
erally produced  by  Elementaries.

333

The  rapport  with  this  realm  of  being  is  generally  due  to
certain  proclivities  in  the  individual,  or  when  whole  com-
munities are  affected,  the  cause  proceeds  from  revolution-
ary movements,  in  the  realms  of  Astral  fluid;  these  con-
tingently affect  the  Elementaries,  who  in  combination  with
low  undeveloped  spirits  of  humanity,  avail  themselves  of
magnetic  epidemics  to  obsess  susceptible  individuals,  and
sympathetically  affect  communities.

From  afflictions  of  this  character,  the  only  successful
method  of  exorcism  is  through  the  magnetic  passes  of
strong,  healthful,  and  well-disposed  magnetizers.

Although  as  we  have  before  stated,  the  means  of  sum-
moning Elementaries  are  similar  to  those  employed  in  the
evocation  of  spirits,  the  aims  for  which  their  services  are
solicited  entirely  determine  the  class  of  respondents.
Whether  the  spirits  invoked  become  visible  or  not,  the
presence  is  surely  there.  The  call  is  always  heard  and  obeyed,
Man  rules  potentially  over  all  lower  existences  than  him-
self; but  woe  to  him,  who  by  seeking  aid,  counsel  or  assist-
ance from  lower  grades  of  being,  binds  himself  to  them ;
henceforth  he  may  rest  assured  they  will  become  his  para-
sites and  associates,  and  as  their  instincts — like  those  of
the  animal  kingdom — are  strong  in  the  particular  direc-
tion of  their  nature,  they  are  powerful  to  disturb,  annoy,
prompt  to  evil,  and  avail  themselves  of  the  contact  induced
by  man's  invitation  to  drag  him  down  to  their  own  level.

The  legendary  idea  of  evil  compacts  between  man  and
the  ^'  Adversary,"  is  not  wholly  mythical.  Every  wrong-
doer signs  that  compact  with  spirits  who  have  sympathy
with  his  evil  actions.

Many  and  many  a  hapless  soul  which  has  ''  shuffled  oflf
the  mortal  coil,"  finds  to  his  cost  that  his  evil  deeds  on
earth  have  been  performed  in  obedience  to  evil  promptings,
andn[hat  when  he  deemed  he  was  procuring  gratification

334

Jtp  himself  alone  by  the  indulgence  of  his  passions,  he  was
actually  doing  the  bidding  of  ElenientarieSj  and  undevel-
oped  human  Souls,  who  by  virtue  of  his  subjection  to
their  will,  or  by  reasons  of  obligations  conferred  upon  him,
now  become  his  rulers,  and  enact  in  reality  the  fabled  myth
of  Satanic  compacts  and  Satanic  possessions.

Except  for  the   purposes  of  scientific  investigation,  or
I  \    with  a  view  of  strengthening  ourselves  against  the  silent
I    \  and  mysterious  promptings  to  evil  that  beset  us  on  every
side,  we  warn  mere  curiosity  seekers,  or  persons  ambitious
to  attach  the  legions  of  an  unknown  world  to  their  service,
against  any  attempts  to  seek  communion  with  Elementary
L   /  spirts,  or  beings  of  any  grade  lower  than  man.

'^  Beings  heloiv  morfalihj  can  grant  nothmgTliai  mortality
oij£litJojtsk.  They  can  only  serve  man  in  some  embryonic
department  of  nature,  and  man  must  stoop  to  their  state
before  they  can  thus  reach  him.  ^

The  author  has  in  vision,  and  guided  by  spirit  friends  and
N^  radiant  Planetary  Angels,  visited  many  spheres  of  these
Elementa.ry  races.  He  has  seen  theni  in  every  stage  of
degradation  and  progression,  some  almost  ready  to  burst
the  chrysolitic  shell  of  their  caterpillar  condition,  and
emerge  into  that  spiritual  realm,  from  which  they  would  be
attracted  back  to  matter,  and  be  born  as  men.  Others,
scarcely  conscious  of  any  higher  existence  than  their  own  ;
rudimentary  beings  who  would  have  to  undergo  ages  of
progressive  transition  ere  they  could  attain  the  coveted
boon  of  immortality.

In  some  of  these  embryonic  spheres,  the  dwellers,  con-
scious of  the  superior  existence  and  potential  influence  of
man,  and  informed  by  their  quick  intuitions  of  the  approach
of  spiritual  visitants,  made  great  preparations  for  their
reception,  and  offered  oblations  and  homage  to  them,  after
the  fashion  of  deific  worship.     It  will  be  asked  why  we

335

allude  to  experiences  so  recondite,  and  from  which  we
would  warn  others  back,  as  we  would  guard  them  from
the  unrest  which  attends  too  wide  a  perception  of  the
mysteries  of  nature.  We  answer,  knowledge  is  only
good  for  us  when  we  can  apply  it  judiciously.  Those  who
investigate  for  the  sake  of  science,  or  with  a  view  of  en-
larging the  narrow  boundaries  of  man's  egotistical  opin-
ions, may  venture  nmch  farther  into  the  realms  of  the
unknown,  than  mere  curiosity  seekers,  or  persons  who
desire  to  apply  the  secrets  of  being  to  selfish  purposes.
It  may  be  as  well  also  for  man  to  remember  that  he  and
his  planet  are  not  the  all  of  being,  and  that  besides
the  revelations  included  in  the  stupendous  outpouring
called  '•  Modern  Spiritualism,"  there  are  man}^  problems
yet  to  be  solved  in  human  life  and  planetary  existence,
which  '^  Spiritualism"  does  not  cover,  nor  ignorance  and
prejudice  dream  of

Besides  these  considerations,  we  would  warn  man
of  the  many  subtle  though  invisible  enemies  which  sur-
round him,  and  rather  by  the  instinct  of  their  embryotic
natures,  than  through  malice  prepense,  seek  to  lay  siege  to
the  garrison  of  the  human  heart.  We  would  advise  him,
moreover  that  into  that  sacred  entrenchment,  no  power  can
enter,  save  by  invitation  of  the  Soul  itself  Angels  may  so-
licit, or  demons  may  tempt,  but  none  can  compel  the  spirit
within  to  action,  unless  it  first  surrenders  the  will  to  the
investing  power.

Alter  the  weird  clairvoyant  pilgrimages  into  the  secret
crypts  or  aerial  kingdoms  of  the  Elementaries  alhided  to
above,  the  author  has  speculated  curiously  upon  the  un-
born triumphs  which  Science  will  yet  achieve,  when  her
indomitable  researches  shall  have  advanced  from  the  realms
of  invisible  gases,  into  those  of  the  countless  strata,  which
make  up  the  imponderable  element  of  FORCE,  the  lowest

336

of  which  is  the  reahn  of  the  Elementaries,  the  highest,
that  of  Astral  Light  or  Spirit  Land.  If  the  telescope  can
gauge  the  infinite  realms  of  space,  and  bring  to  the  As-
tronomer's view  whole  hemispheres  of  blazing  suns,  where
the  naked  eye  could  discern  only  darkness  impenetrable ;
if  the  microscope  can  reveal  a  kingdom  of  animalculas,
where  the  unassisted  vision  beholds  only  a  drop  of  water,
why  may  we  not  hope  that  the  realms  of  the  impondera-
ble will  yet  be  gauged  by  scientific  instruments,  and  the
blank  and  non-intelligent  element  of  Force,  yield  up  to
view  a  Soul  Universe,  consisting  of  Kingdoms  and  Empires,
before  whose  magnitude,  power,  and  beauty,  the  worlds  of
matter  will  shrink  into  atomic  littleness  !  When  Science
stands  still  or  goes  back,  we  shall  see  the  gates  of  future
possibilities  shut  against  her ;  until  then,  the  conquest  of
two  new  worlds  await  her  discovery,  those  inhabited  by
the  enfranchised  souls  of  men  and  the  Elementaries.
'^  Of  the  radiant  and  exalted  realms  of  being  termed  Plane-
tary Spirits,  who  with  the  countless  orders  of  Angels  and
Archangels  come  under  the  category  of  Super-mundane
Spiritism,  it  seems  impossible  to  convey  any  adequate  con-
ception, save  to  those  who  have  enjoyed  the  glorious  pri-
vilege of  communion  with  them.

All  nations  of  antiquity  believed  in,  and  taught  of  them,
yet  even  as  "  tutelary  spirits,"  they  rarely  communicate
openly  with  earth,  and  except  to  such  Mystics  as  have  by
years  of  preparation  fitted  themselves  for  such  high  com-
munion, their  natures  and  functions  are  but  little  known.

Still  we  feel  impelled  to  speak  of  their  existence  not
alone  for  the  truth's  sake,  but  also  because  we  would  en-
large that  narrow  and  limited  view  of  God's  Universe,
which  in  so  many  minds  can  never  expand  beyond  the
idea  of  a  mortal  pilgrimage  and  immortal  existence  for
the  inhabitants  of  this  visible  earth  only.     Every  planet,

337

sun,  and  system,  is  teeming  with  life,  and  life  both  mate-
rial and  spiritual  appropriate  to  each  particular  orb  in
space.  The  higher  minds  of  every  spirit  sphere,  inter-
change communion  with  others  in  the  same  system  of  the
Universe  as  their  own.  Clairvoyants,  Seers,  and  instruct-
ed Magicians,  can  if  they  will,  invoke  Planetary  spirits,  in
preference  to  those  of  their  own  natures  ;  but  here  as
throughout  this  volume,  we  affirm  that  the  most  direct,
normal  and  harmonious  spheres  of  communion,  are  those
which  connect  man  and  the  spirits  of  ancestors,  those
whose  impelling  motives  in  each  case  are  love,  kindness,
desire  for  spiritual  light  and  progress  on  the  one  side,  and
the  undying  affection  which  survives  the  shock  of  death,
and  urges  kind  spirit  friends  to  minister  tenderly  to  those
they  have  left  behind,  on  the  other.

The  ties  which  unite  in  bonds  of  natural  affinity  the  in-
habitants of  earth  and  their  spirit  friends  and  kindred,  are
those  of  root  and  branch,  parents  and  offspring,  and  can
never  be  broken,  or  superseded  in  the  scale  of  natural  har-
mony.

For  the  names  and  offices  of  the  Planetary  Spirits  who
are  chiefly  instrumental  in  communicating  with  mortals,
as  well  as  the  method  of  invoking  them,  we  refer  the
reader  to  the  Magical  Elements  of  Peter  D^Abano,  to  be
found  in  a  future  section,  and  for  a  concluding  notice  con-
cerning Elementary  Spirits,  we  point  to  the  following  ex-
cerpts, taken  from  the  Author's  Autobiography,  entitled
"  Ghost' Land.''

"They  (the  Brotherhood)  alleged  that  every  fragment
of  matter  in  the  universe  represented  a  corresponding  atom
of  Spiritual  existence,  hence  they  claimed  there  were
earthy  spirits  ;  spirits  of  the  flood,  the  fire,  the  air ;  spirits
of  various  animals  ;  spirits  of  plant  life,  in  all  its  varieties  ;
spirits  of  the  atmosphere  ;  and  planetary  spirits,  without

338

limit  or  number.  The  spirits  of  the  planets,  and  higher
worlds  than  earth,  take  rank  far  above  any  of  those  that
dwelt  upon,  or  in  its  interior.  These  spirits  are  far  more
powerful,  wise,  and  far-seeing  than  the  earth  spirits.  They
assumed  that  as  man's  soul  was  composed  of  all  the  ele-
ments which  were  represented  in  his  body,  so  his  spirit  was
as  a  whole,  far  superior  to  the  spirits  of  earth,  water,
plants,  minerals,  etc.  To  hold  communion  with  them,
however,  was  deemed  by  the  Brotherhood  legitimate  and
necessary  to  those  who  would  obtain  a  full  understanding
of  the  special  departments  of  Nature  in  which  these  em-
bryotic  existences  were  to  be  found.  Thus  they  invoked
their  presence  by  magical  rites,  and  sought  to  obtain  con-
trol over  them,  for  the  purpose  of  wresting  from  them  the
complete  understanding  of,  and  power  over  the  secrets  of
Nature.  They  believed  that  the  soul's  essence  became  pro-
gressed by  entering  into  organic  forms,  and  ultimately
formed  portions  of  that  exalted  race  of  beings,  who  ruled
the  fate  of  nations,  and  from  time  to  time  communicated
with  the  soul  of  man  as  planetary  spirits.  They  taught
that  the  elementary  spirits  were  dissipated  into  space  by
the  action  of  death,  but  were  taken  up  in  higher  organisms,
and   ultimately    entered  into  the  composition  of  human

spirits Professor  M.  was  exceedingly  generous  and

distributed  his  abundant  means  with  an  unstinted  hand.
One  day,  discoursing  with  me  on  the  subject  of  his  lavish
expenditure,  he  remarked  carelessly  : —

a  c  There  is  that  mineral  quality  in  my  organism,  Louis,
which  attracts  to  me,  and  easily  subjects  to  my  control,
the  elementary  spirits  who  rule  in  the  mineral  kingdoms.
Have  I  not  informed  you  how  invariably  I  can  tell  the
quality  of  mines,  however  distant  7  how  often  I  have
stumbled,  as  if  by  accident,  upon  buried  treasures  ?  and
how  constantly  my   investments   and  speculations    have

339

resulted  in  financial  successes  ?  Louis,  I  attract  money ^
because  I  attract  mineral  elements,  and  the  spirits  who  rule
in  that  realm  of  Nature.

'' '  I  neither  seek  for,  nor  covet  wealth.  I  love  precious
stones  for  their  beauty  and  magnetic  virtues,  but  money,
as  a  mere  possession,  I  despise.  Were  I  as  mercenary  in
my  disposition,  as  I  am  powerful  in  the  means  of  gaining
wealth,  I  could  be  richer  than  Croesus,  and  command  a
longer  purse  than  Fortunatus.  Nevertheless  the  magnetic
attractions  which  draw  unto  me  the  metallic  treasures  of
the  earth,  fail  to  find  any  response  in  the  attractions  of  my
spirit ;  whereas,  were  I  so  constituted  as  to  lack  the  force
which  attracts  the  service  of  the  spirits  of  the  metals,  my
soul  would  feel  and  yearn  for  a  supply  to  the  deficiency,  in
a  constant  aspiration  for  money  and  treasure. '

"  And  that  is  why  Professor  M.  was  rich,  but  did  not
care  for,  or  value  his  wealth,  whilst  so  many  millions,  who
do  not  possess  in  their  organisms  that  peculiar  mineral
quality,  which,  as  the  Brotherhood  taught,  was  necessary
to  attract  wealth,  pine  for  its  possession,  yet  spend  their
lives  vainly  in  its  pursuit.

''  Thus  it  is,  that  moral,  mental,  and  physical  equilibrium
is  sustained  throughout  the  grand  machinery  of  the  uni-
verse."

....''  I  must  close  this  chapter  by  pointing  out  to  the
reader  how  naturally  a  careful  analysis  of  the  human  spirit
throws  light  upon  all  the  psychological  problems  that  have
confused  the  race,  and  perplexed  the  philosopher.  One
individual  becomes  rich  without  effort,  inherits  wealth,
finds  wealth,  acquires  it  in  a  thousand  ways,  and  that  with-
out needing  or  laboring  for  it.  Another  spends  his  life  in
toiling  to  acquire  it,  and  yet  can  never  succeed.  No  one
leaves  him  an  inheritance,  he  never  purchases  the  success-
ful number  in  a  lottery,  never  succeeds  in  a  financial  spec-
ulation.

^

340

^'  May  there  not  be  truth  in  the  theory  of  the  Brother-
hood, to  wit ;  that  beings  potent  in  the  realms  of  mineral
treasure,  are  magnetically  attracted  to  such  organisms,  as
assimilate  with  their  own  1

^'  I  have  known  one  of  the  Brothers,  who  passed  through
nine  battles  unharmed,  whilst  more  than  fifty  of  his  ac-
quaintances, who  had  just  entered  the  field  of  carnage,  fell
at  the  first  or  second  shot.

"  Our  philosophers  alleged,  that  spirits  of  the  fiery  ele-
ments could  avert  swift  blows  (especially  such  as  struck
fire)  from  those  who  had  a  preponderance  of  a  similar
element  in  them,  whilst  others,  deficient  in  that  quality  of
being,  attracted  all  such  blows  as  produced  fire.  They
carried  this  theory  forward  into  the  tendency  to  be
drowned,  or  to  avoid  the  action  of  the  watery  element, —
to  become  subject  to  a  certain  class  of  accidents,  to  be  in
danger  from  cattle,  serpents,  falling  bodies,  and  indeed  to
all  the  events  of  life,  asserting  that  as  spirits  pervaded
every  atom  of  space,  and  man's  being  was  made  up  of  all
the  elements,  so  when  certain  elements  prevailed,  corre-
sponding spiritual  influences  were  attracted  and  became
favorable  to  him ;  whereas  the  reverse  of  this  position  ob-
tained, in  organisms  deficient  in  special  elementary  forces.
It  was  to  this  cause  that  they  attributed  the  good  and
bad  luck  of  different  individuals,  and  special  successes
and  failures  in  all.  I  was  introduced  by  one  of  the
Brotherhood,  to  two  young  girls,  one  of  whom  was  pas-
sionately fond  of  flowers,  and  the  other  ot  birds.  In  the
clairvoyant  condition,  I  was  subsequently  shown  by  our
ruling  spirit,  the  '  crowned  angel,'  and  the  attendant  spirits
who  were  attracted  to  these  young  creatures  ;  and  I  now
affirm,  that  all  the  fairy  tales  and  legends  of  Supernatu-
ralism,  which  have  been  written  on  the  subject  of  Sylphs,
Undines,  etc.,  pale  and  grow  cold  before  the  divine  beauty,
exquisite  purity,  and  aspirational  grace,  which  shines  out

341

through  the  fleeting  fragrance  of  those  spirits  that  corres-
pond to  flowers  and  birds."

''  In  a  conversation  with  a  beautiful  Mystic,  one  of  the
author's  earliest  friends  and  associates  in  the  realms  of
spiritual  research,  now  herself  a  glorified  angel,  the  follow-
ing items  of  philosophy  were  suggested.

"  '  Constance,'  I  asked,  '  is  it  given  you  to  know  what
new  form  you  will  inhabit  ?  Surely,  one  so  good  and  beau-
tiful can  become  nothing  less  than  a  radiant  planetary
spirit?'

"  '  I  shall  be  the  same  Constance  I  ever  was,'  she  replied.
'  I  am  an  immortal  spirit  7iow,  although  bound  in  material
chains  within  this  frail  body.'

''  '  Constance,  you  dream.  Death  is  the  end  of  individu-
ality. Your  spirit  may  be,  must  be,  taken  up  by  the
bright  realms  of  starry  being,  but  never  as  the  Constance
you  now  are.'

"  'Forever  and  forever,  Louis,  I  shall  be  ever  the  same  !
I  have  seen  worlds  of  being,  these  Magians  do  not  dream
of  Worlds  of  bright  resurrected  human  souls  upon  whom
death  has  had  no  power,  save  to  dissolve  the  earthly
chains  that  held  them  in  tenements  of  clay.  I  have  seen
the   soul  world ;  I  have  seen  that  it  is  imperishable.

"  'Louis,  there  are  in  these  grasses  beneath  our  feet  spir-
itual essences  that  never  die.  In  my  moments  of  happiest
lucidity,  my  soul  winged  through  space  and  pierced  into  a
brighter  interior  than  they  have  ever  realized — aye,  even
into  the  real  soul  of  the  universe,  not  the  mere  magnetic
envelope  which  binds  spirit  and  body  together.  Louis,  in
the  first  or  inner  recesses  of  nature  is  the  realm  of  force —
comprising  light,  heat,  magnetism,  life,  nerve-aura,  essence
and  all  the  imponderables  that  make  up  motion,  for  motion
is  force,  composed  of  many  subdivisible  parts.  Here  in-
here those  worlds  of  half-formed  embryotic  existences  with
which  our  teachers  hold  intercourse.     They  are  the  spir-

342

itual  parts  of  matter,  and  supply  to  matter  the  qualities  of
force  ;  but  they  are  all  embryotic,  transitory,  and  only  par-
tially intelligent  existences.  Nothing  which  is  imperfect
is  permanent,  hence  these  elementary  spirits  have  no  real
or  permanent  existence,  they  are  fragments  of  being ;  or-
gans, but  not  organisms  ;  hence  they  perish — die,  that  we
may  gather  up  their  progressed  atoms,  and  incarnate  their
separate  organs  into  the  perfected  man.'

*'  ^  And  man  himself,  Constance  V

''  ^  Man  as  a  perfected  organism  cannot  die,  Louis.  The
mould  in  which  he  is  formed  must  perish,  in  order  that  the
soul  may  go  free.  The  envelope,  or  magnetic  body  that
binds  body  and  soul  together,  is  formed  of  Force  and  Ele-
mentary Spirit ;  hence  this  stays  for  a  time  with  the  soul
after  death,  and  enables  it  to  return  to,  or  linger  around  the
earth  for  providential  purposes,  until  it  has  become  purified
from  sin  ;  but  even  this  at  length  drops  off,  and  then  the
soul  lives  as  pure  spirit,  in  spirit  realms,  gloriously  bright,
radiantly  happy,  strong,  powerful,  eternal,  infinite.  That
is  heaven  ;  that  it  is  to  dwell  with  God ;  such  souls  are  His
angels.

"  '  The  hand  is  not  the  body  ;  the  eye  is  not  the  head ;
neither  are  the  thin,  vapory  essences  that  constitute  the
separate  organs,  of  which  the  world  of  force  is  composed,
the  soul.  Mark  me,  Louis !  Priests  dream  of  the  exist-
ence of  soul  worlds ;  the  Brotherhood,  of  the  beings  in  the
world  of  force.  The  priests  call  the  Elementary  spirits
of  the  mid-region  mere  creations  of  human  fancy  and  su-
perstition. The  Brothers  charge  the  same  hallucination
upon  the  priests.  Both  are  partly  right  and  partly  wrong,
for  the  actual  experiences  of  the  soul  will  prove,  that  be-
ings exist  of  both  natures,  and  that  both  realms  are  veri-
ties ;  only  the  Elementary  spirits  in  the  realms  of  force  are
like  the  earth,  perishable  and  transitory,  and  the  perfected
spirits  in  the  realm  of  soul  are  immortal,  and  never  die.

^  ?>

343

SECTION  XVIII.

Summary  of  BpiHtism  and  Magic  in  transitional  Eras--
WitcJwraft— Spirit  of  Persecution  in  Qhristian  Church-
es—Causes for  the  unpopularity  of  Spiritism— Alchem-
ists—The  Fhilosophef  s  Stone  and  Elixir  Vitce.

The  history  of  Spiritism  and  Magic  recedes  from  view,
and  becomes  dim  to  the  eye  of  the  superficial  observer,  as
the  night  of  ruin  and  decay  deepens  into  impenetrable
gloom,  and  settles  over  the  splendid  Orient  and  the  classic
beauty  of  Greece  and  Rome.

With  the  extinction  of  national  life  and  glory  in  these
once  powerful  dynasties,  the  spiritualistic  influences  they
diffused  throughout  the  world  seem  to  wane,  and  finally
vanish  from  the  page  of  history,  becoming  only  a  memory,
a  tradition,  or  a  sacred  myth.

But  this  absence  of  metaphysical  life  from  physical  his-
tory is  more  apparent  than  real.  Many  causes  combined
to  prejudice  public  opinion  against  the  belief  in  Spiritism,
yet  Spiritism  stretching  forward  in  one  unbroken  chain  of
influence  from  ancient  to  modern  times,  has  never  ceased
to  exist,  and  the  changes  effected  by  altered  conditions,
altered  opinions,  and  the  rise  and  fall  of  dynasties,  have  no
more  succeeded  in  obliterating  spirit  manifestations  from
the  page  of  human  destiny,  than  the  over-shadowing  pall
of  midnight  crushes  out  the  fragrance  and  bloom  of  the
flowers  it  effectually  conceals.

The  early  Christian  Fathers  not  only  retained  their  faith
in  the  power  and  ministry  of  Angels  and  Spirits,  on  earth,
but  they  proved  that  faith  by  the  works  of  the  Spirit,
which  they  performed  as  their  Master  commanded  them.

344

and  for  some  centuries  after  his  death,  they  looked  with
suspicion  on  those  who  failed  to  render  this  important  tes-
timony to  their  belief  in  Christianity.

Tertullian,  one  of  the  most  zealous  of  the  second  century
converts  to  Christianity,  sternly  advised,  that,  "  any  per-
sons calling  themselves  Christians,  who  could  not  even
expel  demons,  or  heal  the  sick,  should  be  put  to  death  as
impostors."

The  celebrated  Bishops  Montanus  and  Gregory,  Origen,
St.  Martin,  Theophilus,  and  numerous  other  eminent  Chris-
tian Fathers,  urged  that  the  same  tests  suggested  by  Ter-
tullian should  be  required  of  professing  Christians.  They
alleged  their  own  willingness  to  submit  to  such  an  ordeal,
and  report  affirms  that  they  gave  continual  evidence  of
their  ability  to  sustain  their  claims.

So  long  as  Greece  and  Rome  maintained  an  independent
nationality,  spiritual  influences  ruled  their  councils,  and
interpenetrated  every  phase  of  their  history.  In  China,
Thibet,  India  and  amongst  the  Northern  Asiatic  nations.
Spiritism  has  never  died  out,  and  continues  in  force,  sub-
ject only  to  modifications  in  the  decadence  of  religious  zeal
and  fervor  to  this  day.

In  every  land  where  gregarious  man  yet  resolves  him-
self into  national  communities,  the  exceptional  gifts  of
Seers  and  Prophets  have  furnished  means  by  which  spirit
visitants  glance  athwart  the  darkened  paths  of  mortality.
Spirit  voices  have  resounded  in  the  air.  The  semblances
of  the  buried  dead  have  glided  through  the  open  door,
mounted  the  stair,  and  flashed  upon  our  sight  like  glimpses
of  moonlight  breaking  through  thick  banks  of  clouds.
Luminous  forms  radiant  with  the  glory  of  the  better  land  ;
shapes  of  woe,  shipwrecked  waifs  from  the  shores  of  a
retributive  hereafter,  have  come  and  gone,  forming  a  per-
petual chain  of  spiritual  revelation,  which  time  and  change

345

have  never  had  power  to  break.  The  realms  of  spiritual
existence  have  never  been  without  some  witness  in  human
consciousness.  Blank  materialism  or  bigoted  ecclesiasti-
cism  have  never  had  the  excuse  to  say,  in  any  decade  of
time — '^  The  vision  is  closed  ;"  "  the  gates  of  the  eternal
city  are  shut;"  "  the  canon  of  revelation  is  ended."

Magic  as  an  art  may  have  been  pursued  in  the  middle
ages,  only  at  spasmodic  intervals,  and  that  under  the  ban
of  the  Church,  and  the  prohibitory  frown  of  the  State.

We  are  not  now  writing  the  history  of  Spiritism  and
Magic,  otherwise  we  could  assign  reasons  in  abundance  for
this  decadence  in  the  faith  of  old ;  a  few  suggestions,  how-
ever, we  feel  compelled  to  make  in  this  direction,  and  com-
mence by  claiming,  that  the  brand  of  reprobation  first
launched  against  the  name  and  fame  of  Spiritism,  was
cast  by  the  hands  of  Christian  Ecclesiastics.

By  internal  luxury  and  external  pride,  the  aristocratic
rulers  of  the  Christian  Churches  in  the  sixth  and  seventh
centuries  succeeded  in  driving  spirit  influence  from  their
midst,  and  finding  themselves  deprived  of  spiritual  gifts,
and  rebuked  by  the  sight  of  laymen  performing  those
apostolic  works  required  of  them  in  proof  of  their  faith,
they  resolved  in  solemn  council  that  henceforth  it  should  he
unlawful  for  any  layman  to  attempt  the  rites  of  exorcism^  or
the  cure  of  disease^  by  the  laying  on  of  hands.  Public  opinion
once  impelled  in  this  direction  soon  gained  force  by  mo-
mentum. ,

In  Great  Britain  the  ignorant  and  prejudiced  mission-
aries who  were  sent  to  convert  the  poor  natives  to  Chris-
tianity, commenced  their  work  by  levelling  their  bitterest
diatribes  against  the  prevailing  worship  of  Druidism.

The  ancient  rites  of  the  Druids  consisted  of  solar  and
sex  worship  interblended.  The  heaps  of  stones  sometimes
piled  in  single  cairns,  sometimes  arranged  in  circles,  but

346

above  all,  those  gigantic  rings  formed  of  upright  unhewn
stones,  with  others  horizontally  laid  across  them,  were  all
symbolical  of  the  ancient  faith  of  the  Sun  worshipper,
blending  with  those  emblems  significant  of  the  Eastern
Phallus  and  Yoni.     The  upright  unhewn  pillars  or  Lithoi

Stone    Mertge,

were  Phallic  emblems,  the  horizontal  slabs  formed  the
mystic  Gate  or  Tau^  both  important  symbols  of  Phallic
worship.  Other  Druidical  altars  formed  of  stones  there
were,  which — either  under  the  subtle  influences  communi-
cated to  them  by  powerful  Priests  and  Priestesses,  or  from
some  peculiar  virtue  in  the  stone  itself,  when  balanced  one
mass  on  another,  could  be  caused  to  rock,  and  thus  give
responses  to  inquiring  worshippers,  just  as  the  modern
Spiritists  obtain  communications  through  the  movements
of  inanimate  bodies.

The  curious  investigator  of  Druidical  remains  and  an-
cient fiaiths  will  find  abundant  evidence  to  show  that  these
"  Cromlechs"  or  rocking  stones  were  nothing  less  than
oracular  tables  used  by  the  Priestly  orders  to  obtain
responses  from  the  invisible  world.

The  nature  of  these  weird  rites  was  known  to  the  an-
cient Britons,  and  when  they  became  converts  to  Christian-

347

ity,  the  Prophetic  powers  of  the  Priests  and  Priestesses,
connected,  as  they  were,  with  dreadful  sacrificial  offerings,
in  which  the  sacred  human  form  was  not  always  exempt,
left  such  impressions  of  mystery  and  awe  upon  their  un-
taught minds,  that  it  was  not  difficult  for  their  Christian
Teachers  to  convince  them  that  this  powerful  Priesthood
wrought  their  marvels  and  obtained  responses  through  the
devils  whom  they  propitiated  with  human  sacrifices.

Thus  the  early  Christians  in  Great  Britain  grew  up  with
an  instinctive  horror  of  Spiritualistic  rites,  and  never
failed  to  connect  them  with  the  influence  of  evil  spirits
and  Satanic  worship.

In  Continental  Europe  whenever  spiritual  gifts  were
manifested  in  the  Convents  or  Monasteries,  they  were
deemed  evidences  of  the  special  favor  of  God,  and  signs  of
extraordinary  sanctity.  The  individuals  thus  highly  fa-
vored were  canonized  after  death  as  saints,  and  vast  revenues
accrued  to  the  shrines  which  enclosed  their  ashes,  from  the
miracles  they  were  assumed  to  work.

That  the  lives  of  the  saints,  and  holy  ascetics  of  the
Christian  Monasteries  should  be  full  of  spiritual  works,
was  naturally  to  be  expected.  The  conditions  for  the  un-
foldtnent  of  latent  spiritual  powers  were  as  rigidly  enforced
in  monastic  rule  as  they  were  voluntarily  endured  by  Hin-
doo Fakeers.  The  severe  discipline,  numerous  fasts,  vigils
and  penances  of  these  gloomy  recluses,  produced  the
same  physiological  and  psychological  changes,  which  have
been  indicated  as  resulting  from  Hindoo  and  Egyptian
methods  of  Initiation.  By  the  same  law,  the  fires  of  per-
secution and  continual  prospects  of  martyrdom,  only  served
to  quicken  the  zeal  and  stimulate  the  devotion  of  the  early
Christians,  until  they  actually  attained  to  those  degrees  of
exalted  insensibility  to  pain,  that  mark  even  now  the  self-
inflicted  mutilations  of  Eastern  Ecstatics,

348

The  rack  and  the  thumb-screw',  the  convent  and  the
monastery,  each  produced  their  legitimate  fruits  in  legions
of  wonder-working  saints  and  inspired  martyrs,  and  these
sufficed  to  supply  the  Christian  Church  with  all  the  spirit-
ism it  was  either  safe  or  politic  to  encourage.

As  it  became  the  interest  of  the  Christian  Hierarchy
to  attribute  all  marvels  wrought  in  Monastic  Institutions
to  the  special  favor  of  God,  and  the  incomparable  sanc-
tity of  Catholic  devotees,  so  it  was  also  necessary  to  reserve
such  vast  auxiliaries  to  Clerical  power  within  clerical
boundaries,  and  hence,  all  who  presumed  to  mainifest  mi-
raculous powers  outside  the  privileged  pale  of  the  Church
and  its  dependencies,  were  at  once  branded  with  the  odious
charge  of  witchcraft,  necromancy  and  black  magic.

The  more  vague  these  charges  were,  and  the  more  diffi-
cult of  definition,  the  more  they  struck  terror  into  the
mind  of  an  ignorant  populace,  until  it  was  deemed  the
highest  act  of  piety  on  the  part  of  laymen  to  accuse,  and
churchmen  to  destroy,  every  hapless  creature  whom  the
superstition  of  the  time,  or  the  possession  of  actual  spirit-
ual endowments,  furnished  excuses  to  brand  with  the  fear-
ful charge  of  witchcraft.  .     .

It  must  be  remembered  that  whilst  the  power  of  life  and
death  was  vested  in  the  hands  of  civil  governments,  the
power  of  conferring  eternal  life  or  eternal  torments,  was
claimed  by  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy  of  the  middle
ages.

The  Church,  usurping  the  name  and  authority  of  Christ,
claimed  not  only  to  be  God's  vicegerent  on  earth,  and  to
hold  the  keys  of  the  kingdom,  but  to  be  the  very  porter
and  door-keeper  of  heaven,  peddling  out  passports  and  sell-
ing seats  for  the  divine  amphitheatres  of  eternity,  to  those
who  could  pay  best,  or  confer  the  richest  benefits  on  its
luxurious  orders.

349

If  Spiritual  gifts  had  passed  away  from  such  a  Church,  if
its  well  fed,  pampered  and  ambitious  disciples  could  no
longer  perform  the  works  enjoined  on  them  by  the  house-
less and  wandering  Nazareue, — was  not  that  sufficient  rea-
son why  no  one  else  should  presume  to  do  more  than  themselves?
— ^that  is,  no  one  outside  of  ecclesiastical  dependencies^for
it  was  as  much  the  policy  of  such  a  Church  to  encourage
the  prestige  of  miraculous  gifts  within  the  limits  of  its  own
holy  "  ring,"  as  it  was  to  burn,  crush,  torture,  hang,  drown,
and  slay  generally,  all  who  made  profession  of  the  same
stupendous  powers,  outside  their  special  jurisdiction.

Every  layman  who  could  perform  the  works  which
Christian  ecclesiastics  ought  to  have  done,  was  a  living  re-
buke to  them  for  their  lack  of  faith,  and  so  there  was  but
one  remedy — and  that,  the  all-potential  one  of  death.
Thus  perished  to  the  number  of  nine  thousand,  the  brave
'and  devoted  Stedinger,  a  section  of  the  Frieslanders,  who
fired  with  the  love  of  freedom,  protested  against  the  inso-
lent autocracy  of  the  Church,  and  so  under  letter  of
authority  from  the  Pope  and  their  Catholic  Majesties  of  Ger-
many, they  were  exterminated  root  and  branch.  Thus
died  the  noble  Waldenses,  a  sect  of  early  Protestants  whose
death  warrant  was  sealed  for  the  same  cause  and  by  the
same  murderous  hands.

Thus  in  the  fourteenth  century,  perished  miserably,  fifty-
nine  of  the  celebrated  military  knights  of  the  Holy  Temple
with  their  brave  and  noble  Commanders  Jaques  de  Molay
and  Guy  of  INormandy,  all  roasted  alivehehvQ  slow  fires  by
Christian  Priests,  and  that  under  the  accusation  of  excelling
in  those  very  arts  for  which  the  model  man  of  the  Chris-
tian Bible,  the  great  lawgiver  of  the  Jews — Moses — had
proved  himself  to  be  so  accompUshed  an  adept,  namely,
magic.  According  to  the  most  authentic  records  of  the
times,  and  from  transcripts  of  the  very  trials  themselves,

350

jt  we  learn  that  between  the  twelfth  and  eighteenth  centu-
ries, thus  perished  amidst  tortures  too  shocking  for  recital,
and  under  circumstances  that  curdle  the  blood  to  remember,
over  200,000  persons  of  both  sexes  and  all  ages,  and  that
in  Continental  Europe  alone  !  |  These  murders  were  per-
petrated by  roasting  alive,  hanging,  burning,  slaying,  and
crushing.  They  included  the  destruction  of  the  pure,  pious,
self-devoted  and  Angel-led  Joan  of  Arc,  the  Saviour  of  her
country,  and  the  ungrateful  monsters  who  publicly  burned
her,  and  all  thus  perished,  either  being  totally  guiltless  of
any  crime,  or  charged  only  with  the  possession  of  those
spiritual  gifts  which  the  founder  of  Christianity  demanded
as  the  evidence  of  Christian  faith.

/  In  all  lands  but  those  dominated  by  Christianityl  Spirit-
ism has  not  only  prevailed  but  it  still  exists  ;  has  been,  and
is,  openly  taught  as  an  art,  engrafted  on  the  services  of  re-
lis:ion,  and  cultured  as  a  science.  Under  Christian  rule
alone  have  its  hapless  votaries'  powers  been  crushed  out  by
torture,  or  silenced  by  death  ;  and  thus  it  is  that  so  strange
and  sudden  a  decadence  appears  on  the  page  of  Imtovj)  to
have  fallen  upon  the  once  popular  and  universal  methods
of  intercourse  which  prevailed  between  spirits  and  mortals
in  the  early  ages.  The  attitude  of  the  Christian  Ministry
towards  the  spiritual  side  of  man's  nature,  has  been  that
of  unceasing  hostility  and  presumptuous  denunciation  ;  can
we  wonder  then,  that  a  final  eclipse  of  faith  has  fallen
upon  the  people  thus  materialized  b}^  the  very  power  to  whom
they  have  entrusted  the  charge  of  their  spiritual  relations,
or  that  the  soul  of  Christian  humanity  has  become  secu-
larized, and  its  spiritual  functions  dwarfed  almost  to  anni-
hilation by  such  a  process  of  training  ?
/To  gather  up  the  scattered  fragments  of  spiritual  life
and  phenomena  which  have  burst  forth  like  pent-up  fires
from  every  hamlet,  city,  or  nation,  of  civilization,  during

351

the  bitter  clerical  proscriptions  of  the  middle  ages,  would
be  impossible  in  a  book  of  this  character. /Nothing  less  than
a  consecutive  and  all-embracing  history  could  do  justice  to
so  vast  a  theme;  our  part  therefore  must  now  be  limited  to
a  few  brief  notices,  and  for  this  purpose  we  select  five  classes
of  representative  Spiritists,  who  figured  most  prominently
during  the  middle  ages,  and  connected  the  first  or  ancient
era  of  spiritual  history  with  the  present  time.

The  three  first  of  these  are,  the  Alchemists,  Rosicru-
cians,  and  Mesmerizers  ;  a  noble  triad  of  scholarly  men,
who,  inspired  with  the  belief  that  spiritual  powers  and
forces  must  be  based  upon  scientific  laws,  endeavored  to
discover  and  practicalize  these,  by  occult  researches  into
nature,  and  the  revival  of  magical  rites  and  ceremonials.

The  two  remaining  classes  included  all  those  unfortunates
branded  with  the  crime  of  witchcraft,  and  unquestionably
in  many  instances  endowed  with  true  prophetic  powers,  and
finally  the  modern  Spiritualists.

Of  the  Alchemists,  as  a  class,  we  have  but  little  now  to
say.  Although  they  professed  to  be  engaged  in  seeking
that  mysterious  stone,  which  would  enable  them  to  trans-
mute base  metals  into  gold,  and  by  expressing  the  virtues
of  certain  drugs  and  herbs,  compound  an  elixir  which
should  prolong  life  indefinitely,  it  is  well  known  to  modern
scholars  that  the  prestige  of  these  pursuits  was  designed
in  many  instances  to  conceal  a  more  occult  and  spiritual
idea./^ Alchemy  owed  its  introduction  into  Europe  to  the
Arabians,  amongst  whom  Aliarabi  and  Avicenna  were  the
most  celebrated. ^/^

These  men  were  no  idle  pretenders  to  the  Hermetic  phi-
losophy. They  were  both  instructed  Physicians,  wise
Magnetists,  and  profound  Psychologists.  Some  of  their
cures  efiected  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  and  inimitable
performances  on  the  lute  and  other  instruments  of  music,

352

proved  them  to  be  Adepts,  if  not  in  magical  art,  at  least
in  the  powers  of  magnetism  and  psychology.  The  first
Alchemist  of  any  repute,  whose  writings  are  preserved,  was
Geber,  supposed  to  have  been  an  Arabian,  but  historically
proved  to  have  been  a  German.  This  philosopher  claimed
that  Alchemy  was  first  practiced  by  Noah,  and  transmitted
to  his  son  Shem,  from  whom  the  derivation  of  the  word
Alchemy  was  traced.  He  proved  that  which  the  Jesuit
Father  Martini  and  Lenglet  du  Fresuoij^  in  their  several  his-
tories of  the  Hermetic  philosophy,  have  clearly  shown,
namely  :  that  Alchemy  was  believed  in,  and  its  principles
attempted,  if  not  successfully  practiced,  in  most  early
periods  of  time.  The  Chinese  taught  of  its  possibility
more  than  two  thousand  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,
and  many  learned  Alchemists  claimed  both  Abraham  and
Moses  as  brothers  of  their  craft.

The  facts  were,  that  the  bitter  persecutions  heaped
upon  all  dissenters  from  the  stereotyped  doctrines  of
Christianity,  as  enunciated  b}^  the  Roman  Catholic  Hier-
archy, compelled  the  concealment  of  heretical  opinions
beneath  some  external  form  of  science,  whose  semblance
could  give  no  offense  to  the  ruling  powers.

The  Arabian  Alchemists  and  their  philosophic  succes-
sors— the  German  Rosicrucians — were  all  waifs  drifted  off
from  the  great  ocean  of  natural  Theosophy,  whose  source
was  to  be  found  in  the  East,  and  whose  origin  dates  back
to  the  foundations  of  Sabaism  and  Ancient  Masonry,  in
Chaldea,  India  and  Egypt.

These  men  were  essentially  the  ^^  Fire  Philosophers"  of
the  middle  ages,  and  their  doctrines  and  practices  were
derived  from  a  profound  study  of  the  truths  discoverable
only  in  the  powers  of  nature.

^/They  assumed  that  matter  was  resolvable  back  into  two,
three,  or  at  most  four  primordial  conditions.     That  by  va-

353

rious  combinations  of  these  original  elements  all  the
varieties  of  material  form  and  substance  were  produced,
hence  gold  (in  these  philosophers'  opinion)  was  but  a  result
of  the  highest  combination  of  elements,  and  the  most  per-
fect experiments  of  nature /<'

If  then  they  argued,  they  could  reduce  matter  back  to
its  primordial  states  and  then  recombine,  leaving  out  the
subsidence  or  tlux,  and  preserving  only  the  finer  particles,
they  could  make  gold  at  will,  and  that  from  the  very  same
substances  that  produced  iron,  lead,  and  all  the  baser  met-
als, which  were  really  gold  in  embryonic  conditions.

To  find  the  great  factor  by  whose  univ.ersal  agency  these
natural  transmutations  proceeded  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,
they  had  only  to  resort  to  the  Rosicrucian  theory  of  latent,
divine,  invisible  fire,  permeating  every  portion  of  matter,
theories  of  which  we  have  written  in  former  sections.
Time,  experience,  and  deep  study,  discovered  to  many  an-
cient philosophers  a  resemblance  between  the  virtues
which  proceeded  from  certain  stones,  crystals,  minerals,
drugs,  herbs,  and  plants  ;  astral,  solar,  and  lunar  influen-
ces, and  the  touch  of  the  human  hand^  or  even  the  contact  of
any  object  which  had  been  worn  by  human  beings.

These,  together  with  the  mysterious  powers  of  the  load-
stone, and  the  universal  correspondence  which  the  realms
of  nature  and  the  sidereal  heavens  disclosed,  convinced
these  fire  philosophers  that  the  great  hidden  virtue,  the
universal  motor  of  being,  was  this  all-pervading  latent
fire, — or  that  which  we  call  magnetism  in  the  earth  and
minerals^~littraction  and  repulsion  in  the  loadstone  ;  elec-
tricity in  the  clouds  and  plants,  and  sparks  evolved  from
batteries  ;  Life  in  animated  bodies  ;  and  Force  through-
ouTthe  Universe  of  moving  forms.  In  recondite  treat-
ises elaborating  the  ideas  which  we  have  thus  briefly
summed    up,    the    ancient    Fire    Worshippers,    Medieval

354

Alchemists,  and  Rosicrucians,  dilated  on  the  Univer-
sal Force  of  being,  as  the  "  Philosopher's  Stone,"  which
applied  to  chemical  lore  could  make  and  unmake
worlds — dissolve  all  bodies,  and  recombine  them  in
whatever  proportions  the  accomplished  chemist  desired,  or
if  expressed  into  juices  and  mixed  in  such  degrees  as  would
preserve  the  largest  amount  of  this  force  in  a  liquid  form,
it  would  be  the  ''  Elixir  Vitae"  of  which  those  who  partook,
drinking  in  the  true  element  of  life,  might  prolong  it  at
will,  or  if  supplied  with  a  sufficient  quantity  from  time  to
time, — live  forever !

Had  Albertus  Magnus,  Thomas  Aquinas,  Geber,  Arte-
phius,  Friar  Roger  Bacon,  and  other  great  and  truly
learned  students  of  these  occult  ideas,  once  beheld  a  Vol-
taic pile  reducing  huge  bars  of  metal  into  a  few  particles
of  ash  in  a,  single  flash,  could  they  have  seen  similar  light-
ning sparks  passing  through  invisible  airs,  crystallizing  them
into  drops  of  water,  or  acting  upon  water,  solidifying  it  into
hard  crystals, — could  they  have  witnessed  processes  now  so
simple,  then  so  stupendously  magical,  and  beheld  as  the
only  visible  agent  of  these  wonderful  transmutations,  noth-
ing but  a  flash  of  lightning,  who  can  question  that  their
faith  in  the  philosopher's  stone  would  have  been  sealed  into
certainty,  and  that  they  would  have  joined  in  the  choral
cry  "  Eureka  !  The  grand  Hermetic  secret  is  revealed."
J^/  Again — Had  these  Adepts  beheld,  as  the  author  has,  a
frail,  wasted,  dying  creature,  extending  its  emaciated  frame
on  the  couch  over  which  the  shadows  of  impending  death
were  falling  fast,  and  watched  as  the  author  has,  a  simple
untaught  countryman  waving  his  rough  warm  hands  over
the  helpless  sufferer,  until,  without  an  atom  of  visible  mat-
ter used,  a  single  particle  of  sensuous  cause  discoverable,
the  color  returned  to  the  wan  cheek,  light  to  the  glazing
eye,  the  crimson  glow  of  life  to  the  pallid  lip,  and  strength

355

to  the  wasted  form,  until  upspringing  from  the  couch  of
death  and  agony,  the  sufferer  becomes  a  man  again  quite
restored  to  life,  strength,  and  health,  would  not  the  watch-
ing Sages  have  pertinently  asked,  ''  Do  you  now  question
the  potency  of  the  Elixir  Vitce,  or  doubt  that  under  its  in-
fluence, the  mortal  might  become  immortal,  and  Hve  for-
ever?"

With  every  day's  experience  in  marvels  of  transforma-
tion, transmutation  and  chemical  change  wrought  by  the
all-potential  magician  Electricity,  with  an  equal  opportu-
nity for  experience  to  those  who  dare  avail  themselves  of  it,
of  the  no  less  marvellous  potency  of  vital  magnetism,  as  a
restorative  of  health,  a  healer  of  disease,  nay,  a  very  Mes-
siah who  can  restore  the  entranced  and  semi-dead  to  life
again, — who  can  question  that  the  Alchemists  of  old  were
Prophets  of  the  new  ?  and  that  their  labors,  veiled  mysti-
cism, and  occult  symbolism,  only  hovered  on  the  threshold
of  those  sublime  truths,  which  Mesmer  and  Franklin  have
sin£e_^monstrated,  and  that  even  now,  modern  science  is
applying  the  philosopher's  stone  to  every  act  of  simple
electrotyping,  and  modern  magnetizers  are  administering
draughts  of  the  Elixir  Vitae  with  every  wave  of  their  life-
bringing  hands.

/'  It  boots  not  now  to  rehearse  the  names  and  exploits  of
the  many  wise  and  patient  scholars,  whose  heretical  beliefs
were  necessarily  hidden  under  the  jargon  of  alchemical
discourses,  and  pretended  researches  into  physical  science.
The  Alchemists  started  upon  metaphysical  propositions,
and  arguing  from  the  original  sacredness  of  fire,  the
Deific  principle  hidden  away  under  every  atom  of  matter,
they  proceeded  to  physical  experiments,  in  order  to  utilize
this  divine  fire,  and  obtain  a  perfect  command  over  all  the
elements  of  nature.

They  discovered  in  the  course  of  their  varied  wander-

356

ings,  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,  many  useful  chemi-
cal combinations.  Roger  Bacon,  for  example,  eliminated
many  profound  truths  in  Astronomy,  and  improved  upon,
if  he  did  not  actually  invent,  the  telescope,  burning-
glasses  and  gunpowder.  Arnold  de  Villeneuve,  Raymond
LuUi,  Albertus  Magnus,  Thomas  Aquinas,  and  many  others
more  or  less  renowned,  preserving  faith  in  the  wonders  of
chemistry,  added  constantly  to  the  sum  of  human  knowl-
edge in  this  direction,  besides  advancing  step  after  step
into  those  realms  of  power  and  achievement,  which  en-
abled Sweedenborg,  Mesmer,  Franklin,  Galvani,  Volta,
and  even  the  scoffing  Faraday,  to  found  upon  the  experi-
ments of  unknown  and  despised  builders,  those  triumphant
galleries  and  corridors  of  mesmeric,  magnetic  and  electri-
cal science,  of  whiclj  the  Ancient  Alchemists  and  Rosicru-
cians  laid  the  foundation  stones.

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XVIII.

Alchemists  and  PhilosopJiers  of  ilie  Seventeenth  and  Eigh-
teenth Centuries — the  general  uniformity  of  their  Oj^in-
ions.

It  would  be  impossible  in  a  work  of  this  limited  nature
to  cite  all  the  names,  much  less  the  opinions,  of  that
numerous  class  distinguished  either  as  Alchemists,  Rosi-
crucians,  Astrologers,  or  Philosophers,  who  formed  the
ranks  of  Mysticism  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth
centuries.  Amongst  the  most  distinguished  of  these  ill-
understood  classes,  were  Nostradamus,  a  celebrated  astron-
omer, and  an  expert  Astrologer  ;  Paracelsus,  an  excellent
Physician  and  a  Scholar,  who  either  accidentally,  or  as  the

357

result  of  research,  discovered  those  truths  concerning  min-
eral and  animal  magnetism  which  Mesmer  subsequently
reduced  to  a  system ;  Van  Helmout,  a  truly  prophetic  per-
son, but  one  who  cultivated  his  gifts  of  Seership  by  the
study  and  practice  of  magical  arts  ;  Albertus  Magnus,
Thomas  Aquinas,  Artephius,  Arnold  de  Villeneuve,  Ray-
mond Lulli,  Roger  Bacon,  Nicholas  Flammel,  George  Rip-
ley, and  many  other  practical  chemists,  who  perceived  the
possibilities  of  Alchemy,  and  who  distinguished  themselves
from  the  thirteenth  to  the  eighteenth  centuries  in  writing
on  this  subject,  and  awakening  the  terror  of  the  i2i;norant,
and  the  denunciations  of  the  bigoted.

In  the  early  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  study  of
Alchemy  and  the  practices  of  Magic  became  at  once  famous
and  infamous^  through  the  influence  of  the  celebrated  Gilles
de  Laval,  a  marshal  of  France,  whose  wealth,  unbridled
luxury  and  shameless  debaucheries  led  him  to  the  prac-
tices of  magical  art,  for  the  sake  of  administering  to  the
vilest  of  passions,  and  the  replenishment  of  his  exhausted
coffers,  drained  by  his  unparalleled  extravagance.  As  this
monster  in  human  form  supplied  to  the  fiction  mongers  of
later  times  the  original  of  the  famous  drama  of  ''Blue
Beard,"  some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  vast  notoriety  to
which  his  crimes  attained.

Neither  the  historical  facts,  nor  the '  exaggerated  tales
which  combined  to  render  the  name  of  Marshal  de  Retz
memorable  through  all  time,  belong  to  this  record ;  it  is
enough  to  add  that  the  magical  practices  to  which  he  re-
sorted in  aid  of  his  unholy  purposes,  contributed  greatly
to  deepen  the  horror  with  which  this  art  was  regarded —
especially  in  an  age  too  ignorant  and  priest-ridden  to  dis-
tinguish the  nature  of  occult  science  from  its  worst  abuse.

It  was  during  the  fifteenth  century  that  Henry  Cornelius
Agrippa  flourished— an  adept  in  physical  science,  scholarly

358

attainments,  as  well  as  occult  art,  which  made  him  the
honored  officer  of  Kings  and  Princes,  the  friend,  adviser
and  Physician  of  Queens  and  Princesses,  and  the  Paragon
of  Magicians  in  all  ages.  It  is  from  a  compendium  of  his
occult  practices  that  we  are  enabled  to  present  our  readers,
in  the  following  section,  with  a  complete  Arhatel  of  Magic^
or  full  directions  for  the  performance  of  those  curious  rites
in  which  Agrippa  and  many  of  his  cotemporaries  claimed
to  be  able  to  control  the  legions  of  Planetary  Spirits.

Cornelius  Agrippa.

From  a  rare  print  in  the  Strashxirg  Collection.

It  must  be  remembered  that  this  distinguished  Knight
and  great  Adept  was  a  devout  Roman  Catholic,  hence  he
employed  those  sacred  names,  garments  and  forms,  which
belonged  to  his  Church,  just  in  the  same  manner  as  the
Arabians,  Greeks,  Chaldeans  and  Egyptians  employed  the
names  and  formulae  of  belief  peculiar  to  their  time  in  their
magical  rites.  Let  it  be  borne  in  mind  however,  that  such
features  of  each  system  are  but  the  exoteric  forms  in  which
the  esoteric  principles  are  wrapped  up.  They  have  no
real  potency  beyond  the  satisfaction  they  procure  to  pious

359

minds,  that  they  are  engaged  in  no  ceremonials  displeas-
ing to  their  Gods,  or  contrary  to  their  forms  of  worship.

Provided  always  that  the  magician  is  duly  prepared  by
fasting,  abstinence,  prayer  and  contemplation — provided
that  his  magnetism  is  potent  and  his  will  all-powerful —
the  spirits  will  obey  and  answer  him,  whether  he  conjures
them  in  the  name  of  Buddha,  Osiris,  Christ  or  Mahomet.
The  true  potency  resides  in  the  quantity  and  quality  of
the  Astral  fluid,  by  which  the  operator  furnishes  means
for  the  use  of  the  spirits,  and  the  power  of  the  Will,  by
which  he  compels  beings  less  potent  than  himself  to  obey
him.  With  these  premises  we  shall  only  add,  that  after  a
careful  study  of  the  occult  works  of  Cornelius  Agrippa,  we
found  it  wholly  impossible  to  reduce  their  quaint  and  in-
volved style  to  the  comprehension  of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury reader,  without  infringing  upon  the  integrity  of  the
text.  Happily  for  our  purpose,  the  same  idea  occurred  to
a  distinguished  philosopher  said  to  have  been  a  pupil  of
the  great  Agrippa's — one  who,  with  much  more  perspicuity
of  style,  undertakes  to  reduce  the  magical  elements  of  his
renowned  prototype  into  much  plainer  language.  As
there  is  not  the  slightest  shadow  of  difference  between  the
systems  of  Agrippa  and  Abano,  except  in  the  superior  clear-
ness of  the  latter's  style,  and  as  both  were  translated  into
English  in  1664  by  the  same  scholarly  editor,  Robert  Turn-
er, of  London,  England,  we  select  Abano's  version  as  the  one
which  cannot  fail  to  prove  the  most  acceptable  to  our
readers.

All  the  signs,  sigils,  names  of  angels,  etc.,  have  been
faithfully  copied  with  the  utmost  care.

360

SECTION   XIX.

II  K  P    V  J^  M  h:  11  a  N  ;

OR,

Magical  Elements  of  Peter  D'Ahano,  FTtilosoplier.

In  the  former  book  of  Agrippa^  it  is  sufficiently  spoken
concerning  Magical  Ceremonies,  and  Initiations.

But  because  he  seemeth  to  have  written  to  the  learned,
and  well  experienced  in  this  Art ;  because  he  doth  not
specially  treat  of  the  Ceremonies,  but  rather  speaketh  of
them  in  general,  it  was  therefore  thought  good  to  adde
hereunto  the  Magical  Elements  of  Petei'  de  Ahano  :  that
those  who  are  hitherto  ignorant,  and  have  not  tasted  of
Magical  Superstitions,  may  have  them  in  readiness,  how
they  may.  exercise  themselves  therein.  For  we  see  in
this  book,  the  distinct  functions  of  spirits,  how  they  may
be  drawn  to  discourse  and  communication  ;  what  is  to  be
done  every  day,  and  every  hour ;  and  how  they  shall  be
read,  as  if  they  were  described  sillable  by  sillable.

In  brief,  in  this  book  are  kept  the  principles  of  Magical
conve}'ances.  But  because  the  greatest  power  is  attributed
to  the  Circles ;  ( for  they  are  certain  fortresses  to  defend
the  operators  safe  from  the  evil  Spirits ; )  In  the  first
place  we  will  treat  concerning  the  composition  of  a  Circle.

Of  the  Circle,  and  the  composition  thereof.

The  form  of  Circles  is  not  always  the  same  ;  but  useth  to
be  changed,  according  to  the  order  of  the  spirits  that  are  to
be  called,  their  places,  dales,  and  hours.     In  making  a  Cir-

361

cle,  it  ought  to  be  considered  in   what  time  of  the  year,
day,  and  hour  you  make  the  Circle  ;  what  Spirits  you  call,
to  what  Star  and  Reo^ion  they  do  belong,  and  what  func-
tions they  have.     Therefore  let  there  be  made  three   Cir-
cles of  the  latitude  of  nine  foot,  and  let  them  be  distant
one  from  another  a  hand's  breadth  ;  and  in  the   middle
Circle,  first,  write  the  name  of  the  hour  wherein   you  do
the  work.     In  the  second  place,  write  the  name  of  the  An-
gel of  the  hour.     In  the  third  place,  the  sigil  of  the  Angel
of  the  hour.     Fourthly,  the  name  of  the  Angel  that  ruleth
that  day,  and  the  names  of  his  Ministers.     In  the   fifth
place,  the  name  of  the  present  time.     Sixthly,  of  the  Spir-
its ruling  in  that  part  of  time,  and  their  Presidents.     Sev-
enthly, the  name  of  the  head  of  the  Signe  ruling  in  that
part  of  time  wherein  you  work.     Eighthly,  the  name  of
the  earth,  according  to  that  time.     Ninthly,  and  for  the
completing  of  the  Middle  Circle,  write  the  name  of  the
Sun  and  Moon,  according  to  the  said  rule  of  time  ;  for  as  the
time  is  changed,  so  the  names  are  to  be  altered.     And  in
the  outermost  Circle  let  there  be  drawn  in  the  four  angles,
the  names  of  the  presidential  Angels  of  the  Air,  that  day
wherein  you  work ;  to  wit,  the  name  of  the  King  and  his
three  Ministers.     Without  the  Circle,  in  four  angles,  let
Pmtagones  be   made.      In  the  inner  Circle,  let  there  be
written  four  divine  names  with  crosses  interposed  in  the
middle  of  the  Circle  ;  to  wit,  towards  the  East  let  there  be
written  Alpha^  and  towards  the  West  let  there  be  written
Omega ;  and  let  a  cross  divide  the  middle  of  the  Circle.
When  the  Circle  is  thus  finished,   according  to  the  rule
now  before  written,  you  shall  proceed.

Of  the  names  of  the  Angels  and  their  Sigils,  it  shall  be
spoken  in  their  proper  places.  Now  let  us  take  a  view  of
the  names  of  the  times.  A  year  is  fourfold,  and  is  divided
into  Spring,  Summer,  Harvest  and  Winter;  the  names
whereof  are  these  :

362

The  Spring,  Taloi.  The  Sinniner,  Casmaran.  Autumne,
Adarael.     Winter,  Earlas.

The  Angels  of  the  Spring :  Caracasa,  Core,  Amatiel,
Commissoros.

The  head  of  the  Signe  of  the  Spring  ;  Spugliguel.

The  name  of  the  Earth  in  the  Spring  :  Amadai.

The  names  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  the  Spring :  The
Sun,  Abraym.     The  Moon,  Agusita.

The  Angels  of  the  Summer :  Gargatel,  Tariel,  Gaviel.

The  head  of  the  Signe  of  the  Summer :  Tubiel.

The  name  of  the  Earth  in  Summer  :  Festativi.

The  names  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  Summer.  The  Sun,
Athemay.     The  Moon,  Armatus.

The  Angels  of  Autumne  :  Tarquam,  Gnabarel.

The  head  of  the  Signe  of  Autumne :    Torquaret.

The  name  of  the  Earth  in  Autumne  :  Rabianara.

The  names  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  Autumne  :  The  Sun,
Commutaff.     The  Moon,  Affaterium.

The  Consecrations  and  Benedictions,  and  First  of  the
Benediction  of  the  Circle.

When  the  Circle  is  ritely  perfected,  sprinkle  the  same
with  holy  water  and  say,  "  Thou  shalt  purge  me  with  hys-
sop, 0  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  clean ;  thou  shalt  wash  me,
and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."

The  Benediction  of   Perfumes.

"  The  God  of  Abraham,  God  of  Isaac,  God  of  Jacob,
bless  here  the  creatures  of  these  kindes,  that  they  may
fill  up  the  power  and  vertue  of  their  odours ;  so  that  neither
the  enemy  nor  any  false  imagination  may  be  able  to  enter
into  them,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &c."  Then  let
them  be  sprinkled  with  holy  water.

The  Exorcisme  of   Fire  upon  which  the  Perfumes    are

TO    BE    PUT.

The  fire  which  is  to  be  used  for  fumigations  is  to  be  in

363

a  new  vessel  of  earth  or  iron,  and  let  it  be  exorcised  after
this  manner :

^'  1  exorcise  thee,  0  thou  creature  of  fire,  by  him  by
whom  all  things  are  made,  that  forthwith  thou  cast  away
every  phantasme  from  thee,  that  it  shall  not  be  able  to  do
any  hurt  in  anything.  Then  say,  "  Bless  0  Lord  this  crea-
ture of  fire,  and  sanctifie  it,  that  it  may  be  blessed  to  set  forth
the  praise  of  thy  holy  name,  that  no  hurt  may  come  to
the  Exorcisers  or  Spectators,  through  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  &c."

Of  the  Garment  and  Pentacle.

Let  it  be  a  Priest's  garment  if  it  can  be ;  but  if  it  can-
not be  had,  let  it  be  of  linen,  and  clean.     Then  take  this

Form    of    a    reniacle.

Pentacle  made  in  the  day  and  hour  of  Mercury,  the  Moon
increasing,    written  in   parchment    made  of  a  kid's  skm.

364

But  first  let  there  be  said  over  it  the  mass  of  the  Holv
Ghost,  and  let  it  be  sprinkled  with  water  of  baptism.

An  Oration   to   be  Said  when  the  Vesture  is  Put    On.

"  Ancor,  Amacor,  Theodonius,  Anitor,  by  the  merits  of
thy  Angels,  0  Lord,  I  will  put  on  the  garment  of  Salvation,
that  this  which  I  desire  may  bring  to  effect,  through  thee,
the  most  holy  Adonay,  whose  Kingdom  endureth  forever
and  ever,  Amen  "

Of  the  Manner  of  Working.

Let  the  Moon  be  increasing  and  equal,  if  it  may  then  be
done,  and  let  her  not  be  combust.

The  Operator  ought  to  be  clean  and  purified  for  the
space  of  nine  days  before  the  beginning  of  the  work,  and
to  be  confessed  and  receive  the  holy  Communion.  Let
him  have  ready  the  perfume  appropriated  to  the  day
wherein  he  would  perform  the  work.  He  ought  also  to
have  holy  water  from  a  Priest,  and  a  new  earthen  vessel
with  fire,  a  Vesture  and  Pentacle  ;  and  let  all  these  things
be  rightl}^  consecrated  and  prepared.  Let  one  of  the  ser-
vants carry  the  earthern  vessel  full  of  fire  and  the  per-
fumes, and  let  another  bear  the  Book,  another  the  Garment
and  Pentacle,  and  let  the  master  carry  the  Sword,  over
which  there  must  be  said  one  Mass  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and
on  the  middle  of  the  Sword  let  there  be  written  this  name  :
Alga,  and  on  the  other  side  thereof,  the  name  On.  And
as  he  goeth  to  the  consecrated  place,  let  him  continually
read  Litanies,  the  servants  answering  ;  and  when  he  cometh
to  the  place  where  he  will  erect  the  Circle,  let  him  draw
the  lines  of  the  Circle,  as  we  have  before  taught ;  and  after
he  hath  made  it,  let  him  sprinkle  the  Circle  with  holy
water,  saying  :  Asperges  me  Domine^  etc.

The  Master,  therefore,  ought  to  be  purified  with  fasting^

365

chastity  and  abstinency  from  all  luxury  the  space  of  three
whole  days  before  the  day  of  the  operation  ;  and  on  the  day
that  he  would  do  the  work,  being  clothed  with  pure  gar-
ments, and  furnished  with  Pentacles,  perfumes  and  other
things  necessary  hereunto,  let  him  enter  the  Circle,  and
call  the  Angels  from  the  four  parts  of  the  world,  which  do
govern  the  seven  Planets,  the  seven  dayes  of  the  week,
Colours  and  Metals,  whose  name  you  shall  see  in  their
places ;  and  with  bended  knees  invocating  the  said  Angels
particularly,  let  him  say  :  ^'0  Angeli  supradicti,  estate  ad-
jutores  mea  petitioni,  et  in  adjutorium  mibi,  in  meis  rebus
et  petitionibus."

Then  let  him  call  the  Angels  from  the  four  parts  of  the
world,  that  rule  the  Air  the  same  day  wherein  he  doth  the
work  ;  and  having  implored  specially  all  the  names  and
Spirits  written  in  the  Circle,  let  him  say  :  ^'  0  vos  omnes,
adjuro  atque  contestor  per  sedum  Adonay,  per  Hagios,
Theos,  Ischyros,  Athanatos,  Paikicletos,  Alpha  et  Omega,
et  per  hoc  tria  nomina  secreta,  Agla,  On,  Tetragrammaton,
quod  bodie  debeatis  adimplere  quod  cupio."

These  things  being  performed,  let  him  read  the  Conjur-
ation assigned  for  the  day  wherein  he  maketh  the  experi-
ment ;  but  if  they  shall  be  pertinacious,  and  will  not  yield
themselves  obedient,  neither  to  the  Conjuration  assigned
to  the  day,  nor  to  the  prayers  before  made,  then  use  the
Conjurations  and  Exorcisms  following.

An  Exorcism  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Air.

We  being  made  after  the  Image  of  God,  endued  with
power  from  God,  and  made  after  his  Will,  do  exorcise  you
by  the  most  mighty  and  powerful  name  of  God,  El,  strong
and  wonderful  (Jiere  he  shall  name  the  spirits  he  would  have
appear,  of  what  Order  soever  theif  he),  and  we  command  you
by  him,  who  said  the  word  and  it  was  done,  and  by  all  the

366

names  of  God,  and  by  the  name  Adonay^  El^  Elohim^  Elohe^
Lehaoth^  Elion^  Escerchie^  Jah^  Tetragrammaton^  Sadajj^  Lord
God  most  high  :  We  powerfully  command  you,  that  you
forthwith  appear  unto  us,  here  before  this  Circle,  in  a  fair
humane  shape,  without  any  deformity  or  tortuosity  ;  come
ye  all  such,  because  we  command  you  by  the  name  of  God  ;
and  by  these  three  secret  names,  Agla^  Orij  Tetragramma-
ton^  I  do  adjure  you ;  and  by  all  the  other  names  of  the
living  and  true  God,  I  exorcise  and  command  you,  that  you
appear  here  before  this  Circle  to  fulfill  our  will  in  all  things
which  shall  seem  good  unto  us  ;  and  by  this  name  Primeu-
maton^  which  Moses  named,  and  the  earth  opened  and  swal-
lowed up  Corah^  Dathan  and  Ahiram  ;  and  we  curse  you  and
deprive  you  from  all  your  office,  joy  and  place,  and  do  bind
you  in  the  depth  of  the  bottomless  Pit,  there  to  remain  un-
til the  day  of  the  last  Judgment ;  unless  you  forthwith
appear  before  this  Circle  to  do  our  will ;  Therefore  come
ye,  come  ye,  come  ye,  Adonay  commandeth  you  ;  Saday^  the
most  mighty  and  dreadful  King  of  Kings,  whose  power  no
creature  is  able  to  resist,  be  unto  you  most  dreadful,  unless
ye  obey,  and  forthwith  appear  before  this  Circle,  let  miser-
able ruin  and  fire  unquenchable  remain  with  you ;  there-
fore come  ye  in  the  name  of  Adonay  Lebaoth^  Adonay  Ami-
oram\  come,  come,  why  stay  you'?  hasten!  Adonay^
Saday^  the  King  of  Kings  commands  you ;  El^Aty^  Asia^
Hin^  Jen^  Achaden^  Vay,  El,  El^  El,  ffau,  Hau,  ffau,  Va,  Va,
Va,

A  Prayer  to  God,  to  be  said  in  the  four  parts  of
THE  World,  in  the  Circle.

"  O  my  most  merciful  heavenly  Father,  have  mercy  up-
on me,  although  a  sinner,  make  appear  the  arm  of  thy
power  in  me  this  day  (although  thy  unworthy  child)
against  these  obstinate  and  pernicious  Spirits.     I  humbly

367

/

implore  and  baseech  thee,  that  these  Spirits  which  I  call
may  be  bound  and  constrained  to  come,  and  give  true  and
perfect  answers  to  those  things  which  1  shall  ask  them,  and
that  they  may  declare  and  shew^  those  things  which  by  me
shall  be  commanded  them."  Then  let  him  stand  in  the
middle  of  the  Circle,  and  hold  his  hand  towards  the  Pent-
acle,  and  say  :  ''  By  the  pentacle  of  Solomon  I  have  called
you,  give  me  a  true  answer."  Then  let  him  say  :  "  By  the
most  mighty  Kings  and  Potentates,  and  the  most  powerful
Princes,  Ministers  of  the  Tartarean  Seat,  chief  Prince  of
the  Seat  of  the  ninth  Legion  ;  I  invoke  you,  and  conjure
you,  and  strongly  command  you,  by  him  who  spoke  and  it
was  done,  and  by  this  ineffable  name  Tetragrammaton  Jeho-
vah, which  being  heard,  the  Elements  are  overthrown,  the
Air  is  shaken,  the  Sea  runneth  back,  the  Fire  is  quenched,
the  Earth  trembleth,  and  all  the  Hosts  of  Celestials,  Ter-
restrials, and  Infernals  do  tremble,  and  are  confounded  to-
gether ;  Wherefore  forthwith  and  without  delay,  do  you
come  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  make  rational  an-
swers unto  all  things  I  shall  ask  of  you  ;  and  come  ye  now
without  delay  manifesting  what  we  desire,  being  conjured
by  the  Name  of  the  eternal,  living,  and  true  God  Helioren
and  fulfil  our  commands,  intelligibly  and  without  any  am-
biguity. "

Visions  and  Apparitions.

These  things  duly  performed,  there  will  appear  infinite
Visions  and  Phantasms,  beating  of  Organs  and  all  kinds  of
Musical  Instruments,  which  is  done  by  the  Spirits,  that
with  the  terror  they  might  force  the  Companions  to  go  out
of  the  Circle,  because  they  can  do  nothing  against  the
Master.  After  this  you  shall  see  an  infinite  Company  of
Archers,  with  a  great  multitude  of  horrible  beasts,  which
will  so  compose  themselves  as  if  they  would  devour  the
fellows  :  nevertheless  fear  nothing.

368

Then  the  Priest  or  Master^  holding  his  hand  toward  the
Fentacle  shall  say^  '^  Avoid  hence  these  iniquities  by  vertue
of  the  Banner  of  God;"  and  then  will  the  Spirits  be  com-
pelled to  obey  the  Master,  and  the  Company  shall  see  no
more.

Then  let  the  Exorcist^  stretching  out  his  hand  to  the  Pentacle^
say^  ''  Behold  the  Pentacle  of  Solomon  which  I  have  brougiit
before  your  presence.  Behold  the  person  of  the  Exorcist
in  the  middle  of  the  Exorcism,  who  is  armed  by  God,  and
without  fear,  and  well  provided,  who  potently  invocateth
*and  calleth  you,  come  therefore  with  speed,  in  the  virtue
of  these  names,  Aye,  Seraye,  Aye,  Seraye  ;  defer  not  to
come  by  the  eternal  Names  of  the  living  and  true  God,
Eloy,  Archima,  Rabur,  and  by  the  Pentacle  here  present,
which  powerfully  reigns  over  you,  and  by  the  virtue  of  the
Celestial  Spirits  your  Lords,  make  haste  to  come  and  yield
obedience  to  your  Master."  This  being  performed,  there
will  be  hissings  in  the  four  parts  of  the  world,  and  then
immediately  you  shall  see  great  motions ;  and  when  you
see  them,  say,  "  Why  stay  you  ?  wherefore  do  you  delay  ?
prepare  yourselves  and  be  obedient  to  your  Master."

Then  they  will  immediately  come  in  their  proper  form  ;
and  when  you  see  them  before  the  Circle,  shew  them  the
Pentacle  covered  with  fine  linen  ;  uncover  it  and  say, ' 'Be-
hold your  conclusion,  if  you  refuse  to  be  obedient ;"  and
suddenly  they  will  appear  in  a  peaceable  form,  and  will
say,  '^  Ask  what  you  will,  for  we  are  prepared  to  fulfil  all
your  commands,  for  the  Lord  hath  subjected  us  hereunto  ;"
and  when  the  Spirits  have  appeared,  then  you  shall  say,
"  Welcome  Spirits,  or  most  noble  Kings,  because  I  have
called  you  through  him  to  whom  Qverj  knee  doth  bow,
both  of  things  in  Heaven  and  things  in  Earth,  and
things  under  the  Earth,  in  whose  hands  are  all  the
Kingdoms  of  Kings,  neither  is  there  any  that  can   con-

369

tradict  his  Majesty.  Wherefore  I  bind  you,  that  you
remain  affable  and  visible  before  this  Circle,  neither  shall
you  depart  without  my  license,  until  you  have  truly  and
without  any  fallacy  performed  my  will,  by  virtue  of  his
power  who  hath  set  the  Sea  her  bounds,  nor  go  beyond  the
law  of  his  Power,  the  most  high  God,  who  hath  created  all
things.  Amen.  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  go  in  peace  unto  your  places  ;  peace
be  between  us  and  you,  be  ye  ready  to  come  when  ye  are
called."

The  Figure  of  a  Circle  for   the   First   Hour   of   the
Lord's  Day  in  Spring-time.

These  are  the  things  which  Peter  de  Ahano  hath  spoken
concerning  Magical  Elements.

370

But  that  you  may  the  better  know  the  manner  of  com-
posing a  Circle,  I  will  set  down  one  scheme ;  so  that  if
any  would  make  a  Circle  in  Spring-time,  for  the  first  hour
of  the  Lord's  day,  it  must  be  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the
illustration  on  the  preceding  page.

It  remaineth  now,  that  we  explain  the  Week,  the  sev-
eral days  thereof,  and  the  first  of  the  Lord's  day.

Considerations  of  the  Lord's  Day.

The  Angel  of  the  Lord's  day,  his  Sigil,  Planet,  Sign  of
the  Planet,  and  the  name  of  the  fourth  Heaven.

^ach

The  Angels  of  the  Lord's  day  :  Michael,  Dardiel,  Hural-
apal.

The  Angels  of  the  Air  ruling  on  the  Lord's  day  :  Yar-
can,  King.

His  Ministers  :     Tus,  Andas,  Cynabal.

The  winde  which  the  Angels  of  the  Air  above  said  are
under :     The  North-winde.

The  Angel  of  the  fourth  Heaven,  ruling  on  the  Lord's
day,  which  ought  to  be  called  from  the  four  parts  of  the
world.

At  the  East :  Samael,  Baciel,  Atel,  Gabriel,  Vionatraba.

At  the  West :  Anael,  Pabel,  Vstael,  Burchat,  Suceratos,
Capabili.

At  the  North :  Atiel,  Auiel,  vel  Aquiel,  Masgabriel,
Sapiel,  Matuyel.

At  the  South:  Haludiel,  Machasiel,  Charsiel,  Vriel,
Naromiel.

The  perfume  of  the  Lord's  day  :     Red  Sanders.

371

The  Conjuration  of  the  Lord's  Day.

"  I  conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  holy
Angels  of  God,  in  the  name  Adonay,  Eye,  Eye,  Eya,  which
is  he  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come,  Eye  Abray,  and  in
the  name  Saday,  Cados,  Cados,  Cados,  sitting  on  high  upon
the  Cherubin ;  and  by  the  great  Name  of  God  himself,
strong  and  powerful,  who  is  exalted  above  all  Heavens,
and  by  the  name  of  the  holy  Angels  who  rule  in  the
fourth  Heaven^  and  by  the  name  of  his  Star,  which  is  Sol ;
and  by  his  Sign  ;  and  by  all  the  names  aforesaid,!  conjure
thee  Michael,  oh  great  Angel,  who  art  chief  Ruler  of  the
Lord's  day;  That  thou  labor  for  me,  and  fulfil  all  my  peti-
tions, according  to  my  will  and  desire,  in  my  cause  and
business.  "

And  here  thou  shaft  declare  thy  cause  and  business,  and
for  what  thing  thou  makest  this  Conjuration.

The  Spirits  of  the  Air  of  the  Lord's  day  are  under  the
North-winde ;  their  nature  is  to  procure  Gold,  Gemmes,
Carbuncles,  Riches  :  to  cause  one  to  obtain  favor  and  be-
nevolence ;  to  dissolve  the  enmities  of  men ;  to  raise  men
to  honors  ;  to  carry  or  take  away  infirmities.  But  in  what
manner  they  appear,  it's  spoken  already  in  the  former  Book
of  Magical  Ceremonies.

Considerations  of  Munday.
The  Angel  of  Munday,  his  Sigil,  Planet,  the  Sign  of  the
Planet,  and  name  of  the  first  Heaven.

The  Angels  of  Munday  :     Gabriel,  Michael, ^Samael.
The  Angels  of  the  Air  ruling  on  Munday :  Arcan,  King
His  Ministers  :     Bilet,  Missabu,  Abuzaha.

372

The  winde  which  the  said  Angels  of  the  Air  are  suhject
to :    The  West  winde.

The  Angels  of  the  first  Heaven  ruling  on  Munday,
which  ought  to  be  called  from  the  four  parts  of  the  world.

From  the  East:    Gabriel,    Gabrael,    Madiel,    Deamiel,

Janael.

From  the  West :    Sachiel,  Laniel,  Habaiel,  Bachanael,

Corabael.

From  the  North :  Mael,  Uvael,  Valuum,  Baliel,  Balay,
Humastrau.

From  the  South  :  Chrauiel,  Dabriel,  Darqueil,  Hanun,
Anayl,  Vetuel.

The  perfume  of  Munday  :  Aloes,

The  Conjuration  of  Munday.

^'  I  conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  good
Angels,  in  the  name  Adonay,  Adonay,  Eye,  Eye,  Eye,
Cados,  Cados,  Cados,  Achim,  Achim,  Ja,  Ja,  strong  Ja,
who  appeared  in  Mount  Sinai  with  the  glorification  of
King  Adonay,  Saday,  who  created  the  sea  and  all  lakes
and  waters  in  the  second  day,  and  sealed  the  sea  in  his
high  name,  and  gave  it  bounds  beyond  which  it  cannot
pass ;  and  by  the  names  of  the  Angels,  who  rule  in  the
first  Legion,  who  serve  Orphauael,  a  great  and  honorable
Angel,  and  by  the  name  of  his  Star,  and  by  all  the  names
aforesaid — I  conjure  thee  Gabriel,  who  art  chief  Ruler  of
Munday,  that  for  me  thou  labour  and  fulfil,"  &c.,  as  in  the
Conjuration  of  Sunday.

The  Spirits  of  the  Air  of  Munday  are  subject  to  the
West-winde,  which  is  the  winde  of  the  Moon ;  their  na-
ture is  to  give  silver,  to  convey  things  from  place  to
place  ;  to  make  horses  swift,  and  to  disclose  the  secrets  of
persons  both  present  and  future ;  but  in  what  manner
they  appear,  you  may  see  in  the  former  book.

373

Considerations  of   Tuesday.

The  Angel  of  Tuesday,  his  Sigil,  his  Planet,  the  sign
governing  that  Planet,  and  the  name  of  the  fifth  Heaven.

The  Angel  of  Tuesday :  Samael,  Satael,  Amabiel.

The  Angels  of  the  Air  ruling  on  Tuesday :  Samax,
King.

His  Ministers  :  Carmax,  Ismoli,  PafFrau.

The  winde  to  which  the  said  Angels  are  subject :  The
East-winde.

The  Angels  of  the  fifth  Heaven  ruling  on  Tuesday,  which
ought  to  be  called  from  the  four  parts  of  the  world.

At  the  East :  Friagne,  Guael,  Damael,  Calza,  Arragon.

At  the  West :  Lama,  Astagna,  Lobquin,  Sencas,  Jazel,
Isiael,  Irel.

At  the  North :  Rahumel,  Hyniel,  Rayel,  Seraphiel,
Mathiel,  Fraciel.

At  the  South  :  Sacriel,  Janiel,  Galdel,  Osael,  Vianuel,
Laliel.

The  Perfume  of  Tuesday  :  Pepper.

The  Conjuration  of  Tuesday.

"  I  Conjure  and  confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  and  holy
Angels,  by  the  name  Ya,  Ya,  Ya,  He,  He,  He,  Va,  Hy,  Hy,
Ha,  Ha,  Va,  Va,  An,  An,  Aie,  Aie,  Eloim,  Eloim ;  and  by
the  name  of  that  high  God  who  made  the  dry  land  appear,
and  called  it  Earth,  and  brought  forth  herbs  and  trees  out
of  the  same ;  and  by  the  name  of  the  Angels  ruling  in  the
fifth  Heaven,  who  serve  Acimoy,  a  great  Angel,  strong
and  honourable ;  and  by   the  name  of  his  Starre,  which

374

is  Mars,  and  by  the  names  aforesaid,  I  Conjure  upon
thee,  Samael,  who  art  a  great  Angel  and  chiefe  ruler
of  Tuesday  ;  and  by  the  name  Adonay,  the  living  and
true  God.  that  for  me  thou  labour  and  fulfil,"  &c.,  as  in  the
Conjuration  of  Sunday.

The  Spirits  of  the  Air  of  Tuesday  are  under  the  East-
winde  ;  their  nature  is  to  cause  wars,  mortality,  death  and
combustions,  and  to  give  two  thousand  Souldiers  at  a  time  ;
to  bring  death,  infirmities  or  health.  The  manner  of  their
appearing  you  may  see  in  the  former  book.

Considerations  of  Wednesday.

The  Angel  of  Wednesday,  his  Sigil,  Planet,  the  Signe
governing  the  Planet,  and  the  name  of  the  second  heaven.

-^

The  Angels  of  Wednesday :  Raphael,  Miel,  Serapiel.

The  Angels  of  the  Air  ruling  on  Wednesday  :  Mediat
or  Modiat,  Rex.

Ministers  :  Suquinos,  Sallales,  Blaef.

The  winde  to  which  the  said  Angels  are  subject :  The
Southwest-winde.

The  Angels  of  the  second  heaven  governing  Wednes-
day, which  ought  to  be  called  from  the  four  parts  of  the
world.

At  the  East :  Mathlai,  Tarmiel,  Barabo.

At  the  West :  Jerescus,  Mitraton.

At  the  North  :  Thiel,  Rael,  Jeriabel,  Venabel,  Velel,  Ab-
niori,  Veirnuel.

At  the  South :  Miliel,  Nelapa,  Babel,  Cahiel,  Yel,  La-
quel.

The  Fumigation  of  Wednesday  :  Mastick.

375

The  Conjuration  of  Wednesday.

"  I  Conjure  and  Confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong,  holy  and
potent  Angels,  in  the  name  of  the  most  dreadfull,  and
blessed  Ja,  Adonay,  Eloim,  Saday.  Sady,  Eie,  Eie,  Eie,
Asamie,  Asaraie ;  and  in  the  name  of  Adonay,  the  God  of
Israel,  who  created  the  two  great  lights  to  distinguish  the
day  from  the  night,  and  by  the  name  of  all  the  Angels
serving  in  the  second  host,  before  Tetra,  a  great  and  pow-
erful Angell ;  and  by  the  name  of  his  Star,  which  is  Mer-
cury ;  and  by  the  name  of  the  Seal,  which  is  sealed  by
God  most  mighty  and  honourable ;  by  all  things  before
spoken,  I  Conjure  upon  thee,  Raphael,  a  great  Angel,  who
art  chief  ruler  of  the  fourth  day  ;  and  by  the  name  of  the
seat  of  the  Animals  having  six  wings,  that  for  me  thou
labor,"  etc.,  as  in  the  Conjuration  of  Sunday.

The  Spirits  of  the  Air  of  Wednesday  are  subject  to  the
Southwest-winde  ;  their  nature  is  to  give  all  Metals  ;  to
reveal  all  earthly  things  past,  present  and  to  come  ;  to
pacifie  Judges,  to  give  victories  in  war,  to  re-edifie,  and
teach  experiments  and  all  decayed  Sciences,  and  to  change
bodies  mixt  of  Elements  conditionally  out  of  one  into
another ;  to  give  infirmities  or  health  ;  to  raise  the  poor,
and  cast  down  the  high  ones  ;  to  binde  or  loose  Spirits ;  to
open  locks  or  bolts ;  such-kind  of  Spirits  have  the  opera-
tion of  others  ;  but  not  in  their  perfect  power,  but  in  vir-
tue or  knowledge.  In  what  manner  they  appear  it  is  be-
fore spoken.

Considerations  of  Thursday.

The  Angel  of  Thursday,  his  Sigil,  Planet,  the  Signe  of
the  Planet,  and  the  name  of  the  Sixth  Heaven.

376

The  Angels  of  Thursday  :  Sachiel,  Castiel,  Asasiel.

The  Angels  of  the  Air  governing  Thursday  :  Suth,  Rex.

Ministers  :  Maguth,  Gutrix,  Pacifer.

The  winde  which  the  said  Angels  of  the  Air  are  under :
The  South- winde.

But  because  there  are  no  Angels  of  the  Air  to  be  found
above  the  fifth  heaven,  therefore  on  Thursday  say  the  pray-
ers following  in  the  four  parts  of  the  world.

At  the  East :  "0  great  and  most  high  God,  honored  world
without  end."

At  the  West :  '^  0  wise,  pure,  and  just  God,  of  divine
clemency,  I  beseech  th^e,  most  holy  Father,  that  this  day  I
may  perfectly  understand  and  accomplish  my  petition.
Thou  who  livest  and  reignest  world  without  end,  Amen."

At  the  North  :  ''0  God  strong  and  mighty  from  everlast-
ing."

At  the  South :  "  0  mighty  and  merciful  God."

The  perfume  of  Thursday  :  Saffron.

I  /  The  Conjuration  of  Thursday.

"  I  Conjure  and  Confirm  upon  you,  ye  holy  Angels,  and  by
the  name  Cados,  Cados,  Cados,  Eschereie,  Eschereie,  Escher-
eie,  Hatim,  Ya,  strong  founder  of  the  worlds,  Cantine,  Jaym,
Janic,  Auie,  Calbot,  Sabbac,  Berisay,  Alnaym :  and  by
the  name  Adonay,  who  created  Fishes,  and  creeping  things
in  the  waters,  and  Birds  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  by
the  names  of  the  angels  serving  in  the  sixth  host,  before
Pastor,  a  holy  Angel,  and  a  great  Prince  ;  and  by  the
name  of  his  Star,  which  is  Jupiter,  and  by  the  name  of
his  Seal,  and  by  the  name  Adonay,  the  great  God,  creator
of  all  things ;  and  by  the  name  of  all  Stars  and  by  their
power,  and  by  all  the  names  aforesaid,  I  conjure  thee  Sa-
chiel, a  great  Angel,  who  art  chief  ruler  of  Thursday,  that
for  uie  thou  labor,"  etc.,  as  in  the  Conjuration  of  the
Lord's  day.

377

The  Spirits  of  the  Air  of  Thursday  are  subject  to  the
South-winde  ;  their  nature  is  to  procure  the  love  of  women,
to  cause  men  to  be  merry  and  joyful ;  to  pacific  strife  and
contentions  ;  to  appease  enemies  ;  to  heal  the  diseased,  and
to  disease  the  whole  ;  and  procureth  losses,  or  taketh  them
away.     Their  manner  of  appearing  is  spoken  of  already.

Considerations  of  Friday.

The  Angel  of  Friday,  his  Sigil,  his  Planet,  the  Signe
governing  that  Planet,  and  name  of  the  third  heaven.

The  Angels  of  Friday  :  Anael,  Rachiel,  Sachiel

The  Angels  of  the  Air  reigning  on  Friday :  Sarabotes,
King.

Ministers  :  Amahiel,  Aba,  Abalidoth.

The  winde  which  the  said  Angels  of  the  Air  are  under :
The  West-winde.

Angels  of  the  third  Heaven,  ruling  on  Friday,  which  are
to  be  called  from  the  four  parts  of  the  world.

At  the  East  :  Setchiel,  Chedusitaniel,  Corat,  Tamael,
Tenaciel.

At  the  West:  Turiel,  Coniel,  Babiel,  Kadie,  Maltiel,
Hviphaltiel.

At  the  North  :  Peniel,  Penael,  Periat,  Raphael,  Rainel,
Doremiel.

At  the  South  :  Porna,  Sachiel,  Chermiel,  Samael,  San-
tanael,  Famiel.

The  perfume  of  Friday  :     Pepperwort.

The  Conjuration  of  Friday.

"  I  Conjure  and  Confirm  upon  you,  ye  strong  Angels,  holy
and  powerful ;  in  the  name  On,  Heij,  Hega,  Ja,  Je,  Adonay,

378

Sadai/^  and  in  the  name  Saday^  who  created  four-footed
beasts,  and  creeping  things,  and  man  in  the  sixth  day,  and
gave  to  Adam  power  over  all  creatures  ;  and  by  the  name
of  the  Angels  serving  in  the  third  host,  before  Dagiel^  a
great  Angel  and  powerful  Prince  ;  and  by  the  name  of  the
Star  which  is  Venus ^  and  by  his  Seal  which  is  holy,  and
by  all|the  names  aforesaid,  I  conjure  upon  thee  Anael^  who
art  chief  ruler  of  the  sixth  day,  that  thou  labour  for  me,"
etc.,  as  before  in  the  Conjuration  of  Sunday.

The  Spirits  of  the  Air  of  Friday  are  subject  to  the  West-
winde  ;  their  nature  is  to  give  silver ;  to  excite  men,  and
incline  them  to  luxury  ;  and  to  make  marriages  ;  to  allure
men  to  love  women  ;  to  cause  or  take  away  infirmities ;
and  to  do  all  things  which  have  motion.

Considerations  of  Saturday,  or  the  Sabbath  Day.

The  Angel  of  Saturday,  his  Seal,  his  Planet,  and  the
Signe  governing  the  Planet.

K

The  Angels  of  Saturday  :     Cassiel,  Machatan,  Uriel.

The  Angels  of  the  Air  ruling  on  Saturday  :  Maymon,
King.

Ministers  :     Abumalith,  Assaibi,  Balidet.

The  winde  which  the  said  Angels  of  the  Air  aforesaid  are
under :     The  Southwest-winde.

The  fumigation  of  Saturday  :     Sulphur.

It  is  already  declared  in  the  Consideration  of  Thursday,
that  there  are  no  Angels  ruling  the  Air,  above  the  fifth
heaven ;  therefore  in  the  four  angles  of  the  world,  use  those
Orations  which  you  see  applied  to  that  purpose  on  Thurs-
day.

379

The  Conjuration  of  Saturday.
"  I  Conjure  and  Confirm  upon  you,  Caphriel  or  Cassiel,
Machator,  and  Seraquiel,  strong  and  powerful  Angels  ;  and
by  the  name  Adonay,  Eie,  Acim,Cados,  Lord  and  Maker  of
the  world,  who  rested  on  the  seventh  day  ;  and  by  the
names  of  the  Angels  serving  in  the  seventh  host,  before
Booel,  a  great  Angel  and  powerful  Prince ;  and  by  the
name  of  his  Star,  which  is  Saturn;  and  by  his  holy  Seal;
and  by  the  names  before  spoken,  I  Conjure  upon  thee
Caphriel,  who  art  chiefe  ruler  of  the  seventh  day,  which  is
the  Sabbath  day,  that  for  me  thou  labour,"  etc.,  as  it  is  set
down  in  the  Conjuration  of  the  Lord's  day.

The  Spirits  of  the  Air  of  Saturday  are  subject  to  the
Southwest-winde ;  the  nature  of  them  is  to  sow  discords,
hatred,  evil  thoughts  and  cogitations  ;  to  give  leave  freely
to  slay  and  kill  every  one,  and  to  lame  or  maim  every
member.  Their  manner  of  appearing  is  declared  in  the
former  book.

Of  TfJE  Names  of  the  Hours  and  the  Angels  Ruling  Them.

It  is  also  to  be  known,  that  the  Angels  do  rule  the  hours
in  a  successive  order,  according  to  the  course  of  the  Hea-
vens and  Planets  unto  which  they  are  subject,  so  that
that  spirit  which  governeth  the  day,  ruleth  also  the
first  hour  of  the  day  ;  the  second  from  this  governeth  the
second  hour  ;  the  third,  the  third  hour,  and  so  consequently ;
and  when  seven  Planets  and  hours  have  made  their  revo-
lution, it  returneth  again  to  the  first  which  ruleth  the  day  :
therefore,  we  shall  first  speak  of  the  names  of  the  hours.

Hours  of  the  day :  L  Yain,  2.  Janor,  3.  Nasmia,  4.
Salla,  5.  Sadedalia,  6.  Thamur,  7.  Ourer,  8.  Thamic,  9.
Neron,  10.  Jay  on,  11.    Abai,  12.  Natalon.

Hours  of  the  night  :  1.  Beron,  2.  Barol,  3.  Thami,  4.
Athar,  5.  Methon,  6.  Rana,  7.  Netos,  8.  Infrac,  9.  Sassur,
10.  Agio,  11.  Calerva,  12.  Salam.

380

Tables  of  the  Angels  of  the  Hours  According  to  the

Course  of  the  Dayes.

Sunday. — Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  day:    1.    Michael,

2.  Anael,  3.    Raphael,  4.   Gabriel,  5.    Cassiel,  6.    Sachiel,

7.  Samael,  8.  Michael,  9.  Anael,  10.  Raphael,  11.  Gabriel,
12.  Cassiel.

Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  night :   1.  Sachiel,  2.  Samael,

3.  Michael,  4.  Anael,  5.  Raphael,  6.  Gabriel,  7.    Cassiel,

8.  Sachiel,  9.  Samael,  10.  Michael,  11.  Anael,  12.
Raphael.

MuNDAY. — Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  day  :    1.   Gabriel,

2.  Cassiel,  3.  Sachiel,  4.  Samael,  5.  Michael,  6.  Anael,  7.
Raphael,  8.  Gabriel,  9.  Cassiel,  10.  Sachiel,  11.  Samael,
12.  Michael.

Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  night :  1.  Anael,  2.  Raphael,

3.  Gabriel,  4.  Cassiel,  5.  Sachiel,  6.  Samael,  7.  Michael,
8.  Anael,  9.  Raphael,  10.  Gabriel,  11.  Cassiel,  12.  Sachiel.

Tuesday. — Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  day:   1.  Samael,

2.  Michael,  3.   Anael,  4.  Raphael,  5.    Gabriel,  6.    Cassiel,

7.  Sachiel,  8.  Samael,  9,  Michael,  10.  Anael,  11.  Raphael,
12.  Gabriel.

Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  night:    1.  Cassiel,  2.  Sachiel,

3.  Samael,  4.  Michael,  5.  Anael,  6.  Raphael,  7.  Gabriel,  8.
Cassiel,  9.  Sachiel,  10.  Samael,  11  Michael,  12.  Anael.

Wednesday. — Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  day :  1.  Ra-
phael, 2.  Gabriel,  3.  Cassiel,  4.  Sachiel,  5.  Samael,  C.
Michael,  7.  Anael,  8.  Raphael,  9.  Gabriel,  10.  Cassiel,
11.    Sachiel,  12   Samael.

Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  night:  1.  Michael,  2.  Anael,
3.    Raphael,  4.    Gabriel,  5.  Cassiel,  6.  Sachiel,  7.  Samael,

8.  Michael,  9.  Anael,  10.  Raphael,  11.  Gabriel,  12.  Cas-
siel.

Thursday. — Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  day  :  1.  Sachael,
2.    Samael,  3.  Michael,  4,  Anael,  5.   Raphael,  6.    Gabriel,

381

7.  Cassiel,  8.  Sachiel,  9.  Samael,  10.  Michael,  11.  Anael,
12.    Raphael.

Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  night:  1  Gabriel,  2.  Cassiel,
3.    Sachiel,  4.  Samael,  5.  Michael,  6.    Anael,   7.  Raphael,'

8.  Gabriel,  9.  Cassiel,  10.  Sachiel,  11.  Samael,  12.  Michael
Friday,— Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  day :   1.  Anael,  2.

Raphael,  3.  Gabriel,  4.  Cassiel,  5.  Sachiel,  6.  Samael,  7.  Mi-
chael, 8.  Anael,  9.  Raphael,  10.  Gabriel,  11.  Cassiel,  12.
Sachiel.

Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  night:  1.  Samael,  2.  Michael,
3.  Anael,  4.  Raphael,  5.  Gabriel,  6.  Cassiel,  7.  Sachiel,  S.
Samael,  9.  Michael,  10.  Anael,  11.  Raphael,  12.  Gabriel.

Saturday.— Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  day  :  1.  Cassiel,
2.  Sachiel,  3.  Samael,  4.  Michael,  5.  Anael,  6.  Raphael,
7.  Gabriel,  8.  Cassiel,  9.  Sachiel,  10.  Samael,  11.  Michael,
12.  Anael.

Angels  of  the  hours  of  the  night :  1.  Raphael,  2.  Ga-
briel, 3.  Cassiel,  4.  Sachiel,  5.  Samael,  6.  Michael,  7.
Anael,  8.  Raphael,  9.  Gabriel,  10.  Cassiel,  11.  Sachiel,  12.
Samael.

But  this  is  to  be  observed  by  the  way,  that  the  first  hour
of  the  day,  of  every  Country,  and  in  every  season  what-
soever, is  to  be  assigned  to  the  sun-rising,  when  he  first
appeareth  arising  in  the  horizon  ;  and  the  first  hour  of  the
night  is  to  be  the  thirteenth  hour,  from  the  first  hour  of
the  day  ;  but  of  these  things  it  is  sufficiently  spoken.

[The  worthy  "Pupil,"  or  rather  student  and  admirer  of  the  great  Cornelius
Agrippa,  in  his  introduction  to  the  Magical  Elements  of  Peter  d'Abano  conveys
the  impression  to  the  reader's  mind  that  the  "  Heptameron"  given  above,  was  writ-
ten after  the  time  of  Agrippa,  as  a  digest  of  that  great  Sage's  magical  method.
Those  who  are  versed  in  the  lives  and  chronological  appearances  of  the  Alchemists
are  aware  that  Peter  d'Abano  flourished  some  two  hundred  years  earlier  than
Agrippa,  whilst  Robert  Turner's  Compendium  of  the  philosophy  of  both  was
''  done  into  English"  nearly  two  centuries  later  than  the  period  of  Agrippa's  birth.
Though  Abano's  method  is  decidedly  the  same  as  Agrippa's,  the  Translator  has
wisely  given  the  former  credit  for  superior  perspicuity  of  style,  hence  the  above
selection  of  Abano's  Heptameron.]

382

SECTION  XX.

Summary  of  Cornelius  Agrippa' sPhilosopliy — Paracelsus
— the  power  of  tlie  Magnet  and  Will —  Witchcraft — the
case  of  Jane  Brooks.

Although  there  are  many  remarkable  features  of  inter-
est in  the  writings  of  Cornehus  Agrippa,  we  deem  it  unne-
cessary to  give  farther  citations  ol  magical  practices.  The
reader,  desirous  to  accomplish  himself  in  the  Magician's
art,  would  derive  but  little  encourngement  from  a  study  of
Agrippa's  works,  especially  as  he  repeatedly  affirms  that
"a  man  must  be  born  a  Magician  from  his  mother's  womb."
This  passage,  with  others  of  a  kindred  character,  plainly
imply  the  great  Magician's  belief,  that  what  we  have  so
often  termed  naturally  prophetic^  or  Mediumistic  endowments^
are  far  more  available  to  procure  communion  with,  and
control  of  spirits,  than  any  arts  which  he  can  recommend.
Again  and  again,  too,  Agrippa  enlarges  on  the  potency  of
the  will  to  produce  magical  results.  His  opinion  of  this
great  instrument  of  power  is  conveyed  in  the  following
quaint  passage :

"  IsTotwithstaudiiig  the  use  of  all  these  signS;,  and  whether  or  no  the  Magician
shall  make  every  peutacle  duly,  aud  write  every  name  in  order,  even  if  he  do
speak  all  which  is  here  set  down  in  every  circumstance  ;  yet,  when  no  spirit  com-
eth,  it  is  the  mind  of  the  invocant  which  doth  fail  him,  for  all  these  things  are  but
as  winds,  which  do  blow  on  the  temper  of  the  mind,  to  stir  it  up  to  action."  "  Un-
less a  man  be  born  a  Magician,  and  Grod  have  destined  him  even  from  his  birth  to  the
work,  so  that  spirits  do  willingly  come  of  their  own  accord — which  doth  happen
to  few — a  man  must  use  only  of  the  things  herein  set  down,  or  written  in  our
other  books  of  occult  philosophy,  as  means  to  fix  the  mind  upon  the  work  to  be
done ;  for  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  mind  itself  that  spirits  do  come  and  go,  and
magical  works  are  done,  and  all  things  in  nature  are  but  as  uses  to  induce  the  will
to  rest  upon  the  point  desired."

Agrippa,  like  Dee,  Lilly,  and  other  professors  of  the  as-

383

trological  art,  teaches  that  it  is  an  exact  science,  which  can
be  learned  and  practiced  independently  of  other  magical
formulae.  In  this  as  in  his  ceremonial  directions,  the  great
philosopher's  language  is  too  involved  to  be  available  to  the
general  reader.

Next  to  Cornelius  Agrippa  one  of  the  most  famous  of
all  the  middle  age  Mystics  was  Paracelsus,  a  Physician,
Philosopher  and  writer,  whose  usefulness  and  practical
sense  justly  entitle  him  to  the  high  rank  assigned  him  as
the  founder  of  a  new  and  revolutionary  system  of  practice
in  the  curative  art.  Whilst  his  voluminous  works  form  a
perfect  storehouse  of  suggestive  thought  and  ideality  in  the
realm  of  metaphysics,  our  space  will  only  allow  us  to  no-
tice the  remarkable  uses  which  he  claimed  to  have  discov-
ered by  the  application  of  the  magnet  and  the  potency  of  the
human  will  in  the  cure  of  disease.  Paracelsus  himself  af-
firms, that  he  relied  chiefly  on  those  two  elements  of  power
for  effecting  the  many  extraordinary  cures  attributed  to
him.

The  famous  ''  weapon  salve,"  by  which  he  was  said  to
heal  the  most  dangerous  wounds,  simply  through  anoint-
ing the  weapons  which  had  inflicted  them, — was  no  doubt
only  a  means  of  psychological  effect  analogous  to  those
now  so  familiarly  in  use  amongst  Electro-biologists.  Be-
ing as  the  narrative  of  his  life  proves,  a  powerful  magneti-
zer  and  still  more  potential  psychologist,  the  effects  he  pro-
duced through  these  supreme  agencies,  naturally  enough
seemed  miraculous  in  the  eyes  of  an  ignorant  and  supersti-
tious community,  hence  it  would  be  difficult  to  credit  all
the  extraordinary  achievements  and  magical  performances
attributed  to  him,  without  an  understanding  of  the  true
secret  of  his  power.  Paracelsus  wrote  many  elaborate
treatises  on  the  occult  virtues  of  herbs,  precious  stones,
gems,  and  crystals.     He  himself  was  a  fine  clairvoyant  and

384

accomplished  in  the  faculty  of  crystal  seeing.  Hence
arose  the  belief  that  he  kept  a  familiar  spirit  imprisoned
in  a  splendid  crystal  which  he  wore  in  the  hilt  of  his
sword,  and  that  from  this  demon  he  derived  his  theurgic
powers  and  remarkable  gifts  of  healing.

Paracelsus  was  a  bitter  opponent  of  the  then  popular
system  of  drug  medication,  and  as  his  denunciations  of
Apothecaries'  nostrums,  and  medical  charlatanism,  were
fulminated  with  all  the  unsparing  violence  of  an  impulsive
and  fearless  opponent,  it  is  no  wonder  that  he  was  loaded
with  opprobrium  by  the  rival  practitioners  of  his  time,
fiercely  denounced  by  one  party,  and  as  extravagantly  eu-
logized by  another,  hence  his  real  claims  to  consideration
as  a  bold  and  scientific  innovator,  and  an  original  discov-
erer, have  scarcely  received  justice  at  the  hands  of  posterity.
The  following  brief  excerpts  from  his  treatise  on  the  Mag-
net, and  his  views  of  the  potency  of  the  human  will,  afford
some  insight  into  the  basic  ideas  of  his  philosophy.

Paracelsus.

Ft'oin  a  rura print  iu  the  Strasbourg  Collection.

He  says:

"  The  magnet  has  lain  before  all  eyes,  yet  no  one  has  ever  thought  whether  it
was  of  any  farther  use  than  that  of  attracting  iron.  The  sordid  doctors  throw  it
in  my  face  that  1  will  not  foUow  the  ancients.  But  in  what  should  I  follow  them  ?
All  that  they  have  said  of  the  magnet  is  nothing  save  what  every  peasant  sees  ;

385

namely,  that  it  attracts  iron.  But  a  wise  man  must  enquire  aud  experiment  for
himself,  and  thus  it  is  that  I  have  discovered  that  the  magnet  possesses  quite  an-
other, though  concealed  power,  from  that  visible  to  every  one."

"In  sickness  you  must  lay  the  magnet  in  the  centre  from  whence  the  sickness
proceeds,  The  magnet  has  two  poles — an  attracting  and  a  repelling  one.  It  is
not  a  matter  of  indifference  how  these  poles  are  applied  :  for  instance  ;  where  the
attack  affects  the  head,  it  is  proper  to  lay  four  magnets  on  the  lower  part  of  the
body,  with  the  attracting  pole  turned  upwards,  and  on  the  head  place  only  one
with  the  reflecting  pole  downwards,  and  then  you  bring  other  means  to  your  aid."
"  I  cure  by  this  meaus :  epilepsy,  defluxions  of  the  eyes,  ears,  nose,  and  all  man-
ner of  diseases." "I  find  such  secrets  hidden  in  the  magnet  that  with-
out it  I  could  in  many  cases  have  effected  nothing."

The  religious  and  magical  philosophy  of  Paracelsus,  is
essentially  that  of  the  Cabala,  from  which  he  derived,  not
only  his  views  of  Creation,  Deity^  angelic  essences,  the
doctrine  of  emanations,  etc.,  but  hints  concerning  the  oc-
cult secrets  of  nature,  which  he,  as  a  practical  and  scien-
tific Physician,  utilized  in  his  system  of  cure,  by  herbs,
magnetic  crystals,  and  psychological  impressions.

Although  often  quoted  in  fragmentary  sketches  of  Para-
celsite  philosophy,  we  deem  the  following  opinions  con-
cerning the  power  of  the  human  will  eminently  worthy  to
be  noted  in  a  book  of  magic,  and  more  illustrative  of  the
real  mind  of  the  philosopher  than  the  vague  and  shadowy
speculations  of  so  many  of  his  followers.  In  the  Stras-
bourg edition  of  Paracelsus's  voluminous  writings,  he  says :

"  It  is  possible  that  my  spirit,  without  the  help  oi  my  body  may  through  a  fiery
will  alone,  and  without  a  sword,  stab  and  wound  others."

"  It  is  also  possible  that  I  can  bring  my  adversary's  spirit  into  an  image  {wraith),
then  double  him  up,  and  lame  him  at  pleasure.  You  are  to  know  that  the  will  is  a
most  potent  operator  in  medicine.  Man  can  hang  a  disease  on  man  or  beast  through
curses,  but  it  does  not  take  effect  through  an  image  of  virgin  wax,  but  by  means

of  the  strength  of  fixed  will." "  Determined  imagination  is  the  beginning

of  all  magical  operations.  It  is  a  spell  from  which  there  is  no  escape  lut  hy  revers-
ing the  operator's  intent."  -The  imagination  of  another  may  be  able  to

kill  me  or  save  me  " "N"o  armor  protects  me  against  magic,  for  it  in-

iures  the  inward  spirit  of  life." ''The  human  spirit  is  so  great  a  thing

that  no  man  can  express  it.  God  himself  is  unchangeable  and  almighty,  so  also
is  the  mind  of  man."  "If  we  rightly  esteemed  the  power  of  man's  mmd,  nothmg
on  earth  would  be  impossible  to  him."

It  would  be  needless  to  offer  further  quotations  Iroui  the

386

writings  of  the  numerous  mystics  who  flourished  from  the
thirteenth  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  centuries.

The  doctrines  of  the  famous  Rosicrucians  have  already
been  sufficiently  noted.  Of  their  existence  or  even  origin
as  an  ordei\  we  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  dilate,  neither
would  such  a  discussion  throw  any  additional  light  on
that  art  which  we  have  shown  in  former  sections  to  be  de-
pendent upon  natural  endowments,  or  methods  of  culture
sufficiently  defined  for  all  practical  purposes.  It  only  re-
mains now  for  us  to  analyze  somewhat  more  in  detail  than
formerly,  the  characteristics  of  that  wonderful  and  myster-
ious drama  which  occupied  such  a  prominent  place  during
the  middle  ages  under  the  title  of  Witchcraft.

Although  the  narratives  on  this  subject  are  so  numerous,
and  accounts  of  the  trials  in  various  countries  so  fully  set
forth  in  the  writings  of  many  eminent  authorities,  that  any
reiteration  of  them  in  this  place  would  be  superfluous,  still
we  feel  that  more  attention  has  been  given  to  the  detail  of
events  than  to  the  elimination  of  a  philosophy,  the  attempts
at  explanation  rendered  by  the  Savants  of  the  time  being
limited  to  the  universal  solvent  of  the  Devil  and  his  Imps,
and  those  of  the  modern  Spiritualists  to  the  sole  agency  of
the  spirits  of  deceased  persons.

When  we  can  obtain  a  fair  statement  and  a  scientific
classification  of  the  phenomena  exhibited  in  this  weird
movement,  we  shall  assuredly  find  a  broad  field  of  action
left  untouched  by  either  of  these  inefficacious  attempts  at
explanation.

In  the  first  place  a  large  mass  of  the  accusations  were
fictitious,  especially  in  the  case  of  those  victims  of  the  popu-
lar fury,  whose  age,  helplessness,  and  ignorance,  rendered
them  fit  subjects  for  superstitious  dread.  Still  another
class  were  unconsciously  and  perhaps  involuntarily,  the
victims — not  of    beneficent  or  even  undeveloped  human

387

spirits — whose  intelligence  and  humanity  would  have  led
them  to  manifest  their  presence  in  human  modes — but  of
Elementaries,  whose  sub-mundane  propensities  were  exhib-
ited in  animal  actions,  and  deeds  of  folly  and  malignity,
which  favored  the  popular  idea  of  a  Satanic  origin.  It
must  be  remembered  that  there  is  as  much  irrationality  in
wholesale  and  obstinate  skepticism,  as  in  credulity.  The
trials  for  witchcraft  and  the  numerous  narratives  put  forth
concerning  it,  prove  that  there  existed  a  certain  family  re-
semblance amongst  its  details  which  suggests  a  basis  of
facts  even  for  the  most  exaggerated  accusations.  For  ex-
ample :  The  "  spectres"  or  "  wraiths"  of  the  accused,  were
frequently  seen  apart  from  their  bodies.  The  modern
Psychologist  must  be  aware  that  the  phenomenon  of  the
"  doppel  ganger''  or  the  apparition  of  the  ''living  spirit,"  is
too  well  established  a  phenomenon  to  be  denied.

Many  of  the  accused  confessed  to  the  practice  of  an-
ointing their  bodies  with  the  famous  "  witch  salve,"  largely
composed  of  Napellus,  Aconite,  Belladonna,  Henbane,  and
other  herbs  which  notoriously  produce  the  sensation  of
fining  through  the  air.

May  we  not  here  find  a  clue  to  the  universal  idea,  that
these  self-deluded  beings — who,  in  some  instances  at  least,
flattered  themselves  that  they  could  communicate  with
occult  powers  by  occult  practices — actually  induced  the
sensations  and  visions  they  related  by  the  narcotics  they
indulged  in "?  None  can  deny  that  the  aspiration  .after
the  \mknown,  and  the  longing  to  communicate  with  the
invisible  world,  to  say  nothing  of  the  attempts  to  improve
upon  miserable  human  conditions  by  the  aid  of  nifernal
or  any  available  arts  that  could  be  arrived  at— have  stimu-
lated humanity  in  every  age ;  hence,  let  us  be  just,  and
whilst  we  may  and  must  admit  that  a  fearful  amount  of
superstitious  error  prevailed  on  the  subject  of  witchcraft,

388

and  an  incalculable  sum  of  cruelty  and  sacrifice  of  human
life  was  the  consequence,  we  must  still  allow  that  there
was  a  substratum  of  truth  in  the  universal  belief,  which
the  ignorance  of  the  age  could  not  separate  from  malevo-
lent accusations  against  innocent  persons,  and  which  the
superstition  of  the  time  could  not  reduce  into  the  applica-
tion of  true  occult  powers.

It  was  clearly  proved  that  some  of  the  accused  persons
did  at  times  make  use  of  charms,  spells,  amulets,  unguents,
talismans,  invocations,  and  other  magical  arts.

The  part  of  true  philosophy  should  be  to  consider
whether  any  of  these  practices  contain  elements  of
potency — not  to  dismiss  them  all  as  idle  and  baseless
superstitions.  Is  it  possible  to  suppose  that  such  arts
should  have  been  handed  down  from  the  days  of  Moses,
and  perhaps  for  thousands  of  years  previous,  and  surviving
all  the  changes  of  time,  and  human  opinion,  continue  to
crop  out  in  every  age  and  country,  unless  they  originated
in  some  foundation  of  natural  law  7  As  we  shall  devote
the  next  section  to  a  review  of  the  possibilities  that  belong
to  this  occult  and  ill-understood  subject,  we  close  this  ne-
cessarily brief  review  of  the  Witchcraft  mania,  by  present-
ing one  illustration  of  that  most  common  of  all  its  phe-
nomenal phases,  which  proves  the  unconscious,  yet  poten-
tial action  of  Magnetism  and  Psychology.  Although  the
narrative  we  select  is  one  which  the  zeal  of  Glanville,
from  whose  writings  we  quote  it,  has  made  familiar,  doubt-
less, to  most  of  our  readers,  we  deem  it  the  best  illustra-
tion we  can  offer  of  a  majority  of  the  cases  for  which  so
many  unfortunates  suffered  the  horrors  of  the  rack  and
stake.

Glanville,  Chaplain  to  Charles  II,  of  England,  writing
in  defense  of  the  truth  of  Witchcraft,  or  rather  its  actu-
ality, as  it  occurred  in  the  seventeenth  century,  says :

389

"  On  Sunday,  15th  of  November,  1657,  about  three  of  the  clock  in
the  afternoon,  Richard  Jones,  then  a  sprightly  youth  about  twelve  years
old,  son  of  Henry  Jones,  of  Shepton  Mallet,  in  the  county  of  Somer-
set, being  in  his  father's  house  alone,  and  perceiving  some  one  looking
in  at  the  windows,  went  to  the  door,  where  one  Jane  Brooks  of  the  same
town  (but  then  by  name  unknown  to  this  boy)  came  to  him.  She  de-
sired him  to  give  her  a  piece  of  close  bread,  and  gave  him  an  apple.
After  which  she  also  stroked  hi?n  down  on  the  right  side,  shook  him  by  the
hand,  and  so  bid  him  good-night.  The  youth  returned  to  the  house,  where
he  had  been  left  well,  when  his  father  and  one  Gibson  went  from  him  ;
but  at  their  return,  which  was  within  an  hour,  they  found  him  ill  and
complaining  of  his  right  side,  in  which  the  pain  continued  the  most  part
of  that  night.  And  on  Monday  following,  in  the  evening,  the  boy  roasted
the  apple  he  had  of  Jane  Brooks,  and  having  eaten  about  half  of  it,  was
extremely  ill,  and  sometimes  speechless,  but  being  recovered,  he  told  his
father  that  a  woman  of  the  town  on  the  Sunday  before  had  given  him
that  apple,  and  that  she  stroked  him  on  the  side.  He  said  he  knew  not
her  name,  but  should  her  person  if  he  saw  her.  Upon  this  Jones  was
advised  to  invite  the  women  of  Shepton  to  come  to  his  house  upon  the
occasion  of  his  son's  illness,  and  the  child  told  him,  that  in  case  the
woman  should  come  in  when  he  was  in  his  Fit,  if  he  were  not  able  to
speak,  he  would  give  him  an  intimation  by  a  jogg,  and  desired  that  his
father  would  then  lead  him  through  the  room,  for  he  said  he  would  put
his  hand  upon  her  if  she  were  there.  After  this,  he  continuing  very  ill,
many  women  came  daily  to  see  him.  And  Jane  Brooks  the  Sunday
after  came  in  with  two  of  her  sisters,  when  several  other  women  of  the
neighborhood  were  there.

"Upon  her  coming  in,  the  boy  was  taken  so  ill  that  for  some  time  he
could  not  see  nor  speak;  but  having  recovered  his  sight,  he  gave  his  father
the  Item,  and  he  led  him  about  the  room.  The  boy  drew  towards  Jane
Brooks,  who  was  behind  her  two  sisters  among  the  other  women,  and
put  his  hand  upon  her,  which  his  father  perceiving,  immediately  scratched
her  face  and  drew  blood  from  her.  The  youth  then  presently  cried  out
that  he  was  well,  and  so  continued  seven  or  eight  days  ;  but  then  meet-
ing with  Alice  Coward,  sister  to  Jane  Brooks,  who,  passing  by,  said  to
him  :  '  How  do  you,  my  Honey  V  he  presently  fell  ill  again.  And  after
that,  the  said  Coward  and  Brooks  often  appeared  to  him.  The  boy  would
describe  the  clothes  and  habit  they  were  in  at  the  time  exactly,  as  the  constable
and  others  have  found  upon  repairing  to  them,  though  Brooks  house  was  at  a
good  distance  from  Jones.  This  they  often  tryed  and  always  found  the
boy  right  in  his  descriptions.

390

''  On  a  certain  Sunday  about  noon,  the  child  being  in  a  room  with
his  father  and  one  Gibson,  and  in  his 7?/,  he  on  the  sudden  called  out
that  he  saw  Jane  Brooks  on  the  wall,  and  pointed  to  the  place,  where  im-
mediately Gibson  struck  with  a  knife  ;  upon  which  the  boy  cried  out  :  'O,
father,  Coz.  Gibson  hath  cut  Jane  Brooks'  hand  and  'tis  bloody.'  The
father  and  Gibson  immediately  repaired  to  the  constable,  a  discreet  per-
son, and  acquainting  him  with  what  had  passed,  desired  him  to  go  with
them  to  Jane  Brooks'  house,  which  he  did.  They  found  her  sitting  in
her  room  on  a  stool  with  one  hand  over  the  other.  The  constable  asked
her  how  she  did  ?  She  answered,  not  well.  He  asked  again  why  she
sate  with  one  hand  over  the  other?  She  replied,  she  was  wont  to  do  so.
He  enquired  if  anything  were  amiss  with  her  hand  ?  Her  answer  was,
it  was  well  enough.  The  constable  desired  that  he  might  see  the  hand
that  was  under;  which,  she  being  unwilling  to  show  him,  he  drew  out
and  found  it  bloody,  according  to  what  the  boy  had  said.  Being  asked
how  it  came  so,  she  said,  I  was  stratched  with  a  great  pin."

''On  the  8th  of  December,  1657,  the  Boy,  Jane  Brooks  and  Alice
Coward,  appeared  at  Castle  Gary,  before  the  Justices,  M.  Hunt  and  M.
Gary.  The  Boy  having  begun  to  give  his  testimony,  upon  the  coming  in
of  the  two  women,  and  their  looking  on  him,  was  instantly  taken  speechless,
and  so  remained  till  the  women  were  removed  out  of  the  room,  and  then
in  a  short  time,  upon  examination,  he  gave  a  full  relation  of  the  men-
tioned particulars.

"On  the  nth  of  January  following,  the  Boy  was  again  examined  be-
fore the  same  Justices  at  Shepton  Mallet,  and  upon  sight  of  Jane  Brooks
was  again  taken  speechless,  but  was  not  so  afterwards  when  Alice  Coward
came  into  the  room  to  him.

"  On  the  next  appearance  at  Shepton,  which  was  on  the  17th  of  Feb-
ruary, there  were  present  many  gentlemen,  ministers  and  others  ;  the
Boy  fell  into  his  fit  upon  the  sight  of  fane  Brooks,  and  lay  in  a  man's  arms
like  a  dead  person  ;  the  woman  was  then  willed  to  lay  her  hand  on  him,  which
she  did,  and  he  thereupon  started  and  sprang  out  in  a  very  strange  and  u?t-
usual  manner.  One  of  the  Justices,  to  prevent  all  possibilities  of  Leger-
demain, caused  Gibson  and  the  rest  to  stand  off  from  the  boy,  and  then
the  fustice  himself  held  him.  The  youth  being  blindfolded,  the  Justice  called
as  if  Brooks  should  touch  him,  but  winked  to  others  to  doit,  which  two
or  three  successively  did,  but  the  boy  appeared  not  concerned.  The  Justice
then  called  on  the  father  to  take  him,  but  had  privately  before  desired
Mr.  Geoffry  Strode  to  hrmg  fane  Brooks  to  touch  him,  at  such  time  as  he
should  call  for  his  father  ;  which  was  done,  and  the  boy  immediately  sprang
out  after  a  very  odd  and  violent  fashion.      He  was  after  touched  by  several

391

persons  and  moved  not ;  hut  fane  Broohhe'mg  caused  to  put  her  hand  up-
on him,  /le  started  and  sprang  out  twice  or  thrice,  as  before.  All  this  while
he  remained  in  his  fit ^  and  sometime  after  ;  and  being  then  laid  on  a  bed  in
the  same  room,  the  people  present  could  not  for  a  long  time  bow  either  of  his
arms  or  legs. "

''  Between  the  mentioned  15th  of  November  and  the  nth  of  January,
the  two  women  appeared  often  to  the  Boy,  their  hands  cold,  their  eyes
staring,  and  their  lips  and  cheeks  looking  pale.  In  this  manner  on  a
Thursday  about  noon,  the  Boy  being  newly  laid  into  his  bed,  Jane
Brooks  and  Alice  Coward  appeared  to  him,  and  told  him  that  what  they
had  begun,  they  could  not  perform,  but  if  he  would  say  no  more  of  it,
they  would  give  him  money,  and  so  put  a  two-pence  into  his  pocket.  After
which  they  took  him  out  of  his  bed,  laid  him  on  the  ground,  and  van-
ished ;  and  the  boy  was  found  by  those  that  came  next  into  the  room,
lying  on  the  floor,  as  if  he  had  been  dead.  The  two-pence  was  seen  by
many,  and  when  it  was  put  into  the  fire,  and  hot,  the  boy  would  fall  ill ;  but
as  soon  as  it  was  taken  out,  and  cold,  he  would  be  again  as  well  as  be-
fore. This  was  seen  and  observed  by  a  minister,  a  discreet  person,  when
the  boy  was  in  one  room  and  the  two-pence  {without  his  knowledge)  put  into  the
fire  in  another;  and  this  was  divers  times  tried  in  the  presence  of  several
persons.

''On  the  25th  of  February  between  two  and  three  in  the  afternoon,
the  boy  being  at  the  house  of  Richard  Isles  at  Shepton  Mallet,  went  out
of  the  room  into  the  garden;  Isles's  wife  followed  him,  and  was  within
two  yards  when  she  saw  him  rise  up  from  the  ground  before  her,  and  so
mounted  higher  and  higher,  till  he  passed  in  the  air  over  the  garden
wall,  and  was  carried  so  above  {ground  more  than  30  yards,  falling  at
last  at  one  Jordan's  door  at  Shepton,  where  he  was  found  as  dead  for  a
time.  But  coming  to  himself,  told  Jordan  that  Jane  Brooks  had  taken
him  up  by  the  arm  out  of  Isles's  garden,  and  carried  him  in  the  air,  as
related.

"  The  Boy  at  several  other  times  was  gone  on  the  suddain,  and  upon
search  after  him  found  in  another  room  as  dead,  and  at  sometimes
strangely  hanging  above  ground,  his  hands  being  flat  against  a  great  beam
in  the  top  of  the  room,  and  all  his  body  two  or  three  feet  from  ground.
There  he  hath  hung  a  quarter  of  an  hour  together  ;  and  being  afterwards
come  to  himself,  he  told  those  that  found  him  that  Jane  Brooks  had  car-
ried him  to  that  place  and  held  him  there.  Nine  people  at  a  time  saw
the  boy  so  strangely  hanging  by  the  beam.

''  From  the  15th  of  November  to  the  loth  of  March  following,  he  was
by  reason  of  his  fits  much  wasted  in  his  body,  and  unspirited  ;  but  after

392

that  time,  being  the  day  the  two  women  were  sent  to  Gaol,  he  had  no
more  of  those  fits.

' '  Jane  Brooks  was  condemned  and  executed  at  Charde  Assizes,  March
26th,  1658.

''This  is  the  sum  of  M.  Hunt's  narrative,  which  concludes  with  both
the  justices'  attestation,  thus: — 'The  aforesaid  passages  were  some  of
them  seen  by  us,  and  the  rest,  and  some  other  remarkable  ones  not  here
set  down,  were,  upon  examination  of  several  credible  witnesses,  taken
upon  Oath  before  us.

(Signed)  "  'Robert  Hunt.

"  '  John  Gary.

Thousands,  and  tens  of  thousands  of  narratives  have
been  already  published  on  the  subject  of  Witchcraft,  some
colored  by  the  wildest  exaggerations,  others  circumstantial
in  detail,  and  as  matter-of-fact  as  the  one  quoted  above —
all  tend  to  prove  the  existence  of  unknown  and  occult
forces  pervading  human  history,  equally  influential  upon
individuals  and  communities,  and  perpetually  challenging
the  attention  of  the  wise  and  philosophic  for  a  classifica-
tion of  the  facts,  and  the  evolvement  of  some  basic  prin-
ciples of  spiritual  science  by  which  to  explain,  govern  and
control  them.

McrttkewHopkinO^tck  rmicr  Generall

''Tryalle  of  a  Witch  before  Matthew  Hopkins,
Portraits  of  My  Imps."

(From    a  Very  Rare  Print.)

393

SECTION  XXI.

Magical  Elements-—  Yarions  kinds  of  DMnation — Ara-
bian Belomancy — ElisJia  and  the  Arrows — Cleomancy,
Geomancy  —  Crystal  Seeing—Bath  Kol,  Chiromancy,
&c.,  <&c. — Of  Stones,  Gems,  Colors  and  Sounds — The
Color  Doctor — Music — Rosicrucian  Ideas  of  Light  and
Music — Spells,  Amulets,  Talismans,  Witchcraft.

It  has  been  intimated  in  various  parts  of  this  volume
that  the  ancients  attached  the  idea  of  occult  virtue  to
herbs,  plants,  flowers,  earths,  minerals,  metals,  certain
beasts,  insects  and  reptiles,  colors,  tones,  words,  forms,
magical  names,  invocations,  spells,  charms,  talismans  and
fumigations.

Every  object  that  could  impress  the  senses — stimulate
them  to  man  tic  frenzy,  or  subdue  them  into  somnambulism,
formed  some  element  in  ancient  magical  practice.  We
have  written  of  the  faith  which  all  nations  of  antiquity
cherished  in  astrological  calculations,  and  unhesitatingly
affirmed  that  the  foundations  for  that  faith  exist  to-day  in
as  much  force  as  in  the  Chaldaic  Era,  and  that  the  basic
idea  of  astrological  truth  is  to  be  found  in  the  fundamental
principles  which  bind  up  the  whole  universe  in  one  com-
pendious system  of  mutual  interdependencies.

Divination  was  also  obtained  through  an  immense  va-
riety of  modes,  chief  amongst  which  were  those  already
alluded  to  in  the  Section  on  Jewish  Magic.  Another  was
performed  amongst  the  Arabians  by  the  flight  of  arrows,
and  called  Belomancy.  Some  allusion  to  this  method  is
made  in  the  Bible  when  EKsha  the  Prophet  in  his  last
hours  was  consulted  by  King  Joash,  whom  Ije  commanded

894

to  take  bow  and  arrows  and  shoot  forth  from  the  window
saying,  "the  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance,  and  the
arrow  of  deliverance  from  Syria,"  &c.,  &c.

In  the  Arabian  method  it  was  customary  to  write  on
slips  of  paper,  and  attach  them  to  the  arrows,  when,  accord-
ing to  the  place  in  which  they  alighted,  or  the  object
which  they  struck,  so  was  the  inscribed  sentence  accepted
as  oracular.

At  the  celebrated  Temple  of  Hercules,  in  Achaia,  the
priests  were  accustomed  to  obtain  oracular  replies  by  the
tossing  of  dice  or  marked  stones ;  this  mode  was  called
Cleomancy.

Cicero  describes  several  modes  of  divining  by  birds,  in
which  their  color,  the  number  in  a  flock,  their  direction,
and  divers  other  minutiae  were  accepted  as  auguries  for
good  or  evil.

Sacrificial  rites  were   in  all  ancient  countries  deemed
infallible  means  of  Soothsaying.     The  motions  of  the  vic-
tim, his  struggles  or  submission,  the  condition  of  the  in-
testines, the  direction  of  the  smoke,  and  other  items  too
numerous  and  too  petty  to  be  dwelt  on,  were  all  deemed
indications  of  the  deepest  moment,  and  on  them,  often  de-
pended the  fate  of  nations,   and    the    destiny    of  Kings.
There  were  several  modes  of  divination  by  water,  by   the
swinging  of  rings,  or  other  light   objec,ts   suspended  from
sacred  books,  which  were  deemed  infallible  as  portents.
To  this  species  ot  chance  divination  belongs  that  method
so  elaborately  described  by  CorneUus  Agrippa,  but  invent-
ed ages  before  his  time,  called  "Geomancy,"  that  is,  divi-
nation by  points  or  dots  set  down  at  random.     This  mode
was  supposed  to  be  practiced  by  the  Persian  Magi,  who
made  clefts  in  the  ground,  and  then,  from  the  numbers  of
marks  found,  they  composed  a  magical  figure,  which  they
interpreted  into  an  oracle.      From  the  use  of  the  ground
as  the  tablet  of  inscription,  comes  the  term  "  Geomancy."

395

Endless  are  the  practices  by  which  the  ancients  sought
to  obtain  that  divine  direction  which  they  prized,  far
above  all  earthly  counsel  or  human  judgment.  They  cul-
tivated the  art  of  crystal  seeing,  gazing  into  mirrors  and
still  water  to  obtain  visions.  They  attached  especial  im-
portance to  dreams,  and  often  accepted  as  oracular  the
voices  of  passers  by,  and  the  sentences  they  uttered,  as
they  sat  waiting  by  the  wayside,  or  at  the  gates  of  their
Temples  ''  for  a  sign."  This  method  amongst  the  Jews
was  termed  Bath-Kol^  or  the  Daughter  of  a  voice^  and  was
used  by  them  when  the  mysterious  tones  of  the  spirit  who
was  wont  to  speak  from  between  the  Cherubim  and  Sera-
phim became  hushed  lorever.

Chiromancy,  or  the  art  of  divining  by  the  lines  of  the
hand,  still  maintains  it»  hold  upon  the  faith  of  a  goodly
number  of  modern  votaries.  Amongst  the  Sybilline  peo-
ple skillful  to  a  proverb  in  this  art,  are  the  Gipsies  of  Eng-
land, the  Zingari  of  Spain,  and  the  Bohemians  of  Paris.
The  success  of  these  vagrant  wanderers  in  reading  the
character,  and  not  unfrequently  the  destiny  of  those  whose
hands  they  examine,  has  often  been  attributed  to  clairvoy-
ance, a  gift  peculiar  to  most  nomadic  tribes,  especially  to
the  Arabians  and  Gipsies,  still  there  are  not  wanting  men
of  mark  and  learning  who  claim  as  much  for  Palmistry  or
Chiromancy  as  for  Physiognomy  or  even  Phrenology.

In  this  art,  as  in  Geomancy,  astrological  science  is  called
into  play,  as  it  is  claimed  the  hand  is  the  chart  of  the
whole  body,  and  as  this  is  under  astral  and  solar  control,
so  the  peculiar  shape  of  the  hand  and  the  lines  on  its  inner
surface  indicate  planetary  configurations,  which  bear  an
immediate    relation  to  destiny,  and  the  influence  of  the

stars.

Pythagoras  attached  the  utmost  importance  to  the  given
name  of  individuals,  and  the  number  of  letters  it  contained.

396

and  this  belief  prevailed  so  generall)^  amongst  man)^  of
the  Grecian  philosophers,  that  it  became  reduced  to  a  sort
of  science,  and  obtained  the  title  of  Onomancy.

In  Wm.  Howitt's  delightful  sketches  of  Rural  Life  in
Germanij^  and  Ennemoser's  History  of  Magic,  are  whole
chapters  concerning  the  popular  superstitions  of  the  middle?
aye,  and  later  ages  too.  in  which  almost  every  motion,
and  every  object,  becomes  interpreted  into  an  omen.

Doubtless  it  is  from  the  alternations  of  fear  and  hope,
between  which  man  is  forever  oscillating,  as  he  pursues
his  toilsome  pilgrimage  through   life's   rough  and   rugged
paths,  that  he  so  continually  ransacks  nature  to  her  in-
most depths,  to  discover  signs  of  warning  or  encourage-
ment to  guide  him.     And  are  these  signs  so  entirely  un-
reliable ?     Is  this  research  so  utterly  fruitless  7    Is  not  man
the  creature  of  Nature  as   much  as  of  God  ?     Built  up  of
her  whole  three  lower  kingdoms,  drinking  from  her  rivers
and  fountains,   inhaling  her  breathing  winds,  constantly
shedding  impalpable  emanations  to  feed  her  vegetable  king-
dom, and  as  constantly  receiving  in  exchange  the  aromal
essences  of  all  that  earth  contains ;  how  deep,  how   inti-
mate must  be  the  sympathy  between  this  microcosmic  man
and  all  things  else  in  being !     Whatever  this  planet  may
be  interiorly,  all  its  separate  parts  must  be  organs  of  "  one
stupendous  whole."     The  men  of  the  wilds  of  Africa  can-
not be  dissevered  from  the  intluences  which  convulse  their
western  brothers.     The  air,  the  tides,  the  secret  crypts  of
earth  traversed  by  magnetic  currents  and  electric  fires,  are
links  which  bind  the  inhabitants  of  every  land  in  one   un-
broken chain  of  harmony.     Does  the  brow  ache  without
the  hand  becoming  heavy  ?     Does  fever  scorch  the  veins
without  exhibiting  its  lurid  light  in  the  glittering  eye?
Can  we  injure  one  single  fibre  without  a  sympathetic  thrill
quivering  through  the  entire  system  7     Then  why  sneer

397

at  the  idea  that  the  separate  parts  of  nature — all  organs,
and  essential  ones,  too,  in  her  sublime  structure — should  so
sympathetically  act  and  react  with  each  other,  that  those
who  can  read  one  part  may  comprehend  the  whole,  or
those  who  feel  the  pang  that  rends  her  heart,  will  be  sure
her  sacred  frame  will   shudder,  even  to  the  farthest  ex-
tremities of  being !     As  man  is   the  crowning  apex  of  all
created  forms,  as  in  him  are  centred  all  powers,  forces,
and  elements  that  compose  the  natural  body  of  the  planet,
is^t  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  all  the  lesser  parts  are
in  subjection  to  him,  and  in  sympathetic  rapport  with  his
destiny  ?     We  may  mistake  the  indications  of  these  deep
sympathies,  and,  in  our  egotism,  imagine  they  cluster  too
thickly  around  our  own  individual  pathway.     Still  they
exist,  and  only  need  a  scientific,  instead  of  an  imaginative
understanding  of  their  profound  utterances,  to  show  us  that
all  nature  is  a  grand  volume,  in  which  the  hieroglyphics
of  universal  being  are  inscribed  in  characters  of  immutable
fate  ;  in  sand-grains  and  mountains,  in  daisies  and  forest
trees,  in  ocean  billows  and  murmuring  brooklets,  in  chirp-
ing insects  and  the  peals  of  heaven's  artillery,  in  fluttering
wings  of  birds  and  hovering  angels.  "*^'"'

"The  great  and  wise   Swedenborg  often  mistook  the  art
of  correspondences,  but  never  the  truth  of  the  science

itself.

The  Magians  of  old,  better  instructed  in  the  occult
powers  of  nature  than  we,  who  have  strayed  so  far  from
her  revealments  in  the  paths  of  artifice,  comprehended  the
laws  of  sympathy  existing  between  all  orders  of  being  and
man ;  hence  their  correct  interpretation  of  signs,  tokens,
omens  and  monitions.  They  understood  that  all  nature
rendered  homage  to  man,  and  that  a  quiver  shook  her
mighty  frame  in  response  to  every  chord  struck  on  the  harp
of  life  by  man's  master  hand.  We  have  no  such  knowl-
e35e  now,  and  so  little  interior  light  to  guide  us  that  the

398

signs  fail,  the  tokens  are  misunderstood,  and  the  attempts
we  make  to  force  them  into  meaning,  betray  us  into  error
and  convert  the  child-like  faiths  of  antiquity,  into  vain
superstition.

Of  Stones,  Gems  and  Colors.

The  splendid  array  of  experiments  by  which  Baron  Von
Reichenbach  has,  within  the  last  half  century  and  under  the
most  stringent  test  conditions,  proved  that  magnetic  ema-
nations streamed  from  shells,  stones  and  crystals,  display-
ing different  degrees  of  force  and  different  shades  of  color,
form  and  radiance,  supplement  the  opinions  of  the  most
authoritative  writers  of  different  ages  on  the  same  subject.

That  all  metals  and  crystalline  bodies  give  off  magnetic
force,  is  now  proved  beyond  question  ;  that  they  are  capa-
ble of  producing  somnambulic  or  ecstatic  effects  in  different
degrees,  Von  Reichenbach's  experiments,  with  over  a  hun-
dred and  fifty  sensitives,  have  abundantly  demonstrated ;
hence  we  may  be  justified  in  regarding  with  some  inter-
est, the  classification  of  the  different  qualities  of  minerals
and  precious  stones,  put  forth  by  Rabbi  Benoni,  a  learned
writer  of  the  fourteenth  century,  said  to  be  one  of  the
most  profound  Alchemists  of  his  time,  who  alleges  that
"  the  loadstone,  sapphire  and  diamond  are  all  capable  of
producing  Somnambulism,  and  when  combined  into  a  talis-
man, attract  such  powerful  Planetary  Spirits,  as  render  the
bearer  almost  invincible."  All  precious  stones  when  cut
with  smooth  surfaces  and  intently  gazed  upon,  are  capable
of  producing  somnambulism  in  the  same  degree  as  the  crys-
tal, also  of  inducing  visions.

Their  varieties  of  color  prove  that  they  absorb  different
degrees  of  light,  and  they  are  said  to  impart  unequal  de-
grees of  heat.  The  Buddhists  esteemed  the  sapphire
above  all  gems,  claiming  that  it  produces  tranquility  of
mind,  and  when  worn  by  one  wholly   pure  and  devoted  to

399

God,  ensures  protection  against  disease,  danger,  and  ven-
omous reptiles.

Orpheus  exalts  the  virtues  of  the  loadstone  almost  as
highly  as  did  Paracelsus  that  of  the  Magnet. — The  former
says  :  ''  With  this  stone  you  can  hear  the  voices  of  the
Gods,  and  learn  heavenly  things."

"  It  will  confer  strength,  banish  disease,  and  when  worn
constantly  about  the  person,  ward  off  epidemics  and
plagues.  Sitting  down  before  it  and  fixing  your  gaze  earn-
estly upon  it,  you  have  but  to  ask  of  the  Gods  for  light  on
any  subject,  and  the  answer  will  come  breathed  out  through
the  stone.  Your  soul  will  hear  it,  and  your  senses  will  dis-
cover it  clearly."  Orpheus  says  of  stones  in  general :
''The  earth  produces  every  good  and  evil  to  man,  but  she
also  provides  a  remedy  for  every  ill.  These  are  to  be  found
chiefly  in  stones.     Every  virtue  lays  hidden  within  them."

Benoni  affirms  that  the  diamond  will  deprive  the  load-
stone of  its  virtue,  and  is  the  most  powerful  of  all  stones  to
promote  spiritual  ecstasy.  Amongst  a  great  variety  of
similar  aphorisms  he  says :  "  The  agate  quenches  thirst
if  held  in  the  mouth,  and  soothes  fever.

"  The  amethyst  banishes  the  desire  for  drink,  and  pro-
motes chastity.

"  The  garnet  preserves  health  and  joy.

'•  The  sapphire  impels  to  all  good  things  like  the  dia-
mond.

"  The  red  coral  is  a  cure  for  indigestion,  when  worn
constantly  about  the  person.

"  Amber  is  a  cure  for  sore  throat  and  glandular  swell-
ings, r

"  The  crystal  promotes  sweet  sleep  and  good  dreams.

"  The  Emerald  promotes    friendship  and  constancy  of

mind.

"  The  onyx  is  a  demon  imprisoned  in  stone,  who  wakes

400

only  of  a  night,  causing  terror  and  disturbance  to  sleepers
who  wear  it.

"  The  opal  is  fatal  to  love,  and  sows  discord  between
the  giver  and  receiver.

''  The  topaz  is  favorable  for  all  haemorrhages,  and  im-
parts strength  and  good  digestion."

We  give  these  quaint  aphorisms  not  as  guides  or  scien-
tific indications,  but  to  show  the  ideas  which  the  latent
powers  of  magnetic  bodies  suggested  to  observers  of  natural
forces.  As  to  the  effect  of  colors  on  the  mind,  whatever
physical  influence  they  may  be  supposed  to  produce,  it
would  be  in  vain  to  deny  their  peculiar  efficacy  in  psy-
chological effects.  In  Emma  Hardinge's  noble  work  "  The
History  of  Modern  American  Spiritualism,"  a  chapter  is
devoted  to  the  recital  of  that  lady's  interview  with  a  sin-
gular individual  residing  in  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  and  pro-
fessing to  make  cures  by  detecting  the  peculiar  colors  which
belonged  to  certain  organisms,  the  plus  or  minus  of  which —
according  to  his  theory — was  the  cause  of  all  disease.  This
chapter,  like  every  other  line  in  this  exhaustive  treatise,  is
a  mine  of  psychologic  wealth.

The  ''  Color  Doctor,"  as  he  was  termed,  being  a  verita-
ble ecstatic,  would,  on  the  first  entrance  of  his  visitors,  go
through  many  of  the  extraordinary  ^motions,  gyrations  and
contortions  peculiar  to  the  Hindoo  Fakeers.  Having  in-
duced in  himself  and  his  visitors  the  necessary  condition
of  rapport^  scenes  amounting  to  mantic  frenzy  would  ensue,
during  which  he  is  reported  to  have  effected  the  most  won-
derful and  unaccountable  cures.  His  particular  theory  of
color  influence,  was  demonstrated  on  the  occasion  of  Emma
Hardinge's  visit,  in. the  following  manner  :  Placing  the  lady
and  several  witnesses  in  one  apartment,  he,  with  an  equal
number  of  persons,  remained  in  another,  where  no  possi-
ble chance  could  have  permitted  the  cme  party  to  observe

401

the  actions  of  the  other,  though  all  could  hear  and  com-
municate together.

The  Operator  then  touched  a  piece  of  cloth  of  a  certain
color,  upon  which  the  lady  in  the  next  apartment  became
impelled  to  represent  in  pantomimic  action  some  scene  sig-
nifying deep  mental  emotion,  for  example :  when  the
Doctor  held  a  piece  of  yellow  cloth  in  his  hand,  the  sub-
ject immediately  prostrated  herself  in  the  attitude  of
adoration,  and  uttered  fervent  prayers  to  the  Deity.  On
assuming  the  color  of  scarlet,  the  subject  became  violently
enraged  and  threatened  war  and  destruction  to  all  around
her.  A  certain  shade  of  grey  caused  the  representation
of  a  rattlesnake,  and  the  signification  of  treachery ;  pink
occasioned  great  joy  and  gladness ;  violet  evidently  deep-
ened the  spiritual  afflatus,  and  wrapped  the  subject  in
heavenly  contemplation  ;  green  excited^her  aversion  ;  and
blue  restored  her  to  perfect  peace  and  equanimity,  seeming,
in  ftict,  to  represent  her  own  nature.  Many  rapid  changes
were  effected  in  the  assumption  of  these  and  other  colors ;
but  always  with  the  same  effect,  and  unvarying  fidelity  of
representation.  The  lady  concludes  a  long  and  most  won-
derful narrative,  witnessed  as  the  scene  was  too,  by  several
scientific  and  distinguished  residents  of  St.  Louis,  by  the
following  pertinent  remarks :

"  When  after  two  hours  captivity  to  this  tearful  spell,  I
was  at  length  released,  and  permitted  to  reflect  upon  the
singular  part  I  had  been  compelled  to  play,  the  idea  forced  it-
self upon  my  mind,  that  in  this  exhibition,  was  a  complete
arcanum  of  occult  discovery.  A  clue  was  at  once  aftbrded
me,  to  the  strong  predilections  which  1  had  always  cherished
for  certain  colors  and  my  dislike  to  others.  I  remembered
the  same  things  of  almost  every  one  I  knew,  and  felt  certain
that  as  colors  corresponded  to  the  passions  of  the  human
soul,  so  the  predominance  of  special   tendencies  of  mind

402

might  be  supposed  to  indicate  a  corresponding  preponder-
ance in  the  physical  system,  of  special  rays  of  color."

Whether  this  theory  be  founded  in  truth  or  error,  the
fact  remains  that  the  weird  Color  Doctor  of  St.  Louis,  ef-
fected many  marvellous  cures  by  imparting  psychologically
as  be  assumed,  the  particular  rays  of  color  in  which  some
of  his  patients  were  deficient,  or  reducing  those  which  pre-
vailed to  such  an  excess  in  others  as  to  create  inflamma-
tion and  disease.

In  the  experiment  above  related,  he  assured  his  visitors
he  used  no  psychological  art  whatever.  He  believed  that
special  colors  prevailed  in  special  organisms,  and  that  the
plus  or  minus  of  the  shade  natural  to  them,  caused  dis-
ease, but  until  the  chance  experiment  which  occurred
through  a  chance  visit  of  Mrs.  Hardinge  and  her  friends,
he  had  no  idea  of  the  intimate  relation  of  colors  to  the
mental  emotions,  and  the  scene  so  briefly  described  above
was  as  much  a  revelation  to  him  as  to  the  witnesses.

In  carefully  conducted  Seances  for  spiritual  manifesta-
tions, the  Author  and  his  mediumistic  friends  have  fre-
quently remarked  the  difterent  shades  of  light  which  ema-
nated from  different  individuals  and  sometimes  attended
the  demonstrations  of  certain  spirits, — also  it  has  been  no-
ticed that  spirits  attached  great  importance  to  colors,  and
taught  that  in  the  spheres,  where  all  things  assume  mo?al
correspondences  to  physical  objects,  spirits  were  compelled
to  display  their  moral  qualities  and  states  of  progression
by  the  color  of  their  garments,  or  the  nature  of  the  flow-
ers, ornaments,  or  animal  representations,  with  which  they
were  surrounded.

The  reader  may  be  assured  there  is  a  magical  arcanum
in  color,  the  study  of  which  would  tend  to  promote  much
more  harmonious  arrangements  in  dress,  furniture,  and
physical  surroundings,  than  mankind  now  enjoys.

403

Of  Music — Noise — Words  and  Tones.

To  avoid  inflicting  on  our  readers  the  recitation  of  mathe-
matical principles  in  defining  the  difference  between  noise
and  music,  and  yet  to  account  for  their  effects  on  the
human  system,  we  lay  down  a  brief  summary  of  axiomatic
ideas  in  the  following  propositions.  Sound  is  an  impulse
communicated  from  one  body  to  another  and  transmitted
to  the  ear  through  waves  or  vibrations  in  the  air,  caused
by  the  original  impulse.  Many  definitions  have  been  ren-
dered to  show  the  difterence  produced  upon  the  ear  by
noise  and  music,  but  we  may  say  in  brief  that,  when  the
waves  of  air  set  in  motion  by  an  original  impulse  are
unequal  in  length,  one  wave  being  short  and  angular,
another  long  and  scarcely  curved,  and  the  whole  mass  of
vibratory  element  is  moved  in  unequal  undulations,  the
result  to  the  ear  is  noise.

When  the  impulse  given  comnmnicates  to  the  air  a  per-
fectly regular  series  of  undulations,  each  wave  assuming
the  same  curve  and  length,  the  result  on  the  ear  is  music.
The  effect  of  these  different  motions  on  the  mind,  need
not  be  discussed  here.  To  all  civilized  nations,  and,  with
a  few  rare  exceptions  to  every  individual,  the  difterence  in
eftect  is  analogous  to  pain  and  pleasure  ;  for,  although  there
are  some  few  individuals  who  do  not  know  noise  from
music,  as  a  general  rule  the  appreciation  of  the  difference
between  these  two  varieties  of  sound,  and  their  effects
upon  the  taste  of  communities,  forms  a  good  gauge  of
national  civilization.

The  lower  a  people  may  be  sunk  in  the  scale  of  *barbar-
ism,  the  greater  is  their  predilection  for  noise  and  general
insensibility  to  music ;  whilst  the  higher  the  status  of  civ-
ilization ranges,  the  greater  is  the  perfection  to  which  the
cultivation  of  music  attains.

It  has  been  shown  in  the  magical  history  of  nations,

404

that  sounds  are  amongst  the  most  potential  means  of  ex-
citing the  ecstatic  afflatus.  The  effects  of  sound  are  both
physical  and  mental.

It  is  of  course  generally  understood  that, concussions
violent  enough  to  create  loud  sounds — such  as  thunder,
explosions,  the  firing  of  artillery,  heavy  blows,  etc.,  etc. —
will  not  only  cause  powerful  vibrations  in  all  surrounding-
objects,  but  frequently  break,  displace,  or  even  totally  de-
stroy them.  Witness  the  effect  on  houses  shattered'  by
explosions  transpiring  at  considerable  distances,  windows
broken,  and  furniture  thrown  down  b}'  the  firing  of  artil-
lery, or  other  concussive  disturbances  of  the  atmosphere.
Similar  vibrations  may  be  felt,  though  in  a  far  less  degree,
by  the  sound  of  a  powerful  organ,  or  a  mass  of  wind  in-
struments.

If  such  effects  can  operate  on  the  comparatively  unyield-
ing tissues  of  inanimate  substances,  may  we  not  reasonably
expect  that  analogous  motions  must  be  transpiring  within
our  own  highly  strung  and  vibratory  organisms  ?  Is  it  not
certain  in  fact,  that  the  elastic  fibres  of  the  human  sys-
tem— especially  the  delicate  medullary  tissues  of  the  nerves
— must  quiver  and  respond  to  every  tone  that  vibrates
through  the  air,  whether  it  be  soft  or  loud,  musical  or  simply
noisy  ?  The  correspondential  effects  on  the  mind  cannot
be  questioned,  and  it  is  doubtless  from  the  combination  of
mental  and  physical  influences  that  we  see  how  distracting
clamors,  especially  if  long  continued,  will  induce  catalepsy,
convulsion,  spasm,  or  even  frenzy.

The  effects  of  music,  on  the  contrary,  are  delightful  and
exalting.  To  susceptible  and  highly  cultivated  natures,
music  is  capable  of  awakening  every  emotion  of  the  human
soul,  from  the  most  rapt  devotion  to  the  wildest  exhilara-
tion, from  the  most  passionate  grief  to  the  excess  of  mirth-
fulness.

405

Music  pierces,  penetrates,  thrills,  never  shocks.  It
plays  along  the  fibres  of  the  nerves,  quickens  the  pulse,
stimulates  the  circulation,  exalts  the  mind,  alters  even  the
molecular  arrangement  of  the  physical  atoms,  and  partly
by  the  harmonious  order  into  which  it  resolves  the  layers  of
atmosphere,  partly  by  its  entrancing  effects  upon  the  soul,
it  fills  the  listener  with  a  divine  magnetism,  and,  for  the
time  being,  translates  him  into  a  superior  condition.

The  Rosicrucians'  theory  of  music  is  that —

"  The  whole  world  is  a  musical  instrument,  a  chromatic,  sensible  instrument;
life  a  chromatic  and  diatonic  scale  of  musical  tones.  The  axis  or  pole  of  the  ce-
lestial world  is  intersected  by  the  spiritual  sun,  or  centre  of  sentient  being,  and
from  thence  stream  forth  rays  of  light,  which,  divided,  form  color,  which,  by  mo-
tion, give  off  t(mes  of  music,  filling  the  universe  with  celestial  sound.  Every  man
has  a  spark  or  microcosmic  sun  in  his  own  being,  and  thus  microcosmically  dif-
fuses rays  of  light,  and  tones,  broken  by  the  incoherencies  of  matter  'tis  true,  but
still  in  essence,  musical  tones.  Earthly  music  is  the  faintest  tradition  of  the
angelic  state.     It  remains  in  the  mind  of  man  as  the  dream  of  a  lost  paradise.

'•  Music  is  yet  master  of  man's  emotions,  and  therefore  of  man.  Heavenly
music  is  produced  from  impact  upon  the  paths  of  planets,  which  stand  as  chords
or  strings  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  hence  light  and  heat,  travelling  between  solar
centres  and  circumferences,  waken  tones,  notes,  chords,  the  sum  of  which  is
ethereal  music."

''Thus  is  earthly  music  a  relic,  a  dream,  a  memory  of  heaven,  an  efflux  from  the
motion  of  planetary  bodies,  a  celestial  speech,  whose  dim  echoes  are  heard  and
imitated  on  earth,  and  thus  are  light  and  tone,  colors  and  music,  inextricably
combined  by  one  producing  cause."

If  the  eyes  of  mortals  could  be  opened  to  behold  the
conditions  of  the  atmosphere  during  the  yells,  shrieks  and
cries  of  a  party  of  howling  dervishes,  the  beating  of  "  tom-
toms "  (drums),  or  crashing  cymbals  in  the  mantic  rites  of
a  party  of  Siberian  Schamans,  Lapps,  or  Thibetian  Lamas,
they  would  see  the  air  tossed  and  torn  into  angular  curves,
jagged  prominences,  literally  driven  about  into  crooked
turns  and  sharp  corners.  This  is  no  exaggeration,  no
mere  fiight  of  a  mystic's  fancy.  If  we  cannot  see  it,  the
science  of  acoustics  assures  us  it  must  be  so,  and  this  ac-
counts for  the  wild  and  mantic  character  of  barbaric  spirit-

/^

406

ism,  induced,  as  it  so  often  is,  by  noise.  On  the  other
hand,  the  same  clairvoyant  vision  would  behold  the  atmos-
phere vibrating  to  fine  music,  full  of  regular  undulating
lines,  every  curve,  swell  and  depression  equal  throughout
the  whole  length  of  the  waves,  and  though  the  lines  might
vary,  each  would  bear  such  harmonious  and  graceful  rela-
tions to  the  other,  that  the  whole  atmosphere  would  appear
as  an  exquisite  landscape ;  blended  lights  and  shadows
wonderfully  graduated  into  an  ocean  of  billowy  air,  where
not  a  single  wave  presented  an  angular,  inharmonious,  or
irregular  curve.  And  these  delightfully  organized  strata
of  atmospheres  impinge  upon  the  physical  forms  of  the
listeners,  penetrate  the  very  marrow  in  the  bone,  and  rear-
range the  very  structure  of  every  fibre  in  the  system.
Can  the  reader  now  understand  the  mysteries  of  snake-
charming  by  the  sweet  and  monotonous  effect  of  certain
musical  instruments  I — Why,  moreover,  nearly  every  beast
and  bird  partakes  of  the  spell  which  music  imparts  7

We  could  fill  a  volume  with  narratives  of  the  potent  ef-
fects of  music  upon  the  animal  kingdom,  and  the  variety  of
those  effects  upon  different  creatures,  under  the  influence
of  different  tones.     The  reader  too,  may  understand  why
the  distracting  clamors  of  the  battle-field,  the  bombard-
ment of  a  city,  the  dances  and  whoops  of  the  red  Indians,
the  shouts  and  howls  of  Dervishes,  and  other  ecstatics  of  low  ,
grades,  summon  from  the  crypts  of  the  earth  embryotic  [
Elementaries,  and  fire  the  brains  of  listening  mortals  with  '
madness  or  ecstasy.  The  spells  of  enchantment,  fascination,
delight,  health,  and  harmony,  that  sweet  music  produces,
no  language  can  describe  ;  but  our  readers  need  question
no  more  its  uses  in  sacred    services,  solemn  invocations,
spirit  circles,  or  any  scenes  where  it  is  desirable  to  lift  a
mortal  up  to  heaven,  and  draw  an  angel  down.

407

Of  Stones,  Herbs,  Flowers,  Fumiga^tions,  Crystals,
Spells,  Amulets,  and  Talismans.

Stones  of  everj  kind  emit  those  magnetic  rays,  which
measurably  serve  to  entrance  those  who  gaze  steadily  upon
their  polished  surfaces,  but  plants  are  all  aromal,  and  give
off  either  in  perfume,  or  essence,  the  finest  particles  of  their
life  at  every  instant  that  they  subsist.  When  pressed,  or
crushed,  this  aroma  is  more  readily  liberated,  and  when
the  juice  of  the  plant  is  extracted  and  drank,  its  quality
enters  with  still  more  potency  into  the  system.

Some  of  the  virtues  of  drugs  and  minerals  are  to  be  found
in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  but  the  possibility  of  extracting
from  both  departments  of  nature  narcotics  and  stimulants,
and  the  universal  use  to  which  they  have  been  applied  in  the
practice  of  ancient  magic,  has  already  been  fully  shown.
It  is  also  well  known  that  the  Asiatics  and  Orientals  of  the
present  day,  together  with  a  larger  number  of  Europeans
than  is  generally  supposed,  resort  to  the  use  of  hasheesh,
opium,  soma  drink,  and  other  pernicious  narcotics,  as  tem-
porary stimulants,  or  to  induce  ecstasy  and  the  trance  con-
dition. The  mediaeval  mystics,  and  even  the  poor  ignorant
beings  accused  of  witchcraft,  resorted  still  more  frequently
to  unguents  and  fumigations.  The  latter  were  invariably
used  in  all  magical  rites,  they  being  deemed  efficacious  in
gratifying  the  spirits  summoned,  also  in  preparing  the
atmosphere  for  their  demonstrations  no  less  than  in  ex-
erting an  influence  upon  the  invocants,  by  stupefying  or
stimulating  the  senses.

In  the  Magical  elements  of  Peter  d'Abano,  the  proper
fumigations  for  different  days  and  seasons  are  fully  set  forth  ;
but,  as  a  general  rule,  magical  rites  are  best  promoted  by
the  burning  of  fragrant  herbs,  aromatic  spices,  ambergris,
frankincense,  fine  incense,  etc.,  etc.

To  those  who  are  curious  to  know   the  composition  of

^.  408

the  famous  '*  Witch  Salve,"  or  unguent,  with  which  it  was
supposed — in  the  middle  ages — those  who  designed  to  attend
the  "  Witches^  Sabbaths,"  must  anoint  tKeir  bodies  in  order
to  facilitate  their  transport  through  the  air  on  "  broom-
stick "  steeds,  ^'  seive  "  chariots  or  more  properly  speaking,
on  the  wings  of  imagimtion  distorted  hy  the  use  of  powerful
narcotics^  we  may  give  on  the  authority  of  Grimm,  Horst,
Van^  Helmont,  and  others,  the  following  list  of  medica-
ments :

The  deadly  nightshade,  the  napellas,  fox  glove,  betony
root,  sweet  fern,  ground  ivy,  origanum,  toad  stool  and
fungi  of  various  kinds  pounded  up  ;  mandrake,  gall  apple,
savin,  vervain,  sorrel  and  fennel  seeds.  These  and  other
herbs  of  a  narcotic,  or  deadly  character,  were  bruised  and
pressed  into  unguents,  or  distilled  into  drinks  with  all  man-
ner of  formidable  rites,  spells  and  incantations.

Sticks  and  staffs  were  to  be  made  from  the  hazel  tree,
and  fern  seed  was  always  carried  around  the  person.  A
favorite  nostrum  of  the  witches  by  way  of  food,  was  boiled
chestnuts  and  sorrel ;  also,  they  used  ointments  made  from
the  oil  of  hemlock,  aconite,  henbane,  and  four  other  herbs
selected  from  the  above  choice  repertoire.

As  to  the  spells,  charms  and  talismans  most  popular  in
the  processes  of  Witchcraft,  our  pen  would  fail  even  to
catalogue  their  number,  much  less  to  attempt  a  description
of  their  absurd  and  meaningless  character.

We  may  mention  one  custom  very  generally  adopted
and  supposed  to  be  peculiarly  effective  in  working  harm  to
distant  persons.  This  was  done  by  constructing  an  image,
as  nearly  resembling  the  person  of  the  victim  as  possible.
It  was  assumed  that,  as  this  image  was  slowly  roasted  be-
fore a  fire,  or  pierced  with  pins,  knives  or  other  sharp  instru-
ments, corresponding  pains  and  sicknesses  would  be  induced
in  the  subject  of  the  fiendish  rite,  an'd  even  death  could
be  thus  procured.

409

To  injure  the  fields,  crops  or  cattle  of  an  enemy,  dust
grains  or  sharp  instruments  were  cast  into  the  air,  accom-
panied by  muttered  curses  and  incantations.  Sometimes
these  foul  performers  buried  insects,  toads,  fruit  or  other
objects  for  the  purposes  of  evil  enchantment ;  but  in  what-
ever rites  they  were  employed,  they  never  failed  to  recite
spells  or  mutter  curses,  the  variety  of  which  would  fill  a
library,  but  their  potency  as  methods  of  projecting  their
psychological  intention  on  their  victims  may  easily  be  under-
stood.

At  this  point  our  readers  will  exclaim,  "  Do  you  then
attribute  potency  to  the  will  of  a  poor  old  half-crazed  be-
ing who  mutters  spells  over  a  cauldron  of  stewed  toads,  or
fricassied  lizards?  Can  the  will  of  such  living  mummies
hurt  cattle,  blight  corn-fields,  or  sap  the  life  juices  of  good
and  true  men  removed  from  these  scenes  of  diablerie  by
great  distances  7"

To  this  we  answer  assuredly  in  the  affirmative.  It  mat-
ters not  whether  the  potency  proceed  from  male  or  female,
old  or  young,  rich  or  poor.

The  bad  alone  will  attempt  such  wickedness,  but  the
true  potency  is  will,  and  should  we  deny  the  possibilities
of  its  exercise  simply  to  gratify  the  prejudices  of  those
who  have  made  no  study  of  psychological  powers,  we
should  falsify  a  vast  mass  of  historical  testimony,  the
authoritative  experience  and  opinion  of  all  ages,  and  the
life-long  personal  testimony  of  the  Author's  own  senses,
which  have  borne  witness  to  thousands  of  instances  wherein
the  will  operated  upon  individuals  removed  by  long  dis-
tances from  the  source  of  the  intiuence.

Save  and  except  the  physical  and  direct  effects  produced
upon  the  system  by  unguents,  drugs,  herbs,  sounds,  and
vapors,  all  the  force  of  Witchcraft  lay  in  the  Will  which
by  mere  superstitious  faith  in  the  idle  rites  performed,  be-

410

came  projected  with  irresistible  power   upon   the  victim
against  whom  it  was  directed.

We  have  already  intimated  that  mischievous  Elementa-
ries  who  have  not  yet  risen  into  the  spheres  of  good,  are
ever  ready  to  respond  to  the  summons  of  natures  similar
to  their  own,  yet  higher  in  the  scale  of  creation  than
themselves.  We  repeat  that  these  beings  are  potent  in
the  particular  realm  to  which  they  belong,  and  can  help
wicked  mortals  in  wicked  purposes.  Remember  too  the
universal  laws  of  sympathy  that  bind  up  all  nature,  ani-
mate and  inanimate,  into  one  vast  chain  of  interdependen-
cies,  and  then  cease  to  wonder  why  the  lower  creatures
can  receive  ban  or  blessing  from  their  sovereign  ruler  man.

MACROCOSMOs.     /  \     Dragoiishead.

Dragon's  tail.  \     /     microcosmos.

Man,  the  Microcosm  of  the  Utiivcrse.

We  have  already  dwelt  at  great  length  on  the  connection
between  the  planetary  system  and  man.  The  profoundest
depths  of  occult  philosophy  derive  their  basis  from  this
correspondence.  The  Ancient  Mysteries,  the  Ancient  and
Modern  Free  Masons,  the  best  philosophers  of  Greece  and
Germany,  the  Cabalists,  and  in  a  word,  the  Metaphysicians
of  all  ages,  teach  that  man  is  the  Microcosm  of  being,  as
God,  Angels,  and  the  upper  world,  form  the  Macrocosm.
The  poorest  of  all  literature,  the  penny  almanack,  cele-

411

brates  this  wonderful  correspondence  in  its  zodiacal  signs
marked  in  their  several  relations  to  the  human  body.  As
an  illustration  of  this  idea,  take  the  following  few  lines  of
Rosicrucian  doctrine  explanatory  of  the  sketch  given  on
the  preceding  page.

''The  Rosicruciau  Cabala  teaches  that  the  three  great  worlds  above,  namely — the
Enipyraeum,  ^therpeum,  and  Elementary  regions  have  their  copies  in  the  three
points  of  the  body  of  man  ;  that  his  head  answers  to  the  first,  his  breast  or  heart
to  the  second,  and  his  ventral  regions  to  the  third.  In  the  head  rests  the  intellect
or  the  magnetism  of  the  assenting  judgment ;  in  his  heart  is  the  conscience  or
emotional  faculty,  in  the  umbilical  regions  reside  the  animal  and  sensuous  facul-
ties.''   "  Thus  man  bears  in  his  body  the  picture  of  the  Triune.     Reason

is  the  head,  feeling  the  breast,  and  the  mechanical  means  of  reason  and  feeling  is

the   epigastric  centre." ''  The  invisible  magnetic  geometrical  latitudes  of

these  three  vital  points,  forms  the  triune  microcosm  which  is  a  copy  of  the  macro-
cosm or  Supreme  Archetype  of  the  Heavens."

We  only  recall  in  these  passages  the  comprehensive  idea
of  an  universal  sympathy  in  nature  which  compels  the  re-
echo of  heavenly  sounds  throughout  the  spaces  of  earth  ; —
which  connects  the  scenes,  events,  and  destinies  played  out
upon  the  stage  of  earth, with  the  grander  dramas  of  eter-
nity performed  by  blazing  suns,  and  flashing  comets — which
places  everything  in  this  world  in  sympathetic  subjection
to  man,  every  human  being  in  sympathetic  relations  one  to
the  other,  and  all  to  God  and  Angels.

In  the  use  of  spells,  charms,  amulets,  consecrated  names
and  words,  can  we  assign  virtue  to  such  objects  ?  No  more
than  did  Cornelius  Agrippa  in  the  many  passages  of  pro-
test he  wrote  against  this  idea,  one  of  which  we  have
quoted.  Some  magnetic  virtues,  some  narcotic  essences,
and  some  sublunary  as  well  as  Astral  influences,  inhere  in
every  plant  that  grows,  on  every  stone  beneath  our  feet ;
yet  we  tread  on  Cabalistic  stones,  pluck  Cabalistic  plants,
aye,  and  make  use  of  Cabalistic  words  every  day,  and—
nothing  comes  of  it !

Our  poor  little  tortured  school  children  painfully  spell
out  the  atvful  name  of  Jehovah,  and  many  another   unpro-

412

noimcable  and  • 'incommunicable  name,"  day  by  day,  and  yet
the  earth  quakes  not — rocks  do  not  rend  apart,  or  demons
seize  upon  and  strangle  out  of  life  the  unconscious  little
magicians,  after  the  fashion  in  which  Cornelius  Agrippa's
rash  student  was  said  to  have  perished.  Solomon's  Seal
and  the  Crux  Ansata  face  us  in  masonic  signs,  patentees'
trade-marks,  and  the  humblest  domestic  implements  every
hour,  and  yet  no  white-robed  ''  splendors"  from  the  Empy-
rean heights  of  their  dwelling  places,  flash  before  our  au-
dacious eyes  in  majestic  rebuke  of  our  impiety.  It  is  in
the  manner  of  using  the  fiery  soul  spirit  put  into  the
witches'  broth,  the  thrice  distilled  dew  of  hatred  with  which
the  puppets  are  lubricated,  the  strong  passion  of  supplica-
tion addressed  to  the  spirits  of  evil,  that  evil  is  wrought
upon  enemies.

That  planets  and  planetary  spirits  rule  over  hours,
days,  months,  and  years,  that  the  scheme  of  life  works  be-
neath their  influence,  and  shapes  our  destiny  according  to
fixed  laws,  is  just  as  certain  as  that  the  bloom  of  the  flowers
is  transmitted  from  soil  and  seed  by  the  chemistry  of  the
sunbeam,  while  the  same  great  alchemist  converts  the  slime
of  the  stagnant  pond  into  the  supreme  purity  and  fragrance
of  the  lily.  But  all  things  in  heaven,  and  all  things  above
the  grade  of  man,  work  together  for  good,  and  even  when
sorrow  and  misfortune  befall  us,  good  will  come  of  it  if  we
place  ourselves  in  harmony  with  heaven  by  good  in  our
own  lives  and  purposes.

Ban,  cursing,  evil  wishes,  evil  deeds,  are  in  direct  an-
tagonism to  God  and  heaven,  angels,  and  all  that  is  above
us.  By  their  revulsive  action  we  precipitate  ourselves  out
of  the  sphere  of  good,  turn  our  backs  on  heaven,  throw  ofi"
the  protection  of  angels,  and  hurl  ourselves  down,  down
into  the  abysses  of  rudimental  being,  into  the  hands  of  evil,
cruel,  remorseless  existences,  who  are  all  the  stronger  be-

413

cause  they  are  of  the  earth  sphere  earthy,  nearer  to  man
in  his  evil  and  wickedness  than  he  is  to  any  beings  above
hitn,  and  prompt  to  perform  any  mischief  that  is  within
the  limits  of  their  narrow  yet  powerful  domain  of  being.
Yet  it  will  be  urged,  "  all  women  called  witches  were  not
evil  in  design,  yet,  like  Jane  Brooks,  they  may  be  power-
ful as  unconscious  magnetizers ;  neither  is  all  magic  black
magic,  or  evil  in  intent,  and  injurious  in  effect."  That  is
true ;  but  as  the  strength  of  will  tends  downward,  its
potency  is  increased  by  the  communion  of  low,  undevel-
oped human  spirits,  and  the  aid  of  Elementaries.

Bright  planetary  spirits,  and  good,  wise  angel  friends,
always  counsel  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  and  recom-

Floating  a  Witch.

mend  the  achievement  of  spiritual  power  and  spiritual
knowledge,  principally  as  a  means  of  elevating  the  soul,
giving  it  new  powers  for  good,  and  new  attributes  of  bless-
ing. In  communion  with  those  bright  beings,  it  will  ever
be  found  that  their  power  and  their  will  is  not  only  potent
for  good,  but  more  potent  than  that  of  man's.  Human
will  then  can  only  be  exercised  in  the  choice  of  the  soul
between  lower  and  higher  existences,  on  the  forces  of
nature,  relations  with  our  fellow  man,  and  over  beings
lower  than  earth.

414

When  we  operate  with  these  lower  existences,  we  should
endeavor  to  rule  them  for  good.  When  with  nature,  to
wrest  her  secrets  from  her,  only  to  use  again  for  good,  and
with  our  fellow  men  for  the  same  aim.  Then  will  God
and  angels,  heaven  and  all  the  heavenly  host  be  with  us,
and  magic  in  that  spirit  becomes  man's  triumph  over
matter,  and  the  exaltation  of  his  soul  to  the  sphere  of
Godhead.

SUPPLEMENT  TO  SECTION  XXI.

The  Magic  Mirror^  its  comjposition  hy  Cahagnet — Commu-
nication from  a  Planetary  Spirit — Foronulce  of  Nostra-
damus— Call  and  discharge  for  Spirits  of  the  Crystal  or
Mirror.

The  following  mode  of  preparing  and  using  a  Magic
Mirror,  is  recommended  by  Alphonse  Cahagnet^  author  of
the  Celestial  Telegraphy  and,  as  the  methods  prescribed  are
simple,  and  the  results  obtained  are  generally  efficacious,
they  are  submitted  to  the  reader  in  the  words  of  Cahagnet
himself :

Magic  Mirror.

"  I  PROMISED  not  to  reserve  to  myself  anything  1  had
learned  from  spirits  ;  I  will  keep  my  word  by  giving  the
secret  of  the  magic  mirror,  revealed  to  me  by  the  Spirit
of  Swedenborg,  who  himself,  possessed  one,  and  of  which
I  have  already  spoken.  I  made  two  in  the  way  recom-
mended to  me,  one  of  which  I  presented  to  my  friend  M.
Renard,  who  after  several  experiments,  gave  a  favorable
report  of  it ;  mine  was  equally  good.  This  is  how  we  should
go  to  work  :  Procure  a  piece  of  glass  as  fine  as  possible,  cut
it  the  required  size,  place  it  over  a  slow  fire,  at  the  same
time  dissolving  some  very  fine  black  lead  in  a  small  quantity

415

of  pure  oil  to  give  it  the  consistence  of  a  liquid  pomade,
which  may  easily  be  spread  over  the  glass  when  well  diluted.

^'-  The  glass  being  hot,  incline  it  on  both  sides,  in  order
that  the  mixture  may  spread  of  itself  all  over  alike  ;  then,
the  glass  being  placed  on  something  quite  straight  and
tiat,  let  the  mixture  dry  without  disturbing  it;  in  a  few
days  it  will  become  as  hard  as  pewter,  presenting  a  very
fine  dark  polish  ;  put  your  glass  in  a  frame,  and  after  well
wiping  its  surface,  hang  it  up  on  a  wall,  as  you  would  a
looking-glass,  but  always  in  a  false  light.  Place  the  per-
son who  desires  to  see  a  spirit,  or  a  scene  before  this  mir-
ror, station  yourself  behind  him,  fixing  your  eyes  steadily
on  the  hinder  part  of  the  brain,  and  summon  the  spirit  in
a  loud  voice  in  the  name  of  God,  in  a  manner  imposing  to
the  individual  looking  in  the  mirror.

"  It  may  be  naturallj^  supposed  that  this  kind  of  exper-
iment requires  certain  conditions,  the  first  of  which  is   to

Shew  Stone  of  Dr.  Dee.

Frotn  the  orlijimd  ht  the  British  Museum.

find  an  individual  endowed  with  this  kind  of  vision.  Noth-
ing is  general  in  psychological  facts.  There  was  much
tatk  at  one  time  of  the  magic  mirror  of  Dr.  Dee,  which
was  sold,  in  1842,  among  the  curiosities  in  the  possession
of  Horace  Walpole,  at  Strawberry  Hill,  lor  the  enormous
sum  of  three  hundred  and  twenty-six  francs.  It  was  snn-
ply  a  bit  of  sea-coal,  perfectly  polished,  cut  in  a  circular
form,  with  a  handle.  This  curiosity  formerly  figured  ni
the  cabinet  of  the  Earl  of  Peterborough.     In  the  catalogue

416

it  was  thus  described  :  '  A  black  stone,  by  means  of  which
Doctor  Dee  evoked  spirits.'  It  passed  from  the  hands  of
the  earl  into  those  of  Lady  Elizabeth  Germaine,  then  be-
came the  property  of  John,  last  duke  of  Argyll,  whose
grandson,  Lord  Campbell,  presented  it  to  Walpole.  The
author  of  the  '  Theatrum  Chemicum,'  Elias  Ashmole,
speaks  of  the  same  mirror  in  the  following  terms :

''  '  By  the  aid  of  this  magic  stone,  we  can  see  whatever
persons  we  desire,  no  matter  in  what  part  of  the  world  they
be,  and  were  they  hidden  in  the  most  retired  apartments,
or  even  in  the  caverns  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth/      John

Dr.  JJce—f'roiH  a  rare  jn-iut.

Dee,  born  in  London,  in  1527,  was  the  son  of  a  wine-mer-
chant ;  he  studied  the  sciences  with  success,  and  devoted
himself,  at  an  early  period,  to  judicial  astrology  ;  Queen
Elizabeth  took  him  under  her  protection  ;  he  composed
several  useful  works,  employed  much  of  his  time  in  the
science  of  magic,  conjured  spirits,  made  predictions,  and
beheld  the  invisible  ;  when  he  had  discovered  his  mirror
he  returned  thanksgivings  to  God.  He  was  occupied  during
his  whole  life  in  the  search  for  the  philosopher's  stone,  and
died  m  London  at  the  age  of  eighty -four,  in  a  state  of  ab-
ject poverty.

"  The  Count  de  Laborde  brought  us  a  somewhat  similar
secret  from  Egypt.  The  Baron  Dupotet  communicated  a
like  one  to  his  subscribers,  in  his  Journal  dc  3fagneHsme  ;  one

417

is  much  more  simplified  than  the  other,  and  succeeds
equally  as  well.  M.  de  Laborde  evokes ;  makes  use  of  per-
fumes and  stands  in  need  of  the  co-operation  of  spirits.  M.
Dupotet  seems  only  to  employ  the  magnetism  of  thought.
Cagliostro  also  employed  a  magnetism  but  little  suspected,
by  placing  one  hand  on  the  head  of  his  pupils.  The  Sor-
cerers of  our  country  places  proceed  in  like  manner,  with
the  first  mirror  met  with,  imploring  the  assistance  of  the
spirits  that  facilitate  such  experiments.

"  M.  de  Laborde  makes  use  of  a  brilliant  ink  which  he
puts  in  the  hollow  of  the  looker's  hand,  and  stimulates  his
nervous  system  by  perfumes.  M.  Dupotet  makes  use  of  a
piece  of  coal  with  which  he  describes  a  circle  on  the  floor
with  the  intention  of  making  perceptible  to  the  person
operated  upon,  such  picture  as  the  latter  desires ;  he
keeps  the  subject  inclined  for  this  experiment  by  thought.
Sorcerers  have  their  reputation,  which  is  of  great  assist-
ance to  them.  Certain  prepossessions  against  such  or  such
a  person  suspected  of  theft  or  aught  else,  their  imposing
air,  their  supplication  to  spirits  without  knowing  positively
the  meaning  of  what  they  say,  this  suffices,  and  they
operate !

"  Leon,  of  whom  I  have  spoken,  followed  in  their  steps.
Prayer,  faith,  and  a  disposition  of  the  visual  organs  facili-
tated his  experiments.  Cagliostro,  preceded  by  his  repu-
tation as  an  incomprehensible  man,  was  often  successful  in
consequence  of  the  tact  he  displayed  in  selecting  his
pupils,  the  occult  magnetism  he  employed,  etc. ;  but  if  I
ask  Messrs.  de  Laborde,  Dupotet,  Cagliostro,  the  sorcerers,
Leon  and  others,  whether  they  themselves  saw  in  their  mir-
rors or  reflecting  body,  they  ivill  reply  no  ;  therefore  there
must  be  a  disposition  for  this  kind  of  experiment ;  we  must
be  influenced  by  an  imposing  display,  an  occult  magnetism,
or  the  aid  of  invocations   and  perfumes.      Wherefore,   in

418

order  to  profit  by  my  mirror,  T  would  advise  the  ceremony
to  be  performed  with  a  certain  dignity,  and  to  have  re-
course only  to  what  may  acton  the  imagination  or  nerves,
as  much  by  a  normal  or  spiritual  magnetism  as  by  the
assistance  of  perfumes.  All  those  that  bear  or  shed  a
sweet,  pleasant  smell,  are  suitable  for  the  good  spirits ;
such  as  incense,  musk,  gum-lac,  etc.  ;  and  for  evil  spirits,
the  seeds  of  henbane,  hemp,  belladonna,  anise,  or  corian-
der, etc.  Each  seeks  his  own  atmosphere,  or  one  akin  to
it ;  but,  above  all,  shun  the  assistance  of  evil  spirits.  Let
the  spirit  of  justice,  discretion,  humanity,  predominate  in
you  ;  or  otherwise,  woe  betide  you !

"  It  will  not,  perhaps,  be  comprehended  why  I  should
recommend  shunning  the  invocation  of  evil  spirits,  and  yet
make  known  the  perfumes  they  delight  in.  I  presume
that  I  shall  be  thought  sufficiently  consistent  to  speak  here
only  of  the  apparitions  we  desire  to  obtain,  on  the  score
of  thefts,  or  other  crimes,  committed  to  your  prejudice.
It  is  the  spirits  of  such  culprits  who  will  obey  your  com-
mand to  present  themselves,  and  seek  the  nauseous  smell
of  these  perfumes.  You  have  nothing  to  fear  from  them,
since,  on  the  contrary,  they  have  everything  to  fear  from
you.  What  I  recommend  you  to  avoid,  when  demanding
apparitions  of  those  you  desire  to  see  is  pronouncing
words,  the  meaning  of  which  is  unknown  to  you,  that
invite  baneful  spirits  to  your  assistance.  This  is  true
Magic."  ....

When  M.  Cahagnet  informs  his  readers  that  the  distin-
guished operators  whose  experiences  he  cites  do  not  them-
selves see  aught  in  their  mirrors,  he  omits  to  add  that  the
assistance  of  one  predisposed  to  magnetic  seer  ship  is  essential,
in  fact  a  magnetized  subject  is  necessary  to  the  success  of
these  methods,  unless  the  operator  is  himself  a  Medium  or
Seer.     It  will  be  asked  by  the  intelligent  reader  if  a   Me-

419

dium  or  Seer  is  essential  to  the  success  of  experiments  by
the  mirror  or  crystal,  why  may  not  the  said  Medium  or
Seer  behold  in  vision,  and  without  the  aid  of  the  instru-
ments, all  he  desires  ?  To  this  we  answer  the  magnet-
ism of  the  operator,  the  psychological  influence  of  the
invocation  and  the  fixidity  of  the  gaze  riveted  upon  the
shining  surface  of  the  mirror  are  aids  to  lucidity — though
not  its  primal  source — but  our  opinions  on  the  subject  of
Magic  and  natural  mediumship  have  already  been  given
in  detail  and  we  only  add  accounts  of  the  methods  recom-
mended and  practiced  by  celebrated  modern  Experts  to
supplement  our  views  of  ancient — with  modern  magic.
For  this  purpose  we  subjoin  the  following  communication
given  to  a  successful  Adept  of  the  present  generation  by  a
Planetary  spirit — the  guardian  of  his  mirror — when  ques-
tioned concerning  the  best  method  of  divination,  also  of
receiving  communications  from  spirits.  The  words  ap-
peared on  the  mirror  inscribed  therein  by  the  spirit,  and
were  read  off  by  the  Adept.

"  The  best  and  most  ancient  method  of  divination  was  by  the  Crystal,  or  Urim
and  Thummim.

''Its  origin  was  divine,  and  the  inspiration,  visions  and  communications  received
through  this  source,  when  man  was  pure  and  holy,  were  free  from  all  human
agencv,  wholly  divine.  The  use  of  the  crystal  in  modern  times  is  almost  as  potent
as  the  Urim  and  Thummim  of  the  Jews,  and  provided  it  is  in  the  hands  of  one
gifted  with  clear  sight,  its  revelations  are  infallible.

'^  Spirits  do  not  actually  appear  in  the  crystal,  but  the  seer  is  magnetically  as-
sisted to  look  through  its  pellucid  depths  into  the  spirit  world.  In  this  way  he
or  she  is  brought  in  such  near  contact  with  spirits  that  they  can  readily  converse
with  niortals."

Another  planetary  spirit,  questioned  on  |the  same  sub-
ject, said  :

"  Whenever  guardian  spirits,  or  angels  of  the  higher  orders  move  in  the  spirit
w(n-ld,  the  air  that  surrounds  them  is  cleared  of  everything  that  is,  in  any  degree,
more  gross  than  themselves.

"  Thus  if  an  atmospheric  spirit  meet  a  more  heavenly  spirit,  the  atmospheric
spirit  yields  to  the  pressure  of  the  air  that  surrounds  the  other,  and  retires  to  let
him  pass.     In  this  way  spirits  visit  the  atmosphere,  and  the  spheres  lower  than

420

their  own,  also  the  earth,  without  once  coining  in  contact  with  those  below  him,
unless  he  wishes  to  do  so.  Thus,  too,  when  he  is  '  called '  to  converse  with
human  beings,  the  Invocant's  thoughts,  or  rather  will,  immediately  reach  him,  and
he  appears  separating  and  sending  before  him  all  influences  less  angelical  than  his
own.

"  Guardian  spirits  and  angels  of  high  degree  are  only  seen  in  the  Urim  and
Thummim,  the  crystal  and  the  mirror,  the  other  modes  of  divining,  by  vessels  of
water,  by  circle  work,  by  shades,  by  bands,  or  black  fluids,  are  only  available  for
seeing  deceased  persons,  atmospheric  spirits,  wandering  spirits,  evil  or  undevel-
oped spirits."

Formula  of  Nostradamus  for  Crystal  Seeing.

Nostra  flfi  inns.

The  following  method,  especially  commendable  for  its
simplicity,  has  been  frequently  employed  with  success  in
magical  evocations  of  Planetary  or  other  spirits  by  Adepts
in  the  nineteenth  century.

It  is  selected  from  hundreds  of  others  in  the  author's
possession,  chiefly  from  the  perspicuity  of  its  wording,  and
the  absence  of  mystic  assumptions.

421

Its  composition  is  attributed  to  the  celebrated  Astrologer
and  Crystal  Seer,  Nostradamus.

Directions  for  Crystal  Seeing.

"  Having  procured  a  good,  clear  stone,  one  that  no  spirit
has  been  called  into  before,  the  Seer  must  determine  to  use
it  for  no  bad  purpose.  I  do  not  say  determine  to  use  it
only  for  good  purposes,  because  many  frivolous  and  trifling
things  might  occur  that  would  induce  one  to  use  it  for  the
knowledge  of  things  appertaining  to  the  world ;  but,  hav-
ing determined  to  use  it  for  no  bad  or  unholy  purpose,  he
should  dedicate  it  first  with  a  fervent  prayer  to  God.

"  Do  not  make  use  of  a  mediator,  but  firmly,  yet  humbly,
trust  that  God  will  put  you  in  possession  of  a  Guardian
Spirit  that  will  show  you  the  visions  you  may  thereafter
wish."

"•  Having  done  this,  inspect  the  Crystal,  and  before  ask-
ing to  see  any  vision,  ask  first  to  see  the  name  of  your
Guardian  Spirit  ;  having  done  this,  ask  to  see  him  ;  when
he  appears,  ask  him  to  give  you  any  advice  he  may  deem
fit  in  using  it.  Ask  him  to  name  the  days  and  hours  that
he  will  appear,  and  also  those  on  which  you  may  call  other
spirits.  Ask  him  to  become  the  Guardian  Spirit  of  your
Crystal  ;  to  prevent  any  evil  spirit  from  appearing,  and
to  give  you  timely  notice  of  anything  about  to  happen  to
you  that  you  may  prevent  it,  or  that  he  may  prevent  it

for  you."

''  This  done,  you  must  discharge  him.  He  should  not
be  kept  more  than  half  an  hour  at  the  first  meeting."

"  When  you  invoke  him  the  next  time,  exorcise  with  a
strong  and  determined  will  three  times  before  you  ask
him  any  questions;  if  at  those  three  times  he  does  not
vanish,  you  may  perfectly  rely  upon  him."

•'After  the  first  time  you  may  keep  him  as  long  as  it

422

may  suit  yours  and  his  convenience  ;  if  he  wishes  to  leave,
he  can  do  so  without  a  discharge  ;  hut  be  careful  that  you
always  use  a  discharge  after  having  finished  of  a  night."

^'  When  invoking  any  Atmospheric  Spirit,  or  a  Spirit  of
any  inferior  degree,  such  as  those  of  living  as  well  as  dead
people,  always  use  the  term  '  if  convenient  and  agree-
able,'etc. ;  or,  '  at  your  pleasure ;'  but  more  particularly
of  a  living  person ;  to  your  Guardian  Spirit,  or  a  Spirit  of
a  High  order,  it  is  not  necessary."

''But  above  all  do  not  use  it  in  any  way,  or  make  it
directly  or  indirectly  an  object  for  the  gaining  of  money.
It  may  appear  to  go  on  smoothly  for  a  few  times.  You
may  have  the  information  and  the  visions  you  wish  for  ;
but  in  the  end  the  consequences  are  lamentable,  and  they
come  sooner  or  later."

"  When  you  have  got  used  to  a  Crystal,  feel  confidence
in  it,  and  assured  in  many  ways  of  the  Truth  of  it,  then
you  can  use  a  Mirror,  which  is  by  a  very  great  deal  the
best."

"  The  Mirror  is  to  be  used  the  same  as  a  Crystal,  but
from  seeing  visions  so  large  and  life-like,  and  from  the  size
of  the  aperture  which  is  made  by  that  into  the  spiritual
world,  it  enables  you  to  come  more  closely  in  contact  with
the  spirits  you  address.

"  Of  all  modes  of  divining  this  is  the  easiest  and  the  best,
the  information  is  given  slowly  at  first,  then  gradually  more
and  more,  until  you  reach  the  grand  height  of  all  human
knowledge  upon  spiritual  matters,  until  you  know  as  much
as  the  human  mind  can  in  any  way  comprehend  of  what
passes  beyond  its  own  World."

The  Call.

"  In  the  name  of  the  Almighty  God,  in  whom  we  live
and  move  and  have  our  being,  I  humbly  beseech  the  Guar-
dian Spirit  of  this  Mirror  or  Crystal  to  appear.

423

''  When  appeared  you  can  ask  your  questions,  and  obtain
instructions  as  to  Calling — asking  when  he  will  allow  you
to  call  him  again,  and  fix  his  time  for  appearing."

For  a  Vision.

''  In  the  name,  etc.,  I  humbly  beseech  the  Spirit  of  this
Mirror  to  favor  me  with  a  Vision  that  will  interest  or  in-
struct us,  (or  favor  us  with  a  Vision  of  such  and  such  a
place  or  event,  etc.")

To  SEE  A  Person.

"  In  the  name,  etc.  Then  say,  R.  B.  be  pleased  to  ap-
pear in  this  Mirror  if  convenient  and  agreeable.  (Never
fail  in  this.")

Exorcism.

^'  In  the  name  of  the  Almighty  God,  in  whom  we  live
and  move  and  have  our  being,  I  dismiss  the  Spirit  now
visible  in  this  Mirror  if  he  is  not" — "  or  if  he  is  not  a  good
and  truthful  Spirit."

"  This  must  be  said  very  intently  and  strongly  three
times,  with  the  finger  upon  the  Crystal,  whenever  a  Spirit
is  from  any  cause  suspected."

Discharge.

'^  In  the  name,  etc.,  I  dismiss  from  this  Mirror  all  Spirits
that  may  have  appeared  therein,  and  the  peace  of  God  be
between  them  and  us  forever.'^

"  This  must  be  said  three  times  upon  closing,  even  if
Spirits  are  not  seen,  as  they  may  have  entered,  and  its
neglect  will  soon  spoil  the  Mirror  or  Crystal."

424

SECTION  XXII

Magnetism — Psyclwlogy — Clairvoyance^  their  connection
loith  Ancient  Magic — the  great  modern  Triad — Paracel-
sus—  Swedenhorg  and  Mesmer — Billot — Deleuze — Ca-
hagnety  etc.,  etc.

Those  who  would  write  the  true  history  of  Magnetism
mast  seek  materials  in  that  of  magic,  for  the  one  is  just  as
surely  a  record  of  the  other,  as  the  principles  of  Astrology
are  derived  from  the  science  of  Astronomy.

We  have  written  to  little  purpose  if  we  have  failed  to
impress  our  readers  with  the  fact  that  the  relations  be-
tween the  worlds  of  invisible  and  visible  being,  are  only
made  known  through  the  occult  forces  which  enable  the
visible  to  penetrate  into  the  realms  of  the  invisible — also
that  the  means  by  which  Spirits,  Angels,  and  even  Tute-
lary Deities,  communicate  with  mortals,  depend  wholly
upon  these  same  occult  forces.  /V\^hether  we  call  this  all-
pervading  motor  of  being,  "  divine  fire,  astral  light,  elec-
tricity, magnetism,  or  life,"  it  is,  as  we  have  before  shown,
the  eternal,  indestructible,  universal  and  infinite  element
of  Force.  Magic,  Deific  relations,  Angelic  ministry,  and
spirit  comnmnion,  are  but  applications  of  this  force  oper-
ating upon  man,  and  the  visible  Universe  is  only  a  magni-
h^ent  chess-board,  on  which  Force  is"playing^he  eternal
game~of  creatron  and  destruction,  with  Suns  and  Satellites
for  its  chess-men.  Whilst  it  becomes  evident  that  the
ancients  obtained  a  wide  control  over  this  stupendous
motor  power  by  long  study  and  painful  initiations,  the
men  of   the  middle   ages   in   a  great   measure    lost   the

425

clue  to  its  guidance,  and  the  apparitional  demonstra-
tions of  its  eternal  activity,  revealed  by  glimpses  from
the  worlds  of  invisible  being,  only  served  to  startle  them
into  superstitious  terror,  without  instructing  them  concern-
ing the  potential  agency  at  work.

Slowly  but  surely  the  veil  of  mystery  is  again  lifting,
and  again  men  see  the  Cyclops  at  work  forging  hemi-
spheres and  earths,  Angels  and  Men,  out  of  matter  and
spirit  by  ttije  motor  power  of  this  same  life-lightning.  The
I'evelation  now  so  slowly  yet  surely  stealing  in  upon  hu-
nian  consciousness,  has  not  been  heralded  by  the  roar  of
the  tempest,  the  boom  of  the  thunder,  or  the  throes  of  the
quaking  earth.

/    Like  the  still  small  voice  that  spoke  to  the  Prophet  Elijah
I   when  the  Lord  passed  hfj — it  has  come  in  the  low  whispers
I   of  two  new  sciences — the  science  of  life   or  magnetism,
/    and  the  science  of  soul  or  psychology.     Only  the  very
!    first  elements  of  these  two  magical  revelations  have  as  yet
dawned  upon  our  age,  but  they  have  shown  us  enough  to
be  assured  that  when  they  are  fully  understood  and  scien-
tifically applied,  they  will  afford  a  clue  to  all  the  mysteries
of  the  past,  and  enable  man  to  achieve  by  natural  law,
all  those  phenomenal  demonstrations  which  in  ancient  times
were  termed  miraculous.

^  To  trace  the  advent  of  these  phases  of  spiritual  science,
it  will  be  necessary  to  recall  the  bold  claims  of  Paracelsus
for  the  almost  miraculous  powers  of  the  magnet,  and
though  most  of  his  followers  were  dreamy  and  impractical
mystics,  who  failed  to  apply  the  comprehensive  ideas  which
he  suggested,  they  served  to  keep  alive  the  fiame  of  occult
fire  which  he  kindled,  until  the  appearance  on  the  scene  of
the  noble  and  illuminated  Swedenborg,  who  presented  as
a  Seer  of  unequalled  lucidity,  that  glorious  element  of  psy-
chological   science,  which    completely    supplemented  the

426

opinions  of  Paracelsus  concerning  magnetism.  It  remained
for  Anton  Mesmer  to  combine  these  two  supreme  soul
forces  into  their  correlative  relations,  and  demonstrate  by
the  practical  application  of  magnetism,  the  possibility  of
emulating  the  natural  endowments  of  Seership,  through  the
revelations  of  the  magnetic  sleep.

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  we  attribute  to  that  illus-
trious triad  of  modern  philosophers,  Paracelsus,  Sweden-
borg,  and  Mesmer,  any  new  discoveries  in  nature.

They  only  rekindled  lights  of  divine  science  which  ignor-
ance and  superstition  had  sought  to  stifle  if  they  could  not
extinguish  them.

Magnetism  the  life  principle  and  psychology  the  soul
power  of  the  Universe,  had  been  as  we  have  constantly
alleged,  the  motors  of  all  magical  operations,  and  the
knowledge  of  this  fact,  and  an  understanding  of  how  to  ap-
ply these  sublime  forces,  constituted  "  the  wisdom  of  the
Ancients,"  and  the  arcanum  of  all  their  mysteries.  But
the  master  spirit  of  antiquity  had  been  slain  by  the  destroy-
ing demons  of  time,  change,  and  revolution.  TJie^  Master^ s
word  was  lost,  and  for  ages  the  building  of  the  grand  Tein-
ple  of  Spiritual  Science  waited  for  the  key-stone  necessary
to  complete  the  arch  of  the  entrance  gate.  The-Alchemists
of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  perceived  the  exist-
ence of  a  "  philosopher's  stone,"  but  dared  not  declare  that
it  was  to  be  found  only  in  the  universal  life  force  of  mag-
netism. The  Rosicrucians  of  two  centuries  later  realized
the  true  nature  of  the  "  Elixir  Vitae"  in  the  imperishable
quality  of  Soul  essence,  but  how  could  they  venture  to  re-
veal to  a  scoffing,  yet  superstitious  age,  the  stupendous  fact
that  this  Soul  essence  could  be  controlled,  imparted,  and
utilized  even  without  the  agency  of  death  to  liberate  it  from
the  body? /It  was  because  Paracelsus  bravely  and  openly
taught  of  this  philosopher's  stone,  giving  its  true  name  as

427

Magnetism,  and  Swedenborg  as  fearlessly  displayed  the
/  latent  possibilities  of  spiritual  communion  and  Seership  in
j  the  human  Soul,  that  these  noble  philosophers  stand  con-
\  fessed  as  the  Fathers  of  the  new  Dispensation.

"The  position  of  Mesmer  in  this  great  unfold ment  is  not
less  triumphantly  defined,  but  that  the  momentous  revolu-
tion he  effected  in  spiritual  science  may  be  the  more  clearly
understood,  we  shall  proceed  to  give  a  brief  compendium
of  the  theorems  by  which  his  methods  of  practice  were
explained.

It  is  from  Dr.  Justinius  Kerner's  clear  yet  reverential
notices  of  the  life  of  this  inestimable  man,  so  little  appre-
ciated in  his  own  time,  so  ill  understood  even  yet  by  the
cold  world  upon  which  he  opened  up  such  a  realm  of  spir-
itual sunshine,  that  we  extract  the  following:  items,

Anton  Mesmer  first  saw  the  light  at  Weiler,  on  the
Rhine,  May  the  23d,  1734.  As  quite  a  young  child,  he  is
said  to  have  exhibited  a  remarkable  predilection  for  run-
ning water,  delighting  to  follow  up  the  course  of  streams
and  brooks  to  their  source,  and  frequently  neglecting  his
scholastic  duties  for  the  pleasure  of  hovering  on  the  banks
of  the  mighty  Rhine,  gathering  stones,  shells,  and  disport-
ing, with  a  strange  joy,  in  the  falling  rain,  the  wild  wind,
the  howling  tempest,  and  the  balmy  sunshine.  He  was
passionately  addicted  to  the  study  of  nature,  and  an  insatia-
ble yearning  led  him  to  explore  her  recesses,  even  at  an
age  when  his  childish  mind  failed  to  command  language
i  for  the  expression  of  the  great  thoughts  that  possessed
him.  During  his  initiatory  studies  for  the  medical  pro-
fession, he  noticed  and  his  associates  were  accustomed
to  comment  on  the  strange  manner  in  which  the  blood  of
a  patient  under  the  operation  of  the  knife  or  lancet  would
immediately  change  the  course  of  its  flow  as  soon  as  he
fjpproached.    Sometimes,  it  is  said,  it  would  cease  instantly,

428

and  where  the  flow  was  sluggish,  its  increase  would  be
immediately  promoted  by  his  touch,  receding  or  suspend-
ing altogether  when  he  withdrew.  A  thousand  petty  in-
cidents, commented  on  at  the  time  as  '  very  curious,'  but
subsequently  remembered  as  tokens  of  his  ever-present  and
spontaneous  magnetic  influence,  were  constantly  occurring
from  his  early  childhood  up  to  the  time  when  his  unerring
instincts  led  him  into  the  arcanum  of  his  great  discovery.
How  this  occurred  will  be  best  rendered  in  the  language
of  Kerner,  who  says:

'•  Duriug  his  litteen  years'  medical  practice  iu  Vienna,  he  came  upon  his  new
art  of  healing  through  observing  the  origin,  the  form,  and  the  career  of  diseases,
in  connection  with  the  great  changes  in  our  solar  system  and  the  universe ;  in
short,  in  connection  with  what  he  termed  Universal  Magnetism.  He  sought  for
this  magnetism  originally  in  electricity  and  subsequently  in  mineral  magnetism.
He  made  use  of  the  magnet  for  healing  at  first  in  1772,  led  to  this  discovery  by
the  astronomer,  Father  Hel ;  using  the  magnet,  however,  simply  as  a  conductor
from  his  own  organism  through  his  hands,  and  by  this  means  brought  forth
remarkable  cures.  A  year  subsequently,  experience  showed  him  that  without
touching  the  magnet,  through  his  hands  alone,  he  could  operate  much  more
powerfully  upon  the  human  organism,  and  thus  originated  through  him  the  discov-
ery of  Animal  Magnetism,  which  he  developed  into  a  science.

"  It  was  after  this  manner  that  Mesmer  reasoned  :  '  There  must  exist  a  power
which  permeates  the  universe,  and  binds  together  all  the  bodies  upon  earth,  and
it  must  be  possible  for  man  to  bring  this  influence  under  his  command.'  This
power  he  first  sought  for  in  the  magnet ;  he  pondered  upon  it  with  regard  to  man,
and  immediately  applied  it  to  the  cure  of  diseases.  The  remarkable  operations
which  were  produced,  and  the  cure  of  the  sick,  would,  iu  another  investigator,
have  brought  him  to  an  end  of  his  experiments.  Mesmer,  however,  went  forward.
Ever  accompanied  by  the  idea  of  the  primal  power  which  must  permeate  the  uni-
verse, and  is  ever  active  within  it,  the  thought  occurred  to  him  that  the  influence
must  exist  yet  more  powerfully  in  man  himself  than  in  the  magnet ;  since,  he
argued,  if  the  magnet  communicates  to  the  iron  the  same  polarity  which  causes
itself  to  be  a  magnet,  an  organized  body  must  be  able  to  produce  similar  conditions
in  another  body.  He  thus  perceived  that  he  could  not  ascribe  alone  to  the  mag-
net which  he  held  in  his  hands  the  efi"ects  which  he  had  observed  produced,  since
he  also  must  in  his  turn  influence  the  magnet.  Upon  this  he  cast  aside  his  mag-
net, and  with  his  hands  alone  brought  forth  similar  and  unadulterated  effects."

No  great  discovery  has  ever  yet  convulsed  the  world
that  has  not  subsequently  brought  forth  its  cloud  of  claim-
ants to  share  in  its  honors.  One  says :  "  Why,  this  is
nothing  new  !     I  always  knew  it,  and  have  observed  it  a

429

hundred  times."  This  cry  is  echoed  and  re-echoed  until
an  hundred,  a  thousand — aye,  half  the  age,  perhaps,  insists
they  always  knew  it  was  so  ;  it  is  nothing  new.  Nothing  can
be  truer  than  this  in  relation  to  magnetism ;  yet,  with  all
the  wise  world's  perception  of  its  truth,  it  required  the
genius  of  a  Mesmer  to  practicalize,  and  above  all  to  reduce
it  to  scientific  theorems.

Kerner  gives  some  narratives  of  Mesmer's  methods  of
treatment  in  his  earliest  stages  of  magnetic  practice,  which,
although  very  striking,  are  not  sufficiently  germain  to  our
purpose  to  admit  of  quoting  here  ;  we  therefore  omit  them,
and  proceed  to  present  the  conclusions  they  caused  the
narrator  to  draw  from  them.     He  writes  thus  :

"  He  ascertained  that  the  principal  agent  in  his  cures  dwelt  within  himself,  and
that  its  power  increased  bj  use.  j^evertheless,  the  idea  was  never  combated  by
Mesmer,  that  persons  upon  whom  animal  magnetism  exercises  but  a  slight  influ-
ence, are  rendered  more  susceptible  to  this  influence  by  the  assistance  of  electri-
cit}'  and  galvanism.  ^

'•  Seifart  remarks  that  he  had  observed  that  Mesmer  wore  beneath  his  linen  shirt
another  of  leather  lined  with  silk,  and  supposes  that  Mesmer  sought  by  this  means
to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  magnetic  fluid.  He  believes  that  Mesmer  also  wore
natural  and  artificial  magnets  about  his  person,  with  the  intention  of  strengthen-
ing the  magnetic  condition  in  himself.

"  At  all  events  it  is  certain  that  at  a  later  period  he  employed  for  the  strengthen-
ing of  the  magnetic  condition,  an  apparatus,  the  Baquet,  or,  as  he  called  it,  the
Magnetic  Basin  or  Paropothus.  This  receptacle,  as  it  was  originally  formed  by
Mesmer,  was  a  large  pan  or  tub,  filled  with  various  magnetic  substances,  such  as
water,  sand,  stone,  glass  bottles  filled  with  water,  etc.  It  is  a  focus  within  which
the  magnetism  finds  itself  concentrated,  and  out  of  which  a  number  of  conductors
proceed;  these  conductors  being  bent,  somewhat  pointed  parallel  iron  wands,  the
(me  end  of  each  wand  being  in  the  tub,  whilst  the  other  end  could  be  applied  to
the  seat  of  the  disease.  This  arrangement  might  be  made  use  of  by  a  number  of
patients  seated  around  the  tub.  Any  suitably-sized  receptacle  for  water— a  pond
(u-  a  fountain  in  a  garden— would  serve  a  patient  as  a  baquet  so  soon  as  the
patient  made  use  of  an  iron  wand  to  conduct  the  magnetism  towards  him  or  her-
self

'•'  In  vain  did  Mesmer  endeavor  to  convince  his  medical  contemporaries  of  the
truth  and  importance  of  his  discovery ;  in  vain  was  his  announcement  of  it  to  the
scientific  academies.  With  but  a  single  exception  he  received  no  answer  from
them.  This  exception  was  the  Academy  of  Berlin,  which  passed  the  following
judgment  :— It  would  in  nowise  enter  upon  an  inquiry  into  a  matter  which  rested
on  such  entirely  unknown  foundations.

"  Upon  this  Mesmer  brought  all  his  discoveries  into  the  form  of  twenty-seven

430

aphorisms,  which  he  sent  to  the  scientiiic  academies  in  the  year  1775.  These
aphorisms  contain  Mesmer's  doctrine  clearly  and.  briefly  expressed,  and  it  is  im-
portant to  hecome  acquainted  with  them,  since  his  ideas  are  here  given  in  his  own
words :

'  1.  There  exists  a  reciprocal  influence  between  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  earth,
and  all  living  beings.

'  2.  A  fluid  which  is  spread  everywhere,  and  which  is  so  expanded  that  it  per-
mits of  no  vacuum,  of  a  delicacy  which  can  be  compared  to  nothing  besides  itself,
and  which,  through  its  nature,  is  enabled  to  receive  movement,  to  spread  and  to
participate  in  it,  is  the  medium  of  this  influence.

'3.  This  reciprocal  activity  is  subject  to  the  operation  of  mechanical  laws,  which
until  now  were  quite  unknown.

'  4.  From  this  activity  spring  alternating  operations,  which  may  be  compared  to
ebb  and  flow.

'  5.  This  ebb  and  flow  are  more  or  less  general,  more  or  less  complex,  according
to  the  nature  of  the  origin  which  has  called  them  forth.

'  6.  Through  this  active  principle,  which  is  far  more  universal  than  any  other  in
nature,  originates  a  relative  activity  between  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  earth,  and
its  component  parts.

'  7.  It  immediately  sets  in  movement — since  it  directly  enters  into  the  substance
of  the  nerves — the  properties  of  matter  and  of  organized  bodies,  and  the  alternative
operations  of  these  active  existences.

'8.  In  human  bodies  are  discovered  properties  which  correspond  with  those
of  the  magnet.  _  Also  various  opposite  poles  maybe  distinguished,  which  can  be
imparted,  changed,  disturbed,  and  strengthened.

'9.  The  property  of  the  animal  body,  which  renders  it  susceptible  to  the  influ-
ence of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  to  the  reciprocal  operation  of  those  bodies  which
surround  it,  verified  by  the  magnet,  has  induced  me  to  term  this  property  Animal
Magnetism.

•  10.  The  power  and  operation  thus  designated  as  Animal  Magnetism  can  be
communicated  to  animate  and  inanimate  bodies ;  both,  however,  are  more  or  less
susceptible.

'  11.  This  power  and  operation  can  be  increased  and  propagated  through  the  in-
strumentality of  these  bodies.

'12.  Through  experience  it  is  observed  that  an  efflux  of  matter  occurs,  the  vola-
tility of  which  enables  it  to  penetrate  all  bodies  without  perceptibly  losing  any  of
its  activity.

'  13.  Its  operation  extends  into  the  distance  without  the  assistance  of  an  inter-
mediate body.

'  14.  It  can  he  increased  and  thrown  hack  again  by  means  of  a  mirror,  as  well
as  by  light.

'  15.  It  can  be  communicated,  increased,  and  spread  by  meatis  of  sotmd.

'  16.  This  magnetic  power  can  be  accumulated,  increased,  and  spread.

'  17.  I  have  observed  that  animated  bodies  are  not  all  equally  fitted  to  receive
this  magnetic  power.  There  are  also  bodies,  although  comparatively  few,  which
possess  such  opposite  qualities  that  their  presence  destroys  the  operation  of  this
magnetism  in  other  bodies.

'  18.  This  opposing  power  permeates  equally  all  bodies  ;  it  can  also  in  the  same
manner  be  communicated,   accumulated,  and  propagated ;  it  streams  back  'from

431

the  surface  ot  mirrors,  and  can  be  spread  by  means  of  sound.  This  is  not  alone
occasioned  by  a  deprivation  of  power,  but  is  caused  by  an  opposing  and  positive
power.

'  19.  The  natural  and  artificial  magnet  is  equally,  with  other  bodies,  susceptible
to  animal  magnetism,  without,  in  either  case,  its  operation  upon  iron  or  upon  the
needle  suflfering  the  slightest  change.

'  20.  This  system  will  place  in  a  clearer  light  the  nature  of  fire,  and  of  light,  as
well  as  the  doctrine  of  attraction,  of  ebb  and  flow,  of  the  magnet,  and  of  elec-
tricity.

'  21.  It  will  demonstrate  that  the  magnet  and  artificial  electricity,  with  regard
to  sicknesses,  possess  simply  qualities  possessed  in  common  with  other  active
forces  aff'orded  by  nature  ;  and  that  if  any  useful  operation  springs  from  their  in-
strumentality, we  have  to  thank  animal  magnetism  for  it.

'  22.  From  instances  deduced  from  my  firmly  established  and  thoroughly  proved
rules,  it  will  be  easily  perceived  that  this  principle  can  immediately  cure  diseases
of  the  nerves.

'  23.  Through  its  assistance  the  physician  receives  much  light  regarding  the  ap-
plication of  medicaments,  whereby  he  can  improve  their  operation,  call  forth  more
beneficial  crises,  and  conduct  them  in  such  wise  as  to  become  master  of  them.

'  24.  Through  communication  of  my  method,  I  shall,  in  unfolding  a  new  doc-
trine of  disease,  prove  the  universal  use  of  this  active  principle.

'25.  Through  this  knowledge  the  physician  will  be  enabled  to  judge  of  the
origin,  the  progress,  and  the  nature  even  of  the  most  intricate  diseases.  He  will
be  enabled  to  prevent  the  increase  of  disease,  and  bring  about  the  cure  without
exposing  his  patient  to  dangerous  effects  or  painful  C(msequences,  whatever  be  the
age,  sex,  or  temperament  of  the  patient.

'26.  Women,  during  pregnancy  and  in  childbirth  receive  advantage  therefrom.

'  27.  The  doctrine  will,  at  length,  place  the  physician  in  such  a  position  tbat  he
will  be  able  to  judge  the  degrees  of  health  possessed  by  any  man,  and  be  able  to
protect  him  from  the  disease  to  which  he  may  be  exposed.  The  art  of  healing  will
by  this  means  attain  to  its  greatest  height  of  perfection.'

''  Thus  deeply  convinced  of  the  truth  of  his  doctrine,  it  was  natural  that  Mesmer
should  feel  keenly  pained  by  the  misconception  and  contempt  of  men,  for  whom,
in  other  directions,  he  entertained  esteem.  He  expresses  his  bitter  sorrow  in  vari-
ous of  the  writings  left  behind  him.

'  This  system,  which  led  me  to  the  discovery  of  animal  magnetism,'  he  writes,
'was  not  the  fruits  of  a  single  day.  By  degrees,  even  as  the  hours  of  my  life  ac-
cumulated, were  gathered  together  in  my  soul  the  observations  which  led  to  it.
The  coldness  with  which  my  earliest  promulgated  ideas  were  met  filled  me  with
astonishment  as  great  as  though  I  had  never  foreseen  such  coldness.  The  learned
(and  physicians  especially)  laughed  over  my  system,  but  quite  out  of  place,  how-
ever, for  although  unsupported  by  experiment  it  must  have  appeared  fully  as  rea-
sonable as  the  greater  portion  of  their  systems,  on  which  they  bestow  the  grand
name  of  principles.

'  This  unfavorable  reception  induced  me  again  to  examine  my  ideas,  lusteatl,
however,  of  losing  through  this,  they  gained  a  higher  degree  of  manifestation,
and  in  truth  everything  convinced  me  that  in  science,  besides  the  principles  already
accepted,  there  must  still  be  others,  either  neglected  or  not  observed.'  "

As  our  work  is  simply  an  attempt  to  elucidate  philoso-

432

phy  from  facts,  we  shall  pursue  the  history  of  Mesmer  no
farther.  His  followers,  some  few  of  whom  were  indeed
worthy  successors  to  so  great  an  original,  added  many  val-
uable experiences  to  his,  but  failed  to  evolve  any  ideas
more  thoroughly  comprehensive  than  those  given  in  his
twenty-seven  aphorisms.  To  show  why  the  mine  of  rich
treasure  opened  up  by  Mesmer  has  been  so  slowly  and  re-
luctantly transferred  to  the  mint  of  national  currency  in
human  practice,  we  have  only  to  remember  the  bitter  per-
secutions, cruel  ingratitude,  and  misrepresentation,  which
followed  the  good  and  amiable  Anton  Mesmer  through  his
life,  and  pursued  his  followers  after  his  decease.

The  narrow  conservatism  of  the  age  too,  and  the  pitiful
jealousy  of  the  Medical  Faculty,  rendered  it  difficult  and
even  dangerous,  to  conduct  magnetic  experiments  openly  in
Europe  within  several  years  of  Mesmer's  decease.  Still
such  experiments  were  not  wanting,  and  to  show  their  re-
sults, we  give  a  few  excerpts  from  the  correspondence
between  the  famous  French  Magnetists,  M.  M.  Deleuze
and  Billot,  from  the  years  1829  to  1840.  By  these  letters,
published  in  two  volumes  in  1836,  it  appears  that  M.  Bil-
lot commenced  his  experiments  in  magnetizing  as  early  as
1789,  and  that  during  this  space  of  over  forty  years,  he  had
an  opportunity  of  witnessing  facts  in  clairvoyance,  ecstasy,
spiritual  mediumship,  and  Somnambulism,  which  at  the
time  of  their  publication  transcended  the  belief  of  the  gen-
eral mass  of  readers.  ^On  many  occasions  in  the  presence
of  entranced  subjects,  Spirits  recognized  as  having  once
lived  on  earth  in  mortal  form — would  come  in  hodilfj  pres-
ence before  the  eyes  of  an  assembled  company,  and  at  re-
quest, bring  flowers,  fruits,  and  objects,  removed  by  distance
from  the  scene  of  the  experiments.  /^

M.  Deleuze  frankly  admits  that  his  experience  was
more  limited  to  those  phases  of  Somnambulism  in  which
his  subjects  submitted  to  amputations  and  severe  surgical

433

operations  without  experiencing  the  slightest  pain,  also
they  could  disclose  hidden  things,  find  lost  property,  detect
crime,  predict  the  future,  speak  in  foreign  languages,  and
describe  distant  places  with  great  eloquence  and  power.

In  a  letter  dated  July,  1831,  M.  Billot  writing  to  De-
leuze,  says  :

"  I  repeat,  I  have  seen  and  kuown  all  that  is  permitted  to  man.  I  have  seen
the  stigmata  arise  on  magnetized  subjects;-!  have  dispelled  obsessions  of  evil
spirits  with  a  single  word.  I  have  seen  spirits  bring  those  material  objects  I  told
you  of,  and  when  requested,  make  them  so  light  that  they  would  float,  and,  again
a  small  hoiteau  de  hontons  was  rendered  so  heavy,  that  I  failed  to  move  it  an  inch
until  the  power  was  removed."

Alfonse  Cahagnet,  to  whose  invaluable  work,  the''  Celes-
tial Telegraph,"  allusion  has  already  been  made — pub-
lished a  series  of  experiments  with  a  vast  number  of  lucid
subjects  who  by  virtue  of  his  magnetism  became  Clairvoy-
an  ts.

At  first  their  lucidity  only  sufficed  to  discover  the  things
of  earth,  and  trace  earthly  scenes  and  persons.  As  the
magnetic  sleep  took  deeper  hold  on  their  senses  however,
it  became  apparent  that  a  new  world  opened  up  before
them.

Without  any  mental  direction  from  their  magnetizers —
they  one  and  all  persisted  in  describing  the  spirits  of  those
whom  the  world  deemed  dead.  They  discoursed  with
tliem,  sometimes  personated  them,  gave  truthful  accounts
of  their  lives  on  earth,  and  described  their  appearances  so
accurately  that  scores  of  enquiring  mourners,  attracted  by
the  fame  of  Cahagnet's  Lucides,  came  thither  to  find  their
dead  restored  to  them.  It  was  as  if  a  gate  had  suddenly
been  opened  into  the  realms  of  paradise,  and  poor  suffering
bereaved  humanity  might  be  seen  crowding  upon  each
other  to  gaze  through  those  golden  portals  and  discover
there  all  they  had  loved,  all  they  had  lost,  and  as  in  a  mir- /
ror  behold  the  delightful  panoramas  of  being  wdiere  their

434

own  tired  feet  were  to  find  rest  when  their  bodies  should
sleep  tTie  last  sleep  of  humanity.

To  those  who  enjoyed  the  unspeakable  privilege  of  lis-
tening to  the  '*  Somnambules"  of  Billot,  Deleuze,  and  Ca-
hagnet,  another  and  yet  more  striking  feature  of  unani-
mous revelation  was  poured  forth.  Spirits  of  those  who
had  passed  away  strong  in  the  faith  of  Roman  Catholicism,
often  priests  and  dignitaries  of  that  conservative  Church,
addressing  staunch  and  prejudiced  believers  in  the  faith
too,  always  asserted  ''  there  was  no  creed  in  Heaven,"  no
sectarian  worship,  no  remains  of  dogmatic  faiths.

They  taught  that  God  was  a  grand  Spiritual  Sun — life
on  earth  a  probation  ; — the  spheres  different  degrees  of
compensative  happiness  or  states  of  retributive  suffering ;
— each  appropriate  to  the  good  or  evil  deeds  done  on  earth.
They  described  the  ascending  changes  open  to  every  soul
in  proportion  to  its  own  efforts  to  improve.

They  all  insisted  that  man  was  his  own  judge,  incurred
a  penalty  or  reward  for  which  there  was  no  substitution.
They  taught  nothing  of  Christ,  absolutely  denied  the  idea
of  vicarious  atonement — and  represented  man  as  his  own
Saviour  or  destroyer.

/    They  spoke  of  arts,  sciences,  and  continued  activities,  as
/  if  the  life  beyond  was  but  an  extension  of  the  present  on  a
I    greatly     improved    scale.     Descriptions    of    the    radiant
j     beauty,  supernal  happiness,  and  ecstatic  sublimity    mani-
j     fested  by  the  blest  spirits  who  had  risen  to  the  spheres  of
'      paradise.  Heaven,  and  the  glory  of  Angelic  companionship,
melts  the  heart,  and  fills  the  soul  with  irresistible  yearn-
ings to  lay  down  life's  weary  burdens  and  be  at  rest  with
them.

''  0,  to  be  there  !"  must  be  the  cry  of  every  tired  spirit
who  listens  to  these  enchanting  pictures  of  an  enchanting
hereafter  ;  one  too,  which  so  reasonably  and  harmoniously

435

meets  the  aspirations  of  that  human  nature  we  yet  bear
about  with  us,  which,  whilst  longing  for  the  unimagin-
able glories  of  Heaven,  shrinks  back  appalled  from  the  in-
comprehensible mysticism  of  theology.  Such  were  some
of  the  original  and  startling  revealments  poured  forth  by
the  French  Clairvoyants  who,  during  the  first  half  of  this
century,  led  in  their  somnambulic  hands  whole  legions  of
arisen  spirits  and  teaching  angels,  all  evidently  builders,
flocking  into  the  great  workshops  of  modern  spiritual  sci-
ence, to  take  their  places  in  the  erection  of  the  new  Church
of  humanity.  We  cannot  close  this  necessarily  brief  sum-
mary, without  quoting  a  few  words  from  that  philosophic
herald  of  Magnetism's  new  morning,  Baron  Dupotet.  This
brave  and  skillful  Scientist  says :

''  ]^()  oue  can  conduct  magnetic  seances  with  patience  and  fidelity,  without  com-
ing to  the  conclusion  which  bursts  upon  my  own  mind,  namely  :  that  in  Magnetism
I  rediscover  the  Spiritology  of  the  ancients.  Let  the  Savant  reject  the  doctrine
of  spiritual  apparitions  as  (me  of  the  great  errors  of  the  past,  the  results  of  the
Magnetic  seance  re-afiBrm  them  all.  They  do  more.  They  prove  that  the  healing
of  the  sick,  the  ecstasy  of  the  Saints,  all  their  miraculous  works  are  ours.  Is  the
knowledge  of  ancient  fnagic  lost  ? — we  have  all  the  facts  on  which  to  reconstruct  it.'\

The  learned  Magnetist  then  recites  a  vast  number  of
the  phenomena  produced  through  his  own  subjects  and  those
of  Puysegur,  Seguin,  Bertrand,  and  many  others,  which
fully  equal  in  marvel  any  of  the  magical  histories  of  past
ages.

And  these  discoveries  multiplying  in  number  every  day,
and  increasing  in  marvel  as  the  Adepts  became  more  and
more  accomplished  in  their  art,  clustered  to  their  meridian
point  before  the  year  1840,  nearly  ten  years  before  the
outbreak  of  modern  Spiritualism  in  America,  a  movement
from  which  many  date  the  advent  of  spiritual  revelation
in  this  generation.

As  a  matter  of  phenomenal  wonder  the  latter  class  are
right  in  their  definition  ;  but  as  the  glorious  triad  of  Mas-

436

ters  through  whom  the  lodges  of  ancient  mystery  are
transformed  into  the  temples  of  modern  science,  Paracelsus,
Swedenborg  and  Mesmer  take  rank  in  unapproachable
honor  and  unrivalled  distinction.  To  their  determined
spirit  of  inquiry,  to  the  patience,  fidelity  and  acumen  with
which  they  conducted  their  extensive  researches,  and  the
unparalleled  courage  with  which  they  dared  to  assail  the
prejudices  of  the  age  in  which  they  lived,  the  generations
to  come  will  owe  the  fact  that  magnetism  and  psychology
have  rediscovered  the  lost  art  of  ancient  magic,  and  trans-
muted the  visionary  stone  and  elixir  of  mediaeval  mystics
into  the  pure  gold  of  modern  spiritual  science.

437

SECTION  XXllI.

Spiritualistic  Literature — The  Harmonial  Philosophy  and
its  Founder — Modern  Spiritism,  its  universality  of  phe-
nomena— Specialties  of  American  Spiritism — Proposi-
tions for  renewing  its  life,  purifying  its  ranks,  and
ednicating  a  new  School  of  the  Prophets — Dark  and  Light
Circles — Closing  Words,

We  have  reached  that  point  in  our  review  when  we  find
ourselves  at  the  final  stage  of  our  journey,  standing  face
to  face  in  fact  with  the  last  great  spiritual  dispensation  of
the  ages,  commonly  termed  "  Modern  Spiritualism."

In  touching  upon  this  part  of  our  record  the  task  re-
solves itself  chiefly  into  the  duty  of  cataloguing  the  many
lucid  and  valuable  expositions  of  the  subject  which  are
already  extant,  rendering  the  least  attempt  to  add  to  this
vast  collection  of  special  literature,  a  work  of  supereroga-
tion. In  England,  '*  The  Two  Worlds,"  by  Thos.  Shorter—
*'  From  Matter  to  Spirit,"  by  Mrs.  De  Morgan,  the  admir-
able spiritualistic  works  of  Wra.  Howitt,  and  Mrs.  Crowe's
'*  Night  Side  of  Nature,"  offer  more  food  for  reflection  than
it  would  seem  the  public  mind  has  as  y(di  been  able  to  as-
similate, whilst  hosts  of  tracts,  pamphlets,  able  magazines
and  newspapers,  furnish  continual  streams  of  information
from  which  no  thirsting  soul  need  go  away  empty.  France
is  equally  rich  in  the  literature  of  Spiritism,  although  the
general  tone  of  its  later  writers  is  deflected  to  sustain  the
peculiar  opinions  of  that  body  of  believers  known  as  ''  Re-
incarnationists."  It  would  be  as  useless  as  impertinent  to
cite  German  literature  in  support  of  Spiritualistic  doctrines
or  point  to  its  phalanx  of  immortal  writers  whose  aflirma-

438

tions  of  the  Spiritual  side  of  man's  nature  have  never
failed  since  the  advent  of  the  printing  press  to  this  hour.
Holland  in  its  excellent  periodicals,  and  Russia  in  its  lib-
eral patronage  of  spirit  media  are  also  contributing  their
quota  to  the  general  store-house  of  occult  knowledge.  In
the  meantime  brave  unflinching  defenders  of  these  truths,
writing  in  Spain  from  amidst  the  ghostly  shadows  of  the
grim  old  Inquisition,  devoted  bands  of  Spiritists  writhing
under  the  proscriptive  ban  of  Priestcraft  in  South  America,
scattering  forces  from  the  Sandwich  Islands,  New  Zealand,
the  East  and  West  Indies,  Australia,  California,  and  indeed
wherever  civilization  has  a  foothold,  all  contribute  to  fill  up
the  columns  of  a  world-wide  Spiritual  Almanac,  and  record
the  ceaseless  irruptions  of  spirit  people  into  this  mundane
world  of  ours.

There  are  many  circumstances  which  combine  to  fix  the
era  of  this  great  modern  movement  at  or  about  the  date
assigned  to  what  has  been  popularly  termed  "  the  Roches-
ter knockings."  Whilst  it  would  be  far  more  difficult  to
name  any  period  of  human  history  when  Spiritism  was
not^  rather  than  when  it  commenced  to  act^  there  is  much  pro-
priety in  assuming  that  the  first  systematic  effort  to  reduce
the  telegraphic  signals  made  by  spirits  to  a  method  of
direct  and  continuous  communication  between  themselves
and  mortals  occurred  at  Rochester,  in  the  State  of  New
York,  America,  and  commenced  in  the  years  1847  and  '48.

The  first  public  exhibition  of  Spiritual  power  too,  oc-
curred at  this  place  and  time,  conducted  under  the  direc-
tion of  Spirits,  and  terminating  in  reports  of  Committees
elected  by  the  people,  alleging  a  Spiritual  cause  for  the
disturbances  that  these  public  meetings  were  convened  to
inquire  into.  In  America  also,  was  presented,  for  the  first
time  in  history,  a  petition  to  the  Government  of  the  country,
signed  by  many  thousands  of  the  most  respectable  of  its

439

citizens,  praying  for  a  scientific  commission  to  inquire  into
a  purely  Spiritualistic  movement.

It  is  from  these  causes,  together  with  the  immense  sur-
faces of  country  embraced  in  the  American  manifestations
— their  power,  variety,  force  and  phenomenal  wonder,  the
enormous  masses  of  its  believers,  and  the  profusion  of  its
literature,  that  mankind  seem  to  have  combined,  with  one
accord,  to  yield  the  pahn  of  all  potency,  number  and  influ-
ence to  American  Spiritism.

Before  entering  upon  a  final  summary  of  this  movement,
it  behooves  us  to  render  another  reason  why  we  should
concentrate  upon  the  modern  Spiritism  of  the  United  States
the  deepest  emotions  of  respect  and  gratitude  which  man-
kind can  render  to  the  movers  and  founders  of  the  great
spiritual  outpouring.

On  American  soil  was  born,  and  under  American  skies
were  first  poured  out,  the  vaticinations  of  a  Seer,  who
stands  second  to  no  prophet,  religious  teacher,  reformer,
writer,  or  phenomenal  wonder-worker,  that  the  page  of
history  has  ever  borne  witness  of.  That  Seer  is  Andrew
Jackson  Davis.  During  a  brief  residence  in  America
some  few  years  since,  the  author,  being  on  a  visit  to  a  friend
in  a  charming  country-seat,  found  himself  made  free  of  a
noble  library  of  several  hundred  volumes.  In  one  portion
of  that  enchanting  study,  just  where  the  beams  of  the
sinking  sun  would  fall  most  favorably  through  the  softened
lustre  of  the  stained-glass  windows,  stood  a  rich  ormulu
table,  where,  in  singular  contrast  to  the  luxurious  objects
surrounding  them,  were  piled  up  a  large  mass  of  plainly
bound  volumes,  most  of  them  large  and  evidently  suffi-
ciently popular  with  their  possessor,  for  they  bore  more  con-
clusive marks  of  wear  than  any  other  of  the  gorgeously
bound  volumes  that  the  room  contained.  On  opening  with
some  curiosity  the  most  ponderous  of  these  books,  the  eye

440

fell  upon  the  following  passages  somewhere  about  the  142(i
page  :

"  As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  so  the  vast  and  boundless  Univercoelum,  the  great
sun  and  centre  from  which  all  these  worlds,  and  systems  of  worlds,  emanated,  is
still  an  exhaustless  fountain  of  chaotic  materials  and  living  inherent  energy  to
drive  into  existence  billions  and  millions  of  billions  of  suns,  with  all  their  ap-
pendages more  than  have  yet  been  produced  !  For  it  has  eternal  motion  and  con-
tains the  forms  that  all  things  subsequently  assume  ;  and  it  contains  laws  that  are
displayed  in  its  geometrical  and  mechanical  structure,  combinations,  laws,  forces,
forms  and  motions  that  have  produced,  and  will  still  produce,  an  infinitude  of  sys-
tems, and  systems  of  systems,  whose  concentric  circles  are  but  an  expanse  from
the  great  germ  of  all  existence,  and  are  incessantly  acting  and  re-acting,  chang-
ing, harmonizing,  organizing  and  etherealizing  every  particle  of  chaotic  and  unde-
veloped matter  that  exists  in  the  vortex  V

Struck  with  the  peculiarity  of  these  strange  and  high-
strung  words,  and  their  analogy  with  the  opinions  that  he
had  himself  imbibed  from  the  study  of  the  Universe  and
its  laws,  the  author  proceeded  to  turn  other  pages  of  this
volume,  and  found  astounding  and  deeply  occult  descrip-
tions of  God,  man,  creation,  the  Solar  and  Astral  systems,
the  mystery  of  force,  life,  being,  the  order  of  creation,  in
fact,  eloquent,  burning  words,  and  thoughts  almost  beyond
earthly  comprehension  for  their  sublimity,  in  every  line.
Hours  swept  on  like  seconds.  The  wonderful  volume  was
glanced  through,  then  others  were  opened.

The  same  writer's  mind  glowed  through  all  those  plain,
cheap  books — books  which  should  have  been  bound  in
rubies  and  sapphires — and  the  reader  became  at  last  almost
paralyzed  at  the  breadth  of  information,  the  intense  insight
into  being,  and  the  majesty  with  which  some  mind  more
than  mortal  had  swept  creation,  and  reduced  its  vast
research  into  the  holiest  and  most  elevated  language.

Hours  passed  on.  The  early  morning  that  had  invited
the  student  into  that  choice  retreat  now  deepened  into  the
gray  mists  of  evening  ;  yet  still  the  straining  gaze  roamed
through  the  wonderful  stack  of  shabby  books,  until  it  fell
upon  this  passage :

441

/  "  The  great  original,  ever-existing,  oiimiscient,  omnipotent  and  omnipresent
prodnctive  power,  the  Soul  of  all  existence,  is  throned  in  a  central  sphere,  the
circumference  of  which  is  the  boundless  universe,  and  around  which  solar,  sidereal
and  stellar  systems  revolve,  in  silent,  majestic  sublimity  and  harmony !  This
power  is  what  mankind  call  Deity,  whose  attributes  are  love  and  wisdom,  corres-
ponding with  the  principles  of  male  and  female,  positive  and  negative,  sustaining
and  creative."

At  this  point  the  master  of  the  mansion,  opening  the
library  door,  uttered  an  exclamation  of  surprise  to  find  the
guest  whose  presence  he  had  missed  for  upwards  of  twelve
hours,  still  at  home.

The  next  words  spoken  were,  "  Who  is  the  author  of
these  wonderful  books  ?"

^'  Oh,  those,"  replied  the  host,  with  seeming  indifference,
''  those  books  are  all  written  by  a  poor  shoemaker's  boy
of  Poughkeepsie.  That  one  " — pointing  to  the  largest,
the  one  which  had  first  attracted  the  attention  and  awak-
ened the  astonishment  of  the  reader — "  was  written,  or
rather  spoken^  when  the  lad  was  about  sixteen  years  of
age ;  he  was  too  ignorant  to  write  it,  he  could  not  have
even  spelled  the  words."

''  In  what  school  was  he  brought  up,  for  heaven's  sake  ?"

"  Utter  destitution."

"  Who  taught  him  all  these  wonderful  things  T'

"  God  and  the  angels.  He  never  had  any  human
teachers.     Of  that  I  am  a  living  witness."

"  But  how  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  weird  and  wonder-
ful were  these  volumes  written  ?"

"  Oh,  at  first  they  were  taken  down  as  he  spoke  them
by  a  Scribe  ;  because  I  tell  you,  he  who  discoursed  of  suns,
stars,  systems,  astronomy,  geology,  physiology,  and  every
other  known  science,  was  too  uneducated  to  be  able  to
write  down  the  words  he  spoke,  and  then,  after  graduating
in  the  schools  of— God  alone  knows  where— but  in  no  col-
lege or  seat  of  learning  on  this  eartli— he  wrote  the  rest
himself,  every  line  of  them."

442

"  But  if  God  and  Angels  taught  him,  is  there  no  record
as  to  how  he  learned  ?"

^'  Yes,  one  which  scores  of  living  men  and  women  will
testify  to.  He  was  magnetized  as  a  little  shoemaker's  lad
of  the  humblest  and  poorest  condition,  and  then  he  be-
came an  independent  clairvoyant."

'*  Aye  indeed  !  Magnetism,  and  then  Psychology,  God's
psychology  poured  into  the  soul,  when  it  becomes  clairvoy-
ant, and  ascends  to  the  spheres  of  Deific  knowledge  !  Why,
this  is  ancient  magic !  The  secret  of  all  spiritualistic
powers  and  possibilities  ;  yet,  when  did  any  ancient  Magian,
any  mind  however  aspiring,  vast,  or  illuminated,  assume
such  a  deptli,  height,  and  breadth  of  comprehension  as
this  ?  Answer  nie  my  friend.  Has  such  a  paragon  ever
existed  as  the  author  of  this  library  ?"

^'  Swedenborg  perhaps.     You  forget  him."

"But  these  revelations  are  more  human,  more  compre-
hensible and  nearer  to  man's  estate  than  Swedenborg's.
They  might  be  the  breathings  of  Swedenborg^s  spirit^  cor-
recting the  shortcomings  of  his  earthly  career."

"  Perhaps  they  are.     This  man  believes  in  spirits."

"  Can  this  wonder  of  the  age  exist  and  the  world  not
know  of  if?"

''  Yes ;  people  know  all  about  him,  but  they  don't  care
for  him  now.  He  is  living  in  great  obscurity  somewhere
in  Jersey  I  believe."

"  But  the  Spiritualists. — Surely  those  immense  bodies  of
thinkers  who  have  disclaimed  the  false  assumptions  of
creeds  and  the  unscientific  absurdities  of  ecclesiastical  dog-
mas— do  not  those  people  so  wonderfully  taught  of  the
spirit,  accept  him  as  their  prophet,  their  leader, — their  hea-
ven-inspired teacher  ?"

"  Hold,  hold  my  friend  !  you  know  not  what  you  say.
The  Spiritualists  are  all  '  individuals.''     They  are  their  own

443

Gods,  their  own  Prophets,  leaderp,  and  teachers  ;  what' !
present  any  human  leader,  teacher,  or  Prophet  to  the
great  bulk  of  the  American  Spiritualists  !  You  will  find
you  are  treading  on  dangerous  ground,  and  will  soon  be
warned  back  with  the  phrases,  '  we  want  no  Popes,  Cardi-
nals, Bishops,  or  Priestly  Leaders  here.'  "

"  But  Leaders  and  Teachers  they  must  have.  Do  they
not  sustain  great  mass  meetings  where  the  public  gather
together  to  hear  their  opinions  discussed  7"

"  Aye,  but  each  one  presents  his  own  opinion,  and  none
but  his  own.  Sometimes  these  opinions  are  as  widely
divergent  as  the  heavens  and  the  earth ;  and  sometimes
not  unlike  in  essence,  light  and  darkness,  still  their  pride  is
to  maintain  '  a  free  platform,'  and  under  this  appellation,
the  Angels  of  darkness  are  as  free  to  have  their  say  as
those  of  light."    I

"  But  this  is  chaos,  disorder,  not  Spiritism,  much  less  the
sweetness,  grace,  and  dignity  of  this  Harmonial  Philoso-
phy !  "

"  The  time  was,  when  Davis's  revelations,  startling  ma-
terialism out  of  its  blank  negations,  and  compelling  atten-
tion from  the  wonderful  and  unprecedented  methods  of
their  delivery,  drew  around  him  a  large  class  of  admiring
friends  and  elevated  thinkers,  who  were  not  ashamed  to
call  themselves  after  him,  'Harmonial  Philosophers,'
but  in  the  revolutionary  spirit  of  this  great  movement
Spiritualism,  thousands  have  rushed  into  its  ranks,  glad  to
escape  from  creeds,  dogmas,  and  ecclesiastical  despotism.
The  memory  of  this  dethroned  tyranny  is  still  too  strong
upon  them  to  admit  of  any  present  attempts  to  organize
a  new  religious  system.  The  swing  of  the  pendulum
has  carried  the  soul  from  despotism  into  license,  and
until  the  revolutionary  elements  of  thought  can  subside
into  equilibrium,  depend  upon  it  even  the  amiable  and  un-

444

assuming  '  harmonial  philosopher's '  leadership   cannot  be
tolerated."

"  But  in  the  meantime  were  these  stupendous  revelations
given  in  vain  ?  Surely  so  noble  a  philosophy,  received
through  an  inspiration  so  unmistakably  divine,  so  free  from
human  bias  or  mortal  intervention,  ought  to  commend  it-
self to  every  civilized  nation  of  the  present  age  !"

'^My  friend,  you  forget  the  elements  of  which  this  gen-
eration is  composed.  Setting  aside  the  scientists  who
scoff  out  of  notice  every  idea  connected  with  spiritual  ex-
istence, or  outside  the  known  routine  of  science,  who  do
you  expect  in  Catholic  and  Protestant  Europe  to  sympa-
thize with  the  revelations  of  the  Poughkeepsie  Seer  ?
Some  few  there  are  in  every  country  where  these
plain,  black  volumes  have  made  their  way,  who  regard
them  as  we  do.  Many  who  even  believe  they  are  the
voice  of  earth's  Tutelary  Angel,  speaking  from  between  the
Cherubim  and  Seraphim  of  past  and  future  ages,  but
they  like  us,  must  wait  until  the  age  is  more  receptive  of
these  sublime  truths.  At  the  present  day,  the  great
majority  of  European  religionists  hold  up  their  hands  with
holy  horror  at  the  name  of  A.  J.  Davis,  and  cry, '  Pantheist !
Heathen  Philosopher ! — This  is  the  man  who  denies  the
Trinity,  disbelieves  in  the  awful  Jehovah  with  his  great
white  throne. — This  is  the  hard-hearted  moralist  who
would  take  away  our  Saviour  from  us,  deny  us  the  conso-
lation of  the  vicarious  atonement,  and  compel  us  all  to  do
personal  penance  for  our  sins,  and  even  abandon  them  alto-
gether !  This  is  he  who  calls  God  a  Spiritual  Sun,  Jesus  an
amiable  young  man,  creation  an  evolution,  and  flies  in  the
face  of  Genesis  and  the  thirty-nine  articles  !'  "

In  after  years,  when  the  author  had  time  and  opportu-
nity to  study  out  the  vast  stores  of  spiritual  thought  and
profound  philosophy,  displayed  in  the  voluminous  writings

445

of  this  great  modern  Prophet,  the  admiration  ihey  excited,
determined  him,  if  he  ever  more  visited  America,  he  would
seek  out  this  marvel  of  the  age,  even  as  the  Disciples  of
classic  Greece  sat  at  the  feet  of  her  master  spirits  to  learn
wisdom.

The  time  for  the  fulfilhnent  of  this  cherished  purpose
came,  and  in  company  with  an  ardent  Disciple  of  the  Har-
monial  Philosophy  from  a  distant  land,  the  author  com-
menced his  search.

Few  Spiritualists  seemed  to  know  even  of  the  where-
abouts of  the  Poughkeepsie  Seer.  Surely  we  thought  he
must  be  at  the  head  of  some  great  Church,  Temple,  Syna-
gogue, a  mechanic's  institute  at  the  least,  or  a  popular  lec-
ture hall ;  some  place,  where  spiritually  starved  souls  could
feed  upon  the  Divine  revelations  of  nature  as  taught  by  one
of  her  purest  and  most  faithful  interpreters  !  But  no  !  the
great  Alchemist  who  had  transmuted  the  Magic  of  early
ages  into  the  gold  of  spiritual  science,  the  Seer,  Philoso-
pher, and  greatest  phenomenon  of  this  or  any  age,  had  to  be
sought  for  in  a  little  shop  in  an  obscure  street,  where,
without  followers,  disciples,  admirers,  and  to  judge  from
appearances  with  but  very  few  customers,  amidst  his  neat,
well  ordered  collection  of  books,  ranged  on  their  shelves  in
curious  little  delicate  curves,  and  tastefully  adorned  with
illuminated  mottoes,  and  Autumn  leaves, — stood  the  great
Seer  J  selling  books  for  a  livelihood.

The  placid  mien  and  gentle  tones  of  the  unassuming
salesman  betrayed  none  of  the  pangs  of  grief,  indignation
and  humiliation  which  two  foreigners  felt  for  him,  as  they
made  their  silent  purchase,  with  hearts  too  lull  for  utter-
ance, and  withdrew.

"  That  man  is  nobler  far  in  the  quiet,  cheerful  dignity
with  which  he  accommodates  himself  to  the  sordid  necessi-
ties of  a  petty  trade,  than  when  he  stood  as  the  interpreter

446

of  Angels,  dictating,  '  Nature's  Divine  Revelations.'"  Thus
spoke  one  of  the  deeply  moved  visitors,

"  The  age  is  not  worthy  of  him ;  he  lives  a  century
before  his  time,"  rejoined  the  other.

''  Aye  !  but  his  works  will  live  after  him.  The  truths  he
reveals  are  eternal,  and  the  revelator  will  yet  become  immor-
tal," was  the  reply.  Even  so.  Time,  the  touch-stone  of
truth,  will  do  justice  to  him — to  all ;  and  so,  Andrew
Jackson  Davis,  farewell!  But,  whilst  the  "Magic  Staff"
— Penetralia,  Stellar  Key,  Arabula,  Harmonia  and  Divine
Revelations — are  in  print,  or  even  in  memory,  never  let
American,  English,  French,  German,  or  "  critic  "  of  any
other  land,  presume  to  say  :  Spiritism  has  no  philosophy.  In
the  volumes  enumerated  above,  it  has  the  best,  broadest,
holiest  and  yet  most  practical  philosophy  that  was  ever
enunciated  since  God  said  :  "  Let  there  be  Light,  and  there
was  Light !"

We  are  not  informed  whether  Mr.  Davis  ranks  himself
before  the  world  as  a  Spiritist  or  not.  Few  of  the  brethren
of  that  order  seem  to  know  or  care  much  about  him  now ;
but  tlie  mode  in  which  his  philosophy  was  produced,  justi-
fies a  stranger's  claim  for  him,  to  wit :  that  of  all  the
children  of  the  Spirit  that  have  illuminated  this  great
modern  movement  called  Spiritism,  one  of  the  best,  truest
and  most  honorable  of  them  all  is  he  who,  in  deep  obscur-
ity, illustrates  so  thoroughly  the  proverb,  '^  A  Prophet  is
not  without  honor,  save  in  his  own  country."

Our  sketch  of  Supermundane  Spiritism  would  not  be
complete  without  this  humble  tribute  to  one  who  forms  its
noblest  illustration — to  one  with  whom  the  writer  has
never  exchanged  a  word  on  earth,  and  in  all  human  prob-
ability never  will,  but  who  rejoices  to  believe  that  name,
so  coldly  slipping  out  of  human  remembrance  and  appre-
ciation now,  will  be  enshrined  in  the  hearts  of  unborn  gen-

447

erations,  and  in  the  shining  roll  of  immortality  be  held
sacred  as  the  Founder  of  a  Divine  and  natural  Harmonial
Dispensation.

In  commenting  on  American  and  European  Spiritism,
we  recognize  no  right  to  add  items  of  history  to  the  im-
mense stores  already  extant,  nor  weary  our  readers  with
descriptions  of  phenomena  which  weekly  and  monthly
periodicals  have  never  failed  to  chronicle  from  the  opening
of  the  movement  to  this  day.  Deeming  a  work  published
under  the  peculiar  limitations  which  herald  forth  this  vol-
ume will  only  render  it  an  ephemera  of  the  day,  our  clos-
ing remarks  will  be  addressed  to  those  who  must  already  be
informed  upon  every  point  of  the  passing  Spiritualistic
movement.  If  they  are  not  so,  the  works  of  Robert  Dale
Owen,  Judge  Edmonds,  Eppes  Sargent,  Eugene  Crowell,
but,  above  all,  Emma  Hardinge's  inimitable  "  Twenty
Years'  History  of  Modern  Spiritualism,"  will  bring  every
student  face  to  face  with  the  entire  details  of  all  that  has
been  effected  by  Spirits  communicating  to  mortals  on
American  soil.  Here  too,  as  in  Europe,  there  are  vast
numbers  of  tracts  being  continually  issued,  representing
all  the  various  phases  of  the  movement,  besides  many
which  do  not  belong  to  it,  but  which  persons,  who  believe
in  its  facts,  availing  themselves  of  its  popularity,  thrust
before  the  public  as  Spiritualistic.

Books  of  poems,  novels,  treatises,  some  with  rare  merit,
others  less  than  mediocre,  flood  the  age  from  Spiritualistic
sources.  A  great  many  newspapers  and  magazines  have
been  published  in  the  interests  of  this  movement,  lived
their  time,  served  their  period  of  usefulness,  and  died  out,
others  still  maintain  their  hold  upon  the  world's  attention
and  command  a  full  share  of  patronage.  The  oldest  and
best  sustained— the  "  Banner  of  Light,"  commenced  in  the
earliest  days  of  the  American  movement,  and  now   occu-

448

pying  the  distinguished  phxce  of  its  leading  organ,  is  in  it-
self a  complete  repertoire  of  all  the  astounding  phenomena,
passing  events,  and  celebrated  personages,  who  constitute
the  history  of  Spiritism.

The  more  detailed  sources  of  information  thus  indicated,
it  only  remains  for  us  to  notice  some  of  the  principal  char-
acteristics of  the  modern  movement

In  America  these  are  strikingly  tinctured  by  the  na-
tional idiosyncrasies  of  the  people,  but  the  methods  of  sig-
naling by  spirit  power  arealike  all  over  the  world.  They
consist  first,  of  the  production  of  sounds  by  knocking ;
table-tilting,  lifting  of  heavy  bodies,  the  transportation
of  small  articles,  such  as  fruits,  flowers,  jewels,  etc.,
etc.,  through  the  air,  and  their  production  at  points
of  distance  from  their  scene  of  departure.  The  exe-
cution of  music  by  spirits  playing  upon  instruments
furnished  by  mortals,  and  still  more  rarely,  music  sung
or  played  by  spirits,  without  any  visible  means  of  its  pro-
,  duction.  The  voices  of  spirits  are  also  heard  clairaudi-
I  ently  and  externally,  sometimes  uttering  words  only,  at
;  others,  long  addresses.  Spirits  display  their  hands,  feet,
tiaces,  and  sometimes  the  whole  form  "  materialized  "  out
of  the  emanations  of  the  mediums  and  human  beings  sur-
rounding them.  In  this  fleshly  masquerade  the  spirits
dance,  sing,  disport  with  the  persons  around  them,  and
perform  liKe  players  on  the  mimic  stage  of  a  theatre.
Other  demonstrations  consist  of  resisting  fire,  the  extension
of  the  body,  also  its  elevation  into  the  air,  and  floating
about  the  apartment.  Spirits  also  exhibit  feats  of  strength,
tying  and  untying  their  Media  when  bound  with  ropes,
and  executing  just  such  sleight-of-hand  tricks  as  are  com-
mon to  jugglers.  Many  higher  phases  of  spirit  power  are
exhibited,  such  as  trance  speaking  and  writing ;  Seership,
or  the  power  of  seeing  and  describing  spirits,  or  personat-

449

ing  their  peculiarities  so  as  to  be  recognized  ;  also  the  im-
pressions which  the  mind  receives  from  spirits,  to  declare
names  and  other  signs  of  identity  by  which  mortals  can  be
assured  their  spirit  friends  are  present.  Many  photogra-
phic likenesses  of  Spirits  are  said  to  have  been  produced
through  Media,  whilst  others  are  impelled  to  draw  por-
traits of  Spirits,  or  flowers  and  allegorical  scenes,  others  to
behold  visions,  prophetic,  descriptive,  or  symbolical.

Many  are  impelled  to  describe  diseases,  prescribe  reme-
dies, or  effect  cures  by  the  laying  on  of  hands.  This
movement  has  also  brought  to  light  a  great  many  latent
powers  of  the  soul,  which  spring  up  under  the  sympathetic
contagion  of  the  time,  and  exhibit  themselves  in  psycho-
metric delineations  of  character  by  touch,  clairvoyance,
magnetic  virtue  and  prophetic  intuition.  Another  strik-
ing and  curious  phase  is  the  frequent  apparition  of  the
spectre,  or  astral  spirit,  disengaged  from  the  still  living
body,  and  manifesting  its  presence  at  a  distance,  with  or
without  the  consciousness  of  the  subject.

Now  the  great  marvel  and  special  interest  which  at-
taches to  all  these  manifestations  of  spirit  power  in  the
nineteenth  century  is  their  original  spontaneity,  and  the
fact  that  they  have  in  most  instances  fallen  upon  the
media  through  whom  they  are  produced,  without  solicita-
tiou  or  any  form  of  preparation.

It  is  in  this  spontaneity,  and  the  vast  abundance  of  the
phenomena,  that  the  modern  movement  differs  so  widely
from  all  preceding  examples,  where — except  in  rare  cases
— years  of  preparation,  initiation,  and  magical  processes
have  been  required  for  the  performance  of  occult  works.
Modern  Spiritism  also  is  more  characteristic  of  human
spirit  agency  than  that  of  any  other  era.

Up  to  the  close  of  the  last  century,  when  the  German
and  French  magnetizers   so  widely  popularized  tlje  prac-

450

tices  of  Mesmerism  and  the  powers  of  Psychology,  a  belief
prevailed  that  occult  works  were  effected  by  Planetary,
Elementary,  and  Tutelary  Spirits  chiefly,  and  that  the  ap-
parition of  deceased  persons  was  rare  and  exceptional.
The  experiments  of  the  magnetizers,  and  the  cloud  of  wit-
nesses who  poured  in  through  their  subjects  from  the
realms  of  spirit  land,  bringing  indisputable  proofs  of  their
identity  with  the  souls  of  deceased  ancestors,  completely
reversed  this  opinion,  and  induced  a  prevalent  belief  that
aU  manifestations  of  a  spiritualistic  character  originated
with  the  liberated  souls  of  humanity.  The  author  has,  in
previous  sections,  adduced  sufficient  reason  for  assuming  a
middle  ground  between  these  opinions ;  and  whilst  there
is  abundant  evidence  to  prove  the  constant  interposition
of  human  spirits  in  human  affairs,  and  the  identity  of  such
spirits  with  a  vast  amount  of  the  occult  phenomena  pro-
duced in  every  age  of  the  world,  we  may  also  rest  assured
that  the  realms  of  the  Elementaries  can  and  do  exercise
considerable  influence  upon  humanity,  especially  in  rela-
tion to  animal  propensities  and  earthly  things  ;  also  that
Planetary  Spirits  rule,  guide  and  interpose  in  human
destiny,  and  that  Tutelary  Spirits  take  charge  of  and
govern  nations,  planets,  and  all  bodies  in  space. — That  all
these  spirits  can  be  seen,  communed  with  and  invoked,  is
also  sufficiently  proved  in  the  course  of  this  work.

When  we  consider  the  stupendous  and  revolutionary
changes  of  opinion  that  this  great  Spiritual  outpouring  in-
duces, we  are  driven  to  accept  of  three  manifest  conclu-
sions ;  the  first  is,  that  we  cannot  be  too  grateful  for  these
demonstrations,  nor  too  careful  to  sift  them  from  all  taint
of  human  folly,  impurity,  hallucination  or  imposture.

Next  we  should  recognize  it  as  our  incumbent  duty,  even
an  urgent  necessity,  to  preserve  to  ourselves  and  posterity,
the  high  privileges  of  this  beneficent  and  instructive  inter-

•     451

course  by  studying  its  laws,  and  endeavoring  scientifically
to  master  its  methods,  so  as  to  control  the  communion
and  be  enabled  to  conduct  it  at  pleasure.

Next,  it  must  strike  every  reasonable  mind  with  indig-
nation, to  perceive  that  those  who  have  assumed  the  high
position  of  leaders  either  in  science  or  ecclesiasticism,
should  so  far  abandon  their  trust  as  to  permit  the  people  to
grope  their  way  blindfold  through  the  mists,  obscurities,  and
difficulties  of  this  vast  outpouring,  without  lending  their
aid  to  solve  its  mysteries,  proving  its  errors  if  it  have  any,
conserving  its  truths  if  they  exist,  and  demonstrating  what-
ever is  true  or  false,  valuable  or  pernicious  in  its  action.

It  is  an  acknowledged  axiom  in  logic,  that  abuse  is  no
argument,  ridicule  no  proof.  And  yet  to  these  petty  arms —
pop-guns  worthy  only  of  pugnacious  school-boys — have
many  of  the  most  eminent  scientists  of  the  day  descended,
when  compelled  by  the  force  of  public  opinion  to  deal  with
the  subject  of  Spiritism.

High  ecclesiasticism  has  done  worse,  for  it  has  falsified
the  very  basis  of  its  own  pretensions,  the  corner-stone  of  its
authority  being  miracle.  By  denouncing  the  modern
power  or  right  to  work  what  has  been  unscientifically
termed  "  miracle,"  the  Church  has  virtually  undermined  its
own  foundations  and  either  proved  itself  impious  enough
"  to  fight  against  the  living  God,"  or  hypocritical  enough
to  maintain  an  institution  founded  upon  myth  and  false-
hood.

From  these  positions  there  is  no  escape,  and  though  we
have  no  intention  in  these  brief  remarks  to  wage  war
upon  materialistic  Science,  or  atheistic  Ecclesiasticism,  we
point  out  the  position  to  our  readers  to  show  them  why
they  must  rely  on  themselves,  and  cease  to  utter  vain  ap-
peals to  any  human  leaders  to  help  them,  or  continue  their
humiliatin<>:  efforts  to  convert  great  men  who  don't  want  to
be  converted.

:452

Many  very  eminent  scientists  and  excellent  members  of
ecclesiastical  bodies  have — as  individuals^  not  as  official
members  of  an  organization — taken  hold  of  Spiritualism  and
hazarded  name  and  place  in  its  advocacy,  but  it  must  be
obvious  even  to  these  illuminated  thinkers,  that  the  formulas
of  material  science  and  the  influences  of  credal  faith  have
no  connection  with  this  great  independent  movement.

The  Scientist  finds  that  a  new  set  of  laws,  and  those
purely  psychological,  must  be  studied  and  obeyed,  before
he  can  make  headway  with  Spiritism,  and  the  Ecclesiastic
continually  proves  that  the  Spirits  do  not  respond  to  the
invocations  or  exorcisms  of  Credal  faiths,  nor  can  the  broad
and  un conservative  revelations  of  Spiritism  be  accommo-
dated to,^the  narrow  dogmas  of  sects.

Once  again  then  we  recommend  the  study  and  adoption
of  those  principles  which  Spiritism  itself  discloses,  and  as
these  are  in  the  strictest  relations  to  good  order,  good
morals,  purity  of  life,  and  the  spirit  of  universal  brother-
hood, we  can  do  mankind  no  better  service  than  to  recom-
mend a  profound  study  both  of  the  science  and  religion  of
Spiritism.

To  illustrate  our  meaning  all  the  more  forcibly,  we  will
refer  to  the  three  aforesaid  conclusions,  which  the  study  of
Modern  Spiritism,  especially  the  American  phase  of  the
movement,  compels  the  observer  to  come  to  :  "  We  cannot
be  too  grateful  for  these  demonstrations,  nor  too  careful  to
sift  them  from  all  taint  of  human  folly,  impurity,  halluci-
nation, or  imposture."

The  author  has  taken  the  opportunity  of  making  three
visits  to  America,  and  that  for  the  sole  purpose  of  studying
the  spiritual  manifestatins  produced  on  her  soil.

On  the  last  two  occasions  he  has  observed  with  more
regret  than  surprise,  a  gradual  but  evident  decadence  in
the  general  feeling  of  grateful   appreciation   which  these

453

manifestations  at  first  awakened.  Some  believers  have
become  accustomed  to  what  was  at  first  an  exciting  won-
der, and  their  curiosity  satisfied,  they  need  no  more.
Others  have  slackened  in  zeal  because  they  have  been
disappointed  in  some  special  results  they  anticipated ;  but
a  still  larger  number  have  withdrawn  their  public  support
from  a  movement  where  the  taint  of  human  folly  and  im-
purity has  become  so  evident  as  to  brand  every  class  of
believers  with  the  evil  reputation  fastened  upon  it  by  the
few.  Hallucination  and  imposture  too  have  prevailed  to
an  alarming  extent  in  the  ranks  of  Spiritism,  and  these
two  last  elements  combining  with  the  before  mentioned
causes,  have  shaken  the  faith  of  many,  and  repelled  still
more  from  this  cause.

It  is  as  a  corrective  to  the  errors  which  so  prominently
force  themselves  into  notice  in  connection  with  the  first
conclusion  we  draw,  that  we  recommend  a  careful  con-
sideration of  the  second,  namely  :  '•  That  we  should  recog-
nize it  as  our  incumbent  duty,  even  an  urgent  necessity,  to
preserve  to  ourselves  and  posterity  the  high  privileges  of
this  beneficent  and  instructive  intercourse,  by  studying  its
laws,  and  endeavoring  scientifically  to  master  its  methods,
so  as  to  control  the  communion,  and  be  enabled  to  con-
duct it  at  pleasure."

On  this  point  let  it  be  remembered  that  all  the  magical
arts  and  possibilities  detailed  in  previous  sections,  are  as
open  to  mankind  to-day  as  ever  they  were.  Whether  it
be  expedient  to  seek  them  or  no,  is  not  the  question.  We
simply  reiterate  they  are  attainable,  and  with  the  lights
of  science  we  now  enjoy,  especially  in  our  improved  knowl-
edge of  magnetic,  psychologic  and  physiological  laws,  they
can  be  arrived  at  with  far  less  severe  probationary  efforts,
and  with  far  milder  methods  of  culture  than  those  formerly
exercised.

454

Superficial  commentators  on  this  subject,  talk  of  the
"  lost  art  of  magic,"  and  describe  as  impossible  achieve-
ments for  modern  Europeans  or  Americans,  the  marvels
enacted  by  Hindoo  Fakeers,  Egyptian  Dervishes,  and  Ara-
bian Santons,  Mediaeval  Ecstatics,  Witches  and  Wizards ;
but  what  marvels  are  much  greater  than  the  talking
Spirits  whose  truth  and  spiritual  origin  were  so  clearly
demonstrated  at  Koon's  spirit  rooms,  even  as  early  as  1850  '?
(vide  Hardinge's  Modern  American  Spiritualism.)  What
revelations  of  Zoroaster,  Buddha,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  or
other  great  Philosophers  of  antiquity,  have  ever  rendered
a  better  code  of  morals,  purer  life,  or  more  scientific  de-
monstration of  creative  order,  and  the  mysteries  of  the
Univercoelum^  than  the  entranced  Mystics,  Sweden borg  and
Andrew  Jackson  Davis '?  Does  M.  Jaccoliot  give  one
single  marvel  of  Hindoo  Spiritism  that  has  not  transpired
in  equal  force  and  greater  abundance  through  the  physical
force  Mediums  of  England  and  America?

The  Ecstatics  of  the  Monasteries  were  canonized  as
Saints,  because  the  stigmata  appeared  on  their  bodies  ;
their  forms  were  elevated  in  the  air,  and  they  could  read
the  thoughts  of  others,  prophesy  the  future,  etc.,  etc.

It  is  not  our  purpose  to  detract  from  the  value  of  the
abundant  literature  now  before  a  very  unappreciative  age,
by  repeating  the  authentic  and  well-attested  narratives
they  contain.  Any  unprejudiced  reader  will  find  the  mar-
vels reported  of  the  Asiatic  Mystics  equalled,  and  in  many
iustances  transcended  by  the  illustrations  of  spirit-power
given  in  Hardinge's  "  Modern  American  Spiritualism "
alone.

Let  it  suffice  to  say,  that  the  stigmata  of  names,  figures,
dates,*  and  signs,  which  have  convinced  thousands  of  dark-
eaed  minds  of  the  Soul's  immortality,  have  appeared  on
the  persons  of  numerous  mediums  of  this  century,  and  are

455

still  appearing  to  those  who  care  to  seek  for  such  evidence  ;
that  the  levitation  of  the  body  is  a  common  occurrence ;
the  power  of  prophecy  has  been  amply  demonstrated  in
thousands  of  well  attested  instances.  The  capacity  to  re-
sist fire  has  been  abundantly  shown.

The  vaticinations  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  Sybils  never
exceeded  many  of  the  eloquent  utterances  of  unlettered
boys  and  girls  in  the  modern  Spiritual  movement,  and  if
shameful  imposture  and  very  bad  reputations  had  not  in-
tervened so  frequently  to  destroy  faith  or  even  patience
with  the  modern  manifestations,  they  exceed  in  use,  won-
der, beauty,  and  number,  a  thousand  fold,  all  the  marvel-
lous tales  recited  of  Greek,  Roman,  Hindoo,  Egyptian,
Persian,  Chaldean,  or  Hebrew  Spiritism,  that  is,  when  the
latter  are  sifted  down  to  well  proven  narratives.  Cabalistic
sentences  are  translated  into  plain  sense,  and  allegorical
flights  of  fancy  are  reduced  to  actual  fact.

The  failures  of  modern  Spiritism,  its  degradation,  lack  (^
of  organic  power,  evil  repute,  and  gradual  but  sure  deca-
dence, all  proceed  from  the  human  side  of  the  movement.  ^  A.
It  may  be  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  repair  the  errors
committed  by  a  fast  fading  generation,  but  it  is  for  us  to
lay  the  foundation  of  improved  conditions,  by  dealing
with  the  rising  generation,  and  for  this  purpose,  the  wis-
est course  we  can  now  pursue  to  show  our  devotion  to  the
interests  of  truth,  and  our  duty  to  posterity,  would  be  to
found  a  New  "School  of  the  Prophets."

In  these,  young  fresh  susceptible  organisms  should  be
selected  as  Neophytes  to  fill  a  future  order  of  Mediums,
Priests,  and  Ministers.  Their  food  should  be  plain  and
simple,  their  habits  pure  and  orderly,  their  lives  spotless,
their  morals  regulated  by  the  most  exalted  and  dignified
standards  of  truth,  justice,  piety,  and  goodness.  They
should  be  under  the  regulation  of   a    company  of  holy

456

women,  and  scientific  men.  Good,  pure-minded,  healthful
magnetizers  should  be  received  into  fellowship  with  them,
and  one  and  all  should  be  magnetized  to  determine  who
were  operators,  and  who  subjects.  The  first  should  be  set
apart  as  Physicians  to  the  sick,  and  operators  for  medium-
istic  and  clairvoyant  development.  The  second  as  Media,
Prophets,  and  Ministers.

As  soon  as  the  aforesaid  powers  were  discovered,  they
should  be  classified  and  the  magnetizations  continued  until
the  subjects  lielt  impressed  to  discontinue  them  and  stand
alone.  Periodical  seances  should  be  established,  at  which
scientific  order  should  strictly  prevail.  The  floors  of  the
circle  room  should  be  intersected  with  plateaus  of  glass,  to
prevent  the  escape  of  the  magnetic  fluid.  The  air  should
often  be  purified  with  streams  of  ozone  ;  the  walls  sur-
rounded with  graceful  forms  of  art  and  well  selected  colors.
Those  destined  to  become  Magnetizers  or  Physicians  should
sit  in  rooms  well  supplied  with  powerful  magnets.  Tender
susceptible  media  should  never  commence  their  sittings
without  first  holding  the  poles  of  a  good  electro-magnetic
battery  in  their  hands,  closing  their  exercises  in  the  same
way.  No  drugs,  narcotics,  or  stimulants  should  be  used
under  any  circumstances,  but  all  other  legitimate  appeals  \
to  the  senses  should  be  put  into  requisition,  the  most  poten-  \
tial  of  which  should  be  healthful  exercises,  bathing,  the
performance  of  exquisite  music,  and  the  sight  of  beautiful  /
forms  of  art.

Those  sensitives  manifesting  tendencies  towards  clair-
voyance should  practice  gazing  steadily  into  the  crystal  or
mirror.  Those  susceptible  of  psychometrical  delineations,
should  practice  their  power,  remembering  that  this,  and  all
other  Spiritual  gifts^  are  as  much  the  result  of  culture  and
exercise,  as  are  the  developments  of  muscular  strength,  or
intellectual  achievement.     No  seances  should  ever  be  at-

457

tempted  without  a  solemn  prepcaratory  invocation  to  good
and  wise  Spirits,  and  to  any  Tutelary,  Angelic  Guardian,
or  Deific  power,  in  which  the  Invocant  places  faith,  and
this  not  only  for  the  purpose  of  stimulating  the  mind  to
aspiration  and  soliciting  the  presence  and  influence  of  the
good  and  wise,  but  also  for  the  purpose  of  banishing  evil
and  mischievous  spirits  from  interfering.  The  same  cer-
emonial of  discharge  or  dismissal  should  be  used  on
breaking  up  a  seance,  in  fact  we  would  recommend  at
least  as  much  courtesy  in  the  treatment  of  Angelic  essences,
as  the  usages  of  society  demand  for  ordinary  acquaint-
ances.

A  '*  School  of  the  Prophets"  conducted  on  some  such
principles  as  we  have  thus  briefly  outlined,  would  certainly
do  as  much  for  this  generation  as  the  mysteries  and  Tem-
ple services  of  antiquity  efiected  for  the  nations  in  which
they  were  practiced — in  a  word — it  would  provide  a  class
of  duly  qualified  Magnetic  Physicians,  Prophets,  Mediums,
Clear  Seers,  and  Spiritualistic  persons,  whose  morals,  char-
acters, and  gifts  being  cultured  and  superinduced  into  re-
ligious and  scientific  methods,  would  fill  the  world  with
blessing  and  usefulness  instead  of  as  now,  desecrating  high
and  holy  gifts  to  base  and  sordid  purposes,  or  disgracing
them  with  characteristics  which  we  do  not  care  to  dwell
upon  in  this  volume.

('-  All  the  public  exercises  of  Spiritualism  should  be  con-
ducted in  decency  and  order.  A  general  basis  of  principles
should  imite  all  persons  who  believe  in  Spiritual  existence
and  Spiritual  gifts,  and  well-qualified  expounders  of  these
subjects  should  be  the  officiating  ministers.  In  these
gatherings,  as  in  the  processes  of  scientific  culture,  the
sweetest  melodies,  the  noblest  harmonies,  the  purest  flowers
and  fragrance,  and  the  most  pleasing  association  of  artistic
sights  with  sounds  should  be  employed.     All  that  could

458

contribute  to  elevate,  purify  and  exalt  the  Soul's  noblest
powers  should  be  resorted  to,  as  legitimate  means  of  influ-
ence, and  nothing  low,  degrading,  slang,  or  impure,  should
be  associated  with  Spiritual  ideas.

In  private  families,  the  practice  of  heterogeneous,  dis-
orderly or  idle  gatherings  to  seek  Spirit  communion,  should
be  sternly  discountenanced.  The  whole  subject  has  been
shamefully  secularized ;  treated  either  as  a  common-place
method  of  spending  an  idle  hour  ;  sought  for  the  mere  pur-
poses of  curiosity,  fun,  fortune-telling,  or  marvel-seeking.

If  the  theories  propounded  in  this  volume  be  correct,  and
spirits  of  various  grades,  from  the  very  highest  to  the  very
lowest,  hover  around  us,  seeking  to  minister  or  pander  to  the
motives  which  impel  the  seekers,  or  the  characteristics  of
mind  which  pervade  the  assemblage,  then  what  class  of
Spirits  must  inevitably  attend  nine-tenths  of  the  spirit
circles  now  in  vogue,  and  what  results  of  good,  use,  indi-
vidual or  collective  elevation,  can  be  expected  to  grow  out
of  them  1  In  the  present  heterogeneous  condition  of  hu-
man society,  we  dare  not  recommend  the  endeavor  to
obtain  personal  communion  with  the  spirit  world  to  every
individual.  The  merchant,  trader,  mechanic,  operative,
seamstress,  shop-keepers  and  laborers,  whose  time  must  be
nearly  all  consumed  in  the  routine  of  perpetual  drudgery,
and  whose  over-taxed  minds  and  bodies  cannot  be  properly
attuned  to  such  exercises,  should  not  attempt  to  deplete
their  systems,  or  risk  the  integrity  of  mental  and  physical
balance,  by  seeking  to  culture  Spiritualistic  endowments.
/  Spiritism,  like  every  other  calling,  demands  its  votaries,
its  devotees,  and  its  peculiarly-prepared  ministers.  Per-
sons having  time  to  devote  to  the  culture  of  their  gifts  and
\  steady  enthusiasm  to  sustain  them  during  their  probation-
ary training,  are  the  only  classes  who  should  attempt  to
teach,  preach,  or  tender  service  publicly  as  Mediums  be-

459

tween  the  better  world  of  Spirits,  and  the  much-darkened
world  of  poor  humanity.

Far  be  it  from  the  author  of  these  pages  to  discourage
the  sweet  and  loving  practice  of  family  circles,  meeting
together  in  the  pleasant  and  sacred  seclusion  of  home,  or
the  social  relations  of  friendship,  to  invoke  the  dear  house-
hold deities  who  have  passed  on  before,  or  who  would  be
so  certain  to  respond  to  the  appeal  of  those  whom  they
have  best  loved  on  earth.

They  tuill  surely  he  there ^  those  loving  spirit  friends  ;  aye,
wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  the  name
of  the  spirit,  whatever  spirit  they  summon  will  he  there^  be
it  God  or  the  Adversary ;   spirits  of  the   heart's  dearest
affections,  or  goblins  from  the  metal  crypts  of  earth,  which
avarice   would  fain  rob  of  its  hidden  treasures.     In  the
meantime,  in  order  to  sytematize  even  these  innocent  home
communings,  good  order  and  strict  conformity  to  scientific
principles  should  be  observed.     We  are  not  now  undertak-
ing to  lay  down  the  exact  methods  in  which  each  circle
for  development  or  communion  should  be  conducted.     We
can  only  touch  upon  the  generalities  of  the  subject,  and
would   recommend   well-wishers  to  these  great  truths  if
they  desire  their  rapid  and  orderly  promotion,  to  abandon
the  childish  and  egotistical  fear  that  now  paralyzes  them,
lest    some  competent  adviser  or  highly  inspired  person
should  assume   leadership  amongst   them,    and  remember
that  to  every  organism  there   must  be  a  head  as  well  as
organs,    to    every    circumference  a  centre,  and  in  every
nation  a  governmental  combination  for  the  protection  of
the  governed,  no  less  than  for  the  restraint  of  the  lawless.
Having  disposed  of  this  poor,  envious   phantom  which  so
troubles  the  peace  of  some  Spiritists,  and  convinced  them-
selves that  it  is  not  necessary  that  a  well-qualified  adept  in
spiritual  things  should  require  those  whom  he  counsels  to

/

460

place  a  triple  crown  on  his  head,  kiss  his  slipper,  and  pro-
nounce his  dictum  infallible — let  Spiritists  come  together
in  reverent  deliberation,  and  decide  what  methods  of
scientific  investigation  they  can  or  ought  to  pursue  so  as
to  evolve  the  basic  principles  upon  which  spirits  commu-
nicate.

Let  them  appoint  qualified  persons  to  prepare  reports
and  verify  their  opinions  by  successful  experiments,  and
until  such  reports,  conjoined  with  such  experiments,  be
accepted  by  the  sense,  reason  and  convicted  judgment  of
the  deliberators,  let  the  reports  be  peremptorily  rejected,
and  the  investigation  continue,  if  it  be  necessary,  from
generation  to  generation,  until  results  are  achieved.  But
such  a  council,  animated  by  such  a  spirit,  would  not  have
to  wait  long.  >^  Magnetism  is  the  pabulum  by  which  spirits
communicate.  Psychology  the  influence.  ,  These  are  the
secret  virtues  of  Magic,  Witchcraft  and  Mediumship  in
every  age,  and  human  nature  changes  not.  If  the  founders
of  home  circles  will  carefully  study  out  the  rules  briefly
suggested  as  indications  in  forming  a  school  for  the  educa-
tion and  training  of  Media,  they  will  surely  become,  in  part
at  least,  successful  enough  to  reward  them  for  some  time
consumed,  and  some  sacrifices  consummated.

If  possible  a  room  should  be  set  apart,  consecrated  and
held  consecrated  to  spiritual  science.

No  unholy  thing  should  enter  there,  no  unholy  thoughts
be  invited.

The  circle  should  meet  at  least  once,  but  better  twice  or
thrice  each  week.  None  should  enter  there  until  they  had
fasted  at  least  four  hours  previously,  and  assemble  together
with  clean  hands  and  clean  hearts.  Let  them  come  as  to
a  holy  place  ;  and  if  neither  vocal  nor  instrumental  music
of  a  sweet  and  harmonious  character  can  be  procured,  a
small  but  finely  toned  chime  of  bells,  glass  harmonica,  or

461

good  musical  box  should  invariably  be  provided  ; — thus  the
atmosphere  will  be  arranged  into  harmonious  strata,  ac-
cording to  the  suggestions  upon  music  contained  in  a  pre-
vious Section.  Let  the  chamber  be  adorned  with  all  the
little  stores  of  beauty  and  pleasant  forms  possible.  Flow-
ers are  sometimes  injurious  to  media,  their  strong  perfume
causing  too  much  excitement  to  the  senses,  but  where
ozone  can  be  procured,  it  is  well  to  pass  streams  through  the
air,  and  the  use  of  the  electro-magnetic  battery  held  by
two  persons  placed  at  each  pole,  the  rest  forming  a  chain,
ever  strengthens  the  force,  and  benefits  all  present.  Ten
minutes'  use  of  this  machine  should  open  and  close  each
seance.  Also,  we  would  enforce  the  same  rule  of  opening
with  an  invocation,  and  closing  with  a  courteous  discharge
to  the  spirits,  suggested  above.  Family  gatherings  might
experiment  with  magnetization  as  before  suggested,  the
strongest,  healthiest  and  most  worthy  of  the  party  being
selected  as  the  operator.  Crystals  and  mirrors  should  be
laid  on  the  circle  table,  also  writing  materials  and  slates.

A  large  circle  beneath  the  table,  sufficient  to  insulate  all
the  sitters  assembled,  and  prevent  even  their  garments
from  touching  the  ground,  should  be  formed  of  glass,  and
this  would  greatly  conduce  to  aid  the  manifestations  by
preventing  the  too  rapid  efflux  of  vital  force.

It  should  forever  after  be  prohibited  to  sit  in  totally
darkened  apartments.  Spirits  come  to  earth  in  their  own
Astral  light,  and  to  this  element  material  light  is  opposed  ;
still  the  unqualified  abuses  that  have  arisen  from  the  prev-
alence of  total  darkness  at  spiritual  seances  should  induce
every  wise  investigator  to  discountenance  them  utterly.

The  fact  that  many  of  the  most  stupendous  evidences  of
spirit  power  have  been  given  in  semi-lighted  apartments,
should  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  those  who  plead  for  dark-
ness as  a  necessary  condition  for  strong  demonstrations ;

462

besides,  the  wise  and  faithful  investigator  can  better
afford  to  dispense  with  strong  demonstrations,  than  good
morals,  decency,  or  spiritual  agency  without  human  inter-
ference.

Let  dark  circles  be  abandoned  to  Elementary  Spirits,  in
and  out  of  earthly  encasements,  and  the  impostors  will
find  much  of  their  occupation  gone.

For  more  detailed  instructions  in  this  and  all  forms  of
spiritual  culture,  we  commend  a  careful  perusal  and  repe-
rusal  of  these  pages.  Attempts  should  be  made  to  elabo-
rate the  many  suggestions  it  contains,  by  the  aid  of  a
council  selected  from  experienced  media  and  philosophic
thinkers, — but  whilst  the  aim  in  view  should  be  to  perfect
those  methods  by  which  Spiritism  can  be  organized  into  a
religion  and  cultivated  as  a  science,  both  Church  and  Ly-
ceum should  be  left  free  to  expand  in  every  direction,  open
to  new  light,  new  conditions  of  society,  and  the  progress
of  human  opinion.  Basic  principles  should  be  sought  for
and  laid  down  as  fundamental  rules  from  which  there  can
be  no  departure ;  powers  of  growth  and  advancement  should
be  just  as  liberally  provided  for,  ever  remembering  that
mind  grows,  but  writings  do  not,  and  that  whilst  the  Uni-
verse is  a  stupendous  organism  whose  centre — the  grand
man — the  Spiritual  Sun — the  Unknown  and  Unknowable
— changes  not, — the  manifestations  of  his  infinity,  his  va-
riousness,  his  beauty,  and  goodness,  are  outwrought  in  eter-
nal series  of  changes.  Light  and  Heat, — Truth  and  Love,
are  eternal  and  unchanging  principles.  Their  manifest-
ations in  created  being  are  infinite.  All  are  tending
outward  from  a  grand  cential  heart  to  an  illimitable  cir-
cumference, yet  all  are  held  in  the  gravitating  arms  of
immutable  law ;  all  are  moved  in  the  expanding  grooves
of  inevitable  progress, — and  all  are  sent  forth  on  Sun-like
paths  of  ascending  glory  to  model  after  God.     Study  him,

463

honor  him,  glorify  him  in  thyself.  Thou  canst  not  mis-
understand or  fail  to  know  him.  In  Heaven,  in  the  bound-
less Universe,  he  is  the  Macrocosm,  the  infinitely  large ;
on  earth  and  in  thyself,  He  is  the  Microcosm,  the  infinitely
little.  In  the  understanding  of  the  mystery  of  God  lies  all
the  secret  potency  of  Art  Magic.

In  the  apprehension  of  his  scheme,  his  glorious  harp  of
creation,  on  which  his  master  hand  is  striking  tones  from
the  lowest  bass  to  the  highest  treble ;  you  hear  the  majes-
tic symphony  whose  notes  are  suns,  systems,  worlds,  earth,
men  ;  —Mundane,  Sub-Mundane,  and  Super-Mundane  Spir-
itism,

465

EPILOGUE  TO  THE  DRAMA  OF  ART  MAGIC.

Some  readers  there  be  whose  chief  aim  is — unconsciously
to  themselves  perhaps — but  greatly  to  the  detriment  of
their  higher  natures — to  search  into  what  they  read  rather
for  the  discovery  of  errors  in  orthography ,  and  innovations
upon  conservative  methods  of  typography,  than  for  the
elimination  of  ideas,  or  the  enjoyment  of  soul  intercourse
with  their  author.  To  this  class  of  readers  our  pages  will
doubtless  present  a  fruitful  soil  for  their  special  methods  of
criticism,  and  to  such,  we  have  no  other  apology  to  offer,
than  that  contained  in  the  few  choice  and  pointed  words
of  the  Editor's  Preface.

There  is  still  another  class  whose  methods  of  study  have
received  the  peculiarly  significant  soubriquet  of,  skimming.
The  chief  delight  of  such  persons  is  in  an  elaborately  pre-
pared Index,  over  the  columns  of  which  they  rejoice  to
pore,  industriously  picking  out  just  the  particular  words
they  have  sympathy  with,  glancing  at  these, — for  Index
worshippers  only  glance,  do  not  read^ — and  abandoning  the
rest  of  the  volume  to  more  patient  and  capable  students
than  themselves.

The  author's  life-long  experience  with  a  great  variety  of
readers,  has  induced  him  to  look  upon  Index  worshippers,
as  the  most  superficial  of  all  book  owners,  and  finally  de-
termined him  not  to  spend  time  in  writing  for  them  at  ail.
In  the  compilation  of  Historical,  Legal,  Statistical  or  Bio-
graphical works,  an  Index  is  not  only  useful,  but  absolutely
essential.     In  a  book  of  ideas  only,  such  an  appendix  offers

466

a  premium  to  the  unworthy  habit  of  "  skimming,"  and
therefore,  rejecting  the  courteous  offer  of  our  patient  and
untiring  Editor,  to  satisfy  the  hypercritical,  by  the  addition
of  an  Index,  we  submit  the  foregoing ''pages  for  study, —
study  which  cannot  master  the  ideas  presented  in  one  su-
perficial reading,  much  less  in  Index  skimmings.

We  ask  a  careful  perusal  and  reperusal  of  these  pages,
not  for  their  literary  merit,  nor  the  exactitude  of  their
methods,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  high  themes  discussed,
and  the  weighty  subjects  which  fill  up  each  column.  When
our  readers  have  bestowed  thus  much  study  upon  the  vol-
ume, they  will  not  need  an  Index  ;  until  they  have  done
so,  we  have  written  for  them  in  vain.  Neither  have  we
followed  the  well-beaten  track  of  custom,  in  giving  a  list  of
the  authorities  cited  in  this  volume.  Whenever  possible
we  have  given  the  names  of  such  authors  as  have  supplied
us  with  felicitous^quotations  ;  but  we  feel  no  impulse  to  bur-
den our  work  with  the  abomination  of  such  signs  as  "  vols.^
vers.^  chaps. .^^  etc.,  etc.,  any  more  than  we  recognize  the  pro-
priety of  harassing  our  readers  by  foot-notes,  or  refer-
ences to  literature,  perhaps  unattainable  to  all  but  special
seekers  into  occult  lore.  And  now  that  our  work — not  of
apology,  but  of  sturdy  resistance  to  conventional  habits  in
book-making — is  done,  what  remains,  save  to  tender  ever-
lasting thanks  to  our  gentle,  faithful  and  long-suffering
Editor ;  most  kindly  greetings  to  the  brave  "  Banner  of
Light,''  the  ''  Spiritual  Scientist,''  "  London  Medium,"  and
"  Spiritualist,"  who  have  so  generously  and  courteously
sustained  her,  and  a  potential  psychologic,  heartfelt  God-
Speed  to  the  noble  five  hundred  who,  in  the  face  of  scorn,
contumely,  ridicule  and  blatant  ignorance,  have  dared  to
register  their  honored  names  as  subscribers  to  Art  Magic,
four  hundred,  at  least,  of  them  paying  their  subscriptions
before  they  were  due,  trusting  gallantly  to  the  good  faith

467

and  honesty  of  Emma  Hardinge  Britten  that  they  should
not  be  robbed  of  their  due,  and  the  rest  signifying  their
insight  and  recognition  of  the  divine  in  humanity,  with  an
absence  of  all  sordid  motive  or  fear  of  public  opinion,
which  forever  protests  against  the  doctrines  of  "  human
depravity,  original  sin,''  or  aught  but  the  sublime  truth  that
the  word  is  liiade  flesh,  and  dwells  amongst  men  now  and
evermore '

*•*

DATE  DUE
