Modern American Spiritualism
========================================
Emma Hardinge Britten (1870) — Britten's twenty-years' record — the foundational history of American spiritualism. Source: https://archive.org/details/modernamericans00britgoog. Public domain.

MODERN 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM: 

A   TWENTY   YEARS'    RECORD 

COMMUNION    BETWEEN    EARTH    AND    THE 
WORLD    OF    SPIRITS. 

BY    EMMA    HARDINGE. 

(THIRD     EDITION.) 

N"EW   TORE: 

PUBLISHED     BY     THE     AUTHOR, 

229  EAST   SIXTIETH    STREET, 

Trade  supplied  by  the  American  News  Co.,  117-131  Nassau  Street,  N.  V.,  o 

"Banner  of  Light"  Office,  158  Washington  St.,  Boston,  Mass. 

MDCCCLXX. 

Hosted  by  Google 

Eo, 

,.«j,a. 

£ 

■MMA  HARDINGE, 

,c^r.£7^ 

,thta«VsOffi«ofi 

h=Bbid 

a  Com 

t of  ths  United  SBi«forlli 

.'.  Soulhcr 

Hosiedb,  Google 

DEDICATION. 

To  THE  Wise  and  Mighty  Beings  through  whose   Instrumentality 

THE  Spiritual  Telegraph  of  the  Nineteenth  Century 

HAS  BEEN  Constructed; 

To  THE  Beneficent  and  Powerful  Spirits  through  whose   Sublime 

Labors  the  Immobtal  World  can  Commune  with  the 

Mortal  Dwellers  of  Earth  ; 

This    Brief,    Fragmentary,    and   most  Imperfect  Record   of  their 
Divine  Ministration,  undertaken  at  their  Command,  and 
executed  under  their  Supervision,  is  Reverently 
AND  Gratefully  Inscribed  by  their  Faith- 
ful AND    Devoted    Medium, 

EMMA  HARDINGE. 

New  York  City, 

229  East  6oih  Street. 
December  151b,  iS6» 

Hosted  by  Google 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Adthor.  Sartain.    Frontispiece 

Oress.  Richardson.    Vignette  Title 

Andrew  Jackson  Davis.      Sartain 24 

Kate  Fox.                             Ritchie 3^ 

a  E.  BsiTTAN.                         Ritchie ^ 

C,  Hammond.                        '"-' 

Professor  Robert  Hare.    Ritchie "S 

Scg.    His  Demonstrative  Machines ii5-ii7 

James  J.  Mapes,  LL.D.          Saktain '4' 

Cora  L.  V.  Scott.               Ritchie 156 

Mrs.  Semantha  Mettler.    Ritchie 20Z 

Gov.  N.  P.  Tallmadge.          Euttre 262 

Benjamin  Franklin.              ^9° 

,    The  Spheres.                        Richardson on  p.  331 

,    Charles  Partridge.              Ritchie 49° 

,    JyDGE  Edmonds.                   Ritchie 5°^ 

Dr.  J.  R.  Newton.              Ritchie 54^ 

,    Peace,  but  not  without  Freedom, End  of  Vol. 

Hosted  by  Google 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

Preface 

Introduction  —  "The  Truth 

CHAPTER  I. 
The  First  Spiritual  Telegraph 

chapter  ii. 
"And  There  Shall  be  No  More  Death."  .    . 

CHAPTER   III. 
The  First  Spiritual  Telegraph  with  Eakth. 

chapter  iv. 
The  First  Public  Investigation  of  Spiritualism. 

CHAPTER  V. 

CHAPTER   VI, 
-J  New  YriRK  from  1849  to  1855. 

CHAPTER   VII. 
*  New  York  Continued.    .    .    . 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
^  New  York  Citv  and  State.     . 

9-14 

"5-19 

21-27 
27-36 
36-42 
42-54 
SS-60 

70-76 
76.83 

CHAPTER   IX. 
1  New  York  Citv  and  State  Continued 83-92 

CHAPTER   X. 
:SM  IN  New  York  Citv  and  State  Continued.     ....      ga-ioo 

CHAPTER   XL 
<  New  York  City  and  State  Continued 101-114 

Hosiedb,  Google 

■rf  TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER   XII.  ,,^^ 

The  Phenomena  of  Sfikitualiem  IX  the  Eastern  States  Gemerallv,     iij-iaS 

chapter  xiii. 
The  Spiritualists'  Memorial  to  Congress 128-141 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
Spirxtuausm  in  New  York  Continued J41-147 

CHAPTER  XV. 
Spiritualism  in  New  York  Concluded 14S-156 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
Spiritualism  in  New  England 157-164 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
Spiritualism  in  New  England  Continued 164-172 

CHAPTER.  XVIII. 
Spiritualism  in  New  England  Continued i73-iSs 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
Spiritualism  in  New  England  Continued 185-194 

CHAPTER  XX. 
Spiritualism  in  New  England  Continued 194-207 

CHAPTER  XXI. 
Spieitual  Movements  —  Some   of   Its  Darker  Shades 207-217 

CHAPTER  XXII. 
The  New  "Motor  Power" 217-229 

CHAPTER  XXHI. 
Spiritual  Movements  Continued 229-239 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 
Spiritualism  and  Spiritual  Mountebanks 239-243 

CHAPTER  XXV. 
Spiritualism  on  Trial 249-261 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 
Spiritualism  in  New  England  Concluded. 261-273 

Hosted  by  Google 

TABLE   OP   CONTENTS.  Vii 

CHAPTER  XXVII.  p^gs 

Spirits ALIsu  in  Pennsylvania 2^3-285 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

IPIRITUALISM    IN    THE   WEST 286-295 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 
Western  SpiEiTtrALtsu    Con'ti,\ued 395-307 

CHAPTER  XXX. 
Western    Sfihitualisji   Continued  —  Ohio 307-318 

chapter  xxxi, 
Western   Spiritualism  Continued  —  Koons's   and    Tippie's   Spirit 

Rooms 319-333 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 
Western   Spiritualism   Continued  —  Indiana.      Cathcaet's   Spirit 

Room 333-345 

CHAPTER  XXXIH. 
Spiritualism  in  Cincinnati 346-353 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
Spiritualism  in  Missouri 353-360 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 
Spiritualism  in  St.  Louis  Continued 361-371 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 
Spiritualism  in  St.  Louis   Continued 371-380 

CHAPTER   XXXVII. 
General  Facts  and  Features  of  Western  Spiritualism.    ....    380-392 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 
Western  Spiritualism  Continued. 392-403 

CHAPTER   XXXIX. 
Spiritualism  in  the  South. 403-416 

CHAPTER   XL. 
Spiritualism  in  the  South  Continued 416-430 

CHAPTER   XLL 
Southern  Spiritualism  Continued. 430-443 

Hosiedb,  Google 

ViH  TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 

chapter   xlii.  psgee 

Spiritualism  in  California 443-453 

CHAPTER  XLIII. 
Spiritualism  in  Canada,  Central  and  South  America,     ....    459-477 

CHAPTER   XLIV. 
Spirit [TALisM  in  the  Territories 477-490 

CHAPTER   XLV. 
Spiritualism  During  the  Great  American  Civil  War,   1S60-5.     .     ,    490-507 

CHAPTER   XLVI. 
Progress  of  Spiritualism  after  the  War  of  1861-5 S0S-519 

CHAPTER   XLVn. 
The  "Cui  Bono"  of  Spiritualism 530-532 

CHAPTER   XLVin. 
"Cui  Bono?"  Continued 532-546 

CONCLUDING  CHAPTER,   XLIX. 
Celebration  of  the  Twentieth  Anniversarv  of  the  "Rochester 

Knockikgs,"  March  31ST,  1868. 546-5^5 

Hosted  by  Google 

PREFACE. 

As  these  pages  seem  to  imply  by  their  title  certain  speciahies  both  in 
regard  to  time  and  place,  whilst  the  subject  of  "  Spiritualism,"  or  the  record 
of  man's  spiritual  experiences  is  one  which  must  be  commensurate  with  the 
physical  history  of  humanity  upon  tliis  globe,  they  require  a  few  words  of 
explanation  touching  the  aim  and  scope  of  the  subject  which  the  author 
designs  to  embrace  in  this  work. 

The  entire  history  of  the  race,  when  recorded  in  accurate  detail  and  fidelity 
to  fact,  ever  has,  and  ever  will  be  found,  marked  with  the  shadowy  outline 
of  a  second  world  of  existence,  supersensuous  to  that  of  mortality.  On  the 
walls  of  our  earthly  dwelling-places  ever  will  be  seen  a  writing  inscribed  by 
"a  part  of  a  man's  hand,"  (he  form  whereof  is  dimly  visible,  ihe  full  pro- 
portions of  which  no  human  eye  may  scan.  And  these  mystic  writings  are 
discovered  everywhere ;  they  are  traced  in  our  holy  places,  and  meet  us  oa 
the  thresholds  of  our  habitations.  They  are  seen  in  our  very  city  streets, 
and  the  stones  prite  of  their  whereabouts. 

bomctimes  we  label  them  "religion,"  at  others,  denounce  them  bv  the 
weird  name  of  "magic,"  "witchcraft,"  or  "Sorceiy,  '  m  a  i\ord,  we  \  in 
ouslv  denominate  them,  as  time,  prejudice,  or  custom  suggests,  under  all  the 
different  titles  which  are  included  in  the  generic  sinonjm  of  "supernatu 
ralisni,"  but  deem  of  them  as  we  will,  the\  include  a  set  of  evpenences, 
occult  and  incomprehensible  though  they  be,  as  irresistible  and  inciitable 
m  tune  and  space  as  the  more  material  array  of  facts  which  we  assume 
makes  up  the  sum  of  hum  in  history  In  truth,  this  same  "  supematurahsm 
is  the  woof  spun  by  the  hands  of  a  po«erful  though  invisible  existence, 
which  mrloses  all  human  lite  and  shapes  all  human  destiny  Hitherto,  we 
ha\e  either  determined  to  reiohe  the  whole  realm  of  power  which  makes 
up  mans  spmtual  existence  mto  the  universal  solvent  of  all  mysteries, 
"God"  and  "His  M iH,"  or  else,  with  still  more  unphilosophic  ignorance, 
we  have  stnven  to  stifle  the  records  of  its  being  beneath  the  pall  of  unrea 
soning  and  senseless  materialism.  Neither  will  longer  serve  our  turn.  All 
mental  progress  tends  to  the  discovery  that  "God's  will"  is  only  manifest 
in  law.  Religion,  ethics,  miracle,  and  supersensuous  life,  like  tides,  and 
times,  and  seasons,  all  resolve  themselves  at  last  into  stern  and  immutable 
procedures  of  a  set  of  mental  laws  as  stringent  as  any  of  those  that  bind  ou(. 

(9) 

Hosted  by  Google 

physical  existence.  The  whole  realm  of  visi-nary  supematutalism  melts 
away,  then,  before  the  morning  sun  of  that  glorious  light  that  science  brings, 
leaving  no  refuge  for  our  world  of  occult  facts  but  to  range  them  within  the 
domain  of  unexplained  but  inevitable  law,  or  else,  like  rude  materialism, 
to  deny  them  altogeflier,  and  write  upon  half  mankind's  experience  the 
gratuitous  charge  of  "falsehood."  Between  the  horns  of  this  dilemma,  and 
in  the  age  when  bold  assertions  or  denial  can  no  longer  serve  the  cause  of 
true  philosophy,  much  less  religion,  comes  the  dawning  of  a  day  of  spiritual 
science,  in  the  vast  and  overwhelming  tides  of  occult  power  that  for  twenty 
years  have  swept  the  continent  of  North  America.  And  when  we  cite  this 
mighty  witness  to  our  bar  of  spiritual  inquisition,  we  stand  alone.  Acknowl- 
edging that  every  fact  we  have  to  record,  or  every  case  to  cite,  bears  a 
strict  analogy  in  point  of  representation  to  other  facts  and  cases  witnessed 
in  every  land  and  age,  we  still  claim  that  the  American  phenomena — 
based,  as  their  authors  insist  they  are,  upon  the  foundations  of  natural  law, 
and  produced  only  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  that  law  affords — form 
such  an  array  of  testimony  concerning  their  origin  as  renders  the  modem 
movement  in  America  a  distinct  and  concrete  one  in  the  world's  history. 
Several  points  of  specialty  cluster  around,  it,  as:  first,  the  astonishing 
fecundity  of  its  manifestations,  crowding  up  tens  of  thousands  of  facts  into 
a  period  of  time  diat  baffles  the  skill  of  any  earthly  recorder  to  keep  track 
of;  next,  the  marvellous  coincidence  and  similarity  of  the  manifestations, 
extending  over  immense  surfaces  of  country — including  three  millions  of 
square  miles  of  thickly-populated  States — within  a  period  of  time  that  renders 
the  possibility  of  propagandism  or  the  theory  of  collusion  impossible;  and 
next,  the  deduction  arising  from  this  last-named  fact,  namely,  that  the  same 
occult  and  invisible  operators  that  originated  tlie  phenomena  in  one  instance, 
must  have  been  instrumental  in  producing  them  in  all.  It  is  contrary  to 
the  peculiar  method  of  the  writer  of  these  pages  to  attempt  the  fortification 
of  any  position  that  may  be  advanced  by  human  authority,  however  high  or 
valuable ;  hence  no  such  course  will  be  pursued,  and  few,  if  any,  authori- 
tative quotations,  outside  of  the  American  history  itself)  will  find  a  record 
here.  Were  it,  however,  admissible,  hosts  of  opinions  world-wide  in  renown 
and  acceptance  could  be  cited  to  prove  the  worth  of  such  wonderfully 
coincident  testimony  as  the  above.  The  exercise  of  simple  reason,  however, 
should  suffice  to  prove  that  a  unique,  well-organized,  and  highly  practical 
concert  of  action  alone  could  account  for  the  manifestation  of  a  coincident 
set  of  phenomena,  spread  over  the  immense  geographical  area  we  have 
indicated,  dividing  itself  diroughout  die  districts  of  thirty-six  separate  States, 
affecting  all  ranks  of  persons  and  classes  of  mind  at  once,  occupying  in 
this  gigantic  system  of  propagandism  less  than  twenty  years,  and  exhibiting 
on  its  simply  human  side  scarcely  a  single  evidence  of  any  of  the  accepted 
■  modes  of  disseminating  strange  tidings  at  present  in  use,  much  less  of  pro- 
,moting  physical  changes   and  developments  of  the  most  unprecedented 

Hosted  by  Google 

nature  m  thousands  of  individuals  themselves.  Still  another  point  of 
isolated  interest  presents  itself  in  the  modern  American  movement,  and  this 
is  in  its  religious  or  doctrinal  character.  Spiritualism,  with  a  large  majority 
of  Its  Amencan  adherents,  is  a  religion,  separate  m  all  respects  from  any 
existing  sect,  because  it  bases  its  affirmations  purely  upon  the  demonstra 
tions  of  fact,  science,  and  nitural  law,  and  admits  of  no  creed  or  denomina- 
tional boundary  \\ith  such  a  foundition,  its  philosophy  must  necessarily 
ramify  through  immeisurable  realms  of  natural  and  unceasing  revelation , 
whilst  destitute  of  the  hedge  of  sectarian  lumtition,  its  aims  must  encom 
pass  the  whole  human  nee  m  membership  If  the  Amencan  spintual 
movement,  therefore,  did  not  stand  wholly  unn\  ailed  m  point  of  umty  of 
design,  wonderful,  though  invisible  concert  of  action,  manifest  purpose,  and 
overwhelming  numencil  strength,  the  doctrmal  isolation  of  its  majorities 
from  all  other  existmg  sects  would  distinguish  it  from  the  Spiritualism  of 
all  other  countries,  wheie  the  generality  oi  believers  appeir  to  a<rept  the 
phenomena  as  a  means  of  deepening  their  convictions  in  ciedal  faiths, 
rather  thin  as  ongmating  suchiiews  of  the  hereafter  as  destroy  reliance 
upon  ceremonial  forms  or  sectanan  behefs  This  religious  phase  of 
the  Amencan  movement  has  ultimated  in  gathenng  together  m  Pente 
costal  meetings  multitudes  of  persons  for  Sabbath  day  worship,  when,  chiefly 
through  the  lips  of  entranced  or  inspired  speakers,  descriptions  of  the 
spheres  and  conditions  of  spirit  life  have  been  portrayed  with  such  glowing 
eloquence,  and  under  such  an  evident  afflatus  of  supernal  power,  that  these 
utterances  have  been  bj  millions  accepted  as  truths,  received  as  genuine 
representations  of  immortal  Hfe,  and  hence  superseded  in  the  minds  of  the 
listeners  the  mere  theories  of  mortals  concerning  the  conditions  of  immortal 
existence.  In  connection  with  such  teachings,  keenly  analytical  discourses 
have  been  given— under  circumstances  that  rendered  their  production  from 
the  normal  condition  of  the  speaker  impossible— on  the  various  natural 
sciences,  illustrative  of  the  all-wise  and  beneficent  character  of  the  Deity, 
the  guardianship  of  his  ministering  spirits,  and  the  propelling  causes  of  such 
human  actions  as  tend  to  elevate  or  deform  the  spirit.  In  this  category 
all  the  various  reforms  of  the  day  have  been  discussed  with  a  profound  logic 
and  searching  acumen  that  would  tax  the  far-reaching  powers  of  the  most 
highly  cultivated  intellects.  Combined  with  such  subjects  as  these,  popular 
opinions  [both  in  matters  of  religion  and  politics]  have  been  analyzed;  and 
seeing  that  the  discovery  and  application  of  truth  has  been  the  sole  object 
claimed  by  the  intelligences  that  influence  these  utterances,  and  that  truth 
has  always  been  defined  as  "thai  which  is,"  it  may  well  be  supposed  that 
mere  fanciful  theories  or  unsound  opinions,  asseverated  upon  human  au- 
thority only,  have  not  been  treated  with  politic  leniency  or  excused  by  the 
sophistries  of  custom  and  prejudice.  And  hence  it  is  that  American 
Spiritualism,  iw  a  r<;/?^iVw,  based  upon  facts,  proved  by  science,  and  defended 
with  an  irresistible  tide  df  burning  oratory  amply  demonstrative  of  a  supra- 

Hosled  by  Google 

mundane  source,  has  b      '^  ^  cl      f   h  but 

has  also  appealed,  and    1  f  Uj  1      d    p    1     k  f  the 

land,  to  whom  "religi  b  d  1  gi       '  or 

one  or  die  odier  mus    b    f  1  d         h  \  f  any- 

other  country  than  A        ca      1  P  P  '  '  gi        h  the 

reason  and  requires  d      1  hu  k    g  f      y    ther 

denomination  than       \!n  S  1   ts        1       b  b       f  on 

scientific  facts,  prove     by  I  d  1  hese 

grounds  alone,  would  b    j  d        d        b    g  Am  bp  1    n  as 

an  unique,  concrete,      dp  Id  d         di  g  from 

historic  justice  a  reco  da^fllm  Idpd  If     Two 

other  considerations      d  h  h  I      1^  d  1       ever 

unworthy  it  may  seem  of  the  stupendous  subject.  The  first  of  these  is  the 
somewhat  remarkable  indifference  with  which  modem  American  Spiritualism 
has  been  treated  by  European  writers  on  kindred  topics.  From  whatever 
cause  the  overwhelming  importance  of  the  American  movement  may  have 
been  deemed  sufficiently  disposed  of  in  occasional  paragraphs  or  at  most  a 
few  chapters  of  meagre  detail,  it  matters  not  now  to  inquire ;  suffice  it  to 
say  that  Asiatic,  African,  European,  and  even  Afnerican  Indian  Spiritualism 
has  been  fully  and  ably  represented  in  most  of  the  languages  spoken  by 
civilized  man,  and  has  engaged  the  attention  of  die  highest  talent  of  every 
age  and  country,  admirable  compendiums  of  which  may  be  perused  by  the 
student  of  our  own  time  from  the  ever-fertile  pens  of  a  Howitt,  Eneraoser, 
Kemer,  DeMorgan,  Scott,  Brevior,  Ashburner,  Reichenbach,  Kardec, 
Browning,  Bushnell,  Crowe,  and  others,  whose  honored  names  command 
the  world's  attention  and  respect  for  the  subjects  they  treat  of.  William 
Howitt  alone  has  exhausted  the  subject,  and  as  far  as  a  world-wide  history 
can  be  transcribed  and  bound  up  in  limited  space,  that  noble  champion  of 
divine  truth  has  ransacked  the  ages  to  bear  witness  on  the  side  of  God, 
immortality,  and  religion.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  too,  with  all  the  acumen 
of  his  keenly-analytical  mind  and  the  charming  style  peculiar  to  his  highly- 
cultivated  intellect,  has  added  many  a  laurel  wreath  to  the  triumphs  of 
spiritual  versus  material  philosophy;  whilst  the  venerable  and  learned  Dr. 
Ashburner  has  penetrated  as  far  into  the  adytum  of  that  temple  of  occult 
force  which  enshrines  the  mystic  cord  that  unites  spirit  and  matter  as  the 
investigations  of  the  present  time  can  carry  man ;  and  yet  the  stupendous 
realities  of  what  the  great  good  God  and  the  spirits  have  done  for  man 
in  America,  during  the  last  eventful  t\venty  years,  remain  almost  a  sealed 
book,  or  one  which,  if  opened  to  the  world,  no  authoritative  finger  has 
pointed  out  to  the  heedless  crowds  who  think  through  the  leading  minds 
of  the  day.  And  who  is  it,  may  well  be  questioned,  that  dares  to  raise 
such  an  index  finger  where  minds  accustomed  to  grasp  the  reins  which  guide 
the  car  of  popular  opinion  have  deemed  the  task  beyond  or  beneath  their 
notice?    No  matter  who  or  what  j  enough-  if  the  task  be  done,  or  at  least 

Hosted  by  Google 

PREFACE.  13 

the  attempt  be  made ;  enough  if  one  grateful  hand,  that  the  loving  clasp 
of  spirits  have  guided  tl^rough  life's  stormiest  patlis,  now  wields  the  ency- 
clopedist's pen,  to  record  their  doings,  or  as  much  of  them  as  that  feeble 
pen  can  note  or  the  narrow  page  ]nreserve.  And  how  small  a  portion  of 
that  mighty  sum  can  here  find  place,  none  better  knows  on  earth  than 
the  mind  that  is  now  bent  with  reverend  puqjose  to  gather  up  the  fragments 
of  those  small  loaves  and  fishes  that  have  yet,  in  the  Providence  of  God, 
sufficed  to  break  the  bread  of  spiritual  life  to  America's  thronging  millions. 
But  a  score  of  years  ago  the  name  of  "Spiritualist"  was  unknown  on  the 
American  continent,  whilst  all  die  sum  of  Spiritualism  was  contained  in 
the  persons  of  three  young  girls,  ignomiuously  designated  the  "Rochester 
knockers."  According  to  the  last  statistical  accounts  of  this  movement, 
furnished  by  its  opponents  in  1867,  Spiritualism  now  numbers  eleven  millions 
of  persons  on  the  American  continent!  And  it  is  to  trace  some  of  the 
most  prominent  footprints  made  by  the  invisible  hosts  who  have  wrought 
this  stupendous  change ;  to  point  to  the  beneficent  effects  on  some  indi- 
viduals, the  marvels  enacted  in  the  persons  of  others ;  preserve  the  memory 
of  well-timed  though  evanescent  specimens  of  spiritual  literature,  bread 
of  the  hour,  but  long  smce  incorporated  in  the  body  of  the  movement 
and  lost  almost  to  recollection,  and  gather  together  the  scattered  blossoms 
of  that  garden  of  spiritual  beauty  that  angel  hands  have  planted,  into  one 
immortal  wreath,  that  this  record  is  attempted.  Geographically  considered, 
the  harvest  ground  of  this  great  American  movement  has  been  spread  over 
a  surface  of  country  extending  from  Maine  to  California ;  and  not  tiie  path- 
less wastes  of  two  vast  oceans  have  sufficed  to  cut  off  or  break  the  tele- 
graphic wires  which  have  conducted  the  sound  of  the  low  tap,  tap,  of 
"the  Rochester  knockers"  over  three  millions  of  square  miles.  Modern 
Spuitualism  is  rife  along  the  length  of  the  far  Pacific  shores,  and  skirts  the 
Atlantic  seaboard.  It  is  in  the  cabin  of  the  miner,  hi  the  heart  of  tlie 
Rocky  Mountains,  on  the  peaks  of  die  White  Sierras,  and  consoles  the 
toiling  emigrant  in  his  nightly  camp  on  the  desert  waste  or  the  wild  prairie. 
It  has  breathed  its  first  lessons  of  freedom  and  refinement  to  the  Carolina 
slave,  and  humbled  the  pride  of  the  Louisiana  planter.  It  has  cheered  the 
hours  of  toil  in  Massachusetts  factori^,  and  stimulated  the  energies  of 
Minnesota  pioneers.  East,  West,  North,  and  South,  its  viewless  lines  have 
run ;  whilst  mental  science,  burning  oratory,  triumph  over  pain  and  death, 
trust  in  God  and  hope  for  man  have  followed  in  its  marcli.  To  count  up 
its  triumphs,  number  its  achievements,  do  faintest  justice  to  its  treasures  of 
hope,  consolation,  moral  improvement,  or  spiritual  elevation,  would  be  as 
impossible  as  it  has  proved  for  the  puny  arm  of  man  to  stay  its  progress; 
but  to  redeem  from  cold  forgetfulness  or  ungrateful  obloquy  the  memory 
of  some  acts,  words,  works,  and  writings,  that  else  might  be  lost  in  the 
whelming  floods  of  diance,  change  and  time  —  this  can  be  done  at  least, 
and  to  the  work,  the  author's  highest  and  most  faithful  aims  are  dedicated 

Hosted  by  Google 

14  PREFACE. 

One  pledge  more  is  offered:  thougii  in  some  special  cases,  names  and  dates 
cannot  be  fully  stated,  all  incidents  related  are  vouclied  for  on  the  aTithor's 
keenest  sense  of  honor.  Tlie  case  of  each  not  personally  known  or 
verified  by  individual  testimony,  has  been  searched  out  and  scrutinized 
with  the  strictest  care.  Authoritarian  names,  having  no  intrinsic  value  with 
"die  spirits,"  possess  none  with  their  scribe.  But  little  of  philosophy  is 
offered,  and  few  deductions  or  theoretical  opinions  will  be  given  on  what 
is  here  presented. 

Faithfully  (o  render  such  well-attested  proofs  of  spiritual  intercourse  as 
the  multitude  of  riches  witli  which  the  author's  stores  are  overloaded  can 
permit  her  to  select  from,  is  all  her  hope  or  aim,  and  yet  the  half  can  never 
be  related,  and  much  that  is  left  unsaid  may  be,  and  is,  of  far  more  worth, 
perhaps,  than  what  is  here  preserved. 

'Tis  said,  "the  vibration  of  one  single  note  of  music  will  linger  on  in 
motion  through  the  corridors  of  all  eternity."  Nothing,  dien,  is  ever  really 
lost,  and  whether  written  or  unwritten  on  the  page  of  mortal  sense,  all  that 
has  been  done  is  done  forever.  Farewell,  then,  regrets  for  half-attempts  or 
ill-executed  purposes.  In  the  eternal  printing  houses  of  creation,  the  types 
of  all  that  is  are  found.  Accept  or  reject  these  pages,  then,  world,  as  you 
may !  They  and  their  author's  aims  and  purposes,  and  all  that  may  be  said,  - 
or  left  undone,  will  meet  and  greet  her  on  that  distant  shore,  where  angel 
reapers  gather  in  God's  harvest  treasures — "over  there!" 

Hosted  by  Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

"THE  TRUTH   AGAINST   THE  WORLD," 

Before  entering  upon  the  main  object  of  this  work,  the  author  deems 
that  a  few  remarks  are  necessary  to  elucidate  the  special  aim  and  scope  of 
her  undertaiing.  A  feverish  appetite  for  novelty  appears  to  be  as  much  a 
specialty  with  the  modem  American  as  with  the  ancient  Athenian.  Perhaps 
this  is  a  providential  inspiration,  which  operates  in  the  minds  of  every  pioneer 
race  as  a  goad  to  the  action  required  to  subjugate  a  new  country.  On  the 
rather  hand,  it  may  be  deemed  a  psycliological  attribute  peculiar  to  the 
-Vmerican  character,  or  a  tendency  which  has  been  quickened  into  abnormal 
ictivily  by  the  vast  and  marvellous  outpouring  of  Spiritualism  over  the  land. 
From  whatever  cause  it  may  arise,  certain  it  is  that  the  cry  of  "  Tell  us  some- 
thing new  "  seems  to  be  a  demand  far  more  urgent  amongst  a  great  majority 
of  the  American  Spiritualists  than  a  requisition  for  the  true,  the  good,  or  the 
beautiful ;  and  because  we  anticipate  tiiis  questionable  standard  of  novelty 
will  be  very  generally  applied  to  measure  the  value  of  these  pages,  we  desire 
on  their  threshold  to  declare  that  they  make  no  provision  for  the  demand 
of  "something  new."  In  the  first  place,  this  work  has  been  undertaken 
chiefly  in  response  to  the  wish  of  Spirit  Friends,  who  have  urgently  pressed 
upon  the  author  the  necessity  of  gatliering  up  the  scattered  fragments  of 
spiritual  literature  that  has  passed  out  of  Circulation,  and  conserving  in  con- 
crete form  the  shreds  and  patches  of  broken  records,  which  must  else  be 
swept  away  into  the  shadowy  realms  of  tradition.  When  it  is  remembered 
that  no  systematic  effort  has  yet  been  made  to  unite  the  multitudinous  lines 
of  interest  that  Spiritualism  has  woven  into  one  connected  chain  of  history ;. 
that  the  numbers  of  the  actors  who  have  figured  in  its  wonderful  drama  must 
be  counted  by  the  milhons  (scarcely  more  than  one  per-cent.  of  whose  experi- 
ences have  ever  been  given  to  the  world),  fiiU  justice  may  be  rendered  to 
our  plea  that  the  very  best  and  utmost  we  can  attempt  is  the  work  of  an 
encyclopedeist,  who  labels  and  catalogues  the  variety  of  phenomena  and 
the  names  of  die  personages  connected  with  the  wonderful  movement,  and 
strings  together  on  the  thread  of  history  such  pearls  of  truth  as  the  relentless, 
forces  of  the  destroyer  Time  have  left  ungathered  on  the  line  of  his  marcL 

In  connection  with  the  groupings  of  various  phenomenal  facts,  we  shall 
endeavour  to  present  the  leading  ideas  which  have  grown  out  of  the  inter- 
course between  "  the  two  worlds,"  cite  the  revelations  of  spirits  concerning 
the  conditions  of  the  after-life  and  the  philosophy  of  the  communion,  and 
quote  the  utterances  of  those  public  teachers  who  claim  to  have  been  spiritu- 
ally inspired.  We  shall  point  to  the  idiosyncracies  of  those  who  have  become 
prominent  in  the  movement,  especially  the  media  for  the  communications 
from  the  spirit-world,  and  when  practicable,  give  such  portions  of  their  biog- 

(15) 

Hosted  by  Google 

le  INTRODUCTION. 

raphies  as  may  enable  us  to  solve  tlie  problem  of  their  seemingly  exceptional 
gifts.  It  will  be  necessaiy  for  the  elucidation  of  our  subject,  and  in  verifica- 
tion of  wliat  maybe  deemed  rash  statements,  that  we  make  frequent  quota- 
tions from  the  press  notices  of  tlie  day,  and  present  verhatiin  extracts  from 
the  spiritual  journals,  where  facts  are  to  be  found  recorded  with  a  minutise 
of  detail  which  cannot  fail  to  be  valuable  to  posterity,  however  tedious 
such  familiar  narratives  may  be  to  those  who  are  still  realizing  similar  expe- 
riences. 

The  earnest  American  Spiritualist  is  one  who  combines  all  the  restless  and 
inquisitive  tendencies  of  his  country  with  the  strong  additional  propelling 
power  to  locomotion  which  a  search  after  the  marvellous  supplies ;  conse- 
quently he  not  only  undertakes  frequent  pilgrimages  for  the  purposes  of 
investigation,  but  visits  distant  places  and  persons  on  spiritualistic  "missions." 
He  reads  all  the  journals  of  the  time  and  place  where  he  tarries  ;  he  visits 
all  the  media  and  joins  all  the  circles  held  there,  whether  in  garrets,  cellars, 
saloons,  halls,  steamboats,  mines,  woods,  valleys,  Indian  wigwams,  or  amongst 
the  ruins  of  the  "  lost  races."  Either  in  his  own  person,  or  that  of  some 
member  of  his  family  or  acquaintance,  he  is  sure  to  have  available  medium 
power  at  bis  command,  consequently  be  has  his  own  store  of  phenomenal 
history  to  add  to  the  general  sum. 

He  is  a  constant  attendant  on  all  the  Sabbath  spiritual  services  held  now 
commonly  in  every  town  and  hamlet  he  may  chance  to  visit,  and  there  he 
never  fails  to  gather  around  him  a  considerable  number  of  the  magnates  of 
the  meeting,  some  member  of  whom  becomes  his  hospitable  entertainer  for 
the  day,  when  the  joint  experiences  of  the  host  and  his  guest  are  inter- 
changed and  fully  canvassed  between  the  morning  and  evening  meetings. 

Some  portion  of  each  Sabbath  is  devoted  in  spiritualistic  associations  to 
the  public  conference,  when  our  sojourner  gives  his  views  with  that  peculiar 
facility  and  occasional  touch  of  eloquence  which  is  an  almost  national  char- 
acteristic in  America.  Most  commonly  the  close  of  the  evening  service  is 
followed  by  several  invitations  from  the  ranks  of  tlie  hospitable  brethren  to 
join  circles,  at  one  of  which  the  welcome  guest  is  greeted  by  mortals  and 
their  celestial  visitors  with  all  that  cordiality  and  fraternal  feeling  which  is 
one  of  the  happy  and  disringuishing  marks  of  American  Spiritualism.  And 
it  is  as  much  due  to  these  locomotive  and  hospitable  features  in  the  move- 
ment that  the  phenomena  has  become  so  widely  diffused,  and  carefully 
studied  as  to  any  national  claim  which  the  American  can  set  up  for  a  peculiarly 
spiritual  nature.  From  such  itinerant  experiences,  however  valuable  and 
■often  wonderful  they  may  have  been,  the  author  freely  confesses  she  has  not 
felt  herself  at  liberty  to  make  many  records.  Compelled  to  withdraw  within 
the  stern  pale  of  well-proved  and  thoroughly  attested  facts,  the  floating  cur- 
Tents  of  mere  hearsay  have  necessarily  been  unwrought  mines  of  wealth. 
Hence,  for  every  fact  recorded  tliere  will  no  doubt  be  fomid  thousands  ready 
to  declare  they  could  have  furnished  testimony  of  a  far  more  wonderful  char- 
acter. To  such  we  can  only  say,  we  write  for  that  posterity  to  whom  our 
facts  ol  veritabU  history  will  be  of  incalculable  value,  though  to  us,  the  living 
actors  therein,  they  may  be  of  little  or  no  importance.  Besides,  the  memory  of 
these  marvels  rapidly  passes  away  from  us,  and  their  effect  upon  our  minds 
Tiecomes  lessened  with  the  flight  of  time.  Many  there  are  that  require  a 
constant  succession  of  phenomena  to  renew  their  faith ;  and  few  amongst 
the  best-informed  Spiritualists  have  been  at  the  trouble  of  carefully  recording 
the  facts  they  have  witnessed.  Spiritual  journals,  too,  though  numerous,  and 
often  conducted  with  remarkable  ability,  have  all— with  the  exceptijn  of  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

INTRODUCTION.  It 

Spiritual  Telegraph  ^XiA.  Banner  of  Light — been  too  short-lived  to  become 
points  of  reference  to  posterity,  and  most  of  the  other  literature  oi  the 
movement,  tliough  often  marked  with  rare  excellence,  yet  from  being  issued 
whilst'  its  events  were  in  transitu,  are  too  premature  in  time  and  incom- 
plete in  detail  for  historical  uses. 

Obviously,  then,  a  duty  rests  on  some  one  to  collect  the  best  and  most 
reliable  evidence  that  the  circumstances  of  the  case  will  afford,  so  as  to  con- 
serve in  a  compendious  fonn  the  records  of  either  the  commencement  of  a 
new  era  or  an  episode  in  human  history  as  unparalleled  in  its  preternattiral 
marvels  as  it  is  rife  with  instruction,  abundant  in  religious,  social,  and  politi- 
cal influence,  and  prophetic  of  a  mighty  and  momentous  future  for  mental 
and  spiritual  science.  Thus,  then,  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is  not  in  the  interest 
of  the  present  so  much  as  for  future  generations  that  we  write ;  not  in  the 
hope  of  putting  forth  a  volume  the  tone  of  which  will  command,  from  popu- 
lar interest,  a  remunerative  sale,  but  in  deep  and  reverential  conviction  of  a 
duty  performed  toward  the  mighty  and  beneficent  power  which  has  inaugu- 
rated this  movement,  and  a  grateful  desire  to  shai'e  with  others  the  priceless 
blessings  of  spiritual  revelation  which  have  been  so  abundantly  poured  out 
.upon  the  actors  in  this  marvellous  drama. 

The  whole  history  of  the  "  Rochester  knockings,"  the  disturbances  in  Dr. 
Phelps's  house  at  Stratford,  the  phenomenal  life  of  the  "  Poughkeepsie  Seer," 
accounts  of  the  Spear,  Harris,  Spencer,  and  other  fanatical  movements, 
together  with  a  vast  array  of  incidents  of  a  less  striking  character,  are  all 
familiar  as  household  words  in  the  ctperience  of  every  nineteenth  century 
Spiritualist.  But  scattered  as  their  records  are  in  solitary  volumes,  or  diffused 
through  a  mass  of  literature  which  has  cost  the  author  years  to  collect  and 
collate  from,  they  obviously  require  systematic  effort  to  arrange ;  and  familiar 
as  they  may  be  to  the  present  generation,  they  demand,  in  justice  to  pos- 
terity, an  ord.erly  place  in  a  compendious  history  of  the  whole  movement. 

Besides  this  candid  statement  of  what  the  spiritualistic  reader  may  or  may 
not  expect  to  find  in  these  pages,  a  few  words  nmst  necessarily  be  addressed 
to  the  critics,  by  whom,  as  is  the  custom,  this  work  is  to  be  heralded  forth  to 
that  portion  of  the  world  who  are  in  the  habit  of  permitting  the  said  critics  to 
do  their  literary  thinking  for  them.  Although  we  scorn  the  petty  subterfuge 
of  affecting  to  disregard  the  world's  opinion  at  the  very  time  when  we  are 
publishing  a  book  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  appealing  to  it,  yet  long  expe- 
rience of  the  course  pursued  by  a  majority  of  the  press  in  reference  to  un- 
popular subjects  generally,  and  Spiritualism  especially,  has  taught  the  author 
to  expect  no  better  treatment  for  her  work  than  has  been  experienced 
by  those  whose  honorable  names  should  have  commanded  respect  for  any 
subject  they  wrote  of  Where  the  honest  truths  detailed  by  an  Ashbumer  or 
a  Howitt  have  been  received  by  bold  denial  or  insolent  ribaldry,  and  that  by 
seif-styled  critics  who  were  utterly  ignorant  of  the  subjects  they  reviled,  how 
can  an  author  without  their  claims  to  public  respect  and  "  decent  observ- 
ance "  hope  to  escape  ?  Whilst  candidly  yielding,  therefore,  to  that  portion 
of  public  opinion  wluch  is  represented  in  press  criticism  all  the  influence  and 
weight  it  deserves,  the  author  begs  respectfully  to  state  that  she  has  heard 
the  epithets  of  "  trash,"  "  falsehood,"  "  imposture,"  "  impiety,"  a  rehash  of 
old  ghost-stories  and  exploded  theories,"  etc.  applied  to  stubborn  facts  and 
ud^pular  truths  before,  and  is  prepared  to  hear  them  again.  Happy  in  the 
belief  that  the  assertions  of  falsehood  do  not  affect  the  realities  of  truth,  nor 
the  opinions  of  bigotiy  and  superstition  long  retard  reJi^ous  progress  or  hin- 
der the  growth  of  spiritual  freedom,  the  author,  in  company  with  a  mighty 

Hosted  by  Google 

i8  INTRODUCTION. 

"cloud  of  witnesses,"  is  contented  to  cast  her  great  truths  upon  the  waters 
of  time,  and  let  them  sink  or  swim,  as  their  own  inherent  vitality  shaJl  deter- 
mine. Well  satisfied  by  the  experience  of  all  mankind  that  truth  and  logic 
wiU  survive  the  shafts  which  abuse  and  ridicule  aim  against  them,  she  com- 
mits her  record  to  time  and  the  inevitable  justice  which  this  mighty  touch- 
stone has  ever  rendered  to  the  cause  of  truth.  Starting  on  our  undertaking, 
first,  with  an  overwhelming  sense  of  its  magnitude  and  many  difficulties;  and 
next,  with  but  very  qualified  expectations  of  a  satisfactory  recognition  from 
either  Spiritualists  or  outsiders,  it  may  be  significantly  asked,  for  whom  do  we 
write  at  all,  and  on  what  possible  basis  do  we  rest  any  expectation  of  public 
acceptance  or  sympathy  in  i  '  "  'te  for  lie  sake 

of  the  spirits,  the  truth,  and  I  we  expect  to 

gather  such  reward  as  we  m 

On  behalf  of  the  spirits  :ficent  beings, 

of  whose  very  existence,  i  to  bless  and 

benefit  the  world,  a  large  mt.      If  they, 

from  flieir  exalted  spheres  o  ,bor  for  a  dark 

and  ignorant  generation,  c:  ancc,  emulate 

their  disinterestedness?     Ai  labor  for  love 

of  the  good  and  true,  with  al  reward  and 

human  appreciation?     It  i  cm  otherwise. 

Ninty-nine  per  cent,  of  the  world's  brightest  inamortals  have  lived,  labored, 
and  died,  for  the  sake  of  the  true,  the  good,  and  the  beautiful,  with  no  other 
reward  than  the  tardy  aiid  remorseful  appreciation  of  posterity.  If  there  be 
any  amongst  us  who  dare  to  emulate  their  martyr-like  devotion,  and  humbly 
seek  to  walk  in  the  track  of  their  shining  though  tear-stained  foot-prints,  why 
question  or  sneer  at  the  choice  ?  It  is  enough  that  the  subject  is  more  than 
worthy  of  all  the  care,  labor,  and  disinterested  effort  that  the  many  or  the 
few  can  bring  to  bear  upon  it.  Through  the  beneficent  action  of  the  mighty 
though  invisible  hosts  who  constitute  the  legions  of  the  modern  spiritual 
army,  thousands  of  darkened  minds  have  been  snatched  from  hopeless  belief 
in  the  horrible  doctrine  of  annihilation.  The  crippled  limbs  have  been  made 
straight,  the  blinded  eyes  opened,  the  dull  ears  unstopped,  the  ebbing  life 
called  back  to  gladden  the  pathway  of  rejoicing  friends;  the  homes 
bereaved  of  frail  mortality  have  been  filled  with  the  glorious  presence  of 
arisen  angels ;  the  sinner  has  been  startled  from  the  paths  of  crime,  and 
the  fainting  strengthened  in  the  thorny  road  of  virtue,  by  the  direct  and 
visible  guidance  and  warning  of  precious  spirit  friends,  A  flood  of  light  has 
been  poured  on  the  long-veiled  and  awful  mysteries  of  the  grave,  revealing 
the  solemn  and  stupendous  realities  of  the  inevitable  hereafter,  and  a  mass 
of  wonderful  revelation  has  illuminated  the  cherished  mysticisms  of  supersri- 
tion  and  sectarianism,  breaking  the  fetters  of  darkness  that  have  so  long  hnng 
around  the  neck  of  humanity.  "Babylon  has  fallen  "^"  M)^tery,  the 
mother  of  abominations,"  is  slain,  and  the  angel  of  truth  and  judgment  has 
sounded  the  tnunpet  of  victory  in  the  great  outpouring  of  modem  Spiritual- 
ism. When  we  remember  that  all  these  results  are  but  a  tithe  of  the  bless- 
ings which  the  Spiritualist  recognizes  as  flowing  from  the  dispensation  where- 
with he  has  been  visited,  can  it  be  a  matter  of  astonishment  that  we  deem  it 
the  highest  of  life's  privileges  to  be  permitted  to  write  for  spirits,  and  bear 
witness  of  their  wonderful  works  tliroughout  the  land?  To  qualify  the 
author  for  this  office,  she  has  borne  her  part  in  every  phase  of  the  spiritual 
dispensation.  From  earliest  childhood  up  to  the  present  time  she  has  seen 
and  conversed  with  spiritual  beings  like  familiar  friends ;  passed  through 

Hosiedb,  Google 

INTRODUCTION.  19 

many  of  the  phases  of  modem  mediumship,  and  witnessed  or  taken  part  in 
most  of  the  scenes  described  in  these  pages.  For  the  perfoimance  of  pro- 
fessional duties  connected  with  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  she  has  travelled 
and  lectured  through  thirty-two  of  the  United  States,  and  gathered  her  records 
chiefly  from  personal  observation  and  the  witness  of  living  millions  who  are 
still  on  earth  to  bear  testimony  to  the  truth  of  her  statements.  Thus,  the 
facts  herein  recorded  are  open  to  the  strictest  scrutiny ;  they  are,  indeed,  still 
transpiring,  and  occur  constantly  in  the  experience  of  eleven  millions  of  persons 
in  America,  whose  numbers  include  authors,  editors,  doctors,  lawy;ers,  clergy- 
men, professors  of  colleges,  magistrates  on  Uie  bench,  statesmen,  traders, 
operatives,  and  mechanics — in  a  word,  all  gradations  of  rank  and  all  classes 
of  thought  As  keen  research  and  sceptical  scrutiny  has  for  the  most  psrt 
characterized  the  progressive  belief  of  American  Spiritualism,  these  vast 
masses  testify  of  that  which  they  know  and  have  proved.  On  the  contrary,  it 
will  be  found  that  the  loudest  and  most  rancorous  opposers  of  this  belief  are 
persons  who  have  either  never  investigated  the  subject  at  all,  or  so  slightly 
as  to  be  in  no  position  to  judge  of  its  subtle  and  far-reaching  realities.  Let 
the  world  determine  between  these  two  classes.  Both,  no  doubt,  will  be 
represented  amongst  the  readers  and  critics  of  these  pages,  and  to  both  we 
close  our  introductory  remarks  by  affirming  that  we  have  lived,  written,  and 
purpose  to  abide  by,  in  time  present  and  to  come,  and  under  all  circum- 
stances, this  axiom  of  invincible  strength  and  never-failing  triumph;  "The 
trudi  against  the  world." 

Hosted  by  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

yj//  f/fft   'rt,-  A' J/-"    i-!^'/-/  /  -/  .> 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

MODERN  AMEEICM  SPIEITUALISM; 

A  TWENTY  YEARS'  RECORD  OF  THE  COMMUNION  BETWEEN 
EARTH  AND  THE  WORLD  OF  SPIRITS, 

La/iinhflarnuofn^ht  ajidwept  t 
His  Uberatcd  sout  raised  from  its  du 
We  led  bim  fai  btyond  the  veas,  an 
And  lahyrinih!  of  Bleep;  IhecLouds 
Aod  all  the  shadowed  dwellers  in  th 
"Wem  far  beneath  him.  ThrmiKh  hi 
Streamed  the  celestial  sunrise. 
Cities  and  teoiple^  of  Celestial  space 

The  Mbsmerizers  —  Electro-biologists— Adventists  of  Spiritualism The 

PovoKKEEPSiE  Seer  and  his  Revelations. 

If  it  be  true  that  the  history  of  humanity  moves  fonvard  in  epochs,  then  it 
is  certain  that  the  leading  characteristics  of  one  era  result  from  thfe 
specialties  of  the  age  which  preceded  it,  whilst  we  in  turn  plant  the  seed 
whose  fruitage  will  be  gathered  by  the  hands  of  our  posterity. 

He  who  searches  for  the  origin  of  some  great  tiiscovery,  or  the  sources 
from  which  spring  stupendous  changes,  may  invariably  trace  the  germ-thought 
through  a  continued  series  of  experimental  antecedents. 

Sometimes  the  causative  idea  is  sown  in  many  minds,  and  springs  up  in 
many  places  at  once,  but  it  may  always  be  traced  in  rudimental  stages  of 
growth  e'er  it  is  exhibited  in  the  maturity  of  a  fully-perfected  work. 

What  we  call  "Modem  American  Spiritualism"  forms  no  exception  to 
this  univerasal  method  of  progressive  unfoldment. 

Startling  and  unprecedented  ' 
ment  of  a  telegraphi 

n  many  respects  as  appears  to  be  the  achieve- 
^    ^  nion  between  the  visible  and  invisible  worlds, 

the  open  ear  of  inteJhgence  will  have  no  difficulty  in  rec<wnizing  (he  voice 
of  many  a  John  the  Baprist  who  ha?  proclaimed  the  coming  of  the  New 
Spiritual  Messiah. 

Hosled  by  Google 

2z  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Amongst  these  none  has  rung  out  with  a  more  clearly-marked  tone  than 
"  Mesmerism,"  with  its  kindred  phenomena  of  "  Electro-biology "  and 
"Clairvoyance."  Chemistry,  Physiology,  Phrenology,  Magnetism,  and  Clair- 
voyance have  all  been  steps  leading  up  through  the  once-forbidden  mysteries 
of  nature  into  the  realm  of  imponderable  forces,  bearing  the  student  onward  to 
the  very  gates  of  the  temple  of  mind,  within  which  are  now  heard  the  low, 
telegraphic  knocks  of  the  spirit,  inviting  the  earnest  inquirers  to  enter,  and 
prophesying  the  great  day  of  revelation,  when  man  may  ascend,  as  on  a 
Jacob's  ladder,  that  mighty  column  where  Physics  is  the  base.  Science  the 
shaft,  Metaphysics  the  superstructure,  and  Spiritualism  the  coronal  glory  of 
the  capital,  whose  starry  crown  pierces  the  overarching  firmament  of 
Heaven, 

Mesmerism,  with  its  wonderful  results  in  somnambulism  and  clairvoyance, 
has  often  been  assumed  by  the  superficial  observer  to  offer  a  complete  solu- 
tion of  the  mysteries  of  Spiritualism.  Without  attempting  at  present  to  show 
how  totally  inadequate  is  this  explanation  to  meet  the  case  in  point,  we  are 
prepared  to  admit  that  mesmerism  has  performed  an  important  part  in  usher- 
ing in  the  more  comprehensive  movement  of  Spiritualism,  For  several  years 
antecedent  to  the  advent  of  the  latter,  mesmerism,  or  "  aniraai  magnetism," 
was  largely  practiced  over  every  part  of  America,  In  nearly  every  city, 
town,  or  hamlet,  the  itinerant  mesmerizer  made  his  rounds,  operating  upon 
chance  subjects  as  opportunity  offered,  and  alternately  exciting  superstitious 
terror  or  wrathful  antagonism  by  the  exercise  of  his  seemingly  magical 
powers. 

Many  professional  operators  were  no  doubt  skilful,  and  with  a  higher  realiza- 
tion of  the  valuable  gift  with  which  they  were  endowed,  might  have  become 
successful  healers  of  the  sick.  As  it  was,  and  despite  the  fact  that  the 
exercise  of  their  art  was  frequently  interrupted  by  the  insensate  fury  of 
ignorant  mobs,  they  often  succeeded  in  effecting  what  were  deemed  "  miracu- 
lous "  cures,  at  which  they  themselves  were  not  less  astonished  than  their 
subjects. 

In  view  of  the  superstitious  bigotry  and  scientific  ignorance  which  prevailed 
on  this  subject  when  animal  magnetism  was  first  practiced  in  America,  con- 
tinuous experiment  and  deliberate  investigation  was  impossible.  Neverthe- 
less, the  exhibitions  of  itinerant  magnetizers,  undignified  and  occasionally 
riotous  as  they  were,  became  suggestive  to  thoughtful  observers,  and  ulti- 
mately produced  a  wide-spread  interest  on  the  subjecL  Intelhgent  witnesses, 
assembled  by  chance  in  a  village  school-house  or  country  bam,  set  them- 
selves to  work  to  discover  the  source  of  the  marvels  they  beheld.  Magnetic 
experiments  were  practiced  in  the  home  circle  ;  more  favorable  conditions 
were  followed  by  more  remarkable  results ;  the  inquiry  deepened  into  pro- 
found interest,  and  the  phenomena  of  animal  magnetism  became  familiarly 
knowm  to  the  most  progressive  classes  of  the  community.  Ignored  by  those 
scientists  who  were  too  proud  to  investigate  anything  they  did  not  originally 
discover,  and  anathematized  by  a  superstitious  and  creed-bound  priesthood, 
animal  magnetism  was  openly  denounced  as  "the  latest  invention  of  the 
enemy  of  mankind,"  or,  "  a  profound  humbug  "  whilst  the  luckless  itinerant 
exhibitor  was  often  cited  before  some  grave  magistrate,  who,  in  the  seclusion 
of  his  own  home,  was  a  more  interested  investigator  and  a  better  operator 
than  the  criminal  he  was  called  upon  to  punish.  In  a  word,  magnetism 
became  a  fashion,  and  its  legitimate  claim  to  be  considered  as  a  science  was 
at  length  fully  established.  The  result  of  this  movement  upon  Spiritualism 
has  now  become  obvious. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  23 

Thousands  of  persons  who  are  wirm  advocates  of  the  spiritual  philosophy 
acknowledge  that  their  attention  wis  first  attracted  to  the  subject  by  their 
interest  in  magnetism.  In  all  the  pnncipal  cities  of  the  Union,  gentlemen 
distinguished  for  their  literary  abilities  progressive  op  nions,  or  prominence  in 
public  affairs,  have  graduated  from  the  study  of  magnetism  and  clairvoyance 
to  become  adherents  to  the  cau'^e  of  Spiritualism  whilst  many  of  the  best 
mediums — especially  the  trance  speakers  and  magnetic  operators — have 
taken  their  first  degree  in  Spiritualism  as  experimentalists  in  the  phenomena 
of  mesmerism. 

All  popular  movements  m  Amenca  ore  spread  over  such  immense  surfaces 
of  country  that  nothing  less  than  a  question  of  national  interest  can  form  a 
focalizing  x>oint  for  popular  opinion,  or  its  representation  in  foreign  countries; 
hence,  whilst  magnetism,  electro-biology,  and  clairvoyance  have  swept  over 
the  land  in  vast  tides  of  influence,  they  have  acquired  more  notoriety  in  a 
few  solitary  instances  in  France  and  Germany,  than  in  all  their  magnitude  in 
the  United  States. 

Admitting  that  the  modem  spiritual  manifestations  in  America  first  began 
to  assume  the  form  of  a  concrete  movement  at  Rochester  in  1848,  it  would 
still  be  impossible  to  separate  the  influence  which  the  prevalence  of  the 
magnetic  idea  exercised  upon  minds  prepared  to  receive  Spiritualism  and 
organisms  already  imbued  with  the  necessary  force  to  develop  mediumship. 

Between  the  epochs  in  which  these  two  great  movements  have  dominated, 
is  an  interregnum,  rife  with  the  advent  of  a  human  phenomenon,  connecting 
both,  belonging  to  both,  yet  standing  alone,  and  unrivalled  in  the  marvellous 
character  of  his  occult  endowments,  and  the  irresistible  nature  of  the  in- 
fluence he  has  exercised  upon  humanity.  This  personage  is  Andrew  Jackson 
Davis,  more  commonly  called  "  the  Poughkeepsie  Seer."  At  about  the  age 
of  fifteen,  young  Davis  first  became  remarkable  in  New  York  and  Connecti- 
cut for  his  skill  in  diagnosing  and  prescribing  for  disease  through  his  wonder- 
ful clairvoyant  faculty.  Of  a  slight  and  delicate  temperament,  the  young 
physician  possessed  a  degree  of  intuitive  refinement  which  in  some  sense 
compensated  for  liis  total  deficiency  of  educational  culture,  and  an  artificial 
grace  which  could  not  be  expected  from  his  exceedingly  humble  origin, 
which  wa£  that  of  the  son  and  apprentice  of  a  poor  country  shoemaker. 

About  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  casually  magnetized  by  a  Mr.  Living- 
ston, of  Poughkeepsie,  who,  discovering  that  the  shoemaker's  boy  possessed 
wonderful  clairvoyant  powers,  and  an  unusually  successful  gift  of  prescribing 
for  the  sick,  gradually  drew  him  from  his  trade  into  association  with  himself 
until  at  lengtli  they  travelled  and  practiced  together  as  operator  and  subject, 
with  unbounded  success  and  benefit  to  the  world. 

From  the  period  when  Mr,  Livingston  accidentally  discovered  young 
Davis's  wonderful  endowments,  his  whole  time  was  so  disposed  of  that 
neither  then  nor  at  any  subsequent  period  of  his  career  could  he  have  found 
leisure,  even  if  he  had  the  capacity,  to  add  one  iota  of  literary  information 
to  his  slender  stock  of  village  scholasticism.  The  exceedingly  humble  rank 
and  limited  means  of  his  parents  deprived  young  Davis  of  all  chances  of 
culture,  save  five  months  at  a  rustic  stiiool  and  the  association  of  the  rude 
boors  of  wild  country  districts.  The  extraordinary  celebrity  to  which  he  has 
now  attained  has  rendered  even  the  minutest  details  of  his  early  childhood 
public  property ;  hence  it  is  well  known  that  his  highest  accomplishment,  at 
the  time  of  what  may  be  called  his  spiritual  illumination,  was  limited  to  the 
capacity  to  read,  write,  and  cipher  very  indiflerently,  whilst  his  whole  stock 
of  remembered  literature  was  a  tale  called  "the  Three  Spaniards." 

Hosted  by  Google 

24  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Mr.  Davis;  was  about  eighteen  years  of  age  when  He  announced  to  the 
circle  of  admirers  who  had  become  interested  in  his  wonderful  lucidity  as  a 
clairvoyant,  that  a  new  and  astounding  phase  of  spiritual  power  was  about 
to  be  revealed  through  his  instrumentali^,  commencing  with  the  delivery  of 
a  course  of  lectures  which  were  destined  ultimately  to  revolutionize  the 
scientific  world  and  produce  a  striking  effect  upon  the  religious  opinions 
of  mankind, 

In  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  Mr.  Davis  proceeded  to  give  the  promised 
course  of  lectures,  for  the  production  of  which  he  selected  Dr.  Lyon,  of 
Bridgeport,  as  his  magnetizer,  the  Rev.  William  Fishbough  as  his  scribe,  the 
Rev.  V.  N.  Parker,  R.  Lapham,  Esq.,  and  Dr.  L.  Smith,  of  New  York,  as  his 
special  witnesses,  whilst  several  other  gentlemen,  high  in  place  or  distin- 
guished for  literary  and  scientific  attainments,  were  from  time  to  time  invited 
in,  or  permitted  to  be  present  at  the  delivery  of  the  lectures  ;  and  thus  was 
produced  the  vast  compendium  of  literary,  scientific,  philosophic,  and  historic 
knowledge,  entitled  "  Nature's  Divine  Revelations."  Of  the  work  itself, 
together  with  a  more  detailed  account  of  its  auliior  and  his  subsequent 
career,  we  shall  speak  more  fully  in  our  biographical  sketches ;  suffice  it  to 
say  that  the  majT'eUously  abnormal  character  of  the  book,,  emanating  as  it 
did  from  a  person  so  utterly  incapable  of  its  production  under  ordinary  cir- 
cumstances, excited  the  most  profound  astonishment  in  all  ranks  and  classes. 
"The  Revelations"  were  quickly  followed  by  "The  Great  Harmonia," 
"  Penetralia,"  "  Present  Age  and  Inner  Life,"  and  other  voluminous  produc- 
tions, the  sum  of  which,  combined  with  Mr.  Davis's  lectures,  editorial  labors, 
associative  movements,  and  wide-spread  personal  influence,  have  effected  a 
complete  revolution  in  the  minds  of  a  large  and  distinguished  class  of  think- 
ers in  die  United  States,  who  are  known  as  the  advocates  of  the  "  Harmo- 
nial  Philosophy,"  abehef  which  emphatically  owes  its  origin  \a  the  poor  shoe- 
maker's  boy.  A,  J.  Davis,  Even  at  the  early  age  of  eighteen  {the  period 
when  the  first  of  the  "Revelations"  were  given)  the  remarkable  attainments 
of  Mr.  Davis  as  a  medical  clairvoyant,  together  with  the  exceeding  purity  of 
his  life  and  the  modesty  of  his  manners,  had  drawn  around  him  a  circle  of 
distinguished  persons  who  became  his  warmly-attached  friends.  Mr.  James 
Victor  Wilson,  a  gentleman  of  New  Orleans,  renowned  for  his  literary  talents 
and  the  author  of  an  excellent  treatise  on  magnetism,  writes  of  him  thus, 
during  the  delivery  of  his  first  lectures  : 

"  The  world  will  shortly  be  apprised  of  a.  triumph  in  clairvoyance  through  the  celebrated 
Mr.  Davis,  which  it  will  be  totally  unprepared  for.  During  the  past  year  this  uneducated, 
unsophisticated,  and  amiable  yonng  man  has  been  delivering  verbally,  day  by  day,  a  com- 
prehensive, vrell-planned,  and  extraordinary  book,  relating  to  all  the  vast  questions  of  the 
age;  to  ihe  physical  sciences;  to  nature  in  all  her  infinite  ramifications;  to  man  in  his 
innumerable  modes  of  esistence  ;  to  God  in  the  nnfathomable  abysses  of  his  love,  wisdom, 
and  power 

"Thousands  of  persons  who  have  witnessed  him  in  his  n 
disclosures,  live  to  testify  to  the  astounding  exaltation  of  mind  p 
bis  abnormal  state. 

"The-two  new  planets  of  our  system,  conjectured  recently,  \ 
manuscripts  fourteen  months  ago,  namely,  March  15  and  16,  1846." 

Shortly  after  the  lectures  commenced,  Mr.  Davis's  rooms  in  New  York 
City  were  thrown  open  to  the  public  for  medical  examinations,  on  which 
occasions  his  manuscripts  were  often  submitted  to  the  highest  intellects  of  the 
country  for  investigation,  and  his  whole  career  —  especially  the  impossibility 
of  his  having  acquired  die  knowledge  he  exhibited  in  his  clairvoyant  state 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  25 

by  any  onliiiary  means — was  made  tlie  subject  of  seaicliing  and  rigid  scrutiny. 
One  of  the  most  marked  results  establislied  by  tlie  life  of  this  |)lienomenal 
personage  was  the  actuality  of  clairvoyance  and  the  triumphant  revelation 
that  the  soul  of  man  coulci  commune  spiritually  with  supra-mundane  as  well 
as  mundane  minds,  and  aspire  far  beyonil  this  terrestrial  sphere  in  its  acqui- 
sition of  knowledge.  The  latter,  indeed,  was  still  a  mooted  i)oint,  and  a  vast 
amount  of  logic  was  expended  on  young  Davis's  case  in  the  attempt  to 
prove  that  all  the  "revelations"  poured  dirough  his  lips  were  only  die  reflex 
of  minds  still  upon  earth,  or  stereotyped  in  books,  and  that  the  seer's  gift 
was  simply  clairvoyant  perception  of  mundane  existences.  It  was  doubdess 
very  gratifying  to  the  egotism  of  certain  individuals  to  believe  that  the  clair- 
voj^ant  had  found  the  source  of  his  remarkable  and  varied  revelations  in 
their  own  higlily-illuminated  minds,  and  they  professed  themselves  willing  to 
become  the  subjects  of  Ais  original  system  of  mental  piracy  for  the  sake 
of  appropriating  the  merit  of  his  comprehensive  philosophy  and  disposing  of 
the  awkward  problem  of  supra-mundane  interference ;  but  whilst  many  of  Mr. 
Davis's  writings  give  obvious  evidence  of  human  clairvoyance,  there  is  still  a 
large  amount  of  original  matter  which  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  admit- 
ting the  hypothesis  of  spiritual  perception  in  realms  of  super- sensuous  ex- 
istence and  inspiration  from  a  worid  of  supra-mundane  knowledge.  Besides 
this,  there  are  points  of  coincidence  in  the  testuaony  of  other  illuminated 
persons  which  must  not  be  lost  sight  of.  "Whilst  it  must  be  admitted  that  Mr. 
Davis's  lucidity  and  breadth  of  mental  power  was  unparalleled  in  the  records 
of  history,  the  gift  of  clairvoyant  sight  was  by  no  means  limited  by  his  ex- 
perience, even  in  liis  own  time.  The  various  magnetic  subjects  who  abounded 
at  the  period  we  write  of,  not  only  gave  evidences  of  a  highly  exalted  condi- 
tion and  remarkable  interior  perception,  but  frequently  perplexed  their  opera- 
tors by  speaking  of  spirits,  declaring  tliey  could  converse  with  "  dead  people," 
perceive  them  in  life,  enter  their  habitations,  and  describe  the  homes  or 
"  spheres  in  which  they  dwelt."  All  this  was  contrary  to  the  experience  of 
the  magnetizers,  hence  declared  by  them  to  be  no  reflex  of  tlieir  minds 
or  opinions ;  and  as  these  unaccountable  vagaries  of  entiancement  seemed  to 
be  on  the  increase,  considerate  and  candid  inquirers  began  to  connect  them 
with  the  wonderfiil  mental  flights  achieved  by  young  Davis,  and  conjecture 
that  aie  freed  sphit  in  its  "sleep  waking"  condition,  might  pass  into  realms 
of  being,  super-sensuous  in  their  nature,  and  supra-mundane  in  their  popu- 

Meantinie,  as  the  transcendent  powers  of  Mr.  Davis  seemed  to  concen- 
trate into  one  focal  point  aU  the  lesser  lights  of  magnetic  marvel,  so  the 
whole  ranks  of  materialistic  antagonism  rushed  pell-mell  upon  him,  as  the 
head  and  front  of  all  spiritualistic  offending.  Nero-like,  tiie  anti-spiritnal 
world  seemed,  to  think  that  in  striking  at  him  they  could  sweep  out  of  being 
all  the  obnoxious,  occult  people  and  forces  that  outraged  their  materialism  or 
bigotry;  hence  the  " Foughkeepsie  Seer"  earned  his  newly-acquired  fame 
at  the  price  of  becoming  a  target  for  the  shafts  of  every  form  of  abuse,  ridi- 
cule, and  slander  that  ignorance  and  prejudice  could  heap  upon  him. 

About  the  early  part  of  December,  1847,  the  general  understanding  of 
spiritual  philosophy  received  a  valuable  impetus  from  the  publication  of  an 
excellent  weekly  journal  entitled  The  Univerealum,  or  Spirilual  Philos- 
opher. This  paper  was  started  at  the  instance  of  a  few  gentlemen  whose 
friendship  for  and  high  appreciation  of  Mr.  Davis  induced  them  to  make  this 
attempt  to  popularize  his  opinions,  and  call  around  them  a  circle  of  such  wise 
and  progressive  minds  as  would  sympathize  with  their  views.    The  projectors 

Hosted  by  Google 

a6  mSTORY  OF  MODERN 

and  chief  contributors  to  the  undertaking  were  Mr.  Davis,  then  just  twenty- 
one  years  of  age  ;  Rev.  WjUiani  Fislibough,  Rev.  Thomas  L.  Harris,  the  in- 
siiired  author  of  the  "  Epic  of  the  Starry  Heavens,"  and  other  equally 
renowned  poems ;  and  tlie  Rev.  S.  H.  Britain,  to  whose  scholarly  cliarge  and 
highly-polished  intellect  the  editorial  department  was  wisely  intnisted. 

Besides  this  accomplished  editorial  statf,  contributors  of  die  highest  talent 
filled  the  columns  of  the  Univercoilum.  Amongst  these  were  die  Rev.  W. 
M.  Fernald,  J.  K.  Redfield,  Mr.  F.  M  Baker,  J.  V.  Ingalls,  Charles  Woitli. 
and  D.  T.  H.  Chivers.  So  brilliant  an  array  of  writers  procured  for  the 
Uitivercmlum  a  high  reputation,  and  besides  being  the  first  spiritual  periodi- 
cal of  modern  date  in  America,  it  became  a  compendium  of  the  best  thoughts 
and  purest  philosophy  of  the  age.  In  addition  to  its  own  intrinsic  merits, 
this  journal  was  favored  with  die  usual  amount  of  advertising,  which  resulted 
from  the  bitter  antagonism  provoked  by  the  spiritualistic  reputation  of  its 
authors  and  editors. 

Unfortunately  the  latter  gentlemen  were  richer  in  mental  than  material 
endowments  ;  hence  they  had  to  struggle  widi  the  usual  amount  of  financial 
disability,  that  seems  to  be  the  fate  of  genius ;  and  hence,  too,  in  all  proba- 
bility, they  were  as  much  indebted  to  the  publicity  afforded  to  their  paper  by 
the  rancor  of  their  opponents  as  to  their  own  merits ;  the  combination  of 
the  two  causes,  however,  enabled  them  to  fill  a  hiatus  in  the  literature  of  the 
time  for  above  two  years,  during  wliich  their  paper,  sustained  by  the  most  in- 
domitable perseverance  and  bitter  self-sacrifice,  laid  tlie  foundation  of  a 
noble  and  genuine  tone  of  thought,  the  fruits  of  which  will  be  felt  in  all  ages 
where  true  spiritual  life  and  philosophy  can  be  appreciated. 

Besides  their  untiring  efforts  in  connection  with  the  paper,  its  noble  staff 
of  editors  endeavored  to  distribute  the  bread  of  life  with  which  they  felt  they 
had  been  so  richly  blessed,  in  lectures  given  at  home  and  abroad,  to  whidi 
they  added  public  discussions,  newspaper  and  magazine  controversies ;  in  a 
word,  they  threw  their  hearts  and  talents  into  the  work,  and  formed  a  nucleus 
from  wliicli  the  irradiations  of  spuitual  thought  and  mfluence  flowed  out  in 
abundant  and  startling  force.  It  is  simple  justice  to  afhnii  that  "Nature's 
Divine  Revelations,"  the  Univercalum,  and  the  personal  influence  and  diffu- 
sive labor  of  their  talented  authors,  inaugurated  a  new  era  in  the  world  of 
thought,  and  opened  up  a  new  channel  of  inspiration,  whose  source,  like  that 
of  the  mighty  Nile,  may  long  remain  a  hidden  mystery,  but  when  explored  by 
the  enterprise  of  future  ages,  will  date  back  to  a  human  Nyanza  in  the  per- 
.son  of  the  "  Poughkeepsie  Seer,"  upheld  by  the  strong  hands  and  sunlit 
minds  of  the  noble  gentlemen  who  rallied  around  him. 

"Honor  to  whom  honor  is  due."  The  despised  itinerant  lecturers  on 
magnetism,  die  still  more  contemned  experimenters  in  electro-biology,  even 
the  unsophisticated  children  and  rustics  who  were  their  subjects,  these,  as 
forerunners  of  the  culminating  marvel  of  modern  ages — A.  J.  Davis — were 
amongst  the  first  to  hear  the  divine  command  to  "prepare  the  way  of  the 
Lord,"  and  re-echo  the  solemn  charge  in  the  wildernesses  of  materialism. 

The  obscurity  of  the  personages,  and  the  humility  of  their  pretensions, 
may  throw  over  die  origin  of  the  movement  the  veil  of  unkind  forge tfulness, 
or  ungrateful  repudiation,  yet  the  vital  fires  of  magnetism  and  the  subtle 
forces  of  psychology  will  yet  be  found  to  underlie  the  whole  science  of  life 
and  mind,  whether  incarnate  in  mortal  clay  or  enfranchised  in  the  free 
spiritual  existence  in  life  beyond  the  tomb.  The  waters  of  Oblivion, 
muddied  by  the  thick  night  of  human  ignorance  and  human  ingratitude,  may 
engulph  jn  dim  forgetfulness  the  name  of  the  author  of  "  Nature's  Divine 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICA]^  SPIRITUALISM.  2^ 

Revelations,"  but  his  phenomenal  life-work  and  teadilngs  have  already 
formed  a  glittering  star  which  is  set  in  tJie  firmament  of  eternity,  surrounded 
by  die  constellation  of  unworn  minds  whom  he  focalized  about  him,  and 
through  whom  the  spiritual  yearnings  of  the  nineteenth  century  first  found 
expression,  in  the  shape  of  a  true  and  hamionious  philosophy. 

A.  J.  Davis  and  liis  friends,  ridiculed,  despised,  contemned  and  slandered 
as  they  were,  on  the  one  hand  startled  the  age  from  the  worship  of  atoms,  in 
which  material  science  pretended  to  discover  the  sources  of  mind  ;  and  on 
the  other,  embodied  the  vague  transcendentalisms  of  credal  faiths  in  the  dis- 
tinct and  tan^ble  form  of  an  electric,  living,  silver  cord,  uniting  the  shadowy 
phantasmagoria  of  matter   with  the  deathless  and  changeless  principle  of 

Though  not  the  origin  of  or  immediately  connected  with  die  phenomenal 
movement  called  Modem  Spiritualism,  though  indeed,  up  to  this  date,  The 
Harmonial  Philosophy  of  A.  J.  Davis,  and  the  doctrines  of  Spiritualism,  may 
maintain  lines  of  separative  demarcation  between  them,  the  great  spiritual 
unfolding  revealed  in  Mr.  Davis's  person,  and  the  irresistible  influence  which 
he  has  exercised  upon  the  opinions  of  the  age,  unquestionably  formed  the 
John  Baptist  which  inaugurated  that  sunEt  day  when  faith  became  knowl- 
edge, hope  of  immqrtahty  a  glorious  realization,  and  the  dark,  spectral 
shadow  of  deafh  became  transfigured  into  the  radiant  form  of  a  ministering 
sphit,  in  the  bright  illuminating  beams  of  modem  Spiritualism. 

CHAPTER   II. 

AND  THERE  SHALL  BE  NO  MORE  DEATH." 

A  FEW  years  ago,  the  author,  being  on  a  lecturing  tour  in  the  vicinity  of  a 
large  village  of  the  community  known  as  "  Shakers,"  was  waited  on  by  some 
of  their  members  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  certain  facts  which  they 
seemed  to  think  it  was  essential  to  the  cause  of  truth  should  be  laid  before 
her.  One  of  the  party,  a  man  distinguished  for  his  literary  talents  and  the  in- 
tegrity of  his  character,  read  a  document  which  purported  to  be  an  account 
of  a  special  visitation  of  the  "guardian  spirits  who  openly  commmed  with 
the  members  of  that  society.  It  seemed  that  man  festations  of  spintual 
presence,  through  rappings,  mOMngs  of  furniture  visions  trance  clairaudi 
ence,  and  clairvoyance,  had  been  common  amongst  the  Shakers  since  the 
time  of  their  foundation,  some  sevent)  years  ago  but  the  particular  \isita 
tion  to  which  the  visitors  desired  to  call  attention  took  place  about  1830, 
when  a  multitude  of  spiritual  beings  with  the  most  solemn  and  forcible 
tokens  of  their  presence,  in  a  vanety  of  phenomenal  wavs  indicated  (he  ap 
proach  of  a  great  spiritual  crisis,  m  whicli  they  designed  for  a  season  to  with 
draw  the  special  gifts  enjoyed  by  the  Shakers  and  pour  them  out  in  mighty 
floods  upon  the"world's  people,  who,  for  the  realization  of  certain  divine 
purposes,  faintly  shadowed  forth,  were  to  be  visited  by  unlooked-for  and  stu- 
pendous tokens  of  spiritual  presence. 

The  commencement  of  the  promised  new  era  was  to  be  inaugurated  by 

Hosted  by  Google 

z8  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

an  extraordinary  discovery  of  material  as  well  as  spiritual  wealth.  Mines  of 
treasure  were  to  be  discovered  in  tlie  eartli,  and  floods  of  spiritual  light  were 
to  descend  from  the  heavens,  and  both  these  vast  outpourings  were,  it  was 
predicted,  to  occur  in  the  year  1848,  and  to  continue  until  about  1870, 
when  fresh  sensuous  and  snper-sensuous  demonstrations  were  to  proclaim  the 
inauguration  of  another  era.  The  record  of  this  spiritual  visitation,  together 
with  the  details  of  the  communication,  was  shown  to  the  author,  duly 
attested  by  numerous  witnesses,  and  bearing  date  about  1S29  or  '30,  The 
document  stated  further,  that  the  Shakers,  fearing  lest  their  beloved  "guar- 
dian angels"  purposed  to  withdraw  from  them  altogether,  wept  in  such 
abundance  that  tiieir  tears  fell  on  the  ground  like  rain,  and  bedewed  the 
sacred  floor  on  which  the  angelic  presence  shone.  The  authenticity, 
together  with  the  date  of  this  prophecy,  has  been  confirmed  by  numerous 
communications  from  other  Shaker  communities  ;  and  in  further  corrobora- 
tion of  its  truth,  we  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  discovery  of  gold  in 
California  and  the  breaking  out  of  Spiritualism  through  the  "Rochester 
knockings  "  both  occurred  in  1847-8. 

In  a  most  excellent  work,  published  as  early  in  the  progress  of  modern 
American  Spiritualism  as  1855,  giving  a  detailed  account  of  its  facts  and 
fMiaticisms  np  to  that  period,  Mr.  E.  W.  Capron,  its  author,  relates,  chiefly 
upon  his  own  authority  as  an  eye-witness,  a  full  and  interesting  account  of 
that  initiatory  phase  of  the  manifestations  known  as  the  "  Rochester  knock- 
ing." Dr.  Hare,  Judge  Edmonds,  Hon.  R.  D.  Owen,  and  other  American 
writers  of  celebrity  have  repeated  in  substance  Mr.  Capron's  narrative,  while 
several  journals  and  a  great  many  ef^emeral  pamphlets,  now  out  of  print, 
have  given  the  sum  of  the  history  with  more  or  less  fidelity,  so  that  a  repeti- 
tion of  this  oft-told  tale  in  these  p^es  might  appear  supererogatory  and  almost 
impertinent,  were  its  insertion  not  in  strict  accordance  with  the  principal  aim 
of  a  work  which  promises  rather  a  compendious  resume  of  the  facts  already 
patent  to  the  public  mind  than  any  originality  of  detail  or  novel  revelation 
m  connection  with  it.  Even  tlie  privilege  enjoyed  by  the  author  of  an  inti- 
mate acquaintance  with  the  famed  "  Poughkeepsie  Seer,"  the  "Rochester 
mediums,"  and  Dr.  Phelps,  of  Stratford,  affords  no  new  sources  of  informa- 
tion in  addition  to  the  facts  already  detailed  in  former  publications ;  but  as 
these  facts  form  the  opening  wedges  that  rent  asunder  the  rock  of  ancient 
supernaturalism,  converting  it  into  the  Ught  of  modem  Spiritualism,  so  the 
oinission  of  these  details  from  our  history  would  shear  effects  from  (heir 
legitimate  causes,  and  display  the  blossom  and  fruitage  of  a  great  movement 
severed  from  the  root  which  gave  it  birth.  The  astonishing  power  of  the 
human  mind  revealed  through  the  magnetic  sleep  were  not  phenomena 
peculiar  to  Mr.  A.  J.  Davis  alone,  nor  unfamiliar  to  the  investigators  of 
:iccnlt  science;  nevertheless,  it  was. in  his  person  that  they  assumed  such 
magnitude  and  orderly  development  as  to  crystaHze  in  one  example  the 
experience  of  preceding  ages,  and  represent  magnetism  and  clairvoyance  as 
facts  which  admit  of  no  dispute.  Strange  sounds  and  apparitions  of  the  so- 
called  deadviete  not  peculiar  to  the  house  at  Hydesville,  inhabited  by  the 
Foxes,  neither  was  the  aura  through  which  spirits  could  manifest  their  pres- 
ence an  attribute  special  to  this  family  alone.  Besides  the  spiritual  manifes- 
tations of  other  times  and  countries,  rappings,  movements  of  ponderable 
bodies,  and  all  the  variety  of  unaccountable  phenomena  witnessed  at  Hydes- 
ville, had  often  startled  the  inhabitants  of  other  districts  before ;  and  although 
the  weird  manifestations  at  Dr.  Phelps's  house  at  Stratford,  exceeded  in 
power  and  persistency  any.  equally  well  attested  facts  of  modern  Spirituahsm, 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  39 

their  nature  was  not  unfamiliar  to  those  who  had  ever  examined  the 
subject  of  haunted  houses  or  the  doings  of  the  German  "  Poltergheist."  Still 
the  concrete  and  scientific  characteristics  of  the  spiritual  movement  in 
America  take  their  origin  in  the  first  attempt  at  telegraphy,  commenced  at 
Hydesville  and  followed  out  in  Rochester,  and  hence  we  cannot  do  justice 
to  the  subject  without  a  careful  review  of  this  portion  of  it.  From  the  first 
working  of  the  spiritual  telegraph  by  which  invisible  beings  were  enabled 
to  spell  out  consecutive  messages,  they  ["the  spirits"]  claimed  that  this 
method  of  communion  was  organized  by  scientific  minds  in  the  spirit  spheres ; 
that  it  depended  mainly  upon  the  conditions  of  human  and  atmospheric 
magnetisms,  and  pointed  to  the  ultimation  of  a  science  whereby  spirits,  oper- 
ating upon  and  through  matter,  could  connect  in  the  most  intimate  rela- 
tions the  worlds  of  material  and  spiritual  existence. 

They  referred  to  the  house  at  Hydesville  as  one  peculiarly  suited  to  their 
purpose  from  the  fact  of  its  being  charged  with  the  aura  requisite  to  make  it 
a  battery  for  the  working  of  the  telegraph  ;  also  to  tlie  Fox  family  as  being 
similarly  endowed. 
.  They  called  this  aura  the  "  life  principle,"  represented  it  as  a  force  which 
constituted  tlie  person  or  place  in  which  it  existed  in  abundance  a  medium, 
or  channel  through  which  spirits  could  communicate.  These  glimmerings  of 
philosophy  form^  the  first  stepping-stones  to  a  spiritual  science  ;  hence  it  is 
to  the  inauguration  of  a  communion  based  upon  diese  principles  that  we  trace 
the  commencement  of  the  present  era,  and  we  should  deem  our  history  in- 
complete unless  it  started  from  that  point. 

In  pursuance  of  this  object,  we  shall  now  invite  the  attention  of  the  reader 
to  a  few  extracts  from  certain  pamphlets,  written  by  E.  E.  Lewis,  Esq.,  of 
Canandaigua,  New  York ;  D.  M.  Dewey,  of  Rochester,  published  in  1850 ; 
J.  R  Campbell,  M.D.,  of  Alleghany,  published  m  1851;  E.  W.  Capron, 
of  Auburn;  and  the  testimony  of  various  members  of  the  Fox  family,  ren- 
dered in  familiar  conversations  with  the  author.  It  should  be  stated 
that  the  scene  of  the  following  manifestions  was  a  small  wooden  house 
in  the  little  village  of  Hydesville,  WajTie  County,  New  York.  The  place, 
not  being  direcdy  accessible  from  a  railroad,  was  lonely,  and  unmarked  by 
those  tokens  of  progress  that  the  locomotive  generally  leaves  in  its  track, 
hence  it  was  the  last  spot  where  a  scene  of  fraud  and  deception  could  find 
motive  for  or  possibility  of  a  successful  execution.  The  family  so  prommently 
identified  wjth  the  phenomena  were  persons  of  worth  ajid  integrity.  Their 
little  dwelling,  diough  so  small  and  simply  fmiiished  as  to  leave  no  shadow 
of  opportunity  for  concealment  or  trick,  was  the  residence  of  honest  piety 
and  rural  simplicity.  All  who  have  ever  known  them  will  bear  witness  to  the 
unimpeachable  character  of  the  good  mother,  now  happily  removed  from  the 
scene  of  her  overwhelming  earthly  trials,  while  the  integrity  of  the  simple- 
minded  farmers  who  were  father  and  brother  to  the  ladies  who  have  since 
become  so  celebrated  as  "  the  Rochester  knockers,"  stands  proved  beyond 
all  question.  At  the  time  of  the  manifestations,  the  house  was  tenanted  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fox  and  their  two  youngest  children,  Matgaret  and  Catharine, 
the  re  p  ag       f  wl    m  M      F      s  published  statement  represents  as 

h  y  may  now  appear,  are  due  alike  in 

ly  a  d   p  y      When   the  future  of  this  wonderful 

n  f  history,  and  antiquity,  if  not  reve- 

d  nkind  to  follow  the  example  of  their 

d,"  the  names  now  sunk  in  obsciuity 

twelve 

dhf     ni  ar 

.  "^^^ 

d       1          g 

justice 

h     f  nly 

movem 

h  11  1 

rence  f 

p  ntu  1   n  1 

ancest 

nd  lab  1    i 

Hosiedb,  Google 

30  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

aod  masked  by  slander  may  perchance  be  engraved  in  monuments  of  bronze 
and  marble,  and  the  incidents  deemed  too  slight  for  notice  may  be  reverenced 
as  "Holy  Writ."  These  changes  of  chance  and  time  have  happened  before. 
If  history  repeats  herself  they  will  occur  again. 

From  a  published  statement  of  the  early  investigations  connected  with 
this  house,  entitled  "  Report  of  the  Mysterious  Noises,  etc.,"  we  learn  that 
some  disturbances  had  affected  the  inhabitants  before  Mr.  Fox  and  his  family 
came  to  reside  there.     Nothing  of  the  kind  was  noticed,  however,  until  the 

tenancy  of  a  Mr.  and  Mrs.  ■ ,  who,  according  to  the  statement  of  Lucre- 

tia  P.  fa  girl  who  occasionally  resided  with  them],  occupied  that  house  for  a 
short  tune  during  the  winter  of  1843-4.  Miss  P.,  in  the  deposition  called 
forth  by  subsequent  investigations,  states  that  one  afternoon  a  pedler,  ap- 
parently about  thirty  years  of  age,  dressed  in  a  black  frock  coat,  light  panta- 
loons and  cap,  and  carrying  with  him  a  pack  of  goods,  called  on  Mrs. , 

who  seemed  to  recognize  him  as  an  acquaintance.     Shortly  after  his  arrival, 

Mrs. called  her,  and  told  her,  very  much   to  her  surprise,  that  she 

thought  she  could  not  afford  to  keep  her  any  longer,  and,  as  she  was  going 
to  Lock  Berlin  that  afternoon,  she  wished  Lucretia  to  leave  the  house  with 
her.  This  the  latter  agreed  to  do,  but  before  going  she  looked  at  a  piece  of 
dress  delaine  in  the  pedler's  pack,  and  requested  hirn  to  call  with  it  at  her 
father's  house  the  next  day.  The  man  promised  to  do  so,  but  she  never  saw 
him  more.  Mrs.  - — —  and  Lucretia  then  left  the  house,  the  pedler  and  Mr. 
■  —  remaining  behind,  the  former  being  apparently  likely  to  remain  there 
for  the  day. 

After  the  lapse  of  three  days,  Mrs. sent  for  Lucretia  P.  from  her  home 

and  requested  her  to  return  to  her  again.  From  this  time  Lucretia  P.  began 
to  hear  knockings  in  the  bedroom,  and  on  one  occasion,  when  her  employers 
had  gone  to  Lock  Berlin,  she  sent  for  her  little  brodier  and  a  companion 
named  Aurelia  to  pass  (he  night  with  her.  All  the  young  people  that  night 
distinctly  heard  noises  which,  as  they  declared,  sounded  like  the  footsteps  of  a 
man  passing  from  the  bedroom  into  the  buttery,  then  down  the  cellar  stairs, 
traversing  tiie  cellar  for  a  short  distance,  and  then  suddenly  stopping. 

They  were  very  much  frightened,  and  scarcely  slept  the  remainder  of  the 
night     In  the  "  Report  of  Mysterious  Noises,"  Mrs.  P.,  the  mother  of 

Lucretia,  who  resided  near,  deposed  that,  having  called  on  Mrs.  one 

day,  after  the  foregoing  circumstances,  she  found  her  quite  ill  from  want  of 

rest  on  the  previous  night.    On  inquiring  the  cause,  Mrs. declared  that 

she  was  sick  of  her  life,  and  that  she  heard  the  footsteps  of  a  man  traversing 
the  house  all  night ;  a  statement  which  she  often  subsequently  repeated. 
About  a  week  after  the  visit  of  the  pedler  to  the  house,  Lucretia,  having  occa- 
sion to  go  down  into  the  cellar,  stumbled  and  fell  into  some  soft  soil.    Aware 

that  this  was  unusual,  she  screamed  for  assistance,  and  when  Mrs. came 

to  her,  she  asked  "  whatever  had  Mr. been  doing  in  the  cellar  ?  "    Mrs. 

replied  that  it  was  only  rat-holes;  and  a  few  nights  afterwards,  the  wit- 
ness related  that  Mr. was  busy  for  a  long  time  in  the  cellar  filling  up 

"the  rat-holes"  with  earth  which  he  carried  there  himself.  The  house,  as 
has  been  stated,  was  an  humble  frame  dwelling,  consisting  of  two  fair-sized 
parlors  opening  into  each  other,  a  bed-room,  and  buttery  or  pantry,  opening 
into  one  of  the  rooms ;  and  a  stairway  between  the  buttery  and  bedroom, 
leading  down  to  the  cellar  and  up  to  the  half-story  above.  It  seems  that 
those  who  had  inhabited  this  house  previously  had  never  noticed  any  unusual 
sounds  or  disturbances  in  it.  A  few  months  from  the  occurrences  above  de- 
tailed it  was  occupied  by  a  Mr.  Michael  Weekman,  whose  testimony  we 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  3! 

extract  from  Dr.  Campbell's   published  account  of  the  spirit  rappings  at 
Hydesville,  which  states  that- — 

"  The  first  well-aathenticited  history  Ihat  we  have  of  the  sounds  so  anaecountable  to  those 
who  have  heard  them  was  in  a  house  occupied  by  Mr.  Michael  Weekmau,  in  a  little  village 
known  by  the  name  of  Hydesville,  in  the  township  of  Arcndia,  Wayne  County.  He 
resided  in  the  house  for  about  eighteen  months,  and  left  some  lime  in  the  year  1847.  Mr. 
Weekmon  makes  the  statement  in  substance  as  follows  :  That  one  evening,  about  the  time 
of  retiring,  he  heard  a  rapping  on  the  outside  door,  and,  what  was  rather  unusual  for  him, 
instead  of  familiarly  bidding  them  '  come  in,'  stepped  to. the  door  and  opened  it.  He  had 
no  doubt  of  finding  some  one  who  wished  to  come  in,  but,  to  his  siu^rise,  found  no  one 
there.  He  went  back  and  proceeded  to  undress,  when,  just  before  getting  into  bed,  he 
heard  another  rap  at  the  door,  loud  and  distinct.  He  stepped  to  the  door  quickly  and 
opened  it,  but,  as  before,  found  no  one  there.  He  stepped  out  and  looted  around,  sup- 
posing that  some  one  was  imposing  on  him.  He  could  liiscover  no  one,  and  went  back 
into  the  house.  After  a  short  time  he  heard  the  rapping  again,  and  stepped  up  [it  being 
often  repeated]  and  held  on  to  the  ktch,  so  that  he  might  ascertain  if  any  one  had  taken 
th^  means  to  annoy  him.  The  rapping  was  repeated ;  the  door  opened  instantly,  but  no 
one  was  to  be  seen  !  He  states  that  he  could  feel  the  jar  of  the  door  very  pkinly  when 
the  rapping  was  heard.  As  he  opened  the  door,  he  sprung  out  and  went  aroimd  the 
house,  but  no  one  was  in  sight.  His  family  were  fearful  to  have  him  go  out  lest  some  one 
intended  to  harm  him.  It  always  remained  a  mystery  to  him,  and  finally,  as  the  rapping 
did  not  continue  at  that  lime,  passed  from  Ms  mind,  except  when  something  of  the  same 
nature  occurred  to  revive  it. 

"  They  were  at  one  time  disturbed  by  a  manifestation  of  a  difTerent  nature,  which  might 
be  thought  more  incredible  than  Ihe  foriner,  had  not  facts  proved  that  such  occurrences 
were  common  m  the  families  where  the  early  manifestations  were  heard.  One  ni^t 
their  little  girl,  then  about  c^ht  years  of  age,  was  heard  to  scream  from  fright,  so  that  the 
family  weie  alarmed  by  her  cries  and  went  to  her  assistance.  This  was  about  midnight. 
She  told  them  that  something  like  a  hand  had  passed  over  her  face  and  head  ;  that  she  felt 
-it  on  the  bed  and  all  over  her,  but  did  not  become  so  much  alarmed  until  it  touched  her 
face.  It  seemed  cold,  and  so  badly  had  she  been  frightened  that  it  was  a  long  time  before 
she  could  tell  the  cause  other  alarm.  It  was  several  days  before  she  could  be  induced  to  go 
into  the  same  room  to  sleep. 

"All  this  might  have  occurred,  and  tieen  only  'the  idle  fabric  of  a  dream;'  and  we 
should  be  inclined  to  the  belief  that  such  was  the  ease  had  we  not  had  the  niost  conclusive 
evidence  that  such  manifestations  were  quite  common,  not  only  in  that  house,  but  in  various 
others  where  any  of  these  strange  occurrences  have  happened. 

' '  We  hear  nolbmg  more  of  Mr.  Weekman  being  disturbed  by  the  rappings  or  other 
manifestations,  or  there  being  anything  of  the  kind  with  that  exception,  until  after  the 
house  was  occupied  by  the  family  of  Mr.  John  D.  Fox.  It  was  reserved  10  that  family  to 
be  the  instruments  of  communicating  to  the  world,  or  to  this  part  of  it,  this  most  singiilar 
afeir.  They  were  the  ones  who  first,  as  if  by  accident,  found  out  that  there  was  an  in- 
telligence manifested  even  in  this  rapping,  which  at  first  appeared  nothmg  more  than  an 
annoying  and  unaccountable  noise. 

"The  family  of  Mr.  Fox  were  well  known  in  the  neighborhood  where  they  readed. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fox  were  connected  with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  of  which  they 
had  for  many  years  been  exemplary  members,  and  had  sustained  a  character  unimpeachable 
for  truth  and  veracity.  No  one  who  knew  them  had  the  least  suspicion  of  their  honesty 
or  truthfulness.  At  the  time  these  occurrences  first  took  place  in  the  family,  there  were 
living  with  the  parents  three  daughters,  the  youngest  about  twelve  years  of  age. 

"  There  are  probably  few  famihes  in  which  such  an  occurrence  could  have  taken  place 
where  it  would  have  created  a  greater  degree  of  surprise  and  fear  than  in  this  one.  They 
were  entirely  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  any  similar  occurrence  in  the  world,  and 
brought  up  in  the  common  routine  of  religious  belief  they  were,  as  in  fact  all  the  world 
really  was  and  still  is,  entirely  unprepared  for  snch  a  development  of  the  power  of  spirits  to 
make  themselves  known  to  us  by  sounds  or  other  ways," 

From  the  family  themselves  the  author  learns  that  they  heard  knocking 
very  frequently  before  the  period  when  they  first  called  in  the  neighbors,  and 
that  they  generally  seemed  to  proceed  from  the  bedroom  or  the  cellar  be- 
neath. Mrs.  Fox  was  at  first  disposed  to  attribute  these  sounds  to  a  neigh- 
boring shoemaker,  but  the  cause  soon  began  to  be  plainly  located  in  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

32  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

house  itself,  and  not  only  seemed  to  jar  the  furniture,  but  even  to  occasijo 
a  lightly  oscillating  movement  of  the  bed  in  which  the  children  slept.  Some- 
times the  sounds  resembled  footsteps,  and  occasionally  the  children  com- 
plained of  being  touched  by  something  invisible,  which  at  one  time  seemed 
like  a  cold  hand,  and  again  a  large  dog.  The  family  had  moved  into 
the  house  in  December,  1847,  and  in  the  February  of  the  following  year  the 
noises  had  become  so  distinct  and  continuous  that  their  rest  was  broken 
night  after  night,  and  they  were  worn  out  by  their  efforts  to  discover  the 
cause.  Up  to  liie  March  of  1848  these  disturbances,  harassing  and  even 
serious  as  they  were,  affecting  their  rest  and  tranquility  of  a  night,  liad  never 
been  heard  during  the  day. 

At  length,  however,  they  became  so  incessant  and  distressing  tliat  Mrs. 
Fox  communicated  tlie  matter  to  her  son  David,  a  farmer,  who  resided 
about  three  miles  distant  from  the  troubled  house.  Her  story,  however, 
was  listened  to  with  incredulity,  and  regarded  simply  as  die  work  of  imagin- 
ation  "  or  something  of  the  simplest  kind  in  the  world."  On  Friday  even- 
ing, March  31st,  the  family  had  retired  to  bed  earlier  than  usual,  being 
completely  worn  out  with  the  restlessness  induced  by  fonner  disturbances. 
The  mother  had  strictly  charged  the  children  "  to  lie  still "  and  take  no 
notice  whatever  of  the  sounds  ;  but,  as  if  in  rebuke  of  her  determined  insen- 
sibility, they  were  on  this  occasion  louder  and  more  pertinacious  than  ever. 
Rest  or  silence  was  impossible  ;  the  parents  had  not  yet  retired,  but  were 
about  to  do  so.  The  children  kept  exclaiming,  and  sitting  up  in  bed  to 
Usten  to  the  sounds.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fox  tried  the  windows  and  doors,  but 
all  in  vain ;  the  raps  were  evidently  answering  the  noise  occasioned  by  the 
father's  shaking  the  window-shashes,  as  if  in  mockery.  At  length  the  young- 
est child,  Kate — who,  in  her  guileless  innocence,  had  become  familiar  widi 
the  invisible  knocker,  until  she  was  more  amused  than  alarmed  at  its  pres- 
ence — merrily  snapped  her  fingers  and  called  out,  "  Here,  Mr.  Split-foot,  do 
as  I  do  ! "  The  effect  was  instantaneous ;  the  invisible  rapper  responded 
by  imitating  the  number  of  her  movements.  She  then  made  a  given  number 
of  motions  with  her  finger  and  thumb  in  the  air,  but  without  noise,  and  her 
astonishment  and  childish  delight  was  redoubled  to  find  that  it  could  see  as 
well  as  hear,  for  a  corresponding  number  of  knocks  were  immediately  given 
to  her  noiseless  motions.  '  "  Only  look,  mother  ! "  she  cried  ;  "  look,  it  can 
see  as  well  as  hear  I  "  What  an  announcement  were  these  few  simple  words  ! 
It  can  See  as  well  as  liear  should  have  been  a  text  which  all  the  doctors, 
professors,  sceptics,  and  scoffers  who  have  subsequently  tried  to  crush  out 
the  sublime  truth  of  spiritual  intercourse  with  earth  should  have  studied  and 
learned  by  heart  ere  they  entered  on  their  rash  and  irreverend  crusade. 
Happily  tor  the  momentous  work  which  the  spiritual  telegraphers  had 
undertaken  to  initiate  in  this  humble  dwelling,  the  first  manifestations  did 
not  appeal  to  the  high  and  learned  of  the  earth,  but  to  the  plain  common- 
sense  of  an  honest  farmer's  wife,  and  suggested  that  whatever  could  see, 
hear,  and  intelligently  respond  to  intelligent  queries,  must  have  in  it  some- 
thing in  common  with  humanity;  and  thus  prompted  she  continued  her 
investigations,  an  act  doubtless  far  beneath  the  dignity  of  mighty  professors 
and  learned  savans,  who  can  work  out  problems  in  Euclid,  but  scorn  to  de- 
scend to  the  simple  task  of  putting  two  and  two  together  to  make  four. 

Addressing  the  viewless  rapper,  Mrs.  Fox  then  said,  "  Count  ten."  The 
raps  obeyed.  "How  old  is  my  daughter  Margaret?"  then"Kate."  Both 
questions  were  distinctly  and  correctly  rapped  out.  The  next  response  was 
wrong,  however.     Querying,  "How  many  children  have  I?"  the  raps  an- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  33 

swered  "  seven."  Mrs.  Fox  only  had  six  living,  but  having  become  sur- 
prised and  interested  enough  to  wish  that  the  invisible  rapper  should  be  cor- 
rect, she  repeated  her  question,  and  was  again  answered  by  seven  knocks. 
Suddenly  she  cried,  "How  many  have  I  living f"  six  raps  responded; 
"  How  many  dead  ?  "  a  single  knock  ;  and  both  these  answers  proved  correct. 
To  the  next  question,  "Are  yon  a  man  that  knocks?"  there  was  no 
response;  but  " Are  you  a  spirit?"  elicited  firm  and  distinct  responsive 
knocks.  To  the  question  whether  "it  would  knock"  if  she  called  in  her 
neighbors,  an  answer  was  given,  whereupon  she  sent  her  husband  for  a  Mrs. 
Redfield,  who,  after  questioning  the  knocker  in  the  same  manner  and  re- 
ceiving numerous  and  always  correct  responses,  in  great  agitation  proceeded 
to  summon  others,  by  whom  similar  investigations  were  conducted,  widi 
equal  success,  far  into  the  night. 

The  reader  must  endeavor  to  picture  to  himself  the  scene  which  followed 
the  introducdon  of  the  neighbors  to  this  wekd  and  most  novel  court  of  in- 

Imagine  the  place  to  be  an  humble  cottage  bedroom  in  a  remote  and 
obscure  hamlet ;  the  judge  and  jurors,  simple,  unsophisticated  rustics  ;  and 
the  witness  an  invisible,  unknown  being,  a  denizen  of  a  world  of  whose  very 
existence  mankind  has  been  ignorant ;  acting  by  laws  mysterious  and  incon- 
ceivable, in  modes  utterly  beyond  all  human  control  or  comprehension,  and 
breaking  through  what  has  been  deemed  the  dark  and  eternal  seal  of  deadi, 
to  reveal  the  long  hidden  mysteries  of  the  grave  and  drag  to  the  light  secrets 
which  not  even  the  fabled  silence  of  the  tomb  could  longer  hide  away. 
Those  who  have  been  accustomed  to  dream  of  death  as  the  end  of  all  whom 
its  shadowy  portals  inclose,  alone  arc  prepared  to  appreciate  the  awful  and 
starUing  reality  of  this  strange  scene,  breaking  apart,  as  it  did,  like  a  rope  of 
sand,  all  the  preconceived  opmions  of  coundess  ages  on  the  existence  and 
destiny  of  the  living  dead. 

Those  who  have  become  familiar  with  the  revealments  of  the  spirit  circle 
will  only  smile  at  the  consternation  evoked  in  this  rustic  party  by  the  now- 
familiar  presence  and  manifestations  of  "die  spirits;"  but  to  those  who  still 
stand  in  the  night  of  superstition,  deeming  of  all  earth's  countless  millions, 
as  dead!  defid!  lost!  gone!  no  one  knows  whither;  never  to  return;  to. 
give  no  sign,  no  echo,  no  dim  vibration  from  that  vast  gulf  profound  of 
unfathomed  mystery — what  a  picture  is  that  which  suddenly  brings  them  in 
an  instant  face  to  face  with  the  mighty  hosts  of  vanished  dead,  all  clo tiled  in 
life,  and  girdet?  round  with  panoply  of  power,  and  light,  and  strength ;  withi 
vivid  memory  of  the  secret  wrongs  deemed  buried  in  tiieir  graves !  The 
wrong  doer  and  his  victims  face  to  face  ;  eardt's  murdered  ones  in  life  again  ; 
her  loved  ones,  supposed  to  be  crumbling  into  dust,  in  busy,  active  life, 
fanning  our  cheeks  with  threads  of  golden  hair  I  Why,  sirs,  the  very  air  is 
full  of  thera  !  Our  city  streets  are  thronged  with  an  unseen  people  who  flit 
about  us,  jostling  us  in  thick  crowds,  and  in  our  silent  chambers,  our  secret 
closets,  and  our  busiest  haunts  ;  their  piercing  eyes,  invisible  to  us,  are  scan- 
ning all  our  ways.  The  universe  is  teeming  with  them;  "there  are  no 
DEAD."  Those  who  went  out  from  the  humble  chamber  on  that  night  of 
mingled  fear  and  awe  beheld  the  world  they  lived  in  with  changed  eyes. 
Every  familiar  thing  to  them  seemed  to  wear  a  different  aspect.  Something 
was  altered;  some  mighty,  nameless  change  had  fallen  on  all  around  them, 
and  though  they  knew  not  how  to  phrase  their  thoughts  in  speech,,  they  all 
and  each  felt  that  they  were  another  man  or  woman,  whilst  the  air,  the  earth, 
the  dust  beneath  them,  and  the  sky  above,  were  filled  with,  a  viewless  host 

Hosted  by  Google 

34  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

of  spirit-witnesses ;  and  that  for  all  they  had  loved  and  lost,  as  for  themselves, 
"there  is  no  death." 

Returning  from  this  digression  to  the  house  at  Hydesville  on  the  memor- 
able night  of  March  31st,  1848,  we  again  invite  the  reader  to  the  perusal  of 
the  statements  collected  by  Dr.  Campbell.  After  reiterating  the  questions 
already  quoted,  the  pamphlet  continues  the  narrative  thus : 

"  Mrs  Fox  Ihen  inquired  in  the  same  way— i.  e.  by  the  raps—  if  it  was  an  injured  spirit, 
and  to  request  an  answer  in  the  same  way,  and  the  rapping  was  repeated.  In  this  way  it 
answered  her  until  she  ascertained  that  it  purported  to  be  the  spirit  of  a  man,  and  that  he 
was  murdered  for  his  money.  To  the  question  of  how  old  he  was,  there  were  thirty-one 
distinct  raps.  She  also  ascertained  by  the  same  means  that  he  was  a  married  man,  and  had 
left  a  wife  and  five  children  ;  that  his  wife  was  dead,  and  had  been  dead  two  years.  After 
ascertambg  so  much,  she  asked  tbe  question,  '  Will  the  noise  continue  if  I  call  in  the 
neighbors?  '  The  answer  was,  by  rapping,  in  the  affirmative.  They  then  for  the  first  time 
btgan  to  call  in  their  neighbors,  to  help,  if  posable,  to  solve  this  great  mystery. 

"  At  first  they  called  in  their  nearest  neighbors,  who  came  thjnldng  they  would  have  a 
l«;arty  laugh  at  the  familj;  for  being  frightened ;  but  when  the  first  lady  that  came  in  found 
that  the  noise,  whatever  it  might  be,  could  tell  the  age  of  herself  as  well  as  others  and 
give  correct  answers  to  questions  on  matters  of  which  the  family  of  Mr.  Fox  was  entirely 
ignorant,  she  concluded  that  there  was  something  beside  a  subject  of  ridicule  and  laughter 
in  these  unseen  but  audible  communications.  These  neighbors  uiM.sted  on  calling  in  others, 
who  came,  and  after  investigation  were  as  much  confounded  as  at  first. 

*'  The  family,  bemg  somewhat  alarmed  and  much  fatigued,  left  the  house  for  the  night. 
The  next  day  the  excitement  began  to  spread,  and  the  house  was  filled  with  anxious  seeliers 
for  the  unknown  and  bvisible  visitor.  Through  that  day  and  up  to  that  time  there  were 
no  sounds  heard  in  the  daytime. 

"On  Sunday  morning,  April  2d,  the  noise  commenced  in  the  daytime,  and  was  heard 
all  that  day  by  all  who  could  get  into  the  house,  as  the  crowd  which  came  from  all  quarters 
was  much  greater  than  tbe  house  would  hold.  We  have  heard  it  estunated  that  at  one 
time  there  were  as  many  as  five  hundred  people  who  had  gathered  to  hear  the  sounds,  so 
great  was  the  excitement  at  the  commencement  of  these  strange  occurrences.  On  Saturday 
evenmg,  there  was  a  committee  appointed  to  ask  questions  and  report  what  the  result  was, 
but  it  was  nothing  of  any  importance  differing  from  what  is  here  related." 

As  a  confirmation  of  what  we  have  above  stated,  we  give  the  following 
extracts  from  the  testimony  of  William  Deusler,  of  Arcadia,  an  immediate 
neighbor  of  Mr.  Fox  at  tiie  time  of  the  transacfion.  This  statement  was 
published  in  a  pamphlet  by  E.  E.  Lewis,  Esq.,  of  Canandaigua,  New  York, 
which  contains  the  testimony  of  many  persons  in  the  neighborhood.  Mr. 
Deusler  says : 

"  I  live  in  this  place.  I  moved  from  Cayuga  County  here  last  October.  I  live  within 
A  few  rods  of  tbe  house  in  which  these  noises  have  been  heard.  The  first  I  heard  anything 
.about  them  was  one  week  ago  last  Friday  evening  [3tst  day  of  March].  Mrs.  Redfield 
came  over  to  my  house  to  get  my  wife  to  go  over  to  Mr.  Fox's.  Mrs.  Redfield  appeared 
to  be  very  much  agitated.  My  wife  wanted  I  should  go  with  them,  and  1  accordingly  went. 
When  she  told  us  what  she  wanted  us  to  go  for  I  laughed  at  her,  and  ridiculed  the  idea 
that  there  was  anything  mysterious  in  it.  I  told  her  it  was  all  nonsense,  and  that  it 
could  easily  be  accounted  for.  This  was  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.  There  were 
some  twelve  or  fourteen  persons  there  when  I  got  mto  the  room.  I  went  into  the  room 
and  sat  down  on  (be  bed.  Mr.  Fox  asked  questions,  and  I  heard  the  rapping  which  they 
had  spoken  of,  distinctly.     I  felt  the  bedstead  jar  when  the  sound  was  produced. 

"  Mrs.  Fox  then  asked  if  it  would  answer  my  questions,  if  I  asked  any,  and  if  so,  rap. 
It  then  rapped  three  times.  I  (hen  asked  if  it  was  an  injural  sphit,  and  it  rapped  ;  I  asked 
if  it  had  come  to  hurt  any  one  who  was  present,  and  it  did  not  rap.  I  then  reversed  this 
(juestion,  and  it  rapped.  I  asked  if  I  or  my  father  bad  injured  it  [as  we  had  formerly  lived 
in  the  house];  there  was  no  noise.     Upon  asking  the  negative  of  these  questions,  the  raj)- 

Eing  was  heard  I  then  asked  if  Mr. [naming  a  person  who  had  formerly  lived  in  the 
ouse]  had  injured  it,  and  if  so,  to  manifest  it  by  rapping,  and  it  made  three  knocks  louder 
tlian  common,  and  at  the  same  time  the  bedstead  jarred  more  than  it  had  done  before.  I 
ithen  inquired  if  it  was  murdered  for  money,  and  the  knocking  was  heard     I  then  reijuested 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SFIRITUAUSM.  35 

it  to  rap  when  I  mentioned  the  sum  of  money  for  which  it  was  murdered,  I  then  asked  if 
it  was  one  hundred,  two,  three  or  four,  and  when  I  came  to  five  hundred  the  rapping  was 
heard.  All  in  the  room  saM  they  heard  it  distinctly.  I  then  asked  the  question  it  it  was 
five  hundred  dollars,  and  the  rapping  was  heard. 

"After  this,  I  sent  over  and  got  Artemns  W.  Hyde  to  come  over.*  He  came  over.  1 
then  asked  over  nearly  the  same  questions  as  before,  and  got  the  same  answers.  Mr.  Red- 
field  sent  after  David  Jewel  and  wife,  and  Mrs.  Hyde  also  came.     After  they  came  in  1 

asked  the  same  questions  over  and  got  the  same  answers. I  then  asked 

it  to  rap  my  age — the  number  of  years  of  my  age.  It  rapped  thirty  tunes.  This  is  my 
age,  and  I  do  not  think  any  one  about  here  knew  my  age,  except  myself  and  family.  I  then 
told  it  to  rap  my  wife's  age,  and  it  rapped  thirty  tunes,  which  is  her  exact  age ;  several  of 
us  counted  it  at  the  same  time.  I  then  asked  it  to  rap  A.  W.  Hyde's  age ;  then  Mrs.  A, 
W.  Hyde's  age.  I  then  continued  to  ask  it  to  rap  the  ages  of  different  persons— nambg 
them  — ui  the  room,  and  it  did  so  correctly,  as  they  all  said.  I  then  asked  the  numb^  of 
children  in  the  different  families  in  the  neighborhood,  and  it  told  them  correctly  in  the  nsual 
way,  by  rapping ;  also  the  number  of  deaths  that  had  taken  place  in  the  different  families, 
and  it  told  correctly. 

"  I  then  asked  in  regard  to  the  time  it  was  murdered,  and  in  the  usual  way,  by  asking 
the  different  days  of  the  week  and  the  different  hours  of  the  day,  learned  that  it  was  mur- 
dered on  Tuesday  night,  about  twelve  o'clock.  The  rapping  was  heard  only  when  this 
particular  time  was  mentioned.  When  it  was  asked  if  it  was  murdered  on  a  Wednesday, 
or  Thursday,  or  Friday  night,  etc.,  there  was  no  rapping.  1  then  aied  if  it  carried  any 
trunk,  and  it  rapped  that  it  did.  .  Then  how  many,  and  it  rapped  once.     In  the  same  way 

we  ascerldned  that  it  had  goods  in  the  trunk,  and  that took  Ihem  when  he  murdered 

him ;  and  that  he  had  a  pack  of  goods  besides.     I  asked  if  its  wife  was  living,  and  it  did 

not  rap.     If  she  was  de^,  and  it  rapped. This  was  tried  over  several 

times  and  the  result  was  always  the  same. 

"  I  then  tried  to  ascertain  the  first  letters  of  its  name  by  calling  over  the  different  letters 
of  the  alphabet.  I  commenced  with  A,  and  asked  if  it  was  the  initial  of  its  name  ;  and 
when  I  asked  if  it  was  B  the  rapping  commenced.  We  then  tried  all  the  other  letters, 
hot  could  get  no  answer  by  the  usual  rappmg.  I  then  asked  if  we  could  find  out  the  whole 
name  by  reading  over  all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  there  was  no  rappmg.  I  then 
reversed  the  question,  and  the  rapping  was  heard.  There  were  a  good 

manymorequestionsaskedon  that  night  by  myself  an  J  others  wh  chl  donotnowremembcr. 
They  were  all  readily  answered  in  the  same  way.  I  staid  in  the  house  until  about  twelve 
o'clock  and  then  came  home.     Mr.  Redfield  and  Mr   Fot  staid  in  the  house  that  night. 

"  Saturday  night  I  went  over  again  about  seven  o  clock  The  house  was  full  of  people 
when  I  got  there.  They  said  it  bad  been  rapping  some  time  I  went  into  the  room.  It 
was  rapping  in  answer  to  questions  when  I  went  in 

"  There  were  as  many  as  three  hundred  people  n  and  aroun  I  the  house  at  this  time,  I 
should  thiiik,  Hiram  Soverhill,  Esq.,  and  Vohiey  B  own  asked  it  questions  while  I  was 
there,  and  it  rapped  in  answer  lo  them. 

"Iwent  over  again  on  Sunday  between  one  and  two  o  clock  P  M.  I  went  into  the 
cellar  with  several  otheis,  and  had  them  all  leave  the  I  ouie  over  our  heads ;  and  then  I 
asked,  if  there  had  been  a  man  buried  in  the  cellar  to  manifest  it  b)  rapping  or  any  other 
noise  or  agn.  The  moment  I  asked  the  question  there  wis  a  sound  like  the  failing  of  a 
stick  about  a  foot  long  and  half  an  inch  through  on  the  floor  m  the  bedroom  over  our 
heads,  it  did  not  seem  to  rebound  at  all ;  there  was  but  one  sound.  I  then  asked  Stephen 
Smith  to  go  right  up  and  examine  the  room,  and  see  if  he  could  discover  the  cause  of  the 
noise.  He  came  biick  and  said  he  could  discover  nothing  ;  that  there  was  no  one  in  the 
room,  or  in  that  part  of  the  hoase.  I  then  asked  two  more  questions,  and  it  rapped  m 
the  usual  way.     We  all  went  up-stidrs  and  made  a  thorough  search,  but  could  find  nothing. 

"I  then  got  a  knife  and  fork,  and  tried  to  see  if  I  could  make  the  same  noise  by  dropping 
them,  but  f  could  not.  This  was  all  I  heard  on  Sunday.  There  is  only  one  floor,  or  par- 
tition, or  thickness  between  the  bedroom  and  the  cellar  ;  no  place  where  anything  could  be 
secreted  to  make  the  noise.  When  this  noise  was  heard  in  the  bedroom  I  could  feel  a 
slight,  tremulous  motion  or  jar 

"  On  Monday  night  I  heard  this  noise  i^in,  and  asked  the  same  qaestions  I  did  before 
and  got  the  same  answers.  This  is  the  last  time  I  have  heard  any  rapping.  I  can  in  no 
way  account  for  this  angnlar  noise  which  I  and  others  have  heard.  It  is  a  mystery  to  me 
wMch  I  am  unable  to  solve 

"  I  lived  in  the  same  house  about  seven  years  ago,  and  at  that  time  never  heard  ai^ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

36  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

noises  of  the  tind  in  and  about  the  premises.    I  have  understood  from  Johnston  and  others 

who  have  lived  there  before moved  there,  that  there  were  no  such  sounds  heard  there 

while  they  occupied  the  house.      I  ne\'er  believed  in  haunted  houses,  or  heard  or  saw  any- 
thing but  what  I  could  account  for  before. 

(Signed) 
"Ap-il\2,  1848.  William  Deuslek." 

To  the  same  effect  is  the  testimony  of  the  following  persons,  whose  cer- 
tificates are  published  in  the  work  alluded  to,  namely  :  John  D.  Fox,  Walter 
Scotten,  Elizabeth  Jewel,  Lorren  Tenney,  James  Bri<%er,  Chauncey  P. 
Losey,  Benjamin  F.  Clark,  Elizabeth  Fox,  Vernelia  Culver,  William  I), 
Storer,  Marvin  P.  Losey,  David  S.  Fox,  and  Mary  Redfield 

CHAPTER  HI. 

THE     FIKST     SPIRITUAL    TELEGRAPH     ON     EARTH. 

The  First  Spirit  Circle— The  Removal  to  Rochester — Persecutiom — The 
Beginning  of  Sorrows  —  The  Spirits  Rejected — Their  Return  and  great 
Joy  of  the  Mediums — Preliminary  Arrangements  for  Public  Invbstiga- 

As  it  was  deemed  best  for  Mrs.  Fox  and  her  children  to  seek  the  shelter 
of  a  neighbor's  house  on  the  night  of  March  31st,  when  they  had  departed, 
Mr.  Fox  and  his  neighbors,  to  the  number  of  seventy  or  eighty  persons,  re- 
mained to  question  as  best  they  could  their  mysterious  visitor  by  the  knocks. 
Through  these,  obtaining  affirmative  answers  or  silence  to  their  suggestions, 
they  learned  that  the  rapper  purported  to  be  the  spirit  of  a  pedler,  who  had 
been,  as  it  was  stated  in  the  preceding  chapter,  murdered  in  that  house  be- 
tween four  and  five  years  ago.  On  naming  over  the  various  inhabitants  of 
the  house  who  niight  have  destroyed  him,  the  knocks  emphatically  and 
repeatedly  pointed  to  one  who  had  lived  there  at  the  time  indicated  \iy  the 
spirit.  It  was  in  this  way  ascertained  [as  far,  at  least,  as  answers  to  leading 
questions  could  be  held  as  testimony],  that  the  pedler  was  murdered  on  the 

Tuesday  night  that  Lucretia  P.,  the  hired  girl,  was  sent  away;  that was 

alone  in  the  house,  and  that  "  the  body  was  dragged  through  the  parior, 
into  the  buttery,  and  thence  down  the  cellar  stairs,  and  buried  ten 
feet  deep  in  the  cellar."  When  the  party  adjourned  to  the  cellar,  the 
knocks  accompanied  them,  and  repeatedly  confirmed  the  above  story  in 
every  particular;  these  sounds  also  indicated  the  place  where  the  bod^  was 
buried,  and  the  rappings  were  given  on  the  spot  above  the  place  pointed 
out  in  the  cellar.  An  attempt  was  made  to  receive  communications  through 
raps,  by  calUng  the  letters  of  the  alphabet ;  the  sounds  responded  to  C  and 
B,  but  it  was  not  until  a  later  period  that  Mr.  David  Fox  succeeded  in  ob- 
taining the  fill!  name  of  Charles  B.  Rosna.     To  the  practiced  investigator  in 

Hosted  by  Google 

A^y-^  -^^t 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  37 

spiritual  phenomena,  it  will  be  readily  understood  that  the  confused  mag- 
netic spheres  of  the  highly-excited  crowd  assembled  in  the  cellar  at  Hydes- 
ville  on  the  night  of  the  31st  of  March,  prevented  the  success  of  the  first 
attempt  of  spirits  to  communicate  through  raps  by  the  alphabet ;  and  the 
same  considerations  show  why  Mr.  Fox,  in  a  calm  and  prayerful  spirit,  did 
succeed  on  a  later  occasion.  The  only  marvel  is  that  this  attempt  was  not 
again  resorted  to  until  four  months  afterwards,  when  Isaac  Post,  a  member 
of  the  Society  of  Friends  and  an  acquaintance  of  the  Fox  family,  weary  of 
the  unsatisfactory  method  of  prompting  questions  and  only  obtaining  nega- 
tive or  affirmative  replies,  suggested  the  same  methodof  communication  as 
that  used  by  David  Fox  in  the  cellar.  The  result  of  this  experiment  has  been, 
as  all  investigators  know,  eminently  successful,  where  the  conditions  have 
not  been  broken  by  over-anxiety,  fear,  antagonism,  or  any  strong  emotion 
on  the  part  of  those  present ;  conditions  which,  by  causing  disturbance  in  the 
delicate,  imponderable  aura  that  surrounds  the  circle,  as  conclusively  break 
the  alHnities  through  which  the  manifestations  are  made  as  unscientific  ar- 
rangements will  destroy  the  effect  of  a  voltaic  pile  or  galvanic  battery. 
Notwithstanding  the  crude  methods  in  which  the  first  investigators  at  Hydes- 
ville  endeavored  to  communicate  with  their  invisible  respondent,  their  report, 
and  the  astounding  implication  of  murder  involved  m  it,  drew  all  the  inhabi- 
tants from  far  and  near  to  the  house.  Up  to  seven  o'clock  on  the  evening 
of  April  ist,  however,  no  noises  were  heard,  after  which  they  re-commenced, 
and  answered  the  questions  as  before,  when  amongst  the  hundreds  there 
assembled,  it  was  asserted  that  not  a  single  incorrect  response  was  given. 
On  the  Monday  following  Mr.  David  Fox  and  others  commenced  digging 
in  the  cellar,  but  as  the  house  was  built  on  low  ground,  and  in  the  vicinity 
of  a  stream  then  much  swollen  bv  rains,  it  was  not  surprising  that  they  were 
baffled  by  the  influx  of  water  at  the  distance  of  three  feet  down.  In  the 
summer  of  1848,  when  the  ground  was  dry  and  the  water  lowered,  "the  dig- 
gings" again  commenced,  when  they  found  a  plank,  a  vacant  place  or  hole, 
some  bits  of  crockery,  which  seemed  to  have  been  part  of  a  wash-bowl,  char- 
coal, quicklime,  some  human  hair,  bones  [declared  on  examination  by  a 
surgeon  to  be  human],  and  a  portion  of  a  human  skull. 

Such  were  the  results  of  the  examination  of  the  cellar ;  such  the  only  cor- 
roborative evidences  obtained  of  the  truth  of  the  spirit* s  tale  of  untimely- 
death  ;  and  hence  it  m,ay  be  proper  to  add  that  Mr. ,  the  party  to 

whom  the  spirit  emphatically  pointed  as  his  murderer,  came  forward  from 
the  town  of  Lyon,  N.  Y.,  to  which  he  had  removed  in  1846,  and  produced  a 
certificate  of  good  character,  signed  by  forty-four  persons,  to  the  effect  that 
they  had  "  never  known  anything  against  him,"  and  "  believed  him  to  be  a 
man  of  upright  and  honest  life,  and  incapable  of  committing  the  crime  of 
which  he  was  suspected."  By  way  of  throwing  discredit  on  the  tale  rapped 
out  by  the  spirits,  several  other  missing  persons'  were  said  to  have  been 
murdered,  and  after  various  parties  had  been  accused  falsely  "  by  the  spirits," 
reappeared  again.  Most  of  these  stories  proved  "  bogus,"  and  none  of 
them  bear  the  least  relation  to  the  unsought  and  unexpected  spontaniety 
of  the  revelations  at  Hydesville.  No  further  investigations,  however,  have 
been  deemed  necessary  into  this  affair. 

The  presence  of  human  remains  in  the  cellar  proves  that  some  one  was 
buried  there,  and  the  accompanying  quicklime  and  charcoal  testify  to  the 
fact  that  all  traces  of  that  mysterious  inhumation  were  purposely  destroyed. 

The  Fox  family  did  not  immediately  quit  the  scene  of  this  mysterious 
haunting,  but  remained  to  witness  still  more  astonishing  phenomena.    .  The 

Hosted  by  Google 

38  HISTORY  OFMODERN 

furniture  was  frequently  moved  about;  the  girls  were  often  clasped  by 
hard,  cold  hands;  doors  were  opened  and  shut  with  much  violence,  their 
beds  were  so  shaken  that  they  were  compelled  to  "  camp  out,"  as  they  termed 
it,  on  the  ground ;  their  bed-clothes  were  dragged  from  off  them,  and  the 
very  floor  and  house  made  to  rock  as  In  an  eardiquake.  Night  after  night 
they  would  be  appalled  by  hearing  a  sound  like  a  death  struggle,  the  gurgling 
of  the  throat,  a  sudden  rush  as  of  falling  blood,  the  dragging  as  if  of  a  help- 
less body  across  the  room  and  down  the  cellar  stairs ;  the  digging  of  a  grave, 
nailing  of  boards,  and  the  filling  up  as  of  a  new-made  grave.  These  sounds 
have  been  subsequently  produced  by  request,  and  spontaneously  also,  in  the 
presence  of  many  persons  assembled  in  circles  at  Rochester;  but  occurring 
as  they  did  in  that  "  lonely  dreadful  house,"  in  the  stillness  of  the  dim  even- 
ing, or  dark  night,  and  startling  them,  when  not  thinking  of  the  subject,  with 
all  the  ghastly  sounds  of  a  murder  then  enacting  in  tragic  reality  close  to 
them,  produced  upon  them  the  most  painful  and  distressing  feelings,  aggra- 
vated, too,  by  other  circumstances  of  annoyance  that  now  began  to  thicken 
around  them. 

It  was  perceived  that "  the  spirits"  seemed  to  select  or  require  the  presence 
of  the  two  younger  girls  of  the  family  for  the  production  of  the  sounds,  and 
though  these  had  been  made  without  them,  especially  on  the  night  of  the  31st 
of  March,  when  all  the  family  save  Mr.  Fox  were  absent  from  the  house, 
still,  as  cariosity  prompted  them  to  close  observation  qf,  and  conversation 
with  the  invisible  power,  it  was  clear  that  the  manifestations  became  more 
powerful  in  the  presence  of  Kate,  the  youngest  sister,  than  with  any  one  else. 

As  the  house  was  continually  thronged  with  curious  inquirers,  and  the 
time,  comfort,  and  peace  of  the  family  were  consumed  in  these  harassing 
disturbances,  besides  the  most  absurd  though  injurious  suspicions  being  cast 
upon  them,  they  endeavored  to  baffle  the  liaunters  by  sending  Kate  to  reside 
with  her  eldest  sister,  Mrs.  Fish,  at  Rochester ;  but  no  sooner  was  she  gone 
than  the  manifestations  re-commenced,  with  more  force  than  ever,  in  the 
presence  of  Margaretta,  the  second  sister.  In  course  of  time,  Mrs.  Fox,  with 
both  her  daughters,  took  up  their  residence  in  Rochester  ;  but  neither  change 
of  place  nor  house,  nor  yet  the  separation  of  the  family,  afforded  them  any 
relief  from  the  disturbances  that  now  evidendy  attached  themselves  to  per- 
sons rather  than  to  places,  as  formerly.  Although  the  Fox  family  had  for 
months  sedulously  striven  to  banish  the  power  that  tormented  them,  praying 
with  all  the  fervor  of  true  Methodism  to  be  released  from  it,  and  enduring 
fear,  loss,  and  anxiety  in  its  continuance,  the  report  of  its  persistent  mani- 
festation began  to  spread  abroad,  causing  a  rain  of  persecution  to  fall  upon 
them  from  ali  quarters. 

The  respectable  parents  were  so  severely  censured  and  so  impertinently 
lectured  by  their  minister — who  should  have  been  the  foremost  to  sustain 
them  in  thetr  heavy  visitations — that  they  were  obliged  to  sever  their  long- 
cherished  and  hitherto  unblemished  relations  with  their  church.  Old  friends 
looked  coldly  on  them,  and  strangers  circulated  the  most  atrocious  slanJcrs 
at  their  expense. 

Mrs.  Fish,  the  eldest  sister,  who  was  a  teacher  of  music  in  Rochester,  be- 
gaii  to  lose  her  professional  connections ;  and  whilst  the  sudden  blanching  of 
the  poor  mother's  hair /«  a  single  week  bore  testimony  to  the  mental  tortures 
which  supra-mundane  terrors  and  mundane  cruelties  had  heaped  upon  them, 
the  world  was  taunting  them  with  originating,  in  wilful  imposture,  the  very 
manifestations  which  were  destroying  their  health,  peace  of  mind,  good  name, 
and  fortunes.  Notwithstanding  their  dislike  of  the  notoriety  that  tiiese  mani- 
festations brought  upon  them,  however,  it  was  impossible  to  avoid  it. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  39 

They  had  solicited  the  advice  of  their  much -respected  friend,  Isaac  Post, 
a  highly  esteemed  Quaker  citizen  of  Rochester,  and,  at  his  suggestion,  suc- 
ceeded in  communicating  by  raps  witli  the  invisible  power,  through  the 
alphabet.  Thus  telegraphic  numbers  were  given  to  signify  "yes,"  "no," 
"  doubtful,"  etc,  and  sentences  were  spelled  out,  by  which  were  learned  the 
astounding  facts  that  not  only  "Charles  Rosna,"  the  supposed  murdered 
pedler,  but  hosts  of  spirits,  good  and  bad,  high  and  low,  could,  under  certain 
conditions  not  understood,  and  impossible  for  mortals  yet  to  comprehend, 
communicate  with  earth;  that  such  communication  was  produced  tlirough 
the  forces  of  spiritual  and  human  magnetism,  in  cliemical  affinity ;  tliat  the 
varieties  of  mi^netisiu  in  diiferent  individuals  afforded  "medium  power"  to 
some,  and  denied  it  to  others ;  that  the  magnetic  relations  necessary  to 
produce  phenomena  were  very  subtle,  liable  to  disturbance,  and  singularly 
susceptible  to  the  influence  of  mental  emotions;  that  the  spirits  cliiefly 
concerned  in  the  inauguration  of  this  telegraphy  were  philosophic  and  scien- 
tific minds,  many  of  whom  had  made  the  study  of  electricity  and  other 
imponderables  a  specialty  in  the  earth-life,  and  prominent  among  them  the 
name  of  Dr.  Benjamin  Franklin  was  frequently  given.  In  addition  to  com- 
munications purporting  thus  to  explain  the  object  and  something  of  the 
modus  operandi  of  the  communion,  numerous  spirit  friends  of  the  family,  and 
those  who  joined  in  their  investigations,  gladdened  the  hearts  of  their  as- 
tonished relatives  by  direct  and  unlooked-for  tests  of  their  presence.  They 
came  spelling  out  their  names,  ages,  and  various  tokens  of  identity  correctly, 
and  proclaiming  the  joyful  tidings  that  they  al!  "  still  lived,"  "  still  loved," 
and  with  die  tenderness  of  human  affection,  and  the  wisdom  of  a  higher 
sphere  of  existence,  watched  over  and  guided  the  beloved  ones  who  had 
mourned  them  as  dead,  with  all  die  gracious  ministry  of  guardian  angels. 

The  spirits  recommended  the  assembling  of  the  friends  of  the  family 
together  in  harmonious  meetings,  which  have  since  obtained  the  name  of 
"spirit  circles,"  and  at  these,  the  practice  of  animal  magnetism  to  some 
of  the  parties  present  was  suggested,  as  a  means  of  evoking  the  phenomena 
of  clairvoyance. 

But  redolent  of  joy  and  consolation  as  is  the  intercourse  with  beloved 
spirit  friends  at  this  time  when  orderly  communion  has  succeeded  to 
doubtful  experiment,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  any  such  harmonious 
results  characterized  the  initiatory  proceedings  of  the  spiritual  movement  in 
Rochester.  Within  and  without  the  dwellings  of  the  mediums,  all  was  fear, 
consternation,  doubt,  and  anxiety. 

Several  persons  possessed  of  clairvoyant  and  clairaudient  powers  had 
been  developed  as  mediums  by  magnetism.  But  in  the  meantime  fanatical 
religionists  of  different  sects  had  forced  themselves  into  the  family  gatherings, 
and  the  wildest  scenes  of  rant,  cant,  and  absurdity  often  ensued.  Opinions 
of  the  most  astounding  nature  were  hazarded  concerning  the  object  of  this 
movement;  som  d  m  g  that  it  was  a  "millenium,"  and  looking  for 
the  speedy  reig       {     \  i  Messiah  and  the  equally  speedy  destruction 

of  the  wicked.     B  nds  accompanied  the  fervent  prayers  of  the 

ranters,  and  wdd         f  which  invisible  actors  played  their  weird 

part,  added  to  th   d  tr    t        f  the  already  tortured  mediums. 

A  Mr.  Calvin  B  n  h  sided  in  the  house  of  Mrs.  J'ish,  and  after- 
wards became  h  h  b  d,  b  ng  particularly  opposed  to  the  manifestations, 
seemed  to  be  selected  by  the  spirits  as  a  marked  bntt  for  their  Puck-like 
pranks.  They  threw  books,  pamphlets,  and  other  small  articles  about  his 
person,  and  tiiough — one  occasion  alone  excepted — they  never  struck  him 

Hosted  by  Google 

40 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

with  sufficient  force  to  cause  him  the  least  injury,  they  persecuted  him  by 
intelligent  signs  and  movements  of  so  violent,  erratic,  and  even  spiteful  a 
character,  as  to  compel  him  at  last  to  own  and  respect  their  power.  They 
often  threw  about  the  house  blocks  of  wood  with  sentences  written  on  them 
for  the  encouragement  and  instruction  of  the  family,  who  uniformly  con- 
ducted themselves  gently,  piously,  and  in  fact  admirably,  in  the  midst  of  the 
trying  scenes  they  were  passing  throiigli. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  clergy  were  idle  spectators  of  the 
tumultuous  wave  that  was  sweeping  over  the  city.  On  the  contrary,  several 
of  them  called  on  Mrs,  Fox  with  offers  to  "-exorcise  the  spirits  ;"  and  when 
they  found  their  attempts  were  futile  and  that  though  the  spirits  would  rap 
in  chorus  to  the  amens  with  which  they  concluded  their  incantations,  they 
were  otherwise  unno\ed  by  these  reverend  performances,  they  generally 
ended  by  proclai  nmg  abroad  that  the  family  were  "in  league  with  the  evil 
one"  or  thi,  authors  of  \  \ile  imposture."  Honorable  exceptions,  how- 
ever, were  found  to  this  cowardly  and  unchristian  course,  and  amongst  these 
was  the  Ret  A  H  Jervis  a  Methodist  minister,  of  Rochester,  in  whose 
family  remarkable  manifestations  occurred  of  the  same  character  as  in  that 
of  the  Foxes,  and  whose  appreciation  of  the  beauty  and  worth  of  the  com- 
munications he  received  several  of  his  published  letters  bear  witness  of. 
Mr.  Lyman  Granger,  Rev.  Charles  Hammond,  Deacon  Hale,  and  several 
other  families  of  wealth  and  influence,  both  in  Rochester  and  the  surrounding 
towns,  also  began  to  experience  similar  phenomena  in  their  own  households, 
while  the  news  came  from  all  quarters,  extending  as  far  as  Cincinnati  and 
St  Louis,  West,  and  Maine,  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  and  New  York, 
East,  that  the  mysterious  rappings  and  other  phases  of  what  is  now  called 
"medium  power"  were  rapidly  spreading  from  town  to  town  and  State  to 
State,  in  fulfilment  of  an  assurance  made  in  the  very  first  of  the  communion 
to  the  Misses  Fox,  namely,  "that  these  manifestations  were  not  to  be  con- 
lined  to  them,  but  would  go  all  over  the  world."  Notwithstanding  tlie  fact 
that  many  persons  besides  the  Fox  family  became  distinguished  as  mediums 
for  the  sounds,  movements  of  furnimre,  and  other  manifestations  of  supra- 
mundane  intelligence,  and  that  every  day  saw  some  new  development  of 
"the  power"  in  families  whose  wealth  and  position  placed  them  beyond  the 
reach  of  suspicion  or  the  possibility  of  collusion,  so  startling  and  unparalleled 
had  been  the  first  appearance  of  the  phenomena  that  it  seemed  impossible 
for  the  public  mind  to»dissever  their  origin  and  continued  practice  from  die 
Fox  family. 

They  were  still  called  the  "Rochester  knockers,"  the  "Fox  girls,"  the 
"rappers,"  and  other  epithets,  equally  foolish  and  cruelly  obnoxious  to  their 
interests  and  feelings  Catharine  Fox,  the  youngest  girl,  had  been  removed 
to  the  house  of  Mr  E  W  Capron,  of  Auburn.  Mrs.  Fish,  though  generally 
present  when  phenomena  were  transpiring,  was  not  in  its  earliest  phases 
conscious  of  being  a  medium.  Margaretta,  the  second  sister,  was  then  in 
reality  the  only  one  through  whom  the  manifestations  appeared  to  proceed, 
when  in  November,  1848,  the  spirits,  who  had  long  been  urging  them  to 
perm't  p  bV  '  tigations  to  be  made  through  her  mediumship,  informed 
the  n  by  p  h  'they  could  not  always  strive  with  them,"  and  since  diey 
we  ly  di  obedient  to  the  spirits'  requests,  and  obviously  opposed 

to    h  ir  p  hey  should  leave  them,  and  in  all  probability  withdraw 

for  h      g  tion,  or  seek   through  other  sources  for   the  fulfilment 

of  1  I  £,h  nd  h  ly  purposes  with  which  this  spiritual  outpouring  had  been 
des<Ti  d. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  41 

To  these  appeals  the  family  were  inflexilile.  They  constantly  prayed 
that  the  cup  of  this  great  bitterness  "might  jiass  from  them."  They  "did 
not  wish  to  be  mediums,"  and  abhorred  the  notoriety,  scandal,  and  persecu- 
tion which  their  fatal  gift  had  brought  upon  them,  and  when  warned  that 
the  spirits  would  leave  them  they  protested  their  delight  at  the  announce- 
ment, and  expressed  their  earnest  desire  that  it  might  be  fulfilled.  There 
were  present  at  a  circle,  when  communications  of  this  character  were  made, 
several  influential  persons  of  the  city,  who  had  become  greatly  interested 
in  the  manifestations  and  were  warm  friends  of  the  family.  They  could 
not,  however,  realize  that  the  threat  here  implied  would  actually  be  fulfiDed 
until  the  spirits,  by  rappings,  spelled  out  several  messages  of  a  particularly 
affectionate  and  valethctory  character.  The  scene  became,  says  an  eye- 
witness, solemn  and  impressive.  The  spirits  announced  that  in  twenty 
minutes  they  would  depart,  and  exactly  as  that  time  expired,  they  spelled 
out,  "We  will  now  bid  you  all  farewell;"  when  the  raps  entirely  ceased. 
The  family  expressed  themselves  "glad  to  be  rid  of  them;"  the  friends 
present  vainly  tried  to  obtain,  by  soOcitations,  made,  as  it  would  seem,  to 
empty  air,  some  demonstration  that  this  beneficent  and  wonderful  visitation 
had  not  indeed  wholly  ceased.  All  was  useless.  A  mournful  silence  filled 
the  apartment  which  had  but  a  few  minutes  before  been  tenanted  with 
angels,  sounding  out  their  dear  messages  of  undying  affection,  tender 
counsel,  wise  instruction,  and  prescient  warning.  The  spirits  indeed  were 
gone ;  and  as  one  by  one  the  depressed  party  separated  and  passed  out  into 
the  silent  moonlit  streets  of  Rochester,  all  and  each  of  them  felt  as  if  some 
great  light  had  suddenly  gone  out,  and  life  was  changed  to  them.  There 
was  a  mighty  blank  in  space,  and  a  shadow  everj^vhere,  but  spirit  light 
came  no  more  to  illuminate  the  .thick  darkness. 

A  fortnight  passed  away,  during  whicti  the  former  investigators  called 
constantly  on  the  Fox  family  to  inquire  if  their  spirit  friends  had  returned. 
For  the  first  few  days  a  stoical  negative  was  their  only  reply;  after  this, 
they  began  more  and  more  fully  to  recognize  the  loss  they  had  sustained. 
The  wise  counsellors  were  gone;  the  sources  of  strange  strength  and  super- 
human consolation  were  Cut  off.  The  tender,  loving,  wonderful  presence, 
no  more  flitted  around  their  steps,  cheered  their  meals,  encouraged  them 
in  their  human  weakness,  or  guided  them  in  their  blindness.  And  these 
most  wonderful  and  providential  beings  their  own  waywardness  had  driven 
from  them.  At  last,  then,  they  met  their  inquiring  friends  with  showers 
of  tears,  choking  sobs,  and  expressions  of  the  bitterest  self-reproach  and 
regret.  On  the  twelfdi  day  of  this  great  heart-dearth  Mr.  E.  VV.  Capron, 
bemg  in  Rochester  on  business,  called  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Fish,  with 
George  Willetts,  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  one  of  their 
earliest  spiritual  investigators.  On  receiving  die  usual  sorrowful  reply 
"that  the  spirits  had  left  them,"  Mr.  Capron  said,  "Perhaps  they  will  rap 
for  us  if  not  for  you."  They  then  entered  the  hall,  and  put  the  usual 
question  if  the  spirits  would  rap  for  them,  in  answer  to  whidi,  and  to  tile 
unspeakable  joy  and  delight  of  all  present,  they  were  greeted  with  a  perfect 
shower  of  the  much-lamented  sounds.  Mrs.  Fish,  now  Mrs.  Underbill, 
often  declares  to  this  day  that  if  suddenly,  fortune,  friends,  and  all  they 
had  ever  loved  had  been  snatched  from  them,  and  as  suddenly  returned 
in  an  hour  of  despair  and  agony,  their  emotions  could  have  scarcely  equalled 
the  ecstacy  with  which  they  once  more  greeted  those  precious  returning 
proofs  that  their  spirit  friends  had  not  deserted  them.  ^  In  fact,  in  the 
entiiusiasm  of  that  returning  morning  of  long-quenched  spiritual  light,  they 

Hosted  by  Google 

42  HISTORY  OF  MODERM 

knelt  down  and  kissed  the  ground  made  sacred  by  the  electric  tones  of  the 
heavenly  telegraph.  And  now  once  more  the  spirits  urged  them  to  make 
the  manifestations  public. 

Again  they  reiterated  the  charge  with  solemn  earnestness,  and  despite  of 
the  medimns*  continued  aversion  to  the  task  imposed  upon  them,  the  fecr 
of  a  fresh  and  final  bereavement  of  the  inestimable  boon  of  spirit  com- 
munion prevented  their  continued  resistance  to  the  course  proposed. 
When  the  persons  who  were  called  upon  to  aid  the  mediums  and  take  some- 
what prominent  parts  in  the  work  urged  the  awkwardness  of  the  positions 
assigned  them,  the  spirits  only  replied,  "Your  triumph  will  be  so  much  the 
greater."  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  severe  warning  they  had  just  received, 
and  the  fear  of  its  repetition,  acted  upon  the  whole  party  with  more  force 
than  any  argument  that  could  have  been  used  to  induce  their  submission. 
Certain  it  is  that  they  at  length  consented,  one  and  all,  to  do  the  bidding 
of  the  spirits ;  but  as  their  first  public  demonstration  of  the  modern  spiritual 
movement  requires  more  accuracy  of  detail  than  history  has  yet  assigned 
to  it,  we  shall  reserve  its  description  for  another  chapter. 

CHAPTER   IV. 

CORINTHIAN  HALL,  OR  THE  FIRST  PUBLIC  INVESTIGATION  OF  SPIRITUALISM. 

Which  cyil  hands  and  loDgucs  c 
The  Inld  encrDachntenls  of  ihe  S3, 
jpm  shafts  orcaLumnjr  and  wit ; 
larine  01  rhe  proud, 

The  scom&il  be 

anne  of  rhe  proud, 

laughter  of  the  crowd. 

Conscious  of  punty  and  wonh. 
We  may  widi  galm  assurance  wait 
-  The  tardy  recompepse  of  earth : 
And  e^en  though  justice  come  too  late 
To  soothe  the  spirit';  homeward  flight, 
StiU  heaven  at  kst  the  wrung  >haU  right." 

Psalms  of  Life. 

Rochester  Science  and  Pibtv  in  1849  —  Law  and  Divinity  Trying  the 
Spirits  —  The  Brave  Followers  of  UEoaGE  Fox  —  Testimony  of  George 
WiLLETTs,  Rev.  C.  Hammond,  and  A.  H.  Jervis  — Dr.  Benjamin  Franklin 
AS  A  Spirit  and  Spiritual  Electricity. 

The  first  public  investigation  into  the  possibility  of  communion  between 
the  world  of  spirits  and  the  earth  they  once  inhabited — between  bereaved 
mourners  and  the  mysterious  dwellers  of  an  unknown  land,  claiming  identity 
with  the  beloved  ones  thus  mourned — should,  as  it  would  seem,  have  inspired 
the  whole  community  with  feelings  of  the  most  profound  interest  and  solemn 
reverence.  The  scene  of  inquiry  should  have  been  a  place  dedicated  to  the 
sacred  offices  of  religion,  and  the  inquisitors  the  men  who,  above  all  others, 
profess  to  teach  the  doctrine  of  the  soul's  immortality. 

Far  otherwise,  however,  did  the  ignorance  and  bigotry  of  the  times  decree 
that  the  investigation  should  be  conducted.  The  spirits,  through  the  rap- 
pings,  both  in  the  presence  of  Margaretta  Fox  in  Rochester,  and  Catharine  in 
Auburn,  shnultaneoulsy  spelled  out  the  same  urgent  requests  that  the  family 
would  challenge  public  scrutiny  and  scientific  investigation.  The  compliance 
which  they  finally  yielded  was  not  only  made  on  the  grounds  mentioned  in 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  43 

the  last  chapter,  but  also  on  the  promise  of  the  spirits  that  they  would  take 
part  in  a  public  inquiry  by  rapping  loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  an  assembled 
audience.  After  several  trials  in  private  houses,  it  was  conceded  that  the 
raps  were  loud  enough  to  sound  distinctly  in  a  large  hall,  before  a  crowded 
auditory. 

The  order  of  proceedings  indicated  by  the  spirits  arranged  that  "  Corin- 
thian Hall,"  the  largest  public  place  of  meeting  in  Rochester,  should  be 
hired,  and  a  lecture  given,  narrating  in  plain  and  terse  language  the  origin 
and  progress  of  the  manifestations  from  their  conamencement  to  their  present 
date.  Afterwards  it  was  directed  that  a  committee  should  be  chosen  from 
the  most  respectable  of  the  audience  present,  who  should  have  cliarge  on 
the  following  day  to  investigate  the  subject  in  private,  and  report  to  an  audi- 
ence each  evening  on  three  successive  occasions.  It  was  promised  that  the 
sounds  should  be  made  during  the  progress  of  the  proceedings  with  sufficient 
force  to  be  heard  throughout  the  liall ;  a  promise  that  was  amply  redeemed 
by  the  spirits  in  clear  and  distinct  rappings.  Mr.  E.  W.  Capron,  of  Auburn, 
was  selected  to  deliver  the  address;  Mr.  George  Willetts  and  Mr.  Isaac  Post 
to  attend  to  the  business  arrangements;  Mrs.  Amy  Post  a  few  other  ladies 
and  the  Rev.  A.  H.  Jervis,  N.  Draper,  layman  Granger  and  other  well 
known  citizens,  to  accompany  the  mediums  on  to  the  platform. 

Many  of  the  parties  thus  honored  by  the  selection  of  the  spirits  were 
exceedingly  unwilling  to  accept  the  equivocal  and  embarrassing  positions 
assigned  to  them;  better  feelings  and  the  urgency  of  the  communications  at 
length  prevailed,  however,  and  the  first  meeting  in  the  e\act  order  preacnbed 
by  the  spirits  took  place  on  the  evening  of  November  14th,  1849.  The 
address  was  given  by  Mr.  Capron  in  a  manner  at  once  so  truthful  and  inter- 
esting that  it  commanded  the  respectful  attention  of  a  numerous  audience. 
The  silence  was  only  broken  by  the  clear  tones  of  the  speaker,  and  the  dis- 
tincdy  audible,  though  muffled  sounds  of  the  raps,  which  constantly  empha- 
sized the  striking  passages  of  the  address.  At  its  close,  a  committee  to 
investigate  the  subject  and  report  on  the  next  evening  was  chosen  by  the 
audience,  consisting  of  the  following  persons,  all  highly  respectable  and 
responsible  citizens  of  Rochester  :  Messrs  A.  J.  Combs,  Daniel  Marsh,  Na- 
thaniel Clark,  A.  Judson,  and  Edwin  Jones.  From  unquestionable  authority 
we  learn  that  in  the  office  of  the  Rochester  Democrat,  an  elaborate  article 
was  prepared,  announcing  "the  entire  explosion  of  the  rapping  humbug;" 
but  though  the  article  in  question,  to  save  time,  was  actually  set  up  in  type, 
yet  the  editors,  to  save  credit,  deferred  it?,  pubhcation  after  the  report  of  the 
committee  was  publicly  rendered  in  the  following  terms : 

"  That  without  the  knowledge  of  the  persons  in  whose  presence  the  manifestations  are 
made,  the  committee  selected  the  hall  of  the  Sons  of  Temperance  for  investigition ;  that 
the  sounds  on  the  floor  near  where  the  two  ladies  stood  were  heard  as  dislmctly  as  at  other 
places,  and  that  part  of  the  committee  heard  the  rapping  on  the  wall  behind  them ;  that  a 
nnraher  of  questions  were  asked,  which  were  answered  not  altogether  right  nor  altogether 
wrong;  that  in  the  afternoon  they  went  to  the  house  of  a  private  citizen,  and  while  there 
the  sounds  were  heard  on  the  outade  of  the  front  door,  after  they  had  entered,  and  on  the 
door  of  a  closet.  By  placing  the  hand  upon  the  door,  there  was  a  sensible  jar  felt  when 
the  rapping  was  heard.  One  of  the  committee  placed  one  of  his  hands  upon  the  feet 
of  the  ladies  and  the  other  on  the  floor,  and  though  the  feet  were  not  moved  there  was 
a  distinct  jar  on  the  floor.  On  the  pavement  and  on  the  ground  the  same  sounds  were 
beard.  When  the  ladies  were  separated  at  a  distance  no  sound  was  heard,  but  when  a  third 
person  was  interposed  between  them  the  sounds  were  heard.  The  ladies  seemed  to  give 
every  opportunity  to  the  committee  to  investigate  the  cause  fully,  and  would  submit  to  a 
thorough  investigation  by  a  committee  of  ladies,  if  deared.  They  all  agreed  that  the 
sounds  were  heard,  bill  they  sntirely  failed  to  discover  any  means  by  which  it  coald  it 
done." 

Hosted  by  Google 

44  HISTORY  OF  MODERl^ 

This  report  was  delivered  to  an  eager  and  excited  audience  on  tlie  second 
public  night,  and  seemed  to  fall  like  a  thunder-bolt  on  many  of  those  assem- 
bled,  who  had  obviously  come  in  the  expectation  of  receiving  one  of  a  very 
different  and  far  less  favorable  character. 

After  some  discussion,  which  already  pointed  to  a  disapproval  of  the  re- 
port, and  a  wish  to  find  the  mediums  guilty  of  imposture,  another  committee 
was  appointed  by  the  audience,  such  persons  being  named  as  were  least 
likely  to  be  favorable  to  the  spiritual  hypothesis  of  the  sounds. 

The  gentlemen  thus  selected  were  Dr.  H.  H.  Langworthy,  Hon.  Frederick 
[Counsellor]  Whittlesey,  D.  C.  McCallum,  William  Fisher,  and  Hon.  A.  P. 
Hascall,  of  LeRoy. 

_  The  ladies  had  been  subject  to  examinations  by  the  former  committee,  the 
rigidity  of  which  was  not  one  of  the  statements  brought  before  the  public. 
Their  feelings  were  often  outraged,  their  statements  doubted,  and  their  pecu- 
liarly sensitive  natures  wounded  to  agony  by  the  cold,  severe,  and  often 
sneering  scrutiny  to  which  they  were  subjected.  Happily  for  them  the  spirit 
friends  behind  the  scenes  encouraged  and  cheered  them,  often  warning  them 
of  the  disagreeable  nature  of  what  they  would  have  to  encounter,  of  the 
"hard  and  angular  characters"  of  some  of  their  judges,  and  the  amenable 
and  spiritual  natures  of  others. 

The  little  great  men  whose  verdict  was  to  render  fore\-er  to  mankind  the 
truth  or  falsehood  of  man's  relations  with  ministering  spirits,  had  no  idea 
what  a  shrewd  and  analytical  spirit  painting  of  themselves  had  already  un- 
masked them  to  those  they  pretended  to  ju^e,  ere  they  themselves  entered 
on  the  farce  of  trying  the  spirits. 

Still  these  two  committees  were  so  far  honest  in  their  search,  and  candid 
enough  in  theu-  report,  as  greatly  to  incense  the  audiences  which  each  night 
assembled,  not  to  hear  the  truth,  but  rather  in  expectation  of  a  report  which 
should  proclaim  the  Fox  family  impostors. 

The  second  investigation  was  conducted,  to  avoid  all  possibility  of  decep- 
tion, at  the  office  of  Counsellor  Whittlesey.  The  ladies  were  placed  in  va- 
rious positions,  together  and  separate,  but  though  the  only  avowed  medium 
was  Margaret,  Mr.  Fish  not  deeming  she  had  the  "  power,"  and  Catharine 
being  absent  at  Auburn,  the  sounds  were  heard  on  the  floor,  chairs,  table, 
walls,  door,  and,  in  fact,  everywhere.  Dr.  LangwortJiy  tested  the  possibihty 
of  their  being  ventriloquism  by  the  use  of  the  stethescope,  and  the  joint  re- 
port of  the  committee  was  that  "the  sounds  were  heard,  and  their  thorough 
investigation  had  conclusively  shown  them  to  be  produced  neither  by  ma- 
chinery nor  ventriloquism,  tiiough  what  the  agent  was,  they  were  unable  to 
determine." 

It  would  be  impossible  to  describe  the  indignation  that  was  manifested  at 
this  second  failure,  and  a  third  committee  was  immediately  chosen,  whose 
sneers  and  scoffing  remarks  seemed  their  chief  recommendation  to  the  office. 
As  a  specimen  of  the  animus  of  these  investigations,  it  may  be  mentioned 
that  one  of  them  — Mr.  Lewis  Burtis  —  declared,  "the  girls  wouldn't  have 
him  on  the  committee  for  a  hundred  dollars."  Another— Mr.  L.  Kenyon  — 
"that  if  he  could  not  find  out  the  trick  he  would  throw  himself  over  Genes- 
see  Falls."  In  addition  to  these  persons  were  Drs.  Langworthy  and  Gates, 
and  William  Fitzhugh.  To  the  honor-of  this  committee  be  it  said,  that  despite 
the  most  severe  and  inquisitorial  treatment,  conducted  with  circumstances  of 
severity  that  azf  quite  as  well  omitted  from  the  record,  they  reported  entirely 
in  the  ladies'  favor,  although  Mr.  Burtis  frankly  owned  himself  beaten,  and 
Mr.  Kenyon  did  not  either  throw  hunself  over  the  Falls  or  pretend  that  he 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  45 

could  "find  out  the  trick."  In  addifion  to  this  final  examination  under  pub- 
lic auspices,  the  committee  appointed  another  to  assist  them  in  their  investi- 
gation, composed  of  ladies,  by  whom  the  clothing  of  the  mediums  was 
thoroughly  searched,  and  even  their  shoes,  stockings,  and  under-garments 
minutely  examined.  The  poor  girls  wept  bitterly  during  this  ordeal;  still 
they  submitted  to  it,  though  shame  and  indignation  wrought  up  their  feelings 
to  so  severe  a  pitch  that  their  sobs  and  lamentations  were  heard  by  some  of 
their  friends  who  had  been  purposely  excluded  from  the  room.  One  of  these, 
a  sweet  Quaker  lady  —  Mrs.  Amy  Post — who  throughout  the  whole  of  their 
bitter  trials  had  lent  them  the  aid  of  her  gentle  counsel  and  the  strength  of  her 
irreproachable  name,  at  last  insisted  upon  forcing  her  way  into  the  chamber 
where  the  poor  girls  were  disrobed  and  undergoing  examination.  No  sooner 
did  the  sight  of  her  friendly  tace  greet  them  than  they  threw  themselves  into 
her  arms,  and  the  favorable  revulsion  of  feeling  occasioned  by  her  presence 
had  the  effect  of  producing  what  the  severe  scrutiny  of  antagonism  had  neu- 
tralized, namely,  a  perfect  shower  of  raps,  from  which  point  the  sounds  were 
loud  and  frequent,  responding  to  questions,  and  rapping  whilst  they  stood 
with  bare  feet  on  pillows,  glass,  and  other  substances  [supposed  to  be  non-con- 
ductors of  electricity],  or  with  their  dresses  tightly  tied  to  their  ankles.  In 
all  these  positions  the  raps  were  distinctly  heard  on  the  floor  and  walls,  in 
proof  of  which  we  extract  the  following  passage  from  the  certificate  of  the 
Ladies  Committee : 

"  When  tbey  were  standing  on  pillows,  with  a  handkerchief  tied  aroond  the  bottom,  of 
their  dresses,  tight  to  the  ankles,  we  all  heard  the  rapping  on  the  wall  and  floor  distinctly. 
[Signed]  "  Mrs.  Stone, 

Mrs.  J.  Gates, 

Mrs,  M.  p.  Lawrence." 

Notwithstanding  the  confidence  which  the  poor  family  had  in  their  own  in- 
tegrity and  the  strength  and  fidelity  of  the  spirits,  the  power  of  public  opinion 
was  so  strong  against  them,  and  the  reports  from  without  were  of  so  alarming 
a  character,  that  they  almost  shrank  fi-om  the  final  trial  that  was  demanded  of 
them,  namely,  to  present  themselves  for  the  fourth  time  on  the  platform,  dur- 
ing the  presentation  of  the  last  report. 

The  two  first  committees  had  frankly  declared  to  Miss  Fox  their  opinions 
of  her  perfect  honesty;  but  it  was  evident  they  disliked  the  task  of  presenting 
themselves  before  the  excited  crowds  that  had  threatened  to  assemble  at 
Corinthian  Hall  that  night,  and  "lynch  the  rappers  and  their  advocates  too," 
provided  the  report  of  the  third  committee  should  be  in  their  favor.  Al- 
though the  feeling  of  those  who  had  come  prepared  for  mischief  was  unmis- 
takable, the  committee,  opposed  as  they  had  been  to  the  mediiuns  the  nig;ht 
before,  were  honest  in  their  statements.  "  They  had  heard  the  sounds," 
they  said,  "and  failed  utterly  to  discover  their  origin.  They  had  proved 
that  neither  machinery  nor  imposture  had  been  used,  and  their  questions, 
many  of  them  being  mental,  were  answered  correctly."        .... 

Each  member  of  the  committee  reported  separately,  and  fiilly  corroborated 
the  others;  and  then  it  was  that  a  scene  of  confusion  ensued,  equal'/  impos- 
sible to  describe  and  discreditable  to  record. 

Mrs.  Fish  and  Amy  Post,  though,  to  use  their  own  words,  th'^y  were  "  no 
mediums,"  had  accompanied  the  pale  and  shrinking  Margaretta  on  the  plat- 
form, ready  to  defend  or  share  her  danger. 

But  the  poor  ladies  were  not  alone ;  Isaac  Post,  the  Rev.  A.  H,  Jervis,  and 
a  few  other  true  men,  and  therefore  gentlemen,  were  on  guard,  determined  to 

Hosiedb,  Google 

4^  HISTORY  OF  MODERTT 

protect,  or  if  need  be  "  perish  with  the  martyrs  to  this  unpopular  but  unques- 
tionable truth,"  whilst  George  Willetts,  whose  peaceful  religion  as  a  Quaker 
lent  peculiar  emphasis  to  his  words,  declared  "that  the  mob  of  ruffians  who 
designed  to  lynch  'the  girls,'  should  do  so— if  they  attempted  it — over  his 
dead  body." 

Sustdned  by  this  faithfbl  little  band,  Mai^aretta  Fox  and  her  friends  pre- 
sented themselves  on  the  platform ;  but  immediately  following  the  reports  of 
the  different  members  of  the  committee,  Josiah  Bissell,  writing  himself  "  Esq." 
and  "  gentleman,"  proceeded  to  distribute  torpedoes  amongst "  the  boys,"  and 
on  every  side  the  explosion  of  these  noisy  tormentors  distracted  the  ears  and 
stimulated  the  ribald  jokes  of  the  mob  against  the  "rappers."  A  "gentle- 
man," who  had  recently  filled  the  post  of  alderman,  led  another  gang  of 
disturbers ;  whilst  two  more  prominent  citizens,  by  the  name  of  Jerome, 
gentlemen,  who,  as  attached  to  a  daily  American  paper,  were  supposed  to  be 
leaders  of  public  opinion,  together  with  a  certain  Major  Packard,  undertook 
to  state  that  the  sounds  were  made  by  leaden  balls  fastened  to  the  "  females' " 
dresses.  They  then  mounted  the  platform  and  invited  up  the  "rowdies" 
for  "investigation,"  until  the  police,  perceiving  the  disgraceful  turn  the  pro- 
ceedings were  taking,  urged  the  ladies  and  their  friends  to  retire,  and  after 
carefully  guarding  them  home,  were  compelled  to  disperse  the  meeting  by 
threatening  the  principal  gentlemen  present  to  arrest  them  as  authors  and 
instigators  of  the  disturbance. 

And  thus  ended  an  investigation  into  the  sublime  and  occult  mysteries  of 
the  communion  between  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds,  in  which  gentlemen, 
magistrates,  editors,  and  professional  men  were  the  judges,  and  enlightened 
American  citizens  the  jury ;  and  thus  too  ended  the  experiment  of  entrusting 
any  truth  that  has  not  yet  been  endorsed  with  the  label  of  popularity,  to  the 
censorship  of  the  men  who  assume  to  be  leaders  of  public  opinion.  Spiritual 
agencies  were  wiser  in  days  of  yore,  and  entmsted  the  promulgation  of 
divine  truth  to  fishermen  and  Galileans  rather  than  to  Scribes  and  Phari- 
sees ;  nevertheless,  though  the  elite  of  Rochester  citizenship  was  "  called  but 
not  chosen,"  the  cause  they  attempted  to  disgrace  rose  triumphantly  out  of  the 
ruins  they  strove  to  create.  The  aim  of  wide-spread  publicity  was  attained. 
The  very  bitterness  of  the  opposition  provoked  disscussion,  and  thousands  heard 
of;  wondered  at,  investigated,  and  finally  believed  in,  spiritual  communion  who 
would  never  have  dreamed  of  the  subject  but  for  the  persecution  and  slander 
that  was  publicly  directed  against  the  "  Rochester  knockings."  But  the  spirit 
of  persecution  did  not  cease  at  Corinthian  Hall.  A  feeling  of  determined 
and  relentless  antagonism  was  excited  against  the  subject  by  the  very  impos- 
sibility of  finding  it  out  or  crushing  it  down.  Believers  began  to  multiply; 
mediums  sprang  up  in  families  whose  wealth  and  position  removed  them 
fi-om  the  least  suspicion  of  imposture ;  and  since  it  was  impossible  to  reach 
these,  or  strike  the  hydra-headed  monster  in  its  now  houriy-increasing  mag- 
nitude, the  only  resort  of  the  unreasoning  spirit  of  persecution,  which  seems 
to  be  an  unaccountable  element  developed  by  the  advent  of  all  new  move- 
ments, was  to  strike  at  the  humble  and  obnoxious  Fox  family. 

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  up  to  the  date  of  the  first  manifestations 
they  had  lived  in  the  enjoyment  of  respect  and  an  unblemished  name  from 
all  who  knew  them,  from  this  time  forth  the  malignant  blows  that  were  aimed 
against  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  were  first  levelled  at  them,  and  even  now, 
their  fair  fame  is  blurred  in  the  city  of  Rochester  by  meaningless  slanders 
that  once  launched  upon  the  relentless  billows  of  time  drift  on  forever,  and 
though  they  may  ultimately  be  swept  away  by  the  tides  of  oblivion,  yet 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  47 

never  return  upon  their  track  to  render  justice  at  the  point  from  whence 
they  started. 

Before  taking  leave  of  the  fortunes  of  this  remarkable  family,  it  will  be 
necessary  Co  the  clear  understanding  of  the  influence  for  good  which  Spirit- 
ualism from  the  first  assumed  towards  majikind,  that  we  should  present  some 
of  the  views  of  the  earbest  investigators  into  tliis  subject,  in  the  form  of 
certain  letters  which  they  themselves  wrote  in  private  correspondence,  but 
which  the  irresistible  logic  of  events  has  converted  into  testimony,  rendered 
invaluable  from  its  unpremeditated  character  and  the  obvious  disinterested- 
ness of  its  authors. 

The  first  letter  which  we  shall  present  is  from  the  pen  of  Mr.  George 
Willetts,  who  was  known  to  ail  his  acquaintances  as  a  man  of  the  most  un- 
impeachable integrity  and  truthfulness.  Mr.  Willetts's  conviction  of  the 
spiritual  origin  of  the  rappings  became  strong  enough  to  induce  him  tt.  take 
the  noble  and  prominent  part  in  the  Corinthian  Hall  inquisition  above 
noticed.  His  letter  is  addressed  to  Mr.  E.  W,  Capron,  of  Auburn,  who 
publishes  it  in  his  work  on  "  The  Facts  and  Fanaticisms  of  Modem  Spirit- 
ualism." Our  extract  is  taken  from  Dr.  Campbell's  pamphlet  on  the  Roches- 
ter knockings : 

"Dear  Friend,  E.  W.Capron;  —  It  is  with  some  reluctance  that  I  futnish  you  with 
the  following  statement ;  not  that  I  am  afraid  to  tell  yon  the  truth,  but  that  the  world,  as 
I  conceive,  is  not  ready  to  receive  such  truths  yeL  Ridicule,  probably,  will  tie  heaped  upon 
me ;  but  when  I  consider  that  it  is  the  ignorant  only  who  use  that  weapon,  perhaps  I  can 
afford  to  stand  up  and  say,  '  let  the  storm  come. '  All  who  know  me  can  say  whether  I  have 
been  truthful  from  my  youth  up,  yea  or  nay;  ajid  the  strongest  language  that  I  can  use  is 
to  say  that  the  following  statement  is  strictly  and  entirely  true : 

"  'In  the  sumtner  of  1S48,  I  had  concluded,  from  the  best  judgment  that  I  could  bring 
to  my  aid,  that  it  was  right  tor  my  family  to  remove  somewhere  amongst  the  wilds  of  the 
West.  Accordingly  I  took  a  tour  of  oteervation,  and  finding  some  land  in  Michigan  that 
suited  me  better  than  any  other,  belonging  to  a  gentleman  living  in  Rochester,  I  stopped  there 
on  my  return,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  negotiate  for  it.  I  staid  with  my  friend  and  relative, 
Isaac  Post,  aiul  while  there  he  told  me  of  certain  sounds  being  heard  in  the  city,  and  that 
they  displayed  intelUgence  and  purported  to  be  made  by  spirits,  or  persons  invisiWe  to  us. 
I  was  really  sceptical  about  any  such  things,  but  at  his  solicitation  went  to  examine  it.  The 
person  with  whom  these  sounds  seemed  to  be  I  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  tiefore,  and  my 
friend  was  careful  not  to  tell  them  who  I  was  or  where  I  had  been.  It  seems  that  the 
qnestion  was  asked  whether  there  was  any  communication  for  me,  and  the  direction  from 
the  sounds  was  that  three  persona  be  magnetized  i  two  of  them  were  present,  and  one  was 
sent  for  from  a  neighboring  family.  I  did  not  know  the  name  of  any  person  present ;  and 
I  was  also  certain  that  no  one  knew  me.  After  the  three  persons  were  put  in  the  '  clair- 
voyant state,'  one  of  them  said,  '  We  have  to  go  to  Michigan.'  They  all  agreed  that  they 
had  to  go  there,  and  began  to  describe  places  and  things  which  I  had  seen,  and  at  length 
came  to  a  piece  of  land  which  they  said  was  the  place  they  came  to  look  at.  They  then 
described  the  land  so  accurately  which  I  had  stopped  in  Rochester  to  buy  that  I  began  to 
wonder  'who  had  told  them.*  They  all  with  one  accord  then  sidd,  '  But  he  must  not  go 
there.  His  father  says  he  had  better  not  go.'  As  they  said  this,  there  came  a  loud  sound 
close  by  my  ch3.i1,  and  Iial  same  distanie  from  any  ether  person.  They  spoke  much  of 
my  father,  and  what  his  mind  was,  and  at  each  time  that  same  sound  was  heard  and  the  jar 
distinctly  felt  close  by  myself.  They  then  said,  'Hisf»oi*fr  thmksit  isnot  best.'  Aslhey 
spoke  this  a.  dijFerent  sound,  not  quite  so  loud,  was  heard,  still  close  by  me.  Then,  '  that 
mj  sister  said  it  was  not  bit.'  Another  and  different  sound  still  was  heard.  Up  to  this 
time  I  had  not  spoken  a  word,  but  found  the  big  drops  of  perspiration  starting  from  my 
face.  I  gathered  courage  and  thought  I  would  dispel  that  illusion  directly  ;  I  said, '  As  you 
assume  to  know  my  father  and  what  his  mind  is  concerning  me,  fer/iaja  you  can  tell  his 
name.'  They  all  seemed  to  look  steadily  for  some  time,  then  commenced  and  spoke  slowly 
and  deliberately  these  letters :  William  Willetts.  At  each  letter  the  loud  sound  that  I  first 
heard  was  again  heard  and  felt  immediately  under  my  feet.  I  never  was  so  astonished  in 
my  life,  and  involuntarily  s^d,  '  What  does  all  this  mean  ?  *  The  sounds  then  said,  by  the 
alphabet  being  called  over,  '  that  they  had  bettec  be  awakened ; '  and  the  first  loud  sound 

Hosiedb,  Google 

48  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

sdd,  ■  I  will  tallt  with  George  and  teU  him  all  about  it.'  The  direction  was  for  Mr.  Post, 
myself,  and  a  little  girl  [Catharine  Fox]  thirteen  years  old,  to  go  by  ourselves.  And  here  I 
wish  it  distinctly  understood  that  all  which  I  sliall  relate  as  obtained  from  these  sounds  was 
in  the  presence  only  of  my  friends  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Post,  myself,  and  the  little  girt  spoken  of. 
As  what  follows  aU  purported  to  be  from  my  father,  I  will  say  that  his  name  was  William 
Willetts,  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  widely  known  at  Westbury,  Long  Island, 
where  he  liv*  until  nearly  sixty  years  of  E^e,  and  subsequently  at  Skajieateles,  Onandagua 
County,  where  he  died  in  1841.  The  communication  by  sounds  then  went  on  to  say  that 
it  was  my  father  that  was  present  and  talking  with  me,  and  three  hours  were  consumed  at 
the  first  interview.  In  saying  to  me  what  his  counsel  was  it  always  assumed  to  counsel 
and  advise,  but  never  to  dictate.  He  said  that  it  was  not  best  for  ua  to  go  to  Michigan, 
and  gave  various  reasons,  among  which  were  that  we  should  not  enjoy  ourselves  in  a  new 
country,  and  that  my  health  would  not  be  competent  for  the  task  of  clearing  up  new  land, 
and  he  foresaw,  if  we  did  go,  we  shonld  come  back  again  and  would  be  less  uk  niunber  than 
when  we  went.  I  then  asked  what  was  best  to  do.  The  answer  was, 'Come  to  Rochester.' 
I  rephed  that  I  knew  of  no  buaness  that  I  could  do  in  Rochester.  The  sounds  said,  '  I 
wiU  tell  thee  when  thee  comes.'  I  asked  if  I  might  know  now.  The  answer  was,  'No, 
I  did  not  need  any  business  until  I  came,  and  then  he  would  teU  me.'  The  sounds  then 
said  that  after  a  time  it  would  be  best  for  me  to  buy  some  land.  I  asked  where.  The 
sounds  then  spelled  out  the  name  of  a  man  whom  no  one  present  knew,  and  said 
that  he  owned  fifty  acres  of  land  on  such  a  sireet  adjoining  the  city,  and  such  a  distance 
from  the  centre  of  the  city ;  that  he  would  sell  any  part.  I  asked  the  price  that  would  be 
asked.  The  sounds  were  heard  and  counted  by  three  of  us—  one  hundred  and  fifty  times  in 
succession— to  tell  us  the  number  of  dollars  per  acre  that  would  be  asked.  The  sounds 
said  that  we  had  better  go  the  next  day  and  see  if  this  was  so,  and  said  that  we  should  not 
see  the  man  until  ten  o'clock,  although  we  might  look  for  him  as  early  as  we  pleased.  In 
the  morning  I  looked  in  the  Directory  and  there  found  the  name  spelled  out  to  us,  and  went 
to  his  residence  at  seven  o'dock,  and  was  informed  that  he  was  gone  to  a  distant  part  of 
the  city,  and  would  not  be  home  until  twelve  o'clock.  We  then  went  to  find  him,  and  had 
some  difficulty  to  do  so,  but  after  talking  with  him  five  or  as  minutes  looked  at  the  tirne 
and  it  was  seven  minutes  past  ten  !  This  person  sdd  that  he  owned  fifty  acres  on  the 
street  told  us  by  the  sounds,  and  said  chat  he  would  sell  any  part.  When  I  asked  him  the 
price  he  showed  me  a  map  with  the  price  of  each  lot  marked,  and  takmg  the  number  of 
acres  said  by  the  sounds  to  be  best  to  buy,  and  averaging  the  price,  it  was  just  upon  one 
hundred  and  fifty  dollars  per  acre,  I  then  went  home  to  my  family  and  pondered  over 
these  strange  thmgs.  Many  were  the  conflicts  In  my  own  mind,  and  I  heard  the  cry  from 
all  quarters,  'humbi^,'  'deception,'  'fraud,'  but  I  could  not  believe  that  I  wanted  to  de- 
ceive myself.  Three  months  I  thought  of  theSe  things  deeply,  and  /  could  not  go  to 
Michigan.  I  concluded  if  it  was  deception  it  would  do  the  world  some  good  to  find  it 
out.  The  first  of  December,  184S,  I  mO(-ed  from  Waterloo  to  Rochester.  A  few  days 
after  getting  here,  the  little  girl  spoken  of  came  round  to  our  house  and  said  that  the  '  spirit 
had  du-ected  her  to  come,  for  what  purpose  she  did  not  know.  We  inquired  what  it  wa^ 
and  this  was  the  communication :  '  I  told  thee  if  thee  wouhl  come  to  Rochester  I  would 
tell  thee  where  thee  could  find  employment ;  in  four  days  from  this  I  will  tell  thee.  In  the 
meantime  the  anti-slavery  folks  are  gomg  to  hold  their  Fair ;  would  it  not  be  weU  for  th^ 
to  help  them?'  No  one  was  present  at  this  time  except  my  wife,  the  little  girl,  and  myself. 
The  four  days  went  by,  and  again,  without  solicitation  and  without  thmking  the  time  was 
up,  the  little  girl  came  again.  The  communication  was,  '  Apply  to  WiUjarn  Wiley,  Super- 
intendent of  the  Aobura  and  Rochester  RaUroad,  to-morrow  at  two  o  olock,  at  his  ottic^ 
foraatuation,  and  thee  will  have  one  before  this  week  is  out.'  This  was  Thursday.  I 
was  a  stranger  to  Mr.  Wiley,  and  I  called  on  Mr.  Post  and  told  him  the  direction,  and 
asked  him  if  the  next  day  he  would  go  with  me.  That  evening:  he,  happening  to  be  at  the 
dmot,  inqmred  if  Mr.  Wiley  was  at  home,  and  was  told  that  he  was  in  Boston,  and  by  a 
letter  just  received  would  not  be  at  home  till  Friday  night.  I  was  told  by  (he  sounds  on 
Wednesday  to  apply  on  Thursday  at  two  o'clock.  Thursday  at  half-past  one,  instead  of 
going  to  the  rdlroad  office,  I  went  round  to  where  these  sounds  were  heard,  and  said,  liow 
is  tWs?  I  am  told  to  apply  to  WUham  Wiley,  and  he  is  in  Boston.'  The  sounds  said., 
'Go  to  his  office  ti^;  he  is  there.'  I  caUed  for  Mr.  Post  and  walked  immediately  there, 
sM.  found  Mr.  Wiiey  in  his  office.  He  said  that  he  had  returned  sooner  than  he  expected 
to  when  he  wrote  the  letter.  Mr.  Post  said  that  I  was  a  relative  of  his  and  wished  employ- 
ment, and  Mr.  WUey  replied  that  they  were  all  full,  with  abundant  apphcations,  and  he  could 
mve  no  encouragement  whatever.  We  walked  back,  thinking  deeply,  and  I  went  whei-e  the 
l>un<is  were  hSrd  ag^n.  I  inquired,  '  How  is  this?  Mr.  Wiley  has  no  place  for  me. 
The  answer  was,  'TAce  will  have  a  place  on  the  cars,  and  wll  irmf  it  before  the  weti 

Hosted  by  Google 

AME^rCAI^  SPIRITUALISM. 

49 

"  On  Saturday  night,  at  dark,  I  met  Mr.  Post,  and  he  asked  if  I  had  heard  anything  from 
Mr.  Wiley,  I  replied,  'Not  a  word.'  At  eight  o'clock  on  that  same  evening,  Mr.  Post 
called  at  my  house,  and  said  that  Mr.  Wiley  had  just  been  at  his  store  and  said^hat  he  had 
a  place  for  me,  and  wished  me  to  call  at  his  office  on  Monday  morning.  As  Mr.  Wiley  did 
not  tell  what  place  I  was  to  fill,  I  i^ain  asked  the  sounds  what  it  was;  and  they  said  'that 
it  was  to  go  as  baggage-master  between  this  place  ajid  Auburn.'  On  Sund*y  morning  I 
wrote  to  my  friend  James  Trueman,  of  Waterloo,  stalmg  that  I  should  pass  through  that 
pkce  on  Monday  following— in  the  capacity  above  stated — before  I  knew  from  Mr.  Wiley 
what  place  he  wanted  me  to  fill,  and  he  can  testify  to  that  fact.  One  month  after  I  had 
been  running  on  the  cars,  I  learned  that  the  person  whose  piaee  1  took  had  done  things 
ivorthy  of  a  dismissal  previous  to  my  being  directed  to  make  application,  and  which  did  not 
come  to  Mr.  Wiley's  notice  till  the  day  on  which  I  received  the  appointment.  These  things 
have  only  been  known  to  a  few  friends;  you  and  the  world  now  have  them.  I  have  many 
conimunications,  penned  down  at  the  time  they  were  received,  purportmg  to  be  from  my 
father,  all  of  the  most  elevating  character,  ineitmg  me  to  goodness,  piu-ity,  and  honesty  of 
heart,  and  ever  pointmg  to  the  endless  progresaon  of  man.  In  conclusion,  I  may  say  that 
I  have  examined  the  matter  attentively  for  one  year  and  a  half,  and  have  had  abundant  op- 
portunity to  do  so,  and  am  prepared  to  say,  although  the  sounds  may  cease  to-day  and 
never  be  heard  again,  they  have  displayed  a  remarkable  degree  of  intelligence,  and  were  not 
made  by  any  person  viable  to  us. 

"George  Willetts." 

The  next  letter  we  shall  quote  is  from  the  Rev.  C.  Hammond,  and  though 
it  contains  no  proofs  of  spirit  identity  of  a  very  striking  character,  it  is 
inserted  in  reference  to  the  singular  worth  of  the  writer  and  the  weight  which 
is  due  to  his  respected  testimony.  Mr.  Hammond,  subsequent  to  the  dicta- 
tion of  this  letter,  became  an  excellent  writing  medium  himself,  and  the 
publisher  ofa  voluminous  collection  of  "communications  from  the  spirit- 
world,"  written  through  his  mediumship. 

Considering  that  Mr.  Hammond  was  content  to  sacrifice  good  name,  fame, 
and  livelihood  in  his  defence  of  the  unpopular  cause  he  espoused,  credence 
should  be  assigned  to  him  for  his  sincerity,  if  denied  on  behalf  of  his  moral 

LETTER  FROM  THE  REV.  C.  HAMMOND. 

"Mr.  D.  M.  DeweY:  Dear  Sir,  —  In  compliance  with  your  solicitation,  I  will  proceed, 
to  lay  before  you  a  brief  statement  of  what  has  fallen  under  my  observation,  in  regard  to. 
the  'jnystetions  sounds'  and  'demonstrations,'  purportmg  to  be  made  liy  intelligent  spirits, 
who  onee  inhabited  an  earthly  tabernacle.  It  is  quite  probable  that  many  others  may  have  ■ 
had  more  convincing  and  salbfactory  evidences  of  the  real  presence  of  their  departed,  or,  as  ■ 
I  should  say,  deceased  friends,  than  myself;  yet  I  am  free  to  acknowledge  my  inability  to- 
account  for  these  marvellous  manifestations  by  any  law  teci^niied  in  science  or  philosophy;, 
nor  am  I  aware  of  having  an  organization  so  extra-credulous  as  to  admit  theoretic^! 
propositions,  without  facts  to  sustidn  them.  If,  therefore,  imposition  and  deegition  have 
'humbugged'  me  into  a  conviction  that  the  'sounds'  and  'demonstrations'  which  I  have 
witnessed  origmate  in  any  cause  other  than  those  assigned  in  this  narrative,  the  person  who  ■ 
shall  disclose  the  mysterf  and  detect  the  fraud  will  receive  my  grateful  acknowledgments. 

"In  the  early  jiart  of  January  last,  m  company  with  other  persons,  I  gained  an  introdne-- 
tionlothefamilyin  this  city  in  whose  residence  these  sounds  had  been  heard.  They  received , 
us  politely,  and  seemed  rather  more  cheerful  than  what  I  W  supposed  would  be  natural  for. 
those  who  were  hourly  exchanging  communications  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  A  company 
of  twenty  or  more  persons  had  assembled ;  the  'three  iters'  came  into  the  room;  the  ■ 
sounds  were  heard,  and  through  the  medium  of  the  alphabet,  they,  and  about  half  the  com- 
pany, were  directed  to  retire  to  another  apartment.  Our  company  in  the  absence  of  the 
'  three  sisters,'  whose  presence  is  generally  deemed  essential  to  these  spiritual  communica- 
tions, were  all  seated  closely  around  an  ordinary  dining  table,  when  one  of  the  ladies,  bowing 
her  head,  inquired  in  rather  a  solemn  tone,  'Will  the  spirit  answer  questions  now?'  No  ■ 
response  being  made,  I  felt  the  disappouitment  of  the  lady,  and  was  half  inclined  to  smile  . 
at  the  ludicrous  scene,  when  the  searching  glance  of  her  suspicious  eye,  falling  upon  me, . 
bade  me  maintain  my  usual  gravity  and  respect  toward  the  company  and  the  occasion  which 
had  called  us  there.     After  several  ineffectual  attempts  to  get  responses,  the  sounds  were- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

5° 

fflSTORY  OF  MODERN' 

heard,  and  the  company  generally  wre  privUeged  with  answers  to  thdr  respective  interrosa- 
tories  I  availed  myself  of  the  opportunity,  but  gamed  no  other  satisfaction  than  a  prompt 
assurance  thai  aU  my  'test  questions'  should  be  answered  wlien  I  should  come  there  a^m. 
I  went  away  scepfical,  though  unable  to  account  for  the  'sounds'  which  caused  the  floor 
occasionally  to  vibrate  under  my  feet.  ^  ,    ,  j 

"On  my  next  viat  I  was  much  more  successful.  During  the  interval,  I  had  prepared  my 
mmd  with  certab  questions  touching  events  imlaiown  to  the  family,  and  of  a  remote  date. 
The  sounds  told  me  my  age  precisely,  though  my  appearance  is  such  as  to  indicate  a 
difference  of  eight  or  ten  years.  The  names  of  ^  of  my  nearest  deceased  relatives  w^e 
riven  me.  I  then  inquired,  'Will  the  spirit  who  now  makes  these  sounds  give  me  its 
name?'  Five  sounds  directed  me  to  the  alphabet,  which  I  repeated  until  the  name  ot 
'Charles'  appeared,  which  answered  to  an  infant  chiU  whom  we  consigned  to  the  grave 
m  March,  1843.  To  roy  inquiries,  it  gave  me  a  true  answer  m  r^ard  to  the  time  it  had 
been  in  the  spirit  hind,  and  iJso  the  period  ance  my  eldest  sister's  death,  wliidi  was  nearly 
eighteen  years;  the  latter  fact  not  being  recoUected  then,  1  found  true  by  dates  on  my 
return  home.  Many  other  test  questions  were  correctly  answer^} ;  and  yet,  notwithstand- 
ine  the  oriain  of  these  sounds  seemed  ^explicable,  I  was  inclmed  to  unpute  them  to 
.-nesmerisni  or  clairvoyance.  However,  as  the  spirit  promised  to  satisfy  me  by  other 
demonstrations  when  I  came  again,  I  patiently  awaited  the  opportunity.  .   ,  ,     ,, 

"On  tlie  third  visit  I  was  selected  From  half  a  dozen  gentlemen,  and  dnected  by  these 
sounds  to  retire  to  another  apartment,  in  company  with  the  'three  sisters  and  their  aged 
mother.  It  was  about  eight  o'clock  m  the  evenmg.  A  lighted  candle  was  placed  on  a 
larce  table,  and  we  seated  ourselves  around  it.  I  occupied  one  side  of  the  table,  the 
mother  and  youngest  daughter  the  right,  and  t>vo  of  the  sisters  the  left,  leaving  the  oppo- 
site ade  of  the  table  vacant.  On  takmg  our  positions  the  sounds  vrere  heard,  and  con- 
tinued to  multiply  and  become  more  violent  until  every  poj-t  of  the  room  trembled  with 
theb  demonstrations.  They  were  unUke  any  I  had  heard  befbre.  Suddenly,  as  we  were 
all  resting  on  the  table,  I  fdt  the  side  next  to  me  to  move  upward.  I  pressed  upon  it 
heavily,  but  soon  it  passed  out  of  the  reach  of  us  all-fuU  sis  feet  from  me,  and  at  least 
four  from  the  nearest  person  to  it.  I  saw  distinctly  its  ptKition— not  a  thread  could  have 
connected  it  with  any  of  the  company  without  my  notice,  for  I  had  come  to  detect  impoM- 
tion,  if  it  could  be  found.  In  this  position  we  were  situated  when  the  question  was 
asked,  'Wm  the  spirit  move  the  table  back  where  it  was  before?'  And  back  it  came, 
as  though  it  were  carried  on  the  head  of  some  one  who  had  not  suited  bis  position  to 
a  perfeS  equipoise,  the  balance  being  sometimes  in  iivor  of  one  side,  and  then  the  other. 
BiTit  reSinW  its  first  position.  In  the  meantune  the  'demonstrations'  grew  louder 
and  loudel  The  family  commenced,  and  sung  the  'spirit's'  song,' and  several  other 
Tees  of  sacred  music,  dirmg  which  accurate  time  was  marked  ot.  the  table,  c^usmg  ,t  to 
tibrate  A  transparent  hand,  resemblmg  a  shadow,  presented  itself  before  m^;  face.  _  I  felt 
fingers  takmg  hold  of  a  lock  of  hair  on  the  left  side  of  my  head,  causing  an  inclination  of 
several  inchet;  then  a  cold  hand  was  drawn  over  my  face;  three  gentle  raps  on  my  left 
knee;  ray  right  Umb  fordblv  pulled,  against  strong  resistance,  under  the  table ;  a  violent 
shaking,  as  though  two  hands  were  applied  to  my  shoulders;  myself  and  <J,air  "pl>fted  and 
iooved%ack  a  f^  inches,  «nd  several  slaps,  as  with  a  hand,  on  the  side  of  my  Lead,  which 
were  repeated  on  each  one  of  the  company,  more  rapidly  than  I  could  count.  lJ""ng 
these  m^ifestations,  a  jnece  of  pasteboard,  nearly  a  foot  square,  viras  swung  with  sncli 
velocity  before  us  as  to  throws  strong  current  of  air  in  our  laces;  a  paper  curtain  at- 
tached to  one  of  the  windows  was  rolled  up  and  unrolled  twice;  a  lounge  '""^^"^ely 
behind  me  was  shaken  violently ;  two  small  drawers  m  a  bureau  played  back  and  forth 
with  inconceivable  rapidity;  a  sound  resemblmg  a  man  sawmg  boards,  and  planmg  them, 
was  heard  under  the  table;  a  common  spinning-wheel  seemed  to  be  111  motion,  makmg  a 
very  natural  buzz  of  the  spindle;  a  reel  articulated  each  knot  wound  upon  it,  whde  the 
soundofarockmg  cradle  indicated  maternal  care  for  the  mfant's  slumbers.  These  were 
among  many  oth^  demonstrations  which  I  witnessed  that  evemng,  amid  which  I  felt  a 
perfect  self-possession,  and  in  no  instance  the  slightest  embarrassment,  exc^t  a  momen- 
tly chiU  wh^  the  cold  hand  was  applied  to  my  face,  sm.,1^  to  a  sensation  1  have  re^ 
when  touching  a  dead  body.  That  any  of  the  company  could  have  performed  these  thmgs, 
under  the  circumstances  m  which  vi-e  were  situated,  would  require  a  greater  stretch  of 
credulity  on  my  part  than  it  would  to  believe  it  was  the  work  of  spirits.     It  could  not, 

Jiowever,  to  sulistiuile  tha  word  laereil  6>r  hatmitd. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

SI 

by  any  fossibility,  have  been  dene  hy  them,  nor  even  altempted,  without  detection.  And 
I  may  add,  that  near  the  close  of  the  demonstrations  at  this  visit,  there  was  n  vibration  of 
the  floor,  as  though  several  tons  in  weight  had  been  uplifted  and  suddenly  fallen  ^ain  upon 
it  This  caused  everything  in  the  room  to  shake  most  violently  for  several  minutes,  when 
the  force  was  withdrawn. 

"I  have  also  tested  the  intelligence  of  these  sphits  in  every  way  my  ingenuity  could  invent. 
On  one  occasion,  I  wrote  a  word  on  a  slip  of  paper  privately,  placed  it  in  my  -wallet,  went 
there— and  the  sounds,  through  the  alphabet,  spelled  that  wotii  correctly  as  I  had  written 
it.     That  word  was  'Sibyl,' 

"  On  the  20th  of  February,  the  two  youngest  asters  made  my  family  a  visit.  Here  the 
sounds  were  heard;  questions  involving  subjects  wholly  unknown  to  them,  were  answered; 
a  large,  heavy  dining- table  was  moved  several  times ;  and  on  expressing  thanks  at  the  table 
to  the  Giver  of  alt  Good,  some  ax  or  eight  sounds  responded  to  every  sentence  I  uttered, 
by  making  loud  and  distinct  soimds  iiL  various  parts  of  the  room, 
"Yours,  truly, 

"  C.  Hammond. 
"  Rochester,  ,FrfjT(a?7  22,  1850." 

A  great  variety  of  otlier  manifestations  began  to  appear  in  families  residing 
in  and  about  Rochester,  besides  the  rappings.  Volumes  might  be  written  on 
the  extraordinary  intelligence  manifested  by  spirits  in  various  ways,  especially 
tlirough  clairvoyance,  premonition,  and  mental  telegraphy.  A  short  but 
rather  striking  instance  of  the  latter  kind  is  inserted  here,  occiuring  in  the 
family  of  the  Rev.  A.  H,  Jervis,  a  Methodist  minister  of  Rochester,  who  was 
warmly  interested  in  the  I'ox  family,  and  who  had  the  advantage  of  the  same 
kind  of  medium  power  as  theirs,  produced  in  members  of  his  own  household. 
It  will  suffice  to  illustrate  multitudes  of  similar  cases  that  were  now  transpiring 
hourly.     Writing  to  E.  W.  Capron,  Mr.  Jervis  says : 

"There  are  many  facts  that  have  come  under  my  observation  equally  convincing  of  the 
mtdhgence  and  utility  of  the  communications  from  these  unseen  agents,  who  I  believe  are 
now  continually  about  us,  and  more  perfectly  acquainted  with  all  our  ways  and  even  our 
thoughts  than  we  are  with  each  other.  But  the  fact  m  reference  to  our  friend  Pickatd 
IS  what  you  require.  He  was  at  my  house  on  Friday,  April  6,  1S4Q.  None  of  the  Fox 
famUy  were  present.  While  at  the  tea-table  we  had  free  communication  on  different 
subjects.  Mr.  Pickard  was  reqaested  to  ask  questions.  He  desired  to  know  who  it  was 
that  would  communicate,  and  was  answered,  'I  am  your  mother,  Mary  Picliard.'  Her 
name,  or  the  fact  of  her  death,  was  not  known  to  any  of  us.  The  next  Monday  evening 
Mr.  Pickard  was  at  Mr.  G — 's,  and  tarried  there  over  night.  He  then  received  a  commu- 
nication purporting  to  be  from  hismother,  saying,  'Your  chiM  is  dead.'  He  came  im- 
mediately  to  my  place,  and  said  he  should  take  the  sti^  for  home  [Lockpott,  axty  miles 
distant]!  accordingly  [and  wholly  on  the  fdth  of  the  spirit's  communication,  remember], 
he  left  in  the  stage  at  eight  A.  M.  At  twelve  that  same  day  I  returned  to  my  home,  my 
wife  meeting  me  with  a  telegraph  envelope,  which  I  first  read  mentally,  and  then  breaking 
the  seal,  read  out  as  follows : 

"  '  Rochester,  April  10,  1849. 
"  'By  Telegraph  from  Lockport,  to  Rev.  A.  H.  Jervis,  No.  4  West  Street: 

"  '  Tell  Mr.  Pickard,  if  you  can  find  him,  Ms  child  died  this  morning.     Answer, 

R.    Mallory.' 

■     ■     "I  then  added  to  my  wife,   'God's  telegraph  has  outdone  Morse's  altogether.' 

"  Yours,  truly, 
"ToE.  W.  Capron,  Auburn.  A.  H.  Jervis." 

Several  attempts  were  made  by  the  spirits  to  reduce  the  communications 
to  something  like  an  orderiy  system  of  spiritual  telegraphy.  One  of  the 
most  fi-equent  names  spelled  out  in  the  Rochester  manifestations  was  tiiat  of 
"Benjamin  Franklin,"  who  claimed  to  be  actively  interested  in  promoting 
themi  a  claim  not  at  all  at  variance  with  the  pursuits  of  this  renowned 

Hosted  by  Google 

53  HISTORY  OF  MODERl^ 

philosopher  whilst  an  inhabitant  of  eaith.  Had  the  instructions  of  this  wise 
and  beneficent  spirit  been  strictly  followed  out,  there  might  possibly  have 
long  since  resulted  that  order  which  was  sadly  lacking  in  the  chaos  of  the 
eariier  manifestations;  but  m  the  meetings  which  now  began  to  take  place  in 
hundreds  of  families,  the  ignorance  and  superstition  which  had  formerly 
prevailed  on  all  subjects  connected  with  the  life  beyond  die  grave,  either 
continued  to  characterize  the  communications  or  became  apparent  in  an 
excess  of  fanatical  credulity. 

The  siancesoi  die  Misses  Fox  were  constantly  broken  up  by  inhannony, 
rudeness,  and  determined  opposition,  on  tiie  part  of  some  of  the  visitors. 
The  company  were  driven  from  room  to  room  by  incessant  intrusions  ;  and 
the  ner\ousIy  excited  state  of  the  poor  mediums'  minds,  together  with  their 
entire  ignorance  of  the  necessary  conditions  for  scientific  communion,  ren- 
dered orderly  experiments  almost  impossible.  In  some  of  the  circles  where 
entranced  clairvoyant  or  impressional  media  presided,  the  wildest  scenes  of 
confusion  would  often  prevail.  Two  or  three  of  "the  prophets"  would  be 
jabbering  in  unknown  tongues  at  once,  whilst  otliers  would  be  shouting  the 
war  whoop  of  the  red  Indian.  "Apostolic"  letters,  in  miserable  grammar 
and  ^orse  spelling,  were  palmed  off  as  genuine  productions  from  the  seventh 
sphere ,  and  all  the  crudities  of  unpressible  minds,  stimulated  half  to  frenzy 
by  the  contagious  excitement  of  the  times,  were  set  down  as  direct  commu- 
nications from  exalted  ancients  whose  authoritative  teachings  no  doubt 
emanated  from  the  fantastic  imaginings  of  self-psychologized  persons.  It 
would  indeed  have  required  a  more  re-creative  power  than  any  that  Divine 
wisdom  has  yet  intrasted  to  spirits  or  mortals  to  fashion  these  elements  into 
order,  or  to  bring  forth  the  wise  dicta  of  science  from  such  disturbed  magnetic 
conditions.  A  few  phenomenal  evidences  were  from  time  to  time  developed 
out  of  the  chaos,  proving  the  power  possessed  by  spints  to  achieve  raax- 
vellous  results  ui  mental  science,  could  favorable  conditions  be  afforded. 
One  of  these  experiments  has  been  so  amply  recorded  by  Mr  N.  Draper,  of 
Rochester,  a  very  worthy  gentieman  and  the  husband  of  a  most  excellent 
magnetic  clairvoyant,  that  we  subjoin  his  statementin  full 
"To  Messrs.  Jervis,  WilUtts,  Janes,  and  others: 

"Gentlemen,  —  As  we  are  required  by  aulliority,  that  we  think  we  have  no  right  to 
disregard,  to  make  public  the  extraordinary  communications  witnessed  at  my  dwelling, 
it  becomes  necessary  to  give  you,  and  through  you  the  public,  the  facts  which  gave  rise 
to  the  first  bterview,  on  Friday,  the  i6th  inst.  The  novelty  of  the  sabject  and  the  state 
of  the  pubhc  mmd  are  such  that  I  feel  prompted  to  do  this,  not  only  correetfy  but  as 
.  minutely  as  possible.  Cu-cmnstances  had  placed  me  in  a  way  to  witness  those  remarkable 
communications  called  the  'mysterious  rapjnngs,'  from  the  time  of  their  origin  in  this  dty 
in  the  summer  of  1848.  After  the  severest  tests,  under  a  variety  of  circumstances  and 
at  various  places,  for  about  one  year,  incontestible  evidence  addressed  to  my  senses 
baffled  my  scepticism,  arid  fully  convinced  me  that  they  were  the  production  of  no  human 
agencies.  And  as  they  profess  to  emanate  from  invisible  intelligences,  called  spirits,  I 
had  not  allowed  myself  the  liberty  to  attribute  them  to  any  other  source,  at  least  until  some 
other  ori^  could  be  detected.  In  hope  of  eUciting  some  further  hght  on  the  mysterious 
subject,  I  proposed  to  a  member  of  my  family,  who  is  susceptible  to  magnetic  influence, 
to  be  put  into  a  clairvoyant  state,  and  see  what  might  be  ijtesented  in  relation  to  it.  She 
complied,  and  for  this  purpose  was  magnetized  on  the  evening  of  the  i  zth  inst. 
"  The  questions  and  answers  were  as  follows ; 

"Q.  Do  you  see  anything  ?  4.  I  see  a  stranger  who  I  never  before  saw.  He  is  not  pre- 
possessing in  appearance,  but  is  very  elevated  in  his  portion,  and  is  busily  employed. 
^.  Wl- at  is  he  doing?  A.  He  is  preparing  work  for  you.  Q.  What  is  the  nature  of  the 
work?  A.  He  is  establishing  a  line  of  communication.  Q.  Ask  him  '  Is  it  practicable  to 
the  communications  between  two  distant  pomls  by  means  of  these  rappmgs ? '    A.  'To  be 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  S3 

sore,'  he  says.  Q.  Can  you  ascertain  who  this  stranger  is?  A.  Benjamin  [and  after  a 
pause  ]  Franklin.  Q.  Will  you  as!:  him  lo  give  you  some  agnal  by  which  we  may  know 
it  is  really  Benjamin  Franltlin?  After  a  silence  of  one  or  two  minutes,  a  violent  shock 
of  her  person  induced  me  hastily  to  say,  '  Wtiat  is  the  matter ;  are  you  waking  up  ?  A.  No; 
you  wanted  a  signal  and  I  told  him  if  it  was  Dr.  Franklin  he  might  electrize  me,  and  he 
di^l  it.  Q.  Has  it  injured  you?  A.  No;  I  feel  better;  my heoil  is  clearer;  I  can  see 
plainer,  Q.  Will  you  ask  him  where  communications  between  distant  points  at  the  same 
time  can  bs  tested.  A.  He  says  at  your  own  house.  Q.  Is  there  anythmg  required  of  us 
in  the  matter?  A.  He  says,  get  two  of  these  young  ladies  about  whoU  there  is  so  much 
t  in  your  city,  place  them  in  extreme  parts  of  two  rooms,  and  yon  [  m 

herself]  be  put  in  the  same  state  in  which  you  now  are,  and  I  will  ci _ 

you.  Q.  Who  else  maybe  in  attendance?  A.  Mr.  Jervis  and  a  few  others  who  have 
been  acquainted  with  the  subject.  Q.  Will  be  direct  as  to  time  ?  A.  He  says  consult  the 
convenience  of  those  concerned,  and  I  shall  be  advised  of  it,  Q.  Are  there  any  further 
directions  to  be  given  atthistime?   A.  That  is  the  end  of  the  chapter. 

"In  compliance  with  the  above,  the  interview  on  Friday,  the  i6th,  was  called,  you  and 
others  notified,  and  the  attendance  of  the  two  young  ladies,  Margaretta  and  Catharine 
Fox,  secured;  from  whom,  for  prudential  reasons,  the  above  facts  and  preliminaries  were 
withheld. 

"  Respectfully  yours,  N.  Draper," 

"  To  tke  Editor  of  the  Daily  Magnet:— 

"  Pursuant  to  the  notice  as  above  stated,  we,  the  undersigned,  met  at  the  house  of  Mr. 
Draper  on  Friday,  the  15th  inst.,  about  four  o'clock  P.  u.  We  inquired  for  directions, 
and  were  answered  by  Edphabet,  'Let  Mrs.  Draper  be  magnetized.'.  Throu^  her  the 
two  young  ladies  were  directed  to  retire  to  another  room.  The  directions  then  were  for 
Mr.  Jervis,  Mrs.  Fox,  and  Catharine  Fox,  to  be  placed  in  a  room  at  the  opposite  end  of 
the  house,  and  for  Mr.  Jervis  to  take  notes.  Margaretta  Fox  should  be  with  the  company 
in  the  parlor,  and  Mr.  Draper  take  notes.  This  was  done.  The  sounds  were  then  heard 
in  both  rooms  by  either  company,  exactly  similar  to  the  sound  heard  in  the  telegnqih 

"  Question  lo  the  Clairoyanl — What  does  that  rapping  mean,  unlike  any  other  soun^ 
before  heard  by  rapping  ?  Answer  —  He  is  trying  the  batteries. "  The  signal  for  the  alpha- 
bet was  heard,  and  on  calling  the  letters  it  was  spelled,  'She  must  be  waked  in  ten  minutes.' 
A  watch  was  placed  on  the  table,  after  noting  the  time,  and  covered  up,  and  the  question 
asked,  if  we  could  have  a  agnal  by  sounds  at  the  exact  time,  and  was  answered  affirma- 
tively. At  the  precise  time  the  si^ial  was  heard.  The  question  was  then  asked,  '  Who 
shall  wake  her  ?  '  and  she  was  instantly  airaltened  with  an  apparent  electric  shock. 

"  At  this  point  there  was  much  interruption,  by  persons  coming  into  both  rooms.     The 

Juestion  was  asked  for  further  dnections,  and  the  answer  was  by  alphabet,  '  Things  are  not  as 
directed ;  therefore,  yoa  cannot  proceed  at  this  time.  There  shonld  be  but  four  in  each 
room.'  Mr.  Jervis  and  company  came  mto  the  parlor,  and  his  notes  read  as  follows: 
'  Things  are  not  as  I  directed  them ;  therefore,  youcannotproceedat  this  tune,'  Q.  Can  we 
have  another  opportunity?  A.  If  I  set  the  tune  and  name  the  company  there  shall  be  no 
'"'  "  Shall  the  appointment  be  now  made?  Answered  ^rmatively.  The  following 
ere  then  named  by  the  alphabet :  Mr.  Jervis,  Mr.  Jones,  Mr.  Draper,  Mr.  Wil- 
letts,  Mrs.  Jervis,  Mr^  Draper,  Mrs.  Brown,  Mrs.  Fox,  Margaret taFox,  and  Catharine  Fos, 
Q.  May  we  know  the  time?  A.  Wednesday  next,  at  four  o'ckick  p.  m.  Q.  The  place? 
A.  Here.  On  the  day  appointed,  February  20th,  the  above-named  persons  convened; 
some  of  the  company  were  late,  and  as  soon  as  order  was  observed,  the  question  was  asked 
'What  are  the  directions  of  Benjamin  Franklin?  A.  Hurry,  first  magnetize  Mrs.  Dra- 
per.' This  was  done,  she  immediately  saymg:  '  He  says  we  are  behind  the  time,  but  he 
will  forgive  US  this  time;  we  must  do  better  in  future.'  The  company  was  divided  as 
follows:  Mr.  Jervis,  Mr.  Jones,  Mrs.  Fox,  Mrs.  Brown,  Catharme  Fox,  in  a  retired  room, 
with  two  doors  closed  between  them.  Mrs.  Draper,  Mrs.  Jervis,  Mr.  Draper,  Mr.  Wil- 
letts,  and  Margaretta  Fox  remained  in  the  parlor.  Sounds  unusually  loud  were  heard  in 
each  room  by  either  company,  as  before,  resembling  the  telegraphic  sounds.  They  were  s6 
unusual  that  Miss  Fox  became  alarmed  and  said,  'What  does  all  this  mean?'  Mrs, 
Draper,  while  her  countenance  was  bradiated  with  animation,  replied,  '  He  is  trying  the 
batteries.'  Soon  there  was  the  wgnal  for  the  alphabet,  and  the  following  communication 
was  spelled  to  the  company  in  [he  parlor  :  '  Now  I  am  ready,  my  friends.  There  will  be 
great  changes  m  the  nineteenth  century.     Things  that  now  look  dark  and  mysterious  to 

iett< 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"After  wailing  a  few  minutes,  Mr.  Jervis  came  into  tlie  parlor,  saying  tliat  he  was 
directed  by  the  sounds  to  come  and  compare  notes.  They  read  as  follows ;  Q.  Are  we  all 
right?  Answered  affirmatively;  agnal  for  alphabet,  and  the  following  was  spelled; 
'  There  will  be  great  changes  in  the  nineteenth  century.  Things  that  now  look  darlt  and  mys- 
lerioua  to  you  will  be  laid  plain  before  your  sight.  Mysteries  are  going  to  be  revealed. 
The  world  will  be  eiUightenel.  I  iagn  my  name,  Benjamin  Frankhn.  Go  in  the  parlor 
and  compare  notes.'  Mr.  Jervis  returned  to  his  company,  and  by  alphabet  was  spelled : 
'  Now  all  go  into  the  parlor.'  The  notes  were  then  compared  in  presence  of  the  whole 
company.  Q.  Is  there  anything  more  from  Dr.  Franklin?  A.  I  thmk  I  have  given  tests 
enough  for  this  day.  Q.  Will  it  not  be  better  to  keep  this  matter  private  ?  2(.  No ;  it 
should  be  published.  Q.  In  what  paper  ?  A.  In  Democrat  or  Magnet.  Q.  Who  shall 
prepare  it  for  publication  ?  A.  George  Willetts.'  Time  and  place  were  then  deagnated 
for  the  same  company  to  meet  again,  with  two  other  persons  added  to  the  number. 

"We  sign  our  names  as  no  parties,  hut  as  witnesses.  If  our  testimony  is  incredible, 
impeach  and  reject  it;  if  admissible,  hand  it  over  to  the  judge  and  jurors — the  public — 
and  charge  them  tliat  we  claim  no  interest  aade  from  their  own  in  their  verdict. 

"Rev.  a.  H.  Jbkvis,  Natkakiel  Draper, 

Edward  Joses,  George  Willetts, 

Rachael  Draper,  Mary  Jervis, 

Maky  Brown,  Margaret  Fox. 

"  Rochester,  February  23,  1S50." 

And  here  for  the  present  we  mast  close  our  account  of  doings  of  the  spirits 
in  Rochester,  and  that  rather  from  the  pressure  of  other  subjects  than  the 
lack  of  material,  as  the  records  of  that  city  alone  would  amply  suffice  to  fill 
up  many  volumes  in  connection  with  the  early  history  of  Spiritualism  in 
America. 

Many  highly  interesting  narratives  are  necessarily  omitted,  and  above  two 
hundred  letters,  printed  and  in  MSS.,  in  the  author's  possession,  containing 
graphic  accounts  of  first  interviews  with  the  spirits  and  subsequent  con- 
viction of  their  truth,  are  withheld  for  want  of  space. 

Many  gentlemen  connected  with  the  press  of  different  cities  joined  in  the 
Rochester  investigations,  and  many  reported  in  favor  of  the  honesty  and 
truth  of  the  mediums. 

Frequent  aclinowledgmeots  were  made  that  the  phenomena  exhibited 
were  marvellous,  the  intelligence  unquestionable,  generally  correct,  and  out 
of  the  sphere  of  the  mediums'  knowledge,  but  admissions  made  thus  far 
generally  concluded  by  declaring  that,  while  acquitting  the  media  of  any 
concocted  plan  in  the  production  of  said  phenomena,  "they  were  not 
prepared;  or  could  not,  would  not,  must  not  believe,  etc,  that  it  was  the 
work  of  spirits."  There  were  many  others  connected  with  the  press,  espe- 
cially the  religious  papers,  who  first  refiised  scornfully  to  investigate  "  the 
thing,"  and  after  pluming  themselves  on  their  virtuous  ignorance,  proceeded 
in  unmeasured  terms  to  revile  it,  heap  scandal  and  denunciation  on  the 
heads  of  all  connected  with  it,  and  fill  their  columns  with  unreasoning  abuse 
of  that  which  they  "knew  nothing  at  all  about." 

Whole  columns  of  the  daily  journals  were  filled  with  trash  of  this  char- 
acter, which  tliough  temporarily  injurious  to  the  feelings  of  those  concerned, 
served  the  purpose  of  giving  the  manifestations  precisely  that  publicity 
which  the  spirits  demanded,  andforwhich,  as  it  would  seem,  a  great  majority 
of  the  press  actually  became  "mediums."  And  thus  the  fiery  cross,  carried 
by  the  hands  of  unseen  messengers,  sped  from  point  to  point ;  the  beacon 
fires  lighted  by  invisible  hands  gleamed  on  every  mountain-top,  and  the  low 
muffled  sound  of  the  spirit-raps  that  first  broke  the  slumbers  of  the  peaceful 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  %<=, 

inhabitants  of  the  humble  tenement  at  Hydesville,  became  the  clarion  peal 
tliat  sounded  out  to  the  millions  of  the  western  hemisphere,  the  anthem  of  the 
soul's  immortahty,  chorused  by  hosts  of  God's  bright  ministering  angels. 

CHAPTER.  V. 

SPIRITUALTSM    IN    AUBURN,    NEW   YORK. 

"  The  at^menl  Ihat  noihing  ever  came 
Lident.    The  phiJosopher 

Thes 

wl» 

Progress  of  Spiritualism  from  1849  to  1855  —  Catharine  Fox  at  Auburn 
—  Mrs.  Tamlin  and  Mrs.  Benedict^ Spirit  Music— The  Opposition- 
Troubles  Within  the  Camp  —  The  Apostolic  Circle. 

It  was  in  November,  1849,  that  the  scenes  were  enacted  in  Corinthian 
Hall,  Rochester,  described  in  the  last  chapter. 

The  immense  geographical  areas  embraced  in  the  thirty-six  States  of  the 
Union,  and  the  fact  that  no  regular  system  of  human  propagandism  issuing 
from  a  central  source  and  ramifying  through  the  country,  or,  indeed,  anything 
analagous  to  such  a  procedure,  has  ever  been  attempted,  to  account  for  the 
spread  cf  Spiritualism,  embarrasses  the  historian  in  describing  its  progress. 
"  Progress,"  in  fact,  it  can  scarcely  be  called ;  for,  if  modern  Spiritualism  had 
been  promulgated  as  well  as  inaugurated  by  the  Rochester  mediums,  its 
course  might  have  been  traced  in  their  foo^rints ;  but  whilst  we  are  con- 
sidering the  effects  upon  some  town  or  State  which  the  visits  of  the  Misses 
Fox  produced,  behold  we  find  a  great  spiritual  outpouring  in  sections  of 
country  where  the  echoes  of  the  Rochester  vibrations  could  never  even  have 
reached. 

Spiritualism  did  not  radiate  from  a  definite  centre,  but  sprang  with  a  spon- 
taneous and  irresistible  life  of  its  own,  independent  of  human  propagandism, 
the  contagious  force  of  public  sentiment,  or  the  psychological  effect  of  com- 
mon report.  If  the  ends  of  the  countless  threads  that  with  sudden  and- 
magical  rapidity  appeared  to  be  inclosing  the  whole  continent  of  America 
in  one  vast  woof  of  spirit-power,  were  not  spun,  held,  and  intelligently  directed, 
by  the  unseen  people  of  the  spirit  country,  then  all  theories  of  causa- 
tion must  fail,  and  the  marvellous  growth  and  blossoming  of  Spiritualism, 
the  germs  of  which  no  \-isible  hands  had  planted,  will  forever  remain  one  of 
the  unfinished  problems  of  the  universe.  Apart  from  the  obviously  supra- 
mundane  character  of  its  production  in  various  sections  of  country  at  once, 
it  is  not  difficult  to  trace  the  secondary  causes  of  its  rapid  growth  in  the  all- 
absorbing  nature  of  its  revealments  and  the  passionate  emotions  of  love  and 
hatred  which  it  excited  in  its  friends  and  foes.  In  fact  it  would  be  difficult 
to  determine  which  was  the  most  effective  form  of  propaganda  for  the  spread 
of  the  belief;  namely,  the  zealous  entliusiasm  of  its  admirers  or  the  bittei 
persecution  of  its  antagonists. 

Hosted  by  Google 

$6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

To  do  justice  to  the  uprising  of  tliis  mighty  power,  we  must  consider  its 
manifestations  in  different  States  about  the  same  period  of  time.  The  first 
point  which  we  shall  notice  is  the  State  of  New  York,  in  whidi  the  com- 
munion between  mortals  and  spirits  first  took  the  form  of  a  scientific  tele- 
graphy. 

In  the  city  of  Auburn,  New  York  State,  resided  Mr.  E.  W.  Capron,  to 
whom  allusion  has  already  been  made  in  connection  with  the  earliest  mani- 
festations and  the  Corinthian  Hall  investigation.  To  strengthen  the  convic- 
tions of  a  spiritual  source  for  the  phenomena,  an  opinion  which  had  irresistibly 
forced  itself  upon  his  reason,  Mr.  Capron  induced  Mrs.  Fox  to  permit  her 
youngest  daughter,  Catharine,  to  spend  some  time  in  his  family.  During  the 
seances  conducted  through  the  mediumship  of  this  young  lady,  many  of  the 
principal  inhabitants  of  Auburn  had  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  the  most 
astounding  phenomena  under  circumstances  which  precluded  even  die  sus- 
picion of  deception.  Spirit  music  was  produced ;  hands  were  seen,  felt,  and 
even  examined,  forming  and  melting  apparently  in  the  clasp  that  held  them; 
messages  of  affection,  timely  waming,  and  prescient  intelligence  were  con- 
stantly spelled  out  through  the  raps  j  the  furniture  moved  in  stipra-mundane 
feats  of  power,  and  almost  every  conceivable  phase  of  intelligent  spiritual 
phenomena  was  exhibited  to  all  who  chose  to  come  and  witness  it.  Two 
remarkable  results  followed  the  first  introduction  of  "the  power"  into 
Auburn.  The  first  was  the  fact  that  diough  the  press  were  permitted  free 
access  to  the  circles,  and  the  most  abundant  opportunity  for  investigation,  yet 
the  strength  of  the  occult  force,  whose  evidences  they  beheld,  only  seemed  to 
arouse  in  the  most  of  their  number  a  vindictive  and  unreasoning  spirit  of  an- 
tagonism, which  broke  forth  in  unqualified  and  often  senseless  slander. 

For  example  :  The  Auburn  Daily  Advertiser  coolly  stated  that  old  Mr. 
Fox  [a  quiet,  inoffensive  fanner,  chiefly  remarkable  for  simple-minded  devo- 
tion to  the  Wesleyan  Church  and  his  retired,  peaceful  habits]  had  by  a  cunning 
contrivance  of  springs  and  wires  managed  to  produce  all  the  marvels  witnessed 
at  Hydesville!  The  fact  diat  every  plank,  board,  and  brick,  or  inch  of 
matter  connected  with  the  possessed  house  had  been  ransacked  in  vain  by 
hundreds  of  persons  in  the  attempt  to  detect  any  trickery,  all  went  for  noth- 
ing with  this  shrewd  editor.  The  still  more  awkward  fact  tliat  the  phenomena 
had  continued  to  increase  in  strength  and  variety  for  upwards  of  a  twelve- 
month, moving  about  from  place  to  place,  house  to  house,  person  to  person, 
involving  the  action  of  above  a  hundred  different  mediums ;  and  that  the  poor 
old  gentleman  accused  of  its  production  had  never,  except  in  the  first  two  or 
three  months  of  the  Hydesville  excitement,  been  in  the  spirit  circles  or  in 
any  way  connected  with  the  movement^ all  this  was  with  equal  sense  and 
candor  utterly  disregarded,  and  good  Mr.  Fox's  "  springs  and  wires,"  invisibly 
fixed  into  nothing,  still  continued  to  stretcli  from  the  cottage  at  Hydesville 
and  to  rap  over  hundreds  of  miles,  sounding  down  to  the  vaUey  of  the  Missis- 
sippi, along  the  vast  seaboard  of  the  New  England  States,  and  up  to  the 
northern  regions  of  Lake  Superior  I  Wonderful  invention  of  a  quiet  little 
New  York  farmer !  and  marvellous  springs  and  wires,  the  intell^ent  action 
of  which  could  reveal  past,  present,  and  future  with  an  accuracy  tliat  would 
have  put  to  shame  Egyptian  magic  or  Chaldean  astrology  !  We  must  here 
remark  that  if  from  time  to  time  we  insert  the  puerilities  and  baseless  slanders 
which  have  been  levelled  against  "  the  cause  "  and  its  adherents,  it  is  not  for 
tiieir  worth  or  efficacy,  but  rather  to  show  the  utter  futility  and  even  despera- 
tion of  that  opposition  whidi  has  been  forced  to  create  such  childish  fictions 
in  order  to  discredit  the  spiritual  hypothesis. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  57 

The  second  result  of  Miss  Kate  Fox's  visit  to  Auburn  seemed  to  be  the 
vinfoldment  of  mediiun  powers  not  less  remarkable  tlmn  her  own  in  many 
persons  who  attended  her  seances.  The  most  prominent  cases  of  this  kind 
occurred  in  the  persons  of  Mrs.  Tamlin  and  Mrs.  Benedict,  mediums  whose 
names  have  since  become  an  integral  part  of  the  great  American  spiritual 
record.  Several  odier  ladies  were  also  developed  in  the  Auburn  circles  as 
mediums  and  clairvoyants.  A  great  variety  of  gifts  in  the  direction  of 
physical,  writing,  healing,  seeing,  and  trance  mcdiumship  also  became  rapidly 
manifest  in  various  families  of  the  highest  respectability,  and  the  great  majority 
of  these  developments  took  place  irrespective  of  Miss  Fox's  presence,  although 
her  visit  first  called  the  attention  of  the  community  to  the  subject,  and  induced 
the  formation  of  the  circles  in  which  these  powers  in  the  various  media  be- 
came externalized.  In  Mr.  Capron's  work  on  the  early  Spiritualism  of 
America  are  recorded  some  very  interesting  accounts  of  the  manifestations  at 
Auburn ;  amongst  others,  the  following  incidents,  which  were  also  verified  to 
the  author  by  Mr.  Henry  C.  Wright,  an  eye-witness  of  the  scenes.  Mr. 
Capron  writes : 

"  Mrs.  Tamlin  was,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  the  first  medium  through  whom 
the  guitar  or  other  muacol  mstruments  were  played,  without  viable  contact,  so  as  to  recc^- 
niie  tunes.  In  her  presence  it  was  played  vrith  ill  the  exactness  of  an  experienced  musician, 
although  she  is  not  acquainted  with  music,  or  herself  able  to  play  on  any  instrument.  The 
tones  varied  from  loud  and  vigorous  to  the  most  refined  touches  of  the  strings  that  could  be 
im^ned." 

At  a  circle  held  at  Mr^.  Tamlin's,  when  about  seven  or  eight  persons  were 
present,  whose  testimony  was  afterwards  publicly  tendered  for  the  truth  of 
what  follows,  Mr.  Capron  goes  on  to  say: 

"  I  had  mi^etized  the  medium,  and,  after  various  manifestations  of  the  spirits,  she  said 
that  they  were  about  to  do  something  new  which  she  could  not  understand.  After  Siting 
a  few  minutes,  we  heard  a  low  sound  like  a  distant  locomotive  whistle.  Soon,  however, 
the  sound  grew  louder,  and  softened  into  the  most  exquisite  muac  One  of  the  company 
was  requested  to  smg  and  she  did  so ;  the  most  beautiful  muac  accompanied.  It  was  like 
the  notes  of  an  exquisite  ^olian  harp,  but  any  attempt  to  describe  its  beauty  would  fail 

We  frequently  had  the  same  kind  of  music  in  the  presence  of  Mrs. 

Tamlin At  times  it  would  resemble  the  finest  conceivable  tones  of  the 

human  voice,  and  almost  seem  to  be  dissolved  into  words. 

"Anotlier  phase  of  this  musical  manifestation  was  the  imitation  of  'Fabyan's'  horn. 
Thb  was  first  produced  when  Henry  C.  Wright  was  present.  He  called  for  the  spirit  of 
N.  P.  Refers  and  asked  him  to  sound  the  horn,  when  immediatdy  a  sound  came  Uke  the 
sounding  of  a  horn  and  its  reverberation  among  distant  hills,  echoing  and  re-echoing  for  a 
long  time.  Mr.  Wright  had  visited  the  White  Mountains  in  company  with  N.  P.  Rogers 
some  years  before,  and  there  had  heard  Fabyan,  the  hotel-keeper,  wind  his  horn  among  the 
hills,  and  it  was  this  sound  that  was  so  exactly  hnitated.  Mr.  Wright  afterwards  published 
a  description  of  this  scene  in  a  pamphlet. " 

So  long  as  the  manifestations  continued  to  be  of  the  character  above  nar. 
rated,  their  appearance  in  Auburn  was  hailed  with  delight  by  bereaved 
mourners,  to  whom  conclusive  evidences  of  the  presence  and  watchful 
guardianship  of  beloved  spirit  friends  was  clearly  proven. 

It  excised  the  interest  of  the  scientific  from  die  fact  that  wonderful  phe- 
nomena of  a  novel  and  interesting  character  were  produced.  It  startled  the 
learned  by  the  exhibition  of  ignorant  adults  and  uninstructed  children  sjieak- 
ing  in  foreign  languages,  and  often  with  marvellous  eloquence.  Clairvoy- 
ance, psychometry,  and  healing  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  or  spiritual  pre- 
scriptions, testified  to  the  beneficent  character  of  the  intelligence  and  the 
vast  range  of  uses  which  it  included. 

Hosted  by  Google 

SS  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

But  tlie  profound  ignorance  of  all  psychological  phenomena  in  which  this 
material  age  has  been  steeped,  soon  operated  to  mar  and  deform  the  infant 
movement. 

The  world  had  to  learn  that  the  spirit  country  is  peopled  from  eardi,  and 
that  spirit-life  commences  from  the  point  where  mortal  existence  ends.  Un- 
conscious  of  this  solemn  truth,  the  early  communicants  witli  the  unseen 
world  were  unprepared  for  the  visitation  of  the  dark  spirits  whom  the  sad 
experiences  of  earth  had  manufactured  into  criminals.  Unaware  that  life, 
wheliier  here  or  hereafter,  is  progress,  not  violent  and  unnatural  change, 
investigators  were  appalled  at  the  representations,  produced  through  media,  of 
the  same  vicious  tendencies  in  spirits  which  fhey  had  beheld  with  indifference 
from  the  same  spirits  whilst  inliabitants  of  earth ;  in  a  word,  they  did  not 
realize  the  fact  (hat  spirits  were  still  human,  and  that  the  soul  in  many  respects 
remained  unchanged  by  tlie  mere  act  of  physical  dissolution.  In  this  state 
of  perplexity  and  ignorance  the  return  of  earth's  criminals  was  generally  met, 
either  by  die  superstitious  and  tinavailii^  exercises  of  old  Cadiolic  rites,  or 
submitted  to  blindly  in  the  idea  that  aU  spirits  must  necessarily  be  author- 
itative, until  the  unwary  medium  became  the  subject  of  the  distressing  con- 
dition now  known  as  "  obsession."  Still,  though  the  first  circles  were  con- 
ducted in  a  condition  of  mental  blindness  scandalous  to  the  religious  teachers 
who  should  long  since  have  instructed  mankmd  concerning  "  spiritual  gifts  " 
and  spiritual  existences,  in  course  of  time  the  investigators  learned  experi- 
mentally to  realize  the  true  character  of  the  spirit-world,  and  that  more  con- 
clusively by  their  failures  than  they  could  have  done  by  contemplatu^  the 
sunlit  side  of  the  picture  only.  But  whilst  die  philosophical  Spirim^ist  be- 
gan to  realize  the  tnie  conditions  of  ImmortaHty  from  comrnunion  with  the 
beings  who  were  living  in  its  experience,  the  egotist  and  fanatic  appropriated 
as  their  share  of  the  great  sphitual  outpouring,  precisely  those  elements  wliicli 
were  best  calculated  to  stimulate  their  vanity  and  pander  to  their  snpersri- 
tious  imaginings.  Amongst  the  Auburn  Spiritualists  were  to  be  found  several 
extremely  ignorant  but  strongly  bigoted  persons  of  the  Second  Advent  per- 
suasion. The  phenomena  of  modern  Spuitualism,  interpreted  tlirough  iheir 
own  narrow  credal  views,  appeared  to  them  to  be  the  actual  inauguration  of 
the  long-promised  "millennium,"  whilst  they — the  "true  believers" — must 
of  course  be  the  chosen  ones  through  whom  the  millennial  dynasty  was  to  be 
established  on  earth. 

Quite  early  in  the  movement  a  circle  had  been  formed,  which  at  first  had 
received  the  modest  tide  of  "  ITie  Auburn  Circle  ; "  but  no  sooner  did  the 
"  chosen  few  "  of  the  millennial  belief  gain  a  foothold  in  this  happy  gathering 
than  they  bent  themselves  to  the  work  of  converting  it  to  their  o>vn  purposes 
and  usmg  the  manifestations  as  an  endorsement  of  their  peculiar  opinions  j 
in  fact,  as  an  eye-witness  of  the  scenes  here  enacted  described  to  die  author, 
"in  return  for  theh  conversion  to  Spiritualism  they  strove  to  convert  the 
spirits  to  Second  Adventism." 

In  pursuance  of  this  notable  idea  they  secured  the  services  of  Mrs.  Bene- 
dict, an  impressible  rapping  medium,  through  whom  the  influences  mortal 
and  unmortal  that  operated  in  this  circle,  dictated  plans  of  action  designed 
to  make  "  the  universe  rock,"  and  that  portion  of  it  which  tiiey  mod- 
estly called  this  little  planet,  a  convert  to  their  feidi  and  a  subject  to 
the  spiritual  authority  of  John  the  Divine,  Daniel  the  Prophet,  Paul  the 
Apostle,  and  odier  Biblical  worthies  whom  they  assumed  to  have  become 
temporarily  reincarnated  in  their  mediumship.  The  ti|le  of  the  circle  was 
changed  from  die  "Auburn"  to  die  "Apostolic  Circle;     Mrs.  Benedict,  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  59 

medium,  was  dispatched  to  New  York,  where,  under  spirit  direction,  she 
summoned  a  certain  Baptist  preacher,  named  James  D.  Scott,  to  come  to 
Auburn  to  minister  in  the  work.  A  series  of  papers  were  published  purport- 
ing to  emanate  from  various  distinguished  personages  of  Jewish  origin  and 
of  the  ApostoHc  age.  Some  of  these  pubhcations  were  well  calculated  to 
produce  the  results  which  their  authors  predicted  for  them,  namely,  a  revohi- 
tion,  though  not  exactly  in  the  universe,  or  even  in  tiie  "  little  planet "  earth, 
but  simply  in  the  fortunes  of  the  luckless  publishers,  who  found  the  issue  of 
the  said  pamphlets  exciting  a  very  revolutionary  effect  upon  their  worldly 
prosperity.  To  the  disbelievers  in  the  Divine  origin  of  these  papers  they 
certainly  created  no  little  feeling  of  indignation  at  the  audacity  which  could 
append  the  names  of  prophets  and  apostles  to  their  absurd  puerilities,  whilst 
even  the  most  credulous  of  the  well-educated  Spintualists  had  cause  to 
mourn  over  the  deterioration  in  grammar  and  orthography  wliich  befalls  the 
exalted  dead  by  a  long  residence  in  die  spirit-world. 

About  the  commencement  of  the  year  1850  the  "Apostolic  Brotherhood" 
assumed  a  more  respectable  literary  shape  under  the  authority  of  the  Rev. 
James  Scott,  and  actually  rose  into  eminence  by  the  accession  to  their  ranks 
of  the  renowned  poet,  preacher,  and  medium,  the  Rev.  Thomas  L.  Harris, 
who  was  also  spiritually  called  to  "  the  work."  With  the  leadership  of  these 
accomplished  gentlemen, — who  claimed  to  act  under  the  highest  spiritual 
guidance,  —  die  movement  gained  in  nuinbers  and  in  unportance  until  it 
seemed  to  absorb  and  control  nearly  all  the  Spiritualism  in  Auburn,  reflect 
itself  through  the  chief  of  the  communications,  crystallize  into  a  numerously 
attended  religious  meeting,  and  finally  to  culminate  in  the  famous  "  Mountain 
Cove  movement,"  of  which  a  detailed  description  will  be  given  in  a  later 
chapter.  And  here  it  may  be  asked  whether  these  shadows,  cast  by  human 
pride,  presumption,  and  fanaticism,  did  not  irrevocably  quench  the  dawning 
light  of  the  still  embryotic  spiritual  movement  ?  We  answer,  most  unques- 
tionably not ;  aldiough  many  were  the  confident  predictions  of  sucli  a  result ; 
indeed  certain  journalistic  magnates  who  had  hitherto  been  indefatigable  in 
castigating  the  cause  through  their  columns,  now  abandoned  their  efforts  with 
the  complaisant  remark  that "  the  Spiritualists  themslves  were  performing  the 
work  of  self-destruction,  and  it  was  onlynecessary  to  give  them  rope  enough  and 
they  would  inevitably  hang  themselves."  In  view  of  what  has  been  already 
narrated,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  this  enlightened  policy  would  have  had  the 
desired  effect  had  it  so  happened  that  all  the  Spiritualists  of  Auburn  were 
included  by  the  followers  of  Fope  Harris  and  Cardinal  Scott ;  but  besides  a 
very  considerable  number  outside  of  their  ranks,  even  some  of  those  who 
had  been  subject  to  Uieir  authority  gained  by  their  experience  some  very- 
wise  and  useful  lessons,  and  not  a  few  of  these  deluded  ones,  instead  of  rush- 
ing to  the  destruction  so  liberally  predicated  for  them,  exchanged  their  lead- 
ership for  Pope  Judgment  and  Cardinal  Reason,  dignitaries  who  were  hence- 
forth enshrined  in  plenary  authority  over  the  spiritualistic  circles  at  Auburn. 
Amongst  the  lessons  that  these  rulers  taught  was  the  very  important  one 
that  no  spirit,  mortal  or  immortal,  should  stand  between  the  creature  and  the 
Creator;  that  it  was  necessary  to  try  the  spirits  .'w^i/i'Atf/ffrOT  by  predsely 
the  same  rules  of  good  and  use  as  those  which  applied  to  spirits  in  the  form, 
and  finally  diat  the  spirit-worid  was  of  no  more  authority  as  spirits  unbodied 
tlian  the  earth-worid  as  spirits  still  embodied.  These  lessons  the  recipients 
deemed  cheaply  learned,  even  though  the  price  paid  for  them  was  the  ridicule 
of  a  community  profoundly  ignorant  of  the  subject  they  ridiculed. 

As  to   the  "fddiful"  amongst  the  "Apostolic  Brotherhood,"  they  soon 

Hosted  by  Google 

6o  HISTORY  OF  -MODERN 

disposed  of  the  question,  as  far  as  the  people  of  Auburn  were  concerned,  by 
quitting  that  "reprobate  community"  for  the  holy  retreat  of  "Mountain 
Cove"  under  the  leadership  of  their  inspired  shepherds.  After  this  instruc- 
tive episode  Spiritualism  in  Auburn  rose,  PhcenixJike,  resurrected  from  the 
ashes  of  fanaticism  into  purified  life,  strength,  and  increasing  numbers. 
Mediuilis  began  to  multiply,  the  gifts  of  the  spirit  became  constantly  more 
abundant,  and  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism  were  swelled  with  daily  added  con- 
verts. 

Sunday  meetings  were  in  due  time  established,  and  a  well  written  weekly 
paper  entitled  The  Spiritual  Clarion,  together  with  an  annual  statistical 
register,  was  issued  from  the  office  of  the  Rev.  Uriah  Clark,  an  ex-Universal- 
ist  minister,  who  established  the  above-named  periodicals  in  Auburn,  from 
whence  they  long  continued  to  go  forth  as  welcome  evangels  of  the  spiritual 
Gospel  to  the  world.  The  city  now  numbers  thousands  of  Spiritualists  ;  nor, 
with  all  the  "rope"  that  Christian  ministers  and  learned  editors  so  generously 
allowed  them,  have  they  yet  "hanged  themselves,"  or  permanently  hindered 
the  progress  of  their  glorious  cause. 

CHAPTER   VI. 

SPIRfrUALISM  IN  NEW  YORK  FROM  1849  TO  1S5S. 
"They  woughc  wilh  sad  Bncsricy ; 

They  builded  wiser  than  ihey  knew 
The  consdtras  stone  to  beauty  grew." 

Spikituai,  Spring-time  in  New  York^Rev.  S.  B.  Britain,  His  Spieitctai, 
Birth — The  "Univercceltim"— -Dr.  Hallock  and  tub  Prophetic  Clairvoy- 
ant—A Literary  Circle — James  Fenkioke  Cooper,  George  Bancroft,  N.  P, 
Willis,  William  Cullen  Bryant,  and  other  Investigators  —  The  Press 
Explaining,  Ignoring,  Abusing,  Decrying,  Defying,  and  Mystifying  the 
Mystery— Those  Rochester  Knockings  Again  —  Grimes,  Ciiauncy,  Burr, 
and  Mrs.  Culver, 

No  year  in  the  first  epoch  of  modern  Spiritualism  h  b  n  n  fruitful 
with  events  of  interest  than  1850.  It  was  in  that  ye  h  n  it  fions 
of  the  most  violent  and  astounding  character  appeared  n  h  f  ly  f  Dr. 
EHakim  Phelps,  D.D.,  of  Stratford,  Connecticut.  It  w  h  n  ai  h  rap- 
pings,  automatic  writing,  and  other  intelligent  modes  f  nmu  g  with 
spirits  became  familiar  in  Boston  dirough  the  mediumsl  p  of  M  M  garet 
Cooper,  daughter  of  the  eminent  lecturer  and  writer,  LeRoy  Sunderland. 

On  February  1,  1850,  a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  Philadelphia, 
Penn.,  formed  themselves  into  an  experimental  circle,  and  after  a  very  few 
sittings  succeeded  in  obtaining,  through  raps,  clairvoyance,  and  other  meth- 
ods, satisfactory  communion  with  the  spirit-world.  Circles  were  inaugurated 
in  the  same  year  in  Providence,  Rhode  Island;  Binghamton,  Westfietd, 
Albany,  Troy,  Waterford,  and  numerous  other  places  in  New  York  State ; 
m  Cincinnati,  where  the  test  rappings  were  remarkably  powerful  and  intelligent ; 
in  Memphis,  Tennessee ;  St  Louis,  Missouri ;  California,  Oregon,  Texas, 
Soudi  America,  Maine,  Vermont,  and  New  Hampshire,  similar  manifestations 
appeared,  and  all  before  the  personal  influence  of  the  "original  Rochester 

Hosted  by  Google 

Pt^/' 

^.0:*:5rX'Kj:~-x, 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  6i 

mediums"  could  give  the  least  color  to  the  supposition,  put  forth  in  many 
instances  by  the  press,  that  these  persons  were  the  authors  or  "teacliers" 
of  the  "  awful  delusion  "  that  liad  seized  on  the  dwellers  of  these  wide-spread 
districts  of  America. 

In  New  York  State  it  cannot  be  questioned  that  the  rumor  of  the 
Rochester  investigations,  the  visits  of  the  mediums  to  its  different  towns, 
combined  with  the  powerful  effect  which  the  phenomenal  career  of  A.  J. 
Davis  produced,  contributed  to  fill  up  tlie  overflowing  measure  of  spiritual 
life  which  has  specially  distinguished  tliis  State. 

In  the  cities  of  Troy  and  Albany,  with  the  neighboring  villages  of  Waterford 
and  Lansingbui^h,  most  excellent  mediums  were  developed,  at  a  very  early 
])eriod  of  the  movement,  for  various  phases  of  "the  power."  The  visits  of 
the  Misses  Fox  and  the  reports  from  Rochester  first  called  attention  to  the 
subject,  but  communion  with  the  spirit-world  by  no  means  depended  on  tliese 
agencies.  For  example  :  In  the  family  of  Mr.  Anson  Attwood,  of  Troy,  a 
gentleman  of  prominent  position  and  high  character,  one  of  his  little  daughters, 
a  child  of  about  ten  years  of  age,  became  suddenly  developed  for  marvellous 
phases  of  tlie  strongest  physical  character,  besides  rapping,  writing,  and 
dabvoyance ;  and  similar  manifestations  continued  to  spring  up  like  grass 
beneath  the  feet  in  every  place  and  with  every  variety  of  development. 

For  the  present,  however,  we  shall  limit  our  observations  to  the  progress  of 
Spiritualism  in  New  York  City. 

One  of  llie  main  features  of  interest  in  tracing  a  movement  for  which  a 
supra-mundane  origin  is  affirmed,  must  necessarily  be  derived  from  the 
proofs  that  can  be  offered  in  verification  of  that  claim.  TTie  history  of  the 
rise  and  progress  of  Spirituahsm  in  New  York  City  forms  as  valuable  an  item 
in  this  class  of  testimony  as  can  well  be  selected,  for  we  see  the  principal 
actors  in  the  great  drama  being  prepared  in  methods  peculiar  to  themselves 
long  before  they  were  called  upon  to  take  part  in  the  siances  by  which  they 
have  since  become  publicly  identified  with  Spiritualism.  A  striking  illus- 
trarion  of  this  occurs  in  the  person  of  the  Rev.  S.  B.  Britain,  a  gentleman 
widely  known  as  an  author  of  eminent  literary  and  scientific  attainments, 
but  more  especially  distinguished  as  one  who  has  filled  the  various  positions 
of  editor,  lecturer,  essayist,  magnetizer,  psychologist,  and  magnetic  physician 
in  the  spiritual  ranks.  By  his  eloquent  advocacy,  public  discussions,  and 
editorial  labors,  Mr.  Britain  has  rendered  services  to  die  cause  of  Spiritu- 
alism which  can  never  be  over-estuuated;  yet  his  adherence  was  not  secured 
through  phenomena]  evidence  or  any  of  the  ordinary  channels  of  human 
propagandism.  Whilst  officiating  as  pastor  to  the  First  Univeralist  Church  in 
Albany,  New  York,  and  during  tlie  progress  of  a  severe  fit  of  sickness,  Mr. 
Britain  was  thrown  into  a  state  of  profound  trance,  which  for  a  period  of 
twelve  days  held  his  consciousness  in  abeyance,  neither  did  he  receive  the 
least  nourishment  for  twenty-one  days.  From  this  condition,  hovering 
between  sleep  and  death,  Mr,  Britain  returned  to  life,  awakening  fi-om  the 
trance  as  mysteriously  as  he  had  sunk  into  it.  With  the  restoration  of  health 
and  consciousness,  however,  his  feelings  experienced  a  complete  revulsion, 
which  marked  him  for  a  changed  man.  Either  a  fresh  train  of  thought  was 
infused  into  his  mind  by  the  still,  small  voice  whose  utterances  can  never  be 
interpreted  into  human  speech,  or  the  presence  of  a  strange  spiritual  visitor 
[whom  he  described  as  of  majesic  aspect  and  benevolent  beating,  often  stand- 
ing near  him  during  the  period  of  his  trance]  engraved  on  his  mind  a  set  of 
impressions  wholly  distinct  and  at  variance  from  those  which  liia  fomier  life's 
images  had  left     Certain  it  is  that  he  arose  from  his  couch  of  suffering  like  a 

Hosted  by  Google 

62  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

soul  resurrected  from  tire  ashes  of  a  burled  past.  For  a  brief  period  onl)',  he 
resumed  his  ministerial  duties;  and  though  earnestly  entreated  by  his  congre- 
gation to  remain  with  them  and  distribute  the  living  bread  of  which  it  was 
evident  that  he  had  partaken,  he  felt  a  strong  mental  pressure  compelling  him 
to  sever  his  connection  with  any  credal  organization  where  he  might  be  fettered 
in  the  free  range  and  expression  of  the  newly-bom  thoughts  that  were  ani- 
mating him.  It  has  already  been  noticed  tliat  the  appearance  of  Mr.  A.  J. 
Davis's  extraordinary  work,  "Nature's  Divine  Revelations,"  was  followed  by 
the  publication  of  tiie  Univercalum.  of  which  the  Rev.  S.  R  Britain  was 
the  editor.  Mr.  Britain  had  taken  a  warm  interest  in  the  young  "  Pough- 
keepsie  Seer's"  supra-mundane  development;  and  having  himself  become 
an  earnest  investigator  into  magnetism,  clairvoyance,  and  those  occult  myste- 
ries of  which  he  reasonably  judged  his  own  case  was  an  evidence,  he  naturally 
gravitated  to  the  ranks  of  the  philosophic  Spiritualists,  amongst  whom  his 
literary  attainments  and  highly-cultured  intellect  procured  him  a  distinguished 
place. 

Thus  it  was  that  he  became,  by  universal  consent  of  his  new  associates, 
the  editor  of  a  paper  which  was  designed  to  embody  the  most  spiritually 
illuminated  thoughts  of  the  age.  But  Mr.  Britain's  phenomenal  preparation 
for  entering  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism  was  by  no  means  an  isolated  evidence 
of  spirit  agency.  Nearly  all  die  persons  connected  directy  or  indirectly 
with  Spiritualism  have  some  remarkable  experiences  to  relate — some  evidence 
to  give  that  they  were  each  being  prepared  in  their  place  to  become  one  of 
the  highly-wrought  and  polished  stones  in  the  great  temple  of  the  "New 
Jerusalem"  ^  so  that  when  at  last  they  came  together  as  if  by  the  force  of 
mutual  and  inevitable  attraction,  they  found  that  the        d         b  tru 

ments  in  the  hands  of  the  supreme  power,  who  was  fa  h  g  d  h  h 
their  separate  experiences,  to  the  work  of  Divine  rain   tr 

At  the  New  York  Conference,  established  in  1851  th 

psychological  subjects.  Dr.  Hallock,  one  of  the  mos      b  dp 

advocates  of  the  truth  of  Spiritualism,  related  severa  h     h  d 

enjoyed  with  magnetic  subjects  about  the  time  of  the  ad  R 

knockings;   amongst  these  is  a  case  strikingly  illust  d 

others  that  were  occurring  in  various  parts  of  the  c        rj      D      H 
being  a  skilful  operator,  was  asked  by  a  clairvoyant        m  g  h 

the  purpose  of  examining  an  aiticle  which  had  just      p        d  N 

York  lyihune  of  December,  1848,  on  the  subject  p 

Hydesviile. 

"The   clairvoyant  passed,"  says   the   doctor,  "int  d 

ecstacy,  and  in  a  solemn  but  happy  frame  of  mind,  evii         b       g  h    g 

in  her  manner  and  appearance,  went  on  to  say  that  th 
of  the  Rochester  phenomena  was  true.     That  it  wo    d  d  th        b 

would  be  repeated  in  various  places  in  America,  Europe,  and  Asia.  That 
its  object  was  to  convince  the  world  of  the  realities  of  spiritual  life  and 
communion,  and  that  these  manifestations  would  not  cease  until  the  end 
was  accomphshed.  She  said  it  appeared  to  her  as  if  a  man  by  the  name  of 
Swedenborg  had  a  great  deal  to  do  with  it.  That  the  rapping  seemed  to  be 
made  by  the  strong  will  of  a  man  trying  to  impress  himself  on  others.  She  de- 
scribed the  appearance  of  Swedenborg  while  on  earth,  related  anecdotes  of 
his  life,  and  added,  "Why,  he  was  like  me ;  that  is,  he  could  be  in  one  place, 
and  tell  what  was  going  on  in  another. "  All  her  statements  with  regard  to 
Swedenborg  were  verified  by  history,  and  those  concerning  the  Rocliester  me- 
diums, besides  other  collateral  circumstances,  were  found  upon  inquiry  to  be 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  C^ 

Strictly  true;  yet  this  person  was  very  illiterate,  and  could  have  had  no 
instruction  upon  the  historical  and  scientific  points  she  discoursed  of. 
When  questioned  in  her  normal  state  if  she  had  ever  heard  of  Swedenborg, 
she  replied,  with  unmistakable  sincerity,  "No;  does  he  live  in  New  York?" 
and  thus  the  effects  which  magnetism  and  clairvoyance  escrtcd  in  preparing 
the  public  mind  and  mediumistic  organizations  for  the  reception  of  Sphitu- 
alism  was  strikingly  illustrated,  and  the  advent  of  the  Rochester  knockings 
in  New  York  found  the  ground  ploughed,  harrowed,  and  seed-bearing,  long 
before  the  first  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox  fo  the  city. 

Notices  of  "  the  mysterious  rappings  in  Hydesville "  had  already  been 
widely  circulated  in  the  papers.  Startling  accounts  of  similar  manifestations 
had  reached  the  citizens  from  their  friends  in  different  parts  of  the  States. 
"  Rappings,"  it  was  said,  had  "  broken  out "  in  several  towns  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  of  Rochester,  but  above  all,  public  attention  was  painfully 
excited  by  the  report  of  the  manifestations  occurring  at  the  house  of  the 
Rev.  Dr.  Phelps,  of  Stratford.  The  unquestionable  veracity  and  high  ecclesi- 
astical position  of  Dr.  Phelps,  and  die  frightfully  preternatural  character  of 
the  events  transpuing  in  his  family,  had  excited  a  feeling  of  curiosity  mingled 
with  terror  wliich  was  heightened  by  the  accounts  of  marvels  transpiring  in 
other  places  with  which  the  public  were  made  familiar  tlirough  the  press, 
especially  the  New-York  Tribune,  the  columns  of  which,  through  tlie  influence 
of  its  progressive  editors,  were  open  to  a  free  representation  of  the  subject 
from  all  quarters,  and  on  both  sides  of  the  question.  It  is  from  a  file  of  this 
paper  for  the  year  1850  that  the  author  is  enabled  to  present  an  account  of 
a  circle  which  was  held  through  the  mediumship  of  the  Fox  family  soon  alter 
their  first  professional  visit  to  New  York  City  in  the  spring  of  1850.  The 
reader  will  perceive  that  the  whole  recital  points  to  the  mere  infancy  of  the 
movement,  and  does  not  offer  a  view  of  any  phenomena  even  commonly- 
interesting  or  startling;  but  as  presenting  a  fair  specimen  of  the  cautious 
tone  of  newspaper  narratives  of  that  period — however  favorable  the  writer's 
opinions  might  be  on  the  subject— but  still  more  in  view  of  the  interest  with 
wliich  we  must  associate  investigations,  connected  widi  names  so  distinguished 
in  literature  as  those  which  figure  in  this  circle,  we  deem  the  verbatim  report 
of  the  Tribune  may  prove  an  acceptable  record.  The  paper  from  wliich  we 
extract  this  report  being  torn  and  the  date  defective,  we  are  only  enabled  to 
indicate  the  time  as  being  about  the  spring  of  1850.  The  report  was  drawn 
up  by  one  of  the  editors,  a  man  of  great  learning  and  intelligence,  Mr. 

"AN    EVENING    WITH    THE    'SPIKITS'— NEW    YORK,    1350. 

"  We  mere  present  on  Thursday  evening  at  a  party  of  gentlemen  who  had  been  invited 
to  the  chambers  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Griswold,  in  Broadway,  to  meet  the  Rochester  ladies, 
whose  connection  with  the  mysterious  knockinES  has  called  forth  such  general  curiosity. 
The  party  had  been  arranged  by  Dr.  Griswold,  who  has  been  increduious  from  the  first 
with  regard  to  any  preternatural  character  in  the  manifestations 

"It  consisted  of  persons  whose  general  character  for  intelligence  and  probity  was  a 
guarantee  against  then-  being  deluded  by  hasty  impressions,  and  who  probably  without  ex- 
ception had  no  prepossession  in  favor  of  the  prmcipal  actors  in  the  movement 

"  Among  the  guests  of  Dr.  Griswold  we  may  without  impropriety  mention  the  names 
of  Mr.  J.  Fenimore  Cooper,  Mr.  George  Bancroft,  Rev.  Dr.  Hawks,  Dr.  J.  W.  Francis, 
Dr.  Marcy,  Mr.  N.  P.  Willis,  William  Cullen  Bryant,  Mr.  Bigelow  of  the  Evening  Post, 
Mr,  Richard  B.  Kimball,  Mr.  11.  T.  Tuckennan,  and  General  Lyman 

"The  ladies  had  been  previously  consulted,  and  after  ascertaining  that  manifestations 
would  take  place,  consented  to  meet  the  party.     In  order  to  prevent  any  suspicion  as  to  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

64  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

arrangement  of  the  room,  furniture,  closets,  etc.,  the  reunione  was  appointed  at  the  house 
of  Dr,  Griswold,  which  neither  of  the  ladies  had  ever  entered  before  the  party  was  assem- 
bled,  A  little  past  eight  o'clock  they  made  their  appearance —  Mrs.  Fox,  an  elderly  lady, 
the  mother  of  the  'ghost -seers'  [which  word  we  use  for  want  of  a  belter],  Mrs.  Fish,  a 
married  daughter,  and  her  two  yomiger  sisters. 

"For  some  tune,  perhaps  a  little  over  half  an  hour,  after  the  arrival  of  (he  ladies  no 
sounds  were  heard,  and  the  company  gave  obvious  symptoms  of  impatience.  They  were 
then  requested  to  draw  nearer  the  table,  which  was  in  front  of  the  ladies,  and  form  them- 
selves into  a  compact  circle.  Soon  after  faint  sounds  began  to  be  heard  from  under  ihe 
floor,  around  the  table,  and  in  different  parts  of  the  room. 

"  They  increased  m  loudness  and  frequency,  becoming  so  clear  and  distmct  that  no  one 
could  deny  their  presence  nor  trace  them  to  any  viable  cause.  The  question  was  now  asked 
Ijy  the 'shost-seers,' '  Will  (he  spirits  converse  with  any  one  present?' 

"After  a  good  deal  of  coquetting  it  was  stud  that  replies  woald  be  given  to  any  questions 
pioposed  by  Dr.  Marcy.  He  inquired  whether  the  spirit  which  he  wished  to  converse  with 
was  a  relation,  was  a  child,  and  what  was  its  age  at  the  tune  of  its  death,  etc.  We  under- 
stood Dc.  Marcy  to  say  that  the  miswers  were  correct 

"  Mr.  Henry  T.  Tuckerman  was  the  nest  to  propound  mquiries  whidj,  contrary  to  the 
usual  custom,  he  expressed  audibly,  so  as  to  be  heard  by  the  ladies  and  the  whole  company. 
Havmg  fixed  in  his  mind  the  name  of  an  individual  he  asked,  '  Did  he  live  in  New  York  ? ' 
No  answer.  'In  Baltimore?  In  Cambridge?  In  Boston?'  Three  distinct  raps,  which 
is  the  sign  of  an  affirmative  answer.  A  n^ative  reply  is  indicated  by  silence.  Mr.  T. 
contmued,  '  Was  he  a  lawyer  ?  A  merchant  ?  A  phy^an  ?  A  clergyman  ? '  Knocks. 
'Was  he  an  Episcopalian?  A  Presbyterian?  A  Unitarian?'  gomg  over  the  names  of 
the  principal  sects.  No  answer.  At  the  suggestion  of  a  gentleman,  Mr.  T.  asked,  '  Was 
he  a  Christian?'  Knocks.  Mr.  T.  then  asked  the  age  of  the  person  in  a  series  of  tens. 
'  Was  he  twenty  vears  old  at  the  time  of  his  death  ?  Was  he  thhty  ?  Fifty  ?  Sixty  ? ' 
Knocks.  '  Has  ne  left  a  family  ? '  Knocks.  '  Children  ?  '  Knocks.  '  Five  ?  Three  ? 
Two?'  Knocks.  'Did  he  die  in  Boston?  In  Philadelphia?  In  Albany?  In  North- 
ampton? In  Bennington?'  Knocks,  'Did  he  die  of  consumption?  Offerer?  Of 
cholera  ?     Of  old  age  ? '     Knocks. 

"The  person  in  Mr.  Tuckerman'smmd  was  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  Channing,  of  Boston,  who 
died  in  Bennington,  Vermont,  while  on  a  journey.  The  degree  of  correctness  in  the 
answers  may  be  judged  by  the  reader.  It  may  be  stated,  however,  that  for  the  last  few 
years  of  his  life  Dr.  C.  disclaimed  the  use  of  all  sectarian  names,  preferring  to  be  called 
only  Christian,  and  that,  though  under  seventy,  his  physical  powers  had  long  suffered  from 
premature  exhaustion 

"  Rev.  Dr.  Hawks  'vai  then  intently  requested  by  several  of  the  party  to  propose  inqui- 
ries, to  which,  after  some  hesitation,  he  reluctantly  consented.  He  did  not  meet  with  any 
great  success.     The  sounds  uttered  were  faint 

"After  several  more  ineffectual  attempts  he  resigned  the  floor  to  Dr.  Francis,  who  was 
welcomed  with  a  general  roll  of  knockings  from  the  mysterious  agents,  seeming  to  claim 
the  privilege  of  old  and  intimate  acquaintance.  With  his  proverbial  urbanity,  seating 
himself  as  if  at  the  bedade  of  a  patient.  Dr.  F.  asked  in  terms  of  the  most  insinuating 
blandness  whether  the  spirits  present  would  converse  with  any  member  of  the  company. 
Would  they  vouchsafe  to  speak  to  his  illustrious  friend,  the  world -renowned  author,  Mr. 
CoopM?  Would  they  converse  with  the  great  American  poet,  Mr.  Bryant?  To  these 
flattering  invitations  no  reply  was  pven.  Would  they  speak  to  so  humble  an  individual  as 
himself?  Lsud  knocks.  Dr.  F.  then  asked,  fixing  on  a  person,  'Was  he  an  American? 
Was  he  an  Enghshman  ?  Was  he  a  Scotchman  ? '  The  knocks  were  loud  and  unanimous, 
'Was  he  a  merchant?  Was  he  abwyer?  Was  he  an  author?'  Loud  knocks.  '  Was  he 
apoet  ?'  'Yes,'  indistinct  knocks.  '  Will  you  tell  his  name  ? '  Here  the  spirits  called  for 
the  alphabet,  by  sounds  intelligible  to  the  'ghost-seers.'  The  answers  by  this  method  are 
given  in  knocks  at  the  letter  desired,  when  the  alphabet  is  repeated  liy  one  of  the  ladies. 
It  then  spelled  out  B-u-r-,  when  the  company  mdiscreetly,  but  spontaneously,  interrupted, 
by  crying  out,  '  Robert  Bums. '  This  was  the  true  answer,  and  after  the  interview  with 
the  favorite  Scotch  poet  Dr.  F,  declined  any  further  communication. 

"Mr.  J..Fenimore  Cooper  was  then  requested  to  enter  into  the  supra-mundane  sphere, 
and  proceed  to  interrogate  the  spirits  with  the  most  imperturbable  self-possession  and 
deliberation.  After  several  desultory  questions  from  which  no  satisfactory  answers  were 
obtained,  Mr.  C.  commenced  a  new  series  of  inquiries.  'Is  the  person  I  inquhe  about  a 
relativB?'  '  Yes,' was  at  once  indicated  by  the  knocks.  '  A  near  relative  ? '  'Yes.'  'A 
nianr  No  answer.  'Awoman?'  'Yes.'  'A  daughter?  Amother?  Awifc?'  No 
answer,      'A  aster?'     'Yes.'     Mr.  C,  then  asked  the  number  of  years  since  her  death. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  65 

To  tliis  the  answer  was  given  in  rapid  and  distinct  raps,  some  counting  forly-five,  others 
forty-nine,  tiftv-four,  etc.  After  considerable  parleying  as  to  llie  manner  in  which  the 
question  should  be  answered,  the  consent  of  the  mviuible  mterlociitor  was  given  to  knock 
the  years  so  slowly  that  they  mi^t  be  distinctly  counted.  This  was  done.  Knock,  knock, 
knock,  for  over  a  minute,  till  the  niunber  amounted  to  fifty,  and  was  unanimously  announced 
by  the  company.  Mr.  C.  now  asked,  '  Did  she  die  of  consumption  ? '  naming  several  dis- 
eases to  which  no  answer  was  given.  'Did  she  die  by  accident?'  'Yes.'^  'Was  she 
kiUed  by  lightnbg  ?  Was  she  shot  ?  Was  she  lost  at  sea  ?  Did  she  fall  from  a  carriage  ? 
Was  she  thrown  from  ahorse?'  'Yes.'  Mr.  Cooper  did  not  pursue  Ms  mquhies  any 
further,  and  stated  to  the  company  that  the  answers  were  correct,  the  person  alluded  to  1^ 
him  being  3  sister  who,  just  fifty  years  ago  the  present  month,  was  lolled  by  being  thrown 
from  a  horse. 

"  The  evening  was  now  far  advanced,  and  it  was  not  thought  desirable  to  continue  the 
colloquies  any  further.  At  the  su^estion  of  several  gentlemen,  the  ladies  removed  from 
the  sofa,  where  they  had  sat  duruig  the  evening,  and  remamed  standing  in  another  part  of 
the  room,  producing  a  vibration  on  the  pannels  which  was  felt  by  every  one  who  touched 
them.  Different  gentlemen  stood  on  the  outade  and  the  inside  of  (he  door  at  the  same 
time,  when  loud  knockings  were  heard  on  the  side  oppoate  to  that  where  they  stood.  The 
ladies  were  at  such  a  distance  fi'om  (he  door  in  both  cases  as  to  lend  no  countenance  to  the 
idea  that  the  sounds  were  produced  by  any  direct  communication  with  them.  They  now 
went  into  a  parlor,  under  the  room  m  which  the  party  was  held,  accompanied  by  several 
gentlemen,  and  the  sounds  were  then  produced  with  great  distmctness,  causing  sensible 
vibrations  in  the  sofa,  and  apparently  coming  from  a  thick  hearth-rug  before  the  fire-pUce, 
as  well  as  from  other  qnatters  of  the  room.  Such  are  the  most  important  facts  which  we 
can  recall  of  the  manifestations  of  the  evening.  We  believe  we  have  slated  them  without 
anji  coloring  whatever,  as  they  appeared  to  every  one  present ;  but  with  regard  to  their 
origuior  theirnature,  we  are  as  much  in  the  dark  as  any  of  our  readers.  The  manners  and 
bearing  of  the  ladies  are  such  as  to  create  a  prepossesaon  m  Iheh  favor.  They  have  no 
theories  to  ofTec  in  explanation  of  the  acts  of  their  mysterious  attendants,  and  apparently 
have  no  control  of  their  incomings  or  outgoings." 

Many  of  the  persons  then  present  for  the  first  time  at  a  spiritual  seance 
have  since  become  firm  believers  in  the  truth  of  the  communion  between  the 
natural  and  spiritual  worlds,  while  some  have  themselves  entered  into  the 
sphere  of  those  sublime  verities  which  they  then  began  to  investigate  af 
a  matter  of  simple  curiosity  or  pastime. 

Amongst  these,  it  is  gratifying  to  know  that  the  distinguished  author  and 
poet  Fenimore  Cooper  and  N.  P.  WiiHs  partook  of  the  illuminating  influence 
of  the  bright  homes  to  which  they  were  so  soon  after  summoned,  as  premoni- 
tory whispers  which  cheered  their  earthly  way  and  prepared  then-  pilgrim  feet 
for  the  brighter  path  they  are  now  treading.  In  how  many  thousands  of 
ears  have  these  same  low  telegraphic  raps  sounded  the  triumphant  words,. 
"  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?"  on  the  eve, 
of  the  very  hoiar  when  some  earthly  pilgrim  was  about  to  take  his  "  leap  in. 
the  dark  ?  "  How  many  a  footprint  to  the  tomb  has  been  illumined  into  the 
highway  of  eternity  by  the  spirit  lights  which  flashed  before  the  eyes  of 
mortals  at  these  same  "  evenings  with  the  spirits." 

Precisely  the  same  results  which  followed  the  introduction  of  Spiritualism: 
in  Auburn,  grew  out  of  the  Misses  Fox's  visit  to  New  York,  namely,  the 
unmitigated  bitterness  with  which  the  press  and  pulpit  commenced  to  assail 
the  cause,  and  the  unmistakable  progress  which  it  seemed  to  make  under 
the  stimulus  of  Iheir  fierce  denunciations.  In  fact,  the  opposition  became 
so  violent  and  unreasonable  thai  it  provoked  investigation,  were  it  only  to 
inquire  into  the  calumnies  that  were  launched  against  the  mediums  and  their 
friends,  and  the  absurdly  fallacious  theories  that  were  set  up  to  account  for 
the  phenomena.  The  result  of  this  feverish  excitement  was  the  formation 
of  circles  in  every  other  house  in  town,  and  the  rapid  development  of  media 
in  every  otlier  family. 

Hosted  by  Google 

66  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

We  have  before  stated  that  a  psychological  society  of  which  A.  J.  Davis's 
revelations  formed  tiie  concretive  power,  was  in  existence  at  the  time  of  the 
Hydesville  disturbances,  whilst  the  issue  of  the  Univercxlum  preceded  that 
event  for  more  tlian  a  year.  The  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox  in  1850  was  most 
opportune,  however. 

That  which  had  hitherto  been  regarded  as  the  mysterious  power  of  clair- 
voyance and  the  revelations  of  the  magnetic  sleep,  now  assumed  a  normal  place 
as  part  of  the  direct  communication  which  had  ever  subsisted  between  "  the 
two  worlds,"  and  all  the  preternatural  spontaniety  of  the  magnetic  movement 
was  justly  regarded  as  the  inspiration  of  wise  spirits ;  a  belief  that  was  per- 
petually being  strengthened  by  a  variety  of  fresh  phases  of  mediumship,  all 
rife  with  intelligent  proofs  of  the  agency  of  individuals  who  had  long  been 
deemed  lost  to  earth  and  its  interests  in  the  dim  mystery  of  the  grave. 

To  arrive  at  any  just  conception  of  the  excitement  to  which  the  public 
mind  was  stimulated  by  the  development  of  open  spiritual  communion  with 
the  so-called  "  dead,"  and  to  appreciate  die  motives  which  compelled  the 
wise  and  candid  to  enter  upon  the  field  of  investigation  with  the  generous  pur- 
pose of  protesting  against  the  calumnies  and  one-sided  action  of  the  press 
towards  Spiritualism,  it  will  be  necessary  to  quote  some  of  the  journalistic 
slanders  that  were  thus  put  forth,  and  in  so  doing  we  shall  make  a  few 
extracts  from  a  small  pamphlet  on  the  early  facts  of  Spiritualism  by  Messrs. 
Capron  and  Barron,  in  which  the  authors,  amongst  other  matters  of  interest, 
give  a  statement  of  the  New  York  Express  to  which  we  especially  desire  to 
call  attention. 

It  would  seem  that  some  tune  antecedent  to  the  Rochester  knockmgs, 
a  certain  Professor  Loomis  had  set  fordi  a  theory  in  the  Scientific  Ameri- 
can, concerning  the  vibratory  effects  of  mill-dams,  and  this  the  sapient  editor 
of  the  Express  tortured  into  a  full  explanation  of  all  the  mysteries  of  modem 
Spiritualism,  no  doubt  thinking  that  if  he  could  destroy  the  spuitualistic  basis 
of  the  rappings,  the  entire  hydra-headed  monster,  whose  existence  he 
innocently  attributed  to  tlie  Fox  family,  would  be  destroyed  at  one  fell  swoop. 
His  explanation  reads  thus  : 

"The  Rochester  Spirits.— We  have  referred  in  our  literary  notices  to  varions 
noises  heard  at  Rochester,  New  York,  and  attributed  to  supemalural  causes. 

"In  the  New  York  5o>«ftjfc  American  v/s  find  the  following  very  plausible  and  very 
ample  explanation ; 

"'Supernatural  Knockings.— A  'knocking  at  the  door  at  nights,"  which  has 
alarmed  the  good  people  of  Rochester  who  attributed  it  10  sphllual  agency,  is  explained  in 
the  American  Journal  of  Science,  by  Prof.  Loomis,  as  the  effect  of  the  vibration  of  a  dam 
over  which  the  water  falls.  Prof.  Loomis  describes  this  vibration  as  producing  sonnds  like 
a  loud  knocking  on  the  doors  and  wdls  of  bnildings,  and  gives  a  particular  account  of  the 
phenomena  as  observed  at  the  daras  of  Cayi^a  FaUs,  Ohio  ;  East  Windsor,  Conn.;  Sprmg- 
field  and  Northampton,  Mass.,  etc.  He  attributes  the  vibrations  to  the  friction  of  the 
water  fallmg  over  the  dam,  and  shows  how  these  sounds  are  transmitted  to  a  distance  by  the 
earth  aud  produce  that  sudden  and  alarming  knocking  sound  in  dwelhngi  Prof  Loomis 
has  pomted  to  a  very  simple  and  easy  method  of  checkmg  this  vibratory  action  of  the  dam* 
and  the  people  of  Rochester,  who  have  been  troubled  by  an  inviable  spirit,  wiU  find  it 
eaaly  exercised  by  mechanical  means. ' 

" '  O  philosophy  and  common  sense,  ye  play  the  devil  with  theories !'  said  one  of  the 
snarlers  in  the  days  of  the  Encyclopedists." 

It  will  be  seen  that  die  New  York  Express  makes  no  allowance  for  the 
locomotive  character  of  these  sounds,  nor  provides  for  their  exorcism  in_  its 
own  city,  nor  in  any  other  place  except  those  afflicted  by  vibratory  noises 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  67 

from  the  neighborhooodof  waterfalls,  whilst  the  agency  by  which  these  noises 
could  communicate  intelligence  is  disdainfully  untouched  altogether. 

On  the  other  hand,  one  Professor  Dewey,  of  Rochester,  challenged  the 
"respectable  papers  in  New  York,  Boston,  etc,"  to  discredit  (he  vibratory 
theory  because  it  was  [as  he  justly  declared]  inapplicable  to  the  facts  of  the 
case ;  but  in  its  place  he  substituted  the  bold  and  wholly  unsustained  asser- 
tion that  the  Rochester  manifestations  were  the  simple  production  of  fraud, 
on  the  part  of  the  Foxes,  a  statement  which  if  true  in  their  case,  never 
touched  similar  manifestations  which  were  now  beginning  to  thicken  in  every 
partofthecountry;nevertheless,theNew  York  papers,  unable  to  furnish  wea- 
pons of  their  own  wherewith  to  annihilate  Spiritualism,  eagerly  repeated 
Prof.  Dewey's  assertions  as  facts,  instead  of  perceiving  that  they  were  simply 
the  ghosts  of  dead  arguments,  and  as  such  could  never  enter  into  successful 
warfare  with  living  spirits. 

One  of  the  cornmittce  who  had  been  appointed  to  examine  the  mediums 
at  Rochester,  and  had  actually  signed  a  report  in  their  favor  which  was  read 
at  Corinthian  Hall,  without  any  further  investigation  or  assignable  reason,  save 
the  desire  to  swim  with  the  tide  of  popular  opinion,  coolly  published  in 
several  papers  an  uncalled-for  denunciation  of  the  Rochester  mediums,  on 
the  ground  of  fraud,  a  charge  which  his  own  former  report  had  utterly 
repudiated. 

A  number  of  base  and  groundless  falsehoods  were  published  also  by  one 
John  W.  Hurn,  of  Rochester,  and  though  they  were  noted,  answered,  and 
triumphantly  refuted  one  by  one  in  the  spiritual  literature  of  the  day,  the 
papers  that  circulated  the  scandal  almost  invariably  refused  to  give  place  to 
the  refutation. 

A  man  calling  himself  Reverend  (?)  and  a  Doctor  of  Divinity,  stood  on  the 
platform  in  Corinthian  Hall,  Rochester,  and  before  a  literary  association 
whom  he  was  called  upon  to  instruct,  and  with  less  skill  than  would  have 
been  exhibited  by  an  itinerant  conjurer  at  a  country  fair,  cracked  his  boots 
to  the  delight  of  his  hterary  auditory,  and  declared  that  to  be  the  explanation 
of  all  the  disturbances  at  Hydesville.  The  learned  and  Christian  gentleman's 
"complete  explanation"  was  another  item  which  found  a  wide  and  ready 
circulation  in  the  leading  journals  of  the  day. 

Several  other  theories  of  equal  value  and  pertinence  were  afforded  exten- 
sive publicity  through  the  same  sources.  Amongst  these,  "  ankle  joints," 
"toe  joints,"  and  "finger  snapping;"  "machinery,"  and  every  description 
of  imposture  generally,  largely  figured  ;  the  characters  of  nearly  every  per- 
son connected  with  the  movement,  were  recklessly  assailed,  and  scarcely  a 
single  opportunity  of  redress  was  atforded  to  the  victims  of  these  falsehoods 
by  the  press  through  their  columns.  One  or  two  more  specimens  of  the 
bhndness  which  partisan  feeling  imposed  upon  the  antagonists  of  this  move- 
ment are  selected  from  hundreds  of  similar  lucubrations,  not  for  their  worth, 
but  rather  to  show  the  exhaustive  and  illogical  positions  the  opposition  were 
compelled  to  assume. 

The  New  York  Commercial  Advertiser  writes  ; 

"  Those  Rochester  Knockings We  perceive  that  a  gentleman  in  town  •  is  lectur- 
ing on  diveis  matters  of  inscrutable  physiology,  and  endeavoring  to  establish  some  connec- 
tion between  them  and  the  rappings  of  \hit,  pretended  spirits  at  Rochester,  We  are  satis- 
fied, so  far  as  the  rappings  are  concerned,  the  gentleman  may  spate  himself  the  trouble  of 
discoursing  on  the  subject. 

*(Rev.  S.  B,  Briltain.) 

Hosted  by  Google 

68  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

"We  have  had  a  long  and  instnietive  conversation  with  a  gentlemati  of  intdligence  from 
the  vicinity  of  Rochester,  and  his  account  makes  it  dear  to  our  minds  that  the  mystery  is 
not  only  an  imposture,  but  a  very  clumsy  one  ;  indebted  for  its  success  entirely  to  the  cre- 
dulity of  the  auditors  and  spectators  who  are  impressed  by  it.  We  say  entirely  to  the 
credulity,  for  the  elmnsiness  of  the  imposture  is  so  great,  there  is  so  little  art  iik  the  means 
adopted  to  avert  detection,  that  people  have  literally  to  tJiut  their  tyes  to  avoid  seeing. 
The  only  point  upon  which  there  is  any  successful  trick  is  the  manner  m  which  the  rapping 
is  effected  It  is  easy  enough  to  see,  if  people  will  not  shut  their  eyes  wilfully,  that  the 
girls  effect  the  rapping  somehow.  For  instance,  if  they  are  prevented  from  placing  them- 
selves in  close  proximity  to  a  door,  a  table,  a  piano,  or  some  object  to  rap  on,  the  rapping 
soon  ceases.  ...  As  for  the  moving  of  the  table,  anybody  can  see  how  that  is  done. 
A  slight  impulse  with  the  foot  pves  a  movement  to  a  table  which  runs  very  readily  on  roll- 
ers, and  as  the  spectators  are  required  to  gather  close  round  the  table  when  it  is  to  be 
moved,  nothing  can  be  easier  than  to  give  it  a  start,  or  an  imperceptible  push  merely  with 
the  toe  of  a  boot."  etc. 

Other  statements  of  a  personal  character  were  made  in  relation  to  the 
friends  and  associates  of  the  mediums  in  this  article,  so  grossly  false  that  Mr. 
E,  W.  Capron  wrote  to  demand,  in  simple  justice,  a  contradiction  of  the 
misstatements,  in  reference  to  himself  at  least  This  was  refused,  and  the  edi- 
tor who  claimed  to  represent  the  piety  as  well  as  the  commercial  interests  of 
New  York,  wilfully  committed  himself  to  the  circulation  of  known  and 
proven  falsehoods. 

Since  the  day  when  the  New  York  Commercial  Advertiser  warned  the 
world  "  only  just  to  open  its  eyes  "  and  they  h  ould  discover  the  whole  thing, 
and  discover  it  to  be  the  trick  of  girls  and  the  impulses  of  "boot  toes,"  up- 
wards of  five  thousand  portraits  of  decea'ied  persons  have  been  executed  un- 
der circumstances  that  rendered  decejition  or  mistake  as  impossible  as  to 
mistake  the  light  of  the  mid-day  sun  for  the  gknng  lamps  of  the  tnty  gas ; 
thousands  and  thousands  of  heaVy,  ponderable  bodies  have  floated  in  space 
without  human  contact;  spirit-hands  ha\e  been  formed  and  melted  in  the 
grasp  of  the  examinant ;  pages,  even  to  the  amount  of  volumes,  have  been 
written  \iy  spirit  hands  alone ;  millions  of  forms  have  been  seen,  described 
and  recognized  as  well-remembered  friends,  through  the  mediumship  of  total 
strangers ;  hidden  things  have  been  dragged  to  light ;  secret  crimes  revealed ; 
thousands  of  darkened  souls  have  been  convinced  of  their  immortal  destiny 
by  facts  tested  through  the  severest  and  most  exhaustive  scrutiny,  and  the 
few  hundreds  of  "credulous,  gullible"  believers,  in  the  genuine  character  of 
the  manifestations,  whom  this  editorial  sage  so  bitterly  satirizes,  have  swelled 
to  a  mighty  army  of  eleven  millions  of  persons  I 

And  who  are  they  whom  he  declares  have  only  to  open  their  eyes  to  detect 
the  imposture?  Magistrates  on  the  bench;  statesmen  in  tlie  Senate ;  law- 
yers, counsellors,  judges,  professors  of  learning  and  divinity,  schoolmen  and 
editors,  doctors  and  divines,  writers,  thinkers,  chemists,  and  men  and  wo- 
nien  of  science,  learning,  intelligence  and  high  repute;  plain  farmers,  shrewd 
mechanics,  common-sense  operatives ;  the  wise  and  the  ignorant,  the  rich  and 
the  poor  —  every  class  and  every  grade  of  mind  but  those  whom  bigotry  de- 
termines to  remain  blind,  prejudice  keeps  so,  lack  of  opportunity  deprives  of 
the  knowledge,  or  those  in  whom  lack  of  common-sense  prevents  its  appre- 
ciation. 

The  Northern  Christian  Advocate,  the  organ  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  and  as  such,  no  doubt,  the  source  from  which  the  members  of  that 
respectable  body  felt  authorized  to  expect  truthful  instruction  concerning 
spiritual  subjects,  writes  thus ; 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

then 

"  Not  being  overstocked  with  gulIibQity  and  having  very  little  taste  for  the  low  marvels 
which  furnish  entertainment  to  some  people,  we  hiive  left  the  thing  to  take  care  of 
itself. 

' '  The  class  of  persons  who  deal  in  those  mysteries  —  we  mean  juggling,  sight-seeing,  and 
sceptical  —  makes  all  inquiry  into  the  subject  dilating  to  a  firm  believer  in  revelation." 

After  this  cool  assurance  that  the  writer  "knew  nothing  at  all  about  the 
matter,"  and  was  deterred  from  inquiry  about  "the  thing,"  from  the  character 
of  the  "  class  of  persons  "  that  generally  took  an  interest  in  such  subjects,  diis 
faithful  "watchman  on  the  walls  of  Zion"  proceeds  to  make  deliberate  asser- 
tions of  the  fraud,  imposture,  and  impiety  of  all  the  actors  in  the  scene,  with 
as  much  assurance  as  if  he  had  actually  performed  his  duty  by  a  thorough 
and  searching  investigation  of  "  the  thing"  he  denounced. 

But  still  more  audacious  warriors  were  provoked  to  do  battle  with  the  spir- 
its than  the  flock  of  illogical  scribblers  whose  only  ailments  were  abuse  and 
slander. 

Perceiving  that  the  success  of  Spiritualism  was  based  upon/acCj-,  against 
which  mere  theories  were  but  as  swords  brandished  to  the  winds,  a  tribe  of 
heroes  arose  who  concluded  that  as  the  strength  of  Spiritualism  lay  in  its 
facts,  the  force  of  the  opposition  must  be  based  upon  the  same  ground.  Fore- 
most in  the  van  of  these  attacks  appeared  Mr.  John  Stanley  Grimes,  a  pro- 
fessional mesmerist  and  exhibitor  of  the  art  of  electro-biology. 

Amidst  a  mass  of  other  daring  affirmations  published  in  the  Tribune, 
defamatory  of  the  character  and  pretensions  of  all  spirit  mediums,  Mr.  Grimes 
goes  on  to  assert  that  Mrs.  Benedict,  of  Auburn,  confessed  to  him,  "  that  the 
raps  heard  in  her  presence  were  made  by  a  board  under  the  floor,  poised  like 
a  lever,  and  so  arranged  that  when  she  stood  near  the  window  she  could  rap 
upon  a  peg  which  was  connected  with  one  end  of  the  lever  and  cause  the 
other  end  to  rise  and  knock  against  the  middle  of  the  floor."  For  the  pro- 
duction of  all  the  other  marvels  occurring  in  her  presence,  Mr.  Grimes  added 
"  she  —  Mrs.  Benedict  —  chatted  a  young  woman  living  in  the  next  house, 
and  two  male  cousins  as  confederates;"  and  as  a  climax  to  this  confession, 
the  trickster  is  made  to  declare,  "  that  she  had  become  acquainted  with  the 
women  who  practiced  the  same  deception  at  Rochester,  and  had  learned  the 
art  of  them." 

As  a  full  exposition  of  the  value  of  this  kind  of  testimony  against  Spirit- 
ualism, let  it  be  remembered  that  Mrs.  Benedict's  mediumship  was  constantly 
exhibited  in  other  houses  besides  her  own,  where  pegs,  loose  boards,  and 
mechanical  contrivances  were  impossible ;  also  in  various  other  towns  besides 
Auburn,  where  her  only  acknowledged  confederates  resided;  that  she  ap- 
peared and  acted  as  a  medium  on  numerous  occasions  with  the  most  acute 
and  analytical  investtgating  circles ;  that  her  own  house,  boards,  w^s,  carpets, 
and  flooring  had  been  repeatedly  searched  by  sceptics,  and  above  all,  that  up 
to  the  time  of  the  pretended  confession,  Mrs.  Benedict  and  the  "  Rochester 
women"  had  never  met,  and  except  by  report,  could  have  had  no  knowledge 
of  each  other's  existence. 

Of  the  same  character  and  value  was  the  pretended  expose  afterwards 
elicited  in  1851  by  the  bold  attempt  of  the  Rev.  Chauncy  Burr  to  present  as 
genuine  the  statement  of  a  woman  who  from  family  differences  had  become 
an  enemy  of  the  Foxes,  after  having  been  at  one  time  on  intimate  terms 
with  them. 

Hosted  by  Google 

7o  HISTORY  OF  MODERtt 

This  person ^ — a  Mrs.  Norman  Culver- — deposed  to  having  been  the 
mother  confessor  to  Catharine  Fox,  who  informed  her  that  the  manifestations 
were  the  artful  coocoction  of  herself  her  sister,  and  cousin ;  that  the  sounds 
were  produced  by  the  snapping  of  their  ankle  joints,  and  that  when  their  feet 
were  held  by  the  committees  in  Rochester,  the  working  of  this  wonderful 
piece  of  human  machinery  was  supplied  by  a  Dutch  servant-girl,  who  rapped 
with  her  knuckles  on  the  floor  from  the  cellar  below. 

Without  attempting  to  controvert  a  statement  so  miserably  flimsy  in  all  its 
bearings  that  it  cannot  cover  a  single  phase  of  "the  manifestations,"  had  they 
all  been  made,  as  this  explanation  would  require,  by  raps  on  the  ground  and 
by  the  feet  of  the  Fox  sisters,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  on  the  night  when  up- 
wards of  three  hundred  people  conversed  by  these  same  raps  with  the  invisible 
knocker  at  Hydesville,  not  one  of  the  Fox  family  was  in  the  dwelling ;  that 
at  the  time  when  the  investigating  committee  at  Rochester  held  the  young 
ladies'  feet,  they  were  not  in  their  own  house,  but  in  places  selected  by  the 
committee,  and  that  if  they  had  been  at  home,  they  could  scarcely  have 
availed  themselves  of  the  presence  of  the  Dutch  servant-girl,  no  such  ap- 
pendage ever  having  formed  a  part  of  their  household. 

And  yet  there  is  scarcely  a  leading  journal  of  the  day  which  did  not  retail 
this  bold  falsehood,  and  so  few  were  willing  to  admit  the  clear,  candid, 
and  well-attested  refutation  of  the  family  and  their  friends,  that  to  this  day 
the  "confession  of  Mrs.  Norman  Culver"  is  quoted  as  an  argument  why  Spir- 
itualism, slain  at  the  hands  of  Rev.  Chauncey  Burr  in  1851,  cannot  be  alive 
this  day,  ahhougji  eleven  millions  of  American  SpirituaUsts  arise  to  testify  to 
the  fact  of  its  existence. 

Truly  it  may  be  said  that  the  hand  that  once  ventures  to  launch  a  slander 
on  the  ocean  of  public  opinion  has  signed  the  death-warrant  of  truth  in  that 
direction,  and  committed  an  act  irrevocable  even  in  his  own  person.  No 
matter  how  frail  be  the  craft  in  which  the  falsehood  is  launched  it  never 
returns  to  its  source,  but  drifts  on  forever ! 

He  who  encounters  the  poison  rarely  finds  the  antidote  'hy  its  side,  and  so 
the  tides  of  eternity  bear  onward  forever  the  condemnatory  verdict  which 
brands  the  slanderer  as  the  murderer  of  truth  and  a  traitor  to  the  well-being 
of  humanity. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     NEW    YORK— CONTINUED. 

Yourptaccfuizo 

.Uhallfind. 

i's^ksoatl^ 

rySS^"- 

Hon.  Hokace  Greeley  and  the  Fox  Family— The  New  York  Circle  akd  Con- 
ference—  The  Press — Our  Views  of  Spirits  aud  Spiritualism  Now  and 
Then. 

Amongst  the  many  instances  of  ignorance,  bigotry,  and  misrepresentation, 
which  assailed  through  the  press  the  first  attempts  of  spirits  to  c 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  ?! 

with  mortals,  it  is-  gratifying  to  notice  the  candid  spirit  in  which  the  New 
York  Tribune  opened  its  columns  to  evidence  on  both  sides  of  the  question. 

About  the  time  wlien  the  Misses  Fox  took  up  their  temporary  residence  at 
Eamum's  Hotel,  in  the  city,  several  letters  from  investigators  were  published 
in  its  columns,  detailing  their  experiences  at  the  various  circles  they  had  at- 
tended, and  even  when  the  writers  withheld  their  own  conclusions  on  the 
results  of  the  stances,  then  narrations — presenting  as  they  did  an  array  of 
evidence  of  a  test  character — impressed  the  public  mind,  and  prompted  a 
wide-spread  spirit  of  investigation. 

Some  of  the  leading  journals  became  rabid  in  their  denunciations,  others 
considerably  modified  their  tone,  but  the  rappings  went  on;  circles  were 
formed  in  every  direction,  and  fresh  phases  of  the  phenomena  perpetually 
sprung  up  to  meet  and  overwhelm  the  vain  theories  that  professed  to  explain 
tlieto  away.  Little  children,  sensitive  women,  grave  men,  and  even  learned 
professors  found  themselves  suddenly  possessed  of  the  gifts  that  had  been  so 
ridiculed  or  questioned.  The  leading  minds  of  the  city  thronged  the  hotel  of 
the  Rochester  mediums,  and  distinguished  visitors  from  far  and  near  took  part 
in  their  si((nees  with  ever-increasing  astonishment  and  interest.  Numerous 
good  test-mediums  became  developed  for  "tlie  power,"  and  filled  tho  city 
with  available  means  for  general  information  and  research  into  this  new  and 
occult  telegraphy  with  the  "  beloved  ones  gone  before," 

The  following  letter  from  the  Hon.  Horace  Greeley,  containing  a  statement 
of  his  views  respecting  the  rappings  produced  throu^  the  Fox  family,  though 
written  with  clwacteristic  caution,  becomes  highly  interesting  from  the  fact 
that,  as  editor  of  the  Tribune,  Mr.  Greeley's  generous  and  manly  treatment  of 
the  matter  through  its  columns  had  already  exposed  him  to  the  calumnious 
sneers  which  were  everywhere  directed  against  those  who,  without  avowed 
partisanship  for  the  subject,  ventured  even  to  treat  it  with  candid  impartiality : 

"  Mrs.  FoK  and  her  three  daughters  left  our  city  yesterday,  on  their  return  to  Rochester, 
after  a  stay  here  of  some  weelisj  during  which  they  have  subjected  the  mysterious  influence 
by  which  they  seem  to  be  accompanied  to  every  reasonable  test  and  to  the  keen  and  critical 
scrutiny  of  hundreds  who  have  chosen  to  visit  them,  or  whom  they  have  been  invited  to 
visit.  The  rooms  which  they  occupied  at  the  hotel  hive  been  repeatedly  searched  and  scni- 
tiniied ;  they  have  been  taken  without  an  hour's  notice  into  houses  they  had  never  before 
entered ;  they  have  been  unconsciously  placed  on  a  glass  surface,  concealed  under  the  carpet  in 
order  to  interrupt  electriciJ  vibrations ;  they  have  been  disrobed  by  a  committee  of  ladies, 
appointed  without  notice,  and  insisling  that  neither  of  them  should  leave  the  room  unlil  the 
invest^ation  had  been  made,  etc.,  etc.;  yet  we  bdieve  no  one  to  this  moment  pretends 
that  he  has  detected  either  of  them  in  producing  or  causing  the  '  rappmgs,'  nor  do  we  think 
any  of  their  contemnors  has  invented  a  pkusible  theory  to  account  for  the  production  of 
these  sounds,  nor  the  sbgular  intelligence  which  [certainly  at  times]  has  seemed  to  be  mani- 
fested through  them.  Some  ten  or  twelve  days  since  they  gave  up  their  rooms  at  the  hotel, 
and  devoted  the  remainder  of  their  sojonm  here  to  visiting  several  families,  to  which  they 
had  been  mvited  1:^  persons  interested  in  the  subject,  and  subjecting  the  singukr  inHuMiee 
to  adoser,  calmer  examination  than  could  be  given  to  it  at  an  hotel,  and  befoie  casual  com- 
pEinies  of  strangers,  drawn  together  by  vague  curiosity  more  than  rational  interest,  or  prede- 
termined and  invincible  hostility.  Our  own  dwellmg  was  among  those  they  thus  visited, 
not  only  submitting  to,  but  courting  the  fullest  and  keenest  inquiry  with  rqjard  to  the  al- 
leged 'manifestations'  from  the  spint -world  by  which  they  were  attended. 

"We  devoted  what  time  we  could  spare  from  our  duties,  out  of  three  days,  to  this  subject  j 
and  it  would  be  the  basest  cowardice  not  to  say  that  we  are  convinced  beyond  a  doubt  of 
their  perfect  integrity  and  good  faith  in  the  premises. 

"  Whatever  may  be  the  origin  or  cause  of  the  '  rappings,'  the  ladies  in  whose  presence  they 
occur  do  not  make  them.  We  tested  this  thoroughly,  and  to  our  entire  satisfaction.  Their 
conduct  and  bearing  is  as  unlike  that  of  deceivers  as  posable ;  and  we  think  no  one  ac- 
quainted with  them  could  believe  them  at  all  capable  of  engaging  in  so  daring,  impious,  and 

Hosiedb,  Google 

73  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

shameful  a  ju^le  as  tliis  would  be  if  tliey  caused  the  sounds.  And  it  is  not  possible;  that 
such  a  ju^le  iJiould  have  been  so  long  perpetrated  in  public 

"Ajuggler  pettorms  one  feat  quickly,  and  hurries  on  to  another ;  he  does  not  devote  week 
after  week  lo  the  same  thing  over  and  over,  deliberately,  in  full  view  of  hundreds  who  ait 
beside  or  confronting  him,  in  broitd  daylight,  not  to  enjoy,  but  to  detect  his  trick.  A  de- 
ceiver naturally  avoids  conversation  on  the  subject  of  his  knavery,  but  these  ladies  converse 
freely  and  fiilly  with  regard  to  the  ori^  of  these  '  tappings'  in  their  dwelUngs,  years  ago  ; 
the  various  sensations  Uiey  caused  in  the  neighborhood  ;  the  excitement  created ;  the  pro- 
gress of  the  developments ;  what  they  have  seen,  heard  and  experienced,  from  first  to  last. 
If  all  were  false,  they  could  not  fail  to  have  involved  themselves  ere  this  b  a  labyrinth  of 
blasting  contradictions,  as  each  separately  gives  accounts  of  the  most  astounding  develop- 
ments at  this  or  that  lime.  Persons  fooll^  enough  so  to  commit  themselves  without  reserve 
or  caution  could  not  have  deferred  a  thorough  self-exposure  for  a  angle  week. 

"Of  course  a  variety  of  opinions  of  so  strange  a  matter  would  naturally  he  formed  by  the 
various  persons  who  have  visited  them,  and  we  presume  that  those  who  have  merely  run  into 
their  room  for  an  hour  or  so,  and  listened,  among  a  huddle  of  strangers,  to  a  medley  of 
questions — not  all  admitting  of  very  profitable  answers — put  to  certain  invisible  intelligen- 
ces, and  answered  by  '  rappings,'  or  smgular  noises  on  the  floor,  table,  etc.,  as  the  alphabet 
was  called  over,  or  otherwise,  would  naturally  go  away,  perhaps  puzzled,  probably  di^usted, 
rarely  convinced. 

"  It  is  hardly  possible  that  a  matter,  ostenably  so  grave,  could  be  presented  under  cir- 
cumstances less  favorable  to  conviction.  But  of  those  who  have  enjoyed  proper  opportu- 
nities for  a  fall  investigation,  we  believe  that  fully  three-fourths  are  convinced,  as  we  are, 
that  these  singular  sounds  and  seeming  manifestations  are  not  produced  by  Mrs.  Fox  and 
her  daughters,  nor  by  any  human  being  connected  with  them.  '  How  they  are  caused,  and 
whence  they  proceed,'  are  questions  whidi  open  a  much  wider  field  of  inquiry,  with  which 
way  marks  we  do  not  profess  to  be  familiar.  He  must  be  well  atquainted  with  the  arcana 
of  the  universe  who  shall  presume  dogmatically  to  decide  that  these  manifestations  are  nat- 
ural or  supernatural.  The  ladies  say  that  they  are  informed  that  this  is  but  the  beginning 
of  a  new  era,  or  economy,  in  which  spirits  clothed  in  the  flesh  are  to  be  more  closely  and 
palpably  coraiected  with  those  who  have  put  on  immortality ;  that  the  manifestations  have 
already  appeared  in  many  other  families,  and  are  deslined  to  be  diffused  and  rendered 
clearer,  until  all  who  will  may  communicate  freely  with  their  friends  who  have  shuffled  oflT 
this  mortal  coil. 

"  Of  all  this  we  know  nothing,  and  shall  guess  nothing;  but  if  we  were  simply  to  print 
[which  we  shall  not]  the  ijuestions  we  asked  and  the  answers  we  received,  during  a  two  hours' 
uninterrupted  conference  with  the  '  rappers,'  we  should  at  once  be  acctised  of  having  done 
so  expressly  to  sustam  the  theory  which  regards  tliese  manifestations  as  the  utterances  of 
departed  spirits.  H.  G." 

The  ball  once  set  rolling  in  New  York  City,  sped  on  with  an  impetus  which 
soon  transcended  the  power  of  the  press,  pulpit  or  pubhc  to  arres^  despite  of 
every  torte  that  was  brought  to  bear  against  it 

In  January,  1851,  Judge  Ediaonds,  whose  potential  influence  on  the  pro- 
gress of  Spiritualism  is  too  widely  known  to  need  comment  here,  commenced 
a  series  of  investigations  which  even  in  their  earliest  stage  formed  the  nucleus 
of  most  important  developments,  extending  far  beyond  tlie  circle  of  even  his 
wide-spread  influence.  Many  other  distinguished  persons,  strengthened  by 
the  example  of  the  learned  Judge,  devoted  themselves  to  the  investigation  of 
the  subject  with  the  almost  invariable  results  of  conviction  that  follow. 

One  of  the  most  important  conversions  to  Spiritualism  that  marks  this 
period  was  that  of  Mr.  Charles  Partridge,  a  merchant  of  New  York,  whose 
probity  and  public  spirit  had  already  secured  for  him  the  highest  considera- 
tion of  his  fellow-citizens.  After  the  return  of  die  Rochester  mediums  to  their 
home,  Mr.  Partridge  and  wife,  being  on  a  tour  in  Western  New  York,  took  oc- 
casion to  visit  the  Fox  family  at  Rochester,  and  there  pursued  their  inquiries 
into  Spiritualism  with  more  leisure  and  deliberation  than  the  crowded  stances 
in  New  York  City  afforded. 

Mr.  Partridge  was  an  enture  stranger  to  the  mediums,  and  a  man  of  keen 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM,  73 

perception,  and  acute  power  of  observation.  These,  togelhcr  with  his  usual 
habits  of  business-like  preparation,  he  brought  to  bear  upon  his  researches,  and 
so  astonishing  were  their  results,  both  in  respect  to  physical  power  and  mental 
intelligence,  that  the  whole  structure  of  his  preconceived  opinions  was  over- 
thrown, and  an  array  of  testimony -presented  wluch  completely  "rolled  back 
the  stone  from  the  door  of  die  sepulchre"  for  him,  and  disclosed  within  it  the 
glorified  foriMs  of  the  white -robed  angels  of  eternal  life,  instead  of  the  corrupt- 
ible ashes  of  death's  unfathomable  mystery. 

To  afford  the  most  perfect  opportunities  for  deliberate  investigation  to  him- 
self and  his  circle  of  friends,  Mr.  Partridge  procured  the  services  of  Kate  and 
Margaretta  Fox  at  his  residence  in  New  York  City,  when  the  most  extraor- 
dinary and  varied  forms  of  intelligent  phenomena  became  so  common  and 
abundant  that  to  resist  conviction  on  the  part  of  those  who  were  privileged  to 
attend  these  circles  became  impossible. 

Although  Mr.  Partridge's  conclusions  w  I      rri     d    t  th      gl     1 

processes  of  rigid  and  exhaustive  scrutiny,  th  u"  [   h  n  h    p 

ful  mind  apprehended  the  fulness  of  the  stup     d         ruth        p  m 

nion]  were  practical  and  important. 

In  the  summer  of  185 1  Mr    Partridge  d 

the  "New  York  Circle"     It  was  die  tirst      g  th      h  d 

been  established  in  connection  with  spmt  c 

'ihe  principal  medium  of  the  circle  was  Mr.  Edward  P.  Fowler,  then 
a  student,  but  subsequently  a  distinguished  member  of  the  medical  profession. 
Accompanied  by  many  ph)Sical  signs  of  a  startling  character,  Mr.  Fowler's 
mediumship  was  of  the  most  vaned  and  interesting  kind. 

The  spirits  wrote  manuscripts  in  different  languages  and  Oriental  cliajac- 
ters  without  the  aid  of  human  hands,  and  his  communications,  spoken  or 
written  in  the  trance  condition,  were  often  of  the  most  exalted  and  scientific 
nature. 

Fortunate  in  securing  from  one  of  their  own  number  the  aid  of  a  telegraphic 
operator  whose  position  removed  him  beyond  the  suspicion  of  interested 
motives,  the  "New  York  Circle"  continued  for  some  years  to  meet  together 
with  delight  and  profit  to  themselves,  and  benefit  to  the  world,  which  was 
occasionally  favored  with  reports  of  their  wondeiful  and  instructive  raanifes- 

Amongst  the  earliest  members  of  diis  association  were.  Hon.  J.  W. 
Edmonds,  Dr.  J.  B.  Gray  and  lady,  Charies  Partrit^e  and  lady.  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Warner,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  R.  T.  Hallock,  Robert  T.  Shannon,  W.  J.  Baner,  Dr. 
Hull,  Mr.  Edward  Fowler,  Miss  Fowler,  Professor  Bush,  Rev,  S.  B.  Britain, 
Almon  Rof^  etc. 

Besides  these,  many  persons  eminent  for  their  talent  or  of  distinguished 
public  position,  were  firom  time  to  time  invited  to  take  part  in  the  stances, 
and  mediums  of  remarkable  phenomenal  gifts  were  not  unfrequently  de- 
veloped under  their  influence ;  in  fact  it  has  been  asserted  that  all  the  regular 
members  of  this  interesting  association  were  baptized  with  the  Pentecostal 
fire,  and  became  in  their  own  persons  mediums  for  various  fonns  of  spirit 
communion. 

It  was  at  one  of  diese  sittings  that  Mr.  Henry  Gordon,  a  medium  from 
Springfield,  Massachusetts,  first  exliibited  in  New  York  the  astonishing  feat 
of  floating  in  die  air.  After  the  first  manifestation  of  this  kind,  the  marvel 
was  frequently  repeated  in  the  person  of  this  same  medium,  and  his  transit 
through  the  air  for  a  distance  of  sixty  feet  at  the  residence  of  Dr.  Gray,  in 

Hosted  by  Google 

74  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Lafayette  place,  occurred  in  the  presence  of  a  large  number  of  unimpeach 
able  witnesses,  including  the  venerable  master  of  the  house  and  Mr.  Cliarles 
Partridge.  But  these  new  and  grand  fields  of  observation  seemed  to  their 
deeply-interested  pajticipants  to  be  misused  when  limited  within  tlie  circle  of 
private  families,  especially  of  the  distinguished  position  occupied  by  most  of 
Dr.  Gray's  visitors. 

It  was  resolved  that  a  conference  should  be  estabhshed  where  the  expe- 
riences of  all  present  could  be  freely  exchanged,  and  to  which  strangers  from 
a  distance  could  be  admitted  without  the  formalities  attending  more  exclusive 

Mr.  Partridge,  whose  wealth  and  standing  shielded  his  motives  from  the 
least  suspicion  of  interest,  but  whose  genial,  large-hearted,  reformatory  nature 
was  peculiarly  attractive  to  the  community,  generously  tendered  a  handsome 
suite  of  reception  rooms  in  his  own  house  for  the  accommodation  of  the  pro- 
posed conference. 

As  the  initiatory  step  towards  forming  a  basis  for  the  future  guidance  of 
those  attending  the  conference,  a  circular  was  issued  of  which  the  following 
is  a  copy : 

"Dear  Sir,— Understanding  that  you  entertdii  the  following  views,  I  cordially  invite  you 
to  a  sodal  meeting  of  persons  of  like  sentiments  to  be  held  at on,  etc 

"ist.  That  IheDivineAutlior  of  the  Universe  is  a  conscious  Spiritual  Being. 

"ad.  That  he  has  revealed  somewhat  of  the  spiritual  world  in  ages  long  ance  passed,  and 
espedally  that  the  Jewish  people  were  a  medium  of  such  revelation, 

"  3d.  That  in  onrown  day  and  through  our  own  American  people,  manifestations  are  being 
made  from  the  spiritual  into  the  natural  world,  whereby  the  immortality  and  unbroken  con- 
tinuity of  the  personal  existence  of  all  men  is  bemg  daily  demonstrated. 

"4th.  That  an  honest,  frank,  and  tolerant  interchange  of  views  and  conclusions  will  tend  to 
promote  a  beneficial  use  ajid  extenaon  of  such  spiritual  manifestations. 

"My  purpose  m inviting  this  meeting  is  furthermore,  after  doe  consideration,  to  ascertain 
whether  anything,  and  wliat,  can  be  done  by  associative  action  in  reference  to  the  advance- 
ment of  harmonious  and  profitable  intercourse  with  the  world  of  spirits. 

This  unassuming  little  circular  was  not  issued  even  under  the  authority  of 
the  gendeman  whose  house  was  the  place  of  gathering,  so  careful  were  the 
real  leaders  of  the  spiritual  movement  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  dicta- 
tion or  assumption  of  a  power  which  they  justly  felt  was  in  the  hands  of 
higher  and  wiser  beings  dian  themselves. 

Astounded  with  the  revealments  which  had  been  made  to  them,  convinced, 
if  the  communion  between  this  and  higher  worlds  was  a  truth,  it  was  one  of 
the  most  solemn  and  important  kind  tliat  humanity  had  ever  been  blessed 
widi,  and  predicated  future  revelations  of  almost  illimitable  use  and  grandeur 
to  mankind,  the  early  pioneers  of  Spiritualism  felt  they  had  been  entrusted 
with  the  discovery  of  mines  of  wealth  which  it  would  be  sacrilege  for  them  to 
reserve  to  themselves,  yet  bHnd  and  helpless  as  they  were  in  the  hands  of  a 
world  almost  unknown  to  them  either  in  power  or  purpose,  they  were  unable 
to  acknowledge  aught  but  the  agency  of  intelligent  spiritual  beings,  and  die 
assurance  that  they  were  dealing  with  them,  in  a  wisdom  beyond  their  own, 
and  a  control  which  was  as  resistless  as  the  breath  of  life  that  animated  them. 

The  first  meeting  of  the  New  York  Conference,  took  place  on  the  14th  of 
November,  1851,  when  several  persons  besides  the  members  of  the  New 
York  Circle  were  present. 

The  views  of  the  assemblage  were  kindly  solicited,  and  their  personal  ex- 
periences listened  to  and  discussed,  and  during  their  deliberations,  the  frequent 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  75 

movements  of  the  table  and  the  sounds  of  rappbgs,  etc.,  testified  that  the 
interest  of  the  scene  was  shared  in  by  a  host  of  invisible  witnesses. 

From  that  time  the  weekly  conferences  continued  without  uitemiptlon  for 
more  than  two  years  in  their  original  form ;  that  is,  in  the  semi-private  char- 
acter of  social  gatherings.  Being  obliged  to  seek  another  place  of  meeting 
in  consequence  of  the  repairs  going  on  in  Mr.  Pailridge's  house,  the  confer- 
ence assumed  a  more  public  though  somewhat  heterogeneous  cliaractcr.  In 
connection  with  tlie  Sunday  meetings  of  the  Spiritualists,  or  at  halls  hired  for 
the  purpose,  they  have  now  continued  with  but  little  intermission  for  some 
eighteen  years. 

It  is  not,  however,  from  a  casual  visit  to  the  New  York  Conference  under 
its  present  aspect  that  the  faintest  idea  can  be  gathered  of  its  utility  in  pro- 
moting tiie  dissemination  and  discussion  of  spiritual  verities.  The  free  and 
unconservative  character  of  its  present  platform  renders  it  liable  to  intrusion 
from  all  classes  of  mind,  and  all  shades  of  opinion ;  hence  the  meetings  are 
now  often  inharmonious,  controversial,  and  even  anti-spiritual ;  but  in  its 
earlier  sessions,  it  faithfully  fulfilled  the  original  design  of  its  founders,  and 
fonned  a  rallying  point  for  tiie  believers,  a  sotirce  of  instruction  and  informa- 
tion to  the  auditory,  and  a  fountain  of  inspiration  for  those  who,  assembling 
together  under  tire  stimulus  of  high  and  often  sublime  thoughts,  felt  "the 
tongues  of  fire  descending  on  tiieir  heads"  in  the  unity  of  these  accordant 
gatlierings. 

Media  were  often  present  at  these  meetings,  and  eidier  by  rappings  or 
trance  speaking,  afforded  the  invisible  projectors  of  the  mightj'  spiritual 
movement  an  opportunity  of  representing  their  views  and  offering  wise  counsel 
on  the  various  plans  of  action  that  were  suggested  for  ihe  wider  dissemination 
of  spiritual  trudis. 

In  the  following  chapter  we  shall  present  a  few  extracts  from  the  minutes 
of  the  first  conferences  held  in  New  York  prior  to  tlie  publication  of  the 
Spiritual  Telegraph.  A  faitiiful  record  of  tliese  interesting  meetings  was 
made  and  preserved  by  the  Secretary,  Dr.  R.  T.  Hallock,  to  whose  courtesy 
we  are  indebted  for  the  valuable  testimony  it  affords.  It  may  seem  a  matter 
of  surprise  and  even  of  indignation,  that  the  early  facts  of  modern  Spiritualism 
should  have  found  no  wide-spread  or  truthful  field  of  representation  until  the 
publication  of  organs  especially  devoted  to  the  subject  could  be  accomphshed. 

It  is  almost  incredible  that  in  America,  where  tlie  newspaper  is  the  neces- 
sity of  the  people's  life,  its  columns  should  have  left  either  unrepresented,  or 
worse  still,  misrepresented,  a  subject  of  such  vast  and  universal  interest  and 
phenomena  so  wonderful  and  well  attested  as  Spirituahsm  abounds  with. 
Yet  the  marvel  of  this  treatment  ceases  when  we  attempt  to  compare  the 
nature  of  the  movement  with  our  own  preconceived  opinions  concerning  the 
possibilities  of  spiritual  existence.  Were  not  these  of  the  most  vague  and 
undefined  character?  and  have  not  all  our  views  of  disembodied  spiritual  life 
been  full  either  of  the  sepulchral  awe  which  threw  over  it  the  veil  of  mysti- 
cism and  terror,  or  else  we  were  taught  to  treat  this  most  sublime  and  mo- 
mentous subject  with  the  fool's  arguments — ridicule,  um-easoning  denial,  and 
senseless  satire. 

The  immortal  soul  of  man  has  either  been  imprisoned  by  dreary  supersti- 
tion in  the  loatlisome  charnel  house,  or  banished  by  ignorance  to  the  nursery 
and  ale  house.  There  has  been  no  midway  in  man's  unphilosophical  treat- 
ment of  the  great  theme;  hence  when  Spiritualism  came,  with  its  common- 
sense  realities,  scientific  methods  of  communion,  and  analytical  philosophy, 
its  form  was  so  totally  at  variance  with  all  preconceived  notions  of  what  a 

Hosted  by  Google 

j6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

spirit  should  do,  or  how  a  "ghost"  should  act,  that  die  human  soul  was  an 
unrecognized  stranger  in  the  land  of  its  birth  and  the  world  of  its  kindred 
humanity. 

To  the  superstitious,  its  dignity  was  shorn  of  its  shroud  and  the  attend- 
ant horrors  of  the  grave.  To  the  pious,  a  spirit  ^vas  a  bodiless  idea,  a  gnome, 
2.  sylph,  ^n  arc/iangd  or  arch  fiend;  anydiing,  rather  than  die  ripe  fruit  of  a 
purified  humanity ;  and  nothing,  rather  than  aught  that  humanity  could  con- 
ceive  of.  To  the  bigot,  ali  spiritual  existence  but  that  which  was  manifested 
in  Judea  eighteen  centuries  ago  was  "satanic"  in  its  origin  and  "evil"  in  per- 
sonality. To  the  scoffer,  the  only  idea  of  any  existence  that  could  not  be 
pounded  in  a  mortar  or  manipulated  in  a  chemist's  retort  was  "humbug," 
imposture,  "  old  woman's  fables,  or  nursery  tales,"  and  thus,  as  there  is  but  a 
step  from  the  sublime  to  the  ridiculous,  the  demoniac  theory  on  die  one  liand, 
and  die  illogical  breadi  of  ridicule  on  Uie  other,  was  all  that  Uie  world's  repre- 
sentatives in  press  and  pulpit  could  bring  to  bear  on  the  subject.  In  lact 
they  only  knew  enough  to  condemn  the  souls  of  their  ancestors  to  the  keep- 
ing of  the  evil  one,  or  drive  them  back  from  their  work  of  angelic  ministry 
by  the  jibes  of  cold  materialism.  Whilst  our  sense  of  reverence  for  the 
exalted  themes  of  immortality  and  our  gratitude  to  the  beloved  immortals  is 
sliocked  and  offended  by  the  denunciations  of  bigotry,  and  the  painfully  irrele- 
vant misconceptions  of  ignorance,  let  us  with  modest  humility  ask  ourselves, 
.  with  such  teachings  as  die  world  has  received  on  such  subjects,  what  right  we 
have  to  look  for  a  more  general  spirit  of  enlightenment. 

The  status  of  human  opinion  on  the  sublime  questions  of  immortal  life  are 
precisely  what  priestcraft  and  indolent  superstition  have  made  it.  If  the 
spirits  had  come  in  accordance  widi  the  cherished  fables  of  antiquity,  or  the 
shapes  which  this  same  superstition  had  devised  for  them,  they  would  doubt- 
less have  been  received  with  more  welcome  and  credit  than  in  the  simplicity 
of  their  risen  humanity.  But  whilst  the  true  believers  had  great  cause  to  be 
thankful  that  die  scales  had  fallen  from  their  eyes,  wlio  could  censure  the 
multitude  for  "walking  in  gross  darkness"  so  long  as  the  people  and  dieir 
teachers  were  "the  blind  leading  the  blind?" 

CHAPTER  Viri. 

SPIRITUALISM      IN      NEW      YORK      CITY      AND      STATE. 

"The  weapons  which  your  hands  have  found 
Are  those  which  heaven  hath  wraughi  -- 
Light,  miih,  and  love;  your  haide  ground, 
The  ftee,  btoad  field  of  thought." 

J,  G.  WH,ITIER. 

Tke  Conference  and  its  Influence— Spiritualism  in  Waterford,  N.  V.— The 
eccleslasticalco.mmission  and  what  came  of  it— narratives  glven  at  thf, 
Conference,  New  York— Mr.  Hooper's  Involuntary  Medium  ship— Edward 
Fowler  anb  Warren  Bovn  to  n  ^  Ekcommuni  cation. 

As  the  meetings  of  the  New  York  Conference  became  more  fully  attended 
by  strangers  from  a  distance,  the  recital  of  the  phenomenal  facts  transpiring 
in  various  sections  of  the  country  increased  the  interest  of  the  gatherings 
and  tended  to  disclose  the  universality  of  the  movement 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  77 

During  the  first  session  of  the  conference  in  1851  Mr.  Smith,  of  Ncinvich, 
related  many  instances  of  fine  test  commimications  received  through  various 
media  residing  in  that  city,  who  presented  the  then  rare  faculty  of  imitating 
the  writing  of  deceased  persons,  and  by  pantomimic  action  graphically  repre- 
senting their  peculiarities,  and  identifying  their  names  by  symbolical  pictures 
psychologically  impressed  upon  the  media. 

The  Rev.  R.  P.  Ambler,  the  editor  of  the  Spiritual  Messenger,  already  in 
successfiil  operation  in  Springfield,  Massachusetts,  related  many  extraordinary 
facts  of  spiritual  phenomena  occurring  in  that  city,  where  the  number  cf 
mediums,  public  and  private,  was  believed  already  to  exceed  two  hundred. 

Drs.  Brewer  and  Beebe  testified  to  the  extraordinary  interest  that  was 
manifested  in  the  city  of  Brooklyn,  New  York,  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism. 
At  circles  held  in  their  own  families,  many  media  had  been  rapidly  developed, 
and  within  the  range  of  their  immediate  acquaintance  above  fifty  chcles  had 
been  formed,  at  which  rapping,  writing,  spirit-lights,  movement  of  heavy 
bodies,  and  various  other  phases  of  "the  power"  were  abundantly  manifest. 
Rev.  Wilham  Fishbough  related  still  more  striking  and  numerous  proofs  of 
the  progress  of  the  cause  in  Williamsburgh,  New  York,  where  he  staled  that 
hundreds  of  circles  were  being  held  nightly,  and  openly-avowed  believers 
were  multiplying  on  every  side.  Several  other  gentlemen  gave  similar  reports 
from  other  sections  of  New  York  State,  especially  from  Troy,  Watertbrd, 
Utica,  Central  and  Western  New  York.  Although  not  in  connection  with  the 
New  York  Conference,  it  belongs  to  our  subject  and  period  to  relate  the  origin 
of  Spirituahsm  in  Waterford,  a  village  about  four  miles  from  Troy,  where  the 
manifestations  had  already  taken  strong  hold  of  a  lai^e  number  of  the  com- 
munity. 

The  reports  from  (his  city  were  so  startling,  and  the  efl"ect  of  conviction 
was  becoming  so  obvious  and  wide  spread,  that  a  reverend  gentleman,'  one  of 
the  officiating  pastors  of  the  large  manufacturing  village  of  Waterford,  waited 
upon  General  BullanJ,  a  distinguished  lawyer  of  the  place,  and  be^ed  him, 
in  company  with  four  ■  other  of  the  most  prominent  men  of  the  district,  to 
institute  inquiries  into  the  "obnoxious  thing,"  with  a  view  to  crushing  its  infi- 
delic  and  satanic  tendencies. 

Without  questioning  as  to  how  far  the  reverend  gentleman's  duty,  as  a 
minister  to  human  souls,  might  have  required  \i\5  personal  inquisition  into  the 
"dangerous  delusion,"  the  good-natued  friend  to  whom  he  delegated  the 
duty  promised  compliance  with  his  re  jue  t.  and  as  h  mself  and  two  others  of 
the  investigating  party  were  famed  for  th  lej^al  acumen,  and  the  whole 
number  were  selected  for  the  qualities  whch  esi  ec  ally  fitted  them  for  the 
ofSce  of  spiritual  "  detectives,"  it  was  cont  dently  bel  eved  that  if  Spiritualism 
had  not  already  been  exploded — a  con  n  nat  on  hich  each  succeeding  day 
was  expected  to  produce— its  annihlaton  at  the  hands  of  the  Waterford 
investigators  was  so  inevitable  that  their  reverend  employer  already  began  to 
busy  himself  in  preparations  for  celebrating  its  funeral  obsequies  in  his  ensuiiig 
Sabbath-day  sermon. 

Having  learned  that  "spirit  rapping"  was  to  be  found  in  its  most  startling 
prominence  in  the  person  of  a  little  daughter  of  Mr.  Anson  Attwood,  of  Troy, 
and  that  the  parents  of  the  child  had  generously  opened  their  house  free  of 
charge  to  investigators,  the  party,  headed  by  General  Bullard,  proceeded  to 
fulfil  their  mission  by  calling  at  the  house  in  question. 

ITiey  were  freely  admitted  by  Mrs.  Attwood,  who,  without  requesting  even 
the  formality  of  their  names,  introduced  them  to  her  little  girl,  who  at  the 
time  was  amusing  herself  wilii  the  toys  proper  to  her  age. 

Hosted  by  Google 

78  HISTORY  OF  MODERtT 

This  total  unconcern,  together  with  the  childish  appearance  and  occupation 
of  the  young  priestess,  somewhat  disconcerted  the  grave  magisterial  party 
who  had  come  prepared  to  detect  well-laid  plans  of  imposture,  or  confront 
the  impious  craft  of  satanic  agency,  but ' '  not  to  play  doll  games  with  children, 
or  learnmetaphysics  from  babes  and  sucklings." 

The  little  medium  was  "out  of  sorts,"  tlie  mother  said,  and  having  been 
tortured  into  ill  temper  and  impatience  by  "  incessant  attendance  on  circles," 
she  had  to  be  coaxed  by  a  liberal  supply  of  candy,  under  the  stimulus  of 
which  she  consented  to  "  sit  for  the  gentlemen."  At  this  crisis  there  was  not 
one  of  the  pajty  but  would  have  gladly  retreated  from  a  scene  where  they 
felt  their  d^nity  as  "  sensible  men  and  magistrates"  ridiculously  compromised 
by  the  initiatory  steps  of  their  mission. 

They  could  well  understand — and  some  of  diem  even  reverently  accord 
their  belief  to— die  idea  that  die  Supreme  Being,  die  Ruler  of  the  Universe, 
had  delegated  to  man  the  right  to  sell  passports  to  a  Roman  Catholic  heaven 
at  so  much  a  head,  put  a  tariff  on  the  liberty  to  commit  sins  at  so  much 
apiece,  or  that  a  Deity  of  infinite  goodness  and  wisdom  should  commission  two 
s/i€-bears  to  come  out  of  a  wood  and  tear  forty  and  two  little  children  because 
they  called  Elisha  the  Prophet,  bald  head*  All  this  and  volumes  more  of  the 
same  nature,  '_'  diey  could  believe  and  still  adore ; "  but  the  idea  of  bribing  a 
child  with  a  piece  of  candy  to  telegraph  a  message  from  a  departed  spirit  I 
The  very  bare  thought  was  so  full'  of  impiety  and  absurdity  that,  but  for  the 
lady-hke  self-possession  of  Mrs.  Attwood,  die  doughty  champions  of  truth 
would  have  run  away  and  hid  themselves  for  sheer  shame,  A  smgle  quarter 
of  an  hour's  experience  of  the  marvels  outwrought  through  this  most  undig- 
nified means,  however,  soon  changed  their  views,  rivetted  their  profoundest 
interest,  and  made  them  forget  the  agency  of  the  unconcerned  little  one 
altogether. 

Seated  on  a  high  chair,  with  her  tiny  feet  resting  ona  footboard,  the  medium 
all-unconsciousIy  munched  away  at  her  sweetmeats  whilst  the  spirits  lifted 
her  about  and  moved  her  from  place  to  place  with  the  ease  of  a  feather  blown 
by  the  winds. 

Meantime  the  heavy  table  around  which  the  party  were  gathered  rocked 
and  rolled  like  a  ship  at  sea ;  the  chairs  of  the  gentlemen,  with  their  occupants, 
were  moved  bodily,  whilst  loud  raps  sounding  from  various  parts  of  the  room 
spelled  out  names,  dates,  and  mess^es,  identical  with  numerous  deceased 
friends  of  the  astounded  witnesses.  The  wonderful  and  occult  science  hidden 
in  these  mysterious  forces,  and  the  preternatural  mass  of  intelligence  spelled 
out  in  choice  and  characteristeric  phrases,  soon  stamped  the  dignity  of  a  stu- 
pendous revelation  from  the  hitherto  mysterious  reahns  of  immortality  upon 
fliis  phase  of  spiritual  telegraphy. 

The  sitters  became  the  deeply-moved  recipients  of  many  an  affecting  token 
of  a  love  that  death  cannot  change  and  a  mental  fire  that  the  grave  cannot 
quench,  and  thus  they  soon  forgot  the  youth  and  insignificance  of  die  little 
telegraphic  wire  that  the  spirits  were  using. 

The  lonely  and  bereaved  heart  of  one  was  cheered  by  the  precious  tokens 
of  identity  which  proved  die  undying  love  of  a  still  living  friend.  Another, 
who  had  long  groped  in  the  blindness  of  cold  materialism,  beheld  the  glorious 
sunlight  of  immortality  proved  in  the  continued  life  of  a  cherished  parent. 
Others  perceived  the  key  which  unlocked  the  dim  mysteries  of  religion  and 
the  problem  of  miracles  wrested  from  the  skeleton  hand  of  death  and  cast 

•  Vide  II.  Kings,  ii.  24. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  79 

into  tlie  open  lap  of  humanity.  All  felt  that  they  stood  on  the  threshold  of 
the  once-closed  temple  of  immortal  mind — diat  they  were  in  the  subHme 
presence  of  "the  mighty  dead,"  and,  putting  the  shoes  of  their  materiality 
from  off  their  feet,  tliey  felt  that  they  were  treading  "  on  holy  ground." 

This  deeply  interesting  skance  was  prolonged  to  an  unusual  length,  and 
just  as  it  was  about  to  terminate  a  spirit,  identifying  himself  with  a  deceased 
brother  of  General  Bullard's,  expressed  a  desire  to  communicate.  Up  to 
this  time  the  "detectives"  had  wholly  fot^otten  that  the  purpose  of  their 
visit  was  to  expose  die  manifestations  and  disprove  their  spiritual  origm  rather 
than  to  yield  up  their  own  convictions  in  the  opposite  direction.  Struck  with 
a  sudden  sense  of  his  duty  towards  his  reverend  friend,  and  with  something 
of  remorseful  feehng  for  his  breacli  of  faith  in  the  premises,  the  General 
determined  to  make  one  final  effort  to  prove  the  whole  thing  a  delusion. 

His  reason  was  strongly  in  favor  of  the  communicating  spirit's  identity  with 
that  of  his  brother,  but  ere  he  would  allow  his  judgment  to  pronounce  in 
favor  of  his  reason,  he  mentally  framed  this  sentence  : 

"  If  this  be  indeed  the  spirit  of  my  brother,  let  him  move  that  child  in  her 
chair  towards  me." 

General  Eullard  was  sitting  at  the  side  of  the  table  opposite  to  the  medium, 
and  as  it  was  a  very  large  one  there  was  room  between  any  of  the  party  for 
die  movement  of  a  chair.  His  wish  was  that  the  child's  chair  should  be 
moved  a  little  towards  the  end  of  the  table  whicli  was  nearest  to  himself,  but 
before  he  could  conclude  the  sentence  in  his  own  mind  which  he  was  endea- 
voring to  frame,  die  child,  chair  and  all,  was  lifted,  carried,  or  moved,  none 
present  could  define  how,  contpletely  round  the  table  and  set  lightly  down  by 
the  side  of  General  -BuUard.  The  whole  party  were  so  paralyzed  by  the 
sudden  action,  the  little  girl  herself  was  so  unconscious  of  any  force  being 
exerted  to  cause  this  change  of  locale,  involving  the  movement  of  the  chah, 
without  the  least  disturbance  of  her  attitude,  for  a  space  of  at  least  ten  feet, 
that  no  one  could  utter  even  an  ejaculation,  until  General  BiiUard,  to  whom 
alone  the  movement  was  pecuharly  significant,  started  up  with  an  irresistible 
impulse,  exclaiming,  "  By  Heaven,  it  is  all  true  ! " 

When  the  investigating  party  at  length  returned  with  their  very  unexpected 
report,  the  reverend  gentleman  in  whose  behalf  they  had  undertaken  it  was 
so  struck  with  consternation  at  the  result  that  he  concluded  to  continue  the 
inquiry  in  his  own  person,  and  as  the  spirits  had  promised  mediumistic  gifts 
to  some  of  the  party  if  they  would  "  sit  for  development,"  die  worthy  minister 
joined  them,  and  actually  became  a  fine  writing  medium,  and  ultimately  a 
confirmed  believer  in  the  truths  of  Spiritualism. 

Our  space  does  not  allow  us  to  follow  up  the  interesting  records  of  circles 
which  grew  out  of  tliis  first  introduction  of  the  subject  to  Wateiford. 

Many  remarkable  meditmis  were  developed  soon  afterwards,  amongst 
whom  was  Mr._Warren  Boynton,  a  most  excellent  writing  medium ;  a  lady 
who  subsequentiy  became  the  wife  of  General  Bullard;  Mr.  John  Proper,  a 
celebrated  and  reliable  test  medium,  and  many  odiers  of  equally  remarkable 
mediumistic  gifts.  Miss  Panny  Davis,  a  young  lady  residing  at  Lansingburg, 
about  two  miles  from  Waterford,  also  caught  die  afflatus  and  at  a  somewhat 
later  period  became  the  subject  of  a  protracted  trance,  during  which  she  lay 
motionless  and  unconscious  for  forty-five  days. 

On  awakening  from  this  remarkable  condition  of  coma.  Miss  Davis  became 
a  high'y-devcloped  trance  speaker,  in  which  character  her  ministrations  have 
instructed  and  delighted  public  audiences  of  many  thousands  of  persons  from 
that  period  to  tiie  present  day. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

So  HISTORY  OF  MODER!>r 

At  Ballston  Spa,  Saratoga,  Glenn's  Falls,  and  especially  in  the  capital  city 
of  New  York — A...irv— new  and  wonderful  phases  of  spirit-power  began  to 
arise  about  this  time. 

The  rumor  of  the  "opening  of  the  gates"  reached  these  places,  and 
induced  the  members  of  various  families  to  "sit  round  the  table  to  see  what 
would  come  of  it." 

When  the  New  York  Conference  were  first  holding  their  sessions  in  1851, 
and  earnestly  discussing  the  means  of  extending  tlie  knowledge  and  culti- 
vating the  gifts  of  spiritual  communion,  thousands  of  circles  were  being  held 
in  different  sections  of  the  State. 

Few  if  any  experiments  of  this  kind  continued  beyond  the  third  sitting 
without  unfolding  mediumistic  powers  in  one  or  more  of  the  parties  present, 
and  the  reports  which  were  weekly  rendered  at  that  conference  fended  to 
show  that  there  was  at  least  one  public  medium  for  every  town,  city,  and 
hamlet  in  the  Empire  State  of  America,  besides  thousands  of  individuals  in 
famiUes  whose  names  were  denied  to  the  public,  though  their  gifts  as  spirit 
mediums  were  the  subject  of  popular  comment  and  notoriety. 

At  a  meetmg  of  the  conference  early  in  the  year  1852,  Dr.  Greaves,  of 
Milwaukee,  a  gentleman  eminent  for  his  truthful  character  and  success  as  a 
physician,  related  a  new  development  of  "the  power,"  as  it  occurred  under 
his  own  observation  in  the  city  of  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.  As  a  scientific 
man,  ever  prosecuting  his  researches  into  nature's  laws  with  the  humility  of 
a  scholar.  Dr.  Greaves  had  investigated  animal  magnetism,  and  realized 
with  considerable  interest  its  singular  results  in  clairvoyance  and  the  cure  of 
diseases. 

In  the  year  1850,  and  before  he  had  more  than  heard  a  faint  rumor  of  the 
"Rochester  knodtings,"  a  clairvoyant  of  remarkable  lucidity  informed  him 
in  the  magnetic  sleep  that  the  spiritual  manifestations  now  so  rife  in  the 
East  would  appear  in  that  city  in  a  few  days,  mentioning  two  individuals 
[patients  of  the  Doctor's],  who  would  become  mediums. 

To  the  mother  of  one  of  these  young  ladies  the  Doctor  soon  after  com- 
municated ihe  singular  prophecy,  when  the  lady  expressed  herself  greatly 
pleased  with  the  intelligence,  as  being  likely  to  account  for  certain  strange 
noises  which  they  had  heard  for  several  nights  past,  and  which  had  caused 
them  equal  alarm  and  annoyance.  At  that  time  the  family  had  never  even 
heard  of  the  "Rochester  knockings;"  but,  acdng  under  the  advice  of  their 
trusted  physician,  they  formed  a  circle,  obtained  loud  rappings  and  intelligent 
responses,  and  within  a  few  weeks  afterwards,  the  father  of  the  young  lady 
informed  Doctor  Greaves  with  great  emotion  that  "they  had  received,  dirough 
Mary,  communicatio      f  11   1    u"  f     d     1      h  d  died,  and  that  strangers 

visiting  them  could  ob  "  *■  *"         -       -        " " 

In  this,  as  in  one      t 
his  own  agency,  and 
evolvii^  medium  po  1 

known  that  he  was  i  d 

circles  in  every  part    fid 
least  thirty  or  forty  f      1 
glad  tidings  of  the  c  mm 
them,  as  in  New  York 
from  it  startled   by  th 
become  the  family 
ministering  spirits. 

At  one  house   th 

h 

1  d 

1  d,D 

Greaves  could  trace 

lly 

h 

b     h 

f 
dd  d  1 

magnetic  operations,  in 
it  no  sooner  became 

k 
h 

h 
1 

d 
lb     , 

h      1 
h 
gl 

was  invited  to  attend 
lediuniistic  gifts  of  at 
the  faint  echo  of  the 

1 

d 
h 

md 
1       bl 
h      h 
h    b 

f'^m 
hui  bl 
i 

hus  far  West,  inducing 
re  curiosity,  and  arise 
domestic  board  had 
lortals  had   been  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  8i 

1  the  mediumship  of  a  fragile  young  girl.  A  sofa  on  which  foOT  full- 
grown  persons  were  seated  was  rocked  to  and  fro  as  viol"nti^'  as  the  strength 
of  the  sofa  would  permit.  Odic  lights  of  a  dee^^  red  color  floated  around 
a  darkened  room,  forming,  melting,  and  being  subjected  to  the  closest 
scrutiny,  affording  to  the  narrator  [a  scientific  chemist]  the  most  conclusive 
assurance  that  they  were  not  of  mundane  origin  or  composition. 

On  several  occasions  a  very  heavy  dining-table  was  held  suspended  in  the 
air  with  several  persons  seated  on  it  whose  feet  did  not  even  touch  the  floor. 

Mr.  Train,  of  Kenosha,  Wisconsin,  detailed  at  the  same  conference  many 
equally  astonishing  evidences  of  phenomenal  Spiritualism,  which  had  arisen 
m_  his  section  of  the  State.  Mr.  Train  seemed  disposed  to  attribute  the 
origin  of  the  manifestations  in  part  to  the  influence  of  magnetism.  His  own 
investigations,  he  stated,  had  conducted  him  from  the  study  of  Swedenborg 
to  the  writings  of  A.  J.  Davis,  and  from  thence  to  the  practice  of  animal 
magnetism,  in  the  course  of  which  his  subjects  not  only  became  clairvoyant, 
but  were  often  attended  by  loud  rappings  and  strange  movements  of  the 
furniture.  Up  to  the  time  when  the  reports  of  spirit  circles  at  the  East 
reached  them,  they  attributed  these  unusual  sights  and  sounds  to  magnetism, 
or  a  peculiar  action  of  electricity  evolved  by  the  condition  of  magnetized 
subjects.^  After  reading  the  experiences  of  others,  they  resolved  to  test  by 
alphabetical  signs  the  possibility  of  communing  with  spirits  through  these 
means;  and  in  their  success,  numbers  were  induced  to  form  circles,  and  thus, 
he  added,  during  the  last  year  [185 1]  Spiritualism  had  extended  over  the 
State,  and  into  adjoining  sections  of  country,  with  inconceivable  rapidity  and 
power. 

Mr.  Nimthome,  of  Bridgeport,  Connecticut,  related  instances  of  the  rapid 
development  of  medium  powers  in  quite  one  half  of  any  given  number  who 
would  consent  to  sit  in  circles.  He  mentioned  a  striking  case  of  phenomenal 
power  that  had  been  exhibited  at  a  recent  circle  in  Bridgeport,  in  which 
a  spirit  who  had  died  by  a  railway  accident  produced  the  sounds  of  the 
whistle  and  locomotive,  and  besides  imitating  the  sound  of  escaping  steam, 
succeeded  in  imparting  to  more  than  a  dozen  people  assembled  the  sense  of 
strong  currents  of  air  nishing  through  the  room. 

Early  in  February,  1852,  Mr.  Partridge,  having  returned  from  a  visit  to 
Massachusetts,  gave  a  most  encouraging  account  of  tlie  progress  of  the  cause 
in  that  State. 

About  the  beginning  of  the  year  1850,  a  gentleman  of  Fitchburg,  Massa- 
chusetts, Mr.  Edward  Hooper,  whilst  sitting  writing  at  his  desk,  found  his 
hand  moved  by  a  strange  and  irresistible  influence  to  inscribe,  without  any 
volition  of  his  own,  these  words  on  the  page^  Your  father  is  dead.  Mr. 
Hooper's  father  at  that  time  resided  in  England,  and  at  the  last  account 
received  from  him  was  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health ;  hence,  the  writing, 
strange  as  it  seemed  to  be,  originating  from  no  impression  on  his  mind, 
caused  little  anxiety  until  it  was  repeated  under  precisely  simikr  circum- 
stances a  few  hours  later,  and  was  confirmed  in  five  days  by  the  receipt  of  a 
letter  from  England,  announcing  his  father's  death. 

The  singularity  of  this  involuntary  and  prophetic  act  of  mediumship 
stimulated  Mr.  Hooper  and  several  of  his  friends  to  hold  circles,  from  which 
had  arisen  a  great  variety  of  phenomenal  facts,  strong  medium  powers,  and  a 
remarkable  degree  of  interest  in  the  subject. 

Mr.  Partridge,  at  the  request  of  a  large  body  of  Spiritualists  in  Templeton, 
Massachusetts,  gave  a  lecture  on  the  subject,  whidi  was  listened  to  by  an 
immense  auditory  widi  the  most  profound  interest 

Hosted  by  Google 

82  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Many  other  places  in  Massachusetts  and  the  rest  of  the  New  England 
States,  were  represented  in  the  conference  to  be  progressing  with  astonishing 
celeri^  in  the  knowledge  of  spiritual  communion,  and  the  unfoldment  of  new 
and  powerful  phases  of  mediumship. 

Tidings  of  this  nature,  however,  were  still  more  remarkable  from  the  West, 
and  even  from  California  and  the  Pacific  Islands.  Visitors  brought  the 
assurance  that  circles  for  spirit  communion  were  being  held  smiultaneously 
widi  die  meetings  that  were  discussing  the  best  means  of  reaching  them 
in  New  York.  Besides  constituting  a  focal  point,  where  all  the  radiating 
lines  of  wide-spread  interest  could  converge  and  be  gathered  up  for  future 
edification,  several  important  modes  of  action  were  devised  and  executed 
by  the  good  pioneers  engaged  in  these  New  York  Conferences.  A  circular 
was  issued  and  sent  to  various  parts  of  the  country,  calhng  for  facts  and 
requesting  die  narration  of  experiences  in  different  States.  The  result  of 
this  wise  measure  was  the  accumulation  of  a  vast  amount  of  mforination, 
forming  an  almost  inexhaustible  treasury  for  research  in  fuhire  time. 

A  committee  was  drafted  also  to  attend  to  the  formation  of  circles  m 
various  parts  of  the  city,  which,  being  numbered  and  communicating  with  the 
Conference  or  New  York  Circle  as  head  centre,  for  a  long  time  supplied  a 
very  satisfactory  chain  of  telegraphic  offices,  whose  records  were  full  of  in- 
teresting phenomena. 

The  rapid  progress  of  Spiritualism,  and  the  privacy  and  reticence  which  has 
marked  its  reception  in  hundreds  of  famihes  since  the  time  of  winch  we  write, 
has  completely  outgrown  the  fostering  care  of  a  parent  cncle,  the  influence 
of  which  was  only  temporarily  felt  in  the  infancy  of  the  movement. 

Another  highly  important  step  was  taken  when  the  conference  came  to 
the  conclusion  to  represent  their  views  in  the  most  public  and  forcible  manner 
possible  through  the  rostrum. 

For  this  purpose  the  services  of  the  Rev.  S.  B.  Britain  were  secured,  and 
a  series  of  addresses  commenced,  the  first  of  which  was  given  at  Hope 
Chapel,  Broadway,  on  the  evening  of  February  26di,  1852.  From  this  time, 
with  few  interruptions.  Spiritualism,  its  claims,  facts,  theories,  and  all  its  gen- 
eral features  of  interest,  have  been  ably  represented  on  New  York  platforms 
on  an  average  once  in  every  week,  until  regular  Sunday  services,  morning 
and  evening,  and  an  afternoon  conference,  has  placed  it  prominently  before 
die  New  York  public  as  a  great  religious  no  less  than  a  reformatory  and 
scientific  movement.  The  most  momentous  result  which  die  deliberations  of 
the  conference  achieved,  however,  was  the  pubhcation  of  a  weekly  journal, 
entitled  die  Spiritual  Telegraph,  which  for  a  period  of  several  years  formed 
one  of  the  most  complete  and  well-conducted  records  of  the  spiritual  move- 
ment of  which  its  literature  can  boast. 

It  was  started  in  the  first  place  by  the  enterprise  of  Mr.  Charles  Partridge 
and  Rev.  S.  B.  Britain,  who,  with  certain  financial  guarantees  from  many  of 
the  leading  Spiritualists  of  the  city,  commenced  their  admirable  and  valuable 
serial  on  May  8th,  1852. 

The  publication  of  diis  paper  was  an  era  in  the  history  of  New  York 
Spiritualism  from  whence  a  stupendous  impetus  was  derived.  As  its  charac- 
ter and  influence  will  be  particularized  in  treating  of  the  literature  of  Spirit- 
ualism, we  need  enter  no  further  at  present  into  the  details  of  diis  important 
undertaking.  Several  pamphlets  of  timely  use  and  value  in  the  early  stages 
of  the  cause  were  published  by  aid  of  liberal  sTibscriptions  from  the  members 
of  the  conference.  Amongst  these  was  an  excellent  essay  on  circles  by  Mr. 
Hunt,  and  some  remarkable  communications  from  the  spirit-worid  through 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  83 

the  raediumship  of  Mr.  Edward  Fowler.     Large  issues  of  this  pamphlet  were 
made  for  gratuitous  circulation. 

The  conference  also  made  large  contributions  towards  the  publication  of 
many  printed  communications,  which,  at  that  particular  stage  of  knowledge, 
or  rather  ignorance,  on  the  subject  of  spirit-life  and  communion,  became 
of  great  importance.  Amongst  Uiese,  we  find  printed  for  gratuitous  circula- 
tion a  number  of  communications  purporting  to  come  from  spirits  whose 
exalted  names  on  earth  were  freely  used  as  authority  for  the  instructions  con- 
veyed.  They  were  given  through  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  Warren  Boynton,  of 
Waterford,  New  York,  of  whom  Mr.  King,  a  gentleman  of  good  standing 
from  the  same  place,  gives  the  following  sketch  : 

"  He  [Mr.  Boynton],  iaTing  sat  in  circles  for  spirit  influence,  found  his  hand  automati- 
cally  conlrolled  to  write  whole  pages  of  matter,  (he  sentiment  of  which  was  often  at  total 
variance  with  his  own  opinions  on  religious  subjects.  Mr.  Boynton  was  a  devoted  adherent 
to  the  tenets  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodists,  and  yet  for  many  months  he  found  himself  im- 
pelled, ander  an  influence  he  could  not  resist,  to  write  sentiments  whose  broad  liberality  he 
knew  to  be  inimical  to  the  dogmas  of  his  own  treed,  and,  what  was  to  him  a  still  more 
perplexing  act,  to  sign  to  many  of  the  heretical  papers  he  so  bitterly  condemned  the 
honored  name  of  the  founder  of  Methodism,  'John  Wesley'  himself.  Amongst  these 
infidelic  protests  against  his  convictions  was  an  essay,  [which  formed  a  part  of  the  printed 
pamphlet  above  alluded  to],  eonunencing  thus;  '  Salvation  is  progresaon.  Christ  is  a  prin- 
ciple. Reason  is  a  divine  attribute  of  the  soul.  Nature  is  a  book  unfoldmg  the  wisdom 
and  goodness  of  the  Deity,'  etc.  Before  the  publication  of  this  pamphlet,  however,  Mr. 
Boynton's  convictions  had  become  harmonized  with  those  of  his  spiritual  teachers,  and  to 
some  extent  in  a  fcelmg  of  disgnst  and  revulsion  produced  by  the  action  of  his  Christian 
instructors,  who  no  sooner  heard  that  he  had  become  'a  sphit  medium'  than  they  forth- 
with excommunicated  him  from  their  fellowship." 

It  is  proper  here  to  remark  that  ecclesiastical  thunder  of  this  description 
was  now  becoming  a  very  frequent  resort  for  the  purpose  of  quenching  the 
spintual  lightning  diat  preceded  it ;  but,  as  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Boynton,  it 
generally  had  the  effect  of  stimulating  the  excommunicated  to  seek  consola- 
tion in  a  more  Christ-like,  if  not  a  Christian  community,  whilst  its  effect  upon 
the  world  in  general  was  precisely  that  which  abuse  or  injustice  ever  pro- 
duces oil  the  brave  and  true — namely,  to  arouse  a  spirit  of  indignant  resist- 
ance which  ended  in  making  ahundred  Spiritualists  for  every  excommunicated 
Christian. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

'    YORK    CITY    AND 
thouh^ars^t  its  vdcf,  but  know. 

STATE-CONTINUED. 
:sl  ml  whfflce  il  come,h  or  whi.W  i\ 

Spirit  Autographs  — Spiritum-  Literature  — Judge  Ebmonds  — The  Early 
Investigators  and  their  Treatment  — Reaction— Mahgaretta  Fox  and 
HER  Assailants -Governor  Tallmadge  and  his  Noble  Testimony— Y  C 
Calhoun  as  a  Spirit. 

Amongst  die  most  remarkable  manifestations  which  were  preserved  in  the 
archives  of  the  New  York  Conference,  none  are  more  interesting  than  those 
which  relate  to  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  Edward  Fowler,  the  medical  student 
to  whom  allusion  has  already  been  made. 

Hosted  by  Google 

84  mSTORV  OF  MODERM 

Besides  the  facility  of  seeing  and  conversing  intelligently  with  spirits,  Mn 
Fowler's  mind,  being  of  a  scientific  cast,  was  frequently  instructed  through 
vivid  pictorial  imagery  or  direct  conamunications  with  the  methods  adopted 
by  spirits  to  effect  their  coipmunion  with  mortals  by  means  of  raps,  move- 
ments of  bodies,  entrancement,  etc.  Languages  of  the  most  unfamiliar 
nature,  hyeroglyphical  figures,  and  Oriental  iviitings,  were  constantly  found  in 
his  chamber  inscribed  on  scraps  of  paper,  vases,  and  other  objects,  under 
circumstances  that  rendered  the  action  of  human  agency  impossible. 

Many  excellent  and  philosophical  descriptions  of  spirit-life  and  teaching 
were  written  or  spoken  by  him  in  the  trance  condition,  some  of  which  will  be 
found  under  the  head  of  "spiritual  communications,"  but  the  one  which  ex- 
cited the  most  interest  at  the  time  was  a  sentence  of  which  a  facsimile  and 
brief  account  will  be  found  in  the  subjoined  extract  from  the  Spiritual  Tele- 
graph  oi -i.^$2. 

It  is  proper  to  add  that  a  number  of  the  signatures  were  facsimiles  of  the 
hand-writing  ot  private  individuals  of  whose  existence  as  spirits  or  mortals 
Mr.  Fowler  could  liave  had  no  knowledge  ;  also  that  their  relations — some 
of  whom  were  members  of  the  New  York  Circle — testified  to  the  correct- 
ness of  the  signatures,  and  the  perfect  resemblance  which  each  signature 
bore  to  that  of  the  writers  whilst  on'  earth. 

The  "  sentiment "  contained  in  the  document  was  often  referred  to  by 
Spiritualists  during  the  late  great  American  conflict,  and  its  prophetic  charac- 
ter as  regards  the  issue  of  the  war  must  not  be  overlooked : 

SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH  — iBss.— NEW  YORK. 

"  Autographs  op  the  Spirits. — Many  of  our  readers  are  perhaps  aware  that  among 
the  Spiritual  manifestations  in  this  city  have  been  a  nnmber  of  fsyiifco/  manuscripts,  mostly 
in  foreign  and  ancient  languages,  and  other  documents  to  which  the  names  of  numerous  iii- 
dividnals  wlio  have  left  the  earth  have  Ijeen  signed. 

"  These  we  have  had  engraved  at  great  expense,  and  for  the  satisfaction  of  our  readers 
we  sliall  publish  them  in  the  Telegraph.     We  submit  the  following  brief  history  of  its 

"  '  At  a  regular  meeting  of  a  circle  convened  for  spiritual  intercourse  at  the  readence  of 
Charles  Partridge,  in  New  York,  December  nth,  1851,  the  subject  of  Kossuth's  mjs^on  to 
this  country  having  been  incidentally  referred  to,  the  spirits  addressed  the  medium,  E.  P. 
Fowler,  as  follows ;  '  Edward,  put  a  paper  on  your  table  and  we  will  write  a  sentiment 
and  subscribe  our  names,  then  you  may  all  agn  it  too.' 

"  '  In  accordance  with  the  above  directions  Edwaid  placed  a  paper  on  his  table  in  his 
sleeping-room,  which  was  duly  written  upon  in  the  course  of  the  night  and  signed  by  fOThi- 
three  spirits.  It  was  subsequently  signed  by  the  members  of  the  circle,  but  owmg  toihe 
om^ion  of  the  history  and  the  irregular  mode  of  affixing  the  signatures  of  the  members, 
the  spirits  made  the  following  communication  at  the  succeeding  regular  meeting :  '  Burn 
that,  and  we  will  write  upon  another.' 

"  '  Accordingly,  the  first  paper  was  destroyed,  and  a  parchment  was  procured  and  placed 
on  Edward's  table  .on  his  retirmg  for  the  night.  On  the  morning  of  the  23d  of  December, 
when  the  medium  arose,  he  found  the  sratiment,  ^  Peace,  but  not  without  freedom,'  and 
the  ^natures,  as  here  published,  inscribed  on  the  parchment. 

'"At  the  meeting  of  the  circle  held  on  the  a5th  of  December  Dr.  Hull  asked  the  spirits 
whether  each  spirit  executed  his  or  her  own  name  as  they  occurred  on  the  parchment,  when 
the  spirits  answered  emphatically,  '  Yes  I ' 

"  '  We,  the  imdecsigned,  believing  that  these  are  the  signatures  of  the  spirits  themselves, 
and  fitlly  concurring  in  the  sentiment  expressed,  hereunto  affix  our  names  this  2Sth  day  of 
December,  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty-one ; 

"  'John  orav,  Edward  P.  Fowler, 

JQHS  v.  Gray,  M.D.,  William  J.  Baner, 

S.  T,  Fowler,  Miss  Almira  L.  Fowler, 

F.  F.  Carey,  Mrs.  S.  A.  Partridge, 

Mrs.  Charlotte  F.  Wells,       Almon  Roff, 
Robert  T.  Shannon,  Ward  Citenev, 

Daniel  Mintiiorn,  Db.  K.  T.  Hallock, 

Chakles  Partridge,  Mrs.  Martha  H.  F.  Baner.  '" 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  85 

About  the  yeax  1851  New  York  Spiritualism  received  a  great  impulse 
from  the  fact  tliat  Mrs.  Fish,  the  eldest  of  the  Fox  sisters,  took  up  her  resi- 
dence ill  die  city,  and  opened  rooms  for  public  seances  which  were  constantly 
thronged  by  eager  and  intelligent  investigators.  At  this  time  also  die 
Sliekinak,  a  fine  literary  monthly  journal,  devoted  to  the  uiterests  of  Spirit- 
ualism, entered  upon  its  second  year  of  successful  propagandism. 

Its  talented  editor,  S.  B.  Britain,  joined  Mr.  Charles  Partridge  in  the 
production  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  the  first  issue  of  which  appeared  in 
May,  1852.  The  Spiritual  Messenger,  edited  by  R.  P.  Ambler  and  ApoUos 
Munn,  of  Springfield,  Massachusetts,  was  already  enjoying  a  wide  circulation, 
and  New  England  Spiritualism  was  further  represented  in  Boston  by  the 
commencement  of  an  excellent  paper,  conducted  by  the  Rev.  S.  Crosby 
Hewitt,  called  the  New  Era. 

Even  the  far  West  was  represented  in  this  constellated  mass  of  spiritual 
journalism,  as  a  large  and  ably-conducted  paper  was  started  in  St  Louis, 
Missouri,  called  Light  from  the  Spirit  World,  which  detailed  die  spread  of 
"the  cause"  from  the  banks  of  the  Hudson  in  the  East,  to  the  shores 
of  the  Mississippi  in  the  Southwest. 

Besides  the  periodicals  already  named,  there  was  a  great  mass  of  ephem- 
eral literature  constantly  issuing  from  the  press,  containing  narratives  of  new 
and  wonderful  phenomena ;  reports  of  lectures,  circles,  discussions,  and  also 
of  conventions,  the  first  of  which,  held  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  was  speedily 
followed  by  others  in  Boston,  Worcester,  and  other  parts  of  the  country. 

Amongst  the  more  important  publications  of  this  period  were  the  works 
of  A.  J.  Davis,  which,  besides  "Nature's  Divine  Revelations"  and  three 
volumes  of  the  "  Great  Harmonia,"  comprised  a  considerable  number  of 
tracts  and  widely-circulated  pamphlets.  A  list  of  the  spiritual  publications 
in  the  New  Era  of  November,  1852,  announced  as  of  recent  date  and 
American  authorship,  a  volume  of  communications  called  "Light  from  the 
Spirit-World,"  received  through  the  mediumship  of  Rev.  C.  Hammond,  of 
Rochester;  "The  Spiritual  Pilgrimage  of  Thomas  Paine,"  from  the  same 
source;  "Elements  of  Spiritual  Philosophy,"  a  finely-written  and  scholarly 
production  by  the  Rev.  R.  P.  Ambler,  of  Springfield,  Massachusetts; 
"  Voices  from  the  Spirit- World,"  by  Isaac  Post,  medium,  of  Rochester ;  "The 
Clairvoyant  Family  Physician,"  by  Mrs.  Tuttle;  several  pamphlets  published 
at  Cincinnati,  Rochester,  and  Auburn,  giving  a  history  of  the  manifestations 
up  to  that  time;  "Modem  Miracles,"  and  other  works,  by  S.  B.  Britain; 
"The  Spiritual  Experiences  of  Mrs.  Lorin  L.  Piatt,  medium;"  "Spirit 
Manifestations,"  by  the  Rev.  Adin  Ballou  ;  "The  Microcosm  and  Macrocosm 
of  the  Universe,"  by  the  Rev.  William  Fishbough;  "Messages  from  the 
Superior  State,"  by  the  Rev.  John  M.  Spear ;  "The  Spiritual  Teacher,"  by 
the  Rev.  R.  P.  Ambler;  "Supernal  Theology,"  and  "The  Spiritual  Instruc- 
tor," etc.  All  these  works  were  produced  during  the  first  three  years 
of  the  modern  manifestations;  and  that  the  sliadowy  side  of  the  picture 
should  not  be  wholly  left  to  the  uncandid  coloring  of  the  opposition,  a 
publication,  was  issued,  called  The  Mountain  Cove  Journal,  fuller  notice  of 
which  will  be  given  hereafter;  but  as  a  specimenof  human  audacity,  impiety, 
and  egotism,  this  paper,  though  professedly  indited  by  orders  of  "apostolic, 
angelic,  and  arch-angelic  spirits,"  was  only  prevented  from  destroying  Spirit- 
ualism by  the  transient  nature  of  its  existence  and  its  very  limited  circulation. 

From  the  year  1851,  spiritual  manifestations  engaged  the  attention  of 
Judge  Edmonds,  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  prominent  legal  men  that  has 
adorned  the   New  York  bar  since  America  could  boast  of  an  historical 

Hosted  by  Google 

86  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

record.  Miss  Laura  Edmonds,  a  daughter  of  ihe  Judge,  also  pursued  her 
researches  in  the  same  direction,  and  becaiue  developed  as  an  excellent 
medium  for  trance  speaking,  the  discerning  of  spirits,  the  gift  of  tongues, 
including  several  dead  and  living  languages  utterly  unknown  to  herself,  the 
ability  to  travel  ciairvoyantly  to  distant  places,  and  communicate  with  absent 
friends  by  the  mental  lele^ph.  All  these  gifts  Miss  Edmonds  nobly  devoted, 
without  money  or  price,  without  distmction  of  rank  or  fortune,  to  tlie  service 
of  the  world;  and  as  her  sianees  were  held  in  her  father's  private  residence, 
amidst  fliose  surroundings  of  wealth  and  refinement  which  rendered  the 
suspicion  of  complicity  or  fraud  impossible,  her  influence  upon  the  minds  of 
her  vast  throng  of  visitors  can  never  be  fully  appreciated,  until  her  own 
transfigured  spirit  shall  stand  face  to  face  with  the  glorioushost  of  enfran- 
chised souls  who  have  wrought  out  their  mission  of  revelation  through  the 
ministrations  of  this  estimable  lady. 

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  a  man  of  Judge  Edmonds's  distinguished  posi- 
tion, could  be  long  permitted  to  throw  his  powerful  advocacy  into  the  scale 
of  an  unpopular  cause,  without  becoming  a  taj^etfor  all  the  shafts  of  ridicule 
and  mendacity  which  were  being  levelled  ag^nst  Spiritualism  and  its  friends. 

Keenly  must  those  shafts  have  rankled,  aimed  as  they  were  at  the  man 
whom  public  opinion  had  before  lauded  to  the  skies,  and  promoted  to  the 
highest  places  of  trust  and  honor ;  tut  tliough  the  Judge  must  have  suffered 
with  all  the  acuteness  of  those  finely-strung  sensibilities  which  are  at  once 
tiie  bane  and  blessing  of  rare  genius,  no  expression  of  contempt  or  anger 
testified  to  his  disdain  of  his  mean  and  inconsistent  assailants,  until  some 
two  years  of  settled  conviction  had  given  him  that  impregnable  anchor  of 
truth  to  lean  upon,  from  which  he  could  afford  to  bear  witness  against  human 
injustice  and  falsehood  without  fear  lest  his  superstructure  of  metaphysical 
philosophy,  based  upon  physical  facts,  should  be  injured  by  the  fierce  storms 
of  pubhc  discussion  in  which  he  soon  found  himself  compelled  to  take  an 
acrive  share. 

The  legal  acumen  which  had  heretofore  commanded  the  highest  meed  of 
public  admiration,  and  the  same  amount  of  carefully-sifted  evidence  which 
he  had  been  wont  to  gather  up  in  the  public  service,  he  now  hurled  m  thunder- 
bolts of  proof  for  the  despised  truths  of  Spiritualism. 

In  company  with  other  gentlemen  who  became  distinguished  as  advocates 
of  Spiritualism,  Judge  Edmonds  was  actually  pointed  at  in  the  streets  "as  a 
crazy  Sphitualist."  As  believers  in  Spiritualism,  himself  and  various  mem- 
bers of  the  bar  and  medical  profession  were  treated  with  contumely,  and 
shouldered  out  of  practice,  office,  and  the  good  opinion  of  their  fellow-men. 

Wealthy  merchants  Uke  Mr  Charles  Partridge  were  compelled  to  assert 
their  claims  to  be  co  s  de  ed  ane  and  maintain  their  commercial  rights,  by 
the  most  firm  and  de  erm  ned  a  on.  Professional  men  and  tradesmen 
were  ofien  reduced  o  he  eyve  e  of  ruin  by  the  evil  reputation  tliat  clung 
around  the  dreaded  name  of  Sp  itualist,"  and  a  relentless  persecution, 
originated  by  the  p  n  a  n  a  n  d  by  the  pulpit,  and  stimulated  to  frenzy 
by  the  rank  and  num  of  e  po  -erful  adherents  that  began  to  swell  its 
ranks,  directed  the  u  flow  of  evil  tides  against  "the  cause"  and  its 
representatives.  Many  of  e  houses  where  circles  were  being  held  were 
disturbed  by  crowds  who  wou  d  gather  together  afl:er  night-fall,  and  with 
yells,  cries,  whistles,  and  o  as  onally  with  the  breaking  of  windows  b^ 
stones  and  other  m  es  endea  o  to  molest  the  quiet  investigators  in  then- 
"unkolywork  of  iiak  n  d  ad    as  one  of  the  Brooklyn  papers  piously 

denomuiated  the  ac   o  seekngfo   the  "Ministry  of  Angels." 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  %1 

The  principal  leaders  of  the  movement,  no  less  than  the  mediums  tliem- 
selves,  were  seriously  obnoxious  to  this  kind  of  rowdyism. 

The  mediums,  especially  the  ladies,  were  turned  out  of  their  offices  and 
boarding-houses.  Hotel-keepers  ollen  declined  to  receive  them,  and  in  the 
streets  they  were  constantly  subject  to  the  most  insulting  and  sometimes 
even  threatening  language.  Their  public  meetings  were  disturbed,  the  cliai- 
acters  of  every  person  connected  with  the  movement  indiscriminately  assailed ; 
the  appearance  of  a  Spiritualist  in  any  public  trial  was  the  signal  for  immedi- 
ate decision  against  their  side  of  the  question,  and  their  mere  opinions  in 
favor  of  the  cause  subjected  them  to  inquisitorial  persecutions,  and  the 
excommunicating  ban  of  the  church  to  which  they  belonged. 

Those  who  liave  not  endured  die  ordeal  of  this  strange  paroxysm  of  civil- 
ized barbarism  could  never  imagine  the  pitch  of  injustice  to  which  it  was 
carried,  nor  the  sufferings  of  the  victims. 

It  is  a  remarkable  and  significant  token  of  "  the  retributive  and  compensa- 
tive power  behind  the  throne,"  that  nearly  all  who  suffered  in  the  first  years 
of  spiritual  persecution,  loss  of  fortune,  practise,  custom,  or  reputation,  have 
experienced  a  reaction  in  their  favor,  which  seems  to  proceed  from  an  invol- 
untary appreciation,  on  the  part  of  the  public,  of  tiie  superior  intelligence 
which  some  of  the  Spiritualists  display. 

Thus,  after  Judge  Edmonds,  General  BuUard,  and  other  distinguished  legal 
practitioners  had  been  robbed  of  the  well-earned  laurels  of  an  honored  career 
at  the  bar,  because,  as  Spiritualists,  ^'■they  must  be  insane;"  whilst  merchants 
who  liad  long  been  esteemed  as  first  on  change  and  in  the  market  were 
compelled  to  threaten  legal  prosecution,  in  order  to  obtain  the  erasure  of 
the  word  "  Spiritualist"  labelled  publicly  against  their  names;  after  teachers 
had  been  ignominiously  thrust  out  of  their  places,  operatives  dismissed,  and 
tradesmen  almost  reduced  to  ruin,  a  period  of  reaction  came,  when  spirtual- 
istic  lawyers  were  found  to  be  "  possessed  of  sources  of  knowledge  "  which 
rendered  their  services  invaluable ;  the  most  skilful  doctors  were  found  to 
be  "those  wonderful  magnetic  physicians,"  and  tlie  word  "Spiritualism" 
began  to  be  interpreted  as  a  challenge  to  the  world  to  expect  superior  excel- 
lence in  art  and  science,  wisdom  in  judgment,  or  success  in  commerce. 

But  this  happy  revulsion  of  feeling  was  still  but  partial,  and  only  became 
manifest  at  a  late  period  of  the  movement. 

Its  first  initiatory  steps  necessarily  demanded  and  obtained  its  martyrs,  like 
every  other  great  reform,  which  has  had  to  march  to  its  success  over  the 
conquered  legions  of  ignorance,  prejudice,  and  superstition.  Even  tiie  suf- 
ferings endured  bj  the  Rochester  mediums  were  not  ended  with  the  public 
inquisition  at  Corinthian  HalL 

Absurd  and  far-fetched  theories  were  still  put  forth  by  so-called  scientific 
men  in  their  useless  attempts  to  kill  the  hydra-headed  monster  through  the 
original  promoters  of  its  notoriety,  and  their  failure  in  so  doing  seemed  to 
incite  the  opponents  to  a  bitterness  which  found  vent  in  forms  of  persecu- 
tion not  always  stopping  short  of  peril  to  life  itself,  as  will  be  shown  in  the 
following  case,  one  out  of  many  similar  annoyances  tliat  tracked  the  footsteps 
of  the  unfortunate  mediums. 

When  Miss  Margaietta  Fox  visited  the  city  of  Troy,  New  York,  in  1850,  an 
evidently  organized  attempt  was  made  on  her  life  by  a  party  whose  agents 
consisted  chiefly  of  a  set  of  rough  men,  said  to  be  Irish  Catholics. 

After  dogging  her  footsteps,  trying  under  various  pretexts  to  get  admission 
to  the  house  where  she  was  holding  circles,  and  seriously  endangering  the 
peace  and  safety  of  the  family  she  was  visiting  by  hurling  stones  and  other 

Hosted  by  Google 

88  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

missiles  against  the  Mfindows,  they  proceeded  to  fire  several  sliuts  at  the 
house,  which  were  no  doubt  aimed  at  Miss  Fox. 

The  circumstances  of  the  case  are  best  detailed  in  a  letter  written  to  a 
friend  of  the  cause  by  Mr.  Bouton,  the  gentleman  at  whose  house  Miss  Fox 
was  staying.     A  portion  of  that  letter  we  subjoin,  as  follows ; 

"  West  Troy,  November  13,  1850, 

"  We  are  endeavoring  to  make  an  arrangement  for  her  [Margaretta] 

to  go  to  another  place.  If  she  has  mentioned  the  name  to  jou,  do  not  mention  it  to  others, 
as  yon  value  her  life.  A  deep  plot  is  laid  to  destroy  her.  My  house  is  beset  every  night  by 
assassins  after  her,  and  we  guard  her  every  moment. 

"We  thmlt,  if  we  can  place  her  where  we  wish  to,  she  will  he  safe.  I  shall  defend  her  and 
her  reputation  at  the  ri^  of  my  fortune  and  saj  life.  I  will  advise  you  of  our  progress. 
Suppress  the  name  of  the  place  if  you  can.  I  write  with  difficulty,  not  having  rested  for 
some  nights.  Five  Iriiunen,  from  some  motive,  are  watching  Mai^aretti.  We  have  seen 
them  all  together. 

' '  She  has  never  left  my  family  without  being  attended,  which  has  given  them  no  opportu- 
nity yet. 

"In  retumuig  ff om  Troy,  late  the  night  before  last,  with  my  family  and  Mai^arelta,  in  a 
coach,  we  came  to  the  river  and  found  no  hoat.  Five  Irishmen  tried  to  persuade  our  driver 
to  go  to  the  long  '  Troy  bridge,'  a  glorious  placS  for  murder.  We  did  not  go,  but  they  fol- 
lowed us  home,  and,  after  we  had  retued,  they  attempted  to  break  into  the  room  occujaed 
by  Margaretla  and  my  sister-in-law. 

"Th^  were  furious  on  being  foiled,  and  threw  stones  against  the  house.  I  have  prepared 
nieans  of  defence,  and  cannot  sleep  much,  and  my  family  less.  I  fear  they  will  return  again 
to-night,  but  they  will  meet  with  a  warm  reception. 

"Last  night  Mrs.  B.  and  Mai^retta  went  to  the  door  of  a  shed  together,  and  a  stone  was 
thrown  at  them.  One  man  on  the  roof  made  an  angry  exclamation  on  finding  that  the  two 
were  together,  instead  of  Margaretta  alone.     They  were  large,  stout  men." , 

A  postscript  to  this  letter,  dated  the  next  day,  the  14th,  says : 

"As  I  feared,  the  Irishmen  did  return  last  night,  and  threw  a  stone  through  the  window, 

and  broke  mto  the  house;  but  we  were  prepared  foe  them,  and  they  did  not  effect  anything. 

We  would  like  to  have  you  come  here  immediately,  if  you  can. " 

The  small  party  of  "Irishmen"  continued  to  increase  until  at  last  Mr.  Bou- 
ton's  house  was  surrounded  by  a  mob,  and  when  Mrs.  Fish,  the  elder  sister, 
arrived  on  an  imperative  telegraphic  summons  from  Rochester,  she  had  to  be 
escorted  to  her  hotel  by  a  party  of  brave  and  well-tried  friends,  in  disguise. 

The  ladies  were  finally  conducted  in  safety  and  secrecy  to  Albany,  where  a 
better  and  more  genial  reception  awaited  diem,  and  then  it  was  found  that 
Cathohcs  and  Irish  did  not  make  up  the  bulk  of  tlie  rude  and  jibing  mobs 
that  surrounded  Mr.  Bouton's  house,  fired  the  shots,  and  threw  stones  at  the 
windows,  uttering  meanwhile  threats  atid  imprecations  against  die  "unholy 
witch  woman  within." 

Yet  these  very  demonstrations  it  was  that  ultimately  caused  a  strong  and 
irresistible  spirit  of  investigation  in  Troy,  and  ended  in  confirming  the  belief 
in  that  place  to'  an  extent  whicli  time  and  the  mutations  of  public  opinion 
elsewhere  have  never  shaken.  Troy,  in  fact,  is  now  one  of  the  spiritual  fort- 
resses of  New  York  State. 

Similar  results,  but  of  far  more  striking  and  important  cliaracter,  grew  out 
of  the  malevolent  attacks  that  were  levelled  against  Judge  Edmonds. 

Some  of  these  being  circulated  in  the  National  Jnlelli^emer,  of  Wash- 
ington, attricted  the  attenhon  ot  the  members  of  the  Legislature,  many  of 
whom  were  warm  friends  and  admirers  of  the  Judge,  and  caused  an  eager 
interest  in  Spmtuahsni  to  arise  m  the  very  heart  and  locus  of  national  in- 
fluence Many  excellerit  mediums  weTe  developed  in  the  progress  <?f  the 
investigations  that  loUowcd,  and  the  \isit  of  tiie  Fox  lamily  compkttd  the 
tnumph  of  the  cause  m  Washington 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERlCAlf  SPIRITUALISM.  89 

Amongst  those  who  protested  most  justly  and  indignantly  against  the  vitu- 
perative spirit  in  which  the  remarks  of  die  Washington  National  Intelligencer 
denounced  Judge  Edmonds  and  his  behef,  was  the  Hon.  N.  P.  Tallmadge, 
a  distinguished  Senator,  ex-Governor  of  Wisconsin,  and  a  warm  person^ 
friend  and  colleague  of  the  Judge. 

In  a  letter  equally  fearless  and  judicially  acute.  Governor  Tallmadge  wrote 
to  the  National  Intelligencer,  indignantly  repudiating  his  denunciations  of  tlie 
Spiritualists,  of  whom  he  proclaims  himself  to  be  one.     He  adds : 

"  And,  let  me  assure  you,  there  are  throughout  this  widely-extemiled  country,  some  of 
the  brightest  and  most  exalted  intellects,  who  have,  from  a  thorough  investigation  of  the 
matter,  come  to  the  same  concluaon." 

In  writing  of  Judge  Edmonds  he  says : 

"I  had  heard  for  a  long  time  of  the  'Rochester  knocltings,'  but  had  paid  no  heed  to 
them ;  on  the  contrary,  had  considered  them  a  deluaon  which  would  soon  pass  away.  I 
contuiued  under  these  impressions  till  some  time  last  sprmg  [iSsa],  when  my  attention  was 
called  to  a  newspaper  attack  on  Judge  Edmonds  for  being  a  believer  in  these  spiritual  mani- 
festations. I  had  known  Judge  Edmonds  for  thirty  years,  had  practiced  law  in  the  same 
courts,  had  served  in  the  Senate  of  New  York,  and  been  associated  with  him  as  a  member 
of  the  Court  for  the  Correction  of  Errors,  the  highest  court  in  the  State ;  had  known 
him  ance  that  time  as  a  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and  more  recently  as  a  Judge  of  the 
Court  of  Appeals,  where  he  holds  a  deservedly  high  and  distinguished  rank  amongst  the  able 
judges  of  that  court,  the  kst  resort  in  the  State  of  New  York.  I  also  knew  him  as  a  gen- 
tleman of  finished  classical  education,  and  as  a  lawyer  of  acute  mind  and  decided  talent  for 
investigation  ;  and,  above  all,  I  knew  him  to  be  a  man  of  unimpeachable  integrity.  Know- 
ing all  these  things,  I  concluded  that  if  he  had  become  a  believer  ui '  spiritual  manifesta- 
tions,' it  was  at  least  a  subject  worthy  of  investigation." 

In  connection  with  this  letter  Governor  Tallmadge  published  several  others, 
addressed  to  some  of  the  most  distinguished  persons  in  the  country,  who 
were  numbered  amongst  his  intimate  friends.  As  all  of  these  were  replete 
widi  incidents  of  the  most  astounding  character,  their  perusal  excited  the 
utmost  interest  and  astonishment,  especially  when  tile  unquestionable  nature 
of  the  authority  is  considered  from  whence  they  emanated.  Our  space  will 
only  allow  us  to  reproduce  one  or  two  of  these  narrations,  for  which  purpose 
we  select,  in  the  first  instance,  a  published  letter  of  Governor  Tallmadge's 
addressed  to  Mrs.  Helen  N.  AVhitman,  the  celebrated  poetess  of  Rhode 
Island. 

This  letter  has  already  been  published  in  substance,  but  the  author  prefers 
to  quote  from  the  manuscripts  supplied  by  the  honored  writer  himself,  as, 
though  occasionally  varying  in  language,  it  is  possible  that  the  memoranda, 
made  immediately  after  the  manifestations  were  produced,  may  contain  a  truer 
transcript  of  the  writer's  feelings  at  the  time  of  their  reception  than  the  entire 
letter  as  it  was  subsequently  prepared  for  publication. 

"Baltimore,  Ap-il  12,  1853. 
"  Hull.  N.  P.  Tallmadge  to  Mrs.  Helen  N.  Whitman  : 

"Dear  Madam,  —  I  seize  a  few  moments  whilst  detained  here  to  give  you  a  more  ex- 
tended account  of  the  physical  manifestations  alluded  to  in  a  former  letter. 

"  In  this  account  I  shall  confine  myself  to  those  which  purport  to  come  from  the  spirit 
of  John  C.  Calhoun.  I  have  received  numerous  communications  from  him  from  the  time 
of  my  commeiicing  this  investigation.     They  have  been  received  through  rapping,  writmg, 

and  speaking  mediums,  and  are  of  the  most  extraordinary  character. After 

the  arrival  of  the  Misses  Fox  in  Washington,  in  February  last,  I  called  on  them  by  ap- 
pointment, and  at  once  received  a  communication  purporting  to  come  from  Calhoun.  I  then 
propounded  mentally  the  following  question  ; 

Hosiedb,  Google 

90  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"  '  Can  you  do  anythii^  to  confirm  me  in  the  truth  of  these  revelations,  and  ri 
my  mind  all  shadow  of  tinbelief?' 

"  To  which  I  received  the  following  answer : 

" '  I  will  give  you  a  communication  on  Monday,  i 
fail  to  be  here.     I  will  then  give  you  an  explanation. 

"  I  must  here  remark  that  ail  the  communications  referred  to  in  this  letter  were  maae 
throi^h  the  alphabet ;  every  letter  being  rapped  out,  letter  by  letter,  and  taken  down  by  me 
as  received,  until  they  spelled  out  words  and  sentences. 

"  I  called  on  Monday,  aa  appomted,  and  received  the  following  communication  s 

"  '  My  friend,  the  question  is  often  put  to  you,  '  What  good  can  result  from  these  mani- 
festations ?'  I  wiU  answer.  ' It  is  to  draw  mankind  together  in  harmony,  and  convince 
sceptics  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.' 

"  I  will  here  interrupt  my  narrative  to  remark  that  when  in  Bridgeport,  in  1850,  I  re- 
ceived  a  communication  through  other  mediums  from  a  spirit  purporting  to  be  W.  E. 
Charming,  which  strongly  reminds  me  of  the  above  sentence. 

"  In  answer  to  the  question,  '  What  do  spirits  propose  to  accomplish  by  these  manifesta- 
tions,' it  was  spelled  out,  'To  unite  mankind,  and  convince  sceptics  of  the  immortality  of 
the  soul.' 

"  During  the  above  communication,  at  Washington,  the  table  was  moved  first  one  way 
and  then  the  other,  and  when  we  all  moved  back,  so  that  no  one  was  touching  it  or  withui 
two  feet  of  it,  it  moved  — wholly  without  contact  —  some  three  or  four  feet,  and  then  re- 
turned to  its  original  position.  This  was  repeated  on  the  other  side,  and  then  one  side  of 
it  was  raised  for  a  few  moments  and  was  ^ain  tested  on  the  floor.  Desirous  to  test  its 
wdght,  it  being  a  heavy  dining  table  capable  of  seating  some  dozen  persons,  I  placed  my 
hands  under  the  leaf  and  endeavored  to  raise  it,  but  without  succeeding  in  stirring  it  an 
inch.  1  then  stood  up  and  exerted  all  the  force  I  was  master  of  in  vain.  I  requested  the 
three  ladies  to  take  hold  and  try  all  together  to  lift  it.  We  hfted  upon  it  until  the  top 
b^an  to  crack,  but  without  raiang  it  a  particle.  Perceiving  that  a  spiritual  force  was 
being  exerted  to  keep  it  down,  I  said :   '  Will  the  spirits  permit  me  to  raise  the  table  ? ' 

"I  then  took  hold  of  it  alone  and  raised  it  without  the  least  effort.  After  this  the  follow- 
ing dialogue  ensued : 

"Q.  Can  you  raise  the  table  entirely  from  the  floor  with  me  on  it?  A.  Yes;  get  me 
the  square  table.  The  square  table  required  was  of  cherry,  with  four  legs^a  large-azed 
tea-table. 

"  Being  brought  out  and  the  leaves  raised  I  took  my  seat  in  the  centre,  the  three  ladies 
atting  at  the  sides  with  their  hands  and  arms  resting  on  it  and  thus  adding  to  the  two  hun- 
dred pounds  weight  already  on  it.  Two  legs  were  first  raised  from  the  floor,  then  the  other 
two  to  a  level  with  the  first,  until  the  whole  table  was  held  suspended  in  the  air  about  sii 
inches  from  the  floor.  While  thus  seated  on  it,  I  could  feel  a  gentle  vibratmg  movement  as 
if  floating  in  the  air.  After  being  thus  suspended  for  a  few  moments  the  table  was  gently 
set  down  again  to  the  floor. 

"  At  a  subsequent  meeting,  the  spirit  ckuming  to  be  my  friend  Calhoun  directed  me  to 
bring^for  the  purpose  of  exhibiting  physical  signs  of  spirit-power  —  three  bells  and  a 
guitar.  These  were  accordingly  procured,  the  beUs  being  of  different  sizes,  the  lai^est  a 
dinner-bell.  A  dravrer  was  to  be  put  under  the  table  upside  down,  and  the  bells  placed  on 
the  drawer. 

"  The  three  ladies  and  myself  then  took  ottr  seatF,  leaning  our  hands  and  arms  upon  the 
table.  The  bells  were  played  upon  in  a  sort  of  melodious  and  rhythmical  chime,  whijst 
nmnerous  raps  were  made,  as  if  keepmg  time  to  a  march.  When  the  raps  ceased  the  bells 
rang  violently  for  several  minutes ;  they  were  also  pressed  on  my  feet  and  knocked  most  ve- 
hemently against  the  under  ode  of  the  table,  raising  up  the  candlesticks  by  the  concussion. 

"  After  the  bells  had  ceased,  I  distinctly  felt  a  hand  grasping  my  foot,  ankle,  and  knee, 
several  times.  I  was  then  directed  to  place  the  guitar  on  the  drawer.  When  all  were  seated 
as  before,  the  guitir  was  at  first  touched  softly  and  gently,  giving  forth  sweet  and  delicious 
sounds  like  an  accompaniment  Presently  the  tones  grew  louder  and  louder,  and  struck 
into  a  bold  symphony  Then  they  diminiied,  becoming  softer,  sweeter,  and  almost  dying 
away,  as  if  at  a  long  distince ,  then  they  returned,  increased  in  power,  grew  louder  and 
nearer,  and  anon  died  away  again  in  long,  vibrating  echoes  of  the  most  indescribable 
beauty  and  sweetness. 

"I  have  heard  the  guitar  pla\ed  by  the  most  skilful  and  scientific  hands,  but  I  never 
could  have  contewed  of  that  mstrument  being  able  to  produce  somids  of  sudi  marvellous 
and  fascinating  beauty,  power,  and  even  grandeur  as  tlus  inviable  performance  that  night 
executed. 

"After  the  music  had  ceased,  it  was  spelled  out  by  the  raps,  'It  was  my  hand  that 
touched  you  and  the  guitar.  C.^LKOUN.' 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRJTUAUSM.  91 

"  The  following  phenomena  occurred  at  my  next  sitting  witli  the  Misses  Fox,  there  being 
(hen  present  General  Hamilton,  General  Waddy  Thompson,  o£  South  Carolina,  and  myself. 
We  were  directed  to  place  the  Bible,  dosed,  on  a  drawer  under  the  table.  It  was  a  small 
pocket  Bible  in  very  fine  print. 

"  For  some  time  numerous  raps  were  heard  beating  lime  to  a  march  that  had  been  sug- 
gested. These  raps  died  away  like  receding  feet,  until  the  sound  entirely  ceased,  when 
other  loud  raps  gave  the  agnai  for  the  alphabet,  by  which  was  spelled  out  the  single  word, 
'Look.'  1  took  up  the  book  most  carefully,  finding  it  was  open,  and  desirous  to  preserve 
the  place.  It  was  then  spelled  out,  '  Read' ;  and  the  verses  of  the  open  chapter  which  it 
was  desired  I  should  read  were  also  spelled  out.  During  the  reading  loud  and  vehement 
lappings  seemed  to  indorse  the  sentiments  rehearsed  mlh  a  power  that  was  fearfully  start- 
ling, as  coming  from  an  invisible  Source. 

"  The  book  was  open  at  St.  John's  Goqie!,  third  chapter,  and  the  verses  mdicated  to  be 
read  were  the  8,  11,  ig,  34,  and  were  as  follows : 

"  '  S.  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  will,  and  thou  hearest  its  voice,  but  knowest  not  whence 
it  Cometh  or  whilher  it  goeth ;  so  is  every  one  that  is  bom  of  the  spirit.' 

'"II.  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  we  speak  what  we  know  and  testify  what  we  have 
seen,  and  ye  receive  not  our  testimony.' 

"  '  19.  And  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  love 
darkness  rather  than  light  because  their  deeds  aie  evil' 

"  '  34.  For  he  whom  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the  words  of  (Sod ;  for  God  giveth  not  the 

"After  this  I  was  directed  to  place  severa!  sheets  of  letter-paper,  together  with  a  pencil, 
on  the  drawer  beneath  the  table.  We  soon  lieard  the  sound  of  the  pencil  on  the  paper ; 
when  it  was  rapped  out,  '  Get  the  pencil  and  sharpen  it.'  I  looked  under  the  table,  but  at 
first  could  not  find  the  pencil  until,  on  continuing  my  search,  I  found  it  lying  three  or  four 
feet  from  the  table  with  the  lead  broken  off  within  the  wood. 

"  I  sharpened  it  as  directed  and  replaced  it  again  upon  the  drawer.  Again  I  heard  the 
sound  of  the  pencil,  but  when  directed  by  the  raps  to  take  up  the  paper,  we  found  it  marked 
on  each  side,  but  no  intelligible  writing  could  be  found.  By  the  raps,  however,  it  was  spelled 

entence,  but  I  wlsli  to  convince  you  I  can 
will  try  a  short  sentence. 

"'John  C.  Calhoun.' 

"  We  met  pursuant  to  appointment,  took  our  seats  as  usual,  all  our  hands  and  arras 
resting  on  the  table.  I  placed  my  alver  pencil-case  on  the  drawer  beneath  the  table,  and 
being  in  communication  with  the  spirit  of  Calhoun  through  the  taps,  I  said,  '  My  friend,  I 
wish  the  sentence  to  be  in  your  own  handwriting,  so  that  your  friaids  will  recognize  it.' 
He  replied,  '  You  will  know  the  writing.'  We  soon  heard  a  rapid  movement  of  the  pencil 
on  the  paper,  the  rustling  of  the  latter,  and  the  movement  of  the  drawer.  I  was  then 
directed  to  look  under  the  drawer.  I  found  my  pencil  oulade  the  drawer,  and  all  the 
sheets  I  had  placed  on  the  top  now  underneath  it ;  they  were  disarranged,  and  on  the  out- 
ade  sheet  was  written,  '  I'm  with  you  still.' 

"  I  have  shown  that  sentence  to  General  Hamilton,  former  Governor  of  South  Carolina, 
General  Waddy  Thompson,  late  Mexican  Minister  ;  General  Robert  Campbell,  of  Havana, 
together  with  many  other  intunate  friends  of  Mr,  Calhoun,  I  also  showed  it  to  one  of  his 
sons,  and  he,  as  well  as  the  rest,  pronounced  it  to  be  a  perfect  facsimile  of  the  kand- 
■wriling  of  John  C.  Calkoun.  General  Hamilton  and  Mrs.  General  Macomb — both  of 
whom  ate  in  possession  of  many  private  letters  from  Calhoun — state  as  a  fact  of  peculiar 
agnificance,  that  he  was  constantly  in  the  habit  of  abbreviatmg  'I  am'  into  'I'm,'  hence 
this  sentence,  short  as  it  is — I'm  with  you  stiil  —  is  peculiarly  chatacterbtic  of  his  expression 
no  less  than  his  singularly  terse  style. 

"  Very  truly  yours, 

"N,  P,  Tallmadge." 

On  this,  as  on  other  and  constantly-recurring  occasions,  it  has  been  re- 
marked that  a  communication  bo  brief,  pointless,  and  therefore  so  inconsistent 
with  the  character  of  a  statesman  as  dignified  and  eloquent  as  the  late  John 
C,  Calhoun,  was  either  at  variance  with  his  earthly  career  or  unworthy  of  his 
exalted  spirit.  To  such  arguments,  let  us  apply  tlie  responses  so  often 
rendered  by  spirits  on  similar  occasions.  "  The  power  by  which  spirits  can 
act  upon  matter  at  all  is  limited,  ill  understood  even  by  themselves,  and  at 
present  in  a  merely  experimental  slate  of  control ;  hence  the  quantity  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

92  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

power  of  the  manifestations  is  deteiiwined  by  conditions  too  complex  and 
subtle,  and  as  yet  too  remote  from  the  sphere  of  material  science,  for  human 
comprehension.  Moreover,  every  communication,  howsoever  transmitted 
through  a  human  organism,  partakes  so  closely  of  the  idiosyncracies  of  the 
medium  that  whilst  the  idea  may  originate  in  the  spirit-world,  the  form  of 
the  communication  must  assume  the  shape  of  the  medium's  mind  and  the 
measure  of  their  force.  Beyond  the  occasional  introduction  of  a  few  words, 
sentences,  or  forms  of  writing  and  expression,  it  is  ahnost  impossible  for  the 
mightiest  controlling  spirit  far  to  transcend  these  limits ;  hence  their  ideas 
not  only  sink  to  the  level  of  tlie  medium's  capacity  in  transmission,  but  often 
become  so  merged  in  their  magnetism  as  to  lose  the  stamp  of  their  spiritual 
origin  altogether. 

■  "  The  communion  may  grow  into  more-assured  identity,  and  a  better  system 
of  telegraphy  may  supervene  when  mortals  industriously  study  the  science  of 
Spirituahsm,  and  reverendly  prepare  themselves  to  honor  it  as  a  religion." 

CHAPTER  X. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN   NEW   VORR  CITY    AKD    ( 
"  Sland  fw  Ihe  right :  though  faUehooi 

nilh  dean  hands 

Spiritualism  Explained  by  Ciiatincv  C.  Burr  —  S.  Gruies  . —  Mr.  Joel  Tiffany 
—  Leo  Miller^  Saul  and  Paul—  Jui>ge  Edmonds's  "Appeal  to  the  Public" — 
The  Press  and  their  Chance  of  Tone  —  Dr.  Dextek — "The  Sacred 
Circle." 

From  the  time  when  the  truth  of  spirit  communion  with  the  earth  became 
a  fact  so  fixed  that  investigators  could  venture  to  call  public  attention  to  the 
subject  with  the  most  perfect  confidence  in  the  results,  an  infatuation 
appeared  to  have  possessed  certain  individuals  with  little  or  no  reason  for 
their  action,  deferminately  to  array  themselves  for  a  war  of  opposition,  which 
they  conducted  with  singular  bitterness  and  indiscriminate  radmess. 

Thus  at  Buffalo,  New  York,  three  gentlemen,  whose  position  as  leaders  of 
science  should  have  deterred  them  from  the  committal  of  their  names  to  a 
published  verdict  of  which  subsequent  events  should  have  made  them  hear- 
tily ashamed,  gravely  rendered  their  testimony  to  the  effect  that  the  mani- 
festations produced  tiirough  the  Fox  sisters  were  all  the  result  of  the  snapping 
of  their  knee  and  ankle  joints  ! 

The  details  of  the  notable  theory  announced  by  "the  Buffalo  doctors," 
together  with  all  the  physiolc^cal  definitions  involved  in  their  astounding 
discovery,  will  be  found  in  a  subsequent  chapter.  It  is  only  necessary  to  state 
here  that  like  all  similar  attempts  to  explain  away  a  substantial  truth  on  vis- 
ionary grounds,  the  discussion  to  which  the  affair  gave  rise  served  as  ex- 
ceedingly valuable  propaganda  for  the  cause  of  Spiritualism. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  <iZ 

The  resort  to  deliberate  falsehood  on  the  i-irt  of  the  professed  mesmerist. 
Grimes  has  already  been  noticed,  and  soon  after  the  sage  Buffalo  doctors  had 
assimed  to  knee  and  ankle  joints  the  new  function  of  producing  the  whole 
range  of  varied  and  intelligent  spiritual  phenomena,  the  ex-Rev.  [?]  C. 
Clwuncy  Burr  took  the  field  to  expose  the  whole  "  trick  "  m  several  public 
lectures  delivered  at  Hope  Chapel,  New  York,  and  other  places,  in  which 
all  the  former  exploded  theories  were  re-hashed,  with  die  addition  of  several 
grave  and  utterly  unfounded  falsehoods. 

It  would  scarcely  be  in  keeping  widi  the  spirit  of  serious  narrative  to  recui 
to  these  pitiful  arts,  were  it  not  advisable  to  note  the  flimsy  and  desperate 
character  of  the  opposition.  r     ,    r 

After  tnaking  a  living,  such  as  it  was,  for  a  few  weeks  out  of  platform 
"expositions"  of  Spiritualism  in  various  places,  where  himself  and  his  confed- 
erates cracked  out  by  their  toe  joints,  etc.,  names  and  sentences  previously 
agreed  upon  ;  after  disgusting  and  disappointing  even  their  best  fnends  by  the 
shallow  character  of  their  imposture,  and  subjecting  themselves  to  far  more 
bitter  and  contemptuous  remarks  from  the  press  than  had  ever  been  levelled 
against  the  cause  they  sought  to  defame,  Messrs  Burr  &  Co.  were  finally 
prosecuted  for  slander  by  Mrs.  Fish  [Leah  Fox],  and  in  die  encounter  ^th 
diat  lady's  lawyer  — Mr.  Joel  Tiffany— lost  even  tlie  rags  of  public  credit, 
wherewith  they  had  been  striving  to  clodie  themselves  as  antagonists  of  Spir- 
itualism. It  may  here  be  mentioned  that  Mr.  Joe!  Tiffany  became  so 
deeply  mterested  in  the  manifestations  through  the  Fox  family  that  he  not 
only  undertook  their  defence  agwnst  the  slanders  of  Burr,  but  devoted  his 
talents  as  an  orator  and  writer  to  the  advocacy  of  the  cause.  His  lectures 
at  the  Spiritualists' Sabbath  meetings,  his  pungent  replies  to  the  attacks  of 
the  clergy  and  secular  press,  and  his  able  conduct  of  one  of  the  most  popu- 
lar periodicals  of  spiritualistic  literature  —  namely,  Tiffan:^s  Monthly  Msga- 

^{^" entitle  him  to  a  foremost  place  amongst  the  ranks  of  spiritual  celebnties, 

and  challenge  our  gratitude  even  to  the  venomous  Chauncy  Burr,  for  first 
prominently  identifying  Mr.  Tiffany  widi  Spiritualism,  m  Cleveland,  Ohio. 
Antagonists  of  a  similar  character  to  the  above  were  multiplying  on  every 
side  encouraged  by  the  unchristian  ardor  with  which  their  juggling  attempts 
were  received  by  the  clergy,  many  of  the  press,  and  a  large  proportion  of  die 
community.  ,  .      ^      ,     >  i 

A  young  lawyer  named  Leo  Miller,  who  was  studying  for  the  bar  and  anxious 
to  fit  himself  for  forensic  display,  determined  to  exercise  his  talents  m  a 
course  of  lectures  through  New  York  which  should  enlist  public  interest  in 
his  favor,  and  for  diis  purpose  he  found  no  theme  so  generaUy  acceptable 
as  the  announcement  that  he  would  "expose  the  pretended  spintual  manifes- 
tations." .  ,  ■    ,i_-    J- 

For  many  weeks  Mr.  Leo  Miller  ran  a  most  successful  career  m  this  direc- 
tion His  lectures  were  crowded,  his  addresses  lauded  to  the  skies  by  the 
press,  while  notices  of  his  meetings  were  read  from  many  of  the  popular  pul- 
pits, and  liis  handbills  industriously  circulated  by  the  clergy. 

As  Mr  Miller  was  an  eloquent  and  attractive  speaker,  his  services  m  con- 
ducting "  tiie  attack"  in  Central  New  York  were  gladly  accepted  m  heu  of 
the  broken  fragment  of  tiie  Grimes  and  Burr  forlorn  hope.  Unfortunately, 
however  for  the  peace  of  mind  of  his  Christian  supporters,  Mr.  Miller  sud- 
denly became  a  "speaking  medium."  A  spiritual  trance  overehadowed  him 
in  one  of  his  most  powerfiil  flights  of  defamatory  oratory,  and  Baalam-like,  ne 
who  came  to  curse  Israel  was  compelled  with  unwilhng  lips  to  pronounce  a 
blessing  instead,  and  to  pour  forfli  prophetic  assurances  of  the  unconquerable 

Hosted  by  Google 

94  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

triumphs  of  the  power  he  had  hitherto  assailed.  Returning  from  his  trulj 
improvised  lecture  scarcely  less  confounded  and  dismayed  than  his  audience, 
he  retired  to  his  couch  to  find  himself  serenaded  by  "raps,"  and  assailed  by 
voices  of  invisible  beings  who  tenderly  rebuked  his  past  perversity,  assured 
him  of  the  consoling  presence  of  loved  and  loving  spirit  friends,  and  urged 
upon  him  the  solemn  duty  of  going  forth  to  atone  for  the  errors  he  had  com- 
mitted by  proclaiming  the  irresistible  truths  of  Spiritualism  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  In  the  midst  of  the  perplexity  which  this  overwhelming  change  occa- 
sioned in  his  mind,  he  received  from  a  man  of  whose  very  name  and  exist- 
ence he  had  had  no  previous  knowledge,  an  exquisite  drawing  of  a  female 
head,  which  the  stranger  informed  him  had  been  executed  whilst  in  a  trance 
and  bimdfolded.  He — the  artist— declared  that  he  had  no  knowledge  what- 
ever of  who  the  lady  was,  or  why  it  should  be  given  to  Mr.  Miller,  beyond 
the  request  of  the  spirit,  whose  portrait  it  was. 

Mr.  Miller  inquired  the  name  of  the  artist,  and  learned  that  he  was  a  Mr. 
Rogers,  of  Columbus,  Ohio,  a  tailor  by  trade ;  totally  unacquainted  with 
drawing ;  an  involuntary  automatic  medium  for  the  production  of  spirit  por- 
traits, hundreds  of  which  had  been  eagerly  claimed  and  recognized  as  beloved 
departed  ones  by  their  astonished  relatives. 

In  some  instances,  as  in  Mr.  Miller's  case,  Mr.  Rogers  was  instructed  by 
the  spirits  to  whom  he  should  send  or  give  the  pictures,  and  it  was  under 
a  charge  of  this  kind  that  he  had  presented  to  Mr.  Miller  a  drawing  which 
the  latter  instantly  recognized  as  the  most  inimitably  faithful  portrait  of  a 
beloved  sister  of  whom  there  was  no  other  likeness  extant.  It  was  impos- 
sible to  mistake  the  resemblance ;  the  friends  of  the  young  lady,  as  well  as 
her  brother,  at  once  perceived  the  correctness  of  the  portrait,  whilst  the  most 
careful  inquiry  into  the  circumstances  of  its  production  only  strengtliened 
the  facts  as  detailed  by  the  artist 

Scores  of  similar  cases,  many  of  them  far  more  marvellous  than  the  above, 
were  brought  to  Mr.  Miller's  notice  in  connection  with  this  same  artist,  and 
the  result  was  that  Mr.  Rogers  became  celebrated  for  his  success  as  a 
delineator  of  the  forms  of  the  beloved  inhabitants  of  the  spirit  country,  and 
Mr.  Leo  Miller  a  renowned  and  powerful  champion  of  the  truths  of  spiritual 
eMstence,  and  communion  with  mortals.  One  of  the  chief  results  to  Mr, 
Miller  in  his  capacity  as  a  public  speaker  was  the  remarkable  fact  that 
within  a  few  weeks  from  the  time  of  his  "change  of  base,"  his  audience  fell 
off  in  numbers  about  the  ratio  of  ninety  per  cent.;  whilst  his  revenue  from 
this  source  of  course  endured  a  proportionate  decrease.  All  this  was  more 
than  compensated  for,  however,  by  the  enthusiasm  of  the  young  orator's 
purpose,  die  joy  of  his  heart,  the  peace  of  his  conscience,  and  the  manifest 
improvement  of  his  style;  still,  no  sooner  was  it  discovered  that  around  his 
pathway  hovered  an  angel  sister,  who  by  her  pure  and  glorified  influence 
made  him  a  better  and  wiser  man,  than  the  pious  withdrew  their  coun- 
tenance ;  the  press  no  longer  advertised  his  lectures,  or  devoted  a  column's 
admiring  criticism  to  "his  able  exposi  of  spirit  rapping ; "  and  saddest  of  all, 
the  clergy  either  foreot  to  announce  his  meetings  and  distribute  his  notices, 
or  only  remembered  him  in  their  sermons  to  cry  "Maranatha,"  and  wain  all 
followers  of  Christ  to  shun  the  daring  infidel  who  presumed  to  give  the  signs 
which  their  master  had  promised  should  follow  those  who  believed  in  him. 

It  was  in  the  year  1853  that  a  course  of  viralent  and  scandalous  attacks 
made  upon  Judge  Edmonds  through  the  public  press,  detennlned  him  to 
resign  the  high  ofiice  of  Judge,  which  he  had  so  nobly  and  honorably  filled  to 
the  satisfaction  of  his  fellow-citizens  and  tlie  benefit  of  the  community. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  95 

The  incitements  to  this  course  of  action  are  briefly  stated  in  the  simple  yet 
dignified  "Appeal  to  the  Public,"  which  the  learned  gentleman  published  on 
the  occasion.  The  mental  trials  which  forced  tliis  statement  from  Judge 
Edmonds  must  necessarily  have  been  very  severe,  but  it  is  impossible  that 
any  one  can  peruse  it  without  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  "in  the  suffer- 
ings of  the  just,  the  world  is  made  wise  unto  salvation,"  and  that  whatever 
may  have  been  the  inducing  motive,  the  catise  of  justice  and  tmfh  were 
greatly  benefitted  by  the  publication  of  so  noble  and  manly  a  document,  and 
sucli  a  clear  and  succinct  account  of  tlie  aspect  and  status  of  Spuitualism 
at  the  date  of  the  following  "  appeal : " 

"TothePtiblic: 

"On  my  recent  return  From  an  escursion  into  the  country,  I  found  that  during  my 
absence  a  decision  lately  pronounced  by  me  liad  been  seized  upon  as  an  occasion  for  an 
attack.  In  several  quarters,  on  my  religious  belief.     I  was  fully  aware  that  (bat  juilEi"f^t. 

running  counter  as  it  would  to  popular  sentiment,  would  subject  my  ai 
cism ;  but  I  confess,  I  did  not  anticipate  that  thence  would  flow  an  assault  on  my  religious 
opinions.  Were  I  a  private  dtizen,  I  ^ould  content  myself  with  merely  claiming  the  right, 
which  belongs  (o  everyone  in  this  country,  of  entertaining  such  faith  on  (his — the  most 
important  of  all  topics — as  my  conscience  might  dictate.  And  as  it  is,  I  mi^ht  perhaps 
rest  satisfied  with  cbailenring  those  who  assaE  me,  to  point  out  a  angle  article  m  my  creed 
that  aims  at  aught  else  than  exalted  private  worth  and  public  virtue.  But  as  the  position 
which  I  occupy  renders  the  soundness  as  well  as  the  int^ity  of  my  judgment  a  matter  of 
public  interest,  I  am  bound  to  acknowledge  the  right  of  others  to  question  my  faith,  and 
my  own  obligation  to  defend  it. 

"I  acknowledge  a  still  further  obligation.  And  inasmuch  as  I  accepted  my  present 
position  under  tfi  implied  understanding,  atleast,  that  I  believed  in  the  Christian  religion, 
and  would  administer  our  civil  law  according  to  the  prindples  of  the  divine  law,  as  it  had 
been  revealed  to  us,  on  which  all  our  institutions  were  based,  so  I  am  bound  to  certify  to 
those  who  have  intrusted  me  with  the  divine  attribute  of  administering  justice  among 
men,  that  my  reverence  for  that  revelation  has  not  been  shaken,  nor  my  obedience  to  that 
moral  law  impaired. 

"  I  have  not,  however,  waited  for  these  assaults,  to  be  impressed  with  these  obligations, 
but  have  already  so  far  felt  them  that  I  have  prepared  to  publish  a  volume  on  the  subject, 
which,  but  for  my  other  avocations,  would  ere  this  have  been  in  the  printer's  hands.  To 
that  I  must  refer  for  mnch  in  elucidation  and  proof  of  my  belief,  which  the  limits  of  this 
communication  will  not  allow  me  to  dwell  upon,  and  content  myself  on  this  occasion  with 
such  general  statements  as  may  tend  to  give  a  correct  idea  of  what  it  is  that  I  believe  or 
have  done.  Even  this  would  not  have  been  necessary  if  those  who  assail  me  had  but 
done  me  the  justice  themselves  to  have  published  anything  I  have  said  or  written  on  the 
subject.  But  hitherto  I  have  been  able  to  reach  the  public  only  through  publications  oE 
very  limited  circulation;  and  the  wildest  and  most  erroneous  notions  have  therefore  been 
imbibed  as  to  my  belief,  and  the  mischief  has  been  increased  by  the  recklessness  with  which 
those  erroneous  statements  have  been  fabricated  by  those  who  could  not  know  them  to  be 
t^e,  but  who  could  eosQy  have  ascertained  them  to  he  false. 

"Thus  one  writer,*  with  a  want  of  feeling  not  perhaps  surprising,  speaks  of  my  'consult- 
ing my  dead  wife '  in  making  up  my  decisions.  Another  says,  that  it  is  '  rumored '  that 
I  have  consulted  spirit  manifestations  in  regard  to  ray  decisions.  Another,  that  my  belief  is 
'at  irreconcilable  variance  with  alt  divine  revelation,'  and  is  'fit  for  no  other  system  than 
devil  worship ;'  and  still  another,  that  '  it  constitutes  an  abandonment  of  all  self-control, 
and  a  surrender  of  the  supremacy  of  reason,  as  informed  and  enlightened  by  the  senses,  to 
the  most  nonsensical  jug^ery. ' 

"All  these  statements  are  as  wide  as  they  can  he  of  truth,  and  I  might  with  some  justice 
complaiu  at  being  subjected  to  such  grievous  imputations,  merely  because  I  had  made  a 
dedsion  which  was  miacceptahle  to  a  portion  of  the  conununity. 

"  But  it  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  complaining  that  I  sit  down  to  write.  I  am  aware  that 
it  is  not  so  much  me  as  it  is  the  faith  which  I  profess,  which  is  the  object  of  attack. 

"It  is  'themighty  theme,  and  not  the  inconaderable  advocate,'  which  offends.  I  am  also 
aware  why  it  is  that  so  much  error  exists  in  the  public  mind  on  that  subject ;  and  my  whole 
purpose  is,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  to  correct  that  error  ;  to  state  truly,  as  far  as  I  can  in 

Hosiedb,  Google 

96  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

this  connection,  what  it  is  that  I  do  believe,  and  generally  the  grounds  on  which  my  belief 
is  founded,  that  all  who  take  interest  in  the  matter  to  read  what  I  may  say,  may  have  the 
means  of  judging  for  themselves  as  to  what  I  really  do  believe,  rather  than  what  others 
etToneonsly  impute  to  me  as  a  beUef. 

"  I  am  ancerely  grateful  to  my  assailants  for  not  imputing  to  me  any  unworthy  or  selfish 
motives,  for  conceding  that  as  a  private  citizen  I  'stand  exempt  from  public  critidsm,' 
and  that  I  am  'not  a  fool,'  and  for  confining  themselves  to  the  mere  imputalirn  that  I 
am  laboring  under  a.  delufJon.  It  is,  therefore,  to  that  point  I  shall  confine  myself  in  what 
I  have  now  to  say. 

"  It  was  in  January,  1851,  that  my  attention  was  first  called  to  the  subject  of  '  spiritual 
intercourse.'  I  was  at  tlie  time  withdrawn  from  general  society.  I  was  laboring  under 
great  depression  of  spirits.  I  was  occupying  all  my  leisure  in  reading  on  the  subject  of  death 
and  man's  existence  afterwards. 

"1  had  in  the  course  of  my  life  read  and  heard  from  the  pulpit  so  many  contradictory  and 
conflicting  doctrines  on  the  subject,  that  I  hardly  knew  what  to  believe.  I  could  not,  if  I 
would,  believe  what  I  did  not  understand,  and  was  anxiously  seeliing  to  know  if  after  death 
we  should  again  meet  with  those  whom  we  had  loved  here,  and  under  what  circum- 

"I  was  invited  by  a  friend  to  witness  the 'Rochester  knockings.'  I  complied,  chiefly  to 
oblige  her  and  to  while  away  a  tedious  hour.  I  thought  a  good  deal  on  what  I  witnessed, 
and  I  determined  to  investigate  the  matter  and  find  out  what  it  was.  If  it  was  a  deception, 
or  a  delasion,  I  thought  that  I  could  detect  it.  For  about  four  months  I  devoted  at  least 
two  evenings  in  a  week,  and  sometimes  more,  to  witnessing  the  phenomena  in  all  its  phases. 
I  kept  careftd  records  of  all  I  witnessed,  and  from  time  to  time  compai'ed  them  with  each 

■  ■  "  rouU  la-  ■       ■ 

other,  to  detect  inconsistencies  and  contradictions.     I  read  all  I  could  lay  my  hi 
tlie  subject,  and  especially  all  the  professed  '  exposures  of  the  humbug.' 

"  I  went  from  place  to  pkce,  seeing  different  mediums,  meeting  with  different  parties  of 
persons ;  often  with  persons  whom  I  had  never  seen  before,  aiS  sometimes  where  I  was 
myself  entirely  unknown ;  sometimes  in  the  dark  and  sometimes  in  the  light;  often  vrith 
inveterate  unbelievers,  and  more  frequently  with  zealous  behevers.  In  fine,  I  availed  my- 
self of  evoy  opportunity  that  was  afforded,  thoroughly  to  sift  the  matter  to  the  bottom.  I 
was  all  this  time  an  unbeliever,  and  tried  the  patience  of  believers  sorely  by  my  scepticism, 
my  captiousness,  and  jay  obdurate  refusal  to  yield  my  belief 

"  I  saw  around  me  some  who  yielded  a  ready  faith  on  one  or  two  attings  only ;  others  ^ain 
under  the  same  circumstances,  avowmg  a  determined  unbelief;  and  some  who  refused  to 
witness  it  at  all,  and  yet  were  confirmed  unbelievers.  I  could  not  imitate  either  of  these 
parties,  and  refused  to  yield  nnless  upon  most  irrefragible  testimony.  At  length  the  evi- 
dence came,  and  in  such  force  that  no  sane  man  could  withhold  his  faith. 

"ThusfarthequestionI  was  investigatingwas,  whether  what  I  saw  was  produced  bymere 
mortal  means,  or  by  some  inviable,  miknown  agency ;  in  other  words,  whether  it  was  a 
deception,  an  impoation,  or  what  it  professed  to  be— the  product  of  some  unknown,  unseen 
cause.  To  detail  what  I  witnessed  would  far  exceed  the  limits  of  this  communication,  for 
m)^  records  of  it  for  those  four  months  alone  fill  at  least  one  hundred  and  thirty  closely 
written  pages,  I  will,  however,  mention  a  few  things,  which  will  give  a  general  idea  of  that 
which  characterized  interviews  now  numbering  several  hundred.  Most  of  (hem  have  occur- 
red in  the  presence  of  others  besides  myselt  I  have  preserved  their  names  in  my  records, 
but  do  not  give  them  to  the  world,  because  I  do  not  desire  to  subject  them  to  the  obloquy 
which  seems,  most  ^rangely,  to  be  visited  upon  all  who  look  into  the  mailer  with  any  other 
feelingthanaresoluteand  obstinate  incredulity,  whatever  the  evidence.  But  these  consider- 
ations grow  out  of  this  fact :  first,  that  I  have  thus  very  many  witnesses,  whom  I  can  invoke 
to  establish  the  truth  of  mjr  statements ;  and  second,  that  if  I  have  been  deluded  and  have  not 
seen  and  heard  what  I  think  I  have,  my  delusion  has  been  shared  by  many  as  shrewd,  as 
intelligent,  as  honest,  and  as  enlightened  people,  as  are  to  be  found  anywhere  among  us. 

"Myattentionwasfirst  drawn  to  the  intercourse  by  the  rappmgs,  then  the  most  common, 
but  now  the  most  inconsiderable  mode  of  commumng.  Of  course  I  was  on  the  look-out 
for  deception,  and  at  first  reUed  upon  my  senses  and  the  concluaona  which  my  reason  might 
draw  from  their  evidence.  But  I  was  at  a  loss  to  teU  how  the  mediums  could  cause  what  I 
witnessed  under  these  circumstances ;  the  mediums  walking  the  length  of  a  suite  of  parlors 
forty  or  fifty  feet,  and  the  rappings  being  distinctly  h«irdlive  or  six  feet  behind  (hem,  the 
whole  distance,  backward  and  forward,  several  times ;  being  heard  near  the  top  of  a  mahog- 
any door,  above  where  the  mediums  could  reach,  and  as  if  struck  hard  with  a  fist ;  being 
heard  on  the  bottom  of  a  car  when  travelling  on  a  raitoad,  and  on  the  floor  and  the  table, 
when  seated  at  lunch,  at  an  eating-house,  by  the  side  of  Ihe  road ;  being  heard  at  different 
parts  of  the  room,  sometimes  several  feet  distant  from  the  medium  and  where  she  could  not 
reach ;  sometimes  on  the  table  and  immediately  after  on  the  floor,  and  then  at  different  parts 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  97 

of  tlie  table,  in  rapid  succession,  enabling  us  to  feel  the  vibration  as  well  as  liear  the 
sounds;  sometimes,  when  the  liands  aiid  feet  of  the  medium  were  both  firiiily  and  carefully 
held  by  some  one  of  the  party,  and  sometunes  on  a  (able  when  no  one  touched  it. 

"  After  de[>ending  upon  my  senses  as  to  these  various  phases  of  the  phenomena,  I 
invol;ed  the  aid  of  science,  and  .with  the  assistance  of  an  accomplished  electrician  and  his 
machinery,  and  eight  or  ten  intelligent,  educated,  shrewd  persons,  examined  the  matter. 
We  pursued  our  inquiries  many  days,  and  establbhed  to  our  satisfaction  two  things :  first, 
that  the  sounds  were  not  produced  by  (he  agency  of  any  person  nrespnf  or  np^r  ns  ■  anH 
second,  that  they  were  not  forthcoming  at  our  will  and  pleasure. 

in  the  meantime  another  feature  attracted  my  attention,  and  that  was  'physical  mani- 
festations,' as  they  are  termed.  Thus,  I  have  known  a  pine  table  with  foiu-  legs  lifted 
bodily  up  from  the  floor  in  the  centre  of  a  cu-cle  of  six  or  eight  persons,  turned  upside  down 
and  Idd  upon  its  top  at  our  feet,  then  lifted  up  over  our  heads  and  put  leaning  against  the 
back  of  the  sofa  on  which  we  sat,  I  have  known  that  same  table  to  be  lifted  up  on  two 
legs,  its  top  at  an  angle  with  the  floor  of  for(y-five  degrees,  when  it  neither  feU  over  of 
itself,  nor  could  any  person  present  put  it  back  on  its  four  legs,  I  have  seen  a  mahogany 
table,  having  only  a  centre  leg,  and  with  a  lamp  bummg  upon  it,  lifted  from  the  floor  at 
least  a  foot,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  those  present,  and  shaken  backward  and  forward  as 
one  would  shake  a  goblet  in  his  hand,  and  the  lamp  retam  its  place  though  its  glass  pen- 
dants rang  again. 

"  I  have  seen  the  table  tipped  up  with  the  lamp  upon  it  so  far  that  the  lamp  must  have 
fallen  off  unless  retained  there  by  something  else  (him  its  own  gravity,  yet  it  fell  not,  moved 
not.  I  have  known  a  dinner.bell  taken  from  a  high  dielf  m  a  closet,  rung  over  the  heads  of 
four  or  five  persons  in  that  closet,  then  rung  around  the  room  over  the  heads  of  twelve  or 
fifteen  persons  in  the  back  parlor,  and  (hen  borne  through  the  foldmg  doors  to  the  further 
end  of  the  front  parlor,  and  there  dropped  on  the  floor.  I  have  frequently  known  persons 
pulled  about  with  a  force  which  it  was  unpossible  for  them  to  resist,  and  once,  when  all  my 
own  strength  was  added  in  vain  to  that  of  the  one  thus  affected.  I  have  known  a  ma- 
hogany clKiir  thrown  on  its  side  and  moved  swiftly  back  and  forth  on  the  floor,  no  one 
touching  it,  through  a  room  where  there  were  at  least  a  dozen  people  sitting,  yet  no  one 
was  touched,  and  it  was  repeatedly  stopped  withm  a  few  inches  of  me,  when  it  was  coming 
with  a  violence  which,  if  not  arrested,  must  have  broken  my  legs. 

"  Thb  is  not  a  tithe — nay,  not  a  hundredth  part  of  what  1  have  witnessed  of  the  same 
character,  but  it  is  enough  to  show  the  general  nature  of  what  was  before  me. 

"At  the  same  time  I  have  heard  from  others,  whose  testimony  would  be  credited  in  any 
human  transaction,  and  which  I  could  not  permit  myself  to  disregard,  accounts  of  still  more 
extraordinary  transactions,  for  I  have  been  by  no  means  so  much  favored  in  this  respect  as 

"  While  these  things  were  going  on  there  appeared  in  the  newspapers  various  explana- 
tions and  'exposures  of  the  humbug,'  as  they  were  termed.  I  read  them  with  care,  in 
the  expectation  of  being  assisted  in  my  researches,  and  I  could  not  but  smile  at  once  at  the 
rashness  and  the  futility  of  the  explanations.  For  instance,  while  certain  learned  pro- 
fessors in  Buffalo  were  congratulating  themselves  on  having  detected  it  in  the  toe  and  knee- 
joints,  the  manifestations  in  this  city  changed  to  ringing  a  bcU  placed  under  the  table.  They 
were  Uke  the  solution  lately  given  by  a  learned  professor  in  England,  who  attributes  the 
tipping  of  tables  to  a  force  in  the  hands  which  are  laid  upon  it,  overlooking  the  material 
fact  that  tables  quite  as  frequently  move  when  there  is  no  hand  upon  them. 

"What  I  have  thus  mentioned  has  happened  in  the  presenceof  others  as  well  as  myself. 
I  have  not  alluded  to  any  of  the  things  which  have  occurred  to  me  when  I  have  been  alone, 
for  as  that  would  depend  upon  my  testimony  onhf^  I  have  preferred  not  to  subject  my 
veracity  to  the  rash  and  reckless  contradictions  of^  those  who  venture  to  denounce  as  an 
'atrocious  imposture'  that  of  which  they  are  profoundly  ignorant,  and  which  has  been 
examined  and  is  believed  in  by  thousands,  and  tens  of  thousands  of  their  fellow-dtizens, 
who  are,  to  say  the  least,  every  whit  as  honest  and  as  intelligent  as  they  are ;  nor  nm  I 
vevy  anxious  to  submit  my  faith  to  the  judgment  of  those  who  would  have  persecuted 
CJaiileo  nigh  unto  death  for  discovermg  our  planetary  system,  and  have  united  in  the  cry  of 
'folly'  at  Fulton's  steamboat,  'humbug'  at  Morse's  telegraph,  and  'insanity'  at  Gray's 

"  Having  thus  by  a  long  series  of  patient  inquiries  satisfied  myself  on  this  point,  my  next 
mquiry  was,  Whence  comes. the  mtelligence  there  is  behind  it  all?  For  that  intelligence 
was  a  remarkable  feature  of  the  phenomena. 

"Thus  I  have  frequently  known  mental  questions  ansivered — that  is,  questions  meicly 
framed  in  the  mind  of  the  interrogator!  and  not  revealed  by  him  or  known  to  others^ 
Preparatory  to  meeting  a  circle  I  have  sat  down  alone  in  my  room  and  carefully  prepared 

Hosiedb,  Google 

98  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

a  series  of  quesliona  to  be  propounded,  and  I  have  been  surprised  to  find  my  questions  an- 
swered, and  in  the  precise  order  in  wiiich  I  made  tliem,  ivitliout  my  even  taking  my  mem. 
orandum  out  of  my  poctet,  and  when  I  linew  that  not  a  person  present  even  knew  tliat  I 
had  prepared  questions,  much  less  what  they  were.  My  most  secret  thoughts,  those  which 
I  have  never  uttered  to  mortal  man  or  woman,  have  been  freely  spoken,  too,  as  if  I  had 
uttered  them.  Purposes  which  I  have  privily  entertained  have  been  pubUdy  reyealed ;  and 
I  liave  once  and  again  been  admonished  that  my  every  thought  was  known  to  and  couk] 
be  disclosed  by  the  intelligence  which  was  thus  manifestuig  itself. 

"  I  have  beard  the  mediums  use  Greek,  Latin,  Spanish,  and  French  words,  when  I  knew 
they  had  no  knowledge  of  any  language  but  their  own  ;  and  it  is  a  fact  that  can  be  attested 
to  by  many,  that  often  there  has  been  speaking  and  wr^tuig  m  foreign  kmguages  and  un- 
known tongues  by  those  who  were  unacquainted  with  either. 

"  Still  the  question  occmred.  May  not  all  this  have  been,  by  some  mysterious  operation, 
the  mere  reflex  of  the  mind  of  some  one  present  ?  The  answer  was  that  facts  were  com- 
mmiicated  which  were  unTmown  then,  but  afterwards  found  to  be  true ;  like  this,  for  m- 
stance :  when  I  was  absent  last  winter  in  Central  America  my  friends  in  town  heard  of  my 
whereabouts  and  of  the  state  of  my  health  seven  times  j  and  on  mj-  return,  by  comparing 
their  information  with  the  entries  in  my  journal,  it  was  found  to  be  invariably  correct.  So 
in  my  recent  viat  to  the  West,  my  whereabouts  and  my  condition  were  tokl  to  a  medium 
m  this  city  whQe  I  was  travelling  on  the  rdlroad  between  Cleveland  and  Toledo.  So 
thouglits  liave  been  uttered  on  subjects  not.  then  in  my  mind,  and  utterly  at  variance  with 
my  own  notions.  This  has  often  happened  to  me  and  to  others  so  as  fully  to  establLsh  the 
fact  that  it  was  not  out  minds  that  gave  birth  to  or  effected  the  communication. 

"Kindred  to  this  are  tfco  well-authenticated  cases  of  persons  who  can  read  the  thoughts 
of  others  in  their  minds.  One  is  an  artist  of  this  city,  of  high  reputation  ;  and  the  other 
the  editor  of  a  newspaper  in  a  neighboring  city.  The  latter  wrote  me  that  m  cornpany 
with  three  friends  he  had  tried  the  esperiment,  and  for  over  forty  succes.'ave  attempts  found 
he  coidd  read  the  secret  thoughts  of  his  companions  as  soon  as  they  were  formed,  and  with- 
out then-  being  uttered.  So,  too,  there  is  the  instance  of  tivo  persons,  one  of  them  also 
resident  in  this  city,  who  can  give  a  faithful  delineation  of  the  character,  and  even  the 
prevailing  mood  of  mmd  of  any  person,  however  unknown  to  them,  upon  whom  they  fix 

"  These  are  not  apocryphal  cases  ;  the  parties  are  at  hand,  and  in  our  very  midst,  and 
any  person  that  pleases  may  make  the  investigation,  as  I  liave,  and  satisfy  himself. 

"  But  all  this,  and  much,  very  much  more  of  a  cogna     n  o  show  roe  that 

there  ivas  a  high  order  of  iuteUigence  involved  in  thi  n  p  n  menon— an  mtelli^ 
gence  outside  of,  and  beyond,  mere  mortal  agency;  h  n       ther  hypothesis 

which  I  could  devise  or  hear  of,  that  could  at  dl  explam    h       w     se  y  is  establisli«l 

by  the  testimony  of  tens    f  th  iisands  and  can  eaaly  b    asc  ed  b    ^y  one  who  will 

take  the  trouble  to  inquir  t.  ■    .    c. 

"If  these  two  point  b    h  d— and  ther  n    hese  United   States 

Jmndredsofthousandsofse  be   g      ho  have  inve   ii;    e(  b        e  they  are— then 

came  this  important  qu  —to  what  e  at       what  purpose? 

With  what  object  ?  .  ^        ,    , 

"To  that  inquiry  I  h  d  dm  amest  attention,  devotmg  to  the  task,  tor  over 
two  years,  aU  the  leisure  m         and  increasjng  that  leisure  as  far  as  I  could  by 

withdrawing  myself  from  rm         ecreations.      I  have  gone  from  circle  to  circle, 

from  medium  to  medium,  seekmg  knowledge  on  the  subject  wherever  I  could  obtam  it, 
■rither  from  books  or  from  observation,  and  bringing  to  bear  upon  it  whatever  of  intelli- 
gence I  have  been  gifted  with  by  nature,  sharpened  and  unproved  by  over  thuty  years' 
practice  at  the  bar,  in  the  legislatiue,  and  on  the  bench.  . 

"\  found  there  were  i-ery  many  ivays  in  which  this  unseen  intelligence  communed  with 
.us,  bcades  the  Tappings  and  table  tippings,  and  that  through  those  other  modes  there 
came  very  many  communications  distinguidied  for  their  elo<iuence,  their  high  order  of 
■mtellect,  and  their  pure  and  lofty  moral  tone.  At  the  same  time  I  discovered  many  incon- 
sistencies and  contradictions  that  were  calculated  to  mislead  ;  I  saw  many  puerile  and 
some  very  absurd  statements,  and  many  that  were  admirably  calculated  to  make  man 
better  and  happier,  and  I  set  to  work  to  see  if  I  couUl  not,  out  of  this  chaos,  gather  some- 
Ihtog  that  might  be  valuable.  . 

"I  was  satisfied  that  something  more  was  intended  than  the  gratification  of  an  idle 
curiosity;  somethuig  more  than  pandei  ing  to  a  diseased  appetite  for  the  roanellous ;  soine- 
thing  more  than  the  promulgation  of  oracular  platitudes ;  something  more  than  upsetting 
material  objects  to  the  admiration  of  the  wonder-lover;  something  more  than  tellmg  the 
.age  ,of  .the  .living  or  the  dead,  etc 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  95 

"For  tliat  something  I  liave  indnstriously  searched.  I  thouEht  tliat  ivas  wiser  than  to 
condemn  without  investigation,  and  denounce  without  knowledge.  What  I  have  dis. 
covered  in  that  regard  I  have  intended  to  give  to  the  world,  that  aU  may  judge  for  them- 
selves whether  there  is  anything  m  it  worthy  the  attention  of  intelligent  beingt  It  would 
hare  been  done  ere  this  if  my  leisure  wouhi  have  allowed  me  tim?to  prerare  mv  raanu 
scnpt  for  the  press.  Now  I  expect  that  my  book  will  be  published  by  thVfirst  of  Sep- 
tember,  and  to  that  I  refer,  as  I  have  already  said,  for  particulars.  ^ 

"I  went  mto  the  investigation  originally  thinking  it  a  deception,  and  intendiie  to  make 
pubhe  my  exposure  of  it.  Havmg,  ?rom  my  researches,  come  to  a  different  conclusion,  I 
feel  that  the  oUigation  to  make  known  the  result  is  just  as  strong.  Therefore  it  is,  mainlv, 
that  I  give  the  result  to  the  \vorId.  I  say  mwily,  because  there  is  another  consideration 
which  influences  me ;  and  that  is  the  desire  to  extend  to  others  a  knowledge  which  I  am 

n  not  but  make  them  happier  and  better. 

"If  those  who  doubt  this  could  but  spend  a  few  days  with  me  in  my  library,  and  witness 
the  calls  I  have  from  strangers  from  all  parts  of  the  country ;  if  they  could  but  look  over 
my  portfolio,  and  read  the  letters  whlcli  pour  in  upon  me  from  all  sections,  and  from 
persons  whom  I  have  never  seen,  and  never  may  see,  they  would  be  able,  from  the  evidence 
thus  furnished  of  the  good  that  has  been  done,  to  form  some  idea  of  what  may  yet  be 
accomplished;  and  they  would  not  wonder  that  I  find  a  compensation  for  the  obloquy 
that  IS  so  freeiy  heaped  upon  me  by  the  ignorant,  in  the  grateful  outpourings  of  hearts 
which  have,  by  my  means,  been  relieved.  One  of  them  says  [and  it  is  a  fair  specimen  of 
the  whole]  'you  have  acted  the  part  of  the  good  Samaritan,  and  poured  oil  into  (he 
wound  of  one  like  to  die,  and  you  will  have  rendered  a  death-bed,  sooner  or  later  calm 
and  ho^ful,  which  might  have  been  disturbed  by  doubts.' 

"  This,  then,  is  the  offence  for  which  I  am  arraigned  at  the  bar  of  the  public  with  so 
nnsparmg  a  condemnation,  declared  unworthy  of  my  high  office,  falsely  accused  of  con- 
sulting aught  else  than  the  law  of  the  land  and  my  oivn  reason  in  the  judgments  which  I 
ofSciEdly  pronounce^  and  have  had  invoked  ag^st  me  '  the  fires  of  Smilhfield  and  the 
hangings  of  Salem.'  From  such  a  condemnation  it  is  that  I  appeal  to  the  calm,  unbiased 
judgment  of  my  countrymen,  with  a  firm  reliance  upon  its  justice. 

...-_,„  ,-„  „    .        .       n     „  "J-  W.  Edmonds. 

"JiEw  YORK,  August  I,  1S53." 

One  result  of  Judge  Edmonds's  appearance  in  public  as  defendant  against 
the  reckless  attacks  of  his  adversaries,  was  a  change  of  tone  in  die  press, 
which,  fliough  strongly  conlinnatory  of  his  triumphant  position,  is  nevertheless 
diaractenstic  of  the  truth  of  an  old  proverb  which  suggests  a  close  alliance 
betwesii  the  bully  zx^A  the  coward  The  following  extracts  will  suffice  to 
justify  tins  insinuation ; 

Prom  the  New  York  Courier. 
"  ps.'^'ter  from  Judge  Edmonds,  published  by  us  on  Saturday,  with  regard  to  tlie  so- 
c^led  spiritual  manifestalions,  coming  as  it  did  from  an  eminent  jurist,  a  man  remarkable 
for  his  clear  common-sense  m  the  practical  affairs  of  life,  and  a  gentleman  of  iireproachable 
character,  arrested  the  attention  ohhe  community,  and  is  regarded  by  many  peri-nsafone 
ji!:^  "^"l  r^'^'^We  documents  of  the  day.  Judge  Edmonds  has  at  least  shown  that  he 
does  not  shrink  fi-om  a  fuU  mvesligation  of  his  case ;  and  his  error  is,  perhaps,  upon  the 

right  side,  under  the       

"  With  regard  to  the  extraordinary  phen 

havmg  occurred  in  his  presence   it  is  worthy  of  n,. „.  „..,„,  ,„.  „,„„  ,„^™,„,e  are  re^ 

tified  to  by  othei-  persons  equaUy  emment  with  himself.  We  have  the  word  of  a  gentleman 
of  acknowledged  high  social  and  professional  position,  one  whose  bare  word  on  any  other 
subject  we  would  receive  without  question,  that  he  saw  a  man  carried  through  the  air  for 
sev^ty  feet  at  the  height  of  three  yards,  although  no  one  touched  him  or'^brouMit  anv 
mechanical  power  to  bear  on  him.  The  story  is  entitled  to  exactly  the  same  faith  which  is 
due  to  those  of  Judge  Edmonds;  no  less,  and  no  more." 

The  Evening  Mirror  remarks: 

"  John  W.  Edmonds,  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  for  this  District,  is  an  able 
lawyer,  an  industrious  judge,  and  a  good  citizen.  For  the  last  eight  years,  occupying  -vilh- 
out   mterruption  the  hightest  judicial  stations,  whatever  may  be  his  faults,  no  ont,  can 

Hosted  by  Google 

100  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

justly  accuse  liiin  of  a  lack  of  ability,  industry,  honesty,  or  fearlessness.  Ko  one  can  doubt 
his  general  saneness,  or  can  believe  for  a  moment  that  the  ordinary  operauoiis  of  liis  miud 
are  not  as  rapid,  accurate,  and  reliable  as  ever.  Both  by  the  practitioners  and  suitors  at 
his  bar,  he  is  recognized  as  [he  head,  in  fact  and  in  merit,  of  the  Supreme  Court  for  this 
District." 

After  reviewing  that  portion  of  the  letter  ia  which  Judge  Edmonds  records 
the  experiences  which  led  him  to  embrace  the  spiritual  faidi,  the  Mirror 
remarks : 

"  Judge  Edmonds,  -with  characteristic  energy,  has  not  been  silent  on  the  subject  of  his 
recently- formed  opinions.  He  has  repeatedly  published  his  experiences  in  some  of  the 
periodicals  devoted  to  the  new  faith,  and  several  of  Ms  articles  were  copied  extensii-ely  by 
the  daily  press.  Of  course,  these  have  furnished  food  for  those  editors  who  prowl  about 
in  search  of  a  paragraph  or  a  satire,  and  have  afforded  a  target  for  many  blunt  but  not 

It  may  be  unjust  to  hold  the  individual  members  of  the  press  responsible 
for  the  tone  assumed  by  the  majority,  but  the  organization  of  that  mighty  body 
in  America  no  more  admits  of  these  nice  distinctions  than  the  case  of  Judge 
Edmonds,  and  the  circumstances  cited  above,  can  be  considered  apart  from 
the  gigantic  movement  of  which  this  distinguished  jurist  was  but  an  integral 
part.  Judge  Edmonds  himself  defines  the  truth  of  this  position  when  he  says, 
"  I  am  aware  that  it  is  not  so  much  me  as  the  faith  which  I  profess,  which  is 
the  object  of  attack.  It  is  the  mighty  theme,  and  not  the  inconsiderable  ad- 
vocate, which  offends." 

It  has  been  the  general  tone  of  the  press,  as  a  body — not  the  opinion  of  its 
individual  members,  hundreds  of  whom  are  devoted  Spiritualists— which  makes 
its  insolent,  profane,  and  persistent  persecufion  of  Spiritualism  a  subject  of 
equal  surprise  and  discredit 

In  1852,  Judge  Edmonds  formed  the  acquaintance  of  Dr.  Dexter,  who 
with  his  two  young  daughters  of  the  respective  ages  of  nine  and  fourteen,  had 
become  developed,  by  sitting  in  a  family  circle,  as  excellent  mediimis.  In 
company  with  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Dexter,  Mr.  Owen  G.  Warten,  the  author  of 
"Supernal  Theology,"  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sweet,  the  latter  a  medium  of  the 
highest  intellectual  nature,  Judge  Edmonds  formed  a  circle  the  result  of 
which  was  a  series  of  communications,  chiefly  written  through  the  hand  of  Dr. 
Dexter,  or  spoken  by  Mrs.  Sweet  and  written  down  by  the  Judge  in  short- 
hand, which  he  gave  to  the  world  in  September,  1853,  under  the  title  of 
"  Spuitualism,  by  Judge  Edmonds  and  Dr.  Dexter." 

A  second  volume,  differing  somewhat  in  character  and  style  from  the  first, 
was  published  by  Judge  Edmonds  and  Dr.  Dexter  in  tlie  following  year— 
namely,  1854.  The  changes  manifest  in  this  work  are  attributed  by  the 
Judge,  in  his  preface,  to  the  addition  of  Miss  Laura  Edmonds,  and  Miss  Keyes, 
her  cousin,  to  the  circle  of  mediums,  besides  aid  received  from  Mrs.  A.  1'. 
Hall  and  Mrs.  Helen  Leeds,  mediums  of  Boston.  As  these  productions  have 
been  long  and  widely  circulated  amongst  the  American  public,  it  is  needless 
to  make  any  other  comment  upon  them  than  to  record  the  profound  impres- 
sions which  their  issue  from  such  a  distinguished  source  created,  and  to  add 
the  fact  that  the  press  and  pulpit  found  in  garbled  extracts  from  their  pages 
eJI  the  fresh  food  for  ribaldry  and  insult  which  the  hterary  and  Christian  spirit 
of  these  two  potential  leaders  of  pubhc  opinion  could  demand. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER   XI. 

J.  M.  Pepkins. 

Character  of  the  Phenomena— Statistics  of  Spiritualism  in  1853-4-S— 
Mediums  in  Ne%v  York— Speaking  with  new  Tongues— Spirit  Portraits 
—Floating  IN  THE  Air— Mrs.  Mettler— Correspondence— Mrs.  Whitman 
AND  Senator  Simmons— Rev.  C,  Hammond— The  Ring  Experiment  in 
Washington. 

Before  proceeding  with  the  historical  course  of  Spiritualism  in  New  York 
it  would  be  well  to  review  the  character  of  the  manifestations  which  had 
during  five  years  only,  grown  out  of  the  first  suuple  raps  that  awakened  the 
ioliabitants  of  the  humble  "spirit  house"  at  Hydesville  to  the  conscious 
presence  of  disembodied  human  souls.  By  a  reference  to  the  admirable 
compendium  of  Spiritualism  in  1853,  as  detailed  by  Judge  Edmonds  in  his 
"appeal,"  given  in  the  last  chapter,  tlie  character  and  standing  of  the 
personages  interested  in  the  cause  may  be  understood,  together  with  the 
nature  of  the  phenomena  which  was  most  operative  at  that  time.  It  was 
roughly  estimated  by  Mr.  N.  P.  Willis,  editor  of  the  Home  Journal— 
himself  an  interested  investigator— that  the  number  of  Spiritualists  in  New 
York  City  could  not  be  less  than  forty  thousand;  the  magnetic  circles  held 
at  this  time  about  three  hundred;  in  Brooklyn  and  Wilhamsburgh  at  least 
twice  that  number ;  whilst  several  thousand  mediumistic  persons,  over  twenty 
public  test  mediums,  and  at  least  a  hundred  clajrvoyant  and  medical  mediums 
could  be  found  in  and  about  the  city  through  whom  strangers  could  acquaint 
themselves  with  tiie  phenomenal  facts  then  transpiring.  Besides  the  ordinary 
phases  of  rapping,  the  movement  of  conderable  bodies,  and  tlie  production 
of  many  varied  and  wonderful  feats  of  power,  spirits  afforded  the  most 
striking  proofs  of  supra-mundane  intelligence. 

Hundreds  of  mediums  were  astounding  the  world  by  speaking  fluently 
in  many  tongues,  of  which  they  had  no  previous  knowledge. 

In  New  York,  Miss  Laura  Edmonds  conversed  fluently,  when  under 
special  influences  of  that  kind,  in  Greek,  Latin,  Italian,  Portuguese,  Polish, 
Hungarian,  and  several  Indian  dialects ;  her  only  branches  of  lingual 
education  having  been  English  and  French.  Miss  Jenny  Keyes  was  influenced 
to  sing  in  Italian  and  Spanish.  Mrs.  Shepherd,  Mrs.  Gilbert  Sweet,  Miss 
Inman,  Mrs.  Tucker,  Miss  Susan  Hoyt,  A.  D.  Ruggles,  and  several  others 
whose  names  we  are  not  privileged  to  give,  all  residents  of  New  York,  spoke 
frequently,  under  influence,  in  Spanish,  Danish,  Italian,  Hebrew,  Greek, 
Malay,  Chinese,  and  Indian. 

Of  Mr.  Edward  Fowler's  mitings  in  Oriental  languages  we  have  already 
spoken.  They  were  often  submitted  fo  eminent  sdiolars,  amongst  others  to 
tlie  learned  Professor  Bush,  of  New  York,  and  pronounced  to  be  ])ure  Hebrew, 
Greek,  Sanscrit,  etc.  j     Mr.  Fowler  being,  according  to  the  testimony  of  his 

Hosted  by  Google 

102  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

friends  and  family,  utterly  incapable  of  writing,  speaking,  or  comprehending 
any  of  the  languages  in  which  these  communications  were  given.  On  one 
occasion  Professor  Bush  being  present  with  Mr.  Fowler  and  desirous  to 
test  the  possibility  of  communicating  in  Hebrew  through  the  raps,  called  the 
alphabet  in  that  language,  and  received  highly  satisfactory  answers  which  he 
afterwards  translated,  bearing  testimony  to  tlie  indisputable  test  character  of 
the  communication,  and  its  purity  and  correctness  of  orthography.  The 
value  of  die  gift  of  tongues  may  be  estimated  from  the  recital  of  an  incident 
that  occurred  in  the  experience  of  the  late  celebrated  agricultural  chemist, 
Professor  Mapes,  who  vouched  for  tlie  verity  of  the  statement.  A  medium 
of  great  phenomenal  powers — whose  name  we  are  forbidden  to  mention — 
was  one  day  influenced  to  go  into  the  streets  in  company  with  Mr.  Heniy 
Vail,  a  pupil  of  Professor  Mapes,  when  she  was  accosted  by  a  miserable- 
looking  woman,  who  addressed  her  in  a  foreign  language. 

The  medium,  who  was  an  uneducated  person,  was  immediately  controlled 
to  answer  the  stranger  intelligibly,  and  under  an  irresistible  spirit  inlluence, 
was  led  into  a  low  quarter  of  die  town,  where  she  found  fourteen  Italians 
crowded  together  in  one  room,  in  a  state  of  deplorable  destitution  and 
sickness,  but  unable,  from  their  ignorance  of  the  English  language,  to  make 
their  necessities  known. 

The  medium  conversed  with  them  fluently,  administered  to  their  relief, 
and  prescribed  clairvoyantly  and  in  their  own  language  for  the  sick  amongst 
them. 

Governor  Tallmadge,  the  Honorable  J.  M.  Giddings,  and  many  prominent 
New  York  Spiritualists,  have  testified  to  numerous  cases  of  a  similar  nature, 
in  which  the  same  medium,  besides  perfoniiing  wonderful  cures  through 
clairvoyant  agency,  conversed  with  poor  strangers  in  the  streets  in  various 
foreign  languages,  she  being,  from  defective  education  scarcely  mistress  of 
her  own. 

The  above  incident  will  remind  many  New  York  Spiritualists  of  a  person 
who  for  years  was  famous  amongst  them  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
mediums  of  the  age,  but  whose  name — on  her  own  solemn  charge — will  find 
no  record  in  these  pages.  We  must  here  add  that,  actuated  by  different 
motives  from  the  party  above  alluded  to,  and  we  regret  to  say,  most  com- 
monly from  the  unworthy  one  of  fear  of  public,  opinion  thousands  of  die 
most  striking  proofs  of  spiritual  communion  are  suppressed,  because  the 
parties  concerned  refuse  their  names  or  other  tokens  of  authenticity 
absolutely  indispensable  to  the  plan  of  this  work. 

Amongst  odier  varieties  of  phenomena  was  the  production  of  magnetized 
water,  by  which  many  sick  persons  were  cured,  and  the  changing  of  the 
color  of  die  water  whilst  enclosed  in  tightly-corked  and  sealed  bottles.  The 
following  extract  is  a  specimen  of  the  latter  phenomena : 

"Mr.  S.  B.  Britain  ;  Dear  Sir,  —  The  cause  of  Spiritualism  in  tliisyicinity  is  moving 
forward,  regardless  of  ihe  opposition  which  it  meets  on  various  liands,  though  mostly  from 
the  Church.  We  have  all  kinds  of  manifestations,  such  as  are  common  in  the  East  with 
you  J  but  the  newest  are  the  spirit  lights  and  the  coloring  of  ■water.  The  lights  are  seen 
by  all  present  in  different  parts  of  the  room.  But  lately  the  medium  was  directed  to  take 
a  bottle  and  liQ  it  half  full  of  water,  and  cork  the  same  tightly,  when  the  spirits  promised 
(o  appear  in  [t.  This  has  been  done,  and  the  light  appeared  so  bright  that  objects  in  the 
room  could  he  distinctly  seen.  The  bottle  was  passed  around  the  circle,  and  all  saw  and 
handled  il. 

' '  The  water  is  placed  in  a  bottle  and  left  on  a  table  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes,  when  it 
is  changed  to  any  color  desired.  These  things  are  being  constantly  witnessed  in  this  vicin- 
ity. I  saw  them  myself  last  evening  in  a  crowded  circle.  They  can  t>e  attested  by  hundreds. 
Water  was  changed  to  various  colors;  and  when  a  sceptical  lady  present  requested  that  it 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SFIRITUALJSM.  103 

be  colored  red,  it  was  instantly  done,  and  afterwards,  by  request,  it  was  turned  to  a  pale 
yellow.  The  orthodox  follis  have  called  it  'humbug,'  'collusion,'  'magnetism,' and  various 
other  things,  till  they  are  headed  in  them  all,  and  now  they  cry,  lastly,  that  it  is  '  the 

"  We  have  all  lands  of  media  here,  but  these  last  inanifestations  are  produced  tlirongh  a 
gentleman  who  is  quite  unlearned.  He  lias  submitted  to  the  most  rigid  examination,  and 
the  people  are  satisfied  that  he  is  not  in  possesion  of  any  art  by  which  to  produce  these 

things. 

"Yours  for  philosophical  truth, 

"E.  P.  Wilson. 

"Farmin'GTON,  Fulton  County,  Illinois." 

About  this  time  the  papers  began  to  circulate  tidings  of  the  most  astound- 
ing phenomena  occurring  in  Athens  County,  Ohio,  in  the  family  of  Mr.  Koons, 
who  had  built  a  "spirit  room"  in  the  woods  to  facilitate  the  performances  of 
"  the  invisibles." 

Without  anticipating  details  wliicli  belong  to  a  separate  notice,  it  may  be 
mentioned  that  the  spirits  commenced,  through  the  mediumship  of  the  Koons 
family,  to  perform  upon  many  instruments  in  concert,  and  tlirough  a  speaking 
trumpet  actually  dictated  a  small  volume  of  communications,  and  drew  dia- 
grams of  the  spheres  and  other  remarkable  details  of  the  unknown  country 
which  they  claimed  to  inhabit. 

In  Columbus,  Ohio,  Messrs.  George  Walocutt  and  Rogers— the  medium 
who  was  instrumental  in  die  conversion  of  Leo  Miller  —  were  convincing 
sceptics  by  hundreds  through  their  astounding  gifts  of  spirit  painting,  repro- 
ducing faithful  portraitores  of  deceased  persons  wholly  unknown  to  them,  and 
often  sending  them  to  strangers  at  distant  places  under  spirit  dhection. 

To  increase  the  marvel  of  these  productions,  they  were  mostly  drawn  eidier 
in  darkened  apartments,  or  when  the  mediums  were  blindfolded  and  sur- 
rounded by  crowds  of  carping  sceptics.  In  Springfield  and  Boston,  Massa- 
chusetts, D.  D.  Home— afterwards  renowned  for  his  extraordinary  mediumistic 
gifts  diroughoul  die  courts  of  Em-ope— Henry  C.  Gordon,  George  Redman, 
and  RoUin  Squire,  were  all  developed  for  physical  manifestations  of  the  most 
wonderful  character. 

These  young  men  were  frequently  lifted  up  in  die  air  and  floated  over 
several  feet  of  ground  in  the  presence  of  hundreds  of  mtnesses. 

Notices  of  these  performances  were  freely  circulated  in  the  secular  as  well 
as  the  spiritual  press,  and  because  from  such  a  source  the  statements  are 
never  in  danger  of  erring  on  the  side  of  credulity,  we  select  the  following 
from  tlie  New  York  Dispatch  : 

"'super-mundane,'  with  a  vengeance — 'medium  floated  in  the  air.' 

"  Mr.  Henry  Gordon,  a  well-known  medium  for  spiritual  manifestations,  being  at  a  circle 
in  this  city  one  evening  last  week,  was  repeatedly  raised  from  his  seat  and  carried  through 
the  room,  without  any  viable  power  touching  him.  The  room  was  partially  darkened,  and 
the  members  of  the  circle  could  distinctly  see  him  floating,  with  his  lower  extremities  some 
two  or  three  feet  from  the  floor  and  some  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  from  the  nearest  person  to 
him.  The  idea  of  any  mediamcaJ  contrivance  in  this  case  is  out  of  the  question,  as  the  circle 
was  gotten  up  extemporaneously  by  persons  too  intelligent  to  deceive  themselves  and  too- 
honest  to  deceive  others ;  and  the  occurrences  took  place  at  a  house  where  Mr.  Gordon  was 
an  invited  guest  only  for  the  evening.  Full  particulars  of  the  affair  were  related  by  eye- 
witnesses, at  the  sphitual  conference  in  Bond  street,  on  Tuesday  evening  last.  Our  fiiond 
Dr.  Hallock  was  one  of  the  party  who  witnessed  this  phenomenon,  and  perhaps  may  be 
induced  to  write  out  a  more  detailed  account  of  it. 

"  The  same  event  took  place  with  Mr.  Gordon  in  this  city  some  two  years  ago,  ol  which 
an  account  wsis  published." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

I04  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

.  In  Buffalo,  tlie  most  intense  excitement  was  prevailing  on  the  subject  of 
the  manifestations.  Besides  a  number  of  mediums  for  the  ordinary  pliases  of 
spirit  telegraphy.  Miss  Brooks,  a  young  and  interesting  girl  of  a  highly-respect- 
able family,  became  developed  for  the  production  of  spirit  music,  wliicli  was 
performed  in  her  presence  in  the  most  masterly  and  brilliant  manner  by  an 
invisible  piano-forte  player,  whose  magnificent  symphonies  were  produced 
when  the  instrument  was  turned  with  the  keys  to  the  wall,  whilst  one  hand  of 
the  medium  rested  Ughtly  on  die  cover  and  the  other  was  held  by  a  member 
of  the  circle. 

Hundreds  of  healing  mediums  were  also  exercising  their  beneficent  gifts  at 
this  time.  Amongst  many  who  have  since  acquired  a  wide  and  deserved 
renown,  none  was  more  instrumental  for  the  working  of  "miraculous"  cures 
than  Mrs.  Alettler,  of  Hartford,  Connecticut.  The  suffering  and  afflicted 
crowded  her  rooms  from  morning  till  night,  whilst  tlie  records  of  the  cures  she 
performed  under  the  avowed  influence  of  spirits  would  fill  a  volume.  The 
four  daughters  of  Governor  Tallmadge,  of  Wisconsin,  became  mediums,  and 
by  their  influence  and  the  exercise  of  their  admirable  gifts  of  seersliip,  trance, 
musical  improvisation,  writing,  and  tongues,  created  an  immense  sensation  in 
llie  fashionable  circles  in  whicli  they  moved. 

Reports  from  the  West  and  California  were  far  more  startling  and  abundant 
even  than  diose  at  the  East,  and  no  day  passed  in  which  the  spiritual  journals 
were  not  filled  with  narratives  of  the  inarvels  that  were  transpiring  on  every 
part  of  the  continent. 

The  following  extract,  from  the  "Telegraph  Papers"  of  1853,  is  taken 
from  the  notes  of  the  distinguished  writer  and  tourist  James  Sargent,  Esq., 
of  Boston; 

"Mr.    Sargent's  route  lay  principally  tlirousli  tracts  of  country  most  rem  t     f  th 

influences  of  civiliiation.  He  was  for  a  portion  of  the  time  surrounded  aln  0  t  du 
sively  by  an  Indian  population  in  a  state  but  little  removed  from  barbarisn  It  need 
hardly  be  added  that  no  vesfige  of  literature,  even  to  the  establishment  of  a  distn  t  po  t 
for  the  benefit  of  travellers,  had  ever  penetrated  these  ivilds.  No  means  fo  the  dissemi 
nation  of  information  existed,  yet  Mr.  Sargent  found  tliat  l/re  rappings  and  all  tl  II 
Spiritual  moJiifeslations  inert  of  cemmon  occurrence. 

"  It  was  not  fay  any  means  unusual,  on  entering  3  log  cabin,  to  find  the  good,  simple 
people  seated  round  the  rude  table  npon  which  raps  were  being  made,  and  replying  in  the 
usual  mode,  to  questions  pat  by  the  auditory.  There  were  to  be  found,  moreover,  both 
writing,  talking,  and  seeing  media,  and  these  in  considerable  numbers. 

"  Tlie  villagers  themselves  appeared  to  be  in  total  ignomnce  of  the  nature  and  character 
of  the  phenomena;  only  replying,  when  questioned,  that  they  'did  not  understand  it; 
didn't  know  but  that  it  might  be  the  devil,'  etc. 

"  These  sylvan  rappings  first  occurred,  it  appears,  when  a  number  of  people  were  sit f inw 
leather  in  conversation,  and  created  no  small  cr~'' — ■-■-  — 

„  .  -  c ... e  superhumi 

intelligence,  seems  to  have  occurred  to  these  unsophisticated  IJeings  naturally,  and  without 
any  kind  of  prompting  or  suggestion  from  persons  already  acquamled  with  the  demonstra- 
tions ;  and  having  arrived  at  this  conclusion,  and  ascertained  that  the  rappings  could  reply 
to  them,  they  no  longer  heatated  to  enter  into  conversation  with  tliem." 

Amongst  records  of  incidental  phenomena  poured  into  the  editorial  sanct- 
ums of  the  New  York  spiritual  journalists,  the  author  selects,  from  ovtjjiv. 
thousand  similar  paragraphs,  a  few  that  have  been  thoroughly  well  attested, 
as  specimen  signs  of  the  times.  The  letter  from  which  the  following  extract 
is  taken  was  written  for  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  by  a  thoroughly  reliable 
corrcsj>ondent. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  105 

"  Mr.  Vin5on  Stoctwell,  in  Tliomson,  Geaug;a  Couiity,  Ohio,  lias  in  his  faiiiily  a  Ilttls 
gill  about  twelve  years  old,  who  became  first  a  rapping,  then  a  writing,  and  lastly  a  clair- 
voyant medluin. 

"She  describes  tlie  nature  of  disease,  tells  the  ^mptoms  and  feelings  of  the  patient, 
prescribes  for  the  same,  and  has  performed  wonderful  cures.  One  case  is  as  follows;  A 
little  girl  nine  years  old  liad  been  under  the  care  of  four  very  eminent  medical  gentlemen 
nearly  two  years,  and  during  that  time  over  one  hundred  pieces  of  bone  had  been  taken 
from  her  limbs.  The  physicians  finally  gave  her  up  as  incurable,  at  wliich  time  she  could 
only  be  moved  from  one  bed  to  another  on  pillows.  She  is  now  entirely  cured  by  a  pre- 
scription made  by  spirits  through  this  medium. 

"Another  was  a  case  of  deafness  of  four  years'  standing.  The  patient  is  a  ]ady,  a 
neighbor  of  mine,  and  I  knew  lier  to  be  so  deaf  that  it  \vas  with  much  difficulty  that  she 
could  be  made  to  understand  by  loudly  speaking  in  her  ear.  This  case,  too,  had  baiHed 
the  sldll  of  several  physicians.     She  was  entirely  healed  by  spiritual  agency  through  this 

"  Another  astonisliing  fact  is  as  follovre :  Mr.  Stockwell,  father  of  the  medium,  left  here 
for  Califoniia ;  afterwards  his  family  had  news  of  Mm  by  spiritual  agency  almost  daily, 
stating  his  whereabouts,  and  many  little  incidents  occurring  in  hisjoumey,  which  statements 
were  found  to  correspond  exactly  with  his  letters  afterward  received.  But  the  most  aston- 
ishing fact  of  all  was,  that  after  being  absent  abont  one  )-ear,  and  the  family  not  hearing 
from  him  for  some  time,  tliey  sat  for  spiritual  communications,  and  to  their  surprise  the 
spirit  informed  them  that  Mr*  Stockwell  was  on  his  way  home.  This  information  was  quite 
onlooked  for,  as  Mr,  Stockwell  was  not  expected  home  until  the  jear  following.  The 
question  was  asked,  'Is  he  on  the  water?'  Aniwcr,  'No  he  is  on  the  Istlunns.'  The 
spirit  stated  at  the  same  time  on  wliat  day  of  the  month  he  would  be  at  home ;  and,  str.onge 
as  it  may  appear,  he  arrived  on  the  very  day  foretold,and  stated  that  In 
at  tlie  time  stated  ir  '' t--^^... 

The  Hartford  Times,  Connecticut,  publishes  in  March,  1853,  the  account 
of  a  seance  which  one  of  its  regular  correspondents  held  with  Mr.  D.  D. 
Home.  After  relating  at  length  the  extraordinary  feats  of  marvel  performed 
through  tables,  bell-ni^ing,  playing  on  various  instmments,  and  moving 
about  of  heavy  pieces  of  furniture,  etc.,  the  iviiter  goes  on  to  relate  an 
incident  of  such  an  interesting  cliaxacter  that  we  quote  llie  description 
entire,  only  premising  that  the  editor  vouches  for  the  full  faith  and  reliability 
of  his  correspondent's  statements : 

"  Later  in  the  evening,  when  the  company  were  preparmg  to  retire,  and  after  Eome  o( 
the  party  had  gone  from  the  room,  the  spirits  requested  us  to  wait ;  and  those  that  re- 
mained were  perinitted  to  see  the  most  remarkable  part  of  that  evening's  proceedings. 
The  gas-light  had  been  turned  down,  but  suifieient  light  remained  ia  llie  room  to  render 
onrselves,  and  most  objects,  quite  visible,  and  the  hands  of  the  party,  wliich  rested  on  the 
table,  could  be  distinctly  seen.     The  spirits  asked ; 

'"How  many  hands  are  there  on  the  table?*    There  were  six  of  us  in  the  party,  and 
the   nswer  a.fter  counting,  was 'twelve,' 
A  J>  y — '  There  are  thirteen.' 

A  d  here,sureenough,  on  that  sideof  the  tablewhichwasvacant.and  opposite  to  the 

m  d    n,    ppeared  a  thirteenth  hand  1    It  faded  as  we  gazed,  but  presently  up  it  came 

ag^  n     a  hand  and  an  arm,  gleaming  and  apiiarently  self-luminous ;  and  it  slowly  moved 

ird       s'ard  the  centre  of  the  table  1    To  make  sure  that  we  were  not  deceived  or 

b    m      nder  a  hallucmation,  we  counted  our  own  hands,  which  were  all  restmg  in  sight 

p      th      ble.     There  it  was,  however,  an  arm  and  a  hand,  the  arm  extending  back  to  tlie 

b        and  there  fading  into  imperceptibiUty.     We  all  saw  it,  and  all  spoke  of  it,  to  assure 

each  other  of  the  reality  of  the  thmg.     It  had  the  color  and  appearance  ofsihier,  but  with 

this  difference — it  seemed  to  be,  to  a  certain  extent,  self-lummous;  it  emitted  a  faint  but 

perceptible  lig?it.     Presently  it  vanished,  but  we  were  soon  permitted  to  see  not  only  the 

same  thing  again,  but  i/it  process  ef  its  formation.     It  began  at  the  elbow,  and  fomied 

rapidly  and  steadily,  until  the  arm  and  hand  again  rested  on  the  table  before  us.     It  wai 

so  plainly  seen  that  I  readily  observed  it  to  be  a  left  hand.     I  inquired ; 

"'Can  you  sirite  with  that  hand,  in  plain  siglit?' 

''Answer  (by  raps)  —  'Perhaps.' 

Hosiedb,  Google 

I06  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"A  sheet  of  paper  and  a  pencil  were  placed  in  (he  centre  of  the  table,  the  hand  receded 
meanwhile  from  view.  In  a  moment  it  came  up  again  [always  appearing  from  the  vacant 
ade  of  the  table]  and  slowly  movCLl  forward  to  the  paper,  which  it  grasped  and  drew  back 
to  the  ^e,  and  there  shook  and  rattled  it  for  some  moments,  but  failed  to  write  anything 
le^ble.  It  then  disappeared,  and  the  next  moment  the  bel!  was  taken  from  beneath  the  . 
table,  carried  from  the  circle  some  ax  feet  toward  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  there  rung 
by  mviable  means,  and  so  distinctly  that  persons  in  another  room,  beyond  an  intervening 
wall  or  passage-way,  plainly  heard  it. 

' '  Presently  it  was  hcought  hack  and  dropped  upon  the  table  —  and  this  while  each  of  us 
sat  quiedy,  without  moving.  The  hand  again,  appeared,  was  seen  to  take  the  bell  from 
the  table  and  place  it  in  the  hands,  first  of  one,  and  then  of  another  of  the  party.  At 
length  it  was  placed  in  mine;  bnt,  slipping  my  hand  over  the  bell,  I  grasped  the  hand  that 
held  it,  dearing  some  more  tangible  knowledge  of  its  character  than  that  afforded  by  sight. 
It  was  a  real  hand — it  had  knuckles,  fingers,  and  finger-nails;  and  what  was  yet  more 
curiousfif  possible], it  was  soft  and  warm,  feeling  much  like  the  hand  of  an  infant,  b  every 
respect  but  that  of  size.  But  the  most  singular  part  of  this  [f  o  me]  strange  occurrence  is 
yet  to  be  told — the  hand  melted  in  my  grasp  1  dissolved,  dissipated,  became  annihilated, 
so  far  as  the  sense  of  feeling  extended.  It  subsequently  reappeared  on  the  table  and  again 
vanbhed,  after  a  statement  [by  the  raps]  to  the  effect  that  this  hand  had  been  produced  by 
a  near  relative  of  some  of  those  in  the  circle,  who  had  been  in  the  interior  life  a  number  of 
years.     Thb  question  was  then  spelled  out ; 

" '  Would  you  like  to  see  the  hand  of  a  colored  person  ? ' 

"In  a  moment  more  there  a.ppeareda  rather  dull-looking g'riy  hand,  somewhat  shadowy, 
and  not  quite  so  clearly  defined  as  the  first,  but  it  was  unmistakably  there,  and  its  gray  huf 
could  be  clearly  seen. 

"  But  tliis  account  grows  lengthy,  and  must  close.  Occurraices  yet  more  astounding  than 
any  liere  related  remain  untold.  Perhaps  in  another  chapter  I  may  give  some  of  them, 
and  also  a  glance  at  one  theory  concerning  the  philosophy  of  the  production  of  these 
startling  realities.  Fact. 

"IIartfoeb,  March  iS,  1S53." 

"SPIRITS    IN    CALIFORNIA— iSsi. 

"  Jesse  Hutchinson  writes  from  California  that  the  spirit  rappings  are  quite  prevalent  in 
the  land  of  gold.  There  are  now  said  to  be  some  twenty  good  mediums  in  San  Francisco. 
They  have  seized  upon  the  editors  and  conductors  of  the  public  press.  The  Herald  is  now 
the  only  sheet  as  yet  unblest  by  their  presence.  One  of  the  editors  of  the  Alia  has  becomr 
a  medium;  also  the  principal  editor  of  the  Whig,  and  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Placa 
Times  is  an  enthuaastic  believer  and  medium."      Spiritual  Telegraph. 

In  a  very  interesting  article  written  by  Hon.  Horace  Greeley  for  Piifnanis 
Monthly  Magazine  tlie  talented  author  ^ives  several  striking  narratives  of 
the  spiritual  experiences  of  some  of  his  friends,  together  widi  his  own  keenly 
acute  though  non-committal  comments  thereon. 

Amongst  odiers,  the  following  recital,  though  it  lias  frequently  been  repub- 
lished, will  not  be  out  of  place,  as  illustrative  of  die  character  of  early 
phenomenal  facts,  vouched  for  on  the  authority  of  Mrs.  S.  Helen  Whitman, 
the  celebrated  poetess  of  Rliode  Island. 

The  narrative  is  given  in  part  of  a  Setter  addressed  by  Mrs.  Wliitman  to 
Mr.  Greeley,  who  introduces  it  with  strong  affirmations  of  the  unimpeachable 
character  of  the  testimony  he  cites,  also  widi  the  following  postscript  added  to 
liis  letter  in  I^tnam's  Magazine: 

"P.  S.  — Since  the  foregoing  was  in  type,  the  writer  lias  received  the  following  letter  from 
Mrs.  Sarah  H.  Whitman,  of  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  reply  to  one  of  inquiry  from  him  as  to 
her  own  experiences  in  Sfiiritjialism,  and  especially  with  regard  to  a  remarkable  experience 
cnrrently  reported  as  having  occurred  to  lion.  James  F.  Simmons,  late  U.  S.  Senator 
from  Rhode  Island,  and  widely  known  as  one  of  the  keenest  and  dearest  of  obEcn'ers,  most 
milikely  to  he  the  dupe  of  mystery  or  the  slave  of  hallucination.' 

"  The  most  material  portion  Is  as  follows: 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

ing  oE  t! 
IS  haude 

'"Dear  Sir, — I  have  had  no  conversation  with  Mr.  Simmons  on  tlie  subject  of  j-our  note 
until  to-day.  I  took  an  early  opportunity  of  acquainting  him  witli  the  contents,  and  this 
morning  he  called  on  me  to  say  that  he  was  perfectly  willing  to  impart  to  you  the  particu- 
lars of  his  ei^perience  in  relation  to  the  layitaioai  •snd-ag performed  nnder  /us  very  eyis 
in  broad  daylight,  by  an  invisible  agent.  In  tlie  fall  of  iSSO  seyenil  messages  were 
telegraphed  to  Mrs,  Simmons  through  the  electric  Eouuds,  purporting  to  come  from  her 
step-son,  James  D.  Simmons,  who  died  some  weeks  before  in  C^ifomia. 

"  '  The  mess^es  were  calculated  to  stimulate  curiosity  and  lead  to  an  attentive  observa- 
tion of  the  phenomena.  Mrs.  S.  having  heard  that  messages  in  the  handwriting  of  deceased 
persons  were  sometimes  written  through  the  same  medium,  asked  if  her  son  would  give 
her  this  evidence.  She  was  informed  —  through  the  sounds — that  the  attempt  should  be 
made,  and  was  directed  to  place  a  slip  of  paper  in  a  certain  drawer  at  the  house  of  the  me- 
dium, and  to  lay  beside  it  her  own  pencil,  which  had  been  g^ven  her  by  the  deceased. 
Weeks  passed  on,  and  although  frequent  inquhies  were  made,  no  writing  ivas  found  on  this 

"  'Mrs.  Simmons  happening  to  call  at  the  house  one  day,  accompanied  by  her  husband, 
made  the  usual  inquiry,  and  received  the  usual  answer. 

"'The  drawer  had  been  opened  not  two  hours  before,  and  nothing  was  seen  in  it  but  the 
pencil  lymg  on  the  blank  paper.  At  the  suggestion  of  Mrs.  S.,  however,  another  investiga- 
tion was  made,  and  on  the  paper  was  found  a  few  pendlled  lines,  resembling  the  hand- 
;  of  the  deceased,  but  not  so  closely  as  to  satisfy  the  mother's  doubts.  Mi-s.  Sha- 
landed  the  paper  to  her  husband.  He  thought  there  was  a  slight  resemblance,  but 
should  probably  not  liave  remarked  it  had  the  writing  been  casually  presented  to  Iiira. 
Had  the  agnature  been  given  him  he  should  at  once  have  decided  on  the  resemblance.  lie 
proposed.  If  the  spirit  of  his  son  were  indeed  present  —  as  alphabetical  communications,  re- 
ceived thrtjugh  the  sounds,  affirmed  him  to  be — that  he  sliould,  then  and  there,  affix  his 
signature  to  the  suspicious  document. 

"  '  In  order  to  facilitate  the  operation,  Mr.  S,  placed  the  closed  points  of  a  pair  of  scis- 
sors in  the  bands  of  the  medium,  and  dropped  his  pencil  through  one  of  the  rings  or  bows, 
the  paper  being  placed  beneath.  Her  hand  presently  b^an  to  tremble,  and  it  was  with  dif- 
ficulty she  could  retain  her  hold  of  the  scissors.  Mr,  Simmons  then  took  them  into  Ms 
oivn  hand,  and  again  dropped  his  pencil  through  the  ring.  It  could  not  readily  be  sustained 
in  this  position.  After  a  few  moments,  however,  it  stood  as  if  firmly  poised  and  perfectly 
stiQ.  It  then  began  slowly  to  move.  Mr.  S.  saw  traced  beneath  his  eyes  the  words  James 
D.  Simmons,  The  letters  were  distinctly  and  deliberately  written,  and  the  handwriting 
was  a  facsimile  of  Ms  son's  signature.  But  what  Mr.  S,  regards  as  the  most  astonishing 
part  of  this  seeming  miracle  is  yet  to  be  told. 

"  'Bendmg  down  to  scrutinize  the  writing  more  closely,  he  observed,  just  as  the  last  word 
was  finished,  tliat  the  top  of  the  pencil  leaned  to  the  right ;  he  thought  it  was  about  to 
slip  through  the  ring,  but  to  his  mfinite  astonishment  he  saw  tlie  point  slide  slowly  back 
along  the  word-  Simmon's,  till  it  rested  over  the  letter  (,  where  it  deliberately  imprinted  a 
dot.  TMs  was  a  punctilio  utterly  unthought  of  by  him ;  he  had  not  noticed  the  omission, 
and  was  therefore  entu-ely  unprepared  for  the  amendment.  He  su^ested  the  experiment, 
and  hitherto  It  had  kept  pace  only  with  his  wQi  or  deare  ;  but  bow  will  those  who  deny 
the  agency  of  discmbodiwl  spirits  in  these  marvels,  ascribing  all  to  the  unassisted  pow- 
ers of  the  human  will  or  to  the  blind  action  of  electricity — how  will  they  dispose  of  this  last 
significant  and  curious  fact  ?  The  only  peculiarity  observable  in  the  writing  was  that  the 
lines  seemed  sometimes  slightly  broken,  as  if  the  pencil  had  been  lifted  and  then  set  down 

'"Another  circumstance  I  am  permitted  to  relate,  which  is  not  readily  to  be  accounted  for 
on  any  other  theory  than  that  of  spiritual  agency:  Mr.  S.,  who  had  received  no  particulars 
of  his  son's  death  until  several  months  after  his  decease,  intending  to  send  for  his  remains, 
questioned  the  spirit  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  body  had  been  disposed  of,  and  received 
a  very  minute  und  circumstantial  account  of  the  means  which  had  been  resorted  to  for  its 
preservation,  it  bemg  at  the  time  embalmed. 

"  '  Improbable  as  some  of  these  statements  seemed,  they  were,  after  an  interval  of  four 
months,  confirmed  as  literally  true  by  a  gentleman,  then  recently  returned  from  California, 
who  was  with  young  Simmons  at  the  period  of  his  death.  Intending  soon  to  return  to  San 
Francisco,  he  called  on  Mr.  Simmons  to  learn  his  wishes  in  relation  to  the  final  disposition 

"  'I  took  down  the  particulars  in  writing  by  the  permisdon  of  Mr.  S.,  during  his  relation 
of  the  facts.  I  have  many  other  narratives  of  a  like  character  from  persons  of  mtelligence 
and  veracity ;  but  they  could  add  nothing  to  the  weight  of  that  which  I  have  just  reported 

Hosiedb,  Google 

io8  HISTORY  OF  MODERN- 

The  following  "  test"  of  spiritual  identity  is  inserted  both  on  account  of 
the  ingenious  method  of  representation  employed  by  the  spirits,  and  for  the 
sake  of  Mr.  Bartlett's  valuable  and  well-accredited  testimony. 

TELEGRAPH   PAPERS. 

"Among  the  numerous  investigators  of  the  subject  of  spiritual  philosoplij  is  Mr.  Bart- 
lett,  the  well-known  Mexican  boundary  commissioner,  Mr,  B.  is  a  man  thorouehiy  versed 
in  science  and  natural  philosophy,  and  is  widely  known,  either  personally  or  by  reputation, 
throughout  a  large  section  of  the  United  Slates. 

"  On  the  occaaon  of  which  I  speak,  Mr.  Hartlett  had  gone,  in  company  with  ex-Senator 
Tallmadge,  to  the  resideuce  of  Mrs,  C.  Laurie,  of  WasMngton,  for  the  purpose  of  witness- 
ing some  of  the  manifestations.  Mr.  L.'s  arallndum  MBw  an 
ger  to  the  family,  and  was  merely  introduced  by  G  n  Tallmadg  a  M  B  a 
fnendofhis.  Soon  the  hand  of  Mr,  L.'d  herw  n  d  w 
'M.  B.' 

"No  one  present  recognized  the  personage  p  h 

' ' '  Were  you  a  relative  of  this  gentleman  ?  B  ] 

" '  No.' 

' '  The  hand  of  the  medium  was  then  made  to  draw  t  le  p  ct  ire  j,ij  ^ 

camp-w^on,  drawn  by  a  team  oE  mules.     To  these  objects  were  added,  at  a  little  distance, 
a  lai^e  tree  and  the  prostrate  figure  of  a  man,  apparently  dead,  beneath  it. 

"'This,'  said  Mr.  B.,  'looks  like  a  scene  in  Mexico.  The  wagon  and  the  mules  are 
just  like  those  we  used  there.     But  I  do  not  understand  the  man  lymg  under  the  tree.' 

"Hereupon  Mrs.  L.,  who  is  a  very  impresable  medium,  remarked: 

"'I  receive  the  impression  that  that  man  died  a  violent  death;  and  further,  that  his 
Chriaian  name  was  Marcus.' 

"Soon  after,  she  added: 

"  '  He  lost  his  life  by  some  means  in  connection  with  that  tree,  and  I  think  his  body 
must  be  buried  beneath  it. 

"  At  this  jnnctme  Mr.  Eartlelt  was  startled  by  the  thorough  recognition  of  the  indi-  . 
viduol  who  was  thus  endeavoring  to  make  himself  known.  He  recollected  him  at  once,  as 
a  man  who  had  been  attached  to  the  boundary  commission  and  whose  name  was  Marcus  B. 
This  individual,  m  company  with  two  others,  had  acquired  a  bad  name  among  the  members  and 
aitackis  of  the  commission,  and  at  length  the  three  coimnitted  a  high  and  daring  crime,  for 
which  they  were  arrested  and  tried  before  a  jury  empanelled  by  Mr.  Bartlett  upon  the  spot, 
conHstingof  ax  Americans  and  six  Mexicans,  and  the  result  was  a  condemnation  to  be  hung 
upon  the  nearest  tree.  This  sentence  was  promptly  executed,  and  the  ttoee  bodies  were 
buried  beneath  the  tree  on  which  they  had  been  hung  1 

"  The  invisible  presence  showed  unmistakable  evidence  of  satisfation  at  the  recognition, 
and  proceeded  to  say  that  he  had  come  to  ask  Mr.  B.'s  pardon  for  his  wrong  deeds,  adding 
that  he  did  not  impress  Mrs.  L.  with  his  whole  name,  for  the  reason  that  he  had  a  brother 

.  and  a  mother  living  in  the  State  of ,  who  did  not  k  f  h     d    th       1      i        ey 

through  Mexico,  and  he  did  not  wish  to  lacerate  then-  feelm"i.  by  any  an     un    m  nt  wh   h 
might  spread  from  others, 

"Mr.  B.  subsequently  said  that  iHs  statement  was  t  tl  t  e,  H  n  nb  d  tl 
surname  of  the  man  who  had  thus  unexpectedly  and    t         1        m    t    1  d    t  ted 

that  his  family  were  actually  living  in  the  remote  State     h   h  h  d  b    n  design  t  d  bj  tl 

"No  member  of  Mr.  Laurie's  family  had  ever  heard    f    M-u       B         U  ght    f 

Ms  tragic  death," 

"NEW  PHASE   OF   THE   MANIFESTATIONS— SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH,   iSsj. 

"Waukeoan,  Jime  7. 

"Deae.  Britain,  —  Among  numerous  and  remarkable  facts  occurring  all  over  the 
land,  furnishing  incontestable  proof  of  spiritual  communion,  the  one  I  am  gouig  to  relate 
may  not  be  conadered  the  least  curious  or  interesting. 

"A  lady  medivml  in  this  vicinity,  Mrs.  Seymour,  when  entranced,  is  m  the  habit  of 
writing  communications  on  her  arms  with  the  point  of  her  finger  —  first  on  tbe  left  arm 
with  the  index  finger  of  the  right  hand,  and  then  vies  versa.  '  Tlic' writing  is  for  some 
minutes  illegible,  but  soon  it  begins  to  appear  in  raised  letters  that  can  be  bott  seen  and 
felt  distinctly. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAM  SPIRITUALISM.  109 

"  At  first  these  lines  Lave  a  whitish  appearance,  but  afterwards  become  a  bright  red,  and 
can  be  as  plainly  seen  and  deciphered  as  chalk-marlis  on  a  wall.  When  esamined  by  the 
sense  of  feeling,  tliey  impart  the  same  unyielding  impresaon  to  the  finger  as  the  lidgea 
inflicted  by  the  stroke  of  a  whip,  though  the  finger,  in  writing,  is  passed  over  the  surface  very 
lightly  and  rapidly.  To  the  eye  they  look  Ulte  a  bum,  or  not  unlike  erysipelas.  They 
remam  thus  distinct  and  legible  for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  cauang  no  pdn  or  even  un- 
pleasant feeling,  and  then  gradually  fade  away  as  they  came,  leaving  the  akm  natural, 
smooth,  and  uncolored. 

"  The  iady  is  also  a  speaking  medium,  and  at  the  close  of  her  address,  m  this  manner, 
usually  gives  the  name  of  the  spirit  who  has  been  speaking,  or  answers  questions  by  'yes' 
and  '  no:  Sometunes,  however,  she  will  write  short  communications,  coveting  the  whole 
arm  from  wrist  to  shoulder,  in  two  or  three  lines,  often  commencing  on  one  arm  and  finish- 
ing on  the  other.  It  is  curious  to  witness  the  facility  with  which  the  arm  is  twisted  to 
receive  the  successive  lines.  The  philosophy  and  rationale  of  this  is  as  puzdmg  to  the 
sceptic and  I  may  say  also  to  the  believer — as  many  other  wonders  of  this  wonderful 

J......   1..^  unseen  operators  manage  to  thus  use  the  different  portions  of  the  living 

organism,  the  finger  for  a  stile,  the  vital  fluid  as  ink,  and  the  llvmg  cuticle  as  parchment, 
it  remains,  perhaps,  for  Dodds,  or  the  Devil,  or  some  other  aspirant  for  fame  to  account  for, 
on  the  score  of  '  the  mvoluntary  powers  of  the  mmd,'  or  some  such  theory  equally  satisfac- 
tory and  assinmely  luminous.  "  ■  "■ 

Since  the  publication  of  the  above  letter,  written  by  an  esteemed  and 
reliable  correspondent,  many  hundreds  of  persons  have  seen  and  bomo  wit- 
ness to  Mrs.  Seymottr's  remarkable  mediumship. 

Several  other  mediums  have  recently  been  developed  for  the  same  phase 
of  spirit-power,  but  as  the  above  is  the  first  public  notice  tliat  appeared  of 
this  phenomenon  it  is  deemed  worthy  of  insertion  here. 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  "notes  of  travel,"  written  for  the 
Boston  New  Era  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Hammond,  of  Rochester,  New  York. 
This  gentleman,  it  may  be  remembered,  was  one  of  the  earliest  investigators 
of  Spiritualism  tlirough  the  mediumship  of  the  Fox  family.  At  the  first  few 
interviews  which  Mr.  Hammond  enjoyed  mth  "the  spirits"  he  became  power- 
fully controlled  as  a  personating,  speaking,  and  trance  medium.  His  physical 
system  was  violently  exercised,  and  that  contKuy  to  his  wish,  or — in  view  of 
lus  ministerial  capacitj' — to  his  sense  of  propriety. 

In  course  of  time,  however,  he  became  a  writing  medium  and  gave  several 
interestiog  and  voluminous  works  to  the  worid,  purporting  to  be  communica- 
tions dictated  by  spirits.  He  subsequently  became  a  popular  inspirational 
speaker,  and  it  was  in  this  mission  that  the  observations  were  made,  a  few  of 
which  will  be  found  as  follows  : 

"NOTES  OF  TRAVEL, 

"  Rochester,  July  14,  1853. 
"Friend  Britmn,  — Belie\-ing  that  the  readers  of  the  Telegraph  vioa\A  be  gratified 
with  a  brief  account  of  what  I  witnessed  during  my  ax  weeks'  tour  to  the  West,  I  am 
induced  to  write  to  yon,  leaving  you  to  judge  and  dispose  of  the  matter  as  you  may  thmk 

"  Along  the  entire  path  of  my  journey  I  found  individuals  of  the  highest  respectability 
anxiously  inquiring  into  the  truth,  and  gladly  receiving  the  light  of  spiritual  communica- 
tions. I  made  a  short  stay  in  Chautauque,  where  I  found  one  rapping  medium  who  received 
such  instruction  through  my  hand  as  resulted  in  developing  her  condition  so  as  to  become  a 
writing  medium.  Several  other  persons  were  exercised  very  powerfully,  even  beyond  their 
power  of  resistance.  One  young  man  took  the  pen  without  the  least  expectation  that  he 
could  be  moved,  and  in  less  than  five  minutes  his  hand  began  to  shake,  and  shake  more 
violently,  as  he  offered  resistance,  then  both  hands,  and  afterwards  his  lunbs,  so  that  he 
could  not  sit  or  stand  still,  but  began  to  dance  to  the  astonishment  of  himself  and  friends. 
This  exercise  was  continued  for  more  than  an  hour,  when  he  was  released.  He  said  it  did 
not  tire  him  in  the  least 

Hosiedb,  Google 

"o  HISTORY  OF  MODERN- 

"From  this  county,  I  pa5sed  on  to  Cleveliind,  wliere  I  arrived  on  Sunday  too  late  for 
the  meeting  of  the  Spiritualists.  I,  however,  found  a  circle  in  the  evening,  far  advanced  in 
the  philosophy  of  gpiritual  intercourse. 

"  During  ten  or  twelve  days,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  attendmg  circles  of  Spiritualists  every 
evenmg,  beside  visitmg  some  forty  or  fifty  families  in  the  daytime.  It  is  nearly  impossible 
to  describe  the  peculiar  manifestations  which  I  beheld,  or  the  manner  in  which  persons  are 
exercised  by  spirits. 

' '  The  most  remarkable  are  the  speakmg,  pointing,  and  dancing  mediums.  The  speakine 
mediums  soraetunes  act  and  speak  in  a  dialect  wholly  unintelligible  to  me,  yet  apparently 
well  understood  by  those  who  are  conversing.  The  circles  bemg  formed,  mediums  are 
histantly  affected,  as  it  were  with  a  magnetic  shock ;  their  eyes  become  closed,  and  yet  they 
act  and  move  about  the  room  with  as  much  readmess  as  though  they  were  conscious  of 
eveij'thing  about  them.  When  the  medium  rises,  however  silent  they  may  be,  by  a  ample 
motion  of  the  finger  another  is  brought  on  the  feet,  and  another,  and  so  on,  tiU  the  required 
number  are  unwillmgly  led  into  a  circle,  when  the  speaking  commences,  each  alternately 
participating  in  the  subject,  under  the  control  of  spirits,  who  act  upon  the  organs  in  sudi  a 
manner  as  to  force  the  utterance  of  words  very  readily  and  correctly.  I  have  in  my  posses- 
ion a  very  interesting  dialogue  which  was  repeated  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Kirkpatrick,  m 
Ohio  city.  This  dialogue  was  uttered  m  the  Indian  language,  and  was  not  at  first  under- 
stood until  a  translation  was  written  out  by  my  hand.  The  manner  of  its  delivery  was 
prely  characteristic  of  the  red  man,  and  yet  I  had  no  idea  of  the  subject  untU  my  hand 
mvoluntarily  wrote  it  out.  I  also  heard  a  French  dial<^e  spoken  by  the  same  mediums, 
I  not  one  of  whom  understood  the  language.  And  however  incredible  it  may  seem,  these 
mediums  do  not,  as  they  inform  me,  become  unconscious  of  the  presence  of  the  company, 
;  norhave  they  the  power  to  sit  down  or  do  differently  than  they  do.  AIL  that  is  done  seems 
to  be  wholly  mechanical,  and  the  mediums  may  be  regarded  as  the  machmery,  acted  upon 
by  an  mvisible  power  so  as  to  induce  manifestations  of  spirits,  who  control  the  voice,  words, 
and  gesticulation,  and  thus  correctly  identify  themselves. 

"  The  jiointm^  mediums  signify  to  each  other  by  ^gns  what  is  required,  and  theu-  silent 
language  is  readily  obeyed.  I  saw  whole  circles  formed  and  placed  in  their  proper  order 
without  a  word  being  uttered. 

"  The  dancing  mediums  are  old  and  young,  and  of  both  sexes.  Sometimes  the  dance  is 
performed  in  a  circle  of  three  or  foor  persons,  hut  not  always.  Tlie  movements  are  very 
eccentiic,  yet  often  exceedmgly  graceful. 

' '  There  was  a  pecuhar  feature  m  this  display  of  sphit-power  which  arrested  my  attention. 
No  one  who  danced  desu'ed  it,  neither  could  they  stop  it.  They  sometimes  made  an  effort 
[for  tliey  were  conscious]  to  at  down  or  fall  down,  but  they  could  not  do  either. 

"A  kdy  who  had  joined  the  Methodist  Church  in  Cleveland,  only  two  weeks  previous, 
was  thrown  into  a  magnetic  condition,  and  caQed  for  music,  and  after  she  had  danced  fifteen 
or  twenty  minutes  was  suddenly  released  and  returned  home. 

"  I  saw  several  exhibitions  of  dancing  during  my  stay  in  Cleveland,  and  I  have  reason  to 
believe  that  such  exercises  may  be  necessary  to  prepare  persons  for  mediumship.     .     . 

"  Accompanied  by  Dr.  A.  Underhill  and  Mr.  H.  Camp,  I  viated  Akron.  We  were 
cordially  received,  and  met  a  lai^e  chcle,  convened  on  short  notice  at  a  private  house. 

"  The  most  remarkable  feature  of  spirit  manifestations  which  1  witnessed  in  Aliron  was 
the  exercises  of  Miss  R.  and  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Bangs,  who  had  scarcely  reached  her  teens, 
both  of  whom  were  unacquainted  with  music,  yet  acted  upon  by  spirits  in  a  way  to  play  the 
most  exquiate  tunes  upon  the  piano.  I  heard  a  great  many  pieces,  difficult  and  plain,  per- 
formed by  both  in  a  style  that  would  do  credit  to  the  learned  in  musical  science. 

"  My  time  being  Hmited  I  pushed  on  to  Adrian.  Here  I  gave  a  public  lecture,  at  the 
request  of  the  Spiritualists,  in  the  evening,  and  have  only  to  regret  that  tlie  largest  hall  in 
the  place  was  too  small  for  the  congregation. 

"  There  are  several  good  mediums  in  Adrian,  and  I  found  them  progressing.  .  .  . 
From  Adrian  I  proceeded  to  Rome.  Here  I  met  a  circle  at  the  house  of  Rev.  Robert 
Wooden.  Some  four  or  five  mediums  met  me  here,  and  tlie  number  wasdoubled  in  twenty- 
four  hours 

"  In  Addison  I  spent  two  days.     A  circle  was  formed,  and  we  enjoyed  a  very  pleasant 

"Indeed,  throughout  the  State  there  is  scarcely  a  neighborhood  without  mediums  and 
friends  of  the  truth. 

"  In  Chicago  I  tarried  two  days,  met  with  two  or  three  circles,  and  delivered  a  public 
lecture,  which  was  well  attended.  In  IlUnois  and  Indiana  there  has  been  some  escitement 
duiing  the  past  whiter,  and  I  learned  that  it  was  constantly  increa^g.  Mr.  Eddy,  of 
Chicago,  is  erectmg  a  hall  to  accommodate  a  large  congregation 

Hosiedb,  Google 

'i^     ^/:0?-^-9r'>-^^^^ 

Hosted  by  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  ill 

"  I  neit  proceeded  to  Waukegan,  by  invitation  of  the  several  members  of  the  '  Excelsiot 
Society.'  Here  I  gave  tliree  public  lectures  on  Spiritualism,  and  foimd  a  great  many  warm 
friends  of  the  new  philosophy.  '  The  Excelsiors '  number  among  them  the  most  talented 
and  respectable  portion  of  the  city,  and  they  have  held  meetings  twice  every  Sunday  during 
the  past  year. 

"  In  the  morning  a  lecture  is  delivered  on  such  moral  or  philosophical  subjects  as  the  lec- 
turer prefers,  and  in  the  ajftemoon  a  conference,  m  which  all  are  permitted  to  speak  who 

"  On  the  3d  of  July  I  reached  home,  and  nothing  occurred  during  the  whole  journey  to 
lessen  the  conviction  that  a  great  reform  is  contemplated  by  the  spirits  among  the  inbabitantp 
ofearih.  I  saw  enough  to  satisfy  me  that  no  human  power  is  competent  to  arrest  or  over 
throw  the  work  of  progress. 

"Yours,  truly, 

"C.  Hammond." 

The  circumstances  detailed  in  the  following  letter  are  inserted  as  illustra- 
tive of  an  immense  airay  of  facts  of  a  similar  character,  which  were  occurrrag 
in  the  experience  of  the  clergy  shortly  after  the  first  manifestations  at  Roches 
ten 

It  answers  the  captious  inquiry  of  those  who  marvel  why  the  "  elect  and  ap- 
pointed ministers  of  God"  were  not  favored  with  the  out-pouring  of  the  spirit  in 
the  same  ratio  as  laymen.  The  truth  is  that  hundreds  of  these  reverend  pastors 
of  souls  were  called  with  the  same  urgency  as  the  one  in  question,  but  unlike 
the  Rev,  S.  B.  Britain,  R.  P.  Ambler,  William  Fishbough,  Thomas  Benning, 
and  many  others  [now  prominent  as  spiritual  speakers]  but  few  of  the  rev- 
erend body  liave  had  the  courage  or  honesty  to  acknowledge  fearlessly  the 
source  of  their  inspiration,  or  the  supra-mundane  nature  of  the  power  that  at- 
tempted to  deal  with  them.  To  "quench  the  spirit,"  and,  "despise  prophe- 
cyings,"  has  hitherto  been  the  approved  clerical  method  in  treating  Spiritual- 
ism ;  hence  it  is  that  we  select  from  many  cases  [some  recorded  in  print,  but 
still  more,  carefully  suppressed,  though  known  to  and  witnessed  by  the 
author]  the  opinions  with  which  one  honest  though  not  very  enlightened 
minister  of  the  gospel  viewed  the  approaches  of  the  spirit  ih  tangible  demon- 

SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH,  NEW  YORK.— A  CLERICAL  MEDIUM. 

"  It  appears  that  the  Rev.  B.  S.  Hobbs,  of  Webster,  New  York,  a  clergyman  of  the  Uni- 
versalist  denomination,  Ikis  of  late  Been  controlled  by  spirits  in  a  forcible  and  irresistible 
manner.  His  own  account  of  his  experience  recently  appeared  in  the  Christian  Ambassador 
of  this  city,  and  has  since  been  copied  into  the  secular  journals.  We  sul^oin  the  concluding 
portion  of  his  letter: 

" '  By  Ihe  request  of  the  friends  here  I  assumed  the  pastoral  duties  of  this  society,  and  I 
continued  my  labors  for  a  period  of  nearly  six  months.  I  had  then  nearly  came  to  the  conclu- 
aon  that  the  days  of  tri^  were  past,  and  a  better  and  brighter  future  would  soon  be  mine. 
But  the  cherished  hope  was  valin.  In  a  moment  when  I  least  expected  it,  the  bolt  again 
fell,  and  I  was  crushed,  in  great  sorrow,  humiliation  and  anguish,  to  the  dust. 

"'It  is  proper  here  to  say  that  this  exhibition  was  the  most  psunful,  if  not  the  strangest, 
of  any  I  have  experienced.  My  speech  was  first  controlled  while  m  the  solemn  act  of  prayer ; 
and  then  I  again  was  compelled  to  speak  in  a  manner  that,  as  before,  led  me  to  think  it  spir- 
itual, and  others  to  thmk  me  strangely  diseased,  if  not  partially  insane.  Before,  when  these 
more  than  dreadful  trials  were  mine,  the  strange  influence  was  of  short  duration.  Not  so, 
however,  in  the  present  instance.  I  was  obliged,  in  spite  of  all  my  ifforts  to  prevent  it,  to 
exhibit  the  character  of  the  speaking  medium  in  full,  bv  addressing  an  audience  on  two  dif- 
ferent occaaons,  and  going  through  (he  strangest  ordeals  common  to  the  Spiritualian  of  the 
present  i^e. 

"*  Nor  did  it  end  here;  nor  is  it  my  duty  now  to  say,  the  end  is  yet  apparent.  Soon  my 
hand,  as  often  before,  was  seized  by  the  strange  spirit -power  and  I  was  obliged  to  write  its 
prophecies  and  sayings.  Tliis  has  continued  for  a  few  months  past  and  the  same  work  ia 
yet  going  on,  and  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  I  am  acting,  not  as  a  Gospel  minister,  but  as 
a  spirit  medium.' 

Hosiedb,  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

y  this  time  the  reader  will  inquire,  '  Does  not  the  writer  lielieve  in  tiie  fact  of  spirit 
nurse  ? '  Tlie  qaestion  shall  be  answered.  I  am  unable  to  understand  my  strange  ex- 
perience in  any  other  manner.  It  has  from  the  first  been  my  opinion  that  no  derangement 
of  mind  could  fossibly  do  the  ivork  with  which  I  have  long  teen  acquainted.  But  the 
ordeal  has  been  so  terrible  tliat  I  hive  tried  to  account  for  it  in  some  other  way  than  it  has 

ever  claimed  to  originate 

"  I  commend  myself  into  the  Father's  hands,  and  to  your  Christian  charity  and  brotherly 

"  B.  S.   HOBBS. 

"Webster,  New  York,  Aprils-;." 

We  shall  conclude  this  chapter  by  a  few  extracts  from  the  digest  of  corres- 
pondence received  by  the  editors  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph. 

The  cases  selected  are  neither  phenomenally  strange,  nor  will  our  space 
allow  us  to  insert  more  than  about  one  per  cent,  of  the  number  that  one  year 
alone  could  furnish ;  they  are  chosen  simply  for  what  theu-  title  signifies, 
namely  :  a  "  digest  of  correspondence,"  also  as  specimens  of  the  progress  of 
the  movement ;  but  above  all,  they  are  records,  the  entire  authenticity  of 
which  the  author  is  personally  cognizant  of. 

"DIGEST  OF 

"  We  have  received  along  communication  from  G,  H.  Baker,  of  Demming,  Indiana,  de- 
tailing some  curious  spiritual  proceedings  in  that  place.  We  have  not  room  for  the  com- 
munication entire,  but  the  leading  facts  which  it  details  are,  that  the  writer  and  others  were 
on  one  occasion  directed  by  the  spirit  to  meet  at  a  particular  house  and  take  a  fiddler  with 
them,  and  they  were  promised  some  demonstrations  that  would  astonish  Ihem.  TTie 
assembly  having  taken  place,  as  soon  as  the  fiddler  commenced  playing  a  number  of  persons 
became  entranced,  and  commenced  dancing  in  the  most  graceful  manner,  though  several  of 
them  had  been  brought  up  Quakers  and  were  entirely  unused  to  that  kind  of  exercise.  A 
young  ^rl  of  fifteen  being  ako  entranced  was  made  to  assume  the  position  of  moderator ; 
and  when  some  sceptical  persons  had  for  sport  intruded  themselves  into  the  circle  of  dancers, 
she  would  seize  them  and  lead  them  to  the  door. 

"By  mutmil  consent  of  the  Spiritoalists  and  Methodists  a  meeting  was  subsequently 
called  with  the  understanding  that  the  Methodist  clergyman  should  preach  a  discourse 
against  Spiritualism,  and  that  Mr.  D.  Mong,  a  speaking  medium  who  then  happened  to  be 
in  the  place,  should  reply  to  him.  The  evening  of  the  appointed  meeting  having  arrived, 
the  band  of  dancing  mediums,  some  fifteen  or  twenty  in  number,  were  the  first  to  enter  the 
house.  They  commenced  their  gyratory  operations  to  the  no-small  scandal  of  the  Method- 
ists, one  of  whom,  being  the  moderator  of  the  church,  commanded  them  to  take  their 

"Theonlyresponsehe  received  was  a  blow  upon  the  mouth,  inflicted  M-ith  the  palm  of 
the  hand  by  the  medium  who  was  the  moderator  of  the  dancing  circle,  and  the  spirits  in- 
sisted on  taking  their  own  time  to  finish  the  dance. 

"A  long  discourse  from  the  clergyman  ensued,  which  was  replied  to  by  the  spirit,  through 
Mr.  Mong;  and  during  the  proceedings  a  Methodist  lady,  the  proprietor  of  the  house 
where  the  meeting  was  holden,  came  under  spiritual  influence  and  bade  adieu  to  the  diurch ; 
and  an  impres^on  decidedly  favorable  to  the  spiritual  cause  appeared  to  be  left  upon  the 
minds  of  the  generality  of  the  audience. 

"  Upon  the  question  whether  these  Spirits  acted  an  orderly  or  disorderly  part  we  have 
nothing  to  say ;  but  if  they  were  disorderly  spirits,  and  those  Methodist  friends  were  really 
Christians,  it  does  seem  strange  to  us  that  they  had  not  the  power  to  rebuke  them  and  cast 
them  out — a  power  which,  in  the  olden  times,  was  considered  as  one  of  the  necessary  marks 
of  true  Christian  discipleship.     [SeeMarkxvi:  ly.—Ed.  Tclegraph.\ 

"  The  editor  of  the  Piedmont  Whig,  published  at  Warrenton,  Virginia,  who  is  not  a 
convert  to  Spiritualism,  says,  in  answer  to  tie  cry  that  the  manifestations  are  all  a  juggle 
and  humbug : 

"  '  Here  are  many  thousands  of  '  mediums,'  many  of  them  children  four  or  five  years  old, 
exhibiting  these  things  daily  and  nightly  in  the  presence  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  specta- 
tors, many  of  whom  are  shrewd,  intelligent  sceptics.  Suppo^g  the  thing  to  be  a  trick, 
all  these  mediums,  men,  women,  and  children,  must  be  respectively  provided  with  a  set  of 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERTCAN^  SPIRITUALISM.  113 

jii^linjT  apparatus  of  the  most  delicate  and  complicated  cliaricter,  sufficient  to  produce  re- 
sults wlucS  liaye  all  the  outward  appearance  of  miracles,  but  which  must  nevertheless  be  so 
easily  man£^;e^i  and  understood  that  a  child  can  operate  with  it,  and  yet  be  so  carefully  and 
artfully  concealed  that  thousands  of  eager,  prying  eyes  cannot  find  it  out.  All  these  thou- 
sands of  juggling  machines  in  operation,  and  controlled  often  by  yoan"  children,  for  four  or 
five  years,  in  the  presence  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  spectators,  and  not  one -solitary  case 
of  detection  occurring  in  all  that  time  !  We  cannot  believe  it.  It  seems  to  us  as  great  an 
absurdity  as  the  wildest  theories  of  those  who  believe  io  the  spirits.  And  if  the  thing  is 
not  a  contrivance — a  trick  of  the  mediums— what  is  it?  That's  just  what  we  want  to  know.' 

"SPIRITS  AND  MEDIUMS  IN  TROY. 

"  Mr.  W.  H  Vosbuigh,  of  West  Troy,  writes  us  concerning  some  iateresting  develop- 
ments which  are  occurring  in  that  place,  the  essential  particulars  of  which  we  condense  as 
follows,  not  having  room  for  the  communication  in  full ;  A  brother  of  Mr.  Vosburgh,  a 
lad  of  some  sixteen  years,  becomes  possessed  by  the  spirits,  who  use  him  for  various  pur- 
poses, anil  among  others  for  the  purpose  of  diagnosing  disease  and  prescribing  its  remedies. 
If  while  he  is  under  spirit-influence,  a  stranger  enters  the  room  .who  is  in  any  way  diseased, 
■the  spirit  who  controls  and  speaks  through  him  will  detect  the  disease  instantly,  without  a 
word  being  spoken  by  any  person  in  the  form,  and  will  proceed  to  describe  it  without  fail, 
ure,  proving  thus  that  he  has  access  to  a  source  of  knowledge  which  is  beyond  the  reach  of 
ordinary  phyadans  in  the  body.  Through  another  medium  the  spirits  are  giving  lectures 
upon  a  variety  of  high  sul^ects  pertaining  to  natural  and  sprntua]  philosophy.  The  medium's 
education  embraces  the  knowledge  of  no  language  be^es  the  English,  and  yet  his  hand  has 
been  used  to  write  different  languages,  and  further,  both  hands  have  been  used  at  the 
same  time,  one  lariling  on  one  subject  and  the  other  on  another.'  These  latter  facts 
afford  a  knotty  question  for  sceptics  to  solve  consistently  with  the  denial  of  spirit  presence 
and  influence." — Telegraph  Papers. 

The  following  is  an  incident  occurring  in  the  mediumship  of  a  very  gifted 
and  well-known  family  of  the  highest  respectability  in  Washington ; 

SPIRITUALISM    !N  WASHINGTON. 

"The  Ring  Experiment  — A  Great  Test  —  Spirit  Lights  —  New  York 
Spiritual  Telegraph  [1853.] 

"Dear  Sir,  —  On  Sunday,  January  8,  the  spirits  manifested  then  presence  and  their 
power  in  the  followmg  beautiful  manner.  The  phenomenon  occurred  at  (he  residence  of 
Mr.   C.  Laurie  in  broad  daylight  and  in  the  presence  of  several  persons,  among  whom: 

"Mr.  Laurie's  daughter,  under  spirit -mfluencc,  was  directed  to  goto  the  piano,  and  place 
thereon  a  heavy  gold  ring.  Having  done  so,  her  hand  was  brought  up  and  placed  over  the 
ring  in  such  a  position  that  the  fingers  pointed  downward  toward  it  at  a  distance  of  about 
four  inches.  Presently  the  ring  began  to  rise.  The  medium's  hand  was  then  moved  still, 
higher,  and  the  ring  followed  il,  approaching  within  some  two  inches  of  the  tips  of  the 
fibers.  It  then  slowly  fell  down  toward  the  piano;  wben|  having  fallen  some  six  Inches, 
it  gradually  rose  to  its  former  position.  It  soon  fell  again.  In  the  same  gradual  manner,, 
■but  this  time  to  a  greater  distance,  a  foot  or  more.  As  it  once  more  slowly  rose,  the 
medium  was  made  to  bend  backward,  her  head  being  thrown  back,  -while  her  hand  was 
raised  and  carried  over  her  head,  until  the  fingers  pointed  downward  to  the  floor.  The 
ring  followed  the  hand,  describing  an  arc  m  its  passage  over  the  medium's  head,  and 
dropped  down  some  ax  inches  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers  behmd  her,  where  it  hung 
suspended  m  air.  After  remaining  in  this  position  a  few  moments,  it  dropped  neariy  to. 
the  floor,  so  slmvly  and  beautifully  as  to  satisfy  every  one  present  that  physical  magnetism 
was  not  the  i^ent  employed  in  producing  its  movements.  Then  it  gradually  rose  again 
some  fourteen  mches  or  more.  In  this  manner  it  kept  rising  and  falling  for  some  time,  as 
if  to  convince  each  beholder  that  a  power  outside  of  and  beyond  any  physical  law  coii- 

"  The  hand  was  next  moved  slowly  back,  followed  by  the  ring,  and  as  the  medium's  body 
slowly  regained  its  upright  position,  her  hand  was  carried  toward  the  wall,  to  which  it 
approached  within  about  three  inches.  Tlie  ring  then  commenced  sttikmg  against  the  wall, 
with  a  clear,  ringing  sound,  like  that  of  a  glass  bell.      The  hand  at  no  tune  touched  the- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

114  HISTOEV  OF  MODERN 

wall,  nor  came  nearer  to  it  than  the  distance  above  stated ;  but  the  ring  wouH  leave  (be 
tips  of  the  fingers,  dart  against  the  wall,  return,  and  then  repeat  the  act.  It  then  followed 
the  hand  while  it  came  back  to  its  first  position  over  the  piano,  where  it  again  went 
through  with  the  motions  of  falling  and  rising. 

"  The  above  beautiful  experiment  was  plainly  seen  by  all  in  the  room,  and  the  circum- 
stances were  such  as  to  exclude  all  possibility  of  deception,  if  the  medium  had  been  disposed 
to  deceive.  But  the  persons  present  were  only  those  of  her  own  family,  and  one  other 
besides  myself;  and  the  character  of  Mr.  Laurie  and  his  family  would  forbid  the  idea  of 
tridtery,  even  had  the  cireamstances  been  otherwise. 

"On  one  evening  subsequently,  the  ring  experiment  was  again  given,  but  not  quite  so 
perfectly.  It  rose,  however,  some  feet  from  the  table,  and  followed  the  medium's  hand 
^ain  over  her  head,  dropping  down  from  behind  her  as  before.  Among  the  spectators  on 
the  latter  occasion  was  the  Hon.  Joshua  R.  Giddings.  Mr.  E.  W;  Capron  and  a  Senate 
reporter  were  also  vritnesses  of  the  sight. 

"  In  remalting  on  the  above  experiment  to  Mr.  Giddings,  I  observed  that  it  was  a  most 
beautiful  one.     The  medium,  who  was  then  in  a  trance,  soon  after  wrote  as  follows : 

'"Well  may  you  say  how  beautiful  is  the  communion  of  the  spirits  with  those  of  the 
lower  sphere  I  And  far  more  beautiful  it  will  be  as  the  cause  pri^esses.  Toy,  peace, 
and  Heaven,  — all,  all,  shall  be  yours,  and  all  connected  with  you  in  this  holy  cause. 
Glory  to  God  the  Most  High  1 

"'Ben.  Franklin.' 

"  The  following  'clincher'  of  a  lest  occurred,  I  think,  on  the  same  day  ;  but  I  will  not 
be  poative  as  to  the  precise  time,  Mr.  Laurie,  while  quietly  seated  by  the  fire,  was 
suddenly  impressed  with  the  presence  and  the  name  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wardlaw,  of  Glasgow, 
Scotland.  So  strong  was  the  impression  that  he  was  forced  to  speak  the  name,  and  say, 
'  I  am  here.'  In  a  moment  more,  on  coming  to  himself,  Mr.  Laurie  recollected  that  he  had 
not  heard  of  Mr.  WardlaVs  death,  and  so  remarked  to  his  family.  [Mr.  Wardlaw  had  been 
an  intimate  friend  of  his  father,  the  late  Rev.  James  Laurie,  who  vras  long  and  weU  known 
to  the  people  of  Washington,  and  who  in  early  life  lived  in  Scotland.] 

"  The  next  week's  steamer  brought  the  news  of  Mr.  Wardlavi^s  death,  which  had  occurred 
at  a  date  shortly  previous  to  that  of  the  visitation  received  by  Mr.  Laurie.  Although  Mr. 
Wardlaw  was'  an  eminent  divine,  and  well  known  in  Scotland  and  in  this  country,  no  one 
was  further  from  the  thoughts  of  Mr.  Laurie  at  that  particular  time  than  he  was,  and  his 
death  was  not  then  known  in  this  country. 

"  On  Sunday  afternoon,  January  22d,  the  little  daughter  of  Mr.  Laurie  [m  the  spheres] 
manifested  herself  to  her  parents  in  the  form  of  a  large,  bright  star,  which  appeared  on  the 
wall.  It  was  seen  by  aU  the  family,  and  was  so  luminous  as  to  light  the  otherwise 
darkened  room  to  a  high  degree.  It  appeared  as  lai^e  as  a  sauecr  at  first,  but  gradually 
contracted  until  it  finely  disappeared.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  things  connected  with 
Uiis  manifestation  was  the  outline  of  a  tmy  ^Hwaa/Drm  —  resemblmg  the  figure  of  a  little 
gitl_whichwasdistinctivseeninadeof  the  radiant  star.  The  4m  of  the  star  is  described 
by  those  who  saw  it  to  have  been  apparently  like  that  of  the  most  brilliant  colors  of  the 
rainbow  combmed.  It  was  seen  by  all  the  famUy  who  were  present,  which  fact  prov^  that 
it  was  no  psychological  effect,  but  a  poritive  presence  of  spiritual  elements  and  forces, 
presented  in  this  most  beautiful  form  of  manifestation.  The  curtains  were  lifted  from  the 
windows,  and  the  sunlight  allowed  to  stream  into  the  room  and  upon  the  wall  where  the 
star  was  fixed,  but  the  latter  still  remained,  and  its  "  super-solar  blaie"  paled  the  ineffectual 
fires  of  the  god  of  day.  At  length,  upon  the  mother's  involuntary  approach  toward  the 
vision  with  outstretched  arms,  in  an  instinctive  desire  to  retain  the  presence  of  her  chdd,  it 
vanished  altogether.  „ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

{7i^'--r^u^    //.^: 

^' 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

THE    PHENOMENA    OF    SPIRITUALISM    IN    THE    EASTERN    STATES. 

"  So  mightily  grew  the  wof  d  of  God  and  prevailed." 

"And  wlien  they  b=ardllie5c  sayings,  tliey  were  full  of  math,  and  cried  out  saying,  'Great  is  Diana  ot  the 
EphsEians.'" 

Dr.  Robert  Hare,  his  Methods  of  Investigation,  Conversion  and  Tes- 
timony—The American  Scientific  Association  and  its  Aims  — Dis- 
tinguished Opponents  —  Rogers,  Mahan,  Eli-iott,  Dodds,  and  Beecher 
— "  Depravity  of  the  Times  "  —  Richmond  and  Britain's  Controversy. 

Amongst  the  distinguished  savans  who  became  interested  in  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism  was  Dr.  Robert  Hare,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Pennsyl- 
vania University,  and  a  gentleman  whose  successful  researches  into  the  oc- 
cult branches  of  science  had  procured  a  world-wide  celebrity  for  his  name. 

He  first  became  an  investigator  in  1853,  when,  to  use  his  own  words,  he 
"  felt  called  upon,  as  an  act  of  duty  to  his  fellow  creatures,  to  bnng  whatever 
influence  he  possessed  to  d^e  attempt  to  stem  the  tide  of "  popular  mad- 
ness," which  in  defiance  of  reason  and  science,  was  fast  setting  in  favor  of 
the  gross  delusion  called  Spiritualism." 

In  pursuance  of  this  humanitary  impulse,  the  venerable  professor,  noticing 
that  the  said  delusion  was  running  a  particularly  rampart  course  in  the  city 
of  his  residence— Philadelphia— and  in  answer  to  a  scientific  inquirer  on  the 
subject  of  electricty,  pubhshed  a  scatliing  letter  in  which,  on  "  eleclrkal 
grounds,  he  propounded  a  theory  calculated  to  destroy  even  to  annihilation 
the  whole  phenomena  of  Spirituahsm,  ending  by  the  emphatic  declaration  that 
he  "entirely  coincided  with  Farraday's  theory  of  table-turning."  Whether 
Spiritualism  was  not  in  itself  based  on  "  electncai  grounds,"  or  diat  it  might 
suffer  decapitation  a  thousand  times,  and  yet  cry  "  I  still  live,"  it  boots  not 
now  to  inquire.  Certain  it  is  that  tables  would  continue  to  turn,  floors  to 
rap,  aiid  ponderable  bodies  to  float  in  space,  though  Professor  Farraday  had 
demonstrated  so  clearly  that  it  was  not  in  their  nature  to  do  so ;  and  what 
was  yet  more  remarkable,  these  sort  of  performances  would  keep  on  increas- 
ing in  power  and  number,  even  after  the  American  Farraday  had  added  his 
dictum  to  that  of  his  English  confrh-e  against  the  legality  of  these  erratic 
physical  proceedings. 

To  give  ail  possible  facility  for  outworking  the  Philadelphia  professor's 
humane  purpose  of  restoring  bewitched  humanity  to  its  senses,  the  secular 
press  throughout  the  country  repubUshed  his  letter  with  triumphant  comments 
of  their  own ;  whilst  two  distinguished  divines  in  New  York,  several  in 
Boston,  Philadelphia,  Providence,  Buffalo,  and  various  cities  of  the  West, 
actually  made  an  electrical  theory  the  subject  of  elaborate  Sabbath-day  dis- 
courses, and  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  ecclesiasticism,  religion 
joined  issue  with  science  in  the  pious  attempts  to  prove  either  that  we  ha^ 
no  souls  at  all,  or  that  they  were  more  ignorant  and  poweriess  without  their 
bodies  than  with  them.  Whilst  the  whole  religious  world  were  rejoicing  over 
the  destructive  dictum  of  English  and  American  science,  combined  in  the 
persons  of  Farraday  and  Hare,  a  quiet  under-current  of  influence  was  setting 

Hosted  by  Google 

Ii6  BISTORY  OF  MODERN 

in  an  opposite  direction,  the  result  of  ivhich  proved  the  glorification  of  Amer- 
can  Clmstendom  to  have  been  somewhat  premature.  The  first  action  of 
this  counter  current  will  be  better  understood  by  the  perusal  of  the  following 
letter,  the  nature  and  authorship  of  which  tells  its  own  story : 

"SouTHWiCK,  Mass.,  November  17,  1S53. 
"  Prof.  Hake  ;  Dear  Sir, —  I  had  the  pleasure  of  a  slight  acquajntance  with  you 
something  less  than  twenty  years  ago,  when  1  exhibited  telescopes  in  Philadelphia,  You 
will,  I  trust,  excuse  the  libertyl  take  in  writing  to  you  now.  I  have  seen  your  letter  in  the 
PhiUdeiphia  Inquirer  upon  table  movmg.  1  never  believed  it  was  caused  by  electricity 
or  gaUanism,  but  is  it  not  as  likely  to  be  these  as  muscular  force  ?  You  agree  with  Pro- 
fessor Farraday  that  the  table  is  moved  by  the  hands  that  are  on  it.  Now,  1  know  as 
certainly  aa  I  can  know  anything,  that  this  is  not  true  in  general,  if  it  is  in  any  instance. 
There  is  as  much  evidence  that  tables  sometimes  move  without  any  person  near 
■them,  as  that  they  sometimes  move  with  hands  upon  them.  !  cannot  in  (his  case  doubt 
the  evidence  of  my  senses.  I  have  seen  tables  move  and  heard  tones  beat  on  them  when 
no  person  was  within  several  feet  of  them.  This  fact  is  proof  positive  that  the  force  or 
power  is  not  muscular.  If  any  further  evidence  was  necessary  to  set  aside  Professor  Farra- 
day's  theory  it  is  found  in  abundance  in  the  great  variety  of  other  facts  taking  place  through 
the  country,  such  as  musical  instruments  being  played  upon  without  any  Einds  touching 
them,  and  a  great  variety  of  other  heavy  artides  being  moved  without  any  viable  cause. 
If  tables  never  moved  except  whai  hands  were  on  them,  and  if  table  tammg  constituted 
all  instead  of  the  least  part  of  Spiritualism,  the  case  would  be  different,  but  as  they  do 
move  btjth  with  and  without  hands,  it  is  plab  that  the  true  cauM  yet  remains  to  be  dis- 

"  I  wish,  sir,  yon  had  time  and  opportunity  to  witness  some  other  phases  of  this  matter 
which  seem  not  to  have  fallen  under  your  notice,  and  I  think  you  would  be  satisfied 
that  there  is  less  '  hallucination '  and  '  self-deception '  about  it  than  you  have  imagined. 

"  The  intelligence  connected  with  these  movements  yet  remains  to  be  accounted  for. 

"  It  these  things  can  be  accounted  for  on  scientific  principles,  would  it  not  be  a  great 
acquisition  to  science  to  discover  what  those  principles  are?  If,  however,  science  cannot 
discover  them,  the  public  are  deeply  interested  in  knowing  the  fact. 

"  No  cause  Ikis  yet  been  asagned  that  does  not  unply  a  greater  absurdity  than  even  to 
believe,  as  many  do,  tliat  it  is  caused  by  spirits  either  good  or  bad,  or  both. 
"  Yours,  respectfully, 

"Asa  Holcomee." 

This  letter,  which  will  be  found  in  Professor  Hare's  elaborate  work  on 
"  Spiritualism  Scientifically  Demonstrated,"  together  with  other  inducements 
offered  by  personal  friends  of  the  professor's,  at  length  resulted  in  his  visit  to 
a  medium,  then  to  another,  and  still  others,  until  his  investigations,  stimulated 
by  the  fresh  marvels  that  accumulated  around  him,  put  to  flight  all  his  scien- 
tific imaginings  on  the  subject,  and  brought  forth'the  gigantic  array  of  testi- 
mony which  was  afterwards  given  to  the  world  in  the  work  on  "  Spiritualism," 
above  alluded  to,  which  was  published  in  1856. 

To  a  mind  like  the  professor's,  imbued  with  all  the  principles  of  that 
materialistic  system,  which  so  many  scientists  determine  must  cover  all  men- 
tal as  well  as  physical  phenomena,  the  process  of  convertion  was  very  slow — 
in  fact,  a  battle  in  which  the  learned  savant  fought  over  every  step  of  ground 
which  the  spirits  gained.  Besides  testing  the  intelligence  of  the  communica- 
ting power  through  an  immense  number  of  media,  and  in  every  conceivable 
form,  Professor  Hare  invented  all  sorts  of  machinery  through  which  he  pro- 
posed to  detect  "tricky  spirits."  Even  the  description  of  these  ingenious 
contrivances  would  fill  a  volume  ;  we  must  therefore  limit  ourselves  to  a 
brief . account  which  Mr.  S.  B.  Britain  published,  of  one  of  his  "spirit 
traps,"  and  an  extract  from  the  statement  of  the  doctor  himself,  made  to  the 
New  York  Conference  in  1854.  Writing  of  Professor  Hare's  experiments 
■with  prepared  machinery,  Mr.  Britain  says  : 

Hosted  by  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  117 

"  First,  to  satisfy  Mmself  that  the  movements  were  not  the  works  of  mortals,  he  took 
brass  billiard  balls,  placed  them  on  dnc  plates,  and  placed  the  hands  of  the  mediums  on  the 
balls,  and  to  his  very  great  astonishment  the  tables  moved.  He  next  arranged  a  table  to 
dide  backward  and  forward,  to  which  attachments  were  made,  cauang  a  disc  to  revolve 
contdning  the  alphabet,  hidden  from  the  view  of  the  mediums.  The  letters  were 
variously  arranged,  out  of  their  r^ular  consecutive  order,  and  the  spirit  was  required  to 
place  them  consecutively,  or  in  their  r^ular  places.  And  bebold,  it  was  done  !  Then 
followed  intelligent  sentences,  which  the  medium  could  not  see  or  know  the  import  of  till 
they  were  told  him. 

"  Again  he  tried  another  capital  test.  The  long  end  of  a  lever  was  placed  on  spiral 
scales  with  an  index  attached,  and  the  weight  marked ;  the  medium's  hand  rested  on  the 
short  end  of  the  beam,  where  it  was  imposable  to  give  pressure  downward,  but  if  pressed 
it  would  have  a  contrary  effect,  and  rdse  the  long  end ;  and  yet,  most  astounding,  the 
weight  was  increased  severs^  pounds  on  the  scale.  These  were  idl  novel  and  very  excellent 
contrivances,  and  will  forever  settle  this  question ;  and  they  should  be  published  in  every 
paper  in  the  Union.  Proceedmg  bomsuckan  (i«;^w,  all  little  quibblers  will  of  course  hide 
their  puny  heads  forever." 

NEW  YORK  CONTEREKCE  — SESSION  OF  SEPTEMBER,  1854. 

"  The  conference  assembled  at  the  usual  hour,  with  a  pretty  full  attendance.  After  the 
bu^ess  matters  weie  disposed  of,  Mr.  Partridge  stated  that  as  Professor  Hare,  of  the  Penn- 
sylvania Univeraty,  was  present,  it  would,  perhaps,  be  interesting  to  the  assembly,  if  he 
would  rehearse  some  of  his  wonderful  experiences  m  rt^ard  to  the  evidences  of  spirit  pres- 
ence and  power. 

"Dr.  Hate  arose,  went  forward  to  the  platform,  and  said,  that  'perhaps  there  was 
nothing  more  astonishing  in  the  history  of  science  'than  that  which  was  presented  to  the 
human  mind  in  the  fact  that  the  presence  of  a  frail  boy  or  girl  supplied  the  conditions  for 
the  exhibition  of  an  invisible  power,  physical  and  intelligent,  far  transcending  their  normal 
capacities.'  He  said,  that 'although  all  men  had  the  power  to  witness  these  manifestations, 
yet  there  was,  undonbtedly,  something  in  the  sphere  or  presence  of  a  rigid  sceptic,  which 
interfered  with  the  conditions,  and  stifled  the  outcoming  of  the  phenomena,' 

"In  illustration  of  this,  he  stated  that  he  once  went  into  a  room  appiopiiated  to  j^«f«/ 
saw  an  ordinary  dining  table ;  examined  it  thoroughly,  and  could  ascertain  nothing  unusual 
or  extraordinary  about  it.  A  medium  was  present,  and  the  table  was  repeatedly  moved, 
without  any  apparently  physical  contact,  and  made  to  beat  tune  to  music. 

"  He  then  got  upon  the  table,  with  his  lunbs  hanging  over  tlie  side,  but  without  touching 
the  floor,  and  it  was  raised  repeatedly  from  the  floor,  with  his  superincumbent  weight  upon 
it,  and  made  to  beat  time  to  a  variety  of  tunes  that  were  sung,  the  quavers  and  semi-qua- 
vers all  bdng  accurately  touched  off  by  it,  all  of  which  it  was  impossible  for  one  m  the  form 

"On  a  subsequent  occasion,  he  took  a  gentleman  —  the  editor  of  the  Daily  Courier  — 
to  the  same  place  with  him,  when  the  phenomena  were  repeated,  the  table  again  beating 
time  to  the  music  with  the  gentleman  upon  it,  and  other  ajually  extraordinary  exhibitions 
of  spirit-power.  But  afterward,  he  took  a  Professor  of  Dickenson  College,  who  was  a  con- 
firmed  sceptic  and  opposer  of  the  manifestations,  to  the  same  medium,  and  although  the 
external  conditions  were  apparently  alike  favorable,  they  failed  to  get  the  least  manifesta- 
tion of  spirit -power.  He  told  hun  to  caE  again,  and  perhaps  they  would  succeed  better. 
After  he  was  gone^  the  manifestations  were  produced  as  usual,  and  upon  asking  the  spirits 
why  they  did  not  manifest  in  his  presence,  they  said  —  '  Tell  him  we  could  not  do  so,  because 
he  was  hunself  a  counter  or  antagonist  medium,  and  that  his  preEcnce  annulled  the  power 
otthe  medium.' 

"  Subsequently  he  came  again,  and  brought  with  him  another  gentleman.  Dr.  Bird,  who 
was  favorable  to  Spiritualism,  and  they  all  sat  down  together  for  the  manifestations.  The 
medium  was  forthwith  entranced,  and  took  the  hand  of  Dr.  Bird,  when  the  manifestata- 
were,  as  asaal,  produced.  The  favorable  influence  of  Dr.  Bird  had  evidentlj'  countervailed 
the  opjioMng  sphere  of  the  Dickenson  Professor.  He  believed  that  the  spu'its  had  told  the 
truth,  when  they  stated  that  the  sphere  of  some  persons,  and  especially  sceptics,  was  counter 
to  that  of  the  medium,  and  destroyed  the  power  of  the  spirits  to  operate.  Inasmuch  as 
there  were  degrees  of  raediumship,  it  was  natural  to  suppose  that  they  shaded  off,  until  they 
presented  m  some  persons,  and  egiecially  sceptics,  a  positive  and  antipodal  power,  which 
balanced  and  overcame  that  of  the  spirit  through  the  inediura. 

"AfriendofhisinPhiladelphiahadaboy  who  was  an  excellent  medium.  He  was  often 
alone  with  him  in  his  lecture-room,  and  witnessed  a  number  of  most  extraordinary  test  man- 
i^tations.     On  one  occasion,  the  spirit  of  his  brother  came  and  communicated.    Said  that 

Hosiedb,  Google 

iiS  HISTORY  OF  MODERl^ 

he  tad  died  of  dropsy,  in  intense  pain,  wliich  was  occaaoncd  by  tlie  water  oozing  througL 
the  sliin.  He  had  died  sixty-four  years  ago.  The  doctor  said  he  was  now  seventy-six  years 
of  age — had  survived  all  his  family,  and  no  one  living  knew  the  circumstances  of  that 
biother's  death  but  himself. 

"  On  another  occasion,  a  spirit  came,  moved  the  spirit-scope,  without  any  physical  con- 
tact whatever,  and  spelt  out  the  name  of  C.  H.  Hare,  and  upon  being  asked  who  it  was, 
he  replied,  'Your  cousin  from  New  Brunswick. '  This  was,  in  fact,  a  second-cousin  of  his, 
with  whom  he  had  but  little  acquaintance  while  he  resided  on  earth.  He  had  a  basket, 
filled  with  a  number  of  small  glass  and  metallic  balls,  and  the  spuits  would,  without  any 
-visible  contact,  throw  these  balls  about  the  room  until  the  basket  was  emptied,  and  then 
again  collect  them  in  the  basket.  Theboy-medinm  never  (ookanymoney  for  his  time  or  the 
exeicise  of  hismediumship.     His  father,  upon  request,  consented  to  let  him  accompany  him 

a. 

J  attend  the  session  of  the  '  American  Association  for  the  Adi 

of  Sdence,'at  Montreal.  One  evening,  on  theh  way  to  Canada,  they  were  having  a  i^flHir^, 
with  the  boy  for  a  medium,  at  Dr.  Gray's,  of  this  city.  After  the  usual  exhibition  of  the 
spirit  phenomena,  the  boy  could  not  find  his  cap.  They  searched  high  and  low,  through  the 
room  and  house  for  it,  but  without  success.  The  spirits  told  him  to  go  without  his  cap  ; 
but,  not  liking  to  be  seen  in  the  streets  without  it,  another  was  procured  for  him.  After 
they  had  gone  about  a  hnndred.yatds  Irom  the  house,  the  cap  fell  upon  the  table,  in  the 
presence  of  those  who  remained. 

"Next  morning,  while  yet  in  their  state-room  on  board  the  boat,  they  found  the  door 
locked,  and  the  key  missing.  They  searched  for  a  long  time  unsuccessfully,  when  the 
^iiits  said  it  was  in  the  bottom  of  the  carpet-bag.  But  the  key  of  the  carpet-bag  was  also 
gone,  when  the  spirits  said  it  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  trunk,  and  on  taking  out  the  bag- 
gage they  found  it  and  then  found  the  hey  of  the  door  at  the  bottom  of  the  carpet-bag. 

"  When  they  arrived  at  Montreal,  and  put  up  at  their  hotel,  he  hunted  his  baggage  for 
hii  toilet -case,  but  could  not  find  it.  The  spirits  told  him  it  was  under  the  bolster  of  his 
bed.  He  raised  the  bolster  and  searched,  but  could  not  find  it.  He  had  his  eye  upon  the 
boy  all  the  time.  The  spirits  told  him  to  look  again ;  and  upon  raising  the  bolster  again, 
precisely  where  he  had  looked  before,  he  found  it.  It  was  impo^ible,  he  said,  that  the 
boy  could  have  done  this,  for  he  stood  in  the  'same  place  all  the  time,  and  could  not  have 
moved  without  his  seeing  hun. 

"  The  next  evening  they  went  to  a  large  party,  at  the  house  of  a  lady,  to  hold  a  circle. 
They  had  packed  the  spirit -scope,  balls,  and  other  apparatus  in  the  carpet-bag.  There  were 
many  sceptics  and  disagreeable  persons  present ;  many  counter-mediums,  as  he  supposed. 
When  they  came  to  open  the  carpet -bag  they  could  not  find  the  key.  They  went  to  the 
table,  but  could  not  get  any  communications  They  entered  into  another  room  with  the 
boy,  and  the  spirit  spelled  out,  by  means  of  raps,  that  he  would  get  the  key  before  he  got 
home.  Whilst  he  was  riding  along  the  streets  of  Montreal  on  his  way  home,  the  key  came 
down  upon  his  breast  I 

"  On  another  occasion,  while  alone  with  the  boy  in  their  room,  and  after  they  had  just 
locked  up  Uie  balls,  spirit-scope,  shavmg-case,  etc.,  m  his  carpet- tog,  the  balls  were  in  some 
inscrutable  way,  taken  from  the  carpet-bag,  and  fell  upon  him  in  a  shower.  Then  came 
the  box,  razor-strap,  etc.,  all  falling,  apparently  from  above,  on  and  around  him. 

"Upon  entering  his  room  one  evening,  he  discovered  his  spirit -scope,  which  he  had 
previously  locked  in  his  carpet-bag,  hanging  high  upon  the  frame  of  the  bar  of  his  bedstead. 
It  was  so  high  that  the  boy  could  not  reach  it  without  procuring  something  to  stand  upon 
much  lugher  ^n  the  bed.  He  then  called  the  chambermaid  and  interrogated  her  in  re^rd 
to  it,  but  she  replied  that  she  could  not  account  for  it.  While  they  were  still  together 
talking  about  it,  the  spirit-scope  came  down  beside  him  on  the  floor.  This,  he  said,  could 
not  have  been  performed  by  either  the  boy  or  the  girl,  because  he  soto  that  they  did  not 
doit. 

"  The  doctor  related  many  sunilar  instances  of  the  exhibition  of  spkit  power  which  took 
place  during  his  recent  journey.  He  s^d  that  he  had  been  engaged  in  scientific  pursuits  for 
upwardsof  half  a  century,  and  his  accuracy  and  precision  had  never  been  questioned  until 
he  had  become  a  Spu-itiialist,  whilst  his  integrity  as  a  man  had  never  in  his  life  been 
assailed  until  the  Harvard  Professors  fiihninated  their  report  agamst  that  which  he  knew 
to  be  true,  and  which  tliey  did  not  know  to  be  false." 

These  meagre  details  of  simple  facts  by  no  means  constitute  the  whole  or 
even  a  tithe  of  tJie  phenomena  with  which  Professor  Hare's  experiences 
abound. 

The  high  reputation  of  this  gentleman  for  scientific  attainment,  his  invinci- 
ble love  of  truth  and  tmimpeachable  integrit)',  no  less  than  the  ingenuity 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  II9 

which  he  displayed  in  his  eirly  iinestigations  and  the  keen  acumen  which 
he  brouffht  to  bear  upon  all  phenomena  of  a  snpra  mundane  character,  from 
the  trifling  facts  above  narrated  to  e\penoient5  involving  the  most  serious 
consequences  to  fortune  and  leputation,  made  his  accession  to  the  cause  of 
Spirituahsm  a  subject  of  as  much  importanLS  to  its  friends  as  it  was  the 
theme  of  bitter  vituperation,  insult,  and  calumn),  from  its  opponents. 

For  instance,  the  Havard  Profe'^sors,  of  whom  the  learned  doctor  had  long 
been  an  admired  colleague  and  friend,  denounced  liis  "  insane  adherence  to 
the  gigantic  humbug"  with  an  msolence  which  our  sense  of  decency  forbids 
us  to  reprint ;  but  the  culmmatuig  pomt  of  insult  which  the  venerable  gentle- 
man was  doomed  to  experience,  because  he  would  persist  in  recording  facts 
as  he  found  them  and  defending  the  truth  which  he  had  proved,  was  dealt 
by  the  hands  of  the  body  with  whom  for  many  years  he  had  been  associated, 
and  whom  the  commonest  usages  of  civilization  should  have  restrained  from 
heaping  affronts  on  the  white  hairs  of  him  who  had  heretofore  been  their 
shining  light  and  distinguished  ornament. 

The  transaction  to  which  we  allude  was  the  impertinent  action  of  one  of  die 
members  of  the  "  American  Scientific  Association,"  sanctioned  by  the  rnajority 
of  that  distinguished  body,  and  subsequently  endorsed  by  all  of  them  in  their 
proceedings.  In  the  Telegraphs  very  mild  yet  significant  account  of  the 
meeting,  no  details  are'  given  of  the  coarse  and  ungentlemanlike  tone  of  the 
discussion  which  bullied-  Professor  Hare  into  silence ;  still,  as  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism  was  not  deemed  a  "proper  one"  for  that  grave  and  learned 
body  to  discuss,  and  the  Telegraph  clearly  sets  forth  what,  in  the  same  session, 
■was  found  to  be  a  proper  subject  for  discussion,  we  shall  give  the  report  verba- 
tim, leaving  theworidto  judge  of  the  fitness  of  "the  American  Scientific 
Association"  to  comprehend,  even  if  they  were  willing  to  discuss  the  sublime 
truths  of  Spirihiahsrn. 

"The  American  Scientifjc  Association  has  just  dosed  its  annual  sesaonin  this 
city  [Washington,  D.  C]  The  meetings  were  held  in  the  lecture  room  of  the  Smithsonian 
Institute.  Before  the  close  of  the  session.  Professor  Hare,  of  Philadelphia,  read  to  the 
convention  aii  mvitation,  made  on  the  part  of  the  Spiritualists  of  Washington  by  a  com- 
mittee, to  attend  the  lecture  of  Rev.  T.  L.  Harris,  on  Spiritualism,  on  Saturday  evening, 
April  sgth.  In  the  midst  of  the  reading  of  this  paper,  Professor  Henry  entered  the  hall, 
and  upon  hearing  the  subject  of  '  Spiritualism'  mentioned,  he  turned  red  in  the  face  and 
interrupted  Profefsor  Hare  by  this  mquity :  '  I  would  be  glad  to  know,  Mr.  President,  if 
this  Bnbjeet  is  in  itrder  f  Professor  Hare  remarked,  that  whether  the  su&jal  were  m  order 
or  not,  it  was  hardly  in  order  to  interrupt  a  member  of  the  convention  in  that  manner 
before  he  had  finished  reading  his  communication.  Professor  Henry  replied  that  this  was 
'a  dangerous  subject  to  be  introduced  into  this  convention;'  that  it  had  better  he  let 
alone,  and  he  moved  that  it  be  l^d  upon  the  table.     The  invitation  was  finally  laid  upon 

"  It  would  seem  that  a  subject  like  this  was  one  which  would  lie  peculiarly  within  the 
domain  of  'science.'  But  the  '  American  Association  for  the  Promotion  of  Science' 
decided  that  it  was  either  unworthy  of  their  attention  or  dangerous  for  them  to  meddle 
with,  and  so  they  voted  to  put  the  mvitation  on  the  table. 

"  We  cannot  omit  in  this  connection  to  mention  that  the  '  American  Association  for  the 
Promotion  of  Science'  held  a  very  learned,  extended,  grave,  and  profound  discussion  at  the 
same  session,  iifan  the  cause  why  'roosters'  crerui  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock  at 
night!  Several  very  togenious  explanations  were,  we  believe,  adduced  to  account  for  this 
remarkable  phenomenon,  which  the  'American  Association  for  the  Promotion  of  Science' 
justly  regarded  as  a  question  naturally  challenging  their  most  seriqus  investigation,  and  to 
the  task  of  accoimting  for  which  they  resolved  to  bring  to  bear  the  combined  force  of  their 
highest  enei^ies.  It  was  finally  decided  by  the  association  that  the  important  fact  that 
roosters  crow  at  half-past  twdve  o'clock  at  night  is  to  be  only  accounted  for  on  the  sup. 
portion — strongly  sustained,  however,  by  well-ascertained  collateral  facts  in  science— that 

Hosiedb,  Google 

I20  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

at  that  particular  hour  a  wave  of  electricity  passes  over  the  earth's  surface,  from  north  to 
south,  which  disturbs  the  fowls  in  their  slumbers,  and  being  naturally  of  a  crowing 
disposition  they  all,  on  being  thus  wakened  and  aroused,  with  one  accord  set  lustily  at 
work  a-crowing  ]  We  think  the  'American  Association  for  the  Promotion  of  Science' 
have  hit  the  mack  at  last.  They  deserve  well  of  their  country  for  having  made  the  above 
imporlaut  aj:quisition  to  the  discoveries  of  science,  and  the  members  who  were  chiefly 
bstrumental  in  bringing  the  subject  up  and  arriving  at  the  conclusion  which  was  adopted 
rfiould  be  voted  a  meddlion  by  Congress.  The  obverse  side  of  the  medal  might  appropri- 
ately bear  the  image  of  a  barn-yard  cock  in  the  attitude  of  crowing,  with  the  inscription 
beneath,  '.£'i«-^iit7' while  the  reverse  could  with  propriety  represent  a  cluster  of  clucking 

One  thing  was  certain,  Dr.  Robert  Hare  had  become  a  Spiritualist ;  and 
as  a  lecturer,  writer,  teacher,  and  investigator,  the  youngest  soldier  in  the 
cause  grew  tired  by  his  side. 

His  revered  name  and  the  long  and  briliiant  siege  which  his  tenacious 
opinions  endured  before  he  yielded  fuli  credence  to  the  spiritual  character  of 
his  besiegers ;  the  insults  which  he  meekly  suffered  for  the  cause  of  truth,  and 
the  rich  legacy  of  spiritual  experiences  which  he  has  left  to  the  world,  render 
his  name  a  bulwark  in  "the  Spiritual  City"  and  his  conversion  a  memorable 
era  in  the  history  of  the  cause. 

The  Rev.  Adin  Eallou,  of  the  respected  mlnisteria)  family  of  that  name, 
had  long  professed  his  firm  faidi  in  the  manifestations,  and  by  writing  and 
public  lectures  nobly  sustained  his  opinions.  The  Rev.  Allan  Putnam,  of 
Roxbury,  Massachusetts,  and  the  distinguished  poet,  scholar,  divine,  and 
orator.  Rev.  John  Pierpont,  of  the  same  State,  also  entered  the  ranks,  and 
performed  Valuable  service  for  the  faith,  of  which  fuller  notices  will  be  found 
■  in  the  record  of  New  England  Spurituaiism ;  indeed,  tiie  shining  list  of  names, 
great  in  American  annals,  if  not  made  prominent  with  the  toy  dignities  called 
titles,  were  extending  to  a  formidable  length  in  every  State  of  the  Union. 

And  now  once  more  let  tis  inquire  into  the  nature  of  the  opposition  that 
was  brought  to  bear  against  Spiritualism,  without,  however,  in  a  single  instance 
retarding  its  progress,  or  winning  back  its  converts  from  their  faith. 

Of  the  character  of  the  itinerants  professing  to  lecture  against  it,  or  give 
"public  demonstrations  of  the  modes  in  which  the  raps,  etc.,  were  made" 
Messrs  Gnmes  and  Burr  form  a  fair  specimen.  Trickery,  collusion,  and  a 
set  of  dangerous  manipulations  with  the  joints,  which  every  physiologist 
declared  could  not  be  continued  for  three  months  without  developing  diseases 
of  the  most  ru  ous  cl  aracte  th  a  plent  1  I  n  \tu  f  libellous  falsehoods 
and  defamatory  n  s-  ta  emen  s  ade  p  the  to  k  n  trade  of  this  set  of 
mountebanks 

Still  a  lower  a  d  nore  u  pn  c  pled  clis  ve  e  represented  \y^  one 
Anderson,  a  professed  juggler  ho  pres  m  go  the  terest  which  attached 
to  the  subject  ot  Sp  ntual  m  at  e  j  ted  to  nake  cap  tal  out  of  it  by  adver- 
tising immense  sums  to  be  given  by  way  of  challenge  to  the  Spiritualists,  etc. 

All  who  have  ever  had  the  patience  to  listen  to  or  read  the  reports  of  this 
man's  gasconading,  will  confess  that  Grimes  and  Burr  were  respectable, 
compared  to  him.  Yet  in  despair  at  the  lack  of  better  weapons,  there  have 
not  been  wanting  those  who,  when  out  of  the  presence  of  Spiritualists,  and 
speaking  with  bated  breath,  would  protest  that  "Professor  [?J  Anderson  had 
explained  all  about  the  raps,  and  killed  Spiritualism  right  out"  Leaving  all 
the  small  fry  of  this  character  to  the  ignominy  which  has  long  since  swept 
over  their  names,  let  us  glance  briefly  at  the  efforts  of  tiiose  whose  position 
in  society  entided  the  world  to  expect  from  them  something  at  least  worthy 
of  their  najnes. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  121 

To  commence  with  those  who  ".ssume  to  be  the  highest  Hterary  and  scien- 
tific  authorities  on  this  subject,  let  us  notice  the  work  of  Dr.  C.  C.  Rogers, 
of  Boston,  who  filled  a  volume  with  what  he  called,  "  The  Philosophy  of  mys- 
terious Agents,  Human  and  Mundane."  In  strict  accordance  with  the  title  of 
his  work,  Dr.  Rogers  has  favored  us  with  a  treatise  so  eminently  mysterious 
that  Ihe  only  comprehensible  idea  we  can  glean  from  it  is,  that  though  the 
manifestations  do  actually  occur,   nevertheless  they  are  not  the  work  of 

Still,  as  somebody  or  something  must  be  answerable  for  that  power  which 
had  proceeded  from  the  turning  of  a  table  to  the  turning  upside  down  of  an 
entire  continent,  the  Doctor  gravely  enunciates  a  theory  which  lays  the  whole 
burden  of  the  manifestations  on  the  cerebrum,  which  is  supposed  somehow  to 
act  somewhat  in  the  way  described  by  one  of  Dr.  Rogers's  newspaper  eulor 
gists  in  a  criticism  on  his  work  which  reads  as  follows:  "He  said  that  he 
thought  the  revelations  were  not  spiritual,  but  a  cerebral  automatic  move- 
ment, depending  for  its  development  upon  the  idiosyncratic  temperament  of 
each  individual,  inspired  through  the  spinal  centres  by  a  mundane  process  of 
electrized  vitality  acting  upon  every  molecule  of  the  system." 

Asthissentenceincludes  a  quotarionfrom  Dr.  Rogers's  book — in  fact,  claims 
to  be  a  compendious  definition  of  its  meaning— it  implies  on  the  part  of  the 
writer  a  condition  of  lucidity  to  which  few  persons  besides  the  Boston  editor 
could  arrive  after  attentively  perusing  the  book.  As  an  example  of  the  effect 
produced  by  this  occult  work  on  less  enlightened  joumahsts,  we  quote  a 
second  criticism,  which  appeared  in  the  colmiins  of  the  Cincinnati  Commercial, 
and  which  though  obviously  written  in  the  spirit  of  satire,  is  not  an  inapt 
description  of  more  learned  stuff  than  that  of  Dr.  Rogers's  on  the  subject  of 
the  manifestations. 

The  extract  reads  as  follows : 

"  The  only  true  and  Intimate  manner  of  accounting  for  the  taps  is  the  phj^iological  de- 
fect of  the  membraneous  system.  The  obluseness  of  tfi  ibdominiil  indicator  causes  the  car- 
til^nous  compressor  to  coagulale  into  the  diaphragm,  and  depresses  the  duodenum  into  the 
flandango.  Now,  if  the  taps  were  caused  by  the  vogation  of  the  electridly  from  the  extremi- 
ties, the  tympanum  would  also  dissolve  into  spiritual  sinctum,  and  the  olfactory  ossiiicator 
would  ferment,  and  become  identical  with  Che  pigmentum. 

"A  friend  of  ouvs,  who  graduated  with  ' distmguished  honors'  at  one  of  the  Northern 
umversities,  says  that  he  must  dissent  in  tato  from  (he  idea  that  the  'depresaon  of  the 
duodenum  into  the  flandango'  could,  by  any  possibility,  cause  tbe  'olfactory  ossificator  to 
ferment,  and  become  identical  with  the  pigmentum.'  He  says  the  tlung  cannot  be  done; 
and  after  quoting  several  learned  authorities  on  the  subject,  winds  up  his  argument  by  the 
remark,  that; 

"  '  Tlie  vibratory  motion  communicated  to  the  tunica  albiigenia  by  the  parturition  of  the 
alveola  process,  eflectuaily  disintegrates  the  cerebellum,  and  predisposes  the  patient  to  pre- 
ternatural distension  of  the  auricular  membraneous  orifice ;  m  which  case,  the  rappings 
become  painfully  and  distuictly  audible  ! ' 

"Now,  whether  this  is,  or  is  not  so,  we  will  not  undertake  to  say,  but  will  leave  the 
whole  matter  in  the  hands  of  the  learned  savans,  in  the  full  confidence  that  little  can  be 
added  to  tlie  above  triumphant  and  incontrovertible  exposition." 

As  if  to  compensate  for  the  undue  share  whicli  Dr.  Rogers  assigned  to  the 
cerebrum  in  turning  the  world  upside  down.  Dr.  Dodds,  another  learned  phil- 
osopher, came  to  the  rescue,  widi  a  theory  of  equal  lucidity,  wliich  accounted 
for  all  the  mischief,  by  the  "automatic  action  of  the  cerebellum";  both  gen- 
tlemen agreed  that  the  nerve  centres  had  something  to  do  with  it,  but  the 
particular  wav  in  which  they  acted,  whether  in  conjunction  with  the  cerebrum 

Hosiedb,  Google 

133  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

or  the  cerebellum,  was  precisely  what  constituted  the  cream  of  the  mystery, 
and  what  neither  of  the  learned  doctors  would  or  could  explain. 

Unfortunately  for  the  success  of  the  back-brain  theory  of  Dr.  Dodds,  just 
as  it  was  midway  in  its  career,  and  seemed  likely  to  divide  the  honors  with 
the  front-br^n  theory  of  Dr.  Rogers,  the  cerebellum  advocate  himself  became 
a  convert  to  Spiritualism,  and  by  aid  of  his  accomplished  daughter,  Miss  Jen- 
nie Dodds,  a  medium  of  fine  oratorical  capacity,  carried  into  the  fold  of  the 
spiritual  church,  a  much  larger  number  of  converts  than  his  "back-brain" 
theory  had  ever  found  readers. 

Soon  after  die  first  issue  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  in  1852,  Dr.  Richmond, 
of  Ohio,  a  gentleman  of  profound  learning  and  research,  commenced  a  series 
of  papers,  which  were  published  in  the  New  York  Tribune,  antagonistic  to  the 
claims  of  Spiritualism. 

At  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Greeley,  chief  editor  of  the  Tribune,  Dr.  Rich- 
mond consented  to  engage  in  a  friendly  discussion  with  Mr.  S.  B.  Britain,  the 
arguments,  pro  and  con,  bebg  published  in  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  and  con- 
tinuing to  instruct  and  entertain  a  rapidly-increasing  circle  of  readers  for  over 
seven  months.  The  learning  and  ability  displayed  on  both  sides  by  these 
able  disputants  not  only  contributed  vastly  to  the  enlightenment  of  the  public, 
but  aided,  to  a  great  extent,  the  circulation  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  in 
which  they  were  published. 

To  answer  the  increasing  demand  for  these  valuable  articles,  they  were  sub- 
sequently reprinted,  in  pamphlet  form,  and  passed  through  many  editions, 
every  one  of  which  was  rapidly  exhausted. 

The  arguments  of  Mr.  Britam  were,  for  the  most  part,  based  upon  reasons 
derived  from  an  immense  array  of  pertinent  facts ;  those  of  Dr.  Richmond 
were  chiefly  attempts  to  make  the  facts  fit  his  peculiar  theories.  According 
to  these,  the  manifestations  were  the  production  of  disease,  hysteria,  halluci- 
nation, excessive  excitement,  etc  Dr.  Richmond  brought  an  immense  num- 
ber of  cases  forward  in  illustration  of  his  theories,  and  concluded  a  ^  erj  inter- 
esting, diough  far-fetched  resume  of  his  arguments,  by  the  following  state- 
ment :  "  All  intense,  long-continued  excitement,  pohtical,  religious,  or  men- 
tal, will  induce  this  state  of  mind.  I  pronounce  it  to  be  a  diseased  condition, 
and  all  spirit  manifestations  to  be  the  work  of  spirits  in  the  bodj  " 

Not  in  die  spirit  of  retaliation,  but  in  simple  justice  to  the  truths  of  history, 
and  as  a  specimen  of  the  kind  of  warfare  through  which  Spintualism  has 
marched  onward  to  its  present  triumphant  position,  we  feel  bound  to  reprint 
the  criticism  of  the  New  York  Times  on  the  Richmond  and  Britain  Discussion 
pamphlet,  which  the  pubHshers  had  courteously  forwarded  to  the  office  of  that 
journal  for  review.  The  first  notice  which  appeared  in  the  New  York  Times 
was  as  follows— 

"  Discussion  o 
ISM ;  by  S.  B 
Britain  1 

"  Appended  to  the  fly-leaf  of  the  copy  of  tl 
printed  notice  from  the  publishers,  drawing  01 
eluding  with  these  words : 

' ' '  We  are  now  rapidly  extending  our  list  of  publications,  and  shall  be  pleased  to  send  you, 
from  time  to  time,  the  better  class  of  our  bocks,  should  we  learn,  from  this  esperiment  that 
you  are  disposed  to  treat  them  fairly.'  We  are  very  much  obliged  to  Messrs.  Partridge  and 
Britain  for  their  consideration  i  but  could  none  of  their  spirits  inform  them  (is  not  Mr. 
■  Britam  himself  a  medium  ?)  that  we  should  certainly  treat  the  present  boolt  most  unfairly  ? 
For,  of  course,  frAi(j»^j//a/r^  means  praiang  the  book,  the  medium,  and  the  spirits. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  IZJ 

Now, we  can  do  neither ;  we  have,  on  the  contrary,  very  harsh  things  to  say  of  all  parties 
concerned,  and  the  book  into  the  ba^ain.  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Britain  will  not  thank  w 
for  our  opinion  of  the  '  better  class '  of  their  publications,  if  the  present  work  is  to  be  con- 
sidered a  specimen.  They  mnst  understand  that  we  look  upon  the  spirit-rapping  question 
as  a  most  detestable  swindle ;  while  we  believe  that  many  of  the  mediums  arc  poor,  deluded 
creatures,  we  are  convinced  that  the  projectors  and  promoters  of  the  affair  are  knaves,  as 
infamous  as  ever  served  out  a  life  sentence  in  a  State-prison. 

"  Of  this  particular  work,  which  purports  to  be  the  record  of  a  controvert  between  a 
believer  and  a  sceptic,  we  can  only  say  that,  if  it  were  not  saved  from  our  loathing  by  its 
stupidity,  the  evident  collusion  between  the  pretended  disputants  would  disgust  us.  A  more 
dishonest  book  has  surely  never  been  published  in  any  country.  We  do  not,  after  this  judg- 
ment, expect  to  be  favored  with  any  more  of  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Britain's  publications." 

On  tlie  publication  of  this  audacious  article,  Mr.  Britain  addressed  the 
editor  of  the  Times  in  the  following  letter  : 

"  Editors  of  the  Times: 

"  Gentlemen, — My  attention  has  been  called  to  your  n  t'        f  mj  t   I'sc  -s' 

with  Dr.  Richmond,  of  Ohio,  wherein  1  find  a  simple  remark  wh   h         t  sen  se 

what  you  might  othenvise  r^ard  as  an  imnecessary  obtrvision 

"It  is  not  my  purpose  to  controvert  your  opinions,  nor  t    m  ddl        th  th    q      t 
which  involves  the  facts  and  philosophy  of  the  present  spiritual  m       m     t       Resject    t,th 
supposed  delusion  of  the  media,  and  the  alleged  knavery  of  tl     p  t  Sp    t  ah  t     I 

have  nothing  whatever  to  say.      Time  and  the  succesaon  of  h  m  t         11  d  tern 

whether  theit  claims  are  well  or  ill  founded. 

"  The  single  remark  in  your  criticism,  which  gives  me  a  cl  im  t    y  dulg  ui  th 

present  instance,  is  the  following : 

"'Of  this  particular  work,  which  purports  to  be  the  reco  d    f  t  sy  b  twee 

b«^ever  and  a  sceptic,  we  can  only  say,  that  if  it  were  not  sa    d  f    m         1      hm„  by  t 
stupidity,  the  evident  colluaon  between  the  pretended  disputai  ts  w    Id  d  sgust  us.   Am 
dishonest  book  surely  never  appeared  in  any  country. ' 

"As  the  above  language  charges  the  respective  parties  in  the  aforesaid  discussion  with  man- 
ifest colluaon  and  unmitigated  dishonesty,  I  must  be  allowed  to  repel  the  charge,  and  to 
insist  that  the  chcumstances  of  the  case  are  utterly  irreconcilable  with  that  assumption,  in 
proof  of  which  I  submit  the  following  brief  statement  of  facts ; 

"  First,  The  writer  of  this  «ever  even  heard  of  Dr.  Richmond  mi!^\is,  articles  against 
Sinritualism  appeared  in  the  daily  papers.  Moreover,  it  is  impossible  to  di^ise  the  fact 
that  the  Doctor's  letters  to  the  Tribune  were  exten^vely  copied  and  widely  endorsed  by  the 
secular  press,  as  affording  a  complete  refutation  of  the  spiritual  theory.  At  that  time,  no 
one  doubted  Dt.  Richmond's  disposition,  and  few,  except  Spiritualists,  questioned  his  ability 
to  demolish  the  whole  fabric  of  spiiitual  philosophy. 

"  Second,  The  uivitation  to  engage  in  a  critical  exammation  of  the  facts  and  philosophy 
of  the  manifestations  emanated  from  Dr.  Richmond  himself,  who  insisted  that  he  could 
account  for  all  the  phenomena  on  purely  nataraJ  principles  or  physical  laws. 

"Third,  Personally,  Dr.  Richmond,  even  to  this  very  hour,  is  a  stranger  to  me.  I  do 
not  know  that  we  were  ever  within  five  hundred  miles  of  each  other. 

"Fourth,  Ourmutmd  correspondence  has  been  hraited  to  the  published  controversy,  and 
the  few  brief  epistles  necessary  in  the  arrangement  of  preliminaries  and  the  transaction  of 
business. 

"Such,  gentlemen,  are  the  facts;  and  your  readerswill  judge  whether  they  afford  any  evi- 
dence of  collusion,  or  of  the  slightest  disposition,  on  our  part,  to  deal  unfairly  with  the 

"Allow  me  to  add,  in  conclusion,  that  while  I  have  hitherto  invited  no  man  to  a  discus- 
sion of  this  subject,  I  have  never  shunned  a  pubhc  interview  with  an  intelligent  opponent. 
Any  ordeal  whtdl  recognizes  authentic  facts  and  logical  deductions  as  the  legitimate  means 
of  trial,  will  still  tind  me  ready;  and,  should  you,  gentlemen,  after  the  perusal  of  this  letter, 
be  disposed  to  entertain  your  first  impressions  (hat  the  discusaon  already  published  was  not 
entereil  into  and  conducted  in  good  fsdth,  and  with  a  view  to  ehcit  the  truth,  perhaps  it 
may  be  vritliin  your  province  to  propose  some  advocate  of  the  material  hypothesis,  in  whose 
fidelity  and  ability  you  have  eoniidence. 

"  Should  you  find  it  convenient  to  designate  such  a  man,  I  shall  readily  accord  to  Ms  per- 
sonal claims,  and  those  of  the  subject  of  our  inquiry,  the  respect  and  attention  which  they 
shall  seem  to  requhe. 

"  Youts  respectfully, 

"  New  York,  SejiUmber  ai,  1853.  S.  B.  Britain." 

Hosted  by  Google 

124  HISTORY  OP  MODERN 

Mr.  Brittain  goes  on  to  remark  : — 

"Our  accusers  did  not  deem  it  proper  to  allow  us  a  hearing  in  our  own  defence. 

"  The  foregoing  letter  was  suppressed  without  a  word  of  apology  from  the  editor  of  the 
Times,  whose  shameless  abandonment  of  the  principles  of  honorable  dealing  may  be  justly 
inferred  from  the  subjoined  editorial  remarks,  which  appeared  in  their  next  issue." 

■"SPIRIT  RAPPINGS. 

"  '  Mr.  S.  B.  Britain,  who  asserts,  we  believe,  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  rappings,  table 
movings,  etc.,  about  which  so  much  noise  has  been  made,  writes  to  us,  denymg  that  there 
was  any  '  collusion  '  between  him  and  Dr.  Richmond  in  their  recent  controversy  upon  this 
subject.  He  rives  sundry  reasons  in  support  of  his  assertion,  which,  however,  is  just  as 
good  without  tTiem  as  with  them.  Mr.  Brltidn  invites  us  to  deagnate  some  person  to  hold 
a  further  controversy  with  him  upon  this  subject.  We  do  not  happen  to  oiwe  any  of  our 
acquaintances  so  deadly  a  spite  as  to  lead  us  to  recommend  that  he  should  engage  in  such  a 
task.  There  are,  prohabfy,  many  ways  in  which  more  po^tive  evil  may  be  done,  than  by 
studying,  writing,  or  reading  upon  this  subject;  but  we  know  none  in  which  time  can  be 
more  utterly  wasted,  or  from  which  less  good  can  possibly  be  derived.  It  is  the  ea^est  thing 
in  the  world  for  a  fluent  writer  to  cover  reams  of  paper  with  interminable  disquisitions  upon 
this  topic,  and  it  is  not  very  difficult,  as  things  go,  to  procure  their  publication.  But  we  can 
conceive  no  lask  more  dreary  or  unprofitable  tl^n  that  of  reading  them.  Every  now  and 
then  we  hear  of  some  poor  creature,  whose  brains  have  been  addled  by  their  devotion  to 
such  studies  ;  and  the  only  reason  why  we  do  not  hear  of  more  is  because  the  majority  of 
those  who  enter  upon  such  pursuits  are  either  destitute  of  brains  altogether,  or  else,  they 
are  htnielessly  addled  in  advance. 

"•We  thmkMr.  Britain  would  have  shown  a  much  stronger  faith  in  hisspirilual  gymnas- 
tics if  he  had  accepted  the  offer,  recently  publLshed  in  our  columns,  of  one  hundred  dollars 
to  any  medium  who  would  move  the  tables,  or  answer  the  questions  of  the  gentleman  who 
made  the  offer.  The  money  was  in  our  hands,  and  the  offer  was  repeatedly  published  in  our 
columns  ;  but  as  no  medium  came  forward,  we  were  compelled  to  return  the  money.  If  Mr. 
Britain,  however,  chooses  to  accept  it  now,  we  presume  the  offer  would  be  renewed.  This 
would  be  a  much  more  decisive  and  satisfactory  mode  of  settling  this  question  than  by  such 
a  controversy  as  Mr.  B.  proposes.     What  does  he  say  to  it  ?" ' 

Again  Mr.  Britain  writes ; 

"  To  give  the  Times  a  chance  to  rede 
any  such  latent  element  remaned  in  its  n 
to  the  Tribune: 

'"READY  FOR  TRIAL. 

"'Tff  the  Editor  of  the  New  York  Tribune: 

'"Sir,  — Some  days  since,  the  Daily  ri»Mj  chai^  Messrs.  Britain  and  Richmond,  the 
parties  to  the  late  discussion  of  Spiritualism,  with  '  evident  colluaon'  and  dishonest  dealing 
with  the  public  Whereupon  the  writer  of  this  addressed  a  civil  letter  to  the  editors  of 
that  journal,  denying  the  diarge,  and  specifying  certain  facts  and  reasons  which  from  their 
nature  utterly  preclude  the  existence  of  such  alleged  collusion  and  dishonesty. 

"  'Instead  of  publishing  the  letter,  the  Times  renewed  its  assault  ui  the  peculiar  spirit 
which  has  already  given  it  a  mean  distinction,  and  concluded  by  proposing  what  it  was 
pleased  to  regard  as  a  '  decisive  and  satisfactory  mode  of  settlmg  this  question  '—the  claims 
of  Spiritualism. 

"  'One  of  its  correspondents  had  previously  ofTered  one  hundred  dollars  for  the  production 
of  certiun  phenomena,  and  the  Times,  to  conceal  the  cowardice  of  ils  unprovoked  and 
nnprincipled  attack  on  Britain  and  Richmond,  and  the  leading  Spiritualists,  who  were  all 
cWacterized  as  'knaves  as  infamous  as  ever  served  out  a  life  sentence  in  a  State  prison,' 
calls  on  the  writer  to  accept  the  otfer  of  its  correspondent. 

"  '  The  object  of  this  communication  is  to  signify  that  the  party  whose  name  is  subscribed 
below  will  accept  the  chaUenge,  with  or  without  the  accompanying  offer  of  one  hundred 
dollars,  provided  the  first  can  be  so  modified  that  the  Times  and  its  correspondent  will 
enter  into  the  following  fair  and  equitable  arrangement ; 

"  '  First,  The  undersigned  will  designate  two  distinguished  citizens  of  New  York,  who  are 
known  to  the  public  and  are  above  tlK  suspicion  of  personal  or  other  improper  motives  ;  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  I25 

Times  shall  appoint  t\TO  of  like  reputation  for  candor  and  honesty,  and  the  four  Ihns  se- 
lected shall  name  a  fifth.  The  parties  so  chosen  shall  constitute  a  committee  to  investigate 
any  phenomena  that  may  occur  in  the  presence  of  such  mediums  as  the  undersigned  shall 

'"Second.  The  committee  shall  have  twelve  sittmgs,  or  a  greater  number  if  the  majority 
of  the  same  shall  so  decide ;  and  at  the  close  of  the  investigation  it  shall  report  the  result. 

»  'Third.  The  committee  shall  be  privileged  to  select  the  place  of  meeting,  which  may  be 
dumfied,  if  preferred,  at  each  succeeding  session. 

'"Fourth,  The  Times  and  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  sliall  each  publish  whatever  the 
committee  shall  be  pleased  to  submit  as  its  report  of  the  essential  facU  elicited  by  the  pro- 
posed investigation.  ,    ,      „. 

"'As  it  does  not  comport  with  the  iiifberal  and  unjust  pohcy  of  the  limes  to  give 

Eablicity  to  any  reply  to  its  unfounded  accusations,  I  am  forced  to  depend  on  your  more 
beral  and  widely-circulated  journal,  to  enable  me  to  reach  the  general  pubhc  before 
which  I  am  accused, 

" '  Very  truly  yours, 

"'S.  B.  Britain. 
'"New  York,  September,  23,  1853.' 

"  How  did  the  Times  treat  this  proposition  ?  Why,  after  the  manner  which  has  charac- 
terised all  of  its  class  — it  did  not  notice  it  a.t  all.  It  was  silent.  We  have  ever  been 
ready  to  submit  the  whole  subject  of  spiritual  manifestations  to  any  just  ordeal,  however 
severe.  We  have  expressed  and  otherwise  manifested  that  disposition  on  numerous  occa- 
sions, through  these  columns,  before  public  assemblies,  and  m  social  chdes. 

"  When  Professor  Mattison  assailed  Spiritualism,  and  we  were  sent  for  to  vindicate  its 
claims,  we  neglected  other  duties  and  went  to  New  England  to  answer  the  call.  The 
Spiritualists  at  West  Winsted  ofleced  to  pay  Mr.  Mattison's  expenses  and  to  give  him 
twenty  dollars  to  come  back  and  support  his  unwarrantable  assumption  in  presence  of  the 
writer.  But  our  astronomical  friend  had  already  reached  his  aphelion,  and  owuig  to  the 
distance  of  that  part  of  his  orbit,  he  could  not  return  in  season. 

"The  prince  of  jugglers,  Anderson,  on  one  occasion  ^ve  a  vauntmg  challenge  and 
offered  five  hundred  dollars  to  any  person  in  the  United  States  who  would  produce  the 
sphilual  phenomena  at  Metropolitan  Hall.  Mr.  Charles  Partridge  presented  himself  at 
the  hali,  and  proposed  to  make  an  effort  to  obtain  the  requited  results,  on  condition  that 
Professor  Anderson  would  consent  to  abide  the  decision  of  an  impartial  committee. 

"NotwithbtandmgMr.  Partridge  positively  declmed  to  accept  the  money,  in  any  event, 
the  Professor  would  not  hazard  a  fair  trial.  He,  however,  became  greatly  excited  and 
abused  Mr.  Partridge  and  the  mediums.  In  his  confusion  he  called  on  the  Lord  and  the 
New  York  Volunteers,  and,  of  course,  di^sted  the  sensible  portion  ot  his  audience. 

"  Mr.  Partridge  has  elsewere  made  a  similar  offer,  and  on  one  oceaaon  through  the  col- 
umns of  the  Tribune.  The  believers  in  Spiritualism  have  never  declmed  any  fair  trial ; 
but  how  has  it  been  with  the  opposition  ?  Manjr  of  our  valiant  opposers  have  kept  them- 
selves out  of  sight,  while  they  have  hurled  theu-  missiles  in  the  form  of  challenges  and 
denundation-s.  They  have  assumed  various  disguises  that  they  might  stab  in  secret  at  the 
most  vital  mterests  of  truth  and  huniaJiity.  Whenever  we  have  offered  to  meet  them 
openly  and  in  a  scientific  ^It,  they  have  uniformly  insisted  on  impoHng  unjust  conditions 
and  unnatural  restramts.  They  daun  that  the  manifestations,  if  they  occur,  must  obey  the 
laws  of  material  nature,  and  insist  that  they  shall  be  tested  by  such  modes  and  formula  as 
are  alone  applicable  to  the  domam  of  physics. 

"  When,  occasionally,  we  have  driven  hypocrisy  to  its  last  resort,  by  proposing  terms 
which  sophistry  can  neither  cavil  afnor  evade,  these  conscientious  opposers  became  sud- 

"  Now  we  deare  our  readers  and  the  public  to  observe  and  remember  that  we  are  in 
constant  readiness  for  a  fair  trial ;  but  our  judges  must  be  honorable  men. 

"  We  do  not  propose  to  go  to  the  Times  office  to  turn  over  the  editor's  table  with  or 
without  human  hands,  and  leave  hun  to  tell  the  story,  for  the  reason  that  we  can  not  depend 
on  the  accuracy  of  his  statements.  Men  who  dispute  the  most  obvious  facts  and  principles 
are  in  no  case  the  most  reliable  witnesses,  and  whoever  will  falsdy  accuse  and  slander  even 
the  humblest  disdple  of  the  truth,  for  nothing,  may  not  scruple  to  defame  truth  itself  for 
'  one  hundred  dollars.'' " 

Such  was  the  conduct  of  one  of  the  most  authoritative  of  the  New  York 
journals,  for  no  other  apparent  motive  than  because  Dr.  Richmond,  from 
whose  known  ability  and  personal  antagonism  to  Spiritualism  so  much  had 

Hosted  by  Google 

126  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

been  expected, /a;7^(/  signally  in  overthrowing  the  arguments  of  Mr.  ^tain 
in  the  disaisston.  It  is  but  justice  to  add  that  the  venomous  character  of 
this  poison  worked  its  own  antidote,  calling  forth  several  manly  and  gener- 
ous protests  from  different  New  York  journals  against  the  atrocious  conduct 
of  the  Times.  Amongst  these,  was  a  frank  statement  from  Mr.  Greeley  of 
the  Tribune,  declaring  the  entire  absence  of  any  collusion  or  even  a  personal 
acquaintance  between  the  disputants,  concluding  as  follows; 

"These  facts  bear  their  own  comment  on  their  face.  Whatever  may  be  the  truth 
respecting  what  is  called  'Spiritualism,'  we  know  that  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Britain  are 
not  scoundrels ;  that  there  was  no  '  collusion '  between  them  and  Dr.  Richmond ;  and  that 
the  Times  has  acted  in  these  premises  exactly  like  the  Times." 

Besides  the  agitation  which  was  excited  by  the  narrow-minded  selfishness 
and  severity  of  the  pulpit  and  press,  three  powers,  more  just,  severe,  and 
authoritative  than  all  the  world  beside,  have  been  sitting  at  the  bar  of  judg- 
ment to  decide  on  the  claims  of  Spiritualism.  These  are  Time,  Progress, 
and  Public  Opinion.  Their  verdict  has  been  rendered  in  during  the  twenty 
years  that  modem  Spiritualism  has  been  on  trial  before  them,  and  their  sen- 
tence is,  "  Spiritualism  is  a  truth,  and  will  live  forever." 

These  same  unimpeachable  judges  have  also  been  dealing  with  the  New 
York  Times  ;  and  though  the  opinions  of  its  editors  on  the  subject  of  Spirit- 
ualism now  are  entirely  unknown  to  the  author,  the  tone  of  its  columns  is  of 
such  a  nature  as  to  justify  the  belief  that  its  editorship  is  in  the  hands  of 
gentlemen,  who,  however  diey  may  be  personally  opposed  to  the  spiritualis- 
tic belief,  could  not  now,  as'  formerly,  be  found  attacking  it  with  the  weapons 
of  falsehood  and  vulgEir  abuse. 

The  next  of  the  valiant  crusaders  against  Spiritualism  whom  our  limits  will 
allow  us  to  notice  is  a  Mr.  Charles  Elliott, 

This  gendeman  was  the  author  of  a  book,  which  he  was  rash  enough  to 
publish  in  1852,  a  period  loo  early  to  furnish  him  with  much  more  available 
material  than  was  to  be  found  in  iHS.  the  then-extant  slanders  against  the  Fox 
family,  and  the  queries  as  to  whether  the  phenomena  claimed  by  the  Rev. 
Dr.  Phelps,  of  Stratford,  to  be  performed  by  spirits  were  not  actually  the  work 
of  the  venerable  gentleman  himself,  or  that  of  some  of  his  family.  Had  Mr. 
Charles  Elliotts  treatise  on  "mysteries,"  or  "glimpses  of  die  supernatural," 
fortunately  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  discerning  editor,  he  mighf  have  been 
spared  the  expense  of  publishing  a  whole  volume  by  the  condensation  of  its 
material  into  the  following  pithy  sentences,  which  will  be  found  to  embody 
all  Ihat  the  author  has  labored  to  prove  in  two  hundred  pages,  namely :  All 
the  manifestations  recorded  in  the  Bible  are  true  all  others  are  the  work  of 
shallow  imposture. 

Next  came  a  volume  of  about  the  same  size  as  Elliott's,  written  by  the 
Rev.  H.  Mattison,  A.M.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  and  .Astronomy, 
and  member  of  the  same  distinguished  body  that  treated  the  venerable  Dr. 
Hare  with  the  courtesies  referred  to  in  the  former  portion  of  this  chapter. 

The  title  of  this  book —  "  Spirit  Rapping  Unveiled,  an  expos&,"  etc.  —  will 
sufficiently  explain  the  basis  of  his  argument.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that,  although 
his  ground,  like  that  of  Mr.  Elliott's,  was  wholly  occupied  with  slanderous 
stories  and  newspaper  libels  against  the  Spiritualists,  still,  as  he  wisely  took 
advantage  of  these  three  years  later  for  their  accumulation,  his  book  possessed 
that  additional  claim  at  least  to  public  notice. 

Next  comes  a  book  from  which  the  community,  whether  of  spiritual  or 
materialistic  tendencies,  had  a  just  right  to  expect  some  revelations  which 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  13? 

should  help  them  to  unravel  the  modem  "  mystery  of  mysteries."  For  was 
it  not  written  by  Professor  Malian,  President  of  Cleveland  University,  and 
did  it  not  undertake,  in  nearly  five  hundred  closely-printed  pages,  to  show 
tliat  it  was  "modern  mysteries  explained  and  exposed?"  Bot  alas  for  the 
mystery,  and  still  more  for  the  explanation  promised  !  the  best  that  the  Pro- 
fessor could  do  was  to  deepen  the  mystery  past  all  finding  out,  and  this  he 
accomplished  by  actually  attributing  the  production  of  "Nature's  Divine 
Revelations,"  "  The  Great  Harmonia,"  "  Penetralia,"  etc.,  together  with  ah 
the  rappings,  tippings,  visions,  cures,  apparitions,  disclosures,  clairvoyant 
revelations,  spirit  lights,  iioatings,  heavings,  dancings,  writings,  and  con- 
tents generally  of  twenty  or  more  large  journals,  and  several  hundreds  of  vol- 
umes and  pamphlets,  to  the  work  of  odyle. 

Wonderful  odyle  in  Professor  Mahan's  eyes  !  Unhappilj,  however,  for  the 
credit  of  the  Cleveland  University's  president^  the  odyhc  theory  found  no 
favor  even  with  the  bitterest  antagonists  of  Spiritualism.  The  press  generally 
were  dissatisfied  with  the  learned  gentleman's  shallow  addition  to  the  mysti- 
cism of  the  subject,  and  even  the  New  York  Times  was  ashamed  of  him, 
concluding  a  pathetic  lamentation  over  his  failure  with  admitting  that,  "We 
sigh  for  some  means  of  explaining  the  explanation,  and  we  do  not  attempt 
criticism  on  a  book  which  we  find  it  impossible  to  understand." 

To  conclude  the  list  of  learned  and  pious  foes  who  brought  their  battering- 
rams  to  bear  against  this  impregnable  fortress,  and  like  the  Prince  de  CondS 
after  his  twenty-one  days'  siege  of  the  Bastile,  were  forced  to  retreat,  leaving 
the  walls  as  they  found  them,  "  only  a  little  stronger."  It  but  remains  for 
us  to  record  the  attack  of  a  certain  "  tlieological  giant,"  by  whose  onslaught 
it  was  confidently  believed,  if  never  before,  the  demon  of  Spiritualism  must 
yield  up  the  ghost.  The  method  of  attack  in  this  instajice  was  on  this  wise  : 
At  a  regular  meeting  of  the  Congregational  Association  of  New  York  and 
Brooklyn,  the  Rev.  Charles  Beecher  was  appointed  to  prepare  a  report  on  the 
spiritual  manifestations.  This  was  faithfully  executed  and  read  before  tlie 
association  at  its  session  of  April,  1853.  In  his  entire  tieatment  of  the  sub- 
ject Mr.  Beecher  certainly  maintained,  both  with  the  friends  and  opponents 
of  the  cause,  the  character  of  a  gentieman,  a  scholar,  and  a  Christian.  Mr. 
Beecher  assumed  thatspirits  could  only  obtain  access  through  prepared  odylic 
conditions  ;  he  maintained  that "  this  was  the  method  by  which  the  spirit  com- 
municated through  the  ancient  prophets  and  apostles,"  and  added  that  "  to 
substitute  any  other  theory  cuts  up  by  the  roots  large  portions  of  the  prophetic 
Scriptures." 

"  Whatever  physiolc^cal  law  accounts  for  odylic  phenomena  in  all  ages,  will  in  the  end 
mevLtably  carry  itself  through  the  Bible,  where  it  deals  with  the  phenomena  of  soul  and 

body  as  mutually  related,  acting  and  reacting. If  a  theory  be  adopted  everywhere 

else  but  in  the  Bible,  excluding  spiritual  intervention  by  odylic  channels  in  toto  and  account- 
ing for  everything  physically,  iien  will  the  covers  of  the  Bible  prove  but  pasteboard  bar- 
riers. Such  a  theory  will  sweep  its  way  through  the  Bible  and  its  authority;  its  plenary 
inspirations  will  be  annihilated. " 

If  Mr.  Beecher  had  rested  here,  permitted  each  one  to  prove  the  spirits, 
try  them,  or,  in  fact,  suffered  each  one  to  draw  their  own  conclusions  con- 
cerning the  nature  and  value  of  the  communications  according  to  the  rights 
■  '  ;  '/ate  judgment  and  conscience,  his  report  would  have  redeemed  die 
-■'*    .     ocean  of  slander,  folly,  and  ignorance  that  disgraced  the  age  in  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

128  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

language  of  the  opposition ;  but  instead  of  that,  the  reverend  scholar,  finding  that 
his  clear  perception  of  fact,  science,  and  reason  compelled  him  to  acknowledge 
the  manifestations,  and  furnished  him  with  a  plausible  and  scientific  origin  for 
their  production,  suddenly  became  alarmed  on  the  score  of  his  religion. 
Deeming,  possibly,  that  the  new  Bible  might  stand  in  the  way  of  the  old — that 
a  priesthood  of  laymen,  boys,  girls,  and  unconsecrated  persons  generally, 
might  interfere  widi  the  proscriptive  rights  of  the  consecrated  ones  particularly, 
he  changed  his  tone,  and  declared  that  the  ancient  spirits  did  come  "  accord- 
ing to  the  law  and  the  testimony,"  but  the  modem  ones  did  not.  That  the 
ancient  mediums — including,  of  course,  Balaam,  Samson,  David,  Solomon, 
etc, — were  all  men  of  God;  whilst  the  modem — mcluding,  of  course.  A,  J, 
Davis,  Kate  Fox,  Daniel  Home,  Linton,  etc.,— were  children  of  the 
other  party.  That  all  the  ancient  manifestations^including,  of  course,  the 
destruction  of  forty  and  two  little  children  by  bears  for  calling  Elisha  "bald 
head,"  and  the  sending  of  a  lying  spirit  into  the  mouths  of  Aliab's  four  hun- 
dred prophets,  etc., — were  all  performed  by  angels;  whilst  the  modern 
manifestations — including,  of  course,  the  thousands  of  souls  converted  to  the 
belief  of  immortality  from  atheism  and  the  seventeen  hundred  marvellous 
cures  of  blind,  lame,  deaf,  and  otherwise  afSlcted  living  persons,  reported  on 
unimpeachable  authority  by  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Britain — were  all  per- 
formed by  the  adversary  and  his  imps ;  in  a  word,  that  the  Spiritualism  of 
Judea  two  thousand  years  ago  was  all  of  God;  and  the  Spiritualism  of  America, 
eighteen  centuries  later,  was  all  of  the  Devil,  and  that — ^because  he,  the  Rev. 
Charles  Eeecher,  said  so. 

"  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  I  " 

CHAPTER  XHI. 

!    SPIRITUALISTS'    MEMORIAL  TO    CONGRESS. 
"  Judas,  bctrayesi  thou  ih=  Son  of  Man  vriih  a  kiaa ! " 
"  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  acrvanl  htareth." 

r  553 

It  was  in  the  year  1854,  that  a  memorial  was  presented  to  Congress  pray- 
ing that  honorable  body  to  appoint  a  commission  of  investigation  into  the 
subject  of  modern  Spiritualism. 

As  the  grounds  of  the  petitioners'  request,  and  a  very  fair  summary  of  the 
aspect  of  die  cause,  is  presented  in  the  language  of  the  memorial,  we  shall 
claim  the  privilege  of  placing  it  on  record  here,  as  much  for  the  reasons 
assigned  above  as  for  the  propriety  of  giving  diat  document  its  legitimate 
place  in  these  pages. 

The  memorial  was  signed  by  fifteen  thousand  persons,  the  name  of  ex- 
Governor  Tallmadge,  of  Wisconsin,  United  States  Senator,  etc.,  standing  at 
the  head  of  the  list. 

Rev.  S.  B.  Britain  was  intrusted  with  the  difficult  task  of  drawing  it  up, 
and  at  the  request  of  Governor  Tallma<%e,  General  Shields,  U.  S.  Senator, 
agreed  to  present  it,  with  a  view  of  urging  the  nomination  of  a  select  com 
mittee  to  consider  the  subject. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  129 

•■A  MEMORIAL. 

rj  of  tKe 

"Your  Memorialists,  citizens  of  the  Republic  of  the  United  States  of  America,  most 
respectfully  beg  leave  to  represent  before  your  honorable  Body,  that  certain  physical  and 
mental  phenomena,  of  questionable  origin  and  mysterious  import,  have  of  late  occurred  in 
this  country,  and  in  almost  all  parts  of  Europe,  and  that  the  same  are  now  so  prevalent, 
especially  in  the  Northern,  Middle,  and  Western  sections  of  the  Union,  as  to  engross  a 
large  share  of  the  public  attention.  The  peculiar  nature  of  the  subject  to  which  the  Me- 
morialists desire  to  solicit  the  attention  of  your  honorable  Body,  may  be  inferred  from  a 
partial  analysis  of  its  phenomenal  aspects  which  are  imperfectly  comprehended  in  the  fol- 
lowing brief  generalization : 

"  First,  An  occult  force  exhibited  in  sliding,  rdsing,  arrettmg,  holding,  suspending,  and 
otherwise  disturbing  numerous  ponderable  bodies,  apparently  in  direct  opposition  Co  the 
acknowledged  laws  of  matter,  and  alti^thet  transcendbg  the  accredited  powers  of  the 
human  mind,  is  manifested  to  thousands  of  intelligent  and  discriminating  persons,  while  the 
human  senses  have  hitherto  failed  to  detect  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  public,  either  the  pri- 
mary or  proximate  causes  of  these  phenomena. 

"Second.  lights  of  various  forms  and  colors,  and  of  different  degrees  of  intensity,  appear 
in  dark  rooms,  where  no  substances  exist  which  are  liable  to  develop  chemical  action  or 
phosphorescent  illumination,  and  in  the  absence  of  all  the  means  and  instruments  whereby 
electricity  is  generated  or  combustion  produced. 

"Third.  Anotier  general  class  of  the  phenomenawhich  we  desire  to  bring  to  the  notice  of 
your  august  Body,  is  presented  in  the  variety  of  sounds  which  are  now  extremely  frequent 
in  their  occurrence,  widely  diversified  m  (heir  character,  and  more  or  less  significant  in 
their  import.  These  conast,  in  part,  of  certain  mysterious  rappings  which  appear  to  indi- 
cate the  presence  of  an  inviable  intelligence ;  sounds  such  as  are  occasioned  by  the  prosecu- 
tion of  several  mechanical  and  other  occupations,  are  often  heard  ;  there  are  others  which 
resemble  the  hoarse  voices  of  the  winds  and  waves,  with  which,  occasionally,  harsh,  creak- 
ing sounds  are  mmgled,  similar  to  those  produced  by  the  masts  and  ri^ng  of  a  ship  while 
it  is  laboring  in  a  rough  sea. 

"  At  times  powerful  concussions  occur,  not  unlike  distant  thunder  or  the  discharge  of  artil- 
lery, accompanied  by  an  oscillatory  movement  of  surrounding  objects,  and  in  some  instances 
by  a  vibratory  or  tremulous  motion  of  the  floor  of  the  apartment ;  or  it  may  be,  of  the 
whole  house  wherem  the  phenomena  occur. 

"  On  other  occasions  harmonic  sounds  are  heard  as  of  human  voices,  but  more  frequently 
resembling  the  tones  of  various  musical  instruments,  among  which  those  of  the  fife  dru  n 
trumpet,  guitar,  harp  and  piano  have  been  mysteriously  and  successfully  rep  ese  ted  bo  h 
with  and  without  the  instruments ;  and  m  either  case,  without  any  api  a  e  t  human  or 
other  visible  agency. 

"  These  phenomena  appear  to  depend,  so  far  as  r^ards  the  process  of  (he  p  oduct  on  on 
the  acknowledged  principles  of  acoustics. 

"There  is  obviously  a  distinction  of  the  sensational  medium  of  the  auditory  nerves,  occa- 
Moned  by  an  undulating  movement  of  the  air,  though  by  what  means  these  atmospheric 
undulations  are  produced  does  not  appear  to  the  satisfaction  ot  acute  observers. 

"Fourth.  All  the  functions  of  the  human  body  and  mind  are  often  and  strangely  influenced 
in  what  appear  to  be  certain  abnormal  slates  of  the  system,  and  by  causes  which  are  neither 
adequately  defined  nor  understood.  The  inviable  power  frequently  interrupts  what  we  ate 
accustomed  to  denominate  the  normal  operation  of  the  faculties,  suspendbg  sensation  and 
the  capacity  for  voluntary  motion,  checking  the  circulation  of  the  animal  fluids,  and  reduc- 
ing the  temperature  of  the  limbs  and  portions  of  the  body  to  a  death-like  coldness  and  rig- 
idity.   Indeed,  in  some  instances  respiration  is  entirely  suspended  for  a  season  ■ —  it  may  be 

Hosiedb,  Google 

I30  HISTORY   OF  MODERN 

tor  hours  or  days  together  —  after  wlilcli  the  faculties  of  the  mind  and  functions  of  the  bodj 
aJe  fully  restored. 

"  It  is,  moreover,  confidently  asserted  that  these  phenomena  have  been  succeeded,  in  nu- 
merous cases,  by  permanent  mental  and  physical  derangement,  and  it  is  poHtively  affirmed 
and  believed  that  many  persons  who  were  suffering  from  organic  defects,  or  from  protracted 
and  apparently  incurable  diseases,  have  been  suddenly  relieved  or  entirely  renovated  by  the 
same  mysterious  agency. 

"  It  may  not  be  improper  to  observe,  in  this  connection,  that  two  general  hypotheses 
obtain  with  respect  to  tlie  origin  of  these  remarkable  phenomensi. 

"  The  one  ascribes  them  to  the  power  and  intelligence  of  departed  spirits,  opera.ting  on 
and  through  the  subtile  and  imponderable  elements  which  pervade  and  permeate  all  material 
forms ;  and  this,  it  should  be  observed,  accords  with  the  ostensible  claims  and  pretensions 
of  the  manifestations  themselves. 

"  AmongThose  who  acdept  this  hypothetas  will  be  found  a  large  number  of  our  fellow-citi- 
zens who  are  alike  distmguished  for  their  moral  worth,  intellectual  powers  and  attainments, 
as  well  as  for  their  eminent  social  position  and  political  inflaence. 

"  Others,  not  less  distinguished  in  all  the  relations  of  life,  reject  this  conclu^n,  and  en- 
tertain the  opinion  that  the  acknowledged  principles  of  phyacs  and  metaphysics  will  enable 
scientific  inquirers  to  account  for  all  the  facts  in  a  rational  and  satisfactory  manner. 
While  your  memorialists  cannot  agree  on  this  question,  but  have  honestly  arrived  at  widely 
different  conclusions  respectmg  the  probable  causes  of  the  phenomena  herem  described, 
they  beg  leave,  most  respectfully,  to '  assure  your  honorable  Body,  they  nevertheless  most 
cordially  concur  in  the  opinion  that  the  alleged  phenomena  do  really  occur,  and  that  their 
mysterious  origin,  peculiar  nature,  and  important  bearing  on  the  interests  of  mankind  de- 
mand for  them  a  patient,  thorough,  and  scientific  investigation. 

"It  cannot  reasonably  be  denied  that  the  various  phenomena  to  wHeh  the  memorial 
refers  are  likely  to  produce  important  and  lasting  results,  permanently  affecting  the  physi- 
cal condition,  mental  development,  and  moral  character  of  a  large  number  of  the  American 

"It  is  obvious  that  these  occult  powers  do  mfluence  the  essential  principles  of  health  and 
life,  of  thought  and  action,  and  hence  tiiey  may  be  destined  to  modify  tlie  conditions  of  our 
being,  the  faith  and  philosophy  of  the  age,  and  the  government  of  the  world. 

"  Moreover,  deeming  it  to  be  intrinsically  proper,  and  at  the  same  time  strictly  compatible 
with  the  cardinal  objects  and  essential  spirit  of  our  institutions,  to  address  the  representa- 
tives of  the  people,  concerning  any  and  every  subject  which  may  be  fairly  presumed  to 
involve  the  discovery  of  new  prmciples,  which  must  or  may  issue  in  momentous  conse- 
iqnences  to  mankind,  we,  your  fellow -citizens,  whose  names  are  appended  to  this  memorial, 
earnestly  desire  to  be  heard  on  this  occasion. 

"In  pursuance,  therefore,  of  theot^ects  contemplated  by  the  present  memorialists,  and  in 
view  of  the  facts  and  reasons  herein  contained  or  referred  to,  your  fellow-citizens  most 
respectfully  petition  your  honorable  Body  for  the  appointment  of  a  scientific  commission  to 
which.this  subject  shall  be  referred,  and  for  such  an  appropriation  as  sliall  enable  the  com- 
missioners to  prosecute  their  inquiries  to  a  successful  termination.  Believing  that  the  pro- 
gress of  science  and  the  true  interests  of  mankind  will  be  greatly  promoted  by  the  proposed 
investigation,  tlie  undersigned  venture  to  indulge  the  hope  that  their  requests  will  be 
approved  and  sanctioned  by  the  wisdom  of  your  honorable  Body. 

"And  to  this  end  the  petitioners  will  ever  pray." 

General  Shields  having  cheerfully  undertaken  to  comply  with  Governor 
Talltnadge's  request,  proceeded  to  execute  his  commission  in  the  following 
speech,  which  is  a  verbatim  report  from  the  National  Intelligencer  of 
Washington,  bearing  date  April,  1854. 

Hon.  James  Shields  s^d : 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  131 

"'I  beg  kave  to  present  to  the  Senate  a  pelition  with  some  fifteen  thou5anii  names 
appended  to  it  upon  1  very  singular  and  novel  subject. 

"  '  The  petitioners  represent  that  eertain  phydcal  and  mental  phenomena  of  mysterious 
import  have  become  so  prevalent  in  this  country  and  Europe  as  to  engross  a  large  share 

"  [General  SWeLds  then  proceeded  to  give  a  summary  of  the  principal  features  of  the 
memorial,  the  reiteration  of  which  would  be  unnecessary  in  this  place.  At  the  conclusion 
of  that  portion  of  his  address  he  proceeded  as  follows ;] 

"  '  I  have  now  given  a  faithful  synopsis  of  this  petition,  which,  however  unprecedented  m 
itself,  has  been  prepared  with  angular  ability,  presenting  the  subject  with  great  delicacy  and 
moderation.  .-  r  ,  -    • 

" '  I  make  it  a  rule  to  present  any  petition  to  the  Senate  which  is  respectful  in  its  terms  ; 
but  having  discha^ed  this  duty  I  may  be  permitted  to  say  that  the  prevalence  of  this  delu- 
sion at  this  age  of  the  world  among  any  conaderable  portion  of  our  citiiens  must  originate, 
in  my  opmion,  in  a  defective  system  of  education,  or  in  a  partial  derangement  of  the  mental 
faculties,  produced  by  a  diseased  condition  of  the  ^hyacal  organiiation,  I  cannot,  therefore, 
believe  that  it  exists  to  the  extent  indicated  in  this  petition. 

"  '  Different  ages  of  the  world  have  had  thdr  peculiar  delusions.  Alchemy  occupied  the 
attention  of  eminent  men  for  several  centuries,  but  there  was  something  sublime  m 
alchemy.  The  pMlosopher's  stone  or  the  transmutation  of  metals  into  go'^;Xha  elixir 
viUe  which  would  preserve  youth  and  beauty,  and  prevent  old  age,  decay  and  death,  were 
blessings  wMch  poor  humanity  ardently  desured  and  which  alchemy  sought  to  discover  by 
perseverance  and  piety.  Rt^er  Bacon,  one  of  the  greatest  akhemists  and  greatest  men  of 
the  thirteenth  century,  while  searchmg  tor  the  philosopher's  stone,  discovered  the  telescope, 
burning'glasses,  and  gunpowder.  ,      ,  ,  ..  .         , 

"  '  The  prosecution  of  that  delusion,  therefore,  led  to  a  number  of  useful  discoveries.  In 
the  Mxteenth  century  Bourished  Cornelius  Agrippa,  alchemist,  astrologer,  and  magician,  one 
of  the  greatest  professors  of  the  hermetic  phihjsophy  that  ever  lived.  lie  had  aR  the  spints 
of  the  air  and  demons  of  the  earth  onder  his  command. 

.  "  '  Paulus  Jovius  says  '  that  the  devil,  in  the  shape  of  a  large  black  dog,  attended  Agrippa 
wherever  he  went.'  Thomas  Nash  says,  at  the  request  of  Lord  Surrey,  Agrippa  called 
up  from  the  grave  several  of  the  great  phUosophers  of  antiquity,  amongst  others,  Tully, 
wlio  he  caused  to  re-deliver  his  celebrated  oration  for  Roscius.  To  please  the  Emperor 
Charles  the  Fourth,  he  summoned  King  David  and  King  Solomon  from  the  tomb,  and 
the  Emperor  conversed  with  them  long  upon  the  science  of  government. 

"  '  This  was  a  glorious  exhibition  of  spiritual  power  compared  with  the  significant  manifes- 
tations of  the  present  day.  I  will  pass  over  the  celebrated  Paracelsus  for  the  purpose  of 
makin"  allusion  to  an  Englishman,  with  whose  veracious  history  every  one  ought  to  make 
himself  acquainted.  .  ... 

"  'In  the  ^teenth  century.  Dr.  Dee  made  such  progress  in  the  talismanic  art  that  he 
acquired  ample  power  to  hold  famiUar  conversation  with  the  spirits  and  augels,  and  to  learn 
from  them  all  the  secrets  of  the  universe.  On  one  occasion  the  angel  Uriel  gave  lura  a 
black  crystal  of  a  convex  form,  which  he  had  only  to  gaze  on  intently,  and  by  a  strong 
efl'ort  of  wiU,  he  could  summon  any  spirit  he  wUhed,  to  reveal  to  him  the  secrets  of 

"  '  Dee,  in  his  veracious  diary,  says,  '  that  one  day  while  he  was  atting  with  Albertus  Las- 
kin,  a  Polish  nobleman,  there  seemed  to  come  out  of  the  oratory  a  spiritual  creature  like  a 
pretty  ^rl  of  seven  or  nine  years  old,  with  her  hair  rolled  up  before  and  hanging  down 
behind;  with  a  gown  of  changeable  red  and  green,  and  a  train.  She  seemed  to  play  in  and 
out  of  the  books  and  up  and  down,  and  as  she  went,  the  books  displaced  themselves  to  make 

"  '  This  i  call  ^iritual  manifestations  of  the  most  fascinating  kmd.  Even  the  books  felt 
the  influence  of  this  fascinating  creature. 

" '  Edward  Kelly,  an  Irishman,  who  was  present  and  witnessed  this  beautiful  apparition, 
verifies  the  Doctor'5  statements  therefore  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  doubt  a  story  of  which 
the  witness  was  an  Irishman.  (Laughter).  Doctor  Dee  was  the  distinguished  favorite  of 
kings  and  queens— a  proof  that  spiritual  science  was  held  in  high  repute  m  the  days  of 
good  Queen  Elizabeth. 

"  '  But  of  all  the  professors  of  occult  science  the  Roacrucians  were  the  most  exalted  and 
refined.  With  them  the  philosopher's  stone  implied  the  possession  of  health  and  happiness, 
command  over  the  service  of  superior  beings,  control  of  the  elements,  and  the  most  intimate 
knowledge  of  aU  the  secrets  of  the  universe.  These  were  objects  worth  striving  for. 
The  Ro^crucians  were  difgusted  with  the  gross  sensual  spirits  who  had  corarauned  with 
man  previous  to  their  day,  so  they  decreed  their  annihUation  and  substituted  in  their  stead 

Hosted  by  Google 

132  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

a  race  of  mild,  beautiful,  and  beneficent  beings.  The  spirits  of  the  olden  times  were 
malignant  and  mischievous,  but  the  new  generation  is  mild  and  benignant. 

"  '  These  spirits,  as  this  petition  asserts,  indulge  in  the  most  innocent  amusements,  as  slid- 
ing, raising,  tipping  tables,  producing  pleasant  sounds  and  variegated  lights ;  sometimes  curing 
diseases;  and  for  tlie  existence  of  this  simple  and  benignant  race,  our  petitioners  are  justly 
indebted  to  the  brethera  of  the  '  Rosy  Cross.' 

"  'Amongst  the  modem  professors  of  spiritualistic  art,  Cagliostro  was  the  most  celebrated. 
In  Paris  his  saloons  were  tiironged  with  the  rich  and  noble,  and  his  charming  countess 
pdned  immense  wealth  by  granting  attending  aylphs  to  such  ladies  as  were  rich  enough  to 
pay  for  their  service. 

"  '  The  '  Biographic  des  Contempores,'  a  work  which  our  present  mediums  ought  to  con- 
jult  with  care,  says,  '  there  was  hardly  a  fine  lady  in  Paris  who  would  not  sup  with  the 
shade  of  Lucretius  in  the  apartments  of  Cagliostro.  There  was  not  a  military  officer  who 
would  not  discuss  the  art  of  war  with  Gesar,  nor  a  counsellor  who  would  not  argue  points 
of  law  with  Cicero.'" 

"'These  were  spiritual  manifestations  worth  paying  ior,  and  our  degenerate  mediums 
.  would  have  to  hide  their  diminished  heads  in  the  presence  of  C^liostro. 

"'It  would  be  a  curious  inquiry  to  follow  this  occult  science  through  all  its  phases  of  min- 
eral and  animal  magnetism,  etc.,  until  we  teach  the  present  and  slowest  phase  of  all,  spirit- 
ual manifestations;  but  I  have  said  enough  to  show  the  truth  of  Buekles's  beautiful  aphor- 
ism, 'The  credulity  of  dupes  is  as  inexhaustible  as  the  invention  of  knaves,' 

"  This  speech  was  received  with  considerable  attention,  but  was  frequently  interrupted 
by  laughter. 

"  Mr.  Weller— What  does  the  Senator  propose  to  do  with  the  petition? 

"Mr.  Petit  —  I.et  it  be  referred  to  three  thousand  clergymen,     (Laughter.) 

"Mr.  Weller--!  surest  that  it  be  referred  to  the  committee  on  foreign  relations. 
(Laughter.) 

"Mr.  Shields — I  am  willing  to  agree  to  the  reference. 

"Mr.  Weller — It  may  be  that  we  may  have  to  enter  into  foreign  relations  with  these 

JDirits.  (Laughter.)  If  so,  it  is  a  proper  subject  for  the  consideration  of  that  committee, 
t  may  be  necessary  for  Americans  to  inquire  if  they  lose  their  citizenship  when  they  leave 
this  world.  It  may  be  expedient  that  all  these  grave  questions  should  be  considered  by  the 
committee  on  foreign  relations,  of  which  I  am  an  humble  member.  I  move  its  reference  to 
that  committee. 

"  Mr.  Mason— I  really  think  it  has  been  made  manifest  by  the  honorable  Senator  who  has 
presented  the  petition,  that  he  has  gone  further  into  the  subject  than  any  of  us.  I  vrould,  there- 
fore, suggest  that  it  should  either  go  to  a  select  committee  on  his  motion,  or  be  referred  to  the 
military  committee,  of  which  he  is  chiurman.  Certainly  the  committee  on  foreign  relations 
has  nothing  to  do  with  it.    Perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  let  the  petition  lie  upon  the  table. 

"Mr.  Shields— This  is  an  important  subject,  and  diould  not  be  sneered  away  in  this 
manner.  (Loud  laughter.)  I  was  willing  to  agree  to  the  motion  of  the  Senator  from  Cali- 
fornia, but  I  do  not  wish  the  petition  to  go  to  the  committee  on  foreign  relations  unless  the 
chairman  of  that  committee  is  perfectly  satisfied  that  he  can  do  the  subject  justice.  (Laugh- 
ter.) 

' '  I  had  thought  of  proposing  to  refer  the  matti 
post  roads,  because  there  may  be  a  possibility  of  est 
the  materkl  and  the  spiritual  world.     (Laughter. ) 

"  Mr.  Mason — I  move  that  the  petition  lie  upon  the  table.     Agreed  to." 

It  is  almost  unnecessary  to  state  that  the  conduct  of  General  Shields,  in 
following  up  the  memorial  which  he  had  undertaken  to  present  by  a  speech 
which  was  calculated  to  destroy  every  vestige  of  interest  or  importance  con- 
tained in  that  document,  excited  the  just  indignation  of  the  memorialists, 
and  called  forth  a  scathing  protest  from  Governor  Tallraadge.  To  this  Gen- 
eral Shields  replied  by  a  few  lines  of  defence  on  the  strictly  Congressional 
character  of  his  proceedings.  Courtesy,  honor,  sincerity,  a  love  of  science 
or  respect  for  religion,  making  no  part  in  his  conduct  on  the  occasion,  of 
course  found  no  place  in  his  defence;  he  had  acted  within  ike  rules  and priv- 
ilegei  of  the  Senate,  and  so  the  matter  terminated. 

The  memorial  was,  as  ordered,  "laid  upon  the  table;"  but  according  to 
die  law  in  such  cases  provided,  it  is  still  preserved  in  the  national  archives, 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  I33 

where  it  remdns  as  an  evidence  that  in  those  days  there  were  at  least  fifteen 
thousand  persons  in  the  land  who  were  better  infomied  on  the  philosophy  of 
mental  science  and  the  high  interests  of  immortality  than  their  elected 
representatives. 

Another  movement  of  important  though  more  local  interest  to  the  cause 
of  Spirituahsm,  was  die  formation  of  a  society  in  New  York  City,  which  was 
chartered  under  the  title  of  "  The  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Spiritual  Knowl- 
edge." Tl  nembe  s  1  red  a  bu  Id  ng  at  553  Broadway,  where  tbey  designed 
to  hold  circles  confere  ce  and  d  scussions,  and  establish  a  printing  press, 
hbrary,  and  all  the  apparat  s  ece  sary  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  purposes 
signified  in  the  r    tie 

The  list  of  nanes  appe  ded  to  the  first  year's  report  includes,  as  will  be 
seen,  many  of  the  n  ost  d  btingu  shed  citizens  of  various  States  besides  New 
York.  It  must  also  be  noted  that  several  of  the  more  prominent  Sphitualists 
of  that  city  did  not  figure  in  diis  list  at  all.  For  the  year  1854,  the  follow- 
ing officers  were  appointed : 

GOVERNOK.  Nathaniel  P.  Tallmadge,  Wisconsin, 

CHef  Justice  Joseph  Williams,  Iowa.  Gen.  Edward  F.  Bullard,  New  York, 

Judge  Willie  P.  Fowler,  Kentucky.  Hon.  Richard  D.  Davis,  New  York. 

Judge  R.  P.  SpaULDING,  Ohio.  Dr.  George  T.  Dexter,  New  York. 

Judge  Chas.  H.  Larrabee,  Wisconsin.  Maj.  George  W.  Raines,  U.  S.  A. 

Horace  H.  Day,  New  York.  E.  W,  Bailev,  Pennsylvania, 

Hon.  Warren  Chase,  Wisconsin.  Phineas  E.  Gay,  Massachusetts. 
Dr,  David  Corey,  Illinois. 

Nathaniel  E.  Wood,  Chemist,  New  York. 

Besides  these  officers,  Trustees,  Advisory,  Executive,  and  Corresponding 
Committees  were  formed,  including  the  names  of  the  most  prominent  and 
respectable  citizens  in  America.  The  society  inaugurated  their  commence- 
ment by  an  address,  from  which  the  following  extracts  will  serve  as 
examples  : 

"But  a  few  short  years  ago,  in  an  obscure  locality,  and  under  circumstances  which 
seemed  to  warrant  tie  belief  in  an  early  termination  of  the  so-called  dream,  Spiritualism,  in 
its  present  form,  was  born.  Its  few  advocates,  in  the  early  days  of  its  life,  were  looked 
upon  as  lunatics— were  despised  for  their  faith;  and  men  of  respectability  and  standing  m 
sodety  could  hardly  be  found  who  were  willing  to  examine  into  the  facts  connected  with  the 
alleged  phenomena,  foe  fear  of  the  reproach  of  the  entire  unbelieving  community.  Since 
that  period.  Spiritualism  has  extended  with  a  rapidity  unprecedented  in  tlie  annals  of  the 
world,  until,  to-day,  it  has  become  a  respectable  powei'  in  society.  Men  whose  education 
and  genius  have  fitted  them  for  occupying  the  highest  stations,  dther  in  politics  or  in  the 
churdi,  have  sacrificed  all  poations  of  earthly  aggiandizement  for  the  sake  of  what  they 
believe  to  be  the  enjoyment  of  high  and  holy  truth. 

.  .  .  .  "  Citizens  of  the  United  Slates,  we  feel  authority  for  saying  that  Hie  day  for 
raiang  the  cry  of  humbug,  chicanery,  or  delusion,  has  passed  away  forever.  You  know,  all 
of  you  who  iava  reftective  nunds,  that  the  application  of  these  terras  to  this  subject  can  no 

Hosiedb,  Google 

134  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

longer  produce  results  J  but  that  rather  these  invectives,  launched  at  your  supposed  enemies, 
will  rebound  upon  yourselves,  and  cover  you  with  shame.  Your  professed  teachers,  your  men 
in  high  places,  the  learned  of  your  universities,  theeloqaent  of  your  pulpils,  have  dealt  in  them 
long  enough.  And  what  results  have  they  achieved  ?  The  theories  which  the  universities  se:^ t 
forth  to  account  for  the  alleged  plienomena,  as  they  were  pleased  to  term  them,  have  not 
only  rendered  their  authors,  but  the  universities,  ridiculous  in  the  minds  of  intelligent 

"Your  pulpits — and  we  mean  Idndly  when  we  speak  of  them,  for  they  have  a  holy  office, 
whether  they  perform  that  office  or  no — your  pulpits  have  launched  forth  invectives.  The 
cry  of  dduaon  and  cMeanery  has  been  h^rd  all  over  the  land.  It  produced  no  effect,  ex- 
cept upon  the  churches  themselves;  and  that  course  was  abandoned.  Policy  was  now 
adopted;  another  plan  was  accepted  as  the  true  one  for  accounting  for  the  spiritual  mani- 
festations,  and  which  has  been  promulgated,  not  only  from  the  pulpits,  but  by  the  religious 

Sress  of  this  country— namely,  that  evil  spirits  have  visited  the  earth,  still  further  to  ddude 
eluded  mortals. 
"It  is  very  strange,  if  they  believe  that  evil  spirits  can  come  to  do  evil  on  this  earth,  that 
good  spirits  will  not  be  penmtted  by  the  good  God  also  to  come  to  effect  good  purposes  ! 
We  profess  to  believe  both  these  propositions.  We  leave  you  to  examine  the  subject  for 
yourselves,  and  we  tell  you,  if  you  will  render  your  roinds  receptive  to  the  truth,  and  engage 
in  the  invest^tion  of  this  subject,  it  will  appear  that  spirits,  both  good  and  evil,  do  come 
here  upon  the  earth,  among  their  friends  aiiS  relatives,  and  teach  them  good  things  and 
bad."  

From  causes  which  we  deem  it  unnecessary  to  discuss  here,  this  society 
proved  but  one  of  numerous  illustrations  that  there  is  something  in  the  genius 
of  Spiritualism,  wliich  up  to  the  present  time  at  least,  has  proved  radically  op- 
posed to  organization.  In  various  sections  of  the  country  spiritual  organ- 
izations had  been  tried,  and  uniformly  ended  in  disappointment  and  failure ; 
these  movements  will  be  more  particularly  noticed  hereafter,  but  in  reference 
to  the  one  under  consideration,  it  is  enough  to  say,  its  career  of  a  little  over 
three  years  forms  no  exception  to  the  rule  alluded  to.  The  society  at  553 
Broadway  can  scarcely  lay  claim  to  have  carried  out,  as  a  body,  any  of  the 
propositions  with  which  they  started ;  although  some  very  valuable  utiUtarian 
results  were  achieved,  yet  it  is  but  justice  to  say  that  such  results  did  not  pro- 
ceed from  the  society,  but  rather  from  one  of  its  members,  Mr.  Horace  H, 
Day,  a  distinguished  merchant  of  the  city,  whose  name  was  at  the  head  of 
the  list  of  the  executive  committee. 

Soon  after  the  opening  of  the  building,  it  assumed  a  character  entirely 
different  to  that  which  had  been  anticipated  in  its  inauguration.  A  feeling  of 
prejudice  against  the  undertaking  had  been  cherished  by  some  of  the  New 
York  SpirituaUsts,  who  found  themselves  excluded  from  the  initiatory  councils, 
and  "  after  having  borne  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day  in  the  early  pioneer 
work  of  the  city,"  deemed  themselves  slighted  by  those  who  had  "  come  into 
the  vineyard  at  comparatively  the  eleventh  hour." 

These  and  similar  statements  were  made  to  the  prejudice  of  the  society  in 
its  first  sessions,  but  after  the  usual  experimental  period  had  elapsed,  and  es- 
pecially after  it  was  proved  that  as  an  association  the  movement  could  not 
be  considered  a  success,  its  promoters  and  opposers,  each  alike  returned  to 
the  fiilfilment  of  the  special  work  their  liands  found  to  do,  and  the  undertak- 
ing bravely  and  faithfully  sustained,  as  before  hinted,  by  Mr.  Horace  H.  Day, 
put  into  action  the  following  instrumentahties :  A  paper  was  started,  entitled 
The  Oiristian  Spiritualist.  A  limited  subscription  hst,  but  a  very  large  gra- 
tuitous circulation,  enabled  this  paper  for  three  years  to  become  a  missionary 
for  a  wide-spread  field  of  usefulness.  Miss  Kate  Fox  was  engaged  at  a  liberal 
salary  to  hold  daily  stances  through  rapping,  writing,  and  the  phases  of  niedi- 
umship  peculiar  to  her,  at  which  the  public  were  admitted  free  each  morning 
from  ten  till  one. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  13S 

A  library  of  all  the  spiritual  works,  foreign  and  native,  that  could  be  pro- 
cured was  kept  for  sale  and  circulation,  under  the  chaise  of  Mr.  Munson. 
A  printing  office  was  also  established  on  tiie  premises,  and  the  use  of  a  hand- 
some room  was  generously  presented  to  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge,  who  had 
become  converted  to  Spiritualism  shortly  after  her  arrival  from  England,  and 
in  zeal  for  the  cause  of  her  new  faith  had  resolved  to  devote  her  powers  as  a 
test  medium,  gratuitously  to  the  service  of  the  public 

In  this  building,  then,  two  test  mediums  were  to  be  found,  at  the  command 
of  all  who  sought  them,  without  money  or  without  price.  It  is  not  too  niucli 
to  assert  that  thousands  who  brought  with  them  guilty  consciences,  broken 
hearts,  and  darkened  minds,  entered  the  rooms  of  Kate  Fox  and  Emma  Har- 
dinge to  quit  them  with  renewed  purposes  for  good,  strengthened  and  con- 
soled by  the  ministry  of  angels,  and  convinced  of  die  sublime  truths  of 
immortality.  The  fact  that  this  bread  of  life,  too,  was  dispensed  without  the 
usual  sordid  incentives  to  action  which  necessity  too  often  compels  the  poor 
spirit  medium  to  resort  to,  in  exchange  for  time,  which  is  bread,  made  a  pro- 
found impression  on  those  who  thronged  tliese  circle  rooms,  and  induced  a 
natural  feehng  of  confidence  in  the  disinterestLdness  of  tiie  source  from 
whence  the  power  came. 

It  seems  here  essential  to  the  thread  of  the  history  to  record  a  few  circum- 
stances in  the  mediumship  of  one  who  has  since  played  a  prominent  part  in 
the  spiritual  movement,  and  therefore  as  much  for  the  sake  of  fidelity  in  his- 
tory as  in  response  to  the  repeated  solicitations  of  her  friends  and  fellow- 
workers,  the  author  will  introduce  a  few  extracts  from  her  own  life,  or  "  Au- 
tobiographical Sketches  by  Emma  Hardinge,"  sphitual  lecturer,  and  the  me- 
dium above  alluded  to. 

"At  this  juncture  [1855],  to  b^uile  the  tedium  and  monot- 
ony of  my  life,  I  suffered  myself  to  be  taken  to  a  strange,  unheard-of  thing  or  person  — 
I  hardly  knew  which — called  a  "medium.'  I  wanted  amusement,  which  was  one  reason 
for  my  investigation ;  I  wanted  to  cany  back  to  Europe  with  me  subjects  for  tacy 
articles  on  America,  for  the  benefit  of  certain  journals  to  which  I  was  a  contributor,  and 
this  was  a  second  reason  ;  and  nothmg  I  had  heard  of  ance  my  residence  in  America  (all 
of  which  I  of  course  deemed  could  be  comprehended  in  as  months  of  New  York  experi- 
ence] struck  me  as  so  eminenfly  ridiculous,  and  illustrative  of  the  technical  phrase,  '  Yan- 
kee notions,'  as  the  daring  humbug  which  pretended  to  give  cotnmunications  from  heaven 
itself. 

"Let  any  of  my  readers  educated  in  strict  orthodox  f^th,  recall  their  eariy  theold^c  opin- 
ions concemmg  ghosts,  death,  resurrection,  heaven,  hell,  spirits,  and  angels,  and  even  then 
they  will  form  but  a  faint  conception  of  a  rather  piously-inclined  young  EnglisJi  girl's  hor- 
ror when  informed  that  souls  in  bliss  descended  from  their  bright  abodes  to  make  tables 
dance ;  and  that  angels  left  '  the  throne  of  God'  to  say  their  dphabets  lo  earth,  and  tell 
its  mhabitants  the  price  of  stocks  and  the  best  time  to  buy  and  sell ! 

"  At  first  I  heard  of  '  the  thmg '  with  unmitigated  horror  and  indignation. 

"  Becoming  familiarized  with  what  they  said  about  '  the  spirits,'  much  of  which  I  heard 
from  some  persons  with  whom  I  boarded  and  certam  of  my  professional  visitors,  I  snbaded 
fromreligioushorror  into  thecertdntyof  t  be  t,  s"™  gross  and  lumsy  species  of  «a^c 
and  though  I  still  felt  indignant  at  the  p    t    se    f  a  tm    this  w  th  anything  so  sacred 

as  an  immortal  soul,  I  thought  I  might  lea  n  m  h  a  t  1st  f  the  people  from  the 
so-called  Spiritualists,  even  more  daringly  mpudent  m  tn  k  and  f  Uy  ttein  Bamum  anil 
U?. '■What  h  It.' 

"  It  vras  in  such  a  frame  of  mind,  and  w  th  su  h  tl   se    that  I  consented  to 

mvestigate  the  subject  of  Spiritualism. 

"  Under  such  a  stimulus  to  saarch,  I  ac    mpa     d  f     J  I"  Uow-boarders  to  the 

rooms  of  Mr.  J.  B.  Conklin.     A  large  p    ty  a,-*  mbl  J  t  every  one  of  whom 

was — in  singular  contrast  to  a  similar  as  nH  g  f  E  gl  h  p  pi  — very  pale,  ard,  as  I 
deemed,  from  that  circumstance,  rather  gh    t  hk 

"  This  was  a  good  beginning,  and  su^    ted  deas    i  mj  t  d  worn  with  midnight 

Hosiedb,  Google 

136  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

vigils  amongst  the  dead.  Presently  I  )ieard  some  of  those  sitting  at  tiie  table  talking 
familiarlj'  with  nothing,  and  responded  to  by  very  rude  and  clumsy  gyi-ations  of  the  table. 
Amused  at  tills  proofing,  which  really  looked  as  if  those  deluded  ones  were  in  earnest, 
I  quietly  directed  my  attention  to  the  table,  and,  though  unable  at  the  time  to  discover 
the  maclunery  by  which  it  was  moved,  I  knew  it  was  there.  I  knew  it  just  as  certainly  as 
did  Mr.  Farraday,  Sur  David  Brewster,  and  the  Harvard  Professors,  in  their  investigations 
with  tables,  and  from  the  same  reliable  source,  too — a  source  common  to  us  all — namely, 
our  ovra  insufferable  seit-conceit  and  untractable  prejudices. 

"All  passed  off  well,  however,  uotii  a  sentence  was  'spelled  oat,' which  seemed  to  me  to 
comment  irreverently  on  the  BiUe.  This  was  enough.  I  don't  know  now,  even  what  the 
sentence  was.  I  did  not  know  then,  whether  the  sentence  was  true  or  false.  It  was  sufficient 
for  me,  that  the  '  Holy  Word  of  God'  was  lightly  spoken  of  in  that  company  of  'ghouls,' 
and  that  I  impiously  sat  by  to  hear  it.  The  next  moment  I  was  in  the  street,  and  that 
right,  with  tearful  petitions  to  Heaven  for  foi^iveness  in  daring  to  hear—  I  did  not  know 
what  —  and  solemn  promises  never  again  to  listen  to  anything  abont  the  Bible  but  the  book 
itself,  I  dropped  to  sleep,  fervently  resolving  never  again  to  visit  so  blasphemous  a  place  as 
a  '  spirit  circle  ;'  a  promise  I  kept  for  the  space  of  a  whole  week.  And  so  ends  the  first 
chapter  in  my  Bpititual  experience." 

Mrs.  Hardinge  was  already  a  natural  medium,  and  endowed  with  the  fa- 
culties essential  to  the  control  of  spirits.  Her  "resolution"  was  her  own, 
her  destiny  under  the  influence  of  the  unseen  power  that  had  led  her  across 
the_  ocean,  to  the  Continent  of  America,  and  up  through  the  most  marvellous 
vicissitudes  of  life  and  fortune  to  this  hour. 

Here,  then,  the  hold  was  not  relaxed.  An  actress  at  the  Broadway  Theatre, 
she  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Augustus  Fenno,  who,  like  many  other 
members  of  the  theatrical  profession,  was  a  warm  Spiritualist  and  an  excel- 
lent trance  and  writing  medium.  At  his  suggestion,  Mrs.  Hardinge  consented 
to  visit  Mrs.  Coan,  a  young  married  lady,  who  had  lately  arrived  in  New 
York  and  established  herself  as  a  test,  rapping,  writing,  and  clairvoyant 
medium. 

At  the  time  of  Mrs.  Hardinge's  first  visit,  Mrs.  Coan  was  giving  skmces 
to  the  public  of  New  York,  and  was  only  introduced  to  her  visitor  by  Mr, 
Fenno,  as  "Miss  Emma  Hardinge  [so  known  in  public],  from  England." 

[Here  follows  a  brief  description  of  this  stance,  tlie  insertion  of  which  wUI 
illustrate  the  charcter  of  what  was  then  known  as  '.'  test  mediumship."] 

"  My  friend  Mr.  Augustus  Fenno,  so  captivated  me  with  the  promise  of  revelations 
through  '  the  raps,'  and  assurances  that  spirit-rappings  were  rarely  of  a  theological  charac- 
ter, that  I  consented  to  aceomjKmy  him  to  visit  the  now-celebtated  Miss  Ada  Hoyt.* 

"  Dire  were  the  misgivings  with  which  I  set  out  on  this  second  investigation,  and  btense 
the  disgust  with  which  the  cool  indifference  of  Miss  Hoyt's  manner  inspired  me.  A  me- 
dium for  departed  spirits,  I  thought,  should  be,  if  not  saintly,  witdi-llke  in  appearance  ;  if 
not  ecstatic  in  gesture  and  speech,  weird-like  and  fantastic;  and  so  the  perfectly  pbiu 
matter-of-fact  cteiracleristics  of  this  live  medium  threw  me  fairly  hors  du  combat. 

"  Arrived  there,  however,  I  scorned  to  retreat ;  and  yet  if  dislike  and  determined 
scepticism  could  have  an  invariably  neutralizing  effect  on  spiritual  manifestations,  I  could 
not  at  this  day  be  writing  my  spiritual  experiences. 

"  I  have  too  often  marvelled  at  the  foolish  verbosity  which  induces  people  to  rehearse 
over  the  tests  they  have  received,  and  read  whole  p^es  of  purely  i)evsonal  communications  to 
others  entirely  unmterested,  to  inflict  the  same  penalty  on  my  readers;  let  it  suffice,  then, 
to  state  that  I  rose  up  after  a  two  hours'  siance  with  Miss  Hoyt,  having  received  all  the  or- 
dinary tests  of  name,  age,  death,  etc.,  froin  almost  every  relative  and  friend  I  had  m  the 
spirit-world.  And  those  obstinate,  clear  raps  came,  not  only  on  the  (able  and  under  it, 
but  on  the  walls,  my  chau-,  following  my  footsteps  around  the  room,  and  m  every  conceivable 
way  that  could  assure  me  they  were  not  produced  by  machmery  connected  either  with  the 
table  or  tiie  person  of  the  medium.     Thus  far  1  was  satisfied— that  is  to  say,  of  the  entire 

*  Mrs.  CooH.     This  lady  hai  since  been  more  gf  netajly  known  by  her  maiden  nams  of  Ada  Hoyt. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  13  7 

absence  of  any  imposture  or  delusion.  Miss  Hoyt,  to  my  inexpressible  dlE^vist,  assnred  ine 
that  I  was  rayself  '  a  great  medium,'  an  ci^resaoii  reiterated  through  the  raps  by  the  in- 
visibles; hence,  she  asserted,  the  m^iifestalionswere  more  than  usually  clear  and  abundant; 
certain  it  is  that  the  chief  of  my  questions  were  unspoken,  and,  therefore,  responded  to  by 
some  intelligence  capable  of  reading  my  mind. 

"  This,  together  with  the  numter  of  names  and  trivial  circumstances  of  identity  that 
were  volunteered  by  the  rappers,  deprived  me  of  the  remotest  chance  of  attributing  the 
communications  to  the  minds  of  any  one  present,  including  my  own.  This  s&aiice  termi- 
nated with  instructions  for  me  'to  fjt  for  conamunicat ions'  tiu-ovigh  myself,  a  proposition 
as  startling  to  me  as  it  was  embarrasang,  ^nce  the  idea  of  my  putting  myself  in  an  attitude 
of  preparation  for  the  performances  a/  g/iosis,  opened  up  to  me  a  train  of  proba- 
bilities beginning  with  tlie  Witch  of  Endor,  and  concluding  with  the  Devil  and  Dr. 
Faastus. 

"Returned  home,  the  confesaon  of  my  second  visit  to  a  medium  drew  from  my  mother 
a  mild  but  emphatic  declaration  that,  although  she  had  hitherto  followed  my  erratic  footsteps 
over  the  wide  world,  and  was  still  ready  to  shelter  nie,  even  in  disgrace,  or  accompany  me, 
if  needs  were,  to  the  grave,  yet  for  this  liorrible  and  blasphemous  subj  ect  she  had  no  sym- 

Ehy,  and  ^ould  I  stiil  perast  in  its  inveMigation,  I  might  prepare  to  see  her  depart  for 
gfend  by  the  nest  ship ;  for  t>eneath  the  roof  where  such  abominations  viexe  practiced, 
she  never  would  consent  to  stay. 

"Finding  that  I  was  fat  more  deposed  to  echo  her  sentiments  than  oppose  them,  my 
mother  ne:it  mquired  of  me  the  result  of  the  weird  interview  I  had  come  from.  In  answer, 
I  read  her,  without  conimeat,  the  questions  and  answers  that  formed  the  siance,  together 
with  the  notes,  in  full,  of  the  whole  scene,  and  then  it  was  that  plain  common  sense  tri- 
umphed over  bigotry  and  prejudice.  The  latter  amiable  qualities  with  which,  I  believe,  I 
was  liberally  endowed,  blinded  my  eyes  to  the  reasonableness  of  attributing  all  the  mass  of 
intelligence  my  notes  revealed  to  its  true  source  ;  but  when  my  unprejudiced,  common-sense 
mother  heard  precious  little  sentences  read,  and  tests  rehearsed,  too  clearly  identical  vrith 
her  son,  husband,  father,  and  dearest  relatives,  to  be  by  any  possibility  mistaken  for  others, 
and  when  by  plain  straight -forward  questions  she  succeeded  in  eliciting  from  me  a  perfect 
detail  of  the  whole  scene,  her  reason  recognized  the  spiritual  truth  as  the  only  solution  of 
the  problem,  and  after  making  me  go  over  and  over  j^jun  the  instructions  I  had  received 
as  to  sitting  at  a  table  for  development,  she  closed  this  chapter  of  my  spiritual  experience 
by  placing  a  small  table  before  me,  and  herself  and  a  young  lady,  at  that  time  visiting  us,  on 
the  opposite  ^e,  with  our  .three  ]>airs  of  hands  solemnly  sjwead  out  on  its  surface,  and 
there,  ui  awful  silence,  we  sat  '  waiting  for  the  sfarits.' " 

"For  many  succeeding  days  at  every  available  leisure  moment  we  continued  thb  mystical 
arrangement,  sometimes  with  our  ample  trio,  and  occasionally  joined  by  other  marvel- 
seekers  of  our  own  stamp.  We  were  'waiting  for  the  spirits,'  and  as  I  imagined  the  only 
mode  of  obtaining  spiritual  communications  was  by  raps  or  tips,  and  neither  of  these  forms 
were  manifested,  so  I  deemed  we  waited  in  vdn.  Meantime  I  was  perplexed  and  my  friends 
alarmed  by  the  singular  effect  of  these  attings  on  myself.  If  the  table  did  not  move  of  it- 
self, it  kept  up  a  perpetual  St.  Vitus's  dance  in  vibration  to  my  own  involuntary  movements, 
especially  of  my  resistless,  constantly  twitching  hands,  poundings,  jerkings,  grimacings  and 
all  the  fonnute  of  physical  development,  succeeding  each  other  with  such  violence  and  ra- 
pidity that  I  should  soon  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  I  was  completely  bewitched,  had 
I  not  fortunately  received  a  visit  from  a  gentleman  well  versed  ia  these  preliminary  medi- 

"From  him  1  learned  that  there  were  many  other  spiritual  gifts  besides  those  I  had  wit- 
nessed, and  in  a  course  of  exercises  which  this  high  priest  put  me  through,  he  pronounced 
me  to  be  a  fine  'magnetic,  psydiologic,  sympathetic,  clairvoyant,  clairaudient,*  and  every 
other  kind  of  fine  subject  generally,  concluding  with  the  promise  to  take  me  to  a  celebrat- 
ed public  medium,   through  whose  influence,   he  felt  confident,  I  should  be  'developed 

"  In  proof  of  the  excessive  distrust  that  possessed  my  mind  at  this  time,  I  replied  to  this 
latter  offer,  that  I  would  go,  provided  he  would  take  me  then  and  there,  without,  as  I 
thought,  allowing  any  time  or  opportunity  for  collusion ;  for,  uncertain  what  the  process  of 
'development'  might  be,  or  what  fearful  changes  I  might  suffer  by  becoming  a  medium,  I 
at  least  resolved  to  march  to  the  sacrifice  with  my  eyes  open.  My  friend,  no  doubt  appre- 
hending the  nature  of  ray  very  flattering  distrust  of  himself,  good-naturedly  replied  that  he 
would  just  step  over  to  his  store  and  return  at  once  and  fetch  me.  But  I  would  go  with 
him,  and  go  with  him  I  did,  carefully  watching  him  to  see  that  he  did  not  write  some  secret 
paper  to  be  slipped  into  some  one's  hand  with  mysterious  instructions  to  do  sonie  anknowa 
thing  with  me ;  and  so  carefully  did  I  scrutinise  every  look,  word,  and  movement,  that  I 
could  have  testified  on  oath  that  I  never  lost  ^ht  ot^my  conductor  for  one  ^gle  instant. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

138  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

until  I  stood  with  him  in  an  upper  room  in  Broadway,  where  a  lai^  party  were  already 
gathered  together  to  hold  a  circle  with  Mrs.  Kellogg,  one  of  the  best  test  mediums  I  ever 
had  the  good  fortune  to  meet,  and  withal  an  accomplished  and  interesting  lady." 

[The  lady  here  referred  to  as  Mrs.  Kello^  was  one  of  the  best  public  mediums  in  the 
city.  She  had  rooms  in  Broadway  where  visitors  were  received  at  stated  periods,  and  from 
whence  sceptics  by  thousands  went  away  convinced  through  her  inimitable  gifts  as  a  clair- 
voyant, writing,  seeing,  and  speaking  medium.  Her  interview  with  Emma  Hardinge  exer- 
cised so  marked  an  effect  upon  tlie  author's  subsequent  career  in  the  cause  of  Spiritualism, 
that  it  is  deemed  in  place  to  insert  the  extract  in  full  from  her  "Autobiographical  Sketches."] 

"Let  the  reader  who  followed  me  to  the  house  of  tbis  kdy,  where,  according  to  my 
friend's  promise  I  was  to  be  'developed  right  away,'  ima^e  a  person  totally  ignorant  of 
the  meaning  of  this  phrase,  finding  herself  in  a  room  full  of  strangers,  in  v^ue  anticipation 
of  some  mild  kind  of  surgical  operation,  by  which  a  rational  being  in  a  perfectly  natural 
state  of  existence  was  suddenly  to  be  converted  into  a  modern  prototype  of  the  woman  of 
Endor.  Awaiting  my  mysterious  fate  with  direful  misgivings,  1  was  suddenly  addressed  by 
the  lady  medium  — ^to  whom,  by  my  own  request,  I  mid  no  introduction,  and  from  whose 
notice  I  had  sedulously  shrunk  away — with  the  words  'Come  here  ^id  sit  with  me ;  you  are 
a  great  medium.'  Obedient  to  her  commanding  gestuies,  I  seated  myself  at  the  ma^ic  ta. 
ble,  when  the  lady  began  rubbing  my  hand  with  considerable  enei^,  but  complaining  all 
the  while  that  I  wore  a  silk  dress.  Why  I  should  not  do  so  was  more  than  I  could  divine; 
but  before  I  could  even  arrange  a  question  in  words  to  this  effect,  astrange,  misty  sensation 
came  over  me,  which  so  completely  obscured  my  faculties  that  an  endeavor  to  recall  who  I 
was,  and  where,  only  ended  in  convincing  me  that  I  was  a  highly-respectable  old  gentleman, 
in  wMch  character  I  gave  what  I  was  Sterwards  informed  were  some  remarkable  person- 
ating tests  of  spirit  identity  to  several  strangers  in  the  room.  To  recapitulate  the  events 
and  sensations  of  that  evening — the  first  of  my  test  mediumistic  experience — would  be 
neither  pos^ble  nor  profitable.  It  is  enough  to  record  that  the  touch  of  Mrs.  Kello^s 
hand  appeared  like  a  magician's  wand,  illummating  the  latent  firesof  magnetic  power,  which, 
once  enkindled,  ever  after  burned  in  the  steady  light  of  mediumistic  gifts. 

"  During  the  three-hours  seaiice  of  that  evening,  it  was  found  that  I  could  give  tests  of 
spirit  identity  by  personations,  impresaons,  writing,  and  aiitomaticmovemenfsof  my  fingers 
over  the  alphabet.  All  present  seemed  much  more  interested  in  this  sudden  and  unexpected 
development  than  myself,  its  subject,  who,  to  confess  the  truth,  was  so  bewildered  with  my 
own  marvellous  performances,  beades  being  half  the  time  lost  m  the  identity  of  the  spirits 
who  were  influencmg  me,  that  I  was  far  more  disposed  to  question  my  own  identity  than 
that  of  any  of  the  spirits  I  was  said  to  represent. 

"  The  experience  of  most  investigators  in  the  spiritual  pMlosophy  has  shown  that  no  tests 
are  thoroughly  convincing  to  individual  mmds,  which  are  not  addressed  to  the  mdividoal's 
own  knowledge  and  reason ;  hence,  all  I  did  by  way  of  convincing  others  that  night  would 
have  failed  to  impress  myself  with  any  other  belief  than  that  of  an  unnatural  and  foreign 
influence  upon  me,  had  not  some  of  the  tests  been  addressed  to  myself  in  automatic  writing, 
which,  though  produced  by  my  own  hand — being  written  upside  down,  and  requiring  to  be 
held  up  to  the  light  for  perusal — convinced  me  my  own  mind  was  not  the  originator  of  the 
sentences. 

"One  of  these  contamed  simply  these  words — '  Ton  —  Find  a  great  sea-snahe  P 
"The  name  of  an  only  and  idolized  brother  was  here  written,  and  with  it,  the  last  words 
I  ever  heard  him  utter  on  earth  ;  namely,  a  charge  that  I — a  anger — would  find  for  him  (he 
words  of  an  old  sea-song,  of  which  he  was  pasaonately  fond,  and  which  he  had  be^ed  me  to 
learn  to  sing  for  his  gratification.  He  spoke  this  sentence  as  he  was  departing  on  his  last 
earthly  voyage,  from  which  he  never  came  back  again. 

' '  These  utterances  of  the  lost  sailor-boy  were  foi^tteti,  in  the  whirlwind  of  grief  for  his 
death,  far,  far,  at  sea,  which  swallowed  up  ail  minor  details,  until,  after  an  absence  of  ten 
years,  what  I  had  been  taught  to  believe  the  impassable  gulf  of  eternity  stood  revealed  before 
me,  as  a  bridge,  on  which  stood  my  beloved  and  lost,  smilingly  repeating  that  sentence, — too 
trifling  to  have  been  preserved  in  the  solemn  archives  of  death- memories,  but  too  surely  iden- 
tical vrith  the  precious  dead  lo  be  repeated  by  any  but  his  own  very  self. 

"  In  scornful  unbelief  of  the  power  I  was  mvestigating,  I  had  said  to  my  conductor, 
before  entering  the  drcle  room,  '  If  all  you  tell  me  of  Spiritualism  be  true,  and  they  succeed 
in  making  me  one  of  these  wonderful  medituns,  I  will  return  to  England  and  make  my  for- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  I39 

benefit  of  the  worlcl,  but — repeating  my  own  careless  words — that,  so  far  from  usmg  lliose 
gifts  to  make  my  fortune,  I  was  never  to  take  fee  or  reward  for  medtumdiip,  nor  would  tlie 
^irit  communicating  release  me  from  the  strong  control  in  which  I  was  held,  until  I  roiide 
pledges  before  the  witnesses  then  present,  first,  that  1  would  devote  my  gifts  to  the  service 
of  others ;  and  next,  that  I  would  not  take  fee  or  reward  for  the  same.  As  this  was  not  the 
custom  of  my  hostess,  who  was  a.  professbnal  medium— neither  was  it  my  own  views  in 
the  matter — this  charge  could  have  been  no  emanation  from  either  her  mind  or  mine. 
And,  in  justice  to  the  many  self-sacrificmg  mediums,  who  have  resigned  other  and  more 
lucrative  employments  to  give  their  services  to  the  public  in  re[uni  for  fees  so  modest  that 
tbey,  too  often,  fail  lo  supply  the  wants  ot  those  who  demand  them,  I  must  here  add  tliat 
the  objection  of  my  spirit  friends  to  taking  pay  for  mediumship  was  special  to  my  own-case. 

"It  seemed  they  perceived  in  me  the  capacity  to  exercise  many  forms  of  meiomship,  all  of 
which  they  desired  should  simply  be  nsed  as  means  to  prepare  me  for  being  a  lecturer — adestiny 
which  I  should  then  have  contemplated  with  so  much  disgust  that,  if  apprised  of  it,  I  should, 
in  all  probability,  have  ceased  my  investigations  at  once.  But,  though  the  reasons  were  not 
then  given  me,  I  have  smce  learned  to  appeeiate  the  excellence  and  wisdom  of  the  advice. 

"  By  not  becommg  a  professional  medium,  I  neither  felt  anxiety  to  please  my  sitters  nor 
temptation  to  impose  when  the  power  failed  roe.  Beades  this,  I  passed  through  many 
phases  too  rapidly  to  be  available  as  a  stereot;^d  test  medium  for  any  special  gift,  and  thus 
I  had  the  happiness  of  doing  good  and  conferring  spu-itual  light  upon  those  who  sought  me, 
beade  gdnmg  a  vast  range  of  experience  and  unfettered  practice,  which  has  been,  and  still 
is,  of  incalculable  use  to  me  as  a  teacher  of  the  spiritual  philosophy. 

"All  this  I  can  now  perceive  'face  to  face;'  though  then,  I  may  truly  say,  I  could  only 
'  see  as  in  a  glass,  darkly. ' 

"  [As  many  contradictory  statements  have  been  circulated  respecting  the  first  mediumistit 
prophecies  of  the  loss  of  the  ship  Pacific,  which  excited  much  indignation  from  the  owner 
refully  as  posable  stifled  after  the  prophecy  was  found 
:he  narrative,  as  originally  recorded  by  the  author ;] 

"  I  mentioned  in  a  former  paper  that  I  had  come  to  this  country  in  the  steamship  Pacific, 
one  of  the  Collins  line.  Ever  since  my  arrival  in  America  I  had  maintained  a  kindly  inter- 
course with  some  of  the  officials  of  the  ship,  between  whom  and  myself  little  offices  of  friend- 
ship were  exchanged  every  time  she  came  mto  port.  The  ship  Pacific  was  due  on  the  mem- 
.  orable  day  when  I  became  developed  as  a  medium. 

' '  On  Wednesday  I  went  down  to.  the  wharf  in  the  hope  of  receivmg  a  little  package  that 
was  to  be  sent  me  from  England  in  chai^  of  the  storelteeper,  an  officer  between  whom, 
my  mother,  and  myself,  the  most  kmdly  acquaintance  had  been  kept  up  ever  ance  our  landmg. 

"Tiie  ship  had  not  arrived,  and  no  tidings  were  received  of  her;  but  as  she  was  only 
due  some  thirty  hours  [the  season  rendered  it  likely  that  winter  storms  would  occasion  the 
delay  of  even  some  days]  no  anxiety  was  felt  in  consequence.  I  mentioned  the  circum- 
stance to  my  mother,  but  beyond  a  slight  expres^on  of  regret,  neither  of  us  commented  on 
the  matter. 

"  That  evening,  just  as  my  mother  and  myself  were  about  to  retue  for  the  night,  a  sud- 
den and  unusual  dull  crept  over  me,  and  an  irresistible  impression  possessed  my  mind  that 
■  a  spirit  had  come  into  our  presence.  A  sensation  as  if  water  was  streaming  over  me  ac- 
companied the  vsj  chilliness  I  experienced,  and  a  feeling  of  indescribable  (error  possessed 
my  whole  being.  I  be^ed  my  mother  to  light  up  every  lamp  we  had  at  hand ;  then  to 
open  the  door  that  the  proximity  of  people  m  the  house  outside  our  room  might  aid  to  dis- 
sipate the  horror  that  seemed  to  pervade  the  very  air.  At  last,  a,t  my  mother's  suggestion, 
I  consented  to  sit  at  the  table,  with  the  alphabet  we  had  provided  turned  from  me  and  to- 
ward her,  so  that  she  could  follow  the  involuntary  movements  of  my  finger,  which  some 
power  seemed  to  guide  ui  pointing  out  the  letters.  In  this  vray  was  rapidly  spelled  out, 
'  Philip  Smith  1  Ship  Pacific' 

"As  that  was  the  name  of  the  storekeeper  for  whom  I  had  been  only  tliat  day  inquiring, 
OUT  corioaty  and  interest  were  now  considerably  excited.  For  a  few  moments  this  mode  of 
manifestation  ceased,  and  to  my  horror,  I  distinctly  felt  an  icy  cold  Jiand  lay  hold  of  my 
arm  ;  then  distinctly,  and  visibly  to  my  mother's  eyes,  something  pulled  my  hair,  which  was 
hanging  in  long  curls ;  all  the  while  the  coldness  of  the  air  increasing  so  pamfully  that  the 
apartment  seemed  pervaded  by  Arctic  breezes.  After  a  while  my  own  convulsed  hand  was 
moved  tremblingly  but  very  rapidly  to  spell  out,  '  My  dear  Emma,  I  have  come  to  tell  you 
I  am  dead.  The  ship  Pacific  Is  lost,  and  all  on  board  have  perished  ;  she  and  her  crew  will 
never  be  heard  from  more.' 

"I  need  not  remind  my  readers  that  lliis  statement,  though  made  within  too  short  a  time 

Hosiedb,  Google 

I40  HISTORY  OF  MODERlf 

from  the  day  wlien  she  was  due,  to  permit  of  tlie  least  anxiety  to  be  felt  on  Iier  account, 
was  strictly  verified  by  subsequent  results.  The  ship  Pacific  aJid  her  ill-fated  crew  were 
never  heard  from  more  ;  and  despite  the  indignant  threats  of  prosecution  tliat  the  owners 
maile  against  the  '  impostors '  wlio  dared  to  predict  her  loss  on  the  faith  of  spiritual  com- 
ications,  which  both  myself  anil  others  to  wliom  I  named  the  facts  did  not  scruple  to  re- 
,  Phillip  Smith  and  some  few  of  his  fellow-suSerers,  in  their  mess^es  from  the  harbor 
wnich  happily  sheltered  their  enfranchised  sphits,  were  the  only  revelators  that  ever  lifteiJ 
the  awfulveil  of  doom  from  their  ocean  crave.  From  this  time,  and  durmg  a  period  of  eigh- 
teen months,  I  sat  constantly  for  all  who  sought  my  services  as  a  test  medium  for  a  great 
variety  of  manifestations.  These  followed  in  rapid  succession,  each  one  practicing  my  whole 
frame  in  a  striking  and  powerful  manner.  I  frequently  saw  giirits  with  great  distinctness, 
describmg  them  with  accuracy,  and  convecsmg  wtth  them  as  I  did  with  my  fellow^mortals. 
I  wrote  in  various  ways,  automatically  and  by  impres^on,  spoke  in  various  conditions  of 
trance  and  semi-consciousness ;  became  a  psychometrist,  partly  clairvoyant,  and  occasion- 
ally a  physician:  in  tact,  with  the  exception  of  boisterous  physical  manifestations,  or  that 
wmch  I  coveted  beyond  all  else — the  raps — it  is  imposable  to  name  a  phase  of  mediumship 
through  which  I  did  not  pass,  and  in  which  I  was  not  fully  and  powerfully  exercised."  .  , 

In  the  first  issues  of  the  new  paper — -the  Christian  Spiritualist — -Professor 
Toohey  was  the  editor,  and  it  was  conducted  by  him  with  a  talent  and  ability 
whicli  secured  a  liigh  and  well-deserved  reputation  for  its  pages.  On  Mr. 
Toohey's  withdrawal,  the  chief  duty  of  filling  "its  columns  with  editorial  matter 
and  the  spiritualistic  tidings  of  the  day  devolved  upon  Mr.  Munson,  Emma 
Hardioge,  and  a  few  voluntary  contributors,  by  whom  the  work  was  sustained 
until  its  termination. 

The  building  was  still  publicly  associated  with  the  pretentious  array  of 
names  whicli  constituted  "  the  society,"  but,  with  the  exception  of  the  per- 
sons'designated  above  and  Mr.  Horace  Day,  who  nobly  defrayed  from  his 
own  private  purse  the  heavy  burden  attending  the  pubhcation  of  the  paper, 
the  rent  of  the  building  and  payment  of  the  officials,  the  society  had  viritually 
ceased  to  exist 

Still  tlie  work  tliat  its  inauguration  accomplished  can  scarcely  be  estimated. 
The  office  at  553  formed  a  nucleus  where  friends  and  strangers  could  as- 
semble together,  interchange  ideas  and  greetings;  read  the  papers,  buy  or 
borrow  all  the  spiritual  literature  of  the  day,  and  attend  the  circles  held  in 
different  apartments  of  the  building.  During  one  of  the  most  exciting  presi- 
dential elections  that  had  marked  the  country's  history,  circles  were  held  in 
that  house  whose  influence  went  forth  and  pervaded  every  State  in  the  Union. 

The  influence  which  the  spiritual  world  exerts  over  the  natural  can  never 
be  properly  understood  and  appreciated  until  the  intimate  relations  subsisting 
between  them  are  fully  comprehended ;  meantime,  the  communion  of  spirits 
with  mortals  discloses  the  nature  and  operation  of  those  relations,  and  in  this 
respect,  the  revelations  that  have  been  made  concerning  the  political  destiny 
of  the  country,  the  plans  that  have  been  foreshadowed,  the  prophetic  visions 
that  have  been  mapped  out  widi  minutest  precision,  the  predestined  scheme 
of  the  untried  future,  and  the  action  that  spirits  have  in  some  instances  re- 
quired of  and  through  tlieir  mediums  for  the  outworking  of  the  Divine  plan, 
would,  if  it  were  prudent  to  reveal  it,  throw  a  marvellous  and  truly  supra-mun- 
dane illumination  over  the  wild  and  terrible  drama  that  has  been  ejiacted  on 
the  American  continent  during  the  last  ten  years,  and  still  more  on  the  events 
of  deep  and  universal  interest  that  are  yet  to  overrule  the  destinies  of  (he 
great  New  World. 

Beyond  entailing  odium  and  suspicion  on  those  whose  efforts  would  be 
most  injuriously  affected  thereby,  such  revelations  would  be  of  compara- 
tively more  detriment  tlian  benefit.  Yet  it  is  essential  to  the  full  assertion  of 
the  claims  of  Spiritualism  that  we  should  allude  to  a  subject,  the  piuport  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

P'i'-S     rF  TSF  MtrHANIOS    .flVS  "  — _  —  \IC]i  F^Ea      if  ""BS  AHFJilGAt    WS* 
^  RO    ''t-  '•HiMfTRi    S.   ^trUIiJL      lIL^O'iOP'n  JUi    ^A     OVAI  xUAD'^OT  1F.,3JGN.U: 

mv     (11    IMF      Y  Ji  /M  01-    TVArrJi/U     f/SJMl     VV    £DF  TJS  A'i-^Oi.AL  WSI         WASTJINGTON.. 

•iCIEA     vr    1      rJC  ri-    1  (/  i//j        iO}A  3   /  GTOvPJMWCAL    OCX  OFF. 

i-c        I  ma  ^  c  '^oi-    I  A  ''  ?2  ifAAr      it  w  v^ujiSiCuLTfi/a  waiF/njn, 

QiOO'^z 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  Ut 

whicli  many  of  our  readers  will  understand.  Many  and  many  are  those  who 
know  how  for  long  months  prior  to  their  public  issue,  Slate  documents  and 
Congressional  ordinances  existed  in  the  secret  archives  of  an  unconsidered  spirit 
circle.  Many  are  the  eyes  that  will  glance  over  these  pages,  that  have  seen  the 
wires  of  the  national  machinery  pulled  by  invisible  hands,  and  some  few  there 
are  who  know  that  a  mightier  Congress  than  that  which  sits  at  Washington 
hiis  helped  to  lay  the  foundations  of  die  New  World's  destiny  in  the  spiiit- 
cirde  rooms  of  553  Broadway. 

It  was  in  May,  1857,  that  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  announced  the  close  of 
the  career  of  the  Christian  Spiritualist,  and  with  it,  of  the  offices  and  spiritual 
functions  which  had  been  performed  in  connection  with  it  at  553  Broadway. 

The  notice  which  records  the  termination  of  this  mission  is  embodied  in  the 
following  simple  sentence : 

"CHRISTIAN    SPIKITUALIST    DISCONTINUED. 

"The  closing  number  of  the  third  volume  of  the  Christian  Spiritualist,  poblishedon  the 
2d  inst.,  comestouswith  the  announcement  that  its  course  is  now  finished.  Its  publication, 
as  it  states,  '  commenced  with  the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Spiritual  Knowledge,  and 
ends  with  it.'  We  are  sorry  that  we  shall  hereafter  be  deprived  of  its  weekly  visits.  During 
llie  last  year  more  particularly,  we  have  regarded  the  Spiritualist  as  among  the  most  valu- 
able of  our  spiritual  publications. 

"  It  has  been  supported  chiefly  by  the  munificence  of  one  individual,  who,  during  the  last 
three  years,  has  expended  no  less  than  $25,000  upon  it  and  other  matters  pert^ning  to  the 
cause,  connected  with  the  office  of  its  publication,  thus  displaying  a  zeal  worthy  of  all  com- 
mendation. 

"  The  movement  of  which  this  paper  was  but  the  least  part,  has  set  in  motion  a  living 
chaui  of  influences  which  will  continue  to  girdle  the  western  continent  until  America  shall 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN    NEW    YORK  — CONTINUED. 

Professor   Mapes   ano    his    Mi 
Harvey — Close  o 

As  the  experiences  of  remarkable  personages  form  the  most  instructive  of 
items  in  spiritual  history,,  we  shall  here  insert  a  few  memoranda  supplied  to  the 
Banner  of  Light  by  the  late  Professor  Mapes,  a  gentleman  scarcely  less  dis- 
tinguished in  the  world  of  science  as  an  agricultural  chemist  than  \vas  Professor 
Hare  in  the  department  of  electricity. 

Professor  Mapes  was  a  friend  and  contemporary  of  Dr.  Hare' s,  and  like  him 
was  strongly  in  favor  of  rendering  for  all  phenomena,  whether  of  the  visible 
or  invisible  universe,  a  simply  material  explanation. 

The  professor's  attention  having  been  directed  towards  the  spiritual 
manifestations,  he  at  first  treated  them  with  the  scathing  rebuke  which 
was  so  often  administered  by  those  who  had  not  investigated  the  sub- 
ject; but  when  he  found  that  many  of  bis  associates  in  science  as  well  as 
social  life- were  deeply  immersed  in  this  "  modem  magic,"  he  determined  to 
bring  his  acute  mind  to  bear  upon  the  matter  sufficiently  to  redeem  his 

Hosted  by  Google 

143  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

friends,  who,  "  though  otherwise  respectable  men  ere  on  th  s  po  nt  he  de- 
dared,  "  fast  running  to  mental  seed  and  imbec  I  ty 

The  experiences  into  which  this  benevolent  purpose  led  h  n  vould  not  be 
sufficiently  remarkable  to  justify  their  reproduct  on  n  these  pages  vere  it 
not  that  they  present  a  striking  instance  of  pat  ence  and  conf  r  ty  to  re- 
quired conditions  in  seeking  phenomena  through  the  sp  t  cu-cle  In  these 
respects,  a  glance  at  the  diary  of  the  learned  profe  sor  v  11  a  i  ply  rej  ay  the 
trouble  of  perusal.  The  following  extracts  are  taken  fro  n  the  J3a  er  of 
LigJit,^^  Spiritual  Telegraph,  3.nA  New  York  Confere  ce  wleren  Profes- 
sor Mapes  is  reported  under  the  cognomen  either  of  Phce  x  or  An  Old 
Spiritualist." 

The  first  of  his  printed  articles  simply  contajns  a  sketch,  in  the  third  per- 
son, of  his  sceptical  opinions,  and  materialistic  philosophy  on  the  subject  of 
"  Spiritualism."     The  second  extract  is  as  follows : 

BANNER  OF  LIGHT.— NEW  YORK,  MARCH  w,  1859. 

"  In  our  last  artiJe  of  this  series,  we  gave  some  acconnt  of  our  friend  PhtEiiix,  and 
now  propose  to  fullil  the  promises  there  made.  He  had  heard  of  Spiritualism  and  had 
attended  many  circles,  m  most  of  which  he  found  persons  predisposed  to  belief;  mediums 
who  pracdced  deceit,  and  mmds  so  fond  of  the  marvellous  as  to  translate  the  clumsy 
dreamings  of  visionaries  mto  divine  aspirations.  Night  after  night  passed  away  without 
anything  having  occurred  that  was  calculated  to  convince  him  that  mediums  were  eon- 
trolled  by  spirits  The  manifestations  whichseem  to  have  been  satisfactory  to  many  others 
were  not  so  to  him.  Still,  occaaonally  he  met  friends  who  recited  manifestations,  which 
seemed  to  be  above  dispute,  of  a  character  far  beyond  what  he  himself  had  witnessed,  and 
thus  he  was  tempted  to  continue  to  meet  with  circles,  notwithstanding  his  own  want  of  suc- 
cess. On  one  particular  evening,  however,  when  seated  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  table 
with  a  medium  and  some  friends  whom  he  had  brought  with  him,  he  plainly  felt  the  touch 
of  hands  upon  his  knees  and  feet.  His  unexpressed  thooghtswere  answered  in  the  affirma- 
tive by  three  touclies  of  the  spirit  hand,  one  touch  for  no,  and  five  for  the  alphabet. 
Upon  repealing;  this  inaudibly  to  the  audience,  letters  were  selected  by  the  spirit  hand, 
which,  upon  bemg 'written  down  by  himself,  spelt  out  consecutive  sentences  containing  facts 
only  known  to  himself  and  to  the  supposed  communicator.  Indeed,  on  this  particular  evening 
every  question  and  answer  from  all  parties  present  seemed  to  be  consecutive  and  full  of  in- 
telligence. He  therefore  held  the  following  dialogue  with  the  spirits,  they  answering  by  raps  : 
Q.  How  shall  I  be  able  to  satisfy  myself  as  to  the  truth  of  Spiritualism  ?  A.  Form  a 
circle  of  twelve  individuals ;  employ  the  be^  medium  you  can  get,  and  continue  your  sit- 
tings until  yoa  can  procure  information  of  a  character  that  will  not  he  distasteM  to  you. 
Have  six  poative  and  sLc  n^ative  minds.  Q.  What  do  you  mean  by  positive  and  negative 
minds?  A.  Six  male  and  six  female  minds.  Q.  Do  you  mean  six  ladies  and  ax  gentle- 
men f  ^.  No ;  by  a  positive  or  male  mind  we  mean  such  an  one  as  your  friend  O.,  who 
is  eccentric,  and  deddes  upon  the  propriety  of  his  own  acts  without  advising  with  his 
friends.  If  he  wished  to  buy  a  house,  he  would  do  so  vrithout  your  approval.  If  advised 
by  his  physician,  he  would  follow  such  advice  only  to  the  extent  that  he  could  comprehend 
it.  This  is  what  we  call  a  male  or  positive  mind.  A  female  or  n^ative  mind  is  such  as 
requires  the  advice  of  its  friends  before  action  of  any  kind  ;  it  is  not  self-sufEcient,  is 

milid  are  necessary  for  an  effective  circle.  ,      _  .     .    .     - 

have  no  farther  dilnculty  in  inducing  your  friends  to  continue  their  sittings. 

"  Phcenix  determmed  to  follow  these  directions,  and  as  the  spirits  had  told  him  that  the 
n^ative  romds  might  be  believers  or  not,  just  as  he  chose,  he  bad  no  difficulty  in  forming 
Ibis  half  of  his  circle.  It  was  recommended,  however,  that  the  poative  mmds  should  not 
he  believers,  mid  with  these  he  had  much  difficulty.  The  first  party  to  whom  he  applied 
was  his  friend  F.  Mc C,  who  flatly  refused,  and  said,  '  You'll  disgrace  yourself  with  this 
nonsense.'  Phcenix  urged  that,  to  oblige  him,  he  wouki  qiend  twenty  nights  in  any  way, 
and  eventually  F.  McC.  agreed  to  stand  the  torture  every  Monday  night  for  twenty 
weeks.     Wtien  O.  was  ap^ied  to  he  laughed  outright,  but  eventually  compromised  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM,  143 

affair  for  the  twenty  nights,  assuring  Phteniit  that  on  the  twenty-first  Monday  he  should  be 
absent.  With  great  difficulty  the  six  positive  minds  were  found.  Mrs.  Brown  was  selected 
as  the  medium,  and  the  circle  commenced. 

"  For  the  first  eighteen  nights  both  questions  and  answers  were  extremely  stupid.  The 
only  curious  phenomenon  was  tlie  raps,  and  with  all  tlie  tlieories  of  snapping  of  toe  and  imee 
joints,  rubbing  the  ball  of  the  toe  on  the  sole  of  the  boot,  electricity,  and  all  the  other 
theories  which  had  been  from  time  to  time  advanced,  the  ax  poative  minds  were  divided; 
but  with  the  n^atives  it  was  af&nned  there  was  a  marvellous  fitness  in  many  of  (he  replies, 
although  the  positive  mmds  did  not  admit  it. 

"  On  the  nineteenth  night  the  tables  were  somewhat  turned.  Phcenix  had  been  lam- 
pooned by  his  associates,  and  when  they  came  t<^ether  on  this  evenmg,  both  himself  and 
positive  friends  agreed  that,  after  one  more  night  of  mummery,  they  would  drop  the  whole 
affair.  The  inquiry  about  the  raps  had  lost  its  interest,  and  although  the  replies  had  been 
srtnewhat  consecutive,  they  Md  gjven  no  indication  of  talent  commensurate  with  the  desire 
of  at  least  six  of  the  circle.  The  medium  had  not  yet  entered  the  room,  when,  in  a  sort 
of  "lark,"  five  sheets  of  paper  were  placed  on  the  floor,  and  one  or  two  lead-pencils  laid 
on  each.  The  medium  entered  and  took  her  seat ;  the  circle  was  organized  as  usual.  In  a 
few  moments  the  pencils  were  all  heard  distinctly  writing.  One  of  the  poMtive  members 
looked  below  the  table-cloth,  and  insisted  that  he  saw  all  the  pencils  standing  upright,  and 
that  they  fell  as  soon  as  he  had  seen  them.  The  sheets  were  lifted  from  the  floor,  and 
were  found  to  contain  many  names,  clearly  written.  The  part^  for  whom  these  names 
were  mtended  was  selected  by  the  spirits,  through  the  raps,  and  m  every  case  the  poative 
friends  were  compelled  to  admit  that  these  names  were  truly  correct  as  those  of  their 
grandfathers,  fathers,  mothers,  etc.,  who  were  in  the  spirit-world.  Phcenix  was  selected 
by  the  spirits  to  ads  questions  on  that  evenii^,  and  the  answers  were  all  pg-tment  and  in- 
structive. On  the  twentieth  evening  [the  followmg  Monday],  every  member  of  the  circle 
h  d  th  u-  hairs  slightly  pulled  from  the  table  while  fitting  on  them.  Raps  occurred  every- 
wh  A  guitar  placed  under  the  table  was  played  upon,  while  resting  alternately  on  the 

kn  es  very  member  of  the  circle.  A  harmonicon  placed  under  the  table,  at  a  point 
urthes        m  the  medium,  was  beautifully  played,  only  two  of  the  members  knowmg  it  vras 

d      h    table,  they  bemg  the  first  who  came  mto  the  room,  and  brought  the  instrument 

d  pla  d  it  there.  A  tumbler  had  been  placed  on  the  floor  at  the  same  time.  Late  in 
h  B  a  handful  of  coin  was  thrown  on  the  floor,  and  then  piled  up  inside  the  tumbler, 

w  h  ise.     The  room  was  well  lighted  with  gas,  and  the  hands  of  the  circle  were 

p  he  top  of  the  table.     Even  the  positive  members  agreed  to  continue  their  sit- 

tings, and  the  same  circle  sat  for  more  than  four  years,  once  each  week, " 

Manifestations  of  a  far  more  astounding  character  tlian  any  recorded  in 
this  initiatory  investigation  were  afterwards  witnessed  by  Professor  Mapes, 
through  a  great  number  of  mediums,  amongst  whom  the  author  has  fre- 
quently been  invited  to  sit  for  the  learned  "savant,"  and  has  partalten  with 
him  of  the  most  elev^iting  and  convincing  evidence  of  the  direct  presence 
and  control  of  a  vast  number  and  variety  of  spirits  ;  indeed  it  seemed  as  if 
the  noblest  minds  of  the  invisible  world  delighted  to  answer  the  appeals  of 
this  powerful  yet  captious  investigator  with  al!  sorts  of  convincing  methods 
of  proving  their  presence.  Honest,  fearless,  and  unremitting  in  his  search 
into  this  wondrous  realm  of  untrodden  science,  the  professor  was  constantly 
rewarded  by  brilliant  suggestions  which,  to  his  quick  apprehension,  formed 
threads  leading  him  into  paths  of  new  discovery,  both  in  mental  and 
physical  science. 

None  can  bear  more  grateful  testimony  to  this  fact  than  the  author,  who 
was  frequently  selected  by  the  professor  for  investigations  of  a  highly  occult 
or  scientific  character,  when  die  results  invariably  attested  the  tmdi  of  the 
homely  proverb  that  "  like  attracts  like  ;"  and  whereas  his  inquiring  mind 
sought  for  the  highest  ideality  to  match  his  own,  he  obtained  such  responses 
as  were  worthy  the  spirit  of  his  inquiry. 

The  circle  alluded  to  in  the  preceding  extracts  continued  its  session,  as 
we  have  stated,  for  several  years.  Nearly  all  its  members  were  men  of 
science   and  public   influence;    all   of  them,    including  Professor   Mapes 

Hosted  by  Google 

144  BISTORY  OF  MODERN 

became  converts  to,  and  powerful  advocates  of  Spiritualism.  Added  to  this, 
the  wife  of  Professor  Mapes,  a  lady  advanced  in  life,  became  suddenly  devoloped 
as  a  most  wonderful  drawing  medium.  Without  any  previous  knowledge  of 
the  art,  Mrs.  Mapes  executed,  in  a  marvellously  rapid  manner,  and  under  cir- 
cumstances of  the  most  abnormal  character,  several  thousand  yisX&r-oxAor  draw- 
ings, which,  for  originality  of  design  and  beauty  of  execution,  stand  unrivalled 
as  works  of  art,  a  gallery  in  themselves,  on  which  the  most  fastidious  and 
highly  instructed  artists  of  th-;  day  have  pronounced  the  verdict  of  faultless. 

Amongst  the  strange  occurrences  which  gave  tokens  of  the  presence  and 
influence  of  spirits,  the  following  incident  may  be  taken  as  an  illustration  of 
a  number  of  similar  cases,  transpiring  in  different  parts  of  the  country. 

SPIRITUAL  ADVERTISER— NEW  YORK,  SEPTEMBER  ii,  1837. 

"  A  strange,  and  somewhat  startling  demonstration  of  spirit  power  occurred  at  tte  Stuy- 
vesant  Institute,  in  this  city,  on  Wednesday  evening  of  last  week,  at  the  commencement  of 
an  attempt  to  deliver  a  lecture  by  Rev.  C.  H.  Harvey.  It  should  be  premised  tliat  this  is 
the  same  Mt.  Harvey  who,  several  years  ago,  wrote  a  valuable  pamphlet,  entitled  "  The 
Millennia!  Dawn,"  in  proof  of  spiritual  manifestations,  and  who,  in  consequence  of  his 
advocacy  of  spiritualistic  views,  was  much  persecuted,  and  finally  suspended  from  the  exe* 
cise  of  his  functions  as  a  minister  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  Since  then,  Mr.  II. 
has  been  quietly  pursuing  his  investigations  in  the  department  that  was  so  obnoxious  to  his 
former  associates,  but  latterly  he  has  become  dissatisfied — very  conscientiously,  no  doubt— 
with  certain  theological  aspects  of  the  spiritualistic  development,  and  deemed  it  his  duty  to 
propose  a  series  of  lectures,  which  he  announced  in  the  following  advertisement  in  the  mom- 
mg  papers ; 

"  'APlea  fortheBible.  — TheRev.C.  H.  Harvejrwill  deliver  a  short  scriesof  lectures 
in  defence  of  the  Bible  against  modern  Spiritualism,  and  inexposition  of  its  phenomena;  the 
first  on  Wednesday  evening,  Septemb^  z,  in  Stuyvesant  Institute,  No.  659  Broadway. 
Mediums  and  advocates  of  Spiritualism  are  invited  (o  attend,  and  full  liberty  will  be 
awarded  them  to  defend  their  'new  philosophy.' " 

At  the  appointed  time,  Mr.  Harvey  appeared  at  the  desk,  at  the  Stuyves- 
ant Institute,  with  a  small  audience  assembled  before  him.  After  offering  a 
prayer,  he  commenced  his  discourse,  immediatly  giving  the  audience  to  under- 
stand that  while  his  position  would  be  in  defence  of  the  Bible,  it  would  be  one 
of  general  hostility  to  modern  Spiritualism,  on  account  of  what  was  alleged  to 
be  its  demoniac  character. 

But  while  proceeding  more  fully  to  defend  his  position  in  regard  to  these 
points,  his  utterance  became  obstructed ;  he  stood  for  a  moment,  as  if  trans- 
fixed, and  then  dropped  to  the  floor,  as  if  smitten  down  with  a  heavy  bludgeon. 

His  friends  were  immediately  at  his  side  on  the  platform.  They  found  him 
pale  and  corpse-like.  One  man,  a  stranger  to  those  present,  who  seemed  to 
be  a  physician,  felt  for  his  pulse,  and  found  that  it  had  entirely  ceased.  Cold 
water  was  sprinkled  upon  his  face ;  brandy  was  poured  down  his  tliroat,  and 
every  available  means  of  restoration  was  applied,  but  without  the  slightest 
apparent  effect ;  and  the  physician,  who  was  not  a  Spiritualist,  pronounced 
him  "  dead !" 

But  after  he  had  lain  in  this  way  for  some  eight  or  ten  minutes,  a  gentle- 
man, who  was  a  Spiritualist,  and  who  understood  the  nature  of  the  attack,  got 
access  to  him,  made  a  few  upward  passes  over  him,  when  he  immediately 
opened  his  eyes,  and  soon  was  so  far  recovered  as  to  arise  and  converse  with 
those  surrounding  him.  He  declared  that  he  had  never  been  in  better  health 
in  his  life  than  he  was  then ;  that  his  attack  did  not  proceed  from  any  physical 
cause,  but  that  it  was  from  a  spirit — from  the  "Devil,"  as  he  termed  it — and 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

145 

expressed  a  wonder  tliat  God  had  not,  in  this  instance,  defended  hini,  as  he 
had  defended  him  against  similar  attacks  before. 

It  was  said  to  be  apparent  to  all  persons  there,  who  had  any  knowledge  of 
philosophy,  that  Mr.  H.'s  attack  was  not  of  the  nature  of  apoplexy,  or  a  rush 
of  blood  to  the  head — neither  faintness,  paralysis,  nor  anything  of  the  kind— but 
that  ic  was  clearly  produced  by  some  strange  and  ultra-physical  cause,  and 
was  paralleled  only  by  what,  in  other  instances,  has  been  known  as  adverse 
spiritual  influences. 

Quietude  being  restored,  Mr.  H.  attempted  to  proceed  with  his  lecture,  but 
his  utterance  was  again  mysteriously  stopped  in  the  same  way,  and  it  was 
thought  by  those  present  diat  if  he  had  persisted  in  his  efforts,  he  w  ould  again 
have  been  smitten  down  as  before.  Again  he  made  the  attempt,  and  again 
failed  in  like  manner  ;  and  finally  he  announced  to  his  auditors  that  their 
money  would  be  returned  to  them  if  they  would  apph  to  the  door  keeper, 
but  tliat  it  was  useless  for  him  to  attempt  to  proceed  with  his  lecture  under 
the  circumstances. 

But  few  comments  on  this  remarkable  case  are  necessary  Mr  Harvey 
had  at  one  time  felt  the  force  and  beauty  of  Spiritualism,  yet  obviously  was 
unable  to  shake  off  the  trammels  of  his  ancient  spirit  of  sectarian  bigotry. 

He  attempted  to  vindicate  the  claims  of  revealed  religion  at  the  expense  of 
Spiritualism,  without  remembering,  or  perhaps  ignorant  of  the  fact,  that  Spir- 
itualism included  in  its  ranks  numbers  of  believers  who  were  as  reverential 
admirers  of  the  Bible  as  himseE  The  crusade  implied  in  his  lecture,  there- 
fore, was  as  unnecessary  as  it  was  evidently  undertaken  in  a  misconception 
of  his  subject.  How  far  spirits  may  have  been  justified  in  silencing  his  erro- 
neous doctrines  by  using  his  mediumistic  organization  in  the  manner  above 
described,  we  do  not  pretend  to  decide.  That  a  spiritual  power  inimical  to 
his  purposes  overshadowed  him,  there  can  be  no  question.  His  peculiar 
organism  was  susceptible  to  such  an  influence ;  and  it  was  obviously  exerted 
to  give  Mr.  Harvey  a  powerful  warning,  and  die  world  an  evidence  that  our 
perversions  of  Divine  truth  do  not  always  pass  unnoticed  by  invisible  powers. 

During  the  eventful  ten  years  between  1850  and  i860,  the  Sabbath  meet- 
ings in  New  York  continued  to  attract  thousands  of  earnest  listeners  to  the 
religious  phase  of  Spiritualism. 

Fresh  and  interesting  media  were  being  rapidly  developed  in  every  grade 
of  society. 

The  circles  held  nightly  might  be  numbered  by  thousands,  whilst  the  press 
and  the  pulpit  continued  to  contribute  their  share  of  vituperation  and  denun- 
ciationto  the  notoriety  of  the  subject. 

Many  changes  had  necessarily  transpired  in  die  external  order  "  of  the  line 
of  inarch." 

The  partnership  between  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Britain  in  the  Spiritual 
Telegraph  had  dissolved,  and  that  invaluable  and  ably-conducted  journal 
had  closed  its  career  of  usefulness  on  the  appearance  of  a  new  paper,  edited, 
by  A.  J.  Davis,  entided  the  Herald  of  Progress. 

As  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  had  obtained  the  first  generally  wide  circu- 
lation of  any  of  the  numerous  journals  devoted  to  the  cause,  and  been  sus- 
tained for  nearly  ten  yeai-s  with  an  ability  and  liberality  which  can  never  be 
over-estimated,  reflecting  undying  honor  on  its  spirited  projector,  Mr.  Charles 
Partridge,  it  is  but  just  that  we  should  insert  a  few  extracts  from  the  valedic- 
tory which  concludes  the  last  issue  of  his  paper : 

Hosted  by  Google 

1^6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"'TIME  UP!' -SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH,  NEW  YORK,  FEBRUARY  ss.  iSfc. 

"These  ominous  words  'Time  up  !'  are  not  unfamiliar  to  our  patrons.  We  have  written 
Ihem  from  time  to  time,  on  the  marrin  of  the  paper,  to  signify  lo  our  subscribers  that  the 
perio'il  foi'  which  they  had  paid  for  the  Tehgrofih  had  expired,  and  also  to  signify  to  then. 
K 1;_:»..: —  r^f  their  further  remittance  and  contmued  support. 

•■  liui  as  time  rolls  on,  human  needs  and  rehilions  change,  okA  the  most  familiar  words 
even,  chance  their  positions,  relations,  and  meaning.   So  now,  instead  of  writing  these  words 

plac  thii  .t  lie  ho«i  of  Ihe  edlloniil  column,  to  osnify  ih.t  the  pn>Pj"J  " 
the  hope  we  h.ve  often  eipre^eJ,  thU  a  m.n  better  eilculUed  to  mfold  thi.  Etent  .tet 
-Spiritualism— antl  introduce  it  practically  to  the  i«oph;,  would  ere  this  appear  to  talte 
our  nlace.  is.  we  trust,  about  to  be  realized.  ,,      ,    j 

..%=  spUtre,  ■Time  up  1'  and  the  mau,  seemingly  has  .ppeared.  Mr  Andrew 
Tardtson  Davis  has  commenced  the  publication  of  a  weekly  paper  callal  the  «c>-o«  c/ 
?Vff«-rjr,  and  arrangements  between  him  and  ourselves  have  been  made  to  traiisier  tne 
Sfirtt„J  re/e^e^^  to  the  ffiraM  of  Frogrei^,  which  commences  its  reguhrr  weekly  issue 

S'SSi^ciaeSlt  i.iu„d-.s  ;.  ;.mm..ce  the  pubUcationof  the  S,lri.^ 

re/^j'rrV.4,"and  nosuch  considerations  enter  into  our  present  detenninati. 

In  our  mtrcKiuctory  address  in  the  first  issue  of  this  paper,  under  date  of  May  8,  1S52, 

may  be  found  the  following ;  .  .-         r      ;,„ 

."I  have  not  rnidertaken  this  enterprise  with  the  hope  or  eipect.tion  o  pecuniary 
profit,  and  I  shall  he  entirely  satisfied  if  it  sliaU  meet  the  wishes  of  those  most  deeply  m- 
Jereslid,  and  at  the  same  iime  subserve  the  great  interest  of  human  progrc  I  shaU 
publish  the  paper  weekly  for  one  year,  whether  It  pays  or  not.      ..     .     .     ■     ■ 

"We  ouSr  however,  to  say  that  the  peconiary  eamiUES  of  the  Tdigratk  never  bore 
.more  favonble  relation  to  its  e,pen,es.than  during  the  Ust  few  mon*.i  and  .tne™- 
Memed  to  he  so  well  appreciated,  or  to  stand  so  favorably  before  the  public,  as  at  present. 
Si  om  private  iettef.  .md  the  voimitar,  notices  of  the  press  and  pulpit  .buudantly 
restlTy.  Neither  ha.  there  ever  l«n  a  more  sutamnti.1  mcreaje  of  patronage  than  of 
kle-  and  had  it  not  been  for  a  iong-cherished  liope  and  a  settled  determmation,  as  we 
Ce  oSen  intimated  in  the«  co\umns,%o  withdraw  from  our  prerat  position  of  conducting 
the  T,Usr,ph  at  the  earliest  opportunity  wliich  looked  promimg  for  a  carrying  forwanl 
by  other  hmfds  the  work  we  balhcgmi,  we  iiou  d  not  now  have  made  th.  rm.f.r.  But 
other  husine..  of  our  own,  and  the  charitable  institutions  m  which  we  delight  to  labor, 
EfaSr"  nearly  dl  om  attention  and  time  in  the  day,  and  we  have  'e™.  obliged  to 
Tall  our  mitmg  for  this  paper  wbde  other  people  have  siqit,  vvbich  ha.  »=  «■"=.*»"- 
Bled  out  lite  on  earth  some  yeari  a.  begin,  to  appear  by  dedinuy  he*h ,  and  ""duty  to 
Sralvei  our  growing  famdy'our  friends,  and  to  humanity,  demand,  that  we  transfer  ditrerenl 

liranches  of  our  husmess  whenever  favorable  opportunities  occur.  

"It  seem,  appropriate  that  we  should  say  methhig  on  this  occasion  reytcting  the 
aiception,  progress,  •irrepre»ible  confUd^'  and  the  success,  of  the  Sfinlwil  pUgrafh. 

S'rSSTthe  Sp?rl,i^  T,l,u<-oth^^  projected  out  of  eJ.ting  ynit  „.nife«.. 
■tlon.,  a  knowledge  of  which  wa.  deemed  nnportant  to  the  happme..  of  all  mankind ,  and 
rim  seemed  to  be  the  usmd  and  the  best  method  of  dijemiuat.g  the  ghidtidinp  from 
K  world  from  which  it  was  sdd  «id  mog  that  'no  traveller  return..'  We  did  not  at  &« 
eXet  to  issue  more  than  a  few  numbers,  and  thei«  were  intended  to  contain  merely  state- 
m^t.  of  the  facts  which  sliould  from  thne  to  time  appear.  Accordingly,  a  few  tracts  were 
issned  in  the  year  1851  and  the  early  part  of  1852,  entitled 'A  New  l^ah 

"  But  the  i.«iHe«.tion.  of  spirits  .0  imireased  that  we  found  more  space  and  a  remdu 
issue  would  he  required  to  make  a  record  of  them.  Accordingly,  on  the  8th  of  May,  1852, 
we  published  the  first  number  of  the  Spifitiml  Telegraph,  mi  have  since  conHnueo  it 
TegSarlj  each  week  to  the  present  number,  which  is  but  eight  copies  iiott  of  eight  com- 
f''.'V£'SrrK/V-J>«  1>"  io"  eminently  mces.f.1  in  all.lhe  purpoKS  tor  vvhlcl 
it  was  established.  It  was  designed  for  a  record  of  the  communications  and  mamiesiaiions 
of  spirits,  and  for  a.  «nne.t,  candid  criterion  of  the  satne  ;  also  "  "  ""S/X'^fS 
tnl  iid  free  interchange  of  experience,  and  thoughts. /re  and  ».,  on  'll  »1>J«;'.  »" 
especiaUy  those  subjecti  which  were  new,  in.tnictivc,  and  elevating  to  ""ukmi  In  these 
SSct.lt  form,  u,  encyclopedia  of  new  phenomena  and  of  the  best  thoughts,  /r.  and  ,n, 
on  the  profoundct  object,  which  ever  engaged  the  minds  of  men.  .  .  ■,•.',■  .^ 
"  The  Tilezrafih  was  not  establidied  for  pecuniary  gam.,  and  in  thi.  also  it  has  l«en 
^coesJul,  and  we  have  the  sali.l^tion  of  h.vhig  contributed  the  best  year,  of  om:  life, 

Hosted  b,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  j^y 

and  largely  of  our  ine:>ns,  lo  so  worthy  an  object;  an^,  finally,  we  have  fo  say  tJiat  the 
Jvlfgri'J'h  va.-i  never  so  well  apprecialed.  and  never  exertetl  a  more  wide  and  healthy 
inHuence  Ihiin  at  present,  and  never  was  more  successful  in  all  its  purirases  and  iiiteres'.s 

tliaii  at  the  moment  of  its  eliaiige. 

"  We  by  no  means  arrogate  to  ourselves  the  credit  of  all  the  brilliant  successes  of  the 
Tekgi-aph.  Much  of  this  is  due  to  inlliiciices  wliicli  have  surrounded  us;  to  flie  able 
contributors  to  its  columns,  anil  to  Brother  Ki^Iiough,  who  has  been  our  indefatieable  co- 
laborer.  -We  now  vei^i-n  our  portion  to  Friend  Bavis.  in  hope  tluit  he  will  reap  some  of 
.l,P  l,»„„fi..  «f  ..,r  labors,  and  will  be  able  to  do  more  and  better  for  the  happiness  and 
iind  tban  ourselves. " 

Believing  tliat  all,  and  far  more,  of  successful  and  untiring  eflbrt  than  the 
modesty  of  the  proprietor  has  permitted  him  to  affirm  in  these  extracts,  will 
be  cordially  acknowledged  in  behalf  of  tiiis  invaluable  paper  by  all  classes 
of  Spiritualists,  we  deem  this  brief  tribute  to  its  inestimable  service  will  be 
found  a.s  acceptable  to  our  readers  as  it  is  well  merited 

Amongst  other    1  f     1     gr  1  I        r  *"  >■ 

Messrs  Owen,  fatl  d  h     ca  f  Sp    tu  li 

unnoticed. 

Of  Mr.  Robert  O 

1 

gr       phi      h    p 

of  a  huraanitary  s  h  f  1  dl  P    k  P 

remark  that  his  ob  dh  Ij  1   U    b  1    f       d    h 

injurj  which  his  infl  ential  oj.  imons  were  supposed  to  exert  on  the  cause  of 
religion,  made  his  conversion  to  Spiritualism,  through  the  test  mediumship  of 
Mrs.  Hayden,  of  Boston,  a  subject  of  wide-spread  interest,  and  universal 
astonishment. 

One  of  England's  most  prominent  statesmen  declared  ^'  that  Mrs.  Hayden 
deserved  a  monument,  if  only  for  the  conversion  of  Robert  Owen." 

Meantime  die  influence  of  the  great  socialist  leader  drew  to  a  careful 
examination  of  the  subject,  hundreds  of  minds  who  were  ready  to  follow  in 
the  clear  footprints  of  so  great  a  man,  although  they  did  not  feel  strong 
enough  to  stand  alone,  even  for  the  sake  of  truth  and  immortality.  ° 

About  die  close  of  the  year  1859,  Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  late 
American  Minister  to  Naples,  and  one  of  the  most  esteeineJTiterary  and 
accomplished  statesmen  of  the  day,  published,  in  Philadelphia,  his  popular 
work,  "  Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  Another  World." 

This  vSliiihe,  which  is  an  admirable  digest  of  the  Spiritualism  of  many 
lauds  and  periods,  coming  from  so  authoritative  a  source,  and  known  lo 
embody  much  of  die  audioi's  personal  observations,  created  a  new  interest 
m  the  subject,  and  increased  the  demand  for  Mr.  Owen's  work  almost 
beyond  the  publisher's  capacity  to  supply.  Another  missionary,  of  equal 
interest  to  diose  who  can  only  receive  opinions  from  high  quarters,  was  the 
volume  of  "Life  Incidents,"  indited  by  the  celebrated  medium,  D.  D.  Home, 
whose  wonderful  spirit  siances  and  cordial  reception  in  nearly  all  die  courts  of 
Europe  and  by  the  highest  magnates,  cast  a  remarkable  illumination  over 
the  assumed  "unpopularity"  of  Spiritualism  in  die  eyes  of  utiaristocratk 
Americans. 

By  these  two  volumes  alone.  Spiritualism,  whilst  numbering  its  five  millions 
in  America,  was  discovered  to  hold  its  irresisrible  sway  over  the  minds  of 
princes,  potentates,  and  powers,  as  well  as  peoples.  Nothing  in  the  history 
of  the  movemenfj  however,  excites  such  profound  astonishment  in  retrospec- 
tion  as  the  silent  and  mysterious  methods  of  its  propagandism. 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERI^ 

CHAPTER  XV. 

IN       NEW       YORK  —  CONCLUDED. 

"Oihcrs,  mocfclng,  said,  "These  men  are  full  of  neiv  wine.' 

The  New  York  Spiritual  Rostrvm— Speaking  Mediums— Test  Mediums  in 
New  York— New  York  Prominent  Spiritualists— Ijnton,  the  Medium- 
Tub  GREAT  Tabernacle  Meeting— Investigations  at  the  New  York  Me- 
chanics' Institu-te- The  Buffalo  Doctors— Stephen  Albeo— Miss  Brooks 
AND  Cora  Scott— Buffalo  Spiritualists. 

Fkom  the  year  1853  the  Spiritualists  of  New  York  succeeded  in  establish- 
ing regular  Sunday  meetings,  which  were  held  at  first  in  the  Stuyvesant 
Inslitute/aftenvards  in  Hope  Chapel,  and  finally  in  Dodworth  Hall,  where 
-with  but  litrie  or  no  interruption,  they  have  continued  for  above  fourteen 
years.  The  services  consisted  generally  of  select  readings,  extemporaneous 
prayers,  and  a  lecture  delivered,  morning  and  evening,  by  the  most  accom- 
plished speakers  that  the  spiritual  ranks  could  afford. 

The  musical  services,  which  were  interspersed  with  the  readings,  were 
originally  organized  and  conducted  by  Mrs,  Emma  Hardinge  and  a  choir  of 
from  twenty  lo  thirty  volunteer  singers. 

As  the  young  performers  were  nearly  all  mediums,  and  die  anthems,  hymns, 
etc.,  were  composed  for  them  by  their  directress,  the  musical  exercises 
formed  a  highly  attractive  feature  of  the  meetings.  For  the  most  part  they 
were  attended  by  a  lai^e  and  eager  throng  of  listeners,  and  when  the  favorite 
speakers  of  the  spiritual  ranks  filled  the  rostrum,  the  fine  hall  was  invariably 
crowded  to  overflowing,  and  the  New  York  papers  vented  their  usual  comple- 
ment of  vituperation  and  insult  by  way  of  satisfaction  to  die  wounded  feelings 
of  rival  sects  and  to  the  manifest  increase  of  the  Spiritualists'  popularity. 

After  the  establishment  of  the  Spiritualists  in  Dodworth  Hall,  die  New 
York  Conference  held  its  sittings  there  on  the  Sunday  afternoons,  when 
strangers  were  admitted,  and  though  they  might  possess  totally  opposite 
views,  were  always  courteously  permitted  to  share  in  the  discussions. 

To  give  an  idea  of  the  meetings  that  were  held  in  New  York  about  diis 
time,  it  will  be  in  order  to  mention  the  names  and  characteristics  of  some  of 
the  speakers  who  officiated,  most  of  whom  were  engaged  by  the  committee 
for  a  course  of  several  successive  Sabbaths. 

Occupying  a  deservedly  foremost  rank  in  this  distinguished  array  were 
A.  J.  Davis,  and  his  amiable  and  talented  wife,  Mrs.  Mary  Davis,  who  in 
point  of  pleasing  oratory,  was  even  more  acceptable  on  die  rostrum  than  the 
great  "Poughkeepsie  Seer,"  her  husband.  S.  B.  Britam,  Charles  Partndge, 
Dr.  Hallock,  Joel  Tiffany,  and  Rev.  William  Fishbough,  all  too  well  known 
and  appreciated  to  need  description,  contributed  often,  by  their  talents  and 
eloquence,  to  the  clear  exposition  of  Spirituahsm.  John  Eovee  Dodds, 
formerly  one  of  the  distinguished  opponents  of  the  cause,  was  now  one  of  its 
able  advocates  on  the  New  York  platform. 

Rev.  R.  P.  Ambler,  and  Rev.  Thomas  L.  Harris,  were  also  amongst  the 
most  popular  of  the  speakers. 

Dr.  J.  Orton,  W.  S.  Courtney,  a  highly  distinguished  lawyer;  Rev.  Thomas 
Eenning,  a  most  exemplary  and  accomplished  gentleman,  formerly  a  Wes- 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  149 

leyan  minister;  J.  H.  Toohey,  a  fine  logical  speaker,  late  editor  of  the 
Christian  Spiritualist;  Dr.  Wellington,  a  successful  medical  practitioner; 
Professor  Hare;  L.  Judd  Pardee,  a  fine  trance  speaker;  Professor  Denton- 
an  eminent  geologist  and  admirable  lecturer;  Hon.  Warren  Chase,  ex-Con- 
gressman and  one  of  the  most  logical  and  philosophical  lecturers  in  the  field ; 
S.  J.  Finney  an  inspirational  speaker  of  extraordinary  ability ;  and  Thomas 
Gates  Forster,  a  gentleman  of  literary  talent,  whose  discourses,  for  eloquence, 
power,  and  wide  range  of  thought,  have  never  been  surpassed  on  any  pulpit 
or  platform,  formed  the  chief  male  portion  of  the  lecturers  engaged  to  dis- 
course to  the  New  York  audiences. 

Besides  these,  the  array  of  female  talent  was  equally  strong  and  remarkable. 
One  of  the  earliest  of  this  class  of  lecturers  was  Miss  C.  M.  Bcebe,  a  lady  whose 
written  essays  form  as  fine  specimens  of  modem  literature  as  any  that  the 
language  contains.  Deservedly  preeminent  in  spiritual  and  personal  attrac- 
tions, also,  was  Mrs.  Cora  Hatch,  a  young  lady  of  scarce  seventeen  summers, 
but  who,  after  several  years  of  wonderful  phenomenal  mediumship,  was  con- 
trolled to  deliver  discourses  whose  marvellous  beauty  of  diction  and  style  of 
oratory  was  their  least  attraction.  Mrs.  Hatch  lectured  on  almost  every 
science  with  equal  facility  and  correctness.  Her  discourses  were  always  de- 
livered in  a  profound  trance,  were  most  commonly  selected  by  a  committee 
chosen  from  the  audience  at  the  time  of  their  delivery,  and  were  succeeded 
by  the  answering  of  questions  propounded  on  the  spo^  the  apt  and  felicitous 
nature  of  which  presented  evidence  of  the  highest  and  most  intellectual  con- 
trol that  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon  a  merely  mortal  medium.  Of  a 
similar  character,  both  in  the  matter  and  fascinating  manner  of  delivery,  were 
the  trance  discourses  of  Mrs.  Emma  Jay  Bullene,  with  whom  the  additional 
charm  of  delightful  singing  was  added^to  her  extemporaneous  oratory.  Miss 
Spi^^e,  a  young  lady  of  scarcely  inferior  attractions,  was  another  of  this  gift- 
ed band.  Mrs.  Charlotte  Tuttle,  a  charming  and  vivacious  trance  speaker, 
Mrs.  Hattie  HuntJey,  Mrs.  Frances  Hyzer,  and  Mrs.  M.  S.  Townsend,  were 
also  distinguished  favorites  of  the  New  York  rostrum.  The  largest  and  most 
appreciative  audiences  that  ever  sustained  with  generous  sympathy  the  sensi- 
tive natures  of  those  abnormal  oratresses,  were  kindly  accorded  to  Emma 
Hardinge,  the  choir  leader,  who  had  also,  under  the  control  of  her  spirit 
guides,  become  a  trance  or  inspirational  speaker;  and  when  to  these  is  added 
an  occasional  visit  from  one  or  other  of  the  hundreds  of  speakers  who  were 
scattered  through  various  parts  of  the  States,  the  quality  of  the  spiritual  plat- 
form at  Dodworth  Hall,  New  York,  may  be  fairly  estimated. 

Besides  this  meeting,  several  others  were  held  in  different  parts  of  the  city; 
amongst  these  there  was  one  for  many  years  conducted  at  Lainartine  Hall 
by  the  learned  Dr.  Horace  Dresser.  In  the  Bowery,  Sixth  avenue,  Brook- 
lyn, Williamsburgh,  and  Morrisania,  regular  Sunday  meetings  were  sustained. 
Besides  the  free  circles  of  Miss  Laura  Edmonds,  J.  E.  Conklin,  Kate  Fox, 
and  Emma  Hardinge,  upwards  of  three  hundred  private  circles  were  known 
to  be  held  in  New  York  about  this  time,  at  which  admirable  and  accom- 
phshed  mediums  presided. 

Amongst  the  more  distinguished  professional  or  public  mediums  were  Mrs. 
Coan,the  excellent  test  rappingmedium;  Geprge  Redman,  a  rapping,  wriring, 
and  test  medium  of  the  most  astounding  physical  endowments;  Mrs.  Cora 
Brown,  Miss  Middlebrook,  and  Miss  Sarah  Irish,  admirable  mediums  for 
test5  by  rappmg,  seeing,  writing,  trance,  etc. ;  Mrs_.  Bradley  and  Mrs^  Town- 
send,  remarkable  mediums  for  the  production  of  spirit  drawings ;  Mrs.  Kel- 
log,  one  of  the  best  clairvoyant,  personating,  seeing,  and  writing  mediums  in 

Hosiedb,  Google 

ISO  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

the  country ;  Mrs.  Harriet  Porter,  a  most  wonderful  prophetic  speaking  and 
seeing  test  medium7~MIss  Seatring,  an  excellent  test  tipping  medium ;  Miss 
Mildred  Cole,  a  child  scarcely  twelve  years  of  age,  but  whose  endowments  as  a 
test  medilim  in  every  variety  of  development  were  almost  unequalled  ;  and  the 
still  famous  Mra.  Leah  Fish,  of  the  Fox  family  [afterwards  the  wife  of  Mr, 
Calvin  Brown],  whose  crowded  seances  attested  the  undiminished  force  of  her 
wonderful  phenomenal  powers. 

With  such  facilities  for  investigating  the  science,  discussing  the  philosophy, 
and  enjoying  the  consoling  religion  of  Spiritualism,  can  it  be  wondered  at 
that  Spirituahsts  began  to  number  their  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  in 
New  York,  and  that,  as  a  science  and  religion  both,  it  at  last  compelled  re- 
spectful recognition  from  the  public.  A  few  more  notices  of  the  prominent 
features  of  the  cause  in  New  York,  and  our  record  in  that  direction  must  be 
brought  to  a  close. 

Besides  opening  his  house  for  receptions,  circles,  conferences,  and  hospi- 
tality of  the  most  profuse  and  noble  kind,  Mr.  Charies  Partridge,  in  varieties 
of  ways,  continued  to  benefit  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  mdi  purse,  person,  and 
character. 

Organizing  circles,  hiring  mediums  from  distant  parts  of  the  country,  and 
"bearing  his  part  in  the  financial  and  executive  departments  of  the  meetings 
with  unsparing  liberality,  this  gentleman's  unflagging  zeal  also  carried  him  on 
to  the  rostrum,  where  his  plain,  straightforward  candor  invariably  secured 
for  him  a  respectful  and  appreciative  auditory. 

On  several  occasions  he  was  invited  to  address  the  "  Young  Men's  Chris- 
tian Association"  of  New  York,  and  in  a  series  of  logical  yet  perfectly  plain 
arguments  he  brought  his  strong  sense  and  vast  experience  to  a  successful 
issue  in  inducing  members  of  that  body  to  investigate  the  claims  of  Spiritual- 
ism. 

Judge  Edmonds  and  Dr.  Warner  also  opened  their  splendid  residences  for 
weekly  receptions  of  Spiritualists,  thus  promoting  a  social  feeling  and  kindly 
interdiange  of  sentiment  between  different  classes  of  the  believers  that  oper- 
ated  very  favorably  upon  all. 

Mrs.  Hatch  frequently  held  investigating  circles,  where  the  philosophy  of 
the  communion  was  discussed  with  the  most  distinguished  savans  of  the 
country,  the  spirits  controlling  the  young  medium  with  a  display  of  ability 
that  was  acknowledged  to  be  perfectly  supra-mundane.  Mrs.  Brown  and 
Emma  Hardinge  held  investigating  cirdes  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  more 
rare  and  occult  phenomena  by  which  the  physical  manifestations  were  made. 
These  meetings  often  resulted  in  the  most  astonishing  displays  of  spirit-power, 
and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  their  details  cannot  be  given  to  the  public,  as 
they  would  make  the  recorded  phenomena  appear  insignificant  by  tiietr  side. 
Emma  Hardinge  and  two  or  three  of  the  prominent  New  York  mediums  also 
entered  into  a  set  of  experiments  on  mental  telegraphy,  from  which  the  most 
interesting  results  were  obtained. 

In  1855  "the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Spiritual  Knowledge"  published 
a  large  volume  of  530  pages,  entitled  "  The  Healing  of  the  Nations."  It  is  a 
collection  of  aphorisms  on  every  imaginable  subject  and  condition  of  life, 
arranged  in  short,  poetic  prose  verses,  the  beauty  of  which,  whether  in  senti- 
ment, imagery,  or  purity  of  diction,  makes  it  a  work  of  unrivalled  excellence 
and  spiritual  elevation. 

The  production  of  this  book  was  due  to  the  mediumship  of  Mr^Charles 
Linton,  a  young  man  developed  into  the  spiritual  ranks  from  tlie  humble 
spEere  of  a  blacksmith,  where  his  opportunities  for  intellectual  culture  were 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  151 

of  course  very  limited.  Notwithstanding  this  disadvantage,  Mr.  Linton  be- 
came a  writing  medium  of  such  extraordinary  capacity  that  he  attracted  the 
attention  of  Governor  TaUmadge,  under  whose  able  editorship  the  "  Heahng 
of  the  Nations"  was  pubhshed. 

Governor  Talhnadge  gives  the  following  account  of  tliis  work  and  its  origin 
in  his  editorial  introduction  ; 

IS  directed  to  write  no  more  miRcellaneous  commnnica- 
iting  a  book  which  would  be  dictated  to  him  through 
spiritual  influence. 

"  He  procured,  according  to  direction,  a  thick,  bound,  blank  volume,  of  the  largest  ruled 
letter  sheet,  and  in  that  commenced  writing.  This  book'  itself  is  almost  a  miracle.  The 
chirograpliy  is  beautiful.  The  handwriting  of  the  medium  herein  is  entirely  different  from 
his  own,  ajid  can  he  read  as  eaaly  as  print.  It  is  written  with  an  accuracy  and  neatness 
that  could  not  be  surpassed  by  the  most  expert  copyist.  There  are  foor  hundred  and  thirty 
pages  in  the  volume  and  not  a  word  of  importance  erased  or  interlined  throughout  the 
whole.     A  large  portion  of  it  has  been  written  in  my  presence 

"  During  the  time  1  was  with  Linton  he  wrote  from  five  to  ten  pages  a  day,  lie  wrote 
rapidly  whilst  the  influence  was  on  him.     ....... 

"  Many  literaryand  scientific  gentlemen  have  examined  the  original  volume,  and  pronounce 
portions  of  it  beyond  human  conception. 

"  The  style  is  amply  faultless,  and  adapted  to  every  capacity.  Tlie  most  astute  critic 
cannot  strike  out  a  word  in  a  single  sentence  and  substitute  another  which  he  can  truthfully 
say  will  improve  it  in  style  or  sentiment." 

Tn  1855  an  immense  spiritual  meeting  was  held  in  a  great  building,  since 
pulled  dowii,  called  "  the  Tabernacle." 

The  house,  tliough  capable  of  holding  upwards  of  four  thousand  persons, 
was  crowded  to  stiffocation  and  hundreds  went  away  unable  to  obtain  ad- 
mission. 

The  following  notice  of  this  meeting  appears  in  one  of  the  New  York 
papers. 

"New  York,  February  2^,  1855. 
"Accordmgto  the  published  notices  in  the  daily  papers  of  this  city,  a  meeting  of  the 
Spiritualists  was  convened  at  the  Broadway  Tabernacle,  on  Friday  evening,  February  16. 
Long  before  the  time  for  the  commencement  of  the  services,  the  house  was  ailed  by  an 
immense  audience,  which  must  have  numbered  over  five  thousand  persons. 

"The  followmg  statement  of  the  J<jj^  5h«  may  be  taken  as  the  general  estimate: 
" '  Spiritual  Mass  Meeting.  —  The  largest  meeting  of  the  season  was  held  last 
"    ;  at  the  Broadway  Tabernacle  by  the  Spiritualists.   The  galleries  and  every  availab'  - 
the  house  were  densely  packed,  and  the  greatest  possible  interest  was  kept  up  durii 

evening 

t  the  Broadway  Tabernacle  by  the  Spiritualists.   The  galleries  and  every  available 
ehousewerede      '         '    '        ' ''  '         '"'"  "         ''    '  — -^ 
le  proceedings. 

"  '  The  meeting  will  prove,  no  doubt,  a  season  long  to  be  remembered,  for  wbile  Lt  is  a 
significant  answer  to  the  assertion  that  Spiritualism  is  'passing  away,'  the  impression  left 
on  the  minds  of  those  who  attended  must  be  the  best  evidence  that  Spiritualism  was  inter- 
nal  and  sympathetic  as  well  as  external  and  numerous. 

" '  It  we  needed  confirmation  on  the  subject  of  spuritual  progress  in  this  city,  it  would  be 
found  in  the  fact  (hat  Spiritualism  was  allowed  a  hearmg  m  the  Tabernacle,  for  two  years 
ago,  vAen  the  Rev.  Mr.  Madison  got  up  a  theological  farce  in  the  same  place,  the  friends 
of  Spiritualism  wished  the  use  of  the  Tabernacle  to  say  what  '  is  and  what  is  not  Spiritual- 
ism; '  but  then  it  could  not  be  had  for  that  purpose.  There  may  have  been  good  reasons 
for  the  refusal,  but  be  that  as  it  may,  one  thing  is  pl^n,  either  Spiritualism  is  better  undCT- 
stood,  or  else  it  is  more  popular^ the  present  meetmg  being  the  authority.' 

"  It  would  be  unnecessary  to  notice  the  addresses  which  were  made  on  the  occasion, 
except  to  say  that  they  were  listened  to  withdoep  interest  by  the  secular  portion  of  tha 
audience,  and  reported  in  an  unusually  respectful  tone  by  the  press." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

^S'  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Amongst  the  numerous  literary,  scientific,  and  even  religious  societies  that 
began  to  realize  the  growing  popularity  of  Spiritualism  and  the  necessity  for 
investigating  its  claims,  was  "  the  Nevir  York  Philosophical  Society  of  the 
Mechanics'  Institute." 

At  three  of  the  meetings  of  tl:is  society,  Mrs.  Coan,  J  B  Conklin,  and 
Mr.  Charles  Partridge  were  invited  to  be  present.  The  investigations  through 
the  two  first-named  mediums  consisted  of  regular  seanus,  m  which  the  vari- 
ous members  of  the  association  tested  the  raps  and  movements  of  the  table 
in  the  usual  way — ivriting  names  of  spirit  friends,  ages,  places  of  death, 
diseases,  and  every  conceivable  token  of  identity  on  several  slips  ot  paper, 
and  then  rolling  tliem  up  in  tight  pellets  and  throwing  them  pell-mell  upon 
the  table. 

Each  pellet  was  picked  out  and  arranged  by  the  raps  or  tips  in  corresponding 
series ;  the  questions  or  tests  suggested  in  them  were  then  all  correctly  spelled 
out  by  tlie  controlling  spirits,  and  as  each  pellet  was  opened  it  was  found  to 
correspond,  whilst  every  answer  to  test  questions  was  given  correctly.  Many 
of  the  questions  were  propounded  in  mystic  ways,  and  some  in  the  German 
language,  but  the  answers  to  all  invariably  indicated  the  personality  of  the 
spirit,  his  or  her  perfect  understanding  of  the  questioner's  meaning,  besides 
conveying  in  many  ways  an  amount  of  spontaneous  intelligence  that  was  not 
asked  for. 

The  impression  produced  upon  the  minds  of  the  shrewd  inquisitors  was 
deep  and  earnest.  All  agreed  in  the  report  which  was  subsequently  issued, 
namely,  that  no  evidence  whatever  of  fraud  or  deception  could  be  traced 
on  the  part  of  the  medium  ;  that  the  intelligence  rendered  \vas  correct,  and 
in  view  of  its  supra-mundane  character,  truly  astounding,  and  could  not  have 
been  the  result  of  diance,  accident,  or,  in  many  cases,  even  psychological 
impression.  On  the  third  evening,  Mr.  Charles  Partridge  addressed  the 
meeting  in  terms  so  clear  and  logical  that  he  was  listened  to  witli  the  most 
profound  attention  and  interest,  and  the  seances  closed  with  a  unanimous 
vote  of  the  society  to  continue  their  investigations  during  the  ensuing  winter 

It  would  scarcely  bepossible  to  close  our  notice  of  Spnituaiism  in  New 
York  without  making  special  reference  to  the  manifestations  which  have 
occurred  in  the  extreme  western  city  of  the  State,  Buffalo. 

In  spiritualistic  annals  Buflalo  has  been  less  celebrated  than  notorious,  as 
the  scene  of  tlie  famous  exposition  of  the  learned  "  Buffalo  Doctors,"  Messrs. 
Flint,  Lee,  and  Coventry. 

As  this  transaction  stands  almost  unrivalled  for  folly  and  even  psychologi- 
cal absurdity,  it  becomes  necessary  to  assign  to  it  the  prominent  place  wliich 
its  remarkable  features  deserve  ;  we  shall  therefore  give  the  expose  in  all  its 
details,  by  inserting  the  letter  written  by  die  said  "  Buffalo  Doctors"  to  the 
Commercial  Advertiser. 

_  It  must  be  stated  that  the  circumstances  referred  to  took  place  during  llie 
visit  of  the  Misses  Foic  to  Buffalo,  in  1851.  In  February  of  that  year,  Mrs. 
Fish  and  her  sister,  Margaretta  Fox,  commenced  giving  seances  at  die  Phelps 
House,  which  were  thronged  with  all  the  e/zV^of  the  city,  amongst  whom  were 
the  Professor  of  Physiology,  the  Professor  of  Materia  Medica,  and  a  Professor 
of  the  Practice  of  Medicine,  of  the  University  of  Buffalo.  In  virtue,  it  may 
be  presumed,  of  the  positions  occupied  by  the  gentlemen,  they  deemed  that 
their  authority  would  carry  great  weight  upon  any  subject  coming  within  the 
range  of  tlieir  observation ;  it  was  doubtless  with  a  full  sense,  tiien,  of  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  153 

effects  they  expected  to  produce  on  the  public  mind,  that  they  penned  tlie 
following  unsoT^ht-for  o  '      ' 

"EXPOSITION  C 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Commercial  Advertiser  : 

"  Curiosit)'  having  led  us  to  risit  the  room  at  the  Phelps  House  in  which  two  females 
from  Rochester  [Mrs.  Fish  and  Miss  Fok]  profess  to  exhibit  striking  manifestations  of  the 
spiritual  world,  by  means  of  which  communion  may  be  held  with  deceased  friends,  etc. ,  and 
hivbg  arrived  at  a  physiolo^cal  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  the  correctness  of  which 
has  been  demonstrated  in  an  instance  that  has  ance  fallen  undCT  oleervation,  we  have  felt 
that  a  public  statement  is  called  for,  which  may  perhaps  serve  to  prevent  further  waste  of 
time,  money,  and  credulity,  to  say  nothing  of  sentiment  and  philosophy,  ilk  connection  with 
this  so  long  successful  imposition. 

"  The  explanation  is  reached  ahnost  by  logical  necessity,  on  the  application  of  a  method 
of  reasoning  much  resorted  to  in  the  diai.-noscs  of  diseases,  viz.;  reasoning  by  way  of  cxclu- 
Mon.  It  was  reached  by  this  method  prior  to  the  demonstration  which  has  subsequently 
occurred. 

"  It  is  to  be  assumed,  first,  that  the  manifestations  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  spiritual, 
provided  they  can  be  phyacally  or  phyHolo^eally  accounted  for.  Immaterial  a^ndes  are 
not  to  be  invoked  until  material  agencies  fill.  We  are  thus  to  exclude  spiritud  causation 
in  this  stage  of  the  investigation. 

**  Next  it  is  to  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  rappmgs  are  not  produced  by  artificial  con- 
trivances about  the  persons  of  the  females,  which  may  be  concealed  by  the  dress.  This 
hypothecs  is  excluded,  because  it  is  understood  that  tho  females  have  been  repeatedly  and 
carefully  examined  by  lady  committees. 

"It  IS  obvious  that  the  rappings  are  not  caused  by  machinery  attached  to  tables,  doors, 
etc.,  for  they  are  heard  in  different  rooms,  and  different  parts  of  the  same  room,  if  the 
females  are  present,  but  always  near  the  spot  where  the  females  are  stationed.  'This 
mechanical  hypothesis  is  then  to  be  excluded. 

"  So  much  for  negative  evidence,  and  now  for  what  positively  relates  to  the  subject. 

"  On  carefully  observing  the  countenances  of  the  two  females,  it  was  evident  that  the 
sounds  were  due  to  the  agency  of  the  younger  sister,  and  that  they  involved  an  effort  of  the 
will.  She  evidently  attempted  to  conceal  any  indications  of  voluntary  effort,  but  in  this 
she  did  not  succeed.  A  voluntary  effort  was  manifest,  and  it  was  plam  that  it  could  not 
be  continued  very  long  without  fatigue. 

"Assuming,  then,  this  positive  fact,  the  inquiry  arises  how  can  the  will  be  exerted  to  pro- 
duce sounds  [rappings]  without  obvious  movements  of  the  body  ?  The  voluntary  muscles 
are  the  only  oi^ans  [save  those  which  belong  t<i  the  mind  itself]  over  which  volition  can 
exert  any  direct  controL  But  the  contractions  of  the  muscles  do  not,  in  the  muscles  them- 
selves, occaaon  obvbus  sounds.  The  muscles,  therefore,  to  develop  audible  vibrations, 
must  act  upon  parts  with  which  they  are  connected.  Now,  it  was  sufficiently  clear  that  the 
rappmgs  were  not  vocal  sounds ;  these  could  not  be  produced  withont  movements  of  the 
respiratory  muscles,  which  would  at  once  lead  to  detection.  Hence,  excluding  vocal  sounds, 
the  only  posable  source  of  the  noises  in  question,  produced,  as  we  have  seen  they  must  be, 
by  voluntary  muscular  contractions,  b  in  one  or  more  of  the  moveable  articulations  of  the 
skeleton.  From  the  anatomical  connections  of  the  voluntary  muscles,  this  explanation 
lemains  as  the  only  alternative. 

"  By  an  analysis  prosecuted  in  this  manner,  we  arrive  at  the  conviction  that  the  rappings 
—  assuming  that  they  are  not  spiritual — are  produced  by  the  action  of  the  will,  through 
voluntary  muscles,  upon  the  joints. 

"  Various  facts  may  be  cited  to  show  that  the  motion  of  joints,  under  certain  circum- 
stances, is  adequate  to  produce  the  phenomena  of  the  rapping ;  but  we  need  not  now  refer 
to  these.  By  a  curious  coincidence,  after  arriving  at  the  above  conclusion  respecting  the 
source  ot  the  sounds,  an  instance  has  fallen  under  our  observation  which  demonstrates  the 
fact  that  noises  precisely  identical  with  the  spiritual  rappings  may  be  produced  in  the  knee 

"  A  h^My  respectable  lady  of  this  dty  possesses  the  ability  to  develop  sounds  sunilar 
both  in  character  and  degree  to  those  professedly  elicited  by  the  Rochester  impostors  from 
the  spiritual  world 

"  We  hnve  witnessed  the  production  of  the  sounds  by  the  lady  referred  to,  and  have  been 
permitted  to  examuie  the  mecliauisra  by  which  they  are  produced.     Without  entering,  at 

Hosiedb,  Google 

IS4 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

this  time,  into  a  yery  minute  anatomical  and  pliyaological  explanation,  it  is  sufficient  to 
slate  ibat  the  muscles  inserted  into  the  upper  and  inner  side  of  the  large  bope  of  the  leg  [tiie 
li&ia]  near  the  knee  joint,  are  brought  into  action  so  as  to  move  the  upper  surface  of  the 
bone  just  named,  laterally  upon  thelower  surface  of  the  thigh  bone  [the/^oiar],  ^idng  rise, 
in  fact,  to  a  partial  lateral  dislocation.  This  is  effected  by  an  act  of  the  will,  without  any 
obvious  movement  of  the  limb,  occa^oning  a  loud  noise,  and  the  return  of  the  bone  to  its 
place  is  attended  by  a  second  sound.  Most  of  the  Rochester  rappmgs  are  also  double.  It 
IS  practicable,  however,  to  produce  a  single  sound,  by  moving  the  bone  out  of  place  with 
the  requisite  quickness  and  force,  and  allowuig  it  to  slide  slowly  back,  in  which  case  it  is 
noiseless. 

"  The  visible  vibrations  of  articles  in  the  room  situated  near  the  operator,  occur  if  the 
limb,  or  any  portion  of  the  body,  is  in  contact  with  them  at  the  time  the  sounds  are  pro- 
duced. The  force  of  the  semi'dislocation  of  the  bone  is  sufficient  to  occasion  distinct 
jarringsof  doors,  tables,  etc.,  if  in  contact.  The  intensity  of  the  sound  may  be  varied  in 
proportion  to  the  force  of  the  muscular  contractions,  and  this  will  render  the  apparent 
source  of  the  rappirigs  more  or  less  distinct. 

"  We  have  witne^ed  repetitions  of  experiments  in  the  case  just  referred  to,  sufficient  to 
exhibit  to  as  all  the  phenomena  of  sounds  belonging  to  the  Rochester  rappings,  and  without 
further  explanation  at  this  time,  we  append  our  names  in  testimony  of  the  facts  contained 
in  the  foregoing  hastily-penned  exposition. 

"Austin  Flint,  M.D. 
Charles  A.   Lee,  M.D. 
C.  B.  Coventry,  M.D. 

"University  of  Buffalo,  February  17,  1851." 

The  publication  of  tiiis  article  produced  a  perfect  legion  of  paper  warriors, 
who  did  battle  on  both  sides  of  the  question  with  ecjual  hardihood  but 
doubtful  success.  Amongst  the  most  interesting  results  of  the  expose,  how- 
ever, was  a  letter  from  the  "females"  themselves,  in  whicli  they  simply  and 
modestly  demanded  a  more  thorough  investigation  before  they  would  consent 
to  be  branded  as  "  impostors"  on  the  faith  of  a  naere  anatomical  theory. 

The  challenge  thus  publicly  made  could  not  be  evaded. 

Another  meeting  took  place,  at  whidi  the  savans  were  permitted  to  place 
the  unfortunate  sisters  in  various  cramped  and  painful  positions,  with  a  view 
of  rendering  the  joints  "tense"  etc 

It  would  be  simply  waste  of  time  now  to  reprint  the  contradictory,  garbled, 
but  almost  incomprehensible  "stuff"  that  the  learned  professors  again  put 
forth  by  way  of  report'  on  tliis  second  meeting,  the  ^st  of  which  was  that 
"when  tlie  sounds"  were  not  heard,  it  was  not  because  there  was  any  sus- 
pension of  the  electric  currents  necessary  to  produce  them  by  the  cramped 
position  of  the  mediums,  or  the  neutralizing  effect  of  the  antagonistic  mag- 
netism of  the  minds  that  were  watching  them  like  tigers  ready  to  spring  upon 
their  prey,  "but  because  they  [the  doctors]  liad  placed  them  in  sucli  a  posi- 
tion that  the  knee  joints  could  not  work."  Again  when  tlie  sounds  were  pro- 
duced, it  was  not  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  scientiiic  cJutcli  was  removed 
or  had  been  partially  relaxed,  but  that  diey  [the  females]  took  sudden  advan- 
tage of  their  freedom  when  the  investigators  were  off  their  guard,  whilst  any 
raps  that  were  heard  in  parts  of  the  room  removed  from  the  mediums,  the 
learned  doctors  tindertook  to  affirm  were  not  heard  there,  only  appeared  to 
be  so  heard,  and  that  by  listeners  who  were  unacquainted  with  the  law  of 
acoustics,  which  made  some  sounds  under  some  circumstances  seem  to  pro- 
ceed from  a  distance,  when  they  were  in  reality  made  quite  near,  etc. 

Dr.  Lee  wrote  a.  concise  statement  of  his  great  discovery  for  the  New 
York  Tribune,  which  was  published  accordingly,  but  with  an  editorial  note 
appended  to  it,  suggesting  that  as  the  Buffalo  doctors  had  confessedly  pre- 
judged the  cause  before  they  had  tried  it,  and  determined  that  the  Rocliester 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  ISS 

ladies  were  humbugging  "  females"  before  they  saw  them,  it  might  have  been 
as  well  to  have  intrusted  the  trial  to  somewhat  more  impart  al  judges. 

As  usual,  the  Buffalo  University  lights  only  threw  a  publicity  over  the 
subject  of  the  rappings,  which  resulted  in  a  perfect  torrent  of  investigation, 
and  filled  the  public  prints  with  reports  of  seances  whose  highly  favorable  and 
often  astounding  character — witnessed  by  many  of  the  most  distinguished 
citizens  of  Buffalo — culminated  in  the  conversion  of  more  investigators  to 
the  belief  in  Spiritualism  than  had  been  known  in  the  space  of  so  short  a 
time  in  any  other  city  of  the  Union. 

Among  the  investigators  provoked  into  research  by  the  flimsy  misrepresen- 
tations of  the  Buffalo  doctors,  was  Mr.  Stephen  Albro,  an  old  and  highly-re- 
spectable citizen,  whose  inquiries  into  Spiritualism,  starting .  from  this  simple 
point,  led  him  into  the  very  thick  of  the  ranks,  and  procured  the  powerful 
advocacy  of  his  pen  and  purse  for  the  cause,  to  which  for  years  he  lent  his 
aid  in  Buffalo,  besides  undertaking  the  publication  of  an  exceedingly  well- 
written  paper,  edited  by  himself,  entitled  T/t£  Age  of  Progress.  It  is  un- 
necessary to  remark  further  on  these  transactions  except  to  point  to  the 
invaluable  results  that  grew  out  of  the  poor  medium's  martyrdom  in  the 
advancement  of  the  cause. 

The  mere  publication  of  The  Age  of  Progress,  and  the  noble  champi- 
onship of  its  editor,  Mr.  Stephen  Albro,  formed  a  Macedonian  phalanx  in 
SpirituaUsm,  for  which  it  owes  the  BiilMo  doctors  an  incalculable  debt  of 
gratitude.  Amongst  other  remakable  results  of  the  excitement  which  fol- 
lowed the  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox  were  many  new  developments  of  medium 
power,  amongst  which  we  must  revert  to  the  case  of  Miss  Sarah  Brooks, 
already  alluded  to  as  the  wonderful  medium  for  an  invisible  piano-forte 
player,  and  also  for  a  number  of  philosophical  spirits  who,  through  the  simple 
raps,  alphabetically  spelled  out  several  hundred  able  lectures,  which  were  each 
week  printed  in  The  Age  of  Progress  for  more  tlian  two  years.  It  was  in 
the  city  of  Buffalo  that  the  Davenport  Brothers  first  became  the  wonder  and 
astonishment  of  their  time. 

Those  who  have  Only  witnessed  their  cabinet  performances  in  the  midst  of 
a  heterogeneous  and  often  bitterly-antagonistic  mob,  cannot  form  the  sl^it- 
est  conception  of  the  marvellous  character  of  the  phenomena  which  first 
startled  the  simple  and  unsophisticated  parents  of  the  two  young  lads,  before 
either  of  them  had  reached  Us  fourteenth  year. 

Besides  the  heavy  poundmgs  and  violent  disturbances  of  the  furniture 
which  ordinai'ily  occur  with  what  is  called  "  physical  force  mediums,"  spectral 
figures  were  fi"equently  seen  by  the  whole  family,  whilst  voices  were  heard 
giving  them  instruction,  advice,  and  encouragement. 

Another  striking  phenomenon  of  the  young  Davenports'  mediumship  was 
the  firing  of  pistols,  rifles,  etc.,  in  the  dark,  against  a  mark,  which,  however 
minute,  was  always  hit  with  marvellous  precision.  Veiy  frequently  the  flash 
of  the  piece  would  disclose  apparitions  guiding  or  receiving  die  bullets,  and 
monstrous  arms  and  hands  were  constantly  seen  flashing  through  the  dark- 
ness, or  even  in  an  obscure  light,  by  members  of  the  family,  under  the  most 
startling  circumstances. 

At  times  the  children  would  be  lifted  up  several  feet  in  the  an,  and  kept 
suspended  there  for  one  or  two  minutes.  The  manifestations  accompanied 
them  everywhere;  in  the  streets  or  stores;  at  their  play  or  in  bed,  and  were 
always  of  the  wildest  and  most  preternatural  character. 

As  a  more  extended  notice  of  these  wonderful  mediums  will  be  given  else- 

Hosled  by  Google 

1S6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

where,  we  shall  only  further  add  tliat  their  residence,  like  that  of  Miss  Brooks, 
was  continually  thronged  by  eager  and  astounded  witnesses. 

Odier  spiritual  manifestations  of  a  fej  more  elevating  cliaracter  were  fre- 
quently afforded  to  the  earnest  seekers  for  tlie  trutla  and  beauty  of  Spiritual- 
ism, through  the  joint  mediumship  of  Miss  Sarah  Brooks  and  Miss  Cora 
Scott  [afterwards  Mrs.  Hatch,  the  celebrated  lecturer].  These  young  ladies, 
both  of  tliem  mere  cliildren  in  age,  shortly  after  tiie  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox, 
became  mediums  and  frequently  held  trance  seances,  at  which  one  would  be 
controlled  to  speak  in  foreign  tongues,  whilst  the  other  interpreted  the  mys- 
tic utterances.  These,  together  with  the  pubhc  lectures  of  Thomas  Gales 
Forster,  one  of  die  most  eloquent  and  powerful  trance  speakers  of  America, 
supplied  tlie  good  people  of  Buffalo  witii  food  for  the  highest  intellectual 
thought,  whilst  the  more  startUng  phenomena  noticed  above,  fully  testified 
diat  the  work  was  of  a  supra-mum^e  character.  Many  other  mediums  of 
singular  power  and  excellence  became  prominent  in  tlie  spiritual  uprising  of 
this  city.  Mrs.  Swain,  Mr.  Sangster,  and  Mr.  Reed,  contributed  their  share 
to  the  marvels  by  the  most  astounding  physical  manifestations. 

Dr.  Griswold  commenced,  in  Buffalo,  the  publication  of  The  Sunbeam,  a 
spiritual  paper  of  an  eminently  religious  tone,  and  contributed  by  liis  remark- 
able mediumship  as  a  seer,  artist,  and  writer,  to  the  elevation  of  the  mighty 
cause  ;  in  short,  no  city  has  been  more  abund:mtly  blessed  with  an  outpour- 
ing of  the  Pentecostal  fire  than  Buffalo. 

Many  changes  have  thinned  the  ranks  and  decimated  the  strength  of  the 
spiritual  army  whose  bright  phalanx  once  shone  so  resplendently  in  this  great 
Western  emporium. 

The  once-crowded  Sabbath  meetings  have,  we  believe,  languished  into 
occasional  gatlierings  only,  wliilst  the  phenomenal  men  and  women  who 
once  made  the  very  name  of  Buffalo  synonymous  with  a  Pentecostal  out- 
pouring, are  scattered  far  and  wide  in  broader  fields  of  labor. 

Stephen  Albro,  Dr.  Griswold,  and  Mr.  A.  C,  Maynard,  tiiree  of  tJie  most 
devoted,  brave,  and  unselfish  laborers  tliat  the  spiritual  cause  has  ever  num- 
bered, have  themselves  passed  to  their  spheres  of  bright  and  nobly-earned 
recompense. 

But  Stephen  Albro's  Age  of  Progress  has  not  been  inaugurated  in  vain. 
The  mighty  flood  sweeps  on,  which  lois  strong  hand  helped  to  direct  into  the 
channels  of  human  usefulness.  The  bright  little  Sunbeam  which  the  de- 
vo  on  and  self-sacrifice  of  good  Dr.  Griswold  reflected  upon  earth's  gross 
darkne  s  1  as  lighted  up  the  pathway  for  many  and  many  a  pilgrim  foot  on 
1  e  h  gl  ays  of  immortality,  and  the  ever-open  door  with  which  the  lavish 
ho  p  al  y  of  good  Mr.  Maynard  welcomed  the  spirits  and  their  wayworn 
n  ed  ums  !  as  drawn  angel  hosts  to  earth,  who  will  never  forsake  it  more. 

The  pi  y  ical  forms  of  the  two  noble  editors,  and  the  well-beloved  and 
generous  friend  of  the  medium,  have  disappeared  from  the  mortal  eyes  of 
those  amongst  whom  they  so  freely  broke  the  bread  of  immortal  life,  but  we 
know  that  their  works  do  follow  them  ;  and  are  gathered  up  in  the  light  of 
those  sunbeams  that  will  never  be  quenched  in  death  or  forge tfulness, 
whilst  their  cherished  memory  will  ever  be  green  in  the  heart  of  every  true 
SpirituSlisL 

Hosted  by  Google 

&?fc^ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM, 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    NEW   ENGLAND.— MASSACHUSETTS    WITCHCRAFT 

Ihough  it  be  not  written  down,  yet  fctget  DOE  that  I  am  an  iss.    ...    Oh  that  I  had  been 

An  attempt  to  arrive  at  the  origin  of  the  spiritual  movement,  proves  first, 
its  vast  universality,  and  next,  its  unbroken  continuity  with  all  preceding  out- 
pourings of  a  similar  kind 

Even  if  we  were  disposed  to  trace  the  beginning  of  New  England  Spiritual- 
ism to  Salem  Witchcraft,  we  should  find  that  the  victims  of  that  reign  of  ig- 
norance and  superstition  inherited  their  occult  gifts  in  legitimate  succession 
from  Hiediumistic  progenitors.  In  the  accounts  of  special  phenomena 
which  we  are  compelled  to  reserve  for  a  second  volume,  will  be  found  the 
narrative  of  an  apparition  whose  manifestations  by  speech,  voice,  appearance, 
and  direct  communion,  far  transcend  any  of  the  other  marvels  of  modern 
times,  yet  this  occurrence  preceded  the  Rochester  knockings  by  forty-seven 
years ;  in  fact,  although  it  seems  necessary,  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  to 
select  a  special  date  for  the  opening  of  our  history,  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
note  any  period  unmarked  by  spiritual  phenomena,  which  if  less  prominently 
heralded  forth  to  the  world  than  the  Hydesville  disturbances,  are  still  proved 
to  be  of  a  kindred  nature,  and  obviously  related  to  a  general  and  unbroken 
thread  of  intercommunion  between  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds. 

The  following  narrative  is  strikingly  illustrative  of  these  remarks,  and  had 
it  been  more  extensively  published  abroad,  would  doubtless  have  been 
regarded  as  the  true  starting  point  of  modem  Spiritualism  in  New  England. 

About  the  year  1837,  a  Dr.  Latkin,  practicing  physician  in  Wrentham, 
Massachusetts,  became  interested  in  the  phenomena  evoked  by  anima!  mag- 
netism. Observing  that  it  might  be  made  instrumental  in  the  cure  of  dis- 
eases, and  finding  himself  possessed  of  the  requisite  power  to  become  an 
operator,  he  conducted  a  series  of  experiments  so  successfully  as  to  convince 
himself  of  the  use  of  magnetism  as  a  curative  agent,  also  of  its  value  in  the 
development  of  clairvoyance,  which  he  found  to  be  a  very  general  result  of 
magnetic  operations.  In  1844  he  tried  the  effect  of  animal  magnetism  npon 
a  servant-girl  employed  in  his  family,  who  was  afflicted  with  fits.  At  first  the 
patient  exhibited  only  a  modification  in  her  physical  symptoms,  but  after  a  time 
clairvoyance  of  a  most  remarkable  character  supervened ;  she  was  enabled 
during  the  mystic  sleep  to  describe  her  own  state,  and  that  of  numbers  of  the 
doctor's  patients,  of  whom  she  had  never  heard.  When  any  difficult  case 
was  presented  to  Dr.  Lavkin,  he  had  only,  by  a  few  passes,  to  place  the  girl 
[Mary  Jane]  in  a  magnetic  sleep,  to  insure  her  giving  a  remarkable  diagnosis 
of  llie  disease  he  wished  to  inquire  about,  and  often,  in  addition,  a  valuable 
and  effective  prescription.  Although  Dr.  Larkin  was  unable  precisely  to 
determine  what  were  the  best  conditions  for  the  prosecution  of  his  magnetic 
researches  with  this  clairvoyant,  there  were  certain  results  growing  out  of 
them  which  were  to  him — at  that  time — as  unaccountable  as  they  were 
spontaneous  and  unlooked-for. 

The  first  of  these  was  the  production  of  loud  knockings,  which  generally 
seemed  to  accompany  the  girl's  trances,  but  in  what  connection.  Dr.  Larkin 
was  unable  to  divine.     They  seemed  to  resound  on  some  article  of  furniture 

Hosted  by  Google 

158  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

too  far  removed  from  the  entranced  subject  to  be  produced  by  her,  and  were 
never  accompanied  by  any  movement  of  her  body  which  could  indicate  their 
source  in  her  volition.  Another  feature  of  perplexing  novelty  to  her  opera- 
tor was  the  constantly-repeated  assertion  that  in  tliese  states  —  which  she 
called  "her  sleep"— she  was  attended  by  a  ^' fairy"  whom  she  named 
"  Katy,"  aud  whom  she  described  as  a  female  of  "  rare  beauty  and  exceeding 
goodness." 

Sometimes,  she  alleged,  she  was  surrounded  by  "fairies"  like  Katy,  but 
none  of  them  equalled  her  in  loveliness  or  power,  and  Katy  it  was  who  de- 
scribed diseases  and  prescribed  for  their  cure.  She  said  the  "fairies"  came 
from  Germany  and  were  very  good,  but  "  Katy"  was  her  "guardian  angel," 
and  when  she  came  the  rest  were  subordinate  to  her. 

It  seemed  that  other  influences  besides  good  ones  were  permitted  to  mani- 
fest themselves  in  this  singular  manner. 

Under  the  control  of  "Katy"  and  the  "fairies"  the  clairvoyant  was  gentle, 
skilful,  and  sometimes  philosophical  and  exalted,  but  occasionally  an  influence 
seemed  to  possess  her  of  the  most  profane  and  mischievous  character.  Her 
entranced  lips,  as  if  moved  by  automatic  action  over  which  she  had  no  con- 
trol, gave  utterance  to  the  most  blasphemous  oaths  and  rude  speeches ;  at 
the  same  time  the  furniture  was  often  moved  about  violently  by  unseen 
hands,  and  heavy  weights  were  lifted  from  place  to  place.  On  one  occasion, 
the  whole  family  being  assembled  round  the  couch  of  the  magnetized  sleeper, 
and  every  door  being  shut,  aheavy  flat-iron,  last  seen  in  the  kitchen^ — quite 
distant  off — was  suddenly  placed  in  then  midst,  and,  at  the  request  of  Mrs. 
I.arkin,  as  suddenly  disappeared,  and  was  next  found  in  the  kitchen,  every 
door  of  communication  having  remained  closed. 

These  aiid  many  similar  manifestations  were  made,  as  the  girl  stated,  by 
"  a  sailor  boy,"  whom  she  saw  and  who  compelled  her  to  utter  the  oaths  and 
profane  speeches  in  which  [as  he  alleged  through  her  lips]  he  had  been  wont 
to  indulge  on  earth.  Meantime  the  power,  whatever  it  might  be,  seemed 
locomotive,  and  followed  the  doctor  occasionally  in  his  professional  visits. 
On  one  occasion,  he  was  attending  a  patient  whose  house  was  situated  alone, 
on  the  top  of  a  high  hill  commanding  a  view  of  every  object  for  miles  round. 
During  his  visit  heavy  poundings  were  heard  on  the  front  door  of  the  house, 
but  on  examining  the  entrance  no  one  could  be  seen,  and  although  not  the 
slightest  chance  for  escape  or  concealment  was  afforded,  the  knocking  con- 
tinued as  long  as  the  doctor  remained. 

As  some  serious  misfortunes  occurred  to  the  owners  of  the  house  shortly 
afterwards,  the  mysterious  knockings  were  regarded  as  "  supernatural 
warnings "  of  their  approach,  but  from  their  frequent  occurrence  in  other 
scenes.  Dr.  Larkin  naturally  attributed  them  to  an  occult  force  originating  in 
himself  or  his  surroundings.  On  another  occasion  Dr.  Larkin  attended  a 
public  dinner  given  to  himself  and  several  members  of  the  medical  profession, 
about  thirty  miles  distant  from  his  home.  On  returning  late  at  night,  his 
wife  requested  him,  before  retiring,  to  visit  Mary  Jane,  who  \vas  entranced 
and  desirous  to  see  him.  On  entering  her  chamber,  he  was  greeted  with 
uproarious  laughter  from,  what  purported  to  be  the  spirit  of  the  sailor  boy, 
who  recounted  Jo  him  all  the  principal  events  of  the  evening,  even  to  his 
trifling  vexation  at  the  salmon  being  underdone  at  diimer,  and  the  roast  pig 
being  eaten  up  before  his  turn  came  to  be  helped.  Besides  Katy  and  the 
sailor  boy,  a  number  of  spirits  came  tlirough  diis  girl  and  seemed  to  take 
pleasure  in  rehearsing  their  histories,  giving  names,  places  of  birth  and  deafli, 
ages,  and  many  particulars  of  their  lives. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  S  U  9 

In  this  way,  Dr.  I.arkin,  who  was       ead     wn        tr  d 

procured  for  tiiis  purpose,  the  histon  h  da 

spirits,  many  cf  whose  statements  he        k  di  g  p  p 

every  instance  found  the  descriptio 
details.  , 

In  her  normal  state  Mary  Jane  wa  aa  d       m  g 

tive,  but  under  the  influence  of  thes  g  ox 

instructive,  and  occasionally  scientific 

The  conununicating  intelligences  \        d 
seemed  to  urge  the  doctor  to  make  t  k 

call  in  witnesses,  and  challenge  from       mm  hi  g 

They  all  prophesied,  too,  of  a  comin  h        h  ur 

with  mortals  should  he  known  and  pr  d  al 

Ahout  1846,  a  most  singular  and  d  as  p         m 

was  superadded  to  the  rest,  imder  what  claimed  to  be  the  mfluence  of  the 
profane  sailor.  The  girl's  limbs  in  several  directions  would  be  thrown  out 
of  joint,  and  tliat  with  apparent  ease,  in  a  moment,  and  without  pain.  _  To 
replace  them,  however,  seemed  to  be  either  beyond  the  power  or  the  will  of 
her  invisible  tormentor,  and  Dr,  I.arkin,  though  an  experienced  surgeon,  was 
often  obliged  to  call  in  the  aid  of  his  professional  bretlircn  and  two  or  three 
strong  assistants.  . 

On  one  occasion  the  knees  and  wrists  of  the  giri  were  thrown  out  of  jomt 
twice  in  a  single  day.  These  panful  feats  were  always  accompanied  by  ioud 
laughter,  hoarse  and  profane  jokes,  and  expressions  of  exultant  delight,  pur- 
porting to  come  from  the  spirit  sailor,  whilst  the  girl  herself  seemed  wholly 
unconscious  of  the  danger  of  her  awkward  situation.  The  preternatural  feats 
of  agility  and  strength  exhibited  on  these  occasions  could  scarcely  be  credited, 
and  the  frightfully  unnatural  contortions  of  the  limbs,  with  which  she  became 
tied  up  into  knots  and  coils,  baffles  all  physiological  explanation,  or  attempts 
at  description. 

One  day,  a  very  dangerous  dislocation  had  been  effected  twice  m  the  same 
morning,  when  tlie  medical  practitioner  whom  Dr.  Larkin  had  summoned  to 
liis  assistance  expressed  a  hope  tliat  his  services  would  not  be  required  again, 
as  he  was  much  pressed  for  time.  Uttering  the  usual  fearful  oaths  that  pur- 
ported to  proceed  from  die  spirit  of  the  sailor,  the  entranced  girl  bid  him  stay 
then,  and  do  his  work  at  once,  upon  which  the  limb  was  again  and  instantly 
tlirown  ont  of  joint,  before  the  eyes  of  the  astonished  assistant. 

Although  Dr.  Larkin  and  his  amiable  lady  had  become  familiar  with  these 
astounding  manifestations  by  their  frequency  during  many  succeeding  months, 
they  were  exceedingly  reluctant  to  comply  with  the  desires  of  their  invisible 
communicants  by  making  the  facts  known  and  courting  public  investigation. 
When,  however,  it  became  necessary  to  introduce  other  practitioners  mto  die 
house  to  help  in  reducing  the  girl's  dislocated  limbs,  and  all  tiie  abnormal 
sights,  sounds,  and  intelligence  attendant  upon  such  a  case  became  a  matter 
of  notoriety,  further  concealment  was  impossible,  and  the  whole  country  rang 
with  rumors  of  the  weird  phenomena  transpinng  m  Dr  Larkin's  family  As 
usual  in  such  cases,  die  most  exaggerated  fictions  were  substituted  for  reah 
ties,  but  what  the  current  reports  lacked  ui  trudi,  diey  gained  in  scandalous 
misrepresentations;  and  stories  were  set  afloat,  as  miunous  to  the  honor  of 
the  harassed  family  as  to  any  scientific  ^ alue  wtocli  the  manifestations  might 
have  had  under  fair  and  impartial  scrutiny 

In  the  fell  of  1847,  nine  men,  headed  by  a  mimster  of  Wrenthara,  called 
on  Dr.  Larkin;  a  self-consdtuted  committee  to  mqume  mto  the  evd  rumors 

Hosted  by  Google 

=■«•  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

that  were  in  circulation  respecting  him.  The  doctor,  without  questioning  the 
validity  of  their  claim  to  intrude  into  the  privacy  of  his  family,  quietly  narrated 
to  them  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  without  offering  any  other  explanation 
than  such  as  the  details  suggested. 

The  committee  were  not  satisfied.  They  reverted  to  die  outrageous  scan- 
dais  nfe  m  die  coranmnity,  and  urged  the  doctor  to  plead  guilty  to  the  charees. 
These  he  mdignantly  denied,  but  offered  to  admit  any  two  or  three  persons 
whom  the  committee  or  the  community  at  larg     h     Id     1        as     m  f 

his  family  for  at  least  one  week.  He  promised  p  d  h  w  h  b  d 
free  of  all  expense,  entertain  them  as  honored  gu  d     fl    d    h         1 

most  unlimited  opportunities  for  observation,      d    ^      d  b  d     by  h 

ultimate  report,  as  to  die  status  which  he  had    h       gl  1    Id  h 

fellow-men. 

Instead  of  at  once  accepting  his  reasonable      d        d  d    ff       1 
tee,  and  others  of  the  same  stainp,  insisted  upo  d    g  1    m    1  1 

doctor's  house  at  all  times  and  seasons,  and  m  d     d  d  h 

reporting  to  the  world  in  his  favor  the  produ  f  ph       m  i    n    h 

instant,  just  as  they  called  for  it 

For  months  the  unfortunate  girl  was  tortured  h  11  r*  f  b  d  d 
impertinent  inquiries  and  solicitations  to  call     p    h      p  n      di  1  h 

limbs,  make  "furniture  jump  about,"  etc. 

The  quiet  of  the  household  was  constandy  b    k  h  p 

disturbed,  and  their  reputation  seriously  damag  d         1  g     d  b 

yielding  doctor  insisted  upon  a  more  orderly  in        g  d 

then  his  first  proposition  was  accepted,  and  an      1    d  1 

est  denomination,  with  his  wife,  was  invited  by  the  Wrentham  select  men,  mag- 
istrates,  and  mmisters  to  take  up  their  residence  for  some  days  in  Dr.  Larkin's 
family,  for  the  express  purpose  of  overseeing  the  doings  of  the  spirits.  The 
choice  of  the  Wrentham  magnates  was  made  without  consulting  the  wishes  of 
Dr.  I^kin,  and  fell  upon  the  Rev.  Mr.  Thatcher  and  his  lady,  bodi  of  whom 
it_  was  supposed,  from  their  profession  of  highly  orthodox  principles,  strict 
piety,  and  similar  requisites  for  passing  judgment,  would  prove  themselves 
more  than  commonly  inimical  to  the  deeds  of  darkness  assumed  to  be  trans- 
piring in  the  possessed  house. 

The  first  evening  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Thatcher's  visit  to  Dr.  Larkin,  he  pro- 
posed to  pray  by  the  side  of  the  invahd  girl ;  when  in  the  very  middle  of  his 
pious  invocations,  the  victim  became  suddenly  entranced,  and  offered  prayers 
for  herself  witli  a  fervor  and  beauty  diat  melted  the  whole  party  into  sympa- 
dietic  tears.  '    ^ 

Concerning  the  result  of  the  clerical  inquisition  it  is  only  necessary  to  say 
that  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thatcher  had  abundant  opportunity  for  observing  and 
closely  scrutinizing  all  and  much  more  than  has  been  related  above,  and  that 
both  declare  themselves  "entirely  convinced  of  the  sincerity  and  purity  of 
life  and  intention  of  Dr.  Larkin  and  his  family,  and  the  veritable  nature  of 
the  occult  phenomena  transpiring  in  the  person  of  the  girl." 

On  one  occasion  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thatcher,  with  Dr.  Larkin  and  his  wife, 
were  standing  around  her  bed,  where  she  lay  entranced  and  answering  their 
questions,  when  the  handkerchief  which  Mr.  Thatcher  was  using  was  suddenly 
snatched  out  of  his  hand  by  an  invisible  power  and  instantly  disappeared. 
Not  a  creature  in  the  room  had  moved,  and  Mr.  Thatcher's  eyes  were  at  the 
time  steadily  fixed  on  Mary  Jane,  so  that  he  could  have  detected  her  slightest 

Remarking  that  any  circumstance,  however  small,  upon  which  a  preternatu- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  l6l 

rd  character  could  be  fixed,  would  answer  the  purpose  of  an  investigation 
as  well  as  more  important  phenomena,  he  retired  with  Dr.  Larkin,  and  left 
the  two  ladies  to  examine  the  bed,  the  girl,  every  inch  of  her  clothing,  and 
the  furniture  of  the  room  in  every  conceivable  direction. 

The  girl  was  then  removed  by  the  ladies  to  another  room,  and  the  gentle- 
men renewed  die  search,  locking  the  doors  and  not  suffering  a  pin  to  escape 
them.  When  all  was  done,  they  found  Mary  Jane  entranced  by  the  swearing 
sailor,  who  roared  with  delight  at  their  confusion,  and  protested  that  he  had 
"carried  off  the  handkerchief  to  Gennany." 

They  then  summoned  the  spirit  Katy,  who  generally  succeeded  in  regida- 
ting  the  disorders  of  the  house.  On  questioning  her,  however,  she  declared 
she  was  unable  to  help  them,  and  advised  that  if  they  really  wished  for  the 
return  of  the  handkerchief,  they  should  ask  it  from  the  spirit  sailor. 

Curious  to  pursue  the  investigation  in  all  its  bearings,  Mr.  Thatcher  in- 
sisted on  following  her  advice.  The  sailor  was  recalled,  and  after  much  inso- 
lence, promised  to  return  the  handkerchief  at  half  past  one  o'clock  that  night. 
And  here  it  ma.y  be  remarked  that,  though  this  spirit  always  kept  his  word 
and  was  wonderfully  faithful  to  time,  he  invariably  made  his  appointments  at 
the  most  unseasonable  hours  and  inconvenient  places  possible,  seemingly  de- 
sirous to  impose  all  the  trouble  he  could  upon  the  family. 

From  the  time  when  this  promise  -was  made  up  to  the  hour  of  its  fulfilment, 
the  girl  was  never  left  alone  for  one  single  moment 

Her  bed,  clothing,  and  person,  were  again  searched,  and  either  Mr.  or  Mrs. 
Tliatcher,  in  company  widi  other  persons,  were  in  her  presence  constantly. 

Mn  Thatcher,  Dr.  I-arkin,  and  their  wives,  finally  disposed  themselves  to 
rest,  round  the  bed  of  the  girl,  on  chairs  and  couches. 

About  one  in  the  morning,  she  spoke  under  the  influence  of  Katy,  and  de- 
sired that  they  should  all  be  awakened,  as  the  spirits  were  preparing  to  return 
the  handkerchief.  The  ladies  then  sat  the  girl  upright  in  the  bed,  placed  her 
hands  before  her  on  the  quilt,  and  drawing  a  sheet  under  her  anns,  held  it 
firmly  so  as  to  prevent  her  moving  a  muscle.  Mr,  and  Mrs.  Thatcher  and 
Dr.  Larkin  then  ranged  themselves  around  the  bed,  Mr.  Thatclier  facing  and 
intently  observing  her.  It  was  in  this  position  that,  as  he  stretched  out  his 
hand  to  call  her  attention  to  a  question  he  was  about  to  put,  the  missing 
handkerchief  in  an  instant  became  visible,  crumpled  up  in  his  open  palm. 

The  gir!  then,  with  a  fierce  oath,  said  hoarsely,  "  There's  your  old  handker- 
chief for  you,  d-   ■■  -n  you  ! " 

It  was  the  work  of  an  instant.  One  second,  and  the  hand  was  empt)' ; 
the  next,  with  not  a  movement  of  a  creature  widiin  two  feet  of  him,  not  the 
motion  of  a  muscle  from  himself  or  any  other  visible  being  in  the  brightly- 
lighted  room,  the  handkerchief  was  in  his  hand— how,' or  from  whence,  he 
never  knew.  The  gentlemen  looked  at  their  watches — it  was  half-past  one  to 
a  second. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.- Thatcher  quitted  Dr.  Larkin's  house  after  a  week  of  the 
most  open  and  thorough  investigation,  and  withm  a  few  days  afterwards,  the 
reverend  gentleman  addressed  a  circular  to  every  brother  minister  within  a 
circuit  of  twenty  miles,  in  which  he  expressed  his  "entire  conviction  of  the 
supra-mundane  character  of  the  events  he  had  witnessed." 

He  acquitted  all  parties  concerned  of  intentional  fraud,  deception,  or  con- 
nivance ;  pronounced  his  belief  that  the  phenomena  he  had  witnessed  were 
worthy  of  the  "  most  serious  and  candid  investigation ;  "  declared  it  was  the 
duty  of  every  minister  of  religion  to  come  to  the  work  of  inquiry  in  an  earnest 
and  unprejudiced  spirit,  and  implored  his  correspondents  and  their  wives  to. 
11 

Hosted  by  Google 

l62  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

hasten  to  the  scene,  and  combine  in  the  most  serious  and  practical  investiga- 
tion of  the  whole  subject 

To  this  letter  no  attention  whatever  was  paid,  but  a  few  days  after  it  was 
issued,  the  Rev.  Horace  James  [immortal  be  his  name  !],  one  of  the  ministers 
of  Wrentham,  and  an  unceasing  persecutor  and  slanderer  of  Dr.  Laritin, 
summoned  three  magistrates,  who,  together  with  a  few  persons  of  the  place 
inimical  to  the  manifestations,  constituted  a  Judicial  court,  before  which  Dr. 
Larkin  was  cited  to  appear,  and  on  the  authority  of  which  the  unfortunate 
sick  girl  was  dragged  from  her  bed  and  arrested  on  the  charge  of  "  necro- 
manc/' ! 

In  this  notable  trial  the  Rev.  Horace  James  appeared  as  complainant, 
chief  witness,  and  even  judge;  for  when  Dr.  Larkin  tried  to  address  the 
court,  Mr.  James  rudely  interrupted  him,  and  asked  the  justices  if  they 
"were  prepared  to  believe  anything  that  man  had  to  say." 

The  wise  officials,  thus  prompted,  replied,  to  a  man,  "Of  course  not;  no- 
body could  believe  him." 

Dr.  Larkin,  realizing  that  spirits  lived  ajid  could  communicate  with  earth, 
and  perceiving  at  once  that  the  spirits  of  Dogberry  and  Verges  had  full  pos- 
session of  the  Wrentham  justices,  sat  down  widi  the  simple  remark  that 
"they  were  wasting  time  in  trying  a  case  which  they  had  prejudged  already." 

If  the  details  of  this  unheard-of  court  of  justice  should  seem  to  draw  too 
largely  on  the  credulity  of  nineteenth-century  readers ;  if  it  seems  impossible 
to  beheve  that  in  1849  a  poor  sick  girl  could  be  dragged  from  her  bed  on 
the  chaise  of  "necromancy,"  and  a  respectable  physician  hailed  before  a 
court  of  his  own  neighbors  on  a  charge  of  sorcery,  —let  the  sequel  speak  for 
itself.  Mary  Jane  was  convicted  on  tliis  charge,  and  actually  sentenced  to 
sixty  days'  imprisonment  in  solitary  confinement  in  Dedham  jail :  witness  the 
Dedham  jail  records  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts. 

As  no  judicial  sentence  could  be  tortured  out  against  Dr.  Larkin,  a  moral 
one  of  still  more  weighty  results  was  pronounced,  which  doomed  him  to  ex- 
pulsion from  the  church  of  which  he  was  a  member  and  the  Rev.  Horace 
James  the  pastor,  unless  he  made  a  full  and  complete  acknowledgment  and 
recantation  of  his  unholy  participancy  in  Mary  Jane's  crime. 

In  America,  where .  a  system  of  church  membership  sanctions  cliurch 
tyranny  strangely  anomalous  with  the  institutions  of  a  so-called  "free  coun- 
try," expulsion  from  church  membership,  or  even  an  equivocal  standing 
within  its  awful  pale,  maybe  regarded  as  "anathema  niaranatha"  on  all 
commercial,  artistic,  or  professional  interests. 

The  ban  of  the  church  is  as  potent  in  a  New  England  town  or  village,  as  was 
the  Pope's  bull  of  excomnmnication  in  the  tenth  century.  Dr.  Larkin  loved 
his  church,  and  liad  always  enjoyed  and  prided  himself  upon  his  good  standing 
within  her  pale.  Of  a  gende,  kindly,  and  genial  nature,  he  had  maintained 
for  many  years  the  regard  and  esteem  of  all  his  fellow  parishioners,  and  the 
continuance  of  these  pleasing  relations  was  essential  to  his  peace  of  mind,  no 
less  than  to  his  professional  standing  and  the  welfare  of  his  family.  But  the 
exigency  of  his  position  was  in  the  highest  degree  embarrassing.  He  had  no 
errors  to  recant,  no  evil  practices  to  acknowledge,  and  yet  the  demand  to  do  so 
was  constant  and  reiterated,  and  upon  his  comphance  alone,  a  restoration  to 
his  unwittingly-forfeited  good  standing  depended.  He  detennined  he  would 
at  least  endeavor  to  conciliate  his  ecclesiastical  tyrants,  and  for  (his  puri)ose 
he  wrote  several  letters  marked  with  the  most  friendly  and  Christian  spirit : 
but  all  would  not  do  ;  nothing  sliort  of  self-accusations,  rife  widi  the  grossest 
foUy  and  ialsehood,  would  satLsty  his  persecutors.     Meanwhile  his  impending 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  163 

ruin  was  fast  hastening  to  its  consummation.  Domestic  cares  and  harassing 
vexations,  thickening  around  the  unfortunate  doctor,  kept  himself  and  his  tor- 
tured wife  on  the  rack  for  more  than  a  year  after  the  conviction  of  the  hap- 
less Mary  Jane,  when,  unable  to  endure  the  unequal  struggle  longer,  he  bid  his 
persecutors  write  such  a  statement  as  would  satisfy  them,  and  he,  on  his  part, 
promised  to  sign  it.  One  after  the  other,  he  had  met  his  accusers,  disposed 
of  and  disproved  every  charge  that  folly,  malice,  or  slander  had  brought 
against  him,  save  the  one  of  "necromancy,"  which,  so  far  as  it  included  in- 
voluntary communications  with  the  so-called  "  dead,"  he  could  not  without  a 
gross  untmth  deny. 

Finally,  the  Rev.  Horace  James  called  on  him  with  the  report  which  he 
deemed  would  be  satisfactory  to  the  church  of  which  he  was  the  pastor.  Be- 
fore appending  his  name  to  the  document,  the  doctor  read  it  aloud  and 
found  it  required  of  him  to  declare  that  he  "  did  not  believe  that  spirits  could 
communicate  by  signs,  sounds,  voices,  entrancement,  or  otherwise,"  and  that 
the  whole  of  the  testimony  which  he  —  Dr.  Larkin  —  had  from  time  to  time 
given  on  this  subject  was  false,  and  hereby  declared  to  be  so.  As  he  finished 
the  perusal  of  this  tissue  of  falsehoods,  Dr.  Larkin,  addressing  his  reverend 
visitor ;  declared  in  the  most  emphatic  terms  tJiat  he  did  believe  in  the  commu- 
nion of  spirits  ;  rf/rf  realize  that  they  could,  and  had  through  the  organism 
of  the  unfortunate  Mary  Jane  again  and  again  communicated  with  him; 
that  he  reiterated  and  repeated  the  truth  of  all  he  had  ever  said  on  the  sub- 
ject ;  and  he  then  asked  if  Mr.  Horace  James,  after  such  a  statement,  could 
require  of  him  to  append  his  name  to  a  document  which  would  proclaim  hun 
a  liar  and  utterly  unworthy  of  the  name  of  a  Christian  man  ?  Mr.  James 
coldly  replied  that  his  signature  to  that  document  was  the  only  condition  on 
which  he  could  be  received  back  into  the  church ;  whereupon  Dr.  Larkin 
signed  his  name,  handed  the  report  to  Mr.  James,  and  declaring  that  it  was 
the  greatest  lie  tliat  ever  was  written,  and  diat  he  [Mr.  James],  as  a  Chris- 
tian minister,  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  admit  such  a  liar  into  his  church,  burst 
into  a  passion  of  tears,  whilst  the  Rev.  Horace  James  departed,  exulting  in 
his  triumph,  and  proclaiming  to  all  his  parishioners  that  Dr.  Larkin  was  once 
more  a  member  of  his  churdi  in  good  standing  I  No  comment  on  this  trans- 
action is  necessary.  Its  principal  details  were  received  by  the  author  from 
the  lips  of  Dr.  Larkin  himself,  who  never  made  the  least  attempt  to  extenu- 
ate his  own  perfidy  in  the  signature  of  the  disgraceful  document  above 
alluded  to,  except  by  reaffirming  the  sufferings  he  had  undergone,  the  ruin- 
ous issues  to  his  family  if  he  persisted  in  refusing,  and  the  impossibility  of  his 
believing  in  his  own  mind  that  a  Christian  minister  would  degrade  his  sacred 
office  to  push  him  to  the  last  fearful  extremity,  and  then  admit  into  his 
church  a  man  who  had  written  himself  unworthy  of  credit  in  any  direction. 

The  subsequent  career  of  Dr.  Larkin,  though  containing  a  vast  array  of 
deeply-interesting  phenomena,  does  not  belong  to  this  history. 

It  is  as  much  as  our  space  will  allow,  to  advert  to  the  fact  that  fresh  suc- 
cessions of  spiritual  outpourings  rendered  the  famous  report  of  the  Rev. 
Horace  James  worthless  as  testimony  against  Spirituahsm.  Dr.  Larkin's 
estimable  companion  passed  away,  soon  afl:er  the  last-named  events,  to  the 
spirit-world ;  and  besides  departing  in  the  full  and  triumphant  faith  of  being 
cheered  in  her  dying  hour  by  the  presence  of  hosts  of  the  beloved  dead,  and 
that  the  ministry  of  her  spirit  relatives  sped  her  parting  soul  to  the  bright 
homes  of  eternity,  this  glorified  spirit,  soon  after  her  transition,  commenced 
a  series  of  manifestations,  which  brought  conviction  to  numbers  of  his  friends 
and  neighbors  that  the  doctor's  wife  was  with  him  still,  and  guided,  cheered, 

Hosted  by  Google 

i64  HISTORY  OP  MODERN- 

and  sust^ned  him,  through  life's  rough  pilgrimage,  during  every  hour  of  the 
passing  day  and  night. 

On  several  occasions  of  imminent  danger  this  bright  spirit  saved  her  hus- 
band's hfe  and  tliat  of  certain  others  from  railway  accidents,  and  finally 
succeeded  in  bringing  conviction  of  the  immortallt)-  of  her  purified  soul,  and 
its  continued  communion  with  earth,  to  many  who  had  formerly  been  his 
bitterest  and  most  active  persecutors. 

These  results,  however,  were  not  achieved  without  a  system  of  opposition 
and  superstitious  folly,  little  short  of  what  has  already  been  narrated.  The 
narrow-minded  bigots  of  Wrentham  and  adjoining  villages  strove  to  legislate 
against  the  onward  sweep  of  the  tide  of  progress,  and  dictate  laws  and  boun- 
dary lines  to  the  dwellers  of  the  unknown  spiritual  country.  They  might  as 
well  have  passed  resolutions  against  the  influx  of  sunlight  or  star  beams- 
Spiritualism  "broke  out"  in  Boston,  and  every  hamlet,  town  or  city  in  its 
vicinity,  whilst  at  least  one-third  of  the  inhabitants,  including  those  who  had 
been  most  active  in  the  crusade  against  Dr.  Larkin  and  the  hapless  Mary 
Jane,  contributed  to  swell  the  vast  and  overwhelming  armies  which  now  make 
up  the  hosts  of  Spiritualism  in  New  England, 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

SPIRITUALISM.    IN    NEW    ENGLAND    CONTINUED— BOSTON. 

The  Spiritual  Philosopher — Mediums  in  Boston  —  Rev.  Allen  Putnam  and 
Natty,  a  Spirit — Spirit  Manhood  and  EAR<rHLY  Childhood  Explained — 
Banner  of  Light — Dr.  Gardner  in  California — His  "Mission" — The 
Boston  Spiritual  Rostrum— Miss  Burbank's  "Circles" — Correspondence. 

The  public  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  Boston,  "the  Athens  of  America" 
and  centre  of  New  England  thought,  was  far  less  marked  and  distinctive  in 
its  earlier  phases  than  that  of  New  York.  This  is  due,  no  doubt,  in  part  to 
the  peculiar  reticence  of  the  New  England  character,  since  we  have  abun- 
dance of  evidence  that  phenomena  were  as  frequent  and  powerful  in  various 
families  in  Boston  as  they  were  in  any  other  part  of  the  States ;  yet  it  is  not 
even  now  our  privilege  to  speak  of  many  of  these  manifestations,  occurring 
as  they  did  in  great  numbers,  though  entirely  within  the  privacy  of  the 
domestic  circle. 

The  first  public  evidences  that  were  given  of  "the  power"  in  Boston,  came 
flirough  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Margaretta  Cooper,  the  daughter  of  the 
eminent  writer  and  lecturer,  17e5.oy  Sunderland."  Besides  his  married 
daughter,  Mrs.  Cooper,  other  members  of  Mr.  Sunderland's  family  were 
gifted  in  a  remarkable  degree  with  mediumistic  powers,  and  Dr.  Larkin,  the 
physician  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter,  together  with  many  other  reliable 
witnesses,  affirm  that  they  could  obtain  satisfactory  responses,  by  raps  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  165 

movements  of  a  cradle,  through  the  medramsliip  of  Mrs.  Cooper's  infant,  only 
seven  months  of  age.  When  Mr,  Sunderland  first  discovered  that  his  family 
were  endowed  with  these  remarkable  gifts,  his  enthusiastic  delight  knew  no 
bounds.  He  threw  open  his  house  to  the  public  and  courted  general  inves- 
tigation through  his  mediums- 

In  1850,  he  commenced  the  publication  of  a  paper  entitled  the  Spiritual 
Philosopher,  from  the  pages  of  which  the  following  account  of  the  manifesta- 
tions in  his  family  may  be  learned : 

_ „  __.5  have  made  muacal  sounds,  which  we  have 

heard  and  know  were  not  made  by  any  human  power.      The  members  of  our   family  and 
strangers  present  have  been  often  touehed  and  handled  by  the  spirits. 

"  Manifestations  have  been  made  by  spirits  to  our  sense  of  sight.  Tlie  responses  to 
questions  are  given  freely  at  our  (able,  during  meal  times,  which  are  thus  prolonged  often 
to  an  bour  and  a.  half  by  conversation  with  our  heavenly  visitants. 

"  They  came  through  Mrs.  Margaretta  S.  Cooper  generally,  but  we  have  had  responses 
also  through  our  second  daughter,  Sarah,  and  also  through  our  grandchild,  Mrs,  Cooper's 
babe,  when  only  two  months  old 

"  Commimications  have  been  voueh-safed  t( 
giving  important  information  relating  more  01 
ing  to  the  universe  of  human  beings. 

"  I  can  only  say  my  heart  is  full,  and  had  I  ten  thousand  tongues,  it  seems  to  me  as  if  I 
could  use  them  all  in  blessing  the  angelic  hosts  who  have  thus  taken  possesion  of  my  earthljf 
sphere.  I  now  enjoy  a  heaven  far  more  real  than  any  I  had  ever  been  taught  to  antici- 
pate." 

Such  expressions  as  these  fill  up  the  pages  of  the  Spiritual  Phildsopher, 
conveying  the  unmistakable  impression  to  all  that  perused  them  that  their 
author  was  transported  beyond  the  plane  of  calm  and  rational  observation, 
and  amply  preparing  the  more  coldly  philosophic  for  the  great  reaction 
which,  in  Mr.  Sunderland's  case,  as  in  many  others,  has  followed  upon  a 
too-yielding  faith,  especially  in  the  infallibility  of  the  intelligence  communi- 
cated 

Despite  the  claim  on  the  part  of  the  spirits  that  the  telegraphy  was  "  new 
and  very  imperfectly  understood,  even  by  them,"  wh:lst  with  mortals  it  was 
continually  being  destroyed  for  lack  of  proper  understandmg  and  requisite 
conditions,  Mr.  Sunderland  persisted  that  no  mistakes  could  occur  through 
his  medium,  etc;  hence  it  is  not  surprising  that,  m  addition  to  inevita- 
ble contradictions  of  this  position,  supplied  by  the  spirits  themselves,  Mr. 
Sunderland  had  the  mortification  to  fall  into  a  trap  prepared  for  him,  which 
completely  annihilated  his  claim  to  the  establishment  of  a  reliable  communion 
between  the  two  worlds. 

His  excessive  disgust  at  this  one  marked  failure,  seemed  to  create  a  revul- 
sion of  feeling  which  prepared  the  talented  editor  of  the  Spiritual  Philosopher 
for  discomfiture  at  every  turn. 

Forgetfiil  of  the  lessons  he  had  himself  inculcated  on  the  effect  of  prede- 
termined opinions  in  psycholo^cal  experiments,  he — a  most  powerful  pathol- 
ogist— brought  to  the  spirit  arcle  feelings  of  distrust  and  aversion  which  his 
recent  failure  had  awakened. 

The  result  was  predsely  what  the  learned  lecturer  would  now  teach  his 
scholars  to  anticipate.  His  own  condition  of  mind  became  impressed  upon 
his  media,  neutralized  the  magnetism  of  the  spirits,  resulted  in  failure  and 
contradictions,  and  threw  the  balance  of  his  prepossessions  into  the  opposite 

Hosted  by  Google 

i66  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

scale,  inducing  Iiiai  to  write  of  the  once  highly-prized  communion  with  spirits 
in  a  tone  of  bitterness  only  equalled  by  his  former  credulity. 

The  effect  upon  the  community,  however,  proved  the  truth  of  the  ad"^e 
that  "in  individual  failures  the  world  grows  wise,"  and,  "in  personal  experi- 
ences, all  mankind  is  experimenting." 

The  genuine  facts  evolved  by  Mrs.  Cooper's  remarkable  mediumship  ex 
tended  far  beyond  her  family  circle,  and  their  influence  is  felt  to  this  day. 
Various  tests  of  spiritual  identity,  rendered  to  total  strangers,  were  published 
by  them  in  different  sections  of  the  country,  and  though  their  lack  of  variety 
from  preceding  records  does  not  justify  their  reproduction  in  these  pages, 
they  are  numerous  and  well-attested  enough  to  have  proved  die  truth  of 
spiritual  telegraphy  had  they  existed  alone  and  unsustained  by  collateral  evi- 
dence. Good  Mr.  Sunderland's  strong  hand  and  vigorous  pen  were  tempo- 
rarily borrowed  by  the  spirit-world  to  set  the  ball  in  motion,  but  it  was  no 
more  given  to  him  to  retard  its  progress  than  the  Newtonian  philosophy  was 
adequate  to  the  production  of  any  cause  which  could  arrest  the  motion  of 
planets  assumed  to  have  received  their  "primitive  impulse"  from  the  hand 
of  die  great  Creator  himself;  and  thus  the  excitement  produced  in  the  public 
mind  by  Mrs.  Cooper's  mediumship  stimulated  the  community  to  eager  re- 
search, promoted  the  formation  of  numerous  circles,  and  the  development 
of  many  very  excellent  and  reliable  public  mediums;  amongst  these,  we 
may  nanie  Mrs.  Helen  I^eeds,  a  lady  whose  gifts  in  the  direction  of  trance, 
impression,  personation,  and  clairvoyance  were  the  means  of  convincing 
hundreds  of  sceptics  who  attended  her  stances. 

In  the  progress  of  the  movement,  agreeable  social  re-unions  were  held  at 
Mrs,  Leeds's  residence  every  week,  where  iJiehighest  order  of  mind  and  talent 
might  be  found  assembled,  to  interchange  kindly  greetings,  and  receive  the 
precious  evidences  of  spiritual  presence  and  communion  which  were  sponta- 
neously rendered  by  numerous  media  who  attended  the  meetings,  and  whose 
varied  powers  became  thus  focalized  into  a  common  centre.  Mrs.  Sisson,  a 
fine  clairvoyant  physician ;  Mrs.  Hayden,  Miss  Little,  Miss  Burbank,  Mrs. 
I-angford,  and  Mrs.  A.  E.  Newton,  were  also  found  to  be  admirable  opera- 
tors for  the  great  spiritual  telegraphy  which  now  began  to  flash  its  messages 
of  immortal  love  and  wisdom  across  a  net-work  of  wires  inclosing  the  whole 
State  of  Massachusetts.  Mr.  John  M.  Spear,  a  Universalist  clergyman  distin- 
guished in  the  temperance,  anti-slavery  and  other  philanthropic  movements, 
became  a  writing  and  impressible  med  un    and  by  \  n  a  kable  methods 

of  procedure — to  be  hereafter  narra  i —  on  bu  d  no  a  little  to  the 
notoriety  of  the  cause. 

In  1853  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newton,  no  long  and  favorably  known  in  the 
spirituahstic  ranks  for  devotion  to  tl  e  cau  e  and  bnfl  n  ab  lity  in  its  sup- 
port, addressed  a  published  statemen  of  h  vie  of  pu  communion  to 
the  Edwards  Street  Congregational  Ch  ir  h,  n  Boston,  the  result  of  which 
was  their  separation  therefrom  and  adherence  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  to 
which  Mrs.  Newton  devoted  her  powers  as  a  medium,  whilst  Mr.  Newton 
became  the  editor  of  the  New  England  Spiritualist,  and  subsequently  of 
the  Spiritual  Ag€,  two  of  the  best  written  and  ablest  journals  which  New 
England  has  ever  contributed  to  the  sum  of  spiritual  literature. 

In  1853  the  Rev.  Allen  Putnam,  formerly  a  Unitarian  minister,  and  sub- 
sequently a  merchant  and"editor  of  the  New  England  Farmer,  gave  by 
invitation  a  fine  scholarly  lecture  at  the  Melodeon,  in  Boston,  on  the  truths 
of  spirit  communion,  as  proved  to  his  mind  by  a  most  thorough  and  search- 
ing  investigation  into  the  phenomena. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  16? 

The  unimpeachable  integrit\  of  Mr  Putmm's  character,  and  his  high 
standing  in  the  community,  added  force  to  his  calm  reasoning  and  acute 
logic,  and  induced  a  vast  number  of  persons  to  follow  his  footsteps  in  the 
path  of  industrious  research  mto  Spintuahsm 

Mr.  Putnam  published  several  excellent  pamphlets,  some  of  which  were 
narratives  of  his  exhaustive  mvestigations  others,  arguments  for  the  use  and 
divine  order  manifest  in  spiritual  revelations.  One  of  the  works  from  this 
valuable  source  was  a  \\tt\Q  br ochure,  entitled  "Natty,  a  Spirit,"  in  which  the 
author  relates  his  intercourse  with  a  wonderful  spirit  child  who  passed  into 
the  higher  spheres  of  existence  after  a  brief  sojourn  of  a  few  days  on  eartli. 
Natty  reported  hunself  to  Mr  Putnam  through  almost  every  medium  with 
whom  he  came  in  contact.  He  claimed  Mr  and  Mrs.  Putnam  as  his  father 
and  mother  on  earth  by  adoption  of  his  own  will  He  gave  convincing  and 
satirfactory  proofs  of  his  real  parentage  and  identity;  but  with  a  delightful 
waywardness,  bright  wit,  and  yet  weird  affection,  especially  manifested  towards 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Putnam,  he  insisted  on  constituting  himself  a  part  of  their  faniily, 
joining  them  at  meals,  guarding  them  in  danger,  prescribing  for  them  in  sick- 
ness, and  by  a  thousand  pretty  diverting  tricks,  innocent  yet  Puck-like  In  their 
singular  ingenuity,  he  constantly  manifested  his  presence  in  their  household 
and  proved  the  freedom  from  care  or  depression  enjoyed  by  the  enfranchised 
spirits  of  the  sphere  to  which  this  happy  being  belonged.  Natty  succeeded, 
through  a  great  variety  of  mediums,  and  with  the  aid  of  Mr.  C.  L.  Fenton, 
an  artist  of  Boston,  in  representing  himself  in  a  fanciful  picture,  crowded 
with  allegorical  objects,  vivid  coloring,  and  all  that  symbolical  form  of  im- 
agery in  which  the  bright  inhabitants  of  the  higher  spheres  delight  to  instruct 
earth's  duller  intellects  through  the  science  of  correspondences. 

The  picture  of  Natty  still  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Putnam,  of  Roxbury, 
represents  the  youthful  spirit  as  he  always  appeared  to  mediums,  namely,  a 
curly-headed  child  of  about  four  years  old,  with  a  sweet,  wise  face,  redolent 
of  thought  and  intellect  far  in  advance  of  his  juvenile  form.  As  the  history 
of  "  Natty,  the  Spirit,"  was  the  subject  of  much  comment,  considerable  inter- 
est, and  the  usual  amount  of  ribald  insolence  directed  by  the  press  against  the 
"senile  credulity  of  Mr.  Putman,"  whose  talents  and  standing  forbade  an  at- 
tack in  any  other  direction,  we  shall  give  an  extract  from  the  published  ac- 
counts of  the  littie  gentleman's  sayings  and  doings  explanatory  of  his  appear- 
ance on  earth  as  a  child,  when  according  to  all  the  corroborative  statements 
of  spirits,  the  soul  grows  as  surely  from  infancy  to  maturity  in  the  spheres  as 
during  its  tenancy  of  a  mortal  body,  and  as  little  Natty's  earth  origin  proved 
him  to  have  been  an  inhabitant  of  thirty-five  years'  standing  in  spirit  land,  his 
juvenile  appearance  and  style  of  communication  was  as  puzzling  to  the  Spir- 
itualists as  it  was  a  subject  of  scathing  ridicule  to  unbelievers.  The  follow- 
ing communication,  published  in  the  New  England  Spiritualist,  was  given  to 
Mr.  Putman  through  one  of  the  most  rehable  test  mediums  of  the  city. 

"  Bear  Father, — Do  let  me  call  you  thus,  for  you  are  indeed  my  spirit  father.  To- 
wards you  first  did  my  spirit  CKperience  filial  feelings. 

"My  stay  in  the  body  was  too  short  for  mc  to  leam  on  earth  what  those  feeluigs  were. 
I  nevei  knew  an  earthly  father.  When  first  we  met  at  the  medium's  table  "  [when  Natty 
was  communicating  with  his  brother  and  Mr.  Putnam  happened  to  be  present]  "your  words 
and  tones  awakened  in  roe  feehngs  that  I  had  never  known  before. 

"  Upon  describmg  those  feelmgs  to  spirits  of  more  experience  than  myself,  they  told  me 
that  such  were  filial  emotions— the  sentiments  which  an  affectionate  child  on  earth  cherishes 
towards  its  earthly  parent. 

"  Having  first  experienced  those  feelmgs  towards  you,  you  are  my  father  more  truly 
(ban  you  1^  supposed. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

i68  HISTORV  OF  MODERl^ 

"  I  Lave  come  to  you  as  the  laughing,  playful  child,  while  in  reidity  1  am  a  full-grown 
Fpirit ;  but  in  earth's  ways  I  am  still  but  a  child,  and  so  the  child's  form  becomes  me  best 
for  the  purpose  of  youi  recognizing  my  true  state,  and  the  accomplishment  of  the  aims  for 
which  I  come  to  earlh 

"As  a  spirit,  I  am  full  grown  ;  as  a  child  of  earth  I  am  little  more  than  an  infant,  ignor- 
ant of  earth's  experiences  and  trials.  In  these,  you  are  my  teacher,  while  in  spiritual  mat- 
ters I  can  help  you I  need  much  aid  which  you  can  give 

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  those  who  leave  the  form  in  early  life  must  return  and  come  in  close 
alliance  with  the  world  before  they  can  learn  some  lessons  which  are  essential  to  the  highest 
elevation  in  the  spheres. 

"  None  of  us  can  lay  the  foundation  of  an  all-embracing  charity  unless  we  learn  by  con- 
tact with  man  on  earth,  his  weakness,  sorrows,  and  temptations. 

By  your  example,  help,  and  associations,  I  can  learn  best  those  life  lessons  which  teach 
charity  for  all,  without  which  I  cannot  ascend  nearer  and  ever  nearer  to  the  common 
Father  of  us  alL  Spnits  in  the  spheres  do  not  usually  learn  their  need  of  accurate  knowl- 
edge of  earlh-life  until  they  are  thirty  years  old  or  more.  Sympathy,  affection  for  pa- 
rents, or  other  motives  of  attraction,  draw  the  childish  ^irit  back  to  its  home  and  relatives. 
But  before  the  age  of  thirty  it  seldom  returns  to  studp'  thoroughly  hnman  coidit'onf  and 
learn  those  lessons  of  deepest  wisdom  which  are  essential  to  the  human  soul's  highest  devel 

opment.     It  is  for  these  purposes  1  now  come. In  the  close  connect  on 

which  you  permit  between  myself  and  you,  I  am,  as  it  were,  experiencing  earth  1  fe  — livmg 
your  life,  experiencir^  your  external  and  internal  struggles,  and  somewhat  sorrowmg  and 
rejoicing  with  you.  Measurably,  my  progress  is  linked  with  yours;  whatever  is  for  jour 
good  helps  me;  your  haxin  is  mine  also." 

Much  more  to  the  same  effect  was  given  on  this  occasion,  and  here  it  may 
he  remarked  that  this  singular  statement  is  confirmed  by  a  vast  array  of  testi- 
mony in  similar  spiritual  communications.  Children's  spirits,  even  from  the 
most  rudimental  periods  of  life,  are  always  represented  as  growing  to  a  glo- 
rious spiritual  maturity,  during  which,  or  after  its  attainment,>they  are  com- 
pelled for  the  purposes  of  full  development,  to  acquire  an  intimate  knowledge 
of  that  life  from  which  they  are  physically  hut  not  spiritually  removed.  The 
experiences  from  which  they  are  cut  off  by  early  death  are  essential,  as  it 
would  appear,  to  their  spiritual  perfection,  and  hence,  have  to  be  acquired 
through  a  set  of  conditions  vague  and  incomprehensible  to  us,  but  dimly  shad- 
owed forth  in  the  ideas  relating  to  "familiar"  and  "guardian  spirits,"  also  in 
the  philosophy  of  "  medium  spirits,"  of  which  more  will  be  said  in  our  second 
volume. 

Quite  early  in  the  spiritual  movement,  Mr.  Bela  Marsh  opened  a  publish- 
ing office  in  Boston,  which,  up  to  the  day  of  his  departure  for  a  better  world, 
some  few  months  since,  continued  to  be  a  source  of  incalculable  use  to  the 
cause,  by  putting  into  circulation  a  mass  of  spiritual  literature,  every  page 
of  which  has  performed  its  work  of  missionary  labor  to  the  world. 

For  the  last  few  years,  mediumistic  s^n/res,  conferences,  and  Sunday  meet- 
ings have  been  held  in  the  same  building  with  Marsh's  book  store  ;  so  in  the 
quiet  seclusion  of  14  Bromfield  street,  the  written  thoughts  and  spoken 
words  of  this  great  movement  have  always  found  a  fitting  and  continuous 
representation. 

In  Boston  was,  and  still  is  published  one  of  the  most  invaluable  mission- 
aries the  cause  of  Spiritualism  has  ever  enjoyed,  namely,  (he  Banner  of 
Light,  acknowledged  to  be  amongst  the  ablest  and  most  liberally  conducted 
papers  in  America.  As  we  shall  have  occasion  to  make  frequent  menrion 
of  this  excellent  periodical  in  the  course  of  our  history,  of  which,  indeed,  the 
Banner  of  Light  forms  an  integral  part,  we  shall  reserve  a  detailed  descrip- 
tion of  its  origin  and  status  for  another  occasion. 

As  the  history  of  SpirituaUsm  in  Boston  is  peculiarly  the  biography  of 
individuals,  it  woidd  be  as  ungratcfiil  as  almost  impossible  to  omit  men- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  169 

tioning  the  name  of  Dr.  Gardner,  formerly  of  Springfield,  Massachusetts, 
who  was  one  of  the  earliest,  as  he  has  been  one  of  the  bravest  and  most 
devoted  champions  of  the  cause,  from  its  commencement  to  its  present 
status. 

Within  a  few  months  after  the  Rochester  knockings  had  become  a  matter 
of  general  comment.  Dr.  Gardner,  then  a  physician  in  large  practice  in 
Springfield  and  a  successful  operator  in  animal  magnetisnj,  became  interested 
in  the  rappings,  and  in  connection  with  Mr.  Rufiis  Elmer,  a  highly-respected 
citizen  and  now  a  prominent  Spiritualist,  held  circles  for  development,  at 
which  several  of  the  most  astounding  phases  of  the  phenomena  were  wit- 
nessed. Floatings  in  the  air — occurring  in  the  mediumship  of  Messrs.  D.  D. 
Home  and  H.  Gordon — raps,  clairvoyance,  and  extraordinary  cases  of  heal- 
ing, became  so  common  in  Springfield  that  even  the  usual  animosity  of  the 
secular  press  could  make  no  headway  against  the  facts,  and  the  Springfield 
Republican,  a  local,  though  very  widely-circulated  journal,  became  crowded 
wifii  records  of  marvellous  and  well-attested  phenomena.  As  they  do  not 
now  present  any  feature  of  novelty,  it  is  needless  to  repeat  them  ;  suffice  it  to 
say  that  dieii  effect  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Springfield  was  to  make  thou- 
sands of  converts  in  the  first  five  years  of  the  movement,  amongst  whom  was 
Dr.  Gardner.  At  the  urgent  solicitation  of  sphit  friends.  Dr.  Gardner,  about 
1849,  midertook  to  accompany  a  relative  who  sailed  his  own  ship  to  Cali- 

The  exact  nature  of  his  "mission"  in  this  voyage,  beyond  the  benefit  of 
his  health,  he  was  entirely  at  a  loss  to  divine,  for  humanly  speaking  he  had  no 
motive  whatever  to  prompt  him,  except  tlie  mgent  appeal  of  spirits  and  a  con- 
catenation of  circumstances  which  seemed  to  force  him  into  die  undertaking. 
During  the  voyage,  his  benevolent  desire  to  heal  the  afflicted  prompted  him 
to  try  the  effect  of  magnetism  on  one  of  the  crew,  a  poor  Chinaman,  who  lay 
sick,  in  mortal  agony  and  danger  of  immediate  dissolution.  Dr.  Gardner  not 
only  succeeded  in  relieving  the  sufferer  and  restoring  him  to  health  by  mag- 
netic passes,  but  he  also  evolved  medium  powers  in  liis  patient,  through  whose 
gift  of  rapping  the  doctor  could  communicate  freely  with  his  friends  in  the 
spirit-world. 

By  a  chain  of  circumstances  seemingly  fortuitous,  this  Chinaman  was  left 
ashore  at  Hong  Kong,  from  whence  subsequent  accounts  brought  the  tidings 
that  "  the  rappings  had  broken  out"  in  that  place  through  a  Chinese  sailor, 
and  that  the  "power"  was  spreading  like  a  contagion,  until  spirit  circles  and 
spirit  mediums  became  as  popular  and  fashionable  in  the  Celestial  Empire  as 
opium  and  souchong. 

Landing  for  a  few  days  at  San  Francisco,  and  still  unable  to  discover  any 
other  purpose  in  his  long  voyage  than  his  restoration  to  health  and  the  medi- 
mnistic  development  of  the  Chinese  sailor,  Dr.  Gardner  determined  to  return 
with  his  relation  in  the  ship  which  had  brought  him  out,  when,  only  the  day 
before  they  were  to  sail,  he  was  accosted  by  a  total  stranger,  who  met  him  on 
the  wharf,  and  with  some  awkward  apology  for  his  intrusion,  suddenly,  and  for 
no  cause  that  he  could  assign,  addressed  him  and  asked  him  if  he  knew  any- 
tiiing  about  these  "new  spirit  rappings." 

Astonished  as  he  was  at  being  thus  accosted,  Dr.  Gardner  courteously 
replied  in  the  affirmative,  when  the  stranger  acknowledged  that  he  felt 
impressed  beyond  his  power  of  resistance  to  put  the  question,  adding  that  the 
rappings  and  other  strange  phenomena  had  transpired  in  his  family,  and  that 
himself  and  friends  were  much  alarmed,  yet  wholly  ignorant  of  the  best  meth- 
ods of  procedure. 

Hosted  by  Google 

1 70  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

He  added  that  it  had  been  communicated  to  them  tlirough  this  mysterious 
intelhgence  that  a  stranger  would  sJwrtly  arrive  at  San  Francisco,  who  would 
direct  them  how  to  proceed  and  dear  up  the  doubt  and  imcertaiucies  under 
which  they  then  labored. 

Both  Dr.  Gardner  and  his  new  friend  were  powerfully  impressed  with  the 
belief  that  this  meeting  was  not  merely  accidental,  and  accompanying  tile 
stranger  to  his  home,  Dr.  Gardner  visited,  counselled,  and  instructed  the  per- 
plexed mediums,  gave  them  the  advantage  of  his  valuable  experience,  encour- 
aging some,  strer^;thening  and  magnetizing  others,  settling  many  difficul- 
ties, and  wisely  organizing  the  scattered  forces  into  well-regulated  circles. 
He  also  distributed  amongst  them  a  goodly  pile  of  spiritual  literature  with 
which  he  had  supplied  himself,  and  took  leave  of  his  grateful  new  acquaint- 
ances happy  in  the  conviction  that  his  mission  was  now  fulfilled  in  planting 
Spiritualism  on  the  remote  shores  of  China  in  the  East,  and  California  in  the 
far  West.  We  must  here  add,  we  have  the  best  authority  for  slating  that 
Dr.  Gardner's  obedience  to  spiritual  monitions  has  been  fruitful  of  good  and 
blessing  in  more  ways  than  those  detailed  above,  and  besides  sowing  seeds  of 
immortal  light  and  beauty  in  distant  lands,  it  has  been  productive  of  changes 
in  the  good  missionary's  own  condition,  essential  to  the  outworking  of  his 
momentous  life-history.  On  his  return  home.  Dr.  Gardner  took  up  his  resi- 
dence in  Boston,  where  he  became  the  sole  and  indefatigable  entrepreneur 
of  the  great  Sunday  gatherings  which  for  twelve  years  have  instnicted  thou- 
sands of  astonished  and  delighted  auditors  in  the  sublime  and  soul-stirring 
truths  of  "  Natural  theology"  taught  by  spirits. 

Thomas  Gales  Forster,  MreJJenderson,  now  Mrs.  Middlebrook  [one  of 
the  sweetest  and  most  eloquent  trance  speakers  of  the  day],  Mrs.  Cora  Hatch, 
Miss  Fannie  Davies,  Emma  Hardinge,  and  Rosa  Amedey,  were  amongst  the 
first  and  most  popular  of  the  trance  speakers  who  filled  the  rostrum  at  the 
old  Melodeon,  Boston,  where  from  a  thousand  to  fifteen  hundred  persons 
assembled  each  Sabbath  afternoon  and  evening,  to  hear  their  teachmgs,  and 
listen  to  the  apt  and  felicitous  answers  that  were  rendered,  through  their  en- 
tranced lips,  to  the  most  difficult  questions  propounded  by  strangers  in  the 
audience.  All  the  speakers  above  named  were  not  only  extemporaneous, 
but  most  commonly  gave  discourses  selected  for  them  by  a  committee  chosen 
from  the  audience  after  they  had  taken  their  seats  on  the  platform.  Even 
the  bitterest  of  the  opposition  accorded  to  these  orations  the  merit  of  being 
unsurpassed  in  style,  diction,  and  oratory,  while  they  were  often  profound  in 
logic,  learning,  histwical  research,  and  science.  Miss  Rosa  Amedey,  a  charm- 
ing trance  speaker,  since  translated  to  the  bright  realms  of  which  she  so  elo- 
quently discoursed,  together  ivith  Mr.  A;  B.^Whiting,  a  young  man  of  fair 
natural  abilities,  but  marvellous  intellectual  powers  under  the  spiritual  affla- 
tus, generally  followed  their  discourses  by  poems  improvised  upon  the  spot, 
upon  any  subject  the  audience  might  select  through  committees.  Many 
other  speakers  besides  those  named  above  were  invited  to  fill  the  rostrum  ; 
all  were  more  or  less  attractive.  The  severe  New  England  climate  often 
militated  against  attendance  at  the  meetings,  and  the  most  powerful  opposi- 
tion that  ever  was  levelled  against  any  portion  of  the  spiritual  movement  was 
directed  ag^nst  these  obnoxious  but  deeply  momentous  gatherings.  All  was 
in  vajn,  however.  They  were  often  thronged  to  overflowing,  whilst  the  week 
evening  meetings  which  were  always  given  when  Cora  Hatch  or  Emma  Har- 
dinge lectured  in  Boston  were  literally  crowded  to  suffocation.  These  gath- 
erings, the  admission  for  which  was  the  trifling  charge  of  one  dime,  were 
conducted  and  sustained  with  all  their  fluctuations  of  occasional  financial 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  171 

losses  by  Dr.  Gardner,  whose  zeal  and  enteq>rise  in  this,  as  in  eveiy  other 
spiritualistic  movement,  was  unflagging  and  disinterested. 

Deli^tfiil  picnic  parties  and  grove-meetings,  often  attended  by  many 
thousands  of  persons,  were  also  organized  by  this  gentleman.  Conventions, 
conferences,  and  debates,  ever  found  him  in  his  place,  and  being  a  clear  and 
sensible  speaker,  his  services  were  frequently  in  request  to  fill  the  desk  at 
various  New  England  meetings. 

His  championship  of  this  unpopular  cause,  no  less  than  the  fact  of  his 
being  the  noted  entrepreneur  of  the  principal  public  meetings  held  in  Bos- 
ton, frequently  brouglit  him  into  collision  with  the  press,  clergy,  lyceum,  and 
finally  with  "Coi:  £reme  de  la  crime  of  science,  learning,  and  religion  combined, 
to  wit,  the  professors  of  Harvard  University,  whose  position  on  this  globe 
may  be  defined  as  follows;  "America  is  the  greatest  country  of  the  earth- 
Boston  is  the  greatest  city  of  America  —  Cambridge  is  the  brain  of  Bos- 
ton —  Harvard  College  is  Cambridge,  and  the  Harvard  professors  are 
the  worid ! "  but  as  an  easier  definition  tban  the  above  is  rendered  by  Bostoni- 
ans  themselves,  when  they  declare  tliat  "Boston  is  the  'Hub'  of  the  uni- 
verse," so  the  posirion  of  the  Harvard  professors  in  reference  to  the  universe 
may  be  better  understood  than  expressed.  In  the  following  chapter  will  be 
found  an  account  of  the  famous  Harvard  investigation,  in  which  the  profes- 
sors of  that  distinguished  seat  of  learning  undertook  to  explain  to  mankind, 
now  and  forevermore,  what  Spiritualism  was  not ;  but  as  the  entrance  of  these 
mighty  magnates  on  the  scene  indicates  the  commencement  of  a  new  act  in 
the  living  drama  of  which  we  write,  we  shall  reserve  their  experiences  for  an- 
other chapter,  and  drop  the  curtain  on  this  by  a  few  extracts  from  the  Spiritual 
Telegraph's  correspondence  on  the  status  of  Spiritualism  in  Boston  from 
1850  to  1857. 

•"SPIRITUALISM  IN  BOSTON.'— FROM  OUR  BOSTON  CORRESPONDENT. 
"Dear  Telegraph, — The  spiritual  movement  in  Boston  lias  some  interesting  features 
wiiidi  your  readers  may  desire  to  become  intimate  with.  I  will  therefore  endeavor  to  give 
them  a  glimpse  of  some  of  the  phases  the  present  exhibits,  assuring  them  that  at  no  time 
ance  the  dawn  of  the  spiritual  advent  has  tliere  been  so  varied  and  so  intense  a  devotion 
hereto  the  investigation  of  this  important  subject.  Doctors,  lawyers,  clergymen,  merchants, 
city  officers,  judges,  ect.,  as  well  as  the  'common  people,'  who  anciently  'heard  Jesus 
gladly,'  are  :J1  '  with  one  accord,'  engaged  in  making  earnest  inquiries  as  to  the  truth  of 
Spiritualism,  and  the  facilities  for  the  investigations  are  now  quite  numerous  and  perfect 
as  compared  with  any  former  state  of  tlie  movement,  with  a  good  prospect  of  still  greater 
nerfection  and  usefulness  in  the  future.     So  you  see  there  is  now  very  little  chance  of  this 

- '  dying  ont,' as  some  'wise  ones'"  have  flattered  themselves,  from  time  to  tune,  would 

n  be  the  case." 

"SPIRITUAL  CIRCLES, 

"  Our  spiritual  circles  here  are  quite  numerous  and  very  varied.  I  attended  one  lately 
of  which  Miss  Burbank  is — humanly  speaking —  the  presiding  spirit.  Miss  B.  is  a  trance 
medium  of  the  first  order,  and  gives  evidence  of  superior  spirit  control  and  inspiration. 
She  holds  four  circles  every  week,  each  of  which  is  different  from  the  others  in  the  s-pecific 
objects  it  has  in  view.  One  of  these  circles  is  called  the  'Benevolent  Circle,'  whose  purpose 
is  to  elevate  persons  in  the  spirit-life  who  need  to  come  again  into  contact  with  earth  so  as 
to  get  such  instruction  and  magnetism  as  will  in  some  measure  compensate  for  their  lack 
of  bade  developments  in  this  life.  Some  tune  ago  I  was  present  at  this  ciicle,  when  idiots, 
criminals,  and  others  of  like  condition,  presented  themselves  through  the  m^ium,  in  con- 
nection with  beings  of  superior  intelligence,  and  it  was  very  curioils  to  witness  the  exidbi- 
tions  of  the  various  degrees  of  mentality  which  were  made  manifest. 

"I  remember  that,  on  the  occaaon  referi'ed  to,  Washmgton  Goode,  'One-Eyed  Thomp- 
son,' and  .others  of  the  same  stamp,  were  permitted  to  communicate,  which  they  did  in 
perfect  character,  abatmg,  of  course,  anything  criminal.  Thompson,  it  seemed,  being  veiy 
much  advanced  because  of  a  superior  intellect  and  very  warm  domestic  affections,  was  per- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

172  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

mitted  to  have  tie  charge  of  Goode,  for  the  purpose  of  raisino;  him  to  a  higher  condition. 
This  he  could  do  more  readily  than  Ihose  much  more  elevated,  because  of  his  affinity  with 
Goode's  condition,  which,  of  course,  brought  them  nearer  together  and  enabled  Thompson 

to  work  more  effectually  for  the  other's  welfare . 

"  Idiots,  too,  were  brought  to  this  circle  for  education ;  and  it  was  very  pleasing  to  see 
how,  as  they  came,  from  lime  to  time  they  were  manifestly  improved  by  the  communion. 
At  each  succesave  visit  they  would  get  some  new  idea,  and  gave  evidence  of  decided  im- 
provement in  mental  development.  They  were  always  brought  by  some  benevolent  spirits, 
wliose  delight  it  was  to  be  thus  engaged,  and  who  would  have  the  full  charge  of  unfoldmg 
the  powers  of  the  previously  blank  intellect 

"STRIKING  TESTS. 

"Among  the  many  tests  of  the  presence  and  identity  of  spirits,  perhaps  none  are  more 
remarkable  than  those  which  have  lately  transpired  at  the  Fountain  House,  in  this  city.  I 
recently  met  a  noted  medium  there,  who,  I  was  previoudy  informed,  never  made  a  single 
mistake  m  his  tests.  His  method  of  giving  tests  is  for  the  inquiring  party  to  fix  the  mmd 
distinctly  on  some  question,  without  uttering  a  word,  and  say  to  the  spirit,  in  the  same 
mental  way,  '  If  the  answer  be  affirmative,  please  agnify  it  by  touching  some  artlde  in  the 
room;  if  negative,  some  other  article'  —  in  either  case  menia/^  naming  the  article  in  ques- 
tion.  Being  previously  informed  of  the  method,  I  sat  one  day  by  the  medium's  side,  took 
his  hand,  and  mentally  sdd,  'If  my  guidine  spiiit  be  present,  will  he  take  the  medium  to  a 
writing  which  hangs  in  the  room,  and  touch  a  certain  name,  among  seveo  names  which  are 
attached  to  it?'  When  I  had  fairly  formed  this  question  in  my  thoughts,  the  medium  sud- 
denly stood  upon  his  feet,  led  me  into  tlie  middle  of  the  room,  turned  quickly  round,  facmg 
the  writing  referred  to  in  mjr  mental  question,  walked  up  to  it  without  hesitation,  and  then 
drew  his  inden  finger  three  tunes  across  the  name  referred  to  !  To  me,  at  least,  this  was  a 
very  fdr  proof  of  some  ability  to  read  thought.  Whether  that  ability  was  the  man's  own 
mind,  or  a  mmd  foreign  to  his,  is  a  legitimate  question  to  ask,  and  one  which  should  be 
answered  as  well  by  tlie  psychologist  as  by  the  Spiritualist.  But  however  this  may  be,  it  is 
certain  that  the  medium  was  tested  in  this  way  several  times,  and  always  with  similar  results. 

"  Another  test  medium,  much  more  remarkable,  has  lately  been  stopping  at  the  Fountam 
House,  who  has  given  very  great  satisfaction  to  all  who  have  met  her.  I  refer  to  Miss 
Coggswell,  of  Vermont.  'I"he  peculiarity  of  her  mediumship  consists  in  the  fact  that,  ui 
answer  fo  any  mental  questions,  writings  are  readily  made  upon  her  arms  and  forehead  in 
raised  letters,  the  color  of  blood  I  The  questioner  sits  near  the  medium,  in  company  with 
several  other  persons,  all  m  broad  daylight,  asks  any  mental  questions  he  chooses,  and  the 
answer  soon  amiears  as  described.  These  words  are  raised  upon  the  arm  or  forehead,  and 
made  in  somewhat  large  characters.  I  had  the  privilege  lately  of  seeing  the  words  '  Dr. 
Woodward '  standing  out  in  bold  relief,  and  in  the  color  of  blood,  on  the  forehead  of  the 
medium,  in  response  to  a  mental  question  from  Dr.  Gardner,  the  present  keeper  of  the 
Fountain  House.  The  medium  was  sitting  in  a  circle  of  several  persons  at  the  time,  m 
broad  daylight,  her  hands  testing  upon  her  lap,  and  the  party  were  watching  her  arms  to 
see  the  writing  appear  there;  but  after  looking  in  that  direction  some  time  m  vain,  some 
one  happened  to  look  into  her  face,  and  saw  the  above  name  standing  out  boldly  before  tlie 
eyes  of  the  company.  Dr.  Woodward— the  former  superintendent  of  the  Insane  Hospital 
atWorcester,  Massachusetts— was,  in  this  life,  an  intunate  friendof  Dr.  Gardner's  and  pro- 
fesses now  to  be  his  guardian  spirit. 

"  A  short  time  ago  some  person  who  had  lost  a  friend  by  bemg  shot  in  the  heart,  deared 
a  test,  through  this  medium,  of  the  presence  of  that  friend.  Several  persons  watched  her 
arms  very  closely,  expecting  every  mmute  to  see  some  writing  of  the  name,  date  of  death, 
age,  cause  of  departure,  etc.,  but  much  to  their  disappomtmeni,  nothmg  was  seen.  After 
wondering  much  at  this  negative  result,  and  regretting  it  in  no  small  degree,  some  one  took 
hoW  of  one  of  the  medium's  arms  and  turned  it  over,  when,  strange  and  most  incredible 
as  it  may  seem,  there  stood  out  boldly,  raised  above  the  ordmary  surface  of  the  arm,  the 
figure  of  a  human  heart,  clearly  defined  and  painted  in  blood  !  But  what  was  most  remark- 
able of  all  was  the  very  distmct  appearance  of  a  wound  in  the  heart,  asif  made  by  a  bullet  1 
This  medium  has  no  disagreeable  sensations  in  the  product  ion  of  these  writings;  and,  if  I 
mistake  not,  she  has  no  peculiar  sensations  at  all.  She  is  very  pasHve  in  her  temperament 
and  general  condition,  which  no  doubt  greatly  favors  the  production  of  these  tests.  She  is 
truly  a  wonder  to  all  who  have  witnessed  these  unique  exhibitions,  among  whom  have  been 
several  highly  scientific  persons  of  this  dly.  Dr.  Bell,  of  Cambridge,  being  among  the  num- 
l>ec.  Thus  the  external  evidences  of  Spiritualism  accumulate  with  mcreasing  force,  and 
promise,  at  no  distant  day,  the  converaon  of  all  who  need  them." 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

SPRITUALISM 

lofhearl!    ThGjr  vili 

(ilcly  barler 
itldfy  plage; 

Harvard  College— Frederick  Willis,  the  Divinity  Student— The  Trai 
Circle— The  People's  Teachers— The  "Facultv"  and  Spiritualism— Rev, 
Theodore  Higginson, 

Time  has  conclusively  proved  that  the  action  of  individuals  has  had  little 
or  no  influence  on  the  progress  of  the  vast  and  ever-onward  march  of  Spirit- 
ualism ;  yet  assuming  that  there  may  arise  very  important  changes  between 
the  then  and  now,  and  the  now  and  hereafter,  in  human  opinions,  whether 
of  persons  or  communities,  it  may  be  a  matter  of  historical  interest  to  know 
what  were  the  opinions  of  the  learned  professors  of  Harvard  College,  on  the 
subject  of  Spiritualism,  in  1857. 

The  following  narrative  will  be  found  to  contain  one  of  the  most  marked 
evidences  of  this  nature  that  the  history  of  Spiritualism  affords. 

Numerous  instances  occur  in  the  experiences  of  mediums,  wherein  certain 
of  the  Harvard  professors  have  severally  and  singly  investigated  the  subject, 
and  even  iDecome  openly  avowed  advocates  of  its  sublime  realities ;' but 
in  the  following  incidents  the  actors  assume  an  amount  of  representative 
authority  which  lays  the  burden  of  tlieir  conduct  on  the  college,  rather  than  on 
the  individual  members  thereof,  and  as  it  is  to  the  church. and  lyceum  as 
institutions,  tiiat  the  people  have  the  right  to  look  for  teaching  and  guidance 
in  mooted  points  of  religion  and  science,  it  affords  us  an  instructive  lesson  to 
contemplate  the  aspect  of  the  Cambridge  University  towards  Spiritualism  in 
1857- 

It  was  some  time  in  the  fall  of  1855  that  Mr.  Frederick  Willas,  a  divmity 
student,  of  Harvard  College,  became  the  subject  of  certain  wonderfiil  phe- 
nomenal experiences,  which  ultimately  confirmed  him  and  his  friends  in  the 
belief  that  he  was  a  "medium"  for  communion  with  departed  spirits.  The 
power  which  fell  upon  Mr.  Willis  was  entirely  unsought  for  and  unwelcome, 
but  the  phenomena  were  abundant  and  wholly  spontaneous.  They  consisted 
of  visions,  trances,  premonitions,  clear  sight,  impressions,  raps  and  powerful 
movements  of  ponderable  bodies,  and  when,  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of 
friends,  he  was  induced  to  sit  for  manifestations  in  di-cles,  it  was  found  that 
musical  instruments  could  be  played  upon  by  spirits,  direct  writing  be  pro- 
duced, and  extraordinary  test  revelations  communicated  through  a  variety  of 
physical  as  well  as  intellectual  methods. 

Mr.  Willis's  position  procured  him  access  to  the  first  circles  in  Massachu- 
setts, whilst  his  wonderful  phenomenal  endowments  and  high  moral  charactei 
rendered  him  an  attractive  and  honored  visitor  wherever  he  went 

Hosted  by  Google 

174  BISTORV  OF  MODERN 

His  exceedingly  fragile  health,  melancholy  and  studious  temperament, 
and  certain  religious  scruples  peculiar  to  his  views  and  educational  preju- 
dices, rendered  him  conscientiously  slow  to  admit  the  possibility  of  spirit 
communion. 

When,  at  lengdi,  his  reason  and  judgment  were  convinced,  his  natural  re- 
serve and  extreme  sensitiveness  disposed  him  to  shrink  with  painfiil-reticence 
from  the  incessant  publicity  which  the  curiosity  of  his  friends  drew  upon  him. 
A  gentle  and  yielding  disposition  more  than  balanced  his  reserve,  and  at 
length  forced  him  into  constantly- widening  circles,  where  his  astonishing  gifts 
of  mediumship  became  the  means  of  convincing  hundreds  of  the  best  informed 
and  most  influential  persons  of  the  State. 

In  the  spring  of  1857,  and  just  as  Mr.  Willis  was  about  to  proceed  to  his 
"  recitations,"  a  lady  sought  admission  to  his  chamber,  announcing  herself  as 

Mrs.  H ,  a  person  deeply  interested  in  SpirituaUsm,  and  a  member  of  a 

family  with  whom  Mr,  Willis  had  some  acquaintance. 

Besides  her  plea  of  intimacy  with  mutual  friends,  and  their  common  faith, 
MrS.  H.  urged  her  desire  to  convert  her  son-in-law,  Mr.  Eustis,  a  well-known 
professor  of  Harvard  College,  and,  as  Mr.  Willis  was  aware,  an  openly 
avowed  sceptic  and  bitter  opponent  of  the  new  spiritualistic  movement. 
Mrs.  H.  stated  that  hecself  and  many  of  her  friends,  sincerely  interested  in 
Spiritualism,  were  most  anxious  to  secure  the  services  of  Mr.  Willis  at  a 
siance  with  Professor  Eustis,  whose  convictions,  however  obsdnate,  they  were 
quite  sure  "  must  yield  before  the  astounding  proofs  of  spirit  communion 
which  Mr.  Willis  could  afford." 

The  lady  pleaded  her  cause  with  almost  irresistible  logic.  Mr.  Willis's 
"high  standing,  and  unimpeachable  integrity,  his  entire  disinterestedness  and 
the  utter  absence  of  motive  for  imposture  —  all  this  combined  with  his  con- 
vincmg  gifts  of  mediumship,  were  precisely  the  conditions  required  to  affect 
such  a  mind  as  that  of  Professor  Eustis." 

The  importance  of  such  an  adherent  to  their  cause  was  also  urged,  and  all 
the  motives  which  could  influence  the  earnest  and  devout  mind  of  the  young 
divinity  student  were  put  into  force  to  second  her  arguments.  Against  alt 
this,  Mr.  Willis  had  only  two  causes  of  objection  to  nrge;  the  first  was  an 
irresistible  impression  of  aversion  to  the  proposed  circle,  and  the  other,  the 
prudence  which  his  peculiar  circumstances  seemed  to  call  for.  Not  only 
Mr.  Eustis,  but  several  other  of  the  professors  as  well  as  the  president  him- 
self were  known  to  be  inimical  to  Spiritualism,  and  Mr.  Willis  had  already 
reason  to  fear  that  his  too-ready  compliance  with  the  urgent  demands  that 
were  made  upon  him  for  his  services  as  a  medium  had  been  injurious  to  his 
standing  in  the  college.  But  to  all  this,  his  importunate  visitant  answered 
that  the  present  opportunity  would  be  precisely  the  opening  for  universal 
conviction  which  the  circumstances  of  the  case  demanded;  in  fact,  under  the 
solemn  promise  that  he  [Mr.  Willis]  should  reccve  "  the  most  candid  and 
courteous  treatment"  from  all  parties  invited  to  meet  him,  he  at  length  con- 
sented to  hold  a  s'eance  at  Mrs.  H.'s  residence,  on  an  evening  appointed  for 
the  purpose. 

The  circle  consisted  of  the  lady  of  the  house.  Professor  Eustis,  and 
some  twelve  or  fourteen  persons  who  were  friends  or  connections  of  the 
family. 

The  company  sat,  as  usual,  around  a  table  from  which  a  leaf  in  the  centre 
had  been  withdrawn,  leaving  a  space  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  permitting 
the  spirits  to  hand  up  any  articles  that  might  be  placed  below. 

The  room  was  brilliantly  lighted,  and  the  manifestations  consisted  of  loud 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  r7S 

raps,  movements  of  the  furniture,  rocking  the  table,  shaking  the  room,  and 
beating  a  drum  that  liad  been  placed  beneath  the  table. 

Bells  also  were  rung,  and  handed  up  through  the  open  space  in  the  table, 
and  an  accoi"dion  was  played  whilst  held  by  one  of  Mr  Willis's  hand"  only, 
the  other  being  free  and  in  sight  of  the  whole  pa  y  I  s  p  ope  also  to 
remark  that  several  of  the  tunes  were  played  on    h  o  dio      n  an     er  to 

mental  requests  of  different  members  of  the  circl 

When  the  hour  of  parting  arrived,  the  whole  of  h  omp  y  xp  essed 
themselves  highly  graU&ed,  whilst  Professor  Eu  w  1  appar  m  erity, 
echoed  their  words. 

After  this  meeting  Mr.  Willis  found  his  studies  so  bcnously  broken  in  upon 
and  his  health  so  much  impaired  by  the  practice  of  his  mediumship,  that  he 
resolved  to  suspend  his  s'eances  until  the  next  vacation.  Several  weeks 
elapsed,  when  he  was  once  more  interrupted  by  a  visit  from  Mrs.  H.  with  an 
earnest  request  for  another  circle.  On  this  occasion  Mr.  Willis  urged  his 
objections  more  strenuously  than  ever,  and  was  met  by  still  more  irresistible 
importunities  on  the  part  of  the  lady. 

As  before,  her  pertinacity  overcame  his  intense  dislike,  and  with  the  same 
emphatic  promise  of  "  most  courteous  and  candid  treatment,"  she  fairly  wor- 
ried the  harassed  student  into  compliance. 

The  same  party,  including  Professor  Eustis,  had  assembled  to  meet  Mr. 
Willis,  but  just  as  they  were  about  to  take  seats  around  the  table,  Mrs.  H, 
stated  that  though  of  course  they  could  not  entertain  the  slightest  suspicion 
of  their  guests,  yet  they  had  all  previously  agreed,  on  their  own  parts,  each 
one  to  sit  with  their  feet  drawn  back  beneath  their  chairs ;  "Would  Mr. 
Willis  be  so  good  as  to  comply  with  this  arrangement  ?"  Mr.  Willis  replied, 
with  some  surprise,  that,  as  he  had  always  sat  with  and  for  friends,  the  idea 
of  imposing  conditions  upon  him  had  never  before  been  suggested;  that 
the  manifestations  were  invariably  of  such  a  character  as  to  preclude  the  pos- 
sibility of  his  interference  ;  nevertheless,  if  it  was  their  wish,  he  would  certainly 
comply  with  the  requisition  ;  he  only  urged,  with  a  smile,  that  he  was  then  in 
such  a  restless  and  nervous  condition  of  health  that  in  all  probability  he 
might  forget,  and  transgress  the  restriction,  but  added,  still  in  half-jestir^ 
earnestness,  that  no  manifestations  had  yet  been  given  through  him  which 
the  position  of  his  feet  could  affect.  Again  the  party  grouped  themselves 
around  the  table  in  a  room  brilliantly  illuminated.  The  instruments,  inclu- 
ding a  small  drum  and  two  sticks,  several  bells,  an  accordion,  a  glassichord 
and  its  two  sticks,  were  all  arranged  by  the  party,  under  the  table, 
and  Mr.  Willis,  though  still  entirely  devoid  of  suspicion  concerning  their 
motives,  observed  that  they  placed  them  so  far  from  him  that,  had  he  been 
disposed  to  touch  them,  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible  to  have  done  so. 

The  company  arranged  themselves,  and  their  disposition  brought  Professor 
Eustis  next  to  Mr.  Willis,  For  nearly  haifan  hour  no  manifestations 
occurred,  nor  will  this  surprise  any  investigator  of  spiritual  phenomena,  when 
they  remember  that  Mr.  Willis's  extremely  sensitive  nature  was  sharpened  to 
agonizing  perception  by  excessive  debili^,  and  that  he  was  placed  next  to 
one  whom  subsequent  disclosures  proved  had  come  there  remorselessly  bent 
upon  his  detection  and  exposure  as  an  impostor. 

Beyond  the  strange  mental  suffering  which  he  endured,  and  wliich  Mr. 
Willis  liimself  describes  as  "  unspeakable  torture,"  no  phenomena  of  any 
kind  transpired,  until  the  raps  gave  the  signal  for  the  alphabet,  and  directed 
that  flie  position  of  the  parties  should  be  so  altered  as  to  bring  Mr.  Willis  on 
one  side  of  the  table,  a  lady  of  the  party  next  to  him,  and  Professor  Eustis  at 

Hosiedb,  Google 

i-jG  mSTORY  OF  MODERN' 

the  end  of  the  table,  with  only  a  lady  intervening  between  himself  and  the 
medium.  After  this  change  had  been  effected,  the  manifestations  proceeded 
■with  their  usual  force  and  freedom.  Amongst  other  phenomena,  let  it  be 
remembered  that  the  glassichord  and  the  drum  were  skilfiilly  played  upon 
with  both  sticks.  On  die  latter,  a  certain  point  of  war  was  executed  with 
great  precision  and  force,  upon  which  one  of  the  ladies  present  asked,  with 
singular  emphasis,  whether  it  was  not  certain  that  both  sticks  must  have  been 
used  to  produce  that  effect?  „         .  ,.       .t     ,,rii-    ru 

The  whole  party  seemed  to  agree  m  the  affirmative,  when  Mr.  Willis  felt 
the  accordion,  which  had  been  placed  far  out  of  the  reach  of  even  his  ex. 
tended  feet,  pressing  up  against  his  leg.  He  intimated  this  fact  to  Vas.  party, 
and  showed  them  that  to  enable  the  spirits  to  play  the  instrument,  it  became 
necessary  that  he  should  hold  it  in  one  hand,  with  the  keys  downwards. 

This  position  he  accordingly  took,  placing  his  left  hand  on  the  table  fully 
in  sight  of  the  whole  party.  The  accordion  resting  its  whole  weight  on  Mr. 
Willis's  right  hand  fatigued  him,  and  involuntarily  he  drew  his  foot  from  be- 
neath the  chair,  and  extended  his  leg  for  the  instrument  to  rest  against. 

The  action  under  any  chcumstances  was  a  natural,  even  a  necessary  one, 
and  was  executed  by  Mr.  WUlis  not  only  upon  the  customary  impulse  of  such 
occasions,  but  also  in  utter  fo^etfulness  of  the  chaise  he  had  received  not 
■  to  extend  his  feet 

Free  as  he  had  ever  been  from  all  intention  or  necessity  to  practice  impos- 
ture, the  idea  had  never  entered  his  head,  hence  the  charge  he  had  received 
entirely  escaped  his  memory. 

"Under  any  restrictions,"  says  Mr.  Willis  himself,  "it  is  morally  certdn  that,  whether 
I  could  have  kept  the  idea  of  its  necessity  in  mind  or  not,  I  never  could  long  have  mam- 
tained  any  condition  of  restraint.  Nervous  and  restless  as  I  always  am,  the  p^s.bility  of 
continuing  in  any  cramped  position  would  be  with  me  a  physical  impossibihty.  I  could  not 
even  at  this  time  undertake  to  say  that  I  had  not  changed  my  position  many  times  uncoi 
sciously  and  involuntarily,  but  under  the  natural  impulse  of  supportmg  the  accordion  In 
._:,.i,ti  A ^  c^»  tr..^,^       W,^  T  rpnK-mhpred  the  restriction  I  should  have  callt 

sciously  and  involuntardy,  but  under  the  natural  impulse  oi  supporiuig  u.t  ovi-uiu. .- 

evitably  drew  my  foot  forward.     Had  I  cememhered  the  restriction  I  should  have  caUed 
attention  to  my  movement,  but  it  had  long  ance  passed  from  my  mmd. 

Following  on  diis  change  of  position,  let  it  be  remembered  that  several 
tunes  were  well  played  in  answer  to  mental  requests  by  the  company  Mr. 
Wilhs  holding  the  instrument  in  one  hand,  with  the  other  visible  to  all,  re- 
posing on  the  table.  ,  ,.     , 

DuSng  the  performance  of  die  music  Mr.  Willis  firequently  realized  a 
strange  touch  about  his  limbs.  He  had  on  several  occasions  been  drawn 
under  the  table  bodily  by  the  spirits  and  rather  roughly  handled,  reeling 
nervously  anxious  lest  such  an  unpleasant  dilemma  was  now  about  to  befal 
him,  he  moved  once  or  twice  in  his  chair,  but  at  length  he  distincfly  felt  a 
foot  placed  beneath  his  leg,  and  raising  it  up,  pinned  it  to  the  under  side  ot 
the  table.  For  a  moment  he  fancied  it  was,  as  usual,  the  vaganes  of  the 
spirits  who  were  operating  upon  him,  but  the  next  he  was  undeceived  by 
Professor  Eusris,  who,  rising  from  the  table,  proceeded  m  the  most  insulting 
and  violent  manner  to  denounce  him  as  "an  impostor,"  and  the  whole  ot  the 
manifestations  as  the  result  of  the  most  unmitigated  fraud  and  deception. 

At  first  astonishment  rendered  Mr.  Willis  speechless,  but  when  he  had  suf- 
ficiently recovered  his  composure,  he  mildly  yet  firmly  expostulated  w.th  his 
accuser,  attempted  to  explain  the  incident  as  above  stated,  and  appealed  to 
the  nature  of  all  the  manifestations  produced  in  evidence  of  the  utter  impos- 
sibihty of  his  assumed  complicity.     He  cited  tiie  skilful  performances  on 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  177 

tiie  drums  and  glassichord,  clearly  requiring  for  their  execution  two  sticks, 
whilst  his  hands  were  bofh  on  the  table ;  the  tunes  played  on  the  accordion 
in  answer  to  mental  questions  whilst  one  hand  was  in  full  view  to  every 
one  r  die  obvious  and  simple  explanation  of  his  foot  being  raised  in  the 
endeavor  to  avoid  the  manifestations  whereby  Professor  Eustis  had  been  for 
some  time  annoying  him :  all  this  he  calmly  urged,  and  insisted  that  they 
proved  the  absiadity  of  any  attempt  to  implicate  loim. 

The  professor  would  not  even  hear  him,  and  his  intolerable  violence  in- 
creased in  proportion  to  his  victim's  agitation.  Feeling  his  strength  rapidly 
failing,  Mr.  Willis  pleaded  that  he  should  be  allowed  an  opportunity  of  prov- 
ing the  genuine  character  of  his  manifestations  by  holding  another  circle  with 
Professor  Eustis,  in  which  he  would  cheerfully  submit  to  any  conditions  that 
might  be  demanded. 

To  this  the  professor  only  replied  by  scornfully  refusing  to  "  degrade  him- 
self by  any  further  intercourse  with  such  an  impostor." 

At  this  point  the  lady  of  the  house  interfered,  and  it  being  now  fully  under- 
stood that  the  whole  circle  and  the  preconcerted  arrangements  had  been 
planned  with  her  connivance  as  a  trap  for  Mr.  Willis,  she  insisted  that  it  was 
due  to  herself  that  Mr.  Willis  sliould  be  allowed  a  fair  opportunity  of  vin- 
dicating himself  in  a  fumre  sitting.  As  all  the  rest  of  the  party  joined  in  this 
requisition,  Professor  Eustis,  wiUi  a  very  bad  grace,  yielded  a  reluctant  assent, 
when  it  was  determined  that  Mr.  Willis  should  call  at  die  professor's  rooms 
the  next  day  at  four  o'clock,  the  hour  following  the  students'  recitations,  and 
there  arrange  to  hold  a  circle  with  Professor  Eustis,  at  such  time  and  place, 
with  such  persons,  and  under  such  test  conditions  as  should  be  agreed  upon, 
Mr._  Willis  only  claiming  on  his  behalf  that  Professor  Eustis  should  suspend: 
his  judgment  and  take  no  steps,  either  by  word  of  moudi  or  pen,  to  reiterate 
the  still  unproved  charges  of  die  night  until  die  mvestigations  of  the  proposed, 
ciicle  should  confinn  or  disprove  them. 

To  these  terms  also  tlie  professor  was  urged  by  his  friends  to  accede  as. 
being  "simple  justice"  to  one  against  whom  none  could  fail  to  perceive  an 
accusation,  wholly  unsustained  by  the  facts  of  the  case,  rested. 

When  these  hasty  arrangements  had  been  concluded  the  overstrung  nerves, 
of  die  suffering  medium  utteriy  failed  him ;  a  constitutional  tendency  to  syn- 
cope, induced  by  an  affection  of  die  heart,  overcame  him,  and  he  remained 
unconscious  and  almost  lifeless  for  a  considerable  time  before  he  could  be 
removed  to  a  carriage  and  conveyed  back  to  his  lodgings. 

Fever,  delirium,  and  the  most  alarming  symptoms,  supervened.  In  this, 
state  he  was  found  by  his  classmates  in  the  morning,  unable  to  quit  his  bed. 
He  retained  sufficient  memory,  however,  to  think  of  his  appointment  with 
Professor  Eustis,  and  sent  one  of  his  fellow-students  to  report  his  con- 
dition, and  assure  the  professor  that  he  would  wait  upon  him  to  carry  out 
the  proposed  arrangement,  at  the  very  earliest   period   his  healdi  would. 

From  this  point  congestion  of  the  brain  set  in,  and  in  a  condition  of  fever, 
delirium,  and  intense  suffering,  Mr.  Willis  remained  powerless  and  unable  to> 
quit  his  bed  for  a  fortnight.  Wlien  at  length  he  became  convalescent,  and! 
appeared,  still  enfeebled  and  greatly  broken  in  health,  amongst  his  classmates, 
again,  he  heard  with  equal  astonishment  and  indignation  that  on  the  very 
^ay  succeeding  the  circle,  though  fully  informed  of  the  extremely  dangerous 
condition  of  Mr.  Willis's  health.  Professor  Eustis  had  deliberately  violated  the 
tenns  of  their  parting  agreement  by  spening  the  hour  that  should  have  been 
devoted  to  instructing  his  class  in  denouncing  Mr.  Willis  as  an  impostor,  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

178  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

so  violent  and  unscrupulous  had  been  the  language  used,  that  Mr.  WilKs 
found  himself  the  common  talk  and  reprobation  of  the  whole  college,  and 
the  subject  of  die  most  injurious  newspaper  paragraphs.  The  full  force  of 
this  dishonorable  treatment,  however,  was  not  fully  realized  until  the  occasion 
of  his  next  attendance  upon  recitation,  when  at  the  close  of  die  exercises,  he 
was  requested  by  Professor  Noyes  to  remain,  and  by  him  was  informed  that 
Professor  Enstis  had  preferred  against  him  charges  of  so  grave  a  nature  that 
it  was  deemed  necessary  the  Faculty  should  consider  them  in  an  official  ex- 
amination. Mr.  Willis  replied  that  the  injurious  reports  which  Professor 
Eustis  had  circulated  had  led  him  to  expect  this,  and  in  answer  to  the  request 
of  Professor  Noyes  that  he  would  prepare  himself  to  meet  the  Faculty^  he 
expressed  his  entire  willingness  to  do  so  "at  once,"  when  it  was  resolved 
that  die  investigation  should  take  place  on  the  following  Friday,  namely, 
March  27,  1857. 

On  the  morning  of  the  appointed  day,  Mr.  Willis  received  an  informal 
note  from  Professor  Noyes,  to  the  effect  that  as  Professor  Eustis  had  asked 
the  privilege  of  bringing  a  "friend"  widi  him  to  the  investigation,  he,  Mr. 
Willis,  was  at  liberty  to  do  the  same. 

Nothing  of  the  function  or  office  which  such  "friends"  were  to  fill,  was, 
however,  suggested. 

In  this  dilemma,  Mr.  Willis,  unable  to  procure  the  attendance  of  the  pardes 
he  most  desired,  was  advised  to  solicit  the  presence  of  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Har- 
rington, a  request  that  was  at  once  cheerfully  acceded  to  by  this  gentleman, 
a  Unitarian  minister  of  high  standing  and  most  estimable  cliaracter. 

On  arriving  at  the  appointed  place,  Mr.  Willis  —  who  had  at  first  been  in- 
formed by  the  president  that  his  judges  would  only  be  die  professors  with 
whom  he  was  acquainted — recognized  in  Professor  Eustis's  "  friend,"  a  Dr. 
Moirell  Wyman,  notoriously  known  to  Mr.  Willis  as  an  open  and  bitter 
antagon'  t  of  Sp' ritualism,  and  an  intimate  of  one  of.  his  own  relations,  with 
who  M  \\  11  as  unfortur.ately  on  very  unfriendly  termc.  Besides  these 
ob  o  s  p  d  po  tions  against  him,  Mr.  Willis  was  at  no  loss  to  perceive 
tha  P  of  o  E  is's  "friend"  had  been  wisely  selected  as  exactly  the  non- 
profe  s  onal  oun  el  best  qualified  to  dispose  of  a  case  wherein  the  defendant 
was  a      k  deb  1  ated,  and  almost  friendless  invalid. 

F  om  he  ery  opening  of  his  case,  Mr.  Willis  felt  no  hope  or  expectation 
Lof  a  successful  issue.  He  loved  and  honored  his  professors  before  whomhe 
istood,  but  the  unaccountable  bitterness  which  seemed  to  possess  the  mind 
of  his  accuser,  and  the  vindictive  spirit  in  which  his  charge  was  made,  almost 
.determined  him  to  iitter  no  plea  or  enter  into  no  contest  with  him. 

Still,  die  statements  of  Professor  Eustis  might  have  carried  their  own  con- 
viction against  himself  before  any  tribunal  that  had  not  deemed  it  their  duty 
■or  predilection  to  prejudge  the  case. 

Professor  Eustis  could  not  avoid  mentioning  the  fact  that  several  tunes 
were  played  in  answer  to  mental  requests  ;  that  tlie  drum  and  other  instru- 
ments were  manipulated  with  a  skill  and  power  Uiat  could  only  be  accom- 
plished by  a  pair  of  hands  at  least,  and  that  one  of  Mr.  Willis's  was  always 
in  sight  during  these  performances ;  furthermore,  he  admitted  tliat  when  the 
drum  was  executing  a  most  vigorous  tatoo,  and  the  glassichoid  was  beat  by 
two  sticks,  with  mai-vellous  agility,  that  both  Mr.  Willis's  hands  were  not  only 
lying  on  the  table  in  full  view  of  tlie  party,  but  that  his  whole  body  was  in  a 
state  of  unmoved  repose,  and  not  a  muscle  could  be  observed  in  motion. 
The  professors  looked  puzded,  and  once  or  twice  shrewdly  questioned  how  a 
■jjair  of  feet  could  play  such  an  instrument  in  such  a  manner  at  all,  and  still 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  1 79 

more,  how  they  could  be  in  inconceivably  violent  motion  below  the  table, 
whilst  the  rest  of  tlie  body  was  in  perfect  passivity  above  it-  "  Did  Professor 
Eostis  notice  tlie  least  movement  of  Mr.  Willis's  body  at  such  times?" 

The  professor  could  not  say  he  did. 

"  Granted  that  the  accordion  could  be  skilfully  played  upon  by  tlie  feet 
and  the  rest  of  the  body  maintained  in  perfect  repose  —  how  could  the  said 
feet,  or  the  said  organism  at  all,  play  tunes  called  for  by  mental  request  of 
certain  parties  present?" 

At  this  awkward  juncture  the  real  use  of  Dr.  Wyman's  presence  became 
triumphantly  manifest.  Rudely  breaking  in  upon  the  examination,  he  ex- 
claimed, "  Ask  Mr.  Willis  how  all  that  was  done  ;  he  can  tell  vou."  Then 
turning  to  tile  defendant,  he  cried,  in  the  same  rough,  authoritative  strain, 
"Come,  Mr.  Willis,  tell  us  how  you  did  that  trick?"  Mr.  Willis  mildly 
replied,  "The  Faculty  have  not  yet  called  upon  me  for  an  answer;  when 
diey  do,  I  will  tell  them  all  I  know  of  the  production  of  the  manifestations." 
"But  why  not  now?"  reiterated  the  friend.  "Are  you  afraid?"  Again 
Mr.  Willis  replied,  he  deferred  answering  only  to  the  Faculty.  But  tlie  Fac- 
ulty were  silent,  and  Dr.  Wynian  was  permitted  to  continue  his  system  of 
browbeating,  until  Mr.  Haningtoii  interfered,  and  insisted  tiiat  Mr.  Willis, 
sick  and  defenceless  as  he  was,  should  not  be  subject  to  such  uncalled-for 
insults. 

Whether  the  Harvard  professors  were  suddenly  moved  by  the  spirit  to  a 
sense  of  tiieir  utter  incapacity  to  judge  of  spiritual  things,  or  the  struggle  be- 
tween their  consciences  and  tlieir  prejudices  was  becoming  unmajiageable,  it 
boots  not  now  to  inquire ;  suffice  it  to  say,  the  happy  thought  broke  in  upon 
them  that  diey  were  not  "  the  proper  persons  to  decide  upon  suchacase;" 
they  believed  Ihey  had  "no  power  to  pronounce  upon  it,"  etc.,  and  having 
voted  diemselves  into  office  as  Mr.  Willis's  judges,  they  voted  themselves  out 
on  the  same  authority,  "concluded  the  case  must  be  referred  to  a  selected 
committee,"  and — adjourned  sine  die. 

Soon  after  this  meeting,  Mr.  Willis  received  a  summons  to  wait  upon  the 
president  of  tlie  college,  who,  in  smooth  and  courteous  phrase,  reminded  him 
of  the  "grave  chaises"  that  had  been  made  against  him,  and  that,  under  all 
the  circumstances,  he  [the  president]  deemed  it  most  expedient  that  Mr.  Wil- 
lis should  quietly  retire  from  the  college,  after  which  in  due  course  of  time  a 
select  committee  would  be  appointed  to  consider  his  case,  wJien,  "after  a 
time,  no  doubt,  all  difficulties  would  be  finally  cleared  away,  and  no  doubt 
Mr.  Willis  might  be  at  liberty  to  resume  his  studies  as  usual." 

To  this  spef.ious  proposition,  Mr,  Willis  replied  that  the  poorest  criminal 
must  be  held  innocent  until  his  guilt  could  be  proved ;  that  he,  Mr.  Willis, 
accused  as  he  was,  insisted  upon  maintaining  all  the  privileges  and  immunities 
of  innocence,  until  his  guilt  had  been  proved,  or  declared  by  a  competent  tri- 
bunal ;  hence  he  declined  to  assume  the  position  of  guilt  which  his  voluntary 
retirement  would  imply. 

The  president  was  urgent,  evidently  desiring  that  the  case  should  not  oc- 
cupy an  official  place  in  the  college  records  ;  Mr.  Willis,  however,  was  firm, 
and  they  parted  on  the  understanding  that  Mr.  Willis  should  reconsider  the 
president's  proposition,  and  communicate  his  decision  in  writing,  which  was 
done  in  the  following  letter. 

Hosted  by  Google 

iSo  HISTORY  OF  M0DERJ7 

"A^ril  2,  1857. 
"To  the  Rev.  yama  Walktr,  D.D.,  President  of  tlu  Family  of  the  Cambridge  Divin- 
it-  School:  ^      , 

"Dear  Sir.—I  have  ^ventlie  proposition  which  you  commnnieated  tome  on  Tuesday 
as  the  decision  of  the  Faculty  in  reference  to  the  charges  maile  against  me  by  Professor 
Eustis  the  most  careful  and  matiu-e  consideration  ;  and  I  respectfully  decline  to  initiate  any 
action' tendmg  to  establish  my  innocence,  for  such  a  course  would  be  an  utter  subversion  of 
all  moral  as  well  as  1^  propriety. 

"I  stand  before  God  aod  man  upon  my  imiocence,  until  my  accusers  shall  have  proved 
my  euilt ;  and  1  also  respectfully  decline  to  withdraw  from  the  school  pendmg  the  requisite 
investigation.  I  maintain  there  is  nothing  in  the  mere  fact  that  such  charges  have  been 
iireferred,  justly  to  prejudice  my  character  or  my  position  in  the  school.         ,   ,   ,      ^ 

"It  is  the>r(w/ofniisconduct  that  siiould  be  allowed  to  affect  me,  and  I  feel  that  1  may 
rightly  claim  as  well  as  anticipate  the  comitenance  and  support  of  the  Faculty  until  I  sliaU 
be  thus  convicted  of  imposture.  . 

"  I  therefore  talte  occaaon  to  inform  you  that,  at  the  earliest  opportunity  convement  witli 
my  health,  I  deem  it  my  duty  to  rejoin  my  class. 

"  I  am  respectfully  yours, 

"  F.  L.  H.  Willis." 

To  this  letter  Mr.  Willis  received  the  following  reply : 

"Cambridge,  AJ^ril 4,  1S57. 
"  Dear  Sir,— By  direction  of  the  Faculty  I  communicate  to  you  the  record  of  the  pro- 

"^"aP a  m^tLg^of  the  Theological  Facolt^f  on  Friday,  March  27,  1857.  a  statement  of 
facts  alleged  to  have  taken  place  at  two  exhibitions  of  what  are  called  j/jyiVaa/iBOHf/Vj-i-a- 
tirns  was  made  by  Professor  Eustis,  with  the  understanding  thM  it  involved  the  cl^i^e  of 
deception  and  imposture  against  Mr.  Frederick  L.  H.  Willis,  of  the  Divinity  School 

"Mr  Willis  was  heard  in  reply  and  denial  of  this  charge.  At  an  adjourned  meetmg  of 
the  Theolorical  Faculty,  on  Monday,  March  30,  the  subject  under  conaderation  at  the 
last  meeting  was  taken  up,  none  but  members  of  the  Faculty  being  present.  After  a  long 
and  serious  dehberation,  the  Facnlty  came  to  the  following  concluaon: 

' '  First  That  Mr.  Willis  had  mcurred  serious  and  grave  charges  coming  from  a  respectable 
source  which,  unless  hevmdicates  himself  from  them,  wiU  materially  aifect  his  character  and 
usefuliiess.  ,  .      ,.,  . .         ■ 

"Second.  That  the  hearmg  of  both  parties  at  the  last  meeting  did  not  amount  to  an  m- 

vestigation  of  such  a  nature  as  would  authorize  this  Faculty  publicly  to  pronounce  upon  the 

truth  or  faMty  of  the  charges  in  question.  .  ^.    .  •» 

"  Third.  That  this  Faculty  must  decline  the  mvestigation  required,  on  the  ground  that  it 

would  be  an  unsuitable  tribunal  for  the  settlement  of  the  matter  in  dispute.    _ 

"Fourth.  ITiat  mitil  the  question  is  settled  by  a  competent  tnbunai,  it  is  proper  that 
Mr   Willis's  connection  with  the  Divinity  School  be  suspended. 

"Fifth  Whereupon,  it  was  unanimously  voted  that  the  president  be  instructed  to  com- 
nwnicate  to  Mr.  Willis  the  above-mentioned  results  of  the  deliberation  of  the  Faculty,  with 
the  understanding  that  Mr.  WUlis  be  aUowed  to  withdraw  from  the  school  of  his  own  ac- 
cord if  he  sees  fit.  _ ,  ... . 

"  At  a  meeting  of  the  Theological  Faculty,  on  Friday,  Apnl  3,  the  president  communi- 
cated a  letter  from  Mr.  Willis,  from  which  it  appeared  that  he  declined  to  withdraw  from 
the  school  as  proposed  :  whereupon  it  was  voted  unanimously,  that  in  conformity  with  the 
conclu^ons  arrived  at  by  the  Facnlty  at  the  last  meeting,  the  comiection  of  Mr.  Wmis  with 
the  Divinity  School  be  suspended  until  further  order  of  the  Board. 

"By  direction  of  the  Faculty, 

"  George  K.  Noyes,  Secretary. 
"Mr.  F.  L.  Willis." 

Let  us  not  be  deceived  by  high-sounding  titles,  nor  even  a  popular  inter- 
pretation of  their  meaning.  "The  Theological  Faculty"  of  the  Divinity 
School,  Cambridge,  meant  a  set  of  ministers  of  the  gospel  of  love,  charity,  and 

truth men  who  were  specially  qualified  by  tlieir  station  and  attainments 

not  only  to  inculcate  such  principles  but  to  teach  and  prepare  others  for  their 
practice. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  rSl 

It  meant  die  higliest  authority  in  the  land  for  the  enforcement  of  the  divine 
love  whicli  forgives  an  erring  brother  seventy  times  seven  times,  justifies  pub- 
licans and  sinners,  prays  for  forgiveness  to  murderers,  and  teaches  men  only 
to  expect  forgiveness  of  their  trespasses  as  they  forgive  each  odier.  To  teach 
such  doctrines  was  what  the  Cambridge  Theological  Faculty  were  supported 
and  paid  to  do.  Yet  this  was  the  body_  of  men  that  branded  a  young,  feeble, 
friendless  man  with  a  stain  so  infamous  in  the  act  of  expulsion,  that  it  was  cal- 
culated to  ruin  his  prospects  irretrievably  in  this  world,  and  perliaps,  by  the 
infliction  of  such  a  penalty,  to  drive  him  into  acts  of  criminaUty  equally  fatal 
to  his  hopes  in  the  hereafter ;  and  all  for  what? 

By  their  own  resolutions,  quoted  above,  they  declare  themselves  incompe- 
tent as  well  as  unattthorized  to  pronounce  any  judgment  against  Mr.  Willis; 
hence  they  inflicted  their  remorseless  penalty  against  one  on  whom,  by  their 
own  acknowledgment,  no  verdict  of  guilt  had  been  found,  and  in  addition  to 
this,  every  member  of  tliat  Faculty  must  have  known  that  the  crime  alleged 
by  Professor  Eustis  was  an  impossible  one.  No  reiteration  of  the  evidence 
is  necessary  to  justify  this  assertion,  the  charge,  as  made  under  the  circum- 
stances, involving  siinply  a  set  of  impossible  actions.  Thus,  on  the  ground  of 
mere  suspicion,  the  apostolic  divines  of  Cambridge  University  determined  to 
brand  a  helpless  and  unoffending  being  confided  to  their  care  with  the  doom 
which  almighty  justice  inflicted  upon  the  first  murderer,  for  it  is  not  too  much 
to  say  that,  in  the  present  state  of  society,  expulsion  from  such  a  scene  under 
such  peculiar  circumstances  and  notorious  publicity,  was  equivalent  to  send- 
ing Mr.  Willis  forth  to  the  world  as  "an  outcast  and  a  vagabond." 

As  Mr.  Willis's  subsequent  career  will  be  found  more  fully  detailed  in  the 
biographical  notices  of  our  forthcoming  volume,  it  is  only  necessary  to  add  that 
his  career  has  not  suffered  by  the  tyranny  of  his  ecclesiastical  persecutors ;  on 
the  contrary,  that  its  monstrous  injustice  produced  a  reaction  in  the  commu- 
nity which  procured  for  its  victim  warm  and  powerful  friends,  through  whose 
influence,  combined  with  tliat  of  the  ever-faithful  invisible  hosts  who  had  their 
medium  in  charge,  he  has  been  conducted  along  a_ pathway  of  honorable  use- 
fullness,  every  step  of  which  has  been  an  advance  in  public  opinion  and^pri- 
vate  estimation,  whilst  the  immediate  consequence  of  Harvard  intolerance 
and  bigotry  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  was  the  publication  of  floods  of  evi- 
dence  in  favor  of  the  truth  of  the  phenomena.  Our  space  will  only  allow  us 
to  present  du-ee  extracts,  all  of  which  are  pertinent  to  diis  case.  The  first  is 
from  die  Boston  Traveller  and  contains  the  protest  of  the  distinguislied  cler- 
gyman who  accompanied  Mr.  Willis  to  die  sham  trial  of  the  Cambridge  Fac- 
ulty, and  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Harrington  was  no 
Spiritualist,  and  not  even  on  terms  of  personal  intunacy  with  Mr.  Willis,  his 
testimony  becomes  the  more  important 

"PROTEST  OF  REV.  MR.  HARRINGTON. 
"  To  the  Reverend  Faculty  of  Ike  Divinity  School  of  Hariiard  College  : 

"Gentlemen,— As  counsel  of  Mr.  F.  L.  H.  ■Willis,  and  in  liis  behalf,  I  respectfully 
submit  the  following  iu  reference  to  the  inquiry  before  you  on  Friday  evening  last. 

"I  earnestly  protest  against  the  use  of  the  ' inquiry '  as  a  baas  of  judgment  upon  Mr. 
Willis  in  any  manner  and  to  any  estent  whatever,  for  the  following  reasons ; 

"First,  Itwasvitiatedthroughout  by  a  course  of  procedure  on  the  part  of  theaccuser  and 
his  counsel,  eminently  partial  and  mijust.  Instead  of  confining  themselves  to  their  proof 
of  the  dlegationa  they  had  made,  they  shifted  the  burden  upon  Mr.  Willis's  shoulders  to 
substantiate  his  own  innocence.  They  sharply  and  persevevingly  cross-questioned  him,  as 
though  he  were  a  witness  mstead  of  the  accused  party,  and  evidently  endeavored  to  entrap 
himm  his  speech.     They  made  many -virtual  and  some  positive  charses  against  his  hon- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

l82  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

esty  of  procedtire,  in  connections  as  to  wHch  they  liad  offered  no  shadow  of  proof.  They 
brought  forward  suppositions  of  possible  trickery  equally  disconnected  from  any  proofs,  and 
boldly  assumed  tliese  posabilities  to  be  conchisive  of  fraud.  In  fine,  they  look  for  granteiJ, 
from  beginning  to  end,  the  very  point  in  question,  to  the  utteroverthrowof  the  whole  inquiry 
asafiiir  and  rdiablegrouni  for  judgment.  I  most  pointedly  and  emphatically  eionerate  the 
Faculty  from  the  slightest  intentional  bias  or  partiality.  But  I  submit  that  the  portion  of  Mr. 
Willis  was  one  demanding  the  most  serious  conaderation ;  that  his  character,  hitherto  imim- 
peached,  should  have  proved  hisshieldagainst  unsupported  imputations;  and  that  the  bearing 
of  the  investigation  onhis  prospects  and  his  peace,  shouldhave  secured  arestilction  of  the  line  of 
inquiry,  and  arguments  to  the  points  expressly  at  issue,  as  defined  by  the  existence  of  posi- 
tive testimony.  It  may  be  suggested  that  it  was  in  the  power  of  Mr.  Willis  to  object  to 
the  course  of  procedure  at  any  moment,  and  that,  as  he  did  not  avail  himself  of  his  oppor- 
tunity to  do  so,  he  cannot  now,  with  propriety,  review  the  proceedings.  To  this  I  reply, 
that  under  the  informal  circumstances  attending  the  inquiry —  tailing  also  into  view  the 
strong  bias  of  the  accnser  and  his  counsel  —  it  would  have  exposed  Mr.  Willis  (o  severe 
misapprehension  if  he  had  endeavored  to  narrow  down  the  investigation  by  insisting  on 
his  legal  rights.  It  was  emphatically  the  part  of  the  Faculty  to  have  protected  him,  had 
they  appreciated  the  angular  one-adedness  of  the  whole  procedure. 

"  In  the  second  place,  I  protest  against  the  use  of  the  inquiry  of  Friday  evening  as  a  baas 
of  judgment  upon  Mr.  Willis,  because  the  sole  testimony  offered  on  that  occasion  was  that 
of  the  accuser,  and  I  impeach  that  testimony  as  miworthy  of  confidence  in  the  premises,  on 
the  fallowing  groimds ; 

"Fhst,  It  maybe  proved  that  Professor  Eustis  has  long  been  noted  for  an  intense  andim- 

Slacable  prejudice  against  the  whole  subject  of  Spiritualism,  so  called;  that  he  has  often 
enounced  its  alleged  phenomena  to  be  deceptions,  and  its  mediums  to  be  impostors,  and 
therefore  was  utterij^  precluded  from  that  candor  and  impartiality  of  mind  which  would 
enable  him  to  investigate,  vrithout  fatal  bias,  the  modus  operandi  of  Mr.  Willis  on  the 
occasions  when  the  deceptions  he  chaises  upon  him  are  alleged  to  have  been  practiced. 

"  Second,  It  may  be  proved  that  in  the  interval  between  the  time  of  fihng  his  accusations 
gainst  Mr.  Willis  with  the  Faculty,  and  the  period  appointed  for  a  hearing  thereupon. 
Professor  Eustis  occupied  the  season  of  one  of  his  regular  lectures  before  the  Scientific 
School  with  the  siibject-matter  of  the  said  accusation ;  that  he  exullingly  declared  his  pre- 
conceived opinions  to  have  been  triumphantly  vindicated,  and  that  he  openly  and  passion- 
ately branded  Mr.  Willis,  by  name,  as  a  deceiver  and  a  cheat, 

"And  I  iirast  that  a  person  who  could  thus  violate  the  proprieties  of  his  pc^tion,  as  the 
preferrer  of  chains  yet  unproved  and  uninvestigated,  and  use  the  opportunities  and  influ- 
ence of  his  of&ce  to  pre-occupy  pciblic  opinion  and  forestall  your  decision,  has  evinced  an 
animoaty  ag^nst  tlie  [Mrson  of  Mr.  Willis,  sufficient  to  fatally  color  whatever  evidence  he 
might  have  to  offer  you, 

"At  the  best,  it.  would  be  only  the  assertion  of  a  single  person,  against  which,  until  it 
should  be  corroborated  by  Other  evidence,  the  explanation  of  Mr,  Willis  constitutes  a 
complete  legal  offset.  And  in  view  of  this  extrenie  bias  of  feelmg  it  is  entirely  unworthy 
to  be  taken  into  account 

"I  do  therefore  solemnly  and  earnestly  protest  against  the  acceptance  of  Mr.  Eustis's 
testimony,  miless  corroborated,  and  against  the  use  of  the  inquiry  of  Friday  evening  last 
as  the'  basis  of  a  judgment  upon  Mr,  Willis,     All  whicll  is  respectfully  submitted. 

"(Signed)  Hbhry  F,  Haurington." 

The  tone  of  some  of  the  most  respectable  portions  of  tlie  press  may  be 
gathered  from  tlie  following  brief  extract  from  tlie  Boston  Traveller.  The 
article  is  selected  chiefly  on  account  of  the  prominent  position  which  that 
journal  occupies  in  the  periodica]  literature  of  Massadiu setts. 

"  The  personal  coutrovei'sy  between  Professor  Eustis  and  Mr.  Willis  is  of  little  moment. 
We  liave  formed  no  opinion  of  Mr.  Willis'sguilt  or  innocence.  Our  position,  so  far  as  he 
is  concerned,  is  merely  that  the  charge  ag^st  him  is  not  sustdned  by  tlie  evidence.  On 
the  general  question  of  what  is  called  '  Spiritualism,'  we  have  been  ted  by  observation  of 
our  ovra,  and  by  the  testimony  of  others,  to  the  belief  that  the  phenomena  called  spiritual- 
istic do  really  occur.  We  believe  that  tables  and  other  articles  have  been  mored,  and 
musico!  instruments  played  upon,  without  the  agency  of  any  ordinary  physical  force.  We 
are  satisfied  that  these  phenomena  have  occurred  not  merely  in  the  dark,  but  in  open  day- 
light, under  the  eyes  of  accurate  and  trustworthy  obseivers,  who  hail  no  pecuniary  or  other 
interest  in  their  production.     They  have  occurred  not  once  or  twice,  nor  twenty  times,  but 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  1 83 

in  hundreds  of  thousands  of  instances,  stretching  thiough  a  series  of  years,  and  in  the  pres- 
ence not  of  professed  and  mercenary  mediums,  but  in  the  bosom  of  respectable  households 
in  all  pacts  of  the  country.  They  are  attested  by  hundreds  of  thou^nds  of  witnesses,  m- 
cludinemany  persons  of  the  highest  character  and  intelligence,  some  of  whom  are  themselres 
'  mediums,'  and  cannot  therefore  be  the  mere  dupes  of  sk^ful  jugglery.  In  numerous  weU- 
authenticated  instances  the  phenomena  have  occurred  under  such  circumstances  that  decep- 
tion or  deluaon  was  utteily  impossiUe.  ,    ,  ,  ^  ,.  ■ 

"No  satisfactory  or  concluawe  explanation  of  these  phenomena  has  ever  been  given. 
The  various  theories  which  have  been  propounded  of  'odic  force,'  ' new  powers  in  nature, 
and  the  like,  are  mere  conjectures,  none  of  which  have  borne  examination  Our  neighbors 
of  the  Courier,  and  some  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  University  at  Cambndge,  solve  the 
nroblem  by  attributing  the  manifestations  to  trickery  and  jugglins.  We  are  cerlam  that 
this  position  is  entirely  untenable,  and  that  to  millions  of  people  m  this  country,  it  ivill  only 
render  those  who  hold  it  objects  of  contempt  and  derision.  It  has  been  to  us,  aud  still  is, 
a  cause  of  rcret  that  gentlemen,  in  whose  reputation  for  knowledge  and  sagacity  the  com- 
munilv  has  so  deep  an  interest,  should  have  compromised  themselves  by  rashly,  without  due 
invest^ation,  taking  a  portion  from  which  they  most  assuredly,  at  no  distant  period,  igno- 
ininiously  retreat." 

In  tlie  cirdes  of  the  theological  literati,  no  indepetident  clergyman  has 
taken  a  higher  rank  than  the  Rev.  Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson.  As  a. 
scholar  writer,  and  orator,  this  gentleman  has  long  maintained  the  respect 
and  admiration  of  the  best  intellects  in  New  England.  It  is  with  peculiar 
pleasure,  tlien,  that  we  find  that  the  insensate  bigotry  of  the  Harvard  profes- 
sors at  last  attracted  the  attention  of  Mr.  Higginson  and  induced  him  to 
investigate  the  subject,  and  finally  to  come  out  of  the  inquiry  in  the  spint  of 
the  annexed  communication,  the  last  which  we  can  select  from  hundreds  of 
similar  statements,  to  the  genuine  character  of  Mr.  Willis's  medmmship.  The 
extract  is  taken  from  one  of  the  Hartford  papers,  and  is  as  follows  :— 

"PHENOMENA  IN  THE  PRESENCE  OF  MR.    WILLIS. 
"  The  case  of  Mr.  Willis,  the  '  suspended'  divinity  student  of  Harvard  College,  is,  a; 

Si^  that  the  Rev.  T.  W.  Hi^nson,  an  independent  clergyman  of  that  aty,  referred  to  it 
hfhis  pulpit  a  Sunday  or  twollnee,  in  connection  with  a  lecture  on  SpirituaUsin,  mid  com- 
mented, in  appropriate  terms,  on  the  hasty  inferences  of  Professor  Enstis,  and  the  mijust 
^tion  of  the  Facilty  in  the  case.  We  shaft  probably  be  able  next  week  to  lay  before  our 
readers  the  particulars  of  this  action,  when  they  may  look  for  something  for  which  it  woold 
be  difiicult  to  find  3  precedent  among  the  doings  of  ssr,^  men.  Rev.  Mr.  HiErsinson  has 
also  published  in  the  Sp^;  the  foUowing  affidavit  of  his 

Mr.  Wmis: 

i  STATEMENT  OF  FACTS. 

alleged  powf 

T  MAY  CONCERN,— The  public  attention  lias  recently  been  allracted  by  the 
^^^^  ,.,,„-..,  ..s  a  'medium,'  of  Mr.  F.  L.  H.  WUiis,  of  Cambridge,  and  by  the  singular 
7^£^  connected  with  his  'suspension'  from  the  Divinity  School  of  Harvard  Uniy^- 
^ivlniustice  to  Mr.  WiUis,  and  to  an  extraordinary  class  of  yet  unexplamed  scientidc 
fart's.  I  wish  to  state  some  phenomena,  observed  by  me  during  two  evenmgs  spent  with 
Wm  at  a  ^ivate  residence  in  this  citjr.  There  were  from  nine  to  twelve  presen^all  ex- 
cept Mr.  Willis,  bdng  citizens  of  this  place,  mcludmg  one  of  our  most  experienced  physi- 
cians. Dr  Heywood  of  Worcester,  Massachusetts.  We  sat  arotmd  a  long  dmmg-tahle. 
The  room  was  not  brilliantly  but  sufficiently  hghted,  so  that  every  movement  of  every  per- 
son  could  be  ^tmctly  watched;  aud  I,  at  least,  watched  them  very  close  y. 
" '  I  shall  omit  the  detiuls  of  the  phenomena,  and  ^ve  only  the  general  heatk : 
"  'First  The  musicM  instruments  which  had  been  previously  placetl  by  the  company 
beneath  the  table -a  guitar,  a  smaU  drum,  an  accordion,  and  two  bells— were  moved 
Xut  from  place  to  pla^,  lifted  and  knocked  agamst  the  under  sideof  the  table,  and  re- 
peatedly ami  loudly  ^yed  upon.  Two  were  several  times  played  m  unison,  at  opposite 
ends  of  the  table  aifl  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  the  medium.  Durmg  this  proccedmg, 
the  whole  table  was  several  times  raised,  and  one  slab  of  it  — bemg  an  extension  table- 
was  lifted  altogether  from  its  support,  and  vibrated  iu  the  air  without  contact  of  hands. 

Hosted  by  Google 

j84  history  of  modern 

"  '  Setond,  The  accordion  was  raised  into  Mr.  Willis's  lap,  and  being  held  by  him,  with 
one  hand,  between  hk  knees,  was  played  very  skilfully,  and  executed  a  variety  of  lunes 
selected  by  us,  and  even  in  answer  to  the  mental  requests  of  some  of  the  company.  Excel- 
lent imitations  of  the  oboe,  violoncello,  and  double-bass  were  also  given.  It  is  well  known 
that  the  accordion  requires,  in  playing,  the  use  of  two  hands. 

'"Third,  Upon  our  extinguishing  the  lamp,  for  the  sake  of  experiment,  &inl  lights 
appeared  upon  the  table  near  Mr.  Willis,  two  or  three  at  a  time,  moving  about  like  glow- 
worms, which  they  resembled.  Other  lights  flickered  in  the  air  with  a  more  rapid  motion, 
like  fire-flies.  Upon  my  obtammg  and  opening  a  phia!  of  phosphorus  tlie  light-  m  ased 
in  intensity,  gradually  dimmishing,  when  I  re-corked  it,  to  their  original  amount  E  rybody 
Id  the  room  perceived  them  distinctly. 

"'Fourth,  The  room  bemg  still  dark,  the  accordion  was  held  on  the  t  U  by  M 
Willis,  and  as  it  played  in  the  manner  before  described,  faint  lights  flickered  d    h 

keys  of  the  instrument.  Durmg  the  darkness,  all  the  phenomena  were  mor  m  =e  I  t 
it  seemed  very  disagreeable  to  the  nerves  of  Mr.  Willis,  and  he  begged  to  h  tl  1  mp 
restored. 

'"Fifth,  The  room  being  agam  lifted,  1  proceeded  to  try  some  closer  pe  m  t 
Taking  the  accordion  ui  my  own  hand,  between  "my  knees,  and  guarding  with  my  feet 
against  the  possibility  of  contact,  I  found,  to  my  surprise,  that  the  other  end  was  seized  by 
an  inviable  force,  and  the  different  keys  audibly  handled,  producing,  at  last,  muacal  somids, 
but  quite  unperfeclly.  Before  king,  however,  it  was  pulled  away  from  me  with  very  great 
force,  and  dropped  on  the  floor.  Others  afterwards  look  the  instrument,  but  k  was  played 
m  no  other  hands.  I  may  add  that  I  simply  held  it  by  the  end  with  one  hand,  and  that  I 
have  no  knowledge  of  the  instrument ;  also,  that  the  hands  of  all  the  company  were  upon 
the  table,  and  that  I  vras  beyond  the  reach  of  Mr.  Willis's  peison. 

"  '  Sixth,  Looking  under  the  table,  while  the  guitar  was  plajing,  I  saw  with  perfect  dis- 
tmctness  the  instrument  lymg  on  its  back,  untouched  by  any  hand,  but  with  fault  flicker- 
ings  of  light  playing  over  the  strings.  I  could  also  see  the  feet  of  the  persons  nearest  it, 
and  that  they  were  not  in  contact  with  it,  while  Mr.  Willis  was  out  of  reach.  No  other 
person  looked  under  the  table,  I  believe,  nor  did  I  mention  these  observations  till  the  phe- 
nomena bad  ceased,  for  1  did  not  wisl:,  at  the  tune,  to  share  my  investigations  with  any 

"'Seventh,  The  guitar  was  moved  slowly  along  by  some  force,  to  me  inscrutable,  and 
lifted  b?*ween  my  knees,  the  neck  restmg  on  my  left  thigh.  At  the  suggestion  of  some  of 
tlie  company,  I  b^an  to  sing,  first  placing  myself  in  such  a  position  as  to  guard  the  instru- 
ment from  possibility  of  contact.  Every  song  I  sang  was  accompanied  accurately  and 
gracefully  on  the  guitar,  with  a  constantly- increasing  facility  of  adaptation.  The  best  ac- 
companiment of  all  was  finely  played  to  a  peculiar  and  rather  difficult  Portuguese  song, 
probably  not  known  to  a  dozen  persons  in  America  besides  myself.  I  cannot  myself  pkiy 
the  guitar,  but  I  have  heard  it  played  a  good  deal,  and  I  know  that  the  accompaniment  was 
aji  extraordinary  thing,  apart  from  the  mystery  of  its  origm.  1  know  that  I  was  beyond 
the  reach  of  any  part  of  Mr.  WilUs's  person,  and  that  it  was  physically  impossible  for  any 
one  to  touch  the  instrument  without  my  detecting  it. 

" '  Eighth,  During  all  these  various  phenomena,  I  felt  repeatedly  a  delicate  grasp  upon  my 
feet,  precisely  resemblmg  that  of  a  hand  with  distinct  fingas.  Upon  my  slipping  off  my 
shoe,  it  was  still  more  distinct,  and  was  in  all  cases  accompanied  by  a  very  peculiar  electrical 
sensation,  as  when  two  persons  complete  the  circuit  of  an  electro-magnetic  battery.  Keep- 
ing my  own  comisel,  I  heard  precisely  the  same  phenomena  simultaneously  described  by 
persons  at  the  other  end  of  the  table.  Afterwards,  placing  my  hand  beneath  the  table,  I 
felt  the  same  contact  still  more  distmctly  upon  that.  All  the  rest  of  the  company  held 
then:  hands  upon  the  table,  and  1  was  beyond  the  reach  of  Mr.  WilUs. 

" '  I  might  make  these  statements  still  more  wonderful  by  going  more  into  detail,  but 
have  probably  gone  so  for  aheady  beyond  the  credulity  of  my  readers  that  I  had  better 
stop.  If  any  refuse  to  believe  these  facts  on  my  testimony,  I  can  only  say  that  1  should 
have  found  it  hard  to  believe  them  on  theirs.  Like  them,  I  prefer  to  verify  novel  facts  by 
my  own  observation.  I  can  only  say  for  myself,  further,  that  1  have  been  all  my  life  a 
student  of  the  natural  sciences,  and  have  earned  by  this  time  some  confidence  m  the  care- 
fulness of  ray  own  observations  and  the  accuracy  of  my  own  senses, 

" '  The  question  of  the  '  spiritual '  origin  is  not  now  raised ;  it  is  a  sunple  question  of  fraud 
or  genuineliess.  If  I  have  not  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  these  phenomena 
which  I  have  just  described,  then  diere  is  no  such  thing  as  evidence,  and  all  the  fabric  of 
natural  science  may  be  a  mass  of  imposture.  Anil  when  I  find,  on  examination,  that  facts 
simikr  to  these  have  been  observed  by  hundreds  of  intelligent  persons,  m  various  places,  foi 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  185 

m  disposed  humbly  to  remember  the  maxim  attributed  to  Arago,  •  He 
■■'     "  ^  ■'■■'■;,  pronounces  the  word 'impoEsable." 

"Thomas  Wentwokth  Hiqgineon.* 
"Worcester,  ss.,  J//-// 15,  1857.  1 

"  '  Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  me,  }■ 

"' Henry  Chapik,  Justice  of  the  Peace.'"  J 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN     NEW    ENGLAND — THE     CAMBRIDG 
CATION. 

"  If  any  old  book  reaolieii  a  flfiLeili  edition. 

But  give  him  a  dcw  b«£  fi«sh  oul  of  Ihe  heart, 
And  you  put  hjm  at  sea  without  ^nmpass  or  chatt. 

When  the  annals  of  science  can  produce  recorded  proofs  tliat  new  discov- 
eries generally  result  from  the  associative  action  of  schools,  colleges,  or  ly- 
ceums ;  or  when  they  can  show  that  the  incipient  efforts  of  genius  in  the 
line  of  discovery  have  been  fostered  and  sustained  by  such  organizations,  we 
may  find  a  fair  excuse  for  the  abject  and  unreasoning  submission  with  which 
the  great  mass  of  mankind  bow  down  before  the  dicta  of  scientific  bodies, 
and  assume  that  the  office  of  a  "professor"  confers  the  ability  and  title  to 
pronounce  authoritative  judgment,  from  whidi  there  can  be  no  appeal.  It 
was  doubtless  in  this  conventional  spirit  of  deference  to  constituted  authority 
that  the  Spiritualists  of  America  thought  it  necessary  to  memorialize  Con- 
gress for  aid  and  indorsement  from  a  "  scientific  commission;" 

It  would  seem  that  the  insolence  with  which  Congress  had  sneered  away 
the  Spiritualists'  memorial,  the  humiliating  trash  put  forth  by  the  Buffalo 
doctors,  President  Mahan,  Dr.  Rogers,  and  others  of  the  "  self-wise  and  pru- 
dent," was  not  yet  enough  to  convince  the  Spiritualists  of  Boston  that  facts 
spoke  louder  than  the  dicta  of  priests,  and  truth  needed  no  indorsement 
from  alina  mater. 

The  editor  of  the  Boston  Courier  offered  a  contemptuous  challenge  of 
five  hundred  dollars  for  the  production  of  certain  phenomena  under  certain 
conditions,  and  required  that  three  distinguished  scientists  of  Harvard  Col- 
lege should  be  the  umpires  on  the  occasion.  The  bait  of  five  hundred  dollars 
did  not  weigh  a  feather  in  the  scale,  but  the  possibility  of  inducing  the  savans 
of  Harvard,  to  condescend  so  far  as  to  investigate  tiie  despised  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism  !  This  indeed  was  a  triumph ;  and  the  prospect  of  indorse- 
ment in  such  a  direction,  seemed  of  more  moment  dian  the  sanction  and 
authority  of  the  supreme  spiritual  power  from  which  the  manifestations 
originated;  and  thus  came  about  the  production  of  that  remarkable  farce, 
by  courtesy  entitled  the  "Cambridge  Investigation." 

From  the  best  attainable  authorities  we  learn  that  the  cliallenge  above 

Hosted  by  Google 

i86  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

named  having  appeared  in  the  columns  of  the  Boston  Courier,  Dr.  Gardner, 
as  .tlie  enterprising  conductor  of  the  public  meetings  In  Boston,  felt  bound 
to  accept  it,  and  agreed  to  procure  the  services  of  some  of  the  best  media 
for  spiritual  manifestations,  to  hold  seamcs  in  the  presence  of  the  gentlemen 
selected  by  the  Boston  Courier  editor,  who  on  his  part  agreed  to  pay  the  sum 
of  five  hundred  dollars,  provided  that  tlie  stipulated  phenomena  were  pro- 
duced in  their  presence. 

The  committee  of  umpires  tlios  chosen  consisted  of  Professors  Pierce, 
Agassiz,  and  Horsford,  of  Harvard  University,  and  Dr.  N.  B,  Gottld,  of  the 
Albany  Observatory,  also  a  resident  of  Cambridge.  The  Boston  Courier  was 
represented  by  one  of  its  editors,  the  Hon.  George  Lunt,  whilst  Dr.  Gardner 
was  sustained  by  several  friends  of  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  amongst  whom 
were  Mr.  Alvin  Adams,  of  the  express  company  which  bears  his  name,  the 
Rev.  Allen  Putnam,  and  Major  Raines,  a  scientific  gentleman  of  Ncvburg, 
New  York.  At  the  invitation  of  Dr.  Gardner,  one  of  the  editors  of  the 
Boston  Traveller  was  also  present,  together  with  Dr.  Bell,  late  superintendent 
of  the  McLean  Lunatic  Asylum. 

Previous  to  the  opening  of  the  meetings.  Dr.  Gardner  had  emphatically 
expressed  his  determination  to  waive  the  award  of  the  five  hundred  dollars, 
and  only  require  of  the  Boston  Courier  to  defray  expenses,  provided  the  mani- 
festations could  be  produced  as  claimed  by  the  Spiritualists.  The  mediums 
'engaged  for  the  occasion  were  Mrs.  Brown — LealiFox — her  sister,  Catherine 
Fox ;  Mr.  J.  V.  Mansfield,  a  wridng  medium  of  great  celebrity ;  Mrs.  Kend- 
rick,  a  test,  rapping,  and  writing  medium ;  Mr.  George  Redman,  and  the 
Davenport  Brothers.  The  seances  were  held  at  the  Albion  buildings,  Tremont 
street,  and  occupied  a  portion  of  three  successive  days,  namely  June  25,  2(1, 
and  27,  1857.  Now,  the  result  of  these  meetings,  whether  we  take  the  ac- 
knowledgments of  the  Spiritualists,  or  the  pro  tern,  report  of  the  professors 
themselves,  was  a  decided  failure. 

The  manifestations  were  few,  imperfect,  and  unsatisfactory,  and  no  legiti- 
mate claim  to  the  award  could  have  been  sustained,  even  had  it  been  set  up, 
a  proceeding  which  from  the  fnst  was  disavowed  by  Dr.  Gardner,  who  con- 
ducted tlie  affair  with  the  most  disinterested  liberality,  and  together  with  his 
friends,  incurred  heavy  expenses  in  procuring  the  services  of  the  mediums 
from  distant  places. 

That  the  best  interests  of  truth  may  be  subserved  in  a  reconsideration  of 
this  almost  forgotten  affair,  we  shall  present  such  statements  as  can  be  fully 
verified  on  bo&  sides  of  the  question.  The  first  document  which  belongs  to 
our  subject  is  the  report  of  the  investigating  committee,  who  published  the 
following  statement  in  the  Boston  papers  : 

"  The  committee  award  that,  Dr.  Gardner,  having  failed  to  produce  before  them  an  agent 
or  medium  who  '  commun;ca.ted  a  word  imparted  to  the  spirits  in  an  adjoining  room,'  'who 
read  a  word  in  English  written  inside  a  book  or  folded  sheet  of  paper,'  who  answered  any 
question  'which  the  superior  intelligences  must  beable  to  answer,'  who  tilted  a  piano  with- 
out touching  it,  or  caused  a  chair  to  move  a  foot ; '  and  ha.ving  failed  to  exhibit  to  the  com- 
mittee any  phenomenon  whidi,  under  the  widest  latitude  of  interpretation,  could  be  re- 
garded as  equivalent  to  either  of  these  proposed  tests,  or  any  phenomenon  which  requhed 
for  its  production,  or  in  any  manner  indicated  a  force  which  could  technically  be  denomi- 
nated 'spiritual,'  or  which  was  hitherto  unknown  to  science,  or  a  phenomenon  of  which 
the  cause  was  not  palpable  to  the  conmiittee,  is,  therefore,  not  entitled  to  claim  from  the 
Boston  Courier  the  proposed  premium  of  five  hundred  dollars." 

Had  the  committee  confined  themselves  to  the  above  paragraph,  the 
course  of  strict"  justice  would  have  been  satisfied  with  the  forfeiture  of  an 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  187 

award  that  was  not  contended  for;  and  tliough  the  cause  of  exact  science 
might  require  certain  explanations  foi  the  obvious  falhires  implied  above,  the 
professors,  either  from  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  mental  and  magnetic  science,  or 
predetermination  not  to  comply  with  such  conditions  as  were  requisite,  might 
have  found  an  excuse  for  the  rendition  of  their  unfavorable  verdict  in  die 
bare  facts  submitted  to  them ;  but  what  follo\vs  not  only  proves  that  they 
wilfully  exceeded  their  functions  as  scientific  investigators,  bnt  tloat  they  went 
into  the  inquiry  animated  by  a  spirit  of  aversion  and  predetermined  hostility, 
false  to  the  cause  of  truth,  and  ruinous  to  the  production  of  phenomena 
which  depend  as  much  on  the  mental  condition  and  magnetic  influence  of  the 
inquirers  as  on  that  of  tiie  media  themselves.  When  it  is  remembered  that 
a  strong  positive  will  can  create  or  destroy  psychological  results,  and  tliat  me- 
diums, themost  sensitive  of  all  psychological  subjects,  are  constantly  bereft  of 
their  powers  by  the  presence  of  one  or  more  determinately  hostile  persons, 
who  can  wonder  at  the  failure  of  the, delicate  and  occult  phenomena  of  spirit 
communion  in  the  presence  of  four  men  who  entered  upon  their  investigation 
with  the  sentiments  to  which  they  appended  their  names,  as  follows,  in  die  re- 
port published  in  the  Boston  Courier : 

"  It  is  tlie  opinion  of  tlie  committee,  derived  from  observation,  that  any  connection  with 
giiritualistic  circles,  so  called,  corrupts  the  morals  and  d^ades  the  intellect.  Tiiey  there- 
fore deem  it  their  solemn  duty  to  warn  the  community  against  this  contaminating  influence, 
which  surely  tends  to  lessen  the  truth  oC  man  and  the  purity  of  woman. 

"  The  committee  will  publisli  a.  report  of  their  proceediiigs,  together  with  the  results  of 
additional  investigations  and  other  evidence,  independent  of  the  special  case  submitted  to 
them,  but  bearing  upon  the  subject  of  this  stupendous  delusion. 

"Benjamin  Piee.ce,  Chairman, 

L.   S.  AGASSIZ, 

B.  A.  Gould,  Jr., 

E.  N,  liOKSFORD. 

"Cambeidge,  y«K*39,  1857." 

Now,  besides  the  effect  which  die  merest  tyro  in  psychology  might  look  for 
in  the  presence  of  investigators  holding  the  above  opinions,  it  is  a  fact  well 
attested  that  some  of  the  members  of  the  committee  transgressed  the  rules 
commonly  observed  at  spirit  circles,  and  notwitlistanding  their  pledge,  given 
in  writing  to  Dr.  Gardner  and  the  Rev.  Allen  Putnam,  diat  tliey  would  com- 
ply with  such  conditions  as  might  be  deemed  requisite  for  the  production  of 
the  manifestations,  they  violated  them  in  several  essential  particulars ;  for 
instance,  Mr.  Lunt  and  Professor  Agassiz  refused  at  any  time  to  join  die 
circle,  though  repeatedly  requested  to  do  so,  and  altliough  it  was  intimated 
to  them  through  the  raps  that  the  spirits  could  not  operate  whilst  diey  were 
standing  or  restlessly  moving  about  the  room.  Others  of  the  "  investigators  " 
pursuing  the  same  course,  the  Spiritualists  frequently  remonstrated  with  them, 
to  which  Professor  Agassiz  replied  that  he  had  "sworn  never  to  sit  in  a  cir- 
cle," but  it  seems  he  liad  not  been  sworn  to  desist  from  annoying  a  circle, 
which  he  did  in  many  ways,  by  moving  about  the  table,  overlooking  the  sit- 
ters, communicating  in  suspicious  whispers  widi  his  colleagues,  and  in  rough 
and  at  times  insulting  speeches  with  the  Sphitualists.  We  shall  here  insert  a 
few  extracts  from  the  spiritualistic  reports,  which  will  at  least  tend  to  show 
that  their  evidence  was  not  garbled  nor  the  obvious  failure  of  their  media  mis- 
represented. 

The  following  quotations  are  from  a  printed  letter  of  the  Rev.  Allen  Put- 
nam, who  was  present  at  all  the  seances,  and  in  answer  to  a  request  from  Dr, 
Gardner,  briefly  noted  down  his  observations  from  memory: 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERIf 

ARRANGEMENTS. 

"We  [Dr.  Gardner  and  the  Rev.  Allen  Putnam]  met  the  four  gentlemen  at  Cambridge, 
and  soon  found  that  they  had  been  named  as  commisaoners,  without  their  own  knowledge 
or  consent ;  and  that  the  first  question  with  them  was,  whether  the  services  and  conditions 
asked  for  were  sudi  that  they  could  serve.  Consequently,  a  free  and  prolonged  conversa- 
tion followed. 

"  Passing  from  that  point,  we  came  to  a  consideration  of  those  'natural  laws  within  which 
we  believe  spirits  are  confined  in  producing  the  manifestations.'  Here  Dr.  G.  turned  to 
myself,  and  asked  for  statements  from  me.  My  position,  taken  then,  as  at  other  tunes  was, 
that  there  is  some  sabtle  natural  fluid  which  is  essential  to  the  spu-its  as  an  mstrument, 
whenever  the;^  work  here  or  near  the  earth's  surface ;  that  this  fluid  can  be  very  eaaly  dis- 
turbed and  dissijjated  by  the  embodied  persons  present,  and  this  so  effectually  as  to  prevent 
all  spirit  operations ;  that  lack  of  quiet  and  Iiarmonious  feelings  among  the  persons  present, 
that  intense  mental  action,  the  m^etic  rays  from  the  human  eye,  or  rays  of  light,  etc., 
might  frustrate  its  use  and  prevent  its   manifestations.     Therefore,  that  it  was  in  tlie 

Sower  of  the  gentlemen  there  present  to  make  the  trial  a  failure  by  ejecting  certam  forces 
om  their  own  minds  and  eyes.  We  stated  that  it  would  be  best  that  all  should  at  in  a 
circle ;  that  all  should  conform,  in  the  order  of  sitting,  to  the  wishes  of  the  mediums ;  that 
all  should  avoid  mtense  mental  action.  Professor  Agassiz  at  once  objected  to  being  b  the 
circle  under  any  circumstances,  and  1  think  the  gentlemen  all  felt  that,  when  acting  as  judges, 

such  would  not  be  adearable  position 

"Another  point,  which  required  many  statements  for  its  elucidation  with  these  gentle- 
men, as  it  does  with  most  people  who  are  not  familiar  with  the  subject,  was  the  powerless- 
ness  of  the  managers  of  the  arrangements,  and  also  of  the  media.  Even  men  of  science 
^vere  not  free  from  the  influence  of  the  notions  that  the  working  powers  in  spirit  manifesta- 
tion are,  on  the  one  hand,  subject  to  man's  control,  and  on  the  other,  that  they  are  ahnost 
omniscient  and  omnipotent,  or  at  least  that  they  can,  at  any  time,  overpower  man.  Pro- 
fessor Agassis  stated  that,  in  all  their  scientific  experiments,  if  a  thmg  could  be  done  once, 
it  could  be  repeated  twenty  times;  and,  therefore,  that  they  might  require  the  same  here. 
He  said  this,  apparently  forgetting  that  we  claimed  that  the  real  actor  is  an  individual 
intelligence,  acting  accordmg  to  his  or  her  own  will  and  powers,  and  not  b  compliance  with 
our  dictation. 

"  Professor  Pierce  inquired  if  we  could  not  ask  the  spirits  whether  they  would  come  and 
manifest  themselves  at  the  triaL  'Ves,'  was  the  answer,  'we  can  ask.'  'And,'  said  he, 
'can  you  not  get  an  answer?'  'Probably,' we  said,  'their  reply  will  be,  'we  will  try." 
'Wbj- can't  they  tell  certainly?'  he  continued.  We  said,  'Can  Mr.  Gould  now  promise 
certamly  that  he  will  exambe  some  particular  star  m  the  heavens  to-morrow  evening  at 
cine  oMock,  while  as  yet  he  knows  not  whether  there  will  be  clouds  or  fogs  ? '  'No, '  said 
Mr.  Pierce,  '  he  can  only  promise  to  point  the  telescope.'  'Very  good,' was  our  answer  ; 
'  the  spirits  can  only  promise  to  try,  and  can,  at  the  time  of  trial,  perform  only  what  the 

conditions  permit.' '  It  was  proposed  to  Dr.  Gardner  that  he  should  be 

permitted  to  have  hb  own  way  in  everything,  even  to  the  selection  of  the  room  time  and 
the  determination  of  all  the  accessory  circumstances. '  Though  this,  m  their  own  langu^e, 
goes  somewhat  further  than  what  my  recollection  would  lead  me  to  use  in  bdicating  my 
own  understanding  as  to  how  far  the  committee  promised  compliance  with  every  wish  the 
doctor  might  express  as  to  their  own  poHtions  and  deportment  m  the  room,  yet  I  had  no 
doubt  that  they  then  indicated  a  purpose  to  give  the  general  subject  of  Spiritualism  free 
scope  and  fair  play,  and  not  a  purpose  to  act  simply  as  judges,  as  to  whether  certain  speci- 
fied acts  could  be  performed  b  their  presence,  they  remaining  mattentive  to  proper  condi- 
tions just  so  far  as  they  chose In  the  course  of  the  conversation.  Dr. 

Gardner  repeated,  in  the  presence  of  the  company,  what  he  had  said  to  me  in  reference  to 
the  five  hundred  dollars,  and  expressed  an  entire  willmgness  to  arrange  for  the  trial,  and  at 
its  close,  report  the  amount  of  expenses,  and  leave  it  to  the  option  of  the  Courier  whether 
to  pay  the  bills  or  not,  and  to  thus  dispose  of  the  pecuniary  pobt  at  once  and  finally.  This 
avowal  seemed  to  give  much  pleasure  to  Professor  Agassii  in  particular,  who  conveyed  the 
idea  that  it  placed  the  whole  matter  before  them  in  a  much  pleasanter  aspect,  and  would 
give  to  them  more  freedom  m  the  investigation.      No  dissent  from  his  view  was  then 

expressed. From  that  tune— June  13  — up  to  the  day  of  the  trial,  my 

belief  was  unfaltcimg  that  the  c""-"-'*'— '  "■ — '•■  —1—:*  -'•-  — •— '  -'  ■  " 

the  mon^  question ;  and  1  was  repeatedly  heard  to  express  a  belief  that  the  learned  gentle- 
men would  enter  heart^y  bfo  a  courteous  and  fair  investigaflon,  and  that  palpable  and 
good  manifestations  would  be  obtdned.  Such  was  my  expectation ;  and  it  was  deduced, 
and  was  fairly  deducible,  from  what  the  members  of  the  committee  had  themselves  said  and 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  189 

done,  and  listened  to  witioiit  dissent,  in  my  presence  at  least We  met 

at  the  Albion,  Mrs.  Brown  and  her  sister.  Miss  C.  Fox,  were  present  as  mediums.  A 
conversation  was  started  which  was  carried  on  mostly,  but  not  entirely,  by  Mr.  Limt,  the 
representative  of  the  Courier,  and  Major  Raines,  of  Newbui^  N.  Y.,  a  gradnate  of  West 
Pomt,  once  asastant  professor  there,  and  who,  in  connection  with  judge  Edmonds  and 

others,  made  a  long-continued  investigation  of  spiritual  powers  scientifically. 

After  a  time,  the  mediums  and  a  few  others  hemg  at  the  table,  raps  were  heard,  mosth"  on 
thefloor,  or  rather  upon  a  threeor  four-inch  platform  covering  the  stuffed  or  deadened  floor, 
whfle  a  few  gentle  ones  were  felt  and  heard  as  if  made  on  the  table.  Afterward,  when 
Mrs.  Urown  stood  by  a  large  wooden  box,  and  put  her  first  finger  and  then  a  common  pencil 
against  the  box,  the  raps  were  heard  there  as  on  the  box  and  near  her  hand.  Again,  when 
she  stood  upon  a  covered  stool,  the  sounds  seemed  to  be  made  beneath  her  on  the  platform. 
Again,  when  the  two  mediums  were  both  standing  on  the  stuffed  seat  of  a  sofa,  the  persons 
near  them  remarked  tliat  they  heard  sounds  as  from  the  wood  of  the  sofa,  and  also  from  the 
wall  against  which  the  sofa  stood. 

"Near  the  close  of  their  sitting.  Professor  Agas^  stated  that  the  production  of  such 
sounds  could  be  referred  to  known  laws,  and  said,  '  Before  the  investigation  is  over  we 
will  explain  to  you  bow  they  may  he  produced.' 

"When  about  to  separate.  Major  Raines  expressed  a  wish  that  all  would  stop  and  compare 
notes,  and  come  to  an  agreement  as  to  what  had  actually  occurred  or  been  exhibited.  A 
few  sentences  as  to  the  propriety  or  unportance  of  this  course  were  exchanged  between  him 
and  Professor  Pierce,  when  the  professor  said,  with  a  very  ironical  and  discourteous  tone  and 
look,  'We  thank  you,  sir,  for  your  advice,' and  bowing,  hastily  left  theroom.  Thisoccnrred 
while  a  portion  of  the  company  were  about  leavmg  the  room,  while  nearly  ^  were  standing 
and  ready  to  go — while  promiscuous  conversation  was  going  on— and  it  if  not  probable 
that  many  heard  or  saw  what  is  here  described.  I  was  standing  by  the  sideof  Major  Raines, 
andsaw  and  heard  the  whole  roost  distinctly.  Mortifiedand  adiamed  at  the  tones  and  looks 
of  (his  representative  of  alma  mater  and  of  science,  when  addressed  to  a  gentleman  and  a 
mao  of  science,  I  turned  silently  away,  and  wasnot  surprised  when,  shortly  after.  Major  Raines 
said  to  me,  'There  seems  no  occasion  for  me  to  remain  here  because  of  any  knowledge  or 
skill  which  my  experience  in  snch  investigations  may  have  given  me;  there  is  no  attempt — no 
purpose  to  havean  investigation  of  the  general  subject.  I  had  better  return  home,'  And 
soon  he  did  go,  as  then  proposed. 

At  the  next  gathering  I  asked,  privately,  and  learned  from  both  Professor  Pierce  and  Mr. 
Gould  that  they  considered  the  money  question  as  still  before  them,  and  that  they  were 
but  judges  and  not  mvestigators.  From  that  time  my  relations  to  them  and  to  that  partic- 
ular trial  became  relativdy  unpleasant.  I  had  little  to  do  or  say  and  nothing  to  hope  for, 
because  of  the  antagonism  in  the  room. 

"At  their  next  sitting  Mr.  Redman  was  the  medium.  Raps  and  tipping  of  the  table  did 
not  come  as  they  usually  do  with  him ;  yet  he  asked  those  at  the  table  to  write  the  names  of 
deceased  friends  and  roll  up  the  slips.  Professor  Pierce  commenced  writing  in  a  book. 
Professor  Agasm,  in  the  meanwhile,  was  standing  near  his  back,  frequently  changmg  his  own 
attitude  and  position,  and  looking  very  intently  upon  Redman,  although  he  said  t^  Professor 
Pierce,  'throw  that  one  out,'  meaning  the  slip  just  written  upon.  There  was  the  appearance 
of  much  mental  dislurliance  in  Professor  A. ,  as  shown  by  his  attitudes,  his  changes  of  position, 
his  wild  gaze,  and  his  tones  when  he  spolie.  No  raps  came  ;  nothing  ckiming  to  be  spkit- 
ual  was  done  by  or  through  Mr.  Redman  m  the  public  room.  At  some  Ihne  during  this  sit- 
ting. Dr.  Gardner  drew  attention  to  the  pomts  of  disturbance  through  strongmental  action 
and  ii  n  use  of  the  eyes.  Mr.  Lunt  was  understood  to  say  that  he  Md  been  usmg 
bo  I  mind  and  eyes  intently  and  with  much  effect;  but  I  was  on  the  oppoate  side  of 
he  00  u  om  him  when  he  spoke,  and  may  not  have  taken  hi  the  exact  import  of  his 
w    ds 

b  mik  vant  of  success  attended  the  other  mediums,  at  all  the  subsequent  sittmgs,  up  to 
he  mee  m  of  the  Davenports  on  the  last  evening.  These  boys,  or  young  men,  were 
n  m  ed  a  uost  enthely  to  the  management  of  the  committee,  and  those  of  us  who  were 
bu  spe  a  ors  are  not  so  informed  as  to  make  it  proper  to  state  in  advance  of  the  committee 
wha  wa  a  tempted  or  what  was  the  success.  We  do  know  that  at  the  close.  Professor 
AgasfJi  held  up  a  small,  short  piece  of  thread,  which  he  said  had  been 'fo-(>fe«,' and  that  was 
the  test.  Havmg  uttered  these  words  in  a  very  rough  tone  and  emphatic  manner,  he,  m  a 
similar  tone  said,  'Good  night,  gentlemen,'  and  hastily  left  us. 

"  Professor  Pierce  then  said  to  Dr.  Gardner,  'I  suppose  you  are  through  with  us.'  The 
doctor  replied ;  '  No ;  you  have  promised  to  show  us  how  the  raps  were  made. '  '  Not  as  a 
committee,'  sdd  Professor  Pierce ;  'Professor  Agasaz  made  that  promise  as  an  individual ; ' 
and  thus  the  affair  closed  —  we  as  much  disappointed  at  the  failure  of  Agasaz  to  keep  his 
word  and  unveil  the  mystery  of  rapping,  as  at  any  one  failure  durmg  the  sittmgs,      .     .    . 

Hosiedb,  Google 

igo  HISTORY  OF  MODERir 

"  The  investigation,  in  fact,  was  a  trial  of  the  correctness  of  the  slalements  msde  at  the 
prdiminary  meeting,  vU;  'that  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  gentlemen  there  present  to  make 
the  trial  a  failure  by  ejecting  certain  forces  from  their  own  mind  and  eyes  1'  In  this  they 
were  snccessfnl. 

"Two  of  the  gentlemen — Professor  Agassiz  and  Mr.  Limt — omitted  throughout  all  the  ses- 
aonsto  comply  with  invitations  to  at  in  the  circle  aronnd  thetaUe,  and  there  was  not  in  any 
iiLStance  or  at  any  pomt  any  opportunity  for  Dr.  Gardner  to  exercise  '  the  determination  of 
all  the  accessory  circumstances.'  The  former  gentleman,  it  seems,  was  permitted  to  exercise 
his  own  choice  as  to  being  in  the  circle,  but  not  so  the  latter.  Dr.  Gardner's  friends  have 
been  disappointed,  and  the  chief  disappointment  was  at  the  manners,  actions,  and  mental  and 

emotional  States  of  two  of  the  committee  and  a  representative  of  the  Courkr 

"Allen  Pittnam. 

"KoxBUHv,  July  lo,  1857." 

The  correspondent  of  the  Tribune,  who  was  present  at  all  the  sessions, 
thus  speaks  of  them  : 

"The  Cambridge  'investigation'  into  Spiritualism  proved  to  be,  properly  speaking,  no 
investigation  at  alL  I  was  present  at  all  the  sessions,  and  took  notes  of  all  that  occurred. 
So  far  as  I  can  see,  the  matter  rests  precisely  where  it  did  before.  Nothing  was  proved  or 
disproved.     The  committee,  I  believe,  think  differently,  and  will  report  in  a  day  o 

That  hearing,  however,  has  never  even  been  claimed  by  the  professors. 
Despite  the  respect  due  to  the  public,  whom  they  had  undertaken  to 
enlighten  on  the  nature  of  the  "  stupendous  delusion,"  weeks,  months,  and 
finaOy  years,  have  elapsed  without  the  production  of  the  promised  report,  and 
as  far  as  the  Cambridge  professors  are  concerned,  "  the  truth  of  man  and 
the  purity  of  woman"  remains  in  the  same  contaminated  condition  in  which 
they  found  it.  In  answer  to  the  numerous  appeals  for  that  mysterious  report, 
put  forth  by  the  spiritualistic  and  secular  press  alike,  the  only  satisfaction 
that  has  ever  been  rendered  will  be  found  in  the  following  paragraph,  taken 
from  the  Boston  Courier.  It  appeared  several  weeks  after  the  "  investiga- 
tion," and  is  as  follows  : 

"  We  have  already  stated  that  the  report  of  the  committee  will  be  no  hurried  affair. 
The  gentlemen  of  that  committee  will  take  their  own  time  to  work  out  the  details  of  the 
subject  It  will  be,  we  venture  to  say,  a  calm,  dispassionate,  unanswerable  exposure  of  this 
monstrous  and  wiclted  fraud  ;  and,  although  both  cheats  and  dupes  may  continue  to  carp  at 
their  proceedings,  as  they  have  done  hitherto,  we  also  venture  to  predict  that  all  the  reason- 
able minds  in  our  cpmmunity  will  rest  satisfied  with  their  conclusions." 

Fearing  that  it  may  take  something  more  than  a  lifetime  to  "  work  out" 

any  details  by  which  the  Harvard  pr  h       Sp                        b    a 

"monstrous  and  wicked  fraud,"  we  w  g                  P                  P 

The  world  has  long  since  pronoun  d      dom          p        h      h 

and  out  of  the  milUons  of  living  b  p                            h      g   h 

cities  of  civilization,  we  doubt  if  the  k               ca        h      h 

Harvard  professors  think  or  say  ab  d   p    h  p                       h 

believed  or  disbelieved  in  die  "fact  1              P 
Agassiz,  Horsford,  and  Gould, 

The  whole  transaction,  althonghit  dm                    n                          n 

tists  of  Harvard   [if,  indeed,  there  b  th    g        h                                ar  h 

beneath  on  which  so  learned  a  bod  d                       gh              ]            II 

calculated  to  read  the  candid  and  pati  b               s, 

not  the  least  important  of  which  is  h     p  n              ff           h   h 

antagonistic  psychology  and  magneti  n  p                     as         p      h    al 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  191 

phenomena,  whether  the  influence  invoked  be  of  a  mundane  or  supra-mun- 
dime  character,  and  next,  that  we,  as  mortals  subject  to  the  control  of 
beings  who  are  avowedly  only  in  the  first  rudimental  stages  of  the  spiritual 
telegraphy,  must  patiently  submit  to  failure  until  we  shall  have  fully  learned 
and  fajtlifully  practiced  whatever  conditions  may  be  requisite  for  success; 
whilst  the  last  and  most  instructive  lesson  this  episode  conveys  is  the 
reproof  and  discomfiture  which  we  incur  when  we  attempt  to  place  sublime 
truth  at  the  mercy  of  those  whose  testimony  is  only  valuable  because  tiiey 
occupy  places  of  distinction  in  the  community.  Great  scientific  or  religious 
truths  have  never  been  intrusted  by  their  Divine  originator  to  the  dubious 
action  of  conservative  or  sectarian  associations,  and  we  do  but  seek  to 
pcnert  the  Dnine  pi  in  when  we  too-eagerly  court  the  praise  or  fear  the 
blame  of  those  who  ha\e  neither  been  called  nor  chosen  to  do  the  work  of 
refonn 

Let  time  and  Supreme  Wisdom  deal  with  men.  Our  part  is  to  accept  of 
die  talent  confided  to  us  and  trust  "the  truth  against  the  world." 

After  the  last  session  of  the  Cambridge  investigation,  Dr.  Gardner,  the 
indefatigable  and  undaunted  champion  of  "  the  spirits,"  proceeded  still  furUier 
in  the  direction  of  public  investigation,  by  tendering  a  general  invitation  to 
the  members  of  the  Boston  press  to  attend  stances,  for  manifestations 
through  the  same  mediums  as  had  been  engaged  with  the  professors. 

The  gentlemen  who  responded  to  this  invitation  were :  Messrs.  Carter, 
Robinson,  and  Brown,  of  the  Boston  Traveller  ;  Stockwell,  oUhe  Journal ; 
Bulger,  ol  the  Fast,  Clapp  and  Shillaber,  of  the  Gazette;  Marsh,  of  the 
£e^,  Tracj,  of  the  Htrald ,  Hill,  'of  the  Ledger,  and  the  editors  of  the 
Banner  of  Light  and  New  England  Spiritualist.  There  were  also  present 
at  a  portion  of  the  sittings,  Hon.  L.  V.  Bell,  A.  Putman,  Esq.,  Alvin  Adams, 
Esq.,  and  others.  The  Boston  Traveller  has  the  following  account  of  the 
first  session ; 

"  The  first  sesMon  of  the  committee  was  held  on  the  forenoon  of  Wednesday,  Jnly  r, 
Mr.  J.  A.  Redman,  of  New  York,  was  present  as  medium.  The  company  were  advised  to 
commence  by  making  a  thorough  inspection  of  all  the  appurtenances  of  the  room  to  satisfy 
themselves  diat  there  was  no  machinery  or  hidden  apparatus  by  which  the  phenomena  could 
be  produced.  The  conditions  imposed,  simple  in  their  character,  only  requiring  the  persons 
to  join  hands  for  a  time,  and  afterwards  occaaonally  to  rest  their  hands  m  concert  upon  the 
table  were  elieerfiilly  complied  with  by  all.  The  result  was,  that  the  cu-c!e  was  readily  har- 
monized, and  the  sounds  so  weil-known  by  SpirituaJists  as  the  '  rappmgs,'  were  promptly 
produced.  ,    ,       .    ,  ,  , 

"  At  the  request  of  the  medium,  each  member  of  the  circle  wrote  the  name  ot  one  or 
more  of  his  spirit  friends  on  a  small  piece  of  paper,  carefully  concealed,  not  only  from  the 
medium,  but  irom  all  others.  The  papers  were  then  folded,  roUed  into  small  pellets  —  each 
one  performing  the  operation  for  himself— and  thrown  promiscuously  together  upon  the 
table.  Any  one  present,  except  the  medium,  was  permitted  to  mix  and  confuse  them  as 
much  as  he  chose.  It  was  now  an  acltnowledged  impossibility  for  any^  one  to  distmguish 
thepaper  on  which  be  had  written.  Hereupon  the  medium  indicated,  with  the  point  of  his 
pendl,  one  after  another  of  the  pellets,  inquiring  of  the  unseen  intelligences  if  the  spirit  was 
present  whose  name  was  written  upon  it.  After  perhaps  a  dozen  had  been  passed  aside  with- 
Sut  response,  three  distinct  raps  were  heard  on  the  table,  diowing  that  he  had  touched  the 
right  one.  Each  person  then  made  the  mquiry  in  turn,  '  Is  it  a  friend  of  mine  ?'  To  one 
of  the  TOnOemen  an  affirmative  was  returned.  '  WiU  that  spirit  write  out  his  name  through 
my  hand?'  asked  the  medium,  'Yes.'  Mr.  Redman's  hand  was  seized  by  some  invisible 
power,  and  rapidly  wrote  the  name  Edward.  The  pellet  was  opened  and  Ediaard  found 
written  upon  it.  A  double  test  wUl  be  noticed  here  ;  both  the  name  and  the  person  who 
wrote  it  were  desi'mated  before  any  one  in  the  room  could  have  known  either.  The  spirit 
was  then  asked  various  questions,  as  to  his  a^e,  occupation  upon  earth,  number  of  brothers 
and  asters,  disease  of  which  he  died,  etc.,  all  of  which  were  answered  correctly. 

Hosted  by  Google 

193  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"Other  pellets  were  designated  b  a  similar  manner,  the  names  written  through  the 
medium's  hand,  and  test  questions  answered,  with  unexceptional  success.  To  enter  into 
particulars  in  reference  to  these  would  be  but  a  repetition  of  the  preceding  experiments." 

A  great  variety  of  tests  of  a  similar  character,  together  with  very  powerful 
and  even  astounding  physical  phenomena,  were  witnessed  in  the  course  of 
these  seances,  and  most  of  the  members  of  the  press  who  attended  them 
candidly  published,  in  the  several  journals  they  represented,  fair  statements 
of  what  they  had  witnessed  and  the  tests  they  received. 

As  these  details  vary  but  httle  from  the  abundant  records  already  familiar 
to  the  reader,  we  shall  only  transcribe  two  more  specimen  articles,  the  first 
of  whicli  is  copied  from  the  Boston  Post. 

"THE  SPIRITUAL  QUESTION  IN  BOSTON. —FURTHER  INVESTIGATIONS, 

"  Notwithstanding  the  condemnatory  report  of  the  '  Spiritual  Investigating  Committee' 
appointed  by  the  publishers  of  the  Courier,  the  substance  of  which  report  being  that  all  of 
the  committee's  four  tests  had  failed  of  being  satisfactorily  met,  Dr.  Gardner  invited,  yesterday 
afternoon  and  evenmg,  to  room  No.  12  Albion  House,  representatives  from  the  different 
newspapers  in  Boston,  for  the  purpose  of  exhibiting  to  them  experiments  in  spbitual  mani- 
festations, and  placmg  then  practical  results  before  the  public.  The  press  was  largely  rep- 
resented, and  the  strictest  attentioq  was  given  to  (he  proceedings. 

"  Without  volunteerm^  any  opinion  on  the  subject  of  Spu-itualism,  we  will  give  a  brief 
statement  of  what  transpned,  as  it  appeared  to  our  understanding: 

"In  the  afternoon  at  three  o'clock,  the  mediums,  Mrs.  Brown  and  Miss  Kate  Fox 
Isisters],  were  present.  At  the  su^estion  of  Dr.  Gardner,  the  visitors  examined  the  tables 
and  fixtures  in  the  room.  The  company,  with  the  mediums,  then  sat  around  a  la^e  table, 
and  in  a  short  time  a  vec)'  brisk  rapping  in  a  variety  of  tones  assailed  the  ear.  A  series  of 
questioning  of  certain  spirits  now  commenced,  through  the  instrumentality  of  the 'raps,' and 
under  the  direction  ol^  the  lady  mediums.  The  answers  were  m  almost  every  instance 
straightforward  and  satisfactory,  and  from  the  system  adoptal  of  transferring  the  question- 
ing from  one  to  another,  a  suspicion  of  collusion  between  the  mediums  would  be  difficult  to 
arrive  at  by  even  the  most  sceptical. 

"'Hiis  silting  occupied  about  an  hour  and  a  quarter. 

"In  the  evenmg,  the  manifestations  were  of  a  different  character.  Two  boys  were 
placed  in  a  box  with  seats  at  each  end,  and  the  lights  put  out.  It  was  then  desired  that 
'  John '  [the  spirit]  should  tie  tliem  together,  ropes  havmg  been  placed  in  the  box  for  that 
purpose.  But  'John' wouldn't  do  it,  and  the  experiment  failed.  The  boys  were  then  tied 
together  in  the  most  secure  manner,  with  many  knots  exceedingly  intricate,  and  the  lights 
i^ain  put  out.  The  request  this  lime  was  that  the  spirit  should  untie  them,  and  while  the 
investigators  held  those  having  charge  of  the  exhibition,  the  boys  were  separated  amid  a 
great  piilling  and  rubbing  noise,  like  rattlmg  of  ropes,  and  much  to  the  astonlstanent  of  all 
present,  who,  with  the  greatest  care,  were  unable  to  detect  any  trickery.  This  transpired 
within  fifteen  minutes, 

"  The  next  feat  was  to  tie  the  boys  up,  which  failed  before,  and  it  was  accomplished  in 
six  minutes.  They  were  examined,  and  the  lights  were  once  more  extmguished.  In  accor- 
dance with  a  request,  the  spirit  [and  when  we  say  'John'  did  this  or  that,  it  is  only  for 
convenience,  based  on  general  supposition]  closed  the  doors  of  the  box  and  bolted  them. 
A  tambourine  had  been  placed  on  the  floor  of  the  box,  and  upon  its  top,  outside,  of  course, 
was  a  violin.  The  latter  article  then  fell  through,  and  the  two  instruments  came  in  contact. 
In  a  second  they  were  ptaymg  '  Pop  goes  the  Weasel. '  The  doors  were  then  unbolted  and 
flew  open,  and  almost  instantly  the  room  was  lighted.  The  company  nishel  towarids  the 
scene  of  action,  and,  wonderful  to  reUte,  found  the  boys  as  intricately  tied  as  at  first. 

"  The  lights  were  again  put  out,  and  the  boys  untied  m  two  robutes,  the  shuttbg  and 
bolting  operation  being  again  performed.  This  was  the  best  experiment  of  the  evenmg, 
and  the  company  departed  perfectly  bewildered  at  what  Ihey  had  seen. 

"  We  submit  the  whole  matter  for  what  it  is  worth 

"  Another  meetbg  will  be  held  this  evening." — Boston  Posl, 

In  one  of  the  Boston  evening  journals,  we  find  a  continuation  of  the  seances 
given,  which  We  shall  render  in  the  editor's  own  words. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  193 

"SUBSEQUENT  SESSIONS  WITH  THE  DAVENPORTS. 

"On  the  following  evening,  further  esiperiments  were  tried  through  the  mediumship  of 
the  Davenports,  and  were  continued  at  three  subseqoent  sessions. 

"  The  results  were  not  dissimilar  to  those  elicited  the  last  evenmg.  On  one  of  these 
occasions,  marline  was  used  in  place  of  clothes-line  for  securing  the  mediums,  as  being 
smaller  and  more  pliable,  and  therefore  could  be  tied  more  closely  and  firmly.  At  another 
time  the  knots,  after  completion,  were  sealed  with  wax,  in  order  to  be  sure  that  the  boys 
did  not  untie  themselves  by  any  means,  to  perform  their  feats.  The  wax  was  undisturbed ; 
yet  a  jai^ii  was  kept  ap  on  the  musical  instruments  which  seemed  as  though  several  hands 
were  at  liberty.  Perhaps  the  most  thoroi^h  tyii^  was  performed  on  one  occasion  by  Cap- 
tain Ayling. 

' '  After  the  process  previously  described  had  been  completed  for  securing  the  boys,  he 
added  a  small  rope  about  the  wrists  of  one  of  Ihem,  which  he  wrought  into  a  complicated 
s^or's  knot,  of  some  MX  or  eight  inches  in  length.  This  knot  alone,  he  said,  would  require 
any  man  fifteen  minutes  to  untie,  in  the  light.  But  in  less  time  than  that  not  only  this 
knot  but  all  the  others  were  untied,  and  the  rope  was  formed  into  a  solid  ball,  called  by 
s^orsa  'swab.'  A  marline  spike  is  always  used  for  makmg  'swabs'  on  ship-board;  but 
nothing  of  the  kind  could  be  found  in  the  box,  nor  about  the  person  of  the  bc^ 

"It  is  proper  to  slate  that  on  several  occasions  the  precaution  was  taken  to  pass  a  cord 
totmd  the  circle,  through  a  button -hole  of  every  person's  coat,  to  prevent  colluaon  with  the 
mediums." 

"SESSION  WITH  MR.   MANSriliLD. 

"On  Monday  afternoon,  6th  instant,  Mr.  J.  W.  Mansfield,  and  Miss  Kendrick,  of 
Chelsea,  were  the  mediums  present.  As  prcvioudy  agreed  upon,  each  genilmKin  had  pre- 
pared a  letter,  which  was  to  be  submitted  to  Mr.  Mansfield,  to  be  answered  through  his 
mediumship. 

"  These  were  te-mclosed  in  uniform  envelopes,  so  that  no  one  should  know  his  own.  It 
was  hoped  that  one  or  more  oE  these  would  be  answered  in  the  presence  of  the  company, 
but  they  were  not. 

"Mr.  Mansfieid  siting  down,  pencil  m  hand,  was  impelled  to  write  a  communication 
which  he  passed  to  Dr.  Gardner.  It  proved  to  be  an  answer  to  a  letter  left  at  Mr.  Mans- 
field's office  that  morning,  by  a  gentleman  then  stopping  at  the  Fountain  House,  Dr.  A.  C. 
Stiles,  of  Bridgeport,  Connecticut. 

"[It  may  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  state  that  Dr.  Stiles  called  on  the  writer  of  this  the 
next  morning  and  brought  with  him  the  letter,  which  he  bad  taken  from  Mr.  Mansfield's 
room,  and  the  ansvrer  written  as  above  mentioned.  Dr.  S.,  let  it  be  understood,  was  a 
total  stranger  to  Mr.  Mansfield.  We  were  permitted  to  open  the  letter,  which  we  found 
inclosed  in  tiTO  separate  envelopes,  pasted  together,  and  the  inade  pa.sl  d  t  th  I  tt 
BO  that  it  was  utterly  imposable  to  get  at  the  writing  without  dest    j    g  th  1  p     ai  d 

cat         W 
bein       fa^ 
strictly  priva 

"Q.  Am  1  in  the  way  of  duty?  A.  You  ask  if  you  are  d  m  y  d  ty  Wh  t 
says  the  inward  monitor?    Let  that  decide  ! 

"  Thoi^h  this  answer  contained  less  of  a  test  than  either  of  the  oth  j  t  t  is  q  t  ffi^ 
dent  to  show  it  came  from  an  intelligence  that  perceived  the  question.] 

"As  Mr.  Mansfield  received  no  further  impression  to  write,  it  was  agreed  to  seal  the 
letters  with  wax  and  permit  hmi  to  take  them  to  the  quiet  of  his  own  room,  and  answer 
them  if  possible. 

"The  next  day  one  of  the  letters  was  sent,  seal  unbroken,  with  an  answer,  superscribed 
to  Mr.  Brown  and  signed  Stephen  C.  Phillips.  Mr.  B.'s  letter  had  been  rightly  sdected 
and  appropriately  answered,  the  name  signed  by  the  metlium  being  the  one  to  whom  it  was 
addressed. 

"Subsequently  Mr.  Carter  had  his  letter  returned,  the  seal  undisturbed,  with  'Blank' 
written  on  the  outside.  Ho  had  inclosed  a  blank  piece  of  paper  m  Ms  envelope.  The 
letter  written  by  Mr.  Hiil  was  also  returned  with  an  answei-  containing  appropriate  replies 
to  eight  questions,  and  signed  with  a  facsimile  of  the  autograph  of  the  person  to  whom 
they  were  addressed. 

"  This  experunent,  like  the  rest  at  these  meetmgs,  was  performed  under  stringent  test 
conditions  and  witnessed  by  persons  as  cool,  collected,  and  far  more  painstaking  than,  the 
Harvard  professors  seeroed  to  have  been.     Dr.  Gardner  and  the  mediums  manifested  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

194  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

utmost  willingness  to  afford  tlie  widest  scope  for  investigation,  and  it  was  evident  tliat  the 
cordial  feelings  of  harmony  and  good  will  that  prevailed  throughout  these  settees  measur- 
ably affected  the  occult  power  by  which  the  marvels  were  wrought.  In  fact,  it  seemed  ap- 
parent to  all  present  that  something  of  human  psychology  ajid  magnetism  was  operatmg 
upon  the  mediums,  although  this  could  by  no  means  explain  the  phenomoia,  much  less 
the  inleUigence  which  [espeeiaUy  in  Mr.  Mansfield's  case]  accompanied  it.  Mean- 
time we  retired,  not  convinced  of  the  spiritual  hypothesis,  it  is  true,  but  still  less  un- 
pressed  with  the  full  force  of  the  a^regated  wisdom  of  the  Cambridge  committee  of  Investi- 

We  should  be  equally  uDcandid  and  unjust  were  we  to  fail  in  remarking 

upon  the  noble  courteous,  and  honorable  exception  which  the  chief  part  of 

B  ff    d  "     h'     ■    ta         t    th    g  1      ton 

ha    un  ry  S  ^^  on 

^  m                                           ag                                   ally 

mm  g                                g                          tual 

m                            g  al                                                                                    ve 

mmsa  k,bg                     seafew 

mm  ^      pular 

n  a           •doL    Di                                     th        sition 

P  m                                                           t  fo!- 

^  icted 

m  ru                             h                ators 

CHAPTER  XX. 

IRITUALISM        IN        NEW       E  N  G  L  A  N  I 

For  wteh,  v.hm"hiiikicg''waa  a  crime, 
Souls  leaped  to  h=a«n  from  acafiblds  a 

They  paBsed—yel  see  the  wodt  Ihey  wroi 
And  ihe  lugh  b(i]K5  of  eenturies  blossoo 

Birds  Brought  by  Spirits  —  Writing  on  the  Arm  — "Cui  Bono?  —Dr.  J. 
R  Newton  —  Testimony  of  Professor  Mapes  — Peakls  fkom  Many  J.ands 
—  M(;sic  OF  the  Spheres— ChurchThunder  —  T.  L.  Harris,  the  Spiritu- 

Those  who  have  noticed  how  invariably  the  mere  fact  of  notoriety  has 
redounded  to  the  advancement  of  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  will  understand 
that  the  results  of  the  Cambridge  investigation  bore  evident  relation  to  the 
publicity  procured  for  the  subject,  but  none  to  its  implied  failure.  True  it  is 
that  some  few  persons  were  heard  to  declare  that  "Spiritualism  had  suffered 
deatii  at  the  hands  of  the  Harvard  professors,"  but  it  soon  became  manifest 
that  it  was  in  a  more  flourishing  condition  than  ever,  and  many  of  its  bitterest 
■opponents,  provoked  into  investigation  by  its  unquenchable  vitality,  became 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  X^ 

devoted  adherents  to  the  cause.  In  order  to  meet  and  counteract  the  in 
jurious  phillipic  of  the  Harvard  professors,  floods  of  evidence  were  poured 
91  upon  the  pubhc  which  might  else  have  remained  in  obscurity,  and  it  is  to 
■  oine  of  the  publications  of  this  kind  that  the  present  chapter  will  be  de- 

A  circle  had  been  formed  in  Boston  consisting  of  thirteen  persons,  whose 
harmonious  relations  with  each  other  seemed  to  be  instrumental  in  procuring 
many  phases  of  spirit-power  equally  interesting  and  wonderful. 

The  circle  had  been  named  by  the  presiding  spirits,  "the  Olive  Branch 
of  Peace,"  and  as  an  appropriate  token  of  their  invisible  friends'  interest  in 
their  meetings,  it  was  promised  that  they  should  be  presented  with  a  white 
dove,  which  would  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  one  who  was  to  take  care 
of  it  for  the  rest.  Minute  directions  were  given  as  to  the  arrangement  and 
conduct  of  the  cu-cle  in  order  to  secure  the  necessary  conditions ;  also  it  was 
directed  that  the  circle  room  should  be  closed  and  hermetically  sealed  for 
twenty-four  hours  previous  to  the  time  appointed  for  the  presentation,  and 
that  when  opened  it  should  be  in  presence  of  all  the  members,  who  should 
enter  simultaneously.  These  conditions  having  been  complied  widi,  and  the 
company  being  seated  in  silent  expectation  for  about  an  hour,  one  of  the 
mediums  in  the  trance  state  said,  "  The  dove  is  now  coming,"  and  immedi- 
ately afterwards,  "It. is  now  in  Mrs.  Vinton's  hands."  On  looking  at  the 
party  indicated,  the  entire  circle  perceived  ne'itling  in  her  hands  a  white  dove 
the  purest,  prettiest,  and  most  gentle  creature  of  the  kind  they  had  ever 
seen. 

This  mysterious  visitant,  although  docile  and  intell  gent  beyond  descrip- 
tion, was  a  veritable  inhabitant  of  this  mundane  sphere  and  durmg  many 
subsequent  months,  when  the  circle  was  m  session  held  its  pKce  m  their 
midst,  suffering  the  caresses  which  were  tenderly  lavished  upon  it  and  rufHing 
its  snowy  plumage  as  it  rested  in  then-  hands  with  tokens  of  reciprocal  affec- 
tion and  familiarity.  In  a  highly-enthusiastic  account  of  this  singular  pres- 
entation published  in  the  New  Era,  eleven  names  from  imongst  the  most 
respectable  inhabitants  of  the  city  were  signed  in  witness  of  the  whole  scene 
as  above  described,  and  in  the  strongest  terms  of  asseveration  for  its  genuine 
character.  This  was  not  the  only  well -authenticated  account  in  which  birds 
were  made  the  appropriate  messengers  of  sphitual  remembrance  and  affec- 
tion. Mrs.  Glover,  an  aged  lady  residing  at  Quincy,  Massachusetts,  was  also 
favored  with  the  presentation  of  a  dove  of  singular  gentleness  and  beauty. 
The  precious  gift  was  conveyed  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner.  The  family 
of  Mrs.  Glover  were  requested  to  search  a  certain  apartment  thorou^ly,  and 
then,  in  presence  of  several  invited  witnesses,  to  lock  and  seal  the  doors  and 
windows  for  twenty-four  hours,  at  the  end  of  which  time  the  room  was  opened 
in  the  presence  of  the  same  witnesses,  and  found  tenanted  only  by  the  beau- 
tiful bird,  which  was  quietly  nestling  on  the  table ;  and  though  it  turned  its 
bright  loving  eyes  on  the  party  as  they  entered,  it  never  moved,  and  unre- 
sistingly suffered  itself  to  be  taken  up  by  its  new  mistress  and  caressed,  with 
all  the  docility  of  long  acquaintanceship. 

The  author  has  frequently  had  the  privilege  of  caressing  this  semi- spiritual 
creature,  and  received  the  account  of  its  appearance  from  those  who  were 
present  on  the  occasion  of  its  advent  amongst  them. 

Numerous  other  instances  can  be  cited  in  which  spirits  have  manifested 
their  power  of  influencing  birds  with  a  degree  of  readiness  and  intelligence  as 
unaccountable  as  it  is  interesting. 

The  somewhat  rare  phenomena  of  writing  on  the  arm,  produced  by  spirits, 

Hosted  by  Google 

i^6  HISTORY  OF  MODERPr 

now  began  to  increase  and  attract  unusual  attention  frcm  its  total  absence 
of  any  circumstances  which  couldaccoimt  for  its  origin  on  mnndane  prin- 

Mr.  Colcbester  and  Mr.  Charles  Foster,  of  Salem,  Massachusetts,  have 
presented  remarkable  evidences  of  this  singular  raediumistic  endowment. 

Both  .were  favored  by  the  production  of  all  the  strongest  phases  of  physi- 
cal force  manifestations,  and  test  intelligence  through  rapping,  writing, 
clairvoyance,  and  other  phenomenal  methods,  was  frequently  given  tbrou^ 
their  organisms;  but  when  total  strangers  to  these  mediums  beheld, 
rising  up  on  the  surface  of  the  arm,  letters  of  a  vivid  red  hue,  resembling  a 
thick  cord  formed  in  the  cuticle,  resolving  themselves  into  the  names  of  de- 
ceased friends,  or  writing  intelligent  messages,  and  then  as  unaccountably 
fading  out  before  their  very  eyes,  and  all  this  without  the  contact  of  a  single 
human  finger,  conviction  of  a  spiritual  origin  for  such  marvels  became  irre- 
sistible, and  bundreds  of  new  converts  were  added  to  the  ranks  of  Spiritual- 
ism by  the  exhibition  of  this  single  phenomenon  in  the  persons  of  these  two 
highly-gifted  mediums. 

The  readers  of  the  spiritual  journals  will  doubtless  remember  the  accounts 
published  of  a  young  woman  residing  in  the  family  of  Mr.  Lewis  Burtis,  of 
Rochester,  in  whose  person  the  remarkable  manifestation  of  spirit  writing  on 
the  arm  was  of  frequent  occurrence. 

The  following  incident,  occurring  in  the  experience  of  the  young  person 
above  referred  to,  was  communicated  to  the  author  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burtis 
themselves,  and  verified  upon  the  testimony  of  other  eye-witnesses. 

A  certain  celebrated  orator  and  editor  of  one  of  the  New  York  State  papers 
was  dining  at  Mr,  Burtis's  house,  and  after  the  meal  was  ended,  sat  with  his 
host  and  family  under  the  shade  of  their  garden  trees,  whilst  the  medium  was 
at  some  distance  from  the  party,  engaged  in  domestic  avocations.  Being  an 
uneducated  person,  she  could  not  read  clearly  the  raised  letters  which  from 
time  to  time  appeared  on  her  arm,  and  hence  she  generally  applied  to  one  of 
the  family  for  an  interpretation  of  their  meaning.  On  the  present  occasion 
she  proceeded  coolly  to  dry  her  hands,  and  advancing  to  the  party;  addressed 
Mrs.  Burtis  aside,  asking  her  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  figures  which  had 
just  then  appeared  on  her  arm,  and  which,  she  added  in  an  undertone,  she 
thought  had  some  reference  "  to  the  nigger  there,"  motioning  to  the  visitor, 
whose  nobility  of  soul  and  intellectual  powers  were  veiled  beneath  the  sable 
skin  of  Africa ;  in  fact,  the  party  referred  to,  though  then  holding  the  position 
of  equality  with  his  host  and  hostess  to  which  his  mental  acquirements  enti- 
tled him,  was  by  birth  a  negro,  and  had  been  a  slave. 

On  examining  the  young  woman's  arm,  Mrs.  Burtis  discovered  that  the  red 
lines  corruscated  upon  it  had  formed  into  a  distinct  and  beautifully  repre- 
sented picture  of  a  kneeling  man,  with  a  woolly  head  and  African  cast  of  fea- 
tures, a  chain  round  his  waist  terminating  in  two  balls,  which  were  ingeniously 
fitted  into  the  veins  at  the  bend  of  the  arm,  whilst  above  the  whole  was  writ- 
ten in  fine  characters  the  words,  "a  poor  old  slave." 

Perhaps  a  stranger  scene  could  hardly  be  imagined  than  that  quiet  garden 
arbor  presented-  The  immobile  aspect  of  the  medium,  gazing  indifferently  at 
die  mystery  wrought  in  her  own  organization ;  the  dark-hued  stranger  regarding 
with  obviously  intense  emotion  this  toucliing  memento  of  the  beloved  and 
martyred  dead ;  the  tearfiil  faces  of  the  rest  of  the  sympathetic  group,  and  the 
phantom  picture  itself  with  its  deeply  significant  meaning  and  an  origin  in  the 
silent  land,  where  it  was  vainly  supposed  the  wrong  and  ruin  of  many  a 
wretched  captive  was  lost  in  the  mysteries  ot  eternity  1     And  as  they  gazed. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  19? 

the  work  of  the  urkHOwii  artist  faded  from  their  eyes,  dissolving  as  it  had 
come,  leaving  behind  neither  sign  nor  token — nothing  but  conjecture  to  prove 
that  tiiey  had  been  "entertaining  an  angel  unawares;"  yet  something  more 
thanconjecture  thatihe  records  of  every  deed,  good  and  bad,  though  faded  out 
of  earthly  sight  and  memory,  are  treasured  up  in  the  archives  of  eternity 
forever ! 

Amongst  the  clamoring  voices  that  were  carrying  the  tidings  of  the  spiritual 
outpouring  over  the  land,  one  ciy  now  frequently  began  to  make  itself  promi- 
nent above  all  others,  and  this  was,  "What  is  the  use  of  it?"  It  seemed  as  if 
every  day's  experience  diminished  more  and  more  the  chances  of  successfully 
stemming  the  flow  of  the  sphitualistic  tide,  or  rendering  the  charge  of  delusion 
and  imposture  in  the  least  tenable ;  but  this  new  cry,  "What  is  the  use  of  it?" 
uttered,  as  common  sense  will  allow,  in  total  disregard  of  the  beneficent  nature 
of  the  manifestations  or  its  elevating  and  cheering  effect  on  hyman  character 
and  feehng,  called  forth  a  fresh  set  of  evidences,  which,  though  numerous  and 
abundant  beyond  the  abihty  of  the  historian  to  transcribe,  deserve  to  be  re- 
presented in  a  few  brief  paragraphs,  whldiwill  illustrate  generally  the  answer 
which  the  manifestations  themselves  supply  to  the  captious  propounders  of 
the  above-noted  queiy. 

Our  first  example  is  to  the  following  effect ; 

Mrs.  Kellog,  the  well-known  spirit  medium  of  New  York,  was  one  day  vis- 
ited by  a  gentleman  holding  a  distinguished  position  as  a  jurist,  and  not  un- 
known in  the  realm  of  letters.  Though  a  stranger  to  Mrs.  Kellog,  she  gave 
him  a  touching  and  graphic  communication  from  his  spirit  mother,  who  ten- 
derly deplored  his  one  lamentable  vice  of  intemperance,  and  declared  she  had 
influenced  him  to  visit  Mrs.  Kellog  with  a  view  of  effecting  a  cure  in  his  ap- 
petite for  drink. 

.  The  visitor  did  not  attempt  to  deny  the  allegation  contained  in  this  com- 
munication, but  quietly  awaited  the  result 

Mrs.  Kellog  then  proceeded  to  make  magnetic  passes  over  him,  which 
produced  singularly  unpleasant  sensations  in  the  digestive  organs,  but  which 
she  assured  him  [still  under  influence]  would  ultimate  in  his  permanent  cure. 
Although  for.  obvious  reasons  we  are  not  privileged  to  give  the  name  of  this 
gentleman,  the  following  letter,  which  he  addressed  to  Mrs.  Kellog  shortly  af- 
ter the  occurrence  narrated  above,  was,  by  his  own  request,  published  in  the 
spiritual  papers,  that  the  writer  might,  thus  far,  at  least,  acquit  himself  of  the 
debt  of  gratitude  which  he  acknowledged  to  the  "blessed  influence  of  Spirit- 
ualism." 

'M/r/77,  iS57- 

"Dear  Madam,  —  It  is  now  thirteen  days  ance  I  met  yon  in  New  York,  and  presum- 
ing you  woLdd  like  to  know  something  of  Che  result  of  tha.t  experiment,  I  have  concluded  to 

"Immediately  after  leaving  your  room  I  felt  a  disagreeable  sensation,  almost  amounting, 
to  pain,  about  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  This  continued  for  some  forty-eight  hours  with  but 
little  appetite,  when  it  passed  off  and  such  a  good  appetite  supervened  as  I  had  not  before 
enjoyed  for  years ;  and  this  continues  to  the  present  day,  accompanied  with  an  excellent 
power  of  digestion, 

"The  day  I  saw  you  was,  a*  you  will  recollect,  the  last  of  my  slay  in  New  York,  and  ac- 
cording to  custom,  I  was  called  upon  to  take  at  least  twenty  or  thirty  'parting  glasses'  with 
friends.  But  after  my  interview  with  you,  it  was  no  more  possible  for  me  to  take  a  glass 
of  any  strong  drink  than  to  consume  so  much  aqua  fortis.  From  that  hour  to  this,  in  fact, 
I  have  not  realized  the  slightest  desire  or  inclination  to  drink  any  ardent  spirits,  nor  have  I 
felt  the  want  of  any  such  stimulus.  It  is  not  that  I  have  any  palpable  feeling  of  di^st 
towards  drink,  but  it  does  not  seem  to  me  as  a  thing  in  the  least  necessary,  or  even  possible ; 
I  have  not  cared  for  it;  do  not  need,  de^e,  or  think  about  it,  except  to  remember,  with  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

198  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

most  intense  gratitude,  my  relief  from  the  crushing  thaldom  of  my  life,  for  indeed  the  de- 
mon of  intemperance  had  so  tightly  wound  his  folds  aroiuid  me  that  I  saircely  hoped  to 
avoid  a  doom  whidi  I  deeply  dreaded.  But,  thank  God,  I  am  free  !  and  my  fervent  prayer 
is  to  remain  so ;  meantime,  for  this  blessed  result,  I  need  not  assure  you  how  nnapeakably 
grateful  I  am  to  you ;  how  like  a  ministering  angel  you  appear,  when  I  reflect  npon  the 
awful  precipice  over  whiiJi  I  was  rushing,  not  blindly,  but  with  such  despuring  speed.  May 
God  bless  you,  as,  in  the  fullness  of  my  sou!,  I  do.  May  he  keep  you,  is  the  earnest  prayra 
of  your  true  friend." 

And  this  is  but  one  of  numerous  instances  wherein  kind  spirit  friends,  either 
through  clairvoyant  prescriptions  or  magnetic  passes,  have  succeeded  in  en- 
tirely destroying  the  the  taste  for  intoxicating  liquors  and  tobacco.  In  the 
case  of  the  venerable  Seth  Hinsliaw,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  and 
beloved  philandiropists  in  Indiana,  the  spirits,  after  having  frequently  re- 
monstrated with  him  on  the  immoderate  use  of  tobacco,  in  answer  to 
his  half  jesting  solicitation  that  they  would  remove  his  appetite  for  the  weed, 
promised  to  do  so  within  nine  days,  and  that  without  any  visible  means,  or 
the  use  of  drugs,  magnetism,  or  will-power  consciously  exerted.  They 
kept  their  word,  for  at  the  end  of  nine  days  and  during  the  reminder  of 
his  beneficent  life,  a  period  of  some  twelve  years,  the  mere  presence  of  to- 
bacco in  the  room,  produced  an  unendurable  and  nauseating  effect  on  Mr. 
Hinshaw. 

In  other  chapters  will  be  found  single  instances,  selected  from  hundreds  of 
others,  in  which  gamblers  have  been  deterred,  and  even  compelled  to  with- 
draw from  the  gambling  table  ;  drunkards  cured,  libertines  restrained,  injustice 
rebuked,  lost  property  found,  murders  detected,  ships  guided,  travellers  di- 
rected, and  almost  every  conceivable  act  of  kindness  and  charity  performed 
which  life's  pilgrims  could  require  from  tender  spirit  guardians.  These  acts 
are  neither  peculiarly  directed  towards  the  believers  in  Spiritualism,  nor  are 
they  invariably  performed  for  all  who  seek  and  need  them.  The  whole  his- 
tory of  Spiritualism  makes  the  fact  apparent  that  tlie  power  to  act  upon 
human  destiny  on  tlie  part  of  spirits  is  limited,  and  subject  to  many  hin- 
drances inexplicable  to  us  in  our  mundane  sphere. 

The  sum  of  our  knowledge  in  this  direction  simply  proves  that  the  pur- 
poses of  omniscient  wisdom  seem  measurably  to  use  the  agency  of  spiritual 
beings  as  instruments,  but  how  far  those  instruments  can  shape  or  modify 
human  affairs,  is  a  mooted  point  on  which  experience  alone  can  enable  each 
individual  to  decide  for  himself.  It  Is  certain  that  much  is  done  of  an  emi- 
nently  beneficent  character  by  kind  ministering  angels. 

The  above  question  of  the  material  uses  of  Spiritualism  receives  daily  and 
abundant  responses  through  the  beneficent  deeds  of  love  and  blessing 
enacted  by  the  "healing  medium"  alone.  The  work  etfected,  for  example,  by 
Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  of  Rhode  Island,  would  form  a  complete  gospel  of  good 
use,  and  evidence  of  the  divine  power  that  operates  through  mediumistic 
sources.  Dr.  J.  R.  Newton  is  a  gentleman  who  has  received  a  regular  rou- 
tine education  as  a  medical  practitioner;  but  becoming  interested  in  psycho- 
logical and  magnetic  experiments,  and  finding  he  possessed  wonderful 
power  in  these  directions,  he  ultimately  abandoned  ail  other  modes  of  prac- 
tice in  favor  of  the  apostolic  mode  of  the  laying  on  of  hands.  His  success  in 
these  efforts  has  been  almost  unparalleled  in  the  annals  of  supra-mundane  his- 
tory. The  blind,  halt,  maimed,  and  miserably  afflicted  in  every  shape  and 
form,  have  entered  his  presence  bowed  to  the  earth  beneath  their  weight  of 
suffering,  and  left  it  "leaping  and  dancing"  as  of  old,  physically  resurrected 
with  new  life.     Hundreds  of  affidavits  to  the  truth  of  these  "mirax:u!ous" 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  1 99 

cures  are  on  record.  Thousands  of  victims  who  once  languished  in  hopeless 
misery  or  were  sinking  into  untimely  graves,  rise  up  and  call  this  man 
'blessed' ;  and  if  the  columns  of  the  local  joiimals  had  not  been  systemati- 
cally  closed  against  this  kind  of  testimony,  the  experience  of  this  one  divine 
instrument  alone  would  liave  crowded  them  widi  answers  to  the  senile  ques- 
tion of  'What  is  the  use  of  Spiritualism?'  But  when  such  aii  example  is 
pressed  home  upon  the  notice  of  determined  prejudice,  the  objection  is  re- 
torted, that  gifts  so  wholly  exceptional  do  not  necessarily  belong  to  the  cate- 
gory of 'spiritualistic'  endowments. 

But  we  respond.  Dr.  Newton's  gifts  are  only  exceptional  in  their  extraor- 
dinary benevolence  and  singular  abundance.  Thousands  of  mediums  less 
distingnished,  and  of  examples  less  striking  than  he  affords,  swell  the  ranks 
of  Spiritualism  ;  and  the  reader  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  peruse  the  full 
details  of  Dr.  Newton's  remarkable  career,  as  we  shall  present  it  in  our  se- 
cond volume's  biographical  sketches,  will  find  ample  reason  to  justify  our 
claim  of  a  spiritual  origin  and  impulsion  for  the  outworking  of  liis  truly  divine 
and  Christ-like  mission. 

In  the  first  aiticle  addressed  by  Phcenix — Professor  Mapes— to  the  Spir- 
itual  Telegraph,  he  sums  up  the  uses  which  he  has  evolved  from  Spiritualism 
in  the  following  brief  but  pithy  sentences : 

"  The  manifestations  wHch  are  pertinent  to  the  ends  required  are  so  conclufjve  m  their 
character  as  to  establish  in  my  mind  certain  cardinal  points.     These  are  : 

"  First,  That  there  is  a  futnre  state  of  existence,  which  is  but  a  continuation  of  our 
present  state  ot  being,  devoid  of  such  portions  of  our  organism  as  are  now  denominated 
material ..      .  .      i 

"  Second,  That  the  great  dm  of  nature,  as  shown  through  a  great  variety  of  spiritual 
fdstences,  is  projjression,  extending  beyond  the  hmits  of  this  mundane  sphere. 

"Third,  That  spirits  can  and  do  communicate  with  mortals,  and  in  all  cases  evince  a 
desire  to  elevate  and  advance  those  they  commune  with. 

"  Fourth,  That  spirits  have,  in  a  vast  number  of  well-attested  mstances,  proved  their 
win  and  ability  to  ward  off  dangers,  cure  sickness,  prevent  crimes,  reform  criminals,  restore 
lost  property,  and  communicate  many  useful,  scientific,  and  some  highly-occult  and  novel 
ideas  to  maokmd." 

Th     p  o  then  goes  on  to  enumerate,  at  great  length,  the  curious 

phas     of  p     n  mena  which  he  has  witnessed,  justly  claiming  that  the  ex- 

ao  di  ary  po  rs  which  invisible  beings  herein  display,  and  the  transcen- 
d  ab     y  w   h  which  they,  by  means  totally  unknown  to  us,  manipulate 

m      n     ob  e       would  of  itself  form  the  basis  of  new  reveahnents  in  science 

a  ado  olutionize  the  entire  realm  of  pbilosopliical  knowledge.  _  Tlie 
sam  b  d  u  gestive  operations,  he  claims,  are  manifested  in  relation  to. 
men  n        he  understanding  of  which  on  the  part  of  spirits,  puts  all 

ou       n  a     mpts  at  theorizing  to  the  blush.     He  concludes  his  treatise 

on  th  hara  of  spirit  communion  in  the  following  unanswerable  sum- 
mary. 

"  Thousands  of  erring  persons  have  been  reformed  by  SpirituaUsm,  and  many  a  chilled 
heart,  that  had  almost  ceased  to  beat  in  unison  with  its  fellows,  has  been  warmed  into 
human  sympathy  by  communications  from  loved  ones,  long  since  passed  from  the  form. 

"  Nothing  has  been  so  efi'ective  in  reclaiming  the  vicious  and  rendering  the  family  circle 

a  perfect  school-house  for  Christian  r--'---      t.  ..,.  i .1.-  ^^.^c  ^f  -l„^,.i„r.  ™,„„  , 

wayward  and  inconstant  heart  into 
reverend  a^ication  to  the  Creator." 

Continuing  this  subject,  we  shall  make  a  few  selections  from  the  over- 
whchning  mass  of  testimony  which  the  records  of  Spiritualism  furnish  con- 

Hosled  by  Google 

aoo  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

cerning  its  peculiarly  utilitarian  and  benevolent  character,  a  few  specimen 
instances  of  which,  are  simply  iOustrative  of  the  thousands  that  are  of  daily 
occurrence  in  tlie  experience  of  Spiritualists. 

The  followbg  incident  is  taken  from  the  Niagara  Democrat,  Niagara 
village ;  the  party  referred  to  is  well  known  as  an  excellent  medium,  but,  fo: 
personal  reasons,  objects  to  die  pubhcation  of  her  name, 

"  A  young  woman  who  resides  on  Lock  street,  in  this  village,  who  is  a  reputed  'spirit 
medium,'  in  going  on  her  way  home  passed  upChurch  street,  intending  to  reach  Loclt  by  the 
way  of  Caledonia  street.  When  she  had  crossed  the  latter,  she  was  arrested  by  some  irroasti- 
ble  impulse,  or,  as  she  desciibes  it,  'felt  some  one  taldng  hold  of  her  arm.'  Under  tiiis  in- 
visible and  irresistible  guidance  she  quitted  her  companion,  tiimed  on  her  steps  again,  and 
was  hurried  along  until  she  arrived  back  on  Church  street  at  Ihe  railroad  crossmg.  Here 
slie  was  compelled  to  hasten  along  the  track  Co  the  deep  cut  west  of  the  tranidt,  when  she  was 
almost  pushed  forward  towards  something  lying  on  the  track,  which,  on  reaching,  ^e  found  to 
be  a  little  child  lying  asleep  across  one  of  the  rails.  The  whistle  of  the  approadiing  cats  had 
already  sounded,  the  train  was  m  sight,  and  '  the  medium '  had  scarce  time  to  seize  the  child 
and  jump  with  il  in  her  arms  to  Ihe  ditch  at  the  side,  ere  the  train  of  cars  dashed  past  her  ! 
The  young  woman's  statement  is  corroborated  by  that  of  the  companion  whom  she  so  sud- 
denly left,  and  several  witne^es,  two  of  whom  actually  saw  the  rescue  of  the  sleeping  child 
before  they  understood  the  circumstances  that  prompted  it.     Our  readers  may  rely  on  the 

In  a  report  of  the  Boston  Convention  of  1854,  a  speech  called  forth  by 
surrounding  circumstances  from  Dr.  Hayden,  editor  of  the  Boston  Star- 
SpangUd  Banner,  bears  rather  significantiy  upon  the  character  of  Spiritual- 
ism and  the  habits  of  Spiritualists,  as  the  following  extracts  will  prove. 

Dr.  Hayden  said ; 

"  Brother  Hudson  had  ™ken  of  hearing  profanity  from  the  mouths  of  some  young  men 
on  the  grouads.  He,  [Dr.  H.]  regretted  to  say,  the  same  blasphemous  soundshadfloated  on 
the  pure  air  to  his  own  ears,  and  he  wished  to  say,  for  the  information  of  any  strangers  that 
might  be  present,  that  any  persons  that  used  profane  language  in  that  place  were  not,  could 
not,  be  Spiritualists.  They  were  outsiders,  attracted  hither  by  curiosity,  but  did  not  belong 
to  the  meetmg.  He  must  here  add  he  had  yet  to  know  the  first  Spiritualist  who  made  use 
of  profanity,  or  was  not  opposed  to  slavery,  the  rum  traffic,  capital  punishment,  and  every 

other  physical  or  mental  form  of  human  degradation. Spiritualists  have 

no  cloak  under  which  to  cover  a  muUitude  of  sins. 

"  Mr.  Hudson  said  he  hoped  he  would  not  be  misunderstood,  as  he  did  not  for  one  mo- 
ment suppose  the  young  men  he  alluded  to  were  Spiritualists.  The  moment  he  heard  them 
swear,  he  knew  they  might  be  Christians  but  could  not  be  Spiritualists." 

It  would  be  superfluous  to  multiply  examples  of  die  above  character  or 
repeat  such  testimony  as  diat  offered  by  Professor  Mapes  on  the  cui  bono  of 
Spnitualism. 

Purposing  to  devote  a  chapter  of  our  second  volume  to  this  well-worn  sub- 
ject olmt  bono,  we  shall  now  invite  the  reader  to  follow  us  through  a  brief 
summary  of  the  phenomena  which  was  especially  rife  about  this  time  in  the 
Eastern  States. 

Amongst  other  demonstrations  of  the  power  with  which  spirits  have  favored 
mortals,  that  of  producing  music  either  through  an  entranced  human  organ- 
ism or  automatically  from  invisible  performers  themselves,  has  been  one  of  the 
most  interesting  and  abundant. 

We  have  already  noticed  several  instances  of  the  production  of  spirit-music 
through  the  mediumship  of  the  Misses  Fox,  Mrs.  Tamlin,  Frederick  Willis, 
Mr.  D,  D.  Home,  the  Davenport  Brothers,  Miss  Brooks,  of  Buffalo,  etc.;  but 
all  that  we  have  yet  recorded  falls  short  of  the  marvels  wrought  through  the 
medimnship  of  two  sisters  in  the  State  of  Maine,  named  Annie  and  Jennie 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  201 

Lord.  These  young  ladies,  both  very  shght,  fragile  persons,  suffering  under 
the  most  pitiable  conditions  of  ill-health,  and  in  their  normal  state  unable  to 
play  upon  any  instrument,  became  mediums  for  various  phases  of  "  the  power," 
requiring  the  most  astounding  physical  force  in  execution,  in  addition  to  which, 
spirits,  in  their  presence  and  in  darkened  rooms,  would  play  upon  a  double 
bass  violoncello,  guitar,  drums,  accordion,  tambourine,  bells,  and  various  small 
instruments,  with  the  most  astonishing  skill  and  power.  Sometimes  the 
instruments  would  be  played  on  singly,  at  others  all  together,  and  not  unfre- 
quently  the  strange  concert  would  conclude  by  placing  the  young  medium, 
seated  in  her  invalid  chair,  silently  and  in  a  single  instant  in  the  centre  of  the 
table,  piling  up  all  the  instruments  around  her,  and  then  calling  for  a  light  to 
exhibit  their  ponderous  feats  of  strength  and  noiseless  agility  to  the  eyes  of 
the  astonished  circle.  The  sisters  rarely  sat  together,  and  though  it  would  be 
impossible  to  conceive  of  any  persons  more  incapable  of  giving  fM  physical 
fewer  than  tliese  two  fragile  and  afflicted  girls,  yet  their  manifestations  with 
one  alone  acting  as  medium,  have  surpassed,  in  feats  of  vast  strength  and 
musical  achievements,  any  that  are  recorded  in  the  annals  of  Spiritualism. 

With  the  Sisters  Lord,  Messrs.  Charles  Foster  Colchester,  D.  D.  Home,  H. 
Gordon,  F.  L.  H.  Willis,  and  at  least  an  hundred  of  the  most  highly  gifted 
pubhc  test  and  physical  mediums  operating  throughout  the  Eastern  States, 
with  Dr.  Newton,  Mrs.  Mettler,  and  a  host  of  admirably-endowed  clairvoyants 
and  healers,  and  while  private  mediums  and  circles  were  to  be  numbered  in 
each  State  by  the  thousand,  New  England  bid  fair  to  outrival  New  York,  Penn- 
sylvania, or  even  the  Western  States  in  the  force  and  multitude  of  its  phe- 
nomenal demonstrations.  Besides  a  large  corps  of  variously -gifted  mediums 
at  the  disposal  of  the  inquring  public,  Boston  was  favored  by  die  presence  of 
Mr.  J.  V.  Mansfield,  the  renowned  writing  medium,  through  whom  thousands 
of  letters  were  transmitted  from  beloved  and  lamented  friends  in  the  "spirit- 
country"  to  their  mourning  relatives  on  earth. 

The  office  of  this  great  spiritual  post-master  was  constantly  crowded  with 
eager  investigators,  and  his  modus  operandi  forms  not  one  of  the  least  remark- 
able demonstrations  of  spirit-power.  Sealed  letters,  carefully  marked  and 
secured,  so  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  open  them  without  detection,  either 
brought  in  the  liand  or  sent  by  investigators,  were  correctly  and  often  most 
graphically  answered  and  returned  witliout  a  single  proven  case  of  one  ever 
having  been  opened.  Sometimes  the  letters  of  sceptical  inquirers  were  inclosed 
in  plates  of  metal  or  curiously  interlaced  with  silk  to  resist  the  supposed  action 
of  "electricity,"  the  wonderful  agent  to  which  so  many  of  the  spiritual  mar- 
vels were  attributed.  Sometimes  they  were  inclosed  in  varieties  of  envelopes, 
pasted,  sealed,  and  privately  marked  with  every  imaginable  test  for  the  detec- 
tion of  any  attempt  to  open  tlie  inclosed  letter.  No  matter  what  were  the 
precautions  used  —  excepting  in  such  rare  cases  as  no  spirit  control  being  pres- 
ent, when  the  letter  was  simply  returned — the  most  conclusive  evidences 
were  given  in  the  answers  that  they  had  been  dictated  by  spirits,  who  were 
fully  cognizant  of  the  hidden  secrets  of  die  package. 

Not  only  were  these  replies  appropriate  and  characteristic,  but,  as  If  to  repel 
the  idea  that  Mr.  Mansfield  liimself  dictated  these  answers,  messages  and 
details  were  given,  not  touched  on  in  the  querist's  letter,  whilst  names  were 
frequently  introduced  that  were  not  mentioned  or  asked  for,  and  not  unfre- 
quently  the  answers  were  written  in  German,  Spanisli,  Greek,  Arabic,  San- 
scrit, and  even  Chinese,  whilst  all  who  knew  the  medium  testified  to  their 
belief  that  he  was  entirely  unacquainted  with  any  language  but  his  own. 

Reserving  further  notice  of  diis  remarkable  medium  for  a  more  extended 

Hosted  by  Google 

Z02  HISTORY  OF  MODERir 

sketch,  we  call  attention  to  two  highly  interesting  phases  of  spirit-power, 
which  were  manifested  in  Hartford,  Connecticut.  The  first  relates  to  Mrs. 
Mettler,  the  celehrated  heaJing  medium.  The  single  testimony  to  her  benefi- 
cent power  which  we  can  insert  in  this  notice  of  New  England  Spiritualism 
is  copied  from  the  Springfield  Republican,  where  it  is  with  justice  re- 
corded, as — 

"SIGNIFICANT  TESTIMONY. 

"  This  is  to  certify  that  I  have  been,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Mrs.  Mettler,  of 
Hartford,  relieved  from  blindness  which  had  previously  baffled  medical  science. 

"  My  age  is  now  fifty-three  years ;  my  health  has  always  been  poor  since  about  my  ninth 
year.  During  much  of  this  time  I  had  suffered  almost  everything  but  death.  At  my  ninlh 
year  I  received  an,  injury  from  the  fall  of  a  log,  since  which  I  have  been  growing  worse, 
until  about  eight  years  ago,  when  I  became  blind  in  my  right  eye  by  the  formation  of  a  cat- 
aract over  the  sight.  For  some  time,  in  fact,  I  could  scarcely  discern  anything  with  either 
eye,  until  I  entirdy  lost  my  sight  in  both.  I  have  been  attended  by  phy^cians  of  reputed 
skill  and  ability;  surgical  operations  have  been  made,  and  everything  done  for  me  that 
could  be  thought  of,  without  affording  me  the  least  relief. 

"  Thus  I  remained  some  three  years  without  the  hope  of  ever  again  beholding  a  rav  ot 
light,  when  I  was  advised  to  go  to  Mrs.  Mettbr,  at  Hartford,  and  get  an  examination.  I 
did  so,  and  there  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  found  a  person  who  seemed  perfectly  to  un- 
derstaiid  my  case,  tracing  out  causes  which  I  had  long  anee  forgotten.  She  informed  me 
that  the  aght  of  one  eye  was  destroyed,  and  the  other  covered  with  a  cataract.  She  gave 
me  a  prescription  and  I  commenced  her  treatment.  At  this  time  my  neighbors  b^an  to 
chide  me  for  the  course  I  had  talten.  But  I  continued  on  with  the  treatment,  resolved  to 
get  my  sight  if  possible,  imtil  I  was  so  persecuted  that  I  was  finally  obliged  to  move  away 
to  Mandiester,  and.  all  because  1  had  gone  to  Mrs.  Mettler  in  the  hope  of  again  beholding 
this  beautiful  world,  a  blessing  that  has  been  finally  vouchsafed  to  me. 

"  Some  six  months  ago  I  began  to  see  a  little,  and  am  now  able  to  see  to  read  and  do 
the  finest  sewing. 

"  When  first  I  went  to  Mrs.  Mettler  my  health  was  so  poor  that  I  could  scarcely  get 
from  one  chair  to  another ;  now  I  not  only  see,  but  am  able  to  do  my  work.  Just  imagine 
a  person  so  atuated  as  I  was,  to  experience  such  a  relief  I  It  is  out  of  my  power  to  ex- 
press my  deep  gratitude  to  Mrs.  Mettler,  or  to  the  friend  who  advised  me  to  consult  her. 
Of  my  persecutors  I  can  only  say,  may  the  light  of  heaven  flow  down  upon  them  until  the 
scales  of  superstition  drop  from  their  eyes. 

"  If  by  these  few  lines  I  may  induce  some  poor  sufferer  to  visit  Mrs.  Mettler,  and  obtain 
1      ..  _  ti  —  J  __i-_r.L_^  T  1 :_„__j   .1 i,,n  T  1 — g  responded  to  the  high- 

lES.    DOTIA  Sfoore. 

"Bristol,  Conn.,  January  i8,  1854." 

Our  next  extract  refers  to  a  daughter  of  the  excellent  lady  referred  to 
above.  Miss  Catherine  Mettler,  who,  like  her  mother,  was  a  highly  gifted 
medium,  as  the  following  notice  from  the  pen  of  Professor  Britain,  written  for 
the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  will  prove. 

a  remarkable  musical  performance,  in  which  a 

^ ^_._,  _._j. ^  nee,  was  rendered  with  wonderful  effect  by  a 

young  lady  medium  from  the  vicinity  of  Boston.  New  England  is  rich  in  these  muacal 
prodigies,  for  since  that  time  we  have  mtnessed  several  still  more  astonislibg  musical  im- 
provisations from  Miss  Catherine  A.  Mettler,  whose  sudden  development  and  rapid  pro- 
gress as  a  musieat  medium  has  occasioned  the  deepest  surprise.  The  youthful  improvisatrice 
is  the  eldest  daughter  of  Dr.  G.  M.  and  Semantha  Mettler,  and  is  now  about  sixteen  years 

"Those  who  have  witnessed  Mrs.  Mettler's  remarkable  powers  as  a  clairvoyant  and 
healing  medium  will  readily  infer  that  Catherine  inheriteil  a  natural  title  to  her  inspiration. 
Previous  to  her  development  as  a  medium,  Catherine  had  taken  a  few  lessons  on  the  piano, 
and  could  execute  a  few  rudimentary  lessons  with  tolerable  correctness,  but  had  rever 
evinced  any  remarkable  taste  for  the  art,  or  given  promise  of  ultimate  proficiency.  One 
day,  whilst  laboring  to  maJie  out  the  mt  of  a  ample  song.  Miss  Mettler's  arms  were  appar. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

nr   ^,,4t/^,.. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITVALISM.  303 

ently  sdzed  ty  an  imltuowii  power,  whith  at  once  compelled  ter  to  commence  the  most 
astonishing  improvisation,  evidencing  an  extraordinary  mastery  over  the  instrument  and  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  science  of  harmony. 

"  The  medium' s  hands  for  some  time  mechanically  obeyed  the  irreastible  Impulse  of  this 
unseen  performer  without  ajiy  volition  or  mental  impression  of  her  own.  At  length  the 
wonderful  sounds  issuing  from  the  instrument  a.ttracted  the  attention  of  other  members  of 
the  family.  Mrs.  Mettler,  who  has  an  intuitively  fine  taste  for  music,  whilst  enEaged  in 
another  part  of  the  house,  heard  and  recognized  the  masterly  touch  of  an  unknown  per- 
former, and  inquired  who  was  in  the  parlor.  She  presumed  that  some  very  skilful  pianist 
had  called  on  her  daughter  without  her  knowledge.  To  ascertain  this  fact,  she  entered  the 
apartment,  where,  to  her  amazement,  she  found  no  one  but  Catherine.  The  yoimg  girl  was 
sitting  at  the  instrument,  apparently  fixed  and  spell-bound ;  her  hands  automatically  per- 
forming those  ndi  u  ymphonies,  but  her  mind  locked  in  the  deep  unconsciousness  of  a 
profound  tra  Sm      tlu    tune  [some  three  months  ago],  Catherine  has  been  diuly 

influenced  by  pir  t  whom  all  skilled  musicians  recognize  by  their  graphic  and  peculiar 
style  to  be  th  wh  m  th  y  lami ;  namely,  Mozart,  Beethoven,  Weber,  and  others,  who 
each  perform  th  ra  k  d  and  unmistakable  iudviduality.  Sometimes  the  compositions 
are  wholly  ongi  al  and  imp  vised  upon  given  subjects.  Sometimes  they  are  recognized 
chef  d'<sinir  of  lb  ated  masters,  of  whom  the  medium  has  scarcely  ever  even  heard. 
These  naarvell  u  perf  n  an  es  are  executed  equally  well  in  the  dark  or  the  light,  and 
usually  occupy  se  e  al  h  m  of  each  day.  On  one  occasion,  when  the  spirits  had  performed 
a  medley  of  some  twenty  popular  air^  Mrs.  Myers,  a  lady  present,  mentally  deored  that 
some  martial  music  shoidd  be  given,  when  the  performer,  by  a  skilful  modulation,  changed 
the  strmn  she  was  then  executing  into  a  noble  march  for  Liberty,  accompanied  with  some 
fine  variations  and  cloang  with  a  sublime  hymn,  improvised,  as  it  was  claimed,  by  the  spirit 
of  Beethoven. 

"  One  night  when  the  writer,  together  with  several  muacal  diUlianIi,  were  present,  It 
was  claimed  that  the  spirit  of  Mozart  would  perform  at  the  request  of  the  company;  where- 
upon we  desired  that  the  medium  should  be  influenced  to  give  his  celebrated  requiem. 
After  a  few  minutes  devoted  to  fine  modulation,  'Mozart's  Requiem'  was  rendered,  as  the 
writer  and  others  acquainted  with  that  composition  can  testifiy,  in  the  most  correct,  impres- 
sive, and  masterly  manner.  Subsequently  'A  Storm  at  Sea'  waS  played,  in  which  the 
battle  of  the  elements  was  illustrated  with  thrilling  effect.  The  power  that  holds  the 
winds  seemed  to  have  relaxed  his  grasp,  and  they  shouted  aloud  for  freedom.  The  angry 
billovre  seemed  to  rise  high  in  the  darkened  air,  and  anon,  ankirg  into  the  fathomless  abyss 
of  ocean,  to  wail  like  imprisoned  spirits.  We  could  hear  the  booming  of  the  thunder,  the 
plashii'g  of  the  rain,  the  rendlns  of  the  sails,  falling  of  the  masts,  and  signal  grais  of  an 
mvisible  ship.  The  prayers  and  shrieks  of  the  despairing  mariners,  then  the  sobbing  of 
the  exhausted  storm,  sinking  into  a  low  wail,  a  hush  I  then  the  transition  of  the  arisen 
spirits  into  the  iand  of  Kght  and  joy  was  celebrated  by  triumphant  songs  splendidly  impro- 
vised, in  a  style  of  the  roost  exalted  and  artistic  excellence,  the  whole  closing  with  an 
exquisite  and  pathetic  rendering  of  the  touching  ballad,  'Home,  Sweet  Home,'" 

It  would  be  impossible  to  notice  the  .various  devetopments  of  individtial 
medium  powers  that  began  rapidly  to  multiply  in  all  the  New  England  States ; 
suffice  it  to  say  that  they  were  so  marked  and  numerous  that  Spiritualism 
assumed  a  vast  and  formidable  importance  throughout  this  whole  section  of 
country. 

In  Willimantic,  Norwich,  Springfield,  Chlcopee,  and  other  considerable 
towns  and  villages  regular  Sunday  meetings  were  held,  at  which  audiences 
of  from  five  hundred  to  a  thousand  persons  constantiy  attended. 

In  Worcester,  Quincy,  Plymouth,  and  other  old  colonial  towns,  the  leading 
minds,  both  in  point  of  intellect  and  position,  openly  avowed  their  belief  in 
the  cause. 

The  rich  and  flourishing  cities  of  Providence,  Rhode  Island ;  Portland  and 
Bangor,  Maine ;  and  Hartford,  Connecticut,  became  perfect  strongholds  of 
the  faitL  Still  the  lack  of  variety  that  attends  mediumistic  demonstrations, 
and  the  limits  of  our  space,  oblige  us  to  confine  our  narrative  chiefly  to  gen- 
eral descriptions  of  the  movement  and  its  progress,  hence  we  must  sum  up 
the  overwhelming  force  and  abimdance  of  New  England  Spiritualism  by  a 

Hosted  by  Google 

304  HISTORY  OF  MODERl^ 

few  dosing  extracts  from  the  Telegraph  papers,  furnished  by  their  most 
trusted  and  reliable  correspondents. 

The  first  of  these,  written  by  a  celebrated  trance  medium,  is  as  follows  ; 

"PROGRESS  OF  SPIRITOALISM  IN  VERMONT. 

"Professor  L.  B.  Britain;  Dear  Sir,— Five  years  have  scarcely  elapsed  since 
Modem  Spiritualism  made  its  advent  in  Vermont,  At  that  period,  a  few  daring  spirits 
CKiended  the  hand  of  welcome  to  the  stranger,  watching  with  painful  anxiety  the  result. 
During  the  interval  since  then,  zealous  churchmen  have  made  themselves  jubilant  at  one 
time  over  its  persecutions,  and  indignant  at  aiiQther  about  its  successes. 

"  Rowdyism  and  religion  have  alternated,  ontU  the  dividhig  lines  between  sinners  and 
saints  have  become  obscure,  while  all  the  time  Spiritualism  has  reared  its  temples  and 

planted  its  groves. Thus,  Spiritualism  has  advanced  whilst  the  oppod- 

tion  has  fallen,  until  in  Vennont  above  seventy  churches — built  by  all  varieties  of  sects  — 
have  been  opened  for  the  use  of  that  SpirituaUsm  which,  a  few  years  ago,  those  same  sects 
so  furioudy  denounced.  The  writer  has  cause  to  remember  when  first  an  effort  was  made 
to  open  a  meeting-house  in  Vennont  for  Spiritualism,  as  that  effort  was  made  lo  allow  him, 
for  the  first  time,  to  stand  before  an  audience  to  be  influenced  by  spirits.  The  attempt 
failed.  A  Universalist  society  held  the  door  fast,  even  agamst  the  wishes  of  the  share- 
holders and  paying  members. The  writer  admits  that  he  can  hardly 

explain  the  fact  why  these  seventy  churches  have  been  opened,  unless,  mdeed,  a  spuitui 
key  has  been  used  to  unlock  them ;  he  merely  cites  the  fact  and  testifies  to  its  truth  from 
personal  knowledge. 

"  In  conclusion,  we  pledge  our  beloved  State  to  sustain  Spiritualism,  and,  day  by  day,  we 
see  her  sons  and  daughters  arise  as  its  advocates,  exponents,  and  adherents,  until  we  believe 
that  she  shall  become  a  home  of  the  spirit  and  a  temple  of  justice,  a  land  where  every  soul 
shall  rejoice  in  the  glorious  light  of  immortahty  and  the  communion  with  immortals  in  joy 

unspeakable. 

"Austin  E.  Simmons. 

"  Woodstock,  VER^fONT,  1856." 

"TELEGRAPH  PAPERS  — 1856, 

"  Mr.  Isaac  Hunt,  writing  from  the  conservative  old  town  of  Augusta,  Maine,  states 
that  Spiritualism  is  just  beginning  to  force  its  way  into  notice  in  that  plate,  met,  of  course, 
as  usual,  with  a  storm  of  opposition.  There  is  a  young  lady  in  the  town,  a  fine  medium, 
through  whom  tlie  spirits  give  some  curious  demonstrations,  manifesting  amongst  other 
things  the  spirit  of  an  old  Revolutionary  soldier,  who,  in  his  unabated  opposition  to  King 
Geoi^e  of  England,  refuses  to  rap  time  to  the  tune  of '  God  Save  the  King,'  but  beats 
time  to  the  airof  'Yankee  Doodle'  with  amazing  force  and  alacrity.  Several  highly- 
respectable  citi2ens  of  the  place  have  recently  become  developed,  as  mediums.  Among 
them  is  a  young  man  who  Is  a  seer,  and  who,  by  the  exercise  of  his  gift  of  inner-sight,  has  in 
several  instances  found  lost  and  stolen  property,  and  given  most  interesting  descriptions  of 
angelic  life  and  scenery  in  the  spheres.  In  one  instance  he  stated  that  preparations  were 
being  made  in  the  spiril-world  foe  the  reception  of  several  persons  still  in  perfect  health. 
He  gave  the  names  of  those  predestined  ones,  but  was  met  with  no  credence.  Witbm  a 
week  after  this  announcement,  two  of  them  departed,  and  we  find  that  a  third,  from  a  sud- 
den and  fatal  accident,  is  likely  to  follow." 

"TELEGRAPH  PAPERS— 1867. 

"William  Lloyd  GAREisoN,whowasprevioiislyscepticalwithregard  to  Spiritualism, 
has  lately  been  investigating  the  subject  with  Mrs,  Leah  Fish,  of  this  city.  The  sph-ita 
of  Jesse  Hutchinson,  Isaac- T.  Hopper,  and  many  other  of  his  friends,  manifested  their  pres- 
ence in  the  most  satisfactory  and  convincing  manner  ;  and  m  closing  an  article  m  his  own 
paper,  on  the  variety  and  character  of  the  demonstrations,  Mr.  Garrison  thus  expresses  him- 

'"  How  can  phenomena  like  these  be  accounted  for  excqjt  on  the  hypothesis  of  spirit 
agency?  If  we  cannot  po^tively  say  that  Isaac  T.  Hopper,  and  Jesse  Hutchinson  were  ac- 
tually prCiient  on  that  occasion,  we  are  at  least  prepared  to  express  our  own  conviction  as 
well  as  that  of  the  witnesses  who  were  in  our  company,  that  spirits  not  of  this  mundane 
sphere  must  have  performed  the  demonstrations  we  have  thus  brieflynarrated  to  our  readers.' " 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  20^ 

The  following  cases  have  several  times  been  paralleled  with  similar  plie- 
nomena,  witnessed  by  scores  of  persons,  of  whom  the  author  has  frequently 
been  one. 

The  possibility  of  rendering  the  human  organism  positive  to  the  action  ot 
both  fire  and  water  by  spiritual  influence  has  now  been  so  often  proved,  in 
the  presence  of  strong  physical  mediums  and  the  most  trustworthy  witnesses, 
that  these  instances  are  not  cited  for  their  novelty,  but  rather  in  illustration  of 
the  class  of  facts  to  which  they  belong  ;  they  were  published  in  the  Christian 
Spiritualist,  Macon,  in  i860,  in  the  following  extract  from  correspondence  : 

"Mrs.  Lovejoy,  of  CincinnatL,  being  on  a  visit  to  this  place,  brought  with  her  a  baby  of 
four  months  old,  who  is  a  remarkable  medium.  We  have  been  accustomed  to  sit  around 
the  cradle  whilst  the  little  one  lies  asleep,  ever  since  she  has  been  here,  and  always  receive 
satisfactory  responses  from  our  spirit  friends,  either  by  raps  or  rockings  of  the  cradle.  If 
the  baby  wakes  during  oar  circle  she  never  cries,  but  seems,  by  the  happy  smile  over  her 
sweet  face,  and  the  delight  with  which  she  crows  along  with  the  raps,  to  receive  some  pleas- 
ant influence  from  the  power  which  is  operating. 

"Last  evening  (April  3],  as  we  were  holding  a  circle  round  the  cradle,  I  asked  the  spirits 
why  the  Christians  did  not  give  the  agns  which  are  promised  to  the  believers  in  the  last 
chapter  of  St.  Mark?  When  the  spirils  rapped  oat,  by  the  alphabet  —  'Because  the  Chris- 
tians of  this  century  were  believers  with  their  lips,  but  too  many  of  Iheit  hearts  were  far 
from  God. '  They  added,  '  They  would  show  what  belief  in  the  truth  of  Scripture  meant, 
through  that  baby,  to-morrow,  and  prove  that  it  was  something  more  than  lip  service.' 

"  The  next  day  [this  morning],  as  I  returned  to  dinner,  I  found  my  wife  and  Mrs.  Love- 
joy  sitting  on  the  verandah  outside  the  house.  They  rose  up  and  went  into  the  parlor  with 
roe,  also  accompanied  by  Mr.  Newman,  my  overseer,  from  Mississippi,  who  was  along  with 

"On  entering  the  parlor,  we  were  all  four  horrified  to  behold  the  baby's  cradle  literally  a 
mass  of  flames ;  a  spark  from  the  pine  fire  probably  had  flown  out,  and  the  cradle  being 
incautiously  left  near  the  open  firepkce,  had  taken  fire,  and  was  now  wrapped  m  flames.  I 
shtjl  never  forget  the  shrieks  of  the  women,  or  my  own  feelings  of  horror  at  the  sight ;  but 
Mr.  Newman  gallantly  rushed  towards  the  blazing  mass,  and,  plunging  his  hands  in,  snatched 
themfant  from  the  cradle,  and  rolled  it  in  its  blazing  night  dresson  thematlingof  the  floor, 
until  the  fire  was  extinguished.  1  seized  a  bucket  of  water  at  the  door,  brought  by  Sam  for 
our  horses,  and  hurled  it  at  the  cradle,  by  which  the  flames  were  soon  put  out ;  but  the 
strange  part  of  the  story  is  that  the  little  one  never  cried,  nor  even  whimpered,  and  that, 
thou^  its  night  dress  was  burned  to  a  cinder,  not  a  angle  scorch  can  be  found  on  its  body, 
nor  the  least  token  of  injury  ;  even  the  bit  of  hair  on  its  little  poll  is  not  anged. 

"  Mrs.  Lovejoy  is  now  in  tied,  attended  by  my  wife,  in  a  painful  condition  of  hysterical 
emotion;  but  the  little  angel — guarded  sign  of  true  Christianity — is  merrily  crowing  in  the 
arms  of  her  nurse.  Cherry,  on  the  floor  at  my  feet,  as  I  write. 

"Mobile,  .4/ri7 4,  1S60.  E.  Hoffman." 

"In  Macon,  Georgia,  a  colored  girl,  who  was  an  excellent  phyaeal  medium,  frequently 
exhibited  the  feat  of  thrusting  her  hand  amongst  the  blazing  pine  logs,  and  removing  it  after 
some  sixty  seconds  without  the  least  injury.  She  always  insisted,  however,  that  she  would 
only  perform  this  feat  when  'Couan  Joe,'  whom  she  called  her  guardian  spirit,  was  present, 
and  bid  her  do  it. 

"  At  New  Orleans,  Louisiana,  a  negro  by  the  name  of  Tom  Jenkins  was  well  known  for 
hispowerofreasting  fire,  under  what  he  called  the 'fluence  of  Big  Ben,' aboatman,  formerly, 
on  the  Mississippi  river,  and  who,  ance  his  death  by  drowning,  had  come  and  made  what 
Tom  called  '  magic '  for  him.  On  one  occasion  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  and  a  party  of  friends 
paying  a  visit  to  Tom,  he  became  entranced,  took  off  his  shoes  and  stockings,  rolled  up  his 
pantaloons  to  his  knees,  and  entered  the  pine  wood  fire,  literally  standing  in  it  as  it  blazed 
upon  the  hearth,  long  enough  to  repeat  in  a  solemn  and  impressive  manner  the  zyK  34th, 
and  25th  versesof  the  third  chapter  of  Daniel." 

The  following  incident  is  one  which  has  obtained  wide  circulation  through 
the  press  of  New  England,  and  relates  to  a  family  of  high  respectability  in 
Vermont     The  statement  is  confirmed  by  many  witnesses,  but  the  official 

Hosted  by  Google 

20lS  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

character  of  the  investigation  alluded  to  in  the  narrative  is  better  warranty 
than  the  attestation  of  private  individuals.  The  relation  is  copied  from  the 
Vermont  Daily  Tribune,  bearing  date,  1854. 

"A  STRONG  CASE. 

"Some  few  weelts  ago  tlie  wifa  of  Mr.  Henry  H.  Mitchel,  of  this  city,  was  controlled  by 
a  preternatural  influence  claiming  to  be  '  spiritual,'  under  which  she  wrote  a  communica- 
tion purporting  to  come  from  Mr.  Mitchel' s  father,  who  had  died  in  1816.  The  'spirit' 
stated  that  at  the  time  he  left  this  mundane  sphere,  he  was  entitled  to  a  quarter  section  of 
land  located  in  Pike  Coonty,  Illinois,  for  military  services  which  he  had  rradered  in  the  war 
of  1812;  and  he  requested  his  son  to  write  to  Washington,  as  the  patent  had  never  been 
issued  from  the  oflice  there ;  that  the  land  was  now  valuable,  and  justly  belonged  to  his 
heirs.  Having  but  little  confidence  in  the  communication,  and  no  knowledge  of  his  lather's 
being  entitled  to  ajiy  government  land,  Mr.  Mitchel  at  first  he^tated  to  write  to  Washing- 
ton, but  was  finally  persnaded  by  some  Spiritualists  to  do  so  for  the  sake  of  the  test  which 
it  would  afford. 

"He  accordingly  wrote  to  the  Honorable  James  Meacham,  one  of  the  members  in  Con- 
gress for  Vermont,  requesting  him  to  examine  the  records  and  ascertain  whether  there  was 
any  truth  in  the  representation. 

"  A  short  tinie  afterwards  he  received  from  Mr.  Meacham  his  papers  and  a  copy  of  the 
record,  with  the  official  seal  of  the  Honorable  John  Wilson,  Land  Commissioner,  showing 
that  his  father  was  entitled  to  a  quarter  section  of  land,  that  was  located  and  recorded  Oc- 
tober 16,  1819.  The  location,  as  indicated  in  the  documents,  was  in  Pike  County,  Ill- 
inois, just  as  the  spirit  had  stated. ' ' 

We  have  now  briefly  reviewed  the  character  of  the  vast  and  abundant  tes- 
timony which  the  annals  of  Spiritualism  afford  in  answer  to  the  question  cut 
bono?  pointed  to  the  varied  and  ever-increasing  phenomena  with  which  it  is 
rife,  and  conclude  our  notice  of  the  movement  in  the  New  England  States 
by  selecting  one  of  the  numerous  examples  which  the  times  furnished  of  the 
effect  which  the  irresistible  progress  of  the  cause  produced  upon  professing 
Christians.  The  following  extract  from  the  records  of  the  day  will  prove  for 
itself  the  desperate  methods  by  which  the  afflicted  shepherds  of  souls  sought 
to  hinder  their  flocks  from  participating  in  the  new  light,  which  all  other  ef- 
forts had  failed  to  extinguish.  It  is  taken  from  the  columns  of  the  Spiritual 
Age,  the  editor  of  which  prefaces  its  introduction  with  these  remarks : 

"  We  have  received  the  followmg  drcular  with  a  request  that  w 
our  columns,  a  more  extended  circulation  than  would  be  secured  I 
to  each  family  in  the  Baptist  Church  at  Ballston  Spa,  New  York. 

"  We  comply  with  this  request  very  cheerfully,  and,  moreover,  call  the  attention  of  our 
readers  to  so  truly  orthodox  a  production  without  the  least  fear  that  the  effect  of  its  perusal 
will  damage  Our  own  subscription  list.  —  Editor  Spiritual  Age. 

"■CIRCULAR. 

"  '  To  the  members  of  the  Baptist  Church,  Balhtort  Spa  : 

"  '  Whereat,  The  theory  and  practices  of  Spiritualism,  or  necromancy,  are  believed  by 
us  to  be  directly  contrary  to  the  teachings  of  the  Bible,  by  which  it  is  expressly  condemned 
as  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  and, 

"'Whereas,  We  discover  from  eKperienee  that  its  practice  leads  directly  to  gross  infidelity 
and  the  subversion  of  Christian  character  and  reputation,  and  thus  involves  a  great  reproach 
to  the  cause  of  Christ ;  therefore, 

"  '  Resolved,  That  we  affectionately  request  all  brethren  and  sisters  to  desist  and  invari- 
ably refrain  from  all  connection  with  the  thing,  and  fiom  all  countenance  of  it,  whether  by 
word  or  deed. 

'"  And  resolved.  That  the  clerk  be  instructed  to  print  the  above  resolutions,  and  send 
one  copy  to  each  family  in  the  chmch. 

"  '  Done  in  church-meeting  at  Ballston  Spa,  February  4,  1S54. 

"  'Charles  T.  Harris,  Church  Clerk. 

" '  Saratoga  Repablieait.'  " 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM  Z0^ 

The  same  paper  from  which  tlie  above  circular  is  copied  publishes  a  dis- 
course of  the  Rev.  T.  L.  Harris,  at  thai  time  a  full  behever  and  indefatigable 
advocate  of  the  truths  of  Spiritualism. 

Although  this  discourse,  entitled  "  the  New  Ministry,"  by  no  means  ex- 
presses in  its  fullness  the  length,  breadth,  or  beauty  of  Spirituahsm,  its  ap- 
pearance coincident  widi  that  of  the  Ballston  Spa  circular,  cliarging  on  Spir- 
ituahsm the  act  of  bringing  "a  great  reproach  on  the  cause  of  Christ,"  is,  to, 
say  the  least  of  it,  signiticant,  and  requires  that  the  two  documents  should  be 
perused  by  every  candid  reader  side  by  side  ;  and  before  Christian  brethren 
and  sisters  determine  to  refrain  from  "the  thing"  on  the  charge  of  the  Bap- 
tist shepherd's  view  of  it,  let  the  said  "thing"  speak  for  itseh'  concerning  its 
own  relation  to  Christian  life  and  character. 

The  following  extracts  from  Mr.  Hairis's  discourse  are  sufficiently  indica- 
tive of  the  whole : 

"  But  there  is  an  ai^meiit  still  more  grave  than  any  to  ivhich  I  have  hitherto  alluded. 
It  is  said  that  persons  in  the  interior  state  are  hostile  to  the  Christian  revelation.  To  this 
I  answer  that  t  for  one  will  never  admit  that  the  influxes  flowing  through  a  spiritual  seer 
are  necessarily  hostile  to  revelation.     .... 

"  All  the  prophets  were  interior  and  illuminated  men.  Through  them  came  not  any  sort 
of  denial  of  religion,  but  the  very  revelations  that  confirm  religion. 

"  All  the  apostles  were  interior  and  illuminated  men,  and  we  are  indebted  to  them  for 
Christianity  itself  in  its  documentary  and  historical  form. 

"  Like  seeks  like ;  if  there  is  a  sublime  Christianity  m  heaven  it  must  flow  down  to  man, 
I  can  conceive  of  no  form  of  Christian  ministry  more  grand  than  a  mmistry  of  Cbrist-like 
men,  m  sympathy  with  humanity  and  en  rapport  with  the  skies. 

"  This  or  liiat  medium  may  be  influenced  bjr  the  peculiarities  of  his  organization,  by  the 
tendencies  of  his  intellect,  by  his  associations  m  the  tiody,  and  by  his  impressions  from  the 
spiritual  world,  to  take  ground  against  some  revelations  m  the  past.  This  I  do  not  deny, 
'    ■  "       '  tain  that  if  religjon  be  true,  our  strongest  allies  are  in  the  world  beyond  the 

"  It  may  be  objected  that  we  are  to  try  the  spirits,  and  believe  only  those  that  teach  that 
Christ  has  come  m  the  flesh.     To  this  I  reply  : 

"  This  passage  in  Si.  John  has  no  certainty  as  a  test,  I  believed  it  in  my  early  experi- 
ence as  a  medium,  aiul  acted  on  it.  However  valued  it  may  have  been  in  the  period  for 
which  ic  was  written,  it  is  useless  now. 

"  I  prefer  to  try  spuits  by  their  works.  We  cannot  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  nor  figs  of 
thistles.  '  Not  they  tlmt  say  '  Lord,  Lord,'  inherit  the  kingdom,  but  they  that  know  the  will 
of  the  Father  and  DO  IT.'  " 

CHAPTER  XXr. 

IRITUAL    ^fOVEMENTS— "MOUNT 

"Who  is  ihis  thai  darfcenelh  counsel  by  notdswllhout  knowledge!" 

How  THE  Apostolic  Brotherhood  Grew  from  a  Circumference  hack  to  a 
Centre — How  the  Centre  Burst  and  Vanished  into  Thin  Air^How 
IT  Gathered  itself  up  again,  and  Grew  Beyond  its  own  Centre  and 
Circumference,  and  Soahed  away  Beyond  Itself — How  Mr.  Charles 
Partridge  brought  it  back  to  Earth  again  until  it  found  its  Level. 

It  now  becomes  the  duty  of  a  faithful  scribe  to  record  some  of  those 
darker  shades  of  the  spiritualistic  history,  which,  doubtiess,  in  the  providential 

Hosted  by  Google 

208  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

plan,  as  on  the  canvas  of  the  artist,  are  essential  features  in  the  landscapes 
of  human  destiny.  In  fulfilling  this  part  of  our  mission,  let  it  be  understood 
that  we  write  with  no  unkind  intent  toward  the  individuals  whose  experiences 
we  detail.  Doubtless  their  acts,  if  stimulated  somewhat  more  by  mundane 
than  supra-mundane  psychology,  were  still  measurably  influenced  by  the  mag- 
netic contagion  of  the  time.  One  marked  result  of  spirit  influence  has  been 
to  externalize  character,  and  develop  into  sudden  prominence  the  hidden 
traits,  perhaps  scarcely  known  to  their  possessors. 

In  accordance  with  the  testimony  adduced,  even  in  the  last  chapter,  it  will 
be  seen  that  vicious  persons,  hitherto  deemed  irreclaimable,  have  been  led 
into  the  paths  of  virtue  and  goodness  by  the  angelic  ministrations  of  guardian 
spirits;  on  the  odier  hand  it  is  certain  that  latent  evil  tendencies  are  not 
uufrequently  matured  into  ugly  prominence  by  the  effects  of  magnetism, 
especially  in  its  indiscriminate  use  or  in  heterogeneous  circles.  Let  these 
remarks  be  borne  inmind,  and  due  weight  be  attached  to  the  original  idiosyn- 
cracies  of  individual  characters,  ere  we  proceed  to  charge  upon  Spiritual- 
ism the  onus  of  the  follies  and  fanaticisms  which  become  revealed  in  the 
history  of  the  various  movements  which  deform  the  sacred  name  of  Spiritual- 
ism, under  the  pretence  of  "reforms,"  an  example  of  which  we  now  propose 
to  record,  in  the  notorious  "Mountain  Cove"  movement. 

This  remarkable  transaction  originated  about  1850,  at  which  time  spiritual 
manifestatio      had  taken  strong  hold  of  many  enthusiastic  minds  in  the  town 

of  Auburn, 

w 

H 

H  d 

g           Sp 
ah/ 
d  b        h    p 

<J     P          g 
d 
d 

P 
h 

e  of  its  proximity  to  the  scene 
d  the  number  of  the  mediumistic 
had  a  fair  chance  of  exhibiting 
s  in  human  character.      The 
a  belief  of  direct  communion 

gifts  called  1 
its  tendenc; 
egotist  bea 

hb 

fl 
h 
dd 

d 

with  the  hig 
sen  re  fanac 
apostolic  di] 
to  move  the 
"The  He 

om  heavenly  personages.     Ob- 
ves  authorized  by  some  high 

the  least  of  which  was  destined 
existing  institutions, 
h  rity  with  this  class  of  inspired 

ones,  and  no  one  under  the  rank  of  an  apostle — except  now  and  then  a 
Jewish  prophet,  or  patriarch — was  deemed  worthy  to  hold  communication 
with  these  "highly  favored  of  the  Lord." 

Meantime,  the  immediate  personal  advent  of  the  "  Messiah"  was  declared 
to  be  the  aim  of  the  manifestations,  whilst  the  self-elected  sa  ts  of  tl  e  dis- 
pensation were  every  one  the  particular  "John  Bapt  s  s  of  tl  e  second 
coming.  The  great  body  of  Spiritualists,  who  happily  represe  ted  the  ma- 
jority as  well  as  the  copamon-sense  of  the  movement,  were  contented  to  seek 
for  the  facts  of  identity  whicli  proved  them  to  be  in  comm  n  on  with  the 
spirits  of  recognized  friends  and  kindred  Such  tests  vere  str  k  ng  and 
abundant,  and  with  them  communications  were  often  n  ade  from  %\  s  who 
were  once  highly  distinguished  on  earth,  and  who  represented  themselves  as 
engaged  in  the  task  of  missionary  labor,  for  some  special  season  or  purpose ; 
but  few ,  if  any,  whose  communications  brought  with  them  internal  evidence 
of  their  claims  to  respect  and  credence,  attempted  to  dictate  to  mortals,  or 
impose  upon  them  any  other  authority  than  such  as  they  would  have  exercised 
over  others  legitimately  on  earth. 

The  leaders  of  the  "Auburn  Apostolic  Circle"  were  originally  a  few  per- 
sons, who,  notwithstanding  their  high  and  pretentious  claim  to  communicate 
with  no  spirit  bom  but  of  Judea,  or  after  the  year  1  of  the  Christian  era, 
still  failed  to  secure  adherents  outside  "  the  faitMul,"  or  to  induce  the  sinful 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  209 

world  to  purchase  t]ie  tracts,  wherein  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  appeared 
clodied  in  very  bad  grammar,  and  the  theology  of  St.  Paul  came  forth  masked 
in  orthography  quite  too  hard  for  modem  well-bred  Peters  to  swallow.  But 
though  it  was  at  last  discovered  that  the  blind  made  but  a  poor  hand  of  lead- 
ing the  blind,  the  usual  resort  of  getting  on  the  blind  side  of  the  strong,  and 
pampering  to  the  weakness  of  the  ambitious,  in  this  as  in  other  cases,  proved 
successful  "  In  the  fulness  of  time  "  the  "  Apostolic  circles  "  were  directed 
by  their  archangelic  leaders,  tlirough  Mrs.  Benedict's  rapping,  to  summon  to  the 
work  the  two  "  chosen  vessels"  before  alluded  to,  namely,  the  Rev.  J.  L. 
Scott,  a  Baptist  preacher,  and  the  Rev.  Thomas  L.  Harris,  an  Universalist, 
both  of  New  York  City. 

Shortly  after  the  accession  of  these  two  "great  lights,"  a  paper  superior  in 
tone  and  orthography  to  anything  that  the  apostolic  band  had  hitherto  put 
forth,  appeared,  under  the  caption  of  "  Disclosures  from  the  Interior,  and 
Superior  Care  for  Mortals."  If  the  grammar  and  style  of  this  publication  had 
risen  with  its  new  editors,  its  authoritative  claims  kept  ample  pace  with  its 
improvements ;  for  whilst  its  columns  were,  humanly  speaking,  cliiefiy  indited 
by  the  twin  "Reverends,"  Scott  and  Harris,  their  words,  they  informed 
their  readers,  were  wholly  dictated  or  inspired  by  a  circle  of  prophets  and 
apostles,  who  derived,  in  their  turn,  plenary  inspiration  froni  the  "Lord  Su- 
preme himself." 

Besides  the  strongest  affirmations  of  the  duty  and  deference  which  tiie 
whole  world  owed  to  the  "  Apostolic  Circle  "  in  general,  and  Scott  and  Harris 
in  particular,  it  was  claimed  through  Mr.  Harris  that  his  interior  revelations 
were  dictated  by  Paul,  John,  Daniel,  and  other  distinguished  Biblical  per- 
sonages, whilst  the  poetry  wliich  enlivened  the  columns  of  the  "  Disclosures," 
was  the  spiritual  lucubrations  of  none  less  than  Coleridge,  Shelley,  Pollock, 
and  a  few  of  the  higher  geniuses  of  modem  times,  to  whom  Mr.  Harris 
thought  proper  to  assign  prominent  positions  in  the  celestial  realms,  of  wliicli 
he  alleged  himself  to  be  a  frequent  and  privileged  visitor. 

The  authority  maintained  by  Scott  and  Harris  over  the  credulity  of  their 
followers  would  be  amusing  enough  to  read  of,  were  it  not  for  the  monstrous 
assumption  of  their  pretensions,  and  the  degradation  of  sxich  intellects  as 
could  submit  to  their  claims.  After  the  society  liad  maintained  its  pUce 
amongst  the  people  of  Auburn  until  forbearance  appeared  to  be  no  longer  a 
virtue,  and  they  received  pretty  emphatic  hints  that  their  holinesses  might 
find  their  longer  residence  in  that  profane  city  disagreeable,  Mr.  Scott  had 
a  timely  vision,  which  su^ested  a  "  change  of  base,"  whereupon  "  the  faith- 
ful "  removed  to  Mountain  Cove,  Fayette  Coimty,  Vii^inia,  and  under  the 
leadership  of  Scott,  were  guided  to  that  particular  spot,  which  the  inspired 
ones  of  tlie  band  informed  the  rest  was  inhabited  by  no  less  a  personage  than 
the  spirit  of  Isaiah  the  Prophet !  Here,  in  the  company  of  about  one  hun- 
dred persons,  who  had  been  induced  to  join  him  and  throw  in  "all  things  in 
common,"  including  in  some  instances  very  considerable  wbrldly  possessions, 
Mr.  Scott  became'  elevated  to  a  height  where  no  other  atom  of  frail  mortality 
could  follow  him,  much  less  comprehend  or  question  the  edicts  whicli  he.  In 
a  supernal  condition  of, inspiration,  enunciated.  In  short,  Mr.  Scott  claimed  . 
to  be  "  divinely  inspired,"  and  liaving  soared  away  above  even  the  circle  of 
prophets  and  apostles  who  formerly  attended  him,  and  attained  even  "unto 
the  counsels  of  the  Most  High,"  he  henceforward  claimed  supreme  and 
unqnestionable  authority  in  all  matters,  whether  social,  religions,  temporal, 
etemaL.or  financial,  that  concerned  tliose  who  were  privileged  with  him  to' 
share  t-Ve  joys  of  "the  holy  mountain."     If  a  question  should  arise  as  to 

Hosiedb,  Google 

2IO  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

whether  one  man,  in  this  nineteenth  centuiy,  could  enunciate  snch  blasphe 
mous  pretentions  and  find  rational  human  beings  who  could  submit  to  thenii 
let  the  sceptical  reader  satisfy  himself  by  perusing  the  statements  of  one 
who  had  the  most  peculiar  facilities,  not  only  for  becoming  acquainted  with 
the  interior  arrangements  of  the  Mountain  Cove  New  Jerusalem,  but  who 
preserved  in  published  form  many  of  the  literal  utterances  upon  which  the 
great  Prophets  of  the  Mountain  founded  their  claims :  we  refer  lo  Mr.  E.  W. 
Capron,  from  whose  admirable  work  on  the  facts  and  fanaticisms  of  modem 
Spiritualism,  we  present  the  following  account  of  this  remarkable  move- 
ment 

"I  have  endeavored  from  every  source  to  obtain  accurate  information  and  give  an 
impartij  history  of  this  smgular  movement.  From  an  acquamtance  who  was  induced  to  join 
the  movement  and  spent  a  long  time  at  the  Cove,  I  have  received  a  statement  of  which  the 
following  is  the  substance : 

"  Mr.  Scott  and  others  arrived  in  Fayette  County,  Vii^nia,  in  the  month  of  October, 
1851,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  community  of  true  believers  in  Spiritualism,  with 
Scott  at  the  head.  It  was  stated  and  understood,  before  any  of  the  company  left  Auburn, 
that  the  land,  when  purchased,  would  be  sold  in  small  quantities  to  all  who  wished  to  settle 
with  them,  and  those  unable  to  purchase  bouse  and  land  would  be  furnished  by  the 

"They  also  were  promised  bnaness,  such  as  each  were  able  to  perform  ;  each  family  to 
be  their  own  regulator,  as  fully  as  out  of  the  association.  The  labor  performed  was  to  be 
paid  for  at  a  fair  remuneration.     Schools  wore  to  be  established,  and  different  branches  of 

badness  instituted 

"  It  was  also  understood  that  there  was  to  be  no  dictation  in  the  movement ;  but  the 
whole  was  to  be  under  the  direction  of  '  the  spirits,'  and  that  all  things  should  be  governed 
on  the  prbdples  of  brotherhood,  unity,  and  equality.  On  the  2d  of  December,  1851  [the 
day  on  which  my  informant  arrived  at  Mountain  Cove],  himself  and  some  siitty  others  were 
told  by  Scott,  who  had  somehow  been  given,  or  taken  the  title  of  'Doctof,'  that  he  was 
receiving  communications  from  the  Deity.  Scott  declared  that  he  received  these  commu- 
nications, standing  '  face  to  face  with  God  !'  and  strange  as  it  may  appear,  most  of  the 
people  there  believed  this  story. 

"  Soon  after  this,  Scott  informed  the  people  that  he  had  been  appointed,  by  high  spiritual 
power,  medium  absolute,  and  that  nothing  but  truth  would  or  could  henceforth  be  given 
through  Mm,  and  that  whatever  was  given  through  him  must  not  be  doubted,  all  doubtmg 
being  rank  heresy.  Soon  after  this,  Scott  informed  Mr.  H.  —  [my  informant]  that  there 
liad  been  a  serious  quarrel  among  them  before  he  [Mr,  H.]  arrived. 

"  To  the  question  as  to  what  was  the  cause  of  the  quarrel,  Scott  replied  that  a  certiun 
individual  had  slandered  Iiis  character,  and  allied  that  he  had  been  guilty  of  licentiousness 
and  adultery. 

"  Mr,  H.  replied  that  the  matter  ought  to  be  investigated  at  once. 
"  A  meeting  was  accordingly  called,  professedly  for  that  purpose.     There  were  but  few 
persons  present,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  organized,  Scott  professed  to  pass  into  the  '  superior 
or  clairvoyant  state,' and  said,  'We'  —  himself  and  his  particular  friends  —  'must  stand 
firm,  and  say  nothing  unless  the  enemy  makes  the  attack.' 

"  And  thus  ended  the  investigation  into  the  charges  of  licentiousness  against  Mr.  Scott. 
Those  who  had  first  made  the  charge  continued  it,  but  no  other  '  investigation '  was  ever 
instituted. 

"  Strife  and  dissenaon  continued  from  that  time  to  distract  the  'harmonious  mount.'  In 
February,  1852,  the  plantation  orig^ally  purchased  was  returned  to  the  person  from  whom 
it  was  bought,  as  the  payments  on  it  couul  not  be  met.  At  this  time  several  families  left 
the  place  on  account  of  the  contention  and  wajit  of  confidence  that  prevailed  in  the  move- 
ment. In  this  emergency  a  meeting  was  called,  and  Scott  passing  into  the  'superior  state,' 
gave  the  following  communication  ;  '  James  must  go  to  New  -York  to  seek  new  minds  to 
carry  on  the  Lord's  work.'     The  'James,'  of  course,  was  himself. 

"  In  adcordance  with  his  own  direction,  he  went  to  the  city  of  New  York,  and  with  the 
[dd  of  Rev.  Thomas  L.  Harris,  succeeded  in  inducing  several  persons  of  property  to  engage 
in  the  enterprise.  Being  Ihns  provided  with  funds,  Scott  returned  and  re-purchased  the 
Cove  property,  which  they  had  surrendered  in  February.  About  the  first  of  May,  1S52, 
Thomas  L.  Harris  and  family,  and  several  other  families,  arrived  at  the  '  New  Jerusalem. '  It 
should  be  mentioned,  that  as  soon  as  Scott  returned  from  New  York,  he  resumed  all  his 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM. 

ibitrary  authority,  df 
e  ;uid  plummet,*  2Jid  tho^  that  did  uot 

"This  latter  oommand  was  carr   d    ut 
away.      On  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Ha 
commenced. 

"It  was  announced  that  Scott  ai  d  H  w         the  chosen  mediums,' through  which 

'  the  Lord  would  communicate  to  m  n  ar  h         d  that  all  other  mediums  would  be 

silenced,  or  become  the  channels  of      mm  n     t       f  r  deceptive  and  lying  spirits.      Thus, 
they  claimed  for  themselves  infallibd  y      d    t     th    bsolute,  direct  from  heaven." 

"  In  proof  of  this,  a  letter  was  sent  t  th  till  nfiding  circle  of  believers  at  Auburn, 
from  which  the  following  passages  may  be  taken  as  illustrative  of  the  enormous  claims  set 
up  by  these  '  divinely-inspired  mediums  of  the  Lord.'  After  detailing  in  the  usual  inflated 
style  the  growth  and  procedure  of  the  'Apostolic  Circle'  in  its  initial  steps,  the  pastoral 
epistle  goes  on  to  say  : 

"  '  In  these,  our  dictated  and  recognized  records,*  James  L.  Scott  and  Thomas  L.  Harris 
are  styled  'vehicles  of  inspiration,'  provided  for  the  trajismission  of  truth  from  heaven  to 
the  external  world.  It  is  also  written  therein  that  these  vehicles  were  specially  provided  and 
prepared  for  this  end,  and  that  the  apostles,  martyrs,  and  confessors,  tog;etner  with  the 
prophets,  patriarchs,  and  seers,  lifted  supplication  for  inspiration  to  pervade  the  chosen 
vehicles  j  that  thdr  prayers  received  response  loud  from  the  angelic  messengers ;  that  the 
glory  of  God  filled  the  sanctuary,  and  that  the  voice  of  the  Lord  Creator  was  audible 
therein  and  gave  answer  favoring  the  supplication. 

"  'Thus  be  it  known,  a  further  commission  was  given  unto  the  mortals  aforesaid,  consti- 
tuting them  in  unity  as  the  organ  of  inspired  communication  from  the  celestial  sphere.  In 
order  that  this  their  work  might  be  accomplished,  their  minds  were  blended  by  supernatural 
influence,  and  thus  made  one  adapted  vehicle  for  transmission  of  truth  absolute,  and  light, 
in  confirmation  and  exposition  of  truth  previoudj  revealed  from  heaven  to  man.'  " 

[A  vast  deal  more  of  a  similar  nature  follows,  which  it  would  be  equally 
lepujisive  and  unnecessary  to  reprint.     The  message  ends  thus.] 

"  Having  thus  guided  the  vehicles  of  communication  to  the  place  directed  by  His  most 
holy  will  and  united  them  thereupon,  the  spirit  who  desu-eth  and  establisheth  the  redeem- 
ing procedure,  issueth  commandment  unto  us.  His  messengers,  to  resume  '  the  Disclosures' 
of  his  truth  without  delay,  that  His  name  may  thereby  be  glorified,  His  people  instructed 
and  comforted,  and  His  compassionate  and  loving  kindness,  in  accordance  with  the  purpose 
in  the  consummation  of  His  procedure,  be  manifest  unto  the  earth  and  the  inhabitants 
thereof." 

Of  the  communications  whereby  "  the  Lord's  people  "  were  to  be  so  spe- 
cially "  instructed  and  comforted,"  the  following  sentences,  spoken,  of  course, 
in  the  "interior  condition,"  by  Scott,  may  be  taken  as  a  specimen. 

"I  read  written  in  letters  of  fire,  'Dost  thou  believe?  and  what  dost  thou  believe?  Who, 
thinltest  thou,  called  thee  here  ?  Who  mspireth  ?  Not  an  angel,  for  he  is  led ;  not  a  seraph, 
for  he  is  controlled ;  not  created  existence,  for  that  is  inspired.     Who,  then,  thinkest  thon, 

called  thee  to  the  mountain  ?    Who  but  God  inspirelh I  am  that  I  am 

now  inquireth  of  thee ;  and  prepare  to  answer  thou  me None  other 

than  God,  thy  Redeemer,  calleth  for  thee.'  None  other  than  He  who  Irath  the  keys  of  death 
and  hell  addresscth  you  through  one  of  your  members." 

And  in  pursuance  of  this  claim  —  to  which,  as  the  reader  will  perceive, 
Moses*  claim  of  direct  personal  intercourse  with  the  Jewish  Jehovah  was 
humility  itself — Mr.  Scott  soon  after  called  upon  his  followers  to  yield  up  all 
pecuniary  interest  in  their  own  possessions  to  him,  which  command  he  issued 
"n  a  general  address  "to  Spiritualists  everywhere,"  of  which  the  following  is 
an  extract : 

Hosted  by  Google 

212  HISTORY  OF  MODEK!^ 

"  But  wliilo  spirits  operate  from  tlie  interior,  man  in  clay  demandelli  external  benefil, 
and  God  supplieth,  by  laws  operating  externally  and  external  means  conducted  by  extern^ 
stewards,  chosen  for  external  purposes.  He  hath,  therefore  afoieCime  commiCC^  to  your 
charge,  as  his  stewards,  the  means  designed  to  be  employed  while  conducting  the  extenuil  in 
the  manifestation  unto  its  consummation.  And  lo  !  now  he  cometh  and  calleth  npon  you, 
and  requireth  the  charge  committed  with  its  improvement.  [To  wit,  principal  and  interest. 
— Author.]  Who  so  hath  and  now  eonsecrateth  to  this  great  work,  to  Mm  shall  be 
given,  and  he  shall  have  more  in  abundance.  To  him  who  boldeth  in  his  hands  the  gifts  of 
&od,  and  hath  not  occupied  for  His  glory,  and  is  wanting  in  disposition  to  render  back  to 
the  author  of  all  blesang,  from  him  shall  be  taken  even  that  which  he  hath ;  for  the  earth  and 
the  substance  thereof  is  Che  Lord's,  and  in  the  redemption  He  establishes  therein  His  Icing- 

m  ;  hence  his  will  shall  be  done  on  earth,  as  by  angels  in  heaven.     Come,  then,  I 

luntain  withthy  substance;  give  it  to  the  Lord,  w"" "  --"--'    '—   ■■---  ■  '--  ■- 

videth  a  feast  of  jat  things  which  shall  be  ui 

mountain  withthy  substance ;  give  it  to  the  Lord,  who  calleth  for  thee  I  for  he  now  pro- 

Among  Other  specimens  of  this  movement  put  forth  by  the  leaders,  we  have 
in  our  possession  a  paper  called  the  Mountain  Cove  Journal,  but  as  its  col- 
umns are  simply  reiterations  of  the  claims  alleged  above,  sermons  to  the  same 
purpose  by  Harris,  and  bulletins  issued  direct  from  the  high  empyrean  courts 
of  Heaven,  by  Scott,  it  would  be  simply  a  repetition  of  an  already  disgusting 
theme  to  reprint  them.  We  conclude  our  notice  of  the  Mountain  Cove  drama 
by  a  further  quotation  from  Mr.  Capron's  informant,  and  one  of  the  partici- 
pators in  the  scenes  he  so  graphically  describes.     Mr.  H.  says: 

"  Mr.  Harris  frequently  declared  that  the  house  which  he  and  Scott  inhab- 
ited -wa.?,  the  house  of  God,  while  Mountain  Cove  ■v^z.'i  the  gate  of  Heaven  ;  that 
the  redemption  of  man  on  earth  would  commence  there,  and  all  who  opposed 
them,  "  the  two  perfect  prophets,"  would  be  driven  from  the  mountain,  from 
which  there  would  be  no  redemption.  Some  time  during  the  summer  of  1852, 
it  was  declared  that  the  spirits,  through  Scott  and  Harris,  had  announced  to 
"the  faithful"  that  a  certain  piece  of  land  within  a  boundary  which  contained 
the  Cove  buildings  must  be  leased  to  the  Lord  as  his  heritage.  Accordingly, 
"the  faithful"  assembled,  and  the  spirits,  through  the  two  prophets,  directed 
the  lease  to  be  made  out  in  their  names,  as  the  "Lord's  chosen  vessels,"  a 
command  that  was  obeyed  accordingly. 

The  Lord  and  his  chosen  ones  being  secured  in  their  lease,  a  series  of  per- 
secutions were  commenced  against  all  who  in  any  way  rebelled  from  the 
authority  of  the  "two  perfect  mediums."  Slander,  discord,  and  conten- 
tion were  rife,  and  peace  and  harmony  were  unknown  among  the  chosen 
people. 

In  the  fall  of  1852,  Scott  and  Harris  had  proclaimed  that  they  were  the  two 
witnesses  named  in  die  tenth  chapter  of  Revelations,  and  that  tiiey  possessed 
die  powers,  to  their  fullest  extent,  spoken  of  therein.  Strange  as  it  may  appear, 
they  found  adherents  and  firm  believers  in  this  declaration ;  persons  who  were 
kept  in  awe  by  these  self-appointed  saints  and  their  constant  assertion  of  their 
own  divine  authority.  In  one  of  his  prayers,  uttered  about  this  time,  Harris 
said :  "  Oh  Lord,  thou  knowest  we  do  not  ■wish  to  destroy  man  luith  fire  from 
our  mouths!"  etc 

The  state  of  discord  continuing  to  increase  into  a  perfect  pandemonium, 
and  one  after  anodier  becoming  more  and  more  disgusted  with  the  arbitrary 
assumption  of  divine  power  and  holiness  on  the  part  of  the  dictators,  many 
departed  and  left  the  Cove  to  the  most  fanatical,  but  finally  the  whole  move- 
ment entirely  dispersed This  history  adds  another  to  the  wild 

and  numerous  schemes  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  religious  fanaticism,  and  bom 
of  the  spiritual  excitement,  which  was  made  a  convenient  hobby  for  men  who 
graduated  through  the  old  forms  of  theological  mysticism,  until  there  was 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  2i3 

nothing  new  in  the  field  to  feed  their  ambition  but  a  pretence  to  special  calls 
and  special  inspiration." 

Thus  ended  the  "  Mountain  Cove  movement,"  but  unfortunately  the  spirit 
that  gave  it  birth  was  still  in  active  existence. 

The  love  of  rule  and  the  insane  desire  for  spiritual  distinction  seem  to  surpass 
in  greed  all  other  forms  of  human  ambirion.  Whether  it  be  that  men  really 
deem  the  divine  government,  whose  empire  they  audaciously  assume,  is  strictly 
impersonal,  or  too  far  off  to  interfere  with  them,  or  that  they  can  actually  psy- 
chologize themselves  into  a  belief  in  the  reality  of  the  claims  they  arrogate, 
it  would  be  difficult  to  decide,  but  certain  it  is  that  the  demon  of  ambition 
which  had  vented  its  arrogance  at  Mountain  Cove  could  not  be  laid  by  a  single 
failure, 

Mr.  Thomas  L.  Harris  returned  to  the  world  to  run  a  mingled  career  of 
supra-mundane  usefulness  and  sub-mundane  folly,  which  the  spirits  that  held 
sway  at  Mountain  Cove,  alone  could  have  been  the  authors  of.  For  two  or 
three  years  after  the  above  episode,  the  disgrace  which  it  entailed  on  the  name 
of  Spiritualism  was  temporarily  obliterated  by  the  bnlliant  evidences  of  spirit- 
power  which  Mr.  Harris  manifested  in  the  improvisition  of  his  wonderful 
poems,  "A  Lyric  of  the  Golden  Age,"  "An  Epic  of  the  Starry  Heavens," 
"The  Morning  Land,"  etc. 

■In  these,  as  in  other  minor  poetical  productions,  Mr  Hams  claimed  that 
the  spirits  of  Byron,  Keats,  Shelley,  Coleridge,  Pollock,  and  other  celebrated 
poets  were  his  inspuing  genii.  He  not  only  ated  their  names  and  assigned 
various  portions  of  his  works  to  their  authorship,  but  compelled  from  the 
grudging  pen  of  his  critics  unqualified  admissions  of  the  stnkmg  similarity  of 
style  observed  in  the  poems  to  their  renowned  spiritual  authors,  while  many 
acknowledgments  were  made  that  these  magnificent  poetical  marvels  were 
fully  worthy  of  any  names,  however  illustrious,  or  any  authorship,  however 
honored. 

Meantime  these  efforts  of  genius  were  poured  forth,  wholly  impromptu,  in 
the  presence  of  many  witnesses  and  under  circumstances  that  could  leave  no 
doubt  of  their  supra^mundane  origin. 

Besides  these  tokens  of  spiritual  control,  Mr.  Harris  frequently  acted  as  a 
test  medium,  giving  communications  to  strangers,  and  describing  spirits  with 
an  accuracy  which  left  no  doubt  of  their  identity. 

And  yet,  after  thus  lending  himself  to  the  propagation  of  the  spiritual  faith 
with  unwearied  assiduity  and  an  amount  of  mediumistic  power  which  amply 
qualified  him  for  a  successful  propagandist,  we  find  him  again  assuming  the 
airs  of  apostolic  leadership.  Separating  himself  from  the  Society  of  Spiritual- 
ists meeting  at  Dodworth's  Hall,  New  York,  by  whom  he  had  been  often 
acceptably  employed  as  a  speaker,  when  they  would  not  avail  themselves  of 
his  services  as  their  permanent  ruler,  Mr.  Harris  proceeded  to  draft  off  a  few 
attached  followers  into  what  he  called  a  "New  Brotherhood,"  a  "Sacred  Fam- 
ily," etc. ;  titles. by  which  he  dignified  certain  little  gatherings  of  persons 
devoted  to  his  opinions,  whom  he  attempted  to  conti^ol  on  the  Mountain 
Cove  plan. 

Mr.  Harris's  fine  mediumship,  wonderful  poetical  improvisations,  and  former 
devoted  advocacy  of  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  unquestionably  identified  him 
at  one'  time  with  that  faith  and  its  adherents  in  America ;  hence  the  belief  still 
exists  among  many  persons,  especially  in  Europe,  that  he  yet  represents  tlie 
Spiritualism  of  America,  and  that  his  somewhat  eccentric  proceedings  are  due 
to  the  peculiarities  of  that  faith.  In  justice  to  the  cause  of  truth,  it  is  proper 
to  state  that  when  Mr,  Harris  found  that  the  Spiritualists  meetmg  at  Dod- 

Hosted  by  Google 

214  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

worth's  Hall,  New  York,  repudiated  his  pretensions  to  leadership,  and  his 
attempt  to  usurp  authority  was  met  by  a  public  rebuke  from  an  honored  mem- 
ber of  the  committee  who  employed  him,  he  immediately  felt  the  necessity  of 
severing  his  connection  with  that  "profene"  and  "infidelic"  body,  and  bitterly 
denouncing  the  "falses"  of  their  faith;  whereupon  he  gathered  together  a  lit- 
tle handful  of  "the  faithful,"  to  whom,  in  his  own  exclusive  meetings,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  pour  forth  torrents  of  abuse  against  the  society  in  whose  behalf  he 
had  before  been  a  zealous  worker. 

This  separation  occurred  in  the  winter  of  1858-9,  shortly  after  which  Mr. 
Harris,  now  the  professed  champion  of  "  Christianity"  versus  "  Spiritualistic 
Pantheism,"  published  a.  poem  called  the  "  Song  of  Satan,"  an  epic  of  so 
shocking  and  repulsive  a  character  that  even  many  of  his  best  friends  were 
obliged  to  credit  its  inspiration  to  the  source  which  the  title  so  candidly 
claimed  for  it.  In  this  truly  Satanic  production,  the  author  assumes  that  all 
the  spirits  that  come  to  earth  to  communicate  to  men  save  only  the  celes- 
tials who  visit  the  "Sacred  Family"  and  their  leader,  are  "demons"  in  the 
worst  sense  of  the  word.  These  "demons"  he  represents  as  personating 
the  spirit  of  the  poets,  whom  he  formerly  claimed  had  inspired  his  charming 
epics. 

Thus,  the  name  of  the  honored  dead,  no  less  than  others  too  sacred  to  be 
mentioned  in  such  a  connection,  are  mixed  up  in  his  dark  and  evil  imaginings 
tmtil  he  scruples  not  to  represent  himself,  in  the  only  really  honorable  and 
useful  portion  of  his  career,  as  the  agent  or  medium  of  "infemals,"  for  the 
sake  of  stigmatizing  every  other  spirit  medium  in  the  same  detestable  cate- 
gory. All  these  preceedings  he  brought  to  a  climax  by  announcing  to  his 
very  little  flock  at  New  York  that  he  had  been  "  intromitted "  into  some 
supernal  degree,  which  obliged  him  to  visit  England,  in  which  place  he 
poured  out  to  the  astonished  ears  of  the  English  Spiritualists,  not  thoroughly 
informed  on  the  politics  and  personages  of  American  Spiritualism,  such  a 
tide  of  abuse  against  his  former  associates,  occupations,  and  spirit-guides, 
that  the  prejudice  thus  raised  in  a  position  where  it  could  not  be  met  and 
conquered,  has  never  been  fully  eradicated  from  the  minds  of  the  Anglican 
Spiritualists.  The  chief  advantage  resulting  from  this  coup  d'etat  of  the  great 
self-appointed  apostle,  may  be  Ibund  in  the  simple,  manly,  and  to  this  day, 
incontrovertable  statement  wherewith  Mr.  Charles  Partridge  met  and 
answered  the  ex-spirit-medium's  charges  against  American  Spiritualism  and 
American  Spiritualists. 

We  shall  quote  Mr.  Partridge's  paper  verbatim,  as  it  gives  an  interior  view 
of  a  strange  and  anomalous  life,  the  darker  hues  of  wiiich  the  world  has  unscru- 
pulously attributed  to  the  influence  of  Spirituahsm.  Perhaps  a  careful  peru- 
sal of  the  following  article  may  reverse  the  picture,  and  show  how  much  the 
noble  cause  of  Spintuahsm  has  to  endure,  from  the  "  demonic  "  characteristics 
of  man,  when  he  is  impelled  by  his  own  human  promptings  to  use  that  cause 
as  a  hobby  to  move  the  chariot  of  his  own  ambitious  cravings  for  spuitmd 
leadership  and  distinction. 

SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH— NEW  YORK,  FEBRUARV  18,  iBiio. 

"Ifall  persons  who  have  heard  or  may  hear  Brother  Harris,  and  if  those  who  have  read 
the  above  article,*  and  others  of  like  character  which  may  be  published,  knew  the  pecnliari- 
ties  of  Mr,  H,  as  well  as  those  do  who  have  been  most  intimate  with  him  during  the  last  fif- 
teen years,  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  make  any  reply  to  his  unsparing  denunciation  of  aU 

•  Mr.  Hums*  HriDOn,  preached  ia  Londan,  England,  on  American  Spiritualism,  republished  in  [ha 
Sftntimll-elfgratA.iitwiYmk. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  215 

those  who  do  not  accept  him  as  their  oracle,  and  labor  to  help  hun  magnify  his  assumed 
office.  But  those  unlaniiliar  with  hun,  do  not  know  his  weaknesses ;  besides,  he  goes  out 
from  us  to  a  foreign  land  under  the  indgnia  of  a  Rsiierend,  and  to  (lie  brethren  and 
friends  of  the  same  general  cause,  denounces  t^  wholesale  the  great  body  of  Spiritudists 
in  America  as  '  Pantheists,'  rqectmg  aiike  the  ideas  of  Scripture  as  a  divine  revelation,  and 
the  existence  of  God,  and  as  grofs  sensaalists,  and  immoral  in  their  conduct  m  all  relations 
of  life.  These  are  grave  charges  ;  and  it  is  not  lo  be  supposed  that  a.  brother  would  prefer 
them  in  a  foreign  land  without  a  cause.     What  then  is  the  cause  ? 

"  If  the  charges  were  true  even,  it  is  contrary  to  the  genius  of  the  new  dispensation  to 
magnify  human  delinquencies  to  the  neighbor  and  much  more  to  do  this  in  a  foreign  land, 
where  there  is  little  or  no  opportunity  for  tlie  accused  to  be  heard  in  defence.  But  the 
great  body  of  Spiritualists  in  America  deny  severally  and  singly  the  charges  preferred 
against  them  by  Mr.  Harris. 

"  Each  one  claims  for  himself  the  same  light  to  investigate  and  determine  whether  the 
Scriptures  are  partial  or  plenary  revelations  of  Divine  truth,  which  Mr.  Harris  has  exer- 
cised for  himself;  but  th^  do  not  recognize  Mr.  Harris's  right  to  dictate  for  their  accep- 
tance his  peculiar  views  of  Divine  truth,  and  here  is  the  rock  of  offence,  and  the  sole  ground 
of  his  charges. 

"The  Spiritualists'  creed,  if  they  have  any,  respecting  the  Divine  rights  and  duties  of  man 
as  to  faith,  knowledge,  and  conduct,  is  that  each  person  shall  be  permitted  to  observe, 
experience,  reflect,  reason,  and  judge  for  himself. 

"Truth,  rather  than  man,  is  theu'  oracle.  We  can  conceive  of  no  objection,  to  this,  save 
by  those  aspiring  to  be  oracles. 

"  Spiritualists  of  America  have  no  mquisilion  to  try  men's  faith  and  conduct  by ;  but 
each  person  who  claims  to  believe  that  spirits  communicate  with  mortals  is  by  common 
consent  a  Spiritualist.  Consequently  there  may  be  Spiritualists  who  are  Pantheists  and 
sensualists,  and  so,  perhaps  there  may  be  some  persons  who  do  not  believe  in  Divine  revela- 
tion exactly  as  Brother  Harris  teaches ;  but  what  authority  does  a  man  derive  from  these 
facts  to  denounce  Che  great  body  of  Spiritualists  in  America  as  Pantheists,  sensualists,  and 
rejectors  of  Divme  revelation  ? 

"  The  great  body  of  Spiritualists  in  America  has  many  members,  some  of  whom  saw 
great  lights  and  heard  spuit  voices  whilst  persecuting  the  faith.  The  balm  of  the  new  dis- 
pensation has  done  much  for  the  restoration  of  wounded  minds  and  consciences,  and  if  it 
has  not  yet  had  time  to  make  them  all  perfect,  it  is  hopeful  to  accomplish  much  in  the  way 
of  doing  so.  But  Brother  Harris's  accusations  against  Spiritualists  are  but  a  duplicate  of 
those  he  preferred  ag^st  the  Universalist  denomination,  to  which  he  is  indebted  for  the 
insignia  of  'Reverend,'  which  he  now  uses  to  sanctify  his  denunciations  of  both  Wths. 

"  While  Brotlier  Harris  was  settled  over  the  Universalist  Society  in  Elizabeth  street,  ia 
this  city,  some  fourteen  years  ago,  he  became  infatuated  with  the  revelations  which  were  just 
then  being  given  through  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  and  when  these  were  published  mider  the 
title  of  '  Nature's  Divine  Revelations,'  Mr.  Harris  asked  leave  of  his  society  to  go  to 
Europe  for  his  health,  which  bemg  generously  granted  by  the  society,  Mr.  Harris,  instead 
of  going  to  Europe,  went  to  this  and  other  western  States  lecturing,  not  for  the  '  Divine 
Revelations'  of  the  Bible,  but  for  those  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis.  The  society  continued 
their  leave  of  absence,  settling  Rev.  E.  H.  Chapm  in  place  of  Mr.  Harris.  After  a  time, 
the  latter  relinquished  his  ardor  for  '  Nature's  Divine  Revelations,'  and  has  since  denounced 
its  author  as  cordially  as  he  did  the  Universalists  and  Spiritualists. 

"Brother  Harris  subsequently  tried  to  build  up  a  society  to  sustain  his  preaching  in  this 
city.  He  preached  in  the  Socialists  and  afterwards  preached  them  out;  and  his  erratic 
preaching  caused  a  constant  change  of  hearers,  and  the  meetings  were  not  sustained. 

"He  Bobsequenlly  commenced  preaching  in  the  Stuyvesant  Institute,  and  while  laboring 
there  endeavored  to  show  the  possibility  of  ^irit  intercourse.  During  this  time  one  Dr. 
Scott,  a  Baptist  minister,  discovering  that  ^gular  phenomena  occurred  in  the  presence  of 
a  Mrs.  Benedict,  of  Auburn,  New  York,  concluded  that  lie  had  evidence  that  St.  Paul  com- 
municated through  her  tappings, 

"  The  idea  that  St.  Paul  would  and  could  condescend  to  speali  through  a  mortal  much 
excited  Mr.  Harris,  and  arrangements  were  made  forMrs.  Benedict  and  Dr.  Scott  to  coine 
to  Mr.  Harris's  boarding-place  at  Brooklyn,  and  deliver  the  oracles  of  St.  Paul  to  twelve 
chosen  persons,  and  if  possible  develop  or  remodel  Mr.  Harris,  so  that  henceforth  he  should 
be  Paul  s  oracle  to  the  world.  Dr.  Scott  also  became  infatuated  with  the  ambition  of  being 
a  medium  for  some  of  the  apostles,  and  fancied  that  he  was  accepted  by  St.  John,  and 
henceforth  they  supposed  that  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  communicated  through  them. 

"It  would  make  this  article  too  lengthy  to  give  the  minutiie  of  the  dramatic  performances 
to  which  these  men  subjected  themselves  to  secure  these  mediatori^  offices. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

"^  HISTORY  OF  MODERN- 

"  It  is  sufficient  to  say  tliat  they  worked  ihemselves  into  Ihe  peftuasion  that  thev  had 
been  chosen  by  God,  Christ,  and  the  Aposlies,  as  the  medinms  of  their  oracles  to  mankind 
and,  under  the  flattering  unction  of  this  persuasion,  they  ^t  about  gathetmg  the  elect,  and 
travelling  westward  to  a  land  sufficiently  pure  for  the  influx  and  efflux  of  Divine  wisdom, 

"  They  mduced  a  small  company  to  take  up  their  beds  and  foUow  them  to  Mountain 
Cove,  Viiginia,  where  they  made  purchases  and  settled.  * 

"Here  they  esta,bli5hed  the  Mountain  Cove  yournal,  and  through  its  columns  they  gave, 
as  they  supposed,  snpemal  wisdom  of  'God,  Christ,  aad  the  Apostles'  to  the  world  ■  and 
It  was  very  generaUy  conceded  that  it  might  be 'supernal  wisdom,'  since  no  mortal  could 
comprehend  it.  In  about  two  years,  we  believe,  this  community  broke  up  in  great  confu- 
sion,  amidst  the  criminations  and  recrimmations  which  have  generally  attended  the  various 
changes  of  Brother  Harris's  visions  and  enterprises. 

"Mr.  Harris  then  returned  to  New  York,  and  the  Spiritualists  received  him  as  it  be- 
S?"^*.'^*''*,'"  "  "■fwei'^'e  a  prodigal  son,  and  mvited  hhn  to  lectnre  for  them  m  Medical 
HaU,  which  they  procured  for  that  purpose.  Here  Brother  Harris  delivered  some  of  the 
most  scorching  discourses  on  the  Scriptures  as  a  Divine  revelation,  and  the  Christian  Church 
generally,  that  we  have  ever  listened  to.  They  were  even  too  strong  for  those  whom  he 
now  denounces  as  rqectmg  the  Scriptures  as  a  divme  revelation.  Nevertheless,  we  heard 
him  gladly,  not  as  an  oracle,  and  not  for  his  censoriousness,  but  for  his  acknowledged  elo- 
quence and  zeal  m  what  he  appeared  to  think  right, 

"After  a  few  months  had  elapsed,  and  the  mortification  of  his  Mountain  Cove  apostolic 
failure  had_  Subsided,  he  seemed  to  come  more  and  more  to  himself,  and  preached  some 
excellent  discourses  to  the  Spiritualists  at  Dodworth's  HalL  Finally,  his  prewulmg  ambi- 
"°?.'°  haveachurch  bfgan  to  pester  him,  and  grew  into  an  open  demand,  to  which  the 
bpintuahsts  did  not  accede,  when  the  Mountab  Cove  spirit  again  took  control  of  him  and 
he  concluded  that  the  love  and  wisdom  of  God  and  Christ  weie  not  permitted  to  penetrate 
the  cloud  of  evil  sphits,  and  flow  down,  even  through  him,  to  the  reprobate  minds,  as  he 
aUeged  them  to  be,  which  congregated  to  hear  him  in  that  place. 

"  This  he  ssdd  to  them,  m  some  of  his  last  discourses,  in  the  plainest  terms  and  at  the 
same  time  he  called  upon  the  few  pure  minds  to  go  out,  follow  him,  and  help  to  build  np 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Brother  Harris  and  some  others  then  separated  themselves  from  the 
main  body  of  Spiritualists  in  this  city,  and  they  afterward  met  in  the  chapel  of  the  Univer- 
sity, under  the  assumed  inagnia  of  the  Swedenborgians,  namely,  "  The  New  Church  ;"  and 
m  his  teaching  he  even  out-Swedenborgd  Swedenboig  himself,  much  lo  the  annoyance  of 
many  of  his  disciples,  who  feigned  to  know  something  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Swedish  seer 
before.  He  continued  to  speak  here  to  a  small  company  of  admirers,  until  he  became 
persuaded— and  so  said  —  that  he  had  been  developed  above  their  plane  of  comprehension, 
and  that  the  Lord  had  prepared  a  man  to  receive  the  mantle  of  that  plane  of  teiching,  and 
that  lie  had  been  mstructed  to  soar  aloft,  go  to  Europe,  and  disseminate  '  supernal  wisdom  ■ 

"Subsequent  to  the  thne  when  he  withdrew  himself  from  Dodworth's  Academy  he 
formed  the  persuasion  that  the  higher  sphits  were  constantly  trying  to  ward  off  the  evil 
ones,  and  that  they  WCTe  trying  to  develop  him  into  a  higher  plane,  for  which  purpose  it 
was  necessary  that  he  should  keep  his  bed, 

•'  This  he  did,  eating  but  little,  and  in  bed  he  wrote,  or  rather  dictated  to  his  araanu- 
erias,  what  appeared  in  his  publications.  He  was  persuaded  that  he  acted  in  accordance 
with  tlie  dictates  of  the  apostles,  Christ,  and  God,  and  only  got  up  when  he  thought  they 
so  impressed  him,  which  was  only  on  Sundays  to  preach. 

"Thus  we  have  with  pain  and  sorrow  responded  to  the  demands  of  the  article  m  the 
London  Cs-itic,  in  civmg  a  very  brief  history  of  Mr.  Harris,  durhig  fifteen  years. 

We  have  not  done  this  to  injure  Mm,  far  from  if,  but  in  the  defence  of  truth,  and  as 
an  lUustration  of  a  prevalent  psydiical  phenomenon  which  is  often  mistaken  for  spirit 
influence,  and  to  call  Brother  Harris's  attention  to  the  changes  which  have  come  over  his 
mmd,  to  the  end  that  he  may  be  less  positive  in  his  opmion  as  to  the  divinity  of  his  persua- 
sion, and,  above  all,  to  be  less  censonons  of  the  brethren  who  are  not  willmg  to  follow  Iiim 
m  his  sudden  changes,  and  chimerical  enterprises. 

"  If  also  this  narrative  shall  sug^^t  to  his  friends  the  injury  they  do  him  by  fallinc 
mto  his  persuasion,  and  thus  bmdmg  him  more  strongly  in  psychical  chains,  we  shall  ^ 
thanklul,  Charles  Partridge." 

Hratt  o^^^e  M^f''"^^  taih"'*'^  '^  ''-'"'  "'"  "" '"""^  ^  '"^  arlKle.from  the  pen  of  Mr.  T,  S. 

tfiosc  supfJttd  by  Mr,  Capron  for  his  secession  riom  ihe^'Ho^Mlj'uma'in  :'^ndMd^"  H^S't  ™al' m" 
.^'^  .'^°t.'^L^°''^Z'":i 5?j'i=!^i'4(^""'  -""-^"""t.  ^d supplied  the flccount»hich  Mr.  Capran 

Hosted  by  Google 

■bridged,  and  fiom  which  we  hav< 

AMERICAN  SPISITUALISM.  217 

With  Mr.  Partridge's  admirable  analysis  of  a  case  whose  disorderly  psy- 
chical states  refer  to  many  others  besides  Mr,  Harris,  we  close  our  account 
of  one  of  the  earliest,  most  prominent  and  persistent  slurs  that  the  white 
standard  of  Spiritualism  has  endured  from  the  hands  of  its  own  legionaries. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Verv  early  in  the  publication  of  the  Boston  New  Era,  numerous  notices 
appeared  in  its  columns  calling  attention  to  the  writings,  lectures,  and  propa- 
gandism  generally  effected  through  the  mediumship  of  a  Mr,  John  M.  Spear, 
a  Universalist  minister,  whose  philanthropic  Hfe  had  procured  for  him  the 
title  of  the  "prisoner's  friend."  Mr.  Spear  had  distinguished  himself  in 
nearly  all  the  benevolent  but  unpopular  reforms  of  the  day.  He  had  labored 
bravely  in  the  Anti-Slavery,  Peace,  and  Temperance  movements  ;  and  the 
desire  to  'benefit  his  fellow-creatures  was  so  obvious  in  all  his  public  ef- 
forts, that  this  fearless  disregard  of  popular  opinion  and  faithful  adherence  to 
what  his  own  heart  dictated  to  him  as  right,  must  be  borne  in  mind  by  those 
who  would  judge  fairly  of  a  very  remarkable,  but  ill-understood,  character. 

Mr.  Spear  was  stated  to  have  became  a  medium  for  the  exercise  of  various 
spiritual  gifts,  about  March,  1852,  from  which  time  he  devoted  himself  with 
characteristic  zeal  to  the  use  of  the  powers  which  he  possessed,  and  to  the 
dissemination  of  the  doctrines  which  he  claimed  to  have  received  from  circles 
of  "high  and  distinguished  spirits." 

A  book  entitled  "Messages  from  the  Superior  State,"  affirmed  to  have 
been  dictated  to  Mr.  Spear  by  the  spirit  of  John  Murray,  the  founder  of  the 
sect  of  Universalism,  was  his  first  public  appearance  before  the  world  as  a 
medium.  His  next  step  was  the  announcement  that,  under  the  direction  of 
a  council  of  "highly-exalted  spirits,"  he  was  to  deliver  a  series  of  public  lec- 
tures, amongst  which  were  a  number  of  essays  on  various  parts  of  the  human 
organism,  purporting  to  originate  with  the  spirit  of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Rush. 
As  these,  like  the  rest  of  Mr.  Spear's  published  books,  are  already  before  the 
world,  our  history  would  have  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  them  beyond  a  pass- 
ing notice,  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  their  author  became  prominent  in 
several  movements  whose  bearing  upon  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  liave  been 
too  marked  and  important  to  be  passed  over. 

The  first  of  these  which  challenges  notice  was  the  presentation  to  the 
world  of  what  its  originator  called  a  "new  motive  power."  It  requires  some 
familiarity  with  Mr.  Spear's  peculiar  style  and  idiosyncracies,  to  appreciate 
the  history  of  this  extraordinary  claim  ;  moreover,  as  this  gentleman's  early 
public  career  illustrates  in  a  remarkable  degree  the  results  which  grew  up  un- 
der the  hot-house  process  of  strong  magnetic  influence,  and  shows  how  the 
marvel  of  open  spirit  communion  developed  the  latent  specialties  of  excep- 
tional natures,  we  shall  antedate  our  notice  of  the  "Spear  movements"  by 

Hosted  by  Google 

2i8  JTISTORY  OF  MODERN 

presenting  some  characteristic  illustrations  of  tlieir  originator,  drawn  from  the 
published  matter  already  before  the  world  concerning  him. 

Mr.  Spear  was~  in  the  habit  of  journeying  over  the  country  as  the  spirit 
moved  him,  or,  as  he  himself  affinned,  at  the  conunand  or  direction  of  spirits, 
to  whom  he  professed  himself  willing  to  render  a  childlike  and  nnquestioning 
obedience.  In  thus  narrating  the  acts  of  individuals  who  have  figured  in  the 
wonderful  drama  of  which  we  write,  we  must  neither  be  understood  to  en- 
dorse, nor  yet  to  criticize  them,  and  when  we  iise  the  term  "the  spirits  "  in 
connection  with  the  affinDation  of  human  mediums  who  profess  to  be  acting 
wholly  under  their  influence,  we  do  so  in  deference  to  the  faith  of  the  parties 
themselves,  rather  than  to  any  disposition  to  label  everything  as  "  spiritual" 
which  claims  such  an  origin. 

Tliat  Mr.  Spear  honestly  believed  in  a  spiritual  origin  for  the  various 
"missions"  he  undertook,  and  the  remarkable  part  which  he  played,  none 
who  have  ever  come  intp  personal  relations  with  him  can  question.  The  un- 
wavering fidelity  with  which  he  adhered  to  his  purposes,  and  the  patience 
with  which  he  endured  reproach  and  odium  for  their  execution,  would  attest 
his  sincerity,  were  other  evidence  wanting. 

Mr,  Spear  alleged  that  in  the  prosecution  of  these  said  "  missions,"  he  could 
not  always  at  first  discern  their  object;  nevertheless,  he  firmly  believed  they 
were  "  instigatedby  the  highest  wisdom,"  and  "designed  for  the  most  benef- 
icent ends." 

Like  many  of  his  compeers,  Mr.  Spear  lived  by  faith,  trusting  for  direction 
and  also  for  financial  resources  to  the  invisible  worid,  and  maintaining  that 
the  providential  dispensations  of  the  hour  had  never  failed  him.  His  numer- 
ous imita.tors  have  rarely  been  equally  fortunate,  and  not  a  few  of  them  have 
procured  for  themselves,  by  a  too  faithful  copy  of  their  remarkable  exemplar, 
the  harsh  tide  of  "  vagrants "  and  "spiritual  mountebanks."  In  his  various 
itinerant  progresses,  Mr.  Spear  frequently  gave  satisfactory  testimony  of  spirit 
control,  by  ministering  successfully  to  the  sick,  and  effecting  cures  either  by 
the  laying  on  of  hands  or  prescribing  for  different  forms  of  disease. 

In  several  instances  he  alleged  that  he  had  been  sent  by  a  spiritual  com- 
mand to  the  houses  of  total  strangers  residing  in  unknown  and  distant  places, 
where  he  became  impressed  to  lay  his  hands  on  the  afflicted,  for  whose  bene- 
fit he  had  been  thus  "spiritually  led."  He  was  also  gifted  with  strong  psychom- 
etric power,  and  deHneated  ch^acter  with  singular  accuracy.  Amongst  other 
revelations  which  this  gentleman  alleged  to  have  recieved  from  "  on  high," 
was  that  of  the  existence  of  divers  societies  in  the  upper  spheres,  whose 
names  and  functions  he  was  especially  instructed  to  make  known  to  man- 
kind. In  connection  with  this  charge  he  nndertook,  whithersoever  his  wan- 
derings led  him,  to  "consecrate"  to  the  service  of  these  heavenly  spcieties 
sundry  mortal  assistants,  upon  whom  he  bestowed  names,  whose  very  number 
and  originality  was  not  the  least  curious  feature  of  his  mediumistic  career. 

The  earnestness  and  good  faith  with  which  these  strange  "  missions  "  were 
achieved,  and  die  not  less  memorable  character  of  the  missionaries  whom  he 
gathered  around  him,  would,  in  any  movement  less  broad  and  cosmopoHtan 
than  Spiritualism,  have  placed  Mr.  Spear  and  his  followers  in  the  position  of 
a  new  sect,  whose  eccentricity  of  names,  language,  and  opinions  would  have 
furnished  all  the  elements  required  to  separate  them  from  the  rest  of  man- 
kind. In  order  to  give  the  most  faithful  possible  representation  of  this  sin- 
gular personage  and  the  relations  which  he  alleged  to  exist  between  himself 
and  the  dwellers  of  the  spirit  country,  we  shall  here  quote  some  of  his  own 
correspondence  addressed  to  the  Boston  New  Era. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  219 

In  July,  1853,  Mr.  Spear  writes  frorii  Utica,  New  York,  as  follows  : 

"NEW  SPIRIT  ASSOCIATIONS. 

"  Brother  Hewitt,  —  We  arrived  in  this  place  on  our  journey  homeward  yesterday. 
By  spirit  direction  we  visited  Niagara  Falls  and  Rocheiter ;  at  both  these  places  our  spirit 
friends  made  important  declarations.  At  Rochester,  through  friend  Hammond  and  myself, 
it  was  declared  that  the  foUowiug  associations  had  been  recently  formed  by  spirits : 

"  First.  An  association  called  the  Association  of  Electrizers. 

"  Second.  An  association  called  the  Association  of  Healthfiilizers. 

"Third.  An  association  called  the  Association  of  Educationiiers. 

"  Fourth.   An  association  called  the  Association  of  Agriculturalizers. 

"  Fifth.  An  association  of  Elementizers. 

"Sixth,   An  association  of  Govemmentiiers. 

"The  above  associations  will  co-operate  with  the  Association  of  Beneficents,  which  was 
o^pnized  some  months  since,  and  has  begun  its  labors. 

"It  was  declared  that  these  newly.fonned  associations  would  soon  select  their  agents  to 
execute  their  schemes.  In  this  place  an  agent  has  been  selected  by  the  Association  of 
*  Agriculturalizers,'  and  the  selection  shows  great  wisdom.  He  was  given  the  name  of  the 
'  Explorer,'  aud  in  connection  with  him  was  a  Decorator.  It  was  also  declared  that 
Brother  Hammond  would  be  much  employed  by  these  assodations,  and  that  he  was  now 
the  best  mediumistic  writer  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  was  given  the  name  of  The 
Writer.  It  was,  moreover,  said  that  the  Associations  of  Govemmentiiers  and  Education- 
izers  would  be  selected  from  amongst  the  '  feminiues. ' 

"  Such  were  some  of  the  new  things  declared  at  Rochester.  Your  readers  will  quietly 
wait,  I  trust,  for  the  fulfilment  of  these  things,  and  will  do  their  part  as  they  may  be 
selected  to  aid  the  newly-formed  associations. 

"Yom-s  truly,  JOHN  M.  SPEAR." 

Whether  Mr.  Spear's  followers  lacked  the  zeal  and  enthusiasm  which  ani- 
mated their  leader,  or  that  he  himself  lived,  talked,  saw,  and  felt  before 
his  time.  He  who  reads  the  secrets  of  human  hearts,  alone  can  decide  ;  cer- 
tain it  is  that  though  promises  of  the  kind  above  cited,  and  "  missions "  of 
various  use  and  spiritual  co-operation  were  freely  dealt  out  wherever  Mr. 
Spear's  indefat^able  and  earnest  purposes  led  him,  his  followers  have  ob- 
served no  part  of  his  charge  so  faithfully  as  that  of  "  waiting  quietly  "  for  the 
fulfilment  of  the  things  that  were  to  come. 

We  should  be  unfaithful  to  the  truth,  which  we  are  pledged  to  record  in 
this  history,  did  we  omit  a  description  of  those  numerous  "consecrations" 
which  Mr.  Spear  felt  impressed  to  bestow  on  various  individuals,  who,  whether 
they  realized  any  subsequent  spiritual  tmfoldings  from  such  ceremonials  or 
nol,  generally  acknowledged  an  effect  at  the  time  something  akin  to  the 
passionate  emotions  of  a  great  revival  season. 

The  particular  instance  to  which  we  call  attention  occurred  with  the  cele- 
brated clairvoyant  and  physician,  Mrs.  Semantha  Mettlcr,  to  whom  Mr. 
Spear,  yielding  as  usual  to  the  impressions  of  the  hour,  paid  a  visit,  when  the 
foUomng  scene  is  reported  in  the  New  Era  to  have  transpired: 

"  Passing  into  the  superior  state,  Mr.  Spear  enunciated  these  words : 
"  'How  fondly,  how  constantly,  how  widely,  is  this  one  [Mrs.  Mettler]  belovedl  How 
lieautiful  is  the  influence  this  woman  exerts  1  Wherever  she  is  she  attracts !  In  this  par- 
ticular she  possesses  a.  most  remarkable  character.  Her  friends  know  no  bounds  to  their 
llffections  for  this  one ;  and  there  is  nothing  which  they  would  leave  undone  to  gratify  her. 
There  passes  from  this  woman  a  very  marked  influence.  It  is  not  precisely  the  religious 
influence;  it  is  not  precisely  the  moral  influence  ;  it  is  not  precisely  the  practical  influence; 
but  it  is,  so  to  q»ak,  a  compost  of  all ;  and  these  are  charmingly  intermingled,  impartmg 
a  most  adhesive  influence. 

"  '  This  medium  [Mr.  Spear]  lias  been  commissioned  to  wisely  instruct  this  woman  for  a 
high  purpose.  There  is  before  this  woman  a  new  and  beautiful  labor.  At  ten  o'clock  to- 
morrow the  purpose  of  his  misHon  lo  this  place  will  be  unfolded.  IJet  this  woman  be  in 
tlie  region  of  the  tranquillities  at  that  hoar.  " 

Hosiedb,  Google 

B20  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

The  report  of  the  New  Era  further  goes  on  to  state,  that,  at  ten  o'clock 
the  succeeding  morning,  Mr.  Spear,  "descending  upon  bended  knee,  pro- 
nounced these  words : 

"  'Father  of  Fatliers,  and  Deity  of  Deities;  Thy  wills  be  done  on  the  earths,  as  they  are 
done  in  the  heaven  of  heavens.  This  fondly  loved  one  [Mrs.  Mettler]  shall  be  conse- 
crated to  the  charities.      Thou  shalt  henceforth  be  called  Charity. 

"'Receive  now  this  blessed  power.'  Here  Mrs.  M.'s  hand  was  closed  and  breathed 
npon,  and  when  it  was  opened,  it  was  said, — 

"  '  This  hand  shall  be  unfolded  to  dispense  blessings,'  etc 

That  these  scenes  were  deemed  to  be  pregnant  with  high  spiritual  import 
is  proved  by  the  fact  that  they  were  recorded  in  some  of  the  spiritual  jour- 
n^s  of  the  time  as  matter  of  solemn  interest,  and  commented  upon  by  the 
actors  therein,  with  terms  of  such  enthusiastic  reverence  as  significantly  tes- 
tifies to  their  sincerity. 

Let  us  here  state,  once  for  all,  that  Mr.  Spear's  peculiar  tone,  language, 
and  views  were  not  accepted  or  s)Tnpathized  in  by  any  large  class  of  Ameri- 
can Spiritualists ;  nevertheless,  they  are  representative  of  a  certain  number 
of  his  especial  admirers,  and  their  illustration,  after  their  own  fashion,  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  the  full  comprehension  of  the  results  which  followed, 
in  what  has  been  called  "  the  new  motive  power"  movement.  Considered 
as  an  isolated  fact,  what  we  are  about  to  narrate  may  seem  to  excuse  the 
opprobrious  epithets  with  which  its  founder  and  his  sympathizers  were  as- 
sailed; but  regarded  as  the  production  of  a  mind  whose  marked  idiosyncra- 
cies  became  powerfully  developed  by  the  afflatus  of  a  great  revival  season, 
and  whose  high  aspirations  and  really  reformatory  aims  were  stimulated  by 
the  influence  of  sanguine  minds  of  kindred  nature  in  the  spheres,  the  his- 
tory of  the  "new  motive  power"  may  be  regarded  as  precisely  the  sequence 
to  be  expected  from  the  temperament  of  its  human  originator.  Wc  must 
add  that  Mr.  Spear's  mind  had  evidently  been  exercised  on  the  subject  of 
combining  mineral  with  vital  electricity  as  a  means  of  developing  the  latent 
powers  of  mediumship,  and  he  had  on  more  than  one  occasion  subjected 
himself  to  the  most  scathing  ridicule  from  his  contemporaries  by  seeking  to 
promote  the  influence  and  control  of  spirits,  through  the  aid  of  copper  and 
zinc  batteries,  so  arranged  about  the  person  as  to  form  an  armor,  from  which 
he  expected  the  most  extrordinary  phenomenal  results.  An  experiment  of 
this  nature,  tried  at  St  Louis,  proved,  so  fai  as  external  effects  were  con- 
cerned, a  complete  failiue ;  hence  it  was  denounced  as  "  the  most  preposterous 
presumption  and  absurd  fanaticism."  ' 

Had  any  manifestly  successful  effects  followed  this  attempt,  die  historian 
would  have  had  a  different  record  to  make.  Mr.  Spear  would  have  been 
pronounced  by  the  Spiritualists  "  inspired,"  and  by  tiie  materialists  a  "  shrewd 
scientist" 

Success  and  failure  are  the  real  touchstones  of  public  opinion ;  yet  who 
can  say  whedier  we  are  not  more  indebted  to  the  bold  adventurer,  who  is 
willing  to  incur  the  risk  and  odium  of  failure  for  the  sake  of  possible  success, 
than  to  the  cautious  idler  who  waits  upon  the  results  of  others'  experiments 
to  determine  whether  he  shall  condemn  or  applaud  ?  After  many  consecra- 
tions, announcements,  and  premonitory  symptoms  of  some  great  and  mO' 
mentous  crisis  to  follow  Mr.  Spear's  remarkable  design,  the  one  event  in  the 
spiritual  movement,  in  fact,  with  which  his  name  is  most  prominently  associ- 
ated, namely,  the  birth  of  a  "  new  motive  power,"  was  heralded  forth  to  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  221 

world  in  the  columns  of  the  New  Era,  in  a  tone,  the  very  nature  of  which 
will  explain  why  the  whole  subject,  instead  of  commanding  the  attention  of 
the  scientitic,  only  incurred  unmixed  scorn  and  reprobation  from  all  but  its 
immediate  friends  and  projectors. 

Mr.  Spear,  as  will  hereafter  be  seen,  had  long  indulged  the  idea  of  em- 
bodying in  some  tangible  form  the  crude  conceptions  of  certain  minds  \a.o\ 
limited  to  the  earth  spheres  aloiie],  who  have  labored  to  discover  and  scien- 
tifically control  the  mystery  of  the  life  principle.  The  medium  and  his  invisi- 
ble counsellors  deemed  they  had  made  this  stupendous  discovery,  and  the 
result  upon  his  own  mind  and  that  of  his  human  coadjutors,  was  a  tone  of 
jubilant  and  premature  triumph,  which  even  from  the  firsf  arrayed  the  great 
majority  of  calm,  dispassionate  thinkers  against  the  whole  transaction. 

The  editor  of  the  New  Era,  a  gentleman  apparently  in  strong  sympathy 
with  Mr.  Spear,  announced  in  the  columns  of  his  journal  that  the  association 
of  the  "Electrizers"  in  the  spheres,  were  preparing  to  reveal  to  mankind 
a  "new  motive  power,"  "God's  last,  best  gift  to  man;"  a  work  that  was 
"destined  to  revohitionize  the  whole  world"  and  "infuse  new  life  and  vitality 
into  all  things,  animate  and  inanimate  ;"  in  a  word,  the  glowing  language  in 
which  the  "great  discovery"  was  heralded  forth  stimulated  expectation  to 
fever  heat,  and  left  little  room  to  doubt  that  a  modem  Frankenstein  had 
arisen,  who,  like  Mrs.  Shelley's  famous  student,  was  prepared  to  show  a  Hv- 
ing  organism,  created  at  the  hajid  of  its  fellow-man,  only  that  the  new  "  mo^n- 
ster"  was  a  being  of  metal  and  wood,  instead  of  flesh  and  blood  like  its 
German  prototype. 

From  time  to  time,  mysterious  hints  had  been  dropped  in  the  columns  of 
"AxtNew  Era  concerning  "this  thing"  which  was  to  "awaken  the  world  to 
wonder,"  and  at  length  it  was  announced,  in  the  terms  above  quoted,  that 
'.'high  spiritual  intelligences"  had,  through  the  organism  of  Mr.  John  M, 
Spear,  given  directions  for  the  construction  of  a  living  machine,  whose  proper- 
ties were  summed  up,  in  language  the  most  exalted  and  triumphant,  as  "a  new 
motor."  In  connection  with  the  existence  of  this  remarkable  work,  reports  of 
the  most  singular,  and,  it  must  be  confessed,  revolting  nature,  were  circulated. 
A  well-known  Boston  medium,  a  lady  of  amiable  character  and  unsullied 
reputation,  was  named  as  the  mother  of  the  "new  motor,"  and  the  most 
shocking,  though  absurd  and  impossible  stories  were  bruited  about  concern- 
ing  the  practices  by  which  "the  life  principle"  had  been  infused  into  its 
organism. 

To  the  truly  scientific,  the  only  question  was,  whether  the  life  principle  was 
actually  there,  not  how  it  got  there ;  but  the  prurient  mind,  stimulated  by  the 
awkward  and  most  injudicious  claims  of  a  human  parentage  for  a  material 
machine,  indulged  in  scandalous  and  even  atrocious  rumors,  whose  effect 
have  marked  the  parties  concerned  so  injuriously  that  it  requires  the  most  un- 
prejudiced consideration  of  the  real  facts  of  the  case  to  disrobe  it  of  its  dark 
and  obnoxious  features.  As  our  part  is  that  of  a  faidiful  as  well  as  im- 
partial historian,  and  as  we  propose  neither  to  set  up  a  defence  of,  or  attack- 
upon,  the  motives  of  the  parties  concerned,  we  shall^  confine  oiir  narrative 
chiefly  to  the  most  authentic  published  statements  which  we  can  find  on  this 
subject,  especially  to  such  as  represent,  with  equal  candor,  opposite  views  of 
the  question.  The  following  paragraphs  announcing  the  birtii  of  the  "  elec- 
trical infant,"  are  taken  from  the  columns  of  the  New  Era,  and  represent  the 
editor's  methods  of  gratulation  on  the  great  event. 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"IMPORTANT  ANNOUNCEMENT. 

"  It  is  with  no  ordinary  feelings  of  satisfaction  that  we  now  announce  to  our  readers  for 
the  first  time  the  result  of  some  peculiar  iabors  under  spirit  direction,  in  which,  in  addition  to 
those  mcident  upon  the  editorship  of  fluB  journal,  we  iiave  been  engaged  during  the  last  nine 

mon.tlls. But  now,  after  about  nine  months  of  almost  incessant  labor, 

oftentimes  under  the  greatest  difficulties,  we  are  prepared  to  announce  to  the  world,^ 

"First.  That  spirits  have  revealed  a  whoHy  new  motive  power,  to  take  the  place  of  all 
Other  motive  powers. 

"  Second.  That  this  revelation  has  been  emiiodied  in  a  model  machine  by  human  co- 
operation with  the  powers  above. 

"  Third.  That  results  are  thus  far  satisfactory  to  its  warmest  friends. 

"THE  THING  MOVES. 

"  We  may  also  say  that  we  have  the  birth  of  a  new  science,  a  new  philosophy,  and  a  new 
life.  The  time  of  deliverance  has  come  at  last,  and  henceforward  the  career  of  humanity 
is  upward  and  onward  —  a  mighty,  a  noble,  and  a  Godlike  career.  All  the  revelations  of 
Spiritualism  heretofore,  all  the  control  of  spirits  over  mortals,  and  the  instruction  and  dis- 
cipline they  have  given  us,  have  only  paved  the  way,  as  it  were,  for  the  advent  of  a  great 
practical  movement,  such  as  the  world  little  dreams  of,  though  It  has  long  deeply 
yearned  for  it  and  agonized  and  groaned  away  its  life  because  it  did  not  come  sooner.  And 
this  new  motive  power  is  to  lead  the  way  in  the  great  speedily-coming  salvation.  It  is  to 
be  the  physical  Saviour  of  the  race.  The  history  of  its  inception,  its  various  stages  of  pro- 
gress, and  its  completion,  will  show  the  world  a  most  beautiful  and  significant  analogy  to 

the  advent  of  Jesus  as  the  spiritual  Saviour  of  the  race ,.    Hence  we  most 

eoufidently  assert  that  the  advent  of  the  science  of  all  sciences,  the  philosophy  of  all  philoso- 
phies, and  the  art  of  all  arts  has  now  fairly  commenced.  The  child  is  born;  not  long  hence 
he  win  go  alone.      Then  he  will  dispute  with  the  doctors  in  the  temples  of  science  and 

Here  even  the  size  of  the  editor's  capitals  failed  him,  language  faded  into 
insignificance,  and  nothing  could  be  given  further  beyond  vague  hints  of  what 
was  to  follow  the  awful  "then"  which  broke  off  breathless  at  the  contempla- 
tion of  its  own  inexpressible  possibilities.  Besides  the  lectures —  two  hundred 
in  number  ^through  which  Mr.  Spear  had  given  directions  for  the  construc- 
tion of  the  "  new  motor,"  this  indefatigable  revelator  had  projected  plans 
for  the  building  of  a  "circular  city"  or  "perfect  earthly  home."  Houses  of 
"symmetry  and  peace,"  temples  of  art,  science,  and  worship,  were  mapped 
out,  and  elaborate  diagrams  planned,  all  of  which  were  carefully  described  and 
engraved  in  the  New  Era,  where  these  designs  were  spiritually  built,  inhab- 
ited, and  handed  down  to  such  portions  of  posterity  as  may  yet  pemse  the 
columns  of  a  paper  excellent  in  intent,  faithful  and  self-sacrificing  in  execu- 
tion, but,  like  the  minds  which  dictated  it,  far  too  much  bent  upon  the  starry 
idealities  of  a  spiritual  existence  to  realize  the  obstacles  of  a  material  one, 
and  too  much  concerned  in  the  possibilities  of  the  future  to  perceive  the  im- 
possibilities of  the  present. 

Immediately  after  the  announcement  of  the  birth  of  the  "electric  motor," 
the  columns  of  the  New  Era  were  filled  with  descriptions  of  the  mechanism, 
which,  it  seemed,  was  designed  to  correspond  to  the  human  organism  and  per- 
form the  functions  of  a  living  being.  In  the  midst  of  the  intense  excitement 
which  the  subject  created  in  Boston,  and  as  if  to  counteract  the  jubilant  tone 
of  the  New  England  spiritual  organ;  a  surly  growl  made  itself  heard  from  the 
New  York  Spiritual  Telegraph,  which,  as  representing  the  dubious  frame  of 
mind  in  which  the  great  majority  of  the  spiritualistic  ranks  regarded  the  en-  . 
thusiastic  perorations  of  the  New  Era,  we  shall  here  insert : 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  223 

"boston  and  the  east. 

"The  New  Motive  Power^Rather  Premature, 

"  In  the  New  Era  of  the  i2Ch  inst.  is  announced  by  Brother  Hewitt,  the  editor,  the  partial 
success  of  the  new  motive  power,  or  electrical  motor,  otherwise  called  perpetual  motion, 
which  is  said  to  have  been  constructed  by  the  aid  of  spirits,  through  Brother  John  M.  Spear 
and  others  as  mediums,  and  which  is  to  take  the  place  of  all  other  power,  at  least  very 
lai^ly  fordrivingship5,caj^and  all  the  endless  whirl  of  mechanical  macliinery.  The  terms 
of  enthusiasm  in  wMcn  Brother  Hewitt  aimounces  il,  might  beget  the  faith  in  its  ultimate 
i^A  compute  success.  'The  Thing  MovesI'  Yes;  but  it  ^ould  be  distinctly  stated  that  this 
refers  to  some  little  balls  connected  with  the  machine,  which  for  some  months  have  given 
evidence  of  motion.  But  the  grand  revolver  —  that  which  answers  to  the  main  wheel  of  a 
factory,  and  upon  which  all  the  executive  power  is  made  dependent  —  has  nevsr  moved  It 
has  not  started  one  bit.  What  may  take  place,  we  presume  not  to  say.  We  are  ready  for 
great  improvements  in  the  mechanic  arts  as  well  as  in  theology,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  sup- 
pose that  some  of  them  may  take  place  by  the  revelations  of  spirits.  But,  at  present,  we 
beheve  there  is  no  such  tlung  as  can  be  really  called  a  new  motive  poiaer,  of  the  character 
described  in  the  Nsvi  Era.  It  is  there —  all  but  the  power  1  Even  the  motion  of  the  main 
revolver  is  not  yet,  and  it  is  hardly  in  reason,  we  should  think,  to  proclaim  the  advent  of 
the  'phyacal  Saviour  of  the  race.'  And  yet  it  is  announced  in  capitals,  that  'The  advent 
of  (he  science  of  all  sciences — the  philosophy  of  all  philosophies,  aud  the  art  of  all  arts,  has 
now  fairly  commenced.  The  child  is  bom— not  long  hence  he  will  go  alone. '  That  re- 
mains to  be  proved.  In  the  meantime,  we  cannot  lift  the  exhortation,  '  Be  not  faithless, 
but  believing.'  Il  is  sufficient  to  say  that  a  great  deal  of  money  and  labor  have  been  ex- 
pended, and  the  machine,  whether  it  goes  or  not,  exhihits  a  ^ood  dcEd  of  philosophical  prin- 
ciple and  considerable  evidence  that  spirits  have  had  something  to  do  with  it.  We  believe 
the  earthly  parties  engaged  in  it  could  not  have  thought  of  such  a  tlung.  It  is  ancerely  to 
be  hoped  that  its  main  Thing  iw/// move,  and  move  to  some  purpose." 

After  an  immense  amount  of  curiosify,  doubt,  hope,  fear,  triumph,  and  edi- 
torial sparring,  and  whilst  very  little  of  the  real  character  of  the  subject  of  all 
this  agitation  was  known,  a  renewal  of  hostilities  was  provoked  upon  more 
assured  ground,  after  the  following  account  of  the  new  motor  machine  had 
been  extensively  circulated  through  the  columns  of  the  spiritual  press,  from 
the  pen  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis.  We  shall  only  quote  such  passages  as 
tend  to  throw  light  upon  this  mysterious  subject,  and  at  the  same  time  prove 
the  estimation  in  which  the  amiable  writer  held  the  much-abused  authors  of 
the  strange  machine. 

"THS  NEW  MOTIVE  POWER  — A.  J.  DAVIS  AT  HIGH-ROCK  COTTAGE.- 
PAPERS, 

"Boston,  June  i,  1854. 
"To  the  Editors  of  ike  Telegraph: 

"Yesterday  I  visited  High-Rock  Tower The  object  of  my  visit  was 

to  investigate  the  '  new  motive  power,'  as  developed  through  the  mediumship  of  John  M. 
Spear,  asasted  1^  the  willing  heart  and  hands  of  S.  Crosby  Hewitt,*  who,  I  understand,  is 
not  a  practical  medium,  but  rather  a  friend  and  doer  of  whatsoever  the  former  is  impressed 
to  dictate,  especially  in  reference  to  the  'new  motor,'  which  is  now  denominated  '  the 
great  sprirituid  revelation  of  the  age.' 

"  Many  persons  of  most  excellent  and  truth-loving  attributes  of  mind  really  accept  this 
mechanism  as  the  best,  dearest  ^fi  of  God  to  mankind.     ...... 

"They  invest  the  very  materialism  of  the  mechanism  with  principles  of  interpretation 
which  give  out  an  emanation  of  religious  feeling  altogether  new  in  the  development  of 
scientific  truth.  Each  wire  is  precious,  sacred,  as  a  spiritual  verso.  Each  plate  of  zinc 
and  copper  is  clothed  with  symbolized  meanings,  corresponding  throughout  with  the  prin- 
ciiJes  and  parts  involved  in  the  livmg  human  organism.  The  philosophy  given  through  Mr. 
Spear,  upon  which  the  mechanism  is  predicated,  is  this : 

"  '  First.  Tliat  there  is  a  universal  electricity. 

"  '  Second.  That  this  electricity  has  never  been  naturally  mcorporated  with  mineral  and 
other  forms  of  matter. 

*  Ths  edUor  of  Ihe  JV™  Era. 

Hosted  by  Google 

224  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

'"Third,  That  the  human  ot^anism  is  the  most  superior,  natural,  efficient  type  of  mecli- 
anism  known  on  the  eaith. 

"  '  Fourth.  That  all  merely  scientific  developments  of  electricity  as  a  motive  power  are 
Euperficial,  and  therefore  useless  or  impracticable. 

"  '  Fifth,  That  the  construction  of  a  raechanism  on  the  laws  of  man's  material  phyaol- 
ogy,  and  fed  by  atniospheric  electricity  obtamed  by  absorption  and  condensation,  and  not 
by  friction  or  galvanic  action,  will  constitute  a  new  revelation  of  scientific  and  spiritual 
truths,  because  the  plan  is  wholly  disrfmilar  to  every  human  use  of  electricity.' 

"  With  some  of  these  poations,  if  not  with  all,  the  intelligent,  unprejudiced  mmd  will 
agree.  These  proportions,  with  numerous  collateral  affirmations,  characterize  the  scientific 
discourses  of  the  medium,  Mr,  Spear.  And  whoever  has  come  mto  friendly  relations  with 
this  roan  needs  no  assurance  from  me  that  he  is  intellectually  disqualified  for  the  develop- 

■ment  of  absolute  science He  is  naturally  a  religious,  spiritually-minded, 

plain,  direct,  believing,  confiding,  simple,  honest,  philanthropic  man,  domg  good  with  all 
his  guileless  hteit,  and  standing  fearlessly  out  in  unpopular  reforms  ;  all  this,  and  more, 
even  at  the  ride  of  incurring  the  dL^leasure  of  helping  firiends,  and  bringing  himself  and 
family  to  the  very  brink  of  destitution. 

"  His  religious  nature  and  former  ministerial  profession  color  all  his  discourses;  they 
therefore  look  spiritual  and  hierophantic  His  extremely  beautiful  simplicity,  his  teachable 
and  therefore  receptive  nature,  without  the  exercise  of  a  vigilant  reason  and  practical 
estimation  of  psychological  laws,  subject  hira  to  the  terrible  misfortune  of  being  eaaly 
imposed  upon  by  his  own  impulses,  his  own  desires  and  secret  tendencies,  nustakiug  them 
at  least  two-thirda  of  the  time  for  'impressions'  from  higher  intelligences. 

"  No  one  can  for  a  moment  believe  but  that  this  medium,  John  M.  Spear,  is  phrenologi- 
cally  incapable  of  the  original  propositions  that  rest  at  the  basis  of  this  mechanism.  But 
with  idl  the  secondary  proportions  which  legitimately  grow  out  of  the  primary  ones,  I 
tMok  no  one  can  fail  to  perceive  a  mingling  of  the  mental  peculiarities  of  the  medium. 
Consequently,  on  this  head,  I  have  come  to  these  concluaons : 

"  First.  That  the  bednnings  of  these  scientific  discourses,  if  they  may  be  so  styled,  were 
imparted  to  the  mind  of  the  medium  from  the  world  of  spirits. 

"Second.  That  then  his  own  mind,  receiving,  each  time  he  enters  the  state,  the  essence 
of  the  new  thoughts  and  a  sort  of  momentum,  continues  the  sayings  in  a  style  and  spint 

corresponding  to  the  inceptive  impresaons 

"A  few  months  ago,  I  viated  this  peculiar  construction,  and  then,  by  observing  the 
progress  made,  the  principles  involved,  I  could  not  but  encourage  the  addition  of  at  least 
another  part,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  procure  the  best  resuUs.  And  it  was,  as  I  have  said, 
with  the  desire  to  obtain  the  realities,  the  merits  and  demerits,  of  this  new  motive  power, 
that  1  made  this  last  visit.  And  having  received  into  my  mind  what  I  conceive  to  be  satis- 
factory conclusions,  I  hereby  proceed  to  give  them  public  utterance,  being  replies  to  ques- 
tions repeatedly  put  to  me  respectuig  it : 

"First.  That  the  various  parts  of  this  meclianism,  both  the  wood  work  and  the  metallic, 
are  extremely  accurate,  and  so  mathematically  arranged  with  reference  to  some  ulterior 
result  or  effect,  that  no  one  can  fail  to  see  the  deagn  of  some  btelligence  superior  in 
mechanical  contrivance  to  these  faculties  in  the  head  of  John  M.  Spear. 

"  Second.  The  medium,  in  living  directions  for  this  and  that  part  to  be  added,  never 
used  'rule  and  compass,'  as  would  seem  to  have  been  the  case,  because  the  parts  are  precise 
as  to  measurement,  and,  accordmg  to  his  directions,  artistically  put  together. 

"Third.  Theoretically,  the  laws  of  poative  and  negative  electricity  are  strictly  fol- 

"  Fourth.  The  mechanism  is,  in  my  estimation,  a  demonstration  that  spirits  have  com- 
municated to  mankind.     I  think  we  can  find  nowhere  any  better  evidence. 

"  These  are  the  merits  of  the  matter  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  demerits  are : 

"  First.  That  the  progressive  construction,  the  private  history,  so  to  speak,  of  this  mech- 
anism, the  manner  pursued,  by  which,  from  time  to  time,  one  part  has  been  added  after  and 
to  another,  proves  the  whole  work  to  be  essentially  experimental,  conducted  very  honestly, 
and  at  Friend  Spear's  expense,  by  several  persons  in  the  other  world,  who,  doubtless,  have 
the  correct  philosophy  of  the  development  of  the  new  motive  power,  but  who  are  deficient 
m  the  practical  knowledge  of  the  means  to  consnmmate  its  aclualiiation. 

"  Second.  Another  demerit  is,  that  although  the  positive  and  negative,  the  male  and 
female,  laws  of  nature  are  very  truthfully  divulged  and  prescribed,  theoretically,  as  the 
only  '  rule  of  faith  and  practice '  in  the  elaboration  of  this  mechanism,  yet,  practically,  as 
every  student  of  nature  will  perceive,  the  adjustment  of  the  poles,  magnefs,  zinc,  and  cop- 
per plates,  etc.,  are  by  no  means  in  physical  harmony  with  these  laws. 

"Third.  Another  demerit  is,  that  the  'motion'  said  to  have  appeared  in  the  small  ei- 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  225 

tremides  or  pulses  of  the  mechanism  was  merely  phenomenal  and  temporary,  owm",  simply, 
to  the  centrifugiJ  escape  of  electricity  from  the  rapidly-oxidizing  surfaces. 

"  Fourth.  And  there  has  been  an  attempt  to  infuse  human  vitality  into  the  mineral  sub- 
stances, on  the  rehgions  theory  of  tlie  'miraculous  conception,'  for  which,  however  the 
spirits  have  divulged  wha,t  is  conadered  a  natural  explaniition.  ■ 

"Fifth.  Another  demerit  is,  Hiat,  suppotjng  the  maximum  'motion 'obtained,  even  then 
—no  matter  how  ^nttc  in  si?e  the  mechanism  might  be  — it  would  not  move  any  addi- 
tional weight,  nor  dnve  the  wheels  of  a  carriage  or  a  mill. 

_  "Sixth.  It  has  already  cost  nearly  two  thousand  dollars,  occupying  the  time  and  attri- 
tion, and  at  times  severely  trying  the  faith  of  Messrs.  Spear  and  Hewitt,  as  weU  as  others, 
who  might  have  done  more  good  in  many  other  ways,  more  to  the  gratification  of  their 

"  In  another  department  of  lliis  strange  category  of  psvchological  and  spiritual  develop- 
ments there  is  an  experience  —  a  very  peculiar  and  delicate  experience  —  to  which  I  am  now 
obliged  to  refer. 

"Ispeak  of  Mrs. ,  of  Boston,  whose  recent  connection  with  this  mechanism  has 

added  fresh  mterest,  not  to  say  additional  perplexity,  to  it.  I  have  conversed  with  her.  I 
have  examined  her  condition,  and  have  traced,  at  least  to  my  own  satisfaction,  the  causes 
of  her  apparently  extraordinary  experience.  This  experience,  according  to  a  report  that 
has  gone  abroad,  is  this : 

"That  by  rneans  of  a  spiritual  overshadowing,  a  la  Virgin  Mary,  the  maternal  functions 
were  brought  mto  active  operation  ;  a  few  of  tlie  usual  phyaolo^cal  symptoms  followed; 
(he  crisis  arnved ;  and  bemg  in  presence  of  the  mechanism,  the  tirst  living  motion  was 
communicated  to  it ;  in  other  words,  that  then  the  new  motive  power  was  born,  which  was 

therefore  regarded  as  'heaven's  best,  last  gift  toman.' 

"Inr^ardto  Mrs. ,  I  observed  that  she  and  her  quiet  and  beautiful  psycholorical 

experiences  have  been  sadly  misunderstood  and  exa^erated.  In  the  second  place,  I  observed 
tiiat  no  one,  except  with  senabihties  truly  delicate  and  tender,  can  appreciate  her  state 
enough  to  do  her  experience  even  common  justice.  In  considering  her  condition,  I  came 
lo  three  conclusions : 

"  First.  Tliat  her  nature  is  sufficiently  impresable  to  render  her  mind  entremely  psycho- 
logical —  by  which  I  mean,  tliat  she  is  organically  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  minds  both 
in  and  out  of  the  body. 

"  Second.  That  her  former  religious  experience  has  been  deep— Sas  left  many  of  its  sym- 
bols II  mean  the  forms  of  her  early  reUgious  ideas]  fixed  upon  her  understanding— upon  her 
alfections  not  less,  althoagh  the  old  ideas  themselves  have  perhaps  permanently  departed, 
giving  place  to  newer  and  higher  conceptions  of  life  and  immortality. 

"  lly  considerbg  welt  these  primary  facts  in  her  condition,  you  will  readily  perceive  that 
Mrs  --—  could  not  only  receive  the  sphere  of  the  impressions  emanalmg  from  and  actuat- 
ing fi  riend  Spear,  but,  in  addition  to  this,  that  her  own  sensitive  yet  resolute  spirit,  operating 
in  conjunction  with  congenial  spirits  actuating  his,  woald  easily  produce  the  phy^togical 
effects  which  have  really  occurred.  You  will  please  understand  me,  Mr.  Editor,  wh™  I 
allirm  that  the  maternal  functions  were  amply  excited  —  not  to  perform  any  natural  offi-e 
but  merely,  through  the  nervous  forces,  to  impart  the  ordmaty  sensations  of  maternity" 
The  symptoms  were  very  good  imitations  and  were  psychologically  produced. 

In  regard  to  the  use  of  the  mechanism,  let  me  add,  that  if  the  object  to  be  gained  is  a- 
demonstration  of  the  fact  of  ^iritual  intercourse,  then,  in  my  mind,  they  have  accomplished, 
that  obj«^,  by  presentmg  a  construction  superior  to  the  mechanical  mformation  of  the  me- 
dmm.  But  if  the  object  is  to  prove  that  spirits  [who  were  once  men]  can  overstep  the 
boundaries  of  human  mtmtion  and  reason,  and  give  us  light  which  we  cannot  obtain  Iw  the 
propCT  means  and  extent  of  investigation,  then,  in  my  mind,  they  can  never  more  success- 
lully  discover  their  mistake  and  its  impossibUity.  Spirits  can  prove  the  immortality  of  the 
human  soul—notbmg  else  with  certamty.  When  disappointed,  some  mediums  say  'These 
are  evil  spu-its."  Others,  when  provoked  with  mistakes  and  failures,  say,  'There  I  wiU 
give  the  whole  thing  up  as  a  humbug.'     Now,  Mr.  Editor,  I  know  that  such  mediums  are 

not  philosophical 

';  It  is  with  deep  and  deepenmg  sorrow,  Mr.  Editor,  that  I  recognize  a  spe-ies  of  unrea- 
soning faith  —  I  may  say,  a  frightful  and  pernicious  tendency  to  fanaticism,  among  the  true 
and  faithfDl  and  teachable  fri^ds  of  spiritual  mtercourse.  There  are  getting  to  be  mdti- 
Uid^  of  Sjjintualists.  When  shall  we  look  for  a  beautiful  crop  of  barmonialjhilosophers  1 
If  the  spints  have  led  you  into  trouble  [simply  by  their  own  ignorance  of  mundane  forces 
and  circumstances],  you  ask,  'What  shall  wes.iy?  What  shall  we  do?'  I  reply  'Why 
not  step  when  and  where  you  see  the  path  ? '    If  spirits  tell  you  to  do  this  or  that,  my  advice 

Hosted  by  Google 

226  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

is,  follow  them  only  when  you  can  give  the  world  a  philosophical  reason  for  the  faith  ytiu 
possess.  Or,  if  you  can  socially  and  pecuniarily  afford  it,  give  the  spirits  a  fair  chance.  In 
order  to  test  their  skill  and  wisdom.  But  never  allow  yourself  to  pay  too  high  for  a  little 
good,  practical  common  sense.  I  say  this  because  many  persons  give  much  time  and 
money  to  leam  a  lesson  which  a  well-lialajiced  mind  would  impart  for  tiie  asking.  .  .  . 
.  .  .  If  I  were  to  leave  the  world  this  hour,  never  more  to  speak  or  write  to  my  fellow- 
men.  I  should  say  to  each,  '  Be  yourself;  follow  the  truth  you  see ;  do  not  faint  or  be  dis- 
couraged in  well-doing,  though  your  ways  may  not  be  as  the  methods  of 
"  '  Your  spirit  brother, 

"'Andrew  Jackson  Davis.'" 

The  publication  of  this  letter  called  forth,  as  may  be  supposed,  much  ar- 
gument and  mutual  recrimination  from  both  the  partisans  and  opponents  of 
the  "  new  motor."  Mr.  S.  C.  Hewitt  defended  his  position  and  sustained 
the  faith  of  the  adherents  with  marked  ability.  A  still  more  timely  article 
appeared  from  the  pen  of  an  anonymous  writer,  who  was  understood  to  be 
tlie  talented  and  highly-esteemed  husband  of  the  lady  who  has  been  referred 

to  as  Mrs. ,  of  Boston.     Calmly  stripping  from  the  story  the  gross  and 

impure  mask  of  absurdity  and  shocking  impossibility  which  the  prurient  fancy 
of  common  report  had  woven  around  it,  this  writer  proceeded  to  show  that 
Mrs. had  been  made  die  subject  of  a  set  of  most  remarkable  psycho- 
logical experiences  and  prophetic  visions,  at  or  about  the  same  time  as  Mr. 
Spear  was  engaged  in  directing  the  construction  of  the  machinery  at  High 
Rock;  that  neither  of  these  parties  seemed  to  have  the  least  intimation  of 
any  relation  existing,  or  designed  to  exist  between  their  several  experiences, 
until  a  certain  period  arrived,  when  Mr.  Spear  was  instructed  to  sumiiion  the 
lady  to  visit  the  machine.  On  this  occasion  a  crisis  was  said  to  have  been 
reached,  in  which  all  parties  concerned  recognized  their  correlation  to  each 
other  and  the  singular  piece  of  mechanism.  To  the  latter,  it  was  affimed,  an 
actual  living  principle  v/s/i  then  communicated,  and  subsequently  maintained, 
through  certain  mediumistic  processes,  until  the  machine,  in  virtue  of  some 
electric  pulsations  which  appeared  in  a  part  of  its  organism,  was  pronounced 
by  its  friends  to  have  become  "  a  thing  of  life." 

Divested  of  the  repulsive  features  which  ignorance  and  prejudice  throw 
around  it,  there  was,  and  ever  will  remain,  something  singularly  mysterious 
and  suggestive  in  the  dual  ocperiences  of  persons  whose  psychological  action, 
from  whatever  cause  it  originated,  was  powerful  enough  to  induce  physiologi- 
cal results  of  a  marked  and  indisputable  nature.  From  whence  originated 
these  inexplicable  manifestations  ?  and  what  class  of  mind,  embodied  or  disem- 
bodied, could  have  projected  experiments  demonstrating,  on  the  one  hand,  so 
much  intelhgence  and  mechanical  skill,  and,  on  the  other,  such  a  total  lack  of 
adaptation  in  the  means  employed  as  to  convert  the  whole  transaction  into  a 
deplorable  failure,  will  in  all  probability  forever  remain  a  mystery.  It  is 
enough  for  our  present  purpose,  that  we  represent  fairly  the  whole  transaction  ; 
and  as  a  large  majority  of  the  Spiritualists  indignantly  protested  against  asso- 
ciating the  history  of  the  "  new  motor "  with  themselves  or  their  cause,  we 
shall  msert  some  extracts  from  the  pen  of  another  correspondent,  who,  whilst 
claiming  to  belong  to  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  obviously  desires  to  disclaim 
the  apphcation  of  any  sid^  issues  to  his  belief.  The  letter  from  which  the 
folio  v  g  quotat  ons  are  taken  is  written  by  a  well-known  and  respected 
Sp  r  t  al  st  of  Massachusetts,  Mr.  J.  H.  Robinson ;  and  though  he  does  not 
wield  q  te  as  gentle  a  pen  as  the  "harmonial  philosopher,"  A.  J.  Davis, 
the  pla  n  1  o  ely  tn.  ths  1  e  writes  represent  such  a  large  majority  of  the 
op     o  s  \h   1  preva  led  co  icerning  the  "  electric  child,"  that  it  is  but  justice 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  22  J 

to  give  them  a  place  in  this  history.     Iq  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  of  June, 
1854,  Mr.  Robinson  says; 

"Boston,  yune ^,  1854, 

"  Mr.  Editor,— It  is  probably  true  that  every  individual  owes  some  duty  to  his  fellow- 
beiogs;  and,  impelled  bya  sense  of  such  obligation,  I  solicit  tbeuseof  your  columns  through 
which  to  express  my  honest  convictions  upon  a  subject  of  much  interest.  It  is  geuerafly 
known  that  I  believe  in  the  possibility  of  intelligible  communications  with  those  who  have 
been  the  subjects  of  physical  death.  The  ^inple  declaration  of  such  a  belief  is  equivalent, 
in  the  estimation  of  two-thirds  of  the  community,  to  an  admission  of  a  greater  portioii  of 
those  absurdities  and  fallacies,  of  daily  occurrence  under  the  broad  and  indefinite  name  of 
'Spiritualism,' — a  concession  which  I  am  by  no  means  willing  to  make. 

' '  There  is  a  pseudo-Spiritualism,  much  over-grown  by  over-feediug,  who  has  got  on  his 
'seven-leagued'  fanatical  boots  and  goes  fast  for  one  who  carries  weight — -of  absurdity. 
But  his  coarse  is  erratic :  first  this  way  and  then  that,  no  fixed  object  in  view  ;  feeds  on 
excitement  and  thirsts  for  wonders.  I  believe  that  seventy-five  per  cent,  of  'Ca^  prevailing 
SpirltuaUsm  is  Spurious  or  useless,  or  both.  Many  well-meaning  persons  are  expecting 
mighty  revolntions,  sudden  changes  in  governments,  and  a  speedy  overthrow  of  the  present 
order  of  things.  We  have  '  Govenraientizers,  Electrizers,  Ediicationizers,'  and  all  kind  of 
iters  you  can  mention,  which  do  not  affect  the  great  questions  of  the  age  in  the  smallest 
posable  degree.  They  are  ample  follies,  which  will  die  out,  leaving  only  regretful  remem- 
brances behind,  coupled  with  some  wonder  that  such  things  should  Imve  been 

"  Common  magnetic  phenomena  are  often  mistaken  for  spiritual  exhibitions,  and  I  suspect 
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  next  sphere  are  unjustly  held  responsible  for  much  inane  drivelling 
as  incomprehensible  to  them  as  to  us. 

"You  have  heard  of  the  'new  motor,'  so  styled  by  its  friends.  Having  some  knowl- 
edge of  tliis  wonderful  '  infant,'  I  am  constraint  to  say  that  it  lives,  moves,  and  has  its 
being  only  in  the  imagination.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  electrical  motor  in  existence. 
A  motor  is  a  moving  power  ;  but  no  man  whose  sympathies  are  not  largely  enlisted,  and 
whose  judgment  is  nor  to  some  extent  waroed,  can  claim  for  that  curious  combination  of 
metals  any  such  characteristic  The  part  of  the  machme  intended  for  the  application  of 
power  has  not  performed  a.  single  revolution  ;  the  mere  'throbbing'  of  a  few  balls  sus- 
pended by  wires  is  no  marvel  at  all,  espetially  where  there  are  electrical  currents ;  but  it  is 
a  marvel  that  such  incidental,  nay,  inevitable,  oscillations  should  be  hailed  as  a  motive  power 
—  'the  physical  Saviour  of  the  race,  bearing  a  beautiful  and  significant  analogy  to  the  advent 
of  Jem.  P 

"  This  is  mnch  to  say  of  an  agglomeration  of  zinc,  steel,  and  copper,  possessing  no  prac- 
tical value.  It  is  said  to  correspond  to  the  human  body  —  has  a  brain,  heart,  lungs,  etc  ; 
but  such  analogies  are  solely  factitious  and  amount  to  nothing,  because  there  can  be  no 
just  comparison  between  inert  matter  and  the  living  human  organism. 

"I  regret  that  this  'new  motive  power' — which  cannot  turn  a  coffee-mill  —  should 
have  been  compared  to  one  whose  whole  life  was  severely  practical.  It  is  vain  to  talk  of 
conception,  gestation,  the  birth  of  motion,  lactation,  etc.  ;  they  are  at  best  sublime  follies, 
onworthy  serious  consideration. 

"It  may  be  said,  perhaps,  that  I  know  but  little  of  the  history  of  this  'new  Messiah.' 
I  am  conversant  with  enough  of  its  history  to  regret  its  premature  announcement  as  a 

"If  spirits  have  had  anything  to  do  with  it,  they  are  obviously  fanatical,  experimenting 
ones,  devoid  of  that  wisdom  which  ought  to  characterize  the  mmds  they  profess  to  repre- 
sent, and  without  that  elevation  of  thought  that  lends  dignity  to  the  wise  and  good  of  every 
sphere.  So  far  as  'science'  is  concerned,  the  results  do  not  bear  evidence  to  any  marked 
■Usplay  of  that  acquirement. 

"Let  the  machine  stand  at  High  Rock  as  a  lasting  evidence  of  human  credulity;  and  let 
no  one  hereafter  surrender  his  judgment  to  the  dictation  of  beings,  visible  or  invisible,  with- 
out seemg  perfectly,  step  by  step,  the  practical  application  of  a  reasonable,  comprehen^blo 
Einciple.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  has  not  yet  made  his  second  advent  in  zinc  and  copper  at 
ynn,  nor  do  I  ever  expect  to  recognize  him  in  such  '  questionable  form.' 
"I  believe  in  the  presence  and  assistance  of  invisible  guardians;  but  there  is  a  limit  to 
my  belief :  I  cannot  accredit  everythmg  that  comes  ip  the  garb  of  '  Spiritualism. ' 

"Yours  for  the  truth,  J.  H.  Robinson." 

There  is  but  ooe  more  act  which  we  feel  called  upon  to  record  in  this  re- 
markable drama,  and  that  we  are  unwilling  to  present  in  the  scathing  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

228  HISTORY   OF  MODERN 

vituperative  tone  in  which  we  find  it  mentioned  in  most  of  the  periodicals  of 
the  time,  whether  spiritual  or  secular,  save  in  one  instance;  and  as  that 
contains  the  historical  portion  of  the  record,  divested  of  the  bitterness  which 
partisan  feeling  has  infused  into  other  accounts,  we  trust  we  shall  be  excused 
for  dting  Mr.  Spear's  own  statement,  published  in  the  New  Era,  of  the  final 
destruction  of  the  hapless  "new  motor"  machine  at  the  hands  of  an  infuri- 
ated and  insensate  mob,  who,  under  the  impulse  of  very  angry  and,  in  some 
respects,  wholly  delusive  feelings,  broke  in  upon  die  cradle  slumbers  of  the 
wonderful  infant  and  ruthlessly  tore  it  to  pieces. 

The  wanton  destruction  of  property,  the  outrageous  abuse  of  the  liberty 
of  the  individual,  and  die  superstitious  folly  which  prompted  the  attack,  can- 
not be  sufficiently  deprecated ;  the  only  excuse  that  could  be  urged  in  ex- 
tenuation of  sucli  a  deed  is  the  publicity  as  well  as  perversion  of  the  private 
portion  of  the  history,  already  hinted  at,  as  including  the  experiences  of  the 

Mrs.  ,  to  whom  frequent  reference  has  been  made.     Those  who  best 

know  this  person  and  her  peculiar  temperament  and  disposition,  will  acquit 
her  of  aught  that  could  merit  censure  or  provoke  the  insulting  and  ribald  re- 
marks that  were  levelled  against  her.  That  peculiar  and  ill-understood  psy- 
chological experiences  prompted  her  to  the  incomprehensible  part  she  seems 
to  have  played  in  this  singular  drama,  is  the  utmost  that  any  one  can  allege  with 
.  justice.  Beyond  this,  what  mortal  is,  in  his  own  life  and  conduct,  unimpeach- 
able enough  to  decide  upon  the  secret  and  unexplained  acts  of  another  ? 
Or  what  mind  is  sufficiently  intuitive  to  be  able  to  understand,  much  less  to 
analyze  and  judge  of  diose  mysterious  springs  of  action  that  are  hidden  in 
the  mystic  recesses  of  a  sensitive  human  soul,  and  have  only  been  interpreted 
on  the  external,  by  the  harsh  tongue  of  rumor. 

And  yet,  on  this  baseless  and  unintelhgible  ground,  a  rude  mob,  stimulated 
by  the  coarse  and  ribald  remarks  of  the  puWc  journals,  persuaded  themselves 
they  were  doing  good  service  to  the  cause  of  religion  and  morals  by  tearing 
a  harmless  piece  of  mechanism  apart,  and  uttering  threats  of  similar  treat- 
ment against  die  obnoxious  parties  who  had  most  injudiciously  set  up,  or  at 
least  sanctioned,  the  monstrous  claim  of  its  human  parentage  ! 

Unable,  as  we  have  above  stated,  to  find  any  published  report  of  this 
transaction  free  from  the  bitter  and  vituperative  spirit  of  partisanship,  we 
shall  close  our  narrative  by  givmg  the  much-abused  inventor  the  benefit  of 
his  own  statement  respecting  the  destruction  of  his  property,  smd  we  do  this 
the  more  cheerfully  as  the  following  letter  is  one  of  the  most  consistent  and 
rational  documents  that  we  can  find  in  print  over  the  signature  of  John  M. 
Spear. 

"THE  ELECTRIC  MOTOE  MOBBED. 

power,  the  press  and  the  pulpit  have  assdied,  ridiculed,  and  misrepresented  il,  until  a  public 
sentiment  has  been  generated  which  encouraged  the  mob  to  assail  and  destroy  it. 

"  It  was  moved,  as  you  know,  to  Randol^  New  York,  that  it  miglit  have  the  advan- 
tage of  that  lofty  electrical  portion.  A  temporary  building  was  erected  to  shelter  it. 
Into  that,  under  cover  of  the  night,  the  mob  entered,  tore  out  the  heart  of  the  mechanism, 
trampled  it  beneath  their  feet,  and  scattered  it  to  the  four  winds. 

"I  know  tliat  the  friends  who  were  engaged  in  constructmg  this  mechanism,  and  those 
who  cheerfully  gave  of  their  means  to  promote  the  work,  will  mourn  that  the  world  has  not 
yet  arrived  at  a  condition  when  it  could  welcome  a  philanthropic  effort  of  this  kind  ;  but 
thus  it  is.      It  did  not  wish  the  effort  to  succeed,  and  it  determined  it  should  not. 

"  The  course  pursued  by  the  avowed  enemies  of  Spu-itualism,  and  also  by  some  of  its 
professed  friends,  m  relation  to  this  effort,  has  caused  me  much  pain  and  not  a  little  sur. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM,  229 

pnsie.  From  the  hour  that  I  became  fully  convinced  that  a  new,  truthful,  and  direct  com- 
munication was  opened  between  the  earth-life  and  the  spirit-world,  I  determined  to  give 
my  time,  my  strength,  my  reputation,  my  all,  to  a  work  which  I  deemed  so  important. 
As  I  had  in  former  years  devoted  myself  to  the  elevation  ofthe  inebriate,  to  the  promotior 
of  peace,  to  the  emancipation  of  the  slave,  and  to  the  aid  of  the  destitute  prisoner,  so  I 
resolved  to  aid  in  this  new  movement,  the  grandest  and  the  most  comprehensive  that  has 

"  Sometimes  when  I  ha.ve  been  made  acquainted  with  the  comprehensive  views  and  the 
philanthropic  plans  which  persons  in  the  more  perfected  conditions  deare  to  unfold,  I  have 
thought  that  perhaps  they  were  somewhat  too  sanguine;  that  the  hour  had  not  yet  come 
when  the  world  could  receive  them,  and  that  on  that  account  they  might  foil  of  accom- 
plishing all  the  good  they  wished  to  do  ;  but  I  have  desired  to  cheerfully  co-operate  with 
thena,  and  to  give  them  a  fair  chance  to  try. 

"  From  the  hour  that  the  Electrizers  expressed  a  deare  to  unfold  lo  the  inhabitants  of 
this  earth  more  perfeetfy.a  knowledge  of  electrical,  magnetic,  and  ethereal  laws,  that  a 
new  motive  power  might  be  exhibited,  I  said  to  them,  '  Friends,  my  lime,  my  strenp;th,  my 
means,  my  influence,  to  aid  a  work  so  important  and  so  beneficent,  are  at  your  disposal' 
Aided  by  several  philanthropic  and  h^hly-intelligent  gentlemen,  to  whom  their  plan  was 
unfolded  and  the  model  exhibited,  lat>ors  were  commenced,  some  two  hundred  highly  scien- 
tific and  very  philosophic  discourses  were  communicated ;  and  at  precisely  the  tune  desig- 
nated, and  at  the  pomt  expected,  motion  appeared  corresponding  to  embryotic  life. 

"But  the  mob  has  done  its  work.  The  little  mechanian  has  been  assailed,  torn  asunder, 
and  trampled  beneath  the  feet  of  man.  But  if  this  effort  to  use  electricity  as  a  motive 
power  fails  at  this  time,  I  am  persuaded  that  in  the  coming  future,  when  man  becomes 
more  intelligent  and  more  fully  unfolded,  he  will  be  able  to  command  this  element  with 
greater  ease  and  with  more  economy  than  he  now  does  steam.  Thank  God,  the  principles 
which  have  been  presented,  and  the  philosophy  which  has  been  communicated,  are  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  mob,  and  can  not  be  harmed  by  the  slanders  of  the  pulpit  or  the  misrep- 
:ions  of  the  press  1 

"  Garrison  has  been  mobbed,  Bhney's  press  was  thrown  mto  the  river,  Lovejoywasmu 
dered ;  yet  anti-slavery  still  lives,  and  the  oppressied  shall  yet  be  free.  So  shall  it  ever  I 
with  all  truths  which  have  been  communicated  to  man.     They  ace  immortal  and  can  ni 

be  destroyed. 

"  Yours,  for  the  aid  of  the  common  humanity, 

"John  M,  Spear." 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

HE      KIANTONE      MOVEMENT, 

"Thb  Sacred 

Although  the  personal  history  of  Mr.  John  M.  Spear,  like  that  of  most  other 
individuals  who  have  taien  a  prominent  part  in  Spiritualism,  includes  the 
progress  of  the  cause  itself,  press  of  matter  in  other  directions  prevents  our 
entering  further  into  the  details  of  his  remarkable  mediumistic  career,  save  to 
give  a  brief  notice  of  a  movement  which  has  very  generally,  but  somewhat 
invidiously,  been  identified  with  his  name  alone.  The  "Kiantone  move- 
ment," as  the  subject  of  our  present  narrative  is  usually  termed,  includes  the 
experiences  of  many  individuals  beside  Mr.  Spear  ;  and  though  it  has  obtained 

Hosted  by  Google 

23°  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

an  unenviable  distinction  for  the  attempt  on  the  part  of  its  participators  to 
establish  a  highly  unpopular  system  of  communism,  it  has  also  been  remark- 
able for  some  phenomenal  features  of  interest,  to  which  we  shall  devote  a 
few  pages  of  impartial  notice. 

It  was  generally  believed  by  the  early  settlers  of  Chautauque  County,  New 
York,  that  salt  existed  in  great  abundance  in  the  valley  of  the  Connewango 
or  Kiantone,  and  that  this  and  other  mineral  treasures  had  been  discovered 
by  tlie  aboriginal  Indians,  who  sedulously  concealed  the  knowledge  from  the 
whites.  The  final  discovery  of  mineral  ftaters  in  this  region  is  briefly  de- 
tailed in  die  following  extracts  from  a  letter  addressed  to  Dr.  Gray,  of 
New  York,  by  Dr.  Greaves,  of  Milwaukee.  This  gentleman  was  requested 
to  make  a  visit  to  Kiantone  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  waters,  and  the 
result  of  his  investigations  will  be  found  in  the  columns  of  the  Spiritual  Tele- 
grapk  oi  iSss  ■■  — 

"Milwaukee,  January  2^,  1853. 

"J.  F.  Gray,  M.D.:— 2>caj-  Sir,~\  avail  myself  of  the  present  opportunity  to 
fulfil  a  promise  I  made  you,  wliile  sojourning  in  New  York,  to  give  you  the  result  of  my 
observations  and  personal  inquiries  in  relation  to  the  remarkable  mineral  spring  alleged  to 
have  been  discovered,  near  Carroll,  Chautauque  County,  New  York,  by  spirit  agency- 

"  Having  listened  to  the  account  given  by  our  friend,  Sheldon,  when  he  brought  the 
water  to  New  York  for  analyiation,  Iresolved  to  turn  aside  from  mj  homeward  journey, 
and  examine  the  whole  matter  for  myself. 

"  Fortunately  I  found  t!ie  owner  of  the  Spring  at  Carroll,  who  took  me  immediately  to 
-his  house,  which  is  located  about  half  a  mile  over  the  line  in  Pennsylvania,  His  name  is 
John  Chase,  From  early  youfh  he  has  been  a  resident  of  that  region,  pursumg  his  trade 
as  a  blacltsmith,  until  three  ot  four  years  since,  when  he  removed  to  the  farm  on  which  he 
now  resides. 

"  About  fifteen  years  ago,  while  Mr.  Chase  was  residing  at  Carroll,  following  his  trade, 
his  wife  made  a  visit  to  a  neighboring  town,  where  there  was  a  'fortune  teller'  who  was 
considered  an  'oracle'  by  those  who  consulted  her.  Mrs.  Chase,  from  mere  curiosity, 
visited  her,  and  during  the  consultation  she  was  mformed  that  ance  she  had  left  home  her 
husband  had  bought  a  ferm ;  that  on  it  was  a  great  treasure,  and  that  he  must  never  part 
with  it.  Mrs.  Chase  ridiculed  the  idea,  expressing  her  unbelief  in  the  strongest  terms,  and 
gave  as  a  reason  that  they  were  so  poor  her  husband  had  no  means  of  paying  for  one.  When 
sheatrived  home  she  immediately  asked  her  husband  if  he  had  bought  a  farm  He  replied 
that  he  had,  but  said  no  one  knew  it  except  himself,  the  seller,  and  a  witness,  and  he  wished 
to  know  how  she  had  heard  of  it.     She  mformed  him  of  the  interview  with  the  fortune 

'«•!"■- Having  bought  the  tract  for  the  purpose  of  using  a  small  water 

power  on  it  for  propelling  machmery  for  the  manufacture  of  w^ons  m  company  with 
another  individual,  and  that  project  having  failed,  Mr.  Chase  repeatedly  offered  the  tract 
for  sale,  placing  no  confidence  in  the  sayings  of  the  seeress,  and  not  being  able  to  pay  for  it. 
He  could  get  no  offer,  and  was  obUged  to  keep  it  until  about  four  years  ago,  when  he 
bought  forty  acres  adjoinmg,  which  came  to  a  highway,  to  enable  him  to  sell  [he  whole 

"  Still  he  got  no  offers,  when,  about  three  years  ago,  William  Brittmgham,  who  was  a 
magnetiier  in  the  neighborhood,  learned  through  a  clairvoyant  that  ther-e  vras  a  great  trea- 
sure on  John  Chase's  farm,  and  besides,  a  valuable  salt  sprmg,  and  that  he  must  not  sell  it. 
This  was  subsequently  confirmed  through  other  mediums  and  clairvoyants,  until  Chase  was 
'constramed  to  act  m  the  matter,  and  resolved  to  follow  directions  and  dig  for  the  reported 

"  Accordmgly,  he  took  a  good  clairvoyant  on  to  (he  ground  some  time  last  spring  who 
located  the  precise  spot,  where  they  afterwards  dug  with  signal  success. 

"  Subsequent  trials  with  other  mediums  corroborated  the  statement  of  the  first  clauTOy- 
ant.  On  the  strength  of  the  above,  he  bargained  with  Mr.  Brittmgham  to  dig  the  pit,  for 
a  certain  interest  in  the  investment,  and  «arly  last  summer  the  work  was  commenced.  They 
were  directed  to  smk  a  pit,  then  to  bore  to  a  certain  specified  depth,  when  they  would  come 
■to  the  spnng.     The  distances  they  were  directed  to  dig  and  to  bore  corresponded  exactly 

with  the  account  of  the  dicing. At  this  point  they  commenced  boring 

M  the  sanie  soil  for  ten  feet  further,  and  struck  the  rock,  which  was  very  hard  for  the  dis- 
tance of  su:  inches,  when  it  became  porous,  and  through  it  the  water  b^an  to  flow.     At 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  23I 

the  depth  of  three  feet  they  ajain  struct  the  hard  portion,  and  ceased  boring.  Not  finding 
it  in  sufficient  quantities,  tl\ey  were  directed  by  the  spirits  to  bore  in  the  centre  of  the  pit, 
which  they  did,  and  struck  a  full  supply,  flowing  at  the  rate  of  about  live  hundred  gallons 
per  liour.  They  were  then  directed  to  commence  boring  on  the  north  ^de  of  the  pit,  and 
they  would  strike  the  salt  water.  After  boring  through  the  hard  clay  and  gravel  they  struck 
the  rock— red  sandstone  —  into  which  they  bored  to  the  depth  of  four  or  five  feet,  and 
came  to  strong  salt  water,  flowing  at  the  rate  of  about  seven  hundred  and  fifty  gallons  per 
hour,  which  they  were  directed  to  plug  up ;  they  did  so,  bM  not  doing  it  efl'ectually,  the 
plug  escaped  durmg  their  absence,  and  the  water  filled  the  whole  pit  and  flowed  over  the 
sor&ce  of  the  ground.  With  roach  labor  for  five  days,  they  succeeded  in  emptying  the  pit 
and  stopping  the  flow.  They  were  then  dhected  to  insert  a  tube  in  the  hole  bored  m  the 
centre  of  the  pit,  teidiing  to  the  surface  of  the  ground,  which  they  did,  when  the  water 
flowed  to  the  hei^tht  of  twelve  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  earth.  The  water  obtamed 
from  this  spring  iflows  turbid  all  of  the  time,  cont^mg  a  large  amount  of  sediment  of 
earthy  matter,  of  an  unctuous  character  to  the  touch,  emittiog  a  peculiar  odor,  and  the 
taste  strongly  alkaline.  Experiments  were  made  by  mixing  the  water  with  flour,  which 
diowed  its  alkalme  properties  by  rai^ng  bread  and  biscuit  very  light.  You  have,  doubtless, 
ere  this  received  from  Chilton  the  chemical  analysis,  hut  as  I  have  heard  nothmg  from  that 
source,  I  am  unable  to  say  what  are  its  chemical  constituents. 

"  The  work  was  completed  about  the  first  of  September  last,  when  they  were  directed  to 
commence  testing,  under  spirit  direction,  the  efficacy  of  the  water  in  the  cure  of  disease. 
1  will  not  detail  to  you  the  cases  treated,  but  amply  enumerate  a  few  of  the  diseases  in 
which,  according  to  the  testimony  of  numbers  in  that  vlcmity,  the  use  of  the  water  had 
been  effectual.  Various  kinds  of  fevers,  dyspepsia,  pneumonia,  rheumatism,  inflaromatlons 
of  the  throat,  bums  and  scalds,  erysipelas,  scarlatma,  etc.  The  details  as  given  to  me  are 
exceedingly  mteresting  and  almost  incredible;  and  I  think  the  whole  matter  is  worth  a 
thorougii  investigation.  It  is  dhected  to  be  used  m  various  ways.  The  water  from  the 
spring  IS  used  intemaliy  and  by  bathing. 

"  An  ointment  is  also  made  for  external  application  for  all  inflammations,  and  the  results 
of  its  use  are  truly  remarkable. 

"Two  well-marked  cases  of  felon  yielded  in  a  few  hours  to  the  application  of  the  omt- 
ment.  In  one  case,  where  the  lady  had  not  slept  for  two  nights  preceding,  and  was  sufferuig 
so  severely  that  she  could  hardly  keep  from  groaning  in  my  presence,  the  p^n  left  in  half 
am  hour ;  m  twelve  hours  the  tumefaction  had  almost  disappeared,  and  she  is  now  wel!„ 
without  any  aggravation.  The  other  case  was  characterized  by  a  gradual  subsidence  of 
the  suffering  in  the  course  of  six  hours,  together  with  the  sweUing,  and  the  result  was  a  final 
and  complete  cure.  .  .  .  Similar  results  have  foUovred  m  a  severe  case  of  croup,  and  in 
obstinate  cough ,  ,  , 

"  In  conclusion  I  would  say  that  ihe  main  facts  above  narrated  are  fully  corroborated  by 
friend  and  foe  in  that  vicinity.  Indeed,  there  is  no  doubt  left  upon  the  minds  of  any  ui 
that  neighborhood  who  have  known  anything  on  the  subject,  that  the  discovery  was  made 
under  the  circumstances  narrated  above. 

"The  parties  concerned  have  been  subjected  to  an  amount  of  obloquy  and  ridicule  truly 
disgraceful,  and  it  is  wonderful  that  their  moral  courage  should  have  so  long  sustained  . 

them  under  such  trials 

"  Yours  truly, 

"James  P.  Greaves." 
Immediately  after  this  discovery  the  mediums  to  whom  the  waters  of  flie 
spring  were  sent,  or  those  who  chanced  to  visit  the  place,  became  endiusi- 
astic  about  its  curative  properties  and    the  valuable  results    which  were 
to  accrue  to  mankind  from  its  use. 

In  1853,  a  gentleman  who  had  become  much  interested  in  the  spring,  and 
sanguine  concerning  the  effects  of  its  discovery,  sent  a  portion  of  the  sedi- 
ment obtained  from  the  water  to  Mr.  John  M.  Spear  for  psychometncal  exam- 
ination. 

Mr.  Spear's  report  confirmed  the  testimony  of  other  clairvoyants,  but 
the  effect  produced  upon  his  own  mind  was  so  great  as  to  induce  him,  in 
company  with  several  of  his  friends,  or,  we  might  almost  say,  followers,  since 
they  were  persons  especially  in  sympathy  with  his  peculiar  opinions,  to  visit 
the  spring  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  in  its  vicinage  a  commumty  whose 
views  would  be  in  hannonious  relations  with  each  other. 

Hosted  by  Google 

232  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Impressed  with  the  perfect  fitness  of  the  place  for  the  designs  they  con 
templated,  Mr.  Spear  and  his  friends  entered  into  an  agreement  with  Messrs 
Chase  and  Brittingham  to  pursue  their  explorations,  settle  upon  certain  por- 
tions of  the  land,  and  possess  themselves  of  an  appropriate  share  of  the 
wealth  they  expected  to  realize ;  but  when  the  astounded  proprietors  of  the 
district  heard  of  the  magnificent  prospective  views  mapped  out  by  the  enthu- 
siastic clairvoyants,  they  began  to  believe  diat  the  untoid  mines  of  wealth 
which  their  new  neighbors  designed  to  realize  were  just  as  well  reserved  in 
their  own  hands  ;  hence  they  curtly  "backed  out"  of  the  arrangement,  and 
left  the  baffled  seers  to  pursue  then-  researches  elsewhere. 

Besides  Mr.  Spear  and  Dr.  Abel  Underbill,  himself  a  most  excellent  clair- 
voyant, there  were  several  odier  mediums  m  the  spiritualistic  part}  Among 
these  were  seers  who  no  sooner  found  themselves  shut  off  from  the  Ch^se 
and  Brittingham  estate  than  they  at  once  perceived  torrents,  floods,  and 
even  oceans  of  underground  wealth  in  other  dn-ections 

The  whole  character  of  the  distnct  testifies  to  the  abundance  of  m  neral 
wealth  in  the  form  of  springs  and  subterranean  deposita,  with  wh  ch  the  earth 
there  is  teeming ;  hence  it  onlv  required  the  exerciae  of  the  natural  eye  to 
perceive  the  possibilities  with  which  the  region  abounded,  and  the  uses  to 
which  it  could  be  turned  under  judicious  management 

At  the  suggestion  of  Dr.  Underbill,  it  was  agreed  to  purchase  a  farm  on 
iand  adjoining  die  Chase  property,  where  it  vtas  aftinned  that  a  spring  known 
as  ''  the  great  deer  lick"  would  be  found  to  possess  all  the  valuable  qualities 
attributed  to  the  waters  already  becoming  so  renowned.  Notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  the  resources  of  the  place  were  in  reality  as  great  as  the  enthu- 
siasm of  the  clau-voyants  alleged  them  to  be,  several  circumstances  combined 
to  retard  the  useful  developments  which  were  so  confidently  anticipated  from 
its  possession.  Among  these  was  lack  of  the  capital  necessary  to  pursue  the 
explorations,  or  work  the  ground  to  utilitarian  purposes.-  A  still  greater  ob- 
stacle was  the  determined  hostility  of  Mr.  Chase  to  the  new  settlers,  and  the 
culminating  cause  of  grief  arose  from  internal  discord  amongst  themselves, 
paralyzing  then-  associative  efforts,  neutralizing  their  attempts  at  harmonious 
combination,  and  finally  giving  rise  to  current  reports  whose  very  scandalous 
nature  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat,  except  to  notice  that  they  seemed  to  jus- 
tify the  determinaton  of  Messrs.  Chase  and  Brittingham  to  oppose  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  contemplated  little  "  kingdom  of  heaven  "  on  their  land 

In  fact  it  has  become  a  matter  of  too  much  public  notoriety  to  veil  or  gloss 
over,  diat  some  of  the  inspired  party  who  had  assembled  at  Kiantone 
Springs,  claimed  to  be  the  organs  or  human  mouthpieces  not  only  for  spirits 
of  an  adventurous  and  scientific  turn  of  mind,  hut  also  for  others  who  pro- 
posed to  establish  a  new  social  order  upon  earth,  in  which  the  marriage  obli- 
gations were  not  treated  with  any  great  amount  of  reverence  or  conventional 
respect 

As  may  be  anticipated,  the  enunciation  of  these  startling  proposirions 
was  received  with  as  much  abhorrence  by  the  opposition  as  they  were  stoutly 
maintained  by  their  advocates.  Both  parties  were  in  sincere  earnest,  and 
here  justice,  no  less  to  individuals  than  to  the  great  body  of  Sphitualists  in 
general,  compels  us  to  off"er  a  few  remarks  on  a  controversy  which,  properly 
speaking,  has  no  reference  whatever  to  Sphitualism;  neverdieless  the  un- 
founded  affirmations  of  certain  Spiritualists,  and  the  malevolence  of  those 
who  have  made  their  views  a  subject  of  scandal  and  reproach  to  the  entire 
body  of  believers,  render  it  necessary  that  we  should  take  the  notorious 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  233 

experiences  of  Kiantone  as  an  illustration  of  the  position  which  we  insist 
upon  our  right  to  claim  for  Spiritualism. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact,  that  long  before  the  advent  of  modern  Spiritualism, 
many  communities  existed  in  America,  tlie  members  of  which  maintained 
opinions  on  the  marriage  question  which  procured  for  them  the  title  of  "  Free 
Lovers." 

Many  individuals  of  high  social  standing,  talent,  and  influence  in  American 
society  professed  opinions  of  a  similar  character,  without,  however,  enrolling 
themselves  as  members  of  a  separated  community ;  in  fact,  tlie  doctrine  of 
"free  love"  in  all  its  ramifications  permeated  the  country,  even  to  the  point 
of  world-wide  notoriety,  years  before  the  advent  of  the  Rochester  knockings. 

That  the  believers  in  these  doctrines  sustained  themselves  on  some  points 
which  they  conceived  to  be  "right,"  none  who  have  ever  observed  the  sacri- 
fices they  made  for  opinion's  sake,  can  question.  Odious  as  their  views  are 
in  the  eyes  of  a  moral  and  orderly  community,  they  were  just  as  ready  to 
endure  social  martyrdom  in  their  defence  as  if  they  had  been  advocating  the 
noblest  truths  and  highest  degree  of  purity ;  hence  none  can  refuse  to  accord 
to  them  the  merit  of  sincerity  and  a  realizing  sense  of  some  worth  in  their  indi- 
vidual opinions,  however  abhorrent  these  may  have  been  to  the  good  sense 
and  pure  feeling  of  their  opponents. 

Now,  when  it  is  remembered  that  a  behef  in  spirit  communion  may  be  and 
most  generally  is,  based  upon  the  evidence  of  sensuous  facts,  and  that  its 
intellectual  acceptance  is  just  as  rational  to  the  robber  and  murderer  as  to  the 
saint  and  sage,  it  can  be  no  matter  of  surprise  that  persons  who  profess  the 
broadest  license  on  the  marriage  question  should  have  accepted  the  demon- 
strations  of  spirit  communion  as  well  as  those  who  believed  in  the  strictest 
views  of  the  conjugal  relation,  or  even  advocated  the  asceticism  of  celibacy. 
Still  the  mere  fact  that  certain  individualswho  professed ''free  love"  doctrines 
became  convinced  of  the  truths  of  spirit  communion  was  quite  sufficient,  when 
all  other  causes  of  offence  failed,  to  give  a  handle  for  antagonism  to  fasten  diis 
obnoxious  and  totally  urelevant  opinion  upon  the  entire  body  of  Spiritualists, 
until  mahce,  grown  desperate  for  lack  of  more  available  weapons,  continued 
to  aim  the  shaft  of  "free  love"  against  Spiritualism,  and  labor  to  make  the 
two  words  appear  to  be  of  synonymous  meaning. 

An  effort  so  palpably  false  and  shallow  must  have  failed  as  signally  as  all 
other  antagonistic  warfare  has  done,  had  not  a  few  individuals,  who  desired  to 
make  the  broad  white  standard  of  Spiritualism  float  over  all  the  little  hobbies 
which  they  thought  proper  to  harness  to  its  triumphant  car,  given  out  as 
veritable  communications  from  "archangelic  spheres,"  "spirit  messages" 
endorsing,  nay,  enjoining,  the  practices  and  doctrines  of  "free  love."  The 
world  has  forgotten,  in  its  eagerness  to  find  real  matter  for  ofl'ence  against 
Spiritualism,  that  the  most  celebrated  as  well  as  the  earliest  professors  of  spir- 
itual gifts  upon  the  American  continent  have  been  Mormons  and  Shakers,  the 
antipodal  points  from  which  "Free  Love"  starts  and  departs.  Itwouldhave 
been  as  easy  to  prove  tliat  all  the  ghastly  lists  of  crime  that  disgrace  our  daily 
pohce  reports  are  chargeable  upon  Christianity,  as  to  show  that  "  free  love" 
had  anything  to  do  with  Spiritualism,  had  not  the  presumption  of  certain  Spir- 
itualists chosen  to  father  their  practices  in  tliis  respect  upon  the  authority 
of  "the  spirits." 

It  is  evident  that  if  Joseph  Smidi's  spirits  tau^t  polygamy,  and  Anne  Lee's 
insisted  upon  celibacy,  there  must  be  a  very  wide  diversity  of  opinions  in  the 
"spirit-world,  and  the  generic  term  of  "the  spirits"  would  not  have  been  suffi- 

Hosled  by  Google 

S34  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

cient  authority  to  account  for  all  the  vagaries  in  which  mankind  chose  to 
indulge,  on  the  plea  of  a  supra-mundane  command,  had  it  not  furnished  the 
weapon  for  which  the  opposition  had  so  long  waited.  Finding  it  at  length, 
they  proceeded  to  use  it  with  such  good  effect  that  for  a  long  time  the  per- 
nicious report  gained  ground,  and  was  sanctioned  by  the  most  injurious  illus- 
trations,  that  ftee-loveism  was  the  professed  doctrine  of  Spiritualism. 

To  no  point  do  we  trace  this  most  baseless  allegation  more  clearly  than  to 
the  Kiantone  community.  It  would  be  unfit  to  assert  that  all  the  Spiritual- 
ists who  were  there  assembled,  professed,  or  even  favored  these  opinions,  but 
it  would  be  equally  false  to  truth  and  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  to  deny,  that 
from  this  place  and  at  the  time  of  the  settlement  narrated  above,  the  propa- 
g  d  m  f  h  pinions  became  most  mischievously  associated  with  Spirit- 
ual b  g  g  candal  and  reproach  on  the  heads  of  thousands  of  innocent 
p  h     1      hed  and  repudiated  the  doctrine,  and  causing  thousands  of 

oh  h     k  b  ck  from  the  investigation  of  a  belief  which  was  so  strangely 

as  d  vith  h    most  repulsive  features  of  communism. 

Ih  p  f  f  he  practices  at  Kiantone,  their  public  opposition,  attack  and 
defence,  are  all  to  be  found  in  the  eighth  volume  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph; 
it  is  needless,  therefore,  for  us  to  burden  our  pages  further  with  the  details  of 
this  movement,  which  eventually  broke  up  in  mutual  recrimination  and  fail- 
ure. The  facts  of  the  case  may  be  briefly  summed  up  thus :  Amongst  die 
Kiantone  community  the  piercing  eye  of  the  spirit  discovered  in  the  first  in- 
stance the  mineral  treasures  that  lay  hidden  in  tJie  mystery  of  time  and  matter, 
wairing  for  the  utilitarian  hand  of  man  to  appropriate  and  convert  them  into 
blessings  for  humanity.  The  association  of  a  number  of  persons  of  dlifcrent 
views  and  pm-poses  developed  the  special  idiosyncracies  of  all,  and  called 
forth  the  special  ideas  of  some  to  an  extent  which,  however  injurious  for  the 
tune  being  to  the  progress  of  Spiritualism,  ultimately  produced  separations  in 
its  ranks  which  have  been  equally  healthful  and  necessary.  By  temporarily 
fastening  an  obnoxious  reputation  upon  the  noble  cause  of  Spiritualism,  the 
"  Kiantone  movement"  called  forth  discussions  and  eliminated  questions  of 
the  highest  import,  which  have  been  of  incalculable  benefit,  and  have  ended 
in  the  sifting  process  which  sooner  or  later  was  essential  to  free  Spiritualism 
from  all  other  claims  and  pretensions  than  the  sublime  purposes  of  proving 
the  soul's  immortality,  the  unity  of  spirit,  and  individual  responsibility.  All 
other  side  issues  are  fungi,  springing  up  from  the  corruption  of  undeveloped 
natures,  and,  like  the  morals  of  Kiantone,  must  ultimately  be  shaken  off  from 
the  divine  body,  on  which  they  are  a  simple  excrescence. 

With  the  breaking  up  of  the  little  community  at  Kiantone,  Mr.  Spear  once 
more  became  a  "  missionary  at  large."  He  gave  to  the  world  a  volume  called 
the  "Educator,"  containing  some  highly  suggestive  and  valuable  essays. 
Several  attempts  at  associative  action  also  owe  a  fleeting  success  to  his  san- 
guine and  enthusiastic  genius,  few  of  which  are  of  sufficient  moment  to  claim 
further  notice. 

Whilst  writing  on  the  subject  of  "  movements,"  however,  and  the  tempo- 
rary influence  such  combinations  exercised  on  the  progress  of  Spiritualism,  we 
must  not  omit  to  notice  one  more  attempt,  whicli  nothing  less  dian  the  inhe- 
rent strength  of  "the  cause"  could  have  transformed  from  an  mstniment  of 
suicidal  ruin  into  a  page  of  salutary  b  arnmg 

It  was  about  the  spring  of  1862  that  a  rumor  went  abroad  concerning  a 
new  movement  permeating  the  ranks  of  Spintuahsm  which  had  already  en- 
listed in  its  interests  some  of  (he  wealthiest  and  most  distinguished  citizens 
of  the  New  England  States.     About  this  time  a  trance  speaker,  whom  we 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  -ftaS 

■shall  designate  as  Mrs.  E.,  came  to  Boston  to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures  un- 
der the  auspices  of  the  Spiritualists. 

Mrs.  E.  had  already  been  apprised  of  some  of  tiie  initiatory  features  of  the 
new  movement,  and  from  sources  both  mundane  and  supra-mundane,  had 
been  warned  that  it  contained  the  seeds  of  irrevocable  mischief,  if  not  ruin,  to 
die  cause  of  Spiritualism.  Other  mediumistic  predictions  tallied  with  these 
dark  premonitions.  It  was  affirmed  that  "amonster  would  be  born  in  Massa- 
chusetts, whose  demoniac  nature  would  tlireaten  the  overthrow  of  the  entire 
fabric  of  strength  and  beauty  that  spirits  had  been  for  ye.ars  laboring  to  up- 
rear."  In  various  communi cations  from  spirit  friends,  the  part  which  Mrs. 
E.  was  required  to  perform  in  the  coming  struggle  was  clearly  pointed  out  to 
her,  and  her  arrival  in  Boston  soon  confirmed  the  statements  made  as  to  what 
was  expected  of  her. 

Boston  had  been  selected,  it  would  appear,  as  die  headquarters  of  the  mys- 
tics ;  and  as  Mrs.  E.  was  one  who  could  command  the  car  of  very  large  audi- 
cences  in  her  public  ministrations,  she  soon  began  to  be  plied  with  earnest 
solicitations  to  throw  whatever  power  and  influence  she  possessed  into  the 
scale  of  "  the  great  new  movement."  All  that  could  successfully  influence  a 
female  heart — the  most  flattering  prospects  of  temporal  and  spiritual  distinc- 
tion as  well  as  appeals  on  the  higher  score  of  angelic  authority — were  urged 
upon  the  medium  to  secure  her  adherence  to  the  movement.  But  angels 
had  already  preoccupied  the  sphere  of  her  mind,  and  made  their  appeals  to 
her  judgment ;  hence  these  importunate  human  sohcitations  only  the  more 
conclusively  proved  to  Mrs.  E.  that  the  hour  of  active  decision  abeady  pre- 
dicted was  at  hand.  The  association  was  not  in  actual  operation  at  the  time 
of  which  we  speak,  yet  its  preliminary  arrangements  had  a  startling  magnitude. 

One  thing  struck  Mrs.  E.  with  pecuhar  significance ;  it  was  the  fact  that 
although  this  movement  seemed  to  include  a  wider  field  of  action  than  had 
ever  yet  been  canvassed,  and  a  greater  number  of  prominent  persons  than 
had  ever  before  seemed  disposed  to  combine  in  a  spiritualistic  association, 
y^et  the  leaders  and  principal  officials  were  unknown,  or  so  veiled  in  myste- 
rious reserve  that  it  was  by  a  seemingly  fortuitous  circumstance  only  that 
Mrs.  E.  learned  who  the  central  sun  and  unmediate  satellites  of  the  system 
really  were.  Acting  under  the  stimulus  of  this  knowledge,  and  aided  by  in- 
terior guidance,  Mrs.  E.  deferred  all  direct  communication  with  the  agents, 
who  strove  to  wind  their  web  around  her  with  singular  pertinacity,  untU  the 
second  Sunday  of  her  ministrations  in  Boston,  when  a  discourse  of  the  most 
marked  and  obvious  character  was  delivered  through  her  lips,  the  purport  of 
which  could  not  be  mistaken.  The  subject  was  the  pernicious  and  retro- 
gressive character  of  secret  societies,  contrasted  with  the  purity,  integrity,  and 
progressive  tendency  of  modern  Spiritualism.  Scathing  rebukes  were  admin- 
istered to  those  who  sought  to  usurp  the  holy  and  beneficent  name  of  Spirit- 
ualism to  veil  their  assumptions  of  authority,  and  mask  in  mystery  and  dark- 
ness  the  world-wide  and  sun-like  revelations  from  the  realms  of  immortality. 

All  organizations  that  would  not  bear  the  scrutiny  of  light,  the  tests  of 
science,  or  the  analysis  of  practical  religion,  were  denounced  as  efiete, 
worthy  only  of  the  days  of  priestly  domination,  and  subversive  of  the  broad, 
comprehensive,  and  truly  practical  bearings  of  Spiritualism 

This  lecture,  delivered  to  an  immense  and  attentive  audience,  was  most  in- 
dignanfly  received,  by  the  partisans  of  the  new  movement,  who  were  assem- 
bled in  the  hall,  expecting  to  hear  an  address  of  a  very  different  character. 
One  of  their  number,  addressing  Mrs.  E.  as  she  was  quitting  the  rostrum, 
assured  her,  in  fiercely-impassioned  tones  that,"  as  she  had  used  her  great  gifts 

Hosted  by  Google 

236  HISTORY  OF  MODERIf 

to  wax  against  a  mighty  and  heaven-born  movement,  so  she  woulc.  yet  repent 
that  night's  oration  in  dust  and  ashes!"  The  members  of  the  association 
were  in  terrible  earnest :  this  now  openly-avowed  antagonist  not  less  so.  An 
attempt  at  compromise,  made  on  the/ollowingdayby  parties  who  wished  well 
to  both,  entirely  failed. 

The  association  avowedly  consisted  of  an  esoteric  as  well  as  an  exoteric 
circle.  Mrs.  E.  charged  some  of  the  "  order  "  with  revolving  around  certain 
persons  and  principles  veiled  h  p  d  y  y  of  h  soteric  adytum, 
and  the  announcement  was  d        1  f      d  d        1  bj  the  members 

of  the  interior,  and  indignan  h  Lyth  f  h      \terior  circles; 

obviously,  they  did  not  enjoy    p    f  d  d   g      d     me  good  reason 

for  the  mystery  of  a  "secre  t)  h  p  began  to  dawn 

upon  the  minds  of  the  unen  d      Al  h       h  consistent  with 

the  principles  of  the  opposi  ]       f    fti  nto  the  secrets 

of  initiation  for  purposes  of  treachery,  the  few  hints  which,  as  above  stated, 
glanced  at  the  veiled  mystery  of  the  secret  portion  of  the  order,  manifestly 
began  to  affect  the  faith  of  those  who  had  allied  themselves  with  the  exterior 
circle,  in  the  belief  that  it  was  based  simply  on  die  highest  affirmations  of  the 
highest  Spiritualism. 

The  external  and  popular  operations  of  the  association  were  of  so  attract- 
ive a  character,  and  so  broadly  humanitary  in  their  views,  diat  however  trans- 
cendental some  of  their  propositions  might  seem,  few  could  take  exception  to 
them.  The  society  was  called  the  "Sacred  Order  of  Unionists,"  and  the  fol- 
lowing excerpts  are  selected  from  a  small  tract  which  they  put  forth  m  exposi- 
tion of  the  exoteric  branch. 

"THE  SACRED  ORDER  OF  UNIONISTS  — 'THAT  THEV  MAY  ALL  BE  ONE.' 

"THs  order  is  a  voluntary  association  of  men  and  women,  instituted  for  the  following 
general  purposes : 

"  First.  To  unite  man  to  man,  nation  to  nation,  planet  to  planet. 

"  Second.  To  aljolish  war  in  all  its  forms,  and  to  promote  universal  peace. 

"Third.  To  organize  various  co-operative  and  beneficent  institutions,  wliich,  without 
injuring  the  rich,  shall  greatly  aid  and  help  to  educate  the  poor  and  the   improvident 

"Fourlh.  To  establish  such  religious  institutions  and  observances  as  are  in  harmony  with 

man's  nature,  and  shall  tend  to  his  highest  culture . 

"  As  collateral  objects  the  order  will  seek : 

"  First.  To  promote  among  men  exact  justice  to  alL 

"Second.  To  establish  universal  freedom. 

"  Third.  To  fraternize  all  races  of  men. 

"Fourth.  To  encourage  all  good  works. 

"  Fifth.  To  ameliorate  and  banish  human  suffering,  etc 

"  Sixth.  To  inaugurate  a  state  in  which  there  shall  be  one  head,  one  heart,  one  language, 

"  For  a  season,  and  for  the  sake  of  greater  efficiency  and  security  in  its  incipient  labors, 
this  order  will  be  veiled  from  the  public  eye;  that  is,  its  specific  operations  and  its  member- 
ship will  be  known  only  to  the  initiated;  but  in  due  time  the  injunction  of  secrecy  will  be 
removed,  and  the  world  will  be  permitted  to  behold  its  glory  and  to  feel  its  power.  Its 
work  of  social  reconstruction  thus  follows  the  natural  or  divine  method  in  the  formation  of 
the  human  organism,  beginning  in  secret  and  proceeding  m  an  orderly  manner  from  centre 
to  circumference.  The  centre  or  heart  of  the  new  social  order  is  the  church,  the  divine  in 
man,  from  whose  vital  pulsations  all  other  parts  proceed. 

"It  has  one  supreme  head,  and  an  assembly  consisting  of  twelve  members;  which 
assembly  will  oiganize  its  various  branches  under  distinct  heads. 

"The  methoi£  of  action  proposed  by  the  order,  while  comprehensive  in  their  purpose, 
are,  in  its  uicipient  stages,  of  a  very  ample  character.  It  has  at  its  head  a  single  mind, 
who  receives  suggestions  from  all  sources- — from  the  heavens  above,  as  well  as  from  the 
earth  beneath." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAI^  SPIRITUALISM.  237 

But  despite  of  the  united  actioD  of  tlie  interior  and  exterior  circles,  nothing 
could  fully  restore  the  confidence  which  had  been  shaken  by  the  antagonistic 
el^brts  which  were  silently,  but  surely,  working  against  them.  Still  the  issue, 
if  left  to  man  alone,  might  have  been  doubtful.  The  veil  of  mystery  which 
inclosed  the  hierophantic  centre  might  be  pierced  by  the  shrewd  eye  of 
speculation,  or  the  keener  glance  of  clairvoyance,  but  would  never  have 
been  shorn  of  its  mystic  pretences,  had  not  some  power,  whose  agency  has 
never  been  fully  disclosed,  moved  two  of  the  fully  initiated,  even  the  hiero- 
phants  of  the  most  interior  mysteries,  to  recede  from  them,  in  what  they 
emphatically  called  "disgust,"  and  boldly  to  come  before  the  world  with  the 
offer  to  expose  them  to  any  ears  that  would  open  to  receive  them.  Upon  this, 
ensued  a  scene  which  probably  was  then  enacted  for  the  first  and  last  time  in 
the  spiritual  ranks.  As  the  promised  revelations  immediately  affected  the 
characters  of  many  persons  who  had  committed  themselves  to  the  association 
without  a  very  clear  understanding  of  what  their  connection  with  its  mysteries 
might  involve,  it  was  determined  to  call  together  as  many  of  those  interested 
as  possible,  and  then  resolve,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  revelations  they 
should  receive,  whether  their  further  adherence  was  consistent  with  their 
views  of  propriety  or  not. 

The  judges  and  jury  who  were  to  constitute  the  first  court  of  inquiry  ever 
held  in  the  annals  of  modem  Spiritualism,  assembled  in  the  ante-chambers 
of  Lyceum  Hall,  Boston,  in  the  month  of  May,  1862,  and  hastily  extempo- 
rised themselves  into  something  of  a  judicial  form. 

The  names  of  those  present,  or  the  full  details  of  what  transpired,  are  no 
longer  of  essential  moment  in  the  annals  of  the  time.  The  history  of  the 
spiritualistic  movement  imperatively  demands  a  record  of  the  causes,  how- 
ever remote  or  indirect,  which  became  influential  upon  its  external  character 
and  progress,  hence  we  are  prepared  to  notice  the  succession  of  every  im- 
portant event,  as  it  occurred ;  but  when  we  are  required  to  connect  those 
events  witli  individuals  to  whom  the  record  may  attadi  censure  or  misunder- 
standing, we  must  remember  that  in  the  great  upheaval  which  society  endured 
by  the  advent  of  so  wonderful  and  unprecedented  a  stimulus  to  new  thought 
as  Spiritualism,  many  violent  extremisms,  temporary  exaggerations,  and  ex- 
cessive revulsions  in  newly-awakened  habits  of  old  thought,  might  be  natur- 
ally expected.  Such  were  the  causes  which  unquestionably  conspired  to 
produce  tlie  fanaticism  of  the  "new  motor  movement." 

Restless  reformers,  keenly  apprehensive  of  the  real  evils  which  afBict 
society  in  iincongenial  family  relations,  sapping  the  very  foundations  of  life 
with  the  curse  of  inherited  wrongs,  rashly  rushed  into  excessive  extremism, 
and  uttered  then-  unconsidered  protestations  against  the  ancient  rigime  by 
originating  a  new  and  far  more  dangerous  one  at  Kiantone,  A  remnant  of 
the  broken  ranks,  which  incurred  failure  in  these  and  many  other  similar 
undertakings,  seemed  determined  to  make  one  final  rally  in  the  Boston  move- 
ment now  under  consideration,  but  with  their  purposes  marred  by  fanatical 
zeal  and  ill-digested  views  of  reform,  they  once  more  failed,  or,  as  they  them- 
selves doubtless  believed,  started  their  undertakii^  in  advance  of  their  time. 
The  accusations  preferred  by  the  hierophants  consisted  of  what  they  claimed 
to  be  "  immoral  practices,  teachings,  and  tend  n  dp        d  b         a 

tions  from  communications,  sanctioning  these  our  all  d  o  1  b  n 
received  from   the  spirit-world    by  certain    m  diun       on  d        1     he 

order. 

The  defence  set  up  was  that  the  said  medium  p  n  d  h  own  nd 
viduali^  rather  than  the  will  or  aim  of  the  assoc  ado     and    hen   heir  author- 

Hosted  by  Google 

a$S  msTORV  OF  MODERlf 

itative  position  therein  was  urged,  a  still  more  exculpatory  toOe  was  attempted 
by  the  application  of  the  well-worn  adage  that  "  to  the  pure  all  things  are  pure." 

It  were  needless  to  pursue  this  subject  further.  The  real  details  are  but 
little  known  to  the  world.  Had  they  been  so,  they  would  have  furnished  the 
press  with  so  many  grains  of  ugly  truth  that  they  might  have  been  spared  a 
whole  world  of  invention,  and  filled  their  columns  with  fresh  editorials,  and 
interminable  variations  of  the  story  from  that  lime  to  the  present.  The  real 
animus  of  Spiritualists  and  Spiritualism,  however,  may  be  judged  from  the 
fact  that  though  the  most  repulsive  features  of  the  case  were  only  known  to 
themselves,  that  though  they  had  in  reality  nothing  to  fear  from  the  world, 
and  as  yet  suffered  no  discredit  in  their  own  persons,  no  sooner  was  the  real 
character  of  the  "secret  society"  known  tlian  the  tree  was  uprooted  by  some 
of  the  very  hands  that  had  been  foremost  to  assist  in  its  planting. 

The  great  body  of  the  Spiritualists  did  not  wait  to  see  good  fruit  springing 
forth  from  a  plant  which  they  perceived  carried  the  seeds  of  corruption  in  its 
heart.  From  the  very  moment  when  they  deemed  the  elements  of  good  sense 
and  pure  feeling  were  lacking  at  the  root,  they  laid  the  axe  to  the  tree,  and  it 
fell  ere  it  had  begun  to  put  forth  leaves  or  branches. 

The  mysterious  association  affected  to  drag  on  an  efTete  existence  for  some 
time  after  the  memorable  trial  above  noted,  but  in  reality  it  virtually  ceased 
to  be,  from  that  hour. 

But  though  the  life  of  the  order  [in  this  generation  at  least]  terminated,  the 
results  which  sprang  from  its  fleeting  existence  were  more  enduring. 

A  meeting  was  convened  by  several  of  the  prominent  Spiritualists  of  Boston, 
and  a  committee  appointed  to  draft  a  plan  for  a  "  declaration  of  principles," 
whereby  the  Spiritualists  then  and  there  assembled  might  be  known  and  un- 
derstood for  what  they  really  were,  and  their  professions  of  belief  no  more  be 
confounded  with  the  disorders  of  "  free-loveism,"  or  the  vagaries  of  fanatics, 
or  one-idea  reformers,  who,  speculating  on  the  credulity  of  their  fellow-mor- 
tals, planned  schemes  for  elevating  thenselves  into  positions  of  leadership. 

At  the  next  adjourned  meeting  of  the  Boston  Spiritualists  above  referred 
to,  the  plan  of  the  committee  was  unanimously  accepted,  printed,  and  widely 
circulated,  as  the  "  Declaration  of  Principles  of  the  Lyceum  Church." 

With  the  exigencies  of  the  time,  the  effects  of  both  poison  and  antidote  have 
ceased  to  be  publicly  felt,  though  the  warning  conveyed  in  the  one,  and  the 
stem  protestations  of  the  other,  have  doubtless  carried  their  results  silently 
forward  into  the  tides  of  life  in  which  tiie  cliaracteristics  of  new  generations 
are  formed. 

The  broken  ranks  of  the  "  Sacred  Order,"  after  having  made  great  pecu- 
niary and  personal  sacrifices  for  its  advancement,  have  lived  to  realize  either 
that  the  force  of  public  opinion,  or  the  unseen  but  still  more  potential  forces 
of  spiritual  influence  were  against  them ;  and  having  endured  some  self-im- 
posed martyrdoms  in  behalf  of  their  cause,  they  have  silently  returned  to  the 
well-beaten  paths  of  ordinary  life,  in  which  they  have  doubtless  found  both 
safety  and  usefulness.  And  thus,  over  obstacles  far  more  real  and  porten- 
tous than  any  which  the  shadowy  realms  of  felsehood  and  the  petty  arm  of 
malice  could  invent.  Spiritualism  has  marched  to  its  triumphs  over  the  legions 
of  its  own  slain.  Suffering  infinitely  more  at  the  hands  of  its  professed  friends 
than  its  avowed  enemies,  nothing  but  the  inherent  strength  and  potent  divin- 
ity of  tiiis  mighty  movement,  could  have  made  head  against  the  combined 
forces  of  persecution  from  without  and  corruption  from  within. 

In  this,  as  in  other  religious  movements,  persons  calling  themselves  "  Spir- 
itualists" seem  to  have  labored  to  overwhelm  their  cause  with  all  the  folly 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  23(> 

and  selfish  purposes  of  their  own  natures,  as  if  for  the  express  purpose  of" 
shaking  down  the  magnificent  temple,  even  though,  Samson-like,  they  should 
perish  beneath  the  ruins  they  create. 

True  it  is  that  experience  proves,  and  observation  shows,  that  the  wrongs, 
falses,  and  evils  of  society  have  not  been  originated,  only  prominently  exhib- 
ited by  Spiritualism  ;  and  when  Spiritualists  remember  that  the  few  fanatical 
episodes  our  space  has  allowed  us  to  notice  can  be  matched  by  twice-told  ter 
thousand  fur  more  formidable  evils,  which  the  hypocrites  of  society  are  evei 
striving  to  cover  with  the  white  mantle  of  religion,  they  may  feel  encouraged 
to  affirm  (liat  folly  and  corruption  are  not  the  peculiar  attributes  of  Spiritual- 
ism alone ;  and  if  that  movement  can  survive  die  shocks  administered  to  it  by 
its  friends,  its  vitality  is  unquenchable  enough  to  overcome  all  the  atucks  of 
its  e: 

CHAPTER    XXIV. 

SPIRITUALISM      AND      SPIRITUAL      MOUNTEBANKS. 

The  Spiritual  Mountebank  System  — Ely— Von  Vleck— Paine  — Mk.  Coles 
AT  The  New  York  Conhekence  —  Randolph  and  his  Recantation  —  The 
New  York  Pathfinder  AND  SwEDENBORG  —  Miss  Vinson  — George  Walcutt 
AND  his  Spiritual  Guardians  —  Professor  and  Mrs.  Spbnce,  on  Non-Immor- 

When  it  is  remembered  that  Spiritualism  numbersone-fourthatleast  of  die 
population  of  the  United  States  in  its  ranks,  it  can  be  no  matter  of  surprise 
to  find  many  persons  associated  with  it,  whose  character  and  actions  are  cal- 
culated to  inflict  far  more  damage  on  the  cause  dian  the  most  bitter  antagon- 
ism or  sectarian  opposition.  Amongst  those,  none  have  been  so  active  for 
mischief  as  "spiritual  mountebanks"  and  dishonest  mediums. 

They  consist  for  the  most  part  of  persons  endowed  with  genuine  medi- 
umstic  gifts,  but  who,  not  possessing  sufficient  ability  to  insure  financial  suc- 
cess, use  these  gifts  as  a  means  of  pandering  either  to  the  marvel-seeker 
or  the  opposidon,  whichever  chances,  for  the  time  being,  to  pay  the  best. 

This  class  of  fungi  generally  spring  up  when  Spiritualism  is  at  its  maxi- 
mum point  of  excitement,  and  after  operating  on  both  sides  of  the  question, 
strike  tlie  balance  in  favor  of  the  most  popular,  which  is  of  course  the  most 
profitable  likewise.  The  dishonest  medium  is  scarcely  less  unprincipled  than 
the  mountebank  ;  for  the  temptation  to  imposition  only  arises  from  the  fact 
that  all  mediumship  is  unreliable,  and  the  desire  to  procure  the  reward  or  credit 
of  devices  which  cannot  be  legitimately  rendered  is  the  stimulus  to  impo- 
sition. Even  the  medium  who  occasionally  practices  deception,  betrays  the 
most  holy  of  causes  and  the  most  sacred  impulses  of  the  heart,  and  such 
acts  of  dieating  are  as  mndi  die  result  of  avarice  or  ambition  as  the  acts 
of  the  professional  trickster.     We  might  be  excused  from  pointing  to  these 

Hosted  by  Google 

240  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

blure  on  the  fajr  face  of  our  cause,  on  the  ground  that  such  proceedings  are 
not  Spiritualism  2.nA  therefore  do  not  bdong  to  our  najrative,  but  as'tney 
measurably  produced  their  effect  on  the  progress  of  Spiritualism,  they  have 
their  place  in  this  record,  and  form  a  necessary  feature  in  a  chronicle  which 
bases  its  claim  to  acceptance  on  the  immutable  principles  of  truth.  The 
period  from  1858  to  1862  was  particularly  rife  with  the  action  of  "  spiritual 
mountebanks."  Up  to  that  time  such  persons  had  been  simply  "  trying  their 
hand  "  at  Spiritualism,  and  feeling,  perhaps,  a  little  uncertain  of  the  power  with 
■which  they  were  dealing,  feared  to  tamper  with  it.  No  sooner  did  they  be- 
gin to  understand  the  really  human  character  of  the  oncc-raysterious  world 
of  spirits,  than  with  cool  assurance  they  proceeded  to  deal  with  it  on  strictly 
human  principles,  and  discovering  on  which  side  of  the  movement  the  finan- 
cial successes  lay,  they  sliaped  their  action  accordingly ;  and  since  Spiritualism 
proper  would  not  pay,  they  proceeded  to  make  capital  out  of  popular  preju- 
dice against  it  by  "  recanting  their  faith,"  "  exposing  its  fallacies,"  and  pro- 
claiming all  mediums  cheats  and  all  Spiritualists  knaves  or  fools,  because  they 
were  willing  to  brand  themselves  in  the  same  category.  It  would  be  almost 
impossible  to  say  who  led  the  van  in  diis  respectable  crusade,  as  none  of  the 
parties  have  attained  sufficient  celebrity  to  distinguish  them  in  their  high  call- 
ing. As  they  appeared  like  wasps  in  the  feverish  heat  of  summer,  or  noxious 
living  things  bom  of  the  undue  excitement  which  reacts  in  corruption,  it  is 
difficult  to  select  individuals  from  the  generic  mass.  Amongst  the  most 
notorious  of  the  fraternity,  however,  a  few  stand  out  more  prominently  than 
the  rest,  foremost  of  whom  in  paramount  impudence  may  be  mentioned  one 
Bly,  who  whether  mediumistically  moved  to  advertise  Spiritualism,  or  a  mere 
chevalier  d'indusirii  laboring  in  any  vocation  that  he  thought  would  pay, 
it  matters  not  now  to  inquire ;  suffice  it  to  say,  that  at  special  points  in  the 
progress  of  the  spiritual  movement,  and  just  when  a  certain  amount  of  an- 
tagonistic stimulus  became  necessary,  Bly  appeared,  now  acting  as  a  medium- 
and  now  going  about  from  place  to  place  recounting  his  own  treachery,  de- 
manding credit  for  his  own  assertions  of  being  an  unmitigated  cheat,  and  act- 
ing as  a  self-appointed  detector-general,  for  "  humbugs  "  of  the  same  class  as 
himself.  At  first  his  pretentions  were  so  bold  and  assuming  that  some  of  the 
Spiritualists  actually  responded  in  good  faith  to  his  daring  tone  of  challenge, 
and  allowed  themselves  to  appear  in  public  discussions  or  paper  contro- 
versies with  him.  It  was  soon  found,  however,  that  his  principal  aim  was  to 
procure  notoriety  and  full  audiences ;  that  his  tricks  were  30  shallow,  his 
impudence  so  unscrupulous,  and,  even  with  the  opposition,  his  whole  pro- 
cedure so  offensive,  that  to  notice  him  at  all,  was  to  concede  his  point,  and 
discredit  any  name  or  person  associated  with  him.  Another  of  the  exposers 
was  one  Von  Vleck,  a  little  man,  whose  hardihood  was  displayed  in  continual 
alternations  between  his  assumption  of  genuine  mediumship  and  his  auda- 
cious acknowledgment  of  deception. 

Both  these  worthies  assumed  the  title  of  "  doctor,"  and  one  of  them  ac- 
tually exhibited  his  tricks  at  Bamum's  Museum  for  a  "  consideration." 

After  these,  appeared  a  certain  "  Melville  Fay,"  who,  though  repeatedly  de- 
tected and  openly  exposed  by  the  Spiritualists  themselves,  insisted  upon  palm- 
ing himself  off  as  a  medium  until  he  was  literally  chased  out  of  the  field, 
when  he,  too,  hhed  public  halls  to  exhibit  his  own  tricks  as  specimens  of  all 
mediumship.  The  cliief  injury  effected  by  this  member  of  the  mountebank 
fraternity  was  the  fact  of  his  bearing  the  name  of  "  Fay,"  hence  causing  him 
to  be  sometimes  mistaken  for  Mr.  William  Fay,  an  excellent  medium,  who 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  241 

travelled  in  Europe  with  the  Davenport  Brothers  and  was  deservedly  cele- 
brated for  remarkable  phenomenal  gifts. 

It  was  about  the  year  1858  that  another  "bogus  medium"  was  added  to  this 
choice  list  in  the  person  of  a  Mr.  Paine,  cf  Worcester,  Mass.  This  man  had 
actually  succeeded  in  carrying  on  a  systematic  course  of  deception  for  some 
years,  by  the  aid  of  machinery  the  nature  of  which  was  reported  in  the  Spir- 
itual Telegraph  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Coles,  who  sums  up  the  mode  of  detecting  the 
imposture  in  the  following  words : 

"UptoSundayevening,  the  4th  instant,  the  >&M  was  undiscovered.  On  that  occaaon, 
in  a  circle  of  ten  persons,  there  happened  to  be  three  Spirilualisls  who  were  very  sceptical, 
viz.,  Mr.  Henry  Smith,  the  well-known  '  Razor.strop  Man;'  Mr.  C.  B.  J.  Waters,  of 
Worcester  ;  and  the  writer  of  this  article.  At  the  conclusion  of  tiie  'manifestations,'  aE 
appeared  satisfied  save  the  three  sceptics,  who  determmed  not  to  leave  the  house  until  the 
carpet  was  taken  up  and  the  floor  esimined.  The  result  of  this  sceptical  determination  was 
a  clear  unravelling  of  the  mystery,  and  there  is  now  one  less  humbug  in  the  spiritual 
field.    .......  John  F.  Coles." 

Now,  the  discovery  of  machinery  in  the  case  of  Mn  Paine  was  not  so  very 
astounding  after  all.  Up  to  the  time  of  the  exposi,  Paine's  "manifesta- 
tions" had  never  been  remarkable  for  intelligence,  and  had  always  been 
given  in  his  own  house,  circumstances  which  did  not  conform  to  the  genius 
of  the  spiritual  phenomena,  whose  chief  characteristics  were  the  tests  of  iden- 
tity, which  proved  the  presence  of  individual  spirits,  and  die  fact  that  they 
could  be  produced  anywhere,  that  is,  in  any  locality,  whether  in  field  or  forest, 
private  houses,  the  dwelling  of  friends  or  strangers,  as  well  as  in  those  of  the 
mediums  themselves.  The  imposition  practiced  by  Paine,  therefore,  was  only 
remarkable  for  the  length  of  time  during  which  it  had  remained  undiscovered 
and  the  extraordinary  reasons  which  he  assigned  for  his  conduct. 

The  Spiritualists  in  general  have  held  for  their  motto,  "  The  tnith,  the  whole 
truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth ;"  hence,  with  characteristic  frankness,  they 
were  accustomed  to  discuss  at  their  conferences  any  subject  that  related  to- 
their  belief  whether  of  a  disparaging  nature  or  otherwise.  At  the  New  York 
Conference  diis  spirit  of  candor  led  them  to  invite  strangers  to  take  part  in 
their  discussions,  and  on  one  occasion,  Mr.  Paine,  the  "  bogus  medium,"  being 
present,  and  requesting  permission  "  to  define  his  position"  in  reference  to 
the  late  exposure  of  his  practices,  he  was  permitted  to  make  the  following: 
statement,  which  we  copy  from  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  : 

"  Mr,  Paine  said,  he  felt  himself  alive  to  the  delicacy  of  his  position  ;  but  if  the  thing 
were  to  do  over  again,  he  would  not  vary  his  programme  in  the  least.  He  is  a  Spiritualist. 
He  believes  there  have  been,  and  may  be  yet  extant,  a  few  honest  mediums,  and  occasion- 
ally a  veritable  spiritual  manifestation ;  but  a  large  proportion  of  the  reputed  mediums  are- 
cheats  and  the  manifestations  shams.  He  does  not  ask  for  the  pity  of  the  conference,  for 
he  does  not  feel  himself  to  be  the  subject  of  pity. 

"  He  stands  commended  in  this  matter  to  his  own  conscience ;  he  has  resorted  to  decep- 
tion in  order  to  meet  deception  and  ultimately  to  e>!pose  it.  He  thinks  the  end  iustilies  the 
means,  in  this  case  at  least,  whatever  doubt  there  might  be  aboat  it  as  a  principle  of  ethics. 
[Here  Mr.  Paine  held  up  a  bit  of  what  appeared  to  be  No.  i  wire  as  the  mighty  instni- 
inent  with  which  he  set  out  to  rid  the  world  of  humbug.]  But  he  counts  this  as 
amongst  his  treasures  m  heaven.  He  has  never  charged  anyt>ody.  Somebody  gave  bis 
wife  six  chairs,  and  small  presents  may  2iave  flowed  into  his  earthly  coffers  from  time  to- 
time  ;  but  it  was  a  labor  of  love  on  his  part  —  love  of  the  cause— a  self-sacrificmg  devo- 
tion to  truth. 

"Having  arrived  in  New  York,  he  commenced  operations  with  the  expectation  of  getting 
the  indorsement  of  the  Spiritualists  to  bis  mediimiship,  and  then  he  intended  to  visit  the 
benighted  cities  of  Boston  and  Philadelphia,  where  it  was  fondly  believed  a  like  success. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

242 

HISTORY  OF  M0DERI7 

"  From  tWs  vartar^  ground  of  spiritualistic  indorsement,  it  was  fully  his         ■ 
rescue  the  cities  aforesaid  and  the  cause  generally  from  the  thraldom  of  cheating  ,  ■  ,. 
bv  issninc  to  each  and  every  oneof  them  a  private  mandate  to  vacate  the  field,  or  be  i-. 
dsDounced  as  cheats.     He  has  no  faith  in  SpirituaUsro  founded  upon  spintuol  manifestatK 
His  aim  is  to  lift  the  soul  from  all  such  Erovellmg  evidences  as  address  themselves  to  n. 
throuoh  the  senses      ....     And  it  may  be  permitted  the  reporter  to  remark  that 
inasmuch  as  Mr.  Paine  has  been  the  first  martyr  to  his  own  pious  fraud,  he  will  retire  into 
private  life  with  a  thorough  disgust  for  his  machine." 

Considering  that  Mr.  Paine  had  actually  been  practicing  on  the  public  for 
five  years  and  never  attempted  to  put  into  action  his  philanthropic  purpose 
of  saving  the  world  from  the  tricks  of  mediums,  until  after  his  own  had  been 
detected  his  very  candid  admissions  did  not  seem  to  produce  much  effect 
upon  the  conference ',  but  it  may  not  be  amiss,  in  this  connecaon,  to  quote  a 
few  paECS  illustrative  of  the  opinions  of  those  who  hstened  to  him.  1  he 
following  sentences  spoken  by  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Loveland,  form  a  pretty  fair 
expression  of  the  general  sentiment  respecting  Mr.  Paine : 

■'  Mr.  Loveland  said :  It  might  be  profitable  to  consider  whether  or  not  Mr.  Paine,  who 
has  felt  himself  impressed  to  cheat  his  fellow-creatures  for  God's  sake,  and  Mr  Coles,  who 
has  exposed  him,  are  not,  themselves,  slightly  tinctured  with  fallacy  in  concluding,  as  the^ 
seem  tVdo,  from  the  deception  proved  and  confessed,  that  cheating  is  vmiversal.  This  is 
s^ange  logic  It  isan  imputation  at  once  repelled  by  every  mmd  that  feels  itself  to  be  hon- 
est. The  logical  inference  arising  from  the  fact  that  there  are  perhaps  thnty  thousand 
mediums,  embradng  every  variety,  as  to  age,  condition,  etc.,  is  that  honesty  is  ther«/*>  and 

"""^llh %'Tnwuate,  as  Messrs.  Coles  and  Paine  seem  to  do,  that  these  arc  mostly,  if  not 
all  cheats,'is  a  Ubel  on  human  nature  and  common  mtelligence.  1  he  very  f^^t  of  Paine  s 
dUy  imitation  or  counterfeit  presupposes  an  original  and  genume.  Whence  the  o"gm^? 
What  expert  in  deception  first  started  the  idea  that  spirits  could  rap  and  move  ponderable 

"""Mr  Coles  could  not  well  have  originated  that  idea,  for,  in  common  with  the  whole 
Christian  church,  he  disbelieves  that  spirits  can  communicate  at  all  in  any  tangible  way^ 
It  could  not  have  been  Mr.  Paine,  for  his  stupid  hoax  proves  that  he  has  not  sense 
enough." 

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  niay  not  have  an  opportunity  of  acquaint- 
ing tliemselves  with  the  fact,  it  may  be  well  to  state  that  after  this  memorable 
f^ure  to  sweep  physical  manifestations  out  of  America  with  a  bit  of  No.  2 
wire  Mr  Paine  of  Worcester,  did  redre  into  private  life,  from  whence,  up  to 
the  date  of  going  to  press,  no  further  tidings  of  that  iUusf  nous  individual  have 

""^  R  was^n  the  year  1858  that  a  great  jubilee  was  proclaimed  in  Boston  by 
-  the  societies  of  Christendom,  who  make  diat  city  dieir  headquarters  on  ac 
count  of  the  public  "recantation"  of  an  individual  known  as  P.  K.  Kan- 
dolph,  a  Spiritualist  and  a  trance  speaker.  Kandolph,  it  was  acknowieaged, 
had  not  been  very  well  sustained  in  his  career  amongst  the  Spiritualists,  and 
it  was  stutgested  that  some  of  their  number  neither  desired  to  sustain  him  nor 
retain  h^services  in  connection  with  the  cause ;  hence,  no  very  great  alarm 
for  its  future  was  experienced  when  he  came  out  in  the  form  of  a  ;'  recanta. 
tion,"  throwing  himself  at  the  same  time  into  the  arms  of  a  certain  sect  of 
Christians  in  Boston,  by  whom  he  was  most  cordially  received,  formally  bap- 
tized and  2rea.tly  patronized  and  prayed  over.  Even  while  m  the  full  tide  of 
his  popularity  amongst  his  new  brethren  he  was  induced,  for  a  "consideration, 
to  appear  on  the  Spiritualists'  platform  at  the  Melodeon  under  the  manage- 
ment of  Dr.  Gardner,  for  the  sake  of  making  his  "recantation'  more  pub- 
■iic  and  proclaiming  it  in  the  very  heart  of  the  spintualistic  ranks-    Many  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  243 

the  sterner  believers  in  the  faith  highly  censured  Dr.  Gardner  for  parading 
this  unworthy  subject  on  the  spiritual  platform,  and  various  motives  have 
been  assigned  for  the  doctor's  conduct.  Some  declared  that  he  only  desired 
to  fill  die  hall ;  others  that  he  vra.s  just  then  destitute  of  a  sensation,  and  was 
glad  to  accept  of  anything  short  of  negro  minstrelsy.  Some  thought  it  was  an 
act  of  bravado  intended  to  show  the  sectarian  who  had  so  eagerly  snatched  at 
this  precious  morsel  how  utterly  unimportant  such  "recantations"  were,  and 
others  there  were  who  shrewdly  suspected  what  we  believe  to  be  the  real  tmth, 
namely,  diat  the  doctor  was  desirous  of  publicly  exhibiting  the  true  character 
of  the  loss  sustained  by  Spiritualism  and  the  gain  of  Christianity.  In  this  as 
in  any  similar  object  aimed  at,  all  parties  were  foiled ;  for  after  having  made 
some  rambling  and  utterly  inapplicable  remarks  about  Spiritualism,  interspersed 
with  evidently  sensational  attempts  to  show  that  he  was  still  "under  the  influ- 
ence "  and  compelled  occasionaUjr  to  break  off  from  his  written  lecture  and  re- 
turn to  his  old  style  of  improvisation,  the  whole  affair  concluded  by  the  said  Dr. 
Randolph's  speedy  return  to  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism,  in  which  he  has  been 
practicing  on  and  off  ever  since.  And  yet  this  petty  attempt  on  the  part  of 
a  single  individual  to  drag  himself  into  notoriety,  even  at  the  expense  of  char- 
acter and  reputation,  was  another  of  the  popular  weapons  which  the  press 
and  pulpit  eagerly  seized  upon  to  wield  against  Spiritualism. 

Amongst  the  more  respectable  and  intelligent  class  of  the  community  it 
becomes  difficult  to  find  any  one  stirred  with  the  special  motives  which  could 
induce  a  "recantation"  from  the  scientific  facts  and  reasonable  philosophy 
of  Spiritualism  ;  nevertheless,  and  in  order  to  give  every  phase  of  the  move- 
ment in  its  most  protean  shape,  and  with  all  available  candor,  we  present  the 
only  instance  we  can  find  of  an  intelligent  and  apparently  reasonable  mind's 
revolt  from  the  once  accepted  faith  of  Spiritualism.  We  shall  offer  the 
plain  facts  of  the  case,  widiout  comment,  or  attempt  to  extenuate  the 
motives  of  the  party  involved,  or  to  explain  away  whatever  of  sliadow  in 
Spiritualism  he  affirms  he  perceived.  We  refer  to  the  case  of  Mr.  ^Vhitney, 
the  editorof  the  New  York /"(tM/rei/f?-,  a  gentleman,  who  having,  as  he  himself 
claimed,  "  thoroughly  investigated  Spiritualism,"  and  even  become  a  medium 
for  its  influence,  finally  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  spirits  are  only  allowed 
by  the  Almighty  to  come  to  the  earth  for  die  purpose  of  leading  mankind  on 
to  ruin  and  eternal  perdition. 

Strangely  enough,  in  the  same  articles  which  contain  his  rambling  disquis- 
itions on  the  Swedenborgian  theory  that  spirit  communion  with  mortals  is 
"  disorderly  and  perilous,"  he  gives  some  of  his  experiences  during  the  years 
in  which  he  had  deemed  himself  "blessed  and  happy"  in  that  intercourse. 
As  Mr.  Charles  Partridge  has  condensed  Mr.  Whitney's  experiences,  and  the 
deductions  he  draws  from  them  oi demoniac  influences,  from  that  gentleman's 
own  words,  printed  in  the  columns  of  the  Pathfinder,  we  shall  republish  them 
in  a  verbatim  extract  from  the  Spiritual  Telegraph. 

PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  OF  MR.  WHITNEY. 
(From  the  Spiritual  Telegraph.) 

"  Having  been  once  or  twice  to  a  tipping  and  writing  medium,  we  were  only  desirous  of 
proving  the  identity  of  a  dear  departed  one,  and  drew  up  a  series  of  questions  wliich  we 
mtended  to  propound  to  the  spirit.  The  questions  referred  to  were  written  on  a  letter  sheet 
of  paper,  and  covered  the  whole  four  pages  in  a  small  and  dosely-written  hand. 

"These  questions  were  written  by  ourself,  when  entirely  alone  and  locked  in  our  sanctum 
free  from  mortal  sight.  Having  finished  the  document,  we  placed  it  in  an  envelope,  sealed 
it,  and  then  placed  it  inside  of  uur  coat  breast-pocket. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

244  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"  We  went  directly  from  our  office  to  the  room  of  the  medium,  holding  n 
with  any  individual  until  the  following  took  place  while  seated  with  the  medium  at  his  table 
in  company  with  three  other  persons,  entire  strangers  to  us. 

«  We  had  sat  probably  fifteen  minutes  at  the  table,  when  the  medium  turned  to  ua  and 
remarked  that  we  could  mquire  if  there  were  any  spirit  that  desired  to  communicate  with  us. 

The  response  came  immediately—'Yes.'    After  putting  t ■' ■"*■  ' 

importance,  we  concluded  we  would  not  produc*  "■" 
another  time,  when  the  medium's  hand  was  contro 

■e  prepared  ? ' 

■'ftmay\yellbeEupposed  that  it  created  a  surprise  in  U5,  that  we  can 
ing,  as  we  did,  that  the  name  of  the  spirit  had  not  be 
knew  the  spirit  we  were  seeliing. 

"  While  under  this  surprise,  a  gentlemaji  who  sat  opposite  to  us,  like  us,  come  to  mvesti- 
gate,  S£dd,  '  Now,  before  aJiylhing  is  spoken,  let  us  get  a  test  out  of  this.  Will  the  spirit 
state  whether  the  gentleman  has  any  questions  prepared,  and  if  so,  will  they  indicate  it,  and 
write  out  throng  the  medium's  hand  the  first  question  written  ? ' 

"'Yes,'  was  the  reply,  'he  hasquestions  prepared,' and  then  the  medium's  hand  wrote  out 
a  question. '  We  immediately  drew  out  the  letter,  opened  it,  and  read  to  those  present  the 
first  question  on  our  list,  which  proved  to  be  an  exact  copy  o£  the  one  the  medium  had  written, 

"The  spirit  again  wrote:  '  I  will  now  answer  your  questions ;  ask  them  mentally.'  We 
held  the  paper  in  front  of  us,  using  care  that  the  medium  or  any  one  present  should  not  over- 

"We  then  read,  mentally,  the  questions,  and,  at  the  end  of  each  question,  the  spirits 
responded,  either  1:^  tips  or  through  the  mediums'  hand,  correctly  and  satisfactorily. 
"  Had  the  spirit  been  present  in  the  body,  it  could  not  have  done  it  more  correctly. 
"  We  left  the  drcle  in  a  state  of  thought  that  no  one  can  conceive  of  who  has  not  passed 
through  a  amilar  scene." 

"Religious  Instructions  from  the  Spirits.  — It  so  happened  that  most  of  our  fam- 
ily became  firm  believers  with  us,  with  the  exception  of  the  mother,  who  looked  upon  the 
manifestations  as  we  do  now,  she  being  a  professor  of  religion  and  member  of  a  Presbyterian 
church;  hence  she  did  all  she  could  to  persuade  us  we  were  under  the  infiucnce  of  evil,  arid 
predicted  that  no  good  would  come  from  it.  She  begged,  entreated,  nay,  implored  her  chil- 
dren to  denounce  and  give  it  up. 

"  So  far  were  her  feelings  concerned  that  she  even  refused  to  remain  with  ns  m  the  house, 
and  demanded  that  the  younger  part  of  her  family  should  go  with  her.  Whilst  in  that  state 
of  mind,  one  of  her  family  present  was  observed  on  a  certain  occasion  to  lie  peculiarly 
affected ;  a  t^eness  came  over  his  face,  and,  with  tears  streaming  from  his  eyes,  he  called  for 
a  pendl  and  wrote  the  following  sentiment,  remarking,  after  he  had  finished  it,  that  it  was  for 
her— the  mother— and  was  from  the  spirit  of  Christ,  as  nearly  as  his  spirit  could  approach 
the  earth :  ,       ,  . 

"  '  Let  the  voice  of  truth  and  reason  ever  guide  you  in  all  your  acts.  Keep  heaven  ever  m 
your  view,  as  tlie  great  Idol  of  your  soul  and  the  pole-star  which  shall  guide  you  to  happiness 
and  a  glorious  immortality,  .  -l-  i  ^  j 

" '  L^et  love  and  unity  entwine  around  your  hearts  a  garland  of  pure  affection,  which  God 
in  his  goodness  has  decreed  to  all  who  shall  desire  to  receive  it.  Be  calm,  modest,  tmassum- 
ing,  trusting  in  tliat  blessed  promise  of  Jesus  which  says.  Where  I  am,  there  ye  shaU  be  also. ' 
"She  immediately  rose  from  her  chair  and  exclaimed, '  I  am  a  believer  in  Spiritualism ;  for 
whilst  sitting  here,  I  uttered  a  fervent  prayer  to  Jesus  tliat  if  these  thmgs  were  true  lie  would 
reveal  it  to  me  by  a  communication  from  himself.  I  am  satisfied  that  my  prayer  was  heard 
and  this  is  the  answer.'  From  that  hour  she  became  a  believer,  and  hascontinued  so  to  the 
present  time  ;  and  more,  she  became  developed  as  a  medium." 

"  Saved  Him  from  the  Flood.  —  Happening  to  visit  a  well-known  medium  one  even- 
ing whUe  sitting  outside  of  the  circle  that  was  gathered  round  the  table,  not  seekmg  or 
expecting  a  communication  from  the  spirits,  the  medium  wrote  the  following:  'My  dear 
Son,  on  your  return  home,  look  well  to  your  house.  Abigail. 

"  The  medium  inquired  who  was  present  that  had  a  mother  in  the  spirit -world  of  that 
name  We  said  nothing,  none  responded,  and  finally  the  medium  asked,  'Is  it  for  this 
one  ? '  pointing  to  each  one  in  turn  in  the  room,  until  it  came  to  us,  when  the  spirit  re- 
monded'Yes.' 

"  We  acknowledged  that  we  had  a  mother  deceased  by  that  name,  took  the  communica- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  345 

tion,  and  returned  home.  We  naturally  took  a  look  about  the  house,  but  could  not  dis- 
cover anything  that  required  more  than  usual  vigilance,  until  our  attention  was  directed  to 
a  '  scuttle '  or  trap-door  in  tlie  roof,  which  had  been  blown  open  by  the  wind.  Having 
closed  this  trap-door  our  attention  was  called  to  the  flues,  which  we  found  in  a  precarious 

"Suffice  it  to  say,  that  had  not  our  attention  been  directed  m  the  channel  it  was  by  the 
spirits,  we  should  have  had  a  large  part  of  our  household  effects  destroyed  tiy  soot  and 
water,  asin  the  night  one  of  the  most  violent  rain-storms  came  up  that  we  ever  remember. 

"  Now  these  are  facts,  and  to  our  own  mmd  are  understood  to  be  communications  from 
disembodied  spirits ;  and  the  reader  will  naturally  exclaim,  '  We  see  no  evil  in  all  that,  but 
amply  a  desire  on  the  part  of  the  spirits  to  prove  their  identity,  and  promote  your  worldly 
comforts  and  interests.'  We  grant  it,  and  can  only  say,  in  the  language  of  another,  that 
'Whom  the  gods  would  destroy,  theyfirst  make  mad;'  and  we,  from  observation  of  the  fruits 
of  modem  Spiritualism,  are  fully  satisfied  tliat  whom  the  devil  wishes  to  control,  he  first 
makes  happy." 

Now  it  may  be  naturally  supposed  that  having  given  an  experience  which 
must  commend  itself  to  every  candid  mind  as  presenting  naught  but  good, 
we  should  be  equally  frank  in  revealing  the  nature  of  the  shoals  and  reefs  on 
which  Mr.  Whitney's  faith  was  ultimately  wrecked,  and  his  confidence  in 
Spiritualism  destroyed,  but  we  are  obliged  to  confess  that  on  searching  the 
columns  of  the  Pathfinder,  we  are  unable  to  fix  upon  a  single  fact  detailed, 
which  would  warrant  any  conclusion  of  a  diabolical  agency  in  the  spiritual 
movement,  and  no  other  philosophy  for  such  an  idea,  than  the  passage  above 
quoted,  namely,  that  "whom  the  devil  would  control,  he  first  makes  happy," 
and  certain  remarks  from  the  writings  of  Swedenborg,  Uie  most  apposite  of 
which  is  quoted  by  Mr.  Whitney,  as  follows ; 

"When  spirits  begin  to  speak  with  man,  he  must  beware  lest  he  believe  them  in  any- 
thing, for  they  say  almost  anything ;  things  are  fabricated  by  them,  and  they  lie ;  for  if  they 
were  permitted  to  relate  what  heaven  is,  and  how  things  are  in  the  heavens,  they  would  tell 
so  many  lies,  and  indeed  with  such  solemn  affirmations,  that  man  would  be  astonished ; 
wherefore,  when  spicils  were  speaking  I  was  not  permitted  to  have  any  faith  in  the  things 
which  they  related. 

"  On  this  account,  the  state  of  speakmg  with  spirits  on  this  earth  is  most  perilous  unless 
one  is  in  the  true  faith.  They  mduce  so  strong  a  persuasion  that  it  is  the  Lord  himself  who 
speaks  and  who  commands,  that  man  cannot  but  believe  and  obey." 

And  thus,  upon  the  one-sided  representations  of  a  philosopher  who  claimed 
the  Divine  privilege  of  spiritiial  sight  and  communion  for  himself,  but  depied 
it  to  others  on  the  peril  of  mysterious  and  wholly  incomprehensible  possibili- 
ties of  danger,  Mr.  Whitney  was  contented  to  renounce  the  intercourse 
whose  truth  and  blessed  ministry  his  own  statements  bore  witness  of,  and 
brand  the  experiences  of  millions  of  his  fellow-mortals  as  disorderly,  if  not 
absolutely  diabolical. 

We  shall  take  but  one  more  glance  at  the  dark  features  of  Spiritualism, 
which  just  about  the  time  of  which  we  are  writing  threatened  to  overcloud  the 
bright  sky  whose  sunshine  liad  so  long  gladdened  the  hearts  of  the  believere, 
and  even  involve  the  whole  cause  in  the  night  of  a  terrible  and  materialistic 
reaction.  The  case  in  question  refers  once  more  to  the  injurious  frauds 
which  were  just  about  this  period  perpetrated  in  the  name  of  Spiritualism. 

The  narrative  is  taken  from  one  of  the  local  Ohio  papers,  and  reads  as 
follows : 

"PRETENTIOUS    SPIRITUALISM. 

Hosted  by  Google 

Z46  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

both  of  Cardin^ton,  Oiiio,  advertised  to  give  exhibitions  of  Spiritualism  in  Mechanic's 
HalL     The  lady  clauns  to  be  a  medium  for  some  remarkable  manifestations  by  the  spirit  of 

"  On  Wednesday  and  Thursday  evenings  large  andiences  attended,  at  an  admittance  of 
twenty-five  cents  each.  The  entertainment  consisted  in  seeing  strung  np  before  the  audi- 
ence, drums,  tambourmes,  and  other  instruments,  and  of  a  briet7illogii;al,  chopped-up  speech 
from  the  minister,  in  explanation  of  the  kind  of  Spiritualism  Ihey  were  about  to  exhibit. 
Then  the  hall  was  made  perfectly  dark,  and  a  person  whom  they  had  engaged  commenced 
playing  lively  tunes  on  the  violin,  and  it  was  s^d  that  the  spirit  '  King'  and  his  associates 
accompanied  the  music  by  playing  the  drums  and  tambourines.  Durmg  the  exhibition  on 
the  third  evenmg,  two  persons  in  diffeient  parts  of  the  hail  suddenly  and  amultaneously 
opened  on  them  tiie  glare  from  darlt-linterns  which  disclosed  the  fact  (hat  the  players  on 
the  drums  and  tambouvines  were  none  other  than  the  Methodist  preacher  and  the  young  girL 

"The  meeting  of  course  broke  up  in  confusion." 

There  are  two  facts  connected  with  this  case  which  did  not  come  under 
the  notice  of  the  Columbus  journalist.  The  first  is,  that  one  of  the  parties 
who  sprang  a  light  on  die  impostors  was  a  well-known  Spiritualist  of  the  city, 
confirming  by  practical  proof  our  assertion  that  the  Spiritualists  have  nothing 
to  fear  for  the  real  facts  of  their  belief,  and  never  seek  to  build  them  up  with 
the  corrupt  material  of  fraud  or  error.  The  second  incident  is  of  a  more 
private  nature  and  involves  a  curious  evidence  of  die  guardianship  and  min- 
istry of  spirits. 

At  an  exibition  of  Miss  Vinson's  pretended  power  as  a  medium,  and  pre- 
vious to  the  expose,  Mr.  George  Walcutt,  of  Columbus,  was  present,  and 
became  strongly  impressed  with  the  deceptive  character  of  what  he  witnessed. 
At  the  following  seance,  which  he  also  attended,  he  resolved,  for  the  sake  of  the 
sublime  truths  which  he  acknowledged  in  Spiritualism,  that  he  would  test  the 
reality  of  his  impressions,  and  if  there  was  falsehood  in  the  matter,  expose  it. 

Mr.  Walcutt,  it  may  be  remembered,  was  one  of  the  far-famed  artists  through 
whose  wonderful  mediumship  hundreds  of  portraits  of  deceased  persons  have 
been  painted  with  marvellous  fidelity,  although  executed  only  from  spirit 
originals,  under  spirit  influence,  and  often  in  the  dark,  or  blindfolded.  Be- 
sides his  remarkable  gifts  in  this  direction,  Mr.  Walcutt  was  a  fine  clairvoyant 
and  clairaudient.  By  aid  of  his  spirittial  sight,  he  distinctly,  in  the  dark,  per- 
ceived Miss  Vinson — who  was  supposed  to  be  quietly  seated  in  her  chair — 
arise  up  just  after  the  light  had  been  extinguished,,  and  commence  manipula- 
ting the  instruments  which  were  assumed  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the  spirits. 
Indignant  at  such  a  fraud,  Mr.  Walcutt — himself  one  of  the  most  truthful  of 
men — resolved  that  he  would  detect  and  expose  the  imposture  ;  for  this  pur- 
pose he  was  determined  to  rise  noiselessly  from  his  seat,  and  grasp  the  arm 
of  the  operator  as  she  was  swinging  the  instruments  about  in  the  darkness. 
His  further  course  he  had  not  resolved  on,  but  to  seize  her  in  the  very  act  of 
trickery  was  his  fixed  purpose.  Just  as  he  was  about  to  rise,  he  felt  the 
grasp  of  a  strong  spirit  hand  on  his  shoulder,  and  a  voice,  which  he  recog- 
nized as  a  beloved  guardian's,  whispered  in  his  ear,  "Sit  still  for  your  life." 
For  a  few  moments  Mr.  Walcutt  obeyed  the  injunction,  paralyzed  beneath  the 
grasp  of  the  spirit  hand,  but  just  as  it  relaxed  its  hold,  a  light  was  sprung  from 
two  distant  parts  of  the  hall  at  once,  discovering  the  "  medium  "  and  her  asso 
date  on  the  floor  and  in  the  very  act  of  manipulating  the  instruments. 

The  audience  was  large  and  highly  incensed  at  the  discovery.  Miss  Vin- 
son was  permitted  to  make  her  escape  quietly  enough,  but  her  male  compan- 
ion  was  subjected  to  some  very  rough  usage,  and  nothing  but  the  vigorous 
interference  of  the  police  saved  him  from  the  retributive  hands  of  "Judge 
Lynch." 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  =47 

Mr.  Walcutt,  as  a  well-known  spirit  medium,  was  particularly  obnoxious  to 
some  of  the  '-roughs"  of  the  city,  consequently  he  was  aware  that  had  he 
carried  out  his  intention  of  stepping  forward  to  seize  the  arm  of  Miss  Vinson, 
at  the  moment  when  the  lights  were  struck,  he  would  have  been  revealed  by 
her  side,  and  apparently  in  the  act  of  aiding  her  deception. 

No  explanation  of  liis  motives  or  appearance  in  such  a  situation  would  have 
availed  in  that  excited  assembly,  and  hence  Mr.  Walcutt  truly  and  gratefully 
inferred  that  the  interference  of  his  kind  and  judicious  guardian  spirit  saved 
him  from  a  most  equivocal  and  dangerous  situation,  and  perhaps  was  the 
means  of  preserving  his  life. 

The  most  severe  blows  that  Spiritualism  has  sustained  have  been  those 
aimed  by  unprincipled  and  avaricious  mediums,  who,  when  the  manifestarions 
failed  to  come  as  freely  as  the  circumstances  required,  practiced  imposition 
to  supply  the  deficiency.  The  detection  of  this  lamentable  species  of  fraud 
gave  occasion  for  the  opposition  to  charge  an  universal  system  of  trickery  upon 
the  spiritual  ranks,  while  not  a  few  of  the  most  staunch  believers  themselves 
alleged  that  nearly  all  the  mediums  might  be  taxed  with  similarly  dishonest 
practices. 

In  respect  to  these  statements  it  must  be  recollected  that  the  mediums  m 
America  count  by  thousands,  whilst  those  engaged  before  the  public  alone 
number  several  hundreds. 

The  gifts  of  mediumship  fall  upon  all  ranks  of  society,  and  all  grades  of 
moral  and  intellectual  development  alike.  The  most  careful  observation  of 
this  power  and  its  exercise,  at  present,  only  reveals  the  fact  that  it  is  a  phy- 
sical peculiarity  of  certain  organizations,  but  that  it  is  by  no  means  dependent 
on  moral  or  intellectual  endowments.  Hence  the  idea  that  the  gift  ofmcdi- 
umship  implies  or  creates  a  tendency  to  deception  is  wholly  unphilosophical, 
and  without  foundation.  Some  of  the  most  estimable  and  some  of  the  most 
unscrupulous  natures  have  become  the  subjects  of  this  remarkable  power. 

Highly  refined  and  tenderly  conscientious  minds  are  to  be  found  in  the 
mediumstic  ranks,  whilst  persons  of  unmistakably  vicious  proclivities  are 
equally  snsceptable  of  the  spiritual  afflatus.  We  can  but  record  the  fact, 
without  at  present  attempting  to  theorize  upon  its  character.  The  whole 
difficulty  which  it  presents  to  the  mind  of  the  observer  ceases,  however,  when 
we  banish  our  preconceived  and  utterly  erroneous  opinions  of  what  a  medium 
between  the  two  worids  ought  to  be,  and  simply  acknowledge  that  which 
seems  patent  to  the  communion,  namely,  that  it  depends  upon  some  elec- 
trical properties  evolved  from  the  physical  or^nlzations  of  favorably-en- 
dowed individuals.  We  must  all  admit  that  special  temptations  to  practice 
deception,  at  times,  overshidow  the  position  of  a  medium.  The  scornful 
incredulity  which  d  fi      h  p    d  enomena ;  the  intense  and  some- 

times painfully  exi  d    u-  th  witness  it.     Theu'  own  profes- 

sional pride  or  the  ty  whi  m  to  render  the  service  promised ; 

all  diese,  together       h     h         ur  Huence  peculiar  to  the  position  of 

a  medium,  are  an  p         fti  nt  for  fraud,  without  resorting  to 

the  far-fetched  and  wh  d  theory  that  "tricky  spirits  "  prompt 

the  imposition.     ^  h  well-proven  case  of  this  kmd  has 

ever  occurred,  wh  p    p  dd  that,  from  a  wide  and  carefully- 

trodden  field  of  ob  th  ustified  in  the  assertion  that  cases 

of  deception,  on  t  g  d  urns,  are  very  few,  although  their 

industrious  circula  Id  gives  them  vast  notoriety,  and 

multiplies  their  nu    b       d    fi    tu 

It  was  from  this    ah  p  ifavorable  to  the  genuine  charac- 

Hosled  by  Google 

240  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

ter  of  all  the  manifestations  at  6ne  time  gained  ground  amongst  the  bigh 
minded  portion  of  the  Spiritualists,  producing  a  most  painful  revulsion  in 
their  feelings,  and  giving  fair  occasion  for  the  jubilant  cry  of  the  opposition, 
"Whom  the  gods  would  destroy,  they  first  make  mad." 

In  the  New  York  Conference,  the  tone  in  which  the  various  exposures  and 
"recantations"  were  discussed  grew  serious,  especially  when  Mr.  John  F. 
Coles,  above  alluded  to,  a  gentleman  who  had  enjoyed  a  wide  experience 
in  Spiritualism,  and  been  himself  the  subject  of  certain  mediumistic  influences, 
declaredin  unmeasured  tenns,  his  belief,  that  all  mediums  were  either  deluded 
or  deluders,  and  that  the  whole  movement  was  little  better  than  a  wide-spread 
humbug,  or  gigantic  hallucination. 

To  the  candid  and  unprejudiced  reader,  satisfactory  reasons  enough  could 
be  assigned,  why  mediums  should  be  fallible,  yet  spirit  communion  true  ; 
why  counterfeits  should  abound,  yet  real  coin  exist.  In  looking  down 
calmly  from  the  hill-tops  of  time,  we  may  marvel  that  a  faith  founded  upon 
well-tried  and  constantly-recurring  facts,  should  be  disturbed  by  tlie  dis- 
covery that  a  few  mediums,  out  of  many  liiousands,  should  be  found  subject 
to  the  ordinary  failings  of  humanity. 

Still  the  faint-hearted  consoled  themselves  by  saying,  that  even  if  the  phe- 
nomena were  unreliable,  the  philosophy  was  all-sufficient ;  appealing,  as  it 
did,  to  their  sense  of  right,  reason  and  justice,  and  carrying  with  it  internal 
evidence  of  its  sublime  realities.  But  even  here,  as  if  the  "enemy"  had 
had  license  to  sift  the  revelating  angel  like  wheat,  and  bright,  beautiful,  much- 
loved  Spiritualism  was  destined  to  undergo  every  ordeal  that  human  perver- 
sity could  put  upon  it,  a  fresh  blow  was  levelled  from  the  very  centre  of  its 
own  ranks,  which  threatened  to  destroy  even  its  foundation  and  comer-stone, 
the  cherished  philosophy  on  which  its  religious  superstructure  was  based. 

This  coup  a'etat  originated  with  a  Professor  and  Mrs.  Spence,  both  dis- 
tinguished members  of  die  spiritual  ranks,  and  persons  whose  influence  was 
marked  and  diftusive.  Mrs.  Spence,  as  Mrs^ritt,  of  St.  Louis,  had  greatly 
contributed  to  the  success  of  the  cause  in  its  early  stages,  by  her  trance  lec- 
tures. After  her  union  with  Prof  Spence,  a  gentleman  of  markedabilityasa 
physician,  this  lady  became  a  highly  popular  and  influential  travelling  lecturer. 

About  die  time  when  "  zeal  waxed  cold,"  and  the  "  faith  of  many  was 
shaken"  from  the  causes  above  detailed,  Mrs.  Spence  and  her  talented  hus- 
band promulgated  tlie  strange  theory  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  human 
race  did  not  attain  to  die  glory  of  immorUlity,  and  that  only  certain  souls, 
under  conditions  which  seemed  terribly  vague  and  unsatisfactory,  survived  the 
shock  of  death  as  individualized  entities ;  their  spiritual  essence  being  either 
absorbed  in  the  great  ocean  of  being,  or  reincarnated  in  some  subsequent 
state  of  higher  development,  etc.  It  is  needless  in  this  place  to  consider 
the  theories  on  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spence  based  their  opinions  of  non- 
immortality  for  a  large  portion  of  the  human  family:  it  is  enough  to  state 
that,  in  view  of  the  intiuence  they  exerted,  their  doctrines  were  received  with 
profound  dismay,  and  in  some  instances  with  agonizing  despair;  in  fact,  the 
promulgation  of  this  most  repulsive  theory  from  a  moderately  authoritative 
source,  would  have  excited  much  painful  discussion  at  any  time,  but  coming 
as  it  did,  just  when  die  cherished  facts  on  which  the  whole  spiritual  super- 
structttte  was  founded  had  to  undergo  the  severe  ordeal  which  a  tide  of 
recantations  and  exposures  necessarily  put  upon  it,  it  seemed  to  fill  the  cap 
of  feverish  doubt  and  incertitude  to  the  very  brim,  and  it  might  with  truth  be 
asserted  that  in  those  days  SpirituaHsm  was  "weighed  in  the  balance;"  but 
whether,  like  Belshazzar  of  old,  it  "was  found  wanting"  or  not,  let  the  next 
-chapter  decide. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

SPIRITUALISM       ON      TRIAL, 

COUNTEKFEIT  AND  GENUINE  CoiN — "  EmMA  HAKDINGE'S  CONFESSION"  —  UN- 
SOLVED Problems  for  Scientists  —  Mr.  Alero  on  "the  Recanters" — Liv- 
ing Spirits^ — Immortality  vs.  Annihilation. 

It  is  now  our  part  to  consider  the  effect  which  the  various  "revelations," 
"exposures,"  new  versions  of  SpirituaUsro,  etc.,  etc.,  produced  upon  tlie 
community  at  large,  and  the  progress  of  the  spiritualistic  cause.  We  have 
noted  the  fact  that  jubilant  voices  were  heard  from  the  ranks  of  the  oppos- 
ition proclaiming  the  iDevitable  death  of  "  the  great  heresy  "  at  the  hands  of 
its  partisans ;  also,  that  feelings  of  deep  despondency  and  lack  of  confidence 
prevailed  in  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism.  When  we  remember  that  the  cardi- 
nal points  on  which  Spiritualism  is  founded  are  its  facts,  and  that  its  whole 
aim  has  been  the  discovery  and  application  of  demonstrable  truths,  it  seems 
strange  to  find  one  class  of  persons  rejoicing  and  another  lamenting  over  the 
threatened  destruction  of  propositions,  which,  if  true,  could  not  be  shaken, 
and  if  simply  theoretical,  were  not  worth  maintaining. 

This  was  the  ground  which  the  author  took  some  eight  years  ago,  when,  in 
answer  to  an  immense  flood  of  correspondence  which  was  poured  in  upon 
her,  soliciting,  as  a  public  teacher,  her  opinion  concerning  the  genuine  char- 
acter of  the  movement,  she  responded  simply  by  a  reference  to  that  class  of 
fects  which  are  beyond  the  readi  of  humanity  to  produce  or  tamper  with. 

Having  in  the  lapse  of  time,  since  then,  seen  no  occasion  to  diange  her 
views  concerning  the  superior  value  of  this  kind  of  testimony  over  all  others, 
and  by  way  of  illustrating  die  tone  of  the  discussions  which  arose  at  this 
juncture,  we  shall  republish  some  communications,  addressed  by  the  author 
to  her  numerous  correspondents  through  the  pages  of  the  spiritual  journals. 
The  first  of  these  relates  to  Mr.  Coles's  sweeping  assertion,  made  at  the  New 
York  Conference,  to  the  effect  that  "  all  spirit  mediums  were  either  deluded 
or  deluders."  In  imitation  of  the  popular  tone  of  the  times,  the  letter  is 
styled 

"EMMA  HARDINGE'S  CONFESSION." 

It  is  addressed  to  the  editor  of  die  Spiritual  Age,  and  is  as  follows  : 

"  Dear  Sir,  —  Since  confesaous  arc  the  fashion  of  the  day,  and  a  confidiag  public  has 
been  voted  into  the  office  of  Father  Confessor,  I  solicit  the  jnediiim  of  your  columns  to 
tender  my  '  confesaon,'  in  addition  to  the  general  sum  of  spiritual  light,  which  conscience, 
or  a  panic  in  the  market  of  anil-spiritual  jugglery,  is  diiFusing  over  the  world, 

"  1  have  DO  very  startling  disclosures  to  make ;  but,  as  I  understand  that  modem  Spirit- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

aSO  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

ualism  is  summoned  to  the  bar  of  justice,  to  be  tried  for  life  and  death,  so  I,  as  one  of  the 
accessories  to  the  fact  of  its  wilful  murder  upon  the  body  of  infidelity,  beg  to  yield  myself 
up  as  '  State' s  evidence '  for  cross-examination. 

"Our  fciend,  the  Banner  ef  Light,  has  recently  undertaken  to  enlighten  the  world  upon 
some  of  my  antecedents,  and  as  that  sketcli  was  as  ample  as  the  occasion  demanded,  I  need 
not  mflict  ftu-ther  personal  details  upon  your  readers.*  Suffice  it  to  say  that  my  career  in 
America  has  been  mainly  enacted  in  some  public  capacity.  In  one  way  of  tlie  other,  the 
whole  of  my  time  has  been  passed  in  a  crowd  ;  and  with  so  many  eager  witcli-finders  on 
all  hands,  and  so  many  qualified  witnesses  to  my  good  or  bad  behayior,  the  world  need 
have  no  fear  but  that  I  shall  soon  be  detected  it  in  this,  my  'confession,'  I  am  caught 
fibbing. 

"  The  first  pomt  upon  which  I  desire  to  be  heard,  and  m  turn  demand  tliat  the  pastors 
of  the  nineteenth  century  will  enlighten  my  darkened  understanding,  is  the  dealing  whidi 
I  had  in  the  very  outset  of  my  career  with  that  form  of  the  '  imposture,'  called  '  phyacal- 
force  mediumship.'  To  show  you.  Judge  World,  that  I  had  all  the  pious  proclivities  that 
were  necessary  to  defend  me  from  iniidelic  tendencies,  I  may  state  that  when  I  first  viated 
a  test  mediom  in  New  YorJt,  1  refused  to  sit  at  his  table  because  I  heard  a  sentence  spelled 
out  which  I  fancied  was  somehow  not  in  exact  conformity  with  the  Bible, 

"For  many  weeks  after  this,  I  heard  of  the  'spirit  rappings'  with  a  horror  so  pious 
that  nothing  but  the  hope  that  my  eitcessive  shrewdness  would  enable  me  to  find  out  what 
was  a  mystery  to  thousands  of  my  better-mformed  fellow-mortals,  would  have  induced  me 
to  inquire  further.  '  For  the  sake  of  the  cause  of  truth,'  and  with  a  fixed  determination 
to  '  expose  this  infidelic  fraud,'  I  accompanied  Mr.  Augustus  Fenno,  the  well-known  come- 
dian, (0  the  house  of  Mrs.  Coan,  the  '  rapping  medium.' 

"  The  first  act  of  the  farce  I  there  witnessed  consisted  of  loud  rappings,  a  phenomenon 
which,  bemg  performed  on  the  table,  I  concluded  could  not  have  been  produced  by  Mrs. 
Coin's  ankle-joints,  which  were  quietly  repoang  beneath  it. 

"  My  part  in  the  drama  was  to  turn  the  table  suddenly  over,  examine  its  under  side  for 
El^gS,  which  failing  to  detect,  I  unpertinently  transferred  my  scrutiny  to  Mrs.  Coan's 
hands,  durmg  which  vain  process  the  raps  began  vibratmg  beneath  my  own  feet.  Whilst 
engB^ed  m  a  rigid  search  for  the  '  springs'  concealed  in  the  carpet,  the  pertinacious  raps 
knocked  the  idea  of  floor  machinery  out  of  my  mind  by  drumming  on  the  wall  quite  ax 
feet  from  any  of  our  party. 

"  We  were  but  three  of  us;  and  fairly  aghast  at  the  evident  absence  of  human  agency  in 
Jie  production  of  these  locomotive  sounds,  I  sank  into  a  chair,  from  which  I  was  instantly 
aroused  by  vigorous  poundings  on  the  back  rail,  close  gainst  my  very  shoulders.  All  this 
while,  Mrs.  Coan  and  Mr.  Fenno,  instead  of  being  covertly  engaged  in  working  hidden 
machinery,  were  coolly  talking  to  each  other  without  evidencmg  the  least  interest  in  my 
unquiet  investigations.  Being  informed  that  the  raps  would  obey  my  mental  request  and 
sound  anywhere  I  wished,  I  Gently  deared  that  they  might  be  produced  in  a  distant  comer 
of  the  room.  An  instant  compliance  with  this  unspoken  thought  dissipated  all  my  precon- 
ceived theories  of  ' ankle-jomts,'  'carpet-machinery,'  or  'table-springs.'  Be^es,  there 
was  intelligence  here  —  mtelligence  that  could  read  and  answer  my  mind. 

"  That  mind  could  not,  of  course,  begin  to  aspire  to  the  sublime  heights  attabed  by  a 
Faraday  or  A"as.  mg  h  w     ai  d  two  together,  it  at  once 

perceived  tha  m  hesddnqfih   case  at  issue.     The  next  act 

of  the  rappbg  humb  w  hdn  gb  nrsan  hrough  a  sort  of  telegraphy, 
by  which,  as     seen  ed    n       end  &      F  rmed   h  t  I  was  a  '  fine  medium '  — 

an  announcem  d       h        m  se  dia„  ereupon  Mrs.  Coan  handed 

me  an  alphabe     and  h    mg  m        w        p  various  letters,  whilst  the 

knocks  would  md  ea       h    sp     al  q  und  spelled  out,  to  my  astonishment, 

not  the  name        ai  y        h  and  d  h  ra  in  such  a  scene  I  was  most 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  251 

naturally  thinking,  but  llie  Christian  and  suroame  of  an  acquaintance  wbo  Jiad  not  even 
entered  my  head. 

"  Whose  mind  was  read  in  this  instance  I  am  unable  to  say,  save  and  except  that  it  was 
not  mine,  wHlst  neither  of  my  companions  had  ever  heard  of  such  a  person  before.  In  the 
absence  of  any  viable  agent  for  this  intelligence,  I  was  fdn  to  conclude  that  the  atmosphere 
was  the  delbquent,  and  it  is  in  tlie  earnest  hope  that  some  of  the  learned  professors  who 
Imma  'Spiritualism  is  all  humbug,'  and  the  recanters  and  exposers  who  say  ditto,  will 
enlighten  me,  that  I  have  ventured  (o  detail  what  would  appear  far  too  penrile  to  notice 
did  it  not  sohippeu  that  neither  'ankle  joints,'  'machinery,'  nor  'mind  reading,'  will  cover 
this  very  trivial  cose.     Where  is  the  theory  that  will  ?    Echo  answers,  'Where?' 

"  I  could  detail  thousands  of  more  reroarlcable  manifestations,  and  thousands  of.investi- 
gators  could  exceed  me  in  marvellous  relations,  but  I  purposely  confine  myself  to  facts,  no 
matter  how  simple  they  may  he,  for  which,  as  yet,  no  explanation  has  been  offered,  and 
which  no  theory,  as  yet  promulgated,  can  cover.  And  yet  I  have  a  soul  to  be  saved. 
Will  no  divine  professor  of  logic,  or  doctor  of  humbug,  show  me  how  to  account  for  ex- 
actly such  a  case  as  this  ?  No  side  isuses  will  do.  I  can  prove  the  truth  of  what  I  narrate, 
and  the  explanation  must  cover  the  truth  or  it  wont  suffice. 

"  I  pass  over  many  months  of  similar  experiences  closely  followed  up,  and  beg  to  select, 
out  of  hundreds  of  fir  more  startling  occurrences,  a  transaction  with  Dr.  Redman,  equally 
out  of  the  pale  of  popular  explanations. 

"  At  a  circle  with  sixteen  persons,  all  living,  producible,  and  reliable  witnesses,  all  entire 
strangers  to  myself  and  Dr.  Redman,  himself  a  strai^r  to  me,  I,  with  others,  wrote  names 
of  spirit  friends  on  some  dozen  slips  of  paper,  and  then  rolled  them  up  into  pellets  so  tightly 
that  if  my  life  had  depended  on  it  I  could  not  have  told  one  from  the  other.  When  aU  the 
party  had  ma.le  similar  pellets,  we  threw  them,  by  the  direction  of  Dr.  Redman,  into  a 
large  confused  heap,  together,  on  the  table.  The  number  of  pellets  thus  indiscriminately 
piled  up  must  have  amounted  to  over  a  hundred.  These  Dr.  Redman  gathered  up  into 
his  hand,  and  then  rolled  them  upon  my  hand,  rolling  away  one  aiter  another  until  there 
only  remained  between  our  two  hands  one  pellet ;  this,  he  informed  me,  was  mine,  and  in 
proof  thereof  he  desired  me  to  put  it  a^de.  I  did  so,  when  the  raps  spelled  out  by  the 
alphabet  a  name  which  I  recognized  as  one  I  had  written.  On  opening  my  pellet  in  pres- 
ence of  the  whole  company,  there  was  my  own  handwriting,  and  the  name  just  spelled  out 
by  the  rapping  imposture  aforesaid. 

"  This  is  another  case  for  which  my  waitmg  soul  demands  an  exact  explanation,  especi- 
ally as  it  is  one  which  fits  the  case  of  thousands  of  other  deluded  ones  besides  myself. 
Passing  over  manifold  similarly  unexplamed  problems  occurring  in  my  daily  experience  of 
Spiritualism,  I  proceed  to  notice  some  of  the  'tricks'  practiced  upon  me  by  Mrs.  Brown, 
of  the  Fox  family.  I  shall  only  notice  the  least  of  this  lady's  performances,  hoping  that  a 
clue  once  afforded  to  the  'small  impositions,'  the  large  ones,  like  the  large  impostors  of 
the  day,  will  collapse,  of  their  own  accord,  of  spontaneous  combustion. 

"  For  many  Simday  evenings  I  was  in  the  habit  of  forming  one  of  a  friendly  circle  at 
Mrs.  Brown's  house.  We  had  tea;  tea-table  raps,  and  nothing  to  pay;  and  as  tlie  ordi- 
nary motive  to  imposition  m  the  world's  eyes,  namely,  gain,  was  out  of  the  question- — nay, 
as  pastime,  rather  than  any  kind  of  buaness  was  the  order  of  the  day,  I  must  presume  that 
Mrs.  Brown's  'trickery'  on  such  occaaons,  being  entirely  gratuitous,  proceeded  from  an 
irresistible  and  chronic  tendency  in  her  to  trick.  On  one  of  these  same  '  evenmgs  at  home,' 
we  ail  sat  after  tea  singing,  whilst  the  '  imposture  '  rapped,  sometimes  b  one  place,  some- 
times in  another,  sometimes  five  or  six  'ankle  joints'  all  going  at  once,  in  tones,  too,  so 
various,  that  Mrs.  Brown's  ankles  must  have  been  a  perfect  orchestra  in  themselves. 

"  At  last  the  signal  was  given  for  the  alphabet,  when  a  single  knocker,  in  tones  as  load  as 
those  produced  by  a  carpenter' s  hammer,  spelled  out  the  request  that  we  should  darken  the 
room  :  we  obeyed  by  extinguishing  the  gas,  but  stiU  the  fire  gave  sufficient  light  to  reveal 
every  form  in  the  room  and  disclose  the  whole  party  with  all  their  hands  joined  and  spread 
out  before  them  on  the  table ;  and  then  it  was  that  I  felt  a  lai^  and  heavy  hand  on  my 

Hosiedb,  Google 

aS2  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

shoulder,  evitlenlly  placed  there  from  some  one  beliind  me.  The  room  was  small,  tic  door 
fast ;  Mrs.  Brown's  hands  held  by  myself  and  another  person,  and  my  other  neighbor's 
haiid  in  mine  and  his  neighbor's.  The  space  beliind  me  was  empty ;  but  in  order  to  try  if 
there  was  intelligence  directing  that  invisible  grasp,  I  menially  requested  that  the  hand 
should  stroke  my  head,  when  mstantly  a  warm,  soft,  though  large  hand  gently  patted  my 
forehead  and  stroked  each  side  of  my  face.  Gideon-like,  requiiing  a  slili  further  test.  I 
again  mentally  requested  that  the  hand  sliould  touch  my  mother,  who  was  Siting  at  the  iur- 
ther  end  of  our  long  table.  'Good  heavens  I  there  is  a  hand  laid  upon  my  head,'  uttered  by 
mamma  the  very  moment  after  framing  this  unspoken  wish,  convinced  me  that  if  ankle 
joints  were  the  originators  of  the  Rochester  knoctings,  their  action  m  the  persons  of  the 
FoK  family  were,  of  all  the  world's  phenonmena,  the  most  marvellous,  omnipresent,  loco- 
motive, independent,  and  intelligent.  I  am  not  going  to  weary  your  readers,  Mr.  Editor, 
by  recounting  details  with  which  every  visitor  to  Mrs.  Leah  Brown  must  be  familiar.  I 
have  simply  noticed  one  of  the  as  yet  undetected  and  unaccounted-for  '  tricks,'  which  are  so 
frequently  enacted  in  her  presence,  and  hereby  give  notice  that  there  are  a  very  large  num- 
ber of  still  more  cunning  '  Fox  tricks '  to  be  accounted  for,  before  I,  for  one,  am  prepared 
to  sign  a  full  recantation  of  my  spiritualistic  faith  in  that  family. 

"  With  a  long  hiatus  in  my  experience  filled  up  with  tremendous  hard  nuts  for  science  to 
crack,  I  beg  to  suggest  another  subject  for  the  philanthropic  labors  of  the  exposjng  medi- 
ums of  the  day,  and  one  which  has  also  remained  untouched  save  by  the  rather  illogical 
argument  of  senseless  abuse.  I  speak  of  Mr.  J.  V.  Mansfield's  faculty  of  answering  sealed 
letters.  True  it  is,  that  I  have  been  told  upon  the  highly  creditable  authority  of  Professor 
Felton,  of  Harvard  Collie,  that  he  knows — without  the  least  proof  of  the  fact,  great  savan 
asheisi — that  Mr.  Mansfield  first ' opens  aU  the  letters  he  answers,  and  then  cunnmgly  seals 
them  up  agidn  ; '  whilst  otliers,  who  have  seen  the  spirit  postmaster  answer  letters  correctly 
which  have  never  even  passed  out  of  the  mvestigator's  hands,  know  upon  authority  equally 
good  as  Professor  Felton's  that  the  said  postmaster  answers  the  said  letters  all  by  aid 
of  clairvoyance ;  '  first  dairvoyantly  reading  them  and  then  answering  them  out  of  his  own 
mind.'  Without  stopping  to  consider  whether  clairvoyance  is  not  as  wonderful  a  phenome- 
non as  any  fact  claimed  in  Spiritualism,  I  must  inquire  of  the  last  set  of  sages,  how  it  hap- 
pened that  Mr.  Mansfield  made  so  egregious  a  blunder  in  my  case  as  to  answer  a  letter, 
which  I  addressed  to  my  father  in  the  spirit -world,  in  the  name  of  a  sister  whom  I  had  not 
asked  for  or  even  mentioned  in  the  letter?  As  the  said  letter  never  passed  out  of  my 
hands,  and  Mr.  Mansfield  answered  it  whilst  I  held  it.  Professor  Felton's  theory  fails; 
whilst  the  fact  of  my  being  an  entire  stranger  to  Mr.  Mansfield,  and  above  all,  my  sister's 
name  neither  being  mentioned  in  the  letter  or  at  the  time  m  my  mind,  militates  rather 
awkwardly  against  the  clairvoyant  theory  ;  besides,  this  wonderful '  clairvoyant '  has  been 
known  to  mention  scores  of  names  that  have  never  been  asked  for  m  sealed  letters ;  to  write 
.  moreover  in  German,  Spanish,  Italian,  Arabic,  Greek,  Hebrew,  and  even  Chinese,  and 
that  without,  as  his  most  intimate  friends  can  testify,  the  slightest  knowledge  of  any  other 
language  than  his  own.  Come,  noble  army  of  recanters  !  bring  up  your  rear  guard  of 
tticljs,  to  account  for  tliese  ugly  facts  1  ...  As  my  inquiry  from  the  beginning  to  tlie 
end  of  my  career  has  been  for  'the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,'  I 
have  spelt  out  my  lesson  with  almost  every  medium  of  the  day,  and  could  ennmerale  a 
thousand  problems  which  the  poor  short-sighted  exposers  have  never  even  touched,  did 
time  and  space  permit ;  but  as  these  are  limited,  I  must  confine  myself  to  the  consideration 
of  one  more  case,  which  common  justice  requires  should  receive  its  share  of  illumination 
with  the  rest,  and  that,  Mr.  Editor,  is  my  unworthy  self. 

"  Mr.  Coles  is  represented  in  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  as  having  said  at  the  New  York 
Conference  that  every  trance  medium  is  an  impostor,  and  every  other  kmd  of  medium 
something  of  the  same  order.  Mr.  Coles  is  a  gentleman  with  whom  I  enjoy  a  very  agree- 
able acquaintance  ;  but  if  he  means  to  say  that  all  persons  who  communicate  an  intelligence 
beyond  their  own  knowledge  are  '  impostors,'  then  I,  as  one  of  that  class,  affirm  that  Mr. 
Coles  tells  an  untruth. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

(jlc 

-^5^ 

X-c^-f-^ 

CT'^-'L^ 

.^^^..^  ^^^^^ 

,   qAjTw^^w/a?    U 

y^  v^^ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  2S3 

"  At  tlie  very  earliest  st^e  of  my  investigations,  I  found  I  was,  and  always  Iiad  been  a 
it  medium  ;'  that  is,  that  I  could  communicate,  by  various  methods,  intelligence  I  had 

not  learned,  and  give  tests  of  the  presence  of  spirits  [unknown  tc 

"  Mv  spirit  friends,  or  the  imposture  that  calls  itself  spirits,  affectionately  charged  upon 
me  the'ir  wish,  that  I  should  at  for  the  public,  and  give  tests  freely  to  all  who  sought  me  ; 
yet  [for  reasons  which  were  satisfiictory  to  my  judgment,  the  chief  of  which  was  that  I  had 
othermeansoflivingbe^desmymediumship]  that  I  should  never  receive  fee  or  reward  for  my 
services  in  this  direction.  They  wished  me  to  make  a  profesaon  of  my  lectures,  but  considered 
that  my  roediumship  in  other  respects  was  uncertain,  and  only  necessary  to  prepare  me  for 
becoming  a  lecturer.  With  this  understanding  I  set  to  work,  and  that  so  successfuUy,  that 
with  no  other  contrivance  of  my  own  than  mere  passivity,  and  waiting  for  some  unlmown 
and  invisible  '  impostor '  to  dictate  what  I  should  say,  see,  or  write,  I  managed  to  convince 
hundreds  of  strangers,  who  flocked  to  my  circle  room  at  553  Broadway,  of  the  presence  and 
identity  of  their  spirit  friends.  The  evidences  of  this  nature,  as  they  were  given  by  wntmg, 
seemg,  and  pantomimic  action,  are  all  out  of  the  reach  of 'ankle-joints'  or  'machinery', 
theories,  but  although  I  am  unwiilbg  (o  enter  into  personal  details,  I  give  notice  that  there 
are  hundreds  of  living  and  producible  witnesses  to  my  asseverations,  and  that  sooner  than 
consent  to  be  unjustly  branded  as  an  'impostor,'  I  shall  compel  a  retraction  of  such  an 
assertion  at  the  risk  of  being  deemed  egotistical,  by  taking  advantage  of  the  many  grateful 
sffers  that  pour  in  upon  me,  to  bear  testimony  to  the  genuine  character  of  my  mediuniship. 
Amongst  an  immense  variety  of  tests  given,  as  1  have  stated,  to  hundreds  of  producible  wit- 
nesses, I  shall  cite  but  one  in  iUustration  of  the  spontaneity  of  spiritual  influence,  and  the 
imposdbility  of  sneering  away  its  facts  on  the  baseless  chai^  of  universal  deception. 
During  my  last  viat  to  Boston,  my  friends  observing  my  pasaonate  love  for  flowers,  kindly 
adorned  my  platform  with  sweet  floral  offerings,  which  I  as  regularly  transferred  to  the  dear 
friend  I  was  visiting,  in  order  that  she  might  carry  them  to  the  grave  of  a  sweet  Uttle  girl 
who  had  passed  away  in  the  spring,  and  after  whose  earthly  form  the  poor  mother's  eyes 
still  yearned.  One  night  I  returned  from  my  lecture  at  the  Melodeon  with  a  lovely  wreath 
and  alaige  bouquet.  The  arrangement  of  the  flovrers  was  somewhat  injured  in  the  carri^e, 
and  I  gave  them,  as  usual,  to  my  dear  hostess,  to  carry  to  the  cemetery.  The  neitt  day, 
when  the  mother  was  about  to  depart  with  her  pme,  she  sent  her  maid  into  the  garden  to 
gather  two  large  dahlias  which  she  placed  in  the  wreath,  and  a  very  small  one  with  which 
she  renovated  the  bouquet.  I  had  never  viated  the  grave  myself,  and  had  no  idea  how  the 
flowers  were  to  be  placed.  The  nest  evening  I  was  dressing  to  lecture  at  the  Music  Hall, 
when,  just  as  I  was  about  to  quit  my  room,  the  bright  spirit  of  the  diild  stood  in  my  path 
and  besought  me  in  her  sweet,  wmning  way  to  give  a  mess^  to  her  mother. 

"  I  have  seen  spirits  from  my  earliest  cbihihood,  had  often  before  seen  this  fair  Lttle 
apparition,  and  did  not  question  but  that  her  mother  would  place  perfect  reliance  on  my 
report ;  but  as  the  message  contained  no  particular  test,  and  it  has  always  been  my  custom  to 
require  tests  both  for  myself  and  others  I  said,  '  Yoa  must  teU  me  somethmg.  Namue,  that 
■will  convince  yout  mother  you  have  really  appeared  to  me.'  '  You  shall  have  such  a  sweet 
nosegay  to-night  at  your  lectnre,  Emma,'  said  the  fair  spirit,  '  and  that  shaU  be  a  test. 
'Not  enough  Nannie,'  I  replied;   'I  often  have  bouquets;  that  will  be  no  test." 

"'Tell  mother,'  answered  the  bright  spirit,  'I  saw  the  angel  she  put  on  my  grave, 
whose  wings  fan  away  evil  spirits;  also  tell  her,  the  two  large  flowers  she  put  into  the 
wreath  yesterday  from  her  garden  are  gone,  but  the  small  one  is  still  there,  m  the  bouquet 
—  nowremember.'  ,  ^     r  ,  . 

"I  hastened  to  my  lecture,  on  to  the  rostrum,  and  there  lay  test  the  first,  a  sweet 
nosegay  '  The  reporter  of  the  Boston  Courier,,  in  a  critique  on  my  lecture  more  honorable 
to  his  gallantry  as  a  gentleman  than  philosophical  as  a  scientist,  remarked,  with  some  humor- 
ous attempts  to  account  for  my  '  inspiration,'  that  I  'looked  lovingly  at  the  splendid  bou- 
quet.' WeU  I  might  I  Ah,  Monsieur  Boston  Courier!  could  you  have  known  the  happy 
thoughts  that  those  flowers  called  forth,  you  would  not  have  wondered  at  my  loving  lool;. 
I  thought  of  the  poor  mother,  whose  faith  that  her  darling  was  not  sleeping  in  the  cold 

Hosted  by  Google 

254  HISTORY  OF  M0DERf7 

ground  tniglit  be  strengthened  tlirough  the  intelligerce  connected  with  those  flowers.  I 
thought  too  of  the  rest  of  that  mysterious  little  communication,  but  as  I  thought  and 
wondered  if  it  would  prove  true,  no  effort  upon  my  part  could  shut  out  from  my  mind  a 
memory  of  my  old  calUng,  the  stage,  and  the  oft  qioted  jlra  e  of  the  Damsh  Hamlet  'My 
life  upon  the  ghost  i '  The  next  day,  when  the  bouquet  wh  ch  I  had  presented  to  my  fnend 
was  about  to  tie  transferred  by  her  once  more  to  the  cemeteri  I  rather  hesitati  igly  told 
her  I  thought  she  might  possibly  find  son  e  d  sturbince  among  t  the  flowers.  Bemg 
urgently  pressed  for  an  explanation,  I  recounted  to  her  the  \  won  above  narrated  when 
my  friend  responded,  'On  ray  way  to  the  cemetery  yesterday  I  bought  ana  placed  on 
the  grave  a  little  china  image  of  an  angel,  with  w  ngs  extended  winch  seemed  to  be  hover  ng, 
to  my  morbid  fancy,  over  the  haUowed  dust  of  mj  chJd.  A=  to  the  flowers,  I  know  aU 
about  the  disturbance ;  for  when  arranging  them  on  the  grave  I  thought  the  lai^e,  flauntmg 
dahlias  looked  out  of  place,  so  I  took  them  out  of  the  wreath  myself.  The  smaller  one, 
being  less  intrusive  in  the  bouqnet,  I  suffered  to  remain.  It  is  all  true;  and,  Emma,  I 
now  know  my  child  must  have  seen  me,  for  not  another  hving  creature  could  be  aware  of 

"  And  now,  if  I  may  seem  very  puerile  in  making  the  casual  arrangement  of  a  bouquet, 
and  the  appearance  of  a  htfle  paltry  chma  image,  evidences  for  the  immortality  of  a  precious 
human  soul,  why  then  I  am  willing  to  plead  guilty  to  the  charge ;  but  as  I  know  china  im- 
ages cannot  come  to  describe  themselves  to  me,  and  bouquets  do  not  arrange  themselves  Or 
tome  and  tell  me  when  they  are  disarranged,  I  conclude  I  am  no  wiser  nor  yet  much  more 
foolish  than  Isaac  Newton  was,  when  he  made  an  insignificant  apple  the  corner-stone  of 
Ihe  world's  grandest  philosophy. 

"One  word  more,  and  with  it  my  fmal  apologies  for  this  long  detail.  I  have  never 
avowed  myself  a  trance  speaker,  becausel  am  not  entirely  unconscious;  and  yet,  when  ques- 
tioned what  definition  I  should  give  to  my  ability  to  speak  upon  any  subject  committees 
may  choose  for  me,  without  a  moment's  premeditation,  I  should  be  absolutely  dishonest  if 
I  did  not  acknowledge  that  the  whole  of  my  lectures  are  obviously,  to  myself,  uttered  with- 
out thought  or  volition  of  my  own,  and  clearly  prompted  by  some  attendant  intelligences, 
who,  also,  to  myself  as  well  as  to  the  eyes  of  many  of  the  most  reliable  seers,  present  the  un- 
mistakable characteristics  of  a  risen,  spiritual,  and  glorified  humanity. 

"  Be^es  this,  I  have  seen,  conversed  with,  and  described  hundreds  of  spirits  whose  iden- 
tity and  contmued  existence  was  thus  clearly  proved  to  their  mourning  relatives. 

"  There  is,  moreover,  a  voice  ever  present  with  me,  cheering  me  in  sorrow,  prescribing 
for  me  in  ackness,  encouraging  me  on  long,  weary  journeys,  advising  me  in  all  my  engage- 
ments, Teveahng  hidden  characters,  and  counselling  me  in  nearly  all  and  every  emergency  of 
life. 

"  This  voice  has  warned  me  in  danger,  biought  me  news  of  absent  friends,  and  rebuked 
me  when  I  deserved  it,  not  the  least  frequent  manifestation,  by  the  by,  of  my  '  demon's ' 
presence.  To  one  of  the  roost  popular  of  the  New  York  ministers,  who  informed  me  that 
Spiritualism  was  '  a  most  dangerous  delusion,'  I  stated  my  case,  and  earnestly  implored  hun 
to  point  out  the  nature  of  the  danger;  but  though  the  reverend  divine  was  a  minister  to  the 
people,  and  I  reminded  him  that  I  was  one  of  the  people,  and  one  too  that  was  leading  away 
many  souls  to  my  way  of  thinking,  he  left  me  with  the  cold  assurance  that  it  was  not  in  his 
way  to  deal  with  'the  thing,'  and  that  it  was  none  of  his  business — he  only  warned  me, 
etc.  Just  so  with  my  friends,  the  'reeanters.'  The  divine  exposed  his  own  unchristian 
neglect  of  duty,  but  convicted  me  of —  nothing. 

"The  'reeanters'  prove  themselves  to  be  rogues  and  cheats,  but  touch  nobody  else's 
case  ;  whilst  for  my  own  part,  I  can  tr.uly  say  I  have  tested  this  matter  in  every  form  and 
shape  ;  and,  let  it  come  from  whence  it  may,  I  own,  with  grateful  thanks  to  God  for  its  man- 
ifestations, that  it  has  made  me  a  better  and  a  happier  woman  than  I  have  ever  been  before. 

"  If  money  or  public  applause  were  ray  object,  I  have  two  professions, —  the  stage  and  mu- 
ac, —  in  either  of  which  I  am  a  proficient,  and  could  treble  ray  present  earnings,  besides  ex- 
changing celebrity  for  notoriety,  ease  for  fatigue,  and  adulation  for  ribaldry,  scorn  and  perse- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  255 

cution;  Irat  as  all  the  world' s  gifts  would  fail  to  replace,  to  my  mind,  the  full  cupof  joy  and 
compsnsalion  which  I  liave  tasted  in  Spiritualism,  I  must  await  personal  conviction,  derived 
from  facts  as  stubborn  as  those  upon  which  my  faith  is  founded,  before  I  am  prepared  to  ad- 
mit as  error  tliat  which  personal  experience  has  assured  me  to  be  invincible  truth. 
"lam,  dear  Mr.  Editor,  yours  very  truly, 

"A  soul  waiting  to  be  saved, 

"Emma  Hakdinge." 

Amongst  the  numerous  letters,  essays,  and  other  forms  of  affirmative  phil- 
osophy which  die  "recantation  movement"  called  forth  in  vast  abundance 
from  the  noblest  minds  in  the  spiritual  ranks,  we  select  the  only  additional 
one  which  om-  space  will  allow  us  to  print,  from  the  pen  of  Stephen  Albro, 
Esq.,  the  highly-respected  editor  of  the  Buffalo  Age  of  Progress. 

Mr.  Albro's  letter  is  addressed  to  a  gentleman  whose  faith  had  been  rudely 
shaken,  it  would  seem,  by  the  discovery  of  a  great  deception  in  the  cause  so 
near  to  his  heart  —  Spiritualism.  In  the  doubt  and  incertitude  of  mind  tlius 
awakened,  he  wisely  came  to  the  conclusion  to  take  advantage  of  the  long 
experience  and  highly  philosophical  opinions  of  Mr.  Albro,  than  whom  no 
more  truthful,  candid,  or  enlightened  adviser  could  be  found  in  any  emer- 
gency, especially  in  the  one  under  consideration,  as  the  reader  will  be  able 
to  determine  from  a  perusal  of  the  following  extracts  of  Mr.  Albro's  corres- 
pondence, as  published  in  the  Age  of  Progress : 

"  To  Mr.  Simmons,  of  New  York: 

"Esteemed  FaiEND  and  Brother,  — I  am  both  pained  and  gratified  by  that  portion 
of  your  letter  which  refers  to  an  unfortunate  class  of  professing  Spiritualists. 

"It  pains  me  to  hear  that  the  eternal  truths  of  the  spiritual  Gospel  that  the  angels  have 
brought  us  are  not  sufficiently  established  in  your  mind  to  prevent  its  being  swayed  to  and 
fro  by  the  fitful  puffs  of  inharmony  which  issue  from  the  lungs  of  unsuccesrful  traffickers  in 
the  ^iritual  philosophy.     .... 

"  Before  proceeding  any  further,  I  will  give  you  a  direct  answer  as  to  the  effect  upon  my 
mind  which  has  been  produced  by  the  '  exposures'  you  refer  to. 

"  They  have  admonished  me  that  Spiritualism  has  more  to  fear  from  unsound  advocates 
than  from  the  most  rabid  of  its  opponents ;  and  even  from  these  there  is  nothing  to  appre- 
hend as  regards  the  final  sweep  of  the  spiritual  philosophy  throughout  the  world.  Only  they 
are  stumbluig-blocks  in  the  way  of  honest  but  timid  mvestigation,  and  tend  somewhat  to 
retard  the  spread  of  celestial  truth  in  the  realm  of  terrestrial  intelligence. 

"  Your  mind  has  been  disturbed  by  the  croaking  voices  who  attribute  the  loss  of  their 
faith  to  frauds  committed  by  pedlers  of  pretended  spiritual  manifestations.  You  have 
lieard  of  'exposures'  and  '  recantations'  from  those  who  publish  Iheirown  shame  by  show- 
ing how  they  thenaselves  practiced  the  frauds  which  they  are  exposing,  and  you  are  at  a  loss 
to  decide  for  yourself  whether  they  were  greater  rogues  and  liars  when  they  committed  the 
frauds  or  when  they  confessed  them.  The  safe  portion  in  such  a  case  is  to  give  them 
cfedit  for  what  they  really  and  continually  report  themselves  to  have  been  on. the  occasions 
alluded  to  in  their  confessions. 

"  I  shall  not  pretend  to  deny,  nay,  I  know,  that  there  are  many  itinerant  mountebanks 
who  perambulate  the  country  under  the  pretence  of  being  ^irituil  media,  for  the  purpose 
of  defrauding  the  unwary  of  their  dimes.  And  what  does  this  fact  amount  to  ?  Nothing 
but  the  evidence  that  every  genuine  and  valuable  product  of  nature,  art,  or  science,  is 
counteracted  for  the  purpose  of  admmistering  to  the  insatiable  sjarit  of  avarice. 

"Those  phyacal  manifestations  which  our  spirit  friends  have  found  it  expedient  to  prac- 
tice, for  the  purpose  of  startling  scepticism  and  awakening  conviction  of  their  presence, 
have  become  so  interesting  and  attractive  that  they  have  naturally  S'iggested  to  the  unprin- 
cipled the  practicability  of  making  capital  out  of  their  imitation.  Hence  the  many  perform- 
ances of  mock  manifestations  by  which  the  country  is  infested,  and  hence  the  evidences  ad- 
duced by 'recanters' to  prove  that  there  are  no  genuine  manifestations 

"  There  is  one  phase  of  spiritual  phenomena  which  is  peculiarly  favorable  to  (he  success 
of  mountebank  imitations;  these  are  the  physical  operations  by  spirits  which  cannot  be 
performed  in  lighted  rooms  because  the  light  is  an  absorbent  or  disturber  of  those  electrical 

Hosiedb,  Google 

2SS  JIl STORY  OF  MODERN- 

forces  which  are  essential  for  the  production  of  the  manifestations  in  question.  .  ,  ,  . 
It  has  been  observed  that  when  heavy  bodies  have  been  suspended  in  the  air,  or  moved 
about  with  immense  force  in  the  dark,  the  introduction  of  Lght  instantly  stops  the  opera- 
tion, often  causing  the  floating  mass  to  fall  to  the  floor  in  a  second And 

these  circumstances,  as  above  hinted,  have  opened  up  a  wide  field  for  the  operations  of 
those  unprincipled  tricksters  who  feed  upon  the  unwary  and  those  who  are  loo  ingenuous 
themselves  to  suspect  treachery  ui  others.  And  in  many  instances  adventurers  in  this 
ignoble  field  of  enterprise  liave  associated  with  them  genuine  mediums  as  unscrupulous  and 
immoral  as  themselves  ;  knaves,  who  are  ready,  for  hire,  to  enter  into  a  league  with  knaves 
and  prostitute  God's  noblest  gift  to  man  for  the  s^e  of  unhallowed  gain. 

"  And  besides  these  there  are  not  a  few  veritable  mediums  who  might  render  invaluable 
service  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  demonstrate  by  their  hi^  gifts  the  glorious  fact  of  immor- 
tality, yet  who,  being  theinselves  destitute  of  all  conscientious  scruples,  when  conditions  will 
not  allow  spirits  to  manifest  throogh  them  —  as  must  often  be  the  ease  with  aU  mediums — 
do  not  hesitate  to  carry  out  the  advertised  or  expected  programme  by  fraudulent  devices 
of  their  own,  held  by  them  in  reserve  for  such  occaaons,  and  performed  with  such  art  as  to 

render  detection  difficult And  the  most  despicable  of  all  apologies  by  which 

such  impious  tricksters  attempt  to  excuse  their  guilt  is  the  disavowal,  when  detected,  of  any 
fraudulent  deagn  on  their  own  part,  and  the  crimination  of  a  spirit ;  stoutly  and  persistently 

averrmg  that  the  deception  was  practiced  under  spirit  influence  and  control." 

Every  '  exposer '  of  whom  I  have  had  personal  knowledge,  has  been  for  years  past  a  pro- 
fessed propagandist  of  the  spiritual  philosophy,  and  apractlcal  speculator  in  the  phenoi 
Think  you  these  recanters  would  have  liecome  such  at  this  day  if  their  labors  in  the  st 
of  ministering  angels  had  met  the  pecuniary  returns  which  prompted  that  service  1 

"  I  tell  yon  nay ;  for  the  whole  genus  '  speculator,'  by  common  mstinct,  will  think  well 
of  and  endeavor  by  every  means  to  protect  that  traffic  by  which  the  greater  amount  of 
gain  can  be  made.  And  thns  it  happens  that  most  of  the  present  exposers  of  the  •  spiritual 
humbug'  are  persons  who  have  faiJed  to  make  its  advocacy  a  paying  vocation,  and  are  now 
endeavoring  to  mend  their  fortunes  by  exhibiting  to  the  scolfers  at  Spiritualism  the  manner 
in  which  they  formerly  practiced  and  imposed  u]>on  the  public  with  'bogus'  manifestations. 

"  Marryaf ,  in  one  of  his  novels,  tells  of  a  gin-drinking  mother  wlio  took  fire  and  was 
reduced  to  cinders  by  inhaling  the  flame  of  a  candle ;  and  he  also  tells  of  the  son  of  that 
mother,  who  gathered  together  her  charred  remams,  and  exhibited  them  to  the  public  fora 
penny  a  sight,  recounting  at  each  exhibition  the  cause  and  manner  of  his  mother's  decease. 
Which  is  the  most  respectable,  think  you,  Marryat's  hero,  or  the  charlatan  who  peddles 
counterfeit  imitations  of  communion  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  and  then  exposes  his  own 
villany  for  a  dime?  If  you  find  the  question  difficult  to  decide,  I  confess  my  inability  to 
help  you M^  course  of  investigation  has  resulted  in  the  following  conclu- 
sions. As  respects  mediums  m  general,  and  spititual  coiranunicationsin  their  present  status, 
I  confess  there  is  mudi  to  complain  of,  regret,  and  wonder  at ;  but  still  more  lo  stunulate  us 

to  further  inquiry,  rejoice  over,  and  thank  God  for But  those  who  look 

more  deeply  mto  the  philosophy  of  Spiritualism  are  not  surprised  at  this.  They  see  at  once 
that  the  mundane  and  supra-mundane  spirits  are  congenial  in  their  natures,  and  equal  b 
development. 

The  undeveloped  mortal  attracts  to  himself  associates  from  the  spirit-world  of  a  like  nature, 
and  these  are  as  capable  of  mastering  the  science  of  the  communion  as  those  of  superior  mental 
and  moral  characteristics.  But  even  in  the  darkest  features  of  this  case  there  is  light,  and 
some  good  resulting  even  from  the  communications  of  false  and  untruthful  spirits.  No  one 
will  deny  that  a  man  is  a  man  because  he  tells  a  falsehood,  neither  can  he  deny  that  a  spirit 
is  such  because  he  wilfuUy  or  ignorantly  perverts  the  truth.  And  again ;  the  lidsehood  of  the 
communicating  spirits  proves  the  great  philosophical  truth  that  death  makes  little  or  no 
change  in  the  soul,  and  that  the  spirit,  whether  of  the  false  or  true,  was  and  is //«  j-ea/ njai;. 

"That  there  are  many  mediums  of  most  estimable  character,  and  manifestations  in  abun- 
dance which  can  be  relied  on,  all  industrious  investigators  will  affirm;  but  whether  all  com- 
munications are  equally  true  or  not  is  another  question,  and  one  which  only  long  experience 

and  careful  observation  can  decide Good  and  truthful  spirits  often  disagree, 

and  contradict  each  other  in  their  opinions,  just  as  surely  as  do  spirits  still  incarnate  in  mor- 
tality; and  for  this  disagreement  in  spu-it  communications,  the  true  remedy  is  the  exercise  of 
human  reason  and  the  sovereignty  of  individual  judgments." 

_  After  pursuing  the  above  line  of  argument  at  great  length,  aiid  illustrating 
his  affirmations  by  the  recital  of  numerous  excellent  tests  of  spirit  identity, 

*  TheaulhorapiJogizeifbrsoineliljerties  used  m  shsartas  superfluous  phrases  frimihc  talented  ediloi'i 
oogiaalletler,  for  the  sakiof  brevity.  n   m  <^  . 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAl^  SPIRITUALISM.  257 

Mr.  Albro  sums  up  with  several  highly  interesting  narratives  of  interviews 
with  spirits.  Our  limits  will  only  permit  us  to  cite  one  of  these,  which  occurred 
through  the  mediumship  of  Dr.  Redman,  and  is  related  by  Mr.  Albro,  as  fol- 
lows : 

"A  gentleman  who  reades  in  this  city  [Buffalo],  but  who  has  not  authorized  me  to  pve  his 
name,  called  at  Mr.  Redman's  room  last  Sunday  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  a  friend  who 
ivas  visilmg  him.     Besides  this  friend,  a  brother  of  the  gentleman  first  named  was  present. 

"This  brother  was  an  inveterate  sceptic,  and  decidedly  opposed  to  Spiritualism.  He 
called  with  the  others  for  curiosity,  but  refused  to  sit  at  the  table  for  investigation. 

"The  spirits,  however,  requested  'all  present'  to  be  seated  at  the  (able.  The  sceptic  at 
length  complied,  when  the  spuit  of  a  deceased  brother  who  had  departed  this  life  in  England 
at  the  age  of  seventeen  years,  addressetl  him,  writing  through  the  hand  of  the  medium  back- 
wards, giving  many  proofs  of  his  identity  and  agning  his  name  in  fnll. 

"The  sceptical  gentleman  then  asked  the  spirit  if  he  could  tell  themanner  of  his  death,  to 
wliicb  the  spirit  answered  by  affirmative  raps,  when  the  hand  of  the  medium  was  immediately 
used  io  make  numerical  characters,  as  follows: 

"9  23  I  19  19  13  IS  20  8  5  18  5  4  9  14  20  8  s  5  I  18 
20    8    4    5     I     rS    2    18    15    20    8    5    rS. 

"What  the  meaning  of  these  figures  could  be  no  one  present  coidd  divine,  till  direction 
was  given  by  the  spirit  through  the  raps  (0  place  numericals  over  the  letters  of  the  alphafiet 
thus;  J  p  c  snd  so  on,  up  to  ™  when  thengures  read;  '  1  was  smothered  in  the  earth,  dear 
brother.' 

"  The  fact  thus  uniquely  represented  was  strictly  true,  the  two  brothers  stating  that  he, 
the  spirit,  and  another  lad  were  at  play  in  a  sand-hole,  the  projecting  bank  of  which  caved 
in  and  sufTocated  him  before  he  could  be  extricated. 

"  This  test  proved  too  strong  for  the  sceptic,  whose  tears  bore  witness  to  the  strength  of 

"Truly  and  fraternally  yonrs,  S.  Albeo." 

It  will  be  remembered  that  we  mentioned  the  p  on  u  gation  b  P  of  and 
Mrs,  Speiice,  of  the  non-immortality  theory  fo  a  g  p  op  on  of  he 
race.  During  the  numerous  discussions  which  e  d  upon  e  en  a 
fion  of  this  very  startling  doctrine,  some  of  its  oppo  en  s  d      en  o     y 

for  a  definition  of  such  conditions  as  the  pron  u  f,a  ors  a  un  ed  o  be  nee 
essary  for  continued  existence,  when,  being  dri  en    o  some  m  ty    and 

compelled  to  make  their  propositions  as  clear  a.  he  da  k  f  a  u  e  o  he 
belief  would  pennit,  they  suggested  an  opin  on  ha  fe  fa  on  s 
maintained  their  individuality  after  death,  unless  they  1    ed  ou     h  d  n  en  a 

existence  in  the  earlh-form,  for  at  least  seventy  yea 

Considering  that  the  average  rate  of  all  human  life  upon  this  globe  is  esti- 
mated by  the  most  accomplished  philosophers  to  range  at  about  forty  years, 
the  prospect  of  a  very  abundant  crop  of  souls  in  the  spirit  spheres  became, 
under  this  hypothesis,  remarkably  slender,  and  as  this  ttieory  cut  at  the  very 
root  of  the  tree  of  hope  for  bereaved  parents,  nine-tenths  of  whom  tlie  same, 
general  calculations  assume  must  see  tlieir  brightest  blossoms  untimely 
nipped  in  the  bud,  the  promulgation  of  such  a  doctrine  became,  in  the  spirit- 
ual ranks,  tantamount  to  the  dissemination  of  the  piinciples  advocated  by 
the  French  encyclopedists  of  1793. 

The  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  discussions  evoked  by  this  kind  of 
teaching  was  the  universal  resort  to  the  old-fashioned  method  of  proving^ 
religious  problems :  namely,  by  theoretical  philosophy. 

In  such  a  warfare  then,  as  in  all  former  times,  nothing  was  proved,  and' 
everything  became  assertion  merely,  or  opinions  utterly  valueless,  because, 
based  upon  theories  undemonstrated  by  the  facts  which  fomi  the  very  corner- 
stone of  the  truly  spiritual  philosophy.  Weary  alike  of  the  hair-splitting  ver- 
biage, which  crowded  the  spiritual  journals,  and  the  pathetic  appeals  whick 

Hosted  by  Google 

■2S8  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

poured  in  upon  the  mediums  from  bereaved  parents,  whose  newly-born  hopes 
of  eternal  life  and  unbroken  progress,  this  remorseless  theory  crushed  into 
annihiliatioii,  the  authur  brought  all  die  influence  she  possessed  amongst  her 
spiritual  friends,  to  bear  upon  her  own  customary  method  of  "proving  all 
things"  before  holding  last  aught  that  could  be  called  "good."  To  do  this, 
she  reminded  her  friends  that  Spiritualism  afforded  a  field  of  operative  facts, 
occupying  three  millions  of  square  miles,  and  involving  the  experiences  of 
from  five  to  seven  millions  of  persons ;  and  as  such  methods  of  dealing  with 
the  hitherto  shadowy  propositions  of  religious  belief  must  eventually  supersede 
all  others,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  reprint  one  of  the  communications  in  ad- 
vocacy of  liiis  course,  addressed  by  the  author  to  the  Banner  of  Light 
towards  the  conclusion  of  the  "non-immortality"  discussion.  It  was 
styled : 

"EMMAHARDINGE  ON  LIVlNn  SPIRITS  AND  DYINO  SPIRITUALISM. 

'-i.ESSRS.  Editors,- — Obsening  a  general  feeling  of  antipatliy  towards  the  repnHve 
stibjeci.  of  non-i[nmortaUL}>,  as  reeenCly  discussed  in  youc  paper,  I  should  not  intrude  any 
furthei  lernarksupon  your  readers  concerning  a  theme  so  unacceptable,  had  I  not  noticed  the 
angular  absence  of  that  peculiar  kLid  of  testimony  which  is  more  calculated  to  rebut  ground- 
less theories  than  all  that  reiison  an  I  logic  can  adduce,  namely,  facts.  When  it  is  remem- 
bered that  m  this  nineteenth  centiry,  thousands  of  the  noblest  minds  of  the  age  were 
professed  materialists,  and  that  witliin  ten  years  a  few  stubborn  facts  alone  have  broaght 
to  them  a  conviction  of  the  souTs  immortality,  which  not  all  the  theoretical  teachings  of 
religion  could  produce,  it  seems  somewhat  remarkable  that  your  numerous  correspondents 
should  waste  their  time,  and  youi  readers'  patience  over  columns  of  theory,  whidi  one  angle 
well-attesteil  fact  would  confirm  ur  disprove  in  Mo. 

"Did  wedeate  to  learn  aught  concerning  the  Arctic  or  Antarctic  regions,  the  centre  of 
Africa,  or  the  Steppes  of  Siberia,  irom  whom  would  your  correspondent  expect  to  obtain 
the  most  reliable  information  — the  fire-side  philosophers  who  sit  at  home,  and  do  all  their 
get^aphy,  geology,  and  natural  hj^ory  on  paper,  covered  with  theories  of  what  they  deem 
those  unknown  realms  ought  to  be,  or  the  bold  adventurers  who  have  penetrated  into  the 
heart  of  the  mystery,  and  taken  living  cognizance  of  the  scenes  they  describe? 

"And  why  do  we  not  apply  these  self-evident  propositions  to  the  dwellers  in  the  spirit 
country,  and  the  theorists  who  pretHid  to  determine  the  nature  of  that  terra  incognita  out 

of  their  own  imaginings With  such  evidences  of  total  failure  in  merely 

theoretical  beliefs  as  the  present  day  affords  us,  it  seems  to  me  astonisliing  that  the  simply 
theoretical  principles  of  this  hideous  'non-immortality'  doctrine  shonld  engage  the  attention 
of  Spiritualists  to  the  total  exclusion  of  those  facts  upon  the  strength  of  which  they  have 
become  Spiritualists  at  all.  If  I  can  put  faith  in  any  of  my  senses,  they  assure  me  as  con- 
clusively of  the  truth  of  spirit  communion  as  of  the  existence  of  any  ordmary  objects  of 
sense ;  and  if  I  believe  in  one  class  of  facts  ranging  under  the  general  appellation  of  spirit 
communion,  how  am  I  to  separate  them  from  another  class,  equally  rife  with  proof  and 
demonstration  of  the  existence  of  all,  instead  of  a  pait  of  the  race  ?  For  example,  if  I  have 
the  concluave  evidence  that  I  am  communing,  now  with  my  grandsire  of  eighty  years,  and 
now  with  my  child  of  eight,  upon  what  hypothesis  am  I  to  believe  that  the  grandfather 
Jives  and  the  child  is  a  myth,  or  that  the  one  communication  is  true  and  the  other^con- 
ditions  being  exactly  similar^  is  false? 

"  Byway  of  illustration,  I  shall  select  a  few  cases,  which  are  aboat  as  well  attested  as  any 
that  the  spiiitaalistic  movement  can  offer : 

"In  Greensboro',  Henry  County,  Indiana,  lives  a  noble  and  venerable  gentleman,  weE 
known  throughout  the  country  as  Mr.  Seth  Hinshaw.  In  his  house  are  a  lai^  colkct'on 
■of  portraits  of  deceased  persons  drawn  by  Mr.  George  Walcutt,  a  spirit  artist  of  Columbus, 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  239 

OWo,  who,  himself  an  entire  stranger  to  my  respecter!  friend  Mr.  Hinshaw,  executed  them 
with  a  fidelity  so  marvellous,  that  they  are  recognized  by  the  whole  family  and  every  neigh- 
bor who  chanced  to  he  acquainted  with  the  originals.  Most  of  these  pictures  were  drawn 
blindfolded;  some  of  them  before  Mr.  Hinsliaw  sent  to  request  them,  and  all  contain 
special  tokens  of  personal  identity  which  cannot  be  mistaken. 

"A  very  inierestmg  account  of  tliese  portraits — nineteen  in  number — is  to  be  found  in  a 
recent  issue  of  the  Spiritual  Tilegrapk,  written  from  Mr.  HinshaVs  residence  liy  Mr. 
Giles  Stebbins.  Now,  amongst  the  pictures  are  not  only  a  wife,  youi^  daughter,  sons, 
and  other  household  jewels,  whose  beloved  and  well-rememheted  features  are  inimitably 
preserved,  but  there  are  also  a  pair  of  twins  represented  in  the  pride  of  youthful  adoles- 
cence, hut  who  never  showed  signs  of  life,  and  in  ^ving  birth  to  wliom  the  mother  died. 
If  the  mother's  semblance  is  so  perfect,  and  the  stranger  artist  conld  give  the  test  evidence 
of  the  birth  at  all  of  those  twins,  where  is  the  proof  that  their  representation  as  living 
immortal  dwellers  in  the  spheres  is  a  falsehood  or  mistake  • 

"  Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  these  children,  their  appearance  to  a  total  stranger  for 
sittings,  their  correspondence  —  as  growing  girls  —  in  age  to  what  they  might  have  been  had 
they  lived  on  earth,  must  also  invalidate  the  manifestation  of  the  spirit  mother  herself,  who 
appeared  to  the  same  artist  with  them,  and  whose  portrdt,  then  and  there  executed,  is 
pronounced  to  be  a  'most  faithfvd  Ukeness'  by  all  who  knew  her. 

"  Mr.  Stebbins's  record  goes  on  to  say : 

"  Also  three  sons  of  present  wife,  Abigail  Hinshaw,  one  still-born,  etc. 

"And  these  are  no  mere  phantoms,  or  dead,  'imperfect'  infants,  good  people,  who 
are  so  anxious  to  snuff  out  other  people's  children  —  your  own,  of  course,  being  in  the  full 
glory  of  immortality  —  but  real,  living,  growing  boys  and  girls  of  different  ages,  all  and  each 
being  just  at  the  stage  of  maturity  which  might  be  expected  from  them. 

"  Besides  these,  there  is  a  goodly  array  of  sweet  young  grandchildren,  removed  at  differ- 
ent periods  of  extreme  youth,  but  obstinately  pcrsistingin  living,  although  not  seventy  years 
of  age,  and  retaining  a  family  likeness  to  their  parents  and  to  each  other,  and  proving  that, 
though  by  virtue  of  the  Said  'non-immortality'  theory,  they  ought  by  this  time  to  be 
little  puffs  of  hydrogen  or  nitrogen  gas,  or  used  up  perhaps,  according  to  the  French  rein- 
carnation theory,  in  the  material  of  somebody  else's  '  progressed '  baby  —  jet  in  God's 
good  providaice,  that  they  are  still  themselves,  and  that  the  glorious  fanction  of  individual- 
ized bang,  however  rudimental,  having  been  once  achieved,  retrc^ession  is  impossible,  and 
the  germ  soul  ultimates  its  Creator's  highest  design  here  or  hereafter,  but  never  mars  ot 
breaks  the  plan  by  (hat  loss  of  individuality  which  implies  araiihilation. 

"One  ot  my  earliest  experiences  as  a  lest  medium  in  New  York  was  to  presenl.to  a  lady 
who  called  upon  me,  a  perfect  sceptic,  descriptions  and  tests  of  the  identity  of  two 
deceased  relatives,  in  sudi  striking  and  vivid  characters  that  conviction  became  irre- 
^stible. 

"  Just  as  the  lady  was  taking  leave  of  me  in  conaderable  agitation  of  mind,  I  became 
impelled  to  write  her  a  communication  purporting  to  come  from  a  daughter,  who,  unlike 
the  other  spurits,  gave  no  name. 

"Mrs.  B.  replied,  there  must  be  some  mistake,  as  she  had  never  had  a  daughter.  Still  the 
^irit  inasted,  and  finally  reminded  the  mother  of  the  birth  of  a  still-bom  female  child,  with 
whom  she  identified  herself  by  stating  accurately,  dates  and  certain  remarkable  circum- 
stances, which  proved  to  the  lady  even  more  astonishing  tests  than  any  which  had  preceded 

"  On  another  occasion  a  spirit,  appearing  as  a  girl  of  about  eighteen,  and  beautiful  as  a 
seraph,  manifested  her  presence  and  claimed  to  be  the  daughter  of  a  lady  for  whom  I  was 
then  sittmg,  but  who  denied  having  had  any  such  child  until  the  fw  spirit  reminded  het 

'  The  author  has  herself  inspected  these  potuajls;  heard  Iheir  history  from  the  lips  of  the  vejieraWc  SeA 
Hinshaw,  miw  a  dweller  in  the  bright  homes  of  innnonalily,  and  received  from  hia  amiable  daughter  two  of 
ihe  pencil  skatcfaes,   namely,   Hdonahj    first  wife    of   Seth   Hiu^iaAF,   and  one  of  the  above-oauiej 

Hosiedb,  Google 

afio  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

that  she  had  only  lived  on  earth  a  few  hours,  and  in  the  little  box  in  which  the  poor  remains 
had  been  put  away,  was  a  certain  piece  of  delicate  mnslin  wrapped  around  the  fonn,  which 
the  spirit  described  most  graphically.  ThismanifestaCionisstrongly  imprinted  on  my  mind  ; 
first,  from  the  beauty  of  the  fair  apparition,  and  next  from  the  regret  she  expressed  that 
the  cold  mother  felt  no  interest  in  a  child  whose  birtli  she  acknowledged,  but  whom,  as  slie 
said,  she  'had  never  known,  and  therefore  could  not  possibly  feel  any  love  for.'     .... 

"  I  could  go  on  Miumerating  scores  of  instances  in  which  young  infants,  and  sometimes 
even  embryotic  births,  were  declared  by  spirits  manifesting,  under  (he  strongest  test  condi- 
tions, to  be  the  germ  of  their  own  individualized  and  unquenchable  immortality.  Enougli 
for  me  to  add  that  quite  two-thirds  of  my  experiences  as  a  test  medium  included  commiuii- 
cationsfrom  spirits  who  had  left:  the  form  imder  twenty  years  of  age ;  in  fact,  in  our  present 
imperfect  understanding  of  the  laws  of  health,  it  is  evident  that  the  chief  of  the  soul  freight 
that  crosses  the  '  lieautiful  river,'  are  the  yoimgest  and  forest  of  eartli's  blossoms,  and  if 
these  are  changed,  even  to  annihilation,  then  is  creation  a  failure  and  qiirit-Iand  a  desert  to 
whicli  the  blooming,  child-peopled  villages  of  earth  are,  m  comparison,  Edens  of  love  and 
beauty.  A  shrewd  Yanlcee,  commenting  on  the  'non-immortality'  theory  to  me  lately, 
observed  *  that  if  it  were  true,  the  I^rd  was  a  poor  trader,  and  would  never  grow  rich  in 
souls,  so  long  as  he  created  such  an  awful  waste  of  raw  material.' 

"  I  shall  close  these  few  fragmentary  illustrations  from  a  page  which  I  am  sure  any  of  our 
reliable  test  mediums  miglit  swell  mto  a  volume,  by  narrating  a  case  which  has  very  recently 
come  under  my  observation,  and  winch  is  well  known  to  most  of  the  mediums  who  visit 
Rhode  Island, 

"  Being  the  guest  of  a  most  estimable  Quaker  iady  of  unimpeachable  character  and  ve- 
racity, my  hostess  said  to  me  one  day,  '  How  can  I  help  being  a  Spiritualist  when  I 
remember  the  facts  of  my  coni  ersion  ?  ' 

"I  cannot  continue  to  quote  my  friend  s  words,  but  tlie  sum  of  her  narrative  is  as 
follows ! 

"  Mrs.  C.  had  at  one  tune  m  her  service,  a  girl  who  proved  to  be  a  fine  rapping  and 
physical  force  medium.  Her  mistress  and  friends  held  frequent  sittings  with  her,  thus  ob- 
taining numerous  communications  from  dear  departed  ones. 

"  On  one  occasion  the  spirit  of  a  young  man  reported  himself,  claming  to  be  the  lady's 
son,  '  She  had  no  son  in  the  spirit-worid,'  she  said ;  '  there  must  be  some  mistake.'  But 
the  spirit  persisted,  and,  to  deepen  the  mystery,  spoke  of  a  beautiful  sister  he  had  with  him, 
whose  existence  was  equally  unknown  to  Mrs.  C.  until  he  reminded  her  that  some  twenty 
years  previous,  she  had  given  birth  to  a  pair  of  twins,  in  whom  not  even  a  sign  of  life  was 
manifest.  The  occasion  was  brought  vividly  to  her  mind  by  the  recital  of  many  attendant 
drcumstances,  of  which  spirit  guardians,  it  seems,  always  instruct  the  spirits  of  embryotic 
births,  for  the  purpose  of  identification. 

"And  so  the  communication  went  on  to  say  that  the  young  spirits,  carefully  matured, 
mifolded,  and  fully  ripened,  m  the  more  perfect  spheres  of  spiritual  existence,  weie  now 
brought  to  the  parents'  home  to  establish  the  natural  relationship  whicli  eternally  subsists 
between  the  root  and  branches  of  humanity.  The  delighted  mother's  conviction,  strength- 
ened by  the  numerous  tests  which  the  spnit  gave  her  concerning  family  details,  only  stum- 
bled at  the  fact  that  she  had  not  even  given  a  name  to  these  unknown  oifspring,  not  deeming 
at  the  time  of  their  blrlh  that  they  possessed  any  spiritual  individuality.  To  this  the  spirits 
rapped  out ;  '  Tliat  is  true,  mother  ;  thee  gave  us  no  names,  so  the  angels  call  me  Love 
and  my  sister  Beauty.  Wilt  thou  name  us  now,  mother  ? '  Mrs.  C,  replied  that  she  would 
endeavor  to  think  of  appropriate  names  for  them  against  the  next  meeting,  which  was  ap- 
pointed at  a  circle  for  the  following  evening.  During  the  ensuing  night,  the  mother  pon- 
dered long  on  the  interview  with  her  'angel-born,'  and  mentally  decided  on  the  names  she 
would  call  them,  though  she  carefully  kept  this  declaon  to  herself.  The  nest  day,  whilst 
pursuing  her  household  avocations  in  company  with  her  maid,  loud  raps  arrested  their  atten- 
tion. It  was  spme  hours  before  the  appointed  circle  was  to  take  place,  hence  the  expected 
interview  with  her  spuU  children  was  not  in  Mrs.  C's  mind.     Calling  the  alphabet,  how- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  261 

ever,  the  young  spirit  son  rapped  out :  '  Motber  we  like  the  names  thou  hast  thought  of 
very  much.'  Knowing  that  these  names  had  never  crossed  her  lips,  and  that  [liey  could 
not  even  be  dreamed  of  by  her  totally  uneducated  medium,  Mrs.  C.  requested  the  spirit  to 
give  them  through  the  raps,  which  immediately  responded  by  spelling  correctly  the  mother's 
anticipated  names  of  '  Angela  '  and  '  Angelo.' 

"  My  venerable  friend  Seth  Hmshaw,  and  my  respected  hostess,  to  whom  the  above  little 
narrative  relates,  your  eyes  wUl .  undoubtedly  meet  these  lines,  and  if  they  should  grow  very 
wide  with  astonishment  at  the  liberty  I  have  taken  with  these  portions  of  your  family  his- 
tory, foi^ve  me  for  the  sake  of  the  happiness  which  your  highly  respected  testimony  may 
bring  to  the  heart  of  some  bereaved  mother  whose  wounds  have  been  torn  open  afresh  by 
the  horrid  and  groundless  theory  that  blank  annihilation  can  ever  be  the  doom  of  the 
divine  spark  that  is  enshrined  even  in  tlie  most  imperfect  human  organism,  and  marks 
ilself  m  characters  as  immortal  as  the  Designer  from  whence  it  came,  on  the  unfmished 
but  not  wasted  framework  meant  to  enclose  life,  when  in  the  fulness  of  time  in  this  sphere, 
or  some  other  equdly  rudimentary,  the  design  should  be  perfected  to  that  point  of  con- 
sciousness which  is  in  itself  immortality. 

"Emma  Hardikge. 

"Oswego,  N.  Y.,  yuly  10,  1S60." 

Of  the  final  result  of  tlie  teachings  communicated  by  Prof,  and  Mrs, 
Spence,  we  are  unable  to  give  any  definite  account ;  their  progress  and 
growth — if  they  effected  any — having  been  lost  sight  of  in  the  stupendous 
successes  achieved  by  the  proven  facts  of  Spiritualism. 

If  however,  "faith  be  the  substance  of  things  unseen,"  and  the  "non-im- 
mortality" theorists  have  a  sufficient  supply  of  diat  quality,  they  may  possi- 
bly have  a  large  influence  in  directions  unknown  to,  as  well  as  unseen  by,  the 
rest  of  mankind. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

SPIRITUALISM     IN     NEW     ENGLAND     (CONCLUDED). 

We  gird  us  ^  the  combg  fighl, 

The^^  and  miih.  and  Imi  of^Heavcn." 

J.  G.  Whittieb. 

EfpectsoftheRecantation Movement— Rev.  Thos.  Higginson's Challenob — 
The  Ten  Thousand  Dollar  Challenge  —  Letters  from  Tallmadge,  Das- 
skin,  Chase,  and  Others —  More  Testimony  for  ImmoetaLitv — The  Boston 
Post  on  Phvsical  Mediumship— The  Ijoston  Spieit-koom  —  Singular  Case  of 
Healing—Correspondence—Circles— Exorcism— Warren  Chase  on  Work 
AND  Wages—  Statistics  of  Spiritualism  in  i860. 

It  would  be  almost  impossible  to  give  an  idea  of  the  mass  of  evidence  in 
favor  of  genuine  Spiritualism  and  reliable  mediumship  which  the  "recanta- 
tion movement"  called  forth.  True  Spiritualists,  instead  of  lamenting  over 
the  defalcations  of  the  worthless,  were  compelled  to  acknowledge  their  in- 
debtedness to  them  for  undertaking  that  sifting  process  in  their  own  behalf, 
which  the  rapid  spread  of  die  cause  and  the  heterogeneous  character  of  its 
believers  so  imperatively  required. 

Hosted  by  Google 

of  country, 
ice,  thouo-h  orii 

gh        >  & 

:arted 

1       p         ! 

cause 

w  d     space 
C     im          g  with 
11  d  f     h  by  the 
d          ark  d  and 

262  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

In  describing  the  various  phases  of  deception,  trickery,  and  fanaticism, 
«4iich  from  time  to  time  have  deformed  the  movement,  we  have  wandered 
far  from  the  actual  lunits  of  the  New  England  States,  whose  Spiritualism  it 
was  the  business  of  the  last  few  chapters  to  describe ;  but  the  wide-spread 
influence  exerted  by  the  manife stations,  renders  it  almost  impossible  to 
narrow  down  our  observations  to  any  particular  sec  ' 

The  influence  of  Messrs  Harris  and  Scott,  for  ii 
in  New  York  and  Virginia,  sp       1  th       I    1 

the  same  may  be  said  of  th    S 
in  Boston  and  Kiantone.     T    di         P    h 
east  of  the  Alleghanies  up  86 

than  that  occupied  by  the  N       Eld 
these  again,  however,  we  find  h 

sifting  process  described  in  1     p       d   g    h  p 

healthful  influence  on  the  d  f  h   h        and  p  rm  of 

Spiritualism.     Amongst  othd        guhdpk       R  djh    Pier- 

pont,  Thomas  W.  Higginson       dAd     Ball      p        hd        hi  posures 

m  terms  of  high  congratulation,  and  tehcitated  their  hearers  on  the  healthful 
action  which  such  a  course  must  inevitably  produce. 

The  Worcester  Spy,  a  paper  generally  sufficiently  violent  in  its  declama- 
tions against  Spiritualism,  gives  the  following  synopsis  of  a  discourse  given  by 
the  Rev.  T.  W.  Higginson,  appropriate  to  the  occasion  of  the  late  exposm-es : 

"Rev.  Thomas  W.  Hi^inson  leeturedal  Dodworth's  Academy,  New  York,  last  Sunday. 

"  The  following  is  a  brief  sketch  of  his  discourse,  Mr.  Hi^iison  .said  that  he  could 
imagine  no  general  class  or  modes  of  spiritual  intercoarse,  which  was  not  represented  in 
Spiritualism.  He  rejoiced  that  it  bad  been  scrutinized  by  so  many  hard-headed  and  scep- 
tical scientific  men.  After  hundreds  of  thousands  of  facts,  extending  over  eight  years,  during 
which  time  three  out  of  every  four  who  had  investigated  it  had  become  converts,  he  had 
the  right  to  claim  that  the  burden  of  proof  rested  on  the  other  side 

"  During  this  time  at  least  twenty  thousand  mediimis  have  been  continually  tested  by 

"  It  vras  easy  for  them  to  be  deceived  in  some  things ;  natural  to  expect  that  some  decep- 
tion, voluntary  and  mvoluntary,  must  exist  in  such  vast  operations.  But  if  the  whole  thing 
was  deception,  then  there  were  twenty  thousand  persons  in  the  country  who  were  guilty  of 
the  blackest  species  of  fraud.  And  who  were  these  deceivers?  Our  brothers,  sisters, 
mothers,  fathers,  children,  and  most  intimate  friends  and  kindred  I  What  could  be  the  pur- 
pose of  such  a  wide-spread  deceptior  ■" 

"  Of  the  many  thousands  of  medi 

"  For  every  one  that  had,  he  cou 
money,  reputation,  friends,  and  worldly  advant^e  of  all  kinds — setting  a^e  the  posabiUty 
of  gain.  Then,  was  vice  so  inlrioHcally  attractive  that  human  tieings  would  wilfully  sacri- 
fice their  honor  and  fortune  for  the  sole  purpose  of  establishmg  an  unpopular  falsehood  ? 
.  ...  He  would  give  his  hundred  dollars  to  any  one  who  would  sustain  fifteen  minutes' 
conversatbn  by  trick  or  machinery  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  that  practiced  by  the 

■nediums, It  was,  he  knew,  of  little  use  to  detail  facts ;  we  ^ould  all  see 

for  ourselves :  still,  what  could  the  exposers  make  of  such  facts  as  these  ? 

"  He  had  seen  a  guitar  play  in  broad  daylight,  without  any  human  hands  upon  it  or  any 
human  being  within  three  feet  of  it.  The  widow  of  '  honest  John  Davis,'  late  Governor 
of  Massachusetts  [herself  the  aster  of  America's  most  eminent  historian],  had  told  him, 
that  while  ^tting  in  her  own  parlor,  with  two  other  ladies  and  a  medium,  she  and  they 
saw  a  pendl  rise  up  on  a  centre-table  in  the  room  of  itself,  and  while  no  human  being  was 
within  several  feet  of  it,  write  an  intelligent  communication  addressed  to  herself.  And  yet, 
this  is  but  one  of  thousands  and  thousands  of  facts,  some  greater  and  some  less,  which  are 
daily  transpiring  in  the  world,  and  which  have  only  been  hailed  by  the  jeers  and  sneers  of 
academies  and  lyceums. 

"  Mr.  H^inson  dosed  a  long  and  earnest  address  with  prayer. 

The  brief  synopsis  above  quoted  was  particularly  noted  in  the  secular  pa- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

//.  /'av. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  263 

pers  for  the  offer  of  "  one  hundred  dollars  "  to  any  trickster  who  could  simu- 
late precisely  the  practices  of  genuine  mediumship.  This  offer  appeared  to 
excite  the  peculiar  merriment  of  the  press,  as  if  the  thing  could  only  by  pos- 
sibility mean  one  of  the  fictions  in  which  clerical  gentlemen  sometimes  in- 
dulge. Presuming  that  the  railing  world  had  already  forgotten  the  numerous 
challenges  of  a  similar  kind  issued  by  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Britain,  the  au- 
thor added  to  Mr.  Hi^;inson's  offer  five  hundred  dollars  to  any  trickster  who 
could,  by  machinery  or  trick,  give  such  test  facts  of  intelligence  as  were 
daily  revealed  through  certain  specified  mediums ;  such  tests  to  be  given  un- 
der precisely  similar  conditions  to  those  employed  by  the  mediums.  This 
offer  was  immediately  doubled  by  Mr.  Miltenberger,  of  St.  Louis,  and  added 
to  by  similar  offers  all  over  the  States,  until  it  amounted  to  the  sum  of  ten 
thousand  dollars.  But  as  no  competitor  for  this  prize  has  ever  yet  appeared, 
it  is  presumed  that  the  "  tricksters  "  did  not  happen  to  see  the  various  papers 
in  wliich  the  offers  were  advertised,  or  that,  like  Mr.  Paine,  of  Worcester, 
"  they  never  performed  for  money."  Out  of  the  floods  of  testimony  that  soon 
began  to  pour  in  from  all  quarters  concerning  the  rapid  advance  of  the  cause, 
we  shall  select  a  few  items  from  well-known  and  reliable  correspondents. 
The  first  whom  we  shall  cite  is  Governor  Tallmadge,  who,  in  describing  an 
incident  connected  with  the  decease  of  an  old  friend  and  near  neighbor  of  his 
family's,  writes  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  as  follows  : 

"hon.  j.  b.  macv  lost  from  the  niagara. 

"  Fond  du  Lac,  Wisconsin. 

"Mtssri.  Partridge  and  Britain  : 

"  You  have,  no  doubt,  seen  in  the  public  papers  the  melancholy  fate  of  our  friend  Hon. 

John  B.  Maey,  by  the  burning  of  the  steamer  '  Niagara '  near  Tort  Washington,  on  Lake 
lichigan.  He,  with  several  others,  was  precipitated  from  the  small  boat  into  the  water, 
whilst  it  was  being  let  down  at  the  stem  of  the  steamer He  was  un- 
surpassed in  his  energy,  enterprise,  and  public  spirit,  and  was  withal  a  devoted  Spiritualist, 

His  noble  widow  entertains  the  same  belief,  and  the  greatest  consolation 

she  has  in  this  sadden  bereavement  is  the  assurance  that  her  husband,  as  a  blessed  minister- 
ing spirit,  can  still  communicate  with  her 

"Mr.  MaCTwas  drowned  on  the  24th  instajil, about  four  o'clock,  P.M.  On  the  morning 
of  the  next  day,  and  before  any  romor  of  his  fate  could  possibly  have  reached  us,  my 
daughter  saw  shadows  flitting  across  her  room,  which  she  mentioned  to  the  family  as  a 
presage  of  bad  news.  Mr.  Macy,  who  had  been  our  near  neighbor,  had  started  for  Lake 
Superior,  and  was  not  expected  home  for  several  days. 

"  In  the  night,  after  the  family  had  retired  to  rest,  my  daughter  discovered  a  bright  light 
in  the  sitting-room  opening  into  hers,  and  the  same  shadow,  which  she  had  indistinctly 
noticed  in  the  morning,  now  appeared  in  the  shape  and  exact  semblance  of  Mr.  Macy. 
She  informed  her  mother  of  the  apparition,  immediately  adding,  under  impresaon,  '  Mr. 
Macy  is  drowned.'  Another  daughter,  who  is  also  a  medium,  sleeping  in  a  different  part 
of  the  house,  saw  the  same  light  and  the  shadowy  form  of  Mr.  Ma.cy  as  he  appeared  to  her 
sister,  upon  which  she  was  influenced  to  write  'Niagara — drowned  by  the  upsetting  of 
the  small-boat.'  The  next  day,  and  for  the  first  time,  the  news  of  the  catastrophe,  and 
the  manner  of  Mr.  Macy's  death,  reached  our  village. 

"Incidents  small  as  these  being  of  such  frequent  occurrence  amongst  us,  do  more  in 
their  totality  to  convince  the  community  that  spirits  Lve,  and  do  communicate  with  earth, 
than  all  the  action  of  cheats  and  vagabonds  can  avail  to  shake  that  belief.  Still  I  believe 
even  these  poor  tools  are  doing  a  good  work  for  the  cause  of  truth,  for  they  stimulate 
mquiry,  and  serve  as  a  check  to  that  excessive  credulity  which  necessarily  results  from  such 
an  abundance  of  phenomena. 

"Circles  are  numerous  here,  mvestigations  keen,  and  the  phenomena 

mo..;  striking  and  abundant  than  ever. 

"  Yours,  very  truly, 

"N.  P.  Tali.ma.dge." 

Hosted  by  Google 

264  HISTOR  Y  OF  MODERN 

Colonel  Danskin,  of  Bakiraore,  wrote  to  the  sanie  effect  in  the  succeeding 
paragraphs,  copied  from  the  Banner  of  Light  of  i860  : 

"  We  hear  no  more  now  of  the  insanily  of  the  Spiritualists.  The  cry  of  'humbug'  is 
dying  out,  and  the  denuncialions  of  the  pijpit  in  this  section  of  country  are  waxing  feeble. 
Even  the  sneers  of  the  secular  press  are  subsiding,  and  the  pity  whidi  some  good  people 
have  expressed  for  the  'deluded  Spiritualists,'  has  been  trausmuted  into  admiration  for  the 
wonderfully  intellectual  power  displayed  upon  our  rostrum 

"  Some  ten  years  ajo,  when  my  attention  was  first  drawn  to  the  subject,  that  wonderful 
medium,  the  poetic  Harris,  was  advertised  to  lecture  in  Carroll  Hall  I  thought  il  worth 
an  hoiu's  attention  to  leam  what  could  be  said  upon  so  strange  a  subject.  The  hall  was 
crowded  by  a  throng  of  curiosity-hunters,  some  of  whom  had  come  to  sneer,  and  a  few  to 
leam  whether  there  was  really  a  communion  between  the  two  worlds.  I  listened  with 
wonder  and  delight.  The  very  thoughts  which  bad  been  flitting  through  my  bram  for  years 
were  here  embodied  in  compact  and  It^cal  propositions. 

"  The  absolute  necessity  of  the  intercommunion  of  men  and  angels  was  clearly  proven. 
The  facts  upon  which  the  claims  of  that  communion  were  based  were  distinctly  stated,  and  the 
philosophy  dedudble  from  those  facts  was  so  eloquently  presented  that  1  saw  a  new  world 
unfolding  before  me  that  my  soul  had  long  yeained  to  behold,  but  for  which  iheobgy  had 
forbidden  me  to  search. 

"Suice  that  time  many  spiritual  speakers  have  viated  onr  city, — the  inspired  AmHer,  the 
modest,  yet  earnest,  Achsah  Sprague.  Here  Cora  Hatch  was  for  months  made  the  mouth- 
fdece  of  the  angels,  who  poured  through  her  finely  organized  brain  the  melodies  of  the 
higher  spheres.  Then  came  the  logical  and  eloquent  Thomas  Gales  Forster,  sowing  the 
seeds  of  truth,  which  have  since  germinated  and  brought  forth  such  good  friiit ;  Enama. 
Hardmge,  the  dashing,  brilliant,  and  forcible  Emma,  v/ho  took  her  hearers  by  storm,  and 
won  the  appiaase  even  of  those  who  were  not  morally  strong  enough  to  cast  aside  entirely 
the  creeds  m  which  their  infant  minds  had  been  siraddled ;  Lizzie  Doten  spoke  a  short 
season  for  u^  and  it  was  dnrmg  this  brief  yiat  that  ew^ui^jte  poem,  '  The  Streets  of  Balti- 
more,' was  given  by  (he  spirit  of  Edgar  Poe,  who  has  often  used  her  mediumship  for  the  out- 
pouring of  his  rhytimiical  sermons.  Since  October  last,  Mrs.  Hyzer  has  been  oar  principal 
speaker,  and  delighted  audiences  have  continued  to  fill  our  hall,  listening  to  the  sublime 

utterances  which  fall  in  living  light  from  her  lips. 

"  Washington  A.  Danskin." 

Deeming  that  die  likenesses  of  deceased  persons^  given  under  marvellous 
test  conditions  by  Messrs.  Rogers,  Walcutt,  Anderson,  and  others,  would 
furnish  undeniable  proofs  of  spirit  intercourse,  many  anxious  inquirers, 
whose  faith  had  been  shaken  by  recent  occurrences,  appealed  to  these  medi- 
ums for  the  proofs  fhey  sought.  The  services  of  the  spirit  artists  were  in 
unusual  demand  at  that  period,  therefore,  and  the  success  of  their  medium- 
iatic  efforts  became  almost  fabulous. 

From  an  immense  mass  of  testimony  incidental  to  the  time,  our  limits  will 
only  pennit  us  to  select  one  case,  which  we  insert  because  it  gives  the  ex- 
perience of  a  well-knovm  citizen  of  Newburyport,  and  is  communicated 
and  vouched  for  by  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  reliable  of  the  advo- 
cates of  Spiritualism,  namely,  Hon.  Warren  Chase. 

"QUERY— BANNER   OF  LIGHT.  —  iSfto. 

"  Would  the  hole  in  the  carpel,  wire  in  the  floor  and  table  of  Mrs,  Paine,  account  for 
the  following?  or,  is  this  one  of  the  tougher  hind  of  manifestations  that  requires  the  devil 
theory  of  Beecher  and  Co.  ?  Mr.  R.  Sherman,  overseer  in  one  of  the  factories  of  New- 
buryport, has  a  wife  who  has  been  many  years  an  inhabitant  of  the  spirit-world.  His 
second  and  present  wife  15  a  medium,  through  whom  the  other  often  commiuiicates  with 
him,  mostly  m  writing.  Some  months  ago,  Mr.  Sherman  requested  his  spirit  companion 
to  try  and  get  for  him  her  likeness,  and  soon  after  she  informed  him  that  she  would  try  to 
do  so ;  promising  to  visit  the  room  of  Mr.  Walcutt,  spirit  artist,  of  Columbus,  Ohio, 
naming  a  day  and  hour  for  that  purpose,  and  requesting  him  to  inform  Mr,  W.  of  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  265 

"That  there  should  be  as  perfect  a  test  given  as  possible,  Mr.  SIieiTnan  got  a  friend  who 
had  no  interest  in  the  matter  to  write  for  liim  to  Mr.  Walcutt,  as  follows  : 

'"Dear  Sir, — I  have  made  arrangenents  with  a  spirit  to  visit  your  room  at [naming 

day  and  hour].     Please  forward  the  result  by  mail'  etc. 

"Mr.  Walcutt  was  sick  in  bed  at  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  but,  bolstered  up,  lie  drew  the 
likeness  of  a  spirit  who  appeared  at  the  time  appointed,  and  sent  it  to  Newbuirport.  On 
being  examined,  it  was  instantly  recogrtized  to  fe  Mr.  Sherman's  first  wife  as  she  appeared 
in  her  last  days,  with  her  hair  cnt  sliort  as  it  was  only  a  few  days  before  her  death,  and  a 
peculiar  curl  on  one  side,  just  as  she  wore  it.  The  hand  was  placed  at  the  ^le  of  her  face, 
whichwasaconstantliabit  with  her,  and  the  whole  picture  contained  unmistakable  proofs  of 
her  identity,  Mr.  Sherman  even  was  surprised  to  see  her  hair  cut  fJlort,  but  tlie  spirit  said 
she  was  so  represented,  to  make  the  test  more  complete. 

"  This  is  onljr  one  of  many  similar  and  equally  good  tests  that  daily  come  under  my  obser- 
vation, and  which  may  help  to  furnish  our  enemies  with  fresh  subjects  to  account  for. 

"I  am  sure  there  is  no  science  in  old  Harvard  that  explains  this  one  fact  alone,  away,  but 
tliose  who  have  a  devil  to  chaise  sach  occurrences  to,  have  the  start  of  me,  and  are  ahead 

"Warren  Chase." 
The  foliomng  extracts  are  from  an  essay  on  immortality  published  in  the 
Sunbeam,  New  York,  by  Professor  Whipple,  a  gentleman  of  uniiupeadiable 
veracity,  and  scientific  attaimnents,  who  had  resigned  the  chances  of  worldly 
distinction  to  which  his  education  and  iwsition  entitled  him,  for  the  sake  of 
becoming  an  itinerant  in  tlie  cause  of  Spiritualism.  Mr.  Whipple's  cases,  al- 
though not  very  remarkable  either  for  originality  or  marvel,  were  highly  ap- 
pUcable  to  die  time,  and  are  illustrative  of  a  subject  which  will  ever  continue 
to  interest  mankind,  namely,  whether  tlie  apparitions  of  deceased  persons  are 
produced  by  unknown  forces  in  the  atmosphere,  mental  images,  or  the  actual 
living  spirits  of  the  departed.  In  die  settlement  of  such  questions  the  proofs 
bf  inteUigeijce  as  well  as  identity  communicated  by  Mr.  Whipple,  are  exceed- 
ingly valuable,  and  being  recited  moreover  with  extreme  directness  and  sim- 
phcity,  they  commend  tliemselves  to  the  attention  of  every  reader. 

"PROFESSOR  WHIPPLE  TO  THE  BANNER  OF  LIGHT. 

"  Eight  yeais  sip  I  was  travelling  in  Medina  County,  in  this  State, 

"  I  put  up  over  Sunday  with  a  family  in  the  town  of  Brunswick.  In  the  family  were  two 
rapping  mediums.  They  and  myself  held  a  circle  during  (lie  day,  when  we  were  seated 
round  a  large  dining  table.  I  propounded  many  questions  to  my  deceased  tektives,  all  of 
which  were  correctfy  answered  through  the  raps. 

"  After  I  had  concluded  questioning,  the  maliums  rose  and  took  a  position  by  the  wmdow 
so.  or  eight  feet  from  the  table,  which,  whilst  they  sang  a  hymn,  kept  time  by  raising  itself 
directly  from  the  floor,  without  the  slightest  physical  contact,  or  the  approach  of  a  human 
being  within  ax  feet  of  it.  I  introduce  this  fact  to  call  attention  to  the  intelligent  agency 
maniiested  independent  of  the  medium. 

"  Last  spring  I  attended  a  drcle  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  Tuttle,  father  of  Hudson  Tuttle. 
It  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  been  at  their  house.  Mr.  Tuttle  became  clairvoyant,  and 
corecily  described  the  spirits  of  my  mother,  two  sisters,  and  a  twin  brother.  She  was  en- 
tranced and  spoke  to  me  of  events  only  known  to  my  spirit  mother  and  myseK 

"  Whilst  lecturing  in  Morrow  County  this  last  winter,  I  attended  a  circle  one  evening 
composed  of  about  twenty  persons,  and  there,  for  the  first  time,  met  a  young  man,  a  medium, 
who  had  no  acquaintance  with  me  and  knew  nothing  of  my  liistory.  He  was  controlled  to 
give  tests  to  different  individuals. 

"At  length  be  turned  hisattenliontome  ;  said  he  saw  a  young  man,  a  spirit,  by  uiy  side, 
whom  he  described  very  particularly. 

"  The  descripti^f  answered  exactly  to  my  brother.  He  compared  liis  features  with  mine ; 
said  we  greatly  resembled  each  other,  and  that  he  appeared  to  bear  the  relation  of  brother  to 
me.  'Now,'  said  he,  I  will  see  if  1  can  lell  how  old  be  is.'  He  paused  a  moment  and  then 
excldmed,  'Why,  he  saj^  he  is  neither  older  nor  younger  tlianyou.'  'Veiy  true,' I  an- 
swered, '  for  he  is  my  twm  brother. ' 

"  A  short  time  before  my  brother  departed  tliis  life,  while  he  lay  sick  in  Minnesota,  I 
went  to  Mr.  Durkee,  a  spirit  physician  residmg  in  Middlefield,  Ohio,  who,  I  understoo<l. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

266  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

couH  examine  diseases  at  a  distance,  without  bemg  informed  of  the  symptoms  of  the  patient. 
He  examined  my  brother  correctly,  described  his  symptoms  and  fhdr  complication,  and  said 
he  was  incurable.  He  told  the  medicines  he  had  taken,  the  effect  produced  by  ihem,  and 
a  marked  change  then  occurring  in  Ms  symptoms.  All  this  I  noted  down,  and  foimd  to  be 
correct  on  my  arrival  in  Minnesota. 

"  My  brother  lived  bat  a  few  days  after  my  return.  Last  September,  at  the  Spiritualists' 
convention,  in  Ashtabula  County,  Ohio,  whilst  on  the  speaker's  stand  in  the  public  hall,  a 
Mrs.  Shaw,  a  trance  medium,  described  to  me  my  twin  brother,  correctly  detmeating  his  ap- 
pearance and  character  in  every  respect ;  yet  she  never  saw  him  in  tlie  earth  form,  or  Imd  the 
slii^test  idea  that  1  had  a  brother.     1  might  relate  numerous  in^ances  of  the  same  kind, 

did  space  permit Rogers,  while  on  earth,  painted  hundreds  of  portraits  of 

individuals  he  never  saw.  He  wouli  sometimes  have  a  portrait  finished  for  months  before 
it  was  rect^iied  and  clauned  by  its  appropriate  owner. 

"  R<^ers  was  a  tailor  by  trade,  with  only  an  ordinary  education,  and  mediocre  talent, 
mthout  the  least  knowledge  of  the  art.  Eschew  his  own  explanation  of  the  production  of 
his  pictures,  namely,  that  one  spirit  appeared  to  him,  and  another  entranced  and  used  hisor- 
ganism  to  paint  the  likeness  of  the  apparition,  and  what  account  could  be  given  of  his 
otherwise  miraculous  gift  ? 

"At  the  early  !^e  of  axteen,  Hudson  Tut  tie,  a  facraer"  s  boy,  with  a  very  common  school 
education,  commenced  under  spirit  influence  to  paint  a  geological  panorama.*  He  painted 
correctly  the  different  geological  systems,  and  characteristic  fossils,  occupying  eight  hundred 
feet  of  canvas. 

"  At  that  time,  he  had  no  practical  knowledge  of  geology ;  yet  many  eminent  professori 
have  pronomiced  the  painting  scientifically  correct,  and  a  remarl^ible  exhibition  of  skill. 
And  thus,  I  might  goon  fli^fiyfniftjjB,  introducing  facts,  some  of  which  ab- 
solutely demonstrate  that  the  soul  lives  beyond  the  tomb,  and  others  bearing  equally  conclu- 
sive evidence  of  the  influence  which  the  immortal  world,  exercises  over  the  mortaL" 

Tlie  New  York  Conference,  at  which  so  much  pubUcity  had  been  given  to 
the  doiogs  of  the  "  tricksters,"  of  course  became  the  scene  of  many  earnest 
expressions  of  counter  opinions.  The  following  is  a  specimen  of  the  tone  the 
discussions  assumed,  subsequent  to  the  exposures.  The  report  dates  a  few 
weeks  later  than  the  Paine  confession  : 

"  At  the  confereiu:e  of  last  week,  the  question  under  discussion  was  whether  all  so-called 
spiritual  communications  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  the  theory  of  clairvoyance.  Dr.  Gray 
was  of  the  opinion  that  clanvoyance  covered  the  whole  ground,  but  as  a  salvo,  made  ci^- 
voyance  aspuitual  state,  into  which  none  could  enter  without  first  coming  into  rapport  with 

a  spirit The  session  of  the  conference  to  which  I  allude  was  rich  in 

fects.     Mr.  Conklin  related  the  foUowmg  : 

"  Last  week  two  Baptist  clei^ymen  from  Brooldyn,  called  on  iiim,  the  one  being  a  Spirit- 
ualist, the  other  openly  acloiowledging  his  frank  belief  that  the  whole  thing  was  '  a  humbng, 
Mr.  Conldin,  without  the  least  feeling  of  annoyance  at  such  an  introduction  to  the  seance, 
directed  the  sceptic  to  write  naines  and  questions  away  from  the  table ;  and  when  he  was 
qnite  sure  that  he,  Mr.  C.,  could  not  have  seen  them,  the  names,  together  with  most  appro- 
priate answers,  were  written  out  by  his  hand.  The  sceptic  was  astonidied;  and,  after 
q>endmg  an  hour  in  askmg  questions  and  receiving  the  most  satisfactory  testa  in  answer,  he 
avowed  his  belief  that  he  must  have  been  conversing  with  the  world  of  spirits,  since  the 
knowledge  communicated  could  have  come  from  no  other  source. 

"The other  reverend  gentleman  stated  (Jmt  on  a  certain  occasion,  when  it  had  been 
previously  announced  to  him,  through  Mr.  Conklin,  that  George  Fox,  the  celebrated  Quaker 
founder,  would  preach  through  him  a  sermon  on  unmortality,  he  found  himself  unable 
to  follow  his  notes :  his  congregation  seemed  to  fade  from  his  sight,  and  whilst  but  partially 
conscious  of  his  surroundings,  he  found  himself  most  pleasingly  impelled  to  pronounce  a 
discourse,  which  his  congregation  subsequently  declared  to  have  been  '  tlie  grandest  sermon 
he  had  ever  preached. '  He  added  that,  at  midnight  on  a  recent  occaaon,  the  fear  of  bur- 
glars became  so  powerfully  impressed  upon  his  mind  that  he  could  neither  sleep  nor  Ke  still. 
At  length  lie  was  compelled  to  rise  and  search  the  house,  when,  on  entering  bis  dining-room 
he  fomid  the  stove  ted  hot,  and  a  horse  of  clothes,  which  had  been  left  standing  around  it, 
upset  by  some  means  upon  the  stove.  Just  as  he  entered,  the  cbthes  had  ignited ;  a  mo- 
ment later,  and  they  would  have  been  in  a  blaze :  the  result  must  have  been  destruction  if 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  26J 

not  of  the  lives,  at  least  of  the  property  of  the  family,  had  not  this  t.inely  impression  sent 
him  there  in  seascin  to  extinguish  the  flames.  Shortly  after,  the  spirit  sister  of  this  gentle- 
man in  fonned  him  at  a  circle  tlat  she  was  the  controlling  power  on  this  occasion.  She  per- 
ceived the  danger,  and  finding  it  impossible  to  impreEs  him  with  the  true  natare  of  the 
case,  succeeded  b  excitina;  liis  mind  to  the  fear  of  robbers.  Mr.  ConMin  also  related  a 
■well  known  instance  of  spirit  teleijraphy,  which  was  the  more  mteresting  as  all  the  parties 
concerned  in  it  were  present  to  veiify  his  statement. 

"  Mr.  Conklin  was  at  Washington.  One  of  his  children  was  taken  ill,  and  attended  by 
Dt.  Gray,  who  con^dered  the  case  so  critical,  that  he  advised  the  family  to  telegraph  for 
Mr.  Cooklin.  The  party  charged  with  this  misaon,  on  his  way  to  the  magnetic  telegraph 
office,  stepped  instead,  into  the  office  of  the  C4rij//3«J>iW/ao/(>(,  at  553  Broadway,  where 
a.  public  circle  was  then  in  sesaon.  Mr.  Joh:i  F.  Coles  was  one  of  the  persons  present, 
and  hearing  the  report  of  the  messenger,  aslied  if  there  was  any  spirit  then  present  who 
would  take  the  message  in  advance  of  the  telegraph.  '  Black  Hawk,'  the  Indian  chief 
ajmounced  himself  and  volunteered  to  do  so.  The  message  was  given  and  the  spirit  pur- 
ported to  depart  on  Hs  errand. 

"  Meanwhile,  Mr.  Conklin  was  in  Ms  room  at  Washington,  and  bein^  fatigued  with  the 
labors  of  the  formoon,  was  reposing  upon  a  sofa,  when  be  felt  suddenly  impelled  to  get  up 
and  go  to  his  table.  There  the  influence  cajne  upon  him,  and  immediately  wrote  through 
his  band;  'Go  right  home — your  little  boy  Sammy,  is  very  sick.  Black  Hawk.'  Mr. 
Conklin  at  once  telegraiied  home,  and  after  receiving  a  confirmation  of  his  message,  fol- 
lowed himself  in  peison. 

"N.  B.— Mr.  Coles,  who  was  concerned  in  the  delivery  of  this  spirit  telegraph,  and  pres- 
ent when  Mr.  Conklin  repeated  the  narrative,  was  quite  willing  to  except  this  case  from  the 
list  of  impoations.     No  general  rule  without  an  exception,  then,  it  seems.     \Reporier.y 

The  following  narrative  was  furnished  by  a  correspondent  of  the  Boston 
Post,  from  whose  volumes  it  is  now  reprinted.  It  was  published  about  the 
time  when  the  majority  of  the  secular  papers  were  writing  voluminous  obitu- 
aries on  Spiritualism,  slain,  as  they  alleged,  at  the  hands  of  the  camp-follow- 
ers who  ever  hang  on  the  rear  of  the  armies  of  progression.  Besides  the 
interest  derived  from  the  narrative  itself,  its  record  by  one  of  the  most  respec- 
table journals  in  New  England,  the  editor  of  whom  vouches  for  its  authen- 
ticity, renders  its  testimony  peculiarly  valuable.  It  is  only  necessary  to  add 
that  the  siance  took  place  in  the  house  of  one  of  the  most  distinguished  mer- 
chants of  Boston,  and  tliat  the  medium,  Mr.  Rollin  Squire,  was  a  gentleman 
whose  standing  and  position  rendered  all  idea  of  interested  motive  or  decep- 
tion impossible.  On  this  head,  moreover,  the  native  of  the  occurrences  will 
be  ample  witness  of  their  supra-mundane  origin. 

"  To  tht  Editor  of  tht  Boston  Post : 

"  It  was  about  ten  minutes  past  seven,  on  Friday  evening,  December  7,  1855,  that  a 

irarty  of  ten  were  admitted  into  the  hoHSe  of  Mr. ,  the  much  respected  merchant,  of 

Boston,  for  the  purpose  of  witnessing  the  strange  phenomena  alleged  to  occur  there.  The 
medium  in  this  case  was  a  yoong  gentleman  under  twenty  years  of  age. 

"  In  the  chamber  to  which  we  were  shown  were  chairs,  a  sofa,  bed,  wardrobe,  looking- 
glasses,  etc,  etc.  The  room  was  about  ten  feet  Iiigh.  In  the  centre  was  a  round  table 
weighii^  ahout  fifty  poands.  Aroand  this  we  became  seated.  The  medium  took  a  gold 
watch,  suspended  it  by  the  cham  from  his  his  right  hand,  closely  enveloped  that  hand  m  a 
handkercliief  to  prevent  the  play  of  a  single  joint,  and  requested  the  spirits  to  open  the 
watch,  remove  the  cap,  shut  it  again,  and  notify  by  raps  when  it  was  completed.  All  this 
was  done.  Also,  the  cap  was  taken  in  a  similar  way  from  a  silver  watdi  of  one  of  the 
party,  and  could  not  be  found,  until  it  dropped  on  the  table,  at  our  request.  The  watches 
were  passed  from  hand  to  hand  under  the  table  many  times. 

"The  roomwasnowdarkened,  when  thefollowing  phenomena  occurred  :  Thetablewas 
fordbly  drawn  up  to  the  ceiling,  leaving  the  dents  of  its  legs  on  the  ceiling ;  it  then  canie 
down,  having  adherecl  to  the  ceiling  with  such  force  as  to  drag  down  the  plaster-dust  with  it. 
It  was  raised  some  twelve  or  fourteen  inches  from  the  floor  whilst  the  whole  party  had  their 
hands  on  its  upper  surface.  Whilst  six  of  our  party  strove  to  hold  it  by  main  force,  it  was 
wrenched  from  our  grasp  and  thrown  some  six  or  eight  feet  upon  the  bed.  The  medium 
was  lifted  bodily  from  the  floor  at  various  distances,  whilst  we  held  him  by  either  hand. 

Hosted  by  Google 

anS  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

He  was  lifted  from  the  floor  and  placed,  standing,  on  the  centre  of  the  table,  and  again 
stretched,  upon  his  back  thereon.  Being  seated  in  his  chair,  himself,  chair  and  all,"wa) 
elevatetl  several  inches,  and  liojjped  alx>ut  the  room  iiiic  a  frog.  Suddenly  it  was  lifted, 
medium  and  all,  into  tlie  centre  of  the  table.  Agam  it  was  drawn  up  so  high  that  the  me- 
dium's head  knocked  ajpunst  the  ceiling;  and  finally  the  medium  was  thrown  out  of  it  upon 
the  bed,  whilst  the  chair  was  hurled  upon  the  floor.  A  leg  of  the  table,  being  slightly 
loose,  was  wrenched  off,  and  a  still  heavier  table  — one  weighbg  ninety  pounds  —  was 
substituted.  This  table  was  gently  r^sed,  turned  in  the  air  topsy-turvy,  and  tlien  lightly 
laid,  legs  upwanis,  on  our  heaik,  restbg  there  as  lightly  as  a  feather  pillow. 

"  This  table  was  also  tossed  about,  pitched  over,  and  floated  hither  and  thither  with  the 
same  ease,  apparently,  as  the  lighter  one. 

"Pillows  were  thrown,  and  every  one  of  us  was  touched  and  pinched,  whilst  we  all 
jomed  hands.  We  were  lanned  as  by  a  cool  current  of  air,  and  somelhmg  like  a  heavy 
arm  or  leg  floated  by  us,  brushing  our  hair  aside. 

"  One  of  the  party  received  a  smart  slap  on  the  forehead,  with  what  felt  to  be  a  human 
hand  —  the  tips  of  the  fingers  slanting  downward,  as  if  from  some  one  above  us.  Others 
also  were  slapped  and  touched  by  a  small  delicate  hand,  but  coming  from  the  same  direc- 
tion  About  ten  o'clock  we  broke  up  our  siltingi  but  ere  we  departed, 

'  we  were  invited  into  the  parlor,  when  the  medium,  standing  on  the  floor,  played  several 
tunes  on  the  piano  —  a  very  heavy  one  —  which  rose  and  fell  m  excellent  tune  to  the  muac 
The  Eeolian  pedal,  too,  was  pressed  down  by  an  invisible  performer,  whilst  the  medium's  two 
feet  were  resting  as  he  stood,  on  the  ground,  at  full  arm's  length  from  the  piano.  Then, 
whilst  he  pressed  the  keys  as  before,  the  instrument  became  mute,  and  whilst  he  still  played 
the  soumJ  was  resumed.  Fmally,  each  party  was  bid  "  good-night,"  his  name  being  rapped 
out  on  2ie  piano  case,  and  we  left  the  house  at  a  quarter  past  ten. 

"Alp  this  was  done  promptly,  and  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  all  preseiit.  Not  a  angle 
request  was  refused.     No  hesitancy  was  evinced ;  not  an  error  was  committed. 

"It  was  a  private  residence;  no  fee  of  admittance,  and  of  the  ten  persons  present,  beades 
the  medium  and  the  gentleman  of  the  house,  eight  were  sceptical  when  they  entered.  They 
left  the  mansion  fully  convinced.  The  whole  of  these  marvels  were  executed  wlthm  three 
hours.     We  leave  comments  to  the  reader      We  state  sober  facts.  W," 

In  Boston,  a  spirit  roon  s  n  la  to  the  one  established  by  Jonathan 
Koons,  in  Ohio,  was  fitted  p  b)  a  ge  len  an  b>  the  name  of  Barnard,  who 
opened  it  free  to  the  publ  c  The  arrangemeo  <;  cons  sted  only  of  an  ordi- 
nary table,  chairs,  and  a  ]  latforn  on     h  cl  the  n  t  mn  cnts  were  placed. 

Everything  in  the  room  cludi  g  e  en  ts  floo  n^s  and  walls  were  repeat- 
edly searched,  to  detect  iiiposture,  if  any  had  been  possible. 

The  first  circles  held  in  the  Boston  spirit  room  are  described  by  Mr.  Bar- 
nard in  the  following  communication  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph: 

"Mr.  Editor,  ^-I  have  recently  instituted  a  '^irit  room,'  with  apparatus  similar  in 
some  respects  to  that  of  Mr.  Koons  in  Ohio,  and  which,  like  his,  Is  free  to  the  public.  ''Ve 
have  had  but  three  attii^s  as  yet,  and  last  night  thespurits  called  through  a  writing  medium 
for  a  vial  of  pure  water.  This  was  procured  for  them  from  the  office  of  Dr.  Pinkerton,  our 
neighbor.  They  then  requested  the  room  to  be  darkened  a  while ;  and  after  it  was,  at  their 
request,  lit  up  i^ain,  we  found  the  vial  contained  pure  sweet  wine,  of  a  dark  red  color, 

"They  also  played  upon  the  instruments,  drums,  tambourine,  and  bells,  most  powerfully  ; 
produced  many  spirit  lights,  and  gave  general  satisfaction  to  the  whole  company,  twenty- 
right  in  number.  Amongst  others  who  were  present  and  will  certify  to  the  above,  were 
Rev.  Allen  Putnam,  of  Roxbnry;  Rufus  Ehner  and  wife,  of  Springfidd;  John  Orvis,  of 
Boston  i  Luther  Parks,  of  Boston ;  and  Jonathan  Buffum,  of  Lynn. 

"Yours  for  the  cause  of  truth, 

"  George   L.   Barnard. 

"13  Auburn  Court,  Boston." 

Far  more  wonderful  phenomena  than  are  here  described  soon  ensued  in 
the  "spirit  room"  in  Boston,  besides  which  many  other  circles  of  equal 
interest  were  held  in  the  city  in  every  rank  of  life  and  phase  of  spiritual 
power. 

About  this  time  —  trom  1855  to  1866- — physical  manifestations    of  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  269 

most  astounding  character,  were  given  at  Providence,  Rliode  Island,  through 
the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Wilbur,  an  invalid  lady,  who  was  chiefly  confined  to 
her  bed ;  also  in  Portland,  Maine,  dirongli  a  little  girl,  the  daughter  of  a 
distinguished  lawyer  of  the  city.  Writings  produced  by  the  spirits  with  their 
own  hands,  under  the  most  stringent  test  conditions,  were  given  through 
these  mediums,  and  contained  eitact  fac-siiniles  of  the  handwriting  of  nu- 
merous deceased  persons,  descriptions  of  the  spheres,  and  philosophical 
essays.  Other  non-professional  mediums,  variously  endowed,  were  reported 
from  different  parts  of  the  New  England  States,  furnishing  an  incontrovertible 
mass  of  testimony  in  favor  of  genuine  mediumship,  and  the  total  absence  of 
any  possible  motive  for  deception  or  fraud.  Amongst  the  innumerable  cases 
of  healing  which  were  daily  flooding  the  spiritual  journals  from  all  sections 
of  the  country,  we  select — as  the  only  one  which  our  space  will  here  permit 
us  to  insert — a  singularly  curious  and  interesting  instance  of  spirit  benefi- 
cence, vouched  for  upon  the  authority  of  unimpeachable  witnesses,  and 
furnished  by  Mr.  Charles  Partridge,  who  was  personally  acquainted  with  all 
the  parties.  Mr.  Partridge  reports  the  circumstances  in  the  Spiritual  Tele- 
graph, in  the  following  terms  1 

"SINGULAR  SPIRITUAL  VISITATION  AND  EXTRAORDINAY  CURE  OF  CONSUMPTION. 

"While  the  writer  was  on  a  vidt  £0  Brunswick,  Maine,  a.  few  days  since,  ihe  interesting 
focts  recorded  in  this  connection  were  communicated  to  liimby  the  lady  and  her  friends,  for 
whom  the  spirits  eietcised  their  extcaordinary  powers. 

Mrs.  D.  P.  Newman,  of  Brunswick,  belongs  to  a  family  in  wMch  consumption  is  a  con- 
genita disease,  one  aster  and  eight  members  of  her  father's  family  having  been  removed 
from  earth  by  thisinsidious  destroyer.  The  health  of  Mrs.  N.  had  been  faiUng  for  some 
years,  owing  to  her  consumptive  tendencies,  when  a  sudden  cold  had  the  effect  to  prostrate 
her  system  and  reduce  her  to  the  condition  of  incurable  suffering.  Confined  to  her  bed,  she 
continued  to  feol  rapidly.  Her  cough  was  incessant  and  every  fresh  paroxysm  of  pain  was 
succeeded  by  increasing  and  hopeless  debility.  One  day,  when  Mrs.  Newman  had  been 
confined  to  her  conch  of  pain  for  five  weeks,  a  angular  circumstance  occuned  in  Vassal- 
horo,  which  is  some  forty  miles  from  Brunswick,  the  residence  of  the  patient.  Mrs.  Not- 
cross,  widely  known  in  the  eastern  portion  of  New  England  as  an  excellent  clairvoyant 
and  healli^  medium,  was  seated  alone  in  her  apartment. 

The  tune  was  early  evening,  and  nothmg  occurred  to  disturb  the  silence  of  the  room 
until  the  door  suddenly  opened,  and  Mrs.  Norcross  beheld  entering  what  appeared  to  be  a 
human  figure  concealed  by  loose  drapery.  Presuming  it  to  be  a  boy  belonging  to  the 
family  who  had  assumed  this  disguise  for  llie  childish  purpose  of  affrighting  her,  Mrs.  Not- 
cross  spoke,  addressing  the  boy  by  name. 

"  Thereupon  the  covering  seemed  to  &11  from  one  side  of  the  figure,  discloang,  to  her 
great  surprise,  a  beautiful  female  form,  with  a  face  glowing  with  earnest  purpose  and  re- 
markable teyijemess  of  feeling.  This  lovely  apparition  Mrs.  Norcross  did  not  recognize  as 
any  one  she  had  ever  seen  before.  After  a  moment's  pause  the  mysterious  visitant  said  : 
'  My  name  is  Jordan,  and  I  have  brought  my  dear  aster  to  have  you  heal  her  by  the  power 
which  you  possess.'  As  she  spoke  the  covering  feli  from  the  other  ade,  disclosbg  a  pale 
invalid,  who  reclined  upon  the  arm  of  the  radiant  stranger.  Mrs.  Norcross  at  once  rect^- 
niied  in  the  invalid  the  shadowy  appearance  of  Mrs.  Newman,  of  Brunswick,  and  it  subse- 
quently appeared  that  the  fair  unknown  was  a  sister  of  the  name  of  Jordan,  who  had  long 
been  an  inhabitant  of  Che  spirit-world. 

"  Before  the  figures  vanished  Mrs.  Norcross  had  a  distinct  perception  of  the  patient's 
dangerous  condition  in  all  its  details ;  but  with  it  she  also  received  a  prescription,  which, 
by  direction,  she  immediately  forwarded  to  Mrs.  Nevnnan.  Foiu'  days  later  the  seeress 
visited  Brunswick,  learned  that  Mrs.  Newman  had  followed  her  prescription,  and  already  a 
marked  and  benefidal  change  had  succeeded.  Other  prescriptions,  given  under  spirit  in- 
fluence, followed,  and  the  patient,  whose  case  had  seemed  utterly  hopeless,  began  gradually 
to  recover,  until,  at  the  expiration  of  eight  weeks,  every  distressing  symptom  had  disa^ 
peared,  the  consumptive  resumed  all  her  domestic  duties,  and  is  now  freed  from  the  debiUty 
and  sufferinn;  that  has  afflicted  her  for  ten  years,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health. 
The  writer  has  given  this  narrative  substantially  as  he  received  it  from  Mrs.  Newman  and 
her  friends  a  few  days  smce.      Mrs.  Newman  caimot  now  refer  to  the  subject  of  her  mjs- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

27©  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

terious  treatment  anil  providential  recovery  without  intense  emotion,  and  whilst  making 
this  record  was  compelled  to  leave  tiie  room  lo  regain  her  self-possession. 

"  When  slie  returned  she  gratefully  acknowledged  tha.t  she  had  become  a  medinm,  and 
was  often  entranced  by  the  beautiful  spirit  ^ster,  whose  angelic  ministrations  had  restored 
her  to  life  and  earthly  nsefulness." 

A  fair  specimen  of  the  methods  which  may  be  successfully  adopted  to  culti- 
vate spiritual  communion,  as  well  as  an  evidence  of  the  spontaneity  of  the 
influence,  wherever  conditions  are  favorable,  will  be  found  in  die  following 
simple  sketch,  recently  communicated  to  the  Banner  of  Light  by  a  highly- 
respected  and  prominent  citizen  of  Greenfield,  Massachusetts  : 

"  Editors  of  the  Banner  of  Light : 

"  Within  a  few  months,  from  various  circumstances,  an  interest  in  the  subject  of  Spirit- 
ualism has  sprung  up  in  the  minds  of  a  few  of  the  citizens  of  tliis  place  —  Greenfield, 
Massachusetts. 

"Some  persons,  each  of  whom  have  enjoyed  good  educational  advantages,  mntnally 
agreed  to  meet  together  regularly,  for  the  purpose  of  critically  examining  the  curious  phe- 
nomena which  each  W  either  witnessed  or  heard  of  from  sources  circulated  to  arrest 
their  attention.  These  persons  were  all  acquainted  with  each  other,  were  of  irreproachable 
standing  in  society,  and  were  all  satisfied  of  the  entire  integrity  of  each  others'  intentions. 
In  forming  this  circle  they  mutually  agreed  lo  lay  aade  all  preconceived  prejudices,  and 
selfish  purposes;  in  short,  to  investigate  patiently,  and  simply  with  the  honest  purpose  of  dis- 
covering if  any  new  and  valuable  (ruth  could  be  brougbt  to  liglit. 

"  During  the  first  few  sittings,  the  phenomena  of  table-tippmg  and  movements  occurred. 
By  these,  questions  were  asked  and  answered  correctly,  through  the  alphabet  and  the  move- 
ments of  .the  table  at  the  right  letters,  in  the  usual  manner.  After  a  while  this  form  of  mani- 
festation discontinued,  and  was  succeeded  by  the  following  :  One  of  the  drcle  was  influenced 
to  give  long-continued,  steady  and  forcible  blows  of  the  hand  upon  the  table ;  blows  which 
must  ordinarily  have  caused  severe  pain  and  swelling,  but  though  sometimes  prolonged  for 
hours,  caused  no  inconvenience,  unless  violently  restrained. 

"After  this,  the  hand  was  moved  as  if  in  the  act  of  writing.  At  first  the  words  were 
illegible,  but  after  a  time  became  distinct,  and  frequently  wrote  out,  'Have  patience.' 
The  writing  was  purely  automatic,  and  seemed  to  be  facilitated  by  the  accompaniment  of 
music,  which  was  called  for  by  pantomime. 

"  Shortly  after  the  writing  became  legible,  entrancemenl  supervened,  and  while  in  this 
state  a  complete  transformation  seemed  to  come  over  tlie  appearance  of  the  medium.  The 
predominant  expression  was  that  of  drollery,  and  hearty  merriment.  By  agns,  muac  was 
called  for,  and  accompanied,  on  the  pait  of  the  medium,  by  dancing,  sometimes  deft  and 
graceful,  at  others  very  energetic  Occasionally  striking  personations  of  deceased  persons 
were  given  and  recogni!ed.  The  information  communicated  by  writing,  was  to  the  effect 
that  a  circle  of  spirits  were  earnestly  engaged  in  the  development  of  our  medium. 

"  We  were  reminded  in  our  impatience  that  there  were  laws  and  conditions  in  spirit-life 
as  stringent  as  those  on  earth  ;  that  these  were  imperative,  and  often  hindered  their  coming 
to  us  as  we  expected  or  desired,  and  that,  moreover,  we  frequently  marred  their  attempts 
by  our  ignorantly  breaking  the  conditions  of  their  manifestation. 

"After  a  time  the  development  of  our  medium  became  characterized  by  the  regular 
appearance  of  three  succesdve  influences,  each  of  which  is  marked  and  distinct  from  the 
other.  First  appears  the  merry  influence  already  described,  who  dances  and  talks  gaily. 
The  second  is  grave,  earnest,  and  instructive,  delivering  a  well-arranged  discourse,  and 
inviting  us  to  discussion.  .  .  .  The  third  influence  is  that  of  an  Indian,  of  apparently 
majestic  mien,  and  highly  characteristic  manner  and  language.     .... 

"  Music  is  demanded  by  signs,  and  sometimes  an  Indian  song  or  dance  is  performed.  . 
.  .  .  Under  this  influence  the  medium  returns  to  his  normal  state.  It  is  a  fact  worthy 
of  notice  that  the  medium's  health  has  materially  improved  since  the  commencement  of 
these  sittings.  ....  The  first,  or  merry  spirit,  it  is  claimed,  professes  to  come  for 
the  purpose  of  preparing  for  the  second,  who  is  our  teacher  and  guide,  instructing  us  in 
wise  philosophy  and  pure  religious  feeling.  The  thud,  or  Indian  influence,  professes  to . 
come  for  the  purpose  of  restoring  our  medium  to  his  normal  condition.  By  the  second,  or 
superior  intelligence,  we  are  assured  that  all  which  is  now  mysterious  to  us  in  this  matter 

slrall  be  ultimately  explained  and  made  clear  to  all  mankind This  article  is 

wTitten  at  the  request  of  our  spirit- teacher,  who  desired  thereby  to  offer  an  inducement  to 
other  thoughtful  and  earnest  souls,  who  might  be  encouraged  to  organize  circles  amongst 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

flwrnsdves,  and  thus  o^en  the  door  for  spirit  viatrnits^who  ^^^^J^  ^^^^"^^^ J,^'^  ^*" 
"One  of  the  Circle." 

aich  opportunities  to  bring  the  truths  of  spirit  communion  to  their  fne 

A  correspondent  of  die  Spiritual  Telegraph  writes  from  Lawrence,  Mas^ 
chusetts,  concerning  die  origin  and  progress  of  the  cause  in  that  place.  He 
says: 

"  The  first  public  manifestations  occurred  about  1857.  Tliose,  and  subsequoit  ones,  pro- 
voked much  investigation,  and  honest  inquirers  '  have  not  failed  to  receive  then  portion  01 

"  "Nevertheless,  the  truth  continues  lo  spread,  and  the  friends  there  have  secnred  a  ball, 
and  hold  two  jneetinjts  every  Sabbath,  besides  many  circles  during  the  week.  At  a  conven- 
tion held  there  durir^  the  last  winter,  a  certain  scei>tic,  attending  with  the  fdl  P^^^  «f 
converting  all  the  infidel  Spiritualists  from  '  the  evil  of  their  ways,  became  sudflenly  en- 
tranced by  the  spirits,  compelled  to  deliver  an  admirable  address  in  favor  of  the  cause,  and 
since  then  has  become,  under  the  same  influence,  one  of  its  most  efficient  advocates. 

The  following  letter  refers  to  a  new,  though,  as  it  will  be  perceived,  inef- 
fective mediod  of  attempting  to  stay  die  "spiritualistic  delusion.'  It  is  one 
of  many  recorded  similar  efforts,  and  is  given  as  a  specimen  of  aU  die  results 
hitherto  achieved  in  such  directions : 

,  "  EXORCISM  BY  HOLY  WATER  A  FAILURE. 

"New  York,  September  18,  1859. 
•' Editors  of  the  Spiritual  TeUgraph: 

■ '  In  your  paper  of  the  7th  inst.  I  notice  that  yon  mtimate  that  the  Right  Rev.  Bishop  of 
AlbanvimrnoM^s  to  '  exorcise  spirits,' or,  in  other  words,  'to  cast  out  devils."  It  may  be 
of  mtirelt  to  the  reverend  gentleman,  and  the  balance  of  the  CathoUc  ctegy-  to  know  that 
the  thins  has  been  tried  and  proved  a  faUure.     The  case  which  proves  this  is  as  follows : 

"  Fo^  ^y,  badly-educated  giris,  of  ^es  ranging  from  fifteen  to  twenty,  havuig  gathered 
together  at  a  friend's  house  to  '  have  a  time  with  the  spL-its,'  or,  m  other  words,  to  trifle 
with  spiritual  manifestations,  seated  themselves  around  a  table,  and  after  asking  aU  mamier 
of  foolish  questions,  requested  the  spirits  to  take  hold  of  them.  _  , 

"The  spirits  at  once  complied;  seized  them,  treated  them  m  the  roughest  manner,  and 
shalmg  them,  caused  them  to  use  the  most  violent  actions  and  outrageous  i^goage,  etc. 
In  this  strait  one  of  the  dignitaries  of  the  mother  church  was  sent  for  in  haste,  to  expel 
the  ol.ses^g  demons.'  After  the  priest  had  arrived  at  the  scene  of  diwrder  he  put  on  h^ 
robes,  got  rtady  the  holy  water,  and  approached  the  assessed  girls  in  the  dnefo.mute 
prowr  to  such  occasion^  After  many  sallies  with  the  holy  fluid,  and  a  -rast  number  of 
ScMtations,  none  of  which  produced  the  sUghtest  effect,  the  mediums  at  length  charged 
upon  him  with  such  irreaslible  power,  and  such  capacity  of  fingec-naUs,  that  the  worthy 
*^«  fled  precipitately,  leaving  t£e  field  in  possession  of  the  demons  and  the  ^pecta  ors, 
Vho  had  gather&l  together  to  ^tness  the  '  exorcism.'  ,  The  girls  s  .11  contmued  to  be  used 
roughly  by  the  discordant  spirits  they  had  mvoked,  untd  the  arrival  of  some  of  their  spirit- 
ualistic friends,  by  whose  judicious  passes  and  gentle  remonstrances  with  the  spnits  ttiey 
were  instantly  relieved.  This  Is  not  the  only  case  where  '  holy  water'  and  holy  incanta- 
tions have  Wled  in  cases  of  obsession,  and,  did  time  and  space  permit,  I  could  cite  ma^y 
other  mstances  to  prt>ve  it.  The  Boston  Pilot  said  some  time  ^o,  'that  a  few  hearty 
prayers  and  a  plentiful  supply  of  holy  water  would  soon  put  down  the  humbng. 

''Now  I  wiU  agree  to  produce  a  hundred  mediums,  whose  manifestations  the  whole 
CathoUc  Church  cannot  afleet.  J  know  of  one  upon  whom  they  may  commence  experi- 
menting immediately,  and  though  they  may  collect  oceans  of  holy  water,  ^d  perform  their 
most  imposing  orgies,  if  they  can  stop  the  manifestations  through  that  medimu  I  wOl  agree 
to  raise  monev  enough  to  build,  at  least,  one  small-siied  church. 

J  &  "Yours    etc.  SPIBITUS." 

The  writer's  name  and  address  were  furnished  to  the  editor  in  full  verifica- 
tion of  the  genuine  character  of  his  offer ;  but,  as  yet,  the  "  small-sized 
church"  has  not  been  demanded. 

Hosted  by  Google 

272  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

An  old  and  highly-respected  correspondent  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph 
furnishes  the  following  illustration  of  the  fallacy  of  attempting  to  explain  the 
spiritual  manifestations  upon  the  principes  of  animal  magnetism, 

"A  BIOLOGIST  DEPRIVED  OF  HIS  POWER.  —TELEGRAPH  PAPERS, 

"MtiRETOWN,  Vermont,  yanaarj' 20,  1854. 

"Messrs.  Editors,  —  The  cause  of  Spiritualism  is  making  rapid  progress  in  this 
vidnity. 

"  We  have  healing,  writing,  speaking,  and  physical  mediums,  yet  not  enough  of  either  to 
satisfy  the  demands  of  inquirers. 

■'Therewas  a  euriouscase  of  spiritual  prophecy  last  fall  at  Montpelier,  in  which  a  great 
biologist  by  the  name  of  Stone  was  told  that  all  his  power  was  gjven  him  from  God  to  pre- 
pare the  way  for  spiritual  manifestations,  and  that  he  would  soon  have  his  power  laken  from 
him  if  he  continued  to  use  it  agamst  Spiritualism.  Whilst  he  was  lecturing  at  Montpelier, 
he  called  on  two  mediums  in  that  place,  and  declaring  that  all  the  marvels  reported  of  them 
conld  be  enplamed  by  animsd  magnetism,  requested  the  ptivil^e  of  magnetizing  them,  hav- 
ing previously  promised  his  friends  that  he  would  'sliow  them  up.'  The  permission  to 
try  his  power  was  readily  granted,  and  as  long  a  time  as  he  pleased  allowed  for  the  experi- 
ment, which,  however,  utterly  (ailed. 

"He  could  do  nothing  with  them,  but  after  the  trial  the  spirits  influenced  them  and  again 
warned  him  that  he  would  have  his  power  taken  from  him,  unless  he  determined  to useit  for 
Spiritualism. 

"Disregarding  the  predictio'-.,  lie  continued  his  foi-mer  course  ;  but  at  his  next  lecture  his 
usual  experiments  over  kis  own  subjects  utterly  failed.  He  at  once  proceeded  to  Northcote, 
andaamilar  fdlure  there  ensued;  and  we  learn  that  after  experimenting  with  other  subjects, 
and  in  other  places,  his  power  seems  to  be  utterly  gone,  and  latterly  we  iiave  ceased  to  hear 
ofStone,  'the  great  biologist.' 

"  Here  is  an  important  fact  illustrated ;  namely,  that  whilst  the  influence  which  controls 
the  spirit  medium  and  biological  subject  is  the  same,  yet  the  former,  coming  from  a  higher 
and  purer  somce,  is  so  much  the  stronger  that  between  the  two  it  establislies  a  difference 
great  enough  to  make  the  spirit  the  controlling  power  over  the  biologist. 

"RoswELL  Child." 

To  attempt  following  further  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  New  England 
would  be  simply  to  enumerate  its  cities,  towns,  and  villages,  and  to  say  thai 
one  or  all  of  the  representative  facts  we  have  named  is  as  rife  in  one  districl 
as  another ;  or  to  number  up  at  least  one-third  of  its  principal  citizens,  and 
affirm  that  they  were  either  openly  or  covertly  known  to  he  Spiritualists. 

Amongst  our  notices  of  mediums,  journals,  spiritual  literature,  associative 
movements,  etc.,  New  England  will  still  be  found  to  occupy  a  prominent 
place.  To  these  special  records  we  must  refer  our  readers  for  further  infor- 
mation, and  conclude  our  notice  of  Spiritualism  in  the  East  up  to  i860  by 
presenting  two  pieces  of  statistical  matter,  both  of  which  deserve  to  be  perused 
with  attention.  The  first  is  a  summary  of  the  receipts  whidi  a  first-class  lec- 
turer obtains  through  his  itinerating  system  of  spiritual  propaganda,  to  which 
several  hundreds  of  persons  are  devoted,  manyof  whom  are  endowed  with  tal- 
ents which  would  procure  for  them  a  field  of  honorable  and  remunerative 
labor  in  various  other  directions.  As  Hon.  Warren  Chase,  whose  report  we 
quote,  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  amongst  the  most  popular  of  the  spiritual  speak- 
ers, his  case  forms  a  fair  illustration  of  the  average  receipts  of  most  of  his 
co-workers,  and  a  very  sufficient  answer,  moreover,  to  the  aUegations  of  those 
who,  knowing  nothing  of  the  genius  of  Spiritualism  or  Spiritualists,  determine 
that  the  immense  number  of  the  latter  must,  judged  by  their  own  standard, 
enter  upon  their  missions  for  the  purpose  of  gain. 

The  following  paragraph  will,  we  think,  furnish  its  own  comments  on  such 
a  belief  or  assertion.  Mr.  Chase's  statement  is  prefaced  by  the  succeeding 
remarks  from  the  editor  of  tiie  Banner  of  Light. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  273 

"WARREN  CHASE— WORK  AND  WAGES. 

"The  cry  is  often  raised,  'Lecturers  are  gettingrick'  .  ,  .  Warren  Chase  lias  made 
his  yearly  report  and  there  seems  from  it  little  danger  of  his  retiring  to  live  on  the  interest  of 
his  lecturing  fund.  Here  is  his  report  t  'During  the  year  I  have  lectured  one  hundred  and 
twenty-one  times,  as  follows:  Five  lectures  in  Washiogton  for  $50,  $10  each;  thirty-seven 
in  New  York,  $121,  about  $5.50  each;  tliirly-five m  Vermout,  I7S,  about  ^2  each,  twenty 
four  in  New  Jersey,  $91,  about  $4  each ;  thirteen  in  Pennsylvania,  I52,  ^  each ;  four  in 
Deleware,  $20,  $5  each;  and  three  m  Connecticut,  ^13,  about  §4.50  eadi;  total,  $425, 
or  less  than  f  3. 50  each.  It  has  cost  a  good  share  of  this  to  pay  my  travelling  and  other 
expenses.  ....  My  mcome  tax  never  troubles  me,  and  probably  none  of  our  speak- 
ers are  much  more  troubled  on  that  score  than  myself " 

Comment  on  this  statement  is  unnecessary,  save  to  express  a  hope  that  the 
following  piece  of  statistical  information  will  prove  of  a  more  acceptable  char- 
acter. 

At  a  convention  held  at  Baltimore  by  the  Catholics  of  the  United  States, 
some  of  their  most  prominent  dignitaries  stated,  upon  "  accurate  and  reliable 
bases  of  information,"  that  the  believers  in  Spiritualism  on  the  American  Con- 
tinent had  reached  the  almost  incredible  number  of  eleven  millions,  or  one- 
third  of  the  population  of  the  United  States  ! 

If  such  are  the  beginnings  of  this  giant  movement,  where,  what,  and  when 
will  be  the  end  ?  If  the  pious  pulpit  and  sanguine  press,  who  are  perpetually 
reporting  the  death  and  burial  of  Spiritualism,  cannot  answer  us,  perhaps  the 
Harvard  professors,  followers  of  Brewster  and  Faraday,  or  the  fine  gentle- 
men of  the  "  Dundreary  "  class,  who  represent  such  a  large  proportion  of  die 
fashionable  brains  of  England,  can  supply  us  with  the  information; 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

PIRITUALISM   IN   PENNSYLVANIA. 

battles  fight  Dn 

EESLii  Mae; 

Spiritualism  in  PKn.ADELPHiA,— Dr.  H.  T.  Child's  Report— Floating  in  the 
AW  AT  A  Public  Meeting  — Mr,  M.  B.  Dyott  and  the  Children's  Lyceum 
—  Spiritualists'  Funerals— Spiritualism  in  Corey,  Titusville  and  Mead- 

VILLE  — McFaDDEN,    the   HeAIING    MEDIUM- DR.    JOHN   NEIVCOMER  —  NORRIS- 

TOWN— Pentecostal  Scenes  in  Roulette— Baltimore  and  Washington- 
Mrs.  Danskin's  Circles. 

We  must  now  present  a  brief  sketdi  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  Spiritualism 
in  Philadelphia ;  and  though  our  space  will  only  admit  of  a  slight  glance  at  its 
external  movement,  we  shall  be  able  to  offer  a  faithful  picture  of  its  origin 
and  present  status,  by  referring  to  a  compendius  notice  which  appeared  in 
the  columns  of  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal  of  1866,  drawn  up  by  a 
gentleman  equally  celebrated  as  a  noble  spiritualist,  aud  as  one  of  the  most 
talented  and  inspired  writers  of  spiritualisric  literature,  namely.  Dr.  H.  T. 
Child,  of  Philadelphia.     The  report  in  question  is  as  follows :  ' 

"A  BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  MODERN  SPIRITUALISM  IN  PHILADELPHIA. 

"  The  underagned  were  appointed  by  the  '  First  Society  of  Spiritnalists,'  in  Philadelphia, 
to  prepare  a  history  of  modem  Spiritualism  in  this  city  :  Henry  T.  Child,  M.  D.  ;  Isaac 
Rhen,  Peter  Osbom,   Dr.  J.  L.   Pierce,  aud  George  D.  Ilenck.     The  foUowIng  report  , 

Hosted  by  Google 

2  74 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

was  read  on  Sunday,  September  3,  1S66,  by  the  cliairman,  and  directed  to  1:  publLOied  in 
(he  Banner  of  Light,  and  Keligia-Fhihsojihical  Journal. 

" '  Tlierc  is  probably  no  better  illustration  of  one  o£  the  prominent  teachings  of  modem 
Spiritualism  llian  that  which  is  given  in  the  Mstory  of  the  movement  in  different  localities. 
And  yet,  we  believe  it  is  well  to  record  its  history  while  it  is  fresh  in  our  memories.    ,    . 

.  ,  -  .  .  In  our  times,  the  free  lhoui;ht  of  the  age,  bom  of  our  noble  iuBtitutions,  was 
lifting  mankind  mto  higher  conditions,  when  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  gave  to  the  world  his 
'Nature's  Divine  Revelations,'  a  volume  whidi,  though  it  contains  much  that  is  speculative 
and  uncertain  in  our  present  state  of  unfoldment,  was  evidently  the  most  su^estive  work, 
not  only  of  its  inspired  and  faithful  author,  bnt  of  the  age  itself. 

"  '  We  believe  that  but  few  of  us  have  realized  the  value  of  this  book,  marking  as  it  did 
an.era  in  human  history,  and  especially  in  the  history  of  our  cause  in  this  city.  Soon  after 
its  appearance,  the  Psychological  Society  of  this  city,  most  of  whose  members  have  since 
been  identified  with  our  cause,  believed  it  to  be  tight  to  brmg  this  book  prominently  before 
the  public,  while  at  the  same  time  they  desired  to  study  it  critically ;  hence  they  rented  a 
hall  on  Fourth  street,  Imown  as  Keim's  Hall,  and  during  the  winter  and  spring  of  1848  and 
1849,  three  evenings  in  the  week  were  devoted  to  reading  this  book.  The  plan  adopted  — 
whichwethinkmightbepursued  withprofit  witli  other  profound  works  — was  to  read  one 
hour  and  devote  the  remainder  of  the  evenmg  to  criticisms  by  the  audience  of  the  portions 
read.  These  meetings  were  eagerly  attended,  and  we  have  no  doubt  were  productive  of 
much  good.  The  spirit  of  inquiry  which  had  been  awakened  was  spreading  with  rapidity ; 
a  new  era  was  dawning;  one  which  had  been  predicted  by  Mr.  Davis  in  the  book  above 
alluded  to,  in  which  intelligent  communications  were  brought  to  this  world  from  the  dwellers 
of  the  inner  life. 

'"The  manifestations  at  Hydesville,  New  Vort,  knoivn  as  the  Rochester  knockings, 
which  had  commenced  in  1S48,  although  not  new,  were  connected  with  the  most  important 
event  of  the  century,  namely,  the  discovery  of  an  intelligence  behind  these,  which  not  only 
attempted  to  explain  their  cause,  but  gave  evidence  of  the  identity  of  individual  spirits  who 
had  passed  from  this  sphere.  On  the  gth  of  October,  1850,  the  first  circle  was  formed  m 
this  city,  and  for  four  months  numerous  meetings  were  held,  without  elicitmg  a  single 
response. 

" '  On  the  evening  of  February  10,  1851,  the  sounds  were  heard,  and  the  manifestations 
which  have  since  become  so  common  over  the  entire  civilized  world,  were  introduced. 

"  '  About  the  15th  of  February,  1851,  the  writer,*  who,  as  a  physician,  was  attending 
Mary  Ann  Wiggins,  a  young  lady,  who  was  a  very  sensitive  clairvoyant  and  magnetic  sub- 
ject, was  informed  that  for  some  time  past  the  family  had  heard  the  sounds  around  her  bed. 
On  this  day,  he  was  told  that  a  brother  in  spirit-life  had  promised  the  medium  that  he 
would  rap.  Having  waited  for  some  time  in  v^n,  he  was  about  to  leave  the  room  when 
three  loud  raps  were  heard  upon  the  wall,  at  some  distance  from  the  bed  of  the  patient. 
In  a  few  days,  these  manifestations  occurred  readily  and  many  persons  were  enabled  to  wit- 

"  '  The  circle  above  alluded  to,  and  others  which  were  subsequently  formed,  met  during 
the  summer  o£  1851  and  the  following  winter.  There  were  also  some  lectures  given  before 
the  Psychological  Society  at  ICeim's  HaU.  In  the  April  of  1862,  some  of  the  friends  met, 
and  in  accordance  with  the  directions  given  by  the  spirits  at  one  of  the  circles,  the  '  Har- 
monial  Benevolent  Society '  was  formed.     The  society  held  meetings  every  week,  and  o 

the  5th  of  May,  1852,  appomled  a  committee, 

■different  circles,  to  draft     pis 

ported  a  short  constitut        w 

object  of  which  was  o      ben 

Lectures  were  delivered,  b 

occasionally  read.      Oi  9 

,1m  Hall,  Sixth  street. 

nember  from 

ach  of  si 

or^anizatioi 

1      On  the  -d  of  June  the  committee  re- 

as        ped 

an     w         mm              ed   h           ty,  the 

h^ 

and           h    h          g         p        al  m  etings. 

ben  aiul 

m   nn  ca                   ed         h     ucl  s  were 

J 

comm          d     d  d                Frank- 

S 

am      hs,       m          fi         fjoly. 

D    H.T     hJd. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  2  7S 

During  this  lime  conferences  were  lielil,  and  at  almost  every  meeting  new  mem^ers  were 
added 

" '  At  a  meeting  held  on  tlie  6th  of  March,  1853,  it  was  moved  that  the  board  be  in- 
strncted  to  procure.  Concert  Hall  for  Sunday  meetings  for  six  months,  if  practicable.     .     . 

The  arrajigements  were  subsequently  made  for  one  year,  and  an  agreement 

entered  into  to  pay  one  thousand  dollars  for  the  year  ;  but  wlien  the  friends  assembled  on 
the  Simday  morning,  they  found  it  closed  against  Ihem.  Preferring  to  yield  peaceably  rather 
than  maintain  their  rights  by  a  legal  controversy,  they  concluded  to  return  to  Franlilin 
HaU 

"  '  On  the  23d  ol  September,  1S54,  Aaron  Comfort  reported  a  proposition  to  hire  San- 
som  Street  Hall  at  a  rent  of  five  liundred  dollars  a  year ;  and  in  September,  1855,  the  rent 
of  Sansom  Street  Hall  — which  was  occupied  by  the  association  for  regular  Sunday  meetings 
— ■  was  reduced  to  four  hundied  dollars  per  annum. 

"  '  Numerous  changes  occurred  in  the  committee  by  death,  removal,  or  lesigTiation,  and 
new  members  were  added.  The  board  continued  to  arrange  for  lectures,  conferences,  etc., 
depending  upon  subscriptions,  and  a  fee  of  five  cents  at  the  door,  until  the  2d  of  August, 
1S64,  when  a  report  was  made  by  them  to  a  new  organization,  offering  to  disband  the  asso- 
ciation, if  they  would  assume  the  engagements,  accept  the  debt,  talte  the  hall,  etc.  ;  which 
being  acceded  to,  the  board  adjourned  sine  die.  Before  noticing  the  action  of  '  the  new 
organization,  namely,  the  '  First  Spiritualist  Association,'  which  succeeded  the  board  that 
for  nine  years  arranged  and  carried  Out,  very  successfully,  courses  of  lectures  in  Sansom  Street 
Hall,  it  may  be  interesting  to  record  the  names  of  the  various  lecturers  who  occupied  their 
rostrum.  They  were,  Dr.  Hallock,  L.  Judd  Pardee,  Dr.  Robert  Hare,  Rev.T.  L.  Harris,  Judge 
Edmonds,  Rufus  Ehner,  J.  H.  Toohey,  Charles  Partridge,  Rev.  S.  B.  Britain,  Joel  Tiffany, 
Rev.  Adin  Ballou,  Rev.  R.  P.  Ambler,  Mr.  G.  Stewart,  A.  J.  Davis  Emerson  Bennett,  Mary 
F.  Davis,  Miss  Emma  Jay,  Dr.  J.  B.  Dodds,  Professor  Mapes,  Miss  Sprague,  Rev.  William 
Fishboogh,  T.  F.  Coles,  William  D.  Wharton,  Miss  Beebe,  Dr.  T.  Orton,  Isaac  Rhen, 
Mr.  Huntley,  Mrs.  Tutlle,  S.  J.  Finney,  W.  S.  Courtney,  Peter  Osbom,  A.  B.  Whiting, 
Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge,  Mrs.  E.  J.  French,  Mrs.  Henderson,  Mrs.  Hyzer,  Mrs.  Hatch, 
R.  P.  Wilson,  Dr.  J.  L.  Fierce,  Rev.  John  Pierpont,  Thomas  Gales  Forster,  Mrs.  M.  S. 
Townsend,  Miss  Uzzie  Doten,  Dr.  H.  T.  Child. 

Besides  the  lectures,  conferences  were  held  during  the  summer  months,  in  which  various 
subjects  were  discussed,  from  time  to  time,  by  members  of  the  society  and  others.  Of  the 
value  of  the  lectures,  embracing,  as  they  have,  a  vast  range  of  thouglit,  often  clothed  in 
the  most  eloquent  and  impresave  language,  we  need  say  nothing;  the  continued  and  in - 
creasmg  interest  in  the  meetings  is  evidence  that  they  have  been  appreciated  ;  and  those  who 
have  attended  them  regularly  have  noticed  that  each  year  we  have  many  new  faces  in  our 
audiences ;  so  that  while  only  hundreds  can  attend  our  meetings,  thousands  have  received 
some  portions  of  the  truth  sown  by  the  various  laborers. 

"  '  The  history  of  Spiritualism  in  this  dty  will  not  be  completed  without  a  reference  to 
other  meetings.  We  have  alluded  to  the  six  circles,  of  which  the  first  society  was  formed. 
Many  others,  both  public  and  private,  have  existed  since.  ,  Of  the  latter,  we  may  not 
speak,  except  to  say  that  their  influence  has  been  eminently  calculated  to  benefit  those  who 
are  seeking  for  a  knowledge  of  the  relations  which  subsist  between  the  spirit-world  and  our 
own.  The  public  circles,  by  furnishing  tests  and  other  means  of  develop  ng  med  a  ha  e 
been  very  useful ;  several  of  these  have  been  continued  and  well  attended  fur  years 

"  '  We  shall  conclude  this  brief  sketch  by  a  reference  to  the  present  organizat  on  under 
whose  auspices  the  meetings  are  held,  entitled  '  The  First  Association  of  bpu"  tual  sts. 
This  society  was  formed  by  the  adoption  of  a  constitution  on  the  24th  of  July  1S64  It 
numbers  several  hundcred  members  and  contributors.  Its  officers  are :  Dr  J  L  P  erce 
President;  M.  B.  Dyott  and  Louis  Belrose,  Vice-Presidents;  -James  Trueman  Secretary 
Henry  T.  Child,  M,  D.,  Treasurer;  and  the  following  Board  of  Director  Mr  M  B 
Dyott,  Isaac  Rhen,  Mrs.  Belrose,  Mrs.  M.  A.  Stretch,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ballenger  M  ani 
Mrs.  Shumway,  Mrs.  A.  B.  Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  C.  Chase, 

Hosted  by  Google 

276  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"  •  One  of  llie  first  acts  of  this  association  was  to  itbimdon  the  fee  of  five  cents  at  (he 
door  and  depend  upon  voluntary  subscriptions  and  donations  to  meet  the  expenses  of  Che 
lectures. 

'f '  Having  received  notice  that  Sansom  Street  Hall  was  to  be  used  for  other  purposes, 
tlie  committee  were  obliged  to  seek  another  place  of  meeting.  After  considerable .  in- 
qniry,  we  have  condnded  to  rent  Washington  Hall  for  the  present ;  thongh  we  are  fully 
aware  it  will  not  accommodate  all  who  wisli  to  attend  the  lectures  this  winter  ;  yet  it  was 
the  most  desirable  hall  that  oonld  lie  obtained.  We  hope  that  the  historian  of  next  year 
will  lie  be  able  to  record  the  fact  that  the  Spiritualists  of  Philadelphia,  who  now  number 
several  thousands,  will  possess  a  hall  of  their  own  capable  of  accommodating  all  who  may 
deare  to  hear  theh  lectures. 

"  '  Among  the  most  practical  features  of  the  sphitual  movement,  the  children's  progres- 
sive lyceum  inust  rank  foremost.*  Tlie  success  of  these  institutions  in  our  city  has  been 
highly  gratifying  to  all  the  friends  of  human  progress  who  have  witnessed  these  operations. 
The  lyceum  nnmber  one,  under  the  conductorship  of  Mr.  M.  B.  Dyott,  with  an  able  corps 
of  leaders,  and  nearly  two  hundred  children  in  the  gioups,  has  a  reputation  second  to  none 
in  our  country :  it  will  be  continued  in  this  hall,  and  we  hope  with  increasing  success. 

"  '  Another  institution  which  owes  its  oi^^  and  snccess  to  our  philosophy  is  the  '  Pene- 
Iralium,'  a  society  which  was  organized  in  October,  1S64,  for  the  purpose  of  extendmg  the 
investigation  of  scientific  subjects  into  the  realm  of  the  spiritual. 

This  society  has  held  regular  weekly  meetings.  The  plan  pursued  is  to  have  a  short  lec- 
ture, and  then  allow  ten  minutes  to  each  speaker  to  present  their  views  upon  the  subject 
under  consideration.  Of  the  utility  of  such  a  course  there  can  be  no  doubt,  and  the  success 
thus  far  has  been  very  apparent.  The  audiences  have  been  lai^e  and  the  range  of  subjects 
quite  exteiiave.  Amongst  the  lectures  arranged  for  the  coming  winter  are:  one  by  Dr. 
Pancoast,  on  the  'structure,  development,  and  functions  of  the  nervous  system;'  one  by 
Isaac  Rhen,  '  on  the  forces  of  nature,'  to  be  illustrated  ly  e\tensive  CAperiments ;  and  one 
by  Dr.  Child,  '  on  life —  its  origin  and  objects.' 

"  •  A  prominent  feature  of  the  spiritual  movement,  nhich  we  must  briefly  notice,  is  the 
admission  of  woman  to  an  equal  position  on  the  rostrum  and  in  the  executive  with  man  ; 
an  experiment  which  is  no  longer  doubtful  Some  of  our  best  lecturers  are  to  be  found 
amongst  those  whom  the  Apostle  Paul  denied  the  right  to  speak  in  church,  and  whom  the 
church  has  almost  universally  excluded. 

"  '  In  thus  tracbg  the  history  of  about  eighteen  years  of  our  cause,  one  prominent  fact  is 
apparent ;  whereas,  at  the  beginnmg  of  that  period  there  were  no  Spiritualists,  liberal  and 
progrcsave  minds  were  still  looking  and  praying  for  the  commg  of  a  new  era,  to-day 
hundreds  of  thousands,  it  is  said  millions,  are  enrolled  under  our  banner  and  within  the 
ranks  of  Spiritualism.  To  say  we  believe  such  are  happier  and  better  for  this  knowledge  is 
but  to  express  the  almost  universal  feelmg  of  this  very  large  class,  who,  having  been  intro- 
duced into  a  practical  knowledge  of  the  near  rebtion  and  communion  between  the  two 
worlds,  the  phyacal  and  the  spiritual,  feel  that  they  have  been  blessed  indeed,  and  that 
life  has  become  a  more  important  reality  by  a  Imowledge  of  its  intimate  connection  with 
the  life  hereafter,  which  is  still  more  reaL'" 

Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  this  sketch  —  which  we  have  necessarily 
abridged  from  the  original  in  some  statistical  details  —  comprehends  all  of 
the  history  of  Spiritualism  in  Philadelphia,  or  indeed  any  other  portion  of  it 
than  the  mere  external  features  of  its  progress. 

The  movement  in  that  city  has  been  pre-eminently  distinguished  for  its  sta- 
bility, utility,  and  influence.  All  the  best  spirit  mediums  and  speakers  in  Amer- 
ita.  iiave  visited  Philaxiclphia,  and  ever  found  in  the  houses  of  its  warm-hearted 
citizens,  the  most  hospitable,  generous  and  practically  Christian  treatment. 

To  go  to  Philadelphia  to  give  lectures  or  manifestations  of  spirit  power, 

•  A  full  acoDunt  of  [he  rise  aad  progresa  of  the  idsiinble  moYement  known  as  ihe  Chitdrcu's  Progresaivs 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  277 

required  a  priori,  in  tlie  mediums,  a  good  capita!  of  spiritualistic  endowments. 
Nothing  less  would  be,  or  ever  has  been,  tolerated  amongst  this  refined  and 
educated  community;  but  once  satisfied  of  the  value  and  genuine  charactei 
of  the  phenomena  displayed,  no  people  have  extended  to  the  unresting  feet 
of  the  wanderer,  a  nobler  or  more  refreshing  welcome,  nor  has  any  com- 
munity done  more  to  sustain  the  hands  of  the  laborers,  whether  in  mortal 
or  spirit  life,  than  the  faithful  Philadelphians, 

Our  limits  have  compelled  us  to  omit  many  of  the  lecturers'  names  who 
have  graced  the  Philadelphia  rostrum  since  the  formation  of  the  last  society 
on  record,  but  we  should  fail  to  do  justice  to  the  genius  of  the  movement, 
did  we  pass  over  that  of  one  of  the  most  constant  and  highly  appreci- 
ated of  the  speakers  who  have  occupied  the  desk  of  late  years,  namely, 
Mrs.  Augusta  Currier.  This  lady,  without  possessing  any  of  die  natural  or 
acquired  advantages  that  arise  from  wealth  and  educational  preparation,  may 
be  regarded  as  one  of  those  phenomenal  children  of  the  spiritual  movement 
who  form  in  themselves  a  complete  evidence  of  supra-mundane  power  and 
guidance.  Youth,  a  pleasing  external  appearance,  and  naturally  graceful 
bearing,  were  the  little  lad^s  only  claims  to  public  attention;  yet,  springing 
from  a  position  of  humble  respectability  only,  she  made  her  way  through  all 
the  various  stages  of  strong  physical  test  mediumship,  clairvoyance,  and 
odier  remarkable  spiritual  gifts,  until,  without  human  aid,  instruction  or  pat- 
ronage, she  gravitated  to  her  legitimate  place,  as  one  of  the  most  brilliant, 
eloquent,  and  attractive  speakers  of  the  day.  Those  who  prepared  her  for, 
and  placed  her  in  this  exalted  position,  where  wholly  unseen  in  this  world, 
miknown  to  men,  and  in  fact  not  "  of  the  earth,  earthy ; "  yet  (he  most  pro- 
found logicians,  renowned  scientists,  and  accomplished  Orators,  have  paled 
before  this  once-obscure  young  woman,  and  looked  with  marvel  and  fruitless 
curiosity  for  the  source  of  her  unearthly  power.  Never  have  the  promises  of 
the  prophets  and  apostles  been  more  wonderfully  fulfilled  than  in  this 
gifted  medium,  who  has  truly  testified,  that  "  the  weak  things  of  earth  should 
confound  the  wise,"  and  "the  ignorance  of  the  foolish  put  to  sliame  the  . 
understanding  of  the  prudent." 

.  As  Mrs.  Currier's  various  gifts  have  been  gradually  unfolded,  her  experience 
has  prove3Vremarkable  exception  to  the  generci  rule,  that  " one  endow- 
ment supersedes  another;"  her  "gift  of  tongues"  has  been  superadded  to  that 
of  her  physical  mediumship,  but  the  latter  has  not  failed  in  consequence,  and 
it  has  been  one  of  the  attendant  charms  of  her  eloquent  addresses,  that  the 
mystic  raps  sound  through  them,  in  frequent  and  emphatic  chorus  to  her, 
sentences.  As  a  more  extended  notice  of  this  interesting  medium  will  be 
found  hereafter  in  our  book  of  biographical  sketches,  we  need  only  further 
add  that  her  frequent  ministrations  on  the  Philadelphia  rostrum  have  been 
as  acceptable  as  beneficial  to  the  cause  in  that  city. 

Another  of  the  fair  missionaries  who  helped  to  dispense  the  bread  of  spirit- 
ual life,  though  unnamed  in  the  preceding  quotations,  was  Miss  Mattie  C. 
Beckwith,  a  highly-esteemed  favorite  of  the  refined  Philadelphians ;  also,  Mrs. 
Middlebiook,  late  Mrs.  Henderson,  of  whose  noble  services  in  the  cause  of 
Spiritualism  we  shall  hereafter  make  further  mention. 

As  the  original  favorites  of  the  rostrum  were  gradually  removed,  by  calls 
to  the  higher  life  or  changes  in  their  own  earthly  arrangements,  the  promise 
of  old,  that  "the  very  stones  would  cry  out"  in  testimony  for  the  truth, 
seemed  to  be  realized,  for  fresh  inspirations  continued  to  pour  from  the 
mouths  of  "babes  and  sucklings"  or  animate  the  most  unlooked-for  instru- 
ments to  arise  and  dispense  die  bread  of  life  to  hungering  souls. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

278  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

PhHadelphia.  has  herself  been  rich  in  internal  missionary  labor.  Besides 
that  giant  of  the  movement.  Dr.  Robert  Hare,  Dr.  H.  T.  Child,  Mr.  lasa^ 
Riieu,  Mr.  M.  TS.  Dyott,  Dr.  Pancoast,  and  several  other  gentlemen  of  learn- 
ing and  intellectual  endowments,  have  filled  the  spiritual  rostrum  with  quite 
as  much  acceptance  as  the  lecturers  from  abroad.  Thus,  the  movement  has 
never  slumbered  in  that  city,  or  lacked  the  oil  by  which  the  lamps  of  immor- 
tality could  be  kept  brightly  burning.  In  no  part  of  the  States  has  the 
celebrated  movement  entitled  tlie  "Children's  Progressive  Lyceum"  taken 
so  deep  a  hold  on  the  people,  or  performed  so  great  a  missionary  work,  as  in 
Philadelphia.  Without  desiring  to  appear  partial  in  selecting  individuals  for 
notice,  where  all  have  labored  so  long  and  faithfully,  it  is  but  justice  to  own 
that  this  pre-eminence  is  due  to  the  indefatigable  labors  of  Mr,  and  Mrs. 
M.  B.  Dyott,  whose  lives  for  several  years  past  seem  to  have  been  mainly 
devoted,  with  a  self-sacrifice,  disinterestedness,  and  endurance,  beyond  all 
worldly  praise  or  appreciation,  to  the  success  of  this  deeply,  important  under- 
taking. When  it  is  remembered  that  in  these  "lyceums"  are  iaid  the  very 
comer-stone,  and  foundations  upon  which  the  faith  of  future  generations  is  to 
be  built ;  that  in  their  early  training,  and  habitudes  of  spiritual  thought,  is  to 
be  found  the  corrective  for  the  bigotry,  superstition,  and  ignorance  of  the  past, 
and  the  bitter  persecutions  tlirough  which  the  present  generation  have  had 
to  struggle,— the  vast  and  momentous  influence  of  this  movement  maybe 
prophetically  felt,  and  something  of  the  stupendous  debt  which  posterity  will 
owe  to  its  founder,  A.  J.  Davis,  and  such  workers  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dyott, 
be  conceived  of  Amidst  much  of  worldly  ingratitude,  misconception,  and 
ancient  bigotry,  lingering  even  amidst  the  spiritual  ranks,  it  is  gratifying  to 
be  able  to  record,  that  the  lucid  intellects  of  the  young  generation,  springing 
up  around  us,  brightened  into  quick  perception  by  the  day-beams  of  Spirit- 
ualism, have  in  part  realized  tlie  v^ue  of  these  unselfish  labors:  witness 
a  handsome  service  of  plate,  which  quite  recently  was  presented,  in  the 
form  of  a  genuine  surprise  party,  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dyott,  by  the  grateful 
teachers  and  members  of  the  Philadelphia  Progressive  Lyceum. 

Highly  interesting  features  of  the  movement,  connecting  the  "Progressive 
Lyceum"  with  the  most  sacred  interesta  of  Spiritualism,  have  been  the 
intennents  —  funerals  we  cannot  call  them  — which  have  consigned  the  mor- 
tal remains  of  those  broken  caskets,  from  which  the  bright  spirits  have 
escaped,  to  the  dust  from  which  they  nere  temporarily  gathered  up,  as 
moulds  for  the  formation  of  immortal  blossoms  At  these  ceremonies,  all 
the  sweetest,  holiest,  and  withal  the  most  consolatory  exercises  of  the  Pro- 
gressive Lyceums  have  been  introduced ,  groups  of  fair  young  children,  whose 
blossoming  beauty  was  in  itself  a  prophecy  of  life  immortal;  processions  of 
mature  people,  chiefly  arrayed  in,  or  adorned  with  pure  white  and  floral  em- 
blems, typical  of  the  love  and  truth,  life,  light,  and  beauty  of  the  spirit  coun- 
try, into  which  the  freed  soul  had  been  bom, — all  these  spoke  not  of 
gloom,  sorrow,  or  impenetrable  mystery ;  no  more  of  death,  bereavement, 
and  agonizing  grief^  made  hideous  by  the  awful  panoply  of  external  signs,  but 
of  deep  sympathy  with  the  bright,  holy,  and  happy  chiuige,  by  which  some 
beloved  one  had  been  made  glorified,  and  which  consigned  the  worn-out 
garments  of  mortality  back  to  its  kindred  earth. 

No  over-strained  or  unnatural  tokens  of  rejoicing  have  been  manifested 
at  these  "spiritual  birthdays."  The  decorum  of  the  processions,  the  solemn 
order  of  the  ceremonial,  the  pathetic,  yet  elevating  songs  and  recitations,  of 
die  children,  the  highly  exalted  tone  in  which  the  orators  pronounced  the 
valedictory  to  the  departing  soul,  all  displayed  the  tenderest  sympathy  for 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  279 

the  great  heart-wrench  involved  m  such  a  change,  and  a  glorious  assurance 
of  continued  life  and  a  bright  progressive  future  for  the  enfranchised  soul. 
Besides  many  mediums  of  tlie  highest  intellectual  character,  Philadelphia 
has  been  visited  by  all  the  best  travelling  physical  mediums,  some  of  whom 
have  been  occasional  residents  there.  Amongst  these  was  the  celebrated 
Henry  Gordon,  of  whom  Dr.  Hallock  related,  at  the  New  York  Conference, 
tSe'loTIowrng  striking  evidence  of  phenomenal  i)ower,  exhibited  during  one 
of  his  {the  Doctor's)  Sunday  discourses  in  that  city: 

"  Dr.  Hallock  stated  that  on  the  previous  Sunday  afternoon,  at  tlie  commencement  of  a 
lecture  he  was  delivermg  before  (he  Spiritualists  of  Philadelphia,  there  was  a  great  deal  of 
spirit  manifestation  in  the  form  of  rappings,  etc.,  which  attracted  much  notice,  and  created 
such  a  disturbance  in  the  minds  of  the  audience,  that  at  one  time  he  was  a  little  annoyed 
lest  due  attention  should  not  be  paid  to  what  he  was  saying,  and  hb  effort  would  be  lost  if 
that  state  of  things  continued.  But  he  soon  forgot  his  concern,  and  went  on  with  his 
(emarks,  and  succeeded  in  entirely  fastenhig  the  attention  of  the  congregation  upon  the 
subject  he  was  ptesentmg ;  and  while,  as  he  believed,  every  ^  and  aU  thoughts  were 
directed  towards  him,  Mr.  Henry  Gordon  the  well-known  physical  medium,  who  then  sat 
at  some  distance  from,  but  in  front  of  him,  in  the  perfectly  well-lighted  room,  rose  in  the 
air  without  any  human  aid,  till  the  speaker  beheld  him  floating  so  high  (hat  his  feet 
just  grazed  the  top  of  the  seat,  above  which  he  hung  m  the  air,  where  be  swayed  about 
from  side  to  side  and  turned  partly  around.  By  this  time  the  attention  of  the  entire  con- 
gr^ation  was  rivetted  on  him,  when  he  sank  to  the  ground.  The  manifestation  was  imper- 
fect on  the  part  of  the  power  that  lifted  him  up,  because  it  was  afterwards  declared  by  the 
spirits  that  they  mtended  to  have  carried  him  over  the  heads  of  the  entire  congregation, 
and  landed  him  on  the  rostrum,  had  the  conditions  permitted,  but  it  seemed  that  the  mtense 
astonisianent  and  ablation  of  the  audience  had  broken  the  conditions  of  pasavity  necessary 
for  the  fulfilment  o(  their  design,  and  so  he  sank  suddenly  to  the  ground.  Still  there 
remained  the  phenomenon  of  his  having  been  lifted  up  and  suspended  in  the  air  without 

morlalaid.infact,  in  a  manner  which  no  mortal  could  have  achiev&i The 

effect  of  this  marvelloas  operation  of  spirits  in  a  crowded  assembly  and  the  full  li^t  of  day, 
instead  of  attracting  the  attention  of  the  andience  from  the  address,  intensified  it  to  the 
utmost  degree.  '  1  think  I  may  say,'  added  Dr.  Hallock,  '  that  I  never  was  in  an  assembly 
where  so  mudi  serene  joy  and  spiritual  exaltation  was  manifested.  Each  one  felt  that  it 
was  good  to  be  there.     I  cannot  describe  that  Pentecostal  scene  in  words." 

Our  limits  compel  us  here  to  close  our  notice  of  Spiritualism  in  Philadel- 
phia. We  need  scarcely  say,  the  lialf  has  not  been  told ;  neither  do  these 
brief  sketches  define  the  extent  of  the  movement  throughout  the  vast  area 
of  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  where  numbers  of  places  we  cannot  pause  to 
notice  clierish  the  faith  with  strong  and  zealous  affection.  In  Corry,  a  small 
but  flourishing  town  in  the  oil  regions,  spiritual  meetings  are  regularly  held 
each  Sabbath.  Some  very  excellent  mediums  are  to  be  found  there,  and  an 
abundance  of  phenomena  is  exhibited. 

Titusville,  a  neighboring  town,  is  also  a  stronghold  of  the  belief.  A  curi- 
ous evidence  of  healing  power  was  exhibited  in  this  place,  and  one  which 
served  greatly  to  popularize  the  cause  of  Spiritualism.  The  wife  of  Mr.  E., 
a  gentleman  of  large  means  and  influence,  residing  in  Titusville,  had  become, 
through  a  pmnful  complication  of  internal  ailments,  a  confirmed  invahd;  in 
fact,  though  quite  a  young  woman,  Mrs.  B.  had  been  confined  to  her  bed  for  a 
period  of  over  three  years.  Enduring  the  most  intense  suffering,  and  her  case 
baffling  all  the  skill  of  such  medical  aid  as  that  wild  district  could  supply,  the 
unhappy  lady  cherished  but  one  wish  in  her  forlorn  and  hopeless  condition, 
and  that  was,  that  death  would  speedily  terminate  her  mournful  existence,  and 
relieve  her  friends  and  family  from  what  she  could  not  but  feel  was  a  heavy 
burden  upon  them.  Her  tender  and  devoted  companion,  having  become  in- 
terested in  Spiritualism,  joyfiilly  hailed  the  approach  of  all  who  professed 
that  faith,  in  the  hope   that  some  amongst  them,  spiritually  guided,  might 

Hosted  by  Google 

2So  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

bring  relief  to  his  long-suffering  paitner,  but  months,  and  at  length  years, 
gilded  by  witliout  any  realization  of  their  vain  hopes,  which  finally  gave 
way  to  resignation  on  die  part  of  the  husband,  and  despair  on  that  of  the 
wife  One  day  a  singular  coujile  of  itinei-ants,  husband  and  wife,  presented 
tneniselves  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  R,  claiming,  rather  dian  requesting,  hospi- 
tality, on  tlie  ground  that  the  male  traveller  was  a  healing  medium,  and  had 
been  sent  there  by  the  spirits  "to  effect  some  great  cure." 

The  man,  whose  name  \vas  "  McFadden,"  did  not  seem  even  to  know  the 
sex  or  quality  of  the  patient  he  was  to  oi)erate  upon,  yet  he  insisted  diat  he 
had  "a  work  to  do  there,"  and  as  his  mild  and  gentle  wife  seconded  his  affir- 
mation, Mr.  R,  though  without  any  very  strong  prepossession  in  their  favor, 
consented  to  receive  them  for  a  ulyle  otoh  house.  For  die  best  interests 
of  truth,  it  is  well  that  the  whole  cu-c  stance  of  this  strange  case  should  be 
fully  understood. 

McFadden  was  represente  1  to  tl  e  aud  or  not  only  by  the  parties  most 
nearly  concerned  in  diis  najxat  ve  naj  ely  Mr  and  Mrs.  B.  themselves,  but 
also  by  others  well  acquainted  th  I  n  as  a  man  of  repulsive  maimers  and 
appearance,  and  one,  moreover,  so  addicted  to  the  use  of  profane  language 
that  he  seemed  scarcely  able  to  speak  without  expressions  painful  to  the  sen- 
sitive ear  to  listen  to.  His  wife  was  mild,  unassuming,  and  benevolent,  and  ex- 
cept for  her  association  with  her  strange  companion,  would,  doubtless,  have 
proved  a  welcome  visitor  an)"ivhere.  When  first  introduced  to  the  bedside 
of  Mrs.  B.,  a  highly  refined  and  sensitive  person,  the  medium  was  literally 
thrown  back  from  her  couch,  as  if  widi  an  electric  shock,  by  the  force  of  re- 
pulsion which  the  lady  at  once  conceived  for  the  strange  operator.  His 
wife,  who  stood  by  at  the  time,  besought  Mrs.  B.  to  make  an  eflbrt  to  over- 
come  this  intense  disgust,  frequently  declaring  that  "they  had  been  sent  to 
cure  her  and  must  do  their  work,  aldiough  her  reptilsive  feeling  would  for  a 
time  inevitably  hinder  them."  In  vain  the  lady  strove  to  accept  of  this  kindly 
assurance,  and  conquer  her  aversion  to  die  rude  operator.  No  sooner  would 
he  approach  her  than  he  fell  back  ividi  die  same  singular  magnetic  force  as 
before ;  and  the  two  poles  of  a  battery,  scientifically  arranged  to  exhibit  the 
nature  of  repulsion,  could  not  have  oi>erated  with  more  marvellous  power 
than  the  patient  and  her  would-be  healer.  And  still  he  persisted  in  his  at- 
tempt, swearing,  even  with  oaths,  that  he  must  and  would  effect  a  cure ; 
that  for  such  a  purpose  he  had  been  sent,  and  without  its  accomplishment  he 
might  not  depart  on  his  way. 

On  a  certain  occasion,  after  a  long  and  hitherto  ineffectual  trial,  the  rough 
doctor,  aided  by  his  gentle  companion,  succeeded  in  producing,  by  distant 
manipulations  over  the  couch  of  Mrs.  B.,  the  the  charmed  magnetic  sleep. 
Awidcing  from  this  delightful  somnolence,  refreshed  and  invigorated,  Mrs.  B. 
remarked  tliat  she  had  not  been  so  free  from  pain  for  three  years,  and  that  at 
length  she  was  convinced  the  true  physician  to  her  malady  had  arrived. 
From  this  time  the  spell  was  broken.  The  intense  magnetic  repulsion  be- 
ing overcome,  kindlier  and  more  receptive  influences  supervened  The 
strange  healer  performed  his  work  with  grateful  appreciation  on  the  part 
of  the  lady,  and  rugged  determination  on  his  own,  and  within  six  weeks 
the  bed-ridden  invalid  was  once  more  in  the  midst  of  her  tiunily,  perform- 
ing, in  perfect  health  and  renewed  strength,  her  household  duties,  with  as 
mucli  ease  and  capacity  as  if  they  had  never  been  interrupted  by  her  long 
and  perilous  years  of  suffering.  Her  cure  was  eff'ected  solely  by  the  laying 
on  of  those  hands  from  which  a  few  weeks  before  she  had  shrank  with  sudi 
loathing,  but  which  she  now  humbly  and  gratefully  acknowledged  had  come 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  281 

to  her  freighted  with  the  inestimable  boon  of  hfe  andhealth.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
B.  related  tliis  circomstaQce  at  3  Pentecostal  gathering,  which  had  assembled 
to  meet  the  author  when  lecturing  for  a  few  days  at  Corry,  en  route  for  tlie  far 
U'est.  The  snow  was  two  foot  deep  on  die  ground  and  still  falling  fast. 
The  roads  were  almost  impassable,  yet  the  once  bedridden  lady  had  trav- 
elled in  that  inclement  season  above  fifty  miles  to  attend  die  author's  lectures, 
and  bear  her  grateful  testimony  to  die  beneficent  character  of  Spiritualism 
and  its  missionaries. 

The  conversation  had  turned  on  the  prevalence  of  "  spiritual  mounte- 
banks "  and  itinerant  vagabonds,  who,  scouring  the  country  in  every  direction, 
used  die  talismanic  word  "  Spiritualism  "  as  dieir  open  sesame  to  the  hospi- 
talities of  the  credulous.  It  was  these  remarks  that  called  forth  the  history 
above  detailed,  which,  being  related  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.  with  tears  of  deep 
emotion,  and  verified  by  several  of  their  acquaintances  present,  who  were 
personally  cogni/.ant  of  the  facts,  was  summed  up  by  the  husband  in  the 
assurance  that  though  he  believed  there  were  many  impostors  ranging  the 
country  and  attempting  to  deceive  people  out  of  a  maintenance  by  false  pro- 
fessions, yet  for  the  sake  of  the  one  divinely  guided  missionary  who  had 
brought  in  his  hand  the  life  of  his  best  beloved,  a// had  since  been  welcome 
who  had  crossed  their  threshold  in  the  sacred  name  of  "the  spirits."'  "I 
can  never  again  close  those  doors  against  the  wanderer,"  he  added,  "  which 
have  been  opened  to  '  entertain  an  angel  unawares.'  " 

In  Meadville,  Pennsylvaina,  a  numerous  body  of  Spiritualists  may  be  found, 
who,  although  laboring  under  many  disabilities  peculiar  to  the  advent  of  a  new 
and  unpopular  movement,  have  struggled  on  bravely,  and  given  a  tone  to  the 
belief  of  these  wild  and  remote  districts  where  the  name  of  Spiritualism  is  no 
longer  regarded  as  a  bugbear,  but  rather  as  a  warranty  for  strange  and  bene- 
ficent powers,  whose  possession  invests  their  owner  with,  gifts  which  are 
deemed  worthy  of  investigation  and  respect 

In  Meadville  resides  Dr.  John  Newcomer,  a  gentleman  who  unites  in 
his  own  person  the  many  gifts  of  inventor,  mechanic,  herbalist,  doctor,.heal- 
ing  medium,  lecturer  writer,  astronomer,  designer  of  certain  remarkably  in- 
genious  astronomical  instruments,  and  originator  of  a  most  singular  prophetic 
scheme  of  the  earth's  destiny.  Besides  these  varied  accomplishments.  Dr. 
John  Newcomer  plays  on  two  or  three  musical  instruments,  one  of  which,  of 
a  lute  fashion,  originated  in  his  own  fertile  genius  and  mechanical  skill.  In 
an  office  open  for  the  sale  of  various  healing  compounds,  all  origbated  by 
himself,  the  visitor  would  find  it  difficult  to  think  of  any  articles  of  domestic 
use,  herbs,  minerals,  drugs  or  machines,  even  models  of  the  earth,  orreries 
and  musical  instruments,  which  are  not  to  be  here  found,  on  "  improved  princi; 
pies ; "  in  fact  this  wonderful  sanctum  is  the  omnium  gatherum  of  a  very  com- 
prehensive mind,  which  represents  itself  and  die  universe  in  equalljr  micro- 
cosmic  characters.  As  Dr.  Newcomer  is  a  very  uncompromising  Spiritualist, 
the  other  world  and  its  interests  come  in  for  an  equal  share  of  illustrative 
talent,  the  full  scope  of  which  appears  in  a  hall  which  Dr.  Newcomer  has  fitted 
up,  and  hires  at  his  own  expense,  for  the  purpose  of  devoting  freely  to  the 
service  of  Spiritualism. 

This  building  will  accommodate  abo  t\  o  hund  ed  p  o  is  neatlyfur- 
nished  with  a  small  platform  and  seats  wl  il  1  e  wall  a  e  adorned  with  a 
largecollectionof  oil-paintings  executed  by  he  e  a  le  opn  or  of  the  hall, 
highly  colored  and  elaborately  finished  Tl  y  fonn  al  og  1  a  serial  and 
pictorial  commentary  on  the  biblical  a  oun  of  ea  o  o^e  her  with  the 
artisf  s  own  views  of  the  hereafter,  as  den  ed  from  the  popula    teachings  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

2S2  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Spiritualism.  Altho  t,h  D  N  wcomer's  pictures  and  the  opinions  they  illus 
trate,  like  every  other  p  odu  on  of  his  remarkable  genius,  are  strictly  orig- 
inal, and  form  no  di  e  affin  )  w  h  any  other  person's  acts  or  works  or 
words,  that  the  most  cosmopol  a  isitor  coiild  ever  have  encountered,  the 
dieological  views  they  sugges  cannot  fail  to  remind  the  beholder  more  im- 
mediately of  Tom  Pa  ne  \  olney  and  the  English  Robert  Taylor,  than  of 
the  Patriarcli  Abrahan  and  th  Apostle  Paul ;  neverdieless,  these  and  other 
"  sacred  "  personages  axe  freely  represented  on  Dr.  Newcomer's  glowing  can- 
vas ;  but  as  they  generally  figure  in  the  same  scene  where  certain  Divine  per- 
sonages are  represented  as  pronging  souls  out  of  heaven  with  celestial  thun- 
derbolts, whilst  otlier  diabolical  personages  stir  them  up  in  burning  broth  with 
brimstone  pitcliforks,  and  the  "  everlasting  Yankee"  is  introduced  with  the 
hook  and  line  of  combined  benevolence  and  ingenuity,  fishing  them  up  ami 
restoring  them  to  earth,  it  may  be  supposed  that  these  biblical  illustrations 
are  not  designed  on  the  most  approved  theological  pattern.  They  are  very 
numerous,  however,  and  highly  suggestive. 

The  ludicious  and  the  horrible  are  represented  in  terribly  faithful  proximity  ; 
and  a  more  graphic  commentary  on  the  heavens,  hells,  saints,  sinners,  angels, 
and  demons,  brimstone  and  blue  fire,  in  which  ancient  orthodoxy  delighted  to 
revel,  from  the  gloomy  Calvin  to  the  stem  Emmons,  and  which  modem  or- 
thodoxy has  not  altogether  quenched  in  the  tides  of  modern  progress,  has 
never  surely  found  a  more  fearless  or  imaginative  illustrator  than  this  same 
singular  Pennsylvania  artist.  It  need  scarcely  be  hinted  that  Dr.  John  New- 
comer is  not  popular  with  the  church-going  community  of  his  district,  and  as 
his  very  direct  and  peculiar  methods  of  propagating  his  opinions  have  ob- 
tdned  for  him  a  wide-spread  notoriety  and  most  obnoxious  reputation,  they 
have  served  to  isolate  him  even  from  many  worldly  persons  who  sympathize 
in  part,  though  not  entirely  with  his  extreme  views. 

In  the  author's  visit  to  Meadvilie  for  the  purpose  of  delivering  two  lectures 
in  that  collegiate  town,  she  realized  most  painfully  the  lines  of  demarcation 
which  strongly  marked  idiosyncracies  draw  between  their  professors  and  man- 
■  kind  in  general.  The  progressive  spirit  which  alreadj-  animated  at  least  one 
half  of  die  youn^  students  and  professors  of  a  fine  Unitarian  college  at  Mead- 
vilie, induced  their  attendance  at  the  lectures,  and  manifested  itself  in  a  noble 
complimentary  testimonial  which  a  few  high-minded  and  talented  young  men 
presented  to  her  in  grateful  acknowledgment  of  her  definition  of  "  the  beau- 
tiful faith  and  philosophy  of  Spiritualism  ;  "  and  yet  these  brave  and  aspiring 
young  spirits  were  driven  off  with  repellingforce  from  the  strange  old  philoso- 
pher,  who  could  have  suggested,  aye,  and  taught  them  so  much  that  their  eager 
souls  were  hungering  for,  had  not  himself  and  his  methods  of  presenting  the 
truth  been  so  eminently  distasteful  to  their  sense  of  propriety  and  refinement. 
Dr.  John  Newcomer  was  also  an  excellent  healing  medium.  His  strong 
hands,  frei^ted  with  health,  and  his  kind  heart  would  gladly  have  spread 
abroad  this  blessing  to  all  around  him.  The  indescribably  odd  old  man 
might  be  seen  any  day  with  basket  on  arm,  gathering  up  medicinal  herbs  and 
plants  of  healing  virtue,  which  would  have  been  cheerfully  drawn  forth  from 
the  shelves  of  his  wonderful  little  museum  for  the  free  use  of  the  afflicted, 
were  there  not  a  ban  on  the  place,  and  a  breath  of  evil  signing  the  dark  stair- 
way which  led  to  it,  with  an  invisible  yet  potent  circle,  into  which  it  was 
deemed  ill  for  the  foot  of  good  repute  to  enter. 

Strange  isolation  of  a  kind  heart,  ready  hand,  and  highly  endowed  brain ! 
Strange  and  cross-grained  woof  of  human  destiny  which  has  converted  an 
instrument  of  blessing  into  a  tool  of  offence  !     Dr.  John  Newcomer  and  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  iZ^ 

world,  require  the  bright  transfiguration  of  the  land  of  light,  truth,  and  charity, 
to  understand,  mutually  forgive,  and  mutually  appreciate  each  other. 

Our  limits  will  only  permit  us  to  notice  two  more  points  of  interest  in  Pennsyl- 
vania, although  the  whole  State  abounds  with  such,  in  the  history  of  Spiritual- 
ism  ;  the  first  of  these  is  Morristown,  near  Philadelphia,  less  remarkable  how- 
ever, for  its  little  faithful  band  of  Spiritualists  than  as  having  been  the  resi- 
dence of  one  of  the  most  talented  advocates  of  the  cause.  Miss  Belle  Bush, 
the  cliarming  poetess  and  writer,  whose  gems  of  thought  have  contributed  so 
largely  to  the  reputation  of  spiritual  literature.  The  second  and  last  note- 
worthy point  which  we  can  notice  in  this  noble  State,  is  Brookfield,  famous  as 
the  scene  of  a  great  spiritual  outporing,  which  occurred  quite  early  in  the 
modern  movement  under  the  following  circumstances. 

Amongst  the  Methodists,  Shakers,  and  other  fervid  sects  of  religionists, 
marked  and  preternatural  tokens  of  a  spiritual  afflatus  had  been  frequent  ever 
since  the  fenious  revival  which  preceded  the  Rochester  knockings  by  some 
ten  years.  Certain  sections  of  country,  called  "  the  burnt  districts  "  from 
having  been  swept  by  the  action  of  the  Pentecostal'  fires,  still  preserved  the 
evidences  of  the  mighty  visitation  in  the  strange  and  apparently  fanatical  as- 
sociations which  sprang  up  amongst  them.  Spiritual  philosophers  attributed 
maJiy  of  the  eccentricities  both  of  the  revival  and  spiritual  movements  to  the 
effect  of  magnetism,  stimulated  into  violent  and  irresistible  action  by  the  con- 
tagion of  the  times.  Unphilosophical  religionists  called  them  the  work  of 
the  "Holy  Ghost"  or  the  "Evil  One,"  according  as  theh  sectarian  prejudices 
inclined.  The  following  narrative,  reprinted  in  part  from  the  Spiritual  Tele- 
graph, isawell-anthenticated  account  of  one  of  these  singular  revival  fevers, 
the  details  of  which  seem  to  be  so  closely  allied  to  Spiritualism,  that  it  claims 
its  legitimate  place  in  our  notice  of  that  movement  in  Pennsylvania.  Mr. 
Partridge,  m  his  editorial  account  of  what  follows,  states  that  the  Rev.  John 
Crapsey  was  a  minister  of  the  high  ecclesiatical  school  at  Brookfield,  Tioga 
County,  Pennsylvania,  and  that,  at  a  meeting  which  he  was  holding  in 
Roulette,  Potter  County,  Pennsylvania,just  as  he  was  quoting  the  words  of 
Jesus  on  the  cross,  "  Eli,  Eli,  lama  Sabachtkani." 

"A  mighty  inviable  power  seemed  suddenly  to  possess  him,  and  a  luminous  appearance 
sdntiLlaled  upon  and  around  his  hand,  shining  with  brilliant  effulgence  in  the  eyes  of  all 
bdiolders.  'Under  an  impulse  ivhlch  I  could  not  resist,  I  sprang,'  says  Mr.  Crapsey, 
•  from  the  desk  out  upon  the  middle  of  the  floor  into  the  midst  of  the  congregation ;  great 
signs  and  wonders  then  ensued  and  were  witnessed  by  alL 

' ' '  Fire,  and  pillars  of  smolte  and  luminous  light  rose  up  bodily  in  our  midst ;  men,  women, 
and  even  stammering  children  were  seized,  speaking  with  new  tongues,  and  uttering  prophe- 
cies. Prayers  and  exhortations  were  poured  forlli  in  abundance,  and  many  of  the  congre- 
gation broke  out  into  the  most  marvellous  and  heavenly  anging.'  " 

But  the  demonstrations  of  this  Pentecostal  hour  did  not  terminate  with  the 
close  of  that  meeting.  They  came  together  again  and  again,  meeting  some- 
times each  day  and  occasionally  in  the  night,  when  similar  manifestations 
accompanied  Iheir  gatherings,  and  continued  up  to  the  date  of  the  Telegraphs 
report,  about  June,  1855.  Mr.  Crapsey  goes  on  to  say  that  at  times,  certain  of 
the  persons  affected,  who  were  chiefly  young  people  from  ten  to  thirty  years 
of  age,  would  come  to  him,  and  enact  in  pantomime  a  spiritual  or  prophetic 
drama,  showing  that  he  would  be  subject  to  much  persecution.  Sometimes 
also  the  house  where  they  were  assembled  would  shake,  and  "even  rock 
about  as  if  in  a  gale  of  wind,  although  the  air  without  was  as  still  as  death." 
They  usually  held  tiieir  meetings  in  a  building,  the  lower  portion  of  which 

Hosted  by  Google 

284  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

was  used  as  a  school,  and  the  shaking  of  tlie  house  became  so  violent  tlial 
the  teachers  were  comiielled  to  dismiss  the  scholars,  as  "they  could  not  write 
and  feared  to  remain  upon  the  premises." 

After  this  excitement  had  continued  until  the  whole  neighborhood  be- 
came stirred  by  it,  a  public  meeting  was  held  in  the  place,  and  a  committee 
appointed  to  wait  on  Mr.  Crapsey  and  request  him  to  quit  the  neighborhood. 
This  be  refused  to  do,  when  tlie  prophetic  warnings  of  the  spiritual  drama 
were  realized  by  Mr.  Crapsey's  arrest  on  a  false  charge  of  his  having  as- 
saulted some  members  of  his  congregation.  A  trial  ensued,  but  as  nodiing 
reprehensible  conld  be  proved  against  the  minister,  and  not  a  witness  could 
be  found  who  did  not  take  part  with  him  in  this  strange  excitement,  he  was 
ultimately  discliarged  ;  but  as  the  disturbances  continued  with  greater  force 
than  ever,  a  fresh  committee  waited  on  him,  with  the  offer  of  a  sum  of  money, 
conditional  upon  his  instant  departure,  an  offer  whicli  he  promptly  and  indig- 
nantly rejected.  Finding  their  efforts  to  drive  him  out  or  quench  the  ob- 
noxious manifestations  in  vain,  Mr.  Crapsey's  opponents  now  began  to 
resort  to  open  violence  and  a  coi\tinued  series  of  persecutions.  Himself  and 
his  congregation  were  denied  entrance  to  any  building  in  the  neighborhood, 
and  when  tliey  sought  shelter  in  woods,  groves,  or  forests,  they  were  set 
upon,  the  woods  fired,  and  themselves  stormed  and  hooted  at. 

And  yet  it  often  happened  that  the  bands  of  disturbers  who  set  upon  these 
gatherings  were  so  stmck  with  die  flashing  of  the  preternatural  lights,  the 
rocking  of  the  trees,  trembling  earth,  and  the  pathetic  appeals  of  the  en- 
tranced speakers,  that  tlieir  acts  of  violence  were  dianged  into  tones  of  prayer, 
and  they  joined  the  revivalists  in  their  celebrations,  leaping,  singing,  shudder- 
ing, and  prayii^,  under  the  same  inevitable  afflatus  as  themselves. 

Mr.  Pendleton,  a  gentleman  who  was  at  that  time  a  resident  of  Brookfield, 
and  an  eye  witness  and  participator  in  their  Pentecostal  meetings,  affirmed 
that  himself  and  many  others  saw  angelic  beings  moving  about  in  their  midst, 
and  that  often  "  the  spirits  of  dead  persons"  were  seen  and  described  with 
such  accuracy  that  their  friends  and  relations  could  not  doubt  but  that 
"truly  their  loved  and  lost  ones  were  arisen  from  the  grave,  and  come  back 
in  life  amongst  them. "  The  phenomena  of  mediumship  which  would  ac-' 
count  for  the  preternatural  lights  and  movements  around  them,  no  less  than 
the  open  vision  which  recognized  the  forms  of  the  beloved  depai^ted,  had  not 
yet  become  sufficiendy  well  known  and  understood  in  those  remote  sections 
of  country  to  resolve  diemselves  into  a  part  of  an  orderly  and  universal 
movement,  hence  for  a  long  time  their  manifestation,  as  above  narrated,  was 
regarded  as  a  special  Pentecostal  outpouring,  which  predicated  the  speedy 
approach  of  the  long  expected  "millennium." 

As  the  report  of  kindred  phenomena,  occurring  in  other  parts  of  the  State, 
reached  the  "  possessed  district,"  its  preternatural  characteristics  disappeared, 
the  excitement  subsided,  and  the  orderly  development  of  medium  powers  in 
and  amongst  Mr.  Crapsey's  congregation  changed  the  fever  into  the  normal 
and  healthy  tone  of  Spiritualism. 

Our  space  will  not  allow  us  to  pause  longer  on  the  progress  of  the  spiritual 
movement  in  Pennsylvania,  or  to  notice,  except  en  passant,  its  many  remarka- 
ble developments  in  Washington  and  Baltimore.  Frequent  allusions  to  the 
extraordinary  mediumistic  gifts  displayed  in  both  cities  will  be  found  scat- 
tered through  these  pages,  and  a  brief  notice  of  the  highly-gifted  Laurie 
family  in  Washington,  and  Colonel  Dansiiin  and  his  amiable  lady  in  Balti- 
more, will  be  given  in  our  biographical  sketches. 

For  the  present  we  can  only  pause  to  remark  that  amongst  the  many  es- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  28S 

cellent  mediums  in  Baltimore,  the  most  distinguished  for  her  professional  ser- 
vices was  a  Mrs.  Morrel,  a  superior  rapping,  wriling,  physical,  and  test  medium. 
Amongst  other  singular  phases  of  intercourse  between  the  hvo  worlds,  a  very 
striking  one  was  exhibited  in  IViltimore  also,  tlirough  the  mediuiiiship  of  Mrs. 
Danskin,  a  lady  moving  in  tlie  first  circles  of  the  city,  but  who,  in  her  fidelity 
to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  nobly  ignored  die  scoffs  and  sneers  of  her  asso- 
ciates, and  devoted  her  remarkable  powers  as  a  trance  medium  to  the  ser- 
vice of  those  who  could  not  be  satisfied  to  investigate  through^  a  professional 
source.  Besides  gifts  of  clairvoyance,  psychometry,  and  healing,  Mrs.  Dan- 
skin  was  ireculiai'ly  distinguished  as  a  medium  through  whom  "  dark  "  or  "  un- 
developed" spirits  could  return  and  manifest  to  earth  tlie  deplorable  ship- 
wrecks whicli  crime  and  ignorance  had  made  of  their  souls.  The  interviews 
with  these  suflering,  earth-bound  beings  were  often  thrilling  and  full  of  warn- 
ing and  instruction. 

TTiese  circles,  as  well  as  others  of  a  similar  kind  held  in  various  parts  of  the 
country,  made  a  profound  impression  on  the  community,  and  induced 
many  persons,  from  motives  of  curiosity  no  less  than  interest,  to  inquire 
more  closely  into  the  relations  sustained  between  the  inhabitants  oi  earth, 
and  the  dwellers  of  the  spirit  country.  The  vague  notions  so  loosely  incul- 
cated by  theology  on  the  conditions  of  compensation  and  retribution  in 
the  hereafter,  were  entirely  put  to  flight  by  the  revelations  of  these  circles. 
The  idea  that  eardily  criminals  could  continue  such  as  spirits,  and  receive 
the  same  benefit  from  human  counsel  as  they  could  have  done  had  they  re- 
mained in  the  form,  was  a  doctrine  so  entirely  subversive  of  all  precon- 
ceived opinions  on  such  subjects,  that  their  promulgation  was  met  with  the 
most  profound  scepticism,  and  sometimes  even  by  indignant  denial.  It 
was  only,  then,  by  the  persistent  efforts  of  such  respected  missionaries  as  Mrs. 
Danskin,  and  other  ladies  who  held  circles  for  the  progression  of  "  undeveloped 
spirits,"  that  this  singular  phase  of  the  communion  between  the  two  worids 
began  to  be  understood,  and  the  possibility  that  we  are  "  all  ministering  spints," 
slowly  to  dawn  upon  the  minds  of  earth's  inhabitants,  not  as  a  mere  bibUcal 
phrase,  but  as  a  solemn  and  divine  mission  which  we  should  endeavor  to 
put  into  practical  reality  for  the  benefit  no  less  of  spirits  in  the  form  than  for 
the  sake  of  those  whom  the  disabilities  of  false  systems  have  sent  from  earth 
still  in  conditions  of  ignorance  and  crime. 

As  this  portion  of  the  spiritual  philosophy  must  be  reserved  for  a  mpre 
full  and  special  notice,  we  shall  now  pass  on  to  consider,  in  detail,  die  Spirit 
uaUsm  of  those  vast  sections  of  country  so  graphically  entitled  "the 
mighty  West" 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERIf 
CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

SPIRITUALISM    IN    THE    WEST — BUFFALO. 
"  Strange  gioiy  gleams  through  llfir's  wild  rents ! 

Character  of  Western  Spiritualism — Manifestations  of  Messrs.  Sangster 
AND  Reed  in  ButTALO— Mrs.  Swain — Still  Further  West — Columbus, 
Ohio  —  The  "Crowing"  Medium  —  "Elementai,  Spirits"^*'The  Devil" 
AT  Armory  Hall. 

The  course  of  our  history  now  carries  us  into  those  more  remote  districts 
which  lie  west  of  the  scenes  we  have  hitherto  been  describing,  and  which 
are  generally  called  by  the  title  of  "the  West." 

Our  subject  in  this  connection  becomes,  like  the  immense  geographical 
area  it  includes,  almost  beyond  the  pen  of  the  historian  to  describe. 

The  utmost  we  can  hope  to  achieve  is  a  brief  notice  of  such  sections  of 
country  as  have  been  distinguished  by  the  presence  of  remarkable  personages, 
or  the  abundance  of  supra-mundane  phenomena. 

In  both  these  respects,  Buffalo,  which  forms  the  extreme  western  point  of 
New  York  State,  has  undoubtedly  a  claim  to  take  a  prominent  rank  in  the 
history  of  Spiritualism. 

As  the  city  where  the  Davenport  Brothers,  Cora  Scott,  Miss  Brooks,  and 
other  distinguished  media  resided  and  first  manifested  their  marvellous  power, 
Buffalo  became  quite  early  celebrated  in  the  spiritual  movement;  nor  was  its 
fame  less  widely  spread  from  the  fact  that  it  was  the  scene  of  the  farce  en- 
acted by  the  notorious  "  Buffalo  Doctors,"  in  connection  with  the  visit  of 
the  Misses  Fox,  as  detailed  in  a  preceding  chapter, 

Reaen  ing  notices  of  its  principal  mediatorial  personages  for  future  biograph- 
ical sketches,  we  shall  simply  pause  to  record  some  of  the  phenomenal  circles 
held  there  by  persons  less  generally  known  in  the  history  of  the  remarkable 
movement 

The  medium  m  the  cases  cited  as  follows,  was  a  young  gentleman  [not 
professional]  whoae  position  in  society  placed  him  above  the  reach  of  sus- 
picion on  the  ground  of  interested  motives,  and  whose  character  was  remark- 
able for  veracity  and  simple  directness  of  purpose. 

We  shall  quote  Mr.  Albro's  version  of  the  narrative  as  it  appeared  in  the 
Age  of  Progress  oil^jxazxy  ^,  1857. 

"MANIFESTATION  EXTRAORDINARY. 

"  On  Saturday  evening  last,  at  our  weeldy  developing  circle,  we  had  a  manifestation, 
the  like  of  which  we  have  never  witnessed  except  at  Davenport's.  A  young  gentleman  of 
the  name  of  Sangster,  of  this  city,  was  in  attendance,  who  is  a  medium  of  extraordinary 
character  for  physical  manifestations.  Our  principal  speaking  medium  being  absent,  it  was 
proposed  to  have  a  dark  circle  and  see  what  we  could  get  through  Mr.  Sangster's  medium- 

"The  proposition  was  met  with  general  approbation,  and  the  necessary  preparations  were 

Hosiedb,  Google 

E 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  287 

chief,  which  we  twisted  into  a  hard  rope.  With  this  we  tied  onehand,  mating  a  Imrd  square 
knot  over  the  wrist,  drawmg  it  as  tight  as  tlie  medium  could  bear  it  without  stopping  tlie 
circulation  of  Che  blood.  We  then  put  his  hands  behind  him  and  tied  the  otlier  hand  equally 
tight  using  up  the  whole  of  the  handkerchief  in  similar  hard  knots.  In  this  position  it  was 
impossible  for  him,  with  all  his  phyacal  powers,  to  free  himself.  This  done  the  light  was 
again  removed,  and  the  medium  left  alone  m  one  comer  of  the  room,  whilst  the  circle  all 
sat  with  thrat  hands  joined.  Directly  the  spirit  rapped  and  called  for  the  light.  It  was 
brought  in,  when  the  medium  was  found  exactly  as  we  had  left  him,  minus  his  coat,  which 
had  been  taken  off  by  the  spirits,  even  while  his  hands  were  tied  as  we  have  described.  After 
tying  him,  we  had  called  upon  ail  the  members  of  the  circle  to  examine  and  test  the  knots, 
and  all  did  tlie  same  again,  bearing  unanimous  testimony  to  the  fact  that  the  knots  were  ex- 
actly as  we  had  tied  them,  not  a  single  fastening  diowmg  the  appearance  of  having  been 

"  The  tying  of  the  medium  occupied  several  minutes;  the  removal  of  the  coat  must  have 
occurred  in  a  few  seconds  only.  Agdn  the  light  was  removed,  the  circle  joined  hands  as  be- 
fore, and  again  tiefore  we  had  been  well  seated,  the  raps  signalled  for  the  light,  which  being 
jroduced,  we  found  the  medium  with  his  coat  on,  the  knots  still  remaining  mtact,  and  the 
jands  liound  behind  him  as  before.  Leaving  the  medium  then  securely  tied,  the  piano  was 
turned  with  its  face  to  the  wall.  The  medium  sat  by  it,  all  joined  hands,  and  the  light  was 
removed.  Singing  was  called  for,  when  an  accompraniment  was  played  on  the  piano,  it  be- 
ing, as  above  stated,  face  to  the  wall  in  such  a  portion  that  no  human  being  could  have 
touched  iL  We  then  asked  the  spirits  if  the  medium's  hands  should  be  untied,  and  received 
an  answer  in  the  affirmative.  We  asked  if  the  spirit  would  untie  him,  which  was  also  prom- 
ised, and  in  a  minute  after  the  handkerchief  was  thrown  upon  onr  own  head.  The  li^ht 
was  brought ;  the  medium  was  found  at  liberty.  On  ;^n  removing  the  light,  the  raps  sig- 
nalled ns  to  place  the  handkerchief  on  the  piano ;  this  done,  and  the  light  agiun  brought  in 
-  a  minute  or  two  after,  we  found  the  medium  tied  with  his  hands,  much  as  we  had  secnred 
him,  only  with  more  complicated  and  even  firmer  knots.  This  dosed  the  marvellous  per- 
formance. 

"  These  circumstances  are  attested  by  all  who  examined  the  knots,  and  every  person  pres- 
ent is  willing,  if  required,  to  make  oath  to  (he  troth  of  the  statement ;  also,  that  they  were 
at  no  time  within  reach  ofthemediumduring  theremoval  and  return  of  the  coat,  and  never 
for  one  moment  disjoined  hands  m  the  cu-ele,  except  when  required  to  produce  the  light. 
The  medium  is  a  young  man  of  high  respectability,  and  of  modest,  unassuming  deportment, 
nor  was  there  one  present  gainst  whose  veradty  a  word  could  be  hazarded.  We  should 
like  to  know  how  gentlemen  of  the  Mahan  school  can  account  for  these  phemomena.  Did 
odyle  do  it  all?  We  are  aware  of  the  explanation  that  will  be  offered  by  the  clergy,  who 
are  at  last  compelled  to  admit  that  these  things  are  done.  They  will  of  course  decide  at 
once  upon  the  agency  of  Ms  Satanic  majesty.  But  if  it  were  indeed  the  original  devil  of  or- 
thodoxy, we  should  suppose  his  fingersVouid  bum  a  fabric  so  easily  Citable  as  a  aUc  hand- 

N.  B.  —  Mr.  Albro  forgot  the  new  school  of  fiends  introduced  by  the  Rev. 
Charles  Beecher. 

As  these  are  such  experts  at  ropes,  etc,  may  they  not  be  equally  non-com- 
bustible in  handling  silk  handkerdiiefs  ? 

The  next  account  which  occurs  of  Mr.  Sangster's  niediumship,  is  furnished 
by  Mr.  Giles  Husted,  an  old  and  highly  respected  citizen  of  Buffalo,  whom 
Mr.  Albro  very  properly  cites  in  publishing  his  report,  "  as  an  authority  of 
unimpeachable  worth."    Mr.  Husted  writes  to  the  Age  of  Progress  as  follows  : 

"Buffalo,  J/orf;5  17,  1857, 

"Friend  Albro,  —  I  send  you  a  statement  of  some  singular  manifestations,  which  I 
term  '  spnitnal,'  that  have  recently  occurred  at  my  house. 

"  By  appointment  some  friends  met  at  my  house  on  an  occasion  when  the  spirits  had 
promised,  if  possible,  to  give  us  some  extraordinary  manifestations.  They  ordered  us  to  tie 
the  medium,  Mr.  Sangster,  most  seliu^y,  and  then,  locking  him  in  a  thoroughly  searched 
ajid  fastened  room,  form  a  circle  in  the  room  adjoining.  After  each  person  was  well  satis- 
fied that  the  medium  was  as  securely  confined  as  ropes,  knots,  locks,  and  bolts,  could  make 
him,  we  formed  a  circle  in  an  adjommg  room,  which  was  well  lighted.  After  sitting  some 
twenty  minutes,  durmg  which  time  we  could  hear  loud  noises  in  the  room  with  the  medium, 
such  as  the  shiftmg  of  franiture,  the  Itnoclting  of  heavy  bodies  ag^nst  the  ceilmg,  and  heavy 

Hosiedb,  Google 

zSS  fflSTORY  OF  MODERN 

poundings,  etc. ;  loud  anJ  successive  rapsgave  tlie  signal  for  the  alphabet  which  Epelled  out 
in  QUI- room  ;   'Look  for  the  coat.' 

"  We  did  so  with  some  siu'prise,  commencing  our  search  in  our  own  room,  where  we  im- 
mediately found  it  Ithe  coat]  folded  up  under  a  chair  about  the  centre  of  the  room.  Our 
whole  party  can  testify  on  oath,  that  the  door  had  never  been  opened  smce  we  entered  the 
room  ;  the  lights  were  burning  brightly  the  whole  time,  and  not  a  movement  had  been  made 
amongst  us ;  in  feet,  confederacy,  had  the  character  of  any  one  present  admitted  of  such  an 
hypothesis,  was  simply  imposable,  or  too  absurd  to  be  thought  of 

"  On  entering  the  circle  room  we  found  it  locked  and  bolted,  with  every  rope,  knot,  and 
fastening  exactly  as  we  had  left  them,  and  the  medium  sitting  bound  hand  and  foot,  without 
his  coat,  which  we  had  possession  of 

"In  a  circle  held  the  3d  of  Match,  we  were  directed  by  the  spirits  to  lock  the  piano  forte, 
and  seal  the  key-hole  with  wax,  and  in  that  condition  the  spirits  played  on  both  strings  and 

"  Will  some  of  the  wise  ones  of  this  age  explain  these  manifestations  on  any  other  hypoth- 
ecs than  tlie  spiritual  one  ? 

"  Respectfully  yours, 

"Giles  Husted." 
Mr.  Albro  writes  of  a  second  circle  still  more  interesting  than  the  first,  as 

"Buffalo,  March  20,  1857. 

"  On  the  evening  of  the  17th  inst.  ^  after  Mr.  Husted  had  sent  niethe  above  communication, 
I  called  at  his  house  to  get  an  explanation  of  some  statements  in  his  letter.  Mr.  James 
Sangsler,  the  medium,  and  another  young  gentleman,  besides  a  yoimg  lady,  not  a  member  of 
the  family»  were  there,  intendmg  to  hold  a  circle.  Mr.  Husled  and  the  me<lium  pressed  me 
to  stay,  and  I  not  very  reluctantly  consented  to  do  so.  After  some  conversation,  a  spirit 
wrote,  through  the  medium's  hand,  directions  to  have  a  dark  circle.  We  were  required  to  lock 
the  outer  doors  of  two  rooms,  leaving  only  the  folding  doors  which  connected  them  unlocked. 
Aiier  all  was  made  secure,'we  shut  the  fohiing  doors  and  placed  a  ch^r  agamst  them,  which 
I  was  requested  to  occupy  so  as  to  make  sure  that  no  one  could  enter  the  room  from  that 
point.  I  locked  all  the  other  doors  myself,  as  well  as  the  piano,  and  retained  the  keys  in 
my  own  possession.  This  done,  by  request  I  also  tied  the  medium  so  securely  that  I  can 
vouch  for  it  he  could  never  have  moved  or  released  himself  by  any  earthly  means. 

"  A  stand  with  paper  and  pencil  was  placed  near  the  medium's  chdr,  which,  together  with 
the  pianoand  writmg  malef^s,  were  at  one  end  of  the  parlor,  whilst  the  rest  of  the  party 
sat  with  joined  han£  around  myself  at  the  other  end,  I  having  taken  my  seat  i^nst  the 
folding  doors.  By  raps  we  were  requested  to  Mug,  which  being  complied  with  by  two  of 
the  party,  the  piano  accompanied  them  from  within  the  closely-locked  case,  continuing,  in 
good  time  and  tune,  to  play  until  the  song  ended.  After  this,  light  was  called  for  and  the 
medium  closely  examined,  but  he  was  found  tied  as  fast,  and  the  knots  as  perfect  as  I  had 
left  them.  Again  the  light  was  extinguished,  anging  called  for,  and  this  time  it  was  only 
accompanied  by  a  scratching  on  the  paper. 

"  The  raps  soon  called  for  the  light,  when  a  note  was  found,  addressed  to  the  young  lady 
of  our  party  above  mentioned,  written  and  agned  by  what  purported  to  be  the  spirit  of  hCT 
mother. 

"  This  operation  was  repeated  several  times,  and  on  each  occasion,  when  the  li^ht  was 
produced,  I  carefully  exammed  the  medium,  found  all  the  fasteumgs  intact  and  wholly  un-  ■ 
disturbed,  and  a  letter  addressed  to  each  member  of  the  company,  signed  by  spirit  friends, 
and  cdntaming  appropriate  messages.  To  my  letter  was  appended  the  name  of  my  much- 
respected  old  friend,  Stephen  Dudley.     The  writing  ran  as  foUovrs  : 

" '  Friend  Albro,  —  Truth  often  blooms  unseen  b  your  world,  and  as  often  receives 
the  scoffs  and  sneers  of  ungenerous  hearts.  Go  on  ;  for  beyond  earth's  turmoil  is  a  brighter 
world,  where  labor  for  truth  never  goes  unrewarded.' 

"I  may  add  that  the  style  and  writmg  were  so  characteristic  of  my  old  friend  that  I 
could  have  recognized  it  vritbout  his  well-known  signature. 

"Before  the  last  writing  was  done,  a  small  snare  drum,  tambourine,  and  bells,  which  had 
been  ordered  by  the  spuits  to  be  brought  m,  were  carried  about  the  room  and  played  in  time 
to  the  singing.  Sometimes  the  room  seemed  to  be  lit  upwith  a  soft  twilight,  although  there 
was  no  artificial  light  in  the  room,  nor  any  means  of  entrance  for  it  from  without. 

"Now,  what  can  the  kneeologians  and  toe -snappmg  mountebanks,  who  make  philosophy 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  aSg 

blush  with  tlie  grossness  of  Iheir  folly,  do  with  facts  lilie  tTiese  ?  Nothing— but  to  tell  their 
admirers  thit  the  five  persons  who  witnessed  (his  phenomena,  and  who  will  pledge  their 
most  sacred  honors  or  any  other  required  form  -of  attestation  that  every  word  we  have  writ- 
ten is  true  to  the  letter,  are  liars  and  perjured  knaves.  This  is  all  they  could  do ;  for  such  is 
the  nature  of  the  phenomena  that  there  is  no  other  alternative  than  to  admit  the  sphitual 
hypothesis,  or  to  impugn  the  credibility  of  the  witnesses.  And  this  no  one  of  thefive  fears 
m  my  community  where  they  are  known." 

Wonderful  manifestations  of  a  similar  kind  to  Mr.  Sangstefs  and  the  Daven- 
ports' were  also  made  through  die  mediuinship  of  Mrs.  Swain,  of  Toronto, 
Canada,  who,  about  the  time  we  write  of,  was  a  resident  in  Buffalo. 

The  specialty  in  the  case  of  this  medium  was,  that  the  phenomena  were 
produced  in  well-lighted  rooms.  Amongst  other  strange  perfonnances,  the 
spirits  succeeded  in  executing  drawings  with  their  own  hands,  on  paper  pre- 
viously marked  and  placed  beneath  the  table,  whilst  the  medium  sat  with  her 
hands  reposing  on  its  surface,  in  the  well-lighted  apartment  The  drawings 
produced  through  Mrs.  Swain's  mediumship  were  made  in  an  incredibly  short 
space  of  time,  and  though  rough  and  inartistic,  were  generally  significant  of 
some  spiritual  idea,  or  especially  interesting  to  certain  persons  present,  who 
often  received  excellent  tests  through  this  means.  One  of  these  drawings  was 
submitted  to  the  author  for  inspection. 

It  was  boldly  and  not  inartistically  designed,  and  represented  a  death-bed 
scene,  where  a  corpse  surrounded  by  weeping  friends  lay  extended,  whilst, 
above  the  bed  was  a  vivid  representation  of  the  departed  spirit,  rising  from  the 
head  of  the  lifeless  body  and  received  in  the  arms  of  a  group  of  attendant 
guardian  angels. 

ITie  following  incidents  would  only  receive  a  place  in  these  pages  on 
the  most  thorough  conviction  of  tlieir  entire  anthenticily,  and  the  unimpeach- 
able character  of  the  witnesses  who  figured  in  the  remarkable  scenes  de- 
tailed. Wlien  we  state  that  the  narratives  were  furnished  by  the  late  Mr.  A. 
E.  Maynard,  of  Buffalo ;  that  tiiey  occurred  at  his  own  residence,  and  in 
the  presence  of  his  respected  widow,  family,  and  immediate  circle  of  friends, 
there  is  not  a  Spiritualist  in  the  country  who  would  not  readily  pledge  their 
honor  for  the  veracity  of  the  statements,  and  admit  that  they  were  made  by 
one  of  the  noblest  and  most  highly  respected  friends  the  c^use  of  Spiritualism 
has  ever  known  or  Spiritualists  have  loved  and  lamented. 

Mr.  Maynard's  name  would  indorse  any  statement  outside,  as  well  as  within 
the  ranks  of  Spiritualism  in  Buffalo. 

As  a  gentleman,  his  veracity  was  held  unquestioned ;  whilst  as  a  public 
officer,  his  character  had  for  long  years  stood  as  a  voucher  for  good  faith, 
and  line  business  capacity.  We  have  received  other  accounts  of  those 
seances  of  a  far  more  wonderful  character ;  but  as  our  space  is  limited,  we 
shall  confine  ourselves  to  narrating  only  such  facts  as  are  vouched  for  over 
the  signature  of  one  who  may  truly  be  called  one  of  the  noblest  works  of 
God^ — an  honest  man. 

"December,  l86l. 
"Banntr of  Light:  '         ■* 

"  Messrs.  Editoks,— Permit  me  to  furnish  your  readers  with  a  brief  account  of  the- 
developments  of  spirit  phenomena,  at  a  circle  held  at  my  house,  on  the  evening  of  De- 
cember 31,  1863.  The  medium  present  was  Mr.  Charles  Reed,  a  person  of  humble  pre- 
tensions, and  whose  mediumistic  powers  have  only  recently  been  brought  to  the  attention, 
of  our  citizens.  He  answers  sealed  tetters,  however  securely  fastened,  under  such  stringent 
test  conditions  as  render  it  impossible  that  there  should  be  any  deception. 

"Some  ten  or  twelve  Mttmgs  have  been  heW  at  my  house  within  the  last  six  weete,  the 
details  of  which  are  of  so  entraorilinary  a  nature  that  I  could  scarcely  dare  to  draw  upon 
the  credulity  of  your  readers  by  relating  them  in  full ;  I  shall  therefore  limit  myself  to  a. 
sketch  of  one  or  two  of  the  least  wonderful  of  these  aittmgs. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

290  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"  One  of  tlie  circles  was  composed  of  seven  males  and  four  females,  inclusive  of  members 
of  my  own  family.  Sesited  around  the  table  in  the  order  directed  by  the  spirits,  we  all 
joined  hands,  and  the  light  was  extinguished.  Our  medium's  hands  being  held  like  the  rest. 
It  was  imposdble  that  any  one  in  the  room  could  move  without  instant  detection.  The 
moment  the  liobt  was  extinguished,  heavy  potmdings  on  the  table  commenced,  and  the 
guitar,  bells,  tnangle,  etc.,  that  we  had  placed  there,  were  played  separately  and  tc^etber, 
"  The  tin  horn  which  we  had  provided  at  the  request  of  the  Epirits,  was  snatched  up,  and 
voices  came  through  it  in  quick  succession.  All  sorts  of  articles  were  picked  up,  and  placed 
upon  the  table  i  as,  first,  acliair,  tbenan  ottorcianplaced  init,  etc.  The  doors  were  locked, 
our  bands  never  for  one  instant  disjoined ;  yet  when  the  light  was  called  for  and  procured, 
we  found  those  things  on  the  table  as  described.  Darkness  being  again  demanded,  the 
spirits  addressed  us  through  the  horn,  caUing  us  each  by  name,  conversing  with  us  familiarly 
on  points  of  special  interest,  and  speaking  of  many  friends  utterly  unknown  to  the  medium, 
who  had  left  the  form  and  desired  now  to  be  announced.  The  spirit  pronounced  the  names 
of  three  persons  known  only  lo  our  family,  related  many  of  their  peculiarities,  and  person- 
ated their  voices  and  manners  to  the  life,  alluding  to  scenes  and  personal  specL-ilties  which 
could  not  be  mistaken.  An  hour  was  spent  in  conversation  in  this  way,  during  which  time 
the  sjnrit  home  was  described  as  a  most  beautiful  place,  from  which  none  ever  a^ain  deared 

to  return  (0  this  earth  life 

' '  The  spirits  took  a  vase  filled  with  wax  flowers,  a  cup  and  saucer,  relics  of  seventy-five 
years  old,  and  two  large  china  vases,  from  the  high  mantel  shelf,  and  placed  them  on  the 
table  without  noise  or  disturbance.  They  also  brought  many  articles  from  an  adjoining 
room,  and  threw  them  into  the  laps  of  their  respective  owners..  They  played  on  the  piano 
when  closed,  raised  the  heavy  table  from  the  floor  with  all  oiu-  hands  on  its  top  ;  patted 
our  faces,  pulled  our  beards  and  hair,  and  laid  their  hands  heavily  on  our  heads  and  siioul- 
ders.  The  bom  was  carried  to  the  ceilmg,  and  all  pacts  ot  the  room,  the  spirit  voices 
anging  and  speaking  to  us  from  every  direction.     The  guitar  also  was  pkiyed  in  various 

Earts  of  the  apartment,  whilst  all  our  hands  were  tightly  clasped  in  each  other's.  Spirit 
anda  were  shown  to  us  through  the  darkness,  and  felt  by  us  m  various  ways.  After  mid- 
night, ft  spirit  voice  distinctly  bid  us  '  A  Happy  New  Year,' 

"  During  the  atting  a  spirit  suddenly  blew  a  shrill  blast  on  what  seemed  to  be  a  drover's 
whistle.  Knowmg  we  had  no  such  instrument  in  the  house,  we  expressed  surprise  at  the 
sound,  when  the  spirit  declared  that  he  had  taken  it  from  the  pocket  of  a  drover  in  Joslyn's 

house a  drover's  tavern  three  miles  from  here.      By  request,  the  spirit  presented  the 

whistle  to  Miss  M. 'a  lips,  who  blew  upon  it  two  shrill  tones  in  verification  of  its  being  a 
genuine  instrument.  The  spirit  then  said,  '  I  am  now  gouig  to  return  it  to  the  drover's 
pocket,'  hear  it  now' — shaking  it,  so  that  we  could  distinctly  hear  the  rattle  of  the  cham 
attached  to  it.  '  Now  it  is  gone ;'  then  a  moment  afterwards,  '  It  is  in  his  pocket  again.' 
After  this  a  violent  and  numerous  clappiny  of  hands  was  made  all  over  the  room,  with  a 
force  and  noise  that  I  could  scarcely  im^ne  any  human  hands  could  produce. 

"  At  a  subsequent  aitting  in  the  same  place,  the  medium  was  taken  up  bodily,  and  whilst 
the  hands  of  both  his  neighbors  still  hehl  on  to  him,  he  was  lifted  up  aa  h^h  as  their 
extended  arms — when  dr^ed  up  from  their  seats,  and  standing  —  could  reach. 

"  He  was  then  suddenly  dropped  down,  yet  as  if  lifted  rather  than  dropped,  for  his  fall 
produced  neither  harm  or  concussion,  though  a  fall  from  such  a  height  must  have  broken 
his  bones.  Again  he  was  taken  up  several  times,  audibly  striking  his  head  agamst  the 
ceiling,  causing  him  to  exclaim  in  some  fear  of  being  hurt,  'Oh,  don't !'  On  one  occaaon 
■Jie  was  held  against  the  ceilmg  for  nearly  a  minute  and  a  half,  and  then,  as  if  to  show  the 
jlature  and  care  of  the  poiver  that  handled  him,  he  was  Isud  lengthwise  on  the  top  of  the 
jiiano,  whilst  the  muac  rack  was  still  standmgup,  wholly  undisturbed. 

"  At  this  circle,  besides  the  frequent  touches  of  powerful  soIM  hands,  the  spirits  walked 
heavily  about  the  room,  and  several  of  them  danced  with  a  sound  and  concussion  like  strong 
■men,  with  thick  boots  on." 

The  last  smnce  of  this  nature  that  we  can  quote,  is  recorded  by  Mr.  May- 
,nard,  and  is  as  follows: 

"HERALD   OF   PROGRESS  — BUFFALO,  JANUARY  IS,  1864. 

"Friend  Davis, — The  most  extraordinary  manifestations  of  spirit -power  of  the  present 
4ge  took  place  at  some  recent  attings  of  the  '  Buffalo  Excelsior  Circle,'  —  so  named  by  our 
..pirit  friends,— held  at  my  residence,  one  of  which  occurring  or.  Wednesday,  January  13, 
I  will  herewith  transcribe  an  accurate  account  of,  as  it  took  ;  lace  m  the  presence  of  a 
.d<»en  of  our  most  respected  and  reliable  citizens. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN.  SPIRITUALISM.  291 

"  The  circle  ^vas  in  order  at  seven  o'cloclf,  each  one  obeying  the  nile  laid  down  by  the 
^irits,  namely,  to  hold  each  other  by  the  liand,  and  not  let  go  ivithout  direction. 

"The  gas-light  was  turned  down,  and  the  spirits  bid  us  welcome  in  an  audible  voice,  and 
then  played  on  the  piano  which  was  placed  dose  up  ag^st  and  facmg  the  wall,  accompa- 
nied by  several  small  instruments.  The  controlling  spirit  —  who  calls  himself  Samson- 
addressed  the  chiurman,  who,  as  is  nsual,  introduced  to  him  all  who  had  not  met  with  as 
before.  Samson  repeated  after  him  the  name  of  each,  saying  cordially  some  words  of  wel- 
come and  greeting. 

"Thech^rman  reminded  Samson  of  Ms  promise  to  strike  the  Park  bell  in  front  of  the 
Sherman  Hotise  in  Chicago  last  evening,  Tuesday,  January  12,  at  eleven  o'clock.  To  this 
Samson  replied,  'Yes,  sir,  I  struck  it  at  the  very  minute  I  said  I  would.'  This  has  been 
verified  by  letters  received  from  several  persons  of  respectability,  who  heard  it,  and  who 
are.wUling  to  bear  testimony  that  they  did  so. 

"  The  chairman  then  reminded  him  that  he  fSamson]  had  promised  to  strike  the  bell  of 
the  Washington  Baptist  Church  in  this  city,  on  that  evening  at  half-past  nine  o'clock.  To 
this  remmdec  Samson  also  assented,  and  declared  that  he  woald  do  it ;  also,  that  he  would 
then  keep  his  engagement  to  change  water  into  wine,  and  'would  do  it  now.'  The  gas 
bring  re-lighted,  a  tumbler  of  clear,  pure  water  was  drawn  from  the  filter,  placed  on  the 
table,  the  li^it  turned  down,  and  all  hands  mslantly  joined.  In  less  than  two  mmutes  the 
spirit  said,  'Give  your  light.'  The  light  being  procured,  the  tumbler  on  the  table  was 
Etandmg  exactly  b  the  same  place,  but  instead  of  the  water,  it  contained,  we  found,  a  red 
liquid  resembling  in  taste  Malaga,  or  the  wines  generally  used  in  the  sacrament.  The  wme 
is  preserved,  and  open  to  the  inspection  of  the  curious.  Many  very  powerful  manifestations 
were  given  and  interesting  conversations  held  on  the  conditions  of  spirit  life."  [As  these 
do  not  vary  from  the  general  representations  made  by  spirits  concerning  their  life  m  the 
spheres,  we  omit  them —  Author.] 

"Tiiehour  for  soundmg  the  bell  having  arrived,  Samson  manifested  considerable  unpa- 
tience  at  the  delay  of  the  worthy  sexton  of  the  church,  who  had  promised  to  join  the  circle. 
He  declared  he  must  have  him  there  for  the  sake  of  his  peculiar  influence,  and  in  answer 
to  a  query  whether  he  could  not  hasten  hb  coming,  sdd  he  could,  and  was  even  then  willing 
hhn  on  his  way.  He  desired  us  to  keep  quiet,  ;md  presently  said,  'He  has  come,'  when 
mstantly  the  door-beU  rang,  and  the  sexton  was  admitted  to  the  circle. 

"  He  said  he  had  carefully  shM  up  the  church,  and  brought  the  keys  with  him,  so  that 
it  was  impossible  that  any  one  could  have  access  b  any  way  to  the  church,  mudi  less  to  the 
bells,  and  yet  in  less  than  three  rainotes  after  his  arrival,  we  all  distinctly  heard,  b  that 
close  room,  over  five  hundred  yards  from  the  church,  a  loud,  clear  peal  on  the  bells.  Several 
persons  b  the  streets  heard  the  peal  like*ise,  and  the  subject  has  excited  much  comment 
and  curious  inquiry.  The  sexton  expresses  his  willingness  to  testify  to  the  fact,  and  show 
how  impossible  ft  was  for  any  human  bemg  to  have  access  to  the  belfry  whilst  it  was  care- 
fully locked  and  he  sat  with  the  keys  of  that  and  the  church  in  our  circle-room. 

"At  a  later  sittmg,  several  sceptical  gentlemen  were  present,  one  of  whom  Samson 
recognized,  givmg  him  several  very  satisfactory  tests;  amongst  the  number,  he  reminded 
him  that  he —  Mr.  S.,  a  lawyer  —  tried  a  suit  for  him,  and  adding,  'Don't  you  remember 
we  beat  him?'  Mr.  S.  replied  by  asking  the  spirit  his  name.  The  spu-jt  reminded  him  of 
the  suit  and  the  name  of  the  oppoangparty,  adding, '  That  man,  Mr.  A.,  was  so  mean  that 
we  don't  speak  (o  him  here.'  Mr,  S.  inquired  how  long  he  bad  been  dead.  The  spirit 
replied,  '  About  three  months ; '  a  statement  which  was  at  the  time  unknown  to  Mr.  S., 
thou^  subsequent  inquiry  verified  it.  The  spirit  added  to  this  many  other  tests  of  identity 
eoncernmg  spu-it  friends  of  Mr.  S.  and  others  present.  At  this  circle  also,  and  for  the  third 
time,  water  was  changed  bto  wine  under  most  stringent  test  conditions.  A  bii-d  and  ci^e, 
and  many  other  articles,  were  moved  about,  and  most  powerful  manifestations  were  made 
whilst  every  hand  in  the  room  was  closely  jobed. 

"  Saturday  evening,  yaniiary  23,  1S64. 
"At  the  dose  of  this  drcle,  the  followbg  inddent  occurred.  Young  Broughton  is  a 
member  of  our  drcle.  He  had  on  this  occasion  brought  his  father,  who  up  to  that  night 
was  a  sceptic.  Both  were  soldiers,  enlisted  b  the  same  company.  The  spirit  SaiuEion  had 
singled  out  the  old  gentleman,  bemg  a  sceptic,  for  a  great  variety  of  slaps  and  poundb-rh, 
which  rather  nettled  him.  At  last  he  asked  if  he  would  '  like  a  little  fun, '  to  which  he  received 
a  good-humored  assent,  when  he  immediately  calleil  for  the  light.  Nothing  had  transpired 
m  the  interim,  nor  had  we  for  aap  moment  disjoined  our  hands,  except  as  usual,  one  of  ui 
had  broken  the  circle  to  re-light  the  gas.  The  light  showed  the  cirde  complete,  and  every, 
thing  untouched,  save  that  our  old  military  friend  was  sitting  minus  his  coat.  Looking 
first  at  his  right  arm  and  then  at  his  left,  covered  only  with  shirt  sleeves,  he  became  utterly 

Hosted  by  Google 

2^3 

HISTORY  OF  MODES!^ 

confounded,  while  his  look  of  amazement,  and  lis  emphatic  protestations  ihsX  he  liad  nevei 
loosed  his  liaiids  from  his  neighbor's  for  one  instant,  'nor  had  an};  one,  or  anjthmg  even 
touched  him'  — provoked  roars  of  laughter  not  unmixed  with  astonishment  on  the  part  ot 
the  wholi-  circle.  Tliece  was  the  coat,  however,  quite  unharmed,  and  folded  up  outside, 
and  at  a  distance  from  the  circle.  AU  present  in^sted  that  as  the  spirits  had  disrobed  the 
soldier,  they  should  be  polite  enough  to  nut  his  coat  on  again.  This  they  promised  to  do, 
when  the  li'ht  was  ^ain  extinguished.  After  sitting  a  few  minutes,  waiting  m  silence  for  the 
promised  demonstration,  Mr.  Broaghton  exultingly  remarked,  that '  they  conld  not  fool  him 
this  time,'  for  aU  was  as  still  and  quiet  as  death.  Instantly  the  sJgnal  was  given  for  the 
light,  when  the  coat  was  found  replaced  on  the  watchful  soldier's  form  without  his  haymg 

the  least  perception  that  he  had  even  been  touched. 

"  fraternally  yours, 

"A.  E.  Matnard." 

Our  notice  of  the  e.Ktraordinary  character  of  spiritual  manifestations  in 
Buffalo  is  intended  to  prepare  the  reader  for  yet  more  forcible  and  striking 
phenomena  thiougliout  the  Western  countrj'. 

It  is  now  an  acknowledged  fact  that  the  demonstrations  of  spint-power 
not  only  correspond  with  the  peculiar  temperament  and  idiosyncracies  of  the 
media,  but  in  some  respects,  appear  to  bear  a  relation  to  the  leading  features  of 
the  climate,  country,  and  people,  where  they  occur.  Thus  the  manifestations 
in  New  York,  Boston,  and  the  Eastern  States,  whilst  partaking  of  all  the  mar- 
vellous character  of  physical  mediumship,  have  been  strongly  marked  ^vith 
the  intellectual  tendencies  of  the  inhabitants.  Philadelphia,  the  beautiful 
Quaker  City,  has  long  been  noted  for  the  stable  character,  and  religious  tend- 
ency of  its  Spirituahsm.  Baltimore  and  Washington,  being  points  of  attrac- 
tion for  visitors,  have  partaken  of  the  cosmopolitan  characteristics  of  New 
York,  while  the  Spiritualism  of  Vermont  and  New  Hampshire,  like  all  moun- 
tain regions,  has  been  singularly  distinguished  for  the  number  and  lucidity  of 
its  seers  and  prophetic  media.  To  the  careful  observer  it  will  be  apparent, 
that,  whilst  every  town,  village,  and  hamlet  has  furnished  its  quota  of  irl- 
spu-ed  laborers,  in  a  number  and  value  far  beyond  the  pen  of  the  historian 
to  record,  the  general  features  of  tlie  movement  point  with  marked  distinct- 
ness to  the  influence  of  special  climatic,  as  well  as  intellectual  and  moral 
conditions.  Thus  it  will  be  no  matter  of  surprise  to  find  the  manifestations 
■  of  spirit-power  in  the  West,  transcending  all  other  localities  for  force  and 
abundance.  Amongst  a  people  untrammelled  by  the  conventionalities  of 
"fashionable  society,"  which  too  often  crowd  back  the  natural  impulses  of  the 
heart  and  brain,  into  polished  artifice,  spiritual  experiments  could  be  con- 
ducted with  every  possible  chance  of  success. 

In  a  land  where  the  large,  the  wild,  and  the  wonderful  in  nature  predis- 
pose the  mind  to  broad  and  lofty  aspirations;  where  the  free  air  sweeps  over 
a  hundred  miles  of  open  praine  at  once,  shouts  its  anthems  of  storm  and 
tempest  from  the  towers  of  God's  cathedral  rocks,  lashes  into  the  fury  of 
ocean  billows,  the  waves  of  inland  seas,  murmurs  throu^  the  depths  of  old 
primevE^  forests,  whose  dim  solitudes  have  never  echoed  to  the  axe^  of  the 
woodman,  or  sweeps  along  a  thousand  miles  of  giant  rivers,  ^  Spiritualism 
becomes  manifest  with  a  force  and  freedom  unknown  to  investigators  under 
less  favorable  circumstances.  As  soon  as  the  rumor  of  the  Rochester  knock- 
ings  reached  the  Western  States,  individual  experiences  began  to  assume 
the  shape  of  corresponding  phenOBiena.  Families  remembered  the  inex- 
plicable sights  and  sounds  which  had  occurred  amongst  themselves;  noted 
what  was  still  transpiring,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  one  explanation 
would  cover  the  whole  ground.  In  fact,  the  period  foretold  by  the  prophet 
Joel,  seemed  actually  at  hand;  and  thousands,  whose  supra-mundane  ex- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  293 

periences  long  ante -dated  the  Hydesville  disturbances,  w^re  witnesses  of  the 
pouring  forth  of  the  spirit  "upon  al)  flesli."  Very  early  in  their  itinerating 
labors,  die  Misses  Fox  visited  the  most  important  cities  of  the  West,  and 
there  they  found  ground  already  prepared  for  die  spiritual  harvest. 

As  Ohio  has  been  one  of  the  most  favored  of  the  Western  States  in  this 
respect,  W2  shall  call  attention  to  some  of  its  Spiritualism  in  the  first  instance. 
In  Columbus,  the  capital  of  Ohio,  several  distinguished  citizens  had  attended 
the  Rochester  investigations  in  their  incipiency,  and  having  assured  them- 
selves there  was  something  occult  and  supra-mundane  in  the  movement,  they 
returned  to  their  homes  and  instituted  circles,  which  were  very  productive  of 
spiritual  fruits.  A  number  of  mediums  were  soon  developed,  amongst  whom 
were  Messrs.  Walcutt  and  Rogers,  the  spirit  artists  so  often  referred  to. 
Besides  these,  Columbus  was  rich  in  seeing,  speaking,  and  writing  mediums, 
whilst  many  warm-hearted  believers  gave  freely  of  their  means  and  hospital- 
ity to  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  laborers  for  the  cause.  Amongst  those 
most  active  m  promoting  Sabbath  meetings  for  lecturers,  and  procuring  the 
services  of  distinguished  media  for  public  manifestations,  none  rendered 
nobler  service  than  Mr,  Savage,  a  prominent  and  highly  respected  citizen,  of 
the  place,  whose  hospitable  roof  and  unstinted  liberality  were  lavishly  de- 
voted to  the  service  of  Spiritualism. 

Amongst  the  earliest  opponents  of  the  cause  in  Columbus,  was  a  physi- 
cian whose  skill  and  influence  in  the  community  rendered  him  a  formidable 
antagonist  to  the  self-sacrificing  efforts  of  his  once-valued  friend,  Mr.  Savage, 
from  whom  the  latter's  adherence  to  Spiritualism  had  considerably  estranged 
him, 

Mr.  Savage  had  good-humoredly  prophesied  that  his  medical  friend  would 
some  day  have  cause  to  rue  his  opposition  to  the  advance  of  truth,  and 
warned  him  to  beware  how  he  unadvisedly  attempted  to  "  quench  the  spirit" 

On  a  certain  occasion  the  learned  physician  was  passing  down  the  principal 
street  of  the  city,  when,  on  arriving  opposite  the  jewelry  store  of  Mr.  Savage, 
he  experienced,  to  his  horror,  an  unaccountable  impulse  to  mount  the  stump 
of  a  tree  which  had  been  cut  down  in  the  walk  he  was  traversing,  and  then 
and  there,  for  several  minutes,  to  crow  in  the  most  graphic  imitation  of  a 
barn-door  fowl.  The  awkward  portions  of  this  incomprehensible,  psychologi- 
cal experience  were,  first,  that  the  grave  physician  was  at  tliat  moment  car- 
rying in  his  hand  a  couple  of  fine  fowls  ready  for  the  spit,  on  his  way  home ; 
secondly,  that  the  hour  when  he  was  compelled  to  make  this  remarkable  ex- 
hibition was  high  noon ;  and  thirdly,  that  the  scene  of  the  display  was  at  once 
the  most  pubhc  in  the  city,  and  just  that  portion  of  it  which  faced  the  door  of 
his  quondam  friend,  Mr.  Savage.     But  the  mortification  of  this  combination  of 

untoward  circumstances  did  not  end  there.     Dr. was  not  free  from  the 

influence  of  the  "defunct  roosters"  [as  thescoffers  significantly  called  the 
phenomenon]  for  several  weeks,  but  would  involuntarily  jump  up  at  any  time, 
or  in  any  place,  in  public  or  in  private,  and  mounting  any  convenient  elevation 
that  liappened  to  be  at  hand,  incontinently  crow  until  the  fit  wore  itself  out. 

The  old  explanation  in  this  singular  case  was  exchanged  from  "witchcraft" 
to  the  more  scientific  modern  jDhrase  of  "  psychology,"  which  power,  it  was 
presumed,  "  those  dreadful  Spiritualists"  had  brought  to  bear  on  the  unfortu- 
nate gentleman  "in  revenge  for  his  opposition  to  their  belief,"  Had  the 
manifestations  been  of  a  less  ludicrous  character,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that 
this  opinion  would  have  provoked  some  strong  measures  against  the  Spiritual- 
ists, who,  though  entirely  guiltless,  were  still  generally  believed  to  have  been 
somehow  the  promoters  of  the  mischief 

Hosted  by  Google 

294  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

The  next  phase,  and  the  one  which  ultimately  conducted  the  medical  vic- 
tim into  the  adytum  of  Spiritualism,  was  an  irresisdble  tendency  to  pour  forth 
torrents  of  language  in  an  unknown  tongue.  To  this  succeeded  several  other 
equally  awkward  evidences  of  an  uncontrollable  power,  leading  him  onward 
until  the  worthy  physician  set  himself  seriously  to  work  to  investigate  the 
nature  of  human  psychology  ;  passing  on  to  the  realm  of  the  spiritual,  by 
inevitable  sequence,  he  soon  found  himself  treading  the  same  paths  with  his 
former  antagonists,  now  become  his  fellow-pilgrims  to  the  same  great  temple 
of  mental  science,  the  entrance  to  which  he  discovered  to  be  the  spirit 
circle  ;  and  thus  it  was  that  Dr. found  the  afflahis,  so  troublesome  and  lu- 
dicrous when  opposed  to  his  stubborn  will,  a  source  of  blessing  and  instruction 
when  coming  nonnally  under  the  control  of  his  reason  ;  in  short,  he  became 
an  excellent  medium,  and  found  his  newly-acquired  spiritual  insight  of  incal- 
culable benefit  to  him  in  his  medical  practice,  Anodier  member  of  the  Col- 
umbus circles  was  also  a  physician  and  good  clairvoyant,  and  this  gentleman 
was  particularly  distii^uished  in  his  practice  for  discovering,  by  interior  sight, 
how  faithfully  his  patients  had  adhered  to  his  prescriptions  in  his  absence,  in 
fact,  his  services  were  in  request  even  fi-om  those  most  violently  opposed  to  his 
belief,  on  account  of  the  remarkable  skill  with  which  he  diagnosed  disease, 
and  the  occult  power  which  he  manifested  in  its  treatmenL 

On  one  occasion,  the  author,  being  engaged  to  lecture  in  Columbus,  Ohio, 
and  hospitably  entertained  by  Mr.  Savage  and  his  amiable  lady,  met,  on  the 
Saturday  evening  of  her  arrival,  a  large  party  of  spiritualistic  friendswho  had 
kindly  assembled  to  welcome  her.  It  was  stated  that  the  bellsof  the  various 
churches  had  been  in  active  operation  during  the  whole  past  week,  summon 
ing  the  Christian  pait  of  the  community  to  "a  imion  prayer  meetmg,"  an  effi- 
cacious method,  as  it  was  deemed,  of  praying  Spiritualism  out  of  e\istenre 
Some  of  the  petitions  offered  up  on  these  occasions  were  to  the  effect  that  the 
Lord  would  be  pleased  to  take  the  Devil  out  of  their  midst ;  and  by  way  of 
informing  the  Supreme  Being  of  tiie  affairs  of  this  nether  world,  the  petition- 
,  ers  distinctly  stated  that  the  said  "Devil"  would  appear  in  the  likeness  of 
Emma  Hardinge,  the  spirit  medium,  and  make  a  descent  upon  the  doomed  city 
of  Columbus  0.t  Armory  Hall,  tiie  next  Sabbath,  at  eleven  o'clock,  A.  m. 
Much  merriment  was  excited  among  Mr.  Savage's  friends  by  the  discus- 
sion of  tiiese  truly  Christian  proceedings,  when  Dr. was  suddenly  en- 
tranced by  an  influence  which  purported  to  be  one  of  a  band  of  "elementary 
spirits,"  whose  special  function  in  the  realm  of  nature  associated  him  with  the 
element  of  fire;  in  fact,  he  announced  himself  as  a  "spirit  of  tiie  fire."  The 
probable  existence  and  communion  with  earth  of  other  than  human  spirits, 
and  especially  of  sucli  as  had  peculiar  affinity  with  different  elements  in  the 
universe,  had  always  been  a  subject  of  divided  opinion  in  these  circles,  where 

the  affirmative  had  been  stoutly  maintained  by  Dr. ,  who  referred  to 

numbers  of  tests  of  supra-mundane  intelligence  afforded  by  these  spirits  in 
jjroof  of  tiieir  existence.  All  the  Doctor's  spiritual  friends  admitted  the  intel- 
ligence, and  the  evidences  of  spirit  control  in  his  mediumship,  but  most  of 
them  believed  that  its  sources  were  limited  to  tiie  plane  of  a  human-soul 
world.     On  the  night  in  question,  "  a  spirit  of  the  fire,"  as  the  communicating 

intelligence  claimed  to  be,  entranced  both  Dr. and  Emma  Hardinge, 

and  informed  the  assembly  tliat  he  was  destined  that  night  to  be  unusually  ac- 
tive in  Ills  department,  and  intended  to  give  the  world  a  strong  proof  that  the 
next  day's  spiritual  meetings  were  under  the  guardianship  of  powerful  protect- 
ing spirits. 

Before  the  party  separated,  a  cry  of  fire  disturbed  the  quiet  of  the  night, 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICA!^  SPIRITUALISM.  295 

and  a  fine  block  of  buildings  adjacent  to  the  one  occupied  by  Mr.  Savage, 
was  found  to  be  on  fire.  The  flames  originated  in  an  hotel  which  extended 
over  nearly  all  the  stores  in  the  block,  whicli,  despite  the  most  energetic  exer- 
tions, during  tliat  fatal  night,  was  burned  to  the  gi-ound.  One  building  alone 
remained  unscathed,  and  tliiswas  the  store  andsuperstructure  at  one  end,  whicli 
seemed  by  a  miracle  to  have  been  preserved  intact,  whilst  the  immense  mass 
connected  with  it  was  irretrievably  swept  info  ruins  by  tlie  fierce  flames. 

The  solitary  building  thus  strangely  preserved  was  Armory  Hall,  the  place 
engaged  for  the  spiritual  lectures,. and  the  front  of  which  was  covered  with 
posters  announcing  the  arrival  of  the  autlior,  who,  the  next  day,  held  morning 
and  evening  services  witliin  its  uninjured  walls,  to  tlie  assembled  masses  who 
crowded  tiiither  to  hear  the  glad  tidings  of  the  great  modern  spiritual  out- 
pouring. 

By  way  of  accounting  for  the  extraordinary  preservation  of  Armory  Hall 
and  the  success  of  the  Spiritualists'  meetings,  whilst  the  rest  of  the  citjr  was 
thrown  into  confusion  by  the  past  nighf  s  terrible  conflagration,  the  "  Cliristian 
Union  "  praying  societies  suggested  that,  "  the  Devil  always  takes  care  of  his 

Some  of  the  more  profane  amongst  the  proscribed  Spiritualists  added  tliat 
it  was  a  pity  diat  the  God  of  the  Christian  petitioners  had  not  been  equally 
watchful  over  the  property  of  his  devout  flock. 

CHAPTER    XXIX. 

WESTEKN      SPIRITUALISM      CONTINUED  —  CLEVELAND. 

What  reckless  man,  though  stauE  and  stroDg, 
Can  plant  aeaio  Ihe  ancient  wrong, 
Oppresstoa'sfluiltytiight  prolong, 
UrGod'shnghl£unhght  barf  " 

PS.1LH3  OF  Life. 

The  Fox  Family  at  Cleveland  —  Me.  Joel  Tiffany  and  the  Optosition  — 
"The  Cleveland  Plainijealer  "  —  Philosophy  through  the  Rappings  — 
Editorial  Opinions  — Abby  Warner  —  Spirituausm  on  Trial — The  Ver- 
dict— President  Lincoln  and  the  Spirits  —  Mrs.  Brown  and  the  "Agita- 
tor" —  Female  E.tECUTivE  in  Cleveland'^  Wonderful  Manifestations 
through  Mr.  William  Hume. 

No  section  of  the  States  has  been  favored  with  a  more  abundant  outpour- 
ing of  the  spirit'tlian  that  called  "the  Western  Reserve,"  including  die  city 
of  Cleveland.  Quite  early  in  the  spiritual  movement,  the  Misses  Fox  visited 
Cleveland,  and  in  connection  with  Mr.  Joel  Tiffany,  their  lecturer,  created  an 
irrepressible  interest  in  that  whole  section  of  country.  Encountering  the 
redoubtable  Chauncy  Burr,  Mr.  I'ifFany  was  induced  to  enter  into  several 
public  discussions  with  him,  whicli,  without  greatly  affecting  the  truth  or  false- 
hood of  Spiritualism,  stimulated  inquiry  to  sudi  a  pitch  of  intensity  that  the 
whole  of  the  Western  Reserve  seemed,  by  natural  attraction,  to  have  resolved 
itself  into  circles  for  tlie  development  of  phenomena.    The  editor  of  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

296  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Cleaveland  PlaindeaUr,  a  talented  and  candid  man,  himself  witnessed  the 
manifestations  through  the  Fox  fainiiy,  and  besides  publishing  the  result  of 
his  own  investigations  and  a  mass  of  evidence  of  a  highly  su^estive  cliarac- 
ter  furnished  by  the  numerous  visitors  who  attended  the  Misses  Fox's  jSowfw, 
tliis  liberal  editor  set  a  noble  example  to  his  literary  contemporaries  by  open- 
ing  his  columns  to  both  sides  of  the  question,  and  thus  peniiitting  the  whole 
truth  to  liave  a  chance  of  reaching  the  community. 

It  would  be  mere  reiteration  of  preceding  cliapters  to  quote  largely  from 
this  source,  but  the  following  extracts  will  be  found  of  interest ;  first,  because 
they  give  a  graphic  description  of  tlie  progress  of  the  movement  despite  the 
usual  virulent  efforts  diat  were  made  for  its  suppression  ;  and  next,  because . 
the  first  communication  cited,  affords  an  interesting  specimen  of  philosophy 
spelled  out  through  the  independent  though  slow  method  of  the  rappings. 

"  So  engrossed  are  we  in  worldly  affairs,  that  we  have  iDut  little  time  to  investigate  spirit- 
ual matters,  although  opportunities  present  themselves  twice  a  day  at  the  Dimhajn  House. 
There  are,  however,  a  few  gentlemen  of  leisure  who  are  taking  up  this  matter  systemati- 
cally, and  looking  into  its  mysteries  most  earnestly.  Some  dozen  of  the  most  mtellectual 
minds  in  the  eity  have  formed  a  leagae  to  jointly  and  candidly  investigate  this  phenomenon, 
and  after  a  few  preliminary  attings  have  reported  favorable  progress. 

"  We  have  been  kindly  invited  by  this  circle  to  attend  whenever  our  convenience  would 
allow,  knowing  that  we  had  the  moral  courage  to  publish  what  we  saw  and  heard,  without 
stopping  to  inquire  whether  anything  ^milar  had  been  published  for  fifty  years  before,  or 
without  consulting  the  masculine  grannies  of  the  day  whether  it  met  their  approval  or  not. 
Last  evening  we  looked  in  at  one  of  the  circles,  and  found  the  company  had  progressed  so 
far  as  to  dispense  with  the  tedious  tests  which  are  usually  required  to  prove  the  identity  of 
the  communicating  intelligeoce,  and  were  then,  as  they  had  reason  to  believe,  actually  taking 
lessons  in  philosophy  from  spiritual  teachers.  After  a  great  variety  of  preliminary  mani- 
festations had  been  given,  an  unusually  loud  knocking  signalized  what  the  sitters  were 
accustomed  to  beUeve  to  be  the  approach  of  Dr.  Benjamin  Franklin.  For  a  long  time 
this  intelligence  comniunicated,  sometimes  by  the  alphabet,  and  occasionally  by  spoken 
question  axA  answer.  The  sum  of  what  was  thus  given,  we,  by  aid  of  the  circle,  have 
reported  as  follovre ; 

"'Spirit  is  the  great  positive  element  of  being;  matter  the  great  n^ative.  There  is  an 
elemental  dificrence  between  matter  and  spirit.  Electricity  and  m^netism  are  intimately 
connected  with  matter,  and  belong  10  it.  There  is  a  dividing  link  between  matter  and 
mind,  compounded  of  electricity  and  magnetism,  yet  finer  than  either,  called  vitality,  or  life. 
There  are  various  degrees  of  refinement  in  magnetism :  chemical  affinities,  cohesion,  and 
gravitation,  are  properties  of  electricity  and  magnetism.  Repulsjon  is  rJiused  by  stronger 
attraction.     The  ascension  of  a  balloon  from  earth  is  an  illustration  of  this  principle. 

"  '  Everything  in  the  universe  takes  its  place  by  virtue  of  elemenlal  affinities,  and  can 
occupy  no  other  place  without  changing  the  relation  of  itself  and  every  other  atom  in  ex- 
istence. The  earth  and  every  other  body  in  space  moves  in  its  orbit  by  the  united  action 
of  every  other  body,  the  combining  influence  of  all  and  each,  separately  and  conjointly, 
acting  upon  each  other.  Thoueiht  is  mental  motion,  and  is  converged  from  one  mind  to 
another  by  an  intermediate  medium,  which  is  put  mto  action  by  the  mind.  This  medium 
lies  between  nervous  fluid  and  spirit,  and  exists  in  various  degrees  of  refinement  in  the  ele- 
ment of  vitality,  or  life. '     

"Much  further  information  of  a  similar  kind  was  given,  which  we  ftuled  to  note.  .  , 
,  .  .  ■  After  the  circle  drew  up  close  to  the  table  for  phenomena,  i'arious  sounds  were 
produced  in  diflerent  parts  of  the  room,  as  raps,  sawbg,  driving  nails,  etc  .... 
.     .     More  is  promised  anon." 

The  editor's  own  views  on  the  subject  of  Sp  r  t  al  sm  are  expressed  in  the 
following  paragraph,  which,  in  view  of  tl  e  treat  e  t  Spiritualism  lias  so 
generally  received  at  the  hands  of  the  1  re  s  we  earn  stly  commend  to  the 
attention  of  every  candid  reader. 

Hosted  by  Google 

yt^-^y  SX-^  ^^.n-ix. 

-^^^2 

-^^- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRIT  UA  LIS  AT.  297 

■■A  CHANGE  IS  GOING  ON. -CLEVELAND  PLAINDEALER-1S31. 

"  Notwithstanding  the  burlesques  of  the  Burrs,  the  exposi  ol  the  Bnfialo  Faculty  (?)  and 
other  learned  dunces,  beddesllie  scofFjof  the  prejudiced  ■ind  ignorant  agaii;Et  the  'rappings,* 
the  cause  expressed  iii  that  word  is  gaining  ground  on  every  side.  One  month  ago,  tliere 
were  not  fifty  believers  in  the  city ,  now  there  are  hundreds  including  some  of  its  best 
minds.  Hundreds  more  are  waiting  for  that  ouular  ev  idence  whidi  alone  can  or  ought  to 
convince  the  world  of  claims  so  unprecedented  and  seemingly  miraculous  as  the  work  of 

"  But  the  most  marked  change  is  going  on  among  the  press.  Exchanges  that  a  few 
months  ^owere  filled  with  ridicule  of  this  subject,  are  now^silhiig,  nay,  anxious  to  receive 
and  publQi  facts  concerning  it.  This  is  as  it  should  be  Why  should  an  editor,  a  single 
individual,  who,  because  he  is  perched  on  a  literary  tripod,  undertake  to  judge  of  all  new 
doctrines  or  forms  of  science  th^t  may  arise,  and  attempt  to  dictate  what  s£tll  go  to  his 
readers  or  what  shall  not  ?  Who  has  appointed  him  guardian  of  all  truth,  and  conimis- 
^oned  him  to  pronounce  as  '  humbug'  that  which  he  may  neither  have  had  leisure  nor  op. 
portimity  to  investigate ;  or,  bavmg  examined,  may  not  have  the  brains  to  comprehend? 
Publish  the  facts  and  the  opinions  of  sensible  men  thereon,  and  let  the  world  judge  for  itselt 
That  is  our  motto." 

The  following  paragraph,  published  in  the  same  paper  as  the  above,  needs 
no  apology  for  its  firesentation  to  tlie  reader  as  an  item  of  rare  interest : 

"JENNV  I.IND  AND  THE  SPIRITS. 

"  It  is  well  known  that  Catherine  Fox,  a  child  of  some  dozen  summers,  is  at  present  and 
has  been  for  some  time  stopping  in  the  family  of  Horace  Greeley,  in  New  York.  Wlien 
Jenny  Lind  heard  of  the  remarkable  manifestations  heard  in  the  presence  of  Katy,  as  she  is 
called,  she  went  to  Mr.  Greeley's  to  see  her.  It  is  said  that  the  sweet  songstress  had  a 
very  interesting  interview  with  what  she  believed  lo  be  the  spirits  of  departed  friends,  and 
when  she  lel^,  she  kissed  little  Katy,  saying,  '  If  it  were  possible  for  you  to  make  these 
sounds,  I  know  it  is  imposable  for  you  to  answer  the  questions  I  have  asked  tins  evening.' 
Jenny  had  been  converang  in  her  native  tongue,  and  she  was  so  impressed  with  the  start- 
ling nature  of  the  intelligence  she  had  received,  that  slie  bade  Katy  good-by  with  eyes 
suffused  with  tears." 

During  the  visits  of  the  Misses  Fox  to  Cleveland,  two  reverend  gentlemen, 
Messrs.  Faton  and  Sheldon,  undertook  once  more  the  ungracious  task  of 
"explodi-jg"  the  manifestations.  Mr.  .Eaton's  method  was  to  visit  the 
mediums  with  falsehood  in  his  heart  and  on  his  lips.  He  called  for  imagin- 
ary spirits,  and  prompted  questions  to  which  false  answers  or  silence  was  die 
only  alternative.  Mr.  Eaton  realized  the  truth  of  the  proverb- that  "We 
always  meet  with  that  we  set  out  to  search  for,  as  we  cast  our  own  shadow 
around  us."  Mr.  Eaton  set  out  to  seek  for  falsehood,  used  falsehood  to 
arrive  at  his  results,  was  met  by  the  falsehoods  he  sought,  and  hence  went 
forth  to  denounce  the  whole  thing  as  a  "humbug." 

Mr.  Sheldon,  having  come  to  Mr.  Eaton's  conclusions,  summoned  an  au- 
dience to  listen  to  a  discourse  of  several  hours  in  length,  when,  after  having 
cxliausted  the  parience  of  the  principal  portion  of  his  auditory,  he  hurriedly 
strove  to  capture  the  attention  of  the  departing  remnant  by  a  rehash  of  thp 
old  "loose  joint"  theory  of  the  Buffalo  doctors.  With  no  better  antagonists 
than  Bun-,  Eaton,  and  Sheldon,  it  is  no  wonder  that  Spiritualism  sliould  make 
unimpedodprogressthrough  the  homes  of  "the  Forest  City";  thzt  the  ieanees 
of  the  Fox  family  should  have  been  attended  by  throngs  of  the  most  intelli- 
gent and  prominent  of  its  citizens,  and  that  when  they  left,  numbers  of  highly 
endowed  mediums  should  become  sufficiently  devgloped  to  take  their  place. 
Amongst  these,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  was  Abby  Warner,  a  poor  orphan 
girl  dependent  on  public  charity  for  support,  and  an  object  of  pity  from  a 

Hosted  by  Google 

298  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

concatenation  of  severe  physical  ailments  which  rendered  her  eqttally  helplesJ 
and  unsightly.  And  yet  it  was  tlirough  the  instrumentality  of  tliis  afflicted 
and  humble  agent  tliat  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  was  to  receive  an  irresistible 
impulse  in  Ohio,  for  Abby  Warner  not  only  became  a  most  wonderful  spirit 
medium,  but,  through  no  volition  of  her  own,  brought  the  phenomena  before 
the  world  in  a  manner  which  human  foresight,  however  keen,  could  hardly 
have  achieved. 

The  first  marked  interest  that  was  excited  by  the  mediumship  of  this  young 
girl,  arose  whilst  she  resided  in  the  house  of  a  good  widow,  Mrs.  Kellog  by 
name,  at  Massillon.  Mrs,  Kellog's  compassionate  heart  had  been  touched 
by  sympathy  for  the  poor  orphan's  afflicted  condition,  and,  out  of  simple  pity, 
she  had  invited  her  to  come  to  her  house  and  assist  her  in  her  domestic 
duties. 

Here,  for  the  first  time,  it  was  discovered  by  Mrs.  Kellog,  who  was  herself 
mediumistic,  that  "  the  raps"  could  be  readily  produced  in  the  presence  and 
about  the  person  of  Abby.  Tliis  discovery  greatly  interested  her  patroness, 
who  induced  her  to  sit  for  circles,  at  which  powerful  physical  manifestations 
and  most  excellent  tests  of  spirit  identity  were  freely  given.  Abby  Warner 
had  lived  in  such  conditions  of  neglect  and  ignorance  ttiat  at  the  time  of  this 
development,  though  eighteen  years  of  age,  she  could  only  read  printed  char- 
acters unperfectly,  but  neither  write  herself  nor  read  writing ;  and  yet,  in  a 
state  of  deep  trance,  this  uneducated  girl  would  write  correctly  with  botii 
hands,  at  the  same  time,  on  different  subjects,  for  different  spirits,  whilst  a 
third  would  manifest  through  the  rappings,  and  spell  out  another  and  totally 
different  communication  simultaneously  with  the  other  two.  Dr.  Abel  Under- 
bill, who  wrote  and  published  the  history  of  Abby  Warner,  states  upon  liis 
own  as  well  as  the  authority  of  scores  of  credible  witnesses,  whose  testimony 
is  rendered  upon  oath,  that  Abby  Warner  often  gave  at  her  circles  three  sep- 
arate communications  at  once,  one  witii  her  right,  and  another  with  her  left 
hand,  and  a  third  tlirough  the  rappings ;  that  these  were  well  written  and  cor- 
rectly phrased,  and  contained  the  most  indubitable  tests  of  the  communica- 
ting spirits'  several  identities.  The  author  is  furnished  with  several  affidavits 
to  this  effect,  but  their  publication  would  but  be  a  reiteration  of  testimony 
already  given  in  Dr.  Underbill's  history  of  the  medium.  We  must  add,  how- 
ever, that  the  answers  to  questions  obtained  in  this  way  were  frequently  men- 
tal and  given  whilst  the  medium  was  in  a  deep  trance,  hence  her  case  is  one 
of  tlie  most  singular  and  exceptional  of  psychologic  as  well  as  mediumistic 
instances  on  record. 

Abby  Warner  was  also  an  excellent  seeing  and  trance  medium,  and  as 
crowds  of  eager  inquirers  availed  themselves  of  her  wonderful  powere,  Mrs, 
K.ellog's  residence  was  often  thronged  with  visitors  curious  to  investigate  this 
marvellous  phenomenon.  When  tiie  reports  of  these  stances  began  to  be 
widely  circulated.  Dr.  Ackley,  a  medical  practitioner  of  Cleveland,  who  had 
been  employed  by  the  poor-house  authorities  to  perform  a  surgical  operation 
on  the  suffering  girl  Abby,  being  moved  with  the  pious  design  of  savii^  the 
world  from  the  awful  ravages  which  Spiritualism  was  now  making  in  it,  visited 
Mrs.  Kellog's  house  to  procure  evidence  which  would  enable  him  to  com- 
mence his  work  of  salvation  by  proving  the  now-celebrated  Abby  Warner  to 
be  an  impostor.  Finding  this  task  somewhat  harder  tlian  he  had  anticipated, 
he  wisely  confined  himself  to  an  ^.r^feMftOT/ of  the  mode  in  whiclitiieobnoxious 
raps  were  produced.  For  this  purpose  he  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Cleveland 
papers,  in  wliich  he  boldly  asserted  tiiat  the  whole  of  the  girl's  manifestations 
were  the  result  of  "  trickery,"  and  all  depended  on  tlie  action,  not  even  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  299 

ankle  and  toe  joints,  but  of  "  tlie  respiratory  muscles  of  the  chest,"  which  pro- 
cess he  described  as  being  perfonned  in  such  an  ingenious  and  masterly  way 
that  his  own  admissions  showed  the  ignorant  medium  to  be  a  better  practical 
surgeon  than  the  redoubtable  doctor  himself.  And  because  this  learned  pro- 
fessor declared  that,  after  he  liad  trtuned  them,  several  of  his  students  could 
rap  with  their  ankles,  respiratory  muscles,  etc.,  as  well  as  Abby,  he  undertook 
to  pronounce  Spiritualism,  from  Rochester  to  California,  "a  profound  hum- 
bug;" solemnly  a.niaounced  that  it  was  "exploded"  forthwith;  and  actually 
expected  somebody  else  besides  himself  to  credit  his  assertions.  After  the 
fulmination  of  this  medical  bull,  which  doubtless  answered  the  pur^se  of  a 
very  good  advertisement  for  the  cause.  Spiritualism  proceeded  with  more 
.  force  and  abundance  in  Cleveland  and  its  vicinity  than  ever,  but  tiie  circum- 
stances that  connected  its  progress  so  publicly  with  the  name  of  Abby  War- 
ner were  as  follows :  Dr.  Underhill  being  in  Massillon,  and  having  taken 
Abby  Warner  into  his  family  for  medical  treatment,  accompanied  her,  with  his 
wife  and  a  few  friends  to  St.  Timothy's  Church,  on  Christmas  eve,  1851. 
They  went  there,  as  they  alleged,  diicfly  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  the  deco- 
rations, which,  as  was  usual  at  that  period,  were  tastefully  arranged  through- 
out the  church. 

Altliough  the  rappings  accompanied  Abby  wherever  -Jie  went,  there  was 
no  reason  to  anticipate  my  of  sulhcient  force  to  disturb  the  congregition , 
hence,  her  friends  were  not  a  little  surprised  to  hear  them  produced  on  thia 
occasion  with  such  unusual  power  and  number  that  the  attention  of  the 
whole  assembly  was  attracted  by  them,  and  fixed  upon  the  place  where 
Abby  and  her  party  were  seated  The  church  was  unusually  quiet  at  the 
time,  and  the  presence  of  the  well  known  and  obnoxious  "  spu-it  rapper '  no 
doubt  fastened  observation  on  the  sounds,  which  they  might  otiierwise  haic 
escaped.  When,  however,  they  were  made  in  full  \olume,  distinctly,  and  m 
excellent  time  to  the  singing,  there  seemed  to  be  no  further  room  to  doubt 
their  source 

The  officiating  minister  desired  [addressing  no  one  in  particular]  that 
"those  knockings  might  cease  ;"  to  which  die  said  knockings  responded  by 
a  single  rap  of  remarkable  force  and  vibratory  power,  a  signal  interpreted  by 
the  initiated  m  spint  telegraphy  to  mean  a  decided  negative  to  the  clergy- 
nmn's  request ,  nor  did  they  cease,  but  rather  increased  in  number  and  force, 
until  the  close  of  the  service  and  die  retirement  of  Abby  and  her  party. 
After  this,  the  indignation  of  the  congregation  vented  itself  in  sundry  intem- 
perate letters,  in  which  die  nature  and  impiety  of  the  outrage  put  upon  a 
Christian  community,  and  the  disturbance  created  in  their  worship,  was 
fiercely  insisted  upon,  in  die  Massillon  papers.  The  result  of  diis  storm 
was  the  citation  of  Abby  Warner,  the  "  ^irit  rapper,"  before  a  public  tribunal, 
to  answer  to  die  charge  of  having  wilfully  and  in  malice  prepense,  disturbed 
a  Christian  assembly  in  the  solemn  act  of  public  worship. 

The  trial,  as  recorded  in  the  columns  of  the  Cleveland  Plaindealer,  is  a 
curious  specimen  of  ignorance,  superstition,  and  malice.  The  full  details  are 
scarcely  of  sufficient  interest  to  warrant  their  insertion  here,  we  shall  there- 
fore only  quote  a  few  extracts  from  the  report,  as  follows : 

"THE  TRIAL  OF  AEEV  WARNER. 

I"  Reported  fur  Hie  Cleveland  Plaindealer. 1 

"  A  large  congregation,  it  seems,  had  met  at  the  Episcopal  Church,  Massillon,  on  Christ- 
mas eve.  Soon  after  the  services  had  commenced,  a  knocking  was  licard,  which  was  con 
tinned  at  intervals  during  the  evening,  notwithstanding  that  the  minister  publicly  desiieJ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

300  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

that  it  might  cease.  After  thi5,  the  raps  again  commenced,  so  loudly  lliai  they  couki  be 
heard  distinctly  in  every  part  of  the  ch.fch  during  t!ie  whole  sermon.  In  order  to  ascei-. 
tain  the  locality  of  the  sounds,  some  ge  .tlemen  went  into  the  basement  of  the  church,  and 
declared  that  the  raps  proceeded  from  that  part  of  (he  building  above  where  Abby  Warner, 
the  well-known  'rappmg  medium,'  was  seated,  Tius,  and  the  fact  that  Dr,  Uiiderliill, 
under  whose  charge  Abby  is  now  residinii;,  as  well  as  other  avowed  believers  in  sjaritual 
manifestations,  was  in  the  churcli,  also  the  rumor  that  the  spirit  had  directed  Aliby  to  go 
there  for  the  purpose  of  producing  manifestations,  induced  those  opposed  to  the  modem 
science  of  pneumatolc^,  to  ascribe  the  raps  to  the  said  Abby,  as  an  offence  worthy  of  con- 
dign punishment. 

' '  The  Spiritualists,  it  appears,  not  only  claimed  that  the  sounds  were  made  by  invi^ble 
inteiligenees,  independent  of  their  volition ;  but,  through  theu'  peculiar  mode  of  mterpretiug 
spirit  telegraphy,  they  inferred  that  they  were  decidedly  opptfied  to  the  doctrines  of  the 
preacher.  This  inatter  has  caused  much  excitement.  In  the  last  number  of  the  town  paper, 
several  distinguished  members  of  the  Episcopal  Church  stated  their  opinion,  that  it  v.'as  a 
scheme  of  Dr.  Underbill's  and  his  associates  to  disttu'b  and  insult  their  religious  exercises, 
and  they  called  upon  all  good  dtizens  to  beware  of  these  'contaminators  of  public  mor- 
als,' and  treat  them  '  with  the  contempt  they  so  justly  merited,'  Moreover,  on  the  strength 
of  the  statute  regarding  disturbance  of  religious  meetings.  Dr.  Reed,  M.D,,  made  his  alh' 
davit  that  he  did  verily  Ijelieve  that  one  Abby  Warner  had  uiterrupted  the  services  at  St. 
Timothy's  Church  on  Christmas  eve  last,  whereupon,  a  warrant  was  issued  for  the  arrest  of 
Abby,  who  was  aecordbgly  brought  before  R.  H.  Folger,  Esq.,  for  examination.  .  ,  . 
As  this  is  the  first  modem  instance  in  which  'the  spirits'  have  been  arraigned  in  a 
court  of  justice,  a  particular  report  of  tlie  trial  will  doubtless  be  interestmg  to  the  public 

"The  trial  commenced  on  Saturday,  December  27,  before  R.  H.  Folger,  Justice  ot 
Peace.  The  office  was  so  crowded  that  the  constable  had  great  difliculty  in  preserving  the 
due  order  and  decorum  of  the  court.     A.  C.  Wales  appeared  for  the  State,  and  Messrs. 

Keith,  Undechill,  and  Pease,  for  the  defendant The  defendant  pleaded 

not  guilty,  and  her  coimsel  admitted  the  fact  that  strange  sounds  had  been  heard  in  St. 
Timothy's  Church  at  the  time  complained  of,  and  in  her  presence,  but  they  alleged  that  these 
were  not  produced  by  any  agency  of  hers,  or  under  an^  control  of  her  own, 

"  The  esamination  of  witnesses  tended  to  elicit  no  facts  beyond  those  already  referred  to, 
namely,  the  production  of  knocks,  coming  sometimes  angly,  sometimes  in  twos  and  threes, 
or  even  in  a  aiower,  emphasizing  certain  passages,  tieating  time  to  the  singing,  and  occasion-  ■ 
al!y  sounding  as  if  two  or  three  persons  struck  together,  and  alwaysloud  and  distinct;  but 
not  a  anale  witness  could  be  found,  who  could  swear  that  they  perceived  the  slightest  move- 
ment m  the  accused  party ;  on  the  contrary,  when  closely  cross-examined,  those  wlio  professed 
to  have  scratinized  (he  action  of  the  'spirit  rapper  narrowly  were  compelled  to  admit 
that  they  could  not  detect  the  least  perceptible  motion,  even  of  her  dress,  at  the  times  when 
the  knocks  were  most  numerous  and  empliatic, 

"  Two  ladies  who  sat  in  the  same  slip  with  her  were  carefully  examined,  and  though 
entirely  unfavorable  to  her  belief,  acknowledged  that  she  never  moved  when  the  kn*ks 
were  at  the  loudest,  and,  whether  she  stood  up  or  sat  down,  (hey  did  not  even  suspect  that 
she  made  the  sounii  ;  indeed,  they  proceeded,  as  they  seemed  to  think,  from  points  quite  dis- 
tant from  her.  Others  (esliiied  that  they  came  from  the  back,  ade,  ground,  or  at  any  rate 
somewhere  near  her  pew,  but  in  what  particular  locality,  all  seemed  strangely  disagreed. 

"  The  trial,  which  continued  during  three  days,  was  removed,  on  account  of  the  immense 
throng  of  spectators,  to  Welker's  Hall ;  and,  after  along  and  patient  investigation,  ended 
in  the  discharge  of  the  accused.  Mr.  Folger,  after  a  very  elaborate  summing  up,  closed  in 
these  words :  '  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  true  source  of  this  disturbance  cannot  be 
ascertained,  and  the  offender  punished,  A  church  has  been  disturbed  in  its  devotions  to 
an  extent  which  arrested  the  attention,  not  only  of  the  rector,  but  of  every  one  present. 
After  three  days  of  patient  investigation,  the  guilty  party  is  nudiscoveted,  and,  thus  far,  the 
investigation  has  proved  fruitless,  for  which  the  court  can  only  express  its  sincere  regret- 
Being  unable,  in  the  light  of  the  proof,  to  find  the  defendant  guilty,  she  is  discharged.'  " 

Atid  thus  ended  a  trial  tipon  wh  ch  the  law,  with  all  its  acumen,  was 
unable  to  throw  any  light ;  a  case  upon  which  the  churih,  with  all  its  as 
sumed  divine  illumination,  only  cast  darkness  visible ,  yet  which  the  pi  un 
common  sense  of  millions  of  less  highly  gifted  authorities  has  discos  tred  to 
be  distinct  emanations  from  tlie  fountain  of  all  light,  — foregleams  Iron  th^ 
realms  of  immortality. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  301 

Immediately  after  the  decision  above  referred  to,  Dr.  Underhill  issued  a 
circular  to  the  effect  tliat  an  investigation  would  be  conducted  by  a  carefully 
selected  committee  of  persons,  chiefly  sceptical,  as  to  the  claims  of  Spiritual- 
ism, in  which  Abby  Warner  should  sit  under  stringent  test  conditions,  to  prove 
the  triith  of  a  spiritual  origin  for  the  raps,  .trance  writings,  speak  ng  1  es 
sages,  descriptions  of  spirits,  ringing  of  bells,  playing  of  musical  nstrun  ents 
movement  of  heavy  ponderable  bodies,  produced  through  her,  as  cla  med 
by  spiritual  agency,  and  without  tmy  act  or  volition  of  her  own. 

The  committee  consisted  all  of  well-known  and  prominent  per  ons  n 
Massillon,  and  were  Messrs.  F.  M.  Keith,  C.  K.  Skinner,  R.  Pirtr  dge  C 
D.  Smith,  and  A.  Pease.  In  connection  with  this  committee  one  of 
ladies  only  was  appointed  to  examine  the  medium's  clothing  before  com  le  i 

Four  sessions  were  held,  at  which  all  the  manifestations  enumerated  above, 
besides  many  personal  tests  of  a  striking  character,  were  rendered,  during  which 
the  hands  of  the  young  girl  were  frequently  held,  her  shoes  taken  off,  and  her 
position  clianged  in  various  ways  to  suit  the  requirements  of  her  judges.  It 
would  but  be  a  repetition  of  already  over-familiar  phenomena,  were  we  to 
quote  the  verbose  and  elaborate  testimonial  which  the  judges  freely  rendered 
to  the  truth  and  genuine  character  of  Abby  Warner's  mediumship  at  the  con- 
elusion  of  their  investigations.  Enough  that  they  summed  up  the  various 
items  of  manifestations  displayed,  minutely  describing  many  of  them,  by  declar- 
ing their  conviction  that  "Abby  Warner  had  neither  art  nor  part  in  tiieir pro- 
duction;" that  they  were  "wonderful,  wholly  unaccountable,  and  genuine  evi- 
dences of  an  occult  and  intelligent  force  outside  the  medium  ; "  and  though 
they  were  not  all  prepared  to  attribute  what  they  had  witnessed  to  the  action 
of  spirits,  they  were  fully  agreed  as  to  Abb/s  innocence  "of  any  share  in 
their  i^erformance."  This  report  was  signed  by  the  whole  committee,  numer- 
ously witnessed,  and  careiuliy  attested. 

The  impetus  given  to  SpirituaUsm  by  this  remarkable  trial  and  the  report 
which  followed  it,  is  almost  inconceivable.  Circles  were  organized  in  every 
family.  Mediumistic  gifts  of  extraordinary  character  were  abundant,  and  the 
purpose,  if  purpose  there  was  on  the  part  of  the  spiritual  perfonners,  of  Abby 
Warner's  visit  to  the  church  of  St.  Timothy,  was  accomplished  in  planting 
Sairitualism  in  almost  every  household  on  the  Western  Reserve. 

Immediately  after  the  election  of  the  late  lamented  President  Lincoln,  an 
article  appeared  in  the  Cleveland  Plaindeahr  which  the  timid  feared,  and  the 
antagonistic  hoped,  would  greatly  prejudice  the  cause  of  the  popular  Republi- 
can leader,  by  associating  his  name  with  Spiritualism. 

In  the  expectation  that  he  would  give  a  public  denial  to  what  some  inter- 
ested parties  were  pleased  to  consider  "  a  most  injurious  statement,"  the  arti- 
cle in  question  was  submitted  to  the  President,  who  quietly  glanced  over  it, 
and  in  answer  to  the  earnest  request  that  he  would  furnish  a  contradiction  to 
the  papers,  replied :  "  The  only  falsehood  in  the  statement  is  that  the  half  of 
it  has  not  been  told.  This  article  does  not  begin  to  tell  the  wonderful  things 
I  have  witnessed."  The  anti-spiritual  friends  of  President  Lincoln  were 
henceforth  silent  on  such  subjects  ;  but  rumor  was  less  obliging  and  constantly 
circulated  reports  of  the  seanees  in  which  the  noble  and  greatly  harassed  mar- 
tyr communed  with  the  spirits  of  wise  and  perfectedmen,  through  whose  pres- 
cient power  and  far-seeing  judgment,  counsels  were  poured  into  his  ear, 
which  bore  mighty  and  fateful  fruit.  A  gentleman  lately  resident  in  Washing- 
ton and  only  known  by  his  most  intimate  friends  as  a  strong  physical  medium, 
became  familiarly  acquainted  with  the  contents  of  many  an  eventful  state  paper 

Hosted  by  Google 

30^  HISTORY  OF  MODERlf 

beforeitever  saw  officiallight— aye,  even  whilst  it  \vasbeingissued  from  the  spir 
imal  press  over  the  telegraphic  wires  whicli  run  between  the  mortal  and  im- 
mortal worlds.  Doubtless  the  human  "  wire-pullers,"  who  surround  the  seats  o( 
ofBce  and  plant  their  batteries  of  influence  so  as  to  make  the  nation's  welfare 
bear  primarily  on  their  own,  imagine  they  have  exerted  an  immense  power  in 
the  great  ulcimates  of  national  destiny,  but  they  little  deem  that  there  are  also 
invisible  machinists  at  work  inclosing  themselves  no  less  than  the  country  in 
a  network  of  hidden  causes,  whose  woof  is  spun  by  the  hands  of  mightier 
statesmen  than  earth,  and  rulers  whose  viewless  batteries  of  power  galvanize 
even  the  very  stones  beneath  men's  feet  into  preacliers  of  their  resistless  pur- 

The  paragraph  in  the  Cleveland  Plaindealer  above  referred  to,  is  as  fol- 
lows: 

"THE  PRESIDENT  ELECT  A  SPlRnuAUST. 

"It  so  happened  that  ConklLn,  the  test  medium  from  New  York,  was  in  Cleveland  on  the 
day  when  President  IJncoIn  arrived  on  liis  way  to  Washington.  Being  a  Republican  himself, 
and  not  wishing  to  run  an  opposition  to  the  distinguished  visitant,  he  brolic  up  his  own 
leveesat  the  Johnson  to  attend  that  of  President  Lmcoln  at  theWeddell  The  moment  he 
set  eyes  on  Mr.  Lincoln,  he  reci^jiiied  in  him  a  very  peculiar  individual  who  had  formerly 
been  a  fretiuent  visitor  at  his  room  in  New  York,  but  whose  name  he  had  never  been  made 
acquainted  with.  He  used  to  come  alone,  sit  alently,  question  mentally,  and  depart  as  be 
came,  unnoticed.  On  one  occasion  he  got  a  remarkable  test,  which  was  pubhshed  in  the 
Spiritualist  at  the  time,  in  New  York,  On  referring  to  a  file  of  that  paper,  Mr.  Conklin 
furnished  us  with  the  narrative,  which  ran  as  follows: 

"'A  GOOD  TEST. 

"  'A  gentleman  who  has  often  viated  Mr.  Conklin,  called  upon  him  on  the  evening  of 
■  March  23,  for  the  usual  purpose  of  communicating  with  his  spirit  friends. 

"'Afler  asking  some  twenty  or  more  mental  question^  which  he  briefly  stated  were  an- 
sweredcorrectly,  heput  tbefollowinsquestion:  'Can  you  inform  me  of  Mr.  K-'s  condition?' 
The  answer,  written  through  Conklin's  hand,  was;  'Yes;  he  is  present  row.'  Q.  When 
did  he  die?  A.  Yesterday  mommg;  he  is  happy,  but  cannot  comraanicate.  The  gen- 
tleman departed  from  his  generally  taciturn  conduct  to  say  this  was  a  very  remarkable  case, 
for  the  friend  he  had  inquired  foi .  and  whom  that  communication  stated  to  be  present,  he 
had  left  three  days  previously  m  Wisconsm,  twelve  hundred  miles  distant,  alive,  and  though 
indisposed,  pronomiced  by  his  phyacian  to  be  fast  recovering  from  a  long  illness.  At  Mr. 
Conklin's  solicitation  he  promised  to  inform  him  if  the  conamunication  should  prove  correct. 
In  accordance  with  his  word,  the  stranger  did  call  on  Conklin  the  next  morning  and  mformed 
him  that  he  had  [ust  received  a  telegraphic  dbpatch  from  a  brother.in-law  of  Mt.  K.'s, 
announdng  his  death  on  the  previous  morning,  and  at  the  hour  stated  by  tlie  spirit.  Mr, 
Conklin  says  that  Mr.  Lincoln  is  the  identical  gentleman  referred  to  in  the  Spiritualist ; 
that  he  remembers  hun  from  the  peculiarity  of  his  appearance,  from  his  frequent  calls,  and 
aa  the  recipient  of  this  partievdar  test.' " 

Besides  many  faithful  and  efficient  friends  of  the  cause  in  Cleveland,  the 
labors  of  Mrs.  H.  M.  F.  Brown,  editress  of  a  stirring  little  paper  entitled  the 
Agitator,  have  produced  a  marked  effect  upon  the  communily  by  aiding  the 
disseminarion  of  Spiritualism  no  less  than  liberal  ideas  generally.  Mrs. 
Brown  not  only  edited  (he  Agitator,  but,  by  her  able  lectures,  essays,  and  con- 
tributions to  all  the  reformatory  and  spiritual  papers  of  the  day,  has  for  years 
done  noble  service  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism.  As  a  resident  of  Cleveland, 
she  exerted  a  marked  influence  in  that  city.  Here  also  resided  for  some  time 
Professor  William  Denton,  the  eminent  geologist,  who,  with  his  wife  and  sis- 
ter, Mrs.  Ann  Cridge,  rendered  their  names  famous  as  the  subjects  of  those 
remarkable  experiments  in  psychometry  which  will  be  hereafter  noticed,  as  re- 
corded in  William  Denton's  philosophical  work,  entitled  "The  Soul  of  Things." 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  303 

Several  of  the  earliest  spiritual  conventions  were  lield  in  Cleveland,  which 
formed  a  point  of  attraction  from  tlie  number  and  entliusiasm  of  the  friends 
located  there.  From  thence,  too.  Spiritualism  radiated  throughout  the  entire 
of  Ohio,  rendering  that  State  famous  in  the  history  of  the  movement.  Before 
taking  leave  of  the  beautiful  ■'  Forest  City,"  we  shall  introduce  the  record  ol 
some  manifestations  which,  although  as  well  attested  as  any  facts  on  the  page 
of  history,  have,  from  their  marvellous  character,  occasioned  much  incredu- 
lous comment  from  the  sceptical. 

It  must  be  stated  diat  the  medium  referred  to,  although  beanng  the  same 
name  as  the  celebrated  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  generally  called  Hume,  of  Euro- 
pean reputation,  was  no  relation  to  him,  nor  were  the  parties  even  acquainted 
with  each  odier.  We  shall  give  the  following  statement  as  nearly  as  possible 
in  the  words  of  the  correspondent  of  die  Spiritual  Telegraph,  Mr.  S.  W. 
Turner,  the  well-known  and  respected  citizen  of  Cleveland  in  whose  experi- 
ence the  facts  transpired. 

"MANIFESTATIONS  AT  CLEVELAND. 

"Cleveuind,  December  13,  1S57, 
"  Mr,  Charles  Partridge  :  Dear  Sir,  ^I  am  requested  by  my  spirit  fnend,  Captdn 
Robert  Kidd,  to  write  a  history  of  some  manifestations  that  Imve  occurred  at  this  place 
within  the  last  iwo  or  three  months,  and  send  it  to  you  for  publication  in  the  Spiritual 
Telegraph,  proyided  that  course  would  meet  your  approval  I  will  endeavor  to  giie  you 
a  plain  statement  of  facts,  leaybg  you  to  present  them  to  your  readers  as  jou  may  throk 

V^'^-  „  Yours,  for  the  truth,  S.  W.  Turner. 

"INCIDENT  OF  THE  MONEY. 

"  On  Wednesday,  August  26,  Mr.  William  Hume  lost  his  poctet-book,  containing  five 
dollars  in  bills,  one  one  and  two  twos,  which  fact  he  conununlcated  to  us  on  the  Thursday 

""■•Tt^dinner  the  same  day  Captdn  Kidd,  the  controlling  spirit  of  Mr  Hume,  com- 
menced rapping.  We  interrelated  the  spirit  to  know  if  he  could  find  the  medium  s  money, 
and  received  in  answer  the  promise  that  he  would  try.  .    ^  :,  ,       .    . 

"  On  Friday,  the  28th,  the  spirit  informed  us  by  raps  that  he  had  found  the  money,  but 
refused  to  return  it  at  that  time.  ,,,„„.■,,,      t. 

"  On  the  following  day,  the  29th,  another  spirit,  caUing  himself  'Mr.  Patrick  Murphy, 
Esq.,  from  Dublin,'  informed  us  by  raps  that  Captain  kidd  had  taken  two  dollars  out  of 
the  pocket-book.  On  Tuesday,  September  I,  the  spirits  gave  directions  for  us  to  hold  a 
circle  on  Wednesday  evening,  at  which  time,  they  said,  they  would  restore  the  pocket- 
book  and  money.  On  Wednesday  evening,  as  promised,  the  book  was  returned  —  short 
twodollars  — by  being  suddenly  thrown  into  the  lap  of  a  lady  present,  but  in  such  a  man- 
ner, and  from  such  a  point,  as  to  render  it  imposable  that  any  one  in  the  room  could  have 
had  any  agency  in  touching  it.  Upon  inquiring  about  the  misang  two  dollars,  we  were  m- 
formed  that  the  money  was  on  board  the  steamer  North  Star,  then  at  her  dock  m  this 

^  ^"  On  Thursday,  the  writer,  in  company  with  Mr.  WilUam  Hume,  went  on  board  the 
steamer  North  Star,  Immediately  on  entering  it  Mr.  Hume  became  entranced,  and,  seiz- 
in" me  by  the  hand,  led  me  to  the  spot  where  the  money  was  found  by  myself,  under  the 
direction  of  the  spuit.  I  found  the  biU  about  eight  feet  from  the-main  deck,  on  tlie  top  of 
a  coU  of  string.  It  was  neatly  folded  up  into  about  an  inch  square,  but  so  tightly  pressed 
to-ether  as  to  require  much  time  and  patience  to  unfold  it  without  destroying  the  bill 
From  the  time  we  entered  the  boat  until  I  found  the  bill,  I  never  lost  sight  of  Mr.  Hume, 
or  loosed  his  hand.  The  bill  could  only  just  have  been  depoated  where  I  found  it,  or  ic 
would  have  been  discovered,  knocked  down,  or  in  some  way  displaced,  and  J  myself,  nnder 
direction,  was  the  first  to  see  and  lay  hands  upon  it.  After  we  had  succeeded  m  unfolding 
our  prize,  Mr.  Hume  — now  restored  to  his  normal  state  — and  myself  sat  down  to  ex- 
amine the  bill  and  converse  upon  the  subject.  After  a  time  1  hanAed  K  (o  Mi.  Harae, 
who  put  it  in  his  vest  pocket.  He  had  ti^en  a  seat  opposite  me,  so  that  I  closely  observed 
his  every  action.      After  conversing  for  a  few  minutes  I  asked  him  to  let  me  see  the  biU 

Hosted  by  Google 

304  HISTOR  V  OF  MODERI^ 

again ;  but  when  Mr  Hume  searched  for  it  in  the  vest  pocket  where  he  had  placed  it, 
although  he  turned  the  pocket  inade  out,  to  our  astonishment  it  was  not  to  be  found. 
Every  pocket  and  place  about  Mr.  Hume  was  searclied,  but  to  no  purpose;  the  bill  was 
gone. 

"  Mr.  Hume  continued  in  dose  company  with  me  the  remainder  of  the  time  until  we 
arrived  iit  my  residence.  Immediately  on  our  enterinj;  the  door  Mr.  Hume  was  entranced, 
and  again  seizin"  me  by  the  hand,  be  led  me  to  a  jjaiitry  containing  some  dishes,  and  on  the 
top  shelf  of  which,  some  eight  feet  from  the  floor,  was  a  covered  dish,  toward  which,  using 
my  hand,  the  medium  pointed.  Being  out  of  reach,  I  took  a  chair  which  stood  near, 
stepped  upon  it,  uncovered  the  dish,  when,  to  my  surprise,  I  found  a  hank  bill  within  the 
disli,  twisted  like  a  cord,  and  tied  up  in  three  knots  so  lightly  that  it  was  with  the  greatest 
difficulty  I  could  undo  them  without  destroying  the  note.  When  I  had  succeeded,  to  my 
utler  astonishment,  1  found  the  identical  two-di3lar  bill  which,  unknown  to  Mr.  Hume,  I 
had  carefully  marked  on  board  the  North  Star,  not  half  an  hour  previous.  After  a  dose 
examination  of  this  bill,  I  placed  it  in  my  pocket-book,  saying,  at  the  same  time,  to  Mr. 
Hume  that  it  was  of  no  use  for  him  to  have  the  money,  as  I  did  not  think  the  spirits  would 
let  him  keep  it. 

"On  the  same  evening,  namely,  September  3,  in  company  with  Mr.  Hume  I  went 
down  to  the  dock  to  witness  the  departure  of  the  North  Star  steamer.  The  evening  was 
beautifully  bright  and  dear.  Aflier  the  boat  had  left,  Mr.  D.  A.  Eddy,  the  medium,  and 
myself,  were  standing  upon  the  dock,  no  other  person  being  present.  I  took  the  two-dollar 
bill  from  my  pocket  and  gave  Mr.  Eddy  the  history  of  it;  travels,  after  which  Mr.  Hume 
requested  me  to  give  it  to  him,  saying  he  would  put  it  in  a  place  that  he  did  not  think  the 
spirits  could  get  at.  So  saying,  he  drew  from  his  pocket  a  conamon  shot-bag,  containing 
some  silver  coin,  and  put  the  bill  in  the  bag,  shakmg  it  wdl  down. 

"  He  then  gave  the  bag  a  twist  and  placed  it  in  his  left-hand  pocket,  saying,  at  the  same 
time,  'There;  I  guess  you' — meaning  the  spirits  —  'won't  get  it  again.'  Immediateiy 
after  speaking  these  words  he  became  entranced,  and  said,  'I  must  go.'  I  replied, 
'Where?'  He  replied,  '  To  your  house ;  and  when  I  go  I  shall  take  something  with  me.' 
I  then  understood  he  spoke  from  the  spirit.  A  change  then  seemed  to  come  over  him,  and 
another  control  said,  'The  fellow  with  the  big  black  whiskers'  —  meaning  the  spirit  that 
had  left —  'has  taken  ihe  medium's  money,  every  cent.'  Mr.  Eddy  and  myself  immediately 
searched  the  pocket  where  Mr.  Hume  had,  a  minute  before,  deposited  the  bi^  under  our 
very  eyes,  and,  as  well  as  the  place  would  admit  of,  his  whole  person,  but  not  a  trace  could 
be  found  of  the  bag,  or  the  least  possibility  of  its  concealment  about  him.  On  coming  to 
his  normal  state  we  told  Mr.  Hume  nothing  of  what  Iiad  transpired,  but  I  s^d  to  hun, 
•Come,  let  us  go  home.' 

' '  Upon  this  we  walked  towards  my  carriage,  which  was  some  ax  or  eight  rods  from 
where  we  stood. 

"  Mr.  Hume  had  a  constant  habit  of  thrusting  both  his  hands  into  his  pockets  when 
walking.  He  did  so  now  whilst  proceeding  to  the  carriwe,  when  he  immediatdy  turned 
to  me  with  an  accent  of  indignant  vexation,  exclaiming,  ■  There,  now,  I  am  beat ;  the  bag 
is  gone,  and  I  have  not  one  cent  left  to  bless  myself  with  1  What  shall  I  do?'  After  en- 
joying a  good  laugh,  and  assuring  Mr.  Hume  it  would  be  all  right,  we  took  leave  of  our 
fnend,  Mr.  Eddy,  and  drove  home ;  at  the  same  time  I  determined  m  my  own  mind  I 
would  not  for  one  moment  lose  sight  of  Mr.  Hume  until  the  bag  and  money  weie  restored. 
On  arriving  at  my  house  I  at  once  proceeded  into  the  parlor  with  Mr.  Hume,  where  we 
sat  down  a  few  moments. 

"  I  then  invited  Mr.  Hume  to  accompany  me  into  the  front  yard,  which  he  did.  Whilst 
standmg  at  the  gate  an  influence  suddenly  entranced  him,  and  seizing  me  by  the  coat- 
collar,  he  said,  in  the  tone  of  the  last  spirit  control :  '  I  see  the  fellow  with  the  big  black 
whiskers  that  got  the  medium's  money.  Upon  this  he  started  off,  dragging  me  along  furi- 
ously after  him,  to  the  back  part  of  the  house.  On  arriving  oppoate  Uie  dining-room  he 
dashed  in,  hurling  me  after  him  with  a  force  that  four  men  in  their  normal  state  could 
scarcely  have  exerted,  exclaiming,  on  entering  the  room,  'There!  there!'  pointing  to  the 
window  at  the  oppoate  side.  And  there,  indeed,  my  eye  caught  the  bag,  placed  in  one 
comer  of  the  window. 

"  Mr.  Hume  let  go  his  grip  of  me,  and  I  walked  to  the  window  and  secured  the  bag. 
The  end  of  the  b^  was  tied  in  a  Iiard  knot,  but  the  contents  were  all  safe  and  the  money 

"HISTORY  OF  THE  KING  MANIFESTATIONS. 

nded  me  that  on  the  following  Sunday 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM 

30s 

a  wish  to  make  Wm  a  liandEome  present,  and  after  some  consultation  on  the  subject,  decided 
that  it  should  be  a  diamond  ring.  She  described  to  me  a  very  handsome  one  which  she 
bad  seen  at  the  store  of  our  friend,  Mr.  N.  E.  Crittenden ;  and  as  the  steamer  to  which  our 
son  was  attached  as  a  clerk  was  to  leave  for  Lake  Superior  on  the  following  day,  it  was 
necessary  that  ibe  ring  should  be  procured  at  once,  so  as  to  present  it  to  him  before  bis 

"Mrs.  Turner  remarked  that  she  was  sorry  she  could  not  present  it  on  the  Sunday,  but 
agreed  to  do  so  the  nest  day.  On  Thursday,  the  34th,  I  went  to  the  store  of  Mr.  Critten- 
den, bought  the  ring  which  Mrs.  Turner  had  described  to  me,  and  at  the  dinner  hour  gave 
it  to  her.  When  I  left  my  house,  about  two  o'clock,  Mrs.  Turner  was  sitting  beside  her 
work-table,  on  which  was  a  small  work-box.  She  held  the  ruig  in  her  hand  for  some  tune, 
extolling  its  beauty,  when  she  raised  the  cover  of  the  box,  placed  the  ring  ia^de  it,  and 
closed  the  cover  tightly  over  it.  She  then  asked  me  if  I  would  go  at  once  to  the  boat  to 
fetch  our  son  George.  On  receiving  an  answer  in  the  afBnnative,  she  added,  '  Tell  George 
I  want  to  see  hira  immediately.'  I  left  the  house,  got  into  my  bu^y,  drove  quickly  to  the 
bcMt,  and  telhng  my  son  his  mother  wished  to  see  him,  made  him  get  into  the  bu^y  and 
drive  off  home.  He  went  at  a  rapid  pace,  arrived  home,  and  found  his  mother  alting  as  I 
had  left  her.  It  could  not  have  been  twenty  minutes  since  I  had  parted  from  her,  and  she 
afterwards  declared  she  had  never  for  one  moment  quitted  her  seat.  On  the  arrival  of  her 
son,  Mrs.  Turner,  with  great  delight,  raised  the  cover  of  the  work-box,  intending  to  hand 
him  the  ring ;  when,  to  her  grief  and  consternation,  she  found  the  sdd  ringwas  gone.  After 
a  most  anxious  but  diligent  search,  she  became  convinced  the  jewel  was  really  gone,  and 
her  dismay  and  vexation  cannot  be  described. 

"  Not  a  sou!  had  entered  the  room  ;  not  a  thmg  had  been  stirred  or  moved  in  it  since 
Mrs.  Turner,  in  my  presence,  deposited  that  ring  within  the  lx>x,  whose  contents,  together 
with  every  place  and  article  m  the  room,  were  now  ransacked  in  vain  for  its  discovery. 
Shortly  after  this  mysterious  disappearance,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Eddy  arrived  to  spend  the  after- 
noon with  my  wife.  Being  apprised  of  what  had  happened,  Mr.  Eddy  came  down  at  once 
to  me  on  board  the  boat,  and  said,  '  Are  you  aware  that  a  bui^lary  has  been  committed  in 
your  house,  to-day  ? '  Upon  informing  me  of  the  transaction,  I  said,  by  impressuon,  '  De- 
pend upon  it,  Captfun  Kidd,  the  spirit,  has  got  that  tmg,  and  means  to  take  it  up  the  lake,, 
and  present  it  to  George  on  the  Smiday  as  his  mother  wished  to  do.'  Mr.  Eddy  answered,, 
'George  feels  much  grieved  about  it,  and  thinks  he  will  never  get  it.'  I  replied,  'It  is  all. 
right ;  George  will  have  it,  that's  a  sure  thing.'  In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  while  at 
tea  with  our  friends,  Mr.  Hume  being  present,  the  spirit  Captam  Kidd  commenced  rapping 
and  spelled  out,  '  I  have  dropped  your  ring  in  the  lake. '  After  a  few  moments  he  entranced 
the  medium,  and  said,  '  For  once  m  my  life  I  have  made  a  d— d  blunder.  I  thought  to 
take  the  ring  to  show  it  to  my  Katy,  *  for  I  knew  that  she  would  be  pleased  to  see  it.  It 
was  my  intention  to  have  returned  and  replaced  it  in  the  casket  before  it  was  missed, 
that  you  might  have  presented  it  as  you  intended  to  the  noble  Geoi^e.  But  just  as  I 
was  leaving  the  west  pier,  my  battery  gave  out ;  the  ring  dropped  in  the  lake,  and  now  lies 
in  fifteen  feet  of  water,  and  at  about  the  same  distance  from  the  pier.  Now,  one  of  two 
things  I  will  do.  Either  the  ring  shall  be  returned  to-morrow,  or  its  equivalent,  one 
hundred  and  ten  dollars  in  gold,  which  ought  to  satisfy  any  reasonable  person.  I  do  not 
know  at  this  time  what  course  I  shall  pursue,  but  think  I  shall  get  the  ring.  I  am  gomg 
to  have  a  talk  with  my  scientific  friends  aboat  it,  and  then  I  will  direct  you  what  I  wish  you 

"  On  the  morning  of  the  zsth,  while  at  breakfast,  after  Mr.  Hume  had  been  helped,  a 
spirit  controlled  him,  compelled  him  to  refuse  a  mouthful  of  food,  and  informed  us  that  at 
one  o'clock  that  day  they  would  take  the  medium  down  to  the  end  of  the  pier,  and  dive  him 
off  into  the  lake,  with  the  intention  of  recovering  (he  lost  treasure.  They  furthermore  or- 
dered  that  Mrs,  Turner,  Dr.  Eaton,  and  myself,  diould  accompany  hun ;  that  we  should  pro- 
cure a  hook  and  line,  fix  it  in  the  manner  they  described,  and  put  it  in  the  medium's  pocket;, 
but  above  all,  that  we  should  say  nothing  to  him  about  what  they  proposed  to  do.  At  din- 
ner the  spirit  agdu  controlled  theniedium,  not  permitting  Mm  to  taste  a  morsel  of  food  that 
day.  At  one  o'clock,  the  hour  appointed,  Mrs.  Turner,  Dr.  Eaton,  the  medium,  and  my- 
self, went  down  to  the  pier  as  directed.  This  pier  not  being  planked  over,  I  borrowed  a. 
boat  and  rowed  Mrs.  Turner  out,  while  Dr.  Eaton  and  the  medium  walked  on  to  the  tim- 
bers to  the  end  of  the  pier.    The  medium,  being  under  strong  control  and  deeply  entranced. . 

■  "Katy,  Captain  Kutd'ssiuril  bride,  was  his  affianced  wife  on  earth,  and  was  the  first  toapproach  him  fron 
le  bright  sphercsiDlonhichha  pure  spirithadriacn.  Captafn  Kidd'g  earth-life  wag  such  as  to  render  his  cud 
ilionTii  the  spheres  a  truly  de^orable  one.  Although  his  plane,  as  he  represented  it,  was  stUI  fer  below  hers 
et  by  aid  of  her  br^ht  influence  he  is  slowly  progressiDe,  and  hopes  evcDtually  to  become  worthy  of  her  »m 

raming  in  the  region  of  Lake  Superior.     '  '  '        S.  W.  TusraEK."  ■ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

3oB  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

went  down  on  the  inside  of  tlie  pier,  out  of  sight  of  my  boat  with  Mrs.  Turner ;  there  ur- 
dressed,  and  aller  putting  on  a  pair  of  old  pantaloons,  went  up  to  the  lop  of  the  pier,  and 
stood  some  ten  minutes,  I  should  think,  apparently  gazing  off  into  the  like,  but  evidently  in 
a  stite  of  total  unconsciousness.  Meantime,  I  pushed  tlie  boat  round  to  the  front  part  of 
the  pier,  to  be  ready  for  whatever  might  arise.  Suddenly  the  medium  plunged  oif  into  the 
lalie,  liead'foremosC,  ■ 

"  After  being  in  the  wafer  about  half  a  mbute,  he  came  to  tlie  surface  at  least  forty  feet 
from  where  he  had  sunk,  with  both  hands  apparently  fall  of  sand  and  gravel,  and  struck  off 
into  the  lake.  After  swimming  about  for  a  considerable  time,  some  motions  were  made 
which  impressed  me  to  push  towards  him.  This  I  accordingly  did,  until  within  his  reach, 
when  he  seized  the  boat  and  cried,  in  the  well-known  tones  of  the  pirate  spirit,  Kidd ;  '  Cap 

tab,  we  came  d d  near  drowning  the  medium,  but  here  is  the  ling ; '  at  the  same  time 

he  handed  me  the  ring  into  the  boat.  I  then  wished  to  help  him  into  the  boat,  but  the  con- 
trolling spirit  refused,  saying,  '  We  will  take  care  of  the  medium.' 

"Atter  swimming  about  for  some  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  longer,  he  was  brought  out 
of  the  water,  and  although  Mr.  Hume's  health  at  that  time  was  very  poor,  and  he  was  ex- 
ceedingly weak,  he  manifested  on  this  occasion  neither  exhaustion  nor  fatigue. 

"  '  Such,  Friend  Partridge,  is  the  history  of  one  of  the  most  striking  manifestatmns  of 

Sirit-power  that  my  eyes  ever  beheld.     I  could  give  yon  the  history  of  many  more  through 
e  same  wonderful  medium,  but  as  I  have  gi^en  all  that  was  desired  by  our  spirit  friends, 
1  will  dose  by  requesting  that  you  make  such  use  of  this  communication  as  you  see  &t, 
"  Yours  truly, 

"Samuel  W.  Turneu. 

dtnessed  the  manifestations  recorded  above,  and  testify 
,  as  made  by  Mr.  S.  W.  Turner. 
"  [Signed]  Ti^.  G.  C.  Eaton." 

Many  manifestations  of  an  equally  marvellous  character  are  supplied  to 
the  author  on  the  faith  of  the  most  unimpeachable  testimony ;  our  space, 
however,  forbids  us  to  narrate  further  incidents  in  connection  widi  this  wonder- 
fully endowed  medium,  whose  exceptional  history  alone  would  fill  a  volume. 

The  following  description  of  Spiritualism  in  the  Western  Reserve  about  1857, 
some  six  years  subsequent  to  the  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox,  must  conclude  our 
notice  of  this  section  of  country.  The  communication  is  from  the  pen  of  a 
highly  esteemed  correspondent  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  : 

"  The  Western  Reserve,  composed  of  the  northeast  portion  of  this  State,  is  a  section  of 
.co^tty  where  Spiritualism  is  advocated  by  the  majority  of  the  inhabitants.  .Churches  which 
-have  heretofore  h^n  fiUed  to  overflowing  with  orthodox  worshippers  are  now  deserted. 
The  altars  where  priests  thundered  forth  the  terrca-s  of  '  heU  fire,  miknt  damnatmn,  and 
ithe  doctrme  of  '  an  angry  and  revengeful  God '  are  now  sUent.  In  the  small  vdl^e  of 
Mewton  Falls,  where  fierce  orthodoxy  absolutely  raged,  three  out  of  the  six  churches  are 
closed,  and  the  other  three  are  almost  deserted.  In  the  meantime  spiritual  meetings  are 
thronged  everywhere,  and  the  number  of  believers  far  exceeds  my  most  sangume  expectations. 
The  'Buckeyes'  have  not  only  recdved  the  plienomenal  truths  of  Spiritualism,  but  are 
fast  putting  its  glorious  teachings  into  practical  reality.  The  consequence  is  that  a  more 
liberal,  open-hearted,  and  harmonious  community  is  not  to  he  found  anywhere.  A  spirit  of 
charity  and  kindness  prevails  on  all  sides,  which  bids  fair  to  promise  the  establishment  of 
'peace  on  earth,  and  good  wiU  toward  mer  '  =—^  -'-  "-  '^■""  "'  s..ir.inal.=n,  nn  the 
Western  Reserve.     The  Spiritualists  held  a 

"Amongst  the  speakers  were  Warren  Chase,  Mrs.  H.  M.  F.  Brown,  Dr.  Underbill,  Mrs. 
Warner,  etc.  ,  ,  i_      v  .   n 

"  As  I  was  unable  to  attend  In  person,  I  cannot  give  j'ou  a  report  of  the  speeches,  but  all 
present  informed  me  the  meeting  went  off  most  harmoniously,  and  not  a  harsh  word  or  dis- 
cordant note  broke  the  tranquillity  of  that  vast  assemblage  of  earnest  seekers  tor  trutli. 
The  number  of  persons  .in  attendance  was  estimated  at  nearly  ten  thousand." 

From  diis  time  public  .Sabbath  meetings  have  been  regularly  sustained  in 
Cleveland. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  307 

Supported  by  many  of  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  city,  and  con- 
ducted by  ladies  and  gentlemen  whose  character  and  position  command  the 
respect  of  the  whole  communitj^,  few  cities  have  sustained  the  public  advocacy 
of  their  belief  with  greater  credit  to  the  cause,  than  the  Spiritualists  of  Cleve- 
land, Ohio. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

WESTEKN      SPIRITUALISM  —  CONTINUED  — 

KooNs's  AND  TiPPiE's  Spirit  Rooms. 

We  have  frequendy  referred  to  that  singular  phase  of  spirit-power  which 
manifests  itself  in  plapng  on  musical  instruments,  producing  sounds,  lights, 
extraordinary  movements  of  ponderable  bodies,  and  even  causing  human 
beings  to  float  in  die  air.  The  mediums  through  whom  this  class  of  phe- 
non  ena  ha  e  been  produced,  were  and  still  are,  very  numerous. 

The  n  an  fe  a  ons  which  first  attracted  attention  at  Hydesville  were  of 
this  1  a  a  e  and  besides  being  at  times  cstremely  powerful  and  varied, 
we  e  en  a  kable  for  their  spontaneity,  and  production  without  the  invoca- 
tory p  ocesses  of  he  circle. 

In  revie  ving  he  history  of  modem  Spiritualism,  there  will  be  found  a  class 
ofplenonena  e  en  more  striking  than  all  others,  namely,  those  which  seem 
to  req  e  he  ondition  of  darkness  for  their  successful  achievement. 
A  o  g  he  mediums  most  celebrated  for  the  production  of  the  latter  kind 
of  s  ual  n  an  fe  tations,  the  Davenport  Brothers  have  been  the  most  widely 
known,  but  the  init'  t  ry  p  m  nts  of  "the  spirits"  in  this  direction,  and 
by  far  the  most  pow  rf  1  1  h  ha  ever  been  performed  in  modern  times, 
owe  their  origin  to  th  di  m  h  p  of  Jonathan  Koons  and  his  family,  of 

whose  spirit  rooms     nd  th  rv  Is  enacted  therein,  we  now  propose  to 

give  a  consecutive  a  t 

In  the  treatment    f    1  bi     t  as  with  all  other  phases  of  the  move- 

ment, our  chief  emb  rr     m  nt        the  multitude  of  our  riches." 

Our  account  of  Koona  s  spmt  rooms  being  necessarily  limited,  we  only 
premise,  therefore,  that,  in  addition  to  such  descriptions  as  the  author  has  veri- 
fied by  personal  investigation,  no  otiier  witnesses  will  be  cited  than  those 
whose  well-known  and  unimpeachable  character  will  commend  their  state- 
ments to  respectful  acceptance. 

Millfield  Township,  Athens  County,  Ohio,  is  a  rough,  stony  district,  inter- 
sected by  pine  woods  and  ranges  of  barren  hills.  In  one  of  the  wildest  por- 
tions of  this  primitive  region,  sheltered  by  tall  forests,  and  swept  by  the 
tempestuous  blasts  that  moan  through  the  gorges  of  hills,  which  are  up- 
heaved on  every  side  as  if  the  whole  district  had  been  formed  by  die 
convulsive  throes  of  earthquakes,  stands  die  scattered  collection  of  farms 
and  pioneer  stores  which  is  called  "Dover  village."  In  1850  this  place 
was  only  accessible  by  a  rough  and  unfrequented  stage-road  of  seventy-two 
miles,  from  the  capital  city,  Columbus,     The  action  of  storm  and  tempest 

Hosted  by  Google 

3o8  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

marked  itself  on  the  blasted  pines,  uprooted  trees,  and  scattered  masses 
of  huge  boulders,  that  strewed  this  wild  road. 

These  bdlcations  of  ancient  flood  and  continuous  storm  become  more 
and  more  marked  as  the  traveller  reaches  the  scene  of  the  marvels  which 
have  procured  for  this  region  such  a  weird  celebrity. 

In  Millfield  Township,  more  properly  than  in  Dover  itself,  are  two  lonely 
farm-houses,  some  two  or  three  miles  apart,  once  respectively  owned  by  Mr. 
Jonathan  Koons  and  Mr.  John  Tippie. 

Both  these  persons  were  "well-to-do"  farmers,  maintaining  large  and  in- 
dustrious families  of  various  ages,  from  infants  in  a.rms  to  full-grown  boys 
and  girls. 

They  bore  the  character  of  good  neighbors,  honest  and  respectable  men, 
with  no  distinguishing  traits  to  point  them  out  as  subjects  of  fanaticism,  still 
less  as  persons  capable  of  practicing  any  species  of  deception  or  imposture. 
On  the  farm  of  each  might  have  been  seen,  some  twelve  or  fourteen  years 
ago,  a  rough,  unpretending-looking  log  house,  strongly  built,  but  wholly  undec- 
orated,  and  composed  of  a  single  room  about  fifteen  feet  by  twelve.  These 
rooms  stood  at  some  distance  from  the  family  dwellings,  and  being  placed  on 
open  ground,  unconnected  with  any  other  building  or  a  single  object  that 
could  afford  a  chance  of  concealment,  they  were  well  calculated  to  offer 
opportunities  for  the  searching  scrutiny  to  which  they  have  been  subjected 
The  buildings  were  erected  by  Messrs.  Koons  and  Tippie,  under  the  direction 
of  what  claimed  to  be  the  spirits  of  human  beings,  as  circle  rooms,  and  fitted 
up  with  instruments,  etc.,  from  written  plans  and  diagrams  drawn  out  by  the 
spirits  with  their  own  hands. 

In  each  room  was  a  "spirit  machine,"  which  consisted  of  a  somewhat  com- 
plex arrangement  of  zinc  and  copper,  serving  the  purpose,  as  the  spirits 
alleged,  of  collecting  and  focalizii^  the  magnetic  aura  used  in  the  manifesta- 
tions. This  novel  battery  was  placed  upon  a  long  wooden  table,  by  the  side 
of  several  instruments,  provided  according  to  direction,  and  consisting  of  a 
harp,  guitar,  violin,  accordion,  tambourine,  triangle,  several  bells,  a  tin  trum- 
pet, and  a  variety  of  toys. 

Two  drums  of  different  sizes  were  slung  up  on  a  high  frame,  and  a  round- 
table  was  so  placed  as  to  come  in  contact  with  the  square  wooden  one  sup- 
porting the  instruments. 

The  mediums  usually  sat  in  a  semicircle  about  the  round  table,  and  tlie  vis- 
itors were  accommodated,  to  the  number  of  twenty  or  more,  on  benches  at 
the  back  of  the  first  circle. 

As  both  rooms  were  built  on  the  same  plan,  and  the  manifestations  in  each 
were  conducted  in  a  similar  manner,  it  will  only  be  necessary  in  future  to 
speak  of  Koons's  spirit  room,  which  was  the  first  designed,  and  where  tiie  cir- 
cles were  originally  organized.  The  phenomena  consisted  of  performances  on 
the  various  instruments,  writing  and  drawing,  loud  knockings,  shaking  of  the 
log  houses,  beating  of  the  drums,  and  conversations  with  those  present,  all  of 
which  were  accomplished  by  the  spirits  diemselves. 

The  room  was  darkened,  orilluminated  only  by  spirit  lights,  which  at  times 
were  brilliant  enough  to  reveal  flitting  forms  and  hands  of  various  sizes,  which 
were  made  more  apparent  by  being  steeped  in  a  weak  solution  of  phosphorus, 
which  was  prepared  and  placed  on  the  table,  by  the  desire  of  the  spirits,  for 
their  use. 

In  this  way  these  hands  were  rendered  distinctly  visible,  and  could  be  seen 
writing  with  wonderfid  rapidity,  carrying  about  the  instruments,  and  beating 
the  drums  with  sux)erhuman  power.     By  written  and  oral  communications, 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM,  309 

given  direct  from  the  spirits,  a  vast  aniount  of  strangely  worded  intelligence 
was  rendered,  enough,  in.  fact,  to  fill  a  volume  of  several  hundred  pages.  The 
manifestations  were  invariably  produced  under  stringent  test  conditions,  that 
is,  the  mediums  were  so  placed  as  to  render  any  movement  on  their  part  lia- 
ble to  instant  detection,  besides  being  so  hemmed  in  on  every  side  diat  any 
change  of  their  positions,  much  less  any  violent  action,  had  they  desired  it, 
would  have  been  simply  impossible.  All  the  manipulations  of  the  instruments 
also,  were  conducted  at  such  a  distance  from  the  circle  as  to  render  the  agency 
of  any  human  being  impossible.  In  many  instances,  the  luminous  hands  of 
the  spirits  were  placed  in  those  of  the  visitors,  and  melted  away  whilst  they 
were  held.  These  hands  alone,  forming,  disappearing,  tapering  off  beyond 
the  wrist  into  empty  space,  moving  hither  and  thither  with  inconceivable 
rapidity,  and  becoming  subject  to  the  scrutiny  of  curious  visitors,  constituted 
a  phenomenon  which  proved  the  genuine  character  of  the  whole  transaction, 
and  presented  one  of  the  most  marvellous  problems  for  scientific  inquiry  that 
the  history  of  man  has  ever  offered.  Another  curious  feature  of  these  circles 
was  the  fact  that  though  immense  feats  of  strength  were  performed  in  total 
darkness,  always  excepting  the  occasional  illuminations  referred  to  above, 
none  of  the  closely-packed  audience  were  ever  struck  or  injured,  proving  that 
intelligence  guided  the  movements,  and  invisible  eyes  pierced  the  gloom 
impervious  to  mortal  sight.  It  is  also  noticeable  that  most  of  the  strangers 
who  visited  the  circles,  however  sedulously  they  might  conceal  their  names, 
were  addressed  orally  by  the  spirits,  sometimes  in  the  very  tones  of  their 
deceased  friends,  and  very  commonly  with  unmistakable  tests  of  their  iden- 
tity. In  this  way,  names  were  given  and  facts  revealed  which  convinced  hun- 
dreds of  visitors,  not  only  of  some  wonderful  occult  power  in  the  operations, 
but  still  more  to  their  satisfaction,  of  the  actual  presence  of  departed  friends, 
of  whose  existence  no  human  being  present  could  be  aware  but  themselves. 

Apart  from  these  incidental  tests,  the  circle  seemed  to  be  conducted  by 
a  band  of  spirits  who  represented  themselves  as  having  lived  in  cycles  of 
time  long  prior  to  the  date  assigned  by  biblical  theologians  for  the  advent 
of  man  on  this  planet 

These  spirits,  who  called  themselves  "  of  die  most  ancient  and  primal 
order  of  man,"  spoke  of  the  race  known  in  the  Bible  by  the  generic  title  of 
"  Adam "  as  mortals  of  a  comparatively  modem  date,  and  of  themselves  as 
by  no  means  the  first  of  earth's  inhabitants,  though  ante-dating  the  theological 
"  Adam  "  by  thousands  of  years. 

They  represented  their  leaders  as  "  most  ancient  angels,"  of  different  orders 
and  ranks,  and  claimed  to  be  governed  by  certain  individual  spirits,  who,  in  their 
written  communications,  styled  themselves  by  the  general  name  of  "  King," 
or  rulers  of  different  spiritual  tribes.  Sometimes  they  signed  themselves 
"King"  No.  I,  z,  3,  and  sometimes"  Servant  and  Scholar  of  God;"and  one 
spirit,  who  drew  charts,  diagrams,  etc.,  called  himself  "  Master,  of  Paints." 

"Oress"  was  the  name  of  an  ancient  angel  who  professed  to  give  instruc- 
tion to  the  circle.  * 

The  communications  referred  to  many  subordinate  spirits  who  aided  in  the 
manifestations,  and  played  the  instruments;  also,  to  the  souls  of  departed  hu- 
man beings  who  had  recently  entered  the  spirit-world,  and  bands  of  dark, 
undeveloped  spirits,  who,  with  their  several  leaders,  were  enabled,  through 
the  strong  corporiety  of  their  spiritual  bodies,  to  produce  powerful  feats  of 
strength  which  more  sublimated  natures  could  not  have  performed.  Fore- 
most of  the  leaders  who  came  under  the  latter  category,  was  a  spirit  who  sub- 

Hosled  by  Google 

3IO  BISTORV  OF  MOBERIT 

seqiiently  became  the  controller  of  the  Davenport  Brothers'  manifestations, 
and  though  he  retained  the  generic  title  of  "  King,"  he  claimed  to  be  one 
"  Morgan,"  a  famous  Welsh  pirate,  who,  while  living  on  earth,  had  been  knight- 
ed  by  Charles  II.  of  England,  and  appointed  Governor  of  Jamaica. 

Having  given  these  preliminary  details  of  the  scene  and  its  weird  actors, 
we  now  call  attention  to  the  circumstances  under  which  Jonathan  Koons, 
"the  solid  Ohio  farmer,"  became  a  participator  in  this  druma  of  unearthly 
marvel. 

From  a  letter  addressed  by  Mr.  Koons  to  a  religious  paper,  entitled  the 
Seraph's  Advocate,  published  at  Syracuse,  New  York,  we  extract  the  follow- 
ing items  of  autobiography : 

"  I  received  yours  of  March  S,  1S53,  and  witli  pleasure  respond  to  your  request  that  I 
would  inform  you  of  the  circumstances  under  which  we  receive  our  communications.  In 
the  first  place,  however,  I  would  state  that  I  had  become  an  advocate  of  atheistical  senti- 
ments, through  the  perversions  of  orthodox  teaching  under  which  I  had  been  educated,  and 
which  at  an  early  age  took  a  deep  hold  upon  my  mind.  Finding  myself,  as  I  grew  up  to 
reason  and  think  on  such  subjects,  sadly  disappointed  in  my  espeetations  of  blessing,  com- 
fort, and  instruction,  I  lirst  bcEian  to  question  the  mystical  doctrines  of  orthodoxy,  and  then 
rejected  them  as  incomprehensible  and  unreasonable,  when,  instead  of  attempting  to  con- 
vince me  of  my  errors,  my  teachers  heaped  curses  and  denunciations  upon  me,  until,  in  my 
agony  of  sphit,  I  was  often  constrained  to  cry  aloud,  '  Lord,  save  me  or  I  perish! '  Still  no 
help  seemed  to  come.  The  teachmgs  of  eternal  destruction,  election,  mfant  damnation, 
etc.,  seemed  to  me  to  grow  more  and  more  irreconcilable  with  the  idea  of  a  'Merciful 
Father,'  or  an  '  all-wise  and  just  Judge.'  At  length,  findmg  no  explanation  of  '  the  mys- 
'*■'"''"'        ■  '  '  ■  .......  taught  doctrine,  and  doubt- 

Mr.  Koons  goes  on  to  relate  how,  having  heard  that  strange  things  were 
said  to  be  wrought  by  spirits  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and  at  last  in 
his  own  vicinity,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1853,  he  made  a  visit  to  a 
neighboring  f      ly  wh        '   w        p       d     h  se  wonders  could  be 

witnessed.     M  h    f  1        f   1    fam  ly   hr     gh  whom  Mr.  Koons  coiri- 

menced  his  gti         hddgl  has       strong  physical  and 

highly  develop  d       d  d  thr     gh  1       h    b  1    Id  phenomena  which  his 

plain  comnio  d    h       d         11  d  hin   were  entirely  out  of 

the  young  girl    p  p    d 

From  this  ph  d  tiyth  gfhis  awakened  curi- 

osity through        ry     p     rtu    ty    f  wh    1    h  Id      ail  himself.     But  the 

mystery  thick      d  d  h  d  1  rony  only  the  more 

surely  proved  th       1      n        1    h  d  h      d  w       not  the  work  of  hu- 

man agency.     Alghh  1         If       d  hwhe  could  pursue  his 

investigations       ml  d  n  h  T     his  inquhy  he  was  re- 

peatedly assur  d  y         11  d     h      m  d  imi-power  existed  in 

every  membe     f  h  fam  1        hi  ai       g     th  m  was  gifted  beyond 

the  ordinary  lot  of  mortals.  On  naming  o\ei  the  various  members  of  his 
household  to  discover  who  was  this  highly  favored  individual,  the  spirits  pro- 
claimed it  to  be  himself,  assuring  him  that  he,  Jonathan  Koons,  was  at  that 
time,  in  his  own  person,  "  the  most  powerful  mediiun  on  earth." 

The  worthy  fanner  at  first  laughed  heartily  at  the  idea  of  there  being  any 
thing  " of  a  spirtual  nature "  about  him;  but  when  this  statement  was  re- 
peated through  various  sources,  and  instmctions  for  the  development  of  his 
unknown  powers  were  given  which  seemed  too  simple  to  shock  his  sense  of 
dignity  or  compromise  his  manhood,  he  resolved  to  try  them  and  "  see  what 
would  come  of  it." 

Mr.  Koons  proceeds  with  his  narrative  as  follows  : 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  31 1 

"  It  was  not  long  ifter  my  return  home,  tliat  I  found  myself  visited  with  the  peculiar 
influence,  besides  which  my  entice  fEimily  became  developed  with  these  strange  spiritual 
gifts,  from  the  child  of  ^vcn  months  to.  my  oldest  son,  of  eigliteen  years,  being  nine  in 
uumber  besides  myself  and  wife,  making  eleven  mediums  in  my  own  family." 

Mr.  Koons  justly  congratulated  himself  on  tlie  "grand  opportunities" 
which  such  a  home  circle  afforded  him  of  private  investigation.  It  would 
appear  that  the  wliole  family  were  so  deUghted  with  these  novel  and  interest- 
ing results  that  they  not  only  sat  constantly  for  their  own  edification,  but 
cheerfully  admitted  all  visitors  whom  the  reports  of  their  new  acquirements 
attracted  to  theix  family  circle.  And  here  let  it  be  stated,  once  for  all,  that 
Messrs.  Koons  and  Tippie  never  received  any  compensation  for  their  vast 
expenditure  of  time,  service,  and  means,  not  even  accepting  of  remuneration 
for  the  abundant  hospitality  with  which  they  entertained  the  crowds  who 
flocked  to  witness  their  wonderful  demonstrations.  In  tlie  erection  of  their 
rooms,  the  purchase  of  instruments,  together  with  their  wear  and  tear,  and 
tbe  immense  outlay  which  an  entertainment  to  crowds  of  visitors  entailed 
upon  them,  all  was  dieerfully  given  without  the  charge  of  a  single  dollar, 
hence,  the  chief  object  which  is  supposed  to  influence  humanity  in  the  eyes 
of  a  selfish  community,  namely,  the  love  of  gain,  was  utterly  wanting  to  in- 
duce trickery  or  deception,  even  had  it  been  possible.  It  might,  however, 
with  still  more  propriety,  be  questioned,  what  these  simple  Ohio  farmers  had  to 
lose,  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  peace  of  their  once  quiet  homes  was 
destroyed,  their  domestic  privacy  invaded,  their  property  consumed,  their 
good  names  loaded  with  insult,  and  the  most  shameful  and  wanton  persecu- 
tions directed  against  them,  and  all  for  their  claim  of  a  spiritual  source  for 
manifestations  which  it  was  physically  impossible  that  they  could  have  origi- 
nated themselves. 

Mr.  Koons  continues  thus  : 

"  We  had  the  greatest  evidences,  and  strongest  demonstrations  in  the  whole  country; 
yet,  as  far  as  it  concerned  myself,  it  might  have  been  '  electricity,  biology,  Satan, '  or 
what  not ;  certain  it  is,  to  my  unquiet  mind  I  could  not  deem  it  the  work  of  disembodied 
spirits. 

"  I  was  disconifiled  in  all  my  oivn  investigations,  and  utterly  unreconciled  to  the  spiritual 

"  I  knew  how  wonderful  it  all  was,  how  unaccountable  to  myself,  and  even  how  beautiful, 
yet  whilst  my  family  and  friends  were  feasting  in  the  enjoyment  of  angelic  correspondence, 
I  was  groaning  in  doubt  and  uncertainty.  At  last,  through  the  mediumship  of  my  eldest 
son,  it  was  promised  that  if  I  would  build  a  room  and  construct  a  table  according  to  a  plan 
that  the  spirits  laid  down  for  me,  I  should  have  all  the  evidence  I  required,  besides  bringing 
conviction  of  the  soul's  immortality  to  hundreds  of  other  darkened  minds. 

"  Delermiued  to  fathom  the  mystery  to  the  utmost  extent  I  could,  I  at  last  set  to  work,, 
bnilt  the  room,  constructed  the  spirit  table,  according  to  exact  direction,  and  then  placed  pen- 
cil and  papers  upon  it.  This  done,  I  carefully  closed,  locked,  sealed,  and  guarded  that  room, 
so  that  no  human  being  could  have  access  to  it  but  myself. 

"  At  the  end  of  a  certain  specified  time,  I  nnclosed  it,  entered,  and  found  the  blank  sheets 
of  paper  I  had  lel^,  covered  with  written  communications  addressed  to  myself,  and  contain- 
ing wise  admonitions,  gentle  rebukes  of  my  scepticism,  encouraging  promises,  and  many  in- 
ternal  evidences  of  their  having  been  written  by  high  intelligences,  and  wise,  benehcent  spirit 

For  several  succeeding  weeks  I  continued  my  experiments,  until  I  had  piles  of  communi- 
cations, produced  in  the  alence  and  mystery  of  that  spirit  room,  as  I  can  solemnly  testify, 
without  the  least  possibility  of  human  agency.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  then,  tliat  in 
process  of  time  my  inveterate  scepticism  gave  way,  and  my  doubts  melted  into  the  assured 
conviction  that  I  was  in  the  hands  of  wise,  high,  and  powerful  spirits.  At  length  the  invisi- 
bles wrote  out  a  bill  tor  several  instruments  of  muac  and  other  articles,  all  of  which  I  pro- 
cured and  disposed  of  as  directed.     Amongst  other  things,  they  asked  for  pistols,  which  th:y 

Hosiedb,  Google 

HISTOR  V  OF  MODERN 

■r  the  heads  of  the  audience,  hitting  giuen 

After  Mr.  Koons  had  acceded  to  the  request  of  the  spirits  to  darken  the 
room  for  strong  physical  manifestations,  both  the  visitors  and  members  of  his 
own  family  were  airanged  by  himself  and  his  neighbors  with  the  most  jealous 
care,  so  as  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  any  movement  taking  place  without 
instant  detection.  After  a  time  the  spirits  began  to  converse  orally  tliroueh 
toe  trumpets,  sing,  pray,  lecture,  draw  charts  of  celestial  scenery,  diagrams  of 
the  spheres,  and  write  long  communications  with  their  own  hands  in  an  in- 
credibly short  space  of  time. 

Many  of  the  communications  thus  written  or  spoken,  were  of  a  highly 
philosophical  character.  In  the  former  method,  the  spirits  themselves  phrased 
the  writings,  but  in  the  latter,  their  family  or  their  visitors  were  obliged  to  take 
down  the  words  from  memory,  and  thus  it  happens  that  the  phraseology  is  far 
more  characteristic  of  the  Ohio  scribes  than  of  their  spiritual  authore  Un- 
fortunately for  the  sarisfaction  of  die  curious  reader,  spirit  writings  were  in 
such  request,  and  the  generous  mediums  were  so  willing  to  gratify  the  in- 
satiate demands  of  their  visitors,  that  little  writing  of  any  philosophical  in- 
terest can  now  be  procured.  Beyond  a  communication  to  be  hereafter  quoted, 
therefore,  we  are  cheifly  dependent  for  specimens  of  this  nature  on  the  im- 
perfect transcnptions  of  a  human  amanuensis.  In  some  long  but  interesting 
communications,  written  in  the  spirit-room  without  human  agency,  it  is  said 
that  spirits,  in  theff  communion  with  eardi,  manifest  through  two  primitive  ele- 
ments ;  namely,  first,  an  electro-magnetic  element  of  which  the  spiritual 
body  IS  composed;  next,  a  physical  aura,  which  emanates  from  the  medium, 
or  can  be  collected  from  material  substances,  analogous,  it  is  supposed,  to 
the  element  of  "  vitality  "  described  in  the  preceding  chapter. 

From  the  combination  of  these  two,  namely,  the  emanations  of  the  spirit  and 
the  medium,  a  thud  or  composite  is  fomied,  which  is  affected  by  the  atmos- 
phere and  human  emanations.  From  the  preponderance  of  the  elcctro-mag- 
netic  or  spiritual  element,  the  laws  of  cohesion  and  gravitation  can  be  over- 
come, and  through  this  spirits  are  enabled  to  dissolve  and  recompose  substances 
with  great  rapidity,  heave  up  and  carry  material  bodies  through  the  air  and 
cause  them  to  float  or  sink  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  die  battery  fornied 
It  IS  this  element  which  enables  some  spirits  highly  charged  with  it,  to  come 
into  contact  with  matter,  and  thus  to  use  pencils,  pens,  etc.,  in  wriring,  drawing, 
and  playing  on  musical  instruments.  By  aid  of  die  physical  or  human  aura  — 
animal  magnetism— they  cause  concussions,  raps,  shaking  of  furniture  and 
heavy  ponderable  bodies  ;  by  this  also  they  produce  spirit  light,  gathering  it  up 
so  as  to  form  an  envelope  of  matter  around  their  own  hands,  condense  sound 
so  as  to  be  heard  singing  and  speaking,  and  strike  upon  die  heavier  instru- 
ments. "  The  composite  element  is  used  more  or  less  in  all  modes " 
It  was  chiefly  through  the  prevalence  of  physical  aura  in  the  latter  that  they 
-were  enabled  to  speak  through  the  tnimpets,  hence,  for  this  feat  they  required 
the  presence  and  peculiar  magnetism  of  Mr.  Koons's  eldest  son,  dirough 
whom  spirit  voices  could  be  heard  in  any  place  besides  the  circle  at  his 
father's  house,  also,  the  spirits,  through  this  medium,  could,  they  alleged,  per- 
form on  a  fiill  band  of  instruments  anywhere. 

Mr.  Koons's  autobiographical  notices  conclude  with  a  description  of  thci-e- 
ligious  philosophy  enunciated  by  the  spirits  of  his  circles,  of  which  we  off:;r 
the  following  summary ; 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  3 13 

"  They  teach,  lie  says,  that  God  is  love,  and  has  placed  all  men  under  the  law  of  eter- 
nal prc^ression,  by  which  every  living  soul  can  become  a  parlidpaot  of  his  divine  glory, 
when  (hey  will  to  do  so,  through  constant  efforts  to  live  a  life  of  use,  good,  and  purity. 
Also,  that  death,  which  dissolves  the  body,  does  not  change  the  soul,  which  is  the  real  man  ; 
hence  it  behooves  man  to  purify  and  cleanse  his  soul  here  upon  earth,  lest  he  should  have 
to  commence  his  progress,  instead  of  contmuing  it,  hereafter.  Also,  they  teach  that  we 
have  spbitual  bodies  witlim  oar  natural  or  material  forms.  Tliat  these  carry  the  ramd  within 
them,  aiid  at  death  temam  mtact,  separating  from  the  earthly  body,  though  retaining  its 
form,  and  adhering  to  the  spirit  of  whose  tendencies  and  disposition  it  exhibits  the  actuality. 
This  spiritual  body,  as  well  as  the  interior  mmd,  are  alike  the  subjects  of  eternal  progres- 
sion,  jret  at  the  moment  of  earthly  dissolution,  it  exhibits  ail  our  vices  or  virtues,  wi^out 
palliation  or  concealment,  and  is  gross  or  fine,  dense  or  sublimated,  bright  as  mid-day  sun 
ijcams  or  dark  as  Erebus,  in  exact  correspondence  with  our  real  mora!  state.  Again, 
they  declare  that  'there  is  an  electric  elemept,  divided  through  space  by  another  element, 
which  bears  no  affinity  to  it ;  that  spirits,  at  least  such  as  communicate  with  earth,  cannot 
themselves  penetrate  this  interior  element ;  in  fact,  to  theh  apprehension,  no  one  in  the 
universe  can  do  so,  save  only  God;  and  this  mysterious  innermost,  withall  its  hidden  and 
ImpenetEable  glories,  is  called  by  spirits,  thesubter  fluid.'  They  declare  'that  the 'electric 
element  forms  the  various  paths  in  which  planets  and  all  other  known  bodies  in  space  travel 
and  move  in  their  respective  orbits,  but  tMt  nothing  visible  to  spirits,  or  comprehensible  to 
them  as  of  an  organic  nature,  can  penetrate  the  realms  of  the  '  subter  fluid,'  yet  it  divides 
and  permeates  all  space,  and  seems  to  hold  m  control  the  mfinite  realms  of  the  electric  ele- 
ment. Rays  of  light,'  however,  they  say,  'can  and  do  penetrate  'the  subter  fluid,'  as 
they  appear  to  issue  from  and  return  to  it  mcessantly.'  Also,  '  There  is  a  grand  central 
territory  in  the  universe,  known  to  exist  by  all  spirits,  and  in  all  worlds.  It  embraces 
illmitabie  though  unknown  realms;  yet  its  position  as  a  vast  central  point  is  defined,  froM 
the  fact  that  from  thence,  and  to  thence,  seem  to  tend  all  the  illimitable  lines  of  attraction, 
gravitation,  and  force,  which  connect  terrestrial  bodies,  and  link  together  firmaments 
teeming  with  lives  and  systems.  AE  the  innumerable  firmaments,  spangled  with  aninfinitude 
of  solar  and  astral  systems,  seem  to  revolve  around,  and  derive  attractive  and  living  forces 
from  this  unknown  centre.  Sometimes  it  is  called  '  the  Celestial  Realm. '  Again  '  The  Cen- 
tral Sun,'  'Heaven,'  'God,*  'The  Infinite  Realm,'  '  The  Eternal  Life  !'  Whole  firma- 
ments thickly  sown  with  suns  and  revolving  satelhtes,  appear  but  as  specks  of  light  m 
comparison  with  the  inconceivable  vastness  of  this  celestial  laboratory,  invisible  and 
Ixjundless  as  it  is,  from  which  flows  out,  through  all  universes,  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal 
forces  of  bemg." 

Such  are  some  of  the  teachings  which,  from  time  to  time,  were  either  written 
by  the  spirits  or  spoken  orally  through  fhe  trumpets.  "What  we  had  written 
down  during  fhe  day,"  says  Mr.  Koons,  "was  often  corrected  by  the  spirits 
through  the  trumpets,  but  the  deep  and  sublime  impress  they  made  upon  our 
minds  in  their  reception,  and  the  terrible  power  of  the  tones  in  which  they 
were  sometimes  given,  no  language  of  mortals  can  describe." 

We  are  now  m  possession  of  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Communications  from 
Angels,"  written  with  fiieirown  hands;  also,  oral  communications  spoken  by 
angels,  and  written  down  as  they  were  delivered  in  presence  of  many  wit- 
nesses, etc.  This  pamphlet  is  edited  by  Dr.  J.  Everett,  a,  gentleman  residing 
in  Athens  County,  Ohio,  who  having  investigated  the  phenomena  exhibited  at 
Koons's  room  most  thoroughly,  became  so  deeply  interested  in  what  he  wit- 
nessed that  he  spent  much  time  and  means  in  collecting  the  communications 
together  and  printing  them  in  pamphlet  form.  With  these,  Dr.  Everett  fur- 
nishes a  number  of  affidavits  from  individuals  who  had  attended  the  circles, 
some  chapters  on  the  philosophy  of  spirit  existence  and  communion,  and  a 
chart  of  the  spheres,  drawn  through  the  hand  of  Nahum  Koons  in  the  trance 
state,  and  explained  by  the  spirits  controlling  him. 

From  some  of  these  sources  we  shall  hereafter  make  a  few  extracts ;  but  by 
way  of  presenting  a  detailed  account  of  the  phenomena  ordinarily  produced 
at  the  public  cirdes,  we  shall  now  introduce  a  few  notices  furnished  by  such 
correspondents  as  will  afford  authentic  and  wholly  reliable  testimony  to  what 
they  witnessed. 

Hosted  by  Google 

3M 

HISTORY  OP  MODERN 

The  first  statement  we  shall  give  is  made  by  the  well  known  and  highly 
respected  head  of  the  firm  of  Stephen  Dudley  &  Sons,  Buffalo,  New  York. 
Amore  honorable  and  indisputable  witness  than  the  venerable  Stephen  Dud- 
ley we  could  not  cite;  we  shall  therefore  quote  his  letter  in  full,  as  it  was 
originally  printed  in  the  Age  of  Progress  : 

"Buffalo,  Decimber  15,  1S54, 
"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Age  of  Fmgress: 

"  Friend  Albro,— Having  made  the  visit  to  Koona's  spirit  room  which  I  have  long  had 
in  contemplation  and  arrived  safely  at  home,  I  now  proceed  to  redeem  my  promise  to  you, 
namely,  to  pve  you  a  faithful  account  of  what  I  there  witnessed  with  my  eyes,  ears,  and 
touch.  I  am  aware  that  my  power  is  wholly  inadequate  to  the  task,  nor  do  I  think  justice 
can  be  done  to  the  subject  by  any  one.  I  shall  therefore  content  myself  with  teUing  you 
the  plain  truth,  and  prominent  lacts,  all  the  marvellous  detdls  of  which  require  too  much 
lailguage  for  me  to  write  or  you  to  puUish. 

Our  company  conasted  of  four  persons,  namely,  Mr.  C— ,  of  New  York  ;  two  ladies, 
and  myself.  We  left  Buffalo  by  railroad  on  Monday  morning,  and  arnved  at  Koons  s  spirit 
room  on  the  following  Wednesday,  November  39.  ...  .  The  road  from  Columbus 
to  the  spirit  room  is  seventy-two  miles  of  very  unpleasant  stage-road.  Prior  to  our  arrival, 
arrangements  had  been  made  for  a  public  circle  (hat  evening,  hence  there  was  quite  a  crowd, 
composed  principally  of  near  neighbors,  the  chief  part  of  whom  were  sceptics.  We,  be- 
ing strangers,  were  by  the  politeness  of  Mr.  Koons,  provided  with  comfortable  seats  m  an 
eligiUe  portion.  .  ,   , 

"It  was  easy  to  see  from  the  first,  that  it  was  a  very  mhannonious  party ;  nevertheless, 
the  sphits  performed  all  they  promised  to  do.  After  we  were  seated,  Mr.  Koons  gave  a 
short  but  very  appropiiate  address,  at  the  condu^on  of  which  the  spmts  announced  then' 
presence  by  a  tremendous  blow  on  the  bass  drum.  It  sounded  like  the  discharge  of  a  can- 
non, and  was  succeeded  by  noises  equally  startling,  occasioned  by  what  was  called  'the 

charring'  of  the  electrical  apparatus  by  the  spirits.  ^  

"In  this  process,  the  large  table  and  the  log  house  itself  shook  like  a  tree  m  a  gale  ol 

"  A  reveille  was  then  beaten  by  the  sphits  on  the  tenor  and  bass  drums  with  tremendous 
power  and  ahnost  distracting  effect.  Mr.  Koons  then  took  up  one  of  two  violins  that  were 
lyins;  on  the  table  before  us,  and  drew  Ms  bow  across  it.  Immediately  the  other  wassound- 
ed,  and  presently  the  full  band  of  aU  the  instruments,  of  which  there  must  have  been  qmte 
a  dozen,  joined  in,  keeping  admirable  time,  tune,  and  concert, 

"  After  the  instrument^  performance,  Mr.  Koons  asked  for  a  vocal  accompaniment  irom 
the  spirits,  which  they  at  once  compUed  with,  and  I  think  if  anything  cau  give  an  idea  of 
heaven  upon  earth,  it  must  be  the  delightful  maac  made  by  that  angehc  chou-. 

"All  this  tune  iere  was  a  most  extraordinary  exhibition  of  spmtual  pyrotechnics,  seem- 
inK  to  consist  of  luminous  bodies  flying  about  with  the  swiftness  of  insects,  yet  mo\-ing  in 
-    orferly  time  to  the  muac.     In  shape  they  resembled  different -aied  human  hands. 

"  The  next  exhibition  was  that  of  a  spirit  hand,  as  perfect  as  any  hand  of  flesh  ^d  blood. 
It  moved  about  amongst  us,  dropping  peices  of  sandpaper  steeped  m  phosphorus,  prepared 
hv  Mr.  Koons  according  to  du'ection  of  the  spirits.  ..... 

"  The  obiect  of  these  motions  seemed  to  be  for  us  to  pick  up  these  pieces,  so  that  the 
hand  might  come,  and  by  theu-  light,  be  seen  to  take  them  from  us.  ^  This  was  repeatedly 
done  In  taking  the  piece  from  me,  this  spirit  hand  seemed  to  linger  in  contact  with  mine, 
in  order  that  I  might  feel  and  examine  it.  It  differed  nothing  from  a  human  hand,  save  m 
its  excessive  coldness.  After  some  conversation  with  the  spirits,  which  was  conducted  in  a 
human  voice  through  a  trumpet,  they  bade  us  '  good-night,'  and  thus  ended  the  public  circle. 
About  two  hours  after  its  d&missal,  young  Mr.  Koons,  the  chief  medium,  and  myself,  went 
into  the  spirit  room  alone,  to  see  if  we  could  learn  what  would  be  the  order  of  the  proceed- 
ings for  the  next  evening.  The  medium  put  the  trumpet  on  the  table,  when  it  was  instanlly 
elevated  about  the  heigth  of  a  man's  head,  and  gave  us  '  good-evenmg,  to  which  we  res- 

"I  then  commenced  a  conversation  with  (hem,  asking  if  my  wife  and  other  dear  depart- 
ed relatives  were  present.  They  said  they  were,  and  some  very  satisfactory  evidences  ensued 
of  their  presence.  I  told  them  we  had  come  a  long  distance  to  see  them,  and  were  desirous 
of  witnessing  some  of  the  more  wonderful  manifestations  of  their  power,  of  which  we  had 
heard  so  much.     They  repUed  that  they  knew  how  far  we  had  come,  and  if  all  things  were 

favorable,  we  should  be  gratified  before  our  departure.      U ' '"■-*  "•■"'  "'■ 

by  '  things  bemg  favorable,'  the  leading  spirit  replied  that 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  31S 

and  not  such  a  one  as  we  had  previously  that  evening.'     After  some  further  conversiltlon, 
we  were  dismissed  with  'good-night.' 

"The  next  evening,  at  seven  o'clock,  Mr.  Koons,  hUiwife,  son,  our  party  of  foiu-,  and 
two  gentlemen,  investigators  —  nine  in  all — cepaiied  to  the  spirit  room. 

"All  being  seated  and  quiet,  tiie  sii^le  startling  concussion  on  the  driun  announced  that 
the  spirits  were  ready  to  commence  the  performance  of  the  evening.  Again  the  table  waa 
dialled,  with  the  convulave  rattUngs  and  tremblings  before  described.  The  tremendous 
Teveille  was  beaten,  Mr.  Koons  commenced  playing  on  the  violin,  joined  not  only  by  the 
whole  band  of  instruments,  but  also  with  a  large  lufoionicon  which  stood  In  the  room,  aoA 
on  this  occaaon  was  played  on,  in  a  most  masterly  maimer.  Again  they  were  ashed  for  a 
vocal  entertainment,  which  was  given  by  several  voices  in  such  delicious  strains,  and  in  such 
exquiate  harmony,  that  I  most  be  permitted  to  say,  if  it  was  done  by  the  '  Devil,'  then  is 
that  worthy  fit  to  lead  a  choir  of  angels.  At  an  interval  m  the  muac,  I  asked  Mr.  Koons 
if  he  would  request  the  spirits  to  write  foe  us.  Without  hesitation  or  delay,  they  supplied 
themselves  with  the  paper  and  pencils  which  we  liad  taken  in  and  laid  on  the  table.  And 
here  let  me  state  that  I  had  brought  with  me  printing  paper,  unsized  and  unruled,  hence, 
unlike  any  that  could  be  procured  in  that  part  of  the  country,  or  indeed,  anywhere  but  from 
a  priming  office ;  also,  I  brought  with  me,  purposely,  one  of  Flesheim's  Buffalo  pencils, 
Tliey  placed  the  paper  on  which  they  were  going  to  write  immediately  before  me.  Then, 
wliat  appeared  to  be  a  human  hand  holding  a  pencil  was  plainly  visible  over  the  paper,  and 
immediately  commenced  writing  with  a  rapidity  that  no  mortal  hand  can  equal  or  come  near 
to.  The  paper,  the  hand,  and  the  pencil,  were  so  near  to  us,  and  so  plainly  viiihle  by  the 
luminosity  of  the  hand,  that  we  could  all  three  have  touched  them,  and  we  were  able  to  in- 
spect them  at  our  leisure  with  the  most  perfect  ease.  My  next  neighbor  was  so  intent  upon 
the  examination  that  he  got  his  head  immediately  over  the  pencil,  whereupon  the  hand 
made  a  sudden  move  upwards  and  hit  his  nose  vidth  the  pendl,  which  gave  him  such  a  start 
that  he  drew  his  head  back  with  considerable  speed.  When  any  one  expressed  a  wish  to  see 
the  hand  move  more  pMnly,  as  some  did,  the  writing  would  cease,  and  the  hand  was  dis- 
played, extended,  opened,  and  shut,  as  if  to  show  the  flexibility  of  the  joints  and  the  kindly 
compliant  disposition  of  its  owner.  One  of  the  ladies,  who  was  not  so  near  as  we  were,  ex- 
pressed a  wish  that  she  had  been  more  eligibly  sealed  Immediately  the  hand  and  paper 
moved  to  the  comer  of  the  table  nearest  to  her,  wrote  there  a  few  lines,  and  then  returned 
to  its  former  position. 

"  When  it  had  written  both  sides  of  the  sheet  full,  it  handed  the  pencil  to  roe,  which 
proved  to  be  the  same  Buffalo  pencil  which  I  had  myself  placed  on  the  table.  The  spirit 
hand  then  folded  the  paper,  and  placed  it  in  mine      ■        ■    -■        ■  ■  ■'    ■ 

structed  what  to  do  with  it.     On  receiving  the  pap 
had  placed  with  the  penciL 

"  After  this  the  hand  was  presented  to  each  01 
wlio  was  too  timid  to  receive  it.  As  before,  it  v 
parently,  as  a  human  hand. 

"After  a  few  words  of  conversation  through  the  trumpet,  they  dismissed  us  with  the  usual 
'good-night.' 

"  In  the  course  of  the  day,  the  spirit  of  my  wife,  who  had  been  in  the  spheres  about  one 
year,  requested  me  to  meet  her  in  the  spirit  room  at  the  close  of  the  circle,  with  no  one  pres- 
ent but  the  medium.  Of  course  I  gladly  attended  the  appointment,  and  she  tried  to  con- 
verse with  me  through  the  trumpet,  hut  failed.  Upon  this,  the  presiding  spirit,  who  had 
greeted  us  on  our  entrance  with  a  cordial  salutation,  apologized  for  her  failure,  and  offered 
to  speak  for  her  ;  and  this  he  did,  giving  her  language,  and  conveying  Co  me  unmistakable 
evidence  of  her  presence.  In  this  way  we  conversed  for  some  fifteen  minutes,  affording  me  a 
proof  of  spirit  existence  and  intercourse,  and  withal  a  gratification,  which  human  language 
would  fail  to  describe.  It  was  at  this  interview  that  I  received  instructions  from  the  presid- 
ing spirit  to  publish  in  the  Buffalo  Age  0/  Progress,  the  communication  written  for  me  by 
the  spirit  hand.  In  obedience  to  these  directions,  i  send  you  the  following,  received  under 
the  circumstances  which  I  have  above,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  faithfully  described : 

"THE   COMMUNICATION. 

" '  To  the  friends  from  Buffalo  and  New  Vori  : 

"  '  We  are  glad  to  meet  you  here,  yet  we  hope  your  visit  has  not  been  induced  bya  desire 
to  gratify  the  idle  curiosity  which  sends  hither  so  many,  upon  whom  we  have  bestowed  our 
presence  and  manifestations  in  this  room.  We  have  labored  here  some  considerable  time 
now,  and  trust  we  have  induced  more  tangible  and  philosophical  views  of  Spiritualism  than 
.those  of  the  M.D.s  and  D.D.s  of  the  world,  especially  those  of  Buffalo,  whose  treatment 

Hosiedb,  Google 

3i6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

of  the  subject  has  not  contributed  much  to  the  enlightenment  or  elevation  ofmaiiliinil.  Out 
object  is  to  show  tlie  infidel,  and  prove  to  the  sceptic,  that  there  is  a  brighter  state  of  exist- 
ence beyond  the  shadow  of  the  grave — a  higher  condition  of  being  than  that  of  earth. 
Mortals  have  for  ^es  been  groping  their  ■way  through  doubts,  fears,  and  despondencies, 
with  r^ard  to  the  future.  Yet  in  all  their  researches,  prompted  by  an  earnest  desire  to 
know  the  truth  coneeming;  a  future  state  of  existence,  how  little  <Jo  they  realize  of  its 
actual  nature,  even  when  they  strive  to  believe  in  the  mystical  teachings  of  theology  ! 

"  'Our  labors  in  this  place  are  intended  to  establish  that  knowledge,  and  by  presenting 
some  views  of  man's  hereafter  which  he  can  comprehend,  prepare  him  practically  for  enter- 
ing upon  its  actual  verities.  Ves,  friends,  we  know  that  as  soon  as  man's  interior  percep- 
tions are  quicliened  into  higher  action  by  the  certiunty  of  another  life,  and  correct  views  of 
the  preparatory  duties  demanded  of  him  in  this,  his  motives  lo  action  will  be  stimulated  by 
that  knowledge,  and  the  icy  chains  of  mental  slavery  will  he  broken,  and  superstitious  doubt 
and  fear  will  never  againusmp  their  sway  over  the  world.  Were  it  not  for  the  ties  of  love  and 
kindred  which  still  bind  us  lo  earth,  be  assured  we  should  not  labor  in  this  way,  or  employ 
oiuselves  in  such  manifestations.  How  much  longer  our  efforts  here  may  continue,  must 
depend  much  upon  the  patience,  perseverance,  and  fidelity,  of  our  mediums,  also  upon  the 
conduct  of  those  who  Efflrtidpate  in  the  light  and  knowledge  which  is  shed  abroad  through 
their  instrumentality.  We  are  happy  in  this  opportunity  of  congratulating  our  servant  C, 
for  Ms  fervent  zeal  and  ready  devotion  to  our  service,  and  for  yielding  up  his  personal  efforts 
in  aid  of  our  mission  to  earth.  We  desire  to  say  to  him,  as  to  our  faithful  servant  Koons 
and  family :  '  Be  of  good  cheer,  and  the  rewards  of  your  labor  and  forbearance  will  meet  and 
greet  you  in  your  bright  abodes  hereafter,  even  if  long  delayed,  or  altogether  withheld  from 
yoo,  in  divme  wisdom  and  necessity,  here.'  Let  the  same  message  be  accepted  by  all  who 
cast  in  their  mites  to  the  treasury  of  light,  knowledge,  and  human  welfare. 

"  'Dictated  by  the  spirit  band  of  this  room.' 

"In  addition  to  the  above  communication,  the  preading  spirit  gave  me  an  oral  and  per- 
sonal message  to  the  editor  of  the  Age  of  Progress,  informing  me  tl:^t  he  was  well  ac- 
quainted [spiritually]  with  him.  In  conclusion,  I  will  state  that  any  one  who  is  anxious 
to  see  the  original  manuscript  which  vras  written  by  the  spirit  hand  can  be  gratified  by 
calling  on  me. 

"  Stephe.v   Dudley." 

Although  the  phenomena  produced  at  Koons's  spirit  room  varied  chiefly 
in  intensity,  rather  than  in  form  and  order,  the  following  account  of  another 
visit  there  will  be  perused  with  interest,  as  it  includes  some  account  of  the 
locality  and  family  arrangements  where  the  wonders  were  enacted.  The 
names  of  the  witnesses  also,  as  signed  in  attestation  of  the  statement,  will  be 
recognized  by  any  one  well  acquainted  in  Cleveland,  as  those  of  some  of  its 
most  respectable  and  trustworthy  citizens. 

S  SPIRIT  ROOM.— AGE  OF  PKOGRESS, 
i3s4. 

"  The  following  is  a  report,  made  to  the  Cleveland  Universe,  published  at  Cleveland, 
Ohio,  by  a  company  of  citizens  who  went  from  that  city  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the 
truth  of  the  many  wonderful  reports  which  they  had  heard  of  spirit  manifestations  at  the 
room  of  Mr.  Koons.  The  investigators  are  among  the  most  intelligent  and  respectable 
citizens  of  Cleveland.  —  Ed.  Age  of  Progress. 

■"REPoiiT  OF  THE  CLEVELAND  COMPANY. 

"  '  Strange  and  interesting  accounts  having  been  given  us  of  the  spiritual  manifestations 
occurring  at  the  spirit  room  of  Jonathan  Koons,  of  Athens  County,  Ohio,  the  nndersigned 
recently  devoted  a  few  days  to  visiting  that  place,  and  witnessing  for  themselves  the  won- 
derful phenomena  there  produced.  From  Cleveland,  we  went  to  Columbus  by  rail,  and 
thence  to  Millfield,  a  distance  of  seventy  miles,  by  private  conveyance,  over  roads  quite 
rough  ■and  hilly.  Here  we  found  two  log  houses  fitted  up  as  spirit  rooms.  These  houses 
are  about  three  miles  apart,  and  each  composed  of  a  single  room  about  twelve  by  fifteen 
feet  in  aze.  One  house  is  on  the  farm  of  Mr.  Jonathan  Koons,  the  other  on  that  of  Mr. 
John  Tippie,  and  both  are  used  only  for  spiritual  demonstrations,  and  were  built  under  the 
direction  of  the  spirits.  We  stayed  two  nights  at  each  plate,  and  carefully  examined  each 
room  and  its  contents  lo  prevent  any  chance   of  our  being  deceived.     In, each  room 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  317 

stands  a  table  on  which  Is  placed  a  machine,  constructed,  like  the  rooms,  cnder  spiritual  di- 
rection. This  machine  is  used  by  the  Erpirits  for  the  purpose,  as  they  allege,  of  collecting 
and  retaining  tlie  electricity  of  the  circle,  and  it  is  'charged,' before  ^ving  any  demonstrations, 
at  every  sitting.  On  the  table,  and  by  the  side  of  the  machinery,  lies  a  violin,  accordion, 
harmonicon,  tambourine,  gnitar,  triangle,  dinner-bells,  etc.,  and  a  tin  Irumpet  about  two 
feet  long.     In  front  of  the  long  table  stands  a  round  one,  about  four  feet  in  diameter. 

CirclS  are  held  in  each  of  these  rooms  almost  every  evening,  and  occasionally  in  the  day 
lime.  A  full  ciiile  at  Mr.  Koons's  consists  of  himself,  vrife,  and  eight  children ;  at  Mr. 
Tippie's,  of  himself,  wife,  and  ten  children.  All  are  mediums  in  each  family.  They  sit  in 
a  semicircle  around  the  tables,  which  are  connected  at  the  ends  with  the  square  table  or 
bench  which  sustains  the  instriinients.  Behind  them  are  benches,  usually  occupied  by 
twenty  or  more  strangers,  who  sit  as  spectators  and  auditors,  and  whose  position  enables 
them  to  command  the  whole  scene.  We  attended  four  sittings  in  the  evening,  and  a 
few  in  the  day  time.  At  these  circles,  we  were  allowed  to  arrai^e  the  furniture,  and  tfl 
seat  the  persons  present  in  such  order  as  we  pleased  ;  and  every  facility  was  afforded  us  for 
carefully  investigating  all  that  transpired.  During  the  circles,  the  following  phenomena  was 
produced ;  After  the  company  were  sealed  and  the  lights  extinguished,  the  presence  of  the 
invisibles  was  manifested  by  several  tremendous  blows  on  the  table,  ceiling,  and  walls.  The 
sounds  were  apparently  made  with  the  drui^icks,  but  their  force  and  frequency  was  al- 
most deafening,  and  exceedingly  startling.  A  reveille  was  then  beaten  on  the  drums, 
which  would  do  credit  to  experienced  drummers.  The  violin,  an  old  one  not  worth  fifty 
cents,  was  tuned,  sxii.  in  the  process  the  p^s  slipped,  and  the  bridge  fell  upon  the  floor. 
These  mishaps  were  immediately  remedied  by  the  spuits.  One  of  the  party  found  fault  that  (he 
violin  was  not  tuned  up  to  concert  pitch.  Being  requested  by  the  spirit  to  give  the  true  pitch, 
he  did  so,  when  the  instrument  was  finely  tuned  again,  and  several  airs  played  upon  it,  not 
with  a  bow,  \>\ia.  pinsieaio.  All  this  time,  the  violin  was  carried  about  to  different  parts  of 
the  room,  and  played  sometimes,  apparently,  quite  up  against  the  ceiling,  and  then  resting 
against  some  one  of  the  company.  Itwasat  one  time  placed,  sirhigi  downward,  on  the  knees 
of  one  of  the  parly,  and  whilst  his  hands  were  gropmg  in  the  dark  all  around  it,  so  as  to  feel 
for  the  inviable  performer,  a  tune  was  played  upon  it.  The  accordion,  harmonicon,  guitar, 
and  other  instrum^its,  were  also  played  in  different  parts  of  the  room,  or  about  our  persons, 
as  we  wished.  Sometimes  all  tlie  instruments  were  played  in  full  chorus  admirably,  and 
seemingly  floating  in  the  air.  We  also  heard  speaking,  whistling,  an^ng,  and  addresses 
through  the  horn.  It  would  be  impossible  to  convey  any  adequate  idea  of  these  musical 
performances :  the  time  lieing  strictly  marked,  now  on  the  tambourine,  triangle,  drum,  tiells, 
etc.,  and  the  various  instruments  made  to  join  in  occasionally,  playing  solo  and  chorus 
alternately,  produced  a  most  pleasing  elTect.  During  the  concert,  words  were  frequently 
spoken  through  the  horn,  indicating  that  one  of  the  invisibles  presided  ova-  the  performance. 
Also  in  this  vray,  many  amusing  comments  on  the  instruments  and  muadans  were  made, 
sometimes  commending  and  soQietimes  severely  criticizing  them. 

' '  Th&  manner  of  usmg  the  horn  deserves  notice.  Bdbre  u^g  it  for  speech  it  would  be 
raised  in  the  air,  then  a  sentence  would  he  distinctly  articulated  through  it,  when  it  would 
fall  to  the  table.  When  we  asked  questions,  the  horn  would  rise,  the  answer  be  given,  and 
it  would  again  fall  to  the  table.  At  our  desire,  they  extended  the  horn  to  us,  and  allowed 
us  to  takehoU  of  the  large  end  of  it,  while  they  conversed  through  it.  At  our  request  to 
see  a  spirit  hand,  a  piece  of  sandpaper  steeped  in  phosphorus  was  taken  up,  by  the  strong 
clear  light  of  which  all  present  could  see  a  hand  entnely  disconnected  with  anybody.  The 
phosphorescent  paper  was  he)d  between  the  finger  and  thumb,  carried  to  all  parts  of  the  room, 
now  rising  to  the  ceiling,  now  passing  repeatedly  and  slowly  before  the  eyes  of  the  circle, 
giving  each  one  an  opportunity  of  deliberately  examining  it.  Again  it  took  a  wide  sweep 
beyond  the  reach  of  any  one  in  the  room,  and  then  returned  close'  to  our  faces.  Every 
portion  of  the  hand  was  clearly  disclosed,  and  its  appearance  was  that  of  a  natural  human 
hand,  strangely  ending  at  the  wrist  in  —  nothing. 

"  We  then  requested  that  a  communication  might  be  written  by  this  hand,  when  imme- 
diately the  bom  was  rwsed,  and  a  voice  said,  '  We  have  no  pencil ;  could  we  borrow 
one  ? '  Upon  this  a  lady  present  held  out  a  pencil,  and  the  hand,  still  holding  the  phos- 
phorus paper,  came  and  took  it  from  her,  and,  laying  down  the  paper,  wrote  the  following, 
the  light  of  the  phosphorus  allowing  us  all  distinctly  to  see  every  mark  made  by  the  hand 
as  it  wrote  with  the  pencil  on  tlie  paper  we  had  furnished.  It  was  written  with  immense 
rapidity,  far  faster  than  any  mortal  could  have  accomplished  it,  and  when  finished,  the  fol- 
lowmg  communication  was  handed  to  one  of  our  party  ; 

"  *  To  the  friends  from  Cleveland: 

" '  The  spirits  who  produce  manifestations  in  this  room  write  these  lines  to  convince  you 

Hosiedb,  Google 

3i8  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

of  their  varied  power,  and  for  tlie  sake  of  removing  doubts  that  exist,  not  only  in  yonr 
minds,  but  amongst  Spritusdists  generally  on  this  subject. 

"  if  the  friends  present  will  certify  as  to  the  manner  in  which  these  lines  were  written, 
and  then  publish  them  to  the  world,  peradventure  it  may  be  instrumental  in  removing  the 
doubts  of  some  sceptics  concerning  the  existence  of  spirits,  their  power  to  act  upon  material 
substances,  and  communicate  with  the  inhabitants  of  earth." 

"  When  the  writing  was  concluded  we  requested  that  we  might  be  allowed  to  touch  the 
hand.  Instantly  it  passed  to  the  head  of  the  circle,  and  there  commencing,  passed  around 
and  shook  hands  with  us  all.  To  our  touch  it  was  human  and  perfect,  and  tlmt  notwith- 
standing the  fact  that  its  various  and  long- continued  movements,  and  its  total  isolation 
from  any  material  body,  gave  us  the  most  indubitable  proofs  that  it  was  no  mortal  hand. 

*'  We  witnessed  many  other  manifestations,  the  mere  record  of  which  would  be  far  too 
long  for  publication. 

"  We  must  not  omit  to  notice,  however,  that  when  the  harmonicon  was  played,  we 
heard  tones  sung  in  excellent  accord  with  it.  There  was,  besides,  speakmg,  or  chanting, 
also  in  harmony  with  the  instrument.  The  words  littered  by  these  voices  were  sometimes 
hymns  of  praise,  at  others,  remarks  addressed  to  the  chcle. 

"  The  manifestations  at  Tipple's  room  are  quite  similar  to  those  of  Koons's,  save  that  at 
the  former  we  neither  saw  writing  nor  a  spirit  hand. 

"At  Tipple's  room,  however,  the  music  is  all  produced  by  spirits,  and  is  more  varied 
and  interestmg  than  at  Koons's.  At  the  latter,  Mr.-  Koons  plays  on  the  violin  at  first,  and 
the  srarits  accompany  hhn,  but  it  Tipple' s  the  music  is  started,  as  well  as  continued,  by  the 
inviables.  On  one  occasion  we  were  discussmg  a  subject  which  involved  us  hi  much  doubt 
and  perplexity.  We  did  not  allude  to  the  matter  before  any  one  but  the  party  engaged  in 
the  discussion,  but  at  the  next  circle  we  were  toH,  through  the  horn,  that  the  spirits  had 
heard  ns,  and  could  clear  up  the  matter  for  ns,  which  they  did  immediately,  and  to  our 

"  We  chanced  to  be  passing  near  the  spirit  room  of  Mr.  Tippie  one  morning,  when  we 
were  surprised  to  hear  a  female  voice  speaking  through  the  born,  and  we  paused  to  Hslen 
to  it.  Mr.  Tippie  and  one  of  his  sons  were  ashmg  questions,  and  receiving  advice  con- 
cerning earthly  affairs  and  spirit  intercourse.  This  female  voice  also  gave  them  much  in- 
formation concerning  the  gfory  and  beauty  of  her  new  home.  To  us  that  private  confer- 
ence was  truly  agnificant  and  beautiful.  The  husband  and  child  had  turned  aside  from 
family  and  friends  to  ask  advice  and  hsten  to  the  gentle  tones  of  the  first  wife  and  mother. 

"The  spontaneity  and  unconcerted  eliaracter  of  thi  mter^iew  not  only  proved  the  entire 
faith  of  the  mediums  in  their  own  sphitual  intercourse  but  lent  additional  interest  and  faith 
to  us  in  our  dealings  with  them.  We  waited  until  the  conference  was  ended,  when,  on 
entering  the  room,  we  found  only  Mr.  Tippie  and  his  son 

"  In  conclusion,  we  advise  all  who  wish  to  witness  demcnstrations  of  spirit-power  under 
circumstances  that  absolutely  forbid  the  possibility  of  be  ng  deceived,  to  make  a  trip  to 
Athens  County,  where  they  cannot  fail  to  be  convinced  that  spirits  who  once  inhabited 
mortal  bodies  still  live,  and  can,  and  do,  hold  intercourse  with  the  dwellers  of  earth. 

"  Newton  E.  Crittenden, 
Helen  D.   Richmond. 
Hannah  F.  M.   Brown. 
CA.H.OI.INE  S.  Lewis. 
Samuel  W.  Treat. 
"Cleveland,  Octoier  2^,  1854." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUAUSM. 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

WESTERN      SPIRITUALISM — OHIO. 

"Vel  shrink  not  ihon,  whoe'er  thou  Brt 
For  God's  freai  purpose  set  apart : 
Before  whose  f^dUcerning  eyes 
The  fuute  as  the  present  lies: 

Stretches  Ihe  Prophet's  heritage  r 
Through  Heaven's  vast  spaces,  anael-trod. 
Through  arches  round  the  throne  of  God, 
Thy  audience  worlds,  all  time  shaU  h^ 
The  nitness  of  the  inidi  in  thee." 

KooKs's  AND  Tippie's  Spirit  Rooms  Continued. 

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  astounding  manifestations  recorded  in  the 
last  chapter  could  long  continue  without  challenging  the  doubts  of  the 
sceptic,  the  cavillings  of  the  suspicious,  and  bitter  antagonism  from  every 
opposer  of  Spiritualism,  In  these  encounters  Messrs.  Koons  and  Tippie 
bacame  the  subjects  of  calumny,  opprobrium,  and,  at  times,  most  ruinous  per- 
secutions. Their  houses  were  often  assailed  by  mobs,  their  bams  and 
crops  destroyed  by  fire,  their  children  set  upon  and  ill-treated;  and  despite 
the  fact  that  they  received  no  compensation,  and  incurred  immense  expense 
without  assigning  any  conceivable  motive  for  the  exercise  of  their  medium 
powers  beyond  their  devotion  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  the  universal  re- 
port of  those  who  did  not  share  in  their  enthusiasm  was  that  fhey  "  made  cap- 
ital" out  of  their  ruin,  and  "carried  on  a  very  profitable  system. of  deception." 

Before  oanating  the  effects  of  this  determined  antagonism  upon  its  unfor- 
tunate though  highly-gifted  objects,  we  propose  to  ^ve  a  few  more  notices  of 
the  unparalleled  wonders  that  called  forth  this  superstitious  malevolence,  and 
let  the  reader  judge  of  the  grounds  on  which  it  could  find  opportunity  for 
exercise. 

The  following  account  is  attested  by  the  signatures  of  several  distinguished 
citizens  from  different  States,  and  was  written,  amongst  numerous  others,  at  a 
period  when  the  local  journals  of  the  East  were  busy  with  Messrs.  Kobns  and 
Tippie's  doings ;  dealing  with  them  in  that  peculiar  way  common  to  "leaders 
of  public  opinion,"  when  they  report  transactions  they  have  never  witnessed, 
pronounce  a  verdict  upon  a  matter  of  which  they  know  nothing,  and  consti- 
tute themselves  judge  and  jurors  of  a  case  which  they  have  never  investi- 

CORRESPONDENCE  OF  THE  AGE  OF  PROGRESS. 

"  Fallasburg,  Kent  Co.,  Michigan,  StJ^timber  25,  1855. 
"  EdUor  of  the  Age  of  Progress  :" 

.  .  .  ,  ' '  For  the  last  ten  tJays  I  have  been  on  a  visit  to  our  friends  Jonathan 
KooQS  and  John  Tippie,  in  Athens  County,  Ohio.  I  am  one  of  many,  Friend  Aibro,  that 
has  cause  to  say  '  God  iiless  them,'  for  their  hospitality  to  the  numbers  who  have  tioarded 
with  them,  day  after  day  and  week  after  week,  without  money  and  without  price,  to  be  wit- 
nesses of  some  of  the  most  convincing  and  astoundmg  evidences  of  the  imroortality  of  Ihe 
soul,  that  were  ever  given  to  3.  bigoted  and  seeptical  world.  It  seems  to  me  utterly  im- 
possible that  any  one  who  takes  up  his  readence  with  either  of  these  families,  partakes  of 
their  simple,  yet  abundant  hospitality,  observes  their  own  mtense  faith  and  devotion  to 
their  angelic  guides,  their  affection  for  and  confiding  trust  in  the  g)iiits  who  surround  them, 
and  above  all,  and  beyond  even  the  inexphcable  marvels  witnessed  at  the  circles,  sees  them, 
from  the  youngest  to  the  oldest  amongst  them,  in  daily  and  hourly  correspondence  with 

Hosiedb,  Google 

mSTORV  OF  MODERN 

nity  to  commit  a.  fraud  in  this  m 

"  The  following  is  a  brief  sketch  of  what  we,  the  undersigned,  witnessed  at  Mr.  Koons'a 
and  which,  if  convenieM,  we  reqnest  yon  to  publish  with  oitc  names  attached  thereto, 
[The  writer  here  enters  into  an  ftccuraledesoription  and  measurement' of  the  spirit  room, 
again  proceedingas  follows:]  "Mr.  Koons  took  his  seat  next  to  Mr.  Champion,  the 
celebrated  medium  from  Nashville,  Tennessee ;  Mrs.  Koons  and  Nahum,  a  plain  country 
boy  of  about  thirteen,  Htting  on  the  other  side  of  him.  Mr.  Koons  and  Nahnm  had  just 
returned  from  a  hard  day's  work  at  a  thrashing  machine,  and  felt  more  disposed  to  go  to 
bed  than  into  the  spirit  room,  as  it  was  dark  when  they  returued  from  the  field." 

[In  the  description  which  follows  of  the  spirit  machine,  etc,  we  omit  all  reiteration  of 
previous  accounts  except  the  following ;]  "  The  two  drums  are  fastened  with  copper  wires 
upon  wooden  supporters  at  the  top  of  the  table.  This  table  is  intersected  witli  copper 
wires  wrapped  with  anc  On  the  upper  cross  wire  hang  some  copper  plates,  cut  in  the  form 
f  doves,  to  which  are  suspended  a  number  of  small  bells,  which  the  spirits 

trog." 

,  A  full  description  here  follows  of  the  instruments,  by  the  careful  ar- 
rangements of  which,  all  chance  of  deception  becomes  impossible,  also  of 
the  phenomena  whidi  the  party  witnessed ;  all  of  which  ditfer  so  little  from 
preceding  accounts,  that  we  omit  them,  resuming  the  narrative  at  the  point 
where  some  variety  appears  in  the  method. 

"  At  times  the  performance  on  the  instruments  would  cease,  when  the  spirits  would  ang 
in  lime  to  Mr.  Koons's  playing  on  the  violin.  Then  they  would  shriek  out  in  an  unearthly 
voice  near  the  ceiling  in  different  parts  of  the  room.  In  fact  we  believe  no  human  bemg 
could  sit  in  that  room  with  an  unprejudiced  mind,  without  being  convinced  of  the  presence 
of  disembodied  spirits. 

"On  Sunday  evening,  September  2,  Mr.  Koons's  brother  havmg  been  buried  that  day, 
Mr.  Koons,  on  his  return  from  the  funeral,  joined  his  wife  and  some  of  oar  party  m  the 
spirit  room.  The  presiding  spirit,  who  is  called  'King,'  said  he  was  engaged  that  evening 
and  could  only  stay  a  short  time,  but  he  would  give  lis  a  brief  address,  which  he  foA  in  a 
very  candid  and  jmpresave  manner,  exhorting  us  to  live  pore  lives  here,  so  as  to  be  in- 
stantly ready  as  immortal  spirits  to  enter  into  the  society  of  the  pure  and  elevated  here- 
after. He  suddenly  threw  down  the  tiumpet  with  which  he  was  speaking,  and  left,  disap- 
pointing Mr.  and  Mrs.  Koons,  who  evidently  wished  for  a  further  communication. 

"  On  Monday  evening  the  spirits  gave  us  a  splendid  musical  entertainment,  preaded  over 
by  a  spirit  calhng  himself  King  No.  3,  who  announced  that  King  No.  i  was  absent,  ,  . 
.  .  .  The  paper  which  the  spirit  had  held  was  then  placed  directly  before  Mr.  Champion, 
of  Nashville,  and  we  all  distinctly  saw  it  mite  the  following  —  the  original  manuscripts  of 
which  (ve  have  in  our  possesaon; 

' '  To  the  friend  from  Mkkigan  (Benj.  Leanitt)  : 
" '  Be  of  good  cheer ;  the  light  is  breaMng  forth  ir 

" '  To  tke  friends  from  the  South : 

"  '  Press  onwards  in  the  cause ;  let  your  light  shine,  so  that  mental  darkness  will  be  dis- 
pelled by  the  approaching  luminary  that  is  rising  in  the  linnament.  KiNG.' 

"  The  following  are  the  names  of  the  witnesses  who  desire  to  certify  to  the  above  state- 

"  C.  Elias  Stifel  and  J.  L.  Stiff,!.,  Wheeling,  Virginia. 

"Andrew  Platt,  Wheeling,  Virginia. 

"  M.  C.  C.  Church,  Nashville,  Tennessee. 

"H.  B.  Champion,  NashvQIe,  Tennessee. 

"A.  M.  Clement,  Ridgeway,  Harden  Co.,  Ohio. 

"Benjamin  Leavitt,  Fallasburgh,  Michigan. 

"A.  Bhuce,  New  Orleans,  Lousiania. 

"Silas  Van  Sickle,  Berkshire,  Delaware  Co.,  Ohio. 

"  Thomas  Morris  and  wife,  Millfield,  Ohio. 

"Benjamin  Leavitt,  Secretary." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  321 

If  the  reader  should  feel  impatient  at  the  narratives  of  different  persons 
all  speaking  of  similar  phenomena,  we  would  urge  .that  there  is  a  special 
value  in  the  corroborative  testimony  of  many  individuals,  who  report  on  the 
same  subject  from  different  intellectual  stand-points;  and  besides  this,  let  it 
be  remembered  that  the  manifestations  thus  strongly  tested  are  almost  nnpar- 
alleled  in  variety  and  power ;  and  having  to  some  extent  diminished  in  subse- 
quent developments,  require  a  strengdi  of  testimony  which  can  scarcely  be 
exaggerated.  We  shall  conclude  our  history  of  the  marvelJous  phenomena 
exliibited  at  Koons's  and  Tippie's  spirit  rooms,  by  a  description  from  the  pen 
of  one  of  the  keenest  of  observers,  as  well  as  the  most  disinterested  of  ad- 
vocates that  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  ,  can  boast ;  namely,  Mr.  Charles  Par- 
tridge, of  New  York,  whose  narrative,  though  given  in  full,  will  amply  repay 
the  trouble  of  a  careful  perusal. 

spirituai,  telegraph— new  york.  1855. 

"  Spirit  Room  of  Jonathan  Koons,  ) 
Dover,  Athens  Co.,  Ohio.         j 

"I  arrived  at  this  room  Sunday  evening,  May  27,  1855,  and  without  making  ntvself 
known,  the  spints  told  Mr.  Koons  who  I  was. 

"  Mr.  Koons  and  one  of  his  sons  went  into  the  '  spirit  room,'  as  is  their  custom,  before 
formmg  the  public  circle,  to  receive  such  instruction  from  '  Kin",'  the  presiding  soirit  as 
he  might  wish  to  communicate.  &   »-      - 

"  There  are  often  more  persons  in  attendance  than  the  room  will  hold,  and  in  that  case 
the  spirit  usually  directs  Mr.  Koons  to  invite  those  who  have  come  the  longest  distance,  and 
cannot  conveniently  remain  there,  calling  the  names  of  the  parties,  and  leaving  out  the 
neighbors  who  can  easily  be  present  on  subsequent  occaaons. 

"  At  one  of  these  preliminary  interviews,  I  was  invited  in  by  Mr.  Korais.  Immediately 
on  closmg  the  door,  the  spirit  took  up  the  trumpet  and  spoke  through  it  audibly,  saymg, 
'Good  evening,  friends,'  to  which  we  responded  in  like  manner.  The  spirit  then  addressed 
me  by  name,  and  observed,  in  substance,  that  although  they  were  strangers  to  me,  I  was 
"?  V  !*''^°'^'' '°  t''^" '  '^^i^  tlify  ''^  long  been  cognizant  of  my  desires  and  efforts  in  behalf 
of  Spiritualism. 

"They  spokeofand  to  me  in  the  most  flattering  terms,  alsoof  Others  who  had  been  boldi 
to  testify  to  the  truth  of  spiritual  manifestations  during  the  severer  trials  of  its  first  intro- 
duction. They  had  watched  the  progress  of  the  Telegraph,  they  said,  with  anxious  solici- 
tude and  eminent  satisfaction,  and  they  closed  with  its  consecratio.i  to  further  uses,  and  a 
fervent  benediction.  After  this,  the  spirit,  '  King,'  said  he  could  not  hold  a  circle  that  even- 
;  I. engaged  elsewhere.     Mr.  Koons  expressed  much  regret  a      " 

ment,  and  said  he  felt  embarrassed  and  mortified  because  several  persons  were  there  who 
had  come  a  long  way  —  some  from  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Virgmia,  Canada,  and 
other  distant  places.  The  spirit  said  he  was  sorry,  but  he  had  engaged  to  attend  a  circle 
elsewhere,  naming  the  place,  a  long  distance  away,  and  that  he  must  be  there  b  fifteen  min- 
utes. Mr.  Koons  would  not  be  satisfied  with  any  excuses,  however,  but  inasted  that  he 
['King']  had  agreed  to  preside  over  the  circle,  and  that  rather  than  be  made  the  instrument 
of  disappointing  others  m  the  performance,  he  wouM  abandon  it  altogether.  'King' 
seemed  to  be  moved  by  these  representations,  and  told  Koons  he  would  see  what  arrange- 
ments could  be  made.  After  a  pause  of  some  five  minutes,  during  which  we  could  get  no 
replies,  the  trumpet  was  taken  up,  and  the  spirit,  speaking  through  it,  said  lie  had  deputed  a 
portion  of  his  band  to  attend  the  distant  circle,  and  he  would  himself  stay  and  preside  over 
the  performance  of  the  evening,  which  must  commence  in  fifteen  minutes.  He  addcil  that 
they  would  not  be  able  to  make  such  good  music  as  usual,  nor  have  then-  full  complement  of 

"  This  preliminary  interview  sufficiently  mdicates  the  character  of  ali  succeeding  ones. 

"I  attended  three  public  circles  in  the  spirit  house  of  Mr.  Koons,  and  three  in  that  of 
Mr.  John  Tipple. 

"  They  are  about  three  miles  apart ;  the  rooms  and  manifestations  are  very  sunilar,  al- 
though the  electrical  tables  differ  somewhat  in  their  construction. 

"The  presiding  spirits  are  called  'King,'  and  claim  to  be  father  and  son, 

"  The  spirit  rooms  will  hold  about  from  twenty  to  thirty  persons  cath  ;  they  arc  often  so 
full  that  many  have  to  go  away  or  remain  outade,  wheie  they  can  hear  the  music  and  con. 

Hosted  by  Google 

322 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

versation  of  the  spirits  perfectly  well,  only  they  have  to  forego  being  toaehed  by  spirits, 
and  seeinir  them.  The  music  is  heard,  under  favorable  circt instances,  for  tlie  distance  of  a 
mile.  After  the  circle  is  formed  and  the  light  extinguished,  a  tremendous  blow  is  struck 
by  the  drum-sticli,  when  immediatelv  the  trass  and  tenor  drums  are  tieaten  with  preternatu- 
ral power,  like  calling  the  roll  on  a  muster  field,  making  a  thousand  echoes.  The  rapid  and 
tremendous  blows  on  these  drums  are  really  frightful  to  many  persons;  it  is  continued  for 
five  minutes  or  more,  and  when  ended,  'Kmg'  usually  takes  up  the  trumpet,  salutes  os 
with,  '  Good  evenmg,  friends,'  and  asks  what  particular  manifestations  are  de^ral.  If 
none  are  specially  asked  for.  King  generally  requests  Mr.  Koons  to  play  on  the  violm,  the 
spirit  band  accompanying  him  on  the  other  instruments :  upon  all  these  the  spirits  perform 
very  scientifically  and  in  wonderfully  quick  time.  They  commence  upon  each  mstrument 
together  in  full  blast,  and  stop  as  suddenly  after  soimding  the  full  note  in  tune,  showing 
thSt  they  have  some  more  perfect  method  than  ours  of  notifying  each  performer  of  Ihe 
very  instant  to  start  and  stop.  Their  accuracy  in  this  respect,  as  also  m  time,  is  beyond 
that  of  any  orchestra  I  ever  heard.  ...  ^.^      c    . 

"After  tlie  introductory  piece  on  the  mstruments,  the  spmts  sang  to  us.  Ihey  hrst 
requested  ns  to  remain  perfectly  ^en  t ;  then  we  heard  human  voices  singmg,  apparently  m  the 
dSance,  so  as  to  be  scarcely  distinguishable ;  the  sounds  gradually  increased,  each  partrela- 
tively,  untU  it  appeared  as  it  a  full  choir  of  voices  were  anging  in  our  room  most  exquisitely. 
I  IhinI:  I  never  heard  such  perfect  harmony.  Each  part  was  admirably  modulated  m  strict 
and  exquiate  tone  with  the  others,  nntU  the  whole  choir  constituted  one  sweet  andfully- 
harmc^ized  chord.  There  was  none  of  tliat  flopping,  floundering,  ranting,  and  shrieking 
which  constitutes  the  sUple  of  what  is  latterly  called  mnac  ;  harmony,  rather  than  noise, 
constituted  the  Spirits'  Song.  So  captivating  was  it,  that  the  heart-strings  seemed  to  relax 
or  increase  their  tendon  in  accord  with  this  heavenly  music.  It  seemed  to  me  that  no  one 
could  sit  in  that  sanctuary  and  listen  to  sounds  that  more  nearly  reached  an  idea  of  the 
EonKS  of  angels  than  anything  that  earth  could  produce,  without  feehng  the  sent mient, 
'Glory  to  God  and  good  will  to  man'  spontaneously  riang  in  the  heart  and  finding  expres- 

^°°  I  don'^t  ^w  that  the  spirits  uttered  words  with  their  song  ;  liut  articulate  sentences 
were  not  necessary,  for  every  tone  and  strain  seemed  pregnant  with  holy  sentiment  such  as 
languid  would  have  failed  to  convey.  . 

"Al^er  this  vocal  piece,  the  spirits  played  several  tunes  on  the  mstruments  pertormmg 
mnch  more  quicUy  than  mortals  usually  do,  and  in  most  perfect  time  throughout.  If  any  in- 
strument got  out  of  tune  they  tuned  it  instantly  and  most  skUfully.  Spirits  seem  to  recon- 
stnict  their  physical  bodies,  or  ^  least  a  portion  of  them,  temporarily,  from  elements  apiiar- 
entlv  similar  to  those  which  constitute  ours.  Spirit  hands  and  arms  were  formed  in  "urMes- 
ence  several  times,  and  by  aid  of  a  solution  of  phosphorus,  prepared  at  their  request  by  JMr. 
Koons,  (hey  were  seen  as  distinctly  as  ma  light  room.  ^        ..    »v.„i.„, 

"At  one  of  the  circles  I  attended,  three  hands  could  be  seen  at  once  steeped  m  thephos- 
phorus,  and  highly  luminous.  They  were  passing  swiftly  around  the  room,  carrying_  and  play 
Jng  on  the  instruments,  and  were  frequently  brought  so  near  our  faces  that  their  motior. 
-  fanned  us  with  the  cool  air.  At  our  request  the  spirits  would  iJac. 
laps,  shoulders,  and  "heads,  so  that  we  could  feel  the  vibration  whilst  they  wi 
"I  held  up  my  hands  and  requested  them  to  beat  time  on  them  with  I 
Thev  did  so  eivii«r  me  more  than  I  asked  for  by  striking  gently  my  knees  and  head  as  well 
as  mv  hands,  as  I  had  seen  done  by  the  best  tambourine  players  of  the  minstrel  bauds  m 
New  York.  The  time  and  rapidity  of  their  performance  was  truly  surprLsmg.  Spinl  hands 
■with  phosphorus  on  them  were  exhiUted  to  us,  opened  and  shut,  and  in  various  ways,  po!j- 
-.tions,  and  places  tliat  no  mortal  hands  could  occupy.  I  took  a  pomplilet  from  mypocket. 
.and  asked  the  spirit  to  place  a  hand  over  it  so  that  I  could  see  to  read  by  it.  Tlii?  was 
instanay  done,  when  I  ^ceived  I  held  the  paper  up^e  down.  I  turned  and  read  it  by  the 
™of  the  ha^d,  wMchVt<^ttier  with  a  part  of  an  arm  was  distmctly  visible  to  the  whole 

''""ffi'spirits  then  shook  hands  with  me;  also  they  placed  their  hands  in  mine  and  permit- 
ted me  to  examine  them  untU  I  was  fuUy  satisfied.     The  same  favor  was  readily  grantetl  to 

°' '^These  spirit  hands  in  all  things  resemble  ours,  except  that  they  had  a  kind  of  tremulous 
motion,  and  felt  cold  and  death-like.  Presently  the  spirit  h:md  took  a  pen  and  we  all  dis- 
rincthTUw  it  write  on  a  paper  lying  on  the  table.  Ttie  writing  was  executed  rnuch  more 
-rapidly  than  any  I  ever  saw'performed  by  a  mortal  hand.  The  paper  was  tli^  g'veii  to  me, 
and  I  still  retain  that  writing  in  my  possession.  At  the  close  of  tliesession,  the  pir  King, 
^  is  his  custom  took  up  the  trumpet  and  gave  a  short  lecture  througUit,  presentmgthe  ben- 
efits in  time  and.eternity  of  mtercourse  ivitli  spirits,  exhorting  us  to  be  faithful  to  our  oppor- 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  323 

(unities,  and  charilible  towards  tliose  wlio  are  in  ignorance  and  error,  etc.,  ie  closed  an 
impressive  adrires?  witli  a  benediction,  and  bid  us  'good-night.' 

"I  am  aware  tiia.t  these  facts  so  much  transcend  the  ordinary  experience  of  mortals  tliat 
few  persons  will  be  prepared  to  accept  them  as  true  on  anything  sliort  of  their  own  witness, 
I  obtained  the  names  Mid  addresses  of  the  following  persons,  who  were  present  at  one  or 
more  of  the  circles  described  above  with  me,  and  I  hope  they  will  excuse  me  for  referring  to 
them  in  conlirmation  of  the  statements  I  have  made. 

Exoepl  one  had  the  advantage  of  beholdiuR  and  testing  these  marvels  in  person,  I  could 
not  offer  a  more  satisiactory  array  of  testimony  than  that  of  the  following-named  ladies  and 
gentlemen:  M,  T.  Butterfieid,  Oeveland,  Ohio;  William  D.  Young,  Covmgton,  Indiana; 
George  and  David  Brier,  Mainsville,  Indiana  ;  David  Edgar  and  daughter,  Mercer  County,. 
Pennsylvania ;  S.  Van  Sickles,  Delaware,  Ohio ;  S.  T.  Dean,  Andrew  O^,  and  George 
Walker  and  son,  Amesville,  Ohio;  A.  Johnson,  MiUfield;  W.  S.  Watkbs,  New  York; 
Thomas  Morris  and  wife,  Dover,  Ohio ;  Dr.  George  Carpenter,  Athens,  Ohio ;  and  Tliomas 
White,  Mount  Pleasant,  Ohio.     Many  other  persons  were  present,  whose  names  1  did  not 

"Charles  Partkidge. 
"New  York." 

In  closing  our  account  of  the  wonderful  works  wrought  for  humanity 
through  the  spirits  in  Athens  County,  Ohio,  a  few  words  of  personal  detail  are 
due  to  the  long-suffering  and  greatly-slandered  human  co-workers  who  have 
figured  in  this  marvellous  spirit  drama.  Something  of  their  unrequited  labor 
and  unjust  persecution  may  be  gathered  from  a  letter  addressed  to  the  editor 
of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  by  Jonathan  Koons,  in  November,  1853,  wherein 
he  says : 

"  From  the  beginning  of  the  manifestations  in  my  house,  the  most  base  and  mitruthful 
charges  against  myself,  family,  and  friends,  have  been  made  by  persons  to  whom  I  liave 
thrown  open  my  house,  and  all  the  fixtures  ordered  by  the  spuits,  for  the  fullest  inspection. 
To  aleace  these  slanders  the  spirits  have  permitted  frequent  changes  to  be  made  in  the  cir- 
cles, allowing  strangers  to  sit  %■  me  and  my  son  whilst  the  demonstrations  were  made.  To 
all  who  reiterate  the  chains  of  fraud,  I  say.  '  Prove  them.  Go  to  those  who  have  seen  and 
heard,  and  if  you  cannot  take  thdr  testimony,  come  and  see  and  hear  for  yourselves.' 

"  Weary  with  a  perpetoal  compliance  wiui  fresh  demands,  1  am  at  length  compelled  to 
say  no  more  changes  will  be  made,  and  persons  who  simply  come  to  detect  me  in  the  prac- 
tice of  the  most  stupendous  and  impossible  imposition  that  the  world  has  ever  dreamed  of, 
are  poUtely  requested  to  stay  away.  If  I  could  have  imaoined  or  contrived  out  of  my  own 
brain  such  unheard  of  manifestations,  I  have  no  interest  in  practicing  them.  I  have  never 
made  a  charge  for  witnessing  them,  and  repeatedly  refused  compensation  when  offered.  My 
time  as  well  as  that  of  my  family,  beades  money  and  provender,  have  been  all  freely  spent, 
to  gratify  the  pubhc ;  whilst  the  extraordinary  communications  written  by  spirits,  though  so 
highly  prized  by  ourselves,  have  been  as  freely  given  away,  sometimes,  1  fear,  only  to  grat- 
ify idle  curiosity,  and  at  otheru,  to  responsible  men  for  publication.  Now,  what  more  can 
I  do  to  satisfy  the  unreasonable  demands  of  unreasonable  men,  unless  I  close  the  manifesta- 
tions  against  them  altogether  ?  The  spirits  make  the  demonstrations  in  their  own  time  and 
way.  if  they  prefer  or  require  darkness,  I  cannot  help  it.  If  they  permit  light,  I  always 
yield  to  it.  All  I  insist  upon  is  that  neither  I  nor  mine  have  any  hand  in  doing  these 
things  ;  that  I  have  never  made  anythmg  by  it,  but  heaiy  losses,  and  never  expect  to  be 
compensated  in  this  life,  beyond  the  untold  satisfaction  of  proving  to  myself  as  well  as  to 
others,  who,  like  me,  were  doubters,  that  the  soul  lives  after  death.  To  myself  and  my 
family,  these  demonstrations  have  been  a  source  of  delight,  instruction,  and  pleasure.  Thqi 
have  been  the  same  to  many  hundreds  of  earnest  seekers  for  truth.  Those  who  are  simply 
seeking  for  falsehood,  generally  end  in  believing  it,  whatever  they  see.  Such  persons, 
having  predetermined  our  guilt,  could  hardly  be  convinced  to  the  contrary  by  any  amount 
of  testimony.  I  am  worn  out  with  the  insolence  of  sceptics  who  simply  come  to  insult  me; 
with  people  demanding  the  same  things  over  and  over  again,  and  still  never  satined.  .  . 
.  .  ,  The  mediums  of  my  family  have  satupnight  after  night,  sacrificing  health,  rest,  and 
comfort,  to  satisfy  others.  Now,  who  can  say  that  I  fear  investigation,  or  have  aught  to 
gain  bv  fraud?  Let  the  history  of  the  past  two  years  be  searched  for  one  single  evidence 
against  me.  My  house  has  been  examined  from  top  to  ijottom,  and  the  only  thing  that  was 
ever  found  concealed  in  it  was  two  young,  aufledged  birds,  which  one  of  my  boys,  boy-lik^ 
had  got  out  of  a  nes-t,  mtendmg  to  rear.     Not  approving  of  the  act  of  robbing  a  nest,  I 

Hosiedb,  Google 

j24  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

wning  off  the  heads  of  the  birds  in  the  piesence  of  certain  individualswho  con^itiited  thein 
selves  a  committee  to  search  my  house,     Wlien,  after  the  very  next  circle,  they  went  away, 

and  charged  tile  demonstrations  on  the  dead  birds  ! True,  I  have  refused 

to  submit  to  ridiculous  experboents  proposed  by  men  who  were  totally  ignorant  of  the  prin- 
ciples  involved,  and  wholly  incompetent  to  devise  tests.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  sub- 
milted  to  hundreds  of  tests,  devised  by  candid  and  competent  persons,  and  the  results,  as 
published  over  and  over  again,  have  proved  an  agency  totally  beyond  the  powef  of  human 
action  in  any  shape. 

"Jonathan  Koons." 
"Athens  Co.,  Ohio,  1853." 

To  the  above  statement  we  must  add,  that  after  devoting  time  and  nieaiis 
during  several  years  to  these  demonstrations,  Messrs.  Koons  and  Tippiu 
found  that  the  peace  of  their  once  tranquil  homes,  the  education  of  their 
children,  and  their  worldly  prosperity,  were  in  danger  of  utter  ruin.  Their  un- 
selfish devotion  to  what  they  deemed  the  best  interests  of  humanity  were  re- 
warded by  slander  and  persecution,  until  human  resources  were  utterly  ex- 
hausted. 

Some  change,  then,  was  imperatively  demanded ;  and  still  unwilling  to 
sacrifice  their  splendid  gifts  to  sordid  necessity,  they  were  induced  to  organ- 
ize travelling  parties  for  the  purpose  of  giving  the  manifestations  a  wider  field 
of  action.  Whether  the  mediums  missed  the  influence  of  their  highly-charged 
spirit  rooms,  and  the  strong  electrical  current  of  their  pine  forests  and  ancient 
hills,  or  whether  the  public  interest  had  waned  by  familiarity  with  these  mar- 
vels, cannot  be  correctly  determined.  Certain  it  is  that  though  very  power- 
ful  evidences  of  spirit  presence  still  followed  them  in  their  missionary  wan-  . 
derings,  they  were  no  longer  regarded  as  the  marvellous  and  exceptional  me- 
diums they  were  once  deemed.  Others  entered  rival  claims  for  public  favor, 
and  the  Koons  and  Tippie  families  seemed  somehow  to  glide  out  of  the 
page  of  supersensuous  celebrity.  A  lapse  of  time^a  hiatus  in  their  history 
— the  bitter  woof  of  that  destiny  which  enfolds  all  reformers  in  an  unpopular 
cause,  closii\g  around  them  its  tightly-strained  cords  of  persecution  and  slan- 
der, and  then,  a  few  fragmentary  lines  from  scenes  far  removed  and  widely 
different  from  their  once  prosperous  home  amongst  the  Ohio  hills,  is  all  that 
the  page  of  history  further  records  of  them.  More  in  the  tone  of  "memo-, 
nam,"  than  as  veritable  biography,  reads  the  simple  epistle  of  the  once  won- 
derful head  of  the  Koons  family,  writing  in  1859,  to  the  editor  of  the  Spirit- 
ual Telegraph  from  parts  almost  unknown. 

"LETTER   FROM  JONATHAN  KOONS— SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH. 

"  Moore's  Prairie,  Jefferson  Co.,  Illinois,  June  15,  1859. 

"Ma.  Charles  Partridge, — Your  kind  favor  of  five  numbers  of  the  Telegraph,  and 
aa  accompanying  letter,  were  duly  received,  and  I  proceed  without  delay  to  answer  the 
queries  contained  in  your  letter. 

"  First,  as  lo  my  present  state  of  faith  and  knowledge  In  Spiritualism  ?  My  faith  is  firm 
as  the  granite  plUar  of  Pike's  Peak,  and  my  knowledge  in  Spiritualism  more  precious  lo  me 
than  all  the  virgin  gold  it  contains  beneath  its  eternal  snow-capped  summit.  High  and  lofty 
as  this,  theobgical  mountains  may  also  lift  their  frozen  and  unfirolilic  summits  to  the  sky, 
but  they  can  never  agdn  shut  out  those  genial  beams  of  spiritual  sunshine  with  which  I 
am  experimentally  blessed. 

"  My  knowledge  relating  to  this  subject  is  voluminous,  but  an  exposition  of  it  would  seem 
almost  as  preposterous  to  the  world  as  would  an  attempt  to  introduce  tropical  fruit  into 
the  arctic  regions.     .... 

"  John  Tippie  has  removed  lo  Lynn  County,  Kansas  Territory.  They  continued  to  hoL3 
spirit  intercourse  up  to  my  last  account  from  them.  I  will  remark  that  the  seeds  of  Spiritu- 
alism ate  already  sown  in  this  so-called  Egyptian  land  Southern  Illinois.  In  an  adjoin- 
ing neighborhood,  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  Wilkey,  regular  circles  have  been  held,  amongst 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  325- 

the  members  of  whi.  h  were  some  promising  mediums  for  trance  speaJiing,  writing,  and  phya- 
caJ  demonstrations.  A  venerable  old  clergyman  here—  Mr.  M.—  a  man  of  rare  talent  and 
education,  has  openly  avowed  his  belief  in  Spiritualism,  to  llie  astonishment  and  mortifica- 
lion  of  his  followers  and  brothers  in  the  cause,  of  which  he  was  for  forty  years  a  prominent 
teacher  and  advocate. 

During  a  recent  illness  of  a  very  severe  character,  several  of  liis  clericaj  brethren  paid  this 
worthy  gentleman  visits,  for  the  pm-pose  of  attempting  to  convince  him  *  of  the  lamentable 
errors  into  which  he  had  fallen  under  Satanic  mflaence. '  These  visits  had  a  ^ngulai  result  ■ 
for  the  more  orthodox  their  efforts  became,  the  more  powerful  and  convincing  became  the 
counter  arguments  of  Mr.  M — until  some  of  his  listeners  were  moved  to  tears,  and  actually 
be^ed  pardon  for  their  miruaon.  Some  left  him  then  deeming  him  Kt  tie  less  than'  a  saint 
whilst  others  quitted,  denouncing  him  as  an  infidel,  heretic,  and  lost  soul,  'imdbr  the 
delusive  mfluence  of  Satan,' 

"  The  Christian  Church  at  Spring  Garden  has  been  offered  him,  for  a  course  of  lectures  on 
the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  exrianatory  of  the  views  which  have  led  him  to  his  present  be- 
lief    This  offer  we  trust  will  be  accepted  as  soon  as  his  health  permits. 

"We  have  not  been  in  a  poation  to  hold  public  circles  since  our  removal  from  Ohio 
last  lalL   Recently,  however,  we  have  become  hungry  for  spiritual  nourishment,  whichha.sled 
us  to  a  renewed  effort  to  receive  manifestations.     At  a  recent  circle  held  by  my  own  family 
and  L.  T.  Dean,  of  Ohio,  we  had  a  most  consoling  interview  with  the  spirits,  and  a  genuine  . 
correspondence  through  the  trumpet. 

"This  effort  has  since  been  repeated  with  equal  success.  We  have  been  continuaUy 
sobcited  to  hold  circles  for  the  benefit  of  investigators,  but  as  yet,  our  present  circumstances 
have  induced  us  to  decline.  At  Salem,  Illmois,  I  opened  my  library  of  spiritual  books  and 
left  them  m  the  care  of  Mr.  E.  Williams,  for  public  inspection  and  perusal  durmg  last  win- 
ter. Mr.  Williams  infonns  me  that  the  spiritual  books  have  been  constantly  kept  warm  in 
the  hands  of  as  many  as  they  would  serve,  which  has  resulted  in  an  immense  interest  on  the 
subject.  There  are  quite  a  number  of  sound  and  able  minds  amongst  us  who  express  a 
great  deare  to  become  acquainted  with  the  facts  and  philosophy  of  Spiritualism,  and  the 
best  we  can  do  for  them  at  present  is  to  give  them  a  catalogue  of  your  valuable  works  and 
distribute  the  Tekgrapk   for  perusal. 

"  Fraternally  yours, 

"JO.NATHAN    KOONS." 

Another  testimony  to  the  unswerving  f^th  of  these  honest  and  devoted  mea 
is  to  be  found  in  an  earlier  issue  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  in  which  an 
esteemed  correspondent  undertakes  to  give  some  account  of  the  spirit  rooms 
of  the  Hon.,  Charles  Cathcart,  an  establishment  which  in  some  sense  suc- 
ceeded, though  it  did  not  take  the  place  of  the  famous  Ohio  circle.  The  allu- 
sions to  Koons  and  Tippie,  though  slight  and  incidental,  will  be  read  with 
interest  by  those  who  have  thns  far  followed  the  narrative  of  their  faithful 
service  in  the  cause  of  Spiritualism.  They  occur  in  the  following  communi- 
cation. 

"SPIRIT  BOOMS  AT  THE  WEST, 

"Laporte,  Indiana,  February  a6,  1859. 
"  Brother  Partridge,— As  it  may  be  interesting  to  your  readers  to  learn  something 
about  what  the  spirit  rooms  m  the  West  are  doing,  I  will  give  you  a  few  lines  on  that  sub- 

"  I  have  not  forgotten  the  glorious  times  that  you  and  I  enjoyed  at  Koons's,  some  four 
years  ago ;  but  oh  !  the  contrast  between  what  we  then  witnessed  and  the  best  that  we 
can  do  now  !  It  reminds  me  of  the  Jewish  fathers  who  mourned  and  wept  at  the  dedica- 
tion of  the  new  temple,  when  they  remembered  how  far  it  fell  short  of  the  glory  of  its  pre- 
decessor. I  have  attended  three  circles  here  ;  one  at  Charles  Cathcart's,  the  others  at  D, 
C  McKellip's.  We  had  good  music  at  them  all,  but  no  speaking  through  the  trumpet, 
"omoffior  philosophical  lectures  from  ancient  liigh  and  holy  spirits,  nor  had  we  any  sweet 
spirit  anging,  shaking  of  their  hands,  or  answering  questions  except  by  raps.  How  great 
the  contrast !  It  brought  a  melancholy  shade  over  my  mind  when  I  remembered  those  glori- 
ous Ohio  circles.  But  far  as  these  fall  short  of  the  manifestations  at  Koons's  and  Tipple's 
rooms,  they  give  great  satisfaction  to  a  large  number  of  persons  who  never  had  the  privilege 
of  witnesang  the  performances  in  those  rooms,  and  are  not  devoid  of  mterest  to  many 

Hosted  by  Google 

326  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

who  liave  seen  those  splendid  manifestations.  Besides  this,  they  are  doing  a  vast  deal  c 
good.  There  are  many  minds  which  can  lie  reached  by  no  other  process,  yet  I  regret  that 
I  know  but  one  trumpet  medium  in  the  West  at  present,  and  he  has  gone  with  his  father, 
John  Tippiel  to  Pike's  Peak.  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr,  Tippie  recently,  informing  ma 
that  King  was  with  them  ;  that  they  were  aU  on  their  way  to  the  Peak,  and  that  they  kept 
up  tlirar  circles  and  obtained  a"  great  deal  of  useful  information  thereby.  We  are  informed 
that  ICoons's  trumpet  medium  has  lost  his  power,  and  is  no  longer  a  medium  for  any  spicituJ 
inSuences.  This.fact  is  pretty  good  evidence  of  his  honesty,  for  if  ever  he  did  peform  with- 
out the  iud  of  spirits,  he  could  and  most  likely  would  continue  to  do  so ;  bat  he  is  not  even 
favored  with  raps,  tips,  or  any  ither  tokens  of  spiritual  presence.  Yet  lie  is  too  honest  to 
renounce  hia  belief  as  some  others  have  done  who  were  once  mediums,  or  thought  themselves 
«o.  There  are  many  who  have  been  developed,  or  partially  so,  ivhose  houses  are  being  left 
unto  them  desolate  in  consequence  of  their  neglect  and  disobedience  to  the  counsel  of  wise 
spirits.  .     In  my  travels  I  kave  found  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  everywhere  m 

the  ascendant My  old  infidel  associates  and  correspondents  have  aJ!,  for  the 

most  part,  long  since  embraced  Spiritualism,  and  I  rejoice  to  say  that  they  are  all  the  better 
for  it  lamalsohappytoknow  that  there  are  thousands  who,  imtil  recently,  were  strongly 
oppoUd  to  the  belief,  who  are  now  beginning  to  mvestigate,  and  amongst  these  are  many 
preachers  of  different  denominations,  and  class  leaders  not  a  few. 

"I  must  relate  an  occurrence  that  recentlytook  place  at  Mr.  Catncart  s  spirit  room,  lie 
had  invited  several  preachers  to  come  and  pray  away  theDevil,  if  they  thought  It  was  that  per- 
son:«ce  who  was  speaking.  At  length  one  of  them  concluded  to  take  Charley  at  his  word 
and  came  on  accordingly.  It  was  agreed  that  if  the  spirits  fdled  to  respond  at  the  close  of 
the  prayer  and  contmue  their  manifestations  after  the  ministers'  exorcisms,  etc.,  that  tt 
should  be  considered  as  evidence  of  their  bemg  beaten,  hut  if  to  spuitual  powras  bad  no 
effect  in  conquerbg  *  the  spirits,'  they  were  to  be  aUowed  as  having  the  best  of  "■  W'th 
thU  understanding  the  preacher  set  to  work,  and  in  order  to  give  him  fair  play,  even  t-tiarley 
[Mr.  Cathcart],  as  requested,  joined  in  the  prayers,  and  went  dovi-n  on  his  mmTow-bones, 
perhaps  for  the  first  time  m  his  life.  But  no  sooner  had  the  word  Amen'  pa^ed  the 
Treacher's  lips,  testifving  that  his  spiritual  invocations  were  concluded,  than  the  spirits  let 
Ihem  know  they  were  not  routed  yet.  Such  raps,  knocking  around,  ratthng  of  drums,  and 
disturbances  generaUy,  of  everything  in  and  about  the  room,  never  took  place  hefore. 

' '  Tiie  preacher  honorably  stood  to  hb  engagement,  acknowledged  that  '  the  spirits  had  the 
best  of  it,  and  that  he  had  misjudged  them.  This  annoimcemeni  he  made  openly  to  his 
congr^ation,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  some  and  the  indignation  of  others.  .  .  .  . 
Tippi?mforms  me  that  he  sold  out  and  left  Ohio  in  compliance  with  Kmg-s  du-ections.  and 
that  he  intends  to  follow  Ms  advice,  let  the  result  he  as  it  may. 

"  Thomas  White." 

We  have  had  occasion  to  notice  the  accounts  which  the  spirits  operating  at 
K-oons's  room  gave  of  themselves,  namely,  that  they  belonged  to  "a  most 
ancient  order  of  men;"  also,  that  from  time  to  time,  other  spirit  communi- 
cated, of  different  classes  and  dates  of  human  existence,  amongst  them, 
spirits  whose  recent  entrance  into  the  spheres  widi  gross,  undeveloped  natures, 
formed  corporal  conditions  for  the  performance  of  the  strongest  physical 
manifestations,  while  the  use  to  which  their  services  were  devoted,  served  as 
means  for  their  own  progression.  In  confirmation  of  tile  claim  to  extreme 
imtiquity,  and  highly  exalted  spiritual  nature,  which  the  controlling  influence 
at  Koons's  alleg^  several  singular  and  interesting  psych ometrical  delineations 
of  the  writings  executed  by  the  spirit  hands  could  be  cited.  Our  space  ttnly 
aUows  us  to  record  one  example  of  this  kind,  which  affords  a  psychometncal 
reading  of  the  famous  original  "  King."  It  was  given  through  one  of  the  most 
reliable  and  highly  developed  mediums  of  her  time,  Mrs.  Kellog,  of  New 
York.  We  quote  die  account  as  we  find  it  in  the  Telegraph  papers  of  1856. 
It  reads  as  follows  : 

■'  We  have  often  had  occasion  to  observe  that  'psychometry,'  or  the  reading  of  character 
by  touch,  might  be  of  service  in  enabling  us  to  determine  the  identity  no  less  than  the 
(ffigin  of  written  communications,  purporting  to  emanate  from  departed  spirits. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  327 

"On  several  occasions  we  have  subjected  such  writings  to  trial  by  this  methoil,  and  have 
always  witnessed  very  interesting  results.  We  will  briefly  narrate  the  particulars  of  an  ex- 
periment of  this  kind,  made  by  Hon.  Joshua  R.  Gidding;s.  One  day  last  week,  in  company 
witli  Mr.  Giddmgs,  Stephen  Diidley,  Esq.,  and  Miss  Jay,  the  celebrated  trance  speaker,  we 
c^ed  on  Mrs.  Kellc^  at  her  circle  rooms,  625  Droadway,  The  gentlemen  accomjKuiying  me, 
hail  in  their  possesaon  a  piece  of  writing  executed  in  the  spiiit  room  of  Jonathan  Koons, 
executed  under  circumstances  which  left  ihem  no  room  to  doubt  but  that  it  was  the  wort  of  a 
spuit.  In  fact,  on  this  point  they  were  entirely  convinced  ;  for  they,  like  the  rest  of  the 
company  present,  saw  and  felt  the  spirit  hand  which  executed  the  writing.  It  was  highly 
illuminated,  and  displayed  a  portion  of  a  bare  arm,  the  termination  of  which  was  lost  in  a 
sort  of  luminous  vapor.  This  hand  was  frequently  opened  and  shut,  and  eshibited  in  various 
ways  during  the  writing,  and  at  its  close  placed  the  paper  in  the  hand  of  Mr.  Dudley,  linger- 
mg  m  his  clasp  and  affordrng  him  full  opportunily  of  examining  it  thoroughly.  The  writing 
was  executed  with  a  rapidity  beyond  the  utmost  capacity  of  man;  it  wasMgned  'King,'  and 
..the  writer,  speaking  through  the  trumpet,  claimed  to  have  lived  on  the  earth  above  ten  thou- 
sand years  ago.  The  paper  was  inclosed  by  Mr.  Dudley  in  a  blank  envelope,  and  carefully 
sealed  by  Mr.  Giddings,  and  when  presented  to  Mrs.  Kellog  and  Miss  Jay,  not  the  slightest 
hint  wasdroppedby  which  they  could  have  imagined  wliat  the  envelope  contained,  or  whence 
it  emanated.  Not  a  angle  remark  was  made  by  which  the  writer  even  could  guess  why 
those  gentlemen  inquired  about  it.  Mrs^  Kdlog,  taking  the  envelope  in  her  hand,  tiecame 
suddenly  deeply  entranced,  and  pointing  upward,  spoke  as  follows ; 

'"A  person  of  great  might  and  power  appears  before  me — a  power  unknown.  I  cannot 
compare  him  to  any  one  on  earth.  He  wields  a  mighty  weapon.  I  can  neither  describe 
nor  expliio  the  influence  (hat  emanates  from  him.  I  can  only  compare  it  to  one  of  whom 
we  read  in  the  Bible.  It  seems  like  unto  one  who  "  rules  the  world.' '  It  [the  writing]  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  done  by  any  human  being.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  a  mortal 
could  have  been  employed  even  as  the  instrament  for  this  writing.  This  is  beyond  human 
efTort. 

'"I  behold  a  sea  of  light  ejitendingeverywhere,anever-fadingliglit.  It  is  not  of  the  sun, 
or  moon,  or  stars;  oh,  that  I  had  the  power  to  describe  it !    I  must  call  it  a  divme  light.  It 

will  never  grow  dim.     I  see  no  limit,  but  onlyan  immenaty  of  light It  seems 

to  me  as  if  this  writing  fell  from  Heaven,  untouched  by  mortal  hands.  I  wonder  at  my 
ability  to  hold  the  paper.  The  sim- fades  bcade  this  light,  Man  must  shrink  beneath  its 
influence.     Tlie  source  appears  like  light,  creating  light.     I  cannot  give  it  human  form.     I 

can  conceive  of  such  a  form,  but  it. is  all  light.' Here  Miss  Jay  was  en- 

tranced  and  said : 

"'Yes,  it  has  a  human  form,  but  developed  to  gigantic  proportions.     The  outlines  are 

lost  to  the  viaon  in  the  intensity  of  light Every  feature  seems  woven  of 

bummg  sunbeams.  Ordinary  beings  cannot  attract  material  atoms  from  the  earth  sphere, 
so  as  to  render  visible  so  mueli  as  a  hand  like  this  one's.  It  must  be  a  power  so  far  ei'aited 
in  the  scale  of  development  as  to  giasp  the  great  laws  that  govern  all  material  combina- 
tions  He  does  not  seem  to  be  of  the  earth,  but  to  belong  to  another  race 

of  bemgs,  whose  spiritual  growth  has  continued  for  ages.  As  pa-petual  material  transfor- 
mations ultimate  in  therefinement  of  the  elements,  so  has  this  spirit  been  refined,  until  all  its 
tissues  and  fibres  seem  to  be  woven  of  the  finest  rays  of  divine  light.  Could  yon  but  gaie 
on  that  i)eing  in  all  his  transcendent  beauty,  you  would  value  life  as  never  before,  and  be 
quickened  and  strengthened  to  go   forward   in  your  own  pathway  of  eternal  progres- 

We  shall  now  insert  a  specimen  of  the  coiniiiunications  written  directly  by 
the  hands  of  spirits  themselves,  sometimes  in  the  presence  of  witnesses,  at 
others  in  the  locked,  sealed,  and  guarded  spirit  room,  without  any  visible 
mediumistic  agency.  The  following  was  obtained  from  direct  writing  exe- 
cuted by  a  spirit  hand  in  the  presence  of  many  witnesses.     It  is  headed  — 

"GENERAL  ADDRESS  Or  KING,   SERVANT  AND  SCHOLAR  OF  GOD. 

"The  spirit  of  one  who  makes  himself  known  by  the  name  of  'King,'  Servant  and 
Scholar  of  God,  desires  to  make  his  general  address  in  the  presence  of  Jonathan  Koons, 
bis  family,  and  others  %  which  persons  I  have  selected  m  consequence  of  the  ])ure  clairvoyant 
power  wluch  exists  among  them,  and  other  magnetic  qualities,  whereby  spirits  are  enabled 

Hosiedb,  Google 

328  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

to  speali  and  write  sentiments  ivliieli  are  in  this  mode  not  liable  to  he  distorted  by  bias,  or 
misrepresented  by  ijjnorance.  And  in  consequence  of  the  anxious  desire  manifested  by  thosa 
people  to  reqdve  spiritiial  truths  do  we  come  amongst  them  ;  yet  we  know  that  ovir  worltwil] 
be  rejected  by  many,  and  condemned  as  the  production  of  their  King  Devil,  whom  they 
profess  to  repudiate,  but  do  so  constantly  serve  by  cmcifying  trulh,  and  rejecting  all  that  is 

contrary  to  their  own  narrow  pride  and  vain  imaginings Truly  we  do  not 

flatter  ourselves  with  the  idea  of  a  welcome  from  minds  of  this  class,  or  from  any  who  arp 
bigoted  to  their  own  opinions ;  nor  do  we  seelt  to  accommodate  our  speech  to  the  prejudices 
of  man,  as  we  tear  is  the  case  with  many  of  the  manifesting  spirits  of  this  day.  But  strange 
'  as  the  form  of  human  speech  is  Co  us  now,  and  bounded  as  is  the  thought  of  angels  in  its 
narrow  confines,  yet  as  far  as  words  can  serve,  am  I  boimd  to  speak  of  that  divine  truth  I 
know,  for  its  influences  teach  me  like  aflammgfire  strearomg  fiom  the  celestial  realms  of  the 
Most  High,  and  pours  in  consuming  justice  overthe  earth,  winnowmgthe  chaff  of  falsehood 
from  the  grains  of  truth,  until  the  nttermost  parts  of  (he  earth  ^all  be  fed  with  the  bread 

of  eternal  life Many  there  are  who  so  firmly  engrave  the  image  of  Satan 

on  their  hearts  that  they  see  only  Ids  reflection  when  they  look  abroad,  or  bdiold  in  the 
faces  of  others  the  picture  miirorcd,  which  Ihey  themselves  have  drawn ;  and  such,  I  full 
well  know,  will  thus  regard  my  coming.  The  bigot  will  have  none  of  me,  because  I  have 
said,  in  oppotdtion  to  his  narrow  creed,  that  I  am  of  a  race  of  men  who  lived  before  their 
fabled  Ad;im;  and  because  I  claim  a  still  more  ancient  state  than  their  ignorance  can  master. 
1  must  befolse,  or  else,  'a  spirit  of  evil.'  If  I  would  tear  the  mask  of  ignorance  fromhee 
eyes  of  men,  and  show  them  truths  long  hid  in  darliness  or  veiled  by  superstition ;  if  I  dar- 
disturb  their  fabled  thoughts  of  God,  and  how  he  wrought  in  the  days  when  men  were  on- 
acquainted  with  the  means  to  record  theiilife  and  times,  and  hand  them  down  to  posterity, — 
tlirai  they  cry  out  their  comprehenave  watchword,  '  Devil  I '  so  that  all  which  they  in  their 
littleness  think  right,  theycdl  'the  Word  of  God,'  and  label  'sacred,'  and  all  which  they  do 
not  know  or  comprehend,  they  call  'the  work  of  Satan,'  or  the  words  of  'heathens.'     .     . 

"  With  what  astonishment  we  contemplate  this  frail  and  blinded  being,  man  1  So  frail, 
and  yet  assuming  to  be  so  strong,  that  a  weak,  short-lived  mortal  presumes  to  call  a  nation 
his,  and  swings  in  his  very  hand  the  destinies  of  millions  of  his  fellow-beings,  seizing  their 
lands,  spoilmg  their  goods  and  houses,  and  making  laws  by  whicli  he  binds  their  very  lives, 
until  his  own  is  rent  from  him  in  a  single  minute,  and  then  the  strong  man  becomes  a  clod 
of  clay  1  ....  So  blind  that  he  cannot  see  the  event  of  the  wcr-x  ensuing  instant, 
and  yet  pretending  to  know  just  what  God  thinks,  and  wills,  and  does,  and  how  he  made 
all  things,  and  how  he  is  pleased  or  angered ;  pleased  with  one  human  worm  for  mumbling 
out  a  form  of  words,  and  angered  with  another  for  eating  meat  npon  a  day  when  he  should 
eat  naught  but  fish ;  in  a  word,  this  poor  blind  atom,  fain  would  claim  to  know  what  celes- 
tial angels,  who  presided  at  his  planet's  birth,  would  veil  their  heads  in  deep  humility  ere 
pretend  to  understand.  And  thus  man  sits  in  his  darkened  cell  of  ignorance,  wrapped  in  the 
antique  rags  bis  ancestors  have  woven,  and  thinks  he's  walking  in  the  light  of  celestial  rev- 
elation.    Groping  himself  in  blindness,  he  pretends  to  point  to  others  the  only  path  to 

Heaven Living  amongst  dead  men's  bones,  he  says  '  there  is  no  spirit,'  and 

pretends  to  gather  from  the  ashes  of  corruption,  the  daily  bread,  meet  for  the  living  souL 
He  looks  to  earth  for  heaven ;  to  matter  to  discover  spirit ;  to  a  dead  and  buried  past,  to 
steer  his  bark  through  present  ills,  or  guide  it  to  future  havens.  He  makes  himself  a 
king,  and  then  parcels  out  God's  heritage  to  his  fellow-men,  as  if  the  earth  were  his,  in- 
stead of  being  stolen  from  God.  He  makes  himself  a  priest,  and  then  pretends  to  sell  out 
passports  to  God's  heavenly  Idngdom.  He  takes  away  the  patariarch's  ladder  on  which 
uigelic  feet  descend,  and  then  sets  up  one  of  his  own  building,  made  out  of  ancient  myths 

and  modern  mysteries,  and  invites  men   to  ascend  it,  without  angelic  aid 

Think  you,  then,  to  such  a  world  as  this  I  have  hope  to  cry  and  yet  be  heard  and  heeded  ? 

"  I  tell  you  nay ;  and  yet  the  spirit  strives  with  men  ;  and,  if  perchance  some  stray  and 
wandering  sheep  ^ould  hear  our  voice,  and  gather  to  (he  fold  of  spiritual  tnith,  our  work 
will  not  be  viun ;  and  freighted  with  that  single  soul,  we  may  return  to  our  heavenly 
Master,  and  say, 'Our  work  is  done.'"    .... 

Such  are  the  highly-strained  and  mystical  phrases  in  which  this  singular 
spirit  influence  from  time  to  time  was  manifested.  Much  more  to  the  same 
purpose  is  given,  most  of  it  in  a  still  more  obscure  mixture  of  biblical  and  oc 
casionally  scientific  imagery.  Sometimes  the  language  is  so  indefinite  and 
strained  as  to  be  wholly  incomprehensible,  but  occasional  glimmerings  of 
high   scientific   truths,    electrical   theories   of   great  value,   geological   and 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITULISM  329 

astronomical  references  of  significant  import,  prove  that  the  ideas  of  the 
communicating  intelligence,  only  needed  a  comprehensive  control  over 
hnman  language  to  embody  revelations  of  profound  interest  and  instruction. 

Tlie  spirits  generally  seemed  to  intimate  that  there  were  hosts  of  beings 
ready  to  commune  with  men,  who  —  witlilield  by  the  bigotry  and  narrow 
prejudice  which  they  foresaw — would  inevitably  reject  them,  unless  their 
revelations  squared  witli  men's  preconceived  opniions.  These  communica- 
tions were  for  the  most  part  signed  "  King,"  with  the  addition,  at  times,  of 
"  Servant  and  Scholar  of  God." 

Besides  the  writings  received  at  Koons's  spirit  room,  other  spiritual  com- 
munications constantly  represent  that  human  language  is  a  most  imperfect 
vehicle  for  the  transmission  of  spiritual  ideas  ;  that  many  spirits,  after  a  long 
residence  in  tlie  spheres  and  the  habit  of  interchanging  tlioughts  through  more 
perfect  methods  than  speecli,  lose  their  facility  of  expression  in  human  Ian 
guage  ;  also  that  the  magnetism  of  the  eardily  medium  shajjes  and  limits  the 
diought  transmitted  tlirough  it,  even  where,  as  in  the  case  of  direct  spirit 
writing,  no  exercise  of  tlie  human  faculties  is  called  into  play. 

A  communicating  spirit  once  declared  that  the  earthly  aura  that 
spirits  used  to  inculcate  their  manifestations  in  material  forms,  was  so 
thoroughly  imbued  with  the  individuality  from  whence  it  emanated,  that 
every  spiritual  production  received  by  mortals  would  be  inevitably  sliaped  to 

the  form  of  th    organism  and  th  ^  ton '  of  the  medium'  -  mind      ?  ' 

ophy  be  app  cabl  11    1  y  u     f      h    f 

the  intelligen  1  d    I       gh  tl      K  nd  T  pp 

respects  tran        d  d  th       m     tal      p  d    1 

certainly  not       g      1       h   1  th  1         I  d 

confused,  illo  dtrgly  dwthhm 

from  whence   h  d         d     h  1 

tor  might  do      11  P         h  1     k  1 

structed  sent  f      1      m  \  m    h 

bering  that    h      b  [1  f       h    f 

tions  assum        IDE  pmtll         hhlm  b  able 

transcript  of  th  ca  d       h      thr     gl    d  "n     g  or 

the  trumpet  f  h      p  n     d  1  se        1        p  'the 

mission  ofagl         gigtlfirdie  d  m  1       efin- 

ing  laws  ofGd,         nhC  ,H  n         1  }^      ism, 

etc. ;   but  the  specimen  we  have  already  give      f        h  d  b     a  r  to 

Koons's  spirit  room  from  a  pa.per  written  by  a  1  and       11    ufh  e  as  an 

example  of  the  whole  series.     Many  of  the  idea  con  a   ed       lee        ings 

however,  are  worthy  of  philosophical  considerat  on 

The  opinion  of  geologists  concerning  the  e  eean  uyo  le  ace, 
and    the  gradual    growth   and   development  of    1  e    pi  n  b    adly 

insisted  upon.     The  claim  of  a  universal  and  -c       n        n  n  n       be- 

tween die  spiritual  and  natural  worlds  is  alleged.  Creeds  and  sects  are  ex- 
cised mtli  no  sparing  hand,  and  the  doctrine  of  God's  providence,  and  uni- 
versal progress  form  the  constant  themes  of  their  teachings.  Some  attempts 
were  made  to  define  the  principles  of  eletricity  and  vital  magnetism,  but  the 
methods  of  communication  seemed  to  be  too  much  trammelled  to  permit  of 
lucid  description. 

We  sliall  close  our  account  of  these  wonderful  phenomena  by  presenting  a 
digram  of  the  spheres,  as  drawn  through  the  hand  of  Kahum  Koons  in  the 
trance  condition,  and  explained  in  direct  writing  by  the  spirits,  who  claim  to 
have  been  the  controlling  influence  in  the  work.     Nahura  Koons  was  a  lad 

If  this 
1 

philos- 
diough 

] 

lany 
d  vere 

f  h 

rces 

tf  1 
1  h 

tiga- 
11  con- 

V^ 

lem- 
vela- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

33»  mSTOR  Y  OF  MODERI^ 

of  about  fifteen  years  of  age,  simple,  ti-utliful,  and  a  fine  clairvoyant,  but  en 
tirely  incapable,  in  his  normal  state,  of  originating  or  even  conceiving  of  the 
ideas  suggested  by  the  diagram.  He  was  frequentli^  taken  spiritually 
through  tlie  spheres,  and  liis  descriptions,  though  deficient  in  lingual  precision, 
are  full  of  sublime  miagery  and  ideal  beauty.  The  explanation  which  ac- 
companied the  annexed  diagram  is  condensed  from  the  spirif  s  highly-elabor- 
ated phraseology. 

"The  region  inclosed  within  H  T,  numbered  from  i  to  7,  represents 
the  spheres.  These  terminate  at  a  celestial  region  called  the  Star  of  Light 
and  Beauty,  G.  The  central  region,  O,  is  tJie  ancient  pit  or  hell,  the 
place  of  "  second  death,"  elaborately  described  by  the  spirit  as  the  lowest 
and  darkest  sphere  of  probation,  but  by  no  means  a  final  state  ;  indeed,  the 
whole  spiritual  theory  of  a  future  life  emphatically  denies  any  finality,  but 
teaches  eternal  and  ever  ascending  scales  of  progress,  whose  conditions  are 
wholly  dependent  on  the  moral  refinement  and  elevation  of  the  pilgrim  souls 
that  tread  them.  Progress  from  this  central  region,  O,  through  all  success- 
ive spheres  marked  outward  to  7,  is  effected  by  changes  somewhat  analo- 
gous to  mortal  dissolution,  though  without  pain  or  sorrow,  but  rather  as  be- 
mg  ascensions  in  high  moral  and  spiritual  development,  passages  marked  by 
triumphant  and  glorious  states  of  angelic  happiness. 

The  region  called  the  Star  of  Light  and  Beauty  is  typically  described  as 
''beneath  the  Throne  of  God."  It  signifies  the  vast  celestial  realms  of  un- 
known and  perhaps  illimitable  extent,  filled  with  the  subtler  fiuiii,  "  the  impen- 
etrable,"  the  inconceivable,  the  source,  fountain,  and  centre  of  all  light, 
heat,  life,  force,  gravitation  and  attraction;  in  a  word,  the  central  sun  of 
being,  the  profound  mystery,  wh"  h  '  s  mi  ed  \  '  the  grand  solvent  name 
of  God.  The  region  C,  fane  fully  narked  w  th  a  cross  and  arrows  of  light, 
signifies  the  realms  of  earth's  r  sen  ni  tyn,  sa  o  rs,  and  exalted  ones  called 
"Christ"  This  is  the  sphere  whch  divded  nto  lany  realms,  is  termed 
"  Heaven,"  and  is  peopled  with  angel  c  1  os  d  ded  into  "  thrones,  domin- 
ions, powers,"  etc.  Here  ultu  ately  a  ce  d  all  tho  e  who  have  "  overcome 
the  world."  D  is  the  great  1  v  ng  s  n  ppo  ed  to  correspond  to  the  apex 
of  the  great  spiritual  sun  be  ea  1  It  is  a  n  atenal  centre  and  source, 
whence  issue  forth  the  rays  of  atenal  1  ght  wl  ch  radiate  tiirough  suns, 
planets,  systems,  and  all  mater  a  bod  es  m  pace  and  is  tiie  carrier  or  ma- 
terial form,  which  conveys  the  ore  ubl  ated  ra)a  of  the  great  spiritual 
son;  it  is  signified  by  the  rays  and  suns  at  E,  K,  L,  and  M.  The  semi- 
circle between  P  and  N  represents  a  focalized  zone  of  celestial  light  emana- 
ting from  the  spiritual  sun,  and  generatmg  the  ph)  sical  central  material  sun 
of  the  universe,  which  thus  becomes  a  combmation  of  etherealized  and 
materialized  elements,  from  which  the  life-centres  of  spirit  and  matter  flow 

A  vast  amount  of  glowing  and  somewhat  incomprehensible  writing  accom- 
panies this  chart;  but  the  main  ideas  are  embodied,  as  well  as  the  occult  na- 
ture of  the  subject  will  permit,  in  the  words  given  above.  The  sum  of  all 
seems  to  be,  an  attempt  to  impress  upon  the  mind  the  idea  of  infinite  progres- 
sion in  time  and  eternity.  Graduated  spheres  of  happiness  and  exaltation 
for  the  souls  of  humanity;  a  grand  central  spiritual  sun,  and  a  corresponden- 
tial  material  luminary ;  each  mystically  related  on  the  consociative  principles 
of  soul  and  body,  and  both  centralizing  all  the  forces  of  being,  and  sending 
out  in  radiative  streams,  eternal  life  through  firmaments  thickly  sown  with 
worlds,  surrounded,  like  earth,  with  their  spirit  spheres ;  and  all  sustained 
and  upheld  in  the  gravitating  arms  of  the  illimitable  and  eternal  sun  of  life, 

Hosted  by  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

332  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

whom  we  vaguely  worship  as  "  God." A  few  question  have, 

from  time  to  time,  risen  in  connection  with  the  history  of  mediums,  tlie  phe- 
nomena of  mediumship,  and  dicir  sjjccial  relation  to  tlie  spirits  who  guide  and 
control  them ;  and  it  seems  to  be  in  order  to  close  our  present  description  by 
a  reiteration  of,  and  response  to,  some  of  those  oft-rejieated  questions. 

Premising  diat  the  manifestations  to  wliich  we  have  referred  as  transpiring  in 
the  spirit  rooms  of  Koons  and  Tippie,  are  special,  and  remarkable  for  clear- 
ness and  force,  it  is  asked.  Why  do  tliey  come  no  more  in  such  a  form  ?  Are 
they  passing  away  or  diminisliing  in  excellence  ?  And  if  so  highly  instructive 
and  useful  as  we  have  represented  them,  why  are  they  not  continued  with 
even  increasing  force  and  beauty  ?  To  tliese  queries  we  answer  generally  : 
These  phenomena  were  evolved  at  tliat  particular  period  when,  in  the  incip- 
iency  of  the  movement,  their  use  was  most  manifest  and  essential.  They 
cease  to  some  extent  widi  die  cessation  of  the  conditions  of  their  production, 
which  were  fervent  zeal,  devotion,  earnest  singleness  of  purpose,  and  lavish 
expenditure  of  time  and  means. 

Messrs.  Koons  and  Tippie  furnished  all  these  in  abundance  until  the  de- 
mands of  material  life  became  too  urgent  and  imperative  for  the  spiritual 
to  withstand. 

These  faithful  workers  expended  thousands  of  dollars,  and  incurred  a  loss 
of  time,  property,  and  position  that  at  length  culminated  in  financial  burdens 
impossible  to  be  borne  longer.  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  with  pre- 
cisely similar  conditions,  similar  manifestations  might  again  be  received, 
but  it  must  be  remembered  that  besides  the  elements  of  success  already  enu- 
merated, the  presence  of  a  lai^e  family  of  highly-mediumistic  children,  and  ■ 
the  electrical  nature  of  the  locality  where  the  circles  were  held,  must  be  taken 
into  account.  Again,  it  has  been  asked,  "  Wliy  die  spirits  who  controlled  the 
Koons  family  were  ungrateful  enough  to  desert:  their  mediums  after  years  of 
faithful  service  ?  "  and  "  Why  they  could  not  have  maintained  them  in  siifB- 
cient  prosperity  to  render  the  continuance  of  their  valuable  services  possible  ?" 
Once  more  we  answer:  die  spirits  use  die  means  they  find,  but  cannot  create 
them.  As  children,  the  Koons  and  Tippie  families  furnished  an  amount  of 
mediuniistic  aura  which  ceased  to  flow  out  in  the  same  proportions  as  they 
attained  the  ^e  of  adolescence.  The  conditions  ended,  the  spirits  could  do 
no  more.  They  did  not  desert  their  mediums,  but  simply  ceased  to  pour 
water  from  the  fountain  when  the  source  became  dry.  Again,  it  has  been 
alleged  diat  Jonathan  Koons  entailed  distress  and  embarrassment  on  his  fam- 
ily by  his  "insane  devotion  to  the  cause,"  and  the  ill-requited  sacrifices  he 
made  for  Spiritualism  have  been  cited  by  his  pious  neighbors,  to  prove  that 
"  Satan  is  a  bad  paymaster  after  all ;  luring  his  victims  on  by  temporary  suc- 
cesses, to  ultimate  ruin  and  disgrace."  Answer ;  Jonathan  Koons  is  not 
the  first  and  will  not  be  the  last  man,  who,  in  a  good  cause,  has  pushed  devo- 
tion beyond  the  bounds  of  worldly  prudence.  This  he  did,  too,  without  any 
promise  on  the  part  of  his  spiritual  allies  that  they  would  or  could  compen- 
sate him  in-a  worldly  point  of  view.  The  spirits  never  promise  their  mediums 
wealth  or  worldly  distinction  — simply  spiiitual  light  and  mental  unfoldment ; 
and  in  these  directions  they  have  always  kept  their  word ;  and  to  the  testi- 
mony of  Jonathan  Koons,  given  above  from  Southern  Illinois,  can  be  added 
that  of  thousands  of  others,  that,  if,  in  the  conduct  of  an  unpopular  cause,  the 
thorns  of  martyrdom  must  inevitably  pierce  the  reformer's  feet,  die  blossoms 
tliat  spring  up  out  of  them  are  worth  all  the  pain  endured. 

The  cross  of  human  suffering  is  ever  surmounted  by  the  crown  of  divine 
blessing.     If  the  figures  in  this  brief  drama  of  marvel  and  mystery  pass  from 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  333 

the  scene,  wrapped  in  the  gray  mists  of  adversity,  is  that  any  argiuiient  against 
a  behef  or  practice  which  has  brought  the  knowledge  of  life,  light,  and  im- 
mortality, to  themselves  as  well  as  to  thousands  of  others  ?  On  this  basis, 
the  nn'mory  of  all  earth's  martyrs,  of  all  who  have  bled,  burned,  or  suffered 
for  the  truth,  might  be  held  accursed ;  and  Christianity,  itself,  be  deemed  the 
work  of'Satan,"  because  its  propagation  led  its  founder  to  the  death  of  a 
malefactor,  and  its  followers  to  martyrdom. 

The  tears  of  unmerited  anguish  water  the  Divine  seeds  which,  though  hid- 
den for  a  while  in  tlie  darkness  of  rudimental  growth,  are  destined  ultimately 
to  cliange  tlie  barren  earth  into  the  fruitful  Eden.  We  know  not  if  ever  the 
amaranth  blossoms  of  immortal  glory  grow  out  of  any  other  soil  than  the 
blood-stained  and  tear-watered  footprints  of  martyrdom  ;  and  if  poor  old  Jon- 
atlian  Koons  has  lost  much  of  material  wealth,  name,  fame,  and  prosperity, 
in  his  search,  he,  like  every  true  Spiritualist,  has  found  the  "pearl  of  great 
price,"  for  whose  possession  he  could  afford  to  exchange  the  whole  world. 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

WESTERN       SPIRITUALISM        CONTIN 

Origin  of  the  Postom  Circle  —  Chahles  W.  Catucart  and  "Baalam's  Ass"-^ 
The  Lamplighter  —  The  Amazon  — The  Convert  and  his  Work  — "King" 
IN  Indiana— Mr-  Cathcabt's  Challenge  — Description  of  the  Maitifes- 
—  Summing  up  Evidence. 

It  has  been  frequently  alleged  by  the  intelligences  which  held  control  at 
Kuons's  spirit  room,  that  similar  manifestations  could  be  obtained  in  any 
gathering  of  harmonious  persons,  who  would  patiently  sit  for  development 
under  precisely  similar  conditions. 

The  truth  of  this  statement  has  been  verified,  in  part,  by  several  experi- 
ments, the  success  of  which  has  only  been  maiTed  by  lack  of  proper  observ- 
ance on  the  part  of  the  investigators.  One  of  the  most  widely  celebrated 
and  successful  efforts  to  repeat  the  Athens  County  phenomena,  transpired 
near  I.aporte,  Indiana,  in  a  district  situated  on  the  stage  route  between  Laporte 
and  Westville,  in  what  has  been  familiarly  known  as  the  "Poston  Circle." 
In  the  place  above  named  "spirit  rooms"  were  established,  and  sf.ances  con- 
ducted, under  drcumstances  the  most  favorable  that  could  be  devised,  for 
placing  the  manifestations  beyond  the  shaxiow  of  suspicion  or  die  possibility 
of  collusion. 

Without  entering  into  a  minute  description  of  demonstrations,  which  in 
neariy  every  particular  resembled  those  of  the  Koona  family,  excepting  that 
they  were  inferior  in  power  and  variety,  we  call  attention  to  the  circum- 
stances attending  the  origin  and  conduct  of  the  seances^  as  tjiey  are  calculated 
to  afford  valuable  suggestions  to  future  investigators. 

Hosted  by  Google 

334  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

Mr.  Poston,  of  Ohio,  having  visited  Koons's  and  Tipple's  "spirit  rooms," 
was  promised  by  die  spirits  that  similar  manifestations  sliotild  be  produced  in 
his  own  family,  under  certain  given  conditions.  Soon  after  this,  he  rented  a 
farm  on  the  estate  of  Mr.  Davis,  a  weahhy  landowner  in  Laporte  County, 
Indiana,  who  had  also  visited  the  Athens  County  circles,  and  according  to  the 
direction  of  "King,"  had  built  a  "spirit  room"  on  the  same  plan  as  Koons 
and  Tippie's. 

Wlien  the  Postons  rented  Mr.  Davis's  farm,  they  commenced  holding  cir- 
cles in  his  new  "spirit  room,"  and  soon  began  to  receive  very  powerful 
manifestations  therein.  It  was  found  that  Miss  Poston,  the  eldest  daughter 
of  the  family,  was  the  medium  of  these  demonstrations,  which  continued  to 
gain  in  force  and  variety  until  the  whole  neighborhood  was  attracted  to  die 
circles,  and  their  fame  hid  fair  to  outrival  their  celebrated  models  in  Ohio. 
■  Amongst  the  visitors  to  Davis's  "s])irit  room"  was  the  Hon.  Charles 
Cathcart,  an  ex-Congressman,  and  a  gentleman  of  great  wealth,  learning,  and 
high  social  standing  in  Indiana-  Mr.  Cathcart  was  the  proprietor  of  a  splen- 
did estate  not  far  distant  from  the  Poston  farm,  hence  he  was  enabled  to 
attend  their  spirit  circles  at  his  leisure,  had  he  desired  it ;  but  having  been  for 
many  years  a  profound  student  in  the  natural  sciences,  and  moreover  of  a 
decidedly  sceptical  turn  of  mind  upon  all  subjects  relating  to  spiritual  exist- 
ence, he  felt  little  or  no  interest  in  a  renewal  of  his  first  visit,  and  utterly 
disregarded  all  the  marvellous  stories  that  were  bruited  about  concerning  the 
"  sphit  room,"  until  he  saw  his  own  children  amusing  themselves  by  pretend- 
to  hold  circles,  at  which  they  insisted  that  invisible  operators  were  present. 

Ey  way  of  dispelling  any  "superstitious  folly"  that  they  might  have  imbibed' 
through  the  reports  of  others,  Mr.  Cathcart  determmed  to  joni  his  young  peo- 
ple in  their  j^flwcw,  and  show  them  "on  philosophical  prmciples"  the  absurd- 
ity of  attributing  to  a  supernatural  cause,  what  he  knew  onginated  in  self- 
delusion,  or  purely  mundane  forces. 

Being,  as  stated  above,  a  scientist  of  a  high  order,  and  conceiving  that  there 
were  still  many  problems  in  electricity,  etc  ,  which  were  unsolved,  but  which 
might  connect  themselves  with  unaccountable  phenomena,  he  placed  upon  a 
very  heavy  table  with  drawers  full  of  books,  three  glass  tumblers,  and  over 
these  a  board,  which  he  presumed  would  be  msulated  bj  its  glass  supports. 
Feeling  as  little  respect  for  what  he  called  "  the  fables  of  orthodoxy  "  as  he 
did  for  "  the  legends  of  Spiritualism,"  and  desmng  to  place  both  in  the  most 
ridiculous  possible  light  before  his  children,  Mr.  Cathcart  requested  his  eld- 
est son  to  play,  according  to  the  Koons  formuiie,  on  the  violin,  "the 
Devil's  Dreani,"  being  the  tune  which  he  deemed  appropriate  to  die  occa- 
sion. He  then  solemnly  invoked  Baalam  to  "spare  him  the  services  of  his 
invaluable  ass,  and  permit  it  to  quit  its  heavenly  stable  for  the  purpose  of 
helping  its  fellow-creafures  to  perform  feats  worthy  of  so  exalted  a  coadjutor. 

Meantime  the  hands  of  the  circle  were  laid  upon  the  board,  but  no  sooner 
had  the  profane  adjuration  passed  his  lips  than,  to  use  Mr.  Cathcart's  own 
words,  "Away  went  the  board !  and  if  we  were  not  surprised,  let  that  word 

be  dropped  from  the  vocabulary We  then   took  avvay  the 

tumblers,  resting  our  hands  on  the  board,  but  round  and  round  it  went ;  we 
put  away  the  board,  and  off  flew  the  table!"  Mr.  Cathcart,  it  seems,  was 
too  good  a  philosopher  to  stop  here.  Scientist  as  he  ivas,  he  found  some- 
tiling  in  this  that  upset  all  his  preconceived  theories,  and  he  determined  that 
tiie  "ass"  whom  he  had  invoked,  should  not  get  the  better  of  hira,  "for," 
he  reasoned,  "as  long  as  he  knows  something  more  than  Charles  Cathcart, 
the  said  Charles  Cathcart  is  the  greatest  ass  of  the  two,"     Continuing  his 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  335 

scoffing  tones  of  invocation,  he  esperimented  with  his  household  circle,  until 
tlie  table,  chairs,  bureaus,  and  heaviest  pieces  of  furniture  would,  with  the 
l^t  touch  of  his  cliildren's  fingers,  fly  round,  float,  heave,  and  with  the  iveight 
of  several  hundred  pounds  upon  them,  resist  the  force  of  the  strongest  mer 
in  attempting  to  restrain  their  erratic  movements. 

On  one  occasion,  when  a  large  table  was  in  the  midst  of  these  eccentric 
gyrations,  it  suddenly  stopped,  and  several  loud  raps  were  heard  from  die 
centre  of  it.  Startled,  yet  not  disconcerted,  Mr,  Cathcart  cried  out "  Halloa ! 
Satan,  is  that  you  ?  if  so,  give  us  three  of  your  best  raps." 

Three  loud  poundings  rather  tiian  raps  immediately  followed,  when  Mr. 
Cathcart,  somewhat  a^med  of  the  encouragement  to  profanity  of  speech 
which  his  words  afforded  to  his  little  ones,  added,  "  Now,  old  fellow,  if  you 
think  as  I  do,  that  it's  a  shame  for  two  old  fools  like  you  and  I  to  be  talking 
nonsense  before  the  cliiidren,  just  give  the  table  a  paning  salute,  and  run  off 
with  it."  The  salute  that  followed  was  emphatic  enough  even  to  startle  Mr. 
Cathcart,  from  whose  hands  the  table  bounded  off  and  ran  coursing  for  seve- 
ral seconds  round  the  room,  without  the  contact  of  a  jingle  human  being. 
But  this  remarkable  phenomenon  did  not  cease  here.  Mr.  Cathcart  had  occa- 
sion to  visit  die  Eastern  States,  and,  whether  he  was  himself  endowed  with 
medium  power  or  that  he  chanced  to  encounter  mediums  wherever  he  went, 
cannot  now  be  determined. 

Certain  it  is  that  not  only  did  the  furniture  of  his  own  house  become  loco- 
mortve  at  will,  but  the  same  mysterious  movements  followed  him  in  all  his 
travels.  He  had  but  to  invoke  "Baalam's  ass,"  as  he  persisted  in  calling 
the  invisible  motor,  and  when  or  wherever  he  would,  he  could  set  the  heavi- 
est pieces  of  furniture  in  the  apartment  where  he  chanced  to  be,  spinning  in 
all  directions ;  in  sliort,  in  his  own  phrase,  he  kindly  hitched  up  his  invisible 
"Jack"  for  the  amusement  of  the  company  at  any  time,  and  he  never  failed 

'"  go- 
To  all  the  heaviDgs,  floatings,  and  poundings,  which  thus  accompanied 
him,  Mr.  Cathcart,  good  philosopher  as  he  was,  could  give  no  explanation, 
and  when  hard  pressed  by  his  friends  upon  the  subject,  only  replied  that  it 
was  the  aforesaid  "  Baalam's  ass,"  or  the  devil  in  or  out  of  Charles  Cathcart. 
As  to  the  spirimal  hypothesis,  he  continued  resolutely  to  repudiate  it.  His 
scientific  dieory  of  possible  causation  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat.  He  could 
not  emulate  the  cool  assurance  of  those  who  branded  millions  of  their  fellow- 
creatures  as  rogues,  or  fools,  for  believing  the  testimony  of  their  senses,  and 
the  legitimate  deductions  wliich  grew  therefrom.  He  knew  he  was  not  de- 
ceiving himself  in  these  sounds  or  motions,  and  had  sufRcient  modesty  to  ac- 
knowledge there  might  be  some  things  in  nature  even  beyond  the  compre- 
hension of  Charles  Cathcart.  "  I  don't  know  everything,"  he  would  say, 
"  if  the  parsons  and  profess(H-s  do  ;  and  it  is  easier  to  believe  that  there  are 
laws  of  nature  of  which  I  am  ignorant,  than  tliat  five  or  six  millions  of  good 
citizens  are  in  a  plot  to  deceive  each  other,  or  have  suddenly  lost  the  faculty 
of  determining  what  they  see  aiid  hear ;  but  as  to  the  '  spirits,'  why,  pshaw  ! 
one  spirit  is  enough  for  me,  and  old  Satan,  with  Baalam's  Jack  for  a  canter, 
covers  the  whole  ground."  Thus  the  philosopher  would  half-theorize 
and  half-jest  the  subject  into  a  mystery  more  profound-  than  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  a  spiritual  agency. 

Naturally  enough,  on  his  return  home  his  desire  increased  to  continue  his 
investigations  in  Davis's  "spirit  room,"  but  here  his  obnoxious  method  of  pre- 
senting die  subject,  and  his  obliging  offer  "  to  harness  up  his  '  Jack,'  for  the 
benefit  of  the  company,"  made  him  an  unwelcome  visitor.     Finding  that  hia 

Hosiedb,  Google 

336  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

presence  was  disaKeeable,  but  still  irresistibly  attracted  to  the  place,  he  was 
one  evening  standing  outside  the  window  listening  to  the  proceedings  within, 
when,  during  a  pause  in  tlie  music,  he  called  out,  "  Don't  you  want  ine  inside 
there,  old  King?"  Upon  tliis,  loud  affinnative  knockings  were  given,  nor 
did  they  cease  until  Mr.  Cathcart  was  permitted  to  enter.  No  sooner  was 
he  seated  and  the  light  extinguished,  tlian  the  manifestations  were  renewed 
with  increased  power.  The  first  act  of  the  drama,  however,  was  the  launch- 
ing of  the  tambourine  at  Mr.  Cathcart's  head.  He  "  ducked,"  but  raised  his 
hand,  caught  and  threw  it  back ;  again  and  again,  and  for  six  successive 
times  this  feat  was  repeated,  proving  that  some  one  who  had  eyesight  enough 
to  direct  the  missile  in  the  dark,  was  intelligently  using  that  tambourine  with 
more  skill  than  himself 

That  night  proved  to  Mr.  Cathcart  a  directing  intelHgence  in  the  circle 
even  greater  than  he  had  dreamed  of.  All  the  manifestations  partook  of 
this  diaracier,  and  he  retired  more  perplexed  than  ever.  When  next  the 
circle  met  Mr,  Cathcart  brought,  by  permission,  an  "Amazonian  Irish  girl," 
one  of  his  domestics,  whom  he  seated  by  the  side  of  Miss  Poston,  with  secret 
instructions  how  to  detect  her  if  there  should  be  any  evidences  of  movement 
on  her  part,  or  appearance  of  trickery.  Whether  the  spirits  had  anticipated 
tliese  arrangements,  or  that  the  presence  of  "the  Amazon  "  was  obnoxious 
to  their  power,  we  cannot  say ;  but  it  was  announced  by  raps,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  sitting,  that  "  there  would  be  no  performance  that  night." 

Baffled,  but  more  than  ever  shaken  in  his  faith  of  the  spiritual  agency  in 
this  circle,  Mr.  Cathcart  now  became  piqued  into  the  resolution  fo  sift  the 
matter  to  the  bottom,  or,  at  least,  to  divest  the  mystery  "  of  the  unnecessary 
burden  of  darkness."  For  this  purpose  be  contrived  the  following  apparatus : 
he  made  a  paper  case  like  a  long  pill-box,  placed  a  glass  tube  at  its  lower 
end,  and  in  diis  put  a  few  drops  of  sulphuric  acid.  Closing  the  upper  part 
of  the  tube  with  blotting-paper,  he  put  into  the  box  a  piece  of  phosphorus, 
and  surrounded  it  with  a  mixture  of  sulphur  and  chlorate  of  potash.  Upon 
turning  this  apparatus  upside  down,  he  knew  that  the  preparation  would  in- 
stantly ignite  with  a  brilliant  flash,  and  the  light  would  continue  to  burn  with 
the  phosphorus.  Being  an  experienced  chemist  himself,  he  had  tried  this  ex- 
periment several  times  successfully,  but  warned  his  family  against  its  use ; 
indeed,  he  declared  it  to  be  unsafe  for  any  one  but  a  practical  chemist,  deem- 
ing, as  he  said,  that  its  sudden  explosion  in  the  hand  of  an  inexperienced 
person  might  afford  the  operator  "  a  nearer  insight  into  spirit-land "  than 
tliey  were  prepared  for. 

The  result  of  Mr.  Cathcart's  experiment  in  the  Poston  Circle  we  shall  give 
in  his  own  words.  When  detailing  his  experiences  in  the  Spiritual  Tekgrapk 
he  writes  as  follows  : 

"  Up  to  this  time,  though  regarded  pretty  generally  as  i  sceptic  or  infidel,  my  orlho- 
dos  friends,  whose  naoiie,  f  am  pleased  to  say,  was  legion,  were  delighted  at  the  determined 
stand  I  look  against  this  'modem  delusion,' and  were  quite  confident  that  with  my  'science 
and  perseverence,'  I  shonld  soon  expose  it  and  do  the  family  of  man  a  great  service. 
Hence  I  had  their  hearty  and  pious  '  God-speed.'  In  addition  (o  the  facts  mentioned  above, 
it  seemed  to  me  there  was  another  connected  with  my  experience,  which  had  mnch  signifi- 
cance. It  was  that  the  table-moving  anil  my  ^asseleclric  machine  both  seemed  similarly 
affected  by  the  weatiier.  Also,  the  table  seemed  to  follow  a  fixed  rule,  being  governed  in 
its  movements  by  our  mode  of  connecting  hands;  as,iftherigbt  little  linger  wasuppermost,  it 
would  go  against  the  sun ;  but  if  the  left  was  uppermost,  it  would  go  with  it.'  At  a  ^anco 
you  can  see  that  my  experience,  as  detailed  above,  must  have  hatl  a  tendency  to  confirm  a, 
mind  schooled  in  materialistic  philosophy  in  the  ojimioii  that  the  most  of  what  was  called 
■spiritual  phenomena'  were  self-deluaons,  or  operations  due  to  some  natural  forces,  which 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  337 

had  long  eluded  science,  but  must  evenutally  be  brought  within  its  domain 

Knowing  that  a  brilliant  light  would  reveal  all  that  was  transpiring,  but  astound  every  per- 
son who  unexpectedly  witnessed  it,  1  frequently  '  lit  up,'  at  home,  to  accustom  my  young 
men  and  boys  to  it. 

"  On  the  n^ht  of  the  illumination  \l  use  (he  word  in  a  double  sense]  I  took  with  me  my 
youngsters,  two  men  and  two  boys,  and  let  three  friends,  who  were  there,  into  (he  secret.  I 
took  my  seat  in  the  circle,  my  friends  occupying  different  places  on  the  back  seats.  After 
the  performance  had  proceeded  some  time,  one  of  my  party,  a  staandi  New  School  Presby. 
tcrian,  asked  that  the  Fisher's  Hornpipe  might  be  played.  This  was  complied  with,  and 
just  when  'old  King'  was  touching  it  aSsecundem  ariem'  upon  the  bass  drum,  which  was 
fastened  upon  a  frame  above  the  table,  after  pioneering  over  and  under  the  table  with  ray 
hands,  which  my  position  close  to  it  enabled  me  to  do,  I  quietly  placed  upon  it,  in  the  very 
centre,  my  '  ligbtning-bug,'  right  ade  up  with  care,  and  dropped  back  into  my  seat,  by 
which  time,  without  noise  or  smell,  the  house  was  as  light  as  day.  What  a  picture  for  an 
artist  !  I  venture  to  say  a  more  graphic  scene  was  seldom  witnessed.  Those  not  in  the  se- 
cret to  be  thus  suddenly  brought  into  Ihe  glare  of  such  a  light  as  they  had  never  dreamed  of, 
and  my  confreres  to  witness  the  stick  beating  the  drum  as  if  handled  from  above,  and  no' 
mortal  nearer  than  about  eight  feet  of  it  I 

"  After  striking  a  few  blows  by  itself,  in  the  light,  the  stick  cose  yet  higher,  and  describ- 
ing, leisurely,  a  curve  in  the  air,  gently  fell  on  the  shoulder  of  Miss  Poston. 

"  We  could  have  seen  a  single  hair  anywhere  about  the  table,  the  light  was  so  bright.  I 
separately  cross-examined  seventeen  of  the  beholders,  and  there  was  not  a  shade  of  difference 
in  the  evidence. 

"  At  first  Captain  Davb  thought  the  light  was  either  caused  by  the  spirits  or  an  explo- 
sion of  some  phosphorus  which  he  had,  but  seeing  the  remnants  of  my  box,  he  demanded 
the  name  of  the  author.  I  immediately  replied  that  I  did  it.  Quite  excited,  he  demanded 
my  object,  when  I  as  readily  replied:  'Ask  old  King;  he  and  I  have  a  perfect  understand- 
ing- '  The  composure  and  cahnness  with  which  I  made  this  reply  drew  a  hearty  laugh  from 
Mr.  Poston,  and  re-established  the  captain's  good  humor.  When  the  light  was  blown  out, 
'  King'  again  reported  himself  with  his  usual  loud  knockmgs,  and  replied  in  the  affinnative 
to  the  questions  of  whether  he  knew  what  I  was  about.  He  said  be  was  anxious  to  give 
this  matter  a  fair  test ;  that  he  knew  me  to  be  honest  in  my  scepticism,  and  determined  to 
let  me  run  such  a  course  that  I  should  have  no  partial  conversion.  He  invited  me  to  come 
to  the  hall.whenever  I  could,  and  always  take  a  seat  near  the  (able.  I  have  frequently  at- 
tended there  since.  I  am  satisfied  that  every  member  of  that  circle  is  as  honest  in  their  be- 
lief, as  I  was  in  my  scepticism.  After  the  '  ilUimination,'  King  very  readily  and  correctly 
answered  my  questions  in  natural  philosophy,  and  furthermore  told  me  that  he  purposely 
bandied  about  the  tambourine  between  my  bands  and  his  and  broke  up  the  sittingthe  night 
I  put  a  watch  on  Miss  Poston,  all  with  a  view  to  lead  me  on  to  the  (est  I  had  now  obtained. 

"  I  was  promised  musical  demonstrations  when  none  but  members  of  my  own  family  were 
present,  and  well  have  the  spirits  redeemed  their  word.  We  have  now  several  cndes  m  our 
neighborhood,  wherein  are  received  every  kind  of  manifestations,  including,  to  me  the  most 
interesting  of  all,  vocal  communications,  the  spirits  speaking  va  propria  pirso3t<x. 

"My  youngest  child  sees  the  spirits,  and  describes  them,  and  they  vouch  for  the  correct- 
ness of  his  descriptions.  What  we  lave  witnessed  in  my  own  house  during  the  last  few 
months  would  fill  volumes.  Every  member  of  my  family  is  as  well  convinced  of  the  daily 
presence  of  our  spirit  friends  as  they  are  of  thrar  own  existence.  I  must  not  omit  to  add 
that  we  have  read  everything  that  we  could  lay  our  hands  on  against  Spiritualism,  and  father 
and  mother  would  blush  for  even  their  youngest  child  if  he  could  not,  in  five  minutes,  cite 
facts  under  his  own  observation  which  would  utterly  demolish  every  puerile  attempt  at  ex- 
planation of  these  phenomena, 

"Not  an  immorat  thought — naught  else,  indeed,  but  love,  charity,  and  wisdom — has  ever 
been  indicated  by  our  heavenly  visitants.  I  know  they  have  brought  '  glad  tidmgs  of  great 
joy '  to  us  ;  they  have  made  us  happier  ;  and  I  verily  believe  that  we  must  be  hardened  in- 
deed, if  they  do  not  make  us  better. 

"  The  best  demonstrations  [and  I  hardly  dare  hope  for  better]  are  to  be  found  in  Mr. 
Poston's  circle  at  home.  Indeed,  it  appears  to  mo  that  we  must  wait  long  before  the  mind 
of  the  public  is  so  enlightened  as  to  enable  spirits  to  give  their  higher  grades  of  development 
to  a  public  sitting. 

"Charles  W.  Cathcakt. 

"  P.  S With  many  I  have  lost  my  standing  as  a  philosopher;  but  with  all,  !  have  won 

the  reputation  of  a  first-rate  lamplighter.      I  had  sooner  ■         ■■  ..-/■. 

lamplighter  in  the  discovery  of  truth,  than  that  of  a  philc 

Hosiedb,  Google 

338  HISTORY-  OF  M0DER17 

From  the  time  when  so  marked  a  change  came  over  the  spirit  of  Mr 
Catlicart'a  dream,  raps,  table-moving,  and  other  phenomena,  accompanied  with 
clear  and  unmistakable  evidence  of  spiritual  intelligence,  pervaded  his  house- 
hold. Several  of  his  family  were  relieved  from  pain  and  even  severe  sick- 
ness by  spirit-power,  and  the  healthful  touches  of  kind,  invisible  hands.  Lights 
flitted  through  their  darkness  ;  voices  spoke  to  them  ;  hands  clasped  meir 
own ;  and  their  children  learned  to  look  upon,  as  well  as  to  think  of  "  the 
sp  s  as  heir  best,  wisest,  and  most  beloved  of  friends.  The  "Amazon,"  to 
who  M  Cathcart  had  intrusted  the  task  of  detecting  Miss  Poston  in  im- 
pos  ure  p  oved  to  be  a  remarkable  medium,  and,  accustomed  to  look  to  in- 
fluence I  ough  her,  they  failed  sometimes  to  note  its  abundance  with  other 
me  be  s  of  the  household.  They  had  musical  demonstrations  of  the  strong- 
est knd  besides  voices  speaking  through  the  trumi>et,  and  the  production  of 
n  any    olo  ed  and  most  wonderfully  brilliant  lights. 

After  some  months  of  these  interesting  experiences,  "  the  Irish  girl,"  who 
they  regarded  as  their  principal  medium,  left  them,  and  the  family  were  for  a 
while  so  overwhelmed  with  thisloss  that  they  considered  themselves  "plunged 
into  the  valley  of  tlie  shadow  of  death,"  and  became  almost  inconsolable. 

By  persevering  with  their  cirdes,however,  they  soon  recognized  the  welcome 
presence  and  manifestations  of  the  now-beloved  spirits,  and  then  they  dis- 
covered that  their  most  powerful  medium  was  Mr.  Calhcart's  little  son  Henry, 
a  child  scarcely  seven  years  old.  No  sooner  did  the  family  become  harmonized 
to  the  new  mediumistic  power  than  it  was  displayed  in  the  most  wonderful 
demonstrations  they  had  ever  witnessed.  Little  Henry  was  tossed  about  the 
room  like  a  feather.  Lifted  in  the  arms  of  the  spirits,  he  would  be  carried  to 
the  ceiling,  cornices,  windows,  perched  up  on  the  highest  nooks  in  the  rooms, 
or  carried  anywhere  and  everywhere  beyond  the  reach  of  human  arms  to 
place  him. 

And  in  these  performances,  no  one  seemed  so  intensely  delighted  as  the 
diild  himself. 

When  being  handed  about,  as  the  other  children  would  describe,  "  just  like 
an  apple,"  the  htde  fellow  would  fairly  shout  with  rapture,  and  cry  "  Go  it,  old 
King!  I'm  not  a  bit  afraid ;  take  me  again  ;  take  me  again!"  Sometimes  the 
child  would  be  entranced,  and  in  that  condition  speak  words  of  wonderful 
wisdom  and  beauty ;  but  confident  as  the  family  had  now  become  of  the  ten- 
der care  and  perfectly  beneficent  character  of  their  spirit  friends,  the  anxious 
mother  could  not  bear  to  see  her  little  one  nnder  this  abnormal  influence, 
and  besought  the  spirits  to  abstainfrom  entrancing  him.  They  repeatedly  as- 
sured her  dirough  tlie  tnimpet,  that  this  influence  would  be  beneficial  to  the 
cliild,  and  enabled  them  to  perform  much  stronger  feats  than  they  could  other- 
wise effect ;  but  as  Mrs.  Cadicart  could  not  be  reconciled  to  this  pha  se  of 
die  i>ower,  die  spirits  kindly  abstained  from  entrancement. 

After  Mr.  Cathcart's  entire  conviction  both  of  the  spiritual  and  bene- 
ficent character  of  his  mysterious  visiunts,  he  built,  or  radier  fitted  up,  a  con- 
venient "  spirit  room  "  for  their  use,  which,  for  several  years,  he  generously 
Opened  free  to  the  public,  giving  all  who  chose  to  visit  it  abundant  opportu- 
nities of  investigation  dirough  his  own  family  and  two  other  equally  powerful 
mediums  who  became  developed  in  the  neighborhood,  namely,  Mrs.  Parton  and 
Mrs.  McKelltps.  Either  at  Davis's  or  Cathcarf  s  spirit  rooms,  therefore, 
manifestations  of  the  most  astounding  character,  besides  trance  speaking, 
healing  by  the  touch,  and  evidences  of  die  presence  of  departed  spirit  friends, 
were  alforded  to  all  who  came,  without  money  and  without  price. 

The  character,  high  social  standing,  and  di^nterestedness  of  the  gentlemen 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  339 

who  promoted  these  meetings  should  always  be  remembered  before  rude  and 
insolent  criticism  is  passed  upon  them. 

As  to  Mr.  Cathcart,  if  he  was  "fanatical"  in  the  eyes  of  tliose  who  could 
not  realize  the  priceless  value  he  set  upon  his  newly-acquired  spiritual  knowl- 
edge, at  least  the  narrative  of  his  antecedent  experiences  will  prove  that  he 
was  neither  bigoted  nor  blindly  deluded;  whilst  to  those  who  venture  to  repeat 
the  oft-disproved  falsehood  that  the  Spiritu;ilists  shrink  from  scientific  investi- 
gations, Mr.  Cathcart's  well-known  acquirements  in  the  realm  of  the  natural 
sciences,  alone  would  repudiate  such  a  charge. 

But  if  the  numerous  examples  already  cited  are  insufficient  to  prove  the 
candid  spirit  in  which  the  best  men  of  the  sphitual  ranks  have  courted  rather 
than  shunned  investigation,  let  the  following  still  unanswered  challenge  speak 
for  itself.  If  it  is  alleged  that  its  publication  chiefly  in  the  spiritualistic  litera- 
ture of  the  day  excluded  other  scientists  from  observing  it,  we  answer,  first, 
(hat  it  was  sufficiently  well  known  and  widely  spread  to  become  matter  of  con- 
versation throughout  the  entire  West ;  and  next,  that  it  has  been  the  general 
policy  of  the  press,  with  a  few  noble  exceptions,  to  exclude  from  their  col- 
umns all  that  the  Spiritualists  had  to  allege  in  their  own  behalf,  and  then 
sneer  at  them  because  they  liad  nothing  to  say;  deny  them  the  right  of  public 
representation,  and  then  insolently  allege   they  had  no  representation  to 

A  most  brilliant  example  of  this  system  of  quashing  the  evidence  will 
be  found  in  the  following  case :  A  certain  London  journal  published  the  state- 
ment that  "Fay,  the  notorious  confederate  of  the  Davenport  Brothers,"  had 
publicly  proclaimed  himself  an  impostor  and  declared  that  all  the  manifesta- 
tions which  he  and  others  had  imposed  upon  the  world  were  the  work  of  decep- 
tion and  confederacy. 

The  writer  of  the  London  journal  then  went  on  to  declare  that  as  the  said 
Fay  had  exposed  himself  and  his  confederates,  the  exposure  of  these  impos- 
tors necessarily  involved  the  entire  demolition  of  "the  gigantic  humbug,  Spir- 
itualism." This  paragraph  was  repeated,  with  variations,  in  nearly  every 
respectable  periodical  in  Great  Britain.  When  it  finally  reached  the  eye  of 
Messrs.  Davenport  and  party,  then  travelling  in  England,  Mr.  William  Fay, 
their  associate,  wrote  out  a  succinct  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  confession 
of  imposture  alluded  to  was  made  by  one  Henry  Melville  Fay,  of  New  York, 
a  personage  not  even  distantly  related  to  the  writer,  who  was  still  a  strong 
Spiritualist,  a  spirit  medium,  and  no  impostor.  To  the  journals  that  had 
given  chculation  to  the  calumny  on  himself  and  the  Davenports,  Mr.  William 
Fay  sent  this  plain  explanatory  statement ;  and  if  the  reader  is  at  any 
loss  to  discover  how  many  of  the  English  journalists  were  honest  and  manly 
enough  to  make  some  effort  to  do  justice  and  contradict  the  injurious  falsehood 
they  had  put  into  irretrievable  circulation,  we  will  save  him  the  trouble  of  gues- 
sing by  giving  the  sum  total  in  these  two  words —  not  one. 

The  substance  of  Mr.  Cathcarfs  challenge  is  contained  in  the  following  let- 
ter, which,  subsequent  to  its  enunciarion  in  printed  circulars,  etc.,  in  Indiana, 
Mr.  C.  refers  to  again,  when  writing  to  tlie  editor  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph. 

SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH,  NEW  VORK-LEITER  FROM  HON.  CHARLES  CATHCART. 

"Laporte,  Indiana,  February,  22,  1857. 
"Messrs.  Editors, — Since  my  name  has  appeared  in  your  paper,  I  have  been  in  the 
constant  reception  of  so  many  letters  making  inquiries  about  the  modeof  obtaining  our  man- 
ifestations, that  I  am  compelled  to  say  to  the  curious  I  can  no  longer  answer  their  letter* 
separately,  but  that,  if  we  succeed  in,  learning  anythmg  further  on  the  subject  which  may 

Hosiedb,  Google 

340  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

promise  usefulness,  you  shall  have  it  for  publication.  I  also  receive  a  great  mmy  inqniries 
to  be  propounded  to  the  spirits  tliat  meet  with  us ;  so  here  I  beg  to  say  to  all  such  corres- 
pondents that  I  will  call  the  attention  of  our  spirit -friends  to  their  communications,  and  will 
leave  it  to  them  to  make  such  replies  as  they  deem  fit  Itnone  are  given,  I  cannot  com- 
inand  them.     The  course  I  safest  is  all  I,  on  my  part,  can  do. 

"  I  thmlt  with  a  little  care,  any  mtelligent  person  might  elicit  our  modus  oferandi  from 
the  two  articles  oVer  roy  ^gnature,  which  recently  appeared  in  your  paper.  1  will,  how- 
ever, once  more  briefly  describe  our  mode  of  proceeding. 

"  We  at  around  a  table  in  the  light,  in  the  developing  circle,  as  we  call  it,  for  about  ten 
minutes,  the  left  hand  in  contact  with,  and  upon  the  next  one's  right,  and  so  on  around 
the  table. 

"  Remember,  you  must  at  passive,  and  as  near  at  peace  with  ajl  the  rest  of  mankind  as 
possible. 

"  Vou  want  a  circle  who  canat  still  and  not  help  the  spirits.  Let  the  spirits  have  it  their 
own  way,  and  it  is  surprising  how  much  better  they  can  do  without  our  aid  than  with  it. 
If  you  have  good  music  from  mortals,  all  the  better,  but  it  must  be  made  by  some  one 
outside  of  the  circle,  and  not  even  there  by  any  one  under  spiritual  influence.  These  con- 
ditions, our  experince  has  proved  to  be  absolutely  essential. 

"  Sometimees  we  are  three  in  uimiber,  sometimes  fifteen,  as  it  may  happien.  When  ten 
minutes  has  expired,  we  extipguish  the  light,  let  go  hands,  and  sit  Mck  two  or  three  feet, 
when  the  manifestations  generally  begin  upon  the  table,  the  spirits  beating  or  playing  on 
whatever  is  there.  The  ^tter  the  instruments,  the  belter  the  mnsic  we  get.  No  peciurar- 
ity  is  required  in  the  room  nor  in  the  fixtures.  All  places  and  all  tables  answer  equally  well, 
provided  you  have  the  mediums  and  can  exclude  the  light.  My  readmg  has  been  quite  exten- 
sive, and  so  has  my  acquaintance  with  Spiritualists,  mediums,  etc,  but  I  am  quite  satisfied 
that  no  rational  e^lanation  has  yet  been  offered  1:^  which  we  can  understand  the  mode  or 
forces  through  which  the  spirits  produce  the  phenomena  we  witness.  I  have  been  a  close 
student  of  material  philosophy,  and  have  acquired  readiness  and  some  skill  in  the  experiments 
necessary  to  the  understandmg  of  the  laws  governing  the  action  of  what  scientists  call  the 
'natural  forces,'  hut  I  am  perfectly  at  a  loss  when  I  attempt  to  conceive  how  these  'spirit- 
ual manifestations'  are  caused. 

"  I  do  not,  however,  for  a  moment  doubt  but  that  they  are  governed  by  laws  as  fixed  and 
permanent  as  those  of  gravitation,  and  only  require  that  the  conditions  necessary  to  their 
manifestation  should  be  observed,  when,  as  in  the  case  of  the  breaking  of  the  stem  of  an 
apple,  the  inevitable  manifestation  of  its  fall  occius. 

"Vou  may  judge  of  the  imbecility  of  scepticism  in  this  country,  when  I  say  to  you  that 
the  two  following  propositions  have  long  been  made  public  without  acceptajice ;  First, 
that  any  intelligent  persons  putting  up  a  hundred  dollars,  I  will  cover  it  with  a  thousand, 
and  that  they  can  have  full  opportunity  by  lighting  up  the  room,  etc.,  to  prove  whether 
these  manifestations  are  made  by  fraudulent  means.  Incase  of  sudi  proof,  I  pledge  myself 
to  give  my  thousand  dollars  in  diarity  ;  on  the  contrary,  after  full  and  fah  trial,  their  hun- 
dred is  to  go  to  the  poor.  Second.  I  have  long  ago  oBered  publicly,  a  reward  of  five  hun- 
dred dollars  for  the  evidence  of  fraud  on  the  part  of  those  sitting  in  my  hall,  with  the  ad- 
vantage of  special  sessions  to  be  held  for  the  investigation,  and  though  hundreds  upon  hun- 
dreds, from  the  first  men  of  the  country  to  the  least,  have  been  here,  the  scepticism  of  none 
of  them  has  been  strong  enough  to  induce  them  to  make  the  eflort  to  pocket  the  five  hun- 
dred dollars. 

"  Another  offer  was  made  to  the  citizens  of  Laporte,  namely,  that  they  should.put  up  two 
thousand  dollars,  which  I  would  cover  with  a  like  sum ;  that  a  drum  should  be  suspended 
from  the  ceilmg  of  the  court  house,  out  of  reach  from  the  floor ;  that  the  Poston  Circle 
would  sit  in  the  room,  manacled ;  and  that  if  the  drum  was  not  beaten,  the  two  thousand 
dollars  put  up  by  their  friends  should  be  dispensed  in  charity,  but  that  if  it  was,  the  other 
two  thousand  should  be  disposed  of  in  lilte  manner ;  every  means  possible  to  be  taken  by 
locks,  guards,  etc. ,  to  prevent  imposition.  The  scepticism  of  a  town  of  Ai.  thousand  people, 
was  not  strong  enough  to  risk  a  donation  of  two  thousand  dollars  to  their  own  poor. 
"  Yours  truly 

"Charles.  W.  Cathcart." 

A  year  later  than  the  date  of  the  above,  Mr.  Cathcart  writes  as  follows  to 
the  Spiritual  Clarion  : 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SFIRITUAUSM.  341 

letter  from  hon.  chas.  w,  cathcakt  — spiritual  clarion,  auburn. 
"  Spirit  Room,  Laporte,  Indiana. 

"Ed,  Clarion,  —  For  three  or  four  years  I  have  kept  open  a  'spirit  room,'  on  my  own 
premises,  at  my  o\™  expense.  The  mediums  are  Mrs.  Partoo  and  Mrs,  McKeUips,  both 
of  whom  have  been  developed  almost  as  long  as  the  Fox  family.  Besides  astonishing  musi- 
cal manifestations,  speaking,  spirit  voices,  lights,  etc.,  we  have  now  a  series  of  beautiful 
pictures  of  the  spirit  land,  painted  by  the  late  E.  Rogers,  of  Columbus,  Ohio,  and  exhibited 
through  the  magic  lantern.      There  are  forty-five  scenes  in  all. 

"I  have  spent  a  great  deal  in  guying  those  manifestations  to  the  world,  and  Jiaye  never 
received,  and  never  will,  any  pecuniary  return. 

"  I  am  grateful  that  I  can  afford  to  do  so.  The  mediums  will  accept  of  a  fair  remunera- 
tion from  those  who  can  afford  it,  and  if  those  who  witness  the  exhibition  of  Rogers's 
Sintmgs,  see  fit  to  give  anythmg  for  the  benefit  of  his  widow  and  orphans,  it  will  be  faith- 
ly  handed  to  them,  and  gratefully  received.  The  spiritual  press  will  confer  a  favor  on  in- 
vestigators, and  oblige  the  undersigned,  by  copying  this  letter. 

"  Respectfully,  yours, 

"Charles.  W.  Cathcaet." 

The  following  letter  is  from  the  head  of  the  "  Poston  Circle,"  and  is  here 
inserted  to  show  tlie  spirit  in  which  the  manifestations  were  conducted: 

—  SPIRITOAI.  TELEGRAPH,    NEW 

"  Spirit  Hall,  —  Ovidng  to  the  numerous  inquiries  made  by  the  public,  and  with  a  view 
to  their  better  accommodation,  the  circle  controlled  by  the  undersigned  will  meet  at  the 
hall  at  Cathcart's  Grove,  on  the  evenmg  of  every  Tuesday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday. 

^'  There  is  a  large  and  comfortable  room  adjomiag  the  hall,  intended  for  the  reception  of 

"The  sittings  wiU  commence  at  six  o'docit  for  the  present,  ajid  then  be  governed  by  the 
time  of  candle-lighting.  Strict  order  and  decorum  will  be  maintained,  and  those  otherwise 
disposed  will  find  the  hall  an  uncongenial  spot.  The  hall  is  atuated  on  the  stage  route  be- 
tween Laporte  and  WestviUe,  nbe  miles  from  the  former,  and  two  from  the  latter  place. 

"  Investigators  will  find  ^  the  Concannon  House,  Westville,  comfortable  quarters  and 
a  conveyance  to  the  hall,  A  register  will  be  kept,  and  every  ptuns  taken  to  give  all  comers 
the  fullest  opportunities  for  investigation.  When  on  any  one  evening  there  are  more  pres- 
sent  than  can  be  accommodated,  those  in  the  vicinity  will  be  expected  to  give  way  to  those 
from  a  distance. 

"  WhQe  all  well-behaved  persons  will  be  admitted,  and  fair  warning  is  given  that  none 
others  need  apply,  the  scrutiny  of  the  wise,  the  learned,  and  scientific,  is  particulariv  in- 
vited. '^  ' 

"  The  circle  will  meet  as  above  till  early  in  April 

"E.  C.  Poston." 

Our  closing  notices  of  this  district,  and  its  remackable  phenomenal  de- 
monstrations, will  be  given  in  a  few  extracts  from  the  narrative  of  a  gentle- 
man of  high  scientific  attainments  and  literary  distinction.  We  are  not 
privileged  to  attach  his  signature  to  the  statements  printed  in  the  Spiritual 
Telegraph,  from  which  our  extracts  are  drawn,  but  we  are  permitted  to  say 
that  his  name  and  standing  are  considered,  both  by  the  editor  of  that  journal 
and  the  author,  as  the  highest  authority  which  they  could  receive  for  the 
fidelity  of  his  narration. 

The  phenomena  described  differ  in  no  respect  from  others  already  noticed. 
We  shall  not,  therefore,  inflict  their  details  on  the  reader,  but  confine  ourselves 
to  quoting  passages  of  interest,  descriptive  of  the  mediums,  or  the  circum- 
stances  attending  the  circles. 

The  writer  commences  his  communication  by  admitting  that  he  is  only  an 
investigator  of  one  year's  standing,  with  a  very  sceptical  turn  of  mind;  but  as 

Hosted  by  Google 

342  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

he  assumes  to  be  the  possessor  of  that  peculiar  shrewdness  with  ■\rfiich  so 
many  inquirers  promise  themselves  they  shall  immediately  discover  that 
whidi  has  baffled  thousands  of  their  fellow-creatures  before  them,  he  declares 
his  wilhngness  to  pursue  his  researches  into  what  be  confesses  to  be,  as  far  as 
he  has  gone,  "one  of  the  most  profound  and  wonderful  psychological  mysteries 
of  the  day." 

After  some  personal  details  of  this  cliaracter,  he  proceeds  to  say  ; 

"  Seeing  in  the  Telegraph,  a  few  weeks  ago,  a  letter  from  the  Hon.  C.  W.  Catlicart,  des- 
cribing the  manifestations  in  Ms  neighborhood,  I  wrote  to  him  to  inquire  whether,  by  a 
journey  there,  I  could  obtain  an  opportunity  of  wifnessine  amilar  demonstrations.  In  an- 
swer, I  received  a  very  kind  and  cordial  invitation  to  his  houise,  where  I  have  passed  a  few 
days  most  lu^eeably,  with  his  intelligent  and  estimable  family.  Every  facility  was  here 
aflonJed  me  lor  making  the  investigations  I  desired,  and  I  propose,  even  at  the  risk  of  ap- 
pearing tedious,  to  describe  them  minutely. 

*'  My  principal  object  was  to  ascertain,  by  satisfaclory  proof,  whether  the  manifestations, 
as  they  are  called,  were  produced  through  some  agency  of  the  persons  present,  or  whether 
they  were  really  to  be  attributed  to  some  power  [intelligent,  of  course]  over  which  those 
persons  liad  no  controL  For  this  purpose  a  dose  and  searching  examination  was  necessary, 
and  the  details  may  not  be  unimportant  to  those  who  may  thence  be  able  to  judge  of  my 
liability  to  be  deceived.  I  shall  only  further  premise  that,  whilst  I  was  determined  to  make 
my  investigation  in  the  Mjirit  of  candor  and  fairness,  I  was  equally  resolved  to  expose  either 

deception   or  illu^on  if  I  could  detect  it." [Here  follows  a  minute 

account  of  the  phenomena  already  so  well  known  to  the  reader,  as  witnessed  in  the  Poston 
Circle  and  Cathcart's  spirit  room.]  "  On  Sunday,  December  7,"  our  corre^)ondent  goes 
onto  say,  "I  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  for  the  first  time,  a  very  excellent  trance  medium 
at  a  small  farm-house  on  the  prairie.  It  was  a  Mrs.  Livmgston,  a  coantrywoman  of  about 
twenty-live  years  of  i^e,  of  amiable  and  exemplary  character,  bat,  as  I  was  informed,  en- 
tirely without  education.  A  circle  of  six  or  seven  persons  sat  around  a  table  with 
her,  for  about  five  minutes,  when  she  arose  with  her  eyes  closed,  and  delivered  a  discourse 
of  an  hour  and  a  half  in  length  which  would  have  done  no  discredit  to  any  of  the  most 
learned  and  distinguished  orators  in  the  eoimtry.  The  subject  was, '  There  is  nothing  lost  in 
nature. '  The  argument  was  con^stent  and  well  sustained  throughout  by  a  variety  of  ap- 
propriate illustrations.  The  diction  was  far  above  mediocrity ;  ornate,  but  in  very  good 
taste,  and  strictly  correct.  Many  of  the  passages  were  highly  poetical,  but  there  was  no 
vulgar  inflation'  of  style.  It  certainly  looked  odd  to  see  a  pl^  countrywoman  in  a  brown 
worsted  dress,  the  front  covered  with  pins,  without  a  collar,  and_with  a  calico  apron  flutter- 
ing around  her,  delivering  such  a  discourse,  with  all  the  gestures  and  intonation  of  voice  of 
an  accomplished  orator.  This  person,  in  her  normal  state,  is  of  a  quiet,  retiring  dispodtion, 
and  incapable  of  delivering,  as  I  was  told,  even  a  connected  discourse. 

"On  the  evening  of  the  8th,  I  attended  another  public  and  also  a  private  circle  at  Davts'a 
Hall,  the  Postons  being  present.  The  manifestations  were  similar  to  what  I  had  before 
witnessed,  only  they  were  even  more  spirited.  '  King '  seemed  determined  to  astonish  us 
with  an  unusiuil  display  of  his  dexterity  in  striking  the  drumsticks  among  the  copper  plates, 
upon  the  wires,  table,  triangle,  and  dnims,  with  such  marvellous  rapidity  that  the  sound 
|HX)duced  from  the  other  instruments  seemed  to  be  slurred  in  as  grace-notes  to  each  suc- 
teeding  beat  of  the  drum.  He  would  occasionally  give  one  of  the  company  a  slight  lap 
upon  the  forehead  or  breast,  as  a  gentle  hint  that  he  was  aware  of  their  presence,  but  these 
vagaries,  which  were  always  executed  during  the  progress  of  an  air,  never  occasioned  the  loss 
of  a  single  note  of  the  music.  During  the  private  silting,  a  guitar  which  was  lying  on  the 
table,  out  of  tune,  the  strings  not  even  being  in  the  right  places,  was  played  upon  in  a  most 
exqui^te  manner. 

"  Several  airs  m  succession  were  executed  in  accompaniment  with  the  violin,  with  great 
rapidity,  and  a  sweetness  of  tone  I  never  before  heard  from  a  guitar.  The  instrument  vras 
laying  very  close  to  me  on  the  table,  and  I  was  unable  to  discover  that  it  was  moved  from 
tlw.t  position  in  the  slightest  degree 

*'  The  spirit  that  is  supposed  to  officiate  at  these  performances  is  called  in  the  neighbor- 
hood by  the  name  of  'King.'  In  reference  to  this  appellation,  it  seems  it  was  adopted  in 
(he  course  of  the  manifestations  at  Davis's  Hall,  wHere,  in  reply  to  questions,  the  querists 
were  informed  that  they  might  as  well  call  him  'King'  as  anything  else;  that  such  was  not 
his  name  on  earth,  but  what  that  was,  or  whether  he  had  died  twenty,  or  twenty  thousand 
years  ago,  was  immaterial  to  their  investigations.  All  that  was  requisite  was  that  they 
should  have  some  recognized  deagnation,  and  '  King '  would  do  as  well  as  another,  only  he 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  343 

preferred  that  they  should  call  him  '  Friend  King,'  rather  than  '  Old  King,'  as  there  are  no 
old  men  in  the  spiiit -world.     There,  tliey  never  grow  old 

"  Many  persons  are  disposed  to  discreilit  the  manifestations,  because  they  are  made  in 
darkness.  But  the  question  is  not  why  darkness  is  chosen  rather  than  light,  but  can  sod 
manifestations  be  made  at  all,  without  human  agency  ?  Reasons  are  assigned,  which  are  not 
incon^tent  with  science  and  philosophy,  for  the  necessity  of  darkness,  but  when  manifesta- 
tions are  made  in  that  condition  which,  well  centered,  transcend  in  all  respects  human 
agency  to  accomplish,  then  the  question  hinges  solely  on  their  production  at  all  under  the 
circumstances,  and  the  darkness  only  increases  the  difficulty  and  calls  for  an  excess  of  care 
and  cautious  observation. 

"Again,  if  the  darkness  is  a  cause  of  suspicion,  would  it  not,  on  the  other  hand,  render  it 
extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  any  individual  to  execute  such  performances  as  were 
made  in  my  presence?  How  could  the  instruments  be  handled  with  such  force,  accuracy, 
delicacy,  yet  preci^on,  ia  total  darkness?  The  musician  who  could  perform  so  well  and 
curiou^y  by  daylight,  would  establish  a  very  high  reputation  ;  and  if  by  long  practice  he 
should  enable  himself  to  perform  such  feats  in  total  darkness  npon  his  own  instnunents, 
arranged  in  a  particular  manner,  it  seems  mcredible  that  he  should  be  able  to  perform  upon 
them  just  as  well  when,  as  was  often  the  case,  they  were  altered  before  the  cucles,  in 
many  ways  disarranged,  and  sometimes  changed.  Except  at  the  circles,  they  are  forbidden 
to  be  touched  or  practiced  on  ;  the  family  never  touch  them  during  the  day,  as  can  be  wit- 
nessed by  the  neighbors,  who  surround  the  spirit  house,  which  is,  moreover,  upon  a  public 

"  It  is  also  proper  to  consider  what  motives  the  parties  concerned  may  have  had  to  im- 
pose upon  themselves  or  others.  As  I  have  already  stated,  these  musical  and  other  wonder- 
inl  physical  phenomena,  occur  in  the  presence  of  Mr,  Cathcart's  family  alone,  theu:  medium 
being  a  bright  little  son  of  seven  years  of  age. 

"  Now,  Mr.  Cathcart  is  a  gentieman  possessing  a  splendid  estate,  of  liigh  social  standmg, 
and  well  known  throughout  the  adjacent  country  as  a  man  of  unquestioned  honor,  candor, 
leambg,  and  the  strictest  truthfulness. 

"  He  has  spent  his  iesiure  hours  for  years  in  the  study  of  the  natural  sdences,  in  which 
he  has  acquired  a  practical  knowledge  raiely  exceeded.  That  such  a  man  could  have  any 
motive  to  hold  these  circles  with  his  own  family  for  the  mere  purpose  of  deluding  them  or 
others,  or  that  one  or  more  of  such  a  family  would  be  capable,  even  if  disposed,  to  get  up 
such  performances,  and  keep  up  the  deception  for  years,  is  altogether  incredible. 

"The  Poston  family  live  upon  a  tract  of  land  rented  from  Mr.  Davis.  If  they  could 
have  any  motive  for  getting  up  such  manifestations,  the  most  obvious  one  would  be  profit. 
They  might,  unquestionably,  make  lar^e  profits  by  such  performances,  conld  they  achieve 
them  themselves  and  exhibit  them,  even  without  the  pretence  of  spiriiual  aid.  If  profit 
were  their  object,  here  then  is  a  legitimate  and  rational  means  of  employing  the  talents 
they  mast  have  cultivated  with  such  immense  labor  and  time,  if  they  do  perform  themselves. 
Oh  the  other  hand,  I  was  informed  that  they  had  received  offers  of  large  sums  of  money  to 
travel  and  exhibit  their  gifts,  but  upon  maMng  inquiry  of  'King' if  he  would  consent,  they 
were  informed  that  they  might  go  if  they  pleased,  but  he  would  not  accompany  them,  as 
his  manifestations  were  not  to  be  made  for  speculative  purposes.  Upon  this,  the  family 
naively  stated  they  could  not  go,  as  without  '  King  and  the  spirits'  they  'should  have  no 
capitti  to  trade  upon.' The  confidence  of  all  these  persons  m  the  advice  and  in- 
structions of  '  King '  seems  to  be  unbounded.  They  rarely  take  any  important  step  without 
first  consulting  him,  and  they  allege  that  they  have  never  been  wronged  or  decdved  by  his 
instructions.  I  was  informed  that  Mr.  Davis  has  formerly  been  a  man  of  rather  a  quarrel- 
some  and  lili^ous  disposition,  and  had  at  the  lime  of  his  first  intercourse  with  '  King,'  no 
less  than  seven  lawsuits  with  his  neighbors  pending,  all  of  which  he  has  dismissed  by  'King's' 
advice,  although  in  some  of  them  he  was  supposed  to  have  had  good  cause  for  complaint. 
Poston  had  formerly  been  a  boatman  on  the  Misassjppi  River,  and  had  acquired  the  usual 
habits  of  that  clasB,  Without  being  intemperate,  he  perhaps  drank  a  little  too  freely  ;  and 
from  some  cause,  shortly  before  ray  visit,  a  misunderstanding  had  occurred  between  him, 
Davis,  and  another  person,  which  threatened  a  disruption  of  their  circle.  In  this  state  ot 
the  case,  'King'  lectured  them  all  roundly;  told  each  of  them  of  their  faults,  and  re- 
quued  thetf  amendment.  He  obliged  Poston  to  make  a  solemn  promise  never  to  teJie 
another  drop  of  spirituous  liquor,  which  promise  he  alluded  to  in  my  presence. 

"  Finally,  he  required  of  them  all  to  shake  hands  across  the  table,  and  admonished  them 
to  be  good  friends  and  fot^t  all  their  contentions ;  and  as  none  of  them  seem  to  have  the 
slightest  notion  of  resisting  this  invisible  friend's  mandates,  hannony  was  effectually  restored, 
One  cannot  help  remarking  that  on  the  supposition,  occasionally  put  forth,  that  these  mani- 
festations are  attributed  to  'demons,'  the  conduct  and  advice  of  '  King'  is  quite  different 

Hosiedb,  Google 

344  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

from  what  we  might  expect,  and  by  no  means  in  harmony  with  our  preconceived  notions  of 
'evil  spirits.' 

"  A  curious  instance  of  the  effect  of  disturbed  mental  conditions  was  related  to  me  by 
Mr.  Cathcart. 

"  It  seems  that  his  little  son,  Henry,  was  frequently  carried  about  by  the  spirits,  and  was 
occasionally  lifted  up  and  put  astride  on  the  drum.  On  one  occasion,  when  he  was  thus  ele- 
vated, his  mother  became  exceedingly  alarmed,  when  '  King '  instructed  them  to  light  up 
and  take  the  child  down  themselves,  as  bis  mother's  nervous  stale  of  mind  had  so  impaired 
the  conditions  by  which  he  operated  that  he  could  not  safely  talte  him  down  himself,  .  .  . 

"  It  was  quite  remarkable  that  the  children,  so  fer  from  being  alarmed  at  tiiese  manifes- 
tations, regard  them  and  the  presence  of  'King'  with  the  greatest  delight.  'Old  King,' 
as  they  will  persist  in  calling  him,  appears  to  be  thrir  best,  and  most  dearly-cherished  friend. 

"  The  perfection  of  the  demonstrations  appears  to  increase  in  proportion  to  the  fidelity 
of  the  circle  and  the  development  of  the  mediums. 

"  The  Poston  Circle  has  been  held  in  this  present  nei(,hborhood  above  a  vear,  during 
which  time  the  improvement  in  its  phenomena  is  said  to  have  been  gradual  and  constant 
It  is  only  about  six  weeks  since  the  first  audible  speakmg  commenced  Thej  are  assured 
that  the  manifestations  wiH  continue  to  improve  with  thi.ir  sleadj  and  persistent  attention  " 

The  phenomena  recorded  in  this  and  the  preceding  chapter,  as  exhibited 
in  two  different  sections  of  country,  and  amongst  four  famihes  of  diftetent 
social  position,  varying  temperaments,  and  intellectual  acquirements,  com- 
prehend nearly  all  that  has  yet  been  produced  m  regularly  constituted  circles, 
under  the  condition  of  darkness.  In  each  instance  cited,  the  total  absence 
of  any  of  those  ordinary  motives  that  could  induce  the  practice  of  deception, 
must  be  carefully  noted.  Messrs.  Koons,  Tippie,  Davis,  and  Cathcart,  were 
all  persons  whose  wealth  and  social  positions  removed  them  from  the  least 
suspicion  of  interested  motives  for  simulating  spiritual  manifestations.  Jona- 
than Koons  and  Hon.  Charles  Cathcart  were  absolutely  opposed  [the  latter 
bitterly  so]  to  the  admission  of  a  spiritual  hypothesis  to  account  for  the  phe- 
nomena. 

The  gallant  and  liberal  spirit  in  which  Mr.  Cathcart  tendered  large  sums 
of  money,  thus  offering  the  most  irresistible  of  all  temptations,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  detecting  himself  and  his  own  pretensions,  leaves  the  slanderer  no 
excuse  for  vilifying  those  engaged  with  him  in  these  transactions.  The  im- 
mense sacrifices  continued  for  years  by  Koons  and  Tippie,  and  the  long  and 
untiring  fidelity  of  Messrs.  Davis  and  Poston,  are  equally  strong  evidence  for 
their  utter  disinterestedness.  Besides  aUlhis  array  of  incontrovertible  evidence, 
and  the  testimony  of  the  manifestations  themselves,  the  mediums  were,  for 
the  most  part,  children,  and  absolutely  incapable,  had  it  been  necessary,  of 
practicing  a  systematic  and  astute  course  of  deception. 

What  remains,  then,  as  a  point  of  attack  ?  Can  the  author  have  had  the 
hardihood  to  cite  the  names  of  states,  counties,  places,  and  persons  that 
never  had  an  existence ;  or,  in  recording  these,  with  all  their  witnesses'  names, 
etc,  with  an  even  painful  circumstantiality  of  detail,  have  we  dared  to  garble 
facts  still  patent  in  the  knowledge  of  hundreds  and  even  thousands  of  living 
witnesses,  ready,  and  many  oi  them  able,  to  come  forward  at  any  moment, 
to  prove  or  disprove  our  statements? 

if  none  are  found  able  upon  sufficient  grounds,  to  invalidate  our  record, 
where  are  the  leaders  of  public  opinion  in  press,  school,  and  pulpit,  who  still 
dare  to  launch  their  ribald  denial,  or  solemn  scriptural  platitudes  against  the 
phenomena  of  a  cause  that  can  bear  such  testimony  to  its  truth  and  worth? 
Where  are  the  sage  philosophers  who  pretend  to  explain  all  nature's  mysteries, 
and  are  yet  only  able,  with  lude,  blank  denial,  to  dispose  of  the  gyrations  of 
floating  bodies  and  dancing  tables  ?  How  much  higher  do  they  star  d  in  the 
scale  of  knowledge  than  the  "Baalani's  ass"  of  Charles  Cathcart?  or  have 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  845 

they  yet  reached  to  his  understanding  of  material  laws,  when  the  latter  is 
"hitfjiedon"  to  ponderable  bodies?  Where,  too,  are  the  pious  Christians 
who  consider  that  day  unsuitably  spent  which  does  not  begin  and  end  with 
"  long  prayers  and  loud  aniens,"  and  yet  devote  their  best  energies  to  quench- 
ing the  spuit,  refusing  to  "  covet  after  spiritual  gifts,"  or  rather  remaining  de- 
terminedly ignorant  of  them ;  and  when  forced  to  admit  of  their  continued 
exercise  in  the  persons  of  their  neighbors,  raising  their  biblical  cry  of  "  Away 
with  him  !  away  wili  him  !     He  is  a  fellow  not  fit  to  live  ! " 

There  are  other  classes,  in  all  ranks  of  life,  to  whom  the  great  modern  spir- 
itual outpouring  is  inconvenient,  and  who,  like  the  ancient  image-makers  of 
Ephesus,  find  the  lai^e  liberty  of  individualized  knowledge  which  the  spiritual 
movement  promotes,  liable  "  to  spoil  their  trade  in  image-making." 

For  such,  at  least,  we  can  find  a  material  if  not  a  spiritual  excuse,  nor  mar- 
vel when  tlie  multitude,  who  have  hitherto  bowed  down  before  the  images 
which  priests,  and  schoolmen  present  for  worship,  shout,  "  Great  is  Diana  of 
the  Ephesians  ! "  But  be  the  cause  what  it  may  that  moves  them,  when 
men  persistently  deny,  or  as  persistently  and  recklessly  vilify  those  great 
and  wonderful  evidences  of  a  good  and  beneficent  spiritual  outpouring,  it  is 
our  part,  in  justice  and  fi'atemal  feeling,  to  warn  them  that  now,  as  of  old, 
they  are  fighting- against  the  living  God. 

We  know  it  will  be  alleged  that  imposture  of  the  grossest  kind  has  been 
practiced,  especially  among  spiritual  mediums  and  in  dark  circles,  and  that 
records  to  this  effect  will  be  found  in  these  pages.  All  this  we  admit,  but 
such  admissions  never  impeach  the  integrity  of  the  phenomena  produced  un- 
der strictly  guarded  conditions,  and  in  circumstances  where  imposture  would 
have  been  equally  causeless,  groundless,  aimless,  and  impossible.  Connect 
the  time  when  the  genuine  manifestations  noticed  in  this  volume  were  given, 
with  the  persons  and  circumstances  of  their  production. 

Remember  that  we  have  been  writing  cliiefly  of  the  originals,  not  the  imita- 
tions ;  and  then  think  what  hardihood  of  purpose  or  fertility  of  human  invention 
could  first  have  devised,  and  then  successfully  caried  out  such  inconceivable 
phenomena  1 

Granted  that  spurious  imitators  and  puerile  attempts  at  deception  had  been 
far  more  numerous  than  our  candid  statements  proclaim,  could  they  for  one 
moment  impeach  the  original  truth  and  value  of  the  royal  coin  stamped  and 
patented  from  the  Divine  mint  of  spiritual  existence  ? 

Ninety-nine  spurious  counterfeits  can  never  destroy  the  value  of  one  pre- 
cious piece,  frei^  from  the  treasury  of  immortality ;  and  that  diese  have  been 
vouchsafed  to  buy  souls  from  the  power  of  darkness,  infidelity,  and  supersti- 
tion, we  know,  and  testify  of  in  these  startling  and  wonderful  spiritual  phe- 

Hosled  by  Google 

34fi  BISTORY  OF  MODERN 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

WESTERN      SPIRITUALISM      CONTINUED. — CINCINNATI. 

Spontaneity  OF  THE  Manifestations  in  Cincinnati— The  youmg  Prophetess  — 
Mrs.  Bushneli,— The  Foxes  in  the  Queen  City  —The  Specialty  of  Soil,  and 
CuMATE  —  Cincinnati  Sunday  Meetings. 

Passing  over  many  sections  of  country  where  Spiritualism  has  made  a  deep 
and  lasting  impression  on  the  community,  we  proceed  to  notice  its  advent  in 
what,  from  size  and  commercial  importance  has.  been  justly  entitled  "  the 
Queen  City  of  the  West,"  Cincinnati. 

Amongst  private  families  it  is  known  that  the  manifestations  had  been  rife 
before  the  rumor  of  the  Rochester knockings  reached  Cincinnati;  and  after 
the  fame  of  tliis  remarkable  movement  became  matter  of  general  notoriety  it 
was  found  that  strange  and  heretofore  unaccountable  sounds,  sights,  and  pre- 
ternatural disturbances  had,  for  two  or  three  years  previous,  been  agitating  die 
minds  of  many  of  the  most  respectable  persons  in  the  city. 

These  unusual  phenomena  were  a.ttributed  to  the  general  prevalence  of 
magnetic  experiments,  which  here,  as  in  other  places,  had  been  widely  practiced 
and  resulted  in  confounding  some,  instructing  others,  very  considerably  dis- 
turbing the  opinions  of  materialism,  and  perplexing  even  die  spiritually-minded. 
In  the  latter  category  we  may  mention  a  Cimily  of  high  social  standing  in 
Cincinnati,  who,  after  having  witnessed  some  public  exhibitions  of  magnetism, 
partly  in  jest  and  pardy  in  earnest,  proceeded  to  experiment  with  each  odier 
in  private. 

The  result  was  that  under  the  influence  of  her  father's  magnetic  passes,  a 
young  lady  of  fourteen  years  old  became  entranced,  but  instead  of  exhibit- 
ing die  usual  psychological  submission  to  her  operator's  will,  she  proceeded 
to  delineate,  in  striking  pantomimic  action,  the  habits  and  peculiarities  of 
several  deceased  persons  whom  the  family  at  once  recognized.  She  also  de- 
scribed spirits,  and  prophesied  correctly  the  approaching  deaths  of  two  of  her 
acquaintances,  who  were  then  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health.  These 
singular  conditions  of  spiritual  lucidity  could  be  induced,  as  the  family  alleged, 
at  any  time  by  mesmeric  passes,  and  first  appeared  in  this  young  lady's  case 
as  early  as  1846.  Anodier  lady  became  the  subject  of  occult  power  by  visit- 
ing a  "  Shaker  "  community  in  the  vicinity  of  Cincinnati,  on  returning  from 
which  she  was  annoyed  with  strange  and  unaccountable  rappings,  which  fol- 
lowed her  whithersoever  she  went,  and  continued  an  unsolved  mystery  until 
the  reports  of  the  Rochester  knockings  induced  her  to  apply  the  telegraphic 
formula  lo  the  sounds,  when  it  was  discovered  that  her  spirit  friends  had  for 
years  been  striving  to  communicate  with  her  through  this  method,  but  had,  up 
to  that  time,  been  baffled  by  her  superstitious  fears  and  ignorance  of  spirit 
communion. 

Mr.  M.  A.  Robinson,  a  wordiy  tradesman  of  the  city,  testified  that  several 
of  his  children  saw  and  described  spirits,  from  die  time  when  they  could  speak, 
and  one  of  them,  a  litde  blue-eyed  fairy  of  seven  years,  would  frequently  fall 
into  spontaneous  trances,  and  deliver  sermons  of  over  an  hour's  length,  full 
of  logical  acumen  and  deep  religious  fervor. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  347 

Mr,  Robinson  has  favored  the  author  with  an  extract  from  one  of  these  ex- 
traordinary discourses,  given  in  1845,  at  least  two  years  before  the  disturbances 
at  Hydesville. 

"  Have  ye  not  lead  that  in  these  latter  days  I  will  pour  out  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh,  and 
your  sons  and  your  dauditers  sliall  prophecy ;  Your  old  men  shall  dreani  dreams  and  your 
young  men  shall  see  visions.  And  lo  !  this  is  the  day  of  which  the  Ijord  hath  testified,  and 
be  that  piomised  to  ponr  out  wiisdom  through  the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklingsdoth  move 
tliese  lips  to  testify  of  his  everlasting  truth.  The  promise  is  redeemed ;  tlie  day  of  the 
^irit  is  at  hand ;  voices  shall  he  heoi'd  crying  in  the  wilderness,  and  that  not  one,  but  many ; 
and  their  sound  shall  reach  from  end  lo  aid  of  the  earth,  and  he  skfil  confound  the  wisdom 
of  the  wise  with  things  that  are  naught,  with  dreams,  and  visions,  and  trances ;  with  arising 
of  the  dead,  and  revdations  which  have  been  kept  secret  from  the  foundation  of  the  world ; 
aye  with  so  mighty  3  change,  that  ere  this  century  shall  be  out,  man  shall  bear  witness  that 
the  Lord  hath  made  all  thSigs  new,  that  there  is  'no  more  death.'" 

The  parents  of  this  child,  now  resident  in  Iowa,  feared  to  "blaze  abroad" 
the  remarkable  gifts  of  the  young  prophetess,  first,  from  their  own  lack  of 
faith  in  her  mysterious  predictions,  and  next,  because  they  painfully  realized 
the  abnormal  character  of  her  control,  and,  deeming  it  was  "disease,"  if  not 
"demoniacal  possession,"  confided  its  nature  only  to  their  family  physician 
and  the  good  Presbyterian  minister  of  whose  congregation  they  were  mem- 
bers. The  former  precribed  calomel,  which  little  Ada  resolutely  refused  to 
take,  alleging  that  tiie  angels  had  her  in  charge,  and  bid  her  refijse  it ;  whilst 
the  latter  prayed  over  her,  on  which  the  little  saint  repaid  him  with  invoca- 
tions so  pious  and  eloquent  that  the  good  man  was  melted  into  tears,  and 
wisely  concluding  that  "  such  heavenly  fruit  could  not  proceed  from  a  cor- 
rupt tree,"  advised  the  parents  "  to  let  her  alone  to  God  and  her  angels,  and 
see  what  would  come  of  it." 

We  could  cite  more  cases  of  seemingly  spontaneous  mediumship  which 
antedated  the  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox  to  Cincinnati,  but  the  above  will  suffice 
to  prove  the  spontanei^  of  the  movement  in  that  city. 

The  first  public  manifestation  of  spirit  communion  was  given  through  the 
mediumship  of  Mrs.  Bushnelj,  a  prescribing  and  medical  clairvoyant,  who 
visited  Cincinnati  in  the  course  of  a  professional  tour. 

Mrs.  Bushnell  had  heard  the  mysterious  knockings  in  Western  New  York 
and  Ohio,  and  shortly  after  her  first  interviews  with  the  spirits,  she  found  the 
powers  which  she  had  witnessed  through  other  media  developed  in  her  own 
person ;  in  short,  she  became  a  rapping,  writing,  and  seeing  medium,  in  addi- 
tion to  her  original  endowments  as  a  fine  clairvoyant  and  psychological 
subject. 

Mr.  Co^eshall,  a  highly  respectable  citizen  of  Cincinnati,  became  so  im- 
pressed with  the  marvel  and  abundance  of  the  evidences  of  spirit  communion 
which  he  witnessed,  that  he  published  a  minute  and  very  usefiil  account  of 
his  experiences  up  to  about  1852, 

From  his  pamphlet  we  gather  the  following  minutes  of  the  first  public 
manifestations  in  Cincinnati : 

"On  the  evening  of  the  26th  of  September,  1 850,  we  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  Mrs. 
Bushnell  with  a  select  party  at  the  house  of  Professor  J.  M.  Buchanan,  the  well-known 
neurologist,  and  editor  of  the  Journal  of  Man.  During  the  evenmg  Mrs.  Bushnell  was 
psychologically  bflueneed  by  the  Professor.  During  this  state  she  made  some  very  accu- 
rate phrenological  examinations  of  several  gentlemen  present,  whom  she  had  never  seen 
before  that  evening,  and  who  sat,  during  the  examination,  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  room 
from  her. 

"  When  Dr., Buchanan  was  about  to  awaken  her  from  the  cldrvoyant  state,  she  bid  him 
stop,  and  entered  upon  a  description  of  the  appearance  and  character  of  the  doctor's  father, 

Hosiedb,  Google 

3^  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

many  years  deceaEcd.  She  gave  a  very  correct  description  of  his  pecsoTial  appearance,  as 
compared  with  a  portrait  afterwards  shown  the  company.  We  requested  permission  to  ask 
the  lady  some  questions.  It  was  granted.  We  inquired  if  we  had  recently  tost  a  relative. 
She  said  yes;  a  person  heavier  than  we  are;  that  he  was  at  a  distance,  west;  tliat  he  was 
going  farther  west ;  that  he  resembled  us  very  much ;  that  he  must  be  a  brother ;  and  that 
he  died  suddenly  of  a  disease  of  the  stomach.  She  described  his  appearance  perfectly ;  gave 
the  peculiarities  of  liis  mtnd,  and  stated  that  he  was  in  pursuit  of  an  object  by  which  he  had 
hoped  to  'shine  in  the  world;'  that  just  before  he  died,  he  expressed  many  regrets;  and 
she  described  effects  and  mementos  that  we  are  positive  he  had  with  him,  as  perfectly  as  we 
could  have  done  it.  Her  impressions  of  all  the  matters  in  referaice  to  him  of  whom  she 
spoke  were  correct. 

"After  tUs  examination,  we  had  several  opportunities  of  testmg  Mrs.  B.'s  claivoyant 
powers,  and  became  convinced  that,  in  many  respects  and  for  many  pnrposes,  they  were 
remarkable.  During  the  interviews  we  had  with  Mrs.  B.  for  clairvoyant  investigations, 
we  learned  from  her  that  the  '  mysterioos  noises '  had  often  been  made  in  her  presence,  and 
that  she  had  communicated  with  spirits  by  means  of  them.  Our  curiosity  being  excited, 
we  expressed  a  strong  deare  to  witness  the  'the  manifestations.'  On  two  occasions  the 
sounds  were  heard  by  Mrs.  B.  in  our  company,  but  were  not  communicative.  The  first 
positive  '  manifestations '  were  heard  on  the  night  of  the  14th  of  October,  at  the  house  of  a 
gentleman  with  whom  Mrs.  B.  boarded.  The  only  intelligible  communication  received  at 
this  time  was, 'Your  battery  is  not  strong  enough.' 

"  On  Wednesday  evening,  October  16,  a  number  of  persons  had  assembled  for  the  pur- 
pose of  receiving  the  benefit  of  Mrs.  Bushnell'  s  medical  exammations,  when  the  soun^  were 
again  heard.  Questions  were  asked,  and  correct  rapping  replies  given  to  a  number  of  inter- 
rogatories, whidi,  it  is  said,  could  not  have  been  correctly  answered  by  any  mortal. 

"  The  report  of  thb  meeting  excited  intense  curioaty,  and  the  next  evenmg  a  larger 
company  assembled  at  the  same  place.  A  circle  having  been  formed,  the  rappings  com- 
menced. Among  the  gentlemen  of  this  circle  were  Mr.  Samuel  Goodin,  of  Goodin's 
building.  Court  street ;  G.  W.  Ball,  stove-founder,  of  Covington,  Kentucky ;  Dr.  J.  P. 
Getchell,  of  the  Eclectic  Medical  College  ;  Mr.  Anson  Atwood,  of  Troy,  New  York ;  Mr. 
Augustus  Wattles,  of  Rural,  Ohio;  Dr.  William  Owens,  of  the  Eclectic  College ;  Mr.  Nor- 
ton, stove-dealer  on  Main  street ;  and  a  number  of  other  gentlemen,  together  with  some 
ladies,  strangers  to  us. 

"  The  alphabet  was  called  by  one  of  the  gentlemen,  who  understood  the  modus  operandi 
of  communication,  and  the  persons  in  the  circle  took  turns  in  puttmg  questions.  It  would 
'  -^        '   '  ■     t,  and . 

"  Before  the  company  dispersed,  some  one  asked  if  all  the  spirits  in  the  room  would  rap 
on  the  table.  In  response,  there  were  a  great  number  of  sounds  made  at  the  same  moraeut 
upon  the  tabic,  some  loud,  some  feeble,  some  sharp,  and  some  prolonged. 

"  During  Friday  and  Saturday  of  this  week,  most  of  the  persons  who  visited  Mrs.  Bush- 
nell for  medical  consultation,  heard  the  mysterious  sounds,  and  many  astonishing  communi- 
cations were  given,  if  the  testimony  of  respectable  persons  is  to  be  credited. 

"  On  Saturday  evening,  October  19,  we  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  these  strange  de- 
monstrations, at  the  house  of  J.  F.  Taylor,  the  gentleman  with  whose  family  we  make  our 
home,  a  man  very  deeply  interested  in  spiritual  investigation,  and  in  whose  house  no  decep- 
tion would  be  allowed  under  any  circuijistances,  A  company  had  been  invited  to  hear  Mrs. 
B.  lecture  on  Spiritualism.  Among  the  persons  present  were  Major  Gano,  clerk  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  Cincinnati ;  Dr.  J.  S.  Garretson ;  Dr.  WiUiam  Owens,  of  the  Eclectic 
Collie;  Dr.  Childs,  of  Walnut  Hills;  Mr.  Augustus  Watles;  Dr.  J.  Wilson,  Botanic 
Physician  ;■  and  many  other  gentlemen,  whose  names  it  is  needless  to  mention,  and  also  a 
large  number  of  ladies. 

"  There  were  three  known  clairvoyants  in  the  company.  While  the  lecture  was  proceed- 
ing, the  sounds  were  heard  apparently  under  the  floor,  near  the  speaker.  The  clairvoyant 
spoke  of  the  rappmgs,  and  called  them  electrical  vibrations,  and  said  communications  might 
be  had  from  the  spirit-world  if  a  battery  was  formed.  Inquiry  being  made  how  a  battery 
could  be  formed,  the  reply  was,  'By  sitting  around  a  table.' 

"  The  lecturer,  with  two  other  persons  designated,  seated  themselves  together  at  one 
corner  of  the  table.  Sounds  were  distmctly  iSard  under  the  floor,  directly  beneath  these 
pei-sons. 

"Thealphahet  was  called,  and  the  word  Ci»-n«//spelled,  thesoundsoccurrmgas  theletter* 
were  spoken  in  repeating  the  alphabet. 

"  It  was  asked  if  it  was  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Cornell  that  communicated.    Rap. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  349 

"A  few  unimportant  questions  were  then  asTteil,  when  a'manifestaaon'  that  startled  the 
entire  company  was  made.  Suddenly  the  left  arm  of  one  of  the  ladies  at  the  table  was 
drawn  bauk  with  great  force,  as  if  it  had  been  grasped  between  the  elbow  and  the  shoulder. 
Several  persons  undertook  to  relieve  the  arm  by  magnetic  passes,  but  without  effect. 

"  The  inquiry  was  made,  'Is  it  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Cornell  that  affects  the  lady  ?  '    Rap. 

'"Will  the  spirit  relieve  her?'    No  sound. 

"  But  suddenly  the  arm  was  thrown  forwariJ,  and  the  lady  relieved. 

"  We  had  been  conyerang  with  the  lady  during  the  day  in  reference  to  the  manifesta- 
tions,  and  remarked  to  the  company  that  she  had  said  she  should  not  believe  th  pp'  gs 
were  made  by  spirits  nnless  some  sph-it  should  take  hold  of  her.  At  this  there  w  se  al 
raps  near  the  lady,  as  if  to  signify  that  the  spirit  had  made  an  effort  to  convin     h 

' '  The  question  was  put,  '  Will  the  spint  take  hold  of  the  lady  again  ?  '    N      and 

' '  But  the  lady  says  that  her  fingers  were  pressed  tt^ther  as  though  a  str  g  h  d  h  d 
grasped  them.     She  describes  the  sensation  on  her  arm  as  if  it  had  been   o  u  ly 

pressed  between  the  elbow  and  shoulder  that  she  was  nnable  to  open  or  shut  h     h    d 

"Weweresatisfiedat  the  time  that  the  manifestation  wasnot  the  effect  of  niagn  m  as 
generally  understood,  because  the  muscles  of  the  arm  were  not  contracted      1      m  was 

merely  drawn,  or  pulled  back,  as  described. On  Tuesday  and  Wednesday 

the  rappings  were  heard  frequently  at  the  house  where  Mrs.  Bushnell  stopped,  and  a  lai^ 
number  of  persons  held  conversations  with  the  rappers.  On  Wednesday  evening  Mrs, 
Bushnell  met  a  select  cucle  at  the  house  of  Professor  J.  K.  Buchanan,  and  communications 
were  receivel  by  raps  from  the  father  of  Dr.  Buchanan,  many  years  deceased,  and  from 
Dr.  T-  V.  Mowow,  a  few  months  deceased,  formerly  dean  of  the  Eclectic  Medical  Col- 
lege." 

Mr.  Spicer,  the  author  of  a  little  work  entitled  "  Sights  and  Sounds,  or 
The  Mystery  of  the  Day,"  published  about  1853,  and  purporting  to  be  an 
account  of  the  American  spiritual  manifestations,  gives  the  following  details 
of  a  siance  with  Mrs.  Bushnell  in  Cintinnati ; 

"  One  cu-cumstance  is  worth 
if  any  spirit  would  communic 

"  '  /  have  done  as  I  agreed.' 

"Upon  this  the  young  lady,  greatly  agitated,  informed  those  present  that  she  had  been  m 
Rochester  with  her  aster  when  rappmg  manifestations  were  being  made  in  the  family  of 
Mrs.  Fish.  They  did  not  believe  them  to  be  spiritual  manifestations,  and  when  they  parted, 
they  mutually  agreed  that  whichever  died  first  should  visit  the  other  in  spirit,  and  make 
raps,  if  it  were  possible.  The  sister  went  to  Wisconsin  and  died.  She  had  come  to  her 
aster  m  Ohio  in  spirit,  and  fulfilled  the  pronaise  made  in  the  flesh." 

Mr.  Spicer  goes  on  to  say  : 

"The  manifestations  were  now  no  longer  confined  to  Mrs.  Bushnell  and  her  neighbor- 
hood,  but  rapidly  spread  over  the  city.  One  lady,  a  Miss  B.,  readmg  in  Cutter  street, 
had  frequently  heard  them,  but  had  never  attempted  to  communicate,  and  her  family  re- 
garded the  mysterious  sounds  as  foreiunners  of  calamity.  Another  lady  had  heard  them 
repeatedly  before  Mrs.  Bushnell  visited  Cincinnati.  Two  years  before  a  Miss  A.  had  heard 
them  so  frequently  that  the  family  became  alarmed,  and  endeavored  by  every  means  to 
ascertain  their  cause,  but  withoot  effect. 

"  Dr.  William  Owens,  of  the  Eclectic  Medical  College,  had  also  heard  the  sounds,  and 
had  received  answers  to  mental  questions  from  the  spirit  of  a  deceased  friend. 

"  Professor  B.  C,  Hill  received,  by  means  of  raps,  what  he  considered  to  be  a  very  im- 
portant communication  in  reference  to  medical  science. 

"  'Die  persons  alluded  to  are  all  of  character  and  station  in  ajid  about  CincinnatL 

"  Besufcs  these  instances,  several  persons,  while  consulting  Mrs.  Bushnell  for  medical  pm- 
poses,  held  communications  with  the  sounds ;  and  it  appears  that,  on  account  of  the  ridi- 
cule thrown  upon  such  as  were  most  intimately  connected  with  the  rapping  manifestations, 
and  because  the  curiosity  th^  excited  brought  so  many  persons  to  her  house,  her  practice 
was  materially  interfered  with.  Mrs.  Bushnell  decided  poatively,  in  the  beginning  of  De- 
cember, that  she  would,  raider  no  circumstances,  place  herself  in  a  '  circle '  for  the  purpose 
of  receiving  manifestations,  and,  with  a  few  exceptions  of  a  private  nature,  adhered  to  her 
resolution. '^ 

Hosted  by  Google 

35°  mSTORY  OF  MODERIT 

The  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox  to  Cincinnati,  in  1851,  revived  the  interest 
which  Mrs.  Bushnell's  withdrawal  from  public  circles  had  somewhat  retarded. 

The  clergy  had  been,  as  usual,  particularly  active  in  calling  attention  to  the 
subject  by  a  series  of  anathemas,  which  poured  with  such  volubility  from  the 
various  pulpits  of  the  city  that  it  reqtjired  other  public  demonstrations  than 
Mrs.  Bushnell's  to  inform  the  world  what  it  was  that  so  considerably  exer- 
cised  the  wrathful  spirit  of  these  reverend  followers  of  the  meek  and  lowly 
Spiritualist  of  Nazareth. 

The  Rev.  C.  B.  Boynton,  of  the  Vine  Street  Congregational  Church,  and 
many  of  his  compeers,  acknowledged  the  power  and  its  spiritual  source,  but 
insisted  upon  it  that  that  source  was  demoniacal,  whilst  Professor  Locke,  of 
the  Medical  College,  and  his  scientific  associates,  summoned  up  the  ghosts 
of  the  defunct  toe  and  knee  joint  theories  to  explam  the  mystery. 

Just  as  the  reverend  and  scientific  savans  had  concluded  that  the  material- 
istic arguments  of  the  one,  and  the  unscientific  fallacies  of  the  o&er,  had  ex- 
ploded the  whole  thing,  and  that  Spiritualism  had  died  out,  the  tide  of  public 
opinion  was  turned  back  into  spiritual  channels  again  by  the  presence  of  the 
famous  Rochester  mediums.  Of  course  Ihey  brought  in  their  train  the  vul- 
tures which  ever  follow  armies,  whether  of  war  or  progression  ;  the  birds  of 
evil  omen  being  in  this  instance  ably  represented  by  the  indomitable  Chauncy 
Burr,  who  vituperated  his  falsehoods  before  the  public  in  one  part  of  the 
city,  whilst  the  Misses  Fox  were  giving  practical  proofs  of  his  mendacity  in 
another.     The  contest  of  public  opinion,  as  usual,  raged  high. 

The  most  distinguished  persons  in  this  city  of  wealth  and  collegiate  institu- 
tions visited  the  circles,  and  many  of  them  became  developed  as  mediums ; 
the  press,  as  usual,  floated  about  bet^veen  tlie  strongest  manifestations  of  pub- 
lic opmion,  being  invariably  found  on  that  side  which  happened  to  be  most 
popular  for  the  time  being. 

One  of  the  honorable  exceptions  to  this  accommodating  spirit  was  Mr.  J. 
D.  Taylor,  editor  of  the  Daily  Times,  who  generously  opened  his  columns  to 
both  sides  of  the  question,  a  course  whose  rarity  claims  an  especial  notice 
whenever  practicable. 

During  the  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox,  the  old  story  of  concealed  madiineiy 
about  their  persons  was  revived,  and  once  more,  at  their  own  earnest  solici- 
tations, the  clothing  of  the  mediums  was  subjected  to  the  searcliing  scrutiny 
of  a  committee  of  ladies,  after  whose  entirely  favorable  report,  the  manifes- 
tations proceeded  with  their  usual  freedom  and  power. 

Some  two  or  three  years  after  the  visit  of  the  Misses  Fox,  an  article  was 
published  in  the  Cincinnati  Daily  Times,  a  few  extracts  from  which  may 
serve  to  show  what  was  the  result  of  their  \-isit  upon  public  opinion, 

"  In  the  private  arteries  of  our  city,  counang  with  steady  but  powerful  motion,  there  is 
an  influence  which  has  assumed  a  m05t  wonderful  magnituda  The  public  mind  discusses 
commercial  policies,  or  agitates  questions  of  the  chm-ch  militant,  and  heeds  not  this  singular 
movement.  The  press  has  been  dumb,  save  in  ridicule,  and  the  great  mass  of  the  people 
little  dream  of  the  terrific  social  and  moral  volcanic  eruption  which  will  necessarily  occur 
ere  long,  from  causes  now  impbging  upon  the  combustible  mental  world. 

"  But  a  sliort  time  ance,  the  subject  of  '  spiritual  rappmgs  '  was  introduced  into  Cincin- 
nati, and  although  it  met  with  a  cold  reception,  yet  it  made  a  deep  impression  on  a  few 
minds,  and  the  seed  has  produced  an  immense  yield. 

"For  some  time  after  the  introduction  of  the  matter  here,  and  when  Co^;eshall's  history 
of  the  rappings  in  Cmcmnati  was  published,  there  were  but  few  believers  in  the  spiritual 
theory,  and  when  Burr  pretended  to  show  up  the  humbug,  many  persons  supposed  that  it 
was  exploded.  But  the  popular  mmd  was  not  satisfied,  and  a  yet  greater  number  com- 
menced mquiries. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

portions  ofthe  city,  and  spiritual  investigators  increased.  Mi 
but  that,  instead  of  allajTug  the  excitement,  had  quite  the  contrary  effect.  People  were 
anKious  to  learn  what  this  great  cause  was  which  had  the  effect  to  unbalance  mind  ;  and 
thousands,  putting  full  confidence  in  their  own  mental  stability,  sought  the  witnessing  of 
spiritual  e:a)eriments. 

"  The  effect  of  this  agilMion  has  been  most  astonishing.  We  have  taken  careful  notes 
of  the  present  state  of  the  movement,  and  the  facts  almost  stagger  belief. 

"It  has  been  quite  impossible  for  us  to  obtain  full  information,  for  many  circles  we  found 
cmtnjsomed  in  private  lunits,  and  we  learned  of  their  existence  by  accident  only ;  of  the 
seances  held  nightly  which  we  know  of,  our  list  reaches  fifty-nine.  This,  however,  does 
not  include  hundreds  of  circles  which  are  held  occaaonally,  or  by  those  who  have  just  com- 
menced experimentuig.  The  number  of  mediums  whose  names  we  could  obtam  is  three 
hundred  and  ten,  which  does  not  include  those  partially  developed.  If  this  class  were  added, 
from  information  we  have  obtaiived,  the  number  of  mediums  in  Cincinnati  would  not  be  less 
tlian  twelve  hundred, 

"The  circles  are  not  confined  to  any  particular  class  of  society,  but  are  formed  on  every 
street  and  square  of  the  city.  No  particular  religious  sect  is  more  interested  than  another ; 
but  Christians,  Jewst  and  Infidels,  are  eameit  in  their  inquiries.  The  number  of  investiga- 
tors here  can  be  estimated  only  by  tens  of  thousands.  So  great  has  been  the  demand  for 
the  publications  touching  this  subject,  that  one  hook  concern,  that  of  F.  Ely,  the  blmd  phre- 
nologist, has  confined  its  bu^ess  almost  entirely  to  this  class  of  books.  The  number  which 
has  been  written  referrmg  directly  to  the  spiritual  phenomena  is  thirty-five,  and  nearadoien 
newspapers  and  periodicals  devoted  to  the  investigation  of  the  sul:ject,  are  issued  in  different 
parts  of  the  Union,  all  of  which  find  many  eager  purchasers  in  our  city.  Another  evidence 
of  the  interest  which  is  felt  in  this  matter  is  exhibited  in  the  fact  that  the  Spiritual  Beacon 
commences  its  pablieation  this  week  with  one  thousand  city  subscribers. 

"  In  the  progress  of  this  movement,  the  old  system  of  communicating  by  raps  has  been 
superseded  by  yet  stranger  processes.  In  the  beginning  of  the  excitement  it  took  a  half- 
hour  (o  obtdn  anything  like  a  complete  sentence  by  the  raps,  but  then  it  was  said  that  in  a 
few  years  mediums  would  be  developed  who  would  talk  and  write  under  spiritual  influence, 
and  that  period,  it  is  alleged,  has  arrived.  The  raps  are  seldom  heard,  but  physical  demon- 
strations are  frequently  witnessed,  which  seem  to  indicate  that  the  power  of  making  noises 
and  moving  matter  has  not  been  abandoned.  Numerous  unquestionably  authenticated  oc- 
currences of  this  character  have  recently  taken  place,  which  have  had  a  tendency  to  draw 
several  distinguished  minds  within  the  arena  of  spiritual  investigation.  We  will  mention  a 
few  of  the  most  boldly  defined  cases  of  this  class. 

"  At  a  private  circle  in  the  western  part  of  the  dly,  the  editor  of  a  morning  paper  was 
carried,  together  with  a  table,  upon  which  he  sat,  several  times  across  the  room,  without 
there  being  any  viable  moving  cause.  A  lady  residing  on  Seventh  street,  whose  daughter, 
a  young  lady,  was  ack  with  fever,  called  upon  the  spirits  to  cure  her  child,  and  desired 
that,  to  iiilly  convince  her  of  their  power,  the  fever  should  leave  one  side  at  a  time.  The 
lady  afhrms  that  the  right  side  of  her  daughter's  face  became  pale  and  cold,  while  the  left 
was  burning  with  a  raging  fever,  but,  after  a  few  moments  it  also  was  relieved. 

"An  ex-judge,  on  Fourth  street,  who  had  been  ridiculing  his  wife  for  convening  circles 
at  their  house,  was  prevailed  on  one  evening  to  remain  in  the  circle.  He  had  always  con- 
sidered the  matter  too  foolish  to  investigate,  and  vauntingly  remarked,  during  the  evening^ 
that  if  spiritual  beings  existed  he  would  lilse  to  see  them  try  their  power  on  the  centre-fable, 
around  which  the  party  were  atting.  No  sooner  had  the  expression  escaped  his  lips  than 
the  top  of  the  table  was  twisted  from  the  coluriin  and  rolled  across  the  floor.  This  gentle- 
man, in  a  recent  private  note  Irom  Washington  city,  where  he  is  now  visiting,  says  that  this 
subject  is  agitating  our  representatives.  He  writes  of  a  circle  which  be  attended  the  even- 
ing previous,  where  Senator  Chase  and  Thomas  Corwin  were  present,  and  also  Preston 
King,  of  New  York,  which  latter  gentleman  was  the  medium. 

In  the  February  number  of  Buchanan's  Journal  of  Man,  the  editor  pves  apparent  cred- 

"But  to  the  communications.  These  are  now  generally  made  by  the  medium's  arm  being 
spiritually  magnetized,  and  becoming  obedient  to  spiritual  direction  in  writing,  or  pointing 
out  letters  on  a  large  alphabet;  or,  as  is  more  frequently  the  case,  after  half  an  hour's  quiet 
bitting  in  a  circle  of  eight  or  a  dozen  persons,  who  form  a  battery  by  uniting  their  hands, 
the  medium  is  magneti^,  and,  it  is  afurmed,  taken  possesion  of  by  the  spirits,  who  use  her 

Hosiedb,  Google 

3S2  HISTORY  OF  MODERN- 

organs  of  speech  in  talking  to  the  company.  These  speeches  are  frequently  of  a  most  ex- 
traordinary character,  representing,  as  they  do,  to  come  from  tlie  spirits  of  great  men  who 
have  passed  from  earth.  A  blue-eyed  girl  of  seventeen,  for  instance,  rises  and  in  a 
vigorous  manner  discusses  politics  or  religion  with  tlie  It^ic  of  Henry  Clay  or  the  pathos  of 
James  A.  Perkms.  A  man  of  forty  speaks  for  John  Wesley  and  Fourier,  uauig,  accurately, 
the  manner  of  speech  of  those  persons ;  or,  perhaps,  the  medium  assumes  the  character  of  a 
near  relative  of  some  one  in  the  chicle,  and  although  having  Ijeen  dead  a  great  whfle,  yet,  by  a 
familiar  gesture,  or  may  be  an  old  by-word  or  sentence,  the  idea  of  the  loved  one  is  brought 
vividW  to  mind. 

"  The  'revelations'  through  the  mediums  vary  somewhat,  yet  all  are  of  a  radical  charac- 
ter. They  teach  the  oveithrow  of  existing  church  organizations,  and  say  that  vital  changes 
most  be  made  in  the  social  and  commercial  world.  The  belief  in  the  spiritual  agency  of 
these  teachings  being  quite  general,  and  becoming  more  so  every  day,  the  efTect  will  be,  as 
we  previously  stated,  to  form  a  great  radical  party,  which  will  de\el)p  itself  ere  long,  and 
astonish  the  world  1^  its  strength." 

Since  the  period  we  have  been  writing  of,  spintnal  mamfestitions  have 
steadily  gained  and  maintained  a  foothold  in  Cincinnati,  which  justly  entitles 
it  to  take  rank  as  one  of  the  great  fortresses  of  the  caube  Vast  numbers  of 
the  most  respected  and  respectable  inhabitants  of  the  city  have  become 
openly  avowed  partisans  of  its  truths,  and  contributed  most  liberally  of  their 
inSuence,  money,  hospitality,  and  advocacy,  for  its  promotion. 

Sabbath  meetings  for  spiritual  lectures  and  conferences  have  been  held  in 
Cincinnati  for  many  years,  and  continued  to  engross  the  unabated  interest 
of  the  thousands  who  attend  them.  Many  most  excellent  public  and  private 
mediums  have  been  developed  in  or  attracted  to  Cincinnati,  amongst  whom 
we  may  name,  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable  and  reliable,  Miss  Lizzie  Keizer, 
of  whom  a  separate  notice  will  be  found  hereafter. 

Many  Sadies  of  high  social  position  in  Cincinnati  have  used  their  fine  raedi- 
uffiistic  gifts  for  the  benefit  of  investigators  with  a  hberality  and  public  spirit 
which  sets  a  noble  exampletoamore  conservative  community  in  other  places; 
in  fact,  the  epithet  of  "Queen  City"  does  not  apply  alone  to  its  vast  popula- 
tion, size,  or  commercial  importance. 

Despite  its  thick  atmosphere  of  coal  and  smoke,  concentrated  by  an  amphi- 
theatre of  surrounding  mountain  ranges,  the  soaring  spirit  of  a  liberal  and 
progressive  community  has  given  so  warm  and  hospitable  a  reception  to  the 
angel  visitors  from  the  spheres,  that  Cincinnati  may  well  be  called  a  royal 
stronghold  of  Spiritualism.  No  more  truly  spiritualized  gatherings  have  ever 
collected  the  focal  rays  of  divine  light  which  stream  down  from  the  bright 
summer-land  than  those  in  which  the  author  has  taken  part  in  Cincinnati, 

Looking  down  upon  the  upturned  faces  of  a  thousand  eager  listeners,  who 
each  Sabbath  morning  and  evening  have  braved  even  the  inclemencies  of  a 
Western  winter  to  attend  spiritual  meetings,  the  speaker  has  been  able  to 
number  thirty  or  forty  bright  mediumistic  eyes  gazing  into  the  space  around 
the  rostrum  filled  with  radiant  spirit  forms,  whom  the  fair  seeressea  would 
often  describe  afterwards  with  a  perfectly  convincing  coincidence  of  testi- 

For  many  long  years  the  President's  chair  was  iilled  by  the  pure-minded, 
amiable,  and  highly  respected  Mr.  Oliver  Lovell,  an  old  citizen,  whose  ven- 
erable face  upturned  in  reverent  appreciation  of  the  truths  he  listened  to  then, 
and  promulgates  now  as  a  ministering  spirit,  formed  in  itself  a  representa- 
tive picture  of  the  fervent  sincerity  of  these  Ohio  Spiritualists.  His  daughter, 
an  accomplished  medium,  and  a  host  of  fair  and  refined  women,  leaders  in  the 
most  fashionable  societies  of  the  city,  might  have  been  seen,  busily  arranging 
the  details  of  their  sweet  volunteer  choir,  adorning  the  rostrum  with  flowers,  or 
softiy  whispering  to  each  other  some  tender  message  of  immortal  affection, 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  353 

poured  dirough  tiieir  oi^anisms  by  the  quenchless  love  of  dear  spirit  friends. 
These  were  Pentecostal  meetings,  and  it  was  light,  life,  and  spiritual  strength 
to  be  there.  Many  changes  have  ensued.  In  the  locomotive  spirit  which 
sweeps  the  whole  continent  with  the  waves  of  progress,  choir,  committee, 
speakers,  and  listeners,  have  moved  away  or  exchanged  places  with  others. 

The  lecturers  of  half  a  score  of  years  ago  would  gaze  upon  strange  faces 
now,  and  but  few  of  the  old  familiar  hands  are  there  to  clasp  their  own  in  the 
warmth  of  ancient  friendship.  But  the  strength  and  potency  of  tlie  cause  has 
never  clianged  with  hands,  faces,  or  tlie  stirring  times  of  war  and  political  con- 
flict. Spiritualism  is  a  fixed  fact  in  Cincinnati,  and  warm  hearts  and  willing 
hands  are  there,  just  as  zealous  in  its  belief  as  ever.  The  opportunities 
for  successful  effort  have  changed  with  the  times,  but  Spirituahsm,  in  its  cause 
and  effect,  is  just  as  firmly  planted  in  this  great  Western  centre  as  the  eternal 
hills  which  garrison  the  city  with  towers  and  bastions  pointing  to  the  skies, 

"Whose  cloudy  rifts  and  rents  disclose. 
The  angel  faces  of  the  watchers 
High  above  the  city's  murky  depths; 
Holding  in  charge  the  woof  of  mortal  weal. 
Averting,  in  love,  the  stings  of  human  woe." 

Entrusted  to  the  guardianship  of  bright  ministering  spirits,  and  upheld  by 
the  fidelity,  gratitude  and  zeal  of  as  warm-hearted  a  community  as  exists  upon 
the  surface  of  the  western  hemisphere,  the  flame  of  Spiritualism,  may  flicker 
and  bend  in  the  winds  of  public  opinion,  but  its  past  career  seems  prophetic 
of  a  future  in  Cincinnati  as  permanent  as  those  same  ancient  hills  which 
environ  it. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

■WESTERN      SPIRITUALISM      CONTINUED  —  ST.      LOUIS. 

St,  Louis  — The  First  Circle  — Its  Pioneers  ~  Mrs.  Britt— Visit  of  the 
Misses  Fox  — The  Jaw-Bo.ne  Theory  and  its  "Samson"- Soldiers  of  the 
Cause  — Thomas  Gales  Forster's  Development  — A  Pioneer  in  Hannibal 
Missouri  ^Spiritualism  on  the  Prairies  in  1B59  — Church  Trial  of  Mr.. 
Stagg,  akd  What  Came  of  it. 

St.  Louis  is  one  of  those  marked  sectional  centres  from  which  a  radiative 
influence  streams  forth,  extending  over  an  area  of  space  and  a  mass  of  popu- 
lation far  exceeding  its  own. 

Situated  at  the  confluence  ol  the  mighty  Missouri  and  Mississippi  rivers, 

the  great  south-western  mart  of  the  giant  Ohio,  and  the  ganglionic  heart 

whidi  unites  all  the  vast  railway  enterprises  which  connect  the  north-west 

at  Chicago  and  the  extrenij  south  at  New  Orleans,  St.  Louis  is  a  geographic 

23 

Hosted  by  Google 

354  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

cally-constituted  capital,  from  whence  tides  of  mental  influence  and  popular 
impression  must  inevitably  sweep  along  with  the  heavy  freights  of  commer- 
cial power  which  constitute  the  wealth  of  this  fine  city. 

In  the  history  of  Spiritualism,  then,  St.  l,oiiis  nnist  either  have  played  an 
important  part,  or  the  movement  itself  would  have  lacked  the  vast  power  in 
the  West  which  has  been  attributed  to  it.  The  former  is  the  case.  St.  I-ouis, 
like  Cincinati,  though  far  removed  from  tlie  scene  of  the  first  public  mani- 
festations of  spirit  communion,  had  internal  resources  which  prepared  it  for 
the  reception  of  the  tidings  that  the  spiritual  telegraph  between  the  two 
worlds  was  open,  and  its  workings  explained  an  occult  and  hitherto  unsolved 
mystery,  which  for  many  months  had  prevailed  in  St  Louis  in  ilie  shape  of 
phenomena  evolved  by  animal  magnetism.  Mesmeric  operators,  who  had 
amused  themselves  with  observing  the  singular  and  various  results  obtained 
by  their  experiments,  had  been  continually  perplexed  and  thwarted  in  their 
attempts  to  account  for  the  flights  of  their  subjects  on  purely  mnndane 
principles ;  no  sooner,  however,  did  intelligence  reach  the  city  that  disem- 
bodied  spirits  were  assumed  to  be  the  authors  of  tangible  manifestations  made 
through  sounds  and  movements  in  Western  New  York,  than  an  illuminating 
beam  shot  over  the  mysteries  of  animal  magnetism,  dividing  it  by  but  one 
"  discreet  degree  "  from  the  still  more  potent  and  subtle  element  of  spiritual 
magnetism. 

The  first  circles  held  in  SL  Louis  were  formed  at  the  suggestion  of  Mr. 
Hedges,  now  well  known  as  a  veteran  soldier  in  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism. 
Mr.  Hedges  had  visited  New  York,  heard  and  communicated  with  the  won- 
derfial  rappings,  and  received  some  instructions  for  the  formation  of  a  circle. 
In  these  initiatory  seances  one  of  the  members,  Mrs.  Amanda  Britt,  afterwards 
Mrs.  Spence,  became  developed  as  a  trance-speaking  medium,  and  her  sub- 
sequent long  and  remarkable  career  as  a  spiritual  lecturer  renders  this  ex- 
periment memorable.  The  chief  object  of  the  early  investigators  was  to 
evoke  the  famous  rappings  which  seemed  to  be  identical  with  the  first  and 
most  convincing  phases  of  "  the  power,"  but  no  sooner  were  they  gratified  in 
this  respect  than  other  and  still  more  startling  phenomena  followed.  Writmg, 
speaking,  and  seeing  mediums  presented  an  array  of  intelligence  which  far 
transcended  the  slow  methods  of  communicating  through  the  raps. 

Wonderful  tests  of  identity  were  often  given  by  pantomimic  action.  Thus, 
a,t  one  of  the  circles,  the  spirit  of  a  Mr.  Owens,  formerly  the  proprietor  of  a 
■masonic  hall,  gave  to  some  masons  present,  through  an  uninstructed  woman, 
unmistakable  masonic  signs. 

Meantime  the  visitors  who  attended  these  s'eances  soon  found  that  the  saine 
(remarkable  results  they  witnessed  abroad  could  be  obtained  bysittingin  their 
■own  homes  and  famiUes ;  and  thus  believers  multiplied,  and  various  phases  of 
mediumship  began  to  appear  in  some  of  the  most  intelligent  and  respectable 
families  in  the  city.  Whilst  the  Missourians  were  thus  groping  their  way  on 
througli  patient,  but  often  very  perplexing  experiments,  a  Miss  Anderson  in 
the  first  place,  and  the  Misses  Fox  shortly  after,  visited  the  city  in  thecapa- 
city  of  public  mediums,  and  in  both  instances  communicated  an  irresistible 
impetus  in  favor  of  Spiritualism  to  the  whole  community. 

During  the  stay  of  the  Rochester  mediums  Dr.  McDowell,  the  foimder 
,of  an  Anatomical  College,  and  a  man  of  profoundly  scienHfic  research,  carried 
the  ladies  to  his  lecture-Toom,  and  pursued,  through  their  mediumship,  a  series 
of  scientific  experiments  which  were  sufScient  to  satisfy  the  spectators  of  the 
entirely  occult  force  with  which  they  were  dealing. 

Thejufidiums  were  stood  upon  glass,  insulated,  and  tested  in  varieties  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  355 

ways,  with  a  view  of  inquiring  how  far  electricity  was  concerned  in  the  pro- 
duction of  the  phenomena. 

These  experiments  —  which  ultimated  in  convincing  nine  out  of  ten  of  the 
savans  who  assisted  in  them  that  there  was  a  force  more  potent  than  any 
known  to  man ;  that  said  force  was  not  in  any  possible  way  or  shape  the 
result  of  trickery,  and  yet  generally  connected  itself  with_an  intelligence 
foreign  to  the  minds  of  the  mediums — were  in  honorable  contrast  to  the 
conduct  of  the  clergy,  who,  in  this  city  particulariy,  distinguished  themselves 
by  their  violent  and  unchristian  opposition  to  Spiritualism. 

A  certain  Dr.  Coons  attended  some  of  the  earliest  circles  for  die  rappings, 
and  chancing  to  get  the  word  "  investigate  "  spelled  wrongly,  he  concluded, 
—  in  what  connection  it  would  be  difficult  to  say- — that  the  whole  thing  was 
imposture  ;  and  being  a  skilful  anatomist,  and  withal  a  little  ashamed  of  re- 
hashing up  the  knee  and  ankle  bone  theory,  he  gravely  published  to  the 
world  a  scientific  statement  to  the  effect  that  "  die  whole  thing  was  performed 
by  the  displacement  of  the  jaw-bone." 

The  raps  continued,  nevertheless;  spread  from  house  to  house,  family  to 
family,  and  threatened  to  increase  ad  infinitum  :  some  of  the  spiritual  press 
suggested  that  the  jaw-bone  theory  was  not  so  far  wrong  after  all,  only  that 
it  was,  on  the  biblical  plan,  the  jaw-bone  of  an  ass,  for  the  original  of  which 
the  learned  Dr.  Coons  was  responsible,  whilst  Spiritualism  was  in  very  truth 
the  "  Samson"  that  knew  how  to  wield  it. 

Succeeding  the  Misses  Fox  and  Miss  Anderson,  Mrs.  Cqrwin,  an  excellent 
rapping  medium ;  Mrs.^versoIl,  a  seeing,  writing,  test,"and  trance  medium  ; 
Mrs.  ^!and,  the  wife  oT  a  very  distinguished  lawyer  in  the  city ;  Mrs^JTgnner, 
a  lady  of  unexceptionable  position  ;  Mr.  Charles  Levy,  a  gendemam  occupy- 
ing a  distinguished  place  as  a  public  official ;  T3r.  James  Neal,  a  merchant, 
who  afterwards  became  a  famous  healing  medium;  Mrs.  Frances  Hyer,  and 
odier  ladies  and  gentlemen  too  numerous  to  mention,  all  moving  in  the  best 
chcles,  became  rapidly  developed  for  different  phases  of  the  power,  and 
freely  and  frankly  used  their  gifts  for  the  benefit  of  all  who  required  their  ser- 
vices. Some  special  notice  will  hereafter  be  made  of  Mrs.  Corwin  and  Mr. 
Levy  as  mediums  ;  in  the  meantime  their  aid,  together  with  one  of  die  best 
public  rapping  mediums  in  the  country.  Miss  Sarah  Jane  Irish,  for  two  years 
a  resident  in  St.  Louis,  contributed  to  offer  faciliries  for  investigation  which 
converted  thousands  to  the  belief  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time. 

Foremost  amongst  the  earliest  inquirers  into  the  phenomena,  and  ever 
foremost  in  liberal  and  untiring  service  in  its  behalf,  every  well-informed  Spir- 
itualist of  America  will  be  prepared  to  read  the  name  of  Mr.  A.  Miitenberger. 
Without  being  a  medium  himself,  Mr.  Miitenberger  is  one  of  those  devoted 
and  self-sacrificing  spirits,  whose  never-failing  zeal  seems  able  to  propel  on- 
ward any  cause,  by  the  mere  specific  gravity  of  its  own  resistless  force. 

In  a  city  where  so  many  noble  gentlemen  and  gifted  ladies  have  labored  for 
the  cause  of  Spiritualism  with  a  fidehty  almost  unprecedented,  it  may  seem 
invidious  to  select  Mr.  Miitenberger  for  markedly  appreciative  notice ;  but 
the  prominence  which  his  able  and  fearless  pen  has  given  him  in  every  spirit- 
ual paper,  no  less  than  his  unbounded  liberality  and  devotion  in  every  spirit- 
ual movement  diroughout  the  States,  calls  for  this  especial  record. 

Perhaps  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  any  city  of  its  size  and  influence  in 
which  so  many  prominent  and  influential  persons  have  devoted  themselves  to 
the  advocacy  of  Spiritualism,  or  where  a  more  permanent  and  honorable  sup- 
port has  been  extended  towards  its  public  advocacy.  Spiritualism  is  undoubt- 
edly, everywhere,  "  the  same  spirit  with  differences  of  administration,"  but  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

3S6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

position  wKich  it  is  to  assume  and  maintain  before  the  public  tnust  be  shaped 
measurably  by  human  effort ;  hence  its  remarkable  success  in  St.  Louis,  and 
hence,  in  a  merely  philosophical  point  of  view,  we  call  special  attention  to  the 
zeal  and  fidelity  of  its  propagandists  in  that  city. 

As  early  as  1853,  a  paper  txStltA  Light  from  the  Spirii-World,  vi3.%  pub- 
lished in  SL  Louis,  of  which  Mr.  Peter  Bland  was  the  editor,  and  Mr.  Manz 
the  publisher.  This  journal  was  short-lived,  but  as  a  timely  record  of  spirit- 
ualistic facts  and  philosophy,  it  served  an  excellent  purpose,  and  fanned  the 
flame  into  wide-spread  radiance.  Besides  the  numerous  circles,  public  and 
private,  diat  were  in  operation,  Mrs.  Britt,  by  her  remarkable  lectures,  first  on 
Sunday  evenings  at  her  own  house,  and  subsequently  to  large  public  audiences 
in  hired  halls,  contributed  essentially  to  the  spread  of  the  belief. 

Conferences  were  held,  too,  for  the  presentation  of  facts  and  the  discussion 
of  opinions.  Here,  as  in  New  York,  they  were  open  to  the  public,  in  halls 
hired  by  the  Spiritualists. 

In  the  printing  oflice  of  Mr.  Josiah  Anderson,  a  most  noble  and  devoted 
champicin  of  the  cause,  Mr,  Thomas  Gales^  Forster  was  developed  as  a  me- 
dium, and  as  this  gentleman  is  now  known  throughout  the  United  States  as  one 
of  the  ablest  and  most  eloquent  speakers  in  the  country,  his  conversion  and 
enlistment  iij  the  ranks  of  mediumship  becomes  a  record  too  eventful 
to  omit. 

Mr.  Forster  commenced  his  investigations,  Said-likc,  by  an  acrimonious 
spirit  of  persecution,  but  ended,  as  above  stated,  by  becoming  one  of  the 
most  renowned  and  admired  exponents  of  the  faith. 

At  first  his  mediumship  assumed  the  form  ot  poetical  improvisation,  and  in 
sianees  with  Mrs.  Frances  Hyer,  a  charming  vehicle  for  inspirational  poems, 
Mr.  Forster  would  alternate  with  the  lady,  lines  which,  on  being  fitted  togedier, 
formed  appropriate  and  interesting  compositions.  Like  Mr,  Manz,  the  pub- 
hsher  of  Light  from  the  Spirit-World,  Mr.  Forster's  newly  acquired  gift  of 
improvisation  enabled  him  to  perform  the  journalistic  feat  of  composing  and 
setting  up  his  ideas  in  type,  as  he  received  them  from  the  source  of  his  pro- 
lific inspiration. 

As  the  subsequent  career  of  this  celebrated  speaker  will  be  noticed  here- 
after, it  is  only  necessary  in  this  place  to  remark  that  his  public  addresses  in 
the  trance  condition,  like  those  of  Mr.  Britt,  soon  began  to  attract  attention, 
and  were  esteemed  as  not  the  least  wonderful  of  the  phenomena  of  the 
day. 

Public  lectures  in  St.  Louis  have  always  been  a  marked  and  attractive  fea- 
ture of  its  Spiritualism,  and  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  they  commenced  in 
1852  and  continued,  withotit  interruption,  until  i86r,  when  the  opening  of 
the  great  American  war  and  the  fact  that  St.  Louis, — -indeed,  the  whole  of 
Missouri,  —  became  an  agitated  scene  of  the  mighty  war  struggle,  may  account 
for  theh  temporary  suspension. 

;  Since  the  close  of  the  war,  lectures,  conferences,  circles,  and  the  delightful 
gatherings  of  the  Children's  Lyceum,  have  proceeded  with  even  more  spirit 
and  success  than  heretofore. 

Situated  so  far  distant  from  the  constellated  intellectual  centres  of  the  East, 
it  may  be  supposed  that  it  was  difficult  to  supply  the  rostrum  with  a  selection 
of  those  popular  speakers  whose  services  were  in  such  eager  demand  in  New 
York,  Boston,  etc.;  but  the  spirit  and  generosity  of  the  Missourian  gentlemen 
overcame  this  obstacle,  and  made  it  so  well  worth  the  while  of  the  very  best 
talent  in  the  movement  to  visit  St.  Louis,  that  the  rostrum  was  invariably 
filled  by  the  most  eminent  and  widely  sought  speakers  in  the  field. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  357 

The  advantage  of  this  liberal  policy  was  realized  too  in  siirroiiiiding  districts, 
which  were  industriously  traversed  and  missionizcd,  between  their  Sabbath 
appointments,  by  the  speakers  engaged  in  St  Louis. 

Thus  it  was  diat,  in  numbers  of  places,  glad  tidings  of  Spiritualism  were 
proclaiiued  for  die  first  time. 

An  instance  of  this  kind  may  be  noriced  in  Hannibal,  Missiouri,  a  beautiful 
mountain  town  on  the  Mississippi,  where,  about  1857,  one  openly  avowed 
Spiritualist  from  Salem,  Massachusetts,  had  taken  up  his  residence.  This 
gallant  champion  of  an  unpopular  truth,  sent  to  procure  the  services  of  the 
a^Jthor,  then  fulfilling  an  engagement  of  some  weeks  in  St.  Louis. 

\Vhen  Mrs.  Hardinge  arrived  at  Hannibal,  the  cold  hospitahties  of  an  hotel 
were  all  that  could  be  secured  for  her  accommodation. 

The  tiiree  nights,  lectures  were  given  to  audiences,  the  chief  portion  of 
whom  were  hid  away  on  the  stairs,  or  listening  by  stealth,  concealed  in  some 
projection  of  the  building. 

Scarcely  a  hand  was  extended  to  greet  tiie  stranger,  whose  presence,  even 
in  the  streets,  escorted  by  her  devoted  ally  and  employer,  was  regarded  by 
some  with  ominous  ill-will,  and  by  others  with  a  ludicrous  terror  which  mani- 
fested itself  in  rapid  flight. 

Two  years  later  the  same  speaker  visited  Hannibal,  when  her  entry  into  the 
town  was  a  perfect  ovation.  Hosts  of  friends  came  forward  to  greet  her  as 
their  first  pioneer  into  the  glorious  realms  of  spiritual  realities.  Prominent 
persons  contended  for  the  pleasure  of  entertaining  her  in  their  hospitable 
dwellings,  and  a  numerous,  attentive,  and  highly-interested  audience,  many  of 
whom  were  Spiritualists,  thronged  her  lecture  halls  night  after  night,  until  the 
largest  building  in  the  place  was  inconveniently  crowded.  A  similar  history, 
vaned  with  many  wonderful  evidences  of  spirit-power  and  presence,  could  be 
given  of  the  whole  range  of  towns  and  villages,  extending  up  the  length  of 
"  the  Fadier  of  Waters  even  to  St  Paul,  Minnesota. 

On  either  side  of  the  noble  Ohio,  down  to  Evansville,  and  the  complete 
length  of  the  Central  Illinois  and  Chicago  and  Alton  Railroads,  romantic  and 
startling  incidents  of  travel,  rapid  and  wonderful  developments  of  mediumis- 
tic  powers,  extraordinary  cases  of  healing,  and  every  phase  of  spiritualistic 
marval  and  interest,  has  marked  the  missionary  efforts  of  the  author  and  her 
fellow-laborers  in  this  section  of  country  for  a  circuit  of  at  least  five  hundred 
square  miles. 

Whole  volumes  could  be  filled  with  such  records,  and  still  the  subject  would 
not  be  exhausted,  nor  the  half  have  been  told  of  the  truths  which  awoke  the 
inhabitants  of  this  vast  region  to  a  realizadon  of  Spiritualism. 

In  favor  of  the  argument  of  some  natural  philosophers,  that  climate,  soil, 
and  scenery,  always  produce  correspondential  psychical  results,  it  must  be 
admitted  that,  whereas,  in  this  district,  nature  displays  herself  in  such  vast 
prairies,  giant  rivers,  and  grand  proportions  generally,  we  may  well  look  for  a 
mental  insphation  equally  lofty,  sublime,  and  far-reaching;  and  this  phil- 
osophy is  well- illustrated  in  the  characteristics  of  the  Western  country  and  its 
inhabitants.  There  is  nothing  small,  petty,  or  grovelling  in  either.  The 
clear  air  seems  to  promote  the  lucid  vision  of  the  seer,  so  that  the  golden 
portals  of  the  summer  land  are  constantly  opening  for  him,  and  permitting 
bright,  though  transient  gleams  of  its  radiant  dwellers  to  be  seen. 

'llie  forms  of  the  glorified  pilgrims  from  the  other  side  of  "the  beautiful 
river"  dance  in  shining  sliadows  along  the  walls  of  these  Western  homes. 
Prophecy  is  remarkably  rife  there.  Clairvoyant  sight  is  open  and  frequent; 
and  mighty  winds  of  inspiration  sweep  over  the  wild  praries,  and  surge  along 

Hosted  by  Google 

358  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

die  flowing  tides  of  the  rivers,  bearing  aJoft  on  tlieir  wings  the  sensitive  and 
abnormal  minds  of  tliose  who  stand  as  "footprints  on  the  bomidaries  of  two 
worlds,"  mediums  for  both,  creatures  of  both,  and  alternately  swayed  by  the 
mysterious  influences  which  are' born  and  tempered  in  bodi,  but  only  meet  in 
the  strange  and  seemingly  abnormal  life  of  mediumship.  Often,  when  quitting 
the  pleasant  and  hospitable  homes  of  St,  Louis,  the  author  has  divei^ed,  be- 
tween her  Sabbath  lectures,  far  away  to  the  prairie  towns  on  missionary  labors, 
the  pecuhar  characteristics  of  Western  Spiritualism  have  beenrevealed  to  her 
with  striking  prominence. 

Take,  for  example,  a  visit  to  a  small  town  on  the  Chicago  and  Alton  Rail- 
road, called  Ei  Paso.  At  the  time  of  the  author's  visit,  about  i85g,tliis  place 
could  not  have  numbered  more  than  six  dwellings,  and  yet  a  fair  and  satisfac- 
tory audience  was  promised  which  was  to  be  procured  to  attend  the  lecture 
in  the  following  way. 
_  At  five  o'clock,  p.m.,  the  speaker  was  escorted  toanotlier  town,  of  similar 
size  to  El  Paso,  about  four  railej  distant  There  hospitable  entertainment 
was  provided,  and  a  number  of  recruits  joined  the  party.  At  six  o'clock  the 
procession  was  formed,  consisting  of  the  buggy  which  conveyed  the  speaker, 
followed  by  four  vehicles  of  nondescript  shapes,  and  no  particular  name, 
except  the  generic  title  of  "  trap, "  or  wagon.  Driving  on  in  single  file,  for 
there  was  no  other  road  than  a  beaten  wagon  track,  the  party  kept  gathering 
up  additions  along,  about,  across,  and  athwart  their  way,  until,  at  seven 
o'clock,  the  train  consisted  of  thirty  vehicles,  all  a  litde  more  nondescript  than 
the  first. 

About  this  time,  night  set  in,  bringing  with  it  a  fine,  drizzling  rain.  The 
usual  metaphor  of  "too  dark  to  see  your  hand  before  you,"  was  literally  veri- 
fied ;  but  whilst  another  hour  was  consumed  in  reaching  the  place  of  destination 
and  gathering  in  fifteen  more  wagon-loads  of  the  faithful,  the  speaker,  who  rode 
in  front  of  the  long  train,  successfully  guided  the  party  by  repeating  the  direc- 
tions conveyed  now  to  her  illuminated  eyes  by  the  beckoning  hand  of  some 
bright  spirit  watcher,  and  now  through  the  low  whisper  of  a  spirit  voice  bid- 
ding her  turn  to  the  "  right,"  "  left,"  or  in  such  a  course  as  would  insure  their 
safe  travel  in  that  tliick  darkness,  which  naught  but  the  eyes  of  the  spirit 
could  pierce.  And  thus  they  journeyed  on,  safely  and  surely,  to  their 
destination,  a  large  school-house  in  die  midst  of  the  prairie,  where  they 
arrived,  as  the  spirits  promised,  exactly  as  tlie  hour  of  eight  appeared  on 
the  dial  plate. 

There  was_  neither  gas  nor  ordinary  appliances  for  lighting  this  primitive 
seat  of  learning,  hence  an  illumination  was  improvised  from  the  lanterns  of 
some  of  die  party,  suspended  on  sticks,  branches  of  trees,  and  sportsmen's 
rifles,  placed  gipsy-fashion  across  each  other,  and  sustaining  die  lantern  in  the 
middle. 

If  the  rude  scene,  the  devotion  manifest  in  the  upturned  faces  of  the  list- 
eners, cast  into  wondrous  lights  and  shadows  by  the  glare  of  the  lanterns,  and 
the  sighing  of  liie  mournful  night  winds  whistling  through  the  crevices  of  the 
log  house,  could  not  magnetize  the  susceptible  speaker  into  unusual  inspira- 
tion, even  the  power  of  her  attending  guardian  spirits  would  have  failed.  But 
both  causes  wrought  their  full  effect,  and  the  lecture  was  a  Pentecostal  hour 
to  speaker  and  audience  alike.  Spirit  friends,  dear  beloved  companions, 
once  deemed  dead  and  gone,  were  there,  revealing  (heir  tender  living  pres- 
ence to  the  eyes  of  the  seers,  and  whispering  words  of  comfort  into  the  ears 
of  the  entranced. 

When  all  was  over,  and  the  last  question  was  propounded  and  answered^ 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SFIRITUALTSM. 

355 

and  the  last  affectionate  farewell,  and  cordial  "  God  bless  you,"  was  spoken, 
the  party  separated,  once  more  penetratinginto  the  tiiickdarkness  of  the  prairie, 
swollen  into  pits  and  quagmires  by  the  winter  rains,  and  the  El  Paso  line  of 
inarch  was  resumed,  steering  their  way  back  as  they  came,  the  author  finding 
their  track  by  the  inspiration  of  her  guardian  spirit,  and  the  rest  of  the  party 
keeping  up  the  thread  of  connection  by  a  long-drawn  chorus  of  sweet  songs, 
tlie  burden  of  which  was  "  There's  rest  for  thee  in  Heaven." 

At  length  the  choral  resonance  grew  faint  and  yet  more  faint,  as,  one  after 
another,  the  spirit-led  wanderers  struck  off  into  divergent  tracks,  until  the  low 
murmuring  of  a  sweet  quartette  subsided  before  "  the  light  in  the  window" 
of  tlie  ghospitable  mansion  which   sheltered  the   speaker's   party  for   the 

And  many  and  many  agolden  evening  sun  has  set  across  the  vast  wastes  of 
the  prairies,  to  leave  a  starless  night  brightened  by  such  spiritual  midnight 
sunshine  as  these  wild  wanderings  evoked.  Hundreds  of  similar  and  often 
far  more  perilous  journeyings  the  author  and  her  co-laborers  have  undertaken 
in  the  progress  of  Western  Spiritualism  ;  but  the  darkest  night  has  always 
been  illumined  by  the  spiritual  sun  for  them,  the  longest  journey  made 
smooth  and  pleasant,  the  most  intricate  path  discovered,  and  the  fiercest 
tempests  calmed,  by  an  angel's  glorious  presence  and  tender,  watchful  care. 

Never  have  the  eternal  pillars  of  cloud  and  fire  shone  more  radiantly  be- 
fore the  e>es  of  mortality  then  in  the  spiritual  medium's  wild,  unwearied 
wai  denngs  in  the  land  of  the  far  West. 

But  to  return  to  St.  Louis.  In  the  month  of  July,  1853,  an  interest, 
amounting  ^o  great  excitement,  prevailed  on  the  subject  of  a  church  trial 
instituted  by  the  pastor  and  subordinate  officials  of  the  Second  Baptist  Church 
m  '^t  Louis  in  which  Mr.  Henry  Stagg,  one  of  the  members  and  a  distin- 
jiiahed  atizen  was  accused  of  heresy,  or  a  belief  in  the  doctrines  of  Spirit- 

Ihe  trial  which  was  marked  with  circumstances  of  unparalleled  bigotry 
-ind  b  tternes";  opened  with  a  citation  to  Mr.  Stagg  to  appear  before  the 
authorities  of  the  church,  who  claimed  to  hold  their  members'  consciences,  no 
less  than  their  souls'  welfare,  locked  up  in  the  narrow  archives  of  this  little 
sectarian  association.  At  the  meeting  where  Mr.  Stagg  was  to  be  formally 
arraigned,  it  was  decided,  contrary  to  the  usual  rules  of  their  organization,  that 
the  strangers  present  should  wifiidraw ;  also  that  Mr.  Stagg  should  not  be 
allowed  to  enter  into  a  defence  of  his  views,  such  a  course  "  being  out  of 
usage  in  Baptist  churches." 

Much  discussion  arising  on  these  questions,  the  meeting  was  adjoumed- 
From  a  pamphlet  published  by  Mr.  Stagg  in  which  the  whole  trial  is  reported 
in  full,  we  find  that  at  this  adjourned  meeting,  and  contrary  to  all/or^^r  ^^  usage 
in  Baptist  churck  meetings,"  where  the  doors  had  always  been  open  to  the 
public,  the  strangers  present,  which  meant  about  half  a  dozen  Spiritualist  friends 
of  Mr.  Stagg,  were  warned  to  quit  the  building.  After  much  warm  discus- 
sion on  this  point,  the  "moderator"  directed  that  a  committee  should  wait 
upon  the  strangt.j  and  ask  their  names  and  reasons  for  desiring  to  be  present, 
when  the  following  report  was  hastily  drawn  lip  amongst  them  : 

"P.  E,  BLAND'S  REASON  FOR  REMAINING. 

"  First.  Because  he  believes  he  is  here  of  right,  the  doors  of  the  church  being  open  on 
occasions  of  this  kind.      He  bas  not  been  informal  that  his  impression  in  this  respect  was 
Second   Being  here  of  right  and  requested  to  leave,  he  did  not  do  so,  becansa 

Hosiedb,  Google 

360  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

he  believed  Ihe  request  wrong,  and  lie  is  i 
canse  requested  to  do  so.  Third,  If  he  is 
made  apparent. 

"WILLIAM  H.  MANZ'S  REASONS. 

"I  entered  to  see  manifestations  of  that  charity  which  Christ  taught  while  on  earth. 
My  friend,  Mr.  Sta^,  has  been  charged  with  entertaining  certain  doctrines  called  by  the 
church  erroneous.  With  him  I  believe  in  these  doctiines,  and  with  him  I  desire  to  see 
them  refuted. 

"A.  S.  Whitby  also  subscribed  to  the  above  reasons. 

"JOHN  SQUIRES'  KEASONS. 

"  I  am  attracted  here  by  the  love  of  truth  ;  and  as  I  regard  truth  universal  and  for  all,  I 
have  desired  to  hear  it  defended,  by  error  being  exposed  ;  and  now  as  you  clium  to  be  the 
light  ot  the  world,  and  as  I  am  of  the  world,  I  hope  yott  will  not  deprive  me  of  the 
great  privit^e  of  your  light,  by  putting  it  under  a  bushel 

"Mr.  Charles  Levy  relied  in  substance,  tha.t  he  did  withdraw  when  first  requested  to  do 
so ;  but  as  he  had  heard  some  very  harsh  epithets  applied  to  them  as  they  were  in  the  act 
of  withdrawing,  he  had  concluded  to  return  again,  and  hear  what  the  result  might  be." 

It  need  hardly  be  stated  that  the  perusal  of  these  reasons  did  not  tend  to 
allay  the  bitterness  of  Christian  wrath  ;  on  tlie  contrary,  the  feeling  waxed  so 
strong  against  the  strangers,  that,  fearing  they  should  only  prejudice  their 
friend/s  cause  and  delay  the  proceedings,  they  departed,  and  the  meeting 
again  adjourned. 

The  sucn  of  all,  however,  was  the  final  condemnation  and  expulsion  of  Mr. 
Stagg  from  fellowship  with  his  Christian  brethren,  the  reverend  pastor  dis- 
missing the  lost  sheep  in  diese  affecting  words :  "  He  [the  pastor]  was  aware 
that  it  was  always  dangerous  to  listen  to  error,  and  hoped  that  those  present, 
and  especially  the  young,  would  take  warning  by  Mr.  Stagg  and  not  go  after 
these  spirits  or  have  anyiiing  to  do  with  them,  or  read  any  of  their  writings, 
but  to  hold  fast  by  the  faith  they  professed.  That  he  now  regarded  Mr.  Stagg 
like  a  barque  without  cliart  or  compass,  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean,  and 
with  nothing  but  the  dim  light  of  nature  to  guide  him,  which,  he  said,  put  him 
more  in  mind  of  a  fire-fiy  flitting  about  in  the  dark,  than  anything  else." 

After  this  terrible  exordium  and  the  awful  condemnation  of  being  excluded 
from  fellowship  with  die  Second  Baptist  Church  of  St  Louis,  it  may  be  some 
consolation  to  sympathising  readers  to  know  that  Mr.  Stagg  has  continued  to 
go  after  those  spirits  ever  since,  with  daily  increasing  satisfaction  to  himself, 
and  benefit  to  his  friends  and  the  public  advocacy  of  free  thought  in  St.  Louis ; 
and  though,  for  full  fifteen  years  later,  Mr.  Stagg  has  had  nothing  but  the  "dim 
light  of  nature  to  guide  him,"  that  feeble  fire-fly  has  conducted  him  into  the 
honor,  affection,  and  respect  of  all  who  know  him ;  into  financial  prosperity 
and  family  joys  ;  and  seems  still  to  promise  fair  to  steer  that  deserted  barque 
into  the  glorious  haven  "where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the 
Nweary  are  at  rest." 

We  rtgret  that  oiu-  space  will  not  allow  us  to  insert  Mr.  Stagg's  answer  to 
the  clerical  and  Christian  bretiiren,  who  denounced  "  the  coveting  after  Spir- 
itual gifts,"  and  obedience  to  the  chaise  "not  to  quench  the  spirit,"  as  a 
crime.  It  is  a  document  replete  with  unanswerable  arguments  and  logical 
exposition  of  the  very  scripture  on  whose  authority  his  condemnation  was 
supposed  to  rest,  but  which  afforded  him,  as  it  has  done  thousands  of  others, 
the  most  irrefragable  proof  that  the  true  believer  and  follower  of  Christ  must 
be  a  true  Spiritualist. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

WESTERN    SPIRITUALISM— ST.    LOUIS    (CONTINUED; 

Western  Lectures— Dr.  Rice  and  the  Spiritualists— Thorns  ik  the  Flesh 
—  The  Order  of  "Patriarchs"  —  The  Order  of  "Angelites"  —  "An- 
gelic" Law,  Order,  and  Poetry  — More  Bursting  Bubbles — The  Price 
OF  Credulity. 

All  the  spiritual  speakers  of  eminence  have  lectured  with  acceptance  and 
general  interest  at  St.  Louis.  Judge  Edmonds,  Thomas  Gales  Forster, 
Thomas  L.  Hairis,  R.  P,  Ambler,  and  J.  S.  Finney  were  amongst  the  earliest 
male  lecturers  who  succeeded  in  attracting  large  audiences  to  hear  the  claims 
of  Spiritualism  discussed  upon  evidence  which  was  constandy  confirmed  at 
the  numerous  circles  held  in  the  city. 

Besides  the  ladies  whose  names  have  already  figured  in  these  pages,  two 
special  favorites  of  the  refined  St  Louis  Spiritualists  were  Miss  Matde 
Hulett  and  Miss  Bell  Scon^l,  both  very  young  and  interesting  members  of 
respectable  families  in  Rockford,  Illinois. 

Although  purely  "Western  lecturers,"  and  with  no  experience  of  the  intel- 
lectual circles  at  the  East,  these  young  ladies'  discourses  have  been  pro- 
nounced "miracles  of  eloquence,  logic,  and  beauty." 

They  were  both  trance  mediums  of  the  highest  order,  and  some  of  their 
published  lectures  transcend  for  depth  of  thought  and  purity  of  diction,  many 
of  the  most  elaborately  prepared  utterances  of  accomplished  ecclesiastics. 

Stimulated  by  their  growing  success  and  the  remarkable  powers  of  their 
speakers,  the  Spiritualists  of  St.  Louis  issued  a  bold  challenge  to  the  Rev. 
Dr.  N.  L.  Rice,  a  famous  debater  and  minister  of  the  Presbyterian  denomi- 
nation, to  enter  upon  a  public  discussion  of  the  theory  of  Spiritualism  with 
Mr.  J.  S.  Finney.  The  Spiritualists  laid  down  twelve  propositions,  which  they 
intended  to  defend,  explanatory  of  their  theory,  invitiDg  Dr.  Rice  to  disprove 
or  answer  them.  To  this  the  doctor  replied  in  a  long  but  somewhat  con- 
temptuous epistle,  declining  the  debate  and  repudiating  the  Spiritualists'  claim 
to  any  definite  position,  eidier  in  philosophy  or  religion.  Tlie  Spiritualists 
retorted  with  an  admirable  and  pungent  review  of  the  reverend  gentleman's 
letter,  and  here  the  correspondence  terminated,  but  its  publication  created 
immense  interest  and  promoted  a  general  desire  to  inquire  further  into  the 
real  claims  of  Spiritualism.  Meantime,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the 
course  of  this  n.i^^lity  current  could  be  permitted  to  run  any  more  smoothly 
in  tlie  far  West  tlian  in  the  busy  and  litigious  East  Many  "  thorns  in  the 
flesh,"  hard  to  bear,  from  time  to  time  harassed  the  action  of  the  common- 
sense  and  intelligent  portion  of  the  Spiritualists,  and  many  a  buffet  of  tliat 
Satan  which  dwells  in  every  heart,  diey  were  compelled  to  endure,  from  the 
follies,  indiscretions,  and  fanaticisms  of  the  "  Sj>iritists,"  who  believed  in  the 
phenomena,  but  had  not  yet  learned  to  apply  it  sufficiently  to  have  become 
true  "Spiritualists." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

363  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

The  reader  will  riinember  the  visit  of  Mr.  Jolih  M.  Spear,  to  St,  Louis,  as 
described  in  a  foniier  chapter,  and  hence  be  prepared  to  learti  that  a  veiy 
considerable  clicck  to  the  enthusiasm  of  believers,  and  the  success  of  their 
propaganda,  was  experienced  through  this  gentleman's  eccentricities,  and  the 
imitations  which  grew  out  of  his  remarkable  example. 

Amongst  other  sources  of  "trouble  in  the  camp"  was  the  formation  of 
two  societies,  neither  of  which  originated  in  St.  Louis,  though  both  communi- 
cated their  baleful  influence  to  the  cause  there. 

The  first  took  rise  in  Cincinnati,  and  was  entitled  "The  order  of  Patriarchs." 
It  was  a  secret  society,  claiming  to  be  of  spiritual  origin,  and  ramifying  widely 
throu^out  the  country,  extending  as  far  as'  Maine  and  New  York,  and  estab- 
lishing branch  societies  even  in  the  remotest  portions  of  the  South.  Its  prin- 
cipal centre  of  operations,  however,  was  in  the  West,  where,  radiatii^  from 
its  starting  point,  Cincinnati,  it  numbered  many  thousands  of  members,  using 
tiiat  word  for  want  of  a  better ;  for  to  say  "disciples,"  votaries,  or  believers, 
would  be  totally  inapphcable  in  reference  to  an  association  which  based  itself 
upon  nothing  in  particular,  taught  only  vague  generalities,  and  amounted,  in 
all,  to  the  same  as  it  arose  from,  namely,  nothing. 

The  fact,  however,  that  its  organization  involved  the  mysticism  of  a  secret 
society,  and  flattered  the  empty-minded  and  puerile  by  official  appointments, 
dignities,  and  regalias,  formed  features  of  attraction  which  captivated  the  fancy 
of  thousands,  whilst  the  hope  that  the  mystery  might  inclose  some  germ  of 
real  usefulness  and  beauty,  induced  many,  evenof  the  best andmostthought- 
ful  Spiritualists,  to  join  its  ranks. 

Fortunately  for  the  cause  of  truth,  though  unhappily  for  the  success  of 
those  who  aimed  at  spiritual  power  and  dignity  through  this  notable  associa- 
tion, it  soon  began  to  be  confidently  affirmed  that  some  of  its  chief  promoters, 
high  and  distinguished  "patriarchs"  of  modem  times,  werepersons  whose 
proclivities  peculiarly  fitted  them  to  assume  that  lofty  title,  in  one  sense  at 
least,  seeing  that  they  had  already  begun  to  imitate  the  example  of  their 
venerable  prototypes  on  the  marriage  question,  and  probably  designed  to 
inaugurate  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  as  models  for  liie  basis  of  a  new  social 
order,  in  which  the  household  arrangements  of  these  honored  personages 
were  to  be  held  up  as  patterns  for  the  nineteenth  century  gentiles. 

The  writer,  having  been  herself  a  hierophant  in  the  order,  stimulated  to 
the  inquiry  into  its  resources  by  the  hope  of  discovering  some  kerne!  of 
wheat  mixed  up  with  a  vast  mass  of  superincumbent  chaff,  feels  qualified  to 
pronounce  upon  its  merits,  and  could  have  undertaken  to  assure  the  commu- 
nity of  its  perfectly  innoxious  character,  as  far,  at  least,  as  folly  and  supersti- 
tion can  ever  be  harmless,  but  the  worid,  outraged  by  the  fact  that  some 
amongst  the  most  distinguished  of  die  "  Patriarchs  "  were  openly  avowed  con- 
temners of  all  that  was  sacred  in  social  or  religious  life,  insisted  upon  fasten- 
ing the  characters  of  the  propagandists  on  the  order. 

In  the  Age  of  Progress  for  1856,  the  editor  gives,  on  his  own  responsibil- 
ity, a  version  of  the  origin  of  this  society,  which,  together  with  his  comments, 
we  shall  present  to  the  reader  in  thefoUowing  extracts : 

"THE  ORDER  OF  THE  PATRIARCHS. 

"  No  plant  whose  seed  has  been  sown  in  the  soil  of  earth,  has  ever  grown  so  lusuiiantly, 
or  loaded  the  atmosphere  with  such  rieharoma,  as  that  of  Spiritualism.  But  when  we  corne 
to  look  about,  even  In  those  fields  where  it  grows  the  most  rapidly,  we  discover  among  it, 
rank  weeds,  the  seeds  of  which  must  have  been  sown  by  some  enemy,  who  cannot  bear  to 
see  others  enjoy  that  foe  wMeh  he  has  no  taste  himself. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  363 

"A  short  distancefrom  where  we  stand,  we  see  a  large  number  of  these  aoiious  plants, 
with  thdr  crests  wavbg  above  the  level  of  the  spiritual  growths  among  which  they  stand. 
This  species  IS  calied  the  'Order  of  the  Palriarchs.'  On  each  of  these  weeds  is  something 
in  the  shape  of  humanity,  who  claims  to  be  a  Spiritualist,  but  who  cannot  bear  to  have  his 
head  even  with  his  surrounding  brethren  aiid  asters,  and  hence,  bb  aim  seems  to  be  to  at- 
tain to  a  little  eminence,  that  he  may  look  down  upon  the  common  plane  and  feel  exalted. 

"  It  is  a  lamentable  fact  that  there  are  large  numbers  of  Sphitualists,  in  various  locali- 
ties in  the  countrjr,  to  whose  palates  Spiritualism,  b  its  simplicity,  is  becoming  stale  and 
nauseating,  youthful  and  beautiful  as  it  is.  These,  unpelled  by  the  aspirations  of  vanity, 
have  essayed  to  elevate  themselves  a  few  mches  above  the  heads  of  their  peers,  by  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  secret  order,  which,  of  course,  is  to  be  the  nucleus  of  a  sect,  to  be  characterized 
by  all  the  bigotry,  mf  olerance,  and  hatred  which  now  rankle  in  the  bosoms  of  one  orthodox 
Christian  sect  towards  another. 

"  As  well  as  we  can  gather  the  history  of  this  new  form  of  an  old  idea,  it  is  as  follows  ; 
Sometime  within  the  last  two  years,  a  man,  whose  name,  if  we  ever  heard  it  did  not  write 
itself  on  our  memory,  being  a  citizen  of  Cmchmati,  received  direction— so  he  afFirmed— 
by  impression,  or  otherwise,  to  go  to  some  other  locality  in  the  city  than  that  which  he  was 
in,  where  he  would  meet  with  a  person,  who  would  give  him  further  instructions  respectmg 
the  performance  of  some  daty  that  lay  before  him.  He  repaired  to  the  spot  indicated, 
where,  to  his  surprise,  he  found  a  residence  which  he  knew  not  existed  in  that  locality 

"  He  opened  his  eyes  in  amazement,  for  it  appeared  to  him  that  the  mantjon  he  saw 
must  be  of  the  genus  fungi,  as  it  must  have  sprung  up  with  mushroom  rapidity  of  growth. 
Though  somewhat  disconcerted  at  this  seeming  evidence  of  magic,  he  ventured  to  pull  at  the 
belt-l;nob,  which  soon  brought  to  the  door  a  gentleman  of  venerable  appearance,  as  all  such 
ghostly  personages  are.  who  hesitated  for  a  moment,  apparently  assuring  himself,  through 
his  mtenor  peiception.',  what  manner  of  man  it  was  who  demanded  admittance  to  the  inte- 
rior of  that  enchanted-  castle. 

"Arriving  at  the  necessary  conclusion,  the  venerable  gentleman  directed  him  to  return  to 
his  own  residence,  where  he  would  find  that  which  wouM  further  instruct  him  in  the  duties 
which  were  required  of  him, 

"Obedient  to  themandateof  duty,  he  put  himself  in  retrograde  motion,  and  soon  arrived 
at  his  ovra  door.  And  oh  !  reader,  what  do  you  think  he  found  there  ?  Was  it  an  'infernal 
machine,'  deagned  to  send  him  to  kingdom-come  on  the  back  of  a  torpedo  ? 

"  No  —  his  interior  self  told  him  not  to  fear,  for  there  was  nothing  but  good  intended  hun 
—  It  was  a  box,  longer  one  way  than  it  was  broad  the  other ;  and  he  valiantly  stepped  up  to 
it  and  found  it  to  bear  the  marks  of  Adams's  Express,  and  addressed  to  himself.  Couri^  1 
exclaimed  the  voice  within  him— not  the  box  — and  he  boldly  tore  it  open.  What  was 
there?  It  was  a  marble  slab,  all  honey-combed  with  perforations  I  What  he  was  to  do 
with  the  present,  was,  for  a  time,  exceedingly  pu22ling  to  his  mind.  But  it  was  not  long  till 
'impression'  came  to  his  relief,  and  sent  him  to  consult  a  distinguished  gentleman  of  the 
cily,  who  was  a  well-known  and  leading  Spiritualist. 

' '  The  two  met,  and,  after  consultation,  agreed  to  refer  the  matter  to  the  spirits,  through 
the  mediation  of  a  clairvoyant,  who  resided  in  the  same  house  with  the  gentleman  appealed 

"This reference  was  to  be  made  without  giving  the  clairvoyant  any  mkling  of  the  cir- 
cumstances in  his  normal  state.  This  was  done,  and  the  contents  of  the  box  were  described, 
and  the  perforations  of  the  slab  declared  to  be  a  language  destined  to  be  taught  to  the 
liuman  family.  A  key  to  this  langu^e  was  also  given,  together  with  instructions  as  to 
forming  a  secret  organbation  (the  grand  arcanum  of  the  whole  thing)  under  the  title  of 
'The  Order  of  the  Patriarchs. ' 

"  From  different  sources  we  glean  scraps,  which,  when  collected  and  put  together,  make 
^  a^regate  of  character  that  presents  this  comer-stone  of  spiritual  sectarianism  as  one 
of  those  abominations  which,  above  all  things,  are  to  be  eschewed  and  deprecated  by  all 
who  aspire  to  that  purity  and  spiritual  elevation  which  tutelary  angels  commend  as  the 
means  of  obtainmg  hap^mess  here  and  the  road  to  a  blissful  immortality  in  the  life  to  come. 
Among  these  scraps  we  find  the  following : 

"  The  hierogiyphieal  perforations  in  the  slab  comprise  a  language  which  is  to  be  doled  out 
to  the  initiated  as  fast  as  they  progress  from  degree  to  degree.  They  have,  in  this  secret 
order,  degrees,  as  they  have  in  all  other  secret  orders;  and  members  in  each  degree  attain 
to  a  knowledge  of  the  slab-language  which  they  had  hi  the  degree  next  below. 

"The  perforations  in  theslaharenot  stationary,  but  miraculously  changeable,  so  that  they 
will  admit  of  infinite  variations  ;  hence.the  mysteries  are  endless.  The  moral  teachings  of 
the  slab-language,  as  we  learn,  embrace  that  of  *  free  love,*  in  its  most  reyoltmg  form. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

364  HISTOR  Y  OF  MODERIV 

"  II  teaches  that  the  martiage  ci 
man  or  any  woman  may  repudiate 

cated  by  this  holy  stone,  is,  that  '  all  women  have  a  right,  under  all  ci 
for  theroselves  who  shall  be  the  fathers  of  their  children  ;  and  tliat  all  men,  withont  regard 
to  any  covenant  eogagement  previously  entered  into,  may  become  such  fatliers  whenever 
the  animal  love-pasaon  is  redprocal  in  its  prompting.' 

"  We  admit  that  these  descriptions  cannot  be  otherwise  than  disgustmg  to  the  reader,  but 
we  cannot  escuse  ourselves  from  the  duty  of  expoang,  as  far  as  our  information  goes,  the 
diaracter  of  this  carbraicular  excrescence,  which  is  about  to  attach  itself  to  the  body  of 
Spiritualism. 

"  Finally,  we  call  upon  eveiy  Spiritualist,  male  and  female,  who  loves  the  sacred  cause  in 
which  they  are  engaged,  to  use  every  influence  in  their  power  to  guard  against  the  approach 
of  this  monster.  There  is  leprosy  in  every  part  of  its  body ;  and  death  —  moral  and  spiritual 
— will  be  ever  close  on  its  track. 

"Let  those  who  have  already  thrown  themselves  into  the  pool  of  moral  pollution  follow  those 
mock  Abrahams,  Isaacs,  Jacobs,  to  infamy  and  to  death  ;  but  let  those  who  prize  purity  and 
H>iti[ual  truth  for  their  intrinsic  value  avoid  them  as  they  would  the  sirocco,  on  whose  wing 
me  pestilences  ride,  and  in  whose  breath  are  concentrated  all  the  deadly  poisons." 

To  the  scathing  remarks  of  the  editor  above  quoted  we  would  reply  that 
the  position  of  openly-avowed  "  free  loveism,"  if  it  was  read  at  all  on  the 
-  mysterious  slab,  was  one  of  the  doctrines  which  happened  to  have  temporarily 
withdrawn  itself,  on  all  such  occasions  as  the  author  perused  its  mysterious 
hieroglyphics. 

The  evil  reports  which  connected  tliemselves  with  its  leaders,  might  have 
been  sufficient  to  account  for  evil  opinions  respecting  the  order,  without  the 
supposed  revelations  of  the  shifting  hieroglyphics.  Be  this  as  it  may,  tlie 
society  soon  sunk  into  the  obsciuity  from  which  it  originated,  and,  though  its 
existence  involved  some  loss  of  character,  time,  and  funds,  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  its  superstitious  rites,  still,  it  served  as  a  temporary  check  to  the 
fervid  enthusiasm  of  those  Spirituahsts  whose  expectations  of  an  immediate 
millennium,  were  constantly  being  excited,  and  was  one  amongst  a  thousand 
similar  warnings,  that  if  ever  the  time  arrives  for  a  concrete  organization  of 
Spiritualism,  it  must  be  when  each  integral  atom  is  sufficiently  purified  to 
take  its  place  as  a  fitting  associate  of  the  general  mass,  not  when  the  general 
mass  is  expected  to  purify  the  atoms. 

The  next  associative  movement  which  we  shall  notice  as  exercising  a  tem- 
porary influence  on  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  St.  Louis,  is  one  of  the 
most  extraordinary  evidences  of  human  folly,  credulity,  impudent  assump- 
tion, and  blasphemous  pretension,  that  the  records  of  any  movement  can 
show.  Though  not  originating,  or  even  directly  connecting  itself  with  Spirit- 
ualism, it  has  been  so  constantly  attributed  to  diis  source,  and  claims  to  deal 
so  largely  with  the  denizens  of  a  spiritual  world,  that  it  cannot,  with  propriety, 
be  omitted  from  this  history. 

The  first  public  notice  that  the  society  of  whicli  we  are  about  to  speak,  at- 
tracted to  itself,  arose  from  the  issue  of  a  little  paper  entitled  'I  he  Thtocrat, 
published  at  Harmony  Springs,  Benton  County,  Arkansas,  where  it  was  claimed 
that  about  forty  persons  had  located  on  a^ fine  tract  of  four  hundred  and  eighty 
.acrta  of  land,  owned  by,  or  at  least  under  the  control  of,  an  ex-Methodist 
minister,  of  the  name  of  Spencer,  who,  with  his  wife,  claimed  to  be  the  found- 
ers and  leaders  of  the  movement 

The  association  was  sometimes  called  the  "Harmonial  Society,"  and  still 
more  frequently,  though  perhaps  in  ridicule,  "The  Angelites."  Mr.  Spencer, 
with  the  self-appointed  degree  of  Doctor,  was  at  one  time  known  as  a  practi- 
tioner of  medical  electricity  in  St.  Louis.     Here  he  acquired  some  reputation 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  36S 

for  his  success  in  psychologizing,  or  temporarily  impressing  his  subjects  by  the 
force  of  his  quiet,  but  singularly  stubborn  will. 

After  a  while,  it  was  rumored  that  he  had  succeeded  in  inducing  several 
persons  of  wealth  and  respectable  position  to  join  him  in  the  purchase  of  a 
large  tract  of  land  in  Arkansas,  where  it  was  designed  to  form  a  society,  the 
externa!  basis  of  which  may  be  gathered  by  a  perusal  of  the  following  extracts 
from  a  circular,  issued  some  time  after  certain  wealthy  dupes  had  actually 
inaugurated,  by  their  presence  and  money,  the  commencement  of  the  asso- 

"TO  APPLICANTS. 

"The  Harmonial  Society  was  oi^anked  by  angelic  direction,  December  25,  1855. 
wliicli  angels  stQl  preside  overit,  and  will  ever  continue  lo  do  so,  as  long  as  their  teachings  are 
respected  and  their  order  observed.  Their  wisdom  [s  unimpeachable,  and  their  integrity 
is  beyond  suspicion.  They  seek  not  money,  but  men  and  women,  whose  spiritual  aspira- 
tions draw  ihem  into  harmonial  relations  with  each  other,  forming  one  common  brother- 
hood, where  angelic  wisdom  and  order  can  be  freely  unfolded. 

They  seek  not  the  worldly-wise,  nor  the  rich,  because  they  are  rich,  but  those  whose  love 
for  truth  is  stronger  than  that  for  gold  j  and  such,  though  poor  and  unlearned  in  worldly 
wisdom,  are  not  rejected. 

"  Our  manner  of  receiving  members  is  not  unlike  that  of  the  Harmonial  Christians  in  the 
early  days  of  Christianity ;  that  is,  each  member  or  apphcant  places  in  the  treasury  all 
noneys,  or  property  of  lakatsoever  kind  nuhkh  tliey  may  possess,  to  be  employed  for  tlie 
benefit  of  the  society,  or  remain  as  a  standing  fund  to  meet,  if  necessary,  any  future  con- 
tingencies. This  union  is  perpetual,  and  no  property  can  ever  be  taken  from  the  society  and 
used  for  seltish  or  isolated  purposes  outside  of  the  interests  of  the  society.  The  home  can 
never  be  sold,  except  by  special  direction  of  our  guides,  whose  wisdom  is  a  safe  light  to 
direct  us  for  all  coming  time 

"  Our  views  of  marriage  are  peculiar  to  ourselves.  We  believe  in  coni'iigal  union  which 
union  is,  and  should  be,  perpetual ;  that  is,  a  man  should  have  but  one  wife,  a  woman  should 
have  but  one  husband,  as  such.  Vet  ail  are  free  to  enjoy  the  society  of  each  other  as 
brothers  and  sisters,  without  the  withering  curse  of  iealousy  on  the  part  of  any  for  punty 
■alone  can  dwdl  in  this  society.  Conjugal  union  is  mdispensable  to  the  proper  and  naturj 
reproduction  of  the  himian  species ;  and  even  with  conjugal  pairs,  reproduction  13  unadv  is 
aWe,  until  our  bodies  are  renovated  by  the  adoption  of  a  proper  course  of  regimen  and 
hygiene  requisite  to  good  health,  a  sound  constitution,  and  consequent  longevity  and  our 
spirits  resurrected  from  the  gross  element  of  selfishness  and  cold  isolation,  which  conditions 
are  necessary  to  the  reproductbn  of  the  legitimate  children  of  trutli.  The  enjoyment  of 
conjugal  life  is  by  no  means  prohibited,  but  all  are  instructed  how  to  prevent  the  re- 
production of  their  species,  except  at  will,  and  by  special  advice  of  our  guides  to  do  so. 
If,  however,  any  should  fall  into  error  by  mistake,  they  are  dealt  with  in  a  loving  and 
lenient  manner,  so  as  to  produce  the  most  perfect  offspring  that  their  present  conditions  of 
purity  will  admit  of.  But  it  should  t>e  borne  in  mind  that  imperfect  conditions  produce 
imperfect  oflspring,  aiid  also,  that  perfect  conditions  produce  perfect  offspring.  Here  ia 
the  commencement  of  all  true  reform 

"  All  applications  for  membership  are  submitted  to  the  wisdom  of  our  guides,  and  whoso- 
ever they  receive  we  receive. 

"Now,  if  the  foregoing  meets  with  your  approb^Ion,  and  you  feel  solicitous  of  becom- 
ing one  with  us  in  this  great  and  heavenly-appointed  harmonial  life,  health,  and  happiness, 
please  send  m  your  application,  in  writing,  giving  your  name  and  the  names  and  numlier  of 
your  family,  whom  you  expect  to  bring  with  you,  together  with  a  true  statement  of  your 
pecuniary  affairs,  the  amount  of  debts  outstanding  or  incoming,  the  amount  of  real  estate, 
money,  personal  property,  etc.  All  these  should  accompany  your  written  application, 
which  will  be  immediately  submitted  to  the  wisdom  of  our  guides,  and  an  answer  forwarded 
by  return  of  mail. 

"  Please  accept  our  ^cere  regards,  and  believe  us  your  brother  and  sister  in  all  truthful 
reform.  T.  E.  Spencer. 

Martha  Spencer. 

"Address,  T.  E.  Spencer,  Harmony  Springs,  Benton  County,  Arkansas." 

Over  and  above  the  information  conveyed  in  this  circular  touching  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

366  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

pretensions  of  the  "principal,"  or  ratlier  the  only  mediums,  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Spencer,  the  substance  of  the  following  statements  were  made  by  these  par- 
ties to  several  persons  outside  die  society,  including  the  author  herself. 

They  declared  that  they  had  once  been  Spiritualists,  but  had  progressed 
into  far  brighter  planes  of  communion  than  those  open  to  tlie  general 
body  of  believers.  They  found  that  about  nine-tenths  of  "the  spirits"  that 
passed  iiito  the  sphere  after  death  were  not  in  reality  immortal  j  that  niany 
human  souls  perish  at  the  death  of  the  physical  body,  whilst  a  few  others 
survived  its  dissolution,  but  after  maintaining  a  sliort  parasitical  existence  by 
preying  on  the  emanarions  of  human  beings,  gradually  melted  away,  died  out 
"  the  second  death,"  and  became  absorbed  in  the  great  ocean  of  spiritual 
existence. 

Meantime  it  was  claimed  that  a  very  small  percentage  of  the  race  —  to  wit, 
individuals  who  had  lived  on  earth  in  a  strict  conformity  with  such  laws  of 
life,  health,  and  doctrine,  as  were  promulgated  at  Harmony  Springs — had 
entirely  survived  the  shock  of  eartlily  dissolution,  and  attained  to  the 
glory  of  immortality  :  how  they  had  managed  to  arrive  at  this  desirable  state 
without  the  aid  of  the  Spencers,  male  and  female,  was  never  quite  clearly 
explained. 

One  of  the  conditions,  however,  was  affirmed  to  be  a  purely  vegetarian  diet, 
and  that  doled  out  in  exceedingly  minimum  proportions.  Of  course  there  were 
some  illustrious  exceptions  made  in  favor  of  the  Bible  worthies,  who  had  all 
managed  to  get  into  the  Spencer  Heaven,  despite  their  meat-eating  propensi- 
ties; but  then  they  lived  a  long  time  ago,  and  it  might  be  presumed  that 
Heaven  had  become  more  exclusive  as  its  population  increased,  especially  as 
the  example  of  John  the  Baptist,  who  was  assumed  to  hold  a  very  distin- 
guished place  in  eternity,  could  no  longer  be  imitated,  from  the  scarcity  of 
locusts  as  an  article  of  daily  consumption. 

The  relations  sustained  between  the  angelic  survivors  of  the  wreck  of  hu- 
man  spirituality  and  the  highly-favored  Arkansas  mediums,  was  a  very  curious 

They  were,  as  the  parties  declared,  "  angels,"  not  "  spirits"  merely ;  and 
.when  they  chose  to  leave  dieir  heavenly  abode,  they  walked  about  earth  in 
such  strictly  human  fonn  and  costume  that  they  were  constantly  encountered 
in  the  streets  and  mistaken  for  ordinary  mortals.  The  lady  alleged  that  these 
"  angels  "  brought  them  gold,  silver,  bani  bills,  and  wearing-apparel ;  the  latter 
not  made  up,  however,  leaving  the  inference  that  there  were  no  angelic  dress- 
makers or  tailors  in  Heaven;  and  in  proof  [?]of  her  assertion,  she  pointed  to 
the  garments  she  wore,  declaring  that  the  Parisian  shawl,  dress,  and  bonnet,  in 
which  she  was  attired  had  been  brought  her  at  sundry  times  by  "angels,"  and 
certain  pieces  of  gold,  which  she  produced  from  her  pocket,  came  from  the 
same  inexhaustible  source.  No  explanation  was  offered  of  the  uses  to  which 
the  large  sums  cast  into  the  general  treasury  by  confiding  disciples  were  put, 
nor  did  it  appear  what  share  the  angels  took  in  the  labors  of  the  home  and 
farm,  which  the  Spencers  declared  were  wholly  superintended  by  the  said 
angels,  though  invisibly,  either  in  person  or  effect,  to  any  eyes  than  those  of 
these  illuminated  seers. 

The  most  tangible  facts  that  came  under  public  notice  with  reference  to 
these  people  and  their  very  large  statements  were,  that  they  had  induced  some 
thirty  families  of  wealdi,  respectabihly,  and  intelligence,  to  join  them,  and  that 
they  were  affirmed  to  exert  an  almost  unlimited  influence  over  their  votaries, 
especially  in  the  case  of  two  or  three  persons,  whose  sound  sense,  talent,  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  367 

more  tlian  ordinary  reputarion  for  judgment,  gave  the  community  of  St.  Louis 
confidence  that  there  must  be  some  value  in  the  movement. 

One  pEirt  of  their  doctrine  was  that  the  human  body  should  never  die,  and 
never  would,  except  man  violated  the  laws  of  his  being,  /.  e.,  by  living  outsid< 
of  Hannony  Springs  and  its  doctrines. 

Again,  it  was  claimed  tliat  the  whole  race  should  live  in  universal  brother- 
hood, especially  on  the  community  of  property  and  social  rights  question,  and 
that  when  mortals  became  sufficiently  sublimated,  by  the  Spencerian  pro- 
cess, to  throw  off  all  the  grossness  of  their  natures,  they  would  be  clothed 
with  pure  spiritual  bodies;  hve  when,  where,  how,  and  as  long  as  they  pleased; 
become  invisible  at  will;  in  short,  be  like  the  "angels,"  or  the  ancient  Rosi- 
cnicians,  of  whom  these  modern  liarmonialists  were  obviously  an  effete  sort  of 
paraplirase. 

The  above  is  a  siimmarj-  of  their  doctrines,  as  exhibited  to  the  world,  rep- 
resented in  tlieir  own  verbiage,  and  put  forth  in  their  ephemeral  tract,  entitled 
the  Theocrat. 

For  some  time  a  curiosity,  amounting  to  real  interest,  was  manifested  in  con- 
nection with  the  "  Angclites,"  but  ^er  a  few  years  of  their  mysterious  existence, 
dark  rumors  issued  from  the  angelic  camp;  threats  of  a  portentous  character 
were  heard  both  from  within  and  without  the  abode  of  haxmony;  and  at  last 
the  bubble  burst  in  the  flight  of  the  Spencers  with  all  the  property  they  could 
lay  hands  on,  and  their  subsequent  arrest  and  imprisonment  at  the  instance  of 
some  of  the  enraged  brethren  who  had  been  audaciously  swindled  out  of  laige 
sums  of  money. 

When  the  whole  matter  came  to  be  the  subject  of  public  investigation,  it 
proved  that  Spencer  had  pretended  to  purchasethe  property  in  the  name  of 
the  community,  but  had,  in  reality,  so  perplexed  the  ritle  and  misrepresented 
its  value,  that  those  who  had  invested  thousands  of  dollars  in  tiie  undertaking, 
could  not  recover  above  fifty  or  a  hundred,  whilst  many  deluded  families  came 
out  of  the  affair  penniless. 

An  expos'e  of  the  internal  arrangements  discovered  a  condition  of  impudent 
assumption  and  psychological  subjugation  ou  the  part  of  the  disciples  to  the 
powerful  will  of  the  master-spirit  of  the  swindle,  almost  incredible. 

It  seemed  that,  at  first,  the  two  pretenders  who  had  founded  the  enterprise 
exerted  an  unlimited  sway  over  their  dupes.  They  made  them  perform  the 
most  laborious  tasks  and  menial  offices;  eat  meagre  food,  bad  in  quality  and 
small  in  quantity;  submit  to  extravagant  and  painfully  minute  directions  for 
the  time  and  mode  of  performing  every  act  of  life;  rise,  go  to  bed,  pray,  and 
even  think,  according  to  the  most  absurd  and  tyrannical  rules,  and  all,  under 
the  horrible  impression  that  in  this  way  only  could  they  be  exempt  from  the  in- 
evitable doom  of  annihilation,  and  attain  to  angelic  perfection ;  and  m  the  mean- 
time, their  tyrants  eat,  drank,  and  acted  exactly  as  they  pleased,  because  they 
had  attained  to  tlte  angelic  perfection  which  absolved  them  from  further  respon- 
sibility. 

At  last,  as  in  the  famous  Mount£un  Cove  movement,  the  demagnetising 
process  set  in,  and  the  depsychologized  dupes,  awaking  from  their  fanatical 
dream  of  mesmeric  influence  and  visionary  enthusiasm,  beheld  themselves 
stripped  of  their  earthly  possessions  and  in  the  power  of  a  pair  of  arrant  swin- 
dlers, whose  ignorance  and  impudence  were  on  an  equal  parallel.  The  result 
of  this  dreadful  awakening  was  manifest  in  scenes  of  perpetual  discord  and  vio- 
lent contention.  Whenever  unruiy  spirits  broke  forth  into  these  scenes  of 
opposition.  Dr.  Spencer  had  corrective  communications  from  "the  angels," 
and  Mrs.  Spencer  fell  into  fits,  spasms,  and  convulsions,  which  required  cPr 

Hosted  by  Google 

368  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

tain  stimulants,  together  with  the  endearments  and  caresses  of  flie  recusant, 
to  bring  her  out  of.  At  length,  liowever,  tlie  fits  became  too  frequent,  and  the 
reconciliations  too  few.  The  i-ssue  of  the  Theocrat.  representing  a  state  of 
angelic  peace,  began  to  be  too  feeble  to  counteract  the  loud  voice  of  rumor, 
whicli  affirmed  the  existence  of  apandemonium  at  Harmony  Springs.  Finally, 
several  of  the  members,  who  had  staid  by  the  ark  in  the  vain  hope  of  rescuing 
some  of  their  dissipated  wealth  from  the  clutches  of  their  spoilers,  resolved  to 
take  active  measures  for  its  recovery,  and  the  rumor  of  this  proceeding  reach- 
ing tlie  Spencers,  they  eloped  with  whatever  they  could  possess  themselves 
of,  leaving  their  victims  literally  penniless.  Upon  this,  one  of  the  members 
who  had  invested  "five  thousand  good  golden  dollars  in  the  operation,"  fol- 
lowed the  fugitives,  had  them  arrested  and  thrown  into  prison,  but,  unhappily, 
the  complications  of  extravagance  and  roguery  by  which  the  money  was  spent 
and  the  estate  involved,  left  little  or  nothing  for  the  victims  but  mortification 
and  ruin.  And  thus  they  separated,  richer,  perhaps,  for  their  experience,  and 
few  of  them  disposed  again  to  trust  to  plenary  inspiration,  infallible  mediuras, 
or  the  unimpeachable  authority  of  spirits  in  die  body,  or  even  angels  out  of  it. 
It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  no  spirit  niedinms  or  spiritual  speakers  could  be  in- 
veigled into  this  miserable  delusion,  though  many  of  their  most  eminent  mem- 
bers had  been  solicited  to  join  it.  On  the  contrary,  they  repeatedly  warned 
the  Spiritualists  of  tiie  West  that  the  movement  was  contrary  to  the  genius  of 
tnie  Spiritualism,  and  a  false  and  fatal  interpolation  of  mean  cunning  and 
wickedness  upon  its  rational  teachings. 

The  result  proved  the  truth  of  their  affirmations,  although,  at  the  time,  they 
were  attributed  to  jealousy  of  the  "angelic  ministration,"  to  which  the  unde- 
veloped spirit  mediums  could  not  aspire. 

The  following  are  choice  specimens  of  die  lectures  which  were  ^ven  on 
the  special  occasions  above  referred  to,  enunciated  through  the  inspired  lips 
of  Mrs.  Martha  Spencer,  and  noted  down  by  appointed  scribes,  until  those 
subhme  utterances  were  observed  by  some  profane  commentators  to  be  sin- 
gularly and  habitually  contradictory  of  each  other,  after  which  the  lectures 
were  given  as  "  lectures  of  the  hour,"  but  transcription  was  forbidden. 

"  There  are  some  that  thinlt  they  are  surronnded  by  enemies,  but  the  worst  enemy  is  in 
their  own  breasls.  In  the  human  heart  is  a  great  enemy ;  it  Im'ks  in  a  place  where  it  can 
throw  lis  deadly  fangs  into  the  mind,  and  escept  you  have  your  mind  fixed  on  the  one  eter- 
nal Father,  you  can  never  attain  the  end  that  you  are  living  for.  Now  if  your  mind  is  im- 
pelled to  tidk  on  politics,  or  other  low  things  of  life,  you  ace  lowering  yourself  beneath  the 
dignity  of  Christ,  your  leader ;  if  you  stoop  below  the  order  of  heaven  to  meddle  with  such 
things,  you  can  never  attain  to  eternal  life,  and  the  tongue  being  an  unruly  member,  it  will 
say  things  that  will  bring  you  into  trouble,  whether  you  say  them  yourself  or  listen  to 
others;  and  if  you  meddle  in  such  things,  j'o«  must  surely  die.  Now,  do  n.it  stoop  to  talk 
with,  any  one  unless  you  have  business,  for  surely  if  you  do  you  will  come  \^  contact  with 
low,  false,  and  worMly  spirits  ;  therefore  keep  from  talking,  or  listenmg,  01  uli'ddling  with 
any  one  whatsoever. 

"  And  some  of  you  talk  to  strangers,  and  meddle  and  make,  and  every  one  that  does, 
surely  drinks  in  death  at  every  sentence  ;  and  if  you  would  have  eternal  life  you  must  be 

partakers  of  none  such  things. Heaven  and  eternal  life  consist  in  Iiaving 

your  oi^ans  rightly  directed  as  you  have  been  taught  by  the  angds;  and  death  is  the  piying 
mto  things  that  are  of  the  world,  and  acquisitiveness,  and  keeping  anything  to  yourselves, 
and  lookmg  into  things  too  much  for  your  knowledge,  and  inquirmg  into  things  that  the 
aiteels  only  hbt  at,  and  questioning  what  the  angels  say,  or  do,  and  doubling  much,  and 
fi-ong  up  separate  dishes  for  yourselves,"  etc. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  369 

It  will  be  readily  perceived  that  these  communications  were  universally 
inferior  in  style  and  pretension  to  the  Mountain  Cove,  or  Spear  inspirations. 

The  communications  given  through  the  medium  of  the  minor  operator, 
Mrs,  Martha  Spencer,  are  not  fair  specimens  of  the  male  genius  of  the 
mcArement,  whose  intelligence,  shrewdness,  and  psychological  power,  were 
far  superior  to  that  of  his  assistant. 

As  an  evidence  of  tlie  trash  that  could  be  imposed  upon  a  self-deluded 
comunity  under  the  afflatus  of  fanaticism  and  credulity,  we  shall  present 
the  reader  with  some  verses,  said  to  have  been  given  directly  from  "the 
angels,"  and  commanded  by  them  to  be  sung  for  the  refreshment  of  the 
brethren  and  sisters  of  the  Harmonial  Society, 

"SONG  OF  THE  ANGELS. 

"  The  car  of  Life  is  passing  by, 
Thej-  call  for  all  who  will,  to  come 
And  take  a  seat  and  riile  with  us, 
Who  are  bound  for  Heaven's  immortal  shore. 

"  The  fare  is  cheap  and  food  is  plain, 
For  you  can  eat  as  you  ride  along ; 
For  there  is  no  grease  to  soil  your  clothes, 
No  bone  to  pick,  or  scales  of  fisli  to  interfere." 

"ANOTHER  ANGELIC  SONG. 

"  Roll  on,  revolving  time,  nor  stay 
To  count  the  days  or  years,  to  tell 
When  Che  curtidn  will  be  drawn, 
ITie  hidden  vessels  will  be  founi 

"  Roll  on  years,  nor  slop  lo  stay. 
For  if  to  death  we  all  are  doomed. 
We  need  not  fear  our  early  tomb. 
For  ages  would  mcrease  our  fears. 

"Let  not  Joshua  forbid  the  snn. 
On  one  moment's  time  to  stay. 
When  all  are  sure  that  we  will  meet 
Our  brothers  that  this  truth  now  teach." 

Our  readers  may  feel  uncertain  whether  any  rational,  educated  Americans 
could  have  either  perpetrated  such  lines,  or  suffered  their  transcription,  when 
uttered  by  the  lips  of  another;  but,  lest  we  should  be  accused  of  having  se- 
lected special  specimens  for  the  purpose  of  caricature,  we  beg  to  state  we 
have  a  large  collection  of  MSS.  of  a  similar  description,  furnished  by  one  of 
the  members,  who  remained  some  years  in  the  society,  and  who,  herself  a 
very  shrewd  and  intelligent  woman,  thus  remarks  upon  them :  "  And  die  most 

wonderful  part  of  the  story  is,  that  F and  other  intelligent,  long-headed 

people,  had  such  implicit  faith  in  that  man  [Dr.  Spencer]  that  they  yielded 
up  everything  to  him,  without  a  murmur,  and  even,  to  the  last,  could  scarcely 
be  brought  to  believe  that  he  was  an  impostor." 

"  Forniy  part,"  adds  my  correspondent,  "  I  saw  through  them  the  first  hour  I 
got  into  the  place,  and  saw  that  everything  had  been  misrepresented  to  us, 
I  was  always  a  thorn  in  their  side  ;  but  I  stayed  along  on  account  of  my  hus- 
band, and  he,  at  last,  in  the  hope  of  getting  back  the  heavy  sums  we  had  put. 
in  die  concern. 

Hosted  by  Google 

370  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"I  am  quite  sure  the  most  of  them  were  bewitched,  or  fascinated,  or  undet 
tlic  spell  of  that  Spencer,  somehow,  and  couldn't  get  out  of  it,  with  all  of  their 
sense,  until  the  spell  was  broken." 

We  are  entirely  of  our  correspondent's  opinion,  only  that  we  trace  the  spell 
to  a  natural  cause ;  to  wit,  that  powerful  human  psydiology  tliat  has  enabled 
hundreds  of  sectarian  leaders  of  various  denominations  to  bind  to  tlieir  cause, 
followers  of  a  mental  calibre  and  intellectual  stcrngth  iar  above  their  own, 
and  even,  as  in  the  cases  of  Montaaus,  Munzer,  Joe  Smith,  and  many  other 
fanatics  of  repulsive  characters  and  manners,  to  subdue,  by  some  hidden  force 
of  will,  minds  that,  without  such  a  power,  would  shrink  with  disgust  from  their 
leadership. 

As  usual,  the  Spencer  explosion  was  at  once  saddled  upon  the  pack-horse, 
"  Spiritualism;"  and  it  requires  some  time  and  a  good  deal  of  forcible  assever- 
ation, to  compel  the  world's  acknowledgment  that  Spiritualists  had  always 
humbly  acknowledged  their  unworthiness  to  soar  to  the  high  companionship 
of  the  angels  at  Harmony  Springs,  whilst  frequent  reference  was  made  to  cer- 
tain communications  given,  at  her  own  solicitation,  to  the  author,  by  her  spirit 
guides,  of  which  the  following  brief  dialogue  is  a  specimen  : 

Medium  guistioning  the  spirits,  ivio  converse  -mitk  ksr. 

Q.  My  ^irit  friend,  are  you  present  ? 

A.  I  am.     What  would  you  ? 

Q.  Did  yon  see  the  lady  who  was  with  mo  just  now?*  Did  you  hear  her  narrative,  and 
think  you  it  is  true  1 

A.  I  saw  the  lady,  and  think  just  as  you  do. 

Q.  Nay,  you  avoid  my  question.  The  lady  wore  clothes  whidi  she  declared  the  angels 
brought  her.      Is  that  true  ? 

A.  I  saw  the  clothes,  but  not  the  angels  who  brought  them. 

Q.  Why  not? 

A.  I  am  but  a  poor  spirit,  remember,  and  cannot  enter  into  the  sphere  of  the  wonderful 
angels  who  provide  yon  lady's  garments. 

Q,  Nay,  but  answer  me  more  to  the  purpose,  for — 

A.  Then  be  quick  with  your  questions ;  I  may  melt  ont  before  you  can  frame  them. 
.Vou  know  r  am  only  a  parasite  living  on  human  emanations,  and  since  you  have  had  no 
dinner  yourself,  I  have  had  no  emanations  to-day,  and  may  fade  out,  for  lack  of  sustenance. 

A.   Alas,  my  Emma,  G.  F.  faded  out  yesterday,   and  J,  F.  has  melted  within  the  last 

And  thus,  by  mere  force  of  ridicule,  but  without  a  single  grave  comment  or 
word  of  denial,  spirits  sneered  the  absurd  Spencer  theories  out  of  their  anxious 
mediums'  minds,  until  not  one  of  them  could  be  induced  to  give  heed  to  die 
Angelism  whose  bold  asseverations  were  equally  un sustained  by  the 
iacts  or  rational  philosophy,  which  marks  the  whole  theory  of  modern  Spir- 
itualism. 

It  was  long,  however,  before  the  prejudiced  world  could  be  induced  to  in- 
stitute this  comparison,  or  relieve  Spiritualism  from  the  odium  of  the  move- 
ment at  Harmony  Springs. 

In  judging  of  this  and  the  preceding  case,  let  the  reader  remember  that 
it  was  a  Spiritualist  editor  that  most  severely  lashed  the  abuses  of  the  infa- 
mous "Patriarchal"  order;  Spiritualists  who  repudiated  with  the  most  per- 
sistant denial,  the  baseless  theories  of  the  self-styled  Harmonialists ;  and  Spirit- 
ualists who  can  always  afford  to  trust  their  truth,  with  all  its  lights  and  shadows, 

*  Mrs.  Marthii  Spencer. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  371 

facts  and  fanaticisms,  to  do  battle  with  the  whole  world,  its  votaries  and  dis- 
ciples included;  convinced  that  it  has  a  footidation  of  fact  and  philosophy  to 
rest  upon,  whidi  the  winds  of  falsehood  cannot  shake,  nor  the  waves  of  oppo- 
sition lash  from  its  eternal  foundations. 

CHAPTER    XXXVr. 

WESTERN    SPIRITUALISM.  — ST.    LOUIS    {CONTINUED; 

"How  now!  whal  have  we  hsrel 

angel,  which? 

Old  P1.AV. 

Speak!  for  Ihyou 

Something  above  the  eaiih,  b 

In  the  city  of  St  Louis,  on  a  street  that  leads  away  towards  the  extreme 
suburbs,  stands  aone-story  frame  building,  whose  worn,  dilapidated  appearance 
betokens  neglect  rather  than  f^e.  The  small  fore-court  is  choked  up  with 
rubbish,  and  the  dingy  door,  though  always  pertinaciously  closed,  looks  as  if 
it  were  ready  to  fall  from  its  hinges  with  rust  and  decay.  Knock  upon  its 
shaking  panels,  and  you  will  encounter,  in  the  narrow  opening  that  is  grudg- 
ii^ly  yielded  to  your  summons,  a  small  elderly  man,  attired  in  anondescript  flut- 
ter of  serge  rags,  in  the  shape  of  a  tunic  and  pantaloons,  torn  and  patched  in 
many  places,  and  bcdight  in  others  with  dingy  stripes  of  various  colored  rags. 

Most  likely  tiie  feet,  hands,  and  throat,  of  this  singular  apparition  will  be 
bare,  with  the  exception  of  the  thick  coating  of  dirt  which  is  nonnal  to  their 
owner;  but  in  all.  probability  the  toes  and  fingers,  as  well  as  the  muscular 
neck,  will  be  garnished  with  stripes  of  particolored  rags  tied  around  them. 

Tiie  head  of  the  little  figure  will  be  covered  with  a  thin  thatch  of  gray  elf- 
locks,  which  erect  themselves  outwardly  in  bristling  array,  save  only  where  they 
lie  matted  together  with  dirt  The  whole  aspect  of  this  remarkable  personage 
is  so  singular,  uncouth,  and  repulsive,  that  you  would  inevitably  shrink  from  the 
half-closed  entrance,  widening  courteou^y  at  the  approadi  of  a  well-be- 
haved stranger,  were  you  not  arrested  by  the  bright  scintillations  of  a  pierc- 
ing and  intelligent  pair  of  eyes,  and  attracted  onwards  by  the  pleasant  and 
even  winning  smile  of  a  face  which,  if  cleansed  from  the  foul  accretions  gath- 
ered in  long  years  of  unwashed  filth,  promises  to  be  kind  and  singularly  intel- 

Overcome  the  first  repulsive  start  which  the  sight  of  this  weird  figure  oc- 
casions you,  cross  the  dim  threshold,  enter  the  dingy  apartment,  make  your 
way,  through  broken  sticks  and  the  "  dust  of  ages,"  to  any  such  bench  or 
frame  as  you  may  deem  promises  you  a  moderate  share  of  support,  be  seated 
in  response  to  a  courteous  wave  of  your  hosf  s  dingy  hand,  and  you  sit  face  to 
face  with  the  celebrated  Dr.  Hotchkiss,  better  known  as  the  "  color  doctor,"  or 
"  snapping  doctor"  [for  both  soubriquets  fit  him] ,  of  St.  Louis. 

If  your  visit  is  one  of  mere  curiosity,  you  had  better  depart  at  once ;  in  fact, 
to  have  stayed  away  altogether  would  have  been  your  best  alternative  in  such 

Hosted  by  Google 

372  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

a  case ;  but  if  you  are  suffering  in  body  or  earnest  in  mind  to  investigate  oi;e 
of  the  rarest  of  nature's  phenomenal  existences,  stay  where  you  are,  and  wit- 
ness what  follows. 

Perhaps,  like  the  author  on  the  occasion  of  her  first  visit  to  the  "  Hotchkiss- 
onian  Institute,"  as  the  two  chambered  shanty  is  styled,  you  may  be  intro- 
duced by  one  of  the  doctor's  patients ;  if  so,  you  are  fortunate,  and  your  ex- 
perience maybe  similar  to  hers,  which  by  way  of  a  preparatory  hint  for  youi 
future  guidance,  we  shall  here  relate. 

Accompanied  by  Mr.  M.,  at  that  time  the  president  of  the  St.  Louis  Spir- 
itual meetings,  the  author  one  day  called  on  Dr.  Hotchkiss,  some  time  In  die 
year  1858,  with  the  desire  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  upon  what  principles  he 
based  his  celebrated  methods  of  cure,  whicli  rumor  affinned  to  be  little 
short  of  miraculous. 

Arrived  at  the  "  shanty,"  as  above  described,  and  admitted  on  the  strength 
of  Mr.  M.'s  introduction,  the  little  doctor  invited  the  lady,  her  escort,  and 
some  strangers  who  were  already  in  the  entrance  chamber,  into  an  inner  apart- 
ment. Here  the  party  found  two  young  women,  attired  in  short  skirts  and 
jackets,  the  one  pink  and  the  other  blue,  whom  the  doctor  called  his  "  keys." 

Mr.  M.,  the  patient  to  be  operated  upon,  was  then  desired  to  mount  on 
the  chest  of  the  little  doctor,  who  stretched  himself  flat  on  his  back  on  the 
ground,  and  whilst  holding  a  hand  of  each  of  the  "  keys,"  in  order  to  give 
greater  force  to  the  manifestations,  Mr.  jumped  up  and  down  on  the  doctor's 
ribs,  some  twelve  or  fourteen  times,  with  all  the  impetus  that  a  heavy  man  of 
a  hundred  and  eighty  pounds  weight  could  give.  The  blows  thus  inflicted  by 
the  boots  of  the  dancer  on  his  passive  human  floor,  might  have  been  heard 
through  the  closed  doors  into  the  street,  but  produced  no  other  effect  upon 
their  recipient  than  to  induce  him,  with  a  violent  quaking  and  sliivering,  to 
spring  up  at  last  from  the  ground,  leap  about  in  the  air  for  a  few  seconds, 
snap  his  fingers  violently,  twist  round  and  round  with  the  agility  of  an  ajse, 
and  then  inform  his  patient  that  he  knew  he  was  much  better,  a  proposition 
to  which  Mr.  M.  cordially  assented. 

The  doctor  then  attempted  to  explain,  for  the  edification  of  his  guests,  his 
belief  that  all  diseases  were  occasioned  by  the  plus  or  minus  of  certain  rays 
of  light,  which  the  human  system  absorbed  in  different  proportions. 

He  said  that  these  rays  containing  different  quantities  of  tiie  prismatic 
colors,  constituted  component  parts  of  the  human  organism,  and  that  some 
persons  exhibit  the  predominance  of  the  ray  of  their  special  color,  by  their  par- 
tiality for  it  as  an  article  of  dress  ;  others  by  their  indifference  to,  or  incapac- 
ity to  distinguished  colors,  etc, ;  in  short,  that  this  predominance  of  special  colors 
in  the  organism  of  each  individual  caused  corresponding  peculiarities  of 
temperament,  while  the  plus  or  minus  of  the  organic  ray  was  the  primary 
cause  of  disease. 

Acting  on  this  theory,  he  wore  various  strips  of  particolored  rags  to  keep 
himself  "in  sympathy"  with  his  patients,  to  whom  he  gave  a  corresponding 
strip  and  color  to  wear  during  the  remedial  process. 

In  addition  to  this  treatment,  the  doctor  occasionally  required  the  said 
patients  to  jump  on  or  pound  his  body  after  the  manner  above  described, 
whilst  the  whole  method  of  treatment  included  various  gyrations,  snappings, 
turnings,  twistings,'  rollings  on  the  ground,  and  a  series  of  eccentric  motions 
equally  indescribable  and  strange. 

To  those  who  had  witnessed  the  processes  by  which  Eastern  ecstatic  s,such 
as  dervishes,  santons,  or  fakeers,  induced  the  magnetic  condition,  it  would 
have  been  apparent  that  similar  principles  were  here  involved  and  uncon- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  373 

Eciously  operated  in  the  "  color  doctor's"  performances.  The  singular  gam- 
bols of  the  erratic  little  figure  not  only  fascinated  or  spell-bound  the  eye  of 
the  observer,  but  succeeded  in  liberating  such  a  vast  chaise  of  magnetic 
aura  from  his  highly  electrical  body,  that  it  became  next  to  impossible  for  a 
"sensitive"  to  remain  in  his  presence  during  these  curative  exercises,  with- 
out coming  under  his  psychological  influence,  an  effect  which  generally  be- 
came manifest  either  by  a  deep  trance,  or  in  the  subject's  sympathetic  imita- 
tion of  the  operator's  fantastic  movements.  This  was  the  effect  produced 
upon  the  author,  who,  from  first  watching  the  remarkable  actions  of  the 
ecstatic  with  simple  curiosity,  at  last  became  spell-bound  beneath  his  strong 
magnetic  influence. 

No  sooner  did  the  doctor  perceive  this  than  he  directed  towards  her  all  his 
further  operations. 

He  first  diagnosed  her  temperament,  and  correctly  intimated  that  her  favor- 
ite colors  were  blue  and  white,  the  former  of  which  he  pronounced  Co  be  her 
representative. 

He  then,  by  silent  will,  commanded  her  to  remove  her  bonnet  and  cloak, 
after  which,  placing  her  in  a  passive  attitude  in  the  inner  chamber,  he  passed 
into  tlie  outer,  ranging  his  visitors  near  the  open  door  of  communication  so 
that  they  could  see  what  transpired  in  both  apartments. 

He  then,  standing  in  the  outer  room,  and  entirely  beyond  the  line  of  vision 
of  any_  one  in  the  inner  chamber,  took  in  his  hand,  one  after  another,  strips 
of  various  colors,  and  the  instant  he  touched  these  his  subject  in  the  inner 
chamber,  wholly  unable  to  see  him,  had  she  even  looked  that  way,  started  up, 
and  in  highly  significant  pantomimic  action,  proceeded  to  represent  some  pas- 
sion of  the  human  soul,  such  as  joy,  grief,  devotion,  despair,  hatred,  rage, 
etc 

In  every  case  a  certain  passion  or  a  scene,  such  as  captivity,  liberty,  etc.,  was 
represented,  as  if  in  correspondence  to  a  special  color ;  sometimes  the  color 
would  be  dropped  by  the  operator  and  several  others  tried,  when  he  would 
again  return  to  the  first  one,  but  the  pantomimic  acdon  of  the  subject  was 
always  special  to  each  color,  no  matter  how  often  it  was  tried  or  the  experi- 
ment varied.  In  this  way,  and  for  a  period  of  two  hours,  a  vast  number  of 
pantomimic  representations  were  enacted.  It  was  enough  for  the  doctor  to 
touch  a  fresh  color  to  change  the  action  with  the  speed  of  lightning.  So  long 
as  he  continued  holding  that  color,  even  while  merely  prolonging  a  conversa- 
tion, the  corresponding  action  continued ;  if  he  dropped  it,  it  ceased  instantly ; 
even  when  he  unconsciously  touched  another  color,  the  spectators  testified 
that  the  action  changed,  proving  that  intentional  psychology  was  not  at  work. 
For  instance,  the  doctor,  without  having  the  least  idea  what  result  would  be 
produced  upon  his  subject,  took  up  a  stnp  of  yellow  cloth ;  instantly  the  lady 
in  the  next  apartment  fell  on  her  knees,  began  worshipping  the  sun,  and  repre- 
senting the  fervor  of  religious  devotion ;  the  operator  dropped  the  color,  and 
the  room  in  which  he  stood  with  the  spectators  being  very  dark,  and  himself 
engaged  in  earnest  conversation,  he  accidently  took  up  a  piece  of  gray  cloth, 
when,  instantly,  the  subject,  as  if  beholding  the  action  through  the  interven- 
ing wall,  began  to  mimic  the  rattle  and  hiss  of  a  snake,  and  to  personate  the 
most  deadly  malice  and  treachery.  The  specialties  of  this  remarkable  scene 
were,  first,  its  entire  spontaneity,  neither  party  having  prepared  for  it,  or 
being  in  expecfarion  of  such  results ;  indeed,  notwithstanding  Dr.  Hotch- 
kiss's  vague  theory  that  colors  corresponded  to  passions,  temperaments,  and 
organic  conditions,  he  had  never  attempted  to  reduce  his  theory  to  a  system, 
and  declared  that  he  was  totally  unprepared  to  expect  what  results  would 

Hosted  by  Google 

374  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

pi oceed  from  the  various  colors  he  touched;  furthermore,  he  admitted  that 
he  had  never  before  witnessed  such  a  scene,  was  entirely  unprepared  for  it, 
and,  therefore,  that  his  will,  or  any  psychological  influence  on  his  part,  was 
entirely  out  of  the  question.  The  next  noteworthy  feature  of  the  scene  was 
the  curious  effect  produced  upon  the  subject,  who,  commencing  by  exceeding 
disgust  and  repulsion  toward  her  operator,  suddenly  found  herself  spell- 
bound, and  though  in  perfect  p'ossession  of  her  consciousness,  felt  so  hope- 
lessly in  the  power  of  this  involuntary  enchantment  that  she  subsequently 
declared,  had  the  doctor  willed  her  to  commit  a  murder  under  that  influence, 
she  would  certainly  have  been  compelled  to  do  so. 

As  a  still  further  illustration  of  ibis  occult  experiment,  we  call  attention  to  the 
following  incident :  Mr.  M.,  as  president  of  the  lecture  committee,  felt  himself 
responsible  for  the  welfare  and  sanity  of  his  charge,  who  was  then  the  lecturer 
for  the  St.  Louis  Association  of  Spiritualists ;  besides  this,  he  was  a  warm 
personal  friend  of  the  author's,  and  felt  greatly  disturbed  at  the  scene  he  wit- 
nessed, and  distrustful  of  the  effects  that  might  result  to  her,  from  the  strange 
and  unaccountable  influence  the  weird  operator  exerted  ;  hence,  he  attempted, 
first  by  appeals,  and  finally  by  remonstrances,  and  even  threats,  to  compel 
him  to  relinquish  his  terrible  power.  The  operator,  however,  delighted  to 
find  "  such  a  good  subject,"  insisted  on  pursuing  an  experiment  so  novel  to 
himself,  as  well  as  interesting  to  the  whole  party,  save  the  harassed  president 
and  the  helpless  subject.  At  length,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  performance, 
Mr.  M.  seized  the  lady  by  the  arm,  and  attempted  to  lead  her  out  of  the 
enchanted  circle. 

The  operator,  instead  of  remonstrating,  quietly  bade  him  "  take  her."  They 
quitted  the  inner  room,  and  had  advanced  half  way  through  the  outer  chamber, 
which  was  very  dark,  when  the  lady  paused,  and,  with  wild  and  agonizing 
cries,  refused  to  advance  one  step  further.  Upon  this  the  operator  trium- 
phantly cried,  "  Take  her  if  you  will,  but  if  you  force  her  onward  you  may  kill 
her.  I  have  placed  a  green  ray  on  the  ground  and  she  cannot  pass  over 
it."  It  was  so  dark  that  the  observers  had  to  examine  the  ground  minutely 
to  ascertain  the  truth  of  this  assertion,  and  yet  die  medium,  without  the  possi- 
bility of  being  informed  of  the  fact  by  natural  sight,  had  felt  and  detected  the 
presence  of  the  obnoxious  ray,  across  which  it  seemed  impossible  to  drag  her. 
The  doctor  explained  that,  having  noticed  her  aversion  to  green,  he  had  placed 
it  on  the  ground  by  way  of  continuing  his  experiments.  But  this  new  and  sin- 
gular experience  suggested  a  happy  thought  to  Mr.  M.,  who  had  also  remarked 
the  medium's  predilection  for  blue.  Observing  that  her  cloak  was  lined  with 
that  color,  he  suddenly  resolved  to  throw  it  across  her  shoulders.  Whether  the 
chanii  lay  in  the  color  or  the  substance,  which  was  silk,  we  leave  the  electri- 
cians and  psychologists  to  decide  ;  certain  it  is  that  as  soon  as  the  garment 
enveloped  her  form,  the  spell  which  held  the  subject  was  broken,  or  rather,  it 
might  be  said,  it  became  polarized,  or  reversed ;  for  whilst  she  passed  into  the 
,  happy  and  exalted  condition  of  trance  that  usually  attended  her  lectures,  the 
'  hitherto  powerful  operator  crouched  at  her  feet,  manifesting  all  the  submis- 
sive action  of  a  dog,  and  obviously  changing  places  with  his  late  subject. 

It  will  be  remembered  by  the  habitual  readers  of  the  spiritual  journals,  that 
Mr.  M.,  the  gentieman  who  accompanied  Mrs.  Hardinge  to  this  remarkable 
interview,  has  written  detailed  accounts  of  that  and  other  stances  between 
the  same  parties,  in  several  diflerent  papers  ;  but  though  his  own  witness  and 
that  of  many  others,  can  be  cited  for  die  accuracy  of  these  statements,  and 
experiments  of  this  nature  involve  some  deeply  interesting,  and  litde  under- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  375 

stood  points  of  occult  philosophy,  our  space  forbids  us  to  enter  into  further 
descriptions  of  them. 

The  occurrence  we  have  noticed  took  place  in  1858,  since  which  time  the 
eccentric  healer  has  to  some  extent  abandoned  his  faith  in  the  sympathetic 
effect  of  colors  as  a  curative  agent,  and  relies  chiefly  on  the  liberation  of  a 
magnetic  aura,  diffused  by  snapping  of  the  joints,  wbirlii^s,  gyrations,  and 
sundry  rotary  movements,  in  which  he  believes  electrical  principles  are  in- 
volved. 

These  he  practices  himself  and  requires  in  his  patients,  and,  strange  as 
such  methods  of  cure  may  appear,  that  they  are  effective,  is  proved  to  be 
an  obstinate  fact,  for  the  "snapping  doctor"  is  not  only  renowned  for  his 
success  as  a  healer,  but  be  maintains  in  synjpathy  with  him  a  number  of  dis- 
ciples, who,  by  similar  "snappings"  and  manifestations,  make  cures  of  an 
equally  unaccountable  and  effective  character  It  is  said  that  Dr.  Hotchkiss, 
by  a  process  peculiar  to  himself,  can  so  charge  his  disciples  with  his  power- 
ful magnetism  that  they  become  reservoirs,  whom  he  can  send  abroad  to 
perform  service  in  lieu  of  himself.  Besides  these,  and  in  connection  with 
the  great  central  battery  in  St.  Louis,  he  has  instructed  operators,  scattered 
over  different  parts  of  tlie  West,  and  provided  they  maintain  their  mysterious 
magnetic  rapport  with  himself,  they  actually  efiect  "miracles"  of  curative 
power,  precisely  as  he  would  do,  were  he  present 

The  author  has  herself  seen  the  ability  of  these  "  snapping  doctors  "  fully 
tested ;  witnessed  the  rapid  and  healthful  results  of  their  operations,  and 
been  furnished  with  numerous  testimonials  from  persons  cured  of  various  dis- 
eases by  their  agency.  Perhaps  not  the  iea=t  remarkable  feature  in  the  case 
of.  the  great  original  is,  that  during  the  twenty  years  he  has  pursued  tiiis 
system  of  healing,  for  some  reason  understood  by  himself,  though  not  imi- 
tated by  his  disciples,  "  the  snapping  doctor"  of  St.  Louis  has  never  waslied 
nor  cleansed  his  person,  and  when  occasionally  induced  to  incase  hunself  in 
fresh  garments,  he  proceeds  systematically  to  reduce  them  to  rags,  so  as  to 
permit  the  same  freedom  of  action  which  belonged  to  the  cast-off  suit. 

The  cures  which  he  has  performed,  however,  are  fixed  facts,  to  whicli  many 
of  his  grateful  patients  have  openly  testified. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  attempt  any  explanation  of  such  a  phenomenon, 
however,  and  we  simply  assign  the  narrative  of  its  existence  a  record  in  these 
pages,  as  one  of  the  unmistakable  evidences  of  that  occult  side  of  our  being 
which  constitutes  man's  spiritual  nature. 

We  shall  close  our  account  of  the  Spiritualism  of  St.  Louis  with  one  or  two 
recitals  of  interest  extracted  from  the  papers  of  the  day,  and  illustrative  of  the 
character  ol  the  movement  in  "  the  far  West." 

The  following  occurirence  transpired  quite  early  in  the  modern  communion 
with  spirits,  and  when  first  observed,  was  regarded  with  equal  awe  and  won- 
der. The  power  of  invisible  beings  to  converse  orally  with  mortals  has  now 
become  so  familiar  a  phenomenon,  that  it  is  no  longer  heralded  to  the  world 
as  a  "wonderfiil  manifestation." 

TELEGRAPH  PAPERS— MAY,  iSsj. 

"A  correspondent  at  Light  fram  the  Sptrit-World,  writing  from  Brookville,  Missouri, 
gives  tlie  details  of  occurrences  which  took  place  with  the  spirits  on  two  successive  evenings, 
of  so  extraordinary  a  character  that  we  cannot  omit  giving  the  following  condensed  account 
of  them. 

"  On  a  certain  evening  several  young  persons  met  together  to  hold  adtcle,  at  which  tnej 
endeavored  to  persuade  the  spirits  to^ve  them  some  'fun,'  as  they  expressed  it.    The  room 

Hosiedb,  Google 

37fi  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

was  pflrtially  darkenecl,  and  in  this  condition,  the  spirits  manifested  themselves  by  dancing, 
stamping,  and  knocliing,  until  the  house  shooL 

"  They  pulled  the  hair  of  some,  and  boxed  the  ears  of  others,  sticking  the  parties  with  pins, 
until  they  drew  blood. 

"  After  several  violent  demonstrations  of  this  kind,  they  took  our  correspondent's  hat, 
which  was  of  braided  straw,  drew  it  along  the  ceiling  and  cornices  of  the  room  until  they 
heard  it  ripping,  when  it  fell,  piece  by  piece,  torn  to  atoms,  on  the  floor.  The  next  even- 
ing, the  same  circle  being  assembleii,  and  in  the  same  sphit  of  thoughtless  experiment,  o 

of  the  members  called  out  a  reque&t  that  if  the  spirits  1  

siybg'Yes.'    To  the  astonishment  of  ^  and  the  con; 
was  distinctly  pronounced. 

" In  their  terror  some  of  the  company  fled  from  the  room;  but  after  the  ei 

a  little  subaded,  those  Who  remruned,  amongst  whom  were  the  mediums,  requested  thesp-.w 
to  converse  with  them,  if  posable,  in  an  audible  tone.  By  the  rappbgs,  the  spirits  agreed  to 
to  do  so,  provided  every  one  present  would  give  their  consent,  and  say  they  were  willing  to 
listen.  An  eager  and  onanimous  assent  being  given,  the  party  remained  perfectly  quiet  for 
a  few  mmntes,  when  a  spirit  voice  proceeded  to  address  them  in  a  peculiarly  high,  shrill  tone, 
as  follows ; 

"  '  Oh,  do  not  say  that  it  is  the  evil  one  that  speaks  to  you,  for  it  is  the  spirit  of  Mary 
Gray,  whom  some  of  you  know. 

"  '  I  was  your  friend  on  earth.  I  am  so  still.  I  come  to  speak  peace  to  yon,  and  teach 
you  to  love  God.  You  rememi^r  the  cliild  of  Mrs.  lioby,  who  died  in  this  place  a  few  days 
ago. 

" '  Tell  the  poor,  moumbg  mother  her  child  stiil  lives.  I  met  it,  attended  by  angel- 
guardians,  bearing  it  to  its  spirit  home.  Tell  her  It  is  well  and  happy,  and  will  grow  in 
beauty  and  purity  in  heaven.  Alas  !  how  many  are  there  here  who  might  suddenly  be  called 
hence,  but  who  are  unfit  to  enter  spirit-life  !  How  few  who  know  w^t  it  is,  ai:d  yei  who 
trifle  away  their  opportunities  of  preparing  for  it ! 

"  'You  have  all  come  here  this  evening  to  trttJe  with  spirits,  and  then  you  ask  for  the 
privilege  of  conversing  with  beings  from  a  higher  world.  Even  now  at  your  neighbor's, 
Mrs.  Ward's,  a  circle  is  bemg  held  at  which  the  subject  is  treated  in  llie  same  ttiflbg  tone, 
and  the  high  and  holy  truths  of  immortality  are  bemg  turned  bto  mere  amusement  and  ri  ji- 

"The  spirit  then  asked  the  company  to  sing  a  hymn  and  pray,  in  both  of  which  exercises 
she  distbctly  and  audibly  joined,  continumg  toconverse  with  them  on  subjects  havbg  a  local 
or  personal  interest,  for  about  two  hours  and  a  half.  To  this  account  the  narrator  appends 
the  names  of  ten  persons,  who  were  witnesses  of  the  scene ;  and  upon  a  careful  inquiry  which 
we  have  bstiluted  into  the  testimony  of  each  one  separately,  we  find  they  all  agree  in  the 
mbutest  detdia — Editor  Telegraph  Papers." 

In  1858  Mr.  Miltenberger,  the  late  president  of  the  Sabbath  meetings  at 
St.  Louis,  writes  of  the  cause  in  that  city  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  as  fol- 
lows  : 

"THE  CAUSE  IN  ST.  LOUIS. 

"  Spiritualism  is  b  a  more  healthy  and  flourishbg  condition  m  this  city  than  it  has  ever 
been  before.  We  have  effected  an  oiganization  for  buaness  purposes,  and  have  elected 
that  oM  champion,  Peter  E.  Bland,  as  president,  Robert  White  as  vice-president,  and  J. 
W.  Blood  as  secretary.  We  have  rented  the  hall  for  the  third  year,  and  paid  for  it  m  ad- 
vance. We  now  give  the  morning  lecture  free,  with  a  collection,  but  at  night  charge  one 
dime  admittance,  a  fee  which,  small  as  it  is,  amounts,  from  our  great  numbers,  to  an  ample 
fund,  while  it  is  sufficient  to  assess  each,  and  not  oppress  any  one,  thus  commanding  the 
approval  of  all. 

"  We  commenced  our  third  year  on  the  12th  bst.,  with  Emma  Hardinge,  who  remabs 
with  us  throi^h  January.  She  was  greeted  on  her  first  Sunday  with  an  overflowing  house, 
hundreds  havmg  to  go  away  without  being  able  to  obtain  standbg  room. 

"  On  the  second  Sunday,  although  it  poured  rab  all  day,  the  house  was  as  full  as  it  could 
hold,  and  her  third  and  fourth  Sundays,  will,  if  fair,  compel  us  to  procure  a  laiger  halL 

"She  has  drawn  out  largely  the  sceptical  portion  of  our  people,  who  do  not  undeTstand 
anythmg  about  'a  trance,'  but  think  she  is  '  a  very  learned  and  wonderful  woman ; '  but  I 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM  377 

still  doiibt  if  our  most  learned  men  could  deliver  such  lectures,  even  if  they  had  Ihe  capacitj 
to  compose  and  the  raeinory  to  retain  them. 

"  Our  severest  critics  say  Ihey  cannot  detect  her  tripping  in  a  single  point  of  history  or 

"A.  J.  and  Mary  Davis  will  lecture  here  after  Emma  Hard  inge,  to  be  followed,  in  rapid 
snecesaon,  by  our  best  speakers. 

"  Tliere  is  a  vast  interest  awakened  here,  and  extending  to  all  Ihe  surrounding  districts 
in  the  West.  Calls  are  pouring  in  for  Mrs.  Hardinge  more  numerous  than  she  could  fulfill 
had  she  a  trinity  of  mouths  to  lecture  with. 

"A.  MiLTENBERCER, 

"  St.  Louis,  December  ao,  1858." 

It  would  be  impossible  to  follow  out  the  course  of  this  great  movement 
further  in  St.  Louis,  except  to  say  that  it  has  ever  been  a  noble  stronghold 
of  the  faith. 

Necessarily  suspended  during  the  progress  of  the  great  American  conflict, 
the  Sabbath  meetings,  a  fine  oi^anization  of  the  Children's  Lyceum,  and  an 
immense  number  of  private  circles,  have  all  been  recently  resumed  with 
vastly  increased  interest ;  indeed,  in  point  of  numbers,  and  the  abiding  faidi 
of  sterUng  and  reliable  supporters,  "  the  cause  |'  has  never  assumed  sucli 
strength  and  importance  there  as  at  the  present  time., 

Redman,  Foster,  Mansfield,  and  all  the  best  test  travelling  mediums,  have 
visited  the  city,  finding  a  warm  welcome  from  the  Spiritualists,  and  extensive 
patronage  from  a  continually  widening  circle  of  inquirers. 

True  the  friends  of  this  great  cause  have  been  subject  in  St.  Louis,  as  in 
every  other  place,  to  many  mutations  of  fortune. 

They  have  endured  scandal,  reproach,  and  mortification,  sometimes- 
unjustly,  and  at  others  justly  called  forth  by  the  follies  and  inconsistencies 
of  the  advocates  and  exponents  of  their  own  belief.  Faithful  to  the  sublime 
tmths  intrusted  to  their  keeping,  the  great  bult  of  the  original  army  who 
first  entered  the  field  in  defence  of  their  glorious  faith,  are  still_  in  the  war- 
riors' panoply,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  standing  like  well-tried  sentinels 
around  the  outposts  of  duly,  ready  to  do  or  die  in  behalf  of  their  beloved 
cause.  We  may  often  have  occasion  to  refer  to  the  individuals  who  consti- 
tute the  legions  of  this  noble  army,  perhaps  to  incidents  connected  with  the 
city  itself,  but  our  narrative  of  its  specialties  must  now  close,  with  a  fervent 
blessing  on  the  hospitable  homes,  warm  hearts,  and  feithful  hands,  of  the  St. 
Louis  Spiritualists. 

Our  review  of  Spiritualism  in  other  portions  of  the  West  must  be  general 
rather  than  local,  although  each  city,  town,  and  village,  would  furnish  ample 
materials  for  an  interesting  narrative. 

Great  excitement  prevailed  at  one  time  through  the  West  in  consequence 
of  the  high-handed  action  by  which  a  respectable  and  wealthy  citizen  of 
Chicago  was  arrested,  dragged  from  his  home,  and  incarcerated  in  a  lunatic 
asylum,  on  no  other  grounds  than  a  charge  of  being  concerned  in  a  banking 
Operation,  which,  being  established  by  Spiritualists,  and  conducted  in  a  some- 
what difierent  manner  to  the  gigantic  American  swindles  commonly  called 
"banks,"  necessarily  implied  insanity,  according  to  the  world's  definition 
thereof 

The  subject  of  diis  outrage  was  Mr.  Ira  B.  Eddy,  a  gentleman  who,  having 
acquired  a  large  property  by  his  financial  ability  in  business,  deemed  himself 
at  liberty  to  dispose  of  his  own  earnings  as  he  pleased,  and  hence  invested 
certain  sums  in  the  banking  establishment  of  Seth  Paine,  a  Spiritualist,  and 
generously  fitted  up  a  room,  for  the  purpose  of  holding  spiritual  meetings,  at 
his  own  expense.     These  were  the  chie^  if  not  the  only  grounds  of  accusa-- 

Hosled  by  Google 

378  HISTORY  OF  MODERI^ 

tion  against  him ;  and  constituting,  as  some  of  his  nearest  relatives  chose  to 
assume,  sufficient  proof  of  his  insanity,  they  had  him  dragged  from  his  home, 
conveyed,  gagged  and  bound,  to  the  distant  State  of  Connecticut,  and  there 
incarcerated  in  the  Hartford  Lunatic  Asylum,  on  the  certificate  obtained  by 
an  affectionate  and  disinterested  brother  I 

The  following  extract  from  the  Telegraph  Papers  of  1853  will  give  a  fair 
summary  of  this  infamous  transaction  ; 

"THE  CASE  OF  IRA  B.  EDDV. 

"  Last  week  we  publislied  a  letter  from  Chicago,  signed  by  tliree  gentlemen  who  reside  in 
that  city,  giving  a  brief  account  of  a,  high-handed  outrage  against  the  rights  of  Mr.  Ira  li. 
Eijdy,  one  of  the  most  peacealile  and  orderly  citizens  of  that  place. 

"  It  appears  that  the  person  of  Mr.  Eddy  was  suddenly  and  violently  seized,  without  any 
legal  process,  by  several  persons,  amongst  whom  were  Dr,  John  A.  Kionicott,  a  Mr.  Starr 
Foote,  one  Freer,  and  another  man  [name  not  given],  and,  on  the  pretence  of  Ms  insanity, 
he  was  tied,  ga^ed,  and  borne  away  from  his  own  house,  he  knew  not  whither.  No  oppor- 
tunity was  given  him  to  speak  to  a  single  friend,  or  to  disclose  to  anyone  the  knowledge  of 
his  wiongs.     We  are  sorty  to  record  the  alleged  fact,  that  even  his  wife  did  not  attempt  to 

E event  this  ignoble  deed,  but  silently  complied  with  the  request  of  those  men,  in  preparing 
s  linen. 

"  Mr,  £ddy  was  taken  to  the  railroad  cars,  but  kept  in  ignorance  of  bis  destination  until 
he  arrived  at  the  lunatic  asylum  in  Hartford,  Connecticut.  Dr.  Kinnicott  was  introduced 
to  the  superintendent  of  the  retreat  by  a  letter,  of  which  he  was  the  bearer,  from  D.  C. 
Eddy,  the  brother  of  Ira,  and  the  doctor  proceeded  to  introduce  bis  associates,  as  '  medical 
men  from  the  vicinity  of  Chicago.' 

"But  Mr.  Eddy  was  too  much  respected,  and  the  injurywasof  too  flagrant  a  character  to 
pass  unnoticed.  As  soon  as  the  nature  of  the  case  was  fairly  known,  many  persons  of  wealth 
and  respectability  interested  themselves  in  his  behalf.  Letters  were  addressed  to  us,  to  Drs. 
Gray,  Hallock,  and  others,  in  this  city,  and  a  communication  forwarded  to  A.  J.  Davis, 
Hartford,  Connecticut,  signed  by  the  postmaster  of  Chicago,  the  proprietor  of  the  Tremont 
House,  and  thirty-ax  other  highly  respectable  citizens  of  tMt  place,  many  of  whom  were  not 
Spiritualists, 

' '  These  all  certified  to  the  good  character,  sound  mind,  peaceable  disposition,  and  busi- 
ness capacity  of  Ira  B.  Eddy.  At  the  same  time,  James  A.  Morrell  and  Nathan  II.  BoUes, 
residents  of  Chicago,  and  personal  friends  of  Mr.  Eddy's,  went  to  Hartford,  to  aid  in  pro- 
curing bis  release. 

"  On  Tuesday,  the  19th  inst.,  '  Mr.  Eddy  was  brought  before  Judge  Phelps  00  a  writ  of 
habeas  corpus. 

"Dr.  John  S.  Butler,  of  the  Insane  Retreat,  Messrs.  Morrell  and  Bolles,  besides  others 

cogniiant  of  the  facts  and  parties,  were  summoned  as  witnesses 

"  The  examination  resulted  in  the  immediate  liberation  of  Mr.  Eddy. 

"  We  have  a  few  earnest  words  to  offer  before  we  dismiss  this  case.  The  facts  elicited 
by  the  evidence  are,  substantially,  as  follows  : 

"  Mr,  Ira  B,  Eddy  is  an  honest  man,  a  worthy  citizen,  of  sane  mind,  and  '  a  good  busi- 
ness man.'  Mr.  Bolles,  who  had  known  him  for  fifteen  years,  declared,  under  oath,  that 
he  had  always  conducted  his  business  skilfully  and  welL  Several  other  witnesses  testified 
that  Mr.  Eddy,  by  his  able  management,  had  Income  the  owner  of  an  estate  worth  $So,ooo, 
but  some  of  bis  relatives,  desirous,  it  would  seem,  to  possess  themselves  of  the  fruits  of  bis 
industry,  have  taken  advantage  of  his  openly-avowed  belief  in  Spiritualism,  to  pretend  that 
he  was  '  insane,'  and  incompetent  to  manage  his  own  affairs, 

"  His  oppressors  did  not  dare  to  introduce  him  into  the  asylum  of  bis  own  State,  where 
the  flagrant  character  of  the  outrage  might  have  been  too  readily  discovered  ;  but,  with  his 
hands  tied,  his  mouth  stopped  like  a  condemned  felon,  he  is  dragged  by  Dr.  Kinnicott  and  a 
trinity  of  farriers,  all  the  way  to  New  England,  And  these  'medical  men  from  the  vicinity 
of  Chicago,'  self-appointed,  to  protect  the  citizens  of  that  place  from  acts  of  violence  which 
one  of  the  most  amiable  and  moffensive  men  in  the  world  was  never  expected  to  commit, 
pay  no  sort  of  respect  to  his  manhood,  but  treat  him  in  exactly  the  way  that  a  set  of  horse- 
doctors  usually  do  treat  their  patients, 

"But  it  maybe  interesting  to  inquire  how  Mr.  Eddy  conducted  himself  under  the  trying 
circumstances.  Did  he  act  like  a  madman  ?  Did  the  outrages  to  which  he  was  subject 
succeed  in  compelling  from  Iiim  acts  or  words  wltose  violence,  however  natural  under  the 
circumstances,  and  perhaps  antidpated  as  the  result  of  sufb  treatment,  could  give  the  least 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  379 

m  to  the  chai^  of  insanity?  On  the  contrary.  Dr.  Butler,  tlie  saperinteodent  of  tha 
:,  bore  emplatic  witness  that  his  conduct  was  '  uniformly  quiet,  gentlemanlike,  and 
OUE,'  nor  could  the  closest  cross-examination  elicit  from  him  a  shadow  of  evidence  to 
justify  the  suspicion  of  insanity, 
_  '_'  The  other  witnesses,  but  few  of  whom  were  Spiritualists,  though  two  of  them  wealthy 
citiiens  of  Chicago,  voluntarily  undertook  the  long  journey  to  Hartford,  to  bear  thcit  indig- 
nant testmiony  against  Mr.  Eddy's  wrongs,  all  affirmed,  from  long  and  intimate  personal  ac- 
quamtance  with  him,  thit  he  had  on  all  occaaoiis  manifested  great  forbearance  towanis  his 
enemies,  never  resenting  their  injuries  in  a  revengeful  spirit,  only  insisting  on  the  undisputed 
possesion  of  his  most  sacred  ri|^ts, —  his  freedom  of  conscience  and  action. 

"  But  his  per.ecutors  did  act  like  madmen,  or  we  have  m  -  -         - 

is  j  indeed,  they  can  hardly  hope  to  be  excused  by  a  righteo 
ni^  the  plea  of  lunacy  in  their  behalf ' ' 

The  details  of  the  trial  are  too  long  for  insertion,  and  the  evidence  elicited 
only  forms  a  confirmation  of  the-  foregoing  statements. 

After  the  appearance  in  court,  and  calm,  collected  evidence  of  Mr.  Eddy 
himself,  who  firmly  but  mildly  attributed  the  outrage  he  had  endured  to  the 
bitter  opposition  with  which  his  relatives  regarded  his  adherence  to  Spiritual- 
ism, the  judge,  without  a  tnoment's  hesitation,  agreed  to  the  motion  of  Mr. 
Eddy's  counsel  for  his  immediate  discharge. 

Anodier  instance  of  tho  animus  with  which  Spiritualism  was  regarded,  and 
the  intolerance,  even  of  public  officials,  in  connection  with  the  subject,  is  to 
be.found  in  the  charge  pronounced  against  a  criminal  by  Judge  Clinton,  of 
the  Superior  Court,  in  Bufialo.  An  indictment  for  assault  and  battery  had 
been  laid  against  a  certain  Mr.  G.,  whose  wife  was  known  to  be  an  excellent 
spirit  medium.  This  fact  was  elicited  in  the  course  of  the  trial ;  and  as  the 
prisoner's  offence  was  assumed  to  be  proved.  Judge  Clinton,  in  pronouncing 
sentence  upon  him,  alluded  to  the  sphitualistic  part  of  the  evidence  in  terms 
which  are  summed  up  in  the  report  of  the  trial  published  in  the  Age  of 
Progress,  with  the  editor's  comments,  as  follows  : 

'"Ma.  G.,  — In  consideration  of  the  good  character  which  yon  have  shown  by  the  affi- 
davits just  read,  the  court  is  disposed  to  be  as  lenient  to  you  as  the  circumstances  of  the 
case  -mil  admit ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they  feel  it  to  be  their  duty  to  deal  with  you  more 
severely  on  account  of  the  shameful  fact  that  the  difficulty  out  of  which  your  offence  grew 
originated  in  your  connection  with  that  miserable  and  dangerous  delusion.  Spirit  uaiism.  I 
am  surprised  that  a  man  who  can  adduce  such  testimony  of  a  good  reputation  shoohl  suffer 
himself  to  be  led  away  by  a  fatal  delusion,  which  has  sent  hundreds  of  its  victims  to  the 
asylums  for  the  insane,  and  which,  if  it  be  of  spiritual  origin,  must  he  of  the  devil.  The 
court' have  decided  to  fine  you,'  etc. 

"  At  the  close  of  this  o:diortation  and  sentence,  the  counsel  for  the  defendant  arose,  and 
ashed  if  the  court  intended  any  portion  of  the  fine  as  a  punishment  for  the  defendant's  con- 
nection with  Spiritualism. 

"The  judge  gave  an  answer  indirectly  inclining  to  the  negative,  but  mdicating  that  the 
court  felt  it  their  duty  to  punish  with  a  heavier  hand  all  oifences  growing  out  of  Spiritual- 
ism, adding,  after  a  pause,  and  with  an  emphatic  flourish  of  his  head,  'And  this  course 
will  he  continued.' 

"  When  the  judge  ceased  the  defendant  whispered  to  his  counsel  that  he  was  not  a  Spir- 
itualist, nor  3.  IJeliever  in  Spiritualism. 

"  This  the  counsel  stated  to  the  court,  together  with  the  defendant's  further  assurance 
that,  though  his  wife  was  a  believer,  he  hun&  had  never  seen  anything  to  convince  him 
of  the  truth  of  the  alleged  spiritual  intercourse." 

The  editor  of  the  Age  of  Progress,  in  his  report,  goes  on  to  say,  "  that  such 
a  metamorphosis,  as  came  over  Judge  Clinton's  face,  he  never  before  remem- 
bered ;  indeed,  the  sweetness  of  the  smile  that  overspread  it  was  far  in 
advunce,  for  blandness,  of  any  smile  that  he  had  heretofore  beheld  on  a 
judicial  face.     The  gracious  expression  was  accompanied  with  these  words : 

Hosted  by  Google 

38o  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"  I  am  heartily  glad  to  hear  it.  I  am  very  glad  that  you  have  more 
sense  than  to  give  credence  to  the  absurdities  and  follies  of  that  most  mis 
chievous  delusion." 

The  editor  adds,  that  in  his  statement  "he  has  not  aimed  to  give  the  pre- 
cise language  of  the  judge,  though  he  has  preserved  the  spirit  and  substance 
of  it,  taking  care,  however,  to  make  it  rather  less  than  more  offensive  to  the 
class  of  people  whom  he  denounced." 

Comment  on  either  of  the  above  cases  is  unnecessary,  beyond  the  obser- 
vation that  such  acts — proceeding  in  an  open,  public,  and  offensive  way,  to 
brand  Spiritualism  as  insanity  and  crime,  worthy  in  the  one  instance  of  out- 
rage and  incarceration,  and  in  the  other,  of  judicial  rebuke  and  cldssifi cation 
with  penal  offences — proclaim  in  trumpet  tones,  the  desperate  character  of 
the  antagonism  with  which  Spiritualism  was  compelled  to  strive.  In  a  land 
boasting  the  largest  amount  of  liberty  which  an  individual  could  enjoy,  the 
poorest,  and  even  the  most  degraded  street  "  rowdy"  might  hope  for  better 
protection  to  his  personal  freedom,  and  such  property  as  rags  and  misery  left 
him,  were  he  even  a  heathen  or  an  adieist,  than  an  inoffensive  and  amiable  gen- 
tleman could  claim,  if  his  religious  convictions  inclined  him  to  Spiritualism. 

But  not  only  this :  the  very  judges,  sitting  on  the  bench  to  administer  im- 
partial justice  to  Jew  and  Gentile,  Christian  and  Pa^n,  deemed  it  in  place 
to  preach  religious  homilies  to  prisoners  on  the  diabolism  of  Spirituahsm,  and 
utter  sentences  which  virtually  treated  its  religious  convictions  as  a  crime. 

The  results,  now  as  heretofore,  were  far  otherwise  than  the  actors  of  such 
dramas  intended.  The  Spiritualists  became  "martyrs,"  and  the  outside  world 
roused  to  the  propriety  of  inquiring  into  their  crime,  became,  in  numerous 
instances,  investigators,  behevers,  and  finally  devoted  adherents  of  those 
ranks  that  gained  its  legionaries  as  surely  from  the  over-reaching  virulence 
of  its  opponents,  as  from  its  own  inherent  truth  and  attractive  beauty. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

UALISM  —  ITS       GENERAL       FACTS       AND 

Mrs.  Packaeb — A  Pakallel  Case  to  Mr.  Eddy's  —  Church  Trial  of  Miss 
Grace  Davis  —  Revival  at  Oberlin  and  Persecutios  of  Mrs.  Schull — 
Remarkable  Phenomena. 

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  repuMished  the  account  of  an  attempt,  which, 
for  intolerant  bigotry  and  bold  outrage,  was,  at  that  time,  unparalleled  in 
the  brief  history  of  Spiritualism.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  precedent  af- 
forded by  the  assumption  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Eddy's  affectionate  relatives 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  381 

that  a  notorious  Spiritualist  must  be  a  notorious  lunatic  wa  a  dangerous, 
because  a  suggestive  one,  and  operated  upon  the  minds  of  others  sufhc  ently 
to  set  a  pernicious  example  to  religious  bigots. 

The  very  idea  that  Spiritualists  could  be  incarcerated,  and  the  r  mi  ch  ev 
ous  influence"  destroyed  by  denouncing  them  as  "insane  va  a  h  t  too 
valuable  to  be  lost  uponthe  unfriendly ;  hence,  despite  tl  e  s  ro  g  feehng  of 
indignation  which  Mr.  Eddy's  treatment  excited,  the  cry  began  to  gather 
force  and  spread  abroad  in  every  direction :  "  Tne  Spiritualists  are  all  insane." 
True,  it  became  as  difficult  to  prove  the  truth  of  this  assertion,  as  it  had  been 
in  Mr.  Eddy's  case ;  still,  the  repetition  of  the  story  proved,  as  was  expected, 
injurious  to  the  credit  of  the  Spiritualists,  and  served  as  a  fresh  weapon  in 
the  hands  of  those  antagonists  whose  swords  were  already  too  battered  for 
further  use.  ' 

Amongst  the  numerous  attempts  at  this  species  of  persecution,  many  read- 
p's  will  remember  the  too-notorious  case  of  Mrs.  Packard,  which,  though  not 
actually  coming  within  the  pale  of  Spiritualism,  is  of  so  kindred  a  character  with 
that  of  Mr.  Eddy's,  that  we  cannot  omit  its  recital  in  this  connection,  especi- 
ally as  the  wrong  endured  by  this  unfortunate  lady  had  the  efiect  of  throwing 
lier  upon  the  sympathies  of  the  Spiritualists,  many  of  whom  became  earnest 
in  her  defence,  and  interested  in  the  alleviation  of  her  unmerited  sufferings, 

Mrs.  Packard  was  the  wife  of  a  Christian  minister  resident  at  Chicago, 
Her  crime  was  the  adoption  of  sentiments  corresponding  to  the  spiritual- 
istic faith,  and  her  punishment  three  years'  imprisonment  in  a  lunatic  asylum, 
at  tlie  instance  of  her  reverend  and  Christian  husband  1 

Her  case  is  thus  stated  in  the  Boston  Universalist,  a  religious  Eastern 
paper,  by  no  means  in  sympathy  with  the  spiritual  movement  and  its  adher- 
ents, hence  its  testimony  is  entitled  to  the  more  attention. 

The  article  is  as  follows  : 

"AN  EXTRAORniNARV  PERSECUTION. 

"  Several  months  anee  the  Chicago  papers  gave  the  particulars  of  a  most  extraordinary 
persecution,  with  accompaniuieWs  of  reliued  cruelty,  which  was  alleged' to  have  taken  place 
in  the  town  of  Waukegan,  Illinois,  about  forty  miles  south  of  Chicago,  The  Btatement 
was  substantially  as  foUows : 

"  A  Rev.  Mr.  Packard,  a  Presbyterian  clei^mau,  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  that  place. 
His  wife  greatly  offended  him  by  avowing  libei^  opinions,  calling  in  question  the  dogma,  of 
total  depravity,  and  criticiijng  freely  other  points  of  belief  in  the  Calvinistic  creed.  The 
husband  deemed,  or  pretended  to  deem,  that  these  expresaons  of  opinion  were  detrimental 
to  the  spiriiual  safety  of  his  children,  the  welfare  of  his  church,  and  the  good  of  the  com- 
munity generally. 

"  Resolving  to  put  a  summary  stop  to  the  growth  of  heresy  emanating  from  Us  own 
family,  he  mana^d  to  procure  the  certificate  of  two  physicians  to  the  charge  of  his  wife's 
insanity,  and  placed  her  in  the  Jacksonville  Lunatic  Aq'lum,  where  she  has  been  kept  in 
confinement  for  three  years  1  No  law  could  reach  her,  for  the  'common  kw'  makes  the. 
husband  the  guardian  of  the  wife's  person,  and  while  the  certificates  of  phyHcians  in  'regu- 
lar standing'  hold  good,  the  husband  can  keep  the  wife  ui  custody.  We  pass  over  the 
circumstances  of  Mrs.  Packard's  escape,  simply  callmg  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  Presby- 
terian clergyman  placed  his  wife  in  an  insane  asylum,  basing  his  chaise  of  insanity  on  the 
grounds  that  he  differed  from  her  in  religious  opinions,  and  finding  two  physicians  willing, 
on  similar  grounds,  to  grant  a  cerlificaie  of  lunacy.  Mrs.  Packard,  having  made  her 
escape,  is  now  in  Boston,  canvassing  the  city  for  the  sale  of  the  first  volume  of  her  book, 
entitled  '  The  Great  Drama,'  and  has  been  seen  by  ourselves  and  others,  not  only  in  the 
full  possession  of  her  senses,  but  in  the  endowment  of  a  very  remarkable  share  of  that  judg- 
ment and  mental  balance  which  are  the  highest  indications  of  sanity.  Her  persecutions  are 
of  so  extraordinary  a  nature,  and  her  statements  so  difficult  of  credence,  that  she  requests 
ns  to  publish  the  following  letters  in  confirmation  of  the  facts  of  the  case  as  she  relates 
theni.  The  first  letter  is  from  Judge  Boardman,  of  Waukegan,  the  second  from  Hon.  S. 
S.  Jones,  of  St.  Charles,  lilinois. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

n  of  h  mgUy 

The  gendemen  whose  testimony  th  ooce 

Be  recognized  hy  the  reader  as  Spir  omit 

their  letters,  logical  and  unanswerab  tliey 

present  arguments  already  familiar  ti  w  no 

new  light  on  the  details  above  given  f  the 

above-named  gentlemen,  Mrs.  Pack  "  her 

case,  attested  by  sixteen  of  her  felloi  Ly  re- 

spectable inhabitants  of  Chicago. 

Another  case  of  clerical  persecution,  exhibited  in  different  form,  but  excit- 
ing a  wide-spread  interest  throughout  the  West,  was  that  of  Miss  Grace  Da- 
vis, a  lady,  who,  without  any  other  motive  than  pure  benevolence,  devoted 
her  remarkable  endowments  as  a  "healing  medium  "  to  the  benefit  of  the 
sick  and  suffering,  for  which  crime  she  was  arraigned  before  an  ecclesiastical 
tribunal  of  her  own  church,  and  then  and  there  condemned  to  suffer  disgrace- 
ful expulsion  from  its  membership. 

The  fact  that  Miss  Grace  Davis  was  punished  by  Christian  authority  for 
obeying  the  chaise  of  the  founder  of  Christianity  in  doing  the  works  which 
he  commanded,  and  following  practically  his  example,  is  thus  recorded  in  a 
brief  summary  of  the  trial,  furnished  by  an  Illinois  secular  paper : 

CHURCH  TRIAL  OF  MISS  GRACS  DAVIS— WAUKEG AN  INDEPENDENT  DEMOCRAT. 

"During  the  past  year  and  aialf,  scarcely  a  day  has  elapsed  in  wMchthe  citizens  of  Wan- 
k^an  have  not  been  cheered  by  the  sight  of  a  little  airy  female  form,  quieliy  gliding  from 
the  Hck-bed  of  one  sufierer  to  that  of  another,  and,  under  the  professed  guidance  of  'spirits,' 
administering  such  aid  as  was  within  lier  power.  •  The  ahnost  unexampled  success  whldi 
attended  her  efforts,  and  the  unselfish  zeal  she  manifested,  often  spending  sleepless  nights  and 
days  of  unremitted  toil  without  hope  of  reward,  gradually  drew  upon  her  the  ire  of  the  Con- 
gregational Church,  of  which  she  was  a  member.  True,  many  friends  of  that  church,  includ- 
ing its  minister,  have  received  the  benefit  of  her  healing  powers,  and  she  was  daily  provmg 
the  truth  of  Christ's  promise,  that  '  believers  in  Him  should  kiy  their  hands  on  the  sick, 
and  they  should  be  healed ; '  yet,  for  reasons  best  known  lo  himself,  the  Rev.  William  Itich- 
arda  deemed  such  conduct  unchristian,  and  gave  her  notice,  by  letter,  to  appear  and  answer 
before  him  to  the  following  four  charges  which  he  preferred  against  her. 

'  First,  that  she  had  Jiol,  for  some  time  past,  attended  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 
Secondly,  that  for  some  time  past  she  had  absented  herself  from  all  the  public  services  of 
the  sanctuary.  Thndly,  that  she  had  attended  meetings  with  those  who  revile  the  Bible 
and  oppose,  hy  all  possible  and  safe  methods,  the  existence  and  progress  of  orthodox  scnli- 

"The  fourth  and  last  charge  was 
guidance  of  spirits  ui  another  spher 
of  health  and  healing. ' 

"The  notice  gave  her  the  privilege  of  appearing  in  person  or  by  counsel,  or  both.  She 
accordingly  selected  Hon.  W.  A.  Boardman,  Ira  Porter,  and  C.  J.  Smith,  Esqs.,  all  at- 
torneys and  personal  friends,  and  prepared  herself  for  the  trial,  which  was  held  on  Wednes- 
day evening  last. 

"  The  congregation  was  first  addressed  by  way  of  prayer  from  Mr.  Richards,  the  minister 
after  which  he  was  chosen  'moderator,'  and  the  so-called  trial  commenced. 

"The  church  voted  to  exclude  Messrs.  Porter  and  Smith  from  being  Miss  Davis's  coun- 
Eel;  and  the  first  charge  was  declared  sustained,  without  even  a  statement  on  any  one's  part 
that  she  was  guilty.  It  finally  appeared,  hy  a  statement  of  some  member  of  the  church,  that 
she  had  been  absent  from  the  Sacrament  only  twice  daring  eight  years,  so  for  that  she  was 

"  The  second  charge  was  changed  for  a  new  one,  which  stated  that  she  had  absented  her- 

*  The  e»acl  daw  of  this  article  is  unfominaKly  omitted,  but  it  is  preaimcd  ftoni  collateral  testimon  j  lohavs 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIHTTUALTSM.  3S3 

self  from  their  SunJ.iy  meetings ;  and  this  was  declared  sustained  in  the  same  manner,  with- 
out even  an  offer  to  sjiow  that  she  was  guilty. 

' '  A  motion  was  made  to  declare  the  other  charges  sustained  without  proof.  At  this  st^e 
of  the  proceedmgs,  Mr.  Porter  arose  to  inquire  what  neighbor  of  his  was  willing  to  stigma- 
tize him  as  a  'reviler  of  religion,'  yet  he  associated  with  the  respondent  and  was  amenable 
to  the  same  charge  as  herself.  He  proceeded  to  show  that  the  accusation  wasfalseaod  nn- 
christian,  but  his  courteous  deportment,  glowing  eloquence,  and  sound  logic,  were  too  strong 
for  those  who  sat  in  judgment,  determine  to  prejudge  the  case,  and  he  was '  choked  down.' 
Judge  Eoardman  offered  to  prove  by  witnesses  that  the  chaises  were  false,  but  the  church, 
prompted  by  their  priest,  refused  to  hear  him,  and  the  motion  was  carried. 

"  The  next  thing  in  order  was  to  fix  the  measure  of  the  punishment.  Dr.  Barker  moved 
to  adjourn  and  settle  the  matter  at  some  future  church  meeting.  Judge  Boardman  opposed 
this  proceeding,  and  insisted  that  he  had  a  right  to  be  heard  upon  this  as  well  as  any  other 
portion  of  the  trial.  But  Mr.  Richards  interposed,  informing  the  judge  he  would  let  Mis3 
Davis  know  by  letter  after  their  next  meeting  what  action  the  church  had  taken.  The 
judge  denounced  this  step  »s  unprecedented  and  inquisitorial,  whereupon  he  was  called  to 
order  by  one  Newman,  a  church-member,  and  ordered  to  at  down.  As  Judge  B,  did  not 
at  once  comply  with  this  order,  Mr.  Newman  ruslied  toward  him  with  his  face  Hushed,  and 
his  fist  doubled,  evidently  with  the  intention  of  exhibiting  his  puplistic  prowess.  At  this 
st.Tgeof  the  proceedings,  A.  J.  Waterman,  Esq.,  a  policemagisttate,  presented  himself  upon 
the  scene,  and  the  meek  and  lowly  church  .member  slunk  back  to  his  seat,  considerably  sub- 
dued. Some  women  screamed,  and  two  poor  dogs,  who  found  they  had  been  caught  m  bad 
company,  set  up  a  howl  of  shame.  Mr.  Richards  declared  the  meeting  adjourned  without 
a  vote,  and  so  the  farce  ended," 

A  public  meeting  was  subsequently  called  at  the  court  house,  on  Friday 
evening,  August  29,  to  review        p  g  hi   tr 

The  court  room  was  thronged  fl        g       dag 

dignation  appeared  to  pervad  b  th  h    p  d 

Chiristiaiis  in  their  action  with  AD  T  vmg 

the  proceedings,  taken  from  th   p  p     q       d 

"Mr.  Ira  Porter  arose  and  stated  ad  G         D 

heard  the  prmciples  of  Christianity  ed  N        T      am  ed  un 

foot  by  those  who  professed  to  be  tl 

"Mr.  Porter   read  the  charges  a  aji     d 

"After  an  eloquent  and  impresa  an  ty  m 

the   benevolent    healing  medium,   J         D  as  ed  am 

church  that  espelled  her  from  its  fe       sh  >:am 

proposed  that  a  committee  of  three  ed        dr  so 

sense  of  the  meeting. 

"  This  proposition  was  at  once  car  ed  If  A         m  as      po 

series  of  resolutions  prepared  and  re  Tn  D  ig 

nant  protest  against  her  accusers. 

"  Some  of  the  latter  were  prcsen        se  med  so  fi     el  S  al 

with  threats  and  violent  denunciation,  that  the  trial  not  only  ended  m  severing  the  connec- 
tion of  Miss  Grace  Davis  with  the  Congregational  Church,  but  in  causing  many  of  its  mem- 
bers, who  had  listened  with  di^ust  to  the  whole  proceeding,  to  seek  in  Miss  Davis's  re- 
ligion for  that  practical  Christianity  which  they  had  failS  to  find  m  the  church  which 
expelled  her." 

As  an  addenda  to  this  narrative,  we  here  publish  an  account  of  one  of 
those  acts,  far  too  numerous  for  record,  for  wliich  the  Christian  Congrega- 
tional Church  deemed  Miss  Davis  unworthy  to  hold  fellowship  with  them. 
The  case,  although  reported  subsequent  to  the  trial  and  the  medium's  re- 
moval from  the  West,  is  especially  selected,  because  it  was  communicated  to 
the  New  York  Spiritual  Telegraph  by  one  of  the  most  esteemed  and  promi- 
nent citizens  of  WilUamsburgh,  and  although,  for  certain  personal  reasons, 
the  names  of  the  parties  are  withheld,  the  reader  may  rely  on  the  entire 
authenticity  of  the  relation. 

Hosted  by  Google 

384  mSTORV  OF  MODERN 

SPIRITUAI,  TELEGRAPH  — NEW  YORK,  JULY  ;»,  1857. 

"  On  Monday,  July  6,  the  spiritnal  medium,  Miss  Grace  Davis,  was  informed  by  one  of 
her  guardian  spirits,  a  phy^dan,  that  on  the  Thursday  week  next,  in  the  afternoon,  she 
woidd  be  eailed  upon  to  hed  the  sick.  From  that  day  to  the  time  appointed  she  was  fre- 
quently reminded  of  this  charge,  and  bidden  to  hold  herself  in  readuiess  to  be  called. 
Wlien  the  day  arrived,  however,  other  drcumstances  bad  driven  the  appointment  from  her 
mind,  when  she  was  hiistily  Enmmoned  to  the  bedade  of  a  young  friend  [Miss  M.],  who  lay 
apparently  dead,  cold,  and  lifeless.  The  attack  had  been  sudden,  ana  the  young  kdy's 
friends  could  not  conceive  of  any  cause  that  could  have  produced  it.  On  approaching  the 
bedside,  the  spirit  physician  remmded  Miss  Davis  of  her  warning,  and  informed  her  that 
her  patient  was  suffering  from  a  morbid  and  stagnant  condition  ot  the  blood,  occasioned 
by  tfliysical  weakness  and  the  excessive  heat  of  tlie  day.  Under  the  directions  of  her 
guide,  the  medium  manipulated  her  patient  for  about  twenty  minutes,  whMi  the  circulation 
was  resumed,  the  color  returned  to  her  face,  the  rigidity  left  her  limbs,  and  in  a  few  min- 
utes more  she  arose  perfectly  restored,  and  without  the  least  unpleasant  symptom  remain- 
ing of  her  late  alarming  condition. 

"  We  desire  to  add,  that  this  is  but  one  out  of  hundreds  of  cases  in  which  this  wonderful 
and  beneficent  medium  has,  under  spirit  direction,  effected  cures,  some  of  them  of  malig- 
nant diseases,  and  many  in  cases  of  suffering  deemed  by  the  physicians  incurable.  We 
are  constantly  asked,  'What  good  does  Spiritualism  do?'  Let  the  acts  of  this  one  ad- 
roiraHe  minister  of  good  and  use  answer  the  question. 

"Yours,  for  the  truth 

"A  Lover  of  Truth." 

We  too  must  add  that  we  are  supplied  with  a  mass  of  evidence  of  a  similar 
character,  in  relation  to  Miss  Grace  Davis,  the  despised  and  rejected  of  the 
Waukegan  Congregational  Christians,  but  our  space  forbids  us  to  enter  upon 
further  details. 

During  a  season  of  revival,  which  took  place  at  Oberlin,  Ohio,  about  1S60, 
when  the  great  Evangelist,  Charles  G.  Finney,  of  Oberhn  College,  was  pastor 
o  the  First  Congregational  Church,  the  afflatus  which  was  expected  to  cany 
divers  stray  souls  into  the  fold  of  the  collegiate  shepherd,  somehow  worked 
in  a  contrary  direction,  and  by  developing  new  and  occult  powers  in  the 
revivalists,  succeeded  in  converting  a  large  number  of  them  into  what  was 
popularly  known  as  "  spirit  mediums." 

Greatly  perplexed  by  the  wonderful  ingenuity  with  which  "Satan"  contrived 
to  traverse  the  best  laid  plans  for  capturing  and  creed-binding  the  grace  of 
God,  the  reverend  shepherd  resolved  to  make  an  example  of  one  of  the  re- 
cusants for  the  benefit  of  the  rest,  and,  as  there  were  several  worthy  men  of 
good  standing  and  "  solid  substance  "  gone  over  to  the  enemy,  it  was  judged 
meet,  by  the  church  dignitaries,  to  sacrifice  a  small  and  weak  sister  for  the 
example  and  behoof  of  these  strong  and  rich  brothers,  in  virtue  of  which 
manly  resolution,  the  victim  selected  was  an  unoffending  invalid  lady,  of  the 
name  of  SdiuU,  who,  upon  being  visited  by  Deacon  Hull,  to  inform  her  of  the 
charges  preferred  against  her,  declared  her  inability,  on  the  plea  of  ill-health, 
to  attend  any  such  citation. 

It  would  almost  seem  that  this  course  was  both  expected  and  desired,  for 
the  invalid  was  inunediately  informed  that  the  church  must  proceed  against 
her,  whether  she  could  attend  to  make  her  defence  or  not  Mrs.  Schull  was 
taken  somewhat  by  surprise  at  such  an  announcement,  and  a  correspondent 
of  the  Banner  of  Light,  in  his  report  of  the  case,  broadly  hints  that  the  sister 
charged  her  accusers  with  cowardice ;  first,  in  selecting  a  lady  to  proceed 
against,  when  there  were  so  many  male  criminals  involved  in  a  similar  offence ; 
next,  in  pressing  the  matter  home  upon  a  weak  invalid ;  and  finally,  in  deny- 
ing her  time  to  make  such  preparation  as  mi^t  avail  to  arrange  her  defence. 
"Church  discipline,"  however,  was  urged  as  the  answer  to  these  somewhat 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICA!^  SPIRITUALISM.  385 

awkward  allegations,  and  it  appears  that  Mrs.  Schull,  stimulated  by  a  strong 
sense  of  the  injustice  practiced  against  her,  summoned  up  sufficient  spirit  to 
plead  her  cause  in  person,  and  despite,  of  all  odds,  determined  to  be  present 
at  the  church  trial. 

The  Banner  of  Light  correspondent  goes  on  to  say  : 

"The  good  people  were  assembled  on  the  day  appointed,  and  the  meeting  was  opened 
with  a  very  earnest  prayer  by  (he  pastor,  who  said,  'O  God!  we  pray  that  this  meetmg  may 
be  conducted  in  such  a  manner  as  will,  please  thee.  It  has  become  necessary  that  this  wo- 
man sliouid  be  made  an  example  of,  that  thy  people  may  see  how  vam  it  is  for  them  to 
rebel  against  thy  government,' etc.  The  answers  were  then  read,  to  the  surprise  of  the 
audience,  and  the  manifest  discomfiture  of  the  pastor,  whose  countenance  changed  conader- 
ably  during  the  reading.  At  its  close,  he  arose,  evidently  confused,  and  said  there  was  no 
need  of  discussing  the  rnatter,  as  she  plead  gnllty  on  the  first  two  chaises  and  that  was 
enough  to  convict  her;  the  last  charge  she  denied  when  she  stated  that  she  believed  in 
modem  Spiritualism  as  she  did  in  ancient  Spiritualism.  He  [Mr.  Fimiey]  stated,  'that 
there  was  no  such  thbg  as  ancient  Spiritualian. ' 

"  Mrs.  Schull  replied.-that  she  believed  in  Spiritualism,  and  if  she  had  embraced  any  of 
its  errors,  she  desired  to  have  them  pointed  out,  that  she  might  discard  them.  To  this,  the 
pastor  answered,  that  the  errors  it  embraced  were  so  numerous  that  they  had  no  time  to 
discuss  them,  and  even  if  they  had,  he  did  not  consider  it  expedient  for  him  to  do  so,  as  he 
considered  it  a  subject  that  tended  to  lead  mankind  from  God,  and  the  less  we  have  to  do 
with  it,  the  better  we  are  off.  He  further  stated  that  Mrs.  Schull,  in  her  answers  to  the 
second  charge,  denied  the  divinity  of  Jesus  by  saying  that  he  professed  'a  two-fold  nature,  a 
carnal  and  a  divme,'  (he  same  as  other  men.  He  sdd  none  but  the  good  possessed  the 
divine  nature;   the  wicked  had  none  of  it.  ^ 

"  Mrs.  Schull  asked  him  some  shrewd  questions,  to  which  the  able  and  faithful  shepherd 
replied  that  he  had  no  time  to  discuss  them.  Several  of  the  members  present  wanted  the 
meeting  adjourned  until  there  was  time  for  such  a  discussion,  but  the  pastor  thought  better 
of  it,  and  stated  that  they  had  better  vote  upon  it  at  once,  so  as  to  get  it  off  their  hands  as 
quickly  as  possible.  The  more  they  agitated  the  subject  the  worse  it  was  for  them.  And 
so  Mrs.  Scholl  was  voted  out,  and  dismissed  upon  the  first  and  second  chaises,  because  the 
pastor  Aad  «o(  Wm^  to  discuss  the  questions  upon  which  Mrs.  Schull' s  soul  was  to  be  saved 
or  lost  to  all  eternity  I 

"In  the  hiunble  hope  that  there  maybe  salvation  outside  of  a  creed  which  permits 
souls  to  be  bandied  about  at  the  pleasure  of  a  fallible  mortal,  or  suffers  them  to  be  lost  if  he 
has  not  leisure  to  save  them,  we  shall  here  insert  a  verbatim  copy  of  the  charges  preferred 
agamst  Mrs.  Schull,  and  the  reply  which  was  deemed  insufficient  to  save  her  from  expulsion 
from  the  holy  membership  of  her  church. 

THE   CHARGES. 

"  The  undersigned  represent,  that  sister  Elizabeth  D.  Schull,  a  member  of  the  First  Con- 
gregational Church,  m  Oberlin,  O.,  is  guilty  of  unchristian  conduct  in  the  following  parlic- 

"  First.  We  charge  her  in  breaking  a  covenant  with  this  church,  in  not  attendmg  the 
pubhc  worship  and  orilinances  for  two  years  past.  Second,  We  charge  her  with  heresy  in 
denymg  the  cardinal  doctrines  of  the  Bible  ;  viz.,  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  doctrine 
of  the  atonement  by  Jesus  Christ.  Third.  In  embracing  modem  Spiritualism,  with  its- 
various  errors.     Ail  of  which  is  submitted  to  the  church  for  action.' 

MRS.  SCHULL'S  REPLY. 
"  Tn  the  First  Congregaiional  Church  of  Oberlin  : 

"  I  am  most  happy  to  have  this  privilege  of  answering  for  myself  to  charges  which  my 
accusers  have  brought  agamst  me  for  unchrLitian  conduct,  as  they  are  pleased  to  term  it, 

"  I  would  say,  in  answer  to  the  first  charge,  that  it  is  five  years  and  more  since  I  have 

attended  the  ordinances  of  the  ehurch I  might  excuse  myself,  and  trulh- 

fully  too,  by  saying  that  the  circumstances  of  my  family  have  been  such  as  lo  oblige  me  to 
work  so  excessively  hard  during  the  six  days  of  the  week,  that  I  felt  too  much  need  of  rest 
on  the  seventh  to  attend  public  worship.     But  that  would  not  be  all  the  truth.     The: 
as 

Hosted  by  Google 

386  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

chtirch  had  ceased  to  benefit  me  spiritually,  so  I  diose  to  worship  God  accordmg  to  the  dic- 
tates of  my  own  conscience,  and  nnder  my  own  vine,  haji  I  a.  place  to  plant  one.  .... 
I  do  believe  in  modern  Spiritualism,  and  also  in  ancient  Spiritualism,  which  I  believe  to  be 
one  and  the  same  thing,  differing  only  in  degree  of  development  in  accordance  with  the 
advancement  of  the  ^;e.  I  believe  God's  laws  are  unchangeable,  and  that  the  same  law  that 
allowed  Peter  and  John  to  see  Moses  and  Elias,  and  John  the  Revelator  to  converse  with 
angels,  stands  unrepealed  to-day.  I  believe  God  commissions  my  angel  friends  as  minister- 
ing spirits  to  commune  with  me,  and  I  have  tajigible  evidence  of  their  presence,  encouraging 
me  to  a  nobler,  purer,  and  Wgher  life,  and  stiengtbening  me  to  bear,  unmoved,  the  scofls 
and  rebukes  of  the  time-serving. 

"  I  have  unbounded  confidence  in  a  Supreme  Being  who  creates,  governs,  and  guides  the 
destinies  of  individuals  and  nations. 

"  I  love  to  contemplate  the  works  of  his  hands, —  the  tiny  flower  beneath  our  feet,  the 
starry  canopy  ofheaven,  the  feathery  tribes  sheltered  in  the  foliage  of  the  solemn  forests 
and  chanting  forth  the  boundless  praises  of  the  great  All  Father  !  I  only  see  discord  in  his 
noblest  work,  man.  jesusgaveanew  commandment,  saying,  'Love  one  another;' he  also  said, 
'Judge  not,  lest  ye  be  judged.'  I  thank  God  most  devoutly  that  we  areendowed  with  facul- 
ties to  tliink,  reason,  and  comprehend  for  ourselves,  and  that  man  Ls  not  our  final  judge.  I 
have  dared  to  think  and  believe  what  to  me  is  truth ;  and  if  my  rel^on  cannot  bear  the  test 
of  reason,  philosophy,  and  common  sense,  it  may  go  ;  but  if  the  church  lias  a  better  to  offer 
me,  I  will  accept  it  with  pleasure. 

"  1  have  encleavored  to  answer  to  the  chains  as  best  I  could  in  the  short  time  allowed  me 
for  that  purpose,  and  I  will  close  by  asking  my  accusers  to  give  me  adear  elucidation  of  'the 
various  errors  of  Spiritualism,'  and  point  out  to  me  those  which  I  have  embraced,  and  I 
will  gladly  relinquish  them. 

"  That  Spiritualism,  as  it  now  exists  in  its  tudimental  state,  has  many,  very  many  errors 
clinging  about  it,  no  one  denies;  but  let  him  who  knows  bimself  to  be  perfect  be  the  first  Co 
lift  up  his  voice  in  total  denunication  of  all  the  claims  of  Spiritualism  or  any  belief  well 
founded  in  truth  and  philosophy. 

"  Whatever  may  be  the  errors  of  SpirituaUsm  or  any  other  ism,  I  am  ready  to  discard 
all  the  errors  I  have  embraced  when  convinced  of  them.  Henceforth  my  church  is  the  world, 
and  humanity  my  brothers  and  sisters. 

"  Elizabeth  D.  Schull," 

Let  it  not  be  supposed  by  any  one  who  peruses  those  pages,  that  by  citing 
the  expulsion  of  Mrs.  Schull  from  a  Congregational  Church  as  an  act  of  per- 
secution, we  would  thereby  deny  to  any  ecclesiastical  association  the  right  to 
include  only  such  members  as  conform,  in  act  and  word,  to  the  strict  tenor  of 
its  credal  obligations. 

On  the  contrary,  in  the  spirit  of  universal  justice,  we  would  defend  such  a 
right  where  and  whenever  claimed,  and  by  virtue  thereof  Mrs.  Schull  had  for- 
feited her  privileges  in  the  First  Congregational  Church  of  Oberlin ;  but  in  yij;w 
iof  the  enormous  claims  to  salvatory  influences  which  all  Christian  organizations 
arrogate  to  themselves,  the  question  still  remains  an  open  one,  how  can  the 
"shepherds,"  "pastors,"  or  spiritual  guides  of  such  associarions  reconcile  it 
to  their  consciences  and  duty,  ruthlessly  to  expel  their  members  in  the  very 
hour  and  act  of  their  most  imminent  peril,  and  that  in  die  method  adopted  by 
Mr.  Charies  Finney,  namely,  of  alleging  ruinous  errors  in  the  new  faith  of 
the  expelled,  yet  refusing  to  explain  them,  reason  witli  her  delusions,  or  take 
any  other  steps  than  such  as  vindictive  feehngs  prompted,  to,  save  the  soul 
escaping  from  his  charge  into  what  he  himself  called  "  eternal  pedition." 
As  the  treatment  experienced  by  Mrs.  Schull  may  be  taken  as  a  fair  specimen 
of  the  action  of  a  large  number  of  Christian  ministers  towards  spiritualistic 
-church-members,  the  moral  of  such  histories,  may  be  summed  up  m  the  fervent 
ejaculation,  "  Thank  God,  the  days  of  the  fiery  stake  and  Spanish  Inquisition 
are  ended  \ "  Were  it  otherwise,  eleven  millions  of  American  Spiritualists 
■would  not  be  alive  now  to  draw  the  line  of  demarcation  between  their 
X:hristlike  faith  and  that  of  their  "  Christian"  persecutors._ 

We  now  invite  the  reader  to  consider  some  of  the  fair  blossoms  which 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITVALTSM.  387 

sprang  from  the  rank  weeds  of  scientific  intolerance  and  ecclesiastical  big- 
otry, which  we  have  been  compelled  to  record. 

In  Sturgis,  Michigan,  the  progressives  of  the  town  had  combined  to  build 
a  handsome  church,  which  was,  by  common  consent,  to  be  open  to  all  denomi- 
nations who  desired  to  perform  service  within  its  walls  ;  that  is,  of  course,  all 
the  various  forms  of  faith  professed  by  the  most  liberal  contributors  to  its 
erection.  Amongst  these  were  several  wealthy  and  prominent  Spiritualists  and, 
it  was  in  view  of  the  very  generous  donations  which  they  had  made  towards 
the  erection  of  this  church  that  they  deemed  themselves  greatly  wronged 
when,  upon  applying  for  the  liberty  to  hold  spiritual  meetings  within  its  walls, 
they  were  rudely  denied,  and  informed  that  a  place  set  apart  for  Christian 
worship  could  not  be  granted  for  any  such  purposes. 

After  the  conflict  which  this  unchristian  conduct  stirred  up  had  proceeded 
too  far  for  compromise  or  conciliation,  the  good  people  of  Sturgis  were  one 
morning  astonished  by  the  sight  of  the  longest  procession  that  had  ever  been 
witnessed  in  that  remote  prairie  town. 

It  consisted  of  a  long  line  of  teams,  each  loaded  with  lumber,  bricks,  iron, 
and  every  description  of  building  material. 

Each  wagon  was  adorned  with  a  littie  flag,  bearing  the  inscription  of 
"Sturgis  Free  Church,"  and  the  whole  of  die  materials,  amply  sufficient  for 
the  erection  of  a  new  and  handsome  building,  were  voluntary  contributions 
from  the  large-hearted  and  unsectarian  men  of  the  district,  who  felt  outraged 
at  the  narrowness  of  that  Christianity  which  could  not  admit  within  its  pre- 
cincts the  only  body  of  believers  who  could  practically  prove  the  truth  of  their 
faith  by  giving  the  signs  their  Master  and  Founder  required  of  them..* 

We  shall  now  make  a  few  extracts  from  the  correspondents'  columns  of  the 
spirituahstic  journals,  dating  from  1855  to  1861,  recording  the  progress  of 
Spiritualism  in  the  West. 

The  Spiritual  Telegraph  quotes  the  following  from  the  Chicago  Times,  a 
secular  paper : 

"  We  leam  that  there  is  a  boy  on  Bonus,  Prairie,  by  the  name  of  Barnes,  who  preaches 
under  what  we  call,  for  want  of  a  Letter  term,  the  'spirit-rapping'  influence.  We  are  in- 
formed by  the  neighbors  of  the  boy,  persons  in  whom  we  have  imphcit  confidence,  that  \iy 
forming  a  'circle,"  that  is,  by  severiil  persons  sitting  quietly  around  a.  table,  the  yomig  lad 
will  pass  into  a  trance,  or  magnetic  sleep,  and  in  this  condition  either  describe  clairvoyantly 
distant  scenes,  diagnose  and  prescribe  successfully  for  diseases,  or  deliver  sermons,  charac- 
terised by  a  depth  of  thought  and  eloquence  of  language  that  would  do  credit  to  our  most 
eminent  and  learned  divines. 

"The  boy  is  only  twelve  years  of  age,  and  entirely  uneducated." 

A  letter  from  the  Hon.  Charles  W,  Cathcart,  dated  1858,  detailing  one  of 
his  numerous  experiences  in  the  scientific  phase  of  Spiritualism,  will  doubt- 
less be  acceptable  to  the  intelligent  reader. 

"SPIRIT  AND  ODIC  UGHTS  — SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH. 

"Laporte,  Indiana,  July  11,  1S58. 

"EniTORS  Telegraph, — Lost  night  it  occurred  to  me  to  try  whether  those  who  could 
see  spirit  lights,  could  also  see  any  luminous  emanations  from  the  poles  of  a  magnet.  After 
holding  one  of  our  dark  circles,  during  which  we  had  our  usual  powerful  musicS  manifesta- 
tions, together  with  a  great  number  of  lights,  distinctly  seen  by  all,  of  various  sizes,  forms, 
and  motions,  we  placed  a  small  electro-magnet  on  the  table.  The  magnet  would  lift  one 
hundred  and  fifty  poimds.     T^e  battery  used  was  a  angle  cell  of  Grove's,  ordinary  size. 

"I  removed  the  armature,  and  we  all  tried  if  we  could  see  any  light  about  its  poles,  but  in 
vain.     There  were  eight  of  us  who  distinctly  saw  the  spirit  lights,  and  occasionally,  under 

'^lU^tbcbstdiapierofSt.  Hade. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

388  HISTORY  OS  MODERlf 

their  radiance,  tlie  magnet,  like  our  hands,  faces,  and  forms,  or  anything  else.  Objects  were 
jlluminated  whether  the  armatnre  was  on  or  off.  While  trying  the  experiment  the  spirit 
liglits  were  exhibited  freely,  and  in  answer  to  oiir  questions  wlicther  the  odic  and  spirit 
flames  were  the  same,  loud  rappings  responded,  '  No. ' 

"The  spirit  of  Professor  Hare  purported  to  communicate  with  us,  for,  hearingot the  death 
of  that  great  and  good  man,  we  asked  our  spirit  friends  if  they  would  try  and  induce  him  to 
visit  our  circle.  They  replied  that  they  would  endeavor  to  bring  liim  to  us,  and  that  when 
he  arrived,  they  would  rive  a  certain  tjgnal,  which  promise  was  redeemed  at  this  sitting. 

"This  spirit  exhibited  a  vast  amount  of  physical  strength.  He  wished  us  to  say  to  the 
world  that  he  was  still  devoted  to  investigation,  and  the  search  for  truth,  as  he  was  on 
earth ;  that  the  communications  combg  through  Mrs.  Gourlay  were  from  him  ;  that  he  pit- 
ied and  forgave  his  bigoted  adversaries;  that  he  found  his  situation  in  the  spirit -world  far 
in  advance  of  his  most  sanguine  expectations;  and  that  ha  would  contijiue  to  labor  for  the 
promotion  of  truth  and  the  happiness  of  humanity. 

"Charles  W.  Cathcart." 

The  following  was  communicated  by  a  regular  correspondent  to  the 
Democratic  Fress,  of  Chicago.  Besides  the  authority  of  that  journal,  the 
parties  who  formed  holh  the  actors  and  witnesses  of  the  scene,  were  well 
known  to  Messrs.  Paj-tridge  and  Britain,  who  copied  the  report  in  the  Tele- 
graph, and  vouched  for  the  entire  accuracy  of  die  si 

"A  CONCERT  EV 

"RocKFORD,  Illinois,  Augusl,  17,  1856. 

"Having  been  informed  that  Rockford  was  a  stronghold  of  'the  spirits,'  and  hemg  de- 
sirous to  witness  some  of  their  performances,  I  accepted  a  friend's  invitation  to  attend  with 
him  a  circle,  held  at  a  house  of  a  well-lmown  and  highly  respected  dtiien  of  the  place,  last 
evening.  After  my  introduction,  the  circle  'sat,'  and  the  'influence'  soon  became  visible 
on  the  nerves  of  some  of  the  sitters,  one  of  whom,  a  young  man,  arose  and  delivered  a 
striking  address  in  a  foreign  tongue,  which  I  was  informed  by  a  party  present,  who  under- 
stood it,  was  spoken  in  the  language  of,  and  purported  to  come  liom,  a.  Sioux  chief.  Soon 
after  this,  two  ladies  and  one  gentleman  came  under  the  '  influence,'  and  after  conversing 
for  some  time  with  each  other  very  fluently  in  a  language  miknown  to  me,  they  commenced 
smging,  in  various  parts  and  the  most  exquisite  harmony.  They  sang  what  seemed  to  be 
pieces  from  some  opera,  taking  their  several  parts  with  highly  dramatic  and  most  thrilling 
eflect. 

"The  lady  who  performed  the  treble  part,  sang  in  the  most  perfect  profesaonal  style,  pro- 
ducing all  the  trills,  cadences,  and  fioriture  of  the  most  accomplished  vocalists,  in  a  man- 
ner that  quite  equalled  Parodi  or  the  best  opera  singer  of  the  day. 

"  The  concert  lasted  an  hour,  not  only  delighting  all  who  heard  it  within  the  house,  but 
entertammg  also  a  large  crowd  without,  who  seemed  equally  fasdnated  by  the  perfonnance. 
At  the  close  of  the  mu^e,  one  of  the  mediums  became  influenced  by  an  Englidi  spirit,  who 
stated  that  the  spirit  vocalists  had  been  three  distinguished  Spanish  opera  singers,  and  that 
the  limguage  in  which  they  sang  was  Spanish,  a  statement  confirmed  by  a  Spanish  gentleman 
present,  who  dedared  that  the  language  was  sung  with  the  utmost  purity.  Most  of  those 
present  were  well  acquamted  with  the  mediums,  and  testified  (hat  they  had  not  only  no 
knowledge  of  any  language  but  their  own,  but  tliat,  in  their  normal  state,  they  were  utterly 
incapable  of  executmg  such  music,  as  they  were  humble  persons,  and  had  never  until  that 
night  been  known  as  singers,  musicians,  linguists,  or  ^fted  in  any  way  so  as  to  account  foi 
their  extraordinary  performances  1 

In  Dixon,  Ilhnois,  a  small,  remote  prairie  town,  Spiritualism  received  a 
strong  impulse  which  has  resulted  in  its  permanent  establishment  there,  through 
the  mediumship  of  a  blind  lady,  Mrs.  Briggs,  who  became  suddenly  developed 
as  a  clairvoyant  physician,  diagnosing  and  prescribing  for  disease,  and  most 
successfully  healing  the  sick  bj-  the  laying  on  of  hands. 

The  remarkable  lucidity  with  which  Mrs.  Briggs  described  the  physical 
condition  of  herpatients,  discovered  lost  property,  and  detailed  the  character 
and  personal  appearance  of  her  visitors,  strongly  impressed  her  neighbors 
with  the  superiority  of  spiritual  over  material  sight. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  3S9 

The  ori^n  and  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  remote  districts  may  generally 
be  traced  to  the  mediumship  of  some  person,  who,  like  Mrs.  Briggs,  were 
specially  endowed  to  meet  the  circumstances  and  surroundings  of  special 
districts.  A  glance  at  the  characteristics  of  the  phenomena  produced  in 
localities  far  removed  from  the  influence  of  older  communities,  will  show 
that  there  is  a  design  and  intelligence  govemmg  it,  and  adapting  it  to  the 
wants  and  peculiarities  of  each  district.  The  following  sketches  will  illus- 
trate tliis  proposition  : 

"THE  PHENOMENA  AT  THE  WEST. 

"June,  1856. 
"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph: 

"  Dear.  Sir, — Believing  that  you  and  your  readers  feel  an  interest  in  whatever  apper- 
tains of  Spirituaiism,  we  send  you  a  Bhoit  sketch  of  the  introdnctipn  and  progressof  the 
cause  in  our  vicinity.  It  is  now  nearly  one  year  since  the  manifestations  claiming  to  be 
'  spiritual '  were  made  to  the  form  of  raps.  These  demonstrations  were  soon  sui>erseded  W 
the  higher,  as  writing  and  clairvoyance,  but  more  generally  by  1  species  of  exercising  whidi 
we  have  not  seen  described  in  any  of  the  spiritual  periodicals,  hence  we  are  indtoed  to  be- 
Keve  tliat  it  is  peculiar  to  the  West.  It  consists  of  a  kind  of  dancing,  in  which  the 
peculiar  characteristics  of  individuals  deceased  are  represented  in  action,  as  well  as  national 
character,  and  occaaonally  acts  oE  marked  individuality,  by  some  or  all  of  which  means, 
g)irits  are  readily  recognized  as  portraytog  themselves  in  these  actions,  by  their  friends 
and  kindred. 

"  We  thuik  we  can  safely  state  there  are  over  an  hundred  persons  ni  this  vicinity,  of  all 
classes  and  ages,  from  the  child  of  two  years  to  the  parent  of  seventy,  who  iiave  been  thus 
toflnenced.  We  have  frequently  seen  as  many  as  twenty,  and  somelunes  fifty  persons  danc- 
ing at  one  time  under  this  mfluence.  The  scene  is  most  novel,  and  strikingly  elicits  the 
attention  even  of  the  most  sceptical.  The  phenomena  presented  in  (he  dance  are  doubt- 
less psychologically  produced  by  spirits,  as  many  of  the  movements  correspond  closely,  if  not 
identically,  irith  those  we  see  in  psychological  subjects,  impressed  by  minds  in  the  Ixidy. 

"We  have  many  wiiting  media,  clairvoyants,  and  psychometricalsibjects. 

The  only  church  in  our  place  has  most  unceremoniou^y  expelled  the  best  part  of  its  mem- 
bers  for  believmg  that  the  Lord's  immortality  is  a  demonstrated  fact.  The  clergy  here- 
abouts seem  to  feel  something  as  they  did  about  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  the  cry  is 

agato  abroad,  'He  will  take  away  our  place  and  nation. ' 

"McCann  Dunn. 

"Maquon,  Cox  Co.,  Illinois. 

Another  specimen  of  the  mdimental  days  of  Spiritualism  in  the  West, 
is  famished  in  the  followbg  communication  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  : 

SPIRIT  COMMUNICATIONS   IN  IOWA. 

"Wilson's  Grove,  Fayette  Co.,  Iowa,  Octc^enj,  1856. 

"Messrs.  pARTitmoE  and  Britain,— Feeling  much  interest  in  what  is  called  Spir- 
itualism, I  have  concluded  to  send  you  an  account  of  the  method  in  which,  for  the  last  five 
or  six  years  past,  my  family  have  had  communications  spelled  out  to  them. 

"Atward,  about  two  feet  long  and  six  inches  wide,  is  nailed  to  the  wall,  so  as  to  hang 
perpendicular.  On  one  side  of  the  board,  an  alphabet  is  placed.  On  each  end  of  the  board 
Ea  small  pulley  with  a  cord  passing  over  each,  and  attached  to  this  cord  is  a  finger,  or  mdex. 
Then,  as  three  or  four  of  us  ^t  with  our  hands  on  the  table,  it  rises  and  falls,  the  mdex,  at 
the  same  time  movmg  up  and  down  over  the  alphabet,  and  haltbg  at  those  letters  which, 
when  put  together,  spell  out  sentences. 

"mien  seated  at  the  table,  we  have  only  to  ask  the  spirits  to  spell  out  a  communication 
when  the  table  commences  to  move  and  the  index  to  pomt  to  different  letters.  These  let- 
ters are  put  down  by  us  on  paper,  and  then  read  by  us  for  the  first  time,  so  tliat  our  minds 
can  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  production  of  the  sentences." 

The  writer  then  gives  some  of  liie  communications  spelled  out  in  this  truly 
automatic  though  primitive  mode,  but  as  they  are  of  a  purely  personal  char- 
acter and  would  be  uninteresting  to  the  general  reader,  we  omit  them. 

Hosted  by  Google 

39°  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

The  letter  is  signed  by  the  well-known  and  respected  name  of  Mr.  Oliver 
T.  Fox. 

Colonel  Kilgore,  a  brave  and  distinguished  officer  in  the  Federal  army, 
sends  the  following  account  of  the  spiritual  manifestations  occurring  in  the 
section  of  county  where  he  resided.  Colonel  Kilgore's  testimony  may  be 
received  as  unquestionable  authority, 

ILEMARK.4ELE   OCCUKEENCES  IN  TENNESSEE. 

"CoMO,  Tennessee,  Fdtuary  3,  1854, 

"Friend  Britain, —  Since  I  wrote  to  yon  last,  I  have  been  much  encouraged  in  conse- 
quence of  some  interesting  spirit  manifestations,  that  are  laliing  place  in  West  Tennessee- 
A  singular  instance  of  spiritual  power  over  material  objects  has  just  occurred  in  this  neigh- 
borhood, 

"A  circle  was  formed  by  some  persons  who  conducted  themselves  in  a  very  trifling  man- 
ner, seeming  to  use  the  manifestations  that  were  occurring  with  considerable  force,  simply 
as  a  means  of  light  amusement,  when,  suddenly,  animmense  log,  someeighteen  feet  in  length, 
which  formed  part  of  the  building  m  which  the  circle  was  being  held,  split  from  one  end  to 
within  two  feet  of  the  other,  with  an  explosion  like  the  firing  of  a  cannon  1 

"  Stolen  money  has  been  recovered  by  the  spirits  pointing  out  the  thief,  and  puttmg  the 
loser  in  possession  of  legal  testimony  against  the  offender,  so  clear  that  the  thief  came  for- 
ward and  gave  up  the  money,  and  paid  off  another  debt  of  long  standing  rather  than  be 
prosecuted."  [We  are  in  possession  of  the  names  of  the  parties  concerned.  Iiiit  in  respect  for 
the  worthy  family  of  the  detected  thief,  we  deem  it  right  to  suppress  them. — Author.] 

"In  the  next  county,  we  have  several  writing  mediums  of  a  very  interesting  character." 

From  Niles,  Michigan,  Mr.  O.  P,  Drury,  a  prominent  and  highly  respected 
Spiritualist,  wrote  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  as  follows,  in  1855  : 

"Some  twenty  miles  from  here  reade  several  brothers  and  theii  families,  three  of  tliem 
wealthy  farmers,  the  other  a  Methodist  preacher,  all  Spuitualists,  by  the  name  of  Hicks. 
They  are  most  worthy  people,  and  higMy  esteemed  in  their  neighborhood. 

"  I  spent  a  delightful  Sunday  amongst  them  ten  days  ago,  and  was  amused  enough,  con- 
Mdering  the  reputation  for  folly  and  insanity  which  our  well-informed  journals  fasten  upon 
Spiritualism,  to  hear  those  matter-of-fact,  solid  men,  detailing  their  experiences,  and  relating 
the  remarkable  cures  eflected  by  a  daughter  of  one  of  the  brothers. 

"Several  wonderful  feats  of  healing  had  been  performed  through  this  young  lady's  medium- 
ship.  When  one  day  her  father  had  his  foot  crushed  by  a  horse,  and  arrived  with  it  swollen 
and  bleeding  at  his  house,  calling  his  daughter,  he  cxclamed,  '  Minerva  1  for  Heaven's  sake 
call  up  the  doctor,'  [the  spirit  doctor]  ;  but  the  'doctor  '  mas  already  there,  in  possesion  of 
the  medium,  and  influenced  her  to  set  the  broken  bone  without  any  assistance.  She  then 
bathed  the  foot,  and,  with  a  few  passes,  removed  entirely  the  inflammation  and  pain  from  the 
suffering  lunb. 

' '  A  few  hours  later,  Mr.  Hicks  pat  on  his  boot,  went  about  his  business,  and  scarcely 
ever  after  experienced  any  inconvenience  from  the  accident.  A  neighbor  of  theirs,  who 
sent  the  account  to  the  papers,  with  his  affidavit  to  the  truth  of  the  statement,  rdates  how 
he  dislocated  his  knee,  and  instead  of  sending  for  a  sui^;eon,  insisted  upon  calling  in  the  aid 
of  Minerva  Hicks.  The  bystanders,  scoffing  at  the  idea  of  such  a  surgeon  in  such  a  ctias, 
tried  to  foo!  her  by  telling  her  that  it  was  the  ankle  that  was  hurt,  but  the  medium,  looking 
up  with  that  peculiar  expression  which  denoted  sphritual  entrancement,  replied : 

"  '  I  know  my  own  buaness; '  then,  calling  for  the  aid  of  some  of  the  bystanders,  she  di- 
rected them  how,  by  strong  yet  skilful  manipulations,  to  reduce  the  dislocation,  after  which 
she  made  passes  over  the  swelled  limb,  untU  it  became  entirely  painless  and  as  well  as  the 

Numerous  other  well-attested  cases  of  healing  are  recorded  of  this  young 
lady,  as  well  as  several  other  members  of  the  Hicks  family,  who  were  de- 
veloped as  healing  mediums,  all  giving  theu  services  freely  for  the  benefit  of  the 
sick  in  their  neighborhood,  which  is  now,  through  their  influence,  a  stronghold 
of  Spirituaiisra. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  39» 

We  shall  conclude  this  chapter's  notices  of  Spiritualism  in  the  West  with  a 
few  "notes  of  travel"  from  the  diary  of  Warren  Chase,  the  faithful  and  zeal- 
ous pioneer  of  "  the  cause  "  in  many  of  the  remotest  and  least  favorable  dis- 
tricts.    Writing  from  Watertown,  Wisconsin,  in  1853,  Mr.  Chase  says  : 

' '  Last  fall,  when  I  lectured  here,  I  found  one  firm  believer,  one  excellent  writing  medium 
and  about  twenty  persons  who  could  be  mduced  to  go  and  hear  me  speak ;  now,  on  my  re- 
turn, after  an  absence  of  only  ms  months,  my  audiences  number  several  hundred,  while 
many  gooJ  mediums  have  become  powerfiilly  developed.  One  of  the  most  useful  is  Mr. 
Healy  Ackley,  whose  powers  were  unfolded  in  the  following  singular  way ; 

' '  By  spiritual  direction,  Mr.  Achley  abstamed  from  food  entirely  for  thirty  days,  during 
which  time  he  took  nothing  but  water  and  chewed  spruce  gum.  He  pursued  his  object 
steadily,  accomplished  his  development  as  a  line  healing  medium,  and  has  now  gone  on  his 
mission  to  restore  the  ack  and  afflicted.  He  lost  about  thirty  pounds  in  we^ht  during  his 
fast,  but  did  not  suffer  from  disease  or  hunger.  He  walkedaboul,  but  performed  no  labor. 
Of  course  all  sorts  of  false  reports  were  circulated  at  his  expense ;  but  the  fact  and  its  excel- 
lent and  important  fruits  remain,  and  no  falsehoods  can  get  rid  of  them. 

It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  promise  which  Mr.  Chase's  report  in  1853 
offers,  with  the  fulfilment  which  the  diary  of  the  same  writer  supplies  in 
1858-g,  in  a  commimicatioD  addressed  to  tlie  Banner  of  Light,  on  the  prog- 
ress of  Spiritualism  in  the  West,  as  follows  : 

"MICHIGAN. 

"Of  our  cause  in  general  throughout  the  country,  I  can  speak  most  encouragingly,  and 
perhaps,  I  tan  find  no  belter  index  of  this  growth  than  the  spread  oi  tht  Banner  of  Light, 
which,  I  am  happy  to  say,  is  carried  at  mast-head  in  full  sail,  and  readable  in  its  own 

light 

"In  our  own  penmsular  State  [Michigan],  the  signs  of  progress  are  truly  encouraging. 
At  Adrian,  I-found  ovx  friends  belter  systematized  and  stronger  than  ever. 

"  Professor  Mahaji,  who  has  been  preaching  against  Spiritualism  for  more  than  a  year 
there,  has  done  more  than  all  our  lecturers  in  aiding  the  spread  of  investigation,  and  thus 
procuring  converts  by  too  heartily  abusing  us. 

"  At  Coldwater,  Brother  F.  L  Willis  is  ministering  most  acceptably  to  souls  hungering 
for  truth,  and  Brother  HackstalT  has  resumed  his  editorial  labors,  advancing  the  character  of 
his  paper  from  politics  to  the  harmonlal  philosophy. 

"At  Sturgis,  a  beautiful  little  town  on  the  Southern  Railroad,  our  friends  have  juat  com- 
pleted a  meeting  house  at  a  cost  of  over  four  thousand  dollars  [the  '  Free  Church '  men- 
tioned in  a  former  part  of  this  chapter].  From  Burr  Oak,  Janesville,  and  other  points  on 
that  road,  1  have  most  flourishing  reports,  and  bad  reports  from — 'nowhere  and  ortho- 
doxy ;'  I  propose,  therefore,  that  the  latter  should  move  to  the  former,  as  a  locality,  and  let 
•nobody'  preach  to  it  'what  they  say.' 

"  From  Pontiac, Lyons,  Ionia,  and  all  the  towns  on  the  Northern  RaQroad,  accounts 
pour  in  of  the  irrepressible  interest  that  pervades  each  place. 

"  At  Ypsilanti,  Brother  Sampson  is  a  host,  whose  formidable  strength  has  rallied  around 
him  a  large  part  of  the  inhabitants. 

"At  Ann  Arbor,  our  university  city,  Brother  Stebbins  has  been  engaged  for  a  year,  and  is. 
doing  a  good  work  in  '  the  Free  Churdi,'  calling  out  the  students  and  some  of  the  best  and 
most  intelligent  families  in  the  place. 

"  The  circuit  judge,  his  companion,  and  many  of  the  most  distinguished  of  the  citizens,  are 
frequent  attendants  at  the  meetings. 

"  At  Jackson,  1  found  such  a  vast  interest  that  there  was  no  adequate  supply  either  for 
lectures  or  phenomena.  I  was  engaged  there  all  the  time.  There  I  found  Brother  Anderson 
from  Lasalle,  astonishing  the  ignorant  and  alarming  the  superstitious,  by  his  wonderful  Uke- 
nesses  of  deceased  persons,  executed  in  the  trance  state. 

"  Our  friends  at  Albion  have  purchased  the  Presbyterian  Church  which  they  borrowed  for 
me  some  years  ago.  For  the  last  three  months,  they  liave  had  regular  meetings  in  It,  with 
A.  B.  Whiting  for  the  preacher. 

' '  There  I  spoke  to  very  large  and  Intelligent  audiences. 

"  Even  Marshall,  one  of  the  most  b^otwl  and  superstitious  towns  in  our  little  State,  is 
beginnmgto  hold  meetings  and  circles,  and  at  Kalamazoo,  the  Unitaiians,  who  have  taken  th« 

Hosiedb,  Google 

39?  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

court  house,  are  Uniting  with  the  most  iiberal  minds  of  the  place,  and  slowly,  but  surely,  merg- 
ing into  our  philosophy. 

"  From  other  towns  of  our  State  further  west,  I  receive  numerous  calls,  and  hear  most 
cheering  ai    '" 

"  At  Battle  Creelt,  the  most  lively  and  enterprising  station  between  Detroit  and  Chicago, 
— r  cause  and  friends  are  in  (he  ascendant. 

"  Three  very  large  and  intelligent  audiences  assembled  to  hear  me  last  Sunday. 

"  The  best  choir  in  the  city  belongs  to  this  meeting,  and  a  large  gathering  of  children 
and  adults  met  in  the  afternoon  for  a  Sunday-school.  Brother  I'ecbles,  one  of  our  ableit 
and  best  speakers,  lectures  every  alternate  Sabbath,  the  other  Sunday's  euercises  bemg  con- 
ducted by  transient  speakers. 

"  Five  miles  from  Battle  Creek  is  the  little  settlement  called  Haxmonia,  where  stands  my 
cottage  on  the  plain. 

"  Here  our  friends  have  had  a  liberal  school  for  seven  or  eight  years,  which  the  enemies 
have  reprted  as  dead  or  broken  up  about  once  a  month.  It  still  Uves,  however,  and  Is 
flourishing.  It  is  entirely  conducted  by  female  teachers,  and  my  heart  is  gladdened  by  the 
sound  of  its  bell  every  half  hour," 

Mr.  Chase's  detailed  account  of  Spiritualism  in  Michigan,  although  cc 

ing  no  items  of  special  interest  or  novelty,  is  commended  to  the  reader  for  its 
entire  truthfulness,  and  its  unassuming,  yet  graphic,  representation  of  most  of 
the  other  States  which  come  under  the  generic  denomination  of  "  the  West." 

CHAPTER    XXXVIII. 

WESTERN      SPIRITUALISM 

f^'lKgroaS 

,  marehl 

s  as  Ibey  Irad  1 

Each  camca  a 

skull, 

Going  down 

lolhedtid. 

EvsrysW,, 

ii,'^4^fi 

So  many  contradictory  and  exaggerated  reports  have,  from  time  to  time, 
been  circulated  concerning  the  celebrated  manifestations  which  are  cliaracter- 
ized  as  the  "Ashtabula  County  phenomena,"  that  we  are  happy  to  be  able  to 
present  to  our  readers  a  thoroughly  authentic  and  circumstantial  account  of 
their  origin  and  progress,  from  the  pen  of  an  eye-witness,  and  one  whose  tes- 
timony would  be  considered,  in  any  cotnmuni^  where  he  was  known,  as  au- 
thority the  most  unimpeachable  and  veracious  that  could  be  obtained.  Be- 
sides the  witness  of  this  gentleman,  the  author  has  had  singularly  fortunate 
opportunities  of  verifying  every  portion  of  the  history  here  related,  and  is  in 
a  position  to  affirm  that  the  following  details  fall  considerably  short  of  the 
truth,  as  many  of  the  most  stajtling  attendant  circumstances,  it  has  been 
deemed  proper  to  suppress. 

The  letter  of  our  esteemed  authority  is  but  slightly  abridged  from  the  form 
in  which  it  originally  appeared  in  the  reprints  o[  the  famous  "  Richmond  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPirjTUALISM. 

Britain  discussion."     The  private  portions  of  the  narrative  which  are  omitted 
were  communicated  to  the  autlior  by  intimate  associates  of  the  lady  referred 

"AusTlNBURG,  February  4,  1S53. 
"  S.  B.  Britain,  Esq.  :  Bear  Sir, —  In  your  favor  of  the  19th  inst.  you  request  r 

n  authentic  account  of  certdn  remarkable  phenomena,  to  which  I  referred 
in  a  former  letter,  and  also  to  state  my  relations  to  the  parties,  and  what  were  my  opportuni- 
tics  for  making  observations, 

"  I  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  publish  the  name  of  the  lady  spoken  of  wilLout  her  consenl, 
nor  can  I  obtain  that  consent  for  the  present,  as  she  is  in  a  distant  State,  and  I  am  unac- 
quMHted  with  her  address.  * 

"  I  will,  however,  make  the  following  brief  statements  concerning  this  lady's  position  and 
characteristics,  injustice  to  herself. 

"  During  (he  fell  of  1850  she  was  plunged  into  a  state  of  the  deepest  distress  by  the  news 
of  her  husband's  death,  which  occurred  on  his  outward  passage  to  San  Francisco.  His  de- 
cease on  ship-board,  far  from  family  and  friends,  with  no  relative  near  to  soothe  his  suffer- 
ings in  the  hour  of  sickness  and  dissolution,  was  to  her  a  trial  of  no  ordinary  magnitude. 
She  was  for  a  long  time  overwhelmed  with  an  agony  that  seemed  to  threaten  her  very  exist- 
ence ;  and  when,  at  length,  the  first  intenaty  of  her  grief  subsided,  and  she  had  fixed  upon  her 
plans  for  the  welfare  of  herself  and  two  little  children,  she  was  at  the  greatest  possible  re- 
move from  the  state  of  mind  which  would  admit  of  her  being  a  party  to  any  deception  or 
intrigue,  could  that  which  I  shall  have  to  relate,  have  ever,  by  any  possibility,  come  under  that 
category.  I  simply  make  this  statement  to  show  that  the  character,  position,  and  surround- 
ings of  the  lady  preclude  the  ordinary  resort  of  rude  and  illogical  minds,  namely,  to  attempt 
accountingfor  the  manifestations  they  cannot  explain,  upon  the  impertbent  and  uncalled-tor 
assumption  of  fraud  or  imposture. 

"It  was  in  the  summer  of  1851,  whilst  on  a  viat  to  the  family  of  Mr.  S.  M.  Cowles,  that 
her  history  as  a  'medium'  commenced. 

"  Soon  after  her  arrival  at  Mr.  Cowles's  the  sounds  began  to  be  heard  which  were  soon 
after  recognized  as  the  '  raps. '  She  had  never  before  heard  them,  and  what  she  had  learned 
of  the  manifestations  in  other  places,  had  not  impressed  her  mind  in  favor  of  the  spiritual 
hypothesis  for  their  origin.  It  was  consequently  a  great  annoyance  to  her,  that,  wherever 
she  went,  or  whatever  she  might  be  doing,  the  sounds  were  around  her  ra  all  directions. 

*'  Of  course  the  family  and  their  friends  were  anxious  to  get  communications,  and  she,  in 
some  instances,  consented  to  gratify  their  wishes.  The  messages  obtained  by  these  means 
were  through  the  rappings  and  alphabet.  On  one  occasion  I  was  kindly  invited  by  a  mem- 
ber of  the  family  to  call  and  see  for  myself  what  these  strange  things  might  mean.  My 
mind  had  been  so  prepossessed  with  what  I  conceived  to  be  the  utter  absurdity  of  the  idea 
that  disembodied  spirits  produced  the  alleged  phenomena,  that  I  had  not,  until  a  short  time 
previously,  even  had  patience  to  read  an  article  on  thesubject..  But,  for  certsun  reasons,  my 
curiosity  had  lately  become  excited,  and  I  was  glad  of  an  opportunity  to  see  and  judge  for 
myself  something  about  'Spiritualism.' 

"  On  ray  way  to  Mr.  Cowles's,  I  mentally  arranged  my  lest  questions,  and  when  seated  at 
the  table  wdth  the  medium,  waiting  for  demonstrations,  I  had  made  up  my  mind  that  the 
spirit,  if  any,  that  would  favor  me  with  a  communication,  would  be  that  of  my  father. 

"  In  a  few  minutes  the  raps  came,  but  did  not  respond  to  or  spell  out  the  name  of 
either  my  father  or  mother,  but  that  of  a  spirit  child,  of  whom  the  medium  could  have  had  no 
knowledge.    At  this  moment  the  sounds  were  heard  at  three  distinct  parts  of  the  table  simul. 

»  The  lady's  namt  and  fimily  are  mailers  of  filll  publicity  in  Ashtabula  Coualy. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

394  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

taneously.  The  medium  ohserved,  '  Here  are  several  spirits ;  you  hive  lost  more  than  one 
child.'  '  I  have  lost  three.'  I  replied.  After  tliis  many  questions  were  put  and  responded 
to  correctly,  the  spirits  ali  three  rapping  together  in  each  instance.  In  reply  to  the  query 
as  to  whether  they  were  together  in  the  spirit -world,  the  raps  sounded  affirmatively  in  the 
most  animated  manner,  and  finally  they  anited  in  rappmg  out,  '  We  are  all  happy  together. 
Earth  was  pleasant  and  we  were  happy:  Heaven  is  beautiful  and  we  are  full  of  joy.'  From 
the  spirit  of  one  of  my  children,  who  passed  away  at  the  age  of  four  years,  it  was  spelled ; 
'  Father,  I  was  an  undeveloped  child  when  I  seemed  to  leave  you,  but  I  have  progressed  to  a 
state  more  glorious  than  manhood's  wisdom.' 

"This  was  my  first  experience  in  spiritual  phenomena,  and  everything  I  had  witnessed 
was  unexpected  and  surprising  to  me. 

"  I  had  not  the  remotest  idea  of  holding  any  converse  with  the  sphrils  of  my  httle  chU- 
dren,  and  the  medium,  having  no  knowledge  of  my  family  history,  must  have  been  equally 
unprepared  for  the  scene. 

"  What  1  have  related  above,  was  all  that  I  personally  witnessed  of  the  manifestations 
during  her  viat  that  time.  She  went  from  Austinbui^h  to  Marlborough  for  the  purpose  of 
attending  a  course  of  lectures  on  anatomy. 

"  It  was  at  that  place  that  the  es^raordinary  phenomena  occurred,  to  which  Dr.  Kich- 
mond  refers.  , 

"Ihavebeforeme  several  letters  from  Dr.  Whiting,  of  Canton,  which  give  the  details 
of  several  of  the  strange  occurrences  personally  witnessed  by  himself,  or  vouched  for  by  the 
most  unimpeachable  testimony.  Suffice  it  to  say.  for  the  present,  that  mysterious  per- 
formauces  were  constantly  going  on  in  the  room  occupied  by  H.  —  by  which  initial  letter 
of  her  name  I  shaU  hereafter  distinguish  her  —  and  a  fellow-student,  principaUy  during  the 
night,  but  not  unfrequently,  also,  in  the  day.  Mrs.  H.  was  at  that  time  studying  surgery, 
etc. ,  with  a  view  to  practice,  and  the  bones  with  which  illustrations  in  anatomy  were  made, 
were  frequently  moved  about  the  room  without  the  agency  of  any  visible  being,  but  par- 
ticularly the  cranium  would  become  locomotive  and  self-adjusting,  and  was  found  always 
looking  at  her,  place  it  where  and  in  what  position  she  would. 

"  At  night  were  heard  the  most  appalling  noises,  and  sounds  as  of  objects  thrown  in  aU 
directions,  and  striking  at  various  points  on  the  waU,  table,  chairs,  bed,  etc.  Tills  annoy- 
ance was  so  constant  as  to  deprive  them  of  sleep,  and  it  kept  them  in  a  state  of  terrible 
tear  and  apprehension. 

"  At  length,  harassed  and  worn  out  with  the  dreadful  persecution  of  a  spirit  who  called 
itself  '  Ann  Merrick,'  H.  left  Marlborough  and  went  to  Dr.  Whiting's.  Thither  the  spirit 
foUowed  her.  and  she  was  driven  ahnost  to  despair.  Onenight,  after  her  arrival  at  Canton, 
she  felt  a  calm  and  soothing  influence  gently  passing  over  her  mind,  inspiring  her  with  the 
confident  hope  that  the  hour  of  her  deliverance  from  this  fearful  haunting  was  at  hand. 
The  next  mormng,  in  presence  of  Dr.  and  Mrs,  Whiting,  H.'s  hand  was  involuntarily 
moved  for  the  first  tune,  and  the  following  mas  written : 

"  '  Frank,'  — the  name  of  her  deceased  husband —  '  I  have  fried  to  communicate  several 
times,  but,  dearest,  you  did  not  heed  me.  I  would  have  saved  yon  from  the  annoyance, 
would  yon  have  permitted  me.  Never  allow  yourself  to  be  alarmed  by  her  raps.  Never 
converse  with  or  about  her.  Call  for  me  ;  I  am  still  your  protector,  dear  H.,  though  a  veil 
is  between  us.      Slifijs  attracted  by  no  affinity  of  mind,  but  your  physical  condition  admits 

of.ia:_^n()yin£jou. Call  for  higher  spirits.      .....     Be  calm. 

dear  wife;  do  not  weep. It  causes  meto  feel  sad,  grief  inyou;  for  though 

earth's  troubles  are  no  more,  we  can  and  do  sympathize  with  the  loved  ones  we  seem  to 

have  left It  is  better  for  you,  better  for  out  little  ones,  and  better  for  me, 

to  see  you  cheerful  and  happy  as  you  were  when  I  was  with  you  in  life.' 

' ' '  Ann '  repeatedly  appeared  after  this,  but  a  mental  call  for  Frank  would  at  once  ban- 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  395 

ish  her.  H.  experienced  not  the  slightest  annoyance  from  that  source  so  long  as  slie  ful- 
filled the  conditions  on  which  Frank  promised  his  protection. 

"From  Canton,  H.  returned  to  her  friends  in  Austinbui^Il  on  the  nth  of  October,  1851. 
Mr.  Cowles  and  his  family  were,  of  course,  interested,  and  anxious  to  be  informed  respect- 
ing the  phenomena  which  had  occurred  at  Marlborough.  In  the  course  of  the  evening  H^ 
was  conversing  with  her  friends  on  the  subject  of  her  painful  experiences  at  that  place, 
when  suddenly  the  loud  raps  were  heard  which  indicated  the  presence  of  '  Ann  Merrick.' 
Mr.  Cowles,  wishing  to  see  something  of  her  power,  gave  her  a  cordial  welcome,  to  which 
she  responded  in  loud  rappings. 

"Byway  of  giving  them  a  taste  of  her  quality,  she  performed  some  of  her  more  gentle 
antics,  such  as  only  knocking  about  chairs,  tables,  etc. 

"During  the  ivhole  of  the  next  day  and  night,  Sunday,  'Ann'  was  perfectly  quiet.  Sev- 
eral interesting  communications,  purporting  to  come  from  spirit  friends  of  the  family,  were 
given  through  H. 

"  About  eight  o'clock  on  the  following  Monday  evening,  H.  had  occasion  to  go  up-stairs 
to  give  some  drink  to  one  of  her  children.  The  hall  stdr-carpet  had  been  taken  up,  and 
the  carpet-rods  were  placed  at  the  head  of  the  stairs.  When  H.  was  about  half-way  up, 
with  a  pitcher  of  water  in  one  hand  and  a  lighted  candle  in  the  other,  the  rods  suddenly 
started  from  their  place,  knocking  the  water  and  light  from  her  hands,  but  without  else 
touching  her.  On  hearing  the  noise,  the  family  hastened  to  the  scene  of  tumult,  and  found 
all  the  rods  scattered  on  the  floor  below. 

"  .A.t  the  usual  hour  of  retiring,  H.,  Miss  Rhoda  Snow,  and  Miss  Martha  Cowles,  went 
to  the  same  apartment  to  pass  the  night.  A  door  at  the  end  of  this  chamber  opens  into  a 
hall  chamber,  and  at  the  opposite  end  another  door  opens  into  a  lumber  room,  containing 
about  fifty  muskets,  with  bayonets;  a  amilar  number  of  cartridge-boxes  and  bolts  were 
hung  up  on  the  wall  above.  One  of  the  lady's  children  was  sleeping  in  that  room,  but  it 
had  no  other  occupant.  The  bed  in  which  the  child  lay  was  in  a  direct  line  between  the 
muskets  and  the  bed  in  the  adjoining  chamber,  which  H.  that  night  occupied.  The  whole 
distance  between  H.'s  bed  and  the  muskets  was  twenty-five  feet.  Another  bed  in  the  same 
room  stood  near  the  door  of  the  lumber-room.  Ai^er  extinguishmg  the  light,  the  ladies 
conversed  together  Dninterruptedly  for  about  ten  minutes,  when  suddenly  the  carpet-cods,  as 
they  supposed,  fell  clattering  on  the  floor.  This  disturbance  was  followed  by  various  sounds 
in  rapid  succession,  of  different  objects  thrown  hither  and  thither  about  the  room.  At 
length  came  a  tremendous  crash,  so  loud  as  to  awaken  and  attract  thither  every  member  of 
the  household. 

"  When  they  had  arrived  in  precipitite  haste,  with  lights,  a  scene  of  confusion,  worthy  of 
Bedlam  ten  times  over,  was  ruealed  Pded  indiscriminately  on  the  floor  were  cartridge- 
boxes  and  belts,  the  carpet  rods,  candlesticks,  combs,  brushes,  clothes,  and  almost  every 
movable  object  in  the  room  One  of  the  muskets,  with  the  bayonet  fixed,  was  found 
thrown  completely  under  H  's  bed,  havingpassed  in  its  way  thither  twenty-five  feet,  or  nearly 
the  whole  extent  of  the  two  rooms.  The  rammer  was  drawn  from  the  musket  and  was 
found  amongst  the  central  pile.  The  muskets  had  not  been  used  for  some  years,  and  were 
much  rusted,  so  that  the  rammer  could  not  have  been  drawn  without  immense  force. 

"  On  Wednesday  evening  the  following  phenomena  occurred  in  the  presence  cf  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Cowles,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Samuel  Snow,  Miss  M.  Cowles,  myself,  and  some  other  per- 
sons: We  were  seated  around  a  lai^e  heavy  table  when  Ann  announced  her  presence  by 
tremendous  raps.  She  at  once  directed  the  lights  to  be  extinguished,  but  as  we  would  not 
consent  to  this,  she  finaUy  induced  us  to  place  lights  in  an  adjoining  cliamber,  leaving  the 
door  of  communication  open.  H.  sat  with  her  fingers  lightly  resting  on  the  table,  no  one 
else  touching  it.  After  performing  sundry  feats  of  rocking,  turning,  and  finally  upsetting 
this  lieavy  piece  of  furniture,  Mr.  Cowles  seated  himself  upon  it  and  challenged  Ann  to 
overturn  it  if  she  could.  Instantly  it  began  rocking  as  before,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye  Mr.  Cowles  was  on  the  ground,  the  table  upon  him.  It  was  replaced,  and  he  re- 
mounted it.     Again,  and  yet  again  it  was  turned  over ;  and  when  Mr.  Cowles  said,  '  Now, 

Hosiedb,  Google 

396  mSTOR  y  OF  MODERN 

Ann,  do  your  worst,'  a  cbair  started  from  tlie  side  of  the  room,  flew  at  Km,  and  struck  him 
violently  across  the  back. 

"Mr.  Cowles  declaimed  further  encounters  with  the  spirit  that  night.  During  these 
occurrences,  another  table,  with  no  one  near  it,  was  tipped  over,  whilst  all  the  books  and 
other  articles  upon  it  were  thrown  on  the  floor  and  then  tossed  about  violently.  A  heavy 
bureau  m  the  adjoining  room  was  overturned,  whilst  hats,  caps,  clothing,  and  other  articles, 
hanging  on  the  wails,  left  their  places  and  jumped  about  as  if  endowed  with  life. " 

After  a  considerable  more  of  similar  performances,  it  seems  that  Messrs. 
Cowles  and  Snow  induced  the  spirit  to  keep  time  with  the  furniture  to  their 
music  on  the  violin;  that  thus  encouraged,  her  proceedings  and  feats  of 
strength  became  more  and  more  outrageous,  until  they  succeeded  in  convers- 
ing with  her  by  means  of  raps,  when  she  announced  that  she  was  born  in 
Ireland,  spent  the  last  three  years  of  her  life  at  Cincinnati,  died  in  the  hos- 
pital, and  followed  her  body  to  Marlborough,  whither  it  had  been  brought  for 
dissection.  The  strong  medium  power  of  H.  and  the  magnetic  force  still  at- 
taching to  her  own  mortal  remains,  served,  it  would  seem,  as  associative  links 
whereby  she  was  enabled  to  play  her  ghostly  pranks  amongst  the  horrors  of 
the  dissecting  room. 

The  accounts  which  we  have  obtained  of  these  feats  from  other  sources, 
are  thus  explained  on  philosophical  principles,  but  the  details  are  too  hideous 
and  revolting  for  insertion  here. 

Resuming  Mr.  Austin's  narrative,  we  find  that  Ann  had  gained  an  advan- 
tage which  she  did  not  intend  to  lose  again.  She  alleged  that  Messrs.  Cowles 
and  Snow  were  "  kindred  spirits,"  and  she  should  bestow  her  particular  atten- 
tions on  them.     The  narrative  goes  on  to  say: 

"  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Snow  remiuned  at  Mr.  Cowles's  through  the  night.  Before  retiring  to 
her  sleeping  apartment,  H.,  accompanied  by  Mrs.  Snow,  went  into  the  parlor  chamber  ad- 
joining the  circle  room,  where,  amidst  a  general  movement  of  all  the  objects  in  the  room,  a 
wash-stand,  with  the  bowl,  pitcher,  and  furnishings,  started  from  the  side  of  the  room,  mov- 
ing out  at  least  four  feet ;  but  though  the  motion  was  quick  as  thought,  the  china  was  not 
displaced,  and  not  a  thing  stirred  or  was  moved  on  the  stand, 

"  When  the  family  retired,  Messrs.  Cowles  and  Snow  occupied  a  bed  in  one  room,  and 
H.  and  Mrs.  Snow  shared  one  of  the  beds  in  the  adjommg  chamber,  before  described.  At 
H.'s  request,  a  candle  and  box  of  matches  was  left  at  her  bedside.  No  sooner  was  the 
light  extinguished  than  these  articles  were  brought  by  the  inviable  agent  from  H.'s  bedade 
to  Mr,  Snow's,  and  there  put  into  his  hands,  evidently  with  the  deagn  of  removmg  them 
ftom  H.  's  reach. 

"  Soon  after,  a  candlestick,  shoes,  brushes,  combs,  and  various  heavy  articles,  began  lo  fly 
round  the  bed  of  the  gentlemen,  touching  them  sometimes,  without  hitting  ihem  hard,  and 
fallmg  in  wild  disorder  all  around  them.  The  case  was  different  when  pillows  or  clothing 
were  used  as  misdles  These  were  dashed  directly  in  their  faces.  The  cartridge-boxes 
swung  on  their  nails,  and  the  guns  and  swords  kept  vilirating  so  as  to  keep  up  an  incessant 

"  The  spirit  kept  articles,  in  this  way,  ia  constant  motion  for  some  time,  when  a  bright 
thought  seemed  to  occur  to  her. 

"  The  ladies  had  hitherto  been  more  annoyed  than  distressed  at  the  tribulation  of  the 
gentlemen,  when  '  Ann '  pulled  out  a  quantity  of  straw  through  a  small  hole  in  the  ticking 
of  the  mattress  under  their  bed,  and  used  it  in  whipping  their  faces.  She  also  jerked  the 
pillows  from  under  their  heads,  and  the  bedclothes  from  beneath  and  off  them,  besides 
keeping  up  an  incessant  movement  of  the  chairs  and  other  articles  of  furniture  in  both 

rooms,  etc On  Thursday,  October  16,  the  father  of  H.  arrived,  full  of 

^scepticism  and  resolutely  determined  '  to  put  an  end  to  the  whole  proceeding.' 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  397 

'*  During liis  first  night's  readence  in  the  house,  lie  received  full  and  satisfactory  proof 
that  'Ann  Merrick '  irould  not  acknowledge  his  authority  in  the  premises,  and  that  he  must 
submit  to  let  her  have  her  own  way,  noleni  -aoUns. 

"On  Friday  evening,  October  17,  a  lady  came  to  Mr.  Cowles's  house  on  a  visit,  and,  de- 
Hring  to  see  something  of  the  doings  of  the  wonder-worlring  'Ann,'  agreed  to  pass  the 
night  with  H. 

"They  retired  to  rest,  H.'s  father  occupying  a  bed  in  the  adjoining  room,  the  door  of 
communication  being  open.     The  lady  occupied  one  bed  and  H.  another. 

"  As  soon  as  the  light  was  put  out  very  hard  rapping  was  heard,  and  the  lady,  terrified, 
went  to  H.'s  bed  for  protection.  From  this,  however,  she  was  so  violently  repulsed,  that, 
supposing  H.  had  struck  her,  she  exclaimed,  'What  are  you  striking  me  for,  HP'  'I  have 
not  touched  you,'  was  the  reply,  but  she  was  struck  again  and  again ;  and  when  she  tried  to 
get  into  bed  she  was  so  forcibly  pushed  back  that  she  retreated  in  extreme  terror  to  the  gen- 
tleman's room  for  protection.  From  thence,  however,  she  was  pelted  with  stockings  and 
garments  of  various  kinds,  until  she  succeeded  in  making  her  way  from  the  haunted  eharo- 

hecs  into  another  apartment 

"  On  Saturday  evening,  October  25,  two  ladies  called  at  Mr.  Cowles's,  both  sceptical  in 
regard  to  the  strange  phenomena  alleged  to  be  occurring  there.  On  this  occasion,  it 
seemed  as  if  Ann  felt  called  upon  to  make  some  unusual  demonstrations.  About  7  o'clock, 
as  one  of  the  ladies  was  passing,  with  H.,  thiough  a  lighted  chamber,  a  bed-quili,  thickly 
stuffed,  left  its  place  and  moved  towards  the  lady,  when,  passing  over  her  head  and  brushing 
gently  her  cap,  it  dropped  in  a  heap  at  her  feet.  Various  other  things  began  to  move 
about  in  a  amilar  manner,  until  but  a  few  minutes  had  elapsed  ere  the  lady  was  thoroughly 
convinced  of  the  genuine  and  supra-mundane  character  of  the  phen 

"  Passing  from  the  chamber,  and  descending  the  stairs,   they  si 
move  from  their  places  and  come  to  meet  them.     Entering  1 

ing,  amongst  other  things,  a  wood-box,  rockmg-ehair,  and  flew 

from  the  box,  the  rocking-chair  was  overturned,  and  the  m    ed     se  m    he 

wall  to  the  centre  of  the  room.      Without  pausing  in  this         m  asse     m  her 

and  seated  themselves  on  a  heavy  settee  furnished  with  roc 

"  Instantly  the  settee  was  rocked  with  frightful  power  an  N      w   men     uld 

by  their  combined  efforts,  have  given  such  a  motion  to  tba  ig      of 

two  persons  atting  on  it.     The  lady  finally  escaped  from  that  terrible  rocking  and  her 
incredulity  about  the  same  time. 

"  On  Sunday  evening,  October  26,  H.,  Miss  Sarah  Austm,  and  Miss  Martha  Cowles, 
retired  lo  the  same  room  to  pass  the  night. 

"Soon  after  they  withdre\v  sucli  a  scene  was  transacted  there  as  altogether  transcends  the 
power  of  description.  It  seemed  as  if  '  Ann'  had  obtained  a  reinforcement  from  pandemo- 
nium itself.  The  father  of  H.,  who  was  in  a  room  separated  from  hers  by  the  hall-cham- 
ber, hastened  below  for  a  light.  As  he  descended  the  stairs,  a  chair  follo«-ed  him  bodily, 
rocking  itself  on  the  floor  and  stairs  as  it  tmnUed  down,  roakmg  a  terrible  racket, 

"In  the  hall  he  met  Mr,  Cowles  with  a  light,  and  they  returned  tc^ether  up-stairs.  At 
the  door  of  his  own  room  he  met  the  pitcher  and  bowl,  taken  off  the  wash-stand  and 
placed  exactly  in  the  entrance  of  the  door. 

"  On  entering  (he  room  of  the  ladies,  where  the  noise  was  tremendous,  they  saw  a  heavy 
trmik,  closely  packed,  rocking  and  rolling  about  with  such  force  as  to  shake  the  whole 
liouse. 

"Other  trunks  were  overturned,  and  their  contents  scattered  on  the  floor.  Almost 
every  movable  object  in  the  room  was  piled  up  in  a  heap  on  the  floor.  At  the  earnest  re- 
quest of  H.,  they  leit  a  lighted  candle  in  the  room  and  retired.  Instantly,  the  candle  was 
put  out  by  some  unseen  agent,  and  then  the  universal  uproar  and  tossing  about  of  ftmii- 
ture  recommenced. 

"Another  light  was  called  for,  instantly  dashed  out,  and  the  same  scene  renewed, 

"  After  a  light  had  been  procured  and  a  third  tune  exlbguished,  every  sound  was  sud- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

398  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

denly  hushed,  and  for  some  minutes  a  death-like  and  ominous  stillness  prevailed.  Tlien 
the  dlenee  was  brolten  by  strains  of  the  most  exquisite  harmony.  It  seemed  like  instru- 
mental music,  yel  there  was  no  instrument  in  the  house,  or  within  forty  rods  of  it.  But 
there,  in  H.''s  room,  apparently  close  to  them,  music  was  heard  by  all  in  the  house,  sweeter 
than  its  auditors  had  ever  before  listened  to.  Some  familiar  airs  were  performed,  but  the 
most  touching  and  delicious  melodies  were  strange  to  all  who  listened  to  that  mysterious 
muac.      It  was  thus  that  '  Ann '  seemed  to  have  made  her  final  adieu. 

' '  H.  has  never,  for  aught  I  know,  heard  more  of  her  since. 

"After  H.  left  Austinbuiy,  what  purported  to  be  the  spirits  of  her  departed  friends  ex- 
pressed an  earnest  deare  that  she  should  yield  herself  to  their  influence  and  become  a  me- 
dium for  communication  from  them  to  the  world.  To  this  sl:e  was  most  determmedly 
•  opposed.     Her  plans  were  Gsed,  and  she  could  not  be  induced  to  change  them. 

"There  was  a  considerable  amount  of  magnetic  influence  exercised  over  her,  but  she  suc- 
ceeded generaEj  in  throwing  it  off.  It  was  after  this  that  she  returned  to  the  townof  Marl- 
borough, where  the  strange  part  of  her  experiences  occurred. 

"  She  had  resumed  her  medical  studies,  under  the  direction  of  her  former  instructor. 

"I  have  since  had  a  relation  of  the  occurrences  that  transpired  from  H.  herself;  but  it  is 
a  long  story,  and  I  cannot  trust  my  memory  (o  repeat  it  correctly.  The  day  before  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  spirit  that  succeeded 'Ann  Merrick,'  the  brain  had  been  taken  from  the  cra- 
nium of  a  female  subject,  and  dissected,  and  a  portion  of  the  muscles  also  taken  up  about 
one  eye.  The  arms  of  the  body  were  extended  on  each  side,  and  the  room  was  then 
carefully  locked  up  for  the  night. 

"  That  night  H.  and  her  room-mate,  and  fellow-student  mere  alarmed  by  the  most 
frightful  sounds.  Tremblmg  with  apprehension  of,  they  knew  not  what,  they  covered  their 
heads  with  the  bedclothes;  but  when  at  last  they  uncovered  them,  there,  standing  by  their 
bedade,  they  beheld  the  spectre  of  the  corpse  that  they  2iad  been  dissecting,  all  reeking  and 
ghastly,  as  they  had  left  it  on  the  table,  save  that  one  of  the  arms  was  folded  across  the 
breast,  a  change  which  was  aclnally  found  to  have  taken  place  when  the  remains  were 
examined. 

' '  So  tremendous  were  the  sounds  produced  by  this  strange  agency  that  crowds  of  people 
were  attracted  around  the  house  where  they  occurred.  The  raps  were  more  like  those 
occasioned  by  the  blows  of  a  sledge-hammer  than  the  ordinary  spirit  detonations. 

"  The  manifestations  at  last  became  so  fearful  and  akirming,  that  H.  and  her  room-mate 
were  afraid  to  pass  the  night  alone.  On  one  occasion  H.  requested  her  brother  to  remain 
in  the  room  with  them,  and  in  the  course  of  the  night,  being  greatly  disturbed,  slie  be^ed 
Mm  to  ascertain  what  it  was  that  was  being  knocked  about  around  thdr  bed  and  over 
their  heads.  He  approached  the  bed,  and  saw  by  the  moonlight,  a  human  skull,  dancing 
up  and  down  over  their  heads. 

"  He  watched  the  motion  of  the  skull  for  a  considerable  time,  and  then  attempted  to  re- 
move it ;  but  it  was  only  by  the  exertion  of  a  good  deal  of  strength  and  agility  that  he 
succeeded. 

"  But  I  must  close  this  communication.  For  the  convenience  of  narrative,  I  have  spoken 
of  the  agents  in  these  transactions  as  'spu-its,'but  whatever  may  have  been  the  cause  of 
the  phenomena,  there  was  no  voluntary  agency  of  man,  woman,  or  child,  in  their  produc- 

"  The  foregoing  is  but  an  outline  of  some  of  the  principal  facts.  Such  as  it  is,  I  submit  it 
lo  the  eonaderation  of  the  scientific. 

"Very  truly,  yours,  L.  M.  Austin," 

"The  forgoing  statement  is  correct  so  far  as  we  personaUy  witnessed  the  phenomena 
therem  related. 

"L.  M.  CowLES,  Rachel  Cowles. 

S.  H.  Snow.  Ehoda  Snow. 

Ann  J.  Snow.  Sarah  H.  Austin." 
Martha  H,  Cowles." 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  399 

From  many  other  sources  the  auflior  has  verified  the  highly  respectable 
testimony  of  Mr.  Austin  in  every  particular,  and  obtained,  in  addition,  a  num- 
ber of  evidences  of  a  still  stranger  kind,  concerning  the  mediumship  of  the 
lady  referred  to  above.  As  they  are  chiefly  of  the  ghastly  character  that  be- 
longs to  the  dissecting  room,  or  relate  to  the  spirits  of  those  whose  bodies 
had  been  thus  operated  upon  after  death,  we  forbear  their  relation. 

Besides  this,  it  seems  that  the  medium  to  this  day  retains  her  invincible 
dislike  to  the  subject  of  spiritual  manifestations,  and  strenuously  disavows 
any  connection  with  them.  Despite,  and  perhaps  in  consequence  of  this  aver- 
sion and  stubborn  resolution,  she  is  still  attended  by  ghastly  sights  and  sounds 
as  tlie  author  has  personally  proved.  Nevertheless  we  do  not  feel  at  liberty 
to  point  further  to  the  lady's  name  or  personality,  though  both  have  been  the 
subject  of  wide-spread  celebrity,  whilst  there  are  scores  of  living  witnesses 
who  can  bear  testimony  to  the  occurrence  of  similar,  and  even  tar  stronger 
and  stranger  phenomena  than  any  above  detailed,  through  the  mediumship 
of  the  same  person. 

The  reader  who  is  familiar  with  the  autobiography  of  Mr.  George  Redman, 
the  late  great  physical  medium  of  Boston,  wiU  recognize  in  "Ann  Merrick" 
an  old  acquaintance,  her  spirit  purporting  to  be  the  author  of  an  immense 
variety  of  demonstrations  occurring  in  Mr.  Redman's  presence,  to  which  the 
appellation  of  physical  force  is  eminently  graphic. 

Pursuing  our  observations  still  further  west,  and  south,  we  once  more  invite 
the  reader  to  glance  over  the  "  digest  of  correspondence  "  found  in  the  col- 
umns of  the  spiritual  journals  from  1850  to  i860. 

TELEGRAPH  PAPERS  — 1854. 

"Mr.  Cowey,  of  Greensburgh,  Indiana,  writesan  account  of  spiritual  manifestations  which 
have  just  commenced  in  the  family  of  General  Foley,  one  of  the  most  respecliible  and  influen- 
tial citizens  of  that  place.  The  general  and  his  family  had  been  previoosly  sceptical,  but 
mere  incited  to  inquiry  by  the  recent  visit  and  lectures  of  Warren  Chase,  at  Greensbui^h. 
One  evening,  after  the  family  had  retired  to  bed,  the  young  men  heard  strange  rappings, 
which  inituced  them  to  rise  and  seat  themselves  round  a  table,  when  the  raps  increased  in 
number  and  volume,  and  most  satisfactory  communications  were  obtained. 

"  At  subsequent  sittings,  the  table  was  moved  whilst  General  Foley  was  Mttii^  upon  it, 
though  h£  weighs  some  two  hundred  pounds. 

"These  and  many  similar  occurrences  have  fully  convinced  the  famEy  of  the  reality  of 
3.  spiritual  presence  and  power." 

The  manifestarions  occurring  in  this  family,  so  highly  distinguished  by  so- 
cial position,  were  noticed  in  the  local  papers  of  the  time  and  place  as  "very 
remarkable,  and  worthy  of  scientific  investigation,"  whilst  far  more  wonderful 
and  continuous  evidences  of  spirit  presence  transpiring  in  the  household  of 
the  venerable  and  benevolent  Seth  Hinshaw,  in  the  same  neighborhood,  were 
stigmatized  as  the  effects  of  "fanaticism"  and  evidences  of  "delusion  and 
folly." 

The  world  has  judged  more  fairly  than  these  time-serving  editors,  however, 
and  given  to  the  unostentatious  munificence  of  the  good  Quaker's  life  a  ce- 
lebrity which  makes  General  Foley's  spiritual  experiences  remarkable  only  be- 
cause diey  occurred  in  Seth  Hinsliaw's  vicinity.  As  a  sketch  of  this  estima- 
ble Spiritualist  will  be  given  in  a  fordicomiug  volume,  we  pass  on  to  notice 
(he  report  of  Western  Spiritualism,  written  for  tlie  Spiritual  Telegraph  by 
Mr.  F.  Coles,  at  that  time  the  travelling  agent  of  the  celebrated  rapping  and 
test  medium,  Mrs.  Coan.     Mr.  Coles's  report  will  be  found  in  the  following 

Hosted  by  Google 

40O  HISTORY  OP  MODERN 

extracts,  to  be  somewhat  at  variance  with  the  character  of  a  "  spiritual  detec- 
tive," which  he  subsequently  assumed  : 

"During  tie  month  of  October,  we  held  thirty  public  meetings  in  some  of  the  principal 
towns  in  Wisconsin,  Iowa,  and  Illinois.     Notwithstanding  the  tightness  of  (be  times  md 

iirostration  of  buaness,  we  have  succeeded  in  interesting  very  large  audiences,  sufficiently 
iberal,  moreover,  to  pay  our  expenses,  which  average  from  ten  to  twenty  dollars  a  night. 
We  adopt  the  independent  plan  of  paying  our  own  bills,  and  trustbg  to  a  small  admittance 
fee  of  ten  or  fifteen  cents  for  compensation.  We  thmk  this  a  better  plan  than  to  have 
free  meetings  and  burden  our  friends  with  expenses  they  may  not  be  able  to  meet. 

"Saui,  the  son  of  Kish,  was  willing  to  give  Samuel,  the  seer,  a  quarter  shekel  of  silver 
[about  thirteen  cents]  to  divine  the  whereabouts  of  his  father's  lost  asses.  Surely  fifteen 
CHitsisnot  too  much  for  the  divination  of  lost  friends  in  the  spirit-world  ;  and  none  grumbled 
at  our  prices,  save  now  and  then  a  thin,  sharp-faced  fellow,  who  is  not  conscious  of  having 
any  friends  to  inquire  for  or  a  soul  to  lose.  Such  ones,  of  course,  are  unwilling  to 
give  something  for  nothing.  They  will  not  even  let  a  sympathetic  tear  cross  the  bridge  of 
their  noses  for  fear  of  being  obliged  to  pay  toll. 

"RocKTORD,  Illinois.  — This  is  one  of  the  finest  cities  in  Illinois.  We  held  two  meet- 
ings  there,  and  shall  give  three  more.  Regular  meetmgs  are  held  each  Sunday,  and  every 
good  speaker  who  has  visited  the  West  has  found  a  warm  welcome  and  a  good  audience 
at  Rockford.  There  are  six  or  .eight  hundred  Spiritualists  in  town  and  the  cause  is  in  a 
very  ilourishing  conditiori, 

"  STiRHtJG,  Illinois.  —  We  held  two  meetings  here  during  court  week.  Of  course 
the  lawyers  were  in  attendance,  and  the  spirits  stood  their  cross-questioning  triumphantly. 
Judge  Eustace  was  on  the  committee  of  mvestigation,  and  in  his  report  to  the  audience 
frankly  confessed  that  he  had  witnessed  that  which  he  could  not  account  for,  and  that  he 
was  positive  no  trick  or  collusion  had  been  practiced. 

"Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.  —  This  is  the  largest  city  in  Wisconsin.  We  had  three 
meetings,  the  weather  being  stormy  every  night  ;  yet  our  audiences  were  large,  the  mani- 
festations very  good,  the  reports  of  the  committee  favorable,  and  the  press  more  than  usu- 
ally honest  and  impartiaL  There  are  many  staunch  friends  here,  and  the  cause  is  fully  able 
to  stand  alone. 

"  Palmyra,  Wisconsin.  —  We  had  fine  meetings  in  this  town,  and  found  some  warm 
friends.  Mr.  Severance,  proprietor  of  the  Pahnyra  Hotel,  refused  to  receive  any  compen- 
sation, either  for  our  board  or  the  use  of  the  hall  in  which  our  meetings  were  held.  Mr. 
S.,  and  nearly  all  his  household  are  Spiritualists,  and  to  him  and  his  lady  we  are  indebted 
for  their  many  acts  of  kfcdness,  and  a  cordial  invitation  to  visit  them  again,     .... 

"  DuBVQM,  Iowa.  —This  beautiful  city  lies  on  the  west  ade  of  the  Misasappi  and  con- 
tains 15,000  inhabitants.  Ours  were  the  first  spiritnal  meeingsever  held  in  Dubuque.  Oar 
first  and  second  meetings  were  but  slimly  attended,  owing  to  rainy  weather ;  our  third  and 
last  drew  out  severd  hundreds  and  created  immense  astonishment  at  the  phenomena.  ^ 

"  The  people  looked  for  jugglery  and  nonsense,  and  were  surprised  to  witness  manifesta- 
tions that  their  oldest  and  wisest  heads  could  not  account  for.  Judge  Hamilton,  one  of  the 
first  men  in  Iowa,  was  on  the  committee,  and  publicly  stated  that  he  knew  no  way  of  ac- 
counting for  what  he  had  witnessed,  save  the  spiritual  h^theas.  Mr.  William  Longhurst, 
formerly  of  Buifalo,  a  good  speaking  medium,  now  resides  at  Dubuque,  and  has  succeeded 
in  getting  up  quite  an  mterest.  A  private  circle  is  held  once  a  week,  and  the  success  of 
Mrs.  Coan's  meetings  has  awakened  the  desire  to  investigate  through  many  other  circles. 

"John  F,  Coles." 

The  following  statement  was  sent  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  by  one  of 
the  most  thorough  and  reliable  spiritualists  in  the  country  : 

"  In  the  month  ofNovember,  1855,  Mr.  Henry  Bathurst  a  young  man  of  about  twenly- 
two  years  of  age,  cdled  upon  us  one  evening  as  we  were  about  to  form  a  spiritual  circle, 
which  he  joined  at  our  mvitation.  Mr^Bathurst  is  well  skilled  in  phonography,  is  our 
near  neighbor,  a  highly  esteemed  member'of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  no 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  401 

Spirituilist,  yet  he  is  willing  to  bear  his  testimony  to  what  follows.  A  boy  thirteen  years 
old,  who  had  not  even  learned  to  write  his  own  alphabet,  was  the  medium,  and  after  we 
had  formed  our  circle,  the  sph-it  of  Mr,  Bathurst's  father  commenced  writing  phonography, 
and  then  presented  it  to  Mr,  B.  Mr.  B.  acknowledged  the  characters,  but  said  the  vowel 
marks  were  omitted.  The  boy  again  took  the  paper,  and  supplied  the  deficiency,  whenMr. 
B.  pronounced  it  to  be  complete  phont^aphy  I  In  the  course  of  the  eveiimg  the  spirit 
wrote  m  what  ho  called  reporttog  style,  and  Mr.  Bathurst,  the  only  one  present  who  could 
read  it,  endorsed  its  correctness,  and  read  it  in  fulL 

"  At  another  time  this  boy  was  controlled  by  a  female  German  spirit,  who  requested  him 
(0  write  a  letter  for  her,  b  German,  to  her  son,  living  in  the  county  west  of  this,  a  man  by 
the  name  of  Unebatigh.  The  letter  was  accordingly  written  through  this  boy,  and  sent  to 
Mr.  Linebaugh,  who  states  that  it  was  German,  purported  to  come  from  his  mother,  who 
had  lived  and  died  m  Germany,  and  gave  correctly  her  name,  the  place  where  she  had  resided 
and  passed  away,  etc.  The  particulars  even  of  the  existence  of  such  a  person  were  un- 
known to  any  one  in  this  country.  Here,  then,  is  alad  who  cannot  write  in  our  own  com- 
mon  alphabet,  writing  correctly  in  phonographic  characters  and  German,  and  giving  histo- 
ries and  facts  of  persons  of  whose  existence  he  could  not  have  the  remotest  idea. 

"  We  have  spirit  healing  and  clairvoyance  amongst  us.  Spirits  from  our  old  residence  in 
Pennsylvania  often  pay  us  a  viat,  and  communicate  to  us  with  an  mtelligence  and  foresight 

truly  astonishing. 

"Yours,  truly, 

"Francis  North. 
"Vailey,  Washington  County,  Iowa,  January  \i,  1857." 

Spiritualism  has  ever  been  rife  amongst  the  North  American  Indians  ;  but 
its  manifestations  generally  differ  so  widely  from  that  which  prevails  amongst 
the  whites,  and  the  source  by  the  Indians  diemselves  is  claimed  to  be  so 
different  to  that  of  their  civilized  neighbors,  that  we  have  deemed  it  fitting  to 
devote  a  special  chapter  to  the  subject.  We  shall,  however,  notice  the  ex- 
perience of  a  very  distinguished  Sioux  warrior,  whose  "  mediumship,"  as  we 
may  term  it,  so  closely  resembles  the  phases  familiar  amongst  ourselves  that 
we  may  justly  rank  them  in  the  same  category. 

An  eminent  traveller,  writing  to  the  Manner  of  Light,  thus  describes  the 
spiritual  endowments  of  the  son  of  the  forest.  Spotted  Tail : 

"Spotted  Tdl,  chief  of  the  Brute  Sioux,  recently  enunciated  his  views  of  the  spirit  land 
to  a  parly  of  whites  at  North  Platte,  Nebraska.  After  death  he  had  an  idea  that  the  spirit 
always  moved  about 

"  He  had  frequently  heard  voices,  m  the  stillness  of  the  forest,  from  friends  that  hid 

' '  He  once  went  to  the  war  with  the  Pawnees.  He  heard  a  voice  calhng  to  him  from 
the  top  of  a  high  hill.  He  went  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  the  voice  contmued  calling 
to  him  from  the  timber.  He  looked  about  and  found  no  one  there.  It  was  a  spirit  The 
voice  told  him  what  to  do  ;  he  believed  it,  and,  following  the  advice,  went  into  the  fight  and 

"  Thrillmgly  interesting  was  our  conversation  with  this  great  Sioux  chief,  through  the  in- 
terpreter, relative  to  the  religious  views  of  his  people. 

"They  believe  m  one  great  spirit,  infinite,  cirangeless;  that  smiles  in  the  sun,  whispers  in 
the  wmds,  and  dances  unseen  in  the  shimmering  waters  of  seas  and  rivers.  They  believe 
the  soui  is  immortal  and  pursues  occupations  in  the  liiture  life  somethiog  similar  to  what 
employs  it  here.  Bad  Indians  go  to  poor  hunting  grounds ;  good  and  bravo  ones  ascend  to 
glorious  lands,  seas,  and  forests,  where  fish,  game,  and  every  earthly  delight,  await  ihem ; . 
where  streams  are  crystal,  flowers  deathless ;  where  dasky  middens  meet  their  lovers,  sport 
to  the  rhythm  of  the  winds  and  waves,  and  never  Christian  robbers  enter.  This  chief  told 
us  distinctly  that  many  of  his  tribe  saw  blanketed  ghosts  ;  and  spirits  returned  from  their 
heavenly  huntmg  grounds  to  counsel  then'  mortal  brothers. 

"  When  the  Indian  is  about  to  die,  he  said,  spuits  came  for  them,  and  were  often  so  clearly 
viable  that  their  relatives  and  friends,  seeing  them  around  the  lodge,  would  shoot  arrows  at 
lliem  m  the  air,  in  the  hope  of  preventing  their  carrying  their  loved  ones  away.  They  have  ■ 
set  seasons  for  lalkmg  with  and  making  presents  to  the  dead,  and  they  constantly  send  mes- 
sages by  the  dying  to  those  who  have  gone  before." 

26 

Hosted  by  Google 

402  HISTORY  OP  MODERN" 

The  cases  of  persecution  which  follow  in  the  track  of  Spiritualism  ai'e  so 
numerous  and  so  constantly  interspersed  with  the  more  agreeable  details  of  its 
triumphant  progress,  that  our  fidelity  to  the  truth  of  history  compels  us  to 
make  frequent  mention  of  them ;  and  we  shall  close  this  chapter  by  noticing 
two  instances  of  this  kind  which  acquired  a  considerable  share  of  notoriety 
about  this  time.  It  was  commonly  supposed  that  the  striking  and  ghostly 
manifestations  which  we  liave  recorded  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter 
created  a  considerable  prejudice  against  the  subject  in  the  district  where  they 
transpired,  and  tliis  may  in  some  measure  account  for  the  disgraceful  result  of 
.  a  prosecution  which  took  place  in  Monroe  Centre,  Ashtabula  County,  Ohio, 
in  relating  which  Mn  Laird,  a  worthy  citizen  of  that  place,  says  that,  _"  in  a 
mock  judicial  proceeding  which  has  just  taken  place  here,  before  a  Justice  of 
Peace,  ten  persons,  most  of  them  children,  were  fined  from  five  to  ten  dollars 
apiece,  with  costs,  for  no  other  crime  than  being  Spiritualists,  and  some  of  them 
mediums.     The  prosecution  was  instituted  by  a  church-member." 

StiD  another  instance  of  the  bitter  warfare  through  which  Spiritualism  has 
been  compelled  to  march  to  its  triumphs,  is  reported  in  the  Telegraph  papers 
as  follows : 

"Mr.  M.W.  Potter,  QfCircleville.PiekawayCounty,  Ohio,  writes  that,  two  years  ago,  lie 
became  interested  in  Spiritualism,  and,  for  purposes  of  investigation,  formed  a  circle  in  his 
own  family.  After  sitting  a  few  evenings,  his  hand  was  moved  to  write  a  request,  wholly 
without  his  own  volition,  that  he  would  go  apart  into  a  room  by  himself,  and  await  the  in- 
fluence of  the  spirit?. 

"  These  injunctions  he  obeyed  ;  and,  in  compliance  with  further  directions,  kept  his  room 
for  several  days,  during  which  time  he  became  an  excellent  automatic  writing  medium.  He 
was  in  the  meanwhile  entirely  cured  of  a  painful  disease  which  had  hopelessly  afflicted  him 
for  eight  years.  His  confinement  to  his  room,  however,  and  his  sudden  and  almost  miracu- 
lous restoration  to  health,  excited  the  superstitious  terror  and  indignation  of  liis  bigoted 
nei^bors.  They  surrounded  hishouse,  forced  themselves  into  his  presence,  and  threatened, 
if  he  dill  not  give  up  Spiritualism,  they  would  procure  his  incarceration  in  a  lunatic  asylum. 
Finding  him  inflexible,  they  laid  such  chains  against  him  as  finally  mduced  the  physicians 
who  had  failed  to  cure  hira  to  grant  a  certificate  of  lunacy. 

"Thus  armed,  they  broke  in  upon  his  home,  forced  him  from  it,  and  bore  him  off  to  the 
insane  asylum  at  Columbus,  Ohio. 

"  Here  he  remained  for  seven  weeks  !  His  friends  at  home,  knowing  him  to  be  perfectly 
sane,  made  application  for  his  release.  The  case  gainst  him,  however,  had  been  so  strongly 
represented  by  his  bigoted  neighbors,  and  the  prejudice  against  Spiritualism  was  so  strong, 
that  it  required  all  the  representations  of  the  physicians  and  officials  of  the  asylum  to  set 
him  ftee.  This,  however,  was  ultimately  accomplished,  and  Mr.  Potter  perrmtted  to  return 
lo  Ms  home." 

In  relating  the  particulars  of  this  atrocious  violation  of  the  liberty  of  the 
subject  and  the  rights  of  conscience,  Mr.  Potter  remarks  :  "  They  could  not 
carry  off  or  affect  my  belief  along  with  my  body,  and  that  is  full  compensation 
for  the  outrage  I  have  endured,  and  enables  me  truthfully  to  say,  in  die 
strength  and  light  of  my  new  faith :  '  Father,  for^ve  diem ;  they  know  not 
what  they  da* " 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

SPIRITUALISM       IN       THE 

!"K?' 

Spikitualism  in  Texas— The  South  and  its  Characteristics  in  regaro  to 
Spiritualism — Tennessee:  Dr.  Ferguson  and  his  "Little  Daughter"  — 
WoNDERFui,  Child  Medium  of  Springfield ^ Memphis  —  The  "Memphis 
Enquirer,"  and  the  "Leath  Orphan  Asylum  —  The  "Tables  Turned" 
ON  THE  Opposition. 

Passing  ovei  an  immense  mass  of  testimony,  furnislied  by  eveiy  city,  town, 
and  village  of  the  far  West,  concerning  the  universality  as  well  as  the  power 
of  the  great  spiritual  outpouring,  and  omitting,  for  lack  of  space,  any  details, 
but  such  as  bear  witness  to  the  variety  of  methods  observed  in  the  manifes- 
tations, we  must  now  invite  our  readers'  attention  to  some  of  those  more  dis- 
tant sections  of  country  in  the  New  World,  which  might  have  been  expected 
to  escape  the  contagion,  if  such  it  were,  of  a  mere  psychological  movement, 
communicated  by  immediate  intercourse  from  one  district  to  another. 

In  this  category  we  might  reasonably  include  the  Gulf  States,  Texas,  Ar- 
kansas, Florida,  California,  Oregon,  and  the  still  more  remote  lands  of  South 
America.  The  following  chapters,  however,  will  dissipate  such  an  illusion, 
if  the  reader  has  not  already  been  better  informed  on  this  topic,  and  give 
some  idea  of  the  working  of  an  universal  force  amongst  people  predisposed, 
by  local  circumstances  and  surroundings,  to  entertain  widely  different  opin- 
ions on  similar  subjects.  Our  first  extracts,  from  the  Spiritual  Telegraph, 
will  refer  to  the  gradual  growth  of  Spiritualism  in  the  still  remote  and  sparsely 
populated  State  of  Texas. 

The  following  communication  is  dated  1856,  and  is  from  a  regular  and  val- 
ued correspondent,  Mr.  Ebenezer  Allen : 

"SPtRrrUALISM  IN  TEXAS. 

"  Galveston,  July  2,  1856. 

"  Gentlemen,—  Some  five  months  ago,  a  letter  from  Mr,  Henry  Force,  of  Madison, 
Orange  County,  Texas,  appeared  in  the  Telegraph,  giving  an  account  of  the  singular  appa- 
rition of  a  black  hand  in  presence  of  several  respectable  gentlemen  and  ladies,  while  the  me- 
dium, Mrs.  A,  E.  Force,  anticipating  a  communication  from  the  spirit-world,  sat  wdting 
at  the  table  in  the  attitude  of  writing. 

"  In  that  portion  of  Teifas  where  Mrs.  Force  resides.  Spiritualism  was  of  spontaneous 
growth.  Mrs.  Force  was  unenpectedly  acted  upon  by  mysterious  powers,  and  slie  became, 
at  what  precise  date  I  am  not  informed,  a  medium  of  superior  capacities. 

"  A  gentleman  living  about  two  miles  froin  her  dwelling  had  a  favorite  servant  who  was  suf- 
reriiig  under  a  severe  rheumatic  attack.    He  was  in  great  pain  ajid  uOable  to  rise  from  his  bed. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

fi; 

404  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

One  dark,  stormy  night  in  January  last,  she  was  roused  from  her  slumber,  under  the  Influence 
of  a  strong  impression  that  she  must  get  up  immediately  and  go  to  her  neighbor's.  She 
waliened  her  husband,  who  at  first  tried  to  dissuade  her,  but  m  vain.  The  impression  was 
imperative  and  could  not  be  resisted,  and  he  consented  to  accompany  her.  Travelling  over 
a  prairie  through  deep  mud,  and  facmga  violent  wind,  with  the  rain  falling  in  torrents,  they 
readied  the  house  of  their  neighbor  an  hour  or  more  past  midnight.  At  her  request  she 
was  conducted  to  the  room  of  the  negro.  She  found  him  in  great  :^ny,  and  immediately 
commenced  making  passes  over  him.  She  continued  her  manipulations  at  intervals,  as  di- 
-ected  by  her  impressions,  and  before  rooming  the  servant  was  restored  to  health.     So  com- 

ilete,  indeed,  was  the  core,  that,  at  an  early  hour,  he  went  to  work  as  usual,  and  continued 

'   labor  without  any  relapse  or  inconvenience. 
"Other  examples  might  be  related  but  for  want  of  space.     Her  medmmship  is  not  Imi- 
ited  to  the  department  of  healing,  and  I  send  you  some  communications  recently  written  in 
her  hand. 

"Under  date  of  June  7  is  the  following,  addressed  to  J.  H.  C:   (4-   - 

"'Dear  Mortal  FRiENos.^We  -will,  to-night,  speak  of  the  condition  of  other 
worlds.  We  may  not  tell  anything  altogether  new,  but  all  good  spirits  can  add  their  testi- 
mony.    Your  system  of  worlds  is  progressing  and  becoming  more  refined. 

" '  The  atmosphere,  also,  is  tiecoming  more  suitable  to  the  spiritual  progress  of  your 

"'When  earth' 5  inhabitants  shall  have  progressed  still  further,  they  will  have  more  per- 
fect organizations— more  love  and  wisdom.  Then,  new  inventions,  or  rather,  new  appli- 
cations of  the  agencies  under  their  control,  will  be  discovered  by  them.  Then  steam-power 
will  be  dispensed  with,  and  in  its  stead  you  will  use  electricity. 

' ' '  (iood-nigbt,  dear  friends. ' 

"  Questiaa  [By  one  of  the  circle].— Spirits  say  the  earth   is  receding  from   ihe    sun. 

What  is  the  cause  ?  .  -     . 

"  Anmitr. The  attractions  are  growing  weaker  m  that  dnection  and  stronger  in  the 

"Q     Can  sphits  divulge  and  suppress  crime?  if  so,  how  long  before  they  will  do  it  ? 

"A.  They  do  so  now,  in  many  instances.  We  think,  probably  in  ten  years  it  will  be  quite 
common ;  "but  mediumship  is  not  properly  established  yet,  so  as  to  admit  of  dependence 
on  communications.  Evil  spirits  will  communicate,  as  weU  as  good,  and  mortals  cannot 
always  be  guarded  on  that  point ;  but,  as  a  general  rule,  judge  the  spirits  by  what  they 
write.     Good-night. 

"Many  other  communications  of  an  interesting  nature  are  furnished  by  Mr.  Ebenezer 
Allen,  proving  the  general  comcidence  of  spiritual  teachings  everywhere,  and  the  growth 
smd  progress  of  the  cause  in  his  section  of  country." 

About  the  same  date,  another  correspondent  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph 
writes  of  an  entirely  difierent  section  of  the  State  in  the  following  despond- 
ing tone : 

letter  from  texas. 

"  Victoria,  Texas. 

"Charles  Partridge,  Esq. — I  have  finally  awakened  some  little  interest  here,  00 
this  all-important  subject,  and  many  respectable  citizens  are  beginning  to  investigate  and 
discuss  the  pos^bility  of  intercourse  between  the  visible  and  mviable  worlds.  The  clergy 
are  busily  eiKaged  in  trymg  to  suppress  in<imry  among  their  fiock,  but  occaaonally  one 
breaks  out  of  the  orthodox  pen,  and,  from  curiosity  or  some  other  motive,  attends  one  of 
our  feeble  circles  to  see  what  he  can,  and  goes  off  wondering  if  this  can  be  a  reality.  We 
are  moving  slowly  bat  surely. ,,.,.,  .c..rj 

"  I  feel  a  little  encouraged.  Eighteen  months  since  I  settled  in  this  place :  at  first  I  found 
but  two  individuals  here  who  had  the  moral  courage  to  avow  their  sentiments  on  this  sub- 
ject Now  we  number  about  twenty,  that  dare  hold  circles,  but,  unfortunately,  we  are  not 
systematized.  I  have  not  been  able  to  impress  upon  the  friends  the  importance  of  regular 
meetmgs ;  consequently,  we  have  no  wdl  or  reliably  developed  mediums. 

"This  whole  country  is  now  prepared  to  hear  the  subject  discussed.  If  we  onlv  had  a 
good  trance  speaking  medimn,  —one  who  is  posted  up  sufficiently  to  meet  the  clergy  in 
debate,  —  Spiritualism  would  prevMl  to  a  very  great  extent. 

"  Mr.  Forster  paid  us  a  flying  viat,  but  left  very  soon.     To  my  knowledge,  he  was  get- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  405 

ting  invitations  from  every  town  and  village  in  Western  Texas,  to  vHt  them.     I  will  take 
the  responsibility  to  say  that  a  good  lecturer  would  be  received  by  the  people  of  Western 
Texas  with  open  arms  and  enthusiasm.     A  majority  are  open  to  conviction, 'but,'  say  tJicy, 
'  we  want  to  hear  and  see  those  things.' 
"Yomr  attention  to  the  above  will  greatly  oblige  an  old  subscriber. 

"J.  W.  Maulding." 

About  four  months  after  the  publication  of  Mr.  Maulding's  letter,  a  secular 
paper,  the  Texas  Advocate,  ptiblished  its  version  of  SpirituaUsm  in  Texas, 
through  a  communication  understood  to  be  the  opinion  of  the  editor  himself. 

"THE  SPIRnS  IN  VICTORIA,  TEXAS. 

*'A  correspondent,  b  whom  we  have  perfect  confidence,  relates  that  the  spirits  advised 
some  members  of  Ms  family  not  to  take  passage  on  the  train  that  evening,  but  declined  giv- 
ing any  reason  for  impartingthis  advice,  save  that  the  trip  would  be  profitless  of  enjoyment. 
When  the  tr^n  was  about  four  miles  from  town,  the  locomotive  came  m  contact  with  two 
planks,  which  some  desperate  feUow  had  placed  across  the  track.  The  engine  was  materially 
damaged,  but  no  person  sustained  any  mjury.  As  to  ourselves,  we  can  testify,  by  personal 
experience,  that  the  spirits  are  having  a  fine  tune  here.  They  have  pretty  much  got  roe  to 
stop  using  tobacco,  which,  I  think,  is  "very  sensible.  I  have  been  at  several  circles,  and  have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  spirits  are  universally  pohte  and  gentlemanly,  or  ladylike, 
according  to  sex  ;  that  while  they  are  higher,  purer,  better  than  we  possiblj-  can  be  in  this 
life,  they  are  not  in&llible.  The  long  and  short  of  my  investigation  establishes  absolutely, 
that  the  spirits  of  oar  depated  friends  do  communicate  with  us." 

This  was  a  great  admission  for  a  Texas  editor  in  1856,  amongst  a  some- 
what dangerous  and  priest-ridden  community. 

One  more  verbatim  report  must  be  inserted  as  illustrative  of  the  modes  in 
which  conviction  reached  leading  minds  in  Texas,  and  established  that  large 
and  imposing  State  as  what  it  now  really  is,  namely,  a  rallying  point  for 
Spiritualism  of  the  most  liberal  and  pro^essive  character. 

The  following  was  written  by  a  prominent  politician  and  esteemed  dtizen 
of  Houston ; 

"  Houston,  Texas,  Nnoember,  1859. 
"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Spirilual  Telegraph  : 

"Dear  Sir,— For  about  seven  years  previous  to  January,  i855,various  stories  of  table 
tipping,  spirit  rapping,  and  other  aimilaj-  wonders,  had  been  related  to  me,  and  I  had  often 
gone  to  the  places  where  such  tWngs  were  to  be  seen,  but  always  arrived  a  little  too  soon  or 
a  little  too  late.  No  demonstration  could  ever  be  had  when  I  looked  on.  I  knew  the 
parties  to  be  ancere  and  truthful  persons,  but  seriously  regretted  that  they  could  have  no 
rapping  exercises  at  a  time  when  I  could  see  them.  My  presence  seemed  to  destroy  the  ex- 
hibition. Of  couree  I  strongly  suspected  deluaon.  Years  rolled  on.  My  heart' s  desire 
and  prayer  was  that  I  might  see  somethmg  that  would  lead  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion. 
At  length,  in  January,  1855,  at  San  Antonio,  in  this  Stat^  one  day,_bemg  on  a  business 
tour  through  that  region,  I  was  standing  in  front  of  the  principal  hotel  in  conversation  with 
several  gentlemen,  when  the  rappings  became  the  subject  of  remark,  and  I  expressed  my 
desu-e  to  see  something,— anythmg  that  a  reasonable  mind  could  cali  proof  of  the  fact  of 
spirit  communion.  One  of  the  gentlemen  told  me  there  would  be  a  'circle'  at  his  house  that 
night,  and  if  T  would  come  round,  perhaps  there  might  or  might  not  be  a  demonstration; 
but  he  wished  me  to  come  anyhow,  as  the  vreather  was  pleasant,  the  distance  short,  and  the 
company  would  be  intelligent,  I  went ;  five  persons  in  all  were  assembled,  and  became 
seated  at  a  round  table,  upon  which  were  paper  and  all  proper  writing  apparatus.  It  was 
proposed  first  to  lay  hands  on  the  table  and  sit  q^uiet.  In  about  five  minutes  spirits  an- 
nounced themselves  by  certain  convulave  motions  m  three  of  the  persons  ;  pens  or  pencils 
were  emphatically  seized,  and  aftM-  some  wild  scribbling,  one  led  off  into  a  connected  sen- 
tence, announcing  the  presence  of  very  many  spirits  anxious  to  communicate.  It  was  then 
proposed  that  eadi  person  at  the  table  should  have  one  chance,  going  round  from  the  medium 
to  her  left,  and  so  on.  I  sat  immediately  on  her  right,  and,  of  course,  was  the  last.  I 
improved  the  occasion,  however,  by  watching  all  that  was  done  or  said.     Things  proceeded 

Hosiedb,  Google 

4o5  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

ill  the  most  quiet  and  orderly  way,  all  the  parties,  escepl  myself,  liaving  been  there  before, 
and  the  whole  affur  being  perfectly  familiar  to  them.  Upon  the  arrival  of  my  opportunity, 
I  framed  in  my  own  mind  the  following  wish :  '  If  there  be  a  possibQity  that  spirits  of  the 
departed  can  communicate  with  mortals,  let  some  rational  proof  thereof  be  now  given.' 
With  perfect  spontaneity  the  hand  of  the  medium  wrote;  '  Do  not  regret  your  past  ex- 
periences ;  they  have  all  helped  to  develop  your  mmd,  and  enable  you  to  arrive  at  primary 
truth.' 

"  Of  course  there  was  nothing  in  the  words  of  the  eommnnication  startling.  The  sen- 
tence was  finished.  The  medium's  hand  gave  a  peculiar  gyratory  motion,  and  executed  the 
fac-simile  signature  of  a  distmguished  United  States  Senator,  who  had  been  a  friend  indeed 
to  me,  but  whom  I  had  seen  buried  nearly  sis  years  before  that  writing  1  I  saw  my  departed 
friend's  name,  written  as  if  by  his  own  iKiiid,  a  thousand  miles  from  the  place  of  his  borial, 
among  the  most  perfect  strangers,  and  so  strikingly  like  his  proper  hand  that,  bad  I  not  seen 
it  written  by  another,  I  would  cheerfully  have  testified  it  to  have  been  in  his  own  proper 

"  Immediately  followed  another,  and  another,  all  of  sunilar  import,  and  each  m  the  pecu- 
liar handwriting  of  the  parties  respectively  while  living.      There  were  seven  or  eight  in  all, 
and,  among  them,  those  of  Senators  Ashley,  and  Sevier,  and  the  Hon.  T.  W.  Trapnall,  all 
of  Arkansas,  all  of  whom  I   had  known  intimately,  and  had  seen  buried  years  before, 
Trapnall  having  died  about  two  years  before.     The  signatures  of  each  of  those  gentlemen 
had  striking  peculiarities,  which  were  preserved  in  all  their  perfection.     The  medium  wrote 
a  most  cramped  and  miserable  hand  while  in  her  normal  condition,  but  executed  the  signa- 
tores  of  those  dead  persons  in  wonderful  perfection.     Now,  what  was  I  to  think  ?    Here 
was  a  stranger,  a  thousand  miles  from  the  plaoe  where  those  friends  lived  and  died,  who 
could  scracdyhave  heard  of,  much  less  been  acquainted  with  the  parties;  and  that  stranger 
was  now  here,  as  certain  a  medium  of  written  communication  from  deceased  friends  to  me, 
as  the  post-office  was  while  they  were  alive.     There  was  but  one  conclusion  to  draw, 
which  was,  that  the  spirits  of  men  and  women,  after  their  bodies  are  dead  and  buried,  can 
and  do  communicate  intelligibly  with  Uving,  healthy,  wide-awake  men.     ..... 

[Signed]  "A  Teuth- Hunter." 

le  and  address,  as  a  voucher  for  this  state- 

To  follow  under  standingly  the  course  of  Spiritualism  in  that  part  of  the 
country,  which,  antecedent  to  the  great  American  war,  was  known  as  the 
Slave  States,  it  would  be  almost  essential  that  the  observer  should  have  per- 
sonally acquainted  himself  with  the  immense  sectional  differences  of  char- 
acter and  interests  which  have  divided  the  Nordi  and  South  in  the  original 
Federal  "Union"  of  States,  rendering  that  "Union"  a  political  association, 
but  in  every  other  respect,  a  mere  name  without  a  shadow  of  foundation. 

It  is  not  our  purpose  in  any  way  to  revive  the  bitter  causes  of  severance 
that  always  divided  these  two  great  sections  of  country,  nor  to  pronounce  any 
opinion  upon  their  respective  claims  in  the  war  ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  we 
should  briefly  advert  to  some  of  those  causes  which  operated  to  render  some 
of  the  Southern  people  singularly  hostile  to  the  introduction  of  Spiritualism 
amongst  them. 

It  is  patent  to  every  American  Spirituahst  that  the  great  majority  of  the 
believers,  save  and  except  the  residents  of  the  Gulf  States,  were  more  or  less 
in  favor  of  anti-slavery. 

If  they  did  not  openly  espouse  that  cause,  it  was  in  the  belief  that  the  in- 
evitable tendency  of  Spiritualism  was  to  promote  the  freedom  of  all  mankind 
in  better  and  more  effective  methods  than  those  insisted  on  by  the  New  Eng- 
land abohtion  party. 

At  the  same  time  many  devoted  Spiritualists  were  to  be  found  amongst  the 
ranks  of  anti-slavery,  and  actively  operating  for  its  success.  Besides  these, 
an  immense  majority  openly  proclaimed  "liberty  for  all  mankind,"  whilst  only 
a  scattered  few  attached  themselves  to  the  pro-slavery  party. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  407 

Independent  of  the  known  and  wide-spread  proclivity  of  the  Spiritualists 
for  anti-slavery,  the  South  had  reason  to  regard  the  highly  liberalizing  ten- 
dencies of  Spiritualism  as  fatal  to  the  perpetuation  of  their  "peculiar  institu- 
tion." 

The  edicts  which  forbade  the  education  of  the  negro  under  penalties  little 
short  of  death,  were  wholly  disregarded  by  the  unco  user  vative  inhabitants  of 
the  spirit  country,  who  frequently  selected  their  mediums  from  amongst  the 
ranks  of  the  servile  and  uneducated  blacks,  causing  them,  under  the  afflatus 
of  their  divine  power,  to  read,  \vrite,  and  speak  with  all  the  facile  eloquence 
of  high  educational  training,  and  not  uufrequently  with  new  tongues. 

The  reports  from  the  ranks  of  colored  mediums  were  most  alarming,  and 
of  course  utterly  disruptive  of  that  ignorance  and  mental  weakness  which  was 
the  stronghold  of  the  master,  and  formed  chains  far  more  binding  than  mills 
tary  legions  or  iron  yokes.  Altogether,  the  teachings  of  Spiritualism,  this 
democracy  of  its  tendencies  on  earth,  and  the  republicanism  of  its  sodetie 
after  dead),  were  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  autocracy  of  the  slave-holding 
power. 

It  is  too  late  now  to  enlarge  upon  this  subject  furtliei;  it  is  too  soon  after 
the  bleeding  hearts  of  a  conquered  nation  have  been  lacerated  by  defeat,  to 
tear  open  their  wounds  by  a  recapitulation  of  the  springs  of  action  which 
influenced  them. 

It  is  enough  to  notice  that  whilst  the  genius  of  Spiritualism  seemed  to  be 
essentially  opposed  to  the  perpetuation  of  human  slavery  in  any  form,  the 
universality  of  die  opposition  manifested  toward  the  belief  in  the  South  was 
much  exaggerated  in  the  North,  and  was  far  more  due  to  the  rancorous  and 
envenomed  antagonism  of  an  interested  Southern  priesthood,  than  to  a  lack 
of  spirituality  in  the  people  themselves. 

Making  aU  diie  allowance  for  the  dangerous  possibilities  which  might  grow 
out  of  Spiritualistic  teachings,  the  Southern  people,  naturally  warm-hearted, 
generous,  and  impulsive,  highly  impressible,  and  intellectually  capable  of  ap- 
preciating the  beauty  and  refining  tendencies  of  Spiritualism,  loved  and 
cherished  it  in  some  families  widi  an  ardor  which  was  greatly  misunderstood 
at  the  North,  and  which,  amongst  other  characteristic  errors,  tended  to  widen 
the  breach  already  interposed  between  tliese  unfortunately  divided  brethren. 
Bearing  these  preliminary  remarks  in  mind,  the  bitter  opposition  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  ardent  and  enthusiastic  appreciation  on  the  other,  which  Spirit- 
ualism experienced  in  the  South,  may  now  be  better  understood. 

Our  first  glance  at  Southern  Spiritualism  must  be  taken  from  Tennes- 
see, where  a  goodly  number  of  noble  and  high-souled  Spiritualists  clustered 
together  in  considerable  strength. 

One  of  the  most  prominent  and  respected  of  the  ranks  was  the  Rev.  J.  B. 
Ferguson,  a  gentleman  who  has  iilled  many  positions  of  religious  and  politi- 
cal distinction  with  the  highest  credit  to  himself  and  benefit  to  his  country. 

Besides  being  one  of  the  most  liberal,  eloquent,  and  popular  preachers  in 
Tennessee,  Dr.  Fet^son  is  a  Master  of  Arts  of  Bacon  College,  Kentucky,  and 
Doctor  of  Laws  of  Franklin  College,  Tennessee.  His  Idndly  disposition,  intel- 
lectual attainments,  and  distinguished  public  services,  justly  entitled  him  to  ex- 
ercise great  influence  in  his  State ;  hence  it  was  no  small  advantage  to  the 
cause  of  Spiritualism  in  the  South  to  include  this  noble  adherent  in  its  ranks. 

In  1848,  Dr.  Fei^son  became  the  editor  of  the  Nashville  Christian 
Magazine;  but  no  literary  position,  however  high,  could  fetter  his  great  soul 
in  the  search  after  truth,  which  he  rightly  estimated  as  the  word  of  God,  un- 
der whatever  aspect  it  was  found,  hence,  after  a  thorough  examination  into  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

4o8  HISTORY  OF  MODERPT 

mysterious  power  of  magnetism  and  clairvoyance,  he  became  an  ardent  stu- 
dent of  occult  philosophy,  and  as  such,  no  sooner  heard  of  the  so-called  spir- 
itual manifestations  than  he  deemed  it  imperative  upon  him,  alike  as  a  Christian 
minister,  editor,  and  teacher  of  the  young,  to  investigate  the  truth  orfalsehood 
of  what  was  alleged  in  relation  to  it. 

Dr.  Ferguson's  experiences  have  resulted  in  such  a  wide-spread  influence 
upon  the  cause,  that  we  deem  it  an  essential  part  of  our  narrative  to  notice 
the  circumstances  attending  his  conversion.  This  we  do  in  a  few  extracts  from 
Dr.  NichoU's  admirable  transcript  of  Uie  life  of  Jesse  B.  Fei^uson,  entitled 
"Supra-mundane  Facts." 

In  this  work  Dr.  Fet^son  says  : 

"  When  the  spiritual  manifestations  at  Rochester  and  other  places  were  claiming  popular 
attention,  I  was  so  occupied  in  pastoral,  editorial,  and  other  duties,  that  I  passed  them  by 
for  the  most  part,  and  was  disposed  to  regard  them  as  the  minglings  of  fanaticism  and  im- 
posture. There  was  one  enception  to  this  statement.  When  attempting,  in  company  with 
a  medical  friend,  to  relieve  a  case  of  physical  suffering,  finding  the  subject  in  the  state  usually 
called  clairvoyant,  I  asked  her  in  relation  to  the  Rochester  manifestations,  and  received  this 
response: 

"  '  The  manifestations  are  from  spirits,  many  of  whom  lived  before  the  present  nations  of 
the  earth  existed;  they  are  seeking  access  to  the  world  by  Che  agency  of  spirits  recently  de- 
jarted.     This  is  true,  and  you  will  find  it  so.' 

"  This  remarkable  declaration  did  not  pass  from  my  memory,  and  I  made  a  note  of  it 
among  my  records  ;  but  I  was  disposed  to  attribute  it  to  a  mesmeric  reflection  ofthe  mind  of 
my  friend  upon  that  of  the  patient.  He  always  protested,  however,  that  I  was  mistaken. 
This  was  in  May,  1849. 

"  My  subsequent  experience  and  observation  are  detailed  in  the  following  letters  and  com- 
munications, which  I  now  offer  to  the  public  as  an  imperative  duty  I  owe  alike  to  truth  and 
right,  and  to  the  responsibilities  that  grow  out  of  privileges  I  regard  as  the  highest  and 
holiest  ever  granted  to  man. 

"  Springfield,  Ohio,  October  34,  1853." 

"Mr.  W.  D.  M.  :  My  dear  Friend,  ^\vi  accordance  with  my  promise,  I  proceed  to 
present  you,  in  as  concise  a  form  as  possible,  my  observations  on  *  spiritual  manifestations.' 

"The  chief  object  of  my  present  visit  to  Ohio  was  to  secure  the  privilege  of  personal  ob- 
servation of  these  strange  phenomena.  In  the  prosecution  of  this  design  I  introduced  the 
subject  in  the  house  of  a  worthy  friend,  who  informed  me  that  himself  and  his  brother  were 
mediums.  They  had  not  been  exercised  for  eighteen  months ;  had  just  come  m  from  the 
com  harvest  to  pay  their  respects  to  me,  and,  though  anxious  to  gratify  me,  evidently 
wished  I  had  sought  some  other  gratification.  By  persuasion,  however,  thej  consented  to 
try,  and  we  sat  down  seriously  to  the  table.  We  had  not  been  seated  long  until  we  had 
ihe  raps,  the  tipping  of  the  stand,  and  decided  changes  in  their  nervous  svstems.  We  re- 
ceived, also,  responses  by  the  aid  of  the  alphabet,  and  the  name  of  an  aged  and  deceased 
preacher  companion  of  mine  was  spelled  out.  The  manifesting  poner  gave  answers  to 
audible  and  mental  questions,  somewhat  remarkable  in  their  character,  but  t  v  no  means 
satisfactory  as  to  the  degree  of  mtelligence  in  the  replies.  The  afternoon,  honeier,  was 
wearing  away,  and  my  Mends  were  expecting  me  at  the  house  of  a  relative.  I  persuaded 
the  best  medium  to  accompany  me  there.  We  opened  the  examination  agam  at  night, 
with  like  results.  Spirits  that  had  departed  in  the  room  we  occupied  were  said  to  be  pres- 
ent, and  among  many  strai^e  things  revealed  to  us  was,  that  I  myself  would  receive  unmis- 
takable manifestations  shortly,  and  that  duringtheensumgtwenty-four  hours.  Most  of  those 
■who  witnessed  the  proceedings  concluded  that  all  we  had  seen  and  heard  were  involuntary 
effects  produced  by  the  medium.     We  retired  to  test,  dismissing  the  subject.     Late  in  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  409 

night  I  awolte  from  a  most  delightful  dream,  when  I  recognized  distinct  raps.  Of  course  I 
was  all  attention.  Satisfying  myself  that  I  was  entirely  awake,  I  directed,  mentally,  several 
questions  to  the  rapping- power,  and  received  remarkable  answers. 

"  On  Sunday  a  gentleman  ealled  and  assured  me  we  could  have  a  meeting  with  a  medium 
at  night.  The  meeting  was  arranged  to  take  place  in  my  room  ;  and  after  tea  quite  a 
number  gathered,  and  three  mediums  were  present.  With  the  exception  of  one  individual, 
a  Methodist  clergyman,  formerly  from  Tennessee,  I  was  a  total  stranger  to  all  present. 
They  neither  knew  me  nor  of  me.  Some  of  them  had  come  in,  they  scarcely  knew  why, 
and  one  of  (Re  mediums  was  a  total  stranger  to  us  all,  coming,  as  he  sidd,  under  the  im- 
pression that  he  'must  come  to  this  place  to-night.'  The  coincidences  of  desire  and  unex- 
pected meeting  were  so  remarkable  that,  but  for  my  knowledge  of  all  that  had  been  done 
towards  the  meeting,  I  would  have  feared  collusion.  On  this  pomt,  however,  I  was  fully 
satisfied 

"  We  were  soon  seated  around  a  table,  and  joined  m  a  good  old  song  of  Zion,  to  pro- 
duce, as  they  said,  passivity  and  harmony  of  mind.  Our  clerical  medium  stated  to  us, 
what  we  had  previously  heard ;  that  he  was  a  man  of  embarrassing  timidity  in  the  presence 
of  strangers,  and  had  been  so  all  his  life ;  that  he  enjoyed  spiritual  communications  best 
alone,  and  that  in  company,  even  when  he  felt  the  influence  most  powerfully,  he  hesitated 
to  act.  We  encouraged  him,  and  did  all  m  our  power  lo  make  him  feel  at  ease.  Soon 
his  arm  was  singularly  agitated,  and,  taking  a  pencil,  he  wrote  what  seemed  to  be  an  ad- 
monition to  himself,  as  follows : 

"  '  You  should  do  your  duty  at  all  times,  and  under  all  circumstances.  What  if  you  are 
in  the  presence  of  strangers?  You  are  also  in  the  presence  of  heavenly  messengers,  who 
are  ever  ready  to  help  and  assist  you.  We  know  the  state  of  your  mind,  lie  passive. 
We  will  think  ;  you  must  write.  Say  10  all  who  look  on,  God  is  present  by  His  messen- 
gers, and  we  wish  to  show  that  writing  may  be  done  intelligibly  by  one  who  is  not  willing 

to  do  his  duty. 

" '  R.  F.  Miller.' 

"  At  this  moment  another  medium  commenced  speaking,  who  had  responded  to  all  said 
by  Mr.  S.  We  will  call  him  Mr,  L.  He  seemed  to  take  up  the  last  remark  of  Mr.  S., 
and  proceeded  to  make  an  address  in  the  German  language,  which  was  translated  for  the 
benefit  of  all  present 

"After  another  address  from  Mr.  S.,  of  a  useful  and  impressive  character,  Mr,  1_  sang 
us  a  most  beautiful  German  song,  music  and  poetry  purporting  to  be  composed  by  a  Ger- 
man ancestor  —  deceased  more  than  a  hundred  years  —  for  the  occaaon.  The  ideas  were 
certMnly  good — the  muac  very  good.  What  made  it  remarkable  was,  that  all  his  acquaint 
ances  dedared  that  he  knew  not,  in  his  natural  state,  one  word  of  German 

"  Thus  they  continued,  alternately  speaking  in  German  and  English,  singing  and  gesticu- 
lating, till  the  evening  had  grown  quite  late,  when  what  purported  to  be  a  German  spirit, 
sang  a  partii^  song,  through  the  medium,  bidding  each  of  us  good-night,  and  assuring  u 
we  would  meet  ^ain. 

"  Believe  me,  my  dear  ar, 

"Very  truly,  etc, 

"J.  B.  Ferguson," 

Shortly  after  this  prelimioary  meeting  with  the  spirits,  Dr.  Ferguson  en- 
joyed a  better  opportunity  of  investigation,  through  the  mediumship  of  a 
young  girl  whom  many  of  onr  readers  will  recognize  as  having  been  one  of 
the  most  extraordiaary  and  reliable  mediums  of  the  day,  although  we  are 
deterred  from  giving  her  name  in  full,  on  account  of  personal  reasons  pecu- 
liar  to  herself  and  her  former  employers. 

Hosted  by  Google 

4IO  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

The  following  is  Dr.  Fei^son's  letter  descriptive  of  his  first  meeting  mth 
this  wonderful  diild : 

"  Nashviixe,  Tenkessbe,  Nsuember  lo,  1864. 

"W.  D,  M. !  My  Dtar  Priend,—  Vi\uie  I  remained  in  Springfield,  Ohio,  during  a 
period  of  sin  weeks,  I  was  regularly  engaged  in  the  examination  of  ^iritual  phenomena, 
under  circumstances  every  way  favorab£  to  a  calm  and  candid  investigation.  After  wit- 
nessing what  I  have  detailed  to  you  in  a  previous  letter,  I  requested  the  privilege  of  in- 
vestgaling  what  were  denominated  'phyacal  manifestations.'  A  meeting  was  immedi- 
ately called  for  tliat  purpose ;  a  large  company  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  highest 
respectability  were  present,  and  a  circle  of  sceptics  and  believers  surrounded  a  laige.dining- 
table,  weighing,  I  suppose,  not  less  than  fifty  pounds. 

"  My  attention  was  directed  to  a  little  girl  of  some  fifteen_^ars,  perhaps  more,  very 
small  of  her  age,  who  was  declared  to  be  the  medium  oTfESe  wonderfol  appeals  to  the 
outward  senses.  I  learned  that  she  was  an  orphan,  and  a  day  laljorer  in  a  fectory,  for  her 
own  support  and  that  of  an  aged  grandmother.  She  was  well  known  to  two  of  my  broth- 
ers-in-law, who  had  accompanied  me  to  the  meelmg,  but  who  had  never  witnessed  a  spiritual 
demonstration.  They  spoke  of  her  kindly ;  said  ^e  had  been  in  their  employ,  was  unculti- 
vated, but  worthy  of  the  highest  commendation  for  industry  and  kindness  (0  an  aged  relative, 
and  that  they  regretted  to  see  her  engaged  in  a  work  they  regarded  as  deceptive  and  dan- 
geroos.  She  appeiu«d  awkward  and  timid  when  introduced  to  the  company,  and  evidently 
manifested  a  desire  to  relhe  from  the  gaze  of  so  many  strange  eyes.  Her  confidence  was 
Eoon  gdned,  and  die  took  her  seat  at  the  table.  We  had  been  seated  but  a  few  moments, 
when  I  discovered  asensible  agitation  of  the  table  under  our  hands,  which  I  was  ready  to 
ascribe  to  the  unconscious  pressure  of  the  party,  or  some  person  in  the  circle.  Soon,  how- 
ever, our  little  'Mary'  —  the  only  name  of  the  medium  vrith  which  we  were  favored  — 
evidently  passed  through  a  strange  transformation,  that  gave  rfgularity  to  her  features, 
kindness  of  expresdon  to  her  countenance,  and.  exquisite  grace  to  her  general  demeanor. 
She  lilied  her  hands  as  if  to  catch  some  inviable  mfluence  descending  from  above,  and 

f laced  them  upon  the  heids  of  several  persons  present,  and,  among  the  vest,  that  of  Mrs. 
',  Her  eyes  were  closed,  and  I  was  impressed  by  her  entire  manner  that  she  was  the  most 
adroit  of  deceivers,  or  else  entirely  unconscious  of  her  movements. 

"  After  completing  this  pantomimic  anointing,  ^e  ^ain  placed  her  hands  on  the  table 
and  the  following  effects  immediately  succeeded ;  The  table  was  thrown  suddenly  from  her, 
and  against  the  persons  opposite  ;  it  was  tipped  down  on  each  ade,  and  a^m  elevated  with  a 
rapidity  almost  mconceivable.  Our  hands  were  thrown  above  it  by  a  power  we  could  not 
appreciate,  and  several  of  the  party  present  were  made  to  clasp  theirs  above  their  heads ; 
among  whom  was  one  of  the  most  confirmed  sceptics  present,  who  has  since  become  a  re- 
mafkahle  writing  medium.  I  prescribed  several  movements  of  the  table,  which  were  made 
as  with  the  velocity  of  thought,  and  loud  raps  were  heard  under  and  upon  it,  to  the  aston- 
ishment of  all  present.  This  character  of  demonstration  was  carried  on  for  some  twenty  or 
thirty  minutes,  when  'Mary'  sdd,  'Mr.  M.  cannot  rise  from  his  seat.'  We  noticed 
the  gentleman  referred  to,  and  found  him  firmly  seated,  his  feet  and  chair  riveted  to  the 
floor.  Several  persons  of  great  physical  strength  attempted  to  remove  his  chair  and  failed, 
A  number  of  experiments  of  this  kind  were  repeated,  and  carefully  tested  by  all  the 
scrutmiimg  powers  our  party  could  command.  The  company  seemed  confounded.  At 
length,  a  Mr.  F.,  a  connection  of  mine,  who  was  present,  and  an  open  denouncer  of  Spirit- 
ualism, spoke  and  said:  'If  Mary  can  have  that  table  moved  without  our  hands  upon  it,  I 
will  believe.'  Of  course,  I  did  not  expect  that  this  could  be  done.  Immediately,  with  a 
graceful  gesture,  she  motioned  every  person  from  the  table  to  a  distance  of  not  less  than 
four  feet.  She  seemed  to  examine,  with  eyes  still  closed,  that  neither  human  foot  nor  dress 
were  near  it.  She  sat  down  in  her  chair  at  the  table,  her  chair  carried,  as  it  were,  by  invis- 
ible hands.  She  then  remarked  that  her  ch^r  was  fastened,  and  could  not  be  moved.  A 
gentleman  attempted  to  move  it  and  confirmed  herstatement.  She  orderedall  to  be  seated 
and  quiet,  with  an  air  of  authority  that  would  have  provoked  a  smile  on  a  less  serious  occa- 
sion, had  it  not  been  for  the  true  dignity  of  her  manner.  Then,  pouiting  to  the  table,  she 
commanded  it  to  '  come,'  and  it  oioved,  more  rapidly  than  any  two  men  could  have  moved 
it  over  a  rough  carpet,  no  human  hand,  nor  any  dynamic  power,  that  could  be  recognized"by 
the  external  senses,  being  near  it.  She  commanded  it  back  agam,  and  it  obeyed  her  order, 
when  the  alphabet  was  called,  and  a  name,  which  was  said  to  be  that  of  her  deceased 
mother,  was  distinctly  rapped,  each  rap  answering  to  the  letters  as  she  called  them ;  then 

my  sceptical  relation  spoke  out  and  said  ;  '  It  is  enough ;"  ^ '--^  '     •  "-'■^  ""'  ^^-■ 

scrilje  the  effect  upon  our  company,  as  his  honest  c 
were  then  present  are  now  avowed  believers." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  4" 

From  this  time  forth,  Dr.  Ferguson's  investigations  were  constant  and  un- 
tiring. Convinced  at  last  of  the  reality  of  communion  between  the  spiritual 
and  natural  worlds,  and  the  perpetual  witness  of  phenomena  that  ought  to 
have  enlisted  the  interest  and  s)anpathy  of  every  truly  religious  and  scientific 
mind  in  the  country,  the  amiable  preacher  both  wrote  and  spoke  his  convic- 
tions with  a  freedom  that  ill  suited  the  temper  of  this  material  age ;  which  soon 
enrolled  his  hitherto  honored  name  on  the  list  of  the  proscribed,  and  often 
threatened  to  write  it  in  letters  of  fire  amongst  the  "the  noble  army  of 
mart)TS." 

Amongst  the  descriptions  of  mediumistic  persons  with  which  his  "  Supra- 
mundane  Facts"  abound,  the  following  will  illustrate  the  character  of  the 
Spiritualism  in  Tennessee,  over  and  above  the  visits  of  celebrated  itinerant 
mediums  who  were  always  welcomed  in  Memphis  and  Nashville.  Dr.  Fer- 
guson writes  : 

"  Last  night,  amid  the  usual  addresses  and  privileges  of  our  regular  meetings,  our  large 
piano  was  moved  without  mortal  hands ;  its  strings  were  repeatedly  touched  while  the  lid 
was  down,  and nomortal liand  near  the  keys;  our  little  altar — a  small  table — Was  carried 
over  the  room,  no  one  present  touching  it ;  loud  raps,  confirmatory  of  important  spiritual 
impressions,  were  made  upon  the  table,  several  articles  of  furniture,  glass,  and  the  walls  of 
the  rooms,  so  hard  as  to  be  heard  in  the  rooms  above  us ;  and  all  in  the  presence  of  eight 
persons,  no  one  of  whom  had  anticipated  or  thought  of,  though  each  was  delighted  with, 
such  evidences.  An  orphan  girl,  who  Was  evidently  the  medium  for  these  manifestations, 
had  come  in  by  spiritual  impression,  and  amid  some  of  these  wonderful  demonstrations,  was 
carried  to  the  piano,  upon  wliich  she  performed,  improvising  three  very  beautiful  songs, 
although  without  an  ordinary  education,  or  the  advantage  of  a  single  lesson  in  muac  Her 
-  name  is  Miss  Nannie  West,  a  destitiite  orphan,  whose  father  received  his  death  by  violence, 
and  who  has  since  been  cared  for  by  the  kindly  and  truly  christian  charity  of  Mrs.  Lee 
Coleman,  of  this  city,  at  whose  house,  whenever  she  is  present  in  the  circle,  the  same  or 
Mmilar  manifestations  have  been  made  repeatedly  during  a  period  of  months,  and  in  the 
presence  of  hundreds. 

"  I  seek  only  to  give  a  plain  statement  of  facts  on  these  manifestations,  and  therefore  for- 
bear to  offer  a  commentary.     They  are  true." 

In  another  place  he  describes  one  of  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Tennessee 
mediums,  Mr.  Champion,  a  writing,  speaking,  and  seeing  medium.  This 
young  man  was  developed,  quite  unexpectedly  to  himself,  at  the  house  of  Dr. 
Ferguson,  and  since  the  period  of  his  interior  unfoldment,  his  experience  as  a 
seer,  test  medium,  trance  speaker,  prophet,  and  clairvoyant,  would  fill  vol- 
umes. He  then  speaks  of  a  Mr.  W.  W.  Finn,  an  excellent  medium,  and  a 
most  faithful  and  zealous  laborer  in  the  cause.  No  one,  however,  more  gen- 
erally contributed  to  the  success  and  spread  of  Spiritualism  than  the  wife  of 
Dr.  Ferguson,  a  lady  whose  remarkable  gifts  of  healing  alone  would  appear^ 
if  fairly  represented,  equal  to  the  miracles  of  the  Jewish  or  Christian  dispen- 

In  speaking  of  his  companion,  Dr.  Ferguson  modestly  says : 

"Mrs.  Ferguson  is  a  medium  for  visions  as  well  as  writing.  She  always  sees  the  spirit 
while  communicating,  whether  through  herself  or  others.  Frequently,  while  engaged  in  her 
household  duties,  she  receives  a  request  from  some  spu-it  friend  to  give  forth  a  eommuriica- 
tion.  In  such  cases  she  sometimes  refuses,  and  again,  after  her  duties  are  over,  will  at  down 
and  in  a  few  moments,  pour  forth  the  wishes  of  her  invisible  visitants.  She  often  recognizes 
them  while  engaged  in  ordinary  conversation  irith  her  friends,  while  visiting  among  her 
neighbors,  at  church,  and  in  the  street,  but,  refers  to  such  greetings  only  in  the  sacred 
privacy  of  confiding  friendship,  and  then  with  evident  wonder  tliat  all  do  not  realize  Iheir 
presence.     She  sees  diem  come  and  go;  marks  their  pleasure  and  disappointment;  ai>d. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

412  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

were  it  not  for  the  materialistic  scepticism  she  meets,  would,  perhaps,  never  meet  an  earthly 
Iriend  without  calling  attention  lo  a  presence  near  them  they  may  still  cherish  in  their  mem- 
ory, or  may  have  forgotten.  We  would  delight  to  give  you  many  of  her  visions,  but  have 
Mled  to  secure  her  consent.  Nothing  but  the  highest  sense  of  religious  duty,  and  that  after 
repeated  admonitions  from  her  spirit  monitors,  could  induce  her  to  allow  even  this  brief  no- 
tice, and  the  use  we  make  of  the  communications  that  follow : 

"  '  Miss  Agnes  Morrison  was  developed  under  your  own  observation.  She  has  felt  the 
retarding  influence  of  ridicule  from  those  who  know  nothing  of  the  difficulties  attending  a 
development  so  extraordinary,  and  those  who  indulged  it,  now  wonder  why  she  has  not  ad- 
vanced more  rapidly.  She  is  what  we  would  call  a  pictorial  medium,  and  presents,  at  times, 
the  highest  psychical  and  spiritoal  truths  under  symbols  most  beautiful  and  impressive.  She 
has  never  failed  to  convince  all  who  have  taken  the  time  and  pains  necessary  to  an  honest 

' ' '  My  daughter  Virginia  bpth  writes  and  speaks  under  spirit  impressions.  Her  manner, 
voice,  and  language  are  graceful  and  appropriate  m  the  extreme.  We  had  no  thought  of 
her  as  a  medium  till  we  were  advised  of  her  peculiar  organization  and  capacity,  from  the 
spirit-world.  She  seems  not,  as  yet,  aware  of  lier  strange  privilegeswhen  in  liie  normal  state, 
and  is  more  interested  in  what  she  has  been  writing  or  speaking  than  even  the  astonished 
isteners  who  witness  her  happy  and  impressive  transformations." 

One  of  the  most  extraordinarj-  evidences  of  supramundane  power  afforded 
by  this  highly  gifted  family  to  the  world,  came  through  Dr.  Fet^uson's  little 
girl,  whose  wonderful  phenomenal  endowments  have  been  so  thoroughly  at- 
tested by  numerous  still  living  witnesses,  that  we  feel  justified  in  transcribing 
her  father's  account  of  her  development  in  his  own  candid  and  truthful  words. 
He  writes ; 

"  In  the  summer  of  1854,  my  daughter  was  on  a  visit  lo  our  friends  at  Merryville,  Ken- 
tucky, the  country  seat  of  Dr.  Charles  Merryweather.  She  had  been  there  two  weelcs 
prior  to  a  proposed  visit  by  her  mother  and  myselt  She  was  a  favorite  of  the  family,  but 
was  not  then  recognized,  either  by  them  or  us,  as  a  medium  for  any  form  of  what  they  called 
spiritual  manifestations.  When  we  arrived  we  were  surprised  to  learn  from  the  venerable 
matron  of  the  mansion,  and  from  Mr.  W.  D.  Merryweather,  that  our  daughter  had  exhib- 
ited a  fact  more  astounding  than  any  we  had  recorded  or  witnessed.  Her  mother  heard  it 
with  evident  pain,  for  it  was  the  desure  of  her  heart  that  no  one  of  her  children  should  be 
called  upon  to  bear  the  reproaches  attached  to  mediumship  liefore  an  ignorant  and  preju- 
diced people.  I  heard  it  with  grave  suspicion  that  my  friends  were  trying  to  deceive  me. 
I  had  told  them  such  strai^e  experiences  that  I  feared  they  were  disposed  to  set  off  my  truth- 
ful representations  with  an  effort  to  see  how  much  I. could  believe.  Indeed,  I  was  offended 
at  their  story,  and  felt  that  I  was  not  treated  as  I  deserved.  So  seriously  did  I  feel  this 
that  I  determined  not  to  remain,  even  with  tried  friends,  where  there  was  a  trifling  with  great 
(ruths,  and  especially  as  I  had  gone  to  them  for  a  respite  from  the  foolish  and  distracting  jar- 
gon of  the  city  upon  this  great  subject. 

"They  saw  and  felt  my  condition  of  roind,  and  assured  me  they  were  never  more  smcere. 
Their  manner  confounded,  but  did  not  convmce  me.  It  served,  however,  to  relieve  me  from 
all  idea  of  trespass  upon  my  serious  method  of  treating  the  subject,  and  I  remained. 

"  These  persons  averred  that  my  little  daughter,  standing  m  the  centre  of  the  drawing- 
room,  in  the  presence  of  eight  or  ten  members  of  the  liunily,  came  under  a  deep  and  strange 
spell,  which  imparted  a  beaming  expresaon  to  her  countenance,  and  gave  a  womanly  seS- 
possession  to  her  manner ;  that  then  she  ordered  a  clean  teacup  and  silver  spoon.  When 
brought,  she  subjected  each  to  the  scrutiny  of  every  individual  present,  and  required  each  to 
examine  and  pronounce  them  clean.  Then,  selecting  Miss  King  to  stand  by  her  side,  she 
resumed  her  place  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  and,  m  gleeful  spirits,  commenced  stirring  the 
spoon  in  the  vacant  cup.  All  of  this  seemed  meaningless  enough,  and  she  joined  the  wit- 
nesses in  their  playful  remarks  respecting  it,  all  the  time,  however,  exhibiting  a  manner 
clearly  not  her  own.  Suddenly  she  claimed  to  be  acting  under  tjie  direction  of  an  invisible 
chemist  —  once  the  head  of  this  family,  and  deceased  some  ten  years — and  an  Indian  chieftain, 
and  requbmg  that  all  should  remain  unmoved  in  their  ^aces,  said  that  a  power  of  spirit 
over  form  should  be  presented,  such  as  no  one  present  bad  ever  witnessed. 

"  She  continued  the  stirring  of  the  spoon  in  the  cup,  and  again  subjected  it  to  the  obser- 
vation of  each  one  present.  Then,  returning  to  the  centre  of  the  room,  ui  what  they  sup- 
posed was  about  five  minutes,  she  presented  the  cup  with  over  a  teaspoonful  of  an  ointment. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  413 

dark  in  color,  and  distinctly  odorous  all  over  the  room,  with  which  she  anointed  the  face  of 
the  gentleman  of  the  house  ;  he  was  suffering  from  neuralgia,  and  received  immediate  relief. 

"  She  then  demanded  to  see  evety  patient  on  the  plantation,  young  and  old,  in  a  negro 
family  of  over  one  hundred  souls,  for  each  of  whom  she  precribedas  if  with  a  full  knowledge 
of  the  art  of  medicme.  Among  the  number  was  a  lad  of  fourteen,  who,  in  some  encounter, 
had  dislocated  his  arm  at  the  shoulder  joint.  They  were  on  the  eve  of  sending  for  the 
family  surgeon,  a  distance  of  six  miles,  when  she  replaced  the  dislocated  arm,  bound  it  and 
fastened  it  securely  to  the  body,  with  professional  skill,  and  was  then  relieved  from  the  spell 
or  trance  in  which  she  had  acted,  with  every  evidence  that  she  scarce  knew  anything  that 
had  occurred  ^ce  ^  first  came  into  the  drawing-room. 

"  Again  I  must  record  that  her  mother  seemed  deeply  pained  m  hearing  the  circumstan- 
tial narrative  of  these  facts,  and  said  to  me:  'I  would  rather  bury  our  dear  bright  child  than 
see  her  a  medium. '  I  felt  all  the  mother  said ;  but  as,  in  all  true  experiences  in  life,  I  had 
learned  to  know  that  a  power  supreraedirects  our  destiny,  I  accepted  the  strange  esperience. 
The  child  seemed  to  fee!  this,  and  nestled  to  me,  when  again  she  became  entranced,  and 
produced  before  me  and  four  other  persons  the  same  result.  In  this  case  she  prescribed 
for  a  man  who  happened  to  come  m  at  the  tune,  and  was  much  emaciated  from  loss  of 
blood,  caused  by  a  terrible  wound  inflicted  upon  him  by  an  enraged  negro  some  months  be- 
fore. She  directed  that  he  diould  seek  and  make  free  use  of  chalybeate  water,  and  as  there 
was  none  near,  she  ordered  a  glass  of  rain-water  to  be  brought,  which  she  stirred  for  some 
minutes  with  a  spoon,  pronounced  it  chalybeate,  and  gave  him  to  drink.  He  also  pro- 
nounced it  such.  He  is  a  phyacian  in  that  neighborhood,  and  has  often  avowed  that  what 
he  drank  was  as  distinctly  chalybeate  as  that  which  he  afterwards  sought,  and  by  which  he 
was  benefited. 

"  These  facts,  with  all  our  eflbrts  to  conceal  them,  became  generally  known,  and  were 
treated  with  ridicule  or  respect,  according  to  the  character  of  the  journals  that  gave  them 
circulation.  They  were,  of  course,  inaccurately  stated,  and  I  was  appealed  to  by  scientific 
men  m  many  parts  of  the  Union  for  a  true  statement.  This  I  made,  and  it  was  published 
in  the  New  York  Spiritual  Telegraph,  over  my  own  signature,  and  with  the  attestation  of 
all  who  witnessed  the  manifestations.  It  is  due  to  troth  to  say  that  this  manifestation  was 
never  given  upon  demand,  and  in  each  case  it  was  evidently  the  result  of  a  care  and  direc- 
tion, superior  in  every  respect  to  that  of  either  parents  or  friends. 

"  One  day,  some  months  afterwards,  when  tnis  daughter  was  at  school  at  Nashville,  she 
was  found  by  her  teacher  weeping  inconsolably,  and  was  sent  home,  refusing  to  give  to  any 
one  but  myself  a  reason  for  her  grief  I  was  sent  for,  when  she  s^d,  with  deep  sobs,  '  It  is 
gone  1 '  '  What,  my  child  ? '  said  I.  '  The  power  I '  she  replied.  I  soon  understood  her 
trouble,  and  reassured  her,  more,  perhaps,  ty  my  manner  than  by  anything  1  said,  for  I  never 
felt  more  at  a  loss  than  in  the  strange  and  now  sad  esperience  of  a  most  lovely  and  dutiful 
chQd.  A  week  passed,  and  all  noticed  that  die  seemed  as  one  who  had  lost  a  parent  or  a 
friend.  My  readence  was  near  the  academy.  One  day,  returning  from  the  city  on  toot,  my 
little  girl  came  running,  all  alive  with  joy,  and  on  taking  her  in  my  arms,  she  exclaimed,  '  I 
have  got  it  again,  pa !  '  What  ? '  was  my  question.  '  I  can't  make  the  medicine,  but  1  can 
write,  said  she.  '  To-day  I  was  called  on  in  my  class  for  a  composition.  I  could  not 
write  one.  I  thotight  I  would  ask  you  to  do  it  for  me,  when  the  teacher  required  that  each 
one  of  the  class  should  retire  and  brmg  a  composition  lo  her.  I  went  away,  and  while 
grieving  that  I  could  think  of  nothing  to  write,  my  hand  felt  just  as  it  did  when  I  made  the 
medicme,  and  I  wrote  a  composition,  which  Miss  S.  says  is  beautiful,  and  she  asked  me  if  I 
Bad  not  committed  it  to  memory  from  some  boot.'  This  power  of  writii^  continued,  and 
its  blessing  tons  all  need  not  be  further  described." 

Besides  these  interesting  personages.  Dr.  Ferguson  makes  high  and  eulo- 
gistic mention  of  a  lady  well  known  in  Memphis,  Tennessee,  Mrs.  Winchester 
by  name,  a  person  of  the  highest  social  position,  wealth,  and  standing,  and, 
amongst  other  remarkable  endowments,  gifted  with  the  power  to  give  masonic 
signs,  and  go  through  all  the  degrees  of  masonry,  in  the  presence  of  the  most 
accomplished  of  the  order,  whose  testimony  to  her  "supernatural  knowledge 
of  their  craft  "  has  often  been  rendered  with  generous  candor. 

We  have  frequently  had  occasion  to  show  how  intimately  the  progress  of 
the  movement  has  been  blended  with  the  personal  experiences  of  its  human 
agents,  and  it  is  this  feature  of  Spiritualism  which  must  plead  our  apology  for 
dwelling  so  long  on  the  influence  of  Dr.  Ferguson  and  his  family,  and  for  pro- 

Hosled  by  Google 

4^4  HISTORY  OF  MODERlf 

ceeding  to  relate  some  experiences  of  the  author's  which  became  of  con- 
siderable importance  in  the  advancement  of  the  cause  in  Memphis,  Ten- 

When  first  invited  to  lecture  at  ilemphis  in  1859,  Mrs,  Hardinge  was 
greeted  with  a  cordial  welcome  trom  a  Urge  and  enthusiasticTsody  of  friends, 
together  with  avast  concourse  of  listeners,  who  attended  her  sabbath  lectures, 
at  \diich,  however,  frequent  and  unmistakable  signs  of  hostility  were  mani- 
fested. 

This  spirit  of  antagonism  soon  took  the  shape  of  a  religious  persecution, 
carried  on  cheifly  by  the  editor  of  the  Memphis  Inquirer,  a  professed 
organ  of  the  Presbyterian  party  m  the  city. 

Besides  the  most  bitter  tone  of  insult  towards  Spiritualism,  it  pleased  the 
editor  of  this  Christian  journal  to  confess  that  the  favorite  Southern  institu- 
tion was  just  at  that  time  resting  on  the  edge  of  a  "slumbering  volcano," 
whose  irruptive  fires,  he  seemed  to  think,  it  was  the  peculiar  province  of  Mrs. 
Hardinge  to  kindle  into  consuming  fury. 

The  repeated  and  merciless  insults  with  which  all  the  author's  public 
addresses  were  lashed,  excited  in  her  ifiends  the  deepest  indignation,  and 
frequently  provoked  the  lady  to  retort,  or  at  lea;t  to  deny  the  atrocious  alle- 
gations with  which  she  was  assailed.  For  some  weeks,  however,  this  just 
and  reasonable  course  of  defence  was  hindered  by  the  emphatic  remon- 
strances of  her  spirit  friends,  who  constantly  urged  her  to  "wait  a  little 
longer,"  assuring  her  that  her  time  had  not  yet  come,  but  would,  if  she  only 
consented  to  follow  their  advice,  and  wait  for  the  opening  of  the  gates  by 
their  hands,  rather  than  vainly  attempt  to  right  herself.  "  Wait,  Emma,  wait," 
they  would  whisper;  "bide  your  time  and  ours;  we  are  not  unmindful,  nor 
yet  powerless  to  do  you  justice;  only  wait  until  we  bid  you  write."  Spirits 
never  forget,  but  they  take  their  own  time  to  work  out  their  purposes. 

A  few  weeks  before  the  close  of  Mrs.  Hardinge's  engagement  in  Memphis, 
she  had  agreed,  according  to  her  custom,  to  lecture  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Leath  Orphanage,  an  institution  which  was  greatly  in  want  of  funds,  and 
for  which  the  guardians  had  solicited  her  willing  aid. 

On  the  day  fixed  for  the  lecture,  the  proprietor  of  the  hall  was  compelled 
to  close  the  doors  at  the  commands  of  a  set  of  "roughs,"  who,  led  on  by 
several  well-known  clerical  gentlemen,  savagely  threatened  to  lynch  all  par- 
ties concerned,  if  they  dared  to  proceed  with  the  lecture. 

Tlie  next  day  being  Sunday,  Mrs.  Hardinge,  when  preparing  for  her  morn- 
ing lecture,  was  advised  by  her  spirit' friends  tiiat  she  was  threatened  with 
some  danger  during  (he  exercises,  but  that,  if  she  had  faith  in  dieir  power 
and  protection,  nodfing  earthly  could  harm  her. 

Communicating  this  warning  to  her  friends,  and  entreating  her  kind  hostess 
to  abstain  from  accompanying  her,  the  lecturer,  attended  by  her  host  and 
some  members  of  his  family,  who  were  resolved  to  share  any  danger  incident 
to  their  speaker,  proceeded  to  enter  upon  her  Sabbath  morning's  duties. 

When  the  lecturer  had  spoken  about  half  an  hour,  a  large  stone  was 
thrown  through  the  window  exactly  opposite  to  where  she  stood,  shivering 
several  panes  of  glass,  and  falling  with  such  force  and  correct  aim  that,  had 
it  hit  a  few  feet  above,  and  struck  her  forehead,  instead  of  falling  exactly  at 
her  feet,  tiie  career  of  the  author  must,  dien  and  there,  have  closed  on  this 
mortal  sphere  of  existence. 

Many  of  the  audience  rose  in  consternation,  but  so  perfect  was  the  spirit- 
ua!  control  of  the  speaker,  that  her  voice  never  faltered,  her  attitude  was  not 
changed,  nor  was  a  syllable  in  the  sentence  she  was  uttering  broken  or  sus- 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  4^5 

peuded.  Seemingly  wholly  unconscious  of  tlie  interruption,  she  proceeded 
with  such  unwavering  steadiness  that  quiet  and  order,  were  instantly  restored 
and  no  one  in  that  audience  dreamed  that  she  had  even  been  conscious  of 
her  imminent  peril,  until  the  close  of  the  address,  when,  stooping  to  pick  up 
the  stone  which  still  lay  in  ugly  proximity  to  her  feet,  she  remarked  that  "  in 
the  progress  of  all  true  reforms,  the  projection  of  vituperation,  insults,  false- 
hoods, and  stones,  might  be  regarded  as  striking  arguments,  but  they  were 
rarely  convincing."  , 

The  next  morning  the  Memphis  Inquirer  seemed  to  have  exhausted  itself 
in  terms  of  abuse  wherewith  to  belabor  the  obnoxious  lecturer  for  the  high 
crime  and  misdemeanour  of  attempting  to  lend  the  aid  of  her  infidehc  talents 
to  build  up  the  "  Leath  Orphan  Asylum." 

He  denounced  the  projector  of  the  missile  in  terms  which  left  no  doubt 
that  his  error  was  not  the  act  itself,  but  a  false  aim  and  lack  of  success,  and 
concluded  Ms  string  of  invectives  by  an  unfortunate,  string  of  falsehoods, 
wherein  he  accused  Mrs.  Hardinge  of  being  a  "  New  England  Abolitionist," 
instead  of  an  Old  England  Spiritualist ;  of  forcing  her  services  upon  the  guar- 
dians of  the  "Leath  Orphan  Asylum,"  instead  of  simply  responding  m  the 
affirmative  to  an  earnest  invitation  from  that  body  to  lecture  for  them  ;  of 
seeking  to  propagate  her  "infamous  opinions"  through  a  charitable  plea,  in- 
stead of  admitting  that  the  lecturer  had  insisted  that  the  audience  should 
choose  any  subject  they  pleased  for  her  discourse,  after  she  had  taken  her  seat 
on  the  platform,  and  of  being  one  of  the  atrocious  "free  love  party,"  instead 
of  having  been  for  years  an  indefatigable  laborer  to  redeem  the  unhappy  out- 
cast woman  from  the  wrongs  which  free  love  had  put  upon  her,  a  work  with 
which  Mrs.  Hardinge's  name  had  been  even  more  widely  associated  dian 
with  Spiritualism, 

Finally,  die  writer  concluded  this  awkward  tissue  of  "  slight  mistakes  "  by 
insisting  that  "if  the  people  of  Memphis  could  not  sustain  then-  orphan 
asylums  without  importing  infidel  lecturers  from  the  North,  their  true  course 
was  to  "let  tliem  slide,"  alleging,  in  substance,  that  the  bodies  of  hungry 
orphans  were  of  no  account,  whilst  the  souls  of  rabid  sectarians  were  in 

This  remarkable  exposition  of  the  Scripture  parable  of  the  Good  Samari- 
tan  no  sooner  appeared  on  the  Monday  morning  in  die  columns  of  the  Presby- 
terian oi^an,  over  the  assumed  signature  of  "An  old  Subscriber,"  than  the 
spirit  guides  of  the  slandered  lecturer  enunciated,  in  then-  usual  emphatic 
whisper,  "  Emma,  the  time  has  come  ;  take  your  pen  and  write." 

It  were  needless  to  reiterate  the  arguments  which  fell  from  the  pen  of  the 
spiritually  guided  medium. 

It  is  enough  to  say  that,  after  a  formal  and  emphatic  denial  of  the  country, 
character,  office,  and  acts,  which  had  been  falsely  attributed  to  her,  the  lec- 
turer proceeded  to  enter  into  a  full  and  elaborate  description  of  what  her 
doctrines,  behef,  and  practices,  really  were,  and  to  institute  a  not  unnatural 
comparison  between  her  statements,  the  action  of  the  religions  papers,  and 
the  rehgious  "  old  subscriber,"  in  general,  and  the  hfe  and  teachings  of  the 
master  they  professed  to  follow,  in  particular. 

When  Mrs.  Hardinge  intimated  to  her  host  her  wish  that  he  should  carry 
her  letter  to  the  office  of  the  Memphis  Inquirer  for  immediate  publication, 
her  friend  asked  her  if  she  was  insane,  or  deemed  him  so  ■  but  on  her  confi- 
dent  assurance  that  the  letter  would  be  accepted,  and  that  the  editor  was  al- 
ready under  the  influence  of  an  invisible  presence,  which  would  compel  liim 
to  print  it,  Mr.  C.  agreed  "  to  try  it  on." 

Hosted  by  Google 

4r6  HISTOR  Y  OF  MODERN 

The  trial  was  successful ;  the  letter  was  published,  read,  and  sold,  until, 
before  noon  on  the  day  of  publication,  extra  editions  were  in  wide  demand, 
to  satisfy  the  suddenly  awakened  interest  which  the  subject  had  at  last  begun 
to  excite. 

Truly  the  long  delayed  writing  came  in  due  season,  as  it  not  only  redeemed 
the  character  of  the  writer,  but  went  from  house  to  house  as  a  missionary  for 
that  noble  cause,  which,  until  then,  could  scarcely  obtain  any  other  hearing 
in  Memphis  than  through  the  medium  of  newspaper  ribaldry.  The  editor  of 
the  paper  himself,  shrinking  from  the  mortification  of  the  transaction  behind 
the  excuse  of  "correspondence,"  acknowledged  that  "  the  old  subscriber" 
had  "got  whipped,"  and  declined  to  prosecute  further  attacks  on  so  "dan- 
gerous" an  antagonist. 

This  admission  was  generally  interpreted  by  the  community  into  the  edi- 
torial purpose  to  "  let  it  slide,"  which  significant  sentence  became  for  a  long 
time  a  popul^  by-word  "  on  street  and  'Change,"  whilst  an  attempt  to  over- 
reach in  business  was  met  by  the  expression,  "  You  can't  come  the  '  old  sub- 
scriber '  over  me." 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  popularity  of  these  phrases,  insignificant 
and  even  vulgar  as  they  were,  denoted  the  public  sentiment,  and  proved 
how  deep  a  hold  the  transaction  in  which  they  originated  had  taken  on  the 
mind  of  that  capricious  world,  that  is  so  easily  moved  in  favor  of  the  strong 
and  successful. 

By  obedience  to  the  spiritual  mandate  in  waiting  for  the  full  ripening  of 
time  and  opportunity,  the  cause  which  the  author  had  in  charge  to  propogate 
became  "  strong  and  successful,"  and  long  continued  to  remain  so  in  Mem- 
phis, Tennessee, 

CHAPTER  XL. 

UALISM       IN       THE 

SOUTH 

The  hurden  of  a  prophel"!  power 
FeU  on  me  in  thai  f«rful  h^r ; 

The  curtain  of  tiie  future  rose. 
I  m«,  bi  down  the  coming  lime, 
The  fiety  chasdKment  of  crime. 

The  Alabama  Legislature  and  the  Spirits — Prophecy  in  the  Alabama 
Legislative  Halls  —  Retribution  —  The  Crescent  City  —  Monsieur  Bar- 
thet's  Testimony — The  Little  Clairvoyant  and  the  Spirits — Mr.  James 
wingard,  the  medium^ author' s  correspondence, 

Sometime  about  the  month  of  January,  i860,  the  Legislature  of  Alabama 
passed  a  bill  declaring  that  any  person  or  persons  giving  public  spiritual  mani- 
festations in  Alabama  should  be  subject  to  a  penalty  of  five  hundred  dollars. 

We  have  given  the  substance,  though  not  the  exact  wording  of  this  edict, 
which  was  met  by  considerable  opposition,  not  only  on  the  part  of  great  num- 
bers of  Spiritualists  resident  in  the  State,  but  also  by  the  Governor  himself, 
who  refused  to  give  his  sanction  to  the  bill. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  417 

Mr.  GeOTge  Redman,  the  celebrated  physical  test  medium,  had  just  passed 
through  die  South,  and  remained  long  enough  to  create  an  immense  interest 
tliroughout  its  length  and  breadth. 

The  author  was  already  engaged  to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures  in  Mobile, 
and  nAimerous  invitations  were  sent  to  her  from  other  parts  of  the  State. 

As  Mrs.  Hardinge's  visit  was  anticipated  at  the  very  time  when  the  bill 
above  named  was  in  agitation,  its  friends  in  the  Legislature  considered  them- 
selves much  aggrieved  by  the  Governor's  refusal  to  sanction  its  passage,  and 
deeming  either  that  he  was  suspiciously  favorable  to  the  cause  it  was  designed 
to  destroy,  or  that  their  own  case  would  be  aggravated  by  the  atlvent  of  the 
expected  lecturer,  they  passed  their  bill  over  the  Governor's  veto,  just  twenty- 
four  hours  before  the  explosion  anticipated  in  her  arrival  could  take  place. 

On  landing  in  Mobile,  Mrs.  Hardinge  was  greeted  by  a  large  and  enthusi- 
astic body  of  friends,  but  found  herself  precluded,  by  legislative  wisdom,  from 
expounding  the  sublime  truths  of  immortality  in  a  city  whose  walls  were  plac- 
arded all  over  with  bills  announcing  the  arrival  of  Madame  Leon,  the  cele- 
brated "  seeress  and  business  clairvoyant,  who  would  show  the  picture  of  your 
future  husband,  tell  the  successful  numbers  in  lotteries,  and  enable  any  des- 
pairing lover  to  secure  the  affections  of  his  heart's  idol,"  etc.  Side  by  side 
with  these  creditable  but  legahzed  exhibitions,  were  flaming  announcements 
of  "the  humbug  of  Spiritualism  exposed  by  Herr  Marvel,"  widia  long  list  of 
all  the  astonishing  feats  which  "  this  only  genuine  living  wizard"  would  dis- 
play for  the  benefit  of  the  pious  State  where  angelic  ministry  might  not  be 
spoken  of. 

Mrs.  Hardinge  passed  through  Mobile,  leaving  many  warm  hearts  behind 
her,  who  would  fain  have  exchanged  these  profane  caricatures  for  the  glad 
tidings  which  beloved  spirit  friends  were  ready  to  dispense  to  the  worid. 

In  passing  through  the  capital  city,  Montgomery,  a  detention  occurred,  of 
some  hours,  in  forramga  railway  connection  if»  ^f^e  for  Macon,  Georgia,  when 
Mrs.  Hardinge  and  some  friends  travelling  in  her  company,  were  induced  to 
while  away  the  tedious  time  by  visiting  the  State  House.  The  legislature  was 
not  sitting  that  day,  and  one  of  the  party,  a  Spiritualist,  remarked  that  they 
were  even  then  standing  in  die  very  -h      b     f    m    h'  h  th  t  ob  o  ' 

enactment  aga  n      he  h  h  d  d 

The  day  was     arm     o     a  d  Th  m  b  ut 

few  sohtary  p  hwdohphd  h 

windows  of  th     e  h      wa  san  A       a  n 

but  sluggish  p 

At  that  pen  d^ — J     uarv     86    ^n  n        n       h   f 

whisper,  even,  that  the  war  spirit  was  abroad,  and  the  legions  of  death  and 
ruin  were  lighting  their  brands  and  sharpening  their  relentless  swords  to  be 
drenched  in  the  life-blood  of  millions,  had  made  itself  heard  in  the  land. 

The  long-cherished  purpose  of  hate  and  fratricidal  struggle  were  all  shroud- 
ed in  the  depths  of  profound  secrecy,  and  the  whole  Southern  country  might 
have  been  represented  in  the  scene  of  stillness  and  tranquillity  that  lay  out- 
stretched before  the  eyes  of  thj  watchers,  who  stood  in  die  State  House  of  the 
capital  city  of  Alabama,  on  that  pleasant  January  afternoon. 

There  were  present  six  persons  besides  the  author,  namely  :  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Adams,  of  Tioga  County,  Pennsylvania ;  Mrs.  Waters  and  her  son ;  a  Scotch 
lady  and  gentleman,  from  Aberdeen;  Mr.  Halford,  of  New  York  City;  and 
Mr.  James,  of  Philadelphia.  All  but  the  motlier  and  son  from  Scofland  were 
acquainted  with  the  author,  and  more  or  less  sympathetic  with  her  belief;  ail 
are  now  living  and  willing  to  testify  to  what  follows. 
37 

Hosted  by  Google 

4t8  history  of  MODERIT' 

.Suddenly  Mrs  Hardinge  became  entranced,  when  die  whole  scene,  lajdng 
outstretched  before  her  eyes,  appeared  to  become  filled  with  long  lines  of 
glittering  horse  and  foot  soldiers,  who,  in  martial  pomp  and  militar}  discipline, 
filed,  rank  after  rank  and  regiment  after  regiment,  through  the  streets  of 
Montgome»y,  and  then  passed  off  into  distance,  and  were  lost  to  view. 

Meantime  the  crasli  of  military  music  seemed  to  thrill  through  the  clair- 
voyant's ears,  at  first  merely  marking  the  tramp  of  the  vast  bodies  of  infantry 
with  a  joyous  rhythm,  but  anon,  as  it  died  off  in  their  receding  march,  wild, 
agonizing  shrieks  commingled  with  its  tones,  and  the  thundering  roll  of  the 
drums  seemed  to  be  muffled  by  deep,  low,  but  heart-reuding  groans,  as  of 
human  sufferers  in  dieir  last  mortal  agony. 

At  lengdi  all  was  still  again,  the  last  gleam  of  the  muskets  flashed  in  the 
sunlight  and  melted  away  in  the  dim  horizon;  die  last  echo  of  the  strangely 
mingled  music  and  agony  ceased,  and  then,  over  the  whole  radiant  landscape, 
there  stole  an  advancing  army  of  clouds,  like  a  march  of  tall  gray  columns, 
reaching  from  earth  to  the  skies,  and  filling  the  air  with  such  a  dense  and 
hideous  gloom,  that  the  whole  scene  became  swallowed  up  in  the  thick,  serried 
folds  of  mist.  In  the  midst  of  these  cloudy  legions,  the  eye  of  the_  seeress 
could  discern  innumerable  forms  who  seemed  to  shiver  and  bend,  as  if  in  the 
whirl  of  a  hidden  tempest,  and  flitted  restlessly  hither  and  thither,  aimless, 
and  hopeless,  apparently  driven  by  some  invisible  power  from  nothing  to 
nowhere. 

And  these  mystic  shadows,  flitting  about  in  the  thick  grayness,  were  un- 
bodied souls ;  not  like  visitants  from  the  bright  summer  land,  nor  yet  beings 
resembling  the  dark,  undeveloped  "dwellers  on  the  direshold,"  whom  eardily 
crimes  held  bound  near  their  former  homes,  but  they  seemed  as  if  they  were 
misty  emanations  of  unripe  human  bodies,  scarcely  conscious  of  their  state, 
yet  hving,  actual  individualities,  once  resident  in  mortal  tenements,  but  torn 
from  their  sheltering  envelope  too  soon,  or  too  suddenly,  to  have  acquired 
the  strength  and  consistency  of  a  fresh  existence.  And  yet  the  numbers  of 
these  restless  phantoms  were  legion,  and  their  multitude  seemed  to  be  ever 
increasing,  when,  lo !  this  weird  phantasmagoria  too  passed  away,  but  not 
before  tlie  seeress  had,  with  entranced  lips,  described  to  the  listeners  every 
feature  of  the  scene  she  had  witnessed. 

Then  the  influence  seemed  to  deepen  upon  her,  and  she  pronounced 
words  which  the  young  Scotchman,  Mr.  Waters,  a  phonographic  writer,  tran- 
scribed upon  the  spot  to  the  following  eff'ect : 

"Woe,  woe  to  thee,  Alabama  ! 

"Fair  land  of  rest,  thy  peace  shall  depart,  thy  glory  be  shorn,  and  the  proud  bigots,  ty- 
rants, and  cowards,  who  have  driven  God's  angels  back  from  Ihycities,  even  in  this  chamber, 
have  sealed  thy  doom,  and  their  own  together. 

"Woe  to  thee,  Alabama  !    Ere  five  drear  yearshave  fled,  thou  shalt  at  as  a  widow,  desolate. 

"The  staff  from  thy  husband's  hand  shall  be  broken,  the  crown  plucked  from  his  head, 
the  sceptre  rent  from  his  grasp. 

"  Thy  sons  shall  be  slain,  thy  legislators  moclied  and  bound  with  the  chains  thou  hast 
fastened  on  others. 

"The  blind  ones,  who  have  proscribed  the  spirits  of  love  and  comfort  from  ministry  in 
thy  homes,  shall  be  spirits  themselves,  and  ere  those  five  years  be  passed,  more  spirits  than 
bodies  shall  wander  in  the  streets  of  Alabama,  homeless,  restless,  and  unripe;  torn  from 
their  earthly  tenements,  and  unfit  for  their  heavenly  ones,  until  thy  grass-grown  streets  and 
thy  moss-covered  dwellings,  shall  be  the  ha,unts  of  legions  of  nnboi^ed  souls,  whom  thy 
.crimes  shall  have  violently  thrust  into  eternity  I " 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  413 

When  this  involuntary  prophecy  of  evil  import  was  read  by  the  young 
scribe  to  the  disenthralled  medium,  her  own  horror  and  regret  at  its  utterance 
far  exceeded  diat  of  any  of  her  aghast  listeners,  not  one  of  whom,  any  more 
than  herself,  attached  to  it  any  other  meaning  than  an  impression  produced 
by  temporary  excitement  and  the  sphere  of  the  unholy  legislative  chamber. 

How  deeply  significant  this  fearful  prophecy  became  during  the  ensuing 
five  years,  all  who  were  witnesses  to  its  utterance,  and  many  others,  to  whom 
it  was  communicated  in  that  same  year,  can  bear  witness  of 

Swept  into  the  red  gulf  of  all-consuming  war,  many  of  the  unhappy  gentle- 
men who  had  legislated  against  "  the  spirits  in  Alabama,"  became,  during  the 
ensuing  five  years,  spirits  themselves,  and  have  doubtless  realized  the  ines- 
timable privileges  wluch  the  communion  they  so  rashly  denounced  on  earth 
was  calculated  to  afford  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  spheres. 

In  other  respects,  the  fatal  prophecy  lias  been  too  literally  fulfilled.  Many 
a  regiment  of  brave  men  have  marched  out  of  the  city  streets  of  Alabama, 
only  to  return  as  unbodied  souls,  and  to  behold  the  streets  grass-grown  and 
deserted,  and  die  thresholds  which  their  mortal  feet  might  never  again  cross, 
overspread  with  the  moss  of  corruption  and  decay. 

Alabama  has  truly  "  sat  as  a  widow,  desolate."  Her  strength  has  been 
shorn,  her  beaut)  gone.  No  State  has  sent  fordi  a  greater  number  of  brave 
and  devoted  victims  to  the  war  than  Alabama ;  no  Southern  State  has  suffered 
more  fearfully.  May  God  and  kind  angels  lift  the  war  curse  from^  her 
widowed  head ! 

The  following  extract  from  a  letter,  written  by  Mr.  Adams,  one  of  die  wit- 
nesses of  the  above  scene,  to  the  author,  in  1864,  from  New  York,  during 
a  temporary  sojourn  there,  will  carry  its  own  comment  on  the  fulfilment  of 
the  fatal  prophecy : 

"Noi*  that  my  two  poor  boys  are  in  dtuly  danger  of  themBclves  becoming  'unbodied 
spirits,'  Emma,  I  continually  revert  to  tha:  terrible  prophecy  of  yours,  uttered  in  Oieassem- 
bly  cliamlier  at  Montgomery.  Heaven  knows  I  was  then  so  little  prepared  Lo  expect  war 
or  any  reasonable  fulfilment  of  the  doom,  that  I  could  only  look  fo  see  some  great  pesti- 
lence, fire,  or  other  sweeping  calamity  falling  on  poor  Alabama.  Last  night,  when  I  read 
in  the  Herald,  of  the  sweeping  extermination  that  had  viated  those  two  fine  Alabama  regi- 
ments, I  could  not  help  going  to  Mrs.  Adams's  desk,  where  she  keeps  the  copy  tliat  young 
Waters  made  us  of  your  prophecy,  and  reading  it  aloud  to  the  whole  company. 

"  Out  friend  J.  B.,  who  was  present,  insisted  upon  seeing  the  date,  and  when  lie  saw  that 
it  was  January,  i860,  they  were  all  fairly  aghast,  and  said,  if  ever  there  was  genuine  proph- 
ecy it  was  contained  in  that  paper.  ^' 

The  next  halting  point  in  our  Southern  review  must  be  the  beautiful 
"  Crescent  City  "  of  New  Orleans,  where  as  large  a  number  of  true-hearted 
Spiritualists  resided  before  the  late  war,  as  in  any  place  of  similar  size  and 
population  in  the  country.  Messrs.  Thomas  L.  Harris  and  Thonias  Gales 
Forster,  had  awakened  an  irrepressible  interest  in  the  doctrinal  part  of  Spirit- 
ualism in  New  Orleans.  Dr.  Ferguson  and  other  eminent  speakers  had 
always  been  warmly  received  there,  and  several  distinguised  test  mediums 
had  given  its  inhabitants  the  most  conclusive  proofs  of  the  telegraphic  com- 
munion. Both  amongst  die  French  and  American  portions  of  the  popula- 
tion, a  number  of  fine  local  mediums  have  been  developed,  some  of  whom 
have  given  manifestations  second  to  none  in  phenomenal  marvel  and  power. 
We  shall  now  present  our  readers  widi  a  few  selections  from  the  published 
accoimts  of  New  Orleans  Spiritualism. 

Hosted  by  Google 

420  mSTORV  OF  MODERN 

The  first  extract  refers  to  the  experience  of  a  French  gentleman,  well  known 
in  the  spiritual  ranks  as  a  man  of  unimpeachable  veracity : 

"MIRACLES  IN  NEW  ORLEANS, —TELEGRAPH  PAPERS. 

•'The  following  literal  translation  of  a  communication  which  we  have  received  from  a 
French  gentleman  of  New  Orleans,  will  no  doubt  he  perused  with  deep  interest,  as  adding 
materially  to  the  common  stock  of  marvel?  and  inexplicabilities  that  are  now  being  de- 
veloped. We  have  only  to  add  that  the  communication  comes  to  us  well  authenticated  by 
collateral  testimony.  We  have  conversed  with  a  French  gentleman  of  this  city  who  is  inli- 
mitely  acqudnted  with  the  writer,  and  who  assures  us  that  the  latter  is  a  cool  and  scientific 
observer,  and  in  every  respect  a  reliable  man.  For  the  last  fourteen  years  he  has  been  con- 
■  nected  with  an  association  for  the  investigation  of  all  questions  coming  under  the  head  of 
animal  magnetism,  psychology,  etc.,  which  numbers  among  its  members  several  dis- 
tinguished gentlemen,  and,  with  the  rest,  the  Hon.  Felix  Garcia,  Preadent  of  the  Senate  ot 
Louisiana.  These  facts  render  it  highly  improbable  that  our  correspondent  has  been  deceived 
in  his  observations,  or  that  he  would,  by  any  means,  knowingly  deceive  others  in  relating 
them.— £^.  leUgraph: 

New  Ori,eans,  March  8,  1855. 
"  Messrs.   Partridge  and  Brittan  : 

"Dear  Sirs,  — Within  about  ax  weeks  we  have  successively  received,  through  an  en- 
tranced medium,  an  orphan  girl  between  thirteen  and  foittteen  years  of  age,  a  quantity  of 
articles,  which  I  will  enumerate,  in  round  numbers,  as  follows :  Sixty  engravings  on  paper 
one  sroaJt  crucifin,  fifty  small  aver  medals  of  different  sizes,  two  small  medals  of  gold,  and 
ten  small  books.  The  engravings  had  almost  all  been  made  in  Paris ;  they  represent  so 
many  different  religious  subjects ;  they  are  of  different  shapes  and  sizes,  but  in  general  they 
measure  about  three  inches  wide,  and  five  or  six  inches  high  ;  their  edges  are  indented  to  the 
depth  of  from  one-half  to  three-quarters  of  an  mch;  they  are  therefore  fragile,  but  they 
nevertheless  come  to  us  without  exhibiting  a  single  fold,  or  being  in  the  least  degree  crum- 
pled. The  medals  all  represent  the  Vu^in  Mary,  and  are  such  as  many  Catholics  suspend 
from  the  necks  of  their  children.  The  books  are  all  works  of  piety,  and  are  in  conformily 
10  the  Roman  faith.  Only  one  of  them  is  in  Enghsh,  this  having  more  than  300  pages,  of 
a  aze  a  little  lai^er  than  the  others.  The  others  are  in  French,  printed  in  France,  having 
284  p3ges,  measurmg  two  and  a  half  inches  one  way  and  three  and  a  half  inches  the  other, 
Bud  bemg  three-quarters  of  an  inch  thick.  All  these  books  seem  not  to  have  been  touched 
since  they  came  from  the  hands  of  the  bookbinder. 

"  There  were  also  sometimes  given  to  the  medium,  some  small  pieces  of  money,  which 
disappeared  in  her  hand  without  one  being  able  to  see  what  became  of  ihem. 

"In  these  diverse  operations,  the  medium  sometimes  held  her  hand  on  the  table,  and 
sometimes  uni/er  it.  She  would  now  and  then  say,  'Give,  then,"  or,  'Take,  then,' as  if 
she  were  speaking  to  some  one.  If  any  one  interrogated  her  on  this  subject,  she  would  say 
she  saw  some  children  like  herself. 

"  We  have  taken  that  girl  into  several  families  where  she  was  a  stranger,  and  there  also, 
salver  medals  and  books  have  been  received.  It  is  Scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  before 
commencing  a  sitting,  stringent  measures  were  taken  to  assure  ourselves  that  nothing  was 
hidden  either  in  the  clothes  of  the  medium  or  in  the  table. 

"  Last  Sunday  I  conducted  her  to  a  house  where  she  had  never  been.  The  room  was 
perfectly  lighted.  The  table,  which  was  a  common  one,  having  four  legs,  rnd  without  a 
drawer,  measured  two  feet  wide,  and  three  feel  long.  The  medium  and  the  master  of  the 
house  seated  themselves  at  the  ades  of  the  table,  and  the  mistress  and  the  youngest  daugh- 
ter sat  at  the  ends.  Two  other  persons  and  myself  remained  a  step  from  the  table,  and  in 
such  a  poation  that  we  could  see  the  hands  of  the  medium. 

"Within  a  few  seconds  the  girl  vras  entranced.  Soon  her  right  hand  extended  and 
eraq>ed,  on  the  back  of  the  hand  [as  it  seemed  to  us]  of  the  ladyofthe  house,  attingat  her 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  431 

lefE,  a  smalt  atver  medal,  which  she  immediaf  e!y  placed  in  the  hand  of  her  yoang  neighbor 
on  the  right,  a  girl  younger  than  herself. 

"A  few  moments  after,  the  same  right  hand  of  the  medium  passed  raider  the  table  ;  she 
scratched  the  under  surface  with  her  nails,  making  a  noise,  and  then,  after  a  few  seconds, 
the  hand  rose  upon  the  table,  holding  a  book  such  as  I  have  described,  and  which  the  medium 
also  gave  to  her  young  ndghbor  on  the  right.  A  few  minutes  afterward  the  medium  awoke, 
the  sitting  having  occupied  about  four  minutes. 

"Some  moments  afterward  it  was  written  by  the  hand  of  the  gentleman  of  the  house, 
that  the  two  articles  had  been  given  by  anrther  of  his  daughtets,  which  daughter  was  then 
fifteen  years  old,  to  her  younger  sister,  who  was  eleven. 

"I  affirm  (hat  whQe  this  took  place,  this  book  was  not  concealed  in  the  clothes  of  the 
medium,  nor  was  it  in  the  table.  I  affirm  again,  that  the  medium  hadno  accomplice  among 
the  six  persons  b  the  room  who  observed  her —  the  only  ones  who  were  in  the  room.  I 
affirm,  a^ain,  that  according  to  no  known  law  could  this  book  have  come  by  a  power  simply 
human. 

"  Tliese  are  positive  facts,  which  a  number  of  serious  persons  observed  with  me,  and 
which  we  continue  to  study.  I  pass  m  silence  a  multitude  of  extremely  interestmg  particu- 
lars ;  they  would  make  my  letter  two  long. 

"  And  now,  as  the  Catholic  clergy  have  seemed  to  me  the  most  hostile  to  the  new  faith,  I 
will  say  that  the  young  orphan  has  been  msfructed,  and  still  acquiesces  in,  the  faith  of  the 
Church  of  Rome,  and  that  these  occurrences  have  taken  place  sometimes  in  the  presence  of 
zealous  Catholics.  In  general,  however,  the  sittings  have  taken  place  indiscriminately,  in  the 
presence  of  Catholics,  Protestants,  and  those  of  no  religion;  but  we  have  peieeived  no  differ- 
ence in  the  results,  unless  it  be  that  the  books  were  always  given  to  Catholics. 

"  Will  the  clergy  of  the  Roman  Church,  who  have  so  much  veneration  for  these  kind  of 
articles,  persist  in  declaring  that  we  are  in  commerce  with  his  satanic  majesty? 
"  Your  humble  servant, 

"Joseph  Earthet." 

Wonderful  as  were  these  demonstrations,  especially  as  strict  inquiry  has 
shown  that  the  child  was  repeatedly  searched  previous  to  the  stances,  and 
that  marvels  of  physical  mediumship,  which  it  was  wholly  impossible  to  pro- 
duce by  any  human  agency,  accompanied  her  wherever  she  went,  another 
letter  of  M.  Barthef  s,  dated  a  month  later  than  the  preceding,  reveals  a 
shadowy  side  to  the  girl's  mediumship,  which,  in  many  ways,  harassed  her 
friends  and  disclosed  peculiar  physical  conditions,  whidi  form  a  curious  fea- 
ture in  the  history  of  somnanibuhsm. 

The  child  herself  proved  conclusively  her  lucidity  of  vision  by  describing 
spirits  who  had  passed  away  long  prior  to  her  birth,  and  of  whom  she  had 
never  heard,  but  yet,  who  were  immediately  recognized  through  the  fidelity  of 
her  delineations. 

From  some  of  these  revelations  it  appeared  that  her  associates  in  the  mag- 
netic trance  were  often  spirits  of  vicious  tendencies,  and  that  whilst  some 
there  were  who  would  have  actually  impelled  her  to  crime,  others  appeared 
to  exert  a  salutary  and  restraining  influence  on  their  evil  propensities. 

Ignorant  as  the  world  has  been  of  the  real  conditions  of  spirit-life  and  its 
varied  states,  her  friends  would  have  revolted  with  grieved  tncreduhty  from 
these  disclosures,  had  they  not  been  convinced  of  their  reality  by  the  unmis- 
takable proofs  of  identity  which  the  child  gave  in  describing  the  appearance, 
names,  and  characteristics,  of  an  immense  number  of  spirits  wholly  unknown 
to  her. 

The  following  quotations  from  M.  Barthet's  second  letter  are  introduced  to 
represent  in  fairness  the  shadowy  features  of  the  case,  before  alluded  to  : 

Hosted  by  Google 

4^2  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

" Editors  of  the  Spiritual  Tdegraph,  etc: 

"  The  sun  had  not  yet  gone  down.  There  were  only  three  of  us, 
including  the  youug  girl.  Madam  S.  magnetized  the  latter,  and  asked  her,  when  she 
saw  that  she  was  asleep,  whether  we  would  receive  any  hooks  during  the  atting  that  even- 
ing.    '  I  do  not  know  ;  they  are  not  there,'  answered  the  child. 

'^' Madam  S.  continued:  'If  they  still  must  have  money,  I  will  give  them  some. 
Silence  for  some  moments  ensued  ;  then  the  sleeper  sdd  they  demanded  some ;  and  three 
small  pieces  of  money  were  given  her,  which  she  put  in  her  pocket  [where  there  were  already 
two  ear-rings  with  which  die  had  been  playing  in  the  morning,  for  she  is  very  childlike,  not 
appearing  to  be  more  than  twelve  years  old]. 

"  A  few  moments  afterward,  the  girl,  still  asleep,  arose  and  passed  into  the  adjommg 
room.  We  followed  and  watched  her.  Seated  at  a  distance  from  us,  she  spoke  in  a  sup- 
pressed voice,  butenergeticallyandwithgesticulations.  'No,no;I  will  not ;  itiswrong.' 
Then  she  left  her  seat,  and  went  and  took  one  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  room,  where  she 
continued  the  same  pantomime  and  discourse,  adding,  'You  are  a  thief ;  you  are  all  the 

time  stealing." Madam  S.  again  said  to  her: 'If  it  is  me  they  wish  to 

rob,  I  permit  them,  provided  they  only  rob  me,  and  take  from  me  nothing  but  money. 

•'  The  sleeper  still  seemed  to  resist,  but  it  soon  became  evident  that  she  yielded.  She 
passed  mto  the  room  of  Madam  S.  which  was  also  hers,  and  went  toward  the  closet, 
which  she  opened,  and  then  pulled  out  a  drawer,  among  the  diverse  contents  of  which  she 
searched  pretty  thoroughly  without  finding  the  coveted  object.  She  took  z  parie-nionnme, 
but  could  not  open  it.  Madame  S.  then  dropped  a  half-dollar  agdnst  the  hand  of  the 
seeker,  which  she  immediately  seiz^,  but  without  appearing  to  notice  what  was  passing  be- 
fore a^  around  her ;  neither  the  fall  of  the  money  nor  our  close  proximity  to  her,  seemed 
to  excite  her  attention.  Fmding  nothing  more  to  which  she  took  a  fancy,  or  perhaps  being 
satisfied  [for  it  afterward  appeared  that  she  had  also  stolen  a  brooch],  she  pushed  in  the 
drawer,  clo^d  the  closet,  went  into  another  room,  and  laid  down  her  whole  length  «ndcr 
a  bed  with  her  nose  against  the  wall.  I  foi^ot  to  say  that,  during  her  visit  to  the  closet, 
she  spoke  in  an  undertone,  and  turned  hei-  head  to  one  ade  as  if  she  were  listening  and 
taUng  care  not  to  be  disturbed.  She  even  cautioned  her  invisible  instigator  not  to  make 
any  noise.  We  were,  however,  almost  touching  her,  but  it  was  evident  that  our  presence 
did  not  annoy  her.  She  remained  under  the  bed  eight  or  ten  minutes  in  continual  conver- 
sation with  her  invisible  comrade.  She  spoke  in  a  tone  very  natural,  and  as  if  she  had  been 
far  from  the  ears  and  eyes  of  aU  observers.  Her  most  frequently  repeated  and  important 
sayingswere;  'You  take  too  much  at  a  time;  don't  take  all  to-day;  if  you  take  the  half- 
dollar  don't  take  the  brooch,  or  if  you  take  the  brooch  don't  take  the  half-dollar.  It  is  loo 
much  ■  Mr  C  '  —  the  father  of  Madam  S. ,  dead  about  twenty  years  —  '  will  perceive 
it  and  blab  it  out,  and  wUl  scold,  and  he  will  carry  it  all  back  to-night.  Don't  take  all ; 
at  another  time  yon  can  steal  it.'  She  dwelt  on  this  latter  word,  of  which  she  frequently 
made  use  during  this  scene.  - 

At  the  word  'brooch'  [epinglette]  Madam  S.  suspected  another  theft,  biie  ran  to 
her  closet  and  sought  in  vdn  a  brooch  which  she  knew  she  put  there.  It  was  an  object  on 
which  she  set  a  high  value,  as  it  had  been  given  to  her.     It  was  a  ample  leaf  in  gold. 

"Madame  S.  sought  in  vain  that  object.  The  somnambulist  must  have  taken  it 
without  our  knowledge.  The  latter,  still  under  the  bed,  continued  her  monologue  m  these 
iords:  'At  anothertime  we  will  steaL  You  will  teU  Alice  and  E.  — 'two  spirits  related 
to  the  family  of  Mr.  S. ,  who  Uved  in  the  same  house  with  us,  and  who,  during  their  life- 
time, had  a  great  love  of  money-'to  come,  and  we  will  steal  also  at  Mr.  L-'s.  He  has 
a  boK  which  is  kept  locked,  but  he  sometimes  fo^ets  the  key.     Let  us  go  and  see. 

"  After  saying  these  words  the  somnambulist  came  forth  from  her  hiding-place,  and  went 
into  the  room  of  Mr.  L.,  and  we  followed  her.  She  tried  the  dravrars  of  a  bureau,  hut 
could  not  open  them.  She  said  :  '  You  see  it  is  locked,  but  sometimes  he  leaves  the  key ; 
then  we  wiU  come  and  steal'  Then  retracing  her  steps,  she  came  again  to  the  room 
of  Madam  S.,  we  being  all  the  while  at  her  heels,  and  seemg  a  sick  lady  coming  whom 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  ifll 

wc  had  left  in  the  first  chamber,  slie  drew  back,  saying,  'See,  n.,whocomesI  Let  us  give 
her  room  to  pass.'  Slie  stood  still,  turning;  her  back  as  if  she  dreaded  to  be  discovered  ; 
but  here  also,  as  elsewhere,  our  presence  did  not  seem  to  annoy  her. 

"  Finally  she  retamed  to  the  room  where  she  first  lost  conscionsness  of  our  presence. 
There,  approaching  a  table  on  which  was  lying  a  pack  of  dominoes,  with  which  she  some- 
times  amused  herself,  she  called  her  inviable  comrade  saying,  '  Come ;  let  us  play  dominoes,', 
and  she  commenced  playing  herself  for  the  two.  I  thought  I  would  save  her  half  the 
trouble,  and  I  pm-poseiy  laid  down  one  of  a  wrong  number.  '  See,  one  has  put  a  five  for  a 
six.  Haven't  you  a  sin?  Very  well;  draw,'  and  her  own  hand  performed  the  office  indi- 
cated. The  pieces  played  by  the  somnambulist  were  well  joined;  however,  when  \  laid 
down  a  piece  in  two  instances,  she  drew  Ijack  her  hand  without  saying  anything,  as  if  she 
were  annoyed  by  some  obstacle  that  was  in  the  way. 

"Pretty  soon  she  left  the  table,  saying,  'You  are  a  stupid  girl;  yoo  don't  know  how  to 
play  ;  and  you  cheat. ' 

"  She  went  some  steps  to  seat  herself,  thus  approaching  our  presence,  and  when  we  were 
about  to  withdraw  from  her  she  expressed  the  desire  to  be  awaked. 
'  "That  being  done,  everything  indicated  her  complete  forgetfulness  of  what  had  oc- 
curred. Then,  searching  in  her  pockets,  she  complained  that  she  missed  her  ear-drops. 
That  evidently  was  all  she  knew.  We  observed  that  she  had  not  the  three  Uttle  pieces  of 
money  which  had  been  given  her  at  the  commencement  of  the  silting,  nor  had  she  the  half- 
doUar,  nor  the  brooch.  We  sent  her  out  upon  an  errand  in  order  that  we  might  in  het 
absence  examine  all  the  nooks  and  comers  where  she  had  been.  The  bed  was  displaced,  the 
carpet  taken  up,  etc.      Vain  researches  1 

"Night  having  arrived,  we  placed  ourselves  at  the  table,  as  was  our  custom.  Mr.  S. 
and  Mr.  D.  had  rejoined  us.  We  were  then  five  in  number.  In  a  few  seconds  the 
child  passed   into  the  abnormal  state,  and  certainly  without  the  agency,  at  least  voluntary, 

of  any  of  us  this  time Being  questioned,  the  medium  responded  that  the 

Uttle  thief  had  a  wry  countenance  and  crooked  figure ;  and  she  added  that  it  was  a  little 
girl  connected  with  the  family  of  Madam  S.  The  latter  said  she  reCognized  her  as  one 
of  her  couans,  dead  nearly  twenty  years,  and  who,  at  the  time  of  her  decease,  was  twelve 
years  old.  She  died  with  convulsions,  which  distorted  her  face  ;  she  was  much  given  to  pil- 
fering, but  as  she  was  sickly,  they  excused  all  her  fantasies. 

"  The  medium  arose  and  went  out  of  the  room,  passed  through  two  other  chambers,  and 
entered  the  dining-room,  in  order  to  seat  herself  at  the  common  table.  The  table,  ordma. 
rily  round,  but  formed  of  two  parts,  and  capable  of  being  extended  by  slides  and  by  sup. 
plying  additional  boards  in  the  middle,  was  now  oval. 

"  One  of  its  longer  ades  was  about  eight  inches  from  the  wall.  The  medium  took  a  seat 
at  the  end  of  the  table  so  as  to  bring  the  waU  on  her  right.  She  placed  her  hands  on  the 
table  with  the  pahns  downward.  There  was  a  light  burning  upon  the  end  of  the  table  next 
to  her,  and  directly  m  front  of  her,  and  its  flame,  standing  at  the  height  of  about  fifteen 
inches  above  the  smface  of  the  table,  shone  directly  in  her  face.  The  somnambulist  seemed 
totalkwith  another,  to  whom  she  said,  'Give  it  to  me  quick,  before  she  comes.'  As  she 
pronounced  these  words  she  quickly  extended  her  right  hand  at  a  point  between  the  table 
and  the  wall,  about  three  or  four  inches  below  the  top  of  the  table,  and  coniiequently  mto 
the  shade,  and  almost  immediately  the  hand  again  arose  with  a  pack^e,  which  was  neither 
enveloped  nor  tied  together,  but  consisted  of  fourteen  engravings  of  diverse  kmds,  like  those 
which  I  described  in  my  previous  letter.  They  measured  on  an  average,  about  four  inches 
by  five  or  six,  and  must  have  cost  at  least  two  dollars.  I  ran  to  the  opposite  side  of  the 
table ;  I  removed  that  end  a  little  further  from  the  wall,  and  looked  and  passed  my  hands 
everywhere. 

"Evidently  the  medium's  hand  had  not  extended  to  the  joint  where  the  ends  separate 
from  each  other  by  means  of  the  grooves,  and  where,  beades,  I  found  nothing  but  dust, 
and  the  pictures  were  very  clean.  Nor  were  they  in  the  least  crumpled,  which  would  cer- 
tainly not  have  been  the  case  if  they  had  been  until  then  concealed  in  the  girl's  clothet 

Hosted  by  Google 

4»4  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

My  ejLamination  completed,  I  took  my  position,  standing,  directly  behind  the  mediimu  The 
three  other  persons,  also  standing,  were  by  the  table  at  the  left  of  the  meiiiiuc,  and  near  her 
side  ;  but  in  the  meanwhile  the  medium  awoke. 

"That  which  is  now  to  be  related  we  can  certify  fully,  and  without  doubt. 

"All  preserving  our  places,  the  medium  seated  and  we  standing,  and  having  our  eyes  fixed 
on  the  girl's  hands,  which  had  resumed  their  place  upon  the  table,  with  the  palms  down 
ward,  this  is  what  we  witnessed  in  the  most  unmistakable  manner ;  for  everything  was  done 
slowly  in  tliis  last  phase  of  the  j&ftcif,  during  which  the  medium  continued  perfectly  awake; 

"I  said  to  the  girl:  'They  have  jnst  given  yon  those  pictures,  but  they  have  not  re- 
turned the  half<lolIar  which  they  have  stolen,  and  they  must  now  return  it.'  Immediately, 
to  the  great  surprise  of  the  medium,  and  also  somewhat  to  ours,  her  right  hand  slowly 
turned  palm  upward,  at  the  same  time  that  her  aim  performed  an  impulsive  movement. 
These  motions,  though  complex,  were  altogether  analogous  to  those  which  are  sometimes 
produced  by  the  will  of  the  magnetizor,  expressed  or  not,  upon  an  impressible  person.  The 
hand  then  moved  to  the  right  until  if  came  to  the  edge  of  the  table,  and  while  tht;  lingers 
were  not  fully  extended,  but  were  immoveable,  the  whole  hand  showed  every  appearance  of 
ri^dity. 

"  We  then  saw  the  hand  descend  three  or  four  inches  into  the  shadow  caused  by  the  edge 
of  the  table,  and  that  by  a  movement  of  its  own  which  was  little  dependent  upon  the  esten- 
Mon  of  the  arm. 

"This  immei'sion  of  the  hand  into  the  shade  only  continued  about  four  seconds,  during 
which  the  hand  did  not  stop  its  motion,  and  rose  again  with  the  same  slowness,  and  showed 
us,  at  the  instant  of  its  emergence  from  the  darkness,  the  half-dollar  lying  in  the  palm,  which 
had  been  continually  kept  upward,  and,  to  all  appearances,  rigid,  the  fingers  continually  re- 
mabing  in  fixed  positions.  Anjmpulave  movement  then  brought  the  arm  over  the  table, 
and  the  hand,  slowly  turning  over,  dropped  the  half-dollar  at  the  foot  of  the  chandelier. 
Then  the  hand  became  suddenly  free,  and  resumed  its  place  by  the  side  of  the  left  hand, 
which  had  not  stirred.  The  medium  said  she  had  felt  '  as  though  some  one  had  drawn  her 
hand  aside,  and  then  dropped  something  heavy  into  it. ' 

"I  again  spoke  and  said;  ' That  is  not  all ;  they  have  also  taken  from  you  fifteen  cents, 
and  they  must  bring  them  back  ;'  when  lo  !  the  same  hand,  performing  the  same  movements, 
and  with  the  same  slowness,  returned  again  and  threw  down  the  three  little  coins  by  the  side 
of  the  first  piece  I 

"'Let  them  bring  back  also  the  brooch,'  added  I ;  and  the  same  hand,  with  the  same  do- 
cility, the  same  precidon,  and  the  same  slowness,  doubtless  to  show  us  that  we  were  not  de- 
ceived, brought  back  the  same  brooch  I 

"  I  did  not  think  of  any  more  objects  to  reclaim,  and  we  were  entertiunmg  ourselves  with 
these  marvels  when  our  conversation  was  suddenly  interrupted.  It  would  appear  that  Mr. 
C,  with  whom  the  somnambulist,  during  the  scene  under  the  bed,  had  threatened  the  little 
inviable  thief,  was  at  his  post,  and  compelled  a  restitution ;  for.  after  a  short  pause,  nearly 
equal  to  the  previous  intervals,  and  as  if  we  had  before  us  a  mechanical  automaton,  the  same 
hand  made  two  more  excur^ons,  such  as  the  three  preceding,  with  a  little  interval  between 
them,  and  each  time  brought  back  one  of  the  forgotten  ear-drops,  of  which  the  girl  herself 
was  certiunly  not  thinking ;  for,  agreeably  surprised  when  she  saw  the  first  one,  she  ex- 
claimed, '  My  ear-rings  I '  and  this  was  said  in  a  tone  of  surprise  which  could  not  have  been 
feigned.     This  ended  the  sianct. 

"  Let  the  reader  notice  particularly  what  were  our  respective  positions.  I  was  standing 
behind,  and  looking  over  the  shoulders  of  the  medium.  The  ihiee  other  persons  were  at 
her  left,  also  standmg,  and  we  did  not  lose  an  instant  in  observing  the  agitated  hand  except 
while  it  remained  immersed  in  the  shadow,  and  w?j  less  distinctly  visible,  and  where  the 
objects  which  were  brought  back  to  us  could  not  be  seen  until  the  direct  rays  of  the  light 
fell  upon  them.  It  is  very  certain  that  the  hand,  during  its  immersion,  did  not  perform  any 
movement  of  its  own  ;  but  we  did  not  see  the  objects  come  to  her  hand,  nor  did  we  see  the 
hands  of  the  spirit. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  425 

"  Let  it  be  observeii,  also,  that  these  objects  could  not  have  been  concealed  in  the  child's 
sleeve,  and  if  they  had  been,  they  could  scarcely  have  been  got  out,  the  sleeves  being  tight 
at  tlie  wristbands.  Beades,  they  conld  not  have  been  slipped  down  over  the  forearm,  which 
only  attained  a  slight  inclination  below  the  horizontal  position.  Observe,  finally,  thai  the 
hand,  in  the  position  to  wliieh  it  descended  to  the  right,  between  the  table  and  the  wall, 
touched  nothing  solid,  and  that  there  was  no  nook  for  anything  to  be  hidden  in,  either  in 
the  table  on  the  one  hand,  or  in  the  wall  on  the  other,  and  that  the  hand  was  wholly  in  the 

M.  Barthef  s  letter,  which  is  dated  New  Orleans,  April  5,  1855,  extends  to 
a  far  greater  length  than  the  above,  but  throws  no  further  light  on  any  of  the 
manifestations. 

Many  circles  were  held  in  New  Orleans,  both  amongst  the  French  and 
Ametican  population,  at  which  all  the  tests  and  usual  phenomena  recorded 
in  other  portions  of  this  history  were  frequently  and  abundantly  repeated. 

Many  excellent  mediums  were  found  amongst  the  colored  population,  one 
of  whom,  a  French  Creole  named  Dr.  Valmour,  attained  a  hi^  and  deserved 
celebrity  as  a  healing  medium. 

Being  possessed  of  some  independent  means  of  his  own,  and  happily  enjoy- 
ing the  rare  boon  of  freedom,  this  noble  and  beneficent  Samaxitan  devoted 
his  gift  of  healing  to  the  world,  without  money  and  without  price,  and  his  suc- 
cesses were  so  marked  as  to  procure  for  him  a  wide-spread  celebrity  and  uni- 
versal respect. 

Another  noted  medium  of  the  "  Crescent  City,"  was  a  Mr.  Jaines  Wingard, 
sometimes  called  Captain  Wingard,  from  his  having  been  a  Mississippi  boatman. 

This  person,  wholly  uneducated,  and  a  plain,  simple,  straightforward  man, 
in  the  humblest  walks  of  life,  wrote  under  spirit  influence  in  Greek,  Hebrew, 
Arabic,  and  other  classical  and  oriental  languages,  in  the  purest  style  of  dic- 
tion. 

Up  to  the  period  of  the  war,  these  writings  were  carefiilly  preserved,  and 
occasionally  exhibited  by  Dr.  Hyde,  a  well-known  physician  of  New  Orleans, 
with  whom  diey  are,  it  is  believed,  still  deposited. 

An  account  of  Mr.  Wingard' s  skill  as  a  spirit  artist,  was  furnished  to  the 
editor  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  who  makes  mention  of  it  as  follows ; 

"COEIOUS  SPIRIT  PERFORMANCES. 

"Ths  Spiritual  Messenger  of  August  glh  contiuns  a  long  communication  from  Monaeor 
Joseph  Barthet,  of  New  Orleans,  in  which  he  details  the  particulars  of  some  wonderful  Spirit 
writings  and  drawings  recently  executed  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Wingard,  of  New  Orleans.  The 
writings,  drawings,  etc. ,  were  performed  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Barthet  and  others,  m  almost 
total  <^]iness,  on  paper  which  had  been  previously  examined  and  found  not  to  contain  any 

"  They  consist  of  communications  in  the  common  Roman  character,  and  in  the  English 
language  (  ofan  upper  portion  of  a  human  skeleton,  accurately  drawn  ;  various  astronomical, 
hierog^phical,  and  cabalistic  figures  ;  a  diagram  for  the  formation  of  a  spiritual  circle,  three 
verses  in  Greek,  fiw  lines  of  l3,tin  poetry,  seven  Ibes  of  French  poetry,  two  sentences  in 
Spanish,  an  inscription  In  Hebrew, —  all  of  which,  except  the  skeleton,  are  transcribed  in  the 
Messenger.  The  communications,  inscriptions,  etc.,  covered  ten  pages  of  foolscap,  and 
were  executed  in  the  space  of  about  one  hour.  In  his  ordinary  state,  Mr.  Wmgard  wouhi 
have  been  utterly  incapable  of  this  performance  even  in  the  light ;  and  no  man,  in  the  exer- 
cise of  the  merely  ordinary  powers  of  sense,  perception,  and  volition,  could  have  accom- 
plished this  feat  without  confusion  in  Ms  markings,  in  that  degree  of  darkness  which  rendered 
even  the  paper  almost  invisible." 

The  following  is  one  of  the  numerous  certificates  that  have  been  published 
concerning  this  same  remarkable  medium  in  his  character  as  a  healer : 

Hosiedb,  Google 

426  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"SPIRfrUAL  TELEGRAPH. —  A  CONVERSION  TO  SPIRITUALISM. 

"December  20,  1856." 
"  Brothers  Erittan  and  Partridge,  —  Having,  through  the  kind  agency  of  Mr. 
James  C,  Wingard,  been  led  from  the  darkness  of  unbelief  into  the  glorious  light  of  the 
spiritual  fallh,  I  deem  it  a  duty  which  1  owe,  alike  to  him  and  to  society  at  large,  to  make 
this  public  statement  in  relation  to  the  matter.  From  the  time  that  Spiritualism  first  be- 
gan to  obtain  headway,  I  took  my  stand  as  one  of  its  bitterest  opponents. 

"  Not  only  was  I  a  sceptic  as  to  the  peculiar  doctrines  of  the  new  faith,  but  I  was  so  to 
all  faith  which  is  worthy  of  the  name.  Immortality  and  God,  and  all  the  mysteries  of  the 
hereafter,  were  to  me  but  as  the  dreams  of  fanatics  and  fools.     I  believed  them  not. 

"  And  in  tliis  I  was  not  alone  ;  it  wasa  family  belief  m  which  my  wife  and  aster  joined. 
Whether  they  had  been  contaminated  by  my  ideas,  or  of  their  own  accord  had  strayed  into 
the  barren  wilds  of  doubt  and  disbelief,  I  cannot  say. 

"  The  first  time  I  ever  saw  Mr.  Wingard  was  in  the  summer  of  1853.  My  wife  was  at 
the  time  lying  at  the  point  of  death. 

"  Our  physician  —  a  man  of  reputed  skill —  had  abandoned  all  hope  of  her  recovery. 
"  On  the  morning  of  the  13th  of  August,  1853,  she  was  taken  with  the  'yellow  fever,' 
and  on  the  evening  of  that  day,— a  fearful  day  in  this  city  of  New  Orleans  — when  stand- 
ing at  my  door,  I  saw  Mr,  Wingard  approach.  Mistaking  him,  in  the  twilight,  for  a  friend 
whom  I  expected,  I  asked  him  to  walk  in,  and  he  did  so.  As  soon  as  we  advanced  to  the 
lighted  room,  I  discovered  my  mistaie,  and  told  him  that  grief  had  so  blinded  me  that  I  had 
mistaken  him. 

"  I  knew  not  then  how  little  my  apologies  were  needed,  and  that  I  had  found  in  hun  a 
friend  indeed.  With  few  preliminaries  I  told  him  of  my  poor  wife's  condition ;  for,  atheist 
though  I  was,  I  loved  my  Mary. 

"  Then  it  was  that  he  breathed  into  my  ear  a  spiritual  hope,  and  told  of  the  mbktermg 
angels  which  come  to  us  from  the  realms  of  the  departed,  with  healing  on  their  wmgs. 

"  like  the  drowning  man  that  catches  at  a  straw,  I  caught  at  the  hope  he  held  out  before 
roe,  and  followed  implicitly  the  advice  he  gave.  That  night,  and  a  p-itt  t  f  the  night  foUow- 
ing,  he  sat  up  with  my  Mary,  and  when  he  called  agdn  on  the  set  d  n  omu  t,  tl  e  last 
bad  symptoms  had  disappeared. 

' '  From  that  time  she  recovered  rapidly,  and  in  a  week  we  parted  from  Mr  Wmgard  and 
saw  no  more  of  him  till  the  early  part  of  July  in  the  present  year 

"  At  our  next  interview  my  wife  was  suffering  from  a  severe  attack  of  tjphodfe  er.  She 
had  wasted  away  almost  to  a  skeleton,  and  physicians  so  disagreed  1  the  d  a^  oses  of  her 
case,  that  I  began  to  lose  all  confidence  in  them,  especially  as  they  all  de  lared  thit  she 
could  not  be  cured. 

"Eventually  I  began  to  mquire  for  Mr.  Wingard,  and  was  gr  eved  to  find  that  he  had 
gone  to  Louisville.  My  wife  was  certain  that  he  could  effect  1  cu  c  f  be  co  Id  but  be 
found ;  and,  to  satisfy  her,  I  followed  him  to  LouisviUe,  but  was  again  disappomted,  by 
learning  that  on  the  mommg  of  my  arrival  he  had  started  for  New  York.  This  informa- 
tion, however,  proved  to  be  unfounded,  for,  in  a  few  days,  I  learned  that  he  liad  returned 
to  New  Orleans. 

"  Having,  on  our  first  acquainlanee,  heard  a  great  deal  from  Mr.  Wingard  about  Spir- 
itualism, and  being  informed  that  a  healing  medium  had  made  his  appearance  at  St.  Louis, 

I  made  up  my  mind  to  see  him.     Accordingly,  I  visili^  St.  Louis,  and  got  Mr.  

to  make  a  spu-ituaJ  examination  of  my  wife's  condition.  After  doing  so,  he  informed  me 
that  she  was  incurable.  This  information,  of  itself,  would  have  killed  nine  women  out  of 
ten  who  were  in  my  wife's  condition,  but  she  still  clung  to  hope  — to  the  hope  that  Mr. 
Wingard  would  cure  her. 

"  By  the  time  we  arrived  at  New  Orleans  my  wife  was  in  a  deplorable  condition  ;  and  at 
the  time  that  an  interview  with  Mr.  Wmgard  was  obtamed,  I  did  not  thmk  that  she  could 
possibly  live  two  days  longer.     When  he  called  she  was  utterly  unconscious.     He  took 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM,  427 

hold  of  her  hands,  and  almost  immediately  a  trance-like  chaoge  came  over  liira.  In  liia 
countenance  a  peculiar  transformation  took  place,  and  from  his  hand  an  electric  or  healing, 
influence  passed  to  her,  though  she  still  rem^ed  unconscious.  After  he  left  she  was  soon 
restored  to  eousciousness,  when  she  informed  us  that  she  had  had  a  vision  of  Mr.  Wingard 
standuig  by  her  bedside  and  holding  her  hand;  and  when  told  that  the  vision  was  a 
reality,  she  seemed  surprised  and  pleased      Mr.   Wingard  again  called,  the  next  day,  and 

"At  the  third  interview  he  was  deeply  entranced,  and  the  mysterious  imfoldings  of  spirit- 
ual power  which  were  then  revealed,  convinced  xne  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  of 
the  real  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being.  I  could  no  longer  doubt  that  men  in  this  life  can 
hold  intimate  and  intelligible  communion  with  departed  relatives  and  friends  from  "the 
better  land."  I  questioned  Mr.  Wingard,  in  his  capacity  of  medium,  of  many  things 
known  only  to  myself  and  God.  Among  otlier  things,  he  informed  me  of  the  particulars  of 
a  business  transaction  at  Mobile;  what  we  had  seen  in  our  recent  trip,  and,  indeed,  all  the 
more  notable  events  in  my  life's  history,  thus  reading  my  soul  as  'an  open  book.'  And  is 
it  to  be  wondered  that  he  fised  my  faith  on  what  has  heretofore  been  '  an  undiscovered 
COtmtry?'  Beade,  he  informed  my  sister  of  many  things  which  were  significant  to  her 
alone,  and  mildly,  yet  strongly,  rebuked  both  of  us  tor  our  unbelief,  in  language  the  most 
touchingly  beautiful  that  we  ever  listened  to.  He  described  accurately  my  father,  mother, 
grandmother,  two  sisters,  and  the  spirits  of  other  deceased  relatives,  some  of  whom  had 
been  removed  to  the  land  of  '  roseate  shadows '  full  thirty  years  ago.  In  fact,  I  could  fill 
pages  with  his  wonderful  revelations  of  things  none  knew  but  myself,  and  many  of  which 
I  had  even  forgotten.  As  to  my  wife,  he  gave  what  was,  as  far  as  I  am  capable  of  judg- 
ing, a  clear  diagnosis  of  her  disease,  and  a  list  of  the  medicines  which  were  necessary  to 
effect  a  cure.  This  was  done  while  he  was  in  a  trance  state,  in  which  condition  he  continued 
for  two  hours.  When  he  returned  to  his  normal  condition,  he  knew  nothing  of  what  had 
occurred. 

"  My  wife  enjoys  better  health  now  than  she  ever  did  before.  I  could  relate  many  things 
which  took  place  when  my  wife  was  subsequently  entranced,  but  to  do  so  would  be  foreign 
to  my  present  purpose.  I  merely  wish  to  render  justice  to  Mr.  Wingard,  to  whom  I  owe 
more  than  I  can  ever  repay.  Money  is  no  equivalent  for  the  life  he  saved  twice,  and  for 
Ihe  hopes  of  immortality  which  he  was  the  means  of  reviving.  I  offered  to  pay  him  for  bis 
services,  but  he  would  take  nothing,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  indeed  that  I  thrust  a 
present  into  his  hands. 

"  Would  to  God  that  (here  were  more  like  him  I     I  have  no  words  to  speak  my  grati- 
tude for  the  restoration  to  health  of  my  dear  companion,  and  for  the  moral  benefits  alike 
obtained  through  his  generous  instrumentality.     May  his  pathway  through  life  be  strewn 
with  flowers,  and  brightened  by  a  radiance  from  the  divine  source  of  love  and  light  I 
"  I  am  liatemally  yours, 

"Robert  H.  Miller. 

"New  Orleans,  November zk,,  1856." 

"  We  concur  in  all  of  the  above  with  feelings  of  profoundest  love  and  gratitude  to  Mr. 
Wingard. 

[Signed] 

The  fact  that  mediumistic  correspondence  is  almost  the  only  record  that 
has  been  kept  of  Southern  Spiritualism,  must  plead  oiu'  apology  for  the  in- 
sertion of  a  letter  written  by  the  author,  in  i860,  on  the  occasion  of  her 
engagement  to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures  in  New  Orleans.  As  the  letter 
conveys  a  far  better  idea  of  such  local  circumstances  and  conditions  as  be- 
long to  our  narrative  at  the  time  of  writing,  than  could  be  gained  by  a  more 

Hosted  by  Google 

428  msTORY  OF  MODERN' 

cold  and  distant  retrospect,  we  sliall  crave  pemiission  to  render  it  entire  as 
it  appeared  in  the  Banner  of  Light  of  January,  i860. 

"SPIRITUALISM  IN  THE  SOUTH. 

"  Messrs.  Editors,  —  Lest  t!ie  report  of  my  experiences  at  Memphis  should  appear  to 
convey  to  the  numerous  readers  of  your  widely  diffused  pages  the  only  illustration  I  can 
offer  of  Spiritualism  in  the  South,  permit  me  to  present  you  with  the  reverse  side  of  the 
picture;  and  as  I  promise  you  a  statement  ascandid  as  the  former,  I  hope  youwill,  injustice, 
place  it  before  your  readers. 

"  I  arrived  in  New  Orleans,  the  first  part  of  December  last,  and  was  received  into  the 
house  of  one  of  the  wealthiest  merchants  in  that  city  of  merchant  princes,  and  by  him  was 
treated  with  a  kindness  which  I  shall  never  forget.  This  gentleman  is  a  fine  medium,  and, 
in  the  exercise  of  his  beneficent  gift  of  healing,  has  effected  some  very  remarkable  cures, 
which,  in  his  modest,  unostentatious  kindness,  the  world  knows  nothing  about.  Half  of 
the  period  of  my  residence  in  New  Orleans  was  passed  in  this  gentleman's  house,  and  the 
other  portion  in  the  family  of  another  New  Orleans  merchant,  where  I  spent  my  Christmas 
and  New  Year.  Those  who  have  ever  experienced  the  festivities  of  an  English  Christmas, 
and  behold  the  affecting  picture  of  family  reunions,  which  the  very  poorest  in  the  land  con- 
trive to  effect  at  this  time,  the  healing  up  of  old  wounds,  the  uniting  of  long  enstranged 
hearts  in  the  cordial  bonds  of  imiversal  peace  and  good-will,  but,  above  all,  the  tender 
rivalry  with  which  families  and  kindred  heap  upon  each  other  the  tokens  of  their  generous 
love  and  mutual  affection,  may  picture  the  English  medium  and  her  only  friend  or  relative  on 
this  vast  continent,  far  away  from  friends,  home,  kindred,  and  all  aecuslomed  lies —  and 
even  this  lonely  mother  and  daughter  separated,  by  a  distance  of  more  than  fifteen  hundred 
milesi  and  yet,  with  these  apparently  mournful  externalities  to  weigh  upon  a  heart  keenly 
alive  to  the  world  of  sympathies,  I  am  bound  to  acknowledge  that  the  beautiful  sphere  of 
affection  and  human  kindness  by  which  I  was  surrounded,  robbed  the  cold  external  of  all 
its  gloom,  and  made  as  bright  and  happy  a  Christmas  for  the  stranger  as  I  ever  experienced 
in  the  midst  of  home  and  kindred.  Amidst  the  profuse  generosity  with  which  friends 
greeted  each  other,  I  was  never  forgotten  nor  omitted,  and  my  noble  host  and  hostess,  and 
the  darling,  fair  Creole  girls  of  their  family,  made  me  forget  every  shade  of  gloomy  remem- 
brance, save  the  absence  of  the  beloved,  far-away  mother.  My  heart  swells  even  now  at 
the  remembrance  of  this  beautiful  New  Orleans  family  ;  and  there  are  many  such  there^ 
bright  jewels,  which  make  the  place,  to  mc,  a  green  and  flowery  haunt,  where  memoi-y 
loves  to  dwell. 

"  My  first  four  lectures  were  given  in  a  small  hall,  which  the  committee  of  gentlemen 
by  whom  I  was  engaged,  had  hired  for  this  purpose ;  but,  as  great  numbers  had  to  go  away 
on  each  occasion  for  want  of  room,  a  large  and  splendid  room  was  secured  for  the  remainder 
of  the  course.  I  remamed  in  New  Orleans  during  five  Sundays,  and,  m  addition  to  the  usual 
morning  and  evening  lectures,  gave,  with  one  ot  two  exce  ig  ur     per- 

week;  and,  nothwithslanding  the  drawback  of  many  da  al  -m  cing 

weather,   some  heavy  rains  and  such  consequent  mud  S  an     alone 

can  boast  of,  together  with  the  interruption  of  the  Christ  bad 

house,  or  fdled  to   secure  a  good  attendance.      Night  1^  sa  ctual 

heads  and  dear  scrutinizing  faces,  might  be  seen  in  their  ac         M  f  the 

finest  mmds  and  clearest  heads  in  this  city  aimounced  g  the 

matter  to  the  foundation,  and  waited  on  this  course  of  r  the 

time,  of  all  the  ordinary  attractions  for  evening  entcrt      m         with  ga    city 

abounds. 

"  Except  in  Boston,  St.  Louis,  or  Philadelphia,  —  cili  h  armes        e  and 

gratitude  are  entwined,  —  I  believe  no  spuil  medium  o  m  ssed  a 

more  intellectual  and  appreciative  audience  than  that  whi  m  New  O  cans; 

and  either  the  noble  Creoles  are  determined  to  talce  Spiri  nail  an  rm,  s  are 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICA!^  SPIRITUALISM.  429 

o  lake  them.  I  believe,  myself,  Ihe  attraction  is  mutual ;  for  there  are  an  un- 
it of  persons  in  the  city  possessed  of  medium  power ;  and,  despite  the  humidity 
of  the  atmosphere, — so  unfavorable  to  the  production  of  these  electro-spiritual  manifesta- 
tions,— there  is  such  a  preponderance  of  intellectual  and  artistic  mind  in  this  city,  that  I 
cannot  but  feel,  with  aid  from  the  exponents  of  the  philosophy,  and  mediums  of  the  phenom- 
ena, there  are  elements  enough  in  New  Orleans  to  spiritiiiilize  the  entire  South.' 

"  Shortly  after  my  own  arrival  in  the  aty,  Dr.  Redman  made  his  welcome  advent ;  and 
never,  surely,  did  a  fairer  opportunity  present  itself  of  practically  testing  the  tmth  of  the 
riidimental  forms  of  the  philosophy  presented  in  the  lectures,  than  this  most  excellent 
test  medium  afforded.  Theory  and  practice  were  here  combined,  as  if  by  the  determined 
and  systematic  order  of  the  spirits ;  for  neither  Dr.  Redman  nor  myself  had  the  least  con- 
cert in  the  matter.  Dr.  Redman's  siances,  like  my  own  lectures,  were  nobly  sustained ; 
and  it  must  have  been  a  much  colder  heart  than  mine,  that  could  have  remained  untouched 
by  the  earnest  and  patient  sphit  of  inquhy  manifested  at  the  lectures,  and  the  many 
affecting  scenes  of  recognition  between  long-lost  friends,  and  bereaved  hearts  that  received 
news  from  the  beloved  immortals  beyond  the  veil,  through  Dr.  Redman's  wonderful 
powers  as  a  test  medium. 

"There  19  but  one  more  point  I  must  notice  ere  I  bid  farewell  to  the  now  most  dear 
Crescent  City.  The  hall  hired  for  me  is  a  very  expensive  one ;  the  charge  for  printing  and 
advertiang,  in  New  Orleans,  is  very  high,  while  the  numbers  who  form  my  committee  of 
atrangments  were  very  small ;  yet  the  whole  of  these  lectures  were  given  to  the  public  by 
the  Ubecatity  of  the  committee,  without  the  charge  of  one  single  cent.  Whatever  contribu- 
tions weremade  toward  expenses  were  wholly  voluntary.  That  these  were  most  generous, 
the  many  shining  gold  pieces  that  glUtered  in  the  hats  of  the  gentlemen  who  nobly  and 
fearlessly  stood  to  receive  them,  bore  ample  witness. 

"  Farewell,  New  Orleai  '1  \  f  th  1 'nmg  orange  grove  and  feir  magnolia^ — strange 
and  beautiful  city  of  life  nd  d  h,  m  most  gorgeous  and  terrible  luxuriance  !  Should  1 
never  more  grasp  the  dc  hand  h  h  so  lovingly  and  generously  sustamed  me  in  my 
work  there,  one  of  the  m        hall  w  d  llections  of  my  mediumistic  pilgrimage  will  be 

the  effort  I  have  been  p    m     ed         m  k       0  aid  m  planting  the  glorious  white  standard 
of  Spiritualism  in  thy  m  ^  p    ity  enfold  thee,  its  strength  sustain  thee,  and 

the  countless  legions  of  ang     h  b    r  it  inspire  thee.      I  can  but  add  my  last,  best 

jffayer  for  thy  weal.      Maj  its  only  motto,      onward  and  upward, "  ever  remain  the  rallying 
cry  of  New  Orleans  and  the  much  loved  friends  it  cont^ns. 

"I  am  at  present  at  Macon,  Messrs.  Editors;  and  as  I  expect  my  career  in  the  South  will 
terminate  in  the  course  of  another  fortnight,  I  will  reserve  the  finale  of  my  experiences 
in  this  section  of  the  country  for  another  paper. 

"I  ajn,  gentlemen,  yours  for  (he  truth, 

"  Emma  IIardinge. 

''Macon,  Ga.,  yaituary,  i860.'' 

The  beautiful  "  Crescent  City  "  has  been  visited  by  many  a  tempest  of  de- 
stroying change  and  icy  materialism  since  the  date  of  this  letter.  In  the  brief 
period  of  eight  years,  thousands  of  its  then  blooming  inhabitants  have 
perished  beneath  the  red  reign  of  war  or  the  fiery  blasts  of  pestilence ;  in  fact,  in 
no  city  of  the  Union  have  the  tivin  angels  of  pain  and  death  exerted  a  more 
■  fearful  sway:  and  yet  Spiritualism  still  lives,  and  is  still  fondly  cherished 
there  ;  in  fact  it  has  been  maintained  as  the  "magic  staff"  on  which  alone 
many  a  breaking  heart  and  bereaved  spirit  could  lean,  and  find  assm'ed 
strength  and  consolation.  Latterly  some  of  our  best  and  most  accomplished 
mediums  have  paid  brief  visits  to  the  city;  and  though  the  shadow  of  the 
Death  Angel  is  still  hovering  above  the  orange  groves,  and  the  faint  wails 
of  woe  that  have  come  up  from  many  a  gory  battle-field  sound  in  mournful 
echoes  through  the  drooping  2ags  of  the  banana  and  palm,  the  dear  voices  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

430  HISTORY  OF  MODERl^ 

spirit  friends  have  never  been  hashed,  and  their  soft  low  whispers  are  gain- 
ing strength  and  number,  and  are  ever  making  themselves  heard  by  (he  shores 
of  the  mighty  Mississippi,  and  wafting  their  immortal  messages  of  love  across 
the  wide  wastes  of  the  treacherous  and  unresting  gulf  waters  that  skirt  the  beau- 
tiful Crescent  City :  in  truth,  Spiritualism  is  a  fixed  fact  in  Lousiana,  and  New 
Orleans  has  yet  to  proclaim  it  to  the  bruised  and  bleeding  heart  of  that 
mourning  State. 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

HERN       SPIRITUALISM 

And  brought  from  him  greal  lidings  to  lliy  soul. 
In  alllhou  doest,  first  of  aU  b=  true 

T.  L.  Hafbb. 

The  Cause  in  Georgia — Author's  Correspondence — Testimonial  from  the 
Macon  Spiritualists  —  De.  Redman's Lettek^Captain  Suhpter's  Ghost  — 
Spiritualism  in  South  Carolina  —  Southern  Illinois — Virginia — Cali- 
fornia —  The  Nature  of  Evidence  Considered— An  English  Gentle- 
man's Testimony  —  General  Vallejo's  Circle, 

In  no  part  of  the  United  States  could  have  been  found  a  more  faithful 
and  devoted  band  of  Spiritualists  than  those  who  formed  the  nucleus  of  the 
cause  in  Macon,  Georgia, 

Quite  early  in  the  movement,  Dr.  L.  W.  Andrews,  the  talented  editor  of 
the  Georgia  Citizen,  published  another  paper,  called  the  Christian  Spirit- 
ualist,  exclusively  devoted  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism,  ably  written  and 
most  liberally  sustained,  chiefly  by  the  zeal  and  enterprise  of  Dr.  Andrews 
himself.  Besides  this  noble  gentleman  and  his  family.  Spiritualism  included 
many  prominent,  and  highly  respected  citizens  of  Macon  in  its  ranks;  hence 
this  place  became  a  radiative  centre,  from  whence  the  light  was  diffused  to 
scattered  believers  in  the  faith,  all  through  the  State  of  Georgia. 

Macon  was  favored  with  several  excellent  mediums,  amongst  whom  Mrs. 
Harvey,  a  Southern  lady,  and  wife  of  a  well-known  Georgian,  was  particu- 
larly distinguished. 

This  lady  was  a  fine  trance,  seeing,  test,  and  healing  medium,  and  gener- 
ously gave  her  services  to  all  who  sought  her  aid. 

Mrs,  Ostrander,  now  Mrs.  Bliss,*  an  excellent  trance  speaker,  created  a 
remarkable  interest  by  holding  Sabbath  meetings  in  Macon  ;  and  in  token  of 
their  appreciation  of  her  services,  the  generous  Spiritualists  presented  her 
with,  over  and  above  a  liberal  recompense  in  money,  a  handsome  gold  watch 
and  chain. 

Mr.  George  Redman  remained  some  time  in  Macon,  and  by  his  wonderful 
and  striking  tests,  brought  over  hundreds  of  intelligent  minds  to  the  beUef  in 
spirit  communion.     The  author  was  almost  the  last  medium  who  visited  this 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  431 

place  prior  to  the  terrible  disruption  produced  in  the  whole  Southern  country 
by  tlie  calamitous  war;  and  the  warm,  generous  cliaracter  of  its  Spiritualism 
and  people  cannot  be  more  fully  understood  than  by  a  perusal  of  the  follow- 
ing letters  taken  from  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  and  Banner  of  Light : 

"  SPIRITUALISM   !N  THE    SOtlTH. 
"Ediiors  of  the  Banner  of  Light  : 

"Gentlemen,  —  Your  correBpondents  in  this  section  of  country  are  few,  yet  your  pagea 
are  highly  appreciated,  and  in  view  of  the  channel  for  friendly  intercourse  which  they  un- 
fold, I  have  been  requested  to  notice  the  condition  of  the  few  places  where  my  restless  feet 
have  been  permitted  to  make  a  temporary  halt  during  my  flying  visit  to  the  South, 

"  Arriving  at  Macon  just  in  time  for  my  long-promised  course  of  lectures,  I  was  re- 
ceived by  a  very  numerous  body  of  Spiritualists I  lectured  in  a  good  hall, 

to  fine  and  appreciative  audiences.  The  meetings  were  held  under  the  generalship  of  Dr. 
Andrews,  the  enterprising  editor  of  the  Christian  Spiritualist,  and  I  am  convbced  that 
it  needs  but  the  laborers,  to  make  Macon  one  of  the  finest  spiritual  harvest  grounds  in  the 
United  States.  Sundays  and  week-days  alike,  the  most  intelligent,  and  numerous  audiences 
flocked  to  the  lectures,  while  my  days  were  spent  among  such  demonstrations  of  Idndness 

and  hospitality  as  warms  my  heart  with  aflectionate  memory. When  I  left 

Macon,  I  was  laden  with  a  beautiful  little  casket,  the  gift  of  my  generous  entertainers,  Dt. 
and  Mrs.  Andrews,  with  a  superb  golden  hning,  fresh  from  the  open  purses  and  yet  mqre 
open  hearts  of  the  whole  society,  besides  the  tears  and  blesangs  of  a  host  of  friends. 

"Columbus,  Georgia,  with  four  ladies  as  its  only  Spiritualists,  was  my  next  field  of  opera- 
tions. Two  of  my  kind  Macon  friends  accompanied  me  there,  and  with  a  query  of  whether 
we  could  even  get  a  hall  to  lecture  in,  we  went,  guided  by  the  spirits'  word  of  command,  to 
lay  siege  to  that  quiet  locality. 

"I  inclose  yon  herewith  a  brief  notice  from  one  of  the  daily  local  papers,"  which  will  give- 
a  fait  idea  of  the  surprise,  no  less  than  kind  appreciation,  with  which  my  efforts  were  met. 
My  audience  amounted,  on  the  first  night,  to  about  thirty,  including  my  brave  lady  host- 
ess's family.  On  my  last  and  third  night's  lecture  they  numbered  some  hundreds,  of  whom 
several  sat  on  the  ground,  for  want  of  seats.  Four  of  the  committee  who,  on  the  last 
evening,  were  chosen  to  select  a  subject,  —  men  who,  I  was  told,  were  equally  distinguished 
for  their  intellectual  attainments,  respectability,  and  scepticism,  —  called  on  me,  as  I  was 
about  to  return  to  fulfil  my  final  engagements  at  Macon,  to  tender  me  a  generous  and  can- 
did invitation  to  stay,  and  extend  the  period  of  my  '  instruction '  amongst  them  as  long  as 
posable.  I  was  compelled  to  go,  but  with  regret  at  my  mability  to  name  any  of  our  many 
distmguished  mediums  and  lecturers  who  could  follow  me  at  onee,  and  extend  the  bread  of 
life  to  those  who  were  thus  earnestly  seeking  and  hungering  for  it 

"  Perhaps  a  more  touching  picture  of  constancy  and  patient  endurance  for  the  truth  can- 
not be  found  anywhere  than  in  the  devotion  of  the  estimable  ladies  who  entertained  myself 
and  my  Macon  friends.  Unsustained  by  male  relatives  or  sympathizers,  they  have  stood 
alone,  bearing  the  brunt  of  the  world's  scorn  and  Mrs.  Grundy's  shru^T^  shoulders,  until 
the  happy  hour  when  they  were  enabled  to  see  Spirituahsm  presented  to  their  persecutors 
after  such  a  iashion  as  would  at  least  msure  it  a  respectful,  if  not  popular  position  hereafter; 
and,  with  this,  these  self-sacrificing,  generous  women  consider  themselves  amply  rewarded. 
My  Macon  friends  were  a  gentleman  and  his  wife,  who  left  family,  home,  and  dollar-making, 
to  go  to  the  trouble  and  expense  of  protecting  me,  hiring  the  hall,  settling  the  details,  and  — 
the  lady  being  a  good  medium,  —  sitting  free  of  charge  for  those  who  came  to  inquire  of  us 
for 'more  light.'     Surely  the  expenses  ofthejourneywereinvestedwell,  for  the  interest  of  (he 

Hosiedb,  Google 

432  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

happiness  with  which  we  all  returned,  far  exceeded  the  lesitimate  rate  allowed  by  llie  law 
of  the  Union,  and  ajnouiited  to  perfect  usuiy. 

"  Mj  last  viat  was  to  Wilmington,  North  Carolina,  where  private  hospitality  of  the  wannest 
kind,  and  public  appreciation  equally  lavish,  have  sent  me  on  my  way  rejoicing,     .     .     . 

"  FareweU,  bright  South  1  and,  while  the  fervent  '  God  bless  you '  parts  the  lipsofthe 
woman,  she  is  stiU  a  medium  for  hosts  of  ^its  who  pronounce  a  blesang  through  the 

earth  form  of 

"Emma  Hakdingb, 

"Feiruatyz,  i860." 

A  still  further  evidence  of  the  generous  appreciation  with  which  Southern 
Spirittmlists  regarded  their  mediums,  is  to  be  found  in  the  following  letter, 
presented  to  the  author  along  with  a  handsome  silver  forte-monnate  amply 
lined  with  gold,  at  the  Close  of  her  lectures  in  Macon. 

The  letter  was  subsequently  forwarded  by  the  Spiritualists  of  Macon,  for 
publication,  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  from  the  columns  of  which  it  is  now 
reprinted : 

"THE  MACON  [GEORGIA)  SPIRITUALISTS  TO  MRS.  EMMA  HARDINGE. 

"  Macon,  January,  24,  i860. 
•'  To  Mrs.  Emma  Harding!  : 

"Dear  MAnAM,  —  Thelittle  faifhfulband  of  Spiritualists  of  Macon  have  authorized  us, 
a  committee  appointed  for  the  purpose,  by  an  impromptu  meeting  held  at  the  dose  oEyour 
lecture,  last  evening,  to  convey  to  you  the  heartfelt  emotions  of  gratitude  which  they,  mdi. 
viduauj  and  eoUectively,  entertain  for  yourself  personally,  and  the  very  high  appreciation 
with  which  they  r^ard  your  recent  manifestations  of  love  in  theu-  midst. 

"  In  obedience  to  this  outgushing  mandate  of  warm  and  affectionate  hearts,  permit  us  to 
say  Mrs.  Hardinge,  that  we  deare  not  to  offend  the  delicacy  of  your  noble  nature  by  any 
fulsome  adulation ;  but,  in  our  feeble  way,  to  express  our  gratification  and  delight  at  bemg 
permitted  to  partake  of  such  a  soul's  festival  as  we  have  enjoyed  in  attendance  upon  your 

"  We  have  had  our  darkened  minds  Ulumined  by  the  divine  radiance  of  the  glorious  phil- 
osophy breathed  through  your  Ups.  We  have  had  our  hearts'  best  affections  stirred  within 
us  to  theu-  very  depths  by  the  glowing  and  eloquent  instruction  imparted  through  your  me- 
diumship,  and  we  feel  that  our  spiritual  natures  have  been  fed  with  the  bread  of  life,  and  oar 
thirsty  spirits  have  been  abundantly  refreshed  by  the  waters  of  eternal  truth,  which  have, 
through  you,  been  poured  out  upon  us  with  such  prodigality  and  richness. 

"  How  else,  then,  can  we  feel  but  joyfully  grateful?  How  otherwise  than  profoundly  im- 
pressed with  our  sense  of  obligation,  firstly,  to  the  great  Father  of  spirits,  who  has  opened 
up  lo  our  vision  the  ineffable  glories  of  a  blissful  immortality ;  secondly,  to  that  shining  cir- 
de  of  invisible  inteUigeuces,  who  have  so  successfully  used  your  oiganism  to  illustrate  and 
enforce  the  laws  of  pr<^es5,  life,  and  inspiration ;  and  thMly,  to  yourself,  gentle  lady,  for 
the  patient,  earnest,  and  affectionate  manner  in  which  you  have  subjected  all  your  physical 
and  intellectual  capabilities  to  the  use  of  those  for  whose  benefit  you  have  labored!  .  ,  . 
For  you,  personally,  permit  us  to  express,  once  more,  the  best  wishes  of  aU  our  hearts :  that 
all  the  happiness  of  which  your  sympathetic  and  cultivated  nature  is  susceptible  may  be 
yours,  without  a  throb  of  pain  to  embitter  your  future ;  and  that  when  life's  work  is  done 
upon  this  footstool,  we  may  all  meet  agdn  with  Emma,  in  those  brigjit  celestial  spheres, 
where  faith  ends  in  knowledge,  and  hope  in  fruition. 

"Fraternally  yours,  etc, 

"L.  F.  W.  Andrews,  1 
John  P.  Haevey,      !■  Committee" 
e.  F.  Lewis,  ) 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUAUSM. 

EXTRACT   OF  A  LETTER  FROM  DR.  REDMAN,  DATED, 

"  We  arrived  at  Wilmington  at  seven  o'clock,  P.M.,  where  I  found  the  pioneer  of  our 
cause  in  that  section.  Colonel  John  McRae,  w^ting  my  reception.  I  was  conveyed  to  the 
ci(y  hotel,  and  commenced  mj  circles  the  following  morning,  16th  inst.  Hardly  had  my 
doors  been  thrown  open  before  I  was  besitged  by  inquiries.  The  town  being  small,  the 
news  of  a  spirit  medium's  arrival  was  well  advertised  in  a  few  hours,  and  those  who  could 
not  obtain  entrance,  contented  themselves  by  gazing  through  the  windows,  and  applying 
their  auricular  appendages  to  the  crevices  in  the  doors. 

"  Instead  of  receiving  visitors  in  private,  as  has  been  my  custom  heretofore,  I  have  betn 
forced  to  divide  the  time  into  six  circles,  of  two  hours  each,  allowing  ten  persons  to  form 
each,  that  I  might  see  the  greater  number  in  the  shortest  time,  my  stay  being  limited, 

"  I  was  quite  surprised  to  find  that  the  magnitude  of  the  circle  interfered  not  a  whit  with 
the,  personal  character  of  the  tests  and  the  communications  given,  for  one  by  one  would 
declare  themselves  satisfied,  and  would  acknowledge  the  source  from  which  came  that  cvi- 
dicnce.      I  shall  pursue  the  same  plan  during  my  labors  South. 

"A  stay  of  one  week  brouglit  before  me  about  five  liundred  persons,  and  of  all  that 
number,  only  two  left  me  in  the  least  sceptical  concerning  the  phenomena  of  modern 
Spiritualism. 

"  One  of  these  two,  was  a  certain  Major ,  who  preferred  to  commune  with  spirits  in 

the  form,  and  was  exposed  by  a  communication  ft:om  the  spirit  of  my  father,  addressed  to  the 
circle,  saying;  'That  man  communicates  with  fictitious  spirits,  and  he  is  satisfied.'  The 
other  was  Mr.  J. ,  who,  haunted  by  some  speculative  genii,  offered  me  a  check  of  five  hun- 
dred dollars  for  the  secret, 

"  Neither  of  these  investigators  were  convinced :  the  first,  because  he  could  not  speak  sat- 
isfactorily with  those  m  the  form ;  the  second,  because  he  foiled  to  make  a  bargain  for  that 
which  hath  no  price. 

"  Dr.  Barker,  a  lecturer  on  phrenology,  who  was  drawing  large  crowds  nightly  at  the 
Town  Hall,  declared,  if  his  wife  would  tell  him  where  he  was  on  the  night  of  her  departure 
from  earth,  he  would  announce  himself  a  Spiritualist  at  his  next  public  lecture.  He  ac- 
cordingly came  to  my  apartments  with  some  friends,  and  was  seated  at  the  table  but  a  short 
time  before  his  spirit  companion  wrote  as  follows ; 

" '  My  Dear  Husband,  —  You  were  lying  on  the  bed  by  my  ade  when  I  left  you  for 
the  spirit-world. 

"  '  Thy  young  wife, 

"  The  man  jumped  from  his  seat,  wiped  the  dew  of  emotion  from  his  eyes,  and  informed 
the  circle  that  '  for  weeks  he  had  been  attending  his  wife,  night  and  day,  until  nature  gave 
out,  and  he  was  compelled  to  sleep ;  and  while  slumbering,  his  dear  one  closed  her  eyes  in 
rest,  as  peacefully  as  a  child.'  The  scene  was  impressive,  and  deeply  did  the  professor  feel 
the  force  of  his  spirit-wife's  message. 

"Agreeably  to  promise  he  announced  the  result  publicly,  remarking  that  bigots  only 
would  refuse  to  investigate,  and  fools  only  would  cry  out  against  these  modern  phenomena ; . 
but  wise  men  would  turn  the  leaf  under  which  cont^ned  a  philosophy  so  beautiful.  Dr.  B. 
declared  to  me,  i)efore  leaving,  that  a  few  more  such  evidences  would  place  him  in  the  field 
as  a  teacher  of  our  faith,  and  '  he  would  preach  it  without  fear  or  favor.' 

"  Although  pressed  exceedingly  by  investigators,  and  believers  multiplying  on  every  side, 
I  left  Wilmington  at  sis  o'clock,  A.M.  on  the  Z3d  instant,  owing  to  the  impatience  of  the 
friends  in  Macon,  some  of  whom  had  already  been  waiting  for  days,  and  came  many  miles 
from  the  country.  After  a  second  jaunt  of  about  three  hundred  miles,  through  dismal 
swamps  and  characteristic  woodland,  I  arrived  at  Macon  on  the  morning  of  (be  24111.     I , 

Hosiedb,  Google 

434  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

found  Bcother  L.  F.  W,  Andrews,  of  tlie  Christian  Spiritualist  prostrated,  as  the  result 
of  a  fracture  of  the  clavicle,  he  having  been  thrown  from  his  bu^y  the  day  before. 

"  Here  I  have  been  received  with  all  the  warmth  charaeterislic  of  Sontliem  hearts,  every- 
thing being  provided,  and  all  that  was  required  of  roe  was  to  take  my  seat  at  the  table  and 
meet  another  flood  of  characters,  equal  in  number  to  those  who  visited  me  at  Wilmington. 

"  My  reception  rooms  are  in  front  of  the  Spirilualist  office,  and  have  been  fitted  up  for 
my  especial  aceominodation.  I  can  assure  my  friends  and  our  mediums,  if  they  ever  follow 
me  in  this  vicinity,  they  will  be  made  members  of  the  same  family,  and  eared  for  as  such. 

I  was  amused,  while  Siting  at  my  window  with  Brother  Lanning,  last  Satt- 

bath  evening,  at  a  soiree  mudcaU.  The  servants  of  the  house,  prompted  by  a  spirit  of  de- 
votion, were  mdulging  in  the  fijUowing  pathetic  stomas  set  to  muac  ; 

"'Come  along,  come  along  I  we're  going  home  to  glory,  hallelujah  1'  'We're  going 
all  to  Leaven,  hallelujah  1'  'Then  we'll  shake  hands  together,  hallelujah  1'  'I'm 
gwme  to  my  Saviour,  bye 'n  bye.'     'I'm  off  among  the  angels  bye 'n  bye.' 

"During  the  anging,  the  raps  very  emphatically  kept  time. 

"  With  hopes  for  the  cause  in  our  own  city,  and  the  spread  of  truth  throughout  the  world. 

"  G.  A.  Redman. 
"  Spiritual  Telegraph." 

The  following  incident  is  given  as  it  appeared  in  a  secular  paper,  the  Sat- 
urday Evening  Gazette,  of  Bishopville.  A  far  more  circumstantial,  though 
over  prolix  account,  was  furnished  to  the  author  by  some  near  relatives  of 
Mr.  Bateman's,  with  a  number  of  written  attestations  to  the  truth  of  the 
story : 

"  In  the  year  1826,  at  Bishopville,  South  Carolina,  Captain  William  Sumpter,  a  grandson 
of  General  Thomas  Sumpter,  committed  suicide,  and  was  buried  at  the  Baptist  churchyard, 
about  one  and  a  half  miles  from  Bishopville,  His  grave  is  about  ten  steps  from  the  public 
road,  leading  from  Bishopville  to  SumpterviUe.  In  a  few  weeks  after  this,  WiUiainBate- 
man,  a  man  of  great  courage  was  riding  from  Bishopville  to  his  home,  about  three  miles  off, 
and  as  he  passed  by  Captain  Sumpter's  grave,  at  about  twelve  or  one  o'clock  in  the  night, 
the  moon  shone  brightly ;  he  informed  me  the  next  morning  that  Captain  Sumpter  arose  from 
his  grave  and  came  to  him,  and  placed  his  hand  on  his  stirrup,  and  just  before  he  disap- 
peared, he  informed  Batemin  it  was  his  time  next.  In  a  few  days  after  (his,  a  man  by  the 
name  of  James  B.  Reaves  shot  Bateman,  giving  him  a  mortal  wound,  which  did  not  termi- 
nate fatally  for  two  or  three  weeks.  Bateman  managed  to  ride  from  Reaves's  house  to  the 
house  of  Moses  Roundtree,  ajid  when  he  arrived  there,  sent  for  Dr.  Bishop,  and  his  brother- 
John  Bateman,  the  latter  at  that  time  overseer  for  Dr.  Bishop;  and  although  W.  Bate- 
man's house  was  much  nearer  than  Bishopville,  he  requested  to  be  taken  to  the  latter  place, 
which  was  done,  and  he  died  at  his  brother's  house  at  Bishopville.  I  was  actmg  as  a  mag- 
istrate at  that  time,  and  as  there  was  no  witness  present  when  Reaves  shot  Bateman,  I 
thought  it  proper  to  take  his  dying  confesaon,  as  it  would  be  good  evidence  ;  and  a  few 
hours  before  his  death,  I  took  down  his  statement ;  and  as  the  circmnstance  of  his  seeing 
■  Sumpter  occurred  to  me,  I  asked  him  to  give  me  a  statement  again,  and  he  s^d  it  was  as  he 
.  stated  before,  and  that  he  was  not  mistaken.  He  observed  to  me  that  it  was  not  imagma- 
tion,  and  said,  '  Don't  you  sec  it  has  happened  as  he  told  me  ? ' 

"J.  B." 

This  circumstance  [parallel  cases  of  which  are  now  so  familiar  amongst 
Spirituahsts]  awakened  a  spirit  of  inquiry  in  South  Carolma  which  never 
slumbered  until  the  report  of  the  "Rochester  knockings"  had  thrown  light 
upon  the  hitherto  dreaded  mystery  of  "  supernaturalism. "  At  the  time 
■when  the  auflior  visited  North  Carolina,  as  above  referred  to,  there  were  a 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM. 

435 

numerous  body  of  Spiritualists  scattered  all  over  the  sister  State,  but  despite 
of  the  fervent  zeal  and  large  numbers  of  believers,  the  times  were  deemed  too 
unsettled  to  permit  the  dissemination  of  spiritual  ideas,  hence  an  engagement 
which  Mrs.  Hardinge  had  entered  into  to  lecture  at  Charleston,  South  Caro- 
lina, was  negatived  after  the  fashion  of  the  Alabama  Legislature ;  for,  although 
the  act  denunciatory  of  spiritual  manifestations  was  not  actually  carried,  it 
was  significantly  threatened,  with  the  aid  of  "Judge  Lynch"  to  back  its  en- 
forcement Notwithstanding  the  fear  of  South  Carolina  politicians  that 
liberal  ideas,  even  of  the  "  the  hereafter,  "  might  endanger  their  peculiar  in- 
stitution on  earth,  it  was  evident  they  could  not  shake  themselves  free  of 
home-made  Spiritualism,  for  at  the  very  time  when  the  Charleston  [South 
Carolina]  Courier  was  most  fiercely  denouncing  the  "  incendiary  practices  of 
the  abhorrent  Spiritualists, "  it  was  innocently  filling  its  columns  witli  accounts 
of  certain  strange  manifestations,  which  it  evidently  did  not  recognize  as 
the  very  gist  of  the  incendiarism. 

The  following  which  is  taken  from  that  journal  itself,  is  a  specimen  of  the 
success  which  die  Legislature  obtained  in  attempting  to  kill  out  Spiritualism. 

"  A  correspondent,  for  whom  the  editor  caji  vouch,  relates  the  following : 
"  A  few  evenmgs  Mnce,  a  little  circle  of  three  young  girls  were  sitting  at  a  table  which 
was  in  violent  motion.  Communications  by  'rapping,'  through  the  alphabet,  were  thrown 
off  with  great  rapidity,  and  names  of  departed  persons  were  given  as  being  present  and  con- 
dutting  the  phenomena.  One  of  the  young  ladies  at  the  table  is  a  writing  medium ;  and  at 
my  request  she  took  a  pencil,  and  in  a  few  seconds  began  to  write  with  great  rapidity,  in  a 
clear,  bold  hand,  her  eyes  being  shut.  In  a  short  time  it  was  announced  that  a.  person  re- 
cently deceased  was  present.  At  the  mstant,  a  thought  occurred  that  I  could  test  the  mat- 
ter in  anew  way,  and  1  asked  —  though  not  sittmg  near  the  table  myself — this  question: 
'Will  you  answer,  if,  instead  of  callmg  the  alphabet,  I  substitute  numbers  from  J  to  z6  — 
say  I  to  mean  A,  2  B,  3  C,  etc.?'  The  reply  was,  'Yes.'  I  said  :  '  Tell  me  who  you  are? 
and  I  b^an  calling  the  numbers,  one,  two,  three,  etc  The  raps  occurred  upon  different 
numbers,  which  I  put  down  on  paper,  no  one  in  the  room,  not  even  myself,  knowing  what 
letters  the  numbersdenoted.  After  the  raps  had  ceased,  I  privately  selected  the  letters  and 
placed  them  over  the  numbers,  and  could  make  no  sense  of  the  name.  I  said  so,  but  did 
not  name  the  letters.  The  table  began  to  tap,  and  spelled  out,  in  the  usual  way,  these 
words:  ' I  did  not  give  the  right  number  last.'  Numbers  were  again  called,  and  the  num- 
ber next  to  the  one  before  given  was  struck.  On  placing  the  corresponding  letter  over  it, 
the  whole  name  became  perfect  and  complete.  Without  intimating  that  any  name  was 
made  out,  I  asked  for  the  name  through  the  writing  medium.  After  an  instant  she  wrote,  \ 
and  the  correspondmg  same  name  of  the  deceased  person  was  written.  Now  here  I  had  J 
two  different  communications  indifferent  ways  1  one  in  a  mode  which  by  its  nature  forbade 
deception,  and  the  other  through  a  young  lady,  whose  very  soul  would  revolt  at  the  idea  of 
trifling  with  the  dead,  or  deceiving  her  friends." 

Another  of  the  South  Carolina  papers  gave  the  following,  amongst  many 
othervariedaccounts  of  spiritual  phenomena  with  which  it  regaled  its  readers 
in  one  column,  whilst  others  were  filled  with  emphatically  Southern  warnings  to 
avoid  "Spiritualism"  on  pain  of  the  favorite  South  Carolina  argument  of  the 
time  —  the  bowie  knife  or  tar  and  feathers.  The  article  would  not  be  inserted 
here,  only  it  relates  to  a  section  of  country  which  has  since  become  widely 
spirituahzed  through  the  mediumship  of  the  parties  referred  to  : 

"RXTRAORDINAEY  MANIFECTATI0N5  IN  SOUTHERN  ILLINOIS. 
"  A  correspondent  of  the  Du  Quoin  Mining  Journal,  vouched  for  by  the  editor  as  '  a 
man  of  truth  under  ordinary  circumstances,'  gives  thefollowingaccountof  some  vcrysingulaf 
manifestations  near  that  place,  of  which  he  was  an  eye-witness  : 

Hosiedb,  Google 

436  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"Aboul  the  middle  of  the  montt  of  March  last,  after  I  Iiad  retired  to  bed  for  the  niglit 
and  was  thbking  of  my  plans  for  the  next  day,  I  heard  a  loud  knod;inff  upon  the  door,  and 
opening  it,  found  my  nearest  neighbor,  Mr.  L.,  awaiting  me.  He  was  trembling  from  head 
to  foot,  at  which  I  was  greatly  surprised,  as  the  night  was  quite  warm,  considering  the  tuna 

"'For  God's  sake  come  to  my  house  immediately'  said  he.  'Satan  or  some  of  his 
crew  have  taken  possession  of  the  premises,  and  are  playing  the  devil  generally ! ' 

"  He  would  give  me  no  time  to  ask  questions,  but  was  exceedingly  anxious  that  I  should 
accompany  him.  I  had  scarcely  got  my  clothes  on,  when  he  took  me  by  the  arm  and 
hurried  me  along  towards  Ms  residence.  He  entered  the  main  room  of  the  building,  closely 
followed  by  myself.  There  the  most  wonderful  sight  I  ever  beheld  presented  itself  to 
my  view.  Mr.  L.'s  wife  and  two  eldest  daughters  were  huddled  up  in  one  comer  of  the 
room,  and  each  was  the  personification  of  terror.  They  were  clinging  to  each  other  and 
sobbing  violently.  Near  the  fireplace  was  the  youngest  daughter,  a  very  pretty  girl,  mov- 
ing round  in  a  kind  of  waltz-like  dance,  with  arms  in  a  horizontal  position,  seemingly  para- 
lyzed, and  humming  a  angular  ajr.  Strange  to  say  every  piece  of  furniture  in  the  house 
.  was  keeping  perfect  time  with  the  movements  of  the  girl,  and  a  clock  on  the  mantel-piece 
had  ceased  running,  but  a  continuous  stream  of  sounds  rung  from  its  bell,  and  added  greatly 
to  the  confusion  then  prevalent.  A  square  table  cut  the  queerest  antics  of  anything  in  the 
room.  First  it  would  tip  forward  on  the  two  front  legs,  then  on  the  two  hinder  ones,  and 
lastly  spin  around  on  one  leg  like  a  top,  and  again  tip  forward  and  backward.  A  fire- 
shovel  was  dancing  a  jig  on  the  hearth ;  the  wood  was  rolling  about,  and  the  pots  and 
skillets  made  an  outlandish  racket. 

' '  Suddenly  the  young  ^rl  ceased  waltzing ;  she  stood  like  a  statue,  and  instantly  every 
article  of  furniture  settled  in  its  accustomed  place.  The  lighted  candle,  which  was  standing 
on  the  mantel-piece,  was  suddenly  extinguished,  as  if  by  an  invisible  person.  The  fire  upon 
the  hearth  was  quite  low,  and  gave  a  very  faint  light. 

"Immediately  after  the  extinguishment  of  the  candle,  a  green  light,  interspersed  with 
orange-colored  rays,  seemed  to  envelop  the  upper  portion  of  the  girl's  body,  gjving  her  a 
supernatural  appearance,  and  the  most  melodious  sounds  followed,  tesemblmg  the  music  oi 
vEolian  harps,  appearing  to  be  around,  below,  and  above  the  occupants  of  the  room. 
This  lasted  about  ten  minutes,  when  the  mu^c  ceased,  and  the  green  light  disappeared ;  but, 
. as  ifby  magic,  the  candle  on  the  mantel-piece  was  ignited,  and  the  girl  fell  insensible  to  the 
floor.  Some  two  hours  elapsed  before  she  was  fully  restored  from  her  trance-like  sleep ; 
but  every  vestige  of  the  singular  performance  in  which  she  had  participated  had  escaped  her 
memory.  Almost  nightly  ^nce,  spiritual  demonstrations  have  occurred  at  my  neighbor's 
house,  yet  difl'ering  in  many  respects  from  those  vritnessed  by  me," 

The  following  manifestation  is  vouched  for  by  ati  indefatigable  and  tal- 
ented correspondent  of  the  early  spiritual  papers— the  Rev.  John  B.  Wolff, 
a  gentleman  who  resided  at  the  time  of  the  occuirence  in  Wheeling,  Vii^nia, 
and  who  constantly  reported  phases  of  spiritual  phenomena,  and  the  rapid  pro- 
gress of  the  cause  in  that  section  of  country,  in  the  most  encouraging  terms : 

"  During  the  last  week  I  went  some  twenty-five  miles  to  get  the  particulars  of  a  singn- 
'  lar  devdopment,  wholly  unanticipated, 

"The  north-east  part  of  Jefl'erson  County,  Ohio,  is  the  locality  of  the  parties  and  facts. 
Mr.  L.  was  the  victim  of  an  erroneous  life,  and  bed-fast  with  palsy,  livmgin  a  retired  neigh- 
borhood with  a  part  of  his  children,  all  of  whom  are  daughters.  In  the  spirit-world  he  has 
sevei-al  sons.  The  family  neither  knew  nor  believed  anything  about  the  rappings.  One 
evening,  after  a  part  of  the  girls  had  retired,  a  distant  sound  was  heard,  resembling  a  bass- 
drum  ;  gradually  it  came  nearer,  until  it  came  into  the  house,  and  was  heard  in  different 
parts  of  it.  Some  of  the  girls  ran  to  a  neighbor's  for  some  person  to  come  and  slay  with 
them.     The  sounds  still  continued,  tt^ether  with  ahnost  every  form  of  the  phenomena. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUAUSM.  437 

until  the  old  man  died.  Tlie  bed  on  which  the  old  man  lay  was  carried  out  into  the  middle 
of  the  room  by  ihese  invisible  agents.  Candles  hanging  against  the  wall  leaped  down, 
separated,  struck  different  individuals  gently,  and  fell  on  the  floor  without  injuring  the 
candles  in  any  degree.  Chairs,  tables,  and  all  other  articles  of  furniture,  were  moved  with- 
out any  viable  contact,  and  that,  too,  in  opposition  to  the  will-power  of  the  parties.  Some 
thought  the  girls  were  bewitched,  others,  that  there  was  a  trick,  while  orthodoxy  decided 
it  was  the  devil. 

"  The  family  were  much  annoyed  and  persecuted  on  account  of  it.  After  they  became 
calm  they  questioned  the  invisible  agent,  and  it  persisted  in  saying  that  these  things  were 
done  by  a  deceased  brother ;  that  they  were  intended  for  good,  and  would  cease  when  the 
father  died.  He  is  dead,  and  they  have  ceased,  hut  not  without  awaking  much  interest 
in  liberal  minds.  The  end  is  not  yet.  The  medium  is  about  twelve  years  of  i^e,  and 
bronpht  np  m  seclusion  from  the  world.  I  have  given  you  only  a  faint  outline  of  the  facts ; 
use  them  as  you  list.  ^    „     ,„ 

'  "J,  E.  Wolff." 

It  wouid  be  needless  further  to  attempt  gathering  up  the  scattered 
threads  which  have  woven  the  woof  of  Spirituahsm  all  over  the  Southern 
country. 

For  reasons  mentioned  in  a  former  chapter,  the  Southern  States,  burdened 
with  (be  restrictive  curse  of  slavery,  had  always  been  deemed  unfruitful,  nay, 
utterly  "barren  soil,"  for  the  planting  of  the  spiritual  seed,  whilst  the  very 
nature  of  the  ban  which  the  slave-holding  population  deemed  themselves 
obliged  to  place  upon  the  introduction  of  all  experimental  ideas  or  "free 
thought,"  seemed  as  though  it  would  have  furnished  ample  reasons  against 
the  favorable  reception  of  Spiritualism. 

Our  retrospect,  brief  as  it  has  been,  must  afford  a  complete  refutation  of 
these  stereotyped,  but  erroneous  opinions 

When  the  desolating  scourge  of  war  swept  over  the  land,  it  necessarily  de- 
strayed  the  orderiy  relations  which  had  begun  to  arise  in  the  spiritual  move- 
ment, whilst  the  resources  for  reliable  record  became  utterly  suspended  in 
the  Southern  States. 

Dr.  Andrews's  excellent  paper,  the  Christian  Spiritualist,  ceased.  The 
regular  Sabbath  meetings  which  had  been  established  in  Macon,  St.  Louis, 
Memphis,  New  Orleans,  and  other  great  Southern  centres,  were  also  sus- 
pended. 

The  minds  of  the  people,  fevered  by  ruin  and  accumulating  calamity,  were 
too  much  agitated  to  cultivate  the  communion,  and  that  which  spontaneously 
appeared,  partook  of  the  ghastly  nature  of  the  dreadful  scenes  which  were 
being  enacted  on  every  side. 

Visions  of  dire  and  awful  import  swam  before  the  eyes  of  the  seers.  ^  Prop- 
hecies of  coming  strife  and  ever  deepening  woe  parted  their  pale  lips,  and 
poured  in  ecstatic  frenzy  through  their  entranced  utterances. 

Terrible  portents  filled  the  air,  and  monitions  of  deadi,  bereavement,  and 
coming  calamity,  hovered  around  every  raediumistic  person,  and  sighed  their 
doleful  notes  of  warning  to  die  very  winds  of  heaven.  Whole  volumes  could 
be  written  in  proof  of  the  prophetic  warnings  which  heralded  in  every  tragic 
event  of  this  hideous  conflict,  and  proved  the  intense  sympathy  of  the  unseen 
world  with  the  great  struggle. 

Both  sections  of  the  contending  parties  laid  claim  to  spiritual  guidance  m 
the  course  they  pursued,  but  though  we  shall  hereafter  devote  one  chapter  to 
the  Spiritualism  of  the  war,  the  whole  subject  is  too  vast,  weird,  and  terrible, 
to  form  a  picture  suitable  to  the  calm  contemplation  of  retrospective  eyes. 
We  shall  now,  therefore,  take  leave  of  Spiritualism  in  die  South,  and  invite 

Hosted  by  Google 

43^  HISTORY  OP  MODERN' 

the  reader  to  glance  at  the  progress  which  it  has  made  in  the  Pacific  States, 
California,  and  Nevada. 

Before  entering  upon  this  part  of  our  task,  we  must  again  impress  upon  the 
reader  oiu  helief  in  the  correspondence  which  exists  between  atmospheric, 
geologic,  and  magnetic  influences. 

All  these  in  Spiritualism  are  represented  in  the  character  of  phenomena, 
and  the  endowments  of  media.  When  the  author  first  visited  the  Pacific 
coast,  and  reported  from  thence  certain  spiritual  manifestations,  which,  though 
as  well  attested  as  any  circumstances  could  possibly  be  that  had  not  a  world- 
wide operation,  the  astounding  force  and  weird  character  of  her  relations  sub- 
jected them  to  a  most  unphilosophical  degree  of  incredulity  on  the  part  of 
those  Spiritualists  who  made  their  own  experiences  die  standard  of  all  other 
persons. 

Forgetting  the  tremendous  demonstrations  which  are  established  beyond 
question  amongst  the  Hindoos,  North  American  Indians,  certain  oriental 
nations,  and  savage  tribes ;  disregarding  the  vast  shock  which  their  own  cher- 
ished early  prejudices  had  received,  when  they  were  first  startled  with  the  re- 
ality of  the  simplest  ofrevelations  from  beyond  the  tomb, — even  well-informed 
Spiritualists,  or  those  who,  from  long  experience  of  a  certain  set  of  phenomena, 
deemed  themselves  such,  undertook  to  pronounce  the  hazardous  verdict  of 
"impossible"  upon  some  of  the  narratives  which  the  Spiritualism  of  California 
supplied.  Many  very  shrewd  and  intelligent  Californians  had  foreseen  this 
treatment  of  what  they  had  themselves  witnessed,  and,  for  their  *'  own  self- 
respect's  sake"  had  withheld  then  experiences  from  the  carping  criticism  of 
their  Eastern  brethren.  But  the  author's  motto  has  ever  been,  "The  truth 
agamst  the  world;  "  and  feeling  assured  that  the  time  must  come  when  all  that 
is  mysterious  in  spirit  intercourse  will  be  fully  interpreted  by  science,  and 
marvels  which  seem  to  transcend  belief  shall  fade  into  insignificance  before 
the  more  extended  powers  which  knowledge  will  unveil  of  the  operations  be- 
tween spirit  and  matter,  the  author  has  determined  now,  as  heretofore,  to  dis- 
regard the  comments  of  the  ignorant  for  their  ignorance's  sake,  and  make 
the  record  faithfully  for  the  truth's  sake,  even  if  she  have  to  wait  for  the  ap- 
proving verdict  of  a  more  spiritually  instructed  generation  on  tliis  part  of  the 
narrative. 

It  is  rather  curious  to  observe  the  indignation  and  haste  wherewith  the 
Spiritualist  proceeds  to  condemn  the  sceptic  for  discrediting  the  facts  which 
he  can  personally  testify  of,  and  yet  how  unwittingly  he  takes  that  sceptic's 
place,  when  other  facts  are  presented  to  him  of  which  he  has  not  had  personal 
experience. 

This  course,  we  repeat,  is  not  a  very  philosophical  one,  especially  when, 
as  in  the  cases  we  shall  presently  relate,  the  phenomena  are  verified  fay  persons 
of  credit  and  standing,  equal  to  any  whose  witness  has  ever  been  cited  in 
the  page  of  human  history. 

Be  diis  as  it  may,  we  shall  present  our  examples  to  the  reader,  changing 
very  little  of  form  or  style  from  the  original  narratives  supplied  by  the  author 
to  the  Herald  of  Progress : 

'■  SPIRITUALISM  IN  CALITORNIA. 

"It  is  frequently  asserted  in  spiritual  communications,  tliat  strong  magnetic  manations  ore 
exhaled  tiy  tlie  strong  pasHons  of  human  beings,  and  given  off  m  abundant  force  in  violent 
death. 

*'  In  illustration  of  tbis  proportion,  spirits  cite  numerous  eases  of  haunted  houBes,  where 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  439 

it  will  be  most  generally  found  that  blool  has  been  spQled,  life  rudely  destroyed,  or  deeply 
rooted  criminality  has  exhaled  tlie  strong  atmosphere  of  passion. 

"In  all  these  instances  a  powerful  charge  of  human  magnetism  is  liberated,  and  this,  adher- 
ing to  wood,  stone,  plants,  or  any  other  contiguousphysical  substance,  forms  a  permanent 
mediumistic  force  which  attracts  the  spirit  connected  with  it,  and  sometimes  even  enchains 
il,  for  3.  stated  period,  to  the  sphere  of  the  emanations. 

"  We  offer  this  observation,  to  show  why  California,  which,  for  some  years  after  the  dis- 
invery  of  gold,  became  the  theatre  of  all  those  lawless  passions  and  scenes  of  violence  which 
ever  run  riot  under  such  dreumstances,  might  reasonably  be  expected  to  manifest  the 
presence  of  those  weird  and  e^th-bound  spirits,  who,  in  the  first  few  years  of  its  fevered 
existence  as  a  gold  country,  were  sent  in  vast  numbers  into  the  spirit -world,  through  the 
gate  of  unnatural  death,  crime,  and  strife. 

"The  wonderful  transparency  of  the  atmosphere,  and  the  heavy  charges  of  mineral  mag- 
neiism  which  permeate  California,  seem  to  be  amongst  other  causes  which  peculiarly  favor 
the  vision  of  the  seer  and  the  production  of  powerful  supra-mundane  phenomena. 

"These  and  other  reasons  combined,  have  produced  manifestations  of  almost  unequalled 
marvel,  although  it  is  only  within  the  last  few  years  that  any  systematic  attempts  to 
present  its  philosophy  publicly  to  the  world  have  been  successful.  " 

"  AUuaon  has  already  been  made  to  the  visit  of  Dr.  Gardner,  of  Boston,  to  the  shores 
of  the  Pacific  State,  by  which  an  early  impetus  was  given  to  the  cause,  and  through  which 
some  permanent  mediumistic  developments  took  place. 

■'  The  first  manifestations  of  which  we  shall  speak  were  recorded  by  an  English  gentle- 
man welllmown  and  highly  esteemed  by  the  editor  of  the  Spiritual  Universe,  who,  together 
with  several  mutual  friends  of  his  own  and  the  author's,  vouch  for  the  entire  reliability  of 

SPIRITUAL  MANIFESTATIONS  IN  CALIFORNIA.  .-SPlRnUAL  UNIVERSE,  JULY  .^,  -yl^. 

"  In  an  extenave  and  fertile  valley,  about  eight  miles  from  the  city  of  Los  Angelos,  in 
California,  stand  die  remains  of  the  Mission  San  Gabriel,  one  of  the  first  rnlssions  founded 
durin°  the  last  century,  by  Spanish  Dominicans,  for  the  purpose  of  Christianmng  the  In- 
dians." Smce  the  exchange  of  the  Mexican  government  for  that  of  the  United  States,  the 
neglected  gardens  and  orchards  have  been  occupied  by  Amencan  squatters. 

"  In  Aikist,  1S53,  a  family  named  Hildreth  arrived  across  the  plams,  toot  possession 
ot  a  part  c?lhe  mission  domain,  and  builTa  comfortable  one-story  bouse  on  it.  1  he  family 
is  Uree  and  very  well  to  do,  having  brought  over  a  considerable  amount  of  stock  from  the 
United  Stales.  In  the  winter,  reports  of  an  extraordinary  nature  were  in  circulation  in  Los 
Angelos  respecting  the  powers  of  two  of  the  daaghters  as  mediums. 

"It  was  said  that  mere  taUe  tipping  was  quite  cast  in  the  shade  by  these  young  women, 
who  were  among  the  most  powerful  mediums  known ;  that  not  only  could  they  produce 
raps  in  any  part  of  the  house,  but  these  noises  accompanied  them  wherever  they  went,  and 
would  answer  qnestions  inteUi^bly.  It  was  moreover  stated  that  tables  and  other  articles 
ot  furniture  were  moved  and  thrown  about  without  the  contact,  or  even  the  will  of  the  me- 
diums, and  tliat  doors  were  opened  and  shut  by  some  invisible  ^ency. 

"Curiosity  HTis  so  much  excited,  that  those  who  could  claim  any  acquaintance  with,  or 

Id  get 

a  introduction  to  the  family,  visited  San  Gabriel  m  parties,  ti 

traordmary  doings.  ,.  j      -  ■.     1  r    .  .■  t 

"  On  questionuig  persons  as  they  returned  from  these  so-called  spiritual  mamfestations,  1 
found  their  answers  could  be  thus  clasafied  ;  .  ,    ,1    r,    -i.   j  ■  _ 

"  First.  Those  who  were  Roman  Catholics  declared  it  was  certamly  the  Devil  s  domgs. 

"Second.  Persons  who  knewhttle  of  natural  sdence  thought  electricity  was  the  cause  of 
the  phenomena,  and  spoke  as  if  they  had  given  a  sufficient,  as  well  as  a  scientific  expiation. 

"  Third  Those  generally  the  beat  informed,  who  could  only  account  for  what  they  had 
seen  and  closely  observed  by  the  recognition  of  some  natural  agency,  of  which  we  at  pre- 
sent know  nothing,  or  else  that  the  disturbances  were  actually  produced  by  spirits.  _  But  no 
one  returned  with  the  impres^on  that  he  had  witnessed  a  case  of  delusion  or  imposition. 

"After  a  time  a  new  phase  appeared.  Voices  were  heard  m  and  about  'he  bouse 
either  conversing  tceether  or  addtessing  different  members  of  the  family.  My  friend, 
the  editor   of  the  Los  Angelos  Star,  could  no  longer  remain  away,  bnt  went  and  sat 

Hosted  by  Google 

44°  HISTOR  Y  OF  MODERN 

a  rest.  He  informed  me,  on  his  re- 
„        1,  lii?  astonishment  became  excessive  ; 

it  lie  iiad  carried  on  a  long  conversation  with  voices  in  the  air  ;  had  witnessed  the  tnro wing 
-..out  of  trunks  and  chairs,  as  well  as  the  opening  and  shutting  of  doors  by  some  invisible 
agency;  and  that  a  sceptical  friend,  on  his  first  arrival,  had  asked  the  spirits  to  do  some- 
thing to  astonish  him,  when  he  was  instantly  drenched  with  cobl  water,  there  not  bemg  pre- 
viously a  drop  of  water  in  the  room. 

"  I  will  now  proceed  to  relate  only  what  I  myself  saw  and  heard.  At  the  solicitation  of 
those  who  were  unable  lo  leave  town,  the  Misses  Hildreths  paid  a  visit  to  some  friends  in 
Los  Angelos,  to  exhibit  their  remarkable  powers.  It  was  at  one  of  the  meetings  that  fol- 
lowed where  I  first  heard  the  'raps.'  Table-tipiiuig  I  had  frequently  seen;  and  although 
renoarkable  communications  had  been  made  me  by  this  means,  I  was  still  doubtful  whether 
or  not  the  answers  were  unconsciously  influenced  by  the  minds,  either  of  the  mediums  or 
the  spectators;  But  here  were  tlie  raps,  loud  rapping  occurring  in  any  loom  the  mediums 
entered  for  the  first  time  in  their  lives,  on  the  tables,  or  witmn  a  box,  or  on  the  floor. 
There  was  no  '  imagination '  here.  '  Rap  ten  tiroes,'  says  one  visitor,  and  ten  distinct 
knoclis  are  coanled  by  the  whole  company.  '  Rap  out  my  name,  and  I'll  believe  you,'  says 
another;  and  his  name  was  correctly  spelled  out.  Tables  were  moved  about  and  turned 
over  by  the  mere  contact  of  two  fingers;  and  a  singular  scene  occurred,  in  which  the  united 
strength  of  two  men  was  unable  to  set  the  table  again  on  its  legs,  as  long  as  Miss  Hild- 
reth's  finger  was  in  contact  with  some  part  of  it. 

"  The  violent  efforts  of  the  men  would  now  and  then  partly  succeed,  when  the  table 
would  rebound  against  them,  and  nearly  throw  them  down. 

"In  February,  1854,  1  determined,  before  leaving  Califiimia,  to  accept  an  invitation  to 
visit  the  Hildreth  family,  a':  San  Gabriel,  and  drove  over  my  wife  and  two  other  ladies  to 
their  residence.  On  approaching  the  house,  everything  appeared  in  order,  except  the  win- 
dows, in  which  scarcely  a  single  entire  pane  of  glass  remained ;  it  was,  indeed,  a  complete 
smash.  This,  we  were  told,  was  done  by  the  spirits  throwing  in  stones  '  until  they  have 
given  np  mending  them.'  After  enjoying  a  hospitable  dinner,  dufmg  which  the  parents  told 
us  that  the  rappings  had  accompanied  their  daughters  ever  since  they  were  mfants  in  the 
cradle,  years  before  any  one  referred  them  to  spiritual  agency,  we  adjourned  to  a  small  room, 
in  which  was  a  large  bed,  a  table,  and  a  few  chairs.  The  first  experiment  was  to  make  a 
four-l^ged  table  walk  out  of  doors,  the  medium  having  but  one  finger  in  contact.  Tliis 
feat  was  accomplished;  but  in  moving  over  the  rough  ground,  the  leg  on  which  the  table 
was  walking,  hitched,  and  broke  oH".  The  large,  heavy  l^edstead,  with  mattress  and  feather 
bed,  was  then  moved  about  the  room  with  great  ease.  One  of  the  mediums  was,  at  thir 
time,  Mttmg  on  a  chair  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  room,  when  the  bed  suddenly  made 
toward  her,  and  riang  up  at  one  end,  placed  itself  in  her  lap.  The  other  sister  had  two 
fingers  jesting  on  the  head-t)oard.  The  bed  was  afterward  found  exceedingly  heavy,  and 
the  force  required  to  move  it  over  the  imeven  earth  floor  very  great. 

"  We  then  referred  to  the  reports  that  various  articles  were  moved  about  the  house  with- 
out any  personal  contact,  and  even  without  then'  will.  They  answered,  that  every  evening, 
about  dusk,  these  remarkable  disturbances  began. 

"  Miss  H.  pointed  to  a  large  trunk,  which  on  the  previous  night  had  been  Isdd  across  her 
chest,  after  having  been  in  bed  a  few  minutes;  she  be^ed  them  not  to  disturb  her,  and  it 
was  quietly  removed  to  its  place.  She  added,  that  lately  the  bedclothes  had  been  suddenly 
jerked  off  them,  and  once  or  twice  their  rings  had  been  taken  off  their  fingers,  and  hid  in 
out-of-the-way  places,  and  yet  they  said,  they  were  particular  to  lock  their  bed-room  doors. 
One  of  the  party  expressed  a  wish  to  see  some  article  of  furniture  moved  without  any  one 
being  m  contact.  One  of  the  mediums  stated  that  such  things  had  occurred  only  at  night, 
but  she  would  try.  A  chair  was  placed  on  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  slie 
held  her  hand  about  a  foot  above  it.  Some  time  passed  away,  and  she  evidently  doubted 
of  succeeding ;  when,  with  a  sudden  jerk,  it  scampered  off  and  upset  itself  about  six  feet 
from  her. 

*'  Our  time  for  departure  was  now  approaching,  and  the  party  retired  to  the  common  sit 
ting  room  to  tEdte  a  little  refreshment  before  starting.  The  rappmg  noise  still  continued 
near  the  mediums,  generally  on  the  floor  or  some  article  of  furniture  near  which  tiiey  sat. 
The  father  proposed  that  his  daughters  should  sing  a  song,  and  request  the  '  spirits '  to  ac- 
company them.  This  they  did  by  rapping  on  or  about  a  table  standing  in  the  centre  of  the 
loom,  the  whole  sonndmg very  much  like  half  a  dozen  persons  beating  'the  devil's  tattoo' 
with  their  knuckles.  A  violin  was  then  placed  in  its  box  on  the  floor,  when,  on  repeating 
the  song,  the  strings  were  sounded  in  accompaniment,  staccato  fashion. 

"  The  family  pressed  os  exceedingly  to  remain  the  night,  as  what  we  had  witnessed  was 
-trifling  to  what  usually  took  place  after  dusk 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  441 

"  With  one  observation,  I  will  now  conclude. 

"If  tie  hundreds  of  intelligent  persons,  strangers  to,  and  apart  from  eacli  other,  who 
have  been  closely  observing  such  anguhir  plienomena,  all  arrive  at  tlie  conclusion  [hat  these 
supposed  delusions  are  tangible  facts,  stem  realities,  —  if  all  these,  and  thousands  of  others 
have  been  deceived,  — of  what  use  is  evidence  at  all? 

"  Such  is  the  self-Bufficiencyof  learned  bodies  in  England  that  they  sneer  at  anything  which 
does  not  conform  to,  or  emanate  from  their  'school,"  and  will  not  condescend  to  rive  this 
wonderful  subject  an  unbiassed  examination,  or  even  an  examination  of  any  kind." 

"The  writer  of  this  ceades  m  Hampstead  Road,  London,  and  speaks  of  what  he  has 
personally  witnessed." — Spiriluai  Uninerse. 

We  have  recorded  tlie  character  of  phenomena  occurring  in  one  of  tlie  most 
remote  parts  of  the  State.  The  following  s'mnces  were  held  in  a  district 
scarcely  less  removed  from  the  great  centres  of  human  intercoiurse  tlian  San 
Gabriel,  hence  less  likely  to  be  the  result  of  contagious  fancy  or  organized 
deception : 

"  spmrruALiSM  in  California.— banner  or  light. 

"  We  copy  from  the  Family  Circle,  published  at  San  Francisco,  California,  the  following 
extracts  from  a  long  account  of  the  spiritual  manifestations  witnessed  at  the  residence  oi 
General  Vallejo  in  Sonoma  valley.     We  commence  with  the  account  of  flie  second  evening's 

"The  circle  was  arranged  is  before,  under  the  direction  oE  the  spuits,  all  hands  being 

"  The  performances  of  tippmg,  rapping,  soundmg  the  strings  of  the  guitar,  and  beatmg 
time  with  the  table,  were  repeated  at  this  sitting. 

"  The  room  being  momentarily  darkened,  the  spirits  were  then  asked  to  sound  the  keys 
of  the  piano.  This  was  also  complied  with  in  various  ways,  as  called  for  by,  and  to  the 
satisfaction  of,  those  present. 

"  Some  one  asked  that  the  guitar  might  be  removed  to  the  centre-table.  Instead  of  this 
request  bemg  literally  complied  with,  the  guitar  was  taken  up  and  conveyed  to  a  sofa  in  a 
remote  corner  of  the  room,  and  Idd  noiselessly  down  upon  It,  where  it  was  found  on  relight- 
ing  the  apartment.  This  was  repeated,  when  it  was  asked  if  the  spirits  would  convey  the 
gnitar  out  of  the  room, 

"The  guitar  was  taken  up  above  the  heads  of  the  circle,  striding  the  hanging  crystals  of 
a  chandelier  in  its  course;  and,  on  relighting  the  candles,  it  was  satisfactorily  ascertamed, 
after  diligent  search,  that  it  was  not  in  the  room,  nor  in  the  adjoining  halL 

"  Andronico  VaUejo,  the  ovmer  of  the  guitar,  began  to  think  that  it  had  really  disap- 
peared beyond  recovery,  and  upbraided  Dr.  Van  Geldem,  who  made  the  request,  with  his 
loss.  Dr.  Frisbie  then  remarked  that  he  should  be  on  his  guard  against  imposition  in  this 
instance,  and  accordingly  he  critically  examined  the  doors  and  windows,  to  assure  himself 
that  no  person  could  enter  the  room  without  bemg  noticed.  The  room  was  again  darkened, 
and  the  spirits  requested  to  return  the  guitar.  A  loud  whizzing  noise,  and  the  sounding  of 
the  strings  of  the  guitar,  were  heard  outade  of  the  house,  and  presently  also  within  the 
house  as  though  It  were  approaching  the  circle,  which  it  soon  did,  the  instrument  being  quiet- 
ly  deposited  on  the  floor  near  by.  An  explanation  by  the  spirits  was  afterwards  given  of  this 
interesting  feat,  to  the  effect  that  the  doors  were  noiselessly  opened,  unpereeived  by  the  circle 
in  order  to  accomplish  the  transportation  of  the  guitar  to  and  fro,  and  that  it  had  been  con- 
cealed on  the  verandah,  which  is  shaded  by  a  thick  growth  of  Madeira  vine,  while  the  mem- 
bers of  the  circle  were  in  search  of  it.     The  circle  then  concluded  to  separate, 

"  On  the  third  evenbg,  August  25,  at  the  same  place,  ~  the  house  of  General  VaUejo,  — 
the  circle  again  convened,  composed  of  the  same  parties  as  on  the  previous  evenmg.  Many 
of  the  performances  of  the  two  previous  evemngs  were  repeated  at  the  commencement  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

442  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

the  sitting-  The  guitar  was  taken  away,  as  beore,  and,  on  searching  diligently  in  the 
room,  the  hall,  outside  of  the  house,  and  on  the  verandah,  it  could  not  be  found.  The 
seirch  was  then  given  up.  While  still  wondering  wliete  it  would  finally  be  discovered,  an 
infant  was  heard  crying  up-staors  ;  a  servant  was  called  and  sent  up  to  the  child.  On  ar- 
riving at  the  lop  of  the  stiurs,  tlie  servant  stumbled  over  some  object  in  the  passage.  She 
immediately  cried  out,  'Here  is  the  guitar  1'  It  was  then  proposed  to  leave  the  guitar 
where  it  was  found,  return  reform,  the  circle,  and  ask  the  spirits  to  return  the  guitar,  as 
they  had  done  on  the  night  before. 

"  They  consented  ;  but  it  was  agreed  that,  meantime,  other  manifestations  should  take 
place. 

"A  drum  was  procure!  fron  an  ad]  nmg  room,  and  it  was  then  asked  if  -ome  spiut 
friend  of  Mrs.  Tracy  was  pre  ent  vho  could  rap  out  his  name,  by  means  of  the  alphabet, 
on  the  drum.  The  answer  was,  "^  es  and  the  alphabet  being  called,  the  iiarae  of  Thomas 
Miller  was  spelled  out.  Mrs.  Tracy  mformed  the  circle  that  this  was  the  name  of  a  dear 
friend,  with  whom  she  was  acquainted  m  her  younger  days,  and  that  he  had  died  at  a  mili- 
tary school  In  the  State  of  Maryland, 

"  The  spWts  were  again  requested  to  bring  the  guitar  back  into  the  room,  answerbg 
•  Yes.'  According  to  their  instructions,  the  lights  were  then  extinguished,  and,  while  Mrs. 
Frisble  was  seated  at  the  piano,  the  whizzing  noise  was  heard  i^n,  when  Mrs.  Frisbie 
being  very  much  excited,  groped  her  way  towards  the  sofa,  where  her  husband  was  seated  ; 
but,  before  she  could  reach  him,  the  guitar  came  in  contact  with  her  dress.  She,  somewhat 
frightened,  endeavored  to  escape  from  it,  but  it  followed  her,  and  she  exclaimed,  '  Strike  a 
light ;  the  guitar  is  stepping  after  mc  ! ' 

"  The  lights  were  immediately  produced,  when  the  guitar  vras  seen  to  be  gently  falling 
away  from  her  person  toward  the  floor,  which  it  reached  without  producing  the  slightest 
noise.  The  circle  had  now  made  np  their  minds  to  adjourn,  when  Uladislan  Vallejo 
obsei-ved  that  there  was  something  like  a  piece  of  paper  sticking  under  the  strings  of  the 
guitar. 

' '  On  examination  it  was  found  to  be  a  viating  card  which  had  for  some  time  been  stuck 
in  the  corner  of  a  looking-glass  frame,  in  the  room  where  the  circle  sat,  and  it  had  not  been 
noticed  by  any  one  that  it  was  removed.  On  closer  inspection  the  following  words,  written 
with  a  pencil,  were  found  upon  it ;  '  I  am  the  spirit  of  Thomas  Miller  who  writes  this  com- 
munication ;  George  Butler  is  a  writing  medium.' 

' '  The  next  puzzle  was  to  ascertain  how  and  when  it  was  written.  On  comparing  it  with 
the  handwriting  of  Butler,  it  was  found  to  resemble  it  precisely.  Mr.  Butler  strenuously 
denied  al!  knowledge  of  this  communication,  but  on  mquiring  of  the  spirit  about  it,  we 
were  informed  that  he  had  written  it  through  Butler's  hand,  having  previously  made  him 
imconseious  for  that  purpose,  while  the  drde  were  waiting  the  return  of  the  guitar. 

"It  is  well  to  remark  here,  that  young  Butler  had  not  been,  previous  to  this  event, 
aware  of  his  mediumship.  To  test  the  reality  of  this  mysterious  discovery,  it  was  asked  if 
the  spii-it  would  now  write  more  communications  in  the  same  way.  This  was  assented  to 
by  the  spirit.  Paper  and  pencil  were  placed  before  the  medium.  The  lights  were  extui- 
guished,  and  the  spirit  soon  made  an  attempt  to  control  the  hand  of  Mr.  Butler;  it 
appeared  to  him,  and  also  to  the  others  who  heard  the  sound  of  the  pencil,  that  the  spirit 
was  endeavoring  to  draw  lines  across  the  paper.  Mr.  Butler,  becoming  annoyed,  threw 
down  the  pencil,  saying,  '  I  don't  like  this  buoness.'  But  imraeditaely  the  circle  was  made 
aware,  by  a  rustling  of  the  paper,  that  it  was  carried  upward  toward  the  ceiling,  and  on 
groping  for  the  pencil  on  the  table,  it  was  discovered  that  it  had  also  disappeared. 

"The  spirit  rapped  out  that  the  circle  should  patiently  await  the  return  of  tlie  expected 
tpirit  message  for  a  few  minutes.  Meanwhile,  raps  were  heard,  as  if  made  by  the  pencil 
on  the  lid  of  the  piano,  on  the  looking-glass,  and  other  objects.     After  a  few  mmutes,  as 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

443 

predicted,  the  paper  was  heard  descendmg  6om  the  ceQing  with  (he  same  rustling  noise  as 
when  it  was  carried  off.  The  pencil  apparently  fell  from  the  ceiling  also,  and  struck  upon 
the  table.  Lights  were  produced  instantly,  and,  to  the  astonishment  of  all,  a  different 
sheet  of  paper  from  that  which  had  been  taken  away,  was  found  upon  the  table;  the  spirit 
liavmg  chosen  to  appropriate,  from  a  portfolio  on  the  centre-table,  a  smaUer  sized  sheet, 
which  bears  a  vignette  representing  the  residence  and  adjouiing  grounds  of  General  Val. 
lejo,  within  which  the  drcle  were  then  sittbg. 

"  The  first  sheet  offered  for  the  use  of  the  spirit  was  not  ruled,  whereas  the  latter  was. 
A  communication,  written  in  a  neat  style  of  penmanship,  strictly  upon  the  ruled  Imes  of 
the  paper,  was  discovered,  and  was  read  aloud  to  the  circle  by  Dr.  Van  Geldern, 

"The  following  is  the  communication  referred  to,  omitting  a  sentence  of  an  exclusively 
personal  nature. 

'"Allhmi!  ye  inhabitants  of  the  riidimental  sphere;  a  new  era  dawns  upon  the  world  ; 
the  spirits  of  the  departed  wiU  not  only  take  cognizance  of  the  affairs  of  this  mundane 
world,  but  will,  hereafter,  through  their  superior  cultivation  and  more  developed  powers, 
exalt  and  ennoble  the  whole  race  of  man.  Thrice  blessed  is  the  present  generation,  for 
they  shall  witness  the  amelioration  of  all  human  maladies,  and  the  mtroductlon  of  a  sys- 
tem of  philosophy  and  religion  in  complete  harmony  with  the  designs  and  attributes  of 
Deity.  False  theories  and  pemidous  practices  shall  give  way  to  an  enlightened  system  and 
consistent  method, 

"  'Diseases  shall  no  longer  be  the  ofp-ohria  medicorum.  Its  ravages  shall  be  stayed; 
human  life  shall  be  greatly  prolonged,  and  man's  happbess  tenfold  advanced.' 

"  '  Thomas  Miller,'  " 

Let  it  be  remembered  that  General  Vallejo,  in  whose  house  the  above 
manifestations,  and  many  others  of  similar  character,  transpired,  was,  and  is, 
one  of  the  oldest  and  most  respected  inhabitants  of  the  State.  His  wealth, 
age,  position,  and  noble  character,  forbid  the  possibility  of  attaching  a  shadow 
of  sospicion  to  his  name ;  and  yet  for  years  he  pursued  similar  investigations 
to  the  above,  under  his  own  roof,  until  his  faith,  and  that  of  his  family,  be- 
came as  fixed  in  the  belief,  as  the  everlasting  hills  of  his  own  California, 

The  writer  of  the  above,  Mr.  Thomas  Miller,  Dr.  Van  Geldern,  Dr.  and 
Mrs.  Frisbie,  Mr.  Butler,  Mrs.  Tracy,  and  all  the  other  members  of  this  re- 
markable circle,  are  persons  of  marked  distinction  and  honor  in  the  State, 
but  these  were  but  the  rudimental  experiences  of  California  Spiritualism. 

CHAPTER    XLir. 

IRITUALISM    IN    CALIFORNIA. 

That  I  will  apeak  to  thee." 

Hahlet  r  —  Shaisfiart. 

The  Authority  Offered— California  Sketches— The  Ritssian  Hill  Circles 
—  Kanaka  Spirits  — The  Spirits  on  Telegraph  Hill— The  Blood  Mark- 
Mr,  J.  V.  Mansfield  —  "  The  Far  West." 

We  now  proceed  to  notice  some  of  those  more  startling  and  ahnost  in- 
credible  phases  of  California  Spiritualism  to  which  allusion  has  been  made  in 

Hosted  by  Google 

444  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

flie  preceding  chapter.  The  authority  on  which  these  records  are  given, 
together  with  the  impression  they  produced  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence, 
will  be  best  imderstood  by  citing  intact  the  original  papers  written  by  the 
author  for  A.  J.  Davis's  Herald  of  Progress,  entitled,  "  California  Sketches." 
Some  of  the  spiritualistic  details  are  necessarily  mixed  with  personal  experi- 
ences, but  even  at  the  risk  of  incurring  tlie  charge  of  egotism,  we  shall  quote 
the  sketches  as  they  stand,  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  integrity  and  spirit 
of  the  narratives. 

It  is  only  necessary  to  add  that  Mr,  A.  J.  Davis,  himself  the  most  exact  and 
reliable  of  editors,  was  furnished  with  the  full  names  and  addresses  of  all  the 
parties  referred  to  by  initials,  and  that,  previous  to  the  publication  of  the 
sketches,  ample  means  were  afforded  to  him  of  verifying  every  statement  they 
contained. 

In  respect  to  the  motive  which  induced  the  author  to  withhold  these  names, 
althougli  their  identity  is  perfectly  well  known  in  California,  it  is  proper  to  say 
ttw-t  all  the  gentlemen  concerned  are  holding  public  offices  of  trust  and  dis- 
tinction, and  consider  that  "  to  be  again  dragged  before  the  public,"  in  narra- 
tives of  their  too  notorious  and  frightful  experiences,  would  be  repulsive  to  their 
feelings  and  injurious  to  their  public  usefulness. 

Relying  on  the  already  well-attested  character  of  the  facts,  then,  it  only  re- 
mains to  repeat  that  these  gentlemen  are  all  known,  and  when  their  expe- 
riences were  first  related  in  ■{&&  True  Calif ornian,  their  names  were  suppressed 
simply  as  a  matter  of  ttiquette. 

The  accounts  were  written  by  a  distinguished  lawyer,  who  was  a  member  of 
the  circles,  but  he,  as  well  as  all  the  parties  concerned,  were  well  acquainted 
with  the  editor  of  the  True  Californian,  who  pledged  his  faith  to  the  public 
for  the  authenticity  of  the  statements  he  published : 

"CALIFORNIA  SKETCHES  — BY  EMMA  HARDINGE. 

"Ere  offering  tiie  following  statements  to  the  readers  of  tbe  Herald,  I  desire  to  give  a 
few  words  of  introduction,  I  have  copied  them,  almost  verbatim,  from  a  file  of  the  True 
Calif orniaii.  of  the  date  of  1856,  but  the  entire  details  of  tlie  transactions,  together  with  a 
vast  amount  of  still  stranger  phenomena,  unpublished,  I  have  myself  received  from  the  lips 
of  the  witnesses.  With  this  article,  I  inclose  to  Mr.  Davis  a  private  memorandum  of  the 
nimes  of  the  parties  mentioned  in  initial  letters  in  the  narrative,  with  the  permission  to  show 
these  to  persons  acquainted  in  California,  or  likely  to  become  so ;  in  addition  to  which,  I  am 
permitted  to  say  that  Joseph  Atkmson,  Esq.,  well  known  in  this  city  of  San  Francisco,  as 
for  some  years  past  proprietor  and  superintendent  of  Ix>ne  Mountdn  Cemetery,  is  not  only 
fully  cognizant  of  all  the  facts,  and  personally  acquainted  with  all  tbe  parties  concerned,  but 
b  willing  to  answer  in  person  all  inquiries,  and  furnish  names,  references,  and  details  in  con- 
nection with  the  affair,  to  any  one  interested  enough  to  write  or  call  upon  him.  I  am  m. 
formed  by  eye-witnesses  of  amilai  manifestations  in  other  parts  of  the  State,  also,  that  the 
two  mediums,  Mrs.  X.  and  her  daughter,  could  produce  this  phenomena  m  all  its  force  and 
variety,  without  the  presence  of  the  other  members  of  the  San  Francisco  circle. 

"  Both  these  ladies  have  now  passed  to  the  spirit-world,  and  the  oxcesave  annoyance  ex- 
perienced by  Mr.  J.  P. ,  in  his  household,  —  the  breaking  of  china  and  furniture,  together, 
with,  as  it  appears  to  me,  his  entire  indifference  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  except  as  a 
carious  and  unexpired  scientific  problem,  —  render  him  unwillmg  to  comply  with  my  re- 
quest to  try  and  optain  a  repetition  of  the  curious  phenomena  in  fresh  circles. 

"  I  have  only  to  add  that  the  entire  history  is  vouched  for,  by  the  irreproachable  eharac- 
ers  and  portions  of  the  parties  concerned.  It  was  on  this  score  that  the  records  found  ad- 
misaon  to  the  colmnnsof  one  of  the  most  respectable  journals  in  Califorma. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

44b 

"For  this  cause  1  send  it  for  republication  in  the  Herald  of  Frogres.',  and  hold  myself 
responsible  for  communicating  only  what  stands  as  well-attested  and  honorably  verified,  as 
it  is  possible  for  any  facts  to  be,  that  only  occur  in  the  presence  of  a  few  witnesses.  I  send 
herewith  an  account  of  the  first  published  seance,  and  in  my  next  will  copy  the  two  follow- 
ing papers. 

"  Emma  Harbinge. 
"San^  Francisco,  Cal.,  March  24,  1864." 

"MIDNIGHT  DISCLOSURES. 
[Cc^iedfrom  the  True  Californian  of  Oct.  3,  1856.] 

"Edihrs  of  the  True  Calif ornian  : 

"  On  Friday  evening  last,  Mr.  B.  and  myself  called  at  the  readence  of  Mr.  J,  P.,  of  this 
city,  for  the  purpose  ot  witnessing  some  of  the  extraordinary  phenomena  that  had  been  re- 
ported as  occurring  in  that  gentleman's  bouse  for  the  past  three  months,  and  which  it  was 
hoped  might  be  repeated  in  our  presence.  I  had  visited  Mr.  J.  P.  on  several  previous  oc- 
casions in  the  hope  of  gratifying  mycnrioaty  by  a  sight  of  the  reported  marvels,  and  found 
the  facts  far  exceeding  anything  I  had  expected.  On  this  occaaon,  therefore,  my  prmcipal 
motive  for  the  visit  was  far  less  for  my  own  gratification  than  that  of  Mr.  B. ,  my  com- 
panion, whose  presence,  appearance,  and  witness,  I  was  most  desirous  so  obt^  in  circum- 
tanees  which  I  found  hafHing  al!  my  efforts  to  explain,  except  upon  a  supernatural 
hypothesis, 

"Before  entering  upon  3.  dotted  account  of  the  seance,  it  may  be  of  some  interest  to 
future  investigators  to  give  a  brief  physiological  description  of  thepersons  through  whose 
mediumship  the  demonstrations  inquestion  seemed  to  be  produced.  As  this  sketch  is  designed 
to  asast  the  researches  of  those  truly  philosophical  minds  that  desire  to  connect  cause  with 
effect  in  these  new  and  at  present  unexplained  phenomena,  1  am  certain  such  a  description  will 
be  found  to  possess  much  significance. 

"If  we  except  myself  and  my  friend  B., — -who  in  the  first  manifestation  had  of  course 
no  share,  —the  household  at  the  scene  of  these  occurrences  consisted  of  Mr.  J.  P.  and 
his  lady,  her  aster  and  the  latter's  daughter;  the  whole  four  of  whom  I  believe  to  have 
been  peculiarly  adapted  for  the  production  of  what  I  am  about  to  relate. 

"  Mr.  J.  P.  is  a  gentleman  of  remarkably  fine  phyoque,  built  on  the  largest,  strongest, 
and  most  healthful  model,  weighing,  I  should  think,  over  two  hundred  and  thirty  poands,  with 
a  strong,  finely  modelled  head,  light  hair,  sanguine  complexion,  and  strongly  magnetic  tem- 
perament. His  poation  in  the  city  is  that  of  alawyer  of  great  eminence;  bat  he  is  alsoknown  as 
a  man  of  very  scientific  attainments,  deep  research,  and  remarkable  for  his  proficiency  in  chem- 
ical, astronomical,  and  mathematical  sciences.  The  fact  that  he  isengaged  in  framing  cer- 
tmn  well-known  mathematical  tables  for  public  use  [a  circumstance  merely  alluded  to  for  the 
purposes  of  identification]  will  illustrate  the  true  bearing  of  his  mind,  and  prove  there  is  no 
credulous  or  incapable  person  to  vouch  for  the  wonders  I  am  about  to  relate. 

''I  have  only  to  add  that  his  ago  is  about  forty,  his  eye  the  keen  and  peculiar  gray  that 
generally  accompanies  sandy  hair,  and  that  a  more  composed,  immobile,  resolute,  and  cour- 
ageous person,  it  has  never  before  been  my  lot  to  encounter.  • 

"  My  friend  E.,  well-known  among  Califomian  merchants  as  a  steady  practical  man,  is 
moreovei'  devoted  to  highly  sdentific  pursuits;  but  it  is  chiefly  because  he  stands  almost 
unrivalled  amongst  us  for  his  keen  knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  shrewd  power  of 
analysis,  that  I  desired  he  should  be  an  observer  of  these  marvels,  convinced  that  any  im- 
posture that  could  escape  his  detective  eye,  must  be  a  little  more  than  mortal  ju^lery. 
Mrs.  J.  P.  is  a  lady  in  about  the  prime  of  life,  of  an  apparently  passive  temperament, 
amiable,  well  educated,  and  very  lady-like;   seemingly  healthful,  with  fair  hwr  and  light 

Hosiedb,  Google 

446  mSTORV  OF  MODERN 

"Her  sister,  Mrs.  X.,  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  lady  older  in  years,  but  of  a  similiar  tem- 
perament. Miss  X.,  the  daughter  of  the  last-named  lady  a  fair  and  excitable  young  lady,, 
completed  our  party. " 

I  believe  the  two  last  named  of  tlie  party  had  recently  arrived  from  the 
Sandwich  Islands.  I  received  this  information  from  Mr.  J.  P.  himself,  who 
considered  it  possible  that  a  long  residence  there  might  have  in  some  degree 
attracted  the  "  Kanaka"  spirits,  who  are  subsequently  described  in  the  nar- 
ati  ve. — AuTHO  R. 

"At  eight  o'clock,  p.m.,  we  arrived,  by  appointment,  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  J.  P.,  sjtu- 
aled  on  Rusdan  Hill,  one  of  those  towering  eminences  overlooking  the  whole  city,  bay, 
and  "Golden  Gate,"  and  besides  commanding  the  most  extenave  view  in  the  ^'icinage, 
peculiarly  charged  with  what  the  magnetizers  would  call  a  '  strong  magnetic  influence" 
6om  the  rarity  of  the  atmosphere  in  such  an  elevated  site, 

"We  were  shown  into  the  library,  where  our  host,  unwillingto  lose  a  moment  from  liter- 
ary employment,  still  toiled  in  the  midst  of  law  papers,  globes,  quadrants,  mathematical 
instruments,  and  charts. 

"  Abstractmg  himself  from  bis  stadies  and  summoning  the  ladies  to  the  apartment,  we 
arranged  ourselves  in  the  usual  fashion  aroimd  the  table,  with  the  exceptionof  my  friend  B., 
who,  armed  with  determined  scepticism  and  resolution  to  place  himself  in  the  most  available 
position  for  observation,  declmed  to  join  us,  and  sat  aloof  as  sentinel  on  the  party.  I  mus 
add  that  ray  friend,  being  very  soon  satisfied  after  a  short  period  of  observation,  that  his 
scruples  were  not  of  much  account  there,  subsequently  joined  the  circle. 

"  Our  hands  were  as  usual  laid  flat  upon  the  table.  Soon  after  taking  our  places  mani- 
festations of  an  ordinary  character  commenced,  such  as  raising  the  table  several  inches  from 
the  ground,  where  it  floated  in  the  air  as  lightly  as  a  cork.  Meantmie  loud  raps  continued- 
to  sound  on  the  table,  floor,  walls,  and  every  part  of  the  room,  without  intermission,  through- 
out the  seance. 

"For  about  an  hour  we  retained  the  solar  lamp  in  the  room.  After  that  we  removed  it, 
leaving  its  glare  still  viable  in  addition  to  the  light  of  the  room  which  shone  in  full  and 
brightly  through  the  windows,  the  curtains  of  which  were  thrown  back.  No  sooner  had 
the  lamp  been  removed  than  it  seemed  as  if  every  object  in  the  room  was  in  motion  ;  chairs, 
sofas,  tables,  and  heavy  pieces  of  fnmiture,  with  marble  tops.  Cushions,  books,  and  every 
light  article  in  the  room  was  hurled  hither  and  thither  as  if  endowed  with  life.  Every- 
thing in  and  about  the  room  was  in  rapid  and  incessant  motion  ;  the  whole  atmosphere  was 
full  of  flying  objects.  Every  one  present  was  pinched,  pulled,  slapped  by  hands;  their 
hair  pulled  or  stroked,  their  eyelids  touched ;  themselves  and  their  chairs  dragged  around 
with  immense  force,  and  often  in  various  directions,  at  our  own  requests. 

"  During  this  scene,  except  when  dodging  to  avoid  the  flying  missiles,  or  moved  hither 
and  thither  by  the  spirits,  at  my  own  eame.st  request,  we  all  kept  our  seats  and  joined  hands. 
We  were  none  of  us  in  a  rank  of  life,  or  in  such  relatiojis  to  each  other  as  to  entertain  the 
smallest  doubt  of  any  one  present.  Yet  our  actions,  or  the  slightest  movement,  was  plainly 
viable  to  all ;  and  no  human  being  in  that  room  and  in  their  senses,  could  question  that  the 
origin  of  the  riot  around  us  was  made  by  strong  and  intelligent,  though  invisible  beings. 
Still,  as  I  had  determined  to  myself  to  observe,  and  record  what  I  observed  for  posterity,  I 
requested  that  even  our  poations  as  we  sat  should  bear  witness  for  us;  hence  it  was,  and 
hence  alone,  that  I  solicited  that  our  hands  should  be  all  joined,  and  our  position  immovably 
fixed,  as  far  as  we  could  command  them,  in  the  midst  of  the  flying  furniture  and  incessant 
uproar  that  was  proceeding  on  every  side ;  meantime  tremendous  raps  wera  thundering 
around  us,  voices  were  heard  whispering,  or  calling  our  names  ;  shrill  whistlings  were  in- 
terspersed with  the  hubbub,  and  the  strings  of  a  guitar  which  had  been  l^d  on  the  table  were 
snapping  and  vibrating  before  our  eyes  with  a  force  that  threatened  lo  tear  them  to  pieces. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICA!^  SPIRITUALISM.  447 

"During  this  time,  too,  we  conversed  frequertlywilh  our  invisible  gnesls  through  the 
alphabet  and  raps ;  and  at  our  request  they  would  vary  the  sounds,  drumming  on  the  walls, 
ceiling,  floor,  etc.,  and  responding  to  all  our  mental  questions  even  in  this  pandemonium, 
or  performing  our  mental  reqaests  almost  instajiianeoualy.  A  book  was  thrown  at  one  of 
the  ladies,  striking  her  severely  on  the  head.  Mr.  B.  picked  it  up  and  placed  it  by  his  side 
on  the  table.  In  an  instant  it  was  snatched  np,  and  as  quickly  replaced,  with  evidently  a 
14af  turned  down.  Mr.  J.  P.  arose,  brought  in  the  light,  and  examined  the  folded  leaf, 
when  he  discovered,  close  to  the  corner  turned  down,  these  words  :  ■  Can  ye  not  discern  the 
signs  of  the  times  ?  '  The  book  was  a  history  of  Central  America,  and  we  all  believe  this 
is  the  only  quotation  from  the  Bible  in  its  pages.  Mr.  J.  P.  then  inquired  by  raps  whose 
spirit  it  was  that  thus  manifested,  when  it  was  answered  it  was  Mr.  King,  a  well-known 
friend  of  nearly  every  one  present,  and  the  martyr  patriot  who  was  murdered  by  Casey. 
Then  followed  these  questions  and  answers  by  Mr,  J.  P. : 

"  Q.  Have  you  any  message  for  us  ? 

"A.  None. 

"^.  Did  you  appear  to  my  family  a  few  evenings ance  in  the  material  form? 

"A.     I  did." 

Here  let  me  state  the  account  which  Mr.  J.  P.  and  all  his  family  gave  of 
this  apparition,  Mr.  J.  P.  repeating  the  narranve  several  times  to  insure  its 
accuracy. 

He  stated  that,  on  a  recent  occasion,  when  the  whole  family  were  assembled 
in  the  library,  their  attention  was  drawn  toward  the  conservatory  at  the  end 
of  the  room  by  the  shaking  of  some  large  plants. 

On  looking  towards  the  place,  they  all  perceived  the  figure  of  Mr,  King, 
plainly  apparent,  precisely  as  in  life,  and  in  his  usual  attire.  The  figure  was 
dense,  and  presented  nothing  of  the  usual  shadowy  appearance  of  such  appari- 
tions. He  stood  quite  still,  until  Mr.  J.  P.  addressed  him;  when,  at  the 
request  of  this  cool  observer,  he  raised  first  one  arm  and  then  the  other ; 
moved  to  the  side,  advancec^  and  retreated,  turned  his  head,  bowed,  and 
in  fact,  for  several  minutes  continued  to  obey  every  motion  suggested. 
All  at  once  Mr.  P.  made  a  sudden  dart  forward,  a  movement  for  which  he 
had  been  some  time  preparing,  intending,  as  he  expressed  it,  to  "grab 
him ;"  but,  on  the  instant,  every  article  in  the  house  seemed  to  be  set  in 
motion  at  once,  as  if  by  the  sjiock  of  an  earthquaJte.  The  figure  "melted 
out"  instantly.  Every  piece  of  furniture  in  the  two  rooms  was  thrown  or 
rolled  out  of  its  place,  several  panes  of  glass  were  broken  as  if  by  an  explo- 
sion, and  cushions  were  dashed  with  blinding  dust  and  force  into  the  faces  of 
every  one  in  the  library.  —  Aiwhor. 

We  return  to  the  '  description  from  the  True  Californian,  and  resume  the 
questioning  of  Mr.  J,  P.,  which  was  as  follows : 

"0-  Mr.  King,  can  yon  appear  to-night  ? 

"A.  IwilL 

"Q.  How  long  first? 

"A.  In  fifteen  minutes. 

"Q.   What  signal  will  you  give ? 

"A.  I  will  ring  the  door-bell. 

"  We  waited  for  about  six  minutes  only,  when  the  door-bell  was  ntng  very  violently  and 
an  attempt  was  apparently  made  to  enter  at  the  door.  This  was  partly  made  of  glass,  and 
opened  from  the  piazza.  The  noise  of  the  door  and  glass  rattling  was  very  violent,  and 
soonded  strange  and  ghastly  in  the  silence  and  semi-darkness  of  our  circle.  Mrs.  X.' 
mother,  children,  and  servants,  were  awakened  by  the  noise,  and  the  fierce  house  dogs,  of 

Hosiedb,  Google 

448  HISTORY  OF  MODESrr 

whom  Mr.  J.  P.  had  provided  several  dnee  these  manifestations  commenced,  began  baying 

"  Mr.  J.  P.  immediately  rose,  and  in  his  calm  collected  way  care  fully  traversed  the  whole 
length  of  the  house,  and  the  piazza  all  around.  Not  a  creature  in  the  mortal  fonn  could  be 
concealed  in  the  ground  undetected  by  the  fierce  dogs,  who  were  set  loose  to  prevent  the 
possible  tricks  of  strangers  ;  beades  the  full  moon  lighted  up  the  room  within  and  without, 
and  from  themoment  when  the  ball  rung,  eveiy  eye  was  fised  upon  the  glass  door,  and  even 
whilst  it  was  most  violently  shaken,  we  all  Isnew,  for  all  saw,  that  not  a  creature  was  visible 
near  it.  We  then  resumed  our  circle,  and  inquired  through  the  raps,  who  was  now  present. 
'Capitana'  was  the  name  spelled  out,  and  recognized  by  Mrs.  X.  as  an  old  Kanaka 
woman,  who  was  known  to  them  and  had  died  several  years  before. 

"  Mr.  J.  P.  asked  if  she  would  appear  fo-oight  as  she  had  on  former  occasions  ;  she  an- 
swered in  the  affirmative,  and  promised  to  ring  the  door-bell  as  the  agnal  of  her  approacli. 
It  was  scarcely  twenty  seconds  after  the  raps  had  ended  spelling  out  this  message,  when  the 
bell  again  rang  furiously,  and  at  the  same  moment  a  bush,  growing  within  a  few  feet  of  the 
window,  was  shaken  so  violently  as  to  fix  all  our  attention  upon  it  in  the  fear  that  it  would 
be  torn  up  by  the  roots.  Then  we  [having  our  attention  fixed  upon  the  bushj  distinctly, 
ajid  ail  together,  saw  a  gigantic  liuman  figure  apparently  rising  and  emerghig  from  the  bush, 
issue  out  into  the  broad  moonlight,  pass  within  two  feet  of  the  window  before  out  eyes, 
and  glide  oif  towards  the  kitchen.  By  a  common  impulse  we  all  rose  and  rushed  to  the 
window,  but  only  in  time  to  see  that  figure  melt  out,  and  another  rise  up  as  it  were,  out  of 
the  ground,  and  immediately  seat  itself  upon  a  bench  befbce  the  kitchen  door,  and  full  in 
the  glare  of  the  broad  moonlight. 

"And  here  I  would  fain  pause,  for  I  have  no  words  adequate  to  describe  what  I  then 
saw;  and  though  its  memory  will  be  forever  engraven  upon  my  brain,  I  can  neither  commu- 
nicate in  words  the  least  reality  of  it,  nor  yet  attempt  its  description,  vrithout  subjecting 
myself  to  the  charge  of  the  wildest  exa^eration.  I  can  only  add,  I  am  now  vn'itmg  for 
the  philosopher  and  those  who,  I  cannot  doubt,  will  in  futurity  realize  similar  manifestations, 
and  the  clue  to  them;  hence,  for  the  sake  of  science,  and  that  supreme  truth  which  will 
some  day  vindicate  and  prove  itself,  I  will  attempt  a  verbal  description  of  this  appalling 
apparition. 

"  It  certainly  bore  the  human  form,  though  in  distorted  and  frightful  disproportion. 

"  It  was  of  gigantic  height  and  frightfully  lean.  Its  face  was  hideously  long,  thin,  and 
distorted;  blacker  than  any  idea  of  blackness  I  ever  had  before;  but  its  expression  I  never 
can  portray.  I  can  only  say  it  was  an  appalling  mixture  of  rage,  hate,  and  despair,  so 
shocking  that  I  caimot  at  any  time  attempt  to  recall  it  without  a  sickening  sensation  of 

"  It  was  horrible  to  look  at,  horrible  to  thmk  of,  and  I  hope  my  mortal  eyes  will  never 
ag^n  be  blighted  with  so  hideous  a  spectacle ;  and  yet  I  looked,  and  we  all  looked,  with  a 
.  fixed  fascination  I  cannot  describe,  though  I  confess  then,  and  still  feel  now,  as  if  I  would 
have  given  much  never  to  have  seen  it.*  The  noise  of  the  ringing  bell  had  again  disturbed 
the  mother  and  yonnger  children  of  Mrs.  X. ,  who  were  occupying  the  chamber  above  us. 

"  Attracted  to  the  wmdow,  as  they  had  often  been  to  witness  similar  phenomena,  they 
looked  and  saw,  exactly  as  we  did,  the  ghastly  apparition  below ;  unable  to  retreat,  yet 
scarcely  able  to  endure  the  sight,  they  stood,  as  they  afterwards  described,  awe-struck  and 
spell-bound  by  the  shocking  spectre.  He  wore  a  lai^e  white  robe  thrown  fully  around  him 
and  pirlly  covering  his  immensely  long  lean  head  ;  and  there  he  sat,  reclining  on  the  bench, 
full  in  the  moonlight,  silent,  still,  and  ghastly,  in  all  his  appalling  ugliness.  The  face  was 
turnel  to  us  somewhat  in  profile. 

•  Tl  ?  writer  of  this  narrative  was,  in  lEfij,  sn  eminent  lawer  in  Nevada 
«ihh.in,anil  "    " ■  '   ----- 

Ihcy  alLeged,  "unmanly,"  bur  strongly  indicadve, 

.Ttfrifflty. 

There 

Iheaui 

rilory.  i 

ind  gri 

iady  re- 

could  > 

,p«kof 

■nful  lo  1 

behold, 

and,™ 

terrific  cha 

rKierofwhatlheyhad 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SFIRITUALTSM.  449 

"For  myself,  T  onf  he  ime  came  when  I  could  bear  this  scene  no  longer.  After 
looking  on  the  gobl  n  fo  human  I  can  never  Ihink  it — till  the  sight  overpowered  me,  I 
rushed  to  the  piazz    do      fee  ng     e  neces^ty  for  air. 

"I  was  followelby  he  a  e  who  were  almost  fainting;  but  on  altemptmg  to  unfasten 
the  door,  which  Mr.  J.  P  had  opened  with  perfect  ease  but  a  few  moments  before,  we 
found  it  barricaded.  Mr,  B  ,  the  braiest  amongst  us  save  Mr.  J.  P,,  remained,  watching 
the  goblin,  as  did  the  famdy  up  stairs,  until  they  saw  it  gradually  and  slowly  melt  out. 
They  never  lost  sight  of  it  until  it-,  divappearance  As  we  retreated,  the  sofas,  chairs,  tables, 
cushions,  globes,  and  mathematical  instruments,  w  ere  hurled  about  in  every  direction  with 
gieat  violence.  I  was  severely  struck  with  a  book,  and  one  of  the  ladies  had  a  cushion 
dashed  in  her  face,  the  dust  from  which  bhnded  her  ejesfor  several  minutes. 

"Mr.  J.  P.  and  his  wife  now  joined  me  at  the  door,  and  after  great  exertion  we  suc- 
ceeded in  forcing  it  partly  open,  when  we  found  that  (he  heavy  iron  gate  at  the  entrance 
of  llie  grounds  had  been  literally  torn  up  out  of  its  sockets,  and  placed  bodily  agjunst 
the  piazza  door.  This  mii£t  have  been  done  in  a  few  minutes,  since  one  of  the  servants  had 
just  passed  through  and  fastened  it.  It  must  have  been  accomplished  without  noise,  though 
it  would  have  takenseveralmen  to  achieve  such  a  feat,  and  we  had  sat  opposite  to  it,  with  the 
moon  shining  full  on  it,  the  whole  period  of  the  circle ;  hence  human  agency  in  such  a  work 
was  simply  impossible. 

"  We  then  followed  Mr.  J.  P.,  who,  by  the  way,  was  the  only  one  of  our  party  that  re- 
tained any  presence  of  mind,  through  the  house  to  the  kitchen,  where  we  hoped  to  confront 
the  apparition  which  we  had  last  seen,  as  described,  on  the  bench  outside  of  it.  Arrived  there 
in  tumidtuous  baste  all  was  over.  The  bench  was  empty,  and  not  a  trace  remained  of  our 
ghastly  vkitor. 

"  Fortunately,  Mr.  B.  and  Mrs.  X.'s  mother  and  children  had  never  quitted  their  posts 
of  observation,  and  each  described  in  an  exactly  similar  manner  the  mode  of  the  spectre's 
disappearance.  Mr.  B.  stood  within  eight  feet  of  it,  and,  just  as  we  approached  the  kitchen- 
door,  he  saw,  as  did  those  above,  the  creature  rise  with  slow  deliberation,  standing  a  mm- 
ute  still,  as  if  to  display  its  enormous  height,  then,  lightly  liftmg  its  robe,  it  seemed  to  float 
off  a  httle  way,  and  then  mstantly,  m  the  clear  space,  become  mvisible.  There  were  four 
witnesses  of  this  scene,  and  each  gave  apiecisely  similar  account  when  questioned  separately. 
At  length  we  returned  to  the  library,  and,  after  some  time  spent  m  attempting  to  regain 
our  composure,  we  resumed  our  sitting;  but  I  wasso  shocked  at  what  I  had  lately  witnessed, 
that  I  protested  against  resnmmg  the  sianci,  unless  the  whole  circle  pledged  themselves 
tliat  no  effort  shoidd  be  made  to  summon  back    ur  f  gh  f  1       t 

"We  all  agreed  to  bend  our  minds  and  a  j.  t  n  n  h  t  tempt  to  call  around  us 
kind,  genial,  and  more  human  beings,  and  conju  d  m  b  ight  and  happy  spirits  to  visit' 
us,  and  aid  in  dispelling  the  horrors  of  the  last  appar       n 

"We  had  not  taken  our  places  five  minut  b  f  n  rvou  and  distrustful  as  we  still  1 
were,  we  were  convinced  our  petitions  were  answ  1  C  1  b  1  ny  breezes  played  around 
us;  soft,  caressing  hands  stroked  our  cheeks  a  Ileal  m  e  than  a  dozen  small,  white,_ 
human  hands  gleamed  about  the  room,  at  first  shadowy  and  like  thin  vapor,  at  last  palpable, 
opaque,  and  seemingly  as  firm  in  sight  and  touch  as  our  own  hands.  Mr.  J,  P.  had  been 
Snifering  all  day  from  toothache,  and  several  of  those  soft  hands  were  seen  and  felt  tenderly 
stroking  his  face.  In  a  short  time  he  exclaimed  that  the  pain  was  entirely  gone,  when  the 
soft  touches  were  withdrawn,  after  which  we  were  admonished,  by  raps,  to  break  up  our 
circle,  which,  at  about  half-past  one  o'clock,  we  most  reluctantly  consented  to  do. 

' '  Kind  good-nights  were  spelled  out  by  the  spirits,  and  we  all  departed. 

"  I  have  no  explanation  to  give  of  the  above  scene,  but  many  vouchers  to  present  for  its 
veracity.  First,  I  offer  my  own  position  in  this  city  [San  Francisco],  for  which,  as  theedi- 
tor  of  this  paper  will  attest,  I  rely  solely  on  my  honorable  name  and  my  reputation  for 
strict  veracity  and  calm  common  sense. 

"  Next,  the  whole  of  the  persons  concerned  in  this  wonderful  sianci  are  persons,  living 
amongst  you,  and  beyond  the  suspicion  or  possibilily  of  collusion  or  deception,.  Every. 
29 

Hosted  by  Google 

4SO  HISTORY  OF  MODERhT 

readeroflhisarticle,  when  published  in  the  7V»f  Co/i/ojTtijn,  knows  Asm ;  and  thougli 
thdr  names  are  withhdd,  their  histories  and  relation  to  these  marvels  are  the  town  talk. 
Tlreir  identity,  then,  is  not  uocertaia,  and  who  amongst  the  coramunilj' can  question,  suspect, 
or  doubt  them? 

"  No  public  exhibition  of  these  marvels  ever  has  or  ever  will  be  permitted,  although  their 
report  is,  as  every  reader  linows,  noised  abroad  far  and  wide  ;  yet  without  tlie  least  chance 
of  any  but  his  invited  guests  investigating  this  phenomena,  I  never  yet  heard  the  shadow  of 
doubt  or  suspicion  cast  on  Mr.  J.  P.'s  name  in  connection  with  them.  There  are  some 
persons  who  are  their  own  vouchers  for  what  they  assert ;  such  is  the  case  with  all  the  parties 
concerned  in  the  present  instance. 

"I  can  only  add  I  have  ohtmned  thepermisaon  of  the  proprietor  of  the  house  to  make 
my  statements  public,  although  he  is  perfectly  indifferent  as  to  their  reception  by  the  world. 

"  He  neither  invites  investigation  nor  permits  any  discussion  on  the  subject.  He  makes 
no  assertions  — allows  of  no  charges.  'It  is  his  buaness  and  no  one  else's.'  To  his  friends 
he  acknowledges  it  is  eimply  a  '  curious  unsolved  scientific  problem.'  To  me  it  is  the  foun- 
dation  stone  upon  which  future  generations  will,  as  I  believe,  erect  the  temple  of  a  new  and 
wonderful  science ;  and  therefore  I  feel  impelled  to  leave  this  misought  record  for  the  benefit 
of  posterity,  to  whom  U  will  be  enough  that  I  relate  truths  kindred  to  their  experiences, 
though  they  may  only  remember  me  as 

"  Fausti;s." 
"midnight  disclosures. 

{Copied from  the  True  Cali/ornian,  Sunday,  October  12,  1856.] 

"Editor!  True  Calif ornian: 

"  The  extraordinary  character  of  the  phenomena  witnessed  by  myself  and  my  friend  B. 
at  our  last  sitting,  did  not  tend  to  dimmish  the  interest  we  felt  00  the  subject,  and  awak- 
ened considerable  anxiety  as  to  the  result  of  our  next  interview  with  the  spirits.  This  was 
appointed  to  come  off  on  Sunday  night,  October  12,  on  which  occadou  we  repaired,  at  the 
appointed  hour,to  the  place  of  meeting,  which,  as  before,  was  at  the  house  of  Mr.  J.  P.,  at 
eight  o^clock,  P.M. 

"Myself  and  B.  had  had  many  earnest  conversations  on  the  subject,  in  the  mterim  between 
the  seanees,  and  both  had  separately  compared  notes  with  the  other  members  of  the  circle; 
and  as  all  our  opinions,  memories,  and  reiterations  were  perfectly  coincident,  we  had  not 
even  the  hope  that  any  of  us  had  been  the  victims  of  individual  hallucinations. 

"The  weather,  on  the  occaaon  of  this,  our  second  visit,  was  very  unpleasant.  A  cold  west 
wind  blew  a  hurricane,  and  rendered  our  attempt  to  gam  the  summit  of  the  high  eminence 
on  which  the  house  of  mystery  was  Htuated,  namely,  Russian  Hill,  no  very  light  feat  of 
pedestrianLsm.  Wondering  as  we  went,  why  so  many  sphitual  manifestations  should  so 
commonly  take  place  on  hills  and  earth's  high  places,  in  pomt  of  locality,  we  at  last  gained, 
the  giddy  Tieights,  and,  as  before,  found  ourselves  comfortably  ensconced  in  Mr.  J.  P.'s  lit- 
erary iind  pleasant  sanctum. 

"  iMor  after  our  entrance,  the  ladies  joined  us,  when  we  proceeded  to  seat  ourselves  in 
portion  around  the  table.  Ere  the  buaness  of  the  circle  commenced,  our  party  was  joined 
by  Mr.  C,  who  had,  like  ourselves,  braved  the  storm  and  wind  without,  to  witness  for  him- 
self what  a  bare  report  of  had  awakened  in  his  mind  the  most  intense  curiosity. 

"  Being  a  highly  respected  literary  friend  of  all  present,  he  was  greeted  with  a  warm  wel- 
come, and  immediately  joined  our  circle. 

"For  the  first  half-hour  the  manifestations,  although  strong  and  interestmg,  were  not 
unusual  in  rapping  and  physical  force  circles.  We  conversed  pleasantly  with  the  invisibles 
toy  raps,  and  the  mcessant  movements  of  the  furniture ;  at  length  the  Kanaka  spirits  were 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  45J 

annooncrf,  wlio  had  often  before  claimed  to  produce  the  most  remarkable  of  the  phenom- 
ena. At  first  the  spirits  seemed  bent  on  exercising  the  credulity  of  our  friend  C,  whose 
fiist  appearance  at  these  circles  seemed  to  attract  Ihem  to  play  him  some  rather  striking 
triclis.  They  introduced  a  liand  into  the  coat  pocket  of  Mr,  B.,  a  banker,  and  drawing 
from  thence  a  large  iron  safe-key,  exhibited  it  in  the  air. 

"Tlieynext  took  Mr.  B.'swatch  from  his  neck,  and  suspended  it  by  the  ribbon  round 
the  neck  of  Mr.  J.  P.  Several  things  were  taken  from  our  pocke'.s  and  thrown  on  the 
table.  We  were  all  repeatedly  struck  by  small  missiles.  One  of  these  struck  my  eye,  caus- 
ing the  tears  to  start.  As  all  our  hands  were  finrily  joined  in  the  circle,  sooner  than  unlock 
them,  I  asked  the  spirits  to  wipe  my  eye. 

"  Instantly  my  pocket-handkerchief  was  drawn  out,  and  I  felt  several  hands,  not  merely 
wiping  my  eye,  but  tenderly  caressing  it,  until  the  pain  was  entirely  gone. 

"After  an  hour  or  so,  we  were  notified,  as  usual,  in  answer  to  our  request  that  the  spirits 
would  appear  visibly  and  give  the  signal  by  the  ringing  of  the  great  door-bell. 

"It  seemed  they  had  waited  thus  long  for  the  moon  to  rise,  and,  as  the  wind  had  subaded, 
the  night  was  fine  and  very  clear. 

"  Suddenly  our  friend  B.  broke  the  circle,  and  springing  forward  to  the  window,  directed 
our  attention  to  the  yard,  which  was  now  almost  as  light  as  day,  and  there  we  beheld, 
standing  outside  the  window,  and  full  in  the  moon's  rays,  what  seemed  to  be  a  girl  of  about 
ten  or  twelve  years  old.  She  was  in  a  slightly  stooping  attitude,  and  flitted  several  times 
back  and  forth  before  the  wmdow,  as  if  to  convince  us  she  was  real,  and  wished  to  give  us 
notice  she  was  there  for  our  gratifiaaion.  Presently  the  girl  approached  the  window,  and 
even  came  within  six  feet  of  us,  when  Mrs.  J.  P.,  unable,  as  it  seemed,  to  endure  the  close 
proximity  of  the  supernatural  visitant,  uttered  an  involuntary  scream. 

"  It  seemed  as  if  tlie  girl  heard  it,  for  she  instantly  flitted  off  in  the  direction  of  the 
kitchen.  We  all  followed  her  movements  with  our  eyes,  and  distinctly  beheld  her  disappear 
as  if  she  liad  melted  out.  Immediately,  in  the  place  she  had  occupied,  appealed  another 
figure,  seemingly  that  of  a  man,  but  it  was  gigantic  in  height,  very  thin  and  extremely 
shadowy.  It  made  toward  the  wall  of  the  house  and  seemed  to  pass  through  it.  Soon  after 
It  reappeared,  apparently  half  within  and  half  without  the  wall,  and  as  if  to  give  us  the  full 
view  of  this  feat,  the  figure  repeated  itseveral  tiroes,  now  melting  into  the  wall,  now  combg 
half  way  out  of  it ;  retreating,  steppbg  off  from  it,  and  then  re-entering  thesolid  bricks  with 
its  Siadowy  substance  again,  until  it  finally  meHed.  And  here  I  must  confess  that  the  excite- 
ment produced  on  the  whole  party  by  these  figures  was  so  great,  that  we  found  it  impossible 
to  reorganize  our  circle  for  any  similar  phenomena  the  rest  of  the  night.  To  beguile  our 
minds  from  the  memory  of  these  apparitions,  Mr.  J.  P.  related  the  singular  experiences  the 
family  had  had  with  the  Kanaka  spirits,  whistling  to  them,  and,  at  his  suggestion,  I  gave  a 
loud  whistle,  and  asked  if  some  spirit  would  try  to  imitate  it.  Instantly  a  voice  repeateil 
my  whistle,  in  a  manner  so  exact  that  it  might  have  been  mistaken  for  an  echo,  but  for  a 
whole  chorus  of  whistles  that  began  lo  tune  up,  and  for  several  minutes  produced  shrill  and 
varied  whistling  from  every  imaginable  direction  ;  now  in  the  yard,  then  m  the  kitchen  ; 
agiun  in  the  distant  road,  and  now  immediately  in  our  ears,  literally  piercing  them  with 
their  shrill  tone.  A  few  minutes  after  the  sounds  changed  to  whlspeiings  and  muttering?, 
in  which  several  names,  especially  my  friend  B.'s,  were  pronounced.  The  difference  in  these 
voices  to  the  tones  of  human  beings,  was  their  high  shrilhiesE,  and  the  resemblance  lo  the 
effort  of  persons  who  whistled  forth  names  instead  of  speaking  them. 

"  The  concluding  experiment  of  'he  evening  was  on  B.,  who  had  several  times  been 
tumbled  from  his  cliair,  but  now  in  so  sudden  a  manner  that  the  thing  was  done  ere  we 
perceived  the  least  movement.  He  was  seized  by  the  coat,  and  hurled  forward  several 
yards  in  the  room.  He  distinctly  felt  himself  lifte<l  by  hands.  He  was  thrown  with  a 
velocity  that  would  have  killed  him  had  he  not  been  lifted  ;  but  though  thrown  so  far  and 
the  thing  being  done  so  quickly,  it  was  evident  he  was  carried,  not  thrown,  and  dropped  so 
lightly  that  be  did  not  sustdn  any  other  inconvenience  than  that  of  breaking  upon  our 
astcr.ished  eyes  in  a  most  undignified  heap,  in  a  remote  comer  of  the  room,  when  a  second 

Hosiedb,  Google 

(152  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

before  he  was  quietly  sitting  in  his  chMr  amongst  us.  Here  closed  the  principal  events  of 
this  night,  and  I  shiill  only  relate  to  you  one  more  chapter  in  this  eitraocdinary  episode 
ere  I  close  my  narrative  of  experiences  with  ghosts  and  supernatur^ism. 

"NIGHT  THIRD,  SUNDAY,  OCTOHER  19,    1856. 

"  At  eight  o'clock:  precisely,  myself  and  former  companion,  Mr.  B.,  again  stood  in  the 
mystic  library  of  our  liusdan  Hill  savan,  hoping  to  behold  a  renewal  of  the  wonders  we 
had  already  participated  in,  with  ever-increasing  uiterest.  We  had  no  sooner  entered  the 
room,  however,  when  Mr.  J.  P.  warned  us  we  must  be  disappomled  this  lime,  as  two  of  the 
ladies,  namely,  Mrs.  X.  and  her  dai^hter,  had  departed ;  and  we  all  had  realized  that  the 
diief  of  the  medium  power  of  our  weird  circles  proceeded  from  these  ladies. 

"He  added  that  his  wife  was  siclt,  but,  unwilling  that  we  should  have  our  steep  walk 
wholly  in  vain,  she  had  consented  to  descend,  and  sit  with  us,  in  the  hope  that  even  this 
part  of  out  diminished  battery  might  be  fruitful  of  some  spiritual  results.  For  some  lime 
we  sat  without  any  manifestations  rewarding  our  patience  ;  after  the  lapse  of  at  least  an 
hour,  the  taps,  creaking,  and  movements  commenced,  and  we  began  to  question  the  spirits 
in  the  usual  way,  by  the  alphabet.  The  intelligence  rendered  thb  time,  however,  was  vague 
and  unsatisfactory.  The  spirits  claimed  to  be  busy  warding  oft  the  approaches  of  evil 
qiiiits,  one  of  whom  we  had  seen  on  the  first  night  of  our  s      ng      h  ry  was 

weak  to  accomplish  mnch,  they  said  ;  but  presently,  after  a  co  m  un 

had  been  heard  m  and  about  the  book-case,  a  large  roll  of  m  ps   ha   was  d  n  ar 

was  removed  and  thrown  violently  into  the  centre  of  the  room, 

"  We  thHi  removed  the  lamp  into  the  piazza,  so  that  it  could       m        U  m 

The  phenomena  immediately  became  much  stronger :  a  pair  0    g  se       ff  g 

one  rolled  into  (he  room  from  a  distant  recess,  launched  itsel      ^  m  ,      d 

dashed  the  lower  pane  mto  pieces.  Similar  phenomena  occurred  with  many  pieces  of  furni- 
ture througli  the  room. 

"  We  then  inquired  if  we  could  not  see  the  spirits  this  night  also ;  were  answered  in  the 
affirmative,  and  promised  a  signal  by  the  ringing  of  the  bell  at  the  street  door. 

"  In  a  few  minutes  the  agnal  came.  The  bell  was  rung  violently,  the  bush  outside  the 
window  rudely  shaken,  and  once  again,  the  young  girl  appeared. 

"  This  time,  however,  she  melted  out,  almost  immediately ;  where  she  had  stood,  how- 
ever, a  light  appeared,  at  first  a  mere  glunmer,  but  in  a  few  seconds  growing  larger  and 
brighter,  untii  it  a.ssumed  the  form  and  size  of  a  large  globe  lantern. 

"  It  seemed  to  be  wavy,  and  cast  no  sliadow  on  the  dark  ground.  It  approached  and  re- 
ceded from  the  window  several  times  ;  at  last  it  stretched  out  from  a  globe  into  other  sliapCs, 
and  after  changmg  rapidly  into  a  great  many  singular  forms,  it  assumed  the  exact  shape  of  a 
long  grave,  about  as  feet  in  length,  and  close  to  the  ground. 

"  We  all  remarked  the  total  absence  of  any  reflection,  although  the  light  was  brilliant,  but 
pale,  and  strongly  resembling  phosphorus. 

"  Presently  the  bunch  resembling  a  mound  or  grave  melted  and  stretched  out  into  a  thin 
long  line  of  light,  ran  along  the  ground,  and  disappeared. 

"  We  returned  to  our  places  at  the  table,  but  although  we  joined  hands  and  waited  with 
prtdseworthy  patience,  no  farther  phenomena  were  vouchsafed  us  tliat  night,  at  least  within 
the  ring  of  our  charmed  circle.  Outade  it,  the  spirits  were  not  idle,  for  they  presently  gave 
evidence  of  their  activity  and  strength,  by  forcibly  dra^ng  Mr.  J.  P.'s  poor  'darkey' 
from  his  bed,  and,  in  the  primitive  covermgs  of  the  night  toilet,  dashmg  him  into  the  passage 
outside  the  circle  door.  Hearing  the  heavy  fall,  we  rushed  to  the  door,  and  there  found  our 
poor  sable  friend  with  a  severe  contusion  of  flie  eye,  and  a  violent  bump  on  the  cheek,  pro- 
duced by  the  blows  he  had  received. 

"  Whether  from  malice  or  mischief  we  were  enable  to  ascertam,  but  Mr.  J.  P,  in- 
formed us,  with  much  sympathy  for  his  poor  servant,  but  yet  more  merriment  at  the  reinem- 
llMMDCe  of  his  ludicrous  adventures,  that  this  poor  inan  was  a  regular  butt  for  the  exercise  of 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  453 

the  spirits'  fun  and  power  ;  that  lie  hai!  actuallyjat  one  time, 
window  in  presence  of  the  family,  and  it  was  quite  a  commor 
hither  and  thither  with  the  facility  of  an  india-rubber  ball. 

"  Aud  thus  ended  the  siance  of  the  night,  and  with  it  I  close  my  detail  of  these  reroark. 
able  phenomena.  If  I  have  related  things  that  draw  somewhat  heavily  on  the  credulity  of 
my  readers,  lean  only  say  the  witnesses  are  your  fellow- townsmen,  and  their  word  is  received 
amongst  you  as  truth  on  far  more  important  subjects  than  this. 

'*  I  have  related  some  wonderful  things,  but  kept  far  more  unrecorded. 

"  The  half  has  not  indeed  yet  been  told ;  and  an  experience  of  seseral  months  with  thi« 
family  of  marvels,  far  exceeding  those  here  set  down,  may  be  calculated  on  as  affording 
food  for  the  curious  and  marvel-seeker,  of  the  most  extraordinary  character.  Enough  has 
been  said,  however,  to  stimulate  inquiry,  if  the  reader  desires  it,  into  similar  phenomena. 

"  Mediums  exist  in  every  family,  and  can,  under  ordinary  circumstimces,  be  readily  de- 
veloped, when  the  facts  above  stated  might  fall  into  insignificance  compared  with  what 
might  grow  out  of  carefnl,  candid,  and  constant  investigation. 

"Fawstus." 

It  would  be  in  vain  to  reiterate  the  allegations  of  good  faith  with  which 
these  articles  are  crowded,  and  to  which  no  additional  testimony  could  or 
should  add  weight.  We  call  attention  to  the  closing  words  of  the  gentleman 
who  writes  under  the  cognomen  of  "  Faustus,"  and  reaffirm  that  marvels  of  a 
far  more  portentous  and  striking  character  than  any  above  related,  occurred 
at  the  residence  of  Mr.  J,  P.,  some  of  which  became  pubUc  property  by  being 
bruited  abroad,  whilst  others  made  their  own  report  to  the  crowds  who  nightly 
assembled  on  Russian  Hill,  to  listen  to  the  weird  sounds  from  within  the 
"  haunted  dwelling,"  until  the  proprietor  was  obliged  to  place  a  guard  over  his 
mansion  in  the  shape  of  several  fierce  dogs  and  strong,  courageous  domestics. 

The  manifestations  continued  during  aperiod  of  many  months ;  long  enough, 
as  the  worthy  scientist^  Mr.  J.  P.,  himself  informed  the  author,  to  destroy 
every  pane  of  glass  or  breakable  article  in  his  house. 

Some  of  these  feats  of  destruction  the  master  of  the  mansion  encouraged, 
he  being  fai  more  curious  to  investigate  this  mystery  as  a  "scientific  problem," 
than  interested  either  in  its  spirituality  or  the  care  of  his  property.  One  day, 
therefore,  he  coolly  challenged  the  invisible  power  to  break  every  thing  they 
could  lay  hands  on,  and  bring  the  wreck  to  him.  Within  seven  minutes  of 
the  utterance  of  this  rash  defiance,  upwards  of  fifty  dollars'  worth  of  splendid 
china  and  valuable  cut-glass  was  suddenly, — from  whence  and  where  no  eye 
could  discern, — pitched  at  his  feet  in  his  own  hbraiy,  a  total  wreck. 

The  departure  from  California,  and  subsequent  death  of  the  two  principal 
mediums,  Mrs.  X.  and  her  daughter,  greatly  mitigated  the  power  and  abun- 
dance of  the  manifestations,  whidi  at  last,— when  Mr.  J,  P.  sternly  forbade  the 
holding  of  any  more  circles  or  the  attempt  to  communicate  with  the  unseen 
agents, — finally  ceased  altogedier. 

Then  memory  and  influence,  however,  cannot  so  easily  pass  away,  and 
never  will  be  forgotten  by  those  who  witnessed  them,  several  of  whom,  in  de- 
scribing them  to  the  author,  have  spoken  of  their  terrible  accompaniments 
with  blanched  cheeks  and  bated  breath. 

The  next  manifestations  of  a  peculiarly  Califomian  character  to  which  we 
call  attention  is,  like  the  preceding  narrative,  republished  from  the  audior's 
"California  Sketches,"  every  detail  of  which  is  known  to  and  attested  by 
many  of  the  most  respectable  inhabitants  of  the  State, 

Hosted  by  Google 

454  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

EXTRACTS  FROM  CALIFORNIA  SKETCHES  — UV  EMMA  HARDINGG. 

"  To  those  unfamiliar  with  San  Francisco,  or  to  whom  the  remarliable  manifeslations 
about  to  be  narrated  are  strange  and  apparently  incredible,  I  beg  to  slate  that  the  chief  of 
my  narrative  is  supplied  by  four  eye-witnesses  of  the  facts,  two  of  whom  are  ladies;  my 
<ither  uiformants  being  a  highly  respected  member  of  the  police  force,  and  a  well-known 
merchant  of  San  Francisco,  whose  testimony  alone  woidd  be  considered  authoritative  in 
any  court  of  justice  in  the  State. 

;  "  Aboat  two  years  ago  it  was  rumored  that  a  family  residing  on  the  very  summit  of  one 
of  those  towering  hills  that  environ  San  Francisco,  and  constitute  the  principal  site  of  its 
beautiful  though  almost  inaccessible  re^dences,  had  be  h  di  g  ir  es,  and  obtataing 
some  very  strong,  though  tepulave,  manifestations.     Th         h  h    family,  a  respect 

able  mechanic,  had  recently  married  a  second  wife,  aw  m         miaWe  disposition, 

and  excellent  character,  and  amongst  the  family  of    h     d       wi  nsisting  of  several 

daughters,  it  was  found  that  two  or  three  of  them  w  m        Th    chief  power  of  the 

manifestations,  however,  appeared  to  rest  with  the  el         d     g  andsome  girl  of  eigh- 

teen, about  whom  very  scandalous  reports  had  been  pp  m  ng  her  neighbors. 

When  the  fact  of  strong  spiritual  manifestations  occurrmg  m  this  family  became  generally 
known,  painfully  suspicions  circumstances  were  revived  in  connection  with  Ihe  young 
woman's  deceased  mother.  It  was  affirmed  that  her  spirit  appeared  in  company  with  sev- 
eral others  who  had  died  violent  deaths,  and  whose  former  residence  in  the  same  place  as 
the  medium  now  inhabited,  had  procured  an  evU  name  for  that  locality.  Murder,  suicide, 
and  Climes  of  the  most  appalling  nature  had  been,  it  was  known,  practiced  in  that  vidnity, 
and  though  the  actors  in  these  dark  tragedies,  like  the  unfortunate  mother  of  the  girl,  were 
now  spirits,  it  was  confidently  aiSrmed  that  the  manifestations  complained  of  by  the  neigh- 
bors, rendering  the  place  as  terrible  as  it  had  formerly  been  notorious,  proceeded  from  these 
unquiet  spirits.  The  furniture  of  ihe  possessed  house  was  broken,  and  thrown  about  with 
wanton  violence.  Dreadful  noises,  mingled  with  cries,  groans,  and  mocking  laughter,  were 
heard.  The  dresses  of  the  females  were  pinned  together  by  unseen  hands,  or  rent  from 
them ;  and,  as  the  climax  of  the  di-sturbances,  the  eldest  girl  was  not  only  haunted  by 
ghastly  figures,  whose  shocking  apparitions  threw  hei  into  fainting  fits,  but  these  spectres, 
actually  marked  her  dress,  person,  and  face,  with  large  spots  of  blood.  This  last  phase  of 
the  phenomena  was  so  frequent  and  terrible  that  the  poor  mother-in-law  called  upon  some 
of  ihe  most  respectable  and  promment  Spiritualists  of  the  city,  and  solicited  their  advice 
and  assistance,  if  posablc,  to  exordse  the  tormentors  who  beset  the  unhappy  ^L 

"When  my  friends  first  visited  this  family,  they  found  this  persecuted  girl,  as  might  have 
been  expected,  in  a  highly  nervous  and  excitable  condition,  deadly  pale,  and  apparently  suffer- 
ing from  the  effects  of  a  severe  illness,  for  which  common  report  asHgned  the  most  scandal- 
ous origin.  During  the  first  spiritual  sianct  held  with  this  young  person,  my  friends,  Mrs. 
T.  and  Mrs.  D,,  represent  her  as  sitting  apart,  pale,  depressed,  and  apparently  uninterested 
in  the  proceedings  of  the  rest  of  the  party. 

"There  were  about  a  dozen  persons  present,  and  the  hour  for  the  siante  had,  at  the  re- 
quest of  the  ladies,  been  fixed  at  twelve,  noon,  objections  of  a  cogent  nature  being  urged 
to  evening  circles,  when  the  manifestations  became  boisterous  and  unendurable.  At  first, 
only  faint  raps  were  heard  in  different  parts  of  the  room,  but  soon  the  young  girl  exhibited 
a  mortal  fear  in  her  attitude  and  features,  and  shrank  back  as  if  from  tlie  approach  of  a 
frightful  object.  Instantly,  and  while  every  eye  was  fixed  upon  her,  she  sank  back  in  her 
chair  m  a  swoon,  and  there,  in  the  broad  glare  of  the  sunlight,  appeared  on  her  face,  which, 
the  moment  before,  was  perfectly  white  and  colorless,  a  large  patch  of  wet,  reeking  blood, 
one  of  her  cheeks  being  marked  exactly  as  if  struck  with  a  bloody  hand. 

"  On  approaching  the  swooning  figure,  a  second  patch  appeared  on  the  other  cheek ; 
and  as  she  stretched  out  ber  hand  as  if  to  ward  off  an  invisible  foe,  another  wet 
and  reeking  stain  instantaneously  became  manifest  on  its  palm.  The  ladies  pres- 
ent procured   a  wash-bowl  and  removed  the  stains  from  the  young  woman's  face  and 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  435 

Imnd;  but  thougli  they  replaced  her  in  the  chair,  restored  her  to  consciousness,  and  never 
for  one  moment  lost  sight  of  lier,  nor  suffered  a  single  movement  to  escape  them,  this  terri- 
ble plienomenon  was  repeated  five  times  in  less  than  an  hour.  Each  time,  the  ladies  washed 
off  the  stain.  They  affirm  what  the  whole  circle  attested :  that  the  girl  never  moved  from 
her  seat ;  that  her  eyes  were  generally  closed  ;  her  face,  eitcept  when  stained  by  the  sudden 
and  ensanguined  marks,  as  pale  as  death  ;  and  not  a  movement  was  made  by  her,  except, 
from  time  to  time,  to  extend  her  hands  in  the  attitudeof  one  who  attempts  to  drive  off  some 
approaching  object ;  and  it  was  at  such  moments  that  the  blood-stains  instantaneously  ap- 
peared on  her  hands,  face,  and  throat.  At  last  the  unfortunate  medium  appeared  to  become 
so  utterly  prostrate,  that  the  circle,  appalled  and  disgusted,  broke  up,  and  the  ladies  in  at- 
tendance proposed  to  help  her  mother-in-law  to  remove  her  to  her  chamber.  For  this  pur- 
pose, two  of  the  ladies,  Mrs.  T.  and  Mrs.  S.,  placed  themselves  one  on  either  side  of  the 
medium,  to  lead  her  out ;  but  just  as  they  reached  the  door,  they  each,  simultaneously,  re- 
ceived some  kind  of  propelling  power  that  drove  them  backwards  as  if  by  a  galvanic  shock, 
and  once  more  the  clear  and  distinct  mark  of  a  bloody  hand  and  fingers  was  imprinted  on 
the  young  girl's  neck. 

"  With  much  difficulty,  and  after  several  similar  attempts  and  rebuffs,  they  succeeded  ui 
supporting  her  to  the  head  of  the  stidrs,  when  the  sound  of  a  heavy  fall  drew  the  rest  of  the 
circle  from  the  room  below.  There  they  found  the  ladies  teclinmg  against  the  wall  equally 
terrified  and  exhausted;  the  medium  had  felleik  to  the  ground,  and  the  face,  neck,  and  dress 
of  one  of  the  ladies  were  stained  with  large  splashes  of  fresh  wet  blood. 

"  Arrived  at  last,  by  aid  of  assistants,  at  the  chamber,  the  girl  was  laid  upon  her  bed, 
when  a  young  sister  of  the  medium's  declared  that  the  '  Spanish  girl '  was  already  lying  on 
the  pillow ;  the  next  moment  the  pillow  where  they  laid  the  girl  down,  was  observed  to  be 
crimsoned  with  blood.  Theyounger  children  always  insisted  that  these  frightful  marks  were 
made  'by  a  Spanish  girl'  who  followed  their  sister  about.  She  had  her  throat  cut,  they 
said ;  and  anotiier  apparition  who  helped  to  make  the  marks,  was  their  mother,  whom  they 

represented  as  reproaching  her  daughter  with  an  infamous  life. 

"  This  is  but  a  small  portion  of  this  singular  and  revolting  history.  The  merchant  to 
whom  I  before  alluded  as  one  of  my  informants,  Mr.  B.,  assured  me  thai,  curious  to  wit- 
ness this  remarkable  phenomenon,  he  one  day  went  to  the  house  with  a  member  of  the 
police  force  who  had  frequently  attended  the  weird  circles  held  there,  though  he  was  un- 
willing to  acknowledge  that  he  had  done  so.  Mr.  B.  and  the  policeman,  obseiving  the  girl 
leaning  out  of  the  parlor  window,  stopped  and  conversed  with  her.  Suddenly  she  drew 
back  with  a  look  of  horror,  when  one  of  the  hands  she  extended  to  ward  off  some  bvisible 
danger,  and  one  side  of  her  pallid  face,  were  instantly  covered  with  blood. 

"  The  quality  of  this  fluid  has  been  several  times  analyzed,  and  always  corresponds  to  that 
of  human  blood. 

"  The  manifestations  occurred  during  many  months,  and  the  persons  in  whose  presence 
they  transpired  are  so  numerous,  that  no  phenomena  are  more  abundantly  witnessed.  The 
police  at  leiigth  interfered  to  stop  the  circles,  and  the  affair  gradually  died  out  with  the  re- 
moval of  the  young  woman  from  her  father's  house. 

"  The  family  ^  last  denied  entrance  to  the  curious,  and  insisted  that  no  further  publicity 
should  be  given  to  the  subject  in  comiection  with  their  names,  on  pain. of  prosecution. 

"The  tongue  of  rumour,  which  could  not  be  thus  alenced,  attributed  to  the  unhappy 
daughter  and  her  spirit  mother,  such  practices  as  would  render  this  ghastly  phenomenon 
singularly  fjgnificant.  It  is  alli^fcd  that  the  family,  having  severed  their  connection  with 
the  unfortunate  medium,  have  resolutely  protested  against  further  intercourse  with  Spinta- 
alists,  and  live  in  strict  secluaon,  hence  I  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  give  their  names  or 
those  of  the  witnesses  to  these  facts,  except  in  private.  Any  one  can  obtain  this  informa- 
tion from  me,  however,  that  will  pledge  themselves  to  use  it  only  in  questioning  the  wit- 
nesses, not  in  harassing  the  family,  whose  peace  of  mind  and  respectability  they  are  said  to 
have  materially  affected." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

4S6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

It  IS  interesting  to  find  that  the  above  case,  with  its  singular  and  repulsive 
details,  does  not  btand  ^lone  Besides  the  frequent  occurrence  of  writings 
upon  the  persons  of  various  mediums,  bearing  the  appearance  of  being  caused 
through  a  temporary  determination  oi  blood  to  the  surface  affected,  produced 
by  spiiits  in  torming  wntings,  pictures,  etc,  several  manifestations  are  re- 
corded, in  which  blood,  in  its  fluid  state,  has  actually  been  drawn  by  spirit- 
power  through  the  veins,  and  made  to  appear  on  the  skin.  One  alone  of 
these  examples  our  space  will  enable  us  to  recite.  It  is  recorded  in  the 
Banner  of  Light,  and  the  correspondent  who  furnishes  it,  is  well  known  to 
the  editor,  who  fully  vouches  for  his  veracity  : 

"WONDERFUL  MANIFESTATIONS. 

"On  a  late  viat  to  the  island  of  Nantucket,  being  favored  with  the  presence  of  an  excel- 
lent medium,  Mr.  John  Gardner,  we  had  some  remarkable  demonstrations. 

' '  At  one  of  our  sittings  we  received  a  communication  from  a  very  dear  friend,  who  was 
murdered  in  California  some  two  years  ^ee.  During  ilie  communication  the  medium  Iiud 
his  hand,  palm  downwards,  on  the  table,  and  presently  asked  me  to  remove  it  cautiously.  I 
did  so,  and,  to  my  great  astonishment,  there  were  three  large  clots  of  wet  blood,  the  size  of 
a  dollar.  At  several  other  sittings  the  same  phenomenon  was  repeated.  The  blood  was  wet; 
and  our  roost  careful  and  searching  investigations  could  not  detect  any  other  origin  for  it 
than  that  which  was  cMmed  in  the  communication,  namely,  a  spiritual  one.  My  sister  and 
brother  were  present,  together  with  Mr.  P.  and  Mrs.  G.,  all  of  whom  will  bear  witness  to 
the  facts.  This  manifestation,  however,  is  not  unusual  with  Mr.  Gardner,  who  is  a  very 
powerful  medium. 

"M.  C.  B." 

Nearly  all  the  Spiritualism  of  California  partook  of  the  weird  and  as- 
tounding character  of  the  manifestations  above  described.  The  author's 
own  experience  of  fifteen  months'  residence  and  travel  through  this  State 
forms  the  most  exciting  and  almost  incredible  episode  of  her  life's  history. 
The  circumstances  attendant  on  such  scenes  would  be  too  personal  for 
detail  in  these  Images,  yet  it  is  due  to  the  history  of  Spiritualism  to  notice 
how  far,  wise  and  beneficent  beings  could  operate  on  human  destiny,  under 
the  most  trying  of  ciroim stances.  From  the  force  of  an  uncontrollable 
series  of  events,  the  author  landed  on  the  shores  of  California,  almost  un- 
expectedly, unannounced,  and  nearly  a  stranger,  except  by  reputation,  to  the 
few  Spiritualists  in  the  cotintry.  Worldly  means  or  aid  she  had  none,  save 
the  friendship  of  Mr.  I.  V.  Mansfield,  the  kind  and  popular  "postmaster" 
between  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds. 

This  seemii^ly  haz^dous  and  uncertain  visit  was  made  at  the  earnest 
charge  of  "  the  spirits,"  ^rtio  declared  that  fame,  honor,  success,  friends,  and 
fair  reward  should  crown  her  daring  experiment,  besides  effecting  a  work  for 
Spiritualism  whose  p£»manent  effects  would  endure  forever. 

All,  and  more  than  all  tliese  promises,  were  fulfilled.  In  her  far  and  wide 
wanderings  throughout  the  State,  extending  even  into  the  distant  territories; 
in  the  midst  of  a  wild  and  semi-hostile  Indian  country,  hair-breadth  escapes 
for  her  life  were  constantly  effected,  by  the  ever-watchiiil  care  and  prescient 
guardianship  of  beloved  spirit  friends.  Dangerous  pohtical  mobs  were  con- 
verted into  generous  protectors,  by  the  power  which  mighty  spirits  brought 
to  bear  through  her  raediumship.  Again  and  again  her  little  store  of  valu- 
ables, or  slender  purse  was  rescued  by  supra-mundane  care  from  the  very 
hands  of  brigands  j  and  in  the  combined  character  of  a  political  as  well  as  a 

Hosted  by  Google 

■AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  457 

Spiritual  missionary,  which  she  assumed  during  die  great  struggle  of  the  war, 
and  ill  which  she  was  constantly  exposed  to  die  antagonism  of  fierce  rivaJ 
liarties,  as  welJ  \%  sects,  it  Is  not  too  much  to  allege  that  she  seemed  to 
bear  a  charmed  life,  and  spirit-power  was  in  every  direction  made  specially 
manifest  through  this,  their  medium. 

In  die  last  few  weeks  of  her  residence  in  California,  the  aiiflior  enjoyed 
the  high  privilege  of  being  invited  by  the  Union  party  of  diat  State  to  under- 
take  a  perilous  campaign  in  favor  of  die  re-election  of  President  Lmcoln. 
The  weather  was  fearfully  sultry,  and  die  mountain  roads,  of  ahnost  prime- 
val wildncss,  were  insufferable  from  roughness  and  dust,  aggravated  by  a 
twelve-months'  drought.  The  fury  of  the  contest  was  for  life  or  death,  war 
or  peace ;  the  destruction  or  unity  of  American  republicanism.  In  the  heat 
of  such  a  terrific  conflict  die  most  bitter  opprobrium  was  heaped  on  the 
head  of  the  "  female  politician ; "  the  most  crafty  and  desperate  attempts 
made  to  silence  her  obnoxious  pleadings;  yet,  under  the  incessant  guide, 
conduct,  warnings,  and  promises  of  her  beloved  spirit  friends,  her  campaign 
of  thirty-two  addresses,  given  in  thirty-six  days,  was  accomphshed  mthout 
hann,  let,  hindrance,  a  single  failm-e,  or  die  least  disturbance,  and  that, 
amongst  die  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  wbo  crowded  to  hear  her,  one 
half  at  least  of  whom  were  her  bitterest  opponents.  The  whole  course  and 
triumphant  termination  of  the  campaign  was  laid  out  for  her,  and  predicted 
through  her  lips  by  her  guardian  spirits,  and  when  her  superhuman  labors 
were  brought  to  a  close,  even  diose  who  had  no  knowledge  of,  or  sympathy 
widi  Spiritualism,  pondered  oier  the  marvellous  incidents  of  this  extraordi- 
nary career,  and  owned  that  whatever  master  she  had  served,  none  but  a 
supra  or  jw*-mundane  power  could  have  conducted  her  dirough  it.  Her 
adventures  and  achievements  in  this  respect  alone,  have  been,  to  all  who  fol- 
lowed them,  a  direct  evidence  of  supernal  power  and  guidance,  or  else  a  leaf, 
from  die  unexplained  and  fantastic  p^es  of  the  "  wild  and  the  wonderful.    ^ 

One  of  die  most  successful  and  industrious  -pioneers  of  Spu-ttualisni  in 
California  was  Mr.  I.  V.  Mansfield,  the  far-famed  writing  medium,  so  often 
alluded  to  in  this  volume.  This  excellent  and  faithful  laborer  succeeded  in 
making  thousands  of  converts  during  his  four  years'  residence  in  California, 
while  his  unblemished  character,  no  less  than  his  remarkable  phenomenal 
gifts,  carried  him  triumphantly  d:rough  all  opposition.  During  his  residence 
on  die  Pacific  coast,  Mr.  Mansfield  [diough  entnely  unacquainted  widi  any 
language  but  his  own]  wrote  answers  to  sealed  letters  m  German,  Greek, 
Hebrew,  Arabic,  Chinese,  French,  and  Mexican. 

Some  of  his  converts  were  amongst  the  best  and  most  exalted  mmds  in  the 
country.  Altogether,  this  accomplished  medium  performed  a  work  which 
the  ingratitude  of  man  may  disregard  or  forget  in  more  recent  marrels,  but 
which  assuredly  laid  the  foundations  of  a  rational,  demonstrated  behef  m 
spirit  communion  throughout  die  State  of  California.  The  details  of  Mr. 
Mansfield's  labors— Uke  those  of  Emma  Hardinge— can  only  find  a  place 
amongst  tiie  special  records  of  biography ;  but  die  history  of  Spintuahsm  on 
die  Pacific  coast  would  be  as  incomplete  without  a  notice  of  his  invaluable 
service  to  the  cause,  as  a  history  of  die  State  of  California,  without  allusion  to 
the  golden  product  which  gives  its  special  value  and  characten sties  to  the 
country.  r-  -ic      ■ 

Since  die  departure  of  Mr.  Mansfield  and  the  author  from   Cahtorma, 
s  other  esteemed  missionaries  have  carried  forward  theu:  work  with 

increased  advantages  and  proportionate  success. 

Mr.   Benjamin  Todd,  Mrs.    Laura  Cuppy,  Mrs.  DeForce   Gordon,  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

458  mSTORY  OF  MODERN 

S.  J.  Finney,  have  completely  established  the  religious  aspect  of  the  cause, 
by  regular  Sabbath  meetings  and  excellent  children's  lyceunis.  Mis.  Q,  M. 
Stowe,  a  favorite  lecturer  and  clairvoyant  from  the  West,  has  practiced  there 
most  successfully,  and  Ada  Hoyt, — now  Mrs.  Foye, — the  far-famed  rapping 
and  test  medium,  has  chased  away  the  last  vestige  of  scepticism  from  the 
minds  of  the  multitudes  who  have  flocked  to  witness  her  public  demonstra- 
tions of  spirit  communion  and  identity.  Many  other  gifted  mediums  have 
found  a  welcome  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  still  more  ai-e  bending  their  steps 
thitherward,  encouraged  by  the  resistless  spread  of  dieir  belief  all  over  the 
land;  penetrating  even  beyond  the  young  Silver  State  of  Nevada,  which  was 
territory  at  the  time  of  die  author's  visit,  whilst  its  "cities,"  in  1863-4,  were 
little  more  tlian  mining  camps.  Here  still  resides  Mrs.  Webber,  once  Miss 
Munson,  a  charming  trance  speaker  and  medical  clairvoyant,  and  the  firs, 
lady  who  ever  had  the  courage  to  deliver  a  spiritual  lecture  in  tiie  "Golden 
State,"  and  that  too  when  it  was  almost  a  rare  sight  to  behold  fliere  a  "  white 
woman,"  much  less  one  who  could  discourse  witli  sucli  tender  eloquence  to 
assembled  multitudes  as  Miss  Munson. 

The  continued  fresh  arrivals  of  popular  and  gifted  mediums  has  almost 
obliterated  the  memory  of  the  early  pioneers  from  the  minds  of  later  settlers 
and  converts,  but  their  "  works  do  follow  them ;"  and  though  tlie  track  whicJi 
their  torn  and  bleeding  feet  so  painfully  beat,  is  now  happily  worn  wide  and 
smooth  by  the  tramp  of  a  nui  d         d  g  ork, 

as  a  whole,  has  succeeded,  no  is      w  the 

harvest.     Tlius,  then,  the  whi  fl  rth's 

loveliest  and  ricliest  garden  gi  fr  isco 

Bay  to  the  snow-capped  heigl  g  ty  N  T         fling 

their  white  pennons  far  over  t      di  g    b  ry  rren 

wastes  of  flie  vast  desert. 

Their  snowy  emblems  ofp  rtdgdl!  fl       over 

the  ocean  waves  that  cap  tii    T  basa        ca  P  ucas. 

Some  of  us  who  have  stood  h  d  b  V    tern 

wave  whose  sunlit    billows  b  di       fl  h  the 

furthest  East,  have  truly  seen  d  b       d  nited 

by  a  single  bridge  of  sunbean  d  wh  h  d  priv- 

ilege to  re-echo  m  diese  distan  g    d     di  g  ta  life, 

brought  by  immortal  messeng  g  th  the 

dawnmg  of  a  spiritual  morning  denip- 

tive  hope  than  all  the  beauty  d  p  has 

shone  on  duiing  its  long  day's     ai  g 

These  human  pioneers  may  never  see,  on  earth,  the  noontide  glory  of  that 
spiritual  sun;  but  they  know  its  refulgent  beams  will  Ught  them  in  the  land 
where  it  never  sets,  and  gleam  in  undying  splendor  around  their  path  in  the 
spirit  countiy,  where  all  their  labors  find  eternal  rest,  and  tlie  long-forgotten 
acts  of  earthly  effort,  deeds  of  blessing,  or  even  kindly  wislies,  will  bloom  in 
undying  fragiance ;  flowers  of  eternal  beauty  in  their  path,  whose  deeds  were 
sown  in  their  thorny  human  pilgrimage. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER  XLIII. 

MISCELLANEOUS  ACCOUNTS  OF  SPIRITUALISM  UJ  NORTH  AND  SOUTH  AMERICA. 

Spirituausm  in  Canada— Wonderful  Manifestations  through  a  Piano- 
Spiritualism  IN  Austria,  Turkey,  China  [vide  New  York  Tribune],  Central 
and  South  America— Circles  on  the  Ocean— Spirits  in  Prison— A  Spir- 
itual Purgatory,  and  Methods  of  Progress — The  Maracavbo  Bull. 

We  are  now  to  take  a,  brief  glance  at  those  distant  scenes  where  the  in- 
fluence of  Eastern  or  even  Western  Spiritualism  could  only  have  been  felt 
through  vague  and  remote  rumors.  True  it  is,  that  the  locomotive  nature 
of  Americans,  propels  them  just  as  frequently  to  the  furthest  parts  of  the  two 
Continents,  North  and  South,  as  to  the  immediate  vicinitj^  of  their  own 
homes ;  hence  it  is  no  matter  of  astonishment  to  find  the  ideas  which  we 
have  just  begun  to  discuss  familiarly  at  our  firesides,  forming  a  staple  topic 
of  conversation  in  the  distant  wilds  of  Central  America,  the  blooming  valleys 
of  the  Amazon,  or  the  primeval  forests  of  Canada. 

spiritualism  in  CANADA. 

spiritualism  has  taken  a  firm  and  deep  hold  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this 
country,  and  in  some  paits  exhibits  a  condition  of  progress  little  behind  that 
of  the  States. 

In  Toronto,  Mrs.  Swain,  one  of  the  most  powerful  physical  mediums  of  the 
day,  has  for  years  been  prqducing  irresistible  conviction  of  spirit  communion 
upon  the  minds  of  hundreds  who  have  attended  her  seances. 

In  London,  Canada  West,  a  number  of  true-hearted  believers  have  rallied 
round  the  lead  of  Mr,  John  Spetigue,  who,  himself  a  devoted  Spiritualist,  has 
for  yeai-s  labored  in  the  cause,  engaging  speakers  and  aiding  in  the  develop- 
ment of  media,  until  his  efforts  have  resulted  in  procuring  a  respectful  hear- 
ing for  the  one,  and  a  very  general  growth  of  die  other. 

In  Ottawa  may  be  found  a  brave  and  devoted  little  band  of  Spiritualists, 
who  depend  chiefly  on  the  abundant  medium  power  existing  amongst  their 
own  ranks,  the  place  being  too  remote  to  secure  tiie  services  of  travelling 
lecturers  and  media. 

At  St.  Cadierine's  there  are  a  lai^e  number  of  Spiritualists,  including 
several  very  excellent  and  successM  healing  mediums.  Mr.  Alfred  H. 
Smith,  of  Laprairie,  Canada  East,  gives  the  following  account  of  spiritualistic 
experiences  in  that  place  : 

"Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph: 

"Sir, — The  newspaper  editors  of  Montreal  having  unanimoosly  refused  to  msesi  a  single 
word  in  favor  of  SpihCualisni,  wliale  they  open  tbdr  columns  to  every  idiot  who  may  find 

Hosiedb,  Google 

460  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

anythinj;  to  say  against  that  doctrine,  the  Mends  of  the  cause  have  determined  to  apply  to 
you,  as  your  journal  is  devoted  to  the  spread  of  Spititualifm,  and  if  necessary  to  pay  for  the 

"It  may  be  asked,  why  are  we  so  anxious  to  publish  our  communications  with  spirits? 
Our  answer  is,  we  cannot  tell.  We  are  forced  to  it  by  a  power  over  which  we  have  no 
control,  and  in  consequence  we  ask  you,  io  the  name  of  God  and  of  truth,  to  give  publidty 
to  the  following ; 

"It  is  about  three  years  since  I  heard  the  phenomenon  of  Spiritualism  first  spoken  of  in 
Canada.  I  then,  as  well  as  at  several  periods  since,  looked  upon  the  thing  as  a  monstrous 
imposition.  I  however  continued  at  the  request  of  several  friends  to  attend  'circles' 
of  the  believers  in  this  new  doctrine,  but  to  no  other  effect  than  to  confinn  me  in  my 
scepticism  ;  and  all  the  arguments  of  my  friends  and  all  the  alleged  manifestations  were 
insufficient  to  convince  me.      But  Providence  chooses  its  own  iune. 

"In  July,  1S53,  I  left  Canada,  in  company  with  an  estimable  friend,  W.  F.  Hawley 
Esq.,  of  the  Ordnance  Department,  C.  E.,  on  a  tour  through  the  Middle  and  Western 
States ;  and  on  Saturday,  the  27th  of  August,  we  arrived  in  LouisviUe,  Kentucky,  where 
my  friend  was  seized  with  yellow  fever,  and  after  an  illness  of  nine  days  he  expired. 

"  It  has  never  been  my  fortune  to  be  acqu^ted  with  a  more  honest,  upright,  or  learned 
man  than  Mr.  Hawley.  He,  as  well  as  myself,  liad  investigated  the  subject  of  Spiritualism, 
but  with  a  contrary  result.  He  was  a  believer,  while  I,  until  the  moment  of  his  death, 
remained  incredulous. 

"  As  I  seldom  left  ihe  bedside  of  my  friend  during  his  illness,  I  took  frequent  occadon  to 
taJk  to  him  of  the  now  faith,  when  he  invariably  expressed  his  entire  belief  in  il ;  and  in  a 
few  days  1  had  the  inexpressible  delight  of  witnesang  the  reward  of  his  fsuth  and  the  realiza- 
tion of  all  his  hopes.  Oh,  sirl  I  cannot  find  words  to  express  the  transporting  emotions 
which  filled  my  mind  at  the  moment  of  his  death.  Although  I  was  the  only  living  being 
present,  yet  I  distinctly  saw  hundreds  of  moving  forms  around  his  bed,  and  in  every  part 
of  the  chamber,  but  of  such  dazzling  splendor  that  I  could  not  distinguish  their  features ; 
the  room  was  filled  with  superhuman  sounds,  which  appeared  to  come  from  ihe  ceiling ; 
and  mvoluntarily  looking  up  I  distinctly  saw  (he  spirit  hover  over  the  body  which  it  had 
just  left,  as  if  uncertiun  whither  to  du^t  its  course.  It  remained  thus  during  the  space 
of  a  minute,  then  moving  gently  to  one  side  it  entered  a  body  whose  transcendent  splendor 
the  tongue  of  man  cannot  express. 

"At  that  moment  I  felt  my  mind,  as  it  were,  regenerated.  " 

"  I  shall  now  give  a  few  out  of  the  many  manifestations  which  have  been  witnessed,  and 
can  be  attested,  by  the  most  respectable  citizens  of  this  village. 

"  On  Saturday,  the  27th  of  August,  1853,  my  friend,  Mr.  William  Fox,  invited  me  to 
meet  a  circle  of  friends  at  his  house ;  accordingly  I  repaired  thither  at  eight  o'clock  that 
evening,  and  met  a  highly  respectable  company,  among  them  a  deigyraan  who  came  to  m- 
vestigate  the  subject  for  his  own  satisfaction.  We  had  not  sat  more  than  twenty  minutes 
when  Mrs.  Fox  became  greatly  agitated  ;  she  was  lifted  forcibly  from  her  chair,  and  sus- 
pended about  a  foot  from  the  earth  for  a  minute  and  a  half;  she  was  then  placed  m  her 
chair  ag^,  but  still  agitated  and  unable  to  speak.  It  was  evident  the  spirit  had  not  suffi- 
dent  influence  over  her.  After  some  moments  Mr.  James  Macdonald  approached,  and 
made  a  few  passes  over  her,  when  she  immediately  spoke  as  foEows : 

"  '  Friends,  it  is  now  five  weeks  ^ce  I  left  your  society  on  earth,  and,  when  I  tell  you 
my  name,  you  will  not  be  surprised  that  I  deare  (0  return  amongst  you  in  spirit,  confirm- 
ing the  glad  anticipations  of  a  bright  existence  in  the  spheres  which  I  cherished  on  earth, 
deaious  to  instruct  yon  in  the  glorious  realities  of  my  present  exalted  condition,  and  give 
you  a  foretaste  of  joys  which  await  the  good  and  true  in  these  blissful  regions.  But  aa 
there  is  another  spirit  who  wislies  to  communicate,  I  shall  withdraw  until  to-morrow  night. 
" '  Farewell ;  your  friend, 

"'W,  F.  Hawley.' 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICA!^  SPIRITUALISM.  461 

"To  me  that  communication  was  most  conyincing.  The  style,  language,  and  certain 
words  of  the  phraseology,  were  essentially  that  of  my  friend.  The  influence  then  changed, 
when  the  medium  said,  addressing  Mr.  Macdonald,  — 

"  '  Friend  Macdonald,  I  know  the  thoughts  that  now  occupy  your  mind,  and  I  come  to 
tell  you  about  your  son,  whom  it  was  your  earnest  deshe  to  hear  of  when  you  came  to  this 
circle,  i  have  just  left  him  where  in  spirit,  I  visited  him,  in  a  very  bad  condition  both 
of  body  and  mind,  lying  in  an  hospital  in  New  Orleans,  suffering  from  a  severe  attack  of 
scrofula  ;  but  you  need  not  feel  uneasy ;  he  is  surrounded  by  the  spirits  of  his  friends,  and 
your  father,  who  occupies  a  higher  sphere  than  that  which  I  inhabit,  tells  me  that  your  son, 
although  obstbate,  is  a  chosen  vessel,  desiuied  lo  do  incalculable  good  among  the  faith- 
ful.'      

"Mr.  Macdonald  then  asked:  'How  am  I  to  know  that  you  are  speakmg  the  truth? 
What  proofs  can  yon  give  me  ?  What  is  your  name  ? '  It  was  written  :  '  Your  father,  who 
is  present,  will  answer  these  questions  to  your  satisfaction,' 

"At  this  moment  the  husband  of  the  medium  came  into  the  room,  and,  from  some  cause, 
the  communication  ceased;  however,  after  a  conversation  of  about  twenty  minutes  on  gen- 
eral topics,  it  v/as  written : 

"'My  Dear  Son,  —  Your  questions  to  the  spirit  who  has  just  left,  I  shall  answer  to  your 
satisfaction.  As  a  proof  that  what  he  told  you  is  true,  you  shall  receive  a  letter  from  New 
Orleans  on  Thursday  next,  corroborating  the  statement  of  your  son's  ihness,  and  on  Fri- 
day, the  28th  of  October,  you  shall  receive  a  letter  from  himself  requesting,  lo  be  again  ad- 
mitted to  your  friendship.  The  name  of  the  spirit  is  Thomas  Henry  Caldwell,  your  son-in- 
law,  and  the  favor  which  he  requests  you  to  do  him  is  to  pay  an  account  which  he  owed 
Mr.  John  Charlton  at  the  tune  of  his  death.  You  can  pay  this  account,  as  the  whole  of 
Caroline's  fortune  is  still  in  your  hands,  and  Caldwell  has  left  no  issue. 
"  '  Good-night. 

" '  William  Macdonald. 

"  Of  the  numerous  family  circumstances  conldned  in  these  communications,  not  a  soul 
present  but  Mr.  Macdonald  himself  had  tlie  least  knowledge.  Although  the  communica- 
tions were  of  so  delicate  and  personal  a  nature,  however,  he  candidly  informed  the  medium 
as  well  as  ail  present,  in  a  few  weeks  subsequent,  that  the  letters  promised  from  his  son  had 
arrived.  Every  statement  of  the  spirit  was  fully  corroborated.  'In  a  word,'  added  Mr. 
Macdonald,  '  unless  it  was  sphits,  no  power  under  heaven  could  have  made  those  discbsures 

"lam,  your: 

The  following  was  communicated  by  Dr.  Orton.  a  well-known  New  York 
physician,  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  of  March,  1858  : 

"DR.  ORTON'S  TOUR  — MRS.  HARDINGE  AT  MONTREAL. 

"  Waterford,  February  18,  1858. 

"I  have  just  had  the  satisfaction  of  meeting  Mrs.  Hardinge  here,  at  the  house  of  Gen- 
eral BuUard,  on  her  return  fr.om  Montreal,  and  of  learning,  from  the  Canada  papers  shehas 
brought  along,  the  results  of  her  Northern  misaon,  which  have  been,  and  promise  still  to 
be,  of  a  most  mteresting  character.  It  seems  that  before  leaving  the  States,  at  Rutland, 
Vermont,  she  was  uiformed  that  her  presence  at  Montreal  as  a  public  speaker,  both  on 
account  of  her  sex  and  the  doctrme  she  advocated,  was  likely  lo  produce  some  disturb- 
ance;  and  that  eertam  persons  were  threatenmg  lo  procure  her  arrest,  should  she  undertake 
to  lecture,  as  a  disturber  of  the  pubhc  peace ;  hence,  she  was  advised  not  to  proceed. 

"  On  her  arrival  at  Montreal  all  this  proved  true.  Nevertheless,  she  proceeded  to  the 
fulfilment  of  her  engagement.  On  entering  the  hall  where  slie  was  to  speak,  on  the  first 
evenmg,  she  was  met  by  sneers  and  audibly  discourteous  remarks,  on  the  part  of  some  of  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

462  SrSTORY  OF  MODERN 

audience.  TMs,  however,  ceased  when  she  had  spoken  a  few  words,  and  all  remuncd  quiet 
and  attentive  to  the  close  of  the  lecture. 

"  The  audience  on  this  first  occasion  was  not  large ;  bnC  amongst  it  was  a  strong  array 
of  learning,  —  of  priests,  lawyers,  doctors  of  various  orders,  and  reporters.  The  time  having 
arrived  for  questioning  the  speaker,  a  Jewish  rabbi,  of  great  scholarship  and  intelligence, 
was  placed  in  the  van  as  chief  spokesman.  A  period  of  profound  and  exciting  interest  suc- 
ceeded. Tlie  questions,  at  least  some  of  them,  according  to  the  journals  of  that  city,  were 
put  vrith  the  obvious  purpose  of  confounding  the  speaker  ;  but,  according  to  the  same  au- 
thority, each  successive  attempt  was  promptly  frustrated,  and  the  tables  turned  upon  the 
querists.  It  was  declared  that  the  speaker  must  have  devoted  her  life  to  study,  in  order  to 
be  able  to  exhibit  the  learning  she  displayed.  The  rabbi  announced  that  it  was  plain  that 
she  was  acqu^ted  with  the  Hebrew  language,  and  interrogated  her  on  tliat  point.  She 
replied  that  she  had  never  studied  the  Hebrew.  But  very  shortly  after,  she  tripped  him  on 
a  point  relating  to  that  language,  and  reasoned  him  down  until  he  acknowledged  his  error. 
At  the  dose  of  the  session,  the  victory  remained  triumphantly  with  the  speaker. 

"  On  the  second  evening  the  hall  was  crowded,  but  with  tlie  lecture,  the  exercises  termi- 
nated. No  one,  according  to  the  journals  referred  to,  seemed  willing  to  enter  the  list  and 
oppose  himself  to  the  ready  wit  and  knowledge  of  the  speaker. 

"Two  more  evenings  of  crowded  audiences,  at  an  admission  fee  of  twenty-five  cents,  suc- 
weded  with  like  results.  ,  The  questions  were  again  resumed,  but  with  no  better  success  on 
the  part  of  the  querists.  On  all  points  raised,  the  lady  speaker  remamed  confessedly 
master  of  the  field;  and  with  a  fifth  and  free  lecture  on  the  Sabbath,  on  whidi  occasion, 
she  vras  tendered,  and  occupied  the  Unitarian  Church,  Mrs.  Hatdinge  closed  her  labors  at 
Montreal,  where  Spiritualism  seems,  previously,  only  to  have  been  known  in  name." 

The  "important  results"  proiDhesied  by  Dr.  Orton,  in  additional  remarks 
omitted  iri  diis  place,  have  indeed  been  accomplished.  From  Montreal  to 
Prince  Edward's  Island,  Mrs.  Hardinge  extended  her  visits  until  the  largest 
cities  and  villages  of  that  section  of  the  province  became  alive  to  die  truths 
of  Spiritualism,  and  earnest  in  evoking  the  abundant  medium-power  with  which 
the  Canadians  seem  to  be  endowed. 

At  Eloonifield,  a  small  village  near  Picton,  Prince  Edward's  Island,  the 
Universalists,  triumphing  over  a  powerful  combination  of  other  sectarian  de. 
nominations,  who  brought  their  united  forces  to  bear  against  them,  at  last 
succeeded  in  raising  funds  to  build  a  church  for  themselves,  wlxich,  for  a  long 
time  they  could  not  open  in  the  face  of  the  bitter  antagonism  with  which  their 
opinions  were  assailed. 

Taking  advantage  of  the  author's  brief  visit  to  the  neighboring  town  of  Pic- 
ton, the  Universalists,  uniting  with  a  number  of  progressive  Quakers  who  re- 
sided there,  invited  her  to  open  their  church  willi  a  spiritual  lecture.  This 
announcement  caused  the  remark,  from  the  anti-progressives  of  the  place,  that 
"  the  Universalists  liad  been  obliged,  at  their  repeated  remonstrances,  to  sweep 
and  garnish  their  house,  even  to  the  expulsion  of  the  devil  of  Universa- 
lism,  but  lo  !  now  they  were  about  to  take  unto  themselves  seven  devils  worse 
than  the  former  one,  in  the  shape  of  Spiritualism." 

The  lecture,  however,  whatever  its  originmighthave  been  in  satanic  imagin- 
ations, was  a  brilliant  success.  The  building  was  crowded  from  floor  to  ceil- 
ing, and  even  the  eminence  on  which  it  stood  was  packed  widi  dense  masses 
of  human  beings,  who  crowded  round  the  open  windows  eager  to  catch  the 
faintest  vibration  of  the  speaker's  voice  from  within.  Poor  hungry  multitudes  ! 
They  had  fed  so  long  on  the  stale  crumbs  of  mouldy  traditions,  listening 
to  the  dim  echoes  from  the  corridors  of  a  buried  past,  that  the  very  shadow 
of  the  bright  life  angel  that  flitted  across  their  path  in  the  shape  of  Spiritual- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  aH 

ism,  seemed  to  them  like  manna  fallen  from  the  sVies.  At  fee  close  of  the 
lecture,  according  to  her  custom,  the  speaker  invited  questions ;  and  after  many 
had  been  answered  and  slie  was  about  to  dismiss  the  multitudes  who  still  lin- 
gered unwilling  to  part  with  her,  a  fine  old  octogenarian  Quaker,  whom  the 
excessive  heat  of  the  thronged  building  had  induced  to  strip  off  alike  his  coat 
and  stubborn  hat,  sprang  on  a  bench,  crying,  "  One  more  question,  blessed 
spirits  ;  only  one  more.  Tell  us,  I  pray  thee,  will  she,  thy  medium,  ever  be 
■  permitted  to  come  amongst  us  again." 

With  the  sad  words  of  answer,  "  Never  more  in  the  mortal  form,"  the  vast 
assembly  separated ;  but  the  seeds  of  Spiritualism  were  sown  on  far  more  im- 
perishable foundations  than  the  mound  which  supported  the  church  where  it 
was  first  proclaimed  in  Eloomfield. 

Although  a  vast  amount  of  deeply  interesting  phenomenal  Spiritualism  is 
now  scatered  all  over  the  province,  especially  amongst  its  French  inhabitants, 
our  space  will  only  permit  us  to  insert  one  more  illustration  of  Canadian  Spir- 
itualism, the  manifestation  of  which  was  communicated  by  a  reliable  citizen 
of  Toronto  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  and  refers  to  the  mediumship  of  Mrs. 
Swiun,  then  a  resident  at  Toronto. 

WONDERFOL  MANIFESTATIONS  BY  A  PIANO.  — SPIRITUAL  TELEGRAPH. 

"  TOROKTO,  October  14,  1856. 
'•Messrs.  Partridge  and  Brittan  : 

"Dear  Friends, —  For  the  benefit  of  your  many  readers,  I  give  you  an  account  of  one 
of  the  numerous  demonstrations  that  we  occasionally  receive  throngh  the  mediumship  of 
Mrs.  Swain,  a  lady  of  this  city,  who,  foi  the  different  phases  of  that  wonderful  power  of 
spirit  influence,  is  rarely  equalled. 

"  Happening  in  her  house  a  few  weeks  ance,  four  persons  bcade  the  medium  and  myself 
took  our  seat,  around  a  piano  that  was  in  the  room,  —  myself  locking  it  and  placing  the  key 
in  my  pocket,  —  with  the  usual  lights  burniiig  in  the  room.  Shortly  after  the  company  had 
taken  their  seats,  the  keys  of  the  instrument  were  sounded,  and  answers  given  in  that  man- 
ret  to  questions  asked.  Among  many  inquiries  made  was  the  question,  '  who  it  was  that 
was  communicating  with  us,'  when  the  name  was  spelled — by  strilting  a  key  as  the  letter 
of  the  alphabet  was  pointed  to  —  of  an  old  friend  of  ray  own,  one  who  had  been  many  years 
at  sea,  and  master  of  several  ships.  To  prove  his  identity  he,  at  my  request,  did  several 
things,  such  as  making  the  noise  of  a  gale  of  wind  rushing  through  the  rigging  and.  blocks  of 
a  vessel ;  the  plash  of  the  water  along  the  side  ;  breaking  of  the  heavy  seas  on  deck  ;  creak- 
ing of  the  guards  and  blocks  ;  and  rolling  the  heavy  instrument,  just  like  a  vessel  tossed 
about  on  a  heavy  sea.  At  the  time  I,  and  most  of  the  other  persons  present  were  leaning  all 
our  weight  on  the  instrument,  it  rdsed  up  and  down,  rolled  about  as  if  it  were  possessed  with 
life,  and  became  light  as  a  feather,  instead  of  weighing  several  hundred  pounds  !  To  make 
assurance  doubly  sure,  I  put  the  following  questions,  knowing  that  no  other  person  present 
beside  myself  knew  the  meaning  of  what  I  asked:  '  Now,  friend,'  said  I,  'wo  will  call  the 
end  of  the  instrument  toward  my  left  the  stem  of  your  ship,  and  the  oppoate  one  the  bow.' 
I  was  sitting  at  the  front  with  my  arms  leaning  on  it.  '  Now,  I  want  you  to  give  your 
ship,  as  you  call  it,  a  list  to  port ; '  when  immediately  over  it  went  to  the  opposite  side  to 
the  one  I  was  leaning  on,  and  perfectly  correct  in  seaman's  language.  It  rested  in  that 
position  for  some  time,  nor  could  all  our  bearing  down  bring  it  back.  I  then  asked  the 
spirit  to  give  'lurch  to  starboard,'  when  over  came  the  piano  to  (he  same  inclination  on  the 
opposite  ade.  I  then  asked  him  to  give  me  a  sample  of  a  ship  riding  at  anchor  in  a  heavy 
head  sea.  Immediately,  up  raised  the  instrument  at  the  bow,  and  then  the  end  represent- 
ing the  stem,  and  so  on,  first  one  and  then  the  other,  with  an  occa^onal  roll  to  each  side. 
After  that  was  over,  one  of  the  party  was  influenced  to  sing  a  sea  song,  when  a  beautiful 
accompaniment  was  played  on  the  strings  to  the  tune  ;  and  one  wonder  is,  that  the  person 

Hosiedb,  Google 

464  HISTORY  OF  M0DERI7 

who  sang,  in  his  normal  state  could  not  sing  at  all,  but  at  this  time  those  who  heard  him 
said  that  he  sang  beautifully.  Now  all  this  was  done  in  a  lighted  room,  with  the  instru- 
ment locked  and  the  key  in  my  own  pocket ;  and  I  know  that  one  or  more  of  the  parties 

present  never  had  their  hands  or  anns  from  off  the  front  board  all  the  time 

"  Yours  sincerely,  for  the  truth, 

"R." 
"  [The  author  of  the  above  communication  sends  his  full  name,  in  attestation  of  the 
(acts  stated.— £A  Telegraph.'^' 

In  consulfing  the  files  of  different  foreign  papers,  our  readers  would  be 
astonished  to  find  the  numerous  allusions  that  are  made  to  the  spread  of 
Spiritualism.  Judge  Edmonds  cites  his  correspondence  in  Hindostan, 
China,  Persia,  Thibet,  Algeria,  the  East  and  West  Indies,  and  nearly  every 
country  of  Europe,  on  this  subject.  The  talented  Poughkeepsie  Seer,  no 
less  than  the  author  of  these  pages,  could  present  a  similar  record.  The 
manifestations,  however,  were  not  always  evidence  to  those  in  whose  pres- 
ence they  were  produced,  of  their  supra-mundane  origin. 

The  Chicago  Tribune,  of  1859,  publishes  the  following : 

"The  Kingston  (Jamada]  Morning  yournat  of  the  8th  ultimo,  gives  the  following 
example  of  the  mysterious  power  which  takes  possession  of  pine  wood  and  mahogany.  It 
will  be  perceived  that  tables  are— occaaonally,  at  least  —  superior  to  telegraphs  as  medi- 
ums of  the  earliest  intelligence.  We  incline  to  the  opinion,  however,  that  they  will  not 
render  such  services  often  enough  to  suit  the  demands  of  speculators.  A  table,  under  the 
influence  of  a  certain  party  in  this  city,  was  questioned  as  to  the  day  on  which  the  espected 
steamer  would  arrive;  when  it  gave  six  distinct  raps,  making  it  the  6th.  On  the  next  ques- 
tion, as  to  the  day  of  the  week,  seven  was  struck,  making  it  Saturday.  Subsequently  an- 
other system  of  rapping— that  of  suspending  a  shilling  by  a  thread  over  a  glass — was  con- 
sulted as  to  the  hour  at  which  the  steamer  would  be  signalized,  and  the  answer  was,  '  One.' 

"How  many  minutes  after?  the  answer  was,  'Twenty.'  These  questions  and  answers  were 
communicated  to  several  parties  in  this  city,  and  have,  as  our  readers  are  aware,  been  cor- 
rect,  the  steamer  having  arrived  on  Saturday,  the  6th,  and  was  signalized  at  the  exact 

Again,  the  New  York  Tribune  of  the  same  year  published  a  letter 
from  a  Vienna  correspondent,  who  says  that  the  rappings  and  various  other 
spirit  manifestations  have  appeared,  not  only  in  the  Austrian  capital,  but 
as  far  as  Persia.     We  quote  an  extract  from  the  letter  in  point : 

"The  Tisiiklof/eic  [table  rappmgs]  have  also  found  theh  way  to  the  imperial  city, 
although  they  do  not  operate  upon  the  slow  and  deliberate  Germans  in  the  same  manner 
as  they  affeit  the  more  excitable  Americans.  On  the  whole,  there  is  something  in  the 
GHsterklspfen  [spirit  rappings]  which  exactly  suits  the  transcendentalism  of  the  Germans. 
A  few  days  ance  I  had  a  long  attingviith  Bibesco,  the  oracle  of  these  things  in  Vieima. 
I  hear  of  no  other  results  good  or  bad,  from  the  same,  than  that  a  few  fortunate  lottery 
tickets  have  been  bought  after  consulting  the  spirits,  and  that  eertdn  ladies,  more  than  a 
•  thousand  weeks  old'  [the  German  of  sweet  seventeen]  have  consulted  them  upon  ques- 
tions concerning  their  future.  A  friend  who  has  a  monomania  for  oriental  affairs,  read 
to  me  a  few  nights  ^nce,  from  a  Persian  newspaper,  that  the 'spirits'  are  also  doing  their 
work  at  Teheran,  the  capital  of  that  empire." 

The  following  is  an  account  of  Spiritualism  in  Guatemala,  one  of  the  prin- 
cipal Central  American  States,  and  the  scene  of  those  colossal  and  mysteri- 
ous ruins  that  speak  with  such  voiceless  eloquence  of  the  unknown  races 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPmiTVALISM.  465 

that  once  inhabited  this  now  deserted  land.  The  writer  is  well  known  to 
the  author  by  reputation,  and  deserves  the  highest  credit  for  his  noble  char- 
acter and  strict  fidelity  to  truth. 

SPIRITtTAL  TELEGRAPH. —LETTER  FROM  CENTR.'VL  AMERICA. 

"So  little  is  Itnown  among  our  people  througliout  the  United  States,  of  the  spread 
of  our  beautiful  philosopliy,  and  the  effect  its  truthfulness  is  producing  in  other  countries, 
that  I  have  thought  it  might  be  interesting,  if  not  advantageous,  to  furnish  you  with  a 
brief  sketch  of  facts  relating  to  Central  America." 

"As  the  first  pioneer  to  plant  our  slandai-d  there,  I  have  taken  a  more  than  ordinary  in- 
terest in  the  struggle  that  is  at  present  going  on,  quietly  but  surely,  for  the  rights  of 
humanity,  the  liberty  of  thought,  and  the  success  of  the  great  principles  uiTolved  in  the 
spiritual  philosophy,  between  our  friends  and  that  portion  of  the  Catholic  population  and 
church  arrayed  agamst  it.  As  early  asDecember,  185^,  1  convened  a  circle  at  my  residence 
in  the  city  of  Guatemala,  and  though  it  was  kept  pretty  secret  until  1858,  still  it  was 
visited  by  a  number  of  inquu-mg  mmds,  and  amongst  them  some  of  the  clergy.  Our 
mediums  were  already  eight  in  number,  all  developed  from  this  parent  circle,  exhibiting 
various  phases  of  mediumship,  but  principally  ofa  phjsical  character.  One  of  these  was 
a  little  Indian  girl  of  about  thu'teen  years  of  age,  through  whom  we  obtained  communica- 
tions with  a  spirit -scope  of  a  very  noiel  construction,  the  plan  of  which  had  been  furnished 
me  whilst  under  influence,  and  I  am  constnuned  to  say  that  up  to  the  present  time  I  have 
seen  no  spirit  telegraphing  equal  to,  or  more  thoroughly  satisfactory.  The  whole  apparatus 
was  insulated  ;  the  alphabetical  side  of  the  disk  presented  to  the  investigator,  and/j-uei  the 
medium,  who  coaM  not  see  a  letter  upon  it,  and  yet  we  received  communications  in  English, 
French,  and  German,  as  well  as  in  Spanish  and  an  Indian  dialect,  the  two  latter  only  being 
spoken  or  understood  by  the  medium.  Another  of  those  developed  was  a  young  lady  about 
nineteen  years  of  age,  with  a  slight  tinge  of  Indian  blood  in  her  veins,  through  whom  phys- 
ical manifestations  and  eomraimications  of  a  very  extraordinary  character  were  given. 
Among  these  were  the  carrying  about  and  ringing  of  a  large  bell  over  the  heads  of  the  circle 
while  the  beams  of  the  midday  sun  were  streaming  in  at  the  windows,  and  at  the  close  of 
the  ringing,  the  clapper  would  be  taken  out  and  thrown  in  a  comer,  and  the  bell  laid  on  a 
table,  or  else  placed  upon  some  person's  head.  Large  tables,  chairs,  and  other  articles, 
would  be  moved  about  and  placed  in  most  smgular  poations,  and  all  done  in  the  strongest 
light,  whilst  every  one  remained  seated.  When  communications  were  given,  a  round  table, 
the  legs  of  pine  and  the  top  of  hard-grtuned  cedar,  weighing  about  thu-ty  pounds,  was  nsed, 
it  was  placed  before  the  medium,  who  remained  in  contact  with  it  about  three  minutes, 
then  withdrew  about  eighteen  inches  or  two  feet  from  it.  Mental  and  written  questions  as, 
well  asoral  were  always  correctly  answered,  and  in  many  instances  things  at  the  time  unknown 
to  the  qdestioner  were  told  and  afterwards  verified.  The  mode  of  replying  was,  however, 
most  singular  and  satisfactory.  TJe  table  always  rose  perpendicularly,  at  least  one  foot 
and  frequertly  two,  in  the  air,  and  descending,  struck  the  floor  sharply,  once,  twice,  three 
times,  or  c  ftener,  as  was  the  right  answer.  Let  me  here  state,  that,  after  a  careful  investi- 
gation of  cause  and  effect  in  these  manifestations  in  Central  America,  for  about  ten  years, 
I  found  that  the  greater  the  altitude  above  the  sea,  and  the  more  pure  and  elastic  the  at- 
mosphere  from  such  elevation,  the  more  powerful  the  manifestations;  and  this  was  expkined ■ 
by  our  spirit  intelligences  as  occasioned  by  the  better  conditions  it  afforded  them  to  operate.: 

"In  1859  and  1 860,  however,  affairs  fookachange.  Several  new  circles  were  established,, 
and  quite  a  number  of  new  mediums  became  developed.  About  this  time  [early  in  1860J, 
I  had  an  interview  witli  President  Carrena  and  some  of  the  leading  gentlemen  on  the  sub- 
ject, and  invited  them  to  attend  at  my  house  and  see  for  themselves.  This  they  did,  and 
from  that  day  the  matter  was  secret  no  longer.  Tlie  President,  on  that  occaaon,  received- 
30 

Hosted  by  Google 

466  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

a  communEcation  from  his  wife,  shortly  before  deceased,  and  in  such  a  way  and  about  sudl 
mattei-s,  as  convinced  him  at  the  outset  that  he  could  not  have  been  imposed  upon,  and 
from  that  time  forth,  up  to  his  recent  death,  he  was  a  firm  beUever  in  the  fact  that  spirit- 
could  return  ani  eommunieate  after  death. 

' '  These  facts  soon  became  known,  and  inquiry  commenced  generally,  not  only  in  the  city, 
but  throughout  different  parts  of  the  country. 

"  When  did  tlie  church  permit  the  enthralled  bemg  to  escape  from  it  without  a  strug- 
gle? A  small  paper  was  started  to  put  down  invesligation  [it  died  after  an  existence 
of  four  months]  by  putting  forth  the  most  consummate  falsehoods  and  denouncing  the  be- 
lievers of  the  spiritual  philosophy  as  enemies  to  God  and  man  ;  devils,  whose  objects  were 
to  overthrow  religion  and  morality,  and  institute  something  terrible,  but  unknown,  m  their 
stead.  The  pulpits  of  the  clergy  teemed  with  the  vilest  abuse,  and  the  Jesuit  Fathers  went 
so  far  as  to  announce  that  any  person  attending  a  circle,  or  permitting  one  to  be  held  in  his 
house,  would  be  denied  the  rites  of  the  Catholic  Church  [absolution  and  communion  after 
confessing]  as  well  as  of  burial  m  consecrated  ground.  They  declared  their  power  to  exor- 
cise  and  piit  down  this  devil  of  Spiritualism,  and  were  determined  to  do  it.  Now  came  the 
trial,  for  the  whole  power  of  the  church  was  defied  ;  many  of  the  clergy  themselves  were 
investigating  secretly,  the  better  educated  class  of  people  were  doing  so  openly,  and  the  cause 
was  spreading  more  and  more. 

"  A  trial  of  strength  at  last  took  place.  A  gentleman,  in  whose  house  was  a  powerful 
medium,  deared  the  fathers  to  exorcise  the  devil,  and  stop  the  rappings  and  other  demon- 
strations. An  altar  was  prepared  and  decked  out  in  the  parlor,  holy  water  sprmtled,  the 
prayers  for  the  exorcism  of  the  devil  read,  incense  burned,  and  every  effort  that  priestcraft 
and  ingenuity  could  devise,  made,  but  it  was  of  no  use  ;  the  rappings  conlmued  during  the 
■whole  performance,  and,  as  if  in  sheer  mockery,  a  small  table  upon  which  a  lighted  candle 
was  placed,  was  upset,  the  candle  describing  a  parabola  in  the  air  as  it  fell,  whilst  no  per- 
son was  ivitliin  six  feet  of  it.  To  the  credit  of  the  clergy  here  [outside  the  Jesuits]  be  it 
said,  that  they  admit  the  phenomena,  and  many  believe  that  good  as  weU  as  evU  mfluenees 
control  it  though  the  greater  portion  call  it  the  work  of  the  devil  They  all,  however, 
recommend  to  thdr  congregations  to  '  leave  it  alone,'  and  not  to  meddle  with  things  they 
know  nothing  about,  or  cannot  understand,  but  leave  the  church  to  grapple  with  it.  Such 
iu-e  their  teachings. 

"The  progress 

is  still  onward,  and  though  its 

y  obstacles  to  encounter  and  overcome,  it  is  sure  and  iviil  triumph.  There  are  at  pres- 
ent over  fifty  circles  in  the  country,  some  one  hundred  known  medioms,  and  probably  as 
many  private  ones,  and  at  least  ten  thousand  sphitual  investigators.  Thisiswonderfulmitself 
to  those  who  know  what  Central  America  is,  and  how  difficult  it  is  for  truth  to  obtain  a 
'bearing  where  the  people  are  taught  never  to  think  for  themselves,  but  leave  the  church  to 
;4o  it  for  them. 

"Fraternally  yours, 

"GUILLEEMO." 

Numerous  letters  from  prominent  dtizens  of  Central  America,  detailing  the 
,rise  and  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  their  state  or  town,  have  been  received  by 
the  author,  and  carefully  verified ;  but  as  the  manifestations  diey  describe  do 
not  present  any  special  features  of  variety  or  interest,  their  insertion  here 
■  would  but  be  needless.  From  the  statistics  furnished  by  these  parties,  how- 
ever we  should  be  disposed  to  rate  the  number  of  Spiritualists  in  Central 
America  at  at  least  twice  tl^e  number,  in  iS66,  to  what  they  were  when  our 
correspondent  wiote  in  1859.  Dr.  Fitzgibbon,  late  Governor  of  Bey  Island, 
'himself  a  strong  Spiritualist  and  medium,  gave  a  very  encouraging  account  of 
:the  cause  in  these  states,  where,  he  affirmed,  hundreds  of  the  native  Indians 
■were  fine  seers  and  natural  mediums,  endowed  with  stronger  and  stranger 
gifts  tlian  any  known  to  Europeans  or  Americans.      He  relates  many  striking 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  467 

incidents  of  circles  held  amongst  the  deep  umbrageous  shades  of  the  wild 
woods,  and  almost  impenetrable  thickets,  in  which  the  presence  of  spirits 
calling  themselves  "L'Espano  Americano"  were  manifest.  Some  of  the  spirits 
mysteriously  brought  stones  from  the  altars  of  the  lost  races,  and  gave, 
through  their  singular,  but  graphic  pantomimic  representations,  distinct  assur- 
ances diat  they  were  the  original  builders  of  these  wonderful  forest  vestiges. 

Other  spirits,  claiming  to  be  a  still  more  ancient  race,  and  insisting  that  they 
were  the  *original  builders  of  all  the  Central  American  cities,  represented 
themselves  through  an  unknown  tongue, — translated  by  the  guardian  spirits 
of  the  mediums, — as  ancient  Phcenicians,  Japanese,  Tartars,  and  Arabs, 
many  tribes  of  whom,  they  said,  penetrated  to  the  American  Continent  from 
the  extreme  north,  across  what  is  now  called  Behring's  Straits,  but  which  these 
spirits  persisted  in  affrihiiigwas,  in  their  day,  part  of  "our  great  ^  land 
globe,"  which  was  broken  hy  ice  seas,  floes,  and  channels,  but  which  was 
perfectly  traversable  by  the  mhabitants  of  what  are  now  deemed  two  sepa^ 
rate  continents 

As  early  as  1854,  Spiritualism  made  its  appearance  on  the  Island  of  Cuba, 
and  as  it  has  since  obtained  a  good  foothold,  even  in  that  land  of  devoted 
and  conservative  Catholicism,  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  note  its  earliest 
manifestations,  as  recorded  through  tiie  correspondents  of  the  Telegraph 
papers. 

The  first  article  of  this  kind  is  headed 

"THE  SPIRITS  AT  HAVANA. 

"  April  \2,  1854. 
"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph : 

"  Dear  Sir,—  In  frequent  conversations  with  our  mutnal  friend,  Mr.  Joseph  T.  Bailey, 
lale  of  Philadelphia,  who  departed  this  life  a  few  weeks  ago  near  Matanzas  on  this  island, 
he  expressed  a  conviction  that  it  would  be  gratifying  to  you  to  hear  of  the  extension  of  the 
spiritual  philosophy,  and  the  vast  field  openmg  for  its  manifestations  among  a  people  so 
diffeient  to  us  in  customs,  language,  and  religion 

"  Being  desirous  to  investigate  and  witness  some  demonstrations  in  Spiritualism,  I  con- 
vened, ill  December  last,  several  friends  at  roy  house  [Mr.  Bailey  as  one],  where,  on  the 
third  night,  after  a  session  of  an  hour  each  time,  we  were  gratBed  and  rejoiced  at  a  re- 
sponse to  our  desires,  ance  which  time  we  have  sessions  in  a  number  of  private  families, 
and  an  accession  of  many  converts  to  the  philosophy ;  but,  unfortunately,  it  is  like  feeling 
in  the  dark,  as  we  have  no  books  in  the  Spanish  language  throwing  light  or  information  on 
the  subject,  and  my  principal  object  in  addressmg  you  at  present  is  to  suggest  that,  if  you 
would  have  translated  the  works  of  Judge  Edmonds  and  TaUmadge,-  it  would  meet  with  an 
extended  demand  throughout  all  Spanish  North  and  South  America,  thus  disseminating 
truth  and  benefiting  humanity. 

"  We  have  obtained,  as  yet,  but  one  healing  medium,  and  one  indifferent  writing  medi- 
um, the  former  a  young  lady,  and  the  latter  a  young  gentleman,  both  members  of  most  re- 
spectable families ;  consequently,  the  manifestations  with  us  have  not  been  of  an  extra- 
ordinary character,  or  such  as  would  be  so  denominated  in  the  United  States,  but  suffi- 
ciently flattering,  considering  the  short  time  om-  attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  subject, 
and  we  confidently  expect  to  be  fiivored  with  something  more  astonishitig. 

"  Although  I  am  fifty  years  of  age,  I  hope  to  live  long  enough  to  witness  much  happi- 
ness from  the  spiritual  intercourse  between  this  and  the  next  sphere. 

' '  Wishing  you  health  and  prosperity,  I  remain  yours  ever  truly, 

"William  Fulton, 
"Proprietor  of  Mansion  House  Hotel." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

"THE  E 

HISTORY  OF  MODERlsr 

i  AND  THE  SPANISH. —TELEGRAPH  PAPERS— APRIL,  1855. 

"  Mrs.  Curds,  rister  to  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Evening  Mirror,  is  at  present  writing 
a  series  of  letters  from  Havana.  From  the  number  which  appeared  itt  the  Mirror  of  the 
2ist  inst     we  e>:tract  the  suT^oined  paragraph  : 

-'"Tbereisconsiderablemtetestfelthereinthesubjectof  spirit  manifestations.  Judge 
Edmonds  stopped  at  our  hotel  when  on  the  island,  and,  just  before  he  left,  had  one  or  two 
dttiDES  in  the  parlor.  I  attended  a  circle,  a  few  evenings  since,  at  Dr.  CaviUo's.  When 
I  entered  the  saloon,  some  of  the  famUy  were  seated  around  the  table,  patiently  waiting  for 
maniiestations.  The  table  at  length  commenced  tipping  in  answer  to  the  questions  pro- 
posed. Spanish  Sph-itualists  bear  a  close  resemblance  to  the  same  class  of  persons  at  home  ; 
and.  although  I  have  great  reverence  for  the  subject,  yet  the  questioning  sounded  so  trivial 
that  it  did  not  tend  to  elevate  the  Spiritualists  in  my  eyes  to  a  level  with  Spnituabsm, 
provmg  that  the  communion  with  the  spirit  world,  although  it  has  assumed  a  some- 
what new  form  in  the  American  movement,  is  simply  the  stream  of  uobrolten  revelation 
flowing  on  from  time  to  eternity.' 

"SPIRITS  IN  CHINA. 
"  Under  this  head  we  find,  in  the  New  York  Tribune  of  May  2Z,  a  communication  re- 
ferring  to  an  article  puUished  in  the  North  China  Hirald,  in  March,  1854.  by  Dr.  Mac- 
gowan,  a  respectable  English  phydcian  long  resident  in  China,  in  which  article  it  was  repre- 
ented  that  spiritual  manifestations,  in  the  form  of  table  tippings,  were  quite  common  m 
and  about  the  city  of  Ningpo,  and  that  the  writer  had  known  of  the  existence  of  said  phe- 
nomena in  that  locality  as  early  as  1S44. 

"  It  was  moreover  represented  that  the  opinions  and  proceedings  of  the  Chinese  Spiritu- 
alists were  quite  similar  to  those  of  their  American  brethren.  But,  desiring  some  more  de- 
finite information  on  this  general  subject,  the  Tribune's  correspondent  had  written  to  Dr. 
Macgowan,  and  received  the  foEowing  reply  ; 

"  '  Ningpo,  China,  February  27,  1857. 
"  'Dear  Sir, My  notes  on  table-moving  and  spiritual  manifestations  in  Chma,  an  ab- 
stract of  which  was  published  m  the  Alia  California  from  Chmese  periodicals,  contain 
nearly  all  that  I  have  to  communicate  on  those  sulgects.  Much  interesting  matter,  as  you 
sorest,  might  beobtained  in  this  country,  on  questions  of  that  description  ;  for,  according 
lo  the  universal  belief  of  the  inhabitants,  and  of  many  foreigners  also,  demons  and  the  souls 
of  departed  men  exercise  ceaseless  influence  on  human  affairs,  and  respond  to  invocations 
duly  addressed  to  them.  But  other  engagements  preclude  me  from  pursuing  these  and 
kindred  psychological  inquiries;  and  as  I  remarked  to  a  learned  German  who  lately  ad- 
dressed me  precisely  as  you  have,  it  Is  desirable  that  =ome  believer  m  these  supernatural 
occurrences  should  undertake  to  write  their  historj 

"'All  the  Roman  Catholic,  and  not  a  few  Protectant  miasionanes  ascribe  to  demoniacal 
i^ency  many  of  the  so-called  supernatural  or  spu-itual  manifestations  that  are  observed  in 
China, 

" '  The  adentific  inquirer  might  then  follow  and  elucidate  the  subject.-  Additional  inter- 
est would  be  given  to  such  mquiries  by  treating  on  the  superstitions  of  Mian-tse,  or  abo- 
ri^nal  tribes,  and  also  on  the  of&dal  aspect  of  geomancyandsupematural  questions. 

"'On  this  last  subject,  the  history  of  the  '  heavenly  teacher,  Taang  Tiense,  hereditary 
high  priest  of  the  Tanists,  alchemists,  or  sect  of  reason,  is  rich  in  material  That  singular 
potentate  has  been  recognized  by  many  succesave  dynasties,  as  enorciser-general  of  the  Em- 
pire. His  palace  is  in  the  adjoining  province  of  Kiang-si,  m  the  prefecture  of  Nankang. 
When  persons  or  palaces  are  possessed  of  maleficent  spirits,  he  is  appealed  to,  and  if  suita- 
bly remunerated,  he  writes  amulets  which  afibrd  immediate  relief;  or,  sometimes  he  dis- 
patches ghostly  b^ffs  for  the  apprehension  of  the  offending  demon,  who  is  at  once  bottled 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  469 

up,  as  all  hurtfiil  spirits  should  be.  I  briefly  allude  to  these  notions  of  the  Chinese,  to  show 
that,  tliough  I  am  unable  to  prosecute  the  inquiries  you  propose,  it  is  not  from  paucity  of 
material  I  should  add  that  table-moving,  as  I  hive  described  it,  is  an  ancient  practice,  not, 
as  you  suppose,  modem. 

"  'Most  truly,  yours, 

"■D.  J.  Macgowan.'" 

We  may  add  to  the  above  that  China  is  not  the  only  oriental  country  in 
which  spiritual  intercourse  has  existed,  in  some  form,  from  remote  antiquity. 
In  Hindostan,  in  Tartary,  and  even  among  the  rude  tribes  of  Kamtchatka,  it 
appears  to  have  been  always  known  in  some  shape ;  but,  according  to  general 
representations  which  we  have  received  from  oriental  lands,  it  appears  that 
spiritual  intercourse  has,  as  it  were,  simultaneously  become  far  more  conspic- 
uous and  signal  than  usual  within  the  last  few  years,  thus  indicating  a  precon- 
certed, providential  arrangement  in  the  interior  world,  to  initiate  some  new 
and  important  dispensation  upon  earth. 

Quite  recently  we  had  the  pleasure  of  conversing  with  an  intelligent  Ger- 
man, who,  witliin  the  last  year,  had  travelled  among  the  Arabs  and  in  the 
Earbary  States,  and  found  a  fully  developed  spiritual  intercourse  everywhere 
remarkably  prevalent  among  them. 

Although  not  directly  bearing  upon  the  subject  of  American  Spiritualism, 
the  following  notice,  appearing  in  so  authoritative  a  journal  as  the  New  York 
Tribune  of  1856,  may  not  be  deemed  out  of  place,  as  a  citation  of  the  vast 
spread  of  the  manifestations  ; 

"SPIRITUAL  RAPPINGS  IN  TURKEY. 

"Constantinople,  March  17,  1S56. 

"  For  more  than  a  year  or  so  past,  news  of  the  turning  tables  has  been  well  known  here, 
and  tried  with  entire  success  by  several  individuals,  young  and  old,  credulous  and  incredu- 
lous, nervous  as  well  as  those  of  strong  frames  and  powerful  nerves,  to  the  utter  amazement 
of  the  spectators.  More  recently,  spiritaal  rappings  have  been  experimentaliied  in  this 
city,  with  equal  success,  and  as  little  understood. 

"An  Armenian  physician.  Dr.  Shishman,  a  pupil  of  the  seminary  of  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Hamlin,  American  Misaonary  of  Bebek,  on  the  Eosphorous,  lately  returned  here  from 
Paris,  where  he  had  gone  to  perfect  his  medical  studies.  While  in  this  capital.  Dr.  S. 
either  heard  of  or  saw  experiments  of  rappings  and  animal  magiieliBm,  and  explained 
the  results  to  some  of  his  countrymen  of  this  place,  much,  no  doubt,  to  their  surprise  and 
curiosity. 

"  Since  bis  arrival,  private  indiwiduals  have  endeavored  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  they 
possessed  the  power  of  magnetism,  and  succeeded  entirely.  One,  a  young  Armenian  lady 
of  Galata,  of  a  very  nervous  temperament,  can  serve  as  a  medium  between  invoked 
spirits  and  human  beings  still  of  this  life.  Startling  as  this  assertion  seems,  the  facts  which 
I  •'"■'1  detail  will  serve  to  support  it. 

"  The  young  lady  in  question  had,  until  recenUy,  a  nervous  indisposition.  She  became 
frequently  attacked  with  hysteria,  and  suffered  much  from  a  feeble  frame.  She  was  placed 
under  Dr.  S.'s  fare,  who  has  succeeded  in  curing  her  almost  entirely.  She  experimented 
with  the  tables  with  extraordinary  success,  and,  at  (he  request  of  the  doctor,  she  consented 
to  make  an  attempt  at  serving  as  a  medium  between  invoked  spirits  and  those  who  choose 
to  ask  for  them.  For  this  purpose  she  seats  herself  near  any  small  circular  table  supported 
by  a  tripod.  She  rests  her  right  hand  upon  this  table,  and  any  person  present  being  de- 
cided to  ask  whether  a  certain  spirit  —  say  of  Napoleon,  Lord  Byron,  or  Mnabeau — will 
respond  to  his  or  her  questions,  makes  the  request  in  an  ordinarily  loud  voice.  If  the 
spirit  is  disposed  to  accede  to  the  reques',  1  knocking  is  distinctly  heard  upon  one  of  the 

Hosiedb,  Google 

47°  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

three  feet  of  the  table.  The  request  must  be  made  in  the  language  which  the  spirit  must 
have  spoken  while  in  this  life 

"Many  of  the  responses  have  filled  all  those  present  with  surprise.  The  incredulous  have 
been  greatly  embarrassed  by  them,  and,  like  myself,  all  feel  that  there  must  be  either  some 
deception,  or  some  result  of  magnetism  thus  brought  into  action,  heretofore  unknown. 

"  Most  of  the  spirits  invoked  have  been  departed  Armenians,  and  consequently  the  language 
^oken  is  the  Armenian,  with  which  I  am  wholly  unacquainted.  What  they  have  been,  and 
still  are,  is  freely  mentioned.  The  spirit  of  an  unele  of  the  young  lady  serving  as  a  medium, 
was  one  evening  invoked,  and  she  had  to  be  cut  off  immediately  from  her  condition  of  me- 
dium, or  she  would  have  fainted,  so  much  was  she  affeeted  by  it.  To  do  this  it  is  only 
--necessary  foe  a  stranger  to  touch  tlje  hand  placed  upon  the  table.  On  Lord  Byron's  spirit 
being  involsed,  the  tappings  on  the  table  were  most  violent,  and  so  alarmed  those  present 
that  the  medium  had  to  be  cut  off  immediately. 

"One  of  the  spirits  has  stated  that  there  are  twelve  persons  in  this  place  who  have  the  fac- 
ulty of  serving  as  mediums.  Some  of  them  ate  known.  One  is  a  married  lady  of  tank, 
who  has  tried  an  experiment  with  eotiie  success,  but,  as  well  from  her  repugnance  as  from 
that  of  her  friends  and  relations,  she  has  determined  not  to  attempt  it  again.  I  would  add 
that  one  of  my  particular  friends,  ayouiig  Armenian  full  of  conscientious  convictions  and  of 
a  probity  and  morality  beyond  all  suspicion,  has  a  brother,  a  priest  at  the  Armenian  College 
of  St  Lazatns  In  Venice,  to  whom  he  is  greatly  attached.  As  an  experiment,  he  asked 
whether  the  'guardian  spirit'  of  tliis  brother  would  manifest  itself  to  him.  It  did  so,  and 
said  that  it  was  no  human  spirit  but  a  'cherubim.' 

"  The  impression  which  these  facts— for  such  they  certainly  aro^ — ^  have  made  in  Constanti- 
nople, is  very  great.  Animal  magnetism  has,  however,  been  practiced  hete  by  some  of  the 
dervishes  fot  many  past  years,  for  the  curing  of  diseases  and  allaying  of  pain.  I  have 
witnessed  this  a  hundred  times,  and  fully  believe  in  its  efficiency.  It  is  nothing  more  than 
manipulation  of  the  parts  affected.  1  verily  believe  that  the  operator  is  wholly  unacquainted 
with  all  magnetism  as  a  science  and  ascribes  it  to  the  superhuman  powers  given  him  by 
AUah,  or  the  prophet,  in  recompense  for  his  jnety  and  constant  mention  or  contemplation 
of  the  name  of  Allah." 

As  the  early  spiritual  journals  made  frequent  mention  of  circles  held  at 
Caracas,  Venezuela,  South  America,  and  a  very  well  written  paper  entitled 
El  Espiritualiste  was  for  a  long  time  published  in  that  remote  terra  incognita, 
our  sketches  of  spiritual  progress  in  the  new  world  would  be  incomplete 
without  some  description  of  the  status  of  Spiritualism  in  that  district. 
The  extracts  are  chiefly  taken  from  the  Spiritual  Telegraph,  whose  editor 
gives  the  following  account  of  the  chief  promoter  of  the  movement  in 
Caracas : 

"SPIRITUALISM  IN  SOITTH  AMERICA. 

"Mr.   S.   Dri^s,  of  Caracas,  S.  A.,  edi  E    Ep      ualiste,  is  now  in  the  city, 

and  gives  us  some  interesting  particulars  of  th    p         m  hey  exist  far  down  towards 

the  equator.     There,  among  foreigners,  and  &  anish  and  Indian  descent, 

a.  spiritual  mtelligence  is  endeavoring  to  mtn  ji   en  e,   and  to  demonstrate  to 

the  common  mind  that  the  seen  and  unsecc    w  an         parated  by  an  impassable 

gulf,  but  flow  iu  together  as  body  and  spin         rming  grand  whole  to  tlie  universe  ; 

and  that  man,  after  passing  from  mortal  aght,  still  lives. 

"  The  Indian  population  of  Venezuela,  Mr.  D.  informs  us,  are  peculiarly  suM.eplible  to 
spirit  influence;  and  as  in  different  countries  the  phenomena  while  the  same  m  fact, 
assume  different  forms,  to  fit  them,  we  may  suppose,  to  the  particular  geniu-.  of  the 
people,  so  in  Caracas  and  its  neighborhood,  the  modes  of  obtaining  manifestations  are  new 
and  peculiar.  " 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  471 

"  The  tables  in  more  common  use  there,  it  appears,  are  round,  and  sustained  on  a  c  tntral 
column  and  three  legs.  Around  the  circumference  of  the  bed  of  one  of  these  is  arranged 
the  alphabet,  and  along  by  the  side  of  the  line  of  letters  a  little  railroad  track,  on  which 
plays  a  car  with  a  pointer.  The  preliminaries  having  been  gone  through,  the  circle  formed, 
and  the  influence  present,  the  medium  lightly  touches  the  car  with  bis  finger,  when  it  starts 
on  its  course,  running  from  one  part  of  the  table  to  another,  and  pointing  oat  tbe  letters, 
which  arc  to  be  woven  into  words  and  sentences,  and  form  a  communication  from  the  in- 
habitants of  the  invisible  world.  Or  if  a  table  prepared  with  rail  and  car  is  not  at  hand, 
the  alphabet  is  arranged  on  the  floor,  when  the  table,  poising  itself  on  two  legs,  oses  one 
of  its  feet  as  a  pointer,  and  thus  demonstrates  a  living  chain  of  connection  between  the  two 

In  1865,  Mr.  Seth  Diiggi 
follows,  to  the  Banner  0/  Light  : 

"MANIFESTAnONS  AT  DEVELOPING  CIRCLES, 

"In  all  the  communications!  have  seen  published  in  reference  to  the  spuritual  philosophy, 
there  is  nothing  like  the  occurrences  which  were  manifested  at  the  Central  Cu-cle  of  Caracas, 
in  past  years.  Some  of  the  facts  were  published  in  a  New  York  spiritual  paper  at  the  time; 
but  tens  of  thousands  who  read  the  Banner  of  Light,  it  may  be  presumed,  never  saw 
those  publications,  and  as  they  may  prove  interesting,  I  take  pleasure  m  furnishing  it  few 
extracts  from  the  records  kept  at  that  time,  as  I  acted  as  scribe 

"Reluming  to  Caracas  after  a  tour  through  the  North,  I  formed  a  circle,  and  selected 
three  persons  to  sit  with  me.  In  twenty  minutes  the  table  lipped  over  upon  my  breast;  and 
we  had  divers  communications  through  this  method,  and  ihat,  too,  witliout  any  developed 
medium. 

"  On  the  tenth  atting,  one  of  our  number,  who  was  an  unbeliever,  saw  figures  on  the 
table,  produced  by  the  invisibles.  At  subsequent  sittings  he  saw  writing  on  the  table  and 
on  the  wall,  which  he  read;  and  soon  after  beheld  departed  spirits  whom  he  had  known  in 
the  flesh. 

"  At  succeeding  circles,  loud  raps  were  produced  in  answer  to  questions ;  and  soon  the 
medium  became  entranced  and  spoke.  We  then  had  many  interesting  communications  from 
our  departed  spirit  friends. 

"  At  one  Mtling  they  manifested  themselves  to  the  medium's  spiritual  eyes,  when  there 
also  appeared  brilliant  letters. 

"My  angel  sister,  Susan,  formed  a  celestial  circle  in  the  spheres  for  the  purpose  of  hold- 
ing communion  with  our  circle,  to  which  new  members  were  added  from  time  to  time.  On 
taking  our  seats  at  the  table,  the  medium,  being  entranced,  would  say,  in  a  loud  voice, 
.'Now  call  over  your  spirit  rolL'  It  bdng  called,  all  the  spirits  present  answered  to  their 
names  by  ^ving  a  loud  rap  on  the  table.  The  number  of  spirits  who  had  been  permitted 
to  jom  the  circle  having  hiereased,  they  were  divided  as  follows :  Ecclesiastical,  nine ; 
military,  nine ;  civic,  eight ;  females,  eighteen ;  making  forty-four  members  on  the  3 1  st  of 
December,  1856,  to  which  number  four  more  were  afterwards  added.  There  was  also  a 
spirit  medical  board,  for  curing  the  sick  through  the  medium.  When  a  new  member  was 
admitted,  it  was  announced  iii  a  loud  voice,  'add  such  a  name  to  your  spirit-list,'  which  I 
at  once  recorded.  As  the  spirit  members  of  the  circle  advanced  to  a  higher  sphere,  it  was 
regularly  announced  in  a  load  voice,  through  the  medium,  and  recorded. 

' '  The  progress  made  by  the  spirits  after  coming  to  our  circles,  was  astonishing ;  and  I 
would  advise  all  Spiritualists  to  sitjn  cncles,  with  or  without  mediums,  to  assist  the  departed 
spirits  who  may  come  for  that  purpose.  They  can  do  much  good,  and  assist  spirits  in  their 
progress  to  the  realms  of  bliss. 

"Seth  Dkiggs. 

"Caracas,  Venezuela,  June  i,  18^5." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

record  signs  of  progress, 

"SPIRITUALISM  IN  VENEZUELA.. —FROM  EL  SPIRITUALISTE. 

"A  German,  having  a  store  immediately  opposite  to  the  archbishop's  palace,  held  a 
conimunication  liy  tipping  the  table,  with  departed  spirits,  when  it  was  spelled  out :  '  Re- 
peat or  you  will  be  damneit.'  This  had  the  effect  to  make  the  man  partially  in.sane.  lie 
commenced  praying  aloud  in  tlie  Spanish  language,  which  he  knew  but  little  of.  The 
archbishop  was  attracted  to  his  balcony,  and,  as  the  friar  says,  was  confounded.  Here 
was  a  Jew,  without  any  religion,  who  was  converted,  and  called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
on  the  Saviour,  and  the  Holy  Virgin,  to  save  his  soul,  in  presence  of  the  archbishop  and 
a  crowd  of  people.  He  repeated  the  Lord's  prayer  and  other  prayers,  in  good  Spanish 
under  spiritual  influence. 

"  Spiritualism  is  malting  headway  in  Caracas  and  in  (he  provinces.  The  church  attempted 
to  stop  it,  but  did  not  succeed 

"There  are  cu-clesin  the  houses  of  the  president,  the  governor,  the  ministers  of  slate, 
and  every  influential  family  b  Caracas.  The  ball  is  rolling,  and  the  great  and  glorious 
cause  is  progressing  with  lightning  speed.  The  dark  vdl  of  superstition  is  being  gradually 
raised  and  the  haven  of  eternal  felicity  is  presented  to  the  view  of  all  who  seek  the  boon. 

"  Our  little  circle  is  greatly  favored  ;  we  are  continually  surroanded  with  spirits  of  the 
highest  order,  who  hover  over  our  spiritual  table,  singing  anthems  and  praises  to  the  Most 
High.  Our  medium  has  had  the  gift  of  seeing  spirits  with  his  natural  eyes  beaowed  upon 
him.  The  time  is  approaching  when  all  sectarian  feuds  will  cease  their  strife,  and  all  man- 
kind will  be  united  as  brothers  and  sisters,  in  one  universal  and  spiritual  church. 

"Seth  Driggs." 

"Caracas,  September  zo,  rS56.  " 

"SriRITUAUSM  IN  VENEZUELA,  1857— CIRCLE  IN  CAKACAS. 

"  J«iy  23- —  The  circle  met,  without  any  visitor  present,  the  medium  bring  influenced 
by  General  Bolivar.  He  made  a  cross  on  the  table,  and  a  shepherd' s  crook ;  then,  pointing 
three  times  in  the  direction  of  the  archbishop's  palace,  and  three  times  in  the  direction  of 
the  president's  house,  he  spoke  of  the  opposition  of  the  church  to  the  great  truths  being  de- 
veloped to  mankind  ;  but,  said  he,  the  bishop  cannot  resist  this  great  principle.     ..... 

"S^itualisra  is  now  progresang  vapidly  in  the  United  States,  also  in  Caracas,  and 
nothing  can  impede  its  progress.     The  table  rose  twice,  indicative  of  the  rising  of  ovu-  faith. 

"  July  27. — The  chcle  met ;  the  table  was  carried  into  a  corner  and  turned  over  on  the 
floor ;  and  bemg  taken  back,  it  moved  ^ain  to  the  same  place  and  tipped  over  ;  and  (his 
was  performed  five  times,  without  our  being  able  to  imagine  the  cause.  The  medium  being 
influenced,  he  pomted  to  the  comer  indicated  and  said,  '  In  that  plaj^  is  interred  the  remams 
of  five  friars,  four  Franciscan  and  one  Dominican  ;  their  names  will  be  given  to  the  circle 
at  another  time,  and  the  truth  can  be  ascertained  by  referring  to  the  records  of  the  church 
of  San  Francisco.  The  spirits  of  the  five  friars  are  all  present  at  this  cttcle  [the  circle  was 
atting  near  where  the  altar  of  a  church  formerly  stood] 

'^  July  iS.^The  medium  being  influenced  by  the  spu-it  of  the  vicar-general.  Doc- 
tor Cordova,  he  spoke  at  large.  Pointing  m  the  dhection  of  the  archbishop's  palace,  he 
said  ;  '  The  scarlet  robe,  the  tinsels,  tassels,  gold  and  diamonds  shall  perish  and  crumble  into 
dust,  and  the  archbishop  shall  fall  Oh  !  how  much  good  he  could  do  if  he  would  investi- 
gate thisdivbeprmdpleandgiveit  his  countenance.  How  spirits  would  rejoice;  but  alas  ! 
his  position  in  the  church  prevents  liini.  He  will  believe,  yea,  he  does  believe,  but  unfor- 
tunately is  precluded  from  manifesting  his  belie£ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM,  473 

"Coming  to  Caracas  as  a  missionary  in  the  spiritual  cause,  witii  but  little  Lope  of  success, 
and  finding  but  one  person  wlio  had  previously  visited  a  circle,  I  added  two  otliers,  and  wo 
commenced  our  sittings.  One  who  joined  as  an  unbeliever  soon  became  developed  as  a 
seeing,  speaking,  and  rapping  medium,  I  have  been  assiduous  in  the  cause,  instructing 
the  living  and  asasting  departed  souls  to  rise  from  darliuess  to  Ught ;  and  my  labor  is  not 
without  its  fruits.  Many  have  come  to  assure  me  that  through  my  instructions  and  advice 
the^  have  ascended  to  the  second  sphere  from  their  dismal  aliode.  Some,  llirough  the 
spirit  manifestations,  have  been  convinced  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  who  did  not  be- 
lieve it  before,  and  have  become  Cbristians,  and  we  have  had  a  great  and  Elorions  revival 
from  ^rit  revelation.  Hundreds  of  families  have  their  spiritual  tables  in  operation,  con- 
verdng  with  their  departed  friends;  and  in  almost  every  case  they  receive  as  correct  an- 
swers as  they  could  through  the  best  developed  medium.  Every  mind  is  inqiuring  what 
this  new  prindple  is,  and  it  is  the  theme  of  conversation  in  every  family. 

"Seth  Dkiggs. 

"Caracas,  August  4,  1S55." 

From  the  above  fragraentSj  some  idea  can  be  formed  of  the  degree  to  which 
peculiar  opinions  and  idiosyncrasies  in  the  media  or  their  local  surroundings, 
influence  the  character  of  the  communications. 

From  the  same  source  we  have  an  account  of  circles  held  at  sea,  and  the 
methods  in  which  certain  media  claim  to  be  instrumental  in  promoting  the 
progress  of  undeveloped  spirits, 

■•  SPIRITUAL  CIRCLES  ON  THE  OCEAN. 

"  On  Isard  the  sckeoner  'y.  L.  Bowman^  Captain  IVooster,  on  a  voyage  fram  Neai 
York  to  Laguayra. 

"Caracas,  September  10,  1857. 

^^  August  II,  1857.  —  Having  in  my  hand,  reading,  a  Spiritual  Telegraph,  I  asked  the 
captain  to  put  bis  band  on  the  table,  when  it  was  promptly  moved.  I  asked  if  the  spirit 
present  knew  what  paper  I  was  reading,  when  an  affirmative  answer  was  given.  I  called 
the  title  of  several  papers,  and  when  the  Telegraph  was  mentioned,  three  tips  of  the  table 
were  given,  indicating  that  to  be  the  paper.  '  Have  you  been  reading  the  Telegraph  with 
me?'  'Yes.'  After  this  I  held  a  circle  every  evening,  commencing  at  sunset,  on  the  deck 
of  the  vessel 

"  August  12.  —  The  spirit  of  a  sailor  appeared,  as  he  declared  himself  to  be ;  and  being 
interrogated,  said  he  toot  pleasure  in  boarding  vessels  at  sea,  to  see  what  was  going  on  ; 
that  he  was  in  the  dark  spheres,  and  desired  to  progress  to  higher  and  brighter  ones.  I 
admonished  him,  and  gave  the  usual  advice  and  instruction,  which  he  promised  to  obey. 

"August  18. —  The  spirit  of  Jose  Manual  Graw  identified  itself;  he  was  a  lawyer  in 
Cumana;  he  trusted  his  ultimate  salvation  to  the  priest  and  absolution;  but  on  making 
the  exchange  of  worlds,  found  such  a  presumption  on  the  part  of  the  Roman  priesthood  to 
tie  erroneous ;  he  was  conagned  to  the  second  sphere,  where  he  still  remsuns. 

','  On  bemg  asked  how  he  came  to  seek  me  out  on  the  ocean,  he  said  that  he  knew  I  was 
a.  Spiritualist  by  the  spiritual  papers  I  sent  to  Cumana,  which  he  had  read  there.  He  had 
sought  me  out  to  hold  communion  with  me. 

"August  19. — An  old  lady  idenlified  herself  as  the  wife  of  Buenaventura  Dommguez,  whom 
I  knew  twenty-seven  years  ago  in  Laguayra.  She  said  she  died  at  the  age  of  seventy-one 
years,  at  Rio  Caribes,  in  the  province  of  Cumana,  and  was  in  the  fourth  sphere ;  that  her 
husband  had  subsequently  died,  and  was  in  the  third  sphere ;  .that  the  spiritual  papers  I 
sent  to  Rio  Carit>es,  which  she  heard  read,  induced  her  to  come  ajid  see  me 

"August  21. — A  spirit  purporting  to  be  the  daughter  of  the  Hon.  Charles  Warner,  At- 
torney-General at  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  appeared  at  tlie  circle,  and,  on  being  interrogated, 
said  slie  never  knew  me ;  tliat  her  father  received  a  spiritual  pamphlet  from  me,  by  which 
Ehe  knew  I  was  a  Spiritualist,  and  had  sought  me  out  to  hold  coramunion  with  the  earth; 

Hosiedb,  Google 

474 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

that  she  was  happy  in  the  fourth  spliere.  On  llie  same  evening,  appeared  the  spirit  of  > 
daughter  of  Pedro  Espinoso,  also  of  the  Island  of  Trinidad.  She  said  her  father  had 
received  from  me  a  spiritual  pamphlet,  by  which  reason  she  had  sought  to  hold  communion 
with  roe ;  that  she  was  in  the  sixth  sphere. 

"^a^K  26.  — A  spirit  manifested  itself;  said  it  was  from  a  dark  sphere.  I  asked  if  it 
came  to  obtdn  advice,  and  desired  to  be  restored  to  light  and  happiness.  It  said  'No.'  On 
being  further  interrogated,  it  said,  it  was  a  man ;  had  made  the  exchange  of  worlds  at  the 
age  of  twenty-seven  years,  and  that  was  nineteen  years  ago ;  that  he  neither  iielieved  in  God 
nor  in  heaven ;  that  he  believed  in  the  Devil ;  that  he  was  sent  to  prevent  the  spirits  from 
the  dark  spheres  coming  to  the  circle  for  advice,  as  by  that  means  they  would  escape  from 
the  dark  spheres.  I  advised  him  to  repent  and  be  saved ;  to  change  his  miserable  abode,  and 
seek  favor  from  the  God  of  truth  and  love,  and  be  eternally  happy.  He  answered  m  the 
negative.      I  then  commanded  hrai  in  God's  name  to  depart,  which  order  he  obeyed. 

"  August  27.—  The  same  spirit  took  possession  of  the  table,  and  said  his  object  was  to 
prevent  communications  with  other  spirits,  when  I  commanded  him  to  depart.  Soon  after 
the  table  was  tipped  again ;  on  inquiry  it  was  said  a  spirit  of  the  third  sphere  was  present ;  but 
after  a  few  questions,  I  discovered  the  deception,  and  challenged  the  spirit  as  to  whether  he 
was  a  truthful  spirit.  He  answered,  '  No ; '  that  he  was  the  same  spirit  who  appeared  the 
previous  evening.  I  asked  him  why  he  came  with  a  lie  in  his  mouth.  He  said  that  was 
his  profession,  and  I  commanded  him  again  to  depart.  Again  the  table  was  tipped ;  and  on 
inquiry  the  spirit  said  he  was  a  relative  of  one  present,  and  inhabited  the  seventh  sphere. 
On  inquiry  as  to  bis  family,  etc.,  he  was  detected  as  a  lying  spirit,  and,  being  challenged, 
said  he  was  the  same  spirit  I  had  twice  driven  away  that  night.  I  mquired  of  him  about 
his  master,  the  Devil ;  he  said  he  wa.s  the  Devil  himself,  and  had  been  four  thousand  years 
in  darkness.  Many  questions  were  asked,  and  prompt  answers  were  given.  When  any 
question  suited  his  taste,  he  gave  a  shake  of  the  table,  indicating  that  he  was  laughing. 
Finding  there  was  no  use  in  driving  him  away,  and  as  we  were  approaching  the  harbor  of 
Laguayra,  he  was  left  to  enjoy  the  victory  he  had  gained  in  keeping  possession  of  the 
table. 

"  It  is  a  source  of  great  satisfaction  to  me  to  find  that  by  the  little  leaven  I  put  mto  the 
meal  of  a  dark-minded  and  superstitious  people  two  years  ago,  the  whole  is  fast  becoming 
leavened.  Several  spiritual  circles,  formed  by  the  most  intellectual  men  of  Caracas,  are  in 
successful  operation.  Four  different  pamphlets  have  been  issued  from  the  press  by  native 
Spintualists,  containing  their  convictions  and  experiences  in  Spiritualism  ;  the  last  has  just 
been  issued  and  distributed  gratuitously  by  Dr.  Michelena,  a  professor  of  medicine  in  the 
college  of  Caracas.  The  doctor  remarks  that  it  is  imputed  to  magnetism,  but  m^netism 
can  not  make  the  table  talk. 

"  For  my  part,  I  have  not  ceased  in  the  good  work.  Whether  on  the  mountdn  top,  the 
scorching  pldn,  or  on  the  ocean  wave,  I  call  around  me  those  who  are  willing  to  be  in- 
structed, and  point  out  the  way  for  them  to  enjoy  the  blessings  of  those  mansions  eternal  in 
the  heavens,  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest. 

"Seth  Driggs." 

For  the  sake  of  giving  in  this  history  every  phase  of  the  spiritual  move- 
ment, we  reprint  extracts  from  Mr.  Driggs's  diary;  but,  whilst  cordially  in- 
dorsing his  sincerity,  and  vouching  for  the  genuine  character  of  the  mani- 
festations he  records,  we  have  no  sufficient  evidence  as  yet  to  base  a 
reliable  theory  on  the  philosophy  involved  in  his  communications.  They 
must  be  received  rather  as  specimens  of  the  spiritual  existence,  which  is  still 
held  in  thrall  by  the  influence  of  a  Roman  Catholic  atmosphere,  than  as  a 
type  of  the  spheres  whose  numerical  positions  are  so  accurately  indicated. 

Before  closing  our  account  of  the  zeal  with  which,  for  many  years,  Seth 
Driggs,  the  editor  of  El  Spiriiualtste,  labored  for  the  advancement  of  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  .SPIRITUALISM.  473 

<^use,  we  niust  jiotice  how  liis  good  service  was  received  by  tliose  ecclesias 
tical  magnates  to  whom  the  spirits  at  his  seances  made  such  frequent  allusions. 
In  the  fall  of  1857,  there  appeared  a  document  which  was  widely  circu- 
lated throughout  Venezuela,  and  other  portions  of  Central  America,  of  which 
the  following  is  tiie  style  and  title  : 

"  We,  Doctor  John  Hilary  Boset,  by  the  Grace  of  Gad  and  of  the  Holy  Apostolic  See, 

Bishop  of  Merida  and  Maracalbo  :  To  our  venerable  clergy  and  the  rest  of  the  faithful 

of  our  Diocese,  greeting  and  benediction. 

'"But  there  were  faUe  prophets  also  among  the  people,  even  as  there  shall  be  faJ^e 
teachers  among  you,  who  privily  shall  bring  in  danmable  heresies,  even  denjing  the  Lord 
tliat  bought  them,  and  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction.' —  St.  Peler,  II.  ii.  i. 

"  When  we  read  in  the  El  Catolicisimo,  published  at  Bogota,  that  the  sect  of  Spiriliialists, 
this  new  monster  let  loose  from  the  lower  regions  to  attack  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  had 
unfurled  its  banner  in  oiir  continent,  and  especially  in  Caracas,  the  Capital  of  our  republic, 
we  could  do  nothing  less  than  apprehend  the  defection  it  might  create  amongst  the  faithful 
placed  under  our  charge.  More  sore  still  is  our  affliction  at  this  movement,  on  beholding 
theimpudencewithwhich  they  have  dared  to  transmit  to  us  by  last  post  a  printed  pamphlet 
styled  :  '  Spiritualism,  or  Manifestations  made  by  the  Spirits  of  the  Celestial  Spheres;  with 
instructions  how  to  communicate  with  the  spirits  of  the  departed.  With  an  extract  of  the 
manifestations  made  by  the  spirits  of  the  central  circle  of  Caracas.  By  Seth  Diiggs.  With  an 
Appendix;' — and  thus  ako,  Nos.  i  and  2,  of  the  El  Spiriiualisle,  the  seals  of  which  en- 
graved upon  the  covers  appear  to  be  by  the  same  author,  and  hence  we  have  reasons  to 
stand  aghast  at  the  spread  already  of  these  pernicious  writuigs,  throughout  the  wide  circuit 
of  our  diocese. 

"  Without  pretending  to  inquire  what  was  the  object  of  the  person  in  addressing  these 
writmgs  to  us,  we  still  cannot  but  lament  the  aberration  of  tlie  human  ramd  in  embracing 
the  new  yeligious  sect  which  Protestantism  has  vomited  forth  in  its  agony  to  fascmate  with 
the  mystery  of  darkness,  and  the  cunning  of  the  serpent,  the  minds  of  the  thoughtless  and 
novelty  seekers. 

"  It  has  appeared  to  us  impossible,  beloved  diocesans,  that  persons  of  sound  judgment 
could  believe  in  the  supposed  revelations  of  the  spirits  that  manifest  themselves  through 
instruments  so  unsuitable  as  turning  tables.  Therefore,  we  repeat,  it  seems  to  us  impossible 
that  credit  can  be  given  by  any  sensible  person  to  all  the  jargon  and  nonsense  of  said  writ- 
ings, which  contain  nothing  substantial  or  real. 

"  It  matters  not,  however,  in  what  way  such  an  invention  is  cooadered.  It  will  always 
have  for  its  author  the  father  of  lies ;  it  will  always  be  m  antagonism  to  the  creed  of  our 
Holy  Mother,  the  Church;  it  will  always  stain  the  purity  of  Christian  morals;  and,  conse- 
quently,  should  be  spumed  and  looked  upon  with  horror  by  all  the  fdthful  who  wish  to 
remamin  the  true  faith  and  wrestle  manfully  against  the  artifices  of  heresy." 

It  will  be  percieved  from  the  last  passages  that  the  reverend  shepherd  not 
only  pronounces  against  tlie  commimications  of  Seth  Driggs'  spirits,  but 
undertakes  to  define  what  such  "an  invention  "  will  always  be;  to  wit, 
"  always  have  for  its  author  the  father  of  lies,"  etc.  Unwittingly,  however, 
he  communicated  some  excellent  facts  concerning  the  progress  of  the  said 
heresy,  alluding  to  its  manifestations  in  Germany  thus : 

"Such  is  the  opinion  of  Cardmal  Reisach,  Bishop  of  Germany,  respecting  these  taming 
tables  and  the  supposed  revelations  through  which  persons  of  distinction  have  yielded 
themselves  up  to  such  a  dangerous  curiosity ;  the  last  few  months  we  have  passed  amon" 
you  have  been  of  bitterness  and  pain.  We  say  it  with  aU  the  afiliction  that  the  Catholic 
religion  inspires.  These  writings,  supremely  deplorable,  do  not  come  from  God  smce  they 
contradict  the  doctrines  of  the  Church ;  they  are  a  web  of  deceptions,  errors,  and  supersti- 
tions ;  and  those  who  engage  in  such  publications  ought  to  be  excluded  from  the  church,  unless 

Hosted  by  Google 

476  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

they  obey  her  by  abandoning  the  infernal  works  that  they  had  undertaken.  Those  who 
Had  and  believe  in  such  communications,  and  speak  and  write  in  defence  of  them,  or  in 
any  other  way  coimlenance  then),  not  enly  commit  a  most  grievous  sin,  and  become  guilty 
of  rebellion  against  the  church,  but  also,  to  render  their  situation  more  deplorable,  the 
absolutions  they  receive  are  null,,  if  they  do  not  renounce  l>eforehand  such  superstitions." 

After  some  passages  of  sympathy  with  the  afflicted  shepherd  of  Germany, 
the  reverend  Hilary  goes  on  to  show  that  the  Bible,  in  all  its  declarations,  but 
especially  in  the  writings  of  Moses  and  St.  Paul,  is  death  on  SpirituaUsm ;  and 
in  confirmation  of  this  he  cites  numbers  of  passages  from  these  authors, 
which  the  impudent  El  Spirttualiste  had  with  equally  good  efi'ect  made  use 
of  to  prove  tiie  truth  of  Spiritualism.  The  fact  that  the  arguments  on  both 
sides  took  biblical  audiority  for  their  widely  dissevered  opinions,  was  just  as 
awkward  in  this  case  as  it  has  proved  in  tlie  instance  of  thousands  of  other 
rival  beliefs,  every  one  of  whom  cites  biblical  texts  in  support  of  their 
opinions,  all  and  each  of  which  evidently  operate  as  sucessfully  for  the  de- 
fence of  a  sect  as  for  its  downfall. 

We  need  scarcely  remind  the  experienced  combatant  in  this  kind  of  war- 
fare that  Moses  and  Paul  prove  just  as  much  for  Seth  Dri^s,  as  Bishop 
Hilary,  and  the  latter  did  not  gain  much  by  quoting  them  or  tend  to  the 
edification  of  any  one  able  and  willing  to  read  the  audiors  for  themselves. 
The  gist  of  the  learned  bishop's  fears  and  palpitations,  however,  may  not  in- 
aptly be  judged  of  by  the  sentence  which  follows  : 

"As  the  communication  with  spirits  is  the  foundation  of  the  new  sect;  as  it  denies  the 
existence  of  hell  for  the  eternal  punishment  of  the  wicked,  of  heaven  for  the  eternal  glory' 
of  the  blessed,  the  moment  the  one  and  the  other  are  judged  after  death ;  and  lastly,  as  it 
considers  the  church  a  purely  human  institution  that  should  be  reformed  by  this  new  revela- 
tion,  and  should  admit  to  her  altars  all  whom  she  has  excluded,— we  shall  therefore  continue 
to  refute  these  errors." 

After  a  long  and  elaborate  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  to  suit  his  pur- 
poses, arranged  precisely  on  the  same  plan  as  Seth  Driggs  used  to  prove  all 
his  arguments,  and  from  the  same  source,  the  bishop  sums  op  by  falhng  back 
on  his  own  authority  in  the  following  sentences ; 

"Despise  those  errors  which  we  have  pomted  out  to  you  as  the  bitter  consequences  of 
the  insolent  temerity  with  .which  some  men,  relymg  on  thdr  own  wisdom,  as  tGe  Holy 
Council  of  Trent  saj-s,  have  dared  to  interpret  the  sacred  Scriptures,  misconstruing  their 
meaning  to  enforce  erroneous  opinions.  Leave  off  reading  the  spiritual  pam^AIets  and 
periodicals,  because  the  doctrines  and  practices  which  they  leach  are  heretical,  scandalous, 
contrary  to  the  faith  and  destructive  of  good  morals,  under  the  penalty  established  by  law 
against  those  who  read  prohibited  books  or  practice  immoral  actions.  Remain  closely 
united  around  the  centre  of  the  Catholic  unity,  Imked  within  the  Roman  See,  and  in  the 
person  of  the  successor  of  St.  Peter  and  Vicar  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth.  Be  firm  m  the 
doctrines  of  the  Catholic  church.  Listen,  in  her  name,  to  the  admonitions  ot  your  legiti- 
mate pastor,  so  that  you  may  not  pass  for  Gentiles  and  publicans,  as  all  unfaithful  and  dis- 
obedient mmds  are  who  do  not  respect  bis  deciaons.  Finally,  preserve  unalterable  the  faith 
of  your  forefathers,  m  order  that  this  being  meritorious  along  with  the  exercise  of  charity 
and  good  works,  jou  may  receive  as  your  reward  the  crown  of  glory,  which  God  has  re- 
served  for  those  who  serve  him  fcuthfully  in  this  life. 

"These,  our  letters,  shall  be  published  in  aU  the  churches  of  our  diocese,  the  first  holiday 
after  receipt,  and  shall  be  copied  in  the  book  ot  government. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  477 

"  GLven,  agned,  and  countersigned  in  our  Episcopal  palace  of  Merida,  this  2d  day  of 
February,  1S47. 

[Signed]  "  John  Hilary,  Bishop  of  Merida. 

"  By  order  of  the  Most  Illustrious  and  Keverened  Bishop. 

[Signedj  "Thomas  Zerpa,  Prebendary  Secretary:' 

It  is  only  necessary  to  ftdd  that  the  effect  of  this  church  thunder  was  to 
diminish  the  public  display  of  Spiritualism  somewhat,  amongst  that  portion 
of  Bishop  Hilar/s  flock  who  placed  in  his  keeping  the  key  to  their  thoughts, 
souls,  and  consciences,  whilst  it  increased  the  curiosity  of  the  rest  tenfold, 
induced  a  wide  spirit  of  investigation,  a  rich  crop  of  spiritual  believers,  some 
secession  from  the  ranks  of  the  dogmatical,  but,  effete  authority  of  a  human 
conscience  keeper,  and  aided  to  plant  Spiritualism  in  Venezuela  on  a  footing 
which,  in  the  private  arteries  of  society,  and  especially  amongst  independent 
thinkers,  can  never  be  defeated  by  future  generations  of  Bishop  Hilarys. 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

'I  RITUALISM       IN       SOUTH       AMERICA       AND       THE       TERRI- 

:  stilly  Djghl,  when  slumber's  cha 
■its,  pure  9.%  light,  are  hoVting  £e 

Spirit  Circles  in  th    T 
Okegon —  Amongst    h    R 
Contrasted, 

In  those  vast  tract     fh    A  n  Continent  known  as  "the  Territories," 

the  belief  in  spirit  d  the  familiar  methods   of  telegraphy 

through  circles,  is  ab  m      n  as  in  the  thickly  populated  States  of 

the  East. 

Amongst  the  rem       a    I  ly  savage  wilds  of  Idaho  Territory,  for  ex- 

ample, circles  have  b  n  q  f  quently  held  by  the  miners  and  others, 
who,  having  witness  d  m  h  g  f  Spiritualism  in  their  far  distant  homes, 
delighted  to  renew  d  m  n  with  those  beloved  beings,  who  seemed 

to  form  such  a  precio  link  b  ti  n  the  memory  of  dear  absent,  as  well  as 
departed,  friends. 

In  a  mining  camp  f  rm  d  am  gs  the  mountains  of  Owhyee,  one  of  the 
best  trance  mediums  of  the  a^,!,,  p  1  aps,  was  to  be  found  in  the  person  of  a 
Mr.  Wilson,  a  young  man  of  feeble  health  and  frail,  sensitive  temperament. 
Mr.  Wilson,  becoming  attached  to  one  of  the  explorers  in  these  wild  regions,  . 
succeeded  in  locating  for  his  friend  some  valuable  silver  "leads"  through 

Hosled  by  Google 

478  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

spirit  guidance,  besides  protecting  himself  and  parly  from  dangers  inntimer- 
able.  In  times  of  sickness,  peculiar  to  those  trying  scenes  of  pioneer  life, 
Mr.  Wilson  was  influenced  by  a  wise  and  beneficent  doctor  to  administer 
such  remedies  as  were  special  to  the  country,  and  rapidly  curative  in  their 
effects. 

The  invaluable  service  that  such  gifted  persons  can  render  in  such  scenes, 
cannot  be  overestimated,  and,  in  Mr.  Wilson's  case,  stimulated  the  miners  to 
hold  circles  in  every  direction,  and  resulted  in  planting  Spiritualism  firmly  in 
thhse  wilds,  and  in  developing  many  excellent  mediums.  Always  corres- 
ponding, in  some  degree,  with  the  character  of  its  surroundings,  especially  in 
respect  to  soil  and  climate,  mediumship  in  those  minii^  lands  seemed  to  be 
chiefly  directed  towards  the  discovery  of  metallic  "leads,"  and  like  certain  of 
the  Mexicans  famous  for  this  gift,  the  mediums  of  the  Territories  became  pe- 
culiarly successful  in  locating  mines,  as  well  as  in  perceiving  spiritually  the 
quality  of  healing  herbs  and  valuable  mineral  springs. 

They  were  touching,  yet  singular  scenes  to  look  upon — the  mining  camps 
—  on  a  pleasant  autumnal  night,  when  the  day's  toil  was  ended,  the  evening 
meal  consumed,  and  a  few  lonely  men,  with  semi-barbarous  and  pseudo-civil- 
ized exteriors,  lay  stretched  around  the  pine  or  brush  fires,  lighted  to  dissipate 
the  chill  effects  of  the  thickly  descending  dews,  and  scare  off  the  savage 
dwellers  of  the  neighboring  caves  and  forests.  There  they  lay  beneath  the 
light  of  the  quiet  stars,  dreamily  looking  into  the  shining  eyes  of  heaven,  or 
gazing  fixedly  on  one  of  those  fiery  blossoms  of  the  skies,  thinking  of  the  far- 
away beloved  ones,  who  might  be  gazing  at  the  same  object,  at  that  very  same 
moment  of  time ;  eye-beams  and  thoughts  meeting,  yet  loving  hearts  and  out- 
stretched hands  severed  by  such  vast  and  almost  illimitable  wastes  of  earth  I 

The  past,  with  its  tender  regretful  memories  ;  the  present,  with  its  awful 
solitude,  intense  loneliness,  and  almost  utter  desolation;  the  future,  with  its 
dim  uncertainties,  remote  hopes,  ever  crowding  fears,  and  heavy  toil ! 

Such  thoughts  as  these  too  often  occupy  the  minds  of  such  exiles  ;  but  as 
they  muse,  suddenly  the  silence  is  broken  by  a  low  tap,  tap,  sounding  in  muf- 
fled yet  distinct  tones  upon  the  rough  pine  bench  that  serves  them  for  a  table. 
In  an  instant  all  is  changed — they  listen  breathlessly;  again  those  low  muf- 
fled sounds  are  heard,  responded  to  by  the  eager  cry,  "  The  spirits  are  come ! " 
Then  they  spring  to  their  feet,  sweep  off  in  haste  and  partial  shame  the  cards, 
cups,  and  bottles  with  which  the  table  is  garnished,  carefully  wipe  it  clean, 
hastily  arrange  themselves  on  rough  wooden  stools  around  it,  and  spre^jl  ont 
their  toil-blistered  hands  upon  its  surface,  whilst  one  of  their  party,  clearing 
his  throat,  leads  ofli  in  a  sweet,  manly  tone,  ringing  like  a  Bethlehemite  hymn  in 
the  still  night  air,  with  an  old  familiar  "  song  of  Zion."  B 
is  ended,  every  voice  has  joined  in  tlie  rough  but  harmo  ru        d 

the  hymn  is  done,  the  table  is  rocking  with  mysterious  g 

rythm  of  the  air  is  beat  by  a  viewless  knocker  with  tha  g 

that  assures  them  the  vast  sol  t  des  are  peopled  with  d 

sympathetic  witnesses.     And  then  con  mences  the  int  g 

and  answer,  so  full  of  news  of  home  abse  t  fhends,  old 
ise  and  prophecy,  hope,  warn    g  k  nd  enco  ragement,      d 

These  are  the  moments  that  tra    form  those  desert  w 
angel-peopled  heaven,  and  plant  the  blosson  s  of  pure  lo  h  p 

in  place  of  the  noisome  weeds  which  bear  the  evil  fruit  of  gamblmg,  drmking^ 
fevered  rage,  intoxicated  madness,  and  not  unfrequently,  red-handed  murder. 
Such  is  the  effect  of  the  spirit  circle  upon  the  miner  that  it  converts  this  most 
lawless  and  desperate  of  human  beings  into  a  gentle,  aspiring,  and  holy  man. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  479 

And  such  are  some  of  the  uses  of  Spiritualism  in  these  wild  western  terri- 
tories. 

Many  of  the  "  cities"  or  central  points,  where  embryo  states  are  already 
seed-like  planted,  have  been  visited  by  mediums,  taking  the  long  and  perilous 
jotirneyover  the  plains,  in  preference  to  the  ocean  route  to  California.  Mr.  J. 
V.  Mansfield,  Mrs.  C.  M.  Stowe,  and  Mrs.  Laura  de  Force  Gordon,  the  two  last 
eiiiinently  distinguislied  as  trance  speakers,  have  each  passed  over  tliis  route, 
and  done  much  to  illuminate  the  darkness  of  the  desert  with  their  inspired  ut- 
terances and  glad  tokens  of  spirit  presence.  And  thus,  amidst  earth's  wildest 
wastes  and  desert  places,  the  mighty  hosts  of  spirits'  marching  feet  are  heard, 
and  altars  are  already  erected  for  the  worship  of  that  God  who  "  is  a  spirit." 

Those  Americans  who  have  visited  the  singular  dwellers  of  the  desert,  call- 
ing themselves  "  Latter  Day  Saints,"  or  "  Mormons,"  report  that  phenomenal 
gifts  are  abundantly  poured  out  upon  them,  though  their  methods  of  invoking 
spiritual  aid  and  presence  differ  from  liiose  of  the  Eastern  States.  Amongst 
the  "Mormons"  resident  in  California  and  Nevada,  many  excellent  spirit 
mediums  are  to  be  found,  especially  in  the  direction  of  prophecy  and  healing. 
They  claim  that  these  gifts  are  communicable  by  the  old  apostolic  mode  of 
laying  on  of  hands,  and  affirm  that  they  have  received  their  gifts  from  the  im- 
position of  hands  on  the  part  of  their  "elders." 

In  British  Columbia,  Spiritualism  partakes  of  the  same  erratic  spontaneity 
as  that  manifested  in  the  Territories  and  mountain  mining  camp  ;  but  in  the; 
large  cities  and  villages  of  Oregon,  the  coinmunion  exhibits  the  same  phases, 
and  has  passed  through  much  the  same  experiences,  as  those  which  character- 
ize  otlier  States  of  the  Union. 

Many  distinguished  mediums  are  to  be  found  in  Oregon ;  and  one  from  the 
town  of  Portland,  a  Mrs.  Butler,  visiting  San  Francisco,  displayed  gifts  of  me- 
diumship  in  the  direcfion  of  test,  trance,  and  clairvoyance,  not  excelled  by 
any  in  America.  The  method  of  control  exerted  in  tlie  case  of  Mrs.  Butler, 
was  somewhat  peculiar.  She  was  generally  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  a  poor 
boy  calUng  himself  "  Jack,"  who,  it  seemed,  had  lived  a  few  years  on  earth,  a 
friendless,  homeless,  vagabond  life,  unclaimed  by  kindred,  and  untrained  by 
kindness.  Yet  this  poor  forsaken  lad  was  endowed  with  so  much  native 
goodness  of  heart,  kindness  of  disposition,  and  apt  wit,  that  when  he  entered 
the  spirit-world,  forced  out  of  the  mortal  form  by  neglect  and  destitution,  he 
became  an  apt  scholar  of  kind  ministering  spirits,  and  was  trained  to  fulfil  his 
broken  earthly  mission,  and  live  out  his  mortal  destiny  by  performing  the  part 
of  a  "medium  spirit,"  in  the  new  and  beautiful  communion  between  the  two 
worids.  When  influencing  "his  medium,"  as  he  called  Mrs.  Butler,  he  dis- 
played many  of  the  characteristics  of  his  earthly  career,  but  withal  so  much 
of  shrewd  intelUgcnce  derived  from  his  improved  condition  in  the  spheres, 
that  he  was  a  universal  favorite  at  Mrs.  Butler's  circles,  where,  entranced  by 
him,  she  would  move  around  amongst  her  sitters  and  accurately  describe  thetr 
spirit  ftiends,  repeat  their  histories,  anecdotes  of  then  earth-lives  ;  give  a  great 
variety  of  ingenious  tests  of  identity,  and  often  end  by  diagnosing  and  pre- 
scribing for  the  various  complaints  of  those  who  surrounded  her. 

Besides  this  excellent  medium,  Oregon  was  favored  with  many  others  of 
rare  endowments  and  valuable  phenomenal  powers.  Mr.  W.  G  Lawson,  a 
lawyer  residing  in  the  city  of  Salem,  in  writing  to  the  Banner  of  Light,  in 
1S60,  thus  describes  the  character  of  Spiritualism  in  Oregon: 

"Oregon  for  many  years  has  been  developing  mediums,  and  distributing  (he  literature  of 
Spirinialism.     I  estimate  the  number  of  Spiritualists  at  about  one-fifth  of  the  population 

Hosted  by  Google 

480  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

that  can  vote.  There  are  two  societies  in  the  State  doLng  well.  But  our  greafest  progress 
is  in  private  circles,  I  venture  to  state  it  as  a  fact,  that  ei-ery  one,  once  known  as  a  frec- 
thinlter,  and  all  who  do  not  belong  to  5ome  orthodox  cliureh,  are  now  confirmed  Spiritual- 

"  There  is  more  individuality  of  purpose  and  character  here  iJian  in  older  places.     Every 

one  thinks  for  himself,    Crosdog  the  wide  plainsseemstohavemidened  thevision 

God  is  no  longer  seen  so  small  as  he  looked  from  the  family  pew  in  the  old  cl:iirch  comer  at 
home  in  the  old  states.  The  orthodox  ministers  of  this  State  do  not  meet  with  much  suc- 
cess in  attempting  to  stem  the  lidai  wave  which  bears  onward  the  new  faith.  They  rely 
npon  scaring  their  flocks  with  the  cry  of  "  Ware  Devil  I '  but  men  and  women  who  have 
escaped  the  sav^es,  or  braved  the  perils  of  the  plains,  or  the  great  seas,  can  no  longer  be 

frightened  by  thehootings  of  owls,  or  spiritual  "bugaboos." In  this  city 

of  Salem,  a  society  called  the  "Friends  of  Progress"  was  organized  last  suminer  with  atiout 
eighty  members.  It  holds  meetings  every  Sunday  evening  at  the  court  house.  Lecturers 
are  selected  from  amongst  the  members,  and,  so  far,  we  have  had  splendid  lectures  right  from 
amongst  ourselves,  and  discovered  talents  unsuspected  before. ' ' 

A  stil!  more  encouraging  account  of  Spiritualism  in  Oregon  was  published 
in  \h&  Banner  of  Light  ior  1867,  written  by  a  Mr.  C.  A.  Reed,  a  well-known 
and  esteemed  Spiritualist  of  Salem,  who  speaks  of  the  cause  as  follows  : 

"  Many  years  ago,  say  in  1853,  the  seeds  of  Spiritualism  were  sown  here,  and  manifesta- 
tions occurred  all  over  the  country. To-day  I  may  venture  to  affirm  that 

nearly  one-half  the  people  are  believers  in  the  essential  doctrines  of  Spiritualism."    .... 

Mr.  Reed  then  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  usual  opposition  which  the  progress  of 
the  cause  called  forth  from  the  bigoted  and  ignorant,  especially  in  the  ranks  of 
the  press  and  clergy.  He  also  speaks  most  enthusiastically  of  the  impetus  which 
the  faith  received  from  the  visit  and  lectures  of  several  distinguished  Eastern 
speakers,  amongst  whom  he  makes  honorable  mention  of  Mr.  Benjamin 
Todd,  a  brave  eloquent  and  fearless  lecturer,  and  Mr.  C.  M.  Stowe,  whose 
welcome  ministrations  called  forth  many  grateful  and  affectionate  testimoni- 
als from  the  citizens  of  Oregon,  amongst  whom  the  sweet  little  lady  won 
golden  opinions. 

Mrs.  Ada  Hoyt  Foye,  the  celebrated  test  rapping  medium,  also  visited 
Oregon,  and  brought  hundreds  of  sceptics  into  the  faith  by  her  wonderful  and 
convincing  public  tests,  through  rappings  and  the  selection  of  ballots,  etc. 

Dr.  Bryant,  the  renowned  healer  by  the  imposition  of  hands,  also  visited 
Oregon ;  and  we  cannot  omit  quoting  Mr.  Reed's  account  of  his  valuable 
ministrations  in  that  State  ; 

"  Dr.  J.  P.  Btyant,  the  wonderful  healer,  has  also  been  here,  I  will  not  undertake  to 
enumerate  all  the  remarkable  cures  wrought  during  his  few  days'  viat  in  Salem. 

"From  the  moment  of  his  arrival  until  his  departure,  his  office  was  thronged  with  the 
sack,  many  of  whom  were  cured  and  ail  benefited." 

Mr.  Reed  here  sets  forth  a  list  of  die  cures  effected  by  Dr.  Bryant,  together 
with  a  description  of  the  parties  and  their  maladies,  also  with  the  names  of 
several  witnesses;  but  we  must  reserve  these  details  for  a  future  work 
on  "healing  mediums." 

We  consider  it  a  part  of  our  history,  however,  to  quote  the  following  noble 
record,  which  tells  its  own  story,  of  die  benevolent  operator  and  his  great 
spiritual  gift: 

"In  behalf  of  the  ladies' benevolent  society'  of  the  'friends  of  progress,'  we  beg  leave  to 
tender  to  Dr.  Bryant  our  sincere  thanks  for  kindly  donating  to  this  society  the  enlire  pro- 
ceeds of  a  collection  taken  at  the  close  of  his  able  lecture,  delivered  at  the  court  house,  in 
this  city  (Salem)  last  Friday  evening;  and  we  would  assure  the  doctor,  that  out  best  wishes, 
will  ever  attend  his  beneficent  kbors  in  healing  the  aek,  causing  the  blind  to  see,  tlie  deaf 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  481 

to  hear,  and  the  lame  to  walk ;  and  may  heaven's  richest  blessings  be  as  abundant,  as  his 
deeds  of  charity  have  been  wide  and  universal  to  earth^s  afflicted  children. 
[Signed] 

"Mrs.  L.  Reed,         1 

Mrs.  J.  E.  Clark,    \  C^mmitUi. 
Miss  L.  E.  Moore,  \ 
Mrs.  LaNDLETtE,  Secretary. 
"Sai.eh,  Oregon,  September,  1867." 

Before  closing  our  account  of  Spiritualism  in  these  remote  parts  of  the 
new  world,  a  few  sketches  of  the  movement  in  connection  with  the  unfortunate 
and  now  fast  disappearing  tribes  of  the  "aboriginal"  people  of  the 
American  continent,  may  not  be  deemed  out  of  place. 

Their  destiny,  it  is  not  our  piupose  to  treat  of  Mysterious  in  their  origin, 
inscrutable  in  their  relation  to  that  supreme,  and  so  called  "overruling" 
"justice"  that  seems  to  have  sanctioned  the  enormous  wrongs  they  have 
sustained,— it  is  certain  that  such  wrongs  can  only  end  in  their  utter  degra- 
dation and  final  disappearance  from  die  face  of  the  earth.  And  yet,  the 
light  which  has  revealed  the  mysterious  issues  of  human  destiny,  and  rent  the 
veil  in  twain  which  once  hid  from  man  the  glorious  realities  of  immortal  life, 
proves  to  us,  that  all  which  human  cruelty  and  wanton  injustice  can  perpe- 
trate against  the  unhappy  red  man,  is  Hmited  to  the  fleeting  moments  of  earthly 
existence.  Here,  and  here  a.lone,  the  white  man  triumphs.  It  is  different 
"  over  there."  The  motives,  the  opportunities,  and  the  use  which  each  one 
has  made  of  the  highest  light  which  each  one  has  been  gifted  with,  irrespective 
of  color,  race,  or  artificial  culture, — these  .will  determine  the  status  of  the 
white  conquerer  and  the  red  victim,  and  Spintuahsm  proves  it 

From  the  spheres,  in  this  new  dispensation  the  white  man  and  the  red 
alike  can  and  do  return  to  earth.  They  come  on  a  mission  of  mmisCry 
common  to  both;  and  it  is  a  glorious  indication  of  the  bright  tr in sfigu ration 
which  death  effects  in  our  human  weaknesses  and  vices,  to  find  that  the  red 
man,  whose  highest  earthly  virtue  is  revenge  and  who  accordmg  to  the 
short-sighted  policy  of  human  calculations  might  reasonably  be  expected  to 
return  in  the  spirit  of  an  avenger  for  the  intolerable  wrongs  his  race  has 
endured,  almost  invariably  performs,  in  the  modern  spiritual  movement,  the 
high  and  blessed  function  of  the  benehcent  Healer  He  who  has  been  vio 
lently  thrust  out  of  life  by  the  ruthless  hand  of  his  conqueror,  comes  back, 
heaping  coals  of  fire  on  his  enem/s  head,  by  deeds  of  mercy,  and  inspirar- 
tions  of  love,  kindness,  blessings,  and  healing. 

Indian  spirits  play  a  prominent  and  most  noble  part  in  the  Spiritualism, 
of  America.  Nearly  every  medium  is  attended  by  one  of  these  beneficent 
beings,  guiding,  counselling,  protecting  them,  and  using  their  pecuUar  knowli 
edge  of  herbs,  plants,  and  earthly  productions,  to  suggest  rare  and  invalua^ 
ble  medicaments  for  the  cure  of  disease.  What  a  comment  on  the  princi- 
ples and  practices  of  Christianity  does  this  phase  of  Spiritualism  present ! 
Hapless  ignorant  beings,  nay,  whole  tribes,  that  have  been  despoiled  and 
dieated  by  Christian  cupidity,  out  of  land,  home,  and  life  itself,  now  seem  to 
be  the  most  prominent  of  all  the  returning  spirits,  in  practically  illustrating  the 
lesson  which  the  Christians  so  glibly  teach  and  so  wantonly  falsify  by  their 
deeds,  namely,  to  "overcome  evil  with  good,"  and  forgive  those  who  knmv 
not  what  diey  do.  It  is  one  of  the  strangest  and  most  instructive  of  les- 
sons—  this  relation  between  the  white  man  and  the  spirit  of  his  "savage 

The    Indian   mocks  the  Christian   missionary,  by  scornfully   repudiating^^ 

Hosted  by  Google 

^82  HISTORY  OF  MODERTT 

the  gentle  theories  of  Christian itj;,  and  urges  the  teachings  of  his  forefathers, 
which  deem  vengeance  for  injuries  the  virtue  of  the  brave ;  but  no  sooner 
does  he  become  a  spirit,  than  he  practically  adopts  the  neglected  duties  of 
true  Christianity,  and  by  deeds  of  love  and  mercy  shows  the  white  man  how 
to  prove  tlie  truth  of  his  creed.  Death  is  in  his  case  the  angel  of  transfigu- 
ration. We  have  denied  him  all  rights  and  privileges  in  his  and  our  father's 
heritage  on  earth :  what  mortal  hand  can  bar  him  out  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  to  which  we  may  not  unduly  affirm  he  has  pressed  in  before  us? 
We  repeat,  that  among  the  healing  mediums,  Indian  spirits  are  ever  deemed 
the  most  sucessful  of  operators.  Doubtless  the  nomadic  and  smiply  natural 
life  which  these  poor  children  of  the  forest  lived  on  earth,  has  instructed 
them  in  the  peculiar  virtues  and  manifold  forms  of  healing  balm  that  the 
earth  generates  in  her  bosom. 

Besides  these  healing  spirits,  it  appears  that  many  of  the  once  powertul 
and  renowned  chiefs  amongst  the  redmen,  delight  to  work  out  a  new  and  beau- 
tiful mission  for  themselves,  in  guarding  and  protecting  the  toilmg  medmms 
through  whom  the  truths  of  Spiritualism  are  disseminated.  They  attend  the 
circles  also,  and  perform  vast  feats  of  physical  strength,  for-which  it  is  alleged 
their  strong  magnetic  spiritual  bodies  are  eminently  fitted. 

Thus"BlackHawk,"  "Osceola,"  "King  Philip,"  "Red Jacket,"  "Logan, 
and  other  renowned  "braves"  are  familiarly  known  as  the  leaders  of  spirit 
bands  at  drcles,  where  the  most  wondeful  phenomena  and  shrewd  intelli- 
gence have  been  exhibited  under  their  influence.  The  services  rendered  by 
those  spirits  to  dieir  media,  would  in  many  instances  form  a  touching  and 
remarkable  history  of  occult  power  and  beneficence. 

To  the  warnings,  guidance,  and  protection  of  a  mighty  war  spirit  calling 
himself  "Arrow-head  the  terrible,"  the  author  has  been  indebted  for  services 
only  to  be  comprehended  by  those  who  have  experienced  a  similar  spiritual 
guardianship.  ...      ,. 

Amongst  our  future  records  of  phenomena,  mediumship,  and  spirit  healing, 
several  instances  of  Indian  Sphitualism  will  he  found,  but  the  tithe  of  this 
truly  Christian  ministry  cannot  be  told.  Many  noble  and  distinguished  In- 
dians both  male  and  female,  claun  to  see  and  hold  converse  with  the  spirits 
of  departed  friends  and  kmdred ,  and  the  faith  in  immortality,  and  the  pres- 
ence and  ministry  of  ancestral  spirits  as  guardians  to  mortals,  might  well 
put  to  shame  the  cold  and  unfaithful  materialism,  even  of  many  professmg 
churchmen.  ■.    .      ■ 

But  there  is  another  ^lew  of  Ind  an  Spiritualism  and  a  darker  side  to  the 
picture  which  it  is  equally  instructive  and  necessary  to  consider ;  and  this  we 
shall  now  present  to  the  reader  ivith  all  the  candor  die  subject  requires. 
Whilst  it  is  admitted  that  indn  duals  no  less  than  whole  tribes  of  this  abong- 
inal  people,  profess  to  hold  commun  on  with  the  -spirits  of  the  departed, 
there  is  a  still  wider  field  of  Indian  Spiritualism  occupied  by  beings  of 
an  unknown  and  doubtful  character  and  mixed  up  with  rites  and  phenomena 
,of  a  strange,  occult,  and  repulsive  character 

The  red  Indian  invokes  other  spirits  than  the  wuls  of  ancestors,  and  his 
"history  bears  witness  of  phenomena  which  find  no  parallel  or  analogy 
amongst  the  records  of  modem  Spmtualism  The  poems  of  Bryant,  Whittier, 
jind  Longfellow,  contain  vi\id  descnptions  of  the  spiritual  faidi  of  the  red  In- 
dian, and  the  "  Hiawatha'  of  the  latter  especially,  abounds  with  elaborate 
deaaiptions  of  die  belief  and  practices  of  the  Indian  in  reference  to  Spint- 
uafisni. 

"X^  following  matter-of-fact  details  are  at  once  the  most  complete  and 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  483 

authoritative  we  can  select  from  a  vast  amount  of  testimony  on  this  interesting 
subject. 

The  author  has  in  her  own  experience  realized  the  correctness  of  the  writer's 
descriptions,  but  as  his  narrative  is  a  personal  one,  and  he  himself  is  a  gentle- 
man for  whose  truthfulness  and  integrity  we  can  fully  vouch,  we  prefer  to 
quote  his  own-words,  than  mar  the  history  by  changing  the  form  of  its  simple 
and  graphic  details.  The  narrative  was  written  by  Alexander  Henry,  who  was 
made  a  captive  at  the  massacre  of  the  garrison  at  Macinac,  during  the  French 
and  Indian  wars  of  1759,  ^"*^  ^^  taken  from  a  work  on  Indian  captivity,  by 
Drake.  The  scene  took  place  at  the  Sault  St.  Marie,  where  a  message  had 
just  been  received  from  Sir  William  Johnson,  inviting  the  Indians  to  Fort 
Niagara,  to  conclude  a  peace. 

"  The  occasion  was  one  of  loo  much  magnitude  to  be  trusted  to  the  decision  of  mere 
human  knowledge  and  discretion,  hence  preparations  were  made  for  solemnly  invoking  and 
consulting  the  Great  Turtle.  The  first  thing  to  be  done,  was  the  building  of  a  large  house, 
or  wigwam,  within  which  was  placed  a  species  of  tent  for  the  use  of  the  priest,  and  recep- 
tion of  the  spiriL  The  tent  was  formed  of  moose-skins,  hung  over  a  framework  of  wood. 
Five  poles,  of  diflTerent  species  of  timber,  about  ten  feet  high,  and  eight  inches  in  diameter, 
were  set  in  a  circle  of  about  four  feet  in  diameter.  The  holes  made  to  receive  them  were 
about  two  feet  deep,  and  the  pillars  bemg  set,  the  holes  were  filled  up  again  with  the  earth 
which  had  been  dug  out.  At  top,  the  pillars  were  bound  together  with  a  circular  hoop  or 
girder.  Over  the  whole  of  this  edifice,  by  way  of  roof,  were  spread  moose-sltins,  covering  it 
at  top  and  around  the  sides,  and  made  fast  with  thongs  of  the  same,  except  on  one  side  where 
a  part  was  left  un&stened  to  permit  the  entrance  of  the  priest.  The  ceremonies  did  not 
commence  until  the  approach  of  night.  To  give  light  within  the  house,  several  fires  were 
kindled  around  the  tent.  Nearly  the  whole  village  assembled  in  the  house,  myself  amongst 
the  rest. 

"  It  was  not  long  before  the  priest  appeared,  almost  in  a  state  of  nudity.  As  he  ap- 
proached the  tent,  the  skins  were  lifted  up  so  as  to  permit  of  his  entrance,  which  he  effected 
by  creeping  in  on  his  hands  and  knees.  His  head  was  scarcely  inside,  when  the  edifice 
massy  and  firmly  built,  as  it  has  been  described,  b^an  to  shake,  and  the  skins  were  no 
sooner  let  fall,  than  the  sounds  of  numerous  voices  were  heard  beneath  them  ;  some  yelling, 
some  barking  like  dogs,  some  howling  like  wolves ;  and  m  this  horrible  concert  were  mingled 
screams  and  subs,  as  of  despair,  anguish,  and  the  sharpest  pain. 

"  Articulate  speech  was  also  uttered  as  if  from  human  lips,  but  in  a  tongue  unknown  to 
any  of  the  audience.  After  some  time  these  confused  and  frightful  noises  were  succeeded 
by  a  deathlike  stillness,  and  now  a  voice  not  heard  before,  manifested  the  arrival  of  a  new 
character  in  the  tent.  This  was  a  low  and  feeble  voice,  resembling  the  cry  of  a  young 
puppy.  The  sound  was  no  sooner  distmguLshed,  than  all  the  Indians  dapped  their  hands 
for  joy,  exckdming  that  this  was  the  chief  spirit,  the  Turtle,  '  the  spirit  that  never  lied.' 
Otber  voices,  which  they  had  distinguished  from  time  to  time,  they  had  previously  hissed, 
realizing  them  as  belonging  to  evil  and  lymg  spirits  which  deceive  mankind.  New  sounds 
came  from  the  tent.  Doringthespace  of  half  an  hour,  a  succession  of  songs  were  heard,  m 
which  a  diversity  of  voices  met  the  ear. 

"  From  his  first  entrance  till  these  songs  were  finished,  we  heard  nothing  in  the  proper 
voice  of  the  priest ;  but  now  he  addressed  the  multitude,  announcing  the  presence  of  the 
Great  Turtle,  and  the  spirit's  readiness  to  answer  to  such  questions  as  were  proposed.  The 
questions  were  to  come  from  the  chief  of  the  village,  who  was  silent,  however,  until  he  had 
pot  a  large  quantity  of  tobacco  into  the  tent,  introducing  it  into  the  aperture.  This  was 
a  sacrifice  otfered  to  the  spirit,  for  spirits  are  supposed  by  the  Indians  to  \x  as  fond  of 
tobaeeo  as  themselves.  The  tobacco  accepted,  he  desired  the  priest  to  inquire  whether 
or  not  the  English  were  preparing  to  make  war  upon  the  Indians,  and  whether  or  not 
there  were  at  Fort  Niagara  a  large  number  of  EngUsh  Uoops. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

484  HISTORY  OF  MODERN- 

"  These  questions  having  been  put  by  the  priest,  the  tenl  instantly  shooli,  and  for  some 
minutes  after,  it  continued  to  work  so  violently  tliat  I  expected  to  see  it  levelled  with  the 
ground. 

"Allthiswaa  a  prelude,  asl  supposed,  to  the  answers  to  be  given,  but  a  terrific  cry  an- 
nounced with  sufficient  intdligibility  the  departure  of  the  Great  Turtle.  A  quarter  of  an 
hour  elapsed  in  silence,  and  I  waited  impatiently  to  see  what  would  be  the  ne^t  incident  of  the 
scene.  It  consisted  in  the  return  of  the  spirit,  whose  voice  was  again  heard,  and  who  how 
deUvereda  conlinued  speech.  The  language  of  the  Great  Turtle  Uke  that  which  we  had 
heard  before,  was  wholly  unintelligible  to  every  ear,  that  of  the  priest  excepted,  and  it  was 
not  therefore,  until  the  latter  gave  us  an  interpretation,  which  did  not  commence  until  the 
spirit  finished,  that  we  learned  the  purpose  of  this  extraordinary  communication.  The 
spirit,  as  we  were  nowinformed  by  the  priest,  had,  (/«r(H^  iiJo^J-^"^.?,  crossed  Lake  Huron, 
and  proceeded  to  Fort  Niagara,  thence  to  Montreal  At  Fort  Niagara  he  had  not  seen 
many  soldiers,  but,  on  descending  the  St.  Lawrence  to  Montreal,  he  had  found  the  river  ful 
of  boats  filled  with  soldiers,  in  numbers  like  the  leaves  of  the  trees.     He  had  met  them  01 

y  up  the  river  coming  !■ 

ir  with  the  Indians.     The  chief  asked  again,  If 

the  Indians  visit  Sir  WUliam  Johnson,  will'  they  be  received  as  friends  ? '  Tlie  spirit' s 
answer,  interpreted  by  the  priest,  was,  "Sir  William  Johnson  will  fill  their  canoes  with 
presents;  blankets,  kettles,  guns,  powder,  shot,  and  large  barrels  of  rum,  such  as  the 
stoutest  Indian  cannot  carry,  and  every  man  will  return  to  his  house  in  safety.' 

"At  this  the  transport  was  universal,  and  amidst  a  loud  clappmg  of  hands  every  voice 
exclmmed,  '  I  will  go,  I  will  go  too  ! '  ■     j       - 

"Questionsofpublicinteresthavmgbeenresolved,  individuals  were  now  permitted  to  m- 
quire  for  absent  (Hends  and  the  fate  of  those  who  were  sick.  Amid  the  general  inqui^tiveness, 
1  yielded  to  my  own  anxiety  for  the  future,  and  having  first,  like  the  rest,  made  a  present  of 
tobacco,  I  inquifed  whether  I  would  ever  agam  reviat  my  native  country. 

"  The  tent  f^iook  as  usual,  and  the  question  being  put  by  the  priest,  was  answered  from 
the  spirit  thus :  That  I  should  take  courage  and  fear  no  danger  ;  nothing  would  happen 
to  hurt  me  and  I  should  in  the  end  reach  my  friends  and  country  in  safety. 

"The  Great  Turtle  continued  to  be  consulted  till  near  midnight,  when  the  crowd 
dispersed  to  their  respective  lodges.  I  was  on  the  strict  watch  during  the  scenel  have 
described,  to  detect  the  particular  contrivance  by  which  it  was  effected,  but  I  came 
away  wholly  unable  to  discover  anytbmg." 

The  result  of  the  expedition  is  stated  in  Drake's  history  to  have  confirmed 
in  every  particular  the  promises  made  by  the  "  spirit  that  never  lied  A 
note  attached  to  this  account  by  the  writer,  informs  ns  that  M.  pe<-hatn- 
plain  has  writtenan  account  of  a  similar  expedition  to  the  one  described, 
which  may  be  seen  in  Charlevoix's  MUtoire  de  la  Nouvelle  France. 

This  scene  took  place  amongst  the  Algonqums  and  Hurons.  Carver, 
the  Indian  traveller,  witnessed  a  similar  one  among  the  Christinaux.  In  each 
case  the  general  features  are  the  same. 

The  following  is  an  account  furnished  to  the  Telegraph  papers  by  Governor 
Tallmadge.  It  is  a  letter  from  his  friend  the  distinguished  scholar,  junst, 
and  writer,  Chief  Justice  Larrabee,  of  Wisconsin.    . 

Tudee  Larrabee  is  an  earnest  and  honored  Spmtualist,  hence  Governor 
Tallmldge  felt  no  scruple  in  making  extracts  from  his  correspondence  for 
the  benefit  of  a  spiritual  paper. 

EXTRACT  OF  A  LETTER  FROM  CHIEF  JUSTICE  LARRABEE,  TO  GOVERNOR  TALI. 
■^  MADGE.  OF  WISCONSIN. 

^'  I  was  conversing  last  week  with  Mr.  John  Du  Bay.  whom  perhaps  you  know.  He  has 
been  among  the  Indian  tribes  aU  his  life,  and  was  ^ent  to  the  American  Fur  Co.  for  many 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  485 

years.  He  toM  me  BOrae  facts,  which,  show  that  converse  with  beings  of  another  world  has 
been  very  coniaion  among  the  Indians.  He  said  that  on  several  different  occasions,  lie  had 
seen  a  '  medicine-man '  construct  three  lodges,  by  placmg  jioles  in  the  ground  and  then,  cover- 
ing them  with  deer-shins,  forming  small  tents  or  wigwams  which  would  just  conlaia  one 
person  in  a  sitting  poslure.  These  tents  were  placed  about  two  tods  apart ;  in  one  the 
'medicine-man'  placed  his  moccasins,  in  another  his  leggings,  and  got  into  the  middle  one 
himself.  Then  any  Indian  who  wished  to  converse  witli  a  departed  'bravo'  would  ask  his 
questions ;  immediately  the  llu-ee  lodges  would  commence  swaying  from  side  to  side,  as  if 
shaken  by  some  one  from  within,  and  voices  would  be  heard  issuing  from  one  or  other,  and 
often  from  all  three  lodges  at  the  same  time. 

"  These  sounds  were  only  intelligible  to  the  'mediclne-maii,'  who  would  underlake  to 
translate  them.  Du  Bay  says  that  he  has  taken  hold  of  these  lodges  frequenliy,  and  exerted 
all  his  strength  to  stop  their  motions,  but  in  vain ;  that  he  has  then  lifted  the  skins,  and 
ascertained  that  there  was  no  one  Inside  to  cause  their  motions 

"Du  Bay  also  related  to  me  some  instances  of  clairvoyant  power  eiercised  by  those 
medical  men.  He,  many  years  ago,  arrived  at  a  trading  post  on  the  head  waters  of  the 
Wisconan,  and  expected  to  meet  there  another  trader  from  a  more  Northern  post  on  Lake 
Superior.  He  waited  several  days  in  vain,  when  a  'medicine-man'  proposed  to  ascertam 
when  he  would  arrive.  Seating  himself  on  the  ground,  he  covered  his  head  with  his  blanket, 
and  after  remaining  there  for  some  minutes,  arose  and  said :  '  To-morrow  the  clouds  will 
cover  the  sky,  but  when  the  sun  is  about  to  set,  you  will  see  a  clear  space,  and  in  it  the  sun. 
Then,  if  you  will  look  at  yonder  pomt  of  land,  on  the  oppoate  side  of  the  lake,  you  will  see 
the  trader  commg.'  The  next  day  was,  as  predicted,  cloudy  until  sunset,  when  the  clouds 
lifted,  and  the  sun  appeared.  Du  Bay  watched  the  point  indicated,  but  no  trader  was  to  be 
seen.  He  turned  to  the  'medicine-man'  and  b^an  to  ridicule  him.  But  the  man  only  re- 
plied, '  1  will  see  i'  when,  attingdown  as  before  for  a  brief  period,  and  then  riang  to  his  feet 
he  said,  '  In  five  minutes  you  will  see  him.'  '  Within  that  time,'  said  Du  Bay,  '  the  trader 
actually  appeared,  and  soon  reached  the  post.' 

"Judge  Larrabee  concludes  his  sketch  of  those  Indian  rites  by  saying :  'I  do  not  now 
recollect  to  have  read  or  heard,  however,  that  the  Indian  believed  he  should  in  spirit  ever 
revisit  his  old  home,  and  converse  with  those  left  behind.' 

The  following  interesting  account  of  the  fanaous  "  Wau-ciius-co,"  is  given  by 
Mr.  Johnson,  the  talented  author  of  many  valuable  works  on  American  In- 
dian life  and  customs,  described  from  his  own  personal  observations.  Tiie 
article  here  quoted  was  written  for  the  Detroit  Daily  Tribune,  of  which 
Mr.  Johnson  was  an  esteemed  correspondent : 

"In  my  previous  letter  I  enumerated  the  different  powers  exercised  by  the  Indian 
'  Ches-a-kees.' ,  In  addition  to  those  named,  is  the  power  of  influencing  the  mind  of  an  In- 
dian at  a  distance  for  good  or  evil.  This  power  was  frequently  exercised  to  the  destruction 
of  wealth,  also  in  cases  of  rivalship  between  warriors,  hunters,  and  lovers.  They  claimed 
that  the  miiuence  of  the  mind  or  will,  could  be  put  upon  material  things,  such  as  guns,  traps, 
etc.,  and  it  was  only  through  counter  spiritual  influences  that  the  charm  or  spell  could  be 
dissipated. 

"  The  charm  they  used  upon  women  was  also  very  powerful.  No  young  warrior  was 
without  his  love-sack,  consisting  of  a  weasel-sltin  containing  the  love-powders  prepared  by 
great  medicine-men.  A  pinch  of  this  powder  placed  upon  the  clothes  or  hair  of  any  girl 
they  loved,  could  not  be  redsted.     They  would  pine,  and  follow  the  enchanter,  as  gentle  as 

Hosiedb,  Google 

486  HISTORY  OF  MODERKT 

"  ClIES-A-KEE. 

"  Wau-chus-co  was  a  noted  Ches-a-kee,  a  dairvoyant,  who  died  in  the  year  1S40,  on 
Round  Island,  near  Maeinac.  He  had  for  ten  years  previous  to  his  death  led  a  most  ex- 
emplary Christian  life,  and  was  a  communicant  of  Ihe  Presbyterian  church  then  on  this 
island,  up  to  the  time  of  his  death, 

"Translations  of  his  statements  respecting  some  portions  of  liLs  life,  I  furnished  to  Mr. 
Henry  Schoolcraft  some  years  ago. 

' '  A  short  time  before  his  death  I  paid  him  a  visit.  '  Come  in,  come  in,  N'osis'  [my 
grandson],  he  said.  After  being  seated  and  our  pipes  lit,  I  said  to  him,  '  Ne-me-tho-miss, 
[my  grandfather],  '  you  are  now  very  old  and  feeble,  and  cannot  expect  to  live  many  days ; 
now  teH  me  the  truth,  who  was  it  that  moved  your  Ches^a-hee  lodge,  and  who  was  it  that 
spoke  when  you  were  practising  your  art  ?  '  A  pause  ensued,  when  he  replied  :  '  Nosis,  you 
being  in  part  of  my  nation,  I  will  tell  all  the  truth;  I  know  i  must  soon  die.  You  must 
know  that  I  fasted  ten  days  when  I  was  a  young  man,  in  compliance  with  a  custom  of  my 
jtribe  ;  and  whUe  my  body  was  feeble  from  long  fasting,  my  thinking  mind,  soul,  or  spirit  m- 
Icreased  in  its  power.  It  appeared  to  embrace  a  vast  extent  of  country  in  its  vision.  While 
I  was  thus  thinking,  animals,  some  of  frightful  shape  and  size,  monstrous  snakes,  serpents, 
and  birds  of  great  variety  appeared,  and  addressed  me  in  human  language,  proposing  to  be 
my  guardian  spirits.  Whilst  my  thinking  mind  embraced  those  various  movmg  forms,  a 
superior  intelligence  directed  me  to  select  one-of  the  bird  species  spbits,  resembling  the 
kite  in  looks  and  form.  Thisspirit  conversed  with  me,  and  told  me  to  call  upon  him  in 
time  of  need  and  he  would  aid  me.  Soon  after,  my  grandmother  brought  me  food.  I  arose 
and  did  eat. 

"  'The  first  time  I  ever  Ches-a-keed,  was  on  a  war  expedition.  We  had  gone  towards 
Chicago,  The  occasion  was  urgent,  and  our  chief  was  afraid  that  our  foes  would  attack  us 
unawares,  and  we.  were  also  destitute  of  proviaons. 

"  '  Our  chief  incessantly  urged  me,  and  finally  I  consented.  Having  prepared  myself,  I 
entered  the  Ches-a-kee  lodge,  and  the  instant  presence  of  the  spirit  was  proved  by  the  vio- 
lent rocking  to  and  fro  of  the  lodge.  "  Tell  us  ;  tell  us  i  where  are  our  enemies  ?  "  tried 
the  chief  and  warriors. 

"  'Soon  the  vision  of  my  thinking  mind,  or  spirit,  embraced  a  large  extent  of  country 
which  I  had  never  seen  before.  Every  object  was  plainly  before  me.  Our  enemies  were 
there  in  their  villages,  unsuspicious  of  danger.  Their  acts  and  conversation  were  made 
known  to  me.  Game  abounded  in  another  direction.  All  this  I  told.  Next  day  we  pro- 
cured food  in  abundance,  and  a  few  days  afterwards  a  doien  scalps  graced  our  return  to  the 
cross  village.  I  exerted  my  powers  frequently  amongst  my  tribe,  and  to  satisfy  the  doubt- 
ful, permitted  them  to  tie  me  as  they  thought  proper.  They  would  sometimes  place  men 
in  the  Ches-a-kee  lodge,  which  would  then  commence  shaking,  indicating  the  presence  of 
the  spirit.  ..JFhe  cords  with  which  I  was  tied  would  then  drop  from  my  limbs.  Frequently 
I  I  have  seen  a  bright  light  at  tlie  opening  at  the  top  of  the  lod^e  and  strange  faces  were 
I  viable  to  me.     The  words  of  the  spirits  were  audible  t    tl      p    t  t  tside,  but  none 

could  understand  them  but  me. 

"  '  In  the  year  1815  the  American  garrison  at  this  p    t      pected  sel  from  Detroit 

with  supplies  for  the  winter.  A  month  had  elapsed  b  d  th  t  n  of  her  expected 
arrival,  and  dreadful  apprehensions  were  entertained  of      ff  nd    I  rvation,  for  she 

"  '  Finally,  the  commanding  officers,  through  the  trad  r=  lied  p  me  to  exercise  my 
art.  I  consented,  and,  after  due  preparation,  I  entered  the  Ches-a-kee  lodge,  which  was 
surrounded  by  Indians  and  whites.  I  had  no  sooner  commenced  shaking  my  shoshegwon 
[rattle],  and  chanting,  than  the  spirits  arrived.  The  rustling  noise  they  made  through  the 
air  was  heard,  and  the  sound  of  their  voices  was  audible  to  all.  The  spirits  directed  my 
thinking  mind  or  soul  toward  the  south  end  of  Lake  Huron,  and  it  lay  before  my  viaon 
with  its  bays  and  islands.     The  atmosphere  appeared  hazy,  like  ouv  Indian  summer.     My 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  48; 

vision  temuiated  a  Uttle  bdow  the  entrance  of  the- St.  Clair  River.  There  lay  the  vessel 
disabled,  and  the  sailors  were  busy  in  repairing  her.  My  sensations  told  me  that  they  would 
be  ready  in  two  days,  and  that  in  seven  days  the  vessel  would  reach  Macmac  by  the  south 
channel  at  that  time  an  unusual  route.  I  told  all  this  to  the  inquirers.  On  the  seventh 
day  the  vessel  hove  in  aght  by  the  south  channel,  and  the  captain  of  the  schooner  cor- 
roborated  all  I  bad  said. 

"  '  Nosis,  I  am  now  a  praying  Christian,  and  my  days  on  earth  are  few  ;  I  have  told  you 
all  the  truth. 

"  '  I  possessed  a  power  which  I  cannot  explain  or  describe  to  you.  I  never  attempted  to 
move  the  lodge.  I  held  communication  with  supernatural  beings,  or  thinking  minds,  or 
spirits  which  acted  upon  my  mind,  or  soul,  and  revealed  to  me  such  knowledge  as  I  have 
described  to  you. 

"  Tlie  foregoing  is  merely  a  slight  sketch  of  the  power  exhibited  by  this  remarkable  and 
half-civilized  Indian.  "The  brief  biography  existing  of  him,  which  has  never  yet  come 
before  the  public,  is  both  interesting  and  wonderful. 

"William  M.  Johnson. 

"August  6,  1859-" 

Such  are  some  of  the  phases  in  which  spirit  communion  exhibits  itself 
amon'^t  the  people  whom  we  call  "savage,"  and  whom,  in  companson  to 
our  more  advanced  civilization,  we  may  justly  call  so;  and  yet,  does  our 
knowledge  of  the  occult  and  invisible  forces  in  nature  furnish  us  with  any 
clue  to  the  mystery  of  these  astounding  manifestations  or  the  power  by 
which  die  unlettered  "savage"  can  avail  himself  of  a  knowledge  which  all 
our  control  over  the  elements  fails  to  compete  with?  In  a  word,  the  red 
Indian  can  do  what  we  can  neither  explain  nor  imitate.  The  few  quotations, 
from  most  reliable  authorities,  which  our  space  has  allowed  us  to  make,  arc 
but  a  tithe  of  the  evidence  which  travellers  amongst  those  people  furnish  us 
with,  and  which  the  author's  own  experience  no  less  than  that  of  many  of  her 
personal  friends,  amply  corroborates.  The  medicine  and  Ches-a-kee  men 
here  mentioned,  are  neither  rare  nor  phenomenal  characters,  but  simply  rep- 
resentative men  aniongst  their  tribes  and  nation.  And  where  lies  the  clue  to 
these  mysteries?  It  is  not  the  results  nor  the  value  of  the  power  here  dis- 
played which  arrests  our  attention,  but  die  subject  of  dee]  est  interest  is  its 
existence  at  all,  connected,  as  it  would  seem,  with  a  realm  of  being  ot  which 
even  the  modem  Spiritualist,  in  orderly  communion  with  the  souls  of  1  s 
ancestors,  can  give  no  explanation,  furnish  no  .analogous  testimony 

The  peculiar  character  of  the  force  exerted  by  the  migiaan  die  nature 
office,  and  origin  of  the  communicating  powers,  whether  human  amraal  =upri 
or  sub  mundane,  we  cannot  even  speculate  upon. 

We  present  die  facts,  without  attempting  any  solution  simply  add  ng  that 
besides  the  experience  of  Judge  Larrabee,  Mons.  Du  Bay  Mr  Johnson 
Schoolcraft,  and  other  eminent  authorities,  die  hardy  Ir^ieller  who  desire 
personally  to  verify  these  statements  may  still  do  so,  by  visiting  the  tribes  of 
friendly  Indians  west  of  the  Alleghanies,  amongst  several  of  whom  the  =ame 
practices  are  frequently  observed  to  this  day. 

We  know  that  in  citing  the  above  as  instances  of  extraordinary  phenomena,, 
we  lay  ourselves  open  to  chaUenge  from  Uie  historians  of  Asiatic  and  East 
Indian  Spiritualism  or  magic,  whose  narratives  of  marvels  performed  by  fa- 
keers,  botke,  dervishes,  and  other  wonder-workers,  would  unquestionably 
throw  all  the  occult  performances  of  Western  "spirits"  into  the  shade,  and 
make  them  appear,  by  comparison,  as  the  sports  of  children  pitted  against  die 
deeds  of  die  Greek  Hercules.     All  students  of  oriental  lore  must  be  fanuliar 

Hosted  by  Google 

488  HISTORY  OF  MODERtT 

witli  details  of  the  horrible  and  preternatural  exhibitions  of  "  magical  art," 
so  often  recorded  and  so  wdl  attested,  which  are  performed  in  Africa,  Asia, 
and  the  East  Indies. 

All  will  admit  that,  whilst  these  narratives  are  given  upon  the  most  unim- 
peachable authority,- — their  extravagancies  tax  the  bounds  of  the  most  elastic 
credulity,  and  cause  the  flesh  to  creep  with  horror  and  disgust  at  their  mere 
recital.  Feats  of  self-mutilation,  and  apparently  actual  dismemberment ;  fire- 
eating,  inhumations  alive,  and  instantaneous  restoration  of  dissevered  parts, 
gaping  wounds,  and  shocking  mutilations,  are  amongst  the  common  practices 
of  the  frenzied  ecstatics  of  the  East. 

These  deeds  have  been,  and  still  are  performed  under  circumstances  of 
authenticity,  and  in  the  presence  of  witnesses  whose  testimony  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  question.  A  party  of  these  revolting  exhibitors  lately  attempted  to 
display  some  of  their  least  shocking  acts  of  "glamour,"  at  the  popular  and 
fashionable  St.  George's  Opera  House,  Langham  Place,  in  the  presence  of  a 
London  audience,  whose  special  character  was  secured  by  making  the  prices 
fabulously  high  and  excluding  females. 

Despite  these  precautions,  some  of  the  witnesses  withdrew  from  the  scene 
appalled  to  faintness ;  and  others,  men  of  acute  powers  of  observation,  exam- 
ined closely  the  apparatus,  clothes,  and  persons  of  the  operators,  and  yet 
failed  to  discover  any  evidence  of  sleight  of  hand,  machinery,  deception,  or 
opportunity  for  practicing  it. 

Eventually,  and  after  a  very  few  exhibitions,  the  performances  were  for- 
bidden in  England,  on  the  ground  that  the  barbarities  practiced,  although 
harmless  in  their  results,  were  real,  not  illusory,  and  therefore  could  not  be 
permitted  in  a  civilized  land. 

Itis,  of  course,  theeasiest,  asit  isthemost  popularway  to  disposeof  these  and 
all  other  unexplained  phenomena,  by  a.  rude,  blank  denial  of  their  existence  ; 
to  cry  "humbug,"  in  the  face  of  the  most  respectable  authority,  and  "it  can- 
not be,"  to  that  which  is  proved  beyond  all  shadow  of  question  to  be.  As 
it  will  be  remembered  that  scarcely  any  of  these  frightfully  preternatural  cases 
of  oriental  Spiritualism,  have  been  presented  to  the  public,  except  by  those 
who  justly  consider  their  honored  names  and  known  veracity  must  shield  them 
from  the  insolent  and  ignorant  incredulity  of  the  uninformed,  to  aJl  who  at- 
tempt to  dispose  of  the  question,  in  the  fashion  of  rude  and  illt^ical  denial, 
we  have  no  arguments  to  offer.  We  neither  expect  nor  desire  to  convince 
them.  Satisfied  from  the  authority  on  which  the  generality  of  the  reports  are 
made,  of  their  genuine  authenticity,  we  have  only  to  point  to  the  facts,  and 
suspend  all  judgment  upon  their  origin,  until  the  future  developments  of 
science  shall  unravel  their  mystery.  Meantime,  in  calling  attention  to  their 
enactments,  we  protest  against  the  attempts  that  have  been  made  to  institute 
.a  comparison  between  diem  and  the  phenomena  of  modern  Spiritualism. 
After  a  long  and  careful  study  into  the  nature  of  these  Asiatic  and  East  In- 
■dian  rites,  we  fail  to  perceive  any  analogy  whatever  between  them  and  the 
control  of  otu:  spirit  friends ;  any  resemblance  between  the  powers  which  the 
spirits  can  exert  upon  matter,  and  those  exercised  by  or  through  these  magii. 

In  the  case  of  the  latter,  we  have  not  always  the  same  evidence  which  the 
J^orth  American  Indian  affords  of  the  interposition  of  spirits  at  all.  The  Ameri- 
'can  Indian  always  claims  to  act  under  the  control  of  spiritual  beings,  although 
not  of  human  characteristics;  but  the  Eastern  ecstatics  will  frequently,  when 
closely  questioned,  affirmthat  their  powers  are  derived  from  a  state  induced  in 
their  own  bodies,  and  that  when  excited  by  music,  noise,  violent  motion,  drugs, 
■or  other  artificial  means,  to  the  requisite  degree  of  frenzy,  their  bodies  are  as 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  489 

naught,  or  entirely  under  their  own  control;  that  they  can  divest  themselves 
of  all  or  any  portions  of  them,  wound,  maim,  or  otherwise  injure  them,  and 
still,  by  the  superior  power  of  their  spirits,  -when  completely  exalted  above 
material  laws,  that  they  can  control  the  elements  with  the  same  ease  that 
electricity,  airs,  and  other  imponderables,  pierce  and  control  the  pon. 
derables. 

A  passive  submission  to  the  control  of  the  invisible  power  a  receptive  con- 
dition of  mind  and  quiescent  state  of  body,  s  o  b  on  he  other  hand, 
the  only  prerequisites  for  the  exercise  of  diat  m  d  un  h  p  by  which  our  spirit 
friends  operate  upon  matter,  as  witnessed  in  tl  e  p  o  n  na  they  produce. 
Granted  that  the  results  in  point  of  marvel  a  e  fin  y  nf  rior ;  consider 
the  difference  of  the  means  employed  to  prod  e  th  m  1  powers  of  hu- 
man spirits  to  act  through  media  are  professed  y  mi  d  tain,  and  sub- 
ject to  laws  but  imperfectly  understood,  but  which  still  seem  to  bear  an 
orderly  analogy  to  the  scientific  revealments  of  our  own  sphere. 

Not  so  with  the  Eastern  ecstatics.  Their  powers  seem  to  be  undefined, 
and  almost  unlimited,  and  bear  no  analogy  to  any  laws  or  limitations  of  earthly 
science  ;  added  to  which  the  one  claims  a  spiritual  and  simply  post-mundane 
origin  for  itself,  and  the  other  a  material  and  altogether  mundane  one ;  hence 
we  affirm  there  is  no  analogy  between  them,  and  none  can  be  truthfully 
drawn.  Until  we  are  better  informed  upon  the  mysterious  powers  involved 
in  the  production  of  both  classes  of  phenomena,  we  insist  that  the  line  of  de- 
marcation  is  clearly  distinct  between  them,  ranging  the  one  under  the  title  of 
"Eastern  magic,"  and  the  other  beneath  that  of  Western  Spiritualism. 

It  would  certainly  be  more  difficult  to  dispose  of  the  questions  which  arise 
concerning  the  origin  of  that  phenomena  which  we  have  described  as  com- 
mon to  the  North  American  Indians.  The  clairvoyant  faculties,  prescient 
powers,  and  general  results  obtained  through  then  Spiritualism,  correspond 
closely  with  that  of  their  civilized  neighbors,  but  the  modes  of  invocation 
differ  essentially,  and  the  characteristics  which  seem  to  mark  the  communi- 
cating intelligences  are  equally  repulsive  and  incomprehensible  to  the  Ameri- 
can Spiritualist. 

Whether  the  red  man  succeeds  in  evoking  and  controlling  to  his  service 
a  race  of  beings  hovering  on  the  precincts  of  a  sub-mundane  sphere,  or  his 
exercises  predispose  him  to  those  ecstatic  conditions  in  which  the  spiritual 
vision  is  broken  and  refracted,  and  he  actually  communicates  witli  unde- 
veloped human  spirits,  but  amidst  the  fumes  of  tobacco  with  which  his  sys- 
tem is  poisoned,  he  mistakes  them  for  anuuals,  birds,  etc.,  we  do  not  pre- 
tend to  decide.  Every  Spiritualist,  in  the  new  dispensation,  stands  at  the 
threshold  only,  of  that  vast  and  wonderful  temple  of  science  which  conceals 
the  mighty  laws  that  govern  and  hold  in  their  embrace,  the  universe  of  mind, 
and  all  the  invisible  forces  kindred  with  it. 

As  yetj  the  long  closed  portals  of  this  mysterious  realm  are  but  partially 
opened  to  our  longing  gaze.  We  look  down  the  shining  corridors  of  eternity, 
and  see  some  of  the  flitting  forms  of  its  glorified  inhabitants.  Our  dull  ears 
catch  the  faint  echoes  of  their  songs,  and  our  longing,  outstretched  hands  feel 
the  silent  clasp  of  thehs;  but  into  the  adytum  of  that  mighty  temple,  who 
has  yet  penetrated? 

We  still  wait  upon  the  threshold ;  and  the  very  boldest,  who  have  dared  to 
step  forward  to  the  inner  portals,  can  but  exclaim  in  deep  humility, 
"  He  is  a  rash  man  who,  outside  the  realm  of  pure  mathematics,  pronounces 
the  word  impossible, "  — rasher  still,  who  says  "  I  know,"  when  the  wisest 
among  men  can  but  affirm,  "  1  believe  ! " 

Hosiedb,  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

CHAPTER   XLV. 

SPIRITUALISM    DURING    THE     GREAT    AMERICAN    CIVIL    WAR    OF 

And,  by  ihe  holy 

ohT' die  s 

rraph-band,  each  waved  ht  Iiand, 

™do."d  m  S»«V™y  rAm-M.»ra«s».>  »mo«o  m.  Co«tru,a»d> -A 

■  SS"o»   m  BAITLR-FIEID-TH.    WmO«   A.B   H.R   F.V.   SO... 

Without  entering  upon  the  vexed  political  questions  whidi  ultimated  in 
tlie  fearful  smggle  between  North  and  South,  inaugurated  u>  die  spnng  of 
Ss."  is  ufceSary  to  point  to  some  of  d,e  results  wb.ch  that  temble  con- 
test exerdsed  upon  the  progress  of  Spitiluah.m.  It  may  be  remarked,  m  ad- 
vance thTnofSt  is  bette?  established  than  d,e  prophehc  anttctpahon.  of 
mSmisde  persons  on  the  eharacle,  and  issue  of  the  stntggle.  It  was  «ot 
™,om™  may  suppose,  an  inevitable  result  that  slavery  in  America  should 
JerS^te  only  through  a  fierce  intestine  war;  or  that  its  downfall  unde  ny 
Src^nstanees"  could  be  calculated  upon  as  a  foregone  eonelu  on  a  h 
Sopositions  aie  easily  enunciated  now  that  the  result  ,s  achiev  d  b  o  Id 
Lve  struck  far  wide  of  any  true  defimtion  of  popular  sentimen  an  e  d  n 
to  the  breaking  out  of  the  war.  , 

We  deem  it  safe  to  assert,  and  that  from  opinions  formed  pon  an  e 
tensive  and  uldmate  knowledge  of  both  North  and  South,  and  a  g  n  at  in 
derstanding  of  the  politics  indpaities  in  both  sections,  that  an  men 

of  the  quesnons  at  issue  between  them  by  the  sword,  was  neve    d     t   ra  eiy 

contemplate*  »»<i  «»>  "»=  """"""^  °°  '"'^  """'  ""I  "T'?''f  f  "^    t 

ZfSSi  striggte.  was  all,  humanly  speaiing,  forced  on  by  the  logic  of  events, 
nShii  htSugh  the  prioncerled  action  of  either  section  of  country. 

We  sarttas  much,  to  demonstrate  the  truly  prophetic  character  of  many  of 
dievtsSJsand  commumcadons  which  circulated  amongst  the  Spintuah.ts, 
miortoThe  opening  of  die  war.  Tlie  reader  will  not  have  fotgotten  the  terri- 
ES"o°ds  of  doom  pronounced  by  the  author  in  the  assembly  chmnbet  of 
MontEOmerv,  Alabama,  in  i860.  .  ,       ,  ■  -  -  r 

NeSer  S  her  friends  fail  to  recall  many  fearful  and  mysterious  ™ons  of 
death  and  desolation  which  she  portrayed  to  them  looming  up  before  her 
eves  as  she  traversed  different  States  of  the  forefated  South. 

'^Onfmore  personal  reminiscence  must  be  introduced  here,  m  deference  to 
die  Ss  of  many  friends  to  whom  the  vision  was  related,  besides  having 
been  published  in  several  of  die  Spiritual  papers. 

At  die  close  of  her  first  engagement  m  iVIontreal,  C.  W.  in  ,8,8,  the  author 
one  morning  at  sunrise  was  twakened  m  die  gray  of  a  Febraary  dawn,  by 
"e  SnSof  the  housemaids  work  proceeding  in  the  adjoining  room.  Wliilst 

yhirst  1  a  tew  moments  in  die  inesoludon  of  one  who  feels  .1  is  time  to  rise. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Cdtet^'^  '^^a^^i^t^i  <:L 

r^ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  49I 

but  lacks  the  courage  to  brave  tlie  cold  of  a  Canadian  winter's  morning,  a  vision- 
aiy  state  came  over  her,  portending  the  approach  of  that  semi-trance  condition, 
in  which  pictorial  representations  of  the  future  were  often  presented  to  her. 
Then,  whilst  all  the  commonplace  surroundings  of  her  chamber  were  preserved 
intact,  the  spiritual  eye  of  the  seeress  looked  beyond  the  thick  curtains  of 
her  window,  and  beheld  the  open  street  without. 

At  first  she  only  noticed  the  people  who  were  abroad  at  that  early  hour 
shivering  in  the  freezing  air  and  hurriedly  traversing  the  icy  ground. 

Presently  her  gaze  was  attracted  upward  to  the  sky,  discoverable  only 
through  the  thick  haze  of  a  wintry  dawn,  but,  as  she  looked  steadily  upon 
the  firmament,  a  sudden  illumination  became  diffused  over  its  entire  breadth 
for,  with  the  usual  unlimited  range  of  spiritual  sight,  the  seeress  appeared  to 
take  ja  the  whole  area  of  the  sky,  and  beheld  it  fiiU  of  a  strange,  white  light, 
at  first  scattered,  but  gradually  gathering  together  in  intense  brilliancy  to 
wards  that  portion  which  immediately  overardied  the  city. 

Here  the  illumination,  becoming  a  vast  and  aggregated  mass  of  fiery  beams, 
seemed  to  have  condensed  in  one  spot  all  the  light  of  the  visible  universe. 
At  first  it  was  simply  an  immensity  of  splendor,  tins  fiery  mass,  but,  anon,  it 
stretched  itself  out,  extending  in  one  direction,  and  lengthening  in  another, 
untU  it  assumed  the  appearance  of  a  gigantic  sword,  the  blade  of  which  was 
straight,  and  composed  of  enamelled  squares  of  many-colored  flowers,  from 
which  the  light  shone  in  scintillating  glory  inconceivable. 

The  handle  of  this  tremendous  weapon  was  a  simple  cross,  straight  either 
way,  formed  of  pure  white  light,  which  illuminated  Canada  only,  whereas  the 
blade  of  particolored  rays  communicated  its  radiance  to  the  whole  of  the 
United  States.  Whilst  this  splendid  vision  lasted,  a  voice  seemed  clearly  to 
pronounce  these  words  :  "  The  blade  is  already  in  the  United  States,  the  cross 
still  rules  in  Canada ;  but  blade  and  liandle  are  one,  and  the  sword  will  never 
be  sheathed  until  both  are  recognized  as  a  unity." 

So  vivid  was  the  picture,  so  real  the  voice,  that  the  seeress,  impressed 
with  its  living  actuality,  sprang  out  of  bed,  ran  to  the  window,  drew  up  the 
blind,  and  then  hastily  opened  the  door  of  her  room,  anxious  to  summon  her 
hostess  to  come  and  partake  with  her  of  the  wonderful  sight  Fortunately 
for  their  opinions  of  her  sanity,  the  busy  housewives  had  quitted  the  adjoin- 
ing room  ere  the  seeress,  en  robe  de  chamhre,  entered  it  Returning  again, 
still  under  the  afflatus  of  her  semi-somnanibuHc  state,  she  beheld  the  gorgeous 
vision  slowly  fade  out  of  sight,  leaving  naught  behind  but  the  leaden  expanse 
of  the  morning  sky. 

And  yet,  so  vivid  was  the  impression  of  the  phantasmagoria  she  had  wit- 
nessed, that,  though  now  thoroughly  surrounded  by  the  chill  atmosphere  of 
her  chamber,  she  could  not  altogether  question  its  reality,  and,  during  the 
day,  frequently  asked  her  visitors  whether  they  had  not  observed  any  unusual 
appearance  in  the  sky  that  morning. 

The  explanation  given  by  her  spirit  guides  of  this  vision,  whose  details  were 
immediately  after  published  in  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  and  Banner  of  Light, 
was  as  follows : 

The  sword  sonified  Judgment.  Its  material  was  light,  or  spiritual  truth. 
Its  many  hues  corresponded  to  the  many  forms  in  which  truth  becomes  re- 
vealed.    The  shape  of  the  vision  being  in  a  sword  signified  War. 

The  blade,  already  covering  the  United  States,  was  prophetic  of  its  ap- 
proaching doom.  The  handle,  ruling  over  Canada,  typified  the  cross  of 
St  Andrews,  or  the  British  power,  which  at  present  governed  the  province. 
The  voice,  however,  prophesied  that  the  sword  would  never  be  shea'^hed 

Hosiedb,  Google 

493 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

until  blade  and  hanae  were  one.  The  vision  was  represented,  furliiermote, 
as  dual,  both  political  and  religious,  and  predicated,  first  a  political,  and  tlien 
a  religious  war,  which  should  only  terminate  when  the  two  countnes  were 
united  under  the  dispensation  of  the  true  light  of  heaveri,  Spiritualism,  typi- 
fied, finally,  by  the  vision  being  presented  to  a  spirit  medium. 

Many  a  one,  since  that  vision  has  been  in  part  fulfilled  in  the  great  Ameri- 
can war,  has  written  to  remind  the  seeress  of  its  publication  in  1858,  and  to 
question  whether  the  finale  of  tiie  prophecy,  in  the  union  of  the  two  coun- 
tries illuminated  by  the  sword,  will  ever  be  fulfilled;  but,  though  the  war  in 
the  States  has  terminated,  the  full  end  is  not  yet.     .     .     .     .     ■ 

In  a  book  entitled  "  Messages  from  John  Quincy  Adams,  published  by 
Josiah  Brigham  in  1S59,  a  communication  purporting  to  come  from  the  spirit 
of  Geoi^e  Washington,  through  the  mediumship  of  Joseph  D.  Stiles,  con- 
tains the  following  striking  and  significant  prophecy  : 

"  The  dties  of  Sodora  and  Gomorrah,  when  they  had  attained  the  summit  of  imperial 
wickedness  and  licentiousness,  as  the  Bible  informs  us,  feU  from  their  high  estate  by  the  visi- 
tation of  natural  penalties,  and  the  righteous  judgments  of  an  overruhng  ProvideaW.  The 
fall  of  those  and  other  la^e  cities  proves  to  us  that  no  individual  or  nation  can  disobey  the 
irrevocable  enactments  of  the  Infinite  Father,  and  escape  the  fixed  penalties  attad.ed  to  such 
traiia^-esaons.  And  can  boasting,  sinful  America  indulge  the  flattering  delusion  that  the 
heavy  judgments  which  fell  upon  these  ancient  cities  will  he  averted  from  her  whose  guilt  is 
equal  if  not  greater  than  theirs?  Does  she  think  that,  Cab-like,  she  can  escape  the  vigilant 
eve  of  the  Divine  Parent,  'whose  voice  is  heard  in  the  rolling  thunders  and  whose  might  is 
seen  in  the  forked  Ughtnings,'  and  that  He  will  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  ery  of  mortal  agony 
daily  home  on  the  four  wmds  of  heaven  to  His  throne  of  justice  from  the  broken  hearts  of 
His  slavery-crushed  children? .... 

"  God  the  Eternal  Father  as  commiESJoned  His  ministers  to  a  great    and  important  un- 

''"' He  L  invested  us  with  power  and  authority  to  influence  the  actions  of  mankind,  and 
aid  Ihem  in  their  struggles  for  right  and  truth.  -    .  i,-    f  1 

"  We  behold  a  period  speedily  approaching  when  man  will  take  up  arms  against  Jus  lel- 
low  man,  and  gj  forth  to  contend  with  the  enemies  of  republican  liberty  and  to  assert  at 
the  point  of  the  bayonet  those  rights  of  which  so  la^e  a  portion  of  their  fdlow-creatares 
Ire  deprived.  Again  will  the  soil  of  America  be  saturated  with  the  blood  of  her  freedom- 
loving  diildren,  when  noble  monuments  will  tremble  from  base  to  summit  with  the  heavy 
roar  of  artillery  and  the  thunder  of  cannon.  The  trials  of  that  internal  war  will  far  e>:ceed 
those  of  the  Revolution,  whUe  the  cause  contended  for  will  equal,  if  not  exceed  m  suWim- 
ity  and  power  that  for  whidl  the  fathers  of  '76  fought.  But  when  the  hat  tie  smoke  shall 
disappe^  and  the  cannon's  fearful  roar  is  hushed,  mankind  will  fully  realise  the  blessmgs 
outflowing  from  the  mighty  stra^le  in  which  they  so  valiantly  cnntended. 

"  Their  eyes  will  no  longer  meet  with  those  bound  in  the  chains  of  physical  slavery,  or 
their  ears  listen  to  the  heavy  sobs  of  the  oppressed ;  but  over  a  land  dedicated  lo  the  prin- 
ciples of  impartial  liberty  the  kmg  of  day  will  rise  and  set,  and  hearts  iiow  breaking  in  the 
bonds  of  the  oppressor  will  rejoice  in  the  blessmgs  of  unmlei-rupted  freedom. 

"  In  this  eventful  revolution,  what  the  patriots  of  the  past  faded  to  accomplish,  their  de- 
scendants wiU  perform  with  the  timely  ^d  of  invisible  powers.  By  tlieir  sides  the  lieavenly 
hosts  wm  labor,  imparting  courage  and  fortitude  in  the  hour  of  trial,  and  m^gmg  them  on- 
ward to  a  speedy  and  magnificent  triumph.  Deploring,  as  we  do,  the  existence  of  slavery 
ajid  the  means  to  be  employed  to  pu^e  it  from  America,  yet  our  sympathies  will  culminate 
to  the  cause  of  right  and  justice,  to  give  strength  to  those 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM,  493 

Wi=  present  these  extracts  without  comment,  simply  reiterating  the  fact  that 
they  were  published,  and  endured  the  usual  amount  of  sneering  criticism  and 
infidelic  scorn  which  has  accompanied  each  fresh  revelation  from  the  world 
of  spirits,  as  early  as  1859.  Hundreds  of  iastances  are  on  record  of  similar  inti- 
mations concerning  the  day  of  trouble  that  was  approaching.  We  have  quoted 
enough,  however,  to  justify  our  claim  that  its  dark  advent  was  the  subject  of  a 
thorough  understanding  on  the  part  of  the  invisible  beings,  to  whom,  under 
the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  universe,  the  destinies  of  mankind  are  given  in 
charge.  When  the  great  calamity  was  fully  realized,  and  the  government 
made  the  first  demand  on  the  people  for  troops,  a  blow  was  levelled  at 
the  order  and  progress  of  all  existing  institutions,  including,  of  course, 
those  of  a  spiritual  character.  About  the  opening  of  the  year  1861,  Spiritual- 
ism had  attained  a  numerical  strength  and  popularity  little  anticipated  either 
by  its  friends  or  foes.  The  latest  statistics  of  the  period  estimated  its  numbers 
at  neariy  nine  millions.  Regular  Sabbath  meetings  and  conferences  were 
held  in  not  less  than  three  thousand  different  places;  and  die  still  growing 
interest  manifested  in  its  teachings  and  phenomena,  cannot  be  adequately 
described. 

When  the  now  far-famed  "  first  gun  was  fired  at  Fort  Sumter,"  that  inau- 
gurated the  great  civil  war,  and  with  its  single,  clear,  rifle  crack,  called  forth 
twice  ten  thousand  echoes  from  the  hoarse  thunder  of  the  cannon,  and  the 
united  discharge  of  a  hundred  thousand  muskets,  when  this  solitary  forerunner 
of  the  fearful  struggle  made  its  portentous  cry  of  warning  heard  from  Maine 
to  California,  the  whole  land,  with  every  institution  it  sustained,  quivered  and 
shook  as  with  one  universal  heart-dirob,  and  the  answer  to  that  summons 
was  made  from  every  voice,  north  and  south,  male  and  female,  throughout 
the  land.  Henceforth  the  streets  were  thronged  with  troops  marching  out 
to  some  point  of  attack  or  defence.  Every  suburb  was  a  camp-ground,  every 
valley  or  hill-top  a  battle-field  ;  the  air  was  filled  with  the  piercing  shrieks  of 
agony  and  despair,  the  groans  of  the  wounded,  the  thunder  of  cannon, 
the  booming  of  the  war  drums,  and  the  fiery  strains  of  martial  music.  Soon 
the  whole  land  became  a  sepulchre,  or  a  temporary  hospital  for  the  mutilated 
forms  spared  in  terrible  mercy  as  wrecks  of  the  battle-field,  where  thousands 
of  their  brave  comrades  lay  stark  and  dead  in  road,  ditches,  or  the  common 
highways  of  the  country.  Desperate  proclamations  demanded  "  life,  more 
life  ! "  to  fill  up  the  decimated  ranks  of  the  broken  armies,  which  liad  already 
absorbed  the  pride  and  strengtii  of  the  country,  leaving  behind  them  desolate 
homes  filled  with  the  voice  of  lamentation,  and  the  pale  forms  of  bereaved 
widows  and  heart-stricken  orphans. 

The  mourners  went  about  the  streets,  and  still  the  cry  of  the  war-demon 
was  for  "  life,  more  life  I"  And  in  the  vast  spoil  of  precious  life  that  was 
ruthlessly  torn  from  friends,  home,  industry,  public  and  private  usefulness, 
and  oiTered  up  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  Moloch  of  war,  no  sect  yielded  more 
readily  of  its  choicest  treasures  than  did  Spiritualism. 

In  martial,  as  in  all  other  forms  of  associative  action,  no  organization  could 
be  effected  amongst  the  Spiritualists. 

Not  a  single  regiment  could  be  combined  from  their  ranks ;  but  in  the 
meantime,  we  doubt  if  the  whole  array  of  the  vast  armies  that  marched  to  the 
fields  of  battle,  should  show  a  single  regiment  where  one  or  more  of  this  faith 
was  not  at  the  post  of  patriotic  duty.  When  the  peculiar  idiosyncrasies  of 
these  raw  and  inexperienced  forces  began  to  be  understood  and  appreciated 
by  their  leaders.  Spiritualists  were  eagerly  sought  for  as  recruits,  even  by  those 
who  had  no  sympathy  with  their  belief;  and  die  reasons  assigned  for  this  re- 

Hosled  by  Google 

494  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

markable  preference  were,  first,  fliat  the  Spiritualists'  total  unconcern  on  the 
subject  of  death  made  them  the  bravest  of  soldiers;  next,  that  their  vital  and 
peculiar  faith  rendered  them  amenable  to  command,  gentle,  subordinate,  and 
exempt  from  most  of  the  popular  vices  of  the  age,  such  as  drinking,  smoking, 
and  profanitj'. 

Where  they  were  possessed  of  medium  powers,  it  was  again  and  again 
proved  that  the  watchful  care  and  prescient  guardianship  of  wise  spirits  was 
exerted,  not  only  in  their  own  behalf,  but  frequently  for  the  benefit  of  their 
comrades,  and,  in  some  instances,  for  the  welfare  of  the  entire  regiment  to 
which  they  belonged.  Numerous  cases  are  recorded  proving  that  kind  spirits, 
through  their  mediums,  have  warned  the  officers  of  the  proximity  of  danger, 
or  the  most  advantageous  course  to  pursue  in  positions  of  difficulty.  As  these 
spiritual  interpositions  were  rarely  openly  acknowledged  and  never  admitted 
into  official  reports,  their  record  of  course  depends  on  the  fidelity  of  personal 
narrative;  hence  we  do  not  feel  justified  in  making  them  more  publicly 
known,  than  the  chief  actors  therein  themselves  desired.  Yet  the  truth  of. 
these  ministrations  and  their  value  became  at  last  so  generally  felt  and  ad- 
mitted, that  the  presence  of  mihtary  Spiritualists,  but  especially  mediums,  was 
eagerly  sought  after  in  these  desperate  times. 

Besides  vast  numbers  of  believers  contributed  fi-om  every  city  and  hamlet 
in  the  several  States,  many  of  the  prominent  spiritual  speakers  became  active 
partisans  and  leaders  in  the  war.  The  gallant  and  venerable  John  Pierpont 
had  accepted  the  post  of  chaplain  to  one  of  the  Massachusetts  regiments 
that  was  summoned  to  the  defence  of  Washington,  after  the  violent  attack 
of  the  Baltimore  "roughs"  on  the  first  republican  troops  sent  through  that 
city. 

Baltimore  was  the  shortest  and  most  direct  route  to  Washington ;  yet  it 
was  considered  obvious,  in  view  of  the  numbers  and  desperation  of  the 
ruffians  who  haunted  that  place,  that  it  would  be  the  most  judicious  course 
to  send  the  military  reinforcements  to  the  capital  fay  a  more  circuitous,  but 
safer  route. 

The  gallant  John  Pierpont,  when  offered  the  appointment  of  chaplain  to 
this  regiment,  declared  that  his  acceptance  of  the  post  should  defend  upon 
his  regiment  marching  through,  instead  of  around  Baltimore,  and  "  proving  to 
the  worid,  that  the  first  American  soldiers  tliat  were  called  upon  to  defend 
tlie  liberties  of  their  country  did  not  commence  by  flying  from  a  mob  of  city 
'  roughs.' " 

Thomas  Gales  Forster,  one  of  the  most  eloquent  advocates  that  the  cause 
of  Spiritualism  could  boast,  placed  his  talents  at  the  command  of  the  govern- 
ment as  one  of  the  war  secretaries,  in  which  position  he  lon^  remained.  N. 
Frank  White,  a  favorite  and  distingiiished  speaker  for  Spiritualism,  entered  the 
Federal  army,  and  served  long  and  faithfully  as  a  volunteer.  Rev.  T.  W. 
Higginson  raised  and  commanded,  witii  distinguished  success,  a  regiment  of 
the  swarthy  sons  of  Africa.  Governor  Sprague,  of  Rhode  Island,  whose 
family  have  long  been  die  most  zealous  and  efficient  supporters  of  Spiritual- 
ism in  Providence,  raised  and  equipped,  out  of  his  own  munificence,  some  of 
the  most  effective  of  the  Rhode  Island  regiments,  commanding  them  in  per- 
son on  the  battle-field.  In  short,  the  Spiritualists  throughout  the  country, 
have  a  noble  record  to  show  of  good  service  done  by  their  ranks  in  behalf  of 
the  cause  of  freedom  and  the  Union. 

Their  good  conduct  no  less  than  their  zeal  was  proverbial ;  and  if  the  Spir- 
itualists could  not  boast  of  a  single  regiment  filled  up  from  their  ranks  alone, 
they  may  claim  to  have  had  a  very  large  share  in  composing  the  entire 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  49S 

Northern  armies.  In  the  meantime,  the  patriotic  enthusiasm  which  threw  so 
many  behevers  into  "  the  imminent  and  deadly  breach,"  sadly  decimated  the 
nmks  of  "  the  faithful "  in  tlie  public  meetings  and  circles. 

In  many  cases  it  became  extremelj  d  fficult  to  sustain  these  so  recenlly 
flourishing  meetings,  and  the  financi-il  burdens  of  the  attempt,  increased  be- 
yond endurance  by  the  frightful  etpenses  of  the  war,  rendered  the  task  one 
of  scarcely  less  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  those  who  were  left  at  home,  than 
that  of  the  heroes  who  were  duoted  to  the  battle-field.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  constant  and  overwhelming  bereavements  of  the  war  rendered  these  meet- 
ings the  chief  stay  and  comfort  of  the  mourners. 

Though  so  many  seats  were  vacant,  and  so  many  beloved  forms  had  dis- 
appeared from  the  rostrum,  chair,  hall,  and  family  altar,  "  whose  place  would 
know  them  no  more,"  the  evidences  of  their  unseen  yet  tangible  presence 
were  so  abundant  and  strong,  that  the  necessity  of  proclaiming  it  to  the  rest 
of  the  sorrowing  community  became  a  duty  too  imperative  to  be  resisted, 
whatever  might  be  the  cost.  . 

Though  financial  disabilities  crippled  their  every  resomice,  and  the  feverish 
agony  of  the  time  destroyed  the  necessary  conditions  of  passivity  and  order 
amongst  the  mediums,  still  the  legions  of  returning  spirits  pleaded  with  irre- 
sistible force  to  be  heard,  and  bereaved  mourners  turned  to  the  never-failing 
consolations  of  Spiritualism,  as  the  only  balm  which  the  destroying  angels  of 
pain  and  death  liad  left  them.  Thus,  though  the  external  progress  of  the 
cause  seemed  to  be  interrupted,  its  real  growth  in  the  hearts  and  affections  of 
the  community  became  a  daily  increasing  fact.  A  disruptive  and  disintegrat- 
ing spirit  scattered  its  ranks  and  swept  over  its  external  prosperity;  but  the 
very  calamities  that  assailed  its  strengdi  became  the  propagandists  of  its 
consolatory  doctrines ;  and  whether  by  the  side  of  the  dying  in  the  hospital, 
or  on  the  battle-field,  acting  as  nurse,  surgeon,  or  minister,  the  Spiritualists 
performed  a  mighty  work  in  the  war,  and  its  effects  have  been  felt  by  adding 
to  the  statistics  of  Spiritualism  at  least  two  millions  of  fresh  believers  in  four 
years.  Tlie  nurses  in  the  hospitals,  the  surgeons  in  the  ranks,  the  chap- 
lains of  the  regiments,  and  the  soldiers  themselves,  from  the  distinguished 
general  officer  to  the  humblest  private  of  the  ranks,  numbered  amongst  them 
the  ubiquitous  Spiritualists.  All  were  marked  by  some  peculiarity  springing 
out  of  their  faith,  and  every  one  such  distinction  became  useful  and  consol- 
atory. At  home,  too,  the  Spiritualists  were  neither  sluggard  nor  inefficient. 
Many  of  the  lecturers  contributed  of  their  greatly  diminished  fees  in  aid  of 
the  country's  suffering  and  wounded  heroes.  The  author  alone,  was  privi- 
leged to  contribute,  by  various  of  the  means  then  resorted  to  ;  to  aid  the  sani- 
tary commissions,  etc.,  nearl  h  dd  s.  Still  the  bitter  and 
insatiate  antagonism  of  the  w  d  bp  h  m,  even  in  this  fearful 
crisis,  when  all  personal  or  s  n  n  mi  h  uld  have  been  merged  in 
the  great  stress  of  the  times  d  d  h  ff  xtremely  difficult,  and 
often  succeeded  in  paralyzing  h  m  g  h  N  n  ous  instances  occurred 
wherein  the  author's  service  d  b  s,  a  lecturer  in  behalf  of 
the  hospitals,  clothing  societi  m  efused  on  the  ground 
of  her  being  "  a  Spiritualist.' 

A  striking  instance  of  this  rod  o    b  g         d    erves  to  be  mentioned 

in  connection  with  Mr.  Char  P  rtr  dg  d  New  York  branch  of  the 
Sanitary  Commission.  Whilst  the  most  ui^ent  appeals  were  making  through- 
out the  country  for  aid  in  behalf  of  the  country's  defenders,  who  were  often 
compelled  to  fight  in  fluttering  rags  and  shoeless  feet,  ere  the  hastily  impro- 
vised commissariat  could  supply  tiiem  with  fresh  clothes;  whilst  dying  heroes 

Hosted  by  Google 

496  IIISTORY  OF  MODERN 

were  often  compelled  to  lie  for  hours  in  every  stage  of  mutilation  on  the  city 
sidewalks,  before  fresh  hospitals  could  be  provided  for  their  relief,  and  every 
dime  from  man,  woman,  and  child,  was  demanded  to  meet  the  ever  increasing 
necessity  of  the  times,  the  popular  resort  of  a  great  fair  was  adopted  in 
New  York,  as  in  every  other  city,  to  collect  funds  in  aid  of  the  noble  "Sani- 
tary Commission."  The  most  urgent  appeals  were  put  forth  for  contribu- 
tions of  all  descriptions.  The  most  liberal  responses  were  equally  abundant. 
In  this  emergency,  Mr.  Charles  Partridge,  being  the  proprietor  of  a  large 
match  factory,  donated  to  the  committee  oa  boots,  etc,  die  generous  pres- 
ent of  six  hundred  dollars'  worth  of  books  and  matches.  This  noble  contri- 
bution was  refused  under  circumstances  which  will  be  best  understood  by  a 
perusal  of  Mr.  Partridge's  own  statement,  addressed  to  the  editor  of  the 
New  York  Tribune,  as  follows ; 

"To  the  Editor  of  the  Nem-  York  Tribune  .' 

"  SiRj Having  tried  in  vain,  as  this  statement  will  show,  lo  get  my  proffered  donation 

to  the  Metropolitan  Fair,  accepted,  I  wish  to  make  the  facts  linown,  hoping  to  find 
authority  somewhere  in  the  management  of  this  great  patriotic  undertaking,  which  will 
correct  the  wrongs  I  complain  of. 

"I  quote  the  following  from  the  printed  circular  sent  to  myself  and  others  soliciting 

"  'We  apply  to  you  in  the  interests  of  no  party.  To  all  sliadesof  opinion  we  are  stran- 
gers.      Each  one  can  send  something  that  can  be  converted  into  a  blanket 

at  the  veiy  least,  anij  that  will  warm,  and  may  save  from  death,  some  one  soldier.  Every 
one  that  can  produce  anything  that  has  money  value  is  invited  to  give.' 

"  In  response  to  this  solicitation,  I  called  on  Mr.  F.  Harper,  chairman  of  the  booksellers' 
committee,  and  offered  to  donate  to  the  fair  three  hundred  dollars'  worth  of  books  and 
three  hundred  dollars'  worth  of  matches.  He  referred  me  to  the  ladies'  committee.  No.  2 
Great  Jones  Street,  where  I  called,  and  was  again  referred  to  Mrs.  Ogden  Hoffman,  17 
West  38lh  Street.     To  this  lady  I  applied,  offering  my  donation. 

"  Mrs.  Hoffman  made  several  inquu-ies  about  the  matches,  which,  I  informed  her,  were 
very  superior  :  the  best  parlor  matches ;  not  of  the  ordinary  offensive  kind;  were  I ree  from 
deleterious  fumes,  waterproof,  and  neatly  put  up,  in  round  wooden  boxes,  for  the  con- 
venience of  purchasers  to  carry  away  with  them." 

Although  rather  surprised  —  caniiA^xm^  the  terms  of  the  circular  as,  above 
quoted,  and  the  dreadful  necessity  which  compelled  the  committee  of  arrange- 
ments to  solicit  "anything  and  everything  that  bore  a  money  value"  — 
to  be  thus  closely  questioned,  Mr.  Partridge  patiently  submitted  to  be  cross- 
examined  by  the  pious  and  patriotic  dame  in  office,  until,  in  answer  to  her 
searcliing  queries  concerning  the  nature  of  the  books  as  well  as  the  matches, 
Mr.  Partridge  was  fain  to  acknowledge  that  some  of  the  said  books  were  on 
Spiritualism.  Mrs.  H.  at  once  exclaimed  "that  she  did  not  believe  in 
Spiritualism,  and  that  she  would  not' receive  them  nor  the  matches  either." 
To  this  Mr.  Partridge  goes  on  to  state : 

"I  replied  that  she  and  her  associates  on  the  committee,  were  the  only  authority  who 
could  receive  books,  and  I  thought  it  incompatible  with  their  position  to  reject  any  books 
that  were  lawful  merchandise  and  commonly  sold,  especially  for  the  reason  that  they  did 
not  believe  in  th«  facts  and  theories  they  treated  of. 

"  finally,  she  consented  to  submit  my  proposed  donation  to  the  commltle,  and  inform 
me  of  the  result  by  letter,  the  next  day ;  but  she  added  she  did  not  think  any  of  the  com- 
mittee believed  In  Spiritualism,  or  would  consent  to  receive  the  books.  Not  hearing  from 
the  committee,  according  to  promise,  I  addressed  a  courteous  note  to  Mrs.  Hoffman,  re- 
questing  to  tnow  her  decision,  to  wluch  I  received  the  following  !  — 

"'The  book  committee  decline  to  recave  the  Spiritualist  boohs  and  matches  offeted 
by  Mr.  Partiidge.' 

'•'March  25,  1864.* 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM. 

"  Mrs.  Ogden  Hefman,  and  Associaies,  Bookseller' 

"  I  did  not  expect  to  receive  such  a  letter  from  yoQ,  without  agnature,  as  (he  one  in 
reply  to  mine  of  March  25tli,  declining  to  receive  my  proffered  donations,  your  circular 
sent  to  me  soliciting  contributions  of  '  anything  which  will  furnish  the  means  of  succoring 
our  national  camps  and  hospitals,'  and  you  were  appointed  to  carry  out  this  purpose.  How 
then,  c^i  it  be  in  your  province  to  reject  any  lawfiil  merchandise,  and  especially  on  the 
^ound  stated  by  Mrs.  Hoffman,  namely,  that  she  did  not  believe  in  Spiritualism,  (he  sub- 
ject treated  of  in  some  of  (he  books;  neither  did  she  think  any  lady  on  the  committee  be- 
lieved in  it,  or  would  consent  (o  receive  books  on  that  subject.  I  shall  be  sorry  to  leam 
that  the  committees  for  this  great  public  demonstration  of  love  and  loyalty  to  a  just  cause, 
and  to  the  country's  wounded  heroes,  have  been  selected  with  reference  to  their  religious 
sentiments,  or  that  the  same  overbearmg,  self-righteous  spirit  prevails  in  their  councils,  as 
that  which  caused  the  war. 

"  It  seems  to  me  to  be  out  of  oider  for  any  committee  of  this  fair  to  exercise  inquisitorial 
predilections,  sectarian  bigotry,  and  dictation  as  to  what  books  the  people  may  or  may  not 
buy  and  read.  It  may  not  be  profitless  to  inform  you  that  the  people's  gifts  to  this  noble 
enterprise  do  not  need  the  sanctification  of  any  committees,  since  it  is  not  for  their  glorifi. 
cation,  but  for  the  amelioration  of  sick  and  suffermg  hnminity  that  the  fair  is  held."   .     , 

Mr.  Partridge  concludes  his  just,  but  well-merited  words  of  rebuke,  by 
again  urging  on  the  Christian  committee  the  acceptance  of  his  gift,  offering 
to  appoint  a  salesmaa  to  dispose  of  them  or  sell  them  separately  in  the  fair 
himself,  rather  than  subtract  their  value  from  the  great  need  of  the  soldiers 
at  that  time.  The  fate  of  this  remonstrance  is  stated  in  the  following  closing 
words  of  Mr.  Partridge's  communication  to  the  Tribune: 

"To  (Ms  letter  I  have  received  no  reply.  I  am  unwilliuj  (hat  the  great  body  of  Spir- 
itualists shall  be  sulyected  to  the  mdignity  of  having  their  books  rejected,  especially  when 
sucli  immense  numbers  of  their  ranks  are  fighting  and  laying  down  their  lives  in  the  very 
cause  which  this  fair  was  held  to  relieve  ;  and  1  trust  this  statement  may  meet  the  eye  of 
some  managers  of  this  great  enterprise,  who  are  authorized,  if  there  be  aiij  such,  to  correct 
tliis  wrong, 

"Charles  Partridge." 

As  a  sign  of  the  times,  and  in  evidence  tliat  even  the  presence  of  the  most 
appalling  distress,  dire  necessity,  sanguine  death,  nothing  in  short,  couid 
soften  the  fierce  spirit  of  sectarian  hate  against  anything,  even  to  a  few 
harmless  boxes  of  matches  that  carried  with  it  the  shadow  of  Spiritualism,  it  is 
but  justice  to  Mrs.  Ogden  Hoffman  to  say  that  she  did  not  stand  alone,  but 
that  the  example  of  Mr.  Partridge's  rejected  books  and  matches,  found 
imitators  under  kindred  circumstances  all  over  the  county,  and  all  through 
Uie  war. 

The  firm  determination  of  the  Spiritualists  to  insist  upon  acting  their  parts 
in  the  great  national  tragedy  in  which  thousands  of  their  fathers,  sons,  and 
husbands  were  perishing,  was  the  only  method  by  which  they  could  succeed 
in  general  in  forcing  their  unwelcome  service  on  the  war  committees ;  still  in 
this  way  they  did  succeed;  and  whilst  sustaining  their  meetings,  conferences, 
and  circles,  by  immense  sacrifices,  contributing  their  noblest  and  best  in 
behalf  of  the  country,  and  laboring  in  despite  of  insult  and  reprobation  in 
every  available  quarter  for  the  amelioration  of  the  darkest  features  of  the 
war,  they  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  tiiat  none  more  than  themselves 
have  contributed,  by  men,  means,  and  magnanimity,  in  bringing  the  dark 
tragedy  to  a  final  and  successful  issue.  Our  space  will  only  allow  us  to  add 
a  few  items  from  the  immense  mass  of  matter  which  the  spiritual  experiences . 
of  the  war  supply. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

49$  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

The  following  account  of  "raediumship  amongst  the  contrabands  '  is 
given  by  a  well-known  Spiritualist  and  contributor  to  the  Banner  of  Light: 

"  Memphis,  Tennessee,  yu/y  25,  1S64. 

"The  negro  is  here  in  great  abundEmce,  and  is  virWaUy  free  Tlie  negro  cliaract^  is 
auite  a  study  to  the  SpirituaUst ;  it  is  so  intuitive,  inspirational,  religious,  and  altc^ether 
mediumistic  .  ....  They  have— these  '  contrabands'— amongst  there,  many  who 
^  "o^^tell  event.,  <md  recogni^  influences.  From  the  religious  tr^nmg  they  have 
received  Is  slaves,  they  believe  their  influences  all  come  from  God  or  Jesus  direct,  although 
thev  often  see  and  describe  the  spirits  of  their  deceased  friends.  _  

'•An  old  gray-headed  negro/a  slave  from  Mississippi,  and  an  exhorter  m  the  colored 
Methodist  camp,  said  to  me  the  other  day,—  n     r.^  l  nrH  mm 

"  '  Why  Massa  Lieutenant,  we  knowed  all  'bout  dis  war  long  ago.  De  good  Lord  cam 
and  tell  it  to  de  ones  he  talk  to.  and  dey  tell  to  oders  Massa,  I  saw  de  Lord  m  his  own 
home  up  yonder  in  de  skies,  and  he  tell  to  dis  poor  chJe  dat  he  should  live  to  see  de  glo^ 
of  de  Lord,  and  dat  aU  colored  people,  poor  slaves,  should  be  free.  Aye,  Massa  Lieutenant, 
and  de  Lord  show  dis  child  more  den  dat.' 

"'Well,  Uncle  Ben,'  I  said,  'what  did  he  show  you?  vi     j       j  _ 

"  '  He  show  me  dat  after  many  year  de  color  people  should  pass  away  like  de  red  man, 
and  be  no  more  in  dis  country.     Dat  I  didn't  like ;  but  de  Lord  kiio.vs  what's  best,  bless 

■  •  And  what  more  did  the  Lord  show  you,  Unde  Een  ? ' 

«'vi  ipn  vpura  none      And  tuv  old  woman's  mudder  saw  dis 
■  ne  snow  roc  uis  ii"i  i.-^re  n  ten  years  gone,     iiju  ijj  — ^^  "v^...-  _ 
war  when  she  wasagal;  more'n  fifty  dat  I  Icnow  on,  saw  dis  war  long  time  gone. 

"'subsequently,  I  beard  the  same  assertion  from  many  of  the  colored  people  about  here  ; 
in  fact  tills  war  seemed  to  have  been  long  prophesied  amongst  them.  On  the  4th  of  July, 
bemg  at  the  negro  camp  near  our  regimmt,  1  noticed  a  negro  man  lookmg  earnestly  and 
moumfullv  at  one  of  his  comrades.      I  said  to  him,— 

"  '  Well  my  man,  what  do  you  see  about  that  man,  that  you  look  at  him  so  earnestly? 
"  'Why,  Massa  Lieutenant,'  replied  the  soldier,  dat  man  die  'fore  long. 
"  '  How  do  you  know  ? ' 
'"Cause I  seed  it.' 

'' '  Tt«  tf\i-Z  Tver  his  head,  and  I  saw  de  black  spot  in  de  middle  of  it ;  and  when  I 
sees  de  black  s|^t  in  de  middle  of  de  light,  den  I  known  de  person  is  gwine  lo  die ;  but  de 
lipht  widout  de  black  spot  is  sure  sign  oMife.'        „   ,     ,    , 

"  '  Do  you  see  anything  about  me  ?'  I  asked.  He  looked  ai 
there  can(e  a  slight  spasmodic  shudder  over  him  as  l^"  =^"1  ■  ' ' 
'  wXifoff''"\XdwiAlhrn^^ot£Uo^deV^  predicted.     The  man  was 

™*^)hr?f;Xy'lb,'uiredforhimagam.  He  had  been  swept  off  by  the  fever,  and  was 
'"""TL^wa^olTnem^'ourSLfluscomradeswhosedeathshehad  truly  predicts, 
and  I  have  met  iith  several  who  could  accurately  determine  before  Ihey  went  mto  battle, 
every  one  out  of  a  whole  company  who  would  never  return  alive. 

The  following  striking  commumcation  was  received  from  the  spirit  of  a  dis- 
.tinguished  soldier,  through  the  mediumship  of  the  celebrated  Hudson  Tuttle  : 

A  SOLDIER'S  SENSATIONS  ON  THE  BATTLE-FIELD. 

"August  13,  1S64. 
..  A  d„l,n»„.«=  ovo  n,e  ,  I  fdt  th=  »,ll,  .t.iU.  l-d  ^j.!,.!  me.    I  h«l  Wkn.    Wbm 

„„»k  to  I,no.wH»ds...o  Bono,  .nd  .1.  o.™y  we,.  .11  mu.d  me  Thm  k™, 
p.l„  iot  tlm.,!.  m,  Itabi  1  toew  I  m  iojered,  b.t  not  mortdly  wo.ndod.  Ate  tie 
bUtle,  wlen  the  Seld  w.,  «eled  for  tie  wonnded,  I  .hould  bo  ced  tor,  ktndl,  tended, 
jind  tlen  sent  home  on  futlougl.  tj   l  i.„ 

"  A  .mtn,  tree  wonUl  meet  me  .1  the  pte.     Tie  ia,  rimemberBl  borne  wonid  shelter 

Hosted  b,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  49p. 

me ;  loving  hands  would  be  busy  about  me,  and  darling  little  ones  climb  my  wi  unded 
knees  and  cling  around  "poor  papa's"  neck.  Ah  !  what  joy,  what  ecstasy  !  a  thousand 
thoughts  like  these  shot  through  my  mind  like  gleams  of  sunlight. 

"  Then  I  heard  the  hoarse  voices  of  fierce  combatants ;  they  had  made  a  stand  directly 
over  where  I  lay.  Our  soldiers  fought  desperately  as  they  retreated,  and  many  a  pursning 
enemy  fell  on  their  track  One  was  aiming  liis  piece  directly  over  me,  when  he  was  struck 
dead.  He  fell  across  me,  1  endeavored  to  move  so  as  to  shake  off  the  dreadful  pressure 
from  my  chest,  but  I  was  too  weak.  I  could  only  suffer  and  think.  Others  fell  thick 
around  me.  One  lay  heavily  upon  my  aching  feef,  but  intolerable  as  was  the  pain  of  this 
added  weight,  I  was  only  pinned  more  closely  to  the  earth  I  could  not  move.  The  com- 
batants had  moved  on ;  their  voices  had  died  off  in  the  distance,  and  I  lay  helpless  in  the 
midst  of  thousands  of  such  wrecks  as  myself.  Thoughts  of  the  dear  home  far  away ;  the  be- 
loved ones  who  were  watching  and  waiting  for  me  amidst  the  quiet  green  hills  of  Vermont, 
mingled  with  the  horror  of  lying  there  in  the  midst  of  that  ghastly  battle-field,  with  the 
dead  weight  that  crushed  me,  growing  lieavier  with  evety  breath.  It  was  like  some  horrid 
nightmare.  A  corpse  resting  its  cold  weight  on  my  breast ;  a  corpse  pressing  on  my  bleed- 
ing limbs  !  Night  came  on,  and  with  it  the  ram.  Darkness  impenetrable  in  the  physical 
world,  and  ohl  what  unutterable  darkness  in  the  mental!  In  the  great  rifts  of  the  black 
heavens  there  were  awlul  flashes  of  lightnmg,  and  bursts  of  thunder,  in  the  midst  of  which  I 
heard  the  groans  of  the  wounded  as  they  lay  in  the  pitiless  rain. 

"  When  the  morning  came,  I  was  almost  unconscious  of  life.  I  remember  watchmg  the 
light  breaking  in  the  gray  east ;  my  head  rested  on  that  side,  and  I  was  too  weak  to  turn  it, 
or  else  it  had  become  stiff  in  the  rain. 

"As  it  became  light,  I  heard  the  rolling  of  artillery,  then  the  fierce,  booming  thunder  of 
the  battle  renewed.  I  heard  the  crash  of  the  rumbling  wheels,  the  tramp  of  the  war  horses. 
I  knew  they  were  coming  towards  me,  and  the  horrible  fear  came  over  me  lest  I  should  be 
trampled  under  foot,  crushed,  maimed,  ground  into  the  dust! 

"I  endeavored  to  shout  and  tell  them  I  was  not  dead,  but  I  could  not  even  whisper. 

"  On  they  came,  maddened  and  reckless  by  the  spirit  of  the  war.  The  iron-footed 
horses  were  on  me,  almost;  but  no — they  passed  me;  but  now  the  dreadful  wheels  ap- 
proached ! 

"  I  saw  them  coming ;  one  was  directly  over  my  eyes.      That  was  the  last  1  remember. 

All  was  perfect  silence.      The  sounds  of  war  were  all  hushed.     1  think  I 

must  have  been  m  perfect,  dreamless  dnmber,  for  I  felt,  heard,  and  saw,  nothing.      When 

I  awoke,  I  was  well,  peaceful,  happy;  John was  slandingnearme,  apparently  in  perfect 

health.  'You  here?'  I  asked,  in  astonishment ;  'I  thought  you  were  dead.'  'Solam' 
he  replied ;  '  at  least,  I  have  lost  my  mortal  body ;  but  you  plainly  see  the  body  is  not  all 
there  is, of  a  man;  for  my  body  is,  as  you  say,  dead,  yet  I  exist.'  '  Surely,'  I  answered  'I 
have  dreamed,  or  else  am  dreaming.' 

"  He  smiled,  as  he  replied  ;  '  Not  so  ;  but  you,  too,  are  dead.'  Our  conversation  lasted 
some  hours  before  I  was  fully  convinced  I  was  really  dead,  though  free  from  pain,  and  the 
horrors  of  the  battle-field  over. 

"  Since  then  I  have  watched  the  advent  of  many  spirits  on  the  battle-field. 

"  The  emotions  they  manifest  are  as  various  as  the  dispositions  they  bore  in  life.  Some 
arise  from  the  body  perfectly  bewildered  ;  others  filled  with  unutterable  hate,  and  only  m- 
sphed  with  the  desire  of  vengeance  on  the  foe.  .  Many  meet  dear  friends  who  await  then- 
coming,  and  hover  round  their  departing  spirits.  Guardian  spirits  stand  ready  by  the  side 
of  all  to  conduct  them  to  the  land  where  wars  shall  cease  forever. 

"I  once  observed  two  Northern  and  Southern  men  charge  bayonets  and  mutually  kill 
each  other.  As  they  arose  to  this  sphere,  they  stood  casting  looks  of  hale  at  each  other; 
but,  by  instant  spiritual  mstinct,  perceiving  that  m  their  immortal  bodies  Ihey  could  no 
longer  injure  one  another,  they  turned  slowly  away,  repelled  by  that  principle  so  cogent 
here,  that  we  cannot  approach  those  we  hate,  nor  quit  those  we  love." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

coo-  -HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

'  The  followmg  instance  is  one  out  of  many  hundreds  known  to  the  author, 
of  spiritual  guidance  and  protection  amidst,  the  casualties  of  war.  1  his  par- 
ticuUr  case  is  selected  for  publication  because  the  writer  has  appended  to 
his  simple  statement  a  name  .well  known  for  its  unimpeachable  worth  as  an 
■  honest  man,  and  a  gallant  soldier : 

"  Geoegiaville,  R.  \.,June,  ii,  1867. 
"  To  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge  : 

"Dear  Madam,  —  I  have  of  late  years  received  many  impressions  aiid  communications, 
and  experienced  various  manifestations  of  power  from  spirit  friends.  Some  of  these  demon- 
strations accompanied  me  whilst  I  was  in  tlie"  Army  of  the  Potomac  "in  1864  and  1865. 
Amongst  other  communications,  the  spirits  assured  me  that  they  would  attend  me,  and  in 
times  of  danger  ward  it  off,  and  constantly  protect  me.  These  promises  have  been  verified 
in  a  remarkable  manner,  when  in  battle. 

"  No  matter  how  close  a  bullet  or  cannon  shot  might  pass  me,  I  never  got  hit.  If  1  was 
not  in  its  exact  range,  the  spirits  would  not  interfere,  but  on  several  occasions,  when  I  must 
certainly  have  been  killed,  but  for  their  interpoalion,  I  was,  without  any  volition  on  my 
own  part,  forcibly  and  instantaneously  drawn  aade  by  some  invisible  power,  just  sufficiently 
to  escape' the  passing  mis^le.  I  have  thus  been  moved  forwards,  or  sideways,  or  made  to 
stoop  as  occasion  required,  just  in  exact  time  to  escape  balls,  a  countless  number  of  times. 
On  two  or  three  occasions  I  have  seen  others  struck  down  by  the  ball  that  wonld  inevitably 
have  hit  me,  but  for  this  wonderful  interference. 

"  A  remarkable  Ulustration  of  spirltnal  protection  was  manifested  on  (he  mormng  of  the 
second  of  April,  1865,  when  attacking  the  rebel  defences  of  Petersburg,  Virginia.  My  spuit 
friends  had  warned  me  of  great  danger,  directed  me  how  to  act,  and  assured  me  of  tbeiT 
ability  to  protect  me  in  the  above  described  manner.  Acting  by  their  adv.ce,  I  was  guided 
rapidly  through  a  tremendous  fire,  to  a  point  in  the  rebels'  abattis  where  a  narrow  path  was 
left  for  their  pickets  to  pass  through. 

"  I  called  to  some  comrades,  three  of  whom  jomed  me  in  runnmg  down  this  path  througli 
a  line  of  stockade,  a  second  line  of  abattis,  across  a  ridge  in  the  ditch,  and  though  an  em- 
brasuie,  into  a  battery  of  two  gmis  and  about  twenty-five  men.  Being  the  first  of  our 
division  [first  dividon,  a^th  corpsl  to  enter  this  portion  of  the  rebels'  works,  others  being 
Obstructed  by  the  abattis,  and  unasdsted  and  undirected,  escept  spiritually,  the  preservation 
of  our  lives  was  little  short  of  a  miracle,  est^cially  as  we  drew  the  attention  of  the  whole 
of  the  rebels  in  the  battery,  who  outnumbered  us  six  to  one ;  but  we  held  our  position 
inside  theh-  works  until  the  lines  were  carried  right  and  lefi,  and  what  rebels  remained  m 
the  battery  surrendered.* 

"  Tliese  manifestations  of  spiritual  guidance  and  protection,  were  of  too  marked  a  nature 
to  be  attributed  to  human  power. 

"  Edwarp  T.  Steeke, 
"  Late  Sergeant  0/  Co.  D,  Second  R.  L  Vols." 

When  Spiritualism  first  became  generally  known  in  New  York,  the  family 
of  a  wealthy  physician  by  the  name  of  Laird  commenced  the  mvestigatioti, 
and  soon  became  convinced  of  its  reality.  The  family  consisted  of  Dr.  and 
Mrs  Laird  and  their  only  son,  John,  a  fine  lad  of  about  fourteen.  In  the 
course  of  their  sittings  it  was  found  tiiat  Mrs.  Laird  and  her  son  were  both 
possessed  of  remarkable  mediumistic  powers,  the  fomer  being  an  excellent 
clairvoyant,  or  seeing  medium,  and  the  young  lad  one  of  the  most  powerlul 
physical  mediums  of  the  day.     The  doctor  was  highly  elated  at  this  discovery, 

*  Sergf ant  Sl«r='!  dannr  and  gallant  ™^^t^„*^^f'J^™;  ST^^L'S'iJ  *!l^^i.t^*iS!XI:h 
£'^^"d  ha«  ^h^^/ra'cSruLn  dlJmcdo^. for 'Srpromisc  uf  spiriciial  protecdon. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  Soi 

and  soon  became  in  consequence  an  enthusiastic  adherent  to  the  faith ;  but 
Mrs.  Laird,  being  nervously  sensitive  on  the  subject  of  the  world's  opinion 
touching  this  unpopular  faith,  strongly  opposed  the  continuance  of  their  cir- 
cles, and  refused  to  contribute  by  her  mediumistic  powers  to  its  propagand- 
ism.  The  family  subsequently  took  up  their  residence  in  Wisconsin  ;  and  it 
was  about  the  year  1859  that  the  author  became  acquainted  with  diem,  and 
on  the  strength  of  her  remonstrances,  that  Mrs.  Laird—  a  most  amiable  and 
interesdng,  thoughahighly  nervous  and  impressible  person  ^consented  to  re- 
new die  family  circles,  and  suffer  her  own  and  her  son's  remarkable  gifts  to 
become  instrumental  in  extending  the  knowledge  of  Spiritualism.  From  this 
time,  until  1862,  their  enjoyment  of  spirit  communion  was  continued  without 
interruption.  It  was  then  that  the  young  man,  John  Laird,  became  importu- 
nate with  his  parents  to  obtain  their  consent  to  go  as  a  volunteer  to  the  war. 
At  first  his  pleadings  were  in  vain.  The  doating  father  and  mother  could  not 
be  induced  to  part  with  their  only  child,  "  their  ewe  lamb  ;  "  but  when  John 
Laird  ui^ed  that  dieir  neighbors,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Marsden,  had  permitted 
James,  his  most  intimate  friend  and  associate,  and  dieir  only  child,  to  volun- 
teer, the  patriotic  doctor  felt  ashamed  of  withholding  his  consent,  and  at  last 
succeeded  in  wringing  a  reluctant  acquiescence  from  the  poor  mother. 

The  two  young  men  attached  themselves  to  the  same  company.  Imme- 
diately after  their  enlistment,  their  regiment  was  ordered  off  to  active  service 
in  the  South,  and  their  time  of  preparation  and  farewell  was  limited  lo  a  few 
hours  only. 

Just  before  they  departed,  the  two  families  had  assembled  to  hold  one 
final  communion  with  the  spirits,  who  were  earnestly  invoked  by  both  the 
fond  and  anxious  mothers,  to  have  special  chaise  over  their  beloved  ones. 
To  these  passionate  appeals.  Dr.  Laird  remarked  widi  pain  and  surprise,  that 
no  promises  were  made  on  the  part  of  the  spirits  to  ward  off  danger  from  the 
two  young  men ;  and  when  the  direct  query  was  propounded  by  himself; 
whether  the  boys  would  return  in  safety  to  their  homes,  no  response  could  be 
obtained,  but  in  its  place,  a  forcible  and  emphatic  communication  to  the  ef- 
fect that  "Anna"  [Mrs.  Laird]  would  be  kept  informed  of  all  that  happened 
to  them.  A  few  months  after  their  departure,  Mrs.  Laird  was  passing  through 
her  chamber  just  before  retiring  for  the  night,  when  she  suddenly  encountered 
the  apparition  of  James  Marsden,  who  appeared  in  his  soldier's  uniform,  and 
looked  well,  strong,  and  happy.  The  phantom  smiled  upon  her,  and  seemed 
to  say,  "  All  is  well,"  then  instantly  vanished. 

Mrs.  Laird  was  greatly  agitated  at  this  visitarion ;  and  deeming  that  it  must 
be  die  disembodied  appearance  of  young  Marsden  thafshe  had  witnessed, 
proceeded  the  next  morning,  with  considerable  pain  and  hesitation,  to  ac- 
quaint his  mother,  and  her  near  neighbor,  widi  what  she  had  beheld.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Marsden,  though  greatly  agitated  by  her  narrative,  clung  to  the 
hope  that  the  words  of  the  apparition,  "  All  is  well"  were  significant  of  good 
tidings  rather  than  death ;  and  in  a  few  days  their  flattering  anticipations  were 
confirmed  by  a  letter  received  from  their  son,  in  which  he  stated  that  on  the 
Friday  evening  last,  they  had  held  a  little  circle  in  the  tent  of  their  captain, 
and  that  he,  James  Marsden,  had,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  realized  the  in- 
fluence of  entrancement ;  that  for  a  few  minutes  he  was  entirely  unconscious, 
and  on  his  awakening,  he  recalled  tiiat  he  had  been  to  Wisconsin,  entered  his 
mother's  house,  and  finding  himself  unable  to  impress  her  wilb  the  fact 
of  his  presence,  diat  he  had  visited  Mrs.  Laird,  and  conversed  with  her ; 
but  the  nature  of  what  transpired  he  could  not  remember.  He  stated 
tlie  hour  to  have  been  precisely  tiiat  at  which  Mrs.  Laird  had  seen  him, 

Hosted  by  Google 

502  HISTORY  OF  MODERM 

adding  that  she  was  in  her  night-dress,  a  description  which  tallied  with  the 
facts  of  the  case. 

From  this  time,  and  during  a  period  of  two  years,  through  which  tune  the 
brave  young  men  were  perfomiing  faithful  service  to  their  country,  Mrs.  Laird 
was  constantly  visited  fay  the  living  spirit  of  James  Marsden,  who  always 
seemed  to  come  a  few  days  or  hours  in  advance  of  the  letters  wliich  the 
fond  parents  received  from  their  boys.  Mrs.  Laird  often  invoked  the  appa- 
rition of  her  own  beloved  son,  and  Mrs.  Marsden  lamented  th^it  she,  rather 
than  her  friend,  could  not  be  the  recipient  of  these  blessed  visitations ;  but 
the  special  desires  of  neither  of  die  ladies  seemed  susceptible  of  gratification, 
though  diey  could  obtain  no  other  solution  of  the  phenomenon,  than  that  Mrs. 
Laird  was  a  "  seeing  medium,"  and  "  Mrs.  Marsden  was  not,"  and  that,  during 
the  circles  which  the  young  soldiers  held  as  often  as  opportunity  perniitted, 
James  Marsden  was  the  only  one  who  was  found  to  be  endowed  with  the 
clairvoyant  faculty  which  enabled  him  to  make  these  strange  spiritual  visita- 
tions. On  a  certain  occasion,  after  one  of  the  most  fearful  conflicts  of  that 
sanguinary  period,  and  when  the  anxious  parents  of  the  absent  soldiers  were 
■    1       ly      p    t  tion  of  tidings  from  the  dreadful  battle-field,  Mrs.  Laird  was 

dd     1>  thr  wn     t    a  d    1  t  n  which  she  beheld  the  figure  of  young 

M      d        mil    g     t       'i  ^     ^"''  ^^^^ '  '^^   gallant  form  was  no 

m         as     f    Id    th        mbl  f    igged  strength  and  youthful  vigor ;  it 

pas    d    1      ly  b  f       h       p  1     yes,  with  the  slow  gliding  motion  of  a 

VI  g  p    t  h  1  t  th  n  f  rm,  the  dishevelled  hair  and  beard,  and, 

f  ry  1     t  f  h     d     s,    vas   drenched  with  blood.     Froni  this 

tune  too,  the  precious  and  consolatory  letters  of  the  young  men  ceased. 

Repeated  inquiries,  and  even  the  personal  applications  which  the  dis- 
tracted parents  made  to  the  officers,  only  afforded  them  the  sad  consolation 
of  hoping  that  their  beloved  ones  still  lived,  though  they  learned  with  un- 
speakable agony  that  they  were  both  prisoners,  and  supposed  to  be  sepa- 
rated Crom  each  other.  Soon  after  these  afflicting  tidings  had  reached  the  be- 
reaved ones,  Mrs.  Laird  was  again  clieered  by  a  renewal  of  young  Marsden's 
spiritual  visirs,  and  that  no  longer  in  the  form  of  mutilation  and  horror  which 
he  had  recently  worn,  but  apparently  well,  in  life,  health,  vigor,  and  wonder- 
ful brightness;  in  fact,  the  moment  the  eye  of  the  seeress  looked  on  the  glo- 
rious apparition,  she  felt  confident  that  she  beheld  an  enfranchised  spirit 

Of  her  own  beloved  boy  no  tidings  were  yet  received  through  any  source ; 
and  the  bright  apparition,  although  for  several  weeks  it  flashed  across  her 
path,  never  spoke,  until  one  evening  when  the  mourning  and  heart-broken 
parents  being  assembled  around  their  little  circle  table  as  usual,  Mrs.  Laird 
became  entranced,  in  which  condition  she  received  from  the  spirit  of  James 
Marsden  the  following  communication :  "  Let  my  father  make  a  journey  to 
Donellsonville  and  apply  to  Captain  Somers,  whom  he  will  there  find  in  charge 
of  my  old  company,  and  from  him  he  shall  receive  the  poorbroken  shell  from 
which  the  butterfly  has  escaped  into  the  sunlit  air  of  eternity."  As  if  to  make 
{this  communicadon  more  significant,  Dr.  Laird  informed  the  audior,  in  his  n^- 
rative  of  those  events,  that  the  remarkably  merry,  though  soniewhat  erratic 
disposition  of  young  Marsden,  had  procured  him  amongst  his  schoolmates, 
the  cognomen  of  the  "  butterfly."  To  all  the  piteous  appeals  of  die  unhappy 
mother  that  James  would  infonn  her  of  the  fate  of  her  own  boy,  Mrs.  Laird, 
could  obtain  no  odier  reply  than  a  sorrowful  shake  of  the  head,  when  the  ap- 
parition would  immediately  disappear.  Five  weeks  after  this  communication, 
Mr.  Marsden  returned  to  his  home  in  Wisconsin  from  Donellsonville,  with 
the  casket  that  contained  die  poor  remains  of  his  dead  hero,  who  had  died,  as 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRTTUALrSM.  So3 

he  learned  from  a  Captain  Somers,  then  in  charge  of  James's  old  company, 
bravely  on  the  battle-field,  covered  with  wounds.  Captain  Somers  on  discov- 
ering the  body  of  the  poor  sufferer  still  living  amidst  a  heap  of  slain,  had 
caused  him  to  be  removed  to  a  temporay  tent  erected  on  the  plains,  where  he 
lingered  for  some  hours  before  he  expired  ;  and  it  was  obviously,  upon  a  com- 
parisoo  of  dates,  on  the  evening  after  his  removal  to  the  tent,  but  some  hours 
before  his  death,  that  his  ghostly  apparition  in  the  red  panoply  of  the  dread- 
ful batde,  had  appeared  to  Mrs.  Laird.  At  his  own  request  his  reniams  had 
been  deposited  in  such  a  place  as  would  enable  his  father  to  identify  and  re- 
move them  without  difficulty,  though  Captain  Somers  acknowledged  that, 
debilitated  by  a  severe  attack  of  sickness,  he  had  been  unable  to  communi- 
cate, as  he  had  promised,  with  James  Marsden's  family,  and  in  consequence 
he  was  greatly  astonished  at  the  information  which  enabled  his  father  to  in- 
quire for  him,  and  thus  obtain  the  poor  lad's  remains. 

But  still  no  tidings  came  of  John  I-aird.  At  last  die  unhappy  father 
himself  resolved  to  depart  on  the  quest,  find  out,  and,  if  possible,  rescue  his 
unfortunate  captive  child,  if  indeed  he  yet  lived;  odierwise,  "to  perish  with 
him."  The  night  before  his  departure,  a  series  of  the  most  temble  pictures 
that  the  mind  could  conceive  of,  flitted  before  the  entranced  eyes  of  the 
unhappy  Mrs.  Laird,  as  they  sat  at  their  usual  circle.  James  Marsden 
was  there,  and  in  answer  to  the  solicitations  of  the  whole  circle,  promised  to 
disclose  the  fate  of  John.  At  first  he  conducted  the  clairvoyant  spiritually 
dirough  all  tlie  sickening  and  heart-rending  scenes  of  a  deserted  battle  field, 
the  day  after  the  carnage.  From  thence  they  passed  to  a  prison,  the  name 
of  which,  for  tlie  honor  of  humanity  we  will  not  write,  desiring  rather  that  its 
ghastly  record  should  sink  into  eternal  oblivion  than  to  renew  the  tale  that 
beca-ne  only  too  popular  when  its  horrors  were  made  public.  There  the 
seeress  beheld  wretched  men  in  every  stage  of  sickness,  corruption,  and 
starvation;  dying  of  filtli,  neglect,  inanition,  and  cruelty.  Mad,  stupid, 
raving,  some  scarce  living,  more  still  just  perishing  in  the  last  agonies  of  their 
hideous  and  revolting  doom, — perhaps  it  had  not  been  possible  for  the 
wretched  mother  to  have  recognized  her  once  bright  and  blooming  boj- 
amidst  the  awful  wrecks  of  humanity,  thus  maimed,  tortured,  and  muti- 
lated out  of  life  by  the  remorseless  spirit  of  fratricidal  war;  but  not  being 
able  to  do  so,  the  horror-struck  mother  kept  cherishing  the  behef  in  her 
heart  of  hearts,  that  he  was  dead,  he  must  be  dead;  nay,  she  hoped,  prayed, 
and  shrieked  aloud  her  petition  to  heaven,  that  he  might  be  dead,  rather 
than  live  to  form  one  of  this  awful  and  ghastly  crew,  dragging  out  an  exist- 
ence to  which  ten  thousand  deaths  would  be  infinitely  preferable.  Whilst 
uttering  these  frantic  petitions,  from  out  as  it  seemed  the  very  midst  of  the 
steam  which  arose  in  foul  exhalations  from  the  wards  of  the  prison  hospital 
fso  called],  a  bright  tongue  of  flame  shot  up  in  the  air,  and  from  it  leaped 
into  the  very  chamber  in  which  she  sat,  as  it  seemed,  flie  living  and  glorified 
semblance  of  her  son,  John  Laird.  His  face  was  beautiful,  fresh,  young,  and 
full  of  joy,  as  if  for  some  mighty  liberation.  He  wore  no  earthly  garments,  but 
a  robe  as  if  of  sheeny  light  floated  around  his  fomi;  his  dark  locks  were 
encircled  by  a  glittering  wreath  of  stars,  which  the  seeress  at  once  com- 
prehended to  be  ike  crown  of  martyrdom.  Far  below  him,  as  it  seemed,  in 
space,  yet  gazing  aflectionately  upon  him,  was  the  radiant  form  of  young 
Marsden.  -     ^  1 1     i     r 

It  appeared  as  if  these  spirits  had  not  met  before,  for  a  joyful  look  of  recog- 
nition Uluminated  the  face  of  John  Laird,  and  his  spirit  seemed  as  if  by  irre- 
astible  attraction  to  float  down  towards  the  form  of  his  friend,  who  on  his 

Hosted  by  Google 

504  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

part  slightly  ascended  lo  meet  him.  They  then  wound  their  arms  tenderly 
around  each  other,  and,  gazing  fof  a  moment  with  countenances  of  the  most 
impressive  love  and  beatitude  upon  the  still  entranced  mother,  they  gradually 
ascended  from  her  view,  in  the  most  transcendent  and  glorious  clouds  of  light, 
illumined  with,  radiant  faces  which  seemed  to  gleam  in  countless  multi- 
tudes tiirough  the  brilliant  and  many  colored  wreaths  of  shining  atmosphere, 
in  which  they  dissappeared. 

At  tire  close  of  this  vision,  the  dim  lights  that  were  burning  in  the  apart- 
ment dowly  went  out,  leaving  the  room  only  illuminated  by  the  moonbeams, 
which  shimmered  through  the  half-closed  curtains;  and  in  this  solemn  gloom 
a  strain  of  the  most  wondrous  and  delicious  music  vibrated  through  the  apart 
ment,  lasting  for  a  period  of  over  seven  minutes,  during  which  its  wonderful 
and  ecstatic  sweetness  produced  a  calm  so  holy,  tranquil,  and  soothing,  over 
all  present,  that  no  word  was  spoken,  no  surprise  manifested,  and  not  even  a 
sigh  was  breathed  by  any  present  until  nearly  ten  minutes  after  the  heavenly 
strains  had  died  away.  Mr.  Laird's  house,  where  the  circle  was  held,  was 
detached;  not  a  single  instrument  of  music  was  to  be  found  within  it,  nor  was 
there  any  possible  source  whence  it  could  have  come. 

There  were  present  at  this  scene,  Miss  Sarah  James,  teacher,  of  Boston ; 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Schooley,  of  Cambridge,  Massachusetts ;  and  Miss  Mary 
Merton,  also  of  Boston,  besides  the  two  families ;  all  of  whom  testify  to  the 
repetition  of  this  fearful  vision  through  the  entranced  lips  of  Mrs.  Laird,  and 
the  wonderful  and  ecstatic  strains  of  music  that  succeeded  it.  The  above  cir- 
cumstances were  detailed  to  the  author  by  Dr.  Laird  hunself,— now  busied 
in  mining  operations  in  the  territories,^ and  testified  to  by  his  friend,  Mr. 
Marsden,  and  Mr.  T.  D.  Connor,  his  clerk,  ^the  person  who  subsequently 
traced  the  death  of  John  Laird  in  one  of  the  Southern  prisons,  and  whose 
testimony  on  their  revolting  and  inhuman  treatment  of  prisoners,  was  after- 
wards made  public.  Both  the  poor  fathers  became  lonely  as  well  as  childless 
men ;  Mrs.  Laird  having  soon  followed  her  soldier  boy  to  the  land  of  light, 
fix)ni  whence  he  continually  came  to  summon  her  home ;  and  her  friend,  Mrs, 
Marsden,  having  sought  to  assauge  the  agony  of  her  bereavement  by  entering 
a  rigid  Catholic  establishment,  where  the  consolations  of  Spiritualism  are 
meted  out  in  minimun  proportions,  by  her  ghostly  confessor.  Both  Dr. 
L^d  and  Mr.  Mtirsden  retained  their  unwavering  faith  in  spiritual  exist- 
ence and  communion,  and  cheerfully  pursued  their  labors  in  duty  to  humanity, 
and  the  confident  hope  of  shortly  joining  their  beloved  ones  in  the  land  of 
never-setting  suns. 

In  Cmcinnati,  Ohio,  the  author  met  a  brave  young  soldier.  Lieutenant 
Emmett,  who  had  been  compelled  to  retire  from  a  career  of  honorable  dis- 
tinction in  the  army  on  account  of  the  loss  of  an  arm. 

He  was  a  strong  Spirituahst,  and  an  excellent  writing  medium.  On  one 
occasion,  being  at  a  circle  where  the  author  was  present,  he  drew  &om  his 
pocket-book  a  communication  from  his  spirit  father,  which  read  to  die  fol- 
lowing effect:  that  if  he  [Frank]  would  go  to  the  war  no  bullet  which  was 
yet  forged,  should  harm  him ;  no  sword  could  maim  him,  or  fire  scorch 
hiin  for  he  [his  father,  in  the  spirit-world]  could  and  would  protect  him 
through  all  the  perils  of  war ;  and  that  he,  Frank  Emmett,  would  be  safer  far 
on  the  battle-field  than  in  the  peaceful  scenes  of  home.  "  How  then  is  it," 
asked  one  of  the  circle,  "  tliat  we  see  you  thus  maimed,  but  still  in  the  uniform 
of  the  army  ?  "  Lieutenant  Emmett  replied :  "  My  spirit  father  kept  his  word. 
I  enlisted  with  the  First  New  York  Volunteers  as  a  private.  I  won  my 
present  rank  step  by  step,  serving  in  six  battles  and  always  finding  myself 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  JoS 

forward, — sometimes  in  defiance  of  orders, ^ — in  the  thickest  of  every  fray.  I 
ha,ve  been  the  target  at  whicli  a  hundred  muskets  were  aimed  i  I  have  been 
the  centre  of  a  fi-eost  of  swords,  and  have  had  no  less  than  five  bayonets 
pointed  at  my  very  throat ;  yet,  somehow,  and  in  a  variety  of  ways  too  nu- 
merous too  relate,  I  escaped  diem  all,  without  a  single  scratch. 

"  My  play-going  comrades  used  to  call  me  "  Der  Fneschutz,"  and  say  I '  bore 
a  charmed  Hfc'  But,  forgetful  that  my  blessed  father's  promise  of  protection 
extended  only  to  the  battle-field,  and  that  he  had  again  and  again  answered  to 
my  poor  wife,  who  was  always  remonstrating  against  my  continuance  in  the 
army,  '  Frank  will  always  be  safer  on  the  battle-field  than  at  home,  whilst 
the  war  lasts,'  I  at  last  yielded  to  Mary's  earnest  solicitations,  obtained  a 
leave  of  absence,  and  went  down  to  New  Orleans  to  spend  my  furlough  with 
her.  The  second  day  of  my  visit,  whilst  out  riding  with  my  wife,  her  horse 
took  fright,  and  I,  in  my  endeavor  to  arrest  him,  was  thrown  down  and  broke 
my  arm.  The  poor  stump  which  I  now  carry,  is  the  testimony  to  the  truth 
of  my  spirit  father's  warning." 

Mrs.  Emmett,  who  was  present  at  this  circle,  confirmed  her  husband's  state 
ments,  adding  tliat  she  sometimes  feared  Frank's  communications,  as  they 
came  through  himself,  were  colored  by  his  own  warlike  wishes  ;  but  since  she 
had  heard  his  comrade's  marvellous  stories  of  her  husband's  hair-breadth 
escapes,  she  was  convinced  that  some  power  had  been  effective  to  guard 
him  on  the  batde-field,  that  could  not  extend  its  protecting  influence  else- 
where. 

In  the  western  part  of  New  York  resides  a  lady,  now  the  wife  of  a  Presby- 
terian minister,  whose  determined  opposition  to  Spiritualism  induces  her,  to 
withhold  her  name  from  publication. 

The  circumstances  of  the  following  narrative  are  so  well  known,  however, 
that  they  are  already  public  property,  and  too  fully  verified  in  the  belief  of 
large  numbers  of  persons  to  need  the  additional  testimony  of  a  name. 

Mrs.  S,  was  a  widow  when  the  war  first  broke  out,  and  being  a  warm  par- 
tisan of  the  Northern  cause,  she  cheerfully  consented  to  part  with  the  eldest 
of  her  five  "boys,"  to  enlist  as  one  of  die  earliest  volunteers  in  a  New  York 
regiment. 

About  five  months  after  his  departure,  she  one  morning  announced  to  the 
rest  of  the  family,  in  calm  and  unfaltering  accents,  that  "  Ernest  was  gone." 
"He  appeared  to  me  last  night,"  said  the  mother,  "with  the  life-blood 
streaming  from  his  wounded  side ;  assured  me  he  had  effected  an  instantan- 
eous transit  into  the  land  of  peace  and  rest,  and  had  already  been  welcomed 
by  his  father  and  sister,  all  well  and  gloriously  happy."  "  He  came  last 
night,"  she  added,  to  tell  me  of  his  change,  and  to  ask  that  I  would  send 
Edward  in  his  place."  So  Edward  went,  and  was  gladly  welcomed  by  the 
comrades  of  the  gallant  Ernest,  whose  place  was  indeed  vacant,  as  the  mother 
had  seen. 

In  another  five  months,  the  widow  and  her  three  remaning  sons  being 
seated  at  the  entrance  porch  of  her  mansion,  she  suddenly  started  up  ex- 
claiming, "Great  Heaven!  my  two  boys,  Edward  and  Ernest  are  here  1 
Alas  !  alas  I  Ernest  leads  his  brother  by  the  hand  mortally  wounded,  but  not 
yet  released  —  oh!  when  will  the  deliverance  come?"  .  .  .  _  .  .  - 
Then,  after  a  long  pause,  she  cried  in  a  tone  of  exultation  and  anguish  com- 
bined :  "  Thank  God 'tis  over."  "The  sting  of  death  is  past;  my  brave 
Edward  is  free  and  has  joined  the  heroes  who  have  gone  before.  'What  is 
the  hour  William  ?"     "  Half-past  eight,  mothei;,"  replied  die  third  son. 

The  dispatches  of  the  following  week  brought  the  tidings  that  Edward  S. 

Hosted  by  Google 

5o6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

had  been  shot  at  his  post  of  duty  at  twenty  minutes  past  eight  on  Friday 
evening  the  preceding  week,  and  had  expired  after  ten  minutes  of  suffering. 
The  family  were  all  Spirituahats,  and  all,  from  the  mother  to  the  infant  of 
eighteen  mondis  old,  good  mediums.  With  their  faith,  and  the  mother's 
patriotic  enthusiasm  then,  it  was  no  marvel  to  their  neighbors  that  William, 
the  diird  son,  departed  for  the  war  within  two  weeks  after  tlie  death  of  his 
second  brother;  but  that  which  seemed  a  blow  almost  too  hard  for  the  be- 
reaved mother  to  bear  was  the  fact  that  her  fourth  boy,  Merwin,  a  lad  of 
only  nineteen  years  old,  insisted  upon  accompanying  him  to  the  fatal  field. 
As  they  took  leave  of  the  dear  home  and  the  precious  mother,  young 
Menvin  murmured,  "1  know  we  shall  never  return,  dearest  mother;  Ernest 
and  Edward  want  us  in  spirit  land  to  help  form  a  regiment  of  guardian  spirits, 
who  are  soon  to  turn  the  tide  of  war,  and  give  the  day  to  liberty  and  the 
Union;  but  they  say,  mother,  they  cannot  do  without  us." 

"  Then  go,  my  beloved  ones,  and  God's  will  be  done,"  sobbed  the  mother. 
"  When  the  angels  cal!  up  heroes  for  America's  salie,  let  the  lament  of  the 
widow  be  hushed,  and  the  wail  of  mourning  be  turned  into  the  song  of  re- 
joicing." 

Mrs.  S.  informed  the  author  that  she  knew  from  memoranda  which  none 
but  a  mother  could  have  kept  widi  such  fearful  exactitude,  tliat  it  was  just  five 
months  between  the  deaths  of  her  two  eldest  sons ;  and  when  the  first  five 
months  had  expired  since  her  tliird  and  fourth  had  departed,  and,  in  the  sixth 
month  afterwards,  slie  heard  from  them  that  they  were  alive  and  well,  her 
mother's  heart  rebounded  with  the  joyful  hope  that  the  spell  was  broken,  and 
her  treasures  might  yet  be  returned  to  her. 

It  was  ten  months,  to  a  day,  since  the  departure  of  William  and  Merwin,  that 
Mrs.  S.  was  sitting  with  her  only  remaining  boy,  a  lad  of  twelve  summers,  sadly 
gazmg  mto  the  parlor  fire,  and  thinking  of  the  absent  mortals  and  the  hov- 
ering unmortals,  when,  in  the  dim  twilight  of  the  fast  deepening  evening,  young 
Lewis  started  up,  exclaiming,  "Oh  mother!  here  they  all  are  again:  here's 
Ernest  and  Edward,  and  Willie  and  Merwin  too,  and  they're  all  in  their 
soldiers'  clothes,  and  Willie  and  Merwin  are  covered  with  blood  and  dust ; 
and  oh  !  mother,  they  wear  no  caps,  and  they've  all  such  shining  rays  round 
theu-  heads,  and  tlieir  faces  do  look  so  bright !  Mother  !  mother  !  the  boys 
are  angels  now,  and  they  shine  like  the  sun  at  noonday  !" 

A  faint  cry  of  agony,  a  muttered  petidon  to  Heaven  for  strength,  and  then 
tlie  bereaved  mother  cried,  "  Alas,  alas !  Then  I've  no  more  sons  to  give  for 
America." 

"  Yes,  but  you  have,  though,  mother,"  rejoined  the  boy  ;  "  you  have  me. 
The  boys  say  they've  come  to  fetch  me." 

With  a  shriek  like  a  wild  animal,  the  miserable  mother  caught  the  boy  to 
her  breast  with  a  clutch  of  iron. 

"  Poor  child !  "  she  answered,  "  what  couldst  fhou  do  for  America,  that  my 
heart's  last  tendril  should  be  rent  from  n:e  ?  No,  child,  no  !  thou  canst  not, 
thou  shalt  not  go  !  besides,  were  there  ten  thousand  such  as  thee,  what  could 
ye  all  do  for  America?  " 

"  I  am  to  be  a  dmmmer,  mother,"  the  little  hero  replied.  "  Ernest  says 
he'll  send  home  Willie  and  Merwin  to  fetch  me  ;  but  they'll  all  four  swear  to 
bring  me  alive,  safe,  and  well  through  the  war.  They  swear  it,  mother,  they 
swear  it" 

The  following  week.  Captain  Conrad  Thomas,  a  neighbor  and  warm  friend 
of  the  bereaved  mother,  escorted  back  the  poor  remains  of  her  two  brave  boys, 
who  had  been  killed  fighting  side  by  side  at  the  batde  of  Gettysbuig.     Cap- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  507 

tain  Thomas  was,  like  Mrs.  S.,  a  strong  Spiritualist,  and  moved  by  the  earnest 
pleadings  of  little  Louis,  and  repeated  communications  from  the  band  of  spirit 
brothers,  with  the  emphatic  assurance  that  not  a  hair  of  tlie  child's  head 
would  be  injured,  he  succeeded  in  inducing  Mrs.  S.  to  let  tlie  last,  son  iJie 
widow's  only  remaining  treasure,  depart  with  Captain  Thomas,  in  the  capacity 
of  drummer-boy.  Little  Louis  did  return,  and  tliat  in  the  mortal  fomi,  alive, 
safe,  and  well,  to  the  lonely  widow's  home,  but  not  until  the  very  close  of  tlie 
war,  and  not  until  after  his  young  life  had  been  given  him  in  many  a  hair- 
breadth escape  and  perilous  adventure,  in  whidi,  he  repeatedly  affinned,  he  saw 
the  uplifted  swords  of  his  four  spirit  brothers  crossed  above  his  head,  and  form- 
ing an  impregnable  fortress  of  defence,  against  which  every  weapon  fonned  by 
man  was  wielded  in  vain.  The  little  drummer-boy  became  a  great  feature  in 
the  latter  portion  of  die  war  ;  and  when  he  did  return,  he  came  to  his  happy 
motlier  loaded  widi  trophies  of  his  gallant  behavior,  and  escorted,  as  he  per- 
sisted in  declaring,  by  his  band  of  angel  brothers. 

The  circumstances  of  this  little  history  are  familiar  to  many  an  inhabitant 
of  Western  New  York;  and  though  their  heroine,  in  deference  to  her  new 
marital  relations,  is  silent  upon  the  spiritualistic  features  of  the  narrative,  she 
cherishes  them  in  her  heart  and  memory,  and  seems  willing  to  allow  her  rev- 
erend husband  to  stigmatize  the  oft-told  tale  as  "all  hallucination,"  for  the 
sake  of  the  glorious  certainties  which  revealed  to  her  the  immortal  destiny  of 
her  arisen  heroes. 

•  With  the  marvellous  history  of  die  pure  and  glorious  martyr  of  Bom  Hemi 
before  us  ;  with  the  historical  evidences  of  how  an  unskilled  and  simple  peas- 
ant girl  could  marshal  the  splendid  armies  of  Fraiice,  redeem  lier  country 
from  the  yoke  of  the  oppressor,  and  perform  feats  of  heroism  outrivalling  die 
most  daring  deeds  of  ancient  chivalry;  with  the  almost  fabulous  glory  of  Joan 
of  Arc's  history  as  our  precedent,  and  the  clearest  of  testimony  that  its  tran- 
scendent marvels  were  solely  achieved  on  the  bidding  of  angels,  and  under  the 
immediate  guidance  and  personal  direction  of  spiritual  beings,  it  seems 
almost  puerile  to  cite  these  obscure  incidents  of  a  similar,  though  in  com- 
parison, scarcely  remarkable  spiritual  supervision.  Did  our  space  permit  us, 
however,  to  narrate  all  the  spiritual  experiences  of  Uiis  eventful  period,  we 
should  find  them  the  same  in  degree,  though  less  in  splendid  power  than  that 
of  the  martyred  maid  of  Orleans,  whilst  their  vast  numbers  might  well  prove 
an  equivalent  for  the  lack  of  striking  interest  and  romantic  beauty. 

In  truth  the  same  divine  messengers  who  led  on  Joan  of  Arc  to  the  salva- 
tion of  France,  formed  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  and  a  shield  of  defence  about  the 
warriors  who  did  battle  for  America's  freedom.  Though  the  means  were  less 
apparent,  the  results  were  not  less  magnificent.  God's  angels  led  on  the 
hosts  who  fought  for  the  liberties  of  France  through  the  mediumship  of  her 
glorious  martyr. 

Invisible  armies  marched  to  the  rescue  of  America's  freedom  through  many 
mediumistic  warriors. 
The  origin  and  results  of  the  warfare  in  each  case  were  alike  divine.^ 
Heaven  itself,  through  human  instrumentalities,  does  battle  on  the  side  of 
liberty  and  justice. 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

CHAPTER   XLVI. 

THE    PROGRESS    OF    SPIRITUALISM    AFTER   THE  WAR   OF    1E61-S. 
"OhlEfno  olha  boon  were  given, 

A  Review  of  Spieitualism  m  New  York,  New  England,  etc, — Judoe  Edmondi 
AT  Music  Hall,  Boston ^Spieituahsm  in  Washington— Correspondence— 
Our  Western  Mediums. 

Our  history  has  now  readied  liia,t  point  where,  as  a  consecutive  n  rrative, 
our  labors  are  almost  ended.  To  pursue,  at  any  further  length,  the  ouching 
incidents  and  spiritual  experiences  which  grew  out  of  the  great  American  war, 
would  require  a  separate  and  special  record,  and  that  of  an  almost  indefinite 
size,  since  the  vast  influx  of  spiritual  existence  which  the  fields  of  carnage 
supplied,  have  furnished  a  completely  new  and  peculiar  array  of  testimony 
concerning  the  communion  of  spirits  with  earth. 

Our  limited  space  compels  us  to  close  the  historical  portions  of  our  record 
by  a  summary  of  the  status  which  Spiritualism  assumed  after  the  disruptive 
action  of  tlie  war  had  ceased,  leaving  only  its  inevitable  efi'ects  behind. 

As  the  preliminary  step  towards  arriving  at  "the  whole  conclusion  of  the 
matter,"  we  invite  the  reader  to  review  the  ground  which  we  have  hitherto 
trodden,  and  consider  its  several  aspects  under  the  influence  which  the  reced- 
ing tides  of  war  have  left 

When  the  roar  of  the  tempest  was,  hushed,  and  the  -waii  for  the  martyred 
President,  the  last  victim  offered  up  to  the  Moloch  of  the  battle-field,  had 
died  away  into  the  silence  of  breathless  expectation,  voices  of  complaint  and 
lament,  or  resignation  and  renewed  aspiration,  went  up  from  the  broken 
ranks  of  the  Spiritual  army  in  every  State  of  the  Union. 

The  Spiritualists  suffered  much  during  the  calamitous  day  of  carnage.  _  As 
unsparing  in  their  devotion  to  the  country's  weal  as  any  other  denomination, 
they  did  not  enjoy  the  same  advantages,  in  consequence  of  tiicir  lack  ot 
organization.  Having  had  neither  special  provision  for  administering  reme- 
dies in  their  peculiar  fashion,  nor  homes  for  their  own  sick,  poor,  maimed,  or 
bereaved  ones,  they  were  compelled  to  merge  the  marked  indiv'd  al'ty  vh'ch 
their  belief  developed,  into  the  customs  and  habits  adopted  by  the  a  ous 
associations  to  which  they  were  obliged  to  apply  for  relief 

The  Sabbath  meetings,  too,  shorn  of  many  of  their  membe  a  d  uch 
of  even  their  transient  support,  languished  for  lack  of  the  pem  anence 
and  stability  which  regular  church  organizations  give  to  other  bod  es  St  11 
a  counterbalance  to  these  conditions  of  external  depression  was  fo  nd  n  the 
inevitable  increase  of  aspiration  towards  the  bright  land  where  so  many 
thousands  of  spirits,  so  lately  the  centres  of  human  love  and  interest,  had 
passed  on.  Yearning  hearts  that  had  never  before  dreamed  of  communion 
with  the  dead,  or  perhaps  scornfully  repudiated  its  idea,  now  turned  wistfully 
towards  the  golden  gates  through  which  their  best  beloved  had  vanished. 

It  has  been  said  that  in  the  four  years'  conflict  that  desolated  the  land, 
over  a  million  of  men,  the  flower  of  America's  manhood,  strength,  and  power, 

Hosted  by  Google 

^:>>s^?  /f^fio^/ 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  JO? 

had  disappeared  from  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  perished  on  the  blood-stained 
altars  of  the  war  demon.  Gone!  none  but  the  immortals  themelves  could 
tell  whither.  .  . 

To  those  realms  of  living  manhood  and  resurrected  sptTitual  bemg,  then, 
how  many  millions  of  mourning  hands  were  piteously  outstretched !  how 
many  passionate  lamentations  have  recalled  the  fleeting  spints  back  to  earth ! 
how  many  tendrils  of  love  have  hound  them  in  ties,  which  death  itself  could 
not  loose,  to  the  homes  which  their  mortal  dissolution  had  left  desolate! 

Broken,  scattered,  and  heterogeneous  as  the  ranks  of  Spiritualism  appear 
after  the  desolating  action  of  the  war  has  swept  through  them,  never  in  any 
period  of  its  brief  history  has  it  taken  so  deep  and  fervent  a  hold  upon 
the  hearts  of  a  mourning  people,  or  been  responded  to  more  fully  by  die 
emphatic  efforts  of  the  recruited  armies  of  the  spirit  country.  The  founda- 
tion of  a  grand  and  powerful  epic  new  in  spiritual  history  are  being  laid  there- 
fore, even  whilst  the  pen  of  the  scribe  is  recording  the  dosing  up  of  the  era 
through  which  it  has  just  passed. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  its  present  external  aspects. 

In  New  York  Cit>',  Sphitualism,  though  still  universally  believed  in,  and 
warmly  clierished,  has  become  less  publicly  manifest  than  formerly. 

Two  Sabbath  meetings  are  commonly  sustained,  with  a  fair  share  of  sup- 
port, and  whenever  the  rostrum  is  filled  by  favorite  speakers,  crowded  audi- 
ences testi^  to  their  continued  interest  in  the  faith. 

In  our  notice  of  societies,  etc.,  will  be  found  a  copy  of  the  charter  on 
which  "  The  First  Society  of  Spiritnahsts  "  in  New  York  was  founded.  This 
organization  started  in  1866,  and  for  several  months  during  the  succeedmg 
\ear,  in  fact,  up  to  the  period  of  her  departure  for  Europe,  the  author  was 
the  regular  speaker  of  the  society. 

The  meetings  were  held  at  Dodworth's  Hall,  and  crowded  audiences  sus- 
tained them,  even  during  the  most  inclement  seasons  of  a  severe  winter. 
Since  then  the  system  of  employing  transient  speakers  has  been  adopted, 
but  with  less  success  than  attendb  the  ministrations  of  a  permanent  lecturer. 
There  is  a  second  meeting  in  New  York  for  spiritual  Sunday  services,  and 
amongst  its  most  acceptable  features  are  the  occasional  addresses  of  the  ever 
esteemed  and  popular  exponent  of  the  "  Harmonial  Philosophy,"  A.  J.  Davis, 
and  the  delightful  meetings  of  the  children's  lyceum,  founded  by  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Davis,  and  hereafter  to  be  described  in  full.  As  the  first  association 
of  the  lyceum  order  was  convened  in  New  York,  under  the  personal  super- 
vision of  its  founder,  this  lyceum  may  be  regarded  as  the  parent  gathenng, 
and  hence  possesses  a  peculiar  interest  and  claim  to  notice. 

The  attendance  is  very  numerous,  often  numbering  some  hundreds  of 
children  and  adults,  and  promoting  a  very  earnest  and  eflectual  interest  m 
Spiritualism  amongst  the  rising  generation. 

A  third  Sabbath  spiritual  meeting  is  held  at  Lamartine  Hall,  Eightii  Avenue, 
at  which  trance  speakers  occasionally  officiate. 

Sunday  services  of  Spiritualists  are  also  held,  and  very  munerously  at- 
tended, in  Brooklyn,  William sburgh,  Jersey  City,  etc,  so  that  New  York  and 
its  envhons  are  as  well  supplied  in  respect  to  doctrinal  teaching  on  this  sub- 
ject, as  by  any  of  those  denominational  organizations  that  date  their  existence 
back  for  centuries. 

The  long  estabhshed  and  still  interesting  conference  holds  its  sessions  be- 
tween the  hours  of  morning  and  evening  service  in  connection  with  the  Sab- 
bath meetings  of  the  "  First  Society  of  Spiritualists."  Besides  these  pub- 
lic opportunities  for  investigation,  New  York  is  rich  in  healing,  trance,  test, 

Hosted  by  Google 

■510  HISTORY  OF  MODERN- 

cliwrvoyant,  and  other  mediums,  whose  addresses  are  to  be  found  in  the  Banner 
of  Light,  and  whose  ranks  are  constantly  supphed  by  the  floating  spiritualistic 
population  which  gravitates,  like  all  other  classes,  in  ever-living  tides  of  fresh 
thought  and  progress,  towards  this  great  cosmopolitan  centre. 

It  is  generally  believed,  however,  that  the  great  sum  of  New  York  Spiritu- 
alism exists  in  private  circles,  of  which  there  are  several  thousand  held  weekly 
in  the  city  and  its  environs ;  in  fact,  to  find  one  family  who  have  not  had  in 
their  own  persons,  or  that  of  their  immediate  acquaintances,  some  medium- 
istic  gifts  or  spiritual  experiences,  is  the  exception,  rather  than  the  rule  of 
New  York  life. 

In  remembering  the  names  that  have  figured  in  the  early  portions  of  this 
volume,  we  may  recall  many  who  have  withdrawn  from  the  arena  of  public 
life  in  connection  with  Spiritualism,  but  not  one  who,  to  the  author's  knowl- 
edge, has  renounced  faith  in  its  teachings,  or  interest  in  its  phenomena. 

The  swift  and  stormy  tides  which  sweep  onward  the  genius  of  the  American 
people,  are  fraught  with  convulsive  changes  and  revolutionary  springs  of  ac- 
tion, hence  the  stability  of  character  which  is  found  in  older  and  more  con- 
servative countries,  is  something  lacking  here,  especially  in  New  York  City, 
which,  both  in  respect  to  its  inhabitants  and  their  leading  traits  of  character,  is 
a  perpetual  scene  of  mutation. 

The  external  aspect  of  Spiritualism  being  as  changeful  as  the  genius  of  the 
city,  we  are  all  the  more  happy  to  observe  that  such  well-tried  champions  of 
the  cause  as  Mr.  P.  E.  Famsworth,  Dr.  Robert  Hal  lock,  Mr.  Albert  Day,. 
Mrs.  J.  M.  Jackson,  A.  J.  Davis,  and  others  who  have  long  and  bravely  borne 
the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day,  are  still  at  their  posts  of  duty,  and  ever  ready 
and  untiring  in  distributing  the  bread  of  life  which  tiiey  have  found  in  Spiritu- 
alism. 

Mrs.  Margaretta  Fox  Kane,  and  her  sister  "  Katy  Fox,"  are  at  present 
residents  of  New  York ;  and  the  glorious  telegraph  which  proclamed  the  mes- 
sages of  immortality  through  tiieir  childish  organisms  twenty  years  ago,  is  still 
sounding  in  their  matured  womanhood. 

Their  eldest  sister,  Leah,  now  Mrs.  Underhill,  in  the  privacy  of  her  happy 
home,  and  in  sympathy  with  her  noble  husband,  still  at  times  affords  to  her 
large  circle  of  friends  the  charm  of  her  undiminished  power,  though  in  the 
retirement  of  private  life,  the  same  precious  joy-bells  of  immortality  ring  out, 
that  gladdened  the  heart  of  many  a  bereaved  mourner  in  her  former  public 

Of  all  the  enthusiastic  believers  who  once  formed  the  ranks  of  New  York 
Spiritualism,  we  know  of  many  who  have  passed  to  the  realm  of  spiritual 
verities  to  whose  threshold  they  were  formerly  but  pilgrims;  of  many  more 
who  have  wandered  from  the  fast  {)cating  heart  of  New  York ;  and  some 
few  who,  as  advocates  and  supporters  of  its  public  propaganda,'  have  grown 
weary,  or  deem  they  have  done  enough,  and  think  half  a  score  of  years 
effort,  devoted  to  tlie  cause  of  eternity,  is  sufficient  for  one  lifetime.  But  of 
all  whose  faces  are  seen  no  more  in  the  ranks  of  the  mighty  army  of 
progression,  in  this  American  Babylon,  we  know  of  but  few  untruthful 
enough  to  deny  the  facts  of  Spiritualism,  or  renounce  its  faith,  however 
valueless  it  may  have  become  to  them.  Many  of  its  once  prominent  advo- 
cates have  grown  tired  of  shouldering  the  sins,  follies,  and  shortcomings  of 
those  who,  called  in  from  life's  highways  and  byways,  are  tmly  spiritually 
"sick,  and  in  need  of  the  physician."  Odiers  deem  the  cost  ia  too  great, 
and  count  a  thousand  dollars  laid  up  in  the  National  Treasury  of  America, 
or  invested  in  the  bank  of  popular  opinion,  represented  by  popular  churches 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SFJRITVALISM.  S'^ 

and  popular  preachers,  better  worth  keeping  than  ten  thousand  times  that 
sum  paid  as  its  usury,  from  the  eternal  treasuries  of  a  just  and  compensative 
hereafter. 

To  one  of  fhose  who  had  thus  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  turned  back, 
the  autlior  lately  queried,  "And  do  you  still  call  yourself  a  Spiritualist?" 
"  In  belief,  I  certainly  am ;"  was  the  reply,  "  for  how  can  I  unknow,  what  I 
have  once  known."  And  herein  consists  the  real  difference  between  Spirit- 
ualism and  every  other  form  of  belief  Sectarian  religionists  believe  without 
knowledge  :     Spiritualists  know,  and  therefore  believe. 

Still  we  repeat,  the  belief  in  its  abiding  truth  and  consoUng  phenomena,  is 
more  than  ever  rife  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  in  the  opening  of  the 
new  era  tliat  dawns  with  the  inauguration  of  liberty  for  every  child  of  the 
great  new  worid,  we  look  to  see  New  York  once  more  the  mighty  fortress 
it  has  been  of  yore,  in  the  spiritual  faith. 

In  Boston,  Spiritualism  appears  to  have  recuperated  more  rapidly  from  the 
paralyzing  effects  of  the  war.  Here  a  few  faithful  and  zealous  workers  who 
are  more  concerned  to  reorganize  its  scattered  ranks,  than  to  "  make  it  pay," 
have  engaged  Music  Hall,  the  large  and  handsome  building  formeriy  occupied 
by  the  followers  of  the  late  lamented  Theodore  Parker,  and  here  the  spiritual 
meetings,  up  to  this  date,  have  assumed  a  prominence  and  importance  never 
exceded  in  the  history,  of  the  movement 

The  following  extracts  from  the  Banner  of  Light,  ivill  give  an  idea  of  die 
m^nitude  and  interest  of  those  gadierings. 

"  MU.SIC  HALL  SPIRrnjAL  MEETINGS." 

"Boston,  O^taier  ig,  1867. 

"  The  first  of  thE  course  of  twenty-eiglit  lectures  on  Spiritualism  was  given  in  Music 
Hall,  io  this  city,  Sunday  afternoon,  October  6,  by  Judge  Edmonds,  of  New  York,  to  a  very 
large  audience.  It  is  noticeable  that  quite  a  change  has  taken  place  in  the  public  mind 
within  a  few  years  on  this  important  subject.  On  the  above  occasion,  the  largest  ball  in 
the  city  was  filled  almost  to  overflowing  with  the  most  intelligent  part  of  the  community. 
All  the  daily  papers  had  reporters  present,  who  gave  an  impartial  report  of  Judge  Edmonds' 
address,  without  adding  one  word  of  slur  or  ridicule.  This  is  only  worthy  of  mention  to 
show  that  intelligent  mmds  from  amongst  all  denominations  are  anxious  to  become  better 
acquainted  witii  the  truths  of  the  spiritual  philosophy.  This  fact,  too,  was  made  evident  by 
the  close  attention  which  each  one  gave  to  the  words  of  the  speaker. 

"  These  meelmgs  are  under  the  sole  direction  of  Mr.  Lysander  Richards,  backed  by  a  num- 
ber of  promment  and  worthy  Spiritualists  who  have  chosen  L.  B,  Wilson  to  act  as  treasurer. 
The  most  available  talent  in  our  ranks  has  been  secured  for  this  series  of  lectures,  and  we 
are  pleased  to  notice  that  the  entire  course  bids  fair  to  be  a  complete  success. 

"One  of  the  most  pleasing  mcidentsof  the  occasion  was  the  appearance  on  the  platform, 
of  the  children  of  the  Mercantile  Hall  Lyceum  to  the  nnmber  of  nearly  one  hundred,  accom- 
panied by  their  teachers.  Theymarched  through  the  streets  of  Boston,  with  their  flags  and 
badges,  creating  a  novel  sensation  [as  it  was  the  first  appearance  of  the  lyeeum  in  our 
streets]  ;  and  filing  into  the  hall,  toolt  their  places  on  the  platform  with  the  utmost  possible 

order  and  decorum Surrounded  by  these  Utile  buds  of  promise,  Judge 

Edmonds  appeared  as  happy  as  though  be  had  found  heaven  upon  earth.  It  was  at  his 
special  request  that  they  were  allowed  to  occupy  the  platform,  as  he  said,  to  give  him  inspu'a- 

A  few  weeks  later  the  Banner  of  Light  gives  a  second  account  of  the 
Music  Hall  meetings  as  follows  : 

"MUSIC  HALL  MEETINGS. 

"  The  success  of  the  course  of  lectures  on  Spiritualism  m  Music  Hall,  Sunday  afternoons, 
thus  far  is  unprecedented.  The  audiences  have  lai^ly  increased  each  Sunday  ;  and  on  the 
27th  of  October,  1867,  at  the  closing  lecture  by  Thomas  Gales  Forster,  over  two  thousand 

Hosiedb,  Google 

512  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

persons  were  present,  making  as  intelligent  and  respectable  looking  an  assembly  as  rojld  le 
seen  anywhere  in  the  'Athens  of  America.'  Tlie  lectures  given  by  Mr.  Forster  during 
the  last  three  weeks  would  be  sufiicjent  to  establish  the  reputation  of  any  speaker,  had  he 
not  previously,  like  Mr.  F.,  held  the  high  position  of  one  of  the  most  profound  thinkers  of 
the  age. 

"  It  was  a  pleasing  scene  to  witness  the  children  of  the  lyceum  surrounding  the  speaker 
on  the  platform,  and  note  their  smiling  and  happy  faces  whilst  listenmg  to  the  melodious 

strains  of  the  oi^jan A  beautiful  illustration  of  spirit  communion  was  then 

manifested.  The  spirit  controlling  the  speaker  Kud  '  there  were  several  bright  spirits  of 
children  present,  who  wished  him  to  transmit  their  messi^es  of  iove  to  their  parents.' 
Amongst  them,  he  said,  was  one  Anna  Cora  Wilson,  daughter  of  the  treasurer,  whose  en- 
trance to  spirit  life  took  place  nuie  years  ago  this  day  ;  a  correct  statement  of  which  Mr. 
Forster  had  no  previous  knowledge. 

"  The  speaker  then  gave  a  message  from  this  bright  spirit  to  her  parents,  breathmg  the 
warmest  sentiments  of  filial  affection,  and  so  unmistakably  characteristic,  as  to  be  readily 

"Then  the  spirits  of  two  young  children,  whose  parent  resided  at  Cambridge,  addrresed 
their  mother,  who  was  present  and  at  once  recognized  and  accepted  her  darlings'  messages 
of  love.  These  practical  illustrations  of  spirit  communion  very  senahly  affected  the  au- 
dience, and  many  an  eye  was  moistened  with  tears ;  not  tears  of  dispair,  but  of  joy,  and  a 
hope  which  such  knowledge  of  the  future  alone  can  give." 

On  May,   lo,   1868,  Warren  Chase  addressed  an  immense  : 
Music  Hall,  Boston,  by  whom  he  was  enthusiastically  received. 

Thus  it  is  evident  the  public  aspect  of  the  cause  continues  to  increase  in 
numbers  and  success,  and  that  the  experiment  of  hiring  the  lai^est  place  of 
meeting  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts,  for  spiritual  meetings  has  resulted  in 
demonstrating  its  increasing  popularity. 

Meantime,  most  of  the  mediums  heretofore  mentioned  in  connection  with 
Boston  Spiritualism  are  still  at  their  posts,  whilst  numbers  of  new  develop- 
ments are  constantly  swelling  their  ranks. 

Sunday  meetings  numerously  attended  are  held  in  Mercantile  Hall,  Boston, 
Canibridgeport,  Chelsea,  East  Boston,  Charlestown,  and  every  suburb  in  and 
around  the  city. 

The  Banner  of  Light  office,  of  which  a  full  account  will  be  given  hereafter, 
still  continues  to  distribute  the  bread  of  spiritual  life  in  many  directioiis,  in- 
cluding the  publication  of  its  admirable  Journal,  the  extensive  sale  of  spiritual 
literature,  its  exhibitions  of  spirit  pictures,  and  its  free  circles.  Perhaps  the 
latter  may  be  regarded  as  amongst  the  most  extraordinary  psychological  phe- 
nomena of  the  day.  They  are  conducted  through  the  mediuniship  of  Mrs. 
Fanny  Conant,  a  lady  who  for  several  years  past  has  been  influenced  by 
spirits  of  every  rank,  grade  of  life,  and  development  of  mind.  These  invisible 
guests  throng  the  circle  room  which  the  editors  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  with 
noble  and  exemplary  generosity,  open  free  to  the  public.  And  there,  as  oppor- 
tunity permits,  they  pour  forth,  through  the  entranced  organism  of  Mrs.  Conant, 
the  tale  of  their  earthly  lives,  their  vices  and  errors,  their  bitter  lamentation  for 
earthly  lives  misspent,  messages  of  love  and  consolation  to  absent  friends,  warn- 
ings, encouragement,  and  every  description  of  characteristic  communication 
that  could  be  conceived  of  as  emanating  from  the  heterogeneous  conditions 
of  human  existence.  And  all  this  is  represented  in  the  voice,  tone,  gestures, 
and  even  the  countenance  of  this  wonderful  medium,  with  such  graphic  fidelity 
that  a  witness  widi  closed  eyes  might  readily  persuade  himself,  he  was  in  the 
actual  presence  of  all  the  varied  characters  thus  delineated.  The  acairacyof 
these  remarkable  spirit  personations  is  further  attested  by  hundreds  of  letters 
addressed  to  the  Banner  of  Light  by  total  strangers,  who  have  read  and 
recognized  the  printed  messages  from  their  spirit  friends. 

A  parent  society  for  State  missionary  labor  has  been  formed  in  Massachu- 

Hosled  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  5^5 

setts,  which  has  effected  aii  immense  amount  of  good,  besides  stimulating 
other  states  to  follow  its  example,  so  that  excellent  associations  for  sending 
the  beat  missionary  talent  in  the  field  to  all  those  points  which  have  not  the 
advantage  of  local  organizations,  are  springing  up  in  every  direction,  and  dis- 
seminating the  pure  and  consoling  doctrines  of  Spiritualism  throughout  tlie 
length  and  breadth  of  the  land. 

The  tendency  to  crystallize  into  local  organizations,  has  never  been  exhib- 
ited in  such  universality  as  since  the  termination  of  the  war.  In  some  fomi 
or  other,  the  Spiritualists  of  America  seem  to  be  drawn  by  the  force  of  irre- 
sistible attraction  into  concrete  associations  in  every  direction.  It  were 
needless,  at  tliis  time,  to  speculate  upon  the  operating  cause  of  tliis  tendency : 
it  would  be  rash  to  predicate  its  ultimate  effects  upon  the  cause.  It  is  enough 
to  notice  the  fact;  and  we  shall  now  present  a  few  extracts  from  the  corres- 
pondents' column  of  the  Banner  of  Light,  illustrative  of  the  number  and  na- 
ture of  the  various  associative  movements  that  are  proceeding  widi  astonish- 
ing spontaneity  to  gather  together  the  scattered  forces  of  Spiritualism  all  over 
the  States. 

"SPIRITUALISM  AT  MARLBORO',  MASSACHUSETTS,  iS6a. 

"The  Spiritualists  of  this  flourishing  town  have  just  formed  a  society  of  which  James 

Giles,   Esq.,  is  president,  Mrs.  Harriet  N.  Taylor,  secretary. Dr.  H.    B. 

Slorer  opened   the  series  of  meetings   lait   Sunday. The  audience  were 

large,  deeply  interested,  and  in  harmonious  sympathy  with  the  cheering  and  elevating  prin- 

Letters  torn  Portland,  Maine,  —  the  business  portions  of  which  had  been 
almost  destroyed  by  the  desolating  fire  of  1866,  —  announced  that  the  Spir- 
itualists, after  having  suffered,  collectively  and  individually,  most  ruinously 
from  the  effects  of  (he  conflagration,  had  resumed  their  meetings  in  1868 
by  organizing  into  the  "  First  Society  of  Spiritualists,"  hiring  a  suitable  hall 
for  their  Sunday  services,  and  pressing  into  the  ranks  all  their  old  and  well- 
tried  champions  with  renewed  spirit  and  energy.  One  of  the  letters  from  this 
noble  band  of  progressionists  concludes  m  these  words : 

We  shall  quote  a  spirited  account  of  the  cause  at  Washington,  D.  C,  from 
a  letter  to  the  Banner  0/  Liglii,  as  follows : 

"  SPIRITUALISM  AT  THE  CAPITAL. 

"For  several  weeks  past  the  Spiritualists  of  Washington  have  been  occupied  in  the 
preparation  of  a  hall  as  a  permanent  home  for  themselves  and  other  friends  of  truth  and  . 
progress. 

"Nobly  and  well  have  they  worked,  heart  with  heart  and  haod  with  hand,  in  this  de- 
arable  effort,  until  the  result  is  successfully  achieved. 

"  Although  the  Spiritualists  here  are  neither  strong  nor  wealthy,  the  subscriptions  and 
donations  have  amounted  to  over  twelve  hundred  dollars ;  and  this  by  a  society  which  was 

not  oj^anized  until  the  beginning  of  the  present  year  [1867I Our  spiritual 

brethren  in  Philadelphia  kindly  transmitted  to  us  a  donation  by  the  hands  of  Dr.  Child,  as 
a  token  of  their  fraternal  interest. 

"  Bright  and  glorious  dawned  the  morning  of  the  dedication  of  our  new  hsdl,  Sunday, 
October  6,  1867.  Bright  and  happy  were  the  dear  faces  congregated  together  on  that 
auspicious  morning,  and  cordial  the  greetings  that  passed  amongst  them  in  the  realization . 
of  a  permanent  religious  home  in  the  nation's  capital 

"The  hal!  is  seventy-five  feet  long,   and  twenty-five  feel  wide,  neatly  but  handsomely. 

33 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

r  brother  Steinberg,  who,  in  this  work,  hasccm.i.butednot  less  than  ons 

i,^.u.^»..u.„.yddlars  to  the  cause. On  the  rear  of  the  platform  is  a 

finely-toned  harmonium  ;  at  the  front,  the  speaker's  desk,  a  neat,  conical  pedestal,  pamteii 
to  represent  white  marble,  havmg  a  pnrple  panel  in  front,  on  which  is  written  m  gold  let- 
ters  :  '  Are  they  not  all  mmistering  spirits  ?  '  r      , ,     ■  v 

"  At  the  back  of  the  platform  are  three  shields  in  fresco,  adorned  m  letters  of  gold  with 
such  sentiments  as  •  Glory  to  God  hi  the  highest ;  on  earth  peace  and  good  wQl  to  men. ' 

"  Handsome  coiums  surround  the  hall,  adorned  with  shields  bearuig  such  inscriptions  as 
'Truth,'  'Justice,'  'Charity,'  etc 

■'  The  piatforra  and  area  in  front  of  it  are  carpeted,  and  the  aisles  matted. 

"  The  German  ladies  of  our  society,  true  to  their  innate  love  of  the  beautiful,  had 
decorated  the  platform  and  hall  with  vases  of  flowers  and  evergreens.  The  panels  on  the 
walls  were  adorned  with  likenesses  of  many  of  the  prominent  Spiritualists,  and  beautiful 
specimens  of  spirit  dravrings,  executed  through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Laune,  Mrs.  Young, 
and  Mrs.  Col%.  The  spirie  likeness  of  Professor  Dayton  —  the  noble  conlrolhng  spu-it  of 
Thomas  Gales  Forster  — by  Rogers,  and  an  exqaisite  spirit  jacture  of  the  daughter  of 
Dr.  Mayhew,  by  Anderson,  also  adorn  the  apartment." 

The  lectures  delivered  in  this  pure  and  choice  home  of  the  spirits,  mortal 
and  immortal,  have  been  characterized  by  an  exaltation  of  tone  and  a  sym- 
pathetic beauty,  which  pleads  strongly  in  favor  of  consecrated  places,  and 
scenes  specially  magnetized  by  the  high  and  holy  purposes  for  which  they  are 
set  apart.  -  '■     j 

At  first  the  new  hall  was  but  moderately  filled,  and  that  with  the  friends 
personally  interested  in  its  services.  In  the  year  1868  die  reports  from 
Washington  lament  that  their  hall  is  "not  nearly  large  enough"  to  accommo- 
date the  overflowing  crowds  who  throng  to  hear  the  spintnalistic  doctrines 
presented  by  the  ablest  speakers  in  the  field,  liberally  engaged  by  the  spirited 
society.  An  excellent  and  fully  attended  children's  lyceum  holds  its  sessions 
in  connet^on  with  the  Sunday  meetings,  and  several  charitable  organizations 
are  in  contemplation  under  the  auspices  of  the  Spiritualists. 

In  Philadelphia,  Providence,  New  York,  Baltimore,  Bangor,  Troy,  Albany, 
Buffalo,  and  indeed  most  of  the  large  Eastern  towns,  chartered  societies, 
of  Spnitualists  have  been  formed,  children's  progressive  lyceums  are  reg- 
ularly sustained,  and  additional  societies  are  constantly  oi^anizing.  In  Cin- 
cinnati, St.  Louis,  Memphis,  New  Orleans,  Chicago,  Milwaukee,  Spnngfield, 
Illinois,  and  all  the  large  Western  cities,  regular  associations  chartered  by  the 
laws  of  the  States  as  "religious  societies"  have  been  formed,  and  in  each 
town  one  if  not  two  and  three  Sabbath  meetings,  a  numerous  lyceum,  and 
several  minor  associative  movements  are  in  active  operation. 

In  Michigan  and  Ohio  nearly  every  town,  large  and  small,  has  formed  a 
regular  and  well-sustained  spiritual  association.  Several  free  churches  and 
meeting-houses  have  been  erected  by  the  Spiritualists,  and  the  noble  exainple 
of  the  SUu-gis  and  Washington  Spiritualists  in  providing  their  own  "spintual 
homes,"  is  fast  being  imitated  all  over  the  States. 

Letters  from  Terra  Haute,  Hannibal,  and  Princeton,  Missouri ;  Adrian, 
Hillsdale,  and  other  small  towns  in  Michigan,  Indiana,  and  Tennessee,  an- 
nounce in  enthusiastic  terms  iho  formation  of  spiritual  societies  under  State 
charters,  and  the  growing  success  whicli  attends  their  meetings. 

Unless  our  space  would  admit  of  publishing  the  immense  mass  of  testi- 
mony which  pours  in  each  week  from  every  part  of  the  States  concerning 
the  increasing  interests  in  Spiritualism,  and  the  irresistible  tendency  of  its 
ranks  to  resolve  into  associative  bodies,  the  real  status  of  the  cause  in  1868 
could  not  be  duly  estimated. 

We  are  enabled  to  state  from  authentic  and  carefully  collected  testimony, 
that  six  hundred  spiritual  associations  have  been  formed  in  America  during 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM  515 

the  last  two  years.  We  cannot  reafSnn  all  the  enthusiastic  representations 
of  correspondents  concerning  the  success  of  tliese  meetings,  which  still,  as  we 
know  from  experience,  retain  much  of  the  heterogeneous  and  ti-ansitory  nature 
which  characterize  new  movements,  especially  in  one  which,  like  Spiritu- 
alism, promotes  such  strongly  marked  individuality  of  disposition  in  all  who 
belong  to  it ;  but  these  efforts,  however  embryotic  they  may  be,  conclusively 
represent  tlie  signs  of  the  times,  and  are  prophetic  of  a  future  for  Spiritualism 
as  powerful  and  unitary,  as  the  purposes  of  tlie  hosts  diat  are  now  influ- 
encing men  to  the  fulfilment  of  their  destiny.  That  the  reader  may  better 
understand  the  real  tone  and  condition  of  the  cause,  as  it  at  present  exists  in 
localities  less  prominently  represented  than  the  large  towns  and  cities,  we 
siiall  conclude  this  chapter  by  bringing  him  in  sympatliy  with  tlie  working 
bees  of  the  hive,  and  invite  him  to  peruse  a  few  extracts  form  the  correspon- 
dence of  the  Banner  of  Light  in  1868. 

"Troy,  Portage  Co.,  Ohio. 

"It  has  been  three  years  since  I  appeared  before  the  public  as  a  lecturer,  but  realidng 
that  it  is  the  duty  oE  ali  who  are  blessed  with  the  inspiration  of  tiie  angel  world  to  go  forth 
and  labor  for  human  prt^ess,  I  have  followed  the  advice  of  a  late  article  in  the  Banner  of 
Light,  by  taking  my  '  carpet-bag,'  and  placing  myself  under  the  protection  of  my  unseen 
guides,  made  my  way  in  the  first  instance  to  Thompson,  Geauaga  County,  Ohio,  where  I 
found  Spiritualism  in  a  very  flourishing  condition. 

"  The  Spiritualists  purchased  an  old  church  last  summer,  rebuilt  it,  and  have  been  fortu- 
nate in  securing  the  services  of  Brother  Kellog,  an  able  speaker,  and  earnest  worker,  for  a 
certam  portion  of  each  year. It  was  ia  this  place  that  I  made  my  first  ap- 
pearance before  the  world  as  a  trance  speaker,  and  you  may  imagine  the  pleasure  it  gave  me 
to  be  greeted  by  a  very  large  audience  after  an  absence  of  more  than  eight  years.  .  .  . 
My  next  visit  was  to  Leroy,  where  I  spoke  twice  to  lai^e  and  appreciative  audiences,  prom- 
ising to  return  and  hold  a  two  days'  meeting  in  the  sunny  days  of  June. 

"  t  next  passed  to  the  pleasant  village  of  Kirtland,  which  formerly  acquired  such  celebrity 
as  the  seat  of  the  Mormons.  The  temple  which  they  built  there  over  thirty  years  ago,  still 
stands,  a  monument  of  folly  and  superstition. 

"  I  thought,  as  I  gaied  upon  its  masave  walls  and  tall  steeples,  of  the  many  hearts  that 
bad  bled,  and  the  tears  that  had  fallen,  amongst  the  families  who  liad  been  robbed  of  bread 
to  erect  that  costly  slmcture.  There  are  but  two  or  three  of  that  faith  now  residing  in 
Kirtland  ;  one  is  Martin  Harris,  who  says  that  he  is  the  mediator  between  God  and  man, 
and  that  Zion  will  yet  reign  in  Kirtland. 

"I  gave  two  lectures  there  February  the  2d,  the  Spiritualists  occupying  the  Baptist 
church,  whose  con^egation  has  gone  to  naught." 

"II.  L  Clark." 

"LETTER  FROM  H.  P.  FAIRFIELD,— BANNER  OF  LIGHT,    iS63. 

"It  may  be  gratifying  to  Spiritualists  to  know  that  out  cause  is  steadily  moving  on  in  the 
great  West.  Spealdng  in  Iowa  City,  last  March,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Kenny,  Universalist  mmis- 
ter,  ofTeted  us  the  use  of  his  church,  himself  attending  my  lectures.  In  April  I  spoke  for 
the  live  society  of  Spiritualists  in  Rock  Island,  Illinois ;  large  audiences  greeted  me.  The 
lyceum  was  in  fine  condition,  and  the  people  are  workers. 

"  May,  with  its  prairie  flowers,  found  me  in  New  Boston,  Illinois.  The  people  are  earn- 
est, with  none  of  the  old  religious  superstition  clinging  to  them.  The  opposition  consists 
of  the  smaU  fragments  of  a  decaying  society.  Spiritualism  is  'the  word  of  the  Lord'  in 
New  Boston. 

"June's  roses  and  heaven' s  bles^ng  found  me  in  Quincy,  Illinois, — beautiful,  flourishmg 
place,  but  sordid  people.  A  few  noble  sotds  save  the  city,  amongst  them,  Mrs.  Belle 
Scougale  Brown,  one  of  our  former  most  successful  speakers.  She  is  still  a  great  help  to 
the  cause. 

"  In  Galesbucg,  the  dty  of  learning,  I  found  Spiritualism  sttu^ling  under  a  mass  of 
theologjc  superstition,  and  eccleaastical  dogma Several  mediums  are  in  pro- 
cess of  fine  spiritual  development  here. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

5,6  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"Durbg  my  engagement  at  Galesburg,  I  was  invited  by  Mr.  O^pod  to  vMt  Oneida, 
III,  and  give  a  coutse  of  lectures.  The  Universa lists  gave  us  the  use  of  their  church,  the 
Rev  Mr  Gorton,  the  clei^man,  attending,  and  asasting  in  the  singing.  At  tlie  close  of 
the  lecture,  and  when  tl.e  audience  were  permitted  to  ask  questions,  the  Rev.  Mr.  MUler,  a 
UniversaJist  misaonary  for  the  North-west  Conference,  asked,  '  WiU  any  of  jour  spirit 
mediums  submit  to  a  trial  of  the  agns  and  tests  like  the  apostles  of  old  ?  ■ 

"  I  replied,  '  Certainly,  I  will,  for  one.    The  agns  were  promised,  to  believers  and  I  am  a 

"  '  Well,'  said  he,  '  I  want  to  mix  a  dose  of  arsenic,  and  pour  it  down  your  throat.  Will 
you  submit,  like  the  apostles,  to  that  lest  ? ' 

"  '  I  was  not  aware  that  it  had  ever  been  tried  upon  them,'  was  my  reply  ;  '  neverthe- 
less, if  you  inast,  I  will  submit. '  .....  I  then  demanded  immediate  action  oil  his 
part ;  but  this  readiness  of  mine  was  too  much  for  him,  and  backing  down,  he  said  I 
want'ed  him  to  commit  murder.  I  continued  to  press  him  to  carry  out  his  plan,  or  discnss 
With  me ;  and  the  audience,  seeing  him  caught  in  his  own  trap,  loudly  cheered  ;  but  the  rev- 
erand  gentleman  continued  lo  decline,  and  finally  hastened  away  from  the  church."   .     . 

Another  glance  at  Western  Spiritualism  is  afforded  by  a  letter  which  the 
author  addressed  to  the  Banner  of  Light  during  a  recent  visit  to  the  States, 
and  a  short  sojourn  in  the  West.  ,  u      u  c 

The  letter  is  chiefly  descriptive  of  the  mediums  upon  whom  the  charge  ot 
propagating  Spiritualism  in  the  far  West  devolves. 

"OUR  WESTERN  MEDIUMS.— BV  EMMA  HARDlNGE 

"The  land  of  the  West  is  a  living  protest  against  the  assertion  of  those 
whose  wish  is  father  to  their  word,  to  wit,  'that  bpmtuah^m  is  djing  out  ' 
That  Spu-itualism,  since  the  war,  has  existed  m  a  transition  state,  1  think 
none  tao  deny,  but  we  find  no  more  reason  to  predicate  its  death,  or  believe 
in  its  decay  than  we  have  to  pronounce  that  the  real  life  of  the  caterpillar  is 
extinct  when  we  see  it  in  the  chrj  salitic  shell,  ere  it  emerges  into  the  butter 

"To  me,  one  of  the  most  sigificant  signs  of  the  present  stitus  Spintnal 
ism  has  assumed,  is  its  undiminished  numbers,  and  the  vast  interest  that  our 
-Sabbath  meetings  call  forth,  and  that  not  only  in  my  own  expenence,  but  m 
that  of  all  my  co-workers  in  the  field.  Another  still  more  suggestive  token 
of  our  cause  and  its  increase,  is  the  fact  that  the  raw  matenal  for  spiritual 
manifestations  is  found  in  superabundance  m  every  stige  of  development 
amongst  us.  ^       ,         i 

"  Mediums,  wholly  or  partially  developed,  ire  to  be  found  in  almost  every 
family  in  the  West,  especially  amongst  the  young  people  who  attend  the  spir- 
itual lyceiuns  What  a  vast  field  of  promise  for  future  developments  does 
this  fact  unfold !  Either  the  soil  or  the  mental  and  physical  atmosphere 
is  favorable  to  die  growdi  of  spiritual  gifts  in  the  open-handed  and  open- 
hearted  West,  or  else  mediums  gravitate  there  as  by  force  of  natural  attrac- 
tion. Certidn  it  is,  that  rare  and  abundant  crops  of  spiritual  gifts  may  be 
predicated  from  a  glance  over  the  harvest  fields  of  the  West,  even  m  their 
present  heterogeneous  aspect.  But  to  speak  of  die  mediums  already  recog- 
nized as  such  in  these  Western  lands,—  Mattie  Hulett  and  Belle  Scougall, 
once  bright  stars  in  the  spiritual  firmament,  diifuse  the  lustre  of  theu-  beams 
now,  over  the  tranquil  scenes  of  home.  Unfortunately  for  the  admirmg  au- 
diences that  once  hung  delighted  on  their  eloquent  utterances,  these  admired 
speakers  have  changed  their  names,  and  with  them,  their  spheres  of  useful- 
ness have  been  removed  from  the  rostrum  to  the  domestic  pnvacy  of  thp 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  JI? 

fireside.  A  similar  change  has  lately  robbed  the  world  of  the  invaluable  ser- 
vices of  Mrs.  Nellie  Wiltsie,  a  sweet  httle  lady,  whose  graceful  bearing  anJ 
marvellous  eloquericeThave  heard  extolled  throughout  the  West,  without  a 
dissenting  voice.* 

"  A-  B.  Whiting,  the  schoJaily  and  poetic  improvisatore  of  Michigan,  is  still 
at  the  good  work ;  and  still  as  ever  doing  it  in  his  own  unsurpassed  fashion. 
I  once  heard  a  scientific  gentleman  remark  of  Mr,  Whiting:  '  Wliat  an  anomaly 
this  man  is  !  Nothing  in  his  manners  or  conversation  gives  the  least  idea  of 
superior  mind  or  classical  attainments  ;  yet  the  realms  of  antiquity  and 
fields  of  classical  lore  seem  to  be  open  pages  which  he  reads  off  with  the 
ease  of  commonplace  converse,  when  under  what  he  calls  his  "spiritual  in- 
fluence.' 

"I  presume  the  West  can  no  more  claim  the  talented  and  indefatigable 
brothers,  Wadsworth,  I-oveland,  and  N.  F.  White,  as  specialties,  than  it  can 
myself;  still  we  all  love  to  be  there,  and  labor,  however  onerous  and  in- 
evitable, is  rendered  infimtelj  pleasurable  by  the  appreciative  and  affection- 
ate hospitalty  that  greets  us  there  But  Mr.  E.  V.  Wilson  does  seem  to  be 
a  specialty  in  the  West,  and  one  so  marked,  that  with  his  incontrovertible 
tesU)  in  public,  private,  here,  there,  and  everywhere,  he  is  a  perfect  Western 
'  iconoclast,'  against  whose  giant  proofs  of  spiritual  presence,  the  images 
of  scepticism  and  superstition  cannot  maintain  a  moment's  success&l  warfare. 

"In  Ohio  still  resides  Hudson  Tuttle,  the  world-renowned  medium,  upon 
whom  bright  spirits  seem  to  delight  in  showering  every  artistic  and  intellectual 
gift,  in  their  power  to  confer.  With  him,  his  charming  wife,  one  of  the  sweetr 
est  ixietesses  of  the  age,  distributes  the  bread  of  spiritual  life  to  all  around  her.  \ 
William  Denton  and  his  highly  gifted  wife  and  sister,  have  also  selected  the 
West  as  their  home,  and  the  same  preference  has  been  accorded  to  the 
praiiie  country  by  Leo_  Miller,  Abraham  James,  the  celebrated  discoverer  of 
the  artesian  well  in  Chicago,  is  travcrsfng  the  oil  regions  in  search  of  favora- 
.  ble  locations  for  digging,  m  which  under  spirit  guidance,  and  in  connection 
with  his  own  remarkable  clairvoyant  powers,  he  is  successful  almost  to  a 
'miracle.'  It  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  record  the  names  even,  of  the 
many  excellent  and  faithfiil  mediums  who  devote  their  fine  gifts  to  the  service 
of  humanity  tJiroughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  West  Two  more  only 
of  the  speakers  whose  noble  service  is  revolutionizing  public  sentiment,  will 
my  space  permit  me  to  name,  and  these  are  Dr.  James  Cooper,  of  Bellefon- 
taine,  and  Alcinda  Wilhelm.  Kind,  patient,  unthing,  and  each  the  centres 
of  large  and  gratefully  admiring  circles  of  friends,  these  most  excellent  work- 
ers constitute  a  host  in  themselves.  Dr.  Cooper's  sphere  is  somewhat  limited 
by  his  medical  practice,  which  i*etains  him  in  proximity,  to  his  home  at  Belle- 
foataine  ;  but  I  have  already  followed  in  the  track  which  dear  Alcinda  Wil- 
helm has  sown  with  the  blossoms  of  truth  and  immortality  throughout  nearly 
every  state  in  the  West,  and  in  each,  I  may  truly  say,  that  the  people  "  rise 
up  and  call  her  blessed."  In  test  and  phenomenal  medimnship  also,  the  West 
is  ridily  endowed.  Fair,  fragile,  and  wonderful  Annie  Lord  Chamberlain  is 
in  Ottawa,  Illinois.  Hovering  between  hfe  and  death,  her  very  proximity  to 
the  spirit  land  seems  to  fit  her  especially  to  be  the  messenger  for  beings  who, 
though  her  frail  organism,  are  able  to  outwork  the  most  astonishing  proofs  of 
their  presence  that  the  records  of  Spiritualism  can  show. 

"  I  hear  of  many  good  mediums  in  Chicago,  but  cannot  speak  of  them  from 

+'6f  iiudMn'^d  Emma'ruTde/WlU^SntoiE'eleli'a  uioic  cilcndcd  notice  will  be  found  bi  a  future 

Hosted  by  Google 

5i8  HISTORY  OF  MODERlf 

personal  knowledge.  I  might  say  thus  mucli  also  of  Mr.  Henry  Slade  of 
Michigan,  but  tliough  my  own  acquaintance  with  tliis  estimable  medium  is 
limited  to  a  brief  correspondence,  if  I  can  place  any  confidence  in  the  testi- 
mony of  almost  every  Western  Spiritualist  I  meet,  Mr.  Slade  is  one  of  the 
most  extraordinary  and  gifted  mediums  of  his  age.  Not  a  single  endowment 
possessed  by  others  is  lacking  in  his  wonderful  power ;  added  to  which,  all  the 
most  astounding  physical  phenomena  commonly  exhibited  in  dark  circles,  are 
freely  produced  through  Mr.  Slade  in  the  full  light  of  day. 

"  Mrs.  Cgr^in,  the  rapping  medium,  and  Mrs.  Eversole,  the  test  clairvoyant 
are  still  at  the  post  of  duty  they  occupied  in  St.  Louis  seventeen  years  ago  ; 
whilst  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Starkey,  late  arrivals  in  that  city, — the  doctor  as  an  edu- 
cated physician,  and  his  amiable  wife  as  one  of  the  best  clairvoyants  of  the 
day,— are  adding  laurels  to  the  cause  by  their  highly  successful  and  beneficent 
-  acts  of  healing  performed  under  the  inspiration  of  their  wise  spirit  guardians. 

"  In  Cincinnati,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  spending  some  time  in  the  dear  and 
hospitable  home  of  most  valued  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Beck,  with  whom  re- 
sides Miss  Lizzie  Keizer,  whose  astonishing  powers  as  a  seeing,  test,  and 
trance  medium,  I  consider  to  exceed  anything  I  have  yet  witnessed  in  spir- 
itual phenomena.* 

"  Another  of  the  'Western  institutions,'  and  one  which  has  wrought  an  in- 
calculable amount  of  good  and  use  in  the  community,  is  Mr.  J.  M.  Peebles, 
the  talented  Western  editor  of  the  Banner  of  Light.  By  his  scholarly  writings 
and  indefatigable  labors  as  a  lecturer,  Mr.  Peebles  has  been  a  gigantic  lever 
in  moving  public  opinion  in  favor  of  the  spiritual  belief,  and  the  repudiation 
of  the  effete  superstition  of  old  orthodoxy.  Being  a  graceful  and  accomplished 
orator,  Mr.  Peebles'  service  is  in  eager  demand  throughout  the  whole 
community ;  but,  as  the  scene  of  his  earliest  and  most  widely  diffused  ef- 
forts, the  West  undoubte'dly  claims  him  for  her  own,  and  as  such  he  is  num- 
bered amongst  her  jewels,  and  forms  a  distinguished  part  of  her  spiritual 
wealth. 

"There  are  more,  many  more,  faithfully  toiling,  and  effectively  laboring  to 
spread  this  gospel  over  the  land,  who  work  to  bitter  disadvantage,  I  might  say 
almost  in  martyrdom,  in  the  present  broken,  confused,  and  inorganic  state  of 
the  cause. 

"Many  of  these  are  scarce  sufficiently  paid  to  enable  them  to  meet  the  cur- 
rent expenses  of  their  hard  and  toilsome  journeyjngs  ;  few,  sufficiently  appre- 
ciated to  answer  the  cravings  of  their  painfully  sensitive  natures,  or  recom- 
pense them  for  the  bitter  woof  of  isolation  and  persecution  whidi  their  un- 
popular calling  entails  upon  them.  Some  such  as  these  I  know  slightly,  but 
many  more  I  could  write  of  did  time  and  opportunity  permit,  who  are  stran- 
gers to  me  personally,  but  dear  brothers  and  sisters  in  the  faithful,  untiring 
and  patient  labors  they  perform.  I  know  they  are  sinking  beneath  the 
weight  of  a  very  heavy  cross,  for  I  have  seen  the  tracks  of  their  bleeding 
feet  as  they  toil  thei^way  up  to  Calvary. 

.  "Take  heart  of  grace,  poor  pilgrims  !  Thy  nameless  footprints  made  on 
earth,  are  the  foundation  lines  in  which  the  car  of  thy  glorious  destiny  will 
run  through  eternity.  Nothing  good,  not  even  a  kindly  wish,  or  pitying  sigh, 
is  lost  in  heaven.  Thy  work  will  precede  thee  there,  and  there  be  treasured 
up  ;  and  out  of  the  few  small  loaves  and  fishes  of  human  effort,  thou  shalt 
gather  up  full  many  a  basket  load  of  spiritual  wealth,  coined  in  the  eternal 
e  houses  of  another  and  a  better  world ! " 

*L5  ML53  Kei?er  win  alsabe  thesutijcctofaKpanLteDotice,  wc  omit  other  portions  i^  ibc  letter  descr^ve 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  5^5 

Our  concluding  extract  will  be  taken  from  the  notes  of  travel,  by  one  of 
the  ablest  and  most  indefatigable  workers  in  the  spiritual  field,  namely,  Dean 
Clark,  die  trance  speaker.  After  enumerating  the  various  places  in  wHch  he 
had  labored  during  the  year  1867,  including  numerous  towns  in  Massachu- 
setts, New  Hampshire,  Vermont,  and  other  New  England  States,  in  alt  of 
whicli  he  speaks  of  the  vast  interest  and  large  audiences  with  which  he  was 
greeted,  he  sums  up  the  earthly  rewards  of  his  spiritual  missionary's  labors  thus : 

"  Thus  has  passed  a  year  of  arduous  struggle  for  the  right,  fraught  with  joy  and  sorrow, 
hope  and  disappointment,  self-denial  and  severe  discipline ;  all  indispensable  lessons  of  life, 
to  fit  me  for  service  to  my  feUow-men,  which,  though  grievous  to  be  bome,  have  been  for 
my  highest  good.  For  my  services,  I  have  received  $4801  more  than  a  fourth  of  which 
was  expended  in  travelhng ;  the  reminder  sufficed  to  keep  my  companion  and  myself  from 
the  poorhouse,  and  enabled  me  to  follow  the  precept  of  laying  up  treasures  in  heaven  only, 
to  my  heart's  content. 

"  But  though  meagrely  compensated  by  mortals,  yet  the  immortals  have  showered  their 
Wesangs  upon  me  in  profusion  ;  and  in  gratitude  for  all  I  have  received,  1  thank  God  and 
take  courage,  while  I  begin  another  year  of  labor  with  the  determination  to  perform  my 
humble  pari  fjuthfully  in  domg  good  wherever  I  may  roam." 

By  tlie  last  two  extracts,  we  design  to  represent  in  all  fidelity,  the  dark  as 
■well  as  the  bright  side  of  the  picture ;  to  contrast  the  straggles  of  human  effort, 
with  the  astonishing  results  so  httle  expected  or  comprehended  by  the  laborers 
themselves. 

There  is  nothing  more  remarkable,  in  fact,  in  the  whole  spiritual  movement 
than  the  vast  numbers  which  have  joined  the  ranks  of  an  army  whose  leaders 
ate  of  tlie  hmnblest  and  whose  legions  scarcely  realize  the  meaning  of  dis- 
cipEne  or  the  ordinary  methods  of  essential  action.  The  human  propaganda 
on  the  one  side  is  a  scene  of  toil,  care,  discomfiture,  and  not  unfrequently  of 
sordid  penury.  The  results  achieved  are  brilliant,  triumphant,  and  irresistible 
successes  for  the  growth  and  progress  of  Spiritualism, 

Compare  the  two,  and  then  ask  how  can  we  solve  the  problem  widiout  the 
intervention  of  a  mighty  and  all-conquering  army  of  reserve,  whose  hosts  up- 
hold the  fainting  hands  of  the  mortal,  by  the  unfailing  strength  and  power  of 
Ihe  immortal 

Hosted  by  Google 

HISTORY  OF  MODERlf 

CHAPTER  XLVII. 

THE  "CUI  BONO"  OF  SPIRITUALISM. 

"AtbcIs,  whtre  e'er  we  go,  atlend 
Our  steps,  i»hai  e'er  beude, 
Wiih  nalcliful  rare  their  charge  defend. 
And  evil  turn  3aAt. 

Hmads  of  brighl  chErutnc  bands 

Sent  by  the  Kine  of  kinea, 
Reioke  ™  bear  us^  theirliands. 

The  question  which  fonns  die  caption  of  this  chapter,  seems  totally  inap- 
plicable to  any  subject  capable  of  bearing  a  high  religious  interpretation,  for 
the  denionstrated  facts  of  Spiritualism  at  once  and  forever  set  at  rest  the 
question  of  the  soul's  immortality.  They  open  up  the  precious  and  consoling 
intercourse  between  loving  hearts  which  the  solemn  mystery  of  death  seems 
to  have  forever  divided.  They  dispel  the  phantoms  of  gloom,  horror,  and 
uncertainty  to  which  superstition  and  ignorance  have  given  birth,  and  reveal 
the  death  angel  clothed  in  garments  of  celestial  light,  conducting  the  shiver- 
ing souls  of  humanity,  not  into  inconceivable  states  of  sepulchral  sleep,  or 
scarcely  less  desirable  conditions  of  everlasting  torture,  or  everlasting  hea- 
venly psalm-singing,  but  into  the  second  and  higher  stage  of  an  eternal  series 
of  progressive  existences.  They  teach  and  prove,  as  far  as  the  witness  of 
another  can  do  so,  the  just,  equitable,  and  reasonable  doctrines  of  compensa- 
tion, retribution,  progress,  individual  responsibility,  eternal  self-conscious- 
ness, and  equally  eternal  affection  between  the  spirits  mho  love  each  other. 

The  whole  range  of  spiritual  phenomena  point  conclusively  to  the  truths 
of  spiritual  doctrines ;  placing  religion  no  longer  on  the  foundations  of  fleet- 
ing human  opinion,  human  assertion,  or  theory,  but  on  the  enduring  basis  of 
scientific  facts,  which  can  neither  be  unknown  when  once  known,  or  disproved 
.  by  the  weight  often  thousand  sectarian  opinions. 

The  scientific  suggestions,  too,  with  which  Spiritualism  abounds,  opening 
up  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  man's  intellectual  progress,  a  clue  to  the 
mysteries  of  mental  and  vital  science,  present  the  grandest  fields  of  discovery 
that  the  inquiring  soul  of  man  has  ever  trodden ;  and  yet,  in  despite  of  all  this, 
and  a  thousand  more  stars  of  brightness,  beauty,  and  blessing,  which  the 
telescopic  light  of  tiie  spirit  has  disclosed  in  the  firmament  of  mortal  existence, 
die  cry  is  still  re-echoed  by  those  who  can  no  longer  disprove  the  truth  of 
spiritual  phenomena,  or  refute  its  doctrines,  "  Granted  all  you  say  is  true ; 
yet, — what  is  the  use  of  it?"  The  only  satisfaction  to  be  derived  from  the 
reiteration  of  this  senseless  phrase  is,  the  evidence  it  affords  that  antagonism 
has  grown  desperate,  and  unable  any  longer  to  maintain  the  attitude  of  bold 
denial,  ends  in  an  attempt  to  depreciate  the  value  of  that  which  it  can  no 
longer  disprove. 

For  the  benefit  of  diose  mere  utilitarians,  who  may  be  unable  to  appreciate 
the  stupendous  aims  which  Spiritualism  embraces  in  its  scientific  and  religious 
aspect,  and  to  show  in  what  an  infinite  variety  of  ways  the  captious  question 
eui  bono  can  be  answered,  we  shall  devote  this  chapter  to  a  detaU  of  the  petty 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  5^1 

incidents  wliich  abound  in  myriads  of  spiritual  experiences  ;  deinonstrating 
the  unceas  ng  care,  watchful  gnardiansliip,  and  providential  ministry  which 
kind  spirit  friends  can  and  do  exert  for  the  benefit  of  earth's  children,  when 
their  organisms  are  susceptible  of  spiritual  influences.  Let  it  be  remembered 
that  in  this  connection  we  only  present  one  of  the  most  simply  utilitarian 
phases  of  Spiritualism,  and  that  without  touching  on  the  sum  of  its  high  and 
elevating  tendencies,  briefly  glanced  at  in  the  opening  of  this  chapter.  Also, 
as  our  repertoire  in  this,  as  in  every  other  direction  in  spiritualistic  history, 
is  overstocked  with  coincident  testiraonj;,  we  shall  pursue  tiie  plan  adopted 
throughout  this  record,  and  merely  give  single  specimens  of  the  class  of  mani- 
festations to  which  each  case  cited,  belongs. 

In  the  New  York  Conference  of  June  9,  1858,  Mr.  Hootee,  a  well-known 
and  highly  esteemed  Spiritualist  of  Maryland,  being  present,  related  the  fol- 
lowing facts,  which  occurred  under  his  own  observation,  and  verified  by  sev- 
eral witnesses,  who  were  members  of  the  Conference.  "Mr.  H."  had  lent 
his  frend  Mr.  S.  $500,  for  wliich  he  took  his  note,  payable  witinn  a  certain 
length  of  time.  .  .     , 

Mr.  S.  resided  at  Annapolis,  and,  a  few  days  after  the  loan,  was  visited  by 
Mr.  H.,  who  requested  him  to  oblige  hiin  with  another  note,  as  he  had  unfor- 
tunately lost  or  mislaid  the  first  one.  To  his  amazement  and  horror,  Mr.  S. 
coolly  denied  any  knowledge  of  the  transaction,  and  insisted  that  he  had 
never  borrowed  any  money  from  Mr.  H.  Finding  all  attempts  to  move  his 
dishonest  creditor  to  a  sense  of  shame  or  justice  in  vain,  Mr.  H.  departed  to 
consult  a  lawyer  in  Annapolis,  who  decided,  however,  that  diere  was  no  rem- 
edy provided  for  him  by  the  law.  The  unfortunate  gentleman  returned  to 
his  home  in  great  distress  of  mind. 

One  day,  as  he  was  passing  through  a  chamber  in  his  house,  he  was  sud- 
denly encountered  by  a  stranger,  who,  with  the  rapidity  of  thought,  told  him 
the  note  which  he  had  mislaid  was  deposited  with  the  clerk  of  the  court,  at 
Annapolis.  As  the  stranger  spoke,  the  vivid  recollection  of  his  having  left 
the  note  there  for  greater  safety,  rushed  into  his  mind.  By  some  niystenotis 
process  of  thought  which  he  could  not  explain,  die  scene  of  the  court-house, 
the  clerk's  room,  and  a  bureau  full  of  drawers,  seemed  to  flit  before  his  eyes ; 
his  gaze,  however,  was  vividly  fastened  upon  a  particular  drawer,  and  widim 
it  he  saw,  or  seemed  to  see,  the  lost  note.  At  this  portion  of  his  "dream, 
■vision,  or  mental  transfiguration,"  whatever  the  condition  might  be  in  which 
'he  found  himself,  he  raised  his  eyes  to  the  stranger,  whom  he  dien  for  die 
■first  time  recognized  as  his  father,  who  had  been  dead  for  many  years.  Be- 
fore the  tliriil  of  strange  mingled  delight  and  fear  which  he  expenenced 
at  this  sight  had  passed  away,  the  visionary  figure,  smiling  tenderly  upon  him, 
melted  into  thin  air  and  was  gone. 

Mr  H.  was  so  powerfully  affected  by  this  apparition,  that  for  some  time 
he  could  not  compose  himself  sufficiently  to  seek  his  wife  and  to  her  relate 
the  chcumstances  which  had  transpired.  Although  she  felt  much  doubt  of 
the  reality  of  the  vision,  attributing  it  to  her  husband's  disturbed  state  of 
mind,  Mrs.  H.  advised  him  to  go  to  AnnapoUs  and  inquire  of  the  clerk 
whether  he  had  not  received  the  note  from  him.  Mr.  H.  followed  her  ad- 
vice ;  and  whilst  the  clerk  was  demurring  as  to  whether  Mr.  H.  had  really 
placed  such  a  document  in  liis  hand,  the  latter,  fixing  his  eyes  upon  a  bureau 
that  stood  in  the  office,  entreated  him  to  search  a  particular  drawer  to  which 
he  pomted.  The  clerk  hesitated.  The  place  was  an  unusual  one,  but  at  Mr. 
H.'s  urgent  request  he  complied,  and  found  die  missing  note,  at  the  very  top 

Hosted  by  Google 

522  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

of  the  drawer,  where  it  had  been  temporarily  deposited,  and  forgotten  by  both 
parties. 

"MURDER  REVEALED  BY  SPIRITS. 

The  inhabitants  of  New  Martinsville,  Virginia,  will  remember  the  circum- 
stances  attending  tlie  detection  of  a  murder  which  was  committed  about  1846, 
the  guilt  of  which  was  obviously  revealed  by  the  spirit  of  the  murdered  man 
himself.  _  i,    .u 

The  following  are  the  particulars  of  this  singular  case  :  Two  men  by  the 
respective  names  of  Gamble  and  Mercer,  had  some  money  transactions  pend- 
ing between  them,  and  on  a  certain  day  left  their  residence.  New  Martinsvaie, 
Virginia,  for  the  avowed  purpose  ot  settling  their  business.  Some  miles 
from  the  town,  a  witness  was  called  in  at  a  public  house  where  the  parties 
were  staying,  to  testify  to  the  payment  of  a  sum  of  money  which  Mr.  Mer- 
cer handed  over  to  Mr.  Gamble.  After  this  transaction,  the  parties  separated. 
The  witness  left  tlie  scene,  for  town.  Mr.  Mercer  mounted  his  horse,  and 
Mr.  Gamble  got  into  his  boat,  then  lying  at  the  ferry,  for  the  avowed  purpose 
of  pursuing  his  way  some  distance  up  the  river.  From  this  time  Gamble  was 
missed  ;  and  after  a  diligent  search  for  him  instituted  by  his  friends,  his  boat 
was  found  tied  to  a  raft,  empty ;  but  time  passed  away  without  any  tidings  of 
its  owner. 

At  length,  after  the  lapse  of  six  months,  the  body  of  the  unfortunate  man 
was  found  in  the  river,  and  although  readily  identified  by  the  clothes,  it  was 
too  much  decomposed  to  enable  the  jury  to  determine  the  manner  01  tie- 
cease.  Thus  matters  remained  for  nearly  four  years,  when  the  interest  which 
it  excited  was  revived  by  the  following  incident  r  A  party  of  citizens  of  New 
Martinsville  went  some  distance  from  the  town  to  a  "  husking."  On  their 
way  home,  some  difference  of  opinion  arose  amongst  them  about  the  com- 
parative distance  of  two  roads.  To  prove  the  facts,  they  separated,  and 
agreed  to  meet  at  a  certain  place.  The  route  of  one  party  lay  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  river,  just  at  the  point  where  the  body  of  Gamble  had  been  found. 

In  this  company  was  a  gentleman  by  the  name  of  Hmeman,  who,  com- 
plaining of  fatigue,  left  his  friends  to  pursue  a  shorter  path  across  the  fields. 
The  evening  was  far  advanced,  and  Mr.  Hineman  had  not  proceeded  far  on 
his  route  when  he  met  a  man  who  suddenly  appeared  in  his  way  and  accosted  ., 
him  with  the  remark,  "  Vou  do  not  know  me."  Mr.  H.  examined  the  fea- 
tures of  his  interrogator,  but  in  the  dim  Ught  was  unable  to  recognize  any 
one  he  had  ever  known.  Upon  this,  the  stranger  added,  "I  am  John  Gam- 
ble whom  Zeb  Mercer  murdered."  These  words  were  spoken  m  a  clear  tone 
of  voice,  after  which  the  stranger  proceeded  to  detail  the  circumstances  of 
the  murder,  complajned  that  the  community  had  not  rendered  hirn  justice, 
arranged  certain  questions  by  which  the  murderer  could  be  convicted,  and 
urged  that  Mr.  Hineman  should  have  Mercer  arrested.  He  then  vanished  as 
suddenly  as  he  had  appeared.  Notwithstanding  the  cu-cumstantial  character 
of  this  interview,  Mr.  Hineman  on  rejoining  his  party  could  scarcely  be  per- 
suaded that  some  one  of  their  number  had  not  been  practicing  deception  upon 

As  they  all  strenuously  denied  it,  however,  he  determined  to  take  further 
steps  to  ascertain  the  character  of  the  apparition.  For  this  purpose,  and 
without  communicating  his  intention  to  any  one,  he  returned  the  next  night 
to  die  exact  spot  where  he  had  seen  the  apparition. 

The  moon  was  clear ;  the  place  furnished  not  the  slightest  chance  for 
concealment ;  and  though  he  waited  some  time  for  the  return  of  the  spint  m 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITVALISM, 

523 

vain,  lie  was  convinced  that  no  human  being  could,  ii,  that  path,  haie  ai> 
peared  and  disappeared  so  suddenly  without  detection.  Thus  musing,  he 
began  to  retrace  his  steps,  when  he  was  again  suddenly  confronted  with  the 
apparition  of  John  Gamble,  who,  after  repeating  the  same  words  as  on  the 
preceding  night,  disappeared  in  the  clear  open  space  lighted  by  the  bright 
moonbeams,  before  Mr.  Hinenian  had  recovered  from  his  surprise. 

Impressed  with  this  second  visitation  beyond  the  power  of  his  natural  and 
intense  scepticism  to  resist,  Mr.  Hinenian  the  next  day  sent  for  the  accused 
party  and  had  him  arrested  on  the  charge  of  Gamble's  murder.  On  the 
trial  which  ensued,  Mr.  Hineman  testified  on  oadi  to  the  circumstances  above 
related.  The  conclusion  of  this  extraordinary  trial  may  be  gathered  from  a 
letter  addressed  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  by  the  Rev.  John  B.  Wolfe,  in 
whlcli,  after  detailing  the  circumstances  above  narrated,  the  editor  adds : 

"A  private  letter,  just  received  from  a  Iiighly  intelligent  gentleman  now  employed  in  one  of 
the  departments  at  Washington,  corroborates  the  essential  facts  in  the  above  statement. 

"  Our  correspondent  adds ;  '  I  have  the  statement  from  a  lawyer,  who  interested  him- 
self at  the  time  of  the  supposed  murder  in  trying  to  trace  out  the  guilty  perpetrator  of  the 
crime,  and  hehad  gatliered  together  a  number  of  facts  which  pointed  strongly  to  the  very 
man  who  has  now  canfessed  the  murdtr.  As  they  were  not  conclusive,  however,  he  kept 
them  to  himself  until  now,  when,  seeing  in  a  Wheeling  journal  the  account  above  alluded 
to,  he  told  me  of  his  knowledge  of  the  afiair. '  " 

The  Olean  Journal  has  a  somewhat  humorous  account  of  a  discovery 
which  at  one  time  excited  great  interest  amongst  the  Spiritualists  of  Ohio ; 
but  as  their  accounts  partook  of  an  enthusiastic  tone  scarcely  in  keeping 
with  so  very  matter-of-fact  a  subject,  we  shall  quote  the  facetious  editor's  own 
words  in  detailing  a  little  domestic  invention  which  he  calls  — 

"TURNING  SPIRITUALISM  TO  A  PRACTICAL  ACCOUNT. 

"It  has  been  very  generally  supposed  by  the  opponents  of  the  new  'spiritual'  theories, 
that  the  Spiritualists  were  a  poor,  indolent,  deluded  set,  who  wasted  their  substance  in  pur- 
suit of  indefinable  phantoms,  and  evanescent  jaclt-o' -lanterns.  We  lately  heard  of  an  in- 
stance in  which  it  has  been  of  benefit  to  one  individual,  if  not  to  many  others.  The  reader 
is  aware  that  a  year  or  more  ago,  the  '  spirits '  who  haunt  the  region  of  the  '  Kiantone,' 
Chautauque  County,  revealed  to  one  of  the  initiated  of  that  region,  a  recipe  for  concoctmg 
'  spiritual  soap. ' 

"  This  recipe  finally  came  into  the  hands  of  an  enterprising  Spiritualist  of  this  county, 
who  shortly  after  sold  it  to  a  Connecticut  gentleman  for  several  thousand  dollars  cash  in 
hand.  Our  friend  who  made  the  sale  is  an  ardent,  genuine  Spiritualist,  and  having  spent  a 
vast  amount  of  money  in  promulgating  the  new  doctrine,  probably  felt  himself  justified  in 
getting  back  a  portion  of  his  investment. 

"  The  down-easter  who  has  bought  the  recipe,  is  already  beginning  to  realize  a  handsome 

In  the  Telegraph  papers  of  1S54  is  die  following  communication  from  a 
highly  respectable  citizen  of  Toronto,  Canada  West,  Mr.  R.  V.  Wilson : 

"THIEF  TRACED  BY  SPIErr  INFORMATION. 

"  Friend  Brittan,  —  The  following  fact  took  place  in  my  own  personal  experience. 
On  the  27th  of  September,  1S53,  Mr.  G.  R,,  a  young  man  in  our  employ,  made  off  with 
I408  of  our  money  in  his  possesaon.     On  the  2d  of  October  following,  Mr.  Mcintosh, 

Hosted  by  Google 

gj^  HISTORY  OF  MODZRTT 

mercliant  of  this  city,  saw  Mr.  R.  in  the  cars,  and  learned  tliat  In 
On  the  8th  of  October,  I  received  a  letter  from  R.  huiiself,  v 

todesist  from  the  endeavors!  waamakingtt 

„^..^  , ^' bound  for  California,  and  would  be  gone  before  I  coidd  receive  that  letter. ' 

"Eeades  feelbg  indignant  at  the  insultmg  tone  of  the  delinquent,  I  was  mudi  distressed 
at  the  loss  of  the  money.  On  reading  R.'s  letter  to  my  wife,  she,  who  had  herself  no  confi. 
denee  in  Spiritualism,  yet  was  aware  of  my  intejest  in  the  subject,  half  jestingly  remarked, 
'  Why  don't  YOU  consult  the  spirits?  '  I  replied  that  I  had  never  thought  of  Joing  so,  but 
would  then  and  there  make  the  attempt.  Accordmgly,  we  sat  down  to  the  table,  when, 
after  the  usual  manifestations  of  the  sphits'  presence,  my  wife's  brother,  Pahner,  announced 
himself.     The  mterview  that  ensued  I  will  detail  as  follows: 

"Q.    'Palmer,  can  you  give  me  any  information  about  Mr.  R.,  who  has  our  money ? ' 

"A.  'I  do  do  not  know.  Can  you  introdnee  me  to  any  of  his  relatives,  that  I  may  make 
the  acquaintance  of  some  of  liis  spirit  friends.' 

"1  mentioned  some  of  R.'s  friends,  when  the  spirit  left  us  for  about  fifteen  minutes. 
When  he  returned,  he  spelled  out,  '  1  wUl  now  try  to  find  him  for  you.'  In  half  an  hour, 
Palmer  returned  agam  and  spelled  out  the  followmg :  '  Mr.  R.  has  not  gone  to  California, 
but  is  m  Oliio.  His  partner,  N.  G.,  is  now  at  8  Weston  Row,  CmcmnatL  R.  will  be 
in  Cmcinnati  m  two  days,  and  I  will  lead  you  to  him  if  you  will  undertake  to  find  him.* 

"The  next  mornuig  I  telegraphed  to  A.  C.  Porter,  of  Cincmnati,  to  find  out  if  N.  G. 
was  at  8  Weston  Row.      In  five  hours  I  received  an  answer  in  the  affirmative. 

"  That  night  I  checked  out  money  to  prosecufemy  search  after  R.  with,  at  which  my  part- 
ner,  to  whom  I  related  my  plans  and  their  inducement,  was  foolish  enough  to  write  on  the 
check,  '  Spiritualism- Wilson  is  on  a  wild-goose  chase.' 

"  On  the  evenmg  specified  bythesphit,  I  was.  in  Cincinnati.  I  called  for  a  room  at  the 
Burnet  House,  sat  down  to  the  table,  and  had  spelled  out  by  the  spu-it  of  Palmer :  'R.  is  at 
the  National  Theatre.  Look  at  the  boxes.'  At  eight  o'clock,  P.M.,  I  walkedinto  the  the- 
atre, and  there,  looking  up  mto  the  boxes,  beheld  the  thief  comfortably  seated  eating  peanuts. 
I  instantly  departed,  appUed  to  Judge  Spooner  for  a  warrant,  returned  with  two  constables, 
and  arrested  Mr.  R.     I  have  only  to  add  that  I  recovered  the  aroomit  of  my  debt,  as  pom- 

ised  by  the  spirit,  and  my  expenses  m  following  the  thief. 

"  Yours,  fraternally, 

"Toronto,  C.  W."  "R-  V.  Wjlson. 

The  foOowing  account  was  sent  to  the  Spiritual  Telegraph  by  Mrs.  T.  E 
Cowee,  a  lady  of  the  most  unimpeachable  veracity,  resident  at  Atwater 
Portage  County,  Ohio.  ,      ^  ,  , 

The  lady  is  a  Spirituahst  was  a  constant  correspondent  of  the  Telegraph, 
and  was  well  acquainted  with  all  the  parties  concerned.  Although  the  names 
and  addresses  were  confided  in  full  to  the  author,  she  was  desired  to  give  the 
initials  only,  in  consideration  of  the  high  respectability  of  the  family,  whose 
relatives  the  narrative  places  in  so  discreditable  a  light. 

"LOST  PAPERS  DISCOVERED  BY  A  SPIRIT. 

"Mr.  H.,  whose  widow  now  resides  at  Chicago,  died  suddenly,  after  a  few  hours'  iUness 
only,  leaving  his  widow  stunned  and  overwhelmed  by  her  unexpected  affliction.  After  the 
funeral  Mrs.  H.  spent  a  few  days  with  her  brother,  and,  having  no  children  of  her  own, 
persuaded  her  niece.  Miss  C,  to  return  with  her  to  her'now  desolate  home.  Soon  after 
her  great  bereavement,  another  unlooked-for  trial  awaited  the  widow.  She  knew  that  Mr. 
H.  had  so  disposed  of  his  property  that  it  would  be  left  entu-ely  to  her.  Yet  he  had  scarcehr 
been  laid  in  the  ground  ere  his  brothers  clahned,  upon  one  pretext  or  other,  the  whole  of  hn 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIklTUAUSM.  525 

estates,  and  announced  thdr  inlention  of  di5possessing  het  of  the  very  house  which  herself 
and  tier  beloved  husband  had  labored  together  to  obtain. 

"  Her  legal  advisers  could  render  her  no  assistance  in  this  strait,  TOithout  she  could  pro- 
duce certain  documents  which  she  knew  Mr.  H.  possessed,  but  which  all  her  anxious  re- 
searches failed  to  discover.  Subsequent  disclosures  rendered  it  certain  that,  whilst  the  stricken 
wife  was  bathing  the  corpse  of  her  husband  with  her  tears,  his  brothers  had  examined  every 
drawer,  and  ransacked  the  house,  in  the  hope  to  discover  and  possess  themselves  of  tliose 
very  deeds,  but,  failing  to  find  them,  they  concluded  that  they  had  either  not  been  made 
out,  or  else  were  destroyed. 

"  Hence  they  mstitutcd  their  claim  with  perfect  impunity.  Mrs.  II.  had  shared  her 
husband' s  labors  in  the  acquisition  of  their  properly.  The  estate  on  which  she  then  dwelt 
had  been  earned,  cultivated,  and  adorned  by  their  mutual  toil,  and  she  could  not  endure 
tlie  thought  of  yielding  up  a  spot  endeared  to  her  by  precious  memories,  and  in  justice  so 
fully  her  own  property.  Whilst  these  distracting  thoughts  filled  her  mind,  she  one  night 
retired  to  rest,  her  niece  sharing  her  couch.  The  latter  was  soon  asleep,  but  sorrow  and 
anxiety  kept  Mrs.  H.  awake,  until,  as  slie  lay  with  her  ^es  closed,  endeavoring  to  compel 
the  forgetfulness  which  would  not  come,  slie  heard  a  peculiar  rustling,  as  of  some  one  ap- 
proaching. The  room  was  large,  and  but  dimly  lighted  by  an  expiring  fire,  whilst  the 
closed  blinds  prevented  the  ingress  of  light  from  the  street.  Yet  the  room  seemed  filled 
with  a  pale,  silvery  radiance,  which  distinctly  revealed  every  object  in  it,  and  show^  her, 
standing  close  by  her  side,  her  husband,  precisely  as  he  had  appeared  in  life,  only  that  he 
r^arded  her  with  an  expression  of  tenderness. 

"  Involuntarily  Mrs.  H.  started  and  pronounced  his  name,  when  the  apparilion,  speaking 
in  an  audible  voice,  implored  her  to  calm  herself  and  listen  to  him,  as  he  had  much  to  say. 

"  He  then  informed  her  that  two  or  three  days  before  his  death,  and  whilst  she  was 
absent  on  a  visit,  he  was  seized  with  a  strong  impresaon  that  his  papers  were  not  safe  in 
his  desk ,  that  he  had  accordingly  made  a  recess  behmd  the  set  of  drawers  in  the  north 
room,  and  there  depoated  several  papers  of  value,  amongst  others  the  misang  deeds. 
Being  struck  with  death  so  suddenly  and  so  soon  after  her  return,  he  bad  not  liad  time  to 
inform  her  of  this,  and  could  not  rest  until  it  had  been  communicated.  He  informed  her 
mmutelj  how  lo  find  the  recess  and  extract  the  papers,  and  then  gradually  melted  away  in 
the  silvery  light  which  still  continued  to  illuminate  the  room  some  time  after  the  spirit  liad 
disappeared.  Mrs.  H.  with  some  difliculty  succeeded  in  arouang  her  niece,  asking  if  she 
had  not  seen  or  heard  anything.  Miss  C.  replied  that  she  had  heard  voices  talking ;  she 
also  expressed  surprise  to  find  the  room  so  light.  Mrs.  H.,  feeling  herself  too  weak  and 
agitated  to  rise,  aslied  Miss  C.  if  she  would  get  up  and  strike  a  light,  and  then  if  she  wonld 
be  afraid  to  go  alone  to  the  north  room,  open  the  third  drawer  of  the  set  there,  where  she 
would  find  a  place  which  seemed  to  be  spliced  in  with  the  wall,  pry  out  with  a  knife  the 
board  at  the  back,  and  bring  the  papers  she  would  find  in  the  recess  to  her.  Miss  C,  who 
related  the  narrative  to  Mrs.  Cowee,  says ;  '  I  was  not  afraid  to  go,  but  I  did  wonder 
why  aunt  had  selected  such  an  hour  for  an  errand  of  that  kind,  and  why  she  sent  me  to  a 
place  which  I  had  not  visited  before.  1  went,  however,  took  out  the  third  drawer,  after  a 
close  scrutiny  found  what  seemed  to  be  the  splicmg  board  let  into  the  wall,  removed  it  with 
some  difficulty,  and  found  several  papers.  These  I  took,  and  placed  them  in  aunt's  tremb- 
ling hands,  who,  after  a  brief  examination,  said ;  "  These  are  the  missing  deeds." '  " 

The  Springfield  Republican,  of  1S56,  one  of  the  most  authoritative  and  re- 
liable secular  journals  in  America,  has  the  following  item,  for  the  strict  au- 
thenticity of  which  the  editor  vouches  ; 

"SPIRITS  AT  A  GAMING  TABLE. 
"  As  a  company  of  our  fast  young  men  were  busy  over  the  card-table  at  M.'s,  last  Fri- 
day evening,  a  angular  nojse  attracted  their  attention.     Ii  was  of  so  unusual  a  nature  that 

Hosiedb,  Google 

526  fflSTORY  OF  MODERir 

they  began  to  look  about  for  Its  cause.  It  was  repeated  again  and  agam  in  -^ther  direc- 
tions.    Something  more  than  curiosity  was  now  exeiled,  and  playing  was  suspended. 

"  Immediately  one  of  the  company  fell  into  what  the  Spiritualists  call  a  'trance,'  and 
proceeded  to  utter,  as  if  from  the  spirit  of  his  father,  a  homHy  against  gambling  and  its  as- 
sodate  vices. 

"This  was  followed  by  a  most  touchmg  address,  purporting  to  come  from  a  deceased  sister 
of  one  of  the  company,  couched  in  such  a  tender  and  affecting  tone,  that  the  whole  com- 
pany were  irresistibly  moved  to  tear.s.  There  was  no  more  card-playing  that  night.  None 
present  were  believers  in  spiritual  manifestations,  and  the  scene  was  equally  strange  and 
novel  to  them  all ;  nevertheless,  its  effect  was  irresistible  and  most  salutary.  The  circum- 
stances were  narrated  at  several  religious  meetings  on  the  succeeding  Sunday,  and  we  have 
reason  to  know  occurred  substantially  as  we  here  repeat  it." 

RESCUE,  BY  SPIRIT  IMPRESSION,  OF  A  MAN  BURIED  ALIVE. 

In  the  year  i860,  Mr.  Anson,  a  highly  respected  inhabitant  of  Prajrie, 
Boone  County,  Illinois,  was  engaged  in  repairing  a  well,  when  a  mass  of 
superincumbent  stone  and  rubbish  under  which  he  was  incautiously  working, 
fell  upon  him,  covering  him  to  the  depth  of  eighteen  or  twenty  feet,  and,  as 
the  neighbors  who  witnessed  the  accident  supposed,  crushing  hun  to  death. 

The  catastrophe  occurred  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  The  neighbors 
immediately  set  to  work  to  dig  out  the  remains  of  the  unfortunate  man,  but 
up  to  twelve  o'clock  at  night,  they  had  not  succeeded  in  reaching  him  ;  and 
beginning  to  suspect  that  the  falling  mass  must  have  precipitated  the  body 
into  the  well,  and  completely  choked  it  up,  they  concluded  that  as  they  were 
all  quite  worn  out  by  their  unceasing  labors,  which  diey  now  felt  would  be 
unavailing,  they  would  suspend  them  until  the  following  morning.  At  this 
crisis,  the  poor  wife  of  Mr.  Anson  broke  into  their  midst,  and  implored  them, 
as  they  would  hope  for  mercy  in  their  own  hour  of  calamity  and  death,  to  con- 
tinue their  efforts.  She  insisted  that  the  spirit  of  a  near  relative  had  appeared 
to  her,  and  declared  diat  Mr.  Anson  was  still  alive,  and  protected  by  the  fall 
of  a  sloping  mass  of  stone  which  formed  a  cavity  above  his  head,  and  that  if 
he  could  be  disinterred  before  a  certain  hour,  his  life  would  be  preserved,  and 
himself  remain  almost  uninjured.  In  this  statement  Mrs.  Anson  was  con- 
firmed by  a  female  neighbor,  who  insisted  that  the  selfsame  spirit  had  ap- 
peared to  her  and  duplicated  the  manifestation.  Incredulous  as  they  were, 
the  kind-hearted  workmen  could  not  resist  the  frantic  appeals  of  the  earnest 
women,  and  on  continuing  their  excavations  for  another  hour  they  reached 
the  body  of  Mr.  Anson,  whom  they  found  stunned  and  insensible,  but  still 
alive,  protected  as  his  wife  had  described.  Under  the  tender  ministrations 
of  his  friends  he  became  completely  restored  to  health  and  strength  in  a  few 
houj-s.  For  the  trudi  of  this  statement  we  have  the  evidence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Anson  ibemselves,  together  with  some  of  the  assistants  who  aided  in  the 
former's  rescue. 

"NAUTICAL  SPIRITS. 

"New  York,  Decemier^,  1858. 
"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Telegraph : 

"Brother  pARTRrocE,— During  my  last  voyage  from  Galveston  to  this  city  in  the 
brig  South,  which  left  Galveston  bar  on  the  28th  of  October,  when  mx  days  out,  I  was 
dtting  in  the  afternoon  near  the  cabin  table,  on  which  a  map  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  was 
spread  out.  Captain  Thomas  Williams  had  taken  his  altitude  and  was  ciphering  out  Ms 
reckoning. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAlsr  SPmiTUALISM.  527 

"  Afier  lie  had  completed  his  tasl;,  he  mailied  five  sniall  points  with  his  compasses,  in- 
dicating the  position  of  the  ship.  I  am  not  a  practical  navigator ;  had  not  seen  any  of  hi? 
reckonings,  nor  had  I  any  reason  to  doubt  the  correctness  of  his  calculations.  I  only  no- 
ticed that  he  seemed  scrupulously  particular  about  them.  On  this  occasion  I  had  a  quill 
toothpick  m  my  hand,  and  by  a  spiritual  impulse  I  could  not  control,  I  pointed  it  to  a  spot 
on  the  map  different  from  the  five  points  indicated  by  (he  captain.  I  became  involuntarily 
mterested;  and  takmg  a  small  piece  of  paper,  the  following  was  traced  under  spirit  influence 
by  my  haud ;  '  Your  calculation  is  not  correct ;  you  are  lat.  26"  i' ;  long.  86°  47'.'  This 
corresponded  exactly  with  the  captain's  reckoning  as  to  latitude,  but  differed  considerably 
in  longitude. 

"  I  called  Captiun  Williams,  who  had  gone  upon  deck,  and,  without  giving  him  any  rea- 
son, told  him  I  believed  his  reckoning  was  not  correct.  He  jestingly  replied,  '  Well, 
Doctor,  my  instruments  do  not  lie ;  the  horizon  is  clear,  and  I  wish  I  were  as  sure  of  a 
fortune  as  I  am  of  the  correctness  of  the  position  of  the  ship.' 

"I  asked  him  if  his  chronometer  was  correct.  He  drew  out  the  proof  corrections; 
one  from  Liverpool,  one  from  New  York,  and  added,  '  You  can  see  for  yourself.'  I  told 
him  I  was  not  an  adept  in  nautical  reckonings,  and  requested  him  to  cipher  out  the  exact 
time,  which  he  immediately  commenced  to  do,  when  lo  !  an  error  in  figures  was  instantly 
apparent. 

"Heealled  the  first  mate  and  said,  'Mr.  C,  when  you  made  this  calculation  of  the  time, 
you  put  down  11;  I  find  13.  He  gave  me  the  reckoning;  I  multiplied  and  divided  the 
same,  and  found  13  the  result.  On  making  an  additional  sight  correction  and  determin- 
mg  the  true  result,  the  captain  found  an  error  in  his  first  calculations,  which  when  adjusted 
brought  the  ship  seventeen  miles  eastward  m  longitude,  and  to  the  precise  point  whidi  had 
been  indicated  by  my  hand  on  the  chart  and  the  figures  written  by  the  spirits. 

"  You  cat!  call  on  the  captain,  who  is  now  in  port,  for  tiie  evidence  of  the  truth  of  what 
I  here  relate.  To  me,  however,  such  manifestations  are  no  novelty,  having  experienced 
hundreds,  nay  thousands,  of  communications  that  to  my  mind  are  unquestionably  of  spirit- 

"  Anthony  M.  Digkowitz,  M.  D. 
"San  Antonio,  Texas." 

Althotigh  the  difference  of  seventeen  miles  in  a  nautical  calculation  was 
not  in  this  case  a  matter  of  any  moment,  seeing  that  the  error  was  detected 
as  soon  as  made,  every  experienced  navigator  is  aware  that  such  a  mistake 
was  liable  to  cost  the  crew  their  lives,  and  the  owners  their  ship.  The  follow- 
ing incident  is  too  kindred  with  the  last  narrative  to  be  omitted  in  this  con- 
nection. It  is  copied  from  the  Fon  du  Lac  Commonwealth  of  the  19th  inst, 
and  all  the  persons  signing  the  document  are  well-known  and  tellable 
persons : 

"  STOCKB RIDGE,  WlS.,y«^26,  1S57. 
"We,  the  undersigned,  left  Oshkosh  in  a  small  boat  for  Stockbridge,  at  twenty  minutes 
past  four  on  Friday  afternoon,  July  19.  A  gentle  wind  was  blowing  from  the  south-west  at 
the  time,  but  at  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  when  nearly  half  way  across  the 
lake,  a  black  cloud  overspread  the  heavens,  making  It  intensely  dark.  At  the  same  time  a 
terrific  gale  of  wind  blew  up  from  the  south-east,  threatening  us  with  immediate  destruction, 
and  rapidly  drifting  us  to  the  north.west.  The  sails  were  immediately  furled,  but  the  boat 
became  unmanageable.  We  knew  not  what  to  do.  It  was  so  dark  that  we  could  not  see 
each  other  except  by  an  occasional  flash  of  lightning,  which  only  served  to  reveal  our  inevit- 
able doom.  Suddenly,  and  while  we  were  expecting  every  moment  to  go  to  the  bottom,  a 
brilliant  ball  of  light,  from  four  to  so.  inches  in  diameter,  appeared  on  the  mast-head,  and 

Hosiedb,  Google 

528  HISTORY  OF  MODERH 

simultaneously  several  small  lights  appeared  on  the  pole  in  the  bands  of  one'  of  the  party 
who  was  using  it  to  steer  the  boat,  which  we  could  not  guide  with  the  rudder ;  also,  on  each 
shoulder  of  this  person  appeared  one  of  these  smaU  glittering  lights.  He  at  the  same  time 
cried  out,  '  Never  fear  !  out  guardian  spirits  are  with  us  I '  Then  the  l^ht  at  the  mast- 
head moved  towards  the  eastern  shore.  We  steered  in  its  wake ;  and  though  we  had  noth- 
ing to  propel  us,  for  we  had  no  oars  on  hoard,  the  boat  moved  rapidly  along  despite  ol 
winds  and  waves.  At  half-past  eleven  we  landed  safely,  having  run  into  a  little  harbor 
nearly  In  a  south-easterly  direction  from  the  place  where  the  gale  first,  struck  us,  since  which 
we  had  proceeded  for  at  least  eight  miles,  propelled  by  an  inviable  power  in  the  midst  of 
that  ragmg  tempest,  in  two  hours  and  thirty  minutes. 

[Signed]  "  Joseph  W.  Schooley.  Wm.  C.  Cook. 

John  Denslow.  Miss  E.  A.  Cook. 

Mrs.  Iea  Schooley.  Amelie  Schoolbv." 

Perhaps  the  age  presents  ns  with  no  more  remarkable  or  interesting  proof 
of  spirit-power  and  its  utility,  than  the  biographical  sketch  which  will  be  found 
in  our  forthcoming  volume,  of  Mr.  Abraham  James,  of  Chicago. 

His  singular  experiences  and  wonderful  phenomenal  endowments  require 
a  more  extended  notice  than  we  can  here  furnish,  and  we  only  call  attention 
to  them  in  this  place  to  illustrate  more  forcibly  the  nature  of  the  subject  we 
are  treating  of,  and  point  to  the  vast  fields  of  use,  science,  and  even  matenal 
wealth,  which  open  up  to  the  eye  of  the  spiritually  entranced  seer. 

Mr.  James  is  a  young  man  whose  dignified  deportment  and  interesting  ap- 
pearance, would  command  for  his  statements  respect  and  credence,  but  be- 
sides the  personal  interest  which  attaches  to  him,  his  extraordinary  history 
proves  itself,  and  establishes  conclusively  the  boundless  superiority  of  spint- 
ual  over  mere  physical  sight.  Mr.  James,  after  a  singular  and  striking  c^eer, 
chiefly  limited  to  the  circle  of  his  own  family,  became  widely  known  and  ad- 
mired as  a  spirit  artist,  and  finally  celebrated,  as  the  discoverer  through  clair- 
voyance of  a  fine  artesian  well,  the  supply  from  which  will  confer  a  lastmg 
benefit  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Chicago  and  its  vicinity. 

Previous  to  the  discovery  of  this  well,  Mr.  James's  extraordinary  medium- 
istic  powers  had  attracted  considerable  curiosity  and  interest.  Deprived  of 
the  advantages  of  a  liberal  education,  and  compelled  by  stern  necessity  to  de- 
vote his  energies  to  hard  material  labors  totally  unsuited  to  his  fragile  con- 
sritution  and  sensitive  temperament,  no  expectation  of  intellectual  culture 
could  be  formed  of  him;  yet,  under  the  afflatus  of  spirit  influence,  he  con- 
versed fluently  in  several  oriental  and  other  foreign  languages,  and  gave  sci- 
entific discourses  which  challenged  the  admiration  and  astonishment  of  the 
most  learned,  .     n  .     .       » 

A  distinguished  professor  [one  of  the  Western  state  geologists]  declared, 
after  hearing  Mr.  James's  trance  discourses,  that  he  had  met  an  uneducated 
young  man  who  knew  more  of  geology  than  he  did  himself. 

For  many  months  Mr.  James  was  influenced  to  execute  vast  and  elaborate 
geological  designs,  which  were  pronounced  by  those  skilled  in  the  science,  as 
marvellous  and  strictly  correct  representations  of  the  earth's  crust,  especially 
in  die  sections  of  country  near  Chicago,  the  vicinity  of  the  medium's  resi- 
dence. Extraordinary  as  were  these  productions  when  theu-  source  is  con- 
sidered, their  mode  of  execution  was  still  more  remarkable  Mr.  James 
would  draw  his  designs  in  the  most  profound  magnetic  sleep ;  occasionally 
with  his  eyes  bandaged,  and  not  unfrequently  working  with  from  two  to  six- 
pencils  in  each  hand,  commencing  the  drawing  on  various  parts  of  the  paper, 
and  afterwards  filling  up  the  details  with  mai-vellous  skill  and  precision.     In 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  529 

the  autumn  of  1863,  Mr.  James  uttered  involuntary  prophecies  of  certain  dis- 
coveries that  were  to  be  made  ])roductive  of  incalculable  benefit  to  the  citi- 
zens of  Chicago.  At  that  time  he  did  not  seem  to  realize  that  he  himself 
was  destined  to  fulfil  his  own  prophetic  monitions.     Such  was  the  case,  how- 

Within  a  few  weeks  after  these  occult  utterances,  the  inspired  seer  acconi- 
phshed  the  realization  of  all  he  had  promised,  by  pointing  out  the  locality 
where  the  purest  of  water,  oil,  petroleum,  and  other  mineral  treasures  lay 
hidden ;  and  it  was  under  his  iairaediaCe  direction  and  tlirough  his  spiritual 
guidance,  tiiat  the  boring  for  the  wells  was  commenced,  and  carried  tlirough 
with  triumphant  success. 

Rmnor  affirms  that  the  faithful  and  deserving  revelator  of  this  magnificent 
discovery,  derived  little  or  no  benefit  from  it  himself  and  was  actually  per- 
mitted to  languish  in  cruel  necessity  and  ill  health  while  others  enjoyed  the 
fruits  of  his  achievement.  But  if  this  be  true  the  power  which  inspired  him 
was  adequate  both  to  sustain  and  compensate  him  for  after  having  vamly 
tried  to  obtain  a  just  share  in  his  own  bnUiant  discovtrj  he  turned  his  foot 
steps  still  under  spirit  direction  from  lUmo  s  to  the  oil  re^  ons  of  Peunsjl 

Here  a  temporary  stagnation  had  fallen  upon  the  commumty  engaged  in 
these  singular  explorations.  A  reaction  from  the  excessive  enthusiasm  of 
first  discovery  had  set  in,  and  there  was  but  little  passing  to  attract  the 
speculator,  or  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  enterpri=mg  But  to  the  piercmg 
eyes  of  spirits,  the  rich  earth,  teeming  with  unwrought  trea=ure=i,  can  evidently 
under  some  conditions  to  mortals  unknown,  ( save  that  they  involve  the  use  of 
certain  mediumistic  organizations,)  be  read  off  with  as  much  ease  as  the  navi- 
gator masters  the  shoals  and  soundings  of  the  padiless  seas.  The  same  bright 
eyes  that  had  pierced  the  mystery  of  the  earth's  crust  in  Illinois,  explored  the 
cavernous  depths  of  Pennsylvania.  Their  purposes  were  disclosed  in  streams 
of  prophetic  eloquence  poured  through  the  lips  of  their  entranced  medium, 
and  after,  in  this  way,  they  had  sufficiently  demonstrated  the  source  from 
whence  the  discovery  was  to  emanate,  Mr.  James  was  again  inspired  to  point 
to  the  locations  where  earth's  rich  treasures  lay  concealed,  and  thus  were  dis- 
covered numerous  and  abundant  wells  of  oil.  Mr.  James  is  now  justly  a 
participator  in  the  results  whlcli  his  own  wonderful  endowments  have  secured. 
His  discoveries,  moreover,  have  served  as  a  motive  power  to  stimulate  the 
community  to  fresh  research,  energetic  labors,  and  a  general  revival  of  the  in- 
dustry and  interest  of  that  whole  section  of  country. 

And  now  for  the  cui  bono  of  these  astounding  spiritual  powers.  Independ- 
ent of  all  persona!  interest  accruing  to  himself,  Mr.  James,  the  spirit  medium, 
has  been  die  means  of  revealing  the  valuable  and  long  hidden  products  of  the 
earth,  and  causing  their  distribution  to  the  comfort  and  blessing  of  countless 
thousands.  Influences  descending  from  this  generation  to  unborn  millions, 
must  follow  in  the  wake  of  such  revealments. 

Employment  and  remunerative  labor  has  been  secured  to  hundreds  of  ne- 
cessitous operatives  engaged  in  the  development  of  the  works.  Fresh  chan- 
nels of  wealth  are  opened  to  many  individuals,  either  for  their  bane  or  blessing, 
as  they  may  use  or  abuse  it.  And  lastly,  one  of  the  grandest  attributes  of 
the  human  spirit,  namely,  the  open  vision  which  penetrates  all  obstacles  of 
time  and  space,  matter  and  mind,  has  been  demonstrated,  proved,  and  certified 
beyond  die  possibility  of  denial  or  the  shadow  of  disproof  It  is  an  act  of 
equal  justice  and  satisfaction  to  the  author  to  be  able  to  add  that  Mr.  James, 
the  subject  of  djiese  rare  phenomenal  endowments,  is,  in  every  way,  worthy 

Hosiedb,  Google 

530  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

of  diem,  and  seoms  disposed  to  use  his  marvellous  power  for  the  good  of 
others  and  the  benefit  of  humanity,  no  less  dian  ui  advancement  of  die  sub- 
hme  truths  of  which  he  is  the  witness,  Widi  modest  humility,  he  has  attrib- 
uted all  die  glory  to  the  spiritual  source  from  which  it  has  emanated. 

Dignified  and  self-centred  as  we  knew  hUii  in  his  adversity,  report  speaks 
of  him  as  kind,  beneficent,  and  humble,  in  his  prosperity.  The  heavenly  be- 
ings who  have  thus  far  led  and  guided  Mm,  alone,  can  foresee  how  die  new 
trial  of  die  ten  Ulents  may  work  on  a  diaracter  hidierto  beautiful  and  untar- 
nished. But  here  we  must  pause,  leaving  the  result  to  Him  who  holds  us  all 
in  the  hollow  of  his  mighty  hand.  _  ,     c     » 

Aldiough  we  axe  at  diis  present  writing  in  possession  of  thousands  ot  welh 
attested  cases,  illustrative  of  the  beneficent  and  providential  influence  which 
spirits  exercise  upon  the  destiny  of  mortals,  our  limits  forbid  the  insertion  of 

my  more  man  mc  lwu  lunuwuig  ji,iji-,^i.iji"."'^  • ■-  ,  r.   ■   -j      j-  i 

In  connection  widi  the  publication  of  the  Bostonifef  England Sptrttualtst, 
a  reading-room  was  opened  with  a  dedicatory  service,  on  which  occasion 
several  speakers  addressed  the  company  assembled  in  exposition  of  die  truths 
and  uses  of  Spiritualism.  „   „    ,^  ,  -j     ^     c 

In  the  course  of  die  evening's  exercises,  Mr.  H.  G.  Cole,  a  resident  of 
Pordand,  Maine,  and  now  a  distinguished  lecturer  m  die  temperance  cause, 
related  the  following  remarkable  spiritual  experience.  ^ 

Mr  Cole  acknowledged  tliat  he  had  formerly  been  a  persistent  vender  ot 
ardent  spirits,  and  diat  in  violation  of  the  Maine  Liquor  Law.  For  this 
offence  he  was  indicted  on  several  chaises,  and  tlirown  into  prison.  While 
diere  his  sister  died,  and  he  was  bailed  out  for  die  purpose  of  attending  her 

funeral.  „    ,  ^     , - 

After  this  sad  ceremony  was  ended,  he  felt  uresistibly  impelled  to  enter  his 
bar-room  and  there  to  stand  as  if  arrested  and  held  fast  by  invisible  hands. 
In  diis  position,  he  distinctly  heard  a  strange,  distant,  yet  clear  voice,  which 
pleaded  with  him  in  die  most  touching  manner  on  his  minous  and  iniquitous 
business.  When  the  spell  was  over,  notwidistanding  the  deep  impression  it 
had  left  on  his  mind,  his  fear  lest  he  was  yielding  to  some  of  the  so-called 
"  spiritual  superstitions  of  the  day,"  determined  him  to  resist  the  invisible 
monition,  and  in  order  to  defy  or  treat  it  as  an  idle  dream,  he  drank  until  he 
succeeded  in  deadening  his  faculties  widi  brutal  intoxication  ;  but  from  die 
moment  when  he  entered  into  diis  course  until  he  sank  into  msensibihly,  and 
from  the  time  when  consciousness  returned  until  he  was  compelled  to  resume 
die  business  of  the  succeeding  day,  die  voice  never  left  him,  and  never  ceased 
to  plead  with  him  in  tones  that  persistendy  rang  in  his  ears  as  diose  of  his  dead 

At' last,  unable  any  longer  to  endure  or  resist  these  mysterious  monition^ 
he  sought  out  an  acquaintance  with  whom  he  had  once  been  intimate,  and 
.whose  chief  recommendation,  on  the  present  occasion,  was  the  fact  diat  he 
.had  been  a  professed  infidel.  .-,,      r       ^  r  .1 

To  this  person  the  unhappy  inebriate  related  candidly  die  story  of  the 
"haunting,"  and  solicited  liis  fi^end's  opinion  as  to  its  cause.  To  his  aston- 
ishment, be  found  diat  the  former  infidel  had  latterly  become  an  ardent 
convert  to  Spiritualism,  and  attributed  the  invisible  pleadings  to  the  influence 
of  anxious  sphit  friends.  At  his  counsellor's  earnest  sohcitation,  Mr.  Cole 
consented  to  accompany  him  to  a  medium,  from  whom  he  instantly  received 
a  comnmnication,  signed  with  the  full  name  of  his  deceased  sister,  and  con- 
taining numerous  indisputable  proofs  of  her  identity.  Mr.  Cole  contmued 
■bis  investigations,  and  it  was  under  diis  redeeming  influence  diat  he  became 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  531 

restored  to  himself  and  society  in  the  character  of  a  faithful  and  effective 
lecturer  for  the  cause  of  temperance. 

Our  concluding  example  is  voudied  for  on  die  respected  and  unquestion- 
able authonty  of  Mr.  Thomas  Hunt,  mercliant,  and  Judge  Waters,  bodi  of 
Salem,  Mass.,  who  are  personally  cognizant  of  the  parties,  and  well  advised 
of  all  the  facts  of  tlie  case. 

A  young  iiian  in  the  employ  of  a  carriage  manufacturer  in  New  York 
canying  on  busmess  on  a  very  extensive  scale,  was  accused  by  his  employer, 
on  grounds  which  he  considered  to  be  conclusive,  of  embezzling  die  sum  of 
seven  hundred  dollars. 

Unwilling  to  proceed  harshly  or  in  haste  against  the  accused  party,  who 
had  hitherto  bome  an  irreproachable  character,  die  manufacturer  wrote  to 
the  youtli's  father,  Mr.  S.,  informing  him  of  die  charge,  and  requesting  his 
immediate  presence  to  investigate  the  unhappy  business.  Before  leaving  his 
place  of  residence,  Mr.  S.,  who  was  a  strong  Spiritualist,  called  on  Mr. 
Charles  Foster,  the  celebrated  test  medium,  who  chanced  to  be  staving  in 
diat  town.  '    ^ 

_  Mr.  S.  carefully  concealed  the  object  of  his  visit,  but  the  medium  became 
instantly  impressed  widi  its  nature,  and  as  soon  as  die  sitting  commenced 
the  spmt  controlling  hini  empliatically  assured  Mr.  S.  that  "his  son  was  in^ 
nocent  of  a  great  crime  that  had  been  laid  to  his  charge,  but  that  the  real 
culprit  could  not  be  brought  to  justice  unless  he  [Mr.  Fosterl  should  accom- 
pany Mr.  S.  to  New  York." 

So  powerful  were  the  demonstrations  accompanying  this  unlooked-for  com- 
mumcation,  that  Mr.  S.  was  induced  to  solicit  Mr.  Foster's  compliance  widi 
the  spmes  request.  This  being  granted,  die  two  gentlemen  set  out  for  New 
York,  and  immediately  proceeded  to  the  ofSce  of  the  carriage  manufacturer 
As  soon  as  the  nature  of  their  business  was  stated,  and  permission  granted 
to  hold  a  seance  then  and  there,  Mr.  Foster,  who  was  a  total  stranger  to  all 
the  parties  concerned,  described  a  fellow-clerk  in  the  manufactory  who  he 
affirmed  to  be  the  guilty  party ;  and  in  proof  thereof,  he  desired  that  a  mes- 
senger should  be  sent  to  search  the  young  man's  desk,  in  which  would  be 
found  a  bunch  of  keys  which  he  desired  should  be  brought  to  the  siance. 

All  this  was  done  :  die  keys  were  found  exactly  where  the  medium  had  de- 
scribed, and  when  placed  m  his  hand,  he  selected  one  which  he  affinned  would 
open  die  safe  from  which  die  money  had  been  abstracted,  and  by  aid  of  which 
the  young  man  had  accomplished  his  theft.  Before  making  this  final  and  con- 
clusive disclosure,  the  spirits  declared,  through  Mr.  Foster,  that  the  culprit  had 
been  tempted  to  this  cnme  by  the  accidental  discovery  that  he  possessed  a 
duplicate  key  of  the  safe,  a  knowledge  he  would  never  have  made  use  of  had 
he  not  been  in  a  condition  of  pressing  necessity  and  ovenvhelming  distress. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  spirits  insisted  upon  receiving  a  promise  that 
if  all  was  found  as  they  had  represented,  the  culprit  should  be  reprimanded 
with  necessary  severity,  but  that  his  crime  should  be  forgiven,  and  a  farther 
test  of  his  good  conduct  be  permitted,  in  continued  service.  Upon  diese  con- 
ditions  flie  revelation  was  made.  The  employer,  struck  with  the  merciful 
consideration  no  less  than  die  justice  of  die  spirits,  faithfully  promised,  and 
honorably  fulfilled  his  pledge. 

Tlie  circumstances  were  correctly  detailed  in  the  minutest  particular.  The 
results  -were  the  entire  justification  of  the  innocent ;  the  arrest  of  a  well  dis- 
posed though  emng  man  in  a  career  of  crime  which  might  have  ended  in 
ureti-ievable  ruin ;  and  another  evidence  that  our  most  secret  ways  are  en- 
vrnjned  with  "  a  cloud  of  witnesses,"  commissioned  in  the  dispensation  of 

Hosted  by  Google 

532  HISTORY  OF  MODERr^ 

divine  law  mcJ  order  to  deal  out  compeniSition  and  retribntion  to  the  children 
ofmortahty.  ,     ^     -„  ^     r       j  ■ 

Several  cases  appKcatable  to  the  subjects  treated  of  will  be  found  in  our 
twentieth  chapter,  but  the  answer  to  the  senseless  question,  Cm  hmi .»  though 
specially  contimied  in  our  next  chapter,  can  only  be  fully  rendered  by  study- 
ing the  genius  of  Spiritualism  in  all  its  relations,  every  one  of  which  bears 
upon  die  divine  principle  of  supreme  good. 

CHAPTER   XLVIIL 

CUI  BONO!  CONTINUED. 

■SpnttTOAr.  INVEHTION- Machine  for  Riving  Shinglcs.-A  SPiaiT-iNVENTEn 
Mi"-NiT™viNO_T»«  WiNnow-SHUTTiR  F.ST.N1...-TK.  Cix.un  o. 
Witnesses  —  The  Anti-Tobacco  Army  -  The  Irrepressible  Conflict. 

Wf.  must  now  call  attention  to  another  phase  of  Spiritualism  still,  as  utilita- 
rian in  its  character  as  the  oamples  cited  in  the  last  chapter,  and  still  respon- 
sive to  the   question,  Cui  bono  ?  ,  -^       l. 

We  shall  noticeafewof  the  instances  which  demonstrate  where  our  thoughts 
come  from,  as  proved  in  that  phase  of  the  con  n  nion  yAta  spints,  which 
suegests  divers  useful  and  scientific   nventons 

Like  the  influence  for  good  which  bp  nti  al  sm  exerts  upon  the  character 
mi  spirits  exercise  upon  the  destiny  of  n  auk  nd  b  t  little  is  known  of  an- 
nehcmmistiy  in  fliis  form  J  but  little  s  nderstood  of  the  silent  influx  which 
Sutworks  itself  in  manifestations  of  human  gen  us  hose  sources  are  unknown 
even  to  their  illuminated  subjects  The  history  of  the  composer,  aullior 
poet,  painter,  mechanic,  and  mventor,  is  full  ot  fine,  and  sometmies  bold 
tracOT  of  the  » supernatural,"  in  the  developement  and  exercise  of  their 
■powers.  From  ignorance  of  the  real  relations  subsisting  between  die  visible 
ind  the  invisible  worlds,  mankind  generally  mistake  spinlual  mspiration 
for  die  unfoldment  of  their  own  talents,  but  still  more  frequently  they 
» tiuench  the  spirit,  "  of  whose  divine  opemtion  dieyhave  a  direct  conscious- 
ness under  the  superincumbent  weight  of  that  fear  winch  shnnks  from  the 
ridicule  ot  the  ignorant  or  the  anathema  of  the  bigot ;  and  thus  but  a  very 
small  percentage  of  die  beneficent  ministry  which  the  immortals  exercise 
upon  the  minds  of  mortals  becomes  known  or  understood.  The  fol  owing 
we  a  few  representative  cases,  selected  from  multimdes  of  othep,  illustra- 
tive of  the  direct  and  recognized  agency  of  spirits  in  the  production  of  new 
inventions. 

M.1CHINE  INVENTED  BY  SPlRrTS.  -TELEGRAPH  PAPERS. 

"PALMER,  Hampton  County,  Mass.,  Ap-ili^  1854. 
"  Mestri.  Parlridgs  and  Btittan  : 

'<  From  a  sense  of  duty,  and  to  give  credtt  to  whom  credit  is  due,  I  offer  the  following 
leitimoay  eoneeming  Ih.  diseovery  tit'^i  ^IrU  ngeocy  ot  .  m.eMi«  tor  li.mg  dimglea 

"  On  the  rand  oF  Mnrcl,  l»t.  Dr.  Barrow  wa.  enlr.n«d  to  give  the  dem.ption   nd 
d«,  the  dtall  ot  the  ni«:Hne,  under  the  avowed  Inllnenee  of  Dr.  Fnnkhn.     Tlie  dialt  wn. 

Hosted  b,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM,  533 

completed  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time,  and  tbat  witliout  tlie  aid  of  any  roatieinatical 
instruments.  On  taking  off  the  draft  to  a  working  size,  tlie  proportions  were  all  found  to 
be  correct,  and  coiild  not  be  improved  upon.  The  model  completed  is  one  third  of  the 
working  size,  and  works  precisely  as  promised.  It  produces  from  the  block  a  shingle  each 
second  of  time,  jndudmg  the  time  required  to  remove  the  shingle  from  the  machine,  and 

the  replacing  of  the  bolts  upon  the  carriage 

"  I  will  simply  add  that  Dr.  Barrow  has  no  knowledge  of  the  mechanical  arts,  and  in 

the  normal  state  could  not  have  given  the  least  idea  of  the  construction  of  such  a  machme. 

"  I  am,  gentlemen,  your  obedient  servant, 

"  H.  C.  BlLLIHGS." 

"a  spirit  invented  mill.— telegraph  papers. 

"  Hahmonsburg,  Crawford  County,  Pennsylvania,  ( 
">/f  13,1858.  f 
"Me.  Partridge,  -  -  Permit  me  to  inform  you  of  the  invention  of  a  very  important  and 
novel  kind  of  nuU,  which  was  su^ested  in  the  following  way.  The  inventor,  who  is  not  a 
Spiritualist,  saw  Hmself,  in  a  vidon,  walking  in  his  saw-mill  yard,  on  what  appeared  to  be 
sawdust,  which,  as  he  walked  through  it,  changed  to  com  meaL  Then  he  beheld  a  mill 
running,  with  the  meal  pouring  off  after  a  peculiar  fashion.  Attentively  observing  the  ma- 
chinery'of  these  operations,  his  mind  became  so  fordbly  impressed  with  them  that  he  started 
up  and  becoming  thoroughly  aroused,  instantly  set  to  work  to  construct  a  model  on  the 
ideas  he  had  seemed  to  behold  in  operation.  Satisfied  with  his  model,  he  next  proceeded  to 
construct  a  mill,  which  proved  to  be  admirably  adapted  for  grinding  all  kinds  of  gr^n.  On 
March  2,  1858,  the  inventor  obtained  a  patent  r^ht  for  his  mifl,  on  which  the  CommisMoner 
of  Pateilts  remarked  that  in  his  judgement  it  was  the  most  useful  mvention  he  had  ever 

granted  a  patent  for. 

"Yours  for  pr^wress, 

"^    '■  "  T.  T.  H." 

"NET-WEAVING  REVEALED  BY  SPIRIT  POWER.- SPIRTTUAL  TELEGRAPH,  1859- 

"  If  the  reader  will  turn  to  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  he  will  find  it  stated  that 
the  Lord  was  moved  vrith  great  wiath  tov»aids  the  iJeople,  inasmuch  as  he  confountled  their 
knowledge,  and  destroyed  their  skill  in  works.  They  possessed  the  art  of  wcavmg  nets  for 
catching  fish,  which  art  the  Lord  suddenly  and  utterly  took  away  from  them,  so  that  they  re- 
membered it  no  more. 

"  This  was  conadered  a  great  calamity  to  those  people,  and  m  makmg  nets,  men  have 
ever  ance  been  compelled  to  tie  the  knots  by  hand. 

*'  There  is  no  estimating  the  amount  of  time  and  money  that  has  been  expended  m  en- 
deavoring to  recover  tWs  lost  art.  Without  searching  the  pages  of  history  to  recaU  the  various 
efforts  that  have  been  made  to  this  purpose,  suffice  it  to  say  that  Napoleon  Bonaparte, 
during  his  reign,  expended  lai^e  sums  of  money  in  the  attempt  to  rediscover  the  lost  ait  of 
net -weaving.  He  failed,  however,  and  the  art  has  only  been  found  agam  withm  the  last 
few  years,  under  the  following  circumstances  1 

"  Recently,  whilst  we,  the  editor  of  the  TeUgraph,  were  lecturmg  at  New  Haven,  Mr. 
Van  Husen,  a  gentleman  about  fifty  years  of  age,  of  a  highly  inteUigent  appearance  and 
most'  respectable  position  in  life,  made  known  to  us  some  of  his  curious  experiences,  and, 
amonc  other  things,  stated  many  years  before  modem  Spiritualism  was  known,  spirits  com- 
menced their  visits  to  him.  Mr.  Van  Husen  both  saw  and  conversed  with  his  heavenly 
visitants  who  clidmed  to  be  the  spirits  of  ancient  Jewish  men  who  had  Uved  in  the  days  when 
nets  were  woven  by  machinery,  and  to  have  been  amongst  those  who  worked  the  machines. 
After  a  while  these  spirits  directed  Mr.  Van  Husen  how  to  construct  a  machine  or  "■-  — 

Their  instructions  were  so  exact  that  Mr.  H,  made,  piece  by 

piece,  sub^tting  each  part' to  Ms  kind  teachers,  untU  the  whole  was  completed,  when,  with 

Hosted  by  Google 

534  HISTORY  OF  MODERIT 

equal  minutke  they  directed  bim  how  to  put  them  all  togetlier.  When  tHs  was  done,  the  ma- 
chine was  a  complete  success,  and  we  saw  it  in  New  Haven,  weaving  nets  with  wonderful 
qieed  and  facility,  tying  three  hundred  and  sixty  knots  in  a  minute.  Afier  the  machine  was 
perfected,  Mr.  Van  Husen  began  to  consider  the  propriety  of  taking  ont  a  patent  for  the  in- 
vention, and  this  brought  up  the  question  as  to  whether  he  could  claim  the  invention  as  his 
own,  when  it  was  dearly  a  revelation  from  spirits.  TruthfuEy  to  his  own  experience,  he 
could  not  make  oath  that  the  invention  was  his,  nor  deny  that  he  received  it  direct  from 
others,  and  being  a  strictly  conEcientious  man,  he  felt  in  considerable  doubt  how  he  should 
proceed.  In  this  dilemma,  he  applied  to  a  Congregational  minister  of  the  place,  and  asked 
him  if  he  considered  it  lawful  or  possible  for  him  to  have  a  revelation. 

"  The  minister  answered  decidedly  in  the  negative.  Mr.  Van  Husen  stated  his  case,  and 
then  asked  whether  he  could  lawfully  and  possibly  make  oath  that  the  invention  was  his 

"  The  preacher  hesitated,  read  over  the  denundatory  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  sajd  he  must 
have  further  time  to  decide.  A  few  days  after,  Mr.  Van  H.,  pressing  the  minister  for  hb 
deciaon,  the  latter  declined  to  take  the  responsibility  upon  himself  of  answering  so  knotty 
a  point.  He  added  however,  that  in  a  few  days  there  would  be  a  meeting  of  ministers  of 
his  denomination  and  he  would  lay  the  matter  before  them  and  ask  for  their  united  coun- 
sel. But  this  reverend  body  were  all  in  the  same  quandary ;  they  agreed  to  defer  their 
answer  until  tlieir  next  meeting,  deeming  it  necessary  to  search  for  sacred  and  secular  auth- 
ority ere  Ihey  could  pronounce  any  decision  that  would  '  involve  perjury,  or  the  damnation 
of  a  soul.'  As  this  priestly  council  continued  to  be  undecided  on  so  grave  a  point,  the 
worthy  medium,  for  such  he  undoubtedly  was,  took  the  advice  of  a  neighboring  minister, 
whose  common  sense  was  a  little  stronger  than  his  priestly  nonsense,  and  who  urged  Mr. 
Van  Husen  to  make  such  a  representation  at  the  Patent  Office  as  would  secure  to  the  only 
mortal  who  had  aright  to  the  invention  all  the  immunities  and  privileges  which  belonged 
to  it.  The  machine,  we  repeat,  b  a  grand  success,  and,  connected  with  Mr.  Van  Husen's 
candid  acknowledgment  of  its  source,  a  grand  demonstration  of  spiritual  intelligence  and 
mioisteting  care  for  mortals." 

Amongst  other  publications  included  in  spiritualistic  literature,  is  a  pam- 
phlet entitled  "The  Spiritual  Invention."  It  is  part  of  an  autobiography 
written  by  Mr.  Frank  Chase,  of  Sutton,  New  Hampshire,  and  records  the 
origin  of  a  self-adjusting,  inside  fastening  window  blind,  whose  simple  yet 
ingenious  construction  was  revealed  to  the  author  directly  from  a  spirit.  As 
Mr.  Chase's  account  of  this  case  is  somewhat  mixed  up  wilh  personal  details 
and  the  writer's  peculiar  idiosyncrasies,  we  shall  substitute  in  its  stead  the 
letter  addressed  by  the  author  to  tbe  spiritual  journals  of  the  time,  written 
to  correct  the  exaggerated  reports  that  were  in  circulation  on  tlie  subject, 
and  afterwards  introduced  by  Mr.  Chase  into  his  pamphlet  by  way  of  preface. 
It  reads  as  follows : 

"Boston,  Aprils,  1862. 
"  To  the  Editors  of  the  Banner  of  Light : 

"  Gentlemen,— -We  all  acknowledge,  with  Thomas  Paine,  that  there  are 
"some  thoughts  that  bolt  into  our  heads,"  coming  we  know  not  how  or 
whence.  Inventors,  composers,  and  writers  will  be  especially  familiar  with 
this  experience;  and,  to  such  of  your  readers  as  may  be  willing  to  acceptof 
a  spiritual  solution  for  this  seeming  spontaneity  of  thought,  the  following  in- 
cidents of  my  travel  may  not  be  uninteresting. 

"Last  November,I  went  to  Sutton,  N.  H.,  to  fulfil  an  engagement  of  long 
standing,  and  give  one  Sunday  to  the  good  people  of  that  place.  I  found  my 
correspondent  and  employ^,  Mr.  Frank  Chase,  almost  the  sole  representa- 
tive of  Spiritualism  in  three  villages ;  and,  if  time  and  space  would  permit  me, 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN-  SPIRITUALISM.  53  S 

1. could  give  your  readers  a  history  of  modem  martyrdom,  endured  daring  a 
five-years'  watfa'e,  conducted  single  handed  by  this  brave  young  man,  against 
bigotrj',  cowardice,  and  village  politics,  that  should  stimulate  the  despairing 
to' hope  uuder  the  most  adverse  circumstances,  and  put  to  shame  the  mur- 
murs of  the  "  well-to-do  "  Spiritualists,  who,  after  enduring  a  few  cold  looks, 
and  paying  out  a  few  dollars  to  sustain  "the  cause,"  wititdraws,  with  the  self- 
satisfied  assurance  "that  they  have  made  sacrifices  enough  for  Spiritualism, 
and  mean  to  do  no  more." 

"Not  so  my  brave  ally,  Mr.  Frank  Chase,  who,  with  scarcely  any  means, 
and  the  entire  battery  of  Sutton  influence  levelled  against  him,  by  aid  of  a 
few  Quixotes,  whose  chief  inducemnet  to  labor  is  the  need  of  the  people, 
rather  than  self,  have  managed  to  keep  Spiritualism  so  unmistakably  before 
Sutton  eyes,  that  they  know  with  the  heart  what  they  reject  with  the  lips. 
Although  none  of  Mr.  Frank  Chase's  family  were  Spiritualists,  I  was  hospi- 
tably entertained  in  his  house. 

"  One  day,  whilst  receiving  visits  from  the  neighbors,  in  company  with  Mr. 
Chase's  mother,  I  noticed  to  some  of  my  visitors  the  presence  of  different 
spirit  friends  they  had  brought  with  them.  As  those  I  was  so  fortunate  as  to 
perceive  were  recognized  with  inany  expressions  of  gladness  and  surprise  by 
tlieir  friends,  Mrs.  Chase  remarked,  '  She  supposed  she  was  not  good  enough 
to  be  visited  by  spirits,  as  I  had  never  recognized  any  for  her.'  In  apparent 
answer  to  her  remark,  a  tall  man  appeared  at  her  side,  who  called  her  '  a 
kind  of  sister  of  his'  This,  in  connection  with  other  tokens  of  identity,  as- 
sured her  it  was  a  half-irother  of  hers,  and  excited  much  curiosity  and  mter- 
est  in  her  mind. 

"Some  time  since,  my  host,  Mr.  Frank  Chase,  had  invented  a  newwindow 
blind,  for  which  he  had  obtained  a  patent.  Mr.  Chase  always  claimed  that 
the  thought  of  this  invention  had  come  into  his  head  in  a  manner  so  singu- 
lar, that  he  was  perfecdy  sure  it  was  a 'spiritual  impression.'  The  spirit 
of  tlie  uncle  now  before  me  informed  me  that  he  [himself  an  ii^enious  work- 
man] had  been  the  author  of  this  thought;  but,  as  the  assertion  contained  in 
it  no  special  proof,  it  was  not  received  by  the  company  with  much  favor. 
Ere  he  disappeared,  the  sphit  added,  'I  will  give  Frank  another  proof  of  my 
care  and  love  for  him,  and  do  something  greatly  to  his  benefit.' 

"That  night,  the  moment  I  extinguished  my  lamp  on  going  to  bed,  the  fall 
man  stood  by  my  side,  kindly  quieted  the  fear  which  the  miserable  prejudice 
of  early  education  has  still  left  on  my  nerves,  of  sphits  ;  and,  after  exacting 
from  me  a  promise  that  what  he  was  about  to  communicate  I  would  freely 
give  to  liis  nephew,  he  proceeded  to  show  me  an  invention  for  closing  window- 
blinds,  opening,  shutting,  and  most  securely  fastening  them,  and  all  from 
the  inside,  and  without  the  cold  and  troublesome  process  of  opening  and  slot- 
ting the  window. 

"  The  machine  was  and  is  exceedingly  simple ;  can  be  applied  to  any  win- 
dow; is  die  most  secure  of  fastening,  when  closed,  against  burglars;  and 
equally  so,  when  pushed  back,  against  the  action  of  the  wind. 

"  My  shadowy  mechanical  friend  took  the  pains  to  show  me  the  instrument 
made  in  two  kmds  of  metal ;  the  one  plain  and  inexpensive,  the  other  more 
showy  and  expensive.  With  another  charge  to  'give  it  to  Frank,'  together 
with  the  assm-ance  that  he  should  obtain  a  patent  for  it  and,  more  apocry- 
phal yet,  be  actually  loaned  the  money  which  was  to  procure  said  patent 
without  any  difficulty,  my  good  instructor  went  over  again  the  screws,  hinges, 
joints,  material,  etc.,  and  bade  me  kindly  good-night. 

"  The  next  morning,  almost  at  dawn  of  day,  saw  me  fitting  on  to  a  frozen 

Hosted  by  Google 

536  HISTORY  OF  MODERlSr 

window,  and  in  die  midst  of  a  blinding  snow-stomi,  a  paper  mode!  of  the 
spirit's  machine.  Mr.  Frank  Chase,  a  ready  and  ingenious  mechanic  him- 
self, at  once  understood  the  idea  ;  and  with  the  promise  of  the  spirit  [which 
he  did  believe],  diat,  where  my  description  failed,  he  would  inspire  him,  and 
a  further  promise  [which  seemed  so  wild  in  Sutton  finance  that  he  did  not  be- 
lieve it],  namely,  fliat  the  means  for  obtaining  his  patent  should  be  found,  I 
quitted  Sutton. 

"  About  one  week  after  my  departure,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr,  Chase, 
announcmg  that  the  machine  was  made,  tried,  and  pronounced  by  several 
mechanics  of  the  vicinity  perfectly  satisfactory  and  complete  in  all  its  details. 
A  few  weeks  later,  my  correspondent  informed  me  that  the  money  was  read- 
ily obtained,  and  tlie  patent  granted  ;  that  the  spiritual  machine  is  now  in 
successful  operation  and  great  demand,  and  can  be  had  of  Mr.  Frank  Chase, 
Sutton,  New  Hampshire,  etc, 

"  As  I  have  the  permission  of  the  parties  concerned  to  publish  this  state- 
ment, and  as  the  various  witnesses  can  and  will  testify  to  the  above,  I  tiiink 
I  am  justified  in  saying  that  in  me  [to  whom  I  presume  none  of  ray  acquaint- 
ances would  look  to  find  germs  even  of  mechanical  genius]  there  is  one  evi- 
dence, at  least,  that  we  need  but  to  see  the  wheels  that  move  the  macliine, 
and  obtain  glimpses  of  the  invisible  workmen  who  are  engaged  in  the  ma- 
chinery, to  find  where  those  thoughts,  fraught  with  gleams  of  untried  possibil- 
ities, and  rife  with  gems  of  useful  discovery,  come  from. 

"  Emma  Hardinge." 

It  seems  that  either  Mr.  Chase's  mind  was  not  perplexed  with  the  same 
scniples  that  afflicted  Mr.  Van  Husen,  or  his  counsels  were  not  distracted  by 
such  interpreters  of  God's  pleasure  as  chose  to  infer  tiiat  he  would  condemn 
a  human  soul  to  eternal  destruction  for  receiving  some  useful  mechanical  sug- 
gestions from  a  man  who  had  become  a  glorified  spirit 

Certain  it  is,  that  Mr.  Chase  readily  obtained  a  patent  for  the  invention, 
and  that  without  sacrifice  of  truth  or  conscience,  as  he  candidly  proclaimed 
to  the  whole  world,  both  in  the  publication  of  his  pamphlet  and  to  the  officials 
who  granted  his  patent,  the  source  from  whence  the  idea  originated.  The 
result  of  Mr.  Chase's  candor  in  this  respect  called  forth  the  following  notice 
from  the  editor  of  tiie  Scientifie  American,  who,  in  commenting  on  the  utilita- 
rian character  of  the  invention  added  : 

"Mr,  Frank  Chase,  of  Sutton,  N.  H.,  states  that  the  blind-fastener  illustrated  on 
another  page  of  the  number,  was  revealed  to  Mm  through  Enuna  Hardinge,  the  spiiit  me- 
dioiQ,  by  the  ghost  of  his  uncle,  a  worthy  mechanic  some  time  deceased.  Acting  upon  Mrs. 
Hardin^e's  instructions,  Mr.  Chase  made  the  fastening,  which  is  certainly  a  good  one,  and 
if  done  by  the  spirits,  as  is  alleged,  is  no  discredit  to  their  inventive  genius. 

"  People  often  dream  of  valuable  inventions,  but  they  do  not  always  turn  out  as  well  aa 
tMs  one." 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  spirit  who  revealed  this  invention  to  the 
author,  urged  upon  her  that  she  should  give  the  idea  to  his  nephew ;  and  here 
it  may  be  added  that  he  insisted  upon  it,  she  should  never  take  any  fee  or 
reward  for  the  same,  or  claim  any  share  of  the  profits.  In  justice  to  all  parries, 
it  is  but  right  to  say,  that  Mr.  Chase  has  again  and  again  pressed  upon  Mrs. 
Hardinge  liberal  offers  of  compensation,  accruing  from  the  sale  of  the  patent 
rights,  etc.  ;  but  the  conditions  imposed  by  die  spirit  have  been  faithfully  re- 
garded, and  not  a  single  cent  has  ever  been  accepted  by  the  medium,  or  any 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'  SPIRITUALISM.  537 

other  reward  tlian  a  well-executed  model  of  the  invention,  with  whi-ch  Mr. 
Chase  kindly  presented  her  as  a  memento,  on  her  quitting  America 

Several  highly  ingenious  and  valuable  pieces  of  machinery  for  quartz-cnish- 
ing,  and  amalgamating,  have  been  given  to  the  early  miners  of  California  and 
Nevada,  through  spirit  mediums.  One  of  the  most  successful  furnaces  now 
in  operation  in  those  States  was  thus  revealed ;  but  as  the  parties,  either 
through  carelessness  or  lack  of  opportunity,  failed  to  secure  patents  for  them, 
and  they  have  been  extensively  imitated,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  cite  the 
names  of  the  mediums  or  the  conditions  of  thek  invention  in  this  ccmnection. 
A  very  beautiful  crystalline  composition  whose  bases  were  rose-leaves  and 
oxide  of  iron,  was  revealed  by  spirits  to  Mr.  John  Birdsall,  an  excellent  me- 
dium and  practical  miner  of  California,  and  by  him  converted  mto  recherche 
ornaments  for  his  friends. 

To  enumerate  the  valuable  medicinal  compounds  that  have  been  revealed 
by  spirits  to  their  mediums  for  anrative  purposes,  would  require  the  space  ot 
a  separate  volume.  The  sister  muses  of  Poetry,  Painting,  and  Music,  also, 
have  been  fully  represented  by  kind  spirit  friends,  whose  magnificent  inspira- 
tions wiU  be  treated  of  more  fully  hereafter. 

Besides  the  few  instances  already  mentioned,  an  immense  number  of  me- 
chanical inventions  are  claimed  to  have  emanated  from  spirits  during  the 
progress  of  this  modem  spiritual  movement ;  our  space,  however,  forbids  the 
insertion  of  more  particular  details.  Narrowing  down  our  observation  to  the 
Spiritualism  of  the  time  and  place  only  which  these  pages  claim  to  repre- 
sent, let  any  intelligent  reader  review  the  circle  of  each  one's  own  acquaint- 
ance, and  in  nine  cases  out  of  every  ten  he  will  find  that  excellence  in  art, 
science,  invention,  or  the  exhibition  of  rare  genius  in  any  shape,  is  always 
accompanied  by  some  direct  or  indirect  evidence  of  occult  aid  and  inspiration. 

Did  opportunity  permit,  we  could  fill  volumes  with  evidences  of  this  nature; 
in  fact,  the  private  and  personal  history  of  every  Spirituahst  in  America 
furnishes  us  with  examples  of  occult  guidance  and  inspiration. 

The  poor  seamstress  finds  herself  foOowing  out  unspoken  monitions  to 
execute  her  weary  task  after  some  improved  fashion  The  embroideress  is 
moved  to  repres     t  ddtyj.  Ih         a  1yd 

prise  to  herself.     Th    1       bl    h        w  f       p  rp  to  lly  mp  II  d  t         p 
her  plans  of  ope  wh  th  th    k  t  h        han  b      1       d  y  1 

and  that  without  b     g   bl   t    d  fi  h       If       1        h   b    a  ly 

developed  medium  fmh  thdfmp  tn  G 

dens  exhibit,  to  th  d    I      pir       1  f      y    f  een  n  tr  nd 

numberless  secre  gnlt  htjd  h  hpd 

in  the  half-enfran    d  f  d  dlthl  ftlgl 

spirit  voices  are  g      nlly  ngdm       d        tk       f       h      1 

tones  of  material 

The  triviality  and  commonplace  character  of  many  ot  these  experiences 
robs  them  of  their  prestige  in  the  eyes  of  the  marvel  seeker,  and  renders  their 
minute  record  uninteresting ;  nevertheless  their  existence  is  demonstrative 
of  an  unbroken  chain  of  connection  and  intercourse  between  the  visible  and 
invisible  worlds,  whose  links  are  composed  of  heart-love  and  mental  sympa- 
thy, forged  by  spiritual  intelligence  and  human  necessity. 

We  now  propose  to  take  a  brief  glance  at  some  of  the  movements  con- 
nected with,  and  growing  out  of  Spiritualism,  whose  progressive  and  benevo- 
lent purposes  are  strongly  characteristic  of  the  tendencies  which  spiritual 
teachings  develop.  Of  these,  none  liave  presented  a  pleasanter  view  of  the 
results  of  spiritual  influence  upon  long  confirmed  and  almost  national  habits. 

Hosted  by  Google 

g  HISTORY  OJ  MODERN 

than,  the  "anti-tobacco  arm,,"  a  httle  association  lAicli  has  grown  np 
amomst  tlie  members  of  the  spiritiial  lyceum  at  Stnrgis,  Michigan. 
Tnan  age  when  the  corporeal  systems  of  foni-fifths  of  onr  n«.Ie  P0P«lj'"™ 
are  saturated  with  the  narcotic  fumes  of  tobacco,  and  the  remaining  fifth  is 
lompelled  to  inhale  some  portion  of  the  poison  in  the  tainted  atmosphere  of 
smoky  streets;  when  the  brain,  muscle,  and  nerve  of  each  succeedi ig gener- 
SiunmistWblydegeoeratingbenead.U,em«l.enc.ofthisf.u^bab,t,we 
can  conceive  of  no  more  phihmthropic  or  praiseworthy  mission  than  that  ac- 
compuS  by  Frank  Wadsworth,  one  of  the  mosteloquent  and  mdefa  igabla 
of  U?eTpiritud  speakers,  in  founding  the  little  "  »''f  "JT-^SL  foltow 
lis  Michigan.  '\\t:  Rilisit-Philoiophual  Jmr„al  a  866,  gives  the  follow, 
ing  account  of  tlie  administration  of  the  anli-tobtueo  pkdse  : 

"5TURG1S  LVCEUM.-ANTl-TOnACCO  ARMY. 
"DEAR  J0UR«AI,_ On  Ita  2Sth  all.,  the  Sturgi,  Lyceum r.llW  In  •  b=% to  He  auH- 
'°  "  S™"'™,  .="«.,  »1  =™,.u,  ddib.„t.ly  pleased  ,he„«I.e.  to  ab...i„  t,.« 
the  use  of  totmoco  lo  aU  its  forms,  totally  and  forever.  ,  .     ,.  j  ,  .,. 

"Ti™  Brother  W«lswo,th'.  kst  da,  with  ..  for  He  pre.eut,  and  he  had  propped  lie 
nled,.  l«.atiMy  framed  «.d  trimmed,  with.  scroU  for  siguUme,  appeuded,  „  .  p.eseM  lo 
SfSeTm      In  .  few  appropriate  remart,  he  cipMued  its  u,»  and  purposes,  e.p.eoms 

tne  lyceum.     inaicw    ^^    r...     ,„  pv^ninle  in  the  world  bv  mvarvably  and  steaddy 

the  desire  that  the  Lyceum  might  become  an  example  m  tiie  woriu  oy  r  / 

onooon-  what  w«,  wrong.  A.  tobacco  wo.  a  greatand  incteoang  evd,  both  lo  the  present 
ISrWurrgleralion,,  be  wished  lb,  members  of  that  lyc.um,  old  and  young,  lo  pledge 

"rTtlyT^':="c=";d  the  prolered  iifl,  -ad  voted  Brotbe,  Walworth  a  b.aity 
•ttauk  youl'  ate  which  Ib.y  marched  h  groups  and  signed  the  pledge.  "■'"J" 
..  '^....  .-  ,1..  c i„n«  m  loin  the  Utile  annv,  and  ton  persons  volunteered  imme- 

'thaUkvou;'  auerwnicniiicy  u,aica„^...  I,.,.-!. a--  "  ,     . 

then  /ve^toth.  spectator,  to  jom  the  little  army.  ^A  ten  per.on.  vdunt 

diately.     The  scene  wis  impresdve  a.id  worthy  of  a  far  better  description  than  I 

give.     Sis  men,  who  had  used  tobacc 

day  to  abandon  its  use  forever.     ' 

pledge,  the  emotion  of  tliose  present 

Free  Church  ring  again.      ■      ■     ■      -.    ■  „,„v,.^wner?    Wherever  our  philosophy 

iL«7i,..  1,,^=,.,.,  ^nivipi  Tipnt.  carrvmi?- the  anti-lobacco  banner  r-     wnerevcruui  piiiiu'-'f  j 

scene  wis  impresave  and  worthy  of  a  lar  better  (lescnpi.o..  uuu.  .  ai..  ^ 
...v.      ^,.,...n  whohadusedtobaceoforupwardsof  forty  years,  pledged  themselve 
%  to  abandon  its  use  forever.     When  those  veteran  chewers  p.t  the^r  names  to    he 
pledge,  the  emotion  of  those  present  found  expression  m  a  cheer  so  hearty  as  to  maKe  tne 

"  What  lyceum  comes  nest,  carrying  the  ai. -  -- 

finds  a  hearing,  wherever  the  lyceum  banner  is  unfurled,  there  let  us  declare  uncomp  omis- 
wTwar  aslb  t  rum,  pro&nily,  tobacco,  apd  anger  j  let  the  souls  that  would  be  strong 
^e  Lilly  developed  in  the  bright  hereafter,  no  longer  be  compelled  to  breathe  polluted 
E  fc^en  To  the  brutal  tones  of  intoxication  or  profanity,  or  experience  the  violence  of 
nntempered  human  passion. 

"AU  goes  weU  with  us  here.     The  work  goes  ou  bravely. 

''  "Fraterually  yours, 

"Le  TAin-EUR. 

"  STUROrs,  Mlcu.,  February,  i8G6." 

Amonust  the  many  useful  and  progressive  ideas  with  which  Mr.  A.  J. 
DavU  has  blessed  the  age,  none  has  assumed  a  more  P"?-?'  rtlT  dS' 
&rm  than  the  institution  of  a  "Moral  Police  Fraternity,"  which  Mn  Uavis 
SSig^in  correction  with  his  Sabbath  meetings,  the  Childretf  s  Prog^sive 
Lyceum,  and  other  embryotic  movements,  whilst  engaged  m  die  pubhcat  on 
liim^aU  cf  Prcirl,,  in  New  York.  The  mam  idea  upon  which  the 
Soral  PolicTFiiterni^  seems  to  have  been  founded,  was  that  of  requiring 
SS  meSber  of  the  asLciation,  as  a  duty  incurnbent  "P<>»  *=  •»'■ '"^^ 
something,  in  some  rfiape  or  form,  b,  wa,  of  assisting  suifetmg,  relieving  dis- 

Hosted  b,  Google 

AMERICAN  Sl-'IRITUAUSM.  539 

tress,  comforting  affliction,  protesting  against  crime,  and  inst.ucting^  igiio- 
rance.  The  members  of  the  association  were  required  to  make  periodical 
reports  of  their  work,  and  received  couiisel  and  advice  in  its  prosecution 
60m  the  founder,  or  experienced- members  of  the  fraternity. 

The  following  extracts  will  afford  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  founder's 
aims  and  inspiration  in  the  first  organization  of  the  society.  The  report  is 
taken  from  Mr.  Davis's  paper,  the  Herald  of  Progress,  which  gives  an  ac- 
count of 

"  The  meeting  was  opened  with  Mn^ng  by  the  Lyceum  choir Mr.  Davis 

then  sdd : 

" '  Having  made  a  brief  report  of  transactions  during  the  past  month,  I  would  lilte  to 
bring  before  you  the  question  of  meetings  b  this  place.  To  me,  these  Sunday  gatherings, 
to  listen  to  useful  spiritual  lectures,  are  peculiarly  a  moial  police  work. 

"  '  It  seemed  to  me,  at  one  time,  that  we  could  not  need  anything  more  than  these  morn- 
ing and  evening  meetings.  But  a  time  came  when  the  pressure  from  the  better  spheres 
was  too  powerful  to  be  resisted ;  the  inspiration  was  too  glorious  and  fertile  to  be  hushed 
into  silence  ;  hence  the  Children's  Lyceum  movement  came  up,  and  has  already  blossomed 
and  here'  [pointing  to  the  choir  of  children]  'are  some  of  its  beautiful  flowers  before 

"  •  The  moral  police  movement  came  up,  as  you  know,  on  the  14th  of  June  last.  It 
could  not  be  repressed.  It  came  just  as  naturally  as  foliage  comes  on  trees  in  the  spring ; 
because  the  time  had  arrived  in  the  progress  of  these  meetings,  — the  putting-forth  time  of 
these  beautiful  evidences  of  the  great  truths  we  believe  and  teach. 

"  '  Our  meetings  might  go  on  until  doomsday,  but  unless  wo  had  some  practical  result 
from  them,  they  would  be  like  a  tree  with  only  foliage,  but  no  fruit.  Our  Children's  Ly- 
ceum and  the  Moral  Police  Fraternity  are  the  fruit  on  the  tree  of  life,  which  we  see  growing 
here  from  week  to  week.'  " 

A  number  of  reports  were  read  at  this  meeting,  detailing  the  labors  of  the 
society  during  the  preceding  month.  They  included  the  offices  of  healing, 
alms-giving,  rendering  advice,  consolation,  protection,  and  a  variety  of  other 
valuable  ministrations,  emulative  of  the  angelic  labors  of  love  effected  for 
mortals  by  tender  and  loving  spirit  friends.  The  operations  of  iJiis  truly  ex- 
cellent society  ceased,  unfortunately,  when  Mr.  Davis's  connection  with  New 
York  Spiritualism  became  suspended. 

Amongst  a  vast  number  of  ephemeral,  though  truly  benevolent  enterprises 
undertaken  by  the  Spiritualists,  the  following,  which  was  established  in  Ilew 
York,  may  be  taken  as  a  specimen  of  many  more  existing  in  other  parts  of 
the  country : 

"SPIRITUALISTS'  RELIEF  ASSOCIATION. —  SPIRITUAL TELEGRAPH,  1858. 

"We  are  happy  to  state  that  the  Spiritualists'  Relief  Association  that  was  formed  in  this 
city  some  weeks  ago,  is  in  successful  operation,  and  domg  much  good.  Its  objects  ace  to 
viat,  comfort,  and  relieve  the  sick,  and  to  administer  to  the  relief  of  the  worthy  destitute, 
especially  amongst  Spiritualists,  assisting  those  who  have  nothing  to  do  to  obtain 
tive,  employment. 

of  Spiritualists,  as  sucii,  10  laKe  uieir  pia,i;c  amuiigst  iiicii  iciiuvv-uicu  as  1 

ers,  teachers,  and  missionaries  for  good,  the  determined  spirit  of  repul 

And  yet,  despite  these  and  similar  attempts  all  over  the  country  on  the  part 

■  Spiritualists,  as  such,  to  take  their  place  amongst  their  fellow-men  as  heal- 

'    ■'       '  "'""''  of  repulsion 

Hosiedb,  Google 

540  msTORY  OF  MODERN 

which  has  perpetually  met  their  advances,  has  drivea  them  back  into  inevit- 
able and  disruptive  isolation. 

And  then  the  cry  is  raised  that  Sphitualists  are  "  totally  unpractical ; 
"  mere  idle  theorists,"  and  that  their  lives  and  doctrines  are  wholly  uni)roduc- 
tive  of  good  to  themselves,  or  the  world  at  large. 

rt  is  constandy  asked,  "What  hospitals  have  they  built ;  what  almshouses 
have  they  endowed  ;  what  new  thing  have  they  discovered,  what  good  diing 
have  they  done  ?  "  ,.,,,.-. 

To  tiiese  demands  we  answer,  "  What  if  ihey  have  faded  to  do  any  of  those 
things  ?  "  The  very  genius  of  the  movement  up  to  this  date  has  forbidden  such 
undertakings  in  any  associative  form.  .    ,   ,  , 

Individually,  the  Spiritualists  are  m  most  instances  practical,  benevolent, 
and  earnest  to  carry  out  in  their  lives  the  pure  doctrine  and  suggestive  ideas 
of  science  inculcated  by  Spiritualism  ;  but  coUectively  the  most  insuperable 
obstacles  have  hitherto  thwarted,  all  dieir  attempts  at  organization. 

As  healers,  dieir  methods  of  cure  apply  chiefly  to  individual  cases,  and  de- 
pend on  the  personal  control  which  wise  spirits  can  exercise  over  dieir  medi- 
ums conditional  upon  time,  place,  and  circumstances. 

To  found  hospitals  upon  principles  in  which  the  Spiritualists  could  agree, 
or  whereby  the  mediums  could  operate  in  concert,  would  require  a  far  more 
definite  understanding  of  magnetic  laws  and  treatment  than  twenty  years  of 
haphazard  experiment  has  afforded  us,  whilst  the  practice  of  any  system 
which  does  not  include  the  use  of  magnetism  and  clairoyance  would  be  en- 
tirely  opposed  to  the  revelations  of  spiritual  science. 

As  a  science.  Spiritualism  has  not  gone  far  enough  to  be  reduced  to  a  sys- 
tem, but  it  has  gone  too  far  to  accept  of  the  dogmatic  and  conservative 
mediods  of  stereotyped  material  science  only,  wheflier  in  medicine,  theology, 
mind,  or  matter.  .    ■  c      ■        u-  v 

To  build  almshouses  implies  a  provision  for  decay  and  infirmity, wtiich 
cannot  be  expected  to  attach  to  a  belief  of  at  most  a  score  of  years  old.  To 
make  provision  in  fact,  for  any  special  states  of  human  need  or  suffering,  im- 
plies the  existence  of  concrete  organizations  bound  together  by  fixed  opin- 
ions or  rallying  around  a  creed.  The  brief  and  agitated  career  of  modern 
Spiritualism  constitutes,  in  one  sense,  a  crusade  against  the  pernicious  effects 
of  fixed  opinions  and  the  dwarfish  tendencies  of  creed  and  dogmas,  hence 
the  first  elements  of  success  in  authoritarian  organizations  are  lacking,  and 
possibly  may  so  continue,  in  die  essential  faith  of  the  Spmtuahst.  To  do 
good  in  any  and  every  direction  with  all  his  heart,  is  a  part  of  a  true  Spiritu- 
alist's belief,  for  his  soul's  sake,  no  less  than  for  humanity  ;  but  to  do  good 
because  he  is  bound  to  comply  with  a  certain  authoritarian  command,  or  for 
fear  of  the  scare-crow  torments  of  theology,  is  precisely  the  kind  of  charity 
which  Spiritualism  has  come  to  breakup,  and  as  yet,  we  deem  Spiritualists  are 
scarcely  ready  again  to  bend  Uieir  necks  to  any  such  yokes,  even  if  necessitous 
human  beings  may  be  benefited  thereby.  .  _     . 

Above  and  independent  of  all  this,  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  mam  in- 
fluence wliich  Spuritualism  primarily  exerts  is  on  individual  cliaracter.  If 
this  great  movement  should  succeed  in  preparing  the  atom  for  a  worthy  and 
final  aggregation  into  the  mass  of  humanity,  it  will  be  found  to  have  effected 
a  fer  more  valuable  and  efficient  reform  Uian  any  which  attempts  to  deal  with 
mankind  by  wholesale,  and  converts  masses,  whose  atoms  contain  the  seeds 
of  corruption  and  decay.  And  the  last  argument  which  we  need  now  cite 
by  way  of  explanation  concerning  the  disintegrated  condition  of  tiie  spiritual 
ranks,  is  to  be  found  in  the  conduct  of  the  objectors  themselves,  who,  afi:er 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  5*1 

haviDg  harassed  the  Spiritualists  out  of  all  the  ordinary  privileges  and  places 
which,  as  members  of  the  body  politic  of  humanity,  they  are  entitled  to,  they 
tlien  reproadi  them  because  the);  are  not  there.  For  iostance,  after  many 
long  and  bitter  conflicts,  the  Siiiritualists  have  succeeded  in  forcing  from  dif- 
ferent State  governments  a  recognition  of  their  right  to  be  regarded  as  re- 
ligious societies,  provided  they  so  register  themselves  under  certain  laws. 
Even  Mr.  Frank  Chase's  pamphlet,  "  The  Spiritual  Invention,"  alluded  to  in 
the  early  part  of  diis  chapter,  became,  upon  his  earnest  representation,  ex- 
empt from  the  tax  demanded  on  the  sale  of  secular  works  because  of  its  "  re- 
ligious character,"  /.  e.,  the  record  of  an  invention  given  by  sphits,  was  ad- 
mitted into  the  category  of  "  religious  works."  Widi  diis  concession  be- 
fore him,  however,  we  still  beg  die  reader  to  abate  his  enthusiasm  at  die 
march  of  public  opinion,  by  recollecting  tlie  blank  denial  which  Mr.  Partridge 
received  from  the  book  committee  on  the  occasion  of  the  Sanitary  Fair  held 
in  New  York,  only  four  years  since,  when  he  tendered  a  donation  of  six  hun- 
dred dollars'  wordi  of  books  and  matches,  because  the  former  contained 
amongst  them  some  spiritual  literature,  and  fliis  was  deemed,  by  the  highly 
orthodox  committee,  too  irreligious  a  subject  to  be  converted  into  aid  for  the 
country's  wounded  and  deeply  necessitous  defenders!  Again,  whilst  the 
laws  of  New  York  compel  die  recognition  of  die  "  First  Spuitualist  Associa- 
tion" of  diat  city  as  a  "religious  body,"  one  of  die  daily  journals  of  New 
York,  only  a  year  ago,  sent  their  reporter  to  write  a  critique  on  the  Spiritual- 
ists' Sabbath  exercises,  in  which  die  fair,  eloquent,  and  honorable  speakers 
are  characterized  as  the  "  wild  animals  of  a  menagerie,"  dieir  personal  ap- 
pearance described  with  a  disgusting  tone  of  ribaldry  that  would  foul  these 
pa^es  to  reprint ;  their  attitudes  and  manners  mocked  and  scoffed  at,  and 
likened  to  "thehootings  of  wild  beasts,"  and  their  conmiittees  satirized  as 
the  "  keepers  of  insane  asylums,"  or  "  menageries." 

About  the  very  time  when  Mr.  Frank  Chase  had  license  to  peddle  his  pam- 
phlet as  "  a  religious  work,"  the  Eddys,  Laura  Ellis,  and  other  prominent 
physical  mediums  were  compelled  to  pay  fines,  or  endure  imprisonment,  hke  ■ 
the  Davenport  Brothers,  for  exhibiting  their  manifestations  without  taking  out 
a  license  to  act  as  "jugglers  and  conjurers."  After  years  of  strife  and  effort, 
to  be  permitted  to  perform  their  own  sacraments  and  obtain  their  legal  recog- 
nition, the  chartered  associarions  of  several  States  issued  certificates  to  some 
of  their  speakers,  of  which  the  following  is  a  specimen : 

"MRS.  S.  E.  WARNEK— MARRIAGE  CERTiFICATK 
"  The  First  Spiritualist  Society  of  Bcloit,  Wisconsin,  has  granted  our  sister  worker,  Mrs. 
S.  E.  Warner,  a  letter  of  fellowship ;  thus  duly  authoriiing  her  to  solemnize  marriage  in 
accordance  with  law.  The  certificate  confers  upon  her  tlie  right  to  of&ciate  on  marriage 
occasions,  secures  her  half-fare  raihoad  tickets,  etc.,  privileges  in  common  with  the  clergy. 
We  earnestly  hope  she  will  exercise  these  rights,  as  weU  as  continue  the  use  of  her  spiritual 
gifts  for  the  redemption  of  humanity." 

The  same  week  in  which  the  Banner  of  Light  published  Uiis  article,  it  con- 
tained the  account  of  a  furious  sermon  which  had  just  been  xJreached  b)'  a 
celebrated  "divine"  of  Boston,  in  which  he  distinctly  stated  that  "  all  the 
Spiritualists  were  '  professed  Freelovites,'  and  every  man  and  woman  amongst 
them  living  in  open  adultery ; "  whilst  the  same  week  [less  than  two  years  agoj 
saw  the  issue  of  a  popular  New  York  journal,  in  which  were  two  closely 
printed  columns  filled  with  ribaldry,  and  pretending  to  be  descriptive  of  the 
"last  penny  exhibirion  at  Dodworth's  Hall    "  diat  is  to  say,  the  reporter 

Hosted  by  Google 

542  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

thus  designated  the  Spiritualist's  Sunday  services,  conducted  hy  the  pure, 
eloquent,  and  amiable  Mrs.  E.  J.  Bullene,  whose  beauty,  modesty,  and  genius, 
would  have  secured  her  at  least  a  gallant  and  admiring  notice  from  any  man 
in  any  other  part  of  die  world  than  America.  When  questioned  why  this 
journal  presumed  to  make  the  Sabbath  exercises  of  the  Spiritualists  the  sub- 
ject of  grossly  insulting  criticism  rather  than  that  of  any  other  religious  denom- 
ination, the  writer  of  the  shameless  article  innocently  expressed  his  astonish- 
ment at  the  Spirituahsts'  claim  to  be  regarded  as  "  a  religious  body,"  and  al- 
leged that  he  had  visited  that  meeting  per  order,  to  find  something  "  funny," 
to  enliven  the  heavy  nature  of  a  Sunda)''s  report. 

Within  the  last  four  years  the  celebrated  healer.  Dr.  Newton,  after  having 
performed  a  remarkable  cure  on  a  little  girl  afflicted  with  a  spinal  disease, 
dismissed  her,  when  the  child,  in  the  exuberance  of  her  delight  at  her  sudden 
freedom  from  pain,  stumbled,  fell  down  stairs,  and  severely  hurt  her  back. 

The  father  of  the  child,  who  could  not  forgive  the  mother  for  having  her 
cured  through  what  he  called  the  "influence  of  the  devil,"  made  this  fresh  in- 
jury a  pretext  for  arresting  Dr.  Newton  on  die  charge  of  "  assault  and  bat- 
tery," alleging  that  the  injury,  so  clearly  the  result  of  the  accident  above 
named,  grew  out  of  "  the  charlatan's  malpractices."  The  trial  took  place  in 
Philadelphia ;  and  though  the  charge  was  altogether  too  absurd  and  far-fetched 
to  be  sustained,  it  produced  some  remarkable  and  unlooked-for  consequences. 

Indignant  at  the  attempt  to  malign  their  benefactor,  over  fifteen  hundred 
witnesses  came  forward,  and  endeavored  to  press  into  court  and  bear  their 
unsought  testimony  to  the  miraculous  cures  which  the  great  physician  had 
wrought  in  their  several  cases,  many  of  which  had  been  restorations  of  sight, 
hearing,  tlie  use  of  their  limbs,  and  exemption  from  chronic  and  seemingly 
incurable  maladies.  The  court,  oppressed  by  the  magnitude  of  this  testimony, 
felt  obliged  to  dismiss  the  case,  and  the  Philadelphia  papers,  compelled,  by 
way  of  public  news,  to  print  some  of  this  magnificent  testimony  for  the  first 
time,  made  the  excuse  that  their  columns  were  too  crowded  to  continue 
to  print  such  a  voluminous  "mass  of  stuff!"  In  the  face  of  this,  and  ex- 
amples of  a  similar  kind,  which  would  swell  the  well-attested  cases  of  healing 
under  direct  spirit  influence,  during  twenty  years  only,  to  over  one  inillion, 
the  legislature  of  Ohio,  where  healing  mediums  abound  more  than  in  any 
other  State,  have  just  passed  a  law  which  makes  it  necessary  for  "  any  one 
who  practises  medicine  in  any  department,  to  have  attended  tivo  whole  courses 
of  instruction,  and  graduated  at  some  school  of  medidne,  and  also  requires 
a  good  character ; "  the  violation  of  this  law  incurs  a  penalty  of  "for  the  first 
offence,  a  fine  of  one  hundred  dollars,  and  for  the  second,  in  addition  to  the 
fine,  imprisonment  in  the  county  jail  for  the  term  of  thirty  days." 

This  is  the  law  of  1868  ;  and  by  it,  Dr.  Newton,  Mrs.  Mettler,  Drs.  Bryant, 
Main,  York,  and  hundreds  of  others  who  have  done  more  in  their  generation 
for  die  alleviation  of  the  sick  and  afflicted  than  a  whole  college  of  surgeons 
could  effect  in  a  hundred  years,  are  forbidden  in  Ohio  to  open  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  lay  their  hands  on  the  sick,  or,  in  a  word,  practise  tiie  fundamental 
chaise  of  the  founder  of  Christianity,  and  the  chief  cardinal  sign  of  a  Chris- 
tian's belief  in  Christ 

Just  as  this  work  is  passing  through  the  press  the  author  has  received  a 
letter  from  the  highly  gifted  and  beneficient  healer,  Dr.  Newton,  fiu-nishing 
statements  concerning  the  possibility  of  effecting  cure  sat  a  distance  from  the 
operator. 

The  circumstances  are  so  thoroughly  well-known  and  attested,  and  seem 
so  apropos  to  the  present  chapter,  that  we  make  no  apology  for  quoting  the 
estimable  writer's  letter  in  full : 

Hosted  by  Google 

H- 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  543 

"Newport,  R.  T.,  November  2,  1869. 

"Mrs.  Emma  HardingB:  Dear  Friend,— In  my  foi-mer  letter  I  omitted  to  relate  a 
few  facts  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  the  power  of  healing  and  influencing  persons  at  a 
.  distance. 

"  Wiiile  healing  in  Syracuse,  New  York,  a  stranger  who  had  just  been  cured  asked  me  if 
I  would  go  to  Fulton,  New  York,  and  cure  his  wife,  who  had  been  bedridden  for  over  three 
years,  arid  unable  to  sit  up  during  that  lime.  I  tolcl  him  that  I  could  cure  her  without  see- 
ing her,  as  well  as  to  go  there;  and  taking  his  right  hand  I  ssdd:  '  Keep  your  thought  upon 
your  wife  ;  I  mil  give  her  a  shock  like  an  electric  battery,  and  with  it  her  disease  will  in- 
stantly leave'r  she  will  arise  perfectly  well,  dress  herself,  call  a  witness  and  note  the  precise 
time,  then  walk  out-doors.  When  you  arrive  home  she  will  meet  you  at  the  door,  and  say, 
'Nathan,  1  am  well  now.'  That  is  your  name?'  'Yes,'  said  he,  'myname  is  Nathan 
Rowley.'  I  liad  never  seen  him  but  a  few  moments  and  never  heard  his  name  before  I 
called  it.  This  was  on  Tuesday.  I  lectured  in  Oswego  the  next  Sunday,  when  Mrs.  Row- 
ley appeared  in  the  audience  and  came  upon  the  platfoi-m  and  related  the  wonder  of  her 
cure  i  said  she  had  never  heard  of  healing  at  a  distance  before  ;  that  she  received  a  powerfuj 
shock,  and  felt  that  she  was  cured;  she  arose,  noted  the  day  and  hour,  and  called  a 
woman  to  witness  what  appeared  to  her  a  miracle. 

"  This  cure  took  place  precisely  at  the  same  time  that  I  eliminated  the  influence  through 
her  husband,  and  every  word  that  was  told  him  was  verified  by  her.  She  came  eleven  miles 
to  make  a  public  statement  of  the  facts,  unsolicited. 

"Another  case  of  inteiest:  Mr.  George  Vincr,  of  Galliopolis,  Ohio,  came  with  ^ments 
of  invalids  to  have  them  cured,  although  several  hundred  miles  distant.  I  eliminated  a 
shock  to  each  separately,  willing  their  disease  to  depart.  He  then  said,  '  I  have  another 
friend  sick,  a  consumptive,  a  Doctor  Elliot,  but  I  have  no  garment."  I  told  him  I  could 
cure  just  as  well  without  it,  and  taking  his  hand,  said:  '  He  is  walking;  on  the  street  nno;,- 
he  will  feel  a  powerful  shock  this  instant,  and  be  perfectly  cured,  and  further,  he  will 
see  a  man's  hand.'  At  the  same  time  I  stretched  forth  my  own  hand  and  looked 
steadily  at  it. 

"  After  a  lapse  of  time  suflideot  to  hear  the  result,  I  had  a  letter  from  Mr.  Viner,  stating 
that  each  one  .had  felt  the  shock  and  that  a// were  benefited,  or  cured ;  that  he  had  also  seen 
Doctor  Elliot,  who  was  very  grateful  for  his  core  ;  that  ho  was  walking  on  the  street  when 
he  felt  the  shock ;  and  that  he  distmctly  saw  the  hand,  but  could  not  account  for  the 

"Another:  Mr.  Charles  E.  Perry,  who,  I  believe,  is  at  present  United  States  Minister  to 
New  Granada.  Mr.  Perry  resided  at  Albany  at  the  time.  His  only  child  was  taken  with 
dysentery.  He  siud  10  his  wife, '  Our  child  can  be  saved  if  we  can  reach  Newport  and  see  Dr. 
Newton.'  They  started,  but  on  arriving  at  Worcester  the  child  was  so  low  they  gave  up 
nearly  all  hope,  and  could  go  no  farther  with  it.  But  Mr.  Perry  started  for  Newport 
alone,  to  get  me  to  go  to  Worcester.  Reaching  my  house  at  about  ten  o'clock,  p.m.,  and 
making  his  errand  known,  I  told  him  I  could  cure  the  chiU  better  under  the  circumstances 
than  if  present.  Taking  his  hand,  I  said,  '  Your  child  is  cured,  and  will  this  moment  burst 
into  a  laugh  ;  and  when  you  get  to  Worcester  you  will  find  your  child  running  about  the 
house  as  well  as  ever,'  which  he  did,  to  his  surprise,  the  next  day ;  and  on  inquiring  of  Mrs. 
Perry  as  to  the  cause  of  this  marvellous  change,  she  slated  that,  at  a  few  minutes  after 
ten,  last  evening,  the  child  suddenly  laughed,  and  was  entirely  well  from  that  moment. 

"I  could  relate  from  memory  multitudes  of  amilar  results  of  my  daily  practice  in  this 
way ;  moreover,  be  assured,  what  I  do,  others  can  da. 

"  Not  only  may  the  blessmgs  of  health,  but  happiness  of  mind,  be  the  certain  effect  of 
this  all-potent  power.     It  is  limitless  as  the  universe. 

"  Veiy  sincerely  your  friend, 

"J.  R.  Newton,  M.D." 

Hudson  Tuttle,  in  writing  to  the  Banner  of  Light  shortly  after  the  passage 

Hosted  by  Google 

544  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

of  the  Ohio  bill  against  healing,  comments  on  it  in  the  following  pungent 
and  noteworthy  remarks : 

"  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  were  he  on  earth  toKJay,  would  not  be  tolerated  at  our  State  capi- 
tal If  he  sliould  cast  tlia  devUs  out  of  some  Mary  Magdalene  in  the  streets  of  Columbus, 
he  would  be  fined ;  and  if  he  should  raise  up  some  dead  Laiurus,  he  would  go  to  the  lock- 
up There  arc  hundreds  of  healers  in  Ohio.  Some  of  these,  though  unknown  beyond  tlieir 
immediate  locality,  are  equal  to  any  in  the  power  they  possess  oyer  ^sease.  ITiey  miKt 
now  desist  from  these  deeds  of  love,  morcy,  and  blessing,  or  practice  them  in  secret,  and  in 
fear  of  punishment  for  the  crime  of  doing  good.  They  are  branded  by  the  law  which  holds 
its  broad  shield  over  the  heads  of  the  anointed  M.D.'s,  who  can  go  on  in  their  course  of 
blind  empiricism,  and  kill  legitimately  under  the  eXoak  of  medical  science. 

'■  It  is  true,  mediums  sometimes  fail  to  oure;  but,  are  M.D.'s  infillible?  For  every  me- 
diumistie  failure,  I  can  show  ten  egregious  blunders  committed  by  the  ignorance  and  conceit 
of  those  who,  finding  the  people  prefer  the  mediums,  now  seek  to  compel  their  own  employ- 
ment by  law. 

"There  is  another  point  in  this  law,  it  possible  still  more  objectionable;  it  is  these  words; 
'  And  also  requires  a  good  moral  character  ? '  ^ 

"  True,  that  sounds  well ;  but  pray  what  is  meant  by  a  good  moral  character?  Who  is 
to  decide  ?  Where  is  the  metre  ?  If  it  be  in  the  decision  of  the  judges  who  framed  this  law, 
or  the  doctors,  whom  it  is  made  to  restore  a  fast-failing  practice  to.  will  thoy  allow  that  any 
Spiritualist  could  be  a  good  moral  character? 

"  Spiritualism  and  infamy,  with  the  prejudiced  part  of  the  community,  have  long  been 
synonymoas  terms  ;  and  ^ce,  in  this  ^e,  it  is  impossible  for  any  State  government  to  pry 
into  every  man's  life,  and  determine  what  amount  of  vice,  or  virtue,  qualifies  him  to  admin- 
ister a  dose  of  rhubarb,  some  test  will  be,  must  be  estabUshed,  and  of  course  this  will  be, 
and  roust  be  the  long  cherishetl  and  popular  one  of  church  membership ;  an  additional  slice 
for  the  chm'ch,  as  well  as  the  doctors.  Oh,  righteous  law !  And  so,  if  the  M.D.  be- 
longs tothe  church,  he  may  kill  scientifically,  to  hisheart's  content ;  but  aa  contraire,  were 
he  the  founder  of  the  Christian  Church  himself,  without  his  diploma  and  papers  of  mem- 
bership, 'Away  with  him;  he  is  a  fellow  not  fit  to  live.'"     

We  think  we  liave  written  to  little  purpose,  if  in  the  course  of  this  volume, 
but  more  especially  in  this  and  the  preceding  chapters,  we  have  utterly 
iailed  to  show  some  of  the  good  that  comes  out  of  the  Spintualistic  Nazareth. 

We  must  have  been  equally  unsuccessful,  if,  even  in  the  last  few  pages,  and 
in  the  hasty  contrast  we  have  drawn  between  the  inevitable  march  of  events 
that  is  forcing  a  passage  for  the  truths  of  Spiritualism,  and  the  surly  antag- 
onism  that  is  laboring  in  every  direction  to  drive  them  back,  we  have  not 
shown  some  reasons  why  Spiritualism  shoold  not,  or  rather  could  not  display 
the  well  organized  and  closely  banded  unity  of  other  denominations,  sects, 
and  crafts,  whose  motto  is  conservatism ;  who  have  been  many  centuries 
practicing  it,  and  who  unite  chiefly  in  die  laudable  effort  to  crowd  back  the 
very  results  that  they  revile  Spiritualism  for  not  having  acheived.  Before  the 
press  indulges  in  contempt  and  insult,  because  Spiritualism  offers  "  noth- 
ing  new,"  let  it  acknowledge  how  persistently  its  columns  have  been  closed 
against  the  admission  of  spiritualistic  records. 

Before  the  world  murmurs  because  the  spnit  medium  does  not  cure  every- 
body and  everything,  let  it  be  informed  how  many  have  been  cured  by  Spirit- 
ualism, and  under  what  shameful  disadvantages  such  beneficent  labors  are 
effected.  Before  the  church  sets  up  its  cry  of  "  Infidel,"  let  it  answer  to  what 
truth  or  Christian  precept  Spiritualism  is  infidel;  who  raises  the  cry  of  mfi- 
del,  and  how  it  is  proved. 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN'   SPIRITUALISM.  545 

Befors  the  community  joins  further  in  the  parrot  cry,  "  Wliat  is  the  use  of 
it  ?  "  let  them  carefully  inquire  from  those  who  have  experienced  its  uses,  not 
from  the  hireling  crafts  who  are  bought  and  sold  by  their  interest  to  abuse  it ; 
and  before  even  Spiritualists  themselves  complain  that  the  movement  has  not 
done  enough,  let  them  be  sure  that  they  are  advised  of  all  that  it  has  already 
accomplished,  and  of  all  the  reasons  against,  and  the  obstacles  which  intervene, 
to  prevent  its  performing  all  that  their  impatience  demands  of  it.  An  un- 
prejudiced review  of  the  ground  which  the  author  and  reader  have  trodden 
together,  will  prove  that  the  triumphs  hitherto  achieved  by  Spiritualism  are 
altogether  unprecedented  and  unparalleled  in  the  course  of  human  history. 

Considering  the  array  of  hnman  effort  that  has  been  brought  to  bear  against 
it,  and  the  absence  or  weakness  of  the  apostles,  champions,  leaders,  founders, 
or  propagandists  who  have  originally  helped  to  lay  its  foundations,  we  may 
truthfully  conclude  that  the  real  sources  of  its  strength  have  been  invisible  to 
mortals,  and  proceed  from  a  higher,  wiser,  and  more  powerful  realm  than 
theirs.  But  even  apart  from  the  supra-mundane  sd-ength  which  has  so  mani- 
festly sustained  the  march  of  this  mighty  movement,  we  may  clearly  perceive 
that,  with  all  the  dying  throes  of  bitter  materialistic  opposition,  the  signs  of 
the  times  are  slowly  but  siirely  changing  in  its  favor, 

The  shameless  press  ribaldry  which  we  have  noticed  in  this  last  chapter, 
IS  beginning  to  be  the  exception,  rather  than  the  rule  of  editorial  conduct  to- 
wards Spiritualism,  and,  when  cited,  is  immediately  accounted  for,  by  the  more 
respectable  and  respected  portion  of  the  press,  by  their  pointing  to  the  source 
of  such  attacks,  and  demanding  what  other  treatment  we  could  expect,  and 
whether  abuse  from  such  qiiarters  would  not  be  a  higher  compliment  Uian 

As  to  the  pulpit,  we  know  it  can  no  longer  afford  to  indulge  in  the  expen- 
sive lusury  of  cashiering  church-members  for  their  belief  in  Spiritualism. 
The  ranks  of  denominational  associations  have  grown  so  thin  by  this  practice, 
that  it  has  now  become  better,  and  certainly  more  remunerative  policy,  to 
steal  the  Spirituahsts'  thunder  and  preach  their  doctrines  under  the  specious 
name  of  their  own  "  ism,"  than  to  empty  their  meeting  houses  by  abusing  the 
faith  of  two-thirds  of  their  congrega lions.  As  to  the  schoolmen,  the  world 
which  accords  them  the  honor  so  justly  their  due,  has  become  too  miich  in- 
dividualized by  American  Republicanism  and  American  Spiritualism,  to  bend 
at  their  authoritative  nod  any  further  than  said  sdioolmen  prove  they  are  in 
advance  of  the  world. 

The  action  of  the  journals  who  purvey  fun  and  filth  for  the  minds  who  re- 
(juire  it,  and  the  legislatures  who  make  laws  to  provide  employment  for  un- 
skilful craftsmen,  are  equally  well  understood  by  the  shrewd,  quick-witted 
American  people  ;  and  though  they  may  serve,  as  heretofore,  the  purpose  of 
dragging  Spiritualism  into  notoriety  in  periods  of  stE^nation,  it  will,  as  hereto- 
fore, go  no  further,  and  will  no  more  arrest  its  progress  than  the  throne  of 
Canute  the  Dane,  placed  on  the  sea-shore,  could  arrest  the  progress  of  the 
ocean's  eternal  and  resistless  tides.  "  On,  on  forever  ! "  is  the  burden  of  that 
mighty  anthem  that  rings  through  the  corridors  of  eternity,  chanted  by  the  le- 
gions of  Progress.  Can  the  croak  of  the  jester,  the  anathema  of  the  priest, 
the  dictum  of  the  pedagogue,  or  the  murmur  of  the  ignorant  and  discontented, 
drown  the  great  chorale  ? 

As  well  expect  that  the  shutter  by  which  some  human  worm  bars  himself 
from  out  the  sunlight  can  extinguish  the  sun's  beam  or  quench  the  fires  of 
Heaven. 

As  for  Spiritualism,  whose  ranks,  mortal  and.  immortal,  make  up  the  eternal. 

Hosted  by  Google 

j^5  fflSTORV  OF  MODERir 

army  of  progress,  the  pressure  of  its  immense  numbers,  and  ever  increasing 
strenetli  togetlier  witlt  tlie  continually  diminisiiing  numbers  and  significant 
weakness  of  its  antagonists,  is  necessarily  producing  a  permanence  and  sta- 
bility in  the  movement  which  will  permit  concert  of  action,  and  altord  oppor- 
tunity for  the  development  of  all  those  resources  hitherto  wasted  in  scenes  of 
strife  and  efforts  at  defence.  ■      ,l  ■ 

When  Spiritualists  can  wisely  combme  their  strength,  and  organije  then 
forces  on  the  latest  and  most  indefeasible  principles  of  individual  liberty,  we 
may  anticipate  aSd  demand  all  the  results  which  so  vast  a  field  of  new  powers 
can  be  expected  to  yield.  Until  then,  we  would  kindly  counsel  our  antago- 
nists to  make  themselves  acquainted  with  at  least  as  much  of  the  subject  they 
revile  as  these  fragmentary  pages  can  disclose,  while  our  spmtualisnc  readers 
may  learn  from  die  same  source,  to  hope,  trust,  and  wait  for  die  good  tune 
coining." 

CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 

"  I  beheld  a  Bold™  pmCl  in  ihe  ™n  of  my  slumber,      ^ 

Whilst  aJIgils,  lab  aed  bcaulifeb  and  coundess.  wilbous  number. 

Were  aivine  gkldsome  grectinE  tu  all  »ho  came  that  wav. 
And  she  gale;forevcr  sivinging,  made  no  grating,  no  hatsh  rmgmg, 

Mcludtoos  as  the  aingiog  of  one  that  aeadmc^  oiottal's  telling 

THE  "  Rochester  Knock- 

Celebratioh  of  r 

Cos  history,  or  rather  the  surface  review  of  that  mighty  and  inscrutable 
movement  whose  sources  of  action  lie  hidden  in  the  mysterions  realms  of 
anoUier  world,  has  reached  that  point  beyond  which  the  plan  of  the  work  pro- 
poses no  advance.  With  this  chapter  we  close  die  record  of  diat  brief  score 
of  years  during  which  Spirimahsm  has  been  known  as  a  fixed  tact  on  the 
American  Continent.  .  ,     .    , 

Had  the  autlior  of  these  pages  been  able  to  exert  a  unitary  psychological 
influence  over  the  wide  extent  of  country  which  the  history  traverses  i  could 
her  voice  have  reached  every  Spiritualist  of  the  land  or  htir  most  earnest 
wish  have  obtained  from  each  a  personal  response,  —  she  could  scarcely  have 
been  more  fortunate  in  securing  compliance  to  her  unexpressed  desire  in 
reference  to  the  advent  which  closes  alike  the  era  of  which  she  writes  and 
the  record  here  presented.  -   ,  .    ,  .  ^       .         a 

In  a  word  the  year  which  beholds  die  completion  of  this  history  is  made 
memorable  by  the  spontaneous  and  wholly  imlooked  for  gathering  together 
of  die  whole  spiriWahstic  community  of  America,  each  m  their  several  States, 
—  in  a  unity  of  feeling  never  before  witnessed  in  the  movement, —  to  cele- 
brate "THE  Twentieth  Anniversary  of  the  famous  Rochester  knock- 

'''"The  Recorh  of  a  Twenty  Years'  Communion  Between  Earth  and 
the  Worlb  of  Spirits,"  a  book  undertaken  solely  at  the  command  of  the 
mighty  invisible  hosts  whose  achievements  it  celebrates,  terminates  with  the 
triimphant  entry  diat  eleven  millions  of  human  beings  who,  twenty  year. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  547 

ago,  knew  not  the  name  of  Spiritualism,  nor  a,uglit  of  its  vast  and  sublime 
significance,  have,  with  one  accord,  and  by  no  preconceived  or  organic  con- 
cert of  action  on  their  part,  united  in  setting  the  seal  of  the  first  national 
celebration  on  this  great  and  memorable  day. 

As  we  have  opened  our  fateful  drama  with  the  advent  of  the  "  Rochester 
knockings,"  inaugurated  by  three  young  and,  until  then,  unknown  persons, 
so  let  us  drop  the  curtain  on  the  same  event  proclaimed  by  the  rejoicing  lips 
of  that  little  trio  multiplied  over  three  millions  of  times. 

The  cliildren  who  formed  two  of  the  group  have  now  blossomed  into  the 
maturity  of  womanhood.  The  third  is  a  staid  matron.  But,  in  the  score  of 
years  that  have  effected  those  alterations  with  them,  what  mighty,  unprece- 
dented, and  incalculable  changes  have  they  seen  growing  out  of  the  momen- 
tous event  of  which  they  were  the  radiative  point,  like  the  axis  of  some  cen- 
tral sun,  whose  illuminating  beams  now  enlighten  an  illimitiblc  firmament  I 

What  an  ocean  of  unparalleled  power  have  they  not  seen  surging  in  waves 
of  irresistible  influence  over  the  old  and  new  worlds,  and  all  taking  date, 
shape,  and  stamp,  from  the  low  knockings  by  which  the  angels  announced 
their  presence  in  their  humble  dwelling  at  Hydesville  ! 

Many  an  earnest  spirit  that  dien  listened  in  breathless  interest,  and  nobly 
erected  the  spiritual  standard  to  re-echo  those  mystic  sounds  on  earth,  has 
passed  from  the  form  of  mortality  to  the  bright  realms  whose  truths  he  once 
proclaimed.  Many  a  brave  heart  that  then  h  bl  d  h  gh,  as  its  owner 
shouldered  the  cross   of  martyrdom  in  del  f    1      n   v  Messiah,  has 

ceased  to  beat,  hushed  in  the  stillness  of  th  n  1      par  iion  tliat  sends 

the  spirit  from  its  mortal  envelope      The  h  d  a  d  p    secuted  parents 

of  the  Hydesville  medium  h 
ever  the  bitter  burden  which  h 
for  the  priceless  evangel  of  rt 

A  frightful  and  desolating 
very  foundations  of  its  ins  tu 
bravest  into  the  realms  of  th 
priests,  writers,  statesmen,       d  1 
arrayed  themselves  into  b  tt  1 
angelic  hosts  into  the  myst  r)       d 
been  in  vain  1 

The  opposing  legions  of  tl       ] 
quest  to  conquest,  in  spite    f  d 
ing  over  every  effort  to  ar 
inscrutable  springs  of  its  I 

swelled  into  a  chorus  of  ele 

The  tiny  rivulet  has  exp     d  d  whose  stormy  billows  have 

beat  on  every  shore  of  ear  1        d         p  ry  city,  town  and  hamlet 

The  humble  frame  dwelling  at  Hydesville  looms  up  into  the  proportions  of 
a  gigantic  temple  whose  foundations  are  laid  in  tlie  four  corners  of  the  earth, 
and  die  rough  and  mgged  path  which  the  bleeding  feet  of  the  Hydesville 
mediums  seemed  doomed  to  tread,  amidst  tears,  shudderings,  and  nameless 
horror,  has  now  loomed  out  into  the  splendid  proportions  of  the  bridge 
which  arches  over  the  awful  cliasm  of  the  grave,  affording  a  transit  for  mil- 
hons  of  aspiring  souls  into  the  glorious  realities  of  eternity,  and  erecting  a 
telegraph  whereby  legions  of  enfranchised  spirits  can  transmit  their  mes- 
sages of  undying  affection,  or  tlieir  glad  tidings  of  immortal  life  and  eternal 
progress.  Recall  the  impetuous  rush  of  fevered  life  that  has  been  so  imper- 
fecdy  glanced  at  in  this  volume. 

f  11 

n   h 

k      nd  laid  down  for- 

f 

h 

f  1       Id  p 
h   h  h      1 
d   h 
d         d   g 

p  n   hem  in  requital 
1      n     proclaimed, 
new  world,  changing  the 
million  of  its  best  and 

bl 
d 
f 

7 

\    o\          i  hAurian  beings,  including 

f  p  bl      opinion  generally,  have 

worn  to  drive  back  the 

1 

f           h 

ice  they  came.     All  has 

al 

mj  h 

marched  on  from  con- 

h 
p 

h 
g 

h     g 

r  persecution ;  triumph- 
its  course,  or  affect  the 

1  n    y      The  low  knockings  have 

Hosiedb,  Google 

g^S  HISTORY  OF  MODEKN 

Remember  that  this  brief  score  of  years  has  seen  the  advent  of  a  new  re- 
limn  that  has  already  shaken  the  foundations  of  human  opimon  to  its  centre, 
»5d  planted  the  seeds  of  a  new  science,  whose  progressive  iinfoldments  must 
revolutionize  the  entire  realm  of  human  knowledge.  j  „    ,  u 

Count  up  the  sick  that  have  been  healed,  the  seemingly  dead  that  have 
been  restored  to  die  arms  of  desolate  mourners. 

Number  Uie  homes  that  have  been  bereaved  of  the  mortal,  to  he  tepeopled 
wldi  the  immortah  Think  of  the  blind  eyes  Uiat  have  been  opened;  the 
stuiiibhng  feet  that  have  been  guided ;  the  sinking  forms  tliat  have  been  up- 
held '  the  broken  hearts  healed,  die  darkened  nimds  illummated.  Ihe 
ctuninal  has  been  arrested  in  his  carreer  of  perdition,  and  die  promise  has 
been  fulfilled :"  There  shall  be  no  more  death  1"  ^u.     . 

And  in  thU  brief  summary,  forget  not  the  humihatmg  narrations  of  bigotry, 
persecution,  ignorance,  and  wilful  materialism,  whose  emissanes  have  so 
Sinly  opposed  the  march  of  the  mighty  movement,  nor  overlook  die  obvious 
instrunieniality  of  the  unseen  hands  which  have  outwrought  fresh  tnumphs 
from  every  attempt  to  destroy  their  work.  ,  ,.     ,       -,■,.,,?  ,i,„ 

Above  ill,  compare  the  insignificance  of  the  means,  and  the  humility  of  *e 
origin  with  the  stupendous  results  and  now  invulnerable  strength  of  bpirit- 
ualism,  and  declare,  if  you  can,  that  aught  but  a  „f,r^undant  power  has 
been  manifested  in  every  act  of  this  mighty  drama. 

Truly  may  we  say  widi  the  prophet  of  Horeb,  "  Did  ever  people  hear  the 
voice  of  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  lire  as  thou  hast  heard,  and 

live? 

If  we  point  with  a  natural  yearning  for  sensuous  evidence  to  those  persons 
dirough  whom  the  first  telegraphic  message  of  diis  divine  commission  was 
executed  with  special  interest,  it  is  not  with  a  view  to  eialt  them  into  the  un- 
Se  prominence  rf  leadership,  or  to  identify  them  as  the  founders  or  leaders 
of  a  sect  but  simply  to  call  attention  to  the  obviously  supra-mundane  char- 
acter of  the  work,  by  a  comparison  of  its  stupendous  strengdi,  with  the  ex- 
ceeding weakness  of  its  human  instrumentalities. 

We  close  our  record,  th      f  ommcnced  it,  by  a  recurrence  to 

the  scene  and  circumstanc  ,1  h  h  the  movement  seemed  to  onginate, 
»nd  availing  ourselves  of  d  e  p  t  n  u  feeling  that  appears  to  have  ani- 
mated the  entire  spiritualist  m  t)  ermmatedusporionofourwork 
bya°L~ofthegreatna  1  lb  ion  of  the  Twentieth  Anmversary 
of  the  "  Rochester  knock  n  j  .    r     ■-     ,„,„ 

If  it  may  becbjected  that  this  festoity  is  of  too  recent  a  date  for  its  repro- 
duction to  interest  the  well-informed  Spinmahst  we  answer  that  we  write 
for  those  that  come  alter  us,  and  who  may  not  enjoy  our  abundant  means 

^  To^such,  one  of  the  most  momentous  and  significant  items  of  our  imperfect 
record,  must  surely  be  the  gathering  together  of  eleven  millions  of  persons  in 
dilfereit  sections  of  the  country,  to  solemnue  an  era  so  fraught  with  he 
temporal  and  eternal  interests  of  hominity,  as  that  which  inaugurated  the 
opening  of  the  telegraph  between  the  mortal  and  immortal  worlds, 
'in  thl°bsenceof  an,  compendious  report  of  this  celebration,  we  shalquote 
passages  from  the  excellent  account  of  die  various  meetings  m  difiirent  States 
furnished  by  the  Banner  of  Light.  l  ,.i  ■     ij    ,-.  ;.  ihe  f„llest 

As  the  notice  of  the  Rochester  celebration  held  in  Boston,  is  the  fullest 
given,  and  may  be  taken  as  a  noble  and  represenlitive  specimen  of  other 
gatherings,  our  extracts  will  he  principally  selected  C:om  that  report. 

Hosted  b,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM. 

"Anniversary  of  Modekn  Spiritualism— Grand  Jubilee  in  Boston— Largb 
Gathering  OF  Spiritualists  in  Music  Hall  — Lyceum  Exhibition  by  Sevem 
Hundred  Children  —  Festivities  of  the  Evening,  consisting  of  Speeches 
BY  Dr.  H.  F.  Garbner,  Mrs.  Emma  F.  Jay  Bullene,  Seldon  J.  Finney, 
Prof,  William  Denton,  and  Mrs.  Mary  F.  Davis  — Poems  by  Lizzie  Doten 
AND  Belle  Bush— etc.,  etc. 

{Reported  for  the  Banner  of  Ligil.} 
"  The  Lyceum  Celebration.  —  The  afternoon  of  Tuesday,  March  31,  wiU  be  a  season 
long  kept  green  in  the  recollection  of  all  who  were  fortunate  enough  to  be  witnesses  of,  or 
participants  in,  the  exercises  of  the  various  ChUdien's  Progiessive  Lyceums  assembled  on 
that  dayin  Muac  Hall,  Boston.  To  the  believer  in  the  spiritual  philosophy, no  sight  could 
be  more  encouragmg  than  those  ranks  of  bappy  faces,  giving  promise  that  the  ri^g  genera- 
tion is  to  take  a  bold  and  decided  stand  in  days  to  come. 

"  The  exercises  of  this  occaaon  were  a  fitting  prelude  to  those  of  the  evening,  and  both 
were  worthy,  in  the  fullest  sense,  of  the  great  cause  they  represented,  and  the  anniversary 
they  were  designed  to  commemorate.  Andrew  Jackson  Davis  and  his  wife,  Mary  F.  Davis, 
the  founders  and  original  managers  of  the  lyeeum  movement,  were  present,  and  dhected  the 
afternoon  entertdnment.  Dr.  Richardson,  conductor  of  the  Chailestown  Lyceum,  assisted 
Mr.  Davis;  and  Mr.  George  W.  Btagd on,  asastant  conductor  of  the  same  lyeeum,  acted  as 
military  director. 

"THE  Hall.— The  balconies  were  tastefully  decorated  with  mottoes,  among  which 
were  :  ■  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  l>eginiiing  of  folly.'  —  '  The  love  of  the  Lord  is  the  be- 
ginnin'T  of  wisdom '  —  'The  stroke  of  death  is  but  a  kindly  frost  which  cracks  the  shell  and 
leaves  the  kernel  room  to  germinate.     What  most  consummate  fools  this  fear  of  death  hath 

made  us  V  —  Shaksfeare .,,,.,,  j  ,, 

"Suspended  from  the  speaker's  desk  was  a  banner  mscribed,  'Upward  and  onward  I 
Nearest  the  doors  leading  to  the  Tremont  Street  entrance  was  posted  the  Boston  Lyceum, 
and  those  of  Charlestown,  Chelsea,  East  Boston,  and  Cambridge  filled  the  mtervemng  space 
to  the  rostrum.  The  whole  floor  of  the  house  was  assigned  to  the  children,  and  filled  by 
them  to  overflowing.  It  is  but  justice,  at  this  point,  to  allude  to  the  beautiful  targets  dis- 
played by  the  Boston  Lyceum,  which  were  presented  to  it  on  Sunday,  March  ai,  by  Mr.  J. 
Walcott  an  artist  of  this  city,  who  painted  them  at  his  own  expense  and  gave  them  as  a 
free-will  ofTering-agood  example  for  other  artists  to  imitate.  These  targets,  twelve  in 
number,  were  valued  at  thiee  hundred  dollars,  and  were  finely  executed  in  oil  colors.  At 
the  time  of  presentation,  Mr.  Walcott  described  his  work  as  follows : 

"They  represented  the  various  groups  by  pictorial  illustrations  of  an  appropriate  character 
npon  each  side,  the  subjects  being  varied  to  avoid  repetition  or  monotony.     Thus,  the  first 

^"^Fountain '  was  illustrated  by  a  natural  fountain  gushing  in  its  pristine  purity  from  a 
group  of  rocks,  with  a  party  of  children  playing  about  il.  On  the  reverse  side  was  aa 
Lg^t  artificial  fountain,  with  its  numerous  jels  and  showers  sparkling  in  the  glowing  bght 
of  a  summer  sunset,  surrounded  by  a  garden  of  brilliant  flowers  and  gorgeous  foliage,  with 
multitudes  of  the  feathered  tribe,  instinct  with  animation,  disporting  themselves  in  its  re- 
fte^ing  spray.  ,      ,        ,         .  ., 

"  'Stream'  was  displayed  by  a  waterfall  among  huge  masses  of  rocks  and  precipitous  wall* 
of  sunlit  granite.  The  opposite  side  represented  a  stream  meandering  through  a  gre^ 
meadow,  among  the  fresh  foliage  of  spring,  and  falling  into  a  rocky  basm  m  the  foreground. 

"  <  River  ■  was  pictured  by  two  charmmg  views  of  a  broader  stream,  wmdmg  its  way 
"Through  wood,  and  mead,  and  shade  and  sun," 
under  diflerent  effects  of  sunlight. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

5SO  HISTORY   OF  MODERN 

' ' '  Lake  ■  was  expressed  by  an  expanse  of  water  surrounded  by  lofiy  eminences  ajld  precipi 
tons,  woody  hills,  with  a  water  party  embarking  for  an  excursion.  The  other  side  was  a 
broad  expanse  of  water  surrounded  by  rich  autumn  foliage.  A  solitary  ileer  served  to  give 
the  pictnre  sufficient  animation, 

"  '  Sea'  was  depicted,  by  a  smooth  surface  of  water  with  a  dark  iloop,  relieved  by  a  bright, 
sunny  sky.  A  lighthouse  on  a  reef  of  rocks  and  a  few  sea-birds  sufficed  to  complete  the 
picture.  The  other  side  represented  the  open  sea  — beyond  dark,  overhangmg  masses  of 
arched  tocks—  against  a  sunset  sky,  with  a  sloop  on  the  beach,  of  a  distant  point  of  land 
and  marine  craft  in  the  extreme  distance. 
.  "'Ocean' was  expressed  in  two  different  ways,  by  atmospheric  efTects.  One  with  abui^t 
of  sunlight  through  a  stormy  sky ;  the  other  was  a  goi^eous  golden  and  vermilion  sunset,  in 
admirable  contrast  with  the  deep  sea-green  of  the  vast  watery  desert  below. 

"  '  Shore  *  exhibited  the  margin  of  the  ocean  with  water-worn  boulders,  fragments  of 
wrecked  water-craft,  etc.  On  the  other  side  the  most  prominent  objects  were  haystacks  on 
a  broad,  sail-marsh,  with  a  group  of  children  gathering  sea- sheUs. 

"  '  Beacon '  displayed  a  lighthouse  by  night,  gleaming  through  a  fo^y  atmosphere.  The 
reverse  was  a  brilliant  moonlight,  with  an  ocean  steamer  under  full  headway  toward  a  sea- 
port in  thedistance. 

"  '  Banner  '  represented  a  rich,  elegant  banner,  emblazoned  with  the  sentence,  — 

"  The  opposite  side  was  an  immense  procession  with  innumeiatile  banners  stretching  far 
away  into  the  dim  perspective  of  distance. 

"  '  Star  ■  dispkyed  a  large  golden  star,  radiant  with  light,  among  other  golden  and  silver 
stars,  on  a  deep  azure  sky.  The  reverse  represented  a  floating  spirit  m  the  atmosphere, 
with  a  single  silver  star  on  its  forehead,  surrounded  by  stellar  constellations. 

"  '  Excelsior '  represented  the  youth  bearing  a  flag  with  the  '  strange  device,'  plodduig  his 
weary  way  throogh  a  snow-storm  toward  the  summit  of  an  icy  mountain.  Suggested  by 
the  incident  in  Longfellow's  poem  of  this  title. 

"  The  other  side  represented  the  youth  as  having  gained  the  summit  of  the  icy  peak,  — 
vnthout  being  frozen  to  death  as  in  the  poem,  —  where  he  beheld  a  vast  landscape  spread  out 
before  him,  with  mountam  and  vaOey,  lake  and  river,  hill  and  dale,  forest  and  meadow  in 
measureless  expanse.  A  balloon  in  the  sky  served  to  hint  that  however  high  we  ascend, 
there  is  ever  a  pomt  loftier  still  to  be  attamed. 

"  '  Uberty'  represented  a  largo  Uberty  cap,  radiant  with  light.  The  reverse  side  displayed 
sn  immense  eagle  with  expanded  wings  oyer  a  wild,  ru^ed  tract  of  country,  where  all  is  ia 
a  state  of  natural  freedom. 

"  The  general  outline  of  these  targets  is  a  great  improvement  on  the  simple  oval  form 
previously  used,  with  a  glided  ornament  at  the  base,  and  scarlet  tassel,  serving  to  conceal 
the  junction  of  the  target  with  the  staff,  at  the  same  time  being  an  elegant  ornament.  The 
summit  of  each  target  is  crowned  liy  a  winged  cherub,  the  features  painted  to  express  the 
progresJve  ^es  of  the  groups,  — Fimn/ai?i  being  quite  juvenile.  Stream  a  little  older,  while 
Excelsior  and  Liberty  are  more  advanced  in  life. 

"  The  Procession.  —  Escorted  by  a  platoon  of  police,  and  Hall's  full  bond,  this  in- 
itial army  of  progress  left  the  hall  by  the  Tremont  Street  entrance,  passed  down  that 
street  to  the  Common,  up  Park  Street  and  Beacon  Street  malls,  and  across  to  Tremont 
Street,  entering  the  hall  at  the  Winter  Street  entrance.  Everywhere  the  fine  display  of 
banners,  flags,  and  happy  faces  beammg  with  the  exuberance  of  health,  attracted  the  at- 
tention and  admiration  of  all.  The  bahny  breeze  of  an  early  spring  day  seemed  fresh  from 
the  portals  of  the  summer-land,  and  the  warm  sun  smiled  on  the  youthful  pioneers  of 

"  The  Boston  Lyceum  took  the  lead.  It  numbered  two  hundred  members.  Its  board 
of  ofEcers  were  as  follows,  etc 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICA!)!  SPIRITUALISM.  55' 

"  The  lai^e  numbers  and  fine  marchins  of  this  lyeeuni  attracted  general  attention. 
Their  banner,  pdnted  and  presented  to  them  by  Mr.  J.  Walcott,  bore  the  inscriptions  t 
■First  Spiritualist  Association,  Boston;  organized  August  31,  1867.'  — 'God  is  Love.' 
—  'Purity,  Truth,  Progress.' 

"Next  in  order  came  the  Charlestown  Lyceum,  which  turned  out  with  full  ranks.  I  his 
[yceum  bore  the  motto,  •  The  truth  against  the  world.'  We  congratulate  our  Charlestown 
friends  on  their  fine  appearance. 

"  The  Chelsea  Lyceum  followed  in  tlie  order  of  march.  The  date  *  1866,'  was  inscribed 
on  its  banner;  it  also  displayed  an  American  flag,  having  in  gUded  letters  around  its  outer 
stripes,  '  Our  country  borders  on  the  spirit  land.' 

"  The  East  Boston  Lyceum  followed.  Abanner  was  carried  in  the  ranks  of  this  society, 
inscribed,  'Children's  Piogressive  Lyceum,  organised  July  7.  if^T,  East  Boston.'  On  the 
obverse,  'Let  integrity  and  upriehtnesa  preserve  us.'  ' Maverick '  has  reason  to  be  proud 
of  her  delegation  on  that  day. 

"  The  Cambrldgeport  Lyceum,  only  three  weeks  old,  dosed  the  procession  ;  its  numbers 
were  lar^,  and  its  marching  excellent,  conadering  the  brief  time  it  had  been  in  exist- 

"Return' TO  the  Hall.  — On  thecondnaon  of  the  march,  which  was  attended  at  aU 
points  by  crowds  of  e^r  spectators,  the  procession  returned  to  the  hall,  and  commenced  the 
indoor  exercises.     These  conasted  of,  — 

"  1.  Song,  by  the  lyceums—  '  Our  Lyceum,  'tis,'  etc. 

"1.  Silver  cham  recitations  — 'Invocation,'  and  '  Gratitude'  — Nos.  1  and  a.  Manual, 
led  by  Miss  M.  A.  Sanborn,  of  the  Boston  Lyceum. 

"  3.  Speaking,  by  one  member  from  each  lyceum. 

"4.  Gynmastics,  including  '  wing  movements,'  led  by  Dr.  Richardson,  of  the  Charlestown 

"3,  Speaking  [3d  course],  by  one  from  each  lycenm. 
"6.  Song  by  the  lycemns,  '  Sweet  Summer  Land.' 
"  7.  Speaking  [3d  course]. 

"  8.   Grand  Banner  March,  accompanied  by  Hall's  band,  to  the 
"9.  Collation. 

"  Where  aU  did  so  nobly,  it  is  invidious  to  institute  comparisons,  either  in  the  manage- 
ment of  the  lyceums,  their  appearance,  or  the  conduct  and  success  of  their  speakers. 

■'  The  alvOT-ehain  recitations  and  EJnging  were  rendered  with  unity  and  great  effect ;  the 
gymnastic  exercises  were  of  a  highly  interesting  character,  and  the  grand  banner  march  from 
the  ball  to  the  collation  was  bea,utiful  in  the  extreme; 

"  A  bountiful  supply  of  the  substantial  'good  things'  havmgbeen  enjoyed  at  the  tables  in 
Bumstead  Hall,  the  children  were  dismissed  to  their  homes.  While  memory  remains,  the 
influence  of  such  scenes  as  these  imprinted  on  the  plastic  heart  of  childhood  will  remdn  also 
to  cheer  the  path  of  after-life.  The  coming  generation,  like  our  own,  may  be  called  to  pass 
through  trying  scenes.  The  time  may  come  when  '  The  youths  shaU  faint  and  be  weary,  and 
the  young  men  shall  utterly  fail ; "  but  let  them  not  be  discouraged,  for  we  are  promised  that 
'  they  that  wait  on  the  truth  shaU  renew  their  strength ;  they  shaU  mount  up  wjth  wings  as 
eagles  ;  they  shaU  run  and  not  be  weary  ;  Ihey  shall  walk  and  not  faint."  In  conclusion, 
we  desire  to  congratulate  all  connected  with  the  lyceum  movement  upon  the  perfect  harmony 
of  action  and  complete  success  which  crowned  their  efforts  at  this  anniversary." 

"The  Evening  Exercises.- The  evening  meeting  at  Music  Hall  was  called  to  order 
at  7.30  o'clock,  by  Dr.  H.  F.  Gardner,  who  said: 

"  '  As  chairman  of  the  committee  of  arrangements,  I  greet  you,  friends,  and  congratulate 
you  upon  the  glorious  success  which  lias  attended  this  pubUc  celebration,  in  the  city  of  Bos- 
ton, of  the  advent  of  modem  Spiritualism.  [Applause.]  The  grand  number  of  our  Uttle 
'  army  of  progress,'  which  assembled  this  aflemooo,  with  only  a  very  short  time  to  prepare 
themselves,  I  think,  wiU  show  those  of  our  opponents  who  have  looked  upon  Spiritualism  al 

Hosted  by  Google 

552  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

somelliing  that  was  of  the  past,  that  it  is  ^itill  living,  tliat  it  lias  an  immorlal  life,  and  tliat  [I 
will  continue  to  grow  and  thrive. 

.  "  '  Many  peisons  do  not  know  the  history  of  spiritual  manifestations,  and  I  have  thought 
that  the  most  appropriate  thing  I  conlddo,  in  opening  these  exercises,  wouiil  be  to  state  the 
reason  why  we  celebraed  this  31st  day  of  March  as  the  anniversary  of  spirit  manifestations  in 
this  century.  I  hold  in  my  hand  a  book  published  some  years  ago  by  Mr.  Capron,  which 
contains  a  statement  given  by  Mrs.  Fox,  the  mother  of  the  young  ladies  who  were  the  first 
mediums  through  whom  intelligence  was  distinctly  and  publicly  transmitted  between  the 
spirit-world  and  our  own.  Many  persons  have  thonght  it  mas  exceedingly  dotibtful  whether 
we  could  fix  the  time.  I  am  perfectly  aware  that  in  England,  as  early  as  i;i6,  the  Wesley 
family  had  spirit  manifestations  very  similar  to  those  of  our  day,  but  they  were  not  recognized 
as  such,  and  through  want  of  proper  questioning,  their  true  character  failed  to  be  ascertdned, 
and  the  manifestations  finally  ceased.  The  Salem  witchcraft,  falsely  so  called,  was  doubtless 
apother  instance  of  an  attempt  by  spirits  to  communicate  intelhgence  to  those  living  upon 
the  earth.  Ourfriend  and  brother,  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  who  ia  upon  this  platform,  some 
years  previous  to  the  manifestations  in  Hydesville,  was  the  subject  of  spirit  control,  and  in 
his  clairvoyant  state  predicted  that  these  manifestations  would  occur  at  a  certain  time. — 
which  prophecy  was  fulfilled.  Swedenborg's  manifestations  were  of  a  similar  character. 
And  so,  without  dwelling  upon  the  subject,  in  all  past  ages  of  the  world  these  manifestations 
have  been  known  upon  the  earth,  but  through  the  ignorance,  bigotry,  and  superstition 
which  prevailed,  an  intelligent  hearing  was  not  granted  to  the  inviables,  who  came  back  to 
Inform  us  of  theh  well-bemg  in  the  life  which  is  to  come  and  which  is;  and  it  was  not  until 
this  nineteenth  century,  on  the  31st  day  of  March,  in  the  year  1848,  tliat  the  first  intelligent 
manifestations  were  rnade,  which  have  given  rise  to  the  wonders  that  have  been  witnessed 
all  over  the  world.'  " 

It  would  be  unnecessary,  indeed  a  mere  reiteration  of  the  statements  con- 
tained in  the  earlier  portion  of  this  volume,  to  reprint  the  rest  of  Dr.  Gard- 
ner's address,  which  consisted  chiefly  of  extracts  from  Mr.  Capron'swork  on 
the  early  manifestations,  and  vivid  comments  on  the  safferings  endured  by 
the  unfortunate  Fox  family,  from  the  ignorance  and  bigotry  of  their  perse- 
cutors.    The  report  proceeds  as  follows : 

"  The  chairman  then  read  the  following  telegrams,  and  stated  that  appropriate  replies 
had  been  transmitted  by  the  committee  of  arrangements : 

" '  Cleveland,  Ohio,  March  31,  i858. 
"•ToH.P.  Gardner,  Mtuicllall: 

"  '  The  SpirituaUsts  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  to  those  of  Boston  :  The  West  to  the  East, 
greelmg:  One  m  action  to-day,  one  in  country,  one  in  purpose,  one  in  progress,  and 
(me  in  destiny. 

"  'C1.EVELAND  Society  of  Spiritualists. 

"  '  By  T.  Lees,  Secretary.' 

'"Chicago,  III.,  March  31,  1S68. 
"'To  ff.  P.  Gardner,  Boston  : 

"  'We  are  baling  a  glorious  time.     Send  you  a  kindly  greeting. 

"  'J.  Spettigue. 
"'Crosby  Music  Hall.' 

"  The  followmg  are  the  replies ; 

•' '  Boston,  March  31,  186S. 
"  '  To  T.  Lees,  Secretary  Spiritualist  Anniversary,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  Garret's  Hall: 
"'Three  thousand  assemMed  send  greeting  1     Spiritualism  triumphant  I    A  glorious 

"  '  H.  F.  G&ftDNER,  Chairman.' 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITOALISM.  553 

'"Bos-roN,  Mar^k  31,  1868, 
" '  To  y.  Spettigue,  Chair maa  Spiritualist  Annivirsary,  Croiby's  Music  Ball,  Chicago  : 
"  '  The  East  sends  greeting  lothe  West.     Three  thousand  assembled  in  Music  Hall;  one 
with  you  in  principle,  one  in  action,  one  in  destiny  ! 

"'H.  F.  Gardner,  CMirman."' 

A  number  of  eloquent  speeches,  and  several  very  interesting  poems,  en- 
livened the  festivities  of  this  interesting  meeting,  but  their  lengdi  and  special 
adaptation  to  the  circumstances  of  the  hour,  render  dieir  insertion  here 
inappropriate.     The  closing  exercises  of  tliis  memorable  evening  were  as  fol- 

At  the  termination  of  a  charming  address  from  Mrs.  Mary  F.  Davis,  the 
chairman  rose  and  said  ; 

"I  believe  in  promptitude,  and  in  hving  up  to  exactly  what  we  promise.  We  have 
something  to  do  before  we  eaa  enter  upon  the  dancing,  and  we  must  therefore  consider  our 
speaking  exercises  as  closed.  We  will  now  conclude  by  singing  the  grand  '  Hallelujah 
Chorus.'  The  song  will  be  sung  by  a  quartette  of  ladies  and  geatleraen  who  have  kindly 
volunteered,  and  the  audience  are  requested  to  join  in  the  chorus.  Let  us  make  this  ball 
ring  as  it  never  did  before.    Let  us  lift  the  very  roof  off : 

"  'Grand  Haixelujah  Chorus. 

Corn^KdiH  spirit-li/g  by  John  Pierpont,  aitd gHKH  by  Miss  Liaxit  DotfH, 

To  the  ways  oi  truth  and  beauty  by  (be  souls  perfecled  trod. 
And  dig  tesuntcdon  Irumpel  aliail  not  wake  us  iroin  the  aod, 

Gloryi  Elory,  Hallehijah  1 
Gbry,  sloiy,  Hallelujah' 

Break  the  bread  of  consolation  to  the  souls  oppressed  with  caie. 

And  drill  Ihem  Lnto  service  wiSi  the  brave  old  veteran  bands. 
Till  the  Damping  of  ourarmy  shall  be  heard  in  distant  lands. 

The  thunders  of  Pn^ression  are  shaking  tyrants'  thrt 
The  breath  ofinspiration  wakes  "  the  vaUfy  of  dry  ba 
The  ancient  alurs  cnimhle  and  the  "Kbig  of  Tenor 

^;.. 

TiU  the  pmp^f  alUatimsl 
And  join  the  spelling  chorns 

"iiJou^ng  ofym^T 

theeea, 
defi«^ 

"  This  fine  song  was  sung  in  a  very  spirited  manner  by  the  quartette,  the  audience  join, 
ing  heartily  and  entbudasticilly  in  the  chorus. 

After  the  reading  of  an  exquisite  and  appropriate  poem  by  Miss  Belle  Bush, 
the  talented  principal  of  the  Belvidere  Seminaiy, —  who,  unable  to  be  present 
herself,  sent  her  "New  Evangel"  as  her  representative, —  the  chairman  dis. 
missed  the  meeting,  when  the  exercises  recommenced  with  — 

db,  Google 

55^  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

"The  Dancing  Festivities. -Tlio  hour  of  ten  Iiavlns  arrived,  those  who  had  been  en- 
joyb"  an  iiitelleclual  feast  for  three  hours  gave  way  for  the  more  exhilar^ing  exercise  of 
dancSis  The  Soor  of  the  hall  was  cleared,  swept,  and  ready  for  use  in  twenty  minutes. 
The  order  of  dances  was  carried  through  m  excellent  Style,  with  no  confuaon  or  loss  of  time, 
under  the  efficient  management  of  J.  H.  Conant  and  his  aids,  Messrs.  G.  Picket,  J.  Camp- 
beil  and  B  R  Drew.  Music  by  Hall's  full  band.  The  entire  list  of  twelve  dances  was 
.completed  promptly  at  one  o'clock  ;  and  all  retired  evidently  well  pleased  with  the  festivities 
of  the  long-to.be-remembered  evening." 

We  are  indebted  to  the  Bannsr  of  Liglii  also  for  preserving  some  of  the 
notices  of  the  secular  press,  which,  in  the  same  spirit  of  liberality  and  refine- 
ment which  has  characterized  the  journalistic  literature  of  Boston  toward  bpu:- 
itualism  throughout  its  tempestuous  career,  reported  die  proceedings  m  an 
honorable  and  respectful  tone  every  way  worthy  of  the  occasion.  The  follow- 
ing is  an  extract  from  the  account  of  die  Morning  Post  : 

"In  the  evening  the  vast  and  beautiful  haU  presented  a  most  animated  appearance, 
thronged  as  it  was  with  one  of  the  most  briUiant  audiences  that  ever  assembled  wiihm  its 

■ '  The  exercises  were  of  a  very  interestmg  character  and  consisted  in  the  earlier  part  of  the 
evening  of  addresses  interspersed  with  music. 

"The  audience  also  united  in  singing  two  original  hymns,  wMch  were  distributed  m 
printed  form  through  the  hall.  . 

"  At  ten  o'clock  the  main  floor  was  cleared  for  dancing,  and  from  that  hour  lill  one  in  tne 
morning  the  saltatory  feature  of  the  entertainment  was  entered  into  with  great  zest  and 

gayety  by  the  greater  portion  of  the  company  present The  ^acious  balco- 

Dies  were  crowded  to  repletion  with  spectators. 

"  As  a  whole,  the  celebration  will  be  long  remembered  as  one  of  the  most  pleasant  and  in- 
teresting events  of  modern  Spiritualism, 

The  celebration  of  this  iamous  anniversary  in  New  York  City,  lacked 
many  of  the  features  of  interest  which  more  concrete  organized  action,  a,nd 
the  presence  of  numerous  children's  lyceimis,  gave  to  the  Boston  festivity. 
Nevertheless,  if  it  was  found  wanting  in  numerical  strength  and  the  general 
interest  which  might  have  been  expected  in  this  famous  stronghold  ol  the 
cause,  it  presented  one  feature  of  peculiar  distinction,  from  the  presence  ot 
two  of  theFox  sisters,  or  original  Rocliester  mediums. 

The  New  York  reporter  for  die  Bmner  of  Lig/tt  gives  the  following  briet 
summary  of  die  proceedings  : 

"THE  Celebration  in  New  York.— Not withstandmg  the  short  notice  and  hastily 
made  arrangements,  tlie  twentieth  anniversary  of  the  '  Rochester  knockmgs'  drew  out  an 
assembly  on  the  eve  of  the  31st  nit.,  at  the  Everett  Rooms,  which  is  admitted,  on  all  hands, 
to  have  been  tlie  most  appropriate  and  respectable,  and  one  of  the  largest  ever  congregated 
in  New  York  by  the  subject  of  Spiritualism.  Every  part  of  the  performance  was  a  com- 
plete success,  and  gave  general  satisfaction,  several  parts  eliciting  the  highest  expression  of 
appredation;  such  especially  was  the  case  with  the  exquisitely  fine  performance  of  Prof. 
Watson  on  the  vioUn  and  his  niece  on  the  piano,  the  audience  seeming  imwillmg  to  release 
thera  after  recallmg  them  to  the  stage,  although  other  parties  and  performances  were  press- 
Dg  for  tune.  Mrs.  Adams  and  daughter,  whose  muac  enriches  the  meetings  of  the  society 
every  Sunday,  were  also  appreciated  by  their  old  and  new  auditors. 

"Of  eachpart  and  performer  we  cannot  afford  tospeak  separately;  but  of  the  general 
supervision  and  management  of  Mr.  P.  E.  Famsworth,  we  must  say  it  was  as  comp  ete  and 
perfect  as  opportunity  would  aUow.     Two  of  the  oriE^nal '  Fox  girls '  were  on  the  platform, 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  5SS 

aiiJ  tlie  rap5  were  heard  by  moit  of  the  audience  [Margaret  was  engaged,  and  did  nol 
arrive  in  time  for  the  first  part  of  tlie  exercises].  Tlie  Herald  of  next  iky,  with  its  usual  long 
rigmarole  of  manufactured  nonsense,  was  compelled  to  admit  the  respectability  of  the  au- 
dience, but  threw  out  its  durs  on  the  last  part  of  the  performance  by  Mr.  and  Miss  Watson, 
which  the  whole  audience,  except  the  Herald  reporter,  appreciated. 

"  The  original  poems  were  sublime  specimens  of  the  inspiration  of  our  day.  The  one 
delivered  by  N.  F.  White,  and  the  othei-  by  Dr.  F.  L.  WUlis,  we  hope  to  see  In  print,  and 
preserved  in  the  history  of  sjirituaJ  literature,  as  rich  specunens  of  inspirational  Spiiit- 
ualism. 

"  The  supper  was  good  to  those  who  ate  it,  the  dance  to  those  who  enjoyed  it,  the  snr- 
plus  funds  to  the  society  that  needed  it,  and  the  whole  evenmg,  one  long  to  be  remembered 
by  the  party  that  enjoyed  it." 

Although  our  limited  space  compels  us  to  omit  any  other  extended  notices 
of  the  vast  and  interesting  assemblages  which  congregated  all  over  the  States 
to  do  honor  to  tliis  momentous  anniversary,  we  cannot  forbear  calling  the 
reader's  attention  to  a  brief  synopsis  of  tiie  celebration  at  Rochester,  and  a 
few  extracts  from  the  addresses  of  those  well-tried  and  long-sufiering  cham- 
pions of  the  cause,  Isaac  and  Amy  Post,  whose  noble  part  and  testimony  in 
the  early  days  of  martyrdom  endured  at  Corinthian  Hall,  tlie  first  chapter 
of  this  volmne  has  fully  recorded. 

"The  meeting  convened  at  loo'elock,  A.  M.,  the  hall  being  nearly  filled  with  persons  pres- 
ent from  adjoining  towns  and  counties,  as  well  as  from  the  city,  all  of  whom  were  appar- 
ently in  earnest,  and  intent  on  doing  honor  to  the  occasions  that  had  called  them  together. 
Mr.  Edward  Jones,  of  Rochester,  chairman  of  the  committee  of  arrangements,  called  the 
meeting  to  order,  and  spoke  substaiilially  as  follows : 

'"Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  —  There  seems  to  have  been  a  spontaneous  movement 
throughout  this  country,  in  regard  to  holding  an  anniversary  meeting  in  commemoration  of 
the  advent  of  modem  Spiritualism.  It  is  now  twenty  years  since  this  startling  phenomenon 
made  its  appearance  among  us  in  this  city,  and  in.this  short  space  of  time  it  has  become 
known  nearly  throughout  the  civilized  world.  Converts  to  this  faith  and  philosophy  are 
now  numbered  by  millions.  No  system  of  philosophy  or  religion  has  ever  made  such  rapid 
strides.  Spirits  gave  me  the  assurance,  in  some  of  the  first  communications  received,  that 
those  manifestations  would  continue  to  spread,  and  ultimately  fill  the  whole  earth.  I  had 
full  faith  in  those  promises  then,  and  have  seen  nothing  ance  to  shake  my  belief  in  their  ful- 
filment. There  is  a  perennial  fountain  in  the  celestial  spheres,  from  which  emanate  mag- 
netic cords  which  are  ever  ready  to  twine  around  receptive  minds,  leading  them  up  hi^ier, 
We  have  reason  to  hope  that  the  light  emanating  from  the  spu-it  spheres  will  ultimately 
dispel  the  darkness  and  superstition  which  have  so  long  enshrouded  the  world,' 

' '  The  following  ofUcers  were  appointed  : 

"/■j-etWaH;  — Charles  W,  Hebard, 

"  Vice  Presidents —  Ifosx:  Post,  Mrs.  S.  D.  Fish,  Dr.  A.  Orvis,  Mrs.  A.  Post,  George 
Willits,  Edward  Jones,  Mrs.  L.  Scott,  Rev.  A.  H,  Jervis,  Mrs.  J.  Watson,  Schuyler  Mo- 
ses, L.  Burtis,  J.  W.  Seaver,  Mr.  English,  Mr,  Chamberston,  Mr,  Whitmore." 

It  will  be  perceived  that  several  of  the  earliest  and  most  faithful  witnesses 
to  the  truth  of  the  manifestations  were  here  present;  and  when  we  remember 
the  vast  amount  of  moral  courage  and  faith  in  divine  guidance  it  must  have 
required,  either  to  avow  the  bitterly  proscribed  faith  in  Spiritualism,  or  to 
test  the  new  and  unknown  power  of  "  the  spirits "  in  1848,  we  believe  the 

Hosted  by  Google 

S5« 

HISTORY  OF  MODERIf 

reader  mil  reioice  to  recognise  llie  names  of  Isaac  and  Amy  Post,  George 
Willk,  Rev  A  H.  Jerris,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bnrtis,  etc.,  once  more  appemng 
ri  Rochester  .pirimal  platform,  after  a  lapse  of  '-"'ffff'' £"'„„, 
At  the  close  of  a  deeply  interesting  and  minute  account  of  the  early  mam- 
festtiist  RochesterfrLrated  by  Mr.  Isaac  Post,  the  report  proceeds  as 

follows 

..Tl>=  «,U.l...»n  .rfo~»  »1  pMtottoopl,t  of  tie  k.t  ,um»  of  •  """"I.  »•"• 
Am  Pel,  of  Eooh»te,,  ™.  raUciied  to  pvo  in  ho,  ie.t.»™y  of  <^l  «P™"  ";  "'■ 
She  .<lte.rf  the  oudlenoe  in  a  vet,  cdld  ud  i«pr.»ve  n..«..r,  B.,«g  .  h. J  I  ■ 
.aing  history  of  th.  Co,ioth«.n   H.U  hv.s.lg.t.o.,  whjoh  "™*  f"™  ^    ' 
ninetio.  T«n  ■CO.     The  njeiling  re,oe.tol  •  copy  for  puW.cUon,  wh.oh  i^  .cctdec 
Td  th"  oUo"  »Tw..  farnUhed.  wUoh  h..  ^0.  .pp»r.  J  1.  .1.  ootan.  of  the  a™. 

...Tho^d:  h„e  w  «.*j  »j;s:'';;'irj™rsrSir?;;d'r£ 

coironuniiiKs;  I  ley  have  learned  the  certainty  of  a  conscious  tuuiree* 

n^s=  in  the  higher  and  ever  progressive  realm  of  spirit  lite. 

".H..«i"ti.«li  that  ™.ho.ldm...  h.r.»i.hth«,k^viog.othed„,a.r'-   " 
.ha.k«p.ing  to  ll«  Fox  f.mly,  thro.sh  who«  mitod  .genoy  the»  bUa^ig.  6.» 

Sm,™  .nd  ohl  1  o.  m.«y  did  th.,  daU,  ..ite  i.  vood  p.ayjr,  "  th.l  .  *«  ''"J  ™ 
rfflre  «.  that  it .ijM  b.  «,a..v.d  from  .h».»  b.t  i  of  God  they  r^l,=d  »  t.»  .11 
f  1,.  .^om   derision,  and  r-5rs.cution  that  might  b.  heaped  iipon  tliem. 

."  "ten  I..1  that  the  .xtrxrdinoy  MeUt,  »id  linKlli*  d.volion  to  tli.  anpopala, 
iruth  of  the  Fox  family  has  never  been  justly  appreciated  by  Spinlurdist^ 

°*  The  Lis...  -h'oh  .h.y  mad,  to  this  ...»  ..n  n™,  b.  told.    Th.  eld.st  d.ngMer 

now  M»  Onderhill,  o!  N.,  York  City,  I  d..m  -orthy  of  oar  .p.=.l  E'"""'; 

,         1         ..  h-rP  in  our  citv  soon  after  this  great  wonder  became  known,  had  one 

STii' rrKSrl'^-b^r  oons.i:,yi  and-ilhoj  any  oomp.^^^^^^ 

-^srri^t/:5=:9a™b.r,„.^^.^»«-^ 

soni,  of  oth.,..     Bnt  she  ,n,™bly  ..jM^  tta^  J^"  "» ™   ".n rdy -ill  nS  L 

™1«  »Ven'X."-.  audi....  for  inv»tig..ion,  and  w.,.,.  mob  .ioi»..  soaght 
to  ,n.  it  down  and  drive  ''=  » j'— J"°  *' "^''m.tig.t.d  „d  managed  entirely  by  th. 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  SS7 

deception,  «itl.  tlmt  timid  young  girl,  Margaretta  Fox  [dow  Mrs.  K^ne],  was  felt  Ly  all  to 
be  a  great  thing,  but  we  Itnew  there  was  a  truth  tliere,  wliich  we  all  wished  to  hai-e  invesH- 
eatea  Our  noble  friend  here.  Rev.  Mr.  Jervis,  who  felt,  perhaps,  that  he  had  a  Larger 
crown  to  lay  upon  t'''^  "liar  than  any  of  us,  was  the  first  to  step  forward  and  say.  "  I  am 
not  afridd  to  face  a  frowning  world,"  This  settled  the  question  with  aU  the  others.  In  thi? 
trau'.action  we  followed  the  direction  of  spirit  friends,  in  every  minutiK,  through  the  three 
days'  and  evenin>'s'  eKaminations.  On  the  fourth  evening  the  audience,  regardless  of  all 
remonstrances,  to°ok  the  whole  management  m  their  own  hands.  They  appointed  Josiah 
Bissel,  Esq.,  chairman,  who,  of  course,  conducted  the  meeting  in  a  way  to  suit  the  «- 
cited  and  indieuant  people.  I  could  name  doctors  and  gentlemen  of  wealth  and  standinp 
in  Rochester  who  iomed  in  raiang  a  mob,  Irom  whose  violence  it  became  necessary  to  call 
upon  a  posse  of  city  officers  to  rescue  this  innocent,  timid  girl,  in  her  early  teens,  arid  her 
elder  ^ter  [who  had  not  as  yet  been  developed  as  a  medium,  but  always  accompanied  her], 
to  a  house  of  safety,  for  they  did  not  dare  go  to  their  home.  ,   ,        ,        , 

"  ■  When  it  was  rumored  that  this  commiltee  had  been  no  more  successful  than  the  others, 
the  excitement  became  intense, 

"  •  The  committee  having  become  satisfied  of  the  integrity  of  the  gitls,  and  their  sympathy 
bring  excited  by  the  threatening  mdications,  earnestly  desired  to  be  permitted  to  occupy 
the  platform  with  n-S  saying  that  the  assailants  should  only  rea*:h  us  over  their  dead  bodies. 
"  '  Few,  I  think,  can  realize  the  trepidation  and  nervous  excitement  induced  by  these  con- 
ditions  Onreaching  home,  Margacetta  had  decided  not  to  go  to  the  hdl  that  evenmg.  1 
said  ' '  We  will  go  by  ourselves,  and  sit  down  quietly  and  see  how  we  shaU  feel  about  it.  '' 
Her  sister  Leah  soon  said,  "  Amy,  if  you  will  go  I  will  go  with  yoa,  if  I  go  to  the  stake  I 
Marearetta  did  not  change  her  mind  until  about  time  to  g9,  when  she  said,  "  I  cannot 
hav^ougowithoutme  I  n,nst  go,  though  I  expect  to.be  Mlled."  With  this  fearfu 
prospect  before  us,  we  went.  When  we  arrived  at  the  hall  we  found  the  faithful  seven  all 
there,  four  mei>  and  three  women,  in  their  aUotted  places.  But,  as  I  said  before,  the  poj^ 
«lace  took  control  of  the  meeting,  and  when  the  report  of  the  committee  indicated  adversely 
to  their  antidpations  and  hopes,  as  each  member  of  the  other  committees  had  done  they 
interrupted  the  proceedings  and  continued  to  do  so,  al.hough  one  of  them  said  he  should 
stand  there  untU  the  next  morning  if  he  was  not  permitted  to  make  his  report.  But  stamp- 
ing, shrieking,  and  aU  kinds  of  hideous  noises,  together  with  explosions  of  torpedoes  m 
evlrv  part  of  the  audience,  obUged  liim  to  desist.  Abonl  this  time  the  audience  came  m  a 
tumultuous  rvish  toward  and  upon  the  platform  ;  a  grand  melSe  ensued,  and  amid  the  con- 
foMonweleft,  escorted,  as  before  stated,  by  the  police-justice  and  others  to  a  place  of 
safety  Subsequently  the  meeting  passed  a  resolution  admonishing  the  medium  and  her 
sister  to  leave  the  city  in  twenty-fom-  hours,  to  which,  of  course,  they  paid  no  heed  except 
that  Ihev  did  not  deem  it  safe  to  go  to  their  own  home  for  several  days.  Soon  alter  tl^.s 
public  investigation,  the  elder  sister,  Leah,  l>ecame  a  superior  medium  for  rappmg,  speak- 
ine.  wrilinE,  and  seeing.  .      ,      .       j 

."  Mv  friends,  I  Imvegiven  this  snmewhatminutehistory  of  the  extendi  and  outward  man- 
Iteaations  of  early  Sptl.nalisn,,  to  the  Unth  ot  .Met  I  c«,  testify,  tor  I  ha,e  slated  noth- 
taTbnt  ,h.t  n,y  e,is  «,  and  n,  e.„  heart.  We  val.e  the.  to,  tire  reason  that  they 
ha«  led  us  to  a  higher  and  diviner  eoneepion  of  spirit  eonscroo.ness  and  sptnt  light  vi-ithin 
ourselves,  which,  if  listened  to.  wUl  lead  and  guide  us  in  paths  of  wisdom  and  goodness. 

"And  now,  l«hold  1  from  these  simple  sounds,  and  the  wisdom  and  power  that  gtive  them, 
has  gone  forth  the  knowledge  that  hath  enlightened  niUion^  and  hronght  them  from  the 
valley  and  shadow  of  death,  where  they  fear  no  evU.  for  they  know  the  eternal  power  of 

the  universe  is  light  and  strength  to  all  nations.' 

■<  Lewis  Burtis  gave  at  length  the  history  of  his  mvestigations,  m  which  testimony  ot  cor- 
roboralion  wa.  given  rigarding  his  astonishment  as  well  a.  conviction  of  the  genuineness  of 
snirit  rappings  in  houses,  also  on  sidewalks  of  brick,  etc. ,  and  very  many  personal  tests  of 
E  po"r,  presence,  and  of  their  individudity  in  particular.  He  also  spoke  of  the  grea. 
consoktioi.  Spiritualism  gave  him,  in  robhhig  the  grave  of  its  victory  «.d  death  of  It. 

Hosted  b,  Google 

558  HISTORY  OF  MODERN 

sting ;  that  lie  had  no  fear  of  the  coming  disralution  of  liis  outer,  well-wom  garment  He 
spoke  earnestly,  and  carried  conviction  to  tlie  minds  of  his  hearers  that  all  he  said  he 
meant. 

"  Mrs.  S.  A.  Burtis  was  then  called  upon.  She  said  she  had  not  put  anything  into 
form,  but  would  relate  a  few  facts  and  phases  of  spirit  manifestations  given  in  her  presence, 
and  mostly  at  her  own  house.  The  first  rap  was  heard  in  1848,  carrying  conviction,  and 
sweeping  away  the  deep  prejudices  against  the  mediums  and  their  manifestations.  Many 
and  deep  were  the  trials  and  persecutions  that  arose  on  every  hand  toward  believers.  Many 
and  various  were  the  forms  of  manifestations  that  soon  in  quick  succession  appeared  — 
writing,  tmnce  speakmg,  etc  ;  whilst  the  following  form  of  manifestation  showed  more 
conclofjvely  than  any  other  the  power  of  spirits  to  clear  away  the  dark  mist  of  scepticism 
from  unbelievers.  At  a  circle  in  Rochester,  in  1858,  J.  F.  Coles,  medium,  of  New  York, 
entranced,  prophesied  that  Miss  Mary  Comstock  would  have  mediumship  developed  at  some 
future  day.  Mrs.  Burtis  then  took  Mary  to  her  house,  and  the  following  are  a  few  of  the, 
many  communications  which  appeared  on  her  arm  in  beautiful  and  legible  characters ! 

"  For  Dr.  R.  T.  Hallocit,  of  New  York,  these  words  upon  Mary's  naked  arm  appeared : 
'  Glorious  are  your  good  works  on  earth.     Let  your  light  shine.' 

"For  Fred.  Douglass,  who  was  also  present,  appeared  a  kneeling  slave  chdned  to  a 
post,  with  these  words :   '  A  poor  old  slave." 

"  At  another  time  a  company  of  ladies,  with  one  gentleman,  from  New  York,  called  to 
witness  this  phase  of  manifestations.  A  line  of  characters  appeared  upon  the  arm  of  Mary, 
which  none  of  us  could  decipher,  until  the  gentleman  was  asked  if  he  could  tell.  He  replied 
he  could  ;  that  it  was  the  name  of  a  masonic  brother  who  died  twenty  years  before,  given 
in  the  masonic  alphabet.  _ 

"At  onetime,  after  passing  through  severe  trials,  the  following  was  given  to  Mrs.  Burtis: 

When  Ihou  layest  down  thy  weary  head,  calmly  sleeiBng, 
Guaidian  angels  near  ihy  bed,  watch  are  keeping," 

"Thefollowmg,  from  the  spirit  of  a  grandchild,  who  had  been  freed  from  its  body  hut  a 
shoit  time,  also  appeared  on  her  arm : 

Trusting  that  our  readers  will  sympathize  with  this  final  repetition  of  an 
oft-told  tale  for  tlie  sake  of  the  honored  narrators  and  the  deeply  interesting 
time  and  place  of  the  narratives,  we  close  our  notice  of  the  Rochester  cele- 
bration with  the  following  remarks  of  the  reporter  : 

"  The  celebration  has  escelled  the  most  sanguuie  expectations  of  the  friends,  and  is  calcu- 
lated to  produce  a  lasting  and  beneficial  result  for  llie  cause.  The  best  of  feeling  prevailed 
throughout  the  entire  exercises.  The  local  newspapers  gave  a  very  candid  statement 
of  proceedings." 

We  must  now  conclude  our  notices  of  tliese  deeply  interesting  gatherings. 
As  the  Boston  account  includes  more  fuE  details  than  any  other  in  print,  we 
have  selected  that  as  our  representative  notice.  Rochester  too  is  especially 
reported  as  being  the  Mecca  to  which  all  hearts  were  turned  on  this  most  im- 
portant anniversary,  whilst  the  presence  of  the  good  pioneers  above  alluded 
to,  made  tlie  occasion  of  the  deepest  and  most  toucliing  interest.  We  would 
gladly  have  availed  ourselves  of  a  more  voluminous  account  of  the  New 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  SS9 

York  celebration  from  the  fact  that  it  was  solemnized  by  the  sounds  of  the 
same  tlirilling  raps  that  twenty  years  ago,  through  the  organisms  of  Margaret 
and  Catherine  Fox,  awoke  the  nineteenth  century  to  its  great  millennium. 
The  presence  of  these  ladies  alone  made  the  anniversary  celebration  in 
New  York  a  scene  of  unequalled  interest. 

For  the  rest,  it  would  be  impossible,  as  it  is  unnecessary,  to  continue 
a  more  detailed  account  of  these  great  national  gatherings.  Suffice  it  to  say, 
that  they  were  observed  with  incidents  of  special  and  local  interest  in  every 
large  city  and  many  of  the  smaller  towns,  in  almost  every  State  of  the  Union, 
and  besides  reawakening  in  the  hearts  of  believers  a  reverend  and  grateful 
memory  of  the  mighty  work  that  has  been  wrought  for  them,  manifestly 
"  through  the  dispensation  of  angels,"  this  anniversary  must  have  impressed 
the  sneering  and  incredulous  world  widi  a  forcible  realization  of  the  stupend- 
ous growth,  power,  and  numerical  strength  which  modern  Spiritualism  has 
attained.  Surely,  as  the  now  open  eyes  of  strangers  looked  upon  the  vast 
masses  of  humanity  flocking  up  to  the  angelic  standards,  beheld  the  signs  of 
ojiganic  strength,  true  brotherhood,  and  childlike  faith  in  spiritual  guidance,  ex- 
hibited by  these  masses  ;  but  above  all,  as  he  looked  upon  that  most  signifi- 
cant of  all  witnesses,  namely,  the  parent  leading  forward  the  young  child  in 
the  path  of  his  own  discovery  ;  or,  as  he  contemplated  with  prophetic  eye, 
what  must  be  the  result  of  the  thronging  legions  of  youth  thus  early  instructed 
in  die  sublime  truths  of  Spiritualism,  when  the  impressions  of  childhood  shall 
become  matured  by  the  judgment  of  manhood,— must  not  such  a  spec- 
tacle have  compelled  the  query  in  each  reflective  mind,  "If  the  begin- 
ning  is  thus  mighty,  what  must  its  future  become,  and  where  will  be  the 

Our  volume  closes,  but  for  our  subject,  "  end  there  is  none." 

The  biographical  sketches  of  mediums  and  prominent  Spiritualists  ;  notices 
of  books,  journals,  and  spiritual  literature  generally;  descriptions  of  classified 
phenomena,  together  with  a  summary  of  die  religion,  science,  and  philosophy 
of  the  movement,  on  all  departments  of  which  we  have  an  immense  abun- 
dance of  untouched  material, —  all  this  must  be  reserved  for  a  forthcoming 
work,  wliich  we  trust  to  be  shortly  able  to  present  to  our  readers  as  an  appen- 
dix and  supplement  to  this  history.  ,    ,        -  , 

We  had  set  out  with  the  intention  of  condensing  all  these  important  fea- 
tures of  the  movement  within  the  limits  of  one  book  ;  but  our  subject  has 
grown  under  our  hands,  and  stiU  transcends  our  utmost  ability  to  grapple 
with  even  in  a  tithe  of  its  gigantic  proportions.  _ 

In  view  of  the  magnitude  of  our  undertaking  and  the  narrow  boundanes 
which  circumstances  impose  upon  human  efforts,  we  might  cast  aside  in  des- 
pair and  humihation  any  pen  that  attempted  to  measure  its  capacity  witli  tiie 
value  or  extent  of  the  record  it  essayed  to  transcribe ;  but  a  part  of  the  phil- 
osophy upon  which  Spiritualism  rests  is,  that  nothing  m  die  universe  is 
ever  really  lost;  and  so,  in  the  divine  economy  of  being,  every  act,  thought, 
woni,  written  or  unwritten,  spoken  or  unexpressed,  though  lost  to  sight  and 
memory  in  the  whelming  floods  of  human  oblivion,  is  still,  m  God  s  Provi- 

Hosted  by  Google 

56o  HISTORY  OF  MODERN' 

dence,  incorporated  into  the  great  sum  of  existence ;  talces  its  place  and 
performs  its  functions  as  an  atom  in  the  eternal  laboratories  of  creation,  where 
"  He  gathers  up  the  beautiful." 

In  tliis  divine  storehouse  of  reserved  and  treasured  forces,  then,  will  be  found 
and  ultimately  outwrought  into  good  and  use,  every  item  wliich  our  feeble 
pen  has  failed  to  clironicle,  and  with  it,  all  the  nieaiureless  aspirations  and 
grateful  purposes  which  stimulated  the  scribe  to  this  undertaking,  and  com- 
pelled her,  in  humble  adoration  of  tJie  Great  Supreme  Spirit,  and  astonished 
graritude  for  the  labors  of  his  ministering  angels,  to  offer  even  tliis  tribute 
of  her  worship  and  love,  and  make  this  incomplete  attempt  to  gather  up  the 
fragments  of  heavenly  food  with  wliich  countless  multitudes  have  been  sus- 
tained during  the  twenty  years'  dispensation  on  earth  of  Modern  American 
SpiRrruALiSM. 

LEAVES  OF    RETROSPECTION  AND  ACKNOWLEDGMENT. 

The  work  of  the  preceding  pages,  commenced  in  1867  and  completed  in 
1868,  was  written  in  England,  far  removed  from  the  scene  of  the  marvellous 
events  therein  recorded,  its  ap|5earance  in  published  form,  liaving  been,  by 
the  force  of  unavoidable  circumstances,  delayed  until  the  opening  of  the 
year  1870.  The  three  years  intervening  between  the  dates  of  its  com- 
mencement and  final  publication,  may  appear  to  the  actors  in  the  ever-shift- 
ing  scenes  of  American  life,  a  period  too  long  to  be  passed  over  without 
notice.  True  it  is,  that  the  author  has  spent  one  twelvemonth  of  this  period 
in  America,  and  maintained,  during  her  absence  in  Europe,  an  uninterrupted 
correspondence  with  those  observers  who  were  best  able  to  keep  her  infonned 
of  the  march  of  events  on  the  American  continent;  but  although  many 
changes  have  swept  over  the  aspect  of  modern  American  Spiritualism  since 
1867,  nothing  has  occurred  to  alter  her  conviction  that  the  "twenty  years 
record"  now  presented,  forms  a  concrete  and  fully  completed  epoch,  the  cir- 
cumstances and  spirit  of  which  will  not  again  be  repeated,  or  even  in  a  sum- 
lar  form,  be  carried  forward  during  this  present  generation. 

Despite  the  imperishable  germs  of  influence  which  the  Spiritualism  of  the 
last  twenty  years  has  planted,  and  the  magnificent  fruitage  which  its  astound- 
ing revelations  must  eventually  produce,  the  calm  and  dispassionate  observer 
cannot  fail  to  perceive  that  its  status  in  the  world,  audits  effect  upon  the  enor- 
mous masses  of  its  advocates  is  no  longer  that  of  a  great  marvel,  nor  a  new 
revelation.  The  wonder  and  novelty  of  modern  Spiritualism^  are  alike  pass- 
ing away ;  and  although  its  phenomena  are  steadily,  but  quietly  on  the  in- 
crease,  and  its  doctrines  noiselessly,  but  irresistibly  permeating  all  ranks  and 
classes,  all  forms  of  Hterature  or  religious  teaching,  yet  its  public  demonstra- 
tions, whether  in  circles  or  Sabbath-day  gatherings,  are  giving  more  evidence 
of  the  steady  faith  and  devoted  adherence  of  true  Spiritualists,  than  of  d»e 
clamorous  enthusiasm  of  numerous  wonder-seeking  "  spiritists." 

Hosted  by  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALISM.  5^1 

Multitudes  of  die  idle  and  unthinking  are  giving  place  to  select  bodies  of 
earnest  and  capable  thinkere.  Circles  abound  more  in  the  sacred  seclusion 
of  the  home  than  in  the  noisy  gatherings  of  the  pubhc  hall,  and  the  doctrinal 
part  of  Sphitualism  is  making  such  rapid  strides  throughout  the  intellectual 
realm  of  the  American  mind,  that  it  no  longer  seems  to  requhe  special  as- 
semblies convened  for  its  exposition. 

The  spiritual  doctrines  which  were  branded  as  "  infidel  heresy"  some  twenty 
years  ago,  are  now  openly  preached  from  every  popular  pulpit,  and  the  di- 
rect agency  and  immediate  presence  of  bright  ministermg  spirits,  denounced 
in  1848,  as  blasphemous  assumptions,  or  affirmations  only  credible  to  "old 
wives"  or  "  idiots,"  become  in  1870  die  accepted  belief  of  diat  majority  which 
piques  itself  upon  the  possession  of  common  sense  and  sound  philosophy. 

Whilst  the  effects  of  such  a  revolution  in  pubhc  sentiment  must  be  fraught 
widi  incalculable  good  for  the  future  of  mankind,  the  changes  which  they  pro- 
duce upon  the  external  aspect  of  Spiritualism  are  liable  to  great  misconcep- 
tion. Tlie  entliusiast  mourns  to  find  the  feveiish  excitement  of  the  great  un- 
foldii^  dying  away.  The  antagonistic  flatter  themselves  that  the  obnoxious 
idea  has  evaporated  widi  the  novelty  of  its  first  expression. 

The  phenomenal  "spiritist"  wonders  how  it  is  that  the  spirits  are  still  with 
us  but  cease  to  astonish  us,  and  the  bigot  trusts  that  the  belief  which  is  silently 
leavening  the  whole  lump  of  society  is  no  more,  because  die  giddy  multitude 
no  longer  herald  its  approacli  with  the  cry  of  astonishment. 

Meantime,  whilst  we  have  the  most  direct  evidence  diat  Spiritualism  is 
even  now  doing  a  mightier  work  for  die  religious  faith  of  humanity,  than  it 
has  ever  yet  effected,  its  external  phenomenal  history  appears  for  the  present 
to  be  closing  up,  and  die  record  diat  we  herewidi  present  could  not  receive 
such  additional  facts  of  interest,  as  would  warrant  our  attempting  to  wnte 
the  history  of  the  last  twelvemonth's  experiences  in  American  Spiritualism. 

Even  in  New  York,  once  the  very  heart  and  focus  of  marvellous  pheno- 
mena, steady  growdi  apd  deepenmg  faith  in  SpirituaUstic  doctrines,  are 
working  too  silendy  to  challenge  the  usual  ribald  notices  of  the  press. 

Multitudes  of  circles  are  held  nightly  in  families  of  all  ranks  and  condi- 
tions An  unostentatious,  but  iVell  supported  meeting  takes  place  every  Sab- 
bath morning  and  evening  in  die  Everett  Rooms,  under  die  able  conduct  of 
Mr  Fatnsworth,  but  the  once  celebrated  Sunday  services  conducted  for  so 
many  years  at  Dodwortli's  Hall  have  been  gradually  abandoned  by  one  popu- 
lar spiritual  leader  after  another  until  their  entire  burden  fell  upon  Mr.  Albert 
Day  a  noble  and  well-tried  champion  of  the  cause  in  New,  York  whose 
zeal 'and  devotion  induced  hun  to  make  heavy  sacrifices  for  die  maintenance 
of  these  favorite  meetings,  until  the  necessity  for  their  existence  was  no  long- 
er felt.  Mr.  Albert  Day  is  no  less  a  zealous  Spuitualist  in  private  than  when 
his  good  service  was  given,  even  at  the  risk  of  his  legal  professional  standing, 
to  die  public  maintenance  of  the  Dodwortli's  Hall  lectures ;  and  Spiritualism, 
is  even  more  rife  and  more  influential  duoughout  the  religious  communities  of 
New  York  tiian  when  it  was  simply  represented  in  one  or  two  Sabbatii  meet- 
ings of  Spiritualists  only. 
36 

Hosted  by  Google 

563  HlSTORy  OF  MODERl^ 

Meantime,  phenomenal  manifestations  of  spirit  presence  have  neither 
diminished  in  force  nor  number  at  the  New  York  circles,  although,  as  above 
stated,  their  recurrence  is  more  limited  to  the  sphere  of  private  families  tlian 
formerly.  Amongst  the  most  accepted  and  popular  of  the  public  test  medi- 
ums, the  two  youngest  daughters  of  the  celebrated  Fox  family,  Margaretta 
and  Catherine,  still  hold  a  distinguished  place.* 

This  con<^tion  of  things  forms  no  inapt  representation  of  Spiritualism  ra 
its  public  status  throughout  the  country.  A  transition  period  for  the  "cause" 
,has  come,  and  all  who  can  and  wiU  look  beneath  the  surface  of  its  changing 
form,  perceive  the  foundation  stones  of  an  edifice  being  laid  for  the  future, 
as  much  more  permanent  and  practical  than  the  past,  as  the  manifestations 
of  law  are  more  imperishable  than  the  flitring  lights  of  phenomena. 

One  of  the  progressive  elements  of  Spiritualism  which  has  neither  waned 
nor  receded  from  public  observation,  has  been  the  production  of  spiritual  Ut- 
erature,  which,  in  point  of  both  quantity  and  quality,  has  taken  the  pahn  dur- 
ing the  last  three  years,  over  that  of,  at  least,  aU  the  ten  which  have  preceded 
them. 

It  would  be  both  needless  and  wearisome  to  sum  up  all  the  excellent  con- 
tributions to  the  literature  of  Spiritualism,  the  titles  of  which  now  crowd  the 
columns  of  flie  Banner  of  Light,  The  Religio-Philosophical  Journal,  The  Ohio 
Spiritualist,  Present  Age,  etc.  Suffice  it  to  say,  whilst  the  brave,  devoted, 
and  well-tried  editorial  staff  of  the  Banner  ofZighth3.vs  endured  sacrifices 
and  evenmartyrdom  in  the  maintenance  of  their  paper  from  which  thousands 
of  other  reformers  would  have  shrunk  back  or  sunk  beneath,  they  are  at 
length  rewarded,  and  the  status  of  their  cause  defined  by  the- fact  that  their 
journal  is  now  recognized  as  one  of  the  permanent  and  honored  literary  "in- 
stitutions "  of  the  country.  A  wide  circulation,  and  equally  just  recognition 
of  Uieir  respective  merits,  is  fast  accruing  to  the  other  periodicals  named 
above,  whilst  their  increasing  popularity  seems  to  add  to,  rather  than  to  take 
from,  the  ever-widening  influence  of  the  veteran  Banner  of  Light. 

Without  finding  space  to  name  over  the  many  contributions  to  the  sum  of 
spiritual  literature  which  the  past  few  years  have  furnished,  we  may,  with  pro- 
priety, notice  the  last  three  works  of  the  inspired  "  Poughkeepsie  Seer,"  A.  J. 
:Davis,  whose  "Stellar  Key,"  "The  Arabula,"  and  "  The  Tale  of  a  Physician," 
are  amongst  the  grandest  andmost  inspired  pieces  of  writing  that  have  issued 
from  Mr.  Davis's  prolific  pen.  The  fact  that  these  works  are  of  such  recent 
production  is  the  evidence  that  the  sources  of  inspuation  are  still  in  process 

•  Since  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  volume  were  in  type,  the  autlior  has  been  reqnested 
to  correct  the  statements  made  by  the  witnesses  at  Hydesville,  respecting  the  ages  of 
Catherine  and  Margaretta  Fok  at  tlie  time  of  the  first  disturbances.  The  mother  of  the 
ladise,  Mrs.  Fox,  addressed  a  letter  to  the  President  of  the  anniversary  meeting  held  in  New 
York 'city  in  i868,tQ  which  she  stated  that,  at  the  timeof  the  tirst  "Rochester  knockings," 
her  daughter  Kate  was  seven  years  old,  and  Margaretta  ten.  The  ages  of  the  children  be- 
ing as  tlie  family  allege,  "  incorrectly  rendered  in  the  first  printed  report,  have  been  errone- 
ou5ly  represented  in  all  subsequent  a< 

Hosiedb,  Google 

AMERICA^  SPIRITUALISM.  563 

of  progressive  unfoldment,  rather  than  closing  up,  in  proportion  to  the  subsi- 
dence of  phenomenal  interest  in  the  public  mind. 

An  admirable  work  from  the  pen  of  the  accomplished  scientist  and  scholar, 
Epes  Sargent,  entitled  "  Planchctte,"  or  "The  Despair  of  Science,"  has  just 
issued  from  the  press  simultaneously  with  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Peebles's  magnificent 
and  exhaustive  prose  epic,  "The  Seer  of  the  Ages."  Either  of  these  works, 
alone,  would  be  sufficient  to  stamp  any  cause  which  they  specially  advocated, 
with  the  genius  and  literary  excellence  of  their  inspired  authors. 

A  no  less  remarkable,  but  far  more  startling  work  in  breadth  of  design  and 
theological  influence,  is  Hudson  Tuttle'slast  book, "  The  God  idea  in  History." 
This  astounding  exposition  of  all  the  theological  myths  and  mysteries  which 
have  distracted  and  deluded  mankind  for  over  a  thousand  years,  will  be  hidled 
fay  every  scholar,  candid  investigator,  and  profound  thinker,  as  the  hook  of  the 
age,  and  one  whose  inevitable  mission  is  to  revolutionize  the  realm  of  opinion, 
which  has  been  for  centuries  drifting  about  amidst  the  fogs  of  sectarian  mys- 
tery, to  find  the  clue  to  the  problems  of  theology. 

So  long  as  the  once  feverish  spirit  of  popular  excitement  which  misrepre- 
sented rather  than  defined  the  status  of  modem  Spiritualism,  culminates  in 
literary  productions  of  this  character,  even  the  enthusiasts  of  "  the  cause" 
need  have  no  fear  for  its  perpetuation  on  the  most  solid  and  enduring  foun- 
dations. 

It  now  simply  remains  for  the  author  to  offer  afew  words  of  grateful  ac- 
knowledgment to  those  laithfu!  allies,  through  whose  instrumentality  chiefly, 
these  pages  have  been  given  to  the  world. 

The  indifferent  reader  can  form  very  little  idea  of  the  multitude  of  agencies 
that  must  have  been  called  into  operation  before  a  record  so  vast  in  its  scope, 
including  such  multitudes  of  figures,  immense  surfaces  of  country,  and  num- 
bers of  incidents,  could  have  been  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  one  individ- 
ual, verified  with  an  exactness  which  leaves  no  room  for  honest  scepticism, 
and  collected  from  so  many  remote  sources ;  to  effect  all  this,  the  numbers  of 
kind  friends  who  have  aided  the  author  could  only  find  mention  were  an 
United  States  directory  appended  to  the  closing  chapter.  All  that  our  space 
will  permit,  is  to  acknowledge,  through  the  persons  of  the  few,  the  obligations 
conferred  by  the  many. 

Chief  amongst  these  generous  allies,  we  must  rank  Mr.  Cliarles  Partridge, 
whose  munificent  gift  of  a  complete  file  of  die  grand  old  Spiritual  Tele- 
graph, and  the  loan  of  several  of  the  steel  plates  from  which  some  of  the 
finest  illustrations  in  the  work  are  printed,  constitute  services,  the  full  value 
of  which,  no  words  can  express. 

Most  earnest  acknowledgments  are  due  to  Dr.  R.  Hallock,  the  honored 
veteran  Spiritualist,  to  whose  admirable  MSS.  minutes  of  the  first  spiritual 
conferences  held  in  New  York  City,  we  are  indebted  for  a  store  of  invaluable 
nformation  concerning  the  initiatory  workings  of  Spiritualism  in  its  earliest 
developments. 

To  tiie  Rev.  J.  S.  Loveland,  for  a  copy' of  the  Boston  New  Era ;  fo  Dr. 
Abel  Underhill,  for  many  valuable  printed  and  MSS.  records,  rare  pamphlets 

Hosted  by  Google 

51,4  HISTORY  OP  MODESIT 

and  other  sources  of  information  on  the  progress  of  Spiritualism  in  the  West ; 
IS  to  those  noble  and  faithful  friends  in  St.  Louis,  Mr.  A.  Miltenberget  and 
Mr.  Charles  Levy,  who  wore  indefatigable  in  collecting  matter,  no«  nnat- 
tainable  from  any  source,  —the  author  acknowledges  a  deep  and  lasting  debt 
of  gratitude. 

Amongst  the  many  loving  hearts  and  willing  hands  thai  have  helped  to 
build  up  the  structure  of  this  spiritual  record,  we  may  not  omit  tonote  two 
highly  esteemed  laborers,  who,  by  the  most  untiring  efforts,  collected  facts,  ob- 
tained evidence,  visited  distant  places  and  persons  in  search  of  obscure  but 
signilicant  records,  and  in  a  dronsand  ways,  by  acts  of  personal  kmdness  to 
the  author  in  her  own  laborious  undertaking,  or  through  patient  research  and 
effort  on  their  own  parts,  have  aided  the  work  and  lightened  the  burden  of 
die  compilation,  witli  a  generous  leal  that  none  but  the  angels  can  bear  wit- 
ness of.  ,r        T  Hr 

These  ladies  are  already  well  known  in  the  spiritual  ranks  as  Mrs.  Jane  M. 
Jackson,  of  New  York,  and  Miss  Caroline  A.  Grimes,  of  Philadelphia,  to 
both  of  whom  this  feeble  acknowledgment  of  invaluable  service  is  impeta- 
tively  demanded.  .  . 

To  Mr  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  who,  in  response  to  the  anthoi's  solicitation 
tor  the  loan  of  a  steel-plate  portrait,  nobly  contributed,  at  his  own  expense, 
die  splendid  prints  of  himself  which  adorn  the  volume ;  to  the  good  and 
generous  Dr.  Newton,  for  a  simiUr  act  of  mnnificence ;  to  Mr.  Bnttan,  for  the 
loan  of  some  fine  plates  ^  and  to  many  aoothet  hberal  and  faithful  spirit, 
from  whom  favors  of  a  like  kind  have  been  received ;  to  the  munificent  act 
of  the  noble  Ba,n,r  of  Lighl  editorial  staff  in  contributing  flie  use  of  then- 
columns  for  jroa.ft»«notices  and  advertisements,— to  all  and  each,  the  author 
tenders  acknowledgments  of  the  deepest  gratitude.  „      ,     ,     . 

There  are  still  two  records  to  enter,  which,  however  staitlmg  and  unlooked 
for  they  may  appear  to  the  eye.  of  the  gentlemen  who  form  then  subjects, 
justice  to  that  posterity  for  which  this  volume  is  chiefly  compiled,  compels  us 
to  make. 

When  the  authorship  of  diis  book  was  completed,  and  the  trying  question 
arose  as  to  how  so  expensive  and  volumhious  an  undertaking  was  to  be 
launched  upon  the  ocean  of  public  opinion,  every  effort  was  made  to  induce 
some  suitable  publishing  house  to  assume  tlie  heavy  responsibility  of  its  pro- 
duction. .  .,  ,. 

When  failures  to  accomplish  diis  purpose  had  multiplied,  until  discourage- 
ment deepened  into  despair,  the  author  received  the  unsolicited  offer  of  a 
noble  English  genUemen  to  bear  the  financial  binden  of  the  publication,  and 
to  risk  the  heavy  ouflay  required  without  any  other  certain  prospect  of  repay- 
ment  than  that  derived  from  his  unselfish  devotion  to  Spmtual.sm,  and  his 
belief  that  the  publication  of  this  history  wa.  but  a  simple  act  of  justice  to  ttie 
wise,  beneficent,  and  wonderful  beings,  whose  labors  for  humamty  it  is  de- 
signed to  bear  witness  of  If  the  name  of  this  gendeman  is  .vithheld  from 
this  public  acknowledgment  of  his  munificent  act,  it  is  srniply  m  deterence 
to  his  sense  of  dehcacy,  which  might  be  wounded  by  its  open  ennnaatioii, 

Hosted  b,  Google 

AMERICAN  SPIRITUALfSm  5^5 

although  its  identity  .-ill  be  readily  di.ined  by  every  English  Spiritualist  and 
cherished  in  the  grateful  appreciation  ot  the  angels  whose  completed  labors 
in  then  twenty  years'  mission  upon  eartlt,  the  noble  pubhslter  has  thus  gener- 
ously outwrought 

The  last  name  in  this  category  of  warm-hearted  and  fotMul  soldters  of  the 
spiritual  cause  which  can  now  be  mentioned,  will  indeed  shme  forth  as  not 
tht  kail,  eiflier  in  efBciency  or  unparalleled  devotion  to  the  whole  undertak- 
ing It  is  Uiat  of  Mr.  Charles  Edwards  Lester,  of  New  York,  already  cele- 
brated as  the  androt  of  the  "Glory  and  Shame  of  England,"  "The  Napole- 
on Dynasty,"  and  many  odier  works  which  afforded  Mr.  Lester  all  the  expe- 
rience necessary  to  the  complete  and  sole  superintendence  of  thrs  publica- 
tiom  To  write  hundreds  of  letters,  notices,  and  adverttsements ;  spend  many 
hours  of  each  day  during  several  months  in  negotiating  wid.  publishers, 
printers,  engravers,  agents,  and  artisans  of  every  kind  diat  the  work  required ; 
to  endure  without  a  munmt,  all  die  fatigues,  disappointments,  harassing  cm- 

to  endure  without  a  munnur,  an  uic  iduguca,  wa^fr.^.."-— , o 

Iratmts,  and  iinceasbg  labors  diat  have  beset  such  an  undertakmg ;  to  econ- 
omise die  funds  with  die  most  scrupulous  hdelity  on  the  one  hand,  and  o  jan- 
iie  the  work  for  the  public  with  beauty  and  precision  on  the  other-has  been 
but  a  tithe  of  die  self-imposed  task  which  Mr.  Lester  has  performed  for  the    , 
last  six  months  widiout  money  and  wiUiout  price. 

If  the  multitude  and  extent  of  the  services  rendered  in  connection  with 
this  book  •  above  all,  if  die  noble  disinterestedness  of  die  English  publisher, 
and  die  magnificent  labors  of  Mr.  Lester  appear  to  the  unspuatual  reader 
a«  extravagant  as  many  of  the  strange  narratives  it  contams,  they  at  least 
testify  that  the  final  acts  of  die  "  twenty  years'  record"  are  every  way  worOiy 
of  die  angelic  love  and  kindness  which  shine  dirough  the  whole  great  spmtual 
outpouring.  When  were  so  many  and  such  heavy  debts  of  kindness  uid 
diinterciitedness  ever  crowded  upon  die  acceptance  of  one  obscure  author 

'"men  were  such  acts  of  pure  unsehi.h  generosity  brought  to  bear  upon  the 
labors  of  one  individual  as  are  recorded  in  the  last  two  examples  ? 

Who  can  question  that  every  step  inthis  undertakmg  has  been  promptecl 
by  deep  devotion  to  a  wonderful  cause,  and  brought  to  a  climax  unparalleled 
deeds  of  supra-mundane  love,  by  unprecedented  deeds  of  mundane  kmdness. 
If  this  « labor  of  love  "  should  tail  in  securing  appreciation  fiom  die  great 
body  of  Spirituahsts  in  America,  then  will  it  be  the  first  and  only  failure  which 
the  history  of  die  movement  or  the  work  of  its  scribe  has  encountered;  but 
even  then  all  who  have  contributed  such  noble  efiort  to  the  completion  of 
die  record,  will  feel  with  the  audior,  that  their  names,  deeds,  and  services, 
will  be  remembered  when  "  He  numbers  up  his  jewels,"  and  find  undying  re- 
cord in  the  Scriptures  of  eternity. 

"He  gathers  up  the  beautiful  forever." 

Hosiedb,  Google 

Hosiedb,  Google
