Perception, Physics, and Reality (C. D. Broad, 1914)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/cu31924029026710). Broad's critical examination of scientific realism and the theory of sense-data.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME
FROM THE

SAGE ENDOWMENT FUND

THE GIFT d^ -

A-3 P&B.'t^ i:lm''iB^


Cornell University Library
BD111 .B86


Percept on. physics and reality ,an„,enq


3 1924 029 026 710


Cornell University
Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 92402902671


PERCEPTION, PHYSICS, AND
REALITY ;

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE INFORMATION

THAT PHYSICAL SCIENCE CAN SUPPLY

ABOUT THE REAL


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

C. F. CLAY, Manager

Uonlron: FETTER LANE, E.G.

dSTlittintef): loo PRINCES STREET


m


V

ti


m


s


u\


l^^


h^mj


18«lin: A. ASHER AND CO.

l.e£p>ig: F. A. BROCKHAUS

iJetoBorit: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

Bombag ont dTalcutta : MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd.

ffiotemta: J. M. DENT AND SONS, Ltd.

Coftoo: THE MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA


All rights reserved


PERCEPTION, PHYSICS,
AND REALITY ;

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE INFORMATION

THAT PHYSICAL SCIENCE CAN SUPPLY

ABOUT THE REAL


by
C. D. BROAD, M.A.

Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge


Cambridge :

at the University Press

1914


(Dambvitrge:

PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS


TO EDGAR DOUGLAS ADRIAN


CONTENTS

CHAP. PAGE

Introduction ...... vii

I. The Arguments against Naif Realism inde-
pendent OF Causation .... 1

II. On Causation ; and on the Arguments that

HAVE BEEN USED AGAINST CauSAL LaWS . 72

III. On Phenomenalism 163

IV. The Causal Theory of Perception; with

special reference to the Relations

BETWEEN the CaUSES OF PERCEPTIONS

AND THE Reality of their Objects . 186

V. The Laws of Mechanics .... 275

Appendix. Note on the Measurement of the
Velocity of Light and on the Theory
op Relativity 354


INTRODUCTION

THE present essay has as its object an attempt to
discover how much natural science can actually
tell us about the nature of reality, and what kind of
assumptions it has to make before we can be sure
that it tells us anything. By natural science, for the
present purpose, I mean physics.

When a certain way of looking at the universe
meets with the extraordinary success with which that
of physics has met it becomes the duty of the philo-
sopher to investigate it with care ; for it is likely
to offer a very much better Cosmology than his own
unaided efforts can do. And, if philosophy is to take
into account empirical facts — and it is extremely diffi-
cult to see what it will be able to tell us about the
existent unless it does — it can hardly neglect the most
fruitful and thorough investigation of certain large
branches of empirical facts that has yet been made.

But natural science starts with certain assumptions,
and, as it goes on, it developes certain general conclusions
about the real world. For instance, it starts with a
position not far removed from naif realism, and, in its
progress, it draws a distinction between the reality of
primary and secondary qualities, and develOpes a causal
theory of perception. Now the distinction between
primary and secondary qualities as to their reality is
a metaphysical question, and science seems historically
to have taken over its answer to it from Descartes.
This has led quite reasonably to an attack on science
from later philosophers who have not agreed that it
was possible to stop at the point at which Descartes
and natural science stopped in this matter. If we look


viii INTEODUCTION

into the arguments of philosophers on this important
question we shall, however, find that they have little
right to cast stones, as their reasonings are confused
and full of implicit assumptions which, when rendered
explicit, tend to cease to be probable. It therefore
becomes very important to reopen this discussion, and
to consider what really is the truth about primaries
and secondaries, and how far the particular traditional
belief which science has inherited on this question is
relevant to its real progress and is consistent with its
other beliefs. I have therefore begun by discussing all
the common arguments against naif realism which do
not depend on the belief that our perceptions are caused
by real things identical with or rather like their objects.
I come to the conclusion that none of these arguments
which are so confidently repeated by philosophers
really give conclusive reasons for dropping even the
crudest kind of realism. I of course assume the
distinction between a perception and its object which
Mr Moore, in his Refutation of Idealism, showed to
have been so largely ignored. Whilst the recognition
of this distinction is all-important, and whilst it is
perfectly true that many of the most plausible argu-
ments used by philosophers against naif realism depend
on ignoring it, it is not true to say that all arguments
for Idealism rest on this confusion. Its recognition is
perfectly compatible with the belief that the objects
of none of our perceptions continue to exist when we
cease to be aware of them. And the arguments that I
discuss in my first chapter are attempts to prove this
proposition, at any rate for some objects. Whilst I do
not think, as will be seen, that they do absolutely
prove anything of the kind, it is not true that they
rest on the confusion that Mr Moore pointed out.

In the second chapter I discuss Causality, with


INTEODUCTION ix

particular reference to the objections that have been
brought against causal laws on various grounds by
philosophers hke Lotze and Mr Braiiley. It is clear
that, unless causal laws have some kind of truth,
science in general cannot tell us about the nature of
the real ; and, in particular, we cannot investigate
arguments against realism that rest on the belief that
our perceptions are the products of causal laws that
include our minds, our bodily organs, and events in
a real world. I have been much assisted here by
the views on Causality in Mr Russell's Principles of
Mathematics, where they were relevant. At the same
time I think that |;hey suffer by having been stated
with particular reference to the science of mechanics.
Mechanics is so abstract and has been so successful
that by keeping it too much in mind we are liable to
forget the difficulties that beset causation in other
regions where we certainly suppose that it holds.
I have been led in the end to state causal laws in
terms of probability.

I must say a word at this point as to the use of
probability in this essay. I have constantly put my
conclusions in terms of probability and not of certainty.
This will perhaps seem peculiar in a work which
claims to be philosophical. It seems to me that one
of the most unfortunate of Kant's obiter dicta is that
philosophy only deals with certainty, and not with
probability. So far is this from being the case that to
many philosophical questions about the nature of reality
no answer except one in terms of probability can be
offered ; whilst to some there seems no prospect of an
answer even in these terms. Few things are more
pathetic than the assumption which practically every
philosopher' makes that his answer to such questions is

' Coumot is an honourable exception.


X INTEODUCTION

the unique possible answer ; and few things are funnier
than the sight of a philosopher with a theory about
the real and the nature of perception founded on
numberless implicit assumptions which, when made
explicit, carry no conviction whatever, telling the
scientist de haut en has that his atoms and ether are
mere economical hypotheses. Into the meaning and
nature of probability I have entered as little as I could.
This is not because I underrate its importance, but
because I do not feel competent to attempt a task
which has happily fallen into better hands than mine.
But, as there is little question about the actual laws of
probability, this omission is less important than it would
otherwise have been.

In the third chapter I discuss a form of the doctrine
known as phenomenalism. This theory is commoner
among physicists than among philosophers, which is
rather ominous for a philosophic theory. The reason
for the wide belief that it enjoys in this quarter is that
the physicist who is interested in the philosophy of his
science naturally turns to the works of Mach and his
school. I should be the last to deny the many excel-
lencies of those works ; but they do not form an
adequate philosophic equipment for the decision of the
questions which they so confidently solve in the pheno-
menalistic sense. I have therefore devoted a very
short chapter to what seem to me to be the essential
points in the discussion of phenomenalism. This is to
be taken mainly as prolegomena to the fourth chapter
on the causal theory of perception. Here I have dis-
cussed as fully as I could this theory, which nearly
everyone assumes, and which has been so little dis-
cussed in its purity. It is curious to note how often
philosophers seem to have held that, when they have
offered an explanation of the causes of our perceptions


INTRODUCTION xi

of certain objects or of the origins of certain beliefs, they
have proved that those objects cannot be real and that
the beliefs must be false. This has been particularly the
case in the matter of perceptual and conceptual space.
An honourable exception to this general failing is
Lotze, who very justly points out that presumably all
our beliefs and perceptions have causes, whether they
be valid beliefs and perceptions of real objects or not.
I have tried to clear up the relation between the causes i
of our perceptions and the reality of their objects ; and i
have been forced to conclude that, in all probability, \
the objects of our perceptions do not exist when they
are not perceived, although there is no absolutely con-
clusive proof of this. The question then arises as to
whether this ought to reduce us to complete agnosti-
cism about the nature of the real causes of our per-
ceptions. I have tried to show that the scientific
account of the causation of our perceptions can be so
stated that its success will enable us to gain probable
judgments about the nature of those real causes, in
spite of the fact that it seems to be stated in terms
of what have been seen to be, in all probability, mere)
appearances.

I have concluded with a discussion of Newtonian
mechanics. This may seem to be out of order in a
work which is primarily philosophical, especially at
a time when there is some reason to think that the
classical mechanics is only a particular case of electro-
magnetic laws. But the philosophical problems raised
by the laws of the motion of matter are essentially the
same as those raised by the laws of the motion of
electricity. These problems are that of absolute or
relative motion, and that of the reality of force. And it
is clearly better for philosophic purposes to discuss these
questions with reference to the ordinary laws of motion


xii INTRODUCTION

which everybody knows and which are clearly appli-
cable to a very large class of motions, if not to all,
within the limits of experimental error. I have been
most helped here by the relevant chapters in the
Principles of Mathematics. It will be seen, however,
that I do not think that Mr Russell proves his point
about absolute space.

The greater part of the present work was submitted
as a dissertation at the examination for Fellowships at
Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1911. I am far from
thinking it conclusive, and I still hanker after a more
realistic view than it reaches. But, if it succeeds in
showing old arguments and old difficulties in a clearer
light, and in bringing forward latent assumptions, it
will not have failed in its object, and may serve as
a stepping-stone to further investigations.

I have to acknowledge but little direct indebted-
ness to books, except in the last chapter. But I owe
much to the lectures and conversation of Mr Bertrand
Russell, and should have found his little book on
Philosophy useful if it had appeared when I was
writing. I also desire to express my obligations to the
lectures of Mr W. E. Johnson of King's, whose rooted
antipathy to publishing anything till he is sure of
everything is a great misfortune to philosophy. I
must also thank Prof Stout for kindly reading the
proofs, and for making many suggestions and criti-
cisms. Sometimes I have modified my argument, or
made additions, to meet points raised by him ; and
when I have not done so, it does not mean that I
have failed to see the force of his objections.


C. D. B.


Cambridge,

September, 1913.


CHAPTEE I

ON THE ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM INDE-
PENDENT OF THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

In the present chapter we are going to begin from
the position of naif realism. It is true that our every-
day view of the world is not quite naively realistic, but
that is what it would like to be. Common-sense is
naively realistic wherever it does not think that there
is some positive reason why it should cease to be so.
And this is so in the vast majority of its perceptions.
When we see a tree we think that it is really green
and really waving about in precisely the same way as
it appears to be. We do not think of our object of
perception being 'Hke' the real tree, we think that
what we perceive is the tree, and that it is just the
same at a given moment whether it be perceived or
not, except that what we perceive may be only a part
of the real tree.

But, as everyone knows, we do not stay in this
happy condition of innocence for long. We have per-
ceptions which are believed to be illusory by which it
is meant that their objects only exist when they are
perceived. Common-sense does not believe in the
reality of what is perceived in dreams or delirium'.
It applies certain arguments which it thinks are
fatal to these. But as soon as it has rejected these
objects it needs some account of the way in which the

B. p. 1


2 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

perceptions of them are produced. This leads it to a
causal theory of perception, and when this is worked
out it leads further still away from naif realism. We
shall discuss the causal theory and the arguments based
upon it in a later chapter. Here we want to consider
those that are independent of it.

Although in a sense naif realism stands at the
opposite pole of thought to phenomenalism, there is
another sense in which it resembles it much more
closely than any intermediate philosophic position
about the reality of objects of perception. The point
of difference of course is that the naif realist maintains
that in perception we are directly aware of what would
equally exist and be unaltered in any of its qualities at
the moment at which we perceive it even if we did not
perceive it, whilst the pure phenomenalist holds that
what can be perceived must be perceived, and that
nothing exists except mental states and the objects
of those of them which are perceptions so long as they
remain objects of them. The point of resemblance is
that neither the phenomenalist nor the naif realist can
admit appearance or illusion. For both everything is
precisely as it appears ; the only dijSerence is that the
phenomenalist holds that all that exists must appear
and that it ceases to exist when it ceases to be per-
ceived.

Before we consider the particular arguments which
are supposed to make it inevitable to desert naif realism
we must consider what precisely it is that those argu-
ments are supposed to prove. They want to prove
that some at least of the objects of which we are
immediately aware cease to exist when we cease to be
aware of them. Naif realism is the denial of this pro-
position. There are different degrees to which this
belief is dropped and we want to see how far, if at all,


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 3

arguments show us that it ought to be dropped. Thus
common-sense would say that a mirror-image of a pin
only exists when someone sees it, if, by the mirror-
image of a pin you mean something that looks exactly
like the sort of pins that we can feel and with which
we can scratch our fingers. On the other hand it
would say that the pin whose reflexion is the mirror-
image exists whether we perceive it or not precisely as
we do perceive it when we do so. But natural science
would say that what we perceive in this latter case
even is not what exists when we do not perceive it,
nor even particularly like it. There is no reason, it
would hold to believe that it has a colour or a tempera-
ture, but most likely it consists of little hard colourless
things of uncertain shape vibrating rapidly and never
getting far away from each other. Idealism again
would say that what is real is not in the least like
what we see, but that it is a thought in God's mind,
or a community of spirits of low intelligence.

Now there is one very important point in all this,
which is often overlooked. This is that whatever else
may or may not exist it is quite certain that what we
perceive exists and has the qualities that it is perceived
to have. The worst that can be said of it is that it is
not also real, i.e. that it does not exist when it is not
the object of someone's perception, not that it does
not exist at all. When I see a pin that of which
I am immediately aware is neither colourless atoms nor
a community of spirits ; and this is a matter of simple
inspection. But it is also quite certain that the
objects of existent perceptions exist at least so long
as the perception of them does so. Hence on any
tenable view of the world there exist things in it that
are coloured and hot and extended. The only further
points of interest about these qualities are {a) whether

1—2


4 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

they can ever exist except when someone is immediately
aware of them, since it is quite certain that they do
when people are aware of them and that many folk are
aware of them from time to time ; and (b) whether
there is anything in the nature and quality of these
objects of immediate awarenesses which justifies a belief
in the existence of other things of which no one is
immediately aware, which differ more or less from those
objects, and yet have a peculiar relation to them which
I shall at present denote by the purposely vague phrase
' correspondence.'

We saw that common-sense accepts naif realism
wherever it is not forced by arguments to abandon it,
and we can now see some of the general conditions to
which all special arguments must conform. In the first
place we must be able to assert that, if j9 be any quality
the attachment of which to any subject .4 is a mark,
that the latter cannot exist unperceived, it must not
also be fatal to ^'s existence when perceived, p must
only be fatal to the unperceived existence, i.e. to the
reality of A and not to A as an object of perception ;
since it is solely by examining the perceived A which
exists that we find that it has the quality p in question.
It is not valid to say that, in reply to this, we might
argue : Perceived A has not the quahty p, but if A
were unperceived it would have p, and therefore A
cannot exist unperceived. For, if it has a new property
when unperceived^ it is not J. the possibility of whose
unperceived existence is denied, but something else A'
which differs from A in another respect beside that of
being unperceived.

I do not know whether this line of argument will
be considered shocking or truistic. I think it is merely
the latter; but it is certainly worth insisting upon,
since in these matters truisms are disregarded as the


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 5

necessity for Mr Moore's 'Refutation of Idealism'
showed. The great service of that article is to insist
on the truism that when you perceive you perceive
something, and that what you do perceive cannot be
the same as the perception of it. And Mr Moore was
undoubtedly right in saying that the recognition of that
truism is a complete refutation of most of the current
arguments for idealism.

Let us then apply this general reasoning without
undue nervousness. I wUl take an example. We all
perceive extended things in spatial relations, and these
perceptions give rise to a series of judgments about
extension. The hundred and one arguments against
the reality of space independent of the causal theory
of perception consist of attempts to show that when
you reflect on these judgments they are found to be
in contradiction. Now these arguments may be true
or false : — they are all so far as I know false. But let
us suppose that one at least of them is true. Then we
must admit that nothing extended exists unperceived.
But, since it is notorious that we do perceive extended
objects, and since it was only by reflexion on the
quaUties and relations of such objects that we arrived
at the judgments that are now proved to contradict
each other — we must also admit that, if our argument
be correct something must exist — at any rate as the
object of an existent perception — which has character-
istics that lead to contradictory propositions, even if
it be granted that such things could not exist except
as objects of perception. In fact we must not say that
a perceptible quality that leads to mutually incompatible
judgments about itself or that of which it is a quality
cannot exist, but that it cannot be real, i.e. cannot
exist otherwise than as an object of perception.

If such cases really arose we should have to come


6 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

to some compromise between three very strongly held
beliefs: (l) that we cannot possibly be mistaken in our
belief that the objects of some of our perceptions have
that peculiar characteristic which we call extension,
(2) that we cannot possibly be mistaken in the pro-
positions about extension which we come to believe in
reflecting on such objects of perception, and (3) that
contradictory propositions cannot be true even of some-
thing that only exists when perceived. It seems to
me that (1) and (3) must be accepted, but that it is
only under certain special circumstances which we shall
mention later that we are obliged to accept (2). Hence
if it were true (which it is not) that the standard
arguments proved that propositions which we believe
about extension are mutually incompatible the right
course would be neither to reject the reality of extended
objects, nor to hold that objects which give rise to
incompatible propositions about themselves can exist
when perceived though not otherwise, but to conclude
that some of the beliefs which we reached by reflexion
on such objects were mistaken.

It is obvious that the main general difficulty of the
arguments that we are going to discuss in this chapter
will be to find propositions on which every one will
agree that if they be true of an object of perception
then it cannot exist except when perceived, propositions
which at the same time are admittedly true of what
we do perceive. The fact that the simple point which
I have laboured perhaps too much above has seldom
been grasped or explicitly stated is the cause, I think,
of the unsatisfactoriness of most of the arguments
against secondary qualities. After reading the argu-
ments one is left with an uneasy feeling of puzzlement.
What precisely is it that they do prove? Do they
prove or only render probable? And must they not


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 7

assume many more axioms than their users make
explicit to prove as much as they seem to be supposed
to do ? Our best plan then will be to go over the
main arguments seriatim and to try and make explicit
those propositions that must be assumed if they are
to be logically valid grounds for believing that their
conclusions are certainly or probably true.

Before we discuss the arguments in detail it will
be well to define the meanings that we intend to
attach to certain terms which we shall constantly use.
The word object is ambiguous. When I perceive a
rainbow or a chair in waking life and when I perceive
anything in a dream all that I perceive can equally be
called objects. I intend to use the word in the general
sense of anything that may be perceived, regardless of
the question whether it can exist if it be not perceived.
There is a narrower sense of the word which would
confine it to objects that are supposed to exist whether
they are perceived or not. Thus the dream chairs and
tables would not be called objects at all, nor would the
colours of the rainbow; but the chair perceived in
waking life and believed to exist whether perceived
or not would be called an object. In the case of the
rainbow it would be quite in accordance with usage to
say that the object of the perception of the rainbow
was little drops of water with light shining on them.
This use is very common where the object of perception
in the wider sense is beUeved to be very much like the
object in this narrower one and to have qualities which
vary continuously as we move about and which, in
some limiting case, coincide with those of what exists
whether we perceive it or not. Thus suppose there is
a real circle. This will be an object in the narrower
sense, since it will continue to exist and be circular
whether we perceive it or not according to the usual


8 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

opinion of common -sense. As we move sideways how-
ever what we really perceive is a series of ellipses of
continuously varying eccentricity. But if a man
standing sideways to the figure were asked : What
object do you perceive? he would almost certainly
answer: A circle; because he believes that what exists
independently of his perception has the quality of
circularity. Hence it is not uncommon to call the
object of perception in such cases not the object that
is actually perceived but the object that is inferred
from what is perceived to exist whether it be perceived
or not.

This confusion has been responsible for much error
and it is necessary to be clear about it before we can
go on. We shall continue to use 'object' in the
wider sense to cover anything that actually is some-
times immediately perceived, whether it exists when
we cease to perceive it or not. We shall divide objects
into appearances, which only exist when they are
perceived, and realities, which exist unchanged whether
perceived or not. All appearances are objects, but it
does not follow that all realities are objects. For we
might have grounds for believing in the existence of
realities which we never could directly perceive. Such
realities would be a light-wave or an electron. Thus
we must accept the possibility of real non-objects,
though there cannot be apparent non-objects. When
I do not want to beg the question of whether we are
dealing with an object or a non-object I shall call it a
term, but we shall not often want the word.

We shall now allow common-sense to assume that
naif realism is true in all cases where there is no reason
to believe that it is false, and consider the reasons other
than the causal theory of perception that have led
people to suppose that in many cases it must be


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 9

rejected. This will be the easier as the type of argu-
ment is exemplified in the rejection of secondary
qualities by Locke and Descartes, and of primaries
by Berkeley and Bradley. The reasons that have been
offered for the rejection of the reality of certain sense -
qualities have been numerous. The following list makes
no claim to be exhaustive, but I do not think that
it misses any argument of importance. (1) Spatio-
temporal incompatibility (e.g. the hands in water
experiment). (2) Conflicting testimony of two
different senses in the same person. (3) Conflicting
testimony between the same sense in two different
people. (4) Perceptions in dreams and morbid bodily
states. (5) Qualities like temperature merging into
feelings of pleasure-pain. (6) Relativity of what is
perceived to the position and past history and present
structure of a bodily organ and to the use of instruments
of precision like microscopes. We can reaUy group (1),
(2) and (3) together as far as the main principle on
which they rest is concerned, though their differences
will demand separate discussion. The point of agree-
ment is that in all the senses testify to the existence
of combinations of characteristics in one spatiotemporal
point which are known to be synthetically incompatible.
(4) and (6) are in the main independent of each other
but not entirely so. Morbid bodily states may be
produced by drugs and are then supposed to cause illu-
sions ; but what is perceived by means of instruments
of precision is also caused by extraneous means acting
on the body, yet this is supposed to add to our know-
ledge of the real. Again (4) and (6), and more especially
(6), are chiefly concerned with causation of perceptions.
As such they will be largely reserved for a later chapter.
We can then put our final list of arguments in the
following scheme.


10 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

I. Synthetic Incompatibility

(a) Testified by one sense in one person.

(b) Testified by difierent senses.

(c) Testified by one sense in different people.
Mainly causal

II. Relativity to organs of perception and the use

of instruments of precision or drugs.

III. Occurrence in dreams or morbid bodily states.

IV. Merging into feelings.

I shall begin by trying to show that I (a) which has
generally been accepted and is almost the only argument
used by Locke rests on a confusion and is incapable by
itself of proving or rendering probable what it has been
supposed to do. For this purpose I shall take Locke's
example of the two hands in water which is supposed
to disprove the reality of temperature. ■

As everyone knows in this experiment the two
hands have been treated differently, the one having
been plunged into a vessel of cold water and the other
into one of hot water. They are then put into a third
vessel of water at temperature intermediate between
the other two, and the water in this appears to the
cold hand to be hot and to the hot hand to be cold.
Hence it is argued that the water cannot really be
either hot or cold, for if so it must be both hot and
cold at the same time, and this is held to be impossible.
As it stands then this is an argument from synthetic
incompatibility and is an example of 1(a). But in as far
as what is perceived depends on the past history of the
organ it is an example of II.

The moment we consider it carefully we shall see
that its weakness is deplorable, (i) In the first place
it is to be noted that it cannot make it even probable
that two bodies at least — viz. my two hands — are not


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 11

really hot or cold. It is evidently not true that I
cannot have contemporary perceptions of different tem-
peratures. It is notorious that I do, and that is indeed
one of the data on which the argument is based.
The argument rests on the proposition that no body
can have different temperatures at the same time and
place. But how could this proposition have been dis-
covered or proved if as a matter of fact no bodies have
any temperature at all ? It would have to be held that
we are immediately certain of the following proposition :
If {per impossihile) bodies could have real temperatures
they could not have two different ones at the same
place and time. The fact is however that the argument
assumes what is no doubt true that I can never feel
the different temperatures at the same time and place.
But I localise the temperatures that I feel on my skin,
and, since I never do feel the same part of my body
to be at different temperatures at the same time, no
experiment can give me any reason to think that my
own body, at any rate, cannot have temperature \
Thus the argument gives no reason for thinking that
my two hands in Locke's experiment are not really hot
and cold_re8£ectively as I perceive them to be, and
^ thati£^efms^a^6^they might not continue to be so
when I cease to perceive their temperatures, (ii) It
is clear then that the argument cannot apply to the
temperatures that I directly perceive, viz. those of my
hands, but only at best to inferences from these to the
temperature of the surrounding medium. Now, if I
make the particular assumption that the temperature
of the water is that of the hand with which it is in
contact, it might be thought that the argument will

1 The only paradox here is that it is the hand whose past treatment
might have heen expected to have made it the hotter which is actually
the colder and vice versd. But nothing is proved by this paradox.


12 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

be valid as a proof that the water has no real tem-
perature. But once more the assumptions made are
inadequate, and that in several respects, (a) If two
propositions together lead to a false conclusion you
have no right to reject one rather than the other on
these grounds alone. Hence if the experiment + the
assumption that water has temperature + the assump-
tion that the temperature is of the same degree as
that in the hand did lead to the impossible conclusion
that the water has different temperatures at the same
time and place, this cannot be said to disprove the
assumption that it has temperature rather than the
assumption as to the magnitude of the temperature if
it has it. One assumption would have to go, but the
experiment throws no light on which it should be.
(6) But, as a matter of fact, neither assumption need
go, and that for a very general if empirical reason which
the supporters of this kind of argument seem to have
overlooked. That reason is that the conditions which
the experiment requires to be satisfied never are and
never can be fulfilled. Either the fingers touch or they
do not. If they touch the water is not felt but the
fingers. If they do not then they are not at exactly
the same point in the water. Nobody in the world
ever has had his two hands at the same time in the
same place, and we may say with some confidence that
nobody ever will perform that feat. But, failing it,
the whole argument falls to the ground. The experi-
ment -I- the assumptions can now only prove that at
the moment at which it was tried the water had
different temperatures at two points very close together.
And there is no objection empirical or d priori to such
a state of affairs. (iii) Supposing that all these
difficulties could be set aside (which they cannot),
how could the right '•onclusion be that the bodies


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 13

have no temperature ? We have seen that some
bodies, viz. our own, must have temperatures at any
rate while we perceive them. For we do perceive
them and we do perceive them on our skins. And
there is nothing to lead us to suppose that the tem-
peratures of our bodies might not exist even when
not perceived. Hence it seems much more reasonable
to conclude from the experiment that, though other
bodies have temperatures, we cannot tell precisely
what their degree is from that of the felt tem-
perature of our hands, than that other bodies have
no temperature at all and our own none except when
we perceive it.

Most of the arguments that Berkeley employs are
vitiated by a certain fallacy which would prevent him
from taking the alternative that we have suggested as
the more reasonable one in view of the experimental
results and the other facts that are known. This
fallacious argument is the following one. He says,
what is perfectly true, that those sensible qualities
that have intensive magnitude, for instance, cannot
exist in general but can only do so with some definite
degree of that magnitude. But his ridiculous doctrine
about abstract ideas leads him to conclude from this
that it is impossible to hold that a certain quality
exists with some intensive magnitude although one
does not know what the particular degree may be.
There is of course nothing impossible or unreasonable
in combining the belief that such qualities can only
exist in definite degrees with the belief in the existence
of such a quality whose definite degree we are unable
to determine although we know that it must be deter-
minate.

We may then sum up the objections to 1(a) in as far
as it applies to qualities which are perceived as localised


14 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

on our bodies and extended, (i) You cannot directly
perceive synthetic incompatibilities. Hence the per-
ceived qualities with which the argument starts cannot
be synthetically incompatible. There is therefore no
reason why they should not be real qualities of your
body at any rate. Hence synthetic incompatibility
with regard to the deliveries of one sense whose
appropriate sense-quality is localised on the body
cannot possibly prove that what is directly perceived
there might not continue to exist even if it ceased to
be perceived. For there can be no reason to suppose
that what was synthetically compatible whUe per-
ceived, will suddenly become synthetically incompatible
when you cease to perceive it. (ii) The argument
can therefore only apply to what is inferred to exist
in other bodies from what you perceive to exist in
your own. But then the argument alone will not tell
you whether you ought to reject the belief that the
quality exists unperceived in these other bodies, or
the belief that its magnitude is related in such and
such a way to that of the perceived quality in your
own body. (iii) The Berkleian objection to the
possibility of holding that a quality can be known
to exist with a definite intensive magnitude whilst
we cannot be sure as to the precise degree of that
magnitude is invalid. (iv) Finally, owing to the
fact that our organs of sense are extended and in-
compenetrable, the common assumption that, in the
case of those that act by contact, the quality is the
same at the point touched as at the touching point
of the organ can never be strictly refuted by this line
of argument.

I have assumed in the discussion of the above
experiment that the quality of temperature is directly
localised in our skins and then inferred to exist else-


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 15

where. I believe this to be true; but, for a general
criticism of this line of argument, we want to see what
will happen if we remove this restriction. I do not
think it wiU make any essential difference. It is
necessary that the qualities to which the reasoning
from synthetic incompatibility is to be applied shall
be directly localised somewhere, for otherwise their
spatiotemporal incompatibility is meaningless. And
at that point, whether it be in our organ of perception
or in a foreign body, it is impossible that there should
be synthetically incompatible qualities, since the
qualities there are directly perceived, and you cannot
perceive incompatible qualities at the same time and
place. Hence as before it will always be a question
of arguing from perceived and therefore compatible
qualities to unperceived ones that are supposed to be
incompatible and, wherever the perceived qualities
that are the data of the argument be localised, the
same criticisms will apply as we have enumerated
above.

I think it will be worth while to say a word or
two about localisation before leaving this subject. It
is obviously aU-important in questions that depend
on synthetic incompatibility, and it is less simple than
it seems. What precisely do people mean by saying
that different degrees of temperature (e.g.) cannot
coexist at the same point 1 Of course the hands in
water experiment with its usual carelessness asserts
the obvious falsehood that the same body cannot be
both hot and cold at the same time. In the previous
discussion we made this precise by replacing it by
' different degrees of temperature cannot coexist at the
same point.'

This statement seems obvious enough, but it is by
no means free from difficulty. When we talk of ' the


16 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

same point' in what space precisely do we suppose
the point to be ? The spaces revealed by our various
senses cannot be immediately identified, and what we
call Space is a synthesis and construction with these
as data and elements. When we say that two
different degrees of temperature cannot coexist at
the same point, do we mean ' at the same point in the
space of the sense (viz. touch) by which we perceive
temperature ' or 'at the same point in the supposed
common Space ' 1 And we have two further alter-
natives before us. Either the proposition is supposed
to be founded by induction on experience, or else it is
a priori in the sense that it is based on the mere
contemplation of the nature of temperature. If the
proof be inductive and it takes the form that we never
have experienced two different degrees of temperature
at the same time in the same point of tactual space,
and therefore they cannot coexist there, it is singu-
larly weak. It may be a good enough argument to
render it probable that we never shall experience
different temperatures together at the same point, but
it cannot possibly prove that they do not coexist.
For an alternative explanation is that we are only
capable of perceiving one of them at a time ; for
instance it might be always the highest of several
temperatures coexisting at the same point that we
perceive. For if the principle is to be used against
people who believe that unperceived temperatures may
exist, it must not assume that they are wrong in order
to prove itself.

But I think that a good many people would say
that their belief is not founded on induction from
experienced lack of coexistence, but is d, priori in
Meinong's sense, i.e. although it is in perception that
we become acquainted with temperatures, yet, once


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 17

acquainted with them, we can see that from their
very nature .it is impossible that different degrees
should exist contemporaneously at the same point.
This position is at any rate much stronger than the
one which we have just discussed. We saw that that
would not even prove the proposition for tactual space,
a fortiori experienced lack of coexistence in tactual
space wiU not prove absence of coexistence in an
assumed common Space. But the d 'priori certainty,
if it exists at all, may be very general ; it may even
take the form that^ quantities with different intensive
magnitudes of the same kind which are also extended
cannot exist contemporaneously at any point of any
space.

So far as I can see the statement in terms of
points, like points themselves, is the child of abstrac-
tion and intellectual construction ; it is convenient but
may not correspond with anything that is real, and
ought for the present purpose to be avoided. The
more concrete form of statement is that no volume in
any space can be wholly occupied at the same moment
by each of two quantities possessed of different inten-
sive magnitudes of the same kind. Of course, if this
principle be really a priori there is nothing further
to be said ; but is it ?

We must remember that our principle is supposed
to apply not merely to intensive magnitudes but also
to shades of colour which are not quantities that differ
in intensive magnitude, but are capable of arrange-
ment in a continuous order. It will be best for the
moment to confine ourselves to colour because there
is no question here of anything corresponding to
physical conduction as in temperature. Suppose we

I I use the terms quantity, magnitude, and kind, in the same sense as
Mr Eussell in his Prindples of Mathematics.

B. p. 2


18 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

have two closed surfaces, one red and one blue, and
that they are not initially in contact. Now I do not
pretend to know exactly what common-sense means
by a surface, but two possibilities are open. Either
there are or there are' not outermost points to physical
surfaces. There is no means of deciding this question;
but we can at least say that it is .arbitrary to suppose
that some surfaces have and others have not outer-
most points. Now let the two surfaces be brought
into contact. I do not know exactly what common-
sense means by this, but I take it to mean that a
point of contact is either an outermost point of one
surface or an outermost point of the other. If then
neither has outermost points they cannot be in contact.
But we suggested that it is reasonable to suppose that
if either has outermost points both will have them.
Hence if there are points of contact they must be
outermost points of both. But the points of one
surface are red and of the other blue ; hence at the
points of Space occupied by the points of contact red
and blue will coexists

If this argument be sound common-sense must
reject or modify its alleged d, priori principle, or deny
that coloured bodies are ever really in contact, or intro-
duce a new physical law ad hoc, or reject the reality
of colours. With regard to the last three alternatives
a few words must be said. There is no evidence that

• I need scarcely mention that a finite volume and a definite shape are
perfectly compatible with the absence of outermost points.

2 Of course other meanings of contact are possible. If bodies have
no outermost points we might say that. A and B touch at P when every
point on one side of P is red and belongs to A and every point on the
other side of P is blue and belongs to B, whilst P has no colour. I merely
want to illustrate that common-sense is not clear as to precisely what it
means and that an alleged a priori certainty is of little value under such
circumstances.


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 19

bodies ever are in contact with each other in physical
Space unless we suppose that the denial of actio in
distans is another d priori axiom. The latter seems
to me to have no self-evidence, whilst the axiom about
synthetic incompatibility has considerable plausibility.
And, if we admit — what seems reasonable — that in the
object of a present perception there may be distinc-
tions that are not perceived, there would be a meaning
in the statement that no bodies are in contact in
perceptual space too. By the introduction of a
physical law ad hoc I mean that we might suppose
that it is a law of nature that as two coloured outer-
most points approach each other each modifies the
other's colour so that they become more and more
alike, and at last when they coincide their colours are
identical. You may say that this is not a very
probable law on the ground that it seems to treat
outermost points in a different way from others, no
matter how near them. But there is no need to
assume this. When these coloured bodies approach
each other all points in the one may influence the
colours of all points in the other ; but if the influence
decreases very quickly with the distance everything
will appear unchanged. With these two alternatives
open to us it would be foolish to deny the reality of
colours on the ground of the principle and the apparent
fact that differently coloured bodies can come into
contact.

I suspect however that common-sense would be
inclined to keep the possibility of contact and to
introduce no physical law, but to modify the principle
in the direction that it is no matter that different
colours should coexist at the same point of physical
Space so long as they are the colours of different
bodies. But, until common-sense can give some

2—2


20 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

account of what it means by the same and different
bodies which shall render plausible the distinction
that it is now trying to introduce, it is hardly worth
while to discuss this modification.

If the above discussion has accomplished nothing'
else it has perhaps served to show that the alleged
a priori principle is by no means so simple as it looks.
I do not wish to deny that it may be d priori, but
I wish to suggest that it can hardly be used with
confidence as a metaphysical criterion of what may
and what cannot be real. For an a priori judgment
is one where, given the terms, we are supposed, by
contemplating their nature and without further appeal
to experience, to be able to make assertions about
some of their relations. And we cannot place much
trust in such judgments when a little discussion shows
that our minds are in a most nebulous state as to the
nature of the terms and the exact meaning of the
assertions about them.

To conclude with some rather more positive con-
siderations about the alleged a p^^iority of the principle
of synthetic incompatibility, I must confess that when
I ask myself why I do not believe that two different
temperatures or two different colours can contem-
poraneously fill the whole of any one volume, I am
not contented (as I ought to be if the judgment were
a priori) to refer merely to the nature of temperature
or colour or intensive magnitude as such. I rather say
to myself: 'If the different temperatures ever did
exist they would at once be equalised by conduction,'
and ' if I put one pigment on top of another they mix
to a new colour.' But these are empirical laws which
may be either laws of the physical world or of the
limitations of our perceptive faculties. In either case
they may have exceptions, and in the second case,


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 21

even if there are no exceptions there is no proof that
different colours and temperatures do not really coexist.
Thus if there actually were experiences which, on the
assumption that temperatures or colours are real, would
force us to conclude that different temperatures or
different colours can fill at one time a single volume,
it is not clear that they would necessitate the re-
jection of the reality of colours or temperatures, since
they might be interpreted as examples by reasoning
from which we could prove that an alleged physical
law has exceptions or that our perceptive faculties
have limitations. And neither of these results would
be so startling as to compel the rejection of the
hypothesis on which they are based.

Since the argument from synthetic incompatibility
thus assumes that the qualities to which it applies are
extended and localised there is only a certain number
of qualities to which it does apply. These are tem-
peratures, pressures on the skin, colours, and flavours.
It does not apply to sounds, because these .are not
generally localised in the way that we might at first
suppose, and moreover are not synthetically incom-
patible. When we hear a bell tolling we might be
thought to localise the sound in the bell, but this is
not really comparable with localising temperatures on
our skins or colours in definite places. It is impossible
to feel temperature without feeling a definite hot (or
cold) surface, or to perceive colour except by perceiving
a definite coloured surface : — this is even so when we
press the eye and see stars or rings. But it is perfectly
possible to perceive a sound without localising it in
that body that causes it. When we do think of ex-
tension and position in respect to sounds it is not
of a volume that has the quality of sound but of one
that is in a state of ' sounding,' i.e. of being the cause


22 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

of the sound or of the perception of it. But we never
think of the surfaces that we perceive as coloured, as
being not really coloured, but only the causes of the
colours. For, even if we adopt the ordinary natural
scientific view about colours, it is quite clear (a) that
we perceive colours as extended, and (6), granted that
this perception is caused by surfaces and volumes
as sound is believed to be, it cannot be by these
surfaces and volumes that we do perceive, for they
at least are coloured whilst science denies that the
causes of our perceptions of colour are coloured. If
sound as such be a quality it is perceptually and
immediately localised in the space between our ears
and the sounding object, and there is no synthetic
incompatibility, for that space can be contempo-
raneously filled by all kinds of different sounds.

I think we may now claim to have shown that
arguments of the type I (a), i.e. arguments from syn-
thetic incompatibility alleged to be testified by one
sense can never by themselves prove or render
probable the unreality of the qualities against which
they are directed. We can pass therefore to

I (6), i.e. to the denial that a quality can exist
unperceived owing to the synthetic incompatibility of
the testimonies of two different senses. There is only
one set of sensible qualities about which more than
one sense is held to be capable of giving direct in-
formation. Those are the geometrical qualities like
shape and extension, which are perceived by both
sight and touch. Now, as everyone is aware, sight
and touch can be very discordant in their deliveries,
and that in more than one way. For instance, two
cases of what looks cubic to sight are sometimes found
on being touched to give widely different tactual and
muscular sensations. For example, what we should


INDEPEINUEJNT uF CAUSALITY 23

commonly call a 'real cube' will give tactual per-
ceptions of eight corners, twelve edges, etc., whilst
the picture of a cube which may look exactly like
the former will merely be felt as a flat surface. If
then it be held that in sight and touch we become
aware of the same reality, then the reality of which
we become aware cannot in general be the common
object of sight and touch, since we have seen that
there is often not a common object to the two per-
ceptions, as distinctions can be found in the one that
cannot be found in the other. We are sure that the
same object cannot be both a plane surface and a
three-dimensional figure, and therefore, even though
sight and touch be indications of the same object, that
object cannot be what is directly perceived in both
of them and may not be what is directly perceived
in either. In the same way, of course, you can get
tactual perceptions of three-dimensional objects to
which visual perceptions of two-dimensional ones
correspond, as when you look straight on to one side
of a cube and merely see a square surface, whilst
you can still feel the corners and edges and other
faces.

Now what precisely do these facts taken by them-
selves prove ? It has always been recognised that the
perception of extended shapes in definite positions is
a much more complicated aflPair than the perception
of the objects of other senses. By this I mean that,
although there is of course a large perceptual element
in it, there is also a great deal of judgment, associa-
tion, analysis, and subsequent synthesis involved which
are not present to anything like the same extent in
what are called the ' perceptions ' of the other senses.
We want to separate off the perceptual element from
that of judgment in order to determine precisely


24 AUGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

where the common element in perceptions of touch
and of sight lies.

It is sometimes held that perception cannot be
defined except by reference to its supposed causes.
This, I think, would be a dangerous doctrine. Of
course there is in it an element that is indefinable,
viz. that of direct awareness of an object. But, then,
many people think that there is direct awareness of
something in all kinds of cognition, and they none the
less recognise the distinction between perceptions and
the other sorts of cognition. Hence even if direct
awareness as a matter of fact only happens in per-
ception, there is some reason to believe that there
must be other marks that distinguish perceptions fi:"om
judgments. Supposing that there is direct aware-
ness in all forms of cognition, I think we may still
be able to find certain common qualities that objects
must have for the direct awareness of them to be
called perceptions. To begin with, I think there is
one negative thing that we can say about perception.
Granted that there is direct awareness in all kinds of
cognition, still the object of the awareness in the other
kinds stands in a peculiar relation to something else,
whilst the object of direct awareness in perception
does not. When I think of the 47th proposition of
the first book of Euclid it is extremely difficult to say
of what it is that I am directly aware ; it probably
difPers from person to person, and in one person from
moment to moment. But it always has a peculiar
relation to the squares on . the sides of a right-angled
triangle and to their metrical properties such that the
whole cognition is said to be ' about ' these properties.
Now in perception pure and simple there seems to
be nothing to correspond to this 'about.' The stage
of pure perception of a coloured surface coiTesponds,


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 25

it would seem, to the state of a man who just reads
the enumeration or sees the figure of the 47th pro-
position, but to whom the words and figure convey
no meaning. Now neither in the case of sense
perception nor in the mere apprehension of words are
we forced to remain at this point, or do we generally
remain there. We generally do proceed to other
cognitive acts that introduce the notion of ' about,'
but perception differs widely from other kinds of
cognition in the acts to which it commonly gives rise.
The peculiarity of perception is {a) that it may give
rise to cognitions that are about its own object ; and
(6) that it is not merely held to give rise to them as
a matter of psychological fact, but is also the sole and
sufficient guarantee of their truth. The cognitions to
which a direct perception gives rise and which are
* about ' its object are held to be indubitably true.
This not purely psychological criterion is, I should say,
a sufficient one for a perception. Such propositions
have a certainty even greater than that of memory.
We recognise in the abstract that memory may be
wrong in particular cases, and the nature of the cer-
tainty here is that it is reasonable to regard it as right
in any particular case until you can prove that it is
wrong, whilst any disproof in a particular case wiU
only be possible by means of some other memories,
and therefore on the general assumption that memory
is true. But we do not even contemplate it as
possible that the judgments about the object of a
perception to which that perception gives rise should
be false.

The matter will probably become clearer if I give
some examples of what I mean. Suppose I assert the
proposition that Socrates is mortal. I shall un-
doubtedly be directly aware of something, but.


26 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

whatever else it may be, it will not be Socrates. If
I happen to be a visualiser probably one of the things
of which I shall be directly aware when I make the
assertion will be an image which is rather like busts
of Socrates that I have seen. But no one supposes
either that I am saying that this image is mortal, or
that my immediate awareness of that image is any
justification for the belief that Socrates is mortal.
But suppose I judge that my mental image has a
snub-nose. This is a judgment ' about ' the object
of which I am directly aware, and its truth is justified
by it in such a way that it would be madness to doubt
it. My immediate awareness of the image then was
a perception on our definition. Now it is, of course,
true that perceptions are commonly held to justify
propositions about other things than their own objects,
but we must note (a) that it is always by a process
of inference or comparison that they do so ; (6) that
these inferences and comparisons will never have that
infallible certainty which the propositions that per-
ceptions justify about their own objects possess ; and
(c) if it really be a case of perception there will
always be some propositions of this latter kind which
can be asserted, even though they will not be the
whole of the propositions that the perception is held
to justify.

Of course it ought to be noted that as soon as
such propositions are put into words they cease to
be absolutely infallible. The meaning that is expressed
to me by the statement ' my mental image has a
snub-nose ' is infallible, and everyone would admit
that I could hardly be mistaken as to the shape of
what I perceive. But when I put the judgment into
words it is assumed that I mean by 'snub-nosed' what
other people do and that I have rightly subsumed


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 27

the present case. But this involves comparisons that
carry me outside the object of my present percep-
tion, and in them I have no infallible guarantee of
correctness.

The above discussion is relevant to the question
of the perception of figure and extension. The point
is that different kinds of objects of perception
guarantee propositions about themselves which vary
very much in number and importance, and that, in
the case of spatial qualities and relations, the judg-
ments are made so instinctively and are so much the
most important part of what is commonly lumped
together under the name of ' spatial perception ' that
it is much more difficult here than in any other case
to decide what is really the object of perception as
such. We can perceive a colour without thinking
of any propositions about it, and the number of those
that it will justify is small, whilst they are not of
great practical importance. But absolutely the reverse
is the case with objects of spatial perception.

We can now try to decide what weight ought to
be given to the discrepancies between sight and touch.
In the first place, the purely perceptual element in
these two senses is clearly not the same. When I
see a cube, and when I feel corners, edges, and faces,
it is obvious that what I perceive in the two cases
difiers. I see extended colours with boundaries ; I feel
temperatures and texture which also have a quality
that I call extension, and I feel certain discontinuities
in these objects which I call boundaries. Of course
when I have identified tactual and visual extension
I call the seen and the felt extensions by the same
name, and so too the seen and felt boundaries within
which there are not these sudden discontinuities. But
the objects perceived by the two senses are never the


28 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

same, for if they were the sole difference between,
seeing and feeling would be that one is- done with
the eye and the other with the skin. But, it will
be said, no doubt there are peculiar features in the
objects of each sense, viz. colours in sight and tem-
peratures, texture, etc., in touch, but still there is
something that is definitely common to the two, and
that is extension and figure, which is what interests
us now.

Of course it is clear that there is some analogy,
but it is very important and not very easy to be clear
as to its exact nature. The analogy seems to be that
our sensations of sight whose objects are colours give
rise to and justify judgments which analyse out of
them the quality of being extended, and of having
definite boundaries, and of having spatial relations.
Our perceptions of temperature and texture can also
have a peculiar quality analysed out of them ; they
too have objects in which there are discontinuities
which constitute boundaries ; and they too have
certain kinds of relations. But, even so, I do not
think that the tactual extension, figures, and relations
that can thus be analysed out of the objects of tactual
perception can be immediately identified with the
visual extensions, figures, and relations that can be
analysed out of seen colours. For instance, so far from
agreeing with Berkeley that distance cannot be per-
ceived visually, it seems to me quite obvious that it
is perceived visually and that it cannot be perceived
tactually. Whatever may be the cause or the history
of my perception it is surely clear that I actually
perceive the opposite side of the Great Court of Trinity
as further away than the side in which my own rooms
are. It may be perfectly true that my judgment
as to how far it is from my side may depend on


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 29

previous experiences of walking across the court. But
feelings of accommodation and convergence associated
with revived muscular sensations are not the per-
ceptions of visual distance which the least intro-
spection shows that we possess. Hence I am not at
all confident that the extension and figure and re-
lations analysed fi?om objects of tactual perception can
at once be identified with those that are analysed from
visually perceived objects. What seems to be more
true is that in visual extension we can analyse out
elements and relations which form a spatial order of
the same type as that which we also find on reflection
to be constituted by the relations and elements that
we can analyse out of the objects of visual perception.
We do not perceive an elaborate spatial order, but
when we come to analyse and reflect upon what we
perceive both by sight and by touch we are led to
construct spatial orders of the same type. Of course
in people who are neither blind nor anaesthetic these
orders are not constructed independently of each
other, and so there are not two similar orders left
standing side by side, but one which is supposed to
include both. It must be noted that when I talk of
' constructing ' a spatial order I do not hold, as so
many people seem to do, that this implies that the
order so reached cannot be that of the real world.
There is not the least reason to suppose that the view
tacitly assumed in so many philosophical works is true
that as soon as you have analysed the steps by which
you have come to believe that what is real has the
quality or relation X, it is perfectly obvious that this
belief must be false.

For our purpose we are mainly concerned with the
belief that the objects of visual and tactual perceptions
are such that reflexion upon the products of an analysis


30 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

of them leads to the knowledge of a common spatial
order. Let us take the cube that I both see and feel.
Why do I suppose it to be the same cube, and what
precisely do I mean by that statement? In the first
place under what conditions do I pronounce that A,
which I feel, and B, which I see, are the same thing 1
I can see an object B and at the same time part of my
total object of vision may be my hand touching B.
1 see the hand moving over B, and, at the same time
I feel the different movements of my joints and muscles
and the different feelings of contact at edges, corners,
etc. There is a correspondence as my eye follows my
hand between the different muscular and joint sensations
and the different convergences of the eye and between
the sudden changes of direction in the boundary lines
that my eye sees and my hand feels. Now we localise
colours where we see them, and temperatures, as I have
already suggested, are commonly supposed to be the
same in the body felt as in the hand that feels them.
Hence the temperatures are localised within the same
space as the colours although the eye cannot perceive
the one nor the hand the other. We thus say : There
is a cold red cube in a certain place because (a) both
temperatures and colours and textures are found on
analysis to yield qualities and relations which on re-
flexion are seen to form wholes of the same general
type, and (6) to each relation and discontinuity that
can be discovered with regard to these qualities in the
object of touch there is found to be one in the object
of sight when the eye perceives the hand to be in contact
with the object of visual perception. Of course people
do not set up an inductive principle that there will
always be this correlation. But there is an association
which causes an expectation of such correlation between
the deliveries of the two senses, and when, as in the


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 31

case of the painted picture of a cube in perspective,
the correspondence fails, we feel disturbed.

But it is easy to see that these facts taken by
themselves yield no reason whatever for rejecting the
belief that the objects of both senses continue to exist
when they cease to be perceived. It merely tells us
that to the geometrical distinctions that we discover
in the object of vision there will generally correspond
felt distinctions in the object that is felt when the
finger is seen to be in contact with the seen object.
Accordingly when we see an object with the geometrical
distinctions that constitute a cube and then find that
we cannot feel any discontinuity when the fingers are
visibly in contact with a visible edge or corner we feel
surprised. But then, as far as perception goes, there
were two different objects. One was coloured and from
it could be analysed the distinctions corresponding to
faces, edges, and corners. The other was smooth and
of some temperature, but it had no felt boundaries.
We experienced by touch in fact what we generally
do when we see that our fingers are in contact with
a single indefinitely extended surface. We could move
our fingers along the seen boundaries and yet we felt
none of the stretching of the arm that usually accom-
panies such action, and none of that peculiar contact
sensation that generally happens when we touch a sharp
discontinuity. Well, it will be said, here is the eye
assuring us of a sharp discontinuity and also that the
finger is touching it, whilst the finger feels nothing of
it. Surely nothing can be sharply discontinuous and
perfectly continuous at the same time and place?

We have already argued that we only perceive
distances from the body with the eye, though we may
judge of them by muscular sensation. Hence the fact
that in the present case of the painted picture of a


32 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

cube we see the figure in three dimensions, but do not
feel any sensation of stretching the arm in visibly
following with the finger the visible edges, that go
out from the body is not really a case of synthetic
incompatibility. It need only show that sensations of
movement are not infallible signs by which to judge
of distances in directions seen as going out from the
body. Still it is right to remember that this is not
merely a question of more or less in regard to the
judgment of distance. Sight tells you that the object
does extend away from you for some distance, whilst
touch leads to the judgment that it does not extend
at all in that direction. We might in fact put the
argument in this way : the seen change of direction of
the surface and the felt continuity are held to be at
the same place because most of our visual and tactual
experiences can best be interpreted on the assumption
that muscular sensation is a sign of visual distance.
But in a certain number of cases, like this one of the
picture of a cube, if you proceed on the same principle
you will be forced to hold that at the same place as
judged both by muscular and visual tests the surface
bends round as judged by sight and remains flat as
judged by touch. Now this bending round is not a
mere question of judgment. There is an appropriate
tactual experience for this kind of discontinuity which
is generally found to go together with the visual dis-
continuity of direction.

Thus the real ground based on synthetic incom-
patibility of the deliveries of two senses for the rejection
of naif realism is pretty complicated. In the first place
you must have identified the objects of the two senses
in some way before the argument from the synthetic
incompatibility of their deliveries need trouble you.
It might be said : either the objects of your two senses


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 33

are the same or they differ. If they be the same they
cannot be incompatible, but if they differ then it does
not matter whether they are compatible or not. The
way in which the employers of the argument get over
the difi&culty is as follows. In ninety-nine cases out
of a hundred to every distinction of a geometrical
character in the seen object it is found that one will
correspond in what is felt by a finger visibly in contact
with the visible object. Hence, as we have seen, the
geometrical qualities that can be analysed out of both
sorts of objects are held to be identical and within
that common boundary it is held that there exist those
other qualities which it is the peculiar function of each
sense to enable us to perceive. Hence the objects of
sight and of touch when certain conditions are fulfilled
are identified. And there is of course so far no reason
for departing from naif realism with regard to the
objects of these senses. But now cases arise where
this identification breaks down, and where, if we insist
on identifying the geometrical qualities that can be
analysed out of the objects of visual perception with
those that can be analysed out of the objects of tactual
perception we shall get to sheer synthetic incompati-
bilities, such as surfaces at the same place both having
edges and going straightly and smoothly on in their old
direction. Under these circumstances the first thing
to do is clearly to deny the invariable identity of
visually and tactually perceived geometrical qualities
and relations under circumstances under which they
had always before been held to be identical. This
however is not by itself any good reason for holding
that either the visually perceived qualities or the
tactually perceived ones cease to exist when they
cease to be perceived ; for, as soon as you have ceased
to believe that they must be identical, the fact that
B. p. 3


34 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

in a given case they prove not to be so is no objection
to either of them. It is quite impossible to prove that
the coloured surface may not bend round but that its
bent part is intangible, whilst the hard, smooth, cold
surface goes on without discontinuity. That is not the
view that common-sense takes however. It has found
that it never gets a tangible surface without also being
able under suitable circumstances to perceive a coloured
one, and it rejects as appearance coloured surfaces that
are not tangible. There is no objection to such a pro-
cedure, but I think we have now seen that the argument
frona synthetic incompatibility of sight- and touch-
deliveries is no conclusive reason for doing so, since it
is not incompatible with perfectly naif realism about
the objects of sight and of touch.

^We may enquire at this point why common-sense
should reject as appearance the object of sight and
keep that of touch where the identification of the two
would lead to synthetic incompatibility.

I think the usual argument that it would put
forward in justification of itself would be the following :
sight and touch agree in bearing witness to extension
and figure, but they differ as to the figure. Also
experience has taught us that spatial characteristics
perceived by sight will in general have felt character-
istics corresponding to them. Now the sole evidence
for their existence is that they are perceived. Hence
when, as in the present case, it is certain that the
spatial relations perceived by two senses differ in part,
it is reasonable to hold that those for which we have
the witness of two senses are the ones that continue
to exist when we cease to perceive them, and that
those for which we have only the evidence of one are

1 The superiority of touch after the Causal Theory of Perception has
been assumed is further discussed in Chap. iv. p. 253 et eeq.


mDEFEJNUJliJM OF CAUSALITY 35

those that are mere appearances. Now sight and
touch agree in bearing witness to the existence of an
extended surface, but touch shows no discontinuity in
it, whilst sight tells us that it is bent round so as to
form a closed surface in three dimensions. Hence it is
reasonable to suppose that what is real is that which
has both senses for a witness, viz. the flat continuous
surface.

This is the familiar and trivial line of argument
which holds that when several senses bear witness to
an object it is more likely to be real than when only
one does so. It is liable to be confused with the
argument that carried Gibbon back from the Roman
Church and back into the last will and testament of
an affectionate but Protestant father. I want now
to point out that it is really very paradoxical and
extremely weak if taken by itself.

It is surely clear that the evidence of two senses
does not add the least certainty to the existence and
qualities of an object of perception of either of them
so long as that object continues to be perceived. For
that certainty, as we have already seen, is the highest
that we can have, and therefore no evidence can hope
to increase it. Thus it is equally certain that what
I see bends round and forms a closed surface in three
dimensions so long as I do see it, whether, as is
usually the case, I can feel the corners and edges,
or, as is the case with the picture of the cube, I
cannot. Hence the argument of common-sense is
this rather curious one : although, whilst an object is
perceived, agreement of more than one sense does not
add in the least to the certainty of propositions about
its existence and qualities which each sense separately
justifies, yet such agreement does make it more probable
that what exists when we cease to perceive it has those

3—2


36 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

properties about which, when it was perceived, the
senses agreed.

Now, taken by itself, this is a very odd argument
indeed, and I do not think that anyone will find it
plausible. It gains any plausibility that it may have
from an argument to prove a quite different conclusion.
If you are basing a belief in the existence of something
that you do not perceive on the fact that if it really
exists it wUl probably produce such and such effects,
then the greater the number of such effects observed
the more likely it will be that this unperceived object
exists and vice versd. Thus Gibbon's argument by
which he ceased to believe in the Real Presence was
valid enough if we take him to have meant that, if the
Body and Blood had been really there, he would have
had certain perceptions which he did not have. But the
same sort of argument is used to distinguish appear-
ance from reality when the appearance is admittedly
there; and here it is quite useless. All that it can
prove is that it may not be appropriate to call the
object of my perception by the name by which I should
if other perceptions were there as well, and not that
an object with the qualities that we do perceive with
one sense is any less likely to be real than one whose
qualities we perceive with two senses. Thus, if the
sacramental wine after appropriate manipulation had
looked to Gibbon like blood but had tasted like wine,
he would not have been justified in thinking it less
likely that such a liquid existed when he ceased to
perceive it than if it had both looked and tasted like
blood. All that he would have been justified in saying
would have been : If this liquid which looks like blood
and tastes like wine exists when I cease to see and
taste it, it will not be safe to call it either blood or wine,
since each name will convey wrong impressions to people.


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 37

I have discussed here one of the grounds which
common-sense would allege for holding that that on
which sight and touch agreed was what was real, when
it has separated reality and appearance owing to the
discrepancy that we have been considering, because
I wanted to show the weakness of this common argu-
ment. Better reasons for preferring touch to sight
will be discussed in the chapter on the Causal Theory
of Perception.

We have now examined the argument I (b) which
attempts to disprove naif realism from the synthetic
incompatibility of the deliveries of two different senses.
We have seen that it rests on even more assumptions
than 1(a), and that, like it, it does not by itself furnish
any conclusive ground for the denial of naif realism
with regard to both senses. If naif realism is to be kept
however that identification of tactual and visual spatial
characteristics which is found to account so well for the
facts over a very wide area must be dropped. And, if
we separate the two, we shall be left with this remark-
able parallelism still on hand and calling for explanation.
The actual procedure of common-sense is to hold to the
deliveries of touch as real and to make the deliveries
of sight, in as far as they conflict with those under
circumstances where they might have been expected
to agree, appearances. We saw that the argument
that what is testified by more than one sense is more
likely to be real than what is only testified by one is
quite baseless; and we found what precisely such an
argument does allow us to infer. So far then we have
seen that there is very little reason why common-sense
should desert naif realism just where it does, and no
reason as yet why it should make that part of what
it perceives real and that part appearance which it is
actually found to do.


38 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

We pass then to
I (c). This is the argument from the incompatible
deliveries of the same sense in different people. Here
again we are faced by a problem which is partly new
but in many ways like that which met us as to what
was meant by the identification of the objects of visual
and tactual perception. This is the question: What
do we mean by two people perceiving the same thing ?
On the naively realistic view from which we start the
argument is faced by the old dilemma. Either what
A and B perceive is the same or different. If it be
the same there is no problem, if different, then, since
the qualities of the objects of their perceptions are
qualities of different objects, what matters it that
they are incompatible ? Why should not both objects
exist quite comfortably unperceived by either A ov B '\

Another question that arises is this : In what sense
is the knowledge that each of us has about the objects
of his perception communicable to other people so that
we can really know that A and B (of whom one may
be oneself) have at the same time objects of perception
which have incompatible qualities? We will discuss
these two questions in order, (i) The Same Object.
I have already pointed out the ambiguity of the word
object and it is very important here to bear in mind
what has been said about it on pp. 7 et seq. What
then do we mean by two people perceiving the same
object in the sense that the direct object of their
perceptions is the same and not merely that something
that might be inferred from them is the same ? What
the present argument wants is that A and B should
be obliged to attribute incompatible qualities to the
same reality if they suppose that the objects of their
perceptions are real. Since realities cannot have in-
compatible qualities it will then follow that the object


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 39

of the perception of one or both of them must be merely
an appearance. This however seems to land us in the
old dilemma that, if the objects of their perceptions are
the same, there is no difficulty; and, if they differ, then
by supposing them to be realities we shall merely have
two different realities with qualities which, if they came
together in the same object would be incompatible — a
fact which is not relevant to existing circumstances.
This difficulty may be met however by supposing that
X and y the two objects are as wholes incompatible with
each other and yet as objects of ^'s and jB's perceptions
respectively occupy the same space at the same time.
Thus the important point is to determine when A and
B hold that the objects that they perceive are in the
same place. If they do this, and the objects perceived
have incompatible qualities, it wiU follow that the two
objects or at any rate one of them must be appearance,
whether they be identical or not. A and B say that they
perceive the same object when (a) if B takes up the
same position as A has just had and also a like attitude
to ^'s, what he perceives is indistinguishable from
what A remembers that he perceived when he occu-
pied this position; and (&), as A and B change their
positions and attitudes what they perceive changes in
general continuously with their changes of position and
attitude; and (c) the objects perceived by both and
the successive objects perceived by each are localised
at the same position of space. Assuming that A and B
can be aware of these three sets of facts then they will
say that they perceive the same object. By this they
really mean in our phraseology that, at any given
moment they perceive different objects, but that the
differences are mere appearance, and either what is
common is reality, or the appearances are data from
which we can argue to the existence qualities of a


40 AKGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

reality which is not as such perceived in any position
of either. But, as we have already said, the really
vital point is that the successive objects should be
localised at the same point of space and that A and B
can know that their contemporary objects of perception
which conform to the rules (a) and (6) are also localised
at the same position. We have yet to discuss how this
is possible. Assuming this to be possible we can see
where the synthetic incompatibility comes in. Let us
take the case of a tangible sphere. A and B, standing
in various places and turning in various ways, will see
portions of ellipsoidal surfaces of slightly different eccen-
tricities and rather different distributions of colour.
All the conditions that I mentioned above will be
fulfilled in this case if they ever are fulfilled. Suppose
A can inform B that he locates the centre of his
ellipsoid at the same point as B does that of his.
Then, if the ellipsoids that A and B perceive be both
realities, there will be — independently of whether they
be perceived or not — two ellipsoids of rather different
eccentricities and distributions of colour having the
same centre. Hence we should get the result that
not only is neither of these ellipsoids tangible — for all
that can be felt is a sphere — but also that each is
invisible to one of the observers. This is of course
not by itself fatal, since the sphere, which common-
sense generally holds to be the reality, is not visible
to anyone and never can be. But if we are going to
introduce invisible reals at all we shall have to do it on
a very lavish scale indeed. We must end by holding
nothing less than that there are as many real ellipsoids
as can be seen by A or B from any position and that
each is visible from one position and one only (or,
remembering that we only perceive parts of ellipsoids
and counting parts of ellipsoids of the same eccentricity


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 41

as the same, from one set of positions and one only).
This argument is of course not conclusive. The real
world might contain all this host of real objects which
are intangible and only visible from certain definite
positions. But this is not a view that commends itself
to most people, and, if naif realism involves it, they
will prefer to leave naif realism. There is not, so far
as I can see, any real difficulty from synthetic incom-
patibility on the assumption that all these ellipsoids
do coexist and have their centres at one point. It
will involve the additional assumption that the presence
of parts of the surface of one of them does not render
the parts of the surface of others that are inside it
invisible from the appropriate position. The argument
then does not in the end rest on the alleged synthetic
incompatibility but on the terrible complications of the
naively realistic hypothesis. It therefore gives no dis-
proof on naif realism, but merely a very strong incentive
to seek another and simpler explanation of the facts.
That explanation and its consequences, which are far-
reaching, is discussed in a later chapter on the Causal
Theory of Perception.

But before we leave I (c) we must discuss the re-
maining question: (ii) Communicability of Perceived
Qualities. For we have assvimed all along that A and
B can know that the objects of their perceptions are
like each other and that they are in the same place.
We must now ask: How precisely is this possible?
On the view of naif realism or of phenomenalism there
is of course no difficulty in two people being aware of
the same object at the same moment. For it merely
involves that X shall be at the same time a constituent
of two awarenesses p^ and q^, one of which is a part of
the complex of related awarenesses that constitutes ^'s
mind and the other of which is a part of the complex


42 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

which is B's mind. But the present problem is different.
It is : Granted that A and B can as a matter of fact
be aware of the same object at the same moment, can
A know that B is aware of the same object as himself?
or, more generally; Can A know what are the qualities
of the object of B's awareness 1 Of course we always
assume that we can know facts of this kind with more
or less accuracy, and our present task is to find the
presuppositions of that opinion.

In the first place the most usual way for us to find
out what B perceives is for him to teU us. Assuming
that he is not lying a comparison of what he says he
perceives with what we know ourselves to perceive will
tell us how like are the objects of our respective per-
ceptions. But this simple method is a good deal more
complicated than it seems. Suppose B says: 'What
I perceive is red,' what information exactly does he
convey? What I directly perceive is a mere noise.
It is however of course a noise with meaning. When
I make noises of that kind I mean to convey informa-
tion as to what I perceive, and presumably B does also.
The first thing then is to recognise that the noise that
B made is the same sort of noise as I should have made
had I wished B to understand that the object that I
perceive has this indefinable quality called red. But
why do I suppose that hearing that noise will make B
think of the quality that I perceive ?

Because B has been taught English ; it will be said.
But how was he taught English in this matter ? Pre-
sumably his parents or guardians in his youth showed
him a number of objects which they believed to agree
in being red, and made the noise in question. The
objects of course all agreed in other respects, e.g. in
that of being extended; but they got over this difficulty
by showing him a number of other things which agreed


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 43

with the red ones in being extended and differed from
them in colour, and by then making a different noise.
Now what were the presuppositions of this method of
teaching ? In the first place his teachers thought that
if B were put in an appropriate position he would
perceive the same or nearly the same distinctions as
they did. They thought that, when they perceived
differences, he would not perceive identity, and, when
they perceived identity that he would not perceive
difference. If B had perceived no difference in objects
in some of which his teachers perceived one quality
(say green) and in others of which they perceived
another quality (say red) B would use the words 'red'
or 'green' indifferently for objects which they con-
sidered red and for those which they held to be green.
If, on the other hand, his teachers saw no difference
in the colours of objects in which he did see a difference,
B would have argued: 'Evidently "red" is a general
name for two different colours'; and he would think
it odd that his teachers should have no different names
for its two species.

This might indeed land B in difficulties when he
came to reflect. Suppose he perceives colour differences
where his firiends perceive none. Call the two colours
that he perceives x and y, and suppose that his friends,
seeing no difference between the two, call both x.
Then, as we saw B will think that « is a general term
covering both x and y. But then it is very likely that
he will see nothing in common between x and y except
that they are both colours. In that case the term x
will stand in his mind for colour in general. But colour
is an universal that extends to other things beside
x and y, things that his friends can distinguish. It
will then seem very strange to B that they only apply
the name a; to a; and y and not to the other colours.


44 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

This may lead to the very odd result that, precisely
because B can distinguish more colours than his friends,
he may be led to think that they can distinguish
something that he cannot, viz. an universal that is
common to x and y but not to all colours.

Still, in general, B could find out and convey to
his friends that he perceived a difference of colour
where they perceived none. But he could give them
no information whatever about the new colour which
they cannot perceive except that it is a colour. Thus
what seems to be communicable with regard to per-
ceptions is whether one person can always find a
difference and a likeness in what he perceives where
the other perceives differences or likenesses. A man
cannot be certain that the object of his perception is
identical with what another person perceives at the
same time ; but he can be sure whether he can or cannot
find a distinction within his object of perception when
the other person finds one in his. Suppose for instance
that an angel could see that when I use the word
'green' another man always perceives what I do when
I use the word 'red' and vice versd. Still neither I
nor the other man could ever find this out, for we
should always agree in our use of the words 'red' and
' green.' We cannot then communicate the objects of
our perceptions to each other, and what we mean by
saying that A and B perceive the same object is that
A can discover no distinction in the object that he
perceives to which B cannot discover a corresponding
one in his own object.

I have used the words distinctions and agreements ;
and it will be well to consider them for a moment.
When A and B agree in discovering an agreement in
their respective objects of perception, we can never be
sure that the agreements that they discover are identical


INDEFEJSDENT OF CAUSALITY 45

with each other. Thus A and B may agree in dis-
covering the universal 'colour,' i.e. they will always
apply the term 'coloured' to the same things, but
we cannot be at all sure that, when they see the
things about which they agree in finding an universal
the universals that they find are qualitatively identical
with each other. Still it is perfectly unimportant
whether they are identical or not so long as they have
precisely the same extension. Moreover, with regard
to each such universal there can be a further agreement
which further determines it. For instance"^ and B
may agree in discovering the universals 'red' and
'sweet,' and although we can never know that ^'s
red and sweet as universals immediately analy sable
out of his objects of perception are the same as B's
red and sweet which are analysed out of his, yet it
wUl still be the case that A and B will agree in
holding that the two universals differ from each other
and from numerous others that they agree in the
present sense in discovering. Hence the ultimate fact
that the qualities that we perceive and the universals
that we find in comparing them are incommunicable,
which I suppose is what Kant meant by saying that
'intuitions without conceptions ai-e blind' is no
hindrance to knowledge.

There remains one more question. How do we
come to be able to communicate these differences and
agreements ? I show a man two surfaces, one red and
the other green. Suppose he is colour-blind. Then
he and I agree in recognising an universal, viz. colour,
but I also recognise two species of it, and he does not.
How do I find out that he agrees with me in discover-
ing the universal and differs in seeing only one species
of it 1 In the first instance I believe that he finds an
universal because he tells me so, and I believe for the


46 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

same reason that he does not find the difference. This
however assumes that he and I agree in what we mean
by agreement and difference. But it might be said:
You grant that with a normal man it is perfectly
possible that what he perceives when you both use the
word green is what you perceive when you both use
the word red and vice versd, and the difference can
never be discovered. How can you be sure then that
when you both use the word distinction he does not
mean what you do when you both use the word identity?
How do you know in fact that when the man says:
'The objects of my perception have something in
common,' he does not mean to indicate the same sort
of experience as you have when you perceive that red
and sweet differ; or, on the other hand, when he says
'I perceive no difference in colour between this and
that,' that his experience is not precisely like yours
when you experience both red and green ? The answer
is as follows: Let us take the colour-blind man and
suppose that he is being taught to speak as a child.
He is put into circumstances under which we perceive
red and green and the two names are told to him.
His teacher says: 'This (pointing to one) is green,
that is red.' This being so, when his teacher says:
'Pick out the green one,' he can of course do so as
long as he remembers which one had that name given
to it. But suppose that we try the experiment again,
and the things are quite alike in all respects except
colour, then the only way to distinguish the one called
green and the one called red is for the colour-blind
man to remember whether it was the third or fourth
thing from the left (say) to which the teacher pointed
when he used the word. Hence if the articles be mixed
up out of his sight he wUl be just as likely to choose
a red one as a green one when asked to choose one of


iJMJjbifjiiN L»j?.iN i u? CAUSALITY 47

the latter. In fact he will be seen to hesitate hopelessly,
trying and failing to remember any characteristic apart
from the original position which marks those called
green from those called red. His actions are thus
precisely like those that we should make if someone
showed us two red or two green things exactly alike
in all respects and said : ' One is A and the other B,'
and then shuffled them about while we were away,
and, when we returned, said: 'Now pick out A.' Now
we have assumed all along that the other man is a
creature whose mind and body work in the main like
ours; unless we had this general conviction we should
not have been so silly as to try to communicate with
him at aU. Hence if, under certain circumstances in
which we know that we perceive a distinction, we see
that he acts in precisely the same way as we do when
we do not perceive one, it is perfectly reasonable to
suppose that the state of his mind is like that of ours
when we do not perceive a distinction. Hence it is
owing to the fact that we have reason to believe that,
under certain test conditions, the presence or absence
of the recognition of a distinction will vitally affect
our outward actions in definite ways that we have
very strong ground for holding that we can know that,
when a man who has been taught to speak in the usual
way says that he perceives a difference, something very
similar is going on in his mind to what goes on in ours
when we use the same phrase. It is the absence of any
such effect on outward action in the case of the matter
of our sensations that makes it impossible to decide
whether we do really perceive the same object when
we agree about our use of the names of such objects.
If I perceive red, and, whenever I do so ^ always
perceives something exactly like what I perceive when
I use the word green and vice versd, I can never find


48 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

this out by a consideration of ^'s actions and mine
under test conditions. For self-knowledge tells me
that I do not act in any two different ways when I
perceive red and when I perceive green that can be
directly connected with the sensuous peculiarities of
the two objects of perception as such. And I must
assume that the same is the case with A. Hence it
is only when he calls red or green both what I call red
and what I call green that I can find any difference
and reasonably come to the conclusion that I perceive
something that he cannot.

Thus the assertion that two people perceive the
same thing in the same place can never be shown to
mean that there is a thing really at a certain place
to which the minds of two people are simultaneously
in direct perceptual relation. We have reason to
believe that, as far as concerns the objects of visual
perception, they are never even precisely alike in the
sense which is communicable at the same time for two
•different people. All that the statement really means
is that there are certain agreements and differences
which people agree or disagree in discovering in their
objects of perception. It means, to put it more accu-
rately, (a) that when A stood in the position in his
perceptual space in which he judges that B now stands
and in the same attitude he discovered no distinctions
in the object of his perception to which B does not
now find corresponding ones in the object of his. And
we saw that agreement or disagreement on this point
is capable of being elicited with fair certainty on the
assumption that i? is a being whose mind works in
substantially the same way as ^'s. (6) That A judges
that the object of his present perception is much like
that which he perceived when he stood in the same
position and attitude as that in which he now judges


INDEPENDE:t;fT OF CAUSALITY 49

B to be standing. And (c) that A found that as he
moved from one position to another there was continuous
variation of those qualities of his successive objects of
perception that changed at all. This is what is meant
when A and B hold that they 'perceive the same
object'; it is all that is communicable; and, as we
have now seen, it is perfectly compatible with extreme
qualitative difference between the objects of ^'s and
Bs perceptions even when each judges that he is in
the same position as has been vacated by the other.

I think then that we may hold that this considera-
tion of what is meant by two people 'perceiving the
same object' and of one person 'perceiving the same
object from different positions' is a serious stumbling-
block to naif realism. Not only is it certain that the
immediate objects of their perceptions at the same time
are not the same and that the objects of the successive
perception of each are not the same; but also a complete
agreement between them in all that is communicable
is not incompatible with extreme differences in the
objects of their perception. This, whilst it prevents
an argument from synthetic incompatibility from being
valid, makes naif realism so complicated and artificial
that one is almost forced to the theory of a common
cause of the perceptions of each person and to the de-
gradation of the objects of most if not of all of these
perceptions to the level of appearance. But this alter-
native needs a separate chapter.

But there remain other alleged arguments against
naif realism which can be discussed independently of a
causal view of perception, and to these we must now
turn. We begin with the argument that I have called
(III). This deals with the alleged disproof of naif
realism based on the happening of dreams and hallu-
cinations. What we perceive in dreams has most of

B. p. 4


50 AKGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

the qualities of what we perceive in waking-life. On
the other hand it is not supposed to be real. Hence
the naif realist is told that this fact is enough to dis-
prove his contention that the objects of perception exist
as such whether they are perceived or not. Since to
be real, for us, just means to be capable of existing
independently of being perceived the question turns
upon what justification there is for believing that the
dream world as such only exists when it is perceived.

It is often rejected from reality on the ground of
internal incoherence. But I do not think that this
position can be maintained. The inconsistency that
is noticed in dreams is not internal inconsistency, but
merely lack of coherence with what happens in waking-
life, and this is not really relevant unless you assume
that, for the dream-world to be real at all, it must be
part of the waking-world. When the Lord Chancellor
in 'lolanthe' suffered from nightmare his dream seems
to us to be wholly incoherent because, in it, he crossed
the Channel from Harwich in a vehicle slightly larger
than a bathing-machine which was boarded at Sloane
Square and South Kensington stations by a party of
friends to whom he supplied a collation consisting of
cold meat and penny ices. Now it is perfectly true
that this is a concatenation of circumstances which it
is most unlikely for any Law Lord in waking-life to
experience, but that does not make it intrinsically
absurd. Hence, if he intended to convey that the
Channel, the friends, and the stations are those which
he respectively crosses, meets, and uses in daily life,
we should be justified in thinking (even though a
respect for the English legal system prevented us from
saying) that he was mistaken. But this by itself is
not any good ground for denying that, in another
world which he expei-iences when asleep and which


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 51

continues to exist when he wakes and ceases to per-
ceive it, there are objects sufficiently like the Channel,
his friends, and the stations on the Underground
between Victoria and Glo'ster Road to be mistaken
for them, which stand in such relations to each other
as it would be unlikely or impossible for the things
which resemble them in waking-life to stand in. The
only argument against this suggestion is that it is
unlikely that, within each of two sets of objects corre-
sponding one to one by likeness so close as to lead
to mistakes of one for the other, there should yet be
two such very diflferent sets of relations. And this is
certainly not a strong argument taken by itself.

The next argument against the reality of dream -
objects is from the discontinuity of dreams. Taking
this objection merely in the form that there are
intervals between our dreams in which we experience
a quite different set of objects this would of course cut
both ways. But the argument is not so weak as this.
It says that when dreams interrupt the course of our
waking-life we can easily pick up the thread of it again.
What we experienced before we slept is continuous
with what we experience when we wake once more.
But what we dreamt before we wake is scarcely ever
continuous with what we dream after we go to sleep
again. This is of course in general true, though, in
certain abnormal cases, it is not and the successive
dreams form as continuous a life as the successive
waking experiences. A good example of this is dis-
cussed by Prof. Flournoy in his book Des Indes au
Planete Mars. But in taking normal dreaming we
must be careful that the continuity in waking-life shall
be judged from an analogous standpoint to the dis-
continuity of the dream-life. The continuity in waking-
life is judged in waking-life. But the discontinuity of

4—2


52 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

dream-life is also judged in waking-life, and this makes
the comparison hardly fair. In a fair comparison, either
I ought in my present dream to judge that its details
are not continuous with those of the dream that I had
last night, or else I ought to judge in a dream that
what I perceived before I went to sleep is continuous
with what I perceived at some other time when I was
awake. As far as I am aware we never do make such
judgments in dreams, and so the comparison never is
quite in pari materid. The fact is that, when we wake
after a dream, we do find a discontinuity, and this
troubles us so that we have to consider closely for a
little while before persuading ourselves that our dream
experience really is discontinuous with the present one
whilst the latter is continuous with that we experienced
before we fell asleep. In the dream however we rarely
do have this state of discomfort which makes us reflect.
Hence it remains a question whether, if we did reflect
in dreams, we might not find them continuous with
past dreams. In this case there would not be real
discontinuity, but merely a temporary abeyance of
our critical and comparative powers. It is not a fact
that in one dream we remember others and positively
see that there are incompatibilities between them and
the present one, but that we simply do not in general
remember and compare dreams whilst in the dreaming
state. In waking-life we do to some extent remember
dreams, and, on comparison, find them much less con-
nected than our interrupted waking experiences; but
then our memory of dreams is notoriously very bad
and fleeting, and so this does not really prove very
much. Hence I think it is fair to conclude that
the evidence for the discontinuity in character between
our successive dreams is neither strictly comparable
with nor nearly so strong as the evidence for the


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALTTY 53

essential continuity of our successive waking experi-
ences.

Suppose however that the evidence were quite as
good, I still do not think that it would furnish any
valid ground Avhen taken by itself for denying that
the objects of our dream -experiences are as likely to
be real as those of waking-life. If I go to sleep and
my body be moved, without waking me, from my bed-
room to a strange field there will be as much dis-
continuity between the objects perceived before going
to sleep and after waking as there is between successive
dreams. We should indeed be very puzzled at first,
but we should not believe that this proved that the
waking-world was unreal. We should consider what
explanation our general knowledge of the waking- world
rendered probable and should no doubt come to the
right conclusion. In the dream, as I have argued, we
do not have much memory, our critical faculties are
dormant, and we feel no puzzlement that might set
us to work in using them. But, supposing that there
be a real world with which we become acquainted in
sleep, there is no reason whatever why we should
always come into cognitive relations with the same
parts of it every time that we enter it at all. We do
not know enough of its character to have learnt the
general laws that may hold in it and, if known, might
explain why at different times we do enter into cognitive
relations with different parts of it, such as are the rules
about the motion of our bodies in the waking-world.
But then we never try to find those laws in our dreams,
since the philosopher and the scientist rarely remain
philosophic or scientific when they are asleep, and so
the fact that we do not find them is no proof that they
do not exist. If it were our custom to walk in our
sleep instead of it being an exception we should find


54 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

as much discontinuity between successive portions of
our waking-life as we now do in our successive dreams ;
and if it were our custom to seek for the laws of the
dream-world while we were in it we might be able to
explain its discontinuities as comfortably as we could
those in the waking-life of the somnambulist.

I do not think then that the standard arguments
from incoherence and discontinuity supply by them-
selves much reason for denying that the dream-world
is real though different from that with which we come
in contact in our waking-life.

We pass then to other arguments. It is urged
that what people perceive in waking-life under similar
circumstances agrees pretty well as a rule, but that
this is not so in dreams. To this argument there
is more than one answer, (a) In hallucinations and
visions produced in definite ways there is frequently
substantial agreement. The experiences of most persons
who have delirium tremens seem to be very similar, so
too those produced by certain drugs like Indian hemp.
To these agreements ought certainly to be added those
of mystics. On the whole there is a remarkable agree-
ment in essentials between the visions of different
mystics, as may be gathered from reading a book like
the Varieties of Religious Experience. The differ-
ences come in, as might be expected, in the philosophical
and theological interpretations of their experiences that
various mystics offer. I understand that the agreement
is still more substantial in the case of Indian mystics
who undergo a definite and common form of initiation.
Of course all the agreements can be explained, hypo-
thetically at any rate, by a causal theory; but we are
purposely leaving that aside in the present chapter.
What I wish to point out here is that there is another
possible explanation, viz. that all people who do certain


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 55

things do come into perceptual contact with a real
common world which those who do not do these things
cannot perceive, and that it is a little hard to follow
those people who hold it to be certain that the micro
scopic structure of nuclei is real because if students
follow prescribed rules they will perceive it, and yet
hold that the fact that the mystics have equally
concordant experiences is not merely explained but
explained away as far as the reality of the objects of^
the latter is concerned by pointing to the fact that
they have undergone a common course of initiation.
But I also quarrel with religious mysticism for a
precisely similar inconsistency. How can it argue
that the agreement of mystics who have had a common
training tends to prove that they perceive a reality
and deny that the agreement of the persons who have
drunk themselves into delirium tremens points to the
reality of pink rats? The mystic's God and the
drunkard's pink rats must, at this stage, stand or fall
together, (b) No doubt though, in normal sleep at
any rate, there is great disagreement. The disagree-
ment between sleepers and wakers seems to me to
prove nothing; it is that between sleepers and sleepers
that is important. But the difficulty is : How can you
tell whether two sleepers are in the same relevant con-
ditions? We know pretty well what conditions are
relevant to what is perceived in waking-life, but there
is no reason to suppose that they would be the same
with regard to the world which we experience in
dreams. It is perfectly absurd to argue that, because
two people in the same bed experience much the same
objects when both are awake, they ought to do so
when both are asleep if there be a real dream-world.
To argue so would be as reasonable as to argue that,
if two people happened to dream that they were


56 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

in the Great Court at the same time, the fact that,
when they woke up, they found themselves in their
respective bedrooms throws doubt on the reality of
the waking-world.

I do not think then that agreement and disagree-
ment taken by themselves are any good argument
against the reality of the world of dreams, of delirium,
and of mystical vision.

^The sole remaining argument with which I am
acquainted involves causality and must be deferred.
This argument in its crude form would hold that for
anything to be real it must be perceived by means of
the appropriate organs. Now we see things in sleep
with our eyes shut, and therefore it is argued that
what we see in dreams cannot be real. Here I have
only to indicate the following points, (a) The causal
argument commonly ends by proving that there is no
reason to suppose that what we do perceive by means
of our organs is real. Hence it can hardly prove that
the dream-world is less than that of waking-life. It
can only prove that both are unreal and that the
perception of both is presumably caused by something
that is real. (6) It is a common premise of the causal
argument that we perceive everything by means of
organs of perception. This, as stated, is simply false
in view of dream-perceptions, and so it is hardly possible
to use both the argument from relativity to an organ
and that from occurrence in dreams to disprove naif
realism, as Bradley quite happily does, (c) On the
other hand the causal theory, here as in most places,
is capable of accounting for the relevant facts. It
accounts for the respective agreements of the drunkards,
the microscopists, and the mystics. But what the
common-sense and scientific supporters of it fail to see

' Cf. Chap. IV. p. 271 et seq. where this question is finally discussed.


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 57

is that, primd facie, at any rate, whilst it reduces God
to the level of the pink rats as regards reality, it
degrades the cell-nuclei to the same position. Now
most scientists could bear with fortitude the reduction
of the Deity to the level of the rodents; but they
resent such an affront to really important things like
nuclei.

It remains now to discuss the argument
(IV). This attempts to refiite naif realism by
pointing to an alleged close approximation of objects
of sense-perception to feelings, and the general intimate
connexion between the two. This argument is evidently
thought to be a strong one. It is used by Berkeley
and not despised by Bradley. One of the many humours
of philosophy is that it is also used by Locke to refute
the solipsist, a person whom that philosopher treats
very much de haiit en has. Whilst Philonous tells Hylas
that a great heat is a great pain, and proceeds to argue
from this premise that temperature is purely subjective,
Locke orders the solipsist to put his hand in the fire —
a method of refutation that recalls the 'coxcombs'' and
Dr Johnson with their ' grinning ' and kicking arguments
for realism.

I will quote Bradley lest we seem to be arguing
with thin air. He says: '...The pleasant and dis-
gusting which we boldly locate in the object, how
can they be there ? Is a thing delightful or sickening
really and in itself? Am, even I the constant owner
of these wandering adjectives ? '^ Do we ' boldly locate '
the pleasant and the disgusting in the object? In
general we have seen that it is not of importance to
the reality of a quality where we happen to locate
it ; it is not until we begin to locate incompatible

> 'And coxcombs vanquish Berkeley with a grin.'
2 Appearance and Reality (Second Edition), p. 12.


58 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

qualities in the same place that difficulties arise.
Now, if we locate these feelings at all, we certainly
do not locate them at the same time in the same
place, so that this cannot be an argument from syn-
thetic incompatibility. Moreover, we saw in discussing
sound that we often do talk as if we located qualities
in what as a matter of fact we regard merely as the
cause of the perception of them, although, when we
come to consider the matter, we see that, if they are
to be located at all, they must occupy a different place
from that in which verbally we put them. I suppose
then that the best way of stating the argument would
be as follows : We do often say that objects are
pleasant or disgusting, and yet we are sure that these
are not real qualities. Ought not this to make us
doubt whether other qualities that we attribute to
objects and recognise by sense really belong to those
objects ?

We must distinguish between the questions of
whether a quality be real and whether it really
belongs to the object to which it is ascribed. The
first simply asks : Does the quality exist unchanged
when no one perceives it ? The second asks : No matter
whether the quality be real or apparent, ought we to
localise it where we do ? Now the present argument
assumes that we know that, with regard to feelings
of pleasure and disgust, we can answer both questions
in the negative. Pleasures and pains are not believed
to exist when not felt, and they are not believed to
be localised in external bodies when we come to reflect.
And the argument is : If we can know this on re-
flection about pleasantness which we yet often treat
as a real quality of objects, may we not suspect that, if
we reflected more carefully, we should see that we make
the same mistake about colours and spatial qualities ?


iJNJj£.jf£irsijrir(x wr CAUSALITY 59

To this the right answer seems to be that the
more carefully we reflect the less likely we are to
confuse feelings like pleasure and pain with qualities
like red and square. For, when we reflect, we see
that red and square are objects of certain awarenesses
but not quahties of any awareness ; since we are
persuaded that no awareness is red or square. On
the other hand, when we reflect on pleasure and pain,
we see that, whilst they may be the objects of the same
sort of awarenesses as those of which red and square
are objects, yet in general they exist in an entirely
different way in which red and square never do exist.
And that is as qualities of awarenesses which are
themselves not awarenesses of pleasiu-e and pain, but
of objects like red and square. If we go too near
a fire we may say that the fire is white-hot and the
sensation painful ; we never call a sensation white-hot
or a fire painful unless, in the former case, we confuse
a sensation as a mental event with the object that
is cognised in it, and, in the latter, mean that the fire
causes pain but does not feel it. But, although we
have seen that we never really do mean that a
material object is pleasant or painful and that we do
seem to mean that pleasure and pain are qualities of
the cognitions of those objects which we term pleasant
or painful, can this latter view be maintained as it
stands 1

Do we really mean that the feeling of pain is a
quality of our sensation of heat in the same way as
the red colour is a quality of the fire ? The difficulty
is that in the latter case we know pretty well by x
being a quality of Y, viz. that x is located in the same
place as the other qualities which together with it
constitute Y\ But when we call the feeling of pain

1 Cf. Chap. II. p. 91 et seq. where this view is more fully discussed.


60 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAfF REALISM

a quality of a sensation we cannot mean anything
like this, for there is. no reason to suppose that a
sensation is in space. And there is a further difficulty.
I have tried to maintain that, in ordinary perception,
that of which we are directly aware is full of dis-
tinctions which are only made explicit in what are
at any rate rudimentary judgments. With regard
to the more salient features these judgments are
made at once and automatically, but, when there is
little interest or the distinctions are hard to discover,
the judgments are not in general made. Yet some-
how all the distinctions that we can discover by paying
attention to our object of perception must have been
in it all along, and indeed they are felt in a vague
way, whether we distinguish them and discover their
relations or not. Now this vague feeling of distinc-
tions and relations that are afterwards made explicit
by judgments seems to me to be closely analogous
to the way in which we become aware of pleasure and
pain. But here arises a difficulty. Just as we can
make judgments and find that the vaguely felt dis-
tinctions and relations become explicit as the qualities
of objects perceived, so we can make our pleasures
and pains the objects of cognitions. It would seem
that by analogy they ought then to be clearly recog-
nised as qualities of what was previously but vaguely
felt, and that the evidence for the view that they are
qualities of mental states should be that, on reflexion,
they always do turn out to be such. But the trouble
is that this is not always the case. Some seem to be
as clearly recognised as qualities of parts of the body
as any ordinary sense-qualities can be. Hence the
evidence for supposing that pleasures and pains differ
from sense-qualities in being qualities of our mental
states breaks down. Bodily pains like toothache,


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 61

when they pass out of the stage of mere feeling and
come to be cognised, seem to be as clearly localised
as red and temperature. And it is hard to see how
they can be at once qualities of the body and of
mental states. Nor can it be maintained that tooth-
ache is merely a quality of the perception of one's tooth
which gets its spatial characteristics by a kind of
subreption from those of the object of this perception.
For we do not generally have any perception of the
tooth at all until the pain begins. It is only then
that we put our tongue to it, and it is the previous
localisation of the pain that tells us where to put our
tongue.

The upshot of our discussion is that [a) no sense-
qualities are qualities of mental events ; (b) though
some pains may be so it is difficult to tell precisely
what such a statement means, and it is certain that
this is not the case with bodily pains. Some pains,
like toothache, seem indistinguishable from sense-
qualities, and it seems to be a strictly comparable
use of terms to say : ' My tooth is painful ' and to say
' My tooth is black and has a hole in it.'

It is evident that only bodily pains and pleasures
are sufficiently like sense-qualities for a belief in their
non-existence when unperceived to be any strong
argument by analogy for the unreality of sense-
qualities. Sence the question turns on whether we
are justified in believing that bodily pleasures and
pains necessarily cease to exist when they cease to
be felt.

But even before we discuss this question we can
see that Bradley's argument is greatly weakened.
Pleasantness and disgustingness are not localised in
objects, but only the power to produce pleasures and
pains. And the pleasures and pains, if localised at


62 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

all, are localised in our own bodies. It is quite useless
to say that it is inconsistent to replace pleasantness
by a cause and to keep redness as a quality - of a
foreign body. You cannot help perceiving red as
extended and at a definite place in space, and the
close analogy between bodily pleasures and pains and
sense-qualities is not an analogy between pleasantness
and painfulness and sense-qualities.

However, it will be worth while to discuss whether
bodily pleasures and pains be real or only exist when
they are perceived. We might either (a) be imme-
diately certain of this, or (&) be certain of it on
grounds that depend on the differences between
pleasures and pains and sense-qualities, or (c) on
grounds that apply equally to both. It is evident
that if our certainty springs from (b) or (c) the
argument based on it is open to the charge of being
an ignoratio elenchi in the one case or a pleonasm in
the other. If we only assure ourselves that tooth-
ache, e.g., ceases to exist when we cease to perceive
it on the ground of the differences between toothache
and sensible qualities, it is clear that no analogical
argument from a premise so proved will give you any
reason for supposing that sensible qualities are mere
appearances. On the other hand, if it be the charac-
teristics that toothache and sensible qualities have
in common that make us think that toothache only
exists when perceived, the characteristics of sensible
qualities will equally dispose of their reality without
any need to drag in the mention of bodily pains.
Hence it can only be valid and useful to argue that
sensible qualities are appearances on the ground that
toothache only exists when we are aware of it, pro-
vided our belief in the latter proposition is founded
on no grounds at all. Now, I quite grant that most


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 63

people believe that pleasures and pains only exist
when someone is aware of them. The question is :
What, if any, are their grounds for that belief?

The usual grounds that are given are relativity
to an organ, and different tastes of different people
at the same time and of the same people at different
times. But, as we have seen, these arguments are
also brought independently against the reality of
sense-qualities, and therefore if they be valid of
pleasure and pain and these be like enough to sense-
qualities for an analogical argument from one to the
other to hold, it would still be a ridiculously round-
about way of degrading sense-qualities to the rank
of appearances. To use the argument by analogy
under such circumstances would merely be to use a
weaker argument where a stronger one is available
and has to be assumed.

I fancy, however, that most people would say that
it is immediately certain that a pain or pleasure
cannot exist unfelt, that its whole essence is to be felt,
and that no meaning can be attached to an unfelt
pleasure or pain. Now, if this be reaUy an imme-
diate certainty, and if sense-qualities be really like
enough to pleasures and pains to make an analogical
argument from one to the other plausible, it would
be a most extraordinary thing if this immediate cer-
tainty should only extend to pleasures and pains and
not to sense-qualities. Yet it seems quite certain
that it does not extend to sense-qualities, since it is
always held to be a paradox that needs support by
arguments when the latter are held to be mere
appearances. But is this quite so certain as it seems
at first sight ? I think we shall find that it is
not. It is indeed felt to be extremely paradoxical to
deny the reality of figure and motion, and rather


64 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

paradoxical to deny that of colour. But as we go lower
down in the scale of the senses, by which I mean as
we pass to those whose deliveries seem to be less and
less capable of scientiBc elaboration, the paradox of
denying the reality of their objects decreases rapidly.
We seem to have little difficulty in thinking of an
unperceived shape or motion or colour ; but what exactly
is an unperceived smell or taste ? Would not common-
sense think it almost as paradoxical to hold that a
lump of sugar has a sweet taste when no one is tasting
it as to hold that it has not a cubical figure when
no one is seeing or touching it ? No doubt the per-
ception of a sweet taste is formally just as much
analysable into content and object as that of a
triangular surface ; but, whereas common-sense is
certain that in the latter case the object is also
existentially separable from the content, it is pretty
sure that in the former such independence is impos-
sible. This example brings us in touch with an
argument of Berkeley's which, though stated in terms
of his erroneous theory about universals, is not es-
sentially dependent on it. May not the belief in the
possibility of the separate existence of objects apart
from content be the result of a vicious abstraction ?
It is not a vicious abstraction (as Berkeley would
probably have held) to recognise the two elements in
any perception, but it is certainly arguable that to
believe in the possibility of their separate existence
is like believing in the possibility of a separate
existence of colours and visible shapes because we can
recognise the distinction between the colour and the
shape of what we see. It is certainly important to
notice two points that favour this view: (1) It is
extremely difficult (if it be really possible at all) to
become aware of the content element in the supposed


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 65

complex ; and (2) it is commonly believed that, whilst
many objects can exist apart from contents, no contents
can exist apart from objects.

I think the difference in our attitude towards the
reality of shapes and colours and of smells and tastes is
expressed in a distinction in popular language. Con-
sider the phrases : That patch looks red ; that patch
is red ; that substance tastes sweet ; that substance
is sweet. The first two phrases have as a rule dis-
tinctly different shades of meaning. When I say
' that patch looks red ' I generally convey a suspicion
that red is not really the colour that the patch is. But
to say that a thing tastes sweet would generally be
regarded as equivalent to saying that it is sweet.
This Hnguistic distinction is no doubt a mark of our
belief that there are real colours and our doubt whether
there are real tastes.

Granted, then, that there is a difference of atti-
tude, is there any justification for it ? Berkeley's
argument would be equally valid as it stands against
the reality of shapes and motions as against that of
colours, and we defer its treatment to a later chapter^.
But common-sense makes a distinction, and the ques-
tion here is whether it has a right to do so. What
it claims is that by direct inspection of smells and
tastes it can see that they are not the kind of things
that could exist unperceived. What, it asks, could
a taste that no one tasted be ? Such a position implies
either that common-sense is in possession of some
general principle by which it can assert that things
with the qualities x cannot be real, whilst things
with the qualities y can be, and that tastes have
the qualities x and shapes the qualities y; or else
that there are immediate judgments about various

1 Chapter in.
B. P. 5


66 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

classes of objects which assert that the objects of one
class are real and that those of another are not. The
difference is of some importance. In the first case
we should say : Tastes are not real because they have
the qualities x, and shapes are real because they have
the qualities y. In the second we should have to
be content with : Tastes (etc.) are unreal and do as
a matter of fact all have the qualities x ; shapes
(etc.) are real and do as a matter of fact have the
qualities y. I think it will be admitted that if the
second be the actual position of common-sense it is
an unsatisfactory one, since it seems arbitrary and
insusceptible of further argument or application.

Let us consider the most important distinctions
between tastes or smells and shapes or colours. They
are the following : (i) shapes and colours are per-
ceptible at points in visual space that differ from
those where the percipient organ (the eye) is present.
Tastes are only perceived on the tongue, whilst smells,
in as far as they are localised directly at all, are placed
vaguely at the nose. (The statement that a body has
such and such a smell is admittedly an inference. It
means that we smell the air in our nostrils and that
we have reason to believe that its smell is due to
odorous particles from a certain body — or, as we put
it, 'the smell comes from this body.') (ii) Colours
often have definite shapes, positions, and relations in
visual space. Tastes and smells only have a very
vague extension without definite shape. If tastes
have any spatial relations they are not directly per-
ceived, but reached by correlating them with points
of tactual space on the tongue. (iii) Tastes and
smells never seem to appear as terms in any causal
laws in the physical world. Tastes do not cause other
tastes except in the sense that they may influence


iJNDJiJfiiJMJEiM uj CAUSALITY 67

by contrast, whilst they are never causally connected,
as far as we know, with motions or colours. On the
other hand, most causal laws are in terms of shapes
and motions and spatial relations reached by reflecting
on visual and tactual percepts. Of course in this respect
colours resemble tastes and smells rather than shapes.
These seem to be the most important differences
between the two kinds of objects. Do they provide
any ground for supposiug that one kind is more likely
to be real than the other ? I am inclined to think
that they provide at least a good excuse if not a very
strong reason for the difference of attitude taken by
common-sense. Common-sense says that it finds it
almost impossible to conceive of an unsmelled smell
or an untasted taste, but finds little difficulty in an
unseen colour and none in an unseen figure. And the
cause of the difficulty seems to me to be that a taste
or a smell has so few qualities and stands in so few
relations that it approaches that pure being which
Hegelians tell us differs in no way from nothing.
There are hardly any propositions that can be asserted
about tastes and smells. They are of course deter-
minate things with a unique nature which makes a
smell a smell and a taste a taste. But apart from
this sensuous uniqueness there is hardly any thing
that can be said about them. They can be very
roughly localised in the perceptual spaces of other
senses, they are vaguely extended, they can be com-
pared in a slight measure in intensity, and they have
ill-defined qualitative differences comparable (though
on an indefinitely lower scale) with colour differences.
Now, when you try to conceive what an object that
you perceive would be if you no longer perceived it
you can only do this by thinking of propositions which
might still be true about it. And we see that there

5—2


68 AEGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF REALISM

are hardly any such propositions that can be at all
definitely formulated. You cannot say much more
than that a smell will still be the smell that it was
when you smelled it ; but you cannot describe this
characteristic to yourself or other people in any general
terms.

When, as in shape and motion, and even to a less
degree in colour, you have a mass of relations and
qualities giving rise to numberless propositions you
can conceive where you no longer perceive. For
although the qualities and relations were given in
perception and still have the sensuous peculiarities
which make, e.g., before and after in time something
dififerent from before and after on a straight line,
still they have general logical characteristics that can
be grasped by thought without further help from sense.

But although this seems to me to account for the
difficulty felt by common-sense in conceiving an un-
smelled smell or an untasted taste, I do not think
that it provides any argument against the possibility
of their being real. As smelled and tasted they have
a definite nature and exist, and the fact that they
have few qualities and stand in few relations, whilst
it makes it difficult for us to conceive their unper-
ceived existence, in no way disproves it. There is no
reason why whatever is real should stand in many
relations and have many qualities, and much in fact
may be real which we cannot intellectually describe.

But however this may be there is one additional
characteristic that even bodily pains have in distinction
from ordinary sense-data, and that is their relation to
volition. All pains as such we desire to remove. We
may of course will to endure a pain because we see
that its removal would be incompatible with the
existence of something that we think very valuable.


INDEPENDENT OF CAUSALITY 69

or would entail a greater pain later. I think, then,
we might say that a bodily pain is a sense-quality
located in our bodies which we directly desire to
remove. This certainly covers all bodily pains ; the
only question is whether it may not be too wide.

It might be said that, if one were deformed, that
would be a sense-quality localised in the body that
anyone would desire to remove, and yet it would not
be a pain. This is true ; but then it is not a sense-
quality that we directly desire to remove like ex-
tremely high temperature of the skin. We desire
to remove deformity because we think it ugly, or
because we feel that it makes us repulsive to others,
or because it prevents us doing many things that we
should like to do. We do not desire to remove it
directly and for its own sake without reference to
anything else. But when I consider any bodily
sensation which I call painful I always find a definite
quality located in my body and a desire to remove
it for its own sake, a desire on which of course I need
not, on reflexion, act. I am not persuaded that there
is any more in bodily pains than their being sense-
qualities located in the body and standing in this
peculiar relation to volition. But this is not important
for us. The point is that a necessary condition for
a bodily pain is that there should be this relation to
the will.

Now I suspect that when a man says that he is
immediately certain that an unfelt bodily pain cannot
exist, what he means is that he is certain that this
relation to the will would not exist unless he were
aware of the sense-quality. And here I agree with
him. An unfelt toothache would not be an ache,
because it does not become one till the will is affected,
and what the mind does not perceive the will does not


70 ARGUMENTS AGAINST NAIF EEALISM

trouble about. But this does not seem to me to imply-
that the sensible quality that is located in the tooth
when we do feel toothache cannot exist unperceived.
It would, then, merely not affect the will, and so not
be a pain.

Now consider Berkeley's argument about the in-
crease of temperature ending in pain. There is no
sudden discontinuity in what we feel as the tem-
perature rises ; yet at first most people would say that
the skin was really warm and would continue to be
so even though we did not feel it, whilst, later on,
when it becomes painful, most people would say that
the pain could not exist except when felt. Even if
Berkeley's solution were right there is a paradox in
the change in the person's conviction as to the in-
dependent existence of what he perceives as the
temperature rises. Berkeley's explanation does not
account for this, and I think that ours does. As the
temperature rises we still continue to have a sensation
whose object is a temperature continuous with what
was experienced before, though of greater intensive
magnitude. But when this intensive magnitude in-
creases beyond a certain point it begins to affect the
will, and we desire its removal directly and for its
own sake with constantly growing vehemence. Now
the subject is certain that nothing can affect his will
of which he is not aware, and therefore he says that
the pain could not exist if it were not perceived,
because temperature does not become a pain except
by affecting his will in this way. But where he and
Berkeley are wrong is in supposing that this proves
or renders it probable that temperature as such cannot
exist unperceived, contrary to the plain man's belief
when the temperature was lower. All that he has
a right to conclude is that the temperature could not


INDEPEJNDJ^JJNT uv CAUSALITY 71

be painful unless it were perceived, not that it might
not exist unperceived.

Thus the argument from bodily pleasures and
pains seems to me to have no validity taken by itself.
And it is only such feelings that resemble sense-
qualities enough to make an analogical argument from
them to the case of sense-qualities plausible. I there-
fore conclude that this argument by itself will not do
what it claims. It is largely confused with arguments
against naif realism based on relativity to an organ
and disagreement among different subjects. And
these can only be fully discussed when we deal with
the causal theory of perception.

We have now discussed all the important argu-
ments against naif realism that do not depend on
causality. They have commonly been accepted by
philosophers without criticism and handed down from
classical scepticism to Descartes, and from Descartes
and Locke to modem thought. We have found that
some are entirely futile ; that none make naif realism
absolutely impossible ; but that to maintain it in face
of the discrepancies between sight and touch and of
the visual perceptions of the same person in different
places and of different people at the same time would
be to assume an immensely complicated world of
largely imperceptible reals for which there is no
evidence except the doctrine of naif realism itself.
These complications are swept away by a causal view ;
but such a view has its own troubles, and these have
yet to be discussed. But before doing this we must
digress for a chapter and consider the Law of Causa-
tion itself. It is vital to science in general and to the
causal view of perception in particular, and it has
been severely handled by philosophers. To it we
must now turn.


CHAPTER II

ON CAUSATION ; AND ON THE ARGUMENTS THAT HAVE
BEEN USED AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS

In this chapter we propose to discuss Causation,
and more particularly certain problems connected with
it on which objections to causation have been based.
It is clearly quite useless to discuss the causal theory
of perception and its bearing on the reality of what we
perceive until we at least know whether there is any
reason to believe that causal laws are necessarily in-
valid. At the same time this chapter will omit some
considerations which, though vitally necessary for a
complete view of causation, are beyond our present
scope. I shall assume in fact the belief that the
results of proceeding upon the theory of probability
are correct without exhaustively discussing the nature
and validity of the axioms on which it is based. This
practically means that I shall assume what everybody
does assume that the ordinary processes of induction
do lead to propositions which are probably true ; though
we might find it very hard to say on precisely what
grounds we believed this.

What then does Causality mean ? This question
has, of course, been discussed ad nauseam, but the dis-
cussion has lead to so little agreement that it is worth
while to enter upon it again. There are two charac-
teristics about which most people would agree that


AUGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 73

they are essential to causality : (a) It deals with
the existent, and (6) it deals with it so far as it is
regarded as changeable. Unfortunately this happy
agreement is somewhat marred by the facts that exist-
ence is a very vague term, and that some people do not
believe that anything that changes exists. This dif-
ference, however, is largely verbal. In the first place,
although people cannot define existence and do use the
term with some looseness, yet it is possible to give
an extensive definition by pointing to the sorts of
things that everyone believes to exist. It is still
easier to point to the sorts of entities that people agree
in believing not to exist, and happily, this is really
what concerns us most. People mean by saying that
causation only applies to things that exist that it
applies, if at all, to what can change ; and they believe
that, if anything can change, it is things like chairs
and tables and minds, and not those like the proposi-
tions of Euclid and the multiplication table. What
would be agreed then is that, if causal laws 'apply
to anything it is to what can change in so far as it
changes.

Then, however, we have the trouble that some
people think that only the changeless is real. They
then proceed to identify reality with existence, and so
there ceases to be any genuine agreement as to that
to which causality appHes. But this is an unnecessary
mystification. We have already tried to show that
all the characteristics that appear must at least qualify
appearances and be true of them in order that we may
be able to argue from these characteristics of appear-
ances that they are not realities. Hence, even if
change be self-contradictory, and therefore all that
changes be appearance, yet these things that are con-
demned as appearances because they change must truly


74 ON CAUSATION;

change if the argument against their reality is to be
valid. Thus it might be true that what changes can
never be more than appearance and. that whatever
is real must be changeless ; but this does not
alter the fact that there is a whole world of
appearances which truly change. In as far as these
appearances and the supposed timeless reality are alike
in differing from such entities as the propositions of
Euclid and the multiplication table, we can say that
both the truly changing appearances and the truly
changeless reality exist. And then the person who
does and the person who does not consider that change
is a mark of appearance will be able to agree that, if
there be any causal laws, they apply to that part
of the existent that changes in so far as it does change.
They will only differ in that the former will have
to say that causality only applies to appearances,
whilst the latter will not see any reason to doubt that
it may also apply to reality. There wUl remain for
both the question : Are there any causal laws, and, if
so, what precisely do they claim to tell us ?

What is the characteristic of what we agree to call
cases of causation ? I throw a stone, we wUl suppose,
and it breaks a window. Here we say either that the
stone breaks the window or that I do so. And this is
said to be a causal action between me or the stone and
the window. The first point on which we must be
clear is what is to be called the cause. Keflexion
would be held to teU us that, although I may be called
the cause of breaking the window, this is at best
an elliptical way of speaking. It will be said that
accurately I am the cause of the motion of the stone,
and the stone is the cause of the breaking of the
window. But, so put, there is a distinction which is, I
think, generally made between the sort of things that


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 75

are causes and the sort of things that are effects. The
stone is a substance, in the sense that it is a subject
and cannot be made a predicate. But the breaking of
the window is not a substance ; it is an attribute of
the window. It can be both a subject and apparently
a predicate too. Not, however, a predicate in quite
the ordinary sense. If we say that a window is red
we no doubt generally mean that it is red now, but we
do not bring in any explicit reference to time. It may
have been red ever since it was a window. On the
other hand a window breaking is an event which
implies a definite beginning in time ; the window can-
not always have been breaking. (There are, of course,
other differences between a window being red and
being broken. The latter state is analysable and the
former is not ; but these differences are not relevant
for our present purpose.)

The effect here then is an event, but it is also
an event that, as we put it, ' happens to ' the window.
On the other hand, the cause, if taken to be the stone,
is not an event, but the sort of thing that has qualities
and to which events 'happen.' Are people prepared to
maintain this distinction between causes and effects,
which is undoubtedly implied in their habitual usage of
the terms ? I do not see that they can do so. There
is always more to be said about the stones that break
windows than that they are stones. In fact whilst
there are many stones that are moving which do not
break windows, there are no stones that break windows
that are not moving. Hence, it seems necessary to
hold that it is not merely the stone that is the cause of
the breaking of the window, but either (a) the motion
of the stone, or (b) the moving stone. Either the
cause is a substance qualified by the fact qf a certain
event happening to it, or it is the event taken as


76 ON CAUSATION;

happening in a certain substance. The eflfect, so far as I
can see, would always be said to be an event happening
to a certain substance and not a substance qualified by
the occurrence of a certain event in it. No one would
say that the effect was a window in the act of breaking
in the same sense as he might say that the cause was
a stone in the act of moving. For this would seem to
imply that the cause produced the window as well as
its state of breaking, which nobody believes.

Can we decide then, whether the cause ought to be
called the moving stone or the motion of the stone 1
We must first see what exactly is the difference
between the two. When we talk of the motion of
anything the phrase is ambiguous. We may mean
either (a) merely the fact that at different moments of
time the same thing is at different places, or (b) we
may mean a supposed quality which all bodies of which
(a) is true possess so long as (a) is true of them. If
(a) be all that is meant by the motion of a body, then
all the actual facts involved about it are its relations to
certain moments of time and to certain points of space.
It is at one point at one moment and at another point
at another moment, and that is all that there is to be
said about it. On the other hand, if {b) be true it also
possesses a quality all the time for any two moments of
which it is in different positions ; viz., a state of motion
which may be greater or less at different times. Now, if
causes be particular existents, as is commonly supposed,
the only particular existents involved in the motion of
the stone are the relations to different points of space
and time. Now it might be a true account of causality
to say that the cause of the breaking of the window
is the stone at-Sj-at-^i , the stone sit-s^-at-t^ ,-••', but
I do not think that this is what people suppose them-
selves to mean when they say that the motion of the


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 17

stone causes the breaking of the window. I think
they mean that, although all these relations exist, they
are not the cause of the breakage, but rather that they
involve in the stone the existence of an intensive mag-
nitude of some quality which is the real cause.

On the other hand, the people who think that it is
the moving stone that breaks the window and not the
motion of the stone would say that it seems absurd to
make a quality or state the subject of an active verb.
They would say that a state of motion no more breaks
windows than fair words butter parsnips, that it is
only a thing that has this quality or state to which the
active verb can be applied, and that the very fact that
those who hold the opposite view cannot take their
state of motion in the abstract as a cause but must
make it the state of motion of the stone gives away
their case.

The foregoing discussion as to what common-sense
takes to be the cause in interactions which it believes
to be causal may seem trivial, but it is really important
as introducing us to a duality of view whose further
elaboration leads to the conflicting philosophic notions
about causality. These two aspects are (1) that of
activity, and (2) that of regularity and predictability.
Activity may be a very discreditable category and we
may ultimately have to reject it, but the fact remains
that people do believe until they become sophisticated
that there is something more in causal laws than mere
uniformities. The activity view leads us to say that
a cause is always a thing in a certain state, and its
elaboration often leads to idealistic theories of the
universe. The uniformity view leads to a theory of
causation like that of Mach or of Mr Russell. Since it
is uniformity that interests science it is not surprising
that those who have approached causation from the


78 ON CAUSATION;

side of physics should have laid stress on that side of
it. Still we have no right to neglect the other side
which is historically more primitive and is certainly
believed to be equally essential by common-sense. If
it leads us into difficulties we must reject it, but
we must not reject it unheard.

We will begin then by attempting to understand
what is meant by the activity view. In the first place
we must notice that, when the law of causality is
stated in general — as distinct from particular causal
laws — in the form that every event has a cause, this
may indeed be meant in the uniformity sense of causa-
tion, but probably most of the assent that it gains
is received from the activity view. That to which
people think they are assenting when they agree that
every event has a cause would seem to contain two
quite distinct but often confused propositions. One is
a law of causation in the activity sense, and one is a
law of uniformity ; but neither is really the law of
causality in the sense that it must have if all causal
laws be merely uniformities. People mean (a) that
they do not think that things that are quiescent
suddenly explode into change unless something other
than themselves forces them out of their quiescence.
If such an explosion has apparently happened you will
find, they believe, on investigation either that they
were not really quiescent, or that they were not really
let alone by other things. And, even if you cannot
find evidence for either of these alternatives, they
would still say that it was certain that one or other of
them had been fulfilled. That a thing genuinely did
nothing for five minutes or five seconds and then
exploded into change without being acted upon from
outside, common-sense refuses to admit, whatever the
-appearances may be. (6) People are also prepared to


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 79

admit that if A forces B to have the state C at one
time it will force it to do so at any other time so long
as nothing else is forcing it in another direction on the
second occasion which was not acting on the first.
But neither of these propositions, which I think must
be what common-sense believes when it accepts the
general law of causality, are what the uniformity
theory of causal laws must mean by this general law.
The uniformity theory can only mean by the law of
causality (a) that there are causal laws ; and (6) that
every event is so connected with other events by one
or more such laws that if enough events had been
known its happening might have been predicted.
Now I do not think that common-sense would hold
that the proposition (6) here was self-evident in its
own right. It would agree to it because it would hold
that every event must have been forced to happen by
something else and that that something acts uniformly.
Thus (b) is only admitted by common -sense, because of
the proposition of which it is immediately certain that
every event must be forced to happen ; without this
neither proposition of the pure uniformity theory
would be held to be certain d priori. Common-sense
would say that, if it were offered the uniformity theory
alone, it would be prepared to admit that the law
of causality as offered would be very useful if true,
that clearly a great many events are connected by
laws of uniformity which allow of prediction, and that
experience proves that the best way to discover such
particular uniformities is to take the view that they
always can be discovered if we only look carefully
enough as a methodological postulate.

Can anything be made of this activity view ? Let
us take the law of causality first. All that is actually
open to investigation in it can be stated in terms of the


80 ON CAUSATION;

uniformity view. For all that possibly could be ob-
served on any theory is the changes in various things
and their temporal relations to each other. If, then,
the activity view were right all that could actually be
observed would be that, when a body A has not been
noticed to change at all for a finite interval and when
it suddenly begins to do so, we can always find either
that some other body has changed, or that A really
was changing during the intei'val when we supposed it
to be quiescent. But, taken as it stands, this amount
of observation gives a ridiculous law. Of course,
whether A has changed or not, we shall always be able
to find plenty of bodies that have changed during the
time in which we have been observing A. Ifv^e know
what forced A to become A' the activity view would
admit that we had discovered a causal law, but since
we can only decide that it was X and not Y that acted
upon A by observing uniformities in X and ^, it is no
thanks to the activity view that the causal law has
been discovered. Everything that can be observed
would have been the same if nothing but the uniformity
view were correct. Thus we reach two conclusions
about the activity view : (l) it is perfectly useless to
science, and (2) no kind of observation of external
things and their changes could prove it.

Some people have thought that the observation of
our volitions and their effects could prove it. This
opinion, however, is ridiculous. No doubt, when I will
to move my body I do have a peculiar feeling of effort,
and so too when I try to remember something that I
have forgotten. But then I am a spirit which has to use
a body to exercise its volitions, and it is not at all sur-
prising that the use of my body should give me feelings
which I call feelings of effort, since I know on other
grounds that the changes in my body are capable of


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 81

producing feelings in me. If other things that appa-
rently interact causally were spirits, interacted volun-
tarily, and had to use bodies to do so, there might be
some reason to suppose that they had the same sort of
feelings. Otherwise there is none. For we differ from
billiard balls in precisely that respect which makes
it probable that when billiard balls hit each other they
do not have feelings of effort.

I suppose that the answer to this will be as follows.
No doubt if billiard balls are not conscious they are
not conscious of feelings of effort. Still we are con-
scious, and our feeling is not a mere feeling, but is
indicative of something which is present in all cases
of genuine causation. It is not the feeling that is
activity, nor does being active just mean that we
have this peculiar feeling, but the feeling is an indi-
cation of some real quality in us when we exercise
causality. This real quality, it wiU be said, can be
assumed to be present in all cases of causality. Over
volitional causation, there would be just the same
controversy between the two schools as to what pre-
cisely is to be called the cause, as there was over what
was the cause when the stone breaks the window.
The beUever in activity would say : I, with this state
of volition, am the cause of the motion of my arm.
The descriptionist would say : From this particular
state of vohtion the motion of my arm at some later
moment can be inferred.

Supposing that my feehng of effort reaUy were
an indication of some quality in me when I exercise
volition, the question remains : What exactly is that
quality, and is it of such a kind that it can be supposed
to be present in stones, and bilUard balls, and other
non-voluntary causal agents ? What, in fact, is really
meant by transitive verbs? Clearly they imply a

B. p. 6


82 ON CAUSATION;

relation, though not necessarily to a different term
from their subjects. If I say ' I hurt,' the statement
is incomplete because we need to know what I hurt.
But what I hurt may be myself In fact, the dif-
ference between active and reflexive forms of transitive
verbs expresses on the activity theory the difference
between transeunt and immanent causation. It ap-
pears then, that the same thing can be both active
and passive with regard to the same action. But it
might be denied that the same thing is ever active and
passive at the same time with regard to the same action.
I may stick a pin further and further into my body for
some seconds, and there will be pain contemporaneously
with the motion of the pin. It would seem that in
this case I was active and passive at the same time
with regard to the same events. But this depends on
whether one accepts or rejects the view that causes
must always precede their effects in time, which has
not yet been discussed. If they must be earlier then
the position and qualities of the pin at earlier moments
will determine the pain at some later moment, and no
moment shall I be active with respect to the cause and
passive with respect to its effect, though I may be pas-
sive with respect to an effect of a previous cause which
is very like the one at present operating.

Again, it is an old truism that nothing can be per-
fectly passive ; the way in which it reacts depends as
much on its own nature as on that of what is said to be
active and is called the cause. The believer in activity
might say : No doubt the object in which the effect is
being produced is affected differently according to its
nature by the same' cause. But this does not make it
active in the same sense in which we hold that the
cause must be so. For the cause is constraining it to do
something which, though definite and determined by


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 83

its own nature, is yet not what its own nature would
have determined had the cause not acted. You could
only say that the body affected was active in the same
sense as the cause, if it actually modified the cause.
Now, in a great many cases, we know that no effect is
produced by the object in which the original effect
occurs in the object that causes it, and in these cases it
is reasonable to say that the object affected is, with re-
spect to the cause, purely passive. Thus, to take Lotze's
Ulustration of the style writing on wax, no doubt if the
wax were not soft the style would not write on it, but if
the style, unUke the wax, remains unchanged throughout
the whole process we can still say that with regard to this
causal action, the style is active and the wax passive.

Can this answer be accepted ? Let us begin by re-
membering that, on the present view of causation, the
cause is the style in a state of motion. But in what
state of motion ? Is it the state in which it would
have been if it had not touched the wax or anything
else, or the state in which it is when it is actually
writing on the wax ? If the former, then clearly the
wax is as active as the style ; in fact there is reciprocal
causation. The style is supposed to be active because
it determines states in the wax which its own nature
would not have determined alone. But the wax deter-
mines states of motion in the style which ex hypothesi
it did not have before it touched the wax, and there-
fore it is active in precisely the same sense as the style.
If, on the other hand, we choose to say that the cause
of the writing on the wax was the motion of the style
as it was actually determined to move when it was in
contact with the wax, then, indeed, the wax was not
active with respect to the immediate cause of the
writing. StUl, it was just as active in changing the
original motion of the style to that which is now taken

6—2


84 ON CAUSATION;

to be the immediate cause of the writing. It would
seem then, that if a thing is said to be active in so far
as its nature determines changes in something else
which, had the latter been left to itself, would not have
happened, the object in which the effect is produced
must in general also be said to be active with respect
to the cause.

It is worth while to point out how the above
discussion as to the implications of the terms ' active '
and ' passive ' agrees with what has already been said
as to the usual distinction that is made between the
sorts of things that are causes and those that are
effects. We said that by effects common-sense always
means the states of things, but that by causes it never
means the states of things alone, but always things in
certain states. Common-sense does not say that the
motion of a style makes marks on wax except ellip-
tically, for the statement that the style in motion
makes the marks. It does not say that the wax with
marks on it is the effect, but that the marks on the
wax are the effect. And when we come to discuss
activity and passivity it does not say that the marks
on the wax are the cause of the change of the style
in motion, but that the wax with its marks is the
cause in the change of motion of the style. In fact it
holds that objects with their states are active or pas-
sive, and, as effects are the states of things but are not
things, it does not say that effects are passive, but only
that the objects whose states are effects are so.

We have now seen that if all causes are active and
aU objects in which effects are produced are passive the
converse also holds. But this is no reason for rejecting
the activity view. No doubt if A be active with
respect to B, and B with respect to ^, it will follow
that A is both active and passive with respect to B.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 85

And this may appear impossible, since activity and
passivity with respect to the same object appear to be
incompatible. But when we examine a particular case
we see that there is no particular harm in such couples
of propositions. The style is said to be active with
respect to the wax, because, if it were not for the style,
the latter would not of its own nature change in the
way that it does. The wax is at the same time active
with regard to the style because the style if not in
contact with the wax would have moved differently.
At best this could only prove that causal action is
always reciprocal, by which it is meant that A never
affects B in any way without B affecting A in some
way (which may, of course, as an unusual particular
case be the same way as that in which A affected B).

The whole question of activity then, seems to come
to this one of a thing forcing another to do that which,
if it were left alone, it would not do. The question is :
Can anything more be made of this notion of ' forcing '
than what the descriptionist makes of it, viz., that there
are synthetic laws of the successive states of things in
accordance with which from a knowledge of the states
at a certain number of times those at any time can be
determined, and that generally the states of more than
one object have to be considered in order to determine
those even of one object ? To answer this question we
need to find out what is meant by what things would
or would not do ' of their own nature.' We generally
suppose that a thing left to itself wiU not suddenly go
out of existence or come to pieces. But we cannot
build very much on this. A shell appears to be a thing
with a nature. It does not cease to be a thing with a
nature when its fuse is lighted. But after a while it
explodes without further external interference. But
this is not really a fair example. A shell with a fuse is


86 ON CAUSATION;

not one thing, and it is not really quiescent when it
seems to be so. It has several parts, one of which
is the fuse, and the fuse has been lighted from outside
and continues to burn till it produces that effect on
the other parts of the shell that causes the disruption.
It would seem, therefore, that the thing that is expected
to keep quiescent of its own nature for ever must
either be perfectly homogeneous or really have been
undergoing no change for a finite time.

It is the latter that is the important characteristic.
It would be held to be just as surprising for a shell
with the fuse unlighted suddenly to explode as for
a shell with no fuse at all to do so, providing nothing
affected it from the outside. I think, then, that com-
mon-sense would deny that homogeneity is essential,
and would hold that even a huge system, like the
solar system, ought to do nothing if it were once
quiescent and even then left to itself. This belief
apparently contradicts the law of gravitation. No
doubt if the planets were all stopped dead for a finite
time and then let go, they would begin to move under
their mutual attractions ; but then the letting go of
them is an external event, and so the belief of common-
sense is compatible with the law of gravitation. Thus
the first point on which common-sense is certain as to
what things can do fi^om their own natures and what
they have to be forced to do, might be put as follows :
If any system, whether under the influence of other
objects or not, has been quiescent for a finite time
it can only be through the action of external objects
and not through its own nature that it ceases to be
quiescent. Such a system will neither change its
qualities nor move as a whole or in parts, nor cease to
exist as a whole or in parts unless it is forced to do so
by changes in objects external to it.


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 87

This opinion is closely bound up with the question
of the continuity of causation on which it is customary
for philosophers to base an antinomy with which we
shall later have to deal. The point is that, if what I
have said be what common-sense really holds, then
it may believe that within any system, so long as there
is no moment after which all the qualities and relations
of all the parts of it remain unchanged for a finite
interval, changes might proceed ' of its own nature '
without assistance from outside. But as soon as all
changes have ceased during a finite interval however
short, they cannot start again except by the action of
objects not contained in the system. Now this belief
sets a limitation on the kind of causal laws that are
possible. It cuts out immanent causal laws in which
the only condition is lapse of time. Such a law as :
After being quiescent for ten seconds the system A
will again begin to change is logically a possible one,
but it would be ruled out of court by the present view.

When we pass from changes fi:"om quiescence to
merely continuous states of change we find it much
harder to decide what a thing or system is supposed to
do ' by its own nature,' and what has to be forced on it
from outside. The distinction clearly assumes that we
can know what a thing's nature is, and what it can do
independently of the effects of other things on it.
Now this might be possible if we could consider
systems which are isolated and are not quiescent, and
find out their characteristics. We might then say that
the changes that went on in this period were due solely
to the nature of the system. But then the only
guarantee that you can have that the system is iso-
lated would be the knowledge that, as a matter of fact,
nothing outside it had acted upon it during the time of
observation. And the only way of judging on this


88 ON CAUSATION;

point brings us straight back to the other view of
causation. We can be sure that a system is isolated
when and only when we find that a selection of data
within it at various times will enable us to infer that
which we actually can observe at other times in it. Of
course, the fact that we cannot do this in a particular
case does not prove that the system is not isolated, for
we may merely be ignorant of the law of the changes
of the system. But until you have actually found
such a law immanent within the system you have
no right to suppose that the changes in that system
are expressions of its own nature in the sense required.
But even so, the isolation is only known to be relative.
Under the supposed conditions we can conclude that
the system has not been acted upon from outside while
we observed it, but we cannot assume that the section
of its history which we observe, and are able to bring
under purely immanent causal laws, was not begun
by action from outside which happened before we
started our observations. In fact, to be perfectly sure
that the changes that we observe in a system are
wholly the expression of its own nature we should
(i) have to discover purely immanent causal laws
which would give, as the state at any moment during
the time of observation, the state that is actually
observed at that moment ; and (ii) to be certain that
at no moment ex parte ante would those laws fail
to give what might have been observed. When both
conditions (i) and (ii) are satisfied we may say that
the changes of a thing or system are purely the ex-
pressions of its own nature^ It follow^, however, fi?om
the conditions that it is practically always impossible

1 Even so there may be necessary external conditions, and our apparent
ability to find a purely immanent law may be merely due to their per-
manence.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 89

to be certain that the changes in any system are
expressions of its own nature, and, therefore, impos-
sible to tell how much is forced upon it by other things.
I think, then, we may sum up our discussion of the
activity theory of causation as follows, (i) Activity
certainly cannot be observed in the external world.
We can only observe those regularities from which we
infer causal laws in the sense of the uniformity theory.
Hence, if you put activity into causation as an essential
element it must be something discovered by thought
and not based by the ordinary processes of induction
on what can be observed, (ii) With regard to the so-
called feeling of activity it seems almost certain that it
depends on the fact that we are minds and in volition
produce states in our bodies which are causally con-
nected with certain feelings in our minds. Hence, if
activity be identified with feeling of activity, there can
be no reason to believe that it is a general characteris-
tic of all causation unless we are already convinced on
other grounds of an idealism like that of Leibniz or
Lotze or Dr McTaggart, which holds that all sub-
stances are minds, (iii) On the other hand, if we
take the more promising position that the feeling
in the case of agents with minds and organic bodies is
not a mere mental event, but the sign of a real quality
of activity which exists whether felt or not in all
causal agents, we must be prepared to state what we
mean by this quality and what can be known about it.
We found that it was no objection to it that in many
and perhaps in all cases it would have to be found
both in the cause and in the effect ; because this would
merely mean that most or all cases of causation are
cases of reciprocal causation, which is a perfectly harm-
less proposition, (iv) But when we come to ask what
activity and passivity mean we are referred to the


90 ON CAUSATION;

notion of one thing forcing another to do what it
would not do of its own nature. When we came
to enquire into this we found that the only way to
decide what anything could do of its own nature was
hy the introduction of causal laws in the uniformity
sense of the word. We can express everything that
is conveyed by saying that one thing is forced to do
something which it would not do by its own nature
by the statement that its changes can only be inferred
by laws that make use as data of events in other
things. And we can state the belief of common-sense
that all systems that begin to change after being
quiescent for a finite time have to be forced from out-
side in terms of the rival theory by saying that a law
of causation that is immanent to a system can only be
found for continuous changes. Thus the notion of
forcing things to do what their nature alone would not
let them do is perfectly compatible with and explicable
by the view of causation that reduces the latter purely to
causal uniformities. But this is the only meaning that
has been proposed for the terms active and passive,
and therefore there seems no reason to suppose that
they stand for qualities involved in all cases of causa-
tion over and above causal regularities, (v) So far as
I can see the only way to retain activity would be
to say that it is just an unanalysable quality, like
red or green, to the reality of which our feeling
when we exercise volition bears witness. With regard
to this modest claim we can merely say that there
seems little reason to believe that our feelings do attest
the existence of such a quality even in the case of
causation by volition, that there is still less to believe
in it in other cases of causation, and that anyhow the
important part of causation has now been shown to lie
wholly in the causal regularities.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 91

We shall therefore assume for the future that the
essence of causality is causal laws and that these are
laws of a certain kind about change. We want in the
rest of this chapter to discuss the nature of these laws
and the objections which philosophers have brought
against them, with a view to seeing how far they can
be trusted. The first important question is : How
exactly are causal laws related to things ?

Causal Laws and Things. This question keeps
us very close to our old discussion about what things
do by their own nature and what they are forced to do
by other things. Just as the activity view overrated
the importance of substances in causality by saying
that all causes are substances in certain states, so the
descriptionist view is liable to underrate it by talking
as if causal laws merely connected events in general
and not events in particular substances. Take for
instance the law that successful volition is followed
by pleasure. The descriptionist is, no doubt, right in
saying that this law means that whenever successful
desire occurs it will be followed by pleasure. But
what is also important to notice is that the general
law only holds when the volition and the pleasure are
supposed to be states of the same person, whatever
that may mean. Smith's successful desire may very
well cause pain in Jones. The notion of cause then is
very closely connected with that of things, since it
is necessary to state to what things the events that
are connected as cause and effect happen.

What then is meant by one thing independently
of causation ? This depends on whether the thing in
question be a mind or a body. In our case it is more
important to consider bodies. With regard to them I
think that we are simply forced to deny that there is
anything ultimate or recondite in the notion of one


92 ON CAUSATION;

thing. There are two different points to note in the
definition of one thing : (i) What distinguishes it at
a given moment from other things at that moment ?
and (ii) What makes us call a certain succession of
states the states of one thing that persists through
time ? And the answers that I would suggest to these
two questions are (i) Homogeneity at a given moment
of sense qualities within a definite boundary in space,
and (ii) That the changes that these qualities and
this boundary undergo are sensibly continuous. Both
these crude statements will need discussion and quali-
fication. We will take them in order.

(i) What precisely do we mean by saying that at a
given moment one thing is an aggregate of qualities in
various relations and all within one definite boundary
which is closed ? On this view a state of a thing is a
quality which is a member of such an aggregate. The
assertion that P is a state of a thing S, which is gene-
rally put in the form S is P, means that P is a member
of that aggregate of related qualities within a closed
boundary to which we give the name of the thing <S.

Various objections can be brought against this view.
The main ones are (a) that qualities themselves have
qualities and relations, and clearly they are not aggre-
gates of qualities in relation and within a boundary ;
and (6) that the account that I have just given of
what is meant by predicating a quality of a thing is
not what is meant, but that it is essential to introduce
the notion of a substance distinct from the qualities.

(a) We do not deny that qualities have qualities
and relations and that these can be predicated of them.
Nor do we deny that the same form of words is
used to denote the two sorts of predication ; e.g. there
is no difference of form between * this table is red,'
and 'this colour is red.' But we shall do well to


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 93

remember that a great many different meanings are
covered by the same word — 'is.' For example, by
implicitly assuming that ' is ' means ' is identical with,'
Mr Bradley comes to the most startling conclusions
about substantives and adjectives ; but surely no one
supposes that, because the same form of words is used
to express identity and inherence, therefore they must
mean the same thing or else nothing at all. In fact,
the argument that our account of the predication
of qualities of substances does not cover the predi-
cation of qualities of qualities comes very ill from the
supporters of substance, since they are in precisely the
same position. For their theory of the first sort of
predication is that it asserts the inherence of a quality
in a substance, whilst their theory of substance being
that it is that which can be a subject but not a predi-
cate, it is clear that the inherence view cannot also
apply to the predication of a quality of a quality.

I do not think then that the fact that qualities
can have predications made about them helps the sub-
stantial account of the states of things as against ours.
What ours requires is merely a further discussion of
the nature of the relations between the qualities and
of the aggregate of which they are elements in those
cases in which the aggregate is said to be a thing with
the elements as its qualities.

We said that a closed boundary is the essential
characteristic of one thing at each moment. As long
as there is a perceptible gap between a candle and
a candle-stick no one would think of calling them one
thing ; but, as soon as the candle is stuck into the
candlestick it is felt to be reasonable for many purposes
to call them one thing. Of course, as it is also known
that they can be put apart, and quite frequently are so,
it is also reasonable to call this one thing an aggregate


94 ON CAUSATION;

of two things. But even this is mainly because the
old spatial boundaries are^^till visible. People would
say that whiskey in one glass is one thing and water in
another glass is another, but, when they are mixed, they
would be much more likely to call the whole one thing.
Thus, if our theory be right, one of the main circum-
stances in constituting one thing of which qualities
can be predicated is the possession by those qualities
of the quality of extension and their standing in
spatial relations. The qualities of one thing at a given
moment are extended sense-qualities like colour, tem-
perature, the objects of tactual sensation, etc., which
together occupy an extension outside the boundary of
which there are either no or very different perceptible
qualities for a finite distance. Some of the qualities
may occupy the whole extension and more than one can
do this provided they be not synthetically incompatible.
Others again may occupy only part of the extension
as do the coloured flowers that form the pattern of a
carpet. The great condition is that there should be as
much continuity within the boundary as possible and
as much discontinuity without it. It is to be noted that
extension and shape occupy a different place in this
notion of a thing from the other qualities like colours,
etc. Primarily, extension and shape are qualities of the
other qualities. But the bounding shape and the ex-
tension contained within it are predicated of the thing
as its shape and extension. Thus, what is funda-
mental is the notion of certain sensible qualities having
extension and shape. I do not think that this notion
can be analysed further. Without some extended
quality we have no definite shape or extension, and
these qualities can only exist in some shape and exten-
sion. Whilst this appears to me to be all that common-
sense means by one physical thing at a given moment,


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 95

it is important to remember that in any particular
case a great deal is involved beside direct perception.
Direct perception may give us colours in a continuous
visible boundary, and it may give us temperatures in a
continuous tactual boundary ; but we need more than
direct perception to tell us that the coloured surface
and the hot surface are one and the same thing. For,
as we have already noted, it is partly a matter of
iaference, and partly a matter of definition, to identify
a seen with a felt boundary, either as to position or to
shape. And then the identification is not a ' finding
identical ' of the objects of two different sense-per-
ceptions, but a correlation of them with a third unper-
ceived common shape through their correlation with
each other.

(6) We can now turn to the other objection that at
any rate what I have suggested as being what is meant
by one thing and the states of that thing at a given
moment is not what we do mean, but that it is neces-
sary to introduce the notion of substance and inherence.
As we are now talking about the predication of quali-
ties of things it would seem that by ' substance ' is to
be understood that which can be a subject but not
a predicate. Now let us consider a red thing. On
our view, to say that it is red merely means that
an instance of redness occupies the whole or part of a
certain bounded extension within which are a number
of other extended qualities and without which for a
finite distance there are not perceptible extended
qualities of at all the same kind. It also allows us to
say that the thing in question is a subject and not a
predicate. For, as a matter of fact, the thing never
does stand in the same sort of relation to other things
in which the qualities that constitute it stand to each
other. If it did they would cease to be other things.


96 ON CAUSATION;

But I grant at once that not all propositions that
assert qualities of physical things can be interpreted in
the way I suggest. To say ' this thing is red and hot '
is of the same form as to say 'this thing is triangular.'
But if we make the former mean that redness and
temperature exist within a certain boundary, we can
hardly make the latter mean that triangularity exists
within a certain boundary. Yet I do not see that we
are forced to say that, since something must be tri-
angular and since we cannot interpret the proposition
in the same way as ' this thing is red,' therefore we
are forced to appeal to substance. For if we ask what
is triangular it is not a substance but the qualities. It
is the red and the temperature that are triangular.
There are, however, some important points to notice
about this. In the first place the ' is ' here does not mean
the same as in ' this is red or hot ' when we take
the shape as fundamental. Another point to notice is
that in the case of extended qualities the ' is ' is
in a certain sense reciprocal. ' This triangle is red '
and 'this red is triangular' are equivalent to each
other. And the further development of this brings us
to another consideration. It is probably not the
universals redness or temperature that are triangular,
but ' this red ' and ' this temperature.' Of course it is
not a completely cogent argument in favour of this
view to say that since, e.g., there are red circles and red
triangles and since the same thing cannot be both
circular and triangular at once, therefore it cannot be
redness that has these spatial qualities. Some such
complex statement as ' redness is triangular here ' and
' redness is circular there,' would meet this objection.
If these were analysable into ' redness is triangular '
and ' redness is here,' etc., the difficulty would no doubt
recur, but there is no reason to assume this. But I do


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 97

not see that we can possibly avoid introducing par-
ticulars somewhere and it is the insistence on particulars
which seems to me to be what is true in the substance
theory. I would analyse ' this red is triangular ' and ' this
triangle is red ' into this is an instance of red and an
instance of triangularity, and it seems to be an ds priori
certainty that any instance of any colour is an instance
of some shape, and any instance of any shape must also
be an instance of some other universal, such as colour
or temperature. What is true in the substance theory
then has no special reference to the unity of a thing
with a number of qualities but refers to the relations
of instances to their universals, a relation which would
equally hold in a case of a particular which was an
instance of only a single universal.

There is one other point to be mentioned before
leaving this subject. Objectiops have been brought
against substance which, if valid, would be equally
fatal to particulars. Have they any weight 1 The
objection is that substance is meaningless, that
nothing can be said about it. If this be true we
could object that particulars are meaningless and
nothing could be said about them. The objection is
not well expressed. Strictly, a thing has meaning
when acquaintance with or knowledge about it either
enables one to infer or causes one by association to
think of something else. I see no reason why everything
should have meaning in this sense. What I suppose to
be intended is that the word substance has no meaning
because no propositions can be known about substance
in abstraction, and, therefore, the hearing or seeing of
the word does not cause one to think about anything
definite. To see whether there is anything in this
objection we must consider for a moment what is meant
by ' vicious abstractions ' which (like most vicious
B. p. 7


98 ON CAUSATION;

characters) have furnished an inexhaustible theme
of conversation especially in Hegelian circles.

The attacks of Berkeley and Hume on abstraction
rested on mere mistakes, on the confusion of ideas
with images. You cannot have an abstract image, and
since ideas were confounded with images, it was thought
that you could not h9,ve an abstract idea (by which
they meant the idea of an abstraction, for of course all
ideas as such are concrete particulars). There is then
no general objection to abstraction. But there is a
common mistake that can be made over abstraction
and that is to assume that whenever two things can be
conceived separately they can exist separately. And
even this must not be rejected without further analysis
as a sheer mistake, for it has three forms. The most
serious form is to abstract an universal and then expect
it to be able to exist like a particular. I should
suppose that it was a very rare error. A less culpable
form is the following. There seem to be universals so
related that an instance of one is always also an
instance of the other, and this connexion can be judged
d, priori. For example, to say that there might exist
a triangle which had nothing but geometrical qualities
would not be to expect triangularity to exist like a
particular, for we are talking of particular triangles
and making no confusion. Where we err is in for-
getting what seems to be an d priori law that nothing
can be an instance merely of triangularity. Finally
there are universals that are found in practice always
to have gone together, thus giving rise to empirical
laws of coexistence. Such are ruminance and cloven-
footedness. In these cases it would not be termed
a vicious abstraction to assert the possibility of
the existence of instances of one that are not also
instances of the others. Here ' possible ' has the


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 99

fairly definite meaning of contradicting no d priori
law.

Now substances and particulars are certainly not
vicious abstractions in the sense that anyone supposes
that they could exist apart from their qualities and rela-
tions. As a matter of fact I think people have been
unduly timid in this direction, for I see no obvious
objection to the existence of terms that stand in
relations but have no qualities except those of standing
in the relations in which they do stand. This does not
mean that they have no nature ; they are what they
are and they differ immediately from other terms.
I have already suggested that we approach (though we
certainly do not reach) such terms in tastes and smells.
But where people find an objection seems to me in the
following place. Where we make an abstraction and
it is justifiable, although it may be that the abstracted
terms cannot exist apart and are not supposed to
be able to do so, yet in order to make the abstraction
it is essential that each element abstracted should have
a definite nature and that something can be said about
it in separation from the other elements. Thus, no one
supposes that triangles can exist without colour or
something equivalent ; yet quantities of propositions
can be asserted about triangles owing to the definite
nature of triangularity without any reference to the
other element which must be present in any existent
triangle. But this condition, it wUl be said, is not
fulfilled in the case of substance in abstraction or
particulars in abstraction ; for, by abstracting their
qualities and relations, you have removed all that
could be said of them. And it is useless to reply that
there is no need to consider them in abstraction
because they exist and are given only with their
qualities and relations. For this very statement

7—2


100 ON CAUSATION;

assumes that what exists and is given is a complex
in which quahties and relations and that which has
qualities and stands in relations can be separated
in thought. When I say : ' This is- red and triangular/
I do not mean that redness is red or triangular or that
triangularity is red or triangular and I must therefore
be talking about some third thing different from both
redness and triangularity.

But does all this really involve any objection to
particulars ? When we say that we take a particular
in abstraction all that we mean is that we leave out of
account all the true propositions such as ' X is red,' or
' X is triangular,' or ' X is more virtuous than F,' and
confine ourselves to the single proposition ' X \s a, par-
ticular.' All the other propositions which are true of
X at all remain so whether we choose to consider them
or not. So it is false to say that nothing can be said
about X ; and what must be meant when people say
that nothing can be said about X in abstraction is that
when you confine yourself to saying that 'X is a
particular ' you convey no information at all. And this
seems to me to be false. Particularity is as good an
universal as redness or triangularity ; and it is as pos-
sible to recognise it. Probably people make a confusion
of the following kind. In the first place many uni-
versal imply the presence of other universals in any
instance of them either in accordance with a priori or
empirical laws. Thus if X be triangular we know that
it must also be an instance of some other universal like
colour and also that if it be a Euclidian triangle the
sum of its angles will equal tt. Now the statement
that X is a particular does not have many interesting
implications like this ; at best it leads to some not very
certain propositions about its relations to space and
time, as, e.g., that it cannot be at two places at once.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 101

But it cannot be an objection to the reality of an
universal that it is not connected by a priori laws
with many other universals, though this fact may
make it difficult to recognise and impossible to describe.
Secondly, many universals are analysable and can be
defined, and people have a tendency to think that
there is something disreputable about anything that
cannot be analysed and defined ; forgetting that if you
are to be able to grasp anything at all you must be
able to grasp something without further analysis.
Now particularity cannot be analysed. The result of
these two facts is that it can neither be defined nor
described, but must be either directly recognised or
missed altogether ; though I can hardly suppose that
anybody has really missed it, yet the fact that they
cannot describe or define it, accompanied by false logical
theories which overrate these two processes, has led
many to deny that there is such an universal at all.

We can therefore turn to —

(ii) Here we have to discuss the theory that the
unity of a thing through time depends on the sensible
continuity of the boundary and the qualities within
it throughout their changes. It is sometimes said
that every change demands something permanent and
that this permanent is substance. If the thing at one
moment was nothing but sense-qualities in a boundary,
how can you say that it changes continuously or dis-
continuously, it will be asked ? A good deal of un-
necessary difficulty has been found in change owing
to the fact that the proposition ' X changes ' has been
taken too rigidly. ' X changes ' seems to present the
following difficulty : Whatever else it may mean it
implies that X had some Equality x^ at a certain time and

1 I am using quality in a very wide sense here ; it will of course include
relations


102 ON CAUSATION;

that it has now ceased to have it, and either replaced
it by another quahty x^ or not at all. Now it is said :
Either a thing at any moment is identically the
same as its qualities in relations of a certain kind, or
we mean by X a permanent substratum. But, if we
mean the former, then it is clear that the X of which
ajj was a quality is not the same X which has the
quality x^ and not the quality x^ so that if, in the
proposition ' X has changed,' you refer either to the X.
that had x^ or the X that has x.^ your statement is
false. The X that was x-^ has not changed ; it has
absolutely ceased to exist. And the X that is x^ has
clearly not changed, for here it is at the moment of
predication. Hence people suppose that they are
forced by the fact of change to say that the X that
they mean is something different from the qualities in
their relations as they are at any moment, that it is,
in fact, the common substratum of these successive
sets of qi^lities in relation.

But there is a very short way with this view as a
solution of the difficulties. For, if ' X has changed '
refers to the substance common to the two successive
states, it is clearly false, since ex hypothesi the sub-
stance is the same in both cases. To this the answer
will be that the full statement of the substantial view
of change is as follows : ' X has changed ' means that
there is one substance underlying two successive
states, but that these states differ. This, however,
does not really help us. For the only way to recog-
nise identity of substance is by identity of qualities ;
hence, since the qualities at two different moments are,
ex hypothesi, different in part at any rate, what right
have you to assert that the substance is the same ?

Accordingly some people thought that they could
have change neither with substance nor without it, and


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 103

so they rejected it altogether. It is clear that the whole
question turns on how much sameness is needed to
allow us to say that two things perceived at different
times and in part different from each other, the same.
If people had reflected they would have seen with
Hume that nothing like complete identity of qualities
is needed to make two things observed at different
times to be regarded as the same thing. All that is
necessary is that the successive objects of observation
should be continuous with each other. By this we
mean that, the shorter the interval between the suc-
cessive observations, the more nearly will the objects
perceived at the two moments be found to resemble
each other in position, configuration and sensible
qualities. When no difference can be found in two
successive observations we say that what is observed
has not changed in the interval. When we have
perceived successive differences and yet continuity in
the sense which I have mentioned we say : Such and
such a thing has changed. By this we do not mean
that any sort of substance has remained permanent all
through, but we mean that we have either observed or
have reason to believe that we could have observed
that the whole process was continuous in the sense
mentioned above from that stage which we now
observe to that one which we observed some time
ago and called ' This X.' Thus our theory is perfectly
competent to account for the statement that a thing
changes and yet is permanent; whilst the substance
theory adds nothing useful to our own.

We can now return to the subject of the relation
of causal laws to things, since we now know what is
meant by things and their states. We find from our
discussion of the meaning of one thing a considerable
support for our rejection of the view that causation


104 ON CAUSATION;

means that one thing forces another to act in a way
in which its own nature would not let it act if it
were left to itself For we now see that what con-
stitutes one thing in the physical world is nothing of
a deep or recondite character, and that its nature is
just its qualities from moment to moment in the rela-
tions in which they constitute a thing. These suc-
cessive qualities in relation still remain precisely what
is meant by the nature of the thing even though
they would be different if it had different relations
to other things. We saw that, so far from causation
involving two separate natures and the forcing of one
by another, it was ultimately only after the intro-
duction of causality and by means of it that we could
theoretically define what a thing does of its own nature,
and that even then this definition is doomed to
remain purely theoretical. In spite of this, since the
notion of thing is of great importance, it is in general
true to say that it is necessary to state causal laws not
merely as holding between successive qualities, but
rather between the successive qualities of definite sorts
of things, that phrase being defined in the sense that
we have given. For in general it will not be irrele-
vant to the truth of a causal law whether the various
states mentioned in it occur in the same or in different
complexes.

We can now express what is meant by the dis-
tinction between immanent and transeunt causality
and can see that there is no difference in principle be-
tween the two that would justify the immense distinction
that Leibniz and Lotze make. Immanence is in the first
instance always relative to a definite system, and a
definite set of events. A causal law is immanent
to a given system S when all the data that are
required by it are to be found within S at various


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 105

times and all the states that can be inferred are
states of parts of S. But S may be a system with
many different parts. Then relatively to the same
causal law that law will be transeunt with respect to
any part of S that we like to choose, because to infer
its states we shall have to consider the states of other
parts of S.

Thus an isolated system of particles in Mechanics is
a system all of whose configurations are determined by
causal laws immanent to the system, but the position of
any particular particle in it is determined by laws
which are transeunt with respect to it. This is the
true distinction between transeunce and immanence.
But the notion of one thing enters in the following
way. The isolated system under immanent causality
may also under our definition be one thing and then
we come to the more common-sense of immanence as
Lotze and Leibniz use the term. On the other hand
the system in which immanent laws of causation hold
may very well be a selection of separate things in our
sense, as indeed is the case with the isolated mechani-
cal system of particles. In such a case Leibniz and
Lotze would have overlooked the immanence in the
whole system, just because the system was not one
thing, and fastened on the transeunce within it with
respect to its various elements. But our discussion as
to what is the criterion of one thing will enable us to
see that both sides are equally valid and that there is
no possible ground in the nature of thing to make
causality immanent with respect to it intelligible and
causality transeunt with respect to it a mystery or
a contradiction. Our main conclusion then in this sec-
tion is that anyone who can accept immanent causality
has no right to strain at transeunt causality ; and when
it is remembered that it is the straining at transeunt


106 ON CAUSATION;

causality that is one ground of Leibniz's monadism and
the sole ground of Lotze's belief in M, this result will
be seen to be of some importance.

I now pass to a second question about Causation,
viz. : —

Causal Laws and Time. On this relation of
causation to time many of the arguments against
causal laws have been based. It was asserted by
Hume that cause must be prior to effect and con-
tiguous to it in time. The latter phrase however
implies that there are contiguous moments in time and
this contradicts the general belief that the time series
is continuous. Thus if there were reason to suppose
that in any causal law cause and effect must be con-
tiguous there would be some grounds for denying that
there can be any causal laws. Hume, however, offers
no argument for his position. He just says quite
bleakly, that ' nothing can operate in a time or place
which is ever so little removed from those of its
existence'.' For a person who was so convinced of
the value of Newton's law of gravitation as to wish to
introduce something like it into the mental world the
statement with regard to space seems an odd one, and,
as that with regard to time has no evidence for it and
is incompatible with that continuity of time in which
most people believe, we need not consider that we
have here an antinomy. We need not reject causation,
but only Hume's doctrine that cause and effect must be
contiguous.

This leaves us with the alternatives that they are
continuous with each other, that they are contemporary,
or that they are separated by finite intervals. At
this point Bradley appears on the scene with an argu-
ment against causation which attempts to prove that

1 Treatise on Human Understanding, Part ill, § 2.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 107

cause and effect both must and cannot be continuous
with each other. The arguments are (i) Cause and
effect must be continuous with each other, for other-
wise there will be a blank time between them during
which the cause does not operate. And, if it does not
operate for a finite time however short, why should it
ever do so ? (ii) Cause cannot be continuous with
effect, for, if so, then if we take an infinitely thin
section across the stream of events it will contain
the cause of all that follows ; and yet, since it wUl
occupy no time at all, it will not be an existent^.

(i) The thesis must either be supposed to assume
the activity view of causation, which we have rejected,
or it will need to be greatly modified. As it stands it
assumes that the cause forces the event to happen
as soon as it is strong enough to do so. If then it was
not strong enough to do so at the beginning of the
interval and nothing happened to it in the interim
it is impossible on the activity theory to understand
how it came to be more successful at the end of the
interval. If, on the other hand, it became strong
enough at the end of the interval then the last cause is
the state at the end and not at the beginning and
so the cause once more is continuous with the effect.
After our rejection of the activity view of causation
such arguments will leave us very cold. It is of
interest to note that Sigwart has an almost identical
argument which is so honestly and clearly put that its
futility becomes obvious to the most casual reader.
He says ; ' If effect consists in a change, and if we
can speak of causation only in so far as a change occurs,
if therefore nothing is effected until the change occurs,
then the action of the cause and the resulting effect
must necessarily be simultaneous ^' This is word for

1 Appearance and Reality, pp. 60—61. ^ Logic, Vol. ii. p. 104.


108 ON CAUSATION;

word what we have made out of Bradley's argument
for the thesis. It comes simply to this, that a thing is
not a cause unless it produces an effect and therefore
you have no right to call it a cause until it has
produced its effect. It is clear that such an argument
is merely verbal, and it is not worth while to consider
it any further.

Since the thesis, when stated on the activity view,
becomes a mere play upon words we will see if any
better fate awaits it when stated in terms of a descrip-
tionist theory of causation such as we are trying to
defend. Stated in terms of the latter view, Bradley's
argument -would be : No state that persists for a finite
time can be a datum in a causal law from which the
state which begins when that time is over can be
inferred. The first thing to be said of this proposition
is that if it happened to be true, it would be a very
miraculous thing that people should ever have thought
that they had discovered and verified causal laws.
For it is tolerably certain that no one has ever been
acquainted with a state that lasted for no time at all.
At best he can only have taken a kind of average over
a short duration. The second point is that the propo-
sition gets such plausibility as it has by being con-
founded with the other proposition that nothing that
has been completely quiescent for a finite time can
have its subsequent changes accounted for by purely
immanent causation. But that does not at all mean
that a persistent state in a system may not be one
of the data in a law of transeunt causation connecting
this state and those of other systems with future
states of the at present quiescent system. If a billiard
ball be at rest there is no purely immanent law of
causation connecting its quiescent states with any
future movements that it may have. But its mass


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 109

and position, though they have persisted for a finite
time unchanged are all-important elements in a trans-
eunt causal law connecting its future positions with
those of another billiard ball that I have just hit in its
direction.

I think the above discussion will enable us to see
exactly what is to be accepted in the doctrine that
cause and eifect are continuous, and subject to what
assumptions it is to be accepted, (i) It is assumed
by common-sense that no system that has been com-
pletely quiescent for a finite time can have its future
changes, if any, predicted by purely immanent causal
laws. This I think must be taken to be a belief about
causation which most people would consider self-
evident, (ii) It is quite admitted that the change
in B which is one of the data from which the states
of A subsequent to its quiescence can be inferred by
a transeunt causal law need not happen at the moment
at which A starts once more to change. (Indeed, if
time be continuous there is not a moment at which A
starts to change. ^ is a for all moments after t and
before t' and ^ at t' and moments after it ; so that
there is either no last moment at which it is a or
no first moment at which it is /S.) But if there be
a finite gap between the occurrence of the event in
B and of the new one that can be inferred in A, then
taking the systems A and B together they will be
a system within which this particular causal law is
immanent. Hence the whole system A + B will have
been quiescent for a finite time and we shall have
to seek a third system C for a law transeunt with
respect to ^-1-5 which shall account for its emergence
fii-om quiescence. To put it in symbols the maxim
(i) holds that if a system A in which there has been
no change for a finite time t takes on the new quality


no ON CAUSATION;

fi at the end of that time then we must go outside of
A to another system B and a state h in it to account
for the occurrence of ^. But if h occurs some time
within the interval t and B remains quiescent for
a finite term in the state h then, if we take A and B
together as one system, that whole system will be
quiescent with the states h and a for a finite time. If
the original maxim be true this demands an appeal to
a third system C to account for the emergence of
A + B from this quiescent state. Hence the maxim (i)
compels you to press forward until you have reached a
system which includes A in which something is hap-
pening through the whole of the interval t which
in A alone is blank and part of which in A + B is
blank and so on. Thus if we accept the maxim that
the future changes of any quiescent system that
follow its quiescence can only be explained by trans-
eunt causal laws, we have to say that the complete
account of any case of causation compels us to proceed
until we reach a continuous causal series immanent in
a larger system which includes A. I must confess
that the maxim does seem to me self-evident. I can-
not believe in an immanent causal law of the form :
When the system A has been in the state a for 2^
minutes we can infer that it will become /8 inde-
pendently of anything that happens in the rest of the
universe. I therefore have to accept the conclusion of
Bradley's thesis, though not his argument for it, and
to suppose that in the end all causation is continuous.
Let us pass then to

(ii) This attempts to prove that causation cannot
be continuous. This is much wider in scope than the
thesis ; and here again Bradley's argument seems to
rest entirely on the activity view of causation for its
plausibility. Each infinitely thin section is to cause


AKUUMEJNTS AGAiJNIST CAUSAL LAWiS 111

the next and yet, being infinitely thin it will occupy
no time and so not exist. In the first place we must
not put the argument as I have just done in the form
that each section causes the next, for that would be
to revert to the theory of contiguity which we have
rejected. We are assuming continuity of time and so
there will be no next. But I suppose that the real
point of the argument is that all your data will be
states without duration and that this is a vicious
abstraction. We must distinguish two different sorts
of objection to states without duration : (a) Meta-
physical objections, and (b) Epistemological ones.

I have already hinted at the epistemological objec-
tion in discussing the thesis. How could you discover
causal laws, if their data are states without duration,
since you certainly cannot directly experience such
states 1 But here we have the metaphysical objection :
How could such abstractions be the causes of any-
thing ? (a) It seems to me that the metaphysical
difficulty which is the only one on which Bradley
touches is not really a serious one. It is only when
you take the view that the cause must be an active
substance with all the solidity of chairs and tables
that there is any difficulty in the fact that events
without duration claim to be causes. When you
merely mean that if you know enough events at
enough moments you can infer some events at all
moments the relation all through is a semi-logical one
between these thin events which are at a moment but
do not endure for a time, and there is nothing very
startling about it provided you can persuade yourself
that there can be states without duration and that you
can know them. But certain metaphysical questions
about change are raised. This question is evidently a
general one connected with change and not- with


112 ON CAUSATION;

causality in particular. We may best approach it from
the point at which we left change when we discussed
what was meant by one thing and by its altering and
yet remaining the same thing. For our explanation of
the changes of things which are complexes of qualities
in relation assumed the changes of qualities and rela-
tions, and questions may arise over the latter as well as
the former. A piece of iron, let us suppose, was black ;
it is heated and it becomes red. This we explained to
mean that a certain complex of quaUties altered in
a certain well-defined sense. But we did not discuss
what was meant by the black changing to red and all
the time remaining a co):bur. Change of qualities and
relations may be of two kinds. Either a quality is
a member of a complex for a time and then ceases
altogether to exist in it, or else we have continuous
change of a quality. As examples of the two sorts of
change of quality we may take (a) an overcooled liquid
suddenly crystallising, and (0) a body steadily rising in
temperature, (a) With the overcooled liquid the
quality of fluidity has been present for a finite time.
A crystal is introduced and suddenly it solidifies. The
quality of fluidity has thus ceased to be a quality com-
bined with the other members of the complex and has
been replaced by that of solidity. To avoid complica-
tions we will confine ourselves to the change of tactual
qualities that has thus suddenly taken place. The two
successive tactual qualities are synthetically incom-
patible ; they cannot be attached at the same time
to the whole of the same bounded extension. The
extended fluid quality has ceased to occupy the given
boundary and it has not appeared anywhere else.
This kind of change then involves that a quality may
exist for a finite time in a given boundary and then cease
to exist there altogether. And another quality that did


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 113

not exist there before may begin to do so at a moment
such that at all moments before it and after an earlier
one the other quality was there. I do not think that
any analysis can be made of what is meant by existence
with a certain boundary during a certain time. The
only question then is whether there is any difficulty in
saying that a certain quality exists for a certain time
at a certain place and that at other times it does
not exist there. It will be said : if you really mean
the same quality how can it have different relations at
different times ? How can it both exist here and not
exist here ? This difficulty is I think met by Mr
Russell's^ position that there can be no objection to a
quality having a relation to certain moments of time
and points of space which it does not have to other
moments of time and points of space, just as there is
no objection to the Senate House being to the left of
King's and to the right of Trinity when viewed from
the river. It is proper to note that it is not necessary
to drag in absolute time with moments in order to
recognise this as the correct solution of the problem.
The temporal relations of events have magnitude.
Hence we can say that there is no objection to fluidity
having that complex relation to existence and the
Norman Conquest and a certain boundary which is
called ' existing here from a time t after the Conquest
to a time / after it ' and not having the relation to the
same terms called ' existing here from a time t' after
the Conquest to a time t" after it.' For there can be
no reason why the same set of terms should not have
some relations of a kind and not others of that kind.
Thus the principle of Mr Russell's solution remains
the same whether we have an absolute time series as
he supposes or only relative time. On the former

1 Principles of Mathematics, Chap. Liv.
B. P. 8


114 ON CAUSATION;

assumption change means that a quality has the same
relation to existence and various moments of time
and does not have it to other moments of time. On
the latter the same entities have some but not all of
the relations of a certain kind to each other.

(/S) We can now, therefore, leave the question
of sudden changes from a quality that has persisted
for a finite time, and come to continuous change
which leads to Bradley's difficulty. We are going to
take as our example a body steadily rising in tempera-
ture. This involves that at no moment is the degree
of temperature the same as at any other moment how-
ever near. Now only definite degrees of temperature
exist. But if the change be continuous no definite
degree persists for any time at all. If it exists it
only does so at a moment and not through a duration.
And so far as I can see the plausibility that is left
in Bradley's antithesis after we have rejected the
activity view of causation rests on the belief that
if none of the successive degrees persist none can be
said to exist. But if none of the particular degrees
existed then clearly there was no temperature in
existence throughout the whole of the interval during
which it was said to be changing continuously. The
argument then rests on the assumption that anything
that exists in time must persist for a finite time. Can
this axiom be maintained ?

The result of holding it would be that we should
have to believe that all changes are of the kind dis-
cussed in (a), i.e. that each state lasts for a finite
duration and is then succeeded by another. When
the duration of each is less than a certain amount the
change has for perception that peculiar character which
we call perceptual continuity. If space be continuous
this wUl mean that a moving body cannot pass through


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 115

all the points on a straight line. For motion would in-
volve that a body was at A for all moments not before t
and before t +t say, at B for all moments not before t + T
and before t + 2t, etc. If then it were at all the points of a
straight line and the line were continuous it would take
an infinite time to cover any distance however short.
But it is perfectly possible to assume either that physical
straight lines are not continuous but consist of large num-
bers of contiguous points very close together. Or we can
assume that the lines are continuous but that a moving
body only visits a selection of their points. Similarly we
can deal with temperature or any other physical magni-
tude that seems continuous. They may be only a large
but finite number of different degrees of temperature, or
else any given body rising in temperature may onlj^ touch
a finite selection of the infinite number of possible inter-
mediate temperatures each of which perhaps actually
exists in some body at some time.

Would this give as much continuity as the accept-
ance of the axiom about immanent causality which we
discussed in the thesis seems to necessitate ? That axiom
forced us to hold that the total state of the universe
could not be the same for any finite time. Now the
present axiom would hold that every state of everything
in the universe persists unchanged for a finite time. For
these to be compatible it would be necessary that every
moment should be the last of some state in the universe
though all states endure for a finite time. Now there is no
objection to this being the case if there be enough states
in the universe. If the time series be compact and there
be 2'"' states then each state can endure for a finite time
and yet the universe never is in the same total state for
a finite time however short. Hence the supposition
that the states of every particular thing in the universe
change discontinuously is not incompatible with the

8—2


116 ON CAUSATION;

result deduced from our earlier axiom about causation
if only there be enough states in the universe.

It would follow, however, from our original axiom
that no immanent causal laws for the causation of
continuous changes of position or degree of quality
would be possible. Thus, if motion be really discon-
tinuous, so that a body moving with a fixed velocity
really stays for a short but finite time at the con-
secutive points of a discontinuous space and then with-
out any lapse of time is at the next point and so on,
the first law of motion which is apparently immanent
must really be pseudo-immanent and the result of a
more fundamental law of transeunt causation. For
taken as an immanent law it would be of the form :
After the material point X has been at a point of
space P„ for a short but finite time t it will be at the
consecutive point P„ + i. This form of law our axiom
rejected as pseudo-immanent. Hence the assumption
that motion is discontinuous is incompatible with the
belief that the first law of motion is an immanent law
and as such applies to an isolated system. There are
not of course the same objections to the assumption
that the change of physical qualities, like temperature,
are really discontinuous, because their changes are not
supposed to be subject to immanent causal laws.

There is, so far as I am aware, only one way of
dealing with a very fundamental proposition such as :
' Whatever exists in time must persist for a finite
time,' which is neither obviously true nor obviously
false ; and that is the rather tedious one which we
have pursued of seeing what would follow if it were
true and then trying to judge whether these results
make that which implies them probable or improbable.
Our investigation has shown (l) that the argument
has no particular relevance to causality when we drop


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 117

the activity view of causation, but is an argument that
really deals with the continuity of change. (2) But an
axiom which seemed self-evident about causation did
imply that at any rate the states of the universe as
a whole must change continuously. We saw, however,
that if the universe only has enough states this is
compatible with the view that the states of all that
is in it last for a finite time. Hence there is no anti-
nomy whether we assume continuity or discontinuity in
the changes of particular things. (3) As the proposi-
tion does not appear to me to be in the least self-
evident, and as it is incompatible with the view that
the first law of motion is the truly immanent law of an
isolated system I see no reason to accept it. But we
have seen that there is no antinomy over causal laws
whether we accept or reject it.

We can therefore turn to —

(b) This it will be remembered is the alleged
epistemological difficulty raised on p. Ill against the
statement of causal laws in terms of momentary states.
The difficulty was that the laws of causation are
supposed to be about the existent and to be found
by observing the existent and yet there is not only
the doubt whether momentary states exist, but the
certainty that they cannot as such be observed. But
surely, even if we accept the view that the laws of
causation are stated in terms of momentary states and
that these cannot be observed and do not exist, we
have no reason for concluding that causal laws may
not be true of the existent and be deduced fi:om
observations upon it. Granted that no one perceives
momentary states it must also be remembered that no
one perceives causal laws, any more than he perceives
states that do not endure for a finite time. Both
causal laws and the momentary states into which


118 ON CAUSATION;

perceptually continuous change of quality is analysed
are discovered by reflecting upon and reasoning about
what we do perceive. It then becomes quite irrelevant
to the validity of causal laws whether the states in
terms of which they are formulated really exist, so
long as it is always possible to retrace one's steps from
these durationless states to what we actually do per-
ceive which, for that reason, exists and endures. Now
this, I take it, we always can do. We know how
we have reached the momentary states from the
enduring ones that we perceive and hence we know
how to get back from the former to the latter. The
argument would run somewhat as follows. We can
get a conceptual account of what is meant by con-
tinuity or compactness by considering the series of real
numbers or the series of rationals respectively. And
here we are on safe ground because we are acquainted
with the elements and can define them. Now there is
no ground for thinking that time is more continuous
than the series of real numbers, in fact there is no
reason for attributiiig to it anything more than com-
pactness which the series of rationals possesses. We
cannot become directly acquainted with moments of
time, but if we suppose that finite durations consist
of terms without duration and that the relation of
before and after among them has the same logical
qualities as that which generates the compact series of
the rational numbers we know that we cannot have
erred on the side of attributing too little continuity to
time. Hence we can define moments as terms having
the same kind of relation to finite times as rational
numbers have to certain classes of them. Suppose then
that we do attribute this kind of continuity to the time-
series. What then are we to say of states that remain
unchanged for a finite time ? Clearly they can be


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 119

analysed into the same state at each of the infinite
number of moments within the finite stretch. Hence
we get to the notion of momentary states. Now the
important point to notice is that no logical exception
can be taken to any of these steps if rightly under-
stood. Time is held to be continuous in the same
general kind of way as the rationals, hence it cannot
be wrong to get clear ideas abdut the continuity of
time by analogies with the rationals where we actually
know what the elements are. The assumption that
time consists of moments arranged by the same kind of
relation as the rational numbers will certainly account
for all the continuity that is perceived. This being
granted, no exception can be taken to the analysis of
existence through a finite time into that of existence
at each moment within the stretch. It is never neces-
sary in the case of causal laws to think of this analysis
as being any more than a form of statement which can
always be translated back into the only form in which
we do perceive states, viz., as lasting for a finite time.

Clearly most if not all causal laws are discovered
from our perceptions. In the case of states that last
for a finite time the momentary state is precisely the
same as that which persists and can be observed, and
so no difficulty ought to be felt. In the case of
continuously varying states what we mean by the
momentary state is that which would have persisted if
the process could have been stopped at the moment at
which the state is said to exist. In practice we try to
take permanent records and thus shift the impossible
problem of directly determining a momentary state
into the soluble one of determining a momentary state
when precisely similar ones exist at all the moments of
a finite duration.

The upshot of the whole discussion is that, although


120 ON CAUSATION;

we admit that causal laws apply to the existent, and
though they are certainly stated in terms of momentary
states which cannot be directly observed, it is quite un-
important for our theory of causation whether momen-
tary states really exist or not. Momentary states are
the product of a theovf of time which (a) will account
for the facts, and (b) is internally consistent. The
theory connects its momentary states with the en-
during ones that can be observed in a perfectly definite
and unambiguous way. Hence it is perfectly possible
to interpret laws connecting momentary states in terms
of states that can be observed and vice versd. And so,
whether momentary states exist or not, it is perfectly
possible (a) from observations on the changes that can be
perceived to pass to laws stated in terms of momentary
events ; and (6) to pass back from these laws to foretell
what states will actually exist in the world.

We can pass then to a,nother question as to the
relation of causal laws to time, viz.. Is Causation
always successive ? It has been held by many philo-
sophers that the caiise must always precede the effect
in time. Hume attempts a proof of this, and Lotze has
a similar argument. Hume's argument runs as follows :
"Tis an established maxim both in natural and moral
philosophy that an object that exists for any time in
its full perfection without producing another is not its
sole cause ; but is assisted by some other principle
which pushes it from its state of inactivity.... Now,
if any cause may be perfectly co-temporary with its
effect, 'tis certain according to this maxim that they
must all of them be so ; since any one that retards its
operation but for a single moment exerts not itself
at that very individual time at which it might have
operated, and therefore is no proper cause. The con-
sequence of this would be... the destruction of that


AKGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 121

succession of causes which we observe in the world,
and indeed the utter annihilation of time. For, if one
cause were co-temporary with its effect, and this effect
with its effect and so on, 'tis plain that there would be
no such thing as succession \'

We have seen in what sense the 'established maxim'
is to be accepted. We must now see precisely how
Hume's argument depends upon it, and whether it
would be valid with the form of the maxim that we
have accepted. The essential point is the attempted
proof that, if any cause be contemporary with its
effect, all must be so. This is supposed to follow from
applying the maxim to a given cause supposed to be
contemporary with its effect. We must remember that
Hume believes that there are contiguous moments in
time. Hence the alternative for him is between a
cause producing its effect at the next moment, or at
one separated from it by several moments, or at the
same moment. The maxim as stated by him cuts out
the middle alternative. He evidently does not think
that it cuts out the first alternative, because that is as
a matter of fact his own view. He wishes to prove
that, if any cause produces its effect at the same
moment as itself the maxim will show that all causes
must do so. Now he only does this by assuming
that there is no alternative between a cause producing
its effect at the same moment as itself or at several
moments later. This of course is true if time be
continuous, but is inconsistent with his own position,
since he accepts the view that the cause 'does not
retard its operation for a single moment,' which means
that it produces its effect at the next moment. But
whether we accept next moments in time or not it is
obvious that his argument is formally vicious. It is

' Treatise of Human Nature, Part iii. § 2.


122 ON CAUSATION;

perfectly obvious that the two premises 'Some causes
produce their effects at the same moment as them-
selves' and 'No cause produces its effect at a moment
later than the next' cannot possibly lead to any con-
clusion about all causes. Yet Hume makes them lead
to the conclusion that all causes produce their effects
at the same moment as t|iemselves. Hence his argu-
ment is invalid whether^e accept his premises or not.

It is interesting to compare Lotze's argument with
Hume's. Lotze^ is trying to produce an antinomy,
about Becoming, and he does this by way of simul-
taneous causation. He argues as follows. If causes
be simultaneous with their effects their relation reduces
to logical connexion. This is similar to Hume's posi-
tion. But as the antithesis of his antinomy he takes
the argument : If causes be not simultaneous with their
effects then a cause would be able to exist for a finite
time without producing its effect. On contraposing
this antithesis we see that, for the same maxim, Lotze
deduces that all causes must be simultaneous with
their effects, whilst Hume concludes that, if any cause
be simultaneous with its effect all must be so. We
can now see the reason for the difference. Hume's
argument is sheerly wrong and Lotze is right on his
own premises. Lotze's premises are that two events
must either be separated by a finite time or be con-
temporary and Hume's maxim. These two do lead to
the conclusion that all causes must be simultaneous
with their effects.

But it is easy for us, after our previous dis-
cussions, to see that any argument for or against
simultaneous causation based on the maxim cannot
be accepted as it stands. It is perfectly clear that
both Hume and Lotze assume in their arguments

1 Metaphysic, Vol. ii. § 207.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 123

the activity view of causation that we have rejected.
The former seems hardly justified in doing this in
view of his final conclusions. But the form in which
we have accepted the maxim leads to no conclusion
whatever about successive or simultaneous causal laws.
The phrases 'the cause' and 'its effect' lose most of
their meaning when we turn all causality into causal
laws by which inferences can be made from a certain
number of data to others at different times. The
maxim as accepted by us merely assured us that a
causal law of the form: 'X remains in the state a
for the time r unchanged and then passes into the
state P' is not an ultimate law immanent to the
system X but will always be found to depend on laws
transeunt to X. But this does not tell us that the
data in causal laws whether immanent or transeunt must
be contemporary with that which is to be inferred. In
fact it is quite clear that as a rule they are not. The
only question then for us is whether causal laws ever
connect states that happen at the same moment.

Lotze and Hume both seem to think that this
is impossible; but they both hold, though on different
grounds, that all causes would be contemporary with
their effects and discuss the question on that basis.
Since we have no need to accept this view, and indeed
no possibility of doing so we cannot accept the reductio
ad dbsurdum of these philosophers that there would
then be no process in the world. On the other hand
the thesis of Lotze's antinomy would apply to all cases
of simultaneous causation if it were valid, even
though not all cases of causation were simultaneous.
We must therefore consider it. Lotze's argument is
that simultaneous causation would be nothing but
logical connexion. When we say that there is simul-
taneous causality we recognise that there is also a


124 ON CAUSATION;

process in time, and if the causality be really simul-
taneous there could not, Lotze thinks, be a process
in time. If this argument be true it will be fatal to
any case of simultaneous causality that offers itself
It is most certainly true that when we commonly hold
that there is simultaneous causation we also hold
that there is a process, ju«f as much as where we
believe the causation to be successive. Thus it would
commonly be said that the heat of a fire is the cause
of water's boiling, and that once the water has started
to boil it is the heat of the fire that causes by simul-
taneous causality the continued boiling. And the
fire's burning and the water's boiling are both con-
tinuous processes that occupy a finite time. Now is
it true that if the causation were really contempora-
neous with the corresponding evaporation of the water
there would be no process? On our view of causa-
tion to say that there is simultaneous causality would
be to say that there is a law connecting each momen-
tary state of the fire with the state of the water at the
same moment. If then the change in the fire and in
the water that goes on through a finite time be nothing
but the succession of their momentary states there can
be no objection to the statement that there is at once
simultaneous causality and a continuous process in the
fire and the water. Hence the burden of the argu-
ment rests on the old question: 'Can the process in
the fire and the water be resolved into the fact that
they have different states at each moment of time,
states that do not themselves occupy any duration?'
This question we have already discussed in reference
to Bradley's argument about the continuity of cau-
sation, and we saw no reason to answer it in the
negative when once we understood its meaning.
But Lotze has an argument of his own on the


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 125

subject which we must just notice. Lotze attempts
the same solution as we have offered and then says
that it will not do. His argument is as follows:
'If we assume, as was assumed, that C (i.e. the cause
in Lotze's notation and the fire with its successive
states in our example) traverses the series Cj, c^...
then, as the order of the series is supposed to be fixed,
each term must be the condition of the succeeding
one, and, as in the previous case (i.e. the problem
of which this account is offered as a solution) two
adjacent terms can neither have any blank interval
of time between them nor can they be simultaneous \'
Thus the argument against the attempted solution is
that the same difficulty breaks out inside the succes-
sive series of states which are supposed to be causes in
the simultaneous causation. The argument assumes
that in any continuous change each state causes the
next one. But, as we saw, if the change be con-
tinuous there can be no next states. Further we saw
that there is no need to suppose that if the continuous
change were subject to immanent causation that cau-
sation must be simultaneous. No doubt, if it were
simultaneous there would be no process ; or to put it
in another way the successive states of a system
could not be accounted for by immanent simultaneous
causality. But, since we saw no reason to suppose
that the amount of continuity that causation demands
precludes causal laws connecting states that are sepa-
rated by finite intervals of time, we are not faced by
Lotze's dilemma. I conclude then that, if our earlier
discussions about the continuity of causation be
accepted, there is no need for us to deny that there
may be laws of simultaneous causality and that they
may be perfectly compatible with a continuous change

' Log. cit.


126 ON CAUSATION;

of state in what is called the 'cause' in common
language.

It being granted that there is no objection to
simultaneous causality two questions remain about it:
(i) Suppose that there is such causality how do we
distinguish cause and effect in it? and (ii) Is there
much reason to suppose that there is such causality?

(i) With regard to the first question it is obvious
that people do claim to distinguish cause and effect
even when they believe themselves to be dealing with
cases of simultaneous causality. Thus no one would
say that the evaporation of the water caused the heat
of the fire. With the theory that causation reduces
to causal laws we must remember that the use of the
term 'a cause' differs very much fi?om that which is
implied by the activity view and is therefore the usage
of everyday life. Here we just have laws that unite
the existence of states in certain aggregates and rela-
tions with that of other states at the same or different
times in the same or different aggregates. Which of
the states then are to be called the causes and which
the effects?

The distinction I think depends on the fact that
many causal laws are not convertible. We may know
that if X and y occur at ^i and t^ in A and B respectively
then z will occur in C at t^ whatever moments <,, t^, t^
may be, so long as t^ — t^ and t^ — t^ are fixed. On the
other hand the occurrence of « in C at 4 will not in
general enable us to infer x and y in A and B at
ii and t^ respectively. When there is this lack of
reciprocity we can call x and y in A and B the. cause
of z in C. But all this is really very unimportant and
there are plenty of cases where it cannot be employed,
as will be seen when we come to discuss the actual
nature of causal laws. So far as it holds at all it


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 127

applies equally to simultaneous causality, which only
differs from the more general example given by its
relation to time. Thus we do say that the fire boils
the water because given the fire in the proper relation
to the water we can infer the boiling of the kettle,
but given boiling water we can only argue to a fire
as one among a number of other possibilities. On
the other hand when the causal law becomes strictly
reciprocal I doubt if it be possible any longer to give
a reasonable meaning to the distinction between cause
and effect.

Perhaps one that agrees more closely with common
usage for the case of simultaneous causality than the
one that I have offered would be the following. Sup-
pose that a system, hke the water, has been quiescent
for some finite time and it then begins to change.
Then we know that the law of causation for these
changes must be transeunt to the quiescent system.
If the causaHty be simultaneous but leads us to states
in another system which was changing with respect to
these states while the first system was still quiescent
we shall generally call the changes in the latter system
the cause of those in the former. Thus the water was
at a certain temperature for some time. It changed
and the law of this change leads to another system,
viz. the fire, states in which produce the changes in
the water by simultaneous causality. But the process
in the fire was going on while the water was still in
its quiescent state. Hence we say that the fire causes
the changes in the water and not vice versd.

(ii) The second question is whether there is any
strong reason for believing that simultaneous causality
takes place. It is clear that, if there be any causality
at all, some of it must be non-simultaneous, and there-
fore it would be an aesthetic advantage if the apparent


128 ON CAUSATION;

cases of simultaneous causality could be reduced to
those of successive causality. I do not think that it
would be possible to offer any proof of the existence
of simultaneous causality, because all the supposed
cases might really be examples of non-simultaneous
causality in which the interval between cause and
effect was so short as not to be perceptible. We do
not, I think, use the term causality unless there be
a change going forward. Thus when we say that all
ruminants are cloven-hoofed we do not generally mean
to assert that one characteristic causes the other by
simultaneous causality. Nevertheless, if we accept
simultaneous causality at all there is no difference in
principle between the connexion of cloven-footedness
with chewing the cud and that between the momen-
tary states of the fire and the water. The only
difference is that in the former case the cloven-footed-
ness is the same at all moments within a finite time,
whilst, in the latter, the states of the fire differ at
every different moment. In both cases the actual
connexion between momentary states is that one state
at one moment can be inferred from the other state at
the same moment. The resemblance between what is
believed to be simultaneous causality and one attribute
being a mark of the presence of another is so great
that it will hardly be possible to insist that the former
cannot really be simultaneous without holding that
the latter cannot be so either. I do not think that
anyone supposes that constant connexion between
attributes in the same thing apparently at the same
moment is really a case of a connexion between momen-
tary states separated by a very short interval of time.
But this inferrability of one attribute from another at
the same moment in the same thing is precisely what
would be meant by simultaneous causality immanent


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 129

with respect to that thing. Hence unless they make
this assumption in the case of constant coexistence of
attributes in one thing there seems to be no ground
for making a similar assumption when we are faced
with what is primd facie transeunt simultaneous
causation. It is never absolutely certain that what
appears to be simultaneous may not really be sepa-
rated by a short interval of time, but, as there is no
theoretical objection to simultaneous causality, and as
what amounts to immanent simultaneous causality is
commonly supposed to be really simultaneous, there
seems to be no good ground for rejecting simultaneous
causality in general.

We can pass then to another quite general question
about causal laws: What is meant by the Necessity
of Causal Laws? Causal laws have been reduced
by us to regularities connecting together the simul-
taneous or successive states of things. (1) But it
seems clear that there are some regularities of this
kind that are not held to be causal. (2) Again we
constantly find that causal laws as stated are not
obeyed. Something, we say, has 'interfered.' In
what sense then can those laws that are admitted to
be causal be held to be universal and necessary or
indeed even true ? We wUl discuss these questions
in order, and we shall find that they have a good deal
of connexion with each other.

(1) With regard to simultaneous causality we should
hesitate to say that chewing the cud was the cause of
cloven-footedness in animals or vice versd; and, with
regard to successive causality we should not say that
the night causes the day or conversely. Yet we saw
that the connexion between chewing the cud and
cloven-footedness was, in our sense of causality, appa-
rently a case of simultaneous immanent causation.

B. p. 9


130 ON CAUSATION;

There is much less certainty about the sequence of night
and day even seeming to be a case of causation in our
theory. It may be doubted whether the occurrence of
darkness is a datum from which that of light can be
inferred without a good many further data.

We must expect that, as our account of causation
drops activity and so differs from that of common-
sense, we shall sometimes differ from common-sense in
our application of the term. In the example of cloven-
footedness and ruminance I think that we must admit
that we have a very specialised case of a causal law.
But it remains true that a great many regularities are
not held to be directly causal, and it will be valuable
for us to investigate this point.

The important thing to notice is that we deny the
term causality to regularities which are known or
believed to be analysable into other regularities. The
fact that day follows night is not thought to be an
instance of a causal law because it is analysed into
[a) the fact that the earth turns round on its axis
once in twenty-four hours, (b) the fact that the light
on the earth is due to the sun, and (c) the fact that
the earth is opaque to light. This is not of course an
analysis in the sense that all these characteristics can
be found in the mere fact that darkness and light
regularly follow each other. On the contrary, the
various propositions are got from various facts which
they explain or from direct experiment, and together
they account for the observed regularity. The facts to
be explained are the successive appearances and dis-
appearances of the sun which is observed to travel
across the sky from east to west and ultimately to
disappear below the horizon. We know by analogy with
other opaque bodies and other sources of light that this
can be explained by supposing that the earth turns round


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 131

relatively to the sun. The point to notice is that our
original regularity has been analysed into a regularity
in the relative motions of the earth and the sun, and
another as to the invisibility of sources of light through
bodies like the earth. Further considerations lead us
to believe that the successive positions of the earth
depend on its past positions. The analysis cannot, so
far as we know, be carried further and so these regu-
larities are finally taken as causal.

Thus we seem to find that a regularity is not held
to be causal unless it cannot be analysed into other
regularities, but it is always held that the products of
the analysis will be one or more laws of causation.
On the face of it this distinction between causal and
other regularities seems to raise more questions than it
answers. It may be reasonably asked whether (a) it
does not become purely subjective in view of the
fact that we never know whether a given regularity
may not be further analysable ; and (6) some further
account of analysis is clearly demanded.

(a) The first objection is not of importance. No
doubt all our knowledge is subjective in the sense
that we do not know how much we have yet to leapn.
But here this is unimportant because, whilst we may
learn that something which we took to be a causal
regularity is really analysable and therefore not truly
one, we shall not learn that what we judged not to be
a causal regularity really is one. If we can give some
account of analysis which will stand criticism, then we
can say that every further step in our analysis of
regularities brings us nearer to truly causal laws, even
if we can never be quite certain that we have got
them. It is right to remark in passing that a good
many physicists (including Helmholtz), and some phi-
losophers (including Sigwart) seem to have held that

9—2


132 ON CAUSATION;

there were marks by which causal laws, in the physical
world at any rate, could be recognised. Such laws,
they thought, would be ones connecting homogeneous
terms with permanent qualities which only differed
by their relative positions in space. Even if this were
true of the physical world we can hardly call it a
complete account of the nature of causal laws in general.
For it assumes that the real world of matter is much
less varied than what we perceive, and for the qualities
dropped out we shall need laws connecting that world
with our minds. And it is clear that the latter cannot
be reduced to regularities among homogeneous things
with permanent qualities which only differ by their
relative spatial positions.

(6) The question of what precisely is to be under-
stood by analysis of regularities in the present con-
nexion is a more serious one. There are several ways
in which a regularity may be analysed.

(a) By splitting it up into two or more regularities
which occupy successive stretches of time into which the
period of the original regularity may be split. Thus,
take the regularity that, if gunpowder be hit hard
enough, it will explode. There is strong reason to
believe that the period between the blow and the
explosion is the scene of two successive regularities :
(i) the blow is followed by rise of temperature; and
(ii) the rise of temperature, if it passes a definite limit
— a fact which itself depends in part on the violence of
the blow — is followed by an explosion. These sub-
sidiary regularities approach much more nearly to the
causal ideal than the regularity which is analysed into
them. For the blow may not be hard enough to give
the requisite rise in temperature or the heat may be
conducted away too quickly, and then the complex regu-
larity will fail although the simpler ones will still hold.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 133

(/S) The second way in which a complex regularity
may be analysed is into contemporaneously operating
causal laws, with each cause producing its own eflFect.
Here what was originally taken as cause and as effect
are both complex. One part of what was taken as
cause produces one part of what was taken as effect, and
the rest of the original cause produces the rest of the
original effect. Thus sun-rays focussed by a burning-
glass on a piece of paper saturated with a silver salt
wiU scorch the paper and change the colour of the silver
salt. Now it is easy to take the light as the cause
and the whole change as the effect. But the proper
analysis shows that the true cause is light + heat and
the true effect is scorching of paper + change of sUver
salt. Now both these laws hold independently of each
other, and it is only when what is lumped together
under the name of light and treated as a single cause
I'eally has both long and short waves in it that what is
taken as effect, viz. scorching + change of colour, will
happen.

It is important to notice that such an analysis
as this cannot always be made even when the cause
and the effect are recognisably composed of parts that
are separately connected by causal laws. When A is
connected causally with B and C with B we are
inclined to suppose that A C must be followed, by BD.
So strong is this belief that, when the actual sequent is
E, we think that E must really be a complex with
B and D as elements even though B and D cannot be
directly detected in E. Now it is true that there
are cases in which when A is followed by B and C
by D, AC is followed by BD ; to such cases the
form of analysis (^) applies. But it is not true that if
A is followed, by B and Chj D, AG must be followed
by BD. Something — E — entirely different from BD


134 ON CAUSATION;

may follow and we have no right to suppose that E
is BD in disguise unless we can prove this to be so.
Here no real analysis is possible.

(y) The last form of analysis is hypothetical ex-
planation. And this raises the question : Is any
observed regularity to be degraded from the rank
of a causal law just because human ingenuity can
invent hypothetical laws that will account for it ?
Clearly this is not what is intended. It is meant
that the hypothetical laws shall have been verified,
i.e. rendered probable by the large region of facts that
they coordinate. But it may be said : At best they
can only be probable whilst many of the regularities
which they are supposed to oust from the position of
causal laws are practically certain. For instance, it
is as certain as anything can be that light is always
refracted on passing at an angle to the surface of
separation between two media of different density.
Yet this is not held to be a causal law. It is, on
the other hand, analysed into hypothetical laws which
connect terms that are merely assumed ad hoc. Thus
it is assumed that light, as a physical phenomenon,
consists of wave-motions which travel with different
velocities through different media, and that these
wav&^motions when they affect the retinas of normal
people produce perceptions of colour which depend
on the wave-length. It is then deduced fi:om the
laws of wave-motion that there will be the pheno-
mena which we call the refraction of light, and what
the laws of those phenomena will be. Now it might be
objected that the laws of refraction are all obvious and
certain whilst the explanatory hypotheses are all pre-
carious. Why not accept the observed regularity then
as an ultimate causal law and drop all these assumed
causal laws that are needed when we degrade the


AKGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 135

observed regularities to mere consequences of really-
causal laws 1 The answer to this is that, if we had to
deal merely with the refraction of light, it would be
most unreasonable to try and get behind the observed
regularities in this way. But then phenomena that
have such close resemblances to those of refraction as to
be equally called optical have also regularities of their
own with which the regularities about refraction, if
taken as ultimate, seem to have nothing in common.
On the other hand the hypothesis which explains the
laws of refraction explains without further assumptions
those of the remaining optical phenomena. The
position then is that, whilst the theory is more
complex and less certain d, priori than any of the
regularities which it is supposed to explain taken by
themselves, yet by accounting for all these regularities
that can be observed to hold it gains a high degree of
probability for itself, and its laws are justly regarded
as causal rather than the observed regularities.

But it may stUl very well be objected that there is
no difference of principle between the complex regu-
larities which are not held to be causal and those
hypotheses which account for them and are held to
be causal laws. The answer to this objection turns on
the second subject to be discussed in this section, viz.
the necessity of causal laws. This vague phrase has
several possible meanings which we must separate, but,
for the present purpose, the following is the important
one. It is believed that a real causal law would assert
an unconditional regularity in some sense ; in fact,
how can you talk of a law when there are exceptions,
since a natural law just means what things of a certain
kind as a matter of fact do ? But as soon as you have
reason to believe that a given regularity is analysable
into several others there enters a ground for believing


136 ON CAUSATION;

that its regularity is only conditional. There is, of
course, first of all the residuum of doubt which attaches
to any alleged causal sequence and therefore even to
the regularities discovered or inferred in the analysis.
But, over and above this, there is in any admittedly
complex regularity the further doubt as to whether
the whole of the elementary sequences can be trusted
always to fall together. If any of them fail, then,
although each may be truly regular, the complex regu-
larity will break down. As an example of this we may
take Kepler's Laws and the Newtonian Planetary
Theory. As long as we consider the planets moving
steadily and comfortably round the sun Kepler's Laws
are all that we need, and they seem to be unconditional
regularities. But when we consider the falling of
bodies to the earth, the motions of the moon, the
Cavendish experiment, etc., we analyse Kepler's Laws
and find them to be the results of the First Law
of Motion and the Law of Gravitation. These we
believe to be unconditional causal laws, and we accept
them as we did the results of the hypothetical account
of optics because they explain such quantities of
seemingly unconnected regularities and apparent
irregularities. But, when we have once made this
analysis and believe it to be true, our whole attitude
towards Kepler's Laws alters. We now know that,
instead of being unconditioned regularities, they are
merely special cases of the consilience of the new
regularities which we believe to be unconditioned.
We know, too, what kind of departures to expect from
them and where and when to expect them ; and, when
we look for them we actually find them in the pertur-
bations of one planet by the others.

We are thus led to see how it is that no regularity
which there is good reason to believe analysable into


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 137

several others is accepted as a causal law. And,
whatever be the upshot of our enquiry into the mean-
ing and truth of the belief that ultimate causal laws
are unconditioned regularities we see that the products
of such analyses are at least less conditioned than
the complex regularities from which they are dis-
covered, and, as such, approach more nearly to the
ideal of a causal law.

We are not however even yet in a position to
discuss the question of what is meant by a causal law
being unconditional and what is meant by its being
' interfered with.' We must first consider certain'
points connected with the analysis of regularities, since
we now see that it is of the products of such analyses
that this question will have to be asked and answered.
We will then discuss certain points that arise in
connexion with the kinds of analysis that I have called
(a) and (y8).

A cause in the most general sense is a set of
successive sets of contemporary events from which
other sets of events can be inferred. The question
with regard to (a) is : What is the least number
of successive sets that is wanted for a complete cause
and a complete effect ? With regard to (y8) the
question is how many distinguishable aspects or
events are needed in each successive set to constitute
a complete cause and a complete effect? It must
be remembered that we are already supposed to have
found a certain regularity and to be trying to analyse
it into truly causal ones. We find that a certain set
of sets of events is regularly followed by another set of
sets, all within a certain interval of time. What we
do in (a) is to make a rearrangement of these successive
sets. In virtue of other experiments we know that some
that come in the middle of the interval follow regularly


138 ON CAUSATION;

on others that come earlier in it, whilst these sequents
under certain circumstances have other sequents, as we
learn from a fresh set of experiments. The essence of
this kind of analysis is that some of the later sets of
events in what was formerly taken as the cause are
found to be effects of the earlier sets in it, or some
of the earlier sets in what was formerly taken as
the effect are found to be causes of the later sets in
it. Finally the parts of the old supposed cause that
are now taken as effects are also part causes of those
parts of the old supposed effect which are now taken
as causes of the later sets in it. This form of analysis
might be called Vertical, because it analyses the
successive sets of sets of contemporary events which
were taken as whole causes or effects into fewer
successive sets which are both causes and effects,
but does not trouble about analysing the sets of
contemporary events themselves at each moment
under consideration.

The kind of analysis mentioned under (/8) may
be called Horizontal. Here we shall find it necessary
to distinguish certain aspects in events. If an event
be the occurrence of a sense-quality at a certain
moment we must distinguish in that quality (1) the
general aspect that makes it the sort of quality that it
is {e.g. sound or colour) ; (2) what I shall call ' charac-
teristics,' i.e. certain independent variables by which
the particularity of the quality is fixed. These are
generally few in number, e.g. in sound they are pitch,
loudness and quality. They generally have intensive
magnitude and the range of their possible values
is believed to be continuous ; (3) the particular values
of these variables.

In an Horizontal Analysis of any regularity we
have to see whether, out of the sets of contemporary


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 139

events successive sets of which constitute ' causes ' and
'effects' in our regularity so long as it is supposed
to be unanalysable, we cannot make selections which
constitute smaller sets known to be related as causes
and effects.

This brings us to the question : Is there any
relation that holds generally between the complexity
of an effect and the complexity of its cause 1 This
is important as bearing on the question of how complex
the real world must be if we hold that it causes our
perceptions but do not hold that the objects of those
perceptions are the real world. Must every distin-
guishable event and characteristic in the effect have a
differentiation in the cause to correspond to it ? Let
us begin with events as wholes. If in an effect a
()8) analysis can be made so that every distinguishable
event is the effect in a different causal law there must
of course be at least as much distinction in the cause as
there are events in the effect, for the cause of any
event must be at least one event. But in general such
an analysis is not possible, and then no conclusion can
be drawn from the number of distinct events in an
effect to that in its cause.

Now let us consider the case of characteristics,
which is more fundamental. An event is not fixed
till all its characteristics are fixed. Hence the causal
laws that determine the occurrence of a definite event
must determine all its characteristics too. Let us
consider an event like a particular sound with its
three characteristics of pitch, loudness and quality
all determinate and let us suppose that it is the com-
plete effect of some cause. Must that cause have
at least three differentiations ? I do not see why
it should. We could only conclude that the cause
must contain at least one event, but not that no


140 ON CAUSATION;

cause can be less complex than its effect either in
the number of events in it or the number of variable
characteristics. There might perfectly well be an
ultimate causal law connecting one event with two
characteristics with four events with three charac-
teristics apiece. I think this view is contrary to
the usual opinion or at any rate to the opinion that
ought to be held if many applications of causality
be valid. I fancy that common-sense would probably
use the following argument about characteristics at
any rate. Suppose that A causes B in the sense that
^'s occurrence at a certain moment is inferable from
^'s occurrence at a definite period earlier. Suppose
that B is an event with three characteristics whilst
^ is a single event with only one. Then it will be
said : ' Each occurrence of A with its characteristic with
a certain value is a definite event and as such will
allow of the inference of a 5 event. Moreover, if the
B event is what is inferred from the A event there
will be one B event to each different A event and
therefore just as many different B events as there are
different A events. But the number of possible B
events is one for each value of each of the three
characteristics that define such events. Hence there
will be quantities of B events left over uncaused by A
events.' This argument is invalid, and that for two
reasons, (l) It assumes that because all B events are
alike in being B's, therefore if one B event is caused by
a particular A event all B events must be caused by A
events. This cannot be proved. At the same time it
seems probable and is certainly true in most cases. If
it be set aside there is the possibility that only a
certain selection of possible B events are caused by A
events, and that all the B events which are supposed
to be left over when all possible A events have been


AKGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 141

considered are caused by a different set of events
which are not A events at all. (2) But, setting this
suggestion aside, there remains another and a fatal
criticism. The argument is only true if the range
of values of the characteristics be discontinuous and
there be only a finite number of possible values for
each. For the argument rests on the assumption that
a compact series defined by the values of one variable
cannot have as many terms as a series defined by the
values of three independent variables whose range
of values is compact. Now if the series be really
compact this assumption is a sheer error, and with
it the argument falls to the ground. It follows then
that, even if we grant that the causes of events
that only differ by possessing the same characteristics
to different degrees, will themselves only differ in this
respect, still the cause need not be as differentiated
as the effect. One set of events that are defined
by a single characteristic and only differ by the par-
ticular values of the latter may, if the values form a
compact series, cause any finite number of events with
any finite number of characteristics apiece.

We can now pass to the question

(2) In what sense are causal laws universal and
necessary ? We now know that the question must
be asked not of any regularity that chances to
appear, but only of the products of analysis where
that is possible. Any of the ordinary regularities
which are stated as causal laws in common life are
found to have exceptions. And there is no avoiding
the fact that a natural law that has exceptions is
not as such a natural law but a mere mistake. We
say that arsenic is a poison, or more accurately that if
a man takes arsenic he will die with certain symptoms ;
but we know quite well that not all people who


142 ON CAUSATION;

take arsenic die with those symptoms, since, if they
take an emetic soon enough they recover. We might
put the matter thus. The set of events that con-
stitute a cause are generally separated by a finite
interval from that which constitutes its effect. And it
is found that the effect depends on what takes place
within that interval. Hence what we said was the
cause was not the complete cause. On the other hand
if you have to take account of what happens at every
moment up to that at which what is called the effect
happens causal laws are quite useless. Nothing at all
is inferred ; for there is no moment immediately before
that at which the effect happens and our causal law
comes to nothing but a mere observation of what
has happened at every instant of a finite stretch of
time. And again there is a difficulty about the
breadth of each momentary state. We have seen
that horizontal analyses are not by any means always
possible. A alone might cause B. But then the
other events are always happening contemporaneously
with A and there is no reason why, if AX pro-
duces B, A Y should do so. Hence causal laws seem
doomed to the barren tautology that if A has once
been followed by B after a time r, then if the whole
state of the universe with A in it recurs and all
the other states that formerly intervened between
A and B also recur B will happen again after a
time T.

This is the essence of Bradley's attack on
causality ; and if it be valid it is fatal. We must
therefore examine it carefully. We will begin with
the Horizontal difficulty. Bradley's position really
amounts to a denial that in any case horizontal
analysis is possible. Now we must begin by dis-
tinguishing two different kinds of uncertainty which


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 143

are often confused. They are («) uncertainty whether
you have found a certain law and whether it is really
true, and (6) that the law is uncertain in its operation.
A law that is uncertain in its operation is not a
law, and there we must leave the matter. But I take
it that the argument with which we have to deal
is different from this. It would take the form: Every
causal law to be of any use must connect only parts of
the total states of the universe at various moments.
But when the laws are stated in these terms they
frequently are found to be false. A appears under
different circumstances and you infer B and B does
not take place. Now you only can infer the laws that
are supposed to connect partial state from observations
on what are really total states, and you assume that
the part of the state not mentioned in your law is
irrelevant. But the constantly proved falsity of your
laws proves that this is at any rate often a mistake.
What right have you to believe that it is ever anything
but a mistake ? And, if so, you never can state
laws with confidence, for they must always connect
partial states to be of any use, and those partial states
are always abstractions from what you now admit is
quite likely to be relevant.

This objection forgets the fact that causal laws are
not merely read off from the book of nature without
further trouble, but have to be sought and tested with
precisely the object of seeing what is and what is
not relevant. Certainly you cannot tell beforehand
what is going to be irrelevant, but then the process of
discovering causal laws just is the process of dis-
covering what is irrelevant. If I shoot a gun at a
person's heart he will generally fall down and be found
dead with a hole in his heart. But if he is wearing a
metal plate over his heart it is very likely this will not


144 ON CAUSATION;

happen. Now certainly there is no h 'priori reason
why the wearing of a metal plate should be more
relevant than the question of what horse wins the
Derby. But an investigation of what actually happens
shows that the one is relevant and the other not.
And, if we investigate the matter more closely, we can
see why the plate is relevant, because we can make
a vertical analysis of the process of killing a man
by a gunshot, though we cannot see why it should be
irrelevant what horse wins the Derby.

The fact is that, so far from it being true that
no occurrence in the universe can be known to be
irrelevant, whole masses of the universe are shown
to be irrelevant every time the law is verified under
different circumstances \ The real objection is that
there do always remain masses of possible events
that might be relevant. If you do not take them into
consideration you cannot be at all confident that your
proposed law is true ; but if you do your law will more
and more come to connect unique states of the whole
universe and so cease to be a general law. Among the
circumstances that cannot be proved to be irrelevant
there is one important group for which this fact does
not greatly matter. That is the relatively permanent
features of the material universe. All the regularities
that we observe and from which ultimately all our
supposed causal laws are gotten take place in presence
of these permanent features, and we cannot tell
whether they may not be relevant circumstances in
laws which, because of their invariable presence, do
not need to mention them. But the same circum-
stances that make it impossible to tell whether, these

1 This is not strictly true. If X happens once in the presence of P and
the absence of § and then again in the absence of P and the presence of §
you cannot decide offhand that P and Q are irrelevant. All you can say
is that P is not essential and § is not essential, but PorQ may be essential.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 145

permanent characteristics be relevant or not make it
unimportant to decide. I do not see how we could
be sure that arsenic kept for the usual time in a man's
stomach would poison him if the planet Mars were
annihilated, since all our experiments have been per-
formed in presence of that planet. But then it is
so very unlikely that the planet Mars will be
annihilated that this possibility is not an objection
to a causal law about arsenic poisoning which makes
no reference to the planet. We must I think assume
in our causal laws a tacit admission that the per-
manent features of the universe are supposed to be
pretty well the same at all times for which they
are supposed to hold.

It is not then the possible relevance of relatively
permanent characteristics that troubles us, but that of
the constantly changing circumstances under which
every new case to which the law is supposed to apply
must take place. Now it is quite clear that we are
not as a matter of fact reduced to the impasse that
Bradley suggests. We can foretell certain classes of
events with almost absolute certainty without taking
into account everything in the universe. For the fact
is that, beginning with a few obvious regularities
which are seen to hold in spite of any change of cir-
cumstances that we can compass, we are led to recog-
nise in the world a system of practically independent
causal series and to see that it is very improbable that
events of the type A should be relevant to causal
laws connecting events of the type B. At the present
stage of our knowledge of the structure of the world
we can confidently rule out the possibility that the
result of a horse-race should aflFect the question of
whether a bullet aimed at a man's heart will kill him.
We know enough about the ' make ' of the universe,

B. p. 10


146 ON CAUSATION;

subject to its hitherto permanent structure remaining
permanent, to know the kind of events to which the
results of horse-races are and are not relevant. But
when we are still in the dark as to the phenomena
under investigation we cannot lay down these rules
about relevance and irrelevance of certain classes of
events to other classes with any confidence, and our
position is much more like that which Bradley seems
to think it ought to be everywhere. Thus we are
practically certain that the strength of illumination
is perfectly irrelevant to the motion of a billiard ball
after it has been hit with a cue, but it would be
radically unscientific to begin by assuming its irrele-
vance to the telekinetic motion of objects by Eusapia
Paladino, supposing that it actually happens. There
is no cb priori necessity that the universe should be
thus divided into causally water-tight compartments,
but experience shows that this is largely the case and
that, by assuming as a methodological principle that
there are such compartments even when they are
not immediately obvious, they can be discovered and
separated. The universe might have been as unified
as some Idealists would wish us to believe, but, by
a merciful ordinance of Providence (for which the true
scientist will be more thankful than for his ' creation,
preservation,' and the other ' blessings of this life ') it
is not so, and other people beside the Absolute have
some chance of disentangling its structure.

But, granted that things are not as hopeless as
Bradley suggests ; that we can discover in the uni-
verse mutually irrelevant groups of events ; and that
the permanent characteristics of the universe, whilst
their permanence precludes our proving that they
are irrelevant, are for the same reason negligible in
practice ; we are still by no means clear of the general


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 147

Bradleian objection. We still have to admit that
within a given isolated group, any cause being given,
you cannot with certainty infer an effect because other
events of the same group may intervene in the time
between cause and effect and so replace the supposed
causal law by a new one with a vertically more
complex cause. And similarly there is the question of
the breadth that is to be given to the cause within
that group.

How then must a causal law be stated for the
events of a group when it is admitted that in general
a finite time elapses between cause and effect and that
your law is useless unless the momentary states men-
tioned are less than the total momentary state of
the group 1 The two difficulties are closely connected.
Suppose that the regularity is not found to be analys-
able vertically but that the intervening events coalesce
with the ones that have gone before to give a new
cause with a new causal law. Then, if the general
law of causaHty be true, those intervening effects
could have been predicted. But in order to predict
them we should have needed a wider knowledge of
the earlier states in the total isolated group than
we actually had. In the most general case we should
need for a completely certain prediction (i) a wider
knowledge of the momentary events in the group that
are contemporary with what we at first took to be the
cause, (ii) a knowledge of the causal law by which
we could predict from them the intermediate states
that we had formerly left out of consideration, and
(iii) a knowledge of the new causal law connecting the
new cause, which consists of what was originally taken
as cause + the intervening events which (i) and (ii)
have enabled us to foresee, with the new and actual
effect. And it is clear that the causal law mentioned

10—2


148 ON CAUSATION;

in (ii) will be open to the same criticisms as the
original one to supplement which it was introduced.
Thus it seems that you will never be able to stop
tUl you have taken in all the events at all the
moments under consideration in the group, and then
you will no longer have inference but mere statement.

I think that so long as we insist that causal
laws shall be capable of giving us certainties about the
occurrence of events this reasoning is fatal to them.
But I think that they can be defended if we hold that
they give us certainties about the probabilities of the
occurrence of events. The line of argument that I
wish to suggest is that a causal law is not properly of
the form ' the occurrence of X at t makes it certain
that Y wiU occur at t + r no matter what moment
t may be ' — which amounts to saying no matter what
other events may be contemporary with X. For this
I would substitute : "' It is certain that the occurrence
of X at any moment increases the probability of I"s
occurrence at a moment t later over what it would
have been if X had not happened.' This is the
suggestion that we must now consider for a moment.

Of any event that can be proposed to us as
happening at a certain moment it is evident that
it is eternally true that it will happen then or that
it will not. By this I mean that the alternative is
settled one way or the other eternally whether we
know or suspect or do not know or suspect which
way it is settled. It is also evident that this amount
of certainty has nothing to do with causal laws,
although it sometimes seems to be thought that it has.
It would be equally true that of the two propositions :
I shall die on the 22nd of September, 1913 and I shall
not die on the 22nd of September, 1913, one definite
one is true without reference to time whether there


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 149

were causal laws in the universe or not. Hence causal
laws and probabilities must have to do with something
beside the truth or falsehood of propositions. Again,
one of the propositions being true and the other being
false independently of our knowledge, we may suspect
that the probability of the two will have something to
do with knowledge. The first point on which to be
clear will be just what the connexion is between truth,
probability and knowledge. A proposition does not
have probability, though it does have truth or false-
hood, when taken in complete abstraction from other
propositions. Probability arises from the fact that
propositions are so related that the knowledge of
certain ones alters the expectation that we ought
to have of the truth of one of the alternatives of
which as we saw we know a 'priori that one definite
one is eternally true, but not which one it is.

Now, since the question of knowledge thus enters,
we may ask whether the probability of a given propo-
sition depends on the other propositions that have
this relation whether they be known or not or on
the knowledge of these propositions. If we take the
latter alternative it might seem that the probability of
a given proposition would become purely subjective,
which no one believes to be the case. But this is not
necessarily so. You might say that 'the probability
of the proposition j>' is an elliptical phrase, which
taken by itself has no meaning or only a conventional
meaning. Thus it might be held that the proper
statement would always be ' the probability of p given
the knowledge of q, r, etc' ; and that by the phrase
* the probability of p ' used by itself all that was
meant was ' the probability of p given that amount of
knowledge that may be assumed in all sane people or
in all the people to whom my remarks are addressed.'


150 ON CAUSATION;

Would this make probability objective in the sense
that is needed ? When A and B say ' the probability
of ^ is a ' and ' the probability of p is /3' respectively ;
they might both be correct on this theory. For one
might mean the probability given the knowledge of q,
and the other the probability given the knowledge
of r. But would this give us any more than the
sort of statement that ' sugar in tea is pleasant ' gives ;
where apparent contradictions are avoided by sub-
stituting for this elliptical phrase : A finds sugar
in tea pleasant and B finds it unpleasant ? This is
not as much objectivity as is wanted for probability-
propositions, because it is held that people can make
mistakes about the probability of propositions, whilst
they can hardly do so about their likes and dislikes.

But this objection could easily be met on the view
under discussion. It might be said, whilst A and B.
may certainly both be right in their judgments of
probability, it is equally true that they may both
be wrong. This may happen in two ways. When
A says ' the probability oi p is a ' he means the
probability of p relative to his present knowledge.
Now he might think that the only relevant bit of
knowledge that he had was q whilst really he knew r
which was also relevant. Or he might be right in
supposing that the only relevant piece of knowledge
that he had was q, but wrong in his estimate of
the probability of p given q. It is tolerably obvious
that the two kinds of mistake come to the same.
To suppose that r is irrelevant is just to make an
erroneous judgment about the probability of j) given r.

But, if this defence of the possibility of making
mistakes about probability, although the correct pro-
bability is always that relative to the knowledge of
the person who makes the probability -judgment, is to


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 151

be tenable, we must clearly assume that the knowledge
of the person in question as to how far what he knows
is relevant to the probability is not a part of the
knowledge that has to be taken into consideration in
saying what is the true probability relative to his state
of knowledge. It is clear in fact that the opposite
view would lead to a vicious circle fallacy; since
then the true probability of p relative to a person's
knowledge would be the probability relative — among
other things — to the knowledge of the true probability.
Hence if this position is to be held at all we must put
it in the form that to every amount of knowledge
there corresponds a true probability of any proposition
relative to that knowledge, but the knowledge of what
the true probability is cannot be one of the data on
which it depends.

But there remains a serious objection to it. Every-
one wUl admit that we ought to prefer a probability
calculated on a wider to one calculated on a narrower
basis, even though the man who only had the narrower
basis of knowledge had made his calculations properly.
But if probability is to be reckoned relatively to people's
knowledge of propositions and not to the propositions
themselves it is difficult to attach any meaning to this
preference. You cannot get over the difficulty by say-
ing that the knowledge that A has given the probability
a to p relative to his knowledge of q and B has given
the value /3 to p relative to his knowledge of q and r
is itself a relevant piece of knowledge for you and one
relative to which the probability ot p is /8 and not a.
For, whatever else this may or may not explain, it
does not explain the fact that A himself will want to
increase his knowledge as much as he can before he is
confident of the value of the probability of p. On the
present theory the only doubt that A ought to have


152 ON CAUSATION;

is whether he has ascribed the right probability relative
to what he does know. If so, his probability is correct ;
and B's probability relative to a wider basis of know-
ledge is no better than it. But no one really does
believe this to be the case. We feel that, although
A and B have both calculated rightly and attributed
the right weight to what they know, B's value of the
probability of p is in some sense preferable to A' a;
and this belief seems incompatible with the statement
that you can only state probabilities relative to what
is known by someone.

Hence we must adopt a different theory as to the
relation between probability, truth, and knowledge.
We shall stiU say that a proposition p has not a
probability taken in abstraction, but that the proba-
bility depends on other propositions. But we must
now say that it depends on the propositions and not
on the knowledge of them. The state of affairs then
is this. To every proposition stating the occurrence
of an event at a certain moment there are other propo-
sitions making similar statements and the probability
of the first depends on the latter whether they are
known or not. We must not suppose that even though
all these propositions were known the proposition in
question is one about which we ought to be certain
one way or the other. The probability of p is that
value which persons who knew all these other propo-
sitions would ascribe to the probahility of p if they
made their calculations properly. What then are we
to say about the probabilities rightly calculated by
persons who do not know all the relevant propositions ?
I think the following is what should be said. When
A says that the probability of p given g is a he may
be perfectly correct; but we must not suppose that
when he speaks of 'the probability of p' he means the


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 153

probability of p given q, even if g- is the only relevant
proposition that he knows. For there may be other
relevant propositions that he does not know, and the
probability of p is that relative to all these + q. But
supposing that q is the only relevant knowledge that he
possesses, whilst someone else — B — has the knowledge
of r which is relevant, B's value of the probability (if
properly calculated) is to be preferred, because he is
nearer the position of knowledge in which the proba-
bility could be calculated, viz., that in which the whole
of the relevant propositions are known.

This however is only a rough first approximation
to a proper theory. This is easily seen from the
following considerations. It may often happen that
when p only is known the probability of X happening
is very high. As time goes on we may learn the addi-
tional relevant proposition q and the probability of
X relative to pq may be quite small. Yet X may
actually happen. In this case we seem to have gone
wrong by taking in more relevant information. For
instance p may be the proposition that someone has
taken poison, X may be his death within a certain
time. The probability of X given p alone will be
large. Suppose we learn q — that he has taken an
emetic — then the probability of X given pq is pretty
small. Yet he may actually die. So the probability
relative to the wider range of relevant propositions is
not always in practice a safer guide than that relative
to a narrower selection. I do not profess to offer a
perfectly satisfactory theory of the relations between
knowledge, probability and truth. At present the
best suggestion I can make is the following, and I
offer it for what it is worth.

Every proposition is eternally either true or false.
The law of causality is perhaps the assertion that to


154 ON CAUSATION;

every true proposition that asserts the happening of an
event at a time there is a set of relevant true propo-
sitions such that relative to the whole of them the
probability of the event happening is 1. (In this case
an uncaused event like a free volition on the indeter-
minist view would be one that actually happens, but
whose probability is not 1 relative to any set of other
true propositions.) The part played by our minds is
a selective one due to our partial ignorance. The
result is that we know selections only of all the propo-
sitions that are relevant to the occurrence of any given
event. Different people know different selections at
the same time, and the same person knows different
selections at different times. Now what we want for
practical purposes of prediction is that when an event
is actually going to happen its probability relative to
the relevant propositions that we know shall be high,
and when it is actually not going to happen the corre-
sponding probability shall be low.

Now, while we must admit that with any selection
less than the whole of the relevant propositions the
probability may be low though the event is actually
going to happen, or high though it is actually not
going to happen, still we shall less often go wrong
if we expect an event to happen when its probability
is high relative to a larger selection than if we base
our expectations on probabilities relative to smaller
selections. For the larger the selection the nearer it
approaches to that group of propositions relative to
which (if the law of causation be true) the probability
of an event that actually happens happening is 1.
Very often we may go wrong by following this injunc-
tion to maximise our selection, for we may acquire our
knowledge in such an unfortunate order that we start
with a set of propositions that make what is true very


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 155

probable and then keep on acquiring knowledge that
decreases the probability whilst we fail to reach at all
the few remaining ones that would once more make
it high. For all that the maxim remains the most
reasonable one to follow ; just as it is reasonable to argue
logically, although you might come to wrong conclusions
by arguing correctly from false or insufficient premises
and to right ones if you had only simply converted
enough A propositions and had enough undistributed
middles. Very often the worst that will befall you in
following it will be that the probability of a true
proposition which, relative to a smaller selection, was
nearly 1, hovers about ^ relative to the wider selection
that you can reach. But this will lead to no error, for
you will simply not feel justified in predicting at all.
You will then miss some truth, but you will have no
expectation disappointed.

I think that we can now see our way to a proper
statement of a causal law and to the answer to Bradley's
objections. A causal law subsists between two sets
of events when they are so related that the proposi-
tion asserting the occurrence of one of the first set
strengthens the probability of the occurrence of one
of the second set. Now it is to be noted that the
strengthening is the same whatever other events may
happen; the only point is that the other events may
weaken more than the given one strengthens. Thus
let us take the proposition: Smith will die in the
next quarter-of-an-hour — -it being assumed that this is
asserted at some definite moment so that it is definite
with respect to time and is therefore a genuine propo-
sition. Then this proposition is eternally true or false
whether there be causal laws in the universe or not.
But, if there be causal laws, there may be, and, if the
Law of Causality be true, there will be propositions


156 ON CAUSATION;

asserting the occurrence of certain other events and
such that the original proposition has a definite real
probability depending upon these whether they be
known or not. Suppose, for instance, that Smith has
taken arsenic within the last few minutes. Then this
proposition largely increases the probability over what
it would be if this were not true. But it does not
follow from this that the probability is large, because
another proposition that may be true is that he will
take an emetic immediately. But the point to notice
is that it remains true in spite of this that the pro-
position that he has taken arsenic does strengthen the
probability that he will die within the next half-hour
whether other propositions be true that weaken it or
not. Causal laws then as laws about the strengthen-
ing of the probability of the occurrence of one event by
the occurrence of another remain on any view. The
only question is whether we can go further than this
and whether it is ever reasonable to suppose that we
have actually arrived at the true probability of the
occurrence of an event.

In our actual application of causal laws we do not
attempt to calculate numerical probabilities. What we
want to know is whether an event is very probable or
very improbable. Bradley's criticism assumes that we
expect causal laws to give us absolute certainty; but
no scientist would demand this and the laws cannot be
defended if such a demand is made. The question then
for us is: Are we ever justified in holding on the data
that we can have that the occurrence of an event is
practically certain? Consider what this means. It
means : Granted that relative to the relevant proposi-
tions that we know other than the knowledge that
all our knowledge is limited, the proposition p is
very probable, have we any right to hold that its


AKGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 157

probability relative to all actually relevant propo-
sitions is 1 ? It seems to me clear that we often
have a good right to do so. Our right depends on
how far we are justified in holding that the proposi-
tions that we do not know, if there be any that are
relevant at all, are either few or have very little
influence on the probability compared with those which
we do know. Now we have already seen that we soon
learn to cast aside whole masses of the universe as
irrelevant to certain aspects of it. Thus the field
within which relevant data are likely to lie is often
a very restricted one as to breadth. And within this
it is often possible to arrange so that the occurrence
of any relevant events other than those which we have
taken into account is most unlikely. If Smith in the
example be locked up in a room and plenty of arsenic
administered I think he will exhibit unreasonable
optimism if he finds any comfort in Mr Bradley's argu-
ment from the complication of the universe.

We may hold then, I think, that Bradley's argument
does not apply in our world to causal laws when they
are stated in terms of the strengthening of probabilities.
Causal laws it may be admitted at once do not give
us complete certainty, but this does not prevent their
being laws, and it does not conflict with any belief that
anybody who uses them has held about them. We
can pass then to the last objection to Causality with
which we shall have to deal, viz.

The alleged Antinomy of a First Cause. We shall
not have to spend much time with this venerable friend,
who, like most elderly antinomies, has the misfortune
to be lame in one leg. The argument for the thesis is
that causation claims to explain events, and, as it only
does so by referring to other events which need just as
much explanation, it involves a vicious infinite regress.


158 ON CAUSATION;

unless we assume a first cause. The argument depends
on using 'explanation' in the sense of proof. The
propositions of Euclid follow from the definitions and
axioms. The axioms are also propositions, but they
do not need a proof because they are supposed to be
self-evident. Similarly it was thought that causal
series must end with an uncaused cause. But diffi-
culties at once break out in such an analogy. The
axioms of Euclid difiered from the propositions by the
fact that they were self-evident whilst the propositions
were not. But the first cause was either an event or
not. In general it was taken to be the first event
in a certain substance, viz. God. But this event,
unlike the axioms of Euclid, had no distinguishing
characteristic like that of self-evidence in their case
to differentiate it from the other events which were
supposed to need causes as self-evidence differentiated
axioms from propositions that needed proof. Hence it
required a cause as much as any other event, and this
must be events in the same or a different substance,
and so the old regress broke out again. It was im-
possible, as Schopenhauer put it, to 'take the Cosmo-
logical Argument as if it were a cab and drop it when
it had taken one as far as one wished to go.' Thus
the antinomy is weak on the side of the thesis. The
analogy of causal explanations with logical proofs which
started the regress breaks down at just the point at
which we wanted it to stop the backward journey.

On our view of causation, however, there is no
reason even to begin the regress, because we do not
hold that there is any analogy between proof and
causation. The possibility of causal laws merely means
that there is a certain amount of unity in the world,
which, on further investigation, is found to take the
form of a set of more or less isolated groups within


ARGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 159

which laws hold. In virtue of this fact the world is not
a perfect chaos in which nothing can be legitimately
expected at one time rather than another, but it is
subject to certain laws such that the happening of one
event or set of events, when known, has a legitimate
influence on our expectation of the occurrence of other
events. The fact that our knowledge of the occurrence
of the events B strengthens our expectation of the
occurrence of the events C and that there were events
A which had they been known to have happened
would have strengthened our expectation of the events
B and so on presents no vicious regress. In fact there
is no real analogy between causal explanation and
logical proof The only sense in which causal laws
explain is that they simplify. They do not show us
why an event happens in terms of some event or law
that is self-evident, for one event has no distinction
from another to correspond to degrees of self-evidence
among propositions. What they do tell us is that
we can hope to know with some certainty what will
happen where and when we cannot have or do not
wish to have direct experience. It is in this sense
that it is right to insist with Mach that their value is
an economic one, whilst at the same time we definitely
take our stand against the Pragmatists and deny
{a) that this is what is meant by their truth, and
(6) that it is a test of their truth. It is because it is
true that they are of a certain definite nature that they
are of economic value to thought, and it is because
predictions made by them are found to be verified by
experience that they are believed to be true. In this
sense of explanation, which is the only one that causal
laws wUl bear, the Kantian antinomy leaves them
untouched.

But it may be said : This is no doubt true of your


160 ON CAUSATION;

causal laws, but what about your axiom that a system
that has been quiescent for a finite time can only have
its emergence from quiescence explained by a causal
law transeunt to the system in question ? Suppose we
accept the axiom as I have done, what will ' happen ?
The sole diflSculty that can arise will be over the
beginning of change in the universe. If this axiom be
true it is clear that the whole universe (meaning the
world + God, if there be one) can never have been
completely quiescent. For it certainly is not so now,
and if it ever had been it would only have got out
of that state through a transeunt causal law which,
with respect to the whole universe, is a contradiction
in terms. But really there is no difficulty about this
whatever. Why should the whole universe ever have
been quiescent for a finite time? Apart from the
axiom the question is a perfectly open one and with it
we must decide that it never has been quiescent for a
finite time. The only argument that could be brought
against this view must be based on the supposed diffi-
culties of infinity and continuity. But, since these diffi-
culties are at an end, arguments based on them alone
may be relegated to that cave in Pilgrims Progress
where Giants Pope and Pagan mumble the bones of
their past victims and growl at the passers-by whom
they can no longer hurt'.

We have now discussed all the classical objections
to causal laws, and have tried to show that none of

1 It must be noted that the fact that the universe can never have been
quiescent for a finite time is perfectly compatible with its having a begin-
ning in time. The universe began at t means that nothing existed at any
moment earlier than t, whilst at t and all later moments up to now
something has existed. The universe has -never been quiescent for a finite
time means that if t and tf be any two moments there is always an
intermediate moment such that what existed at it differs either from
what existed at t or from what existed at tf.


AEGUMENTS AGAINST CAUSAL LAWS 161

them are of weight against the view of such laws as
which we have offered and which suffices for natural
science. It only remains to close this chapter with a
word about the Law of Causality as opposed to par-
ticular laws of Causation. The Law of Causality is
that every event has a cause and it is often supposed
to be an a 'priori truth. Now we have admitted as
an h priori truth the law that a system that has been
quiescent for a finite time can only be set in change
by a causal process transeunt to itself. The certainty
of this law may cover two certainties, (a) that such
a system will only be set in motion by causes, and
(&) that those causes will be partly transeunt to the
system. Now are (a) and (6) both equally self-evident?
It seems to me that (6) is self-evident; on the other
hand (a) is a particular case of the general Law of
Causality that every event has a cause. Of course the
particular case might well be self-evident without the
general law being so too. That every event has a cause
means on our theory that to every true proposition
asserting the occurrence of an event at any given time
there is a number of true propositions asserting the
occurrence of other events at different (and perhaps,
to be in accord with tradition, we should add earlier)
times such that relative to this set the probability of
the event's occurrence is ] . This proposition does not
seem to me self-evident, nor do I know of any means
of proving it. At the same time it obviously cannot
be disproved and it is advantageous to assume it as
a methodological postulate. So far we have found that
by assuming it even in the most unpromising cases we
can find laws such as it suggests. But we never know
when it may break down, and some persons hold
that it does so over volition. I do not know that
there is nearly such good reason to think that it
B. p. 11


162 ON CAUSATION

breaks down over volition as over the occurrence of
earthquakes, but as some people take an innocent
pleasure in believing that their volitions are not even
theoretically predictable, it will be pleasant not to
have to rob them of that harmless opinion.

Is the particular case of this supposed law which
we see forms a part of the axiom about causality self-
evident 1 That takes the form that whenever a system
that has been quiescent for a finite time ceases to
be so there is an event or events so related to the
new one in the system that the knowledge of them
strengthens the probability of the latter. I am in-
clined to believe that this is self-evident. If I enter
a room and find that a chair which was by the fixe is
now by the window I invariably hold that if I had
been present I might have had knowledge of events
which would have strengthened the probability of this
change. In fact, apart from the knowledge that such
events may have happened in my absence, or, to put
it more strongly, with the certainty that they have
not happened, the change of position of the chair has
no probability at all.


CHAPTER III


ON phenomenalism'


Before coming to the chapter on the Causal Theory
of Perception and its eflFects on our beUefs in the reality
of the objects of our perceptions, I propose to devote a
short space to the discussion of Phenomenalism.

No apology is needed for discussing this theory
somewhere in any essay which deals with the question
of the information, if any, that perception can give us
about reality. And when this question is raised with
particular reference to the philosophical position of the
truths of natural science, such a discussion is essential
in view of the fact that Mach and his school are
phenomenalists, and hold that phenomenalism is the
philosophic theory that is best suited to be the basis
for physics. The only preliminary point that does
call for some explanation is why I should discuss
phenomenalism here rather than after the chapter on
the Causal Theory of Perception. It will be said that

' It must be understood that in this chapter I am not discussing
arguments for phenomenalism — so far as I am aware — that any pheno-
menalist uses. The average phenomenalist bases his position on the kind
of considerations that Mr Moore overthrew in his Refutation of Idealism.
For the purposes of the philosophy of science Mach is the most important
phenomenalist. But he has no positive arguments for his position that
are worth discussing. He is vitiated by the fallacy that Mr Moore over-
threw, and it seems that his main reason for holding the doctrine is
that he supposes — for some inscrutable reason — that it is scientific and
'economic' to a preeminent degree. Anyhow he has now retired behind
the formula "Es giebt keine Machschen Philosophie." I have therefore
tried to invent the argument which a philosophical phenomenalist might
reasonably use, and to criticise it.

11—2


164 ON PHENOMENALISM

it is arguments based on the causal theory that chiefly
undermine naif realism, and that it would be a more
reasonable order to discuss phenomenalism as an al-
ternative when the difficulties of naif realism were
becoming insuperable than here, where they have
hardly fairly begun.

We may anticipate the results of the next chapter
so far as to agree that the main difficulties of naif
realism do spring from the causal account of perception ;
but we may still defend the order that we have adopted.
For we shall try to show in the present chapter that
causal arguments that refute naif realism cannot be
used to support phenomenalism. Moreover, the main
problem about phenomenalism from the point of view
of the philosophy of natural science is to be found in
the question of its relation to causal laws, and so there
is good reason for discussing it directly after we have
finished with Causality. I shall therefore proceed to
discuss phenomenalism without further apology.

First of all, what precisely is meant by phenome-
nalism ? In the sense in which we propose to discuss
it it is the theory about the reality of the world with
which we come in contact in perception which is
diametrically opposite to that of naif realism. It holds,
not merely that the objects of all our perceptions exist
only when they are perceived, but also that there are
no permanent real things with laws of their own that
cause these perceptions and in some measure resemble
their objects. The laws of science, stated in terms of
such supposed realities and their states, are for it mere
transcriptions of laws connecting the perceptions that
people actually have, and these perceptions and their
laws are all that we can hope to make the objects of
science.

Phenomenalism, unlike naif realism, is a position


ON PHENOMENALISM 165

that needs proof. Every man is a realist except in so
far as experience and reflexion force him away from
that position. But nobody becomes a phenomenaUst
except by argument. Nor is phenomenalism the
position at which we naturally arrive on leaving naif
realism \ As soon as the average man is forced away
from naif realism at any point he always assumes that,
in the case of every characteristic that does not raise
some special difi&culty, he perceives the real, and that
events in that real cause the perception of that charac-
teristic which he now has to believe to be appearance.
What, then, are the arguments for phenomenalism ?

Clearly it has to refute both naaf realism and the
modified form of realism that is put in its place. We
have already discussed the arguments against naif
realism that are independent of causality, and seen that
most of them have very little weight. And the argu-
ments that remain to be discussed in the next chapter
from the relativity of perceptions to an organ will not
really prove phenomenalism. The argument is a little
complicated, and we had better put it formally, in order
to avoid all chance of error. Let p be the proposition
' phenomenalism is true.' Let q be the proposition that
the objects of our perceptions depend on the structure
of our organs. Can we prove p from this, i.e. can
we at the same time assert q and qDp'^. In the first
place, if phenomenalism be true, our perceptions cannot
depend on the permanent structure of our organs, for
they will have no permanent structure. They exist
when somebody perceives them, but not otherwise.
Hence, unless you can be sure that, e.g., somebody
always perceives your eye when you perceive a colour,

' As with naif realism so with phenomenalism there is no room for
appearance, and the plain man does soon distinguish appearance and
reality.


166 ON PHENOMENALISM

there is no truth in the statement that what you per-
ceive by sight depends on your eye and its structure.
Every time you perceive a colour when no one does
perceive your eye, you have a perception of colour which
does not depend on the existence of an organ and its
structure. Hence we can assert the proposition p D~ g-.
Taking this together with qlip, we get qD r^ q. But
g* D ~ 2 • 3 • ~ ?• Hence we reach the conclusion that
q'^p .0. ~ g. Thus to assert both q'^p and q would
involve the assertion of both q and ~ q. You cannot
do this, and therefore you cannot prove p from the
argument. It is true that Berkeley, whose argument
is properly phenomenalistic, is so shocked at this result
that he introduces God either — for the point is uncer-
tain — to perceive your eye when no one else does, or
to be a permanent cause which can make people perceive
an eye whenever someone else perceives a colour. But
either alternative is a departure from pure phenome-
nalism. The first alternative is ridiculous, unless there
be other grounds for believing in the existence of God.
Taken as an argument for God, the position might be
stated as follows : ' I have produced a theory about the
unreality of the objects of our perceptions which is
intrinsically so contrary to what people generally be-
lieve that it needs powerful proofs. What would be
a strong proof, if it were consistent both with known
facts and with my theory, is unfortunately inconsistent
with them. It would cease to be so if I introduced
a new fact, viz. a percipient God. Therefore it is obvious
that such a God must exist.' The second alternative
takes us away from phenomenalism to a form of idealism,
for it now holds that our perceptions have permanent
causes common to all of us under like circumstances ;
but it goes beyond this by supposing that these causes
are to be found in the volition of a single person whom


ON PHENOMENALISM 167

it identifies with the God of theology. The first step
takes us from phenomenaHsm to a form of reahsm, the
second to a form of idealism.

We may then, I think, agree that no arguments
based on relativity of perception to an organ can by
themselves legitimately lead to the proposition that all
that we ever perceive is appearance, and that there
corresponds nothing permanent in the real to the
objects that we time and again perceive, and that
common-sense takes to be relatively permanent realities.
I do not, of course, wish to deny at this stage that the
propositions about relativity to an organ could be stated
in a roundabout way in terms of phenomenalism.
I only want to show that they could not when so stated
be consistently made into an argument to prove the
truth of phenomenalism in general.

There is, in fact, no direct argument for phenome-
nalism that can make any claim on us. The doctrine,
if held at all, can only be held reasonably on some such
grounds as the following : Suppose it were found that
naif realism could not be maintained, and that the
causal view that is substituted for it leaves us in com-
plete agnosticism about the real, then the cry might
well arise : Why not drop all reference to the real and
state everything in terms of perceptions and the laws
of their connexion ? To this question the answer must
be : Either you do not intend to attempt to find any
causal laws that will tell us what perceptions to expect
or you do. In the former case you must remember that
your theory is less well off than the one that boldly
assumes real causes of our perceptions rather like their
objects, and assumes that they obey certain laws. For
these assumptions do account for a good many of the
perceptions that we have, and there is no reason to
suppose that there is any h priori objection to making


168 ON PHENOMENALISM

them. In the latter case, if you are to keep to pure
phenomenahsm you will have to account for present
perceptions by causal laws that bring in no data beside
other perceptions. And it may certainly be questioned
whether you wiU be able to do this. If you bring into
your laws anything hke ' possible perceptions,' or ' per-
ceptions beneath the threshold of consciousness,' you
have, however, left pure phenomenalism. For you are
now assuming the existence of something that is not,
and never has been, the object of a direct awareness,
and that is precisely what the ordinary scientist does
in his assumptions about the real world. The question
will then merely be (a) whether his assumption that
the real world is on the whole very much like the
objects that he perceives is a 'priori less probable than
yours, and (6) whether your theory can explain the
occurrence of the perceptions that we actually have as
well as the rival theory.

I think it is perfectly clear that an absolutely pure
phenomenalism that wishes to explain and anticipate
our perceptions can be ruled out of court. We will
suppose that it is allowed to assume present perceptions
and those that it can remember. It is quite clear that
with these alone there are no causal laws possible that
will account for the perceptions that we may expect to
have anything like as well as the assumptions which
science makes will do. To make such laws possible we
shall certainly have to take into account the perceptions
that other people have, that we and they might have,
and those that we have had but have forgotten. The
question is whether the processes by which the phenome-
nalist — who has now ceased to be a pure phenomenalist
— arrives at his beliefs in all these other perceptions
would not equally justify the plain man's assumption
of a real world more or less like what he perceives.


ON PHENOMENALISM 169

We will consider, then, the phenomenalist's answer to
the two questions proposed to him on the last page.

(a) Why should it be held to be d priori more
probable that what is real is perceptions than that it is
something like the objects of our perceptions ? To this
the phenomenalist would answer : Everyone has per-
ceptions, and perceptions at least must certainly exist
whether they themselves are objects of direct awareness
or not. On the other hand, the objects of our percep-
tions are clearly only known to exist in the relation
of being perceived. What right, then, have you to
suppose > that they could exist out of this relation 1
Thus the argument is that in assuming other perceptions
as the real causes of our present ones we are only
assuming that the real consists of what we know on
other grounds must be capable of existing unperceived ;
whilst in assuming that it is like the objects of our
perceptions, we are assuming that what exists unper-
ceived is like that which is clearly only experienced as
perceived, and cannot be proved independently to exist
in any other state.

We must consider both sides of this argument
carefully. We must keep separate the two distinc-
tions of conscious and unconscious perceptions, and
of perceptions which are, and those which are not,
reflected upon. These two differences are often con-
fused. Let us begin with that between those that are
and those that are not reflected upon. It is quite clear
that when I perceive a tree or any of the objects of
ordinary life I do not generally reflect upon this
perception and say that I know that I perceive a tree\

' This does not of course prove that I am not as a matter of fact
directly aware of my perception when I have it, but merely that I do
not make a certain judgment which I could not make unless I were
directly aware of the perception.


170 ON PHENOMENALISM

And it is generally considered that the opposite view
would involve an infinite regress in knowledge that is
psychologically impossible. On the other hand, my
awareness of the tree, whether reflected upon or not,
would be called a ' conscious awareness,' as against the
so-called unconscious perceptions that I am supposed
to have by Leibniz, or believers in the sub-liminal self,
when I hear the roaring of the waves. These are
supposed to consist of perceptions of the numberless
little noises due to the rolling of the separate stones,
and they are supposed to differ from any perception
like that of the tree in a definite way which would
perhaps best be described as a difference of 'intensive
magnitude. Now, it is clear that the distinction be-
tween perceptions that are and those that are not
reflected upon is a valid one, and can be witnessed by
introspection, but there is much more doubt whether
the distinction between conscious and unconscious per-
ceptions is valid. Unconscious perceptions have often
been introduced where either there was no need to
assume any event in the brain or the mind, or where
all that was needed was a persistent state of the brain
or the mind, or both, which alone does not produce or
constitute a perception, but in company with other
such states, or under new bodily or mental conditions
is capable of giving rise to a perception. But there is
no more reason for calling a psychical state of this kind
an unconscious perception than for calling a match-box
an unlighted bonfire. Similarly if we grant that at a
given moment there may be unanalysed detail in the
object of a perception which attention can discover we
do not assume any but conscious perceptions. Before
it was discovered it was part of the object of a total
conscious perception ; afterwards it forms the objects
of several new conscious perceptions. Perceptions,


ON PHENOMENALISM 171

then, are either conscious and like our perceptions of
trees and chairs, or there is no reason for calling them
perceptions at all. And it is certainly not essential
to the existence of perceptions that they should be
reflected upon.

Hence, to be plausible, the phenomenal] st position
has to be stated as follows. The assumption that the
real causes of our perceptions are perceptions that we
have had and have forgotten (i.e. on which we have
ceased to be able to reflect) or are perceptions in other
people (i.e. perceptions on which we never could have
reflected) is so far more probable than any other
alternative a priori in that we know that perceptions
can and do exist unreflected upon, whilst we do not
know that the objects of those perceptions, or anything
like them, exists unperceived.

Before discussing this argument in its present form
we must say a word in explanation of the second half
of it. This is the argument that, since the objects of
our perceptions are clearly only known to exist when
perceived, it is a greater assumption to suppose that
the unknown real causes of our perceptions are like
their objects than that they are other perceptions,
since we have now seen that other perceptions are able
to exist unreflected upon. This does not, of course,
mean that when I perceive a tree I perceive it as
something perceived by me, for this would be just to
deny the true assertion of the other part of the argu-
ment that perceptions can and do exist unreflected
upon. What it means is that a thing is only directly
known to exist while it is actually an object of per-
ception, whether, as a matter of fact, we did or did not
reflect at the moment of perceiving it that this was
the case. The point, then, is that, whilst there is no
ground independent of the success with which the


172 ON PHENOMENALISM

assumption meets in accounting for the occurrence of
our perceptions which makes it necessary to suppose
that the objects of perceptions, or anything like them,
exists unperceived, it is certain that perceptions can
and do exist unreflected upon. The assumption that
the unknown real causes of our perceptions are other
perceptions that are unreflected upon by us is therefore
d, priori a more probable or a less improbable assumption
than that they are like the objects of our perceptions.

Now that we have stated this argument as fairly
as possible, there are two criticisms to be made upon
it, one from each side. From the side of the argument
that perceptions can certainly exist unreflected upon,
we must ask whether the sense in which this is true
is the sense in which it will make the phenomenalist
assumption of forgotten perceptions and perceptions in
other people as the real causes of our perceptions more
probable d, priori than the rival assumption. The
phenomenalist wants to be able to assume forgotten
perceptions and perceptions in other people. He
argues that these are just perceptions that are not
reflected upon by the person who assumes them, and
that, since it is known that such can exist, the as-
sumption of them is d priori the most probable one
that can be made about the nature of the real. I think
that this argument loses most of its weight when we
examine a little more carefully the meaning of reflexion.
We shall see, in fact, that, if the assumption of forgotten
states of mind in oneself is d, priori slightly more
probable than that of a real world like the objects of
our perception, the assumption of perceptions in other
people — which is certainly necessary for phenomenalism
even more than for other views — is not more probable.

When we say that it is certain that perceptions
can and do exist unreflected upon, we mean that we


ON PHENOMENALISM 173

can now remember to have had many perceptions of
which we can also remember that at the time at which
we had them we did not think or say to oui'selves :
'I have now a perception of X.' This, it is to be
noted, involves memory. I am directly aware now
of the perception that I had some time ago, and I am
directly aware that I did not at the moment at which
I had the perception have the sort of experience that
enables me to say, ' I have such and such a perception.'
Such a proposition would, of course, have been true ;
but I did not then have, as I do now, that direct
awareness of my perception at that time which would
have enabled me to assert it. You can only show that
you have perceptions of which you are not directly
aware when you have them by becoming directly aware
of them later, and not by the alleged infinite regress
that accompanies the opposite view. That regress only
applies to the assertion that you cannot know without
knowing that you know, and knowing that you know
that you know, and so on. But it certainly does not
disprove the possibility that every perception might be
accompanied by a coexistent awareness of it. We only
discover that this is not the case by becoming directly
aware through memory of a past perception, and also
of the fact that there was no awareness of that
perception contemporary with its occurrence \

We can now see that phenomenalism has just as
much and just as little right to assume other minds
as common-sense and science have to assume that the
causes of our perceptions are like their objects in general
character. It is true that we know directly that
perceptions have existed at moments when we were
not directly aware of them. But it is also clear that

1 How far memory can be taken to prove a negative on such a point
I should hesitate to dogmatise.


174 ON PHENOMENALISM

the only perceptions of which we know this are those
of which we have been directly aware at some time.
Now, the perceptions of other people just are percep-
tions of which we never can be directly aware. Hence
the passage from perceptions in us of which we were
not aware when they existed to the assumption of
perceptions in other people is not a mere assumption
of more of the same kind, but an assumption that
perceptions of which we can never be directly aware
exist, whilst all that we know directly is that per-
ceptions of which we are sometimes, but not always,
aware exist. For all that direct experience can tell
us, it might be the case that the only perceptions that
can exist are those of which we are sometimes directly
aware. Of course, I do not use this as an argument
to show that we make a mistake in assuming percep-
tions in ourselves and others that are never the objects
of direct awareness, but merely to show that the
phenomenalist who assumes perceptions of which he
can never ex hypothesi be directly aware, makes a jump
just as much as the man who assumes realities like
the objects of his perceptions but which are not per-
ceived. To be strictly fair, however, we must grant
that the phenomenalist's jump from solipsism is not as
great as that of the man who holds that the real in its
general character resembles the objects of his percep-
tions. To assume that there exist perceptions of
which I am never directly aware when I know that
there are perceptions of which I am very rarely aware,
and which exist when I am not aware of them, is
undoubtedly a less assumption than to suppose that
something like that which I can never know to exist
except as an object of perception exists unperceived.

And in the matter of assuming forgotten percep-
tions of his own the phenomenalist's position is still


ON PHENOMENALISM 175

less open to cavil. A forgotten perception is one of
which I believe that I could at one time have been
directly aware, but of which I can not at the present
be directly aware. Now, of course, it is true that the
only perceptions of which the phenomenalist can be
immediately certain that they existed when he was
not directly aware of them are those of which he can
be directly aware when he makes the judgment, and
ex hypothesi perceptions that he has forgotten are not
in that position. So that there is a jump into a slightly
different territory when I assume perceptions of which
I am no longer able to be directly aware. But the
jump is less in this case than that which takes the
phenomenalist out of solipsism. There he started with
perceptions of which he was immediately certain that
they existed when he was not aware of them, but
could only be thus certain because he could be aware
of them when he made the judgment, and assumed
perceptions of which he never could be aware. Here
he starts from the same set of perceptions and assumes
others which only differ from them by the fact that
he can no longer be aware of them at will, although
he believes that he could have been aware of them at
some time.

We must now consider from the other side what
is to be said about the phenomenalistic argument that
its assumption about the nature of the real is d priori
more probable than that of the scientific realist. Is
it true that there are no other considerations that
ought to be noticed in trying to find the relative
a priori probabilities of the rival assumptions about
the real beside those mentioned in the phenomenalistic
argument ? It is clear that in considering the d, priori
probabilities we ought to take into account all rele-
vant knowledge and belief as well as that about the


176 ON PHENOMENALISM

comparative success with which the two assumptions
account for our perceptions. Now, as we have constantly
pointed out, people invariably begin with the conviction
that what they perceive is real. It is only by argu-
ments that they can be led out of this position, and when
they pass out of it to the belief that what they perceive
is appearances, the perception of which is caused by a
reality, they still do not maintain a perfectly open mind
as to the nature of that reality. It is quite true that
purely on the grounds of the law of causation there is
no reason why a cause should resemble its effect ; some
causes do so and others do not. But people do not
decide here solely on the grounds of the law of
causality. They suppose that in this particular case
the cause does resemble — not indeed the effect, which
is a psychical event, and is therefore more like the
cause on the phenomenalistic theory — but the object
of the perceptions that are the effects. If we started
with perfectly open minds from the position that our
perceptions as psychical events have causes which exist
but cannot be perceived, then the phenomenalistic
argument that it is d, priori more probable that those
real causes should be of the same general nature as
perceptions than that they should be of the same
general nature as the objects of perceptions would, as
we have seen, have a certain though not a great
weight. But when we are considering the a priori
probabilities in this subject we must take into account,
not merely the law of causality and the amount of
knowledge and ignorance that it allows us, but also
any other relevant judgments about probability that
may be made on this point. Now it seems to me
clear that people do think that it is more likely that
the real shall be like the objects of their perceptions
than like their perceptions as psychical events. This


OJN I'HEJNOMENALISM 177

is not a belief, as we have seen and shall see, to which
the standard arguments for subjective idealism^ can
bring any valid objection. Of course there are many-
beliefs which are very generally held, and the opposite
of which it is very difficult to believe, which are as
a matter of fact false. But I am not suggesting that
it is more probable d priori that the real world should
be like the objects of our perception than like the
perceptions themselves, because most or all people
think so. I merely wish to suggest that when a man
recognises that there is no reason why the real world
should not resemble in character the objects of his
perceptions he will undoubtedly hold that it is more
probable that it does than that it does not, and that
this belief must be taken into account by every man
who has it when he considers the relative probability
a priori of phenomenalism and scientific realism. Our
beliefs may be wrong, but so long as we have them
and no valid argument can be found against them, it
is our duty to judge in accordance with them, and not
to pretend that they are non-existent.

I think it is fair then to conclude that the phe-
nomenalistic argument, when superposed on the belief
that our perceptions have causes, does not succeed in
making it d priori more probable that the nature of
those realities should be like that of our perceptions
rather than that it should be like that of the objects of
our perceptions. We will pass then to the relative final
probabilities of the two theories, i.e. the probabilities

1 It should be noted, however, that these do not exhaust the arguments
on which IdeaUsm has been based. The arguments for esse=percipere
do not depend, as Mr Moore seemed to hold in his Befviation of Idealism,
on the doctrine that esse = pereipi. He forgot such arguments as the
HegeUan Dialectic and Lotze's doctrine that substances must be selves.
I do not think that these arguments prove idealism, but this is not the
place to discuss them.

B. P. 12


178 ON PHENOMENALISM

that they gain by the agreement of the perceptions
that they predict with those which we actually have.
This takes us to the question which on p. 168 I called
(b). If two hypotheses be equally probable d, priori
and explain known facts, their relative final proba-
bilities are dependent on how well they explain the
facts. By explaining the facts is meant making that
probable which is actually found in most cases to be
true. In the present reference there are two points
to be noted : (l) Whether it is necessary at all to go
outside the perceptions that we now have and can
remember ; and (2) whether, if we do so, laws entirely
in terms of perceptions will explain better than laws in
terms of realities whose general nature is like that of
the objects of our perceptions.

It is quite clear that if we keep entirely to what
we can remember we shall be able to find but few
causal laws among our perceptions. We must there-
fore give up all hope of being able to predict what
perceptions we are likely to have in given circumstances
or else assume something beside those perceptions that
we can at a given moment reflect upon directly. The
assumption that we make will have its initial proba-
bility increased in proportion to the success which it
has in accounting for what is found to be true. The
question that remains therefore is what assumption
does this best.

Phenomenalism has a plausible argument to prove
that the assumption of real causes of our perceptions
like their objects in general character cannot explain
better than the assumption of perceptions, because
the hypotheses are really equivalent. This argument
runs as follows : Suppose you do assume that your
perceptions are caused by realities that obey certain
laws among themselves. The only evidence for the


ON PHENOMENALISM 179

particular kinds of realities and for the laws that they
obey are the regularities that can be observed among
your perceptions. Surely, then, it would be just as
well to say that these regularities justify causal laws
among perceptions of the form ' the occurrence of the
perceptions, p, q, r at t makes that of s, t, u at t + T
probable,' as to say that the first set were caused by
X, that X makes Y probable and that Y causes the
second set. The argument then is that you do not
directly need to assume anything fresh. You say that
the observed regularities among perceptions are evidence
for certain causal laws among them. Then no doubt
you will find that these sometimes inexplicably break
down unless you assume that you had perceptions on
which you cannot now reflect, i.e. forgotten perceptions.
The first point to notice about this argument is that,
as we have already seen, the amount of regularity
among the perceptions that can be remembered at any
given time is very small indeed. As a matter of fact,
we aU assume on no grounds at all that what we per-
ceive is more or less the same as what is real, and when
this assumption is made as it is, it enables us to discover
and make probable very many regularities which with-
out it would not have been noticed or judged probable.
The suggested laws of the form mentioned above
connecting the occurrence of perceptions with each
other could certainly never have been discovered if it
had not been the case that by nature we make the
assumption that the real world resembles the objects
that we perceive. The phenomenalist then will have
to regard our incorrigible tendency to make this as-
sumption as a ' felix cuj/pg^ like that which led to the
Redemption by way of the Fall. Still I do not think
that we have any right to hold that because we should
not have discovered certain propositions if we had not

12—2


180 ON PHENOMENALISM

made certain assumptions, therefore the assumptions
must be held to be more probable than the propositions
which would not have been discovered without them.
The essence of the phenomenalist argument is that, in
as far as the assumption of the real world with its laws
could ever give a verifiable result, it could be replaced
by hypothetical propositions about the occurrence of
perceptions, and that as far as it could not give a
verifiable result it was useless.

I think, however, that the position of the phe-
nomenalist is open to criticism. It unquestionably
follows from the laws of probability that if a proposi-
tion or set of propositions _p strengthen the probability
of a proposition q, then if q be found to be true the
probability of j? is strengthened. Now it is quite clear
that the assumption of a real world with certain laws
is a set of propositions that strengthen the probability
of what is actually found to happen. And it is also
clear that it is a different assumption from that of laws
connecting perceptions, even though it always has to
be verified, if at all, by noting the occurrence of certain
perceptions under certain circumstances which must
also appear as perceptions. Hence it is quite certain
that this particular assumption, like any other that
makes probable what is as a matter of fact true, has
its probability increased. Of course the phenomenalist
would be perfectly right if he said that the discoverable
order in our perceptions does not by itself prove the
existence of a regular world of reals that cause them.
For if any regular system led us to another regular
system as probably existing, we should have no right to
stop at the first external world. Its regularity would
make it very probable that there was another that
caused it, and so on. The fact is that the strengthen-
ing of probability takes place multiplicatively, and,


ON PHENOMENALISM 181

if the d, priori probability of the assumption be small,
the final probability of the existence of such an assumed
world will be negligible. Hence you cannot prove to
a man who thinks it very unlikely that anything exists
except perceptions, that it is probable that a real world
like the objects of perceptions exists on the ground
that it explains so well what actually takes place.

But, granted that no one really is in the position
that he thinks it positively improbable that there
should be a real world like the objects of his percep-
tions, except through listening to erroneous arguments,
we must compare the strengthening of the probability
of such an external world with the strengthening of
the probability of laws connecting our perceptions,
which are equivalent to the former in all cases capable
of verification. Let us take some simple scientific law
and consider it — say the proposition that ' heat causes
metals to expand.' The ordinary theory would be
that the metals, the temperature, and the length exist
whether we perceive them or not ; that, under suitable
circumstances, we can perceive them ; and that, when
we do so, we are actually able to perceive that con-
nexion which we believe to hold between change of
temperature and change of length, whether we perceive
it or not. The phenomenalist position is that it is
absurd to assume any more than the law about per-
ceptions, that whenever we have a perception of a
metal with a certain degree of temperature we can
perceive a certain length, and that this will increase
as the felt temperature increases. This, the phenome-
nalist would say, is all that ever could be verified in
the realist's law, and therefore all in his assumption
that any verification can render probable. Now if all
laws were as simple as this the phenomenalist might
be right ; but this is not the case. The actual position


182 ON PHENOMENALISM

that we have to face is the following one : In general
it is not a case of finding regular conjunctions of
perceptions and arguing from this that there is a
causal law of the form that the occurrence of Pi
strengthens the probability of the occurrence ofp^ and
makes it practically certain. There are some such
regularities among our perceptions, and if we confined
ourselves to them, I think it would be true to say
that such hypothetical propositions about perceptions
were better justified than the assumption of real
connexions of events that take place alike when we
do and when we do not perceive them. But the
propositions at which we arrive as probable when
we assume a real world like the objects of our per-
ceptions, are not propositions at which we could have
arrived from any actual recurrent series of connected
perceptions, for the excellent reason that such a
recurrent series will not in general have taken place.
Thus we must not merely say that the assumption of
real causes of our perceptions obeying certain laws
enables us to discover regularities in our perceptions
that we should otherwise miss. What we must say
is that the assumption actually renders probable pro-
positions about the connexion of our perceptions that
would not be rendered probable by our actual percep-
tions alone, and which are verified. Propositions of
the form ' if p occurs it is practically certain that
q will occur, where p and q are perceptions,' can only
be rendered probable by our perceptions when p and
q actually do constantly occur together. But in
general both p and q scarcely ever occur at all, and
therefore it is true to say that our perceptions alone do
not render such propositions probable. But this just
means that unless the assumption is probably true
these propositions are not probable. Now the less


ON PHENOMENALISM 183

probable a proposition is antecedently, i.e. without the
assumption of a given proposition, the more probable
does that assumption become if it makes the ante-
cedently improbable proposition soluble, and the latter
is as a matter of fact found to be true.

Let us take an example from the wave-theory of
light. It can be shown to follow from this that there
will be a bright spot in the middle of the shadow
cast by a small circular object like a coin. Now the
phenomenalist would say : ' Why suppose that this
verifies the wave-theory in as far as that involves
what cannot be perceived 1 Why not say at once
that it makes probable the law that I shall always
perceive a bright spot in the middle when I perceive
a circular shadow. This is the only part of the law
that can be verified. True I should never have
thought of looking for a bright spot there if I had
not made the assumption of the wave theory, but this
merely shows that the assumption was a fortunate aid
to the discovery of a hypothetical proposition connect-
ing my perceptions.' In accordance with what we
have said, the following is the right answer to this
contention. Certainly it is perfectly true that what
has been discovered involves a hypothetical law about
perceptions. But if you keep to perceptions the law
was not probable unless there was an actual coexistence
in all or most cases of the shadow and the bright spot.
Now, as a matter of fact, on your theory there was
not such a coexistence. It is useless for you to tell us
that there was a bright spot, but that you did not
notice it, because you did not expect it to be there.
If phenomenalism be correct it was not there when
you did not notice it. Hence unless the assumption
of the wave theory be true, or at least probable, your
law about perceptions and their connexion does not


184 ON PHENOMENALISM

merely remain undiscovered, it actually has practically
no probability. On the other hand, when you have
made the assumption of the wave-theory, and learnt
from it that such a spot ought to be found, the fact
that you find it and that antecedently to the as-
sumption there was practically no probability of its
being there strengthens the probability of the assump-
tion enormously. In fact, the whole criticism of the
phenomenalistic argument under discussion might be
put as follows : Propositions asserting constant con-
junctions hypothetically can only be rendered probable
either by the actual observable recurrence of both
terms in conjunction or by the fact that they can be
inferred from probable hypotheses. In most of the
hypothetical laws about the conjunctions of perceptions
a constant recurrence of both terms in conjunction is
not as a matter of fact experienced. It follows that
such laws are not probable unless they follow from
some probable hypothesis. But if such an hypothesis
can be found, and the conjunction can be verified, even
in a single case the very fact that, apart from the
hypothesis, it had no particular probability, makes the
probability of the hypothesis stronger.

We cannot therefore accept the phenomenalistic
position that we may just as well assume hypothetical
laws about our perceptions as causes of them obeying
among themselves the laws laid down by physics.
The laws of physics will indeed in general be able
to be stated in terms of connexions between possible
perceptions ; but the laws so stated will have little or
no probability apart from the truth or probability of
the assumption about the real world and its laws.
And the mere statement of the laws of physics in
terms of possible perceptions would not be without
difficulty. Atoms, molecules, and ether-waves could


ON PHENOMENALISM- 185

not be put directly into phenomenalistic laws. For
they are supposed to be of such a nature that they
could not possibly be perceived. Hence a phenome-
nalistic law about them would take the form : If I
had the perception 'p which, ex-hypothesi, I cannot
have, I should always have also the perception q which,
ex-hypothesi, I cannot have. If, then, we are to be
able to carry science to any pitch it is essential that
we should be able to allow the existence of real causes
of our perceptions as at least possible, and when this
is done the most probable laws for them to obey among
themselves are those which science finds it necessary
to assume in order to account for what is perceived.
Now these laws are not in the least like those which
perceptions obey among themselves, although they are
of course connected with the latter. They are in fact
laws about the kind of changes that we can observe
in the object of a single continuous perception ; and
the only common characteristics of the objects of our
perceptions and the perceptions themselves is that
both have temporal relations and can enter into causal
laws. Hence, until anyone can make up a theory in terms
of laws like those that hold between perceptions which
will explain our perceptions better than the theory of
science, we shall be justified in holding that if there
be a real world at all it probably resembles the objects
of our perceptions. But this is subject to the difficulties
which have to be dealt with in the next chapter, due
to the fact that it has been held that the causal theory
of knowledge, which begins by assuming a real world
like the objects of our perceptions, ends by over-
throwing all knowledge of the real. To the discussion
of that theory we now turn.


CHAPTEE IV

THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

At every step in the preceding chapters we have
been brought against the causal theory of perception.
We saw too that it tended to land common-sense in
conclusions that it did not want. Common-sense
started with naif realism and only left it when and
inasmuch as it was forced to do so. But it was forced
away from it at certain points by arguments inde-
pendent of the causal theory of perception, and, when-
ever this happened, it introduced the causal view. For
no sooner had common-sense distinguished between
appearance and reality than it was forced to give some
account of the relations between them in those objects
which it perceived as being all of a piece, and, but
for difficulties, would have continued to regard as all
equally real. Unhesitatingly and without reflexion
it rushed to the causal theory. The reality caused the
perception of the appearances, and from the appear-
ances you could get information about the reality.
But the theory, whether true or not, was a bad ally
for common-sense realism. It was not content to act
as a humble account of the connexion of those two
aspects which common-sense had been forced to
separate. It could not leave common-sense with that
amount of naif realism that it wanted and that other
arguments allowed to it. For the causal view itself


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 187

becomes the strongest argument against naif realism,
and, when pursued, seems to leave it no foothold in
the world. Educated common-sense followed it in
its rejection of secondary qualities, but refused to
give up primaries, and so matters stand to-day with
science — except when it becomes phenomenalistic.
But it was impossible for the philosopher to stop
there ; he was hurried on to the Thing-in-itself, and,
in its mysterious presence, according to temperament
he worshipped with Mr Spencer, constructed moral
fairy tales with Kant, or began to ask, as we propose
to do, whether his leader — the causal theory — which
he had so innocently followed might not be a will o'
the wisp.

We propose to discuss in the present chapter the
arguments against naif realism that depend on causa-
tion. We shall have to enquire where precisely they
will let us rest and what precisely is meant by the
view which is certainly held vaguely by educated
common -sense that our perceptions have causes and
that some relation is to be found between the nature
of these causes and the reality of the objects perceived.

The essential argument that we have to examine is
that from the relativity of objects of perception to an i
organ ; but we shall find that the causal theory once
introduced exerts an influence on all the other argu-
ments which we have previously discussed without
assuming it.

It seems to be held that relativity to an organ is
fatal to the reality of sense qualities. The state-
ment to begin with is vague, but at the very outset
we must carefully distinguish it from the position that
I discussed in the last chapter which held that, since
one of the qualities which reflexion sho^v^s to belong
to every object that we perceive is that of standing in


188 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEEOEPTION

the relation of being perceived, there can be no ground
for supposing that any object that can be perceived
ever exists out of that relation. The argument here
to be discussed introduces indeed a relation ; but it is
a relation to the body and not to the mind. Let me
quote Bradley as an exponent of the argument under
discussion. 'A thing is coloured, but, except to some
eye, it seems not coloured at all. And the eye...
relation to which appears somehow to make the
quality — does that itself possess colour ? Clearly not
unless there be another eye that sees it. Nothing
therefore is really coloured ; colour seems only to
belong to what is itself colourless. And the same
result holds with heat and cold'.'

There is clearly an analogy between this argument
and the one for pure phenomenalism. It says : No
doubt when you perceive red you do not at the same
time perceive a relation to your eye. StUl, in con-
sidering whether red be real or only an appearance,
you ought clearly to take into account all that you
can possibly find out about it. Now one of the things
that you can find out about it is that it is never per-
ceived except when it is also possible to find that it
stands in certain relations to your eye. What right
then have you to believe that it can exist out of those
relations ? The argument is then confused with the
formally similar one for phenomenalism, because the
relation mentioned in it is confused with that of being
perceived, which plays the same part in that argument.
It is, however, easy to see that the two relations can-
not be identical, since relativity to an organ cannot
possibly be the same as relativity to a percipient
mind.

Our first duty then will be to clear up the relations

1 Appearance and Reality, Chap. I. p. 12.


THE CAUSAL THEOKY OF PERCEPTION 189

between the two arguments. Call the present one b
and the phenomenalistic one a. In the first place h is
no ground by itself for believing the phenomenalistic
conclusion. The fact that whatever I perceive has a
certain relation to an organ of perception cannot pos-
sibly be by itself any reason for supposing that it does
not exist when it is not perceived. For the relation
to the organ, whatever it may be, is not the relation
of being perceived, since that is a relation to the mind
and not to the body. Hence, although b might prove,
e.g. that there is no reason to suppose that red ever
exists out of some relation to the eye, yet, as this
relation cannot itself be that of being perceived, there
can be no reason supplied by b alone that red does
not exist in this relation R to the eye even when it
is not perceived. It is clear that to prove the phe-
nomenalistic conclusion we need something more than
b, viz. a premise to the effect that the relation R to
the organ of sense, whatever it may be, implies also
the relation of being perceived. Without this we
merely know that we never do perceive X without
being able to show that it is also related to some
organ ; and this leaves two alternatives open to us
beside phenomenalism, viz. (i) that the object con-
tinues to exist in the same relation to our organs
even when we cease to perceive it, or (ii) that, whilst
it cannot be perceived when it ceases to stand in this
relation to the organ, yet it does not cease to exist
when it ceases to stand in this relation. And, as
before, the sole reason so far for choosing phenomenal-
ism rather than one of these alternatives is the old
argument a which we have already discussed.

So far I have taken the relativity argument quite
generally, and have shown that, unless the relation R
to an organ which it claims to discover can be proved


190 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

to imply the relation P of being perceived, it has no
bearing on phenomenalism whatever. We will now
consider R a little more closely and see if there be
any reason to suppose that it implies P. What is
the nature of J? ? It is clear that at this stage we
must not tie ourselves down to the causal theory
which common-sense commonly assumes as the con-
necting link between appearance and reality when it
thinks it has discovered a distinction between the
two. For the perceived relation is supposed to con-
nect our organs of perception with what we perceive
and the argument from it is supposed to show that
what we perceive is always an appearance. On the
other hand the causal relation is supposed to connect
our perception of a given object taken as a mental
event with the supposed real cause of that perception
which is not itself the object of it. Another point to
notice about R is that it must be a relation of whose
existence and nature we must be able to learn, and
we must therefore be careful that we do not, by as-
suming that the presence of R makes the objects of
our perception appearances, assume that R itself is at
once an object of a perception and a reality.

It is tolerably easy to see by considering particular
cases what sort of a relation R must be. We shall
see that it is not supposed to be a perceptible relation,
and that is as it should be. Let us consider sight for
example. I see a coloured object. I shut my eye or
am deprived of it by accident and I no longer see such
an object. So too if I turn my eye away and replace
it by my ear. Again my eye is a very complicated
organ in which various distinct parts can be found,
and, by lesions of the eye and the comparison of it
with other optical instruments I can discover approxi-
mately what rdle each part plays in the act of vision.


THE CAUSAL THEOKY OF PERCEPTION 191

We can find reason for supposing that the rods and
cones are connected with colour vision, and con-
vergence and accommodation with the perception of
distance. The relation R then splits up into several
distinct ones in the case of sight, (a) Without eyes
or with them shut I can see nothing, (fe) Some at
least of the distinguishable characteristics in the object
perceived cannot be perceived in the absence of certain
appropriate structures in the eye. (c) With open eyes
possessing all the appropriate parts in working order
what I perceive depends on the position of my body.
To put the matter more generally we must say :
(a) Without special organs you cannot perceive the
special qualities like sound, colour, extension, etc.
(6) With such organs there is reason to believe that
some of the special characteristics of these qualities
are so connected with the detailed structure of the
organ that in its absence they are imperceptible.
And (c) with the appropriate organs in full working
order what you perceive will still be a part con-
ditioned by the position and past history of your
body. It is only in the case of sight and hearing
that much progress has been made in correlating
distinctions that can be perceived in those qualities
that cannot be perceived without the organ with the
structure of that organ.

We can now at least be clear about the various
relations with which we have to deal. There is
firstly the relation P of an object to the mind when
that object is perceived. And then there is the
relation R between the object and the body which
has been found to split up into the three relations
rj, r^, r^. The relation r^ is that without the ap-
propriate organ we cannot perceive qualities of a
given sort. To this the main exception would be


192 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PEECEPTION

perceptions in dreams, r^ is a relation involving the
particular characteristics of qualities (e.g. the par-
ticular colour or sound). It is such that without
certain distinctions in the structure of the appro-
priate organ we cannot distinguish these particular
characteristics. The relation r, is between the posi-
tion and past history of our bodies and what we
perceive. The question is whether the fact that
whenever objects stand in the relation P to the mind
they also have the relations r^, r^, r^ to our bodies is
any reason for supposing that they cease to exist
when they cease to stand in the relation P.

With regard to the relation r, it seems to me
tolerably obvious that it proves nothing. The fact
that without eyes no one would perceive colours can
be no reason for supposing that, granted that people
have eyes and perceive colours, those colours cease to
exist when they are not perceived. The possession
of this structure might be the only way in which a
mind that is connected with a body could perceive
colours which would be there whether it perceived
them or not. It is generally, and I think justly,
held that there might well be sensible qualities that
we do not perceive just because we have not the
requisite organs. Electrical and magnetic qualities
might perhaps be offered as examples. And there is
a singular inconsistency in the position of a man who
holds that the fact that without eyes we cannot per-
ceive colours proves that colours are only appearances,
and also holds that the fact that we dream about
colours proves the same conclusion. When we dream
about colours the objects of our dream perceptions
are as coloured as those of waking life ; the only
difference is that we perceive them with our eyes
shut. It is therefore an undue attempt to make


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 193

the best of both worlds which proves that colours are
mere appearances both because we can and because
we cannot perceive them without using our eyes.

But it will be said that it is not the fact that we
must have appropriate organs in order to perceive
definite sense-qualities that proves that the latter
are mere appearances, but rather the necessity of
the relation r^. It will be said that this is a
mere rhetorical flourish preparatory to the really fatal
argument that when you have got the organs and
thus are able to perceive the general qualities the
perception of the particular characteristics depends
on the detailed structure of the organ. But, taken by
itself, this argument seems to be precisely in the same
position as the argument from r-j. It is impossible to
tell a 'priori whether the detailed structure of the
organ is the condition by which the mind perceives
real distinctions or whether it merely conditions the
production of the perception of an apparent object
with these apparent distinctions in it. Either ex-
planation will account for the facts.

The argument is often reinforced by considering
how different the world must look to birds and insects
with their eyes so widely different in structure from
ours. It will be said : We have every reason to
think that, even if there be something in common
between what is perceived by all beings that have
eyes, yet shapes, distances, and no doubt colours, will
depend on the different structure of their organs.
Think then how different must be the detail of what
we perceive with our couple of movable adjustable
lenses from what an insect perceives with an im-
movable eye consisting of hundreds of lenses set in
different directions. What right have you to suppose
that the object of your perception alone continues to
B. p. 13


194 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

exist unchanged when you cease to perceive it ?
There seems to be something in this argument which
makes it worth whUe for us to consider precisely what
it proves or renders probable, rather than hastily to
reject aU sense-qualities from the real, as is often done.

As stated the argument is open to criticism. We
are told in one breath that the internal structure of
the insect's eye obviously differs very much from our
own and also that for this reason it is presumptuous
to suppose that the spatial characteristics that our
eyes discover in their objects of vision hold when we
cease to perceive. Well, if that be so, what reason
have we for supposing that the insect's eye really
does differ from our own ? Our only reason is that
it looks to differ ; but then it is presumptuous, we
are warned, to suppose that the distinctions that we
perceive are those which exist when we cease to
perceive them. Hence it is presumptuous to believe
that the insect's eye reaUy does differ from ours ; but
it was the supposed difference in the first instance
that made it presumptuous to trust our own sight.

The argument can, however, be freed from this
defect. What it wants to be able to hold is that,
whilst there is no particular reason to suppose that
what I perceive is real, there is reason to believe that
the perceived differences of structure between my eye
and an animal's are marks of a real difference in
structure. Although differences in the objects per-
ceived may not themselves be real characteristics yet
they may well be marks of real characteristics and
this would be enough for the present purpose. When
I perceive differences in the structure of two eyes and
conclude that they must involve some difference in
the characteristics of the objects perceived by means
of them, I am not forced to believe that in order for


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 195

there to be a real difference between the eyes at all
it must consist in the reality of the perceived differ-
ences. It is enough that these perceived differences
shall be marks of real ones. In that case I can
conclude that the real structure of the insect's eye
differs from that of my own and therefore that in
all probability what he perceives is different from
what I do. The premise on which this conclusion
is based can be shown to be probable. When we
have no information whatever about the nature of
' correspondence ' between appearance and reality it
will be improbable that two objects that look different
will have the same reality ' corresponding ' to them.
For the corresponding realities can be identical in
only one way whilst they can differ in an indefinite
number. Hence, when nothing more is known except
that the objects of one's perceptions are appearances,
the alternative that what corresponds to two different
appearances is entirely the same is only one alter-
native out of an infinite number. The real structure
of the insect's eye might differ from that of our own
in an indefinite number of ways ; it could only be
identical with it in one. Now the fact that the
perceived objects differ certainly does not add to the
already small probability that the corresponding reali-
ties are identical. Hence it seems fair to conclude
that the perceived difference between my eye and
that of an insect is a mark of a real difference in
structure and therefore that it is probable that the
insect does not perceive precisely the same object of
perception as I do.

Granted then that our experience does give us
some good ground for supposing that insects perceive
different objects from what we do in respect of detail,
<5an the rest of the argument be maintained 1 The

13—2


196 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION

rest of the argument was that under these circum-
stances it was very presumptuous to suppose that
what we perceive is real rather than the different
object which the insect perceives. This is supposed
to force us to the alternative that neither of the two
objects is real. Clearly some further argument must
be needed to prove this, since anything that has yet
been offered leaves open the alternative that both are
real even when we reject as unreasonable the belief
that one is superior to the other in reality. Now the
only ground for denying that both what the insect sees
and what I see are real is the old one that we mentioned
in the second chapter that we otherwise multiply real
entities to a terrible extent. For the position is quite
comparable with that of the innumerable different
ellipses that we see as we move about when we say
that what * we really perceive ' is a circle. The alter-
native then was open to us to hold that all these
were equally real, but that each could only be seen
from one position and that none of them could be
felt. Here again it might be that both what we
perceive and what the insect perceives are equally
real, but that only minds furnished with eyes like
ours can perceive the reahty that we do, and only
those furnished with eyes like insects' can perceive
the reality that they do. And once more I must
insist that until you assume that all these perceptions
of very similar objects have a common real cause there
is nothing improbable in a word of reals, each of which
can only be perceived by one creature from one place.
Still, as we know, that is not the alternative that
anyone adopts. We always assume that realities are
dear and perceptions of appearances cheap and prefer
to shape our theories of perception so as to lessen the
former at the price of increasing the latter.


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 197

What then I wish particularly to point out is
that once more the relativity argument has proved
powerless by itself to show that the objects of our
perceptions are appearances rather than that the
structure of our organs is the necessary condition of
our perceiving certain special qualities and character-
istics of reality. In the argument that we have just
discussed it has merely succeeded in leading us back
to the argument I (&) of our first chapter and in pro-
viding some new special cases to which to apply it.

We have now seen how far the argument from
relativity to an organ, in as far as it rests on a corre-
lation between the observed structure of our organs
and the characteristics of our objects of perception,
is relevant to the question of realism. We have seen
that all the facts are capable of two interpretations,
viz. the Instrumental one which holds that our organs
and their detailed structure are the instruments by
which the mind perceives real things and their real
qualities and characteristics ; and the Causal one
which holds that our organs and their internal struc-
ture are conditions of the perception by the mind of
objects and distinctions in them, both of which for
aught we can teU are mere appearances. So far the
only means that has been offered for deciding between
the two views is the old argument from complication
of reals.

Our next step will be to discuss these two alter-
natives further and to consider the extraordinary way
in which science and common -sense divide up given
masses of perceptions as between these two views.
We may then perhaps hope to discover some principle
of separation which we can criticise. Where corre-
lation can be found between organ and object per-
ceived common -sense will sometimes hold that the


198 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

bodily conditions are what enable the mind to perceive
certain characteristics that continue to exist whether
they be perceived or not, and in other cases it holds
that the detail is the actual cause of the detail in the
object perceived and that the distinctions in the object
cease to exist when we cease to perceive them. We
will cite some examples and then try to discover some
principle of distinction and to criticise it. (i) The
fact that we need definite organs to perceive definite
qualities and that the perception of detail in the
object perceived is found to depend in some measure
on the structure of the organ is not generally thought
by common-sense to prove that the qualities and the
details perceived are mere appearance. It is rather
held that the organ may be regarded as an instru-
ment like a hammer or a chisel which the mind uses
to perceive qualities and distinctions which are really
present whether they are perceived or not. As we
saw we only begin to doubt this when we consider
that in all probability other creatures must perceive
things as rather different from what we do, and that
it is difilcult to give any prerogative to our organs
as telling either the whole truth or nothing but the
truth about reality, and equally repugnant to believe
that what each of us perceives is real but imper-
ceptible to the other, (ii) The fact that as we move
our bodies about what we perceive is seen to change
shape steadily is held to prove that we do not perceive
the real ; for it is held that in general these changes
do not take place in the real that ' corresponds to '
our objects of perception. Similarly the double objects
that we perceive when we push our eyes aside are not
supposed to be real. Thus this sort of dependence on
the positions and states of our organs is supposed to
prove that what we perceive is appearances and that


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 199

the change in our organs causes them to alter, and
not that the real alters and the changes in our organs
are the means by which we perceive this real altera-
tion, (iii) The use of instruments on the other hand
seems to be held to be comparable with that of the
detailed structure of our organs and to be the means
by which we perceive real distinctions which we could
not perceive without them. Yet (iv) not all instru-
ments are supposed to do this. Some are believed
to distort the real, i.e. to show us characteristics that
are not there except as perceived. And the taking of
certain drugs or excess of alcohol is supposed to have
the same effect ; i.e. not to reveal new details in
reality but to make us perceive more appearances.

Here we have a wide and difficult subject for
discussion and criticism. We must first of aU dis-
tinguish the Instrumental View from the rest. The
Instrumental View refers to the relatively permanent
structure of our bodily organs and holds that they
are the means whereby our minds get at real dis-
tinctions. So far is this view carried that, unless
the proper instrument be employed, what is perceived
is not real. This is one reason why it is held to be
obvious that what is perceived in dreams is unreal.
' You had your eyes shut when you saw this,' which
would be the usual criticism of a dream perception
would reduce to ' You were not using the instruments
which everyone knows to be essential if you wish to
see the real.' Of course there are other arguments
about dreams which I have also discussed ; but this
would certainly be regarded as one important argu-
ment. The present view also holds that there are
some additional conditions that the mind can usefully
employ to help the bodily instrument, viz. certain
arrangements of matter like microscopes. These,


200 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

although not permanent conditions like the eyes and
their structure, are yet held to be naeans of getting
information about the real that could not be discovered
without their help. Again, bodily instruments, like
other instruments, are held to need adjustment and
arrangement in proper positions in order for them to
enable the mind to perceive the real. And this raises
the difficulty of how we can tell when they really are
in adjustment. And we also have to try and under-
stand how it is that some instruments and some bodily
motions can be known to help the mind to perceive
the real whilst others can be known to make it perceive
appearance.

I think then that we can discuss the whole problem
under the following heads : (i) Can we maintain that .
the bodily organs are instruments by which the mind
can learn about the real in perception, and that the
dependence of the perception of certain characteristics
in the objects perceived on the detailed structure of
the organ only shows that this detail is necessary for
the perception of real characteristics and not that it
is the cause of the perception of merely apparent
characteristics ? (ii) Can we give a reasonable account
of what we mean by these bodily organs being in
proper adjustment which will enable us to hold that
under certain conditions the objects perceived by them
are real, but under others — such as the pushing aside
of the eye or the change of shapes with motion — they
are not real ? And (iii) Can we give a reasonable
account of instruments of precision which will justify
the view e.g. that an object seen through a micro-
scope gives us new and true information about reality,
whilst the universal yellowness seen after taking san-
tonin does not ?

(i) The Instrumental Theory. First of all we


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 201

must try to understand precisely what is meant by
an instrumental theory of perception. We wiU begin
by considering the analogy with tools, and see how
far it holds. Let us consider a typewriter. This is
a material mechanism consisting of parts so connected
that by using it properly the hand can print letters
on paper in any order that the mind chooses. The
letters that are printable are correlated with differ-
entiations of the typewriter itself. Now it is obvious
that there is some analogy between an arrangement
like this and an organ like the eye. The eye also
is a differentiated structure ; without it (if we set
aside dreams) we can perceive neither visual exten-
sion, shape, distance, nor colours. With it there is
strong reason to believe that some at least of the
particular characteristics of these general qualities are
correlated with certain differentiations of its structure.
So far the analogy to the typewriter is pretty close.
But now we must note some differences. (i) That
effect of the typewriter's working for which we say
it is the necessary instrument is produced in a third
thing different both from that which employs the
instrument and from the instrument itself — viz. the
paper. Now, in vision with the eye, on the as-
sumption that the eye is an instrument by which
we come to perceive reality, we must have quite a
different arrangement. In the case of the typewriter
there was (a) the mind and body of the t5rpist; (b) the
machine with its internal structure, and (c) the blank
paper. As a result of changes in a effects are pro-
duced in b which in turn produce effects in c which
are correlated with the differentiations of b. In vision
with the eye we seem to have (a) the mind, (b) the
eye with its internal structure — (we ought of course
to include the brain and nerves, but the point is


202 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION

unimportant for the present purpose) — (c) the real
object with its real differentiations, and (d) the effect,
which is presumably the perception by the mind of
the object with its differentiations. But in the first
case d was a change in c caused by a through the
use of h. Now in the present case this is precisely
what is not supposed to happen. If the act of per-
ceiving X changes X then it is not X that we perceive.
In fact the change is supposed to be produced not in
c but in a, i.e. in the mind that uses the instrument.
If follows that, even on the instrumental view, the
effect is a change in the mind, so that the instru-
mental view has at once some affinity to the causal
one.

The next point to notice is the peculiar nature of
the effect. Knowledge and perception are of course
unique events, and it is not to be expected that an
example taken from material instruments used to affect
the material world will furnish a complete analogy.
Unfortunately there is not a general agreement as
to the precise nature of the effect. The difficulty is
that people are not agreed as to what they mean by
a mind. But, waiving that difficulty, and supposing
that we do know more or less what we mean by a
mind even if we should be hard put to it to express our
meaning in words, I suppose we could agree that the
effect is what we call a perception and that a per-
ception is something that can be analysed conceptually
into a mind in the relation of perception to an object.
It is an open question whether these terms can ever
exist out of relations of that kind, but that of course
is precisely the question that we have aU along been
discussing. All that can be said about the relation
is that it must not alter the qualities of its referent
otherwise than to give it the quality which it did


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 203

not, if real, possess before, viz. that of being perceived,
i.e. of being relatum to this relation. Some such view
as this must I think be admitted. It must be noted
that here it is hardly possible to call the real object
a cause of the perception, except that it may be
something in the object that causes a mind provided
with the appropriate organs to enter into this relation
to that particular object rather than to another at a
given time. But this does not depend, I take it, on
that particular character that it is perceived to have
in distinction from other objects of perception ; for
all objects that are real and are perceived at any time
must agree in possessing in them the causes necessary
to set up the relation to the mind if those causes lie
in the perceived objects at all. This is quite different
from the case of the typewriter. There is not some-
thing already written on the paper, nor does something
in the paper other than the writing set up a relation
by means of the typewriter between the hand and the
written paper.

It is the belief in eiTor that forces us to desert
a purely instrumental view such as I have sketched.
We have some reason to believe that we do not always
perceive what really exists ; at any rate if we believe
it we have to deal with a. terribly complicated world.
Now the difficulty on the present view of the per-
ception of appearances is obvious. They are not
perceptions of nothing, but have an object just as
much as do those which are supposed to be perceptions
of the real. And the objects in both cases are clearly
very much alike. The important difference is supposed
to be that appearances, unlike real objects of percep-
tion, cease to exist when they cease to be perceived.
But if perception by means of an organ just means
that through its assistance mind and object are brought


204 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

into the relation of perception to each other, this seems
to imply that both are existing beforehand ready to
be brought into that relation. And this cannot be
so with apparent objects. The only way then to ex-
plain the perception of appearances on this theory
would be to suppose that they begin to exist and
enter into the relation of being perceived at one and
the same moment. Now this is clearly the edge of
a slippery slope. For now it seems as if the mind
and its organs were, at any rate, the part-causes not
merely of the entering of an already existent reality
into a definite relation to the mind, but also of the
existence of objects with their differentiations. If
then the mind -|- an organ -|- perhaps some third factor
are capable of causing not only the entry of realities
into the relation of being perceived but also the exist-
ence of objects in that relation — objects which cease
to exist when the relation ceases to hold — what ground
can we have for supposing that any of the objects that
we perceive are realities rather than that they are
appearances caused in the second way, which is now
admitted to be possible ? In fact can you begin to
distinguish between appearances and realities without
making it very probable that we perceive nothing but
appearances 1

Thus the instrumental theory comes to be replaced
by a causal one. In the causal theory something X
acts on the organ, the organ and the mind together
produce a perception as a whole, i.e. something from
which indeed an object can be analysed out, though
there is no reason to think that it can exist out
of that whole called a perception. Such an object is
an appearance in our sense of the word. As soon
as all perceived objects thus become appearances the
analysis of the perception into mind -I- relation -I- object


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 205

tends to be dropped and replaced by a whole called
a state of mind in which the difference of object is
attached as a kind of adjective. For, since all these
objects are appearances, and cannot exist, as is believed,
out of this relation to the mind, it is felt that the
old analysis is otiose. This is of course harmless
enough so long as it merely means that, whilst the
distinction between perception and object perceived
is clearly recognised, it is also recognised that it is
only an analysis like that of a note into its pitch,
intensity, and quality, and that the elements elicited
do not exist apart. But in practice it is a most
dangerous step because the undoubtedly important
difference between object perceived and perception of
object, which remains on any theory, is minimised
until it is thought that because the latter is mental
the formqr must obviously be so too.

But we have been running ahead of common-sense
and must now return to it. The replacement of the
instrumental theory by the causal one is very slow
and tentative, and common-sense believes that it can
distinguish between cases where the instrumental
theory still holds and others where the causal one
becomes necessary. Let us consider the steps that
common-sense makes. (a) The instrumental theory
is believed at first to be sufficient for the ordinary
perceptions of everyday life, and only mirages and
bent sticks and such objects are held to require the
causal view. (6) Further investigation shows that
what different people see at the same time and what
the same person sees at different times from different
places often closely resemble each other and yet have
discoverable differences. The likenesses and differ-
ences seem easily explicable on the causal theory
by the assumption of a common cause and slightly


206 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

different conditions. Hence the causal theory begins
to spread at the expense of the instrumental one.
(c) Speculative persons now suggest that in all cases
what we perceive are appearances but that in true
perceptions the objects perceived are like the real
non -mental non-organic causes of these perceptions,
whilst in illusory perceptions they are not. (d) Finally
it is asked : What possible reason can there be for
supposing that the causes of our perceptions in any
way resemble the effects ? Thus we reach the thing-
in-itself. Ordinary common-sense wavers between (a)
and (6); orthodox science (apart from Mach's school)
wavers between {h) and (c). {d) is held with varying
degrees of consistency by Kant, Spencer, and Huxley ;
but efforts have always been made to get away from
it and to offer some further determination of things-
in-themselves, e.g. the Will in Schopenhauer and
the nolimenal self in Kant. Common-sense apparently
never supposes that the causes of our perceptions are
past states of ourselves or of other minds. This
alternative, according to the way in which it is worked
out, leads to Solipsism, Phenomenalism, or Idealism.

We must now consider the position that the or-
gans of perception are the mind's instruments a little
further, and show some other distinctions between
them and instruments like typewriters which are
used by the body and the mind. In all use of in-
struments the user is supposed to be a substance and
active. We saw that we could make little use of the
conception of activity and that there were difficulties
about substance except for objects in space. This
view then will assume that the mind is a substance
and active. By its activity we can only mean, after
our discussion on causality, that events in it are
part-causes of an effect. The effect here is however


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 207

a change in the mind, as we have seen. Hence we
have to distinguish (a) the change in the mind that
caused it to use the instrument and (6) the change
that this use of the instrument causes in the mind
that uses it. All ordinary instruments like type-
writers are voluntarily employed, thus, in their
employment there are on the instrumental view of
the bodily organs two separate uses of instruments —
(i) the mind uses the body (here by means of volition)
and (ii) the body uses the typewriter. We have to
consider the first of these. In the use of organs by
the mind for perception the use may be voluntary
or involuntary. There are a good many perceptions
that we cannot help having. On the other hand it
is clear that the use of our organs is also in part
voluntary. The volition enters when we voluntarily
place and adjust our organs and when we pay atten-
tion. It is only in such cases as these that the mind's
use of organs of perception is strictly analogous to
the use of a typewriter. We voluntarily do certain
things with our bodies just as we do with typewriters
because we have reason to believe that the result will
be one which we wish and cannot reach without the
use of such helps. But, whilst typewriters wUl not
work of themselves, i.e. someone must wish to write
in order for them to write anything, minds can and
do have perceptions by means of their organs even
when they do not wish to do so. When the reference
to volition as an antecedent to the use of the instru-
ment is cut out a good deal of the analogy between
our organs and instruments seems to vanish. We must
now say that the same mind which can use bodily
organs to produce changes in itself called perceptions
may also have those changes produced in itself by the
instruments without having previously willed to use


208 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

them. Now we know that, in the case of perception,
the perception that is finally produced is an effect in
the mind ; but what was essential to a purely instru-
mental view was that the mind + the organ should also
condition the perception. On the view of perception
as a relation between mind and object the mind could
only be said to be a cause in the sense that it depends
on its nature that the relation of perception can be
set up between it and anything else. Now even
when our having a certain perception can be said to
depend on our past volitions the immediate effect of
those volitions is merely to adjust our organs and put
them into definite positions. After that what we
perceive does not depend, so far as we can see, on any
other volition. But, for complete analogy between
the use of an instrument by the body and that of an
organ by the mind, it would seem, as we saw, essential
that the mind should be ' active ' in using the in-
strument, and that would mean that all the time it
was being used events in the mind were going on
and were part-causes of the effect. We see however
that there is no evidence that this is the case either
with voluntary or involuntary perception. In the
first place, for the present purpose the former reduces
to the latter, because, as we saw, the whole effect of
volition is to produce a preliminary adjustment of the
organ after which everything proceeds involuntarily.
And in this involuntary process we cannot discover
that the cause of the perception is the comparatively
permanent structure of the organ -1- changing states
of the mind. As far as we can see the mind only
enters as a kind of permanent condition in the sense
that it is the sort of thing which alone can be refer-
ent to the relation of perception. Thus the analogy
between perception by means of an organ and the


THE CAUSAL THEOKY OF PERCEPTION 209

use of an instrument like a typewriter breaks down
over the fact that the user in the first case is not
and in the second case is continually 'actiA'e' while
he uses the instrument. The view with which we
seem to be left is that organ + mind are joint con-
ditions with some other cause of the mind entering
into the relation of perception to an object.

What however was the essential element in the
instrumental view from the standpoint of the theory
of knowledge 1 It was that the use of the organ
gave us true knowledge about reality which we could
not get without it. Now this possibility is not
affected by the distinction that we have just noted
between the way in which minds use organs and the
way in which they use typewriters by means of
bodies. Suppose that the organs + the mind are joint
conditions with some other cause of the establishment
of the relation of p.erception between the mind and
some object, then the important question for the
theory of knowledge is not directly what that third
part of the cause may be, but whether as a matter
of fact the term to which the three in conjunction cause
the mind to have this relation is a real thing or an
appearance. It would not be necessary in order that
perception should give knowledge of the real that the
third condition of the perception beside the organ and
the mind should lie in the reality which is perceived
in that particular perception. Yet common-sense has
rarely accepted any other alternative. It has always
wanted the cause to be like the object of the per-
ception that it causes, and, in as far as it has failed
to be so, it has held that object to be appearance.

We must take a less timid view however and put our
question about the revised form of the instrumental
theory as follows : Granted that the mind and the

B. p. 14


210 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION

structure of our bodily organs are joint conditions
"which in combination with some other cause bring
the itiind into the relation of perceiving an object,
can we discover (a) Whether that object is real, and,
if so, when ? and (b) What are the natures of the
causes in particular cases ?

Now common-sense in its own theory of knowledge
has an answer to both these questions. In its less
reflective form it says : (a) Nearly all the objects
with which we enter into the relation of perception
are real ; but some are appearances : (&) When our
perceptions are perceptions of the real the cause of
our perceiving just this thing at this moment lies in
the reality which we perceive together with the joint
conditions that we have the appropriate organs and
a mind. When we perceive an appearance the cause
cannot be in the object of that perception, since that
did not exist untU the perception itself did so. It
must therefore lie in other things which we do not
perceive at the moment when we perceive the appear-
ances. This seems to me to be the theory of knowledge
of reflective common-sense, and, as it is carried over, in
part at any rate, into natural science, we shall do well
to examine it carefully.

This theory enables common-sense to give some
account of the various ellipses that are seen from
various positions and the real circle which it believes
to be there. The real circle, it will say, has in itself
the cause of our perception of it when combined with
other relatively permanent conditions. The ellipses
that are seen from other positions are appearances
and, as such, it cannot be events in them that cause
our perception of them. On the contrary it is still
events in the real circle. These have remained the
same but the conditions have changed slightly and


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 211

therefore it is only to be expected from our general
knowledge of causal laws that a slight change in the
effect will be produced such as is observed. This then
would be the way in which common-sense would
ftilfil its favourite maxim that ' realities are dear and
appearances cheap' on the present view. We shall
have later to consider whether this particular argument
is justified even on its own premises.

At present however we will consider generally the
view that we have attributed to common-sense. That
view depends on the synthetic proposition that when
real things are perceived events in the real things
are part-causes of the perceptions of them, the other
conditions being (a) a mind, and (h) bodily organs
properly constructed and adjusted. Is such a syn-
thetic proposition true, and, if so, could we ever have
been led to discover its truth ?

The first point to note is that it contains two
synthetic propositions. (a) Certain objects of per-
ception have events in them which are causes of those
objects being perceived ; and (6) All objects that are
real and are perceived have the perceptions of them-
selves caused by events in them. It leaves open the
question whether there are real things that are never
perceived, but common-sense would certainly hold that
that was possible and probable. We have to enquire
then whether these two synthetic propositions are
true, or whether it is possible to get the sort of
evidence necessary to prove or render them probable.
They are certainly not self-evident, so that unless
they can be rendered probable by some other pro-
positions we have no particular right to believe them.
We may therefore begin by asking whether there is
any. way of proving or rendering them probable.

Causal laws can only be elicited by observation

U— 2


212 THE CAUSAL THEOKY OF PERCEPTION

either of the sequence of events which we finally
decide to be cause and effect, or of other sequences
which we analyse so that the causal law in question
emerges as a product of analysis, or as a hypothetical
law between what is not observed which what is
observed renders probable. Now it is quite clear that
we cannot observe first certain events in X and then
note that later on we perceive X, for that would be
to imply that we can observe parts of X before we
observe any of it, which is absurd. Hence, if the
causal law be one of succession it cannot be discovered
by observing the succession directly. If the causation
be contemporary it would be theoretically possible to
observe directly that conjunction of events which might
encourage a belief in a causal law. For we might
observe that there was always a definite process going
on in all objects that we perceive so long as we per-
ceive them. But there would be very little comfort
to be got out of this. In the first place we do not
observe anything of the kind. And further, if we did,
we certainly could not base a law of simultaneous
causality on this alone ; we should also want to know
whether the same process might not be going on in
the things when we did not observe them. And we
clearly could not decide this point by observation,
since we cannot perceive what things are doing when
we do not perceive them.

It is perhaps worth while to note that if we are
dealing with successive causation the converse of (&)
will follow fi:'om (a). If there be any objects of per-
ception, the perception of which is caused by events in
those objects that happened before the perception took
place, then it is clear that such objects must be real.
For they must have existed before the perception of
them took place in order that they should have states


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 213

before that event, and if they were appearances this
■would be impossible. If the causality be simultaneous
this will still follow. For the event in the object will
then take place at the same moment as the perception,
if it be the cause of the latter. But an event cannot
be said to take place in anything unless that thing
has existed for a finite time', and therefore if an event
in an object be a cause even by simultaneous causality
of the perception of that object the object must have
existed for a finite time before it was perceived, and
therefore be real. The same will hold if we allow the
cause to follow the effect, though common-sense does
not generally admit this possibility. For if an event
in X be a cause of a previous perception of X, then
X must exist after the perception of X, and therefore
cannot be a mere appearance. If we allow an interval
between cause and effect we must be prepared to admit
that a mind may perceive an object either before it
has begun or after it has ceased to exist. There is
no particular objection to this. Common-sense would
indeed reject the former alternative, but it holds that
the latter often occurs, and, as far as I can see, there
is no difference in principle involved.

After this digression we can return to the question
of how it is supposed that we actually learn about the
propositions (a) and (b). It will now be admitted that
we cannot hope to discover by direct observation the
causal laws whether simultaneous or successive that
connect events in what we perceive with our perception
thereof. The only possible method then must be the
hypothetical one. Now we are also told by science
that the cause of our perceptions of objects is im-
perceptible events in imperceptible parts of those

1 For any change involves two different states at different moments,
and all different moments are at finite durations apart.


214 THE CAUSAL THEOllY OF PERCEPTION

objects if real. Science would certainly hold that the
perceptions of dreams are appearances, and as we saw
would probably give as one reason for this opinion that
they are not perceived by means of the appropriate
organs. But, if pressed as to why this should matter,
I think it would almost certainly reply that as the
organs are not used we must assume that dreams are
due to central excitations, which just means that they
are caused by our own bodies. And, if it be asked
why perceptions completely caused by states of our
own bodies should not be perceptions of real objects,
I think there can be no doubt that science would answer
that it is because the object of our dream perception
is not a part of that body whose changes cause the
perception. Thus there seems to be no doubt that
science does in some way accept the common-sense
view that the perceptions of real objects must be
caused by events in those objects, although it cannot
be quite so naif about it as is common-sense.

It will be best then to formulate the theory under
discussion in terms of the beliefs of science since we see
that they only differ from those of common-sense by
their greater elaboration and more consistent appli-
cation of a common principle. We must then (l)
formulate the position which natural science takes up
on this matter, and (2) see whether it is a subject to
which the hypothetical method really applies.

(1) We know roughly that science believes that
extension, figure, mass, and motion are real, and that
it believes itself able to prove, or at any rate to render
very probable, that the causes of the perceptions, both
of other qualities which it believes to be appearances
and of those qualities which it believes to be real, are
the motions of small extended masses with electric
charges. It is true that so far, without introducing


Missing Page


216 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

whole, retaining the old geometrical outline. It is in
this sense, then, I take it, that the primary qualities
that we perceive under certain conditions with our
organs are real.

We can now understand in what sense science
means that when we perceive what is real the cause of
our perception is events in the reality that is perceived.
It means that the cause is events in the real which are
not themselves perceptible, but are changes in imper-
ceptible parts of that whose real shape, size, and motion
as a whole we are caused to perceive by these events.
This is an intelligible statement, but in it the view of
common-sense is beginning to lose its simplicity. It
will be noted that on the ordinary scientific view the
instrumental and the causal positions are combined in
the perception of an object. The events in that object
are supposed to bring us really into perceptual relation
with some at least of its primary qualities, and the eye
is a necessary means to this end. But they also are
supposed to cause states in our eyes which cause per-
ceptions of colours, and the objects of these perceptions
are mere appearances. If we had not properly con-
structed eyes we should not perceive either shapes
or colours ; but the second would not rob us of any
knowledge about the real on this theory, whilst the
first would. I think, however, that even among
secondaries science would draw some distinction. It
would almost certainly hold that the colours perceived
on real tablecloths were in some way more reputable
than those perceived in dreams, on the ground that the
cause of the former was events in that of which there
was a perception, whilst this is not so in the latter.
I do not think, however, that anything can be made
of such a distinction. Once a quality is believed to be
an appearance it is surely impossible to smuggle back


Missing Page


218 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION

have states which affect the brain, and the states of
the brain are the last cause of the perception, both
of appearances and of realities. Thus without any-
special theory about the nature of the complete causes
of our perceptions, it looks as if we could distinguish
three kinds of causal laws which successively operate
in the causation of our perceptions. These would be
(a) Physicophysiological laws which deal with the
causation of the variable states in the relatively per-
manent structure of our organs; (6) Physiological laws
connecting the states of our organs with the final
states of our brain; and (c) Psychophysiological laws
connecting the final states of our brain with the
differentiations of the object the perception of which
they cause. When we do not want to refer to this
probable analysis of the total process we shall just
refer to the whole process as Psychophysical.

What particularly interests us at present is the
evidence for the physicophysiological laws, but it is.
hardly possible to consider these alone and apart from
the total process. It is clear that our evidence must
in the end rest on what we do perceive. Now all that
we can be fairly sure about without hypothesis is the
necessity of organs of a certain definite structure for
us to be able to perceive certain general qualities at
all. But of course we never do perceive qualities in
general, but particular cases of them, and we perceive
now one particular case and now another ; now a green
circle and now a red triangle. If we accept the
instrumental view we are not forced to believe that
there is a different bodily state for every different
particularisation of general qualities that we perceive.
The eye with its special structure might be essential
to our perception of colour and shape and extension of
any kind, but it might well be that when once we had


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 219

the structure requisite for this we could perceive a red
triangle and a green circle without there being any
special state of body corresponding to red and green,
to circle and triangle. Something would bring a mind
capable of perceiving colour and shape now into per-
ceptual relation with a red triangle and now to a green
circle, and there would be an end of the matter. On
the other hand, this is not the type of view that science
tends to adopt as it advances. It expects to find not
merely that a permanent structure of the organs is
necessary for the perception of general qualities, but
also that to every particular difference perceived there
will be a different state in the organ. Thus it would
expect to find that the eye really was in a different
state when it perceived a red triangle from that in
which it is when it perceives a red circle. It is clear
that a great deal in this view must be as hypothetical
as anything in the purely psychophysiological part of
the process. No one can observe that there is a different
state in the eye and finally in the brain for every
different particularisation of every quality that is per-
ceived. Still as time goes on some direct evidence is
found. We can more or less correlate the accommoda-
tion and convergence of our eyes with the distance at
which we perceive objects and prove that in their
absence objects can only be perceived clearly at a
single distance ; and we can correlate, though with less
certainty, the fibres of Corti with the hearing of notes.
Still in the main the further developments of the
physiology of the sense organs and their laws must be
as hypothetical as electrons and the laws of light-
transmission.

Now when we have got beyond what we can
actually observe it is clear that from the same data,
viz. our perceptions and their observed qualities, we


220 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION

have yet to substantiate two sorts of hypothetical
entities at least and three sorts of hypothetical laws
at least. Any perception will involve the hypothetical
causes of the states of our organs and their laws; the
hypothetical imperceptible states of our organs and of
the brain and their laws; and the hypothetical laws
connecting the states of our brains with the objects
that they are supposed to cause us to perceive. We
have, in fact, a large number of unknowns to determine
from one set of knowns, viz. our perceptions and their
sequences. It is clear, then, that there can be no
perfectly determinate solution of the problem. You
can make up various laws and various entities, and by
suitably connecting them account for the facts. Still,
if one theory can be set up whose assumptions are not
intrinsically improbable, and which does account for
the facts that can be observed much better than any
other, and also intrinsically quite well, we may fairly
assume that it is very probable.

In some measure this seems to be possible. For
instance, we can tell by actual observation that certain
permanent general qualities in what we perceive can
only be perceived by people who have a certain per-
ceptible organ and with a perceptible structure of
a certain kind. And still keeping to the perceptible,
we can carry such correlation a good deal further with
great probability. Now, if we can assume that what
we cannot perceive resembles in the main what we
can and do, it is fair to hold that an hypothesis that
carries such a correlation between the structure of our
organs and the ability to perceive details still further,
is intrinsically quite probable, and, if in company with
other intrinsically probable hypotheses, it accounts weU
for what we do perceive, the total system will be probable,
and will reflect an additional probability on its parts.


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 221

So much for physiological hypotheses and entities.
Again, with regard to physicophysiological ones, subject
to the same assumption of the probability that what
is not perceived is like what is perceived, we may buUd
up an initially probable hypothesis about the physical
causes of the physiological changes that end in percep-
tions ; and this, when combined with our physiological
and psychophysiological hypotheses, themselves sup-
posed intrinsically not improbable, will account so well
for what we do perceive that it will furnish a probable
theory and will reflect an additional probability on its
elements. For instance, we might run very rapidly
over the scientific arguments for the wave-theory of
light to show the kind of argument with which we
have to deal. It would go somewhat as foUows :
(i) It is a matter of direct observation that when we
hear a sound we can generally find a vibrating body
which we can see and feel to be vibrating, (ii) Another
essential element is a medium between the body and
the ear, and it can be shown that we only hear the
sound after a definite interval from the beginning of
the vibrations which depends on the distance and the
nature of the medium, (iii) There are a great many
phenomena with regard to colours which can best be
explained by supposing that the cause of our percep-
tion of them is also a vibratory disturbance ; but the
absence of a material medium is not found, as in the
case of sound, to stop the experience altogether,
(iv) There are numbers of phenomena which can be
easily explained on the assumption that bodies are
more differentiated than they appear to be, and only
with great difficulty without that assumption, (v) On
the assumption that Uttle imperceptible bits of matter
and little electric charges obey the same laws as
larger perceptible ones, there is good reason to believe


222 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

(a) that little charged particles exist in bodies under
certain conditions, and (b) that when they vibrate
they will emit periodic electric and magnetic dis-
turbances that will travel with a calculable velocity,
and will be executed at right angles to their direction
of propagation, (vi) Experiments make it probable
that light also travels with the velocity, and the effect
of magnetic fields on polarised light make it very
probable that the periodic disturbances mentioned in
(v) are to be identified with light, and are the cause —
together with the structure of our organs — of our
perception of colours and shapes, (vii) Just as it is
practically certain from experiments with Savart's
wheels and with syrens that the pitch of notes that,
are heard depends on the number of vibrations that
reach the ear per second, so we find that many other-
wise inexplicable phenomena receive an elegant ex-
planation when a similar assumption is made as to
the connexion between perceived colours and periods
of vibration of light.

Such, then, in the roughest outline are the argu-
ments on which science founds its particular theory as
to the causes of our perceptions. It will be seen that
to be plausible the arguments must assume that what
is real but imperceptible resembles that which we
perceive. If primary qualities be real, then it is very
probable that what we perceive is more differentiated
than it appears to be, and if the imperceptible obeys
the same laws ' as the perceptible, then it is very
probable that the account which science offers of the
mode of production of our perceptions is correct. On
the other hand, unless we have reason to believe that,
at any rate with regard to primary qualities, the result
of this whole complicated process is actually to make
us perceive the real, even if it only enables us to


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 223

perceive a part of what is really there, the whole
theory becomes meaningless as it stands, and must
either be rejected in toto or replaced by some very
complicated set of further propositions. Unless, for
instance, what we perceive as extended really is ex-
tended, it is certainly not obvious what could be
meant by saying that the perception of it was caused
by the imperceptible motions of imperceptible parts of
it. The question, then, as to whether we accept the
instrumental view which holds that all this causal
process ultimately ends in the perception by the mind
of something real, or the purely causal view according
to which it merely causes us to perceive an object
which is an appearance, and allows no conclusions
about the real further than the conclusion that it is
able to cause perceptions of this kind, is no academic
one, but is vitally important to science. Once grant
that science is right in taking the instrumental view
with regard to the perception of primaries, and it can
go on its way rejoicing, and everything that it tells us
will be a real contribution to cosmology. But once
deny this and its eminently successful theory will have
destroyed its own premises, and the attempt to restate
it in terms of the new situation must be laborious, and
may well be unsuccessful. But before we come to this
vitally important point as to whether science can justify
itself in retaining just so much of the instrumental
view as it does and replacing it everywhere else by
a causal one, we must consider a little more closely the
position which science takes, that when we perceive
a reality the cause of our perception is to be found
in it.

If it be true that the perception of all that is real
in an object perceived is caused by events in that
reality, the position of science as to the unreality


224 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION

of secondaries might seem to follow logically from its
statement that the perception of secondaries is caused
by states of primaries. For if 'P is real' implies that
the perception of P is caused by events in P itself, it
must follow that if the perception of P is not caused
by events in P itself then P is not real. Such an
argument, though formally valid, would be illusory in
the present case because it depends on an ambiguity
in the word ' in.' No doubt if the scientific theory be
correct the perception of red is caused by the motions of
imperceptible bodies, and with respect to the causal laws
involved, nothing is mentioned except their primary
qualities. That, however, is not surprising. The ob-
served laws of mechanics are always stated in terms of
primary qualities, simply because it is observed that it is
practically^ indifferent to them what colours the bodies
may have. We have no ground for denying that the
little particles whose motions cause the perception of
a red body may be red. It will entirely depend on
whether we hold that the effect of the wave-motion on
the eyes and brain and mind is to bring the latter into
relation with the real colour or merely to produce
a perception with an apparent object, viz. red. Unless
you first deny the possibility that the motions, which
as a matter of fact cause you to perceive red, are the
motions of red bodies, you cannot hold that the fact
that without those motions you cannot perceive red,
and that the laws of them involve no mention of red-
ness proves that they cannot be red. In fact, you
cannot be sure that the perception of red is not caused
by events in what is red untU you know that they are
events in what has merely primary qualities, and there-
fore you cannot use the scientific theory of the causation
of perceptions to disprove the reality of colour.

1 Not theoretically, because of radiation pressure.


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION 225

But is there any reason to accept the scientific
view that when we perceive something that is real the
events that cause that perception are to be found in
the reahty that we perceive ? A priori there is certainly
no very good reason, so far as I am aware, for such
a belief. When we perceive a definite reality, the
event whose causation we are seeking is the establish-
ment of a relation between the mind and that reality.
Certainly on the ordinary view of causation this event
must have a cause; but I know no reason why that
cause should be found in the reality which is relatum
to this relation. If I throw a stone through the third
ground-floor window on the right of the Great Gate,
the cause of my throwing it through that window may
have no connexion with events in the window or the
room beyond. It may just as well be because someone
jerks my arm at the time, or because I believe that three
is a sacred number. I think that the best reason that
science could offer for its belief would be that the
assumption of it seems to lead to a general theory that
is better in accord with the observable facts than any
other that can be suggested, whilst it is not intrinsically
improbable if we suppose primary qualities to be real.
There is, however, a further reason which makes this
suggestion an intrinsically reasonable one. When we
perceive a real thing the effect is a setting up between
it and the mind of a certain relation. It is held that
for this to happen a mind, a certain kind of organ, and
an event of some sort are necessary. The question
is : What sort of event and where ? The reason why
an event is wanted at all is because our perceptions
begin and end, and we perceive now this and now that.
Granted, then, that we knew the type of event required,
we should still have to ask why the relation set up by
it between the mind as referent and a real object as

B. p. 15


226 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

relatum should have now X as relatum and at another
time Y. Yet this certainly happens, and therefore it
seems as if the nature of X and Y ought to enter some-
where into the statement of the causal law. Now, of
course, it need not be the case that the particular way
in which X and Y enter should be that the event is
in X when X is perceived, and in Y when Y is per-
ceived; but, since the position of the event is as yet
undetermined, and since it is certain that X and Y
must be mentioned somewhere in the causal law, it
is certainly reasonable as an hypothesis to locate the
events in X and Y respectively, and to say that when
a real thing is perceived the event that causes us to
begin to perceive that thing is an event in it. When
once this is done we build up on that probable hypo-
thesis the scientific theory that the cause of the
perception of both primary and secondary qualities is
to be found in imperceptible events in imperceptible
parts of what we perceive in this particular perception.
And in so far as the theory, founded on this initially
reasonable assumption, is found to account for actually
perceived phenomena under various circumstances,
the initially probable assumption has its probability
strengthened.

We can now sum up the scientific position and
the arguments for it, including those by which it
holds itself to be justified in rejecting secondary
qualities, (a) There is reason to believe that our suc-
cessive perceptions depend jointly on our minds, the
permanent structure of our bodily organs, and on some
variable event whose location is as yet undetermined.
(6) In the perception of the real the efiect of these
causes is to establish a relation between the mind and
some particular reality that is perceived, (c) Since we
sometimes perceive one object and sometimes another.


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION 227

and this only partly depends on our own volitions,
it will follow that, if our minds ever ertter into this
relation with real objects, a complete law of the
causation of our particular perceptions wiU have to
take into account those qualities or relations of the
reals in question which determine why the mind is
related now to one and now to another, (d) Since the
position of the event, which is a joint cause of the
perception according to (a), has not yet been de-
fined, it seems probable that we can satisfy (c) by
locating it in the particular reality which it causes
us to perceive, (e) When we make this assumption
and try to determine the nature of the events in
question, we are led by ordinary scientific arguments
to the view that the causes of our perceptions are
motions of imperceptible pieces of matter contained
within the boundaries that we actually perceive.
(/) But the laws at which we arrive not only do not
require us to take into account the secondary qualities
of these imperceptible particles, but also account for
the perception of the secondary as well as of the
primary qualities, (g) Hence not only is the proba-
bility of our initial assumption that our perception of the
real is caused by events in the realities that we perceive
strengthened by the agreement of the theory based on
it with the facts, but also, since that theory accounts
for the whole of what we perceive by events which are
only known to have the characteristics of part of it,
there is no reason to suppose that the remaining
characteristics of what we perceive are real.

We must now criticise this argument. It is obliged
to hold that primary qualities are real. Its troubles
spring from the fact that it certainly does not believe
that all perceived primary qualities are real and that
it holds that no secondaries are so. A purely instru-

15—2


•228 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEKCEPTION

mental theory or a purely causal theory does not suffer
from such difficulties. Their special difficulties are
that the one gives us a great deal more reality than
we want, whilst the other makes the undoubtedly
successful scientific theory difficult if not impossible to
state consistently with its conclusions.

We have already said something about the scientific
argument against secondaries. But we merely showed
there that the scientific theory, even if fully accepted,
does not make it impossible that there should be real
secondaries, and that the mechanism of the wave-
theory should be the one way by which we are able to
perceive them. But the argument in (g) above against
secondaries is rather different. It is not directed to
proving that they cannot be real, but only to showing
that there is no reason why they shovild be so. Let
us consider this argument. It simply rests on the
fact that, whilst the theory as to the causes of our per-
ceptions of primaries has to be stated in terms of
primaries, the theory of the causation of the perception
of secondaries does not explicitly demand any more
than primaries and events in them. Now we have
indeed seen that it is utterly impossible to conclude
from such an argument that bodies are not really
coloured ; but, for all that, it might be held that if we
accept the general theory there is a stronger reason
for believing in the reality of primaries than in that of
secondaries. For unless some primaries are real the
theory as stated falls to the ground, whilst on the
other hand it would be perfectly consistent with the
theory — though not, as is so often believed, a necessary
consequence of it — that all secondaries were mere
appearances. Still there is one consideration which is
relevant and must be noted. We cannot confine the
supposed real qualities to extension and figure and


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 229

number. We only experience extended colours or
temperatures or hardnesses, and I fail to see what
right we have to apply laws which have been obtained
by observing extended bodies that always had other
qualities beside extension to mere extensions. I think
then that we shall have to conclude that the theory
that makes primary qualities real must also accept the
reality of some other quality related to extension in
the same sort of way as are colours and temperatures.
That quality might not be a colour or a temperature,
or, if it were, it might never be the colour or tempera-
ture that we perceive. But, as we have seen, there is
so far no independent argument to make us take the
instrumental view for primaries and the causal view
for secondaries, so that when it is once granted that
the instrumental view must be taken for at least some
primaries there is no good reason for not taking it also
for the perception of at least some secondaries, and
supposing that sometimes at any rate the result of all
the complicated mechanism of the wave-theory and the
eye and the brain, is to bring us into direct perceptual
relations with real colour.

It ought to be noted that the same positive argu-
ment does not apply to sounds. I do not think that it
is possible to prove that the instrumental view is not
sometimes true of them as well as of colour, and that
the vibrating bodies and the waves and the complex
structure of the ear are not the means by which the
mind perceives what would still exist whether perceived
or not. But, on the other hand, whilst all that is
extended has colour or temperature or ' feel,' all that is
extended is not sonorous. Hence there is no positive
reason for believing that the perception of sound is
any more than an effect of the motions of perceptible
bodies, and the perception of a mere appearance.


230 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

The crux of the whole question then really is
whether we can keep the instrumental view for the
perception of primaries. If so we can keep the
scientific theory as in essence true about a large part
of reality. There being no d priori reason why we
should not accept the reality of primaries merely on
the ground of relativity to an organ, the difficulty
springs not from this relativity, but from the fact
that neither science nor common-sense believes for a
moment that the instrumental theory applies to most
of the primary qualities that we perceive. Science is
perfectly convinced that most of the shapes and sizes
that we perceive are not real, but are appearances
more or less like the reality. And here it has clearly
dropped the instrumental theory altogether.

We must therefore consider the cases in which it
is believed and those in which it is denied that we
perceive real primary qualities, in the hope that we
may be able to justify the distinction that is drawn.
In fact we have got to answer the question that I
asked in p. 200 of this chapter : ' Can we give a
reasonable account of what we mean by bodily organs
being in proper adjustment, which will enable us to
hold that under definite knowable conditions the
objects perceived by their means are real, but that
under others, such as the pushing aside of the eye or
the change of shape due to motion, they are not real?'
All the arguments of any weight against primaries
practically come to the assertion that we cannot make
this distinction. Thus we have to consider our old
friends the successive ellipses seen instead of an object
which is believed to be really a circle, and the second
object seen on pushing aside the eye, and the visions of
sleep and drugs. The realist view seems to be that in
the main we can distinguish ; that, although under


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION 231

many circumstances what we perceive are appearances,
yet these can not only be known to be such, but can
also be connected with the reality by known laws, so
that its qualities can be discovered from theirs.

The idealist argument would be : You perceive
shapes and sizes, and as you change your position they
alter slightly. You do not believe that all these
successive qualities are real and yet you do believe
that primary qualities are real. But what ground
can you possibly have for your conclusions about real
primary qualities except what you do perceive, which
you admit to be appearance, and all of whose observable
laws must be laws of appearances ? With regard to
the visual perception of three-dimensional objects the
case is still more paradoxical, as Mr Prichard' points
out in his able book on Kant. We believe that there
may be real spheres, yet we are equally certain that if
there be real spheres what we see when we say, in our
crude way, 'that we perceive a sphere ' never is spheri-
cal but is ellipsoidal.

This must necessarily modify the instrumental view
of knowledge. It will now not be able to say in
general that in the perception of real primary qualities
some event in the real makes us perceive that real.
In the case of the three-dimensional bodies we never
do perceive the real, and therefore, if the event in what
we believe to be real causes us to perceive anything, it
is at any rate not the real. It will have to be modified
somewhat as follows. In many cases we cannot per-
ceive the real object, events in which are the joint cause
with our bodies and minds of our having the percep-
tion. In fact, in the case of seeing three-dimensional
objects we never can perceive the reality. But the
characteristics of the appearance that we do perceive

1 Kanii Theory of Knowledge, Chap. iv. passim.


232 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PEECEPTION

depend jointly according to discoverable laws on (a) real
events in the reality that is said to ' correspond ' to the
appearance, (b) on the real primary qualities of the
reality, (c) on the real relative spatial positions of the
organ and the reality, and (d) on the state of the
organ and the mind. We must note how very different
in principle this is from the old instrumental view.
In that view we could perceive realities, and, when we
did so, the effect was the establishment of a relation
between the mind and a pre-existing reality. No
question of likeness of cause and effect arose ; for
nothing could be more unlike the cause (viz. events in
the way of motion of imperceptible parts of the reality
perceived) than the effect (viz. a relation between the
mind and the reality). But here the question becomes
a very pertinent one. If you never perceive the reality
but only appearances, which, with the perceptions of
them, are caused as wholes by events in the reality,
how do you discover those laws which enable you to
judge, either (a) that the reality has primary qualities
as the appearance has, or (&) that the particular
primary qualities of the reality can be deduced from
those of the appearance ? Here you do seem to be
assuming quite unjustifiably as you did not do on the
old statement of the instrumental theory, that one
aspect of an effect must resemble the thing in which
the events that caused it took place.

Is there any way out of this difficulty ? I think
the first point will be to investigate its premises a
little more closely. The essence of the argument is
that with three-dimensional bodies you say that you
never perceive the reality, and therefore it seems im-
possible to see how you can be justified in your further
assertion that you know how the qualities of the reality
are connected with what you perceive. One important


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 233

point is that so far the argument has ofl'ered no ground
for doubting that extension and figure of some kind
are reah I may shift about from place to place keep-
ing my eye (as we say) on the same object, and I
may observe that it changes in shape ; but I never
observe that it ceases to be extended and to have a
shape. Now it seems to me that this is a very im-
portant fact for the present purpose. We know that
if primary qualities be real at all, they cannot just be
shapes in general and sizes in general, but must be
particular shapes and sizes. Moreover we have now
seen that the present argument at least gives us no
reason to doubt the existence in reality of the general
quality, and therefore of some (though, it may be,
unknown) particularisations of it. Hence if we find
general laws connecting the shapes and sizes of per-
ceived figures we may be able without undue presump-
tion to gain some knowledge of the shapes and sizes
of real figures that correspond to what we perceive.

Before, however, we work out this consideration any
further it is right to notice an alternative that common-
sense and science do not accept, and, as far as I know,
do not discuss. This is the alternative that the
circles and ellipses really do alter in shape as we move
relatively to them. After all why should not our
movement be a cause of their change of shape accord-
ing to definite laws just as well as our squeezing them
with our fingers if they chance to be made of some
bendsome material ? In that case it is clear that the
purely instrumental theory would be saved. We
should perceive something different in each position,
but then the real object would have changed. This
would be a very reasonable view to take if we happened
to be alone in the universe, but it will not do in view
of the fact that there are other people who claim to


234 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

perceive the same reality as ourselves. For if what
both of us perceive is a reality, and if it really alters
when we move, then, if I move and the other man
stands still, the same reality will both change and
remain unchanged. Thus the main reason why we
cannot accept this explanation is not that there is
anything intrinsically improbable in it, and not that it
would not perfectly well account for the changes of
the objects perceived with change of position for each
one of us taken separately. The trouble about it is
that it will not allow us in any sense to say that two
people ' perceive the same thing at the same time ' no
matter how much alike the objects of their perceptions
may be. For the theory in question will make the
objects of all the successive perceptions of each of us
real, and, since the above considerations show that
they cannot in general be the same realities as other
people perceive at the same moment, we shall need as
many realities as there are people. And this common-
sense wishes to avoid.

The suggestion then that the real actually does alter
in shape as we move about will not help us greatly,
and, having mentioned and discussed this suggestion,
we can return with a good conscience to the problem
of how much, if any, of the instrumental theory of
perception can be kept when once some of it begins to
be rejected. So far we have seen that no reason has
been adduced even by those who say that we never
can see the true shapes of soHd objects, to prove that
we are not right in ascribing primary qualities to the
real even if perception does not at once tell us what
the particular primary qualities may be. The next
point to notice is that science does not believe that in no
case do we perceive the real primary qualities of objects.
For it holds that in the case of two-dimensional ones


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 235

at any rate there are positions from which the true
shape can be seen.

Let us consider then whether there is any reasonable
ground for distinguishing those cases in which we are
said to perceive the true shapes of bodies from those
much more numerous ones where this is denied. We
will take the circle and the ellipses. All the ellipses
are said to be appearances and the circle alone is said
to be real. Are there any really relevant differences
between the circle and the ellipses that will justify
this distinction ? The facts of the case here are that
(a) in one set of positions and in one set alone we
perceive a circle, and (6) in all positions, whatever we
may see, we feel a circle. Now we have already argued
in our second chapter that, apart from some kind of
causal theory, it is a sheer fallacy to suppose that the
agreement of two senses increases the probability that
that in which they agree is real. We are no more
certain that what we feel is circular than that what
we see is elliptical at the same moment ; — we could
not be more certain, for both judgments have the
greatest certainty that it is possible for judgments
to have. Hence it is perfectly open to us to say
either that both the seen ellipses and the felt circle are
real and coexist ; or that both are mere appearances ;
or that one is real and the other an appearance ; but,
so far as I know, there is no reason why what is per-
ceived by two senses should be more likely to continue
to exist when it is perceived by neither than what is
perceived by only one. This was the conclusion that
we reached before we elaborated the instrumental view
of perception as we have been trying to do in this
chapter. The question now is whether that view
adds anything to the results of our earlier discus-
sion. I am inclined to think that it does. We must


236 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION

remember that we are now accepting the possibility of
the instrumental view — which has never I think been
successfully denied — and that it is our present business
to see if there be any ground for retaining it at all
when it has been restricted as much as science and
common-sense restrict it. Now, on that view, if we
ever do perceive a real object, our minds are brought
into direct relation with that reality owing to events
that occur in it, and the possession by our minds of
proper instruments. Now it is quite certain that the
same real object cannot be at once circular and ellip-
tical. Hence if our minds are ever brought at the
same time into the relation of perception to an object
that is at once circular and elliptical it cannot be real.
Hence if we suppose that the tactual and visual shapes
belong to the same object, none but the circular object
can be real ; for in all other cases there is this synthetic
incompatibility. Thus, whilst it is perfectly true to
hold as we did in an earlier chapter that agreement
between the deliveries of various senses is no proof
that the object is more than an appearance, yet we
can say that if the mind ever comes into perceptual
contact with the same reality through two different
senses it is only where their deliveries agree that this
can actually be the case. When there is disagree-
ment either one sense is not in contact with reality at
all, or they are not in contact with the same reality.
We have already discussed in the second chapter in
what sense we believe that visual and tactual spatial
characteristics do belong to the same object and can be
synthetically incompatible.

I think then that the position which common-sense
takes up as regards the ellipses and the circle is a
perfectly reasonable one. The agreement of the senses
does not indeed, as we have seen, refute the possibility


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 237

that the felt and seen circle may both be appearances.
If we decide then (a) that most of the visually per-
ceived objects are to be counted as appearances so
as to prevent the infinite multiplication of realities,
(6) that all the visual objects and also the tactual
objects are connected with a single reality, and (c) that
under suitable circumstances this common reality can
be an object of both sight and touch, we shall have to
conclude that the reality is circular and not elliptical.
To take any of the ellipses as real, together with
assumptions (a) and (6), is (1) arbitrary, since it is
only the circle that is marked out by a special
property, viz. the agreement of the senses, and
(2) involves the view that touch does not here bring
you into contact with reality at all, though sight does.

But once the distinction has been made the laws
that we can discover to connect the objects of our per-
ceptions as regards spatial qualities wiU in certain know-
able cases be laws connecting realites with appearances.
For instance, when we have distinguished the circle as
real from the ellipses as appearances, the observations
that we can make on the perceptions that we have
when we stand in certain places, will teach us laws
connecting real primary qualities with those of ap-
pearances. And when these laws are once firmly
established we shall be able to argue from an object of
perception to the most probable particular primary
qualities of the reality that ' corresponds ' to it.

Now our abihty to do this was precisely the paradox
which was so troublesome before, viz. the question of
how it can be possible, for instance, to say that we
know that all our spatial perceptions have merely
apparent objects if these be solids. We can now easily
justify this apparently paradoxical statement. We
have no reason to doubt now that we can perceive the


238 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

real figures that exist in two dimensions and dis-
tinguish them from mere appearances. By so doing
we can discover the laws that connect the shapes
of appearances seen from certain positions with the
shapes of realities. Then we can give a meaning to
the saying that we know that we can never see what
is really a sphere. This means that when we feel a
sphere we always see some kind of ellipsoid no matter
in what position we stand, and when we see a sphere
from some definite position, we can always only feel an
ellipsoid. And the general laws that we have dis-
covered by the consideration of the changes of shape
of two-dimensional objects with changes of position
will enable us to understand why this should be
the case.

So far so good then. It was essential to the
scientific theory to be able to keep the instrumental
view of perception with regard to primary qualities,
and there seemed to be a grave doubt whether it could
do this in view of the fact that for all secondaries and
for many primaries, it held a different theory which
made them appearances. We saw that in regard to
secondaries there just was no conclusive ground for a
distinction, though it would not make any real dif-
ference to the scientific theory whether it dropped
them or kept them. And, with regard to the changing
shapes of what we see most of which science pronounces
to be appearances more or less like the reality, we saw
that (a) this distinction might be drawn without our
having to deny that shape and size are qualities of the
real ; (h) that it is possible to agree that if the instru-
mental theory be ever valid, it will be so only when
science holds it to be so, and not when it denies that
it is ; and (c) that by applying this criterion and start-
ing from the perception of objects of two dimensions,


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 239

science can discover laws connecting real shapes with
those of appearances seen under definite conditions,
and come to the conclusion that we never see solid
bodies as they really are.

But we are by no means at the end of our troubles
yet. All that has been said in the last paragraph will
hold if we have reason to believe that the instrumental
theory is a true account of perception in at least some
cases. But the question is whether there are not
other considerations beside those that have already
been considered that render this very improbable. In
fact the question will be : Can we give any reasonable
account of what we mean by the instrument being
wrongly adjusted or out of order ; and will not the
account that we have to give of this be so general
that it will replace the old instrumental theory
altogether ?

Let me now try to make the problem a little
plainer. The diflSculty arose most clearly over what
common-sense holds to be sheer illusion, though it will
be easy to see that it also applies to the case of the
appearances that are called ' appearances of ' a reality
like them such as the successive ellipses. The position
is as follows. Grant that there is illusion whether
small or great and you must grant that the complex
mechanism involved in perception can produce two
entirely different results. Entirely different in one
sense and yet on the other hand unfortunately very
much alike. It is the combination of their extreme
likeness and their utter difference that threatens to
wreck the instrumental theory, and with it, the science
of physics as ordinarily understood. When we per-
ceive reality, if we ever do so, the effect of the whole
process in the reality, the organ, the brain, and the
mind is to establish a relation between the mind and


240 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PEECEPTION

the reality that we perceive. When we perceive
appearance, the effect of much the same process in the
organs and the brain is to produce, not a relation to
something already existing, but a whole of object + re-
lation to mind. Now two effects could hardly be more
unlike than this. Yet on the other hand there is an
immense likeness between them. The perceived object
in both cases is very much the same. The ellipses
that are only produced as elements in the whole called
a perception are extremely like the circle which is
believed to be able to exist out of the perception.
Hence it is not unreasonable to say to the person who
wants to keep the instrumental view in one place and
to drop it in another : Can you really believe that prac-
tically the same mechanism can produce such utterly
different results ? Again, you have granted that most
of the objects that you perceive are appearances. You
only see the circle which you believe to be real in one
set of positions ; but you see the ellipses which you
believe to be appearances from an infinite number of
sets of positions. Surely it would be more reasonable
to hold that it too is an appearance. Look at the
advantages that will accrue from this shght change.
At once you will be able to drop this incredible behef
that the same mechanism sometimes brings your mind
into relation with a previously existing object and
sometimes creates the object in the relation. And,
with the dropping of the difference, the likeness which
was so puzzling on your original theory will become
natural. In all cases the effect will be the production
of a perception as a whole whose object cannot continue
to exist out of it. What then more likely than that
some common cause under slightly varying conditions
produces these very similar perceptions ?

This is the argument for idealism as against the


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION 241

instrumental theory of knowledge when an effort is
made to confine the latter to some parts only of per-
ception. It offers common-sense and science a choice
between the incredible view which they agree in
rejecting that anything that anybody perceives any-
where is real and the view which it has just attacked.
It concludes that realism can keep to neither position
and must pass over into complete idealism. The
argument seems to me to be a powerful one, but the
results of accepting it are serious. All that we can
perceive is appearance, and there is no reason to
suppose that the real has any qualities like those
which we perceive. All that can be said of the real
is that it must be of such a nature as to be able to
cause the perceptions that people actually have.

We must consider this argument as carefully as
possible and see if it be sound. The line that it takes
is that we must suppose that in many cases the effect
of the processes in our organs and brains is to set
up a perception as a whole instead of a relation to a
real object, and that therefore it is better to assume
that this is what happens in all cases of perception.
In fact the present position is that the causation of
our perceptions can be analysed vertically into states
of brain, caused by states of organs, caused by states
of something else. The states of brain, however
caused, produce the same perception whose object is of
course an appearance ; but in some cases the object
perceived resembles a reality, states in which are a
remote cause of those in the organ.

The first question is whether this view can formulate
its position consistently with its own conclusions. We
must remember that we are stiU left with all the old
observations, viz. those that tell us that without an eye
colours are not perceived, and with an eye the possibility

B. p. 16


242 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

of perceiving various colours depends on the internal
structure of the eye. But, whilst it was easy to formu-
late these conclusions on the instrumental theory, it is
less so now that we believe that all objects of perception,
and therefore the eye and its structure, are appearances.
I think however it can be done. I know that when it is
impossible for me to perceive an eye in a man's body
under circumstances where I might expect to do so, that
as a rule he cannot perceive colours or visual extension.
On the causal theory the ultimate cause of my perceiving
an eye is certain states of my brain. A remoter cause
is states of my own eye, and a still remoter one is some
other states of the real. Now it is clear that by all
these conditions I do not mean perceived conditions.
For it is certain that people perceive colours when no
one perceives their eyes or their brains. Hence we
must put the whole theory into terms of real causes of
perception. I think it will then become reasonable to
state the observed facts in the following way : There
is a relatively permanent structure in reality, which
is a condition of the possibility of the mind which is
connected with it, perceiving coloured and extended
appearances, and which is also a remote cause of other
people, whose minds are possessed of similar real struc-
tures, perceiving an eye. We can deal in the same
way with correlations between the perceptible structure
of an organ and the possibility of perceiving some
particular quality like red or green.

Thus it is hardly true to say that a purely causal
theory leads to complete agnosticism, for it does allow
of a certain amount of analysis of the causes of our
perceptions in accordance with the actually observed
conditions for their production. We must now see
whether such an analysis cannot be carried further.
If we consider the general nature of what we perceive


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PEECEPTION 243

we shall see that all perceptions have much in common.
They are all built up out of quite a few general qualities
like colour, sound, extension, figure, taste, smell, tempe-
rature, etc., which continually recur. The differences
other than geometrical between our objects of perception
consist in the following respects : (1) The presence of a
given general quality in one and its total absence in
another; (2) Difference in the degrees of the charac-
teristics of the qualities. By this I mean that the
general qualities like colour have for their particulari-
sation a small number of characteristics which may be
compared to independent variables — e.g. colour is par-
ticularised by colour-tone, saturation, and intensity.
Each of these variables has a continuous set of values,
and perceptions differ in their objects according as the
values of these variables differ. Apart from charac-
teristics and their continuous series of possible values
there would be only 2" — 1 different possible objects of
perception where n is the number of different general
qualities and is, as we have seen, quite a small number.
But all these general quahties have to be particularised
by the special values of their characteristics. Of
these they generally possess several — thus colour an'fl
sound have three apiece — and each of them is generally
supposed to have a continuous or at any rate a compact
series of possible values. It is from the last fact that the
infinite variety of the objects that we perceive springs.
Now this analysis of what we do perceive at once
suggests, it seems to me, a further analysis of the
causes of our perceptions. We have now seen that
we have very good evidence for the belief that the
possibility of having perceptions, whose objects have the
general qualities that we have mentioned, depends on
the connexion of the mind with a real structure, states
of which are the condition of one mind perceiving these

16—2


244 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

general qualities, and other states of which are the
cause of other minds connected with similar structures
perceiving bodily oi-gans. Hence the general qualities
perceived can be correlated with this permanent real
structure without which they cannot be perceived.

But, on the other hand, we are not able to perceive
in our organs anything that corresponds to the par-
ticular values of the characteristics of these general
qualities, which perpetually alter as we have different
perceptions. But it seems not unreasonable to believe
that what determines the perception of a given par-
ticular quality at a certain moment must be states in
that permanent structure which we believe to be the
condition for the perception of the general quality of
which this is one possible particularisation. This, at any
rate, seems the most reasonable analysis to make.

We must not, however, make the mistake of suppos-
ing that we can go on to conclude that if a particular
quality has (say) three independent characteristics,
there must be either three real states in its cause or
that, if there be only one state it must have three
distinguishable characteristics like e.g. wave-length,
amplitude, and form. For we saw in the chapter on
Causality that, although a different effect — however
small the difference — must have a different cause, yet
this does not prove that, when the differences in the
effects are differences in the values of certain indepen-
dent variables with a continuous range of values, the
cause of any given effect of the kind must be as
differentiated as that effect. We cannot, in fact, be
sure that the three characteristics of perceived colours,
may not be due to events that have only one variable
characteristic.

I think we can now say that we have been able to
show that a purely causal theory, which makes all the


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 245

objects of perception appearances, can be stated com-
patibly with the observations about our bodily organs
"with which the two rival views of instrument and
cause both started. We have seen what sort of
analysis can probably be made, on the strength of
those observations, of the unknown causes of our per-
ceptions. But the difficulties attending the scientific
theory of the causation of perceptions on this view,
which makes the objects of all our perceptions ap-
pearances, remains untouched. What is the objection
to the scientific theory from our standpoint ? It is a
theory of the more remote causes of our perceptions,
of the causes of those states in our organs and minds,
which, however caused, end in a perception of an
appearance. But it is stated in terms of primary
qualities and it actually involves the view that we can
find out the primary qualities of these remote causes
in many cases from those of the appearance perceived.
Hence it assumes that the remote causes of our per-
ceptions resemble their objects not only in the general
way that both have primary qualities, but also in the
much more particular one that there is a general
resemblance between the shape of the appearance and
the shape of the remote cause. We might put the
matter thus : Real primary qualities are essential to
the scientific theory, therefore (a) the causes of our
perceptions are held to have primary qualities and
must be real, since they are admitted to be imper-
ceptible, and (6) the theory can only be built up by
assuming that the causal laws between these remote
causes and the events in the real structure of our
organs are those that hold between observable primary
qualities. On the other hand the conclusion of the
theory gives us no warrant whatever for supposing
that primary qualities are any more than appearances.


246 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION

And finally it seems a very extraordinary thing that
science should hold that what resembles the object
that we perceive is not its immediate cause, or the last
cause but one, but a cause which, on its own theory,
is a long way back in the vertical causal series.

The first point that we have to notice is that
science holds that in general we only perceive an object
which something in the real resembles, when other
people also perceive it or can do so. There are diffi-
culties about this view which we will discuss later ; at
present we will accept it. Now we notice that under
similar circumstances a slight change in our own
position, when we remain as we say, 'looking at the
same thing,' makes but a very slight change in the
qualities of what we perceive. The ellipses are very
like the circle and each other. Now this I think quite
reasonably suggests that under such circumstances our
perceptions have a common remote cause, and that
some slight change of condition makes the difference
in what we perceive. This is the sort of justification
that science can offer for the apparently arbitrary
procedure of fleeing to a remote member of the causal
series as the one that is supposed to resemble the
object perceived. It does not of course justify the
assertion that the object perceived is like any of the
causes of the perception ; but it does suggest that, if
it were, it would be a cause remote enough to be
common to the causal series of several observers that
it would resemble.

The next point on which we must be clear is that
the further determination of the real world does not
pretend to be anything more than hypothetical. This,
it must be remembered, would be true of such argu-
ments and conclusions as are involved in the wave-
theory of light and the dynamical theory of gases even


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PEECEPTION 247

if we could have maintained the instrumental theory,
and held that we sometimes perceived the real. For,
although on that theory we perceive the real, it is
quite certain that we do not perceive those particular
realities with which the scientific theory deals, and
therefore they can only be proved by the success with
which they account for what we can perceive. Now,
the only reason that we are worse off when we believe
that we do not perceive the real is that the initial
probability of an hypothesis about the real, stated in
terms of qualities of what we perceive, is less. The
probability that is reflected back on such an hypothesis
by the fact that it does explain what we perceive
remains the same as before. But it is easy to see that,
under the circumstances, any alternative hypothesis
about the real will have to rest its probability entirely
on its ability to explain the perceived. For by our own
admission nothing is directly known about the qualities
of the real and therefore the initial probability of any
further particular determination of it is the same as that
of any other, so long as the laws of logic and probability
are obeyed by it. Hence in comparing the probability
of any two alternative theories as to the further deter-
mination of the nature of the real causes of perception
we need not consider anything but their respective
success in explaining what we do perceive. And there
is certainly no alternative theory of the nature of the
real before the public at present that can claim to
explain so many of the facts so well as the theory
of science. Thus the correct answer of science to such
an objection as Dr McTaggart makes in his Dogmas of
Religion, that ' the existence of matter is a bare possi-
bility to which it would be foolish to attach the least
importanceV is that, whilst all alternative possibilities

1 Op. cit. p. 95.


248 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

are equally bare when you start from the view that
what you actually perceive is appearance, this particu-
lar one accounts for the perceptions that we actually
do have in a way in which no other, so far as we
can tell, does. (I have already discussed in my
chapter on Phenomenalism the plausible theory that
the causes of our perceptions are themselves mental in
character.)

But the statement that, on the theory of proba-
bility, if we start from the view that all that we
perceive is appearance, the further determination of
reality in terms of primary qualities which science
offers is the most probable with which we are ac-
quainted, must not be misunderstood. Science has
absolutely no need to suppose that reality has those
peculiarities which I have already mentioned as being
incommunicable even from man to man. I mean the
peculiar and incommunicable sense experiences that we
have. It is true that we cannot perceive reality and
therefore when we say that there is a real square we
cannot mean that the reality has that sensuous particu-
larity that we experience when we see a square. But
this is utterly unimportant to science, because, as we
have seen, such sensuous particularity is absolutely in-
communicable, and therefore cannot be a possible subject
of a science of any kind. Just as we cannot possibly
know whether A and B, who always use the words
' red ' and ' green ' under the same circumstances, really
have the same experience, so we cannot and do not
need to know whether the real has the peculiar
sensuous quality that we experience when we use
those terms. But just as we can agree with each
other as to the use of these terms — the important
point being that we all find and fail to find distinctions
in what we perceive in agreement with each other — so


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 249

we can ascribe primary qualities to reality in the sense
that we can believe that it will agree in having dis-
tinctions where we perceive spatial distinctions and
where other people agree with us in perceiving them.
This, then, is all that can be demanded when we say that
the real has primary qualities; we cannot mean more
than when we say that the objects of other people's
perceptions can be known to be square or red, and we
know that this merely means that one of us will never
find homogeneity where the other finds distinction.

If, then, we allow science to assume hypothetically
the reality of at least some primary qualities, we have
seen that it can build up a very successful theory to
account for the perception both of primaries and of
secondaries. It does this, as we saw, by assuming that
the real shapes are those for which sight and touch agree,
and therefore that in some cases at least, though very
few, the appearance is exactly like the reality events
in which are a remote cause of our perception, whilst
in general the perceived distance of a visible object is
the real distance of the remote cause. But it would
obviously be very much better if the scientific theory
could be stated in a much less definite form. If, in
fact, we could state it in terms of causes without having
to specify their nature so accurately, it is clear that
it would still retain such probability as it does from
explaining the facts, but would gain in probability by
not having to make such definite and complicated
assumptions about reality. The question is whether
this is possible, and to this question we now turn.

It is tolerably easy to offer an account of the
scientific theory of the causation of our perceptions of
sounds which does not assume the reality of primary
qualities. The ordinary arguments assume this reality
and proceed from the fact that when we begin to hear


250 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

a sound there is strong reason to believe that we could
always have perceived a body vibrating which began to
vibrate at a time before we began to hear the sound.
This time is shown to depend on the perceived distance
of the vibrating body and the nature of the medium
between it and our ears. Now, on the present theory,
to say that we always could have perceived a body
vibrating at a certain time, means that a real thing
existed, states in which are capable of making us
perceive such a body. We know that there must be
such real causes on the present theory; we know, too,
that they are remote causes, events in which produce
real changes in that real structure which ' corre-
sponds' in the sense discussed earlier to our perceptible
ears. But we do not need for the present purpose
further to specify the nature of that real thing. Hence
we can state the scientific law as follows: A remote
cause of our hearing a sound is a remote cause, events
in which are capable of making us perceive a vibrating
body if there be a proper organ in a proper state at
the time. Thus the theory adopted by science for the
cause of our perception of sounds, though stated in
terms of primary qualities, can be stated just as well
in terms of the supposed remote causes of our percep-
tions of primary qualities. It then becomes indifferent
to us whether primary qualities be realities or merely
appearances, and science does no harm in continuing to
state its position in terms of primaries, since we can
always interpret it in the way in which we have just
been doing.

But clearly this will not help us very far unless we
can also state the scientific theory of the causation of
our perceptions of primary qualities, and of colours in
terms that do not assume the reality of primaries. And
this is by no means a simple problem.


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 251

Let us begin by stating the scientific theory in
terms of primaries, and then see if it be possible to
transform it. The theory is that the last cause of our
perceiving an object of a definite shape and colour is
states in our brains ; that the cause of these is states
in our eyes ; that the cause of these is vibrations that
travel with a definite velocity through an imperceptible
medium ; and that the cause of these is the vibrations
of numbers of imperceptible particles. This last stage
of the causal process is supposed to have a definite
figure closely related to that which we perceive as
a result of the whole process. Moreover, the little
particles, beside lying within this definite boundary,
are supposed to have a position in space relatively to
us, which is practically that in which the perceived
figure is seen to be. Consider now for a moment the
difficulties that beset any attempt to state such a theory
as this in terms which do not involve the reality of
primary qualities. There are three difficulties about
this theory over and above those which occur in the
physical account of the perception of sounds. (1) With
sound we could under favourable circumstances perceive
the vibrating body and the medium. Here we cannot
even theoretically perceive either the particles or the
medium or their motions. (2) The theory of sound
does not try to explain the causation of our perceptions
of sounds which it grants to be appearances by the
states of supposed real sounds. But this theory does
undertake to explain the perception of primary qualities
by real primary qualities and their states, whilst it is
forced to conclude that, so far as we can tell, there is
every probability that all the primary qualities that
we perceive are appearances. (3) As a consequence of
this difference the theory of sound did not have to
come to the amazing conclusion that a cause four stages


252 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION

back in the process closely resembles the object of the
perception, which the subsequent stages end by pro-
ducing. But this is the conclusion at which the theory
of light arrives, or, perhaps we ought to say, from
which it starts. Now these three difficulties, peculiar
to the theory of light, end in another paradox, which
seems almost insoluble except on the assumption of the
reality of primary qualities. Science tells us that the
remote cause of our perception of an object is imper-
ceptible parts of that object. But it also holds that
the object perceived is an appearance ; for we perceive
chairs and tables as homogeneous and not as quantities
of little bodies in rapid motion. But it is hard to see
how a reality can be part of an appearance, even if we
grant that these can be unperceived parts of an appear-
ance at all. The solution of the paradox seems to
depend entirely on the assumption, not merely that
primary qualities are real, but also that, as far as distance
and shape are concerned, the primary qualities of the
appearance that we perceive are substantially similar to
those of its remote cause. It then can be said that
the little particles are unperceived, and that they form
part of a reality which occupies practically the same
place as the perceived appearance. But this solution
does not seem possible without these very special, and,
so far as I know, intrinsically groundless assumptions.
We must not however despair, but see if we cannot
state the essence of the scientific theory of the per-
ception of primaries without assuming their reality.
We have already seen that the fact that all persons
under certain circumstances perceive much the same
objects — e.g. ellipses — renders it very probable that
there is a common remote cause of their perceptions.
Let us revert, then, to the case of the circle and the
ellipses. We know that in whatever position we may


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 253

be, so long as we touch the object, we feel something
circular. The question of whether we touch it or not
depends on our own volitions. Thus we seem to be
justified on the causal theory in supposing that there
is a permanent reality which, whenever we will, will
give us the same tactual sensations of shape. We know
further that we can often get these tactual sensations
when we cannot see anything at all. This suggests
that the cause of our seeing the circular or elliptical
object, when we do see it, is events that do not always
take place. ' In the dark,' as we put it, these events
are presumably not taking place. But when they do
happen we perceive an object that is geometrically
very much like what we feel, and, under certain
circumstances, is exactly like it as far as shape is
concerned. Now this, I think, suggests that there is
some permanent reality which causes our sensations of
touch whenever we will, and that sometimes events
happen in that reality which cause us to see objects of
various shapes which, however, are always like the felt
shape.

Now the question is whether we might not be
allowed to assume the instrumental theory for touch
even though we have had to drop it for sight. Let us
recall for a moment why it seemed unlikely to be true
for sight, and see whether the same argument will
apply to touch or not. There was nothing intrinsically
impossible or even improbable about the instrumental
theory to begin with. It remained a perfectly possible
alternative theory to the causal one, which makes all
our perceptions appearances until we come to the fact
that science and common-sense agree in believing that
the greater part of our visual perceptions, even of
primary qualities, are mere appearances. Then it had
to hold that precisely the same sort of causal processes


254 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION

in the same bodily organs must be capable of producing
two entirely different results, viz. the establishment of
a relation between the mind and a reality, and the pro-
duction of a whole perception consisting of an apparent
object very like the one that is supposed to be real +
the same sort of relation to the mind as we had before.
And we agreed that this was a very unlikely state of
affairs, and that it seemed much more reasonable to
suppose that in all cases the effect was of the same
nature, viz. the production of the perception of an
appearance as a whole. Thus the ground of the de-
cision against the instrumental theory in the case of
sight was that it was held that most of the objects
perceived by sight were appearances. But this
conclusion does not prejudice the possibility of the
instrumental theory for other organs of perception.
If with them, e.g. with touch, we were to find no
reason for supposing that any of the objects perceived
were appearances, we should no longer have the paradox
of the same causal process producing two utterly
different effects, and therefore no ground for rejecting
the instrumental theory as regards the deliveries of
that organ.

Now it is at least obvious on the face of it that
there are very much fewer cases of perception of objects
by touch that are declared to be illusory than there
are of sight. For instance, all the difficulties that
arise from change of shape with change of position
vanish at once here. So long as we feel the object
at all, no matter who we are or where we are, we feel
the same shape, or at worst can explain the change of
shape by a real change in the object. Our feeling it
or not depends on our volition, but when we once feel
it we always feel it as having the same shape.

But it will be said : There are illusions of touch,


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 255

and even though there be much fewer than of sight,
that is enough to wreck the theory that the organs
of touch act purely instrumentally. Let us then
consider these supposed illusions and see whether
they be really relevant. The two following seem to
be typical cases, (i) There is the old Aristotelian
experiment of holding a pen between the crossed
first and second fingers so that it touches the back
of the former and the inside of the latter. Under
these circumstances it is said that two pens are felt
instead of one. (I cannot get the illusion myself, but
I am prepared to believe Aristotle and the numerous
other distinguished persons who have been more for-
tunate than I have.) (ii) The other is the illusion
that has been pretty closely investigated in modern
times — of the two compass points which have to be
placed at diiferent distances apart when applied to
different parts of the skin in order to be felt as dis-
tinct. Everyone is acquainted with a particular appli-
cation of this who has been so unfortunate as to have
a hole in his tooth. This will appear enormous to his
tongue and tiny to the eyes of himself and his dentist.
I do not think either of these criticisms need
prevent us from holding that touch is a sense that acts
purely instrumentally, and that for aught we know to
the contrary, tells us the real shapes of real things. In
the first place, so far as I know, there are not supposed
to be any illusions about felt shape. The two illusions
mentioned above rest on the fact that a judgment in
the one case about number and in the other about
distance and length, conflict with judgments based on
the deliveries of sight ; and in these cases we accept
sight. The first point to notice is that the experiment
with the compass points is entirely irrelevant to the
possibility of the instrumental theory. It does not


256 THE CAUSAL THEOKY OF PERCEPTION

make against that theory if the use of the instrument
does not tell you the whole truth about the real ; the
troubles arise when it gives you a perception with an
object that is believed to be an appearance. Now, if
there be really two compass-points, and under certain
circumstances you only feel one, there is no apparent
object involved, and therefore no argument against the
instrumental theory. You explain the facts at once by
saying that the skin on your back is not nearly such
a delicate instrument for perceiving the real as is the skin
on your tongue-tip, and therefore distinctions in the real
can be discovered by one which are left unnoticed when
the other is employed. And if you pass to the further
experiment by which it is found that at different parts
of the skin, when the compass-points are far enough
apart to be distinctly perceived in all cases, the
distances perceived by the eye and the skin do not
agree, this still is not relevant.

We do not here have at some points, or at all,
illusory objects of perception. At all the points we
perceive distances between the two compass-needles,
but when we compare their magnitude that at one
point seems greater than that at another, although we
do not believe that this is really true. Now, com-
parison of a past perception with a present one in
respect of the magnitude of one of its characteristics
is quite clearly an act of judgment and not of percep-
tion. Now there is no reason on a purely instrumental
theory why you should not make erroneous judgments
about the real. Let us be quite clear about this point.
When I have a perception on any theory, certain of the
judgments that I make about its object must be in-
fallible, e.g. judgments as to its being extended, and
having such and such a colour or shape. Now, whilst
the judgment that it has extensive magnitude and that


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 257

its boundary lines have length, is infallible, it is quite
clear that the perception does not guarantee infallible
judgments as to what those lengths are. For you could
at best only have infallible judgments as to one length
being greater than, equal to, or less than another in
the same object of perception. Now it is clear that the
present experiment with compass-points does not make
us suppose on the instrumental theory that now one of
two lines in the real is longer and now shorter than
the other. It only tells us at best that if we can trust
our memories it seems likely that the length that we
now perceive would be judged to be greater than the
one that we perceived when a different part of the skin
was touched, if as a matter of fact both lengths could
be perceived at once, which they cannot. But when
once we grant that there is no question in either case
of a positive perception of something that is believed
to be an appearance, but merely the question of
a judgment of comparison between a characteristic in
an object perceived by two different instruments we
have no diflSculty in accounting for the fiicts compatibly
with the instrumental theory that in both cases what
we perceive is the real object. Judgments of com-
parison between the object of two different perceptions
may very well be determined by other causes besides
what is actually perceived. We may perceive real
distance and perceive it as having a definite magnitude,
but the actual magnitude which we judge it to have
may well depend on other circumstances beside the
perceived distance. Hence the same distance may well
be judged to have different magnitudes when perceived
by different instruments. Nor indeed have we far to
seek for the cause of our judging that the magnitude
differs in the two cases. In both cases the instruments
used are parts of the skin. We know from the earlier
B. p. 17


258 THE CAUSAL THEOKY OF PERCEPTION

forms of this experiment, which I have already dis-
cussed, that some parts of the skin are more dehcate
instruments than others in that one part can discover
distinctions when the other only finds homogeneity.
Hence it is clear that in the less sensitive parts of the
skin, when the distance is really the same, the real
state of affairs will be more like that in which no
distinction can be detected than it is at a more sensitive
part. And this may well be interpreted as a real
shortening of the distance between the points. Thus
I think that we are justified in holding that, as far as
the compass-point experiment is concerned, there is
no reason for supposing that what we perceive by the
sense of touch is ever an appearance, at least as regards
geometrical qualities. And this leaves it perfectly
open to us to assume the instrumental theory for this
sense. We have not indeed disproved the causal
theory which makes the objects of all our perceptions
appearances, but it removes the sole ground which led
us to prefer that view in the case of sight. The causal
theory for touch remains a possibility which it would
be fooHsh to adopt without necessity, since with the
instrumental alternative we can accept substantially
the theories of physics, whUst with the causal one it is
doubtful if we could transform them so that the same
evidence still supported them.

It now remains to say a word about Aristotle's
experiment, and to show that this, too, is erroneous
judgment, and not the perception of an appearance, as
is the seeing of ellipses when what is real is a circle.
The first point to notice is that two instruments of
perception are used on the instrumental theory — the
outer part of one and the inner part of the other
finger. The second point is that if the deliveries of
the sense of touch can be trusted, which of course on


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 259

the instrumental theory they can be, these two organs
are not in contact with the same part of the reaUty.
These two facts, which are true on the instrumental
theory, can now be used to explain the illusion com-
patibly with it. No one in the position in which the
fingers are held ever does have a perception of a single
round surface. He feels, on the contrary, two bits of
round surfaces. But the assertion that we perceive
a pen means that we perceive the whole circular
surface, and this we do not do. Hence under the
circumstances any assertion about pens, and therefore
about the number of pens, is not a judgment based
entirely on a perception and guaranteed by it, but is
either an inference or an association. It is as much an
inference to say, under the conditions of the experiment,
that you hold one pen as that you hold two ; the only
difference is that the latter inference is liable to be
made and that it happens to be erroneous. Thus we
do not perceive an appearance, but we make a false
judgment. And so this attempt to show that we
sometimes perceive appearances by means of touch
seems to have broken down.

Touch, then, we may conclude, for anything that
we have yet learnt, is a purely instrumental sense
which always makes us perceive the truth about the
geometrical qualities of real objects, even if it be only
a small part of the truth and if we be liable to base
unwarrantable inferences on such partial knowledge.
But if once this position be granted, we have made
an immense step forward in the rehabilitation of the
scientific theory of the causation of visual perceptions.
For we can now agree with science that the geometrical
qualities of the appearances that we see bear a close
resemblance to those of certain reals, and that in some
cases they are exactly like them. And science will

17—2


260 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

now be justified, if it finds that view conducive to
the explanation of our visual perceptions — as it does,
in supposing that a remote cause of its perceptions
is in many cases events which are imperceptible in
these tangible reals that resemble the objects of visual
perception. For the recognition of the reality of the
tangible carries with it a solution of the paradoxes men-
tioned on p. 252. For instance, there is now no difficulty
about real, but imperceptible events in imperceptible
little bodies which occupy the same place as that in
which the body is perceived to be. For it was granted
that touch did not tell us the whole truth about tangible
realities. But it was claimed that it told us, so far as
we know, nothing but the truth about their geometrical
qualities. In that case they are truly extended, and
may well have parts too small for our senses to per-
ceive. Again, it now ceases to be arbitrary to take
the fourth stage backwards in the causation of a visual
perception for that which 'corresponds' to the object
perceived. For now we have i-eason to believe that
there can be reals which closely resemble the object
perceived in shape, and that events in them may be
the common cause of similar but slightly difierent
visual perceptions in various people. It is clearly not
arbitrary to take as the corresponding reality that
which resembles in geometric form these perceptions'
objects, and is at the same time the common remote
cause of the perceptions.

At the same time I should hesitate to lay too
much stress on the instrumental character of touch.
It is evident that in order to be able to maintain it we
must be prepared to assert that we never perceive
appearances by touch, at any rate, as regards figure.
We must be able to prove of any suggested case that
it is either a perception of fewer, but not of different


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 261

distinctions from those of the real, or that it is not
a case of perception of appearance, but of erroneous
judgment based on the perception of the real. Now
it would certainly be rash to maintain that no cases
do arise which are only explicable as perceptions of
appearances. If, for example, we ever have tactual
experiences in dreams it is doubtful whether they
could be explained otherwise than as the perceptions
of appearances. I do not know that we ever do feel
the shapes of things in dreams, but a theory that
rested on the assumption that we never do so would
be in a precarious state.

Fortunately, however, by combining the facts of
sight and touch it is possible, even on the assumption
that the causal theory holds for the latter sense as
well as for the former, to gain some probable con-
clusions about the real causes of our perceptions of
appearances. It is granted that the approximate
agreement of our visual perceptions under given
circumstances suggests a common remote cause for
them. Further, the fact that practically always we
all feel the same shape under these circumstances if
we wUl move our fingers along the edges, makes it
almost certain that there is a common remote cause of
our perceptions of tactual figure. And this is found to
be independent of the relative position of the object
touched and the body of the person who touches it
other than the actual touching organ. Again, there
is always a general agreement in shape under these
circumstances between what we feel and what we see,
and under some circumstances a complete agreement.
Yet the processes of causation of the two sorts of
perception are widely different. They employ different
organs, and one set of perceptions can be had in the
absence of the other. Now the fact that when we feel


262 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

an object we can nearly always see an object of much
the same shape tends, I think, to show that there is
probably a common set of conditions which the causes
of the two kinds of perception obey. When we add to
this the facts that there is every reason to believe that
the intermediate stages in the causal process are widely
different in the two cases, and that something that we
have previously only felt may subsequently be accom-
panied by a visual appearance (owing, e.g., to its being
heated or illuminated), we shall be inclined to believe
that the supposed identity of conditions in the remote
causes of our corresponding perceptions of sight and
touch are not identical events. If, then, the events
differ, as they must do, since the intermediate causation
is so different, and since one sort of perception can be
had without the other, we must look for the identity
which is to explain why, when both sorts of perceptions
do occur together, their shapes do so closely correspond
in something else than remote events. It looks, in
fact, as if we might find it in some permanent con-
ditions or relations, which both the events that cause
the visual perceptions and those that cause the corre-
sponding tactual ones obey. Now it seems to me that
the simplest way to account for all these facts is to
assume a real counterpart to tactual perceptions when-
ever we can share those perceptions with others, and
so have reasons to believe that they are due to
a common remote cause.

Let us recapitulate the advantages that such an
assumption offers us. (1) We have already seen that
we practically never suppose that tactual perception
deceives us as to the shape of the real. So much was
this so that, except for the fact that cases might possibly
arise in which we should have to flee to appearances of
touch, we urged that there was no reason to deny the


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 263

possibility that tactual objects of perception were real.
If we think, however, that it is safer to believe that
tactual objects, too, are appearances, they will have
the advantage over visual appearances that, whereas
the assumption that the former were all real would
lead to terrible complications, no such complications
would arise over the belief that tactual appearances
were real. Now this is essential to the theory of
a real spatial counterpart. To make this the counter-
part of visually perceived spatial appearances would
make the world of reality as complicated as it would
be if we supposed that these visual appearances were
themselves real. But to make it a counterpart of the
tactual appearances will not lead to these complications
because we already know that there is only one tactual
appearance to an infinite number of corresponding
visual ones. Hence the internal consistency and the
comparative simplicity of tactual appearances make it
reasonable to hold that, if there be a spatial counter-
part at all, it will be to tactual and not to visual
spatial appearances. (2) The assumption of such
a counterpart avoids the assumption either that what
we perceive is more than appearance, or that the
reality that causes the perception is exactly like the
object of the latter. It avoids the belief which we
have already seen to be strictly impossible of proof, or
even of conjecture, that the real remote causes of our
perceptions have the same sort of sensuous particu-
larity as do the objects of each man's perceptions for
himself. But it replaces it by the belief that there is a
one to one correspondence between perceived geometri-
cal distinctions in the object of tactual perception and
certain permanent ones in the reality events in which
cause the perception. And this is all that we mean
when we say that another man perceives the same object


264 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

as we do. (3) It offers an explanation of the facts
(a) that the shapes of visual appearances and of tactual
ones are always correlated closely and may be identical,
although the perceptions of which they form an
analyaable element must be very differently caused ;
and (6) that the tactual perceptions of different people
agree, whilst their visual perceptions under such cir-
cumstances only differ slightly. (4) It thus enables
the ordinary scientific theory of visual perception and
its causes to be built up on the foundation of the
essential reality of the shapes given in tactual per-
ception. For it is to these shapes that there is a real
one to one correspondence. The theory of a real
counterpart to tactual appearances thus gains any
probability that the success of the scientific theory of
perception is able to reflect on its premises, and this
is of course a very gi-eat deal. (5) On the other hand
it is not tied down like the instrumental theory to
accept every tactual perception that occurs as supplying
true information about the spatial relations of the real.
All the objects of tactual perception for it are appear-
ances. To nearly all of them it is able to believe that
there are real counterparts. On this assumption it
builds up the scientific view of the world and in
particular of visual perception into an immense self-
consistent whole. If now it ever happens — as far as
I am aware it never does — that a tactual perception
occurs which leads to the belief in a ' real ' shape which
does not fit in with the rest of the scientific theory,
and which cannot be explained away either as false
judgment or merely partial perception, the present
theory is prepared to meet it. It knew aU along that
all the objects of its tactual perceptions were appear-
ances, but, on the assumption that to practically all
of them there is a real counterpart, it has been able to


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PEECEPTION 265

build up a consistent theory of visual perception which
has now attained to such probability from perpetual
verification by experiment that in the case of these
(possible) few objects of tactual perception it may be
able to deny that there is a real counterpart to them
on the ground that such a belief would be inconsistent
with its whole well- verified body of knowledge.

Our conclusion, then, is that it is most probable that
there is a real counterpart corresponding point for point
to what is perceived in most (perhaps in all) the tactual
perceptions that we have of figure, though doubtless
more differentiated than the tactual objects themselves ;
and that events in this reality are the causes of our visual
perceptions, according to laws which science, stating
its position in terms of perceptible primaries, is able to
discover. Whether there be any real correlate to the
particular colours that we perceive over and above the
real correlates of the imperceptible motions which
science demands it is impossible to tell. That the real
possesses something more than the correlate of tactual
extension there is no reason to doubt ; for tactual ex-
tension and visual extensions are both extensions of
something. But what that something is and whether
it or only events in it differ when we perceive different
colours, temperatures, and ' feels ' it is impossible to
decide. Only this much can be said, that where, as in
physical optics and in the scientific theories of sound
and of heat (Kinetic Theory of Gases), we can make
up successful hypothetical laws of the causation of our
perceptions in terms of the counterparts of figures,
spatial relations, and their changes alone; the belief
that there are actual correlated qualities in the real
is pro tanto weakened in probability. The reality of
colours, and sounds, and temperatures, or rather of
a real correlate to these general qualities in the remote


266 THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PEECEPTION

causes of our perceiving them is not disproved by
the scientific theory ; these quahties are in the same
depressing logical position as Dr McTaggart's non-
omnipotent and non-creative God — 'the only reason
against their reality is that there is no reason for it.'
In such good company we will leave them.

Before ending this rather tedious chapter we must,
however, see how the causal theory has affected our
previous position about dreams and drugs and instru-
ments which we had to leave in a rather unsatisfactory
state at the end of the third chapter. It will be
remembered that in that chapter we came to the
conclusion that, apart from the causal theory of
perception, it was impossible to draw a distinction on
any reasonable basis between the reality of the God
whom the mystic can only perceive after certain
definite initiatory processes, the pink rats that can
only be seen by those who habitually take excess of
alcohol, and the nuclei of cells which can only be seen
by people who use microscopes after a certain pre-
scribed method. We saw that the scientist wanted
to put the cell-nuclei into an impregnable position,
after which the Deity and the rodents must sigh in
vain, and that there was grave doubt whether, even
with the causal theory, he could do this. But we
have travelled some distance since we left that chapter,
and we may now be better able to deal with the
question. The old difficulty was that it seemed
monstrous to hold that the fact that mystics only
experienced God, or people only saw everything yellow
when they had performed certain rites or taken san-
tonine, proved that what they saw was appearance,
whilst the entirely comparable case of using a micro-
scope did not prove any such thing. And our discus-
sion of the instrumental view has only increased our


THE CAUSAL THEOKY OF PERCEPTION 267

certainty that any such arguments to prove that an
object of perception is an appearance are invalid. The
theory that the mystic initiation is a necessary means
to the perception of a reality that cannot be perceived
without it is d, priori as reasonable a view as the
alternative that those initiations are just the causes of
the perception of appearances by the persons who
employ them.

On the other hand, the upshot of the present
chapter has been to show that, unless we want to have
an immense complication of similar realities that are
only perceptible from one position or by one person,
we must in many cases reject the instrumental theory;
and that when we once begin to do this in any case
there are good grounds for doing so in all cases,
certainly as far as sight is concerned. Hence we have
now to explain why, when it is granted that what the
mystic, the drunkard, and the microscopist perceive is
equally appearance, we hold that the last mentioned
gives additional knowledge about reality and are
doubtfiil whether the two former do so.

At first sight the microscope seems to present
a contradiction to the views that we have put forward
as to it being reasonable to assume a real counterpart
to tactual figure, but not in general to visual figure.
For it almost seems as if we were here trusting our
eyes as against touch for a knowledge of reality.
A little consideration will prove that this is not the
case and will justify the confidence that is placed in
vision with a properly constructed optical instrument.
If we assume that there exists as a rule a real counter-
part to figures which we agree on perceiving by touch,
we get the laws connecting these figures with what is
perceived by sight under definite conditions as laws
connecting the shapes of visual objects with the real


268 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

counterparts of tactual ones. Thus are developed the
theorems of geometrical optics. By applying these
laws we learn that an arrangement of tangible points
in a plane, if looked at through a microscope properly
focussed and at right angles to that plane, will be
replaced in visual perception by an object whose shape,
at any rate at the centre of the field of vision, will
not differ from the tangible shape, but whose size will
seem greater than the tangible size. This last phrase
means that the distance apart of two points seen
through the microscope will be judged to be equal to
a tangible length greater than that which we actually
feel. Now it should be noticed that in this point,
where there is a positive inconsistency between the
teaching of sight as aided by the microscope and touch,
we do not hold that sight is correct, but that touch is.
That is, we believe that whatever corresponds to length
in the real counterpart of the tactual figure agrees
with it rather than with the lengths perceived by
means of the microscope. But we also know that two
points that may be perceived as one by the skin at
one point may be perceived as two at other points.
Hence it is fair to conclude that in the real counter-
part when whatever corresponds to tactual distance
diminishes beyond a certain amount it no longer is
able to produce a tactual perception with two dis-
tinguishable points. Hence we are led to conclude
that the inability to distinguish two points in our
tactual perception does not prove that there is not
a real distinction of the same kind as is responsible for
the differences of tactual magnitude that we actually
can perceive. Now we know from the general laws of
light that a microscope makes two points which can
be perceived tactually as distinct to be perceived as
still further apart in the visual appearance, i.e. as


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PEECEPTION 269

being as far apart as two points which, seen by the
naked eye, would correspond to a larger tactual
distance. Hence it is reasonable to believe that in
vision with a microscope really distinct points too
' near together ' to produce any distinction of tactual
character, are able to produce distinctions in the visual
perception's object.

It is reasonable, then, to hold that in vision with
a microscope we learn about real distinctions of the
same tjrpe and in the same relations as those which do
produce distinctions in objects of tactual perception
and of visual perception with the naked eye, but which
in tbeir real relations have less of that magnitude
which accounts for the perception of length than is
necessary to cause perceptions with distinctions in
their objects without the use of artificial aids to per-
ception. In this sense, then, I think the belief that
properly constructed optical instruments give us in-
formation about reality subject to limitations put upon
them by the theory of light is justified. And, so far
from conflicting with the belief in a real counterpart
to tactual objects of perception it can only be properly
defended on some such assumption.

We can therefore pass at once to the case of drugs
and of drunkenness. Mach tells us in his Analysis
of Sensations that if a person takes santonine every-
thing will appear yellow to him. We may take this
fact as a text for the subsequent discussion, assuming
on Mach's authority that it is true. Most people
would hold that the yellow colour, due to taking the
drug, is a mere appearance, and even the scientist who
thinks that all colours are appearances would hold that
this was unreal in some special sense. A priori the
following views are possible : (1) The taking of santo-
nine is comparable with the use of a microscope. It


270 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

causes the perception of an appearance with a distinc-
tion in it to which something in the reaUty corresponds,
but which does not make itself felt in the perceptions
produced in people who have not taken santonine.
(2) The taking of santonine makes a real change in the
real cause of the perception, so that it now causes a
perception of a yellow object. (3) The drug affects the
brain or other organs involved in perception and causes
the same remote cause to produce a different effect.

I think we can practically dismiss the first alter-
native with a very few words. If santonine made us
perceive a new colour there would be much to be said
for the position here taken up. It might well be
explained by the fact that the taking of the drug
enabled us to have perceptions corresponding to wave-
lengths which now produce no effect on the mind.
But it is quite clear that this is not what happens.
We all agree with the person who has taken the drug
in perceiving objects of practically the same shape and
with some colour or other. Also we agree among our-
selves about the colour and unite in disagreeing with
the patient. Now the complete agreement, as we
have already argued, suggests a common remote cause.
But the difference is not one like we have between
the microscope and the naked eye, that one perceives
distinctions which the other simply fails to perceive.
The drugged person simply differs from everyone else
in the colour that he perceives ; he does not perceive
a fresh distinction; in fact, if Mach be taken to mean
that he perceives everything as uniformly yellow, his
position as against others is that of the colour-blind
man against the rest of the world, rather than that
of the microscope against the naked eye. If he be
right then the agreement between other people to
perceive various colours becomes inexplicable.


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 271

The second alternative cannot possibly stand by
itself. If when A takes santonine changes do really
take place in the remote cause of his perceptions which
make it contain those events which cause the perception
of yellow, you have to explain why none of the other
people, all of whom are capable of perceiving that
colour, fail to do so. Thus as an alternative to sup-
posing that the drug affects ^'s bodily organs of per-
ception you propose a theory which involves that it
affects those of everyone else. To offer such a compli-
cated theory is ridiculous unless one is forced to it.
Hence we are left with the usual conclusion that santo-
nine merely affects the organs of perception of the man
who takes it ; so that the same remote cause which
normally makes other pebple (and the patient when
he has not taken the drug) perceive various colours,
now makes the patient perceive all things as yellow.

It only remains now to notice the cases of delirium,
dreams, and mystical visions. The case of delirium
produced by excess of alcohol or by any cause which
makes people have much the same perceptions, is not
strictly comparable with that of santonine. For now
the patients all perceive the same sort of things, as
they did before, but these are no longer anything like
what other people perceive. Now under these circum-
stances we cannot suppose that there is a common
remote cause of the perception of the delirious and the
normal observer, as we did in the case of the people
who have and those who have not taken santonine,
and who perceive much the same shapes. Hence this
does leave open the possibility that the perceptions of
the delirious man have real causes which are remote,
but which fail to produce any perceptible effect on the
minds of people who have not taken the drug in ques-
tion. This possibility needs a little further discussion.


272 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

Of course the mere fact that even a delirious man's
perceptions have an adequate cause somewhere is not
of any interest in the present question ; what we want
to know is whether there is any ground for supposing
that there exist remote causes for the existence of
perceptions of pink rats by people who have drugged
themselves with alcohol in the same sense as there
exist remote causes for the perceptions of chairs and
tables by people in their sober senses. Now I think
that in the particular case of a man who sees pink
rats with his eyes open there is strong ground for
accepting the ordinary view that they are mere
appearances in the sense that they have no remote
cause which is in any sense a real counterpart of their
shape. For pink rats are not things so very different
from what ordinary people see every day. There is
nothing peculiar about them except the fact that the
rats that other people perceive are not of that colour.
Moreover, they are localised at places in a room where
other people can neither see nor feel anything by
a man whose eyes are open. Now it seems to me
that it is this close resemblance to the objects of
ordinary perception and to the processes of ordinary
perception ending in such a surprising discrepancy
that is fatal to the belief in real remote causes that
only affect the delirious through alcohol. The likeness
to what can be perceived by normal people, and the
open eyes, suggest that if there were such a remote
cause it could not be — either in itself or in its actions —
unlike the remote causes of our perceptions of chairs
and tables and ' real ' rats. But then it becomes
inexplicable why it should only be able to produce
perceptions in people who have habitually drunk to
excess. Hence it seems clear that in this case the more
normal explanation that these objects are produced


THE CAUSAL THEOEY OF PERCEPTION 273

entirely centrally, as an effect of the alcohol on the
brain, is in all probability the right one.

When, however, we come to mystical visions in
which people agree who have had the same sort of
initiation, it seems to me we get further and further
away from the case of santonine with which we started
and nearer to a position in which the ordinary view of
central excitation, though still possible, ceases to be
so overwhelmingly the more probable explanation.
Mystics often have their experiences when their bodily
organs — at any rate the external ones — are not in use.
Also they frequently say that they cannot describe the
experiences that they have had in terms of the objects
that they perceive in their normal life. Now it seems
to me clear that the less their experiences resemble
those of other people, and the less their way of getting
them resembles ordinary perception, the less objection
there is to the explanation that there is a special real
remote cause of them in just the same sense as there is a
real remote cause of those perceptions on which ordinary
people agree. For it now ceases to be improbable that
such real causes should exist and operate without pro-
ducing perceptions by the usual channels in uninitiated
persons.

I do not wish unduly to labour a point that would
be more important for the philosophy of religion or of
psychical research than for us, but as I hold that
psychical research is a legitimate branch of natural
science — though a difficult and backward one — I hope
that I may be excused for adding a very few reflexions
on this matter. There seem to me to be three possible
cases to be dealt with if we assume the possibility of
genuine veridical mystic vision. It might take the
form of perception. In that case the veridical character
of the vision would only mean that there really were

B. P. W


274 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION

common causes capable of producing perceptions of
certain objects in mystics, but not in other people, and
different from the causes of what anybody perceives in
the ordinary course of nature. In that case we should be
faced by precisely the same sort of problems for mystical
vision as we found in ordinary perception, viz. whether
anything, and if so what, can be determined about these
common real causes from the objects of the perceptions
which they cause. Or it might be held that in mystical
vision we had true instrumentality, and the objects
perceived were the real things. These questions it
would be impossible to decide, even if we knew a great
deal more about mystic vision than we do. For we
have seen that they are far from easy, and can only
receive more or less probable answers even for ordinary
perception. Finally there is the possibility that what
happens in certain mystical states is not a perception,
but a feehng that a proposition is self-evident which is
not present to other people. I find it difficult to under-
stand what can be meant by, say, perceiving the doctrine
of the Trinity. But I can understand that a man
might in a vision become immediately certain of the
truth of that doctrine, or that he might have a per-
ception which he held could best be explained by
believing that the doctrine was true. But we should
have no ground for accepting either his immediate
certainty or his explanation of his perception without
examination just because he attained them in a vision.
He might be, as many of us are in ordinary life,
immediately certain of a proposition that is in all
probability false ; and he might, as we often do, pro-
pose as an explanation of his perception which was
inadequate, or take as the only possible explanation one
to which a more intelligent or experienced person could
offer dozens of equally or more probable alternatives.


CHAPTEE V


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS


We have now seen that there is some reason for
believing and no reason for disbelieving that there
exist real counterparts to the figures which aU people
agree in perceiving by touch. We have also seen that,
when this assumption is made, it is possible to find
laws between tactually and visually perceived figures
and the visually perceived distances and positions of
the latter relative to the body of the observer, and so
to reason from a visually perceived figure of a given
shape to the real counterpart of a tactual figure of
definite shape events in which do cause the visual
perception that we have, and which, if we performed
the proper actions, would give us the corresponding
tactual perception. We are thus justified in talking
about geometrical relations, shapes, and distances as
existing even when we do not perceive them, it
being understood that we mean the real counterpart
to which there would correspond a tactually perceived
figure with the geometrical qualities in question if
as a matter of fact we did have such a perception.
Thus such a statement as : ' I cannot perceive an atom
but I believe that atoms are shaped like dumb-bells '
means that I believe that there exist in the real
counterpart realities qualitatively like those, events
in which cause visual perception of dumb-bellshaped

18—2


276 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

figures, but the real quantity that corresponds to the
sizes of lines and volumes and surfaces in perceived
objects is so small that no perception is actually
produced.

^Sar-the laws of mechanics are laws that are
found to enable us to connect the spatial positions of
bodies at various times. In particular the so-called
Laws of Motion are conditions which, it is believed,
all material bodies obey, no matter what other in-
formation may be needed for a complete determination
of their state. It follows that the laws of mechanics
are well worth discussion. In the first place, if what
has been said before be correct they are laws about
reality or can become so by a simple change of state-
ment like the one I have given above about the shape
of an atom. In the second place, they give rise to
much the most certain and important physical science
that exists, and so they are good examples of causal
laws at their best. In the third place, they raise a
number of interesting questions, and their obscurity
compared with the certainty of the structure that has
been built upon them is yet another example of the
truth mentioned by Mr Russell that in most sciences
it is the middle parts that are simple and evident, and
the foundations and the higher applications that are
obscure and difficult.

I think that our best plan will be to state the
three laws in a form similar to Newton's if not
absolutely identical with it, and then to consider the
notions involved in them and any problems that may
arise with regard to them and the kind of evidence for
them. Our discussions may of course necessitate a
different statement at the end from what we had at
the beginning.

The laws of motion as usually stated are (1) Every


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 277

body persists in a state of rest or of uniform motion in
a straight line unless acted upon by some external
force. (2) The measure of the force acting upon a
body at any moment in a given direction is the rate of
change of momentum of the body in that direction at
that moment. (3) For any pair of bodies A and B
which exert forces on each other the forces are equal
in magnitude, have the same line of action, and are
opposite in sense.

The first law has been by some people supposed to
be a barren tautology, and by others to be an d priori
truth. But the most serious question that must
necessarily precede any decision on these points is :
What precisely is meant by the motion of a body in
a straight line, and by its uniformity 1 Until you are
clear about this you obviously cannot be sure whether
that of which you are certain d priori is the first law
of motion, because you do not know what is meant by
the first law of motion.

Everyone knows that the paths in which bodies
appear to travel depend, as we put it, on whether the
observer is at rest or in motion on his own account.
And the velocity which we attribute to the body will
depend on the body relatively to which the distance
travelled is measured and on the measurement of time
adopted.

Hence, if you take all motion to be relative, you
cannot talk about the direction or the velocity of a
body, because no body has an unique direction or
velocity. Each one will have dozens of different and
equally good velocities and directions according to the
bodies relatively to which its motion is determined.
Similarly for the measurement of time. It is always
measured by the recurrence of certain events, and,
according as you take different processes to be uniform,


278 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

you will reach different results as to the uniformity or
lack of it in a given motion. Newton of course clearly
recognised this. He distinguished between absolute
space, time, and motion, and the relative spaces, times,
and motions ; and admitted that it was perfectly
possible that no change, was uniform and therefore
capable of giving a measure of absolute time, and
that no body was absolutely at rest or in uniform
absolute motion in a straight line. But he thought
that he could give a criterion of absolute motion,
and, by experiment, prove the reality of at any rate
absolute rotation. On the other hand, most philo-
sophers have a strong objection to absolute motion,
space, or time ; and, putting this aside, there is felt to
be a reasonable doubt whether it can be necessary or
possible to start — as mechanics presumably does — from
empirical data, to reach laws which are stated in terms
of t^o entities which certainly cannot be perceived,
and finally to return and explain empirically perceived
motion by means: of these laws.

Thus most of the recent discussions on mechanics
have set the following problem before themselves :
To state Newton's Laws of Motion compatibly with
the belief that all motion is relative to material
bodies.

Now we have seen that, if all motion be relative,
you cannot talk about the motion of a body. But
of course it might be possible to find one material
system or a number of systems such that the motions
of other bodies relatively to these obeyed Newton's
laws. This has been attempted by Neumann, Streintz,
and Lange.

Neumann's' theory is that there exists somewhere
in space a body a, motions relative to which obey the

' Die Oodilei-Newtonsche Theorie.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 279

Newtonian Laws, He compares the assumption of a
to that of a luminiferous ether, but holds that it still
more closely resembles the theory of electric fluids.
It, like them, has a certain indeterminateness, since
any other body a' that moved relatively to a with an
uniform translational velocity and without rotation
would do equally well for our fundamental body of
reference. I do not agree with Mr Russell's' criticism
of Neumann's body a. He admits that Neumann does
not incur the fallacy of supposing that a is fixed (no
small triumph for a relativist !). But he goes on to
add that 'any statement as to its rest or motion...
on his theory... would be wholly unmeaning. Never-
theless it seems evident that the question whether one
body is at rest or in motion must have as good a
meaning as the same question concerning any other
body ; and this seems sufficient to condemn Neumann's
attempted escape from absolute motion.' This criticism
seems to me to rest on a misunderstanding of those
people who wish to keep both Newton's laws and
relative motion. Relative motion without any further
information is indeterminate. But it is perfectly
possible that the relative motions of all bodies except
one with respect to that one should be found to obey
certain laws. It is not true to say that it is meaning-
less to make any statement about a's rest or motion.
This assumes that it is only those motions that obey
Newton's laws that are real, which is tantamount to
the assumption of absolute motion in a more rigid
sense even than Newton's. For it is quite certain
that a has motions relatively to other bodies, since
other bodies have motions relatively to a ; though
ex hypothesi it will not, like other bodies, have one
definite relative rest or motion to which Newton's

1 Principles of Mathematics, Chap, lviii. p. 491.


280 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

laws will apply, a in fact, like all other bodies, will
have a large number of relative motions at the same
time ; but, unlike other bodies, there will not be one
of its relative motions that can be picked out as obey-
ing Newton's laws.

The trouble about Neumann's body a is that it is
as incapable of being perceived directly as the points
of absolute space. Hence it makes it no easier to see
how the laws of Mechanics could have been discovered
and justified by empirical observations. If a be
essential to the laws of mechanics, then those laws
must tacitly assert relations to a. But the laws of
mechanics must have been induced from empirical
observations of motions relative to bodies other than
a. Now this must mean that regularities are dis-
covered when we refer motions to some bodies
A, B, C ... etc. Hence the observed regularities are
regularities in motions relative to A or B or C ....
Thus the argument for a wiU have to be as follows :
If you replace the motions relative to ^ or i? or C
by motions relative to a body a and suppose that
these relative motions obey the Newtonian laws you
will be able to explain the observed regularities in
motions relative to A and B and C .... But I fail to
see that this furnishes any evidence for the existence
of a ; all that we know is that, relative to it, we can
ascribe such velocities in such directions to observable ,
bodies that, when subjected to the Newtonian laws,
they will account for the observable relative motions
of the bodies. But we must note that, when we
have assumed the Newtonian laws and the body a,
we have still to fix the Newtonian masses and forces
and the particular velocities and directions of the
assumed motions relative to a, so that the results
shall agree with the observed relative motions. Can


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 281

we suppose that agreement with observed regularities
will suffice to determine all these variables, and to
prove the truth of the laws, and to prove the existence
of a ? The fact is that if the Newtonian laws be
true of some relative motion there must be regu-
larities of some kind amongst motions relative to any
body in the universe that you choose to take, and,
since all relative motions are equally real, the various
laws thus reached will be merely mathematical trans-
formations of each other. 1 The sole advantage of
the Newtonian system wfth a body a will be that
the laws will be much simpler. But this is n-ot the
slightest ground for believing in the existence of
the body a. To do so on such grounds would be
strictly comparable to holding that, because the equa-
tion of a curve becomes simpler by suitable changes
of axes and shifting of origin, there is reason to
believe that the particular position of the origin and
the particular inclinations of the axes that give the
simplest equation are real in a sense in which other
axes and origins are not. Thus I conclude that
Neumann is quite wrong in comparing the evidence
for the reality of a to that for the reality of the ether.
He is no doubt nearer the mark when he says that
it is more comparable to the electric fluids ; for the
electric fluids are merely mathematical fictions, which
however have a slightly better claim to be considered
as possible realities thah a.

In fact we can come to a general conclusion about
all efforts to state the Newtonian laws in terms of
relative motion. Either they mean that, if we take
all motions relatively to axes defined by certain per-
ceptible bodies like 'fixed' stars, Newton's laws are
approximately obeyed. Or they mean that we can
so replace the perceived relative motions by motions


282 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

relative to an imaginary body that, if we assume that
these motions obey the Newtonian laws, we can
account for all the observed relative motions. This,
however, will not give the smallest reason for supposing
that the imagined body is real or that the Newtonian
laws are truer than others that would result if the
motions were taken relatively to some other body. It
will merely tell us that, in so far as the results of this
hypothesis agree with the observed relative motions,
there will be some laws connecting the motions of
bodies relative to any body that we choose to take,
which will be compatible with the Newtonian laws
and will be merely mathematical transformations of
them, but will be much more complex. The Newtonian
laws and the imagined body will be comparable, not
to a fruitful scientific hypothesis which is constantly
verified by experience ; but to a happy choice of axes
and origin which renders otherwise intractable problems
soluble. That would not of course be any disparage-
ment to the Newtonian laws nor to the genius of their
discoverer. It would still have been one of the most
important discovei^ies ever made that such a trans-
formation can be found. But it would be more than
this. For, in connecting all the observed regularities
in the motions of bodies relative to other bodies, it
would have shown that there are general laws con-
necting all motions, no matter to what body they are
taken as relative. Otherwise it would be perfectly
possible that there should be motions that obey no
laws ; and this would also involve the proposition that
the motions of all bodies relatively to some bodies were
without regularity.

But, it may be said, if a be purely imaginary, what
is the use of calling it a body 1 Have not the axes
in a become indistinguishable from the supposed axes in


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 283

absolute space ? Moreover, as Mr Russell asks, if the
axes be material how can you deny that they may be
subject to forces ? And, if they be subject to forces,
they will be accelerated and therefore will not be axes
relative to which Newton's laws will hold. Mr Russell
remarks that the question whether all bodies be
subject to forces must be at least significant, and
that this is fatal to the relative view. Now I do
not think that this is a fau- argument against the
theory in question, because it seems to me to rest on
the assumption of the opposite view. If Newton's
laws be really laid down for motions relative to
absolute space then it is reasonable to hold that they
must be true or false whatever bodies we may be
considering, and that it must be always significant to
ask this question. But suppose we were to put the
laws in the form that they hold as far as we can
gather for the motions of all observable bodies relative
to axes defined by the fixed stars. It would follow
from this that if the laws hold rigidly of the motions
of other bodies the fixed stars cannot be acted on by
forces. What would the statement mean then, which
we should be much more likely to admit, that the
fixed stars too are very probably acted on by forces ?
If we are going to use ' forces ' in the same sense as
before and in the only one that Mr Russell could
admit, it would mean : Very probably the fixed stars
do move with accelerated motions relative to axis for
motions relative to which the Newtonian laws hold.
Now the only axes for motions relative to which we
have any reason to suppose the Newtonian laws hold
are defined by the fixed stars themselves. And it is
quite certain that the stars cannot be accelerated
relative to axes defined by themselves. Hence the
meaning of the phrase would be : Very likely there


284 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

are bodies such that, if axes be defined by them, the
fixed stars have accelerations relatively to those axes
which obey Newton's laws. This would of course
assure us that our original belief that motions of
observable bodies relative to axes defined by the
fixed stars obey the Newtonian laws cannot be strictly
accurate. Hence we can always give a meaning to
Mr Bussell's question on a purely relative theory.
His question is : ' Are your bodies of reference /3i
subject to Newtonian forces or not ? ' We answer
(1) that this question, on the relative theory, must
mean : Are there any bodies of reference ^S^ relative
to which your bodies of reference ySi have accelerations
that obey Newton's laws ? And (2) the answer to
this question is {a) that, if you hold that the ob-
servable bodies X which you said obeyed Newton's
laws for their motions relative to ^^ really obey them
accurately, then there cannot be a set of bodies /3^
relative to which the bodies /Sj have accelerations that
obey Newton's laws. In that case the bodies jSj are not
subject to Newtonian forces. But (b) if, on the other
hand, you admit — as of course you must do — that the
motions of the other bodies X relative to axes defined
by ^1 can only be known to obey Newton's laws
within the limits of experimental error, then it is
perfectly possible that there may be a set of bodies
/Sa relative to which both the bodies ySj and the bodies
X are accelerated according to Newtonian laws, but
that the nature of their respective motions is such
that the motions of X relative to /8i also approximately
obey Newton's laws. In this case the bodies /Sj may
be subject to Newtonian forces. Of course the same
sort of question may be asked of ^^ and the same sort
of answer can be given and so on ad indefinitum.
But I do not see that there is anything objectionable


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 285

in such a regress ; it certainly makes no difference to
mechanics as an empirical science, and Mr Russell's
question can be made significant on the relative theory
of any set of bodies of which he chooses to ask it.

There is one further point to notice before leaving
this subject. The relativist is not obliged in fact, and
least of all on Mr Russell's theories of causation in
general and in mechanics, to make his axes real
bodies. What he wants is to find such axes as will
give the laws of the actual relative motions of bodies
in the world in the simplest possible form. If he can
simplify his laws by taking to define his axes bodies
which he merely imagines in places where no bodies
actually are and by ascribing such relative motions to
them with respect to the real bodies in the universe as
are compatible with the relative motions of the latter,
he is at perfect liberty to do so. For instance, it
would be perfectly legitimate, after we have found
that the first law of motion is approximately obeyed
for motions relative to the fixed stars and have gone
on to discover that the fixed stars are actually in
relative motion to each other, to ask ourselves whether
we cannot, by imagining bodies in places where they
cannot be observed and ascribing to them certain
motions relative to the real bodies in the universe
which are compatible with the latter's actual motions
relative to each other, get a set of axes such that
the motions which we must ascribe to real bodies
relative to them accurately obey the First Law.
There are only two plausible objections that could
be brought against this. (1) It might be said that
the accelerations relative to imaginary bodies are
imaginary accelerations and therefore cannot be the
efiects of real causes nor the causes of real effects.
But, as Mr Russell well shows, on any view of


286 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

mechanics this difficulty, if it be a difficulty, will
arise over the resolution and composition of forces ;
so it is no special objection to the relativist theory.
But actually when we have banished the view that
causation involves activity and have grasped the
fact that it means nothing but laws, the difficulty
vanishes. If the laws can be more simply stated in
terms of motions that do not really take place than
in terms of any that do there is no objection to using
the simpler form when you know that you can always
get back to the actual motions when you wish. The
imaginary bodies and their imaginary motions are to
be regarded as parameters, and the fact that they do
not exist in nature is no more reason for refusing to
state laws of nature in terms of them than is the fact
that the cycloidal arches of Westminster Bridge were
not actually made by rolling circles on straight lines
a reason why an engineer should not simplify his
calculations about them by imagining them so pro-
duced and introducing parameters accordingly. (2) It
might be objected that if you introduce imaginary
bodies and motions you might as well introduce
absolute space. To this the answer is simple. If you
only mean that as a mathematical device the state-
ment of laws in terms of absolute space is as good
as the statement in terms of imaginary bodies and
motions we may agree in the main. But you must not
suppose that this proves the reality of absolute space
any more than it proves that of the imagined bodies
and motions. And the relativist might reasonably
add that his plan involves a less violent effort of
imagination, since we are acquainted directly with
correlates to real bodies and real relative motions,
whilst we have no direct experience of anything corre-
sponding to real points and real absolute motions.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 287

But of course with these objections removed the
theory of the relativity of motion is still by no means
out of the wood. There are first of all the supposed
experimental arguments for absolute rotation which
have to be considered ; and then there is an argument
for the necessity of absolute translation as being what
we really mean by motion to be discussed ; and finally
we must ask by what positive arguments the theory
of the relativity of motion proposes to support its
position.

We will begin with Newton's bucket, and the
paradoxes that have been held to spring from a denial
of absolute translation. One very startling paradox
is mentioned by Neumann\ He points out that if
we take the case of a material point revolving round
another under their mutual attraction and imagine
all the other bodies in the universe annihilated it
would follow that the two points must run into
each other along the straight line determined by
them at the moment at which this cosmic disaster
happened. For, on the relative theory, all motions
must be changes of distance between points or of
angles determined by at least three points. Now
the last possibility vanishes because there are no
longer three points in the universe. Hence the result
follows that the two particles will now run into each
other according to the ordinary law of attraction. I con-
fess I do not see why the relative theory should make
difficulties for itself by talking of ' material points.'
This particular trouble would not arise in so acute
a form if you considered two finite bodies like the
sun and the earth ; for you could define a plane in
the sun by taking three marks on it and then observe
the change of angle between it and the line joining

1 Op. cit. p. 28.


288 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

one of the spots to the centre of the earth. But of
course this is a part of the general difficulty about
any relative theory. If it makes its points finite and
perceptible you cannot talk of the distance and the
plane that they define. And, if you make them
material points, then, though you have avoided this
difficulty, your points have ceased to be perceptible
and it is difficult to see what advantage you now
have over the absolute theory of space. But this is
a question for geometry rather than for mechanics.
Still we shall see that it is impossible to state the
third law or to apply the laws of motion to rotating
bodies without introducing particles, so that Neumann's
paradox is a well-founded one.

But the more celebrated argument for absolute
rotation is Newton's bucket experiment. Everyone
knows what this is. A bucket with water in it is
rotated about its axis. ( 1 ) The bucket rotates relatively
to the water and the surface of the latter remains
level. (2) The water finally takes up the rotation of
the bucket. There is then no relative motion between
the bucket and the water, but the surface of the latter
becomes depressed in the middle and assumes a para-
boloidal form. (3) The bucket is now stopped and
the water goes on rotating. It is now rotating
relatively to the bucket and it still retains the para-
boloidal form. (4) Finally, the water ceases to rotate
relatively to the bucket, and the surface is once more
flat. This experiment, Newton held, distinguished
between absolute and relative rotation and gave a
measure of the former. We will discuss these two
arguments in turn.

To begin with Neumann's. If Neumann's assump-
tion that all the bodies in the universe be annihilated
be taken literally it is clear that it must include the


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 289

annihilation of the body a. For the two particles
that are left cannot possibly be the body a, since that
must consist of at least four particles. But, since
Neumann holds that the laws of mechanics can only
be stated in terms of motions relative to a he goes too
far in saying that the particles would run together
along the straight line joining them at the moment
according to the law of gravitation. For to know
how they would run together involves an integration
based on the assumption that the first law of motion
stUl holds, and Neumann has been insisting that that
law is meaningless until we introduce a. But we may
agree that the particles must keep to this straight line
however they may move in it. What one does not
quite see is what relevance the whole example has to
Neumann's particular theory. For Neumann's theory
is a particular account of the statement of Newton's
laws in terms of relative motion. This particular
paradox might be valid as a ground for rejecting
relative motion altogether, but it cannot be any
ground for accepting Neumann's particular theory of
the body a ; all that could result from it would be
that the most terrible consequences would follow the
annihilation of the body a when we are given the
relativity of aU motion and a's peculiar position among
bodies.

But the question is : Does this paradox, which
certainly proves nothing in favour of Neumann's
theory, prove something in favour of the theory
of absolute rotation which contradicts Neumann's ?
Mach^ holds that it does not. He accuses Neumann
of ' making a meaningless assumption for the purpose
of eliminating a contradiction,' and of ' making too

1 Prindplesof Mechanics, 'Eng.Tra.ns.f. 572. [He is discussing another
argument of Neumann's, but it is quite parallel to the present one.]

B. p. 19


290 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

free a use of intellectual experiment.' I suppose that
the ' contradiction ' is to be found in the two proposi-
tions : (1) The existence of other bodies not exerting
forces cannot be relevant to the motion of a body, and
(2) that, if the relative theory of motion be true, the
annihilation of all other bodies does change the motion
of the remaining two. The ' meaningless assumption '
must be the denial of the relative theory. It is im-
possible, however, to agree that there is any contra-
diction to be removed, on the relative theory ; and
I do not see that either Neumann or Mach (who
accept the relative theory) can possibly hold that there
is. It is merely forgotten as usual that, on the relative
theory, every body has at the same time a number
of different motions in different directions, according
to the body to which the motion is taken as relative.
When any bodies are taken to cease to exist the
motions relative to these naturally cease to exist also.
But the other proposition which asserts that the dis-
appearance of bodies not exerting forces is irrelevant
means that it is irrelevant to motions relative to a
Newtonian frame of reference. If the bodies that
constitute this disappear too then naturally the New-
tonian laws cease to apply, since the motions to which
alone they apply have ceased to exist. But there is
no contradiction in this to the other statement. There
is merely a paradox because unsophisticated persons
do not believe that motion is purely relative to other
bodies. Thus the whole question is whether this
belief which makes Neumann's result a paradox does
or does not rest on a 'meaningless assumption.' To
assert that it does is to assert without proof that
what nearly everyone believes is not only false but
meaningless.

The other criticism of Mach's is worthy of more


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 291

serious consideration. Apparently Mach's objection
is that this result rests on too violent an abstraction.
He says : ' When experimenting in thought it is
permissible to modify unimportant circumstances in
order to bring out new features in a given case ; but
it is not to be antecedently assumed that the universe
is without influence on the phenomenon in question \'
This is clearly very unsatisfactory. ' Unimportant ' is
purely subjective in this reference ; apparently things
become important when the abstraction of them lands
Mach's theories in paradoxes. But then their im-
portance is relative to Mach rather than to the
universe at large. In fact the whole argument is
irrelevant. Either motion is relative, as Mach be-
lieves, or it is not. If so then all bodies in the
universe are equally relevant and Neumann's result
follows strictly. If not^ we may certainly agree with
Mach that the laws of mechanics which have been
induced from motions that took place in presence of
the rest of the material universe would very likely not
hold when there were only two bodies in it. But that
is not the least ground for supposing that the laws
that hold under these circumstances would be such
that the bodies would move in absolute space in the
same way as they would on the relative theory when
there were only two bodies left. If absolute motion
be a 'meaningless assumption' this would be a meanings
less suggestion ; and if not, there is no reason why
the laws of absolute motion when there are only two

1 Log. cit. (the italics are Mach's).

2 I take the object of Mach's argument to be to show that Neumann's
paradox is not really so very paradoxical, because, even if we assume abso-
lute motion, we have no right to assume that, when the universe is reduced
to two bodies, the laws induced from such a widely different universe as
ours would apply. It is on this view of his meaning that I discuss the
passage.

19—2


292 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

bodies in the universe should agree with those of
relative motion under like circumstances, when it is
notorious that, for many relative motions, they do not
when there are more bodies. Mach's arguments in fact
are both logically fallacious, one is a petitio principii
and the other an ignoratio elenchi. The whole paradox
arises out of the fact that we instinctively believe that
motion is not purely relative, and the whole question
is whether this belief in any form can be justified or
refiited.

Before we discuss this question, however, we must
consider Newton's bucket. This celebrated experiment,
together with gyroscopes and Foucault's pendulum,
has been the great argument used by believers in
absolute rotation, among whom we may mention
Newton, Kant (in a peculiar and characteristic modi-
fication). Maxwell, Streintz, and Mr Russell. What
does the experiment immediately prove? It proves
that the relative rotation of the water and the bucket
is irrelevant to the shape of the surface of the water.
The water is flat when both bucket and water are at
rest relative to the earth, and paraboloidal when both
are moving with the same velocity relatively to it.
Hence both states are compatible with relative rest of
the bucket and the water. On the other hand both
are also compatible with relative motion of the two.
The point that is relevant to the shape of the surface
is the motion of the water relative to something other
than the bucket. I must confess that this seems to me to
be perfectly compatible with the relative theory. The
water might weU become curved when it moved rela-
tively to the fixed stars, but have its shape quite
indifierent to its motion relative to the bucket. So
far I agree with Mach. But he then proceeds to add
the statement that : ' No one is competent to say how


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 293

the experiment would turn out if the sides of the
vessel were increased in thickness and mass till they
were ultimately several leagues thicks' The precise
relevance of this remark I have never, after the
longest consideration, been able to fathom. So far as
I can see Mach's position would be that we can account
for the motions that are perceived by Newton's laws
if, wherever Newton uses absolute space, velocity, or
acceleration, we substitute position, velocity, or ac-
celeration relative to axes defined by the fixed stars.
This is at least a plausible position ; but, if it is to
be of any use, it must enable us to give at least a
probable account of what would happen if the walls
of the bucket became several leagues thick. If Mach
merely wishes to tell us that we cannot be perfectly
certain what will happen under circumstances that we
cannot observe this is no doubt quite true, but it is
surely rather platitudinous. But how the proposi-
tion that we cannot be certain of what will happen
under a given set of circumstances can increase
the probability of any proposition except that we
live in an uncertain world is more than I can under-
stand.

I conclude then that, whilst Newton's bucket
might possibly be a test between absolute and relative
rotation for those people who already believe in
absolute rotation, there is nothing in it that is in-
compatible with a purely relative theory of motion,
and therefore it cannot decide between the two rival
theories.

We pass then to the Foucault pendulum which
is supposed to prove to us that the earth rotates
absolutely. Let us once more begin by considering
what it is precisely that we observe in the Foucault

1 Principles of Mechanics, p. 232.


294 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

experiment. We swing a large pendulum and we
note the plane in which it begins to swing'. We will
suppose that we make a chalk-mark on the floor in
the line where this plane cuts it. As time goes on, if
we draw lines on the same principle we shall find that
they make angles with each other. From a considera-
tion of these angles and the lapse of time we can
calculate the velocity of the earth about its axis ; and
we find that this value agrees with that reached from
observations made on the fixed stars. It is surely
perfectly plain that what we observe is not absolute
rotation, but the change of position of a plane with
respect to its former position as marked out by
material lines. Hence the conclusion that the earth
rotates about its axis with a certain absolute angular
velocity must be deduced irom these observed premises
by reasoning. The results of that reasoning must
contain a reference to absolute time and space which
was clearly not contained in the premises which were
observed. But new entities cannot get into a con-
clusion unless they were introduced somewhere in the
course of the reasoning as supplementary assumptions.
As a matter of fact they were of course introduced in
the laws of motion and in particular in the first law.
For it was on the first law and on that alone that
it was decided that the plane in which the pendulum
swings is fixed in absolute space. Thus the Foucault
pendulum only proves absolute rotation if you have
already assumed laws of motion in terms of absolute
space and time. By itself it merely exhibits a par-
ticular case of relative motion.

But, it will be asked, does not the fact that the
angular velocity deduced from this experiment agrees

' I shall assume that the pendulum is swinging at the N. Pole. This
makes no difference of principle and simplifies the statement.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 295

with that reached from the observations of fixed stars
prove anything ? Certainly it proves something, but
not, so far as I can see, anything about absolute space
and motion. What it proves is that the plane in
which the pendulum swings is, within the limits of
experimental error, at rest with respect to axes
determined by the fixed stars. This tells us that,
if the sky had always been covered with clouds, we
might have reached Newton's laws if we had referred
all motions to systems of coordinates defined by the
planes of Foucault's pendulums and the perpendiculars
to them. This seems to be the best that can be said
for Streintz's^ position that we must define what he
calls Fundamental Bodies and Fundamental Systems
by their non-rotation as proved by gyroscopes and
pendulums and then enunciate the Newtonian laws
with respect to them. But Streintz ruins his position
by coming to a statesmanlike compromise (worthy
of the best traditions of English public life) and
accepting absolute rotation, whilst he holds that
absolute translation is meaningless. This is a double
error. In the first place we have seen that such ex-
periments do not prove absolute rest or motion apart
from the assumption of Newton's laws in terms of
absolute space and motion. In the second place these
laws are stated in terms of absolute translation, which
Streintz says is meaningless. And, finally, if you
accept absolute rotation you have accepted absolute
direction at any rate, and, although this does not
positively necessitate absolute space, it does not seem
to be an easier assumption or a more likely one.

I hope that I have now shown conclusively that it
is circular to pretend that such experiments prove
absolute rotation ; they merely give a ground for

1 Die phygikalischen Grundlagen der Meehanik, pp. 24 and 25.


296 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

deciding between absolute and relative motions to
those people who have already accepted absolute
motion and formulated the laws of mechanics in terms
of it.

Mach uses his well-known argument against the
Foucault pendulum experiment that it cannot be
said to prove that the earth would rotate even if
there were no fixed stars. He says that : ' The
universe is not twice given with an earth at rest and
an earth in motion ; but only once with its relative
motions alone determinable. It is accordingly not
permitted to us to say how things would be if the
earth did not rotated' Mr RusselP severely criticises
this argument, but I cannot accept his criticism as
it stands. After repeating the first of the two
sentences that I have quoted from Mach, Mr Russell
adds : ' Hence any argument that the rotation of the
earth could be inferred if there were no heavenly
bodies is futile.' I do not know if Mach drew this
conclusion in his first edition from which Mr Kussell
quotes. As will be seen in the quotation which
I give his conclusion is dififerent in the English trans-
lation. His argument seems to me to be the perfectly
sound one that the earth is never given (i.e. in ex-
perience) as absolutely at rest or in motion, and that
he does not see how we can pass from the observed
relative rest or motion to a supposed absolute rest or
motion divided in certain proportions between the two
terms. The conclusion that Mr Russell gives and
that I am unable to find in my edition of Mach is
obviously foolish on Mach's own principles. It is in
fact ambiguous. It might mean either that if there
were no heavenly bodies there might be nothing

* Principles of Mechanics, Tp. 'SSH. (Italics are Mach's.)
2 Principles of Mathematics, p. 492.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 297

relatively to which the earth could rotate, or else that,
if the heavenly bodies ceased to exist, the earth might
cease to rotate relatively to something that remains
observable whether there be heavenly bodies or not,
and relatively to which it did rotate when there were
heavenly bodies. The first alternative is disproved
by the Foucault experiment, since that does give an
observable relative rotation whether the fixed stars
can be observed or not. But if Mach, as interpreted
by Mr RusseU, merely means that, if there were no
heavenly bodies, the Foucault experiment might cease
to give the same result, I really do not see how we
could disprove this, or how it is relevant to the question
of absolute or relative motion. It is in fact a re-
petition of Mach's argument against Neumann which
we have already seen to be intrinsically valid but a
platitude, and, in the use to which it is put, an ignoratio
elenchi.

I must confess that I do not understand Mr
Russell's condemnation of the argument in itself. For
he condemns it, not because he thinks that its present
use is an ignoratio elenchi, but because he holds that
it rests on an entirely false view of the nature of
mechanics as a science. He says : ' The logical basis
of the argument is that all propositions are essentially
concerned with actual existents and not with entities
which may or may not exist. For if... the whole
dynamical world with its laws can be considered
without reference to existence then it can be no part
of the meaning of those laws to assert that the matter
to which they apply exists... \' This seems to me
a very curious argument. I can only meet it by
asking whether it be or be not true that mechanics

1 Principles of Mathematics, p. 493.


298 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

is a science the laws of which are based on empirical
observations. Mr Russell at least is hardly likely to
deny this. Now those empirical observations have all
been made in the presence of the heavenly bodies.
Also all laws based on observation are only probable,
and it is generally and reasonably held that their
probability diminishes as the state of affairs to which
it is proposed to apply them departs more and more
from that under which they were originally observed
to be obeyed. Hence it seems to me that Mach is
perfectly correct in holding that it is quite possible
that the Foucault experiment might not succeed if all
the heavenly bodies were annihilated. Such a con-
clusion, as we have seen, is not relevant to what he
is trying to prove, but it seems to me a valid con-
clusion as against Mr Russell's criticisms. It does
not rest at all on the logical basis that ' all pro-
positions are essentially concerned with existents ' but
on the proposition that all general laws that rest on
empirical evidence must depend for their truth on ob-
servations of the existent, that they can never be more
than probable, and that their probability diminishes
the further the state of affairs under consideration
differs from that from observations of which they were
originally induced. Nor does this conclusion conflict
in the slightest degree with the fact that rational
dynamics makes no mention of the fixed stars, or
that the problems with which works on rational
dynamics are full have no reference to real distribu-
tions of matter. For what is Rational Dynamics ?
It is the mathematical results that follow from the
assumption of Newton's laws. True, Newton's laws,
on the relative theory, are those that are found to
hold of the existent world for those motions that take
place relatively to axes defined by the fixed stars.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 299

But this does not prevent rational dynamics from
dropping the fixed stars, replacing them by axes in an
assumed absolute space, and supposing that all motions
relative to such axes obey the same laws as those that
are observed to hold in the real world for motions
relative to the fixed stars, and working out the
results of these assumptions for any assigned imaginary
distribution of masses. You might perfectly well
make up a non-Newtonian rational dynamics, and
the only difference would be that its results would
not be applicable to the motions of real bodies rela-
tive to the fixed stars. In fact we may end this
discussion by proposing the following dilemma to
Mr Russell. Either Newtonian dynamics is purely
rational or not. If so I fail to see how it can throw
any light on the existent and how Mr Russell can be
justified in such statements as that Foucault's pen-
dulum and Newton's bucket prove the existence of
absolute space and motion. But if not, then, though
no appeal to the existent is needed in proving its
conclusions fi:om its premises, you cannot be sure that
the conclusions would apply to an existent so different
from that from which the premises were originally
induced as a universe that consisted of nothing but
the earth with all the heavenly bodies annihilated
would be from the total universe that we know and
observe.

I agree then with Mach that none of the argu-
ments so far produced are incompatible with a purely
relative theory of motion, so long as the theory under-
stands itself.

Experimental arguments from the motions of matter
then wUl not help us, and we must pass to other ones.
Let us begin by asking on what grounds precisely
relativists deny absolute space and motion. I think


300 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

there are three. The first is that they cannot be
perceived and that we can do without them. The
second is that they are meaningless. And the third
is that space involves contradictions. Arguments like
the second are always cheap and easy and rather
contemptible. Taken literally the argument asks us
to believe that the words ' absolute space ' and ' ab-
solute motion' are Tuere noises or marks on paper
which convey nothing to anybody. The best way to
refute this opinion is actually to state what the
difference between the two views means, and this
I do lower down. In the meanwhile it is only
necessary to note (what many people forget) that to
say that absolute motion is meaningless and to produce
further arguments against it is inconsistent. You
cannot refute a noise or overthrow a mark by a
syllogism ; you must confine yourself to saying that
you do not understand what Newton and Euler and
other supporters of absolute motion were talking
about, and that you strongly suspect that they
themselves did not know what they were talking
about. And you will run some risk of having
the first statement believed and the second doubted.
The third point need not detain us either. The argu-
ments to prove that space cannot be real because, if
it were, contradictory propositions would be true
about it, all rest on sheer errors about infinity and
continuity. For their refutation we have merely to
refer to the relevant chapters in Mr Russell's Principles
of Mathematics.

The sole argument then that is left to the relativists
against the belief of common-sense in absolute motion
is that it is not perceptible. Is this any argument at
all ? It will be remembered that we have tried to
show in the earlier parts of the present essay that in


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 301

all probability nothing that is perceptible is real.
Hence we should be more disposed to believe that
absolute motion is an appearance if we could perceive
it than to believe that it cannot be real because it
is imperceptible. We must therefore try to show
what is meant by the distinction between absolute
and relative motion on our view. We have expressed
a belief in the existence of a real counterpart to
those spatial relations which we agree in perceiving
by the sense of touch and to those objects of visual
perception which science, based on the belief of a real
counterpart to tactual space, is able to justify. But
what is perceived by sight or touch always has other
qualities beside spatial ones. The spatial qualities
that we perceive involve relations, and those relations
must have terms. Those terms we took to be real
but unknown qualities in real counterpart relations,
and we supposed that the changes in these caused
our perceptions of colour and temperature and also
of perceived spatial relations. Now the question of
absolute space for us simply is this : Do the real
correlates to perceived spatial relations hold directly
between these unknown terms or is there a continuum
of other terms between which real relations eternally
hold, so that the correlates of perceived and change-
able spatial relations are really complex and arise
from the terms between which they hold being ' at '
now one and now another of this continuum of terms
which stand in eternal relations to each other 1 The
latter supposition is what would correspond to absolute
space on our theory. We may at once refer to these
supposed terms as 'geometrical points,' since it is
admitted that such points could not be perceived.
We can at least see that the question at issue is not
meaningless. We cannot perceive either points, if


302 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

there be such things, or those other terms between
which we believe the relations correlated to the felt
spatial relations hold. But, whilst points cause no
perception in us at all we believe that the other terms
or events in them are the causes of perceptions. We
will call the latter set of terms ' material qualities,'
The question then can be put as follows : Granted
that there are material qualities in certain real rela-
tions closely correlated with those spatial relations
that we perceive by touch between sensible things, and
granted that events in these material qualities cause
our perceptions of pieces of matter of various shapes
and sizes and in various motions, are we to say that
these real correlated relations are simple and variable
relations between such material qualities ? The
affirmative answer to this question is the relative
theory. The other alternative is that there is a real
continuum of geometrical points which eternally stand
to each other in certain relations and do not produce
any perception in us. The real correlated relations to
the spatial relations that we perceive will then not
be simple but will arise out of a certain relation of
material qualities to variable geometrical points + the
eternal relations of these points to each other. This
is the absolute theory in terms of our view of per-
ception and of the probable nature of the real. Since,
on our theory, we cannot perceive either geometrical
points or material qualities, the fact that geometrical
points are imperceptible is very much less important
than it might be on some other theories.

It will be said, however, that the admission that,
unlike material qualities, geometrical points and their
eternal relations produce no perceptions in us, takes
away aU reason for believing in them. But this is
not strictly true. For common-sense holds that not


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 303

all motion is relative, and, if it be correct in that
opinion, something like geometrical points will be needed
to make our theory correspond to the views which
common-sense holds and can justify.

The question then is : Can common-sense justify
this belief? Is it ultimate, or does it depend on bad
reasoning or on psychological causes that are com-
petent to produce the behef but are equally or only
compatible with the truth of the relative theory ?
If the belief were ultimate it would, I think, be very
unwise not to give due weight to it, since we have
now seen that there is absolutely no argument
against its possibility. For the question turns on
what is meant by motion ; and that, after all, must
ultimately rest on what people find, after careful
reflexion on all the possibilities, that they actually do
mean by it. If, after looking at all the alternatives,
people still think that it is essential to what they
mean by motion to be able to say of two bodies
that move relatively to each other that the real
motion of one is so much and that of the other so
much, or that one really moves and the other really
stands still, it would be unwise to accept the relative
theory which makes such statements falsehoods.

Now it is not to be denied that, if bodies have
absolute motions at all, people constantly make mis-
takes as to what they are. We feel instinctively that
the earth stands stUl and that motions relative to
it are absolute motions. But the fact that people
often or always make mistakes in assigning the
magnitude of a quality q in given cases, does not
prove that there is no such quality as q, or that it is
not an essential part of the notion of that process in
a particular case of which it was wrongly assigned.
The very fact that people always assign it somewhere


304 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

and in some degree in the process shows that they
at least believe that the quality in question is in
general essentially bound up with the meaning of the
process. It might very well be possible to explain
their mistakes by psychological causes without being
able to explain away that characteristic about which
their judgments were mistaken.

In the first place, it is clear that in many cases of
perceived motion something is perceived in one body
which cannot be observed in the others. Thus, if I see
someone walking up the Hall there is a positive per-
ceptible difference from what I should see if the end
of the Hall moved toward him, although, on the
relative theory there can be no difference as far as
motion is concerned, since that merely consists in the
shortening of the distance between the man and the
wall. Thus, it seems necessary to hold that, even if
we cannot perceive absolute motion, we can perceive
distinctions in the case of two bodies that move
relatively to each other which are interpreted in
terms of absolute motion. This, however, need not
trouble the relativist. For, in the case under dis-
cussion there are differences of relative motion that
account for the difference perceived. The man who
is said to be ' really ' moving really is moving relatively
to my body, whilst the wall at the end of the Hall
is not. Hence, while it might remain true that all
motion is relative, still the man who is said by
common-sense to move will indeed have a relative
motion which the end of the Hall, which common-
sense calls stationary, will not have. Again, we are
quite sure, with respect to our own bodies, whether
we move or something else moves relatively to us ;
but then the actual perceptible difference is that,
whilst in both cases we perceive the same relative


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 305

motion between our own body and the other one, in
the one case we also have certain muscular sensations
and perceive that we are also moving relatively to
other bodies, and in the other we have no muscular
sensations and no perception of relative motion between
our own body and other bodies than the given one,
whilst the given one is now perceived to be in relative
motion to others beside our own.

I do not think that there can be any doubt that
there is a peculiar perception both tactual and visual
which we can call perception of motion. And motion
so perceived is undoubtedly absolute, in the sense
that the direct object of the perception is not the
mere change of a relation between two bodies but is
ascribed as a quality to one or both of them. But
all this is in the realm of appearances. When you
come to ask what it is in reality that causes the
perception of such appearances you can always, it
seems to me, explain them just as well in terms of
real relative motion as in terms of real absolute
motion. The belief that motion is absolute, which
common-sense holds, seems to spring from a confusion
between these two different senses of motion ; viz,
motion as the object of a perception and therefore
an appearance, and real motion. Apparent, i.e. per-
ceptible, motion is always absolute in the sense
described above. It is always ascribed as a quality
to the moving body or bodies. But our previous
investigations have led us to believe that all such
perceptible qualities are appearances. And, at any
rate, the motion that is thus absolute is not that
which mechanics takes to be absolute. The perceptible
absolute motion of the earth is zero, whilst the per-
ceptible motion of telegraph-posts from a train window
though quite as absolute as any other perceptible

B. p. 20


306 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

motion Is not that which mechanics has to ascribe
to them.

But it is not unnatural that the absoluteness
which attaches to the apparent motions which common -
sense perceives should be carried over into the account
that science gives of the real causes of the per-
ceptions of these appearances ; and so it is supposed
that motion must be absolute in the widely different
meaning that that term has in mechanics. Now the
theory of absolute motion is indeed a possible ex-
planation of these appearances, though, in as far
as it is admitted that the appearances often cause
us to make mistakes about the real absolute motion,
it can hardly be called a completely satisfactory
one. But it is also possible, as we have seen, to
explain these distinctions in the appearances in terms
of purely relative motion -|- muscular sensation. We
must remember that, even if A and B could only
move relatively to each other, so that there were
no sense in saying that it was really A that moved
whilst B stood still, yet there might still be reason
to believe that the cause of the change of their mutual
distance was in one of the terms only, and this would
make a distinction between the two which, owing to
the prejudice carried over from apparent absolute
motion, would come to be held as a mark of real
absolute motion. And I do not think that the phe-
nomena of motion offer us any means of deciding
between the two possible alternatives.

Thus, my conclusion is that common-sense be-
lieves in real absolute motion because it really does
perceive different qualities in moving objects which
depend on motion but are not accounted for by the
merely symmetrical relation of change of distance
between them. But perceptible motion, like all that


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 307

is perceived, is an appearance ; it is not the motion
that is measurable and to which it seems likely that
there directly corresponds a real change in the spatial
counterpart. The real motions that cause the per-
ceptions of these appearances, being called by the
same name, and being so intimately related to the
former, are supposed by a kind of subreption to be
absolute in the sense that each body has its own
motion. When this view is worked out it leads to
the theory of absolute space and motion that I sug-
gested above. And that theory will explain the facts,
and is not meaningless. On the other hand, a theory
of purely relative real motion will equally explain
the apparent absolute motions that people perceive.
Hence the fact that common -sense quite rightly
believes that the motions that it perceives are ab-
solute is no reason why we should think that the
motions with which we deal in science are so. The
question remains a perfectly open one. And we have
already come to the same conclusion from the experi-
mental attempts at a proof of absolute motion. At
the same time it ought to be added that the absolute
theory lays claim to a much greater knowledge about
the real than does the relative one, and therefore
I think that, on philosophic grounds, the relative
theory is to be preferred. For mathematical purposes
the absolute view is undoubtedly better, and we have
seen that problems treated in terms of absolute motion
can be applied to the existing world when for absolute
motion is substituted motion relative to axes defined
by the fixed stars.

We have thus decided in the same sense as
Mach, though by somewhat difiFerent arguments, that
^ a straight line ' for the purposes of the Laws of
Motion means a straight Hne relative to axes defined

20—2


308 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

by the fixed stars, and that ' uniform velocity ' means
velocity that is uniform relative to such axes\ But
now the question arises : What do we mean by uni-
formity 1 We need a discussion about time and its
measurement to answer this question. An uniform
motion is presumably one in which equal spaces are
covered in equal times. But what are equal times,
and how do you know when they are equal ?

We generally measure equal times by the rotation
of the earth. But how do we know that the suc-
cessive rotations of the earth take place in equal
times ? As a matter of fact we do not even believe
it to be strictly true, for we talk of the slow change
of the length of the second so measured owing to the
tidal drag, and attempts have been made to calculate
this change. It must be noted that this is not a
question of whether time be absolute or relative ; the
question is one of measurement which applies equally
to either theory, and rests on the fact that quantities
of duration cannot be moved about in time as metre-
scales can be in space and superposed. We thus seem
to be in the same position as we should be in the
measurement of space if we had to measure a length in
England by considering how long it looks as compared
with what we can remember as to the length of the
standard metre in Paris from the time when we last
saw it. Whether temporal relations be directly be-
tween events, or directly between absolute moments
and only indirectly between events, the fact remains
that it is only the relations between events that can
be observed and measured, and so this difficulty arises
on either view.

1 Subject of course to the possibility of defining axes by means of
imaginary bodies such that motions of real bodies relative to them shall
stUl more accurately obey the First Law.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 309

Neumann' discusses this question. His method is

(i) to state the First Law of Motion in terms of the

same time instead of equal times, and then (ii) to

construct from it a definition of equal times. On this

view the actual statement of the first law becomes :

' Any two bodies A and B under the action of no

forces describe straight lines relative to the body a,

and successive equal lengths of ^'s path correspond

to successive equal lengths of B's path.' You take

any arbitrary distance on ^'s path and note where

B is when A is at the beginning of this distance. You

then note where B is on its path when A is at the

end of this distance. Call these two distances l^ and 4.

You now let A run on to any other position, let us say

IJ from the point from which l^ was measured. When

it reaches this point you note that 5 is at a position

li from the point from which Zj was measured. And

I' I'
you find that, if no forces act upon either, y~T-

This then is Neumann's account of the Law of
Inertia.

From it he now proceeds to give a definition of
equal times. Equal times are those in which a body
under the action of no forces describes equal lengths.
Thus, the point of Neumann's definition is to replace
equal times for one bod}^ by the same time for several
bodies in the statement of the Law of Inertia. That
law then states the relation between successive dis-
tances passed over in the same time by different bodies
all unacted upon by forces. He then defines equality
of time by means of the law of inertia so stated. This
of course does not mean that he defines what is meant
by the equality of two durations, but that he tells us
what is to be taken as the measure of it in mechanics.

1 Op. dt. p. IS et seq.


310 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

Streintz^ criticises Neumann's position as follows.
He says that Neumann's form of the law of inertia
would still be obeyed if, under the action of no forces,
any two bodies obeyed laws of motion of the form
X = Kf{t) and a;' =j^f{t) where / is any function. This
of course is obviously true. Streintz goes on to state
that this is incompatible with Neumann's statement
that equal times are those in which a body under
no forces covers equal spaces. For, he says, all that
we can tell from the fact that a body obeying
Neumann's law of inertia has covered two spaces
x^ — x^ and x^ — x^ which are equal is that

/(g-/(0=/(0-/(0-

I think this criticism rests on a complete mis-
understanding of Neumann's position. He is not
trying to prove from his law of inertia that a body
that obeys it will describe equal spaces in equal times.
He is defining the times in which such a body passes
over equal spaces as equal. It is clearly impossible
to refute a definition ; the best you can do is to show
that it covers some cases where the times are admitted
not to be equal, or leaves out others in which we
believe that the times are equal. But, with Neumann's
definition, Streintz's hypothesis that x = Kf{t) for a
body moving under the action of no forces reduces to
X = Kt. The fact is that Neumann's statement of the
law of inertia is not simply convertible, and Streintz
is quite justified in pointing this out ; but, on the
other, Neumann is also justified in taking a class
of motions which the law says fulfil the conditions
(viz. those performed under the action of no force) and
defining the times which bodies animated with these
motions take to cover equal spaces as equal : provided

' Op. cit. p. 87 et seq.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 311

always that he can pick out this class of motions that
are performed under the action of no force by some
criterion other than their fulfilling the conditions laid
down in the law.

The real criticism on Neumann's definition is that
he does not tell us how to distinguish bodies under the
action of no forces from others. His law of inertia,
as we have how seen, cannot be a criterion of this
untU we have found at least one motion which is
known, independently of that law, to be performed
under the action of no forces. For his statement of
the law merely tells us about the relation between the
corresponding spaces passed over by two bodies both
under the action of no forces.

Streintz^ himself rests the measurement of time
on an axiom, which is that, if any action takes place
twice under exactly the same circumstances, it wiU
always take exactly the same time to accomplish itself
This position needs a little further explanation before
it can be criticised. The example that Streintz gives
shows -that he does not mean that the conditions are
to remain constant throughout the whole of each
example of the process. They may change during it
in any way you like. But at corresponding points of
each process the conditions must be the same. Under
these conditions Streintz considers it axiomatic that
the duration of the two examples of the process will
be identical. The axiom is plausible, and we must
examine it to see whether it may not contain an
implicit circle. What precisely do we mean by 'corre-
sponding points of each process ' ? Clearly not points
at equal times after the beginning of each process ;
for this assumes the measurement of equal times. It
must therefore be held to mean at the same observable

' Op. eit. p. 80 et seq.


312 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

stage of the processes. Thus, if we drop the same
body from the same point above the earth's surface
at different times equal durations will be supposed to
have elapsed each time it reaches the earth, because
it will be supposed to have been subject to the same
conditions at corresponding points in its fall.

The axiom is not therefore logically vicious. On
the other hand, are the circumstances ever the same
in two different experiments, and, if so, how do we
know it ? It is perfectly clear that they never are
precisely the same, and therefore the axiom, even if
true, is useless as it stands as a means of telling when
equal times have elapsed. It would need modification
to the form : If any process can be repeated and, if at
corresponding stages the relevant circumstances are
the same, it will take place in equal times. But what
are ' relevant circumstances ' ? Since ex hypothesi the
two events as such do not differ in any observable
characteristic the only way in which a circumstance
can be relevant is to alter the time between any two
corresponding stages in each of its successive occur-
rences. Hence to say that in corresponding stages
no relevant circumstances are different, just means
that in corresponding stages no circumstances are
different that would make the time between a pair
in one process differ from that between the corre-
sponding pair in the repeated process. So now the
definition of equal times based on the only form in
which the axiom can be applied to their actual
determination is sheerly circular.

Lange' gives a peculiar theory of the nature of
the First Law of Motion both with regard to space
and time. He asserts that his theory of time-measure-
ment is identical with Neumann's in principle. This,

' Die geschichtUche Entwicklung des Bewegungshegriffes.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 313

as we have seen, would be a most serious objection
to it if he happens to be correct in this statement. But
his discussion is much more general than Neumann's
and deserves a short consideration. It is best put in
the second Appendix to the work with which we are
dealing. Lange holds that the full statement of the
First Law involves two conventions and two verifiable
propositions. He says that you must not take the
motions with which mechanics deal as being either
(o) relative to absolute space and absolute time, or
(h) relative to any axes defined by existing bodies or
to actual events. He gives no new arguments for
either position, and the only point that interests us
at present is his discussion as to what these motions
do involve. To answer this question he introduces an
axiom called by him the 'Principle of Particular
Determination.' I had better quote Lange's own
words about this principle. 'Wir haben...ein Theorem,
welches in Bezug auf eine beliebige Anzahl gleichar-
tiger Elemente der wissenschaftlichen Betrachtung. . .
die gleiche Behauptung...aufstellt. Der zum Ver-
standniss dieser Behauptung vorauszusetzende Mass-
stab der quantitativen Bestimmung.,.wird so normirt
dass jenes Theorem fiir eines der Elemente gilt und
zwar eben per conventionem gilt. Der Wahrheits-
gehalt, d.h. das mehr als bloss Conventionelle des
Theorems liegt dann nur darin, dass nach jener auf
Grund eines Elementes erfolgten conventionellen Nor-
mirung des Massstabes das Theorem sofort fiir alle
ubrigen Elemente gilt.'

Now in the First Law we are told that all material
particles left to themselves describe straight lines with
uniform velocity. Lange takes any one particle left
to itself and defines its motion as being one that covers
equal spaces in equal times relatively to a certain set


314 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

of axes. This is conventional. The times are defined
as equal in which this particular particle covers equal
spaces. The experimental part of the law is supposed
to be that every other particle when left to itself
describes relatively to the same axes equal spaces in
times defined as equal by the motion of the first
particle. It follows that the experimental law can
be put in the form : ' If out of all the particles moving
under the action of no force any one be chosen, then
every one of the rest will describe equal spaces whilst
the first describes equal spaces, and the times in
which the first does this are defined as being equal.'
This is practically the same as Neumann's account of
the law of inertia. The definition of equal times as
those in which the assigned particle describes equal
spaces only differs from Neumann's definition by re-
ferring to an assigned particle instead of to any
particle left to itself. I fail to see that this is any
improvement. In fact the whole method of treatment
suffers from the same defect as Neumann's. It has to
assume that you can know when a particle is under
the action of no forces, and it offers no test by which
this can be determined without assuming that you
have been able to determine it independently in at
least one case. Lange's attempt to define a straight
line for the purposes of the first law of motion seems
to me to labour under the same defect and some others
besides. If I understand him aright his position is as
follows. If three material points be shot out together
from a single point of space with their directions not
in one plane and left to themselves they wiU in
general describe curves. You can prove as a mere
matter of geometry that there is always at least one
set of axes relative to which all these curves are
straight lines. The physical part of the law is the


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 315

further assertion that any fourth material point left
to itself wiU describe a straight line relative to axes
so defined. Clearly we have the old trouble about
how you are to judge when material points are left
to themselves apart from the laws of motion. More-
over the statement that the three points are left to
themselves is ambiguous. Does it mean left to their
mutual actions but free from those of any other bodies,
or that each is free from the action of all other bodies ?
Lange might reply that it is of no importance whether
we can tell in particular cases that bodies are left to
themselves, because his object is not to point out an
actual inertial system (this can only be done by
experience) but to define what is meant by such a
system. But this does not meet the objection that
the notion of being 'left to itself enters into the
definition of the system and therefore must presum-
ably be relevant, and yet it must mean 'left to
itself ' not in some vague general way but in a strictly
mechanical sense, and we can only give a meaning
to this afier we have stated and accepted the laws
of motion.

The question then arises : Have we not some
measure of the equality of the duration of two events
which do not completely overlap, independent of the
laws of motion ? It is perfectly clear that people did
measure times and did judge them to be equal or
unequal before the First Law of Motion was thought
of; and there must therefore be some supposed criterion
independent of any assumption as to the presence or
absence of forces. Streintz's axiom, we saw, would
not work as stated, but it seems to be much more
promising than any that w^e have yet noticed. I think,
however, that the best account of the criterion of the
equality of non-coincident durations is to be found in


316 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

an article in Mind^ by Rhodes. It will not do as it
stands, but by introducing certain modifications I
think it can be made fairly satisfactory.

Recurrent events are either isochronous or aniso-
chronous. We want a test for isochronism. Rhodes
says that there is no intrinsic difference between a
series of isochronous events and one of anisochronous
events. He goes so far as to say that there is nothing
in the motion of a pendulum taken alone to make us
believe that it is any more likely to be isochronous
than are the motions of a weather-cock. This, I think,
is exaggerated. It does not seem to me that we lack
all power of making judgments correctly about the
relative magnitudes of durations that do not overlap
completely. The trouble with us is that these judg-
ments are very likely to be affected by subjective
factors, and that to a much greater degree than im-
mediate judgments about spatial equality or inequality.
Further, whUst we can make our immediate judgments
about space almost indefinitely more accurate by means
of measuring-rods — though the assumption of their
constancy of length raises rather difficult problems —
we have not as yet found anything that corresponds to
a measuring-rod for time. It is for this purpose that
we want isochronous recurrent processes. Thus, whilst
I differ from Rhodes in believing that anybody in his
senses would recognise that a pendulum is very much
more nearly isochronous than a weather-cock by merely
looking at the movements of each, I agree that we
want something more than the intrinsic qualities of
the pendulum's motion to assure us that it really is
isochronous. It might be much more nearly so than
the movements of the weather-cock and yet be far
from perfect isochronism.

d, O. S., Vol. X, 1885, 'The Measurement of Time.'


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 317

Rhodes's method of determining isochronism is
as follows. Suppose there is a process P whose
isochronism we want to test. Let P' be any other
process that goes on contemporarily with P. Then,
if P' be recurrent, it is either isochronous or aniso-
chronous. Thus the d, priori possibilities are (i) P
and P' both anisochronous ; (ii) P and P' both
isochronous ; (iii) P isochronous and P' anisochronous ;
and (iv) P anisochronous and P' isochronous. Now
in case (ii) it is certain that to every complete recurrent
event in the process P there will correspond the same
number of events in the process P'. You cannot of
course ensure that it shall be a whole number, but it
will always be the same whole number + the same
fraction of an event. By a fraction of an event we
mean an example of one of the recurrent events that
reaches a certain determinate stage other than the
end one of it. This is a necessary characteristic of
two isochronous recurrent events, whether there be
any causal connexion between them or not. Does
it completely distinguish the case (ii) from all the
other possible cases ! It is clear that it cuts out the
cases (iii) and (iv) entirely. We are left then with
(i). Rhodes of course admits that two anisochronous
series of events might have this quality which two
isochronous series must have. Hence the condition
for isochronism that he has given, though necessary,
is not sufficient. He therefore adds that the two
processes P and P' must be ' independent of each
other.' Unfortunately he does not tell us how this
is to be discovered, and so his theory becomes useless.

I think, however, that we can complete the criterion
in terms of the theory of probability, on the assump-
tion that we can make rough immediate judgments
about the equality or inequality of durations that do


318 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

not entirely overlap. For the present purpose the
statement that P and P' are both isochronous but are
not independent means that each is accelerated or
retarded according to the same law. Now it is fair
to assume that the more diiferent the two processes
are from each other the less likely is this to be the
case. It is not d, priori wildly improbably that all
pendulums are actually retarded according to the same
law even when swinging in vacuo ; but it is very un-
likely that the rotation of the earth, the swings of a
pendulum and the vibrations of an electron are all
retarded according to the same law. Let us call the
proposition 'P is isochronous' pi. Let us denote the
contradictory of a proposition q by q. Let us call the
proposition that to an event in P there always corre-
sponds the same number of events in P', r. Finally
I shall adopt the notation pjq = ' the probability of p
given that q is true.' plf= ' the probability of p
given the knowledge that everyone is supposed to
have before the experiment is performed.

We want to compare p^/r with pi/r. We know
that

r/ptp/ = 0, r/ptpt=0, and rjp^p! =1.
Now p, =p,p,' .Y. p,p!,

. • . Pi/r =p,p,'/r +p,p!lr

^ Pipllfy.rlp,pl p,p[lf%r\p,pl

'T'lf I' If

-hKlf

Again

Pi =p,.p! • V . p,p!.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 319

, • . p^jr =p,p,'lr + p. pljr

_ p.p!lf^Tlp,pl
rif

Hence we have that

p.jr ^ ip.pllf
P4r PiP'If-x- rjp.p! '

Let us now consider this fraction critically. The first
point to notice is that all the terms in it, being values
of probabilities, must be proper fractions. Hence there
is a general expectation that the denominator which
is the product of two fractions will be pretty small.
Further, from what we have already said about the
possibility of judging roughly of isochronism by im-
mediate inspection, and in view of the fact that the
experiment is being used on two processes that appear
to be isochronous to see whether they reaUy are so,
we see that PipZ/f is very much greater than ppijf.
It follows that pijr must be very much greater than
p.jr unless rjp.p! is practically equal to one. But it is
perfectly obvious that rjp^p! is a very small fraction,
since it is only under very special circumstances that
two non-isochronous series of events should be so
connected that to every complete event in one there
shall correspond the same number of events in the
other. It is clear from observing series of events
which immediate inspection shows to be anisochronous
that in general this connexion does not hold. And
from what we have said above it is clear that the
less alike the two processes P and P' are to each
other the smaller is r/p^p/, for the less likely it is


320 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

that both are accelerated or retarded according to the
same law. On the other hand the fact that they
resemble each other little in other respects is no
reason for thinking them unlikely to be really iso-
chronous if they seem to be so, i.e. for pip!lf to be
small. Hence we conclude that if two series of
recurrent events appear to be isochronous by them-
selves, and if to each event in one there always
corresponds a fixed number of events in the other, it
is enormously more probable that each is isochronous
than that neither is so, whilst it is impossible that
one should be isochronous and the other not. I think
therefore that Ehodes's method of recognising iso-
chronism is really satisfactory and non-circular with
the modifications that we have made in it. There are
two further considerations not mentioned by Rhodes
which may be added touching the effect of the duration
of the experiments, (i) If there be the smallest differ-
ence between the laws of two anisochronous processes
it is certain that the longer they are compared the
more it will show itself. So that in the case of two
processes which give the test for isochronism however
long we try them together we are forced to decide
either for real isochronism or anisochronism + exact
identity of law. And the latter is much less likely
than the former, as we have said, if the two processes
be of very different kinds, (ii) If we consider a single
recurrent process and find that {a) it recurs pretty
quickly, and (h) that it continues as long as we care
to observe, or at any rate for a very long time, and
(c) that successive occurrences seem to us to take the
same time, we can get a fair test of equality of time.
For (a) and (&) tell us together either that the process
is not retarded at all or that the retardation is very
small at each recurrence. And (c) tells us that it


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 321

must be pretty regular. But if two successive occur-
rences are judged to take the same time and it can
be proved that the retardation in each must be very
small we must be committing a very small error in
counting them as equal. Thus even a single process
which is actually not perfectly isochronous may when
properly criticised give us a very accurate measure
of equality of two times, provided we admit that we
are capable of comparing pretty accurately the times
taken by two successive events of the same kind when
the time occupied by each is short. And there seems
no reason to doubt this.

We can now define equal times as those in which
a recurrent event takes place in an isochronous re-
current series ; isochronism being measured according
to the method indicated above. Since this method
makes no mention of forces we can state the Laws of
Motion without any further trouble as regards space
and time. The first law will run as follows : A body
under the action of no forces describes a straight line
relative to axes determined by the fixed stars so that,
whenever it covers equal spaces, the same number
of events takes place in some recurrent series which
appears to be isochronous and is found to be so related
to some other series that appears to be isochronous
that to every event in the former there corresponds
the same number of events in the latter. It must be
added that, whilst it is perfectly possible that a series
which seems isochronous and fulfils the conditions with
respect to another apparently isochronous series might
not obey them when tested with respect to another
apparently isochronous series, yet, as a matter of fact,
this does not generally happen. Most perceptibly
isochronous series obey the test indifierently with each
other within the limits of observation ; and this is
B. p. 21


322 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

~what we should expect from real isochronism, whilst
we should not expect this agreement if we were mis-
taking for isochronism connected anisochronous series.
But, when once the science of mechanics has been
based on the laws of motion, and these upon this
method of measuring equality of time, it is perfectly-
possible and logical to show that the world will be
more easily and fully explained if we assume certain
small and imperceptible departures from isochronism
in processes on whose assumed absolute isochronism
the laws of motion were originally built\

The remaining problem of the laws of motion is
that of Force. What is meant by force, and how do
we know whether it is present or absent 1 It would
seem that, in order to arrive at the law that when
no forces act on a body it moves in a straight line
with uniform velocity relative to a certain set of axes,
we must have been able to recognise, in some cases
at least, the presence or absence of force by other
characteristics than those of motion. To discuss this
point it will be best to turn to the Second Law of
Motion. This law offers us a measure of force and
not a definition of it. It says that the force acting
on a body in a given direction at a given moment
is measured by the rate of change of its momentum
in that direction at that moment with respect to
time. Momentum is measured by the product of
mass and velocity, and, if mass be constant, this will
mean that the measure of the force acting on a
body at a given moment is the mass x the accelera-
tion at that moment in the given direction. This is

1 This may be compared with our desertion, first of the earth, and
then perhaps of the fixed stars, as axes of reference relative to which the
First Law holds, and the substitution of axes defined by imaginary bodies
80 determined that motions I'elative to them shall accurately obey the
First Law.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 323

supposed to be relative to the axes and the measure
of time that we have already discussed. It follows
at once from this that, if the velocity be constant in
a given direction, the force will be zero in that direc-
tion. Hence the converse of the First Law follows
from the Second. The law itself does not follow
however. The fact that when a body is at rest or
moves with uniform velocity in a given direction the
measure of the force in that direction is zero does not
prove that, when no force acts on a body, it will move
in a straight line with uniform or zero velocity. We
must therefore discuss the Second Law in order to
come to any conclusion about the nature of force. On
the subject of the position of force in mechanics a long
discussion has raged ; some holding that it is neces-
sary to retain it, others that it ought to be rejected
as a mere relic of animism. We cannot perhaps expect
to say much that is new on such a hackneyed subject,
but we cannot pass it by without discussion.

The whole question of force is closely bound up
with the view that is taken of causation. Kirchhoff
and Mach who banished forces from mechanics, sup-
posed, it would seem, that the notion of cause is
obsolete, and that the case of force in mechanics is
a peculiarly disgraceful example of the survival of
obsolete prejudices. We should prefer to say that
force is bound up with the activity view of causation,
although it will be obvious enough that we do not
hold that, with the departure of activity, science must
or can drop causation. I think that, as far as Mach
is concerned, any lengthy discussion on this point
would be merely verbal. It is quite clear that, rightly
or wrongly, he retains what we have called causal
laws, and what we have held to be practically the
whole of causation. In this sense then Mach does

21—2


324 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

not drop causation from Mechanics. On the other
hand he does drop the activity view of causation, and
he seems to hold that the name ' cause ' is no longer
applicable after that view has been dropped. Any
argument on such a question as this would obviously
be merely verbal ; and it is not worth while to embark
on it. We have merely to note that, in our sense of
causation, there undoubtedly is causation in mechanics,
and that we mean to go on using the word.

The classical definition of force is that it is the
\immediate cause of motion. But this is far too vague.
/For motions with a uniform velocity can and do con-
tinue without the action of force. We should have
;to say that it is the cause of acceleration, instead of
merely saying that the acceleration at a given moment
is the measure of the force at that moment. But it
is clear that people did not mean that everything
that caused an acceleration was a force in the sense
in which mechanics uses the term. When I will to
move my arm it might be said that my volition is
the cause of the motion. But it would not be said
that a volition was a mechanical force. Yet again
when one billiard ball hits another it would be said
that the first causes the acceleration of the second.
But no one would call a billiard ball a force. We saw
that the activity view of causation makes the cause
a substance in a certain state, and the effect a state
of a substance. Hence I think we can fairly state
the common view of force in mechanics as follows :
A body in a state of exercising force is the cause of a
state of acceleration in another body.

Now we have already rejected the activity view of
causation which makes substances in a certain state
the causes of states in other substances. We cannot
therefore make any exception in the present case. Force


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 325

seems here, as activity is everywhere, to be a mere
qualitas occulta, the mere turning of a causal law
connecting observable or inferrable states of two sub-
stances at different times into a quality of one of them.
But the case for force can be argued a little further by
its upholders. Some people think that some of their
perceptions are either perceptions of force, or, at worst,
of something that proves the existence of peculiar
qualities to which the name forces may appropriately
be given. If this were true forces would not be occult
qualities and we could state laws, in our own sense of
causation, about them. We must therefore enquire for
a moment into these alleged perceptions of force.

We may agree with Hofler' that the term force is
ambiguous in ordinary life. It covers tensions and
pressures and also supposed permanent real qualities
of bodies, such as the force of gravitation. Hofler adds
a third meaning, viz. mass-accelerations. This is not
even I think what is meant by force except by people
who merely wish to keep the name force after they have
given up the common belief in it as something special ;
it is certainly not the idea that the word force calls up
iu the mind of any unsophisticated person. The people
v^ho wish to identify force with mass-accelerations
seem to me to have forgotten that there is such a
thing as the science of Statics where forces are believed
to operate as much as in Dynamics but where there
are no accelerations. Hence, I think, we shall do best
to say that, if there are forces, then they are the
causes of mass-accelerations in dynamics and of the
straightening of strings and the extension of spring-
balances in statics. The question is whether people
are right in thinking that the qualities called forces
can be perceived, and whether they have any special

' Stvdien zw gegenwartigen Philoaophie der Mecha/nik, p. 31.


326 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

perceptions which tell them independently that there
must be these special qualities even though they cannot
perceive them.

It is obvious that perceptions of straightened
strings, or extended spring-balances, or accelerated
bodies are not themselves perceptions of forces. And
it is by no means clear that the causal laws which
explain such perceptible effects ever need among their
data any special qualities like forces, or indeed any-
thing but positions, motions, and certain characteristic
coeflBcients. If there be any perceptions whose objects
can reasonably be held to be forces or to necessitate a
belief in special qualities which we can call forces as
their cause they must be our sensations of tension
and pressure. The names of these obviously beg the
question of whether their objects really are forces.
But it is tolerably obvious that, when we consider, we
do not hold that they are any more preceptions of
forces than are perceptions of stretched strings or
accelerated masses. When we feel our skin pulled or
pressed we localise the felt pull or pressure in our skin
as we should a felt temperature. But, if we suppose
that forces are qualities which are localised somewhere
in the body that is causing the pull or pressure, since
that is not in general our own body, it is clear that
the immediate object of our perception is not what is
believed to be the quality of force.

Indeed when we say that we feel a pull we mean
that we have a perception whose object is localised at
a certain part of our body and which is supposed to be
caused by a force in another body which is pulling it.
We must say then that common-sense holds, not
that it directly perceives forces in its experiences of
pulls and pressui'es, but that it perceives a quality
localised in the body the existence of which is supposed


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 327

to be a mark of the existence of force in the body that
is said to be pulling or pressing.

But, after all, is there any better reason to assume
a new kind of quality as the cause of these perceptions
than for the cause of the straightening and stretching
of strings ? On the contrary it seems quite clear that
these perceptions are the result of the shortening and
lengthening of parts of our skins. They thus depend
on the general effects in bodies with regard to which
we saw no good reason to suppose that it was necessary
to assume forces, as special qualities of bodies, as their
causes. Hence these feelings cannot furnish the
smallest additional evidence for the necessity of
assuming real forces.

The only other experiences that we have which
might seem to offer any evidence for the reality of
forces are sensations of effort that we have in pushing,
pulling, and raising bodies. We must not confuse
these with the sensations that we have already dis-
cussed. The two always occur together, and this
might be expected, if there really were forces and
these sensations were closely connected with them,
from the Third Law of Motion. It is, however, per-
fectly easy to distinguish the two. Can we say that
the perceptions of effort are the perception of the
quality of force in our bodies 1 I do not think that
Poincare's rhetorical question : ' Do you suppose that
the sun feels muscular effort in keeping the planets in
their elliptical paths V ' has any particular weight,
although he thinks that it settles the matter.
Naturally if the sun has no mind it does not perceive
anything at all. But that is quite irrelevant. The
true question is : Does the sun in keeping the earth
from moving off at a tangent have that sort of quality

1 La Science et I'Hypothese, p. 130.


328 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

which we who have minds perceive when we forcibly
drag a heavy body ? Is it a real quality, and, if so,
may it not be a quality that only belongs to organic
todies ? Even if we conclude that it is a real quality
in our own bodies it is a sheer inference to suppose
that it exists in other bodies as different from our own
as the sun or a billiard-ball. And, as in the case of
temperature, such an inference is very precarious.

I conclude then that we have no reason to suppose
that inorganic bodies, with which, after all, we are
mainly concerned in mechanics, have any qualities in
them comparable to what we perceive in our own
bodies when we say that we exercise force or have
force exerted upon us. Such qualities cannot be
directly perceived in other bodies, the inference from
our bodies to non-organic ones is precarious in the
extreme, and there seems every reason to believe that
the causes of these peculiar perceptions in us are not
special qualities called forces in foreign bodies, but the
same qualities and states as cause the tensions of
strings and the changes of velocity in bodies. It only
remains then to ask whether the states and qualities
that cause these various effects are something special
to which the name of forces can be given, or are just
the positions, velocities, etc. , of bodies. What we have
now seen is that certain peculiar experiences of ours
give no reason for adopting the former alternative.

Mr Russell has an argument which, if true, would
demolish forces altogether as real qualities. We have
seen that, if forces be real, they must be the causes of
accelerations among other effects ; though it does not
of course follow that the causes of accelerations must
be forces ; for that is the question that we are now
discussing. Now Mr Russell's argument is that an
acceleration is not an event and therefore cannot be


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 329

an effect. Hence it cannot have a cause. Hence, if
there are no causes of accelerations and forces are the
causes of accelerations or nothing, there can be no real
forces. Let us then consider Mr Russell's arguments
to prove that accelerations are not real events. There
are two of them, one narrower and one more sweeping.
The first argument^ is that, whatever may be the case
with a resultant acceleration, it is certain that a com-
jponent acceleration is not an event. The components
of a vector are merely the products of analysis. The
vector from London to Cambridge can indeed be
resolved into a vector from Euston to Bletchley and
another from Bletchley to Cambridge ; but a sane
person in coming to Cambridge from London does not
pass through Bletchley, and so the journeys represented
by these two vectors are not in any sense implied in
the journey represented by the vector from London
to Cambridge. This is the only one that is actually
made. The others are not parts of it which must exist
if it does, but operations whose final result, if they wei'e
made, — which they are not — would be the same.
Hence component forces at any rate cannot be real.
The other argument" is that no acceleration, component
or resultant, can be a real event. This argument is
based on Weierstrass's account of the nature of a
differential coefficient. The momentary acceleration is
the differential coefficient of space by time for that
particular value of the time. As such it is a limit and
a mere number, and so cannot be an effect of anything.
Hence that which, if it were anything, would be the
cause of an acceleration is a mere nothing and cannot
be real.

These arguments are interesting, and, if a belief

1 Principles of Mathematics, pp. 484, 485.

2 Ibid. pp. 473, 474.


330 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

that accelerations are real events be truly incompatible
with the theory of the nature of a difPerential coefficient,
it must be rejected, since that theory is undoubtedly
true. But I do not think that there is this incompati-
bility. No doubt an acceleration as a limit is a mer&
number, but then no one ever supposed that, by saying-
that the acceleration of a body at a given moment was
X feet per second per second, he meant that it was
identical with x feet per second per second. I can see
no reason whatever why velocity and acceleration
should not be real states of bodies with magnitudes
measured by the numbers which are reached as the
limits of certain mathematical expressions. Whether
an acceleration be a real event or not is of course-
another question ; but I do not see that the fact that,
if it were, its magnitude would be measured by the
value of a limit could prove that it could not be real.
It will be well to make it quite clear that this possi-
bility interferes in no way with Weierstrass's solution
of the Zenonian paradoxes about motion. The essence
of that solution is the insistence on the fact that every
value of a variable is a constant, so that at every
moment the arrow in Zeno's paradox is at one definite
point equally, whether in a finite time it moves or not.
The difference between the two cases is simply that, in
the one, it is at different points at different moments,
whilst, in the other, it is at the same point at different
moments. Now this would meet all the difficulties just
as well if at every moment the moving arrow had a
quality with an intensive magnitude measured by the
differential coefficient of space with respect to time for
the body at that moment. The moving arrow would
still, at any moment, be at a single point of space,
and, at different moments, at different points. It would
merely have a quality at each point which the arrow


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 331

that was at the same point at different moments would
not have. Hence Weierstrass's unquestionably correct
account of motion and his denial of infinitesimals does
not touch the possibility of the existence of a physical
quality of velocity or acceleration ; and I cannot agree
with Mr Russell that Weierstrass's theory necessitates
a more integrated form of the laws of motion.

We pass then to the other argument that, at any
rate, only resultant accelerations could be real. It
is quite clear that Mr Russell's argument is valid as
regards the ordinary analysis into components in three
directions at right angles to each other. These three
directions are chosen merely for convenience in hand-
ling the problem under discussion, and correspond to
nothing that actually takes place. But is it certain
that nothing corresponds when the components are
apparently actually given 1 For instance, in the case
of a system of gravitating particles, are there no ac-
celerations along the lines joining the given particle
to each of the others ? It is quite certain that there
are no motions along these lines in general, but only
along that of the resultant force on the particle at
each moment. It is also true that in a finite time r
the position reached by the particle in question is
not what it would be if it were successively dragged
along the lines joining it to the particles at the
beginning of the motion for a time t along each. If
we grant, however, that accelerations may be states
of particles, whose magnitude is measured by the dif-
ferential coefficient of space by time at the moment
for the particle, then it would be possible that at each
moment the various particles did produce these states
with their appropriate magnitudes, even though no
states corresponding to an arbitrary selection of com-
ponents existed. But, although I do not think it


332 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

possible to disprove the existence of such states, I
see very little evidence for their reality. And it is
certain that the lavs^s of mechanics can be stated
without them. Hence it seems much more philo-
sophical to state any causal laws that are involved
in a form that avoids velocities and accelerations.
At the same time you cannot work out any problems
in mechanics in this integrated form. You must also
remember that, although a statement of the relations
between accelerations is not directly about what exists,
yet the fact that such statements bring you back in
the end to what does exist and can be observed makes
them laws about the existent. It was no doubt im-
portant for Mr Russell to show that, if you insist
that causal laws shall only connect actually existent
states or events, then the laws of motion will involve
relations between configurations at three moments.
But, when you have passed so far away from the
ordinary view of causation as Mr Russell has done
and as we have also, it seems rather needless purism
to deny the name of causal laws to uniformities that
connect, if not existent states, yet terms which only
are connected as they are in virtue of the nature
of the existent.

But, even when we state laws in terms of ac-
celerations, we do not need to make any mention of
forces. Hence we can conclude that, if accelerations
do not exist, forces, as causes of them, cannot exist ;
whilst, if they do exist, there is not the .slightest
reason to suppose that their causes are special quali-
ties called forces. Wherever forces nominally occur
in dynamics it is always in the form of special laws
over and above the laws of motion, connecting the
configuration or states of a system with the accelera-
tions of its parts. Thus, when we talk of the electrical


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 333

attraction between two charged particles, we seem to
be talking of force as a cause of their accelerations.
But, when we work out a problem, the only way in
which the alleged force enters is in the fact that
coefficients e, e' are to be attached to each particle
and that the acceleration in one due to the presence

of the other is — x , where r is their distance apart.

mr ^

Instead of the force determining the acceleration it
is determined by two coefficients and the relative
positions of the particles according to a certain law.
The only use that force has in dynamics is that it is
a convenient phrase when we do not want explicitly
to take into consideration the other bodies in the
system. We can then talk of a field of force ; but
we merely mean by this that bodies placed in a certain
position all have a certain definite acceleration im-
parted to them that only depends on their own masses
and other coefficients.

Our best plan will now be to try and state the
laws of motion without force, although not necessarily
in terms of configurations, for the reason that I have
given above. For a reason into which we shall enter
later the laws must be stated in terms of particles
and not of definite bodies.

I should state the First Law in the following
terms : ' Changes in the magnitude or the direction
of the velocity of any particle, relative to axes deter-
mined by the fixed stars, and measured by processes
shown to be isochronous by the method discussed
above, cannot be determined by purely immanent
causal laws.' The first law then tells us that we
must look for the other data in any causal law that
shall enable us to predict such changes relative to
the fixed stars in events or qualities of something


334 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

outside the system consisting of the particle and the
stars. Is the evidence for this law empirical or d, priori ?
The only possible way to show that it was d, priori
would be to connect it with our axiom about causality,
and it is easy to show that it cannot be deduced from
that. Our axiom, it will be remembered, said that,
if any system had been quiescent for a finite time
and then began to change, the change could only be
explained by a causal law transeunt to the system.
It is clear that this is both too wide and too narrow
for the first law of motion. It is too wide in as far as
it tells us that in any system of particles that had
been relatively at rest for a finite time the cause of
any change from rest must be looked for outside the
system. For our law refers to a particular system,
viz. that of the particle and the fixed stars. And to
that system it does not apply because we know that
the system of the fixed stars and any particle is not
quiescent, since the fact of stellar motion in the line
of sight renders it almost certain that the stars are
in relative motion to each other. But again it is too
narrow. At best it could only tell us that a particle
at rest relatively to the fixed stars would remain at
rest ; it could not tell us that a particle in motion
with reference to them might not move in circles,
or stop, or perpetually alter its velocity without our
having to go outside the system for explanation.

If there be any evidence then for the law it must
be empirical. Everyone knows the type of direct
empirical evidence that is offered for the law. We
are told that if we throw a stone along a smooth flat
surface it will travel a long way in a straight line,
and that the smoother the surface is made the further
it wiU travel. This always appears to me to be a bad
example of the law, though I think it is of importance


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 335

in view of the historical prejudices which the law
had to meet. With regard to the first point, it is
a bad example because we need to commit a circle
in order to be sure that it is an example at all. The
reason is as follows. What do you mean by smooth ?
If you mean a geometrical quality then it is clear that
the necessity of mentioning it in the example shows
that you have not reached an immanent causal law.
The future position of the body is foretold, not from
its present position and velocity alone, but from these
+ the geometrical qualities of the surface on which it
moves. Hence, as it stands, we have no example
here of the supposed law. But if, on the other hand,
you mean by smooth that the surface is one that has
no effect on the motion of the body, then the experiment
-and its completion in thought merely come to this,
that continued movement in a straight line is a proof
that the surface is not having any causal influence.
But it is only a proof by assuming the law, and so
"the experiment can give no support to the law.

The fact is that there is no non-circular direct
■experimental evidence of the first law. What an
■experiment of the kind just discussed did do was to
upset the scholastic theory of motion based on the
maxim; Cessante causd cessat effectus. The applica-
tion of this maxim to motion was that a motion only
<3ontinued as long as that which originally caused it
continued to act, or at any rate, that, when it ceased,
the motion died away of itself Now these views
the experiment does tend to undermine, and so it
makes way for the true view. When it is seen that
the stone goes on for some distance and the distance
depends on the nature of the surface it suggests that
motion does not have to be kept up by the same
causes as produce it, since a flat surface is not a


336 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

cause of motion in the first instance. And, when it
was further seen that the more you polished the
surface the further the stone went, it followed that
it was much more reasonable to ascribe the gradual
cessation of motion to the nature of the surface than
to some immanent causal law in the nature of all
moving bodies. Thus, the value of the experiments
that are alleged to prove the first law is not that
they do prove it but that they render improbable
certain plausible alternative views that are incom-
patible with it.

The true proof of the law is to be found in the
explanation that it offers of projectiles' paths and of
planetary motion. It was found that, under certain
circumstances, by holding that motions were com-
pounded out of unchanging velocities in certain
directions and changeable ones that obeyed definite
laws in which the presence and qualities of other
bodies were data, these motions could be completely
accounted for. And wherever the velocities did re-
main constant in magnitude and direction no mention
of the states of other bodies was needed.

With regard to the second law I agree with
Mr Russell's statement'. This is that, in an isolated
material system of w particles, there are certain constant
coefficients called masses {m^, m^...m„) to be associated
with the particles respectively. Then, for any particle
in the system, the acceleration multiplied by the

1 Principles of Mathematics, p. 48.3. [It might seem that the statement
that it was the momentary configuration that is relevant is contradicted
by the form of Hooke's Law for stretched strings within the elastic limit,

viz. mii = - ^^ where !c is the present and Xf, the unstretched length.

But, in a system so isolated as Mr Russell takes, we could hardly talk
about the unstretched length of a body. "We could merely say that x^,
like q, is a constant that has to be introduced in connecting the momentary
configuration with the momentary acceleration.]


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 337

mass is a function of the masses, relative positions, and
velocities of the particles at the moment. It will be
the same function for the system at all times. And in
general it will involve other coefficients beside masses.
There are two points to notice about this law.
In the first place the other coefficients that enter
into the expression are the marks of what are called
' forces of nature ' such as gravitation, and electrical
charges, and the elasticity constants of bodies. We
have already seen that they are not anything that
need lead us to believe in forces in the old sense.
What is called a ' mechanical explanation ' consists
in replacing them by masses, positions, velocities, and
geometrical conditions. We shall have to discuss the
meaning of such attempts toward the end of this
chapter.

The other point to notice is that the law is only
asserted for an isolated system. When we ask what
this means we find that it means a system whose
states at all moments can be determined by a purely
immanent causal law from a sufficient number of
observations made within it. How wide a system
must be in order to be isolated is a question that
cannot be answered a 'priori, but we learn by ex-
perience what kind of terms are relevant and what
are not. All systems, if our discussion on space and
motion be correct, must be assumed to include the
fixed stars, or, at any rate, axes defined by bodies that
are known to be at rest or in uniform translational
motions in straight lines with respect to them.

The nature of the evidence for the Second Law is
once more entirely indirect. It is in fact precisely the
same evidence as proves the first law, viz. that all
mechanical processes can be analysed in this particular
way. As Poincare points out, if they appear to fail, you

B. p. 22


338 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

can always avoid the difficulty by assuming enough
hidden particles in proper positions and motions to
which these two laws do apply.

To discuss the notion of mass we need the third
law. Now it is with the third law that the intro-
duction of particles instead of finite bodies becomes
essential, so that this will be the best place for the
discussion of this question foreshadowed on p. 333.
The third law states that, in an isolated system of
particles, you can take the particles by pairs, and,
considering their accelerations along the lines joining
them, these will always be opposite in direction, and
the product of them by the respective masses of the
pair will be equal. So far we have only spoken of
masses as coefficients introduced in the second law
and apparently comparable to such other coefficients
as e, the electric charges, or y, the gravitational con-
stant. But here we learn something fresh about the
coefficients. Granted that for any two particles in
the system f^^ and f^^ are opposite in sign, which is
a law of nature, it is of course a mere convention
that coefficients m^ and m^ can be found such that
''ih-frs + 'f^sfsr — O- But where we pass out of the
world of convention and back to laws of nature is in
the fact that, if we take any third particle, and, with
the same notation as before, have m,.^^^ -f- m^/^,. =
where m^ is merely chosen to make this equation
hold, we shall find that, with the value of m^ thus
reached, the equation m,f,t + mtft^ = holds. And
you will find that, when the relative masses of the
particles in a given isolated system have thus been de-
termined, they are, in general', fixed and independent
of any other variations in the states of the particles.

1 This is not strictly tme of moving charged particles, when the velocity
approaches that of light.


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 339

Now it is quite clear that such a proposition as the
Third Law has no definite meaning except for particles,
because there is no line that can be called the line
joining two finite bodies. At the same time all that
can ever be observed is finite bodies and their states.
How then do we reach the notion of particles and the
laws stated in terms of them ? And why do we state
the other laws also in terms of particles and not of
finite bodies?

The analyses of motion which, I have argued, led
to the first and second laws were analyses of the
motions of bodies of finite size, rigid, and moving
translationally. Such were the experiments with pro-
jectiles, and falling bodies, and the simple pendulum ;
such too were the motions of the planets about the
sun to which Newton first applied this analysis.

It is, of course, true that the earth and the other
planets also rotate on their own axes ; but Newton
found that it was not necessary to take this fact into
account when he laid down the laws that govern the
motions of the planets about the sun, and of the moon
about the earth. I Hence something very like the first
two laws of motion was reached without having re-
course to particles. They were not indeed directly
observed to hold of finite rigid bodies in their trans-
lational motions, but they could be analysed out of
those motions. Similarly, owing to the large distances
of the planets from each other and from the sun, it was
possible for many purposes to treat them as points and
talk of the line joining them. This enabled the third
law to be applied to them in a rough way, but it was
not their motions that were the evidence on which the
third law was based. That evidence was of two kinds.
It came partly from dynamics and partly from statics.
Also, whilst it is much the most paradoxical of the

22—2


340 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

three laws to the untutored mind, it is curious that it
is the only one of the three for which there is a kind
of direct sensible evidence. The dynamical evidence
for the law with regard to finite bodies came from the
experiments of Huyghens and Wren on the percussion
of spheres.

They were not, of course, entirely clear as to the
distinction between mass and weight, but then weight
is an accurate enough measure of mass at a given place
on the earth. The result of their experiments was to
show that, when the spheres ran into each other along
the line joining their centres, the sum of their momenta
before and after impact was constant, whatever might
be the elasticity of the bodies. Owing to their use of
spheres they could get a clear account of what was
meant by the line joining the two bodies at the
moment of impact. When we combine this result
with the second law of motion we see that the ac-
celerations of the bodies which ended in the permanent
change of their velocities, and presumably took place
while they were in contact, must have been in opposite
directions along the common normal, and must have
obeyed the third law. Similarly, dynamical experiments
can be performed with floating magnets which support
the law for finite bodies that can be treated as points.

I will not interrupt the argument for the moment
with the consideration of the statical proofs, and the
direct experiences of the truth of the law for finite
bodies, but will pass at once to the introduction of
particles from what was already known. What was
already known then was that the three laws held for
the translational motions of bodies which were rigid
and approximately spherical like the planets and the
balls in the impact experiments. Here you could give
a definite meaning to the velocity or acceleration of


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 341

the body in a given direction, and to the line joining
two bodies under certain circumstances. But, with
such limitations, it is clear that there is an immense
number of motions with which Newton's laws could
not deal. They could do nothing with pure rotations,
since they are all about translational motion. They
could not be directly applied to bodies that are not
fairly rigid, for how can you talk of the velocity or
acceleration of a body whose different parts have
different ones. And, except for bodies so far apart
with respect to their size, as to be treated as points, or
bodies that only act when in contact where you can
define directions by the common normal at the point of
contact, how can you give a meaning to the Third Law ?

The passage to particles from finite bodies is best
seen in the treatment of rotation which first showed
that Newton's laws could deal with motions of that
kind as well as with the translational motions in
reference to which they were formulated. The first
problem involving the rotation of rigid bodies that
was solved was that of the time of swing of a
compound pendulum. This was first fully discussed
by Huyghens. Huyghens' solution, however, was
based on principles which, though compatible with
Newton's, and indeed, mutually deducible from them,
were formally different. It involved, in fact, the
conceptions of work and kinetic energy instead of
those of force and momentum. The statement of the
Newtonian method of dealing with such cases is to be
found in D'Alembert's principle.

Bvit the essence of both solutions is to imagine the
body divided up into an indefinite number of masses
located at geometrical points. You thus get rid of
rotation on the part of these elements, because a point
cannot rotate. On the other hand, you can replace


342 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

the rotation of a finite body about an axis by the
translatory motion of its elements in closed curves.
Now the laws of motion, as we saw, were obtained
from just such motions of finite bodies. It is then
obviously worth while to enquire whether, if you
assume that their translatory motions obey the laws of
motion for finite bodies, you will be able to account for
the motions of the whole system. At any rate, it is
clear that all the laws can be stated with much greater
precision for particles than for finite bodies, and in
fact that the third cannot otherwise be stated in a
quite definite form. We must notice at once that
neither D'Alembert nor Huyghens have any right to
assume a priori either (a) that the same laws that
applied to the large bodies would apply to the little
ones, or (b) that, if they did, it would be possible to
work out the results of applying them to an infinite
number of particles with no other conditions imposed
than that they form elements of a rigid body. Naturally,
unless we cotdd actually prove that this assumption
led to the laws that had been found to hold for finite
bodies, we should have no justification for making it.
But it can easily be shown that if the third law of
motion applies to any system of bodies the position of
the mass-centre of these bodies (defined in the usual
way) wiU either continue to remain unchanged, or will
alter with uniform velocity along a straight line relative
to axes defined by fixed stars so long as the system is
isolated, no matter what special laws there may be
determining the mass-accelerations of each particle in
terms of functions of the masses, positions, velocities,
etc. of the others. But when our system of particles
is subject to the condition that the distances between
all of them remain constant, we have the case of a
rigid body, and so we get back to the first law of


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 343

motion for finite rigid bodies from the analysis of the
motions of which it was first deduced. So that the
hypothesis that the mass-points obey the same laws of
motion as the finite rigid bodies, is at any rate self-
consistent as far as concerns the first law, whilst it
allows of much greater rigour of statement.

But we must not stop here, for, by the same pro-
cedure, we can show, what was not at all clear before,
that the laws of motion, though stated in terms of the
translatory motion of finite bodies, are also capable of
dealing with their rotations. For, as we have seen,
we can reduce rotation of a finite body to the descrip-
tion of closed curves by its particles. But then we
can prove that, if these particles obey the third law,
and if we assume in addition that the oppositely
directed accelerations that they determine in each
other are along the line joining them, the sum of the
angular momenta of all the particles in an isolated
system about any axis fixed relatively to the fixed
stars is constant. Similarly, from the other laws of
motion and the special laws for the system, we can
determine the rotation of any set of particles in the
system about any axis. Hence the mere assumption of
particles accurately obeying the same laws as were laid
down — ^though imperfectly at best — for the translatory
motions of finite bodies make the latter, even in their
pure rotations susceptible of mechanical treatment.
Hence the object of science is much better attained by
stating the laws in terms of particles. The laws that
were originally discovered for finite bodies become
consequences, and new consequences are discovered for
the rotations of such bodies. The only additional
assumptions that have had to be made are (a) that
the opposite accelerations postulated by the third law
shall be in the line joining the particles, and (b) that


344 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

the mass of a finite body is the sum of the masses of
its particles. With regard to the first point, we saw
that the weakness of the third law, as stated for finite
bodies, was in the matter of direction, and hence any
assumption that we make with regard to direction
when, we come to deal with particles, where direction
first becomes definite, can hardly be said to contradict
anything that has been observed of finite bodies. But,
indeed, nothing in the interactions of finite bodies would
point to the oppositely determined accelerations having
any other directions than that along the line of junc-
tion. If it made an angle with it, our two magnet poles
in water would rotate with ever increasing velocity,
which is contrary to all experience. The assumption
about mass is necessary to make the first law apply to
rigid bodies on the assumption that it applies to their
constituent particles. There is no evidence against
masses being additive, and, with regard to bodies of
finite size, conclusive evidence for it.

I think it should now be clear why we state the
laws of motion in terms of particles, although they
must have been discovered by considering and an-
alysing the motions of finite bodies. And it is also
clear in what sense the statement in terms of particles
is justified by those experiences of finite bodies and
their motions which alone we can have. Owing to the
fact that works on dynamics begin for didactic purposes
with the dynamics of the particle, and then pass
through DAlembert's principle to the dynamics of
finite bodies, we are often inclined to think that
principle merely a mathematical development. But
we must remember that the order of knowledge is

(1) laws for the translatory motions of finite bodies;

(2) the application of these laws to hypothetical par-
ticles with the increased precision of statement that


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 345

this allows; (3) proof that this gives the laws for finite
rigid bodies in their traiislational motions, and that it
also enables ns to account for the rotations of such
bodies without any new assumptions. The last is
a real discovery made by the hypothetical method.

The question now arises : Are we to consider the
analysis into particles as a real analysis, or is it merely
a happy mathematical device ? We must remember
that, whether we state the laws of motion in terms of
velocities and accelerations as we have done, or purely
in terms of configurations as Mr Russell does, a state-
ment in terms of particles seems to be equally necessary.
Thus we cannot argue off-hand that particles, like
accelerations and velocities, are merely mathematical
apparatus by which we can indeed start from the
existent and get back to the existent, but which
themselves have nothing existent corresponding to
them. In fact we have to ask the question whether
Mr Russell's laws, in so far as they are stated in terms
of particles, are any more truly causal, in the sense of
dealing with what exists, than the laws stated in terms
of velocities and accelerations. Let us then begin by
clearly understanding what such a question means on
our views. People can perceive bodies, but it is clear
that they cannot perceive particles. Hence, whilst
bodies can exist as appearances, particles, if they exist
at all, must be realities. Now let us consider our
views about the nature of the laws of mechanics. As
laws taken from appearances and stated in terms of
them, we might think that they were laws about
appearances, but this is not what we really do think,
since we hold that it is quite irrelevant whether anyone
is looking on or not to the fact that the laws are
obeyed. What we mean by this is that, whilst as
stated, they are laws about what we perceive, they


346 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

are laws about that aspect of it and its changes to
which we believe there to correspond a real counter-
part. The laws that govern the motions of billiard
balls are, as stated, laws about appearances and they
were found by observing the motions of perceptible
billiard balls. But we believe that there exists some-
thing corresponding to the felt round objects and
to their visible spatial relations, and that these real
relations condition the shapes and distances which,
under suitable circumstances, events in the terms that
have these real relations, enable us to perceive.
Thus our mechanical laws, though stated in terms
of appearances, are really about the changes in these
real relations to which, when we do have the percep-
tions, there correspond these perceptible changes from
which the laws were reached. We see then that the
fact that the particles could not possibly be perceived
does not militate against their reality, since, with finite
and perceptible bodies, the laws of mechanics only hold
of them in so far as they correspond in their spatial
relations to a real correlate which exists whether we
perceive it or not. But the real reason that makes
it unwise to assume that particles are more than
a mathematical device is the following. A particle
differs entirely from any matter that we ever do
perceive in that it has no extension at all. In this
respect it is utterly different to assume the reality of
particles from what it is to assume the reality of
molecules or electrons. A molecule is supposed to be
of finite size, though imperceptible. This means for
us that it is a real thing with qualities and relations
like those which determine our perception of bodies of
finite size and definite shape, but that, unlike them, it
does not have events in it that can cause us to have
a perception of a body of a definite shape and minute


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 347

size. But, with a particle, all is different. It has no
size at all, to speak in terms of appearances, and that
means that, if it is real it is not in the least like any-
thing that determines any perception that we have.
It has in fact every mark of being a mathematical
artifact, and, as such, whilst we cannot deny that it
might possibly be real, we have no good reason for sup-
posing that it is so. On this ground I think we may
conclude that we were justified in not paying too much
attention to Mr Russell's insistence on the statement
of the laws of motion in terms of nothing but particles,
times and positions ; since there is no more reason to
suppose that particles really exist, than that velocities
and accelerations do so.

The laws of motion then can and must be stated
without reference to forces. These are replaced by
coefficients which enter the expressions for the amount
of acceleration of one particle in terms of the relative
positions, velocities, etc., of other particles in the
system. We have now a final question to consider.
Force is used in statics. Does it here reduce to the
same mere name as in dynamics, or must we at length
introduce special qualities called forces ? As far as the
conditions of equilibrium are concerned of course,
statics is only a particular case of dynamics, for which
the ordinary laws of motion are ample. The only
difference that could possibly lead to difficulty is that,
whereas dynamics seems to deal wholly with the
motions of particles, it is commonly believed that a
system may be in equilibrium, in the sense that none
of its particles are in motion, and yet ' forces ' may be
exerted between its parts. Consider, for instance, the
case of a bow with the string drawn so that the bow is
bent. We hold that all the particles in the bow are
at rest (setting aside molecular and electrical theories),


348 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

and the conditions for this can be determined by the
laws of motion. But it is also held that the string and
the wood are in a state of tension, and, in fact, that
forces are being exerted between one part of the
system and the others. Let us try to see precisely
what this means. In the first place it means that the
shape of the wood is different from what it would be
if it did not form part of the system to which it now
belongs. It is clear that particles cannot be supposed
to change their shape ; all that can alter with them is
their relative positions. Thus, we must recognise that
the same system of particles can have different con-
figurations when it forms part of different systems.
But there is nothing in this that has not already been
mentioned in the second law of motion. It was known
from that that, to determine the positions of the
particles in a system at any moment, certain special
laws were needed over and above the laws of motions.
These laws tell us that, with certain systems of particles,
the particles will come to rest in certain relative
positions ; so that the second law of motion which
relates momentary configurations to momentary ac-
celerations will tell us what will be the configuration
when there is no acceleration on the part of any of the
particles, when once the particular laws for the system
under description are known. What happens then is
this : We find that the positions of the particles of
certain substances are connected with their accelera-
tions according to definite laws when portions of the
substance of definite size and shape are made parts
of systems, the acceleration produced by which on a
particle placed at the point at which the substance is
placed we have already determined. We assume that
the same laws will be obeyed in any system in which
a. piece of such a substance forms a part. And, by


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 349

saying that the piece of the substance in a given
system, though in equilibrium, is exerting forces inside
the system, we mean that, in the present configuration,
it would not be in equilibrium out of that system, but
that its particles would be accelerated according to
the known laws until a new stable configuration was
reached.

Thus once more the alleged ' forces ' are nothing
but general laws connecting configuration of particles
with acceleration in systems of a particular kind.
Because these laws hold as a rule wherever a system
of particles of the same kind may find itself, we make
this law, which is general, into a particular quality of
the body, and call it a force. We are more particularly
encouraged to do this in statical examples because, if
our bodies form parts of such a statical system, they
themselves are deformed according to certain laws just
like other bodies from the shapes and sizes that they
have when they are not parts of the system. These
deformations, as we saw, are accompanied by a peculiar
kind of feeling, and, because this feeling is peculiar, we
assume — without justification, as I have tried to show,
— that it must have a peculiar cause, viz. a force.

But, although there is no need to assume some-
thing special called forces, we must consider how these
special laws of matter comport with the statement of
all mechanical laws in terms of particles. The special
laws that determine for us the form of our function in
the second law and the coefficients that it is to contain
are supplied by the special sciences like electricity,
magnetism, and what is commonly lumped together
under the title of ' Properties of Matter.' Whilst one
of these special laws — that of gravitation — seems to
apply to all kinds of matter at all times and in all
states of aggregation, the others do not. The same


350 THE LA.WS OF MECHANICS

matter may have different electrical charges at different
times, only certain matter is magnetisable, and the
constants like rigidity and the coefl&cients of dilatation
and friction vary from one kind and state of matter to
another. Now it is true that all these laws, in so far
as mechanics can use them, will have to be stated in
terms of the relation between the accelerations of
particles and the distances, velocities, etc., of other
particles together with certain coefficients. But, at the
same time, if a given configuration of iron particles is
associated with a different acceleration from the same
configuration of particles in wood it would seem that
we must accept as ultimate the different qualities of
material bodies. And, again, if we take the case of
charged bodies and find that we can explain their

attraction by a law of the form — , whilst there is

nothing similar in the case of apparently precisely
similar bodies which we assert to be uncharged, we
seem forced to assume really different states of matter.
We can now see what precisely is meant by a
mechanical explanation of some physical phenomenon.
It does not merely mean a proof that all the motions
in this sphere of physics obey the laws of motion ; for
this is generally believed from the outset. What it
means is that, by suitable assumptions, the coefficients
in the function required by the second law, which
depend on the particular nature of the matter under
discussion, can be eliminated. By ' suitable assump-
tions,' for the present purpose, it is meant that, instead
of supposing ultimately different kinds of particles in
which acceleration and configuration are connected by
the same general form of law but with particular
different coefficients, we can explain the phenomena
by assuming different invisible configuration and


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 351

numbers of particles of the same kind connected by
laws in which there is no difierence of coefficient.
When this has been done with the separate 'properties
of matter ' a mechanical explanation would go on to try
and show that all these were special cases of a single
law connecting distributions of particles with accelera-
tions. The perceived qualities in which bodies differ
must pari passu with such explanations be thrust
back into different ultimate psychophysiological laws
connecting different states of aggregation of the same
kind of particles with the clearly different objects that
M^e perceive.

This tendency on the part of the physicist has
been bitterly reviled by philosophers, notably by Prof
Ward in his Naturalism and Agnosticism. Let us
see what attitude we ought to take up towards it.

Since we have seen no reason for supposing that
particles as such are real, there is nothing to choose
between the statement that a piece of wood and a
piece of iron of the same shape and size consist of the
same number and arrangement of particles with dif-
ferent laws — or, at any rate, with laws that require
a different coefficient — and the statement that they
consist of different numbers of particles, all alike,
obeying the same laws, but giving a different observable
effect owing to their differences of number and con-
figuration. The really important question is this :
Are we justified in supposing that the causes of the
perception of a piece of wood and of a piece of iron of
the same size and shape are differently aggregated
collections of the same kind of small but finite real
bodies differing only by their number and arrangement,
and such that when, for purposes of the second law
of motion, we make the mathematical analysis into
particles, we can assume the same laws connecting


352 THE LAWS OF MECHANICS

configuration with acceleration, and explain the ob-
served differences in terms of the differences of number
and configuration ? This is the sort of question that
is raised by molecular theories, and more especially by
the electron theory ; and an afiirmative answer to it
would show that these theories do give information
about the real.

Let us suppose for a moment that this could be
done ; would it have any philosophical importance, and
would there be any philosophical objection to it as an
account of the real ? Our previous results will enable
us to answer this question. In the first place we have
seen that there is not the least reason, on the assump-
tion that there is a real world events in which cause
our perceptions, why, to every difference of quality in
the object of our perceptions, there should be one
in the cause of the perception. Hence there is no
theoretical objection to reducing the ultimate com-
plexity of the real causes of our perceptions below that
of the world that we perceive, so long as you are still
able to account for the differences in what we perceive.
Again, whilst we have seen that there is no intrinsic
reason why any of the ordinary sense-qualities should
not be real, the causal theory of perception leaves no
reason for thinking that they are so. On the other
hand, there is some reason for thinking that there is
a real counterpart to our objects of spatial perception
and more especially to those of touch. Hence, whilst
there is no theoretical objection to the reduction of the
ultimate differences of the supposed real causes of our
perceptions as far as is compatible with the explanation
of the differences in their objects, we are positively
making fewer debatable assumptions about the real by
reducing real qualities and replacing them by laws
connecting those that are left and their geometrical


THE LAWS OF MECHANICS 353

relations, as far as is possible. Such procedure does
indeed make more assumptions about those qualities
and relations that it leaves in the real, but it assumes
the reality of fewer ultimate qualities. Now, as the
sole ground for assuming real differences of quality is
to explain perceived differences of quality, and, as we
find that we can best explain the latter by assuming
only a few of the former, together with laws about their
relations and changes in terms of that real counterpart
to the objects of spatial perception which we have
been compelled to assume, the procedure of physics
does offer us the least objectionable account of that
branch of reality with which it treats that is possible.
It would be madness to hold that the information that
it offers us is certain, when taken as information about
the real ; it is, and it must always remain, problematic
in the extreme. But, with all its imperfections, it
remains the best account of the real causes of our
perceptions that we can have in the present state of
knowledge ; and it is only by pursuing the same
methods that a still better account can be reached.

It may well be that further experience wUl show,
as it seems to be showing, that the Newtonian laws
are only special cases of still more general laws ; and
that Newtonian mass is not a genuine constant under
all conditions. But the more general laws will still be
laws about positions and velocities of some extended
quality or qualities, and, as such, will be capable of the
same sort of defence that I have offered for the tradi-
tional mechanical physics ; that, although its laws
were deduced from experiments made with appearances,
they are transcriptions of the laws that hold among
the real causes of our perceptions of appearances, and
among the relations of these real causes to each other
in a real spatial counterpart.

B. P. '^3


APPENDIX

NOTE ON THE MEASUREMENT OF THE VELOCITY OF
LIGHT AND ON THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

A WORK on philosophy to be in the present fashion
must talk about M. Bergson, and a work on space
and time must mention the Theory of Relativity. We
will confine ourselves to a few words about the more
important of these two modish subjects.

It is clear that the equations of electrodynamics,
on any theory, raise the same questions about absolute
or relative space and time as do the Newtonian laws
of motion. For we have the old diflSculty that the
laws are supposed to be the results of empirical obser-
vation, and to be stated in terms of absolute space and
time. They contain moreover a certain constant c
which has the dimensions of a velocity, and is identified
with the velocity of light, or any other electromagnetic
disturbance, in vacuo. So the question arises whether
this is an absolute or a relative velocity.

If electrodynamics merely raises the same problems
as ordinary mechanics, and provides no material for a
further discussion, it will not be worth while to trouble
about it. There will be nothing to discuss except the
interesting question whether the laws of electrody-
namics hold for the same axes (those defined by the
fixed stars) as the laws of motion, and this can be left


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 355

to the physicist. But the velocity of light or any
electromagnetic disturbance is a somewhat different
thing from that of a piece of matter ; and electro-
dynamic considerations have given rise to the Theory
of Relativity which is believed by some of its sup-
porters (notably by the late distinguished mathe-
matician Minkowski\ who did so much for its theo-
retical development) to necessitate entirely new views
about space and time. It will therefore be worth our
while to discuss shortly the assumptions involved in
measuring the velocity of light, and the Theory of
Relativity.

Suppose you know the time at which a disturbance
leaves a body A, and the time at which it reaches
another body B, and the distance between the two,
you have necessary — though not perhaps sufficient —
factors for determining the velocity of propagation of
the disturbance. But, in practice, the determination
even of these factors involves certain assumptions
which are not commonly made explicit. It is one
of the greatest and least equivocal of the services
of the Theory of Relativity to have called attention
to this fact. Let us leave that theory out of the
question for the present and consider for ourselves
the problems involved in the determination of these
three factors.

If you want to measure the velocity of a body it
is a truism that you must be able to identify it. It
must be the same body that leaves one of your fixed

1 Rawm und Zeit. For a full exposition of the Theory of Relativity
see Das Belatimtdtsprinzip by M. Laue, and, for a more elementary
account. Bos Relativitdtsprimip der Elektrodynamik by G. 0. Berg. The
best discission of the subject in English is the very able article by Prof.
Huntington, Phil. Mag. April, 1912. Two interesting pamphlets, called
Optical Geometry of Motion and A Theory of Time and Space, by Mr A. A.
Eobb, may also be mentioned.

23—2


356 MEASUEEMENT OF THE

points at one moment and reaches the other at the
second moment. Similarly, in measuring the velocity
of light, we want to deal with the same disturbance
throughout. This identification is made in a simple
way in Fizeau's method of using a toothed wheel to
cover and uncover a source of light successively. The
disturbance that we have to deal w4th is that emitted
by the source during the time that the opening is
faced by a definite one of the gaps in the rotating
toothed wheel. This disturbance passes to a distant
mirror, and is reflected back to the toothed wheel.
If the wheel be rotating below a certain speed the
disturbance will come back to find a part of the gap
from which it came still open, and an image of the
source will be seen. But, if the speed be increased, a
velocity will be reached such that, when the light that
has passed through one gap in the wheel returns from
reflexion, it is faced by the tooth which forms one
side of this gap ; it cannot pass through and the
image disappears. If the speed be further increased
it returns to find the next gap opposite the source ;
it passes through ; and the image is restored. Thus,
if you first increase the speed till the image vanishes,
and then increase it till it reappears, you know that
the image that you see is due to the light that passed
through the gap next before the one through which
it is now returning. There is not absolute identifi-
cation, but you know that you are dealing with some
part of the light emitted during the very short time
that the opening is faced by any given gap ; and that
is enough. It is because there seem to be no bodies
that are opaque to gravitation, as so many are to light,
that we cannot measure the velocity of gravitation or
prove that it has one at all ; for we cannot identify
the ' gravitational distui-bance ' emitted by any body


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 357

at a given moment with that received elsewhere at
another moment.

So much for identification. I will continue to
consider the Fizeau method, because, although it is
not in practice so good as that of Fizeau and Foucault,
which uses a rotating mirror, it is more straightforward
and therefore better adapted as an example for a dis-
cussion of general principles. Let us turn then to
the two positions involved in the measurement of a
velocity. In this method the two positions at which
we actually observe are indeed identical points on the
same instrument. But here, as everywhere else, you
must measure a distance, and so deal with two different
points in order to measure a velocity. The two points
are of course the gap and the centre of the mirror.
In terrestrial experiments the distance of these would
of course be measured by means of rigid bodies, whether
in the gross form of meter scales or in the refinements
of micrometers. But many long distances have to be
measured by means of light signals, and, again, our
most accurate measures of very small differences of
length are by means of the shifting of interference
bands. Both these methods involve a knowledge of
the velocity of light, and would therefore be inadmis-
sible in experiments to prove that light has a velocity
or to determine its particular magnitude. But the pre-
suppositions of ordinary straightforward measurement
with scales have not always been made explicit, and it
is a merit of the Theory of Relativity to call attention
to them. They involve, in fact, time as well as space.
It has always been recognised that measurement
by superposition involves at least one assumption
which cannot well be verified, and that is the con-
stancy of length of the measure. The difficulty is of
this nature. I use a scale to compare two lengths


358 MEASUREMENT OF THE

because I do not trust my immediate judgments of
comparison under certain circumstances. The cir-
cumstances are the following. (i) Even if I can see
two lengths at the same time, yet, unless I can put
them side by side and notice whether there is any
overlap, I cannot trust my immediate judgments of
comparison. And (ii) the case is worse when I cannot
perceive the two objects at the same time in any
position. For I then have to compare what I see
with what I remember, and memory in such matters
is very untrustworthy. By the use of a portable
scale I obviate the first difficulty altogether ; but I
only obviate the second on the assumption that my
scale remains of the same length when I carry it
about. Now my judgment on this point rests on
memory, to correct the untrustworthiness of which we
used a scale at all. This is to put the difficulty in its
most striking way ; but actually there are modifications
to be made, (i) We happen to have the power of
actually observing motion, if it be within certain limits
of speed, as a special object. Now we can keep our
scale under view while we are carrying it about, and,
since we do not observe this phenomenon, we can be
sure that, if it be changing in length, it must be either
very quickly or very slowly. We can further be sure
that it is not changing very quickly, for, if it were,
even our imperfect comparisons based on memory
would soon indicate a change in length to us. Hence
we can at least conclude that, if our scale does change
in length, it does so either very slowly or, at any rate, by
a very small total amount, (ii) The untrustworthiness
of judgments of comparison based on memory increases
very quickly with the time that elapses between the
perception of what is now remembered and the present
memory of it. If we compare two distant lengths it


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 359

is not in our power to reduce this period, which
depends on their distance apart, beyond a certain
amount ; but it is possible to keep the scale under
practically continuous observation. If I want to com-
pare a length at Cambridge with a length in London
by memory not less than 1^ hours can elapse between
the two observations; but, if I carry a metre scale with
me, I can (at the risk of alarming my fellow-passengers)
contemplate it during the whole journey from Cam-
bridge to King's Cross. I am well aware of course
that this is not conclusive. X„^i may look as long as
i„, and X„ as i„_i, and so on ; and yet actually there
may be such a shortening that, if I could directly
compare X„_, and X„^i, I should at once see that their
length differed. Still I am at any rate less liable to
error than if I trusted immediately to memory. For,
be it noted, the length of the lapse, which decreases
the trustworthiness of direct comparisons by memory
of things in widely different places, may very well be
a positive help here. For, if the slow change goes on
continually in one direction, I shall surely be able to
detect it even by memory sooner or later. If A and
JB, the two distant bodies, were nearly equal then
memory is a bad guide ; but, if A be the length of
my metre scale when I left Cambridge, and B its
length at King's Cross, and B is actually considerably
shorter than A, though at any two observations made
near together on the journey the lengths appeared
the same, then the defect of memory due to lapse of
time is being compensated by the actual growth of
difference between what I observed at Cambridge and
what I observe at King's Cross ; for comparison is
always more trustworthy for great differences than for
small ones. (iii) Finally, there is a more general
argument in favour of assuming the constancy of


360 MEASUREMENT OF THE

length of a scale when there is no special reason to
doubt it. Suppose that we have done as we should do
in all accurate physical measurement, and eliminated
the effects of those causes which we hnow to influence
the length of material bodies. We are left with un-
known possible physical causes, and with the possibility
that the mere fact of motion influences length. Now
the unknown physical causes might depend on the
path pursued in carrying the scale from A to B.
These could be neglected if we found that our com-
parison of the lengths of A and B by the scale were
the same no matter what path we pursued \ The main
exceptions to this would be (l) if the change of length
of the scale depended on bodies so distant that any
difference of path that we could make would be
negligible in regard to them, or (2) if the change
were due to bodies within the earth, since we could
not follow paths both in and out of the earth to see
whether there were any difference. (l) may fairly
be neglected, on the ground that in all science we are
obliged to assume that the influence of bodies decreases
with their distance, and that we know (as far as we
can be said to know anything in the empirical world)
that physical forces and disturbances, like light and
sound and gravitation, diminish rapidly in intensity
with distance. I do not know how (2) could be
eliminated. Another possibility is that the change
of length is not due to the path pursued, but depends
on circumstances which are only operative quite near
the bodies to be measured. Here we can only say
that, since, by hypothesis, the change is sudden, we
might fairly expect it to be observable.

1 Of course this is only true if you are using a scale to measure and
compare two distant bodies ; if you are measuring the distance between
two bodies this method of elimination is no longer possible because you
must push the scale along the line joining them.


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 361

Lastly, the question of the possibility of length
being dependent on velocity needs a moment's con-
sideration. It will meet us again in the Theory of
Relativity. We must begin by noticing that it is
a suggestion that has a much more definite meaning
on the theory of absolute than on that of relative
motion. It is perfectly possible that, if there be
absolute space and time, there may be laws connecting
the lengths of bodies with their absolute velocities. In
Lorentz's^ and Fitzgerald's theories of electromagnetic
phenomena in moving bodies it is found necessary to
suppose that bodies alter their linear dimensions with
their velocities along the direction of motion but not
at right angles to it. But the velocities contemplated
are absolute ones, or, at any rate, relative to the ether
only. If it were suggested that there is only motion
relative to other bodies, and yet that length depends
on velocity, we should have a strange position ; for
every body in the universe has relative motions of
the most various magnitudes and in the most various
directions at the same time. If I walk across the
room my metre scale has a velocity relative to me,
and, at the same time, it has velocities relative to all
the white ants who are moving about in South Africa.
It were surely very wild to suppose that these relative
velocities — which are just as real as any others —
genuinely condition the length of bodies, unless we
have the strongest grounds for doing so. But it will
be best to defer the further discussion of this theory
until we have seen why it is supposed to be needful
to assume it.

The upshot of this discussion is that here, as in the
choice of axes for mechanics, and the determination

1 Lorentz, Th& Theory of Electrons.


362 MEASUREMENT OF THE

of equality of times, we start with a belief in the
general trustworthiness of our judgments of com-
parison, then proceed to criticise and modify on
the basis of what seems probable from our general
knowledge of the 'make' of the world, and finally
take as equal those qualities which at once seem
equal to our senses as corrected by the best means
at our disposal, and, by being taken as equal, enable
us to state verifiable general laws about the real world
in the simplest possible terms. Here, as everywhere,
there is always the possibility of our being wrong —
and I would add the possibility of theoretically in-
corrigible mistakes ; but, until we are proved wrong,
we shall act reasonably in believing ourselves to be
right. What I would particularly deprecate is that
perverted kind of idealism of which the philosophic
works of the late M. Poincar^ are full, which holds
that, when we can imagine a physical law which
would make our measurements in error and yet would
not allow us ever to detect the mistake, we must
say that there is nothing absolute to measure and
(what certainly follows) that there can be no right
or wrong in the matter. We may surely recognise,
as a matter of theory, that we may be liable to genuine
errors which we shall never discover ; but, having
made this acknowledgement, we need never trouble
further about them.

The difficulty which I have been discussing about
measurement is, as I said, an old one, but it is worthy
of consideration. There remains, however, another con-
nexion between the measurement of lengths and time,
the implications of which have only lately been recog-
nised. This connexion is very relevant to the velocity
of light and the Theory of Relativity. If there be
absolute space the distances between points in it are


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 363

not ftinctions of time but are eternal relations. But,
whether there be absolute space or not, it is certain
that we cannot measure directly the distances between
its points, but must confine ourselves to the distances^
between bodies in space. Now the distances between
bodies are not eternal but are liable to change. What
we want to know is the distance between two bodies
at a definite moment, for this alone is certainly
definite. Hence time enters essentially into the
measurement of spatial magnitudes, though not, so far
as I can see, into the notion of space, as Minkowski
would have us believe.

It is evident that no process of measurement can
directly give us the distance between two bodies at
any definite moment, though, under certain circum-
stances, the results of our measurement may as a
matter of fact coincide numerically with the value
of the distance at some definite moment. Unless
my measuring-rod exactly fits the distance to be
measured, it is clear that the moment at which, in
the course of measuring, one end of the rod reaches
the body B cannot be the same as that at which
the other end is at A, but wiU be later. But what
we want to know is the distance between A at one
moment and B at the same moment. We might
feel tempted to say that, if A and B be relatively
at rest, then the number of times that I lay the
measuring-rod down in passing from ^ to ^ will
give their distance at any moment during the period
for which they remain relatively at rest. But this
forgets an essential factor. The measuring-rod itself
is a material object, and has to be laid on something


1 I do not attempt here to discuss what precisely the distance between
two bodies can mean. But I mention the matter as being one full of
difficulties that have hardly been touched as yet.


364 MEASUKEMENT OF THE

— call it a third body X. If there be no relative
motion between A, B, and X, and none between X
and the rod at the moments when the positions of
the latter's end-points are being marked on X, what
we measure will give the distance at any moment
between A and B. If, on the other hand, whilst
the same conditions are fulfilled, as between A and
B on the one hand, and X and the rod on the other,
but A and B are moving relatively to X, what we
measure will not be the distance between A and B
at any moment. It will, in both cases, be a measure
of the distance between the point on X with which
A coincided when we began to measure and the point
on X with which B coincided when we ceased to
measure, but this wiU no longer coincide with the
distance between A and B either at the moment
when we began or at that when we ceased measur-
ing. If we forget this consideration, and if A and

B both move in the direction AB with the velocity v
relative to X, whilst the rod when in position for
reading is at rest relative to X, it is clear that we
shall reach different results according as we measure
from ^ to jB or from B to A. If we measure from
^ to _B the distance from where A was when we
started to where B is when we end is greater than
that between A and B at any moment, and the
difference will depend on how fast we measure. If
we measure from B to A our measured distance will
be too short. Finally, if v be greater than the rate
at which we measure, we shall never overtake B, and
shall therefore judge that the distance between A
and B is infinite as compared with the length of
our rod. If, on the other hand, we measure from B
to A, it may be that A will have reached the end
of the rod that was at B before we move the rod,


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 365

and then we shall conclude that there is no distance
between A and B.

All this sounds silly enough when we put it in
terms of rods. We say that we should see A moving
up the rod as we measured from A to B, or B moving
away from it as we measured from jB to ^ ; and that,
anyhow, we could tell that something was wrong,
because, if the measured distance from A to B difiered
from that from B to A, we should know at once that
we could not be dealing with the distances at the
same moment, since distance at the same moment
is symmetrical. This is doubtless true, but it would
not help us if the velocities with which we had to
deal were very small ; and it is only because we do
not use rods for measurement in the cases where
errors of this kind are at once important and difficult
to detect that the problem does not arise with
measuring-rods. But it arises acutely when we
deal with the velocity of light, and this in two
ways. In the first place, it enters into the actual
determination of the velocity of light, and, further,
it is involved in all measurements of distance made
by means of that velocity when it is supposed to be
known.

Let us return once more to our Fizeau experiment
to illustrate these statements. We take as the dis-
tance that the light has travelled twice the measured
length between the wheel and the mirror. We have
good grounds for holding that these are relatively
at rest to each other and also that both are relatively
at rest to the earth on which we lay our scale. Hence
the distance measured is actually that between the
two at any moment. But did the light travel this
distance when it left the gap and reached the mirror,
and does it travel the same distance when it leaves


366 MEASUREMENT OF THE

the mirror and returns to the gap ? We are likely
to say that the actual distance travelled by the light
is not from where the gap is when it leaves it to
where the mirror is at that moment ; nor from where
the gap was when the light reached the mirror to
where the mirror is then ; but that it is the distance
between where the gap was when the light left it and
where the mirror is when it reaches it. But here
the consistent relativist is on very slippery ground,
and, if he thinks that he is merely using the language
of common-sense, he must remember that common-
sense is not relativistic. By the ' place where A was '
the relativist must of course mean a place defined by
distances from some material axes. Hence the 'place
where A was ' will depend on your axes. If you take
axes fixed in the earth the place where the gap was
when the light left it is the same as the place where
it is when the light returns to it, and the place where
the mirror was when the light left the gap is the
same as the place where it is when the light reaches
it. For there is no relative motion between the in-
strument and the earth. If, on the other hand, we
take the fixed stars to define our axes the place where
the gap was when the light left it will no longer be
the same as the place where the gap is when the light
returns to it ; and naturally the same remarks apply
to the mirror. This is of course because of the rota-
tion of the earth relative to the fixed stars. What
we have to be careful to remember is that the relativist
has no right to the phrase ' the place where A is '
because he must mean its place with respect to some
definite set of material axes, and, according as he
chooses a set X or a set Y, the -place where A was
at ^1 may be the same as or difierent from the place
where it is at t^. What the relativist must talk about


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 367

is always ' the place of A relative to X ' and ' the
place of A relative to F ' ; there is no inconsistency
in one of these changing and the other being un-
altered in an interval t. Common-sense on the other
hand can talk of ' the place of ^ ' at a given moment,
because it means its place in absolute space. It
follows that the relativist has no right to talk of
the distance travelled by the light. The light left
the gap, reached the mirror, and returned to the gap.
Relative to the earth the distance travelled is twice
that measured between the gap and the mirror ;
relative to the fixed stars it is different from this.
If you object that, after all, there must be some
definite distance that the light has travelled inde-
pendent of your choice of axes, I can only answer
that, if you think so, you must drop your theory of
relative space. No doubt the distance between two
bodies at any moment is independent of choice of
axes ; but, when the distance required is that from
where A was at one moment to where B is at another
moment, it is no longer the distance between A and
B at any moment that you are measuring but the
distance between two hypothetical pieces of matter
A' and B', rigidly attached to your particular system
of axes, and such that A coincided with A' at the
first moment and B with B' at the second mioment.

We might expect then that, if we divide twice
the measured distance by the time elapsed between
leaving the first gap and re-entering the next, we
shall get the velocity of light relative to the earth,
but not relative to the fixed stars. (This of course
assumes that the velocity of light is constant and
that no time is taken up by reflexion at the mirror.
These assumptions I do not propose to discuss.) We
can now pass to the celebrated Michelsen-Morley


368 MEASUREMENT OF THE

experiment. Stated in its simplest terms the ex-
periment comes to this. Light from a source fixed
in the earth is sent out in a direction tangential to
the earth's orbit. It is then partially reflected and
partially transmitted by a mirror fixed at a point P
in this line. One part continues in its old direction,
and the other goes at right angles to it and therefore
to the tangent to the earth's orbit. Both parts are
reflected back along their respective paths by mirrors
placed normally to them at the same measured dis-
tances from P. Now, owing to the motion of the
earth in its orbit, the light that has travelled straight
on in the tangent and back again has described a
slightly longer path relative to the fixed stars than
that which was deflected at right angles. Since the
velocity relative to the fixed stars is constant in all
directions the two disturbances that meet after the re-
flexions will not have started from the common source
at exactly the same time. They will therefore inter-
fere. If we turn the whole apparatus through a
right angle in its own plane the interference bands
ought to have shifted, and the amount of shifting
should enable us to compare the velocity of the earth
in its orbit relative to the fixed stars with that of
light. Michelsen and Morley's apparatus was quite
delicate enough to detect changes of this order, but
none were detected.

Another and an equivalent way of stating the
result is as follows. If the velocity of light relative
to the fixed stars be the same in all directions, whilst
the earth has a velocity relative to them in a certain
direction and none at right angles to it, we should
expect the velocity of light relative to the earth to
be different for paths along and at right angles to
its direction of motion. Hence, if the paths on the


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 369

earth are equal, light ought to take different times
to traverse them, and so there ought to be this
mterference phenomenon which actually is not ob-
served.

It is the non-observability of such effects which
is the motive of the Theory of Eelativity. We can
already see that one of the alleged paradoxes that
flow from this Theory, viz. that if A has velocity u
relative to B and B has velocity v relative to C in
the same direction then the velocity of A relative
to C is not u + v, is realised in the experiment ; for,
if we call c the velocity of light relative to the fixed
stars and u that of the earth relative to them, it
would follow from this law that the velocity of Hght
relative to the earth would be c — uia. the direction
of the earth's motion and c at right angles to it,
whereas both velocities are found to be equal. But
before we actually pass to the Theory itself there are
two points worth mentioning, (i) In the Michelsen-
Morley experiment we are sending out light from a
source which is in motion relative to the fixed stars.
If we supposed light to consist of particles obeying
the ordinary laws of mechanics and shot off from
the emitting body by impulsive forces which are the
same in all directions, then those particles which
travelled parallel to the earth's direction of motion
would start with the common velocity due to the
impulse -I- the velocity that they already had as parts
of a body moving relative to the fixed stars. Those
which were shot off at right angles to the earth's
motion would only have the velocity due to the im-
pulse in that direction, though they would of course
drift with the velocity of the earth in the direction
of its motion. The result would be that the velocity
of light from a source moving relatively to the fixed

B. p. 24


370 MEASUREMENT OF THE

stars would not be the same relative to the fixed
stars in all directions, and this might explain the
negative result of the experiment without resort to
anything more complicated. We should further, I take
it, have to suppose that on passing through the glass
plate at P the direct ray would be retarded and that
this retardation would be permanent. On the wave-
theory it is of course retarded, but only for as long
as it is travelling in the glass. It is worth while to
mention this alternative theory, but hardly to work
it out, since all the arguments by which physicists
have persuaded themselves that the undulatory theory
is to be preferred to the emission theory are against
it. (ii) The purely physical theory to account for
the result of the Michelsen-Morley experiment is that
of Lorentz and Fitzgerald that bodies in motion re-
lative to the fixed stars undergo a contraction in the
direction of their motion, which depends on their
velocity, but none at right angles to it. This
contraction cannot be detected, because it afiects the
measuring scale too ; so that lengths measured on
the earth in various directions, which appear equal,
are not really so. It can be shown that, if a length
which is I when there is no motion relative to the

fixed stars becomes I / 1 — — when it moves with


^M


velocity v along its own direction relative to the stars,
but remains unchanged if moved at right angles to
itself, the observed results can be predicted. (The
letter c stands here for the velocity of light relative
to the fixed stars.) Of course Lorentz does not
mention the fixed stars but talks about motion rela-
tive to the ether, which he supposes to be fixed in
absolute space. Since you can no more determine
velocities or positions relative to the ether than to


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 371

absolute space, and since the former is supposed to
be fixed in the latter, I see no advantage in retaining
both conceptions. If either is to be retained absolute
space has much the better claim. But, in any case,
the empirical laws must have been discovered by
reference to actual bodies, and these are here, as in
mechanics, ultimately the fixed stars, or a system of
co-ordinates so imagined as to make a form of state-
ment of the laws which is approximately true in
terms of motions relative to the fixed stars com-
pletely true in terms of motions with respect to it.
The objection to the Lorentz-Fitzgerald theory as it
stands is its apparent arbitrariness. I do not think
that it is a legitimate objection to say with Poincard
that the contraction is postulated ad hoc. Of course
it is postulated ad hoc ; so is everything in physics
that cannot be directly observed. Nor is it relevant
to say that there is a very great difference between
postulating something to account for what you do
observe and postulating something to account for your
observing nothing. To observe nothing where, on
theories which have so far accounted wonderfully well
for all the phenomena, you ought to observe something,
is a very positive fact ; it shows that your theories are
either wrong, or, at any rate, incomplete ; and, in as far
as they have been so successful over so large a field, it is
reasonable, not to reject them entirely and start afresh,
but to seek for some supplementary hypothesis that
shall account for their present failure. My objection
to the theory is that, when you leave out of account
ether and absolute space, it seems strange and improb-
able. Let us grant at once that this is no conclusive
reason against it, and that no causal law that you can
possibly suggest is d, priori impossible, and let us
then consider what is involved in this suggested law.

24—2


372 MEASUREMENT OF THE

If we are to be consistent relativists we must
say that length, on this theory, depends on motion
relative to the fixed stars. We shall then probably
be asked why motion relative to the fixed stars
should be connected with length rather than motions
relative to (say) the most hard-roed codfish in the
Atlantic, since one set has no prerogative of reality
over the other. But our discussions about dynamics
will enable us to dispose of this question with some-
thing more than the general answer that you cannot
prescribe ds priori what in nature is going to be
relevant to what. The answer in fact is that length
will be as much connected with motions relative to
the codfish, or any other body of reference, as with
motions relative to the fixed stars. All that we
have to add is that, if you refer the motions of all
bodies to the fixed stars, the law connecting their
lengths with their velocities will take the simple
form given by Lorentz and Fitzgerald, whilst, if you
refer their motions to axes fixed in the codfish, the
law (though equivalent) will be of excessive compli-
cation. There is nothing arbitrary in an objectionable
sense in the Lorentz-Fitzgerald law when stated in
terms of the fixed stars ; it gives the fixed stars no
prerogative in nature but only a prerogative in
human calculations. Leibniz's God, with his passion
for complicated mathematics, would probably prefer
the codfish as a body of reference, and would com-
mit no error in doing so. You may, if you choose,
make an objection somewhat like Mr Russell's question
whether the fixed stars on the relativist view are
subject to Newtonian forces. You can say : At the
same moment the fixed stars cannot have two different
sizes ; when you refer motions to them they will not
be shortened, since v in the Lorentz-Fitzgerald formida


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 373

wiU vanish. But, when you refer them and other
bodies to the codfish, they wiU have a definite velocity,
and they will be shortened. All this, however, is sheer
confusion. If the Lorentz-Fitzgerald formula be strictly
true for the bodies in the world when referred to the
fixed stars then the equivalent law when you refer
all bodies, including the fixed stars, to the codfish
must be such that the absolute size of each body at
the same moment is the same.

So far then the Lorentz-Fitzgerald law, though
stated by its authors in terms of absolute motion or
(what is equivalent) of motion relative to a fixed ether,
furnishes, even if true, no more ground for a belief in
absolute space or a fixed ether than do the laws of
mechanics when similarly stated. But where people
feel a difficulty is here. Is it possible, they will ask,
that an intrinsic quality of a body, like its length, can
be causally connected with a mere change in its ex-
ternal relations like its relative motions ? We do not,
I must repeat, in ordinary life believe for an instant
that motion is tnerely a change of distance either
between two bodies or between bodies and points of
absolute space ; it is only by a great efibrt that we
can bring ourselves to keep this view firmly before the
mind in all its bearings, and the fallacies with which
discussions on absolute and relative motion bristle
(some of which I can hardly expect to have been
fortunate enough to avoid) show that, with the slightest
relaxation of attention, we fall back into the notions of
common-sense. We regard the motion of each body
as a quality of it as much as its size, and, whilst we
grant that this quality is connected with changes of
spatial relation between bodies, and, if we believe in
absolute space, between them and it, I doubt whethei
even the acceptance of absolute space, when coupled


374 MEASUEEMENT OF THE

with the assertion that the motion of a body is nothing
hut the change of its relation to points of absolute space,
gives what common-sense thinks it means by motion.
Now common-sense, holding this belief that the motion
of a body is something more than the change of its
spatial relations, finds no particular difficulty in thinking
that this quality may be connected with the other
quality of the body called length. It is surprising,
like the properties of Radium, because unfamiliar ; but
that is the worst that can be said of it. But, if you
ask common-sense to drop the idea that you can talk
of the motion of a single body as a quality of it, and to
confine itself to the change of distance between it and
other bodies — a perfectly reciprocal change — and then
tell it that this is causally connected with the size of
the body, it will tell you that it is inconceivable. Nor
would it be much comforted if you told it that the
size was connected with the rate at which its distance
was changing with respect to points of absolute space.
It will say to the first suggestion : I am ready to
believe that if I walk across the room my height alters,
because the motion and the height are both qualities
of me ; but I cannot believe that if you walk across
the room the mere change of distance wiU alter my
height, for my height is a quality of me and the change
of distance a mere alteration in a reciprocal relation be-
tween us. I am even ready to believe that your motion,
if you will let me take it as a quality of you, affects
my height, for I know of plenty of cases of transeunt
causation ; but further than this I cannot go. Put
into abstract form, the position of common-sense is that,
if a reciprocal relation between two terms involves no
qualities in those terms except that of standing in this
relation, then a change in this relation cannot be
causally connected with changes in those qualities


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 375

which can be seen not to be dependent for their
existence on the existence of other terms. Size is such
a quaHty ; common-sense is firmly convinced that, if
there were only one body in the universe, it would
have some definite size and shape at each moment ;
and, if you answer that size depends on relations, you
simply commit the fallacy of confusing magnitude with
the possibility of measuring magnitude. The same
difficulty is not felt with mechanics, because here we
have causal relations between changes of distance, not
between them and qualities of terms.

Frankly I am not prepared to pronounce on this
dogma. When I reflect on it I do not see that it is
self-evident"; but one must attach a certain weight' to
general principles which many people find evident,
unless one can either show that they are false, or point
to causes which have actually produced the belief but
include among them beliefs incompatible with it. The
dogma remains the only serious objection to the Lorentz-
Fitzgerald theory, assuming that the latter accounts for
the facts. But, if we could show that there was no need
for any special physical assumption, that the negative
result of the Michelsen-Morley and numerous other
experiments depends on assumptions involved in all
measurement, which are commonly overlooked and only
here begin to be relevant, we should gain a double
advantage. We should no longer go against what may
be an d, priori law, and what, at any rate, renders such
a theory as that of Lorentz intrinsically improbable ;
and we should not have to alter or supplement our old,
and, so far, successful theory of electrodynamics, but
merely to develop the consequences of something in it
that had been overlooked. The Theory of Relativity
claims these advantages, and we will now consider it.

Let us consider two systems which are in relative


376 MEASUREMENT OF THE

motion to each other, and suppose that the people on
them are trying to find the magnitude of some physical
quantity like the velocity of light. It is clear that, if
we call Si and S^ the two systems, the question : Is the
velocity of light relative to »Si the same as or different
from its velocity relative to S^ ? has no very definite
meaning till we are sure that the people on both
systems are using the same units of length and of time,
or, at any rate, know the relations between their re-
spective units. Of course, in nature, light has a certain
velocity relative to each system, and these velocities
are either the same or different, whatever may be
people's measures of them. But all that we can know
is whether the numerical values found by the two sets
of observers are the same ; and it is clear that their
sameness or difference will only allow us to infer
to the sameness or difference of physical velocity if
they are using the same units. If, again, they think
they are using the same units, but their judgments on
this point are in fault, sameness of measure will not
mean sameness of magnitude measured, and difference
of measure need not mean difference of magnitude
measured. These points seem obvious ; but, as most
difficulties here spring from neglecting to make the
obvious explicit, I mention them. Let us first consider
their judgments about time. It is clear that they
must not merely agree about their units of time, but
must also agree as to when a physical process is uniform.
The only thing they can do is to agree to take some
definite physical process, which they can both observe,
as uniform, and to standardise their measuring in-
struments by means of this. As we have already
pointed out, there is an element of convention + an
element of immediate judgment involved in taking a
certain process as uniform. We begin with immediate


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 377

judgments of comparison, and end by defining as uni-
form some process which (a) appears uniform to our
judgments of immediate comparison, and (6) by being
assumed uniform, simplifies as far as possible the
statement of laws that are found to be true. We can
suppose that each set of people has gone through this
process for themselves independently of each other and
that each has decided that the velocity of light relative
to his system is uniform. This does not imply that
each has found the same numerical value for it, for
that would involve that they have agreed about units
of length and time\ This being assumed, we can
suppose that they both use the same methods of
regulating their clocks so that they shall go uniformly.
The method adopted by both will be as follows : When
a clock on S^ marks t-^ a light signal is sent out to some
other point in the direction of relative motion and
reflected back. It returns when the clock marks t^.
Another signal is sent out to the same point when the
clock marks t^ and returns when it marks t^. If you
always find that t^ — t^^t^ — t, the clock will be said to
be going uniformly. The people on S.^ will regulate
their clocks in the same way.

Now we can suppose clocks dotted about S^ and *S,
wherever we please, and the next point that you must
agree about is in your test for whether all the clocks
in a system are going at the sa/me rate, it being granted
that each goes at a uniform rate. Here two methods
present themselves. If you can carry the clocks about
you have only to bring them up to the clock that you
are going to take as standard on *S,, and see whether,
while this clock's hands pass from t^ to t^, those of all

1 In what follows about the regulation of clocks and the comparison of
rates and zeros I am very much indebted to Prof. Huntington's article
already quoted.

24—5


378 MEASUREMENT OF THE

the others pass through the same angle. If so you can
further completely synchronise the clocks by seeing that
all mark t^ together. Assuming that the rates of your
clocks will not be altered by carrying them about they
can now be put back in their places on S^ and all the
clocks on that system will be running at the same
uniform rate and having the same zero. The people
on S^ can synchronise their clocks with their standard
one in the same way. But, if you cannot synchronise
your clocks in this way (and it is very unlikely that
you could do so for all the clocks of a system), another
plan must be adopted by the people on each system.
Let the standard clock on S^ send out a light signal to
a point P on S^ when it marks ^j. Let this reach P
when P's clock marks t^. Let the standard clock
send out a second signal when it marks t^, and let this
reach P when P's clock marks t^. Then if t^ — t^^t^ — t.^
we say that the clock at P is going at the same rate
as the standard clock. It only remains to set the zeros
of the other clocks on S^ in accord with the standard one.
If the standard one sends out a signal when it marks
t^, and this is received at P when P's clock marks t^
and at once reflected back to the standard clock, reach-
ing it when it marks t^, we say that the zeros of the two
clocks agree, provided that t^ = ^{t^ + tg). The people on
S^ are supposed to set their clocks in the same way.

So far we have assumed that both people have
concluded that the velocity of light is uniform inde-
pendently of each other. It is clear that, if this way
of setting clocks be reasonable at all, it is as reason-
able for the people on S^ as for those on S^. And the
supposed uniformity' of the velocity of light makes it

1 Prof. Huntington does not mention this point, which seems to me
important. Unless they both assumed this it would be an unreasonable
way of setting clocks for the ones who did not assume it.


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 379

reasonable for both. Let us now consider their
measures of length. Granted that each holds that
light travels uniformly relative to him, and remem-
bering that they cannot possibly compare the velocities
of light which each finds relative to his own system
with each other until they have agreed on their units
of length and time, we see that there must be an
element of convention in the answer to the question
whether the velocity of light relative to both is the
same or different. It is clear that they can so choose
their respective units that the numerical values of the
two velocities will be the same, and, if they further
have grounds for thinking that their units are the
same under these circumstances, they will naturally
conclude that the actual velocities of which their
measures are equal are equal in nature. Now the
people on S^ are at liberty to define their units in such
a way that if a light signal leaves a point P when P's
clock marks ^j and reaches a point Q when Q'b clock
■ marks t^ the measure of the distance PQ shaU be
c (ij — ij). c is a mere number which they can choose
as they like, and whatever they choose will be the
numerical value of the velocity of light relative to them
in their units. Now, if the people on S^ have syn-
chronised their clocks in the same way as those on S^,
and have decided to set out a coordinate system in the
same way by light signals, their choice of units of space
and time are still open to them. They can make their
standard clock go at any rate they like compared with
that of Si and they can choose any unit they like for
distance. Since, until they have chosen their units,
they cannot say whether the velocity of light relative
to them is the same as or different from that of light
relative to S^, they are at liberty to choose their units
so that the two velocities shall have the same measure.


380 MEASUREMENT OF THE

This will not of course supply them with any reason

for supposing that the two velocities are equal in fact,

unless they have grounds for believing that their units

of time and space are the same multiples of S^'s units

of time and space respectively. Thus the fact that

the measured velocity is the same relative to the two

systems depends on a convention about units. Still

the question whether the velocities themselves, as

distinct from the measures of them, are equal is not

a matter of convention ; it depends on whether equal

measures of length and time, as determined on these

conventions, really correspond to equal lengths and

times in nature.

Let us suppose that the people on >Si reckon that

the standard clock on S^ is going r times as fast as

theirs. Their method of judgment is as follows. They

find that when they observe this clock to mark i/ the

clock on their system which is opposite to it marks ^i,

that when they observe it to mark tj the clock on

their system opposite to it marks t,, and that '

t' — t'

-^ — J- = r. Let us further suppose that the people on

/S'l reckon that S^ is moving with a velocity u relative to
them along their x axis. Then it is easy to show, and
it is shown by Prof. Huntington, that, if the clocks be
synchronised and the coordinates set out by light
signals in accordance with the rules laid down, the
following relations will hold between the coordinates
and clock-readings of the two systems. Let the
standard clocks be at the respective origins of the
two systems, and, when these origins are opposite each
other, let the clocks mark 0. Further let the common
direction of relative velocity be taken as the ic-axis in
both. Then, if x, y, z be the coordinates of a point on
/Si and the clock there reads ^i, whilst «', y', z' are the


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 381

coordinates of the point on S^ opposite to this and </
its clock reading, the following equations hold :

x' = Ik{x — ut), y' = ly, z' = Iz


t' = lKlt-%X


V-^" 'V-


These are the usual equations of the Theory of
Helativity. It can be shown that, with our conventions,
the numerical value of the velocity of S^ relative to S^,
as measured by people on S^, is — u, and that the rate
of the standard clock on S^, as observed from S^, is

-5- . It will then be seen that the equations are — as

they ought to be, seeing we are dealing simply with
relative motion between the two systems — completely
reciprocal ; i.e. we have

x = kI' {sd — u't') etc.

A further very important result is that the
numerical value of the velocity of light from a source
in uniform motion relative to the two systems is found
to be the same, viz. c by observers on each relative to
his own system. The fact that this follows from simple
and obvious considerations about measurement on Prof.
Huntington's method seems to me to be its great
advantage over that of Einstein. Einstein^ takes this
by no means obvious result as an independent postu-
late, and it is from this that he actually obtains the
transformation equations by mathematical reasoning.
I say that he takes it as independent ; I should say
that he ought to do so. Actually he seems to think

1 Jahrhuch d. Radioaktivitdt u. Elektronik, Jan. 1908.


382 MEASUEEMENT OF THE

(wrongly, as is well brought out by Mr Norman
CampbelP) that it is deducible from the axiom that
the velocity of light relative to a system from a source
fixed in it and measured by people on it will be inde-
pendent of the relative motion of the system to others'.
The Lorentz-Fitzgerald formula follows at once
from these equations, and therefore — when measure-
ments are made by light signals, at any rate — from
plausible conventions about measurement, and from
these alone. Let P and Q be two points on the aj-axis
of ;Si, and let their coordinates be x^ and x^. Then the
people on S-^ will call the measure of PQ x^ — Xp. The
measure which people on S^ will give of their distance
will be the measure that they give of the distance
between two points P' and Q on S^, such that, at the
same moment by the clocks on S^ (say t'), P' is opposite
to P and Q' to Q. Then we have :

and x^ = kI {xg — utg),

when tp and t^ are the readings of the clocks on S^ at
P when P is opposite to P' and at Q when Q is
opposite to Q' respectively. Thus


Whence h-% = '7. («? - «i>).

.-. X^-xJ^Kl{Xg-Xp)(l-'^


— \Xg — Xp).


K


Suppose that i2 is a point on S^ such that RP is at
right angles to PQ and yr-yp = Xg-Xp. Then it is

1 'Common Sense of Relativity,' Phil. Mag. April, 1911.

2 This axiom may be compared with our remarks on the Lorentz-
Fitzgerald Theory, p. 374 et seq.


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 383

easy to show that the distance RP as reckoned by
people on S^ will be I {y^ — y^). Hence

Vr'-yp _i{yr-yv) _..yr-yp_.. L


' ^^ l{x,-x,) ^^"'^^ x/i-f


This is in accord with the Lorentz-Fitzgerald
formula.

Again, the people on S^ will not reckon two events
which happen at different places on S^ as contemporary
when the people on S^ count them as contemporary.
Suppose an event happens at P on S^ when the clock
there marks t and another at Q on S-^ when the clock
there marks the same. The times at which they will
be judged to have happened by people on S^ will be
those marked by their clocks which are opposite P
and Q respectively when the clocks at P and Q mark t.
Let these times be tj and t^.

Then tp =kI (t — -^Xp] and t^ = KlU — -^x^

V

— — ^2 \Xq Xp ).

So the event at the place further along the axis of
X is judged by the people on S^ to happen before that
at the point nearer the origin, though the people on S^
judge them to be contemporary. Of course the com-
plete reciprocity of the transformation equations in-
volves that all these remarks apply, mutatis mutandis,
to the judgment of people on S^ about times and
distances on S^.

But, now that we have seen some of the implications
of setting clocks and measuring lengths according to
the reasonable conventions set out above, the question


384 MEASUREMENT OF THE

arises : What would the people on S-^ and ;Sj really
believe about the physical world ? We must assume
that they can communicate with each other (e.g. by
wireless telegraphy) ; indeed we have already assumed
this when we said that they both took the same
number c as the measure of the velocity of light
relative to their own systems from sources fixed in
them. But we will not assume at present that clocks
or measuring rods can be carried about either system,
or, d, fortiori, from one system to the other.

It is clear that the people on S^ will tell those on
S^ that the latter's clocks are not really synchronous,
but that they get slower the further they are along
the cc-axis from the origin. And the people on S^ will
make exactly the same criticism on the clocks of S^.
Yet both have synchronised their clocks by the same
method, and therefore the opinion of neither is to be
preferred to that of the other. What are they to
conclude ? The difference arises out of the employ-
ment of two different methods of judging synchronism.
The people on ^i judge of the synchronism of their own
clocks by the method of light signals, so do the people
on S^. But the people on S^ apply a different test to
S^'s clocks. Their test is that, if a clock of theirs at P
marks t and the clock opposite to it on S^ then marks
t\ then, if a clock of theirs at Q marks t, the clock
opposite to this on S^ ought also to mark t'. The
argument is that the readings at P and P' are certainly
contemporary and the readings at Q and Q' are
certainly contemporary, but identity of reading at P
and Q indicates identity of time if the clocks on S^ are
properly set, and therefore, if the clocks on S^ were
properly set, there ought to be identity of readings at
P' and Q'. It is difficult to find any flaw in this test,
and therefore we must conclude that there is some-
thing wrong with the test which is used by the


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 385

separate systems, in fact that identity of clock-readings
on a given system set out by the conventions that we
have adopted is not a mark of identity of time. Since
both parties cannot be right, and since neither has the
slightest claim to be right as against the other, the only
conclusion is that both may be wrong, and that these
conventions, plausible as they may seem, do not give
us a system of clocks such that identity of reading on
two clocks of the same system means identity of time.

But the source of the perplexity would be quite
clear to a believer in a fixed ether or absolute space.
He would say : Your tests for synchronism in clocks
and your measures of distance are not in general valid
ones, they only are real tests for the particular case of
systems that are at rest relative to the medium in
which light travels. Now, when you have (as in your
example) two systems in relative motion to each other,
it is certain that one and possible that each of them is
in motion relative to the ether. Hence your tests are
bound to lead you to wrong beliefs in at least one of
the systems, and the paradoxes that you find result as
a matter of course. Unfortunately no experiments will
detect or measure velocity relative to the ether, and
therefore we cannot tell in what system, if any, the
tests proposed do really ensure the synchronism of
clocks.

It is clear how it happens that the test is not in
general accurate. It will be remembered that, in regu-
lating our clocks, we said that their zeros agreed if
a light signal which left the standard clock when it
marks t^ reaches a clock at P on the £c-axis when it
marks t^, is reflected, and returns to the standard clock
when it marks t^ such that t^ = -^ {t^ + 1^. We can see
that this test is only valid if the velocity of light rela-
tive to our system be the same in both directions. We
have assumed in fact in using the test that the velocity


386 MEASUREMENT OF THE

of light relative to each system is not merely uniform
in any given direction, but is the same in all directions
and in both senses. Since we have set out our clocks
and coordinates on this assumption it is not surprising
that our measures of the velocity of light accord with
it ; but, unless the assumption be true, agreement of
numerical values of measures is no proof of identity of
what is measured. On the other hand until we have
made some assumption that will enable us to set out
coordinates and regulate clocks, we can get no numerical
measures at all. The result of the discussion seems to
me to be this : (l) Left to themselves the people on
/Sj and S^ would have no reason to doubt the correct-
ness of the assumptions on which they regulated their
clocks and set out their coordinates. (2) Even when
they can communicate and discover disagreement
neither has any claim to be right as against the other,
since both have made the same assumptions. Hence
one must be wrong and both may be, and neither can
tell which is. (3) The assumption which must be
wrong in at least one case is that the velocity of light
relative to the system in nature (as distinct from the
numerical value found for it) is the same in all direc-
tions and both senses. (4) Since you cannot regulate
your clocks and set out your coordinates until you have
made some assumption on this point, and cannot get
numerical values for the relative velocities of light in
various directions until you have regulated your clocks
and set out your coordinates, no numerical value gained
by experiment can ever without circularity be claimed
as a proof of your assumption. (5) But disagreement
between people on different systems who have made
similar assumptions on points as to which there must
be agreement if the assumptions be true disproves
their truth in one case at least. (6) What remains to
be said is that these disagreements are of no direct


VELOCITY OF LIGHT 387

importance to philosophy or to science. They are of
no direct importance to philosophy, because the reality
of time and space and the existence of equal lengths
and contemporary events are in no way touched by the
fact that it is impossible to give an absolutely satis-
factory test for equality of lengths or times. Indirectly
they are of great interest because they force us to see
that assumptions are made in aU measurement which
are often overlooked or taken as obviously true. And
they are of no direct importance to science, because we
are not there concerned to discover laws connecting
absolute lengths, durations, and other magnitudes, but
only laws connecting the values which we can read
off our instruments. No doubt we call these values
measures of the lengths, times, forces, etc. in nature,
and so speak of the laws connecting the measured
values as laws of what they are supposed to measure.
But what we have to remember is that, whilst these
laws do, no doubt, imply the existence of laws in
nature, they are expressions of the latter subject to
the assumptions on which our measured values are
supposed to be measures of the natural magnitudes in
question. If those assumptions be false, but internally
consistent and consistently employed, we shall arrive at
laws which are true and valuable, but are not direct
transcriptions into numbers of the functional relations
of those natural magnitudes in terms of which they
are verbally stated. To put it more clearly, let us
suppose that I discover a law connecting my measures
of three magnitudes P, Q, and R. I shall no doubt
talk of this as a law connecting the magnitudes P, Q,
and P themselves. Now, all my measurements are
made on certain assumptions about what is a test for
equality and inequality among such magnitudes. If
these assumptions be true, i.e. if my assumptions lead
me to believe that two quantities of the kind P are


388- VELOCITY OF LIGHT

equal when they actually have the same magnitude,
and to suppose that one is greater than the other
when it actually has a greater magnitude, and so on,
then my law connecting the measures of P, Q, and Ji
can be called a direct transcription into numbers of the
law of nature connecting the magnitudes themselves.
If, on the other hand, my assumptions be false, but
consistent and consistently used, i.e. if they lead me to
take quantities with different magnitudes as equal, and
so on, yet so that my mistakes obey a fixed law, then
the law connecting my measures will not be direct
transcription into numbers of that which in nature
connects the magnitudes of the kind involved, but it
will be an indirect transcription of it which will be just
as useful, and — since it is connected with the direct
transcription in a fixed, though to us unknown, way —
in a perfectly definite sense, true. The Principle of
Relativity, as a physical theory based on empirical
evidence, now simply comes to this. If the people on
two systems S^ and S^ in uniform relative motion to
each other have both laid out their coordinate systems
and regulated their clocks on the assumptions described
above, what each takes to be the measure of any given
physical magnitude will be the same function of what
he takes to be the measures of other physical magni-
tudes. We know that one man's laws, at any rate,
cannot be a direct transcription of the laws of these
magnitudes in nature, and that perhaps the laws of
neither are direct transcriptions ; but this need worry
no one, since no one can ever prove that his laws are
direct transcriptions of those of nature, and all purposes
of science are served if they be only indirect ones.


OAMBKIDGE : PEINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVEKSITY PBESS.


A SELECTION OF PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS

PUBLISHED BY
THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

The Vitality of Platonism and other Essays. By James

Adam, late Fellow and Senior Tutor of Emmanuel College, Cambridge.
Edited by his wife Adela Mamon Adam. Demy 8vo. 7s 6d net.

Roman Stoicism. Being lectures on the history of the Stoic
philosophy with special reference to its development within the Boman
Empire. By E. V. Abnold, Litt.D., Professor of Latin m the University
College of North Wales. Demy 8vo. 10s 6d net.

The Philosophical Works of Descartes. Rendered into
English by Elizabeth S. Haldane, LL.D., and G. B. T. Boss, M.A., D.Phil.
Demy 8vo. In two volumes. 10s 6d net each.

The Philosophy and Psycholog^y of Pietro Pomponazzi.

By Andbew Halliday Douglas, sometime Professor of Apologetics and
Pastoral Theology in Knox College, Toronto. Edited by Charles Douglas
and E. P. Habdt. Demy 8vo. 7s 6d net.

Neoplatonism in relation to Christianity. An Essay. By
C. Elsee, M.A. Crown 8vo. 2s 6d net.

The Problem of Evil in Plotinus. By B. A. G. Fuller,
sometime Instructor in Philosophy at Harvard University. Crown 8vo.
7s 6d net.

Philosophy: What is it? By F. B. Jevons, Litt.D., Professor
of Philosophy in the University of Durham. Fcap 8vo. Is 6d net.

The Pursuit of Reason. By Chaeles Francis Keary, M.A.
Demy 8vo. 9s net.

Studies in Hegelian Cosmology. By John McTaggart Ellis
McTaggabt, Litt.D., FeUow of Trinity College. Demy 8vo. 8s.

Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic. By J. McT. E. McTaggart.

Demy 8vo. 8s.

A Commentary on HegePs Logic. By J. McT. E. McTaggaet.
Demy 8vo. Ss.

A Sketch of Ancient Philosophy from Thales to Cicero.

By Joseph B. Mayob, M.A. Extra foap. 8vo. 3s 6d.

Principia Ethica. By George Edward Moore, Litt.D., Fellow
of Trinity College, Cambridge. Demy 8vo. 7s 6d net.

A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz, with
an Appendix of leading passages. By Hon. Bertband Eussell, M.A.
Demy 8vo. 7s 6d net.

The Moral Life and Moral Worth. By W. R. Sorley, Litt.D.,
Knightbridge Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Cambridge.
Eoyal 16mo. Cloth, Is net. Leather, 2s 6d net. Cambridge Manuals Series.

continued overleaf


The Realm of Ends, Or Pluralism and Theism. The

Gifford Lectures delivered in the University of St Andrews in the years
1907—10. By Jambs Wabb, So.D., Professor of Mental Philosophy, Cam-
bridge. Second Edition, with Some Bepliea to Criticisms. Demy 8vo.
12s 6d net.

Six Essays on The Platonic Theory of Knowledge as

expounded in the later dialogues and reviewed by Aristotle. By Marie
V. Williams, late Marion Kennedy Student of Newnham College. Crown
8vo. 3s net.

The Presentation of Reality. By Helen Wodehouse, D.Phil.,
Leotm'er in Philosophy in the University of Birmingham. Crown 8vo.
3s net.

The Existential Import of Categorical Predication . Studies

in Logic. By A. Wolf, M.A. (Lond.), B.A. (Camb.)., Fellow of University
College, London, Lecturer in Philosophy at the University of London.
Crown 8vo. 48 net.

A New Law of Thought and its logical bearings. By

E. E. Constance Jones. With a preface by Professor Stout. Crown 8vo.
2s net. Girton College Studies.

The Essentials of Mental Measurement. By William

Bbown, M.A. (Oxon.), D.Sc. (Lond.). Demy 8vo. 3s 6d net.

A Text-Book of Experimental Psychology. With Laboratory
Exercises. By Chables S. Mybes, M.A., M.D., So.D., of Gonville and Caius
College, University Lecturer in Experimental Psychology, Cambridge.
Second edition. In two parts. Demy 8vo. Part I. Text-Book. With one
plate and 24 figures and diagrams. Fart 11. Laboratory Exercises. With
42 figures and diagrams. Price for the two parts, 10s 6d net.

An Introduction to Experimental Psychology. By C. 8.

Mtbks, M.D., Sc.D. Royal 16mo. With 22 illustrations. Cloth, Is net;
leather, 2s 6d net. Cambridge Manuals Series.

Heredity and Memory. Being the Henry Sidgwick Memorial
Lecture, 1912. By James Wabd, Sc.D., Professor of Mental Philosophy in
the University of Cambridge. Crown 8vo. Paper covers. Is net. Cloth.
Is 6d net.

A Treatise on Natural Philosophy. By Lord Kelvin,
LL.D., F.E.S., and Peieb Guthrie Tait, M.A. Demy 8vo. Part I. 16s.
PartIL IBs.

Elements of Natural Philosophy. By Lord Kelvin and
P. G. Tait. Demy 8vo. Second Edition. 9s.


Cambridge University Press

C. F. Clay, Manager : Fetter Lane, London
