On the Crania and Bones of Les Eyzies; or, The Ancient Cave-Men of the Périgord (Paul Broca, 1868)
==================================================================================================
Broca's 1868 Eyzies memoir in English — the first scientific description of the Cro-Magnon skeletons. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (jstor-3025031) — Anthropological Review, October 1868.


408 ANTHROPOLOGICAL REVIEW.

by the aid of a language he has made his own ; all animals do the
same. He can articulate sounds ; other animals can imitate sounds as
well as he can. He presents simply in this respect a greater develop-
ment of a faculty common to all social animals.


ON THE CRANIA AND BONES OF LES EYZIES; Oil,
THE ANCIENT CAVE-MEN OF PERIGORD.*

By Prof. Paul Broca, Secretary-General of the Anthropological Society of
Paris, and Honorary Fellow of the Anthropological Society of London.


No discovery could offer more interest to Anthropology than that of
these bones. It is the complement — one would almost say the
crowning work — of the important discoveries which Mr. Lartet, sen.,
and his much lamented fellow-labourer, M. Christy, made four years
ago in the caverns of Perigord. The numerous objects found in these
caverns have not only furnished to us the most incontestible and
striking proofs of the contemporaneity of man with the mammoth,
but they have revealed to us the most curious details of the life and
customs of the ancient cave-men of Perigord. The anatomical cha-
racteristics of the intelligent and artistic race, whose admirable carv-
ings and sculptures are to us a subject of astonishment, yet, however,
remain to be disclosed to us. The latest researches in Les Eyzies
cave, by M. Lartet, jun., permit us now to bridge this gap. No doubt
can be raised as to the authenticity and high antiquity of the bones
which these researches have brought to light. The stratigraphical
details furnished by this gentleman, prove not only that they are as
ancient as, but that they are even more ancient than the carved objects
of the great cavern of Les Eyzies ; the latter correspond to the eptoch
in which the reindeer was already predominant among the fauna,
while the former seem to approximate rather to the time of the mam-
moth ; and although a very long period between these two epochs
might have elapsed, we are compelled to believe that the passage from
one to the other took place gradually, without any ethnographical
revolution ; that the same race remained without interruption in the
same place ; and that, if the bones which we are about to examine,
are not those of the artistes of the reindeer period, they are at least
those of their ancestors. The remains of quaternary man that we

* This article is the most important part of a long Memoir by Prof. Broca,
which will appear in Lartet's and Christy's Reliqmce Aquitanicw.


BROCA ON THE CRANIA AND BONES OP LES EYZIES. 409

have examined hitherto, belong for the most part to individuals of
short statiu-e, in whom the cranium is of small capacity, and the face
more or less prognathous. We should hence conclude that the primi-
tive population of Europe either belonged to a Negroid or Mongoloid
race (according to either hypothesis), in whom the stature did not
much exceed that of the modern Laplanders. We consider that
this opinion rests on well-ascertained facts. It rests also on a pre-
conceived idea which we have for a long time opposed, viz., that there
is in quaternary Europe only one single race of men. Based on the
ethnographical theory that the diversity of the human race results
from the influence of media (such as climate, food, soil, etc.) we admit
that the typical differences must be effaced as we pass backwards in
time ; and when the polygenists objected that the separation of the
principal groups of races was already complete from the origin of his-
toric time, we replied, that it was not in very recent times, but in the
immense and incalculable periods which preceded them, that the
divergencies from the original type were manifested. Reduced to
these terms, the question of the unity of the human race became ad-
journed to the moment when palceontology should have discovered
some remains of primitive man, or at least those of races of the qua-
tenary epoch. We should consider that these races, separated from
us by thousands of ages perhaps, and of a certainty infinitely more
approximated to the human origines than the most ancient of the his-
toric races, must present, if not an absolute uniformity, at least a
manifest convergance towards the type of the common mould in which
we can conceive them to have been cast. But it happens here, as
does so frequently happen in other things, that the facts brought to
light contradict a pre-conceived theory.

The quaternary race of Les Eyzies, differs from the quaternary
race of the caverns of Belgium, as much as the most dissimilar modern
races differ among themselves. The contrast is complete, not only
when we consider the conformation and volume of the head, but also
when we consider the form and dimensions of the limb bones. The
greater part of the bones which have been discovered belong to three
individuals. There are three crania, of which one is perfect. Not
one of the skeletons is capable of being put together, but in closing
the bones of the trunk and of the members, in accordance with their
shape, colour, and density, we are able to separate them chiefly into
three groups, which, in respect of the character referred to, appear to
belong to the three crania. There are, besides, some small fragments
of a cranium belonging to an adult, and some others of one belonging
to a child. The number of bodies deposited in this burying place was
five ; it can hardly be said that there were more. It is, therefore, not
VOL. vi. — no. xxin. 2 F


410 ANTHROPOLOGICAL REVIEW.

impossible that all these individuals should have been members of one
family. Of the relics of these five persons, we can only speak of three,
the remains of the two others being represented by only insignificant
fragments.

The author then minutely described the character of each of the
bones, and said, if, in conclusion, we cast a general glance over the
divers elements that we have just examined, we shall find in the race
of Les Eyzies a remarkable combination of characters — some of supe-
riority and some of inferiority. The great capacity of the brain, the
development of the frontal region, the fine elliptical form of the ante-
rior part of the profile of the skull, the orthographic disposition of the
superior facial region (from which arises a considerable enlargement of
the facial angle of Camper) are incontestable characteristics of supe-
riority such as we are accustomed to meet with only in civilised races.
On the other hand, the great breadth of the face, the alveolar pro-
gnathism, the enormous development of the ascending ramus of the
jaw, the extent and roughness of the surfaces for the insertion of
muscles, and especially of the masticators, lead to the idea of a savage
and brutal race, and we are led to suspect that the woman has been
slain by a blow with a hatchet, and that the thigh-bone of the old man
bears traces of an old and serious injury. Examine again the simpli-
city of the sutures, and then probably equally simple obliterations,
which pass before backwards, as in the case with barbarous peoples.
Let us add, that the shape of the bones, and in particular the extra-
ordinary development of the ridge of femur, indicate a high degree of
muscular power. Let us review these three characteristics, the exces-
sive breadth of the ramus of the jaw, the sub-coronoid curvature of
the ulna, of which the coronoid cavity is extremely shallow, and above
all the flattening of the tibiae, are more or less manifestly simious ;
and we shall thus complete the picture of a race which in some of its
characteristics attained the highest and noblest degrees of human
morphology, and in others descended even below the most degraded
anthropological types of the present day.

This antithesis, at first sight, appears paradoxical, but is it not the
anatomical confirmation of that which the discoveries of Messrs.
Lartet (senior) and Christy have already taught us concerning the
life and habits of the denizens of the cave of Perigord. The men who,
in the quaternary epoch were the initiators of progress and the pre-
cursors of civilisation ; who developed the remarkable industry and
wonderful arts of which we to day admire the products, must of neces-
sity have combined with the intelligence which invents and brings to
perfection, much strength of body and habits of war, and of the chase,
which alone could then assure them security and subsistence. Now-


BROCA ON THE BONES AND CRANIA OF LES EYZIES. 411

a-days, with our irresistible metals, with our terrible fire-arms, with
our land cleared and cultivated for centuries, with all the resources
which agriculture and commerce furnish us, we can live in peace the
life of the civilised ; but in those days, when immense forests, which
the stone hatchet was incompetent to fell, covered the greater part of
the soil ; when, in default of agriculture, man was compelled to seek a
subsistence by the chase alone; when the immediate necessities of
existence demanded a continual warfare against such animals as the
mammoth ; and, lastly, when the hunting grounds, the sole resource
of one tribe, would have to be defended against the incursions and
attacks of neighbouring tribes, it behoved them, under penalty of
disappearing from the face of the earth, to accommodate themselves
to circumstances, and to live the violent life of barbarians. The
troglodytes of Les Eyzies were, therefore, barbarians in common with
all the human kind of their day, and we ought not to be astonished
that such conditions should have been the cause of very marked im-
pressions on the skeletons of these people. But these barbarians were
intelligent and perfectible, and whilst continuing their struggle against
nature and against their fellow-men, they managed to leave them-
selves sufficient leisure to increase their knowledge, to develope their
industries, and even to elevate themselves to the cultivation of the
arts. Such precious aptitudes, rare in all times, but truly extra-
ordinary in regard to the period in which they were manifested, could
only result in favour of an advance in cerebral organisation, such as
that which has found a morphological expression in the skulls of the
race of Les Eyzies. What became of this race so remarkable, which
appears to us in that distant past like a bright light in the midst of
darkness 1 ? In cultivating the arts which adorn life and render it en-
joyable, have such people lost the smallest quantity of that warlike
energy which alone could protect them against the ferocious aggres-
sions of surrounding savages 1 And have they succumbed like those
precursors who, having arrived untimely, disappeared, oppressed to
death by the incompatible media into which they tried to introduce a
premature progress ? or, indeed, surviving this inevitable struggle, in
which their civilisation has perished, have they not escaped exter-
mination only to fall back into universal barbarism ; and to lose, in the
long run, under the influence of crossing, of social change, and of the
gradual transformation of the fauna and the climate, the anatomical
characters which formerly distinguished them? It is permitted to
hope that future discoveries will furnish new elements for the solution
of these important questions ; but as yet we can assert one thing only
— and that is, that the race of Les Eyzies is entirely different from
any other race, ancient or modern, that we have ever seen or heard of.

2 f 2
