This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

Google” books

https://books.google.com

This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

Google” books

https://books.google.com

ÜSTERREICHISCHE

NATIONALBIBLIOTHEK

Vm/r

K. K. HOFBI BL IOTHEK
OSTERR. NATIONALBIBLIOTHEK

Digitized by

Google

I I

i

I

!

Digitized by <^.ooQLe

Digitized by

Google

zed by

Google

Digitized by

THE

TRAVELS

OF

BÉRTRANDON DE LA BROCQUIEREj

COLNSELLOR & FIRST ESQUIRX-CARVER TO PHILIPPE
LE BON, DUKE OF BURGUNDY,

TO PALESTINE,

AND HIS

RETURN

FK.OM

JERUSALEM OVERLAND TO FRANCE ,

DU RING THE YEARS 1432 & 1433.

Extracted and put into modem French f rom a Manuscript
in the National Library at Paris , and published
BY M. LE GRAND d’aüSSY,

In the fifth Vol. of the Mem. de l’Institut.

TRANSLATED B Y

THOMAS JOHNES, ESQ,

SLt tlje tafoû puesfjf,

BY JAMES HENDERSON.

M DCCC Vllt

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by

Google

XQ THE

MEMORY

«F

HIS MUCH-BELOVED SISTER

ELIZABETH,

WIFE O F JOHN HANBURY WILLIAMS, ES2 ,

OF COLDBROOK, M0NMOUTHSHIR.E,

jyho txchanged the présent Life for a better on the î\st Marché
M.DCCC,VI,

THE

fOLLOWING SHEETS ARE DEDICATED

BV

THOMAS JOHNES.

JIafod, March xxii. A. D , m.dccc.yii«

fef WIE N )§]

The mortal remains of the affectionate Relative
tvhose name is recorded in the prcceding page ,
and whose virtues will live , to his latest breath ,
in the remembrance of the translalor of the
following work, are deposited in the church of
Llanfoyst, in Monmouthshire t -^-where f on a
monument erected to her memory by her most
disconsolate husband, is inscribed the follotoing
epitaph, composed by the Rev. Vf ia . Shepherd,
of Gateacre in the county of Lancaster.

Strahger, or Friend ! with silent steps and slow,
Who wanderest pensive thro’ this hallow’d gloom.
Muse on the fleeting date of bliss below.

And mark, with reverence due, ELIZA’s tomb.

For 'tis not Pride that rears this sculptur’d stone,

To spread the honours of heraldic famé !

Here love.connubial poursthe plaintive moan.
And dews, with bitter tears, ELIZA’s name.

Here sad Remembrance fondly loves to dwell.

And wrings with woe a widow’d husband’s breast,
While aye she points to the dark narrow cell,
Where the cold ashes of ELIZA rest.

i

Stranger, or Friend! hast Thou a partner dear?

Go, press her doser to thy aching heart :

With silent wing the moment hastens near,

The dreadful moment, when ye too must part!

Digitized by k^ooQle

Digitized by <^.ooQle

A

PRELÏMINARŸ DISCÔÜRSE.

Accôunts iof travels publishëd bÿ thé

French hâve a very early origin. At the
beginning of the fifth eentury, Rutilius
Claudius Nnmàtianus pùblished oné, which
bas been handed dowrt to us incomplète,
because death perhaps did riot allow him
to finish it. The object of his travels was
bis rèturn from Rome to his own country of
Gaul ; but as he came by sea, he could onlÿ
describe the ports and harbours on the coast,
and thence has necessarily resulted a monotony
in his work, which a man of more genius
Would hâve surmounted. Besides, he vvished
to Write a poem, which foreed him to assume a

B

Digiti^ed by Google

2

poetical tone, and to give poetical descriptions,
or such as were so called. In fine, this poem
is in the elegiac measure; and every one knows
that this kind of versification, the property
of which is to interest the idea every two
verses, and to confine these verses to a perpétuai
return of an uniform cadence, is perhaps of ail
others the least suited to description. When
the imagination has much to paint, when at
every moment it has need of varied and brilliant
pictures, it requires great freedom to display
with advantage ail its riches: it cannot,
therefore, consequently accommodate itself to
a double confinement, the infallible effect of
which would be to extinguish its fire.

A pagan in religion, Rutilius has shewn
his aversion to the Christian doctrine in verses,
where, confounding Christians and Jews, he
speaks ill of both sects.

It is in conséquence of the same sentiments
that, having seen on his voyage some monks
in the island of Capraia, he wrote against

Digitized by C.ooQLe

s

monks the following verses, which I shall
quote to give my readers an idea of his
style.

Squalet hicifugis insula plena viris.
ïpsi se monachos, graio cognomine, dicunt,

Quod, soli, nullo vivere teste, volunt.

Munera Fortunæ metuunt, dum damna verentur:

Quisquam sponte miser, ne miser esse queat.

Quænam perversi rabies tam crebra cerebri,

Pum mala formides, ncc bona posse pati ?*

His work contains curious details' in
geography, and even some for the antiquary
( and historian ; such, for instance, as his
inscription of a saltmarsh, and the anecdote
of the buraing of the books of the Sybils at
Home by order of Stilico. There are also
some good verses, and among them this in

4 •

partiçular on a ruined town :

< Cemimus cxemplis oppida posse morî/

Çut his composition is bad: his descriptions,
are dry and cold, and his manner pitifuf
and mçao;—no genius, no imagination* and,

Digitized by kjOOQle

4

çonsequently no inventioin in the pictures hn
attempts to paint.

Suchis his work, at least so it has appeared
to me ; and it is probably on account of these
defects that his poem has been called by the
degrading name of ‘ Itinerary,’ under which
it is known. There is a french translation
of it by le Franc de Pompjgnan*.

About 505, Arculfus, a bishop of Gaul,
made a pilgrimage to Jérusalem. On his
return, he wished to publish an account of it»
and employed a scots abbot, called Adamanus,
to arrange his manuscript notes and his own
verbal account. The relation composed by
Adamanus, entitled ‘ De Locis Sanctis,’ and
divided into three books, was first printed by
Gretser, and afterward more completely by
Mabillon. Arculfus, having visited the holy
land, embarked for Alexandria, thence he
çrossed over to the island of Cyprus, and

♦ In the Mélangés de Litter. et Poésie, &c. par P Acad, de
Montauban, p. 8J.

»

Digiti; ' / Google

J

jrom Cyprus he went to Constantinople,
whence he returned to France.

Such travels certainly promise a great
deal ; and the man who had to describe
Palestine, Egypt, and the capital of the
eastern empire, might assuredly hâve made
an interesting work. But the execution of
50 vast a design required philosophy and
knowledge, in which his âge was miserably
déficient It is a pilgrimage, and not trayels,
that the prelate has published. He neither
makes us acquainted with the laws, manners,
and usages of the people, nor with any thing
that concerns the places or countries he passes
through, but solely the relies and abjects of
dévotion that were revered there.

Thus, in his first book, which treats of
Jérusalem, he tells us of the column to which
Jésus was tied when he was scourged,—of the
lance that pierced his side,—of his shroud ,—5
pf a stone on which he knelt to pray, and
which now bears the impression of his kneçs,—r

\

Digitized by <^.ooQle

of another stone from which hc ascended ta
Heaven, and which bears the print of his
feet,-—of clothes wôm by the Virgin, which
represent his portrait,—of the fig-tree on
which Judas hanged himself:—in short, of
fhe stone on which St Stephen expired, &c.

Jn bis second book, he passes through
various parts of Palestine, visited by pilgrims,
and follpws them in their errors, When at
Jéricho, he mentions the house of the harlot
Rahab; in the plains of Mamré, he speaks
of the tornbs of Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Sarah, Rebecca and Leah î at Nazareth, he
tells ns of the spot where the angel came ta
announce to Mary that, though a yirgin, she
should conceive; at Bethlehem, of the stone
on which Jésus was washed on his nativity,—•
the tombs of Raçhel, David, St Jerome, and
of the three shepherds who came to the
adoration, &c.

The third book is, for the greater part,
dedicated tp Constantinople; but he only

Digitized by kjOOQle

T

speaks of the true cross of St George,—of art

image of the Virgin which, having been
*

thrown by a JeW into the most disgusting
filth, had been picked up by a Christian, and
a miraculous oil had flowed from it.

For many âges, thedescrïptionsof Palestine
contained nothing but the pious. and coarse
fables invented daily by the Orientais, to give
crédit to certain places which they endeavoured
to institute as pilgrimages, and thus quietly
draw to their own profit the money of the
pilgrims. These last greedily swallowed every
taie they heard, and scrupulously persevered
in paying their dévotions at ail the places that
had been pointed out to them. On their return
to Europe, this was ail they had to relate: but
indeed this was ail that was required from
them.

Nevêrtheless our saint (for at his death
he was declared such, as well as his editor
Adamanus) gives us, in his second book, some
historical accoùnt of Tyre and Damascus.

Digiti; ‘ / Google

6

He speaks also more in detail respecting

Alexandria; and I even find, under the last

«

head, two facts that hâve seemed to me worthÿ
of attention.

The first coneerns the fcrocodiles, which
he represents as so numerous in the lower part
of the Nile, that the instant an ox, horse, or
ass, enters the river to drink, they are seized by
them, and dragged under water and devoured*
tvhilst at this day, if we believe the ünanimous
accounts of modem travellers, crocodiles are
only seen in upper Egypt ; and it is a sort of
prodigy to see any near to Cairo, and thence
to the sea there is not a single one.

The other respects the island of Pharos^
on which Ptoloïny Philadelphus constructed
a tower containing fires, to iserve as a land-mark
to sailors, and which also had the name of
Pharos. It is known that after the time of
Ptolomy this island was joined by a mole to
the main land, having a bridge at each
extremity ; that Cleopatra completed thé

Digitized by ^ooole

9

ïsthmus, by destrôying the bridgès and carîying

on the mole ; in short, that at this day thé

whole island is connected with the main land:

Bevertheless our prelate speaks of it in his timè

as if it were still an island, ‘ In dextera parte

portus parva insula habetur, in qua rrraxima

turris est qùam, in commune, Græci et Latini,

ex ipsius rei usu, Phàrum vocitaverunt.’ Hé

tmist doubtiess hâve been mistaken; but
* '

probably at the time he saw it the mole onlÿ

existed, and the immense qùantities of earth

which make it part of the continent hâve

been since added $ and he did not perhaps

consider a dykç made by the hand of màrt

capable of preventing an island froai being

what nature had formed it»

*

In the ninth century, we had another
îsort of travels by Hètton, monk and abbot
of Riehenou, afterward bishop of Basil. He
was an able man of business, and employed as
such by Charlemagne, who sent faim, in 811,
ambassador to Constantinople. On his retum

c

Digitized by C.ooQLe

10

to France» he there published an account of
bis mission, which, hitherto, bas ftot been
found, and which we ought to regret the
more, as it would afford us many curious
details respecting an empire, whose connections
with France were then so nu mérous, and
carried on with such activity. We should
not, perhaps, consider it as totally lost: it
may be possible that this manuscript, after
remaining many centuries buned, accident
may bring to the knowledge of some of ouf
learned men, who will give it to the public.

This bas happened to the travels of
another french monk, named Bernard, which»
feeing published in 870 and lost, hâve been
found again by Mabillon, and bfought to
iight. Üke to those of Arculfus, they consist
only of travels to the holy land, more concise,
however, than his, and written -with less
pretension, but with the exception of a few
details personal to the author, containing
©nly a dry énumération of the holy places»

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

tl

which circumstance has caused thia likewisç
|o be cntitled * De Locis Sanctis.’

The route, however, of the two pilgrims
was diffèrent. Arculfus sailed direct for
Palestine, and thence re-embarked to visit
Alexandria : on the contrary, Bernard first
disembarks at Alexandria; he ascends the Nile
as far as Babylon, descends it again to Damietta,
and, traversing the desert on camels, arrives af
Gaza in the holy land.

There he makes, like St Arculfus, different
pilgrimages ; fewer, however, than thé latter,

- whether from his profession not permitting him
such expenses, or whether he has neglected to
notice them v

I shall only remark, that in certain
çhurches nçw miracles had been invented
since the time of the bishop,—miracles which
he certainly would hâve mentioned had : they
then existed ; for instance, that of the church
of St Mary,' wherein it was said no rain ever
feh, although it was roofless. Such was the

* Digitized by kjooole

1 «

miracle to which the Greeks hâve given soi
much celebrity, and which was performed
yearly on Easterreve, in the church of the
holy sepulchre, when an angel desoended from
heaven to light the waxen tapérs, furnishing
the Christians of the town with a new Are* .
which was communicated to them by the
patriarch, and which they devoutly çarried
with them to their homes,

Bernard relates an anecdote, in his passage
ôver the desart, deserving notice. He says*
that the Christian and pagan merçhants had,
çstablished two caravajnsaries in this immense
océan ofsand,—the pne çalled Albara,the other
Albacara,—where travellers might provide
themselves with ail things neçessary for their
jpurney,;

This aqthor also informs us of an
establishment formed by Charlemagne at
Jérusalem, ip fayour of those who spoke
*• la langue romane,’ and of *the existence
çf wbiçh the Ffençb, espeçially the pien of

Digitized by' C.oooLe

1S

Jetters, will not hear without a sensible
pleasure.

Charlemagne, the glory of the west, h ad,
by his conquests and great qualities, attracted
the attention of the celebrated caliph Haroun
al-.Raschid, a man who had filled the east with
his renown.

Haroun, eager to testify to Charles
the esteem and considération he bore him,
had sent him ambassadors, with magnificent
présents: and these ambassadors, ourhistorians
say, were even charged to offer him the keys
of Jérusalem, on the part of their master.

Probably Charles had taken advantage
of this favourable opportunity to establish an
hospital or réceptacle in the town for pilgrims
who should corne from his french territories.
Such was the spirit of the times. This sort
çf travels being thought the most holy that
dévotion could imagine, a prince who
favoured them believed he deserved t well
frpm religion. Çhar^ejnagne, besides, had

Digitized by tjOOQle

1*

& taste for pilgrimages ; and tus historian,
Eginhard, observes with surprise, that in spite
of his prédilection for St Peter at Rome, he
had paid his dévotions there but four times in
his life,

A great man, however, often shews himself
great in the midst of surrounding préjudices.
Charles had been the restorer of ktters in
Frarice î he had re-established orthography,
regenerated writipg, and formed fiandsome
libraries; he would hâve his hospital at
Jérusalem furnished with a good library
also, for the use of the pilgrims ; and the
establishment was in the entire possession of it
at the time of Bernard : ‘ nobilissimam habens.
hibliothecam,studio imperatoris/ Theemperor
had even assigned twelve houses, situated in the
valley of Josaphat, with their lands, vineyards
.and gardens, for the support and repairs of the
house, and the maintenance of the pilgrims.

Although Eginhard ought to hâve been
çatiated with pilgrimages, he, however, made

Digitized by <^.ooQle

15

one to Rome, on hw return tfarough ltaly, and,
vhen heentered France, another to StMichacTs
mount.

In regafd to this Jast, he observes that it
is situated on a rock on the shore of die ooast
«f Normandy, and washed twioe a-day atihigh
water by the waves of die sea. But he adds,
that on the feast off the Saint, the access to the
rock and to the -chapel remains firee, and that
the océan forms, iike the Red Sea in the time
of Moses, two*great walis, between which the
passage remains perfectly dry; and that this
miracle only takes place on this day, and lasts
the whdeof k.

Oür national littérature was in possession
of four books of travefe; one to the coasts of
Italy, one to Constantinople, and two to the
holy land. In the thirteenth century, a very
extraordinary ocurrence procured two to
Tartary.

This immense country, whose inhabitants,
in various times and under different names, hâve

Digitized by kjooole

pfeopled, con^uered, or ravaged the greatef
part of Europe and Asia, found itself, if.I
may so say, wholly in arms.

Fanaticised by the incrediblè*conquésts of
one of their chiefs* the famous Gengkis-Khan*
and persuaded that the wholë earth owed them
obedience, these warlike and ferocious wanderers
had marched, after the conquest of China, to
invade the north-eastern part of Europe»

Wherever their innumerable hordes had
passed, kingdoms had been ■ïuined, wholo
nations exterminated, or dragged into slavery,
Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, the frontière .of
Austria, were ravaged in a hprrible mannen
Nothihg could check this inundation; and if
it felt any résistance in* one quarter, it threw
itself elsewhere with greater fury. In short,
ail Christendom was panic-struck; and, to use
the expression of one of our historians, ‘ iO
trembled to the shores of the océan

* La Chaise. Vie de St Louis, liv. v. p. 30U

Digitized by G.ooQLe

I».

ïn thisgeneral consternation, Innocent IV?
Vished to shew himself the common father of
the faithful. He was, at the rime, in Lyons,
whitherhe had corne to hold a council fof the
excommunication of the redoubtable Frederick*
who had, three tirfies before, been in vain
excommunidatéd by his predecessor». Thère».
whUe overwhelming the emperor with aH his
thtinders, Innocent formed à project, thé idea
âlone ef which ann’ounces his intoxication
wkh povrér. It was nothing less than to «end
apostolical lettors to the Tartars, to persuade
them to lày down their ara», and embrace the
Christian religion: * ut âb hominum stragé
désisteront, 'et. fidei vcritatem reciperent*.*
He givés these letters m chargé to an
ambassador, and this ambassador is a cordeliéf
ftiar,’called Jerfn du Plan de Carpin, (Joannes
de Piano Carpini) who on Easter-day, kl the
year 124-5, sets off with his comparions, and,

♦ Vincent. JBellovac. Spec. Hist. Ub. xxxii. cap. 2.

D

Digitized by ^ooole

Il

tn the road, picks up a third companiorr,
a Polandef, named Benedict.

Whetber the order of St Dominîck wâs
displeased to see such an honour conferred
exclusively on the order of St Francis; whether
Innocent was alartned for the safety of his
ambassadeurs in so long and dangerous a
joumey; or whether, from some other motive
of which we are ignorant, he dispatched, by
another route, a second embassy, composed

solely of preaching friars.-^-The» last,

amoünting to five~ had, for their principal,
one named Ascelin; and among thon was
friar Simon de St Quentin, of whom I shall
soon hâve occasion to speak» They were, like
the Cordeliers, bearers of apostolical ktters,
and were charged with the same orders
respeetîng the Tartars, namely, to prevail
on these people to abstain from war of ail
kinds, and to receive baptism»

De Carpin had, however, with the abov*
Instructions, received private and particular

Digitized by kjooole

19

ones to examine attentively, and to collect
witfa care, whatever he should thipk worthy
of notice among this people and çountry. He
did 80 , and, on his retnm, published a relation
composèd with this view, and, consequently,
entitled by him * Qesta Tartarorum.’ In fact*
ail he says of bis travels, and of what passed
on his journey, is comprised in one single
chapttr. The seven others, are filled with
description of what relates to the Tartars, aa
to» the soil of their country, their manners,
usages, conquests, mode of fighting, &c.

' I hâve discovered, among the manuscripts.
of the national library, (No 2477, at page 66)
a more complète copy than that in Hackluyt,
eontaining a tolerably long préfacé by the
euthor, not in that édition» In short, at the
epocha when these travels first appeared*
Vincent de Beauvais had inserted the greateç
part in his * Spéculum Historiale.’

This friar Vincent, a dominican monk,
reader or preacher to St Lom$> had been.desired

Digitized by <^.ooQle

m

by tbat prince to undertake different work» %
which in* fact he produced, and they now
form a very considérable collection. Among
the number is a long and heavy historical
compilation, under the title of ‘ Spéculum
Historiale,’ in which he ' has inserted, or
intermixed, the accounts of our taravellei?.
To render it more interesting and complété,
he has added, by a very happy thought, certain
private details with which he was furnished
by his brother-monk, Simon de St Quentin,
one of thç associâtes of Asçelin in the second
embassy; Haying had an opportunity of
seeing Simon on his rçturn from Tartary, he
learnt from him many things which he has
inserted in various parts of his ‘ Spéculum
Historiale,’ particularly kl the thirty-second
and last book. There, from what he had
written and published of Carpin, and what
he had learnt from Simon’s conversation, h,e
makes a mixed relation, which he divides intQ
.fifty çhapters, and this is the account kRQWft

Digitized by kjOOQle

11

to us. Bergeron has given a translation of
it, in bis collection of travels. made düring the
twelfth and three foUowing centuries. He has,
however, thoùght proper to separate the two
relations of Carpin and Simon, in order to hâve
inemorials of die second embassy as well as of
the first. He bas, consequendy, detached six
chapters from the récital of Vincent, attributed
b.y him to Simon, making a separate article of
them, under the name of Ascelin, the chief
of the second légation, which is ail we know
of it. As for the success of these two embassies,
I do not think it worth mentioning, for it
may easily be guessed what it must hâve been.
The same attended two others sent by St Louis
to those countries, though from a different
motive.

This monarch, in 1248, commenced his
disastroüs expédition to Egypt, and had just put
into the island of Cyprus with his fleet, when he
received, on. the 12th of December, in that island,
^n embassy from the Tartars, the twq principal

Digitized by k^ooQLe

22

persons of which bore the names of David and
Mark. These adventurers gave out that they
were delegated to him by their prince, who
had been lately converted to the Christian faith,
and whose name they said was Ercalthay,
They Jikewise affirmed that the great khan
of the Tartars had also received baptism, a»
well as the çhief officers of his court and aymy,
and that hç was anxious to form an aUiance
with the king.

However gross this imposture may now
seem, Louis çould not help swallowing it,
He resolved to send an embassy to. these
converted khans or princes, to congratulât©
them on their happiness, and to engage thenr
to faveur and propagate the Christian religion
within their dominions. Thç ambassador he.
named for this purpose was a preaching friar,
çalled Andrew Longjumeau, or Lonjumel,
to whom he added, as associâtes, two other
Pominicans, two clerks, and two officers of
his housefcold..

Digitized by

Google

2$

David and Mark, the better to imposa
on him, affected to shew themselves fervent
Christiatts : they attended with him ail the
services for the célébration of Christmas,
and gave him to understand that a tent of
scarlet cloth would be a most agreeable présent
to the khan. That was the object of thèse
two knaves. The king instandy orderéd
a magnificent one to be made, and had
embroidered on it the annunciation, the
passion, and othér mysteries of the Christian
religion. To this présent he added another,
of every thing that was necessary, in vase9
and in silver plate, for the use of a chapeL
In fine, he gave them relies, and some of the
wood of the true Cross ; that is to say, what
"was in his opinion above ail things in the
World.

But here I must not omit an observation,
Which shews the spirit of that roman court
Which believed itself to hâve the right of
cemmanding every sovereign, namely, that

Digitized by

Goog'

the legate whoni the pope had placéd îü
the king’s army as his représentative, and to
order ail things in his name, wrote, by means
of these ambassadors, to the two tartarian
princes, and in his ietter announced that he
adopted and acknowledged them as children
of the church. He gained as much from his
pretensions, and the advances made in his Ietter»
as the king for his tent, his chapel and his relies.
Longjumeau, on his arrivai in Tartary, sought
in vain for the prince Ercalthay, and this grand
khan, who had been baptised with his wholé
court, and retumed as wise as he had set out»
He ought, nevertheless, to hâve gained some
knowledge respecting the country ; for it was
said he had travelled there before, and when
David appeared in the presence of the king
at Cyprus, he pretended to know him, as
having seen him formerly in Tartary. These
circumstances hâve been transmitted to us by
the historians of the times. As for himself, he
has not left any account of his mission, and

Digitized by <^.ooQle

25

it may be thought he wàs ashaméd ôf iti
Louis had been so coarsely duped that hè
might also hâve felt some disgust, or at léast
bave gained prudence-from expérience; but*-
a very Few years after, hè again suffèred himself
to be deceived. It was in the year 1253 , when
be was still in Asia»

Althoügh, on obtaining his liberty from
the prisons of Egypt, he was bound by
every tie to return to France, where he had
so many wounds to heal and tears to dry, an
ili-understood dévotion had conducted him to
Palestine, where, regardless of the duties he
owed his subjects, and to himself as king, he
not only lost tvvo years, almost solely occupied
in pilgrimages, but, in spite of the exhausted
State of the finances of his realm, he expended
very Considérable sums in rebuilding and
fortifying some trifling places of which the
Christians of that country were still in the
possession»

Digitized by ^ooQle

t)uring this time, a report was current
that a tartarian prince, named Sartach, had
embraced Christianity» The baptism of an
infidel prince was, for Louis, one of those
happy circumstances the charms of which it
was impossible for him to resist. He therefore
determined to send an embassy to Sartach, to
compliment him on the occasion, as he
had before done to Ercalthay. His former
ambassadors were Dominicans; but he now
fixed on the Franciscans, and appointed friar
Guillaume Rubruquis the principal. Pope
Innocent had also successively given an embassy
to each of these orders of monks; and to follow
such an example was the great delight of Louis.
He had so tender an affection for each of them
that his sole wish was, he said, to be able to
divide himSelf into two, that he might give
to each a half of himself.

Rubruquis, on his arrivai a t the court of
Sartach, might easily hâve satisfied himself
©f the falsehood of the taies which the eastern

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

Christians every now and then propagated,
conceming the pretendcd conversions of
tartarian princes. That he might not wholly
lose the fruit of his journey, he solicited this
chief to permit him to preach the gospel in his
dominions. Sartach replied, that he dared not
take on himself the granting so extraordinary
a request, and sent the converter tô his father
Baathu, who sent him to thegrand khan.

When Rubruquis and his companions
presented themselves before this last prince,
they were dressed in the copes of the church :
one bore a cross and a missal, another
a censor, Rubruquis himself the Bible and
Psaltçr, and thus he advanced, supported by
them, çhaunting canticles. This spectacle
which, from his monastic préjudices, he
thought imposing, was but a burlesque, and
produced no effect, not even the laughter of
die Tartar ; and, without doubt, ill satisfied
with a very useless journey, lie retumed to givp
an acçount of it to the king.

Digitized by ^ooQle

Louis was no longer in Syria. The death
Of his mother, queen Blanche, had at last-
recalled him to France, which he ought never-
to hâve quitted, but whither, however, he did
not return until a further delay of a year,
Rubruquis was preparing to follow him,
when he received an order from his superior
not to leave the country, but to. retire to the
convent of St Jeqp d’Acre, and thence to Write
to the king, to inform him of the ill success of
his mission. He obeyed, and sent the king
an account, which time has preserved to us,
and which, like the preceding one, has been
translated by Bergeron. We are indebted for
it, to the overbearing temper of a jealpus and
harsh superior; for had the travellcr obtained
permission to follow the king, and attend his
court, he would not, perhapç, havç written any
thing.

Thus, therefore, of the four monkish
çmbassies sent to Tartary, as well by pope
Jnnocent as the king, the two Franciseras,

Digitized by kjOOQle

29

fcnly, Carpin and Rubruquis, hâve left us any
accounts ; and these works, although tinged
with the modes of thinking of the âge, and
especially of the profession of those who
wrote them, are precious objects to us for the .
interesting details they gi$e of a distant country,
at that time scarcely known by name, and with
which, since that epocha, we hâve not preserved
any connection.

The courage of Rubruquis cannot fail of
being admired, who fears not to déclaré openly
enough to the king, that David was an impostor
who had deceived him. But Louis had the
fanaticism of conversions and proselytism; and
that, in some minds, is an incurable disorder.

Duped twice, he was so a third time shordy
afterward, respecting a king of Tunis, who,
he was told, was desirous of receiving baptism.
This baptism was a long time his chimera, and
he looked forward to the day when he should
be god-father to this prince, as the happiest of
Jiis life. He would hâve willingly çonsented

Digitized by L.ooQLe

30

to hâve passed the remainder of his days in the
dungeons of Africa, if, at this price, he could
hâve seen him a Christian. It was for die
purpose of standing god-father to an infidel
that he sailed to the coasts of Tunis, and lost
a second fleet and a second army, and a second
finie disgraced the frençh arms, which. had
shewn suçh hrilliancy at the battle of Bovines,
and at last perished by the plague, in the npidst
of a pestiferous. camp, and thus merited, by
|he multiplied misfortunes of France* the
qualifications of martyr and saint.,

\Vith regard to Bergeron, every one must
agréé, that by publishing his translation he has,
done real service to literature and science;
and I am certainly very far from wishing to,
depreciate the merits of it. I am, however,
çonvinced it would hâve been greater if he
had'not made too free a translation of the
çeveral pièces that form his collection, and*
above ail, if he had not omitted so much of the
originals, which, indeed, spares us the detail of

Digitized by C.ooQLe

31

many uninteresting circumstances, but which,
at die same time, deprives us of the inestimable
advantage of appreciating the author, and the
âge he lived in. He himself tells us, in a
preliminary discourse to one of the travels
which he has printed, * that he had translated
it from very coarse Latin, in which it was
written, according to the taste of that âge, to
display it in our language with more clearness
and elegance.’ Hence it has happened, that
when promising to give us travels of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, he has
given us modem ones, that hâve ail nearly the
same physiognomy, whereas they ought to hâve
had their own proper features.

The collection of Bergeron, though good
For his time, is no longer so for ours. As it
contains works full of errors, we should wish
for notes, historical discussions, and learned
remarks ; and perhaps a new édition of these
ancient travels would be an useful undertaking,
and one which could not fail to be weil

Digitized by

Google

reeeived by the public, more especially if th$
original text was added to the translation. This
translation, however, ought to be scrupulously
faithfiil, and no omissions should be permittedj
and extracts ought to be made of such parts
as the translater might judge it expédient to
retrench. It is not amusement a reader looks for
in these works, but instruction. The moment
any person attempts to disfigure such authors*
by giving to them a modem turn of expression*
for the use of the youth of both 6exes, their
works are ruined. Hâve you travels, whatever
they may be, of such and such a century ? This
is what I ask, and what you should make m«
acquainted with.

' lf there be any one among our men of
letters, who, to the knowledge of history and
geography, unités courage and patience with
the love of research, and whom the above
undertaking does not alarm, I inform him,
that in regard to the * Spéculum Historiale’
thereare in the national library four manuscript

Digitized by ^ooQle

33

copies, ünder thè numbers 4898, 4900, 4901,
4902.

The two travellers of thé 14th century,
who hâve published their accounts, afe not
Frenchmen bom; but, as bofch wrote originally
in the french language, they belong to us under
thfe title of authors, and, in this respect, I am
bound to speak of them. One is Hayton,
thé Armenian, the other Mandeville, an
Englishman.

Hayton, king of Armenià, had feeen'
despoiled of his dominions by the Saracens.
He appiîed for succour to the Tartars, who,
in feet, took üp arms, and re-established him
ort his thîone* His negotiations and his
travels appeared to him deserving of being
transmitted to posterity, and, in conséquence,
he drew up some accounts of thém, whieh,
when bn the point of death, he gave into
the hânds of Hayton, his nephew, lord of
Courchh

F

Digitized by kjOOQle

This last, after having takcn a very active
part, as well in the afFairs of Armenia as in the
wars which that kingdom had still to support,
came to Cyprus, and made himself a Prèmonstré
monk. It was in this island he learnt the french
language, which, being carried thither by the
Lusignans, was become the language of the
court, and of ail who were not of the lowest
orders.

From Cyprus the monk Hayton had passed
to Poitiers, where he was desirous of publishing
the memoirs of his uncle, and also an account
of the events in which he himself had been
an actor and witness. He called his work
a History of the East, and intrusted the
publication of it to another monk, named
Faucon, to whom he dictated in French from
memory. This work had such success that
pope Clement V. ordered the same Faucon to
translate it into Latin, that those : who did not
understand F rench might not lose theenjoyment

Digitized by ^ooQle

35

©f it. The latin translation appeared in 1307 ;
and three manuscript copies of it are in the •
national library, under the numbers 7514,
7515, A, and 6041. At page 180, at the
end of No. 7515, is the following note of the
editor, which confirais ali that I hâve said of
this book. .

* Explicit liber historiarum partium »rientis ,
a religioso viro fratre Haytono, ordinis beati
Augustini, domino Churchi, consanguineo regis
Armeniæ, compilato (compilatus) ex mandato
summi pontificis dominiClementis papae quinti,
in dvitate Pictaviensi regni Franchie: quem
ego Nicolaüs Falconi, primo scripsi in gallico
ydiomàte, sicut idem frater H. michi (mihi)
ore suo dietabat, absque nota sive aliquo
exemplari *. Et de Gallico transtuli in
Latinum ; anno Domini m.ccc. septimo,
Biense Augustin

Bergeron has published the history of
Hayton; but instead of giving the original
* The copy, No. 7514, adds, ‘ arerbo ad verbunu*

Digitized by ^ooQle

36

french text, or at least the latin version of the.
editcwc, he has merely given a french version of
fois Latin, so that we hâve but a translation of
a translation.

In regard to Mandeville, be tells us, that-
this traveller composed his work in three
languageç, English, French and Latin. It is.
a mistake, for I hâve, at this moment, under
my eye, a manuscript copy in the national
library. No. 10,024, written in 1477, as a note
at the conclusion by the eopyist assures us.
Now in this copy there is the following passage :

« Je eusse mis cest livre en Latin, pour plus
briefment délivrez (to proceed more quickly,
to abridge the labour). Mais pour ce que
plusieurs ayment et entendent mieulx Romans
(le François) que Latin, l’ai-ge (je l’ai) mis
en Romans , affin que chascun l’entende, et
que les seigneurs et lç chevaliers et aultres
nobles hommes qui ne scçvent point de Latin,
ou petit, (peu) qui pnt esté oultrermer, saiçhent
se je dy voir (vrai) ou npn.*

Digitized by kjooole

ST

Besides, at the time of Mandevillë, the
french languagc was spoken in England. lt
had been carried thither by William the
conqueror, and none other was allowed to be
taught in the schools. AU law proeeedings,
and acts of parliament, were recorded in
French; and, when Mandevüle wrote in
French, it was his natural language. If he
had usedthe Latin, it would hâve been with a
view that other nations, ignorait of French,
tnight read his work.

In truth, his French shews the soil it
cornes from, by the many anglicisms and
vicious expressions, the reasons for which are
readily guessed, as it is known that the farther
a rivulet flows from its spring-head the more
altered the water becomes ; hut I consider thia
as the smaUest defect. of the author : without
taste, judgment or criticism, he not only
admits into his work, indiscriminately, every
taie and fable he hears, but forges the like
himse|f at çvery moment^

Digitized by v. * Qle

SS

If we believe hlm, he embarked on
Michaelmas-dayin theycar 13 32, and travelled,
during thirty-five years, over the greater part
üf Asia and Africa. Well, reader, hâve the
same courage as I hâve had, and peruse his
book ; and if you shall allow that he may
perhaps hâve seen Constantinople, Palestine
and Egypt, (which, however, I am far from
tvarranting) you will remain convinced that,
most assuredly, he ha» never set foot in any of
those countries which he describes as blindly,
viz. Arabia, Tartary, India, Ethiopia, âcc.

If the fictions he imagines offèred any
amusement or interest,—if hc only used the
right of lying, which the greater part of
travellers hâve so long been in possession of,
he might be tolerated ; but in his travds the
geographical errors are so gross, the fables so
stupid, the descriptions of imaginary countries
and people so ridicutous,—in short, absurdities
$o revolting, that I know pot what name to
giYe them, lt would be disagreeable to treat

Digitized by kjOOQle

39

i*

an author as an impostor; but how much
more so to style him an impudent gabbler*
Yet how can we otherwise treat a travelkr,

/

who tellS us of giants thirty feet high ; of trees
whose fruits are changed into birds that are
eaten ; of other trees that daily spring from
the earth, increasing in growth from sun-rise
tomid-day,and then decreaâng and re-entering
the earth in the evenings; of a perilous valley,
4he fiction of which he had borrowed from our
old romances, wherein he meets with such
incredible adventures, that he would infallibly
hâve perished, if he had not prudently taken
the sacrament ; of a river that springs from
the terrestrial paradise, and, instead of waters,
flows with precious stones. This paradise,
which he says is 4 aü commencement de la
terre,* is situated so high, that 4 il touche de
près la lune.’ In short, a thousand other
absurdities of the same sort, that mark not
the errors of stupidity and credulity, but wilful
lies and deceit.

Digitized by kjOOQle

40

I even consîder in the same light the
thirty-five years he says he employed to run
over the world, without ever thinking of
retuming to his own country untfl the goût
first tormented him. Although there exist
three printed éditions of his travels; one of
1487 by Jean Crès, another of 1517 by
Régnault, the third of 1542 by Canterel; they
are scarcely known but in the short extract
Bergeron has published of them. In fact,»
this editor found them so improbable and so
fabulous, that he has reduced them to twelve
pages, although our manuscrîpt consista of one
hundred and seventy-eight.

In the fifteenth century, we had two other
travels to the holy land ; the one which I am
now about to translate, the other by a carmélite
monk named Huen, printed in 1487, but of
which I shall not say any thing here, as it is
posterior to the other.

The same reason prevents me front
npticing a work published by Mamerot,

%

Digitized by <^.ooQle

41

chaunter of canon of Troyes, Beside, this
Work, entitled * Passages faiz oultre Mer par
les Roys de France et autres Princes et Seigneurs
François contre les Turcqs et autres Sarrasins
et Mores oultre-marins,* is not, properly
speaking, travels, but an historical compilation
of the different croisades that took place in
France, and which the author, after the false
chronicle of Turpin, and our romances of
chivalry, has made to commence under the
reign of Charlemagne. The national library
possesses a magnificent copy of this book,
ornamented with a great number of beautiful
miniatures and pictures.

I now corne to the work of la Brocquière,
byt this also requires some explanation.

G

Digitized by C.ooQLe

Digitized by VKjOOQle

THE

SECOND PART.

The folly of the croisades, like ail other follies
in France, had but a certain duration ; or, to
speak more correctly, like to some fevers, it
grew calm of itself after a few deliriums. Most
assuredly the croisade of Louis le jeune and the
two of St Louis, still more disastrous, had
brought on the kingdom a sufficiency of shame
and misfortunes to hâve made us believe this
fanaticism extinguished for ever. Superstition,
nevertheless, sought, from time to time, to
rekindle the dame. Often at confession, and
in certain cases that required public penance,
die clergy impçsed, for satisfaction, a pilgrîmago
to Jérusalem, or a croisade at a çertain period»

Digitized by ^ooQle

4 4

i

Many tîmes the popes employed the whole
force of their politics, and the ascendancy of
their authority, to renew, among the princes of
Christendom, one of those koly leagues , where
their ambition had so much to gain, without
risking any thing but indulgencies,

Philippe le bel, through a pretence of
teal and religion, affected, for a moment, to
form another croisade in France. Philippe
de Valois, a prince the least qualified for sq
difficult an enterprise, and one which required
so much talent, appeared, for some years, to
occupy himself on this subject. He received
an embassy from the king of Armenia, opened
negotiations with the court of Rome, and even
ordered préparations for one in the port of
Marseille. In short, during the interval of
these movements, in the year 1 332 , a Dominicain
called Brochard, (simamed L’Allemand, from
the name of his country) presented him with
two latin works cqmposed expressly for thi
purpoçe.

Digitized by kjOOQle

t

In one of them, which consîsts of a
, description of the holy land, he makes him
acquainted with the country, the object of his
intended conquest; and as he had resided
twenty-four years h^that country, in quality
of missionary and preacher, few could allégé
so many reasons as himself for speaking of it.

The other work, divided into two books,
< Par commémoration des deux épées dont il
est mention dans l’Evangile,’ subdivided into
twelve chapters, * à l’honneur des douze.
Apôtres,’ treated of the different routes for
an army to march thither ; of the précautions
necessary to be taken for the^uccess of the
enterprise; in fine, of the means to be adopted
and pursued to insure the undertaking. With
• yegard to this last, which solely concerna the
marine, and the art of war, we are surprised
to see such subjects handled by an autiior who
was but a simple monk. But who does not
know, that in the âges of ignorance, whoever
ts less iguojant than ht contemporaries

Digitized by <^.ooQle

46

srrogates to himself the right of dtscussing
cvery subject ? Besides, in the advice Brochard
was giving to the king and his générais, his
expérience may hâve suggested some nseful
hints; and, after ail, smce in die class of
nobles, towhom these subjects belonged, no
one, perhaps, could be found who had the
same local knowlege,* and an equal talent for
writing on them, why may he not hâve
hazarded that which they were unable to
perforai?

Whatever we may think of his motive, or
the excuse offered, it seems that his work made
a favourable impression on the king and his
council; forwe see, at least by the contdnuator
of the chronicle of Nangis, that the monarch
eent, * in terram Turcorum,* Jean de Cépoy,
and the bishop of Beauvais, with a small body
of infantry, * ad explorandos portus et passus,
ad faciendas aliquasmunitiones etpræparationes
victualium pro passagio terne sanctæ and
that this small troop, after having gakied

Digitized by ^ooQle

47

some considérable advantages, considerîng the
weakness of its force, returned to France in
the year 1335.

Ail this noise, however, of armaments,
préparations and menaces, with which the
kingdom resounded for some years, ended in
vain boasting. I doubt not but that, at the
beginning, the king was in eamest : he had
suffèred his vanity to be dazzled by the
brilliancy of a project that would fix the eyes
of ail Asia and Europe on him; and modérais
understandings are unable to resist the
séduction of such chimeras. But, very soon,
like ail weakcharacters,fatigued with difficultés,
he sought for a pretext to put an end to it, and,
in conséquence, demanded from the pope titles
and money, which he refused to grant him.
The* expédition was then no longer talked of;
and ail it produced was to draw on the king
of Armenia the vengeance of the Turks, for
having gone to France to solicit a league, and
succours against thenw

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

Diiring the following century, similar*
vain boastings took place at the court o(
Burgundy, though with a commencement
apparently more serious.

Iri the year 143 £ 2,one hilndred years after
the publication of these two works of Brochard,
many great lords in the dominions of Burgundy,
and holding offices under duke Philippe le bon,
made a pilgrimage to Jérusalem. Among
them was his first esquire-carver, named la
Brocquière, who, having performed many
devout pilgrimages in Palestine, retumed sick
to Jérusalem, and, during his convalescence,
formed the bold scheme of retuming to
France overland. This would lead him to
traverse the western part of Asia and eastern
Europe, and, during the whole journey,
except towards the end of it, through the
dominions of Mussulmen. The execution of
such a journey, even at this day, would not be
without difficulties, and it was then thought
impossible. It was in vain his companions

Digitized by

Google

49

attempted to dissuade him from it: he was
obstinate ; and, setting out, overcomes every
obstacle, returns in the course of the year
1433, and présents himself to the duke in his
saracen dress, which he had been obliged to
wear, and on the horse that had carried him the
whole of this astonishing journey.

So extraordinary an adventure could not
fail to produce a great effèct at court. The
duke had an anxious desire that the traveller
should reduce his account to writing, with
which he complied; but the wôrk did not
appear for some years after, even posterior to
the year 1438, since that period is mentioned,
as will be seen hereafter.

It was scarcely possible for the duke to
hâve his esquire-carver daily in his présence
and not to be sometimesdesirous of questioning
him about this land of infidels; and as he
must hâve heard his accounts when at table,
his imagination could not avoid being heated,

Digitized by ^ooQle

50

J

and he also must hâve formed chimeras of
croisade and conquest.

What inakes me suppose that he put suçH
questions to la Brocquière, is the latter’s having
inserted in his travels a long discussion on the
jnilitary force of the Turks,—on the means of
combating it successfully,—and concluding,
that even a small army, but well organised and
conducted, might, without risk, march to
Jérusalem. Assuredly sqch an épisode, of sq
great a length, and with so important a
conclusion, xleserves notice in a work presented
to the duke, and composed by his orders ? and
we must agréé, that it would hâve scarcely
been placed there without design, or without
a particular intention.

In fact, we see that from time to üme
Philippe announced great schemes on this
subject; but more occupied with pleasure than
with glory, as the fifteen acknowledged bastards
he left behind prove, ail his vain boasdngs
evaporated in words. At last, however,

Digitized by <^.ooQle

Si

there was a moment when ail Christendom,
alarmed at the rapidity" of the conquests of
the young and formidable Mohammed II. and
at the immense armament he was preparing
against Constantinople, thought there was
no other mode of formjng a barrier against
him than a general le'ague.

The duke, from the extent and population
of his dominions, was more powerful than
many kings, and might hâve acted an important
part in this coalition. He affècted to make his
appearance in it one of the first ; and to do it
with éclat, he gave, at Lille in 1453, a splendid
and pompous feast, or rather spectacle with
inachinery, altogether very odd, very inconsistent
in the multitude of its parts, but the most
astonishing of the sort of any that history has
handed down to aïs. This spectacle, which
I hâve elsewhere described *, and which

* M. le Grand d’Aussi refers, in a note, to bis ‘ History
of the private Life of the French,’ for a description of this
festival. As that book may not bc much known in thû
çoundy, 1 «hall translate an account thereof.

Digitized by kjOOQle

swallowed immense sums of monev, that, in
the présent circumstances, might with ease

c Of ail the entertainments that hlstory has afforded us
mny details, thcre is none which equals that given by Philippe
le bon, duke of Burgundy, at Lille, in the year 1453 . It
displays at once so much magnificence and $o many pueriiities,
such variety of machinery ahd automata, so many actors and
so many living animais, that I* believe I shall giatifv the
çuriosity of n\ y readers by desçi ibing it. Monstrelet gives an
abridged account ; but it is detailed at length by Matthieu de
Couci and Olivier de la Marche. What, however, rendera
it interesting, is, that it was eccasioned by one great event^
and almost the cause of another.

* Mohammed IL one of the most redoubtable and
enterprising enemies the Christians had to ençounter, menaced*
at this moment, Constantinople, which, in fact, he besieged,
and took some months afterward. The formidable armament
he had prçpared for this expédition had made ail Europe
tremble. It was thought that no other means rçmained to
save Christendom than to form a general league and arm
against him ; and it was with this intent the duke ôf Burgundy
gave his grand pantomime-entertainmçnt,

* In an immense hall three tables were laid out, that
might, perhaps, more justly be called théâtres, considering the
pumbef of machines th^t were placed on each. That for thç
duke was square, and had four omaments.

* 1 . A churçh with its bçll and organ, with four chaunters
to play on it, and sing when their time of acting should require it,

* ?• A statue of a nakçd child, placed on a rock* wbn
from his ‘ broquette pissait eau-rose.*

Digitized by ^ooQle

55

hâve been better employed, concluded with
some vows of arms, as well on the part of the

* 3. A vesscl, largcr than what would serve to navigate
on the seas, having on boardu numerous crew, who performed
ail the manœuvres as if they had been really at sea.

‘ 4. A rivulet that ran through a meadow omamented
-with shrubs and flowers : rocks, studded with saphires and
other precious stones, served as a boundary to it ; and in the
centre was a figure of St Andrew, from the end of whose cross
spouted out a stream of water.

* On the second table were seen nine omaments,

* 1. A sort of pasty, in which were inclosed twenty
eight musicians, men and children, who were each to play on
a different instrument during certain interludes of the feast.

* 2. The castle of Lusignan, with its ditches and
towers : from the two smallest, a stream of orangeade ran into
the ditches ; and, on the highest tower, Melusina was seen
disguised as a serpent.

4 3. A windmill placed on a hillock. A magpie was
fixed on one of the sails, which served for a mark to ail sorts
of persons, who amused themselves with shooting with
cross'bows.

‘ 4. A vineyard, in the midst of which were placed
two casks, as emblems of those containing good and evil.
One held a sweet and the other a bitter liquor. A man richly
diessed, seated cross-legged on one of the casks, held in his
fiand ^ paper, by which he offered the choice of his liquors to
al) who might wish to taste them.

4 4* À desert country, where a tyger was represçntcd
)ighting with a serpent.

Digitized by

Google

si

duke as of several of the lords of his court ;
and this was the whole resuit of it. It took

* 6. A savage mounted on a carrfel, sëeming on the
point of making a long joumey/

4 7. A man with a long pôle, beating a bush wherein
inany small birds had taken refuge. Near to it was ah orchard
inclosed by a trellis of roses, with a knight seated by his
mistress’s side, who caught and eat the birds the other drové
from the bush. A kind of satirical allegory, ingeiiious enough,
and which probably gave rise to the proverbial expression, 4 to
beat the bush for another.

‘ 8. Monntains and rocks covered with hanging icicles,
ahiong which a fool was seen mounted on a bcar.

4 9. À lake surroundcd by various towns and castles.
A vessel was on it sailing with ail her salis set.

4 The third table, smaller than the preceding ones, had
but three décorations.

4 1. A travelling merchant, as passing through a villagé
with his pack on his back.

4 2. An indian forest full of automata of variouà
animais walking about.

4 3. A lion fastened to a tree, near which was a man
beating a dog.

4 On the right andieft of the buffet, which was set off
with vases of chrystal, cups omamented with gold and precious
stones, and an immense quantity of gold and silver plate, weré
two columns: one bore the statue of a naked woman, from
whose right breast flowed hippocras during supper-time ; the
lower parts of her body were covered with a napkin loadcd
with greek lçtters of a violet colour.

Digitized by CjOOQle

55

pjaçp in February, and Mohammed captured
Constantinople in May.

* To thç other jcohmm, a living Eon w a * fetened, bjr
an iron chain. He was there placed to guard the naked woraan»
p the inscription in golden letters on a shield announced —* Do
not touçji the lady. 1

4 It 1*3 probable the naked woman, with the greefc
Jettera, was intended to reprisent Constantinople despoiled,—r
the lion, who forbade any one to touch her, the dnke of
Pprgnndy,—and the man who beat the # dog in présence of
the bon, sultan Mohammed.

‘ Beside the nurpbçr of ipachines I hâve desçribed, the
hall çontained £ve scaffolds for those spectators who were not
of the supper, and paiticnlarly for the great crowds of foreignera
whora t}ie report of this feast had brought to Lille.

4 On the entrance of the duke and his court, he walked
about for soipe tirne to examine the various décorations ; after
which he pt down to table, and the maitres d’hôtel served up
the supper.

4 Every course consisted of foity-four dishes, each of
which was lowered down from the roof by machinery, on
pus painted blue and gold, and with the device of the duke.

4 The moment he was seated with his guests, the bel!
pf the church tojled, and, instantly, three iittle choristera came
out of the pasty, and began to sing a very sweet air, by way
of grâce : they were accompanied by a shepherd on his pipe.
Shortly after, a horae entered, escorted by fifteen or sixteen
knights in the liverv of the duke. He moved backward, and
bore on his bare back two masked trumpeters, seated back
to back ; and in this manner he made the circuit of thé hall

Digitized by ^ooQle

5(5

The news of this disaster, the hofribte
massacres that followed the conquest, and the

backward, àttended by the knights, the two trompeter* playing
ail thetime symphonies.

( When they had quitted die hall, the organ of the
church was heard, and one of the musicians in the pasty
played on a german hom. A great automata, representing
an enormous wild boar, now entered, having on his back a
monster, half a savage and half a griffin ; and this monster
bore alsp a man on his shoulders. They had no sooner
departed than the chaunters in the church sang an air, and
three of the musicians in the pasty executed a trio : one played
on the douçaine (dulciana, probably dulcimer), the second on
the lute, and the third on another instrument.

c Such were the different amusements that formed the
accompaniments to the first course : ail, excepting the music 9
were farces foreign to the feast. Those of the second course
had as little connection; but they were preparatory to the last,
in which the object of this entertainment was to be pathetically
explained.

c The entertainment of the second course consisted of
a dramatic pantomime that represented the conquest of ,the
golden fleece by Jason,—a kind of allegory that recalled to
the spectators the order of the golden fleece, which the dilke
had instituted twenty-threc years before.

* For this spectacle, a small théâtre had been erected at
one end of the hall, and which a large green silken cuitain had
hid from the eyes of the assembly. On a sudden, a symphony
of clarions was heard behind this curtain : it was drawn up,
and Jason was seen fighting with, and bringing to the yoke,

Digitized by ^ooQle

incalculable conséquences it might hâve on
Christendom, spread universal alarm. The

two bidls that Vômited fiâmes of fire, tb whom had been
committed the defence of the garden of the Hcsperidcs. The
hero next cômbats a monstrous dragon, cüts off his head and
Sears out his teeth. He then ploughs a field with the bulls he
had tamed, sows there the teeth of the dragon, and instantly
an army of soldiert spring from the earth, who fight togethef
Biost bitteriy, and altemately kill each other.

* The three acts of this sort of opéra did not
immediately foHowi the spaces bétween each act were
filied up by interludes in the tâste of those of die preceding. 1
The first consisted of a youth who entered the hall mounted
en a large white stag, when they both sailg a duo ; then
à fiery dragon» who flew roünd the hall. A hawking scene
was next presented, when two falcons were seen to strike
down a héron, which was instandy presented to the duke. Ail
lhese interludes were accompanied either by pièces on the
argan, by the chauntcrs in the church, ôr by the musicians
hi the paisty, who every time executed an air on a different
instrument.

‘ These successive spectacles, however» were but, as
I hâve said, a preliminary amusement»—or, to borrow die
expressions of the two authors from whom I make this
extract, were but * a worldly pastime,* given to the spectator*
to entertain diem until the time of the grand scene» the scene
which was to explain the subject of this feast, and the real
cause of it.

‘ It was opened by a giant dressed widi a turban in the
tnorisco fashion, and clotbed in a long robe of striped green

* • * I . - •• * •

Digitized by <^.ooQle

duke then thought it incumbent on him ta
déclare his intentions otherwise than by feasts,

ÿlk. He hcld in his left hand a guisarmc of die antique mode»
and with his right led an éléphant This animal bore on it*
back a tower in whiçh was a female to rcpresent the church:
she had on her head a white veil, after the raanoer of nuns ;
her robe was of white satin, but her mande was black, to
mark her grief. When she was çome near to where tbo
duke sate, she sang a triolet to hâve the giant stopped, and
then made a long complaint in veree, in which baving displayed
die many ills she was suffering from the infidels, she implored
succour from the duke and the knights of die fleççe then
présent

4 Different officers now cntered with the king at anus#
of die order of the golden fleece, followed by two knights of
die order, each leading a damsel, one of whom was nattiml
daughter to the duke. The king at anus bore a live
pheasant, decorated with a collar of gold and precioua
atones: approaching the duke, he made a profouod obeîaancç»
and $aid, that it being the custora at grand festivals to offer
to the princes and gentlemen a peacock, or some noble bird»
for thcm to make a vow upon, he was corne with two ladies
to offer to his yalour a pheasant

4 The duke, in reply to this proposition# gave to the king
at anus a billet written in his own hand, that he bad prepared
before hand, the substance of which was read aloud, as follows,
He there vowed, to God pre-eminent, then to the gloriou*
▼irgin, his mother, and afterward to the ladies, and to the
pheasant, that if the king of France, his lord paramount, or any
other princes, would undertake a croisade against the Turks»
Jie would accompany or follow thcm -, and that he himsdf

Digitized by kjOOQle

59

and announced a croisade. He consequently
lévied large su ms from his people, even formed
an army, and marched into Germany : but on

would combat the sultan body to body, if he would accept
his challenge. The lady represendng the church having
thanked him, she made the cirçuit of the hall with her
clephant, during which time almost ail. the princes and
great lords présent made vows on die bird of the most
extravagant nature—such as not to drink wine, not to be
seated at table» or not to lie down one day of the week,,
until tliey should hâve met the infidel army—or hâve
been the first to attack it—or liave overthrown the banner
of the sultan—or to retura to Europe without bringing with
them a Turk prisoner. In short» one made a vow» (which.
will give an idea of the religion of these new croisaders) that
if he could not obtain the last favours of his mistress before hig
departure, he would marry the first damsel he should meet that
bad twenty thousand crowns.

* When the vows were ended» a troop of musicians
entered, accompanied by a great number of lighted torches.
Twelve ladies fellowed» every one attended by a knight : each
personified a virtue. They formed a dance» and thus the
festival ended.

* AU this noisy vain boasting had no efièct. The duke
levied large sums fiom his territories under pretence of thia
croisade, and even advanced into Germany, when a convenient
Ulness made him retum home ; and this pretended lion permitted
Mohammed to beat the dog without any opposition/

For furdicr particulars» see * l’Histoire de la Vie privée
des FnmçoiSé ,

Digitized by ^ooQle

a sudden the raging lion stopped,—a very
çonvenient illness served for a pretext, and
fce returned home again,

He nevertheless affected to talkof croisades
as before, and ordered one of his subjects, Joseph
Miélot, canon of Lille, to translate for him intQ
French the two treatises of Brochard -that
I hâve before noticed. In short, when pope
Pius II. convoked at Mantua, in 1459, an
assembly of Christian princes, to form a league
against Mohammed, he did not faiL to scnd
thither his ambassadors, at the head of whom
was the duke of Cleves,

Miélot finished his work in 1455, as the
short préfacé at the beginning informs us: the
two translations are in one of the manuscripts
\vhiçh the national library has lately received
from Belgium. They are written in the same
hand with the travels of la Brocquière,

Although of the three works, this ought
to hâve appeared before the other two,
ijevertheless the whole three, whéther from
ççonomy jn binding or from analogy ef

Digitized by kjOOQle

61

iwatters, hâve been united together, and thus
form a thick folio volume, numbered 314-,
bound in wood, covered with red sheepskin,
and lettered on tbe back, 4 Avis directif do
Brochard.*

This manoscript, from the writing,
préservation, miniatures, and fineness of the
vellum, is very valuàble; but its value is
greatly increased by other considérations, for
in my opinion it has been composed from
original treatises presented by their authors to
Philippe le bon, or from the copy commanded
by him to be made by one of his copyists from
the handwriting of the authors, placed perhaps
in his library.

I think I see a confirmation of. this
assertion, not only in the beauty of the MS,
and in the escutcheon of the prince, which is
çmblazoned in four places, and twice with his
piotto, * Aultre n’aray,’ but also in the vignette
of one of the two frontispieces, as well as in
the miniature of the ot;her, This vignette^

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

which is at the beginning of the volume,
represents Miélot on hls knees presenting
his book to the duke, who is seated and
surrounded by several courtiers, three of
whom are decorated, like himself with the
collar of the golden flcece. In the miniature
preceding the travels, la Brocquière is seen in
the same attitude. He is dressed as a Saracen,
and has near him his horse, which I hâve before
mentioned.

With regard to duke Philip, simamed
the Good, this is not the place to examine
whether he has truly deserved so glorious a
title, and whether history has not many
reproaches to make him of more than one
kind. But, as a man of letters, I must not
©mit saying, in honour to his memory, that
leaming has many obligations to him, and that
he was one of the princes from Charlemagne
to Francis I. who hâve done the most for it ;
that in the fifteenth century hé was in the twO
Burgundies, and in Belgium particularly, what

Digitized by G.ooQLe

»

€5

1» the preceding century Charles V. hadbeen
in France, and that, like Charles, he had
formed for himself a library ; had ordered
translations and original Works ; hadencouraged
men of letters, draughtsmen and able copyists ;
in fine, that he perhaps rendered to the sciences
more real services than Charles, because he waa
less superstitioua.

I shall give, jn * due History of French
Literature,’ which I am now writing, detail*
on ail these different facts. 1 hâve discdvered
nutnerous proofs of them in the manuscripts
that hâve passed from Belgium to France, or, ta
speak more correctly, in the manuscripts of tho
library from Br ussels, which constituted one of
the most considérable parts of what came from
that country. This library, which in regard
to the french part of it, is especially confided
to my care, and consequently has been almost
wholly perused by me, was composed from.
the libraries of private persons, of whom the
prinçipals are as follow :

Digitized by ^ooole

64

imo, A certain numberof manüsCripts that
had formerly composed the library of Charles V.
of Charles VI. of John duke of Berri, brother
to Charles V. and which, during the troubles
of the kingdom under Charles VI. and at the
beginning of the reign of his son, were stolen
and carried away by the dukes of Burgundy.
Those of John are known from his signature,
written by himself on the last page of the
volume, and sometimes in many other places.
Those that belonged to the two kings of France
hâve the shield of France emblazoned, and
hâve dedicatory epistles, with miniatures,
representing the authors presenting their books
to the monarch, who is clothed in the royal
mantle. There are other manuscripts, taken
from the foregoing libraries, but for the theft
of them I cannot produce such authentic
proofs, because, in the number, many are not
ornamented with miniatures, or had not been
presented to the king, and therefore bear not
such marks as those before mentioned ; but l

Digitized by C.ooQLe

tran produce, in proof that they hâve beèr*
acquired by the like means, so many probabilités,
and plausible conjectures, that they are, m my
eyes, équivalent to proof-positive*.

c 2do, Manuscriptsthatlegitimatelybelonged
to the dukes of Burgundy, that is to say, which
were either acquired by them, or dedicated and
presented to them, or commanded by them,
whether as original works or as simple copies*
In the class of those dedicated, the greater
number hâve been inscribed to Philippe le bon.
Of those written by command, almost the
whole were for him; and this confirms what I
before said, of the obligations literature has to
him, and what he did for iti

3 ttOy Manuscripts, which having belonged
to great lords in the. dominions of Bürgündy»
or to private persons, hâve passed at different;
times, and by some means or other, into the
Brussels library. Among them, we must
particularly notice those of Charles de Croy,
coünt of Chimay, godfather to tlie emperor

K

Digitized by C.ooQLe

Charles V. knight of the golden fleece, created
by Maximilian, in 1486, prince of Chimay.
His manuscripts are pretty numerous, and
bear, for a distinctive mark, his arms, and his
signature written by himself.

It résulta from the above, that in regard
to the meritsoftheBrusscls collection in French,
itcan scarcely offer anybutmodem manuscripts.
I hâve indeed seen very few that were valuable
for their antiquitv, their rarity, or the suhject
of the work ; but many are curious for their
writing, their préservation, and especiàlly for
their miniatures ; and these last will be
mterestirtg objects to persons who, like me,
shall undertake a history of the arts in the
lower âges. They will prove, that inBelgium
the flourishing State of some manufactures had
considerably advanced the progress of the arts
of painting and drawing. But I retum to the
three treatises of our volume.

I shall say but one word on Brochard’s
description of Palestine, because the original

/

Digitized by kjOOQle

07

Latin having been printed it is known, and
because Miélot, in the préfacé to his translation,
assures us, of what I am myself convinced of,
that he has not added any thing of his own.
Brochard, on his part, insists on his exaçtness.
He not only remained twenty-four years in that
country, but traversed it in its double diameter
from north to south, from the foot of Libanus
to Beersheba,—and from west to east, from
the Mediterranean to the Dead Sea. In
short, he describes nothing, which to use the
words of his franslator, * he had not bodily
seen, he himself being on the spot,’

The translation begins at page 76 of our
volume, and has this title: * Le livre de la
description de la terre-saincte, fait en l’onneur
et loenge de Dieu, et compilé jadis, l’an
u. nic xxxii. par frere Brochard, l’Alemant,
de l’ordre des Prescheurs,*

His second work being unpublished,

I shall speak of it more fully, but solely from
tire translation by Miélot. The work is

Digitized by L.ooQLe

«8

divlded into two, parts, and is entitled, # Advist
directif,’ (counsels for marching) pour faire 1©
passage d’oultre mer.*

For this expédition, says Brochard, ther©
are two different ways, by land and by sea ; and
he advises the king to use them both at the sam©
time,—the first for his army, the second for th©
transport of provision, tents, machines and
ammunitions of war, and for such as are
accustomed to the sea. This would require
from ten totwelve galleys, which by negotiation»
may be obtained from theGenoese or V enetians.
Theselast hâve possession of Candia, Negropont
with other islands and important places on the
continent. The Genoese hâve Pera, near to
Constantinople, and Caffa in Tartary. Thés©
two nations are beside well acquainted with th©
winds and seas of A sia, with the language, th©
islands, shores and ports of that country.

Should the voyage by sea be preferred,
the ports of Aigues-mortes, Marseille or Nie©
jnay be chosen tp embark frgm ; and the island

Digitized by G.ooQLe

69

of Cyprus would serve for a harbour to receivç
them, in like manner as St Louis put in there.
But many inconveniencies arise from a sea
voyage, as well as the remaining so long on
board ship, which generaüy causes, disagreeable
sicknesses in man and horse. This voyage
must dépend also on the winds, and there ia
always reason to fear tempests, and the ill
effects of change of climate. It even often
happens, that when it is intended merely ta
put into a port, the vessel is detained by
contrary winds. Add to these dangers, the
wines of Cyprus, which are naturally too
ardent: if you mix water with them, you
destroy their flavour,—and if you do not, they
affect the brain and bum the entrails. When
St Louis wintered in this island, his army
suffered ail these inconveniences ; for there
died two hundred and fifty counts, barons and

i

knights, of the highest nobility in his army.

There is another passage, including sea
gnd land, and whiçh offers two roads,—the

Digitized by L.ooQLe

7©

«ne through Africa, the other through Italy.
That through Africa is extremely dangerous,
on account of the fortified castles near whkh
y ou must march, the risk of wanting provision,
the desert you must pass throügh, and Egypt.
The road itself is also of an immense lçngth ;
for if you set out from the streights of Gibraltar,
you will hâve 2500 miles to march before you
can arrive within two short days joumey of
Jérusalem: if you set out from Tunis, 2400,
Conclusion—the road through Africa is
impossible, and must not be thought of.

The route through Italy présents three
diffèrent roads : one through Aquileia, Istria,
Palmatia, the kingdom of Rassia (Servia),
and Thessalonica, the greatest city of Macedonia %
which is but eight short days joumey from
Constantinople. Tins was the route followed
by the Romans, when they made war in the
east. These countries are fertile, * but inhabited
by people disobedient to the church of Rome,
With regard to their valour and boldness tu

Digitized by C.ooQLe

71

resist, they are beneath notice, not being in
any respect superior to women.*

The second is through la Puglia. The
embarkation must take place at Brundusium,
to disembark at Durazzo, which belongs to
my lord the prince of Tarentum. The army
would then advance through Albania, Blaque
and Thessalonica.

The third, in like manner, traverses la
Puglia; but it passes through Otranto, Corfou,
which belongs to my foresaid lord of Tarentum,
Desponte, Blaque, Thessalonica. This was the
road followed at the first croisade by Robert
earl of Flanders, Robert duke of ^ormandy,
Hugh brother to king Philippe I. and Tancred
prince of Tarentum.

After discussing the passages by sea, and
by sea and land, Brochard examines the onc
wholly by land. It traverses Germany,
Hungary and Bulgaria, and was taken by
the greater part of the armies of France and
Germany at the first croisade, under the conduct

Digitized by C.ooQLe

72'

of Petef the hefmit, and is that which thé-
author advises the king to follow. But when
in Hungary there is the choice of two rôads j
the onè through Bulgaria—the othet through
Sclavonia, which constitutes part of the
kingdom of Rassia» Godfrey of Bouillon, his
two brothers, and Baldwin count of Mons*
took the first road. Raimond comte de Saint
Gilles, and Audemare bishop of Puy, and
legate (rom the holy see, followed thé second*
although some authors prétend that they took
that through Acquileia and Dalmatia.

Should the .king adopt this passage
overland, the army, when in Hungary, might
be divided into two, and then, for the greatef
convenience of forage, each party might take
separate roads ; the one through Bulgaria, the
other through Sclavonia. , The king should
follow the first road, as being the shortest.
With regard to the Languedocians and
Provençals, who are near to Italy, they may
be permitted to go by way of Brundusium

Digitized by <^.ooQle

73

$nd Ôtrànto» Their rendeîvous would be at
ThessaloftiCa, where they would raeet the main
body which had màrched throügh Aquiieia.
To this advice* as to the advantages and
fticonvèniences of the different roads, the
Dominican açlds 8ome others respecting the
princes thtough whose States it wôuld be
©ece&ary to pass, ând on the regources which
may be found*in these sevéral States*

ha Rassia, he says, is â fertile couûtry,
with five goW mines, five of silver, and many
more producing gold and silver, at work. No
mofethan one thoüsand horse and six thoU6and
infantiy, Would be wanted for the conquest of
this country, and * it would be an agreeable
and acceptable jewel to gain.’

The author wishes that no treaty of alliance
«hoûld be made with this kihg, nor with the
greek emperor ; and, the better to strengthen
his proposition, he relates some particulars
as to the persons of these two monarchs, and
especially of the first, whom he calls an

&

Digitized by ^ooQle

74

usurper. As for the other, he not ônfy insîsti
that nêither peace nor truce should be madç»
but that war should be declared against him.

In conséquence, he points out the means
to besiege Constantinople, Adrianople and
Thessalonica ; and as from what has happened,
he no way doubts of what may again happen,
that is to say, the capture of Constantinople, he
proposes divers régulations for the govemment
of thé empire of the east, when it shall be a
Second time conqüered, and for bringing it
again under the roman religion*

He concludes his * Avis directifs,’ by
warning the croisaders to be on their guard
against the perfidy of the Greeks, as well as
against the Syriàns, the Hassassins, and other
people of Asia. He enters into a detail of the
plots that will be laid for them, and shews
the manner of avoiding thenu

Brochard, in his first part, has conducted
the host of our Lord by land to Constantinople,
and made it capture the town* In the second

Digitized by ^ooQle

75

part, he causes it to pass the Dardanelles,
and leads it into Asia. He is, however,
perfectly acquainted with these countnes; for,
indepéndently of his twenty-four years résidence
in Palestine, he had tpavelled over Armehia,
Persia, the grecian empire, &c.

According to him, the cause of the ill
success of the kings of France and England,
in the preceding croisades, was the ill-judged
attacks they made on the Turks and the sultan
of Egypt at the same time. He proposes to
make war only on the Turks, and to hâve them
alone for enemies. To do it with success,
he gives descriptions of Turkey, calied by the
Greeks, Anaçhèly (Anatolia). He points out
ihe means of securing provision for the army
Jby sea, and gives the well-founded hope of
victory over a people neçessarily abandoned
by God, because their malice ü accomplished %
and internally weakened by intestine wars, and
from the want of leaders,—whose cavalry is
composed of slaves, having little courage or

Digitized by <^.ooQle

16

jndustry, with small weak horses, badly armcd
with turkish bows and haubergeons of leather,
which may more properly be called cuirasses * ;
over a people, in short; who only fight as
tbey retreat, and who, after the Greeks and
Babylonians, are the most worthless of ail the
east in deeds of arms. '

The author déclarés, at the conclusion,
that in ail tbat country there is scarcely a nation
which he has not seen march to battle ; and
that the single power of France, without any
aid whatever, may defeat, not only the Turks
and Egyptians-j-, but also the Tartars,
excepting solejy the Indians, Arabians and
Persians.

The Brussels collection eontains another
copy of the ‘ Advis directif,’ on paper in folio,

* The haubert and haubergeon (a lighter sort of
haubert) were a kind of netted $hirts of iron, which fell ha\f
way down die thigh. The turkish haubergeons, on the
conti ary, were so short, they might, according to our author,
be called by the name of cuirasses.

t The Turks and Egyptians ! ! friar Brochard, yo^
fbrget Louis le jeune and St f-ouis.

Digitized by kjOOQle

77

xvith miniatures. No 352. This makes a
volume of itself. The vignette représenta
Brochard writing at his desk ; and in the next
miniature, he is presenting his book to the
king : this is followed by another miniature,
where the king is seen on his'march to the
holy land.

I have also found, in the same collection,
the two latin treatises of the author, united in
one volume folio on paper, No. 319, bound
in red sheepskin. The title of the first is
* Directorium ad passagium faciendum, editum
per quemdam fratrem ordinis predicatorum,
scribentem experta et visa potius quam audita;
ad serenissimum principem et dominum
Philippum regem Francorum, anno Domini
m.ccc.xxxii.*

The title of the second is, * Libellus de
terra sancta, editus a fratre Brochardo,
.Theutonico, ordinis fratrum predicatorum.*
At the end of this copy, we read that it was
written.by Jean Reginaldi, canon of Cambray,

\

Digitized by kjOOQle

As the other is undoubtedly of the same
handwriting, I api cqnvinced it nmst also
hâve beeji written by Regiqaldi.

It now remains for me to make ray readers
acquainted with pur tbird freneh work, the
travels of la Brocquière, which I am about to
publish.

The author was a gentleman, as may easily
be seen, when he speaks of hprses, strong
castles, and tiltings, His account is out an
itinerary, which is often somewhat monotonous,
particularly in the descriptions of countries and
towns ; but this itinerary is interesting to the
history and the geography of the times, There
will be found in them very precious materials*
and sometimes sketches and pictures nofc
without merit.

The traveller is a m*n of a prudent
.and sensible mind, full of judgment and
ynderstanding. The impartiality he displays,
when he speaks of the infidel nations with
which he hais had occasion to be acquainjed.

Digitized by ^ooQle

Will be admired, pafticularly his account
of the Türks, whose good faith, according
to him, was greatly süperior to that of
taatiy Christians. He has scarcely axly of
the superstition of his âge, but die dévotion
to pilgrirtlages ànd relies : at the same time, he
sheWS littlé fâith iti the authenticity of the relies
which were displayed before him.

With regard to pilgrimages» it will be
seen by the pê fusai of his book how they had
bèen ftiultiplied in Palestine; and his work
will be fbr us à memorial which, on one hand»
Will eonvince us of the blind credulity of our
Western devoteeS in adopting these pious fables»
and, on the other hând, of the criminal tricks
of thé Christians in the holy land, who had
invented them to wheedle out the money from
the pockéts ôf the croisaders and pilgrims, and
gain an incorae at thèir expense.

La Brocquicre writes, like a military man,
•in a frank and manly style, which* announces
veracity and inspires confidence; but he also

Digitized by ^ooQle

80

Wntes negligently, so that his subject 1s Ilot
ahvays very clearly arranged, and at times ho
bcgins to relate a fact, the continuation of
which is in some distant pages. Though this
confusion be rare, I hâve taken the liberty to
correct, and to unité what was before divided.

Our manuscript has the same defect as
the greater part of other manuscripts, in the
orthography of certain names, which frequently
vary in every page, and even sometimes in two
sentences that follow each other. I may be
blamed, perhaps, for noticing these variations
of a language which, though at that time
instable, is now fixed ; for instance^ he writes,
Auteriche, Aulhei ick ,> Ausltice , and Ostriche.

This I hâve corrected, and shall do the
same with those names the spelling of which
does not vary in the manuscript, but which
are differently written at this day. Other names
are completely changed, and are no longer the
same. We do not now call the Black Sea * la
Met Majeure,’ nor the Danube * la Dunoë.’ •

Digitized by k^ooQLe

81

I am aware that it will be matter of
objection against me, that I hâve done wrong
ln giving to an author expressions,which were
neither his own, nor those of his time ; but
having well weighed the advantages and
inconveniences of a very literal translation,
I haVe been satisfied that so rigorous an
exactness would render the text unintelligible
and fatiguing for the generality of readers; and
that, if we would hâve an author understood,
we must make him speak as he would hâve
spoken himself, had he been living among us.
In short, there are things of which good sense
ordains the suppression or change ; and it
would be ridiculous, for instance, to say like
la Brocquière, ‘ un seigneur hongre, 1 for ‘ un
seigneur hongrois * des Chrétiens vulgair.es, 1
for * des Chrétiens bulgares, 1 &c.

M

Digitized by C.ooQle

Digitized by <^.ooQle

Digitized by

Google

Digitized by vjOOQLC

THE

TRAVELS

%

OP

LA BROCQUIERE.

HERE BEGIWS THE JOURNEY OP BERTRANDON
DE LA BROCQUlkRE TO THE HOLY LAND,
IN THE YEAR OF GRACE ONE THOUSAND
POUR HUNDRED AND THIRTY-TWO.

To animate and inflame the hearts of such
noble men as may be desirous of seeing the
world, and by the order and command of the
most high, most powerful, and my most
redoubted lord, Philippe, by the grâce of God,
duke of Burgundy, Lorraine, Brabant and
JLinpbourg, count of Flanders, Artois and

Digitized by AaOOQle

84

Burgundy *, palatine of Hainault, Holland,
Zealand and Namur, marquis of the holy
empire, lord of Friesland, Salins and Mechlin,
I, Bertrandon de la Brocquière, a native of thç
duchy of Guienne, lord de Vieux-Chateau,
çounsellor, and first esquirc-carver to my
aforesaid most redoubted lord, after recollecting
every event, in addition to what I had madc
an abridgement of in a small book by way
of mémorandums, hâve fairly written ont
this account of my short travels, in order
that if any king, or Christian prince, should
wish to make the conquest of Jérusalem,
and lead thither an army overland, or if any
gentleman should be desirous of travelling
thither, each of them may be made acquainted
with ail the towns, cities, régions, countries,
rivers, mountains and passes in the districts, as

* Burgundy was divided into two parts, the duchy and
«ounty. The last, since known under the name of Franche
Comté, began, at this period, to take that appellation ; and this
is the reason why our author styles Philippe duke and coup*
pf Burgundy.

Digitized by C.oooLe

85

well as the lords to whom they belong, from
the duchy of Burgundy to Jérusalem.

The route hence to the,holy city of Rome
is too well known for me to stop and describe it.

I shall pass lightly over this article, and not '
say much until I corne to Syria. I hâve
travelled through the wnole country from
Gaza, which is the entrance to Egypt, to
within a day’s journey of Aleppo, a town
situated on the north of the frontier, and which
we pass in going to Persia.

Having formed a resolution to make a
devout pilgrimage to Jérusalem, and being
determined to discharge my vow, I quitted, in
the month of February, in the year 1432, the
court of my most redoubted lord, which was
then at Ghent. After traversing Picardy,
Champagne, Burgundy, I entered Savoy,
crossed the Rhône, and arrived at Chambéry
by the Mont-du-Chat.

Here commences a long chain of
jnountains, the highest of which is called

Digitized by C.ooQLe

Mount Cenis, which forms a dangerous pass
for travellers in times of snow. The road is
so difficult to find, that a traveller, unless he
wish to lose it, must take one of the guides
of the country, called ‘ Marrons/ These
people advise you not to make any sort of
noise that may shake the atmosphère round
the mountain, for in that case the snow 19
detached, and rolls with impetuosity to the
ground. Mount Cenis séparâtes Italy from
France.

Having thence descended into Piedmont,
a handsome and pleasant country, surrounded
on three skies by mountains, 1 passed through
Turin, where I crossed the Po, and proceeded
to Asti, which belongs to the duke of Orléans;
then to Alcxandria, the greater part of the
inhabitants of which are said to be usurers,—to
Piacenxa, belonging to the duke of Milan,—and
at last to Bologna la Grassa, part of the pope’s
dominions. The emperor Sigismund was at
Piacenxa ; Jhe had corne thithçr from Milan,

Digitized by C.ooQLe

87

<vhere he had received his second crown, and
was on his road to Rome in search of the
third *.

From Bologna T had another chain of
mountains (the Appenines) to pass, to enter
the States of the Florentines. Florence is a
large town, where the commonalty govern.
Every three months they elect for' the
government magistrates, called Priori, who
are taken from different professions ; and as
long as they remain in office they are
honoured, but cm the expiration of the
three months they retum to their former
situations.

F rom Florence I went to Monte Pulciano,
a castle built on an eminencë, and surrounded

i

on three sides by a large lake (Lago di Perugia),

# In 1414 Sigismund, electedemperor, had received the
s3ver crown at Aix la.Chapelle. In the month of Noveraber
1431, à little before the passage of our traveller, he had
veceived the iron crown at Milan; but it was not until 1443
he received at Rome, from the bonds of the pope, thaï of
gold.

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

88

A

thence to Spoleto, Monte-FiasCone, and a t
length to Rome.

Rome is well known. Authors of veracity
assure us, that for seven hundred years she was-
mistress of the world. But although their
writings should not affirm this, would there
not be sufficiency of proof in ail the grand
ediffces now existing; in those columns of
marble, those statues, and those monuments
as marvellous to see as to describe.

Add to the above the immense quantities
of relies that are there,—so many things that
our Lord has touched,. such numbers of holy
bodies of apostles, martyrs, confessors and
virgins,—in short, so many churches where
the holy pontiffs hâve granted full indulgences
for sin.

I saw there Eugenius IV. aVenetian, who
bad just been elected pope*. The prince of

* We shall see, hereafter, that la Brocquière left Rome
on the 25 th march, and Eugenius had been elected on the first
days of the mouth. .

Digitized by L.ooQLe

Salefnum had declared War agaihst hifti: he
was of the Colonna family, and nephcw to
pope Martin *»

I quitted R ortie the 25th of March, and,
passing throügh a town belonging to the
count de Thalamoné, a relation to the cardinal
des Ursins, arrived at Urbino ; thence* through
the lordshipsof the Malatestas, came to Rimini,
part of the venetian dominions. I crossed three
branches of the Po, and came to Chiosa, a town
of the Venetians, which had formerly a good
harbour; but this was destroyed by themselves,
when the Genoese came to lay siégé to Venice.
From Chiosa, I landed at Venice, distant
twenty-five miles.

Venice is a great and handsome town,
«ncient and commercial, and built in the

* Martin V. prédecessor to Ëugenius, was a Colonna -,
and therè was a dtclartd enftiity betweèn his faûiily and that
of the Orsini. Ëugenius, when established in the holy chair,
took part in this quatrel, and sided with the Oisini agoinst the
Colonnas, who were nephéws to Martin. The last took up
arms, and triade war en him.

N

Digitized by V.ooQLe

middle of the sea. Its diffèrent quarters being
separated by water form so many islands, so
that a boat is necessary to go from one to the
other.

This town possesses the body of St Helena,
mother of the emperor Constantine, as well as
many others that I hâve seen, especially several
bodies of the holy innocents, which are entire.
These last are in an island calied Murano,
renowned for its manufactories of glass.

The government of Venice is full of
wisdom. No one can be a member of the
council, nor hold any employment, unless he
be noble and bom in the town. It has a duke,
who is bound to hâve ever with him, during
the day, six of the most ancient and celebrated
members of the council. When the duke dies,
his successor is chosen from among those who
hâve shewn the greatest knowledge and zeal
for the public good.

On the 8th of May, I embarked to
accomplish my vow, on board a galley, with

/

Digitized by ^ooQle

some other pilgrims. We coasted Sclavonia,
and successively touched at Pola, Zara,>
Sebenico and Corfou.

Pola seemed to me to hâve been formerly
a handsome and strong town, with an excellent
harbour. We were shewn at Zara the body of
St Simeon, to whom X)ur Lord was presented
in the Temple. The town is surrounded on
three sides by the sea, and its fine port is shut
in by an iron chain. Sebenico bejongs to the
Venetians, as does Corfou, which, with a very
handsome harbour, has also two castles.

From Corfou we sailed to Modon, a good’
and fair town in the Morea, under the same
masters ; thence to Candia, a most fertile
island, the inhabitants of which are excellent
sailors. The government of Venice nominates
a govemôr, who takes the title of duke, but
who holds his place only" three years. Thence
to Rhodes, where I had but time to see
the town: to Balfa, a ruined town in the

Digitized by <^.ooQle

92

island of Cyprus,—and at length to Jaffa, in
the holy land of promise.

At Jaffa, the pardons commence for
pilgrims to the holy land. It formerly
belonged to the Christians, and was then
strong: at présent, it is entirely destroyed,
having only a few tenté covered with reeds,
whither pilgrims retire to shelter themseives
from the heat of the sun. The sea enters the
town, and fbrms a bad and shallow harbour :
it is dangerous to remain there long for fear of
being driven on shore by a gust of wind.
There are two springs of firesh water; but one
is overflowed by the sea, when the westerly
wind blows a little strong. When any pilgrims
disembark there, interpreters and other offkers
®f the sultan* instantly hasten to ascertain
their numbers, to serve them as guides, and

* The sultans of Egypt are here meant. Palestine
*nd Syria were at that time under their power. The sultaq
will be often mentioned in the coyrse of the work.

Digitized by kjOOQle

to receive, in the name of their master, the
customary tribute.

Ramlé, the first town we came to from
JafFa, is without walls, but a good and
commercial town, seated in an agreeable and
fertile district. We went to visit, in the
neighbourhood, a village where my lord Saint'
George was martyred ; and, on our retum to
Ramlé, we continued our route, and arrived,
after two days, at * the holy city of Jérusalem,
where our Lord Jésus Christ suffered death
for us.*

After performing the customary pilgrimages,
we performed those to the mountain where
Jésus fasted forty days ; to the Jordan, where
he was baptised ; to the ch’urch of Saint
John, near to that river; to that of Saint
Martha and St Mary Magdalen, where our
Lord rqised Lazarus from the dead ; to
Bethlehem, where he was bom ; to the birth
place of St John Baptist; to the house of
£achariah ; and, lastly, to the holy cross, where

Digitized by L.ooQLe

94•

the trce grew that formed the féal cross, afiter
which we returned to Jérusalem.

The Cordeliers hâve a church at
Bethlehem, in which they perform divine
service, but they are under great subjection to
the Saracens. The town is only inhabited by
Saracens, ànd some Christiàns of the girdle *.

At the birth-place ôf St John Baptist, a
rock is shewn, which, during the time of
Herod’s persécution of the innocents, opened
itSelf miraculously in two, whén St Elizabeth
having therein hid her son, it closed again of
it 9 elf, and the child remaïned shut up, as it is
said, two whole days.

Jérusalem is situated in a mountainous and
strong countty, and is at this day a considérable

* The caliph Motoüakkek, itf the year 235 of the
Hegira, or the 856th of the Christian æra, ordered the
Christiàns and Jews to wear a broad girdle of leather, and
they wear it to this day in the east. From that epocha, the
Christiàns of Asia, and especially those of Syria, who are
tnostly Jacobites, or Nestorians, were called Christiàns of the
Çrirdle*

Digitized by C.ooQLe

town, although it appears to hâve been mu ch
more so in former times. It is under the
dominion of the sultan» to the shame and grief
of Christendom. Among the firee Christians,
there are but two Cordeliers who inhabit the
holy sepulchre, and even they sure harrassed by
the Saracens : I can speak of it firom my own
knowledge, having been witness of it for two
months. In the church of the holy sepulchre
résidé also many other sorts of Christians:
Jacobites, Armenians, Abyssinians from the
country of Prester John, and Christians of
the girdle ; but of these the Francs suffer the
greatest hardships.

When ail these pilgrimages were
accomplished, we undertook another, equally
customary, that to St Catherine’s on Mount
Sinai. For this purpose we formed a party of
ten pilgrims, sir André de Thoulongeon, sir
Michel de Ligne, Guillaume de Ligne, his
brother, Sanson de Lalaing, Pierre de Vaudrey,
Godefroi de Thoisi, Humbert Buffart, Jean de

Digitized by G.ooQLe

la Roc, Simonet (his femüy naine is léft blank)
and myself *.

For thc information of others, who likc
myself, may wish to visit this country, I shall
say, that the custom is to treat with the chief
interpréter at Jérusalem, who receives a tax for
the sultah, and one for himself, and then sends
to inform the interpréter at Gaza, who, in his
tum, negotiates a passage with the Arabians
of the deserL These Arabs enjoy the right of
conducting pilgrims; and, as they are not
always under due subjection to the sultan,
their camels must be used, which they let to
hire at ten ducats a head.

The Saracen, who at this time held
the office of chief interpréter, was called

* Thèse naines, of which die five first are of greaf
lords in the States of the duke of Burgundy, ahew that several
persons of the duke’s court had formed a company for this
pilgrimage to Palestine, and are, probably, those who
embarked with our author at Venice, although he has not
before named them. Toulongeon was created, this same
year 1432, a knight of the golden fleece, but was not invested
with theorder; for he was thenapilgrim, anddied on theroad*

Digitized by ^ooQle

91

Nanchardin. Having received the aûswef
from the Arabs, he assembled us before thé
chapel, which is at the entrance and on the
left of the holy sepulchre : he there took down
in writing our âges, names, surnames, and very
particular descriptions of our persons, and sent
a duplicate of this to the chief interpréter at
Cairo. These précautions are taken for the
security of travellerç, and to prevent the
Arabs from detaining any of them ; but I am
persuaded that it is done likewise through
mistrust, and through tèar of some exchange
- or substitution that may naake them lose the
tribute-money.

When on the eve of oür departure, we

bought wine for the journey, and laid in a

stock of provision, excepting biscuit, which

we were to find at Gaza. Nanchardin having

provided asses and mules to carry us and our

provision, with a particular interpréter, we

set ofF. '

»

O

Digitized by <^.ooQle

93

The first place we came to was a village
formerly more considérable, at présent inhabited
by Christians of the girdle, who cultivate vines.
The second was a town called St Abraham,
and situated in the valley of Hébron, * where
our Lord created our first father Adam.’ In
that place are buried together, Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, with their wives; but this sepukhre
is now inclosed within a mosque of the Saracens.
We were anxious to see it, and even advanced
to the gâte; but our guides and interpréter
assured us they dared not suffer us to enter in
the day-time, on account of the dangers they
should run, and that any Christian found
within a mosque is instantly put to death,
unless he renounce his religion.

After the valley of Hébron, we traversed
another of greater extent, near to which the
mountain whereon St John performed his
penitence was pointed out to us. Thence we
crossed a desert country, and lodged in One of

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

99

those houses built through charity, and called
Khan : from this khan, we came to Gaza.

Gaza, situated in a fine côuntry near the
sea, and at the entrance of the desert, is a
strong town, although uninclosed. It is
pretended that it formerly belonged to the
famous Samson. His palace is stdll shewn,
and also the columns of that which he pulled
down; but I dare not affirm that these are the
same.

Pilgrims are harshly treated there; and
we sliould hâve likewise suffefed, had it not
been for the governor, a man about sixty
years of âge, and a Circassian, who heard our
complaints, and did us justice. Thrice were
we obliged to appear before him: once, on
account of the swords we wore,—and the two
other times, for quarrels which the Moucres
Saracens sought to hâve with us.

Many of us wished to purchase asses; for
the camel has a very rough movement, which
is extremely fatiguing to those unaccustomed

Digitized by ^ooQle

100

to it. An ass is sold at Gaza for two ducats ;
but the Moucres not only wanted to prevent
our buying any, but to force us to hire asses
from them, at the price of five ducats to Saint
Catherine’s. This conduct was represented to
the goveraor. For myself, who had hitherto
rode on a camel, and had no intentions of
changing, I desired they would tell me how
I could ride a camel and an ass at the same
time. The governor decided in our favour,
and ordered that we should not be forced to
hire any asses from the Moucres against our
inclinations.

We here laid in fresh provision necessaiy
for the continuation of our joumey ; but on
the eve of our departure, four of my companions
fell sick, and retumed to Jérusalem. 1 set off
with the five others, and we came to a village
çituated at the entrance of the desert, and the
only one to be met with between Gaza and
St Catherine’s. Sir Sanson de Lalaing also
there quitted us, and retumed ; so that

Digitized by Google

101

our company consistée! of sir Apdrew de
-Toulongeon, Pierre de Vaudrei, Godefroi de
Toisi, Jean de la Roe, and myself.

We thus travelied two days in the desert
absolutely without seeing any thing deserving
to be related. Only one moming I saw,
before sun-rise, an animal running on four
legs, about three fcet long, but scarcely a palm
in height. The Arabians fled at the sight of
it, and the animal hastened to hide itself in a
bush hard by. Sir Andrew and Pierre de
Vaudrei dismounted, and pursued it sword
in hand, when it began to cry like a cat on the
approach of a dog. Pierre de Vaudrei struck
it on the back with the point of his sword, but
did it no harm, from its being covered with
scales like a sturgeon. It sprung at sir
Andrew, who, with a blow from his sword,
eut the neck partly through, and âung it on
its back, with its feet in the air, and killed it.
The head resembled that of a large hare : the
fçet were like the hands of a young child, with

Digitized by ^ooQle

102

a pretty lohg tail, like that of the large green
lizard. Our Arabs and interpréter told us it
was very dangerous *.

At the end of the second day’s journey,
I was seized with such a burning fever that it
was impossible for me to proceed further. My
four companions, distressed at this accident,
made me mount an ass, and recommended me
to one of our Arabs, whom they charged to
reconduct me, if possible, to Gaza.

This man took a great deal of care of me,
which is unusual, in respect to Christians. He
faithfully kept me company, and led me in the
cvening to pass the night in one of their
camps, which might consist of fourscore and
some tents, pitched in the form of a Street.
These tents consist of two pôles stuck in
the ground by the bigger end, at a certain
distance from each other, and on them is

* From this vague description, it should seem that the
animal spoken of was the great lizard, called Monitor , because
it is pretended that it gives information of the approach of a
crocodile. As for the.terror of the Arabs, it was groundless.

Digitized by ^ooQle

103

placed another pôle cross-way, and over this
last is laid a thick coverlid of woollen, or
coarse hair.

On my arrivai, four or five Arabs, who
were acquainted with my companion, came to
meet us. They dismounted me from my ass,
and laid me on a mattress which I had with
me, and then, treating me according to their
method, kneaded and pinched me so much with
their hands *, that from fatigue and lassitude
I slept and reposed for six hours.

During ail this time no one did me the
least harm, nor took any thing from me. It
would, however, hâve been very easy for them
so to do ; and 1 must hâve been a tempting
prey, for I had with me two hundred ducats,
and two camels laden with provision and
wine.

I set out, on my return to Gaza, before
day; butwhen I camethither, I found neither

* This is what is called in French * Masser,’ a mèthod
used in everal parts of the east for certain disoi ders.

Digitized by kjOOQle

1<M

my four comparions who had remained behind
nor sir Sanson de Lalaing. The whole five
had retumed to Jérusalem, carrying with them
the interpréter. Fortunately I met with a
siciÜan Jew to whom I could make myself
understood; and he sent me an old Samaritan,
who, by some medicines which he gave me,
appeased the great heat I endured.

Two days after, finding myself a little
better, I set ofF in company with a Moor, who
conducted me by a road on the sea-side. We
passed near to Ascalon, and thence traversed
an agreeable and fertile country to Ramlé, where
I regained the road to Jérusalem.

On the first day’s journey, I met on my
road the governor of that town, retuming
from a pilgrimage with a company of fifty
horsemen and one hundred camels, mounted
principally by women and chiidren, who had
attended him to his place of dévotion. I passed
the night with them, and the morrow, on my
return to Jérusalem, took up my lodgings

Digitized by kjOOQle

103

with thé Cordeliers at the chur£h of Moun.t
Sion, where ï met again my five comrades.

On my arrivai, I went to bed, that my
disorder might be properiy treated ; but I was
not cured, or in a State to départ, until. thc
l£>th of August. . During my convalescence»
I recollected that I had frequently heard it
said that it was impossible for a Christian to
retum overland from Jérusalem to France.
I dare not, even now whçn I hâve performed
this journey, as§ert that it is safe. I thought,
nevertheless, that nothing was impossible for
a man to undertake, who has a constitution
strong enough to support fatigue, and has
xnoney and health. It is not, however,
through vain boasting that I say this; but,
with the aid of God and his glorious mother,
who never fail to assist those who pray to them
heartily, I resolved to attempt the journey.

I kept my project secret for some time,
without even hinting it to my companions:
I was also desirous, before I undertook it,

v

Digitized by kjOOQle

100

to perforai other pilgrimages, especially those
to Nazareth and Mount Tabor. I went, in
conséquence, to make Nanchardin, principal
interpréter to the sultan, acquainted with my
intentions, who supplied me with a suificient
interpréter for my joumey. I thought of
making my first pilgrimage to Mount Tabor,
and everythingwas prepared for it; butwhen
I was on the point of setting ont, the head of
the convent where I lodged dissuaded me, and
opposed my intentions most strongly. The
interpréter, on his side, refused to go, saying,
that in the présent circumstances I would not
find any person to attend me; for that the road
lay through the territories of towns which
were at war with each other, and that very
lately a Venetian and his interpréter had been
there assassinated.

I confined myself therefore to the second
pilgrimage, in which sir Sanson de Lalaing
and Humbert wished to accompany me. We
left sir Michel de Ligne sick at Mount Sion,

Digitized by t^ooole

107

and his brother William remained, with his
servant, to attend on him. The rest of us set

ofF on the day of mid-August *, with the

*

intention of going to Jaffa by way of Ramlé,
and from Jaffa to Nazareth; but, before I
departed, I went to the tomb of our lady, to
implore her protection for my grand joumey
home. I heard divine service at the Cordeliers,
and saw there people who call themselves
Christians; ‘ but some of them are very strange
ones, according to our manner.’

The principal monk at Jérusalem was so
friendly as to accompany us as far as Jaffa,
with a cordelier friar of the convent of
Beaune. They there quitted us, and we
engaged a bark from the Moors, which carried
us to the port of Acre,

This is a handsome port, deep, and well
inclosed. The town itself appears to hâve
been large *and strong ; but at présent there

* Is aot dûs a contradiction to wjhat be says just bcfarc i —T.

Digitized by kjOOQle

103

do not exist more than three hundred houses,
situated at one of its extremities, and at some
distance from the sea. With, regard to our
pilgrimage, we could not accomplish it. Some
venetian merchants, whom we consulted,
dissuaded us, and, from what they said, we
gave it up. They told us, at the same time,
that a galley from Narbonne was expected at
Baruth ; and my comrades being desirous to
take that opportunity of returning to France,
we consequently followed the road to that
tovvn,

We saw, on our way thither, Sur, an
inclosed town, with a good port, then Seyde,
another sea-port tolerably good. Baruth has
been more considérable than it is now, but its
port is still handsome, deep, and safe for
vessels. On one of its points we see the
remains of a strong castle which it formerly
had, but which is now in ruins *. *

* Sur is the ancient Tyre,—Seyde, Sidon,—Baruth,
Berites, What la Brocquière here says is interesting for

Digitized by

Google

109

As for myself, solely occupied with my
grand journey, I employed the time we staid
in this town in seçking information concerning
it ; and to this end- addressed myself to a
genoese merchant, called Jacques Pervézin.
He advised me to go to Damascus, assuring
me that I should find there merchants from
Venice, Catalonia, Florence, Genoa, and
elsewhere, whose counsels might guide me.
He even gave me a letter of recommendation
to a countryman of his, named Ottobon
Escot.

Being resolved to consult Escot before
I proceeded farther, I proposed to 6ir Sanson
to go and see Damascus, without, however,
telling him any thing of my project. He
accepted my proposai with pleasure, and we
set out under the conduct of a Moucre. I hâve
before said that the Moucres in Syria are the

geography : ît proves that ail these sea-ports of Syria, formerly
90 commercial and famous, but at this day so degraded and
completely useless, werç, in his time, for the greater pqut, fit
for commerce*

Digitized

Google

110

people whose trade is conducting travellcrs, and
hiring out to them asses and mules.

On quitting Baruth, we had to traverse
some high mountains to a long plain, called
the valley of Noah, because it is said, that
Noah there built the ark. This valley is not,
at the utmost, more than a league wide ; but
it is pleasant and fertile, watered by two rivers,
and peopled by Arabs.

As far as Damascus, we continued to
travel between mountains, at whose feet are
many villages and vineyards. But I warn
those who, like me, shall hâve occasion to
make this journey, to take good care of
themselves during the night, for in my life I
iiever felt such cold. This excess of cold is
caused by the fall of the dew, and it is thus
throughout Syria. The greater the heat during
the day, the more abundant the dew, and the
cold of the night.

It is two days journey from Baruth
to Damascus. The Mohammedans hâve

Dii ' i by Google

ni

established a particular custora for Christian»
ail through Syria, in not permitting them to
enter the towns on horseback. None, that
are known to be such, dare do it, and, in
conséquence, our Moucré made sir Sanson and
myself dismount before we entered any town.
Scarcely had we arrived inDamascus tban about
a dozen Saracens came round to look at us.
1 wore a broad beaver hat, which is unusual in
that country; and one of them gave me a
blow with a staff, which knocked it off my
head on the ground. I own that my first
movement was to lift my fist at him ; but the
Moucre, throwing himself between us, pushed
me aside, and very fortunately for me he did
so, for in an instant we were surrounded by
thirty or forty persons; and if I had given
a blow 1 know not what would hâve become
of us.

I mention this circumstance to show that
the inhabitants of Damascus are a wicked race,
and, consequently, care should be takcn to

Digitizec +/ kjOOQle

112

fcvoid anÿ quàrrels with them. It is the same
in other mohammedan countries. I know bjr
expérience that you must not joke with them,
nor at the same time seem afraid, nor appear
poor, for then they will despise you; nor rich,
for they are very avaricious, as ail who hâve
disembarked at Jaffa know to their cost.

Damascus may contain, as I hâve heard,
one hundred thousand soûls. The town is
rich, commercial, and, after Cairo, is the most
considérable of ail in the possession of the
sultan. To the north, south and east, is an
extensive plain : to the west a mountain rises,
at the foot of which the suburbs are built.
A river runs through it, which is divided into
several canals : the town only is inclosed by a
handsome wall, for the suburbs are larger than
the town. I hâve nowhere seen such extensive
gardens, better fruits, nor greater plenty of
water. This is said to be so abundant,
that there is scarcely a house without a
fountairu

Digitized by <^.ooQle

113

The governor is only inferior to the sultan
in ail Syria and Egypt; but as at diffèrent
times some governors hâve revolted, the sultans
hâve taken précautions to restrain them within
proper bounds. Damascus has a strong castle
on the side toward the mountain, with wide
and deep ditches, whereof the sultan appoints
a captain of his own friends, who never sufFers
the governor to enter it.

It was, ih 1400 , destroyed, and reduce4
to ashes by Tamerlane. Vestiges of this
disaster now remain; and toward the gâte
of St Paul there is a whole quartier that has
tieVer been rebuilt. There is a khan in the
town, appropriated as a deposit and plaçe of,
safety to merchants and their goods. It is
called Khan Berkot, from its having originally
been the résidence of a person of that name. For
my part, I believe that Berkot was aFrenchman ;
and what inclines me to this opinion is, that on
a stone of the house are carved flowers de luce,
which appear as ancient as the walls.

«i

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

' Wha'teVer may hâve been his origin, he
waS a vety gaîlarit ihan, and to this day enjoys
a high réputation in that country. Never
during his lîfetime, and while he was in poWer,
could the Persians or Tartars gain the smaheSt
portion df land in Syria. The moment he
learnt that one of their armies tvas advancing,
he instantly marched to meét it, as “fer as fhfc
river, beyond Aleppo, that séparâtes Syria
from Persia, and which, froih a guess df the
situation, I believe to be the river Jehon whidh
falls intô the Misses in Turcomania. The
peaple of -Damascus are persüaded that had
he lived, Tamerlane Vrould néver hâve carried
his arnis thither. Tamerlane, hdtvever, did
honour to his memory ; for when he took the
town, and ordered it to be set on fire, he
commanded the house of Berkot to be spared,
and appdinted a g^iard to prevent ifcs being
hürt by the : fire, so that it subsists to this day.

• The -Christians are hated at -Damascus.
Every evening the merchants are shtit up m
their houses by persdns appointed for thw

Digitized by kjOOQle

purpose, and who, on the morrow, corne ta»
open their gates when it may please them.

I found there many genoese, venetian,
çalabrian, florentine, and french merçhants.
The last were cpme thither to purchase severaf
articles, and particularly spiceries, with the.
intention of taking them to Baruth, and
embarking them on board the galley expected
from Narbonne. Among them was Jacques
Coeur*, who has since acted a great part in
France, and wgs master of the wardrobe tQ
the king. He told us the galley was then at
Alexandria, and that probably sir Andrew and

♦ Jacques Coeur was an extraordinary character, and
a striking instance of the ingratitude of monarchs.

Although of low origin, he raised himself by his
aJbilities to high honours, and acquired by his activity
immense riches. He was one of the most celcbrated
inerchants that eyer existed; and had it not bcen for his
superior management of the finances, the générais, able as
they were, of Charles VIL would nevcr hâve expelled the
English from France.

Should time be allowed me, I shall probably publish
a sélection from curious papers, illustrative of his life, and of
other events that took place in France during the reigns of
Q*rl& VI. Çh^rlej VIL ap4J-ouis T .J*

Digitized by ^ooQle

his three companions would embark on board
at Baruth.

I was shewn the place, without the walla
of Damascus, where St Paul had a vision, was
struck blind, and thrown from his horse. He
caused himself to be conducted to Damascus,
where he was baptised ; but the place of his
baptism is now a mosque.

I saw also the stone from which St George
mounted his horse when he went to combat
the dragon. It is two feet square; and they
say, that when formerly the Saracens attempted
to earry it away, in spite of ail the strength
they employed they çould not sycceed,

Having seen Damascus, sir Sanson and
myself returned to Baruth, where we found
sir Andrew, Pierre de Vaudrei, GeofFroi dç
Toisi and Jean de la Roe, who had corne
thither, as Jacques Coeur had told us. The
galley arrived from Alexandria two or three
days afterward ; but, during this short interval,
we witnessed a feast, celebrated by the Moors
m their ançient manner, It began m thç

Digitized by C.ooQLe

•lit

èvening at sun-set. Numerous companie»,
scattered here and there, were singing and
uttering loud cries. While this was passing,
the cannon of the castle were fired, and the
people of the town launched into the air;
* bien hault et bien loing, une manière de feu
plus gros que le plus gros fallot que je veisse
oncques allumé.’ They told me, they
sometimes made use of such at sea, to set lire
to the sails of an enemy’s vessel. It seems to
me, that as it is a thing easy to be made, and
ôf little expense, it may be equally well
employed to burn a camp or a thatched
village, or in an engagement with cavalry to
frighten the horses.

Curious to know its composition, I sent
the servant of my host to the person who made
this fire, and requested him to teach me the
method. He returned for answer that he
dared not, for that he should run great danger
were it known ; but as there is nothing a Moor
will not do for money, I offered him a ducat,
whiçh quieted his fears, and he taught me ali

Digitized by ^ooQle

he knew, and even gave me the moulds in
wood, with the other ingrédients, which I havç
brought to France.

The evening before the embarkation, {
took sir André de Toulongeon aside, and,
having made him promise tbat he would mot
make any opposition to what I was about to
reveal to him, I informed him of my design
to return home overland. In conséquence of
his promise, he did not attempt to hinder me,
but represented ail the dangers I should hâve
to eiicounter, and the risk I should run of being
forced to deny my faith to Jésus Cukist.
I must own that his représentations were
well founded; and of ail the perik he had
menaced me with, there was not onç I did
not expérience, except denyrog my religion.
He engaged his companions to talk with me
also on this sybject; but what they urged
was vain : I suffered them to set sail, and
remained at Baruth.

On their departure, I visited a mosque
that had onginaliy been a handsome church.

Digitized by kjOOQle

built, as it is said, by St Barbara. It is added,
that wben the Saracens had gained possession,
and their criers had, as -usual, ascended the
tower to «nnounce the time of prayer, they
were $o beaten that from that day no one bas
ventured to -retera thither,

There is afeo another miràculous building
that has been -changed into a cburch, which
formerîÿ was a house -belonging to ïhe 5éws.
One day these peop'le finding an image of our
Lord began to stone it, as their fàthers had in
times past stoned the Original ; but the image
having shed blood, they were so frightened
with the tniradle, that they fled and accused
themselves to the bishop, and gave up even
their house in réparation for their crime.
A church wes made from it, which at présent
is served by the Cordeliers.

I '\vas lodged at the house of a venetian
merchant, named Paul Barberico ; and as l had
no way entirely renounced my two pilgrimages
to Nazareth and mount Tabor, in spite of the

Digitized by C.ooQLe

120

obstacles which it had been said I should meet
with, 1 consulted him on this double journey.
He procured for me a Moucre, wbo undertook
to conduct me, and bound himself before him
to carry me safe and sound as far as Damascus,
and to bring him back from thence a certificate
of having performed his engagement, signed
by me. This man made me dress myself like
a Saracen. The Franks, for their sedurity in
travelling, hâve obtained permission from the
sultan to wear this dress when on a journey.

I departed with my Moucre from Baruth
on the morrow after the galley had sailed, and
we followed the road to Seyde that lies between
the sea and the mountains. These frequently
run so far into the sea that travellers are forced
to go on the sands, and at other times they are
three quarters of a league distant.

After an hour’s ride, I came to a smali
wood of lofty pines, which the people of the
country preserve with care. It is even forbidden
to eut down any of them ; but I am ignorant

Digitized by <^.ooQle

12l

of the reàson for such a régulation. Furthér
on was a tolerably deep river, which my Moucre
said came from the valley of Noah, but the water
was nôt good to drink. It had a stone bridge
over it, and hard by was a khan, where we
passed the night. ' .

On the morrow, we arrived at Seyde,
a town situated near the sea, and inclosed on
the land side by ditches, which are not deep.

Sur, called by the Moors ‘Four,’ has
a similar situation. It is supplied with excellent
water from a spring a quarter of a league to
the southward of the town, conducted to it by
an aqueduct. I only pâssed through ; and it
seemed to be handsome, though not strong,
any more than Seyde,—both having been
fofmerly destroyed, as appears from their
walls, which are not to be compared to those
of ourtowns.

The mountain near Sur forms a crescènt,
the two horns advancing as far as the sea: the
void between them is not filled with villages,

R

Digitized by k^ooQLe

122

though there are many on the sides of thé
mountain. A league farther, we came to
a pass which forced us to travel over a bank,
on the summit of which is a tower. Travellers
going to Acre hâve no other road than this,
and the tower has been erected for their
eecurity.

From this défilé to Acre, the mountains
are low, and many habitations are visible,
inhabited, for the greater part, by Arabs.
Near the town, I met a great lord of the
country, called Fancardin : he was encamped
on the open plain, carrying his tents with him.

Acre, though in a plain of about four
leagues in extent, is surrounded on three sides
by mountains, and on the fburth by the sea.
I made acquaintance there with a venetian
merchant called Aubert Franc, who received
me well, and procured me much useful
information respecting my two pilgrimages,
by which I profited. With the aid of his
advice, I took the road to Nazareth, and.

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

123

having crossed an extensive plain, came to the
fountain, the water of which our Lord changed
mto wine at the marnage of Archétréclin* : it
is near a village where St Peter is said to hâve
been born.

Nazareth is another large village, built
between two mountains ; but the place where
the angel Gabriel came to announce to the
Virgin Mary, that she would be a mother, is
in a pitiful State. The church that had been
there built is entirely destroyed ; and of the
house wherein our lady*was when the angd
appeared to her, not the smallest remuant
exists.

From Nazareth I went to Mount Tabor,
the place where the transfiguration of our Lord,

* Architriclinus is a latin word, formed from tbe
Greek, which the evangelist applies to signify the master of
the house, or major domo, who presided at the marriage of
Cana. Our ignorant authors of the lower âges took it for
the name of a man, and made a saint of him, whom
they called Saint Archétréclin. In la Brocquière’s account*
Archétréclin is die bridegroom at Cana,

Digitized by ^ooQle

12 *

and many other miracles, took effect. These
pasturages attract the Arabs who corne thither
with their beasts ; and 1 was forced to engage
four additional men as an escort, two of whom
were Arabs. The ascent of the mountain is
rugged, because there is no road : I performed
it on the back of a mule, but it took me two
hours. The summit is terminated by an
almost circular plain of about two bow-shots
in length, and one in width. It was formerly
inclosed with walls, the ruins of which, and
the ditches, are still .visible : within the wall, ,
and around it, were several churches, and one
especially, where, although in ruins, fiill
pardon for vice and sin is gained.

To the east of Mount Tabor, and at the
foot of it, we saw the Tiberiade beyond
which the Jordan flows: to the westward is an
extensive plain, very agreeable from its gardens,
fiiled with date palm trees, and small tufts of
trees planted like vines, on which grows the
çottop, At sun-rise, these last hâve a singuJar

Digitized by

Google

125

effect, and, seeing thèir green leaves covefed
with cotton, the traveller would suppose it had
snowed on them *.

1 descended into this plain to dinner, for
I had brought with me chickens and wine.
My guides conducted me to the house of a
man, Who, when he saw my wine, took me for
a pèrsonof conséquence, and received me well.
He brought me a porringer of milk, another
of honey, and a branch loaded with dates.
They were the first I had ever seen. I noticed
also the manner of manufacturing cotton, in
which men and women were employed. Here
my guides wanted to extort more money frotn
me, and insisted on making a fresh bargain ta
reconduct me to Nazareth. I had not my
sword with me, for I confess Ishould hâve
drawn it ; and it would hâve been madness

# M. de la Brocquière is here probably mistaken.
The cotton tree retembles in its leaves the vine; but the cotton
is formed in capsules, and not on the leaves. There are many
trees, whose leave are covered extemally with a wfaite down,
>yt poûç that in this jpanner producç cçttop,

Digitized by ^ooQle

în me, and in ail who shall imitate me.
The resuit of the quarrel wa6, that I was
obliged to give them twelve drachms of their
moncy, équivalent to half a ducat. The
moment they had recehïed them, the whole
four left me, so that I was obliged to return
alone with my Moucre.

*

We had not proceeded far on our road
when we saw two Arabs, armed in their
manner, and mounted on beautiful horses,
corne toward us. The Moucre was much
frightened ; but, fortunately, they passed us
without saying a word. He owned, that had
they suspected I was a Christian, they would
hâve unmercifully killed us both, or, at the
least, hâve stripped us naked.

Each of them bore a long and thin pôle,
shod at the ends with iron; one of which was
pointed, the other round, but having many
sharp blades a span long. Their bucklcr was
round, according to their cusfom, convex at
the centre, whence came a thick point of iron;

Digitized by C.ooQLe

127

land from that point, to the bottom, it was
omamcnted with a long silken ftingc. They
were dressed in robes, whose sleeves, a foot and
a half wide, hung down their arms; and,
instead of a cap, they had a round hat,
terminated in a point of rough crimson wool,
which, instead ofhaving the linen cloth twisted
about it like other Moors, fell down, on each
«ide of it, the whole of its breadth.

We went to lodge at Samaria, because I
wished to see the lake of Tiberias, where, it is
said, St Peter was accustonaed to fish ; and by so
doing some pardons may be gained, for it was
the ember-week of September. The Moucre
kft me to myself the whole day. Samaria is
situated on the extremity of a mountain. We
entered it at the close of day, and left it
at midnight to visit the lake. The Moucre
had proposed this hour to évadé the tribute
exacted from ail who go thither ; but the night
hindered me from seeing the surrounding
country. v .

\

Digitized by kjOOQle

Ï28

I went first to Josfeph’s well, so called
from his bêing cast into it byhis brethren,
There is a handsome mosque near it, which I
entered, with my Moucre, pretending to be a
Saracen.

Further on is a stone bridge over the
Jordan, called Jacob’s Bridge on account of
a house hard by, said to bave been the
résidence of that patriarch. The river flows
from a great lake situated at the foot of
a mountain to the north-west, on which
Namcardin has a very handsome castle.

From the lake, I took the rôad to
Damascus. The country is tolerably pleasant;
andalthough the roadleadsbetween mountains,
they are generally from one to two leagues
asunder. There is, however, one narrow
place, where the road is only wide enough for
a horse to pass. The tract ail around it, to
the right and left, for the space of about a
league in length and breadth, is covered with
immense flint stoaes, like pebbles in a river*

Digitized by <^.ooQle

#

129

the greater part as big as a wine-tun.
Beyond this pass is a handsome khan,
surrounded by fountains and rivulets. Four
or five miles from Dama’scüs is another, the
inost magnificent I ever saw, seated near a
small river, formed by a junction of springs
rising on the spot. The nearer you approach
the town, the finer is the country.

I met, near Damascus, a very black
Moor, who had rode a camel from Cairo in
eight days, though it is usually sixteén days
joumey. His'çamel had run away from him ;
but, with the assistance of my Moucre, we
recovered it. These couriers hâve a singular
saddle, on which they sit cross-legged ; but
the rapidity of the camel is so great, that
to prevent any bad efïècts from the air, they
hâve their heads and bodies tightly bandaged.

This courier was the bearer of an order
from the sultan. A galley and two galliots,
of the prince of Tarentum, had captured,
before Tripoli in Syria, a vessel from the-

s

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

130

Moors; and the sultan, by way of reprisai, had
sent to arrest ail the Catalonians and Genoese
who might be found in Damascus and
throughout Syria. This news, which tny
Moucre told me, did not alarm me: I entered
boldly the town with other Saracens, because,
dressed like them, I thought I had nothing
to fear. This expédition had taken up seven
days.

On the morrow of my arrivai, I saw the
caravan return from Mecca. It was said to
be composed of three thousand camels, and,
in fact, it was two days and as many çights
before they had ail entered the town. This
event was, according to custom, a great festival.
The govemor of Damascus, attended by the
principal persons of the town, went to meet
the caravan, out of respect to the Alcoran,
which it bore. This is the book of law
Mohammed left to his followers. It was
enveloped in a silken covering, painted over
with moorish inscriptions; and the camel

Digitized by ^ooQle

131

that bore it was, in like manner, decorated
ail over with silk.

Four musicians, and a great number of
drums and trumpets preceded this camel, and
made a loud noise. In front, and aroünd, were
about thirty men,—some bearing cross-bows,
others drawn swords, others smali harquebuses,
which they fired ofF every now and then*.
Behind the came! followed eight old men,
mounted on the swiftest camels, and near them
were led their horses magnificently caparisoned
and ornamented with rich saddles, according
to the custom of the country. After them
came a turkish lady, a relation of the grand
seignior, in a litter borne by two camels with
rich housings. There were many of these
animais covered with cloth of gold.

The caravan was composed of Moors;
Turks, Barbaresques, Tartars, Persians, and

* The author does not mention what sort of harquebuses
these were ; but it k rçmarkable, that our portable fire-arms»
die invention of which is very recent in Europe, were, at that
time, in use among the Mohammedans of Asia,

Digitized by kjOOQle

132

other sectaries of the false prophet Mohammed.
These people prétend, that having once made
a pilgrimage to Mecca, they cannot be damned.
Of this I was assured by a renegado slave, a
Bulgarian by birth, who belonged to the lady
I hâve mentioned. He was called Hayauldoula,
whichsignifies,in the turkishlanguage, * servant
of God,’ and pretended to hâve been three times
at Mecca. 1 formed an acquaintance with
him, beçause he spoke a little ltalian, and
often kept me company in the night as well as
in the day.

In our conversations, I frequently questioned
him about Mohammed, and where his body was
interred.. He told me it was at Mecca ; that
the shrine coutaining the body was in a circular
chapel, open at the top, and that it was through
this opening the pilgrims saw the shrine; that
among them were some, who, having seen it,
hâd their eyes thrust out, because they said,
after what they had just seen, the wôrld could
no longer offer thçm any thing worth looking

Digitized by

Google

133

at. ‘ There were in fect, in this caràvan, two
persons, the one of sixteen and the other of
twenty-two or twenty-three years old, who had
thus made themselves blind.

Hayauldoula told me also, that it was not
at Mecca where pardons for sin were granted,
but at Médina, where St Abraham built a
house that still remains *. The building is in
the form of a cloister, of which pilgrims make
the circuit.

With regard to the town, it is seated on
the sea-shore. lndians, the inhabitants of
Prester John’s country, bring thither, in large
ships, spices, and other productions of their
country; and thither the Mohammedans go
to purchase them. They load them ôn
camels, and other beasts of burden, for the
markets of Cairo, Damascus, and other places,

* Our travclleris mistaken. The tomb of Mohammed
is at Médina and not at Mecca ; and the house of Abraham
is at Mecca, and not Médina, where pilgrims gain pardons»
aod whçrc that grçat commerce is çarried on*

Digitizèd by k^ooQle

13 *

as is weU known. The distance from Mecca
to Damascus is forty days jouraey across the
desert. The heat is excessive ; and many of
the caravan were suffocated.

According to the renegado slave, the
annual caravan to Médina should be composed
of seven hundred thousand persons; and wheil
ttiis number is incomplète, God sends his
angels to make if up. At the great day of
judgment, Mohammed will admit into paradise
as many persons a$ he shall please, where
they will enjoy honey, milk, and wpmen at
pleasure.

As I was incessantly hearing Mohammed
spoken of, I wished to know something about
him; and, for this purpose, I addressed myself
to a priest in Damascus, attached to the
venetian consul, who often said mass in his
house, confessed the merchants of that nation,
end, when necessary, regulated their affairs.
Having confessed myself to him, and settled
my worldly concerns, i asked him if he were

Digitized by kjOOQle

acquainted with the doctrines of Mohammed.
Hesaid hewas, and knew ail the Alcoran. I then
besought him, in the best manner I could, that
he would put down in writing ail he knew of
him, that 1 might présent it to my lord the
duke of Burgundy. He did so with pleasure;
and 1 hâve brought with me his work.

My intention was to go to Bursa ; and,
in conséquence, I was introduced to a Moor»
who engaged to conduct me thither in the
track of the caravan, on paying him thirty
ducats and his expenses ; but as I was advised
to distrust the Moors, as people of bad faith,
and subject to break their promises, I did not
conclude the hargain. I say this for the
instruction of those who may hâve any concerns
with them, for I believe them to be such as
they were described to me. Hayauldoula, on
his part, procured me the acquaintance of
some caramanian merchants, but 1 took
another resolution.

Digitized by Gocwlë •

136

In regard to the pilgrims that go to
Mecca, the grand Turk has a custom peculiar
to himself; at least, I am ignorant if the other
mohammedan powers do the same; which is,
that when the caravan leaves his States, he
chooses for it a chief, whom they are bound
to obey as implicitly as himself. The chief of
this caravan was called Hoyarbarach : he was
a native of Bursa, and one of its principal
inhabitants. I caused myself to be presented
to him by mine host and another person, as a
man that wanted to go to that town to see
a brother : they entreated him to receive me
in his company, and to afford me his security.
He asked if I understood Arabie, Turkish,
Hëbrew, the vulgar tongue, or Greek ? When
they replied that I did not, he answered, * Well,
what can he prétend to do ?’

However, représentations were made to
him, that on account of the war I dared not
go thither by sea, and that if he would.

Digitized by

Google

137

eondescènd tb admit me I would do as well
as I could. He then consented ; and, having
' placed his two ands ôn his head and touched
his beard, he told me in the turkish language,
that I might join his slaves ; but he insisted
that I should be dressed just like them.

I went immediately after this interview,
with one of my friends, to the market, called the
Bazar, and bought two long white robes that
reached to my ancles, a complété turban, a linen
girdle, a fustian pair of drawers to tuck the
ends of my robe in,—two small bags, the one
for my own use, the other to hang on my
horse’s head while feeding him with barley
andstraw,—a leathern spoon and sait, a carpet
to sleep on,—and lastly a pajletot (a sort of
doublet) of a white skin, which I lined with
linen cloth, and which was of service to me
in the nights. I purchased also a white tarquais
(a sort of quiver) complété, to which hung a
swofd and knives ; but as to the tarquais and
sword, I could only buy them privately,—for

T ' • ■

Digitized by kjOOQle

13S

if those who hâve the administration of justice
had known of it, the seller and myself would
hâve run great risks.

The damascus blades are the handsomest
and best of ail Syria ; and k is curious to
observe their manner of burnishing them.
This operation is performed before tempering;
and they hâve, for this purpose, a small piece
of wood, in which is fixed an iron, which they
rub up and down the blade, and thus clear ofF
ail inequalities, as a plane does to wood ; they
then temper and polish it. This polish is so
highly finished, that when any one wants to
arrange his turban, he uses his sword for a
looking-glass. A6 to its temper, it is perfect,
and I hâve nowhere seen swords that eut so
excellently.

There are made at Damascus, and in
the adjoining country, mirrors of Steel, that
magnify objects like burning glasses. I hâve
seen some that, when exposed to the sun, hâve
reflected the heat so strongly as to set fire to a
plank fifteen or sixteen feet distant..

Digitized by ^oôole

139

»

I bought a small horse that turned out
very well. Before my departure, I had him
shod at Damascus; and thence, as far as Bursa,
which is near fifty days journey, I had nothing
to do with his feet, excepting one of the fore
ones which was pricked by a nail, and made
him lame for three weeks, so well do they
shoe their horses. The shoes are light, thin,
lengthened towards the heel, and thinner
there than at’the toe. They are not turned
up, and hâve but four nail holes, two on each
side. The nails are square, with a thick and
heavy head. When a shoe is wanted, and it is
necessary to work it to make it fit the hoof, it
is done cold without ever putting it in the fire,
which can readily be done because it is so thin.
To pare the hoof, they use a pruning knife,
similar to what vine-dressers trim their vines
with, both in this as well as on the other side
of the sea.

The horses of this country only walk and
* gallop ; and, when purchased, those who hava

Digitized by kjOOQle

HO

the bcst walk are preferred, as in Europe those
whô trot the best. They hâve wide nostrils,
gallop well, and are excellent, costing little on
the road; for they eat only at night, and then
but a small quantity of barley with chopped
6traw. They never drink but in the afternoon ;
and their bridles are always left in their raouths,
£ven when in the stable,like mules : when therc,
they hâve the two hinder legs tied, and they
are intermixed ail together, horees and mares.
AU are geldings, excepting a few kept for
stallions. Should you hâve any business with
a rich man, and çall on him, he will carry
you, to speak with you, to his stables, which
are, çonsequently, kept always very cool, and
very clean,

We, Eqropeans, prefer a stone^horse of a
good breéd, but the Moors esteem only mares.
Jn that çountry, a great man is not ashamed
to ride a mare, with its foal running after the
dam. I hâve seen some exceedingly beautiful,
sold as high as t'vp qr three hqndred ducats.

Digitized by kjOOQle

141

They are accustomed to keep their horses
* •

very low, and never to allow them to get fat.
The men of fortune carry with them, when
they ride, a small drum, which they use in
battle, or iri skirmishes, to rally their men : it
is fastened to the pummel of their saddles,
and they beat on it with a piece of flat
leâther. I also purchased one, with spurs, and
vermilion-coloured boots, which came up to
my knees, acçording to the custom of the
country.

Asa mark of my gratitude to Hoyarbarach,
I went to offer. him a pot of green ginger, but
he refused it ; and it was by dint of prayers
and entxeaties that I prevailed on lîim to accept
of it. I had not any other pledge for my
security than what 1 hâve mentioned ; but I
found him full of frankness and good wilj,
more, perhaps, than I should hâve found in
many Christians.

God, who had protected me in the
eecqmplishment of this journey, brought me

Digitized by ^ooQle

acquainted with a Jew of Caffa, who spoke
the tartar and italian languages ; and I requested
him to assist me in putting down in writing the
names of every thing I might hâve occasion to
want for myself and my horse, while on the
road. On our arrivai, the first day’s joumey,
at Ballec, I drew out my papèr to know how
to ask for barley and chopped straw, which
I wanted to give my horse. Ten or twelve
Turks near me, observing my action, burst
into laughter, and, coming nearer to examine
my paper, seemed as much surprised at our
Writing a$ we are with theirs. They took a
liking to me, and made every effort to teach
me to speak Turkish : they were never weary
of making me often repeat the same thing,
and pronounced it so many different ways
that I could not fail to retain it ; so, when we
separated, I knew how to call for every thing
jiecessary for myself and horse.

During the stay of the caravan at
Damascus, I made a pilgrimage about sixteen

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

14 $

miles distant, <o our lady of Serdenay. Ta
arrive there, we traversed a mountain a full
quartier of a mile in length, to Which the
gardens of Damascus extend. We then
descended into a delightful valley, full of
vineyards and gardens, with a handsome
fountain of excellent water. Here, on a rock»
has been erected a small castle, with a church
of greek monks, having a portrait of the virgin
painted on wood, whose head has been carried
thither miraculously, but in what manner 1 am
ignorant

It is added, that it always swéats, and that
this sweat is an oil *. Ail 1 can say is, that

* Many authors of the 13th ccntury mention this virgin
of Serdenay, that wâs famous dnring the croisades ; and they
speak of this oily sweat, that had the réputation of doing
miracles. Tbe6e fabulons accounts of miraculous sweatings
were common in Asia. Among others, that which exuded
from the tomb <of the bishop Nicholas, one of those
saints whose existence is more than doubtful, was much
vaunted. This pretended liquor of Nicholas was even an
vbject of adoration ; and we read, that in 165], a clergy man at
Paris, having received a phial of it, demanded and obtained

Digitized by t^ooQle

14 *

•

when I went thither I was shewfi at the end of
the church, behind the great altar, a niche
formed in the wall, where I saw the image,
te hic h was a fiat thing, and might be about one
foot and a half high by one foot wide. I cannot
say whether it is of wood or stone, for it was
entirely covered with clothes. The front was
closed with an iron trellis, and underneathi
was the vase containing the oil. A woman
accosted me, and with a silver spoon moved
aside the clothes, and wanted to anoint me
with the sign of the cross on the forehead, the
temples and breast. I believe this was a mere
trick to get money : nevertheless, I do not
mean to say that our lady may not hâve more
power than this image.

I returned to Damascus, and on the
evening of the departure of the caravan
settled my affairs, and my conscience, as if

permission from the archbishop to expose it to die vénération
of the faithful.— Hist. de Paris, icc. from Le Boeuf, t. 1.
part 2. p. 557.

Digitized by

Google

U3

ï bad been at the point of death; but suddérily
I found myself in great trouble. I hâve before
mentioned the messenger whom the sultan
had sent with orders to arrfest ail the genoese
and catalonian merchants found within his
dominions. By virtue of this order, my host,
who was a Genoese, was arrested, his effects
seized, and aMoor placed in his house to take
care of them. I endeavoured to save ail I
could for him ; and that the Moor might not
notice it, I made him drunk. i was arrested
in my turn, and carried before one of their
cadies, who are considered as somewhat like
ourbishops, and hâve the officeof administering
justice. This cadi turned me over to another
cadi, who sent me to prison with the merchants,
although he knew I was not one; but this
disagreeable affair had been brought on me by
an interpréter who wanted to extort money
from me, as he had before attempted on my
hrst journey hither. Had it not been for
Antoine Mourroüzin, the venetian consul, I

v

Digitized by kjOOQle

U6

musfc hâve paid a sum of money; but I
remained in prison, and, in the mean time, the
caravan set ofF.

The .consul, to obtain my liberty, was
foreed to make intercession, conjointly with
others, to the governor of Damascus, alledging
that I had been arrested without cause, which
the interpréter well knew. The governor sent
for a Genoese, named Gentil Impérial, a
merchant employed by the sultan to purchase
slaves for him at CafFa, He asked me who I
was, and my business at Damascus. On my
replying that I was a Frenchman returning
from a pilgrimage to Jérusalem, he said they
had done wrong to detain me, and that I
might départ when I pleased,

I set ofF on the morrow of the sixth of
October, accompanied by a Moucre, whom I
had first charged to carry my turkish dress out
of the town, because a Christian is not
permitted to wear a white turban there. At a
short distance, a mountain rises, on which I

Digitized by C.ooQLe

147

was shewn a house, said to hâve been that of
Cain. During the first day we travclled over
mountains, but the road was good. On the
second day we entered a fine country, which
continued cheerful until we came to Balbeck.

My Moucre there quitted me, as I had
overtaken the caravan. It was encamped
near a river, on account of the great heat in
these parts: the nights are nevertheless very
cold, which will scarcely be believed, and
the dews exceedingly. heavy. I waited on
Hoyarbarach, who confirmed the permission
he had granted me to accompany him, and
recommended it to me not to quit the
caravan. 1

On the morrow morning, at eleven
o’clock, I gaye my horse water, with oats
and straw, according to the custom of our
countries. This time the Turks said nothing
tome; but at six o’clock in the evening,
when, having given him water, I was about
fastening the. bag, that he roight eat, they

Digitizecf by kjOOQle

/

ns

opposed it, and took ofF the bag; for they
nevcr sufFer their horses to eat but dûring the
night, and will not allow one to begin eating
before the rest, untess when they are at grass.

The captain of the caravan had with
him a mameluke of the sultan, who was a
Circassian, and going to Çaramania in search
of a brother, This man seeing me alone,
and ignorant of the language of the country,
charitably wished to serve me as a companion,
and toôk me with him ; but, as he had no tent,
we were often obliged ta pass the nights under
trees in gar-dens.

It was then that I was obliged to learn to
sleep on the ground,to drink nothing hut water,
and to sit cross-legged. This posture was at
first painful, but it was still more so to
accustom myself to sit my horse wiçh such very
short stirrups,—and I sufFered so much, that
. when l had dismounted, I could not remount
^ithopt assistance, sp spre were my ham&j but

Digitized by kjooole

after a little time, this manner seemed even
more convenient than ours.

That same evening I supped with the
mameluke ; but we had only bread, cheese
and milk. I had, when eating, a table-cloth,
like the rich men of the country. These cloths
are four feet in diameter, and round, having
strings attached to them, so that they may be
drawn up like a purse. When they are used,
they are spread out; and when the meal is over,
they are drawn up with ail that remains within
them, without their losing a çrumb of bread or
a raisin. But I observed, that whether their
repast had been good or bad, they never failed
to retum thanks aloud to God.

Balbeck is a good town, well inclosed
with walls, and tolerably commercial. In the
center is a castle, built with very large stones.
<At présent it contains a mosque, in \yhich, it
is said, there is a human skull, with eyes so
enormous that a man may pass his head
. fhrough their openings. I cannot affirm thjs

Digitized by <^.ooQle

Ï50

for fact, as none but Saracens may enter die
mosque. ,

From Balbeck we went to Hamos, and
encamped on the banks of a river. It was
there I observed their manner of encamping
and pitching their tents. The tents are neither
very high nor very large, so that one man can
pitch them, and six persons may with ease
repose in them during the heat. In the course
of the day they lay open the lower parts, to
give passage to the air, and close them in the
night time. * One camel can carry seven or
eight with thin pôles : some of them are very
handsome.

As my companion, the Mameluke, and
myself, had no tent, we fixed our quarters in a
garden. There we were joined by two
Turcomans of Satalia, returning from Mecca,
who supped with us. These men, seeing
me well clothed and well mounted, having a
handsome sword, and well furnished tarquais,
proposed to the Mameluke, as he afterwards

Digitized by kjOOQle

151

owned when we separated, to make away with
me, considering that I was but a Christian,
and unworthy of being in their company. He
answered, that since I had eaten bread and sait
with them, it would be a great crime ; that it
was forbidden by their law; and that, aftér ail,
God had created the Christians as well as the
Saracens.

They, however, persisted in their design ;
and as I testified a desire of seeing Aleppo,
the most considérable town in Syria after
Damascus, they pressed me to join them.
I was ignorant of their intention, and accepted
their ofièr; but I am now convinced they only
wanted to eut my throat. The Mameluke
forbade them to corne any more near us, and
by this means saved my life.

We set out from Balbeck two hours
before day; and our caravan consisted of from
four to five hundred persons, with six or seven
hundred camels and mules ; for it had great

Digitized by kjOOQle

quantifies of spicery. ' I will describe the ordef
of its march.

The caravan has a very large drum; and
the moment the chief orders the departure,
three loud strokes are beaten. Every one then
makes himself ready, and, when prepared,
joins the file without uttering a word. Ten
of our people would, in such cases, make more
noise than a thousand of theirs. Thus they
march in silence, unless it be at night, or that
any one should sing a song celebrating the
heroic deeds of their ancestors. .At the break
of day, two or three placed at a great distance
from each other cry out, and answer one
another, as is done from the towers of the
mosques at the usual hours. In short, a little
before and after run-rise, devout people make
their customary prayers and oblations.

To perform these oblations, if they be near
a rivulet, they dismount, and, with feet naked,
they wash their whole bodies. Should there.

Digitized by kjOOQle

15S

be no rivulet ncar, at the usualtimefor fhes*
ceremonies, they pass their hands over their
bodies. The last among them washes his
mouth an<_ the opposite part,- and then taras
to the south, when ail raise two Angers in the
air, prostrate themselves, and kiss the ground
thrice: they then rise up and say their prayers.
They hâve been ordered to practise these
ablutions instead of confessions. Persons of
rank, to avoid failing in their performance,,
always càrry, when they travel, leathem bottles
full of water, which are suspended under the
bellies of çamels or horses, and are generally
very handsome. ,

Hamos (Hems) is a good town, well
inclosed with walls and ditches * en glacis,*
situated in a plain on the banks of a small
river. Here terminâtes one end of the plain
of Noah, which is said to extend as far as
Persia. Tamerlane made his irruption through
this plain when he took and destroyed so many
cities. At the extremity of the town is a

x

Digitized by <^.ooQle

handsome castle, constructed on â height, with
glacis as far as the walls.

From Hems, we went to Hama. Th©
country is fine; but I saw few inhabitants
exceptmg Arabs, who were rebuilding some
of the ruined villages. I met with a merchant
fromVenice in Hama, named Laurent Souranze.
Hereceived me well, lodged me in his house,
and shewed me the town and castle. It has
good towers, with strong and thick walls, built,
like the castle of Provins, on a rock, in which
deep ditches hâve been eut. At one end of
the town is the castle, strongly and well built
on an élévation, which is fortified by ditches,
and surmounted by a citadel which commands
the whole ; and the sides are washed by a river,
said to be one of the four that flowed out of
paradise. I know not if this be fact or not :
ail that I know is, that it runs east-south-east,
and loses itself near Antioch.

Here is the greatest wheel I ever saw.
It is put in motion by the river, and supplie*

Digitized by <^.ooQle

155

the inhabitants, although numerous, with thé
nccessary quantity of water. The water falls
into a trough eut in the castie-rock, and thencë
is conducted to the town, where it flows through
the streets in an aqueduct formed on great
square pillars twelve feet high, and two wide,
I was in want of several things to be like my
fellow-travellers, of which the Mameluke
having informed me, my host Laurent carried
me himself to the bazar to purchase. The
things wanted were small silken bonnets, in.
the fashion of the Turcomans, a cap to wear
under them, turkish spoons, knives with their
Steel, a comb and case, and a leathern cup,—
ail of which are suspended to the sword,
I likewise bought some finger-stalls to draw
the bow, another tarquais complété—to save
the one I had, which was very handsome—and
lastly a capinat, which is a robe of Une white
felt, impénétrable to the rain.

On the road 1 made acquaintance with
some of my fellow-travellers, who, when they

Digitized by kjooole

150

fbund out that I lodged with a Frank, came
to ask me to procure them some wine. This
Hquor is forbidden them by their religion, and
they dare not drink it bcfore their own
countrymen ; but they hoped to do it without
risk at the house of a Frank, and yet they were
returning from Mecca ! I spoke of it to my
host Laurent, but he said lie was afraid to
comply, from the great dangers he should run
were it known. I went to carry them this
answer; but they had been more fortunate
clsewhere, in procuring some at the house of
a Greek. They proposed that I should
accompany them to partake, whether from
pure friendship, or to authorise them to
drink wine in the presence of the Greek.
This man conducted us to a small gallery
where we ail six seated ourselves in a circle on
the floor, He Hrst placed in the midst of us a
large and handsome earthen jug, that might
contain four gallons at least: he then brought
fpr each of us a pot full of wine, whiçh he

Digitized by CjOOQle

157

poured into the jug, and placed beside it two
earthen porringers to serve for glasses.

The first who began, drank to his
companion, according to their custom ; this
did the same to the next, and so on the others.
We drank in this manner for a long time
without eating ; at length, I perceived that I
could no longer continue it without suflèring,
and begged of them, with uplifted hands, to
permit me to leave off; but they grew very
angry, and complained as if 1 had been resolved
to interrupt their pleasure and do them an
injury. Fortunately there was one among
them more acquainted with me than the rest,
and who loved me so that he called me
* Kardays,’ that is to say, Brother. He
offered to take my place, and to drink for me
when it should be my tum. This appeased
them, and, having accepted the ofièr, the party
continued until evening, when it was necessaiy
for us to retum to the khan,

Digitized by ^ooole

15 *

The captain of the caravan was, at the
moment, seated on a bench of stone, and had
befbre him a lighted torch. It was not difficult
for him to guess whence we came, and,
cehsequently, four of our companions slipped
away, and one only remained with me.
I mention ail this, to forewarn any persons
that may travel through these countries, to
avoid drinking with the natives, unless they
shall wish to swallow so much as will make
them fall to the ground.

The Mameluke, who was ignorant of my
debauch, had, during that time, bought a
goose for us both. He had just boiled it ;
and, for want of veijuice, had dressed it
with the green leaves of the leek : I eat of it
with him, and it lasted us for three days.

I should hâve liked to hâve seen Aleppo ;
but the caravan taking the strait road to
Antioch, I was forced to give up ali thoughts
pf it. As the caravan was not to set out for

Digitized by kjOOQle

159

two days, die Mameluke proposed that wê
should ride forward, the more easily to procure
lodgings. Four turkish merchants desired to
be of our party, and we six travelled together.

Half a league from Hama, we came té
the river, and crossed it by a bridge. It had
overâowed, although there had not been any
ram. Here I wished to give my horse some
water; but as die bank was steep, and the river
deep, had not the Mameluke corne to my àid,
I must inevitably hâve been drowned.

On the opposite side of the river is a long
and vast plain, where we met six or eight
Turcomans, accompanied by a woman. She
wore a tarquais like them ; and, on enquiring
into this, I was told that the women of this
nation are brave, and in time of war fight like
men. It was added, and this seemed to me
very extraordinary, that there are about thirty
thousand women who thus bear the tarquai9,
and are under the dominion of a lord.

/

Digitized by kjOOQle

160

named Turcgadiroly, who résides among th*
mounuins of Armenia, on the frontière of
Persia.

The second day’s joumey was through a
mountainous country, tolerably fertile, though
ill watered ; but we saw nothing but ruined
houses. As we travelled, my Mameluke
taught me to shoot with the bow, and made
me buy finger-stalls and rings for this purpose.
At length we arrived at a village that was
rich in woods, vineyards and corn fields, but
having no other water than what was in
cisterns.

This district seemed to hâve been formerly
inhabited by Christians; and I own it gave me
great pleasure when I was told, that it had ail
belonged to Franks, and the ruins of churches
vvere shewn me as a proof of it.

We fixed our quarters in this village; and
it was then I first saw the habitations of the.
Turcomans, and women of that nation with

Digitized by

Google

161

uncovered faces. They commônly hidé thein
under a piece of black tammy, to- which
those who are wealthy attach pièces of money
and precious. stones. The men are good
archers. I sàw several draw the bow, which
they do sitting, and at a short distance ; and
this gives to their arrows great rapidity and
strength.

; On leaving Syria, AVeentered Turcomania,
called by us Armenia. The capital is a very
considérable town, named Antequayé by them,
and by us Antioch. It was very flourishing
in former times, and has still handsome walls
in good repair, which inclose a large tract of
ground, and even some mountains; but its
houses are not more than three hundred in
number. It is bounded on the south by a
mountain, on the north by a great lake,
beyond which is an open and fine country.
The river that cornes from Hama runs
alongside the wàlls. Almost ail the inhabitants
areTurcomans or Arabs; and their profession

Y

Digitized by k^ooQLe

162

is breeding cattle, such as camels, goats, cows
and sheep.

The goats are, for the most part, white,
and the handsomest 1 hâve ever seen, not
having, like those of Syria, hanging ears ; and
their hair is soft, of some length, and curling.
Their sheep hâve thick and broad tails. They
also feed wild asses, which they tame : these
much resemble stags in their hair, ears and
head, and hâve, like them, cloven feet. I knoxv
not if they hâve the same cry, for I never heard
them. They are large, handsome, and go
with other beasts ; but I hâve never seen them
mounted *.

For the carriage merchandise they use
the büffàlo and ox, as we do the horse. They
also use them to ride on; and 1 hâve seen
large herds, some carrying goods and others
men.

* This animal cannot be an ass, for it bas a cloven
foot, which the ass has not. It xqay probably be a sort of
.antilope, or rather a buffalo.

Digitized by kjOOQle

16 $

The lord of this country was Ramedang,
a rich, powerful and brave prince. For some
time he was so redoubtable that the sultan was
alarmed, and afraid to anger him; but, wishing
to destroy him, he practised wkh the karman,
who could more easily deceive Ramedang
than any other, having given him his sister in
marriage. In conséquence, one day, as they
were eating together, the karman arrested him
and delivered him to the sultan, who put him
to death, and took possession of Turcomania,
giving, however, a portion of it to the karman.
On leaving Antioch, I continued my road with
the Mameluke, and we first crossed a mountain
called Negre, on which he pointed out to me
three or four handsome castles in ruins, that
had belonged to the Christians. The road is
good, and incessantiy perfomed by the number
of laurels with which the country abounds;
but the descent is twice as rapid as the ascent.
It finishes at the gulph of Asacs, which we
çall Layaste, because, in fact, it takes its name

Digitized by ^ooQle

from the tovvn of Ayas. This gülf extends
itself between two mountains inland for upward
of fifteen miles: its breadth may be about
tvvelve, but I refer for this to the sea charts.

At the foot of the mountain, near the
road, and close to the sea-shore, are the ruins
of a strong castle, defendcd on the landside by
a marsh, so that it could only be approached
by sea, or by a narrow causeway across the
marsh. It was inhabited, but the Turcomans
had posted themselves hard by. They occupied
one hundred and twenty tents, some of felt,
otbers of white and blue cotton, ail very
handsome, and capable of containing, with
case, from fifteen to sixteen persons. These
are their bouses, and, as \ve do in ours, they
perform in thçm ail their household business
except making fires.

We halted ampng them: they placed
before 14s one of the table-cloths before
mentioned, in which there remained fragments
of bread, cbeesç and grapes. They then

Digitized by <^.ooQle

165

brought us a dozen of thin cakes of bread,
with a large jug of curdled milk, called by
them Yogort. The cakes are a foot broad,
round, and thinner than wafers: they fold
them up as grocers.do their papers for épices,
and eat them filled with the curdled milk.

A league further is a karavansera, where
we lodged. These. establishments consist of
houses like the khans in Syria.

In the course of this day’s journey,
I overtook on the road an Armenian, who
spoke a little Italian. Finding I was a
Christian, he entered into conversation with
me, and told me many things of the country,
its inhabitants, and likewise of the sultan,
and Ramedang, lord of Turcomania, whom
I hâve already mentioned. He said, that
this last was of a large size, very brave,
and the most expert of ail the Turks in
handling a battle-axe and sword. His mother
was a Christian, and had caused him to be
baptised according to the greek ritual, to take

A

Digitized by C.ooQLe

from him the smell and odour ôf those who
are not baptised *. But he was neither a good
Christian nor a good Saracen ; and when they
spoke to him of the two prophets, Jésus and
Mohammed, he said, « For my part, I am for
the living prophets : they will be more usefut
to me than dead ones.’

His territories on one side joined those of
the karman, whose sister he had married, and
on the other Syria, which belonged to the
sultan. Every time the subjects of the latter
passed through his country, he exacted tolls
from them. But at length the sultan prevailed
on the karman, as 1 hâve before noticed, to
betray his brother-in-law to him ; and at this
moment he possesses ail Turcomania as fer as
Tharsus, and even one day’s journey further.—
That day, accompanied by the Armenian, we

* The Christian» of Asia were perfeetly persuaded th«*t
the infidels had a dkagreeable smell that was peculîar to them,
and which baptism took away. This superstition will be
again noticed. The baptism was, accordirçg to die greek
ritual, by immersion.

Digitized by k^ooQLe

ÎS7

once morè lodged with thés Turçomans, who
again servcd us with milk. It was here I saw
womçn make those thin cakes I spoke of.
This is their qianner of inaking them : they
hâve a small round table, very smooth, ou
which they throw some flour, and mix it with
water to a patfe, softer than that for bread.
This paste they divine into round pièces,
which they flatten aa muçh as possible with a
wooden roller, of a smalJer diameter than an
egg, until they make them as thjn as 1 hâve
mentioned. During this operation, they hâve
a convex plate of iron placed on a tripod, and
heated hy a gentle lire undej-neath, on which
they spread the cake, and instantly turn it, so
that they make two of their cakes sooner than
a waferman can make one wafer.

I was two days traversing the country
round the gulf. It is handsome, and had
formerly many castles belonging to Christians,
at présent destroyed. Such was the one seen
to the eastward before we arrived at Ayas.

Digitized by ^ooQle

168

The inhabitartts are Tiircomans, who are a
handsome race, excellent archers, and living
on little. Their dwellings are round, like
pavilions, éovered with felt. They live in the
open plain, and hâve a chief whom they obey ;
but they frequently change their situation,
when they carry their houses with them. In
this case, they. are accustomed to submk
themselves to the lord on whose lands they
fix, and even to assist him with their arms,
should he be at war. But should they quit
his domains, and pass over to those of his
enemy, they serve him in his turn against the
Other ; and they are noway thought the worse
of for this, as it is their custom, and they are
wanderers.

On my road, I met one of their chiefs
hawking with falcons, with which he took
tame geese. I was told, that hé might
hâve under his command ten thousand
Turcomans. ^The Country is favourable to
the chace, but intcrsected by many small

Digitized by <^.ooQle

1 69

rivers that fall into the gulf. Wild boars are
here abundant.

About the centre of the gulf is a défilé
formed by a rock, under which the road
passes : it is not two bow-shots from the sea ;
and this passage was fortnerly defended by a
castle, which made it very strong, but it is
now in ruins.

On leaving this streight, we entered a fine
extensive plain inhabited by Turcomans : my
companion, the Armenian, pointed out to me
a castle on a mountain, where were only people
of his nation, and the walls of which were
washed by a river called Jehon. We travelled
along the banks of this river to a town called
Misse-sur-Jehon, because it runs through it. ^

Misse, situated four days journey from
Antioch, belonged to the Christians, and was
a considérable city. Many churches, half
destroyed, still remain : the choir of the great
church is y et entire, but converted into a
mosque. The bridge is of wood, the former

z

Digitized by kjOOQle

170

stone' one having been carried away by the
floods.* One half of the town is completely
in ruins : the other half has preserved its walls,
and abont three hundred houses, filled with
Turcômans.

t

F rom Misse to Adena, the country continues
level and good, inhabited by Turcômans.
Adena is two days joumey from Misse, and
I thére proposed to wait for the caravan. It
àrrivèd : I went with the Mameluke, together
with some others, many of whom were great
merchants, to lodge near the bridge, between
the river and the walls of the town ; and it was
there I observed the manner of theTurks saying
their prayers and offering sacrifice. They no
way hid themselves from my notice, but on
the contrary seemed well pleased when I said
my Pater noster, which seemed to them

wonderful. I sometimes heard them chaunt

\

their prayers at the beginning of the night,—
when they seat themselves in a circle, and
shake their bodies and heads while they sing
in a very uncouth manner.

Digitized by ^ooQle

171

One day, they catried me with them to
the stoves and baths of the town; and as I
refused to bathe, for I must hâve undrest
myself, and was afraid of showing my money,
they gave me their clothes to keep, From this
moment, we were much connected.

The bath-house is very high, and terminatcd
by a dôme, in whiçh a circular opening is
contrived to light the wholç interior. The
stoves and baths are handsome, and very clean,
When the bathers corne out of the water, they
seat themselves on small hurdles of thin osiers,
dry themselves, and comb their beards.

It was at Adena I first saw the two young
men who had got their eyes thrust out at Mecca,
after having seen the tomb of Mohammed.

The Turks bèar well fatigue and a hard
life: they are not incommoded, as I hâve
witnessed, during the whole journey, by
sleeping on the grouud like animais, They
are of a gay, cheerful humour, and willingly
sing sangs of the heroiç deeds of their ancestors*

Digitized by ^ooQle

172

Any one, therefore, who wishes to livc with
them must not be grave or melancholy, but
always hâve a smiling countenanoe. They are
also men of probity, and charitable toward
eacb other. 1 hâve often observed, that should
a poor person pass by when they are eating,
they would invite him to partake of their
meal, which is a thing we never do.

In many places, I found they did not bake
their bread half as much as ours. It is soft,
and, unless a person be accustomed to it, is
difficult to be chewed. In regard to méat,
they eat it raw, dried in the sun. When any
of their beasts, horse or camel, is so dangerously
ill that no hopes remain of saving its life, they
eut its throat, and eat it not raw, but a little
dressed. They are very clean in the dressing
their méat, but eat it dirtily. They, in like
manner, keep their beard very neat and clean,
but never wash their hands but when theybathe*
when they are about to say their prayers, or
^yhen they wash their beards and hindçr parts.

Digitized by kjOOQle

175

Adena is a tolerably good commercial

town, vvell inclosed with walls, situated in a

fine country, and sufiiciently near the sea.

The river Adena, which is wide and rises

among the high mountains of Armenia, flows

beneath its walls. It has over it a long bridge,

and the broadest I ever saw. Its inhabitants

and prince are Turcomans: the prince is

brother to the brave Ramedang, whom the

sultan had murdered. I was told the sultan

»

had his son in his power, but dared not süffer
him to retum into Turcomania.

From Adena, I went toThuro, which we
call Tharsis. The country continues good,
though near the mountains, and is inhabited
by Turcomans, who live in villages or in tents.
The district around Tharsis abounds in corn,
wine, wood and water. It was a famous
tqwn, and very ancient buildings are still seen
in it. I believe this was the town besieged by
Baldwin, brother to Godfrey of Bouillon.
At présent it has a governof appointed by the

t

Digitized by

Google

174

•ultan, and many Moors live within it. It is
defended by a castle, with ditches 4 à glacis/
and by a double wall, which in some parts is
triple. A small river runs through it, and
there is another at a short distance.

I found there a cypriot merchant, named
Antony, who had resided in this country a long
time, and knew the language well. He talked
to me very pertinently about it; but he did
me another favour, that of giving me some
good wine, for I had not tasted any for several
days.

Tharsis is but sixty miles from Curco, a
castle built on the sea-shore, belonging to the
king of Cyprus.

In this whole country, they speak the

turkish tongue, which begins even to be spoken

at Antioch, the capital, as I havé before said,

*

of Turcomania. It is a very fine language,
laconic, and easily learnt.

As we had to cross the high mountains
of Armenia, Hoyarbarach, the chief of ou.r

Digitized by k^ooQLe

175

caravan would hâve it ail assembled ; and, for
this purpose, he waited some days for those in
the rear to corne up. At last we departed,
on the eve of All-souls-day. The Mameluke
advised me to lay in provision for four days.
I consequently purchased a sufficiency of bread
and cheese fbr myself, and of oats and barley
for my horse. On quitting Tharsis, we
traveUed three french leagues over a fine
champaign country, peopled withTurcomans;
and then we entered on the mountains, which
are the highest I hâve ever seen. They skirt
on three sides the country I had travelled over
from Antioch : the sea bounds the other on
the south.

We first passed through woods during a
whole day, but the road is not bad. We lodged
in the evening at a narrow pass, where there
seemed to hâve been formerly a castle. The
second day’s journey was not at ail disagréeable,
and we passed the night at a caravansera. The
third, we followed the banks of a small river.

\

Digitized by <^.ooQle

170 .

and saw on die - mountains an innumerable
quantity of speckled partridges.

In the evening, we halted on a plain about
a league in length and a quarter wide, where
four great valleys met;—the one by which
we had corne,—another that runs northward
towards the country of the lord called
Turcgadirony, and towards Persia : the third
runs eastward, and I know not whethèr this
, also does not lead to Persia : the last extends
to the westward, and it is that which I followed,
and which conducted me to the country of
the karman. Each of these four has a river,
and the four rivers run to this last country.

It snowed much during the night. To
save my horse from the weather, I covered
him with my capinat, the felt robe, which
I used for a cloak ; but I myself caught cold,
and got that disagreeable disorder, a dysentery.
Had it not been for my Mameluke, I should
hâve been in great danger; but he assisted me,
and made me instantly quit the place in which

Digitized by <^.ooQle

m

1 was. We both, thereforè, set off* Very éarîy,
and ascended the high mountains where the
castle of Cubléch is situated, ând is the highest
I am acquainted with. It is seen two days
journey off; but sometimes we turned our
backs to it, by reason of the windings of the
mountains, sometimes also we lost sight of it,
as it was hidden by their height. No one can
penctrate into the country of the karman
but on foôt over the mountain on which
this castle is built, The pass is narrow,
and in some places has been perforated by
the chissel, but it is every where commanded
by .Cublech. This castle, the last which the
Armenians lost, belongs at this day to the
karman, who had it in his division after the
death of Ramedang»

These mountains are coVered with
perpétuai snow, having only a road for horses,
. although there are some plains scattered among
them. They are dangerous on account of the
Turcomans who inhabit them; butduringthe

A A

Digitized by

Google

four days I was travelling among them, t nevêf
perceived a single dwelling.

On leaving the mountains of Armenia, to
enter the country of the karman, there are
still others to be crossed. On one of them is
a pass, having a castle called Lève, where a
toll is paid to the karman. This toll was
farmed to a Greek, who, on seeing me, judged
from my features that I was a Christian, and
stopped me. If I had been forced to return I
should hâve been a dead man, for I was
afterward assured, that before I had gone half
a league my throat would hâve been eut, for
the caravan was at a great distance. Fortunately
my Mameluke bribed the Greek, and, in
considération of two ducats that I gave him,
he opened the passage.

Further on is the castle of Asers, and,
beyond that the castle of a town called Araclie
(Eregli.)

On descending the mountain, we entered
a plain as level as the sea : then are seen some

Digitized by <^.ooQle

179

heights toward the north, which, scattered
here and there, appear like so many islands in
the midst of the waves. It is on this plain
that Eregli is situated, a town formerly
inclosed, but now in the greatest State of ruin.
I found there, however, some provision ; for
my last four days journey from Tharsus had
afforded me nothing but water. The environs
of the town arc covered with villages, inhabited
chiefly by Turcomans.

On quitting Eregli, we met two gentlemen
of the country, who appeared to be men of
distinction: they shewed great friendship to
the Mameluke, and carried him to regale at
an adjoining village, the dwellings of which
are eut out of thexock. We passed the night
there, but 1 was forced to stay the remaindér
of the time in a cavern, to take care ç>f our
horses. When the Mameluke retumed, he told
me that these two men had asked who I was,
and that in his answer he had misled them,
by saying I was a Circassian, who cauld not
speak Arabie.

Digitized by kjOOQle

180

From Eregli to Larande, vvhirher our
route lay, is tvvo days journey. Tbis town,
though not inclosed, is large, commercial, and
well simated. There was, in ancient times, a
great and strong castle in the center of the
town, the gates of which are now visible : they
are of iron, and very handsome, but the walls
are destroyed. There is a fine plain bctween
these two towns ; and after 1 I left Lève l did
not notice a single tree in the opcn country.

There were in Larande two cypriot
gentlemen, the one named Lyachin Castrico,
the other Léon Maschero, who both spoke
very tolerable French*. They inquired of
me my country, and what had brought me
t’nither : I replicd, that I was a servant of my
lord of Burgundy, that I came from Jérusalem

* The Lusignans, when kings of Cyprus, toward tho
end of the twelfth century, had introduced the french
Janguage into that islan<L It was at Cyprus, when St Louis
fut in there on his croisade to Egypt, that the code called * the
Assizes of Jérusalem* was dtawn up and published, and which
hecame ^he code of laws for the Cypriots. The frenc^t
language continued tp be that of the coprt and of weU
f dpcated persoi^s,

Digitized by

Google

181

to Damascus, and was following the caravan.
They appeared astonished that I had been
«uffered to pass; but when they had asked
whither I was going, and I had answered,
that I was on my return overland through
France to my foresaid lord,—they told me it
was impossible to be done, and that if I had
a thousand lives, I should lose them ail. In
conséquence, they proposed that I should
return to Cyprus with them ; for there were
at that island two galleys that had corne thither
to convey back the daughter of the king, who
had been betrothed in marriage to the son of
my lord of Savoy * ; and they doubted not
but the king, from the love and respect he
bore to the duke of Burgundy, would grant
me a passage on board one of them. I replied,
that, since God had graciously permitted that

* Louis, son to Amadæus VIII. duke of Savoy., He
jnarried in 1432 Anne de Lusignan, daughter tojean II. king
of Cyprus, deceased in the month of June, and sister tQ
Jçan III. then on the throne,

Digitized by

Google

I-shouId arrive at Larande, he would probably
allow me to go further; but that, at ail events,
I was determined to finish my joumey as I had
begun it, or die in the attempt.

I asked them, in my turn, whither they
were going. They said their king was just
dead : that during his life there had always
been a truce with the grand karmap, and that
the young king and his oouncil had sent them
to renew this alliance. Being curious to make
acquaintance with this great prince, whom his
nation reverences as we do our king, I
entreated permission to accompany them, to
which they consented.

I met likewise with another Cypriot at
Larande, called Perrin Passerot, a merchant,
who had resided some time in the country.
He was from Famagousta, and had been
banished from that town, because he and one
©f his brothers had attempted to deliver it up
to the king, as it was then in the hands of the
Genoese.

Digitized by kjOOQle

183

My Mameluks also met wkh five or six of
his countrymen. They were young circassian
slaves, who were on their way to thc résidence
of the sultan. He was désirons to regale them
on their meeting ; and as he had hçard there
were Christians at Larande, he gnessed they
Would not be-without wine, and begged of me
to procure him some. By dint of inquiry, and
for half a ducat, I was enabled to purchase the
half of a goat-skin full, of which I made him
a présent.

He shewed great joy on receiving it, and
instantly went to his companions, with whom
he passed the whole night drinking. He himself
swallowed so much that on the morrow he was
near dying on the road, but he cured himself
by a method which is peculiar to them. In such
cases, they hâve a very large bottle full of water,
and as their stomach becomes empty, they drink
water as long as they are able, as if they would
rinse a bottle, which they throw up, and then
drink of it again. He was thus employed on

Digitized by <^.ooQle

the road until mid-day, when hc was perffectly
recovered.

From Larande we went to Qulongue,
called by the Greeks * Qühonguopoly *.*
> These places are two days joarney distant
from each other. The country is fine, and
well furnished with villages, but wants water,
and has no trees but such as hâve been planted
near houses for' their fruit, nor any other river
but that which runs near the town.

This town is considérable and commercial,
defended by ditches ‘ en glacis,’ and good walls
strengthened with towers, and is the best the
karman possesses. There remains a small
castle : formerly there was a very strong one
in the center of the town, but it has been
pulled down to furnish materials to build the
prince’s palace.

I staid there four days, that the ambassador
from Cyprus and the caravan might hâve time

* The copyist has written it further on QuohongUe and
Quhongue. I shall write it henceforward Couhongue.

Digitized by G.ooQLe

185

to ârrivé. Whcn the arrtbassadof Came, I
asked him when he intended to wait on the
karman, and repeated my request to be présent,
which he promised. to grant. There were,
however,amonghisslaves four greek renegadoes,
one of whom was his usher at arms, who United
in their efforts to dissuade him from it; but
he replied, that he saw no inconvenience,
and, beside, that I had shewn such eagerness
to witness the ceremony, that he should take
pleasure in obliging me.

He was apprised of thê hour when he
might make his obeisance to the prince, inform
him of the object of his mission, and offer his
présents ï for it is an established custom in the
east nevér to appear before a superior without
bringing présents. His were six pièces of
camlet of Cyprus, I know not how many élis
of scaflet, forty sugaf loaves, a peregrine falcon,
two cross-bows, and a dozen of bolts.

Some genets were sent him to carry the
présents ; and he and his attendants were

B B

Digitized by k^ooQLe

186

mounted on horses, which the great lords,
who had corne to the palace to attend the
prince during this ceremony, had lefit at the
gâte.

The ambassador madè use of one of them,
but dismounted at the entrance of the palace,
when we were ushered into a large hall wherc
there might be about three hundred persons.
The prince occupied the adjoining apartment,
around which were arranged thirty slaves
standing : he was himself in a corner, seated
on a carpet on the ground, according to the
custom of the country, clad in a crimson and
gold cloth, with his elbow leaning on a cushion
of another sort of cloth of gold. Near him
was his sword, his chancellor standing in.
front, and, at a little distance, three men
seated.

The présents were first laid before him,
which he scarcely deigned to look at; then the
ambassador entered, attended by an interpréter,
because he did not understand the turkish

Digitized by kjooole

language. After the usual reverences, the
chancellor detnanded his credential letters,
which he read aloud. The ambassador then
addressed the king by means of his interpréter,
and said, that the king of Cyprus had sent him
to salute him, and to request that he would
accept the présents now before him, as a mark
of his friendship.

The prince made no answer, but caused
him to be seated.on the ground after their
manner, below the three persons before
mentioned, and at some distance; from the
prince. He now inquired after the health of
his brother the king of Cyprus, and was told
that he had lost his father, and had
commissioned him to renew the alliance that
had subsisted between the two çountries during
the lifetime of the deceased, for which he was
very anxious. The prince answered, that he
desired it as earnestly. He then questioned
the ambassador when the late king died, the
âge of his successor, if he were prudent, if his

Digitized by C.ooQLe

188

country was obedient ; and, as to these last
questions, the answer was ‘ Yes he seemed
well pleased.

After these words, the ambassador was
told to rise, which he did, and took leave of
the prince, who did not move more at his
departure tban at his entrance. On leaving
the palace, he found the sajne horses whiçh
■ had carried him thither ; and, having mounted
oneof them,he was reconduçted to his lodgings;
but he was sçarcely çntered when the ushers
of arms presented themselves, for in these
ceremonies it is customary to give thçm money,
and the ambassador did not neglect it.

He next went to pay his compliments to
the son of the prince, to offer him présent?
and deliver his letters. He was seated like his
father, with three persons near him ; b\it when
the ambassador made his reverence, he rose up,
thenreseated timself, and plaçed the.ambassadojr
above these three personages. As for us who
aççompanied him, they placed us far behjnd>

Digitized by <^.ooQle

189

Having noticed a bench, I was about to seat
myself on it without any ceremony; but I was
pulled ofF, and made to bend my knees and
crouch on the ground like the rest..

On our return home, an usher of arms to
the son visited us, as those of the father had
done, who also received some money. These
people, however, are satisfied with a little.

, The prince and his son, in their turn, sent
the ambassador a présent for his expenses,
which is likewise one of their customs. The
first sent fifty aspres, the second thirty. An
aspre is the money of the country, and fifty
are equal in value to a venetian ducat.

I saw the prince go through the town in
procession on a Friday, which is a holiday to
them, when he was going to say his prayers.
His guards were about .fifty horsemen, the
greater part his slaves, and about thirty
jnfantry, who surrounded him. He bore a
sword in his belt, and had a tabolcan at the
pvmunel of his saddle, according to the custom

Digitized by <^.ooQle

190

of the country. He and his son hâve been
baptised in the greek manner, to take off the
bad smell ; and 1 was told that the son’s raother
was a Christian. It is thus ail the grandees
get themselves baptised, that they may ’not
stink.

His territories are considérable : they begin
one day’s journey on this side Tharsus, and
extend to the country of Amurath Bey, the
other karman I spoke of, and whom vve call
the Grand Turk. In this line they are, as it
is said, twenty leagues wide; but they are
sixteen days joiirney in length, as I know well
from having travelled them. They extend, as
they assured me, on the north-east, as far as
the frontière of Persia.

The karman possesses also a maritime
coast, called the Farsats. It extends from
Tharsus to Courco, which belongs to the
king of Cyprus, and to a port called Zabari.
This district produces the most expert sailors
koown, but they hâve revolted against him.

Digitized by

Go le

191

The karman is a handsome prince, about
thirty-two years old, and married to a sister of
Amurath Bey. He is well obeyed by his
subjects, although I hâve heard people say
he was very cruel, and that few days passed
without some noses, feet or hands being eut
ofF, or some one put to death. Should any
man be rich, he condemns him to die that he
may seize his fortune ; and it is said, that the
greater part of his nobles hâve thu$ perished,
Eight days before my arrivai» he had caused one
to be torn to pièces by dogs. Two days after
this execution, he had caused one of his wives
to be put to death, even the mother of his eldest
son, who, when I saw him, knew nothing of
this murder.

The inhabitants of the country are a bad
race,—thieves, cheats, and great assassins: they
kill each other, and justice is so relaxed that
they are never arrested for it.

I found at Couhongue Antoine Passerot,
brother to Perrin Passerot whom I had seen at

Digitized by kjOOQle

Larande. They had both been accused of
attempting to deliver Famagousta to the king
of Cyprus, and had been banished. They had
retired to the States of the karman ; the one to
Larande, the other to Couhongue. Antony
had been unfortunate. Vice sometimes blinds
people; and he had been caught with a
mohammedan woman, and the king had
forced him to deny his religion to escape
death; but he appeared to be still a staunch
Catholic. In our conversations, he told me
many particulars of the country, of the
character and the government of the prince,
and especially as to the manner in which he
had taken and delivered up Ramedang.

The karman, he said, had a brother
whom he banished from the country, and who
took refuge at the court of the sultan, where
he found an asylum. The sultan did not
dare to déclaré war against him, but gave
him to understand, that unless he delivered
Ramedang into his hands he would send his

Digitized by kjOOQle

193

brother with troops so to do. The karman
made no hésitation, and rather than fight
with him committed an infamous treason in
regard to his brother-in-law. Antony added,
that he was weak and cowardly, althoügh his
people are the bravât in ail Turkey. His real
name is Imbreymbas; but he is called Karman,
from his being the lord of the coüntry.

Althoügh he is allied to the grand Turk,
having married his sister, he detests him for
having taken from him a portion of the karman.
He is, however, afraid to make war on him,
as he is the stronger ; but I am persuaded
that if he saw him successfully attacked by the
Europeans, he would not leave him in peace.

In traversing his country, I passed near
the frontière of another, called Gasserie,
which is bounded on one side by the karman,
and on the other by the high mountains of
Turcomania that extend toward Tharsis and
Persia. Its lord is a valiant warrior, called
Gadiroly, who has under his command thirty

c c

Digitized by ^ooole

t^ousand turconjati men at arms, and about
qne hundred thousand \vomen*as brave and as
fît for combat as men.

There are four lords continually at war
with eaçh other,—Gadiroly, Quharayiïich,
Quaraychust, and the son of Tamerlan, who
i$ said to govern Persia.

Antony told me, that when I quitted the
ipountains on the other side of Eregh, I had
passed within half a day’sjoumey of a ceiebrated
town where the body of St Basil is interred,
and spoke of it in such a mannçr that I had
a wish to see it : but he so strongly reprèsented
that I should lose more by sepdrating myself
from the caravan, and expose my$ejf to great
risks by travelling alone, that I renounced ail
tljoughts of it.

He owned to me, that his intentions were
to accompany me to my lord the dukc ; for
that he had no desire to become a Saracen, and
that, if hç had entered into any engagements^
en this head, it was solely to eseape death. Jt>

Digitized by VjOOQ

had been ordered that he should be circumcisèd,
and he was expecting the execution of it daily,
which gave him many fears. He was a very
handsome man, about thirty-six years old.

He told me also, that the natives offer up
public prayers in their mosques, like as we do
in our churches on Sundays, in behalf of
Christian princes, and, for other objects which
we ask from God. Now one of the things
they pray.to God for is, to deliver them from
the coming of such a man as Godfrey of
Bouillon.

The chief of the caravan making
préparations to départ, I went to take leavè
of the cypriot ambassadors. They had
ilattered themselves that I would return with
them, and renewed their entreaties, assuring
me that I should never complété my joumey ;
but I persisted. It was at Couhongue that
the caravan broke up, Hoyarbarach took
with him only his own people, his wife, two
of his children, whom he had carried with

Digitized by G.ooQle

bim to Mecca, one or two foroign women,
and myself.

I bade adieu to my Mameluke,. This
good man, whose name was Mohammed,
bad done me innumerable services. He was
very charitable, and never refused alms when
asked in the name of God. It was through
charity he had been so kind to me, and I must
confess that without his assistance I could not
bave performed my journey without incurring
the greatest danger; and that, had it not been
for his kindness, I should often hâve been
çxposed to cold and hunger, and much
embarrassed with my horse.

On taking leave of him, I was desirou?
of shewing my gratitude; but he wquld never
accept of any thing except a pièce of our fine
european cloth to cover bis head, wbich seemed
to please him much, He told me ail the
occasions that had come to bis knowledge,
on whiçb, if it had not been for him, I should
baye run risks qf being asçassinated, and

Digitized by ^ooQle

197

wamed me to be very • circumspect in my
connections with the Saracens, for that there
were among them some as wicked as the
Franks. I write this to recal to my reader’s
memory, that the personwho, from his love to
God, did me so many and essential kindnesses,
was a man not of our faith.

The country we travelled through, on
JeavingCouhongue,is handsome,with tolerably
good villages, but the inhabitants are wicked.
Hoyarbaraçh forbade me to go out of my
quarters when we halted, even in villages, for
fear lest I should be assassinated. There is
near this place a celebrated bath, to which sick
persons corne for a çureof theirseveraldisorders.
There are the remains of many hanses that
formerly beloqged to the knights-hospitallers
of Jérusalem, with the cross of Jérusalem on
them.

After three days march, we came to a small
tpwn, caljed Achsaray, situated at the foot of
a high mountain that shelters it from the south,

Digitized by ^ooQle

The Country is level, but not populous, and
'the natives hâve a bad charactér : I \va$
consequently forbidden to leave my house in
the evening.

I travelled the ensuing day between two
high mountains, whose tops are crowned
with wood. The district is well peopled,
partly by the Turcomans, and consists of
pasture and marsh land. I there crossed a
little brook that divides this country of karman
from that of the ôther karman possessed by
Amurath Bey, called by us the Grand Turk,
This division resembles the former, in being a
flat country, with mountains here and there.

On our road, we passed a town with a
castle, called Achanay, and further on we
came to a caravansera, where we intended to
pass the night, but we ibund there twenty-five
asses. Our commander refused to enter, and
preferred returning a league back to a large
village, where we lodged, and found bread,
cheese and milk.

Digitized by k^ooQLe

1 99

F rom this place we went to Carassar,
which tooktwodays. Carassar, in the turkish
language, signifies * black stone.’ It is the;
capital of the country that Amurath Bey took
by force of arms. Although uninclosed, it isr
a place of considérable trade, and h as çne of
the finest castles I hâve seen, but without any
othçr water than what is collected in cisterns.,
It is seated on the summit of a high rock^ so
round that it rüight be thought to be worked
withachissel. Below it is the town, surrounding
it on three sides; but both are commanded by
a mountain, from the north east to the north
West. The other side opens to a plain, through.
which runs a river. Not long ago, the Greeks
had gained possession of this place, but.
afterward lost it by their cowardice.

They dress sheeps feet here wijth a
cleanliness I hâve no where seen. I regaled
myself with them the more eagerly, as I had
not eaten any dressed méat since I had left.
Couhongue. They cook also a niçe dish with.

Digitized by k^ooQLe

green walnuts. Their manner is to peel them,
eut thera into two, and put them on a string :
then they are besprinkled with boiled wine,
which attaches itself to them, and forms a jeily
like paste ail around them. It is a very agreeable
food, especially when a person is hungry. We
were obliged to lay in a stock of bread and

cheese for two days, as I-%as disgustec^ with

<

raw méat.

Two days were employed in journeying
from Carassar to Cotthay. The country is
good, well watered, having no very high
mountains. We traversed one end of a fbrest,
which seemed to me only remarkable for
consistdng entirely of oak, taller and larger
than any I had hitherto met with, having
besides, like fir-trees, branches only at the top.

We took up our quarters for the-night at
a caravansera, distant from any habitations.
We found there barley and straw in plenty,
and we could the more easily hâve supplied
our wants, as there was but a single servant

Digitized by \jOOQle

tô take care of them; but the ownerft néver
hâve any thing to fear of this kind, for at such
places there is no man so bolcT as to take the
smallest article wîthout paying for it.

% On our road was a small river, reriowned
for its water. Hoyarbàraoh went to drink of
it with his women, and wished me to do the,
same, he himself offèring me some içi his leathern
cup. This was the first time on the journey
that he had done me this favour.

Cotthay, although pretty considérable, is
without walls; but it has a handsome and large
castle, composed of three forts rising one above
the other, on the declivity of a hill, which has a
double inclosure. This place was the résidence
of the son of the grand Turk.

There was a caravansera in the town,
whither we Went to lodge. It was already
occupied by a party of Turks, and we were
obligsd, according to custom, to turo our
horses together pell-mell. On the morrow
moming, when making ready to départ,

D D

Digitized by kjOOQle

202

î perçeived that one of my straps had been
taken, which served to fasten on my horse’s
crupper, my carpets and other things I carried
behind me. *

At first, 1 began to cry out with much
noiàe and anger; but there was a turkish slave
présent, one belonging to the sultan’s son,
a man of weight and about fifty years old,
who, hearing me speak the language very
incorrectly, took me by the hand, and
conducted me to the gâte of the caravansera,
when he asked me in Italian who I was ? 1 was
stupified to hear him thus speak, and replied
that I was a Frank. * Whence do you
corne ?’ ‘ From Damascus, in company with
Hoyarbarach, and I am going to Bursa to
meet one. of my brothers.’ * Indeed ! but
you are a spy, and corne to make your
remarks on this country. If you were not,
would you not hâve embarked, and returned
home by sea?’

This unexpected accusation confounded
me : I answered, however, that the Venetians

Digitized by k^ooQLe

203 '

and Genoese were carrying on so bitter a war
that I was afraid to venture by sea. He asked
whence I came? * From the kingdom of
France,’ was my answer. * Are you from
the neighbourhood of Paris ?’ I réplied,
I was not,—and in my tqrn asked if he were
acqnainted with Paris? He said he had
formerly been there with a captain, named
Bernabo. * Take my ad vice,’ continued he:

* return to the caravanscra, seek your horse,
and bring him hither to me, for there are
some albanian slaves, who will steal from you
every thing he carries. While I am taking
care of him, do you go and breakfast, and
procure for yourself and your horse provision
for five days, for so long will you he on the
road without meeting with any.’

I followed his advice, and went to
purchase provision. I breakfasted also the
more heartily as I had not, for two days tasted
méat, and was told that I must not expeçt to
meet with any for five days more.

Digitized by ^ooQle

20 *

• When I quïtted the caravansera, I took
the rbad to Bu rsa, leaving that leading to
Troy on my left, between the south and west
points. -Thçre were many high mountains,
se ver al-ôf which I’had to pass over. I had
also two days journey through forests, afiter
which I traversed a'handsome plain in which
are some villages good enough for the country.
Half a day’s journey from Bursa, we came
to One that supplied us with méat and
grapes,—which last were as fresh as in the
time of vintage : this mode of preserving them
is à secret they hâve. The Turks oflèred
me some roast méat; but it was rtot half
dressed, and as the méat was roasting on
the spit we eut ofF slices, We had also
some kaymack, buffalo cream ; and it was so
good and sweçt that I eat of it till 1 almost
burst.

Before we entered this last village, we
' notieçd the arrivai of a Turk from Bursa,
who had been sent to the wife of Hoyarbarach,

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

205

to announce to hcr the death of her father.
She shewed great grief on the occasion, and
I had then, for the first time, an opportunité
of seeing her face uncovered. She was a njost
beautiful woman.

There was at this place a renegado slave,
a native of Bulgaria, who through affectation
of zeal, and tP shew himself a good Saracen,
rcproached the Turks of the caravan for having
allowed me to be in their company, saying it
was sinful in them to do so, who were returning
from the holy pilgrimage to Mecca. In
conséquence, they notified to me that we
must separate, and I was obliged to set off
for Bursa.

I departed, therefore, on the morrow, an
hour before day, with the aid of God, who
had hithérto conducted me. He now guided
me so well, that I never asked my road more
than once on the whole way.

On entering the town, I met numbers of
people coming out to meet the caravan, for

Digitized by kjOOQle

20 6

such is the custom. The most considérable
look on it as a duty, and it constitutes a
festival. Several of them, supposing I was
one of the pilgrims, kissed my hands and
robe. When I had entered the town, I was
greatly embarrassed, for I had corne to a square
tbat had four streets opening from it, and
I knew not which to take. God again pointed
out to me the right one, that which leads to
the bazar, where the merchants résidé with
their merchandize. I addressed mysdf to the
first Christian I saw, and fortunately he
happened to be one of the Espinolis of Genoa,
the very person to whom Parvesin of Baruth
had given me letters.

He was much surprised to see me, and
conducted me to the house of a Florentine,

i

where 1 was lodged, as well as my horse.

I remained there ten days, and employed
that time in examining the town, being
conducted by the merchants, who took great
pleasure in so doing

Digitized by G.ooQLe

207

Of ail the towns in the possession of thé
Turks, tbis is the most considérable. It is of
great extent, carries on considérable trade,and is
situated at the foot of the north side of mount
Olympus, whence flows a river which, passing
through the town, divides itself into several
branches, forming, as it were, a number of
small towns that mâkeit look larger than it is.

It is at Bursaîhat the turkish sultans are
buried. There are many handsome buildings,
and particularly a great number of hospitals*
among which there are four, wherebread, wine
and méat are frequently distributed to the poor
who will accept cf them for the sake of God;
At one of the extremities of the town, toward.
. the west, is an handsome and vast castle, built
on an eminence that may well contain a
thousand houses. There is also the palace of
the sultan, which they told me was a very
delightful place within side, having a garden
and pretty pond. The prince had at that time
fifty wives ; and he often, as they said, amuses

Digitized by Giooole

208

himself in a boat with some of them on this
pièce of water.

Bursa was also the résidence of Camurat,
bashaw, or, as we should say, governor or
lieutenant of Turkey. He is a very brave
man, the most active the Turk has, and the
most able to conduct any enterprise, which
qualifies hâve been the principal cause of his
élévation to this lieutenancy.

I asked if he govemed the country well,
- and if he knew how to make himself obeyed ?
I was tdd that he was obeyed and respected
like Amurath himself, and had for his salary
fifty thousand ducats a-yeaf; and that, when
the Turk went to war, he brought him, at his
own expense, twenty thousand men ; but that
he had likewise his pensioners, who in this case
were bound to supply him at their charges, one
with a thousand men,another with two,another
with three thousand, and so on with the rest.

There are in Bursa two bazars; one where
ail sorts of silken stufft, rich and brilliant

Digitized by k^ooQLe

diaotonds âfé sold, great quantifies of pearls,.
and cheap cotton cloths, and a variety of
other merchandise, the énumération of which
would be tiresome. In the other bazar, cotton
and white soap are sold, and constitute a great
article of commerce»

I saw also, in a màrket-*house, a lamentable
sîght,—a public sale of Christians for slaves»
both men and women. The custom is to
make them sit down on benches, and he who
Cornes to buy sees only the face, the hands, and
a little of the arm of the females. I witnessed
at Damascus the sale of a yoüng black girl, of
hot more than fifteen or sixteen years of âge :
she was led along the streets quite naked,
excepting the belly, the hinder parts, and a
little below them.

It was at Bursa that I eat, for the first time,

caviare and olive oil. This food is only fit for

Greeks, and when nothing better can be had.

Some days after the return of Hoyarbarach,

%

,1 went to take leave of him, and to thank him

fi B

Digitized by tjOOQle

£or the means he had procured me of continuing
my joumey to this place. I found him in the
bazar, seated on an elevatedstone bench, with
many of the principal inhabitants of the town.
The merchants had aççompanied me in this
visit: some of them, Florentines by nation,
interested themselves on behalf of a Spaniard,
who, having been a slave to the sultan, found
means to escape from Egypt and corne to
Bursa. They begged I would take him with
me. I carried him at my expense as far as
Constantinople, where I left him ; but I am
persuaded he was a renegado, and I hâve never
heard any thing of him since.

Three Genoese had bought spices from
the merchants of the caravan, and intended
carrying them to Pera, near Constantinople,
and on the other side of the streights which
we call the streights of St George, for sale.
Wishing totake the advantageof their company,
I waited for their departure, and for this reason
ataid at Bursa, for no one can pass this streight
unless he be known. In this view, they

Digitized by kjOOQle

su

procured me a letter from the govémor,
which I carried with me; but it was useless,
for I found means to cross with. them. We
set out together; but they made me, for
greater security, buy a high red hat with a
huvette of iron wire *, which I wore as far as
Constantinople.

On leaving Bursa, we travelled northward
over a plain, watered by a deep river, which,
about four Ieagues lower down, falls into the
_ gulph between Constantinople and Gallipôli,
We had a day’s joumey among mountains,
which wood and a clayey soil made very
disagreeable. There was on the road a small
tree bearing a fruit somewhat bigger than our
largest cherries, and of the shape and tastè of
Strawberries, but a little acid. It i$ pleasant
to eat; but if a great quantity be eaten, it
mounts to the head, and intoxicates. It is
ripe in Novembef and Decemberf.

* Huvette,—a kind of ornament wom on die hat
+ From the description, it seems to be die Arbutu* AûdrachûÇ.

Digitized by ^ooQle

£12

From the summit of the mountain, the
gulph of Gallipoli is visible ; and, when vve
had descended it, we entered a valley terminated
by a very large lake, round which many houses
are built. It was there I first saw turkish
carpeta made. I passed the night in this
valley, which is very fertile in rice.

On pursuing our road, we came sometimes
to mountains, valleys, pasture-lands, and great
forests, which would be impossible to pas*
without a guide, and where the horses plunge
?o deeply in the soil they can hardly extricate
themselves. I believe, for my part, that this
is the forest spoken of in the history of Godfrey
of Bouillon, which he had such difficulty to,
traverse.

I passed the night on the further side of it,
at a village within four leagues of Nicomedia,
which is a large town, with a harbour for
shipping. This harbour is called Lenguo, and
çommences at the gulph of Constantinople,
apd çxtends to thç tçwn, where it is a bp\v T shot

Digitized by C.ooQLe

S13

in breadth. Ail this country is difKcult
to travel; but beyond Nicomedia, toward
Constantinople, it is very fine, and tolerably
good travelling. It is more peopled with
Greeks than Turks; but these Greeks hâve
a greater aversion to the latin Christians than
the Turks themselves.

I coasted the gulph of Constantinople,
and, leaving the road to Nicea, a town
situated to the northward near the Black Sea,
I successively lodged. at a village, in ruins,
inhabited solely by Greeks,—then at another,
near to Scutari,—and lastly at Scutari itself,
on the streight, and opposite to Pera.

The Turks guard this passage, and receive
a toll from ail who cross it. It has rocks that
would make it easy of defence, if they were
fortified. Men and horses can readily embark
and disembark. My companions and I crossed
in two greek vessels. The owners of my boat
fppk me for a Turk, and paid me great honours;

Digitized by C.ooQLe

214

but whèn they saw me, after landing, leave
my horse at the gâte of Pera to be taken care
of, and kiquire after a genoese merchant, named
Christopher Parvesin, to whom I had letters,
they suspected I was a Christian.

Two of them waited for me at the gâte ;
and when I returned for my horse, they
demanded more than I had agreed on for my
passage, and wanted to cheat me. ï believe
they would even hâve struck me, had they
dared : I had my sword and my good tarquais;
but a genbese shoemaker, who lived hard by,
coming to my aid, they were forced to retreat.
I mention this as a waming to travellers, who,
like me, may hâve any thing to do with the
Greeks. Ail those with whom I hâve had any
concerm hâve only made me more suspicious,
for 1 hâve found more probity in the Turks.

These people love not the Christians of
the roman persuasion, and the submission which
they hâve since made to this churçh was raoto

Digitized by C.ooQLe

215

tbrough self-intere$t than sincerity *. Therefore
I hâve been told, that a Jittle before ï came to
Constantinople, the pope, in a general council,
had declared them schismatics and accursed,
and had devoted them to be the slaves of-
slaves -j-,

* In 1438 John Paleologus II. came to Italy to form
an union between the greek and lafin churches, which took
place the erouing year at the council of Florence. But this
step, as la Brocquière remarks, was, on the part of the cmperor,
but à polidcal operation, dictated by interest, and without
conséquence. His dominions were then in so misérable a
State, and himself so hairassed by the Turks, that he was
anxious to procure the aid of the Latins ; and it was with this
hope that he had corne to inveigle the pope. , This epocha,
of 1438, is of conséquence to our traveb; for it proves, since
la Brocquière quotes it, that hc published it posterior to that
year.

f A false fact. The general council that took platce
a litde before he came to Constantinople was that of Basil in
1431, when, far from anathematising and cursing theGreeks,
it was occupied about their re-union. This pretended
malédiction was undoubtedly a report, which those who were
against this"re-union sprcad abroad in Constantinople; and
the traveller seems to hâve understood it by the expression, it
•mas told me.

Digitized by ^ooQle

Pera is a large town, inhabited by Greeks,
Jews and Genoese : the last are masters of it,
under the duke of Milan, who styles liimself
Lord of Pera. It has a podestat-and other
officers, who govern it after their manner.

A great commerce is carried on with the
Turks; but the latter hâve a singular privilège,
namely, that should any of their slaves run
away, and seek an asylum in Pera, they must
be given up.

The port is the handsomest of ail I hâve
seen, and I believe I may add, of any in the
possession of the Christians, for the i largest
genoese vessels may lie alongsidc the quays;
but as ail the world knows this, I shall not
say more. It, however, seems to me, that on
the land side, and near the church, in the
vicinity of the gâte at the extremity of the
haven, the place is weak.

I met at Pera an ambassador from the
duke of Milan, named Sir Benedicto de

Digitized by

Google

217

Fôürlino. The düke, wanting the support of
the emperor Sigismônd against the Venetians,
and seeing Sigismônd embarrassed with the
defence of his kingdom of Hungary against
the Turks, had sent an embassy to Amurath,
to negotiate a peace between these two princes.

Sir Bénédicte, in honour of my lord of
Burgundy, gave me a gracious réception^
He even told me, that to do mischief to the
Venetians, he had contributed to make them
lose Salonica, taken from them by the Turks;
and certainly in this hé acted so much the
worse, for I hâve since seen the inhabitants of
that town deny Jésus Christ, and embrace
the mohammedan religion.

There was also at Pera, a Neapolitan,
called Peter of Naples, with whom I was
acquainted. He said he was married in the
country of Prester John, and made many
efforts to induce me to go thither with him.
I questioned him much respecting this country,
and he told me many things which I shall here

F F

Digitized by C.oooLe

218

insert; but I know not whether what he said be
the truth, and shall not therefore warrant any
part of it *.

Two days after my arrivai at Pera, I
Crossed the haven to Constantinople, to visit
that city. It is large and spacious, having the
form of a triangle: one side is bounded by the
streights of St George,—another, toward the
South, by the bay, which extends as far as
Gallipoli, and on the north side is the port.

There are, it is said, three large towns
on the earth, each inclosing seven hills,—
Rome, Constantinople and Antioch. Rome
is, I think, larger and more compact than
Constantinople. As for Antioch, as I only saw
it when passing by, I cannot speak of its size :

* The manner in which our traveller here announcc*
the relation of the Neapolitan shows how little he believed it ;
and in this, his usual good sense does not forsake him. This
récital is, in fect, but a tissue of absurd fables, and revoldng
marvels, undeserving to be quoted, although they may generally
be found in authors of those times. We shall omit them, and
let the traveller continue his narratioq.

Digitized by

Google

219

its hills, however, appeared to me higher than
those of the two others.

They estimate the circuit of the city of
Constantinople at eighteen miles, a third of •
which is on the land side toward the west. It
is well inclosed with walls, particularly on the
land side. This extent, estimated at six miles
from one angle to the other, has likewise a deep
ditch, * en glacis,’ excepting for about two
hundred paces at one of its extremities, near
the palace called la Blaquerne. I was assured
that the Turks had failed in their attempt to
take the town at this weak part. Fifteen or
twenty feet in front of this ditch, is a false bray
of a good and high wall. At the two extremities
of this line, were formerly handsome palaces
which, if we may judge from their présent ruins,
were also very strong. I was told they had
been destroyed by an emperor, when taken
prisoner by the Turks and in danger of
his life. The conqueror insisted on his
surrendering Constantinople, and, in case of

Digitized by <^.ooQle

220

refusai, threatened to put him to death. The
other replied, that he preferred death to the
disgrâce of afflicting Christendom by so great
a loss, and that his death would be nothing in
comparison. When the Turk saw he could
gain nothing by this means, he offered him his
liberty on condition that the square in front of
St Sophia should be demolished, with the two
palaces, His project was, thus to weaken the
town, that he might the more easily take it.
The emperor accepted his offers, the proçf of
which exists at this day,

Constantinople is formed of many separate
parts, so that it contains several open spaces to
a greater extent than those built on. The
largest vessels can anchor under its walls as at
Fera : it has beside a small harbour in the
interior, capable of containing three or four
galleys, This is situated to the southward,
near a gâte, where a hillock is pointed out
composed of bones of the Christians, who
after the eonquests of Jérusalem and Acre, by

Digitized by C.ooQLe

221

Godfrey of Bouillon, were returning by this
streight. When the Greeks,had Ferried them
over, they conducted them to this place, which
is remote and secret, where they were murdered.
The whole, although a very numerous body,
would hâve thus perished, had not a page
found means to re-cross to Asia, and inform
them of the danger that awaited them. On
this, they spread themselves on the shores
of the Black Sea; and from them are said
to be descended those rude Christians who
inhabit that part of the country,—Circassians,
Mingrelians, Ziques, Gothlans and Anangats.
But as this is an old story, I know of it no
more than what was told me.

The city has many handsome churches ;
but the most remarkable and principal is that
of St Sophia, where the patriarch résides, with
others of the rank of canons. It is of a circular
shape,situated neartheeastern point, andformed
of three different parts,—one subterraneous,
another above the ground, and a third over

Digitized by kjOOQle

222

that. Formerly it was surrounded by cloistcrs,
and was three miles, as they say, in circumference.
It is now of smaller extent, and only three
cloisters remairi, ail paved, and incrusted with
squares of white marble, and ornamented with
large columns of various colours *. The
gates are remarkable for their breadth and
height, and are of brass.

This church, they say, possesses orne of
the robes of our Lord,—the end of the lance
that pierced his side,—the sponge that was
offered him to drink from,—and the reed that
was put into his hand. I can only say, that
behind the choir, I was shewn the gridiron on
which St Laurence was broiled,—and a large
stone, in the shape of a wash-stand, on which,
they say, Abraham gave the angels to eat,

* Two of thèse galleries, or porticos, called by our
author cloisters, as well as the columus, still subsist. These
last are formed of different materials, porphyry, granité,
marble, &c. ; and this is the reason why the traveller, not
being a naturalisé repiesents them as being of various
colours.

Digitized by L.ooQLe

when they were going to destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah.

I was curious to witness thc manner ofthe
Greeks performing divine service, and went to
StSophia on a daywhen thepatriarchoiSciated.
The emperor was présent, accompanied by his
wife, his mother, and brother, the despot of
the Morea *. A mystery was represented, the
subject of which was the three youths whom
Nebuchadnezzar had ordered to be thrown into
the fiery fumace f.

The empress, daughter to the emperor of
Trebisonde, seemed very handsome ; but, as I
was at a distance, I wished to hâve a nearer
view,— and I was also desirous to see how she

* This emperor was John Paleologus II.—his brother
Demetrius, despot or prince of the Peloponesus,—his mother
Irene, daughter to Constantine Dragasés, sovereign of a small
country in Macedonia,—his wife Maria Comnenes, daughter
to Alexis, emperor of Trebisonde*

t These devout farces were then as common in the
greek church as in the latin. They were called * Mysteries*
in France ; and this is the name given by our traveller to the
ope he saw in St Sophia.

Digitized by <^.ooQle

22é

mounted hcr horse ; for it was thus she hàd
corne to the church, attended only by two
ladies, three old men, ministère of State, and
three of that species of men to whose guard
the Turks entrust their wives. On coming
out of St Sophia, she went into an adjoining
house to dine, which obliged me to wait until
she returned to her palace, and consequently to
pass the whole day without eating or drinking.
At length she appeared. A bench was brought
forth, and placed near her horse, which was
supefb, and had a magnificent saddle. When
she had mounted the bench, one of the old men
took the long mantle she wore, passed to the
opposite side of the horse, and held it in his
hands extended as high as he could : during
this, she put her foot in the stirrup, and bestrode
the horse like a man. When she was in her
seat, the old man cast the mantle over her
shoülders ; afîter which one of those long hats,
yvith a point, so common in Greece, was given
to her: it was ornamented at one of the

Digitized by

Google

225

extremities with three gokien plumes, and was
very becoming.

I was so near that I was ordefed to fall
back, and consequently had a full view of her.
She wore in her ears. broad and fiat rings, set
with several precious sternes, especially rubies.
She looked young and fair, and handsomer
than when in church. In one word, I should
not hâve had a fouit to find with her, had she
not been painted, and assuredly she had not
any need of it.

The two ladies mourtted their horses at
the same time that she did : they were both
handsome, and wore, like her, mandes and
hats. The company returned to the palace
of la Blaquerne.

In the front of St Sophia is a large
and handsome square, sürrounded with walls
like a palace, where games were performed in
ancient rimes *. I saw the brothef .of the

* The Greek Hippodrome,—ât présent the Atmcidan.
•f the Turks.

Q G

Digitized by kjOOQle

32 6

emperor, the despot of thè Morea, exercising
Ijrimself there, with a score of other horsemen.
Each had a bow, and tbey galloped along
the inclosure, throwing their hats befbrt
them, which, when they had passed, they
shot at ; and he who with his arrow pierced
his hat, or was nearest to it, was esteemed
the most expert. This exercise they had
adopted from the Turks, and was one of
which they were endeavouring to make
themselves masters.

On this side, hear the point of die angle,
is the beautiful church of St George, which
has, fronting Turkey in Asia, a tower at the
narrowest part of the streights.

On the other side, to the westward, is a
very high square column, with characters
traced on it, and bearing on the summit an
equestrian statue of Constantine in bronze.
He holds a sceptre in his.left hand, with his
right extended towards Turkeÿ in Asia, and
the road to Jérusalem, as if to dénoté that the

Digitized by tjooole

227

wholeof that country was under hisgôvemment.
Near this column arc three others, placed in a
line, and of one single piece, bearing three gilt
horses, now at Venice *.

In the pretty church of the Panthéacrator,
occupied by greek monks, who are what we
should call in France Grey Franciscan Friars,
I was shewn a stone or table of divers colours,
which Nicodemus had caused to be eut to be
placed on his tomb, and which he made use of
to lay out the body of our Lord, when hë
took him down from the cross. During this
operation, the virgin was weeping over the
body; but her. tears, instead of remaining on
it, fell on the stone, and they are ail now to bè
seen upon it. I at first took them for drops of
wax, and touched them with my hand, and
then bended down to look at them horizontally,
and against the light, when they seemed to me
like drops of congealed water. This is a thing

* Thcre are four,-—and now at Pari*.

Digitized by LjOOQle

228

that may hâve been seen by many persons a*
wèll as myself.

In the same church are the tombs of
Constantine and of St Helena, his mother,
raised each about eight feet high on a column,
having its summit terminated in a point, eut
into four sides, in the fashion of a diamond.

It is reported that the Venetians, while in
power at Constantinople, took the body of
St Helena from its tomb, and carried it to
Venice, where they say it is now entire. It is
added, that they attempted the same thing in
regard to the body of Constantine, but could
not succeed ; and this is probable enough, for
to this day two broken parts are to be seen,
where they made the attempt, The two tombs
tire of red jasper.

In the church of St Apostola is shewn
the broken shaft of the column to which our
Saviour was fastened when he was beaten with
rods, by order of Pilate. . This shaft, longer
than the height of a man, is of the same stone

Digitized by

Google

£2S>

with the two others that I hâve seen, at Rome
and at Jérusalem ; but this exceeds in size the
other two put together.

There are likewise in the same church, in
wooden coffins, many holy bedies, very entire,
and any one that chooses may see them. One
of them had his head eut off, and that of
another saint has been given him. The Greeks,
however, hâve not the like dévotion that we
hâve for these relies. It is the same in respect
to the stone of Nicodemus and the pillar of our
Lord,—which last is simply inclosed by planks,
and placed upright near one of the columns on
the right hand of the great entrance at the front
of the church.

Among the fine churches, I shall mention
one more as remarkable, namely that called La
Blaquerne, from being near the impérial palace,
which, although small and badly rooted, has
paintings, with a pavement and incrustations
pf marble. I doubt not but there may be
Others worthy of notice, but I was unable to

Digitized by L.ooQLe

«30

visit them ail. The latin merchants hâve one
ôtuated opposite to the passage to Pera, where
mass, after the romaii manner, is daily said.

There are merchants from ail nations
jn this town,’—but none so powerful as the
Venetians, who hâve a bailiff that régulâtes
ail their a flairs, independent of the emperor
and his officers. This privilège they hâve
enjoyed for a long time *. It is even said,
that they hâve twice by their galleys saved
the town from the Turks ; but; for my part;
J believe that God lias spared it, more for the
holy relies it contains than for any thing else.
The Turks hâve also an offieer to superintend
their commerce, who, like the venetian bailiff,
is independent of the emperor: they hâve even
the privilège, that if une of their slaves shall
run away, and take refuge within the city, on
their demanding him, the emperor is bound to
give him up.

* Sincc the conquest of the east by the Latins in 1204,
to vhkU conquest the Venetians gready contributed.

Dit zed by

aogle

This prince must be undef great subjection
to the Turks, since he pays him, as I am told,
a tribute of ten thousand ducats annually ; and
this süm is only for Constantinople, for béyond
that town he possesses nothing but a castle
situated three leagues to the north, and in
Greece a small city called Salubria.

I was lodged with a catalonian merchant,
who having told one of the officers of the
palace that I was attached to my lord of
Burgundy, the emperor caused me to be asked
if it were true that the duke had taken the
Pucelle d’Orléans, which the Greeks would
scarcely believe. I told them truly how the
matter had passed, at which they were greatly
astonished *. .

* The Pucelle having bravely fought the English and
lhe duke of Burgundy, leagued against France, had beeft
made prisoner in 1430, by an officer of Jean de Luxembourg,
the duke’s general, and, being afterward sold by Jean to the
English, was burat by them the following year. This
atrocious vengeance had. resounded throughout Europe. At
Constantinople, public rumour had attributed it to the duke ;
but the Greeks would not believe that a Christian prince could

Digitized by C.ooQLe

232

The merchants informed me, that on
Candlemas-day there would be a solemn
service performed in the afternoon, similar
to what we perform on that day, and they
conducted me thither. The emperor was
at one end of the hall, seated on a cushion.
The empress saw the ceremony from a window
in an upper apartment. The chaplains who
chaunt the service are strangely omamented
and dressed : they sing the service by heart,
‘ selon leurs dois.’

Some days after, they carried me to see a
feast given on account of the marriage of one
of the emperor’s relations. There was a
tournament after the manner of the country,
but which appeared very strange to me.

I will describe it. In the miçldle of a
square, they had planted, like to a quintany,
a large pôle, to which was fastened a plank
three feet wide, and five feet long. Forty

bave been capable of such an atrocity, which seemed to thepi,
says our author, as something impossible.

Digitized by kjOOQle

233

cavaliers advanced to this spot, without any
arms or armoür whatever but a short stick.
They at first amused themselves by running
after éach other, which lasted for about half
an hour,—then from sixty to fourscore rods-
of Aider weré brpught, of the thickness and
length of those we use for thatching. The
bridegroom first took one, and set ofF full
gallop toward the plank, to break it: as it
shook in his hand, he broke it with ease,
when shouts of joy rcsounded, and the
instruments of music, namely nacaires, like
those of the Turks, begarr to play. Each
of the other cavaliers broke their wands in
the same manner. ; Then the bridegroom
tied two of them together, which in truth
were. not too strong, and broke them without
being wounded *. Thus ended the feast, and

* La Brocquière must hâve thought thesè justings
ridiculous, from being accustomed to our tournaments, where
the knights, cased in iron, fought with swords, lances and
batdc-axes* and when, very frequently, men were kilied^
wounded, or trodden under foot by the horses. Thi» has

H H

Digitized by kjOOQle

eVery onc returned to his home sâfe and Sound.
The emperor and empress had been spectators
of it from a window.

My intentions were to leave Constantinople
with this sir Benedict de Fôurlino, who, as I
hâve said,had been sent ambassador to theTùrk
by the duke of Milan. There was a gentleman
named Jean Visconti, and seven other persons
in his company, with ten led horses; for when
a traveller passes through Greece, he must
absolutely carry eveiy necessary with him.

I departed from Constantinople the 23d
January 1433, and first came to the pass of
Rigory, which was formerly tolerably strong :
it is formed in a valley through which runs an
arm of the sea, twenty miles long. There was
a tower, but the Turks hâve destrôyed it. In
this place, there remain a bridge, a causeway and
a greek village. In the way to Constantinople
by land, there is but this pass, and another

made him twice say» that in this justing with sticks no on*
Was woondedi

Digitized by kjooole

23 5

lower down, still more dangerous, on a river
which there discharges itself into the sea.

From Rigory I went to Thiras, inhabited
also by Greeks : it has been a good town, and
a pass as strong as the preceding one, from
being formed in like manner by the sea. At
each end of the bridge, there Was a large tower;
but tower and town, ail hâve been destroyed
by the Turks.

I went from Thiras to Salubria. This
town, two days journey from Constantinople,
îs situated on the gulph, that extends from
this place as far as Gallipoli, and has a small
harbour, The Turks could never take it,
although it is not strong toward the sea. It
belongs to the emperor, as well as the whole
country hitherto ; but this country is completely
ruined, and has but poor villages,

Thence I came to Chorleu, formerly
considérable,—destroyed by the Turks, and
now inhabited by them and Greeks.—Next to
Çhorleu is Misterio, a small inclosed place,

Digitized by C.ooQLe

Ê3<5’

inhabited only bÿ Greeks,—with one single
Turk, to whom his prince has given it. •

From Misterio we came to Pirgasy, where
there are none but Turks. The walls have
been thrown down.—Zambry is the next place
to Pirgasy, and is equally destroyed.

We next came to Adrianople, a large
Commercial town, very populous, and situated
on a great river called the Mariza, six days
journey from Constantinople. This is the
Strongest town possessed by the Turk in
Greece, and here he chiçfly résides. The
lieutenant or governor of Greece lives here
also ; and many merchants from Venice,
Catalonia, Genoa and Florence are likewise
residents. The country from Constantinople
hither is good, and well watered,—but thinly
peopled, having fertile vallies that produce
every thing but wood.

The Turk was at Lessère *, a large town
^n Pyrre, near to Pharsalia, where the décisive

* Q. if- not Larissa (Seres), in Phrygia.

Digitized by G.ooQLe

237

battle.was fought between Cæsar and Pompey,
and sir Benedict took the road thither to wait
on him. We crossed the Marina in a boat, and
shortly afiter met fifty women of the Turk’s
y seraglio, attended by about sixteen eunuchs,
who told us they were escorting them to
Adrianople, whither their master proposed
soon following them.

We came to Dymodique *, a good^town,
inclosed with a double wall. It is defended on
one side by a river, and on the other by a large
and strong castle, constructed on an élévation
which is almost round, and which may contain
within its extent three hundred houses. In the
castle is a dungeon, wherein I was told theTurk
keeps his treasure.

From Demetica, we came to Ypsala-f-:
it has been a tolerable town, but is totally
destroyed. I çrossed the Mariza a second time.
It is two days journey from Adrianople, and

* Q. Demetica.

, t Çypsela.

Digitized by kjOOQle

238

the country throughout was marshy, and
difficult for the horses.

Ay ne *, beyond Ypsala, is on the sea-shore,
and at the mouth of the Mariza, which at this
place is full two miles wide. When Troy
flourished, this was a powerful city, and had
a king : at présent, its lord is brother to the
lord of Matelin, and tributary to theTurk.

On a circular hillock is the tomb of
Polydore, the youngest of the sons of Priam,
The father had sent this son, during the siégé
of Troy, to the king of Eno with much
treasure; but, after the destruction of Troy,
the king, as much through fear of the Greeks
as the wish to possess this treasure, put the
young prince to death.

At Eno, 1 crossed the Mariza in a large
vessel, and came to Macri, another maritime
town to the westward of the first, and inhabited
by Turks and Greeks, It is near to the island
of Samandra •f, which belongs to the lord

• £ro. f Q. Samothraly

Digitized by <^.ooQle

239

of Eno, and seems to hâve been fofmerly
considérable : at présent, the whole of it is in
ruins, excepting a part of the castle.

' Caumissin, whether we came next, after
having traversed a mountain, has good wâlis,
which make it sufficiently strong, although it
is small. It is situated on a brook, in a fine
flat çountry, inclosed by mountains to the
westward; and this plain extends, for five or
six days joûrney, to Lessère.

Missy was equally strong, and well
fortified ; but part of its walls are thrown
down, and every thing within is destroyed :
it is uninhabited.

Peritoq, an ancient town, and formerly
considérable, is seated on a gulph which runs
inland about forty miles, beginning at Monte
Santo, where are such numbers of monks.
Greeks are the inhabitants, and it is defended
by good walls, which hâve, however, many
ibreaches in them. Thence to Lessère, the
road leads over an extensive plain. It was

Digitized by kjOOQle

240

near Lessère, they say, that the grand battle
of Pharsalia was fought.

We did not proceed to this last town;
for hearing the Turk was on the road, we
waited for him at Yamgbatsar, a village
constructed by his subjects. When he travels,
his escort consists of four or five hundred horse ;
but as he is passionately fond of hawking, the
greater part of this troop was composed of
falconers and goshawk-trainers, a people that
are great favourites with him ; and it is said,
that he keeps more than two thousand of
them. Having this passion, he travels very
short days journies, which are to him more an
object of amusement and pleasure.

He entered Yamgbatsar in a shower of
rain, having only fifty horsemen attending
him and a dozen archers, his slaves, walking
on foot before him. His dress was*a robe of
crimson velvet, lined with sable, and on his
head he wore, like the Turks, a red hat: to
save himself from the rain, he had thrown

Digitized by <^.ooQle

241

oVer thîs robe another, in the mariner of a
mantle, after the fashion of the. country.

He was encamped in a pavilion which
had been brought with him; for lodgings are
nowhere to be met with, nor any provision,
except in the large towns, so that travellers
are obliged to carry ail things with them.
He had numbers of camels and other beasts
of burden.

In the afternoon he came out of his
pavilion to go to the bath, and I saw him at
my ease. He was on horseback, with the
same hat and crimson robe, attended by six
persons on fbot.. I heard him speak to his
attendants, and -he seemed to hâve a deep
toned voice, He is about twenty-eight or
thifty years old, and is already very fat.

The ambassador sent one of his attendants
to ask him, if he could hâve an audience, and
présent him the gifts he had brought. He
triade answer, that being now occupied with
his pleasures, he would not listen to any

i i

*

V

Digitized by

Google

matters of business ; that, besides, lois bashaws
were absent; that the ambassador must wait
for them, or return to Adrianoplc.

Sir Benedict accepted the latter proposai,
and, consequently, we retumed to Gaumissin,
whence having repassed the mountain I hâve
spoken of, we entered a road formed betweca
two high rocks, and through them flows a rives:,
A strong castle, called Goloung, had been
built on one of these rocks, for its defence,
but it is now in ruins. The mountain is partiy
covered with wood, and is inhabited by a
wicked race of assassins. .

At length we arrived at Trajanopoly, a
town built by the emperor Trajan, who did
many things worthy of record. He was the
son of the founder of Adrianople; and the
Saracens say, that he had an ear like to that of
a sheep *. This town was very large, near to

♦ Trajanopoly was not io called from having been
built by Trajan, but because he died there. It existed before
his time, and was named Sdinunte.

Digitized by G.ooQLe

243

the sea and die Mariza ; but now nothing
is seen but ruins, with a few inhabitants*
A mountain rises to the east of it, and the sea
lies cm the south. One of its baths bears the
name of Holy Water.

Further on is Vyra, an ancient castle,
demolished in many places. A Greek told
me the church had three hundred canons
attached to it. The choir is still remaining,
but the Turks hâve converted it into a mosque.
They hâve also surrounded the çastle with a
considérable town, inhabited by them and
Greeks. It is seated on a mountain, near the
Mariza.

On leaving Vyra, we met the lieutenant
of Gréeee, whom the Turk had sent for, and

Adrian was ûot the father of Trajan, but his adopted
$pn, and» in this right, becamc his successor.

Adrianoplo was not founded by Adrian. An
carthquake had ruîned k, and he ordered it to be rebuilt, and
gave it his name. Such errors are excusable in an author of
the fifteenth century. As for the sheep’s çar, he speaks of k
as a saracenic üble.

Digitized by ^ooQle

244

he was on his road to him with a troop of
onc hundred and twenty horse. He is a
handsome man, a native of Bulgaria, and
had been the slave of his master; but as he
has the talent of drinking hard, the prince
gave him the government of Greece, with a
revenue of fifty thousand ducats.

Demetica, on my return, appeared much
Jarger and handsomer than I thought it the
first time ; and if it be true that the Turk has
there deposited his treasure, he is certainly in
the right to do so.

We were forced to wait eleven days in
Adrianople. At length he arrived, on the
first day of Lent. The mufti, who is with.
them what the pope is to. us, went out to meet
him, accompanied by the principal persons of
the town, who formed a long procession. He
was already near the town when they met hirn,
but had halted to take some refreshment, and
had sent forward part of his attendants. He did
ppt makç his entry until njght-fall,

Digitized by kjOOQle

245

During my stay at Adriànople, I had
the opportunity of making acquaintance with
several persons who had resided at his court,
and consequently knew him well, and who
told me many particulars about him. In the
first place, as I hâve seen him ffequeritly,
I shall say that he is a little, short, thick man,
with the physiognomy of a Tartar. He has
a broad and brown face, high cheek bones,
a round beard, a great and crooked nose,
with little eyes; but they say he is kind, good,
generous, and willingly gives away lands and
money,

His revenues are two millions and a half
of ducats, including twenty-five thousand
received as tribute-money *. Besides, whçn
he raises an army, it not only costs him
nothing, but he gains by it; for the troops

* There must bc herc an error of die copyist, for
25,000 ducats as tribut? is too small a sum. We shall see,
further on, that the despo( of Seryia paid annually 50,000
for feiinself alope,

Digitized by

Google

that are brought hîm from Turkey in Europe,
pay at Gallipoli, the comarch, which is three
aspers for each man, and five for each horse.
It is the same at the passage of the Danube.
“Whenever his soldiers go on an expédition,
and make a capture of slaves, he has the
right of choosing one out of every five. He
is nevertheless thought not to love war, and
this seems to me well founded. He has, in fact,
hitherto met with such trifling résistance from
Christendom that, were he to employ ail his
power and wealth on this object, it would be
easy for him to conquer great part of it*. His

* The sultan mentîoned here under the itame of
Amourat Bey, is Amurath II. one of die most celebratcd of
die ottoman princes. History records many of his victories,
which are indeçd for the most part poscerior to the account of
our traveUer. If he did not conquer more, it was owing to
having Huniade or Scanderbeg oppused to him. But his glory
was eclipsed by that of his son, the famous Mohammed II.
die ténor of Christiane* and sumamed by bis countrymen
4 the great,* who twenty yea^s after this period, in 1453,
took Constantinople, and desçoyed whgt Htde rçmained of
the greek empire*

Digitized by G.ooQLe

247

favourite pleasures are huntmg and hawking i
and he has, as thêy say, upwards of a thousand
hounds, and two thousand trained hawks of
different sorts, of which I hâve seen very
raany.

He loves liquor, and those who drink
hard : as for himself, he can easily quaff off
from feu to twelve gondils of wine, which
amount to six or seven quarts *. When he
has drunk much, he bec ornes 'generous, and
distributes ‘bis great gifts : his attendants,
therefore, are vfery happy when. they hear him
cali for wine. Last year, a Moor took it into
his head to preach to him cm this subject,
admonishing him that wine was forbidden by
the prophet, and that those who drank it
werc not good Saracens. The only answer
the prince gave was to order him to prison :

* The quarte , so caüed from being the fourth part of
the chenet, which contained four pots and one french pint.
The pot held two pints, consequently the quarte made two
botdes more than half a septier ; and twelve gondils made
twenty-three bottles.

Digitized by ^ooQle

248

he thenbanished him his territories, with orders
never again to set his foot on them.

He unités, to his love for women, a taste
for boys, and has three- hundred of the former
and about thirty of thë latter, which he prefers,
and when they are grown up he recompenses
them with rich présents and lordships. One
of them he married to a sister of his, with an
annual income of 25,000 ducats.

Some persons estimate his treasure at
half a million of ducats, others at a million.
This is exclusive of his plate,’ his slaves, the
jewels for his women, which last article is
estimated alone at a million of gold. I am
convinced, that if he would for one year
abstain from thus giving away blindly, and
hold his. hand, he would lay by a million of
ducats without wronging any one.

Every now and then he makes great and
remarkable examples of justice, which procures
him perfect obedience at home and abroad.
He likewise knows how to keep his country

Digitized by kjOOQle

249

4ri âh excellent State of defénce, wlthout

i

oppressing his turkish subjects by taxes Of
other modes of extortion.

His hoüsHold is composed of five thousand
persons, as vvell horse as foot; but in war-time
he does not augment their pay, so that he doe$
not expend more than in time of peace, contrary
to what happens in éther nations.

His principal officers are three bashavrs,
or visir bashaws. The visir is a counsellor,—-
tbe bashaw a sort of chief, or lieutenant. These
three hâve the charge of ail that concerns
himself or his houshold, and no one can speak
with him but through them. When he is in
Greece, the lieutenant of Greece has thô
superintendance of the army,—and when in
Turkey, the lieutenant of Turkey.

He has given away great possessions, but
he may résumé them at pfeasure. Besides,
those to whom they hâve been given, are
bound to serve him in waf, with a certain
number of troops, at their ovyn expense.

X K

Digitized by kjOOQle

'»

250

It is thus that Greece annually supplies
him with thirty thousand men, whom he may
lead whither he pleases,—and Turkey ten
thousand, for whom he only fonds provisions.
Should he want a more considérable army,
Greece alone, as they tell me, can then furnish
him with one hundred and twenty thousand
more ; but he is obliged to pay for these. The
pay is five aspers for the infantry, and eight for
the cavalry.

I hâve, however, heard, that of these
hundred and twenty thousand, there was but
half, that is to say, the cavalry, that were
properly equipped, and well armed with
tarquais and sword : the rest were comppsed
of men on foot miserably accoutredj—some
having swords without bows, others without
swords, bows, or any arms whatever, many
having only staves. It is the same with the
infantry supplied by Turkey, one half armed
with staves. Thisturkish infantry is nevertheless
more esteemed than the greek, and considered
as better soldiers.

Digitized by vjO' Qle

251

Other persons, whose testimony I regard
as authentic, hâve since told me, that the troops
Turkey is obliged to fumish, when the prince
wants ta form an army, amount to thirty
thousand men,and those from Greece totwenty,
without including two or three thousand slaves
of his own, whom he arms well.

Among these slaves are many Christians;
«and there are likewise numbers of them among
the troops from Greece, Albanians, Bulgarians,
and from other countries. In the last army
from Greece, there were three thousand servian
horse, which the despot of the province had
sent under the command of one of his sons,
ft was with great regret that these people came
to serve him, but they dared not refuse.

The bashaws arrived at Adrianople three
days after their lord, bringing with them part
of his people and his baggage. This baggage
consista of about a hundred camels, and two
hundred and fifty mules and sumpter horses,
as the nation does not use waggons.

Digitized by <^.ooQle

Ô52

Sir Benedict was impatient to hâve an
audience, and made inquiries of the bashaws
if he could see the prince : their answer was a
négative. The reason of this refusai was, that
they had been drinking with him, and were
ail intoxicated. They, however, sent on the
morrow to the ambassador to let him know
they were visible, when he instantly waited on
each with his présents; for such is the çustora.
of the çountry, that nq one can speak to them
without bringing something: even the slaves
who guard their gates are not exempted from
it. I accompanied him on this visit.

On the following day, in the afternoon,
he was informed that he might corne to the
palace. He instantly mounted his. horsc to go
thither with his attendants, and I joined the
company ; but we were ail on foot, he alone
being on horseback.

In front of the court, we found a great
number of men and horses. The gâte was
guardçd by about thirty slaves, undçr the

Digitized by kjooole

253

command of a chief, armed with staves.
Should any person offer to enter without
permission, they bid him retire : if he persist,
they drive him away with their staves.

What we call the court of the king, the
Turks call * porte du seigneur.’ Every time
the prince receives a message or an embassy,
which happens almost daily, * il fait porte.*
‘ Faire jx>rte,’ is for him the same as when
our kings of. France hold royal State and
open court, although there is much différence
between the two ceremonies, as I shall presently
show.

When the ambassador had entered, they
made him sit down near the gâte, with maiiy
other persons who were waiting for the prince
to quit his apartment and hold his court. The
three bashaws first entered, with the governor
of Greece and others of the great lords. His
chamber looked into a very large court: the
. governor went thither to wait for him.—At
iength he appeared. His dress was, as usual,

Digitized by <^.ooQle

254

a crimson satin robe, over which he had, by
way of mande, another of green figured satin,
lined with sable. His young boys accompanied
him, but no further than to the entrance of the
apartment, when tbey returned. There was
nobody with him but a small dwarf, and two
young persons who acted the part of fools*.

He walked across an angle of the court to
a gallery, where a seat had been prepared for
him. It was a kind of couch. covered with
velvet, wkh four or five steps to mount to it.

i

He seated himself on it, like to our taylors
when they are going to work, and the three
bashaws took their places a little way from him.
The other officers, who on these days make
part of the attendants, likewise entered the
gallery, and posted themselves along the walls
as far from him as they could. Without,

* Having fools was a very ancien* Custom at the
eastem courts. It had been introduced by the croisaders to
the courts of Christian princes, and was continued at that of
France untii the rcign of Louis XIV.

Digitized by ^ooQle

2 55

“but fronting him, were twenty wâllachian ✓
gentlemen seated, who had been detained by
him as hostages for the good conduct of their
countrymen. Within this apartment werô
placed about a hundred dishes of tin, eacix
containing a piece of mutton and rice.

When ail were placed, a lord from Bosniâ
was introduced, who pretended that the crown
of that country belonged to him, and came in
conséquence to do homage for it to the Turlc,
and ask succour from him against the présent
king. He was conducted to a seat near the
bashaws; and when his attendants had made
their appearance, the ambassador from Milan
was sent for.

He advanced, followed by his présents,
which were set down near the tin dishes.
Persons appointed to receive them raised them
above their heads, as high as they could r that
the prince and his court might see them.
While this was passing, sir Benedict walked

Digitized by kjOOQle

S56

slowly toward the gallery. A persôn of
distinction came to introduce him.

On entering, he made a reverence without
taking off the bonnet from his head, and when
near the steps of the couch he made another
very low one„ The prince then rose, descended
two Steps to corne nearer to the ambassador,
and took him by the hand. The ambassador
wished to kiss his hand, but he refused it ; and
by means of a jew interpréter, who understood
. the turkish and italian languages, asked how
his good brother and neighbour the duke of
Milan was in health. The ambassador having
replied to this question, he was conducted to a
seat near the Bosnian, but walking bhckwards,
with his face toward the prince, àccording to
the custom of the country.

The prince waited to reseat himself, until
the ambassador had sitten down : then the
different officers on duty who were in the
apartment sat down on the floor,—and the

Digitized by

Google

25 T

I

persort Whô had introduced thé anibassado?
went to seek for us his attendants, and pkced
us near the Bosnians.

In the mean time, a silken üapkin was
attached to the prince, and a round pièce
of thin red leather was placed before him, for
their usage is to eat only frodi tâble-coverings
o^ leather, then some dressed méat was broüght
to him in two gilded dishes. When he was
served, his officers went and took the tin
dishes I hâve spoken of, and distributed them
to the persons in the hall, one dish among
four. There was in each a piece of.mutton,
and some clear rice, but neither bread nor any
thing to drink. I saw, however, in a comer
of the court a high buffet with shelves, wbich
had some little plate on them, and at the foot
was a large silver vase, in the shape of a drinking
cup, which I perceived many to drink out of,
but whether water or wine 1 know not.

With regard to the méat on the dishes,
some tasted of it, others not; but before ail

l h

Digitized by ^ooQle

258

were served, it waS necessary to takc away, for
the prince had not been inclined to eat. He
never takes any thing in public, and there are
yery few persons who can boast of having
heard bim speak, oi* of having seen him eat
or drink.

On his going away,* the musicians, who
were placed in the court near the buffet, began
to play. They played on instruments, and.
süng songs that celebrated the heroic actions
of turkish warriors. When those in the gallery.
heard any thing that pleàsçd them, they shouted,
after their manner, most horrid cries. Being
ignorant on what they were playing, I went
into the court, apd saw they. wçre stringed
instruments, and of a large size.

The musicians entered.the apartment,
and èat whatever they could find. At length
the méat was taken away when every one ros©
up, and the ambassador retired without having
said a word respecting his embassy, whichis
never customary at a first audience.

Digitized by kjOOQle

259

' There is also anôther cùstom, that when
an ambassador has been pVesented to the prince^
this latter, until he shall hâve given him his
answer, sends him wherewith to pay his daily
expenses, and thé sum is two hundred aspevs.
On the morrow, therefore, ©ne of the officers
of the treasury, the samé who had conducted
sir Benedict to the court, jcame to him with
the above sum. Sbortly after, the slaves who
guarded the gâté came for what is usually
given them : they are, however, satïsfied with
a little.

On the third day, the bashaws let the
ambassador know, they were ready to iearri
from him the subject of his embassy. He
immediately went to thè court, and I
accompànied him ; but thé prince hâd closed
his audience, and was just retired,- and onlÿ
the three bashaws, with the Beguelar or
govemor of Greece ,were now remaining,
When we had passed the gâte, we found these
fourseated on a piece of wood that happened

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

960

%0 be withoutside pf the gallery. They sent to
Oesire the ambassadeur would corne fprward,
and had a carpet placed on thç ground
before them, on which they made him seat
himself, like to a criminal before his judge,
notwithstanding *tjiere were présent great
numbers pf people.

Ha explained to them >the object of bis
mission, whiçhwas, as I heard, to entreatthçir
lord, on the part of thedukeof Milan, to consent
to yield up t° thç roman çmperor Sigismond,
Hungary, Wallachia, Bulgaria as far as Sophia,
Bosnia,andthe part of Albania he now possessed
which was dépendant on Sclavonia.' They
replied, they could not at that moment inform
the prince of hi$ request, as he was occupied ;
but that within ten days he sbould hâve his
ànswer, if they shonld then hâve received it
from him. There is likewisé another custom j
that from the time when an ambassador is
annpunççd as such, he can nevef speak with
|hç prince pçrspnally, This régulation was

Digitized by ^ooQle

261

made since the grandfather of die présent prince
was murdered by an ambassador. from Servia.
That envoy had corne to solicit from him some
aUeviation in favour of his countrymen, whom
the prince wanted to reduce to slavery. In
despair at not obtaining his object, he stabbed
him, and was himself massacred the ‘instant
after *.

# The grandfather of Amurath IL was Bajâzet I.
who died prisoner to Tamerlane, whether treated with kindness,
by the conqueror, as some authors prétend, or çonfined in an
iron cage, according to others. This story of the Servian
cannot therefore regard him. But we find in the life of
Amurath I. father- to Bajazet, and, consequendy, gneat
grandfather to Amurath IL a circumstance that may havebcen
the foundation for this story of the assassination.

This priqce had just gained a complété victory over the
despot of Servia, in which he was made prisoner, and was
passing over the ûeld of batde near to a servian soldier,
mortallv wounded, who, knowing him, exerted his remaining
strength and poinarded him.

According to others, the despot, named Lazarus, or
EJeazer Bulcowitz, finding himself attacked by Amurath, with
spi irrésistible army, and seeing no other chance of opposing
hiqa but by treason, gains over *one of the great lords of hi$
çourt, who, feigning discontent, passer çver to the party of'

Digitized by

Google

262

On the tentih day, we went to the court
to receive die answer. The prince was there,
as at the fîrst time, seated' on his couch; but
he had with him in 'thé gallery only those that
served his table. Isaw neither buffet, minstrels,
nor the lord of Bosnia, nor the Wallachians,
but only Magnoly, brother ta the duke of
Cephalonia, whose manners to the prince were
those of a re.spectful servant. Even the bashaws
were without, and standing at a distance, as
well as the greafer part of the persons whom
I had before seen in the interior, but their
number was much lessened.

the sultan, and assassinâtes him. (Du Cange Familiæ* Bisant.
p. 334.) •

According to another acCount, Amurath was slain
in the combat; and Lazarus, being made prisoner by the
Turks, "was hewed k> pièces on the bleedirtg corpse of their
master. -

It seems, from, the récital of la Brocquière, that the
account of the assassination by the Serviar», is the true one.
Tnis at leàst appears probable, from the précautions taken at
the Ottoman Porte a'gainst foreign ambassadors ; for at this
day, when they are introducdd to the sultan, they are heltTby
the sleeve of their coats.

Digitized by

C ogle

«63

Buring the time we were made to wait
without, the chief cadi, with his assessors,
administered justice at the outward gâte of the
palace* when I saw some foreign Christians
corne to plead their cause before him: but
when the prince rose up,. the judges ended
their sittings and retired to their homçs. '

I saw the prince pass with his attendants
to. the great court, which I was unable to do
the first time. He wore a robe of cloth of gold
and green, somewhat rich, and lie seemed to me
to hâve a hasty step.

When he had re-entered his apartments,

the bashaws, seated as on the preceding day on

the piece of wood, sent for the ambassador.

Their ■answer was, that their master charged

him to salute, in his name, his brother the

duke of Milan ; that he was very desirous of

• • *

doing much for him, but that his présent
request was unreasonable ; that from regard
to him their prince had frequently abstained
from pùshing his conquests further in Hungary,

zed by kjooole

which bc might easily hâve done, and such a

sacrifice ought to satisfy him; that it would

%

be too hard for him to surrender ail he had
won by the sword ; and that in the présent
circumstances, he and his soldiers had no
other theatre to occupy their courage’ besides
the territories of the emperor, and that he
should be the more unwilling to renoünce
them, because hitherto he had never met the
emperot’s forces without beating them, or
putting them to flight, as was well known to
ail the world.

The ambassador, jn fact, knew this
personally, for in the last defeat of Sigismond.
before Çouloubath, he had witnassed his
disaster: he had even, the night precedkig the
batde, quitted his camp, to wait on the Turk.
In our conversations, he told me many
particulars on this subject. I saw also two
genoese cross-bowmen, who related to me
how the emperor and his army had re-passed
the Danube in his gallies.

Digitized by kjOOQle

2 65

The ambassador having received his
answer from the bashaws, returned to his
lodgings ; but he was scarcely arrived, when
he received, on the part of the sultan, five
thousand aspers, with a robe of crimson
camocas lined with yellow calimanco.

Thirty-six aspers are worth a venetian
ducat; but of the five thousand aspers, the
treasurer deducted ten per cent, as fees of
©fiice.

I saw also, during my stay at Adrianople,
a présent of another sort, made likewise by the
sultan to a bride on her wedding day. This
bride was daughter to the Begler Bey, governor
of Greece; and the daughter of one of the
bashaws, attended by upwards of thirty other
women, had been charged to ofFer it. Her
dress was of crimson tissue and gold : her
face was covered, according to custom, with
a very rich veil ornamented with diamonds.
The attendant ladies had magnificent veils,
and their dresses were robes of crimson velvet,

M M

/

Digitized by kjOOQle

2 66

ând robes of cloth of gold without fur. They
were ail on horseback, riding astride like men,
and some of them had superb saddles.

In front of the procession marched thirteen
or fourteen horsemen, and two minstrels also on
horseback, as well as other musicians carrying
a trumpet, a very large drum, and about eight
pairs of tymbals, which altogether made a most
abominable noise. After the musicians came
the présent, and then the ladies. This présent
consisted of seventy broad platters of tin loaded
with diffèrent sorts of sweetmeats, wet and dry,
and of twenty other platters having on them
sheep skinned, painted red and white, and ail
had a silver ring suspended firom the nose,
and two others in the ears.

I had an opportunity of seeing, while at
Adrianople, numbers of Christians chained
who were brought thither for sale. They
begged for alms in the Street ; but my heart
bleeds when 1 think on the shocking hardships
they suffèr.

Digitized by <^.ooQle

207

We left that town on the 12th of Mar ch,
under the escort of a slave whotn the sultan had
ordered to accompany the ambassador. This
man was of great utilky to us on the road,
more especialiy in regard to lodgings,—for
wherever he demanded any thing for us, it was
eagerly and instantly granted,

Our first day’s jouraey was through a
beautiful country, ascending the Mariza,
which we crossed at a ferry : the second,
though the roads were good, was employed in
passing through woods. At length, we entered
Macedonia, between two mountains opening
to an extensive plain, whiçh may be forty miles
wide, and is watered by the Mariza. I there
met fifteen men and ten women çhained by the
neck, inhahitants of Bosnia, whom the Turks
had just carried off in an excursion which they
had made thither. Two Turks were leading
them for sale to Adrianople.

Shortly after, we arrived at Philopoppolj,
the captai of Macedonia, and built by king

Digitized by

Google

268

Philip. ït is situated in a plain on the Mariza,
in an excellent country where ail sorts of
provision are sold very cheap, It was formerly
a considérable town, and indeed is so now.
Within it are three mountains, two of which
are at one of its extremities toward the
southward, and the other in the centre. On
this last had been constructed a large castle,
in the form of a crescent, now destroyed.
I was shown the situation of king Philip’s
palace, which has been demolished, but the
walls still remain. Philipoppoli is inhabited
chiefly by Bulgarians, who follow the greek
ritual.

I crossed the Mariza by a bridge, on
leaving Philipoppoli, and rode a whole day
over the plain I mentioned : it terminâtes at a
mountain sixteen or twenty miles in length,
çovered with wood. This place was in former
times infested by robbers, and very dangerous
to pass. The Turk has ordered, that whoever
inhabits these parts shall be free ; in conséquence^

Digitized by

Google

269

tvvo villages hâve been erected and inhabited by
Bulgarians, in one of which, situated on the
confines of Bulgaria and Macedonia, I passed
the night.

Having crossed the mountain, we came to
a plain six miles long by two broad,—then to
a forest sixteen miles in length,—then to another
great plain wholly shut in by mountains, well
peopled with Bulgarians, and having a river
running through it.

After three days joumey, I came at last to
a town named Sophia, which had been very
considérable, as may be judged from the
ruins of its walls, now thrown down; but
it is at présent the best in Bulgaria. It has
a small castle, and is situated near a mountain
on the southward, and at the beginning of a
great plain sixty miles long by ten wide. The
inhabitants are chiefly Bulgarians, as in the
adjacent villages. The Turks are few in
number, which causes the others to feel the

Digitized by <^.ooQle

270

greâtcst désire to throw off thcir yoke, if they
could find any to assist thom. v

I saw some Turks return from an excursion
to Hungary,—and a Genoese, named Nicolas
Ciba, told me he had also seen those who had
crossed the Danube return, and that there was
not one in ten that had both bow and sword :
for my part, of those I saw, there were many
more that had neither bow nor sword than
those who were armed with both. The beat
equipped had a small wooden target. In
truth, we must confess that it is a greafc
shame for Christepdom to suffer iîself to be
subjugated by such a race, for they are much
below what is thought of them.

On quitting Sophia, I traversed fifty miles
of thé plain I spoke of, The country is well
inhabited by Bulgarians of the greek religion,
I then passed through a mountairtous country,
tolerably good for travelling on horseback, and
çapie to a Uttle town in a plain on the Nissave,

Digitized by

Google

271

called Pirotte. It is uninclosed, but has a small
castle, defended on one side by the river, on the
other by a marsh : to the north is a mountain.
It is inhabited by Turks only.

Beyond Pirotte, the country is again
mountainous, when, after a circuit, we came
again to die Nissave, which runs through a
beautiful valley betwçen two tolerably high
hills. At the foot of one of them was the
town of Ysvouriere, now totally destroyed,
even to the walls. We followed the banks of
the river through die valley, and came to
another mountain, difficult to pass, although
cars and carts do go over it. We then arrived
at an agreeable valley, still watered by the
Nissave, which having crossed by a bridge,
we entered Nissa.

This town had a handsome castle that
belonged to the despot of Servia. The Turk
took it, five years ago, by storm, and entirely
destroyed it. The situation is in a delightful
country, abounding in rice. I continued to

Digitized by ^ooole

272

follow the river from Nissa, through a country,
equally pleasant, and well filled with villages.
I at last crossed it at a ferry, and saw it no
more. The mountains now commenced, and
I had a long miry forest to pass, and, after ten
days joumey from Adrianople, arrived at
Corsebech *, a small town situated a mile
distant from the Morava.

The Morava is a large river that runs
from Bosnia, and divides Bulgaria from la
Rascia or Servia, a province which indifferently
bears these two names, and which the Turk
conquered six years ago. Corsebech had a
small castle, now demolished: it has still a
double wall, but the upper parts, as far as the
battlements, hâve been thrown down.

I found there Cénasnin Bey, captain or
commandant of this vast frontier country,
that extends from Wallachia as far as Sclavonia.
He résides part of the year in this town ; and

* Q. Kruzccvaz, or Alagia Hisar.

Digitized by ^ooQle

273

they told me he vvas originally a Greek, who did
not drink wine like'other Turks; that he was
prudent and brave, and knew how to fnake
himself feared and obeyed. The Turk has
intrusted him with the government of this
country, of which he possesses the greater part
as his own property. He sufFers no one to
cross the river, unless they be known to him,
of unless they be bearers of letters from his
master, or, in his absence, from the govemor
of Greece.

We saW there a beautiful woman, one of

4 9

w/

the hungarian nobility, whose situation inspifed
us with pity. An hungarian renegado, one of
the lowest rank, had carried her ofF in an
excursion, and treated her as his wife. On
seeing us, she melted into tears, for she had
not as yet renounced her religion.

On leaving Corsebech, we crossed the
Morava by a ferry, and entered the territory of
the despot of Servia, a fine and well-peopled
country* Ail on this side the river belongs to

N N

Digitized by kjOOQle

27 é

him,—the district on the other to theTurk;
but the despot pays him an annual tribute of
fifty thousand ducats. He possesses also, on
this river, toward the common boundaries of
Bulgaria, Sclavonia, Albania and Bosnia, a
town called Nyeuberge, whiçh. has a . mine
producing gold and silver at. the same rime,
Each year it pays him more than two hundred.
thousand ducats, as. well informed; peopl©
assuredme: without this, he would be.spon
driven out of his dominions.

I passed on my road near to the castle of
Escalache, that belongs to him. It has been a
strong place, on the point of a hill, at the foot
of which the Nissave forms a junction.with
the Morava. Part of the walls, with a tower
in the form of a dungeon, are ail that remain.

At the mouth of these two rivers, the
Turk usually keeps from eighty to a hundred
gallies, galliots and rafts, to conyey over his.
cavalry and army in time of war. I could not
$ee them, as no Christian is allpwed.to approach

Digitized by ^ooQle

275

them ; but a man, worthy of belief, informed
me there was a body of three hundred men
always posted there to guard them, and that
they ate relieved every two months. _

The distance from Escalache to thé
Danube is one hundred miles: nevertheless,
in ail this distance, there does not subsist any
fort, or place of defence, but a village, and a
house etected by Cénasnin-Bey on the declivity
of a mountain, with a mosque.

I followed the course of the Morava, and
with the exception of a very miry pass, that
continues about a mile, caused by a mountain
pressing too close on the river, I had a good
road through a pleasant well-peopled çountry.
It was not the same the second day, for I had
mountains, wood, and much mud to travel
throügh. The country, notwithstanding, was
as fine as a mountaihous country càn be. It is
full of villages, and ail your wants may bç
fhere suppliéd.

Digitized by t^.ooQLe

From the time we had entered Macedonia,
Bulgaria and Servia, I found on our passage
that the Turk every where caused pr< clamation
to be made, that whoever was bound to join
the army should hold himself in readiness to
march. They told us, that those who, in
obedience to this duty, fed a horse, were
exempted from the tax of the comarch ; that
such Christians as were desirous of being
excused from serving pay fifty aspers a-head j
pnd that sqme are forced to join the army, but
only when it requircs reinforcements.

I learnt also at the court of the despot^
that the Turk has dividedl the guard and
defence of these frontier provinces among
three captains; one, called Dysem Bey, has
the district from the confines of Wallachia tq
the Black Sea ; Cénasnin-Bey cpmmands fronts
Wallachia to the borders of Bosnia ; and Isaaq
Bey from these frontiers as far as Sclavonia,
^hat is to say, ail beyond the Morava.

Digitized by kjOOQle

277

To continue the account of my journey,
I shall say, that I came to a town, or rather a
country-house, called Nicodem. lt is here
the despot has fixed his résidence because the
soil is good, and there are woods and rivers
abounding with every thing needful for the
pleasures of the chace and hawking, of which
he is very fond.

He was out hawking by the river side,
attended by fifty horse, three of his children,
?md a Turk, who had been sent by the sultan
to summon him to send his contingent to the
army, under the escort of one of his sons.
Independently of his tribute, this is one of the
conditions imposed upon him. Every time
the sultan sends him his orders, he is obliged
to furnish him witheight hundred or a thousand
horse, under the command of his second son.

He gave the sultan one of his daughters
in marriage : nevertheless, there passes not a,
day that he does not fear being deprived of his
dominions. 1 hâve even heard say, that some

Digitized by

Google

wished to inspire the sultan with this idea, but
that he had answered, * I draw more from
them now than if they wçre my own ; for in
this case I should be obliged to give them to
one of my slaves, and should not receive any
thing/

The troops he is now raising are said to
be intended against Albania. Ten thousand
hâve already marched thither, which was the
reason he had so few with him when I saw
him at Lessère ; but this first army had been
destroyed *.

The prince of Servia is a tall, handsome
man, from fifty-eight to sixty years old : he
has five children, three boys and two girls.
Of the boys, one is twenty years, another
sixteen, and the third fourteen ; and ait

* It was in fact this same ÿear, \433, that the
renowned Scanderbeg having, by a trick, regained possession
of Albania, of which his ancestors were the sovereigns,
çommenced that sagacious war against Amuratb, which
çovered him with glory, and tamishcd die last years of the
sultan.

Digitized by C.ooQLe

27 »

three, like their father, hâve very agreeablè
countenances. In respect to the girls, One is:
marriedto the sultan, another to the count de 1
Seil; but as Ihave not seenthem, I cannot
describe ttiem*

When we methim hawklog, the ambassadar
and myself took him by the hand, which I
kissed, for. such is the custom. On the
morrow, we went to pay him our respects;
He had a tolerably numerous court, composed
of very, handsome men, who wore the beard'
and hair long, as they areof the greek church.
There were.in the town a bishop and a doctor
in theology, on their road to Constantinople,
sent as ambassadors to the emperor, by the holy
council of Basil f.

* This grince was named George Brancovitz or
Wkovitz. Some account of him and his familv is to be
found in du Cange* (Familiæ Bisant. page 336.)

+ This holy council concluded its sittings by citing to
its tribunal^ and deposing the pope, whilst the pope commanded
it to dissolve itself, and convoked another at Ferrara. At
Florence, he had undcrtaken to form an union of the greek and

Digitized by Cjooole ■

280

1 had cmployed two days in going from
Corsebèch to Nicodem, and from Nicodem to
Belgrade half a day. There is nothing but
forests, mountains and valleys to this town;
but the vallies are crowded with villages, in
which provision and good wines are met with.

Belgrade is in Servia, and did belong to
the despot; but, four years ago, he ceded it to
the king of Hungary, for fear lest he should
suffer it to be taken by the Turk, as he had
done Coulumbach. This was a heavy loss to
Christendom. The other would be still greater,
because the place is stronger, and can contain
from five to six thousand horse *. Its walls

latin churches, and with this design had sent the ambassadors
to the emperor. He came actually to Italy, and signéd at
Florence that political and simulated union before mendoned.

* My readers may perhaps be surpriscd that oui*
author, when he speaks of the garrison of any strong place,
particularizes only cavalry ; and that, when he mendons the
contingent sent by the despot to the turkish army, he spécifiés
but horse. The reason is, that when he wrote, Europe
paid no attention but to cavalry ; and the infantry, badly
armed, formed and equippcd, was not considered of any
conséquence.

Digitized by CjOOQle

àré washed Ôn One side bÿ a làrgé rivet’ that
'cornes from Bosnia, called the Save ; and oii
the ôther it hâs a castléi néar’to which runs
the Danube^ and into this thé Save flows*
The town is built Un the point formed by
thesè two rivers.

Within its walls the ground rises; but on
the land side, it is sô fiat-that any ohe may
lïiarch into the ditch. There is, however, a
village on this side that extends from the Save
to the Danube, and surrounds the town to the
distancé of â bow-shot. This village is irihabited
by Servians, and on Easter-day I heard mass
there in the sclavonic tongue; It is under
obediençe to the church of Rome, and its
ceremonies are nothing different from ours.

The place is strong from its situation, and
by arti, having ditches en glacis, a double wall,
well kept in repair, that follows exactly the rise
and fall of the ground. It has also five forts,
three on the elevated ground I spoke of, and
two On the river, but these last are commanded

o o

Digitized by k^ooQle

282

by the preceding ones. It has likewise a small
harbour that may hold from fifteen to twenty
galljes, dcfcndcd by towers çonstructed at cach
extremity, It is shut up by a çhain from one

tower to the other : at least, so it was told me,

/

for the two shores are so distant I could not
see it.

I saw on the Save six gallies and five
galliots, near to the weakest of the five forts.
In this are many Servians, but they are not
permitted to enter the other forts. The
whole five are wèll furnished with artillery.
I particularly noticed three cannons of brassa
two of them were formed of two pièces, and
one of such a size, I never before saw the like**
Its mouth was forty-two inches in diameter,
but it seemed short for its thickness -f.

* From otnr author thus noticing the brass camion, it
*hould seem they were still rare in his time, and looked on as
wonders. Inouïs XI. had a dozen cast, and gave them the
«âmes of die twelve pcers of Fiance.

f It was then die fashion to make pièces of artillery
of an enormous size» Mohammed II. at the siégé of

Digitized by Le

283

The commandant of the place was sir
Mathicô, an arragonian knight, and he had
for his lieutenant his own brother, styled my
lord brother.

The Turk is in possession of the castle of
Coulumbach, on the Danube, two days journey
below Belgrade. He seized it from the despot,
and it is, as they say, a strong place, but easily
attacked with artillery ; and ail succour may be
eut ofF from it, which is a great disadvantage.
He there keeps a hundred light gallies, having
sixteen or eighteen oars on a side to pass over
to Hungary at his pleasure. The governor of
this place is Cénasnin-Bey, before spoken of,

Constantinople, employed cannon cast on the spot that threw,
as they say, balls of two hundred weight.

Monstrelet speaks of a gun that Louis XI. had cast at
Tours, and carried afterward to Paris, that flung balls of fivc
hundred pounds.

In 17i7, prinçe Eugene, after his victory over thq
Turks, found in Belgrade a cannon twenty-five feet long, that
shot balls of one hundred and ten pounds, whose charge was
fifty-two pounds of powder. It was also then customary to
make the balls of marblc or stone, worked to fit fixe mouths
of différent cannons.

Digitized by VjOOQ

On the Danube, but in Hungary, and
opposite to Belgrade, the despot has a town
and castle that were given him by the emperor*,
vvith several others, that afford him an income
of fifty thousand ducats, on condition of his,
beçoming his liege man, but he pbeys the
Turk more than the emperor.

Two days after my arrivai at Belgrade,
I sa\v twcnty-five mçn, armed after the manner
of the country, enter the town, whom count
Mathico the govemor had sent for to remain
in garrison. Tbey told me they were
Çermans, although they had Servians and
Hungarians so near at hand ; but they sa^d,
the Servians were subjects and tributaries to
the Turk: of course, they çould not trust
them,—and as for the Hungarians, they were
so much afraid of him, that should he appear,
they would not dare to defend it, however great
its strength. They were obliged, therefore, to,

# Sigkmoqd king of Bohemia and Hungary. It ia
•rctcnded that Sigismond gave them in exçhange for Belgrade,

Digitized by ^ooQle

285

eall in strangcrs; and this measure became the ’
more necessary from its being the only place
in the possession of the emperor to enable him
to pass and repass the Panube, in case of need.

This conversation greatly astonished me,
and caused me to make some réfactions on
the strange subjection in which the Turk
keeps Macedonia, Bùlgaria, the emperor of
Constantinople, the Greeks, the despût of
Servià and his subjects. Such a dépendance
appeared to me a lamentable thing for
Clirjstendom ; and, as I iived with the Turks,
and became acquainted with their manner of
living and fighting, and hâve frequented the
company of sensible persons who hâve observed
them narrowly in their great enterprizes, I am
çmboldened to write something concerning
them, according to the best of my abilities,
under correction, however, from those better
informed, and to show how it may be possible
tp re-conquer the territories they havç gained

Digitized by kjOOQle

2S9

possession of, and to beat theni in the field of
battle.

I shall begin with what regards their
persons, andsay,theyareatolerablyhandsome
race, with long beards, but of moderate size
and strength. I know well that it is a
common expression to say, as strong as a
Turk,—nevejrtheless I hâve seen an infinity of
Christians, vvhen strength was necessary, excel
them ; and I myself, who am not of the strongest

rnake, hâve, when circumstances required

♦

labour, found very many weaker than me.

They are diligent, willingly rise early, and
live on little, being satisfied with bread badly
baked, rau flesh dried in the sun, milk curdled
©r not, honey, cheese, grapes, fruit, herbs, and
even a handful of flour, with which they make
a potage sufficient to feed six or eight for a day.
Should they hâve a horse or camel sick without
hopes of recovery, they eut its throat and eat it.
I hâve witnessed this many and many a time.

Digitized by kjOOQle

287

They are indiffèrent where they sleep, and lie
on the ground.

Their dress consists of two or three robeé
of cotton, thrown one over the other, which
fall to their feet. Over these again they wear
another of felt, in the manner of a mande,
called a Capinat. This, though light, resists
rain, and there are some very fine and
handsome. Their boots corne up to the
knecs, and they hâve large drawers, some of
crimson velvet, others of silk or fustian and
common stuffs. In war, or when travelling,
to avoid being embarrassed by their robes,
they tuck the ends into their drawers, by
which they can move with greater ffeedoim

Their horses are gôod, cost litde in food,
gallop well and for a long time. They keep
them very poor, never feeding them but at
night, and then only giving them five or six
handfuls of barley and double the quantity of
chopped straw,—-the whole put Into a bag
which hangs from their ears. At break of

Digitized by kjOOQle

day, they bridlc, clean and curry them, but
never' allow them to drink before mid day,—*■
then in the afternoon every time that they find
water, and in the evening when they lodge or
encamp; for they always hait early, and near a
river if possible. This last time they leave them
bridled for an hour like mules, and then, at a
fixed moment, each gives his horse provender.

During the night-time, they cover them
with felt or other stufis, and I hâve seen such
coverings very handsome : they hâve the like
also for their hounds, in which they are curious»
and hâve a good breed ; although with long
hanging ears and tufted tails, which, however*
they carry well.

Ail their horses are geldings : they keep
some others for stallions, but so few, that I
hâve never seen a single one. They saddle
and bridle them * à la genette.* Their saddles
are commonly very rich, but holloWj having
pummels before and behind, with short stirrup
leathers and wide stirrups<

Digitized by <^.ooQle

\Vith regard to their acfcoutrenïents ànd
dresses for wàr, I had twice an opportunity of
seeing themj On the occasions of greek
renegüdoes, who, renouncirtg their own, had
embraced the mohanimedan religion. The
Turks celebrate these evênts with much
festivity. Tbey dress themsfelves in their best
arms, and traverse the town with as numerous
a procession as possible. On these occasions
1 hâve sèen thém wear very handsome coats of
armour like to Ours, èxcept that the links of
the mai! weré siïialler : the vambraces were the
same. In one word, they resemble those
pictures that represent figures of the tinte of
Julius Cæsar. Their armour descends almost
half way down the thigh; but a pièce of
silken stufF is attached circularly to the bottom
of it, that fa Ils dbwn to the calf of the leg.

On their head they wear a round white
cap, half a foot high, terminated in a point.
It is ornamented with plates of iron on ail
sides, to ward off from the face, neck and

p p

Digitized by ^ooQle

i290

chëeks, blows of the sword, and arc like the
helmets in France, called Salades*. Beside
this head-piece, they usually wear another
dver it, namely a bonnet of iron wire. There
âre some of these so rich and handsome that
they cost frorn forty to fifty ducats, whereas
the first are bought for one or two: although
not so strong as the others, they resist the eut
of a sword.

I hâve spoken of their saddles, in which
they sit, as in an arm chair, deep sunk in them,
their knees very high, and with short stirrups,
a position in which they cannot support the
smallest blow from a lance withoüt being
unhorsed.

The arms of those who hâve any fortune
are a bow, a tarquais, a sword, a heavy mace
with a short handle, the thick end of which is
eut into many angles. This is a dangerous

* A sort of light casque then in use, which, not having
vizor nor throat piece, had aeed ®f projecting plates of iront*
guard the face.

Digitized by Cjooole

weapon, when struck on the shoulders, or
on an unguarded arm. I am convinced that
a blow given with it on a head armed with
a salade would stun a man.

Several hâve small wooden bucklers, with
which they cover themselves well on horseback
when they draw the bow. ï hâve been assured
of this by those who hâve long used them, as
well as from having seen it myself.

Their obédience to superiors is boundless.
None dare disobey, even when their lives are at
hasard ; and it is chiefly owing to this steady
submission that such great exploits hâve been
performed, and such vast conquests gained, as
rénder them masters of a more extensive and
considérable country than ail France.

I hâve been assured, that whenever the
Christian powers hâve taken up arms against
them, they hâve always had timely information
of it. In this case, the sultan has their march
watched by men assigned to this purpose, and
he lays wait for them with his army two or

Digitized by tjooole

three days march from the spot where he
proposes to fight them. Should he think the
opportunity favourable, he falls suddenly on
them; and for these occasions they hâve a
particular kind of march, beaten on a large
drum. When this signal is given, those who
are to lead march quietly ofF, followed by the
others with the same silence, without the file
ever being interrupted, from the horses and
men being trained to this purpose. Ten
thousand Turks, on such an occasion, will
make less noise than one hundred men in the
Christian armies. In their ordinary marches,
they only walk, but in these they always gallop ;
and as they are beside lightly armed, they will
thus advance further from evening to day-break
than in three other days,—and this is the reason
why they cannot wear such complété armour
as the French and Italians. They cboose also
no horses but such as walk fast, and gallop
for a long time, while we select pnly those
that trot well and with ease.

Digitized by tjOOQle

&9S

It is by these forcèd marches that they
hâve succeeded in surprising and completely
defeating the Christians in their different
\vars. It is thus they çonquered duke John,
whose soûl may God pardon * ! and again
the emperor Sigismond so recently before
Coulumbach, where sir Advis, a polish knight,
perished.

Their manner of fighting varies according
to circumstances. When they find a favourable
opportunity for it, they divide .themsçlves into

* John count of Nevcrs, sirnamed sans peur , and son
to Philippe le hardi, duke of Burgundy. Sigismond having
formed a league, to check the çonquests of Bajazet, Charles VI.
sent him a body of troops, in which were two thousand
gentlemen, under the command of tbe count of Nevers.
The Christian anny was defeated at Nicopolis in 13^6, and
the French slain or made prisoners. See fuither particulars in
the fourth volume of Froissait.

When Jean sucçeeded hi$ father, as duke of Burgundy,
he caused the duke of Orléans, brotber to the king of France,
to be cowardly assassinated. He was murdered in his turn
by Tannegui du Chàtel, an ancient servant of the duke of
Orléans. These facts prove that la Brocquière was in the
right, when speaking of John to pray that God would pardon

Digitized by ^ooQle

diffèrent troops, and thus attack many parts of
an army at once. This mode is particularly
üsed when they are among woods or mountain?»
from the great facility they hâve of uniting
together again.

At other times they form ambuscacks,
and send out scouts weil mounted to observe
the enemy : if their report be, that he is not
on his guard, they instantly form their plan,
and take advantage of the circumstance.
Should they find the army well drawn up,
they curvet round it within bow-shot, and
while thus prancing shoot at the men and
horses, and continue this manœuvre so long
that they at la&t throw it into disorder. If
the army attempt to pursue them, they fly,
and disperse each separately, even should only
a fourth part of their own number be ordered
against them; but it is in their flight that they
are formidable, and it has been almost atways
then that they hâve defeated the Christians.
In flying, they hâve the adroitness to shoot

Digitized by kjOOQle

295

their arrows so very trae that they scarcely
cver foil to hit man of horse.

Each cavalier has also on the pumrael of
his saddle a taholcan. When the chief, or any
of his officers, perceives the enemy who pursues
to be in disorder, he gives three strokes on this
instrument: the others, on hearing it, do the
same, and they are instantly formed round
their chief, like so many hogs round the old
©ne,—and thep, according to circumstances,
they either receive the charge of the assailants,
©r fall on them by troops, and attack them in
different places at the same time.

In pitched battles, they employ another
stratagem,whichconsists in throwingfire-works
among the cavalry to frighten the horses: they
often post in their front a great body of
dromedaries and camels, which are bold and
vicious : these they drive before them on the
enemy’s line of horse, and throw it into
confusion.

Digitized by kjOOQle

2 96

Such are the modes of fighting the Turks
hâve hitherto adopted against the Christians;
I would not most assuredly wrong or depreciate
them ; for I must own that I hâve alwaÿs
found them, in my diffèrent connections, frank
and loyal, and when it was necessary to shew
courage, they hâve never failed to do so :. but
1 am not the less convinced, that it would be
no difScült matter, for troops well mounted
and well commanded, to defeat them ; and,
in regard to myself, I déclaré, that with one
half of their numbers I should never hesitate
to attack them.

Their armies, I know, commonly consist
of two hundred thousand men; but the greater
part are on foot, and destitute, as I before said,
of tarquais, helmets, mallets or sword,—few
indeed being completely armed.

They hâve besides among them a great
number of Christians, who serve through force,
Greeks, Bulgarians, Macedonians, Albanians,

ogie ^

297

Sclavonians, Wallachians, Servions, ahd othèf
subjects of the despots of that countiy.

Ail these people detest theTurki because
Ke holds them in a severe captivity; aüd should
they see the Christians march in forcé against
him, and above ail the French, I hâve not the
smallestdoubt but they would tum against him
and do him gréât tmséhief;

The Turks are not, therefore, so terribly
formidable as I hâve heard say. I own,
however, that it will be necessary* if any
attempt be made against them, to hâve a
general well obeyed by his troops, and who.
would particularly listen to the advice of those
acquainted with their .mode of warfare. This
was the fault, as I am informedj of the emperor
Sigismond, when he was defeated by them at
Coulumbach. Had he attended to the advice
given him, he would not hâve been fbrced to
raise the siégé, since he had from twenty-five
to thirty thousand Hungarians. Did not two
hundred genoese and lombardy cross-bows.

Q Q

Digitized by ^ooQle

alone chcck the enemy, overawe them, and
cover his retreat, while he embarked on board

the gallies that he had on the Danube,—while

/

six thousand Wallachians, under the polish
knight before mentioned, having separated
and posted themselves on a small eminence,
were ail eut to pièces.

I speak nothing here but what I hâve seen
myself, or heard from undoubted authority :
therefore, in case any Christian prince or
general may wish to attempt the conquest of
Turkey in Europe, or even to penetrate
further, I think I am able to give much
information on this subject. I shall, however,
speak according to my abilities ; and should
any thing escape me that may be displeasing
to some of my readers, I beg they will excuse
it, and pass it by, as if I had said nothing.

The monarch who should form such a
project ought at first to propose to himself for
his object, not glory and renown, but God,
religion, and the salvation of so many soûls

Digitized by C.oooLe

299

that are in the road to perdition. He must
be well assured beforehand that the regular
payment of his troops is provided for,—and
that he carries with him none but such as hâve
a fair réputation, with a good will for the
purpose,—and, above ail, that they be not
pillagers. With regard to the payment of
them, I think it should dépend on the holy
father to see that it be regularly made ; but
until the moment when the army enters the
turkish territory, there should be made a strict
law, that no one take any thing without paying
for it. No person likes to see his property
stolen; and I hâve heard, that those whohave
been guilty of such things hâve not found
themselves the better for it. I, however, refer
these things to the prince and the lords of his
council; I shall confine myself to speak of
thè sort of troops I think proper for such aq
attempt, and whom, if I had the choice,
I should like to accompany,

Digitized by ^ OQle

300

ï woüld, in the first place, select from
France men at arms, archers and cross-bows,
in as great numbers as possible, and of
the sort mentioned ahove. Secondly, from
England, a thousand men at arms and ten
thousand archers. Thirdly, from Germany,
the greatest number possible of gentlemen,
with their cross-bowmen on horse and foot.
Çollect together from fifteen to twenty thousand
archers and cross-bows qf theSe three nations,
adding thereto from two to three hundred light
troops ; and I will ask from God the grâce to.
march with them, and engage they shall
advance without difficulty from Belgrade to
Constantinople.

They will require but light armour, as
I hâve before observed that the turkish bow
has no great strength. When near, their.
archers shoot true and quick; but they do not
shoot nearly $o far as we do. Their bows are
thick and short, and their arrows thin and of

Digitized by C.ooQle

SOI

no length : their iron heads are stuck into the
^vood, which cannot bear a great blow nor
make a deep wound, even on an unarmed
place. From this it will be seen, slight arrnour
only is wanted for the troops,—that is to say,
t light grèves for the legs and thighs, thin plate
armour for the body, with helmets having wide
vizor-pieces. A turkish arrovv wùuld perhaps
pierce a light coat of mail, but would be turned
aside by plate-armour, however. thin.

I shall add, that in case of necessity our
archers çan make use of the arrows of the
Turks, bpt that they çannot do the same with
purs, because the notch is not sufficiently wide,
and the strings of thçir bows, being made of
sinews, are too thick.

Acçordjng to my opinion, ©ur cavalry
should be armed with light. sharp-headed
lances, and with strong well-tempered swords.
It may be also advantageous to hâve small
battle-axes 6n the wrist. The infantry should
frave double-headed battle-axçs, and a long and

Digitized by kjOOQle

302

sharp spear, both having their hands defended
with gauntlets. With regard to this last article,

I own I hâve seen some in Germany made of
boiled leather, that I consider as effectuai as
those of iron.

When the army shall corne to an open
plain, where a combat may be fought with
advantage, it should be done, but then the
whole should be formed into one body: the
van and rear guards should be employed on
the wings. The pikemen to be intermixed in
the line, unless it should be preferred to post
them .otherwise to skirmish; but the general
will be careful not thus to post the men at
arms. In front of the line, and on the wings,
the light troops will be scattered; and every.
one must be strictly forbidden, under pain of
deafh, to pursue the ranaways.

It is the policy of the Turks to hâve
their armies twice as numerous as those of
the Christians. This superiority of numbers
augments their courage, and allows them to,

Digitized by ^ooQle

303

form different corps, and to make their attack
on various parts at the same time. Should
theÿ once force an opening, they rush through
in incredible crowds, and it is then a miracle
if ail be not lost.

To prevent this misfortune, the light
troops should be numerously posted on the
angles of the line of battle, and, by this means;
keep it compact, so as not to suffer it to be
broken. This manœuvre seems to me the
more easily to be executed, from these light
troops not being sufficiently armed to form a
column, capable, by its weight, of any great
impulsion. The turkish lances are worth
nothing : their archers are the best troops they
hâve, and these do not shoot so strong nor so
far as ours do.

They hâve a more numerous cavalry;
and their horses, though inferior in strength
to ours, and incapable of bearing such heavy
weights, gallop better, and skirmish for a
longer time vvithout losing their wind. This

Digitized by <^.ooQle

304

is an additionàl reason for the armÿ âlways
keeping in a close and good order.

When this method is constantly followed,
they willbeforced to combat disadvantageously*
and, consequently, to risk every thing, or retreat
before the army. Should this last be the case*
the cavalry must be sent in pursuit, but it must
always march in good order, and be ever ready
to fight,.and receive them well, should they
turn about. With such conduct, it is noway
doubtful but they must alway be defeated ;
and if a contrary one be followed, they will
beat us, as has ever happened.

I may, perhaps, be told, that it would be
disgraceful thus to remain on the défensive
when in presence of the enemy; and that,
living as they do on little, they would starve.
us, unless we quitted our intrenchment to fight
with them.

I shall answer, that it is not customary for
them to remain long in one place; that to-day
they are at this place, to morrow a day and a

Digitized by Google

I

30 3

/

ftâlPs march ofF: they re-appeai* again 33
Suddenly as they disappeared ; and that if an
army be not continually on its guard, it will
run great risks. The important point is, to
be ever on the watch from the moment they
appear in sight, and ready to mount for the
combat.

Should there be any difficult passage on
the line of march, as many men at arms and
archers must be sent thither as the situation
will allow for a combat, and they must be
continually in order of battle until the whole
be passed. No foragers must ever be sent out,
for they would be as so many lost men ; and
besides they would find nothing abroad, for
in war-time the Turks transport every thing
into tovvns. v

With ail these précautions, the conquest
of Türkey in Europe would not be a difficult
enterprise,—provided, I repeat it, that the army
be kept in one body, never divided, and n®

R R

Digitized by

Google

detachments ever sent after thè enemy. Should
I be asked, how I would secure provision?
I answer, that Turkey and Servia hâve
navigable rivers, and Bulgaria, Macedonia
and the greek provinces are fertile.

Thé army advancing always thus in a
mass, the Turks would be forced to retreatî
and they must of necessity choose one of two
extremities, as I hâve before said,—either to
re-cross into Asia, and abandon their properties,
their wives and their children, since the country
is, as may be seen from my description of it,
defenceless,—or risk a battle, as they hâve
always done, when they hâve passed the
Danube.

I conclude, therefore, that with good
troops composed from thfe three nations
I hâve named, French, English and Germans,
succëss would be certain ; and that, if they
were sufficiently numerous, well United and
commanded, they might march to Jérusalem.
But I shall now return to my travels.

Digitized by kjOOQle

307

I crossed the Danube at Belgrade. It vvas
at this moment exceedingly swollen, and may
hâve been twelve miles broad. Never in the
memory of man had such a flood been seen.
Being unable to travel to Buda by the direct
road, I went to a village called Pensey. On
leaving Pensey, I came to the most level plain
I ever saw, and, after being ferried over a river,
arrived at the town of Beurquerel, which
belongs to * the despot of Servia, and where
I crossed two other rivers by a bridge. From
Beurquerel, I came to Verchet, belonging also
to the despot there I crossed the Theis, a
wide and deep river,—and at length I arrived
at Zegedin, situated upon it.

In the whole length of this road, with the
exception of two small woods inclosed by a
rivulet, I did not see a single tree. The natives
use, for firing, straw or reeds, collected from
the banks of rivers, or from their numerous
marshes. They eat, instead of bread, soft
cakes,—but they hâve not muçh food.

Digiti; _ i by <^.ooQle

308

Zegedin is a large country town, of a
single Street that seems about a league in
length. It is in a fertile country, abounding
with ail sorts of provision. Many crânes and
bustards are taken here, and I saw the market
place full of them, but they dress and eat them
in a filtliy manner. The Theis abounds in
fish, and I hâve no whcre seen a river that
produces such large ones.

Many wild horses are brought thither for
sale, and their manner of conquering and
taming them is curious. I hâve been told
that, should any one want three or four
thousand, they could be procured witoin the
town ; and they are so cheap that a very good
road horse may be bought for ten hungarian
florins. The empcror, as 1 heard, had given
Zegedin to a bishop. I saw this bishop, and
be seemed a man of a broad conscience. The
cordelier lriars hâve a handsome church in this
town, w here 1 heard service,but it was performed
^ little after the bungariati mode.

Digitized by kjOOQle

309

From Zegedin I came to Pest, a tolerably
good country town on the Danube, opposite to
Buda. The country, from one town to the
other, was good and level, and full of immense
herds of horses, that live wild on these plains
like savage animais, and hence the numbers
seen at the markets of Zegedin.

I crossed the Danube at Pest, and entered
Buda, seven days after my departure from
Belgrade. Buda is the capital of Hungary,
situated on an eminence, and larger than it is
broad. To the east is the Danube, to the west
a valley, to the south a palace, which commands
the gâte of the town : it was begun by the
présent empcror, and, when he shall hâve
finished it, will be extensive and strong. On
this side, but without the walls, are very
handsome hot baths. There are also others
along the banks of the Danube to the eastward,
but these are not so good as the preceding ones.
—The town is governed by Germans, as well
jn respect to policç as commerce, and what

Digitized by kjOOQle

310

regards the different professions. Many Jews
live tbere who speak French well, several of
them being descendants <?f those driven formerly
from France. I found also there a merchant
from Arras, called Clays Davion : he vvas one
of those whom the emperor Sigismond had
brought from France to establish manufactories
in his country. Clays was a tapestry weaver*.

The environs of Buda are agreeable, and
its territory fertile in ail sorts of provision,
especiaily in white wines,but they are somewhat
fiery, which is attributed to the adjacent hot
springs, and to the sulphur they émit. One
league from the town is the body of St Paul,
the hcrmit, vvhich is in a perfect State of
préservation.

I returned to Pest, where I also found six
or eight french families, whom the emperor

* Sigismond, in his travels to France, had visited thç
jnanufactories, and particularly those of Flanders, at that
time famous for its tapestries. He wished to establish similar
ones in his capital of Hungary, and for this effect had engage^
different workipen to foliow hun.

Digitized by C.ooQLe

311

had sent thither to constrüct on the Danubê,
and opposite to his palace, a large tower.. .His
intentions were, to shut up the river with a
chain extending from it; and I should suppose
he wanted to imitate what had been done frorti
the town of Burgundy that fronts the fort of
L’Ecluse ; but I do not believe it is practicable

here, for the river is too broad. ,1 had the

«•*

curiosity to visit the tower, which is about the
length of three lances high, and round about
were quantifies of hewn stone; but it had
remained some time in this State, because the
masons who had begun the work were dead,
and those that had survived them were said not
tô hâve knowledge enough to continue it.

Pest is inhabited by many horse-dealers ;
and whoever may want two thousand good
horses, they can furnish the quantity. They
sell them by stables full, containing ten horses,
and their price for each stable is two hundred
florins. I looked into several, where two or
three horses alone were worth that price.

Digitized by kjOOQle

312

They corne for the most part from the
mountains of Transylvania, which bound
Hungary to the eastward. I purchased one,
that galloped well, as indeed they almost ali
do. The country is excellent for breeding
them, from the quantity of grass it produces ;
but they hâve the fault of being a little
headstrong, and particularly difficult to shoe,
so that I hâve sometimes seen them obliged to
be cast on the ground to be shod.

The mountains just spoken of contain
mines of gold and sait, each of which pay
annually to the king one hundred hungarian
florins. He had given up that of gold to the
lord of Prussia and to count Mathico, on
condition that the first would guard the
frontier against the Turk, and the second
Belgrade. The queen had reserved to her
own use the revenue from sait.

The sait is beautiful : it is eut out of a
rock like free stone, into pièces of about a foot
long, squared, but a little convex on the upper

Digitized by kjOOQle

313

side. Whoever should see them in a cart Would
take them for stone. It is afterward pounded in
a mortar,and turns out tolerably white,but finer
and better than any I hâve elsewhere tasted.

In my road through Hungary, I hâve
frequently met waggons with six, seven or
eight persons in them, and drawn by only a
single horse; for it is customary with them,
when they make long journies, to use only
one. They universally hâve thehind wheels
higher than the fore wheels. There are some
covered in their country manner, which are
very handsome, and so light that, including
wheels, it seemed that a man could carry one
of them suspended to hi6 neck. As the country
is perfectly smooth and level, there is nothing
to prevent the horse from being always on the
trot. It is from this great evenness of the ground
that when they plough they draw furrows of
an extraordinary length.

Until I came to Pest, I had no servant ;
but there I treated myself with one, and took

s s

Digitized by kjOOQle

314

one of those french masons into my service
whom I found at Pest : he was from Brai sur
Somme.

On my retum to Buda, I accompanied the
milanese ambassador to pay our compliments
to the grand count of Hungary, a title which
answers to that of lieutenant of the emperor.
The grand count received me with much
distinction, because from my dress he took
me for a Turk ; but when he leamt I was
a Christian, he was somewhat colder. I was
told that he was a man whose conversation
was little to be depended on, and that no great
trust must be placed in his promises. This is
somewhat generally the reproach made to the
Hungarians; and for my part, I own, that
after the idea given me of them by my
acquaintance, I should hâve less confidence
in an Hungarian than in a Turk.

The grand count is an old man. It was
he, as I heard, who formerly arrested Sigismond
king of Bohemia and Hungary, and afterward
emperor, and threw him into prison, whence

Digitized by C.ooQLe

315

he afterwards released him by an amicable
agreement.

His son was just married to a beautiful
hungarian lady. I saw him at a tournament
after their manner, when the combatants were
mounted on siiiall horses and low saddles:
they were gallantly dressed, and had strong
and short lances. It was a pleasing spectacle.
Whenever the two champions hit, both perhaps,
but certainly one of them must be unhorsed,—»
and it is then seen who has the firmest seat*.

When they tilt for golden wands, ail the
horses are of the same size, ail the saddles of
the same form,—and they are drawn for by
lot, and the justers are taken by pairs : should
one of two adversaries fall, the victor is obliged
to retire, and is not permitted to tilt again.

* The knights in France were mounted for toumaments
or battle on large strong horses called ‘ Palefrois.* Their
saddles were high piqued before and behind, which afforded
them greater means of resisting the shock of the lance thaï*
the small horses and low saddles of the Hungarians ; and thfs
is the reason our author says, that in the tilts of the Hungarians
ît may be easily seen which knight has the best seat on hi*
horse.

Digitized by kjOOQle

31 6

I had never quitted the company of thç
milanese ambassador until we came to Buda ;
but he had told me on the raad, that we must
there separate, that he might continue his route
to Milan. Soan after my retum to Buda,
I called, in conséquence, on' Clays Davion,
who gave me a letter of recommendation to
a merchant of his acquaintance at Vienna,

As I had fully opened myself to him, not
thinking it right to make a secret of my rank,
my name, or the country I had corne from, or
the honour I had of belonging to my lord duke
of Burgundy, he had inserted ail this in his
letter, and I profited from it.

From Buda, I came to Thiat, a country
town where the king is said to be fond of
rcsiding,—then to Janiz, in Gerraan * Jane *, ?
a town pn the Danube, I afterward passed by
another town .built on an island in that- river,
xvhich had been given by the emperor to one
pf the dépendants of the duke of Burgundy,
^vhom I believe to be sir Renier Pot. I also
f Jane. Q. Gcq.

Digitized by G.ooQLe

317

passed through Brut*, situated on a river

that divides the kingdom of Hungary from the

duchy of Austria. The river runs through a
%

marsh, vVhere a long and narrow causeway has
heen constructed. This is an important place,
and I am convinced that a small body of men
could effeçtually defend it on the austrian side.

Two leagues further the ambassador took
leave of me, and followed another road to
return to the duke of Milan, his lord. I took
that leading to Vienna, wherç I arrived after
five days journey.

On my entering the town, no one would
lodge me, supposing I was a Turk. At last,
by accident some one pointed out to me an inn
where I was received. Fortunately my servant
whom I had hired at Pest knew the hungarian
and high german languages : he desired that thç
merchant to whom I had a letter might be sent
for. On seeking him, he came, and not only
pffered me every service in his power, but went to
* Bruck-

Digitized by kjOOQle

318

inform my lord duke Albert *, cousin-german to
tny lord, of my arrivai, who instantly dispatched
to me a poursuivant at arms, and shortly after
sir Albrech de Potadorf.

Not two hours after my arrivai, I saw sir
Albrech dismount at the gâte of my inn, and,
hearing him ask for me, I thought myself
undone. A little before my departure for the
holy land 1, with some others, had arrested
him between Flanders and Brabant, because
we thought him a subject of Frederick of
Austria f, who had challenged my lord ; and
I now doubted not but that he was corne in
his tum to arrest me, and perhaps do worse.

He told me that his lord, duke Albert,
having leamt that I was attached to the duke
of Butgundy, had sent him to me to offer, on his
part, every service that was in his power;' that

* AlbertlI. duke of Austria, emperor after the death
of Sigismond.

+ Frederick duke of Austria succeeded Albert IL as
emperor.

Digitized by <^.ooQle

319

he defired me to ask whatever I might want
as boldly fforn him as from my own lord, for
that he wished to treat his servants in the same
manner as he would his owh. Sir Albrech
then spoke for himself : he presented me with
money, and offered me horses or any thing
else ; in short, he rendered me good for evil,
although, after ail, I had not done any thing
to him but what honour permitted, and even
ordered me to do.

Two days after, duke Albert sent to say
he wished to speak with me ; and sir Albrech
again came to conduct me to him. I presented
myself to him the moment he came from mass,
attended by eight or ten old knights of a
respectable appearance. Scarcely had I made
my reverence, when he took me by the»hand,
and would not suffèr me to speak to him
on my knees. He asked many questions,
particularly about my lord, which induced me
to think he had a great affection for him.

He was of a tolerably good size, brown
complexion, good humoured, affable, valiant

Digitized by kjOOQle

520

and generous, and was said to possess every
good quality. Among the persons who
accompanied him were some lords from
Bohemia, whom the Hussites had expelled
from that country because they would not be
of their religion.

At the same time, a great lord of that
country, called Paanepot, was presented to
him, who had corne with several others, on the
part of the Hussites, to treat with him, and
establish peace.

These last proposed to mardi to the
assistance of the king of Poland, against the
lords of Prussia, and made, as I heard, great
offers to duke Albert, if hç would second
them; but he replied, according to my
inforniation, that, until they submitted
themselves to the religion of Jésus Christ,
he would never make trace nor peace with
them as long as he should live.

In fact, at this very time he had twice
beaten them in battle; had conquered from
them ail Moravia ; and, by his conduct and

Digitized by C.ooQLe

321

Valôür,hadaggrandized himself atÊheir expensè*

-On quitting his presence, I was conducted

to that of the duchess, à tâll biandsome woman,
daughtêr to the emperor, and heiress, after him,
to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bôhetnia, ând
their dépendances. She had j ust been brought
to bed of a daughtêr, which had oçcasioned
festivals and tournaments, that were the more
numerously attended, because, hitherto, she
had not had any children.

On the morrow, the duke sent sir Albrech
to invite me to dinner, and made me sit at hïs
table with an hungarian lord and another, an
Aastrian. Ail his attendants are on board
wages, and no one dines with him unless
invited by the master of his household.

The table was square ; and the custom is
for one dish to be brought at a time, and for him
who is nearest to eat of it, which supplies the
place of a taster *. Fish and flesh were served,

* Formerly there was, at thfe tables of sovereigns, an
officer to taste every dish before it was put on the table Thi$
précaution had originally been taken against poison.

T T

Digitized by ^ooole

522

and above ail a quantity of méat stronglÿ
Seasoned, but always dish by dish.

After the dinner, I was carried to see the
dancing in the apartments of the duchess.
She gave me a bonnet of gold thread and silk,
a ring, and a diamond to wear on my head,
according to the fashion of the country.

There were présent many nobles of each
sex,—and I saw there some very handsome
women, with the finest heads of hair that can
be conceived.

When I had remained in these apartments
Some time, a gentleman named Payser, who,
though but a squire, was a Chamberlain and
keeper of the jewels of the duke of Austria,
came, by his orders, to shew them to me. I saw
the crown of Bohemia, which has some very fine
diamonds, and the largest ruby I ever saw. It
seemed bigger than a full-sized date ; but it is
not clear, and there are some cavities toward
the bottom that shew a few black spots.
--The keeper then carried me to see the

Digitized by <^.ooQle

$2$

wague-bonnes *, which the duke of Austria
had constructed to combat the Bohemians.
I perceived none that could hold more than
twénty men ; but he assured me there was oné
that would contain three hundred, and did not
require more than eighteen horses to draw it.

I met at this court the lord de Valse, a
gallant knight, and the greatest baron in
Austria after the duke. I saw there also
sir Jacques Trousset, a handsome swabian
knight; but there was another, named le
Chant, hereditary cup-bearer to the emperor,
who having lost his brother and many friends
at the battle of Bar, and hearing that I belonged
to my lord of Burgundy, caused me to be
watched to know the day of my departure,
that he might seize me as I was travelling
through Bavaria. Luckily for me, the duke
of Austria was informed of his intentions,
and sent him away, making me stay longer
at Vienna than I intended, to wait for the

* Waguebonne—is a sort of waggon, or moveablc
tower, used in war.

Digitized by V.ooQLe

departure of the lord de Valse and sir Jacques
Trousset, that I might accompanÿ them,

During my stay, I witnessed three of the
tournaments I mentioned, with çmall horses
and low saddles. One took place at court,—
the others in the streets; but at the last,
several were unhorsed so heavily that they
wcrë dangerously woundçd,

The dukç of Austria made me in private
o{fers of money. I received similar offers front
sir Albert and sir Robert DaurcstofF, a great
lord in Austria, who, the preceding yëar, had
travelled in disguise through Flanders, and had
tberc seen my lord duke, and spoke very
handsomely of him. In short, I received very
pressing ones from a poursuivant of lovver

Brittany, named Toutseul, who, after having

«

served under the admirai of Spain, was now in
the service of the duke of Austria. This
Breton called on me everv day to go tQ mass,
and attended me wherever I wished to go,
Persuaded that I must hâve expended on my
journey ail the money 1 had, a little befpre my

Digitized by ^ooQle

325

departure, he presented me with the value of
fifty marcs in enamels, and insisted that I
should sell them for my profit; but, as I
equally refused to açcept them or to borrow,
he protested that no one should ever know
any thing of it.

Vienna is a tolerably large town, well
inclosed with dçep ditches and high walls,
inhabited by rich merçhants and ali sorts of
tradesmen. The Danube washes its wall on
the north side. The surrounding country is
pleasant and good; and it is a place of
amusement .and pleasure. The natives are
better dressed than those of Hungary, although
they ail wear coarse doublets, very thick and
wide. In war they cover the doublet with an
haubergeon, a glaçon *, a large hat of iron,
and other armour usual in that coüntry.
They hâve many crennequiniers, for such is

* Glaçon or Glachon,—a kind of défensive armour.
The French çalled i Glaçon* a sort of fine.cloth that was
doubdess glazed. I suspect that glaçon in German was a kind
of coat-armour made of many folds of quilted cloth, such as
fùr gambisons. Pçrhaps it may bc only a cuirasse.

Digitized by CjO' Le

326

the name given in Austria and Bohemia to
those called archers in hungary. Their bovvs
are like those of the Turks, but not so good
nor so strong ; and they do not use them so
well as they do. The Hungarians pull the
string with three fingers, and the Turks with
the thumb and ring.

When I went to take leave of the duke
and duchess of Austria, he recommended me
himself to my two travelling companions, sir
Jacques Trousset and the lord de Valse, who
was setting off for his command on the frontiers
of Bohemia. He repeated his question, as to
my wanting money ; but I answered, as I had
before done to ail who had offered me some,
that my lord of Burgundy had so amply supplied
me on my departure, that I had a sufficiency for
my return to him, but that I requested hé would
grant me a safe conduct, which he did.

The Danube, for three days journey on
leaving Vienna, runs eastward : firom above
Buda to the point of Belgrade, it takes a
southerly direction, and then,between Hungary

Digitized by V.ooQle

S‘27

and Bulgaria, it résumés its easterly course, and'
falls, as they say, into the Black Sea at Mont
Castre.

I left Vienna in company with the before
mentioned lord of Valse and sir James Trousset.
The first was going to his lady.at Lintz, and
the second to his country-seat.

After two days travelling, we came to
Saint Polten, vvhere 'the best knives of the
country are made. Thence to Molke on the
Danube, where is the best manufacture of
cross-bows,—having beside a very handsome
carthusian monastery. Thence to Valse,
which belongs to the aforesaid lord. The
castle is constructed on an elevated rock, that
commands the Danube. He himself shewed
me the ornaments of the altar of the chapel :
I never before saw any so rich in embroidery
and in pearls. 1 there also noticed boats
drawn up the Danube by horses.

The morrow of our arrivai, a bavarian
gentleman-came to pay his respects to the lord

Digitized by ViOOQLe

S28

pf Valse. Sir Jacques Trousset, informed of
his arrivai, declared he would hang him on a
thorn in a garden. The lord de Vaise hastened
to him, and entreated he would not put such
an affront on him in his own house. * Well,*
replied sir Jacques, * should he corne elsewhere
within my reach, he shall not escape hanging.*
The lord de Valse went to the gentleman, and
made him a sign to go away, which he complied
with. The cause of this anger of sir Jacques
was, that he himself and the greater part of his
attendants were of the secret company, and
that the gentleman, having been also a member,
had misbehaved *.

From Valse we came to Ens, situated on
the river Ems ;—thence to Evresperch, on the
same river, and within the domain of the bishop
of Passau,—and then to Lintz, a very good
town, with a castle on the Danube, and not

* This relates, probably, to the famous secret tribunal ;
and the Bavarian, whom Trousset wanted to hang, may hâve
been a false brother, who had revealed the secrets of it.

Digitized by <^.ooQle

i

329

far* from the frontiers ôf Bohemia. It belongs'
to the duke ôf Austria, and the lôrd of Valse’
is governor of it.

I saw there madame de Valse, a very
handsome lady from Bohemia, who gave me
a flattering réception. She presented me with
an excellent trotter for the road, a diamond to
put in my hair, after the austrian fashion, and
a bonnet of pearls ornamented with a ring and
a ruby ».

The lord of Valse remaining atLintz with
his lady, I continued my journey in company
with sir Jacques Trousset, to Erfurt, which
belongs to the count de Chambourg. Here
•Austria ends, and it had taken us six days to
corne from Vicnna hither. From Erfurt we
came to Riet, a bavarian town belonging to
duke Henry,—then to Prenne on the river
Sceine—- to Bourchaze, a town with a castle on
the same river, where we met the duke.—

.* These bonnets must not be mistaken for such as
ours. They wcre only wreaths, or circular crowns.

ü ü

Digitized by kjooole

Thence to Mouldrof, where we crossed the
Taing. In short, having traversed the country
of duke Louis of Bavaria, without entering any
of its towns, we arrived at Munich, the prettiest
little town I ever saw, and which belongs to
duke William of Bavaria.

I quitted Bavaria at Lansperch to enter
Swabia, and passed through Mindelheim, that
belongs to the duke, through Memingen, an
impérial town, and thence to Walpourch, one
of sir James’s castles. He did not arrive until
three days after me, because he had somc friends
to visit in the neighbourhood ; but he had given
orders to his people to treat me as they would
do himself.

On his return, we set out for Ravensburg*
an impérial town,—and thence to Martof, and
Mersbourg, a town of the bishop of Constance
seated on the lake of this name. The lake in
this part may be about three italian miles broad.
I crossed it and came to Constance, where
I passed the Rhine, which there first assumes
this name on issuing from the lake.

Digitized by kjOOQle

331

It was at this town that sir Jacques
Trousset left me. This knight, one of
the most amiable and valiant in Germany,
had done me the honour and pleasure of
accompanying me so far from respect to the
duke of Austria, and would hâve escorted
me further had he not been engaged at a
tournament ; but he gave me, in his stead, a
poursuivant, whom he charged to esçort me
as far as I should wish.

This tournament had been undertaken by
the lord de Valse. They ioved each other like
brothers, and were to tilt with war lances,
bucklers and helmets of iron, according to the
custom of the country, thirteen againstthirteen,
ail friends and relations. Sir James was well
furnished with every sort of arms, which he had
shewn me himself in his castle of Walporch.
I took my leave of him, and quitted him with
much regret.

From Constance I went to Stein, where
J crossed the Rhine,—thence to Shaffhousen, a

Digitized by V.ooQLe

332

town belonging to the emperor—toWaldshutts,
to Lauffembourg, to Rhinfeld, ail the property
of duke Frederick of Austria—and to Basil,
another impérial town, whither, on account
of the council then assembled there, the
emperor had sent duke William of Bavaria,
as his lieutenant.

The duke and duchess were desirous to see
me. I assisted at a session of the council, where
he represented the emperor,—and among tlie
riumbers were the lord cardinal of St Angelo,
legate from the holy father pope Eugenius,seven
other cardinals, many patriarchs, archbishops
and bishops. 1 met there several on the part
of my lord of Burgundy, among whom were
sir Guillebert de Lannoy, lord of Villerval,
his ambassador, master Jean Germain and the
bishop of Châlons. I had a conversation with
the legate, who inquired much about the
countries I had seen, especially Turkey. He
seemed to hâve the conquest of this last much
at heart, and recointnended it tp me to repeat to

Digitized by kjOOQle

333

my lord of Burgundy certain particulars that
I had told to him relative to such conquest.

At Basil I parted with my poursuivant,
whd returned to Austria; and having traveiled
through the country of Ferette, belonging to
duke Frederick of Austria, and passed by
Montbeliart, which is the property of the
countess of that name, I cntered Franche
Comté, which belongs to my lord duke, and
arrived at Besançon. I supposed that he was
in Klanders, and consequently traveiled on^he
frontiers of Bar and Lorraine to Veson;
but at Villeneuve I learnt that he was on the
frontier of Burgundy, and had caused Mussi
l’Evêque to be besieged. I went then by
Auxonne to Dijon, where I found the lord
chancellor of Burgundy, in whose company
I went to pay my respects to the duke. His
people were at the siégé, and he himself at the
abbey of Poitiers.

I appeared in his presence dressed in the
game manner as when I left Damascus, and

Digitized by C.ooQLe

had the horse kd before him which I had
purchased in that town, and which had
brought me to France. My lord received me
with much kindness. I presented to him my
horse, my dress, with the Koran, and Life of
Mohammed, written in Latin, which the
chaplain to the venetian consul at Damascus
had given me. He had these books delivered
to master John Germain to examine : but
I hâve never heard one word concerning
them since that time. This master John
was a doctor of divinity : he was bishop of
Châlons~sur-Soane, and knight of the golden
fleece*.

* Jean Germain, bom at Cluni, and consequently a
subject to the duke of Burgundy, had, when a child, pleased v
the duchess, who sent him to study at the university of Paris,
•where he distinguished himself. The duke, whose favour he
afterward gained, made him, in 1431, chancellor of his order
of the golden fleece, and not knight, as la Brocquière say$.
The year following he was nominated bishop of Nevers ; sent
in 1432 ambassador, flrst to Rome, and then to the counçil at
Basil, as one of his représentatives. In 1436 he was translated
from the see of Nevers to that of Châlons-sur-Soane.

Digitized by L.ooQLe

335

If I hâve said little respecting the country ,
between this place and Vienna, it has been
because it is well known. With regard to the
others I hâve travelled through, I inform my
readers, that the journey was not undertaken
through ostentation or vanity, but for the
guidance and information of such persons as
may hâve similar desires as I hâve had to see
and be acquainted with these countries, and in
obedience to my highly redoubted lord the
duke of Burgundy, who commanded me to
Write these travels. I always carried with me
a small book, in which I wrote down my
adventures whenever time permitted ; and it is

What la Brocquière says of this bishop scems peevish ;
but if my readers will consider, (hat not hearing any thing of
the two interesting manuscripts he had brought from Asia,
there was cause for his bcing out of humour. Germain,
howevcr, was employed on them, but he was labouring to
réfuté them. At his death, in 1461, he left two works in
manuscript, copies of which are to be found in some libraries ;
one entitled, 1 De Conceptione beatæ Mariæ Virginis,
adversus Mahometanos et Infidèles, Libri duo:’ the othcr,
6 Adversus Alcoranum, Libri quinque.’

Digitized by kjOOQle

HENDERSON, PRINTER,
HAFOD.

from these mémorandums that I hâve composed
the history of my journey. If it be not so well
composed as others could hâve done it, I must
beg my readers to excuse me.

THE END.

Digitized by <^.ooQle

Dii zed by ^ooQle

Digitized by <^.ooQle

F

f

Dii ' zed by VjOOQ

Osterrvichisch* NaMonaMMottwk

+Z155543500

Digitized by <^.ooQle
