The Ring and the Book, Vol. 2 (Robert Browning, 1869)
=====================================================
Books 5–8 of the Roman murder epic. Public domain. Internet Archive (1868 vol. 2).

BRARy 
)F  THE 

UNIVERSITY 


^V 
^ ^  f/ ////,'//. 


THE 


:^ING  AND  THE   BOOK. 


BY 


ROBERT    BROWNING, 

M.A., 

HONORARY  FELLOW  OF  BALLIOL  COLLEGE,  OXFORD. 


IN    FOUR     VOLUMES, 
VOL.  II. 


SMITH,     ELDER    AND     CO.,     LONDON. 

1868. 

[Tfte  Tdglit  of  Translation  is  I'eserved.} 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Tertium  Quid i 


Count  Guido  Franceschini  73 


GiusErPE  Caponsacchi 161 


ivi55987^ 


THE 

RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 


IV. 

TERTIUM   QUID. 


True,  Excellency — as  his  Highness  says, 

Though  she  's  not  dead  yet,  she  's  as  good  as  stretched 

Symmetrical  beside  the  other  two  ; 

Though  he  's  not  judged  yet,  he  's  the  same  as  judged, 

So  do  the  facts  abound  and  superabound  :  5 

And  nothing  hinders,  now,  we  lift  the  case 

Out  of  the  shade  into  the  shine,  allow 

Qualified  persons  to  pronounce  at  last. 

Nay,  edge  in  an  authoritative  word 

Between  this  rabble's-brabble  of  dolts  and  fools  10 

Who  make  up  reasonless  unreasoning  Rome. 

"  Now  for  the  Trial !"  they  roar :  "  the  Trial  to  test 

VOL.    II.  B 


THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 


'^  The  truth,  weigh  husband  and  weigh  wife  aUke 

"  I'   the    scales    of    law,    make    one    scale    kick   the 

beam!" 
Law  's  a  machine  from  which,  to  please  the  mob,  1 5 

Truth  the  divinity  must  needs  descend 
And  clear  things  at  the  play's  fifth  act — aha  ! 
Hammer  into  their  noddles  who  was  who 
And  what  was  what.     I  tell  the  simpletons 
**  Could  law  be  competent  to  such  a  feat  20 

"  'T  were  done  already:  what  begins  next  week 
'^  Is  end  o'  the  Trial,  last  link  of  a  chain 
'^  Whereof  the  first  was  forged  three  years  ago 
"  When  law  addressed  herself  to  set  wrong  right, 
''  And  proved  so  slow  in  taking  the  first  step  25 

"  That  ever  some  new  grievance, — tort,  retort, 
"  On  one  or  the  other  side, — overtook  i'  the  game, 
"  Retarded  sentence,  till  this  deed  of  death 
"  Is  thrown  in,  as  it  were,  last  bale  to  boat 
"  Crammed  to  the  edge  with  cargo — or  passengers?     30 
"  '  Trecentos  inseris :  ohe,  jam  satis  est ! 
"  '  Hue  appelle!^ — passengers,  the  word  must  be." 
Long  since,  the  boat  was  loaded  to  my  eyes. 
To  hear  the  rabble  and  brabble,  you  'd  call  the  case 
Fused  and  confused  past  human  finding  out.  35 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


One  calls  the  square  round,  f  other  the  round  square — 

And  pardonably  in  that  first  surprise 

O'  the  blood  that  fell  and  splashed  the  diagram  : 

But  now  we  Ve  used  our  eyes  to  the  violent  hue 

Can't  we  look  through  the  crimson  and  trace  lines  ?     40 

It  makes  a  man  despair  of  history, 

Eusebius  and  the  established  fact — fig's  end  ! 

Oh,  give  the  fools  their  Trial,  rattle  away 

With  the  leash  of  lawyers,  two  on  either  side — 

One  barks,  one  bites, — Masters  Arcangeli  45 

And  Spreti, — that 's  the  husband's  ultimate  hope 

Against  the  Fisc  and  the  other  kind  of  Fisc, 

Bound  to  do  barking  for  the  wife  :  bow — wow ! 

Why,  Excellency,  we  and  his  Highness  here 

Would  settle  the  matter  as  sufficiently  50 

As  ever  will  Advocate  This  and  Fiscal  That 

And  Judge  the  Other,  with  even — a  word  and  a  wink — 

We  well  know  who  for  ultimate  arbiter. 

Let  us  beware  o'  the  basset-table — lest 

We  jog  the  elbow  of  Her  Eminence,  55 

Jostle  his  cards, — he  '11  rap  you  out  a  .  .  st ! 

By  the  window-seat !    And  here  's  the  Marquis  too  ! 

Indulge  me  but  a  moment :  if  I  fail 

— Favoured  with  such  an  audience,  understand  ! — 


THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 


To  set  things  right,  why,  class  me  with  the  mob  60 

As  understander  of  the  mind  of  man ! 

The  mob, — now,  that 's  just  how  the  error  comes  ! 

Bethink  you  that  you  have  to  deal  with  plehs^ 

The  commonalty  ;  this  is  an  episode 

In  burgess-life, — ^why  seek  to  aggrandize,  65 

Idealize,  denaturalize  the  class  ? 

People  talk  just  as  if  they  had  to  do 

With  a  noble  pair  that .  .  Excellency,  your  ear ! 

Stoop  to  me.  Highness, — listen  and  look  yourselves  ! 

This  Pietro,  this  Violante,  live  their  life  70 

At  Rome  in  the  easy  way  that  's  far  from  worst 
Even  for  their  betters, — themselves  love  themselves, 
Spend  their  own  oil  in  feeding  their  own  lamp 
That  their  own  faces  may  grow  bright  thereby.     , 
They  get  to  fifty  and  over  :  how  's  the  lamp  ?  75 

Full  to  the  depth  o'  the  wick, — moneys  so  much ; 
And  also  with  a  remnant, — so  much  more 
Of  moneys, — ^w^hich  there  's  no  consuming  now, 
But,  when  the  wick  shall  moulder  out  some  day, 
Failing  fresh  twist  of  tow  to  use  up  dregs,  80 

Will  lie  a  prize  for  the  passer-by, — to-wit 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


Anyone  that  can  prove  himself  the  heir, 

Seeing,  the  couple  are  wanting  in  a  child  : 

Meantime  their  wick  swims  in  the  safe  broad  bowl 

O'  the  middle  rank, — not  raised  a  beacon's  height        85 

For  wind  to  ravage,  nor  swung  till  lamp  graze  ground 

As  watchman's  cresset,  he  pokes  here  and  there. 

Going  his  rounds  to  probe  the  ruts  i'  the  road 

Or  fish  the  luck  o'  the  puddle.     Pietro's  soul 

Was  satisfied  when  crony  smirked,  "  No  wine  90 

"  Like  Pietro's,  and  he  drinks  it  every  day !" 

His  wife's  heart  swelled  her  boddice,  joyed  its  fill 

When  neighbours  turned  heads  wistfully  at  church, 

Sighed  at  the  load  of  lace  that  came  to  pray. 

Well,  having  got  through  fifty  years  of  flare,  95 

They  burn  out  so,  indulge  so  their  dear  selves. 

That  Pietro  finds  himself  in  debt  at  last. 

As  he  were  any  lordling  of  us  all  : 

And,  for  the  dark  begins  to  creep  on  day, 

Creditors  grow  uneasy,  talk  aside,  100 

Take  counsel,  then  importune  all  at  once. 

For  if  the  good  fat  rosy  careless  man, 

Who  has  not  laid  a  ducat  by,  decease — 

Let  the  lamp  fall,  no  heir  at  hand  to  catch — 

Why,  being  childless,  there  's  a  spilth  i'  the  street       105 


THE    RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 


O'  the  remnant,  there  's  a  scramble  for  the  dregs 
By  the  stranger :  so,  they  grant  him  no  long  day 
But  come  in  a  body,  clamour  to  be  paid. 

What 's  his  resource  ?     He  asks  and  straight  obtains 

The  customary  largess,  dole  dealt  out  no 

To,  what  we  call  our  "poor  dear  shame-faced  ones," 

In  secret  once  a  month  to  spare  the  shame 

O'  the  slothful  and  the  spendthrift, — pauper-saints 

The  Pope  puts  meat  i'  the  mouth  of,  ravens  they, 

And  providence  he — ^just  what  the  mob  admares  !        115 

That  is,  instead  of  putting  a  prompt  foot 

On  selfish  worthless  human  slugs  whose  slime 

Has  failed  to  lubricate  their  path  in  life, 

"Why,  the  Pope  picks  the  first  ripe  fruit  that  falls 

And  gracious  puts  it  in  the  vermin's  way.  120 

Pietro  could  never  save  a  dollar  ?     Straight 

He  must  be  subsidized  at  our  expense  : 

And  for  his  wife — the  harmless  household  sheep 

One  ought  not  to  see  harassed  in  her  age — 

Judge,  by  the  way  she  bore  adversity,  .    125 

O'  the  patient  nature  you  ask  pity  for  ! 

How  long,  now,  would  the  roughest  marketman. 

Handling  the  creatures  huddled  to  the  knife, 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


Harass  a  mutton  ere  she  made  a  mouth 

Or  menaced  biting  ?    Yet  the  poor  sheep  here,  130 

Violante,  the  old  innocent  burgess-wife, 

In  her  first  difficulty  showed  great  teeth 

Fit  to  crunch  up  and  swallow  a  good  round  crime. 

She  meditates  the  tenure  of  the  Trust, 

Fidel  commissiim  is  the  lawyer-phrase,  135 

These  funds  that  only  want  an  heir  to  take — 

Goes  o'er  the  gamut  o'  the  creditor's  cry 

By  semitones  from  whine  to  snarl  high  up 

And  growl  down  low,  one  scale  in  sundry  keys, — 

Pauses  with  a  little  compunction  for  the  face        .       140 

Of  Pietro  frustrate  of  its  ancient  cheer, — 

Never  a  bottle  now  for  friend  at  need, — 

Comes  to  a  stop  on  her  own  frittered  lace 

And  neighbourly  condolences  thereat. 

Then  makes  her  mind  up,  sees  the  thing  to  do :  145 

And  so,  deliberately  snaps  house-book  clasp, 

Posts  off  to  vespers,  missal  beneath  arm, 

Passes  the  proper  San  Lorenzo  by. 

Dives  down  a  little  lane  to  the  left,  is  lost 

In  a  labyrinth  of  dwellings  best  unnamed,  150 

Selects  a  certain  blind  one,  black  at  base, 

Blinking  at  top, — the  sign  of  we  know  what, — 


8  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

One  candle  in  a  casement  set  to  wink 

Streetward,  do  service  to  no  shrine  inside, — 

Mounts  thither  by  the  filthy  flight  of  stairs,  155 

Holding  the  cord  by  the  wall,  to  the  tip-top. 

Gropes  for  the  door  i'  the  dark,  ajar  of  course, 

Raps,  opens,  enters  in :  up  starts  a  thing 

Naked  as  needs  be — "  What,  you  rogue,  't  is  you  ? 

*'  Back, — how  can  I  have  taken  a  farthing  yet?  160 

"  Mercy  on  me,  poor  sinner  that  I  am ! 

"  Here's  .  .  why,  I  took  you  for  Madonna's  self 

'*  With  all  that  sudden  swirl  of  silk  i'  the  place ! 

"  What  may  your  pleasure  be,  my  bonny  dame  ?'' 

Your  Excellency  suppHes  aught  left  obscure?  165 

One  of  those  women  that  abound  in  Rome, 

Whose  needs  oblige  them  eke  out  one  poor  trade 

By  another  vile  one  :  her  ostensible  work 

Was  washing  clothes,  out  in  the  open  air 

At  the  cistern  by  Citorio ;  but  true  trade —  170 

Whispering  to  idlers  when  they  stopped  and  praised 

The  ancles  she  let  liberally  shine 

In  kneeling  at  the  slab  by  the  fountain-side, 

That  there  was  plenty  more  to  criticise 

At  home,  that  eve,  i'  the  house  where  candle  blinked 

Decorously  above,  and  all  was  done  176 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


I*  the  holy  fear  of  God  and  cheap  beside. 

Violante,  now,  had  seen  this  woman  wash, 

Noticed  and  envied  her  propitious  shape, 

Tracked  her  home  to  her  house-top,  noted  too,  180 

And  now  was  come  to  tempt  her  and  propose 

A  bargain  far  more  shameful  than  the  first 

Which  trafficked  her  virginity  away 

For  a  melon  and  three  pauls  at  twelve  years  old. 

Five  minutes'  talk  with  this  poor  child  of  Eve,  185 

Struck  was  the  bargain,  business  at  an  end — 

"  Then,  six  months  hence,  that  person  whom  you  trust, 

"  Comes,  fetches  whatsoever  babe  it  be  ; 

"  I  keep  the  price  and  secret,  you  the  babe, 

"  Paying  beside  for  mass  to  make  all  straight :  190 

**  Meantime,  I  pouch  the  earnest-money-piece." 

Down  stairs  again  goes  fumbling  by  the  rope 

Violante,  triumphing  in  a  flourish  of  fire 

From  her  own  brain,  self-lit  by  such  success, — 

Gains  church  in  time  for  the  ^' Magnificat'^  195 

And  gives  forth  "  My  reproof  is  taken  away, 

"  And  blessed  shall  mankind  proclaim  me  now," 

So  that  the  officiating  priest  turns  round 

To  see  who  proffers  the  obstreperous  praise  : 


THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 


Then  home  to  Pietro,  the  enraptured-much  200 

But  puzzled-more  when  told  the  wondrous  news — 

How  orisons  and  works  of  charity, 

(Beside  that  pair  of  pinners  and  a  coif, 

Birth-day  surprise  last  Wednesday  was  five  weeks) 

Had  borne  fruit  in  the  Autumn  of  his  life, —  205 

They,  or  the  Orvieto  in  a  double  dose. 

Anyhow,  she  must  keep  house  next  six  months. 

Lie  on  the  settle,  avoid  the  three-legged  stool, 

And,  chiefly,  not  be  crossed  in  wish  or  whim, 

And  the  result  was  like  to  be  an  heir.  210 

Accordingly,  when  time  v/as  come  about, 

He  found  himself  the  sire  indeed  of  this 

Francesca  Vittoria  Pompilia  and  the  rest 

O'  the  names  whereby  he  sealed  her  his  next  day. 

A  crime  complete  in  its  v/ay  is  here,  I  hope  ?  215 

Lies  to  God,  lies  to  man,  every  way  lies 

To  nature  and  civility  and  the  mode : 

Flat  robbery  of  the  proper  heirs  thus  foiled 

0'  the  due  succession, — and,  what  followed  thence, 

Robbery  of  God,  through  the  confessor's  ear  220 

Debarred  the  most  note-worthy  incident 

When  all  else  done  and  undone  twelve-month  through 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


Was  put  in  evidence  at  Easter-time. 

All  other  peccadillos  ! — but  this  one 

To  the  priest  who  comes  next  day  to  dine  with  us?    225 

'T  were  inexpedient ;  decency  forbade. 

Is  so  far  clear  ?     You  know  Violante  now, 

Compute  her  capability  of  crime 

By  this  authentic  instance  ?     Black  hard  cold 

Crime  like  a  stone  you  kick  up  with  your  foot  230 

I'  the  middle  of  a  field  ? 

I  thought  as  much. 
But  now,  a  question, — how  long  does  it  lie, 
The  bad  and  barren  bit  of  stuff  you  kick, 
Before  encroached  on  and  encompassed  round  235 

With  minute  moss,  weed,  wild-flower — made  alive 
By  worm,  and  fly,  and  foot  of  the  free  bird  ? 
Your  Highness, — healthy  minds  let  bygones  be, 
Leave  old  crimes  to  grow  young  and  virtuous-like 
I'  the  sun  and  air  ;  so  time  treats  ugly  deeds  :  240 

They  take  the  natural  blessing  of  all  change. 
There  was  the  joy  o'  the  husband  silly-sooth, 
The  softening  of  the  wife's  old  wicked  heart. 
Virtues  to  right  and  left,  profusely  paid 


THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


If  SO  they  might  compensate  the  saved  sin.  245 

And  then  the  sudden  existence,  dewy-dear, 

O'  the  rose  above  the  dungheap,  the  pure  child 

As  good  as  new  created,  since  withdrawn 

From  the  horror  of  the  pre-appointed  lot 

With  the  unknown  father  and  the  mother  known         250 

Too  well, — some  fourteen  years  of  squalid  youth, 

And  then  libertinage,  disease^  the  grave — 

Hell  in  life  here,  hereafter  life  in  hell : 

Look  at  that  horror  and  this  soft  repose  ! 

Why,  moralist,  the  sin  has  saved  a  soul !  255 

Then,  even  the  palpable  grievance  to  the  heirs — 

'Faith,  this  was  no  frank  setting  hand  to  throat 

And  robbing  a  man,  but  .  .  Excellency,  by  your  leave, 

How  did  you  get  that  marvel  of  a  gem, 

The 'sapphire  with  the  Graces  grand  and  Greek  ?        260 

The  story  is,  stooping  to  pick  a  stone 

From  the  pathway  through  a  vineyard — no-man's-land — 

To  pelt  a  sparrow  with,  you  chanced  on  this  :  . 

Why  now,  do  those  five  clowns  o'  the  family 

O'  the  vinedresser  digest  their  porridge  worse  265 

That  not  one  keeps  it  in  his  goatskin  pouch 

To  do  flints'-service  with  the  tinder-box  ? 

Do  n't  cheat  me,  do  n't  cheat  you,  do  n't  cheat  a  friend  ! 


TERTIUM    QUID.  T3 


But  are  you  so  hard  on  who  jostles  just 

A  stranger  with  no  natural  sort  of  claim  270 

To  the  havings  and  the  holdings  (here  's  the  point) 

Unless  by  misadventure,  and  defect 

Of  that  which  ought  to  be — nay,  which  there  's  none 

Would  dare  so  much  as  wish  to  profit  by — 

Since  who  dares  put  in  just  so  many  words  275 

"  May  Pietro  fail  to  have  a  child,  please  God  ! 

"  So  shall  his  house  and  goods  belong  to  me, 

"  The  sooner  that  his  heart  will  pine  betimes  ?  " 

Well   then,   God   do   n't   please,   nor    his    heart    shall 

pine ! 
Because  he  has  a  child  at  last,  you  see,  280 

Or  selfsame  thing  as  though  a  child  it  were, 
He  thinks,  whose  sole  concern  it  is  to  think  : 
If  he  accepts  it  why  should  you  demur  ? 

Moreover,  say  that  certain  sin  there  seem. 

The  proper  process  of  unsinning  sin  285 

Is  to  begin  well-doing  somehow  else. 

Pietro, — remember,  with  no  sin  at  all 

I'  the  substitution, — why,  this  gift  of  God 

Flung  in  his  lap  from  over  Paradise 

Steadied  him  in  a  moment,  set  him  straight  290 


14  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 

On  the  good  path  he  had  been  straymg  from. 
Henceforward  no  more  wilfuhiess  and  waste, 
Cuppings,  carousings, — these  a  sponge  wiped  out. 
All  sort  of  self-denial  was  easy  now 
For  the  child's  sake,  the  chatelaine  to  be,  295 

Who    must  want  much  and   might  want  who    knows 

what  ? 
And  so,  the  debts  were  paid,  habits  reformed, 
Expense  curtailed,  the  dowry  set  to  grow. 
As  for  the  wife, — I  said,  hers  the  whole  sin  : 
So,  hers  the  exemplary  penance.     'T  was  a  text  300 

Whereon  folk  preached  and  praised,  the  district  through  : 
"  Oh,  make  us  happy  and  you  make  us  good  ! 
"  It  all  comes  of  God  giving  her  a  child  : 
"  Such  graces  follow  God's  best  earthly  gift ! " 

Here  you  put  by  my  guard,  pass  to  my  heart  305 

By  the  home-thrust—"  There  's  a  lie  at  base  of  all." 

Why,  thou  exact  Prince,  is  it  a  pearl  or  no, 

Yon  globe  upon  the  Principessa's  neck  ? 

That  great  round  glory  of  pellucid  stuff, 

A  fish  secreted  round  a  grain  of  grit !  '310 

Do  you  call  it  Avorthless  for  the  worthless  core  ? 

(She  do  n't,  who  well  knows  what  she  changed  for  it !) 


TERTIUM    QUID.  1 5 


So,  to  our  brace  of  burgesses  again  ! 

You  see  so  far  i'  the  story,  who  was  right, 

Who  wrong,  who  neither,  do  n't  you  ?     What,  you  do  n't  ? 

Eh  ?    Well,  admit  there  's  somewhat  dark  i'  the  case, 

Let 's  on — the  rest  shall  clear,  I  promise  you.  317 

Leap  over  a  dozen  years  :  you  find,  these  passed. 

An  old  good  easy  creditable  sire, 

A  careful  housewife's  beaming  bustling  face,  320 

Both  wrapped  up  in  the  love  of  their  one  child, 

The  strange  tall  pale  beautiful  creature  grown 

Lily-like  out  o'  the  cleft  i'  the  sun-smit  rock 

To  bow  its  white  miraculous  birth  of  buds 

I'  the  way  of  wandering  Joseph  and  his  spouse, —       325 

So  painters  fancy  :  here  it  was  a  fact. 

And  this  their  lily, — could  they  but  transplant 

And  set  in  vase  to  stand  by  Solomon's  porch 

'Twixt  lion  and  lion  ! — this  Pompilia  of  theirs. 

Could  they  see  worthily  married,  well  bestowed  330 

In  house  and  home  !     And  why  despair  of  this 

With  Rome  to  choose  from,  save  the  topmost  rank  ? 

Themselves  would  help  the  choice  with  heart  and  soul, 

Throw  their  late  savings  in  a  common  heap 

Should  go  with  the  dowry,  to  be  followed  in  time        335 

By  the  heritage  legitimately  hers  : 


I^  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

And  when  such  paragon  was  found  and  fixed, 

Why,  they  might  chant  their  "  Nunc  dimitfas  "  straight. 

Indeed  the  prize  was  simply  full  to  a  fault ; 

Exorbitant  for  the  suitor  they  should  seek,  340 

And  social  class  to  choose  among,  these  cits. 

Yet  there  's  a  latitude  :  exceptional  white 

Amid  the  general  brown  o'  the  species,  lurks 

A  burgess  nearly  an  aristocrat, 

Legitimately  in  reach  :  look  out  for  him  !  345 

What  banker,  merchant,  has  seen  better  days. 

What  second-rate  painter  a-pushing  up. 

Poet  a-slipping  down,  shall  bid  the  best 

For  this  young  beauty  with  the  thumping  purse  ? 

Alack,  had  it  been  but  one  of  such  as  these  350 

So  like  the  real  thing  they  may  pass  for  it. 

All  had  gone  well !  Unluckily  fate  must  needs 

It  proved  to  be  the  impossible  thing  itself; 

The  truth  and  not  the  sham  :  hence  ruin  to  them  all. 

For,  Guido  Franceschini  was  the  head  355 

Of  an  old  family  in  Arezzo,  old 

To  that  degree  they  could  afford  be  poor 

Better  than  most  :  the  case  is  common  too. 


TERTIUM    QUID.  I? 


Out  of  the  vast  door  'scutcheoned  overhead, 

Creeps  out  a  serving-man  on  Saturdays  360 

To  cater  for  the  week, — turns  up  anon 

I'  the  market,  chaffering  for  the  lamb's  least  leg, 

Or  the  quarter-fowl,  less  entrails,  claws  and  comb  : 

Then  back  again  with  prize, — a  liver  begged 

Into  the  bargain,  gizzard  overlooked, —  365 

He  's  mincing  these  to  give  the  beans  a  taste. 

When,  at  your  knock,  he  leaves  the  simmering  soup. 

Waits  on  the  curious  stranger-visitant, 

Napkin  in  half-wiped  hand,  to  show  the  rooms. 

Point  pictures  out  have  hung  their  hundred  years,       370 

"  Priceless,"  he  tells  you, — puts  in  his  place  at  once 

The  man  of  money :  yes,  you  're  banker-king 

Or  merchant-kaiser,  wallow  in  your  wealth 

While  patron,  the  house-master,  can't  afford 

To  stop  our  ceiling-hole  that  rain  so  rots —  375 

But  he  's  the  man  of  mark,  and  there  's  his  shield, 

And  yonder  's  the  famed  Rafael,  first  in  kind, 

The  painter  painted  for  his  grandfather — 

You  have  paid  a  paul  to  see  :  "  Good  morning.  Sir  ! " 

Such  is  the  law  of  compensation.     Here  380 

The  poverty  was  getting  too  acute ; 

There  gaped  so  many  noble  mouths  to  feed, 

VOL.    II.  c 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Beans  must  suffice  unflavoured  of  the  fowl. 

The  mother, — hers  would  be  a  spun-out  life 

I'  the  nature  of  things  ;  the  sisters  had  done  well       385 

And  married  men  of  reasonable  rank  : 

But  that  sort  of  illumination  stops, 

Throws  back  no  heat  upon  the  parent-hearth. 

The  family  instinct  felt  out  for  its  fire 

To  the  Church, — the  Church  traditionally  helps  390 

A  second  son  :  and  such  was  Paolo, 

Established  here  at  Rome  these  thirty  years. 

Who  played  the  regular  game, — priest  and  Abate, 

Made  friends,  owned  house  and  land,  became  of  use 

To  a  personage  :  his  course  lay  clear  enough.  395 

The  youngest  caught  the  sympathetic  flame, 

And,  though  unfledged  wings  kept  him  still  i'  the  cage, 

Yet  he  shot  up  to  be  a  Canon,  so 

Clung  to  the  higher  perch  and  crowed  in  hope. 

Even  our  Guido,  eldest  brother,  went  400 

As  far  i'  the  way  o'  the  Church  as  safety  seemed, 

He  being  Head  o'  the  House,  ordained  to  wive, — 

So,  could  but  dally  with  an  Order  or  two 

And  testify  good-will  i'  the  cause  :  he  dipt 

His  top-hair  and  thus  far  affected  Christ,  405 

But  main  promotion  must  fall  otherwise. 


TERTIUM    QUID.  1 9 


Though   Still  from  the  side  o'  the  Church :   and  here 

was  he 
At  Rome,  since  first  youth,  worn  threadbare  of  soul 
By  forty-six  years'  rubbing  on  hard  life. 
Getting  fast  tired  o'  the  game  whose  word  is — "  Wait !  " 
When  one  day, — he  too  having  his  Cardinal  411 

To  serv'e  in  some  ambiguous  sort,  as  serve 
To  draw  the  coach  the  plumes  o'  the  horses'  heads, — 
The  Cardinal  saw  fit  to  dispense  with  him. 
Ride  with  one  plume  the  less  ;  and  off  it  dropped.     415 

Guido  thus  left, — with  a  youth  spent  in  vain 

And  not  a  penny  in  purse  to  show  for  it, 

Advised  with  Paolo,  bent  no  doubt  in  chafe 

The  bla,ck  brows  somewhat  formidably  the  while. 

'^  AVhere  is  the  good  I  came  to  get  at  Rome?  420 

"  Where  the  repayment  of  the  servitude 

^'  To  a  purple  popinjay,  whose  feet  I  kiss, 

"  Knowing  his  father  wiped  the  shoes  of  mine  ?  " 

"  Patience,"  pats  Paolo  the  recalcitrant — 

"  You  have  not  had,  so  far,  the  proper  luck,  425 

"  Nor  do  my  gains  sufiice  to  keep  us  both : 

"  A  modest  competency  is  mine,  not  more. 


THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


"  You  are  the  Count  however,  yours  the  style, 

'•  Heirdom  and  state, — you  can't  expect  all  good. 

"  Had  I,  now,  held  your  hand  of  cards  .  .  well,  well — 

"  What 's  yet  unplayed,  I  '11  look  at,  by  your  leave,     431 

"  Over  your  shoulder, — I  who  made  my  game, 

^'  Let 's  see,  if  I  can  't  help  to  handle  yours. 

'^  Fie  on  you,  all  the  Honours  in  your  fist, 

'^  Countship,  Househeadship, — how  have  you  misdealt  I 

"  Why,  in  the  first  place,  they  will  marry  a  man  !         436 

'^  Notum  tonsoribics  !    To  the  Tonsor  then  ! 

"•  Come,  clear  your  looks,  and  choose  your  freshest  suit, 

"  And,  after  function's  done  with,  down  we  go 

''  To  the  woman-dealer  in  perukes,  a  wrench  440 

"  I  and  some  others  settled  in  the  shop 

*'  At  Place  Colonna  :  she  's  an  oracle.     Hmxm  ! 

"  '  Dear,  'tis  my  brother  :  brother,  'tis  my  dear. 

''  '-  Dear,  give  us  counsel !     Whom  do  you  suggest 

"  '  As  properest  party  in  the  quarter  round,  445 

"  '-  For  the  Count  here  ? — he  is  minded  to  take  wife, 

"  '  And  further  tells  me  he  intends  to  slip 

"•  '  Twenty  zecchines  under  the  bottom-scalp 

'•'  'Of  his  old  wig  when  he  sends  it  to  revive 

^'  '  For  the  wedding  :  and  I  add  a  trifle  too.  450 

"  '  You  know  what  personage  I'm  potent  with.' " 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


And  SO  plumped  out  Pompilia's  name  the  first. 
She  told  them  of  the  household  and  its  ways, 
The  easy  husband  and  the  shrewder  wife 
In  Via  Vittoria, — how  the  tall  young  girl,  455 

With  hair  black  as  yon  patch  and  eyes  as  big 
As  yon  pomander  to  make  freckles  fly, 
Would  have  so  much  for  certain,  and  so  much  more 
In  likelihood, — why,  it  suited,  slipt  as  smooth 
As  the  Pope's  pantoufle  does  on  the  Pope's  foot.         460 
"  I'll  to  the  husband  !  "  Guido  ups  and  cries. 
"  Ay,  so  you  'd  play  your  last  court-card,  no  doubt ! " 
Puts  Paolo  in  with  a  groan — '^  Only,  you  see, 
"  'Tis  I,  this  time,  that  supervise  your  lead. 
"  Priests   play  with  women,   maids,  wives,   mothers, — 
why?  465 

"  These  play  with  men  and  take  them  off  our  hands. 
^'  Did  I  come,  counsel  with  some  cut-beard  gruff 
''  Or  rather  this  sleek  young-old  barberess  ? 
^'  Go,  brother,  stand  you  rapt  in  the  ante-room 
"  Of  Her  Efiicacity  my  Cardinal  470 

^'  For  an  hour, — he  likes  to  have  lord-suitors  lounge, — 
^'  While  I  betake  myself  to  the  grey  mare, 
"  The  better  horse, — how  wise  the  people's  word  ! — 
"  And  wait  on  Madam  Violante." 


THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 


Said  and  done.     475 
He  was  at  Via  Vittoria  in  three  skips  : 
Proposed  at  once  to  fill  up  the  one  want 
O'  the  burgess-family  which,  v/ealthy  enough, 
And  comfortable  to  heart's  desire,  yet  crouched 
Outside  a  gate  to  heaven, — locked,  bolted,  barred,      480 
Whereof  Count  Guido  had  a  key  he  kept 
Under  his  pillow,  but  Pompilia's  hand 
Might  slide  behind  his  neck  and  pilfer  thence. 
The  key  was  fairy ;  mention  of  it,  made 
Violante  feel  the  thing  shoot  one  sharp  ray  485 

That  reached  the  heart  o'  the  woman.     ''  I  assent  : 
"  Yours  be  Pompilia,  hers  and  ours  that  key 
^'  To  all  the  glories  of  the  greater  life  ! 
''■  There  's  Pietro  to  convince  :  leave  that  to  me  !  " 

Then  was  the  matter  broached  to  Pietro ;  then  490 

Did  Pietro  make  demand  and  get  response 
That  in  the  Countship  was  a  truth,  but  in 
The  counting  up  of  the  Count's  cash,  a  lie  : 
He  thereupon  stroked  grave  his  chin,  looked  great. 
Declined  the  honour.     Then  the  wife  wiped  one —     495 
Winked  with  the  other  eye  turned  Paolo-ward, 
Whispered  Pompilia,  stole  to  church  at  eve, 


TERTIUM    QUID.  23 


Found  Guido  there  and  got  the  marriage  done, 

.And  finally  begged  pardon  at  the  feet 

Of  her  dear  lord  and  master.     Whereupon  500 

Quoth  Pietro — "  Let  us  make  the  best  of  things  !  " 

"  I  knew  your  love  would  licence  us,"  quoth  she  : 

Quoth  Paolo  once  more,  "  Mothers,  wives  and  maids, 

^'  These  be  the  tools  wherewith  priests  manage  men." 

Now,  here  take  breath  and  ask, — ^which  bird  o'  the  brace 

Decoyed  the  other  into  clapnet  ?     Who  506 

Was  fool,  who  knave  ?     Neither  and  both,  perchance. 

There  was  a  bargain  mentally  proposed 

On  each  side,  straight  and  plain  and  fair  enough ; 

Mind  knew  its  own  mind  :  but  when  mind  must  speak. 

The  bargain  have  expression  in  plain  terms,  511 

There  was  the  blunder  incident  to  words. 

And  in  the  clumsy  process,  fair  turned  foul. 

The  straight  backbone-thought  of  the  crooked  speech 

Were  just — ^'  I  Guido  truck  my  name  and  rank  515 

"  For  so  much  money  and  youth  and  female  charms."-— 

''  We  Pietro  and  Violante  give  our  child 

"  And  wealth  to  you  for  a  rise  i'  the  world  thereby." 

Such  naked  truth  while  chambered  in  the  brain 

Shocks  nowise  :  walk  it  forth  by  way  of  tongue, —       52a 


24  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Out  on  the  cynical  unseemliness  ! 

Hence  was  the  need,  on  either  side,  of  a  lie 

To  serve  as  decent  wrappage  :  so,  Guido  gives 

Money  for  money, — and  they,  bride  for  groom, 

Having,  he,  not  a  doit,  they,  not  a  child  525 

Honestly  theirs,  but  this  poor  waif  and  stray. 

According  to  the  words,  each  cheated  each ; 

But  in  the  inexpressive  barter  of  thoughts. 

Each  did  give  and  did  take  the  thing  designed. 

The  rank  on  this  side  and  the  cash  on  that —  530 

Attained  the  object  of  the  traffic,  so. 

The  way  of  the  world,  the  daily  bargain  struck 

In  the  first  market !     Why  sells  Jack  his  ware  ? 

^^  For  the  sake  of  serving  an  old  customer." 

Why  does  Jill  buy  it?     '' Simply  not  to  break  535 

"  A  custom,  pass  the  old  stall  the  first  time." 

Why,  you  know  where  the  gist  is  of  the  exchange  : 

Each  sees  a  profit,  throws  the  fine  words  in. 

Don't  be  too  hard  o'  the  pair !     Had  each  pretence 

Been  simultaneously  discovered,  stripped  540 

From  off  the  body  o'  the  transaction,  just 

As  when  a  cook  .  .  will  Excellency  forgive  ? 

Strips  away  those  long  loose  superfluous  legs 

From  either  side  the  crayfish,  leaving  folk 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


A  meal  all  meat  henceforth,  no  garnishry,  545 

(With  your  respect,  Prince  !) — balance  had  been  kept, 

No  party  blamed  the  other, — so,  starting  fair, 

All  subsequent  fence  of  wrong  returned  by  wrong 

r  the  matrimonial  thrust  and  parry,  at  least 

Had  followed  on  equal  terms.     But,  as  it  chanced,     550 

One  party  had  the  advantage,  saw  the  cheat 

Of  the  other  first  and  kept  its  own  concealed  : 

And  the  luck  o'  the  first  discovery  fell,  beside, 

To  the  least  adroit  and  self-possessed  o'  the  pair. 

'Twas  foolish  Pietro  and  his  wife  saw  first  555 

The  nobleman  was  penniless,  and  screamed 

"  We  are  cheated ! "  •  • 

Such  unprofitable  noise 
Angers  at  all  times  :  but  when  those  who  plague. 
Do  it  from  inside  your  own  house  and  home,  560 

Gnats  which  yourself  have  closed  the  curtain  round. 
Noise  goes  too  near  the  brain  and  makes  you  mad. 
The  gnats  say,  Guido  used  the  candle-flame 
Unfairly, — worsened  that  first  bad  of  his. 
By  practise  of  all  kind  of  cruelty  565 

To  oust  them  and  suppress  the  wail  and  whine, — 
That  speedily  he  so  scared  and  bullied  them, 


2  6  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Fain  were  they,  long  before  five  months  were  out, 

To  beg  him  grant,  from  what  was  once  their  wealth, 

Just  so  much  as  would  help  them  back  to  Rome         570 

Where,  when  they  had  finished  paying  the  last  doit 

O'  the  dowry,  they  might  beg  from  door  to  door. 

So  say  the  Comparini — as  if  it  were 

In  pure  resentment  for  this  worse  than  bad. 

That  then  Violante,  feeling  conscience  prick,  575 

Confessed  her  substitution  of  the  child 

Whence  all  the  harm  came, — and  that  Pietro  first 

Bethought  him  of  advantage  to  himself 

I'  the  deed,  as  part  revenge,  part  remedy 

For  all  miscalculation  in  the  pact.  580 

On  the  other  hand  "  Not  so  !"  Guido  retorts — 

"  I  am  the  wronged,  solely,  from  first  to  last, 

"  Who  gave  the  dignity  I  engaged  to  give, 

"  Which  was,  is,  cannot  but  continue  gain. 

^'  My  being  poor  was  a  bye-circumstance,  585 

"  Miscalculated  piece  of  untowardness, 

"  Might  end  to-morrow  did  heaven's  windows  ope, 

"  Or  uncle  die  and  leave  me  his  estate. 

"  You  should  have  put  up  with  the  minor  flaw, 

"  Getting  the  main  prize  of  the  jewel.     If  wealth,       590 


TERTIUM    QUID.  27 


"  Not  rank,  had  been  prime  object  in  your  thoughts, 

^'  Why  not  have  taken  the  butcher's  son,  the  boy 

"  O'    the    baker    or    candlestick-maker  ?      In    all    the 

rest, 
''  It  was  yourselves  broke  compact  and  played  false, 
''  And  made  a  life  in  common  impossible.  595 

"  Show  me  the  stipulation  of  our  bond 
"  That  you  should  make  your  profit  of  being  inside 
"My  house,  to  hustle  and  edge  me  out  o'  the  same, 
''  First  make  a  laughing-stock  of  mine  and  me, 
"  Then  round  us  in  the  ears  from  morn  to  night  600 

"  (Because  v\^e  show  wry  faces  at  your  mirth) 
"  That  you  are  robbed,  starved,  beaten  and  what  not ! 
"  You  fled  a  hell  of  your  own  lighting-up, 
''  Pay  for  your  own  miscalculation  too  : 
'*  You  thought  nobility,  gained  at  any  price,  605 

"  Would  suit  and  satisfy, — find  the  mistake, 
"  And  now  retaliate,  not  on  yourselves,  but  me. 
"  And  how?     By  telling  me,  i'  the  face  of  the  world, 
''  I  it  is  have  been  cheated  all  this  while, 
"  Abominably  and  irreparably, — my  name  610 

"  Given  to  a  cur-cast  mongrel,  a  drab's  brat, 
"  A  beggar's  bye-blow, — thus  depriving  me 
"  Of  what  yourselves  allege  the  whole  and  sole 


28  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  Aim  on  my  part  i'  the  marriage, — money  to-wit. 

"  This  thrust  I  have  to  parry  by  a  guard  615 

"  Which  leaves  me  open  to  a  counter-thrust 

"  On  the  other  side, — no  way  but  there  's  a  pass 

"  Clean  through  me.     If  I  prove,  as  I  hope  to  do, 

"  There  's  not  one  truth  in  this  your  odious  tale 

*'  O'  the  buying,  selhng,  substituting — prove  620 

'^  Your  daughter  was  and  is  your  daughter, — well, 

"And    her    dowry  hers    and    therefore    mine,  —  what 

then  ? 
'*  Why,  where  's  the  appropriate  punishment  for  this 
"  Enormous  lie  hatched  for  mere  malice'  sake 
"  To  ruin  me?     Is  that  a  wrong  or  no?  625 

*'  And  if  I  try  revenge  for  remedy, 
"  Can  I  well  make  it  strong  and  bitter  enough  ?  " 

I  anticipate  however — only  ask. 

Which  of  the  two  here  sinned  most  ?     A  nice  point ! 

Which  brownness  is  least  black, — decide  who  can,      630 

Wager-by-battle-of-cheating  !     What  do  you  say. 

Highness  ?    Suppose,  your  Excellency,  we  leave 

The  question  at  this  stage,  proceed  to  the  next, 

Both  parties  step  out,  fight  their  prize  upon. 

In  the  eye  o'  the  world  ?  635 


TERTIUM    QUID.  29 


They  brandish  law  'gainst  law  ; 
The  grinding  of  such  blades,  each  ]3arry  of  each, 
Throws  terrible  sparks  off,  over  and  above  the  thrusts, 
And  makes  more  sinister  the  fight,  to  the  eye, 
Than  the  very  wounds  that  follow.     Beside  the  tale    640 
Which  the  Comparini  have  to  re-assert, 
They  needs  must  write,  print,  publish  all  abroad 
The  straitnesses  of  Guido's  household  life — 
The  petty  nothings  we  bear  privately 
But  break  down  under  when  fools  flock  around.  645 

What  is  it  all  to  the  facts  o'  the  couple's  case, 
How  helps  it  prove  Pompilia  not  their  child, 
If  Guido's  mother,  brother,  kith  and  kin 
Fare  ill,  lie  hard,  lack  clothes,  lack  fire,  lack  food  ? 
That  's  one  more  wrong  than  needs.  650 

On  the  other  hand, 
Guido, — whose  cue  is  to  dispute  the  truth 
O'  the  tale,  reject  the  shame  it  throws  on  him, — 
He  may  retaliate,  fight  his  foe  in  turn 
And  welcome,  we  allow.     Ay,  but  he  can't !  655 

He  's  at  home,  only  acts  by  proxy  here  : 
Law  may  meet  law, — but  all  the  gibes  and  jeers, 
The  superfluity  of  naughtiness, 


30  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Those  libels  on  his  House, — how  reach  at  them  ? 

Two  hateful  faces,  grinning  all  a-glow,  660 

Not  only  make  parade  of  spoil  they  filched, 

But  foul  him  from  the  height  of  a  tower,  you  see. 

Unluckily  temptation  is  at  hand — 

To  take  revenge  on  a  trifle  overlooked, 

A  pet  lamb  they  have  left  in  reach  outside,  665 

Whose  first  bleat,  when  he  plucks  the  wool  away, 

Will  strike  the  grinners  grave  :  his  wife  remains 

Who,  four  months  earlier,  some  thirteen  years  old, 

Never  a  mile  away  from  mother's  house 

And  petted  to  the  height  of  her  desire,  670 

Was  told  one  morning  that  her  fate  was  come. 

She  must  be  married — ^just  as,  a  month  before. 

Her  mother  told  her  she  must  comb  her  hair 

And  twist  her  curls  into  one  knot  behind. 

These  fools  forgot  their  pet  lamb,  fed  with  flowers,      675 

Then  'ticed  as  usual  by  the  bit  of  cake. 

Out  of  the  bower  into  the  butchery. 

Plague  her,  he  plagues  them  threefold  :  but  how  plague  ? 

The  world  may  have  its  word  to  say  to  that : 

You  can't  do  some  things  with  impunity.  '      .  680 

What  remains .  .  well,  it  is  an  ugly  thought .  . 

But  that  he  drive  herself  to  plague  herself — 


TERTIUM    QUID. 


Herself  disgrace  herself  and  so  disgrace 
Who  seek  to  disgrace  Guido  ? 

There's  the  clue  685 

To  what  else  seems  gratuitously  vile, 
If,  as  is  said,  from  this  time  forth  the  rack 
Was  tried  upon  Pompilia  :  't  was  to  wrench 
Her  limbs  into  exposure  that  brings  shame. 
The  aim  o'  the  cruelty  being  so  crueller  still,  690 

That  cruelty  almost  grows  compassion's  self 
Could  one  attribute  it  to  mere  return 
O'  the  parents'  outrage,  wrong  avenging  wrong. 
They  see  in  this  a  deeper  deadlier  aim, 
Not  to  vex  just  a  body  they  held  dear,  695 

But  blacken  too  a  soul  they  boasted  white, 
And  show  the  world  their  saint  in  a  lover's  arms, 
No  matter  how  driven  thither, — so  they  say. 

On  the  other  hand,  so  much  is  easily  said. 

And  Guido  lacks  not  an  apologist.  700 

The  pair  had  nobody  but  themselves  to  blame, 

Being  selfish  beasts  throughout,  no  less,  no  more  : 

— Cared  for  themselves,  their  supposed  good,  nought  else, 

And  brought  about  the  marriage  3  good  proved  bad, 


32  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

As  little  they  cared  for  her  its  victim — nay,  705 

Meant  she  should  stay  behind  and  take  the  chance, 

If  haply  they  might  wriggle  themselves  free. 

They  baited  their  own  hook  to  catch  a  fish 

With  this  poor  worm,  failed  o'  the  prize,  and  then 

Sought  how  to  unbait  tackle,  let  worm  float  710 

Or  sink,  amuse  the  monster  while  they  'scaped. 

Under  the  best  stars  Hymen  brings  above. 

Had  all  been  honesty  on  either  side, 

A  common  sincere  effort  to  good  end. 

Still,  this  would  prove  a  difficult  problem,  Prince  !       715 

— Given,  a  fair  wife,  aged  thirteen  years, 

A  husband  poor,  care-bitten,  sorrow-sunk, 

Little,  long-nosed,  bush-bearded,  lantern-jawed, 

Forty-six-years  full, — place  the  two  grown  one. 

She,  cut  off  sheer  from  every  natural  aid,  720 

In  a  strange  town  with  no  familiar  face — 

He,  in  his  own  parade-ground  or  retreat 

As  need  were,  free  from  challenge,  much  less  check 

To  an  irritated,  disappointed  will — 

How  evolve  happiness  from  such  a  match  ?  725 

'T  were  hard  to  serve  up  a  congenial  dish 

Out  of  these  ill-agreeing  morsels,  Duke, 

By  the  best  exercise  of  the  cook's  craft, 


TERTIUM    QUID.  33 


Best  interspersion  of  spice,  salt  and  sweet ! 

But  let  two  ghastly  scullions  concoct  mess  730 

With  brimstone,  pitch,  vitriol  and  devil's-dung — 

Throw  in  abuse  o'  the  man,  his  body  and  soul, 

Kith,  kin  and  generation,  shake  all  slab 

At  Rome,  Arezzo,  for  the  world  to  nose, 

Then  end  by  publishing,  for  fiend's  arch-prank,  735 

That,  over  and  above  sauce  to  the  meat's  self, 

Why,  even  the  meat,  bedevilled  thus  in  dish, 

Was  never  a  pheasant  but  a  carrion-crow — 

Prince,  what  will  then  the  natural  loathing  be  ? 

What  wonder  if  this  ? — the  compound  plague  o'  the  pair 

Pricked  Guido, — not  to  take  the  course  they  hoped,   741 

That  is,  submit  him  to  their  statement's  truth. 

Accept  its  obvious  promise  of  relief. 

And  thrust  them  out  of  doors  the  girl  again 

Since  the  girl's  dowry  would  not  enter  there,  745 

— Quit  of  the  one  if  baulked  of  the  other  :  no  ! 

Rather  did  rage  and  hate  so  work  in  him. 

Their  product  proved  the  horrible  conceit 

That  he  should  plot  and  plan  and  bring  to  pass 

His  wife  might,  of  her  own  free  will  and  deed,  750 

Relieve  him  of  her  presence,  get  her  gone, 

And  yet  leave  all  the  dowry  safe  behind, 

VOL.    II.  D 


34  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Confirmed  his  own  henceforward  past  dispute, 

While  blotting  out,  as  by  a  belch  of  hell, 

Their  triumph  in  her  misery  and  death.  755 

You  see,  the  man  was  Aretine,  had  touch 

O'  the  subtle  air  that  breeds  the  subtle  wit ; 

Was  noble  too,  of  old  blood  thrice-refined 

That  shrinks  from  clownish  coarseness  in  disgust : 

Allow  that  such  an  one  may  take  revenge,  760 

You  do  n't  expect  he  '11  catch  up  stone  and  fling, 

Or  try  cross-buttock,  or  whirl  quarter-staff? 

Instead  of  the  honest  drubbing  clowns  bestow. 

When  out  of  temper  at  the  dinner  spoilt. 

On  meddling  mother-in-law  and  tiresome  wife, —         765 

Substitute  for  the  clown  a  nobleman, 

And  you  have  Guido,  practising,  't  is  said, 

Unmitigably  from  the  very  first. 

The  finer  vengeance  :  this,  they  say,  the  fact 

O'  the  famous  letter  shows — the  writing  traced  770 

At  Guido's  instance  by  the  timid  wife 

Over  the  pencilled  words  himself  wTit  first — 

Wherein  she,  who  could  neither  write  nor  read. 

Was  made  unblushingly  declare  a  tale 

To  the  brother,  the  Abate  then  in  Rome,  775 


TERTIUM    QUID.  35 


How  her  putative  parents  had  impressed, 

On  their  departure,  their  enjoinment;  bade 

"  We  being  safely  arrived  here,  follow,  you  ! 

"  Poison  your  husband,  rob,  set  fire  to  all, 

"  And  then  by  means  o'  the  gallant  you  procure  780 

''  With  ease,  by  helpful  eye  and  ready  tongue, 

"  The  brave  youth  ready  to  dare,  do  and  die, 

'^  You  shall  run  off  and  merrily  reach  Rome 

"  Where  we  may  live  like  flies  in  honey-pot :  " — 

Such  being  exact  the  programme  of  the  course  785 

Imputed  her  as  carried  to  effect. 

They  also  say, — to  keep  her  straight  therein, 

All  sort  of  torture  was  piled,  pain  on  pain, 

On  either  side  Pompilia's  path  of  life. 

Built  round  about  and  over  against  by  fear,  790 

Circumvallated  month  by  month,  and  week 

By  week,  and  day  by  day,  and  hour  by  hour. 

Close,  closer  and  yet  closer  still  with  pain, 

No  outlet  from  the  encroaching  pain  save  just 

Where  stood  one  saviour  like  a  piece  of  heaven,  795 

Hell's  arms  would  strain  round  but  for  this  blue  gap. 

She,  they  say  further,  first  tried  every  chink, 

Every  imaginable  break  i'  the  fire, 


36  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

As  way  of  escape  :  ran  to  the  Commissary, 

Who  bade  her  not  malign  his  friend  her  spouse ;  800 

Flung  herself  thrice  at  the  Archbishop's  feet, 

Where  three  times  the  Archbishop  let  her  lie. 

Spend  her  whole  sorrow  and  sob  full  heart  forth, 

And  then  took  up  the  slight  load  from  the  ground 

And  bore  it  back  for  husband  to  chastise, —  805 

Mildly  of  course, — but  natural  right  is  right. 

So  went  she  slipping  ever  yet  catching  at  help, 

Missing  the  high  till  come  to  lowest  and  last. 

No  more  than  a  certain  friar  of  mean  degree, 

Who  heard  her  story  in  confession,  wept,  810 

Crossed  himself,  showed  the  man  within  the  monk. 

"  Then,  will  you  save  me,  you  the  one  i'  the  world  ? 

^'  I  cannot  even  write  my  woes,  nor  put 

^'  My  prayer  for  help  in  words  a  friend  may  read, — 

"  I  no  more  own  a  coin  than  have  an  hour  8 1 5 

*^  Free  of  observance, — I  was  watched  to  church, 

"  Am  watched  now,  shall  be  watched  back  presently, — 

*^  How  buy  the  skill  of  scribe  i'  the  market-place  ? 

".Pray  you,  write  down  and  send  whatever  I  say 

'^  O'  the  need  I  have  my  parents  take  me  hence  ! "      820 

The  good  man  rubbed  his  eyes  and  could  not  choose — 

Let  her  dictate  her  letter  in  such  a  sense 


TERTIUM    QUID.  37 


That  parents,  to  save  breaking  down  a  wall, 

Might  lift  her  over :  she  went  back,  heaven  in  her  heart. 

Then  the  good  man  took  counsel  of  his  couch,  825 

Woke  and  thought  twice,  the  second  thought  the  best : 

"  Here  am  I,  foolish  body  that  I  be, 

"  Caught  all  but  pushing,  teaching,  who  but  I, 

'^  My  betters  tlieir  plain  duty, — what,  I  dare 

"  Help  a  case  the  Archbishop  would  not  help,  830 

'*  Mend  matters,  peradventure,  God  loves  mar? 

"  What  hath  the  married  life  but  strifes  and  plagues 

•'  For  proper  dispensation?     So  a  fool 

^'  Once  touched  the  ark, — poor  Hophni  that  T  am  ! 

"  Oh  married  ones,  much  rather  should  I  bid,  835 

*'  In  patience  all  of  ye  possess  your  souls  ! 

"  This  life  is  brief  and  troubles  die  with  it : 

""  Where  were  the  prick  to  soar  up  homeward  else?" 

So  saying,  he  burnt  the  letter  he  had  writ. 

Said  Ave  for  her  intention,  in  its  place,  840 

Took  snuff  and  comfort,  and  had  done  with  all. 

Then  the  grim  arms  stretched  yet  a  little  more 

And  each  touched  each,  all  but  one  streak  i'  the  midst, 

Whereat  stood  Caponsacchi,  who  cried,  "  This  way, 

"  Out  by  me  !     Hesitate  one  moment  more  845 

^'  And  the  fire  shuts  out  me  and  shuts  in  you  ! 


38  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

''  Here  my  hand  holds  you  Hfe  out ! "     Whereupon 
She  clasped  the  hand,  which  closed  on  hers  and  drew 
Pompilia  out  o'  the  circle  now  complete. 
Whose  fault  or  shame  but  Guido's? — ask  her  friends.  850 

But  then  this  is  the  wife's — Pompilia's  tale — 

Eve's  .  .  no,  not  Eve's,  since  Eve,  to  speak  the  truth, 

Was  hardly  fallen  (our  candour  might  pronounce) 

So  much  of  paradisal  nature.  Eve's, 

When  simply  saying  in  her  own  defence  855 

*'  The  serpent  tempted  me  and  I  did  eat." 

Her  daughters  ever  since  prefer  to  urge 

"  Adam  so  starved  me  I  was  fain  accept 

"  The  apple  any  serpent  pushed  my  way." 

What  an  elaborate  theory  have  we  here,  860 

Ingeniously  nursed  up,  pretentiously 

Brought  forth,  pushed  forward  amid  trumpet-blast, 

To  account  for  the  thawing  of  an  icicle. 

Show  us  there  needed  ^tna  vomit  flame 

Ere  run  the  chrystal  into  dew-drops  !     Else,  865 

How,  unless  hell  broke  loose  to  cause  the  step, 

How  could  a  married  lady  go  astray  ? 

Bless  the  fools  !    And  't  is  just  this  way  they  are  blessed, 

And  the  world  wags  still, — because  fools  are  sure 


TERTIUM    QUID.  39 


— Oh,  not  of  my  wife  nor  your  daughter  !     No  !  870 

But  of  their  own  :  the  case  is  altered  quite. 

Look  now, — last  week,  the  lady  we  all  love, — 

Daughter  o'  the  couple  we  all  venerate. 

Wife  of  the  husband  we  all  cap  before, 

Mother  o'  the  babes  we  all  breathe  blessings  on, —      875 

Was  caught  in  converse  with  a  negro  page. 

Hell  thawed  that  icicle,  else  "  Why  was  it — 

"  Why?"    asked  and  echoed  the  fools.     "Because,  you 

fools,—" 
So  did  the  dame's  self  answer,  she  who  could, 
With  that  fine  candour  only  forthcoming  880 

When  't  is  no  odds  whether  withheld  or  no — 
"  Because  my  husband  was  the  saint  you  say, 
"  And, — with  that  childish  goodness,  absurd  faith, 
^'  Stupid  self-satisfaction,  you  so  praise,— 
"  Saint  to  you,  insupportable  to  me.  885 

"  Had  he, — instead  of  calling  me  fine  names, 
"  Lucretia  and  Susanna  and  so  forth, 
"  And  curtaining  Correggio  carefully 
"  Lest  I  be  taught  that  Leda  had  two  legs, — 
"  — But  once  never  so  little  tweaked  my  nose  890 

"  For  peeping  through  my  fan  at  Carnival, 
"  Confessing  thereby  '  I  have  no  easy  task — 


40  THE    RING    AND    THE    BOOK. 

^'  ^  I  need  use  all  my  powers  to  hold  you  mine, 

^'  '  And  then, — ^why  't  is  so  doubtful  if  they  serve, 

"  '  That — take  this,  as  an  earnest  of  despair  ! '  895 

^'  Why,  we  were  quits — I  had  wiped  the  harm  away, 

^'  Thought  'The  man  fears  me  !'  and  foregone  revenge." 

We  must  not  want  all  this  elaborate  work 

To  solve  the  problem  why  young  fancy-and-flesh 

Slips  from  the  dull  side  of  a  spouse  in  years,  900 

Betakes  it  to  the  breast  of  brisk-and-bold 

Whose  love-scrapes  furnish  talk  for  all  the  town  ! 

Accordingly,  one  word  on  the  other  side 

Tips  over  the  piled-up  fabric  of  a  tale. 

Guido  says — that  is,  always,  his  friends  say —  905 

It  is  unlikely  from  the  wickedness. 

That  any  man  treat  any  woman  so. 

The  letter  in  question  was  her  very  own. 

Unprompted  and  unaided  :  she  could  write — 

As  able  to  write  as  ready  to  sin,  or  free,  910 

When  there  was  danger,  to  deny  both  facts. 

He  bids  you  mark,  herself  from  first  to  last 

Attributes  all  the  so-styled  torture  just 

To  jealousy, — ^jealousy  of  whom  but  just 

This  very  Caponsacchi !     How  suits  here  915 


TERTIUM    QUID.  4I 

This  with  the  other  alleged  motive,  Prince  ? 

Would  Guido  make  a  terror  of  the  man 

He  meant  should  tempt  the  woman,  as  they  charge  ? 

Do  you  fright  your  hare  that  you  may  catch  your  hare  ? 

Consider  too,  the  charge  was  made  and  met  920 

At  the  proper  time  and  place  where  proofs  were  plain — 

Heard  patiently  and  disposed  of  thoroughly 

By  the  highest  powers,  possessors  of  most  light, 

The  Governor,  for  the  law,  and  the  Archbishop 

For  the  gospel :  which  acknowledged  primacies,  925 

'T  is  impudently  pleaded,  he  could  warp 

Into  a  tacit  partnership  with  crime — 

He  being  the  while,  believe  their  own  account, 

Impotent,  penniless  and  miserable  ! 

He  further  asks — Duke,  note  the  knotty  point ! —       930 

How  he, — concede  him  skill  to  play  such  part 

And  drive  his  wife  into  a  gallant's  arms, — 

Could  bring  the  gallant  to  play  his  part  too 

And  stand  with  arms  so  opportunely  wide  ? 

How  bring  this  Caponsacchi, — with  whom,  friends      935 

And  foes  alike  agree,  throughout  his  life 

He  never  interchanged  a  civil  word 

Nor  lifted  courteous  cap  to  — how  bend  him. 

To  such  observancy  of  beck  and  call. 


42  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

— To'undertake  this  strange  and  perilous  feat  940 

For  the  good  of  Guido,  using,  as  the  lure, 

Pompilia  whom,  himself  and  she  avouch, 

He  had  nor  spoken  with  nor  seen,  indeed, 

Beyond  sight  in  a  public  theatre. 

When  she  wrote  letters  (she  that  could  not  write  !)      945 

The  importunate  shamelessly-protested  love 

Which  brought  him,  though  reluctant,  to  her  feet. 

And  forced  on  him  the  plunge  which,  howsoe'er 

She  might  swim  up  i'  the  whirl,  must  bury  him 

Under  abysmal  black  :  a  priest  contrive  950 

No  mitigable  amour  to  be  hushed  up, 

But  open  flight  and  noon-day  infamy  ? 

Try  and  concoct  defence  for  such  revolt ! 

Take  the  wife's  tale  as  true,  say  she  was  wronged, — 

Pray,  in  what  rubric  of  the  breviary  955 

Do  you  find  it  registered  the  part  of  a  priest 

That  to  right  wrongs  he  skip  from  the  church-door, 

Go  journeying  with  a  woman  that  's  a  wife. 

And  be  pursued,  o'ertaken  and  captured  .  .  how  ? 

In  a  lay-dress,  playing  the  sentinel  960 

Where  the  wife  sleeps  (says  he  who  best  should  know) 

And  sleeping,  sleepless,  both  have  spent  the  night ! 

Could  no  one  else  be  found  to  serve  at  need — 


TERTIUM    QUID.  43 


No  woman — or  if  man,  no  safer  sort 

Than  this  not  well-reputed  turbulence  ?  965 

Then,  look  into  his  own  account  o'  the  case ! 

He,  being  the  stranger  and  astonished  one, 

Yet  received  protestations  of  her  love 

From  lady  neither  known  nor  cared  about : 

Love,  so  protested,  bred  in  him  disgust  970 

After  the  wonder, — or  increduUty, 

Such  impudence  seeming  impossible. 

But,  soon  assured  such  impudence  might  be, 

When  he  had  seen  with  his  own  eyes  at  last 

Letters  thrown  down  to  him  i'  the  very  street  975 

From  behind  lattice  where  the  lady  lurked, 

And  read  their  passionate  summons  to  her  side — 

Why  then,  a  thousand  thoughts  swarmed  up  and  in, — 

How  he  had  seen  her  once,  a  moment's  space, 

Observed  she  was  so  young  and  beautiful,  980 

Heard  everywhere  report  she  suffered  much 

From  a  jealous  husband  thrice  her  age, — in  short 

There  flashed  the  propriety,  expediency 

Of  treating,  trying  might  they  come  to  terms, 

— At  all  events,  granting  the  interview  985 

Prayed  for,  and  so  adapted  to  assist 


44  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Decision  as  to  whether  he  advance, 

Stand  or  retire,  in  his  benevolent  mood. 

Therefore  the  interview  befell  at  length ; 

And  at  this  one  and  only  interview,  990 

He  saw  the  sole  and  single  course  to  take — 

Bade  her  dispose  of  him,  head,  heart  and  hand, 

Did  her  behest  and  braved  the  consequence, 

Not  for  the  natural  end,  the  love  of  man 

For  woman  whether  love  be  virtue  or  vice,  995 

But,  please  you,  altogether  for  pity's  sake — 

Pity  of  innocence  and  helplessness  ! 

And  how  did  he  assure  himself  of  both  ? 

Had  he  been  the  house-inmate,  visitor, 

Eye-witness  of  the  described  martyrdom,  1000 

So,  competent  to  pronounce  its  remedy 

Ere  rush  on  such  extreme  and  desperate  course. 

Involving  such  enormity  of  harm, 

Moreover,  to  the  husband  judged  thus,  doomed 

And  damned  without  a  Avord  in  his  defence  ?  1 005 

But  no, — the  truth  was  felt  by  instinct  here  ! 

— Process  w^hich  saves  a  world  of  trouble  and  time, 

And  there  's  his  story  :  what  do  you  say  to  it, 

Trying  its  truth  by  your  own  instinct  too, 

Since  that 's  to  be  the  expeditious  mode?  1010 


TERTIUM    QUID.  45 


'  And  now,  do  hear  my  version,"  Guido  cries  : 

'  I  accept  argument  and  inference  both. 

'  It  would  indeed  have  been  miraculous 

'  Had  such  a  confidency  sprung  to  birth 

'  With  no  more  fanning  from  acquaintanceship  1015 

'  Than  here  avowed  by  my  wife  and  this  priest. 

'  Only,  it  did  not :  you  must  substitute 

'  The  old  stale  unromantic  way  of  fault, 

'  The  commonplace  adventure,  mere  intrigue 

'  In  the  prose  form  with  the  unpoetic  tricks,  1020 

^  Cheatings  and  lies  :  they  used  the  hackney  chair 

'  Satan  jaunts  forth  with,  shabby  and  serviceable, 

'  No  gilded  jimcrack-novelty  from  below, 

'  To  bowl  you  along  thither,  swift  and  sure. 

'  That  same  officious  go-between,  the  wench  1025 

'  That  gave  and  took  the  letters  of  the  two, 

^  Now  offers  self  and  service  back  to  me  : 

'  Bears  testimony  to  visits  night  by  night 

'  When  all  was  safe,  the  husband  far  and  away, — 

'  To  many  a  timely  slipping  out  at  large  1030 

'  By  light  o'  the  morning-star,  ere  he  should  wake. 

'  And  when  the  fugitives  were  found  at  last, 

'  Why,  with  them  were  found  also,  to  belie 

'  What  protest  they  might  make  of  innocence, 


46  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  All  documents  yet  wanting,  if  need  were,  1035 

"  To  establish  guilt  in  them,  disgrace  in  me — 

"  The  chronicle  o'  the  converse  from  its  rise 

"  To  culmination  in  this  outrage  :  read  ! 

"  Letters  from  wife  to  priest,  from  priest  to  wife, — 

''  Here  they  are,  read  and  say  where  they  chime  in  1040 

'^  With  the  other  tale,  superlative  purity 

"  O'  the  pair  of  saints  !     I  stand  or  fall  by  these." 

But  then  on  the  other  side  again, — how  say 

The  pair  of  saints  ?     That  not  one  word  is  theirs — 

No  syllable  o'  the  batch  or  writ  or  sent  1045 

Or  yet  received  by  either  of  the  two. 

"  Found,"  says  the  priest,  ''  because  he  needed  them, 

"  Failing  all  other  proofs,  to  prove  our  fault : 

"  So,  here  they  are,  just  as  is  natural. 

'^  Oh  yes — we  had  our  missives,  each  of  us  !  1050 

"  Not  these,  but  to  the  full  as  vile,  no  doubt : 

"  Hers  as  from  me, — she  could  not  read,  so  burnt, — 

''  Mine  as  from  her, — I  burnt  because  I  read. 

"  Who  forged  and  found  them?     Cui profueri7it !'' 

(I  take  the  phrase  out  of  your  Highness'  mouth)        1055 

"He  who  would  gain  by  her  fault  and  my  fall, 

"  The  trickster,  schemer  and  pretender — he 


TERTIUM    QUID.  47 


"  Whose  whole  career  was  lie  entailing  lie 

^'  Sought  to  be  sealed  truth  by  the  worst  lie  last ! " 

Guido  rejoins — "  Did  the  other  end  o'  the  tale  1060 

*^  Match  this  beginning  !     'Tis  alleged  I  prove 

'^  A  murderer  at  the  end,  a  man  of  force 

"  Prompt,  indiscriminate,  effectual :  good  ! 

"  Then  what  need  all  this  trifling  woman's-work, 

"  Letters  and  embassies  and  weak  intrigue,  1065 

^'  When  will  and  power  were  mine  to  end  at  once 

"  Safely  and  surely  ?     Murder  had  come  first 

"  Not  last  with  such  a  man,  assure  yourselves  ! 

*'  The  silent  acqiietia^  stilling  at  command — 

"  A  drop  a  day  i'  the  wine  or  soup,  the  dose, —         1070 

"  The  shattering  beam  that  breaks  above  the  bed 

"  And  beats  out  brains,  with  nobody  to  blame 

"  Except  the  wormy  age  which  eats  even  oak, — 

*^  Nay,  the  staunch  steel  or  trusty  cord, — who  cares 

"  I'  the  blind  old  palace,  a  pitfall  at  each  step,  1075 

"  With  none  to  see,  much  more  to  interpose 

"  O'  the  two,  three  creeping  house-dog-servant-things 

"  Born  mine  and  bred  mine  ? — had  I  willed  gross  death, 

"  I  had  found  nearer  paths  to  thrust  him  prey 

"  Than  this  that  goes  meandering  here  and  there      1080 


48  THE    RING   AND   THK    BOOK. 


"  Through  half  the  world  and  calls  down  in  its  course  ' 

''  Notice  and  noise, — hate,  vengeance,  should  it  fail, 

^'  Derision  and  contempt  though  it  succeed  ! 

''  Moreover,  what  o'  the  future  son  and  heir  ? 

"  The  unborn  babe  about  to  be  called  mine, —  1085 

''  What  end  in  heaping  all  this  shame  on  him, 

"  Were  I  indifferent  to  my  own  black  share  ? 

^^  Would  I  have  tried  these  crookednesses,  say, 

"  Willing  and  able  to  effect  the  straight?  " 

"  Ay,  would  you  I" — one  may  hear  the  priest  retort, 

''  Being  as  you  are,  i'  the  stock,  a  man  of  guile,         1091 

''  And  ruffianism  but  an  added  graft. 

^'  You,  a  born  coward,  try  a  coward's  arms, 

''  Trick  and  chicane, — and  only  when  these  fail 

"  Does  violence  follow,  and  like  fox  you  bite  1095 

"  Caught  out  in  stealing.     Also,  the  disgrace 

''  You  hardly  shrunk  at,  wholly  shrivelled  her : 

"  You   plunged   her    thin   white    delicate   hand   i'   the 

flame 
"  Along  with  your  coarse  horny  brutish  fist, 
^'  Held  them  a  second  there,  then  drew  out  both       1100 
"  — Yours  roughed  a  little,  hers  ruined  through  and 

through. 


TERTIUM    QUID.  49 


''  Your  hurt  would  heal  forthwith  at  ointment's  touch — 

''  Namely,  succession  to  the  inheritance 

''  Which  bolder  crime  had  lost  you  :  let  things  change, 

''  The  birth  o'  the  boy  warrant  the  bolder  crime,        1105 

*'  Why,  murder  was  determined,  dared  and  done. 

''  For  me,"  the  priest  proceeds  with  his  reply, 

''  The  look  o'  the  thing,  the  chances  of  mistake, 

"  All  were  against  me, — that,  I  knew  the  first : 

'^  But,  knowing  also  what  my  duty  was,  mo 

^'  I  did  it :  I  must  look  to  men  more  skilled 

^^  I'  the  reading  hearts  than  ever  was  the  world." 

Highness,  decide  !     Pronounce,  Her  Excellency  ! 

Or  .  .  .  even  leave  this  argument  in  doubt, 

Account  it  a  fit  matter,  taken  up  11 15 

With  all  its  faces,  manifold  enough. 

To  put  upon — what  fronts  us,  the  next  stage. 

Next  legal  process  ! — Guido,  in  pursuit. 

Coming  up  with  the  fugitives  at  the  inn. 

Caused  both  to  be  arrested  then  and  there  1 120 

And  sent  to  Rome  for  judgment  on  the  case — 

Thither,  with  all  his  armoury  of  proofs 

Betook  himself,  and  there  we  '11  meet  him  now, 

Waiting  the  further  issue. 

VOL.    II.  E 


50  '  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Here  some  smile  1125 

"  And  never  let  him  henceforth  dare  to  plead, — 
"  Of  all  pleas  and  excuses  in  the  world 
"  For  any  deed  hereafter  to  be  done, — 
"  His  irrepressible  wrath  at  honour's  wound  ! 
'^  Passion  and  madness  irrepressible?  1130 

"  Why,  Count  and  cavalier,  the  husband  comes 
"  And  catches  foe  i'  the  very  act  of  shame : 
"  There  's  man  to  man, — nature  must  have  her  way, — 
"  We  look  he  should  have  cleared  things  on  the  spot. 
"  Yes,  then,  indeed — even  tho'  it  prove  he  erred —   1135 
'^  Though  the  ambiguous  first  appearance,  mount 
'•  Of  solid  injury,  melt  soon  to  mist, 
"  Still, — had  he  slain  the  lover  and  the  wife — 
"  Or,  since  she  was  a  woman  and  his  wife, 
'*  Slain  him,  but  stript  her  naked  to  the  skin  1140 

"  Or  at  best  left  no  more  of  an  attire 
^'  Than  patch  sufficient  to  pin  paper  to, 
^^  Some  one  love-letter,  infamy  and  all, 
"  As  passport  to  the  Paphos  fit  for  such, 
"  Safe-conduct  to  her  natural  home  the  stews, —        1145 
"  Good  !     One  had  recognised  the  power  o'  the  pulse. 
''  But  when  he  stands,  the  stock-fish, — sticks  to  law — 
^'  Offers  the  hole  in  his  heart,  all  fresh  and  warm, 


TERTIUM    QUID.  5 1 


^'  For  scrivener's  pen  to  poke  and  play  about — 

"  Can  stand,  can  stare,  can  tell  his  beads  perhaps,    1150 

''  Oh,  let  us  hear  no  syllable  o'  the  rage  ! 

^'  Such  rage  were  a  convenient  afterthought 

"  For  one  who  would  have  shown  his  teeth  belike, 

'^  Exhibited  unbridled  rage  enough, 

"  Had  but  the  priest  been  found,  as  was  to  hope,      11 55 

"  In  serge,  not  silk,  with  crucifix,  not  sword : 

*^  Whereas  the  grey  innocuous  grub,  of  yore, 

"  Had  hatched  a  hornet,  tickle  to  the  touch, 

"  The  priest  was  metamorphosed  into  knight. 

"  And  even  the  timid  wife,  whose  cue  was — shriek,   it 60 

^'  Bury  her  brow  beneath  his  trampling  foot, — 

"  She  too  sprang  at  him  like  a  pythoness  : 

"  So,  gulp  down  rage,  passion  must  be  postponed, 

"  Calm  be  the  word  !     Well,  our  word  is — we  brand 

"  This  part  o'  the  business,  howsoever  the  rest  1165 

"  Befall." 

*^  Nay,"  interpose  as  prompt  his  friends — 
"  This  is  the  world's  way  !     So  you  adjudge  reward 
"  To  the  forbearance  and  legality 

^^  Yourselves  begin  by  inculcating — ay,  11 70 

"  Exacting  from  us  all  with  knife  at  throat  ! 
"  This  one  wrong  more  you  add  to  wrong's  amount, — 


52  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  You  publish  all,  with  the  kind  comment  here, 

"  ^  Its  victim  was  too  cowardly  for  revenge.' " 

Make  it  your  own  case, — you  who  stand  apart  !         1^75 

The  husband  wakes  one  morn  from  heavy  slee'p, 

With  a  taste  of  poppy  in  his  mouth, — rubs  eyes, 

Finds  his  wife  flown,  his  strong  box  ransacked  too, 

Follows  as  he  best  can,  overtakes  i'  the  end. 

You  bid  him  use  his  privilege  :  well,  it  seems  1180 

He  's  scarce  cool-blooded  enough  for  the  right  move — 

Does  not  shoot  when  the  game  were  sure,  but  stands 

Bewildered  at  the  critical  minute, — since 

He  has  the  first  flash  of  the  fact  alone 

To  judge  from,  act  with,  not  the  steady  lights  1185 

Of  after-knowledge, — yours  who  stand  at  ease 

To  try  conclusions  :  he  's  in  smother  and  smoke, 

You  outside,  with  explosion  at  an  end : 

The  sulphur  may  be  lightning  or  a  squib — 

He  '11  know  in  a  minute,  but  till  then,  he  doubts.      11 90 

Back  from  what  you  know  to  what  he  knew  not ! 

Hear  the  priest's  lofty  ''  I  am  innocent," 

The  wife's  as  resolute  ''  You  are  guilty  !  "     Come  I 

Are  you  not  staggered? — pause,  and  you  lose  the  move  ! 

Nought  left  you  but  a  low  appeal  to  law,  1 195 

**  Coward"  tied  to  your  tail  for  compliment ! 


TERTIUM    QUID.  S3 


Another  consideration :  have  it  your  way  ! 

Admit  the  worst :  his  courage  failed  the  Count, 

He 's  cowardly  like  the  best  o'  the  burgesses 

He  's  grown  incorporate  with, — a  very  cur,  1200 

Kick  him  from  out  your  circle  by  all  means  ! 

Why,  trundled  down  this  reputable  stair. 

Still,  the  Church-door  lies  wide  to  take  him  in, 

And  the  Court-porch  also :  in  he  sneaks  to  each, — 

^'  Yes,  I  have  lost  my  honour  and  my  wife,  1205 

"  And,  being  moreover  an  ignoble  hound, 

"  I  dare  not  jeopardise  my  life  for  them  ! " 

Religion  and  Law  lean  forward  from  their  chairs, 

^'  Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant !"  Ay, 

Not  only  applaud  him  that  he  scorned  the  world,      12 10 

But  punish  should  he  dare  do  otherwise. 

If  the  case  be  clear  or  turbid, — you  must  say  ! 

Thus,  anyhow,  it  mounted  to  the  stage 

In  the  law-courts, — let 's  see  clearly  from  this  point  ! — 

Where  the  priest  tells  his  story  true  or  false,  1 2 1 5 

And  the  wife  her  story,  and  the  husband  his, 

All  with  result  as  happy  as  before. 

The  courts  would  nor  condemn  nor  yet  acquit 

This,  that  or  the  other,  in  so  distinct  a  sense 


54  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

As  end  the  strife  to  either's  absolute  loss :  1220 

Pronounced,  in  place  of  something  definite, 
'  Each  of  the  parties,  whether  goat  or  sheep 
'  I'  the  main,  has  wool  to  show  and  hair  to  hide. 

*  Each  has  brought  somehow  trouble,  is  somehow  cause 

^  Of  pains  enough, — even  though  no  worse  were  proved. 

*  Here  is  a  husband,  cannot  rule  his  wife  1226 
'  Without  provoking  her  to  scream  and  scratch 

'  And  scour  the  fields, — causelessly,  it  may  be  : 

*  Here  is  that  wife, — w^ho  makes  her  sex  our  plague, 

'  Wedlock,  our  bugbear, — perhaps  with  cause  enough  : 
'  And  here  is  the  truant  priest  o'  the  trio,  worst         1231 
'  Or  best — each  quality  being  conceivable. 
^  Let  us  impose  a  little  mulct  on  each. 
^  We  punish  youth  in  state  of  pupilage 

*  Who  talk  at  hours  when  youth  is  bound  to  sleep,  1235 
'  Whether  the  prattle  turn  upon  Saint  Rose 

^  Or  Donna  Olimpia  of  the  Vatican  : 

'  'T  is  talk,  talked  wisely  or  unwisely  talked, 

'  I'  the  dormitory  where  to  talk  at  all, 

'  Transgresses,  and  is  mulct :  as  here  we  mean.        1240 

'  For  the  wife, — let  her  betake  herself,  for  rest, 

^  After  her  run,  to  a  House  of  Convertites — 

'  Keep  there,  as  good  as  real  imprisonment : 


TERTIUM    QUID.  55 


'^  Being  sick  and  tired,  she  will  recover  so. 

"  For  the  priest,  spritely  strayer  out  of  bounds,  1245 

''  Who  made  Arezzo  hot  to  hold  him, — Rome 

''  Profits  by  his  withdrawal  from  the  scene. 

'^  Let  him  be  relegate  to  Civita, 

*'  Circumscribed  by  its  bounds  till  matters  mend : 

"  There  he  at  least  Hes  out  o'  the  way  of  harm  1250 

'^  From  foes — perhaps  from  the  too  friendly  fair. 

'^  And  finally  for  the  husband,  whose  rash  rule 

"  Has  but  itself  to  blame  for  this  ado, — 

'^  If  he  be  vexed  that,  in  our  judgments  dealt, 

"  He  fails  obtain  what  he  accounts  his  right,  1255 

"  Let  him  go  comforted  with  the  thought,  no  less, 

"  That,  turn  each  sentence  howsoever  he  may, 

"  There  's  satisfaction  to  extract  therefrom. 

''  For,  does  he  wish  his  wife  proved  innocent  ? 

^'  Well,  she  's  not  guilty,  he  may  safely  urge,  1260 

^'  Has  missed  the  stripes  dishonest  wives  endure — 

^'  This  being  a  fatherly  pat  o'  the  cheek,  no  more. 

'^  Does  he  wish  her  guilty?     Were  she  otherwise 

"  Would  she  be  locked  up,  set  to  say  her  prayers, 

"  Prevented  intercourse  with  the  outside  world,         1265 

"  And  that  suspected  priest  in  banishment, 

"  Whose  portion  is  a  further  help  i'  the  case  ? 


56  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

^'  Oh,  ay,  you  all  of  you  want  the  other  thing, 

"  The  extreme  of  law,  some  verdict  neat,  complete, — 

"  Either,  the  whole  o'  the  dowry  in  your  poke  1270 

*'  With  full  release  from  the  false  wife,  to  boot, 

*'  And  heading,  hanging  for  the  priest,  beside — 

*'  Or,  contrary,  claim  freedom  for  the  wife, 

"  Repayment  of  each  penny  paid  her  spouse, 

"  Amends  for  the  past,  release  for  the  future  !    Such 

*^  Is  wisdom  to  the  children  of  this  world  ;  1276 

*'  But  we  've  no  mind,  we  children  of  the  light, 

"  To  miss  the  advantage  of  the  golden  mean, 

"  And  push  things  to  the  steel  point."     Thus  the  courts. 

Is  it  settled  so  far  ?     Settled  or  disturbed,  1280 

Console  yourselves  :  't  is  like  .  .  an  instance,  now  ! 

You  've  seen  the  puppets,  of  Place  Navona,  play, — 

Punch  and  his  mate, — how  threats  pass,  blows  are  dealt, 

And  a  crisis  comes  :  the  crowd  or  clap  or  hiss 

Accordingly  as  disposed  for  man  or  wife —  1285 

When  down  the  actors  duck  awhile  perdue, 

Donning  what  novel  rag-and-feather  trim 

Best  suits  the  next  adventure,  new  effect : 

And, — by  the  time  the  mob  is  on  the  move, 

With  something  like  a  judgment//'^  and  con^ —         1290 


TERTIUM    QUID.  57 


There  's  a  whistle,  up  again  the  actors  pop 

In  t'  other  tatter  with  fresh-tinseled  staves, 

To  re-engage  in  one  last  worst  fight  more 

Shall  show,  what  you  thought  tragedy  was  farce. 

Note,  that  the  climax  and  the  crown  of  things  1295 

Invariably  is,  the  devil  appears  himself, 

Armed  and  accoutred,  horns  and  hoofs  and  tail ! 

Just  so,  nor  otherwise  it  proved — you  '11  see  : 

Move  to  the  murder,  never  mind  the  rest ! 

Guido,  at  such  a  general  duck-down,  1300 

I'  the  breathing-space, — of  wife  to  convent  here, 

Priest  to  his  relegation,  and  himself 

To  Arezzo, — had  resigned  his  part  perforce 

To  brother  Abate,  who  bustled,  did  his  best. 

Retrieved  things  somewhat,  managed  the  three  suits — 

Since,  it  should  seem,  there  were  three  suits-at-law    1306 

Behoved  him  look  to,  still,  lest  bad  grow  worse  : 

First  civil  suit, — the  one  the  parents  brought, 

Impugning  the  legitimacy  of  his  wife, 

Affirming  thence  the  nullity  of  her  rights  :  13^0 

This  was  before  the  Rota, — Mclines, 

That  's  judge  there,  made  that  notable  decree 

Which  partly  leaned  to  Guido,  as  I  said, — 


58  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

But  Pietro  had  appealed  against  the  same 

To  the  very  court  will  judge  what  we  judge  now —    13 15 

Tommati  and  his  fellows, — Suit  the  first. 

Next  civil  suit, — demand  on  the  wife's  part 

Of  separation  from  the  husband's  bed 

On  plea  of  cruelty  and  risk  to  life — 

Claims  restitution  of  the  dowry  paid,  1320 

Immunity  from  paying  any  more  : 

This  second,  the  Vicegerent  has  to  judge. 

Third  and  last  suit, — this  time,  a  criminal  one, — 

Atiswer  to,  and  protection  from,  both  these, — 

Guido's  complaint  of  guilt  against  his  wife  1325 

In  the  Tribunal  of  the  Governor, 

Venturini,  also  judge  of  the  present  cause. 

Three  suits  of  all  importance  plaguing  him. 

Beside  a  little  private  enterprise 

Of  Guido's, — essay  at  a  shorter  cut.  1330 

For  Paolo,  knowing  the  right  way  at  Rome, 

Had,  even  while  superintending  these  three  suits 

I'  the  regular  way,  each  at  its  proper  court. 

Ingeniously  made  interest  with  the  Pope 

To  set  such  tedious  regular  forms  aside,  1335 

And,  acting  the  supreme  and  ultimate  judge. 

Declare  for  the  husband  and  against  the  wife. 


TERTIUM    QUID.  59 


Well,  at  such  crisis  and  extreme  of  straits, 

The  man  at  bay,  buffeted  in  this  wise, 

Happened  the  strangest  accident  of  all.  1340 

"  Then,"  sigh  friends,  "  the  last  feather  broke  his  back, 

''  Made  him  forget  all  possible  remedies 

''  Save  one — he  rushed  to,  as  the  sole  relief 

"  From  horror  and  the  abominable  thing." 

"  Or  rather,"  laugh  foes,  "  then  did  there  befall        1345 

^'  The  luckiest  of  conceivable  events, 

''  Most  pregnant  with  impunity  for  him, 

"  Which  henceforth  turned  the  flank  of  all  attack, 

"  And  bade  him  do  his  wickedest  and  worst." 

— The  wife's  withdrawal  from  the  Convertites,  1350 

Visit  to  the  villa  where  her  parents  lived, 

And  birth  there  of  his  babe.     Divergence  here  ! 

I  simply  take  the  facts,  ask  what  they  show. 

First  comes  this  thunderclap  of  a  surprise  : 

Then  follow  all  the  signs  and  silences  1355 

Premonitory  of  earthquake.     Paolo  first 

Vanished,  was  swept  off  somewhere,  lost  to  Rome : 

(Wells  dry  up,  while  the  sky  is  sunny  and  blue.) 

Then  Guido  girds  himself  for  enterprise. 

Hies  to  Vittiano,  counsels  with  his  steward,  1360 


6o  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Comes  to  terms  with  four  peasants  young  and  bold, 

And  starts  for  Rome  the  Holy,  reaches  her 

At  very  holiest,  for  't  is  Christmas  Eve, 

And  makes  straight  for  the  Abate's  dried-up  font, 

The  lodge  where  Paolo  ceased  to  work  the  pipes.      1365 

And  then,  rest  taken,  observation  made 

And  plan  completed,  all  in  a  grim  week. 

The  five  proceed  in  a  body,  reach  the  place, 

— Pietro's,  by  the  Paolina,  silent,  lone. 

And  stupefied  by  the  propitious  snow, —  1370 

At  one  in  the  evening  :  knock  :  a  voice  "  Who's  there  ?  " 

'^  Friends  with  a  letter  from  the  priest  your  friend." 

At  the  door,  straight  smiles  old  Violante's  self. 

She  falls, — her  son-in-law  stabs  through  and  through. 

Reaches  thro'  her  at  Pietro — "  With  your  son  1375 

"  This  is  the  way  to  settle  suits,  good  sire  ! " 

He  bellows  ''  Mercy  for  heaven,  not  for  earth ! 

"  Leave  to  confess  and  save  my  sinful  soul, 

^'  Then  do  your  pleasure  on  the  body  of  me  ! " 

— "  Nay,  father,  soul  with  body  must  take  its  chance  !  " 

He  presently  got  his  portion  and  lay  still.  1381 

And  last,  PompiHa  rushes  here  and  there 

Like  a  dove  among  lightnings  in  her  brake. 

Falls  also  :  Guido's,  this  last  husband's-act. 


TERTIUM    QUID.  6  I 


He  lifts  her  by  the  long  dishevelled  hair,  1385 

Holds  her  away  at  arms'  length  with  one  hand, 
While  the  other  tries  if  life  come  from  the  mouth — 
Looks  out  his  whole  heart's  hate  on  the  shut  eyes, 
Draws  a  deep  satisfied  breath,  ^'  So — dead  at  last !  " 
Throws  down  the  burthen  on  dead  Pietro's  knees,     1390 
And  ends  all  with  "  Let  us  away,  my  boys  ! " 

And,  as  they  left  by  one  door,  in  at  the  other 
Tumbled  the  neighbours — for  the  shrieks  had  pierced 
To   the   mill   and   the    grange,    this   cottage    and   that 

shed. 
Soon  followed  the  Public  Force  ;  pursuit  began         1395 
Though  Guido  had  the  start  and  chose  the  road  : 
So,  that  same  night  was  he,  with  the  other  four. 
Overtaken  near  Baccano, — where  they  sank 
By  the  way-side,  in  some  shelter  meant  for  beasts. 
And  now  lay  heaped  together,  nuzzling  swine,  1400 

Each  wrapped  in  bloody  cloak,  each  grasping  still 
His  unwiped  weapon,  sleeping  all  the  same 
The  sleep  o'  the  just, — a  journey  of  twenty  miles 
Bringing  just  and  unjust  to  a  level,  you  see. 
The  only  one  i'  the  world  that  suffered  aught  1405 

By  the  whole  night's  toil  and  trouble,  flight  and  chase. 


62  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Was  just  the  officer  who  took  them,  Head 

O'  the  Public  Force, — Patrizj,  zealous  soul, 

Who,  havmg  duty  to  sustain  the  flesh, 

Got  heated,  caught  a  fever  and  so  died  :  1410 

A  warning  to  the  over-vigilant, 

— Virtue  in  a  chafe  should  change  her  linen  quick, 

Lest  pleurisy  get  start  of  providence. 

(That's  for  the  Cardinal,  and  told,  I  think  !) 

Well,  they  bring  back  the  company  to  Rome.  1415 

Says  Guido,  "  By  your  leave,  I  fain  would  ask 

^^  How  you  found  out 't  was  I  who  did  the  deed? 

"  What  put  you  on  my  trace,  a  foreigner, 

"  Supposed  in  Arezzo, — and  assuredly  safe 

"  Except  for  an  oversight :  who  told  you,  pray?"      1420 

"  Why,  naturally  your  wife  !  "     Down  Guido  dro'ps 

O'  the  horse  he  rode, — they  have  to  steady  and  stay, 

At  either  side  the  brute  that  bore  him,  bound, 

So  strange  it  seemed  his  wife  should  live  and  speak  ! 

She  had  prayed — at  least  so  people  tell  you  now —   1425 

For  but  one  thing  to  the  Virgin  for  herself. 

Not  simply,  as  did  Pietro  'mid  the  stabs, — 

Time  to  confess  and  get  her  own  soul  saved — 

But  time  to  make  the  truth  apparent,  truth 


TERTIUM    QUID.  63 


For  God's  sake,  lest  men  should  believe  a  lie  :  1430 

Which  seems  to  have  been  about  the  single  prayer 

She  ever  put  up,  that  was  granted  her. 

With  this  hope  in  her  head,  of  telling  truth, — 

Being  familiarized  with  pain,  beside, — 

She  bore  the  stabbing  to  a  certain  pitch  1435 

Without  a  useless  cry,  was  flung  for  dead 

On  Pietro's  lap,  and  so  attained  her  point. 

Her  friends  subjoin  this — have  I  done  with  them  ? — 

And  cite  the  miracle  of  continued  life 

(She  was  not  dead  when  I  arrived  just  now)  1440 

As  attestation  to  her  probity. 

Does  it  strike  your  Excellency  ?    Why,  your  Highness, 

The  self-command  and  even  the  final  prayer, 

Our  candour  must  acknowledge  explainable 

As  easily  by  the  consciousness  of  guilt.  1445 

So,  when  they  add  that  her  confession  nms 

She  was  of  wifehood  one  white  innocence 

In  thought,  word,  act,  from  first  of  her  short  life 

To  last  of  it ;  praying,  i'  the  face  of  death,     '  . 

That  God  forgive  her  other  sins — not  this,  1450 

She  is  charged  with  and  must  die  for,  that  she  failed 

Anyway  to  her  husband  :  while  thereon 


64  THE    RING    AND    THE    BOOK. 


Comments  the  old  Religious — **  So  much  good, 

"  Patience  beneath  enormity  of  ill, 

*'  I  hear  to  my  confusion,  woe  is  me,  1455 

"  Sinner  that  I  stand,  shamed  in  the  walk  and  gait 

"  I  have  practised  and  grown  old  in,  by  a  child  ! " — 

Guido's  friends  shrug  the  shoulder,  ''  Just  this  same 

*'  Prodigious  absolute  calm  in  the  last  hour 

"  Confirms  us, — being  the  natural  result  1460 

^'  Of  a  life  which  proves  consistent  to  the  close. 

-*  Having  braved  heaven  and  deceived  earth  throughout, 

"  She  braves  still  and  deceives  still,  gains  thereby 

''  Two  ends,  she  prizes  beyond  earth  or  heaven  : 

'*  First  sets  her  lover  free,  imperilled  sore  1465 

"  By  the  new  turn  things  take  :  he  answers  yet 

"  For  the  part  he  played  :    they  have   summoned   him 

indeed : 
"  The  past  ripped  up,  he  may  be  punished  still : 
**  What  better  way  of  saving  him  than  this  ? 
"  Then, — thus  she  dies  revenged  to  the  uttermost     147c 
^'  On  Guido,  drags  him  with  her  in  the  dark, 
"  The  lower  still  the  better,  do  you  doubt  ? 
"  Thus,  two  ways,  does  she  love  her  love  to  the  end, 
'^  And  hate  her  hate, — death,  hell  is  no  such  price 
"  To  pay  for  these, — lovers  and  haters  hold."  1475 


TERTIUM    QUID.  65 


But  there's  another  parry  for  the  thrust. 

'^  Confession,"  cry  folks — "a  confession,  think  ! 

'^  Confession  of  the  moribund  is  true  ! " 

Which  of  them,  my  wise  friends  ?     This  public  one, 

Or  the  private  other  we  shall  never  know  ?         •         1480 

The  private  may  contain, — your  casuists  teach, — 

The  acknowledgment  of,  and  the  penitence  for, 

That  other  public  one,  so  people  say. 

However  it  be, — we  trench  on  delicate  ground, 

Her  Eminence  is  peeping  o'er  the  cards, —  1485 

Can  one  find  nothing  in  behalf  of  this 

Catastrophe  ?     Deaf  folks  accuse  the  dumb  ! 

You  criticize  the  drunken  reel,  fool's-speech, 

Maniacal  gesture  of  the  man, — Ave  grant ! 

But  who  poured  poison  in  his  cup,  we  ask?  1490 

Recall  the  list  of  his  excessive  wrongs, 

First  cheated  in  his  wife,  robbed  by  her  kin. 

Rendered  anon  the  laughing-stock  o'  the  world 

By  the  story,  true  or  false,  of  his  wife's  birth, — 

The  last  seal  publicly  apposed  to  shame  1495 

By  the  open  flight  of  wife  and  priest, — why.  Sirs, 

Step  out  of  Rome  a  furlong,  would  you  know 

What  anotherguess  tribunal  than  ours  here, 

Mere  worldly  Court  without  the  help  of  grace, 

VOL.    II.  F 


66  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Thinks  of  just  that  one  incident  o'  the  flight?  1500 

Guido  preferred  the  same  complaint  before  " 

The  court  at  Arezzo,  bar  of  the  Granduke, — 

In  virtue  of  it  being  Tuscany 

Where  the  offence  had  rise  and  flight  began, — 

Self-same  complaint  he  made  in  the  sequel  here        1505 

Where  the  offence  grew  to  the  full,  the  flight 

Ended  :  offence  and  flight,  one  fact  judged  twice 

By  two  distinct  tribunals, — what  result  ? 

There  was  a  sentence  passed  at  the  same  time 

By  Arezzo  and  confirmed  by  the  Granduke,  1510 

Which  nothing  baulks  of  swift  and  sure  effect 

But  absence  of  the  guilty,  (flight  to  Rome 

Frees  them  from  Tuscan  jurisdiction  now) 

— Condemns  the  wife  to  the  opprobrious  doom 

Of  all  whom  law  just  lets  escape  from  death.  1515 

The  Stinche,  House  of  Punishment,  for  life, — 

That 's  what  the  wife  deserves  in  Tuscany  : 

Here,  she  deserves — remitting  with  a  smile 

To  her  father's  house,  main  object  of  the  flight ! 

The  thief  presented  with  the  thing  he  steals  !  1520 

At  this  discrepancy  of  judgments — mad, 
The  man  took  on  himself  the  office,  judged ; 


TERTIUM    QUID.  67 


And  the  only  argument  against  the  use 

O'  the  law  he  thus  took  into  his  own  hands 

Is  .  .  what,  I  ask  you? — that,  revenging  wrong,        1525 

He  did  not  revenge  sooner,  kill  at  first 

Whom  he  killed  last !     That  is  the  final  charge. 

Sooner  ?     What  's  soon  or  late  i'  the  case  ? — ask  we. 

A  wound  i'  the  flesh  no  doubt  wants  prompt  redress ; 

It  smarts  a  little  to-day,  well  in  a  week,  1530 

Forgotten  in  a  month ;  or  never,  or  now,  revenge  1 

But   a  wound   to  the  soul  ?     That  rankles   worse   and 

worse. 
Shall  I  comfort  you,  explaining — "Not  this  once 
"  But  now  it  may  be  some  five  hundred  times 
"  I  called  you  ruflian,  pandar,  liar  and  rogue  :  1535 

"  The  injury  must  be  less  by  lapse  of  time  ?  " 
The  wrong  is  a  wrong,  one  and  immortal  too, 
And  that  you  bore  it  those  five  hundred  times. 
Let  it  rankle  unrevenged  five  hundred  years, 
Is  just  five  hundred  wrongs  the  more  and  worse  !      1540 
Men,  plagued  this  fashion,  get  to  explode  this  way. 
If  left  no  other. 

"  But  we  left  this  man 
"  Many  another  way,  and  there's  his  fault," 


68  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

'T  is  answered — *'  He  himself  preferred  our  arm        1545 

"  O'  the  law  to  fight  his  battle  with.     No  doubt 

"  We  did  not  open  him  an  armoury 

'•  To  pick  and  choose  from,  use,  and  then  reject. 

''  He  tries  one  weapon  and  fails, — he  tries  the  next 

''  And  next :  he  flourishes  wit  and  common  sense,     r55o 

*'  They  fail  him, — he  plies  logic  doughtily, 

"  It  fails  him  too, — thereon,  discovers  last 

"  He  has  been  blind  to  the  combustibles — 

"  That  all  the  while  he  is  a-glow  with  ire, 

"  Boiling  with  irrepressible  rage,  and  so  1555 

^'  May  try  explosives  and  discard  cold  steel, — 

"  So  hire  assassins,  plot,  plan,  execute  ! 

"  Is  this  the  honest  self-forgetting  rage 

"  We  are  called  to  pardon  ?     Does  the  furious  bull 

"  Pick  out  four  help  mates  from  the  grazing  herd       1560 

"  And  journey  with  them  over  hill  and  dale 

^'  Till  he  find  his  enemy  ?  " 

What  rejoinder?  save 
That  friends  accept  our  bull-similitude. 
Bull-like, — the  indiscriminate  slaughter,  rude  1565 

And  reckless  aggravation  of  revenge, 
Were  all  i'  the  way  o'  the  brute  who  never  once  , 


TERTIUM    QUID.  69 


Ceases,  amid  all  provocation  more, 

To  bear  in  mind  the  first  tormentor,  first 

Giver  o'  the  Avound  that  goaded  him  to  fight :  1570 

And,  though  a  dozen  follow  and  reinforce 

The  aggressor,  wound  in  front  and  wound  in  flank, 

Continues  undisturbedly  pursuit, 

And  only  after  prostrating  his  prize 

Turns  on  the  pettier,  makes  a  general  prey.  1575 

So  Guido  rushed  against  Violante,  first 

Author  of  all  his  wrongs,  fons  et  origo 

Maloriim — increasingly  drunk, — which  justice  done, 

He  finished  with  the  rest.     Do  you  blame  a  bull  ? 

In  truth  you  look  as  puzzled  as  ere  I  preached  !        1580 

How  is  that  ?     There  are  difticulties  perhaps 

On  any  supposition,  and  either  side. 

Each  party  wants  too  much,  claims  sympathy 

For  its  object  of  compassion,  more  than  just. 

Cry  the  wife's  friends,  "  O  the  enormous  crime  1585 

"  Caused  by  no  provocation  in  the  world  ! " 

"  Was  not  the  wife  a  little  weak  ?  " — inquire — 

"  Punished  extravagantly,  if  you  please, 

"  But  meriting  a  little  punishment  ? 

"  One  treated  inconsiderately,  say,  1590 


70  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"Rather  than  one  deserving  not  at  all 

"  Treatment  and  discipline  o'  the  harsher  sort  ?  " 

No,  they  must  have  her  purity  itself, 

Quite  angel, — and  her  parents  angels  too 

Of  an  aged  sort,  immaculate,  word  and  deed,  ^595  . 

At  all  events,  so  seeming,  till  the  fiend. 

Even  Guido,  by  his  folly,  forced  from  them 

The  untoward  avowal  of  the  trick  o'  the  birth. 

Would  otherwise  be  safe  and  secret  now. 

Why,  here  you  have  the  awfulest  of  crimes  1600 

For  nothing  !     Hell  broke  loose  on  a  butterfly  ! 

A  dragon  born  of  rose-dew  and  the  moon  ! 

Yet  here  is  the  monster  !     Why,  he  's  a  mere  man — 

Born,  bred  and  brought  up  in  tlie  usual  way. 

His  mother  loves  him,  still  his  brothers  stick  1605 

To  the  good  fellow  of  the  boyish  games  ; 

The  Governor  of  his  town  knows  and  approves. 

The  Archbishop  of  the  place  knows  and  assists  : 

Here  he  has  Cardinal  This  to  vouch  for  the  past, 

Cardinal  That  to  trust  for  the  future, — match  16 10 

And  marriage  were  a  Cardinal's  making, — in  short, 

AVhat  if  a  tragedy  be  acted  here 

Impossible  for  malice  to  improve, 

And  innocent  Guido  with  his  innocent  four 


TERTIUM    QUID.  71 


Be  added,  all  five,  to  the  guilty  three,  1615 

That  we  of  these  last  days  be  edified 

With  one  full  taste  o'  the  justice  of  the  world  ? 

The  long  and  the  short  is,  truth  is  what  I  show  : — 

Undoubtedly  no  pains  ought  to  be  spared 

To  give  the  mob  an  inkling  of  our  lights.  1620 

It  seems  unduly  harsh  to  put  the  man 

To  the  torture,  as  I  hear  the  court  intends, 

Though  readiest  way  of  twisting  out  the  truth  ; 

He  is  noble,  and  he  may  be  innocent : 

On  the  other  hand,  if  they  exempt  the  man  1625 

(As  it  is  also  said  they  hesitate 

On  the  fair  ground,  presumptive  guilt  is  weak 

I'  the  case  of  nobility  and  privilege), — 

What  crime  that  ever  was,  ever  will  be, 

Deserves  the  torture  ?     Then  abolish  it !  1630 

You  see  the  reduction  ad  abstirdum^  Sirs  ? 

Her  Excellency  must  pronounce,  in  fine  ! 

What,  she  prefers  going  and  joining  play  ? 

Her  Highness  finds  it  late,  intends  retire  ? 

I  am  of  their  mind  :  only,  all  this  talk,  talked,  1635 

T  was  not  for  nothing  that  we  talked,  I  hope  ? 


72  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Both  know  as  much  about  it,  now,  at  least, 

As  all  Rome  :  no  particular  thanks,  I  beg  ! 

(You  '11  see,  I  have  not  so  advanced  myself, 

After  my  teaching  the  two  idiots  here  !)  1640 


(     73     ) 


V. 

COUNT  GUIDO   FRANCESCHINI. 

Thanks,  Sir,  but,  should  it  please  the  reverend  Court, 

I  feel  I  can  stand  somehow,  half  sit  down 

Without  help,  make  shift  to  even  speak,  you  see. 

Fortified  by  the  sip  of  .  .  .  why,  't  is  wine, 

Velletri, — and  not  vinegar  and  gall,  5 

So  changed  and  good  the  times  grow  !     Thanks,  kind 

Sir! 
Oh,  but  one  sip  's  enough  !  I  want  my  head 
To  save  my  neck,  there  's  work  awaits  me  still. 
How  cautious  and  considerate  .  .  .  aie,  aie,  aie, 
Not  your  fault,  sweet  Sir !     Come,  you  take  to  heart     10 
An  ordinary  matter.     Law  is  law. 
Noblemen  were  exempt,  the  vulgar  thought, 


74  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

From  racking,  but,  since  law  thinks  otherwise, 

I  have  been  put  to  the  rack  :  all  's  over  now, 

And  neither  wrist — what  men  style,  out  of  joint  :  15 

If  any  harm  be,  't  is  the  shoulder-blade, 

The  left  one,  that  seems  wrong  i'  the  socket, — Sirs, 

Much  could  not  happen,  I  was  quick  to  faint. 

Being  past  my  prime  of  life,  and  out  of  health. 

In  short  I  thank  you, — yes,  and  mean  the  Avord.  20 

Needs  must  the  Court  be  slow  to  understand 

How  this  quite  novel  form  of  taking  pain, 

This  getting  tortured  merely  in  the  flesh. 

Amounts  to  almost  an  agreeable  change 

In  my  case,  rne  fastidious,  plied  too  much  25 

With  opposite  treatment,  used  (forgive  the  joke) 

To  the  rasp-tooth  toying  with  this  brain  of  mine, 

And,  in  and  out  my  heart,  the  play  o'  the  probe. 

Four  years  have  I  been  operated  on 

I'  the  soul,  do  you  see — its  tense  or  tremulous  part —  30 

My  self-respect,  my  care  for  a  good  name. 

Pride  in  an  old  one,  love  of  kindred — ^just 

A  mother,  brothers,  sisters,  and  the  like. 

That  looked  up  to  my  face  when  days  were  dim, 

And  fancied  they  found  light  there — no  one  spot,  35 

Foppishly  sensitive,  but  has  paid  its  pang. 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  75 

That,  and  not  this  you  now  oblige  me  with, 

That  was  the  Vigil-torment,  if  you  please  ! 

The  poor  old  noble  House  that  drew  the  rags 

O'  the  Franceschini's  once  superb  array  40 

Close  round  her,  hoped  to  slink  unchallenged  by, — 

Pluck  off  these  !     Turn  the  drapery  inside  out 

And  teach  the  tittering  town  how  scarlet  wears ! 

Show  men  the  lucklessness,  the  improvidence 

Of  the  easy-natured  Count  before  this  Count,  45 

The  father  I  have  some  slight  feeling  for. 

Who  let  the  world  sHde,  nor  foresaw  that  friends 

Then  proud  to  cap  and  kiss  the  patron's  shoe, 

Would,  when  the  purse  he  left  held  spider-webs. 

Properly  push  his  child  to  wall  one  day  !  50 

Mimic  the  tetchy  humour,  furtive  glance 

And  brow  where  half  was  furious  half  fatigued, 

O'  the  same  son  got  to  be  of  middle  age. 

Sour,  saturnine, — your  humble  servant  here, — 

When  things  go  cross  and  the  young  wife,  he  finds        55 

Take  to  the  windov/  at  a  whistle's  bid, 

And  yet  demurs  thereon,  preposterous  fool  ! — 

Whereat  the  worthies  judge  he  wants  advice 

And  beg  to  civilly  ask  what 's  evil  here. 

Perhaps  remonstrate  on  the  habit  they  deem  60 


76  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


He  's  given  unduly  to,  of  beating  her 

.  .  Oh,  sure  he  beats  her — why  says  John  so  else. 

Who  is  cousin  to  George  who  is  sib  to  Tecla's  self 

Who  cooks  the  meal  and  combs  the  lady's  hair  ? 

What?     'T  is  my  wrist  you  merely  dislocate  -     65 

For  the  future  when  you  mean  me  martyrdom  ? 

— Let  the  old  mother's  economy  alone, 

How  the  brocade-strips  saved  o'  the  seamy  side 

O'  the  wedding-gown  buy  raiment  for  a  year  ? 

— How  she  can  dress  and  dish  up — lordly  dish  70 

Fit  for  a  duke,  lamb's  head  and  purtenance — 

With  her  proud  hands,  feast  household  so  a  week  ? 

No  word  o'  the  wine  rejoicing  God  and  man 

The  less  when  three-parts  water  ?     Then,  I  say, 

A  trifle  of  torture  to  the  flesh,  like  yours,  75 

While  soul  is  spared  such  foretaste  of  hell-fire, 

Is  naught.     But  I  curtail  the  catalogue 

Through  policy, — a  rhetorician's  trick, — 

Because  I  would  reserve  some  choicer  points 

O'  the  practice,  more  exactly  parallel —  80 

(Having  an  eye  to  climax)  with  what  gift. 

Eventual  grace  the  Court  may  have  in  store 

I'  the  way  of  plague — my  crown  of  punishments. 

When  I  am  hanged  or  headed,  time  enough 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHIXI.  77 

To  prove  the  tenderness  of  only  that,  85 

Mere  heading,  hanging, — not  their  counterpart, 

Not  demonstration  public  and  precise 

That  I,  having  married  the  mongrel  of  a  drab. 

Am  bound  to  grant  that  mongrel-brat,  my  wife. 

Her  mother's  birthright-Hcence  as  is  just, —  90 

I^et  her  sleep  undisturbed,  i'  the  family  st3de, 

Her  sleep  out  in  the  embraces  of  a  priest, 

Nor  disallow  their  bastard  as  my  heir ! 

Your  .sole  mistake, — dare  I  submit  so  much 

To  the  reverend  Court  ? — has  been  in  all  this  pains      95 

To  make  a  stone  roll  down  hill, — rack  and  wrench 

And  rend  a  man  to  pieces,  all  for  what  ? 

Why — make  him  ope  mouth  in  his  own  defence, 

Show  cause  for  what  he  has  done,  the  irregular  deed, 

(Since  that  he  did  it,  scarce  dispute  can  be)  100 

And  clear  his  fame  a  little,  beside  the  luck 

Of  stopping  even  yet,  if  possible, 

Discomfort  to  his  flesh  from  noose  or  axe — 

For  that,  out  come  the  implements  of  law  ! 

]May  it  content  my  lords  the  gracious  Court  105 

To  listen  only  half  so  patient-long 

As  I  will  in  that  sense  profusely  speak, 

And — fie,  they  shall  not  call  in  screws  to  help  ! 


78  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

I  killed  Pompilia  Franceschini,  Sirs  ; 

Killed  too  the  Comparini,  husband,  wife,  no 

Who  called  themselves,  by  a  notorious  lie, 

Her  father  and  her  mother  to  ruin  me. 

There  's  the  irregular  deed  :  you  want  no  more 

Than  right  interpretation  of  the  same, 

And  truth  so  far — am  I  to  understand?  115 

To  that  then,  with  convenient  speed, — because 

Now  I  consider, — yes,  despite  my  boast. 

There  is  an  ailing  in  this  omoplat 

May  clip  my  speech  all  too  abruptly  close. 

Whatever  the  good- will  in  me.     Now  for  truth  !  120 

I'  the  name  of  the  indivisible  Trinity ! 

Will  my  lords,  in  the  plentitude  of  their  light. 

Weigh  well  that  all  this  trouble  has  come  on  me 

Through  my  persistent  treading  in  the  paths 

Where  I  was  trained  to  go, — wearing  that  yoke  125 

My  shoulder  was  predestined  to  receive. 

Born  to  the  hereditary  stoop  and  crease  ? 

Noble,  I  recognized  my  nobler  still, 

The  Church,  my  suzerain  ;  no  mock-mistress,  she ; 

The  secular  owned  the  spiritual :  mates  of  mine         130 

Have  thrown  their  careless  hoofs  up  at  her  call 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  79 


*'  Forsake  the  clover  and  come  drag  my  wain  ! " 

There  they  go  cropping  :  I  protruded  nose 

To  halter,  bent  my  back  of  docile  beast, 

And  now  am  whealed,  one  wide  wound  all  of  me,       135 

For  being  found  at  the  eleventh  hour  o'  the  day 

Padding  the  mill-track,  not  neck-deep  in  grass  : 

— My  one  fault,  I  am  stiffened  by  my  work, 

— My  one  reward,  I  help  the  Court  to  smile  I 

I  am  representative  of  a  great  line,  140 

One  of  the  first  of  the  old  families 

In  Arezzo,  ancientest  of  Tuscan  towns. 

When  my  worst  foe  is  fain  to  challenge  this, 

His  w^orst  exception  runs — not  first  in  rank 

But  second,  noble  in  the  next  degree  ,  145 

Only ;  not  malice  'self  maligns  me  more. 

So,  my  lord  opposite  has  composed,  we  know, 

A  marvel  of  a  book,  sustains  the  point 

That  Francis  boasts  the  primacy  'mid  saints  ; 

Yet  not  inaptly  hath  his  argument  150 

Obtained  response  from  yon  my  other  lord 

In  thesis  published  with  the  world's  applause 

— Rather  't  is  Dominic  such  post  befits  : 

Why,  at  the  worst,  Francis  stays  Francis  still, 


8o  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Second  in  rank  to  Dominic  it  may  be,  155 

Still,  very  saintly,  very  like  our  Lord  ] 

And  I  at  least  descend  from  a  Guido  once 

Homager  to  the  Empire,  nought  below — 

Of  which  account  as  proof  that,  none  o'  the  line 

Having  a  single  gift  beyond  brave  blood,  160 

Or  able  to  do  aught  but  give,  give,  give 

In  blood  and  brain,  in  house  and  land  and  cash. 

Not  get  and  garner  as  the  vulgar  may. 

We  became  poor  as  Francis  or  our  Lord. 

Be  that  as  it  likes  you.  Sirs, — whenever  it  chanced      165 

Myself  grew  capable  anyway  of  remark, 

(Which  was  soon — penury  makes  wit  premature) 

This  struck  me,  I  was  poor  who  should  be  rich 

Or  pay  that  fault  to  the  world  which  trifles  not 

When  lineage  lacks  the  flag  yet  lifts  the  pole  :  170 

Therefore  I  must  make  move  forthwith,  transfer 

My  stranded  self,  born  fish  with  gill  and  fin 

Fit  for  the  deep  sea,  now  left  flap  bare-backed 

In  slush  and  sand,  a  show  to  crawlers  vile 

Reared  of  the  low-tide  and  aright  therein.  175 

The  enviable  youth  with  the  old  name. 

Wide  chest,  stout  arms,  sound  brow  and  pricking  veins, 

A  heartful  of  desire,  man's  natural  load, 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI. 


A  brainful  of  belief,  the  noble's  lot, — 

All  this  life,  cramped  and  gasping,  high  and  dry  i8o 

I'  the  wave's  retreat, — the  misery,  good  my  lords, 

Which  made  you  merriment  at  Rome  of  late, — 

It  made  me  reason,  rather — muse,  demand 

— Why  our  bare  dropping  palace,  in  the  street 

Where  such-an-one  whose  grandfather  sold  tripe  185 

Was  adding  to  his  purchased  pile  a  fourth 

Tall  tower,  could  hardly  show  a  turret  sound  ? 

Why  Countess  Beatrice,  whose  son  I  am. 

Cowered  in  the  winter-time  as  she  spun  flax, 

Blew  on  the  earthen  basket  of  live  ash,  190 

Instead  of  jaunting  forth  in  coach  and  six 

like  such-another  widow  who  ne'er  was  wed  ? 

I  asked  my  fellows,  how  came  this  about  ? 

"  Why,  Jack,  the  suttler's  child,  perhaps  the  camp's, 

"  Went  to  the  wars,  fought  sturdily,  took  a  town  195 

"  And  got  rewarded  as  was  natural. 

'^  She  of  the  coach  and  six — excuse  me  there  ! 

"  Why,  do  n't  you  know  the  story  of  her  friend  ? 

"  A  clown  dressed  vines  on  somebody's  estate, 

*^  His  boy  recoiled  from  muck,  liked  Latin  more,         200 

^'  Stuck  to  his  pen  and  got  to  be  a  priest, 

"  Till  one  day  .  .  do  n't  you  mind  that  telling  tract 

VOL.    II.  G 


82  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  Against  Molinos,  the  old  Cardinal  wrote  ? 

"  He  penned  and  dropped  it  in  the  patron's  desk 

''  Who,  deep  in  thought  and  absent  much  of  mind,     205 

'^  Licensed  the  thing,  allowed  it  for  his  own  ; 

"  Quick  came  promotion, — srnwi  cinque^  Count ! 

''  Oh,  he  can  pay  for  coach  and  six,  be  sure  1 " 

"  — ^Well,  let  me  go,  do  likewise  :  war  's  the  word — 

"  That  way  the  Franceschini  worked  at  first,  210 

"  I  '11  take  my  turn,  try  soldiership." — *'  What,  you  ? 

"  The  eldest  son  and  heir  and  prop  o'  the  house, 

"  So  do  you  see  your  duty  ?     Here  's  your  post, 

"  Hard  by  the  hearth  and  altar.     (Roam  from  roof, 

"  This  youngster,  play  the  gypsy  out  of  doors,  215 

"  And  who  keeps  kith  and  kin  that  fall  on  us  ?) 

"  Stand  fast,  stick  tight,  conserve  your  gods  at  home  ! " 

"•  — Well  then,  the  quiet  course,  the  contrary  trade  ! 

^'  We  had  a  cousin  amongst  us  once  was  Pope, 

^'  And  minor  glories  manifold.     Try  the  Church,         220 

"  The  tonsure,  and, — since  heresy  's  but  half-slain 

"  Even  by  the  Cardinal's  tract  he  thought  he  wrote, — 

"  Have  at  Molinos  ! " — ''  Have  at  a  fool's  head  ! 

"  You  a  priest  ?     How  were  marriage  possible  ? 

"  There  must  be  Franceschini  till  time  ends —  225 

*^  That 's  your  vocation.     Make  your  brothers  priests. 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  83 

'^  Paul  shall  be  porporate,  and  Girolamo  step 

"  Red-stockinged  in  the  presence  when  you  choose, 

^^  But  save  one  Franceschini  for  the  age  ! 

*^  Be  not  the  vine  but  dig  and  dung  its  root,  230 

"  Be  not  a  priest  but  gird  up  priesthood's  loins, 

'^  With  one  foot  in  Arezzo  stride  to  Rome, 

"  Spend  yourself  there  and  bring  the  purchase  back  ! 

"  Go  hence  to  Rome,  be  guided  ! " 

So  I  was.  235 

I  turned  alike  from  the  hill-side  zig-zag  thread 
Of  way  to  the  table-land  a  soldier  takes, 
Alike  from  the  low-lying  pasture-place 
Where  churchmen  graze,  recline  and  ruminate, 
— Ventured  to  mount  no  platform  like  my  lords  240 

Who  judge  the  world,  bear  brain  I  dare  not  brag — 
But  stationed  me,  might  thus  the  expression  serve. 
As  who  should  fetch  and  carry,  come  and  go. 
Meddle  and  make  i'  the  cause  my  lords  love  most —  244 
The  public  weal,  which  hangs  to  the  law,  which  holds 
By    the    Church,    which  happens   to   be   through  God 

himself. 
Humbly  I  helped  the  Church  till  here  I  stand, — 
Or  would  stand  but  for  the  omoplat,  you  see  ! 


84  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Bidden  qualify  for  Rome,  I,  having  a  field, 

Went,  sold  it,  laid  the  sum  at  Peter's  foot :  250 

Which  means — I  settled  home-accounts  with  speed. 

Set  apart  just  a  modicum  should  suffice 

To  keep  the  villa's  head  above  the  waves 

Of  weed  inundating  its  oil  and  wine. 

And  prop  roof,  stanchion  wall  o'  the  palace  so  255 

It  should  keep  breath  i'  the  body,  hold  its  own 

Amid  the  advance  of  neighbouring  loftiness — 

(People  like  building  where  they  used  to  beg) — 

Till  succoured  one  day, — shared  the  residue 

Between  my  mother  and  brothers  and  sisters  there,     260 

Black-eyed  babe  Donna  This  and  Donna  That, 

As  near  to  starving  as  might  decently  be, 

— Left  myself  journey-charges,  change  of  suit, 

A  purse  to  put  i'  the  pocket  of  the  Groom 

O'  the  Chamber  of  the  patron,  and  a  glove  265 

With  a  ring  to  it  for  the  digits  of  the  niece 

Sure  to  be  helpful  in  his  household, — then 

Started  for  Rome,  and  led  the  life  prescribed. 

Close  to  the  Church,  though  clean  of  it,  I  assumed 

Three  or  four  orders  of  no  consequence,  270 

— They  cast  out  evil  spirits  and  exorcise, 

For  example  j  bind  a  man  to  nothing  more, 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  85 

Give  clerical  savour  to  his  layman's-salt, 

Facilitate  his  claim  to  loaf  and  fish 

Should  miracle  leave,  beyond  what  feeds  the  flock,      275 

Fragments  to  brim  the  basket  of  a  friend — 

While,  for  the  world's  sake,  I  rode,  danced  and  gamed, 

Quitted  me  like  a  courtier,  measured  mine 

With  whatsoever  blade  had  fame  in  fence, 

— Ready  to  let  the  basket  go  its  round  280 

Even  though  my  turn  was  come  to  help  myself, 

Should  Dives  count  on  me  at  dinner-time 

As  just  the  understand er  of  a  joke 

And  not  immoderate  in  repartee. 

Utrique  sic parahis,  Sirs,  I  said  285 

''  Here,"  (in  the  fortitude  of  years  fifteen. 

So  good  a  pedagogue  is  penury) 

"  Here  wait,  do  service,  — serving  and  to  serve  ! 

''  And,  in  due  time,  I  nowise  doubt  at  all, 

^^  The  recognition  of  my  service  comes.  290 

"  Next  year  I'm  only  sixteen.     I  can  wait." 

I  waited  thirty  years,  may  it  please  the  Court : 

Saw  meanwhile  many  a  denizen  o'  the  dung 

Hop,  skip,  jump  o'er  my  shoulder,  make  him  wings 

And  fly  aloft, — succeed,  in  the  usual  phrase.  295 


S6  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Everyone  soon  or  late  comes  round  by  Rome  : 

Stand  still  here,  you  '11  see  all  in  turn  succeed. 

Why,  look  you,  so  and  so,  the  physician  here, 

My  father's  lacquey's  son  we  sent  to  school, 

Doctored  and  dosed  this  Eminence  and  that,  300 

Salved  the  last  Pope  his  certain  obstinate  sore. 

Soon  bought  land  as  became  him,  names  it  now : 

I  grasp  bell  at  his  griffin-guarded  gate, 

Traverse  the  half-mile  avenue, — a  term, 

A  cypress,  and  a  statue,  three  and  three, —  305 

Deliver  message  from  my  Monsignor, 

With  varletry  at  lounge  i'  the  vestibule 

I  'm  barred  from,  who  bear  mud  upon  my  shoe. 

My  father's  chaplain's  nephew.  Chamberlain, — 

Nothing  less,  please  you  ! — courteous  all  the  same,     310 

— He  does  not  see  me  though  I  wait  an  hour 

At  his  staircase-landing  'twixt  the  brace  of  busts, 

A  noseless  Sylla,  Marius  maimed  to  match, 

My  father  gave  him  for  a  hexastich 

Made  on  my  birth-day, — but  he  sends  me  down,         315 

To  make  amends,  that  relic  I  prize  most — 

The  unburnt  end  o'  the  very  candle.  Sirs, 

Purfied  with  paint  so  prettily  round  and  round, 

He  carried  in  such  state  last  Peter's-day, — 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  87 

In  token  I,  his  gentleman  and  squire,  320 

Had  held  the  bridle,  walked  his  managed  mule 

Without  a  tittup  the  procession  through. 

Nay,  the  official, — one  you  know,  sweet  lords  ! — 

Who  drew  the  warrant  for  my  transfer  late 

To  the  New  Prisons  from  Tordinona, — he  325 

Graciously  had  remembrance — "  Francesc  .  .  ha  ? 

''  His  sire,  now — how  a  thing  shall  come  about ! — 

"  Paid  me  a  dozen  florins  above  the  fee, 

"  For  drawing  deftly  up  a  deed  of  sale 

"  When  troubles  fell  so  thick  on  him,  good  heart,       330 

"  And  I  was  prompt  and  pushing  !     By  all  means  ! 

"  At  the  New  Prisons  be  it  his  son  shall  lie, — 

^^  Anything  for  an  old  friend  ! "  and  thereat 

Signed  name  with  triple  flourish  underneath. 

These  were  my  fellows,  such  their  fortunes  now,  335 

While  I — kept  fasts  and  feasts  innumerable. 

Matins  and  vespers,  functions  to  no  end 

I'  the  train  of  Monsignor  and  Eminence, 

As  gentleman-squire,  and  for  my  zeal's  reward 

Have  rarely  missed  a  place  at  the  table-foot  340 

Except  when  some  Ambassador,  or  such  like. 

Brought  his  own  people.     Brief,  one  day  I  felt 

The  tick  of  time  inside  me,  turning-point 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


And  slight  sense  there  was  now  enough  of  this  : 

That  I  was  near  my  seventh  dimacteric,  345 

Hard  upon,  if  not  over,  the  middle  life, 

And,  although  fed  by  the  east-wind,  fulsome-fine 

With  foretaste  of  the  Land  of  Promise,  still 

My  gorge  gave  symptom  it  might  play  me  false ; 

Better  not  press  it  further, — be  content  350 

With  living  and  dying  only  a  nobleman, 

Who  merely  had  a  father  great  and  rich, 

Who  simply  had  one  greater  and  richer  yet. 

And  so  on  back  and  back  till  first  and  best 

Began  i'  the  night;  I  finish  in  the  day.  355 

^^  The  mother  must  be  getting  old,"  I  said ; 

*^  The  sisters  are  well  wedded  away,  our  name 

"  Can  manage  to  pass  a  sister  off,  at  need, 

"  And  do  for  dowry :  both  my  brothers  thrive — 

"  Regular  priests  they  are,  nor,  bat-like,  'bide  360 

"  'Twixt  flesh  and  fowl  with  neither  privilege. 

*'  My  spare  revenue  must  keep  me  and  mine. 

*^  I  am  tired :  Arezzo's  air  is  good  to  breathe ; 

"  Vittiano, — one  limes  flocks  of  thrushes  there  ; 

"  A  leathern  coat  costs  little  and  lasts  long  :  365 

"  Let  me  bid  hope  good-bye,  content  at  home  !  " 

Thus,  one  day,  I  disbosomed  me  and  bowed. 


COUNT   GUTDO    FRANCESCHINI.  89 

AVhereat  began  the  little  buzz  and  thrill 

O'  the  gazers  round  me  ;  each  face  brightened  up  : 

As  when  at  your  Casino,  deep  in  dawn,  370 

A  gamester  says  at  last,  "  I  play  no  more, 

"  Forego  gain,  acquiesce  in  loss,  withdraw 

"  Anyhow  : "  and  the  watchers  of.  his  ways, 

A  trifle  struck  compunctious  at  the  word, 

Yet  sensible  of  relief,  breathe  free  once  more,  375 

Break  up  the  ring,  venture  polite  advice — 

'^  How,  Sir  ?     So  scant  of  heart  and  hope  indeed  ? 

"  Retire  with  neither  cross  nor  pile  from  play  ? — 

"  So  incurious,  so  short-casting  ? — give  your  chance 

"  To  a  younger,  stronger,  bolder  spirit  belike,  380 

"  Just  when  luck  turns  and  the  .fine  throw  sweeps  all  ?  " 

Such  was  the  chorus  :  and  its  goodwill  meant — 

"  See  that  the  loser  leave  door  handsomely  ! 

"  There  's  an  ill  look, — it 's  sinister,  spoils  sport, 

"  When  an  old  bruised  and  battered  year-b3^-year        385 

*'  Fighter  with  fortune,  not  a  penny  in  poke, 

"  Reels  down  the  steps  of  our  establishment 

"  And  staggers  on  broad  daylight  and  the  world, 

"  In  shagrag  beard  and  doleful  doublet,  drops 

"  And  breaks  his  heart  on  the  outside  :  people  prate  390 

"  '  Such  is  the  profit  of  a  trip  upstairs  ! ' 


90  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  Contrive  he  sidle  forth,  baulked  of  the  blow 

"  Best  dealt  by  way  of  moral,  bidding  down 

'^  No  curse  but  blessings  rather  on  our  heads 

^^  For  some  poor  prize  he  bears  at  tattered  breast,       395 

"  Some  palpable  sort  of  kind  of  good  to  set 

"  Over  and  against  the  grievance  :  give  him  quick  ! " 

Whereon  protested  Paul,  "  Go  hang  yourselves  ! 

'^  Leave  him  to  me.     Count  Guido  and  brother  of  mine, 

"  A  word  in  your  ear  !     Take  courage  since  faint  heart 

^*  Ne'er  won  .  .  .  aha,  fair  lady,  do  n't  m.en  say?        401 

"  There  's  a  sors,  there  's  a  right  Virgilian  dip  ! 

^'  Do  you  see  the  happiness  o'  the  hint  ?    At  worst, 

'^  If  the  Church  want  no  more  of  you,  the  Court 

"  No  more,  and  the  Camp  as  little,  the  ingrates, — come, 

"  Count  you  are  counted :  still  you  've  coat  to  back,  406 

"  Not  cloth  of  gold  and  tissue,  as  we  hoped, 

"  But  cloth  with  sparks  and  spangles  on  its  frieze 

"  From  Camp,  Court,  Church,  enough  to  make  a  shine, 

"  Entitle  you  to  carry  home  a  wife  410 

*'  With  the  proper  dowry,  let  the  worst  betide  ! 

^'  Why,  it  was  just  a  wife  you  meant  to  take  1 " 

Now,  Paul's  advice  was  weighty  :  priests  should  know : 
And  Paul  apprised  me,  ere  the  week  was  out, 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  9 1 


That  Pietro  and  Violante,  the  easy  pair,  415 

The  cits  enough,  with  stomach  to  be  more, 

Had  just  the  daughter  and  exact  the  sum 

To  truck  for  the  quality  of  myself :  "  She  's  young, 

"  Pretty  and  rich  :  you  're  noble,  classic,  choice. 

"  Is  it  to  be  a  match?"     "  A  match/'  said  I.  420 

Done  !     He  proposed  all,  I  accepted  all. 

And  we  performed  all.     So  I  said  and  did 

Simply.     As  simply  followed,  not  at  first 

But  with  the  outbreak  of  misfortune,  still 

One  comment  on  the  saying  and  doing — "  What  ?       425 

''  No  blush  at  the  avowal  you  dared  buy 

^'  A  girl  of  age  beseems  your  granddaughter, 

'^  Like  ox  or  ass  ?     Are  flesh  and  blood  a  ware  ? 

^'  Are  heart  and  soul  a  chattel  ?  " 

Softly,  Sirs  !  430 

Will  the  Court  of  its  charity  teach  poor  me 
Anxious  to  learn,  of  any  way  i'  the  world. 
Allowed  by  custom  and  convenience,  save 
This  same  which,  taught  from  my  youth  up,  I  trod  ? 
Take  me  along  with  you  ;  where  was  the  wrong  step  ? 
If  what  I  gave  in  barter,  style  and  state  436 

And  all  that  hangs  to  Franceschinihood, 
Were  worthless, — why,  society  goes  to  ground. 


92  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Its  rules  are  idiot' s-rambling.     Honour  of  birth, — 

If  that  thing  has  no  value,  cannot  buy  440 

Something  with  value  of  another  sort, 

You  Ve  no  reward  nor  punishment  to  give 

I'  the  giving  or  the  taking  honour ;  straight 

Your  social  fabric,  pinnacle  to  base. 

Comes  down  a-clatter  like  a  house  of  cards.  445 

Get  honour,  and  keep  honour  free  from  flaw, 

Aim  at  still  higher  honour, — gabble  o'  the  goose  ! 

Go  bid  a  second  blockhead  like  myself 

Spend  fifty  years  in  guarding  bubbles  of  breath. 

Soapsuds  with  air  i'  the  belly,  gilded  brave,  450 

Guarded  and  guided,  all  to  break  at  touch 

O'  the  first  young  girl's  hand  and  first  old  fool's  purse ! 

All  my  privation  and  endurance,  all 

Love,  loyalty  and  labour  dared  and  did. 

Fiddle-de-dee  ! — why,  doer  and  darer  both, —  455 

Count  Guido  Franceschini  had  hit  the  mark 

Far  better,  spent  his  life  with  more  eifect, 

As  a  dancer  or  a  prizer,  trades  that  pay  ! 

On  the  other  hand,  bid  this  buffoonery  cease, 

Admit  that  honour  is  a  privilege,  460 

The  question  follows,  privilege  worth  what  ? 

Why,  worth  the  market-price, — now  up,  now  down, 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  93 

Just  SO  with  this  as  with  all  other  ware  : 

Therefore  essay  the  market,  sell  your  name. 

Style  and  condition  to  who  buys  them  best !  465 

"  Does  my  name  purchase,"  had  I  dared  inquire, 

"  Your  niece,  my  lord  ?  "  there  would  have  been  rebuff 

Though  courtesy,  your  Lordship  cannot  else — 

"  Not  altogether  !     Rank  for  rank  may  stand  : 

"  But  I  have  wealth  beside,  you — poverty;  470 

"  Your  scale  flies  up  there :  bid  a  second  bid, 

'^  Rank  too  and  wealth  too  ! "     Reasoned  like  yourself! 

But  was  it  to  you  I  went  with  goods  to  sell  ? 

This  time  'twas  my  scale  quietly  kissed  the  ground, 

Mere  rank  against  mere  wealth — some  youth  beside,  475 

Some  beauty  too,  thrown  into  the  bargain,  just 

As  the  buyer  likes  or  lets  alone.     I  thought 

To  deal  o'  the  square  :  others  find  fault,  it  seems  : 

The  thing  is,  those  my  oft'er  most  concerned, 

Pietro,  Violante,  cried  they  fair  or  foul  ?  480 

What  did  they  make  o'  the  terms  ?     Preposterous  terms  ? 

Why  then  accede  so  promptly,  close  with  such 

Nor  take  a  minute  to  chaffer  ?     Bargain  struck, 

They  straight  grew  bilious,  wished  their  money  back, 

Repented  them,  no  doubt :  why,  so  did  I,  485 

So  did  your  Lordship,  if  town-talk  be  true, 


94  I'HE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Of  paying  a  full  farm's  worth  for  that  piece 

By  Pietro  of  Cortona — probably 

His  scholar  Giro  Ferri  may  have  retouched — 

You  caring  more  for  colour  than  design —  490 

Getting  a  little  tired  of  cupids  too. 

That  's  incident  to  all  the  folk  Avho  buy  ! 

I  am  charged,  I  know,  with  gilding  fact  by  fraud  j 

I  falsified  and  fabricated,  wrote 

Myself  down  roughly  richer  than  I  prove,  495 

Rendered  a  wrong  revenue, — grant  it  all ! 

Mere  grace,  mere  coquetry  such  fraud,  I  say : 

A  flourish  round  the  figures  of  a  sum 

For  fashion's  sake,  that  deceives  nobody. 

The  veritable  back-bone,  understood  500 

Essence  of  this  same  bargain,  blank  and  bare. 

Being  the  exchange  of  quality  for  wealth, — 

What  may  such  fancy-flights  be  ?     Flecks  of  oil 

Flirted  by  chapmen  where  plain  dealing  grates. 

I  may  have  dripped  a  drop — ^^  My  name  I  sell ;  505 

''  Not  but  that  I  too  boast  my  wealth  " — as  they, 

''  — We  bring  you  riches  ;  still  our  ancestor 

''  Was  hardly  the  rapscallion,  folks  saw  flogged, 

"  But  heir  to  we  know  who,  were  rights  of  force  ! " 

They  knew  and  I  knew  where  the  back-bone  lurked  510 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHIXI.  95 


I'  the  writhings  of  the  bargain,  lords,  believe  ! 

I  paid  down  all  engaged  for,  to  a  doit. 

Delivered  them  just  that  which,  their  life  long. 

They  hungered  in  the  hearts  of  them  to  gain — 

Incorporation  with  nobility  thus  515 

In  word  and  deed  :  for  that  they  gave  me  wealth. 

But  when  they  came  to  try  their  gain,  my  gift, 

Quit  Rome  and  qualify  for  Arezzo,  take 

The  tone  o'  the  new  sphere  that  absorbed  the  old. 

Put  away  gossip  Jack  and  goody  Joan  520 

And  go  become  familiar  with  the  Great, 

Greatness  to  touch  and  taste  and  handle  now, — 

Why,  then, — they  found  that  all  was  vanity. 

Vexation,  and  what  Solomon  describes  ! 

The  old  abundant  city-fare  was  best,  525 

The  kindly  warmth  o'  the  commons,  the  glad  clap 

Of  the  equal  on  the  shoulder,  the  frank  grin 

Of  the  underling  at  all  so  many  spoons 

Fire-new  at  neighbourly  treat, — best,  best  and  best 

Beyond  compare  ! — down  to  the  loll  itself  530 

O'  the  pot-house  settle, — better  such  a  bench 

Than  the  stiff  crucifixion  by  my  dais 

Under  the  piece-meal  damask  canopy 

With  the  coroneted  coat  of  arms  a-top  ! 


9^  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Poverty  and  privation  for  pride's  sake,  535 

All  they  engaged  to  easily  brave  and  bear, — 

With  the  fit  upon  them  and  their  brains  a-work, — 

Proved  unendurable  to  the  sobered  sots. 

A  banished  prince,  now,  will  exude  a  juice 

And  salamander-like  support  the  flame  :  540 

He  dines  on  chesnuts,  chucks  the  husks  to  help 

The  broil  o'  the  brazier,  pays  the  due  baioc, 

Goes  off  light-hearted  :  his  grimace  begins 

At  the  funny  humours  of  the  christening-feast 

Of  friend  the  money-lender, — then  he  's  touched         545 

By  the  flame  and  frizzles  at  the  babe  to  kiss  ! 

Here  was  the  converse  trial,  opposite  mind  : 

Here  did  a  petty  nature  split  on  rock 

Of  vulgar  wants  predestinate  for  such — 

One  dish  at  supper  and  weak  wine  to  boot !  550 

The  prince  had  grinned  and  borne  :  the  citizen  shrieked, 

Summoned  the  neighbourhood  to  attest  the  wrong. 

Made  noisy  protest  he  was  murdered, — stoned 

And   burned   and    drowned  and   hanged, — then   broke 

away, 
He  and  his  wife,  to  tell  their  Rome  the  rest.  555 

And  this  you  admire,  you  men  o'  the  world,  my  lords  ? 
This  moves  compassion,  makes  you  doubt  my  faith  ? 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  97 

Why,  I  appeal  to  .  .  sun  and  moon  ?     Not  I  ! 

Rather  to  Plautus,  Terence,  Boccaccio's  Book, 

My  townsman,  frank  Ser  Franco's  merry  Tales, —       560 

To  all  who  strip  a  vizard  from  a  face, 

A  body  from  its  padding,  and  a  soul 

From  froth  and  ignorance  it  styles  itself, — 

If  this  be  other  than  the  daily  hap 

Of  purbhnd  greed  that  dog-like  still  drops  bone,  565 

Grasps  shadow,  and  then  howls  the  case  is  hard  ! 

So  much  for  them  so  far  :  now  for  myself, 

My  profit  or  loss  i'  the  matter  :  married  am  I  : 

Text  whereon  friendly  censors  burst  to  preach. 

Ay,  at  Rome  even,  long  ere  I  was  left  570 

To  regulate  her  life  for  my  young  bride 

Alone  at  Arezzo,  friendliness  outbroke 

(Sifting  my  future  to  predict  its  fault) 

'^  Purchase  and  sale  being  thus  so  plain  a  point, 

'^  How  of  a  certain  soul  bound  up,  may-be,  575 

''  I'  the  barter  with  the  body  and  money-bags  ? 

''  From  the  bride's  soul  what  is  it  you  expect  ?  " 

Why,  loyalty  and  obedience, — wish  and  will 

To  settle  and  suit  her  fresh  and  plastic  mind 

To  the  novel,  nor  disadvantageous  mould  !  580 

VOL.    II.  H 


98  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Father  and  mother  shall  the  woman  leave, 

Cleave  to  the  husband,  be  it  for  weal  or  woe  : 

There  is  the  law  :  what  sets  this  law  aside 

In  my  particular  case  ?     My  friends  submit 

"  Guide,  guardian,  benefactor, — fee,  faw,  fum,  585 

"  The  fact  is  you  are  forty-five  years  old, 

'^  Nor  very  comely  even  for  that  age  : 

"  Girls  must  have  boys."     Why,  let  girls  say  so  then. 

Nor  call  the  boys  and  men,  who  say  the  same. 

Brute  this  and  beast  the  other  as  they  do  !  590 

Come,  cards  on  table  !     When  you  chaunt  us  next 

Epithalamium  full  to  overflow 

With  praise  and  glory  of  white  womanhood, 

The  chaste  and  pure — troll  no  such  lies  o'er  lip  ! 

Put  in  their  stead  a  crudity  or  two,  595 

Such  short  and  simple  statement  of  the  case 

As  youth  chalks  on  our  walls  at  spring  of  year  ! 

No  !  I  shall  still  think'  nobler  of  the  sex, 

Believe  a  woman  still  may  take  a  man 

For  the  short  period  that  his  soul  wears  flesh,  600 

And,  for  the  soul's  sake,  understand  the  fault 

Of  armour  frayed  by  fighting.     Tush,  it  tempts 

One's  tongue  too  much  !    I  '11  say — the  law  's  the  law  : 

With  a  wife  I  look  to  find  all  wifeliness, 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  99 

As  when  I  buy,  timber  and  twig,  a  tree —  605 

I  buy  the  song  o'  the  nightingale  inside. 

Such  was  the  pact :  PompiHa  from  the  first 

Broke  it,  refused  from  the  beginning  day 

Either  in  body  or  soul  to  cleave  to  mine, 

And  published  it  forthwith  to  all  the  world.  610 

No  rupture, — you  must  join  ere  you  can  break, — 

Before  we  had  cohabited  a  month 

She  found  I  was  a  devil  and  no  man, — 

Made  common  cause  with  those  who  found  as  much, 

Her  parents,  Pietro  and  Violante, — moved  615 

Heaven  and  earth  to  the  rescue  of  all  three. 

In  four  months'  time,  the  time  o'  the  parents'  stay, 

Arezzo  was  a-ringing,  bells  in  a  blaze, 

With  the  unimaginable  story  rife 

I'  the  mouth  of  man,  woman  and  child — to-wit  620 

My  misdemeanour.     First  the  lighter  side. 

Ludicrous  face  of  things, — how  very  poor 

The  Franceschini  had  become  at  last, 

The  meanness  and  the  misery  of  each  shift 

To  save  a  soldo,  stretch  and  make  ends  meet.  625 

Next,  the  more  hateful  aspect, — how  myself 

With  cruelty  beyond  Caligula's 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Had  Stripped  and  beaten,  robbed  and  murdered  them, 

The  good  old  couple,  I  decoyed,  abused, 

Plundered  and  then  cast  out,  and  happily  so,  630 

Since, — in  due  course  the  abominable  comes, — 

Woe  worth  the  poor  young  wife  left  lonely  here  ! 

Repugnant  in  my  person  as  my  mind, 

I  sought, — was  ever  heard  of  such  revenge  ? 

—To  lure  and  bind  her  to  so  cursed  a  couch,  635 

Such  co-embrace  with  sulphur,  snake  and  toad. 

That  she  was  fain  to  rush  forth,  call  the  stones 

O'  the  common  street  to  save  her,  not  from  hate 

Of  mine  merely,  but  .  .  .  must  I  burn  my  lips 

With  the  blister  of  the  lie  ?  .  .  the  satyr-love  640 

Of  who  but  my  own  brother,  the  young  priest, 

Too  long  enforced  to  lenten  fare  belike. 

Now  tempted  by  the  morsel  tossed  him  full 

I'  the  trencher  where  lay  bread  and  herbs  at  best. 

Mark,  this  yourselves  say  ! — this,  none  disallows,         645 

Was  charged  to  me  by  the  universal  voice 

At  the  instigation  of  my  four-months'  wife  ! — 

And  then  you  ask  ''  Such  charges  so  preferred, 

'^  (Truly  or  falsely,  here  concerns  us  not) 

"  Pricked  you  to  punish  now  if  not  before  ? —  650 

*^  Did  not  the  harshness  double  itself,  the  hate 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI. 


''  Harden  ?  "  I  answer  "  Have  it  your  way  and  will  !  " 

Say  my  resentment  grew  apace  :  what  then  ? 

Do  you  cry  out  on  the  marvel  ?     When  I  find 

That  pure  smooth  egg  which,  laid  within  my  nest,       655 

Could  not  but  hatch  a  comfort  to  us  all, 

Issues  a  cockatrice  for  me  and  mine, 

Do  you  stare  to  see  me  stamp  on  it  ?     Swans  are  soft : 

Is  it  not  clear  that  she  you  call  my  wife. 

That  any  wife  of  any  husband,  caught  660 

Whetting  a  sting  like  this  against  his  breast, — 

Speckled  with  fragments  of  the  fresh-broke  shell. 

Married  a  month  and  making  outcry  thus, — 

Proves  a  plague-prodigy  to  God  and  man  ? 

She  married  :  what  was  it  she  married  for,  66^ 

Counted  upon  and  meant  to  meet  thereby  ? 

''  Love"  suggests  some  one,  *'  love,  a  little  word 

•'•  Whereof  we  have  not  heard  one  syllable." 

So,  the  Pompilia,  child,  girl,  wife,  in  one, 

Wanted  the  beating  pulse,  the  rolling  eye,  670 

The  frantic  gesture,  the  devotion  due 

From  Thyrsis  to  Neaera  !  Guido's  love — 

AVhy  not  proven^al  roses  in  his  shoe, 

Plume  to  his  cap,  and  trio  of  guitars 

At  casement,  with  a  bravo  close  beside  ?  675 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Good  things  all  these  are,  clearly  claimable 

When  the  fit  price  is  paid  the  proper  way. 

Had  it  been  some  friend's  wife,  now,  threw  her  fan 

At  my  foot,  with  just  this  pretty  scrap  attached, 

"  Shame,  death,  damnation — fall  these  as  they  may,   680 

"  So  I  find  you,  for  a  minute  !     Come  this  eve  !  " 

— Why,  at  such  sweet  self-sacrifice, — who  knows  ? 

I  might  have  fired  up,  found  me  at  my  post, 

Ardent  from  head  to  heel,  nor  feared  catch  cough. 

Nay,  had  some  other  friend's  .  .  say,  daughter,  tripped 

Upstairs  and  tumbled  flat  and  frank  on  me,  686 

Bareheaded  and  barefooted,  with  loose  hair 

And  garments  all  at  large, — cried  "  Take  me  thus  ! 

"  Duke  So-and-So,  the  greatest  man  in  Rome — 

^'  To  escape  his  hand  and  heart  have  I  broke  bounds, 

"  Traversed  the  town  and  reached  you!" — Then,  indeed. 

The  lady  had  not  reached  a  man  of  ice  !  692 

1  would  have  rummaged,  ransacked  at  the  word 

Those  old  odd  corners  of  an  empty  heart 

For  remnants  of  dim  love  the  long  disused,  695 

And  dusty  crumblings  of  romance  !     But  here, 

We  talk  of  just  a  marriage,  if  you  please — 

The  every-day  conditions  and  no  more ; 

Where  do  these  bind  me  to  bestow  one  drop 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  J  03 

Of  blood  shall  dye  my  wife's  true-love-knot  pink?       700 

Pompilia  was  no  pigeon,  Venus'  pet, 

That  shuffled  from  between  her  pressing  paps 

To  sit  on  my  rough  shoulder, — but  a  hawk, 

I  bought  at  a  hawk's  price  and  carried  home 

To  do  hawk's  service— at  the  Rotunda,  say,  705 

Where,  six  o'  the  callow  nestlings  in  a  row. 

You  pick  and  choose  and  pay  the  price  for  such. 

I  have  paid  my  pound,  await  my  penny's  worth, 

So,  hoodwink,  starve  and  properly  train  my  bird, 

And,  should  she  prove  a  haggard, — twist  her  neck  !    710 

Did  I  not  pay  my  name  and  style,  my  hope 

And  trust,  my  all  ?     Through  spending  these  amiss 

I  am  here  !     'T  is  scarce  the  gravity  of  the  Court 

Will  blame  me  that  I  never  piped  a  tune, 

Treated  my  falcon-gentle  like  my  finch.  715 

The  obligation  I  incurred  was  just 

To  practise  mastery,  prove  my  mastership  : — 

PompiHa's  duty  was — submit  herself. 

Afford  me  pleasure,  perhaps  cure  my  bile. 

Am  I  to  teach  my  lords  what  marriage  means,  720 

What  God  ordains  thereby  and  man  fulfils 

Who,  docile  to  the  dictate,  treads  the  house  ? 

My  lords  have  chosen  the  happier  part  with  Paul 


104  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

And  neither  marry  nor  burn, — yet  priestliness 

Can  find  a  parallel  to  the  marriage-bond  725 

In  its  own  blessed  special  ordinance 

Whereof  indeed  was  marriage  made  the  type  : 

The  Church  may  show  her  insubordinate, 

As  marriage  her  refractory.     How  of  the  Monk 

Who  finds  the  claustral  regimen  too  sharp  730 

After  the  first  month's  essay  ?     What's  the  mode 

With  the  Deacon  who  supports  indifferently  * 

The  rod  o'  the  Bishop  when  he  tastes  its  smart 

Full  four  weeks?     Do  you  straightway  slacken  hold 

Of  the  innocents,  the  all-unwary  ones  735 

Who,  eager  to  profess,  mistook  their  mind  ? — 

Remit  a  fast-day's  rigour  to  the  Monk 

Who  fancied  Francis'  manna  meant  roast  quails, 

Concede  the  Deacon  sweet  society. 

He  never  thought  the  Levite-rule  renounced, —  740 

Or  rather  prescribe  short  chain  and  sharp  scourge 

Corrective  of  such  peccant  humours  ?     This — 

I  take  to  be  the  Church's  mode,  and  mine. 

If  I  was  over-harsh, — the  worse  i'  the  wife 

Who  did  not  win  from  harshness  as  she  ought,  745 

Wanted  the  patience  and  persuasion,  lore 

Of  love,  should  cure  me  and  console  herself 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  105 

Put  case  that  I  mishandle,  flurry  and  fright 

My  hawk  through  ckimsiness  in  sportsmanship, 

Twitch  out  five  pens  where  plucking  one  would  serve — 

What,  shall  she  bite  and  claw  to  mend  the  case  ?         75^1 

And,  if  you  find  I  pluck  five  more  for  that, 

Shall  you  weep  "  How  he  roughs  the  turtle  there  ?  " 

'  Such  was  the  starting ;  now  of  the  further  step. 
In  lieu  of  taking  penance  in  good  part,  755 

The  Monk,  with  hue  and  cry,  summons  a  mob 
To  make  a  bonfire  of  the  convent,  say, — 
And  the  Deacon's  pretty  piece  of  virtue  (save 
The  ears  o'  the  Court  !  I  try  to  save  my  head) 
Instructed  by  the  ingenuous  postulant,  760 

Taxes  the  Bishop  with  adultery,  (mud 
Needs  must  pair  off  with  mud,  and  filth  with  filth) — 
Such  being  my  next  experience  :  who  knows  not — 
The  couple,  father  and  mother  of  my  wife. 
Returned  to  Rome,  published  before  my  lords,  765 

Put  into  print,  made  circulate  far  and  wide 
That  they  had  cheated  me  who  cheated  them  ? 
Pompilia,  I  supposed  their  daughter,  drew 
Breath  first  'mid  Rome's  worst  rankness,  through  the  deed 
Of  a  drab  and  a  rogue,  was  bye-blow  bastard-babe     770 


Io6  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Of  a  nameless  strumpet,  passed  off,  palmed  on  me 

As  the  daughter  with  the  dowry.     Daughter?     Dht 

O'  the  kennel !     Dowry  ?     Dust  o'  the  street  !     Nought 

Nought  less,  nought  else  but — oh — ah — assuredly  [more, 

A  Franceschini  and  my  very  wife  !  775 

Now  take  this  charge  as  you  will,  for  false  or  true, — 

This  charge,  preferred  before  your  very  selves 

Who  judge  me  now, — I  pray  you,  adjudge  again, 

Classing  it  with  the  cheats  or  with  the  lies, 

By  which  category  I  suffer  most !  780 

But  of  their  reckoning,  theirs  who  dealt  with  me 

In  either  fashion, — I  reserve  my  word. 

Justify  that  in  its  place ;  I  am  now  to  say, 

Whichever  point  o'  the  charge  might  poison  most, 

Pompilia's  duty  was  no  doubtful  one.  785 

You  put  the  protestation  in  her  mouth 

"  Henceforward  and  forevermore,  avaunt 

'^  Ye  fiends,  who  drop  disguise  and  glare  revealed 

"  In  your  own  shape,  no  longer  father  mine 

"  Nor  mother  mine  !  Too  nakedly  you  hate  790 

^'  Me  whom  you  looked  as  if  you  loved  once, — me 

"  Whom,  whether  true  or  false,  your  tale  now  damns, 

"  Divulged  thus  to  my  public  infamy, 

^*  Private  perdition,  absolute  overthrow. 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  I07 

'^  For,  hate  my  husband  to  your  hearts'  content,  795 

"  I,  spoil  and  prey  of  you  from  first  to  last, 

"  I  who  have  done  you  the  blind  service,  lured 

'^  The  lion  to  your  pit-fall, — I,  thus  left 

^'  To  answer  for  my  ignorant  bleating  there, 

^'  I  should  have  been  remembered  and  withdrawn       800 

''  From  the  first  o'  the  natural  fury,  not  flung  loose 

^'  A  proverb  and  a  byeword  men  w^ill  mouth 

"  At  the  cross- way,  in  the  corner,  up  and  down  . 

"  Rome  and  Arezzo, — there,  full  in  my  face, 

^^  If  my  lord,  missing  them  and  finding  me,  805 

'^  Content  himself  with  casting  his  reproach 

''  To  drop  i'  the  street  where  such  impostors  die. 

'^  Ah,  but — that  husband,  what  the  wonder  were  ! — 

"  If,  far  from  casting  thus  away  the  rag 

'^  Smeared  with  the  plague,  his  hand  had  chanced  upon, 

"  Sewn  to  his  pillow  by  Locusta's  wile, —  811 

"  Far  from  abolishing,  root,  stem  and  branch, 

''  The  misgrowth  of  infectious  mistletoe 

"  Foisted  into  his  stock  for  honest  graft, — 

"  If  he,  repudiate  not,  renounce  nowise,  815 

"  But,  guarding,  guiding  me,  maintain  my  cause 

"  By  making  it  his  own,  (what  other  way  ?) 

''  — To  keep  my  name  for  me,  he  call  it  his, 


I08  THE    RING    AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  Claim  it  of  who  would  take  it  by  their  lie, — 

'^  To  save  my  wealth  for  me — or  babe  of  mine  820 

"  Their  lie  was  framed  to  beggar  at  the  birth — 

'^  He  bid  them  loose  grasp,  give  our  gold  again  : 

"  Refuse  to  become  partner  with  the  pair 

**  Even  in  a  game  which,  played  adroitly,  gives 

^'  Its  winner  life's  great  wonderful  new  chance, —        825 

'^  Of  marrying,  to-wit,  a  second  time, — 

"  Ah,  did  he  do  thus,  what  a  friend  were  he  ! 

"  Anger  he  might  show, — who  can  stamp  out  flame 

'^  Yet  spread  no  black  o'  the  brand  ? — yet,  rough  albeit 

'^  In  the  act,  as  whose  bare  feet  feel  embers  scorch,    830 

'^  What  grace  were  his,  what  gratitude  were  mine  1 " 

Such  protestation  should  have  been  my  wife's. 

Looking  for  this,  do  I  exact  too  much  ? 

Why,  here 's  the, — word  for  word  so  much,  no  more, — 

Avowal  she  made,  her  pure  spontaneous  speech  ^^j^  5 

To  my  brother  the  Abate  at  first  blush, 

Ere  the  good  impulse  had  begun  to  fade — 

So  did  she  make  confession  for  the  pair. 

So  pour  forth  praises  in  her  own  behalf. 

'^  Ay,  the  false  letter,"  interpose  my  lords —  840 

"  The  simulated  writing, — 't  was  a  trick  : 

"  You  traced  the  signs,  she  merely  marked  the  same, 


COUNT  GUIDO  FRANCESCHINI.  109 

''  The  product  was  not  hers  but  yours."     Alack, 

I  want  no  more  impulsion  to  tell  truth 

From  the  other  trick,  the  torture  inside  there  !  845 

I  confess  all — let  it  be  understood — 

And  deny  nothing  !     If  I  baffle  you  so, 

Can  so  fence,  in  the  plenitude  of  right. 

That  my  poor  lath  en  dagger  puts  aside 

Each  pass  o'  the  Bilboa,  beats  you  all  the  same, —      850 

What  matters  inefficiency  of  blade  ? 

Mine  and  not  hers  the  letter, — conceded,  lords  ! 

Impute  to  me  that  practice  ! — take  as  proved 

I  taught  my  wife  her  duty,  made  her  see 

What  it  behoved  her  see  and  say  and  do,  855 

Feel  in  her  heart  and  with  her  tongue  declare, 

And,  whether  sluggish  or  recalcitrant, 

Forced  her  to  take  the  right  step,  I  myself 

Marching  in  mere  marital  rectitude  ! 

And  who  finds  fault  here,  say  the  tale  be  true  ?  860 

Would  not  my  lords  commend  the  priest  whose  zeal 

Seized  on  the  sick,  morose  or  moribund. 

By  the  palsy-smitten  finger,  made  it  cross 

His  brow  correctly  at  the  critical  time  ? 

— Or  answered  for  the  inarticulate  babe  865 

At  baptism,  in  its  stead  declared  the  faith. 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


And  saved  what  else  would  perish  unprofessed  ? 

True,  the  incapable  hand  may  rally  yet, 

Renounce  the  sign  with  renovated  strength, — 

The  babe  may  grow  up  man  and  Molinist, —  870 

And  so  Pompilia,  set  in  the  good  path 

And  left  to  go  alone  there,  soon  might  see 

That  too  frank-forward,  all  too  simple-strait 

Her  step  was,  and  decline  to  tread  the  rough. 

When  here  lay,  tempting  foot,  the  meadow-side,  875 

And  there  the  coppice  called  with  singing-birds  ! 

Soon  she  discovered  she  was  young  and  fair, 

That  many  in  Arezzo  knew  as  much, — 

Yes,  this  next  cup  of  bitterness,  my  lords, 

llad  to  begin  go  filling,  drop  by  drop,  880 

Its  measure  up  of  full  disgust  for  me, 

Filtered  into  by  every  noisome  drain — 

Society's  sink  toward  which  all  moisture  runs. 

Would  not  you  prophesy — "  She  on  whose  brow  is  stamped 

^'  The  note  of  the  imputation  that  we  know, —  885 

"  Rightly  or  wrongly  mothered  with  a  whore, — ■ 

"  Such  an  one,  to  disprove  the  frightful  charge, 

"  What  will  she  but  exaggerate  chastity, 

"  Err  in  excess  of  wifehood,  as  it  were, 

*^  Renounce  even  levities  permitted  youth,  890 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  Ill 

"  Though  not  youth  struck  to  age  by  a  thunderbolt  ? 

"  Cry  Svolf  i'  the  sheepfold,  where  's  the  sheep  dares 

bleat, 
"  Knowing  the  shepherd  listens  for  a  growl  ?" 
So  you  expect.     How  did  the  devil  decree  ? 
Why,  my  lords,  just  the  contrary  of  course  !  895 

It  was  in  the  house  from  the  window,  at  the  church 
From  the  hassock, — where  the  theatre  lent  its  lodge, 
Or  staging  for  the  public  show  left  space, — 
That  still  Pompilia  needs  must  find  herself 
launching  her  looks  forth,  letting  looks  reply  900 

As  arrows  to  a  challenge  j  on  all  sides 
Ever  new  contribution  to  her  lap. 
Till  one  day,  what  is  it  knocks  at  my  clenched  teeth 
But  the  cup  full,  curse-collected  all  for  me  ? 
And  I  must  needs  drink,  drink  this  gallant's  praise,     905 
That  minion's  prayer,  the  other  fop's  reproach. 
And  come  at  the  dregs  to — Caponsacchi !     Sirs, 
I, — chin  deep  in  a  marsh  of  misery. 
Struggling  to  extricate  my  name  and  fame 
And  fortune  from  the  marsh  would  drown  them  all,    910 
My  face  the  sole  unstrangled  part  of  me, — 
I  must  have  this  new  gad-fly  in  that  face, 
Must  free  me  from  the  attacking  lover  too  ! 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Men  say  I  battled  ungracefully  enough — 

Was  harsh,  uncouth  and  ludicrous  beyond  915 

The  proper  part  o'  the  husband  :  have  it  so  ! 

Your  lordships  are  considerate  at  least — 

You  order  me  to  speak  in  my  defence 

Plainly,  expect  no  quavering  tuneful  trills 

As  when  you  bid  a  singer  solace  you, —  920 

Nor  look  that  I  shall  give  it,  for  a  grace, 

Stans  pede  in  tmo  : — you  remember  well 

In  the  one  case,  't  is  a  plainsong  too  severe. 

This  story  of  my  wrongs, — and  that  I  ache 

And  need  a  chair,  in  the  other.     Ask  you  me  925 

Why,  when  I  felt  this  trouble  flap  my  face, 

Already  pricked  with  every  shame  could  perch, — 

When,  with  her  parents,  my  wife  plagued  me  too, — 

Why  I  enforced  not  exhortation  mild 

To  leave  whore's-tricks  and  let  my  brows  alone,  930 

With  mulct  of  comfits,  promise  of  perfume  ? 

"  Far  from  that !     No,  you  took  the  opposite  course, 
"•  Breathed   threatenings,    rage   and  slaughter ! "     What 

you  will  ! 
And  the  end  has  come,  the  doom  is  verily  here. 
Unhindered  by  the  threatening.     See  fate's  flare         935 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  II3 

Full  on  each  face  of  the  dead  guilty  three  1 

Look  at  them  well,  and  now,  lords,  look  at  this  ! 

Tell  me  :  if  on  that  day  when  I  found  first 

That  Capon sacchi  thought  the  nearest  way 

To  his  church  was  some  half-mile  round  by  my  door. 

And  that  he  so  admired,  shall  I  suppose,  941 

The  manner  of  the  swallows'  come-and-go 

Between  the  props  o'  the  window  over-head, — 

That  window  happening  to  be  my  wife's, — 

As  to  stand  gazing  by  the  hour  on  high,  945 

Of  May-eves,  while  she  sat  and  let  him  smile, — 

If  I, — instead  of  threatening,  talking  big, 

Showing  hair-powder,  a  prodigious  pinch, 

For  poison  in  a  bottle, — making  believe 

At  desperate  doings  with  a  bauble-sword,  950 

And  other  bugaboo-and-baby-work, — 

Had,  with  the  vulgarest  household  implement. 

Calmly  and  quietly  cut  off,  clean  thro'  bone. 

But  one  joint  of  one  finger  of  my  wife, 

Saying  "  For  listening  to  the  serenade,  955 

"  Here 's  your  ring-finger  shorter  a  full  third  : 

"  Be  certain  I  will  slice  away  next  joint, 

'*  Next  time  that  anybody  underneath 

"  Seems  somehow  to  be  sauntering  as  he  hoped 

VOL.    II.  I 


114  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  A  flower  would  eddy  out  of  your  hand  to  his  960 

'^  While  you  please  fidget  with  the  branch  above 

''  O'  the  rose-tree  in  the  terrace  !" — had  I  done  so, 

Why,  there  had  followed  a  quick  sharp  scream,  some  pain, 

Much  calling  for  plaister,  damage  to  the  dress, 

A  somewhat  sulky  countenance  next  day,  965 

Perhaps  reproaches, — but  reflections  too  ! 

I  don't  hear  much  of  harm  that  Malchus  did 

After  the  incident  of  the  ear,  my  lords  ! 

Saint  Peter  took  the  efficacious  way  ; 

Malchus  was  sore  but  silenced  for  his  life  :  970 

He  did  not  hang  himself  i'  the  Potter's  Field 

Like  Judas,  who  was  trusted  with  the  bag 

And  treated  to  sops  after  he  proved  a  thief. 

So,  by  this  time,  my  true  and  obedient  wife 

Might  have  been  telling  beads  with  a  gloved  hand  ;    975 

Awkward  a  little  at  pricking  hearts  and  darts 

On  sampler  possibly,  but  well  otherwise  : 

Not  where  Rome  shudders  now  to  see  her  lie. 

I  give  that  for  the  course  a  wise  man  takes ; 

I  took  the  other  however,  tried  the  fool's,  980 

The  lighter  remedy,  brandished  rapier  dread 

With  cork-ball  at  the  tip,  boxed  Malchus'  ear 

Instead  of  severing  the  cartilage. 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  II5 

Called  her  a  terrible  nickname,  and  the  like 

And  there  an  end  :  and  what  was  the  end  of  that?     985 

What  was  the  good  effect  o'  the  gentle  course  ? 

Why,  one  night  I  went  drowsily  to  bed, 

Dropped  asleep  suddenly,  not  suddenly  woke, 

But  did  wake  with  rough  rousing  and  loud  cry. 

To  find  noon  in  my  face,  a  crowd  in  my  room,  990 

Fumes  in  my  brain,  fire  in  my  throat,  my  wife 

Gone  God  knows  whither, — rifled  vesture-chest, 

And  ransacked  money-coffer.     "  What  does  it  mean  ?  " 

The  servants  had  been  drugged  too,  stared  and  yawned, 

"  It  must  be  that  our  lady  has  eloped  ! "  995 

— "  Whither  and  with  whom?" — "  With  whom  but  the 

Canon's  self? 
"  One  recognizes  Caponsacchi  there  !  " — 
(By  this  time  the  admiring  neighbourhood 
Joined  chorus  round  me  while  I  rubbed  my  eyes) 
'^  'T  is  months  since  their  intelligence  began, —         1000 
"  A  comedy  the  town  was  privy  to, — 
"  He  wrote  and  she  wrote,  she  spoke,  he  replied, 
"  And  going  in  and  out  your  house  last  night 
"  Was  easy  work  for  one  .  .  to  be  plain  with  you  .  .  . 
"  Accustomed  to  do  both,  at  dusk  and  dawn  1005 

"  When  you  were  absent, — at  the  villa,  you  know, 


Il6  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  Where  husbandry  required  the  master-mind. 

"  Did  not  you  know  ?     Why,  we  all  knew,  you  see  !  " 

And  presently,  bit  by  bit,  the  full  and  true 

Particulars  of  the  tale  were  volunteered  loio 

With  all  the  breathless  zeal  of  friendship — "  Thus 

'^  Matters  were  managed  :  at  the  seventh  hour  of  night "  .  . 

— "  Later,  at  daybreak"  .  .  "  Caponsacchi  came"  .  .  . 

— ^'  While  you  and  all  your  household  slept  like  death, 

"  Drugged  as  your  supper  was  with  drowsy  stuff  "... 

— "  And  your  own  cousin  Guillichini  too —  1016 

'^  Either  or  both  entered  your  dwelling-place, 

"  Plundered  it  at  their  pleasure,  made  prize  of  all, 

'^  Including  your  wife  .  .  ." — "  Oh,  your  wife  led  the  way, 

''  Out  of  doors,  on  to  the  gate  .  .  ." — ''  But  gates  are  shut, 

"  In  a  decent  town,  to  darkness  and  such  deeds  :     102 1 

'^  They  climbed  the  wall — your  lady  must  be  lithe— 

"  At  the  gap,  the  broken  bit  .  ."    — "  Torrione,  true  ! 

^^  To  escape  the  questioning  guard  at  the  proper  gate, 

*^  Clemente,  where  at  the  inn,  hard  by,  '  the  Horse,' 

^'  Just  outside,  a  calash  in  readiness  1026 

"  Took  the  two  principals,  all  alone  at  last, 

^'  To  gate  San  Spirito,  which  o'erlooks  the  road, 

^^  Leads  to  Perugia,  Rome  and  liberty." 

Bit  by  bit  thus  made-up  mosaic-wise,  1030 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  II7 


Flat  lay  my  fortune, — tesselated  floor, 
Imperishable  tracery  devils  should  foot 
And  frolic  it  on,  around  my  broken  gods, 
Over  my  desecrated  hearth. 

So  much  1035 

For  the  terrible  effect  of  threatening.  Sirs  ! 

Well,  this  way  I  was  shaken  wide  awake, 

Doctored  and  drenched,  somewhat  unpoisoned  so  ; 

Then,  set  on  horseback  and  bid  seek  the  lost, 

I  started  alone,  head  of  me,  heart  of  me  1040 

Fire,  and  each  limb  as  languid  .  .  ah,  sweet  lords, 

Bethink  you  ! — poison-torture,  try  persuade 

The  next  refractory  Molinist  with  that !    .    .    . 

Floundered  thro'  day  and  night,  another  day 

And  yet  another  night,  and  so  at  last,  1045 

As  Lucifer  kept  falling  to  find  hell. 

Tumbled  into  the  court-yard  of  an  inn 

At  the  end,  and  fell  on  whom  I  thought  to  find. 

Even  Caponsacchi, — what  part  once  was  priest, 

Cast  to  the  winds  now  with  the  cassock-rags  :  1050 

In  cape  and  sword  a  cavalier  confessed. 

There  stood  he  chiding  dilatory  grooms. 

Chafing  that  only  horseflesh  and  no  team 


Il8  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Of  eagles  would  supply  the  last  relay, 

Whirl  him  along  the  league,  the  one  post  more  1055 

Between  the  couple  and  Rome  and  liberty. 

'T  was  dawn,  the  couple  were  rested  in  a  sort, 

And  though  the  lady,  tired, — the  tenderer  sex, — 

Still  lingered  in  her  chamber, — to  adjust 

The  limp  hair,  look  for  any  blush  astray, —  io6c 

She  would  descend  in  a  twinkling, — ''  Have  you  out 

"  The  horses  therefore  !  " 

So  did  I  find  my  wife. 
Is  the  case  complete  ?   Do  your  eyes  here  see  with  mine  ? 
Even  the  parties  dared  deny  no  one  1065 

Point  out  of  all  these  points. 

What  follows  next  ? 
''  Why,  that  then  was  the  time,"  you  interpose, 
•'  Or  then  or  never,  while  the  fact  was  fresh, 
"  To  take  the  natural  vengeance  :  there  and  thus      1070 
^^  They  and  you, — somebody  had  stuck  a  sword 
"  Beside  you  while  he  pushed  you  on  your  horse, — 
'^  'T  was  requisite  to  slay  the  couple.  Count ! " 
Just  so  my  friends  say — "  Kill !  "  they  cry  in  a  breath. 
Who  presently,  when  matters  grow  to  a  head  1075 

And  I  do  kill  the  offending  ones  indeed, — 
When  crime  of  theirs,  only  surmised  before, 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  IIQ 

Is  patent,  proved  indisputably  now, — 

When  remedy  for  wrong,  untried  at  the  time, 

Which  law  professes  shall  not  fail  a  friend,  1080 

Is  thrice  tried  now,  found  threefold  worse  than  null, — 

When  what  might  turn  to  transient  shade,  who  knows  ? 

Solidifies  into  a  blot  which  breaks 

Hell's  black  off  in  pale  flakes  for  fear  of  mine, — 

Then,  when  I  claim  and  take  revenge — "  So  rash  ?  " 

They  cry — "  so  little  reverence  for  the  law  ?  "  1086 

Listen,  my  masters,  and  distinguish  here  I 

At  first,  I  called  in  law  to  act  and  help  : 

Seeing  I  did  so,  "  Why,  't  is  clear,"  they  cry, 

''  You  shrank  from  gallant  readiness  and  risk,  1090 

^'  Were  coward  :  the  thing 's  inexplicable  else." 

Sweet  my  lords,  let  the  thing  be  !  I  fall  flat, 

Play  the  reed,  not  the  oak,  to  breath  of  man . 

Only,  inform  my  ignorance  !     Say  I  stand 

Convicted  of  the  having  been  afraid,  io95 

Proved  a  poltroon,  no  lion  but  a  lamb, — 

Does  that  deprive  me  of  my  right  of  lamb 

And  give  my  fleece  and  flesh  to  the  first  wolf? 

Are  eunuchs,  women,  children,  shieldless  quite 

Against  attack  their  own  timidity  tempts  ?  iioo 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Cowardice  were  misfortune  and  no  crime  ! 

— Take  it  that  way,  since  I  am  fallen  so  low 

I  scarce  dare  brush  the  fly  that  blows  my  face, 

And  thank  the  man  who  simply  spits  not  there, — 

Unless  the  Court  be  generous,  comprehend  1105 

How  one  brought  up  at  the  very  feet  of  law 

As  I,  awaits  the  grave  Gamaliel's  nod 

Ere  he  clench  fist  at  outrage, — much  less,  stab  ! 

— How,  ready  enough  to  rise  at  the  right  time, 

I  still  could  recognise  no  time  mature  mo 

Unsanctioned  by  a  move  o'  the  judgment-seat, 

So,  mute  in  misery,  eyed  my  masters  here 

Motionless  till  the  authoritative  word 

Pronounced  amercement     There  's  the  riddle  solved  : 

This  is  just  why  I  slew  nor  her  nor  him,  1 1 15 

But  called  in  law,  law's  delegate  in  the  place, 

And  bade  arrest  the  guilty  couple,  Sirs  ! 

We  had  some  trouble  to  do  so — you  have  heard 

They  braved  me, — he  with  arrogance  and  scorn. 

She,  with  a  volubility  of  curse,  1120 

A  conversancy  in  the  skill  of  tooth 

And  claw  to  make  suspicion  seem  absurd, 

Nay,  an  alacrity  to  put  to  proof 

At  my  own  throat  my  own  sword,  teach  me  so 


COUNT    GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI. 


To  try  conclusions  better  the  next  time, —  1125 

Which  did  the  proper  service  with  the  mob. 

They  never  tried  to  put  on  mask  at  all : 

Two  avowed  lovers  forcibly  torn  apart, 

Upbraid  the  tyrant  as  in  a  playhouse  scene, 

Ay,  and  with  proper  clapping  and  applause  1130 

From  the  audience  that  enjoys  the  bold  and  free. 

I  kept  still,  said  to  myself,  ''  There's  law  !  "     Anon 

We  searched  the  chamber  where  they  passed  the  night, 

Found  what  confimied  the  worst  was  feared  before. 

However  needless  confirmation  now —  1135 

The  witches'  circle  intact,  charms  undisturbed 

That  raised  the  spirit  and  succubus, — letters,  to-wit, 

Love-laden,  each  the  bag  o'  the  bee  that  bore 

Honey  from  lily  and  rose  to  Cupid's  hive, — 

Now,  poetry  in  some  rank  blossom-burst,  1140 

Now,   prose, — "  Come    here,    go    there,    wait    such    a 

while, 
^^  He  's  at  the  villa,  now  he  's  back  again  : 
*'  We  are  saved,  we  are  lost,  we  are  lovers  all  the  same  !" 
All  in  order,  all  complete, — even  to  a  clue 
To  the  drowsiness  that  happed  so  opportune —  1145 

No  mystery,  when  I  read  "  Of  all  things,  find 
^'  What  wine  Sir  Jealousy  decides  to  drink — 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  Red  wine  ?     Because  a  sleeping-potion,  dust 
"  Dropped  into  white,  discolours  wine  and  shows." 

— '^  Oh,  but  we  did  not  write  a  single  word  !  1150 

"  Somebody  forged  the  letters  in  our  name  ! — " 

Both  in  a  breath  protested  presently. 

Aha,  Sacchetti  again  ! — ^'  Dame," — quoth  the  Duke, 

'^  What  meaneth  this  epistle,  counsel  me, 

''  I  pick  from  out  thy  placket  and  peruse,  1155 

^*  Wherein  my  page  averreth  thou  art  white 

"  And  warm  and  wonderful  'tvvixt  pap  and  pap  ?  " 

"  Sir,"  laughed  the  Lady  *'  't  is  a  counterfeit ! 

''  Thy  page  did  never  stroke  but  Dian's  breast, 

"  The  pretty  hound  I  nurture  for  thy  sake  :  11 60 

"  To  lie  were  losel, — by  my  fay,  no  more  ! " 

And  no  more  say  I  too,  and  spare  the  Court. 

Ah,  the  Court !  yes,  I  come  to  the  Court's  self; 

Such  the  case,  so  complete  in  fact  and  proof 

I  laid  at  the  feet  of  law, —there  sat  my  lords,  1165 

Here  sit  they  now,  so  may  they  ever  sit 

In  easier  attitude  than  suits  my  haunch  ! 

In  this  same  chamber  did  I  bare  my  sores 

O'  the  soul  and  not  the  body, — shun  no  shame, 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 23 

Shrink  from  no  probing  of  the  ulcerous  part,  1170 

Since  confident  in  Nature, — which  is  God, — 

That  she  who,  for  wise  ends,  concocts  a  plague, 

Curbs,  at  the  right  time,  the  plague's  virulence  too  : 

Law  renovates  even  Lazarus, — cures  me  ! 

Caesar  thou  seekest  ?     To  Caesar  thou  shalt  go  !         11 75 

Caesar 's  at  Rome ;  to  Rome  accordingly  ! 

The  case  was  soon  decided  :  both  weights,  cast 

I'  the  balance,  vibrate,  neither  kicks  the  beam, 

Here  away,  there  away,  this  now  and  now  that. 

To  every  one  o'  my  grievances  law  gave  n8o 

Redress,  could  purblind  eye  but  see  the  point. 

The  wife  stood  a  convicted  runagate 

From  house  and  husband,— driven  to  such  a  course 

By  what  she  somehow  took  for  cruelty, 

Oppression  and  imperilment  of  life —  1185 

Not  that  such  things  were,  but  that  so  they  seemed  : 

Therefore,  the  end  conceded  lawful,  (since 

To  save  life  there  's  no  risk  should  stay  our  leap) 

It  follows  that  all  means  to  the  lawful  end 

Are  lawful  likewise, — poison,  theft  and  flight.  11 90 

As  for  the  priest's  part,  did  he  meddle  or  make, 

Enough  that  he  too  thought  life  jeopardised; 


124  1'HE    RING   AND   THE   BOOK. 

Concede  him  then  the  colour  charity 

Casts  on  a  doubtful  course, — if  blackish  white 

Or  whitish  black,  will  charity  hesitate  ?  1195 

What  did  he  else  but  act  the  precept  out. 

Leave,  like  a  provident  shepherd,  his  safe  flock 

To  follow  the  single  lamb  and  strayaway  ? 

Best  hope  so  and  think  so, — that  the  ticklish  time 

r  the  carriage,  the  tempting  privacy,  the  last  1200 

Somewhat  ambiguous  accident  at  the  inn, 

— All  may  bear  explanation  :  may  ?  then,  must ! 

The  letters, — do  they  so  incriminate  ? 

But  what  if  the  whole  prove  a  prank  o'  the  pen, 

FHght  of  the  fancy,  none  of  theirs  at  all,  1205 

Bred  of  the  vapours  of  my  brain  belike. 

Or  at  worst  mere  exercise  of  scholar's-wit 

In  the  courtly  Caponsacchi  :  verse,  convict  ? 

Did  not  Catullus  write  less  seemly  once  ? 

Yet  dodiis  and  unblemished  he  abides.  1210 

Wherefore  so  ready  to  infer  the  worst  ? 

Still,  I  did  righteously  in  bringing  doubts 

For  the  law  to  solve, — take  the  solution  now  ! 

"  Seeing  that  the  said  associates,  wife  and  priest, 

"  Bear  themselves  not  without  some  touch  of  blame 

*'  — Else  why  the  pother,  scandal  and  outcry  12 16 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 25 

"  Which  trouble  our  peace  and  require  chastisement  ? 

^'  We,  for  complicity  in  Pompilia's  flight 

'*  And  deviation,  and  carnal  intercourse 

'^  With  the  same,  do  set  aside  and  relegate  1220 

''  The  Canon  Capon sacchi  for  three  years 

"  At  Civita  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome  : 

"  And  we  consign  Pompilia  to  the  care 

'*  Of  a  certain  Sisterhood  of  penitents 

'^  I'  the  city's  self,  expert  to  deal  with  such."  1225 

Word    for    word,    there's    your    judgment !     Read    it, 

lords, 
Re-utter  your  deliberate  penalty 
For  the  crime  yourselves  establish  !     Your  award — 
Who  chop  a  man's  right-hand  off  at  the  wrist 
For  tracing  with  forefinger  words  in  wine  1230 

O'  the  table  of  a  drinking-booth  that  bear 
Interpretation  as  they  mocked  the  Church  ! 
— Who  brand  a  woman  black  between  the  breasts 
For  sinning  by  connection  with  a  Jew  : 
While  for  the  Jew's  self— pudency  be  dumb  !  1235 

You  mete  out  punishment  such  and  such,  yet  so 
Punish  the  adultery  of  wife  and  priest ! 
Take  note  of  that,  before  the  Molinists  do, 
And  read  me  right  the  riddle,  since  right  must  be  ! 


126  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

While  I  stood  rapt  away  with  w^onderment,  1240 

Voices  broke  in  upon  my  mood  and  muse. 

"  Do  you  sleep  ?  "  began  the  friends  at  either  ear, 

"  The  case  is  settled, — you  willed  it  should  be  so — 

"  None  of  our  counsel,  always  recollect ! 

"  With  lawn's  award,  budge  !     Back  into  your  place  ! 

"  Your  betters  shall  arrange  the  rest  for  you.  1246 

"  We  '11  enter  a  new  action,  claim  divorce  : 

"  Your  marriage  was  a  cheat  themselves  allow  : 

"  You  erred  i'  the  person, — might  have  married  thus 

"  Your  sister  or  your  daughter  unaware.  1250 

"  We  '11  gain  you,  that  way,  liberty  at  least, 

"  Sure  of  so  much  by  law's  own  showing.     Up 

"  And  off  with  you  and  your  unluckiness — 

"  Leave  us  to  bury  the  blunder,  sweep  things  smooth  ! " 

I  was  in  humble  frame  of  mind,  be  sure  !  1255 

I  bowed,  betook  me  to  my  place  again. 

Station  by  station  I  retraced  the  road. 

Touched  at  this  hostel,  passed  this  post-house  by. 

Where,  fresh-remembered  yet,  the  fugitives 

Had  risen  to  the  heroic  stature  :  still —  1260 

"  That  was  the  bench  they  sat  on, — there's  the  board 

"  They  took  the  meal  at, — yonder  garden-ground 

^^  They  leaned  across  the  gate  of," — ever  a  word 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 27 


O'  the  Helen  and  the  Paris,  with  "  Ha  !  you  're  he, 

^*  The  .  .  much-commiserated  husband  ?  "     Step      1265 

By  step,  across  the  pelting,  did  I  reach 

Arezzo,  underwent  the  archway's  grin, 

Traversed  the  length  of  sarcasm  in  the  street. 

Found  myself  in  my  horrible  house  once  more, 

And  after  a  colloquy  .  .  no  word  assists  !  1270 

With  the  mother  and  the  brothers,  stiffened  me 

Strait  out  from  head  to  foot  as  dead  man  does. 

And,  thus  prepared  for  life  as  he  for  hell, 

Marched  to  the  public  Square  and  met  the  world. 

x\pologise  for  the  pincers,  palliate  screws  ?  T275 

Ply  me  with  such  toy-trifles,  I  entreat ! 

Trust  who  has  tried  both  sulphur  and  sops-in-wine ! 

I  played  the  man  as  1  best  might,  bade  friends 

Put  non-essentials  by  and  face  the  fact. 

*'  What  need  to  hang  myself  as  you  advise  ?  1280 

^^  The  paramour  is  banished, — the  ocean's  width, 

"  Or  the  suburb's  length, — to  Ultima  Thule,  say, 

"  Or  Proxima  Civitas,  what 's  the  odds  of  name 

"  And  place  ?     He  's  banished,  and  the  fact 's  the  thing. 

"  Why  should  law  banish  innocence  an  inch?  1285 

"  Here  's  guilt  then,  what  else  do  I  care  to  know  ? 


128  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  The  adulteress  lies  imprisoned, — whedier  in  a  well 

^*  With  bricks  above  and  a  snake  for  company, 

^^  Or  tied  by  a  garter  to  a  bed-post, — much 

"  I  mind  what 's  little, — least 's  enough  and  to  spare  ! 

"  The  little  filHp  on  the  coward's  cheek  1291 

"■  Serves  as  though  crab-tree  cudgel  broke  his  pate. 

"  Law  has  pronounced  there  's  punishment,  less  or  more: 

"  And  I  take  note  o'  the  fact  and  use  it  thus — 

""  For  the  first  flaw  in  the  original  bond,  i-95 

"  I  claim  release.     My  contract  was  to  wed 

'^  The  daughter  of  Pietro  and  Violante.     Both 

"  Protest  they  never  had  a  child  at  all. 

''  Then  I  have  never  made  a  contract :  good  ! 

'^  Cancel  me  quick  the  thing  pretended  one.  1300 

'^  I  shall  be  free.     What  matter  if  hurried  over 

^'  The  harbour-boom  by  a  great  favouring  tide, 

"  Or  the  last  of  a  spent  ripple  that  lifts  and  leaves  ? 

'^  The  Abate  is  about  it.     Laugh  who  wins  ! 

"  You  shall  not  laugh  me  out  of  faith  in  law  !  1305 

"  I  listen,-  through  all  your  noise,  to  Rome  !  " 

Rome  spoke. 
In  three  months  letters  thence  admonished  me, 
*^  Your  plan  for  the  divorce  is  all  mistake. 
**  It  would  hold,  now,  had  you,  taking  thought  to  wed 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 29 

^^  Rachel  of  the  blue  eye  and  golden  hair,  131 1 

"  Found  swarth-skinned  Leah  cumber  couch  next  day  : 

"  But  Rachel,  blue-eyed  golden-haired  aright, 

"  Proving  to  be  only  Laban's  child,  not  Lot's, 

"  Remains  yours  all  the  same  for  ever  more.  13 15 

"  No  whit  to  the  purpose  is  your  plea  :  you  err 

"  I'  the  person  and  the  quality — nowise 

"  In  the  individual, — that  's  the  case  in  point  ! 

"  You  go  to  the  ground, — are  met  by  a  cross-suit 

".  For  separation,  of  the  Rachel  here,  1320 

"  From  bed  and  board, — she  is  the  injured  one, 

"  You  did  the  wrong  and  have  to  answer  it. 

"As  for  the  circumstance  of  imprisonment 

"  And  colour  it  lends  to  this  your  new  attack, 

"  Never  fear,  that  point  is  considered  too  !  1325 

"  The  durance  is  already  at  an  end  ; 

"  The  convent-quiet  preyed  upon  her  health, 

"  She  is  transferred  now  to  her  parents'  house 

"  — No-parents,  when  that  cheats  and  plunders  you, 

"  But  parentage  again  confessed  in  full,  1330 

"  When  such  confession  pricks  and  plagues  you  more — 

"  As  now — for,  this  their  house  is  not  the  house 

"  In  Via  Vittoria  wherein  neighbours'  watch 

'*  Might  incommode  the  freedom  of  your  wife, 

VOL.    II.  K 


T30  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

*^  But  a  certain  villa  smothered  up  in  vines  1335 

"  At  the  town's  edge  by  the  gate  i'  the  Pauline  way, 

"  Out  of  eye-reach,  out  of  ear-shot,  little  and  lone, 

"  Whither  a  friend, — at  Civita,  we  hope, 

"  A  good  half-dozen-hours'  ride  off, — might,  some  eve, 

^^  Betake  himself,  and  whence  ride  back,  some  morn,    1 340 

"  Nobody  the  wiser :  but  be  that  as  it  may, 

^*  Do  not  afflict  your  brains  with  trifles  now. 

"  You  have  still  three  suits  to  manage,  all  and  each 

"  Ruinous  truly  should  the  event  play  false. 

"  It  is  indeed  the  likelier  so  to  do,  •  1345 

^^  That  brother  Paul,  your  single  prop  and  stay, 

*^  After  a  vain  attempt  to  bring  the  Pope 

^*  To  set  aside  procedures,  sit  himself 

"  And  summarily  use  prerogative, 

'^  Afford  us  the  infallible  finger's  tact  1350 

**  To  disentwine  your  tangle  of  affairs, 

"  Paul, — finding  it  moreover  past  his  strength 

"  To  stem  the  irruption,  bear  Rome's  ridicule 

"  Of  .  .  .  since  friends  must  speak  .  .  to  be  round 

with  you  .  . 
**  Of  the  old  outwitted  husband,  wronged  and  wroth, 
"  Pitted  against  a  brace  of  juveniles —  1356 

"  A  brisk  priest  who  is  versed  in  Ovid's  art 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  I3I 

"  More  than  his  Summa,  and  a  gamesome  wife 

'^  Able  to  act  Corinna  without  book, 

"  Beside  the  waggish  parents  who  played  dupes         1360 

"  To  dupe  the  duper — (and  truly  divers  scenes 

'^  Of  the  Arezzo  palace,  tickle  rib 

"  And  teaze  eye  till  the  tears  come,  so  we  laugh ; 

"  Nor  wants  the  shock  at  the  inn  its  comic  force, 

"  And  then  the  letters  and  poetry — merum  sal!)        1365 

'^  — Paul,  finally,  in  such  a  state  of  things, 

"  After  a  brief  temptation  to  go  jump 

''  And  join  the  fishes  in  the  Tiber,  drowns 

"  Sorrow  another  and  a  wiser  way  : 

"  House  and  goods,  he  has  sold  all  off,  is  gone,         1370 

''  Leaves   Rome, — whether  for   France  or   Spain,   who 

knows  ? 
"  Or  Britain  almost  divided  from  our  orb. 
'^  You  have  lost  him  anyhow." 

Now, — I  see  my  lords 
Shift  in  their  seat, — would  I  could  do  the  same  !        1375 
They  probably  please  expect  my  bile  was  moved 
To  purpose,  nor  much  blame  me  :  now,  they  judge, 
The  fiery  titillation  urged  my  flesh 
Break  through  the  bonds.     By  your  pardon,  no,  sweet 

Sirs ! 


132  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

I  got  such  missives  in  the  public  place  ;  1380 

When  I  sought  home, — with  such  news,  mounted  stair 

And  sat  at  last  in  the  sombre  gallery, 

('T  was  Autumn,  the  old  mother  in  bed  betimes, 

Having  to  bear  that  cold,  the  finer  frame 

Of  her  daughter-in-law  had  found  intolerable —         1385 

The  brother,  walking  misery  away 

O'  the  mountain-side  with  dog  and  gun  belike) 

As  I  supped,  ate  the  coarse  bread,  drank  the  wine 

Weak  once,  now  acrid  with  the  toad's-head-squeeze, 

My  wife's  bestowment, — I  broke  silence  thus  :  1390 

"  Let  me,  a  man,  manfully  meet  the  fact, 

"  Confront  the  worst  o'  the  truth,  end,  and  have  peace  ! 

**  I  am  irremediably  beaten  here, — 

"  The  gross  illiterate  vulgar  couple, — bah  ! 

"  Why,  they  have  measured  forces,  mastered  mine,     1395 

"  Made  me  their  spoil  and  prey  from  first  to  last. 

"  They  have  got  my  name, — 't  is  nailed  now  fast  to  theirs, 

"  The  child  or  changeling  is  anyway  my  wife  ; 

*^  Point  by  point  as  they  plan  they  execute, 

"  They  gain  all,  and  I  lose  all — even  to  the  lure       1400 

"  That  led  to  loss, — they  have  the  wealth  again 

"  They  hazarded  awhile  to  hook  me  with, 

Have  caught  the  fish  and  find  the  bait  entire  : 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 33 

^'  They  even  have  their  child  or  changeling  back 

"  To  trade  with,  turn  to  account  a  second  time.         1405 

^'  The  brother,  j^resumably  might  tell  a  tale 

"  Or  give  a  warning, — he,  too,  flies  the  field, 

"  And  with  him  vanish  help  and  hope  of  help. 

"  They  have  caught  me  in  the  cavern  where  I  fell, 

"  Covered  my  loudest  cry  for  human  aid  1410 

^^  With  this  enormous  paving-stone  of  shame. 

"  Well,  are  we  demigods  or  merely  clay  ? 

"  Is  success  still  attendant  on  desert  ? 

"  Is  this,  we  live  on,  heaven  and  the  final  state, 

"  Or  earth  which  means  probation  to  the  end?  141 5 

"  Why  claim  escape  from  man's  predestined  lot 

''  Of  being  beaten  and  baffled  ? — God's  decree, 

"  In  which  I,  bowing  bruised  head,  acquiesce. 

"  One  of  us  Franceschini  fell  long  since 

''  V  the  Holy  Land,  betrayed,  tradition  runs,  1420 

^'  To  Paynims  by  the  feigning  of  a  girl 

'^  He  rushed  to  free  from  ravisher,  and  found 

"  Lay  safe  enough  with  friends  in  ambuscade 

"  Who   flayed    him  while  she  clapped   her  hands  and 

laughed : 
^^  Let  me  end,  falling  by  a  like  device.  1425 

^^  It  will  not  be  so  hard.     I  am  the  last 


134  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  O'  my  line  which  will  not  suffer  any  more. 
"  I  have  attained  to  my  full  fifty  years, 
"  (About  the  average  of  us  all,  'tis  said, 
"  Though  it  seems  longer  to  the  unlucky  man)  1430 

'^  — Lived  through  my  share  of  life ;  let  all  end  here, 
"  Me  and  the  house  and  grief  and  shame  at  once. 
"  Friends  my  informants, — I  can  bear  your  blow  !  " 
And  I  believe  't  was  in  no  unmeet  match 
For  the  stoic's  mood,  with  something  like  a  smile,     1435 
That,  when  morose  December  roused  me  next, 
I  took  into  my  hand,  broke  seal  to  read 
The  new  epistle  from  Rome.     "  All  to  no  use  ! 
^'  Whate'er  the  turn  next  injury  take,"  smiled  I, 
'^  Here  's  one  has  chosen  his  part  and  knows  his  cue. 
"  I  am  done  with,  dead  now  ;  strike  away,  good  friends  ! 
^'  Are  the  three  suits  decided  in  a  trice  ?  1442 

"  Against  me, — there  's  no  question  !     How  does  it  go  ? 
"  Is  the  par-entage  of  my  wife  demonstrated 
"  Infamous  to  her  wish  ?     Parades  she  now  1445 

*'  Loosed  of  the  cincture  that  so  irked  the  loin  ? 
"  Is  the  last  penny  extracted  from  my  purse 
"  To  mulct  me  for  demanding  the  first  pound 
"  Was  promised  in  return  for  value  paid  ? 
"  Has  the  priest,  with  nobody  to  court  beside,  1450 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  I35 

"  Courted  the  Muse  in  exile,  hitched  my  hap 

^^  Into  a  rattUng  ballad-rhyme  which,  bawled 

"  At  tavern-doors,  wakes  rapture  everywhere, 

"^And  helps  cheap  wine  down  throat  this  Christmas  time, 

"  Beating  the  bagpipes  ?     Any  or  all  of  these  !  1455 

"  As  well,  good  friends,  you  cursed  my  palace  here 

'*  To  its  old  cold  stone  face, — stuck  your  cap  for  crest 

"  Over  the  shield  that 's  extant  in  the  Square, — 

"  Or  spat  on  the  statue's  cheek,  the  impatient  world 

"  Sees  cumber  tomb-top  in  our  family  church  :  1460 

"  Let  him  creep  under  covert  as  I  shall  do, 

"  Half  below-ground  already  indeed.     Good-bye  1 

"  My  brothers  are  priests,  and  childless  so ;  that 's  well — 

"  And,  thank  God  most  for  this,  no  child  leave  I — 

"  None  after  me  to  bear  till  his  heart  break  1465 

"  The  being  a  Francheschini  and  my  son  ! " 

"  Nay,"  said  the  letter,  "  but  you  have  just  that ! 

'^  A  babe,  your  veritable  son  and  heir — 

"  Lawful, — 't  is  only  eight  months  since  your  wife 

"  Left  you, — so,  son  and  heir,  your  babe  was  born    1470 

"  Last  Wednesday  in  the  villa, — you  see  the  cause 

"  For  quitting  Convent  without  beat  of  drum, 

"  Stealing  a  hurried  march  to  this  retreat 


136  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

'^  That 's  not  so  savage  as  the  Sisterhood 

"  To  slips  and  stumbles  :  Pietro's  heart  is  soft,  1475 

"  Violante  leans  to  pity's  side, — the  pair 

^*  Ushered  you  into  Hfe  a  bouncing  boy : 

"  And  he's  already  hidden  away  and  safe 

"  From  any  claim  on  him  you  mean  to  make — 

*'  They  need  him  for  themselves, — don 't  fear,  they  know 

*^  The  use  o'  the  bantling, — the  nerve  thus  laid  bare 

"  To  nip  at,  new  and  nice,  with  finger-nail ! "  1482 

Then  I  rose  up  like  fire,  and  fire-like  roared. 

What,  all  is  only  beginning  not  ending  now  ? 

The  worm  which  wormed  its  way  from  skin  through  flesh 

To  the  bone  and  there  lay  biting,  did  its  best,  i486 

What,  it  goes  on  to  scrape  at  the  bone's  self. 

Will  wind  to  inmost  marrow  and  madden  me  ? 

There  's  to  be  yet  my  representative. 

Another  of  the  name  shall  keep  displayed  1490 

The  flag  with  the  ordure  on  it,  brandish  still 

The  broken  sword  has  served  to  stir  a  jakes  ? 

Who  will  he  be,  how  will  you  call  the  man  ? 

A  Franceschini, — when  who  cut  my  purse. 

Filched  my  name,  hemmed  me  round,  hustled  me  hard 

As  rogues  at  a  fair  some  fool  they  strip  i'  the  midst,    1496 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  I37 

When  these  count  gains,  vaunt  pillage  presently : — 

But  a  Caponsacchi,  oh,  be  very  sure  ! 

When  what  demands  its  tribute  of  applause 

Is  the  cunning  and  impudence  o'  the  pair  of  cheats, 

The  lies  and  lust  o'  the  mother,  and  the  brave  1501 

Bold  carriage  of  the  priest,  worthily  crowned 

By  a  witness  to  his  feat  i'  the  following  age, — 

And  how  this  three-fold  cord  could  hook  and  fetch 

And  land  leviathan  that  king  of  pride  !  1505 

Or  say,  by  some  mad  miracle  of  chance, 

Is  he  indeed  my  flesh  and  blood,  this  babe  ? 

Was  it  because  fate  forged  a  link  at  last 

Betwixt  my  wife  and  me,  and  both  alike 

Found  we  had  henceforth  some  one  thing  to  love,     15 10 

Was  it  when  she  could  damn  my  soul  indeed 

She  unlatched  door,  let  all  the  devils  o'  the  dark 

Dance  in  on  me  to  cover  her  escape  ? 

Why  then,  the  surplusage  of  disgrace,  the  spilth 

Over  and  above  the  measure  of  infamy,  15 15 

Failing  to  take  effect  on  my  coarse  flesh 

Seasoned  with  scorn  now,  saturate  with  shame, — 

Is  saved  to  instil  on  and  corrode  the  brow, 

The  baby-softness  of  my  first-born  child — 

The  child  I  had  died  to  see  though  in  a  dream,         1520 


138  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

The  child  I  was  bid  strike  out  for,  beat  the  wave 

And  baffle  the  tide  of  troubles  where  I  swam, 

So  I  might  touch  shore,  lay  down  life  at  last 

At  the  feet  so  dim  and  distant  and  divine 

Of  the  apparition,  as  't  were  Mary's  babe  1525 

Had  held,  through  night  and  storm,  the  torch  aloft, — 

Born  now  in  very  deed  to  bear  this  brand 

On  forehead  and  curse  me  who  could  not  save  1 

Rather  be  the  town-talk  true,  Square's  jest,  street's  jeer 

True,  my  own  inmost  heart's  confession  true,  1530 

And  he 's  the  priest's  bastard  and  none  of  mine  ! 

Ay,  there  was  cause  for  flight,  swift  flight  and  sure  ! 

The  husband  gets  unruly,  breaks  all  bounds 

When  he  encounters  some  familiar  face. 

Fashion  of  feature,  brow  and  eyes  and  lips  1535 

Where  he  least  looked  to  find  them, — time  to  fly  ! 

This  bastard  then,  a  nest  for  him  is  made, 

As  the  manner  is  of  vermin,  in  my  flesh — 

Shall  I  let  the  filthy  pest  buzz,  flap  and  sting, 

Busy  at  my  vitals  and,  nor  hand  nor  foot  1540 

Lift,  but  let  be,  lie  still  and  rot  resigned  ? 

No,  I  appeal  to  God, — what  says  Himself, 

How  lessons  Nature  when  I  look  to  learn  ? 

Why,  that  I  am  alive,  am  still  a  man 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 39 

With  brain  and  heart  and  tongue  and  right-hand  too — 
Nay,  even  with  friends,  in  such  a  cause  as  this,  1546 

To  right  me  if  I  fail  to  take  my  right. 
No  more  of  law  ;  a  voice  beyond  the  law 
Enters  my  heart,  Qjds  est  p7^o  Domino  ? 

Myself,  in  my  own  Vittiano,  told  the  tale  1550 

To  my  own  serving-people  summoned  there : 

Told  the  first  half  of  it,  scarce  heard  to  end 

By  judges  who  got  done  with  judgment  quick 

And  clamoured  to  go  execute  her  'hest — 

Who  cried  "Not  one  of  us  that  dig  your  soil  1555 

"  And  dress  your  vineyard,  prune  your  olive-trees, 

"  But  would  have  brained  the  man  debauched  our  wife, 

"  And  staked  the  wife  whose  lust  allured  the  man, 

''  And  paunched  the  Duke,  had  it  been  possible, 

"  Who  ruled  the  land,  yet  barred  us  such  revenge  ! " 

I  fixed  on  the  first  whose  eyes  caught  mine,  some  four, 

Resolute  youngsters  with  the  heart  still  fresh,  1562 

Filled  my  purse  with  the  residue  o'  the  coin 

Uncaught-up  by  my  wife  whom  haste  made  blind. 

Donned  the  first  rough  and  rural  garb  I  found,  1565 

Took  whatsoever  weapon  came  to  hand, 

And  out  we  flung  and  on  we  ran  or  reeled 


I40  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Rome  ward,  I  have  no  memory  of  our  way, 

Only  that,  when  at  intervals  the  cloud 

Of  horror  about  me  opened  to  let  in  life,  1570 

I  listened  to  some  song  in  the  ear,  some  snatch 

Of  a  legend,  relic  of  religion,  stray 

Fragment  of  record  very  strong  and  old 

Of  the  first  conscience,  the  anterior  right. 

The  God's-gift  to  mankind,  impulse  to  quench  1575 

The  antagonistic  spark  of  hell  and  tread 

Satan  ^nd  all  his  malice  into  dust. 

Declare  to  the  world  the  one  law,  right  is  right. 

Then  the  cloud  re-encompassed  me,  and  so 

I  found  myself,  as  on  the  wings  of  winds,  1580 

Arrived  :  I  was  at  Rome  on  Christmas  Eve. 

Festive  bells — everywhere  the  Feast  o'  the  Babe, 

Joy  upon  earth,  peace  and  good  will  to  man  ! 

I  am  baptized.     I  started  and  let  drop 

The  dagger.     "  Where  is  it.  His  promised  peace  ?  "    1585 

Nine  days  o'  the  Birth-Feast  did  I  pause  and  pray 

To  enter  into  no  temptation  more. 

I  bore  the  hateful  house,  my  brother's  once, 

Deserted, — let  the  ghost  of  social  joy 

Mock  and  make  mouths  at  me  from  empty  room     1590 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  I4I 


And  idle  door  that  missed  the  master's  step, — 

Bore  the  frank  wonder  of  incredulous  eyes, 

As  my  own  people  watched  without  a  word, 

Waited,  from  where  they  huddled  round  the  hearth 

Black  like  all  else,  that  nod  so  slow  to  come —  ^595 

I  stopped  my  ears  even  to  the  inner  call 

Of  the  dread  duty,  heard  only  the  song 

"  Peace  upon  earth,"  saw  nothing  but  the  face 

O'  the  Holy  Infant  and  the  halo  there 

Able  to  cover  yet  another  face  1600 

Behind  it,  Satan's  which  I  else  should  see. 

But,  day  by  day,  joy  waned  and  withered  off: 

The  Babe's  face,  premature  with  peak  and  pine, 

Sank  into  wrinkled  ruinous  old  age, 

Suffering  and  death,  then  mist-like  disappeared,         1605 

And  showed  only  the  Cross  at  end  of  all, 

Left  nothing  rnore  to  interpose  'twixt  me 

And  the  dread  duty, — for  the  angel's  song, 

^'  Peace  upon  earth,"  louder  and  louder  pealed 

"  O  Lord,  how  long,  how  long  be  unavenged?  "        16 10 

On  the  ninth  day,  this  grew  too  much  for  man. 

I  started  up — "  Some  end  must  be  !  "    At  once. 

Silence  :  then,  scratching  like  a  death-watch-tick, 

Slowly  within  my  brain  was  syllabled, 


142  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  One  more  concession,  one  decisive  way  1615 

"  And  but  one,  to  determine  thee  the  truth, — 
*^  This  way,  in  fine,  I  whisper  in  thy  ear : 
"  Now  doubt,  anon  decide,  thereupon  act ! " 

"  That  is  a  way,  thou  whisperest  in  my  ear ! 

"  I  doubt,  I  will  decide,  then  act,"  said  I —  1620 

Then  beckoned  my  companions  :  '*  Time  is  come  !  " 

And  so,  all  yet  uncertain  save  the  will 

To  do  right,  and  the  daring  aught  save  leave 

Right  undone,  I  did  find  myself  at  last 

I'  the  dark  before  the  villa  with  my  friends,  1625 

And  made  the  experiment,  the  final  test. 

Ultimate  chance  that  ever  was  to  be 

For  the  wretchedness  inside.     I  knocked — pronounced 

The  name,  the  predetermined  touch  for  truth, 

*'  What  welcome  for  the  wanderer?  Open  straight — " 

To  the  friend,  physician,  friar  upon  his  rounds,  1631 

Traveller  belated,  beggar  lame  and  blind  ? — 

No,  but — *'  to  Caponsacchi ! "     And  the  door 

Opened. 

And  then, — why,  even  then,  I  think,  1635 

I'  the  minute  that  confirmed  my  worst  of  fears, 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 43 

Surely, — I  pray  God  that  I  think  aright ! — 

Had  but  Pompilia's  self,  the  tender  thing 

Who  once  was  good  and  pure,  was  once  my  lamb 

And  lay  in  my  bosom,  had  the  well-known  shape      1640 

Fronted  me  in  the  door-way, — stood  there  faint 

With  the  recent  pang,  perhaps,  of  giving  birth 

To  what  might,  though  by  miracle,  seem  my  child, — 

Nay  more,  I  will  say,  had  even  the  aged  fool 

Pietro,  the  dotard,  in  whom  folly  and  age  1645 

Wrought,  more  than  enmity  or  malevolence. 

To  practice  and  conspire  against  my  peace, — 

Had  either  of  these  but  opened,  I  had  paused. 

But  it  was  she  the  hag,  she  that  brought  hell 

For  a  dowry  with  her  to  her  husband's  house,  1650 

She  the  mock-mother,  she  that  made  the  match 

And  married  me  to  perdition,  spring  and  source 

O'  the  fire  inside  me  that  boiled  up  from  heart 

To  brain  and  hailed  the  Fury  gave  it  birth, — 

Violante  Comparini,  she  it  was,  1655 

With  the  old  grin  amid  the  wrinkles  yet, 

Opened  :  as  if  in  turning  from  the  Cross, 

With  trust  to  keep  the  sight  and  save  my  soul, 

I  had  stumbled,  first  thing,  on  the  serpent's  head 

Coiled  with  a  leer  at  foot  of  it.  1660 


144  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

There  was  the  end  ! 
Then  was  I  rapt  away  by  the  impulse,  one 
Immeasurable  everlasting  wave  of  a  need 
To  abohsh  that  detested  life.     'T  was  done  : 
You  know  the  rest  and  how  the  folds  o'  the  thing,     1665 
Twisting  for  help,  involved  the  other  two 
More  or  less  serpent-like  :  how  I  was  mad, 
Blind,  stamped  on  all,  the  earth-worms  with  the  asp. 
And  ended  so. 

You  came  on  me  that  night,  1670 

Your  officers  of  justice, — caught  the  crime 
In  the  first  natural  frenzy  of  remorse  ? 
Twenty  miles  off,  sound  sleeping  as  a  child 
On  a  cloak  i'  the  straw  which  promised  shelter  first, 
With  the  bloody  arms  beside  me, — was  it  not  so  ?     1675 
Wherefore  not?    Why,  how  else  should  I  be  found? 
I  was  my  own  self,  had  my  sense  again, 
My  soul  safe  from  the  serpents.     I  could  sleep  : 
Indeed  and,  dear  my  lords,  I  shall  sleep  now, 
Spite  of  my  shoulder,  in  five  minutes'  space,  1680 

AVhen  you  dismiss  me,  having  truth  enough  ! 
It  is  but  a  few  days  are  passed,  I  find, 
Since  this  adventure.     Do  you  tell  me,  four  ? 
Then  the  dead  are  scarce  quiet  where  they  lie, 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 45 

Old  Pietro,  old  Violante,  side  by  side  1685 

At  the  church  Lorenzo, — oh,  they  know  it  well  ! 

So  do  I.     But  my  wife  is  still  alive, 

Has  breath  enough  to  tell  her  story  yet, 

Her  way,  which  is  not  mine,  no  doubt  at  all. 

And  Caponsacchi,  you  have  summoned  him, —  1690 

Was  he  so  far  to  send  for  ?     Not  at  hand  ? 

I  thought  some  few  o'  the  stabs  were  in  his  heart. 

Or  had  not  been  so  lavish, — less  had  served. 

Well,  he  too  tells  his  story, — florid  prose 

As  smooth  as  mine  is  rough.     You  see,  my  lords,      1695 

There  will  be  a  lying  intoxicating  smoke 

Born  of  the  blood, — confusion  probably, — 

For  lies  breed  lies — but  all  that  rests  with  you  ! 

The  trial  is  no  concern  of  mine ;  with  me 

The  main  of  the  care  is  over  :  I  at  least  1700 

Recognise  who  took  that  huge  burthen  off, 

Let  me  begin  to  live  again.     I  did 

God's  bidding  and  man's  duty,  so,  breathe  free  ; 

Look  you  to  the  rest !     I  heard  Himself  prescribe, 

That  great  Physician,  and  dared  lance  the  core  1705 

Of  the  bad  ulcer  ;  and  the  rage  abates, 

I  am  myself  and  whole  now  :  I  prove  cured 

By  the  eyes  that  see,  the  ears  that  hear  again, 

VOL.    II.  L 


146  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

The  limbs  that  have  relearned  their  youthful  play, 

The  healthy  taste  of  food  and  feel  of  clothes  17 10 

And  taking  to  our  common  life  once  more, 

All  that  now  urges  my  defence  from  death. 

The  willingness  to  live,  what  means  it  else  ? 

Before, — but  let  the  very  action  speak  ! 

Judge*  for  yourselves,  what  life  seemed  worth  to  me 

Who,  not  by  proxy  but  in  person,  pitched  17 16 

Head-foremost  into  danger  as  a  fool 

That  never  cares  if  he  can  swim  or  no — 

So  he  but  find  the  bottom,  braves  the  brook. 

No  man  omits  precaution,  quite  neglects  1720 

Secresy,  safety,  schemes  not  how  retreat. 

Having  schemed  he  might  advance.     Did  I  so  scheme? 

Why,  with  a  warrant  which  't  is  ask  and  have. 

With  horse  thereby  made  mine  without  a  word, 

I  had  gained  the  frontier  and  slept  safe  that  night.     1725 

Then,  my  companions, — call  them  what  you  please. 

Slave  or  stipendiary, — what  need  of  one 

To  me  whose  right-hand  did  its  owner's  work  ? 

Hire  an  assassin  yet  expose  yourself? 

As  well  buy  glove  and  then  thrust  naked  hand  1730 

I'  the  thorn-bush.     No,  the  wise  man  stays  at  home, 

Sends  only  agents  out,  with  pay  to  earn  : 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  147 

At  home,  when  they  come  back, — he  straight  discards 
Or  else  disowns.     Why  use  such  tools  at  all 
When  a  man's  foes  are  of  his  house,  like  mine,  1735 

Sit  at  his  board,  sleep  in  his  bed  ?  Why  noise, 
When  there  's  the  acqiietta  and  the  silent  way  ? 
Clearly  my  life  was  valueless. 

But  now 
Health  is  returned,  and  sanity  of  soul  1740 

Nowise  indifferent  to  the  body's  harm. 
I  find  the  instinct  bids  me  save  my  life ; 
My  wits,  too,  rally  round  me  ;  I  pick  up 
And  use  the  arms  that  strewed  the  ground  before, 
Unnoticed  or  spurned  aside  :  I  take  my  stand,  1745 

Make  my  defence.     God  shall  not  lose  a  life 
May  do  Him  further  service,  while  I  speak 
And  you  hear,  you  my  judges  and  last  hope  ! 
You  are  the  law  :  't  is  to  the  law  I  look. 
I  began  life  by  hanging  to  the  law,  1750 

To  the  law  it  is  I  hang  till  Hfe  shall  end. 
My  brother  made  appeal  to  the  Pope,  't  is  true. 
To  stay  proceedings,  judge  my  cause  himself 
Nor  trouble  law, — some  fondness  of  conceit 
That  rectitude,  sagacity  sufficed  1755 


148  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

The  investigator  in  a  case  like  mine, 

Dispensed  with  the  machine  of  law.     The  Pope 

Knew  better,  set  aside  my  brother's  plea 

And  put  me  back  to  law, — referred  the  cause 

Adjiidices  7?ieos, — doubtlessly  did  well.  1760 

Here,  then,  I  clutch  my  judges, — I  claim  law — 

Cry,  by  the  higher  law  whereof  your  law 

O'  the  land  is  humbly  representative, — 

Cry,  on  what  point  is  it,  where  either  accuse, 

I  fail  to  furnish  you  defence  ?     I  stand  1765 

Acquitted,  actually  or  virtually. 

By  every  intermediate  kind  of  court 

That  takes  account  of  right  or  wrong  in  man. 

Each  unit  in  the  series  that  begins 

With  God's  throne,  ends  with  the  tribunal  here.  1770 

God  breathes,  not  speaks,  his  verdicts,  felt  not  heard. 

Passed  on  successively  to  each  court  I  call 

Man's  conscience,  custom,  manners,  all  that  make 

More  and  more  effort  to  promulgate,  mark 

God's  verdict  in  determinable  words,  1775 

Till  last  come  human  jurists — solidify 

Fluid  result, — what 's  fixable  lies  forged. 

Statute, — the  residue  escapes  in  fume. 

Yet  hangs  aloft,  a  cloud,  as  palpable 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 49 

To  the  finer  sense  as  word  the  legist  welds.  ,       1780 

Justinian's  Pandects  only  make  precise 

What  simply  sparkled  in  men's  eyes  before, 

Twitched  in  their  brow  or  quivered  on  their  lip, 

Waited  the  speech  they  called  but  would  not  come. 

These  courts  then,  whose  decree  your  own  confirms, — 

Take  my  whole  life,  not  this  last  act  alone,  1786 

Look  on  it  by.  the  light  reflected  thence  ! 

What  has  Society  to  charge  me  with  ? 

Come,  unreservedly, — favour  nor  fear, — 

I  am  Guido  Franceschini,  am  I  not?  1790 

You  know  the  courses  I  was  free  to  take  ? 

I  took  just  that  which  let  me  serve  the  Church, 

I  gave  it  all  my  labour  in  body  and  soul 

Till  these  broke  down  i'  the  service.     ^'  Specify  ?  " 

Well,  my  last  patron  was  a  Cardinal.  1795 

I  left  him  unconvicted  of  a  fault  — 

Was  even  helped,  by  way  of  gratitude, 

Into  the  new  life  that  I  left  him  for. 

This  very  misery  of  the  marriage, — he 

Made  it,  kind  soul,  so  far  as  in  him  lay —  t8oo 

Signed  the  deed  where  you  yet  may  see  his  name. 

He  is  gone  to  his  reward, — dead,  being  my  friend 

Who  could  have  helped  here  also, — that,  of  course  ! 


150  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

So  far,  there  's  my  acquittal,  I  suppose. 

Then  comes  the  marriage  itself — no  question,  lords, 

Of  the  entire  validity  of  that !  1806 

In  the  extremity  of  distress,  't  is  true. 

For  after-reasons,  furnished  abundantly, 

I  wished  the  thing  invalid,  went  to  you 

Only  some  months  since,  set  you  duly  forth  18  uo 

My  wrong  and  prayed  your  remedy,  that  a  cheat 

Should  not  have  force  to  cheat  my  whole  life  long. 

"  Annul  a  marriage  ?     'T  is  impossible  ! 

''  Though  ring  about  your  neck  be  brass  not  gold, 

"  Needs  must  it  clasp,  gangrene  you  all  the  same  ! " 

Well,  let  me  have  the  benefit,  just  so  far,  18 16 

O'  the  fact  announced, — my  wife  then  is  my  wife, 

I  have  allowance  for  a  husband's  right. 

I  am  charged  with  passing  right's  due  bound, — such  acts 

As  I  thought  just,  my  wife  called  cruelty,  1820 

Complained  of  in  due  form,^convoked  no  court 

Of  common  gossipry,  but  took  her  wrongs — 

And  not  once,  but  so  long  as  patience  served — 

To  the  town's  top,  jurisdiction's  pride  of  place. 

To  the  Archbishop  and  the  Governor.  1825 

These  heard  her  charge  with  my  reply,  and  found 

That  futile,  this  sufficient :  they  dismissed 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  151 

The  hysteric  querulous  rebel,  and  confirmed 

Authority  in  its  wholesome  exercise, 

They,  with  directest  access  to  the  facts.  1830 

"  — Ay,  for  it  was  their  friendship  favoured  you, 

"  Hereditary  alliance  against  a  breach 

^'  I'  the  social  order :  prejudice  for  the  name 

''  Of  Franceschini ! " — So  I  hear  it  said  : 

But  not  here.     You,  lords,  never  will  you  say  1835 

"  Such  is  the  nullity  of  grace  and  truth, 

"  Such  the  corruption  of  the  faith,  such  lapse 

'^  Of  law,  such  warrant  have  the  Molinists 

"  For  daring  reprehend  us  as  they  do, — 

"  That  we  pronounce  it  just  a  common  case,  1840 

"  Two  dignitaries,  each  in  his  degree 

"  First,  foremost,  this  the  spiritual  head,  and  that 

"  The  secular  arm  o'  the  body  politic, 

'^  Should,  for  mere  wrongs'  love  and  injustice'  sake, 

"  Side  with,  aid  and  abet  in  cruelty  1845 

"  This  broken  beggarly  noble, — bribed  perhaps 

"  By  his  watered  wine  and  mouldy  crust  of  bread — 

^'  Rather  than  that  sweet  tremulous  flower-like  wife 

"  Who  kissed  their  hands  and  curled  about  their  feet 

"  Looking  the  irresistible  loveliness  1850 

"  In  tears  that  takes  man  captive,  turns  "...  enough  I 


152  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Do  you  blast  your  predecessors?    What  forbids 

Posterity  to  trebly  blast  yourselves 

Who  set  the  example  and  instruct  their  tongue  ? 

You  dreaded  the  crowd,  succumbed  to  the  popular  cry, 

Or  else,  would  nowise  seem  defer  thereto  1856 

And  yield  to  public  clamour  though  i'  the  right ! 

You  ridded  your  eye  of  my  unseemliness. 

The  noble  whose  misfortune  wearied  you, — 

Or,  what 's  more  probable,  made  common  cause        i860 

With  the  cleric  section,  punished  in  myself 

Maladroit  uncomplaisant  laity, 

Defective  in  behaviour  to  a  priest 

Who  claimed  the  customary  partnership 

I'  the  house  and  the  wife.     Lords,  any  lie  will  serve  ! 

Look  to  it, — or  allow  me  freed  so  far  !  1866 

Then  I  proceed  a  step,  come  with  clean  hands 

Thus  far,  re-tell  the  tale  told  eight  months  since. 

The  wife,  you  allow  so  far,  I  have  not  wronged, 

Has  fled  my  roof,  plundered  me  and  decamped         1870 

In  company  with  the  priest  her  paramour : 

And  I  gave  chace,  came  up  with,  caught  the  two 

At  the  wayside  inn  where  both  had  spent  the  night, 

Found  them  in  flagrant  fault,  and  found  as  well. 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 53 

By  documents  with  name  and  plan  and  date,  1875 

The  fault  was  furtive  then  that's  flagrant  now, 

Their  intercourse  a  long  established  crime. 

I  did  not  take  the  license  law's  self  gives 

To  slay  both  criminals  o'  the  spot  at  the  time, 

But  held  my  hand, — preferred  play  prodigy  1880 

Of  patience  which  the  world  calls  cowardice, 

Rather  than  seem  anticipate  the  law 

And  cast  discredit  on  its  organs, — you — 

So,  to  your  bar  I  brought  both  criminals. 

And  made  my  statement :  heard  their  counter-charge 

Nay, — their  corroboration  of  my  tale,  1886 

Nowise  disputing  its  allegements,  not 

I'  the  main,  not  more  than  nature's  decency 

Compels  men  to  keep  silence  in  this  kind, —  . 

Only  contending  that  the  deeds  avowed  1890 

Would  take  another  colour  and  bear  excuse. 

You  were  to  judge  between  us ;  so  you  did. 

You  disregard  the  excuse,  you  breathe  away 

The  colour  of  innocence  and  leave  guilt  black, 

'^  Guilty  "  is  the  decision  of  the  court,  1895 

And  that  I  stand  in  consequence  untouched. 

One  white  integrity  from  head  to  heel. 

Not  guilty  ?    Why  then  did  you  punish  them  ? 


154  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

True,  punishment  has  been  inadequate — 

'T  is  not  I  only,  not  my  friends  that  joke,  1900 

My  foes  that  jeer,  who  echo  "inadequate" — 

For,  by  a  chance  that  comes  to  help  for  once. 

The  same  case  simultaneously  was  judged 

At  Arezzo,  in  the  province  of  the  Court 

Where  the  crime  had  beginning  but  not  end.  1905 

They  then,  deciding  on  but  half  o'  the  crime, 

The  effraction,  robbery, — features  of  the  fault 

I  never  cared  to  dwell  upon  at  Rome, — 

What  was  it  they  adjudged  as  penalty 

To  Pompilia, — the  one  criminal  o'  the  pair  1910 

Amenable  to  their  judgment,  not  the  priest 

Who  is  Rome's  ?     Why,  just  imprisonment  for  life 

I'  the  Stinche.     There  was  Tuscany's  award 

To  a  wife  that  robs  her  husband  :  you  at  Rome 

Having  to  deal  with  adultery  in  a  wife  1915 

And,  in  a  priest,  breach  of  the  priestly  vow. 

Give  gentle  sequestration  for  a  month 

In  a  manageable  Convent,  then  release. 

You  call  imprisonment,  in  the  very  house 

O'  the  very  couple,  the  sole  aim  and  end  1920 

Of  the  culprits'  crime  was — there  to  reach  and  rest 

And  there  take  solace  and  defy  me  :  well, — 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 55 

This  difference  'twixt  their  penalty  and  yours 

Is  immaterial :  make  your  penalty  less — 

Merely  that  she  should  henceforth  wear  black  gloves 

And  white  fan,  she  who  wore  the  opposite —  1926 

Why,  all  the  same  the  fact  o'  the  thing  subsists. 

Reconcile  to  your  conscience  as  you  may, 

Be  it  on  your  own  heads,  you  pronounced  one  half 

0'  the  penalty  for  heinousness  like  hers  1930 

And  his,  that 's  for  a  fault  at  Carnival 

Of  comfit-pelting  past  discretion's  law, 

Or  accident  to  handkerchief  in  Lent 

Which  falls  perversely  as  a  lady  kneels 

Abruptly,  and  but  half  conceals  her  neck  !  1935 

I  acquiesce  for  my  part, — punished,  though 

By  a  pin-point  scratch,  means  guilty  :  guilty  means 

— What  have  I  been  but  innocent  hitherto  ? 

Anyhow,  here  the  offence,  being  punished,  ends. 

Ends  ? — for  you  deemed  so,  did  you  not,  sweet  lords  ? 

That  was  throughout  the  veritable  aim  1941 

O'  the  sentence  light  or  heavy, — to  redress 

Recognised  wrong  ?     You  righted  me,  I  think? 

Well  then, — what  if  I,  at  this  last  of  all. 

Demonstrate  you,  as  my  whole  pleading  proves,         1945 


156  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

No  particle  of  wrong  received  thereby 

One  atom  of  right  ? — that  cure  grew  worse  disease  ? 

That  in  the  process  you  call  "justice  done  " 

All  along  you  have  nipped  away  just  inch 

By  inch  the  creeping  climbing  length  of  plague  1950 

Breaking  my  tree  of  life  from  root  to  branch, 

And  left  me,  after  all  and  every  act 

Of  your  interference, — lightened  of  what  load? 

At  liberty  wherein  ?     Mere  words  and  wind  ! 

"  Now  I  was  saved,  now  I  should  feel  no  more  1955 

"  The  hot  breath,  find  a  respite  from  fixed  eye 

"  And  vibrant  tongue ! "  Why,  scarce  your  back  was  turned, 

There  was  the  reptile,  that  feigned  death  at  first. 

Renewing  its  detested  spire  and  spire 

Around  me,  rising  to  such  heights  of  hate  i960 

That,  so  far  from  mere  purpose  now  to  crush 

And  coil  itself  on  the  remains  of  me, 

Body  and  mind,  and  there  flesh  fang  content, 

Its  aim  is  now  to  evoke  life  from  death^ 

Make  me  anew,  satisfy  in  my  son  1965 

The  hunger  I  may  feed  but  never  sate, 

Tormented  on  to  perpetuity, — 

My  son,  whom,  dead,  I  shall  know,  understand. 

Feel,  hear,  see,  never  more  escape  the  sight 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  157 

In  heaven  that 's  turned  to  hell,  or  hell  returned        1970 

(So,  rather,  say)  to  this  same  earth  again, — 

Moulded  into  the  image  and  made  one, 

Fashioned  of  soul  as  featured  like  in  face, 

First  taught  to  laugh  and  lisp  and  stand  and  go 

By  that  thief,  poisoner  and  adulteress  1975 

I  call  Pompilia,  he  calls  .  .  .  sacred  name, 

Be  unpronounced,  be  unpolluted  here  ! 

And  last  led  up  to  the  glory  and  prize  of  hate 

By  his  .  .  foster-father,  Caponsacchi's  self, 

The  perjured  priest,  pink  of  conspirators,  1980 

Tricksters  and  knaves,  yet  polished,  superfine. 

Manhood  to  model  adolescence  by  .  .  . 

Lords,  look  on  me,  declare, — when,  what  I  show. 

Is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  what  you  deemed 

And  doled  me  out  for  justice, — what  did  you  say?    1985 

For  reparation,  restitution  and  more, — 

AVill  you  not  thank,  praise,  bid  me  to  your  breasts 

For  having  done  the  thing  you  thought  to  do. 

And  thoroughly  trampled  out  sin's  life  at  last  ? 

I  have  heightened  phrase  to  make  your  soft  speech  serve, 

Doubled  the  blow  you  but  essayed  to  strike,  1991 

Carried  into  effect  your  mandate  here 

That  else  had  fallen  to  ground  ;  mere  duty  done, 


158  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Oversight  of  the  master  just  supplied 

By  zeal  i'  the  servant :  I,  being  used  to  serve,  1995 

Have  simply  .  .  .  what  is  it  they  charge  me  with  ? 

Blackened  again,  made  legible  once  more 

Your  own  decree,  not  permanently  writ, 

Rightly  conceived  but  all  too  faintly  traced, — 

It  reads  efficient,  now,  comminatory,  2000 

A  terror  to  the  wicked,  answers  so 

The  mood  o'  the  magistrate,  the  mind  of  law. 

Absolve,  then,  me,  law's  mere  executant ! 

Protect  your  own  defender, — save  me,  Sirs  ! 

Give  me  my  life,  give  me  my  liberty,  2005 

My  good  name  and  my  civic  rights  again  ! 

It  would  be  too  fond,  too  complacent  play 

Into  the  hands  o'  the  devil,  should  we  lose 

The  game  here,  I  for  God  :  a  soldier-bee 

That  yields  his  life,  exenterate  with  the  stroke  2010 

O'  the  sting  that  saves  the  hive.     I  need  that  life. 

Oh,  never  fear  !     I  '11  find  life  plenty  use 

Though  it  should  last  five  years  more,  aches  and  all ! 

For,  first  thing,  there's  the  mother's  age  to  help — 

Let  her  come  break  her  heart  upon  my  breast,  2015 

Not  on  the  blank  stone  of  my  nameless  tomb  ! 

The  fugitive  brother  has  to  be  bidden  back 


COUNT   GUIDO    FRANCESCHINI.  1 59 

To  the  old  routine,  repugnant  to  the  tread, 

Of  daily  suit  and  service  to  the  Church, — 

Thro'  gibe  and  jest,  those  stones  that  Shimei  flung  ! 

Ay,  and  the  spirit-broken  youth  at  home,  2021 

The  awe-struck  altar-ministrant,  shall  make 

Amends  for  faith  now  palsied  at  the  source, 

Shall  see  truth  yet  triumphant,  justice  yet 

A  victor  in  the  battle  of  this  world  !  2025 

Give  me — for  last,  best  gift,  my  son  again. 

Whom  law  makes  mine, — I  take  him  at  your  word, 

Mine  be  he,  by  miraculous  mercy,  lords  ! 

Let  me  lift  up  his  youth  and  innocence 

To  purify  my  palace,  room  by  room  2030 

Purged  of  the  memories,  lend  from  his  bright  brow 

Light  to  the  old  proud  paladin  my  sire 

Shrunk  now  for  shame  into  the  darkest  shade 

O'  the  tapestry,  showed  him  once  and  shrouds  him  now  ! 

Then  may  we, — strong  from  that  rekindled  smile, — 

Go  forward,  face  new  times,  the  better  day.  2036 

And  when,  in  times  made  better  through  your  brave 

Decision  now, — might  but  Utopia  be  ! — 

Rome  rife  with  honest  women  and  strong  men. 

Manners  reformed,  old  habits  back  once  more,  2040 

Customs  that  recognize  the  standard  worth, — 


l6o  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

The  wholesome  household  rule  m  force  again, 

Husbands  once  more  God's  representative, 

Wives  like  the  typical  Spouse  once  more,  and  Priests 

No  longer  men  of  Belial,  with  no  aim  2045 

At  leading  silly  women  captive,  but 

Of  rising  to  such  duties  as  yours  now, — 

Then  will  I  set  my  son  at  my  right-hand 

And  tell  his  father's  story  to  this  point. 

Adding  ''The  task  seemed  superhuman,  still  2050 

"  I  dared  and  did  it,  trusting  God  and  law  : 

"  And  they  approved  of  me  :  give  praise  to  both  ! " 

And  if,  for  answer,  he  shall  stoop  to  kiss 

My  hand,  and  peradventure  start  thereat, — 

I  engage  to  smile  "  That  was  an  accident  2055 

"  I'  the  necessary  process, — just  a  trip 

''  O'  the  torture-irons  in  their  search  for  truth, — 

"  Hardly  misfortune,  and  no  fault  at  all." . 


(     i6i     ) 


VI. 

GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI. 

Answer  you,  Sirs  ?     Do  I  understand  aright  ? 

Have  patience  !     In  this  sudden  smoke  from  hell, — 

So  things  disguise  themselves, — I  cannot  see 

My  own  hand  held  thus  broad  before  my  face 

And  know  it  again.     Answer  you  ?     Then  that  means    5 

Tell  over  twice  what  I,  the  first  time,  told 

Six  months  ago  :  't  was  here,  I  do  believe. 

Fronting  you  same  three  in  this  very  room, 

I  stood  and  told  you  :  yet  now  no  one  laughs. 

Who  then  .  .  nay,  dear  my  lords,  but  laugh  you  did,     10 

As  good  as  laugh,  what  in  a  judge  we  style 

Laughter — no  levity,  nothing  indecorous,  lords  ! 

Only, — I  think  I  apprehend  the  mood : 

VOL.  II.  M 


1 62  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

There  was  the  blameless  shrug,  permissible  smirk, 

The  pen's  pretence  at  play  with  the  pursed  mouth,        15 

The  titter  stifled  in  the  hollow  palm 

Which  rubbed  the  eyebrow  and  caressed  the  nose, 

When  I  first  told  my  tale  :  they  meant,  you  know, 

"  The  sly  one,  all  this  we  are  bound  believe  ! 

"  Well,  he  can  say  no  other  than  what  he  says.  20 

"  We  have  been  young,  too, — come,  there  's  greater  guilt ! 

"  Let  him  but  decently  disembroil  himself, 

"  Scramble  from  out  the  scrape  nor  move  the  mud,  — 

"  We  solid  ones  may  risk  a  finger-stretch  ! " 

And  now  you  sit  as  grave,  stare  as  aghast  25 

As  if  I  were  a  phantom  :  now  't  is — *'  Friend, 

"  Collect  yourself! " — no  laughing  matter  more — 

'^  Counsel  the  Court  in  this  extremity, 

"  Tell  us  again  !  " — tell  that,  for  telling  which, 

I  got  the  jocular  piece  of  punishment,  30 

Was  sent  to  lounge  a  little  in  the  place 

Whence  now  of  a  sudden  here  you  summon  me 

To  take  the  intelligence  from  just — your  lips 

You,  Judge  Tommati,  who  then  tittered  most, — 

That  she  I  helped  eight  months  since  to  escape.  35 

Her  husband,  is  retaken  by  the  same, 

Three  days  ago,  if  I  have  seized  your  sense, — 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 63 

(I  being  disallowed  to  interfere, 

Meddle  or  make  in  a  matter  none  of  mine, 

For  you  and  law  were  guardians  quite  enough  40 

O'  the  innocent,  without  a  pert  priest's  help) — 

And  that  he  has  butchered  her  accordingly. 

As  she  foretold  and  as  myself  believed, — 

And,  so  foretelling  and  believing  so. 

We  were  punished,  both  of  us,  the  merry  way  :  45 

Therefore,  tell  once  again  the  tale  !     For  what  ? 

Pompilia  is  only  dying  while  I  speak  ! 

Why  does  the  mirth  hang  fire  and  miss  the  smile  ? 

My  masters,  there  's  an  old  book,  you  should  con 

For  strange  adventures,  applicable  yet,  50 

'T  is  stuffed  with.     Do  you  know  that  there  was  once 

This  thing  :  a  multitude  of  worthy  folk 

Took  recreation,  watched  a  certain  group 

Of  soldiery  intent  upon  a  game, — 

HoAv  first  they  wrangled,  but  soon  fell  to  play,  55 

Threw  dice, — the  best  diversion  in  the  world, 

A  word  in  your  ear, — they  are  now  casting  lots. 

Ay,  with  that  gesture  quaint  and  cry  uncouth, 

For  the  coat  of  One  murdered  an  hour  ago  ! 

I  am  a  priest, — talk  of  what  I  have  learned.  60 

PompiHa  is  bleeding  out  her  life  belike, 


164  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Gasping  away  the  latest  breath  of  all, 

This  minute,  while  I  talk — not  while  you  laugh  ? 

Yet,  being  sobered  now,  what  is  it  you  ask 

By  way  of  explanation  ?    There  's  the  fact !  65 

It  seems  to  fill  the  universe  with  sight 

And  sound, — from  the  four  corners  of  this  earth 

Tells  itself  over,  to  my  sense  at  least. 

But  you  may  want  it  lower  set  i'  the  scale, — 

Too  vast,  too  close  it  clangs  in  the  ear,  perhaps;  70 

You  'd  stand  back  just  to  comprehend  it  more  : 

Well  then,  let  me,  the  hollow  rock,  condense 

The  voice  o'  the  sea  and  wind,  interpret  you 

The  mystery  of  this  murder.     God  above  ! 

It  is  too  paltry,  such  a  transference  75 

O'  the  storm's  roar  to  the  cranny  of  the  stone  ! 

This  deed,  you  saw  begin — why  does  its  end 

Surprise  you  ?    Why  should  the  event  enforce 

The  lesson,  we  ourselves  learned,  she  and  I, 

From  the  first  o'  the  fact,  and  taught  you,  all  in  vain  ?   80 

This  Guido  from  whose  throat  you  took  my  grasp, 

Was  this  man  to  be  favoured,  now,  or  feared. 

Let  do  his  will,  or  have  his  will  restrained, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  165 

In  the  relation  with  PompiHa  ? — say  ! 

Did  any  other  man  need  interpose  85 

— Oh,  though  first  comer,  though  as  strange  at  the  work 

As  fribble  must  be,  coxcomb,  fool  that 's  near 

To  knave  as,  say,  a  priest  who  fears  the  world — 

Was  he  bound  brave  the  peril,  save  the  doomed, 

Or  go  on,  sing  his  snatch  and  pluck  his  flower,  90 

Keep  the  straight  path  and  let  the  victim  die  ? 

I  held  so  j  you  decided  otherwise,  ■ 

Saw  no  such  peril,  therefore  no  such  need 

To  stop  song,  loosen  flower,  and  leave  path  :  Law, 

Law  was  aware  and  watching,  would  suflice,  95 

Wanted  no  priest's  intrusion,  palpably 

Pretence,  too  manifest  a  subterfuge  ! 

Whereupon  I,  priest,  coxcomb,  fribble  and  fool. 

Ensconced  me  in  my  corner,  thus  rebuked, 

A  kind  of  culprit,  over-zealous  hound  100 

Kicked  for  his  pains  to  kennel ;  I  gave  place, 

To  you,  and  let  the  law  reign  paramount : 

I  left  Pompilia  to  your  watch  and  ward. 

And  now  you  point  me — there  and  thus  she  lies  ! 

Men,  for  the  last  time,  what  do  you  want  with  me  ?     105 
Is  it, — you  acknowledge,  as  it  were,  a  use, 


1 66  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

A  profit  in  employing  me  ? — at  length 

I  may  conceivably  help  the  august  law  ? 

I  am  free  to  break  the  blow,  next  hawk  that  swoops 

On  next  dove,  nor  miss  much  of  good  repute  ?  no 

Or  what  if  this  your  summons,  after  all, 

Be  but  the  form  of  mere  release,  no  more, 

Which  turns  the  key  and  lets  the  captive  go  ? 

I  have  paid  enough  in  person  at  Civita, 

Am  free, — what  more  need  I  concern  me  with  ?  115 

Thank  you  !  I  am  rehabilitated  then, 

A  very  reputable  priest.     But  she — 

The  glory  of  life,  the  beauty  of  the  world, 

The  splendour  of  heaven,  .  .  .  well,  Sirs,  does  no  one 

move  ? 
Do  I  speak  ambiguously?     The  glory,  I  say,  120 

And  the  beauty,  I  say,  and  splendour,  still  say  I, 
Who,  a  priest,  trained  to  live  my  whole  life  long 
On  beauty  and  splendour,  solely  at  their  source, 
God, — have  thus  recognized  my  food  in  one, 
You  tell  me,  is  fast  dying  while  we  talk,  125 

Pompilia, — how  does  lenity  to  me, 
Remit  one  death-bed  pang  to  her  ?     Come,  smile  ! 
The  proper  wink  at  the  hot-headed  youth 
Who  lets  his  soul  show,  through  transparent  words. 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI.  l6j 

The  mundane  love  that 's  sin  and  scandal  too  !  130 

You  are  all  struck  acquiescent  now,  it  seems : 

It  seems  the  oldest,  gravest  signor  here, 

Even  the  redoubtable  Tommati,  sits 

Chop-fallen, — understands  how  law  might  take 

Service  like  mine,  of  brain  and  heart  and  hand,  135 

In  good  part.     Better  late  than  never,  law  ! 

You  understand  of  a  sudden,  gospel  too 

Has  a  claim  here,  may  possibly  pronounce 

Consistent  with  my  priesthood,  worthy  Christ, 

That  I  endeavoured  to  save  Pomp  ilia?  140 

Then, 
You  were  wrong,  you  see  :  that 's  well  to  see,  though  late : 
That 's  all  we  may  expect  of  man,  this  side 
The  grave  :  his  good  is — knowing  he  is  bad  : 
Thus  will  it  be  with  us  when  the  books  ope  145 

And  we  stand  at  the  bar  on  judgment-day. 
Well  then,  I  have  a  mind  to  speak,  see  cause 
To  relume  the  quenched  flax  by  this  dreadful  light, 
Burn  my  soul  out  in  showing  you  the  truth. 
I  heard,  last  time  I  stood  here  to  be  judged,  150 

What  is  priest's-duty, — labour  to  pluck  tares 
And  weed  the  corn  of  Molinism ;  let  me 


1 68  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Make  you  hear,  this  time,  how,  in  such  a  case, 

Man,  be  he  in  the  priesthood  or  at  plough. 

Mindful  of  Christ  or  marching  step  by  step  155 

With  .  .  .  what 's  his  style,  the  other  potentate 

Who  bids  have  courage  and  keep  honour  safe. 

Nor  let  minuter  admonition  teaze  ? — 

How  he  is  bound,  better  or  worse,  to  act. 

Earth  will  not  end  through  this  misjudgment,  no  !       160 

For  you  and  the  others  like  you  sure  to  come. 

Fresh  work  is  sure  to  follow, — wickedness 

That  wants  withstanding.     Many  a  man  of  blood. 

Many  a  man  of  guile  will  clamour  yet, 

Bid  you  redress  his  grievance, — as  he  clutched  165 

The  prey,  forsooth  a  stranger  stepped  between. 

And  there 's  the  good  gripe  in  pure  waste  !    My  part 

Is  done  ;  i'  the  doing  it,  I  pass  away 

Out  of  the  world.     I  want  no  more  with  earth. 

Let  me,  in  heaven's  name,  use  the  very  snuff  170 

O'  the  taper  in  one  last  spark  shall  show  truth 

For  a  moment,  show  Pompilia  who  was  true  ! 

Not  for  her  sake,  but  yours  :  if  she  is  dead, 

Oh,  Sirs,  she  can  be  loved  by  none  of  you 

Most  or  least  priestly  !     Saints,  to  do  us  good,  175 

Must  be  in  heaven,  I  seem  to  understand  : 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI.  1 69 

We  never  find  them  saints  before,  at  least. 
Be  her  first  prayer  then  presently  for  you — 
She  has  done  the  good  to  me  .  . 

What  is  all  this  ?      i8o 
There,  I  was  bom,  have  lived,  shall  die,  a  fool ! 
This  is  a  foolish  outset : — might  with  cause 
Give  colour  to  the  very  lie  o'  the  man, 
The  murderer, — make  as  if  I  loved  his  wife, 
In  the  way  he  called  love.     He  is  the  fool  there  !       185 
Why,  had  there  been  in  me  the  touch  of  taint, 
I  had  picked  up  so  much  of  knaves'-policy 
As  hide  it,  keep  one  hand  pressed  on  the  place 
Suspected  of  a  spot  would  damn  us  both. 
Or  no,  not  her  ! — not  even  if  any  of  you  190 

Dares  think  that  I,  i'  the  face  of  death,  her  death 
That 's  in  my  eyes  and  ears  and  brain  and  heart. 
Lie, — if  he  does,  let  him  !  I  mean  to  say. 
So  he  stop  there,  stay  thought  from  smirching  her 
The  snow-white  soul  that  angels  fear  to  take  195 

Untenderly.     But,  all  the  same,  I  know 
I  too  am  taintless,  and  I  bare  my  breast. 
You  can 't  think,  men  as  you  are,  all  of  you. 
But  that,  to  hear  thus  suddenly  such  an  end 
Of  such  a  wonderful  white  soul,  that  comes  200 


1 70  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Of  a  man  and  murderer  calling  the  white  black, 
Must  shake  me,  trouble  and  disadvantage.     Sirs, 
Only  seventeen  ! 

Why,  good  and  wise  you  are  ! 
You  might  at  the  beginning  stop  my  mouth  :  205 

So,  none  would  be  to  speak  for  her,  that  knew. 
I  talk  impertinently,  and  you  bear. 
All  the  same.     This  it  is  to  have  to  do 
With  honest  hearts  :  they  easily  may  err. 
But  in  the  main  they  wish  well  to  the  truth.  210 

You  are  Christians  ;  somehow,  no  one  ever  plucked 
A  rag,  even,  from  the  body  of  the  Lord, 
To  wear  and  mock  with,  but,  despite  himself. 
He  looked  the  greater  and  was  the  better.     Yes, 
I  shall  go  on  now.     Does  she  need  or  not  215 

I  keep  calm  ?     Calm  I  '11  keep  as  monk  that  croons 
Transcribing  battle,  earthquake,  famine,  plague, 
From  parchment  to  his  cloister's  chronicle. 
Not  one  word  more  from  the  point  now  ! 

I  begin.     220 
Yes,  I  am  one  of  your  body  and  a  priest. 
Also  I  am  a  younger  son  o'  the  House 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  171 

Oldest  now,  greatest  once,  in  my  birth-town 

Arezzo,  I  recognize  no  equal  there — 

(I  want  all  arguments,  all  sorts  of  arms  225 

That  seem  to  serve, — use  this  for  a  reason,  wait ! ) 

Not  therefore  thrust  into  the  Church,  because 

O'  the  piece  of  bread  one  gets  there.     We  were  first 

Of  Fiesole,  that  rings  still  with  the  fame 

Of  Capo-in-Sacco  our  progenitor :  230 

When  Florence  ruined  Fiesole,  our  folk 

Migrated  to  the  victor-city,  and  there 

Flourished, — our  palace  and  our  tower  attest, 

In  the  Old  Mercato, — this  was  years  ago. 

Four  hundred,  full, — no,  it  wants  fourteen  just.  235 

Our  arms  are  those  of  Fiesole  itself. 

The  shield  quartered  with  white  and  red  :  a  branch 

Are  the  Salviati  of  us,  nothing  more. 

That  were  good  help  to  the  Church  ?     But  better  still — 

Not  simply  for  the  advantage  of  my  birth  240 

I'  the  way  of  the  world,  was  I  proposed  for  priest ; 

But  because  there  's  an  illustration,  late 

I'  the  day,  that  's  loved  and  looked  to  as  a  saint 

Still  in  Arezzo,  he  was  bishop  of. 

Sixty  years  since  ;  he  spent  to  the  last  doit  245 

His  bishop's-revenue  among  the  poor, 


172  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

And  used  to  tend  the  needy  and  the  sick, 

Barefoot,  because  of  his  humility. 

He  it  was, — when  the  Gran  duke  Ferdinand 

Swore  he  would  raze  our  city,  plough  the  place  250 

And  sow  it  with  salt,  because  we  Aretines 

Had  tied  a  rope  about  the  neck,  to  hale 

The  statue  of  his  father  from  its  base 

For  hate's  sake, — he  availed  by  prayers  and  tears 

To  pacify  the  Duke  and  save  the  town.  255 

This  was  my  father's  father's  brother.     You  see. 

For  his  sake,  how  it  was  I  had  a  right 

To  the  self-same  office,  bishop  in  the  egg, 

So,  grew  i'  the  garb  and  prattled  in  the  school. 

Was  made  expect,  from  infancy  almost,  260 

The  proper  mood  o'  the  priest ;  till  time  ran  by 

And  brought  the  day  when  I  must  read  the  vows. 

Declare  the  world  renounced  and  undertake 

To  become  priest  and  leave  probation, — leap 

Over  the  ledge  into  the  other  Hfe,  265 

Having  gone  trippingly  hitherto  up  to  the  height 

O'er  the  wan  water.     Just  a  vow  to  read  ! 

I  stopped  short  awe-struck.     "  How  shall  holiest  flesh 
*'  Engage  to  keep  such  vow  inviolate, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 73 

'^  How  much  less  mine, — I  know  myself  too  weak,     270 

"  Unworthy  !     Choose  a  worthier  stronger  man  !" 

And  the  very  Bishop  smiled  and  stopped  the  mouth 

In  its  mid-protestation.     "  Incapable  ? 

"  Qualmish  of  conscience  ?     Thou  ingenuous  boy  ! 

"  Clear  up  the  clouds  and  cast  thy, scruples  far  !  275 

"  I  satisfy  thee  there  's  an  easier  sense 

"  Wherein  to  take  such  vow  than  suits  the  first 

"'  Rough  rigid  reading.     Mark  what  makes  all  smooth, 

"  Nay,  has  been  even  a  solace  to  myself ! 

"  The  Jews  who  needs  must,  in  their  synagogue,         280 

''  Utter  sometimes  the  holy  name  of  God, 

'^  A  thing  their  superstition  boggles  at, 

"  Pronounce  aloud  the  ineffable  sacrosanct, — 

"  How  does  their  shrewdness  help  them  ?    In  this  wise  ; 

"  Another  set  of  sounds  they  substitute,  285 

"  Jumble  so  consonants  and  vowels — how 

"  Should  I  know  ? — that  there  grows  from  out  the  old 

"  Quite  a  new  word  that  means  the  very  same — 

"  And  o'er  the  hard  place  slide  they  with  a  smile. 

"  Giuseppe  Maria  Caponsacchi  mine,  290 

"  Nobody  wants  you  in  these  latter  days 

"  To  prop  the  Church  by  breaking  your  back-bone, — 

"  As  the  necessary  way  was  once,  we  know, 


174  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  When  Dioclesian  flourished  and  his  Kke  ; 

'^  That  building  of  the  buttress-work  was  done  295 

'^  By  martyrs  and  confessors  :  let  it  bide, 

"  Add  not  a  brick,  but,  where  you  see  a  chink, 

"  Stick  in  a  sprig  of  ivy  or  root  a  rose 

"  Shall  make  amends  and  beautify  the  pile  ! 

"  We  profit  as  you  were  the  painfullest  300 

"  O'  the  martyrs,  and  you  prove  yourself  a  match 

"  For  the  cruellest  confessor  ever  was, 

"  If  you  march  boldly  up  and  take  your  stand 

"  Where  their  blood  soaks,  their  bones  yet  strew  the  soil, 

"And  cry  *  Take  notice,  I  the  young  and  free  305 

"  *  And  well-to-do  i'  the  world,  thus  leave  the  world, 

"  '  Cast  in  my  lot  thus  with  no  gay  young  world 

"  '  But  the  grand  old  Church  :  she  tempts  me  of  the  two!' 

"  Renounce  the  world  ?     Nay,  keep  and  give  it  us  ! 

"  Let  us  have  you,  and  boast  of  what  you  bring.         310 

"  We  want  the  pick  o'  the  earth  to  practise  with, 

"  Not  its  offscouring,  halt  and  deaf  and  blind 

"  In  soul  and  body.     There  's  a  rubble-stone 

"  Unfit  for  the  front  o'  the  building,  stuff  to  stow 

"  In  a  gap  behind  and  keep  us  weather-tight ;  315 

"  There  's  porphyry  for  the  prominent  place.    Good  lack  ! 

"  Saint  Paul  has  had  enough  and  to  spare,  I  trow, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 75 

"  Of  ragged  run-away  Onesimus  : 

"  He  wants  the  right-hand  with  the  signet-ring 

"  Of  King  Agrippa,  now,  to  shake  and  use.  320 

"  I  have  a  heavy  scholar  cloistered  up, 

^'  Close  under  lock  and  key,  kept  at  his  task 

"  Of  letting  Fenelon  know  the  fool  he  is,, 

"  In  a  book  I  promise  Christendom  next  Spring. 

"  Why,  if  he  covets  so  much  meat,  the  clown,  325 

"  As  a  lark's  wing  next  Friday,  or,  any  day, 

"  Diversion  beyond  catching  his  own  fleas, 

^'  He  shall  be  properly  swinged,  I  promise  him. 

"  But  you,  who  are  so  quite  another  paste 

''  Of  a  man, — do  you  obey  me  ?     Cultivate  330 

"  Assiduous,  that  superior  gift  you  have 

"  Of  making  madrigals — (who  told  me  ?     Ah  !) 

"  Get  done  a  Marinesque  Adoniad  straight 

"  With  a  pulse  o'  the  blood  a-pricking,  here  and  there, 

"  That  I  may  tell  the  lady,  '  And  he's  ours  ! ' "  335 

So  I  became  a  priest :  those  terms  changed  all, 
I  was  good  enough  for  that,  nor  cheated  so  ; 
I  could  live  thus  and  still  hold  head  erect. 
Now  you  see  why  I  may  have  been  before 
A  fribble  and  coxcomb,  yet,  as  priest,  break  word       340 


176  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Nowise,  to  make  you  disbelieve  me  now. 

I  need  that  you  should  know  my  truth.     Well,  then, 

According  to  prescription  did  I  live, 

— Conformed  myself,  both  read  the  breviary 

And  wrote  the  rhymes,  was  punctual  to  my  place        345 

I'  the  Pieve,  and  as  diligent  at  my  post 

Where  beauty  and  fashion  rule.     I  throve  apace, 

Sub-deacon,  Canon,  the  authority 

For  delicate  play  at  tarocs,  and  arbiter 

O'  the  magnitude  of  fan-mounts  :  all  the  while  350 

Wanting  no  whit  the  advantage  of  a  hint 

Benignant  to  the  promising  pupil, — thus  : 

"  Enough  attention  to  the  Countess  nov/, 

*•  The  young  one ;  't  is  her  mother  rules  the  roast, 

"  We  know  where,  and  puts  in  a  word  :  go  pay  355 

"  Devoir  to-morrow  morning  after  mass  ! 

"  Break  that  rash  promise  to  preach.  Passion-week  ! 

'*  Has  it  escaped  you  the  Archbishop  grunts 

"  And  snuffles  when  one  grieves  to  tell  his  Grace 

*^  No  soul  dares  treat  the  subject  of  the  day  360 

*^  Since  his  own  masterly  handling  it  (ha,  ha !) 

"  Five  years  ago, — when  somebody  could  help 

"  And  touch  up  an  odd  phrase  in  time  of  need, 

"  (He,  he  !) — and  somebody  helps  you,  my  son  ! 


GIUSEPPE  CAPONS ACCHI.  1 77 

"  Therefore,  don't  prove  so  indispensable  365 

''  At  the  Pieve,  sit  more  loose  i'  the  seat,  nor  grow 

^'  A  fixture  by  attendance  morn  and  eve  ! 

''  Arezzo  's  just  a  haven  midway  Rome — 

''  Rome  's  the  eventual  harbour, — make  for  port, 

"  Crowd  sail,  crack  cordage  !     And  your  cargo  be       370 

''  A  polished  presence,  a  genteel  manner,  wit 

''  At  will,  and  tact  at  every  pore  of  you  ! 

'^  I  sent  our  lump  of  learning,  Brother  Clout, 

"  And  Father  Slouch,  our  piece  of  piety, 

"  To  see  Rome  and  try  suit  the  Cardinal.  375 

"  Thither    they   clump-clumped,    beads    and    book    in 

hand, 
'^  And  ever  since  't  is  meat  for  man  and  maid 
''  How  both   flopped   down,    prayed   blessing   on   bent 

pate 
'^  Bald  many  an  inch  beyond  the  tonsure's  need, 
^^  Never  once  dreaming,  the  two  moony  dolts,  380 

^'  There  's  nothing  moves  his  Eminence  so  much 
''  As — far  from  all  this  awe  at  sanctitude — 
'*  Heads  that  wag,  eyes  that  twinkle,  modified  mirth 
"  At  the  closet-lectures  on  the  Latin  tongue 
''  A  lady  learns  so  much  by,  we  know  where.  385 

'^  AVhy,  body  o'  Bacchus,  you  should  crave  his  rule 

VOL.  II.  N 


178  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

^^  For  pauses  in  the  elegiac  couplet,  chasms 

"  Permissible  only  to  Catullus  !     There  I 

"  Now  go  do  duty :  brisk,  break  Priscian's  head 

'^  By  reading  the  day's  office — there  's  no  help.  390 

"  You  've  Ovid  in  your  poke  to  plaster  that ; 

"  Amen  's  at  the  end  of  all :  then  sup  with  me  !  " 

Well,  after  three  or  four  years  of  this  life, 
In  prosecution  of  my  calling,  I 

Found  myself  at  the  theatre  one  night  395 

With  a  brother  Canon,  in  a  mood  and  mind 
Proper. enough  for  the  place,  amused  or  no  : 
When  I  saw  enter,  stand,  and  seat  herself 
A  lady,  young,  tall,  beautiful,  strange  and  sad. 
It  was  as  when,  in  our  cathedral  once,  400 

As  I  got  yawningly  through  matin-song, 
I  saw/acc/imi  bear  a  burden  up. 
Base  it  on  the  high-altar,  break  away 
A  board  or  two,  and  leave  the  thing  inside 
Lofty  and  lone  :  and  lo,  when  next  I  looked,  405 

There  was  the  Rafael !     I  was  still  one  stare, 
When — "  Nay,  I'll  make  her  give  you  back  your  gaze  " — 
Said  Canon  Conti ;  and  at  the  word  he  tossed 
A  paper-twist  of  comfits  to  her  lap, 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI.  T79 

And  dodged  and  in  a  trice  was  at  my  back  410 

Nodding  from  over  my  shoulder.     Then  she  turned, 

Looked  our  way,  smiled  the  beautiful  sad  strange  smile. 

"  Is  not  she  fair?     'T  is  my  new  cousin,"  said  he  : 

"  The  fellow  lurking  there  i'  the  black  o'  the  box 

"  Is  Guido,  the  old  scapegrace  :  she  's  his  wife,  4T5 

"  Married  three  years  since  :  how  his  Countship  sulks  ! 

*'  He  has  brought  little  back  from  Rome  beside, 

"  After  the  bragging,  bullying.     A  fair  face, 

"  And — they  do  say — a  pocket-full  of  gold 

"  When  he  can  worry  both  her  parents  dead.  420 

"  I  don  't  go  much  there,  for  the  chamber  's  cold 

"  And  the  coffee  pale.    I  got  a  turn  at  first 

"  Paying  my  duty, — I  observed  they  crouched 

"  — The  two  old  frightened  family  spectres,  close 

"  In  a  corner,  each  on  each  like  mouse  on  mouse       425 

"  I'  the  cat's  cage :  ever  since,  I  stay  at  home. 

"  Hallo,  there  's  Guido,  the  black,  mean  and  small, 

"  Bends  his  brows  on  us— please  to  bend  your  own 

'^  On  the  shapely  nether  limbs  of  Light-skirts  there        , 

^'  By  way  of  a  diversion  !     I  was  a  fool  430 

^*  To  fling  the  sweetmeats.     Prudence,  for  God's  love  ! 

"  To-morrow  I'll  make  my  peace,  e'en  tell  some  fib, 

"  Try  if  I  can't  find  means  to  take  you  there." 


l8o  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

That  night  and  next  day  did  the  gaze  endure, 

Burnt  to  my  brain,  as  sunbeam  thro'  shut  eyes,  435 

And  not  once  changed  the  beautiful  sad  strange  smile. 

At  vespers  Conti  leaned  beside  my  seat 

I'  the  choir, — part  said,  part  sung — "  In  ex-cel-sis — 

"'  All 's  to  no  purpose  :  I  have  louted  low, 

^'  But  he  saw  you  staring — quia  sub — do  n't  incline      440 

"  To  know  you  nearer :  him  we  would  not  hold 

"  For  Hercules, — the  man  would  lick  your  shoe 

^'  If  you  and  certain  efficacious  friends 

"  Managed  him  warily, — but  there  's  the  wife  : 

"  Spare  her,  because  he  beats  her,  as  it  is,  445 

''  She  's  breaking  her  heart  quite  fast  enough— y'c:?;;^  /// — 

''  So,  be  you  rational  and  make  amends 

*^  With  little  Light-skirts  yonder — in  secida 

"  Secic-lo-o-o-o-riun.     Ah,  you  rogue  !    Every  one  knows 

^^  What  great  dame  she  makes  jealous  :  one  against  one, 

''  Play,  and  win  both  ! "  451 

Sirs,  ere  the  week  was  out, 
lisaw  and  said  to  myself  "  Light-skirts  hides  teeth 
"  Would  make  a  dog  sick, — the  great  dame  shows  spite 
^'  Should  drive  a  cat  mad  :  't  is  but  poor  work  this —  455 
"  Counting  one's  fingers  till  the  sonnet 's  crowned. 
''  I  doubt  much  if  Marino  really  be 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI. 


*^  A  better  bard  than  Dante  after  all. 

"  'T  is  more  amusing  to  go  pace  at  eve 

^^  I'  the  Duomo, — watch  the  day's  last  gleam  outside  460 

^^  Turn,  as  into  a  skirt  of  God's  own  robe, 

"  Those  lancet-windows'  jewelled  miracle, — 

"  Than  go  eat  the  Archbishop's  ortolans, 

"  Digest  his  jokes.     Luckily  Lent  is  near  : 

'^  Who  cares  to  look  will  find  me  in  my  stall  465 

^'  At  the  Pieve,  constant  to  this  faith  at  least — 

^'  Never  to  write  a  canzonet  any  more." 

So,  next  week,  't  was  my  patron  spoke  abrupt. 

In  altered  guise,  "  Young  man,  can  it  be  true 

"  That  after  all  your  promise  of  sound  fruit,  470 

^'  You  have  kept  away  from  Countess  young  or  old 

"  And  gone  play  truant  in  church  all  day  long? 

"  Are  you  turning  Molinist  ?  "     I  answered  quick 

"  Sir,  what  if  I  turned  Christian  ?    It  might  be. 

'^  The  fact  is,  I  am  troubled  in  my  mind,  475 

"  Beset  and  pressed  hard  by  some  novel  thoughts. 

"  This  your  Arezzo  is  a  limited  world  ; 

"  There  's  a  strange  Pope, — 't  is  said,  a  priest  who  thinks. 

"  Rome  is  the  port,  you  say :  to  Rome  I  go. 

^'  1  will  live  alone,  one  does  so  in  a  crowd,  480 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


'^  And  look  into  my  heart  a  little."     ''  Lent 

"  Ended,"— I  told  friends,—"  I  shall  go  to  Rome." 

One  evening  I  was  sitting  in  a  muse 
Over  the  opened  "  Summa,"  darkened  round 
By  the  mid-March  twilight,  thinking  how  my  life         485 
Had  shaken  under  me, — broke  short  indeed 
And  showed  the  gap  'twixt  what  is,  what  should  be, — 
And  into  what  abysm  the  soul  may  slip. 
Leave  aspiration  here,  achievement  there. 
Lacking  omnipotence  to  connect  extremes —  490 

Thinking  moreover  .  .  oh,  thinking,  if  you  like. 
How  utterly  dissociated  was  I 
A  priest  and  celibate,  from  the  sad  strange  wife 
Of  Guido, — ^just  as  an  instance  to  the  point. 
Nought  more, — how  I  had  a  whole  store  of  strengths  495 
Eating  into  my  heart,  which  craved  employ. 
And  she,  perhaps,  need  of  a  finger's  help, — 
And  yet  there  was  no  way  in  the  wide  world 
To  stretch  out  mine  and  so  relieve  myself — 
How  when  the  page  o'  the  Summa  preached  its  best,  500 
Her  smile  kept  glowing  out  of  it,  as  to  mock 
The  silence  we  could  break  by  no  one  word, — 
There  came  a  tap  without  the  chamber-door, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 83 

And  a  whisper,  when  I  bade  who  tapped  speak  out, 
And,  in  obedience  to  my  summons,  last  505 

In  ghded  a  masked  muffled  mystery. 
Laid  hghtly  a  letter  on  the  opened  book, 
Then  stood  with  folded  arms  and  foot  demure, 
Pointing  as  if  to  mark  the  minutes'  flight. 

I  took  the  letter,  read  to  the  effect  510 

That  she,  I  lately  flung  the  comfits  to. 

Had  a  warm  heart  to  give  me  in  exchange. 

And  gave  it, — loved  me  and  confessed  it  thus. 

And  bade  me  render  thanks  by  word  of  mouth, 

Going  that  night  to  such  a  side  o'  the  house  515 

Where  the  small  terrace  overhangs  a  street 

Blind  and  deserted,  not  the  street  in  front : 

Her  husband  being  away,  the  surly  patch, 

At  his  villa  of  Vittiano. 

"  And  you  ?  " — I  asked  :     520 
"  What  may  you  be  ?  " — "  Count  Guido's  kind  of  maid — 
''  Most  of  us  have  two  functions  in  his  house. 
'^  We  all  hate  him,  the  lady  suffers  much, 
"  'T  is  just  we  show  compassion,  furnish  aid, 
"  Specially  since  her  choice  is  fixed  so  well.  525 


184  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  What  answer  may  I  bring  to  cheer  the  sweet 
"Pompilia?" 

Then  I  took  a  pen  and  wrote. 
^  No  more  of  this  !    That  you  are  fair,  I  know : 
^  But  other  thoughts  now  occupy  my  mind.  530 

^  I  should  not  thus  have  played  the  insensible 
^  Once  on  a  time.     What  made  you, — may  one  ask, — 
^  Marry  your  hideous  husband  ?    'T  was  a  fault, 
^  And  now  you  taste  the  fruit  of  it.     Farewell." 

^  There  ! "  smiled  I  as  she  snatched  it  and  was  gone — 

'  There,  let  the  jealous  miscreant, — Guido's  self,         536 

^  Whose  mean  soul  grins  through  this  transparent  trick, — 

'  Be  baulked  so  far,  defrauded  of  his  aim  ! 

^  What  fund  of  satisfaction  to  the  knave, 

'  Had  I  kicked  this  his  messenger  down  stairs,  540 

'  Trussed  to  the  middle  of  her  impudence, 

'  Setting  his  heart  at  ease  so  !    No,  indeed  ! 

'  There's  the  reply  which  he  shall  turn  and  twist 

'  At  pleasure,  snuff  at  till  his  brain  grow  drunk, 

^  As  the  bear  does  when  he  finds  a  scented  glove       545 

^  That  puzzles  him, — a  hand  and  yet  no  hand, 

^  Of  other  perfume  than  his  own  foul  paw  ! 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  185 

"  Last  month,  I  had  doubtless  chosen  to  play  the  dupe, 

"  Accepted  the  mock-invitation,  kept 

"  The  sham  appointment,  cudgel  beneath  cloak,  550 

"  Prepared  myself  to  pull  the  appointer's  self 

"  Out  of  the  window  from  his  hiding-place 

"  Behind  the  gown  of  this  part-messenger 

"  Part-mistress  who  would  personate  the  wife. 

"  Such  had  seemed  once  a  jest  permissible  :  555 

'^  Now,  I  am  not  i'  the  mood." 

Back  next  morn  brought 
The  messenger,  a  second  letter  in  hand. 
"  You  are  cruel,  Thyrsis,  and  Myrtilla  moans 
"  Neglected  but  adores  you,  makes  request  560 

"  For  mercy :  why  is  it  you  dare  not  come  ? 
"  Such  virtue  is  scarce  natural  to  your  age : 
*'  You  must  love  someone  else  ;  I  hear  you  do, 
^*  The  Baron's  daughter  or  the  Advocate's  wife, 
''  Or  both, — all 's  one,  would  you  make  me  the  third — 
"  I  take  the  crumbs  from  table  gratefully  566 

^'  Nor  grudge  who  feasts  there.  'Faith,  I  blush  and  blaze  1 
"  Yet  if  I  break  all  bounds,  there  's  reason  sure, 
"  Are  you  determinedly  bent  on  Rome  ? 
"  I  am  wretched  here,  a  monster  tortures  me  :  570 

^*  Carry  me  with  you  !     Come  and  say  you  will  ! 


l86  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  Concert  this  very  evening  !     Do  not  write  ! 
"  I  am  ever  at  the  window  of  my  room 
^'  Over  the  terrace,  at  the  Ave.     Come  !  " 

I  questioned — lifting  half  the  woman's  mask  575 

To  let  her  smile  loose.     "  So,  you  gave  my  line 

"  To  the  merry  lady  ?  "     "  She  kissed  off  the  wax, 

"  And  put  what  paper  was  not  kissed  away, 

'^  In  her  bosom  to  go  burn  :  but  merry,  no  ! 

^'  She  wept  all  night  when  evening  brought  no  friend,  580 

"  Alone,  the  unkind  missive  at  her  breast ; 

^*  Thus  Philomel,  the  thorn  at  her  breast  too, 

"  Sings"  .  .  .  "Writes  this  second  letter?"    "Even  so  ! 

"  Then  she  may  peep  at  vespers  forth  ?  " — "  What  risk 

"  Do  we  run  o'  the  husband  ?  " — "  Ah, — no  risk  at  all ! 

"  He  is  more  stupid  even  than  jealous.     Ah —  586 

"  That  was  the  reason  ?     Why,  the  man  's  away  ! 

"  Beside,  his  bugbear  is  that  friend  of  yours, 

"  Fat  little  Canon  Conti.     He  fears  him — 

"  How  should  he  dream  of  you  ?     I  told  you  truth — 590 

"  He  goes  to  the  villa  at  Vittiano — 't  is 

"  The  time  when  Spring-sap  rises  in  the  vine — 

"  Spends  the  night  there.     And  then  his  wife  's  a  chrld, 

"  Does  he  think  a  child  outwits  him  ?     A  mere  child  : 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 87 

''  Yet  so  full  grown,  a  dish  for  any  duke.  595 

"Do  n't  quarrel  longer  with  such  cates,  but  come  ! " 

I  wrote  "  In  vain  do  you  solicit  me. 

"  I  am  a  priest :  and  you  are  wedded  wife, 

''  Whatever  kind  of  brute  your  husband  prove. 

'^  I  have  scruples,  in  short.     Yet  should  you  really  show 

"  Sign  at  the  window  .  .  .  but  nay,  best  be  good  !     601 

^^  My  thoughts  are  elsewhere." — ''  Take  her  that !  " 

— "  Again 
"  Let  the  incarnate  meanness,  cheat  and  spy, 
"  Mean  to  the  marrow  of  him,  make  his  heart  605 

^'  His  food,  anticipate  hell's  worm  once  more  ! 
'^  Let  him  watch  shivering  at  the  window — ay, 
''  And  let  this  hybrid,  this  his  light-of-love 
^'  And  lackey-of-lies, — a  sage  economy, — 
"  Paid  with  embracings  for  the  rank  brass  coin, —       610 
"  Let  her  report  and  make  him  chuckle  o'er 
"  The  break-down  of  my  resolution  now, 
"  And  lour  at  disappointment  in  good  time  ! 
"  — So  tantalize  and  so  enrage  by  turns, 
"  Until  the  two  fall  each  on  the  other  like  615 

^'  Two  famished  spiders,  as  the  coveted  fly 
**  That  toys  long,  leaves  their  net  and  them  at  last !  " 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


And  SO  the  missives  followed  thick  and  fast 

For  a  month,  say, — I  still  came  at  every  turn 

On  the  soft  sly  adder,  endlong  'neath  my  tread.         '620 

I  was  met  i'  the  street,  made  sign  to  in  the  church, 

A  slip  was  found  i'  the  door-sill,  scribbled  word 

'Twixt  page  and  page  o'  the  prayer-book  in  my  place  :   ' 

A  crumpled  thing  dropped  even  before  my  feet, 

Pushed  through  the  blind,  above  the  terrace-rail,         625 

As  I  passed,  by  day,  the  very  window  once. 

And  ever  from  corners  would  be  peering  up 

The  messenger,  with  the  self-same  demand 

'^  Obdurate  still,  no  flesh  but  adamant  ? 

"  Nothing  to  cure  the  wound,  assuage  the  throe  630 

^'  O'  the  sweetest  lamb  that  ever  loved  a  bear  ?  " 

And  ever  my  one  answer  in  one  tone — 

"  Go  your  ways,  temptress  !     Let  a  priest  read,  pray, 

"  Unplagued  of  vain  talk,  visions  not  for  him  ! 

"  In  the  end,  you  '11  have  your  will  and  ruin  me  1  "     635 

One  day,  a  variation :  thus  I  read  : 

"  You  have  gained  little  by  timidity. 

"  My  husband  has  found  out  my  love  at  length, 

'^  Sees  cousin  Conti  was  the  stalking-horse, 

"  And  you  the  game  he  covered,  poor  fat  soul  !  640 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 89 

**  My  husband  is  a  formidable  foe, 

"  Will  stick  at  nothing  to  destroy  you.     Stand 

"  Prepared,  or  better,  run  till  you  reach  Rome  ! 

"  I  bade  you  visit  me,  when  the  last  place 

"  My  tyrant  would  have  turned  suspicious  at,  645 

"  Or  cared  to  seek  you  in,  was  .  .  why  say,  where  ? 

''  But  now  all  's  changed  :  beside,  the  season  's  past 

^'  At  the  villa, — wants  the  master's  eye  no  more. 

"  Anyhow,  I  beseech  you,  stay  away 

'-  From  the  window !     He  might  well  be  posted  there." 

I  wrote — ''  You  raise  my  courage,  or  call  up  651 

'^  My  curiosity,  who  am  but  man. 

"  Tell  him  he  owns  the  palace,  not  the  street 

''  Under — that 's  his  and  yours  and  mine  alike. 

'^  If  it  should  please  me  pad  the  path  this  eve,  655 

"  Guido  will  have  two  troubles,  first  to  get 

"  Into  a  rage  and  then  get  out  again. 

''  Be  cautious,  though  :  at  the  Ave  I  " 

You  of  the  court  ! 
When  I  stood  question  here  and  reached  this  point     660 
O'  the  narrative, — search  notes  and  see  and  say 
If  some  one  did  not  interpose  with  smile 
And  sneer,  "  And  prithee  why  so  confident 


190  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

^^  That  the  husband  must,  of  all  needs,  not  the  wife, 

"  Fabricate  thus, — what  if  the  lady  loved?  665 

"  What  if  she  wrote  the  letters  ?  " 

Learned  Sir, 
I  told  you  there  's  a  picture  in  our  church. 
Well,  if  a  low-browed  verger  sidled  up 
Bringing  me,  like  a  blotch,  on  his  prod's  point,  670 

A  transfixed  scorpion,  let  the  reptile  writhe, 
And  then  said,  ''  See  a  thing  that  Rafael  made — 
"  This  venom  issued  from  Madonna's  mouth  !  " — 
I  should  reply,  ""  Rather,  the  soul  of  you 
''  Has  issued  from  your  body,  like  from  like,  675 

"  By  way  of  the  ordure-corner  ! " 

But  no  less, 
I  tired  of  the  same  black  teazing  lie 
Obtruded  thus  at  every  turn ;  the  pest 
Was  far  too  near  the  picture,  anyhow  :  680 

One  does  Madonna  service,  making  clowns 
Remove  their  dung-heap  from  the  sacristy. 
"  I  will  to  the  window,  as  he  tempts,"  said  I : 
*^  Yes,  whom  the  easy  love  has  failed  allure, 
"■  This  new  bait  of  adventure  may, — he  thinks.  685 

'^  While  the  imprisoned  lady  keeps  afar, 
"  There  will  they  lie  in  ambush,  heads  alert, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  191 

''  Kith,  kin,  and  Count  mustered  to  bite  my  heel. 

^^  No  mother  nor  brother  viper  of  the  brood 

"  Shall  scuttle  off  without  the  instructive  bruise  !  "      690 

So,  I  went :  crossed  street  and  street :  "  The  next  street's 

turn, 
'^  I  stand  beneath  the  terrace,  see,  above, 
"  The  black  of  the  ambush-window.     Then,  in  place 
'•  Of  hand's  throw  of  soft  prelude  over  lute 
"■  And  cough  that  clears  way  for  the  ditty  last," —       695 
I  began  to  laugh  already — ^'  he  will  have 
"  ^  Out  of  the  hole  you  hide  in,  on  to  the  front, 
''  ^  Count  Guido  Franceschini,  show  yourself ! 
'^  ^  Hear  what  a  man  thinks  of  a  thing  like  you, 
"  '  And  after,  take  this  foulness  in  your  face  ! '  "  700 

The  words  lay  living  on  my  lip,  I  made 

The  one  turn  more — and  there  at  the  window  stood, 

Framed  in  its  black  square  length,  with  lamp  in  hand, 

Pompilia ;  the  same  great,  grave,  griefful  air 

As  stands  i'  the  dusk,  on  altar  that  I  know,  705 

Left  alone  with  one  moonbeam  in  her  cell, 

Our  Lady  of  all  the  Sorrows.     Ere  I  knelt — 

Assured  myself  that  she  was  flesh  and  blood — 

She  had  looked  one  look  and  vanished. 


192  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

I  thought — "  Just  SO  : 
"  It  was  herself,  they  have  set  her  there  to  watch —    7 1 1 
"  Stationed  to  see  some  wedding-band  go  by, 
'^  On  fair  pretence  that  she  must  bless  the  bride, 
^^  Or  wait  some  funeral  with  friends  wind  past, 
"  And  crave  peace  for  the  corpse  that  claims  its  due.  715 
'^  She  never  dreams  they  used  her  for  a  snare, 
''  And  now  withdraw  the  bait  has  served  its  turn. 
''  Well  done,  the  husband,  who  shall  fare  the  worse  ! " 
And  on  my  lip  again  was — ''  Out  with  thee, 
''  Guido  !  "    When  all  at  once  she  re-appeared  ;  720 

But,  this  time,  on  the  terrace  overhead, 
So  close  above  me,  she  could  almost  touch 
My  head  if  she  bent  down  ;  and  she  did  bend. 
While  I  stood  still  as  stone,  all  eye,  all  ear. 

She  began — ^' You  have  sent  me  letters.  Sir  :  725 

'*  I  have  read  none,  I  can  neither  read  nor  write  ; 

'^  But  she  you  gave  them  to,  a  woman  here, 

''  One  of  the  people  in  whose  power  I  am, 

'*  Partly  explained  their  sense,  I  think,  to  me 

''  Obliged  to  listen  while  she  inculcates  730 

"  That  you,  a  priest,  can  dare  love  me,  a  wife, 

^'  Desire  to  live  or  die  as  I  shall  bid. 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 93 

^'  (She  makes  me  listen  if  I  will  or  no) 

"  Because  you  saw  my  face  a  single  time. 

^'  It  cannot  be  she  says  the  thing  you  mean ;  735 

"  Such  wickedness  were  deadly  to  us  both  : 

"  But  good  true  love  would  help  me  now  so  much — 

"  I  tell  myself,  you  may  mean  good  and  true. 

^'  You  offer  me,  I  seem  to  understand, 

"  Because  I  am  in  poverty  and  starve,  740 

"  Much  money,  where  one  piece  would  save  my  life. 

"  The  silver  cup  upon  the  altar-cloth 

^'  Is  neither  yours  to  give  nor  mine  to  take ; 

'^  But  I  might  take  one  bit  of  bread  therefrom, 

"  Since  I  am  starving,  and  return  the  rest,  745 

"  Yet  do  no  harm  :  this  is  my  very  case. 

"  I  am  in  that  strait,  I  may  not  abstain 

"  From  so  much  of  assistance  as  would  bring 

"  The  guilt  of  theft  on  neither  you  nor  me ; 

"  But  no  superfluous  particle  of  aid.  750 

"  I  think,  if  you  will  let  me  state  my  case, 

"  Even  had  you  been  so  fancy-fevered  here, 

"  Not  your  sound  self,  you  must  grow  healthy  now — 

'^  Care  only  to  bestow  what  I  can  take. 

"  That  it  is  only  you  in  the  wide  world,  755 

"  Knowing  me  nor  in  thought  nor  word  nor  deed, 

VOL.  II.  o 


194  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  Who,  all  unprompted  save  by  your  own  heart, 

"  Come  proffering  assistance  now, — were  strange 

''  But  that  my  whole  life  is  so  strange  :  as  strange 

"  It  is,  my  husband  whom  I  have  not  wronged  760 

"  Should  hate  and  harm  me.     For  his  own  soul's  sake, 

"  Hinder  the  harm  !     But  there  is  something  more, 

^^  And  that  the  strangest :  it  has  got  to  be 

^^  Somehow  for  my  sake  too,  and  yet  not  mine, 

'^  — This  is  a  riddle — for  some  kind  of  sake  765 

''  Not  any  clearer  to  myself  than  you, 

"And  yet  as  certain  as  that  I  draw  breath, — 

'^  I  would  fain  live,  not  die — oh  no,  not  die  ! 

"  My  case  is,  I  was  dwelling  happily 

"  At  Rome  with  those  dear  Comparini,  called  770 

"  Father  and  mother  to  me  ;  when  at  once 

"  I  found  I  had  become  Count  Guido's  wife  : 

"  Who  then,  not  waiting  for  a  moment,  changed 

"  Into  a  fury  of  fire,  if  once  he  was 

"  Merely  a  man  :  his  face  threw  fire  at  mine,  775 

"  He  laid  a  hand  on  me  that  burned  all  peace, 

"  All  joy,  all  hope,  and  last  all  fear  away, 

"  Dipping  the  bough  of  life,  so  pleasant  once, 

"  In  fire  which  shrivelled  leaf  and  bud  alike, 

**  Burning  not  only  present  life  but  past,  780 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  I95 

"  Which  you  might  think  was  safe  beyond  his  reach. 

"  He  reached  it,  though,  since  that  beloved  pair, 

"  My  father  once,  my  mother  all  those  years, 

"•  That  loved  me  so,  now  say  I  dreamed  a  dream 

"  And  bid  me  wake,  henceforth  no  child  of  theirs,       785 

"  Never  in  all  the  time  their  child  at  all. 

''  Do  you  understand?     I  cannot :  yet  so  it  is. 

"■  Just  so  I  say  of  you  that  proffer  help  : 

"  I  cannot  understand  what  prompts  your  soul, 

"  I  simply  needs  must  see  that  it  is  so,  790 

•^  Only  one  strange  and  wonderful  thing  more. 

'^  They  came  here  with  me,  those  two  dear  ones,  kept 

''  All  the  old  love  up,  till  my  husband,  till 

"  His  people  here  so  tortured  them,  they  fled. 

"  And  now,  is  it  because  I  grow  in  flesh  795 

'-  And  spirit  one  with  him  their  torturer, 

'•  That  they,  renouncing  him,  must  cast  off  me  ? 

^'  If  I  were  graced  by  God  to  have  a  child, 

"  Could  I  one  day  deny  God  graced  me  so  ? 

"  Then,  since  my  husband  hates  me,  I  shall  break      800 

"•  No  law  that  reigns  in  this  fell  house  of  hate, 

"  By  using — letting  have  effect  so  much 

''  Of  hate  as  hides  me  from  that  whole  of  hate 

''  Would  take  my  life  which  I  want  and  must  have — 


196  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  Just  as  I  take  from  your  excess  of  love  805 

'^  Enough  to  save  my  life  with,  all  I  need. 

"  The  Archbishop  said  to  murder  me  were  sin  : 

"  My  leaving  Guido  were  a  kind  of  death 

'^  With  no  sin, — more  death,  he  must  answer  for. 

'^  Hear  now  what  death  to  him  and  life  to  you  810 

"  I  wish  to  pay  and  owe.     Take  me  to  Rome  ! 

"■  You  go  to  Rome,  the  servant  makes  me  hear. 

"  Take  me  as  you  would  take  a  dog,  I  think, 

"  Masterless  left  for  strangers  to  maltreat : 

"  Take  me  home  like  that — leave  me  in  the  house      815 

*'  Where  the  father  and  the  mother  are;  and  soon 

"  They  '11  come  to  know  and  call  me  by  my  name, 

"  Their  child  once  more,  since  child  I  am,  for  all 

^'  They  now  forget  me,  which  is  the  worst  o'  the  dream — 

"  And  the  way  to  end  dreams  is  to  break  them,  stand, 

''  Walk,  go  :  then  help  me  to  stand,  walk  and  go  !      821 

"  The  Governor  said  the  strong  should  help  the  weak  : 

"  You  know  how  weak  the  strongest  women  are. 

"  How  could  I  find  my  way  there  by  myself? 

'^  I  cannot  even  call  out,  make  them  hear —  825 

^'  Just  as  in  dreams  :  I  have  tried  and  proved  the  fact. 

"  I  have  told  this  story  and  more  to  good  great  men, 

^^  The  Archbishop  and  the  Governor :  they  smiled. 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  197 

"  '  Stop  your  mouth,  fair  one  ! ' — presently  they  frowned, 

"  '  Get  you  gone,  disengage  you  from  our  feet ! '         830 

"  I  went  in  my  despair  to  an  old  priest, 

''  Only  a  friar,  no  great  man  like  these  two, 

"  But  good,  the  Augustinian,  people  name 

'^  Romano, — he  confessed  me  two  months  since  : 

''  He  fears  God,  why  then  needs  he  fear  the  world  ?    835 

'^  And  when  he  questioned  how  it  came  about 

"  That  I  was  found  in  danger  of  a  sin — 

"  Despair  of  any  help  from  providence, — 

"  '  Since,  though  your  husband  outrage  you,'  said  he, 

"  ^  That  is  a  case  too  common,  the  wives  die  840 

'^  '  Or  live,  but  do  not  sin  so  deep  as  this ' — 

''  Then  I  toldv— what  I  never  will  tell  you — 

'^  How,  worse  than  husband's  hate,  I  had  to  bear 

*'  The  love, — soliciting  to  shame  called  love, — 

"  Of  his  brother, — the  young  idle  priest  i'  the  house    845 

^'  With  only  the  devil  to  meet  there.     ^  This  is  grave — 

"  ^  Yes,  we  must  interfere  :  I  counsel, — write 

"  '  To  those  who  used  to  be  your  parents  once, 

''  '  Of  dangers  here,  bid  them  convey  you  hence  ! ' 

"  '  But,'  said  I,  '  when  I  neither  read  nor  write  ? '        850 

"  Then  he  took  pity  and  promised  '  I  will  write.' 

"  If  he  did  so, — why,  they  are  dumb  or  dead  : 


198  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

*  Either  they  give  no  credit  to  the  tale, 

'  Or  else,  wrapped  wholly  up  in  their  own  joy 

^  Of  such  escape,  they  care  not  who  cries,  still  855 

'  V  the  clutches.     Anyhow,  no  word  arrives. 

^  All  such  extravagance  and  dreadfulness 

*  Seems  incident  to  dreaming,  cured  one  way, — 
'  Wake  me  !     The  letter  I  received  this  morn, 

'  Said — if  the  woman  spoke  your  very  sense —  860 

^  '  You  would  die  for  me  : '  I  can  believe  it  now : 

'  For  now  the  dream  gets  to  involve  yourself 

'  First  of  all,  you  seemed  wicked  and  not  good, 

'  In  writing  me  those  letters  :  you  came  in 

'  Like  a  thief  upon  me.     I  this  morning  said  865 

'  In  my  extremity,  entreat  the  thief ! 

'  Try  if  he  have  in  him  no  honest  touch  ! 

^  A  thief  might  save  me  from  a  murderer. 

'  'T  was  a  thief  said  the  last  kind  word  to  Christ : 

^  Christ  took  the  kindness  and  forgave  the  theft :        870 

^  And  so  did  I  prepare  what  I  now  say. 

^  But  now,  that  you  stand  and  I  see  your  face, 

'  Though  you  have  never  uttered  word  yet, — well,  I  know, 

^  Here  too  has  been  dream-work,  delusion  too, 

^  And  that  at  no  time,  you  with  the  eyes  here,  875 

'  Ever  intended  to  do  wrong  by  me. 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  1 99 

"  Nor  wrote  such  letters  therefore.     It  is  false, 

^*  And  you  are  true,  have  been  true,  will  be  true. 

"  To  Rome  then, — when  is  it  you  take  me  there? 

"  Each  minute  lost  is  mortal.    When  ? — I  ask."  880 

I  answered  "  It  shall  be  when  it  can  be. 

"  I  will  go  hence  and  do  your  pleasure,  find 

"  The  sure  and  speedy  means  of  travel,  then 

"  Come  back  and  take  you  to  your  friends  in  Rome. 

'•  There  wants  a  carnage,  money  and  the  rest, —         885 

'^  A  day's  work  by  to-morrow  at  this  time. 

"  How  shall  I  see  you  and  assure  escape  ?  " 

She  replied,  ''  Pass,  to-morrow  at  this  hour. 

"  If  I  am  at  the  open  window,  well : 

"  If  I  am  absent,  drop  a  handkerchief  890 

"  And  walk  by  !  I  shall  see  from  where  I  watch, 

"  And  know  that  all  is  done.    Return  next  eve, 

"  And  next,  and  so  till  wx  can  meet  and  speak  ! " 

'*  To-morrow  at  this  hour  I  pass,"  said  I. 

She  was  withdrawn.  895 

Here  is  another  point 
I  bid  you  pause  at.  When  I  told  thus  far, 
Someone  said,  subtly,  "  Here  at  least  was  found 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  Your  confidence  in  error, — you  perceived 

"  The  spirit  of  the  letters,  in  a  sort,    •  900 

"  Had  been  the  lady's,  if  the  body  should  be 

"  Supplied  by  Guido  :  say,  he  forged  them  all ! 

"  Here  was  the  unforged  fact — she  sent  for  you, 

''  Spontaneously  elected  you  to  help, 

''  — What  men  call,  loved  you  :  Guido  read  her  mind, 

"  Gave  it  expression  to  assure  the  world  906 

"  The  case  was  just  as  he  foresaw  :  he  wrote, 

"  She  spoke." 

Sirs,  that  first  simile  serves  still, — 
That  falsehood  of  a  scorpion  hatched,  I  say,  910 

Nowhere  i'  the  world  but  in  Madonna's  mouth. 
Go  on  !     Suppose,  that  falsehood  foiled,  next  eve 
Pictured  Madonna  raised  her  painted  hand, 
Fixed  the  face  Rafael  bent  above  the  Babe, 
On  my  face  as  I  flung  me  at  her  feet :  .915 

Such  miracle  vouchsafed  and  manifest, 
Would  that  prove  the  first  lying  tale  was  true  ? 
Pompilia  spoke,  and  I  at  once  received, 
Accepted  my  own  fact,  my  miracle 
Self-authorised  and  self-explained, — she  chose  920 

To  summon  me  and  signify  her  choice. 
Afterward, — oh  !  I  gave  a  passing  glance 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI. 


To  a  certain  ugly  cloud-shape,  goblin-shred 

Of  hell-smoke  hurrying  past  the  splendid  moon 

Out  now  to  tolerate  no  darkness  more,  925 

And  saw  right  through  the  thing  that  tried  to  pass 

For  truth  and  solid,  not  an  empty  lie  : 

"  So,  he  not  only  forged  the  words  for  her 

''  But  words  for  me,  made  letters  he  called  mine  : 

"  What  I  sent,  he  retained,  gave  these  in  place,  930 

"  All  by  the  mistress-messenger  !     i\s  I 

"  Recognized  her,  at  potency  of  truth, 

"  So  she,  by  the  crystaUine  soul,  knew  me, 

"  Never  mistook  the  signs.     Enough  of  this — 

"  Let  the  wraith  go  to  nothingness  again,  935 

'*  Here  is  the  orb,  have  only  thought  for  her  ! " 

"  Thought?"  nay,  Sirs,  what  shall  follow  was  not  thought: 

I  have  thought  sometimes,  and  thought  long  and  hard. 

I  have  stood  before,  gone  round  a  serious  thing. 

Tasked  my  whole  mind  to  touch  and  clasp  it  close,     940 

As  I  stretch  forth  my  arm  to  touch  this  bar. 

God  and  man,  and  what  duty  I  owe  both, — 

I  dare  to  say  I  have  confronted  these 

In  thought :  but  no  such  faculty  helped  here. 

I  put  forth  no  thought, — powerless,  all  that  night        945 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


I  paced  the  city :  it  was  the  first  Spring. 

By  the  invasion  I  lay  passive  to, 

In  rushed  new  things,  the  old  were  rapt  away ; 

Alike  abolished — the  imprisonment 

Of  the  outside  air,  the  inside  weight  o'  the  world         950 

That  pulled  me  down.    Death  meant,  to  spurn  the  ground. 

Soar  to  the  sky, — die  well  and  you  do  that. 

The  very  immolation  made  the  bliss ; 

Death  was  the  heart  of  life,  and  all  the  harm 

My  folly  had  crouched  to  avoid,  now  proved  a  veil      955 

Hiding  all  gain  my  wisdom  strove  to  grasp  : 

As  if  the  intense  centre  of  the  flame 

Should  turn  a  heaven  to  that  devoted  fly 

Which  hitherto,  sophist  alike  and  sage. 

Saint  Thomas  with  his  sober  grey  goose-quill,  960 

And  sinner  Plato  by  Cephisian  reed. 

Would  fain,  pretending  just  the  insect's  good, 

Whisk  ofl',  drive  back,  consign  to  shade  again. 

Into  another  state,  under  new  rule 

I  knew  myself  was  passing  swift  and  sure  ;  965 

Whereof  the  initiatory  pang  approached, 

Felicitous  annoy,  as  bitter-sweet 

As  when  the  virgin-band,  the  victors  chaste, 

Feel  at  the  end  the  earthly  garments  drop, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  203 


And  rise  with  something  of  a  rosy  shame  970 

Into  immortal  nakedness  :  so  I 

Lay,  and  let  come  the  proper  throe  would  thrill 

Into  the  ecstacy  and  outthrob  pain. 

I'  the  grey  of  dawn  it  was  I  found  myself 

Facing  the  pillared  front  o'  the  Pieve — mine,  975 

My  church  :  it  seemed  to  say  for  the  first  time 

''  But  am  not  I  the  Bride,  the  mystic  love 

^'  O'  the  Lamb,  who  took  thy  plighted  troth,  my  priest, 

''  To  fold  thy  warm  heart  on  my  heart  of  stone 

"  And  freeze  thee  nor  unfasten  any  more  ?  980 

''  This  is  a  fleshly  woman, — let  the  free 

"  Bestow  their  life-blood,  thou  art  pulseless  now  ! " 

See  !    Day  by  day  I  had  risen  and  left  this  church 

At  the  signal  waved  me  by  some  foolish  fan. 

With  half  a  curse  and  half  a  pitying  smile  985 

For  the  monk  I  stumbled  over  in  my  haste. 

Prostrate  and  corpse-like  at  the  altar-foot 

Intent  on  his  corona :  then  the  church 

Was  ready  with  her  quip,  if  word  conduced. 

To  quicken  my  pace  nor  stop  for  prating — "  There  !  990 

"  Be  thankful  you  are  no  such  ninny,  go 

"  Rather  to  teach  a  black-eyed  novice  cards 


204  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  Than  gabble  Latin  and  protrude  that  nose 

''  Smoothed  to  a  sheep's  through  no  brains  and  much 

faith  ! " 
That  sort  of  incentive  !    Now  the  church  changed  tone — 
Now,  when  I  found  out  first  that  Hfe  and  death  996 

Are  means  to  an  end,  that  passion  uses  both, 
Indisputably  mistress  of  the  man 
Whose  form  of  worship  is  self-sacrifice — 
Now,  from  the  stone  lungs  sighed  the  scrannel  voice 
"  Leave  that  live  passion,  come  be  dead  with  me  ! " 
As  if,  i'  the  fabled  garden,  I  had  gone  1002 

On  great  adventure,  plucked  in  ignorance 
Hedge-fruit,  and  feasted  to  satiety, 

J^aughing  at  such  high  fame  for  hips  and  haws,  1005 

And  scorned  the  achievement :  then  come  all  at  once 
O'  the  prize  o'  the  place,  the  thing  of  perfect  gold. 
The  apple's  self :  and,  scarce  my  eye  on  that. 
Was  'ware  as  well  o'  the  seven-fold  dragon's  watch. 

Sirs,  I  obeyed.     Obedience  was  too  strange, —  10 10 

This  new  thing  that  had  been  struck  into  me 
By  the  look  o'  the  lady, — to  dare  disobey 
The  first  authoritative  word.     'T  was  God's. 
I  had  been  lifted  to  the  level  of  her. 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  205 


Could  take  such  sounds  into  my  sense.     I  said  1015 

"•  We  two  are  cognizant  o'  the  Master  now ; 

"  It  is  she  bids  me  bow  the  head :  how  true, 

"  I  am  a  priest !  I  see  the  function  here  ; 

"  I  thought  the  other  way  self-sacrifice  : 

'^  This  is  the  true,  seals  up  the  perfect  sum.  1020 

"'  I  pay  it,  sit  down,  silently  obey." 

So,  I  went  home.     Dawn  broke,  noon  broadened,  I — 

I  sat  stone-still,  let  time  run  over  me. 

The  sun  slanted  into  my  room,  had  reached 

The  west.     I  opened  book, — Aquinas  blazed  1025 

With  one  black  name  only  on  the  white  page. 

I  looked  up,  saw  the  sunset :  vespers  rang  : 

^^  She  counts  the  minutes  till  I  keep  my  word 

''  And  come  say  all  is  ready.     I  am  a  priest. 

"  Duty  to  God  is  duty  to  her  :  I  think  1030 

"  God,  who  created  her,  will  save  her  too 

"  Some  new  way,  by  one  miracle  the  more, 

''  Without  me.     Then,  prayer  may  avail  perhaps." 

I  went  to  my  own.  place  i'  the  Pieve,  read 

The  office  :  I  was  back  at  home  again  103  5 

Sitting  i'  the  dark.     "  Could  she  but  know — but  know 

"  That,  were  there  good  in  this  distinct  from  God's, 


2o6  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 


"  Really  good  as  it  reached  her,  though  procured 

''  By  a  sin  of  mine, — I  should  sin  :  God  forgives. 

""  She  knows  it  is  no  fear  withholds  me  :  fear?  1040 

"  Of  what  ?     Suspense  here  is  the  terrible  thing. 

''  If  she  should,  as  she  counts  the  minutes,  come 

''  On  the  fantastic  notion  that  I  fear 

^'  The  world  now,  fear  the  Archbishop,  fear  perhaps 

•'  Count  Guido,  he  who,  having  forged  the  lies,  1045 

'•  May  wait  the  work,  attend  the  effect, — I  fear 

"  The  sword  of  Guido  !     Let  God  see  to  that — 

^'  Hating  lies,  let  not  her  believe  a  lie  ! " 

Vgain  the  morning  found  me.     "  I  will  work, 
''  Tie  down  my  foolish  thoughts.     Thank  God  so  far  ! 
"  I  have  saved  her  from  a  scandal,  stopped  the  tongues 
'*  Had  broken  else  into  a  cackle  and  hiss  1052 

"  Around  the  noble  name.     Duty  is  still 
''  Wisdom  :  I  have  been  wise."     So  the  day  wore. 

At  evening — "  But,  achieving  victory,  1055 

''  I  must  not  blink  the  priest's  peculiar  part, 

''  Nor  shrink  to  counsel,  comfort :  priest  and  friend — 

''  How  do  we  discontinue  to  be  friends  ? 

''  I  will  go  minister,  advise  her  seek 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  207 

"  Help  at  the  source, — above  all,  not  despair :  1060 

'^  There  may  be  other  happier  help  at  hand. 
"  I  hope  it, — wherefore  then  neglect  to  say  ?  " 

There  she  stood — leaned  there,  for  the  second  time, 

Over  the  terrace,  looked  at  me,  then  spoke  : 

"  Why  is  it  you  have  suffered  me  to  stay  1065 

"  Breaking  my  heart  two  days  more  than  was  need  ? 

"  Why  delay  help,  your  own  heart  yearns  to  give  ? 

'^  You  are  again  here,  in  the  self-same  mind, 

'^  I  see  here,  steadfast  in  the  face  of  you, — 

'^  You  grudge  to  do  no  one  thing  that  I  ask.  1070 

^'  Why  then  is  nothing  done  ?     You  know  my  need. 

'^  Still,  through  God's  pity  on  me,  there  is  time 

•'  And  one  day  more  :  shall  I  be  saved  or  no  ?  " 

I  answered — "  Lady,  w^aste  no  thought,  no  word 

*'  Even  to  forgive  me  !     Care  for  what  I  care —         1075 

"  Only  !     Now  follow  me  as  I  were  fate  ! 

"  Leave  this  house  in  the  dark  to-morrow  night, 

"  Just  before  daybreak  : — there  's  new  moon  this  eve — 

**  It  sets,  and  then  begins  the  solid  black. 

^^  Descend,  proceed  to  the  Torrione,  step  1080 

"  Over  the  low  dilapidated  wall, 

^'  Take  San  Clemente,  there  's  no  other  gate 


208  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  Unguarded  at  the  hour  :  some  paces  thence 
^'  An  inn  stands  ;  cross  to  it ;  I  shall  be  there." 

She  answered,  "  If  T  can  but  find  the  way.  1085 

^'  But  I  shall  find  it.     Go  now  ! " 

I  did  go, 
Took  rapidly  the  route  myself  prescribed, 
Stopped  at  Torrione,  climbed  the  ruined  place, 
Proved  that  the  gate  was  practicable,  reached  1090 

The  inn,  no  eye,  despite  the  dark,  could  miss, 
Knocked  there  and  entered,  made  the  host  secure  : 
^'  With  Caponsacchi  it  is  ask  and  have  ; 
"  I  know  my  betters.     Are  you  bound  for  Rome  ? 
^'  I  get  swift  horse  and  trusty  man,"  said  he.  1095 

Then  I  retraced  my  steps,  was  found  once  more 

In  my  own  house  for  the  last  time  :  there  lay 

The  broad  pale  opened  Summa.     "  Shut  his  book, 

^'  There  's  other  showing  !     'T  was  a  Thomas  too 

^'  Obtained, — more  favoured  than  his  namesake  here, — 

'^  A  gift,  tied  faith  fast,  foiled  the  tug  of  doubt, —      iioi 

*'  Our  Lady's  girdle ;  down  he  saw  it  drop 

*'  As  she  ascended  into  heaven,  they  say  : 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI.  209 

''  He  kept  that  safe  and  bade  all  doubt  adieu. 

'^  I  too  have  seen  a  lady  and  hold  a  grace."  1105 

I  know  not  how  the  night  passed  :  morning  broke  : 

Presently  came  my  servant.     "  Sir,  this  eve — 

'^  Do  you  forget  ?  "     I  started. — "  How  forget  ? 

"  What  is  it  you  know?" — "  With  due  submission,  Sir, 

"  This  being  last  Monday  in  the  month  but  one        mo 

^'  And  a  vigil,  since  to-morrow  is  Saint  George, 

*'  And  feast  day,  and  moreover  day  for  copes, 

"  And  Canon  Conti  now  away  a  month, 

"  And  Canon  Crispi  sour  because,  forsooth, 

^^  You  let  him  sulk  in  stall  and  bear  the  brunt  11 15 

'•  Of  the  octave.  .  .  Well,  Sir,  'tis  important ! " 

^'Truel"     ■ 
"  Hearken,  I  have  to  start  for  Rome  this  night. 
^'  No  word,  lest  Crispi  overboil  and  burst ! 
"  Provide  me  with  a  laic  dress  !     Throw  dust  11 20 

''  I'  the  Canon's  eye,  stop  his  tongue's  scandal  so ! 
*^  See  there  's  a  sword  in  case  of  accident." 
I  knew  the  knave,  the  knave  knew  me. 

And  thus 
Through  each  familiar  hindrance  of  the  day  1 125 

VOL.  II.  p 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Did  I  make  steadily  for  its  hour  and  end, — 

Felt  time's  old  barrier-growth  of  right  and  fit 

Give  way  through  all  its  twines,  and  let  me  go ; 

Use  and  wont  recognized  the  excepted  man. 

Let  speed  the  special  service, — and  I  sped  1130 

Till,  at  the  dead  between  midnight  and  morn. 

There  was  I  at  the  goal,  before  the  gate, 

With  a  tune  in  the  ears,  low  leading  up  to  loud, 

A  light  in  the  eyes,  faint  that  would  soon  be  flare. 

Ever  some  spiritual  Avitness  new  and  new  1135 

In  faster  frequence,  crowding  solitude 

To  watch  the  way  o'  the  warfare, — till,  at  last. 

When  the  ecstatic  minute  must  bring  birth, 

Began  a  whiteness  in  the  distance,  waxed 

Whiter  and  whiter,  near  grew  and  more  near,  1 140 

Till  it  was  she  :  there  did  Pompilia  come  : 

The  white  I  saw  shine  through  her  was  her  soul's, 

Certainly,  for  the  body  was  one  black. 

Black  from  head  down  to  foot.     She  did  not  speak. 

Glided  into  the  carriage, — so  a  cloud  1145 

Gathers  the  moon  up.     "  By  San  Spirito, 

^'  To  Rome,  as  if  the  road  burned  underneath  I 

''  Reach  Rome,  then  hold  my  head  in  pledge,  I  pay 

^'  The  run  and  the  risk  to  heart's  content !  "     Just  that, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHf. 


I  said, — then,  in  another  tick  of  time,  1 150 

Sprang,  was  beside  her,  she  and  I  alone. 

So  it  began,  our  flight  thro'  dusk  to  clear, 

Through  day  and  night  and  day  again  to  night 

Once  more,  and  to  last  dreadful  dawn  of  all. 

Sirs,  how  should  I  lie  quiet  in  my  grave  1155 

Unless  you  suffer  me  wring,  drop  by  drop, 

My  brain  dry,  make  a  riddance  of  the  drench 

Of  minutes  with  a  memory  in  each, 

Recorded  motion,  breath  or  look  of  hers, 

Which  poured  forth  would  present  you  one  pure  glass, 

Mirror  you  plain, — as  God's  sea,  glassed  in  gold,       1161 

His  saints, — the  perfect  soul  Pompilia  ?     Men, 

You  must  know  that  a  man  gets  drunk  with  truth 

Stagnant  inside  him  !     Oh,  they  've  killed  her,  Sirs  ! 

Can  I  be  calm?  1165 

Calmly !     Each  incident 
Proves,  I  maintain,  that  action  of  the  flight 
For  the  true  thing  it  was.     The  first  faint  scratch 
O'  the  stone  will  test  its  nature,  teach  its  worth 
To  idiots  who  name  Parian,  coprolite.  1170 

After  all,  I  shall  give  no  glare — at  best 
Only  display  you  certain  scattered  lights 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Lamping  the  rush  and  roll  of  the  abyss — 

Nothing  but  here  and  there  a  fire-point  pricks 

Wavelet  from  wavelet :  well  !  1175 

For  the  first  hour 
We  both  were  silent  in  the  night,  I  know : 
Sometimes  I  did  not  see  nor  understand. 
Blackness  engulphed  me, — partial  stupor,  say — 
Then  I  would  break  way,  breathe  through  the  surprise, 
And  be  aware  again,  and  see  who  sat  1181 

In  the  dark  vest  with  the  white  face  and  hands. 
I  said  to  myself—"  I  have  caught  it,  I  conceive 
"  The  mind  o'  the  mystery  :  't  is  the  way  they  wake 
^'  And  wait,  two  martyrs  somewhere  in  a  tomb  1185 

"  Each  by  each  as  their  blessing  was  to  die ; 
'*  Some  signal  they  are  promised  and  expect, 
"  When  to  arise  before  the  trumpet  scares  : 
''  So,  through  the  whole  course  of  the  world  they  wait 
"  The  last  day,  but  so  fearless  and  so  safe !  1190 

^'  No  otherwise,  in  safety  and  not  fear, 
"  I  lie,  because  she  lies  too  by  my  side." 
You  know  this  is  not  love,  Sirs, — it  is  faith, 
The  feeling  that  there  's  God,  he  reigns  and  rules 
Out  of  this  low  world  :  that  is  all ;  no  harm  !  1 195 

At  times  she  drew  a  soft  sigh — music  seemed 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  213 

Always  to  hover  just  above  her  Hps 
Not  settle, — break  a  silence  music  too. 

In  the  determined  morning,  I  first  found 

Her  head  erect,  her  face  turned  full  to  me,  1200 

Her  soul  intent  on  mine  through  two  wide  eyes. 

I  answered  them.     •'  You  are  saved  hitherto. 

^'  We  have  passed  Perugia, — gone  round  by  the  wood, 

^^  Not  through,  I  seem  to  think, — and  opposite 

"  I  know  Assisi ;  this  is  holy  ground."  1205 

Then  she  resumed.     "  How  long  since  we  both  left 

''  Arezzo  ?  " — "  Years — and  certain  hours  beside." 

It  was  at  .  .  .  ah,  but  I  forget  the  names  ! 

'T  is  a  mere  post-house  and  a  hovel  or  two, — 

I  left  the  carriage  and  got  bread  and  wine  1 2 1  o 

And  brought  it  her. — "  Does  it  detain  to  eat?  " 

"  — They  stay  perforce,  change  horses, — therefore  eat ! 

"  We  lose  no  minute  :  we  arrive,  be  sure  !  " 

She  said — I  know  not  where — there  's  a  great  hill 

Close  over,  and  the  stream  has  lost  its  bridge,  1215 

One  fords  it.     She  began — "  I  have  heard  say 

"  Of  some  sick  body  that  my  mother  knew, 

^'  'T  was  no  good  sign  when  in  a  limb  diseased 


214  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK. 

^^  All  the  pain  suddenly  departs, — as  if 

"  The  guardian  angel  discontinued  pain  1220 

"  Because  the  hope  of  cure  was  gone  at  last : 

^^  The  limb  will  not  again  exert  itself, 

"  It  needs  be  pained  no  longer :  so  with  me, 

"  — My  soul  whence  all  the  pain  is  past  at  once  : 

^^  All  pain  must  be  to  work  some  good  in  the  end.     1225 

''  True,  this  I  feel  now,  this  may  be  that  good, 

"  Pain  was  because  of, — otherwise,  I  fear  ! " 

She  said, — a  long  while  later  in  the  day, 

When  I  had  let  the  silence  be, — abrupt — 

'^  Have  you  a  mother?" — "  She  died,  I  was  born."  1230 

"  A  sister  then?" — "  No  sister." — ''Who  was  it — 

''  What  woman  were  you  used  to  serve  this  way, 

"  Be  kind  to,  till  I  called  you  and  you  came  ?  " 

I  did  not  like  that  word.     Soon  afterward— 

"  Tell  me,  are  men  unhappy,  in  some  kind"  1235 

*'  Of  mere  unhappiness  at  being  men, 

''  As  women  suffer,  being  womanish  ? 

"  Have  you,  now,  some  unhappiness,  I  mean, 

"  Bom  of  what  may  be  man's  strength  overmuch, 

''  To  match  the  undue  susceptibility,  1240 

*'  The  sense  at  every  pore  when  hate  is  close  ? 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  215 

^'  It  hurts  us  if  a  baby  hides  its  face 
^^  Or  child  strikes  at  us  punily,  calls  names 
"  Or  makes  a  mouth, — much  more  if  stranger  men   1244 
"  Laugh  or  frown, — just  as  that  were  much  to  bear  ! 
''  Yet  rocks  spht, — and  the  blow-ball  does  no  more, 
"  Quivers  to  feathery  nothing  at  a  touch ; 
"  And    strength    may    have    its    drawback,    weakness 
scapes." 

Once  she  asked  "  What  is  it  that  made  you  smile, 

"  At  the  great  gate  with  the  eagles  and  the  snakes,   1250 

^*  Where  the  company  entered,  't  is  a  long  time  since  ?  " 

'^  — Forgive — I  think  you  would  not  understand  : 

''  Ah,  but  you  ask  me, — therefore,  it  was  this. 

^'  That  was  a  certain  bishop's  villa-gate, 

"  I  knew  it  by  the  eagles, — and  at  once  1255 

'*  Remembered  this  same  bishop  was  just  he 

''  People  of  old  were  wont  to  bid  me  please 

"  If  I  would  catch  preferment :  so,  I  smiled 

"  Because  an  impulse  came  to  me,  a  whim — 

'^  What  if  I  prayed  the  prelate  leave  to  speak,  1260 

''  Began  upon  him  in  his  presence-hall 

^<  — «  What,  still  at  work  so  grey  and  obsolete? 

*^  '  Still  rocheted  and  mitred  more  or  less  ? 


2l6  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  ^  Do  n't  you  feel  all  that  out  of  fashion  now  ? 

"  *  I  find  out  when  the  day  of  things  is  done  ! '  "       1265 

At  eve  we  heard  the  angehis :  she  turned — 

"  I  told  you  I  can  neither  read  nor  write. 

"  My  life  stopped  with  the  play-time  ;  I  will  leani, 

"  If  I  begin  to  live  again  :  but  you — 

"  Who  are  a  priest — wherefore  do  you  not  read         1270 

''  The  service  at  this  hour?     Read  Gabriel's  song, 

"  The  lesson,  and  then  read  the  little  prayer 

''  To  Raphael,  proper  for  us  travellers  !  " 

I  did  not  like  that,  neither,  but  I  read. 

When  we  stopped  at  Foligno  it  was  dark.  1275 

The  people  of  the  post  came  out  with  lights  : 

The  driver  said,  "  This  time  to-morrow,  may. 

^^  Saints  only  help,  relays  continue  good, 

^'  Nor  robbers  hinder,  we  arrive  at  Rome." 

I  urged, — ''  AVhy  tax  your  strength  a  second  night  ?  1280 

"  Trust  me,  alight  here  and  take  brief  repose  ! 

"  We  are  out  of  harm's  reach,  past  pursuit :  go  sleep 

"  If  but  an  hour  !  I  keep  watch,  guard  the  while 

"  Here  in  the  doorway."     But  her  whole  face  changed. 

The  misery  grew  again  about  her  mouth,  1285 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHr.  217 

The  eyes  burned  up  from  faintness,  like  tlie  fawn's 
Tired  to  death  in  the  thicket,  when  she  feels 
The  probing  spear  o'  the  huntsman.     '^  Oh,  no  stay  !  " 
She  cried,  in  the  fawn's  cry,  "  On  to  Rome,  on,  on — 
"  Unless  'tis  you  who  fear, — which  cannot  be  !  "       1290 

We  did  go  on  all  night ;  but  at  its  close 

She  was  troubled,  restless,  moaned  low,  talked  at  whiles 

To  herself,  her  brow  on  quiver  with  the  dream  : 

Once,  wide  awake,  she  menaced,  at  arms'  length 

Waved  away  something — "  Never  again  with  you  !    1295 

"  My  soul  is  mine,  my  body  is  my  soul's  : 

"  You  and  I  are  divided  ever  more 

"  In  soul  and  body  :  get  you  gone  !  "     Then  I — 

^'  Why,  in  my  whole  life  I  have  never  prayed  ! 

''  Oh,  if  the  God,  that  only  can,  would  help  !  1300 

*^  Am  I  his  priest  with  power  to  cast  out  fiends  ? 

"  Let  God  arise  and  all  his  enemies 

^'  Be  scattered  !  "     By  morn,  there  was  peace,  no  sigh 

Out  of  the  deep  sleep. 

When  she  woke  at  last,         1305 
I  answered  the  first  look — "  Scarce  twelve  hours  more, 
"  Then,  Rome  !     There  probably  was  no  pursuit, 


2l8  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  There  cannot  now  be  peril :  bear  up  brave  ! 

'^  Just  some  twelve  hours  to  press  through  to  the  prize — 

"  Then,  no  more  of  the  terrible  journey  !  "     "  Then, 

''  No  more  o'  the  journey  :  if  it  might  but  last !         13  ii 

'^  Always,  my  life-long,  thus  to  journey  still ! 

'^  It  is  the  interruption  that  I  dread, — 

^'  With  no  dread,  ever  to  be  here  and  thus  ! 

"  Never  to  see  a  face  nor  hear  a  voice  !  13 15 

'^  Yours  is  no  voice  ;  you  speak  when  you  are  dumb  ; 

''  Nor  face,  I  see  it  in  the  dark.     I  want 

''  No  face  nor  voice  that  change  and  grow  unkind." 

That  I  liked,  that  was  the  best  thing  she  said. 

In  the  broad  day,  I  dared  entreat,  ^'  Descend  !  "       1320 

I  told  a  woman,  at  the  garden-gate 

By  the  post-house,  white  and  pleasant  in  the  sun, 

'^  It  is  my  sister, — talk  with  her  apart  ! 

"  She  is  married  and  unhappy,  you  perceive ; 

"  I  take  her  home  because  her  head  is  hurt ;  1325 

'^'Comfort  her  as  you  women  understand  1 " 

So,  there  I  left  them  by  the  garden-wall, 

Paced  the  road,  then  bade  put  the  horses  to. 

Came  back,  and  there  she  sat :  close  to  her  knee, 

A  black-eyed  child  still  held  the  bowl  of  milk,  1330 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  2I9 

Wondered  to  see  how  little  she  could  drink, 

And  in  her  arms  the  woman's  infant  lay. 

She  smiled  at  me  ''  How  much  good  this  has  done  ! 

"  This  is  a  whole  night's  rest  and  how  much  more  ! 

"  I  can  proceed  now,  though  I  wish  to  stay.  1335 

'^  How  do  you  call  that  tree  with  the  thick  top 

"  That  holds  in  all  its  leafy  green  and  gold 

'^  The  sun  now  like  an  immense  egg  of  fire  ?  " 

(It  was  a  million-leaved  mimosa.)     ^'  Take 

"  The  babe  away  from  me  and  let  me  go  1 "  1340 

And  in  the  carriage  *'  Still  a  day,  my  friend  ! 

'^  And  perhaps  half  a  night,  the  woman  fears. 

''  I  pray  it  finish  since  it  cannot  last. 

"  There  may  be  more  misfortune  at  the  close, 

"  And  where  will  you  be  ?     God  suffice  me  then  !"  1345 

And  presently — for  there  was  a  roadside-shrine — 

'*  When  I  was  taken  first  to  my  own  church 

'^  Lorenzo  in  Lucina,  being  a  girl, 

'^  And  bid  confess  my  faults,  I  interposed 

"  ^  But  teach  me  what  fault  to  confess  and  know  ! '   1350 

'^  So,  the  priest  said — ^  You  should  bethink  3^ourself ; 

'^  ^  Each  human  being  needs  must  have  done  wrong  ! ' 

"  Now,  be  you  candid  and  no  priest  but  friend — 

''  Were  I  surprised  and  killed  here  on  the  spot. 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  A  runaway  from  husband  and  his  home,  1355 

"  Do  you  account  it  were  in  sin  I  died  ? 

''  My  husband  used  to  seem  to  harm  me,  not  .  .  . 

'^  Not  on  pretence  he  punished  sin  of  mine, 

'^  Nor  for  sin's  sake  and  lust  of  cruelty, 

"  But  as  I  heard  him  bid  a  farming-man  1360 

"  At  the  villa  take  a  lamb  once  to  the  wood 

''  And  there  ill-treat  it,  meaning  that  the  wolf 

'^  Should  hear  its  cries,  and  so  come,  quick  be  caught, 

"  Enticed  to  the  trap  :  he  practised  thus  with  me 

'^  That  so,  whatever  w^ere  his  gain  thereby,  1365 

'^  Others  than  I  might  become  prey  and  spoil. 

''  Had  it  been  only  between  our  two  selves, — 

*'  His  pleasure  and  my  pain, — why,  pleasure  him 

*'  By  dying,  nor  such  need  to  make  a  coil  ! 

"  But  this  was  worth  an  effort,  that  my  pain  1370 

"  Should  not  become  a  snare,  prove  pain  threefold 

''  To  other  people — strangers — or  unborn — 

"  How  should  I  know  ?  I  sought  release  from  that — 

"  I  think,  or  else  from, — dare  I  say,  some  cause 

'^  Such  as  is  put  into  a  tree,  which  turns  1375 

^'  Away  from  the  northwind  with  what  nest  it  holds, — 

"  The  woman  said  that  trees  so  turn :  now,  friend, 

''  Tell  me,  because  I  cannot  trust  myself  ! 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI. 


"  You  are  a  man  :  what  have  I  done  amiss  ?  " 

You  must  conceive  my  answer, — I  forget —  1380 

Taken  up  wholly  with  the  thought,  perhaps, 

This  time  she  might  have  said, — might,  did  not  say — 

"  You  are  a  priest."     She  said,  "  my  friend." 

Day  wore, 
We  passed  the  places,  somehow  the  calm  went,         1385 
Again  the  restless  eyes  began  to  rove 
In  new  fear  of  the  foe  mine  could  not  see  : 
She  wandered  in  her  mind, — addressed  me  once 
'^  Gaetano  !  " — that  is  not  my  name  :  whose  name  ? 
I  grew  alarmed,  my  head  seemed  turning  too  :  1390 

I  quickened  pace  with  promise  now,  now  threat : 
Bade  drive  and  drive,  nor  any  stopping  more. 
""  Too  deep  i'  the  thick  of  the  struggle,  struggle  through  ! 
^'  Then  drench  her  in  repose  though  death's  self  pour 
"  The  plenitude  of  quiet, — help  us,  God,  1395 

''  Whom  the  winds  carry  !  " 

Suddenly  I  saw 
The  old  tower,  and  the  little  white-walled  clump 
Of  buildings  and  the  cypress-tree  or  two, — 
'^  Already  Castelnuovo — Rome  !"  I  cried,  1400 

^^  As  good  as  Rome, — Rome  is  the  next  stage,  think  ! 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  This  is  where  travellers'  hearts  are  wont  to  beat. 

"  Say  you  are  saved,  sweet  lady  !  "     Up  she  woke. 

The  sky  was  fierce  with  colour  from  the  sun 

Setting.     She  screamed  out  "  No,  I  must  not  die  !     1405 

"  Take  me  no  farther,  I  should  die  :  stay  here  ! 

"  I  have  more  life  to  save  than  mine  !" 

She  swooned. 
We  seemed  safe  :  what  was  it  foreboded  so  ? 
Out  of  the  coach  into  the  inn  I  bore  14 10 

The  motionless  and  breathless  pure  and  pale 
Pompilia, — bore  her  through  a  pitying  group 
And  laid  her  on  a  couch,  still  calm  and  cured 
By  deep  sleep  of  all  woes  at  once.     The  host 
Was  urgent  "  Let  her  stay  an  hour  or  two  I  141 5 

"  Leave  her  to  us,  all  will  be  right  by  morn  ! " 
Oh,  my  foreboding  !     But  I  could  not  choose. 

I  paced  the  passage,  kept  watch  all  night  long. 

I  listened, — not  one  movement,  not  one  sigh. 

"  Fear  not  :  she  sleeps  so  sound  ! "  they  said — but  I 

Feared,  all  the  same,  kept  fearing  more  and  more,    142 1 

Found  myself  throb  with  fear  from  head  to  foot, 

Filled  with  a  sense  of  such  impending  woe, 

That,  at  first  pause  of  night,  pretence  of  gray, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  223 

I  made  my  mind  up  it  was  morn. — "  Reach  Rome,  1425 
"  Lest  hell  reach  her  1     A  dozen  miles  to  make, 
^*  Another  long  breath,  and  we  emerge  ! "     I  stood 
I'  the  court-yard,  roused  the  sleepy  grooms.     ''  Have  out 
'^  Carriage  and  horse,  give  haste,  take  gold  ! " — said  I. 
While  they  made  ready  in  the  doubtful  morn, —         1430 
'T  was  the  last  minute, — needs  must  I  ascend 
And  break  her  sleep  ;  I  turned  to  go. 

And  there 
Faced  me  Count  Guido,  there  posed  the  mean  man 
As  master, — took  the  field,  encamped  his  rights,        1435 
Challenged  the  world  :  there  leered  new  triumph,  there 
Scowled  the  old  malice  in  the  visage  bad 
And  black   o'  the  scamp.     Soon  triumph   suppled   the 

tongue 
A  little,  malice  glued  to  his  dry  throat, 
And  he  part  howled,  part  hissed  .  .  oh,  how  he  kept     ^ 
Well  out  o'  the  way,  at  arm's  length  and  to  spare  ! — 
"  My  salutation  to  your  priestship  !     What  ?  1442 

"  Matutinal,  busy  with  book  so  soon 
"  Of  an  April  day  that 's  damp  as  tears  that  now 
"  Deluge  Arezzo  at  its  darling's  flight  ? —  1445 

"  'T  is  unfair,  wrongs  feminity  at  large, 
''  To  let  a  single  dame  monopolize 


2  24  1HE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  A  heart  the  whole  sex  claims,  should  share  alike  : 

'^  Therefore  I  overtake  you,  Canon  !     Come  ! 

'^  The  lady, — could  you  leave  her  side  so  soon  ?        1450 

"  You  have  not  yet  experienced  at  her  hands 

"  My  treatment,  you  lay  down  undrugged,  I  see  ! 

"  Hence  this  alertness— hence  no  death-in-life 

'*  Like  what  held  arms  fast  when  she  stole  from  mine. 

''  To  be  sure,  you  took  the  solace  and  repose  1455 

"  That  first  night  at  Foligno  ! — news  abound 

"  O'  the  road  by  this  time, — men  regaled  me  much, 

"  As  past  them  I  came  halting  after  you, 

^'  Vulcan  pursuing  Mars,  as  poets  sing, — 

"  Still  at  the  last  here  pant  I,  but  arrive,  1460 

'^  Vulcan — and  not  without  my  Cyclops  too, 

"  The  Commissary  and  the  unpoisoned  ann 

"  O'  the  Civil  Force,  should  Mars  turn  mutineer. 

"  Enough  of  foohng  :  capture  the  culprits,  friend  1 

''  Here  is  the  lover  in  the  smart  disguise  1465 

"  With  the  sword, — he  is  a  priest,  so  mine  lies  still : 

"  There  upstairs  hides  my  wife  the  runaway, 

''  His  leman  :  the  two  plotted,  poisoned  first, 

"  Plundered  me  after,  and  eloped  thus  far  1469 

'^  Where  now  you  find  them.     Do  your  duty  quick  ! 

"  Arrest  and  hold  him  !  That  's  done  :  now  catch  her  1  " 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  225 

During  this  speech  of  that  man, — well,  I  stood  1472 

Away,  as  he  managed, — still,  I  stood  as  near 

The  throat  of  him, — with  these  two  hands,  my  own, — 

As  now  I  stand  near  yours,  Sir, — one  quick  spring,    1475 

One  great  good  satisfying  gripe,  and  lo  ! 

There  had  he  lain  abolished  with  his  lie. 

Creation  purged  o'  the  miscreate,  man  redeemed, 

A  spittle  wiped  off  from  the  face  of  God  ! 

I,  in  some  measure,  seek  a  poor  excuse  1480 

For  what  I  left  undone,  in  just  this  fact 

That  my  first  feeling  at  the  speech  I  quote 

Was — not  of  what  a  blasphemy  was  dared, 

Not  what  a  bag  of  venomed  purulence 

Was  split  and  noisome, — but  how  splendidly  1485 

Mirthful,  what  ludicrous  a  lie  was  launched  ! 

Would  Moliere's  self  wish  more  than  hear  such  man 

Call,  claim  such  woman  for  his  own,  his  wife, 

Even  though,  in  due  amazement  at  the  boast, 

He  had  stammered,  she  moreover  was  divine  ?  1490 

She  to  be  his, — were  hardly  less  absurd 

Than  that  he  took  her  name  into  his  mouth. 

Licked,  and  then  let  it  go  again,  the  beast. 

Signed  with  his  slaver.     Oh,  she  poisoned  him. 

Plundered  him,  and  the  rest !     W^ell,  what  I  wished  1495 

VOL.  II.  Q 


226  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Was,  that  he  would  but  go  on,  say  once  more 

So  to  the  world,  and  get  his  meed  of  men, 

The  fist's  reply  to  the  filth.     And  while  I  mused. 

The  minute,  oh  the  misery,  was  gone  ! 

On  either  idle  hand  of  me  there  stood  1500 

Really  an  officer,  nor  laughed  i'  the  least. 

They  rendered  justice  to  his  reason,  laid 

Logic  to  heart,  as  't  were  submitted  them 

*'  Twice  two  makes  four." 

"  And  now,  catch  her  ! " — he  cried. 
That  sobered  me.     ^'  Let  myself  lead  the  way —        1506 
"  Ere  you  arrest  me,  who  am  somebody, 
"  And,  as  you  hear,  a  priest  and  privileged, — 
'^  To  the  lady's  chamber  !  I  presume  you — men 
"  Expert,  instructed  how  to  find  out  truth,  15 10 

"  Familiar  with  the  guise  of  guilt.     Detect 
"  Guilt  on  her  face  when  it  meets  mine,  then  judge 
"  Between  us  and  the  mad  dog  howling  there  !  " 
Up  we  all  went  together,  in  they  broke 
O'  the  chamber  late  my  chapel.     There  she  lay,         15 15 
Composed  as  when  I  laid  her.  that  last  eve, 
O'  the  couch,  still  breathless,  motionless,  sleep's  self, 
Wax-white,  seraphic,  saturate  with  the  sun 
O'  the  morning  that  now  flooded  from  the  front 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  227 

And  filled  the  window  with  a  light  like  blood.  1520 

"  Behold  the  poisoner,  the  adulteress, 

^'  — And  feigning  sleep  too  !  Seize,  bind  !  " — Guido  hissed. 

She  started  up,  stood  erect,  face  to  face 

With  the  husband :  back  he  fell,  was  buttressed  there 

By  the  window  all  a-flame  with  morning-red,  1525 

He  the  black  figure,  the  opprobrious  blur 

Against  all  peace  and  joy  and  light  and  life. 

"  Away  from  between  me  and  hell ! " — she  cried  : 

*^  Hell  for  me,  no  embracing  any  more  ! 

^'  I  am  God's,  I  love  God,  God — whose  knees  I  clasp, 

"  Whose  utterly  most  just  award  I  take,  1531 

"  But  bear  no  more  love-making  devils  :  hence  !  " 

I  may  have  made  an  effort  to  reach  her  side   ' 

From  where  I  stood  i'  the  door-way,— anyhow 

I  found  the  arms,  I  wanted,  pinioned  fast,  1535 

Was  powerless  in  the  clutch  to  left  and  right 

O'  the  rabble  pouring  in,  rascality 

Enlisted,  rampant  on  the  side  of  hearth 

Home  and  the  husband, — pay  in  prospect  too  ! 

They  heaped  themselves  upon  me. — "  Ha ! — and  him 

"  Also  you  outrage  ?     Him,  too,  my  sole  friend,        1541 

^^  Guardian  and  saviour?    That  I  baulk  you  of, 


2  28  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  Since — see  how  God  can  help  at  last  and  worst!" 

She  sprung  at  the  sword  that  hung  beside  him,  seized, 

Drew,  brandished  it,  the  sunrise  burned  for  joy  1545 

O'  the  blade,  "  Die,"  cried  she,  "  devil,  in  God's  name!" 

Ah,  but  they  all  closed  round  her,  twelve  to  one,  ' 

— The  unmanly  men,  no  woman-mother  made, 

Spawned  somehow !     Dead-white  and  disarmed  she  lay. 

No  matter  for  the  sword,  her  word  sufficed  1550 

To  spike  the  coward  through  and  through :  he  shook, 

Could  only  spit  between  the  teeth — "  You  see  ? 

"  You  hear?  Bear  witness,  then !  Write  down  .  .  but,  no — 

"  Carry  these  criminals  to  the  prison-house, 

"  For  first  thing  !  I  begin  my  search  meanwhile         1555 

"  After  the  stolen  effects,  gold,  jewels,  plate, 

"  Money  and  clothes,  they  robbed  me  of  and  fled  : 

"  With  no  few  amorous  pieces,  verse  and  prose, 

"  I  have  much  reason  to  expect  to  find." 

When  I  saw,  that, — no  more  than  the  first  mad  speech. 

Made  out  the  speaker  mad  and  a  laughing  stock,       156 1 

So  neither  did  this  next  device  explode 

One  listener's  indignation, — that  a  scribe 

Did  sit  down,  set  himself  to  write  indeed. 

And  sundry  knaves  began  to  peer  and  pry  1565 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI.  229 

In  corner  and  hole, — that  Guido,  wiping  brow 

And  getting  him  a  countenance,  was  fast 

Losing  his  fear,  beginning  to  strut  free 

0'  the  stage  of  his  exploit,  snuff  here,  sniff  there, — 

I  took  the  truth  in,  guessed  sufficiently  ^57^ 

The  service  for  the  moment — ^'  What  I  say, 

"  Slight  at  your  peril !     We  are  aliens  here, 

^'  My  adversary  and  I,  called  noble  both  ; 

"  I  am  the  nobler,  and  a  name  men  know. 

"  I  could  refer  our  cause  to  our  own  court  1575 

^'  In  our  own  country,  but  prefer  appeal 

"  To  the  nearer  jurisdiction.     Being  a  priest, 

**  Though  in  a  secular  garb, — for  reasons  good 

^^  I  shall  adduce  in  due  time  to  my  peers, — 

*^  I  demand  that  the  Church  I  serve,  decide  1580 

**  Between  us,  right  the  slandered  lady  there. 

"  A  Tuscan  noble,  I  might  claim  the  Duke : 

**  A  priest,  I  rather  choose  the  Church, — bid  Rome 

"  Cover  the  wronged  with  her  inviolate  shield." 

There  was  no  refusing  this  :  they  bore  me  off,  1585 

They  bore  her  off,  to  separate  cells  o'  the  same 
Ignoble  prison,  and,  separate,  thence  to  Rome. 
Pompilia's  face,  then  and  thus,  looked  on  me 


230  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 


The  last  time  in  this  Hfe  :  not  one  sight  since, 

Never  another  sight  to  be  !     And  yet  1590 

I  thought  I  had  saved  her.    I  appealed  to  Rome  : 

It  seems  I  simply  sent  her  to  her  death. 

You  tell  me  she  is  dying  now,  or  dead  ; 

•I  cannot  bring  myself  to  quite  believe 

This  is  a  place  you  torture  people  in :  1595 

What  if  this  your  intelligence  were  just 

A  subtlety,  an  honest  wile  to  work 

On  a  man  at  unawares  ?     'T  were  w^orthy  you. 

No,  Sirs,  I  cannot  have  the  lady  dead  ! 

That  erect  form,  flashing  brow,  fulgurant  eye,  1600 

That  voice  immortal  (oh,  that  voice  of  hers  !) 

That  vision  in  the  blood-red  day-break — that 

Leap  to  life  of  the  pale  electric  sword 

Angels  go  armed  with, — that  was  not  the  last 

O'  the  lady  !     Come,  I  see  through  it,  you  iind —     1605 

Know  the  manoeuvre  !     Also  herself  said 

I  had  saved  her  :  do  you  dare  say  she  spoke  false  ? 

Let  me  see  for  myself  if  it  be  so  ! 

Though  she  were  dying,  a  priest  might  be  of  use, 

The  more  when  he  's  a  friend  too, — she  called  me     1610 

Far  beyond  '^  friend."     Come,  let  me  see  her — indeed 

It  is  my  duty,  being  a  priest :  I  hope 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  23  T 

I  Stand  confessed,  established,  proved  a  priest  ? 

My  punishment  had  motive  that,  a  priest 

I,  in  a  laic  garb,  a  mundane  mode,  1615 

Did  what  were  harmlessly  done  otherwise. 

I  never  touched  her  with  my  finger-tip 

Except  to  carry  her  to  the  couch,  that  eve. 

Against  my  heart,  beneath  my  head,  bowed  low. 

As  we  priests  carry  the  paten  :  that  is  why  1620 

— To  get  leave  and  go  see  her  of  your  grace — 

I  have  told  you  this  whole  story  over  again. 

Do  I  deserve  grace  ?     For  I  might  lock  lips, 

Laugh  at  your  jurisdiction  :  what  have  you 

To  do  with  me  in  the  matter?     I  suppose  1625 

You  hardly  think  I  donned  a  bravo's  dress 

To  have  a  hand  in  the  new  crime  ;  on  the  old, 

Judgment 's  delivered,  penalty  imposed, 

I  was  chained  fast  at  Civita  hand  and  foot — 

She  had  only  you  to  trust  to,  you  and  Rome,  1630 

Rome  and  the  Church,  and  no  pert  meddling  priest 

Two  days  ago,  when  Guido,  with  the  right, 

Hacked  her  to  pieces.     One  might  well  be  wroth  ; 

I  have  been  patient,  done  my  best  to  help  : 

I  come  from  Civita  and  punishment  1635 

As  friend  of  the  court — and  for  pure  friendship's  sake 


232  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Have  told  my  tale  to  the  end, — nay,  not  the  end — 
For,  wait — I'll  end — not  leave  you  that  excuse  ! 

When  we  were  parted, — shall  I  go  on  there  ? 
I  was  presently  brought  to  Rome — yes,  here  I  stood 
Opposite  yonder  very  crucifix —  1641 

And  there  sat  you  and  you,  Sirs,  quite  the  same. 
I  heard  charge,  and  bore  question,  and  told  tale 
Noted  down  in  the  book  there, — turn  and  see 
If,  by  one  jot  or  tittle,  I  vary  now  !  1645 

I'  the  colour  the  tale  takes,  there  's  change  perhaps  ; 
'T  is  natural,  since  the  sky  is  different, 
Eclipse  in  the  air  now ;  still,  the  outline  stays. 
I  showed  you  how  it  came  to  be  my  part 
To  save  the  lady.     Then  your  clerk  produced  1650 

Papers,  a  pack  of  stupid  and  impure 
Banalities  called  letters  about  love — 
Love,  indeed, — I  could  teach  who  styled  them  so, 
Better,  I  think,  though  priest  and  loveless  both  ! 
— How  was  it  that  a  wife,  young,  innocent,  1655 

And  stranger  to  your  person,  wrote  this  page  ?  " — 
— She  wrote  it  when  the  Holy  Father  wrote 
The  bestiality  that  posts  thro'  Rome, 
Put  in  his  mouth  by  Pasquin." — "  Nor  perhaps 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI. 


^'  Did  you  return  these  answers,  verse  and  prose,       1660 

^'  Signed,  sealed  and  sent  the  lady?   There 's  your  hand  ! " 

''  — This  precious  piece  of  verse,  I  really  judge 

"  Is  meant  to  copy  my  own  character, 

"  A  clumsy  mimic ;  and  this  other  prose, 

^^  Not  so  much  even  ;  both  rank  forgery  :  1665 

"  Verse,  quotha?  Bembo's  verse  !  When  Saint  John  wrote 

'^  The  tract  '  Z>i^  Tribus^  I  wrote  this  to  match." 

''  — How  came  it,  then,  the  documents  were  found 

''  At  the  inn  on  your  departure  ?  " — '^  I  opine, 

^'  Because  there  were  no  documents  to  find  1670 

"  In  my  presence, — you  must  hide  before  you  find. 

^*  Who  forged  them,  hardly  practised  in  my  view ; 

''  Who  found  them,  waited  till  I  turned  my  back." 

'*  — And  what  of  the  clandestine  visits  paid, 

''  Nocturnal  passage  in  and  out  the  house  1675 

"  With  its  lord  absent  ?     'T  is  alleged  you  climbed  .  .   .' 

''  — Flew  on  a  broomstick  to  the  man  i'  the  moon  ! 

'*  Who  witnessed  or  will  testify  this  trash  ?  " 

"  — The  trusty  servant,  Margherita's  self, 

'''  Even  she  who  brought  you  letters,  you  confess,       1680 

*'  And,  you  confess,  took  letters  in  reply  : 

"  Forget  not  we  have  knowledge  of  the  facts ! " 

"  — Sirs,  who  have  knowledge  of  the  facts,  defray 


234  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  The  expenditure  of  wit  I  waste  in  vain, 

"  Trying  to  find  out  just  one  fact  of  all !  1685 

'^  She  who  brought  letters  from  who  could  not  write, 

'^  And  took  back  letters  to  who  could  not  read, — 

"  Who  was  that  messenger,  of  your  charity  ?  " 

^*  — Well,  so  far  favours  you  the  circumstance 

*'  That  this  same  messenger  .  .  how  shall  we  say?  .  . 

^'  Sud  impiitatione  mereti'icis  1691 

"  Lahorat, — which  makes  accusation  null  : 

*'  We   waive   this   woman's  : — nought    makes   void    the 

next. 
""  Borsi,  called  Venerino,  he  who  drove, 
'^  O'  the  first  night  when  you  fled  away,  at  length      1695 
"  Deposes  to  your  kissings  in  the  coach, 
"  — Frequent,  frenetic  .  .  ."     "When  deposed  he  so?" 
*'  After  some  wrecks  of  sharp  imprisonment  .  .  ." 
"  — Granted  by  friend  the  Governor,  I  engage — " 
"  — For  his  participation  in  your  flight  !  1700 

'^  At  length  his  obduracy  melting  made 
"  The  avowal  mentioned  .  ."     "  Was  dismissed  forthwith 
''  To  liberty,  poor  knave,  for  recompense. 
^*  Sirs,  give  what  credit  to  the  lie  you  can  ! 
"  For  me,  no  word  in  my  defence  I  speak,  1705 

'-''  And  God  shall  argue  for  the  lady  ! " 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  235 

So 
Did  I  stand  question,  and  make  answer,  still 
With  the  same  result  of  smiling  disbelief, 
Polite  impossibility  of  faith  17  lo 

In  such  affected  virtue  in  a  priest ; 
But  a  showing  fair  play,  an  indulgence,  even. 
To  one  no  worse  than  others  after  all — 
Who  had  not  brought  disgrace  to  the  order,  played 
Discreetly,  ruffled  gown  nor  ripped  the  cloth  1715 

In  a  bungling  game  at  romps  :  I  have  told  you,  Sirs — 
If  I  pretended  simply  to  be  pure 
Honest  and  Christian  in  the  case, — absurd  ! 
As  well  go  boast  myself  above  the  needs 
O'  the  human  nature,  careless  how  meat  smells,         1720 
Wine  tastes, — a  saint  above  the  smack !    But  once 
Abate  my  crest,  own  flaws  i'  the  flesh,  agree 
To  go  with  the  herd,  be  hog  no  more  nor  less, 
Wliy,  hogs  in  common  herd  have  common  rights — 
I  must  not  be  unduly  borne  upon,  1725 

Who  had  just  romanced  a  little,  sown  wild  oats, 
But  'scaped  without  a  scandal,  flagrant  fault. 
My  name  helped  to  a  mirthful  circumstance  : 
''  Joseph  "  would  do  well  to  amend  his  plea  : 
Undoubtedly — some  toying  with  the  wife,  1730 


236  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 


But  as  for  ruffian  violence  and  rape, 

Potiphar  pressed  too  much  on  the  other  side  ! 

The  intrigue,  the  elopement,  the  disguise, — well  charged  ! 

The  letters  and  verse  looked  hardly  like  the  truth. 

Your  apprehension  was — of  guilt  enough  1735 

To  be  compatible  with  innocence, 

So,  punished  best  a  little  and  not  too  much. 

Had  I  struck  Guido  Franceschini's  face. 

You  had  counselled  me  withdraw  for  my  own  sake, 

Baulk  him  of  bravo-hiring.     Friends  came  round,     1740 

Congratulated,  "  Nobody  mistakes  ! 

"  The  pettiness  o'  the  forfeiture  defines 

''  The  peccadillo  :  Guido  gets  his  share  : 

"  His  wife  is  free  of  husband  and  hook-nose, 

'*  The  mouldy  viands  and  the  mother-in-law.  1745 

*'  To  Civita  with  you  and  amuse  the  time, 

''  Travesty  us  '  De  Raptii  HelciicB  ! ' 

^^  A  funny  figure  must  the  husband  cut 

'-  When  the  wife  makes  him  skip, — too  ticklish,  eh? 

'*  Do  it  in  Latin,  not  the  Vulgar,  then  !  1750 

"  Scazons — we'll  copy  and  send  his  Eminence  ! 

'^  Mind — one  iambus  in  the  final  foot  ! 

"  He  '11  rectify  it,  be  your  friend  for  life  !  " 

Oh,  Sirs,  depend  on  me  for  much  new  light 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  237 

Thrown  on  the  justice  and  rehgion  here  1755 

By  this  proceeding,  much  fresh  food  for  thought ! 

And  I  was  just  set  down  to  study  these 

In  relegation,  two  short  days  ago, 

Admiring  how  you  read  the  rules,  when,  clap, 

A  thunder  comes  into  my  solitude —  1760 

I  am  caught  up  in  a  whirlwind  and  cast  here. 

Told  of  a  sudden,  in  this  room  where  so  late 

You  dealt  out  law  adroitly,  that  those  scales, 

I  meekly  bowed  to,  took  my  allotment  from, 

Guido  has  snatched  at,  broken  in  your  hands,  1765 

Metes  to  himself  the  murder  of  his  wife. 

Full  measure,  pressed  down,  running  over  now  !    . 

Can  I  assist  to  an  explanation  ? — Yes, 

I  rise  in  your  esteem,  sagacious  Sirs, 

Stand  up  a  renderer  of  reasons,  not  1770 

The  officious  priest  would  personate  Saint  George 

For  a  mock  Princess  in  undragoned  days. 

What,  the  blood  startles  you  ?     What,  after  all 

The  priest  who  needs  must  carry  sword  on  thigh 

May  find  imperative  use  for  it  ?     Then,  there  was     1775 

A  Princess,  was  a  dragon  belching  flame, 

And  should  have  been  a  Saint  George  also  ?    Then, 


238  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

There  might  be  worse  schemes  than  to  break  the  bonds 

At  Arezzo,  lead  her  by  the  Kttle  hand. 

Till  she  reached  Rome,  and  let  her  try  to  live  ?  1780 

But  you  were  the  law  and  the  gospel, — would  one  please 

Stand  back,  allow  your  faculty  elbow-room  ? 

You  blind  guides  who  must  needs  lead  eyes  that  see  ! 

Fools,  alike  ignorant  of  man  and  God  !  1784 

What  was  there  here  should  have  perplexed  your  wit 

For  a  wink  of  the  owl-eyes  of  you  ?     How  miss,  then, 

What 's  now  forced  on  you  by  this  flare  of  fact— 

As  if  Saint  Peter  failed  to  recognise 

Nero  as  no  apostle,  John  or  James, 

Till  someone  burned  a  martyr,  made  a  torch  1790 

O'  the  blood  and  fat  to  show  his  features  by  ! 

Could  you  fail  read  this  cartulary  aright 

On  head  and  front  of  Franceschini  there. 

Large-lettered  like  hell's  masterpiece  of  print, — 

That  he,  from  the  beginning  pricked  at  heart  1795 

By  some  lust,  letch  of  hate  against  his  wife. 

Plotted  to  plague  her  into  overt  sin 

And  shame,  would  slay  Pompilia  body  and  soul, 

And  save  his  mean  self — miserably  caught 

I'  the  quagmire  of  his  own  tricks,  cheats  and  lies  ?    1800 

— That  himself  wrote  those  papers,— from  himself 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  239 


To  himself, — which,  i'  the  name  of  me  and  her, 

His  mistress-messengergave  her  and  me, 

Touching  us  with  such  pustules  of  the  soul 

That  she  and  I  might  take  the  taint,  be  shown  1805 

To  the  world  and  shuddered  over,  speckled  so  ? 

— That  the  agent  put  her  sense  into  my  words,  ■ 

Made  substitution  of  the  thing  she  hoped. 

For  the  thing  she  had  and  held,  its  opposite, 

While  the  husband  in  the  background  bit  his  lips      18 10 

At  each  fresh  failure  of  his  precious  plot  ? 

— That  when  at  the  last  we  did  rush  each  on  each, 

By  no  chance  but  because  God  willed  it  so — 

The  spark  of  truth  was  struck  from  out  our  souls — 

Made  all  of  me,  descried  in  the  first  glance,  18 15 

Seem  fair  and  honest  and  permissible  love 

O'  the  good  and  true — as  the  first  glance  told  me 

There  was  no  duty  patent  in  the  world 

Like  daring  try  be  good  and  true  myself. 

Leaving  the  shows  of  things  to  the  Lord  of  Show      1820 

And  Prince  o'  the  Power  of  the  Air.     Our  very  flight. 

Even  to  its  most  ambiguous  circumstance, 

Irrefragably  proved  how  futile,  false  .  .  . 

Why,  men — men  and  not  boys — boys  and  not  babes — 

Babes  and  not  beasts — beasts  and  not  stocks  and  stones ! — 


240  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Had  the  liar's  lie  been  true  one  pin-point  speck,        1826 ' 

Were  I  the  accepted  suitor,  free  o'  the  place, 

Disposer  of  the  time,  to  come  at  a  call 

And  go  at  a  wink  as  who  should  say  me  nay, — 

What  need  of  flight,  what  were  the  gain  therefrom     1830 

But  just  damnation,  failure  or  success  ? 

Damnation  pure  and  simple  to  her  the  wife 

And  me  the  priest — who  bartered  private  bliss 

For  public  reprobation,  the  safe  shade 

For  the  sunshine  which  men  see  to  pelt  me  by  :         1835 

What  other  advantage, — we  who  led  the  days 

And  nights  alone  i'  the  house, — was  flight  to  find  ? 

In  our  whole  journey  did  we  stop  an  hour. 

Diverge  a  foot  from  strait  road  till  we  reached 

Or  would  have  reached — but  for  that  fate  of  ours —  1840 

The  father  and  mother,  in  the  eye  of  Rome, 

The  eye  of  yourselves  we  made  aware  of  us 

At  the  first  fall  of  misfortune  ?     And  indeed 

You  did  so  far  give  sanction  to  our  flight. 

Confirm  its  purpose,  as  lend  helping  hand,  1845 

Deliver  up  Pompilia  not  to  him 

She  fled,  but  those  the  flight  was  ventured  for. 

Why  then  could  you,  who  stopped  short,  not  go  on 

One  poor  step  more,  and  justify  the  means, 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  241 

Having  allowed  the  end? — not  see  and  say  1850 

'^  Here  's  the  exceptional  conduct  that  should  claim 

"  To  be  exceptionally  judged  on  rules 

''  Which,  understood,  make  no  exception  here  "— 

Why  play  instead  into  the  devil's  hands 

By  dealing  so  ambiguously  as  gave  1855 

Guido  the  power  to  intervene  like  me, 

Prove  one  exception  more?  I  saved  his  wife 

Against  law  :  against  law  he  slays  her  now  : 

Deal  with  him  ! 

I  have  done  with  being  judged.      i860 
I  stand  here  guiltless  in  thought,  word  and  deed, 
To  the  point  that  I  apprise  you, — in  contempt 
For  all  misapprehending  ignorance 
0'  the  human  heart,  much  more  the  mind  of  Christ, — 
That  I  assuredly  did  bow,  was  blessed  1865 

By  the  revelation  of  Pompilia.     There  ! 
Such  is  the  final  fact  I  fling  you.  Sirs, 
To  mouth  and  mumble  and  misinterpret :  there  ! 
*^  The  priest 's  in  love,"  have  it  the  vulgar  way  ! 
Unpriest  me,  rend  the  rags  o'  the  vestment,  do —      1870 
Degrade  deep,  disenfranchise  all  you  dare — 
Remove  me  from  the  midst,  no  longer  priest 

VOL.  II.  R 


242  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

And  fit  companion  for  the  like  of  you — 

Your  gay  Abati  with  the  well-turned  leg 

And  rose  i'  the  hat-rim,  Canons,  cross  at  neck  1875 

And  silk  mask  in  the  pocket  of  the  gown. 

Brisk  bishops  with  the  world's  musk  still  un brushed 

From  the  rochet ;  I  '11  no  more  of  these  good  things  : 

There  's  a  crack  somewhere,  something  that 's  unsound 

I'  the  rattle  !  1880 

For  Pompilia — ^be  advised. 
Build  churches,  go  pray  !     You  will  find  me  there, 
I  know,  if  you  come, — and  you  will  come,  I  know. 
Why,  there  's  a  Judge  weeping !     Did  not  I  say 
You  were  good  and  true  at  bottom  ?  You  see  the  truth — 
I  am  glad  I  helped  you  :  she  helped  me  just  so.        1886 

But  for  Count  Guido, — you  must  counsel  there  ! 

I  bow  my  head,  bend  to  the  very  dust, 

Break  myself  up  in  shame  of  faultiness. 

I  had  him  one  whole  moment,  as  I  said —  1890 

As  I  remember,  as  will  never  out 

O'  the  thoughts  of  me, — I  had  him  in  arm's  reach 

There, — as  you  stand.  Sir,  now  you  cease  to  sit, — 

I  could  have  killed  him  ere  he  killed  his  wife, 


GIUSEPPE   CAPONSACCHI.  243 

And  did  not :  he  went  off  alive  and  well  1895 

And  then  effected  this  last  feat — through  me  ! 

Me — not  through  you — dismiss  that  fear  !     'T  was  you 

Hindered  me  staying  here  to  save  her, — not 

From  leaving  you  and  going  back  to  him 

And  doing  service  in  Arezzo.     Come,  1900 

Instruct  me  in  procedure  !  I  conceive — 

In  all  due  self-abasement  might  I  speak — 

How  you  will  deal  with  Guido  :  oh,  not  death  ! 

Death,  if  it  let  her  life  be  :  otherwise 

Not  death, — your  lights  will  teach  you  clearer  !  I      1905 

Certainly  have  an  instinct  of  my  own 

I'  the  matter  :  bear  with  me  and  weigh  its  worth  ! 

Let  us  go  away — leave  Guido  all  alone 

Back  on  the  world  again  that  knows  him  now  ! 

I  think  he  will  be  found  (indulge  so  far  !)  1910 

Not  to  die  so  much  as  slide  out  of  life, 

Pushed  by  the  general  horror  and  common  hate 

Low,  lower, — left  o'  the  very  ledge  of  things, 

I  seem  to  see  him  catch  convulsively 

One  by  one  at  all  honest  forms  of  life,  1915 

At  reason,  order,  decency  and  use — 

To  cramp  him  and  get  foothold  by  at  least ; 

And  still  they  disengage  them  from  his  clutch. 


244  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

^'  What,  you  are  he,  then,  had  PompiHa  once 

"  And  so  forwent  her  ?    Take  not  up  with  us  !  "        1920 

And  thus  I  see  him  slowly  and  surely  edged 

Off  all  the  table-land  whence  life  upsprings 

Aspiring  to  be  immortality, 

As  the  snake,  hatched  on  hill-top  by  mischance. 

Despite  his  wriggHng,  slips,  sHdes,  sHdders  down       1925 

Hill-side,  lies  low  and  prostrate  on  the  smooth 

Level  of  the  outer  place,  lapsed  in  the  vale  : 

So  I  lose  Guido  in  the  loneliness. 

Silence  and  dusk,  till  at  the  doleful  end. 

At  the  horizontal  line,  creation's  verge,  1930 

From  what  just  is  to  absolute  nothingness — 

Lo,  what  is  this  he  meets,  strains  onward  still  ? 

What  other  man  deep  further  in  the  fate. 

Who,  turning  at  the  prize  of  a  footfall 

To  flatter  him  and  promise  fellowship,  ^935 

Discovers  in  the  act  a  frightful  face — 

Judas,  made  monstrous  by  much  solitude  ! 

The  two  are  at  one  now !     Let  them  love  their  love 

That  bites  and  claws  like  hate,  or  hate  their  hate 

That  mops  and  mows  and  makes  as  it  were  love  !     1940 

There,  let  them  each  tear  each  in  devil's-fun. 

Or  fondle  this  the  other  while  malice  aches — 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  245 

Both  teach,  both  learn  detestability  ! 

Kiss  him  the  kiss,  Iscariot !     Pay  that  back, 

That  smatch  o'  the  slaver  blistering  on  your  lip — ■      1945 

By  the  better  trick,  the  insult  he  spared  Christ — 

Lure  him  the  lure  o'  the  letters,  Aretine  ! 

Lick  him  o'er  slimy-smooth  with  jelly-filth 

O'  the  verse-and-prose  pollution  in  love's  guise  ! 

The  cockatrice  is  with  the  basilisk  !  1950 

There  let  them  grapple,  denizens  o'  the  dark, 

Foes  or  friends,  but  indissolubly  bound. 

In  their  one  spot  out  of  the  ken  of  God 

Or  care  of  man,  for  ever  and  ever  more  ! 

Why,  Sirs,  what 's  this  ?   Why,  this  is  sorry  and  strange  ! — 

Futility,  divagation  :  this  from  me  1956 

Bound  to  be  rational,  justify  an  act 

Of  sober  man  ! — whereas,  being  moved  so  much, 

I  give  you  cause  to  doubt  the  lady's  mind  : 

A  pretty  sarcasm  for  the  world  !     I  fear  i960 

You  do  her  wit  injustice, — all  through  me  ! 

Like  my  fate  all  through, — ineffective  help  ! 

A  poor  rash  advocate  I  prove  myself. 

You  might  be  angry  with  good  cause  :  but  sure 

At  the  advocate, — only  at  the  undue  zeal  1965 


246  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 

That  spoils  the  force  of  his  own  plea,  I  think  ? 

My  part  was  just  to  tell  you  how  things  stand, 

State  facts  and  not  be  flustered  at  their  fume. 

But  then  't  is  a  priest  speaks  :  as  for  love, — no  ! 

If  you  let  buzz  a  vulgar  fly  like  that  1970 

About  your  brains,  as  if  I  loved,  forsooth. 

Indeed,  Sirs,  you  do  wrong  !     We  had  no  thought 

Of  such  infatuation,  she  and  I  : 

There  are  many  points  that  prove  it :  do  be  just ! 

I  told  you, — at  one  little  roadside-place  1975 

I  spent  a  good  half-hour,  paced  to  and  fro 

The  garden  ;  just  to  leave  her  free  awhile, 

I  plucked  a  handful  of  Spring  herb  and  bloom  : 

I  might  have  sat  beside  her  on  the  bench 

Where  the  children  were  :  I  wish  the  thing  had  been, 

Indeed  :  the  event  could  not  be  worse,  you  know :    1981 

One  more  half-hour  of  her  saved  !    She  's  dead  now.  Sirs  ! 

While  I  was  running  on  at  such  a  rate. 

Friends  should  have  plucked  me  by  the  sleeve  :  I  went 

Too  much  o'  the  trivial  outside  of  her  face  1985 

And  the  purity  that  shone  there — plain  to  me, 

Not  to  you,  what  more  natural  ?     Nor  am  I 

Infatuated, — oh,  I  saw,  be  sure  ! 

Her  brow  had  not  the  right  line,  leaned  too  much. 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  247 

Painters  would  say  ;  they  like  the  straight-up  Greek  : 

This  seemed  bent  somewhat  with  an  invisible  crown 

Of  martyr  and  saint,  not  such  as  art  approves.  1992 

And  how  the  dark  orbs  dwelt  deep  underneath, 

Looked  out  of  such  a  sad  sweet  heaven  on  me — 

The  lips,  compressed  a  little,  came  forward  too,         1995 

Careful  for  a  whole  world  of  sin  and  pain. 

That  was  the  face,  her  husband  makes  his  plea. 

He  sought  just  to  disfigure, — no  offence 

Beyond  that !     Sirs,  let  us  be  rational ! 

He  needs  must  vindicate  his  honour, — ay,  2000 

Yet  shirks,  the  coward,  in  a  clown's  disguise, 

Away  from  the  scene,  endeavours  to  escape. 

Now,  had  he  done  so,  slain  and  left  no  trace 

O'  the  slayer, — what  were  vindicated,  pray  ? 

You  had  found  his  wife  disfigured  or  a  corpse,  2005 

For  what  and  by  whom  ?     It  is  too  palpable  ! 

Then,  here  's  another  point  involving  law  : 

I  use  this  argument  to  show  you  meant 

No  calumny  against  us  by  that  title 

O'  the  sentence, — Hars  try  to  twist  it  so  :  2010 

What  penalty  it  bore,  I  had  to  pay 

Till  further  proof  should  follow  of  innocence — 

Prohationis  ob  defectum^ — proof  ? 


248  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

How  could  you  get  proof  without  trying  us  ? 

You  went  through  the  preHminary  form,  2015 

Stopped  there,  contrived  this  sentence  to  amuse 

The  adversary.     If  the  title  ran 

For  more  than  fault  imputed  and  not  proved, 

That  was  a  simple  penman's  error,  else 

A  slip  i'  the  phrase, — as  when  we  say  of  you  2020 

"  Charged  with  injustice  " — which  may  either  be 

Or  not  be, — 't  is  a  name  that  sticks  meanwhile. 

Another  relevant  matter  :  fool  that  I  am  ! 

Not  what  I  wish  true,  yet  a  point  friends  urge  : 

It  is  not  true, — yet,  since  friends  think  it  helps, —     2025 

She  only  tried  me  when  some  others  failed — 

Began  with  Conti,  whom  I  told  you  of, 

And  Guillichini,  Guido's  kinsfolk  both. 

And  when  abandoned  by  them,  not  before, 

Turned  to  me.     That  's  conclusive  why  she  turned.  2030 

Much  good  they  got  by  the  happy  cowardice ! 

Conti  is  dead,  poisoned  a  month  ago  : 

Does  that  much  strike  you  as  a  sin  ?     Not  much, 

After  the  present  murder, — one  mark  more 

On  the  Moor's  skin, — what  is  black  by  blacker  still? 

Conti  had  come  here  and  told  truth.     And  so  2036 

With  Guillichini ;  he  's  condemned  of  course 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  249 

To  the  galleys,  as  a  friend  in  this  affair, 

Tried  and  condemned  for  no  one  thing  i'  the  world, 

A  fortnight  since  by  who  but  the  Governor  ? —  2040 

The  just  judge,  who  refused  Pompilia  help 

At  first  blush,  being  her  husband's  friend,  you  know. 

There  are  two  tales  to  suit  the  separate  courts, 

Arezzo  and  Rome  :  he  tells  you  here,  we  fled 

Alone,  unhelped, — lays  stress  on  the  main  fault,        2045 

The  spiritual  sin,  Rome  looks  to  :  but  elsewhere 

He  likes  best  we  should  break  in,  steal,  bear  off. 

Be  fit  to  brand  and  pillory  and  flog — 

That 's  the  charge  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  Governor  : 

If  these  unpriest  me,  you  and  I  may  yet    .  2050 

Converse,  Vincenzo  Marzi-Medici  ! 

Oh,  Sirs,  there  are  worse  men  than  you,  I  say  ! 

More  easily  duped,  I  mean ;  this  stupid  lie. 

Its  liar  never  dared  propound  in  Rome, 

He  gets  Arezzo  to  receive, — nay  more,  2055 

Gets  Florence  and  the  Duke  to  authorise ! 

This  is  their  Rota's  sentence,  their  Granduke 

Signs  and  seals  !     Rome  for  me  henceforward — Rome, 

Where  better  men  are, — most  of  all,  that  man 

The  Augustinian  of  the  Hospital,  2060 

Who  writes  the  letter, — he  confessed,  he  says, 


250  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Many  a  dying  person,  never  one 

So  sweet  and  true  and  pure  and  beautiful. 

A  good  man  !     Will  you  make  him  Pope  one  day  ? 

Not  that  he  is  not  good  too,  this  we  have —  2065 

But  old, — else  he  would  have  his  word  to  speak, 

His  truth  to  teach  the  world :  I  thirst  for  truth, 

But  shall  not  drink  it  till  I  reach  the  source. 

Sirs,  I  am  quiet  again.     You  see,  we  are 

So  very  pitiable,  she  and  I,  2070 

Who  had  conceivably  been  otherwise. 

Forget  distemperature  and  idle  heat ! 

Apart  from  truth's  sake,  what 's  to  move  so  much  ? 

Pompilia  will  be  presently  with  God  ; 

I  am,  on  earth,  as  good  as  out  of  it,  2075 

A  relegated  priest ;  when  exile  ends, 

I  mean  to  do  my  duty  and  live  long. 

She  and  I  are  mere  strangers  now :  but  priests 

Should  study  passion  ;  how  else  cure  mankind. 

Who  come  for  help  in  passionate  extremes?  2080 

I  do  but  play  with  an  imagined  life 

Of  who,  unfettered  by  a  vow,  unblessed 

By  the  higher  call, — since  you  will  have  it  so, — 

Leads  it  companioned  by  the  woman  there. 


GIUSEPPE    CAPONSACCHI.  25  I 

To  live,  and  see  her  learn,  and  learn  by  her,  2085 

Out  of  the  low  obscure  and  petty  world — 

Or  only  see  one  purpose  and  one  will 

Evolve  themselves  i'  the  world,  change  wrong  to  right : 

To  have  to  do  with  nothing  but  the  true. 

The  good,  the  eternal — and  these,  not  alone  2090 

In  the  main  current  of  the  general  life. 

But  small  experiences  of  every  day, 

Concerns  of  the  particular  hearth  and  home  : 

To  learn  not  only  by  a  comet's  rush 

But  a  rose's  birth, — not  by  the  grandeur,  God —        2095 

But  the  comfort,  Christ.     All  this,  how  far  away  ! 

Mere  delectation,  meet  for  a  minute's  dream  ! — 

Just  as  a  drudging  student  trims  his  lamp, 

Opens  his  Plutarch,  puts  him  in  the  place 

Of  Roman,  Grecian  ;  draws  the  patched  gown  close. 

Dreams,  "  Thus  should  I  fight,  save  or  rule  the  world  !" — 

Then  smilingly,  contentedly,  awakes  2100 

To  the  old  solitary  nothingness. 

So  I,  from  such  communion,  pass  content  .  .  . 

O  great,  just,  good  God  !     Miserable  me  !  2105 


LONDON  : 

PRINTED   BY  SMITH,    ELDER  AND  CO., 

OLD   BAILEY,    E,C. 
