The Ring and the Book, Vol. 1 (Robert Browning, 1869)
=====================================================
The Roman murder trial retold by twelve voices — Browning's epic, complete in four volumes. Public domain. Internet Archive (1868 vol. 1).

%iiigiir'


iri^dl^«1S


'>M^^  4.\S


I


if?


i^r


^i


.j.l.llMiU.IHI.M.Uai!lll.M.m!M


OF  THii  \.

UNIVERSITY  )

OF  /


:^J^  ^  »>'


THE


RING  AND  THE  BOOK.


ROBERT    BROWNING,

M.A.,

HONORARY     FELLOW     OF     BALLIOL     COLLEGE,     OXFORD.


IN   FOUR     VOLUMES.
VOL.  I.


SMITH,     ELDER     AND     CO.,     LONDON.
1868.

[r/ic  Uight  of  Translation  is  reserved.]


CONTENTS.


PAGE

The  Ring  and  the  Book i


Half-Rome   75


The  Other  Half-Rome 157


M559S71


THE

RING  AND    THE  BOOK.


I.

THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Do  you  see  this  Ring  ?

'T  is  Rome-work,  made  to  match
(By  Castellani's  imitative  craft)
Etrurian  circlets  found,  some  happy  morn,
After  a  dropping  April ;  found  alive  5

Spark-like  'mid  unearthed  slope-side  figtree-roots
That  roof  old  tombs  at  Chiusi :  soft,  you  see,
Yet  crisp  as  jewel-cutting.     There  's  one  trick,
(Craftsmen  instruct  me)  one  approved  device
And  but  one,  fits  such  slivers  of  pure  gold  10

VOL.  h  B


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


As  this  was, — such  mere  oozings  from  the  mine,
Virgin  as  oval  tawny  pendent  tear
At  beehive-edge  when  ripened  combs  o'erflow, —
To. bear  the  file's  tooth  and  the  hammer's  tap  :
Since  hammer  needs  must  widen  out  the  round,
And  file  emboss  it  fine  with  lily-flowers,
Ere  the  stuff  grow  a  ring-thing  right  to  wear.
That  trick  is,  the  artificer  melts  up  wax
With  honey,  so  to  speak  ;  he  mingles  gold
With  gold's  alloy,  and,  duly  tempering  both,
Effects  a  manageable  mass,  then  works.
But  his  work  ended,  once  the  thing  a  ring,
Oh,  there  's  repristination  !     Just  a  spirt
C  the  proper  fiery  acid  o'er  its  face.
And  forth  the  alloy  unfastened  fiies  in  fume ;
While,  self-sufiicient  now,  the  shape  remains.
The  rondure  brave,  the  lilied  loveliness,
Gold  as  it  was,  is,  shall  be  evermore  :
Prime  nature  with  an  added  artistry —
No  carat  lost,  and  you  have  gained  a  ring.


THE    RING  AND    THE    BOOK.


What  of  it  ?     'T  is  a  figure,  a  symbol,  say ;
A  thing's  sign  :  now  for  the  thing  signified.

Do  you  see  this  square  old  yellow  Book,  I  toss

I'  the  air,  and  catch  again,  and  twirl  about

By  the  crumpled  vellum  covers, — pure  crude  fact  35

Secreted  from  man's  life  when  hearts  beat  hard.

And  brains,  high-blooded,  ticked  two  centuries  since  ?

Examine  it  yourselves  !     I  found  this  book,

Gave  a  lira  for  it,  eightpence  English  just,

(Mark  the  predestination  !)  when  a  Hand,  40

Always  above  my  shoulder,  pushed  me  once,

One  day  still  fierce  'mid  many  a  day  struck  calm.

Across  a  Square  in  Florence,  crammed  with  booths,

Buzzing  and  blaze,  noontide  and  market-time  ;

Toward  Baccio's  marble,— ay,  the  basement-ledge         45

O'  the  pedestal  where  sits  and  menaces

John  of  the  Black  Bands  with  the  upright  spear,

'Twixt  palace  and  church, — Riccardi  where  they  lived,

His  race,  and  San  Lorenzo  where  they  lie.


THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.


This  book, — precisely  on  that  palace-step  50

Which,  meant  for  lounging  knaves  o'  the  Medici,

Now  serves  re- venders  to  display  their  ware, —

'Mongst  odds  and  ends  of  ravage,  picture-frames

White  through  the  worn  gilt,  mirror-sconces  chipped,

Bronze  angel-heads  once  knobs  attached  to  chests,       55

(Handled  when  ancient  dames  chose  forth  brocade)

Modern  chalk  drawings,  studies  from  the  nude.

Samples  of  stone,  jet,  breccia,  porphyry

Polished  and  rough,  sundry  amazing  busts

In  baked  earth,  (broken.  Providence  be  praised  !)         60

A  wreck  of  tapestry,  proudly-purposed  web

When  reds  and  blues  were  indeed  red  and  blue,

Now  offered  as  a  mat  to  save  bare  feet

(Since  carpets  constitute  a  cruel  cost)

Treading  the  chill  scagliola  bedward  :  then  65

A  pile  of  brown-etched  prints,  two  crazie  each,

Stopped  by  a  conch  a-top  from  fluttering  forth

— Sowing  the  Square  with  works  of  one  and  the  same

Master,  the  imaginative  Sienese


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


Great  in  the  scenic  backgrounds — (name  and  fame       70

None  of  you  know,  nor  does  he  fare  the  worse :)

From  these  .  .  Oh,  with  a  Lionard  going  cheap

If  it  should  prove,  as  promised,  that  Joconde

Whereof  a  copy  contents  the  Louvre  ! — these

1  picked  this  book  from.     Five  compeers  in  flank         75

Stood  left  and  right  of  it  as  tempting  more —

A  dogseared  Spicilegium,  the  fond  tale

0'  the  Frail  One  of  the  Flower,  by  young  Dumas,

Vulgarized  Horace  for  the  use  of  schools.

The  Life,  Death,  Miracles  of  Saint  Somebody,  80

Saint  Somebody  Else,  his  Miracles,  Death  and  Life, —

With  this,  one  glance  at  the  lettered  back  of  which,

And  "  Stall  ! "  cried  I  :  a  lira  made  it  mine.

Here  it  is,  this  I  toss  and  take  again ;
Small-quarto  size,  part  print  part  manuscript :  85

A  book  in  shape  but,  really,  pure  crude  fact
Secreted  from  man's  life  when  hearts  beat  hard,        '
And  brains,  high-blooded,  ticked  two  centuries  since.


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


Give  it  me  back  !     The  thing 's  restorative

I'  the  touch  and  sight.  90

That  memorable  day,
(June  was  the  month,  Lorenzo  named  the  Square)
I  leaned  a  little  and  overlooked  my  prize
By  the  low  railing  round  the  fountain-source
Close  to  the  statue,  where  a  step  descends  :  95

While  clinked  the  cans  of  copper,  as  stooped  and  rose
Thick-ankled  girls  who  brimmed  them,  and  made  place
For  marketmen  glad  to  pitch  basket  down.
Dip  a  broad  melon-leaf  that  holds  the  wet,
And  whisk  their  faded  fresh.     And  on  I  read  100

Presently,  though  my  path  grew  perilous
Between  the  outspread  straw-work,  piles  of  plait
Soon  to  be  flapping,  each  o'er  two  black  eyes
And  swathe  of  Tuscan  hair,  on  festas  fine :
Through  fire-irons,  tribes  of  tongs,  shovels  in  sheaves,
Skeleton  bedsteads,  wardrobe-drawers  agape,  io5

Rows  of  tall  slim  brass  lamps  with  dangling  gear, —


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


And  worse,  cast  clothes  a-sweeteiiing  in  the  sun  :

None  of  them  took  my  eye  fromx  off  my  prize.

Still  read  I  on,  from  written  title-page  no

To  written  index,  on,  through  street  and  street,

At  the  Strozzi,  at  the  Pillar,  at  the  Bridge;

Till,  by  the  time  I  stood  at  home  again

In  Casa  Guidi  by  Felice  Church,

Under  the  doorway  where  the  black  begins  115

With  the  first  stone-slab  of  the  staircase  cold,

I  had  mastered  the  contents,  knew  the  wdiole  truth

Gathered  together,  bound  up  in  this  book.

Print  three-fifths,  written  supplement  the  rest.

'•  Romana  HomicidioriLm''' — nay,  120

Better  translate — "  A  Roman  murder-case  :

''  Position  of  the  entire  criminal  cause

"  Of  Guido  Franceschini,  nobleman,

*'  With  certain  Four  the  cutthroats  in  his  pay,

"  Tried,  all  five,  and  found  guilty  and  put  to  death     125

"  By  heading  or  hanging  as  befitted  ranks,

*'  At  Rome  on  February  Twenty  Two,


8  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

"  Since  our  salvation  Sixteen  Ninety  Eight :

**  Wherein  it  is  disputed  if,  and  when,

"  Husbands  may  kill  adulterous  wives,  yet  'scape        130

"  The  customary  forfeit."

Word  for  word.
So  ran  the  title-page  :  murder,  or  else
Legitimate  punishment  of  the  other  crime,
Accounted  murder  by  mistake, — ^just  that  135

And  no  more,  in  a  Latin  cramp  enough
WHien  the  law  had  her  eloquence  to  launch,
But  interfilleted  with  Italian  streaks
When  testimony  stooped  to  mother-tongue, —
That,  was  this  old  square  yellow  book  about.  140

Now,  as  the  ingot,  ere  the  ring  was  forged.

Lay  gold,  (beseech  you,  hold  that  figure  fast !)

So,  in  this  book  lay  absolutely  truth,

Fanciless  fact,  the  documents  indeed,

Primary  lawyer-pleadings  for,  against,  145


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


The  aforesaid  Five ;  real  summed-up  circumstance

Adduced  in  proof  of  these  on  either  side,

Put  forth  and  printed,  as  the  practice  was.

At  Rome,  in  the  ApostoHc  Chamber's  type.

And  so  submitted  to  the  eye  o'  the  Court  150

Presided  over  by  Plis  Reverence

Rome's  Governor  and  Criminal  Judge, — the  trial

Itself,  to  all  intents,  being  then  as  now

Here  in  the  book  and  nowise  out  of  it ;

Seeing,  there  properly  was  no  judgment-bar,  155

No  bringing  of  accuser  and  accused,

And  whoso  judged  both  parties,  face  to  face

Before  some  court,  as  we  conceive  of  courts.

There  was  a  Hall  of  Justice  ;  that  came  last :

For  justice  had  a  chamber  by  the  hall  160

Where  she  took  evidence  first,  summed  up  the  same.

Then  sent  accuser  and  accused  alike.

In  person  of  the  advocate  of  each.

To  weigh  that  evidence'  w^orth,  arrange,  array

The  battle.     'T  was  the  so-styled  Fisc  began,  165


lO  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Pleaded  (and  since  he  only  spoke  in  print

The  printed  voice  of  him  lives  now  as  then)

The  public  Prosecutor — ''  Murder 's  proved  ;

"  With  five  .  .  what  we  call  qualities  of  bad,

'^  Worse,  worst,  and  yet  worse  still,  and  still  worse  yet;

"  Crest  over  crest  crowning  the  cockatrice,  171

*'  That  beggar  hell's  regalia  to  enrich

"  Count  Guido  Franceschini :  punish  him  ! "

Thus  was  the  paper  put  before  the  court

In  the  next  stage,  (no  noisy  work  at  all,)  175

To  study  at  ease.     In  due  time  like  reply

Came  from  the  so-styled  Patron  of  the  Poor,

Official  mouthpiece  of  the  five  accused

Too  poor  to  fee  a  better, — Guido's  luck

Or  else  his  fellows',  which,  I  hardly  know, —  iSo

An  outbreak  as  of  wonder  at  the  world,

A  fury-fit  of  outraged  innocence,

A  passion  of  betrayed  simplicity  :

"  Punish  Count  Guido  ?     For  what  crime,  what  hint

^^  O'  the  colour  of  a  crime,  inform  us  first !  185


THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.


"  Reward  him  rather  !     Recognize,  we  say,

"  In  the  deed  done,  a  righteous  judgment  dealt  1

"  All  conscience  and  all  courage, — there  's  our  Count

"  Charactered  in  a  word  ;  and,  what 's  more  strange,

''  He  had  companionship  in  privilege,  190

^*  Found  four  courageous  conscientious  friends  :

^'  Absolve,  applaud  all  five,  as  props  of  law,

*'  Sustainers  of  society  ! — perchance

"  A  trilie  over-hasty  with  the  hand

"  To  hold  her  tottering  ark,  had  tumbled  else;  195

*'  But  that 's  a  splendid  fault  whereat  we  wink,

"■  Wishing  your  cold  correctness  sparkled  so  ! "

Thus  paper  second  followed  paper  first,

Thus  did  the  two  join  issue — nay,  the  four.

Each  pleader  having  an  adjunct.     "  True,  he  killed

"  — So  to  speak — in  a  certain  sort — his  wife,  201

"  But  laudably,  since  thus  it  happed  ! "  quoth  one  :

Whereat,  more  witness  and  the  case  postponed.

"  Thus  it  happed  not,  since  thus  he  did  the  deed,

"  And  proved  himself  thereby  portentousest  205


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


"  Of  cutthroats  and  a  prodigy  of  crime,

'''  As  the  woman  that  he  slaughtered  was  a  saint,

"  Martyr  and  miracle  ! "  quoth  the  other  to  match  :

Again,  more  witness,  and  the  case  postponed.

^'  A  miracle,  ay — of  lust  and  impudence  ;  210

*'*  Hear  my  new  reasons  ! "  interposed  the  first :

"  — Coupled  with  more  of  mine  !  "  pursued  his  peer.

"  Beside,  the  precedents,  the  authorities  ! "

From  both  at  once  a  cry  with  an  echo,  that !

That  was  a  firebrand  at  each  fox's  tail  215

Unleashed  in  a  cornfield  :  soon  spread  flare  enough,

As  hurtled  thither  and  there  heaped  themselves

From  earth's  four  corners,  all  authority

And  precedent  for  putting  wives  to  death,

Or  letting  wives  live,  sinful  as  they  seem.  220

How  legislated,  now,  in  this  respect,

Solon  and  his  Athenians  ?     Quote  the  code

Of  Romulus  and  Rome  !     Justinian  speak  !

Nor  modern  Baldo,  Bartolo  be  dumb  !

The  Roman  voice  was  potent,  plentiful ;  225


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


Cornelia  dc  Sicariis  hurried  to  help

Foinpeia  de  Parricidlis ;  Julia  de

Something-or-other  jostled  Lex  this-and-that ;

King  Solomon  confirmed  Apostle  Paul  :

That  nice  decision  of  Dolabella,  eh  ?  230

That  pregnant  instance  of  Theodoric,  oh  !

Down  to  that  choice  example  ^lian  gives

(An  instance  I  find  much  insisted  on)

Of  the  elephant  who,  brute-beast  though  he  were,

Yet  understood  and  punished  on  the  spot  235

His  master's  naughty  spouse  and  faithless  friend ;

A  true  tale  which  has  edified  each  child,

Much  more  shall  flourish  favoured  by  our  court !

Pages  of  proof  this  way,  and  that  way  proof,

And  always — once  again  the  case  postponed.  240

Thus  wrangled,  brangled,  jangled  they  a  month,

— Only  on  paper,  pleadings  all  in  print,

Nor  ever  was,  except  i'  the  brains  of  men.

More  noise  by  word  of  mouth  than  you  hear  now —


14  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Till  the  court  cut  all  short  with  ''  Judged,  your  cause.     245

"  Receive  our  sentence  !     Praise  God  !     We  pronounce

"  Count  Guido  devilish  and  damnable  :

'^  His  wife  Pompilia  in  thought,  word  and  deed,

''  Was  perfect  pure,  he  murdered  her  for  that :

"  As  for  the  Four  who  helped  the  One,  all  Five —      250

"  Why,  let  employer  and  hirelings  share  alike

'^  In  guilt  and  guilt's  reward,  the  death  their  due  1 "

So  was  the  trial  at  end,  do  you  suppose  ?

"  Guilty  you  find  him,  death  you  doom  him  to  ?

*^  Ay,  w^ere  not  Guido.  more  than  needs,  a  priest,        255

"  Priest  and  to  spare  ! " — this  Avas  a  shot  reserved  ;

I  learn  this  from  epistles  which  begin

Here  where  the  print  ends, — see  the  pen  and  ink

Of  the  advocate^  the  ready  at  a  pinch  ! —

"  My  client  boasts  the  clerkly  privilege,  260

"  Has  taken  minor  orders  many  enough,

"  Shows  still  sufficient  chrism  upon  his  pate

"  To  neutralize  a  blood-stain  :  presbyter^


THE   RING  AND    THE    BOOK.  1 5

"  Prima  tojisiiT'ce,  siibdiacomis^

"  SaccrdoSj  so  he  slips  from  underneath  265

"  Your  power,  the  temporal,  slides  inside  the  robe

*^  Of  mother  Church  :  to  her  we  make  appeal

"  By  the  Pope,  the  Church's  head  !"

A  parlous  plea,
Put  in  with  noticeable  effect,  it  seems  ;    ,  270

'•  Since  straight," — resumes  the  zealous  orator,
Making  a  friend  acquainted  with  the  facts, —
"  Once  the  word  '  clericality '  let  fall,
"  Procedure  stopped  and  freer  breath  was  drawn
"  By  all  considerate  and  responsible  Rome."  275

Quality  took  the  decent  part,  of  course  ;
Held  by  the  husband,  who  was  noble  too  :
Or,  for  the  matter  of  that,  a  churl  would  side
With  too-rehned  susceptibility.

And  honour  which,  tender  in  the  extreme,  2 So

Stung  to  the  quick,  must  roughly  right  itself
At  all  risks,  not  sit  still  and  whine  for  law


l6f  THE    RING   AND    THE   BOOK.

As  a  Jew  would,  if  you  squeezed  him  to  the  wall,

Brisk-trotting  through  the  Ghetto.     Nay,  it  seems,

Even  the  Emperor's  Envoy  had  his  say

To  say  on  the  subject;  might  not  see,  unmoved.

Civility  menaced  throughout  Christendom

By  too  harsh  measure  dealt  her  champion  here.

Lastly,  what  made  all  safe,  the  Pope  was  kind.

From  his  youth  up,  reluctant  to  take  life.

If  mercy  might  be  just  and  yet  show  grace ;

Much  more  unlikely  then,  in  extreme  age,

To  take  a  life  the  general  sense  bade  spare.

'T  v/as  plain  that  Guido  would  go  scatheless  yet.  .'

But  human  promise,  oh,  how  short  of  shine  !
How  topple  down  the  piles  of  hope  we  rear  !
How  history  proves  .  .  .  nay,  read  Herodotus  !
Suddenly  starting  from  a  nap,  as  it  were,
A  dog-sleep  with  one  shut,  one  open  orb.
Cried  the  Pope's  great  self, — Innocent  by  name
And  nature  too,  and  eighty-six  years  old.


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  1 7

Antonio  Pignatelli  of  Naples,  Pope

Who  had  trod  many  lands,  known  many  deeds.

Probed  many  hearts,  beginning  with  his  own,

And  now  was  far  in  readiness  for  God, —  305

'Twas  he  who  first  bade  leave  those  souls  in  peace,

Those  Jansenists,  re-nicknamed  Molinists,

('Gainst  whom  the  cry  w^ent,  like  a  frowsy  tune,

Tickling  men's  ears — the  sect  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour

1'  the  teeth  of  the  world  which,  clown-like,  loves  to  chew

]>e  it  but  a  straw  twixt  work  and  whistling- while,         311

Taste  some  vituperation,  bite  away.

Whether  at  marjoram-sprig  or  garlic-clove,

Aught  it  may  sport  with,  spoil,  and  then  spit  forth)

'^  Leave  them  alone,"  bade  he,  "  those  Molinists  !        315

"  Who  may  have  other  light  than  w^e  perceive,

*'  Or  why  is  it  the  whole  world  hates  them  thus  ?"

Also  he  peeled  off  that  last  scandal-rag

Of  Nepotism  ;  and  so  observed  the  poor

That  men  would  merrily  say,  "  Halt,  deaf  and  blind,  320

*'  Who  feed  on  fat  things,  leave  the  master's  self

VOL.  I.  c


1 8  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

"  To  gather  up  the  fragments  of  his  feast,

"  These  be  the  nephews  of  Pope  Innocent ! —

"  His  own  meal  costs  but  live  carHnes  a  day,

"  Poor-priest's  allowance,  for  he  claims  no  more."       325

— Pie  cried  of  a  sudden,  this  great  good  old  Pope,

When  they  appealed  in  last  resort  to  him,

"  I  have  mastered  the  whole  matter  :  I  nothing  doubt.

"  Though  Guido  stood  forth  priest  from  head  to  heel,

"  Instead  of,  as  alleged,  a  piece  of  one, —  330

"  And  further,  were  he,  from  the  tonsured  scalp

^^  To  the  sandaled  sole  of  him,  my  son  and  Christ's,

^^  Instead  of  touching  us  by  finger-tip

"  As  you  assert,  and  pressing  up  so  close

'^  Only  to  set  a  blood-smutch  on  our  robe, —  335

*'  I  and  Christ  would  renounce  all  right  in  him.

^'  Am  I  not  Pope,  and  presently  to  die,

^'  And  busied  how  to  render  my  account,

*'  And  shall  I  wait  a  day  ere  I  decide

"  On  doing  or  not  doing  justice  here?  340

^^  Cut  off  his  head  to-morrow  by  this  time.


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  1 9

"  Hang  up  his  four  mates,  two  on  either  hand,
''  And  end  one  business  more  !  "


r  So  said,  so  done —

Rather  so  writ,  for  the  old  Pope  bade  this,  345

I  fnid,  with  his  particular  chirograph,
His  own  no  such  infirm  hand,  Friday  night ;
And  next  day,  February  Twenty  Two,
Since  our  salvation  Sixteen  Ninety  Eight,
— Not  at  the  proper  head-and-hanging-place  350

On  bridge-foot  close  by  Castle  Angelo,
Where  custom  somewhat  staled  the  spectacle,
('Twas  not  so  well  i'  the  way  of  Rome,  beside,
The  noble  Rome,  the  Rome  of  Guido's  rank)
But  at  the  city's  newer  gayer  end, — •  355

The  cavalcading  promenading  place
Beside  the  gate  and  opposite  the  church
Under  the  Pincian  gardens  green  with  Spring,
'Neath  the  obelisk  'twixt  the  fountains  in  the  Square^
Did  Guido  and  his  fellows  find  their  fate,  360


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.


All  Rome  for  witness,  and — my  writer  adds —

Remonstrant  in  its  universal  grief,

Since  Giiido  had  the  suffrage  of  all  Rome.

This  is  the  bookful ;  thus  far  take  the  truth,

The  un tempered  gold,  the  fact  untampered  with,         365

The  mere  ring-metal  ere  the  ring  be  made  !

And  what  has  hitherto  come  of  it  ?     Who  preserves

The  memory  of  this  Guido,  and  his  wife

Pompilia,  more  than  Ademollo's  name,

The  etcher  of  those  prints,  two  crazie  each,  370

Saved  by  a  stone  from  snowing  broad  the  Square

With  scenic  backgrounds  ?    W^as  this  truth  of  force  ?

Able  to  take  its  own  part  as  truth  should,

Sufficient,  self-sustaining  ?    AVhy,  if  so —

Yonder  's  a  fire,  into  it  goes  my  book,  375

As  who  shall  say  me  nay,  and  what  the  loss  ?

You  know  the  tale  already  ;  I  may  ask,

Rather  than  think  to  tell  you,  more  thereof, —

Ask  you  not  merely  who  were  he  and  she,


I


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


Husband  and  wife,  what  manner  of  mankind,  380

But  how^  you  hold  concerning  this  and  that

Other  yet-unnamed  actor  in  the  piece.

The  young  frank  handsome  courdy  Canon,  now,

The  priest,  declared  the  lover  of  the  wife.

He  who,  no  question,  did  elope  with  her,  385

For  certain  bring  the  tragedy  about,

Giuseppe  Caponsacchi ; — his  strange  course

I'  the  matter,  was  it  right  or  wrong  or  both  ?

Then  the  old  couple,  slaughtered  with  the  wife

By  tlie  husband  as  accomplices  in  crime,  390

Those  Comparini,  Pietro  and  his  spouse, —

What  say  you  to  the  right  or  wrong  of  that,

AMien,  at  a  known  name  whispered  through  the  door

Of  a  lone  villa  on  a  Christmas  night.

It  opened  that  the  joyous  hearts  inside  395

Might  welcome  as  it  were  an  angel-guest

Come  in  Christ's  name  to  knock  and  enter,  sup

And  satisfy  the  loving  ones  he  saved ;

And  so  did  welcome  devils  and  their  death  ?


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


I  have  been  silent  on  that  circumstance  4o<

Although  the  couple  passed  for  close  of  kin
To  wife  and  husband,  v/ere  by  some  accounts
Pompilia's  very  parents  :  you  know  best.
Also  that  infant  the  great  joy  was  for,
That  Gaetano,  the  wife's  two-weeks'  babe,  40  =

The  husband's  first-born  child,  his  son  and  heir.
Whose  birth  and  being  turned  his  night  to  day-
Why  must  the  father  kill  the  mother  thus
Because  she  bore  his  son  and  saved  himself?

Well,  British  Public,  ye  who  like  me  not,  41c

(God  love  you  !)  and  will  have  your  proper  laugh

At  the  dark  question,  laugh  it !     I  laugh  first.

Truth  must  prevail,  the  proverb  vows ;  and  truth

— Here  is  it  all  i'  the  book  at  last,  as  first

There  it  was  all  i'  the  heads  and  hearts  of  Rome        41  =

Gentle  and  simple,  never  to  fall  nor  fade

Nor  be  forgotten.     Yet,  a  little  while,

The  passage  of  a  century  or  so,


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  23


Decads  thrice  five,  and  here  's  time  paid  his  tax,
Oblivion  gone  home  with  her  harvesting,  420

And  all  left  smooth  again  as  scythe  could  shave.
Far  from  beginning  with  you  London  folk,
I  took  my  book  to  Rome  first,  tried  truth's  power
On  likely  people.     "  Have  you  met  such  names  ?
I"  Is  a  tradition  extant  of  such  ficts  ?  425

I"  Your  law-courts  stand,  your  records  frown  a-row :
:  *>*  What   if   I   rove   and   rummage?"      '^ — Why,   you'll
waste
■  Your  pains  and  end  as  wise  as  you  began  !  "
Everyone  snickered  :  "  names  and  facts  thus  old
'^  Are  newer  much  than  Europe  news  we  find  430

"  Down  in  to-day's  Diaiio.     Records,  quotha?
"  Why,    the    French    burned    them,  what    else  do  the

Frencli  ?  ,

"'  The  rap-and-rending  nation  !     And  it  tells
"-  Against  the  Church,  no  doubt, — another  gird
"  At  the  Temporality,  your  Trial,  of  course  ?"  435

"  — Quite  otherwise  this  time,"  submitted  I ;


24  THE    RING    AND    THE    BOOK.

"  Clean  for  the  Church  and  dead  against  the  world,

"  The  flesh  and  the  devil,  does  it  tell  for  once."

"  — The  rarer  and  the  happier  !     All  the  same,

"  Content  you  with  your  treasure  of  a  book,  440

"  And  waive  Avhat  's  wanting  !     Take  a  friend's  advice  !

*•  It's  not  the  custom  of  the  country.     Mend

^^  Your  ways  indeed  and  we  may  stretch  a  point :

"  Go  get  you  manned  by  Manning  and  new-manned

*'  By  Newman  and,  mayhap,  wise-manned  to  boot       445

^'  By  Wiseman,  and  we'll  see  or  else  we  won't !

"  Thanks  meantime  for  the  story,  long  and  strong,

"  A  pretty  piece  of  narrative  enough,

*'  Which  scarce  ought  so  to  drop  out,  one  would  think,

''  From  the  more  curious  annals  of  our  kind.  450

^'  Do  you  tell  the  story,  now,  in  oft-hand  style,

^'  Straight  from  the  book  ?  Or  simply  here  and  there,

"  (The  while  you  vault  it  through  the  loose  and  large)

^'  Hang  to  a  hint  ?     Or  is  there  book  at  all,

"  And  don't  you  deal  in  poetry,  make-believe,  455

"  And  the  white  lies  it  sounds  like  ?  "


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


Yes  and  no  !
From  the  book,  yes  ;  thence  bit  by  bit  I  dug
The  Hngot  truth,  that  memorable  day,
Assayed  and  knew  my  piecemeal  gain  was  gold, —      460
Yes ;  but  from  something  else  surpassing  that,
Something  of  mine  which,  mixed  up  with  the  mass,
Made  it  bear  hammer  and  be  firm  to  file.
Fancy  with  fact  is  just  one  fact  the  more  ;
To-wit,  that  fancy  has  informed,  transpierced,  465

Thridded  and  so  thrown  fast  the  facts  else  free,
As  right  through  ring  and  ring  runs  the  djereed
And  binds  the  loose,  one  bar  without  a  break.
I  fused  my  live  soul  and  that  inert  stuff,
Before  attempting  smithcraft,  on  the  night  470

After  the  day  when, — truth  thus  grasped  and  gained, —
The  book  was  shut  and  done  with  and  laid  by
On  the  cream-coloured  massive  agate,  broad
'Neath  the  twin  cherubs  in  the  tarnished  frame
O'  the  mirror,  tall  thence  to  the  ceiling-top.  475

And  from  the  readim?,  and  that  slab  I  leant


26  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

My  elbow  on,  the  while  I  read  and  read,

I  turned,  to  free  myself  and  find  the  world.

And  stepped  out  on  the  narrow  terrace,  built

Over  the  street  and  opposite  the  church,  480

And  paced  its  lozenge-brickwork  sprinkled  cool ;

Because  Felice-church-side  stretched,  a-glow

Through  each  square  window  fringed  for  festival,

Whence  came  the  clear  voice  of  the  cloistered  ones

Chanting  a  chant  made  for  midsummer  nights —         485

I  know  not  what  particular  praise  of  God,

It  always  came  and  went  with  June.     Beneath

I'  the  street,  quick  shown  by  openings  of  the  sky

When  flame  fell  silently  from  cloud  to  cloud,

Richer  than  that  gold  snow  Jove  rained  on  Rhodes,  490

The  townsmen  walked  by  twos  and  threes,  and  talked.

Drinking  the  blackness  in  default  of  air —

A  busy  human  sense  beneath  my  feet :

While  in  and  out  the  terrace-plants,  and  round

One  branch  of  tall  datura,  waxed  and  waned  495

The  lamp-fly  lured  there,  wanting  the  white  flower.


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  27

Over  the  roof  o'  the  Hghted  church  I  looked

A  bowshot  to  the  street's  end,  north  away

Out  of  the  Roman  gate  to  the  Roman  road

By  the  river,  till  I  felt  the  Apennine.  500

And  there  would  lie  Arezzo,  the  man's  town,

The  woman's  trap  and  cage  and  torture-place,

Also  the  stage  where  the  priest  played  his  part,

A  spectacle  for  angels,  —ay,  indeed,

There  lay  Arezzo  !     Farther  then  I  fared,  505

Feeling  my  way  on  through  the  hot  and  dense,

Rome  ward,  until  I  found  the  wayside  inn

By  Castelnuovo's  few  mean  hut-like  homes

Huddled  together  on  the  hill-foot  bleak.

Bare,  broken  only  by  that  tree  or  two  510

Against  the  sudden  bloody  splendour  poured

Cursewise  in  his  departure  by  the  day

On  the  low  house-roof  of  that  squalid  inn

Where  they  three,  for  the  first  time  and  the  last,

Husband  and  wife  and  priest,  met  face  to  face.  515

Whence  I  went  on  ao:ain,  the  end  was  near,


28  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Step  by  step,  missing  none  and  marking  all,

Till  Rome  itself,  the  ghastly  goal,  I  reached.

Why,  all  the  while, — how  could  it  otherwise  ? —

The  life  in  me  abolished  the  death  of  things,  520

Deep  calling  unto  deep  :  as  then  and  there

Acted  itself  over  again  once  more

The  tragic  piece.     I  saw  with  my  own  eyes

In  Florence  as  I  trod  the  terrace,  breathed

The  beauty  and  the  fearfulness  of  night,  525

How  it  had  run,  this  round  from  Rome  to  Rome — ■

Because,  you  are  to  know,  they  lived  at  Rome,

Pompilia's  parents,  as  they  thought  themselves,

Two  poor  ignoble  hearts  who  did  their  best

Part  God's  way,  part  the  other  way  than  God's,  530

To  somehow  make  a  shift  and  scramble  through

The  world's  mud,  careless  if  it  splashed  and  spoiled,

Provided  they  might  so  hold  high,  keep  clean

Their  child's  soul,  one  soul  white  enough  for  three.

And  lift  it  to  whatever  star  should  stoop,  535

What  possible  sphere  of  purer  life  than  theirs


THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.   .  29


Should  come  in  aid  of  whiteness  hard  to  save.

I  saw  the  star  stoop,  that  they  strained  to  touch,

And  did  touch  and  depose  their  treasure  on,

As  Guido  Franceschini  took  away  540

PompiHa  to  be  his  for  evermore,

While  they  sang  *'  Now  let  us  depart  in  peace,

"  Having  beheld  thy  glory,  Guido's  wife  ! "

I  saw  the  star  supposed,  but  fog  o'  the  fen.

Gilded  star-fashion  by  a  glint  from  hell ;  545

Having  been  heaved  up,  haled  on  its  gross  way,

By  hands  unguessed  before,  invisible  help

From  a  dark  brotherhood,  and  specially

Two  obscure  goblin  creatures,  fox-faced  this,

Cat-clawed  the  other,  called  his  next  of  kui  550

By  Guido  the  main  monster, — cloaked  and  caped,   -

■Making  as  they  were  priests,  to  mock  God  more, — •

Abate  Paul,  Canon  Girolamo.

These  who  had  rolled  the  starlike  pest  to  Rome

And  stationed  it  to  suck  up  and  absorb  555

The  sweetness  of  Pompilia,  rolled  again


$0  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

That  bloated  bubble,  with  her  soul  inside,

Back  to  Arezzo  and  a  palace  there —

Or  say,  a  fissure  in  the  honest  earth

Whence  long  ago  had  curled  the  vapour  fiist,  560

Blown  big  by  nether  fires  to  appal  day  :

It  touched  home,  broke,  and  blasted  far  and  wide.

I  saw  the  cheated  couple  find  the  cheat

And  guess  what  foul  rite  they  were  captured  for, —

Too  fain  to  follow  over  hill  and  dale  565

That  child  of  theirs  caught  up  thus  in  the  cloud

And  carried  by  the  Prince  o'  the  Power  of  the  Air

Whither  he  would,  to  wilderness  or  sea.

I  saw  them,  in  the  potency  of  fear,

Break  somehow  through  the  satyr-family  570

(For  a  grey  mother  with  a  monkey-mien,

Mopping  and  mowing,  was  apparent  too,

As,  confident  of  capture,  all  took  hands

And  danced  about  the  captives  in  a  ring)

— Saw  them  break  through,  breathe  safe,  at  Rome  again,

Saved  by  the  selfish  instinct,  losing  so  576


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  3 1


Their  loved  one  left  with  haters.     These  I  saw,

In  recrudescency  of  baffled  hate,

Prepare  to  wring  the  uttermost  revenge

From  body  and  soul  thus  left  them  :  all  was  sure,        580

Fire  laid  and  cauldron  set,  the  obscene  ring  traced,

The  victim  stripped  and  prostrate  :  what  of  God  ?

The  cleaving  of  a  cloud,  a  cry,  a  crash.

Quenched  lay  their  cauldron,  cowered  i'  the  dust  the  crew.

As,  in  a  glory  of  armour  like  Saint  George,  585

Out  again  sprang  the  young  good  beauteous  priest

Bearing  away  the  lady  in  his  arms,

Saved  for  a  splendid  minute  and  no  more.

For,  whom  i'  the  path  did  that  priest  come  upon.

He  and  the  poor  lost  lady  borne  so  brave,  590

— Checking  the  song  of  praise  in  me,  had  else

Swelled  to  the  full  for  God's  will  done  on  earth —

Whom  but  a  dusk  misfeatured  messenger.

No  other  than  the  angel  of  this  life,

Whose  care  is  lest  men  see  too  much  at  once.  595

He  made  the  sign,  such  God-glimpse  must  suffice,


32  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Nor  prejudice  the  Prince  o'  the  Power  of  the  Air,

Whose  ministration  piles  us  overhead

What  we  call,  first,  earth's  roof  and,  last,  heaven's  floor,

Now  grate  o'  the  trap,  then  outlet  of  the  cage  :  600

So  took  the  lady,  left  the  priest  alone.

And  once  more  canopied  the  world  with  black.

But  through  the  blackness  I  saw  Rome  again,

And  where  a  solitary  villa  stood

In  a  lone  garden-quarter  :  it  was  eve,  605

The  second  of  the  year,  and  oh  so  cold  !

Ever  and  anon  there  flittered  through  the  air

A  snow-flake,  and  a  scanty  couch  of  snow

Crusted  the  grass-walk  and  the  garden-mould.

All  was  grave,  silent,  sinister, — when,  ha?  610

Glimmeringly  did  a  pack  of  were-wolves  pad

The  snow,  those  flames  Avere  Guido's  eyes  in,  front,

And  all  five  found  and  footed  it,  the  track,

To  where  a  threshold-streak  of  warmth  and  light

Betrayed  the  villa-door  with  life  inside,  615

While  an  inch  outside  were  those  blood-bright  eyes,


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  ^^

And  black  lips  wrinkling  o'er  the  flash  of  teeth,

And  tongues  that  lolled — Oh  God  that  madest  man  !

They  parleyed  in  their  language.     Then  one  whined —

That  was  the  policy  and  master-stroke —  620

Deep  in  his  throat  whispered  what  seemed  a  name —

"  Open  to  Caponsacchi !  "  Guido  cried  :

"  Gabriel ! "  cried  Lucifer  at  Eden-gate.

Wide  as  a  heart,  opened  the  door  at  once,

Showing  the  joyous  couple,  and  their  child  625

The  two-weeks'  mother,  to  the  wolves,  the  wolves

To  them.    Close  eyes  !    And  when  the  corpses  lay

Stark-stretched,  and  those  the  wolves,  their  wolf-work  done,

Were  safe-embosomed  by  the  night  again,

I  knew  a  necessary  change  in  things  ;  630

As  when  the  worst  watch  of  the  night  gives  way,

And  there  comes  duly,  to  take  cognisance,

The  scrutinizing  eye-point  of  some  star —

And  who  despairs  of  a  new  daybreak  now  ?

Lo,  the  first  ray  protruded  on  those  five  I  635

It  reached  them,  and  each  felon  writhed  transfixed.

VOL.  I.  D


34  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Awhile  they  palpitated  on  the  spear

Motionless  over  Tophet :  stand  or  fall  ?

"  I  say,  the  spear  should  fall — should  stand,  I  say  !  "

Cried  the  world  come  to  judgment,  granting  grace      640

Or  dealing  doom  according  to  world's  wont,

Those  world's-bystanders  grouped  on  Rome's  cross-road

At  prick  and  summons  of  the  primal  curse

Which  bids  man  love  as  well  as  make  a  lie.

There  prattled  they,  discoursed  the  right  and  wrong,   645

Turned  wrong  to  right,  proved  wolves  sheep  and  sheep

wolves,
So  that  you  scarce  distinguished  fell  from  fleece ;
Till  out  spoke  a  great  guardian  of  the  fold,
Stood  up,  put  forth  his  hand  that  held  the  crook,
And  motioned  that  the  arrested  point  decline  :  650

Horribly  off,  the  wriggling  dead-weight  reeled,
Rushed  to  the  bottom  and  lay  ruined  there.
Though  still  at  the  pit's  mouth,  despite  the  smoke
O'  the  burning,  tarriers  turned  again  to  talk
And  trim  the  balance,  and  detect  at  least  655


THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.  35

A  touch  of  wolf  in  what  showed  whitest  sheep,

A  cross  of  sheep  redeeming  the  whole  wolf, —

Vex  truth  a  little  longer  : — less  and  less.

Because  years  came  and  went,  and  more  and  more

Brought  new  lies  with  them  to  be  loved  in  turn.  660

Till  all  at  once  the  memory  of  the  thing, —

The  fact  that,  wolves  or  sheep,  such  creatures  were, —

Which  hitherto,  however  men  supposed,

Had  somehow  plain  and  pillar-like  prevailed

I'  the  midst  of  them,  indisputably  fact,  665

Granite,  time's  tooth  should  grate  against,  not  graze, —

Why,  this  proved  sandstone,  friable,  fast  to  fly

And  give  its  grain  away  at  wish  o'  the  wind.

Ever  and  ever  m.ore  diminutive,

Base  gone,  shaft  lost,  only  entablature,  670

Dwindled  into  no  bigger  than  a  book,

Lay  of  the  column ;  and  that  little,  left

By  the  roadside  'mid  the  ordure,  shards  and  weeds.

Until  I  haply,  wandering  that  way.

Kicked  it  up,  turned  it  over,  and  recognized,  675


36  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

For  all  the  crumblement,  this  abacus,

This  square  old  yellow  book, — could  calculate

By  this  the  lost  proportions  of  the  style.

This  was  it  from,  my  fancy  with  those  facts,

I  used  to  tell  the  tale,  turned  gay  to  grave,  680

But  lacked  a  listener  seldom ;  such  alloy,

Such  substance  of  me  interfused  the  gold

Which,  wrought  into  a  shapely  ring  therewith,

Hammered  and  filed,  fingered  and  favoured,  last

Lay  ready  for  the  renovating  wash  685

O'  the  water.     ^^  How  much  of  the  tale  was  true  ?  "

I  disappeared  ;  the  book  grew  all  in  all ;

The  lawyers'  pleadings  swelled  back  to  their  size, —

Doubled  in  two,  the  crease  upon  them  yet,

For  more  commodity  of  carriage,  see  ! —  -690

And  these  are  letters,  veritable  sheets

That  brought  posthaste  the  news  to  Florence,  writ

At  Eome  the  day  Count  Guido  died,  we  find.

To  stay  the  craving  of  a  client  there,


I


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  37

Who  bound  the  same  and  so  produced  my  book.        695
Lovers  of  dead  truth,  did  ye  fare  the  worse  ?
Lovers  of  live  truth,  found  ye  false  my  tale  ?

Well,  now  j  there's  nothing  in  nor  out  o'  the  world
Good  except  truth  :  yet  this,  the  something  else,
What's  this  then,  which  proves  good  yet  seems  untrue  ?
This  that  I  mixed  with  truth,  motions  of  mine  701

That  quickened,  made  the  inertness  malleolable
O'  the  gold  was  not  mine, — what's  your  name  for  this  ?
Are  means  to  the  end,  themselves  in  part  the  end  ?
Is  fiction  which  makes  fact  alive,  fact  too  ?  705

The  somehow  may  be  thishow.

I  find  first
Writ  down  for  very  A.  B.  C.  of  fact,
"  In  the  beginning  God  made  heaven  and  earth ;"
From  which,  no  matter  with  what  lisp,  I  spell  710

And  speak  you  out  a  consequence — that  man,
Man, — as  befits  the  made,  the  inferior  thing, —
Purposed,  since  made,  to  grow,  not  make  in  turn.


38  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Yet  forced  to  try  and  make,  else  fail  to  grow, —

Formed  to  rise,  reach  at,  if  not  grasp  and  gain  715

The  good  beyond  him, — which  attempt  is  growth, —

Repeats  God's  process  in  man's  due  degree,

Attaining  man's  proportionate  result, —

Creates,  no,  but  resuscitates,  perhaps.

Inalienable,  the  arch-prerogative  720

Which  turns  thought,  act — conceives,  expresses  too  !

No  less,  man,  bounded,  yearning  to  be  free,

May  so  project  his  surplusage  of  soul

In  search  of  body,  so  add  self  to  self

By  owning  what  lay  ownerless  before, —  725

So  find,  so  fill  full,  so  appropriate  forms —

That,  although  nothing  which  had  never  life

Shall  get  life  from  him,  be,  not  having  been,

Yet,  something  dead  may  get  to  live  again,

Something  with  too  much  life  or  not  enough,  730

Which,  either  way  imperfect,  ended  once  :

An  end  whereat  man's  impulse  intervenes,

Makes  new  beginning,  starts  the  dead  alive,


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  39

Completes  the  incomplete  and  saves  the  thing.

Man's  breath  were  vain  to  light  a  virgin  wick, —  735

Half-burned-out,  all  but  quite-quenched  wicks  o'  the  lamp

Stationed  for  temple-service  on  this  earth,

These  indeed  let  him  breathe  on  and  relume  !

For  such  man's  feat  is,  in  the  due  degree,

— Mimic  creation,  galvanism  for  life,  740

But  still  a  glory  portioned  in  the  scale.

Why  did  the  mage  say, — feeling  as  we  are  wont

For  truth,  and  stopping  midway  short  of  truth.

And  resting  on  a  lie, — "  I  raise  a  ghost  ?  "

"  Because,"  he  taught  adepts,  '^  man  makes  not  man.

"  Yet  by  a  special  gift,  an  art  of  arts,  746

*'  More  insight  and  more  outsight  and  much  more

"  Will  to  use  both  of  these  than  boast  my  mates,

"  I  can  detach  from  me,  commission  forth

"  Half  of  my  soul;  which  in  its  pilgrimage  750

"  O'er  old  unwandered  waste  ways  of  the  world,

"  May  chance  upon  some  fragment  of  a  whole,

^'  Rag  of  flesh,  scrap  of  bone  in  dim  disuse,


40  THE    RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

"  Smoking  flax  that  fed  fire  once  :  prompt  therein

'^  I  enter,  spark-Hke,  put  old  powers  to  play,  755

"  Push  lines  out  to  the  limit,  lead  forth  last

**  (By,  a  moonrise  through  a  ruin  of  a  crypt)

*^  What  shall  be  mistily  seen,  murmuringly  heard,

'*  Mistakenly  felt :  then  write  my  name  with  Faust's  !  "

Oh,  Faust,  why  Faust?    Was  not  Elisha  once? —       760

Who  bade  them  lay  his  staff  on  a  corpse-face.

There  was  no  voice,  no  hearing  :  he  went  in

Therefore,  and  shut  the  door  upon  them  twain.

And  prayed  unto  the  Lord  :  and  he  went  up

And  lay  upon  the  corpse,  dead  on  the  couch,  765

And  put  his  mouth  upon  its  mouth,  his  eyes

Upon  its  eyes,  his  hands  upon  its  hands.

And    stretched    him    on    the    flesh ;    the  flesh  waxed

warm  :
And  he  returned,  walked  to  and  fro  the  house.
And  went  up,  stretched  him  on  the  flesh  again,  770

And  the  eyes  opened.     'Tis  a  credible  feat
With  the  right  man  and  way.


p


THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.  41


Enough  of  me !
The  Book  !  I  turn  its  medicinable  leaves
In  London  now  .till,  as  in  Florence  erst,  775

A  spirit  laughs  and  leaps  through  every  limb,
And  lights  my  eye,  and  lifts  me  by  the  hair,
Letting  me  have  my  will  again  with  these
— How  title  I  the  dead  alive  once  more  ?

Count  Guido  Franceschini  the  Aretine,  780

Descended  of  an  ancient  house,  though  poor,

A  beak-nosed  bushy-bearded  black-haired  lord,

Lean,  pallid,  low  of  stature  yet  robust,

Fifty  years  old, — having  four  years  ago

Married  Pompilia  Comparini,  young,  785

Good,  beautiful,  at  Rome,  where  she  was  born.

And  brought  her  to  Arezzo,  where  they  lived

Unhappy  lives,  whatever  curse  the  cause, —

This  husband,  taking  four  accomplices.

Followed  this  wife  to  Rome,  where  she  was  fled  790

From  their  Arezzo  to  find  peace  again.


42  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

In  convoy,  eight  months  earlier,  of  a  priest,

Aretine  also,  of  still  nobler  birth,

Giuseppe  Caponsacchi, — and  caught  her  there

Quiet  in  a  villa  on  a  Christmas  night,  795

With  only  Pietro  and  Violante  by,

Both  her  putative  parents  ;  killed  the  three,

Aged,  they,  seventy  each,  and  she,  seventeen.

And,  two  weeks  since,  the  mother  of  his  babe

First-born  and  heir  to  w^hat  the  style  was  worth  800

O'  the  Guido  who  determined,  dared  and  did

This  deed  just  as  he  purposed  point  by  point.

Then,  bent  upon  escape,  but  hotly  pressed.

And  captured  with  his  co-mates  that  same  night,

He,  brought  to  trial,  stood  on  this  defence —  805

Injury  to  his  honour  caused  the  act ;

That  since  his  wife  was  false,  (as  manifest

By  flight  from  home  in  such  companionship,)

Death,  punishment  deserved  of  the  false  wife

And  faithless  parents  who  abetted  her  810

I'  the  flight  aforesaid,  wronged  nor  God  nor  man.


THE   RING  AND    THE    BOOK.  43

"  Nor  false  she,  nor  yet  faithless  they,"  replied

The  accuser ;  ^^  cloaked  and  masked  this  murder  glooms ;

"  True  was  Pompilia,  loyal  too  the  pair ;

"  Out  of  the  man's  own  heart  this  monster  curled,       815

"  This  crime  coiled  with  connivancy  at  crime,

*'  His  victim's  breast,  he  tells  you,  hatched  and  reared ;

'^  Uncoil  we  and  stretch  stark  the  worm  of  hell  1  '*

A  month  the  trial  swayed  this  way  and  that

Ere  judgment  settled  down  on  Guido's  guilt ;  820

Then  was  the  Pope,  that  good  Twelfth  Innocent,

Appealed  to  :  who  well  weighed  what  went  before,

Affirmed  the  guilt  and  gave  the  guilty  doom.

Let  this  old  woe  step  on  the  stage  again  !

Act  itself  o'er  anew  for  men  to  judge,  825

Not  by  the  very  sense  and  sight  indeed —

(Which  take  at  best  imperfect  cognizance.

Since,  how  heart  moves  brain,  and  how  both  move  hand,

What  mortal  ever  in  entirety  saw?)

— No  dose  of  purer  truth  than  man  digests,  830


44  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

But  truth  with  falsehood,  milk  that  feeds  him  now,

Not  strong  meat  he  may  get  to  bear  some  day —

To-wit,  by  voices  we  call  evidence,

Uproar  in  the  echo,  live  fact  deadened  down,

Talked  over,  bruited  abroad,  whispered  away,  835

Yet  helping  us  to  all  we  seem  to  hear :

For  how  else  know  we  save  by  worth  of  word  ?

Here  are  the  voices  presently  shall  sound

In  due  succession.     First,  the  world's  outcry

Around  the  rush  and  ripple  of  any  fact  840

Fallen  stonewise,  plumb  on  the  smooth  face  of  things  ;

The  world's  guess,  as  it  crowds  the  bank  o'  the  pool,

At  what  were  figure  and  substance,  by  their  splash  :

Then,  by  vibrations  in  the  general  mind.

At  depth  of  deed  already  out  of  reach.  845

This  threefold  murder  of  the  day  before, —

Say,  Half-Rome  's  feel  after  the  vanished  truth ;

Honest  enough,  as  the  way  is  :  all  the  same,

Harbouring  in  the  centre  of  its  sense


£  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  45

A  hidden  germ  of  failure,  shy  but  sure,  850

Should  neutralize  that  honesty  and  leave

That  feel  for  truth  at  fault,  as  the  way  is  too.

Some  prepossession  such  as  starts  amiss,

By  but  a  hair's  breadth  at  the  shoulder-blade,

The  arm  o'  the  feeler,  dip  he  ne'er  so  brave;  855

And  so  leads  waveringly,  lets  fall  wide

O'  the  mark  his  finger  meant  to  find,  and  fix

Truth  at  the  bottom,  that  deceptive  speck.

With  this  Half-Rome, — the  source  of  swerving,  call

Over-behef  in  Guido's  right  and  wrong  860

Rather  than  in  Pompilia's  wrong  and  right :

Who  shall  say  how,  who  shall  say  why  ?    'T  is  there —

The  instinctive  theorizing  whence  a  fact

Looks  to  the  eye  as  the  eye  likes  the  look.

Gossip  in  a  pubHc  place,  a  sample-speech.  865

Some  worthy,  with  his  previous  hint  to  find

A  husband's  side  the  safer,  and  no  whit

Aware  he  is  not  ^acus  the  while, —

How  such  an  one  supposes  and  states  fact


46  THE    RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

To  whosoever  of  a  multitude  870

Will  listen,  and  perhaps  prolong  thereby

The  not-unpleasant  flutter  at  the  breast,

Born  of  a  certain  spectacle  shut  in

By  the  church  Lorenzo  opposite.     So,  they  lounge

Midway  the  mouth  o'  the  street,  on  Corso  side,  875

'Twixt  palace  Fiano  and  palace  Ruspoli,

Linger  and  listen ;  keeping  clear  o'  the  crowd.

Yet  wishful  one  could  lend  that  crowd  one's  eyes,

(So  universal  is  its  plague  of  squint)

And  make  hearts  beat  our  time  that  flutter  false  :        880

— All  for  the  truth's  sake,  mere  truth,  nothing  else  !

How  Half-Rome  found  for  Guido  much  excuse.

Next,  from  Rome's  other  half,  the  opposite  feel

For  truth  with  a  like  swerve,  like  unsuccess, —

Or  if  success,  by  no  more  skill  but  luck  :  885

This  time,  through  rather  siding  with  the  wife,

However  the  fancy-fit  inclined  that  way.

Than  with  the  husband.     One  wears  drab,  one,  pink  ;


I


THE    RING  AND    THE    BOOK.  47

Who    wears    pink,    ask    him    "Which    shall   win    the

race,
"  Of  coupled  runners  like  as  Qgg  and  Ggg?"  890

"  — ^Why,  if  I  must  choose,  he  with  the  pink  scarf."
Doubtless  for  some  such  reason  choice  fell  here.
A  piece  of  public  talk  to  correspond
At  the  next  stage  of  the  story ;  just  a  day
Let  pass  and  new  day  bring  the  proper  change.  895

Another  sample-speech  i'  the  market-place
O'  the  Barberini  by  the  Capucins ;
Where  the  old  Triton,  at  his  fountain-sport,
Bernini's  creature  plated  to  the  paps.
Puffs  up  steel  sleet  which  breaks  to  diamond  dust,      900
A  spray  of  sparkles  snorted  from  his  conch.
High  over  the  caritellas,  out  o'  the  way
O'  the  motley  merchandizing  multitude.
Our  murder  has  been  done  three  days  ago.
The  frost  is  over  and  gone,  the  south  wind  laughs,      905
And,  to  the  very  tiles  of  each  red  roof
A-smoke  i'  the  sunshine,  Rome  lies  gold  and  glad  :


48  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

So,  listen  how,  to  the  other  half  of  Rome,
Pompilia  seemed  a  saint  and  martyr  both  !

Then,  yet  another  day  let  come  and  go,  910

With  pause  prelusive  still  of  novelty,

Hear  a  fresh  speaker  ! — neither  this  nor  that

Half-Rome  aforesaid ;  something  bred  of  both  :

One  and  one  breed  the  inevitable  three.

Such  is  the  personage  harangues  you  next ;  915

The  elaborated  product,  tertium  quid:

Rome's  first  commotion  in  subsidence  gives

The  curd  o'  the  cream,  flower  o'  the  wheat,  as  it  were,

And  finer  sense  o'  the  city.     Is  this  plain  ?

You  get  a  reasoned  statement  of  the  case,  920

Eventual  verdict  of  the  curious  few

Who  care  to  sift  a  business  to  the  bran

Nor  coarsely  bolt  it  like  the  simpler  sort.

Here,  after  ignorance,  instruction  speaks ;

Here,  clarity  of  candour,  history's  soul,  925

The  critical  mind,  in  short :  no  gossip-guess.


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  49

What  the  superior  social  section  thinks,

In  person  of  some  man  of  quality

Who, — breathing  musk  from  lace-work  and  brocade,

His  solitaire  amid  the  flow  of  frill,  930

Powdered  peruke  on  nose,  and  bag  at  back,

And  cane  dependent  from  the  ruffled  wrist, —

Harangues  in  silvery  and  selectest  phrase

'Neath  waxlight  in  a  glorified  saloon

Where  mirrors  m.ultiply  the  girandole  :  935

Courting  the  approbation  of  no  mob,

But  Eminence  This  and  All-Illustrious  That

Who  take  snuff  softly,  range  in  well-bred  ring,

Card-table-quitters  for  observance'  sake,

Around  the  argument,  the  rational  word —  940

Still,  spite  its  weight  and  worth,  a  sample-speech.

How  quality  dissertated  on  the  case.

So  much  for  Rome  and  rumour ;  smoke  comes  first  :

Once  the  smoke  risen  untroubled,  we  descry

Clearlier  what  tongues  of  flame  may  spire  and  spit      945

VOL.  I.  E


50  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

To  eye  and  ear,  each  with  appropriate  tinge

According  to  its  food,  pure  or  impure.

The  actors,  no  mere  rumours  of  the  act,

Intervene.     First  you  hear  Count  Guido's  voice,

In  a  small  chamber  that  adjoins  the  court,

Where  Governor  and  Judges,  summoned  thence,

Tommati,  Venturini  and  the  rest,

Find  the  accused  ripe  for  declaring  truth.

Soft-cushioned  sits  he ;  yet  shifts  seat,  shirks  touch,

As,  with  a  twitchy  brow  and  wincing  lip

And  cheek  that  changes  to  all  kinds  of  white,

He  proffers  his  defence,  in  tones  subdued

Near  to  mock-mildness  now,  so  mournful  seems

The  obtuser  sense  truth  fails  to  satisfy ;

Now,  moved,  from  pathos  at  the  wrong  endured.

To  passion ;  for  the  natural  man  is  roused

At  fools  who  first  do  wrong,  then  pour  the  blame

Of  their  wrong-doing,  Satan-like,  on  Job.

Also  his  tongue  at  times  is  hard  to  curb ;

Incisive,  nigh  satiric  bites  the  phrase,


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  5 1

Rough-raw,  yet  somehow  claiming  privilege

— It  is  so  hard  for  shrewdness  to  admit

Folly  means  no  harm  when  she  calls  black  white  !

— Eruption  momentary  at  the  most,

Modified  forthwith  by  a  fall  o'  the  fire,  970

Sage  acquiescence  ;  for  the  world  's  the  world,

And,  what  it  errs  in,  Judges  rectify  :

He  feels  he  has  a  fist,  then  folds  his  arms

Crosswise  and  makes  his  mind  up  to  be  meek.

And  never  once  does  he  detach  his  eye  975

From  those  ranged  there  to  slay  him  or  to  save,

But  does  his  best  man's-service  for  himself,

Despite, ^ — what  twitches  brow  and  makes  lip  wince, —

His  limbs'  late  taste  of  what  was  called  the  Cord,

Or  Vigil-torture  more  facetiously.  980

Even  so ;  they  were  wont  to  tease  the  truth

Out  of  loath  witness  (toying,  trifling  time)

By  torture  :  'twas  a  trick,  a  vice  of  the  age.

Here,  there  and  everywhere,  what  would  you  have  ?

Religion  used  to  tell  Humanity  985


52  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

She  gave  him  warrant  or  denied  him  course.

And  since  the  course  was  much  to  his  own  mind,

Of  pinching  flesh  and  pulling  bone  from  bone

To  unhusk  truth  a-hiding  in  its  hulls,

Nor  whisper  of  a  warning  stopped  the  way,  990

He,  in  their  joint  behalf,  the  burly  slave,

Bestirred  him,  mauled  and  maimed  all  recusants,

While,  prim  in  place,  ReHgion  overlooked ;

And  so  had  done  till  doomsday,  never  a  sign

Nor  sound  of  interference  from  her  moudi,  995

But  that  at  last  the  burly  slave  wiped  brow.

Let  eye  give  notice  as  if  soul  were  there.

Muttered  "  'Tis  a  vile  trick,  foolish  more  than  vile,

"  Should  have  been  counted  sin  ;  I  make  it  so  :

"  At  any  rate  no  more  of  it  for  me —  1000

"  Nay,  for  I  break  the  torture-engine  thus  1 "

Then  did  Religion  start  up,  stare  amain,

Look  round  for  help  and  see  none,  smile  and  say

"  What,  broken  is  the  rack  ?    AVell  done  of  thee  !

"  Did  I  forget  to  abrogate  its  use  ?  1005


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  53

*'  Be  the  mistake  in  common  with  us  both  !

"  — One  more  fault  our  bHnd  age  shall  answer  for,

"  Down  in  my  book  denounced  though  it  must  be

"  Somewhere.    Henceforth  find  truth  by  milder  means  ! "

Ah  but,  Religion,  did  we  wait  for  thee  loio

To  ope  the  book,  that  serves  to  sit  upon.

And  pick  such  place  out,  we  should  wait  indeed !

That  is  all  history  :  and  what  is  not  now,

Was  then,  defendants  found  it  to  their  cost.

How  Guido,  after  being  tortured,  spoke.  1015

Also  hear  Caponsacchi  who  comes  next,

Man  and  priest — could  you  comprehend  the  coil  ! —

In  days  when  that  was  rife  which  now  is  rare.     *

How,  mingling  each  its  multifarious  wires.

Now  heaven,  now  earth,  now  heaven  and  earth  at  once,

Had  plucked  at  and  perplexed  their  puppet  here,      102 1

Played  off  the  young  frank  personable  priest ;

Sworn  fast  and  tonsured  plain  heaven's  celibate,

And  yet  earth's  clear-accepted  servitor.


54  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

A  courtly  spiritual  Cupid,  squire  of  dames  1025

By  law  of  love  and  mandate  of  the  mode.

The  Church's  own,  or  why  parade  her  seal,

Wherefore  that  chrism  and  consecrative  work  ?

Yet  verily  the  world's,  or  why  go  badged

A  prince  of  sonneteers  and  lutanists,  1030

Show  colour  of  each  vanity  in  vogue

Eorne  with  decorum  due  on  blameless  breast  ?

All  that  is  changed  now,  as  he  tells  the  court

How  he  had  played  the  part  excepted  at ;

Tells  it  moreover,  now  the  second  time  :  1035

Since,  for  his  cause  of  scandal,  his  own  share

I'  the  flight  from  home  and  husband  of  the  wife,

He  has  been  censured,  punished  in  a  sort

By  relegation, — exile,  we  should  say,

To  a  short  distance  for  a  little  time, —  1040

Whence  he  is  summoned  on  a  sudden  now.

Informed  that  she,  he  thought  to  save,  is  lost.

And,  in  a  breath,  bidden  re-tell  his  tale.

Since  the  first  telling  somehow  missed  effect,


THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  55

And  then  advise  in  the  matter.     There  stands  he,     1045

While  the  same  grim  black-panelled  chamber  blinks

As  though  rubbed  shiny  with  the  sins  of  Rome

Told  the  same  oak  for  ages — ^^vave-washed  wall

Whereto  has  set  a  sea  of  wickedness.

There,  where  you  yesterday  heard  Guido  speak,         1050

Speaks  Caponsacchi;  and  there  face  him  too

Tommati,  Venturini  and  the  rest

Who,  eight  months  earlier,  scarce  repressed  the  smile,

Forewent  the  wink ;  waived  recognition  so

Of  peccadillos  incident  to  youth,  1055

Especially  youth  high-born  ;  for  youth  means  love,

Vows  can't  change  nature,  priests  are  only  men,

And  love  needs  stratagem  and  subterfuge  :

Which  age,  that  once  was  youth,  should  recognize,

May  blame,  but  needs  not  press  too  hard  against.     1060

Here  sit  the  old  Judges  then,  but  with  no  grace

Of  reverend  carriage,  magisterial  port.

For  why  ?  The  accused  of  eight  months  since, — the  same

Who  cut  the  conscious  figure  of  a  fool,


56  THE    RING    AND    THE    BOOK.

Changed    countenance,    dropped    bashful    gaze    to

ground,
While  hesitating  for  an  answer  then, —  1066

Now  is  grown  judge  himself,  terrifies  now
This,  now  the  other  culprit  called  a  judge.
Whose  turn  it  is  to  stammer  and  look  strange,
As  he  speaks  rapidly,  angrily,  speech  that  smites  :      1070
And  they  keep  silence,  bear  blow  after  blow,
Because  the  seeming-solitary  man,
Speaking  for  God,  may  have  an  audience  too.
Invisible,  no  discreet  judge  provokes.
How  the  priest  Caponsacchi  said  his  say.  1075

Then  a  soul  sighs  its  lowest  and  its  last

After  the  loud  ones, — so  much  breath  remains

Unused  by  the  four-days'-dying ;  for  she  lived

Thus  long,  miraculously  long,  't  was  thought,

Just  that  Pompilia  might  defend  herself  1080

How,  while  the  hireling  and  the  alien  stoop.

Comfort,  yet  question, — since  the  time  is  brief.


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  57


And  folk,  allowably  inquisitive,

Encircle  the  low  pallet  where  she  lies  ^

In  the  good  house  that  helps  the  poor  to  die, —        1085

Pompilia  tells  the  story  of  her  life.

For  friend  and  lover, — leech  and  man  of  law

Do  service  ]  busy  helpful  ministrants

As  varied  in  their  calling  as  their  mind,

Temper  and  age  :  and  yet  from  all  of  these,  1090

About  the  white  bed  under  the  arched  roof,

Is  somehow,  as  it  were,  evolved  a  one, —

Small  separate  sympathies  combined  and  large,

Nothings  that  were,  grown  something  very  much  ;

As  if  the  bystanders  gave  each  his  straw,         "  1095

All  he  had,  though  a  trifle  in  itself,

Which,  plaited  all  together,  made  a  Cross

Fit  to  die  looking  on  and  praying  with,

Just  as  well  as  if  ivory  or  gold.

So,  to  the  common  kindliness  she  speaks,  iioo

There  being  scarce  more  privacy  at  the  last

For  mind  than  body :  but  she  is  used  to  bear,


58  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

And  only  unused  to  the  brotherly  look.
How  she  endeavoured  to  explain  her  life.

Then,  since  a  Trial  ensued,  a  touch  o'  the  same        1105

To  sober  us,  flustered  with  frothy  talk,

And  teach  our  common  sense  its  helplessness.

For  why  deal  simply  with  divining-rod,

Scrape  where  we  fancy  secret  sources  flow,

And  ignore  law,  the  recognized  machine,  mo

Elaborate  display  of  pipe  and  wheel

Framed  to  unchoak,  pump  up  and  pour  apace

Truth  in  a  flowery  foam  shall  wash  the  world  ?

The  patent  truth-extracting  process, — ha  ?

Let  us  make  all  that  mystery  turn  one  wheel,  11 15

Give  you  a  single  grind  of  law  at  least !

One  orator,  of  two  on  either  side.

Shall  teach  us  the  puissance  of  the  tongue

— That  is,  o'  the  pen  which  simulated  tongue

On  paper  and  saved  all  except  the  sound  11 20

Which  never  was.     Law's  speech  beside  law's  thought  ?


THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  59

That  were  too  stunning,  too  immense  an  odds :

That  point  of  vantage,  law  let  nobly  pass.

One  lawyer  shall  admit  us  to  behold

The  manner  of  the  making  out  a  case,  1125

First  fashion  of  a  speech  j  the  chick  in  Qgg,

And  masterpiece  law's  bosom  incubates.

How  Don  Giacinto  of  the  Arcangeli,

Called  Procurator  of  the  Poor  at  Rome,

Now  advocate  for  Guido  and  his  mates, —  1130

The  jolly  learned  man  of  middle  age.

Cheek  and  jowl  all  in  laps  with  fat  and  law,

Mirthful  as  mighty,  yet,  as  great  hearts  use,

Despite  the  name  and  fame  that  tempt  our  flesh,

Constant  to  that  devotion  of  the  hearth,  1135

Still  captive  in  those  dear  domestic  ties  ! —

How  he, — having  a  cause  to  triumph  with,

All  kind  of  interests  to  keep  intact.

More  than  one  efficacious  personage

To  tranquillize,  conciliate  and  secure,";  11 40

And  above  all,  public  anxiety


6o  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

To  quiet,  show  its  Guido  in  good  hands, —
Also,  as  if  such  burdens  were  too  light,
A  certain  family-feast  to  claim  his  care.
The  birthday-banquet  for  the  only  son —
Paternity  at  smiling  strife  with  law —
How  he  brings  both  to  buckle  in  one  bond  ;
And,  thick  at  throat,  with  waterish  under-eye,
Turns  to  his  task  and  settles  in  his  seat
And  puts  his  utmost  means  to  practice  now :
Wheezes  out  law  and  whiffles  Latin  forth.
And,  just  as  though  roast  lamb  would  never  be,
Makes  logic  levigate  tlie  big  crime  small :
Rubs  palm  on  palm,  rakes  foot  with  itchy  foot,
Conceives  and  inchoates  the  argument.
Sprinkling  each  flower  appropriate  to  the  time,
— Ovidian  quip  or  Ciceronian  crank,
A-bubble  in  the  larynx  while  he  laughs,
As  he  had  fritters  deep  down  frying  there.
How  he  turns,  twists,  and  tries  the  oily  thing
Shall  be — first  speech  for  Guido  'gainst  the  Fisc.


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  6 1

Then  with  a  skip  as  it  were  from  heel  to  head,

Leaving  yourselves  fill  up  the  middle  bulk

O'  the  Trial,  reconstruct  its  shape  august,

From  such  exordium  clap  we  to  the  close ;  1165

Give  you,  if  we  dare  wing  to  such  a  height.

The  absolute  glory  in  some  full-grown  speech

On  the  other  side,  some  finished  butterfly.

Some  breathing  diamond-flake  with  leaf-gold  fans.

That  takes  the  air,  no  trace  of  worm  it  was,  11 70

Or  cabbage-bed  it  had  production  from.

Giovambattista  o'  the  Bottini,  Fisc,

Pompilia's  patron  by  the  chance  of  the  hour.

To-morrow  her  persecutor, — composite,  he.

As  becomes  who  must  meet  such  various  calls —    -   1175

Odds  of  age  joined  in  him  with  ends  of  youth.

A  man  of  ready  smile  and  facile  tear.

Improvised  hopes,  despairs  at  nod  and  beck.

And  language — ah,  the  gift  of  eloquence  !

Language  that  goes  as  easy  as  a  glove  11 80

O'er  good  and  evil,  smoothens  both  to  one.


62  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Rashness  helps  caution  with  him,  fires  the  straw,

In  fi-ee  enthusiastic  careless  fit,

On  the  first  proper  pinnacle  of  rock

Which  happens,  as  reward  for  all  that  zeal,  1185

To  lure  some  bark  to  founder  and  bring  gain  :

While  calm  sits  Caution,  rapt  with  heavenward  eye,

A  true  confessor's  gaze  amid  the  glare,

Beaconing  to  the  breaker,  death  and  hell.

"  Well   done,    thou   good   and    faithful !  "     she   ap-
proves:  1 190

"  Hadst  thou  let  slip  a  faggot  to  the  beach,

"  The  crew  had  surely  spied  thy  precipice

"  And  saved  their  boat ;  the  simple  and  the  slow,

"  Who   should    have  prompt  forestalled  the  wrecker's
fee  :

^^  Let  the  next  crew  be  wise  and  hail  in  time  !  "         11 95

Just  so  compounded  is  the  outside  man,

Blue  juvenile  pure  eye  and  pippin  cheek,

And  brow  all  prematurely  soiled  and  seamed

With  sudden  age,  bright  devastated  hair.


THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.  6$

Ah,  but  you  miss  the  very  tones  o'  the  voice,  1200

The  scrannel  pipe  that  screams  in  heights  of  head,

As,  in  his  modest  studio,  all  alone,

The  tall  wight  stands  a-tiptoe,  strives  and  strains,

Both  eyes  shut,  like  the  cockerel  that  would  crow.

Tries  to  his  own  self  amorously  o'er  1205

What  never  will  be  uttered  else  than  so —

To  the  four  walls,  for  Forum  and  Mars'  Hill,

Speaks  out  the  poesy  which,  penned,  turns  prose.

Clavecinist  debarred  his  instrument,

He  yet  thrums — shirking  neither  turn  nor  trill,  12 10

With  desperate  finger  on  dumb  table-edge —

The  sovereign  rondo,  shall  conclude  his  Smfe,

Charm  an  imaginary  audience  there.

From  old  Corelli  to  young  Haendel,  both

I'  the  flesh  at  Rome,  ere  he  perforce  go  print  12 15

The  cold  black  score,  mere  music  for  the  mind —

The  last  speech  against  Guido  and  his  gang,

With  special  end  to  prove  Pompilia  pure.

How  the  Fisc  vindicates  Pompilia's  fame.


64  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Then  comes  the  all  but  end,  the  ultmiate  1220

Judgment  save  yours.     Pope  Innocent  the  Twelfth,

Simple,  sagacious,  mild  yet  resolute,

With  prudence,  probity  and — what  beside

From  the  other  world  he  feels  impress  at  times,

Having  attained  to  fourscore  years  and  six, —  1225

How,  when  the  court  found  Guido  and  the  rest

Guilty,  but  law  supplied  a  subterfuge

And  passed  the  final  sentence  to  the  Pope,

He,  bringing  his  intelligence  to  bear

This  last  time  on  what  ball  behoves  him  drop  1230

In  the  urn,  or  white  or  black,  does  drop  a  black.

Send  five  souls  more  to  just  precede  his  own,

Stand  him  in  stead  and  witness,  if  need  were.

How  he  is  wont  to  do  God's  work  on  earth.

The  manner  of  his  sitting  out  the  dim  1235

Droop  of  a  sombre  February  day

In  the  plain  closet  where  he  does  such  work,

With,  from  all  Peter's  treasury,  one  stool,

One  table  and  one  lathen  crucifix.


THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.  65

There  sits  the  Pope,  his  thoughts  for  company;         1240

Grave  but  not  sad, — nay,  something  like  a  cheer

Leaves  the  Hps  free  to  be  benevolent,

Which,  all  day  long,  did  duty  firm  and  fast.

A  cherishing  there  is  of  foot  and  knee,  1244

A  chafing  loose-skinned  large-veined  hand  with  hand, —

What  steward  but  knows  when  stewardship  earns  its  wage.

May  levy  praise,  anticipate  the  lord  ?

He  reads,  notes,  lays  the  papers  down  at  last,

Muses,  then  takes  a  turn  about  the  room ;

Unclasps  a  huge  tome  in  an  antique  guise,  1250

Primitive  print  and  tongue  half  obsolete,

That  stands  him  in  diurnal  stead ;  opes  page.

Finds  place  where  falls  the  passage  to  be  conned

According  to  an  order  long  in  use  :

And,  as  he  comes  upon  the  evening's  chance,  1255

Starts  somewhat,  solemnizes  straight  his  smile,

Then  reads  aloud  that  portion  first  to  last.

And  at  the  end  lets  flow  his  own  thoughts  forth

Likewise  aloud,  for  respite  and  relief,

VOL.  I.  F


66  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Till  by  the  dreary  relics  of  the  west  1260

Wan  through  the  half-moon  window,  all  his  light,

He  bows  the  head  while  the  lips  move  in  prayer,

Writes  some  three  brief  lines,  signs  and  seals  the  same,

Tinkles  a  hand-bell,  bids  the  obsequious  Sir

Who  puts  foot  presently  o'  the  closet-sill  1265

He  watched  outside  of,  bear  as  superscribed

That  mandate  to  the  Governor  forthwith  :

Then  heaves  abroad  his  cares  in  one  good  sigh.

Traverses  corridor  with  no  arm's  help,

And  so  to  sup  as  a  clear  conscience  should.  1270

The  manner  of  the  judgment  of  the  Pope.

Then  must  speak  Guido  yet  a  second  time,

Satan's  old  saw  being  apt  here — skin  for  skin,

All  a  man  hath  that  will  he  give  for  life.

While  life  was  graspable  and  gainable,  free  1275

To  bird-like  buzz  her  wings  round  Guido's  brow.

Not  much  truth  stiffened  out  the  web  of  words

He  wove  to  catch  her  :  when  away  she  flew


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  67

And  death  came,  death's  breath  rivelled  up  the  Hes,

Left  bare  the  metal  thread,  the  fibre  fine  1280

Of  truth,  i'  the  spinning  :  the  true  words  come  last.

How  Guido,  to  another  purpose  quite,

Speaks  and  despairs,  the  last  night  of  his  life,

In  that  New  Prison  by  Castle  Angelo

At  the  bridge-foot :  the  same  man,  another  voice.      1285

On  a  stone  bench  in  a  close  fetid  cell.

Where  the  hot  vapour  of  an  agony.

Struck  into  drops  on  the  cold  wall,  runs  down

Horrible  worms  made  out  of  sweat  and  tears —

There  crouch,  well  nigh  to  the  knees  in  dungeon-straw,

Lit  by  the  sole  lamp  sufi'ered  for  their  sake,  1291

Two  awe-struck  figures,  this  a  Cardinal,

That  an  Abate,  both  of  old  styled  friends

Of  the  part-man  part-monster  in  the  midst,

So  changed  is  Franceschini's  gentle  blood.  1295

The  tiger-cat  screams  now,  that  whined  before.

That  pried  and  tried  and  trod  so  gingerly.

Till  in  its  silkiness  the  trap-teeth  join ;


68  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Then  you  know  how  the  bristling  fury  foams.

They  listen,  this  wrapped  in  his  folds  of  red,  1300

While  his  feet  fumble  for  the  filth  below ;

The  other,  as  beseems  a  stouter  heart.

Working  his  best  with  beads  and  cross  to  ban

The  enemy  that  comes  in  like  a  flood

Spite  of  the  standard  set  up,  verily  1305

And  in  no  trope  at  all,  against  him  there  :

For  at  the  prison-gate,  just  a  few  steps

Outside,  already,  in  the  doubtful  dawn.

Thither,  from  this  side  and  from  that,  slow  sweep

And  settle  down  in  silence  solidly,  13 10

Crow- wise,  the  frightful  Brotherhood  of  Death.

Black-hatted  and  black-hooded  huddle  they.

Black  rosaries  a-dangling  from  each  waist ;

So  take  they  their  grim  station  at  the  door.

Torches  alight  and  cross-bones-banner  ^read,  13 15

And  that  gigantic  Christ  with  open  arms.

Grounded.     Nor  lacks  there  aught  but  that  the  group

Break  forth,  intone  the  lamentable  psalm,


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.  69

^'  Out  of  the  deeps,  Lord,  have  I  cried  to  thee  !  " —

When  inside,  from  the  true  profound,  a  sign  1320

Shall  bear  intelligence  that  the  foe  is  foiled,

Count  Guido  Franceschini  has  confessed,

And  is  absolved  and  reconciled  with  God.

Then  they,  intoning,  may  begin  their  march,

Make  by  the  longest  way  for  the  People's  Square,     1325

Carry  the  criminal  to  his  crime's  award  :

A  mob  to  cleave,  a  scaffolding  to  reach.

Two  gallows  and  Mannaia  crowning  all.

How  Guido  made  defence  a  second  time.

Finally,  even  as  thus  by  step  and  step  1330

I  led  you  from  the  level  of  to-day

Up  to  the  summit  of  so  long  ago,

Here,  whence  I  point  you  the  wide  prospect  round —

Let  me,  by  like  steps,  slope  you  back  to  smooth.

Land  you  on  mother-earth,  no  whit  the  worse,  1335

To  feed  o'  the  fat  o'  the  furrow :  free  to  dwell.

Taste  our  time's  better  things  profusely  spread


70  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

For  all  who. love  the  level,  corn  and  wine,

Much  cattle  and  the  many-folded  fleece.

Shall  not  my  friends  go  feast  again  on  sward,  1340

Though  cognizant  of  country  in  the  clouds

Higher  than  wistful  eagle's  horny  eye

Ever  unclosed  for,  'mid  ancestral  crags,

When  morning  broke  and  Spring  was  back  once  more,

And  he  died,  heaven,  save  by  his  heart,  unreached  ?

Yet  heaven  my  fancy  lifts  to,  ladder-Hke, —  1346

As  Jack  reached,  holpen  of  his  beanstalk-rungs  !

A  novel  country  :  I  might  make  it  mine

By  choosing  which  one  aspect  of  the  year

Suited  mood  best,  and  putting  solely  that    ,  1350

On  panel  somewhere  in  the  House  of  Fame,

Landscaping  what  I  saved,  not  what  I  saw  :

— Might  fix  you,  whether  frost  in  goblin-time

Startled  the  moon  with  his  abrupt  bright  laugh,

Or,  August's  hair  afloat  in  filmy  fire,  1355

She  fell,  arms  wide,  face  foremost  on  the  world.


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  7 1

Swooned  there  and  so  singed  out  the  strength  of  things.

Thus  were  abolished  Spring  and  Autumn  both,

The  land  dwarfed  to  one  likeness  of  the  land,

Life  cramped  corpse-fashion.     Rather  learn  and  love

Each  facet-flash  of  the  revolving  year  ! —  136 1

Red,  green  and  blue  that  whirl  into  a  white,

The  variance  now,  the  eventual  unity.

Which  make  the  miracle.     See  it  for  yourselves,

This  man's  act,  changeable  because  alive  !  1365

Action  now  shrouds,  now  shows  the  informing  thought ;

Man,  like  a  glass  ball  with  a  spark  a-top,

Out  of  the  magic  fire  that  lurks  inside,

Shows  one  tint  at  a  time  to  take  the  eye  :

Which,  let  a  finger  touch  the  silent  sleep,  1370

Shifted  a  hair's-breadth  shoots  you  dark  for  bright.

Suffuses  bright  with  dark,  and  baffies  so

Your  sentence  absolute  for  shine  or  shade.

Once  set  such  orbs, — white  styled,  black  stigmatized, —

A-rolling,  see  them  once  on  the  other  side  1375

Your  good  men  and  your  bad  men  every  one,


72  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

From  Guido  Franceschini  to  Guy  Faux,

Oft  would  you  rub  your  eyes  and  change  your  names.

Such,  British  Public,  ye  who  like  me  not,

(God  love  you  !) — whom  I  yet  have  laboured  for,      1380

Perchance  more  careful  whoso  runs  may  read

Than  erst  when  all,  it  seemed,  could  read  who  ran, —

Perchance  more  careless  whoso  reads  may  praise

Than  late  when  he  who  praised  and  read  and  wrote

Was  apt  to  find  himself  the  self-same  me, —  T385

Such  labour  had  such  issue,  so  I  wrought

This  arc,  by  furtherance  of  such  alloy,

And  so,  by  one  spirt,  take  away  its  trace

Till,  justifiably  golden,  rounds  my  ring.

A  ring  without  a  posy,  and  that  ring  mine  ?  1390

O  lyric  Love,  half-angel  and  half-bird
And  all  a  wonder  and  a  wild  desire, —
Boldest  of  hearts  that  ever  braved  the  sun.


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.  73

Took  sanctuary  within  the  hoHer  blue,

And  sang  a  kindred  soul  out  to  his  face, —  1395

Yet  human  at  the  red-ripe  of  the  heart —

When  the  first  summons  from  the  darkling  earth

Reached    thee    amid    thy    chambers,    blanched    their

blue,
And  bared  them  of  the  glory — to  drop  down,
To  toil  for  man,  to  suffer  or  to  die, —  1400

This  is  the  same  voice  :  can  thy  soul  know  change  ?
Hail  then,  and  hearken  from  the  realms  of  help  !
Never  may  I  commence  my  song,  my  due
To  God  who  best  taught  song  by  gift  of  thee.
Except  with  bent  head  and  beseeching  hand —  1405

That  still,  despite  the  distance  and  the  dark.
What  was,  again  may  be  ;  some  interchange
Of  grace,  some  splendour  once  thy  very  thought.
Some  benediction  anciently  thy  smile  :
— Never  conclude,  but  raising  hand  and  head  14 10

Thither  where  eyes,  that  cannot  reach,  yet  yearn
For  all  hope,  all  sustainment,  all  reward.


74  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

Their  utmost  up  and  on, — so  blessing  back
In  those  thy  realms  of  help,  that  heaven  thy  home,
Some  whiteness  which,  I  judge,  thy  face  makes  proud,
Some  wanness  where,  I  think,  thy  foot  may  fall !       141 6


(     75     )


IL

HALF-ROME.

What,  you,  Sir,  come  too  ?     (Just  the  man  I'd  meet.)

Be  ruled  by  me  and  have  a  care  o'  the  crowd :

This  way,  while  fresh  folk  go  and  get  their  gaze  :

I'll  tell  you  like  a  book  and  save  your  shins.

Fie,  what  a  roaring  day  we've  had  !     Whose  fault  ?         5

Lorenzo  in  Lucina, — here's  a  church

To  hold  a  crowd  at  need,  accommodate

All  comers  from  the  Corso  !     If  this  crush

Make  not  its  priests  ashamed  of  what  they  show

For  temple-room,  don't  prick  them  to  draw  purse  lo

And  down  with  bricks  and  mortar,  eke  us  out


76  THE    RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

The  beggarly  transept  with  its  bit  of  apse

Into  a  decent  space  for  Christian  ease,

Why,  to-day's  lucky  pearl  is  cast  to  swine.

Listen  and  estimate  the  luck  they've  had  !  .15

(The  right  man,  and  I  hold  him.)

Sir,  do  you  see,
They  laid  both  bodies  in  the  church,  this  morn
The  first  thing,  on  the  chancel  two  steps  up,
Behind  the  little  marble  balustrade ;  20

Disposed  them,  Pietro  the  old  murdered  fool
To  the  right  of  the  altar,  and  his  wretched  wife
On  the  other  side.     In  trying  to  count  stabs.
People  supposed  Violante  showed  the  most,
Till  somebody  explained  us  that  mistake  ;  25

His  wounds  had  been  dealt  out  indifferent  where.
But  she  took  all  her  stabbings  in  the  face,
Since  punished  thus  solely  for  honour's  sake,
Honoris  causa ^  that's  the  proper  term.
A  delicacy  there  is,  our  gallants  hold,  30

When  you  avenge  your  honour  and  only  then.


HALF-ROME.  77


That  you  disfigure  the  subject,  fray  the  face,

Not  just  take  hfe  and  end,  in  clownish  guise.

It  was  Violante  gave  the  first  offence,

Got  therefore  the  conspicuous  punishment :  35

While  Pietro,  who  helped  merely,  his  mere  death

Answered  the  purpose,  so  his  face  went  free.

We  fancied  even,  free  as  you  please,  that  face

Showed  itself  still  intolerably  wronged  ;

Was  wrinkled  over  with  resentment  yet,  40

Nor  calm  at  all,  as  murdered  faces  use,

Once  the  worst  ended  :  an  indignant  air

O'  the  head  there  was — 'tis  said  the  body  turned

Round  and  away,  rolled  from  Violante's  side

Where  they  had  laid  it  loving-husband-like.  45

If  so,  if  corpses  can  be  sensitive,

Why  did  not  he  roll  right  down  altar-step.

Roll  on  through  nave,  roll  fairly  out  of  church,

Deprive  Lorenzo  of  the  spectacle,

Pay  back  thus  the  succession  of  affronts  50

Whereto  this  church  had  served  as  theatre  ?


78  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

For  see  :  at  that  same  altar  where  he  lies,

To  that  same  inch  of  step,  was  brought  the  babe

For  blessing  after  baptism,  and  there  styled

Pompilia,  and  a  string  of  names  beside,  55

By  his  bad  wife,  some  seventeen  years  ago.

Who  purchased  her  simply  to  palm  on  him,

Flatter  his  dotage  and  defraud  the  heirs.

Wait  awhile  !     Also  to  this  very  step

Did  this  Violante,  twelve  years  afterward,  60

Bring,  the  mock-mother,  that  child-cheat  full-grown,

Pompilia,  in  pursuance  of  her  plot.

And  there  brave  God  and  man  a  second  time

By  linking  a  new  victim  to  the  lie.

There,  having  made  a  match  unknown  to  him,  65

She,  still  unknown  to  Pietro,  tied  the  knot

Which  nothing  cuts  except  this  kind  of  knife  ;

Yes,  made  her  daughter,  as  the  girl  was  held,

Marry  a  man,  and  honest  man  beside.

And  man  of  birth  to  boot, — clandestinely  70

Because  of  this,  because  of  that,  because


HALF-ROME.  79


O'  the  devil's  will  to  work  his  worst  for  once, —

Confident  she  could  top  her  part  at  need

And,  when  her  husband  must  be  told  in  turn,

Ply  the  wife's  trade,  jjlay  off  the  sex's  trick  75

And,  alternating  worry  with  quiet  qualms.

Bravado  with  submissiveness,  quick  fool

Her  Pietro  into  patience  :  so  it  proved.

Ay,  'tis  four  years  since  man  and  wife  they  grew,

This  Guido  Franceschini  and  this  same  80

Pompilia,  foolishly  thought,  falsely  declared

A  Comparini  and  the  couple's  child :

Just  at  this  altar  where,  beneath  the  piece

Of  Master  Guido  Reni,  Christ  on  cross,

Second  to  nought  observable  in  Rome,  85

That  couple  lie  now,  murdered  yestereve.

Even  the  blind  can  see  a  providence  here.

From  dawn  till  now  that  it  is  growing  dusk,

A  multitude  has  flocked  and  filled  the  church,

Coming  and  going,  coming  back  again,  90


8o  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Till  to  count  crazed  one.     Rome  was  at  the  show.

People  climbed  up  the  columns,  fought  for  spikes

O'  the  chapel-rail  to  perch  themselves  upon,

Jumped  over  and  so  broke  the  wooden  work

Painted  like  porphyry  to  deceive  the  eye ;  95

Serve  the  priests  right !     The  organ-loft  was  crammed.

Women  were  fainting,  no  few  fights  ensued,

In  short,  it  w^as  a  show  repaid  your  pains  :

For,  though  their  room  was  scant  undoubtedly,

Yet  they  did  manage  matters,  to  be  just,  100

A  little  at  this  Lorenzo.     Body  o'  me  !

I  saw  a  body  exposed  once  .  .  .  never  mind  !

Enough  that  here  the  bodies  had  their  due.

No  stinginess  in  wax,  a  row  all  round.

And  one  big  taper  at  each  head  and  foot.  105

So,  people  pushed  their  way,  and  took  their  turn.
Saw,  threw  their  eyes  up,  crossed  themselves,  gave  place
To  pressure  from  behind,  since  all  the  world
Knew  the  old  pair,  could  talk  the  tragedy


HALF-ROME.


Over  from  first  to  last :  Pompilia  too,  no

Those  who  had  known  her — what 't  was  worth  to  them  !

Guido's  acquaintance  was  in  less  request ;

The  Count  had  lounged  somewhat  too  long  in  Rome,

Made  himself  cheap ;  with  him  were  hand  and  glove

Barbers  and  blear-eyed,  as  the  ancient  sings.  115

Also  he  is  alive  and  like  to  be  :

Had  he  considerately  died, — aha  !

I  jostled  Luca  Cini  on  his  staff.

Mute  in  the  midst,  the  whole  man  one  amaze,

Staring  amain  and  crossing  brow  and  breast.  120

"  How  now  ?  "  asked  I.    "  Tis  seventy  years,"  quoth  he,

"  Since  I  first  saw,  holding  my  father's  hand,

**  Bodies  set  forth  :  a  many  have  I  seen,

"  Yet  all  was  poor  to  this  I  live  and  see.

''  Here  the  world's  wickedness  seals  up  the  sum  :        125

"  What  with  Molinos'  doctrine  and  this  deed,

^*  Antichrist  's  surely  come  and  doomsday  near.

"  May  I  depart  in  peace,  I  have  seen  my  see."

"  Depart  then,"  I  advised,  "  nor  block  the  road

VOL.  I.  G


82  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

"  For  youngsters  still  behindhand  with  such  sights!"  130

"  Why  no,"  rejoins  the  venerable  sire,

''  I  know  it 's  horrid,  hideous  past  belief,

"  Burdensome  far  beyond  what  eye  can  bear  ;

"  But  they  do  promise,  when  Pompilia  dies

"  I'  the  course  o'  the  day, — and  she  can't  outlive  night, —

^'  They'll  bring  her  body  also  to  expose  136

"  Beside  the  parents,  one,  two,  three  a-breast ;

"  That  were  indeed  a  sight  which,  might  I  see,

"  I  trust  I  should  not  last  to  see  the  like  ! "

Whereat  I  bade  the  senior  spare  his  shanks,  140

Since  doctors  give  her  till  to-night  to  live

And  tell  us  how  the  butchery  happened.     "  Ah,

"  But  you  can't  know  ! "  sighs  he,  '^  I'll  not  despair  :

"  Beside  I'm  useful  at  explaining  things —

'^  As,  how  the  dagger  laid  there  at  the  feet,  145

"  Caused  the  peculiar  cuts ;  I  mind  its  make,

"  Triangular  i'  the  blade,  a  Genoese,

''  Armed  with  those  little  hook-teeth  on  the  edge

^'  To  open  in  the  flesh  nor  shut  again  :


HALF-ROME.  S^


"  I  like  to  teach  a  novice  :  I  shall  stay  !  "  150

And  stay  he  did,  and  stay  be  sure  he  will.

A  personage  came  by  the  private  door

At  noon  to  have  his  look ;  I  name  no  names  :

Well  then,  His  Eminence  the  Cardinal,

Whose  servitor  in  honourable  sort  155

Guido  was  once,  the  same  who  made  the  match,

(Will  you  have  the  truth  ?)  whereof  we  see  effect.

No  sooner  whisper  ran  he  was  arrived

Than  up  pops  Curate  Carlo,  a  brisk  lad.

Who  never  lets  a  good  occasion. slip,  160

And  volunteers  improving  the  event.

We  looked  he'd  give  the  history's  self  some  help.

Treat  us  to  how  the  wife's  confession  went

(This  morning  she  confessed  her  crime,  we  know)

And,  may-be,  throw  in  something  of  the  Priest —        165

If  he's  not  ordered  back,  punished  anew.

The  gallant,  Caponsacchi,  Lucifer

I'  the  garden  where  Pompilia,  Eve-like,  lured


84  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Her  Adam  Guide  to  his  fault  and  fall.

Think  you  we  got  a  sprig  of  speech  akin  170

To  this  from  Carlo,  with  the  Cardinal  there  ?

Too  wary,  he  was,  too  widely  awake,  I  trow.

He  did  the  murder  in  a  dozen  words;

Then  said  that  all  such  outrages  crop  forth

I'  the  course  of  nature,  when  Molinos'  tares  175

Are  sown  for  wheat,  flourish  and  choke  the  Church :

So  slid  on  to  the  abominable  sect

And  the  philosophic  sin — we've  heard  all  that,

And  the  Cardinal  too,  (who  book-made  on  the  same)

But,  for  the  murder,  left  it  where  he  found.  180

Oh  but  he's  quick,  the  Curate,  minds  his  game  !

And,  after  all,  we  have  the  main  o'  the  fact :

Case  could  not  well  be  simpler, — mapped,  as  it  were,

We  follow  the  murder's  maze  from  source  to  sea,

By  the  red  line,  past  mistake  :  one  sees  indeed  185

Not  only  how  all  was  and  must  have  been,

But  cannot  other  than  be  to  the  end  of  time.

Turn  out  here  by  the  Ruspoli !     Do  you  hold


HALF-ROME.  85


Guido  was  so  prodigiously  to  blame  ?

A  certain  cousin  of  yours  has  told  you  so?  190

Exactly  !     Here's  a  friend  shall  set  you  right,

Let  him  but  have  the  handsel  of  your  ear.

These  wretched  Comparini  were  once  gay

And  galiard,  of  the  modest  middle  class  :

Born  in  this  quarter  seventy  years  ago,  195

And  married  young,  they  lived  the  accustomed  life,

Citizens  as  they  were  of  good  repute  :

And,  childless,  naturally  took  their  ease

With  only  their  two  selves  to  care  about

And  use  the  wealth  for  :  wealthy  is  the  word,  200

Since  Pietro  was  possessed  of  house  and  land —

And  specially  one  house,  when  good  days  were,

In  Via  Vittoria,  the  aspectable  street

Where  he  lived  mainly;  but  another  house

Of  less  pretension  did  he  buy  betimes,  205

The  villa,  meant  for  jaunts  and  jollity,

I'  the  Pauline  district,  to  be  private  there —


S6  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Just  what  puts  murder  in  an  enemy's  head.

Moreover, — and  here's  the  worm  i'  the  core,  the  germ

O'  the  rottenness  and  ruin  which  arrived, —      ^  .2

He  owned  some  usufruct,  had  moneys'  use

Lifelong,  but  to  determine  with  his  Hfe

In  heirs'  default :  so,  Pietro  craved  an  heir,

(The  story  always  old  and  always  new)

Shut  his  fool's-eyes  fast  on  the  visible  good  2

And  wealth  for  certain,  opened  them  owl-wide

On  fortune's  sole  piece  of  forgetfulness,

The  child  that  should  have  been  and  Vv^ould  not  be.

Hence,  seventeen  years  ago,  conceive  his  glee

When  first  Violante,  'twixt  a  smile  and  a  blush,  2

With  touch  of  agitation  proper  too,

Announced  that,  spite  of  her  unpromising  age,

The  miracle  would  in  time  be  manifest,

An  heir's  birth  was  to  happen  ;  and  it  did.

Somehow  or  other, — how,  all  in  good  time  !  2

By  a  trick,  a  sleight  of  hand  you  are  to  hear, —


HALF-ROME.  87


A  child  was  born,  Pompilia,  for  his  joy,

Plaything  at  once  and  prop,  a  fairy-gift,

A  saints'  grace  or,  say,  grant  of  the  good  God, —

A  fiddle-pin's  end  !    What  imbeciles  are  we  !  230

Look  now  :  if  some  one  could  have  prophesied,

'^  For  love  of  you,  for  liking  to  your  wife,

'^  I  undertake  to  crush  a  snake  I  spy

''  Settling  itself  i'  the  soft  of  both  your  breasts.

"  Give  me  yon  babe  to  strangle  painlessly  !  235

"  She'll  soar  to  the  safe  :  you'll  have  your  crying  out,

^^  Then  sleep,  then  wake,  then  sleep,  then  end  your

days
"  In  peace  and  plenty,  mixed  with  mild  regret,
"  Thirty    years    hence    when    Christmas    takes    old

folk"—
How  had  old  Pietro  sprung  up,  crossed  himself,  240

And  kicked  the  conjuror  !     Whereas  you  and  I,
Being  wise  with  after-wit,  had  clapped  our  hands ;
Nay,  added,  in  the  old  fool's  interest,
"  Strangle  the  black-eyed  babe,  so  far  so  good,


88  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

"  But  on  condition  you  relieve  the  man  245

"  O'  the  wife  and  throttle  him  Violante  too —
"  She  is  the  mischief! "

We  had  hit  the  mark.
She,  whose  trick  brought  the  babe  into  the  world,
She  it  was,  when  the  babe  was  grown  a  girl,  250

Judged  a  new  trick  should  reinforce  the  old,
Send  vigour  to  the  lie  now  somewhat  spent
By  twelve  years'  service ;  lest  Eve's  rule  decline
Over  this  Adam  of  hers,  whose  cabbage-plot
Throve  dubiously  since  turned  fools'-paradise,  255

Spite  of  a  nightingale  on  every  stump.
Pietro's  estate  was  dwindling  day  by  day,
While  he,  rapt  far  above  such  mundane  care,
Crawled  all-fours  with  his  baby  pick-a-back,
Sat  at  serene  cats'-cradle  with  his  child,  260

Or  took  the  measured  tallness,  top  to  toe.
Of  what  was  grown  a  great  girl  twelve  years  old  :
Till  sudden  at  the  door  a  tap  discreet,


HALF-ROME.  89


A  visitor's  premonitory  cough,

And  poverty  had  reached  him  in  her  rounds.  265

This  came  when  he  was  past  the  working-time,

Had  learned  to  dandle  and  forgot  to  dig,

And  who  must  but  Violante  cast  about.

Contrive  and  task  that  head  of  hers  again  ?

She  who  had  caught  one  fish,  could  make  that  catch

A  bigger  still,  in  angler's  policy  :  271

So,  with  an  angler's  mercy  for  the  bait.

Her  minnow  was  set  wriggling  on  its  barb

And  tossed  to  the  mid-stream  ;  that  is,  this  grown  girl

With  the  great  eyes  and  bounty  of  black  hair  275

And  first  crisp  youth  that  tempts  a  jaded  taste,

Was  whisked  i'  the  way  of  a  certain  man,  who  snapped.

Count  Guido  Franceschini  the  Aretine

Was  head  of  an  old  noble  house  enough.

Not  over-rich,  you  can't  have  everything,  280

But  such  a  man  as  riches  rub  against,


90  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK.

Readily  stick  to, — one  with  a  right  to  them

Born  in  the  blood  :  'twas  in  his  very  brow

Always  to  knit  itself  against  the  world,

So  be  beforehand  when  that  stinted  due  285

Service  and  suit :  the  world  ducks  and  defers.

As  such  folks  do,  he  had  come  up  to  Rome

To  better  his  fortune,  and,  since  many  years,

Was  friend  and  follower  of  a  cardinal ;

Waiting  the  rather  thus  on  providence,  290

That  a  shrewd  younger  poorer  brother  yet.

The  Abate  Paolo,  a  regular  priest,

Had  long  since  tried  his  powers  and  found  he  swam

With  the  deftest  on  the  Galilean  pool :

But  then  he  was  a  web-foot,  free  o'  the  wave,  295

And  no  ambiguous  dab-chick  hatched  to  strut.

Humbled  by  any  fond  attempt  to  swim

When  fiercer  fowl  usurped  his  dunghill-top —

A  whole  priest,  Paolo,  no  mere  piece  of  one

Like  Guido  tacked  thus  to  the  Church's  tail !  300

Guido  moreover,  as  the  head  o'  the  house.


HALF-ROME.  9 1


Claiming  the  main  prize,  not  the  lesser  luck,
The  centre  lily,  no  mere  chickweed  fringe.

He  waited  and  learned  waiting,  thirty  years ;

Got  promise,  missed  performance — what  would  you  have  ?

No  petty  post  rewards  a  nobleman  306

For  spending  youth  in  splendid  lackey-work,

And  there's  concurrence  for  each  rarer  prize  ;

When  that  falls,  rougher  hand  and  readier  foot

Push  aside  Guido  spite  of  his  black  looks.  310

The  end  was,  Guido,  when  the  warning  showed.

The  first  white  hair  i'  the  glass,  gave  up  the  game.

Determined  on  returning  to  his  town,

Making  the  best  of  bad  incurable.

Patching  the  old  palace  up  and  lingering  there  315

The  customary  life  out  with  his  kin.

Where  honour  helps  to  spice  the  scanty  bread.

Just  as  he  trimmed  his  lamp  and  girt  his  loins
To  go  his  journey  and  be  wise  at  home^


92  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

In  the  right  mood  of  disappomted  worth,  320

Who  but  Violante  sudden  spied  her  prey
(Where  was  I  with  that  angler-simile  ?)
,  And  threw  her  bait,  Pompilia,  where  he  sulked —
A  gleam  i'  the  gloom  !

What  if  he  gained  thus  much,
Wrung  out  this  sweet  drop  from  the  bitter  Past,  326

Bore  off  this  rose-bud  from  the  prickly  brake
To  justify  such  torn  clothes  and  scratched  hands,
iVnd,  after  all,  brought  something  back  from  Rome  ?
Would  not  a  wife  serve  at  Arezzo  well  '  330

To  light  the  dark  house,  lend  a  look  of  youth
To  the  mother's  face  grown  meagre,  left  alone
And  famished  with  the  emptiness  of  hope,
Old  Donna  Beatrice  ?    Wife  you  want
Would  you  play  family-representative,  335

Carry  you  elder-brotherly,  high  and  right
O'er  what  may  prove  the  natural  petulance
Of  the  third  brother,  younger,  greedier  still.


HALF-ROME.  93


Girolamo,  also  a  fledgeling  priest,

Beginning  life  in  turn  with  callow  beak  340

Agape  for  luck,  no  luck  had  stopped  and  stilled.
Such  were  the  pinks  and  greys  about  the  bait
Persuaded  Guido  gulp  down  hook  and  all.

What  constituted  him  so  choice  a  catch,

You  question  ?     Past  his  prime  and  poor  beside  ?       345

Ask  that  of  any  she  who  knows  the  trade.

Why  first,  here  was  a  nobleman  with  friends,

A  palace  one  might  run  to  and  be  safe

When  presently  the  threatened  fate  should  fall,

A  big-browed  master  to  block  door-way  up,  350

Parley  with  people  bent  on  pushing  by

And  praying  the  mild  Pietro  quick  clear  scores  :

Is  birth  a  privilege  and  power  or  no  ?

Also, — but  judge  of  the  result  desired.

By  the  price  paid  and  manner  of  the  sale.  355

The  Count  was  made  woo,  win  and  wed  at  once  :

Asked,  and  was  haled  for  answer,  lest  the  heat


94  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

Should  cool,  to  San  Lorenzo,  one  blind  eve,

And  had  Pompilia  put  into  his  arms

O'  the  sly  there,  by  a  hasty  candle-blink,  360

With  sanction  of  some  priest-confederate

Properly  paid  to  make  short  work  and  sure.

So  did  old  Pietro's  daughter  change  her  style

For  Guido  Franceschini's  lady-wife

Ere  Guido  knew  it  well ;  and  why  this  haste  365

iVnd  scramble  and  indecent  secrecy  ?

'^  Lest  Pietro,  all  the  while  in  ignorance,

"  Should  get  to  learn,  gainsay  and  break  the  match  :

"  His  peevishness  had  promptly  put  aside

"  Such  honour  and  refused  the  proffered  boon,  370

"  Pleased  to  become  authoritative  once.

*'  She  remedied  the  wilful  man's  mistake — "

Did  our  discreet  Violante.     Rather  say.

Thus  did  she,  lest  the  object  of  her  game,

Guido  the  gulled  one,  give  him  but  a  chance,  375

A  moment's  respite,  time  for  thinking  twice,


HALF-ROME.  95


Might  count  the  cost  before  he  sold  himself,
And  try  the  clink  of  coin  they  paid  him  with.

But  passed,  the  bargain  struck,  the  business  done,

Once  the  clandestine  marriage  over  thus,  380

All  parties  made  perforce  the  best  o'  the  fact ;

Pietro  could  play  vast  indignation  off.

Be  ignorant  and  astounded,  dupe  alike

At  need,  of  wife,  daughter  and  son-in-law.

While  Guido  found  himself  in  flagrant  fault,  385

Must  e'en  do  suit  and  service,  soothe,  subdue

A  father  not  unreasonably  chafed,

Bring  him  to  terms  by  paying  son's  devoir.

Pleasant  initiation  !

The  end,  this  :  390

Guido's  broad  back  was  saddled  to  bear  all —
Pietro,  Violante,  and  Pompilia  too, —
Three  lots  cast  confidently  in  one  lap,
Three  dead-weights  with  one  arm  to  lift  the  three


96  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Out  of  their  limbo  up  to  life  again  :  395

The  Roman  household  was  to  strike  fresh  root

In  a  new  soil,  graced  with  a  novel  name,

Gilt  with  an  alien  glory,  Aretine

Henceforth  and  never  Roman  any  more.

By  treaty  and  engagement :  thus  it  ran  :  400

Pompilia's  dowry  for  Pompilia's  self

As  a  thing  of  course, — she  paid  her  own  expense  ;

No  loss  nor  gain  there  :  but  the  couple,  you  see,

They,  for  their  part,  turned  over  first  of  all

Their  fortune  in  its  rags  and  rottenness  405

To  Guido,  fusion  and  confusion,  he

And  his  with  them  and  theirs, — whatever  rag

With  a  coin  residuary  fell  on  floor

When  Brother  Paolo's  energetic  shake

Should  do  the  relics  justice  :  since  'twas  thought,        410

Once  vulnerable  Pietro  out  of  reach.

That,  left  at  Rome  as  representative.

The  Abate,  backed  by  a  potent  patron  here,

And  otherwise  with  purple  flushing  him,


HALF-ROME.  97


Might  play  a  good  game  with  the  creditor,  415

Make  up  a  moiety  which,  great  or  small,

Should  go  to  the  common  stock — if  anything,

Guido's,  so  far  repayment  of  the  cost

About  to  be, — and  if,  as  looked  more  like,

Nothing, — why,  all  the  nobler  cost  were  his  420

Who  guaranteed,  for  better  or  for  worse,

To  Pietro  and  Violante,  house  and  home.

Kith  and  kin,  with  the  pick  of  company

And  life  o'  the  fat  o'  the  land  while  life  should  last.

How  say  you  to  the  bargain  at  first  blush  ?  425

Why  did  a  middle-aged  not-silly  man

Show  himself  thus  besotted  all  at  once  ?

Quoth  Solomon,  one  black  eye  does  it  all.

They  went  to  Arezzo, — Pietro  and  his  spouse.

With  just  the  dusk  o'  the  day  of  life  to  spend,  430

Eager  to  use  the  twilight,  taste  a  treat.

Enjoy  for  once  with  neither  stay  nor  stint

The  luxury  of  lord-and-lady-ship,

VOL.  L  H


gS  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

And  realise  the  stuff  and  nonsense  long

A-simmer  in  their  noddles  ;  vent  the  fume  435

Born  there  and  bred,  the  citizen's  conceit

How  fares  nobility  while  crossing  earth,

What  rampart  or  invisible  body-guard

Keeps  off  the  taint  of  common  life  from  such.

They  had  not  fed  for  nothing  on  the  tales  440

Of  grandees  who  give  banquets  worthy  Jove,

Spending  gold  as  if  Plutus  paid  a  whim,

Served  with  obeisances  as  when  .  .  .  what  God  ?

I'm  at  the  end  of  my  tether ;  'tis  enough

You  understand  what  they  came  primed  to  see:  445

While  Guido  who  should  minister  the  sight.

Stay  all  this  qualmish  greediness  of  soul

With  apples  and  with  flagons — for  his  part,

Was  set  on  life  diverse  as  pole  from  pole :

Lust  of  the  flesh,  lust  of  the  eye, — what  else  450

Was  he  just  now  awake  from,  sick  and  sage.

After  the  very  debauch  they  would  begin  ? —

Suppose  such  stufl"  and  nonsense  really  were.


HALF-ROME.  99


That  bubble,  they  were  bent  on  blowing  big,

He  had  blown  already  till  he  burst  his  cheeks,  455

And  hence  found  soapsuds  bitter  to  the  tongue.

He  hoped  now  to  walk  softly  all  his  days

In  soberness  of  spirit,  if  haply  so.

Pinching  and  paring  he  might  furnish  forth

A  frugal  board,  bare  sustenance,  no  more,  460

Till  times,  that  could  not  well  grow  worse,  should  mend.

Thus  minded  then,  two  parties  mean  to  meet

And  make  each  other  happy.     The  first  week,

And  fancy  strikes  fact  and  explodes  in  full.

"  This,"  shrieked  the  Comparini,  "  this  the  Count,      465

"  The  palace,  the  signorial  privilege,

"  The  pomp  and  pageantry  were  promised  us  ?

"  For  this  have  we  exchanged  our  liberty,

"  Our  competence,  our  darling  of  a  child?

"  To  house  as  spectres  in  a  sepulchre  470

"  Under  this  black  stone  heap,  the  street's  disgrace,

"  Grimmest  as  that  is  of  the  gruesome  town,


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


^^  And  here  pick  garbage  on  a  pewter  plate

"  Or  cough  at  verjuice  dripped  from  earthenware  ?    .

^'  Oh  Via  Vittoria,  oh  the  other  place  475

"  I'  the  Pauline,  did  we  give  you  up  for  this  ?

'^  Where's  the' foregone  liousekeeping  good  and  gay,

**  The  neighbourliness,  the  companionship,

"  The  treat  and  feast  when  holidays  came  round,

"  The  daily  feast  that  seemed  no  treat  at  all,  480

"  Called  common  by  the  uncommon  fools  we  were  !

"  Even  the  sun  that  used  to  shine  at  Rome,

'''  Where  is  it?    Robbed  and  starved  and  frozen  too,

'^  We  will  have  justice,  justice  if  there  be  ! "

Did  not  they  shout,  did  not  the  town  resound  !  485

Guido's  old  lady-mother  Beatrice,

Who  since  her  husband,  Count  Tommaso's  death.

Had  held  sole  sway  i  'the  house, — the  doited  crone

Slow  to  acknowledge,  curtsey  and  abdicate, — •

Was  recognized  of  true  novercal  type,  490

Dragon  and  devil.     His  brother  Girolamo

Came  next  in  order  :  priest  was  he  ?     The  worse  !


HALF-ROME.


No  way  of  winning  him  to  leave  his  mumps

And  help  the  laugh  against  old  ancestry

And  formal  habits  long  since  out  of  date,  495

Letting  his  youth  be  patterned  on  the  mode

Approved  of  where  Violante  laid  down  law.

Or  did  he  brighten  up  by  way  of  change  ?

Dispose  himself  for  affability  ?

The  malapert,  too  complaisant  by  half  500

To  the  alarmed  young  novice  of  a  bride  !

Let  him  go  buzz,  betake  himself  elsewhere

Nor  singe  his  fly-wings  in  the  candle-flame  !

Four  months'  probation  of  this  purgatory.

Dog-snap  and  cat-claw,  curse  and  counterblast,  505

The  devil's  self  had  been  sick  of  his  own  din  ;

And  Pietro,  after  trumpeting  huge  wrongs

At  church  and  market-place,  pillar  and  post,

Square's  corner,  street's  end,  now  the  palace-step

And  now  the  wine-house  bench — while,  on  her  side,   510

Violante  up  and  down  was  voluble


102  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

In  whatsoever  pair  of  ears  would  perk

From  goody,  gossip,  cater-cousin  and  sib,

Curious  to  peep  at  the  inside  of  things

And  catch  in  the  act  pretentious  poverty  515

At  its  wits'  end  to  keep  appearance  up,

Make  both  ends  meet, — nothing  the  vulgar  loves

Like  what  this  couple  pitched  them  right  and  left, —

Then,  their  worst  done  that  way,  they  struck  tent,  marched :

— Renounced  their  share  o'  the  bargain,  flung  what  dues

Guido  was  bound  to  pay,  in  Guido's  face,  521

Left  their  hearts'-darling,  treasure  of  the  twain

And  so  forth,  the  poor  inexperienced  bride.

To  her  own  devices,  bade  Arezzo  rot

And  the  life  signorial,  and  sought  Rome  once  more.   525

I  see  the  comment  ready  on  your  lip,

*'  The  better  fortune,  Guido's — free  at  least

"  By  this  defection  of  the  foolish  pair,

"  He  could  begin  make  profit  in  some  sort

^^  Of  the  young  bride  and  the  new  quietness,  530


HALF-ROME.  I03


''  Lead  his  own  life  now,  henceforth  breathe  unplagued."
Could  he  ?    You  know  the  sex  like  Guido's  self.
Learn  the  Violante-nature  !

Once  in  Rome,
By  way  of  helping  Guido  lead  such  life,  535

Her  first  act  to  inaugurate  return
Was,  she  got  pricked  in  conscience  :  Jubilee
Gave  her  the  hint.     Our  Pope,  as  kind  as  just,
Attained  his  eighty  years,  announced  a  boon
Should  make  us  bless  the  fact,  held  Jubilee —  540

Short  shrift,  prompt  pardon  for  the  light  offence,
And  no  rough  dealing  with  the  regular  crime
So  this  occasion  were  not  suffered  slip —
Otherwise,  sins  commuted  as  before.
Without  the  least  abatement  in  the  price.  545

Now,  who  had  thought  it  ?    All  this  while,  it  seems,
Our  sage  Violante  had  a  sin  of  a  sort
She  must  compound  for  now  or  not  at  all :
Now  be  the  ready  riddance  !     She  confessed


104  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

Pompilia  was  a  fable  not  a  fact :  550

She  never  bore  a  child  in  her  whole  life.

Had  this  child  been  a  changeling,  that  were  grace

In  some  degree,  exchange  is  hardly  theft ;

You  take  your  stand  on  truth  ere  leap  your  lie  :

Here  was  all  lie,  no  touch  of  truth  at  all,  555

All  the  lie  hers — not  even  Pietro  guessed

He  was  as  childless  still  as  twelve  years  since.

The  babe  had  been  a  find  i'  the  filth-heap.  Sir,

Catch  from  the  kennel !     There  was  found  at  Rome,

Down  in  the  deepest  of  our  social  dregs,  560

A  woman  who  professed  the  wanton's  trade

Under  the  requisite  thin  coverture,

Communis  meretrix  and  washer-wife  :

The  creature  thus  conditioned  found  by  chance

Motherhood  like  a  jewel  in  the  muck,  ,  565

And  straightway  either  trafficked  with  her  prize

Or  listened  to  the  tempter  and  let  be, —

Made  pact  abolishing  her  place  and  part

In  womankind,  beast-fellowship  indeed —


HALF-ROME.  I05


She  sold  this  babe  eight  months  before  its  birth  570

To  our  Violante,  Pietro's  honest  spouse,

Well-famed  and  widely-instanced  as  that  crown

To  the  husband,  virtue  in  a  woman's  shape.

She  it  was,  bought  and  paid  for,  passed  the  thing

Off  as  the  flesh  and  blood  and  child  of  her  575

Despite  the  flagrant  fifty  years, — and  why  ?

Partly  to  please  old  Pietro,  fill  his  cup

With  wine  at  the  late  hour  when  lees  are  left,

And  send  him  from  life's  feast  rejoicingly, —

Partly  to  cheat  the  rightful  heirs,  agape,  580

Each  uncle's  cousin's  brother's  son  of  him,

For  that  same  principal  of  the  usufruct

It  vext  him  he  must  die  and  leave  behind.

Such  was  the  sin  had  come  to  be,  confessed.

Which  of  the  tales,  the  first  or  last,  was  true?  585

Did  she  so  sin  once,  or,  confessing  now.

Sin  for  the  first  time  ?     Either  way  you  will.

One  sees  a  reason  for  the  cheat :  one  sees


I06  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK.'

A  reason  for  a  cheat  in  owning  cheat

Where  no  cheat  had  been.     What  of  the  revenge  ?      590

What  prompted  the  contrition  all  at  once,

Made  the  avowal  easy,  the  shame  slight  ?

Why,  prove  they  but  Pompilia  not  their  child,

No  child,  no  dowry ;  this,  supposed  their  child,

Had  claimed  what  this,  shown  alien  to  their  blood,     595

Claimed  nowise  :  Guido's  claim  was  through  his  wife,

Null  then  and  void  with  hers.     The  biter  bit.

Do  you  see  1     For  such  repayment  of  the  past.

One  might  conceive  the  penitential  pair

Ready  to  bring  their  case  before  the  courts,  600

Publish  their  infamy  to  all  the  world

And,  arm  in  arm,  go  chuckling  thence  content.

Is  this  your  view  ?    'Twas  Guido's  anyhow
And  colourable  :  he  came  forward  then.
Protested  in  his  very  bride's  behalf  605

-Against  this  lie  and  all  it  led  to,  least
Of  all  the  loss  o'  the  dowry ;  no  !     From  her


HALF-ROME.  I07


And  him  alike  he  would  expunge  the  blot,
Erase  the  brand  of  such  a  bestial  birth,
Participate  in  no  hideous  heritage  6io

Gathered  from  the  gutter  to  be  garnered  up
And  glorified  in  a  palace.     Peter  and  Paul  !
But  that  who  likes  may  look  upon  the  pair
.  Exposed  in  yonder  church,  and  show  his  skill
By  saying  which  is  eye  and  which  is  mouth  615

Thro'  those  stabs  thick  and  threefold, — but  for  that —
A  strong  word  on  the  liars  and  their  lie
Might  crave  expression  and  obtain  it,  Sir  1
— Though  prematurely,  since  there's  more  to  come.
More  that  will  shake  your  confidence  in  things  620

Your  cousin  tells  you, — may  I  be  so  bold  ?

This  makes  the  first  act  of  the  farce, — anon

The  stealing  sombre  element  comes  in

Till  all  is  black  or  blood-red  in  the  piece.

Guido,  thus  made  a  laughing-stock  abroad,  625

A  proverb  for  the  market-place  at  home.


Io8  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Left  alone  with  Pompilia  now,  this  graft

So  reputable  on  his  ancient  stock,

This  plague-seed  set  to  fester  his  sound  flesh,

What  did  the  Count  ?     Pvevenge  him  on  his  wife  ?      630

Unfasten  at  all  risks  to  rid  himself

The  noisome  lazar-badge,  fall  foul  of  fate.

And,  careless  whether  the  poor  rag  was  ware

O'  the  part  it  played,  or  helped  unwittingly,

Bid  it  go  burn  and  leave  his  frayed  flesh  free  ?  635

Plainly,  did  Guido  open  both  doors  wide.

Spurn  thence  the  cur-cast  creature  and  clear  scores

As  man  might,  tempted  in  extreme  like  this  ?

No,  birth  and  breeding,  and  compassion  too

Saved  her  such  scandal.  She  was  young,  he  thought,  640

Not  privy  to  the  treason,  punished  most

I'  the  proclamation  of  it ;  why  make  her

A  party  to  the  crime  she  suffered  by  ?

Then  the  black  eyes  were  now  her  very  own,

Not  any  more  Violante's  :  let  her  live,  645

Lose  in  a  new  air,  under  a  new  sun,


HALF-ROME.  I09


The  taint  of  the  imputed  parentage

Truely  or  falsely,  take  no  more  the  touch

Of  Pietro  and  his  partner  anyhow  !

All  might  go  well  yet.  650

So  she  thought,  herself,
It  seems,  since  what  was  her  first  act  and  deed
When  news  came  how  these  kindly  ones  at  Rome
Had  stripped  her  naked  to  amuse  the  world
With  spots  here,  spots  there  and  spots  everywhere  ?    655
— For  I  should  tell  you  that  they  noised  abroad
Not  merely  the  main  scandal  of  her  birth.
But  slanders  written,  printed,  published  wide.
Pamphlets  which  set  forth  all  the  pleasantry
Of  how  the  promised  glory  was  a  dream,  660

The  power  a  bubble  and  the  wealth — why,  dust.
There  was  a  picture,  painted  to  the  life,
Of  those  rare  doings,  that  superlative
Initiation  in  magnificence
Conferred  on  a  poor  Roman  family  665


THE    RING  AND   THE    BOOK.


By  favour  of  Arezzo  and  her  first

And  famousest,  the  Franceschini  there.

You  had  the  Countship  holding  head  aloft

Bravely  although  bespattered,  shifts  and  straits

In    keeping    out    o'   the    way    o'   the    v/heels    o'  the

world,  670

The  comic  of  those  home-contrivances
When  the  old  lady-mother's  wit  was  taxed
To  find  six  clamorous  mouths  in  food  more  real
Than  fruit  plucked  off  the  cob  webbed  family-tree,
Or  acorns  shed  from  its  gilt  mouldered  frame —         675
Cold    glories    served    up     with    three-pauls'     worth'

sauce.
What,  I  ask, — when  the  drunkenness  of  hate
Hiccuped  return  for  hospitality,
Befouled  the  table  they  had  feasted  on,
Or  say, — God  knows  I'll  not  prejudge  the  case, —       680
Grievances  thus  distorted,  magnified,
Coloured  by  quarrel  into  calumny, —
What  side  did  our  Pompilia  first  espouse  ?


HALF-ROME.  Ill


Her  first  deliberate  measure  was,  she  wrote,

Pricked  by  some  loyal  impulse,  straight  to  Rome        685

And  her  husband's  brother  the  Abate  there,

Who,  having  managed  to  effect  the  match,

Might  take  men's  censure  for  its  ill  success.

She  made  a  clean  breast  also  in  her  turn ;

She  qualified  the  couple  handsomely  !  690

Since  whose  departure,  hell,  she  said,  was  heaven.

And  the  house,  late  distracted  by  their  peals.

Quiet  as  Carmel  where  the  lilies  live.

Herself  had  oftentimes  complained :  but  why  ?

All  her  complaints  had  been  their  prompting,  tales      695

Trumped  up,  devices  to  this  very  end.

Their  game  had  been  to  thwart  her  husband's  love

And  cross  his  will,  malign  his  words  and  ways.

So  reach  this  issue,  furnish  this  pretence

For  impudent  withdrawal  from  their  bond, —  700

Theft,  indeed  murder,  since  they  meant  no  less

Whose  last  injunction  to  her  simple  self

Had  been — what  parents'-precept  do  you  think  ?


THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.


That  she  should  follow  after  with  all  speed,
Fly  from  her  husband's  house  clandestinely,
Join  them  at  Rome  again,  but  first  of  all
Pick  up  a  fresh  companion  in  her  flight,
Putting  so  youth  and  beauty  to  fit  use,
Some  gay,  dare-devil,  cloak-and-rapier  spark
Capable  of  adventure, — helped  by  whom
She,  some  fine  eve  when  lutes  were  in  the  air.
Having  put  poison  in  the  posset-cup.
Laid  hands  on  money,  jewels  and  the  like,
And,  to  conceal  the  thing  with  more  effect.
By  way  of  parting  benediction  too,
Fired  the  house, — one  would  finish  famously
I'  the  tumult,  slip  out,  scurry  off  and  away
And  turn  up  merrily  at  home  once  more.
Fact  this,  and  not  a  dream  o'  the  devil,  Sir  !
And  more  than  this,  a  fact  none  dare  dispute.
Word  for  word,  such  a  letter  did  she  write.
And  such  the  Abate  read,  nor  simply  read
But  gave  all  Rome  to  ruminate  upon.


^


HALF-ROME.  II3


III  answer  to  such  charges  as,  I  say,

The  couple  sought  to  be  beforehand  with.  725

The  cause  thus  carried  to  the  courts  at  Rome,

Guido  away,  the  Abate  had  no  choice

But  stand  forth,  take  his  absent  brother's  part,

Defend  the  honour  of  himself  beside.

He  made  what  head  he  might  against  the  pair,  730

Maintained  Pompilia's  birth  legitimate

And  all  her  rights  intact — hers,  Guido's  now —

And  so  far  by  his  tactics  turned  their  flank,

The  enemy  being  beforehand  in  the  place.

That,  though  the  courts  allowed  the  cheat  for  fact,      735

Suffered  Violante  to  parade  her  shame,

Publish  her  infamy  to  heart's  content,

And  let  the  tale  o'  the  feigned  birth  pass  for  proved, —

Yet  they  stopped  there,  refused  to  intervene

And  dispossess  the  innocents,  befooled  740

By  gifts  o'  the  guilty,  at  guilt's  new  caprice  :

They  would  not  take  away  the  dowry  now

VOL.  L  I


114  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Wrongfully  given  at  first,  nor  bar  at  all

Succession  to  the  aforesaid  usufruct,

Established  on  a  fraud,  nor  play  the  game  745

Of  Pietro's  child  and  now  not  Pietro's  child

As  it  might  suit  the  gamester's  purpose.     Thus

Was  justice  ever  ridiculed  in  Rome  :

Such  be  the  double  verdicts  favoured  here

Which  send  away  both  parties  to  a  suit  750

Nor  puffed  up  nor  cast  down, — for  each  a  crumb

Of  right,  for  neither  of  them  the  whole  loaf.

Whence,  on  the  Comparini's  part,  appeal —

Counter-appeal  on  Guido's, — that's  the  game :

And  so  the  matter  stands,  even  to  this  hour,  755

Bandied  as  balls  are  in  a  tennis-court,

And    so    might    stand,    unless    some    heart    broke

first,
Till  doomsday.

Leave  it  thus,  and  now  revert
To  the  old  Arezzo  whence  we  moved  to  Rome.  760


HALF-ROME.  II5


We've  had  enough  o'  the  parents,  false  or  true,

Now  for  a  touch  o'  the  daughter's  quahty.

The  start 's  fair  henceforth — every  obstacle

Out  of  the  young  wife's  footpath — she's  alone —

Left  to  walk  warily  now  :  how  does  she  walk  ?  765

Why,  once  a  dwelling's  doorpost  marked  and  crossed

In  rubric  by  the  enemy  on  his  rounds

As  eligible,  as  fit  place  of  prey,

Baffle  him  henceforth,  keep  him  out  who  can  !

Stop  up  the  door  at  the  first  hint  of  hoof,  770

Presently  at  the  window  taps  a  horn,

And  Satan 's  by  your  fireside,  never  fear  !

Pompilia,  left  alone  now,  found  herself;

Found  herself  young  too,  sprightly,  fair  enough,

Matched  with  a  husband  old  beyond  his  age  775

(Though    that    was    something    like    four    times    her

own)
Because  of  cares  past,  present  and  to  come  :
Found  too  the  house  dull  and  its  inmates  dead,
So,  looked  outside  for  light  and  life.


Il6  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

And  lo  780

There  in  a  trice  did  turn  up  life  and  light,
The  man  with  the  aureole,  sympathy  made  flesh,
The  all-consoling  Caponsacchi,  Sir  !
A  priest — what  else  should  the  consoler  be  ?
With  goodly  shoulderblade  and  proper  leg,  785

A  portly  make  and  a  symmetric  shape.
And  curls  that  clustered  to  the  tonsure  quite.
This  was  a  bishop  in  the  bud,  and  now
A  canon  full-blown  so  far  :  priest,  and  priest
Nowise  exorbitantly  overworked,  790

The  courtly  Christian,  not  so  much  Saint  Paul
As  a  saint  of  Cassar's  household  ;  there  posed  he
Sending  his  god-glance  after  his  shot  shaft,
Apollos  turned  Apollo,  while  the  snake
Pompilia  writhed  transfixed  through  all  her  spires.      795
He,  not  a  visitor  at  Guido's  house,
Scarce  an  acquaintance,  but  in  prime  request
With  the  magnates  of  Arezzo,  was  seen  here.
Heard  there,  felt  everywhere  in  Guido's  path


HALF-ROME.  II7


If  Guide's  wife's  path  be  her  husband's  too.  800

Now  he  threw  comfits  at  the  theatre

Into  her  lap, — what  harm  in  Carnival  ?

Now  he  pressed  close  till  his  foot  touched  her  gown,

His  hand  brushed  hers, — how  help  on  promenade  ?

And,  ever  on  weighty  business,  found  his  steps  805

Incline  to  a  certain  haunt  of  doubtful  fame

Which  fronted  Guido's  palace  by  mere  chance ;

While — how  do  accidents  sometimes  combine  !

Pompilia  chose  to  cloister  up  her  charms

Just  in  a  chamber  that  o'erlooked  the  street,  810

Sat  there  to  pray,  or  peep  thence  at  mankind.

This  passage  of  arms  and  wits  amused  the  town.

At  last  the  husband  lifted  eyebrow, — bent

On  day-book  and  the  study  how  to  wring

Half  the  due  vintage  from  the  worn-out  vines  815

At  the  villa,  teaze  a  quarter  the  old  rent

From  the  farmstead,  tenants  swore  would  tumble  soon, —

Pricked  up  his  ear  a-singing  day  and  night


Il6  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK.

And  lo  780

There  in  a  trice  did  turn  up  life  and  light,
The  man  with  the  aureole,  sympathy  made  flesh,
The  all-consoling  Caponsacchi,  Sir  !
A  priest — ^what  else  should  the  consoler  be  ?
With  goodly  shoulderblade  and  proper  leg,  785

A  portly  make  and  a  symmetric  shape.
And  curls  that  clustered  to  the  tonsure  quite.
This  was  a  bishop  in  the  bud,  and  now
A  canon  full-blown  so  far  :  priest,  and  priest
Nowise  exorbitantly  overworked,  790

The  courtly  Christian,  not  so  much  Saint  Paul
As  a  saint  of  Cassar's  household  :  there  posed  he
Sending  his  god-glance  after  his  shot  shaft,
Apollos  turned  Apollo,  while  the  snake
Pompilia  writhed  transfixed  through  all  her  spires.      795
He,  not  a  visitor  at  Guido's  house,
Scarce  an  acquaintance,  but  in  prime  request
With  the  magnates  of  Arezzo,  was  seen  here.
Heard  there,  felt  everywhere  in  Guido's  path


HALF-ROME.  II7


If  Guide's  wife's  path  be  her  husband's  too.  800

Now  he  threw  comfits  at  the  theatre

Into  her  lap, — what  harm  in  Carnival  ?

Now  he  pressed  close  till  his  foot  touched  her  gown,

His  hand  brushed  hers, — how  help  on  promenade  ?

And,  ever  on  weighty  business,  found  his  steps  805

Incline  to  a  certain  haunt  of  doubtful  fame

Which  fronted  Guido's  palace  by  mere  chance ;

While — how  do  accidents  sometimes  combine  !

Pompilia  chose  to  cloister  up  her  charms

Just  in  a  chamber  that  o'erlooked  the  street,  810

Sat  there  to  pray,  or  peep  thence  at  mankind.

This  passage  of  arms  and  wits  amused  the  town.

At  last  the  husband  lifted  eyebrow, — bent

On  day-book  and  the  study  how  to  wring

Half  the  due  vintage  from  the  worn-out  vines  815

At  the  villa,  teaze  a  quarter  the  old  rent

From  the  farmstead,  tenants  swore  would  tumble  soon, —

Pricked  up  his  ear  a-singing  day  and  night


Il8  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

With  "  ruin,  ruin  ; " — and  so  surprised  at  last —

Why,  what  else  but  a  titter  ?     Up  he  jumps.  820

Back  to  mind  come  those  scratchings  at  the  grange,

Prints  of  the  paw  about  the  outhouse ;  rife

In  his  head  at  once  again  are  word  and  wink,

Mimi  here  and  budget  there,  the  smell  o'  the  fox.

The  musk  o'  the  gallant.  "  Friends,  there's  falseness  here !  '*

The  proper  help  of  friends  in  such  a  strait  826

Is  waggery,  the  world  over.     Laugh  him  free

O'  the  regular  jealous-fit  that's  incident

To  all  old  husbands  that  wed  brisk  young  wives,

And  he'll  go  duly  docile  all  his  days.  830

"  Somebody  courts  your  wife.  Count  ?  Where  and  when  ?

^*  How  and  why  ?     Mere  horn-madness  :  have  a  care  !

"  Your  lady  loves  her  own  room,  sticks  to  it,

'''  Locks  herself  in  for  hours,  you  say  yourself.

"  And — what,  it's  Caponsacchi  means  you  harm  ?       835

''  The  Canon  ?     We  caress  him,  he's  the  world's,

**  A  man  of  such  acceptance, — never  dream,


HALF-ROME.  1 1 9


"  Though  he  were  fifty  times  the  fox  you  fear,

"  He'd  risk  his  brush  for  your  particular  chick,

"  When  the  wide  town's  his  hen-roost !    Fie  o'  the  fool ! "

So  they  dispensed  their  comfort  of  a  kind.  841

Guido  at  last  cried  "  Something  is  in  the  air,

"  Under  the  earth,  some  plot  against  my  peace  :

^'  The  trouble  of  eclipse  hangs  overhead,

"  How  it  should  come  of  that  officious  orb  845

"  Your  Canon  in  my  system,  you  must  say :

''  I  say — that  from  tlTe  pressure  of  this  spring

"  Began  the  chime  and  interchange  of  bells,

"  Ever  one  whisper,  and  one  whisper  more,

^'  And  just  one  whisper  for  the  silvery  last,  850

"  Till  all  at  once  a-row  the  bronze-throats  burst

"  Into  a  larum  both  significant

''  And  sinister  :  stop  it  I  must  and  will.

"  I^et  Caponsacchi  take  his  hand  away

"  From  the  wire  ! — disport  himself  in  other  paths       855

''  Than  lead  precisely  to  m.y  palace-gate, —

"  Look  where  he  likes  except  one  window's  way


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.


"  Where,  cheek  on  hand,  and  elbow  set  on  sill,

"  Happens  to  lean  and  say  her  litanies

^^  Every  day  and  all  day  long,  just  my  wife —  860

"  Or  wife  and  Caponsacchi  may  fare  the  worse  !  "

Admire  the  man's  simplicity,  "  I'll  do  this,

^'  I'll  not  have  that,  I'll  pmiish  and  prevent ! " —

'Tis  easy  saying.     But  to  a  fray,  you  see,

Two  parties  go.     The  badger  shows  his  teeth  :  865

The  fox  nor  lies  down  sheep-like  nor  dares  fight.

Oh,  the  wife  knew  the  appropriate  warfare  w^ell,

The  way  to  put  suspicion  to  the  blush  !

At  first  hint  of  remonstrance,  up  and  out

I'  the  face  of  the  world,  you  found  her :  she  could  speak.

State  her  case, — Franceschini  was  a  name,  871

Guido  had  his  full  share  of  foes  and  friends —

Why  should  not  she  call  these  to  arbitrate  ?

She  bade  the  Governor  do  governance.

Cried  out  on  the  Archbishop, — why,  there  now,  875

Take  him  for  sample  !     Three  successive  times,


HALF-ROME.


Had  he  to  reconduct  her  by  main-force

From  where  she  took  her  station  opposite

His  shut  door, — on  the  pubHc  steps  thereto,

Wringing  her  hands,  when  he  came  out  to  see,  880

And  shrieking  all  her  wrongs  forth  at  his  foot, —

Back  to  the  husband  and  the  house  she  fled  :

Judge  if  that  husband  w^armed  him  in  the  face

Of  friends  or  frowned  on  foes  as  heretofore  !

Judge  if  he  missed  the  natural  grin  of  folk,  885

Or  lacked  the  customary  compliment

Of  cap  and  bells,  the  luckless  husband's  fit !

I

So  it  went  on  and  on  till — who  was  right  ?

One  merry  April  morning,  Guido  woke

After  the  cuckoo,  so  late,  near  noonday,  890

With  an  inordinate  yawning  of  the  jaws.

Ears  plugged,  eyes  gummed  together,  palate,  tongue

And  teeth  one  mud-paste  made  of  poppy-milk ;

And  found  his  wife  flown,  his  scrutoire  the  worse

For  a  rummage, — ^jewelry  that  was,  was  not,  895


122  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Some  money  there  had  made  itself  wings  too, —

The  door  lay  wide  and  yet  the  servants  slept

Sound  as  the  dead,  or  dosed  which  does  as  well.

In  short,  Pompilia,  she  who,  candid  soul.

Had  not  so  much  as  spoken  all  her  life  900

To  the  Canon,  nay,  so  much  as  peeped  at  him

Between  her  fingers  while  she  prayed  in  church, —

This  lamb-like  innocent  of  fifteen  years

(Such  she  was  grown  to  by  this  time  of  day)

Had  simply  put  an  opiate  in  the  drink  905

Of  the  whole  household  overnight,  and  then

Got  up  and  gone  about  her  work  secure,

Laid  hand  on  this  waif  and  the  other  stray.

Spoiled  the  Philistine  and  marched  out  of  doors

In  company  of  the  Canon  who.  Lord's  love,  910

What  with  his  daily  duty  at  the  church,

Nightly  devoir  where  ladies  congregate,

Had  something  else  to  mind,  assure  yourself.

Beside  Pompilia,  paragon  though  she  be.

Or  notice  if  her  nose  were  sharp  or  blunt !  915


HALF-ROME.  1 23


Well,  anyhow,  albeit  impossible,

Both  of  them  were  together  jollily

Jaunting  it  Rome-ward,  half-way  there  by  this,

While  Guido  was  left  go  and  get  undnigged,

Gather  his  wits  up,  groaningly  give  thanks  920

When  neighbours  crowded  round  him  to  condole.

"  Ah,"  quoth  a  gossip,  "  well  I  mind  me  now,

"  The  Count  did  always  say  he  thought  he  felt

^^  He  feared  as  if  this  very  chance  might  fall !

'^  And  when  a  man  of  fifty  finds  his  corns  925

"  Ache  and  his  joints  throb,  and  foresees  a  stomi,

**  Though  neighbours  laugh  and  say  the  sky  is  clear,

"  Let  us  henceforth  believe  him  weatherwise  ! "

Then  was  the  story  told,  I'll  cut  you  short :

All  neighbours  knew  :  no  mystery  in  the  world.  930

The  lovers  left  at  nightfall — over  night

Had  Capon  sacchi  come  to  carry  off

Pompilia, — not  alone,  a  friend  of  his,

One  Guillichini,  the  more  conversant

With  Guido's  housekeeping  that  he  was  just  935


124  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

A  cousin  of  Guido's  and  might  play  a  prank —

(Have  not  you  too  a  cousin  that 's  a  wag?)

— Lord  and  a  Canon  also, — what  would  you  have  ?

Such  are  the  red-clothed  milk-swollen  poppy-heads

That  stand  and  stiffen  'mid  the  wheat  o'  the  Church  ! —

This  worthy  came  to  aid,  abet  his  best.  94 1

And  so  the  house  was  ransacked,  booty  bagged,

The  lady  led  downstairs  and  out  of  doors

Guided  and  guarded  till^  the  city  passed,

A  carriage  lay  convenient  at  the  gate.  945

Good-bye  to  the  friendly  Canon  ;  the  loving  one

Could  peradventure  do  the  rest  himself.

In  jumps  Pompilia,  after  her  the  priest,

^^  Whip,  driver  !     Money  makes  the  mare  to  go,

"  And  we've  a  bagful.     Take  the  Roman  road  ! "        950

So  said  the  neighbours.     This  was  eight  hours  since.

Guido  heard  all,  swore  the  befitting  oaths,
Shook  off  the  relics  of  his  poison-drench,
Got  horse,  was  fairly  started  in  pursuit


HALF-ROME.  1 25


With  never  a  friend  to  follow,  found  the  track  955

Fast  enough,  't  was  the  straight  Perugia  way,

Trod  soon  upon  their  veiy  heels,  too  late

By  a  minute  only  at  Camoscia,  at

Chiusi,  Foligno,  ever  the  fugitives

Just  ahead,  just  out  as  he  galloped  in,  960

Getting  the  good  news  ever  fresh  and  fresh.

Till,  lo,  at  the  last  stage  of  all,  last  post

Before  Rome, — as  we  say,  in  sight  of  Rome

And  safety  (there's  impunity  at  Rome

For  priests,  you  know)  at — what's  the  little  place  ?      965

What  some  call  Castelnuovo,  some  just  call

The  Osteria,  because  o'  the  post-house  inn.

There,  at  the  journey's  all  but  end,  it  seems,"

Triumph  deceived  them  and  undid  them  both,

Secure  they  might  foretaste  felicity  970

Nor  fear  surprisal :  so,  they  were  surprised.

There  did  they  halt  at  early  evening,  there

Did  Guido  overtake  them  :  't  was  day-break  ;

He  came  in  time  enough,  not  time  too  much,


126  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Since  in  the  courtyard  stood  the  Canon's  self  975

Urging  the  drowsy  stable-grooms  to  haste

Harness  the  horses,  have  the  journey  end,

The  trifling  four-hours'-running,  so  reach  Rome.

And  the  other  runaway,  the  wife  ?     Upstairs,

Still  on  the  couch  where  she  had  spent  the  night,        980

One  couch  in  one  room,  and  one  room  for  both.

So  gained  they  six  hours,  so  were  lost  thereby,

Sir,  what's  the  sequel  ?     Lover  and  beloved

Fall  on  their  knees?     No  impudence  serves  here?

They  beat  their  breasts  and  beg  for  easy  death,         ,985

Confess  this,  that  and  the  other  ? — anyhow

Confess  there  wanted  not  some  likelihood

To  the  supposition  so  preposterous,

That,  O  Pompilia,  thy  sequestered  eyes

Had  noticed,  straying  o'er  the  prayerbook's  edge,        990

More  of  the  Canon  than  that  black  his  coat.

Buckled  his  shoes  were,  broad  his  hat  of  brim  :

And  that,  O  Canon,  thy  religious  care


HALF-ROME.  1 27


»


Had  breathed  too  soft  a  henedicite

To  banish  trouble  from  a  lady's  breast  995

So  lonely  and  so  lovely,  nor  so  lean  !

This  you  expect  ?     Indeed,  then,  much  you  err.

Not  to  such  ordinary  end  as  this

Had  Caponsacchi  flung  the  cassock  far.

Doffed  the  priest,  donned  the  perfect  cavalier;  1000

The  die  was  cast :  over  shoes  over  boots  :

And  just  as  she,  I  presently  shall  show,

Pompilia,  soon  looked  Helen  to  the  life.

Recumbent  upstairs  in  her  pink  and  white,

So,  in  the  inn-yard,  bold  as  't  were  Troy-town,  1005

There  strutted  Paris  in  correct  costume,

Cloak,  cap  and  feather,  no  appointment  missed.

Even  to  a  wicked-looking  sword  at  side.

He  seemed  to  find  and  feel  famiHar  at.

Nor  wanted  words  as  ready  and  as  big  roio

As  the  part  he  played,  the  bold  abashless  one.

*'  I  interposed  to  save  your  wife  from  death,

"  Yourself  from  shame,  the  true  and  only  shame  ;


128  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

"  Ask  your  own  conscience  else  ! — or,  failing  that,

"  What  I  have  done  I  answer,  anywhere,  1015

^'  Here,  if  you  will ;  you  see  I  have  a  sw^ord  :

"  Or,  since  I  have  a  tonsure  as  you  taunt,

'^  At  Rome,  by  all  means, — priests  to  try  a  priest.

"  Only,  speak  where  your  wife's  voice  can  reply  ! "

And  then  he  fingered  at  the  sword  again.  1020

So,  Guido  called,  in  aid  and  witness  both,

The  Public  Force.     The  Commissary  came,

Officers  also;  they  secured  the  priest;

Then,  for  his  more  confusion,  mounted  up

With  him,  a  guard  on  either  side,  the  stair  1025

To  the  bed-room  where  still  slept  or  feigned  a  sleep

His  paramour  and  Guido's  wife  :  in  burst

The  company  and  bade  her  wake  and  rise.

Her  defence  ?    This.    She  woke,  saw,  sprang  upright
I'  the  midst  and  stood  as  terrible  as  truth,  1030

Sprang  to  her  husband's  side,  caught  at  the  sword
That  hung  there  useless,  since  they  held  each  hand


HALF-ROME.  1 29


O'  the  lover,  had  disarmed  him  properly,

And  in  a  moment  out  flew  the  bright  thing

Full  in  the  face  of  Guido, — but  for  help  1035

O'  the  guards  who  held  her  back  and  pinioned  her

With  pains  enough,  she  had  finished  you  my  tale

With  a  flourish  of  red  all  round  it,  pinked  her  man

Prettily ;  but  she  fought  them  one  to  six.

They  stopped  that, — but  her  tongue  continued  free  :  1040

She  spat  forth  such  invective  at  her  spouse,

O'erfrothed  him  with  such  foam  of  murderer,

Thief,  pandar— that  the  popular  tide  soon  turned,

The  favour  of  the  very  shirri^  straight

Ebbed  from  the  husband,  set  toward  his  wife,  1045

People  cried  "  Hands  off,  pay  a  priest  respect ! "

And  "  persecuting  fiend  "  and  "  martyred  saint  "

Began  to  lead  a  measure  from  lip  to  lip.

But  facts  are  facts  and  flinch  not ;  stubborn  things.
And  the  question  "  Prithee,  friend,  how  comes  my  purse
'^  I'  the  poke  of  you  ?  " — admits  of  no  reply.  105 1

VOL.  L  K


130  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Here  was  a  priest  found  out  in  masquerade,

A  wife  caught  playing  truant  if  no  more  ;

While  the  Count,  mortified  in  mien  enough,

And,  nose  to  face,  an  added  palm  in  length,  1055

Was  plain  writ  ^'  husband  "  every  piece  of  him  :

Capture  once  made,  release  could  hardly  be.

Beside,  the  prisoners  both  made  appeal,

"  Take  us  to  Rome  ! "

Taken  to  Rome  they  were ;  1060

The  husband  trooping  after,  piteously.
Tail  between  legs,  no  talk  of  triumph  now —
No  honour  set  firm  on  its  feet  once  more
On  two  dead  bodies  of  the  guilty, — nay,
No  dubious  salve  to  honour's  broken  pate  1065

From  chance  that,  after  all,  the  hurt  might  seem
A  skin-deep  matter,  scratch  that  leaves  no  scar  :
For  Guido's  first  search, — ferreting,  poor  soul.
Here,  there  and  everywhere  in  the  vile  place
Abandoned  to  him  when  their  backs  were  turned,      1070
Found, — furnishing  a  last  and  best  regale, —


HALF-ROME.  I3I


All  the  love-letters  bandied  twixt  the  pair

Since  the  first  timid  trembling  into  life

O'  the  love-star  till  its  stand  at  fiery  full.

Mad  prose,  mad  verse,  fears,  hopes,  triumph,  despair,

Avowal,  disclaimer,  plans,  dates,  names, — was  nought

Wanting  to  prove,  if  proof  consoles  at  all,  1077

That  this  had  been  but  the  fifth  act  o'  the  piece

Whereof  the  due  proemium,  months  ago

These  playwrights  had  put  forth,  and  ever  since        1080

Matured  the  middle,  added  'neath  his  nose.

He  might  go  cross  himself:  the  case  was  clear.

Therefore  to  Rome  with  the  clear  case ;  there  plead

Each  party  its  best,  and  leave  the  law  do  right,

Let  her  shine  forth  and  show,  as  God  in  heaven,       1085

Vice  prostrate,  virtue  pedestalled  at  last,

The  triumph  of  truth  !     What  else  shall  glad  our  gaze

When  once  authority  has  knit  the  brow

And  set  the  brain  behind  it  to  decide

Between  the  wolf  and  sheep  turned  litigants  ?  1090


132  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

*'  This  is  indeed  a  business  "  law  shook  head :

"  A  husband  charges  hard  things  on  a  wife,

"  The  wife  as  hard  o'  the  husband  :  whose  fault  here  ?

"  A  wife  that  flies  her  husband's  house,  does  wrong  :

"  The  male  friend's  interference  looks  amiss,  1095

"  Lends  a  suspicion  :  but  suppose  the  wife,

''  On  the  other  hand,  be  jeopardized  at  home —

*'  Nay,  that  she  simply  hold,  ill-groundedly,

''  An  apprehension  she  is  jeopardized, —

"  And  further,  if  the  friend  partake  the  fear,  iioo

**  And,  in  a  commendable  charity

"  Which  trusteth  all,  trust  her  that  she  mistrusts, —

"  What  do  they  but  obey  the  natural  law  ?

'*  Pretence  may  this  be  and  a  cloak  for  sin,

"  And  circumstances  that  concur  i'  the  close  1105

"  Hint  as  much,  loudly — yet  scarce  loud  enough

"  To  drown  the  answer  *  strange  may  yet  be  true  : '

^'  Innocence  often  looks  like  guiltiness.

"  The  accused  declare  that  in  thought,  word  and  deed,

"  Innocent  were  they  both  from  first  to  last  mo


HALF-ROME.  1 33


^'  As  male-babe  haply  laid  by  female-babe

''  At  church  on  edge  of  the  baptismal  font

"  Together  for  a  minute,  perfect-pure.

'^  Difficult  to  believe,  yet  possible,

"  As  witness  Joseph,  the  friend's  patron-saint.  1115

"  The  night  at  the  inn — there  charity  nigh  chokes

''  Ere  swallow  what  they  both  asseverate  ;

''  Though  down  the  gullet  faith  may  feel  it  go,

'^  When  mindful  of  what  flight  fatigued  the  flesh

''  Out  of  its  faculty  and  fleshliness,  1120

'^  Subdued  it  to  the  soul,  as  saints  assure  :

^*  So  long  a  flight  necessitates  a  fall

^'  On  the  first  bed,  though  in  a  Hon's  den,

"  And  the  first  pillow,  though  the  lion's  back  :

"  Difficult  to  believe,  yet  possible.  11 25

'^  Last  come  the  letters'  bundled  beastliness —

"  Authority  repugns  give  glance  to  twice,

'^  Turns  head,  and  almost  lets  her  whip-lash  fall ;

"  Yet  here  a  voice  cries  ^  Respite  ! '  from  the  clouds —

"  The  accused,  both  in  a  tale,  protest,  disclaim,        1130


134  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

"  Abominate  the  horror  :  '  Not  my  hand '

*^  Asserts  the  friend — '  Nor  mine  '  chimes  in  the  wife,

"  '  Seeing  I  have  no  hand,  nor  write  at  all.'

"  Illiterate — for  she  goes  on  to  ask,

"  What  if  the  friend  did  pen  now  verse  now  prose,    1135

"  Commend  it  to  her  notice  now  and  then  ?

'^  'Twas  pearls  to  swine  :  she  read  no  more  than  wrote,

"  And  kept  no  more  than  read,  for  as  they  fell

^^  She  ever  brushed  the  burr-like  things  away,

"  Or,  better,  burned  them,  quenched  the  fire  in  smoke.

"  As  for  this  fardel,  filth  and  fooHshness,  11,41

"  She  sees  it  now  the  first  time  :  burn  it  too  1

"  While  for  his  part  the  friend  vows  ignorance

"  Alike  of  what  bears  his  name  and  bears  hers  :

'^  'Tis  forgery,  a  felon's  masterpiece,  1145

''  And,  as  'tis  said  the  fox  still  finds  the  stench,

'^  Home-manufacture  and  the  husband's  work.

"  Though  he  confesses,  the  ingenuous  friend,

"  That  certain  missives,  letters  of  a  sort,

^^  Flighty  and  feeble,  which  assigned  themselves        11 50


HALF-ROME.  1 35


j     "  To  the  wife,  no  less  have  fallen,  far  too  oft,

^-  In  his  path :  wherefrom  he  understood  just  this —

"  That  were  they  verily  the  lady's  own,

'-  Why,  she  who  penned  them,  since  he  never  saw

"  Save  for  one  minute  the  mere  face  of  her,  1155

I   "  Since  never  had  there  been  the  interchange
"  Of  word  with  word  between  them  all  their  life,
"  Why,  she  must  be  the  fondest  of  the  frail,
''  And  fit,  she  for  the  ' apage'  he  flung,
'^  Her  letters  for  the  flame  they  went  to  feed.  11 60

"  But,  now  he  sees  her  face  and  hears  her  speech,
"  Much  he  repents  him  if,  in  fancy-freak
^'  For  a  moment  the  minutest  measurable,
^^  He  coupled  her  with  the  first  flimsy  word
^'  O'  the  self-spun  fabric  some  mean  spider-soul         1165
^'  Furnished  forth  :  stop  his  films  and  stamp  on  him  !
"  Never  was  such  a  tangled  knottiness,
"•  But  thus  authority  cuts  the  Gordian  through,
'^  And  mark  how  her  decision  suits  the  need  !
"  Here's  troublesomeness,  scandal  on  both  sides,      11 70


136  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

"  Plenty  of  fault  to  find,  no  absolute  crime :

"  Let  each  side  own  its  fault  and  make  amends  !

"  What  does  a  priest  in  cavalier's  attire

"  Consorting  publicly  with  vagrant  wives

"  In  quarters  close  as  the  confessional,  1175

"  Though  innocent  of  harm  ?     'Tis  harm  enough  :

''  Let  him  pay  it,  and  be  relegate  a  good

"  Three  years,  to  spend  in  some  place  not  too  far

^'  Nor  yet  too  near,  midway  twixt  near  and  far,

"  Rome  and  Arezzo, — Civita  we  choose,  11 8a

"  Where  he  may  lounge  away  time,  live  at  large,

"  Find  out  the  proper  function  of  a  priest,

^*  Nowise  an  exile, — that  were  punishment,

*^  But  one  our  love  thus  keeps  out  of  harm's  way

"  Not  more  from  the  husband's  anger  than,  mayhap  1185

^^  His  own  .  .  .  say,  indiscretion,  waywardness,

"  And  v/anderings  when  Easter  eves  grow  warm.

'^  For  the  wife, — well,  our  best  step  to  take  with  her,

"  On  her  own  showing,  were  to  shift  her  root

"  From  the  old  cold  shade  and  unhappy  soil  1 1 90


HALF-ROME.  1 37


"  Into  a  generous  ground  that  fronts  the  south :
"  Where,  since  her  callow  soul,  a-shiver  late,
^'  Craved  simply  warmth  and  called  mere  passers-by
^'  To  the  rescue,  she  should  have  her  fill  of  shine.
^^  Do  house  and  husband  hinder  and  not  help  ?         1 195
'^  Why  then,  forget  both  and  stay  here  at  peace,
''  Come  into  our  community,  enroll
"  Herself  along  with  those  good  Convertites,
"  Those  sinners  saved,  those  Magdalens  re-made,
''Accept  their  ministration,  well  bestow  1200

"  Her  body  and  patiently  possess  her  soul,
''  Until  we  see  what  better  can  be  done.
"  Last  for  the  husband  :  if  his  tale  prove  true,
^'  Well  is  he  rid  of  two  domestic  plagues —
"  The  wife  that  ailed,  do  whatsoever  he  would,  1205

''  And  friend  of  hers  that  undertook  the  cure.
> '^ee,  what  a  double  load  we  lift  from  breast !
"  Off  he  may  go,  return,  resume  old  life,
"  Laugh  at  the  priest  here  and  Pompilia  there
''  In  limbo  each  and  punished  for  their  pains,  12 10


138  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

"  And  grateful  tell  the  inquiring  neighbourhood —

"  In  Rome,  no  wrong  but  has  its  remedy."

The  case  was  closed.     Now,  am  I  fair  or  no

In  what  I  utter  ?     Do  I  state  the  facts,

Having  forechosen  a  side  ?     I  promised  you  !  12 15

The  Canon  Caponsacchi,  then,  was  sent

To  change  his  garb,  re-trim  his  tonsure,  tie

The  clerkly  silk  round,  every  plait  correct,

Make  the  impressive  entry  on  his  place

Of  relegation,  thrill  his  Civita,  1220

As  Ovid,  a  like  sufferer  in  the  cause,

Planted  a  primrose -patch  by  Pontus  :  where.

What  with  much  culture  of  the  sonnet-stave

And  converse  with  the  aborigines.

Soft  savagery  of  eyes  unused  to  roll,  1225

And  hearts  that  all  awry  went  pit-a-pat

And  wanted  setting  right  in  charity,

What  were  a  couple  of  years  to  while  away  ?

Pompilia,  as  enjoined,  betook  herself


HALF-ROME.  1 39


To  the  aforesaid  Convertites,  the  sisterhood  1230

In  Via  Lungara,  where  the  light  ones  live,

Spin,  pray,  then  sing  like  linnets  o'er  the  flax.

"  Anywhere,  anyhow,  out  of  my  husband's  house

^'  Is  heaven,"  cried  she, — was  therefore  suited  so.

But  for  Count  Guido  Franceschini,  he —  1235

The  injured  man  thus  righted — found  no  heaven

I'  the  house  when  he  returned  there,  I  engage,

Was  welcomed  by  the  city  turned  upside  down

In  a  chorus  of  inquiry.     ^'  What,  back — you  ?

"  And  no  wife  ?     Left  her  with  the  Penitents  ?  1240

'^  Ah,  being  young  and  pretty,  'twere  a  shame

"  To  have  her  whipped  in  public  :  leave  the  job

^^  To  the  priests  who  understand  !   Such  priests  as  yours —

"  (Pontifex  Maximus  whipped  Vestals  once)

"  Our  madcap  Caponsacchi :  think  of  him  !  1245

"  So,  he  fired  up,  showed  fight  and  skill  of  fence  ?

"  Ay,  you  drew  also,  but  you  did  not  fight !

"  The  wiser,  'tis  a  word  and  a  blow  with  him,

**  True  Caponsacchi,  of  old  Head-i'-the-Sack


140  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

*'  That  fought  at  Fiesole  ere  Florence  was  :  1250

^^  He  had  done  enough,  to  firk  you  were  too  much.

"  And  did  the  little  lady  menace  you,

"  Make  at  your  breast  with  your  own  harmless  sword  ?

^'  The  spitfire  !  Well,  thank  God  you're  safe  and  sound,

"  Have  kept  the  sixth  commandment  whether  or  no

"  The  lady  broke  the  seventh  :  I  only  wish  1256

"  I  were  as  saint-like,  could  contain  me  so.

^'  I  am  a  sinner,  I  fear  I  should  have  left

^'  Sir  Priest  no  nose-tip  to  turn  up  at  me  1"

You,  Sir,  who  listen  but  interpose  no  word,  1260

Ask  yourself,  had  you  borne  a  baiting  thus  ?

Was  it  enough  to  make  a  wise  man  mad  ?

Oh,  but  I'll  have  your  verdict  at  the  end  1

Well,  not  enough,  it  seems  :  such  mere  hurt  falls.

Frets  awhile,  and  aches  long,  then  less  and  less,        1265

And  so  is  done  with.     Such  was  not  the  scheme

O'  the  pleasant  Comparini :  on  Guido's  wound

Ever  in  due  succession,  drop  by  drop.


HALF-ROME.  I4I


Came  slow  distilment  from  the  alembic  hare

Set  on  to  simmer  by  Canidian  hate,  1270

Corrosives  keeping  the  man's  misery  raw.

First  fire-drop, — ^when  he  thought  to  make  the  best

O'  the  bad,  to  wring  fi'om  out  the  sentence  passed,

Poor,  pitiful,  absurd  although  it  were.

Yet  what  might  eke  him  out  result  enough  1275

And  make  it  worth  his  while  he  had  the  right

And  not  the  wrong  i'  the  matter  judged  at  Rome.

Inadequate  her  punishment,  no  less

Punished  in  some  slight  sort  his  wife  had  been ;

Then,  punished  for  adultery,  what  else  ?  1280

On  such  admitted  crime  he  thought  to  seize.

And  institute  procedure  in  the  courts

Which  cut  corruption  of  this  kind  from  man.

Cast  loose  a  wife  proved  loose  and  castaway  :

He  claimed  in  due  form  a  divorce  at  least.  1285

This  claim  was  met  now  by  a  counterclaim :
Pompilia  sought  divorce  from  bed  and  board


142  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Of  Guido,  whose  outrageous  cruelty,

Whose  mother's  malice  and  whose  brother's  hate

Were  just  the  white  o'  the  charge,  such  dreadful  depths

Blackened  its  centre, — hints  of  worse  than  hate,        1291

Love  from  that  brother,  by  that  Guido's  guile.

That  mother's  prompting.     Such  reply  was  made,

So  was  the  engine  loaded,  wound  up,  sprung

On  Guido,  who  received  the  bolt  in  breast ;  1295

But  no  less  bore  up,  giddily  perhaps.

He  had  the  Abate  Paolo  still  in  Rome,

Brother  and  friend  and  fighter  on  his  side  :

They  rallied  in  a  measure,  met  the  foe

Manlike,  joined  battle  in  the  public  courts,  1300

As  if  to  shame  supine  law  from  her  sloth :

And  waiting  her  award,  let  beat  the  while

Arezzo's  banter,  Rome's  buffoonery,

On  this  ear  and  on  that  ear,  deaf  alike,

Safe  from  worse  outrage.     Let  a  scorpion  nip,  1305

And  never  mind  till  he  contorts  his  tail !

But  there  was  sting  i'  the  creature  ;  thus  it  struck.


HALF-ROME.  '  1 43


Guido  had  thought  in  his  simplicity —

That  lying  declaration  of  remorse,

That  story  of  the  child  which  was  no  child  13  lo

And  motherhood  no  motherhood  at  all,

— That  even  this  sin  might  have  its  sort  of  good

Inasmuch  as  no  question  could  be  more.

Call  it  false,  call  the  story  true,  no  claim

Of  further  parentage  pretended  now  :  13 15

The  parents  had  abjured  all  right,  at  least,

I'  the  woman  still  his  wife  :  to  plead  right  now

Were  to  declare  the  abjuration  false  :

He  was  relieved  from  any  fear  henceforth

Their  hands  might  touch,  their  breath  defile  again     1320

Pompilia  with  his  name  upon  her  yet.

Well,  no  :  the  next  news  was,  Pompilia's  health

Demanded  change  after  full  three  long  weeks

Spent  in  devotion  with  the  Sisterhood, —

Rendering  sojourn, — so  the  court  opined, —  1325

Too  irksome,  since  the  convent's  walls  were  high

And  windows  narrow,  nor  was  air  enough


144  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Nor  light  enough,  but  all  looked  prison-like,

The    last    thing    which    had    come    in    the    court's

head.
Propose  a  new  expedient  therefore, — this  !  1330

She  had  demanded — had  obtained  indeed,
By  intervention  of  whatever  friends
Or  perhaps  lovers — (beauty  in  distress,
In  one  whose  tale  is  the  town-talk  beside,
Never  lacks  friendship's  arm  about  her  neck) —         1335
Not  freedom,  scarce  remitted  penalty,
Solely  the  transfer  to  some  private  place
Where  better  air,  more  light,  new  food  might  be —
Incarcerated  (call  it,  all  the  same)

At  some  sure  friend's  house  she  must  keep  inside,      1340
Be  found  in  at  requirement  fast  enough, —
Do77iiis  pro  careers,  in  Roman  style.
You  keep  the  house  i'  the  main,  as  most  men  do
And  all  good  women  :  but  free  otherwise,
Should  friends  arrive,  to  lodge  and  entertain.  1345

And  such  a  domum,  such  a  dwelling-place,


HALF-ROME.  1 45


Having  all  Rome  to  choose  from,  where  chose  she  ?

What  house  obtained  Pompilia's  preference  ?

Why,  just  the  Comparini's — just,  do  you  mark,

Theirs  who  renounced  all  part  and  lot  in  her  1350

So  long  as  Guido  could  be  robbed  thereby.

And  only  fell  back  on  relationship

And  found  their  daughter  safe  and  sound  again

So  soon  as  that  might  stab  him :  yes,  the  pair

Who,  as  I  told  you,  first  had  baited  hook  1355

With  this  poor  gilded  fly  Pompilia-thing,

Then  caught  the  fish,  pulled  Guido  to  the  shore

And  gutted  him, — now  found  a  further  use

For    the    bait,    would    trail    the    gauze    wings    yet

again
I'  the  way  of  what  new  swimmer  passed  their  stand.  1360
They  took  Pompilia  to  their  hiding-place —
Not  in  the  heart  of  Rome  as  formerly.
Under  observance,  subject  to  control —
But  out  o'  the  way, — or  in  the  way,  who  knows  ?
That  blind  mute  villa  lurking  by  the  gate  1365

VOL.  L  L


146  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

At  Via  Paulina,  not  so  hard  to  miss

By  the  honest  eye,  easy  enough  to  find

In  twihght  by  marauders  :  where  perchance

Some  muffled  Caponsacchi  might  repair,

Employ  odd  moments  when  he  too  tried  change,       1370

Found  that  a  friend's  abode  was  pleasanter

Than  relegation,  penance  and  the  rest.

Come,  here's  the  last  drop  does  its  worst  to  wound,

Here's  Guido  poisoned  to  the  bone,  you  say.

Your  boasted  still's  full  strain  and  strength:  not  so!    1375

One  master-squeeze  from  screw  shall  bring  to  birth

The  hoard  i'  the  heart  o'  the  toad,  hell's  quintessence.

He  learned  the  true  convenience  of  the  change,

And  why  a  convent  wants  the  cheerful  hearts

And  helpful  hands  which  female  straits  require,  1380

When,  in  the  blind  mute  villa  by  the  gate,

Pompilia — what  ?  sang,  danced,  saw  company  ?

— Gave  birth,  Sir,  to  a  child,  his  son  and  heir.

Or  Guido's  heir  and  Caponsacchi's  son.    .


4^


HALF-ROME.  1 47


I  want  your  word  now :  what  do  you  say  to  this  ?      1385

What  would  say  little  Arezzo  and  great  Rome,

And  what  did  God  say  and  the  devil  say

One  at  each  ear  o'  the  man,  the  husband,  now

The  father  ?    Why,  the  overburdened  mind

Broke  down,  what  was  a  brain  became  a  blaze.  1390

In  fury  of  the  moment — (that  first  news

Fell  on  the  Count  among  his  vines,  it  seems.

Doing  his  farm-work,) — why,  he  summoned  steward,

Called    in    the    first    four    hard    hands    and    stout

hearts
From  field  and  furrow,  poured  forth  his  appeal,         1395
Not  to  Rome's  law  and  gospel  any  more,
But  this  clown  with  a  mother  or  a  wife,
That  clodpole  with  a  sister  or  a  son  :
And,  whereas  law  and  gospel  held  their  peace.
What  wonder  if  the  sticks  and  stones  cried  out?        1400

All  five  soon  somehow  found  themselves  at  Rome,
At  the  villa  door :  there  was  the  warmth  and  light —


148  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

The  sense  of  life  so  just  an  inch  inside —

Some  angel  must  have  whispered  *^  One  more  chance  ! "

He  gave  it :  bade  the  others  stand  aside  :  1405

Knocked  at  the  door, — "  Who  is  it  knocks  ?  "  cried  one.

"  I  will  make,"  surely  Guido's  angel  said,

'^  One  final  essay,  last  experiment,

"  Speak  the  word,  name  the  name  from  out  all  names

^*  Which,  if, — as  doubtless  strong  illusions  are,  1410

"  And  strange  disguisings  whence  even  truth  seems  false,

*'  And,  for  I  am  a  man,  I  dare  not  do

''  God's  work  until  assured  I  see  with  God, —

"  If  I  should  bring  my  lips  to  breathe  that  name

"  And  they  be  innocent, — nay,  by  one  touch  141 5

"  Of  innocence  redeemed  from  utter  guilt, — •

"  That  name  will  bar  the  door  and  bid  fate  pass.

"  I  will  not  say  *  It  is  a  messenger,

"  *  A  neighbour,  even  a  belated  man,

^'  *  Much  less  your  husband's  friend,  your  husband's  self:'

"  At  such  appeal  the  door  is  bound  to  ope.  142 1


HALF-RO:.IE.  J  49


''  But  I  will  say  " — here's  rhetoric  and  to  spare  !
Why,  Sir,  the  stumbling-block  is  cursed  and  kicked,
Block  though  it  be ;  the  name  that  brought  offence
Will  bring  offence  :  the  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire    1425
Although  that  fire  feed  on  a  taper-wick
Which  never  left  the  altar  nor  singed  fly  :
And  had  a  harmless  man  tripped  you  by  chance,
How  would  you  wait  him,  stand  or  step  aside,
When  next  you  heard  he  rolled  your  way  ?     Enough.

"  Giuseppe  Caponsacchi !  "  Guido  cried  ;  1431

And  open  flew  the  door  :  enough  again.

Vengeance,  30U  know,  burst,  like  a  mountain- wave

That  holds  a  monster  in  it,  over  the  house,

And  wiped  its  filthy  four  walls  free  again  1435

With  a  wash  of  hell-fire, — father,  mother,  wife.

Killed  them  all,  bathed  his  name  clean  in  their  blood,

And,  reeking  so,  was  caught,  his  friends  and  he,

Haled  hither  and  imprisoned  yesternight

O'  the  day  all  this  was.  1440


150  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Now  the  whole  is  known,
And  how  the  old  couple  come  to  lie  in  state
Though  hacked  to  pieces, — never,  the  expert  say.
So  thorough  a  study  of  stabbing — while  the  wife
Viper-like,  very  difficult  to  slay,  1445

Writhes  still  through  eveiy  ring  of  her,  poor  wretch,
At  the  Hospital  hard  by — survives,  we'll  hope,
To  somewhat  purify  her  putrid  soul
By  full  confession,  make  so  much  amends
While  time  lasts  ;  since  at  day's  end  die  she  must.     1450

For  Caponsacchi, — why,  they'll  have  him  here,

The  hero  of  the  adventure,  who  so  fit

To  tell  it  in  the  coming  Carnival  ?

'Twill  make  the  fortune  of  whate'er  saloon

Hears  him  recount,  with  helpful  cheek,  and  eye        1455

Hotly  indignant  now,  now  dewy-dimmed.

The  incidents  of  flight,  pursuit,  surprise,

Capture,  with  hints  of  kisses  all  between —

While  Guido,  the  most  unromantic  spouse.


HALF-ROME.  151


No  longer  fit  to  laugh  at  since  the  blood  1460

Gave  the  broad  farce  an  all  too  brutal  ah*,

Why,  he  and  those  our  luckless  friends  of  his

May  tumble  in  the  straw  this  bitter  day —

Laid  by  the  heels  i'  the  New  Prison,  I  hear,

To  bide  their  trial,  since  trial,  and  for  the  life,  1465

Follows  if  but  for  form's  sake  :  yes,  indeed  !

But  with  a  certain  issue  :  no  dispute,

'^  Try  him,"  bids  law  :  formalities  oblige  :

But  as  to  the  issue, — look  me  in  the  face  ! —

If  the  law  thinks  to  find  them  guilty.  Sir,  1470

Master  or  men — touch  one  hair  of  the  five,

Then  I  say  in  the  name  of  all  that's  left

Of  honour  in  Rome,  civility  i'  the  world

Whereof  Rome  boasts  herself  the  central  source, —

There's  an  end  to  all  hope  of  justice  more.  1475

Astrsea's  gone  indeed,  let  hope  go  too  !

Who  is  it  dares  impugn  the  natural  law  ?

Deny  God's  word  "  the  faithless  wife  shall  die  ?  "


152  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

What,  are  we  blind  ?     How  can  we  fail  to  see,

This  crowd  of  miseries  make  the  man  a  mark,  1480

Accumulate  on  one  devoted  head

For  our  example,  yours  and  mine  who  read

Its  lesson  thus — "  Henceforward  let  none  dare

*'  Stand,  like  a  natural  in  the  public  way,

"  Letting  the  very  urchins  twitch  his  beard  1485

"  And  tweak  his  nose,  to  earn  a  nickname  so,

"  Of  the  male-Grissel  or  the  modern  Job  !  "

Had  Guido,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.

Summed  up  the  reckoning,  promptly  paid  himself,

That  morning  when  he  came  up  with  the  pair  1490

At  the  wayside  inn,-^exacted  his  just  debt

By  aid  of  what  first  mattock,  pitchfork,  axe

Came  to  hand  in  the  helpful  stable-yard.

And  with  that  axe,  if  providence  so  pleased.

Cloven  each  head,  by  some  Rolando-stroke,  1495

In  one  clean  cut  from  crown  to  clavicle,

— Slain  the  priest-gallant,  the  wife-paramour.

Sticking,  for  all  defence,  in  each  skull's  cleft


HALF-ROME.  1 53


The  rhyme  and  reason  of  the  stroke  thus  dealt,

To-wit,  those  letters  and  last  evidence  1500

Of  shame,  each  package  in  its  proper  place, —

Bidding,  who  pitied,  undistend  the  skulls, —

I  say,  the  world  had  praised  the  man.     But  no  !

That  were  too  plain,  too  straight,  too  simply  just !

He  hesitates,  calls  law  forsooth  to  help.  1505

And  law,  distasteful  to  who  calls  in  law

When  honour  is  beforehand  and  would  serve,

What  wonder  if  law  hesitate  in  turn,

Plead  her  disuse  to  calls  o'  the  kind,  reply

Smiling  a  litde  "  'Tis  yourself  assess  15 10

"  The  worth  of  what's  lost,  sum  of  damage  done :

"  What  you  touched  with  so  light  a  finger-tip,

"  You  whose  concern  it  was  to  grasp  the  thing,

"  Why  must  law  gird  herself  and  grapple  with  ?

*^  Law,  alien  to  the  actor  whose  warm  blood  15 15

"  Asks  heat  from  law  whose  veins  run  lukewarm  milk, —

"  What  you  dealt  lightly  with,  shall  law  make  out

"  Heinous  forsooth?"


154  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Sir,   what's  the  good  of  law
In    a    case    o'    the    kind?       None,    as    she    all    but

says.  1520

Call  in  law  when  a  neighbour  breaks  your  fence,
Cribs  from  your  field,  tampers  with  rent  or  lease,
Touches    the    purse    or    pocket,  —  but    wooes    your

wife  ?
No  :  take  the  old  way  trod  when  men  were  men  !
Guido  preferred  the  new  path, — for  his  pains,  1525

Stuck  in  a  quagmire,  floundered  worse  and  worse
Until  he  managed  somehow  scramble  back
Into  the  safe  sure  rutted  road  once  more.
Revenged  his  own  wrong  like  a  gentleman.
Once  back  'mid  the  familiar  prints,  no  doubt  1530

He  made  too  rash  amends  for  his  first  fault.
Vaulted  too  loftily  over  what  barred  him  late.
And  lit  i'  the  mire  again, — the  common  chance.
The  natural  over-energy :  the  deed
Maladroit  yields  three  deaths  instead  of  one,  1535

And  one  life  left :  for  where's  the  Canon's  corpse  ?


HALF-ROME.  1 55


All  which  is  the  worse  for  Guido,  but,  be  frank —

The  better  for  you  and  me  and  all  the  world,

Husbands  of  wives,  especially  in  Rome.

The  thing  is  put  right,  in  the  old  place, — ay,  1540

The  rod  hangs  on  its  nail  behind  the  door.

Fresh  from  the  brine  :  a  matter  I  commend

To  the  notice,  during  Carnival  that's  near.

Of  a  certain  what's-his-name  and  jackanapes

Somewhat  too  civil  of  eves  with  lute  and  song  1545

About  a  house  here,  where  I  keep  a  wife.

(You,  being  his  cousin,  may  go  tell  him  so.)


(     157     )


III.
THE  OTHER  HALF-ROME.

Another  day  that  finds  her  living  yet,

Little  Pompilia,  with  the  patient  brow

And  lamentable  smile  on  those  poor  lips,

And,  under  the  white  hospital-array,

A  flower-like  body,  to  frighten  at  a  bruise  5

You  'd  think,  yet  now,  stabbed  through  and  through  again,

Alive  i'  the  ruins.     'T  is  a  miracle.

It  seems  that,  when  her  husband  struck  her  first,

She  prayed  Madonna  just  that  she  might  live

So  long  as  to  confess  and  be  absolved ;  10

And  whether  it  was  that,  all  her  sad  life  long.


158  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

Never  before  successful  in  a  prayer,

This  prayer  rose  with  authority  too  dread, —

Or  whether,  because  earth  was  hell  to  her,

By  compensation,  when  the  blackness  broke  15

She  got  one  glimpse  of  quiet  and  the  cool  blue.

To  show  her  for  a  moment  such  things  were, —

Or  else, — as  the  Augustinian  Brother  thinks,

The  friar  who  took  confession  from  her  lip, —

When  a  probationary  soul  that  moves  20

From  nobleness  to  nobleness,  as  she,

Over  the  rough  way  of  the  world,  succumbs,

Bloodies  its  last  thorn  with  unflinching  foot.

The  angels  love  to  do  their  work  betimes,

Staunch  some  wounds  here  nor  leave  so  much  for  God.  25

Who  knows  ?     However  it  be,  confessed,  absolved.

She  lies,  with  overplus  of  life  beside

To  speak  and  right  herself  from  first  to  last.

Right  the  friend  also,  lamb-pure,  lion-brave,

Care  for  the  boy's  concerns,  to  save  the  son  30

From  the  sire,  her  two-weeks'  infant  orphaned  thus,


THE   OTHER   HALF-ROME.  1 59

And — with  best  smile  of  all  reserved  for  him —
Pardon  that  sire  and  husband  from  the  heart.
A  miracle,  so  tell  your  Molinists  !

There  she  lies  in  the  long  white  lazar-house.  35

Rome  has  besieged,  these  two  days,  never  doubt.

Saint  Anna's  where  she  waits  her  death,  to  hear

Though  but  the  chink  o'  the  bell,  turn  o'  the  hinge

When  the  reluctant  wicket  opes  at  last.

Lets  in,  on  now  this  and  now  that  pretence,  40

Too  many  by  half, — complain  the  men  of  art, —

For  a  patient  in  such  plight.     The  lawyers  first

Paid  the  due  visit — justice  must  be  done  ;

They  took  her  witness,  why  the  murder  was ;

Then  the  priests  followed  properly, — a  soul  45

To  shrive ;  't  was  Brother  Celestine's  own  right,

The  same  who  noises  thus  her  gifts  abroad  :

But  many  more,  who  found  they  were  old  friends.

Pushed  in  to  have  their  stare  and  take  their  talk

And  go  forth  boasting  of  it  and  to  boast.  50


l6o  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Old  Monna  Baldi  chatters  like  a  jay,

Swears — but  that,  prematurely  trundled  out

Just  as  she  felt  the  benefit  begin,

The  miracle  was  snapped  up  by  somebody, —

Her  palsied  limb  'gan  prick  and  promise  life  55

At    touch    o'    the    bedclothes    merely,  —  how    much

more
Had  she  but  brushed  the  body  as  she  tried  !
Cavalier  Carlo — well,  there  's  some  excuse
For  him — Maratta  who  paints  Virgins  so —
He  too  must  fee  the  porter  and  slip  by  60

With  pencil  cut  and  paper  squared,  and  straight
There  was  he  figuring  away  at  face —
"  A  lovelier  face  is  not  in  Rome,"  cried  he,
*^  Shaped  like  a  peacock's  egg,  the  pure  as  pearl,
"  That  hatches  you  anon  a  snow-white  chick."  65

Then,  oh  that  pair  of  eyes,  that  pendent  hair.
Black  this,  and  black  the  other  !     Mighty  fine — •
But  nobody  cared  ask  to  paint  the  same.
Nor  grew  a  poet  over  hair  and  eyes


THE    OTHER   HALF-ROME.  l6l

Four  little  years  ago  when,  ask  and  have,  70

The  woman  who  wakes  all  this  rapture  leaned

Flower-like  from  out  her  window  long  enough,

As  much  uncomplimented  as  uncropped

By  comers  and  goers  in  Via  Vittoria  :  eh  ?

'T  is  just  a  flower's  fate  :  past  parterre  we  trip,  75

Till  peradventure  someone  plucks  our  sleeve —

'^  Yon  blossom  at  the  briar's  end,  that  's  the  rose

''  Two  jealous  people  fought  for  yesterday

^'  And  killed  each  other  :  see,  there  's  undisturbed

*'  A  pretty  pool  at  the  root,  of  rival  red !"  80

Then  cry  we,  *'  Ah,  the  perfect  paragon  !"

Then  crave  we,  ^^  Just  one  keepsake-leaf  for  us  !"

Truth  lies  between  :  there  's  anyhow  a  child

Of  seventeen  years,  whether  a  flower  or  weed.

Ruined  :  who  did  it  shall  account  to  Christ —  85

Having  no  pity  on  the  harmless  life

And  gentle  face  and  girlish  form  he  found,

And  thus  flings  back :  go  practise  if  you  please

VOL.    I.  M


1 62  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

With  men  and  women  :  leave  a  child  alone

For  Christ's  particular  love's  sake  ! — so  I  say.  90

Somebody,  at  the  bedside,  said  much  more,

Took  on  him  to  explain  the  secret  cause

O'  the  crime  :  quoth  he,  "  Such  crimes  are  very  rife,

"  Explode  nor  make  us  wonder  now-a-days,

"  Seeing  that  Antichrist  disseminates  95

*'  That  doctrine  of  the  Philosophic  Sin  :

"  Molinos'  sect  will  soon  make  earth  too  hot ! "

^^  Nay,"  groaned  the  Augustinian,  '^  what 's  there  new?

^'  Crime  will  not  fail  to  flare  up  from  men's  hearts

^'  While  hearts  are  men's  and  so  born  criminal ;  100

"  Which  one  fact,  always  old  yet  ever  new,

"  Accounts  for  so  much  crime  that,  for  my  part,

"  Molinos  may  go  whistle  to  the  wind  ^

*'  That  waits  outside  a  certain  church,  you  know  ! "

Though  really  it  does  seem  as  if  she  here,  105

Pompilia,  living  so  and  dying  thus,


THE    OTHER   HALF-ROME.  1 63

Has  had  undue  experience  how  much  crime

A  heart  can  hatch.     Why  was  she  made  to  learn

— Not  you,  not  I,  not  even  Molinos'  self —

What  Guido  Franceschini's  heart  could  hold?  no

Thus  saintship  is  effected  probably ;

No  sparing  saints  the  process  ! — which  the  more

Tends  to  the  reconciling  us,  no  saints,

To  sinnership,  immunity  and  all.

"  For  see  now :  Pietro  and  Violante's  life  115

Till  seventeen  years  ago,  all  Rome  might  note
And  quote  for  happy — see  the  signs  distinct
Of  happiness  as  we  yon  Triton's  trump.
What  could  they  be  but  happy  ? — balanced  so.
Nor  low  i'  the  social  scale  nor  yet  too  high,  120

Nor  poor  nor  richer  than  comports  with  ease.
Nor  bright  and  envied,  nor  obscure  and  scorned.
Nor  so  young  that  their  pleasures  fell  too  thick,
Nor  old  past  catching  pleasure  when  it  fell,
Nothing  above,  below  the  just  degree,  125


164  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

All  at  the  mean  where  joy's  components  mix.

So  again,  in  the  couple's  very  souls

You  saw  the  adequate  half  with  half  to  match,

Each  having  and  each  lacking  somewhat,  both

Making  a  whole  that  had  all  and  lacked  nought;         130

The  round  and  sound,  in  whose  composure  just

The  acquiescent  and  recipient  side

Was  Pietro's,  and  the  stirring  striving  one

Violante's  :  both  in  union  gave  the  due

Quietude,  enterprise,  craving  and  content,  135

Which  go  to  bodily  health  and  peace  of  mind.

But,  as  't  is  said  a  body,  rightly  mixed,

Each  element  in  equipoise,  would  last

Too  long  and  live  for  ever, — accordingly

Holds  a  germ — sand-grain  weight  too  much  i'  the  scale —

Ordained  to  get  predominance  one  day  141

And  so  bring  all  to  ruin  and  release, —

J«^ot  otherwise  a  fatal  germ  lurked  here  :

"  With  mortals  much  must  go,  but  something  stays  ;

^'  Nothing  will  stay  of  our  so  happy  selyes."  145


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 65

Out  of  the  very  ripeness  of  life's  core

A  worm  was  bred — "  Our  life  shall  leave  no  fruit."

Enough  of  bliss,  they  thought,  could  bliss  bear  seed,

Yield  its  like,  propagate  a  bliss  in  turn

And  keep  the  kind  up  ;  not  supplant  themselves  150

But  put  in  evidence,  record  they  were.

Show  them,  when  done  with,  i'  the  shape  of  a  child.

**  'T  is  in  a  child,  man  and  wife  grow  complete,

"  One  flesh  :  God  says  so  :  let  him  do  his  work  ! "

Now,  one  reminder  of  this  gnawing  want,  155

One  special  prick  o'  the  maggot  at  the  core.

Always  befell  when,  as  the  day  came  round,

A  certain  yearly  sum, — our  Pietro  being,

As  the  long  name  runs,  an  usufructuary, —

Dropped  in  the  common  bag  as  interest  160

Of  money,  his  till  death,  not  afterward,

FaiHng  an  heir  :  an  heir  would  take  and  take,

A  child  of  theirs  be  wealthy  in  their  place

To  nobody's  hurt — the  stranger  else  seized  all.


1 66  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Prosperity  rolled  river-like  and  stopped,  165

Making  their  mill  go  ;  but  when  wheel  wore  out,
The  wave  would  find  a  space  and  sweep  on  free
And,  half-a-mile  off,  grind  some  neighbour's  corn.

Adam-like,  Pietro  sighed  and  said  no  more  :

Eve  saw  the  apple  was  fair  and  good  to  taste,  170

So,  plucked  it,  having  asked  the  snake  advice.

She  told  her  husband  God  was  merciful,

And  his  and  her  prayer  granted  at  the  last  :

Let  the  old  mill-stone  moulder, — wheel  unworn.

Quartz  from  the  quarry,  shot  into  the  stream  175

Adroitly,  should  go  bring  grist  as  before —

Their  house  continued  to  them  by  an  heir,

Their  vacant  heart  replenished  with  a  child.

We  have  her  own  confession  at  full  length

Made  in  the  first  remorse  :  't  was  Jubilee  180

Pealed  in  the  ear  o'  the  conscience  and  it  woke.

She  found  she  had  offended  God  no  doubt,

So  much  was  plain  from  what  had  happened  since.


THE   OTHER   HALF-ROME.  1 67

Misfortune  on  misfortune ;  but  she  harmed

No  one  i'  the  world,  so  far  as  she  could  see.  185

The  act  had  gladdened  Pietro  to  the  height,

Her  husband — God  himself  must  gladden  so

Or  not  at  all — (thus  much  seems  probable

From  the  implicit  faith,  or  rather  say

Stupid  credulity  of  the  foolish  man  190

Who  swallowed  such  a  tale  nor  strained  a  whit

Even  at  his  wife's  far-over-iifty  years

Matching  his  sixty-and-under.)     Him  she  blessed,

And  as  for  doing  any  detriment

To  the  veritable  heir, — why,  tell  her  first  195

Who  was  he  ?     Which  of  all  the  hands  held  up

I'  the  crowd,  would  one  day  gather  round  their  gate,

Did  she  so  wrong  by  intercepting  thus

The  ducat,  spendthrift  fortune  thought  to  fling

For  a  scramble  just  to  make  the  mob  break  shins?     200

She  kept  it,  saved  them  kicks  and  cuffs  thereby.

While  at  the  least  one  good  work  had  she  wrought,

Good,  clearly  and  incontestably  !     Her  cheat —


1 68  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

What  was  it  to  its  subject,  the  child's  seh",

But  charity  and  rehgion  ?     See  the  girl  !  205

A  body  most  like — a  soul  too  probably —

Doomed  to  death,  such  a  double  death  as  waits

The  illicit  offspring  of  a  common  trull,

Sure  to  resent  and  forthwith  rid  herself

Of  a  mere  interruption  to  sin's  trade,  210

In  the  efficacious  way  old  Tiber  knows.

Was  not  so  much  proved  by  the  ready  sale

O'  the  child,  glad  transfer  of  this  irksome  chance  ?

Well  then,  she  had  caught  up  this  castaway :

This  fragile  egg,  some  careless  wild  bird  dropped,       215

She  had  picked  from  where  it  waited  the  foot-fall,

And  put  in  her  own  breast  till  forth  broke  finch

Able  to  sing  God  praise  on  mornings  now.

What  so  excessive  harm  was  done  ? — she  asked.

To  which  demand  the  dreadful  answer  comes —  220

For  that  same  deed,  now  at  Lorenzo's  church,
Both  agents,  conscious  and  inconscious,  lie ;


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 69

While  she,  the  deed  was  done  to  benefit,

Lies  also,  the  most  lamentable  of  things.

Yonder  where  curious  people  count  her  breaths,  225

Calculate  how  long  yet  the  little  life

Unspilt  may  serve  their  turn  nor  spoil  the  show,

Give  them  their  story,  then  the  church  its  group.

Well,  having  gained  Pompilia,  the  girl  grew

I'  the  midst  of  Pietro  here,.  Violante  there,  230

Each,  like  a  semicircle  with  stretched  arms.

Joining  the  other  round  her  preciousness —

Two  walls  that  go  about  a  garden-plot

Where  a  chance  sliver,  branchlet  slipt  from  bole

Of  some  tongue-leaved  eye-figured  Eden  tree,  235

Filched  by  two  exiles  and  borne  far  away.

Patiently  glorifies  their  solitude, —

Year  by  year  mounting,  grade  by  grade  surmounts

The  builded  brick-work,  yet  is  compassed  still.

Still  hidden  happily  and  shielded  safe, —  240

Else  why  should  miracle  have  graced  the  ground  ?


1 70  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

But  on  the  twelfth  sun  that  brought  April  there

What  meant  that  laugh  ?     The  copmg-stone  was  reached ;

Nay,  a  light  tuft  of  bloom  towered  above

To  be  toyed  with  by  butterfly  or  bee,  245

Done  good  to  or  else  harm  to  from  outside :

Pompilia's  root,  stem  and  a  branch  or  two

Home  enclosed  still,  the  rest  would  be  the  world's.

All  which  was  taught  our  couple  though  obtuse.

Since  walls  have  ears,  when  one  day  brought  a  priest,  250

Smooth-mannered  soft-speeched  sleek-cheeked  visitor,

The  notable  Abate  Paolo — known

As  younger  brother  of  a  Tuscan  house

Whereof  the  actual  representative.

Count  Guido,  had  employed  his  youth  and  age  255

In  culture  of  Rome's  most  productive  plant —

A  cardinal :  but  years  pass  and  change  comes,

In  token  of  which,  here  was  our  Paolo  brought

To  broach  a  weighty  business.     Might  he  speak  ?

Yes — to  Violante  somehow  caught  alone  260

While  Pietro  took  his  after-dinner  doze.


THE    OTHER   HALF-ROME.  171

And  the  young  maiden,  busily  as  befits,
Minded  her  broider-frame  three  chambers  off.

So — ^giving  now  his  great  flap-hat  a  gloss

With  flat  o'  the  hand  between-whiles,  soothing  now     265

The  silk  from  out  its  creases  o'er  the  calf,

Setting  the  stocking  clerical  again,

But  never  disengaging,  once  engaged,

The  thin  clear  grey  hold  of  his  eyes  on  her —

He  dissertated  on  that  Tuscan  house,  270

Those  Franceschini, — very  old  they  were —

Not  rich  however — oh,  not  rich,  at  least.

As  people  look  to  be  who,  low  i'  the  scale

One  way,  have  reason,  rising  all  they  can

By  favour  of  the  money-bag :  't  is  fair —  275

Do  all  gifts  go  together  ?     But  do  n't  suppose

That  being  not  so  rich  means  all  so  poor !

Say  rather,  well  enough— i'  the  way,  indeed,

Ha,  ha,  to  better  fortune  than  the  best,

Since  if  his  brother's  patron-friend  kept  faith,  280


172  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Put  into  promised  play  the  Cardinalate,
Their  house  might  wear  the  red  cloth  that  keeps  warm,
Would  but  the  Count  have  patience — there  's  the  point !
For  he  was  slipping  into  years  apace,
And  years  make  men  restless— they  needs  must  see    285
Some  certainty,  some  sort  of  end  assured.
Sparkle,  tho'  from  the  topmost  beacon- tip
That  warrants  life  a  harbour  through  the  haze.
In  short,  call  him  fantastic  as  you  choose,
Guido  was  home-sick,  yearned  for  the  old  sights  290

And  usual  faces, — fain  would  settle  himself
And  have  the  patron's  bounty  when  it  fell
Irrigate  far  rather  than  deluge  near,
Go  fertilize  Arezzo,  not  flood  Rome.
Sooth  to  say,  't  was  the  wiser  wish  :  the  Count  295

Proved  wanting  in  ambition, — let  us  avouch.
Since  truth  is  best, — in  callousness  of  heart.
Winced  at  those  pin-pricks  whereby  honours  hang
A  ribbon  o'er  each  puncture  :  his — no  soul
Ecclesiastic  (here  the  hat  was  brushed)  300


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 73

Humble  but  self-sustaining,  calm  and  cold,

Having,  as  one  who  puts  his  hand  to  the  plough,

Renounced  the  over-vivid  family-feel —

Poor  brother  Guido  !     All  too  plain,  he  pined

Amid  Rome's  pomp  and  glare  for  dinginess  305

And  that  dilapidated  palace-shell

Vast  as  a  quarry  and,  very  like,  as  bare —

Since  to  this  comes  old  grandeur  now-a-days —

Or  that  absurd  wild  villa  in  the  waste

O'  the  hill  side,  breezy  though,  for  who  likes  air,         310

Vittiano,  nor  unpleasant  with  its  vines,

Outside  the  city  and  the  summer  heats.

And  now  his  harping  on  this  one  tense  chord

The  villa  and  the  palace,  palace  this

And  villa  the  other,  all  day  and  all  night  315

Creaked  like  the  implacable  cicala's  cry

And  made  one's  ear-drum  ache  :  nought  else  would  serve

But  that,  to  light  his  mother's  visage  up

With  second  youth,  hope,  gaiety  again,

He  must  find  straightway,  woo  and  haply  win  320


174  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

And  bear  away  triumphant  back,  some  wife.

Well  now,  the  man  was  rational  in  his  way —

He,  the  Abate, — ought  he  to  interpose  ?

Unless  by  straining  still  his  tutelage

(Priesthood  leaps  over  elder-brothership)  325

Across  this  difficulty  :  then  let  go,

Leave  the  poor  fellow  in  peace  !    Would  that  be  wrong  ?

There  was  no  making  Guido  great,  it  seems.

Spite  of  himself :  then  happy  be  his  dole  !

Indeed,  the  Abate's  little  interest  33a

Was  somewhat  nearly  touched  i'  the  case,  they  saw  :

Since  if  his  simple  kinsman  so  were  bent.

Began  his  rounds  in  Rome  to  catch  a  wife,

Full  soon  would  such  unworldliness  surprise

The  rare  bird,  sprinkle  salt  on  phoenix'  tail,  335

And  so  secure  the  nest  a  sparrow-hawk.

No  lack  of  mothers  here  in  Rome, — no  dread

Of  daughters  lured  as  larks  by  looking-glass  !

The  first  name-pecking  credit-scratching  fowl

Would  drop  her  unfledged  cuckoo  in  our  nest  340


THE    OTHER   HALF-ROME.  175

To  gather  greyness  there,  give  voice  at  length

And  shame  the  brood  .  .  but  it  was  long  ago

When  crusades  were,  and  we  sent  eagles  forth !

No,  that  at  least  the  Abate  could  forestall.

He  read  the  thought  within  his  brother's  word,  345

Knev/  what  he  purposed  better  than  himself  ■

We  want  no  name  and  fame — having  our  own  :

No  worldly  aggrandizement — such  we  fly  :

But  if  some  wonder  of  a  woman's-heart

Were  yet  untainted  on  this  grimy  earth,  350

Tender  and  true — tradition  tells  of  such —

Prepared  to  pant  in  time  and  tune  with  ours —

If  some  good  girl  (a  girl,  since  she  must  take

The  new  bent,  live  new  life,  adopt  new  modes)

Not  wealthy — Guido  for  his  rank  was  poor —  355

But  with  whatever  dowry  came  to  hand,

There  were  the  lady-love  predestinate  !

And  somehow  the  Abate's  guardian  eye —

Scintillant,  rutilant,  fraternal  fire, —

Roving  round  every  way  had  seized  the  prize  360


176  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

— The  instinct  of  us,  we,  the  spiritualty  !

Come,  cards  on  table ;  was  it  true  or  false

That  here — here  in  this  very  tenement —

Yea,  Via  Vittoria  did  a  marvel  hide,

Lily  of  a  maiden,  white  with  intact  leaf  365

Guessed  thro'  the  sheath  that  saved  it  from  the  sun  ?

A  daughter  with  the  mother's  hands  still  clasped

Over  her  head  for  fillet  virginal,

A  wife  worth  Guido's  house  and  hand  and  heart  ?

He  came  to  see  ;  had  spoken,  he  could  no  less —       370

(A  final  cherish  of  the  stockinged  calf)

If  harm  were, — well,  the  matter  was  off  his  mind.

Then  with  the  great  air  did  he  kiss,  devout,

Violante's  hand,  and  rise  up  his  whole  height

(A  certain  purple  gleam  about  the  black)  375

And  go  forth  grandly, — as  if  the  Pope  came  next.

And  so  Violante  rubbed  her  eyes  awhile,

Got  up  too,  walked  to  wake  her  Pietro  soon

And  pour  into  his  ear  the  mighty  news


THE   OTHER   HALF-ROME.  177

How  somebody  had  somehow  somewhere  seen  380

Their  tree-top-tuft  of  bloom  above  the  wall,

And  came  now  to  apprise  them  the  tree's  self

Was  no  such  crab-sort  as  should  feed  the  swine,

But  veritable  gold,  the  Hesperian  ball

Ordained  for  Hercules  to  haste  and  pluck,  385

And  bear  and  give  the  Gods  to  banquet  with —

Hercules  standing  ready  at  the  door.

Whereon  did  Pietro  rub  his  eyes  in  turn,

Look  very  wise,  a  little  woeful  too,

Then,  periwig  on  head,  and  cane  in  hand,  390

Sally  forth  dignifiedly  into  the  Square

Of  Spain  across  Babbuino  the  six  steps,

Toward  the  Boat-fountain  where  our  idlers  lounge, —

Ask,  for  form's  sake,  who  Hercules  might  be,

And  have  congratulation  from  the  world.  395

Heartily  laughed  the  world  in  his  fool's-face

And  told  him  Hercules  was  just  the  heir

To  the  stubble  once  a  corn-field,  and  brick-heap

VOL.    I.  N


17^  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Where  used  to  be  a  dwelling-place  now  burned.

Guido  and  Franceschini ;  a  Count, — ay  :  400

But  a  cross  i'  the  poke  to  bless  the  Countship  ?      No  !

All  gone  except  sloth,  pride,  rapacity.

Humours  of  the  imposthume  incident

To  rich  blood  that  runs  thin, — nursed  to  a  head

By  the  rankly-salted  soil — a  cardinal's  court  405

Where,  parasite  and  picker-up  of  crumbs.

He  had  hung  on  long,  and  now,  let  go,  said  some,

But  shaken  off,  said  others, — in  any  case

Tired  of  the  trade  and  something  worse  for  wear.

Was  wanting  to  change  town  for  country  quick,  410

Go  home  again  :  let  Pietro  help  him  home  !

The  brother.  Abate  Paolo,  shrewder  mouse.

Had  pricked  for  comfortable  quarters,  inched

Into  the  core  of  Rome,  and  fattened  so ;

But  Guido,  over-burly  for  rat's  hole  415

Suited  to  clerical  slimness,  starved  outside.

Must  shift  for  himself :  and  so  the  shift  was  this  !

What,  was  the  snug  retreat  of  Pietro  tracked,


THE   OTHER   HALF-ROME.  1 79

The  little  provision  for  his  old  age  snuffed  ?

'^  Oh,  make  your  girl  a  lady,  an  you  list,  420

"  But  have  more  mercy  on  our  wit  than  vaunt

"  Your  bargain  as  we  burgesses  who  brag  !

"  Why,  Goodman  Dullard,  if  a  friend  must  speak,

"  Would  the  Count,  think  you,  stoop  to  you  and  yours

"  Were  there  the  value  of  one  penny-piece  425

"  To  rattle  'twixt  his  palms — or  likelier  laugh,

*^  Bid  your  Pompilia  help  you  black  his  shoe  ?  "

Home  again,  shaking  oft  the  puzzled  pate,

Went  Pietro  to  announce  a  change  indeed.

Yet  point  Violante  where  some  solace  lay  430

Of  a  rueful  sort, — the  taper,  quenched  so  soon.

Had  ended  merely  in  a  snuff,  not  stink —

Congratulate  there  was  one  hope  the  less

Not  misery  the  more  :  and  so  an  end.

The  marriage  thus  impossible,  the  rest  435

Followed  :  our  spokesman,  Paolo,  heard  his  fate,


c8o  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Resignedly  Count  Guido  bore  the  blow  :

Violante  wiped  away  the  transient  tear,

Renounced  the  playing  Danae  to  gold  dreams,

Praised  much  her  Pietro's  prompt  sagaciousness,         440

Found  neighbours'  envy  natural,  lightly  laughed

At  gossips'  malice,  fairly  wrapped  herself

In  her  integrity  three  folds  about.

And,  letting  pass  a  little  day  or  two.

Threw,  even  over  that  integrity,  445

Another  wrappage,  namely  one  thick  veil

That  hid  her,  matron-wise,  from  head  to  foot.

And,  by  the  hand  holding  a  girl  veiled  too,

Stood,  one  dim  end  of  a  December  day.

In  Saint  Lorenzo  on  the  altar-step —  450

Just  where  she  lies  now  and  that  girl  will  lie —

Only  with  fifty  candles'  company

Now — in  the  place  of  the  poor  winking  one

Which  saw,— doors  shut  and  sacristan  made  sure, —

A  priest — perhaps  Abate  Paolo — wed  455

Guido  clandestinely,  irrevocably


THE   OTHER    HALF-ROME.


To  his  Pompilia  aged  thirteen  years

And  five  months, — witness  the  church  register, —

Pompilia,  (thus  become  Count  Guido's  wife

Clandestinely,  irrevocably  his,)  460

Who  all  the  while  had  borne,  from  first  to  last,

As  brisk  a  part  i'  the  bargain,  as  yon  lamb,

Brought  forth  from  basket  and  set  out  for  sale.

Bears  while  they  chaffer,  wary  market-man

And  voluble  housewife,  o'er  it, — each  in  turn  465

Patting  the  curly  calm  inconscious  head,

With  the  shambles  ready  round  the  corner  there,

When  the  talk  's  talked  out  and  a  bargain  struck.

Transfer  complete,  why,  Pietro  was  apprised.

Violante  sobbed  the  sobs  and  prayed  the  prayers        470

And  said  the  serpent  tempted  so  she  fell.

Till  Pietro  had  to  clear  his  brow  apace

And  make  the  best  of  matters  :  wrath  at  first, —

How  else  ?  pacification  presently,

Why  not  ? — could  flesh  withstand  the  impurpled  one,  475


184  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Bear  with  them,  housemates,  pensionaries,  pawned

To  an  alien  for  fulfilment  of  their  pact.

Guido  should  at  discretion  deal  them  orts,  515

Bread-bounty  in  Arezzo  the  strange  place, —

They  who  had  lived  deliciously  and  rolled

Rome's  choicest  comfit  'neath  the  tongue  before.

Into  this  quag,  '^  jump  "  bade  the  Cardinal !

And  neck -deep  in  a  minute  there  flounced  they.  520

But  they  touched  bottom  at  Arezzo  :  there —

Four  months'  experience  of  how  craft  and  greed

Quickened  by  penury  and  pretentious  hate

Of  plain  truth,  brutify  and  bestialize, —

Four  months'  taste  of  apportioned  insolence,  525

Cruelty  graduated,  dose  by  dose

Of  ruffianism  dealt  out  at  bed  and  board,

And  lo,  the  work  was  done,  success  clapped  hands.

The  starved,  stripped,  beaten  brace  of  stupid  dupes

Broke  at  last  in  their  desperation  loose,  530

Fled  away  for  their  lives,  and  lucky  so ;


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 85

Found  their  account  in  casting  coat  afar

And  bearing  off  a  shred  of  skin  at  least :

Left  Guido  lord  o'  the  prey,  as  the  lion  is,

And,  careless  what  came  after,  carried  their  wrongs     535

To  Rome, — I  nothing  doubt,  with  such  remorse

As  folly  feels,  since  pain  can  make  it  wise,

But  crime,  past  wisdom,  which  is  innocence.

Needs  not  be  plagued  with  till  a  later  day.

Pietro  went  back  to  beg  from  door  to  door,  540

In  hope  that  memory  not  quite  extinct

Of  cheery  days  and  festive  nights  would  move

Friends  and  acquaintance — after  the  natural  laugh,

And  tributary  "  Just  as  we  foretold — "

To  show  some  bowels,  give  the  dregs  o'  the  cup,         545

Scraps  of  the  trencher,  to  their  host  that  was.

Or  let  him  share  the  mat  with  the  mastiff,  he

Who  lived  large  and  kept  open  house  so  long.

Not  so  Violante  :  ever  a-head  i'  the  march,

Quick  at  the  bye-road  and  the  cut-across,  550


1 86  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

She  went  first  to  the  best  adviser,  God —

Whose  finger  unmistakably  was  felt

In  all  this  retribution  of  the  past.

Here  was  the  prize  of  sin,  luck  of  a  lie  !

But  here  too  was  the  Holy  Year  would  help,  555

Bound  to  rid  sinners  of  sin  vulgar,  sin

Abnormal,  sin  prodigious,  up  to  sin

Impossible  and  supposed  for  Jubilee'  sake  :

To  lift  the  leadenest  of  lies,  let  soar

The  soul  unhampered  by  a  feather-weight.  560

''  I  will  "  said  she  "  go  burn  out  this  bad  hole

'^  That  breeds  the  scorpion,  baulk  the  plague  at  least

'^  Its  hope  of  further  creeping  progeny  :

^'  I  will  confess  my  fault,  be  punished,  yes,

^^  But  pardoned  too  :  Saint  Peter  pays  for  all."  565

So,  with  the  crowd  she  mixed,  made  for  the  dome,
Through  the  great  door  new-broken  for  the  nonce
Marched,  muffled  more  than  ever  matron-wise,
Up  the  left  nave  to  the  formidable  throne.


THE   OTHER   HALF-ROME.  1 87

Fell  into  file  with  this  the  poisoner  570

And  that  the  parricide,  and  reached  in  turn

The  poor  repugnant  Penitentiary

Set  at  this  gully-hole  o'  the  world's  discharge

To  help  the  frightfullest  of  filth  have  vent,

And  then  knelt  down  and  whispered  in  his  ear  575

How  she  had  bought  Pompilia,  palmed  the  babe

On  Pietro,  passed  the  girl  off  as  their  child

To  Guido,  and  defrauded  of  his  due

This  one  and  that  one, — more  than  she  could  name,

Until  her  solid  piece  of  wickedness  580

Happened  to  split  and  spread  woe  far  and  wide :

Contritely  now  she  brought  the  case  for  cure.

Replied  the  throne — "  Ere  God  forgive  the  guilt,

"  Make  man  some  restitution  !     Do  your  part !

'^  The  owners  of  your  husband's  heritage,  585

*'  Barred  thence  by  this  pretended  birth  and  heir, —

^•'  Tell  them,  the  bar  came  so,  is  broken  so,

"  Theirs  be  the  due  reversion  as  before  !


1 88  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

"  Your  husband  who,  no  partner  m  the  guilt,

"  Suffers  the  penalty,  led  blindfold  thus  590

*'  By  love  of  what  he  thought  his  flesh  and  blood

"  To  alienate  his  all  in  her  behalf, —

*'  Tell  him  too  such  contract  is  null  and  void  !

^'  Last,  he  who  personates  your  son-in-law,

'*  Who  with  sealed  eyes  and  stopped  ears,  tame  and  mute,

**  Took  at  your  hand  that  bastard  of  a  whore  596

^'  You  called  your  daughter  and  he  calls  his  wife, —

*'  Tell  him,  and  bear  the  anger  which  is  just!

*^  Then,  penance  so  performed,  may  pardon  be  !"

Who  could  gainsay  this  just  and  right  award  ?  600

Nobody  in  the  world  :  but,  out  o'  the  world,

Who  knows  ? — might  timid  intervention  be

From  any  makeshift  of  an  angel-guide.

Substitute  for  celestial  guardianship.

Pretending  to  take  care  of  the  girl's  self:  605

*'  Woman,  confessing  crime  is  healthy  work,

"  And  telling  truth  relieves  a  liar  like  you,


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 89

"  But  what  of  her  my  unconsidered  charge  ?

"  No  thought  of,  while  this  good  befalls  yourself,

"  What  in  the  way  of  harm  may  find  out  her?"  6io

No  least  thought,  I  assure  you  :   truth  being  truth,

Tell  it  and  shame  the  devil !

Said  and  done :
Home  went  Violante  and  disbosomed  all :
And  Pietro  who,  six  months  before,  had  borne  615

Word  after  word  of  such  a  piece  of  news
Like  so  much  cold  steel  inched  through  his  breast-blade,
Now  at  its  entry  gave  a  leap  for  joy.
As  who — what  did  I  say  of  one  in  a  quag  ? —
Should  catch  a  hand  from  heaven  and  spring  thereby
Out  of  the  mud,  on  ten  toes  stand  once  more.  621

*^  What?    All  that  used  to  be,  may  be  again?
"  My  money  mine  again,  my  house,  my  land,
"  My  chairs  and  tables,  all  mine  evermore  ?
"  What,  the  girl's  dowry  never  was  the  girl's,  625

*'  And,  unpaid  yet,  is  never  now  to  pay?
"  Then  the  girl's  self,  my  pale  Pompilia  child


1 90  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

"  That  used  to  be  my  own  with  her  great  eyes —

*'  He  who  drove  us  forth,  why  should  he  keep  her

"  When  proved  as  very  a  pauper  as  himself?  630

*^  Will  she  come  back,  with  nothing  changed  at  all,

^'  And  laugh  '  But  how  you  dreamed  uneasily  !

^'  *  I  saw  the  great  drops  stand  here  on  your  brow —

*'  '  Did  I  do  wrong  to  wake  you  with  a  kiss?'

*^  No,  indeed,  darling  !  No,  for  wide  awake  635

"  I  see  another  outburst  of  surprise  :         n

"  The  lout-lord,  bully-beggar,  braggart-sneak,

^^  Who  not  content  with  cutting  purse,  crops  ear —

''  Assuredly  it  shall  be  salve  to  mine

*^  When  this  great  news  red-letters  him,  the  rogue  !     640

*^  Ay,  let  him  taste  the  teeth  o'  the  trap,  this  fox,

*'  Give  us  our  lamb  back,  golden  fleece  and  all,

*'  Let  her  creep  in  and  warm  our  breasts  again  !

"  What  care  for  the  past  ? — we  three  are  our  old  selves,

^'  Who  know  now  what  the  outside  world  is  worth."    645

And  so,  he  carried  case  before  the  courts ;

And  there  Violante,  blushing  to  the  bone,


THE   OTHER   HALF-ROME.  I9I

Made  public  declaration  of  her  fault,

Renounced  her  motherhood,  and  prayed  the  law

To  interpose,  frustrate  of  its  effect  650

Her  folly,  and  redress  the  injury  done.

Whereof  was  the  disastrous  consequence.

That  though  indisputably  clear  the  case

(For  thirteen  years  are  not  so  large  a  lapse,

And  still  six  witnesses  survived  in  Rome  655

To  prove  the  truth  o'  the  tale) — yet,  patent  wrong

Seemed  Guido's  ;  the  first  cheat  had  chanced  on  him  :

Here  was  the  pity  that,  deciding  right,

Those  who  began  the  wrong  would  gain  the  good.

Guido  pronounced  the  story  one  long  lie  660

Lied  to  do  robbery  and  take  revenge  :

Or  say  it  were  no  lie  at  all  but  truth.

Then,  it  both  robbed  the  right  heirs  and  shamed  him

Without  revenge  to  humanize  the  deed  :  664

What  had  he  done  when  first  they  shamed  him  thus  ?

But  that  were  too  fantastic  :  losels  they,


192  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

And  leasing  this  world's-wonder  of  a  lie,

They  lied  to  blot  him  though  it  brand  themselves.

So  answered  Guido  through  the  Abate's  mouth.

Wherefore  the  court,  its  customary  way,  670

Inclined  to  the  middle  course  the  sage  affect —

They  held  the  child  to  be  a  changeling, — good :

But,  lest  the  husband  got  no  good  thereby,

They  willed  the  dowry,  though  not  hers  at  all,

Should  yet  be  his,  if  not  by  right  then  grace —  675

Part-payment  for  the  plain  injustice  done.

But  then,  that  other  contract,  Pietro's  work.

Renunciation  of  his  own  estate,

That  must  be  cancelled — give  him  back  his  goods.

He  was  no  party  to  the  cheat  at  least !  680

So  ran  the  judgment : — whence  a  prompt  appeal

On  both  sides,  seeing  right  is  absolute.

Cried  Pietro  ^'  Is  Pompilia  not  my  child  ?

"  Why  give  her  my  child's  dowry?" — "Have  I  right

"  To  the  dowry,  why  not  to  the  rest  as  well?"  685


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 93

Cried  Guido,  or  cried  Paolo  in  his  name :
Till  law  said  "  Reinvestigate  the  case  ! "
And  so  the  matter  pends,  unto  this  day.

Hence  new  disaster — that  no  outlet  seemed  ;

Whatever  the  fortune  of  the  battle-field,  690

No  path  whereby  the  fatal  man  might  march

Victorious,  wreath  on  head  and  spoils  in  hand,

And  back  turned  full  upon  the  baffled  foe, —

Nor  cranny  whence,  desperate  and  disgraced.

Stripped  to  the  skin,  he  might  be  fain  to  crawl  695

Worm-like,  and  so  away  with  his  defeat

To  other  fortune  and  the  novel  prey.

No,  he  was  pinned  to  the  place  there,  left  alone

With  his  immense  hate  and,  the  solitary

Subject  to  satisfy  that  hate,  his  wife.  700

"  Cast  her  off?     Turn  her  naked  out  of  doors?

*^  Easily  said  !     But  still  the  action  pends,

^'  Still  dowry,  principal  and  interest,

^'  Pietro's  possessions,  all  I  bargained  for, —

VOL.    I.  O


194  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

''  Any  good  day,  be  but  my  friends  alert,  705

"  May  give  them  me  if  she  continue  mine.

"  Yet,  keep  her  ?     Keep  the  puppet  of  my  foes —

''  Her  voice  that  lisps  me  back  their  curse — her  eye

"'  They  lend  their  leer  of  triumph  to — her  lip

*'  I  touch  and  taste  their  very  filth  upon  ?  "  710

In  short,  he  also  took^the  middle  course

Rome  taught  him — did  at  last  excogitate

How  he  might  keep  the  good  and  leave  the  bad

Twined  in  revenge,  yet  extricable, — nay

Make  the  very  hate's  eruption,  very  rush  715

Of  the  unpent  sluice  of  cruelty  relieve

His  heart  first,  then  go  fertilize  his  field.

What  if  the  girl-wife,  tortured  with  due  care.

Should  take,  as  though  spontaneously,  the  road

It  were  impolitic  to  thrust  her  on  ?  720

If,  goaded,  she  broke  out  in  full  revolt.

Followed  her  parents  i'  the  face  o'  the  world,

Branded  as  runaway  not  castaway,


THE    OTHER   HALF-ROME.  195

Self-sentenced  and  self-punished  in  the  act?

So  should  the  loathed  form  and  detested  face  725

Launch  themselves  into  hell  and  there  be  lost

While  he  looked  o'er  the  brink  with  folded  arms ;

So  should  the  heaped-up  shames  go  shuddering  back

O'  the  head  o'  the  heapers,  Pietro  and  his  wife,

And  bury  in  the  breakage  three  at  once  :  730

While  Guido,  left  free,  no  one  right  renounced,

Gain  present,  gain  prospective,  all  the  gain,

None  of  the  wife  except  her  rights  absorbed,

Should  ask  law  what  it  was  law  paused  about —

If  law  were  dubious  still  whose  word  to  take,  735,

The  husband's — dignified  and  derelict.

Or  the  wife's — the  .  .  what  I  tell  you.     It  should  be.

Guido's  first  step  was  to  take  pen^  indite

A  letter  to  the  Abate, — not  his  own.

His  wife's, — she  should  re-write,  sign,  seal  and  send.  74a

She  liberally  told  the  household-news.

Rejoiced  her  vile  progenitors  were  fled,


196  TPIE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Revealed  their  malice — how  they  even  laid

A  last  injunction  on  her,  when  they  fled,

That  she  should  forthwith  find  a  paramour,  745

Complot  with  him  to  gather  spoil  enough

Then  burn  the  house  down, — taking  previous  care

To  poison  all  its  inmates  overnight, —

And  so  companioned,  so  provisioned  too.

Follow  to  Rome  and  all  join  fortunes  gay.  750

This  letter,  traced  in  pencil-characters,

Guido  as  easily  got  retraced  in  ink

By  his  wife's  pen,  guided  from  end  to  end.

As  it  had  been  just  so  much  Hebrew,  Sir  :

For  why  ?     That  wife  could  broider,  sing  perhaps,.       755

Pray  certainly,  but  no  more  read  than  write

This  letter  ^'  which  yet  write  she  must,"  he  said

^'  Being  half  courtesy  and  compliment,    -

"  Half  sisterliness  ;  take  the  thing  on  trust !  "

She  had  as  readily  re-traccd  the  words  760

Of  her  own  death-warrant, — in  some  sort 't  was  so.

This  letter  the  Abate  in  due  course


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 97

Communicated  to  such  curious  souls

In  Rome  as  needs  must  pry  into  the  cause

Of  quarrel,  why  the  Comparini  fled  765

The  Franceschini,  whence  the  grievance  grew,

What  the  hubbub  meant :    "  Nay, — see  the  wife's  own

word,
"  Authentic  answer  !     Tell  detractors  too
'*  There  's  a  plan  formed,  a  programme  figured  here
"  — Pray  God  no  after-practice  put  to  proof,  •  770

"  This  letter  cast  no  light  upon,  one  day  ! "

So    much    for    what    should    work    in    Rome, —  back

now
To  Arezzo,  go  on  with  the  project  there,
Forward  the  next  step  with  as  bold  a  foot,
And  plague  Pompilia  to  the  height,  you  see  !  775

Accordingly  did  Guido  set  himself
To  worry  up  and  down,  across,  around.
The  woman,  hemmed  in  by  her  household-bars, —
Chased  her  about  the  coop  of  daily  life,


iqS  the  ring  and  the  book.

Having  first  stopped  each  outlet  thence  save  one
Which,  Hke  bird  with  a  ferret  in  her  haunt,
She  needs  must  seize  as  sole  way  of  escape
Though  there  was  tied  and  twittering  a  decoy
To  seem  as  if  it  tempted, — just  the  plunie
O'  the  popinjay,  and  not  a  respite  there
From  tooth  and  claw  of  something  in  the  dark, —
Giuseppe  Caponsacchi.

Now  begins
The  tenebrific  passage  of  the  tale  :
How  hold  a  light,  display  the  cavern's  gorge  ?
How,  in  this  phase  of  the  affair,  show  truth  ?
Here  is  the  dying  wife  who  smiles  and  says
^'  So  it  was, — so  it  was  not, — how  it  was,
"  I  never  knew  nor  ever  care  to  know — "
Till  they  all  weep,  physician,  man  of  law.
Even  that  poor  old  bit  of  battered  brass
Beaten  out  of  all  shape  by  the  world's  sins.
Common  utensil  of  the  lazar-house —
Confessor  Celestino  groans  "  'T  is  truth,


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  1 99

"  All  truth  and  only  truth  :  there  's  something  else,    800

**  Some  presence  in  the  room  beside  us  all,

"  Something  that  every  lie  expires  before  :

"  No  question  she  was  pure  from  first  to  last."

So  far  is  well  and  helps  us  to  believe  :

But  beyond,  she  the  helpless,  simple-sweet  805

Or  silly-sooth,  unskilled  to  break  one  blow

At  her  good  fame  by  putting  finger  forth, —

How  can  she  render  service  to  the  truth  ?

The  bird  says  "  So  I  fluttered  where  a  springe

"  Caught  me  :  the  springe  did  not  contrive  itself,         810

"  That  I  know  :  who  contrived  it,  God  forgive  ! "

But  we,  who  hear  no  voice  and  have  dry  eyes,

Must  ask, — we  cannot  else,  absolving  her, —

How  of  the  part  played  by  that  same  decoy

I'    the    catching,     caging?       Was    himself    caught

first?  815

We  deal  here  with  no  innocent  at  least,
No  witless  victim, — he's  a  man  of  the  age
And  a  priest  beside, — persuade  the  mocking  world


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


Mere  charity  boiled  over  in  this  sort !

He  whose  own  safety  too, — (the  Pope  's  apprised —   820

Good-natured  with  the  secular  offence,

The  Pope  looks  grave  on  priesthood  in  a  scrape)

Our  priest's  own  safety  therefore,  may-be  life,

Hangs  on  the  issue  !     You  will  find  it  hard.

Guido  is  here  to  meet  you  with  fixed  foot,  825

Stiff  like  a  statue — "  Leave  what  went  before  !

*^  My  wife  fled  i'  the  company  of  a  priest,

*^  Spent  two  days  and  two  nights  alone  with  him  :

"  Leave  what  came  after  !  "     He  is  hard  to  throw.

Moreover  priests  are  merely  flesh  and  blood  ;  830

When  we  get  weakness,  and  no  guilt  beside.

We  have  no  such  great  ill-fortune  :  finding  grey.

We  gladly  call  that  white  which  might  be  black.

Too  used  to  the  double-dye.     So,  if  the  priest

Moved  by  Pompilia's  youth  and  beauty,  gave  835

Way  to  the  natural  weakness Anyhow

Here  be  facts,  charactery ;  what  they  spell
Determine,  and  thence  pick  what  sense  you  may !


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.


There  was  a  certain  young  bold  handsome  priest

Popular  in  the  city,  far  and  wide  840

Famed,  for  Arezzo  's  but  a  little  place.

As  the  best  of  good  companions,  gay  and  grave

At  the  decent  minute ;  settled  in  his  stall.

Or  sideling,  lute  on  lap,  by  lady's  couch.

Ever  the  courtly  Canon  :  see  in  such  845

A  star  shall  climb  apace  and  culminate.

Have  its  due  handbreadth  of  the  heaven  at  Rome,

Though  meanwhile  pausing  on  Arezzo's  edge,

As  modest  candle  'mid  the  mountain  fog,

To  rub  off  redness  and  rusticity  850

Ere  it  sweep  chastened,  gain  the  silver-sphere.

Whether  through  Guido's  absence  or  what  else.

This  Caponsacchi,  favourite  of  the  town.

Was  yet  no  friend  of  his  nor  free  o'  the  house.

Though  both  moved  in  the  regular  magnates'  march —

Each  must  observe  the  other's  tread  and  halt  856

At  church,  saloon,  theatre,  house  of  play.

Who  could  help  noticing  the  husband's  slouch,


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


The  black  of  his  brow — or  miss  the  news  that  buzzed

Of  how  the  little  solitary  wife  860

Wept  and  looked  out  of  window  all  day  long  ?

What  need  of  minute  search  into  such  springs

As  start  men,  set  o'  the  move  ? — machinery

Old  as  earth,  obvious  as  the  noonday  sun.

Why,  take  men  as  they  come, — an  instance  now, —     865

Of  all  those  who  have  simply  gone  to  see

Pompiha  on  her  deathbed  since  four  days,

Half  at  the  least  are,  call  it  how  you  please.

In  love  with  her — I  don't  except  the  priests

Nor  even  the  old  confessor  whose  eyes  run  870

Over  at  what  he  styles  his  sister's  voice

Who  died  so  early  and  weaned  him  from  the  world.

Well,  had  they  viewed  her  ere  the  paleness  pushed

The  last  o'  the  red  o'  the  rose  away,  while  yet

Some  hand,  adventurous  'twixt  the  wind  and  her,        875

Might  let  the  life  run  back  and  raise  the  flower

Rich  with  reward  up  to  the  guardian's  face, —

Would  they  have  kept  that  hand  employed  the  same


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.


At  fumbling  on  with  prayer-book  pages  ?     No  !

Men  are  men  :  why  then  need  I  say  one  word  880

More  than  this,  that  our  man  the  Canon  here

Saw,  pitied,  loved  Pompilia  ?

This  is  why ;
This  startling  why  :  that  Capon sacchi's  self —
Whom  foes  and  friends  alike  avouch,  for  good  885

Or  ill,  a  man  of  truth  whate'er  betide.
Intrepid  altogether,  reckless  too
How  his  own  fame  and  fortune,  tossed  to  the  winds,
Suffer  by  any  turn  the  adventure  take,
Nay,  more — not  thrusting,  like  a  badge  to  hide,  890

'Twixt  shirt  and  skin  a  joy  which  shown  is  shame —
But  flirting  flag-like  i'  the  face  o'  the  world
This  tell-tale  kerchief,  this  conspicuous  love
For  the  lady, — oh,  called  innocent  love,  I  know  !
Only,  such  scarlet  fiery  innocence  895

As  most  men  would  try  muffle  up  in  shade, —
— 'Tis  strange  then  that  this  else  abashless  mouth


204  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

Should  yet  maintain,  for  truth's  sake  which  is  God's,

That  it  was  not  he  made  the  first  advance,

That,  even  ere  word  had  passed  between  the  two,       900

Pompiha  penned  him  letters,  passionate  prayers,

If  not  love,  then  so  simulating  love

That  he,  no  novice  to  the  taste  of  thyme,

Turned  from  such  over-luscious  honey-clot

At  end  o'  the  flower,  and  would  not  lend  his  lip  905

Till  .  .  but  the  tale  here  frankly  outsoars  faith  :

There  must  be  falsehood  somewhere.     For  her  part,

Pompilia  quietly  constantly  avers

She  never  penned  a  letter  in  her  life

Nor  to  the  Canon  nor  any  other  man,  910

Being  incompetent  to  write  and  read  :

Nor  had  she  ever  uttered  word  to  him,  nor  he

To  her  till  that  same  evening  when  they  met.

She  on  her  window-terrace,  he  beneath

I'  the  public  street,  as  was  their  fateful  chance,  915

And  she  adjured  him  in  the  name  of  God

Find  out  and  bring  to  pass  where,  when  and  how


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  205

Escape  with  him  to  Rome  might  be  contrived.

Means  found,  plan  laid  and  time  fixed,  she  avers.

And  heart  assured  to  heart  in  loyalty,  920

All  at  an  impulse  !     All  extemporized

As  in  romance-books  !     Is  that  credible  ?

Well,  yes  :  as  she  avers  this  with  calm  mouth

Dying,  I  do  think  "  Credible  ! ''  you'd  cry —

Did  not  the  priest's  voice  come  to  break  the  spell  :     925

They  questioned  him  apart,  as  the  custom  is,

VvHien  first  the  matter  made  a  noise  at  Rome,

And  he,  calm,  constant  then  as  she  is  now,

For  truth's  sake  did  assert  and  reassert

Those  letters  called  him  to  her  and  he  came,  930

— Which  damns  the  story  credible  otherwise.

Why  should  this  man, — mad  to  devote  himself.

Careless  what  comes  of  his  own  fame,  the  first, —

Be  studious  thus  to  publish  and  declare

Just  what  the  lightest  nature  loves  to  hide,  935

Nor  screen  a  lady  from  the  byword's  laugh

"  First  spoke  the  lady,  last  the  cavalier  ! "


206  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

— I  say, — why  should  the  man  tell  truth  just  here

When  graceful  lying  meets  such  ready  shrift  ?

Or  is  there  a  first  moment  for  a  priest  940

As  for  a  woman,  when  invaded  shame

Must  have  its  first  and  last  excuse  to  show  ?

Do  both  contrive  love's  entry  in  the  mind

Shall  look,  i'  the  manner  of  it,  a  surprise.

That  after,  once  the  flag  o'  the  fort  hauled  down,        945

Effrontery  may  sink  drawbridge,  open  gate,

Welcome  and  entertain  the  conqueror?  -

Or  what  do  you  say  to  a  touch  of  the  devil's  worst  ?

Can  it  be  that  the  husband,  he  who  wrote

The  letter  to  his  brother  I  told  you  of,  950

I'  the  name  of  her  it  meant  to  criminate, —

What  if  he  wrote  those  letters  to  the  priest?

Further  the  priest  says,  when  it  first  befell,

This  folly  o'  the  letters,  that  he  checked  the  flow.

Put  them  back  lightly  each  wdth  its  reply.  955

Here  again  vexes  new  discrepancy :

There  never  reached  her  eye  a  word  from  him ;


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  207

He  did  write  but  she  could  not  read — she  could

Burn  what  offended  wifehood,  womanhood,

So  did  burn  :  never  bade  him  come  to  her,  960

Yet  when  it  proved  he  must  come,  let  him  come,

And  when  he  did  come  though  uncalled,  she  spoke

Prompt  by  an  inspiration  :  thus  it  was.

Will  you  go  somewhat  back  to  understand  ?

When  first,  pursuant  to  his  plan,  there  sprung,  965

Like  an  uncaged  beast,  Guido's  cruelty

On  the  weak  shoulders  of  his  wife,  she  cried

To  those  whom  law  appoints  resource  for  such,

The  secular  guardian — that's  the  Governor,

And  the  Archbishop, — that's  the  spiritual  guide,  970

And  prayed  them  take  the  claws  from  out  her  flesh.

Now,  this  is  ever  the  ill  consequence

Of  being  noble,  poor  and  difficult,

Ungainly,  yet  too  great  to  disregard, —

That  the  bom  peers  and  friends  hereditary  975

Though  disinclined  to  help  from  their  own  store


2  08  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

The  opprobrious  wight,  put  penny  in  his  poke

From  purse  of  theirs  or  leave  the  door  ajar

When  he  goes  wistful  by  at  dinner-time, —

Yet,  if  his  needs  conduct  him  where  they  sit  980

Smugly  in  office,  judge  this,  bishop  that,

Dispensers  of  the  shine  and  shade  o'  the  place —

And  if,  the  friend's  door  shut  and  purse  undrawn,

The  potentate  may  find  the  office-hall

Do  as  good  service  at  no  cost — give  help  985

By-the-bye,  pay  up  traditional  dues  at  once

Just  through  a  feather-weight  too  much  i'  the  scale,

A  finger-tip  forgot  at  the  balance-tongue, —

Why,  only  churls  refuse,  or  Molinists.

Thus  when,  in  the  first  roughness  of  surprise  990

At  Guido's  wolf-face  whence  the  sheepskin  fell.

The  frightened  couple,  all  bewilderment.

Rushed  to  the  Governor, — who  else  rights  wrong?

Told  him  their  tale  of  wrong  and  craved  redress —

Why,  then  the  Governor  woke  up  to  the  fact  995

That  Guido  was  a  friend  of  old,  poor  Count ! —


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  209

So,  promptly  paid  his  tribute,  promised  the  pair,

Wholesome  chastisement  should  soon  cure  their  qualms

Next  time  they  came  and  prated  and  told  lies :

Which  stopped  all  prating,  sent  them  dumb  to  Rome.

Well,  now  it  was  Pompilia's  turn  to  try  :  looi

The  troubles  pressing  on  her,  as  I  said.

Three  times  she  rushed,  maddened  by  misery,

To  the  other  mighty  man,  sobbed  out  her  prayer

At  footstool  of  the  Archbishop — fast  the  friend  1005

Of  her  husband  also  !     Oh,  good  friends  of  yore  !

So,  the  Archbishop,  not  to  be  outdone

By  the  Governor,  break  custom  more  than  he.

Thrice  bade  the  foolish  woman  stop  her  tongue.

Unloosed  her  hands  from  harassing  his  gout,  10 10

Coached  her  and  carried  her  to  the  Count  again,

— His  old  friend  should  be  master  in  his  house,

Rule  his  wife  and  correct  her  faults  at  need  !

Well,  driven  from  post  to  pillar  in  this  wise,

She,  as  a  last  resource,  betook  herself  10 15

To  one,  should  be  no  family-friend  at  least,

VOL.   I.  p


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


A  simple  friar  o'  the  city ;  confessed  to  him,

Then  told  how  fierce  temptation  of  release

By  self-dealt  death  was  busy  with  her  soul,

And  urged  that  he  put  this  in  words,  write  plain        1020

For  one  who  could  not  write^  set  down  her  prayer

That  Pietro  and  Violante,  parent-like

If  somehow  not  her  parents,  should  for  love

Come  save  her,  pluck  from  out  the  flame  the  brand

Themselves  had  thoughtlessly  thrust  in  so  deep         1025

To  send  gay-coloured  sparkles  up  and  cheer

Their  seat  at  the  chimney-corner.     The  good  friar

Promised  as  much  at  the  moment ;  but,  alack,

Night  brings  discretion :  he  was  no  one's  friend,

Yet  presently  found  he  could  not  turn  about  1030

Nor  take  a  step  i'  the  case  and  fail  to  tread

On  someone's  toe  who  either  was  a  friend,

Or  a  friend's  friend,  or  friend's  friend  thrice-removed,

And  woe  to  friar  by  whom  offences  come  !

So,  the  course  being  plain, — with  a  general  sigh        1035

At  matrimony  the  profound  mistake, —


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.


He  threw  reluctantly  the  business  up,
Having  his  other  penitents  to  mind.

If  then,  all  outlets  thus  secured  save  one,

At  last  she  took  to  the  open,  stood  and  stared  1040

With  her  wan  face  to  see  where  God  might  wait —

And  there  found  Caponsacchi  wait  as  well

For  the  precious  something  at  perdition's  edge.

He  only  was  predestinate  to  save, —

And  if  they  recognised  in  a  critical  flash  1045

From  the  zenith,  each  the  other,  her  need  of  him,

His  need  of .  .  say,  a  woman  to  perish  for,

The  regular, way  o'  the  world,  yet  break  no  vow,

Do  no  harm  save  to  himself, — if  this  were  thus  ?

How  do  you  say?     It  were  improbable  ;  1050

So  is  the  legend  of  my  patron-saint.

Anyhow,  whether,  as  Guido  states  the  case,
Pompilia, — like  a  starving  wretch  i'  the  street
Who  stops  and  rifles  the  first  passenger


212  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

In  the  great  right  of  an  excessive  wrong, —
Did  somehow  call  this  stranger  and  he  came, —
Or  whether  the  strange  sudden  interview
Blazed  as  when  star  and  star  must  needs  go  close
Till  each  hurts  each  and  there  is  loss  in  heaven —
Whatever  way  in  this  strange  world  it  was, —
Pompilia  and  Caponsacchi  met,  in  fine,
She  at  her  window,  he  i'  the  street  beneath,
And  understood  each  other  at  first  look.

All  was  determined  and  performed  at  once.

And  on  a  certain  April  evening,  late

I'  the  month,  this  girl  of  sixteen,  bride  and  wife

Three  years  and  over, — she  who  hitherto

Had  never  taken  twenty  steps  in  Rome

Beyond  the  church,  pinned  to  her  mother's  gown,

Nor,  in  Arezzo,  knew  her  way  through  street

Except  what  led  to  the  Archbishop's  door, —

Such  an  one  rose  up  in  the  dark,  laid  hand

On  what  came  first,  clothes  and  a  trinket  or  two,


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.


Belongings  of  her  own  in  the  old  day, —
Stole  from  the  side  o'  the  sleeping  spouse — who  knows  ?
Sleeping  perhaps,  silent  for  certain, — slid  1076

Ghost-like  from  great  dark  room  to  great  dark  room,
In  through  the  tapestries  and  out  again
And  onward,  unembarrassed  as  a  fate,
Descended  staircase,  gained  last  door  of  all,  1080

Sent  it  wide  open  at  first  push  of  palm,
And  there  stood,  first  time,  last  and  only  time.
At  liberty,  alone  in  the  open  street, —
Unquestioned,  unmolested  found  herself
^At  the  city  gate,  by  Caponsacchi's  side,  1085

Hope  there,  joy  there,  life  and  all  good  again,
The  carriage  there,  the  convoy  there,  light  there
Broadening  into  a  full  blaze  at  Rome
And  breaking  small  what  long  miles  lay  between ;
Up  she  sprang,  in  he  follovved,  they  were  safe.  1090

The  husband  quotes  this  for  incredible.
All  of  the  story  from  first  word  to  last  :


214  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Sees  the  priest's  hand  throughout  upholding  hers,

Traces  his  foot  to  the  alcove,  that  night.

Whither  and  whence  blindfold  he  knew  the  way,       1095

Proficient  in  all  craft  and  stealthiness ;

And  cites  for  proof  a  servant,  eye  that  watched

And  ear  that  opened  to  purse  secrets  up,

A  woman-spy, — suborned  to  give  and  take

Letters  and  tokens,  do  the  work  of  shame  iioo

The  more  adroitly  that  herself,  who  helped

Communion  thus  between  a  tainted  pair.

Had  long  since  been  a  leper  thick  in  spot,

A  common  trull  o'  the  town  :  she  witnessed  all.

Helped  many  meetings,  partings,  took  her  wage        1 105

And  then  told  Guido  the  whole  matter.     Lies  !

The  woman's  life  confutes  her  word, — her  word

Confutes  itself:  ^^  Thus,  thus  and  thus  I  lied."

"  And  thus,  no  question,  still  you  lie,"  we  say.

"  Ay,  but  at  last,  e'en  have  it  how  you  Avill,  mo

"  Whatever  the  means,  whatever  the  way,  explodes


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  215

"  The  consummation  " — the  accusers  shriek :

"  Here  is  the  wife  avowedly  found  in  flight,

^^  And  the  companion  of  her  flight,  a  priest ;

"  She  flies  her  husband,  he  the  church  his  spouse :    1 1 1 5

"  What  is  this  ?  "

Wife  and  priest  alike  reply
^'  This  is  the  simple  thing  it  claims  to  be,
"  A  course  we  took  for  life  and  honour's  sake,
"  Very  strange,  very  justifiable."  11 20

She  says,  "  God  put  it  in  my  head  to  fly,
"  As  when  the  martin  migrates  :  autumn  claps
^'  Her  hands,  cries  '  Winter  's  coming,  will  be  here,
"  '  Off  with  you  ere  the  white  teeth  overtake  !
''  ^  Flee  !'     So  I  fled  :  this  friend  was  the  warm  day,
"  The  south  wind  and  whatever  favours  flight ;  1126

^'  I  took  the  favour,  had  the  help,  how  else  ?
^'  And  so  we  did  fly  rapidly  all  night,
''  All  day,  all  night — a  longer  night — again,
*^  And  then  another  day,  longest  of  days,  1130


2l6  THE    RING    AND    THE    BOOK.

"  And  all  the  while,  whether  we  fled  or  stopped,

"  I  scarce  know  how  or  why,  one  thought  filled  both,

''  '  Fly  and  arrive  ! '     So  long  as  I  found  strength

^^  I  talked  with  my  companion,  told  him  much,

*^  Knowing  that  he  knew  more,  knew  me,  knew  God

'^  And  God's  disposal  of  me, — but  the  sense  1136

"  O'  the  blessed  flight  absorbed  me  in  the  main,

"  And  speech  became  mere  talking  through  a  sleep,

^^  Till  at  the  end  of  that  last  longest  night

''  In  a  red  daybreak,  when  we  reached  an  inn  1 1 40

/'  And  my  companion  whispered  *  Next  stage — Rome  ! '

"  Sudden  the  weak  flesh  fell  like  piled-up  cards,

^^  All  the  frail  fabric  at  a  finger's  touch,

'^  And  prostrate  the  poor  soul  too,  and  I  said

"  ^  But  though  Count  Guido  were  a  furlong  ofl",  1 145

"  '  Just  on  me,  1  must  stop  and  rest  awhile  ! '

''  Then  something  like  a  white  wave  o'  the  sea

"  Broke  o'er  my  brain  and  buried  me  in  sleep

^'  Blessedly,  till  it  ebbed  and  left  me  loose,

<'  And  where  was  I  found  but  on  a  strange  bed         1150


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  217

"  In  a  Strange  room  like  hell,  roaring  with  noise,

"  Ruddy  with  flame,  and  filled  with  men,  in  front

'^  Whom  but  the  man  you  call  my  husband,  ay —

"  Count  Guido  once  more  between  heaven  and  me,

"  For  there  my  heaven  stood,  my  salvation,  yes —    1155

"  That  Caponsacchi  all  my  heaven  of  help,

^'  Helpless  himself,  held  prisoner  in  the  hands

'^  Of  men  who  looked  up  in  my  husband's  face

"  To  take  the  fate  thence  he  should  signify,

*'  Just  as  the  way  was  at  Arezzo  :  then,  1160

^'  Not  for  my  sake  but  his  who  had  helped  me —

''  I  sprang  up,  reached  him  with  one  bound,  and  seized

'^  The  sword  o'  the  felon,  trembling  at  his  side,

"  Fit  creature  of  a  coward,  unsheathed  the  thing

"  And  would  have  pinned  him  through  the  poison-bag

"  To  the  wall  and  left  him  there  to  palpitate,  11 66

^'  As  you  serve  scorpions,  but  men  interposed —

'^  Disarmed  me,  gave  his  life  to  him  again

^^  That  he  might  take  mine  and  the  other  lives,

*^  And  he  has  done  so.     I  submit  myself!  "  11 70


2l8  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

The  priest  says — oh,  and  in  the  main  result

The  facts  asseverate,  he  truly  says.

As  to  the  very  act  and  deed  of  him.

However  you  mistrust  the  mind  o'  the  man —

The  flight  was  just  for  flight's  sake,  no  pretext  1175

For  aught  except  to  set  Pompilia  free  :

He  says  "  I  cite  the  husband's  self's  worst  charge

"  In  proof  of  my  best  word  for  both  of  us.

'^  Be  it  conceded  that  so  many  times

"  We  took  our  pleasure  in  his  palace  :  then,  11 80

"  What  need  to  fly  at  all  ? — or  flying  no  less,

"  What  need  to  outrage  the  lips  sick  and  white

^'  Of  a  woman,  and  bring  ruin  down  beside,

'^  By  halting  when  Rome  lay  one  stage  beyond?"

So  does  he  vindicate  Pompilia's  fame,  1185

Confirm  her  story  in  all  points  but  one —

This  ;  that,  so  fleeing  and  so  breathing  forth

Her  last  strength  in  the  prayer  to  halt  awhile,

She  makes  confusion  of  the  reddening  white

Which  was  the  sunset  when  her  strength  gave  way,  11 90


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  219

And  the  next  sunrise  and  its  whitening  red

Which  she  revived  in  when  her  husband  came  :

She  mixes  both  times,  morn  and  eve,  in  one,

Having  Hved  through  a  blank  of  night  'twixt  each

Though  dead-asleep,  unaware  as  a  corpse,  1195

She  on  the  bed  above  ;  her  friend  below

Watched  in  the  doorway  of  the  inn  the  while,

Stood  i'  the  red  o'  the  morn,  that  she  mistakes.

In  act  to  rouse  and  quicken  the  tardy  crew

And  hurry  out  the  horses,  have  the  stage  1200

Over,  the  last  league,  reach  Rome  and  be  safe  :

When  up  came  Guido.

Guido's  tale  begins —
How  he  and  his  whole  household,  drunk  to  death
By  some  enchanted  potion,  poppied  drugs  1205

Plied  by  the  wife,  lay  powerless  in  gross  sleep
And  left  the  spoilers  unimpeded  way.
Could  not  shake  off  their  poison  and  pursue.
Till  noontide,  then  made  shift  to  get  on  horse
And  did  pursue  :  which  means,  he  took  his  time,       12 10


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK:


Pressed  on  no  more  than  lingered  after,  stej)

By  step,  just  making  sure  o'  the  fugitives,

Till  at  the  nick  of  time,  he  saw  his  chance,

Seized  it,  came  up  with  and  surprised  the  pair.

How  he  must  needs  have  gnawn  lip  and  gnashed  teeth,

Taking  successively  at  tower  and  town,  .    t2i6

Village  and  roadside,  still  the  same  report

^^  Yes,  such  a  pair  arrived  an  hour  ago,

*'  Sat  in  the  carriage  just  where  your  horse  stands,

**  While  we  got  horses  ready, — turned  deaf  ear         1220

^^  To  all  entreaty  they  would  even  alight ;

*^  Counted  the  minutes  and  resumed  their  course."

Would  they  indeed  escape,  arrive  at  Rome,

Leave  no  least  loop  to  let  damnation  through,

And  foil  him  of  his  captured  infamy,  1225

Prize  of  guilt  proved  and  perfect  ?     So  it  seemed  :

Till,  oh  the  happy  chance,  at  last  stage,  Rome

But  two  short  hours  off,  Castelnuovo  reached.

The  guardian  angel  gave  reluctant  place,

Satan  stepped  forward  with  alacrity,  1230


f


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  221

Pompilia's  flesh  and  blood  succumbed,  perforce

A  halt  was,  and  her  husband  had  his  will.

Perdue  he  couched,  counted  out  hour  by  hour

Till  he  should  spy  in  the  east  a  signal-streak —

Night  had  been,  morrow  w^as,  triumph  would  be.       1235

Do  you  see  the  plan  deliciously  complete  ?

The  rush  upon  the  unsuspecting  sleep,

The  easy  execution,  tlie  outcry

Over  the  deed  "  Take  notice  all  the  world  !

*'  These  two  dead  bodies,  locked  still  in  embrace, —

*'  The  man  is  Caponsacchi  and  a  priest,  1241

*'  The  woman  is  my  wife  :  they  fled  me  late,

^'  Thus  have  I  found  and  you  behold  them  thus,

*'  And  may  judge  me  :  do  you  approve  or  no  ?  "

Success  did  seem  not  so  improbable,  1245

But  that  already  Satan's  laugh  was  heard.

His  black  back  turned  on  Guido — left  i'  the  lurch

Or  rather,  baulked  of  suit  and  service  now,

That  he  improve  on  both  by  one  deed  more,


THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK.


Burn  up  the  better  at  no  distant  day,  1250

Body  and  soul  one  holocaust  to  hell.

Anyhow,  of  this  natural  consequence

Did  just  the  last  link  of  the  long  chain  snap  :

For  his  eruption  was  o'  the  priest,  alive

And  alert,  calm,  resolute  and  formidable,  1255

Not  the  least  look  of  fear  in  that  broad  brow —

One  not  to  be  disposed  of  by  surprise,

And  armed  moreover — who  had  guessed  as  much  ?

Yes,  there  stood  he  in  secular  costume

Complete  from  head  to  heel,  with  sword  at  side,        1260

He  seemed  to  know  the  trick  of  perfectly.

There  was  no  prompt  suppression  of  the  man

As  he  said  calmly  ''  I  have  saved  your  wife

''  From  death ;  there  was  no  other  way  but  this  ;

'^  Of  what  do  I  defraud  you  except  death?  1265

^'  Charge  any  wrong  beyond,  I  answer  it."

Guido,  the  valorous,  had  met  his  match.

Was  forced  to  demand  help  instead  of  fight,

Bid  the  authorities  o'  the  place  lend  aid


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  223

And  make  the  best  of  a  broken  matter  so.  1270

They  soon  obeyed  the  summons — I  suppose,

Apprized  and  ready,  or  not  far  to  seek —

Laid  hands  on  Caponsacchi,  found  in  fault,

A  priest  yet  flagrantly  accoutred  thus, —

Then,  to  make  good  Count  Guido's  further  charge,   1275

Proceeded,  prisoner  made  lead  the  way,

In  a  crowd,  upstairs  to  the  chamber-door

Where  wax-white,  dead  asleep,  deep  beyond  dream,

As  the  priest  laid  her,  lay  Pompilia  yet.

And  as  he  mounted  step  and  step  with  the  crowd      1280

How  I  see  Guido  taking  heart  again  !

He  knew  his  wife  so  well  and  the  way  of  her —

How  at  the  outbreak  she  would  shroud  her  shame

In  hell's  heart,  would  it  mercifully  yawn —

How,  failing  that,  her  forehead  to  his  foot,  1285

She  would  crouch  silent  till  the  great  doom  fell.

Leave  him  triumphant  with  the  crowd  to  see  !

Guilt  motionless  or  writhing  like  a  worm  ?


2  24  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

No  !    Second  misadventure,  this  worm  turned,

I  told  you  :  would  have  slain  him  on  the  spot  1290

With  his  own  weapon,  but  they  seized  her  hands  :

Leaving  her  tongue  free,  as  it  tolled  the  knell

Of  Guido's  hope  so  lively  late.     The  past

Took  quite  another  shape  now.     She  who  shrieked

"  At  least  and  for  ever  I  am  mine  and  God's,  1295

**  Thanks  to  his  liberating  angel  Death —

*'  Never  again  degraded  to  be  yours

"  The  ignoble  noble,  the  unmanly  man,

"  The  beast  below  the  beast  in  brutishness  !  " —

This  was  the  froward  child,  ''  the  restif  lamb  1300

*^  Used  to  be  cherished  in  his  breast,"  he  groaned —

"  Eat    from    his    hand    and    drink    from    out    his

cup,
'^  The  while  his  fingers  pushed  their  loving  way
*'  Through  curl  on  curl  of  that  soft  coat — alas,
^'  And  she  all  silverly  baaed  gratitude  1305

"  While  meditating  mischief  !  " — and  so  forth.
He  must  invent  another  story  now  !


THE   OTHER   HALF-ROME.  225

The  ins  and  outs  o'  the  rooms  were  searched :  he  found

Or  showed  for  found  the  abominable  prize —

Love-letters  from  his  wife  who  cannot  write,  13  lo

Love-letters  in  reply  o'  the  priest — thank  God  ! —

Who  can  write  and  confront  his  character

With  this,  and  prove  the  false  thing  forged  throughout :

Spitting  whereat,  he  needs  must  spatter  who

But  Guido's  self? — that  forged  and  falsified  13 15

One  letter  called  Pompilia's,  past  dispute  :

Then  why  not  these  to  make  sure  still  more  sure  ?

So  was  the  case  concluded  then  and  there :

Guido  preferred  his  charges  in  due  form,

Called  on  the  law  to  adjudicate,  consigned  1320

The  accused  ones  to  the  Prefect  of  the  place.

(Oh  mouse-birth  of  that  mountain-like  revenge  ! )

And  so  to  his  own  place  betook  himself

After  the  spring  that  failed, — the  wildcat's  way.

The  captured  parties  were  conveyed  to  Rome  ;  1325

Investigation  followed  here  i'  the  court —

VOL.    I.  Q


226  THE    RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

Soon  to  review  the  fruit  of  its  own  work,

From  then  to  now  being  eight  months  and  no  more.

Guido  kept  out  of  sight  and  safe  at  home  :

The  Abate,  brother  Paolo,  helped  most  1330

At  words  when  deeds  were  out  of  question,  pushed

Nearest  the  purple,  best  played  deputy.

So,  pleaded,  Guido's  representative

At  the  court  shall  soon  try  Guido's  self, — what's  more,

The  court  that  also  took — I  told  you,  Sir —  1335

That  statement  of  the  couple,  how  a  cheat

Had  been  i'  the  birth  of  the  babe,  no  child  of  theirs.

That  was  the  prelude ;  this,  the  play's  first  act :

Whereof  we  wait  what  comes,  crown,  close  of  all.

Well,  the  result  was  something  of  a  shade  1340

On  the  parties  thus  accused, — how  otherwise  ?

Shade,  but  with  shine  as  unmistakable.

Each  had  a  prompt  defence  :  Pompilia  first —

"  Earth  was  made  hell  to  me  who  did  no  harm :

^'  I  only  could  emerge  one  way  from  hell  1345


THE   OTHER   HALF  ROME.  227

"  By  catching  at  the  one  hand  held  me,  so

"  I  caught  at  it  and  thereby  stepped  to  heaven  :

"  If  that  be  wrong,  do  with  me  what  you  will ! "

Then  Caponsacchi  with  a  grave  grand  sweep

O'  the  arm  as  though  his  soul  warned  baseness  off —

"  If  as  a  man,  then  much  more  as  a  priest  135 1

''  I  hold  me  bound  to  help  weak  innocence :

^^  If  so  my  worldly  reputation  burst,

'^  Being  the  bubble  it  is,  why,  burst  it  may :

"  Blame  I  can  bear  though  not  blameworthiness.       1355

''  But  use  your  sense  first,  see  if  the  miscreant  here

"  The  man  who  tortured  thus  the  woman,  thus

^*  Have  not  both  laid  the  trap  and  fixed  the  lure

"  Over  the  pit  should  bury  body  and  soul !

"  His  facts  are  lies  :  his  letters  are  the  fact —  1360

"  An  infiltration  flavoured  with  himself!

"  As  for  the  fancies — whether  .  .  what  is  it  you  say  ?

"  The  lady  loves  me,  whether  I  love  her

"  In  the  forbidden  sense  of  your  surmise, —

"  If,  with  the  midday  blaze  of  truth  above,  1365


2  28  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK.

"  The  unlidded  eye  of  God  awake,  aware,

"  You  needs  must  pry  about  and  track  the  course

"  Of  each  stray  beam  of  hght  may  traverse  earth,

''  To  the  night's  sun  and  Lucifer  himself,

"Do  so,  at  other  time,  in  other  place,  1370

*'  Not  now  nor  here  !     Enough  that  first  to  last

''  I  never  touched  her  lip  nor  she  my  hand

"  Nor  either  of  us  thought  a  thought,  much  less

"  Spoke  a  word  which  the  Virgin  might  not  hear.

"  Be  that  your  question,  thus  I  answer  it."  1375

Then  the  court  had  to  make  its  mind  up,  spoke.

"  It  is  a  thorny  question,  and  a  tale

**  Hard  to  believe,  but  not  impossible :

"  Who  can  be  absolute  for  either  side  ?

"  A  middle  course  is  happily  open  yet.  1380

^^  Here  has  a  blot  surprised  the  social  blank, —

"Whether  through  favour,  feebleness  or  fault,

"  No  matter,  leprosy  has  touched  our  robe

^^  And  we're  unclean  and  must  be  purified.


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  229

''  Here  is  a  wife  makes  holiday  from  home,  1385

"  A  priest  caught  playing  truant  to  his  church,

"  In  masquerade  moreover  :  both  allege

"  Enough  excuse  to  stop  our  lifted  scourge

"  Which  else  would  heavily  fall.     On  the  other  hand,

"  Here  is  a  husband,  ay  and  man  of  mark,  1390

"  Who  comes  complaining  here,  demands  redress

"  As  if  he  were  the  pattern  of  desert —

"  The  while  those  plaguy  allegations  frown,

'*  Forbid  we  grant  him  the  redress  he  seeks.

"  To  all  men  be  our  moderation  known  !  1395

"  Rewarding  none  while  compensating  each,

"  Hurting  all  round  though  harming  nobody,

'^  Husband,  wife,  priest,  scot-free  not  one  shall  'scape,

"  Yet  priest,  wife,  husband,  boast  the  unbroken  head

"  From  application  of  our  excellent  oil :  1400

"  So  that,  whatever  be  the  fact,  in  fine,

"  It  makes  no  miss  of  justice  in  a  sort.

"  First,  let  the  husband  stomach  as  he  may,

"  His  wife  shall  neither  be  returned  him,  no —


230  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

"  Nor  branded,  whipped  and  caged,  but  just  consigned

''  To  a  convent  and  the  quietude  she  cravse  ;  1406

^•'  So  is  he  rid  of  his  domestic  plague  :

"  What  better  thing  can  happen  to  a  man  ?

*'  Next,  let  the  priest  retire — unshent,  unshamed,

"  Unpunished  as  for  perpetrating  crime,  14 10

"But  relegated  (not  imprisoned.  Sirs  !)

"  Sent  for  three  years  to  clarify  his  youth

''  At  Civita,  a  rest  by  the  way  to  Rome  :

''  There  let  his  life  skim  off  its  last  of  lees

"  Nor  keep  this  dubious  colour.     Judged  the  cause  :

"  All  parties  may  retire,  content,  we  hope."  141 6

That's  Rome's  way,  the  traditional  road  of  law ;

Whither  it  leads  is  what  remains  to  tell.

The  priest  went  to  his  relegation-place,

The  wife  to  her  convent,  brother  Paolo  1420

To  the  arms  of  brother  Guido  with  the  news

And  this  beside — his  charge  was  countercharged ;

The  Comparini,  his  old  brace  of  hates.


THE   OTHER    HALF-ROME.  23 1

Were  breathed  and  vigilant  and  venomous  now —

Had  shot  a  second  bolt  where  the  first  stuck,  1425

And  followed  up  the  pending  dowry-suit

By  a  procedure  should  release  the  wife

From  so  much  of  the  marriage-bond  as  barred

Escape  when  Guido  turned  the  screw  too  much

On  his  wife's  flesh  and  blood,  as  husband  may.  1430

No  more  defence,  she  turned  and  made  attack,

Claimed  now  divorce  from  bed  and  board,  in  short :

Pleaded  such  subtle  strokes  of  cruelty.

Such  slow  sure  siege  laid  to  her  body  and  soul,

As,  proved, — and  proofs  seemed  coming  thick  and  fast, —

Would  gain  both  freedom  and  the  dowTy  back  1436

Even  should  the  first  suit  leave  them  in  his  grasp  :

So  urged  the  Comparini  for  the  wife.

Guido  had  gained  not  one  of  the  good  things

He  grasped  at  by  his  creditable  plan  1440

O'  the  flight  and  following  and  the  rest :  the  suit

That  smouldered  late  was  fanned  to  fury  new,

This  adjunct  came  to  help  with  fiercer  fire,


232  THE    RING  AND   THE    BOOK.

While  he  had  got  himself  a  quite  new  plague —

Found  the  world's  face  an  universal  grin  1445

At  this  last  best  of  the  Hundred  Merry  Tales

Of  how  a  young  and  spritely  clerk  devised

To  carry  off  a  spouse  that  moped  too  much,

And  cured  her  of  the  vapours  in  a  trice :

And  how  the  husband,  playing  Vulcan's  part,  1450

Told  by  the  Sun,  started  in  hot  pursuit

To  catch  the  lovers,  and  came  halting  up.

Cast  his  net  and  then  called  the  Gods  to  see

The  convicts  in  their  rosy  impudence —

Whereat  said  Mercury  "  Would  that  I  were  Mars  !"  1455

Oh  it  was  rare,  and  naughty  all  the  same  !

Brief,  the  wife's  courage  and  cunning, — the  priest's  show

Of  chivalry  and  adroitness, — last  not  least,

The  husband — how  he  ne'er  showed  teeth  at  all,

Whose  bark  had  promised  biting ;  but  just  sneaked  1460

Back  to  his  kennel,  tail  'twixt  legs,  as  't  were, —

All  this  was  hard  to  gulp  down  and  digest.

So  pays  the  devil  his  liegeman,  brass  for  gold.


THE    OTHER   HALF-ROME.  233

But  this  was  at  Arezzo  :  here  in  Rome

Brave  Paolo  bore  up  against  it  all —  1465

Battled  it  out,  nor  wanting  to  himself

Nor  Guido  nor  the  House  whose  weight  he  bore

Pillar-like,  not  by  force  of  arm  but  brain.

He  knew  his  Rome,  what  wheels  we  set  to  work  ;

Plied  influential  folk,  pressed  to  the  ear  1470

Of  the  efficacious  purple,  pushed  his  way

To  the  old  Pope's  self, — past  decency  indeed, —

Praying  him  take  the  matter  in  his  hands

Out  of  the  regular  court's  incompetence  ;

But  times  are  changed  and  nephews  out  of  date         1475

And  favouritism  unfashionable  :  the  Pope

Said  "  Render  Caesar  what  is  Caesar's  due  ! "

As  for  the  Comparini's  counter-plea.

He  met  that  by  a  counter-plea  again,

Made  Guido  claim  divorce — with  help  so  far  1480

By  the  trial's  issue  :  for,  why  punishment

However  slight  unless  for  guiltiness

However  slender  ? — and  a  molehill  serves


234  THE  RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Much  as  a  mountain  of  offence  this  way.

So  was  he  gathering  strength  on  every  side  1485

And  growing  more  and  more  to  menace — when

All  of  a  terrible  moment  came  the  blow

That  beat  down  Paolo's  fence,  ended  the  play

O'  the  foil  and  brought  Mannaia  on  the  stage.

Five  months  had  passed  now  since  Pompilia's  flight,

Months  spent  in  peace  among  the  Convert  nuns  :      1491

This, — being,  as  it  seemed,  for  Guido's  sake

Solely,  what  pride  might  call  imprisonment

And  quote  as  something  gained,  to  friends  at  home, —

This  naturally  was  at  Guido's  charge  :  1495

Grudge  it  he  might,  but  penitential  fare,

Prayers,  preachings,  who  but  he  defrayed  the  cost  ?

So,  Paolo  dropped,  as  proxy,  doit  by  doit

Like    heart's   blood,   till — what 's  here  ?    What    notice

comes  ?
The  Convent's  self  makes  application  bland  1500

That,  since  Pompilia's  health  is  fast  o'  the  wane,


THE   OTHER    HALF-ROME.  235


She  may  have  leave  to  go  combine  her  cure

Of  soul  with  cure  of  body,  mend  her  mind

Together  with  her  thin  arms  and  sunk  eyes

That  want  fresh  air  outside  the  convent-wall,  1505

Say  in  a  friendly  house, — and  which  so  fit

As  a  certain  villa  in  the  Pauline  way,

That  happens  to  hold  Pietro  and  his  wife.

The  natural  guardians  ?     "  Oh,  and  shift  the  care

^^  You  shift  the  cost,  too  ;  Pietro  pays  in  turn,  1510

"  And  lightens  Guido  of  a  load  !    And  then,

"  Villa  or  convent,  two  names  for  one  thing,

"  Always  the  sojourn  means  imprisonment,

^'  Do7mim  pro  career e — nowise  we  relax,

"  Nothing  abate  :  how  answers  Paolo  ?"  15 15

You,
What  would  you  answer  ?    All  so  smooth  and  fair.
Even  Paul's  astuteness  sniffed  no  harm  i'  the  world.
He  authorised  the  transfer,  saw  it  made
And,  two  months  after,  reaped  the  fruit  of  the  same.
Having  to  sit  down,  rack  his  brain  and  find  1 5  2 1


236  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

What  phrase  should  serve  him  best  to  notify

Our  Guido  that  by  happy  providence

A  son  and  heir,  a  babe  was  born  to  him

I'  the  villa, — go  tell  sympathising  friends  !  1525

Yes,  such  had  been  Pompilia's  privilege :

She,  when  she  fled,  was  one  month  gone  with  child,

Known  to  herself  or  unknown,  either  way

Availing  to  explain  (say  men  of  art)

The  strange  and  passionate  precipitance  1530

Of  maiden  startled  into  motherhood

Which  changes  body  and  soul  by  nature's  law.

So  when  the  she-dove  breeds,  strange  yearnings  come

For  the  unknown  shelter  by  undreamed-of  shores,

And  there  is  born  a  blood-pulse  in  her  heart  1535

To  fight  if  needs  be,  though  with  flap  of  wing,

For  the  wool-flock  or  the  fur-tuft,  though  a  hawk

Contest  the  prize, — wherefore,  she  knows  not  yet.

Anyhow,  thus  to  Guido  came  the  news.

''  I  shall  have  quitted  Rome  ere  you  arrive  1540

'^  To  take  the  one  step  left," — wrote  Paolo.


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  237

Then  did  the  winch  o'  the  winepress  of  all  hate,

Vanity,  disappointment,  grudge  and  greed.

Take  the  last  turn  that  screws  out  pure  revenge

With  a  bright  bubble  at  the  brim  beside —  1545

By  an  heir's  birth  he  was  assured  at  once

O'  the  main  prize,  all  the  money  in  dispute :

Pompilia's  dowry  might  revert  to  her

Or  stay  with  him  as  law's  caprice  should  point, —

But  now — now — what  was  Pietro's  shall  be  hers,        1550

AVhat  was  hers  shall  remain  her  own, — if  hers.

Why  then, — oh,  not  her  husband's  but — her  heir's  !

That  heir  being  his  too,  all  grew  his  at  last

By  this  road  or  by  that  road,  since  they  join.

Before,  why,  push  he  Pietro  out  o'  the  world, —         1555

The  current  of  the  money  stopped,  you  see,

Pompilia  being  proved  no  Pietro's  child  :

Or  let  it  be  PompiHa's  life  he  quenched,

Again  the  current  of  the  money  stopped, —

Guido  debarred  his  rights  as  husband  soon,  1 560

So  the  new  process  threatened  ; — now,  the  chance.


238  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK.

Now,  the  resplendent  minute  !     Clear  the  earth,

Cleanse  the  house,  let  the  three  but  disappear

A  child  remains,  depositary  of  all.

That  Guido  may  enjoy  his  own  again  !  1565

Repair  all  losses  by  a  master-stroke.

Wipe  out  the  past,  all  done  and  left  undone,

Swell  the  good  present  to  best  evermore,

Die  into  new  life,  which  let  blood  baptize  !

So,  i'  the  blue  of  a  sudden  sulphur-blaze,  1570

And  why  there  was  one  step  to  take  at  Rome,

And  why  he  should  not  meet  with  Paolo  there,

He  saw — the  ins  and  outs  to  the  heart  of  hell —

And  took  the  straight  line  thither  swift  and  sure.

He  rushed  to  Vittiano,  found  four  sons  o'  the  soil,     1575

Brutes  of  his  breeding,  with  one  spark  i'  the  clod

That  served  for  a  soul,  the  looking  up  to  him

Or  aught  called  Franceschini  as  life,  death.

Heaven,  hell, — lord  paramount,  assembled  these.

Harangued,  equipped,  instructed,  pressed  each  clod  1580


THE    OTHER   HALF-ROME.  239

With    his    will's    imprint;     then    took    horse,    pHed

spur,
And  so  arrived,  all  five  of  them,  at  Rome
On  Christmas-Eve,  and  forthwith  found  themselves
Installed  i'  the  vacancy  and  solitude
Left  them  by  Paolo,  the  considerate  man  1585

Who,  good  as  his  v/ord,  disappeared  at  once
As  if  to  leave  the  stage  free.     A  whole  week
Did  Guido  spend  in  study  of  his  part,
Then  played  it  fearless  of  a  failure.     One,
Struck  the  year's  clock  whereof  the  hours  are  days,   1590
And  off  was  rung  o'  the  little  wheels  the  chime
'*  Good  will  on  earth  and  peace  to  man  :  "  but,  two,
Proceeded  the  same  bell  and,  evening  come,
The  dreadful  five  felt  finger-wise  their  way
Across  the  town  by  blind  cuts  and  black  turns         .1595
To  the  little  lone  suburban  villa ;  knocked —
"  Who  may  be  outside  ?  "  called  a  well-known  voice.
"  A  friend  of  Caponsacchi's  bringing  friends
"A  letter."


240  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

That 's  a  test,  the  excusers  say ;
Ay,  and  a  test  conclusive,  I  return.  1600

What?     Had    that    name    brought  touch   of   guilt   or

taste
Of  fear  with  it,  aught  to  dash  the  present  joy
With  memory  of  the  sorrow  just  at  end, —
She,  happy  in  her  parents'  arms  at  length
With  the  new  blessing  of  the  two  weeks'  babe, —     .1605
How  had  that  name's  announcement  moved  the  wife  ?
Or,  as  the  other  slanders  circulate,
Were  Caponsacchi  no  rare  visitant
On  nights  and  days  whither  safe  harbour  lured.
What  bait  had  been  i'  the  name  to  ope  the  door?      16 10
The  promise  of  a  letter  ?     Stealthy  guests
Have  secret  watchwords,  private  entrances  :
The  man's  own  self  might  have  been  found  inside
And  all  the  scheme  made  frustrate  by  a  word.
No  :  but  since  Guido  knew,  none  knew  so  well,        16 15
The  man  had  never  since  returned  to  Rome
Nor  seen  the  wife's  face  more  than  villa's  front.


THE    OTHER    HALF-ROME.  24 1

So,  could  not  be  at  hand  to  warn  or  save, —
For  that,  he  took  this  sure  way  to  the  end.

'^  Come  in,"  bade  poor  Violante  cheerfully,  1620

Drawing  the  door-bolt :  that  death  was  the  first,
Stabbed    through    and  through.     Pietro,   close    on    her

heels.
Set  up  a  cry — ''  Let  me  confess  myself !
"  Grant  but  confession  !  "     Cold  steel  was  the  grant.
Then  came  Pompilia's  turn.  1625

Then  they  escaped.
The    noise    o'    the     slaughter    roused    the    neighbour-
hood.
They  had  forgotten  just  the  one  thing  more
Which  saves  i'  the  circumstance,  the  ticket  to-wit
Which  puts  post-horses  at  a  traveller's  use  :  1630

So,  all  on  foot,  desperate  through  the  dark
Reeled  they  like  drunkards  along  open  road,
Accomplished  a  prodigious  twenty  miles
Homeward,  and  gained  Baccano  very  near,

VOL.    I.  R


242  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

Stumbled  at  last,  deaf,  dumb,  blind  through  the
feat,  1635

Into  a  grange  and,  one  dead  heap,  slept  there

Till  the  pursuers  hard  upon  their  trace

Reached  them  and  took  them,  red  from  head  to
heel,

And  brought  them  to  the  prison  where  they  lie.

The  couple  were  laid  i'  the  church  two  days  ago,       1640

And  the  wife  lives  yet  by  miracle.

All  is  told.
You  hardly  need  ask  what  Count  Guido  says.
Since  something  he  must  say.     "  I  own  the  deed — "
(He  cannot  choose, — but — )  "  I  declare  the  same     1645
"  Just  and  inevitable, — since  no  way  else
*^  Was  left  me,  but  by  this  of  taking  life,
"  To  save  my  honour  which  is  more  than  life.
"  I  exercised  a  husband's  rights."     To  which
The  answer  is  as  prompt—"  There  was  no  fault        1650
"  In  any  one  o'  the  three  to  punish  thus :


THE   OTHER    HALF-ROME.  243

'^  Neither  i'  the  wife,  who  kept  all  faith  to  you,

'^  Nor  in  the  parents,  whom  yourself  first  duped,

"  Robbed  and  maltreated,  then  turned  out  of  doors.

'^  You  wronged  and  they  endured  wrong ;  yours  the  fault.

''  Next,  had  endurance  overpassed  the  mark  1656

'^  And  turned  resentment  needing  remedy, —

''  Nay,  put  the  absurd  impossible  case,  for  once —

''  You  were  all  blameless  of  the  blame  alleged

'^  And  they  blameworthy  where  you  fix  all  blame,      1660

'^  Still,  why  this  violation  of  the  law  ?

"  Yourself  elected  law  should  take  its  course,

"  Avenge  wrong,  or  show  vengeance  not  your  right ;

"  Why,  only  when  the  balance  in  law's  hand

"  Trembles  against  you  and  inclines  the  way  1665

"  O'  the  other  party,  do  you  make  protest,  .

''  Renounce  arbitrament,  flying  out  of  court,

"  And  crying  ^  Honour's  hurt  the  sword  must  cure  ?  '

"  Aha,  and  so  i'  the  middle  of  each  suit

"  Trying  i'  the  courts, — and  you  had  three  in  play     1670

''  With  an  appeal  to  the  Pope's  self  beside, —


244  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK.

'^  What,  you  may  chop  and  change  and  right  your  wrongs
'^  Leaving  the  law  to  lag  as  she  thinks  fit  ?  "

That  were  too  temptingly  commodious,  Count !

One  would  have  still  a  remedy  in  reserve  1675

Should  reach  the  safest  oldest  sinner,  you  see  !

One's  honour  forsooth  ?     Does  that  take  hurt  alone

From  the  extreme  outrage  ?     I  who  have  no  wife,

Being  yet  sensitive  in  my  degree

As  Guido, — must  discover  hurt  elsewhere  1680

Which,  half  compounded-for  in  days  gone  by,

May  profitably  break  out  now  afresh,

Need  cure  from  my  own  expeditious  hands.

The  lie  that  was,  as  it  were,  imputed  me

When  you  objected  to  my  contract's  clause, —  1685

The  theft  as  good  as,  one  may  say,  alleged.

When  you,  co-heir  in  a  will,  excepted,  Sir,

To  my  administration  of  effects,

— Aha,  do  you  think  law  disposed  of  these  ?

My  honour  's  touched  and  shall  deal  death  around  !  1690


THE  OTHER  HALF- ROME.  245

Count,  that  were  too  commodious,  I  repeat !

If  any  law  be  imperative  on  us  all,

Of  all  are  you  the  enemy  :  out  with  you

From  the  common  light  and  air  and  life  of  man  !


THE    END    OF    VOL.


LONDON  :

PRINTED    BY   SMITH,    ELDER   AND   CO.,

OLD   BAILEY,    E.  C.


NEW  AND  UNIFORM  EDITION

OF

THE  POETICAL  WORKS

OF

MR.  ROBERT  BROWNING.

In  Six  Volumes.     Fcap.  8vo.     Price  Five  Shillings  each.

VOL.  I. — Pauline — Paracelsus — Strafford,


VOL.  II. — Sordello — Pippa  Passes.


VOL.    III. — King     Victor    and    King    Charles-
Dramatic  Lyrics —  The  Return  of  the  Disuses.


VOL.  IV. — A    Blot  in   the   'Scutcheon — Colombes
Birthday — Dramatic  Romances.


VOL.  V. — A  Soul's    Tragedy — Luria — Christmas-
Eve  a7id  Easter  Day — Men  and  Women.


VOL.  VI. — In  a  Balcony — Dramatis  Personcs.


LONDON  :  SMITH,  ELDER  AND  CO.


■iJ-lA..  1


\r
