A Traveller's Narrative Written to Illustrate the Episode of the Bab
E. G. Browne (translator) (1891)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): E. G. Browne's 1891 Cambridge University Press edition, Vol. II: English Translation and Notes, of A Traveller's Narrative Written to Illustrate the Episode of the Bab. Public domain.

========================================================================

A  TEAVELLER'S  NARRATIVE


WRITTEN TO ILLUSTRATE


THE EPISODE OF THE BAB.


iLmrtnn: 0. J.  CLAY  AND  SONS,

CAMBEIDGE UNIVERSITY PEESS WAEEHOUSE,

Ave  Maeia  Lane.


(lamiiilJBE: DEIGHTON,  BELL,  AND  CO.

Itipjis: F.  A. BROCKHAUS.

iJiEto  Botlt: MACMILLAN  AND  CO.


A  TEAYELLER'S  NAREATIYE

WRITTEN TO ILLUSTRATE

THE EPISODE OE  THE  BAB,

?.  V  i  I
EDITED IN THE ORIGINAL PERSIAN,
AND  TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH,  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION
AND EXPLANATORY  NOTES,


BY

EDWARD G. BROWNE, M.A., M.B.,
■>■

FELLOW OF PEMBKOKE COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND LEOTDRER IN PERSIAN
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.


VOLUME M. ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND NOTES.
EDITBB FOB THE SYNDICS OF TEE VNITEBSITY PRESS.


CAMBRIDGE  :

AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

1891

[All  Rights  reserved.]


ffiambtiiige :

PHINTED IIY 0. J. CIjAY, M.A. AND BONH,
AT TlirO UNIVKIIHITY I'RHHR.


CCiXTEXTS OF VOLrME  n.


PAGE

tcrr-orrcnox vii

AJ'PEST'a ........... lir

CosEiGExrA It

TEAXSiilloX ..........  1

Xl'TI  a. Fer?i.-ii: a::d  European  ac-c-cnni;  oi  the  Bab  ard

Hs  religicn ....... 17?

XorE  B. Tie  Seve-.^  Marhrs 211

!SoTE  C.  Procc'i  of  the  Bib's  a.fe  fror;  the  Persiaii  Beviii  .  Cl~
XjTE  D.  The  meaning  of  the  tiile  "Bab  "  ....  •>iO.
yoiT  E. lie  ?hr-kiii5.  and  tieii  doerrine  ci  tie  ■■  F::inh

STipporr " -234

XorE  r. SzppleiTieEtarr -ctioes  of  certain  perscris  nientioned

in  the  text  .  . . .  . ^ "

Tne  B.ab's  Klgriniage  to  Meoo.i  and  remmi;  fhiri::
Se;vy~;d  Tahya  o:  Daxab  and  the  yir_;  InsTa-recticii  .
The  Bab";  escape  from  Shira;  to  Isfal.in  . 'iC-

Thr  Conferene^  .^t  Isfahan ..... 2^
M-lh.  Jaira  and  his  Philosophv ....
The  Bab  at  llakii  and  Chihnk  ....

The  nr?i  exandnarijn  of  the  Bab  a;  Tabriz
The  Bab's  olaim  to  be  the  I-i'.n  Mahd; .
Certain  rcints  oi  Shi-ite  doctrine  reierred  to  in  the

text"  .■ 296

The  Execiition  oi  Mnlla  Mtihrimniad  -Ah  of  Bai-

funish 306

KTirratn'i-'Avn 309

r^eiiratiTe  Attribntes . . .  .817

Tne  Eab's  last  moments SlH

The  attempt  on  the  t'n.i"^'s  life  and  the  M.^ssaore  of

Teher,ii: 3ii3


x

OTE

G.

>"

OTZ

H.

K

OTE

L

N

OTX

J.

X

:7i:

E.

X

JTE

L.

s

OTZ

M.

:s

OH

X.

X

orx

0.

X

OTZ

P.

>c

C'TZ

Q-

:s

i-.TE

E.

X

OTE

S.

N

OTE

T.

3-17


VI  CONTENTS.

Note  U. Writings  of  the  Bib  and  Subh-i-Ezol . . • ■'■^■^'
Note  V. Text?  from  tlio  Persian  Bey4n  concerning  the  hiRli

estate  of  "  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest  "
Note  W. Mlrzi  Yahy4  "  Rubh-i-Ezel "  and  the  Cyprus  exiles ^'1!'
Note  X. Translation  of  the  Superscription  and  Exordium  of

Behi'u'lliih's  Epistle  to  the  KinR  of  Persia • '^'>0
Note  Y. The Martyrs  of IsfahAn, the martyrdom  el'  Aka

Mirz4  Ashraf  of  Ablid6,  and  the  persecutions

of  Si-dih  and  NajafAbdd . . . ■ • ^00
Note  Z. Zeynu'l-Mukarrabln  the  Scribe,  and  the  li^'bt  thrown

by  his  colophons  on  the  Babl  calendar . • '11^
Index 427


INTEODUCTION.


This  book  is  the  history  of  a  proscribed  and  persecuted
sect  ^vritteu  by  one  of  themselves.  After  sufleriug  in
silence  for  nigh  upon  half  a  century,  they  at  length  find
voice  to  tell  their  tale  and  offer  their  apology.  Of  this
voice  I  am  the  interpreter.

So  many  Persian  works  of  universally  acknowledged
and  incontrovertible  merit  remain  unpubKshed,  not  only
in  Europe  but  in  the  East,  that  one  who  offers  to  the
public  as  the  result  of  his  study  and  labour  the  transla-
tion and  text  of  a  quite  recent  compilation,  whereof  the
authorship  must  remain  unknown,  and  which  must  there-
fore rely  solely  on  whatever  intrinsic  interest  and  merit
it  may  possess,  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  state  the
considerations  which  have  led  him  to  select  for  publication
such  a  work

This  book  is,  as  I  have  said,  recent  in  composition ;  for,
as  appears  from  a  passage  which  will  be  found  on  p.  67,
it  was  written  probably_duriag  the  year  18 s 6.  It  is  also
anonymous.  This  could  not  well  be  otherwise  ;  for  what
Persian  could,  with  ordinary  prudence,  acknowledge  a  work
written  in  defence  of  a  faith  whereof  the  name  is  scarce
mentioned  in  Persia  without  fear  and  trembhng  ?  So  that
these  two  things,  which  some  might  incline  to  account
grave  defects  in  the  book,  and  reasons  against  its  pubh-


Vlll  INTRODUCTION.

cation,  are,  in  truth,  inherent  in  its  very  nature  and
character.  It  is  of  quite  modern  origin,  because  it  treats
of  a  recent  movement,  of  which  the  first  beginnings  are
remembered  by  many  still  living;  it  is  anonymous,  because
every  promoter  of  that  movement  is,  in  the  country  which
gave  it  birth,  as  a  man  "sitting  beneath  a  sword  suspended
by  a  single  hair,  who  knoweth  not  when  it  shall  descend
upon  him,  whether  it  shall  descend  instantly  or  after  a
while'."

If,  then,  the  subject  treated  of  in  this  book  be  of
sufficient  interest  and  importance  to  merit  careful  study,
and  if  the  book  itself,  notwithstanding  our  ignorance  of  its
authorship,  can  be  shewn  to  proceed  from  a  trustworthy
source,  I  am  sufficiently  justified  in  having  decided  to  edit
and  translate  this  "Traveller's  Narrative."

Now  it  appears  to  me  that  the  history  of  the  B&hi
movement  must  be  interesting  in  different  ways  to  others
besides  those  who  are  directly  engaged  in  the  study  of
Persian.  To  the  student  of  religious  thought  it  will  afford
no  little  matter  for  reflection  ;  for  here  he  may  contemplate
such  personalities  as  by  lapse  of  time  pass  into  heroes  and
demi-gods  still  unob.scured  by  myth  and  fable;  he  may
examine  by  the  light  of  concurrent  and  independent  testi-
mony one  of  those  strange  outbursts  of  enthusiasm,  faith,
fervent  devotion,  and  indomitable  heroism— or  fanaticism,  if
you  will — which  we  are  accustomed  to  associate  with  the
earlier  history  of  the  human  race ;  he  may  witness,  in  a
word,  the  birth  of  a  faith  which  may  not  impossibly  win  a
place  amidst  the  great  religions  of  the  world.  To  the
ethnologist  also  it  may  yield  food  for  thought  as  to  the
character  of  a  people,  who,  stigmatized  as  they  often  have
been  as  selfish,  mercenary,  avaricious,  egotistical,  sordid
and cowardly, are  yet capable  of  exhibiting under  the

■ See  p. 150  infra.


INTRODUCTION.  ix

influence  of  a  strong  religious  impulse  a  degree  of  devotion,
disinterestedness,  generosity,  unselfishness,  nobility,  and
courage  which  may  be  paralleled  in  history,  but  can
scarcely  be  surpassed.  To  the  politician,  too,  the  matter
is  not  devoid  of  importance  ;  for  what  changes  may  not  be
effected  in  a  country  now  reckoned  almost  as  a  cypher  in
the  balance  of  national  forces  by  a  religion  capable  of
evoking  so  mighty  a  spirit  ?  Let  those  who  know  what
Muhammad  made  the  Arabs,  consider  well  what  the  B4b
may  yet  make  the  Persians.

But  to  myself,  and  I  believe  to  most  others  who  have
been  or  shall  be  brought  to  consider  this  matter,  the
paramount  interest  thereof  lies  in  this,  that  here  is  some-
thing, whether  mse  or  unwise,  whether  tending  towards
the  amelioration  of  mankind  or  the  reverse,  which  seemed
to  many  hundreds,  if  not  thousands,  of  our  fellow-creatures
worth  suffering  and  dying  for,  and  which,  on  this  ground
alone,  must  be  accounted  worthy  of  our  most  attentive  study.

I  have  now  to  explain  how  this  book  came  into  my
hands  ;  what,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  were  the
causes  which  led  to  its  composition  ;  and  why  (with  certain
reservations  which  will  be  presently  specified)  we  are
warranted  in  regarding  it  as  a  true  and  authentic  account
of  the  events  which  it  relates.  In  order  to  make  this
explanation  clear,  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  describe  briefly
how  my  attention  was  first  directed  towards  this  subject ;
how  my  interest  in  it  was  kindled ;  how  the  means  of
investigating  it  were  made  available  to  me ;  and  how  the
investigation,  whereof  this  book  is  at  present  the  final  out-
come, was  conducted.

One  day  some  seven  years  ago  I  was  searching  amongst
the  books  in  the  University  Library  of  Cambridge  for  fresh

B.  h


X  INTRODUCTION.

materials  for  an  essay  on  the  Siifl  philosophy,  in  the  study
of  which  I  was  then  chiefly  engaged,  when  my  eye  was
caught  by  the  title  of  Count  Gobineau's  Religions  et
Philosophies  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.  I  took  down  the  booK,
glanced  through  it  to  discover  whether  or  no  it  contamecl
any  account  of  the  Siifi's,  and,  finding  that  a  short  chapter
was  devoted  to  them,  brought  it  back  witli  me  to  my
rooms.  My  first  superficial  glance  had  also  shewn  me  that
a  considerable  portion  of  the  book  was  taken  up  with  an
account  of  the  B4bfs,  of  which  sect  I  had  at  that  time  no
definite  knowledge,  save  a  general  idea  that  they  had  been
subjected  to  a  most  severe  persecution.

The  perusal  of  Gobineau's  chapter  on  the  Sufis  caused
me,  I  must  frankly  confess,  no  small  mortification ;  for  I
was  an  ardent  admirer  of  these  eloquent  mystics,  whose
spirit  has  inspired  so  much  of  what  is  best  and  finest  m
Persian  literature,  and  a  rude  shock  was  inflicted  on  my
susceptibilities  by  such  words  as  these  : — "Le  qui<^tisme,  le
beng  et  I'opium,  I'ivrognerie  la  plus  abjecte,  voil^  surtout
ce  qu'elle  [le  soufysme]  a  produit."

When,  however,  I  turned  from  this  mournful  chapter  to
that  portion  of  the  book  which  treated  of  the  B4bi  move-
ment, the  case  was  altogether  different.  To  anyone  who
has  already  read  this  masterpiece  of  historical  composition,
this  most  perfect  presentation  of  accurate  and  critical
research  in  the  form  of  a  narrative  of  thrilling  and  sustained
interest,  such  as  one  may,  indeed,  hope  to  find  in  the
drama  or  the  romance,  but  can  scarcely  expect  from  the
historian,  it  is  needless  to  describe  the  effect  which  it
produced  on  me.  To  anyone  who  has  not  read  it,  I  can
only  say  let  him  do  so  forthwith,  if  he  is  in  any  way
interested  in  the  history  of  the  B4bis.  Many  new  facts
may  be  added  to  those  recorded  by  Gobineau,  and  the
history  which  he  carried  down  to  a.d. 1852  needs  to  be


INTRODUCTION.  xi

supplemented  by  an  appendix  detailing  the  events  of  the
last  thirty-eight  years,  but  the  narrative  of  the  first  origin
of  Bdbiism  can  hardly  be  told  better  than  he  has  told  it ;
certainly  not  in  a  style  more  eloquent  nor  in  a  manner
more  worthy  of  the  subject.

Count  Gobineau's  book,  then,  effected  in  a  certain  sense
a  complete  revolution  in  my  ideas  and  projects.  I  had
long  ardently  desired  to  visit  Persia  and  above  all  Shirdz,
and  this  desire  was  now  greatly  intensified.  But  whereas  I
had  previously  wished  to  see  Shfr4z  because  it  was  the
home  of  Hifiz  and  of  Sa'dl,  I  now  wished  to  see  it  because
it  was  the  birthplace  of  MirzA  'Alf  Muhammad  the  Bdb.
And,  after  Shlrdz,  not  Tiis  and  Nish^piir,  but  Zanjdn,
Mdzandardn,  and  Tabriz  were  the  objects  of  my  eager
desire.  My  impatience,  too,  was  greatly  increased ;  for
I  reflected  that  although  there  must  be  many  stiU  living
who  had  witnessed,  or  even  taken  part  in,  the  events  of
which  I  was  so  anxious  to  discover  every  slightest  detail,
each  year  that  passed  would  materially  lessen  their  number,
and  render  ever  fainter  the  possibility  of  restoring  the
picture  in  its  entirety.  Besides  this,  I  was  eager  to  know
more  of  the  doctrines  which  could  inspire  such  heroism,
and  to  gain  this  knowledge,  as  I  clearly  perceived,  there
was  but  one  satisfactory  and  effectual  method.  As  Anquetil
du  Perron  had  succeeded  in  unlocking  the  secrets  of  the  Zo-
roastrian  religion  by  going  amongst  those  who  professed  it,
winning  their  confidence,  and  eventually,  after  infinite
patience  and  endeavour,  obtaining  copies  of  their  sacred
books  and  a  clue  to  their  contents,  so  I,  if  I  were  to  succeed
in  fathoming  the  mysteries  of  the  B4bl  faith,  must  go  to
the  land  of  its  origin,  strive  to  become  intimate  with  some
of  its  votaries,  and  from  these  obtain  the  knowledge  which
I  sought.  Let  no  one  suppose  that  I  am  so  presumptuous
as  to  institute  any  comparison  between  Anquetil  du  Perron

62


xii  INTRODUCTION.

and myself. His  task  was  one  which  only  rare  courage,
perseverance,  and  genius  coiild  bring  to  a  successful  issue.
He  had  to  induce  the  suspicious,  taciturn,  and  uncommuni-
cative priests  of  an  ancient  national  religion  actuated  by
no  desire  of  making  proselytes  to  impart  to  him  a  secret
doctrine  and  ritual  hitherto  most  jealously  guarded. And
when  at  length  the  sacred  books  were  gained,  they  were
books  written  in  a  language  so  long  dead  that  over  it  had
formed  a  deposit  of  commentaries  in  a  speech  which  had
grown,  flourished,  and  died  since it had  been  a  spoken
tongue. Added  to this, Anquetil's investigations were
conducted  amidst  hardships,  privations,  and  dangers  of  an
exceptional  kind. The  B^bls,  on  the  contrary,  would,  I
was  convinced,  be  eager  to  impart  their  doctrines  to  any
enquirer  on  whose  discretion  and  fidelity  they  could  place
reliance. Their sacred  books, moreover, were either  in
Arabic,  or  in  Persian,  and,  beyond  a  certain  reserve  and
obscurity  necessitated  by  prudential  motives,  and  a  peculiar
terminology  such  as  all sects, whether philosophical or
religious, possess, I anticipated no particular difficulty
in  understanding  them. One  special  obstacle,  it  was  true,
did exist  in  this  case  to  the  primary  establishment of
relations  of  intimacy. The  B4bls  were  a  proscribed  sect,
whereof  every  member  was  practically  liable  to  outlawry
and  even  death  should  he  allow  his  creed  to  become  known.
It  seemed  probable  enough,  therefore,  that  I  should  at  first
have some  difficulty  in discovering them and  putting
myself  into  communication  with  them. Yet,  could  I  but
find  means  of  spending  a  few  months  in  Persia,  it  would  be
hard,  I  thought,  if  some  lucky  chance  did  not  bring  me  in
contact  with  some  B4bl  who  would  venture  to  take  me  into
his  confidence. And,  if  the  first  step  could  be  won,  I  relied
on  the  fair  knowledge  of  colloquial  Persian  which  I  already
possessed,  the  general  acquaintance  with  the  B^bf  doctrines


INTRODUCTION.  xiii

which  Gobinean's  work  had  given  me,  the  genuiae  admira-i
_tioii  which  I  felt  for  the  Bdb  and  his  apostles^  and  the
close  brotherhood  which,  according  to  all  analogy,  must
probably  exist  within  the  sect,  to  eifect  the  restZ  )

Meanwhile  the  first  step  was  to  get  to  Persia,  and  of
this  there  seemed  to  be  but  little  chance.  Anquetil  du
Perron  would  have  gone,  chance  or  no  chance,  and  either
attained  his  object  or  perished  in  the  search.  I,  not  being
fashioned  in  so  heroic  a  mould,  waited  for  the  means.
I  made  several  fruitless  attempts  to  obtain  some  appoint-
ment which  would  take  me  to  the  land  of  my  quest,
and  finally,  as  a  last  resource,  offered  myself  as  a  candidate
for  a  medical  post  in  the  realms  of  the  Xizdm  of  Haydar-
ihii,  on  the  chance  that  there  I  might  fiud  means  of
visiting  Persia.  Here  again  I  was  unsuccessful ;  and  I  was
beginning  to  despair  of  attaining  my  object  when  suddenly
and  unexpectedly  that  thing  befel  me  which  is,  as  I  beheve,
the  greatest  good-fortune  which  can  fall  to  the  lot  of  one
eager  to  pursue  a  scientific  enqxiiry  from  which  he  is
debarred  by  lack  of  means.  A  fellowship  became  vacant  at
my  college,  and  to  this  fellowship  I  was  elected.  This
happened  on  May  30th,  1887.  Five  months  later  I  had
crossed  the  Turco-Persian  frontier  and  was  within  three
stages  of  Tabriz.

Of  the  disappointments  and  failures  which  I  at  first
met  with  in  my  attempts  to  discover  and  communicate
with  the  Bdbis ;  of  the  fortunate  chance  which  at  length
placed  the  clue  in  my  hand ;  and  of  the  fulfilment  of  my
hopes  in  a  manner  surpassing  my  most  sanguine  expec-
tations I  have  already  spoken  in  another  place '.  Of  these
and  other  things  incidental  to  my  journey  I  may  perhaps
give a  fuller  account  at  some  future  time. Here  it  is

1  Journal  of  the  Roxjal  Asiatic  Society,  for  1889,  vol.  xxi.  (New
Series),  pp.  486—489,  493 — i96,  501,  &o.


XIV  INTRODUCTION.

sufficient  for  me  to  state  that  I  returned  to  England  in
October  1888,  having  visited  Zanj^n,  Tabriz,  Shiriiz,  and
Sheylih  Tabarsf,  the  places  most  intimately  associated  with
B&hi  history ;  having  lived  on  terms  of  intimacy  for  periods
varying  from  a  few  days  to  many  weeks  with  the  principal
Mhia  at  Isfahdn,  Shfrdz,  Yezd,  and  Kirmd-n ;  and  bringing
with  me  a  number  of  Bihi  books  and  writings,  as  well  as
journals  wherein  the  gist  of  every  important  conversation
with  any  member  of  the  sect  was  carefully  recorded.

So  soon  as  I  had  established  myself  once  more  in
the  college  which  four  years'  absence  from  Cambridge  and
a  year's  travelling  in  Persia  had  served  to  render  yet  more
dear  to  me,  I  set  to  work  to  make  a  systematic  examination
of  the  materials  collected  during  my  journey.  The  Persian
Beydn,  the  IMn,  the  KHdb-i-AMas,  the  Epistles  to  the
Kings,  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadtd,  and  a  host  of  more  or  less
important  letters,  memoranda,  poems,  and  abstracts,  were
read,  digested,  and  indexed ;  and  the  outcome  of  this  and
my  previous  labour,  together  with  a  brief  account  of  my
journey,  was  laid  before  the  public  in  two  articles,  com-
prising in  all  170  pages,  of  which  the  first  appeared  in
July,  the  second  in  October  1889,  in  the  Journal  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society.  To  these  articles  I  shall  continually
have  occasion  to  refer  in  the  course  of  this  work,  and,  for
the  sake  of  brevity,  I  shall  henceforth  generally  denote
them  as  "B.  i."and"B.  ii."

The  preparation  of  these  articles,  in  conjunction  with
other  work,  kept  me  occupied  till  the  autumn  of  1889,
(vhen,  the  main  results  of  my  investigations  having  been
satisfactorily  recorded,  I  was  left  at  liberty  to  turn  my
ittention  to  matters  of  detail.  It  appeared  to  me  extremely
iesirable  that  texts  or  translations  of  the  chief  Bd,bf  works
should  be  published  in  extenso;  the  only  question  was
frhich  to  begin  with. Inasmuch  as  it  seemed  likely  that


INTRODUCTION.  XV

the  historical  aspects  of  the  movement  would  prove  more
generally  interesting  than  its  doctrinal  aspects,  I  finally
determined  to  publish  first  the  text  and  translation  of  the
Tdrikh-i-Jadid^ ,  and  this  determination  was  approved  by
several  of  my  friends  and  correspondents  whose  knowledge
entitled  them  to  speak  with  authority.  This  text  and
translation  I  accordingly  began  to  prepare ;  and  the  former
was  completely  copied  out  for  the  printer  (awaiting  only
collation  with  the  British  Museum  text)^,  while  the  latter
was  in  an  advanced  stage  of  progress,  when  circumstances,
immediately  to  be  detailed,  occurred,  which  postponed  the
completion  of  that  work,  and  substituted  for  it  another,  the
present.

My  researches  amongst  the  B4bfe  in  Persia  had,  at  a
comparatively  early  stage,  revealed  to  me  the  fact  that
since  Count  Gobineau  composed  his  work  great  changes
had  taken  place  in  their  organization  and  attitude.  I  had
expected  to  find  Mlrzd  Yahyd  8ubk-i-Ezel  ("  Hazrat-i-
Ezel"  as  Gobineau  calls  him)  universally  acknowledged  by
them  as  the  Bdb's  successor  and  the  sole  head  to  whom
they  confessed  allegiance.  My  surprise  was  great  when
I  discovered  that,  so  far  from  this  being  the  case,  the
maioritv  of  the  Jibls,3poke__only_of_^ggM  as  their  chief
and  prophet;  asserted  that  the  B^b  was  merely  his  herald


1  Concerning  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  see  Note  A  afTehd,  pp.  192^:::lfT-
infra.

2  This  collation  has  since  been  effected,  and  the  variants  offered
by  the  British  Museum  ms.  proved  to  be  both  numerous  and  im-
portant. Should  the  publication  of  the  work  be  proceeded  with,
it  would  be  necessary  to  collate  also  the  defective  ms.  recently  acquired
by  the  St.  Petersburg  Library,  the  closing  words  of  which  occur  on
p.  235  of  my  ms.  See  note  1  at  the  foot  of  p.  192  infra,  and
the  forthcoming  (sixth)  vol.  of  Baron  Rosen's  Collections  Scientifiques,
p.  244.


XVI  INTRODUCTION.

and  forerunner  (those  who  had  read  the  Gospels,  and  they
were  many,  hkened  the  Bdb  to  John  the  Baptist  and  Beh^
to  Christ);  and  either  entirely  ignored  or  strangely  dis-
paraged Mfrz^  YahyA.  It  took  me  some  time  fully  to
grasp  this  new  and  unexpected  position  of  affairs,  and
perhaps  I  should  not  have  succeeded  in  doing  so  had  it  not
been  fer  the  knowledge  of  the  former  state  of  things  which
I  had  obtained  from  Gobineau's  work,  and  the  acquaintance
which  I  subsequently  made  in  Kirm^n  with  five  or  six
persons  who  adhered  to  what  I  may  call  the  "  old  dis-
pensation" and  regarded  Mirz4  Yahy4  " Bubh-i-Ezel"  as
the  legitimate  and  sole  successor  of  the  Bdb.

To  state  briefly  a  long  story,  the  case  stands  thus  : —
-'  (1)  Mfrz4  'Alf  Muhammad  the  Mb_during  his  life
cjiose  from  amongst  his  most  faithful  and  most  gifted
disciples  l^__gersons  called  "  Letters  of  the  Liying_^'
{Hwni^ai-i-Ha^y),  who,  together  with  himself  the  "Point"
(Nuktay,  constituted  that  sacred  hierarchy  oX_19_called
the  "First  Unity "  (JahidA-Amal).^  Of  thesr^O^etters^
I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  a  complete  list,  and  indeed
it  would  appear  that  the  whole  hierarchy  was  never  made
known.  Mlrz4  Yahyd  Subh-i-Ezel  held  the  fourtirplace"m
this  hierarchy,  and,  on  the  dgatb_of  theJ^jPoint  and  the
two  first  "Letters,"  rose,  by  a  natural  process  of  promotion,
to  the  position  of  cEeT  of  tEe^sect'.  Behd,  wEose"proper
name  is  Mirzd  Huseyn  'All  of  Nur,'  was  also,  according  to
Gobineaa^  included  in  the  "Unity."  Gobineau  has,  how-
ever, mistakenThe  relationsliip  which  existed  between  him
and  Mfrzd,  Yahy^.  That  the  two  are  brothers  (or  rather
half-brothers,  born  of  the  same  father  by  different  wives)  is
a  fact  established  by  convincing  testimony''.

^  See  note  1  on  p.  95  infra..

■^  Religions  et  Philosophies,  p.  277.

3  Cf.  pp.  56,  note  2  ;  63,  top  ;  and  373.


INTRODUCTION.  xvii

(2)  Mlrzd  'Alf  Muhammad  the  EAb  declared  explicitly
and  repeatedly  in  all  his  works  that  the  religion  established
by  him  and  the  books  revealed  to  him  were  inno  way

_fiiial]_that  his  followers  must  continually  expept  the  a,dvRnt
of  "  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest,"  who  would  perfect  and
complete  this  religion  ;  that,  though  "  He  whom  God  shall
manifest"  would  not,  it  was  hoped,  delay  his  appearance
for  more  than  1511,  or,  at  most,  2001  years  (these  numbers
being  represented  in  cabbalistic  fashion  by  the  words
Ghiydth  and  Mustaghcith),  he  midit  appear  at  any  time ;
and  that,  whenever  one  should  appear  claiming  to  be  "  He
whom  God  shall  manifest,"  his  very  being,  together  with
his  power  of  revealing  verses,  would  be  his  sufficient  signs.
All  who  believed  in  the  Bd,b  were  solemnly  warned  not
to  reject  one  so  characterized  and  making  such  a  claim,
and  were  commanded,  in  case  of  doubt,  to  incline  towards
belief  rather  than  disbelief

(3)  During  the  sojourn  of  the  Bdbi  exiles  at  Adria-
nople,  Eehd  (according  to  Nabil  in  a.d.  1866— 7)_su^^nly

claimed  to be  "He  whom God^sha.ll ma.nitfig}-,""  in  pronf  of

which  he  revealed  sundry  "  signs "  {dydt)  in  eloquent
Arabic  and  Persian,  wherein  he  summoned  all  the  Bibis  to
acknowledge  him  as  their  supreme  and  sole  chief  and
spiritual  guide.  Most  of  the  B4bis  eventually  made  this
acknowledgement,  vowed  allegiance  to  Beh4,  and  thereby
became  BeMUs;  some  few  refused  to  transfer  their  al-
legiance  from  Mi'rzd.  Yahyd.  Subh-i-Ezel  (who  himself
strenuously  resisted  Behd's  claims,  which  he  regarded  in
the  light  of  an  usurpation  and  a  rebellion),  and  these  were
thenceforth  known  as  Ezelis.

Thus  did  the  great  schism  take  place  which  divided  the
Bdbis  into  two  unequal  parties :  a  large  majority,  of  whose
unbounded  and  almost  incredible  love  and  reverence  the
object  is  BehA; a  small  minority,  whose eager  gaze is


xviii  INTRODUCTION.

directed,  not  to  Acre  in  Syria,  but  to  Famagusta  in  Cyprus,
where  dwells  the  exiled  chief  whom  they  refuse  to  disavow.
Needless  is  it  to  say  how  bitter  is  the  animosity  which  sub-
sists between  the  Beh4'ls  and  the  Ezelfs.  Amongst  both
factions  I  have  found  good  men  and  faithful  friends,  and
from  the  chiefs  of  both  and  their  sons  I  have  met  with
much  kindness ;  wherefore  I  would  for  the  present  touch  as
lightly  as  may  be  on  this  painful  matter,  leaving  my
readers  to  draw  their  own  conclusions  from  what  is  herein-
after set  forth.  The  general  nature  of  the  arguments  for
and  against  either  side  will  be  found  summarized  at  pp.  514
and  515  of  my  first  and  pp.  997—998  of  my  second  article
on  the  BAbis  in  the  J.B.A.8.,  to  which  I  refer  such  of  my
readers  as  are  curious  to  examine  the  matter  more  mi-
nutely. Of  one  thing  there  can,  in  my  opinion,  be  but
little  doubt:  the  future  (if  BAbiism,  as  I  most  firmly  be-
lieve, has  a  future)  belongs  to  Beh4  and  his  successors  and
followers.

With  most  of  the  facts  summarized  above  I  became
acquainted  during  my  sojourn  in  Persia,  but  I  was  unable
to  learn  for  certain  whether  Mirzd  Yahyd  8iibh-i-Ezel  was
still  alive,  nor  could  I  ascertain  in  what  part  of  Cyprus  he
had  fixed  his  residence.  A  dervish  with  whom  I  became
acquainted  in  Kirm4n  told  me  that  he  had  visited  him,  but
could  not  remember  the  name  of  the  town  wherein  he
dwelt ;  and  none  of  the  Ezells  whom  I  saw  could  give  me
any  more  precise  information.  In  my  first  paper  on  the
Bdbis  in  the  J.B.A.S.  (pp.  516 — 517)  I  was  therefore
compelled  to  confess  my  failure  in  all  attempts  to  elucidate
this  point.  At  the  same  time  I  pointed  out  how  much
precious  information  might  be  gained  from  Suhh-i-Ezel  if  he
were  still  alive,  and  how  extremely  desirable  it  was  in  the
interests  of  science  that  this  matter  should  be  cleared  up.


INTRODUCTION.  XIX

After  the  publication  of  my  first,  and  during  the  prepa-
ration of  my  second  paper,  I  began  to  institute  enquiries
on  this  point.  My  sister,  who  was  then  traveUing  in  the
East,  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  first  clue  from  Mr  G.  L.
Houston,  who  was  kind  enough  to  procure  for  me  definite
proof  that  8ubh-i-Ezel  was  still  alive  and  was  residing  -ivith
his  family  at  Famagusta.  Shortly  after  this,  my  friend  Dr
F.  H.  H.  Guillemard,  who  had  spent  many  months  in  Cyprus
and  had  friends  in  all  parts  of  the  island,  very  obligingly
wrote  to  Mr  C.  D.  Cobham,  Commissioner  at  Larnaca,  and  to
Captain  Young,  Commissioner  at  Famagusta,  asking  them
to  obtain  for  me  the  fullest  information  possible  relative  to
the  BAbl  exiles  in  C3rprus.  I  myself  wrote  at  the  same
time,  stating  the  nature  of  the  information  which  I  sought.
Both  Captain  Young  and  Mr  Cobham  responded  to  my
request  with  a  kindness  for  which  I  cannot  sufficiently
express  my  gratitude ;  and  .so  vigorously  and  energetically
did  they  push  their  enquiries  that  I  was  soon  in  possession
of  all  the  chief  facts  relating  to  the  Bdbi  exiles.  Captain
Young,  indeed,  spared  no  pains  to  clear  up  every  point
connected  with  the  enquiry.  The  day  after  he  received
my  letter  he  paid  a  visit  to  Subh-i-Ezel;  questioned  him
concerning  his  life,  his  adventures,  and  his  doctrines ;  asked
for  information  on  sundry  points  mentioned  in  my  paper ;
and  forwarded  to  me  a  complete  account  of  all  that  he  had
learned.  Nor  was  this  all;  for  he  succeeded  so  well  in
winning  Subh-i-Ezel's  confidence  that  with  this  first  letter
(dated  July  28th,  1889)  he  was  able  to  forward  a  ms.  of
one  of  the  B4b's  works,  whereof,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  copy
had  previously  reached  Europe.  Through  Captain  Young
I  was  also  able  to  address  directly  to  Buhh-i-Ezel  letters
containing  questions  on  numerous  matters  connected  with
the  history,  doctrine,  and  literature  of  the  B^bfs,  to  all  of
which  letters  I  received  most  full  and  courteous  replies.


XX  INTHODUCTION.

Siilili-i-Ezi'l,  fnrtliGV  sent  iiii^  at  (liCfGruiil.  times  several  (il  ln'i'
Mss.,  a  comiilcto  li.st  of  ,miic1i  of  l-lic,  Biili's  worlcH  m  li'i'l
boon  in  Iu'h  own  ]i(iMSGnsiiiri  at  Ba^rlidad ',  and  a  lirirf  liistmy
oftlio  Bilbf  movement  written  by  hiniHolf',  iH^>^i(b!K  niiMKirinis
letters,  oacli  one  of  wliieb  c.ontairKid  most  proeioUH  inform.'i-
tion.

This  corres))(>ndeiic-(^,  wliieli  opened  ont  so  i-icli  a  mine
of  new  faels,  was  bnt  in  an  early  ,sl„'j,i^'e  wlien  my  Hei'ond
paper  on  the  B.ibts  was  pul)li,shed  in  the  J.ILA.S.  for
Oetohei-  IKSy,  but  I  was  abhi  l,o  add  to  it  an  a,ppe,ndix  (])p.
Dili — 01)8)  embodying  tiie  moi-(!  imporl-ant  luwnlts  of  tlic
snqniry  undertaken  by  (Japtain  Younif,  jVIr  (Joblwun,  and
Mr  Houston.  A  fuller  and  more  accurate  account  of  Suhh-
i-PJzcl,  and  th(!  otiier  BiiW  exiles  in  (Jypnis,  ba,se(l  <in  the
inquiries  of  the  above-nK^ntioned  gentlemen,  tin;  examina-
tion of  official  doenments,  and  the  statements  m;uli^  to  me
jy  i^iihk-l-hLd,  his  scjus,  and  others,  will  be  hjund  in  Note
iV  at  the  (uid  of  this  book.  It  is  thenilbre  unnecessary
or  me  to  allude  further  to  this  c,(iii-(wponden<',e  M,t  jiresiuit.

While  I  was  in  Persia  1  had  already  formed  tln^  iriten-
^i(m  of  visitinf^  Acre  and  Iea,niinf,'  the  doctrine  ol'  lioh.'L
rom  the  fountain-hea,d.  From  the  moment,  when  I  dis-
lovered  i}\a.t  Siihli-i-l'htl  was  still  alive  I  furth(!r  resolved
o  visit  him  also,  for  from  ro]ieat(Hl  pei-sonal  int(^i-vi(;vvs  I
nticipatod  n'sults  wbii-h  could  not  be  obtaiiir'd  by  a  cor-
esponden(-e,  however  elaborates  I  was  also  anxious  for  my
wn  satisf;i,ction  to  se(;  those  who  sinci;  the  liab's  death  had
leen  the  leaders  of  the  Biibt  movement.  Without  this  I
elt  that  my  researches  would  lack  that  comphjteruws  which
wished  to  f,dve  them.  The  motives  which  imiielh'il  me
owards  Acre  and  Famaf,'usta  were  ei|nally  strotif,',  hut
omewhat  dillerent. At  the  former  jjlace  I  ex])(!ct,ed  to  sei;

1  See  Note  U  at  end.


INTRODTJCTION.  xxi

the  mainspring  and  fulcrum  of  a  mighty  force  with  the
astonishing  results  of  which  I  had  become  practically
acquainted  in  Persia,  and  from  which  I  believed  (as  I  still
believe)  that  results  yet  more  wonderful  might  be  expected
in  the  future.  At  the  latter  place  I  hoped  to  converse
with  one  whom  the  B4b  had  recognized  as  his  immediate
successor  and  vicegerent;  one  who  had  been  personally
acquainted  with  MulU  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh,  MuUd
Sheykh  'Alf,  Suleym4n  Khdn,  Kurratu'  l-'Ayn,  and,  in
short,  almost  all  of  those  whose  devoted  lives  and  heroic
deaths  had  first  inspired  my  enthusiasm;  one,  moreover,
who  represented  the  spirit  and  tradition  of  the  old  Bibfism,
which,  in  the  hands  of  Beh4,  had  already  undergone  im-
portant modifications,  and,  indeed,  become  almost  a  new
religion.  Various  considerations  decided  me  to  visit
Cyprus  first,  of  which  two  only  need  be  mentioned  here : —
firstly,  it  was  practically  certain  that  no  obstacle  to  my
seeing  Subh-i-Ezel  would  arise,  while  it  was  by  no  means
certain  that  I  should  be  able  to  see  Beh4;  secondly,  the
logical  order  of  procedure  was  to  begin  with  the  investiga-
tion of  the  old  order  of  things,  and  having  completed  this,
to  continue  the  examination  of  the  new.  I  hoped,  how-
ever, to  make  one  journey  suffice  for  the  attainment  of
both  objects;  but,  allowing  for  the  time  which  must  be
consumed  in  actual  travelling,  it  was  clear  that  at  least
two  months  would  be  required  for  the  enterprise.  The
Long  Vacation  was  amply  suflficient  for  the  purpose,  but
the  summer  was  the  most  unsuitable  season  for  such  a
journey,  and  I  therefore  determined  to  petition  the
University  for  such  extension  of  leave  at  Easter  as  would
enable  me  to  be  absent  from  England  for  two  months.
The  University,  ever  ready  to  facilitate  research  of  every
kind,  granted  me  permission  to  absent  myself  from  Cam-
bridge from  March  4th  till  May  3rd,  1890,  and  accordingly.


XXll  INTRODUCTION.

leaving  England  on  the  date  first  mentioned,  I  landed  at
Larnaca  in  Cyprus  on  March  19th.

Captain  Young  and  Mr  Cobham,  on  becoming  ac-
quainted with  my  intention  of  visiting  Cyprus,  had,  with
that  ready  kindness  and  hospitality  which,  so  far  as  my
experience  goes,  are  rarely  lacking  in  Englishmen  resident
in  the  East,  written  to  ask  me  to  be  their  guest  during
such  time  as  I  might  desire  to  remain  in  Famagusta  or
Larnaca,  so  that  I  was  entirely  relieved  of  all  anxiety  as  to
the  possibility  of  finding  a  base  of  operations  for  my  re-
searches. Captain  Young  further  counselled  me,  in  case  I
svished  to  gain  access  to  the  official  records  of  the  Island
jrovernment,  to  obtain  before  leaving  England  such  letters
jf  recommendation  as  might  ensure  the  attainment  of  this
)bject.  I  accordingly  applied  for  help  in  obtaining  these
;o  Major-General  Sir  Frederic  Goldsmid,  whose  long
•esidence  in  Persia  and  intimate  knowledge  of  the  Persian
)eople  and  language  had  led  him  to  take  some  interest  in
ay  communications  on  the  subject  of  the  BAbls  to  the
loyal  Asiatic  Society.  He  spared  no  pains  to  further
ay  plans,  and  introduced  me  to  Sir  Robert  Biddulph,  who
ery  kindly  gave  me  a  letter  to  Sir  Henry  Bulwer,  the
Governor-General  of  Cyprus,  asking  him  to  allow  me,  so
ir  as  might  be  permissible  or  expedient,  to  inspect  such
fficial  documents  as  might  throw  light  on  the  object  of
ly  investigations.

In  Larnaca  I  spent  only  one  day,  the  shortness  of  the
ime  at  my  disposal  and  my  eagerness  to  see  Subh-i-Ezel
Dmpelling  me  with  great  reluctance  to  forego  the  pleasure
•hich  a  more  prolonged  sojourn  under  Mr  Cobham's
ospitable  roof  would  have  afforded  me.  That  day  passed
lost  pleasantly,  for  in  my  host  I  found  not  only  an  ac-
3mplished  Oriental  scholar  and  a  traveller  to  whom  few
3gions  of  the  habitable  globe  were  unknown,  but  a  genial


INTRODUCTION.  XXlll

friend  and  a  warm  sympathizer  in  my  researcKes.  Mr
Cobham  had  studied  Persian  for  some  time  with  MushMn-
Kalam,  one  of  the  Behd'l  exiles  sent  with  Subh-i-Bzel
to  Cyprus^,  and  from  him  had  learned  much  concerning
the  new  religion.  8ubh-i-Ezel,  however,  he  had  not  seen  ;
for  Mmhkm-Kalam,  as  was  natural,  had  spoken  only  of
Beh^,  and  had  entirely  ignored  the  existence  of  a  chief
whose  authority  he  disavowed.

On  the  following  day  (Thursday,  March  20th,  1890)
I  bade  farewell  to  Mr  Cobham,  and,  after  some  six  hours
spent  in  a  somewhat  antiquated  vehicle  belonging  to  a
loquacious  Italian  who  had  fought  for  Garibaldi,  found
myseK  at  Famagusta,  or  rather  its  suburb  Varoshia,  where  I
met  with  a  most  cordial  welcome  from  Captain  and  Lady
Evelyn  Young.  Captain  Young  at  once  sent  a  message  to
Subh-i-EzeV s  son  'Abdu'l-'Alf  (who  keeps  a  shop  in
Varoshia)  requesting  him  to  come  to  the  kondk.  In  a
short  time  he  appeared ;  and  I  was  much  struck  by  the
refinement  of  his  manner,  the  intelligence  revealed  by  his
countenance  and  conversation,  and  the  courteousness  of  his .
address.  Our  conversation  was  conducted  in  Persian,!
which,  though  he  had  never  been  in  Persia,  he  spoke  as  his
mother-tongue.  It  was  soon  arranged  that  I  should  visit'
8tibh-i-Ezel  on  the  following  day  at  whatever  time  he
should  appoint.

Next  morning  we  received  a  message  to  the  effect  that
Subh-i-Ezel  was  prepared  to  receive  us  as  soon  as  we  could
come.  At  about  11  a.m.,  therefore,  Captain  Young  drove
me  into  the  town,  which  is  situated  about  a  mile  from  the
suburb  of  Varoshia.  As  I  had  not  entered  within  the
walls  of  Famagusta  on  the  preceding  day  I  now  saw
for  the  first  time  the  massive  fortifications,  the  multitu-

1  Coneeming  Mushkin-Kalam  see  B.  i,  p.  516;  B.  ii,  pp.  994—995;
and  Note  W  at  end.


XXIV  INTRODUCTION.

dinous  churches  (whereof  the  number,  as  is  currently
reported  by  the  inhabitants,  equals  the  number  of  days
in  the  year),  and  the  desolate  neglected  streets  of  that
most  interesting  relic  of  the  Middle  Ages.  After  Captain
Young  had  transacted  some  other  business  we  proceeded
to  Siibh-i-Ezel' s  abode,  in  the  court-yard  of  which  we  were
received  by  his  sons  'Abdu'l-'Ali,  Rizvin-'Alf,  'Abdu'l-
Wahi'd,  and  Taki'u'd-Di'n,  and  an  old  Bd,bf  of  Zanjd.n  who
had  settled  in  the  island  so  as  to  be  near  his  master.
Accompanied  by  these  (with  the  exception  of  the  last-
mentioned)  we  ascended  to  an  upper  room,  where  a  vener-
able and  benevolent-looking  old  man  of  about  sixty  years
of  age,  somewhat  below  the  middle  height,  with  ample
forehead  on  which  the  traces  of  care  and  anxiety  were
apparent,  clear  searching  blue  eyes,  and  long  grey  beard,
rose  and  advanced  to  meet  us.  Before  that  mild  and
dignified  countenance  I  involuntarily  bowed  myself  with
unfeigned  respect ;  for  at  length  my  long-cherished  desire
was  fulfilled,  and  I  stood  face  to  face  with  Mirzii  Yahyd,
Buhlyi-Ezd  ("the  Morning  of  Eternity"),  the  appointed
successor  of  the  B^b,  the  fourth  "Letter"  of  the  "First
Unity."

This  my  first  interview  was  necessarily  short  and  some-
what formal,  for  I  had  yet  to  win  the  confidence  of  Suhh-i-
Ezel  and  induce  him  little  by  little  to  speak  without
reserve  of  those  things  whereof  I  so  earnestly  desired  to
hear.  In  this,  thanks  to  the  confidence  with  which  Captain
Young's  kindness  had  already  inspired  Subk-i-Ezel,  and  the
very  vivid  picture  of  the  chief  actors  in  the  Biibf  movement,
which,  first  derived  from  the  perusal  of  Count  Gobineau's
work,  had  continued  to  glow  and  grow  in  my  mind  till  it
became  almost  as  a  part  of  my  own  personal  experience,  I
was  completely  successful.  During  the  fortnight  which
I  spent  at  Famagusta  I  visited  Sub/i-i-Ezel  daily,  remaining


INTEODUCTION.  XXV

with  him  as  a  rule  from  two  or  three  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon until  sunset.  Lack  of  space  forbids  me  from  de-
scribing in  detail  and  consecutive  order  the  conversations
which  took  place  on  these  occasions.  Note-book  and  pencil
in  hand  I  sat  before  him  day  by  day;  and  every  evening  I
returned  to  Varoshia  with  a  rich  store  of  new  facts,  most  of
which  will  be  found  recorded  in  the  notes  wherewith  I  have
striven  to  illustrate  or  check  the  statements  advanced  in
the  following  pages.  Apart  from  the  delight  inseparable
from  successful  research  my  stay  at  Famagnsta  was  a  very
pleasant  one,  for  from  every  one  with  whom  I  came  in
contact,  but  most  of  all  from  Captain  and  Lady  Evelyn
Young,  I  met  with  a  kindness  which  I  can  never  forget.
Besides  my  visits  to  Suhh-i-Ezel  in  the  afternoon  I  often
spent  some  portion  of  the  morning  with  his  son  'Abdu'-
l-'AH,  and  we  were  sometimes  joined  by  Rizvdn  'AH,  or  by
one  or  other  of  the  few  Ezelis  who  have  settled  in  Fama-
gusta.  During  these  conversations  I  learned  many  new
facts  of  greater  or  less  importance.  The  reserve  which  had
at  first  been  apparent  in  Suhh-i-Ezel  gradually  disappeared,
and  at  each  successive  interview  I  found  him  more  com-
municative. Although  our  conversation  was  chiefly  on
rehgious  topics,  and  the  history,  biography,  doctrine,  and
literature  of  the  B4bfs,  other  matters  were  occasionally
discussed.  Of  the  B4b  and  his  first  apostles  and  followers,
as  of  his  own  life  and  adventures,  Sid)h-i-Ezel  would  speak
freely,  but  concerning  the  origin  of  the  schism  which  for
him  had  been  attended  with  such  disastrous  results,  and  all
pertaining  to  Behd,  and  the  Behd.'is,  he  was  most  reticent,
so  that,  perceiving  this  subject  to  be  distasteful,  I  refrained
for  the  most  part  from  alluding  to  it.  During  these
conferences  Subh-i-Ezel's  sons  were  always  present,  though
they  hardly  spoke  in  the  presence  of  their  father,  towards
whom  they  observed  the  utmost  deference  and  respect.
B.  c


XXVI  INTRODUCTION,

Tea  was  always  served  in  the  Persian  fashion,  but  tobacco
in  all  forms  was  conspicuous  by  its  absence,  the  Ezelfs,
unHke  the  Beh^'is,  following  the  injunctions  of  the  BAb  in
this  matter.  In  the  course  of  each  visit,  or  sometimes
when  I  was  leaving  the  house,  Subh-i-Ezel' s  youngest  son
Taki'u'd-Dfn,  a  pretty,  graceful  child  about  thirteen  years
of  age,  used  to  present  me  with  a  little  bunch  of  roses
or  such  other  flowers  as  the  modest  garden  attached  to  the
house  would  aff'ord.  On  my  walk  to  and  from  Famagusta
I  was  always  accompanied  by  'Abdu'l-'AH  and  often  by  one
of  his  brothers.

A  few  days  after  my  arrival  at  Famagusta  I  wrote  to
Sir  Henry  Bulwer  stating  what  was  my  object  in  desiring
to  examine  the  official  records  concerning  the  exiles  which
might  be  preserved  at  Nicosia,  asking  whether  I  might  be
permitted  to  do  so,  and  forwarding  the  letter  of  recommen-
dation given  me  by  Sir  Robert  Biddulph.  In  response  to
my  request  Sir  Henry  Bulwer,  having  learnt  that  the
shortness  of  my  stay  in  the  island  made  it  difficult,  if  not
impossible,  for  me  to  visit  Nicosia,  was  kind  enough  to
xjrward  for  my  perusal  all  the  more  important  papers
bearing  on  the  subject.  All  of  these,  therefore,  I  was  able
io  examine  at  my  leisure ;  and  of  all  of  them,  with  one  ex-
jeption,  I  received  permission  to  make  use.  An  abstract
)f  the  important  facts  and  dates  established  by  these
locuments  will  be  found  in  Note  W  at  the  end  of  this
Dook.

The  fifth  of  April,  which  was  the  ultimate  limit  where-
rnto  my  stay  in  Cyprus  could  be  protracted,  unless  I  were
prepared  to  postpone  indefinitely  my  visit  to  Acre,  came  at
.ast.  On  the  morning  of  that  day,  therefore,  having  with
^reat  reluctance  bade  farewell  to  all  my  kind  friends,  I  left
Famagusta,  and  embarked  the  same  afternoon  at  Larnaca


INTRODUCTION.  XXVll

on  the  Messageries  steamer  Gironde.  I  passed  a  pleasant
evening  with  a  Turkish  official  and  a  Syrian  who  were  the
only  other  passengers  besides  myself,  and  early  next
morning  awoke  to  find  myself  at  Beyrout.

As  I  had  now  but  two  weeks  at  my  disposal  ere  I  must
again  turn  my  face  homewards  I  was  naturally  anxious  to
proceed  as  soon  as  possible  to  Acre,  especially  as  I  learned
that  should  I  fail  to  find  a  steamer  bound  directly  for  that
port,  three  days  at  least  would  be  consumed  by  the  journey
thither.  It  was,  however,  necessary  for  me  first  to  obtain
permission  from  the  Bdbi  head-quarters ;  for  though  I  could
without  doubt  proceed  to  Acre  if  I  so  pleased  without  con-
sulting any  one's  inclination  save  my  own,  it  was  certain
that  unless  my  journey  had  previously  received  the  sanction
of  Beh4  it  would  in  all  probability  result  in  naught  but
failure  and  disappointment.  Now  there  reside  at  Be3rrout,
Port  Said,  and  Alexandria  (by  one  of  which  places  all
desirous  of  proceeding  to  Acre  by  sea  must  of  necessity
pass)  B4bis  of  consequence  to  whom  aU  desirous  of  visiting
Beh4  must  in  the  first  instance  apply.  Should  such  appli-
cation prove  successful,  the  applicant  is  informed  that  he
may  proceed  on  his  journey,  and  receives  such  instruction,
advice,  and  assistance  as  may  be  necessary.  To  the  B4bf
agent  at  Beyrout  (whose  name  I  do  not  feel  myself  at
liberty  to  mention)  I  had  a  letter  of  recommendation  from
one  of  his  relatives  with  whom  I  had  become  acquainted  in
Persia.  The  first  thing  which  I  did  on  my  arrival  was  to
send  a  messenger  to  discover  his  abode.  The  messenger
shortly  returned,  saying  that  he  had  indeed  succeeded  in
finding  the  place  indicated,  but  that  the  agent  was  absent
from  Beyrout.  This  was  a  most  serious  blow  to  my  hopes,
for  time  was  against  me,  and  every  day  was  of  vital  im-
portance. There  was  nothing  for  it,  however,  but  to  make
the  best  of  the  matter,  and  I  therefore  went  in  person  to

c2


XXVlll  INTEODUCTION.

the  abode  of  the  absent  agent  and  presented  myself  to  liiw
deputy,  who  opened  and  attentively  perused  my  letter  of
recommendation,  and  then  informed  me  that  his  imistur
was  at  Acre  and  was  not  expected  back  for  ten  days  nr  a
fortnight.  In  reply  to  my  anxious  enquiries  as  to  how  I
had  best  proceed,  he  advised  me  to  write  a  letter  to  his
master  explaining  the  state  of  the  case,  which  letter,  to-
gether with  the  letter  of  recommendation,  lie  undertook  to
forward  at  once,  as  the  post  fortunately  chanced  to  be
leaving  for  Acre  that  very  evening.  I  at  once  wrote  as  he
directed,  and  then  returned  to  my  lodging  with  the  de-
pressing consciousness  that  at  least  five  or  six  days  must
elapse  ere  I  could  receive  an  answer  to  my  letter  or  start
for  Acre ;  that  even  if  permission  was  granted  (as  no  steamer
appeared  likely  to  be  sailing)  three  more  days  would  be
spent  in  reaching  my  goal ;  and  that  consequently  eight  or
nine  days  out  of  the  fourteen  still  remaining  to  me  woulil  be
wasted  before  I  could  even  set  foot  in  the  land  of  my  quest.
Altogether  I  began  to  fear  that  the  second  part  of  my
journey  was  likely  to  prove  far  less  successful  than  the  first.
Fortunately  matters  turned  out  much  better  than  I  ex-
pected. In  the  first  place  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr
Eyres,  the  British  Vice-Consul,  whose  kindness  and  hospi-
tality did  much  to  render  my  stay  at  Beyrout  pleasant,  and
who,  on  learning  that  I  wished  to  proceed  to  Acre,  told  me
that  he  himself  intended  to  start  for  Acre  and  Haifa  on  the
following  Friday  (April  11th),  and  that  I  might  if  I  pleased
accompany  him.  In  the  second  place  it  occurred  to  me
that  I  might  save  two  or  three  days'  delay  by  telegraphing
to  Acre  so  soon  as  my  letter  must,  in  the  natural  course  of
things,  have  reached  its  destination,  and  requesting  a
telegram  in  reply  to  inform  me  whether  I  might  proceed
thither.  On  Wednesday,  April  9th,  therefore,  I  sent  a
telegram  to  this  effect. On  Thursday  evening,  returnin"-


INTRODUCTION.  xxix

after  sunset  to  my  hotel  from  a  ride  in  the  hills,  I  was  met
with  the  welcome  news  that  a  Persian  had  called  twice  to
see  me  during  the  afternoon  stating  that  he  had  important
business  which  would  not  brook  delay,  and  that  he  had  left
a  note  for  me  which  I  should  find  upstairs.  From  this
note,  hurriedly  scribbled  in  pencil  on  a  scrap  of  paper,  I
learned  that  permission  had  been  granted,  and  that  I  was
free  to  start  as  soon  as  I  pleased.

On  receiving  this  intelligence  my  first  action  was  to
verify  it  beyond  all  doubt  by  calling  at  once  on  the  deputy
of  the  absent  agent,  whom  I  fortimately  found  at  home.
He  congTatulated  me  warmly  on  the  happy  issue  of  my
affairs,  and  handed  over  to  me  the  original  telegram.  It
was  laconic  in  the  extreme,  containing,  besides  the  address,
two  words  only: — "' Yutaurijjaku  'I-musufir"  ("Let  the
traveller  approach").  He  then  informed  me  that  as  no
steamer  was  starting  for  Acre  I  must  of  necessity  proceed
thither  by  land,  and  that  the  reason  why  he  had  been  so
anxious  to  communicate  with  me  earlier  was  that  the  post
left  that  day  at  sun-down  and  I  might  have  accompanied  it.
I  then  told  him  of  Mr  Ejtcs'  kind  offer;  which,  as  we
agreed,  was  a  most  exceptional  piece  of  good-fortune  for
me,  inasmuch  as  he  proposed  to  start  on  the  following
morning,  and  expected  to  reach  Acre  on  April  13th.

After  bidding  farewell  to  the  deputy-agent  and  thanking
him  for  the  effectual  aid  which  he  had  rendered  me,  I
\-isited  Mr  Eyres,  and  told  him  that  I  would  accept  his
kind  offer  if  I  could  obtain  a  horse  and  make  the  necessary
arrangements  for  my  journey  on  the  following  morning.
He  told  me  that  he  must  start  early,  but  that  if  I  left
Beyrout  by  mid-day  I  could  easily  overtake  him  at  Sidon,
where  he  would  halt  for  the  niglit ;  and  he  ftirther  placed
at  my  disposal  the  services  of  one  of  his  hnwicdsts  to  assist
me  in  my  preparations.


XXX  INTRODUCTION.

Next  morning  (Friday,  April  11th)  I  was  astir  early,
for  there  was  much  to  be  done.  With  the  help  of  my
friend  Jemdiu'd-Dfn  Bey  of  the  Imperial  Ottoman  Bank,
and  the  active  co-operation  of  the  kawwds  of  the  Consulate,
all  was  at  length  satisfactorily  arranged ;  and  shortly  after
midday  I  found  myself  on  a  sturdy,  good-looking,  but
somewhat  indolent  horse,  with  a  hhurjin  (pair  of  saddle-
bags) containing  the  most  indispensable  of  my  effects
behind  me,  plodding  along  a  sandy  road  bordered  with
cactus  in  the  direction  of  Sidon,  where  (the  road  being
fortunately  easy  to  follow)  I  arrived  without  mishap  at
sun-down.

To  speak  of  the  delights  of  that  three  days'  journey,  the
beauty  of  the  scenery,  the  purity  and  fragrance  of  the  soft
spring  air,  the  pleasant  mid-day  halts  by  some  rippling
stream  or  in  some  balmy  grove,  and  the  hospitable  recep-
tions accorded  to  me  as  Mr  E3Tes'  travelling  companion  by
those  in  whose  houses  we  alighted  at  Sidon,  Tyre,  and
Acre,  would  be  to  wander  further  than  is  permissible  from
the  subject  in  hand.  Suffice  it  to  say  that,  thanks  to
Mr  Byres'  kindness  in  allowing  me  to  accompany  him,  a
journey,  which,  if  performed  in  solitude,  would  have  lost
more  than  half  its  charm,  was  rendered  enjoyable  in  the
highest  degree.  The  last  day  was  perhaps  the  most  de-
lightful of  all,  and  I  was  greatly  astonished  on  entering  the
Acre  plain  to  behold  a  wealth  of  beautiful  gardens  and
fragrant  orange-groves  such  as  I  had  little  expected  to  find
in  what  Behd  has  stigmatized  as  "the  most  desolate  of
countries"  {akhrabu'l-bildd).  I  subsequently  mentioned
this  feeling  of  surprise  to  the  B4bls  at  Acre,  who  replied
that  had  I  seen  it  when  Behi  first  came  there  nearly  two
and  twenty  years  ago  I  should  not  have  deemed  the  title
misapplied,  but  that  since  he  had  dwelt  there  it  had
assumed  this  fair  and  comely  aspect.


INTRODUCTION.  XXxi

We  entered  Acre  towards  sun-down  on  April  13th,  and,
wending  our  way  through  the  fine  bazaars,  on  the  smooth
stone  pavement  of  which  our  horses'  hoofs  slipped  as  on  ice,
alighted  at  the  house  of  a  Christian  merchant  named
Ibrahim  Khiiri,  who  accorded  to  us  the  usual  hospitable
reception.  That  same  evening  I  sent  a  note  to  the  B^bi
agent,  which  was  brought  back  by  the  messenger  unopened,
with  the  disagreeable  news  that  my  mysterious  corre-
spondent had  gone  to  Haifd  with  Behd's  eldest  son  'Abbds
Efendf .  This  was  most  unwelcome  information ;  for  as  Mr
Eyres  was  leaving  the  next  day  for  Haifd,  and  I  did  not
wish  to  trespass  further  on  the  hospitality  of  Ibrahim
Khilrf,  it  was  absolutely  essential  that  I  should  obtain  help
from  the  Bdbfs  in  finding  other  quarters.  Evidently  there
was  nothing  for  it  but  to  wait  for  the  morrow  and  what  it
might  bring  forth.

Next  morning  I  enquired  if  there  was  any  representative
of  the  absent  agent  who  might  be  cognizant  of  his  move-
ments, and  was  conducted  to  a  shop  in  the  bazaar,  where  I
found  a  tall  handsome  youth  clothed  entirely  in  white  save
for  his  red  fez,  from  beneath  which  a  mass  of  glossy  black
hair  swept  back  behind  his  ears,  at  the  lower  level  of  which
it  terminated'.  This  youth,  accosting  me  in  Turkish,
enquired  first  somewhat  haughtily  what  might  be  my
business.  I  answered  him  in  Persian,  whereat  he  appeared
surprised ;  and,  after  hearing  what  I  had  to  say,  bade  me
follow  him.  He  led  me  to  a  house  situated  near  the  sea-
shore, at  the  door  of  which  we  were  met  by  an  old  Persian

^  Concerning  the  characteristic  manner  in  which  the  Babis  arrange
their  hair,  cf.  B.  i.  pp.  499 — 500.  The  wearing  of  pure  white  garments
was  from  the  first  another  special  feature  of  theirs.  Thus  we  learn
from  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  that  the  defenders  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi  used  to
issue  forth  to  attack  their  foes  clad  in  pure  white  raiment  and  crying
out  "  Yd  Sdltibu'z-Zamdn  "  ("  0  Lord  of  the  Age  ! ").


XXXll  INTRODUCTION.

with  long  grizzled  hair  and  beard,  whose  scrutinizing  gaze
was  rendered  more  rather  than  less  formidable  by  an
enormous  pair  of  spectacles.  This  man,  after  conversing
for  a  few  moments  with  my  guide  in  an  under  tone,  led  me
into  a  large  room  devoid  of  all  furniture  save  a  sort  of
bench  or  divan  which  ran  round  its  four  sides.  I  had
scarcely  seated  myself  when  another  Persian,  evidently
superior  in  authority  to  the  other  two,  entered  and  saluted
me.  He  was  a  man  of  middle  height  and  middle  age,  with
a  keen  and  not  unpleasing  countenance,  whereof  the  lower
part  was  concealed  by  a  short  crisp  beard.  After  bidding
me  reseat  myself  (for  I  had  of  course  risen  on  his  entrance)
and  ordering  his  servant  (for  such,  I  discovered,  was  the
old  man  who  had  met  me  at  the  door)  to  give  me  a  cup
of  coffee,  he  proceeded  to  subject  me  to  a  most  minute
cross-examination  as  to  my  nationality,  my  occupation,  my
travels  in  Persia,  the  objects  of  my  present  journey,  and
the  like.  My  answers  appeared  to  satisfy  him ;  and  when
he  had  finished  his  questioning  he  asked  me  what  I  pro-
posed to  do.  I  told  him  that  I  would  be  guided  entirely
by  his  advice.  He  then  asked  me  whether  I  would  proceed
to  Haifd,,  where  I  was  certain  to  find  the  agent  whom
I  sought  with  Beh^'s  son  'Abb4s  Bfendf.  To  this  I  replied
that  as  I  had  but  a  few  days  at  my  disposal,  and  as  Acre
and  not  Haifd  was  the  goal  of  my  journey,  I  would  rather
remain  than  depart.  "In  that  case,"  said  he,  "I  myself
wiU  go  to  Haifd  this  afternoon  and  bring  back  word
tomorrow  what  you  must  do.  Meanwhile  will  you  remain
where  you  stayed  last  night  till  I  return?"  I  answered
that  I  would  rather  not  trespass  further  on  a  hospitality
extended  to  me  solely  as  Mr  Eyres'  friend,  and  that  if  he
could  suggest  any  other  lodging  for  that  night  I  should  be
glad.  I  was  not,  I  added,  exacting  in  the  matter  of
comfort,  and  would  be  quite  content  with  a  caravansary.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIU

He  reflected  for  a  few  moments  and  then  said,  "  Very  well.
If  that  be  your  wish  you  can  stay  here.  I  myself  shall  be
absent,  but  I  will  give  instructions  that  you  shall  be  looked
after.  And  after  all  it  is  only  for  one  night :  tomorrow  I
shall  return,  and  we  will,  if  God  please,  find  you  better
quarters.  When  the  consul  departs  for  Haif4  do  you  also
leave  the  house  where  you  are  staying  and  bring  your
efi"ects  here."  I  then  took  my  leave  with  many  expressions
of  gratitude,  and  occupied  myself  during  the  remainder  of
the  morning  in  packing  my  saddle-bags  and  making  arrange-
ments for  the  stabling  of  my  horse  during  the  time  I
expected  to  remain  at  Acre.

After  lunch  Mr  Eyres  departed  for  Haifd,  and  I,  quitting
Ibrahim  Khuri's  abode,  found  someone  to  carry  my  effects
to  the  house  which  I  had  visited  in  the  morning.  Here  I
was  received  by  a  sharp-looking  boy  of  about  fourteen,  who
proved  to  be  the  son  of  my  interlocutor  of  the  morning,  to
whom  also,  as  I  subsequently  discovered,  the  house  which
I  had  now  entered  belonged.  I  had  expected  to  receive
but  the  roughest  accommodation,  the  resources  of  the
house  being  in  nowise  revealed  by  the  room  on  the  ground-
floor  where  I  had  been  received  in  the  morning.  My
experience  of  the  hospitalit^f  the  Persians  in  general  and.
the  Bdbfs  in  particular^^and  the  ^deceptive  exteriors  of
OrientaLhouses,  might,  it  is  true,  have  led  me  to  expect
tolerable  comfort,  but  could  hardly  have  prepared  me  for
the  positive  luxury  which  the  thoughtful  kindness  of  my
host  had  provided.  During  the  afternoon  I  was  entertained
by  my  host's  son,  who  showed  that  admirable  courtesy  and
savoirfaire  with  which  even  quite  young  Persian  boys  are
capable,  in  the  absence  of  their  elders,  of  receiving  the
stranger  and  doing  the  honours  of  the  house.  As  it  was
Easter  Monday  the  street  outside  was  filled  with  S3Tian
Christians,  who  continued  so  long  as  daylight  lasted  to


xxxiv  INTRODUCTION.

express  their  joy  in  howls,  gun-shots,  and  wild  dances,  at
which  we  looked  on  in  amazement  from  the  window.  A
more  remarkable  and  discordant  expression  of  rehgious
fervour  it  has  never  been  my  lot  to  witness.  Towards  the
latter  part  of  the  afternoon  my  host's  son,  thinking,  I
suppose,  that  I  needed  further  amusement,  took  me  to  see
an  itinerant  Greek  photographer  who  was  temporarily
established  in  a  sort  of  cellar  in  the  basement  of  the  house.
This  Greek  spoke  French  tolerably  well,  and  seemed  an
honest,  kindly  fellow.  He  was  very  anxious  to  make  out
that  I  was  a  free-mason,  and  importuned  me  greatly  to  tell
him  the  names  of  the  pillars  of  Solomon's  temple.  Dim
recollections  of  some  book  purporting  to  expose  the  secrets
of  that  cult  prompted  me  to  seek  escape  from  his  pertinacity
by  suggesting  "  Boaz,"  whereupon  nothing  would  serve  him
but  I  must  tell  him  the  name  of  the  other.  As  I  had
forgotten  this,  and  beguu  to  weary  of  the  subject,  I  took  my
leave.

Towards  evening  I  received  another  visitor,  whose  mien
and  bearing  alike  marked  him  as  a  person  of  consequence.
He  was  a  man  of  perhaps  thirty  or  thirty-five  years  of  age,
with  a  face  which  called  to  one's  mind  the  finest  types  of
Iranian  physiognomy  preserved  to  us  in  the  bas-reliefs  of
Persepolis,  yet  mth  something  in  it  beyond  this,  which
involuntarily  called  forth  in  my  mind  the  thought,  "  What
would  not  an  artist  desirous  of  painting  a  saint  or  an
apostle  give  for  such  a  model ! "  My  visitor  (who,  as  I
afterwards  discovered,  was  a  son  of  Beh4's  deceased  brother
Miis4)  was  clothed,  save  for  the  tall  red  fez  which  crowned
his  head,  entirely  in  pure  white;  and  everything  about
him,  from  his  short  well-trimmed  beard  and  the  masses  of
jet-black  hair  swept  boldly  back  behind  his  ears,  to  the  hem
of  his  spotless  garment,  was  characterized  by  the  same
scrupulous  neatness. He  saluted  me  very  graciously,  and


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV

remained  conversing  with  me  all  the  evening.  Shortly
after  supper  he  bade  me  good-night,  saying  that  I  must
doubtless  be  fatigued  Avith  my  journey.  I  was  then  con-
ducted by  my  host's  son  and  the  old  servant  to  the  room
where  I  had  spent  the  afternoon,  where,  to  my  astonish-
ment, I  found  that  a  bed  provided  with  the  most  efficient
mosquito-curtains  and  furnished  with  fair  white  sheets  and
soft  mattress  had  been  prepared  for  me.  The  arrangement
of  the  mosquito-curtains  (called  by  my  new  friends  ndmusi)
was  such  as  I  had  not  previously  seen,  and,  as  it  appeared
to  me  perfect  in  simplicity  and  efficiency,  I  shall  describe
it  for  the  benefit  of  other  travellers.  The  ndmusi,  then,
consists  of  what  may  most  easily  be  described  as  a  large
box  or  small  chamber  of  muslin,  rectangular  in  shape,
greater  in  length  than  in  breadth,  and  furnished  with  a
single  funnel-shaped  aperture  in  one  of  its  sides.  This
muslin  chamber  is  suspended  by  its  corners  by  cords
attached  to  the  wall,  and  is  entered  through  the  funnel-
shaped  aperture,  the  mouth  of  which  is  encircled  by  a  cord.
The  bed  is  laid  inside,  its  component  parts  being  intro-
duced one  by  one.  The  occupant  on  entering  draws  tight
the  constricting  cord,  and  is  thereby  completely  cut  off
from  the  attacks  of  gnats,  mosquitoes,  and  the  like.  The
whole  structure  can,  when  not  in  use,  be  folded  up  into  a
very  small  compass.

I  arose  next  morning  (Tuesday,  April  14th)  after  a  most
refreshing  sleep,  and  was  served  with  tea  by  the  old  man
with  the  spectacles.  Soon  after  this  a  sudden  stir  without
announced  the  arrival  of  fresh  visitors,  and  a  moment  after
my  companion  of  the  previous  evening  entered  the  room
accompanied  by  two  other  persons,  one  of  whom  proved  to
be  the  Bdbf  agent  from  Beyrout,  while  the  other,  as  I  guessed
from  the  first  by  the  extraordinary  deference  shewn  to  him
by  all  present,  was  none  other  than  Behd's  eldest  son  'Abbds


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION.


Efendf.  Seldom  have  I  seen  one  whose  appearance  im^
pressed  me  more.  A  tall  strongly-built  man  holding  himsel:
straight  as  an  arrow,  with  white  turban  and  raiment,  lon^
black  locks  reaching  almost  to  the  shoulder,  broad  powerfu.
forehead  indicating  a  strong  intellect  combined  with  an
unswerving  will,  eyes  keen  as  a  hawk's,  and  strongly-
marked  but  pleasing  features — such  was  my  first  impression
of  'Abbds  Efendf,  "the  master"  {AM)  as  he  par  excellence
is  called  by  the  Bdbfs.  Subsequent  conversation  with  him
served  only  to  heighten  the  respect  with  which  his  appear-
ance had  from  the  first  inspired  me.  One  more  eloquent
of  speech,  more  ready  of  argument,  more  apt  of  illustration,
more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  sacred  books  of  the
Jews,  the  Christians,  and  the  iluhammadans,  could,  I
should  think,  scarcely  be  found  even  amongst  the  eloquent,
ready,  and  subtle  race  to  which  he  belongs.  These  qualities,
combined  with  a  bearing  at  once  majestic  and  genial,  made
me  cease  to  wonder  at  the  influence  and  esteem  which  he
enjoyed  even  beyond  the  circle  of  his  father's  followers.
About  the  greatness  of  this  man  and  his  power  no  one  who
had  seen  him  could  entertain  a  doubt.

In  this  illustrious  company  did  I  partake  of  the  mid-day
meal.  Soon  after  its  conclusion  'Abbd,s  Efendf  and  the
others  arose  with  a  prefatory  "  Bismi'MJi,"  and  signified  to
me  that  I  should  accompany  them,  which  I  did,  without
having  any  idea  whither  we  were  going.  I  observed,
however,  that  the  saddle-bags  containing  my  effects  were
carried  after  us  by  one  of  those  present ;  from  which  I
concluded  that  I  was  not  intended  to  remain  in  my  present
quarters.  We  left  the  house,  traversed  the  bazaars,  and
quitted  the  town  by  its  solitary  gate.  Outside  this  gate
near  the  sea  is  a  large  shed  which  serves  as  a  coffee-house,
and  here  we  seated  ourselves,  my  companions  evidently
awaiting  the  arrival  of  something  or  somebody  from  a  large


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVll

mansion  half-hidden  in  a  grove  of  trees  situated  about
a  mile  or  a  mile  and  a  half  inland,  towards  which  they
contiaually  directed  their  glances.  While  we  were  waiting
thus,  a  weird-looking  old  man,  who  proved  to  be  none
other  than  the  famous  Mushkin-Kalarn} ,  came  and  seated
himself  beside  us.  He  told  me  that  he  had  heard  all  about
me  from  a  relation  of  his  at  Isfahan  (that  same  dalldl  who
had  been  the  means  of  my  first  introduction  to  the  Bd,bi
community^),  and  that  he  had  been  expecting  to  see  me  at
Acre  ever  since  that  time.

Presently  we  discerned  advancing  towards  us  along  the
road  from  the  mansion  above  mentioned  three  animals,  one
of  which  was  ridden  by  a  man.  Thereupon  we  arose  and
went  to  meet  them  ;  and  I  soon  found  myself  mounted  on
one  of  those  fine  white  asses  which,  in  my  opinion,  are
of  all  quadrupeds  the  most  comfortable  to  ride.  A  quarter
of  an  hour  later  we  alighted  in  front  of  the  large  mansion
aforesaid,  whereof  the  name,  Behje  (Joy),  is  said  to  be  a
corruption  (though,  as  the  B^bis  do  not  fail  to  point  out,  a
very  happy  corruption)  oiBdghcha  (which  signifies  a  garden).
I  was  almost  immediately  conducted  into  a  large  room  on
the  ground-floor,  where  I  was  most  cordially  received  by
several  persons  whom  I  had  not  hitherto  seen.  Amongst
these  were  two  of  Behd's  younger  sons,  of  whom  one  was
apparently  about  twenty-five  and  the  other  about  twenty-
one  years  of  age.  Both  were  handsome  and  distinguished
enough  in  appearance,  and  the  expression  of  the  younger
was  singularly  sweet  and  winning.  Besides  these  a  very
old  man  with  light  blue  eyes  and  white  beard,  whose  green
turban  proclaimed  him  a  descendant  of  the  Prophet,  ad-
vanced to  welcome  me,  saying, "We  kuow  not  how  we

1  See  B.  i,  p.  516,  B.  ii,  p.  994,  and  Note  W  at  the  end  of  this
book.

2  See  B.  i,  p.  487  et  seq.


XXXVIU  INTRODUCTION.

should  greet  thee,  whether  we  should  salute  thee  with
'as-seldmu  'aleykum'  or  with  ' AMhu  obMK'"  When  I
discovered  that  this  venerable  old  man  was  not  only  one  of
the  original  companions  of  the  B^b  but  his  relative  and
comrade  from  earliest  childhood,  it  may  well  be  imagined
with  what  eagerness  I  gazed  upon  him  and  listened  to  his
every  utterance.

So  here  at  Behje^z.'s,  I  installed  as  a  guest,  in  the  very
midst  of  all  that  B4blism  accounts  most  noble  and  most
holy;  and  here  did  I  spend  five  most  memorable  days,
during  which  I  enjoyed  unparalleled  and  unhoped-for
opportunities  of  holding  intercourse  with  those  who  are  the
very  fountain-heads  of  that  mighty  and  wondrous  spirit
which  works  with  invisible  but  ever-increasing  force  for  the
transformation  and  quickening  of  a  people  who  slumber  in
a  sleep  like  unto  death.  It  was  in  truth  a  strange  and
moving  experience,  but  one  whereof  I  despair  of  conveying
any  save  the  feeblest  impression.  I  might,  indeed,  strive
to  describe  in  gi-eater  detail  the  faces  and  forms  which
surrounded  me,  the  conversations  to  which  I  was  privileged
to  listen,  the  solemn  melodious  reading  of  the  sacred  books,
the  general  sense  of  harmony  and  content  which  pervaded
the  place,  and  the  fragrant  shady  gardens  whither  in  the
afternoon  we  sometimes  repaired;  but  all  this  was  as
nought  in  comparison  with  the  spiritual  atmosphere  with
which  I  was  encompassed.  Persian  Muslims  will  tell  you
often  that  the  Bdbls  bewitch  or  drug  their  guests  so  that
these,  impelled  by  a  fascination  which  they  cannot  resist,
become  similarly  affected  with  what  the  aforesaid  Muslims
regard  as  a  strange  and  incomprehensible  madness.  Idle
and  absurd  as  this  belief  is,  it  yet  rests  on  a  basis  of  fact
stronger  than  that  which  supports  the  greater  part  of  what

1  i.e.  with  the  salutation  ordinarily  used  by  the  Muhammadans,  or
with  that  peculiar  to  the  B4bls,


INTRODUCTION.  XXxix

they  allege  concerning  tliis  people.  The  spirit  which
pervades  the  Bdbfs  is  such  that  it  can  hardly  fail  to  affect
most  powerfully  all  subjected  to  its  influence.  It  may
appal  or  attract :  it  cannot  be  ignored  or  disregarded.
Let  those  who  have  not  seen  disbelieve  me  if  they  will;
but,  should  that  spirit  once  reveal  itself  to  them,  they
will  experience  an  emotion  which  they  are  not  likely  to
forget.

Of  the  culminating  event  of  this  my  journey  some  few
words  at  least  must  be  said.  During  the  morning  of  the
day'  after  my  installation  at  Belije  one  of  Behd.'s  younger
sons  entered  the  room  where  I  was  sitting  and  beckoned  to
me  to  follow  him.  I  did  so,  and  was  conducted  through
passages  and  rooms  at  which  I  scarcely  had  time  to  glance
to  a  spacious  hall,  paved,  so  far  as  I  remember  (for  my
mind  was  occupied  with  other  thoughts)  with  a  mosaic  of
marble.  Before  a  curtain  suspended  from  the  wall  of  this
great  ante-chamber  my  conductor  paused  for  a  moment
while  I  removed  my  shoes.  Then,  with  a  quick  movement
of  the  hand,  he  withdrew,  and,  as  I  passed,  replaced  the
curtain ;  and  I  found  myself  in  a  large  apartment,  along  the
upper  end  of  which  ran  a  low  divan,  while  on  the  side
opposite  to  the  door  were  placed  two  or  three  chairs.
Though  I  dimly  suspected  whither  I  was  going  and  whom  I
was  to  behold  (for  no  distinct  intimation  had  been  given  to
me),  a  second  or  two  elapsed  ere,  with  a  throb  of  wonder
and  awe,  I  became  definitely  conscious  that  the  room  was  not
untenanted.  In  the  corner  where  the  divan  met  the  wall
sat  a  wondrous  and  venerable  figure,  crowned  with  a  felt
head-dress  of  the  kind  called  tdj  by  dervishes  (but  of
unusual  height  and  make),  round  the  base  of  which  was
wound  a  small  white  turban.  The  face  of  him  on  whom  I
gazed  I  can  never  forget,  though  I  cannot  describe  it.
Those  piercing  eyes  seemed  to  read  one's  very  soul ;  power


xl  INTRODUCTION.

and  authority  sat  on  that  ample  brow ;  while  the  deep  lines
on  the  forehead  and  face  implied  an  age  which  the  jet-
black  hair  and  beard  flowing  down  in  indistinguishable
luxuriance  almost  to  the  waist  seemed  to  belie.  No  need
to  ask  in  whose  presence  I  stood,  as  I  bowed  myself  before
one  who  is  the  object  of  a  devotion  and  love  which  kings
might  envy  and  emperors  sigh  for  in  vain  !
'  ~  A  mild  dignified  voice  bade  me  be  seated,  and  then
continued :— "  Praise  be  to  God  that  thou  hast  attained ! . . .

Thou  hast  come  to  see  ajmsoner  and  an  exile We

I  desire  but  the  good  of  the  world  and  theTiappiness  of  the
I  nations  ;  yet  they  deem  us  a  stirrer  up  of  strife  and  sedition
worthy  of  bondage  and  banishment.  .  .  .  That  all  nations
should  become  one  in  faith  and  all  men  as  brothersj  that
the  bonds  of  affection  and  unity  betweeiTtEiesons  of  men
should  be  strengthened;  that  diversity  of  religion  should
cease,  and  differences  of  race  T)e  annulled — what  harm  is
there  m  this  ? .  .  .  Yet  so  it  shall  be ;  these  fruitless  strifes,
these  ruinous  wars  shall  pass  away,  and  the  '  Most  Great
Peace'  shall  come  ....  Do  not  you  in  Europe  need  this  also  ?
Is  not  this  that  which  Christ  foretold? .  .  .  Yet  do  we  see
your  kings  and  rulers  lavishing  their  treasures  more  freely
on  means  for  the  destruction  of  tKeliuman  race iJiaiLonJhat,
which  would  conduce  to  the  happinessof  mankind . . .  These
strifes  amTthis  bIflodshfiijiicL_discord_jnust^iifia§e,  and.^all
men  be  as  onejkindred  and  one  family  ....  Let  not  a  man
glory  in  this,  that Jie  Joyes  his  counriy ;  let  him  rather
glory  irTEErs,  that  he  loves  his  kind  .  .  .  ."

Such,  so  fax  as  I  can  recall  them,  were  the  words  which,
besides  many  others,  I  heard  from  Beh^.  Let  those  who
read  them  consider  well  with  liheniielves  whether  such
doctrines  merit  death  and  bonds,  and  whether  the  world
is  more  likely  to  gain  or  lose  by  their  diffusion.

My  interview  lasted  altogether  about  twenty  minutes.


INTROBUCTION.  xli

and  during  the  latter  part  of  it  Behi  read  a  portion  of  that
epistle  {lavjh)  whereof  the  translation  occupies  the  last
paragraph  on  p.  70  and  the  greater  part  of  p.  71  of  this
book.

During  the  five  da)'s  spent  at  Behje  (TuesA&y ,  April  15th
to  Sunday,  April  20th),  I  was  admitted  to  Beh4's  presence
four  times.  These  interviews  always  took  place  an  hour  or
two  before  noon,  and  lasted  from  twenty  minutes  to  half-au-
hour.  One  of  Behi's  sons  always  accompanied  me,  and
once  Ak4  Mirz4  Ak^  J^n  (Jenah-i-Khddimu  lldhy  the
amanuensis  {kdtib-i-dydt)  was  also  present.  In  their
general  features  these  interviews  resembled  the  first,  of
which  I  have  attempted  to  give  a  description.  Besides
this,  one  afternoon  I  saw  Behd  walking  in  one  of  the
gardens  which  belong  to  him.  He  was  surrounded  by  a
httle  group  of  his  chief  followers.  How  the  journey  to  and
from  the  garden  was  accomphshed  I  know  not:  probably
under  cover  of  the  darkness  of  night.

At  length  the  last  day  to  which  my  departure  could
possibly  be  deferred  if  I  were  to  reach  Cambridge  ere  the
expiration  of  my  leave  arrived.  Loath  as  I  was  to  go,
there  was  no  help  for  it ;  and  reluctantly  enough  I  declined
the  pressing  invitations  to  prolong  my  stay  which  the
kindness  of  my  friends  prompted  them  to  utter.  Finding
that  I  was  bent  on  departure,  and  that  I  could  not  remain
longer  without  running  a  great  risk  of  breaking  my  promise,
they  ceased  to  try  to  dissuade  me  from  going,  and,  with
most  considerate  kindness,  strove  to  make  such  arrange-
ments for  my  return  journey  as  might  most  conduce  to  my
comfort.  In  spite  of  aU  my  assurances  that  I  could  easily
return  by  myself,  it  was  settled  that  the  Bdbf  agent  of
Beyrout  should  accompany  me  thither. I was  very  un-

1  See  B.  i,  p.  519  ;  and  pp.  355,  n.  2,  358,  and  360—362  infra.
B.  d


xlii  INTEODUCTION.

willing  to  put  him  to  such  inconvenience,  but  was  finally
compelled  to  accede  to  this  arrangement,  which,  of  course,
made  the  return  journey  far  pleasanter  than  it  would  other-
wise have  been.

In  the  course  of  a  conversation  which  took  place  soon
after  my  arrival  I  had  expressed  a  strong  desire  to  become
better  acquainted  with  the  later  history  of  the  Bihi  move-
ment, adding  that  the  only  history  written  in  a  friendly
and  sympathetic  spirit  which  I  had  seen  was  the  Turikh-i-
Jadid,  and  that  this  only  carried  the  narrative  down  to  the
year  a.d.  1850.  In  reply  I  was  told  that  a  concise  and
authentic  history  carried  down  almost  to  the  present  day
had  been  compiled' ;  and  that  same  day  this  book,  of  which
the  text  and  translation  are  now  published,  was  placed  in
my  hands.  I  did  not  at  first  understand  that  this  was
a  gift,  for  many  books  were  lent  to  me  to  read  in  my
room ;  and  consequently  I  spent  much  time  which,  as  the
event  turned  out,  might  have  been  more  profitably  em-
ployed, in  copying  out  what  I  deemed  the  more  important
passages  of  the  work  in  question.  When,  at  the  moment
of  my  departure,  I  offered  to  return  the  book,  I  was  told
that  it  was  a  gift  which  I  might  take  with  me  in  re-
membrance of  my  visit ;  whereat  I  rejoiced  greatly.  Be-
sides this  I  received  a  fine  ms.  copy  of  the  Ikun  written  by
the  same  scribe,  "the  Letter  Zd'"';  for  I  had  mentioned
incidentally  that  the  copy  of  that  work  which  I  had
obtained  in  Persia  had  unfortunately  suffered  damages
which  rendered  many  passages  almost  illegible.

At  length  the  moment  of  departure  came,  and,  after
taking  an  affectionate  farewell  of  my  kind  friends,  I  once

'  For  a  fuller  account  of  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the
compilation  of  this  hiBtory  see  that  portion  of  Note  A  which  is
devoted  to  the  Tnrikh-i-Jadid  (pp.  194—195  ivfra).

^  See  Note  Z  at  end.


INTRODUCTION.  xliii

more  turned  my  face  towards  Beyrout.  I  was  accompanied
by  the  B&hi  agent ;  and  a  servant,  who,  left  fatherless  in
childhood  by  one  of  the  Bdbi  persecutions  in  Persia,  had
since  remained  in  the  household  of  Behd,  went  with  us  as
far  as  Tyre.  I  have  seldom  seen  one  whose  countenance
and  conversation  revealed  a  more  complete  contentment
with  his  lot.  That  night  we  slept  in  a  caravansaray  at
Tyre.  Next  day  the  servant  bade  us  farewell  and  turned
back  towards  Acre,  while  we  continued  on  our  way,  and
shortly  after  sunset  passed  through  the  beautiful  gardens
which  surround  Sidon,  that  fairest  and  most  fragrant  of
Syria's  cities.  Here  we  alighted  at  the  house  of  a  Bdbl  of
Yezd,  whose  kindly  hospitality  formed  a  pleasant  contrast
to  our  somewhat  dreary  lodgings  of  the  previous  night.

On  the  evening  of  the  following  day  (Tuesday,  April
22nd)  we  entered  Beyrout,  and  halted  for  a  while  to  rest
and  refresh  ourselves  with  tea  at  the  house  of  a  B4bl  of
Baghdad  which  was  situated  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town.
This  man  had  as  a  child  gone  with  his  father  to  Persia  in
the  hope  of  seeing  the  Bd.b.  This  he  was  unable  to  do,  the
B4b  being  at  that  time  confined  in  the  fortress  of  Chihrlk,
but  at  Teherdn  he  had  seen  MuUd  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh.
I  asked  him  what  manner  of  man  Mulld  Huseyn  was.
"Lean  and  fragile  to  look  at,"  he  answered,  "but  keen  and
bright  as  the  sword  which  never  left  his  side.  For  the  rest,
he  was  not  more  than  thirty  or  thirty-five  years  old,  and
his  raiment  was  white."

Next  day  soon  after  sun-down,  the  last  farewells  said,
and  the  precious  mss.  carefully  concealed  about  me,  I  was
borne  swiftly  out  of  Beyrout  harbour  by  the  Egyptian
steamer  Rahmdniyya.  Eight  days  later,  on  Thursday,  May
1st,  I  was  back  in  Cambridge.  So  ended  a  most  interest-
ing, most  successful,  and  most  pleasant  journey.

d2


xliv  INTRODUCTION.

Shortly  after  my  return  to  Cambridge  I  addressed  a
note  to  the  Syndicate  of  the  University  Press,  stating  in
brief  outline  the  course  and  results  of  the  investigations
which  had  occupied  me  during  the  last  three  years,  and  my
desire  to  place  before  the  world  some  portion  of  these
results  by  publishing  the  text  and  translation  of  one  or
other  of  the  two  Mhi  histories  which  I  had  obtained.  Of
these  two  histories  I  briefly  discussed  the  respective  merits,
adding  that,  although  the  text  of  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  only
awaited  collation  with  the  British  Museum  ms.,  while  the
translation  thereof  was  far  advanced  towards  completion,
this  newer  history,  owing  to  its  comparatively  small  bulk,
could  probably  be  got  ready  for  publication  quite  as  soon
as  the  larger  work,  while  the  ms.  of  it  which  I  had  obtained,
being  accurate,  well  written,  and,  to  the  best  of  my  know-
ledge, unique  in  Europe,  might,  with  perfect  propriety,  be
reproduced  in  facsimile  by  some  process  of  photo-litho-
graphy. In  reply  to  my  application,  1  was  presently  in-
formed that  the  Syndicate  was  prepared  to  accept  and
publish  the  smaller  work  so  soon  as  it  should  be  ready,
while  the  expediency  of  publishing  the  larger  Tdrikh-i-
Jadid  was  deferred  for  future  consideration.  On  learning
the  favourable  result  of  my  application  I  at  once  applied
myself  vigorously  to  the  work  of  translation  and  annota-
tion, and  by  the  end  of  July  1890  the  first  proof-sheets
were  already  before  me.  As  it  had  been  decided  that  the
text  should  be  reproduced  by  photo-lithography,  I  had
no  anxiety  on  that  score ;  and  the  excellence  of  the
facsimile  produced  in  the  workshops  of  the  Cambridge
Engraving  Company  under  the  careful  supervision  of
Mr  Dew-Smith  of  Trinity  College,  will,  I  am  confident,
more  than  reconcile  the  Persian  scholar  to  the  necessity  of
dealing  with  a  lithographed  instead  of  a  printed  text.


INTEODUCTION.  xlv

It  remains  for  me  to  speak  briefly  of  tlie  peculiarities
of  this  history  both  as  regards  tone  and  style.  As  to  the
former,  the  chief  features  which  will  strike  the  attentive
reader  are  : —

(1)  The  quite  secondary  importance  accorded  to  the
Bdb,  whose  mission  is  throughout  depicted  as  a  mere  pre-
paration for  the  fuller  and  more  perfect  dispensation  of
Behd.  In  like  manner  the  deeds  and  sufferings  of  the  early
apostles  of  Bdblism  are  passed  over  very  lightly,  and  many
of  the  most  remarkable  events  of  the  older  dispensation
(such  as  the  deaths  of  the  'Seven  Martyrs','  and^e  great
massacre  at  Teherdn  in  1852  which  Kenan^  calls  "un  jour
sans  pareil  peut-Ttre  dansl'histoire  du  monde")  are  almost
or  quite  unnoticed.  The  martyrdoms  of  Mlrzd  Badi"^  and
the  two  Seyyids  of  Isfahan*,  which  belong  to  the  new
dispensation,  are,  on  the  other  hand,  treated  of  very  fuUy.

(2)  Mirzd  Yahyd  Subh-i-Ezel  is  throughout  depicted  as
a  person  of  no  consequence,  enjoying  for  a  while  a  merely
nominal  supremacy,  bestowed  upon  him,  not  for  any  special
merit  or  capacity,  but  out  of  regard  for  certain  considera-
tions of  expediency^  No  opportunity  is  lost  of  disparaging
both  his  courage  and  his  judgement",  and  of  contrasting  him
in  these  respects  with  Beh4,  who  is  everyTvhere  described  as
the  true  and  legitimate  chief.  \^

(3)  Towards  the  Sh4h  of  Persia  an  extraordinarily
temperatejoneis^served,^  and  in  severalpiaces  apologies
are  put  forwarj^Jbr  his  justification^tbe blarne  for  £Ea


cruelties  inflicted  on  the  Bdbi's  being  thrown  either  on  his

'  See  Note  B  at  end.

'  Les  Apotres,  p.  378. See  also  Note  T  at  end.

3  See  pp.  102—106  infra.

*  See  pp.  167—169  and  400  et  seq.  infra,  and  B.  i,  pp.  489—491.

*  Cf.  pp.  62—63  infra.

«  Cf.  pp.  51—52;  63—64;  89—90;  and  93—101  infra.


xlvi  INTRODUCTION.

ministers  and  courtiers,  or  on Jhe  Muhammadanjdoctor§,
wEoarerepeatecIIy  and  strongly  denounced  \

(4)  ~^e  resistance  opposed  to  the  government  by  the
earlier  Bdbfs  is  deprecated  even  when  evoked  by  the  most
wanton  acts  of  aggression  and  cruelty",  the  attempt  on  the
fehdh's  life  in  particular  being  alluded  to  with  the  utmost
Miorror' ;  and  it  is  implied  that,  although  the  jBdbVgrecepts
were  altogether  those  of  peace., the  stronger  will  and  in-
fluence of  Behd  were  needed  to  give  them  actual  currency  ^

The  chief  pecuHarities  presented  by  the  style  of  this
work  are  as  follows  : —

(1)  A  remarkable  terseness  and  concision  rare  in
Persian.

(2)  An  unusual  preponderance  of  the  Arabic  element,
and  the  frequent  employment  of  many  uncommon  Arabic
words.

(3)  An  abundant  use  of  the  past  participle  in  place  of
the  past  tense  where  we  should  expect  the  latter.  A  good
instance  of  this  peculiarity  occurs  in  the  first  five  lines  of
p.  3  of  the  text.  Of  these  three  peculiarities  the  second
and  third  are  noticed  by  Gobineau  {Religions  et  Philoso-
phies, p.  312)  as  characteristic  of  the  Bd,bl  style  in  general.
He  says : — "  C'est  un  persan  oil  il  ne  paralt  presque  que
des  mots  arabes  choisis  parmi  les  plus  relev^s  et  les  plus
rares,  et  oil  se  combinent  les  formes  gTammaticales  des
deux  langues  de  mani^re  k  exercer  singuliferement  la
sagacity  et,  il  faut  le  dire  aussi,  la  patience  des  lecteurs
ddvots  et  confiants.  Suivant  un  usage,  qui  est  du  reste
assez  regu  dans  les  ouvrages  philosophiques,  les  verbes
persans  employes  se  prdsentent  presque  toujours  sous  la


1  Cf.  pp.  20,  32—33,  34—35,  40-41,  52,  and  104—106  infra.

2  Cf.  p.  35  infra.  3  See  pp.  49—51  infra.
*  Cf.  pp.  65—69  infra.


INTEODTJCTION.  xlvii

forme  concrete  de  participes  passes,  afin  de  resfsembler
autant  que  possible  k  des  verbes  arabes."

(4)  A  very  noticeable  tendency  to  omit  the  Persian
auxiliary  verb  after  Arabic  participles,  whether  active  or
passive,  and  generally  speaking  to  restrict  the  employment
of  the  verb  as  much  as  possible.  The  following  instances
(and  the  like  will  be  found  almost  on  every  page)  will
suffice  to  illustrate  this  feature : —

(On  p.  1,  last  line,  and  p.  2,  first  line) : — ^\ ij*>-

uJl  IjLft] — "Now  since  these  various  accounts  [are]  re-
corded in  other  pages,  and  [since]  the  setting  forth  thereof
[would  be]  the  cause  of  prolixity,  therefore  "...etc.

(On  p.  39,  last  line,  and  p.  40,  first  line) : — 0|>jI  <^J^i

*  Jii  Py>-y^  »Li'  J^'to  jy'^ — "Well,  Persia  [was]  in
this  critical  state  and  the  learned  doctors  perplexed  and
anxious,  wjien  the  late  Prince  Muhammad  Shdh  died."

(On  p.  43,  last  line,  and  p.  44,  first  three  hues): —

_j yjx^  jj v-jIj  J_^_j  3i^  \3'y^  fti'^  w— >-

*  j>-^  J  jjiliti  0§sr  J>i  J^  ^  j_ji:;l—" Their  con-
ceptions and  ideas  [were]  after  the  former  fashion,  and
their  conduct  and  behaviour  in  correspondence  with  ancient
usage.  The  way  of  approach  to  the  B4b  [was],  moreover,
closed,  and  the  flame  of  trouble  visibly  blazing  on  every
side."


xlviii  INTRODUCTION.

(5)  Two  peculiar  idioms  common  to  all  B^bf  compo-
sitions remain  to  be  noticed. The  first  of  these  is  the

continual  use of  i-5  <J»- in  the sense of  "for,"  to  the

almost  complete  exclusion  of  \j,'j'>  ^  lj»-,  or  the  simple

d»-,  which  are  commonly  employed  in  other  works.  The
second  is  the  combination  of  the  past  and  the  present  or
the  past  and  future  tenses  in  general  assertions  (an  idiom
which  is  even  more  common  in  the  writings  of  the  Bd,b
than  in  those  of  Beh4).  Of  this  usage  the  following
instances  may  be  cited  from  the  present  work : —

(At  the  bottom  of  p.  141): — Jb> j oLkL  jl  i^ is^

..."for  that  Peerless  King  hath  been  aiid  will  he  for  ever-
lasting Holy  above  ascent  or  descent."

(In  the  sentence  at  the  top  of  p.  142  which  follows  the
above) :^_5  i.5Jt>-l  y^  ijfa\ J^  />_jJl  O  v^  *,_5^  ly^
*  jijj  J&i^pcJ  _j n^^  ^^^  \  al.>l>M — "Therefore  to-day

victory  neither  liath  been  nor  will  he  interference  with  any
one,  nor  strife  with  any  person."

The  peculiarities  of  style  affected  by  the  B^b  have  for
the  most  part  received  the  sanction  of  Behd,,  and  are  copied
with  greater  or  less  fidelity  by  the  majority  of  B4bls,  so
that  one  famihar  with  them  might  often  succeed  in  recog-
nizing a  letter  or  other  document  as  of  Bdbi  authorship.

It  remains  for  me  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  the  principles
which  have  guided  me  in  my  own  work,  viz.  the  translation
and  notes.  As  regards  the  former,  I  have  taken  as  my  guide
the  canon  laid  down  by  the  late  Dr  William  Wright,  whose


INTRODUCTION.  xlix

death,  mourned  by  all  as  an  irreparable  loss,  was  to  such  as
were  like  myself  privileged  to  listen  to  his  teaching  and
feel  the  genial  influence  of  his  constant  and  unvarying
kindness  and  encouragement,  the  saddest  of  bereavements.
This  canon  he  states  as  follows  {Chronicle  of  Joshua  the
Stylite,  Cambridge,  1882,  pp.  vi — vii  of  the  Preface): —
"  In  my  translation  I  have  striven  to  be  as  literal  as  the
difference  between  the  two  idioms  wiU  allow.  My  method
is  first  to  translate  as  closely  as  I  can,  and  then  to  try  if  I
can  improve  the  form  of  expression  in  any  way  without  the
sacrifice  of  truthfulness  to  the  original.  I  also  endeavour
to  preserve  a  somewhat  antiquated  and  Biblical  style,  as
being  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  rendering  into  English  of
Oriental  works,  whether  poetical  or  historical.  The  Old
Testament  and  the  Ko'r^n,  which  are,  of  course,  in  many
ways  strikingly  similar  in  their  diction,  can  both  be  easily
made  ridiculous  by  turning  them  into  our  modern  ver-
nacular, particularly  if  we  vulgarize  with  malice  prepense."
Now  though  I  cannot  flatter  myself  that  I  have  succeeded
in  making  my  translation  of  this  history  very  eloquent
English,  I  can  at  least  conscientiously  declare  that  I  have
spared  no  pains  to  reproduce  faithfully  not  only  the  thought
but  also  the  style  and  diction  of  my  author.  The  desire  to
give  a  correct  impression  of  the  original  has  even  led  me  to
preserve  the  Persian  idiom  where  a  slight  alteration  would
have  improved  the  English.  An  instance  of  this  occurs
in  the  very  first  sentence  on  p.  1,  where  "on  the  lips"
would  undoubtedly  have  been  better  Enghsh  than  "  on  the
tongues."  Throughout  my  translation  I  have  unhesitatingly
preferred  fidelity  to  elegance ;  and,  even  if  I  have  gone
too  far  in  this,  I  trust  that  at  least  the  Enghsh  reader  will
obtain  a  clearer  idea  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  original
than  would  otherwise  have  been  possible.  Words  of
constant  recurrence  have  been,  so  far  as  possible,  rendered


1  INTRODUCTION.

by  the  same  English  equivalent,  which,  according  to  the
canon  above  referred  to,  often  bears  the  meaning  which  it
has  in  the  Bible  rather  than  that  which  is  given  to  it
in  ordinary  usage.  Thus  by  "lawyers"  (*L^)  are  in-
tended the  expounders  of  the  Sacred  Books  and  of  the  Law
therein  contained,  and  by  "doctors"  (*Llc)  those  learned
in  theology  and  the  kindred  sciences.

As  regards  the  notes  with  which  I  have  endeavoured  to
elucidate,  control,  and  amplify  the  text,  they  are  of  two
kinds;  foot-notes  containing  explanations  necessary  for  the
proper  comprehension  of  the  text,  references,  supplementary
details  or  varying  traditions  of  events  recorded  in  the  body
of  the  work,  brief  notices  of  events  intentionally  or  accident-
ally passed  over,  comments,  and  the  like;  and  the  final
notes  designated  by  capital  letters,  to  which  perhaps  the
term  "Excursus"  or  "Appendix"  might  more  fitly  have
been  given.  These  latter  have,  I  confess,  grown  to  propor-
tions far  exceeding  what  I  originally  intended,  for  the
printing  of  the  translation  was  finished  ere  half  of  them
was  ^vritten,  and  ever  as  I  wrote  fresh  scraps  of  information
which  I  could  not  persuade  myself  to  omit  kept  coming  in.
I  cannot  but  feel  that,  partly  in  consequence  of  this,  partly
because  of  the  very  nature  of  my  original  plan,  portions  of
my  work  will  appear  discursive,  desultory,  and  disconnected,
even  if  it  be  free  (which  I  can  scarcely  hope)  from  contra-
dictions and  repetitions.  But  my  aim  and  object  has  been
chiefly  to  record,  for  the  benefit  of  future  historians,  every
fact  which  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  and  every  varying
tradition  which  I  have  heard  in  Persia,  Turkey,  Syria,  or
Cyprus.  In  the  case  of  divergent  traditions  I  have,  so  far
as  was  consistent  with  the  safety  of  my  informants,  given
the  isndd  or  chain  of  authorities  by  which  they  reached
me. When  this  could  not  be  done,  I  have  striven  to  give


INTRODUCTION.  li

the  reader  some  means  of  forming  an  estimate  of  the
character  of  my  informant.  The  office  of  the  chronicler
and  collector  of  traditions  is,  in  comparison  with  that  of  the
historian,  a  humble  one ;  yet  the  labours  of  the  former  are
indispensable  to  those  of  the  latter,  and  must  precede  them.
The  immense  superiority  of  Tabarl  to  all  other  Oriental
historians  lies,  as  Professor  Noeldeke  observes,  in  this,  that
he  was  content  to  record  the  various  traditions  of  diverse
events  which  he  learned  from  this  one  or  that  one  without
seeking  prematurely  to  blend  them  into  one  harmonious
narrative.  Let  the  oldest  traditions  of  any  historical  event
once  be  gathered  up,  the  credibility  of  their  narrators  being,
as  far  as  possible,  determined,  and  the  chronicle  may  with-
out prejudice  to  itself  await  in  patience,  for  centuries  if
need  be,  the  magic  touch  of  the  true  historian ;  but  if  once
the  old  traditions  be  lost  the  loss  can  never  be  made  good.
Through  a  fortunate  combination  of  circumstances  unlikely
to  repeat  itself  I  was  placed  in  a  singularly  good  position
for  gathering  together  B4bl  traditions  from  sources  many
of  which  will  in  a  few  years  be  no  longer  available,  and  I
was  impatient  to  place  on  record  the  mass  of  information
thus  arduously  acquired;  so  that  now,  as  I  write  the  last
page  of  this  work,  I  am  conscious  of  a  deep  sense  of  relief
and  thankfulness  that  no  obstacle  has  intervened  to  prevent
the  conclusion  of  my  labours.

Of  the  bibliography  of  Biblisma^full  account  will  be
foun3~in  Note'A  at  the  end  of  the  book,  so  that  I  need  ^
add  nothing  further  on  this  subject.  My  first  and  second
articles  on  the  B^bis  in  the  J.  K,.  A.  8.  for  1889  (vol.  xxi,
new  series,  parts  iii  and  iv)  are,  as  already  explained,
respectively  denoted  throughout  this  work  as  "B.  i,"  and
"B.  ii."  When  Gobineau  is  quoted,  his  work  Les  Religions
et  les  Philosophies  dans  I'Asie  Gentrale  (2nd  edition,  Paris,
1866) is  referred to, unless otherwise specified. Mirza


lii  INTRODUCTION.

Kazem-Beg's  five  articles  on  the  Bihis  in  the  Journal
Asiatiqtie,  though  all  published  in  1866,  extend  through  two
volumes  of  that  periodical,  each  of  which  volumes  has  a
separate  pagination.  For  convenience  and  brevity,  there-
fore, the  first  and  second  of  these  articles,  included  in  vol.
vii  {sixiime  serie)  of  the  Journal  Asiatique,  are  together
denoted  as  "Kazem-Beg  i,"  while  the  third,  fourth,  and
fifth,  contained  in  vol.  viii,  are  called  "Kazem-Beg  ii."
Any  other  works  whereof  the  full  titles  are  not  given  in  the
notes  will  be  found  described  in  detail  in  Note  A.

Concerning  the  facsimile  of  the  text  some  few  words
are  necessary.  Thanks  to  the  careful  supervision  of  Mr
A.  G.  Dew-Smith  of  Trinity  College,  for  whose  sympathetic
and  cordial  co-operation  I  desire  to  express  my  warmest
gratitude,  this  leaves  Httle  to  be  desired,  reproducing  faith-
fully the  features  of  the  original  MS.  In  spite  of  all  care,
however,  the  reproduction  of  a  letter  or  word  here  and
there  would  in  the  first  instance  prove  defective,  while  now
and  then  points  and  dots  not  belonging  to  the  original
would  creep  in.  Most  of  these  defects  have,  I  hope,  been
removed,  every  page  having  been  subjected  two  or  three
times  to  a  careful  scrutiny.  During  this  revision  the
original  MS.  was  always  before  me,  and  only  when  it  ap-
peared that  a  defect  observed  in  the  proof  already  existed
there  has  it  been  left  untouched.  In  a  word,  so  far  as  the
text  is  concerned  the  object  has  been  to  reproduce,  not  to
correct  or  emend.  From  this  general  rule,  however,  I  have
been  compelled  to  deviate  in  certain  special  cases.  Through-
out the  original  MS.  a  somewhat  erratic  system  of  punctua-
tion by  means  of  red  dots  prevails.  These  red  dots  neces-
sarily appeared  as  black  dots  in  the  facsimile.  Now  and
then  it  happened  that,  owing  to  their  situation,  they
came  to  simulate  diacritical  points,  thus  creating  a  con-
fusion, ambiguity,  or  unsightliness  which  was  foreign  to  the


INTEODUCTION.  liii

original  MS.  In  such  cases  I  have  considered  myself  justified
in  removing  these  marks  of  punctuation,  but  so  far  as  pos-
sible they  have  been  allowed  to  stand.  The  Persian  title-
page  does  not  belong  to  the  original,  but  was  subsequently
written  at  Acre  by  my  request  in  black,  and  beautifully
reproduced  in  colours  by  Mr  Dew-Smith.

An  investigation  such  as  that  whereof  the  course  has
been  above  detailed  can  be  brought  to  a  successful  issue
only  by  the  co-operation  and  assistance  of  many  persons,
without  whose  kindly  aid  the  desired  information  could  not
be  obtained.  To  each  and  all  of  those  to  whose  aid  I  am
thus  indebted  I  have  striven,  even  at  the  risk  of  repetition,
to  express  my  indebtedness  as  occasion  arose.  It  only
remains  for  me  to  tender  my  most  sincere  thanks  to  such
of  my  friends  as  have  assisted  me  in  the  actual  preparation
of  the  work.  In  the  tedious  work  of  revising  the  proof-
sheets  I  have  received  most  efficient  and  valuable  help
from  Mr  E.  A.  Neil  of  this  College.  To  the  kindness  and
learning  of  Professor  Robertson  Smith,  of  Christ's  College,
and  Mr  A.  A.  Bevan,  of  Trinity  College,  I  am  indebted  for
many  suggestions  and  corrections.  To  the  rare  generosity
of  Baron  Victor  Rosen  of  St  Petersburg  in  allowing  me  to
make  full  and  free  use  of  still  unpublished  work  I  have  had
occasion  to  refer  repeatedly  in  the  course  of  my  notes.
Lastly,  I  desire  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  Syndics  of
the  University  Press  for  that  liberal  assistance  without
which  the  publication  of  this  work  might  have  been  in-
definitely postponed.


ADDENDA.

On  p.  132  add  the  following  note  to  the  first  sentence  of  the  last
paragraph : — In  K.  the  word ^  has  been  inserted  above  the  line

before  the  words  ijuUa jl jl- If  we  accept  this  reading  (which

is,  however,  unsupported  by  Eosen's  as  by  the  present  text)  the  sen-
tence will  translate  as  follows : — "  They  have  misrepresented  matters
before  the  presence  of  the  King  in  such  a  way  that  if  any  ill  deed
proceed  from  anyone  not  of  this  sect  they  account  him  as  [a  follower]
of  the  religion  of  these  servants."

On  p.  138,  1.  5,  add  the  following  note  after  "Book": — K.,  sup-
ported by  Eosen's  text,  inserts  a  sentence  whereof  this  is  the  transla-
tion:— "  Some  men,  when  they  are  unable  to  answer  their  opponent,
lay  hold  of  the  rope  of  textual  corruption ;  whereas  mention  of  textual
corruption  occurs  [only]  in  special  passages."  This  Persian  sentence,
if  admitted,  would  seem  to  come  more  naturally  at  the  end  of  the
passage  in  Persian  (omitted  in  the  present  text,  translated  in  the
foot-notes  on  pp.  137 — 138)  than  where  it  stands  at  present  in  the
midst  of  a  piece  of  Arabic.  As  regards  sequence  of  ideas,  too,  it
would  be  much  more  appropriately  placed  there  than  in  its  present
position,  where  it  has  no  obvious  connection  with  the  context.

On  p.  141, 11.  5 — 6,  add  the  following  note : — K.,  as  well  as  Eosen's
text,  reads  "we  have  sprinkled"  instead  of  "loe  have  made  manifest."

On  p.  142,  1.  20,  add  the  following  note: — Eosen's  text  agrees  with

K.  in  reading  aj^yJia  {celebrated,  notorious)  instead  of  a^  aujLa
(apparent,  evident).


NOTA  BENE.

Passages  of  which  the  original  is  in  Arabic  are  printed  in  italics
in  the  translation.  Words  supplied  to  complete  the  sense  are  enclosed
in  square  brackets.


CORRIGENDA.

Baron  Eoseu  has  kindly  called  my  attention  to  the  following
errors : —

On  p.  69,  n.  1,  and  again,  in  a  yet  more  definite  manner,  on
pp.  208  and  211,  I  have  committed  the  inexcusable  blunder  of  con-
founding Beha'u'llah's  earlier  Suratu'l-Muliik  with  his  later  Alwdli-i-
Saldtin.  The  former  only  is  described  by  Baron  Eosen  in  the  first
volume  of  the  Collections  Scientifiques,  and  what  is  there  written
bears  no  reference  whatever  to  the  Sura-iSeykal  or  the  Alwah-i-
Saldtln  comprised  in  it.  The  MS.  described  by  Baron  Eosen  on
pp.  145 — 243  of  the  forthcoming  sixth  volume  of  the  Collectiom
Scientifiques  contains  a  series  of  Beha'u'llah's  writings.  The  first  of
these  pieces  is  the  Suratu'l-ilulilk  (previously  described  in  the  first
volume  of  the  Collections  Scientifiques)  concerning  the  authorship  of
which  I  expressed  my  doubts  on  pp.  954 — 8  of  my  second  article  in
the  J.  E.  A.  S.  for  1889.  In  reply  to  my  objections  Baron  Eosen
proves  quite  conclusively  {Collections  Scientifiques,  vol.  vi,  pp.  145 — 8)
that  the  Suratu'l-Muluk  was  written  by  Beha'u'llah,  and  that  it  was,
moreover,  written  at  an  earlier  date  than  the  Alwdh-i-Saldtin.  The
same  ms.  contains  also  the  Sura-i-Heykal  (including,  of  course,  the
Alwdh-i-Saldtin),  and  it  is  of  this  that  the  fuU  text  will  appear  in
vol.  vi  of  the  Collections  Scientifiques.  The  Silratu'l-MuMk  appears
to  have  been  written  about  the  end  of  the  Baghdad  period,  i.e.
about  A.D.  1864 ;  the  Alwdh-i-Saldtin  (or  at  least  the  Epistle  to  the
King  of  Persia,  which  is  the  longest  and  most  important  of  them)
during  the  latter  days  of  the  Adrianople  period  (c/.  pp.  102,  and
119,  n.  1  supra),  i.e.  about  July  1863.  The  reader  is  therefore
requested  to  make  the  following  corrections.  On  p.  69,  n.  1,  1.  4,
for  "  JSTk  Sj^  "  read  "  'J>.il  Jj>-."  On  p.  208,  1.  27,  for  "  a  copy
of  Bella's  Sura-i-Heykal"  read  "a  copy  of  Beha's  Siiratu'l-MuMk,"
and  delete  what  foUows  down  to  the  end  of  1.  2  on  p.  209,  as  well  as
n.  2  on  p.  208.  On  p.  211,  1.  5,  for  "(or  J<f>  'oj^)"  read  "and
the  J<f'  ^j>-."


A  TKAVELLER'S  NARRATIVE


WRITTEN TO ILLUSTRATE


THE EPISODE OF THE BAB.


Touching  the  individual  known  as  the  Bdb  and  p.  l.
the  true  nature  of  this  sect  diverse  tales  are  on  the
tongues  and  in  the  mouths  of  men,  and  various  ac-
counts are  contained  in  the  pages  of  Persian  history
and  the  leaves  of  European  chronicles'.  But  because
of  the  variety  of  their  assertions  and  the  diversity
of  their  narratives  not  one  is  as  worthy  of  confidence
as  it  should  be.  Some  have  loosed  their  tongues
in  extreme  censure  and  condemnation ;  some  foreign
chronicles  have  spoken  in  a  commendatory  strain ;
while  a  certain  section  have  recorded  what  they
themselves  have  heard  without  addressing  themselves
either  to  censure  or  approbation.

1  See  Note  A  at  end.
B.  1


2  A  traveller's  narrative.

p.  2.  Now  since  these  various  accounts  are  recorded
in  other  pages,  and  since  the  setting  forth  thereof
would  lead  to  prolixity,  therefore  what  relates  to  the
history  of  this  matter  (sought  out  with  the  utmost
diligence  during  the  time  of  my  travels  in  all  parts
of  Persia,  whether  far  or  near,  from  those  without
and  those  within,  from  friends  and  strangers),  and
that  whereon  the  disputants  are  agreed,  shall  be
briefly  set  forth  in  writing,  so  that  a  summary  of
the  facts  of  the  case  may  be  at  the  disposal  of  those
who  are  athirst  after  the  fountain  of  knowledge  and
who  seek  to  become  acquainted  with  all  events.

The  B4b  was  a  young  merchant  of  the  Pure
Lineage^i  He  was  born  iiTthe^year  one  thousand  two
hundred  and  thirty-five  [a.  h.]  on  the  first  day  of
Muharram^,  and  when  after  a  few  years  his  father
Seyyid  Muhammad  Rizd  died,  he  was  brought  up  in

P;  3-  ShMz  in  the  arms  of  his  maternal  uncle  MiXZ^S^gyyid.
'Ali^  the  merchant.  On  attaining  inaturityhe_engaged
in  trade  in  Bushire,  first  in  partnership  with  his
maternal  uncle  and  afterwards  independently.  On
account  ot  wliat'was  obsCTved  m  Emhe  was  noted
for  godliness,  devoutness,  virtue,  and  piety,  and  was
regarded  in  the  sight  of  men  as  so  characterized.

1  i.e.  a  Seyyid,  or  descendant  of  the  family  of  the  Prophet.

2  October  20th, 1819  a.d. Cf.  B.  ii,  p.  993 ; and  B.  i,
p.  517-511.

3  See  Note  B  at  end.


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  3

In  the  year  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixty
[a.  h.],  whenhe  was  in  his  twenty-fifth  year',  certain
sigua..feecame  appargiiL_iiL_hig  conduct,  behaviour,
manners,  and  demeanour  whereby  it  became  evident
in  Shfr^z  that  he  had  some  conflict  in  his  mind  and
some  other  flight  beneath  his  wing.  He  began  to
speak  and  to  declare  the  rank  of  B4b-hood. Now


what  he  intended  by  the  term  ^Bdb^JGa.te]  was  this,
that  he  was  the  channel  of  grace  from  some  great
Person  still  behind  the  veil  of  glory,  who  was  the
possessor  of  countless  and  boundless  perfections,  by
whose  will  -he  moved,  and  to  the  bond  of  whose
love  he  clung.  And  in  the  first  book  which  he  wrote
in  explanation  of  the  Sura  of  Joseph^,  he  addressed
himself  in  aU  passages  to  that  Person  unseen  from
whom  he  received  help  and  grace,  sought  for  aid  in
the  arrangement  of  his  preliminaries,  and  craved  the
sacrifice  of  life  in  the  way  of  his  love.

Amongst  others  is  this  sentence  : '  0  Remnant  of
God*,  I  am  ivholly  sacrificed  to  Thee ;  I  am  content

'  Jam^di-ul-Ula  5th,  1260  a.h.  (May  23rd,  1844  A.D.lia  the
date  given  by  the  Bib  himself  in  the  Persian  Beydn  as  that
whereon  his  mission  commenced.  The  texts  referred  to  will
he  found  quoted  in  Note  C  at  end.  Cf.  also  B.  i,  pp.
507-508.

^  See  Note  D  at  end.

^  Kur'an  xii.  See  Gobineau,  pp.  146-147;  Rosen  MSS.
Arabes,  pp.  179-191;  B.  ii,  pp.  904-909.

''  See  Kazem-Beg  ii,  p.  486  and  note.

1—2


4  A  traveller's  narrative.

with  curses  in  Thy  way ;  I  crave  nought  hut  to  be
slain  in  Thy  love ;  and  God  tlie  Supreme  sufficeth  as
an  Eternal  Protection.'

He  likewise  composed  a  number  of  works  in
explanation  and elucidation of  the verses of the

p.  5.  Kur'^n,  of  sermons,  and  of  prayers  in  Arabic ;  inciting

-  ,  and  urging men  to  expect  the  appearance  of  that

Person;  and  these  books  he  named  'Inspired  Pages'

and  '  Word  of  Conscience.' But  on  investigation  it

was  discovered  that  he  laid  no  claim  to  revelation

' from  an  angel.

Now  since  he  was  noted  amongst  the  people  for
lack  of  instruction  and  education,  this  circumstance
appeared  in  the  sight  of  men  supernatural.  ""Some
men  inclined  to  him,  but  the  greater  part  manifested
strong  disapproval ;  whilst  all  the  learned  doctors
and  lawyers  of  repute  who  occupied  chairs,  altars,
and  pulpits  were  unanimously  agreed  on  eradication
and  suppression,  save  some  divines  of  the  Sheyklii"
party  who  were  anchorites  and  recluses,  and  who,
agreeably  to  their  tenets,  were  ever  seeking  for
some  great,  incomparable,  and  trustworthy  person,

p.  6.  whom  they  accounted,  according  to  their  own  ter-
minology, as  the  'Fourth  Supiiorf  and  the  central


1  See  Gobineau,  pp.  30-32;  Kazem-Beg,  pp.  457-464;  B.  ii,
pp.  884-885  and  pp.  888-892;  and  Note  E  at  end.

2  See  Note  E  at  end.


A TRAVELLERS NARKATITE.  5

m?j2i:esT;ition of the trath? of :he Ferspiciiov.s
Re-igT-on''.

Ot"  Thif  mimber  Mulln  HiiseTO  of  Biislirawevli,
M:r;d  Ahmad  of  Azirhand.  M;;::-  S.dik  'M-i^addai
;-The  Holy' J.  Sheykh  Abu  Turiib  of  Aslirahar^i.
ill;:!;-  Yujiif  of  Ardabil.  Miilla  JaM  of  rr^nnirya.
MuL:!  M:ilid:  of  K:>-d,  Sheykh  Si^'id  :he  Indian.
Mr^l.'.  'Ah  of  Bij;a2E.  and  :he  like  of  these  came
or.:  r.uTO  him  and  spread  themse've^  :":ir?"ih  all
i'>ar:s  of  Fersiri'.

The  Bab  r,i:r-<elf  >e:  our  to  perfonn  the  circnm-
;-iii:brJ;inon  of  the  H  ">e  of  God'.  On  his  letum.
irhen  the  news .  f  his  airival :;:  Biisiiire  reached  Sliir-.t;.
there  w;^.j  much  disov.ssion.  and  a  str.t::ice  excite-
ment cird  a_-it.t:ion  became  apparent  in  that  city.
The  ZTe:'.t  m;^;. rity  of  the  doctors  srt  theEiseives  to  p.
"epv.viiate  him.  de^reei--:;-  slaughter  and  d.estrtction.
and  they  indtioed  H-.tsr>T;  Khan  -4  "'-iJ  .-?- j.s.^f.  who
was  the  governor  of  F;irs.  to  intict  a  bvarhic  on  the
Babs  mis.sion?.rie-.  that  is  on  Mtlla  S..dik  31:1-
X'.j-M i^  :  the",  h^vin,:  burnt  his  ::iot:st:t:hes  and
ieard  t?;;ther  with  th.ose  of  Mirzc^  Mnhammad  "Ah
of  Barntrtsh  and M ril.- 'Al: Atbar of  Ardistc^n.

-  i.e.  liic  nelidon  .^:  Isl^in.

-  For  a  izz-^ii  aecoani  of  some  o:  ihesi  v-erscn;  ^«  >'::<:

*  i.e.  ;-ir  ril^lnis^e  ;o  Mecca. s~  Sjze—B;-  i.  p.  344
j.-z5  !i::c  :  ana  s.ls.'*  X^^'c  G  at  end.


6  A  traveller's  narrative.

they  put  halters  on  all  the  three  and  led  them  round
the  streets  and  bazaars.

Now  since  the  doctors  of  Persia  have  no  ad-
ministrative capacity,  they  thought  that  violence  and
interference  would  cause  extinction  and  silence  and
lead  to  suppression  and  oblivion ;  whereas  interference
in  matters  of  conscience  causes  stability  and  firmness-
and  attracts  the  attention  of  men's  sight  and  souls  ;
which  fact  has  received  experimental  proof  many
times  and  often.  So  this  punishment  caused  notoriety,
and  most  men  fell  to  making  enquiry.

The  governor  of  F4rs,  acting  according  to  that
which  the  doctors  deemed  expedient,  sent  several
horsemen  \  caused  the  B4b  to  be  brought  before  him,
censured  and  blamed  him  in  the  presence  of  the
doctors  and  scholars,  and  loosed  his  tongue  in  the
demand  for  reparation.  And  when  the  B4b  returned
his  censure  and  withstood  him  greatly,  at  a  sign
from  the  president  they  struck  him  a  violent  blow,
insulting  and  contemning  him,  in  such  wise  that  his
turban  fell  from  his  head  and  the  mark  of  the  blow
was  apparent  on  his  face.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
meeting  they  decided  to  take  counsel,  and,  on  re-
ceiving bail  and  surety  from  his  maternal  uncle
HAjf  Seyyid  'Ali,  sent  him  to  his  house  forbidding
him  to  hold  intercourse  with  relations  or  strangers.

'  See  Note  G  at  end,  and  Kazem-Beg  i,  pp.  346-348.


A TRAVELLER  S NARRATIVE.  7

One  day  they  summoned  him  to  the  mosque
urging  and  constraining  him  to  recant,  but  he
discoursed  from  the  pulpit  in  such  wise  as  to  silence
and  subdue  those  present  and  to  stabhsh  and
strengthen  his  followers.  It  was  then  supposed  that  p.|9.
he  claimed  to  be  the  medium  of  grace  from  His
Highness  the  Lord  of  the  Age'  (upon  him  be  peace);
but  afterwards  it  became  known  and  evident  that  his
meaning  was  the  Gate-hood  [Bdbiyyat]  of  another
city  and  the  mediumship  of  the  graces  of  another
person  whose  qualities  and  attributes  were  contained
in  his  books  and  treatises.

At  all  events,  as  has  been  mentioned,  by  reason
of  the  doctors'  lack  of  experience  and  skill  in  ad-
ministrative science,  and  the  continual  succession
of  their  decisions,  comment  was  rife ;  and  their
interference  with  the  Bd,b  cast  a  clamour  throughout
Persia,  causing  increased  ardour  in  friends  and  the
coming  forward  of  the  hesitating.  For  by  reason  of
these  occurrences  men's  interest  increased,  and  in
all  parts  of  Persia  some  [of  God's]  servants  inclined
toward  him,  until  the  matter  acquired  such  import-  p- 10.
ance  that  the  late  king  Muhammad  Shd,h  delegated
a  certain  person  named  Seyyid  Yahyd  of  Ddr4b^,
who  was  one  of  the  best  known  of  doctors  and
Seyyids  as  well  as  an  object  of  veneration  and  con-

1  See  Kazem-Beg  i,  p.  345  and  note.
^  See  Note  H  at  end.


8  A  traveller's  narrative.

fidence,  giving  him  a  horse  and  money  for  the  journey
so  that  he  might  proceed  to  ShMz  and  personally
investigate  this  matter.

When  the  above-mentioned  Seyyid  arrived  at
Shfr4z  he  interviewed  the  B4b  three  times.  In  the
first  and  second  conferences  questioning  and  an-
swering took  place ;  in  the  third  conference  he  re-
quested a  commentary  on  the  Siira  called  Kawthar\
and  when  the  B4b,  without  thought  or  reflection,
wrote  an  elaborate  commentary  on  the  Kawthar
in  his  presence,  the  above-mentioned  Se)^id  was
charmed  and  enraptured  with  him,  and  straightway,
without  consideration  for  the  future  or  anxiety  about
the  results  of  this  affection,  hastened  to  Buriljird  to
p.  11.  his  father  Seyyid  Ja'far,  known  as  Kashfi,  and  ac-
quainted him  with  the  matter.  And,  although  he
was  wise  and  prudent  and  was  wont  to  have  regard
to  the  requirements  of  the  time,  he  wrote  without
fear  or  care  a  detailed  account  of  his  observations  to
Mfrzd  Lutf  'Alf  the  chamberlain  in  order  that  the
latter  might  submit  it  to  the  notice  of  the  late  king,
while  he  himself  journeyed  to  all  parts  of  Persia,  and
in  every  town  and  station  summoned  the  people  from
the  pulpit-tops  in  such  wise  that  other  learned
doctors  decided  that  he  must  be  mad,  accounting  it
a  sure  case  of  bewitchment.

'  Kur'an,  cviii.


A  traveixee's  narrative.  9

Now  when  the  news  of  the  decisions  of  the  doctors
and  the  outcry  and  clamour  of  the  lawyers  reached
Zanjdn,  Mull4  Muhammad  'Alf  the  divine',  who  was
a  man  of  mark  possessed  of  penetrating  speech,  sent
one  of  those  on  whom  he  could  rely  to  ShMz  to
investigate  this  matter.  This  person,  having  ac-  p.  12.
quainted  himself  with  the  details  of  these  occurrences
in  such  wise  as  was  necessary  and  proper,  returned
with  some  [of  the  B^b's]  writings.  When  the  divine
heard  how  matters  were  and  had  made  himself  ac-
quainted with  the  writings,  notwithstanding  that  he
was  a  man  expert  in  knowledge  and  noted  for  pro-
found research,  he  went  mad  and  became  crazed  as
was  predestined :  he  gathered  up  his  books  in  the
lecture-room  saying,  "  The  season  of  spring  and  wine
has  arrived,"  and  littered  this  sentence: — "_§earch^l
for  knowledge  after  reaching  the  hnown  is  culpable."
"TheF  fi-oni~tlie~siimmit  of  the  pulpit  he  summonea
and  directed  all  his  disciples  [to  embrace  the  doc-
trine], and  wrote  to  the  BAb  his  own  declaration  and
confession.

The  Bd,b  in  his  reply  signified  to  him  the  obliga-
tion of  congregational  prayer.

Although  the  doctors  of  Zanjdn  arose  with  heart
and  soul  to  exhort  and  admonish  the  people  they  p.  13.
could  effect  nothing. Finally  they  were  compelled  to

1  Full  accounts  of  this  remarkable  man  will  be  found  in
Gobineau  (pp.  233-252)  and  Kazem-Beg  ii  (pp.  198-224).


10  A  traveller's  narrative.

go  to  Teherdn  and  made  their  complaint  before  the
late  king  Muhammad  Sh^h,  requesting  tliat  Mullu
Muhammad  'Alf  might  he  summorjed  tf;  Teherdn.
So  the  royal  order  went  forth  that  he  should  appear.

Now  when  he  came  to  Teheran  they  brought  him
before  a  conclave  of  the  doctors  ;  but,  so  they  relate,
after  many  controversies  and  disputations  nought
was  effected  with  him  in  that  assembly.  The  late
king  therefore  bestowed  on  him  a  staff  and  fifty
tumdns'  for  his  expenses,  and  gave  him  permission  to
return.

At  all  events,  this  news  being  disseminated  through
all  parts  and  regions  of  Persia,  and  several  proselytes
p,  14.  arriving  in  FArs,  tlje  doctors  perceived  that  the  matter
had  acquired  importance,  that  the  power  to  deal  with
it  had  e.scaped  from  their  liands,  and  tfiat  imprison-
ment, beating,  tormenting,  and  contumely  were  fruit-
less. .So  they  signified  to  the  govenior  of  F^r-i,
^  Huse}!!  Khin,  "  If  thou  desire-t  the  extinction  of
')  thisJirej_or  seekest  a  firm  stopper  for  this  rent  and
di.srui)tion,  an  immediate  f;ure  and  decisive  remedy  is
to  kill  the  B4b.  And  the  B4b  has  assemblefl  a  great
host  and  meditates  a  rising."

So  Huseyn  KliAn  ordered  'Abdu'l-Hamfd  KliAn
the  high  con-table  to  attack  the  house  of  the  B^b's

1  At  the  present  time  this  would  b«  equivalent  to  ahout
£1.5,  but  at  the  time  referred  to  it  would  be  considerably  more
— probably  more  than  £20.


11

maternal  uncle  at  midnight  on  all  sides,  and  to  bring
him  and  all  his  followers  hand-cuffed.  But  'Abdu'l-
Hamid  Iviian  and  his  hosts  found  uo  one  in  the  house
save  the  Bab.  his  maternal  uncle,  and  Se>}"id  Kazim
of  Zanjan ;  and  as  it  chanced  that  on  tliat  night  the
siokness  of  the  plapie  and  the  extreme  heat  of  the  p.  13.
werither  had  compelleil  HusejTi  Kh;iu  to  flee,  he
released  the  Bab  on  condition  of  his  quitniig  the
city  .

On  the  morning  after  that  night  the  B;ib  with
Seyrid  Kiidm  of  Zanjan  set  out  froiu  Shiraz  for  Isfa-
_harL  Before  reaching  Isfahan  he  wrote  a  letter  to  the
Jilrtiir.adu  d-Daichi.  the  governor  of  the  province.
requesting  a  lodging  in  some  stiitable  place  with  the
s;uiction  of  the  government.  The  governor  appointed
the  mansion  of  the  Imam-Jiuua.  There  he  abode
forry  days ;  and  one  day.  agreeably  to  the  request  of
the  Im;ini.  he  wrote  without  retiection  a  comn.enT;'.ry
on  [the  S'-i-a  ,il  Wa'l-Ap-'  before  the  c-'ii;p;\uy.
When  this  news  reached  the  ^lu'taiimJ  he  soaght  an
interview  with  him  and  quesTioued  him  concerning
the  ■  Sprdal  Mission.'  At  that  same  interview  an
answer  pro\"ing  the  '  Special  Mission  '  was  written^

The  Mu'tjmaJ  then  g^i^ve orders that  all  the  p.  lo.
doctors  shov.Id  assemMe  and  dispute  with  liim  in  one

•  See  Xote  I  at  end.

'  Kur"an,  ciii.

^  See  Xote  I  at  end.


12  A  traveller's  narrative.

conclave,  and  that  the  discussion  should  be  faith-
fully recorded  without  alteration  by  the  instrumen-
tality of  his  private  secretary,  in  order  that  it  might
be  sent  to  TeherAn,  and  that  whatever  the  royal  edict
and  decree  should  ordain  might  be  carried  out.

The  doctors,  however,  considering  this  arrange-
ment as  a  weakening  of  the  Law,  did  not  agree,  but
held  a  conclave  and  wrote,  "  If  there  be  doubt  in  the
matter  there  is  need  of  assembly  and  discussion,  but
as  this  person's  disagreement  with  the  most  luminous
Law  is  clearer  than  the  sun  therefore  the  best  possible
thing  is  to  put  in  practice  the  sentence  of  the  Law."

The  Mu'tamad  then  desired  to  hold  the  assembled
conference  in  his  own  presence  so  that  the  actual
truth  might  be  disclosed  and  hearts  be  at  peace,
but  these  learned  doctors  and  honourable  scholars,
p.  17.  unwilling  to  bring  the  Perspicuous  Law  into  con-
tempt, did  not  approve  discussion  and  controversy
with  a  young  merchant,  with  the  exception  of  that
most  erudite  sage  Ak4  Muhammad  Mahdf,  and  that
eminent  Platonist  Mfrz4  Hasan  of  Niir'.  So  the
conference  terminated  in  questionings  on  certain
points  relating  to  the  science  of  fundamental  dogma,
and  the  elucidation  and  analysis  of  the  doctrines  of
MuM  SadrA^ So,  as  no  conclusion  was  arrived  at

1  See  Note  J  at  end.

2  For  some  account  of  this  great  philosopher  see  Gobineau,
pp.  80-90,  and  Note  K  at  end.


A  traveller's  narrative.  13

by  the  governor  from  this  conference,  the  severe  sen-
tence and  harsh  decision  of  the  learned  doctors  was
not  carried  out ;  but,  anxious  to  abate  the  great
anxiety  quickly  and  prevent  a  public  tumult  effec-
tually, he  gave  currency  to  a  report  that  a  decree  had
been  issued  ordering  the  Bdb  to  be  sent  to  Teherdn
in  order  that  some  decisive  settlement  might  be
arrived  at,  or  that  some  courageous  divine  might  be
able  to  confute  [him].

He  accordingly  sent  him  forth  from  Isfahan  with  a  p.  18.
company  of  his  own  mounted  body-guard  ;  but  when
they  reached  Milrch6-Khilr'  he  gave  secret  orders  for
his  return  to  Isfahan,  where  he  aiforded  him  a  refuge
and  asylum  in  his  own  roofed  private  quarters";  and
not  a  soul  save  the  confidential  and  trusty  dependents
of  the  Mu'tamad  knew  aught  of  the  Bd.b.

A  period  of  four  months  passed  in  this  fashion,
and  the  Mu'tamad  passed  away  to  the  mercy  of  God.
Gurgin  Khdn,  the  Mu'tamad' s  nephew,  was  aware  of
the  B4b's  being  in  the  private  apartments,  and  repre-
sented the  matter  to  the  Prime  Minister.  Hdji  Mfrzd.
Akdsl,  that celebrated  minister,  issued  a  decisive

1  Miirche-Khiir  is  the  second  stage  out  from  Isfahan  on  the
north  road,  and  is  distant  about  35  miles  therefrom.

^  The  building  to  which  the  Bab  was  thus  transferred  is
called  in  the  Tarikh-i-Jadid  't}ie  Royal  Building  of  the  Sun'
( jUaL.  xi,jj>.  OjUe).  In  the  Persian Beyan  {Vdhid  ii,  ch.  16)
the  Bab  alludes  to  his  dweUing-place  at  Isfahan  under  the
name  of  jj^  OjUe.


14  A  traveller's  narrative.

command  and  gave  instructions  tliat  they  should
send  the  B4b  secretly  in  disguise  under  the  escort  of
Nuseyri"  horsemen  to  the  capital.
p.><i.  When  he  reached  Kindr-i-gird"  a  fresh  order  came
from  the  Prime  Minister  appointing  the  village  of
Kalfn^  as  an  abode  and  dwelling-place.  There  he
remained  for  a  period  of  twenty  days.  After  that,
the  B4b  forwarded  a  letter  to  the  Royal  Presence
craving  audience  to  set  forth  the  truth  of  his  con-
dition, expecting  this  to  be  a  means  for  the  attain-
ment of  great  advantages.  The  Prime  Minister  did
not  admit  this,  and  made  representation  to  the  Royal
Presence  :— "  The  royal  cavalcade  is  on  the  point  of
starting,  and  to  engage  in  such  matters  as  the  present

1  The  Nuseyri  religion  is  prevalent  amongst  many  of  the
llydt  or  wandering  tribes  of  Persia.  An  interesting  account  of
the  secret  doctrines  and  practices  of  this  sect  by  one  Suleym&u
Efendi  al-Adhani,  who  had  withdrawn  himself  from  it  sub-
sequently to  his  initiation,  has  been  published  at  Beyrout

under  the  title  of  iUl j|_^i ,_i5' J ajt»jj| i_,yijl ,^'cf

i^joJI.  A  very  comprehensive  account  of  this  work  by  E.  E.
Salisbury  may  be  found  in  the  Journal  of  the  American
Oriental  Society  for  1866  (vol.  viii,  pp.  227— .308).  See  also  de
Sacy's  Expose  de  la  Religion  des  Druzes,  vol.  ii,  pp.  559 — 586.

=  A  station  on  the  old  Isfahan  road  (now  abandoned  for
one  bearing  more  towards  the  west)  distant  about  28  miles
from  Teheran.

3  "  Nom  de  la  premiere  station  que  rencontre  le  voyageur
en  allant  de  Eey  a  Khowar."  Barbier  de  Meynard,  Diction-
naire  GSog.  Hist,  et  Litt.  de  la  Perse  (Paris,  1861).


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  15

\vill  conduce  to  the  disruption  of  the  kingdom.
Xeither  is  there  any  doubt  that  the  most  notable
doctors  of  the  capital  also  will  behave  after  the
fashion  of  the  doctors  of  Isfahan,  which  thing  will  be
the  cause  of  a  popular  outbreak,  or  that,  according  to
the  religion  of  the  immaculate  Im^m,  they  will  regard  p-  20.
the  blood  of  this  Seyyid  as  of  no  account,  yea,  as
more  lawful  than  mother's  milk.  The  imperial  train
is  prepared  for  travel,  neither  is  there  hindrance  or
impediment  in  view.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
presence  of  the  Bd,b  will  be  the  cause  of  the
gravest  trouble  and  the  greatest  mischief.  There-
fore, on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  the  wisest  plan
is  this : — to  place  this  person  in  the  Castle  of
M4kii  during  the  period  of  absence  of  the  royal
train  from  the  seat  of  the  imperial  throne,  and  to
defer  the  obtaining  of  an  audience  to  the  time  of
return."

Agreeably  to  this  view  a  letter  was  issued  ad-
dressed to  the  Bdb  in  his  Majesty's  own  writing,  and,
according  to  the  traditional  account  of  the  tenour
of  this  letter,  the  epitome  thereof  is  this  : —

(After  the  titles).  "Since  the  royal  train  is  on
the  verge  of  departure  from  Teherdn,  to  meet  in  a  p.  21.
befitting  manner  is  impossible.  Do  you  go  to  MAkA
and  there  abide  and  rest  for  a  while,  engaged  in
praying  for  our  victorious  state ;  and  we  have  ar-
ranged that  under  all  circumstances  they  shall  shew


IG  A TllAVELLEIl's NARRATIVE.

you  attention  and  respect.  When  we  return  from
travel  we  will  summon  you  spoinally."

After  this  they  sent  him  off  with  several  mounted
guards  (amongst  them  Muhammad  Beg,  tlie  <'iiurier)
to  Tabriz  and  MilkiV.

Besides  this  the  followers  of  the  BAb  recount
certain  messages  conveyed  [from  him]  by  the  instru-
mentality of  Muhammad  Beg  (amongst  which  was
a  promise  to  heal  the  foot  of  the  late  king,  Imt  on
condition  of  an  interview,  and  the  suppression  of
the  tyranny  of  the  majority),  and  the  Prime  Minis-
ter's prevention  of  the  conveyance  of  these  letters
to  the  Royal  Presence.  For  he  hims(tlf  laid  claim
to  be  a  spiritual  guide  and  was  prepared  to  perform
p.  22.  the  functions  of  religious  directorship.  But  others
deny  these  accounts.

At  all  events  in  the  course  of  the  journey  he
wrote  a  letter  to  tlj£_lidmc  Minister,  saying,  "You
summoned  me  from  Isfahiin  to  meet  the  doctors  and
for  the  attainment  of  a  decisive  settlement.  What
has  happened  now  that  this  excellent  intention  has
been  changed  for  Milkft  and  Tabriz?"

Although  he  remained  forty  days  in  the  city  of
Tabriz  the  learned  d(jctors  did  not  condescend  to
approach  him  and  did  not  deem  it  right  to  meet  iiim.
Then  they  sent  him  off'  to  the  tJastlc  of  Milku,  and
for  nine  montlis  lodged  liim  in  the  inui'cessible  castle

' Ki;(j  Noto  L  at  end.


A TRAVELLERS XARRATIVE.  17

which  is  situated  on  the  summit  of  that  lofty  moun-
tain. And  'Ah  Khdn  of  Md,kiiS  because  of  his  ex-
essive  love  for  the  family  of  the  Prophet,  paid  him
uch  attention  as  was  possible,  and  gave  permission
[to  some  persons]  to  converse  vrith  him.

Now  when  the  accomplished  divines  of  Azar-
baijAn  perceived  that  in  all  the  parts  round  about
Tabriz  it  jvas  as  though  the  last  day  had  come  by
reason  of  the  excessive  clamour,  they  requested  the
government  to  punish  the  [Bdb's]  followers,  and  tn
remove  the  Bdb  to  the  Castle  of  Chihrik.  So  they
sent  him  to  that  castle  and  consigned  him  to  the
keeping  of  Yahyd  Kh^n  the  Kurd'.

Glory  be  to  God !  Notwithstanding  these  deci-
sions of  great  doctors  and  reverend  lawyers,  and
severe  punishments  and  reprimands — beatings,  ban-
ishments, and  imprisonments — on  the  part  of  gover-
nors, this  sect  was  daily  on  the  increase,  and  the
discussion  and  disputation  was  such  that  in  meetings
and  assemblies  in  all  parts  of  Persia  there  was  no,  con-
'\  versation  but  on  this  topic.  Great  was  the  commotion
which  arose  :  the  doctors  of  the  Perspicuous  Kehgion
were  lamenting,  the  common  folk  clamorous  and
agitated,  and  the  Friends  rejoicing  and  applaiiding.

But  the  Bdb  himself  attached  no  importance  to

this  uproar  and  tumult,  and,  alike  on  the  road  and

in  the  castles  of  Mdkii and  Chihrik,  evening  and

'  See  Note  L  at  end.

B.  2


18  A  traveller's  narrative.

morning,  nay,  day  and  night,  in  extremest  rapture
and  amazement,  he  would  restrict  himself  to  repeat-
ing and  meditating  on  the  qualities  and  attributes
of  that  absent-yet-present,  regarded-and-regarding
Person  of  his'.  Thus  he  makes  a  mention  of  him
whereof  this  is  the  purport : —

"  Though  the  ocean  of  woe  rageth  on  every  side,
and  the  bolts  of  fate  follow  in  quick  succession,  and
the  darknesses  of  griefs  and  afflictions  invade  soul
and  body,  yet  is  my  heart  brightened  by  the  remem-
brance of  Thy  countenance  and  my  soul  is  as  a  rose-
garden  from  the  perfume  of  Thy  nature."

In  short,  after  he  had  remained  for  three  months
in  the  Castle  of  Chihrik,  the  eminent  doctors  of
p.  2^.  Tabriz  and  scholars  of  Azarbaij4n  wrote  to  Teheran
and  demanded  a  severe  punishment  in  regard  to  the
B4b  for  the  intimidation  and  frightening  of  the  people,
1  When  the  Prime  Minister  H4jl  Mi'rzii  Ak4si  beheld
the  ferment  and  clamour  of  the  learned  doctors  in  all
districts  of  Persia,  he  perforce  became  their  accomplice
and  ordered  him to be  brought  from Chihrik  to

1  As  I  have  pointed  out  in  another  place  (B.  ii,  pp.  924-927),
one  of  the  most  striking  features  of  the  Persian  Bey4n,  com-
posed by  the  B&b  during  his  imprisonment  at  Makti  (which  he
repeatedly  alludes  to  as  'the  Mountain  of  M'  ^  jj»),  is  the
continual  reference  to  '  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest '  (s ^^t,  ^
J|V  whose  precursor  the  Bab  considered  himself  to  be.  The
work  translated  by  Gobineau  (op.  cit.  p.  461  et  seq.)  under  the
title  of  Livre  des  Preceptes  also  affords  ample  evidence  of  this.


A  traveller's  narrative.  1

Tabriz.  In  the  course  of  his  transit  by  UrAniiy]
the  governor  of  the  district  Kdsim  Mfrzd.  treated  hi
with  extraordinary  deference,  and  a  strange  flockii
together  of  high  and  low  was  apparent.  These  co:
ducted  themselves  with  the  utmost  respectfulness'.
When  the  E4b  reached  Tabriz  they  brought  hi
after  some  days  before  the  government  tribunal.  <
the  learned  doctors  the  Nizdmu  'l-'Ulam4,  Mul
Muhammad M&m&k&ni, MinA  Ahmad  the Imdi


'  Dr  Wright  of  the  American  Mission  at  Unimiyya  wrot<
hrief  account  of  the  Bab  and  his  sect  which  was  commui
cated  by  Mr  Perkins  to  the  German  Oriental  Society  and  pu
lished  in  their  transactions  for  the  year  1851.  This  accoui
dated  March  31st,  1851,  fully  confirms  the  statement  h<
made.  After  describing  briefly  the  rise  of  the  sect,  the  am
of  the  Bab,  his  imprisonment  at  M4ku  (..."a  remote  distr
six  days'  journey  from  Unimiyya  situated  on  the  Turki
frontier"),  his  transference  to  Chihrik  (..."near  Salmis,  or
two  days'  journey  from  Unimiyya"),  and  the  conflicts  betwe
the  Babis  and  the  orthodox  party,  especially  in  Mazandars
he  says: — "Die  Sache  wurde  so  ernsthaft,  dass  die  Eegieru
den  Befehl  erliess,  den  Sectenstifter  naoh  Tabriz  zu  bring
und  ihm  die  Bastonade  zu  geben,  seine  Sehiiler  aber  libera
wo  man  sie  fande,  aufzugreifen  und  mit  Geld-  und  Kbrpi
strafen  zu  belegen.  Auf  dem  Wege  nach  Tabriz  wurde  B
nach  Orumia  gebracht,  wo  ihn  der  Statthalter  mit  besondei
Aufmerksamkeit  behandelte  und  viele  Personen  die  Erlaubni
erhielten,  ihn  zu  besuchen.  Bei  einer  Gelegenheit  war  ei
Menge  Leute  bei  ihm,  und  wie  der  Statthalter  naohher  I
merkte,  waren  diese  alle  geheimnissvoU  bewegt  und  braoh
in  Thranen  aus."  {Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandisch
Gesellschaft,  vol.  v,  pp.  384-385.)

9 9


20  A TRAVKI,IJ0R'S NAIiUATIVE.


p.  26.  Jiiin'a,  MfrzA  'Alf  A.sghar  the  Slicykliu  'I-IhIAiii,  iind'
several  otlier  divineH  were  present'.  'I'hoy  askcn),
concerning  the  cl.iinis  of  tlie  Bflb.  He  iulvancoil  tlie
claim  0^ Mahdf-hood  ;  whereon  a  mighty  tumult  arose.
Eminent  doctors  in  overwhelmingmightconi])ii-ssc<i  liini,
on  all  sides,  and  such  was  thc^  onset  oC  orthodoxy  tliat
it  had  been  no  great  wonder  if  a  mere  youth  had  not
withstood  the  mountain  of  Elhurz.  'J'hcy  ilemanch'd,
proof.  Without  Jiesitation  he.  recited  tcvxts,  saying,
"This  is  the  permanent  ;iiid  most  miglity  iir-oof."
They  criticised  his  grammar.  Ih^  adduced  ;i.rgiiments
from  the  Kur'iin,  setting  forth  tlierefrom  instances  of
similar  infractions  of  the  rules  of  grammar.  So  tlic
assembly  broke  up  and  the  Biib  returned  to  his  own
dwelling.
-~  jrhe  heaven-cradled  Crown-l'rince"' vv;is at thai

p.  27.  time  governor  of  Azarljaijiin.  He  jironounced  no
sentence  with  regard  to  the  Bab,  nor  did  lie  desire  to
interfere  with  him.  The  doctors,  however,  coiisideriMl
it  advisable  at  h;ast  to  inflict  a  severe  chastisement,
and  beating  was  decided  on.  Hut  none  of  tlie  corjis
oi  farrushes'  would  agree  to  hei:i)ni(!  tlie  iMstruir](nits
of  the  infliction  of  this  punishment.  Ho  Mfrz^  'Alf
/ Asghar the Sheykhu 'l-lsliim. who  was  one  of  the

'  See  Note  M  at  cmi.

'■^  N4Hiru'd-Din,  the  iJiraent  liing  of  T'ciHia.
'  The  fnrriinli  {hti-m\iy  rar/ifl-K/irnidri)  ifi  tlif  licUjr  of  tlie
East.


A traveller's yARRATIVE.  fl

noble  Se^^idf.  bro\xglir  biin  to  his  om.ii  liOv.>e  and
lipplieil  the  nxi^  with  lii>  own  hand.  After  this,  they
:~ent  the  Bab  back  to  Qiihrik  and  ^.■.bjected  him  to  a
>tri(;t  eoufinement.

Xc'W  w-hen  the  news  of  this  beating,  ch;\srlsemen:.
imprisonments  and  rigour  reached  all  i.arts  of  Persia.
learned  divine^  and  e^Teeu:eli  latr\-ers  who  were  pos-
sessed of  powffl-  and  influence  girt  up  the  1  'ii->  cf
eudeavonr  for  the  eradioatiou  and  suppression  of  iliis
>ei-T.  exerting  their  nt.most  effon^  tlierefor.  And
they  wrote  notice  of  their  deoisioi!.  t-o  wit  ""that;
tins  per>ou  and  his  follower^  are  in  flh^olvirr'  error
and  iirejiurtfiil  to  Church  and  SiaTe.  "  And  since
the  governor-  in  Persia  enjoyed  the  fallesi  au-
thoriTv.  in  >oiiie  p^OTiIlce^  tliey  followed  this  dooisiou
and  nuired  in  uprooting  and  dispersing  the  Bab:s.
But  the  late  King  Mnhamuifld  Shah  acted  withdeh-
t>eratiou  in  this  matter,  relleetiug.  "This  yo;::;:  i?  of
the  Pure  Lineage  and  of  the  family  of  him  addressed
with  'irtrt i:  i,,-t for  t^'t'.' So  long  as  no  offen-

^  For  an  admirable  sietA  of  the  characters  of  liiis  monirdi
and  his  nii;-.:sier  Haj:  Mirzs  Ati.-:.  see  G-obineau.  pp.  l^ft-lf'!?.
Conoeming  the  laner  see  also  W.4Tfci:'~  Hiftori/  cj  Pcrf^u,
p.  "2^^.

-  See  note  1  ai  foot  of  pi.  i  In  a  very  well-known  tra-ii-
tion  God  is  said  to  have  addressed  the  Prophet  Muiianimaa  as
follows: — i'>iV'  i.--i'.^  »  ;;V  .  SlV  »^  'Were  it  not  fc^-  1.ht£  I
'.J.J  nor  CTcMed  the  fearen*.'  Hence  "the  family  of  him
^dressed with -were .; no!  jor :\::'" :::e.ii".s sinpl.T the


22  A  traveller's  narrative.

sive  actions  which  are  incompatible  with  the  public
peace  and  well-being  proceed  from  him,  the  govern-
ment should  not  interfere  with  him."  And  whenever
the  learned  doctors  appealed  to  him  from  the  sur-
rounding districts,  he  either  gave  no  answer,  or  else
commanded  them  to  act  with  deliberation.

Notwithstanding  this,  between  eminent  doctors

p.  29.  and  illustrious  scholars  and  those  learned  persons  who
were  followers  of  the  B4b  opposition,  discussion,  and
strife  did  so  increase  that  in  some  provinces  they
desired  [to  resort  to]  mutual  imprecation  ;  and  for
the  governors  of  the  provinces,  too,  TTffeans  of  ac-
quiring gain  was  produced,  so  that~gfeat  tumuK~and
disturbance  arose.  And  since  the  TnaFady  of  the
gout  had  vfolently  attacked  the  king's  foot  and
occupied  his  world-ordering  thought,  the  good  judge-
ment of  the  Chief  Minister,  the  famous  Hdji  Mirzii
Akdsi ',  became  the  pivot  of  the  conduct  of  afiikirs,
and  his  incapacity  and  lack  of  resource  became  ap-
parent as  the  sun.  For  every  hour  he  formed  a  new
opinion  and  gave  a  new  order :  at^  one  moment  he
would  seek  tojupportjthedecision  of  the  doctors,  ac-
counting the  eradication ^nd  suppression  of  tiie~BSbis
ag_necessary :  at  another  jime  he  would  charge  the

p.  30.  doctors  with  aggressiveness^  regarding  undue  inter-
descendants  of  the  Prophet,  amongst  whom  the  Bab,  in  his
capacity  of  Seyyid,  must  be  reckoned.
1  See  note  1  at  foot  of  preceding  page.


A  traveller's  narrative.  23

ference  as  contrary  to  justice:  at  another  time  he
would  become  a  mystic  amTsay,  'All  these  voices  are
from  tlie  King^,'  or  repeat  with  his  tongue,  'Moses  is
at  war  with  Moses','  or  recite, '  This  is  nought  hit  TTiy

'  The  distich  of  which  this  is  the  first  hemistich  is  a  gieat
favourite  with  the  Sfifls.  It  occurs  in  the  first  hook  of  the
Masnavi  of  Jalalu'd-Din  Edmi  in  the  8th  story  (Story  of  the
Harper).  Different  editions  present  considerable  variants  in
the  first  hemistich,  and  in  no  one  of  the  four  which  I  have
consulted  does  it  stand  as  here  quoted.  In  the  Bombay
edition  of  A.  H.  1290  (p.  50, 1.  20),  the  Teheran  edition  of  A.H.
1299  known  as  'AU'ud-Dawla's  (p.  51,  1.  4),  and  a  Constanti-
nople edition  of  the  first  book  published  in  A.H.  1288  (p.  77,
1.  20)  the  entire  couplet  stands  as  follows :

^  j^ ail j^  t}'^ J' '^J' * ■■>. *^  J'  •'.y Jb' »J' (3^
"Indeed  that  voice  is  really  from  the  King
Although  [apparently]  it  is  from  the  throat  of  'Abdu  'lldlu"

The  English  reader  may  consult  Eedhouse's  versified  trans-
lation of  Book  i  of  the  Masnavi,  p.  141,  first  two  lines.

^  This  quotation  is  also  from  the  Masnavi  [Teheran  edition
of  'Ala'ud-Dawla,  p.  65,  1.  27;  Bombay  edition,  p.  63,  1.  16].
The  couplet  stands  in  both  as  follows : —

"When  Colourlessness  became  the  captive  of  colour
A  Moses  is  at  war  with  a  Moses."
Eedhouse's  version  will  be  found  on  p.  180  of  his  work
above  quoted,  first  two  hnes.  A  complete  treatise  on  the
mysticism  of  the  Srifis  might  be  written  on  this  text,  which  is
pretty  fully  discussed  in  H4ji  MuUa  Hadi's  excellent  com-
mentary on  the  Masnavi  (Teheran  edition  of  A.H.  1285,  p.  68
and  also  in  a  marginal  note  in  'Ala'ud-Dawla's  Teheran  edition
{loc.  cit.).  In  brief  the  meaning  is  this: — that  strife  and  contest


24  A  traveller's  narrative.

trial'.'  In  short  this  changeable  minister,  by  reason  of
his  mismanagement  of  importantmatters  and  failure
to  control  andorder  tiie  afiairs  of  the  community,  so
acted  that  disturbance  and  clamour  arose  from  all^
quarters_and  directions^:  the  most  notable  and  in-
fluential of  the  doctors  ordered  the  common  folk  to
!  inolesnhe  followefr  of  thE"B4b,  "ancT  a  general  on-
(1  slaught  took  place.  More  especially  when  the  claim
oT'Mahdf-hood''  reached  the  hearing  of  eminent
divines  and  profound  doctors  they  began  to  make
lamentation  and  to  cry  and  complain  from  their
p.  31.  pulpits,  saying,  "  one  of  the  essentials  of  religion  and
of  the  authentic  traditions  transmitted  from  the  holy
Im4ms,  nay,  the  chief  basis  of  the  foundations  of  the
church  of  His  Highness  Ja'far^,  is  the  Occultation

arise  from  the  imprisonment  of  the  One  Absolute  Undifferen-
tiated Being  {'Colourlessness')  in  the  phantasmal  appearances
( '  colours ')  of  the  World  of  Plurality.  So  Jaml  says  at  the  close
of  a  very  beautiful  passage : —

"All  this  tumult  aiid  strife  in  the  world  are  from  love  of  Him;
It  hath  become  known  at  this  time  tliat  the  source  of  the  strife
is  One."
'  Kur'an  vii,  154.

^  See  note  N  at  end,  and  p.  20  supra.
*  The  Imam  Ja'far-i-Sadik,  as  he  is  commonly  called,  was
according  to  the  Shi'ite  faith,  the  sixth  of  the  twelve  Im4ms


A  traveller's  narrative.  25

of  tlie  immaculate  twelfth  ImAm  (upon  both  of  them
be  peace).  What  has  happened  to  J^bulkd'?  Where
has  Jibuls4  gone?  What  was  the  Minor  Occulta-
tion?  What  has  become  of  the  Major  Occultation?
What  are  the  sayings  of  Huseyn  ibn  Riih,  and  what

and  succeeded  his  father,  the  Imam  Muhammad  Bakir,  who
was  the  fifth  Imam.  Why  the  Shi'ites  should  speak  of  him  as
in  some  sort  the  founder  of  their  church  is  explained  thus  in  a
work  called  s»jj|  j,'lip  {Tenets  of  tite  Shi'ites)  published  in
Teheran: — "Since  His  Holiness  [the  Imam  Ja'far]  lived  at
the  end  of  the  Omayyad  and  the  beginning  of  the  'Abbasid
dynasty  and  these  two  families  were  in  conflict  with  one
another,  he  tranquilly  engaged  in  expounding  the  ordinances  of
God ;  therefore  do  men  refer  the  religion  to  him,  since  he  gave
currency  to  the  true  doctrines."

'■  For  the  explanation  of  this  and  the  subsequent  points
of  Shi'ite  belief  alluded  to  in  this  passage  see  Note  0  at  end.
The  general  tenour  of  the  argument  here  put  in  the  mouths  of
the  Shi'ite  doctors  is  this: — "That  certain  prodigies  and
marvellous  signs  shall  usher  in  the  advent  of  the  Imam  Mahdi
is  an  essential  doctrine  of  our  faith  sufficiently  confirmed  and
established  by  authentic  traditions.  If  we  believe  this,  then
we  must  reject  the  Bab's  claim  to  be  the  promised  Mahdi,
since  these  signs  have  not  been  witnessed:  in  which  case  it
behoves  us  to  inflict  on  him  the  severest  punishment.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  we  admit  the  Bab's  claim,  we  thereby  renounce
our  religion  and  become  neither  Sunnis  nor  Shi 'as;  unless,
indeed,  we  take  the  view  of  the  Babis  that  these  signs  are  to  be
understood  metaphorically,  that  no  literal  fulfilment  of  them
is  to  be  looked  for,  and  that  to  substantiate  a  claim  to  Mahdi-
hood  only  two  things  are  necessary — that  the  claimant  should
belong  to  the  family  of  the  Prophet,  and  that  he  should  be  able
to  produce  revealed  verses  similar  to  those  in  the  Kur'au."
Concerning  this  view  of  the  Babis  see  B.  ii,  pp.  915 — 918.


26  A  traveller's  narrative.

the  tradition  of  Ibn  Mihriydr  ?  What  shall  we  make
of  the  flight  of  the  Guardians  and  the  Helpers?  How
shall  we  deal  with  the  conquest  of  the  East  and  the
West  ?  Where  is  the  Ass  of  Antichrist  ?  When  will
the  appearance  of  Sofyin  be  ?  Where  are  the  signs
which  are  in  the  traditions  of  the  Holy  Family  ?
Where  is  that  whereon  the  Victorious  Church  is
agreed  ?  The  matter  is  not  outside  one  of  two  alter-
atives : — either  we  must  repudiate  the  traditions  of
p.  32.  the  Holy  Im4ms,  grow  wearied  of  the  Church  of  Ja'far,
and  account  the  clear  indications  of  the  Imdm  as  dis-
turbed dreams ;  or,  in  accordance  with  the  primary  and
subsidiary  doctrines  of  the  Faith  and  the  essential
and  explicit  declarations  of  the  most  luminous  Law,
we  must  consider  the  repudiation,  nay,  the  destruc-
tion of  this  person  as  our  chief  duty.  If  so  be
that  we  shut  our  eyes  to  these  authentic  traditions
and  obvious  doctrines  universally  admitted,  no  rem-
nant will  endure  of  the  fundamental  basis  of  the
Church  of  the  immaculate  Im4m  :  we  shall  neither
be  Sunnites,  nor  shall  we  be  of  the  prevalent  sect '  to
continue  awaiting  the  promised  Saint  and  believing
in  the  begotten  Mahdf.  Otherwise  we  must  regard
as  admissible  the  opening  of  the  Gate  of  Saintship,
and  consider  that  He  who  is  to  arise"  of  the  family  of
Muhammad  possesses  two  signs :— the  first  condition,

1  i.e.  of  the  Shi'ite  church  dominant  in  Persia.
^  i.e.  the  Imam-Mahdi. See  Note  0  at  end.


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  27

Holy  Lineage ;  the  second,  [that  he  is  divinely]  forti-
fied with  brilliant  verses.  What  can  we  do  with  these
thousand-year-old  beliefs  of  the  delivered  band  of
the  Shi'ites,  or  what  shall  we  say  concerning  their  p.  33.
profound  doctors  and  pre-eminent  divines  ?  Were  all
these  in  error  1  Did  they  journey  in  the  vale  of
transgression  ?  What  an  evidently  false  assertion  is
this !  By  God,  this  is  a  thing  to  break  the  back !
0  people,  extinguish  this  fire  and  forget  these  words  !
Alas !  woe  to  our  Faith,  woe  to  our  Law  !  "

Thus  did  they  make  complaint  in  mosques  and
chapels,  in  pulpits  and  congregations.

But  the  B&hi  chiefs  composed  treatises  against
them,  and  set  in  order  replies  according  to  their  own
thought'.  Were  these  to  be  discussed  in  detail  it
would  conduce  to  prolixity,  and  our  object  is  the
statement  of  history,  not  of  arguments  for  believing
or  rejecting ;  but  of  some  of  the  replies  the  gist  is
this  : — that  they  held  the  Proof  as  supreme,  and  the
evidence  as outweighing  traditions,  considering  the  P-  34.

1  Amongst  the  controversial  works  of  the  Babis  may  be
mentioned  especially  the  tau,  jfVj  (Seven  Proofs)  composed
by  the  Bab  himself  about  the  year  a.h.  1264-5  (a.d.  1848-49)
dnring  his  imprisonment  at  Mak^  and  the  jiij  (Assurance)
composed  by  Beha'u'Uah  in  Baghdad  in  the  year  a.h.  1278
(a.d.  1861-62).  For  a  brief  abstract  of  the  former  see  B.  ii,
pp.  912 — 918:  for  specimens  of  the  latter  carefully  and
judiciously  selected  see  Rosen's  MSS.  Permm,  pp.  32 — 51,
and  for  some  account  of  the  work  see  B.  ii,  pp.  944 — 948.


28 A  traveller's  narrative.

former  as  the  root  and  the  latter  as  the  branch,  and
saying,  "If  the  branch  agree  not  with  the  root  it
serves  not  as  an  argument  and  is  unworthy  of  re-
liance ;  for  the  reported  consequence  has  no  right  to
oppose  itself  to  the  established  principle,  and  cannot
argue  against  it."  Indeed  in  such  cases  they  regarded
interpretation  as  the  truth  of  revelation  and  the
essence  of  true  exegesis':  thus,  for  instance,  they
interpreted  the  sovereignty  of  the  Kaim  as  a  mystical
sovereignty,  and  his  conquests  as  conquests  of  the
cities  of  hearts,  adducing  in  support  of  this  the  meek-
ness and  defeat  of  the  Chief  of  Martyrs'  (may  the  Hfe
of  all  being  be  a  sacrifice  for  him).  For  he  was  the
true  manifestation  of  the  blessed  verse  'And  verily
our  host  shall  overcome  for  them^,'  yet,  notwithstand-
ing this,  he  quaffed  the  cup  of  martyrdom  with  perfect
p.  35.  meekness,  and,  at  the  very  moment  of  uttermost
defeat,  triumphed  over  his  enemies  and  became  the
most  mighty  of  the  troops  of  the  Supreme  Host.
Similarly  they  regarded  the  numerous  writings  which,
in  spite  of  his  lack  of  education,  the  B4b  had  com-
posed, as  due  to  the  promptings  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;
extracted  from  books  contrary  sayings  handed  down
by  men  of  mark ;  adduced  traditions  apparently
agreeing  with  their  objects ; and  clung  to  the  an-

1  See  Rosen's  MSS.  Persans,  p.  36,  and  B.  ii,  pp.  915 — 916.
^  Huseyn,  son  of  'All,  the  third  Imam.
3  Kur'an  xxxvii,  173.


A  traveller's  narrative.  29

nouncements  of  certain  notables  of  yore.  They  also
considered  the  conversion  of  austere  and  recluse  doc-
tors and  eminent  votaries  of  the  Perspicuous  Religion
[of  IsMm]  as  a  valid  proof",  deemed  the  steadfast-
ness and  constanc]'  of  the  Bdb  a  most  mighty  sign^,
and  related  miracles  and  the  like;  which  things,
heing  altogether  foreign  to  our  purpose,  we  have
passed  by  with  brevity,  and  will  now  proceed  with  p-  36.
our  original  topic.

At  the  time  of  these  events  certain  persons
appeared  amongst  the  Bihis  who  had  a  strange
ascendancy  and  appearance  in  the  eyes  of  this  sect.
Amongst  these  was  MirzA  Muhammad  'All  of  Mdzan-
dar^n,  who  was  the  disciple  of  the  illustrious  Seyyid
(may  God  exalt  his  station)  Hdji  Se}yid  Kdzim  of
Resht,  and  who  was  the  associate  and  companion  of
the  B4b  in  his  pilgrimage  journey.  After  a  while
certain  manners  and  states  issued  from  him  such
that  aU,  acting  with  absolute  confidence,  considered
obedience  to  him  as  an  impregnable  stronghold,  so
that  even  MuM  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh,  who  was  the
leader  of  aU  and  the  arbiter  appealed  to  alike  by  the
noble  and  the  humble  of  this  sect,  used  to  behave  in
his  presence  with  great  humility  and  with  the  self-
abasement  of  a  lowly  servant  ^

1  See  Rosen's  MSS.  Persans,  p.  41.

2  Ibid,  p.  43.

'  This  statement  is  confirmed  by  the  Tarikh-i-Jadid.


30  A  traveller's  narrative.

This  personage  set  himself  to  exalt  the  word  of
p.  37.  the  Bdb  with  the  utmost  steadfastness,  and  the  Bdb
did  full  justice  to  speech  in  praising  and  glorifying
him,  accounting  his  uprising  as  an  assistance  from
the  Unseen.  In  delivery  and  style '  he  was  '  evident
magic,'  and  in  firmness  and  constancy  superior  to  all.
At  length  in  the  year  [a.h.]  1265  at  the  sentence  of
the  chief  of  lawyers  the  Sa'fdu  'l-'Ulam4  the  chief
divine  of  B4rfuriish,  he  yielded  his  head  and  surren-
dered his  life  amidst  extremest  clamour  and  outcry^
And  amongst  them  was  she  who  was  entitled
Kurratu  'l-'Ayn  the  daughter  of  H4jl  Mull4  Siilih,
the  sage  of  Kazvfn,  the  erudite  doctor.  She,  accord-
ing to  what  is  related,  was  skilled  in  diverse  arts,
amazed  the  understandings  and  thoughts  of  the
most  eminent  masters  by  her  eloquent  dissertations
on  the  exegesis  and  tradition  of  the  Perspicuous
Book^  and  was  a  mighty  sign  in  the  doctrines  of  the
glorious  Sheykh  of  Ahs4*.  At  the  Supreme  Shrines"
p.  38.  she  borrowed  light  on  matters  divine  from  the  lamp

1  Of  the  writings  of  Mull4  Muhammad  'Ali  (called  _,|f|
A„^jj  from  the  title— ^.^jj  j_,i:;^— borne  by  their  author
amongst  his  co-religionists)  six  pieces  occupying  in  all  39
pages  are  contained  in  a  ms.  in  my  possession.

2  See  Note  P  at  end.

3  The  Kur'4n.

*  Sheykh  Ahmad  Ahsa'i  the  founder  of  the  Sheykhi  school
of  theology,  concerning  which  see  Note  E  at  end.
'  Kerbela  and  Nejef.


A  traveller's  narrative.  31

of  Kdzim',  and  freely  sacrificed  her  life  in  the  way  of
the  Bdb,  She  discussed  and  disputed  with  the  doctors
and  sages,  loosing  her  tongue  to  establish  her  doctrine.
Such  fame  did  she  acquire  that  most  people  who  were
scholars  or  mystics  sought  to  hear  her  speech  and
were  eager  to  become  acquainted  with  her  powers  of
speculation  and  deduction.  Shejiad.j^brain  full  of
tumultuous  ideas,  and  thoughtsjeheiaent  and  restless.
In  many  places  she  triumphed  over  the  contentious,
expounding  the  most  subtle  questions.  "When  she
^as  imprisoned  in  the  house  of  [Mahmiid]  the  Kaldn-
tar  of  Teherdn^  and  the  festivities  and  rejoicings  of
a  wedding  were  going  on,  the  wives  of  the  city  mag-
nates who  were  present  as  guests  were  so  charmed
with  the  beauty  of  her  speech  that,  forgetting  the  p.  39.
festivities,  they  gathered  round  her,  diverted  by
listening  to  her  words  from  listening  to  the  melodies,
and  rendered  indifferent  by  witnessing  her  marvels
to  the  contemplation  of  the  pleasant  and  novel
sights  which  are  incidental  to  a  wedding.  In  short
in  elocution  she  was  the  calamity  of  the  age,  and
in  ratiocination  the  trouble  of  ThF  world.  Of  fearf^
or  timidity  there  was  no  trace  in  her  heart,  nor  had
the admonitions  of  the  kindly-disposed  any  profit  -

'  Haji  Seyyid  Kazim  of  Eesht,  the  pupil  and  successor  of
Sheykh  Ahmad  and  the  Teacher  of  the  Bab. See  Note  E  at  end.

2  See  Gobineau,  pp.  292—295;  Kazem-Beg  i,  p.  522  and
note,  and  ii,  p.  249 ;  and  Eastwick's  Diplomate's  Residence  in
Persia,  vol.  i,  p.  288—290.


32 A  traveller's  narrative.

or  fruit  for  her.  Although  she  was  of  [such  as  are]
damsels  [meet]  for  the  bridal  bower,  yet  she  wrested
pre-eminence  from  stalwart  men,  and  continued  to
strain  the  feet  of  steadfastness  until  she  yielded  up^
her  life  at  the  sentence  of  the  mighty  doctors  in
Teherdn7  TBut  vere  we  to  occupy  ourselves  with
these  details  the  matter  would  end  in  prolixity'.

Well,  Persia  was  in  this  critical  state  and  the
learned  doctors  perplexed  and  anxious,  when  the
p.  40.  late  Prince  Muhammad  Shdh  died^  and  the  throne
■  of  sovereignty  was  adorned  with  the  person  of  the
aew  monarch.  Mlrz4  Taki  Khdn  Amir-Nizam,  who
was  Prime  Minister  and  Chief  Regent,  seized  in
the  grasp  of  his  despotic  power  the  reins  of  the
aifairs  of  the  commonwealth,  and  urged  the  steed  of
his  ambition  into  the  arena  of  wilfulness  and  sole
possession.  This  minister  was  a  person  devoid  jjf
experience  and  wanting  in  consideration  for  the  con-
sequences of  actions;  bloodthirsty  and  shamelessj.
and  swift^and  ready  to shed blood'. Severity  in

1  For  some  further account  of Kurratu'l-'Ayu  see  Note
Q  at  end.

2  September  4th,  1848. See  Watson's  History,  p.  354.

5  This  is  by  no  means  the  light  in  which  Mirz6,  Taki  Khan
is  regarded  by  most  historians.  See  especially  the  encomiums
bestowed  on  him  by  Watson  {History  of  _  Persia  from  the
bet/inning  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,  &ct.  p.  364  and  p.  404).
Compare  also  Lady  Sheil's  Diary,  pp.  248—253.  Yet  his  cruelty
N  towards  the  Bab  andTiii  followers  goes  far  to  justify  their
opinion  of  him,  and  at  least  fully  explains  the  fact  that  they


A TEAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  33

punishing  he  regarded  as  wise  administration,  and
harshly  entreating,  distressing,  intimidating,  and
frightening  the  people  he  considered  as  a  fulcrum  for
the  advancement  of  the  monarchy.  And  as  His
Majesty  the  King  was  in  the  prime  of  youthful  years
the  minister  fell  into  strange  fancies  and  sounded  the  p.  41.
drum  of  absolutism  in  [the  conduct  of]  affairs  :  on  his
own  decisive  resolution,  without  seeking  permission
from  the  Royal  Presence  or  taking  counsel  with
prudent  statesmen,  he  issued  orders  to  persecute
the  Bdbfs,  imagining  that  by  overweening  force  he
coul3  eradicate  and  suppress  matters  of  this  nature,
and  that  harshness  would  bear  good  fruit ;  whereas
[in  fact]  to  interfere  with  matters  of  conscience  is
simply  to  give  them  greater  currency  and  strength ;
the  more  you  strive  to  extinguish  the  more  will  the
flame  be  kindled,  more  especially  in  matters  of  faith
and  religion,  which  spread  and  acquire  influence  so
soon  as  blood  is  shed,  and  strongly  aff'ect  men's
hearts.  These  things  have  been  put  to  the  proof,
and  the  greatest  proof  is  this  very  transaction.  Thus
they  relate  that  the  possessions  of  a  certain  Bdbj_jn_p.  42.
Kdshdn  were  plundered,  and  his  household_scattered
and  dispersed.  They  stripped  him  naked  and  scourged
him,  defiled  his  beard,  mounted  hini  face  backwards

regard  the  cruel  fate  which  befel  him  at  the  hands  of  the  king
as  a  signal  instance  of  Divine  vengeance.  See  Gobineau,  p.
253—254.

B.  3


34 A  travellee's  narrative.

on  an  ass^jidparaded  him  through  the  streets  and
bazaars  with  the  utmost  cruelty,  to  the  sound  of
drums,  trumpets,  guitars,  and  tambourines.  A  certain
guebre '  who  knew  absolutely  nought  of  the  world  or
its  denizens  chanced  to  be  seated  apart  in  a  corner
of  a  caravansaray.  When  the  clamour  of  the  people
rose  high  he  hastened  into  the  street,  and,  becoming
cognizant  of  the  offence  and  the  offender,  and  the
cause  of  his  public  disgrace  and  punishment  in
full  detail,  he  fell  to  making  search,  and  that  very
I  day  entered  the  society  of  the  B^bfs,  saying,  "  This
I  very  ill-usage  and  public  humiliation  is  a  proof  of
43.  truth  and  the  very  best  of  arguments.  Had  it
not  been  thus  it  .mig-ht_,have  been  that  j,  thousand
years  would  have  passed  ere  one  like  me  became
inforroed."

At  all  events  the  minister  with  the  utmost  arbi-
trariness, without  receiving  any  instructions  or  asking
permission,  s_eut  forth  commands  in  all  directions  to
punish  and  chastise  the  B4bis.  Governors  and  ma-
gistrates  sought  a  pretext  for  amassing  wealthy  and
ofiicials  a_means  of  [acquiring]  profits ;  celebrated
doctors  from  the  summits  of  their  pulpits  incited
men  to  inake^ general  onslaught;  the  powers  of  the

'■  It  is  almost  unnecessary  to  remark  that  the  word  guebre
(more  correctly  gabr)  is  always  used  in  a  contemptuous  if  not
in  an  offensive  sense.  It  is  never  used  by  the  Zoroastrians  in
speaking  of  themselves.


A  traveller's  narrative.  35

religious  and  the  civil  law  linked  hands  and  stroTO
to  eradicate  and  destroy  this  people.

Now  this  people  had  not  yet  acquired  such  know-
ledge as  was  right  and  needful  of  the  fundamental
principles  and  hidden  doctrines  of  the  BAb's  teachings,
and  did  not  recognise  their  duties.  Their  concep-
tions and  ideas  were  after  the  former  fashion,  and
their  conduct  and  behaviour  in  correspondence  with  p.  44.
ancient  usage.  The  way  of  approach  to  the  B4b  was,
moreover,  closed,  and  the  flame  of  trouble  visibly
blazing  on  every  side.  At  the  decree  of  the  most
celebrated  of  the  doctors,  the  government,  and  indeed
the  common  people,  had,  witlTlrresistible  power,  in-
aug-urated  rapine  and  plunder  on  all  sides,  ajid  were
engaged  in  punishing  and  torturing,  killing  and
despoiling,  in  order  that  they  might  quench  this  fire
and  wither  these~[poor]"soiils.  In  towns  where  these
were  but  a  limited  number  all  of  them  with  bound
hands  became  food  for  the  sword,  while  in^ities
where  they  were  numerous  they  arose  in  self-defence
agreeably  to  their  former  beliefs,  since  it  was  im-
possible for  them  to  make  enquiry  as  to  their  duty,
and  all  doors  were  closed.

In  MdzandarAn  amongst  other  places  the  people  of  p.  45.
the  city  of  Bdrfurush  at  the  command  of  the  chief  of
lawyers  the  Sa'fdiiTTTlam^  made  a^;en^ral  attack  jon
MuUi  Huseyn  ofJBushraweyh  and  his  followers,  and
slew  six  or  seven  pers(jns. They  were  busy  compassing

3—2


36  A  traveller's  narrative.

the  destruction  of  the  rest  also  when  Mulld  Huseyn
ordered  the  azcrn^  to  be  sounded  and  stretched  forth
his  hand  to  the  sword,  whereupon  all  sought  flight,
and  the  nobles  and  lords  coming  before  him  with
the  utmost  penitence  and  deference  agreed  that  he
should  be  permitted  Jojdepart.  They  further  sent
with  them  as  a  guard  Khusraw  of  Kd,df-kald  with
horsemen  and  footmen,  so  that,  according  to  the
terms  of  agreement,  they  might  go  forth  safe  and
protected  from  the  territory  of  MAzandar^n.  When
they,  being  ignorant  of  the  fords  and  paths,  had
emerged  from  the  city,  Khusraw  dispersed  hisjiorse-
men  and  footmen  and  set  themjn  ambush  in  the
p.  46.  forest  ofTffiaiidard^n,  scattered  and  separated  the
Bd,bfs  in  that  forest  on  the  road  and  off  the  road,
and  began  to  hunt  them  down  singly.  When  the
reports  of  muskets  arose  on  every  side  the  hidden
secret  became  manifest,  and  several  wanderers  and
other  persons  were  suddenly  slain  with  bullets.
MuUd  Huseyig  ordered  the  asaw '  J_Q_be_sou]ideiLjt0
assemble  his  scattered  followers,  while  Mlrzd,  Lutf-
'Ah^  the  secretary  drew  his  dagger  and  ripped  open
Khusraw's  vitals.  Of  Khusraw's  hpst  .spme_Hfii:e
slain  and  others  wandered  distractedly  over  the  field

'  The  call  to  prayer.

2  According  to  the  Tdrihh-i-Jadid  it  was  a  Babi  named
Mirza  Muhammad  Taki  who,  exasperated  by  Khusraw's  in-
solences towards  MuUa  Huseyn  slew  the  treacherous  guide.


.A  traveller's  narrative.  37

of  battle.  Mulld  Huseyn  quartered  his  host  in  a
fort  near  the  burial-place  of  Sheykh  Tabarsf,  and,
being  aware  of  the  wishes  of  the  community,  relaxed
and  interrupted  the  march.  This  detachment  was  p.  47.
subsequently  further  reinforced  by  Mfrzd  Muhammad
'All  of  Mtondardn  with  a  number  of  other  persons,
so  that  the_  garrison_j)f  the _fort  numbered  three
hundred  and  thirteen  souls.  Of  these,  however,  all
were  not  capable  of  fighting,  only  one  hundred  and
ten  persons  being  prepared  for  war.  Most  of  them
were  doctors  or  students  whose  companions  had  beeii
during  their  whole  life  books  and  treatises ;  yet,  in
spite  oftEe'fact  that  lEey  were  unaccustomed  to  war
or  to  the  blows  of  shot  and  sword,  four  times  were
camps  and  armies  arrayed  against  them  and  they  were
attacked  and  hemmed  in  with  cannons,  muskets,  and
bomb-shells,  and  on  all  four  occasions  they  inflicted
defeat,  while  the  army  was  completely  routed  &nA
dispersed^. On  the occasion of  the  fourth  defeat

'  The  tomb  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi — ever  memorable  for  the
gallant  defence  of  the  B4bis — is  situated  about  fourteen  miles
SE.  of  Barfurfish  and  can  only  be  reached  by  traversing
swampy  rice-fields  and  dense  forests  which  in  wet  weather
must  be  almost  impassable.  I  visited  the  spot  on  September
26th  1888,  and  could  perceive  no  trace  of  the  strong  ramparts
described  by  the  Musulman  historians  and  by  Gobineau  as
having  been  erected  by  the  Babis.

2  Kazem-Beg  enumerates  four  sorties  made  by  the  Babis,  of
which  the  first  three  were  successful,  although  in  the  second
Mulla  Huseyn  was  killed. Kazem-Beg's  second  sortie  there-


38  A  traveller's  narrative.

'Abbds-Kulf  jOid^  of  LMjdn  was  captain  of  the  forces
and  Prince  MaMi'-KuH  Mfrzd  commander  in  the  camp.
p.  48.  The  Kh4n  above  mentioned  used  at  nights  to  con-
ceal and  hide  himself  in  disguise  amongst  the  trees
of  the  forest  outside  the  camp,  while  during  the  day
he  was  present  in  the  encampment.  The  last  battle
,  took  place  at  night  and  the  army  was  routed.  The
Bdbfe  fired  the  tents  and  huts,  and  night  became
bright  as  day.  The  foot  of  MulU  Huseyn's  horse
caught  in  a  noose,  for  he  was  riding,  the  others  being
on  foot.  'Abbds-Kulf  Khdn  recognised  him  from  the
top  of  a  tree  afar  off,  and  with  his  own  hand  dis-
charged several  bullets.  At  the  third  shot  he
threw  him  from  his  feet.  He  was  borne  by  his
followers  to  the  fort,  and  there  they  buried  him.
Notwithstanding  this  event  [the  troops]  could  not

fore  corresponds  to  the  fourth  Babi  victory  mentioned  above.
Considerable  confusion  exists  as  to  the  successive  incidents  of
the  siege,  but  after  comparing  the  different  accounts  and
especially  that  of  the  Tdrikli-i-Jadld  I  should  suppose  the  lagr
successes  here  alluded  to  to  be  as  follows:— (1)  Bout  of  some  of
the  comrades  of  the  deceased  Khuaraw  who  attacked  the  B^bis
some  three  weeks  after  they  had  taken  up  their  quarters  at
Sheykh  Tabarsi.  __(2|  Repulse  of  a  larger  force  of  local  volun-
teers and  sack  of  Farahil  (Kazem-Beg  i,  p.  491 — 492 ;  Gobiueau,
p.  197—199).  (3)_8urprise  of  MahdI-Kuli  Mirza  and  rout  of  his
troops  with  great  loss  (Kazem-Beg  i,  p.  495 — 499 ;  Gobineau,
p.  201 — 206).  (4)  The  successful  sortie  wherein  Mulla  Huseyn's
gallant  career  was  brought  to  a  close  in  the  very  hour  of
victory  (Kazem-Beg  i,  p.  499—504;  Gobineau,  p.  210 — 215).


A  traveller's  narrative.  39

prevail  by superior force. At  length the Prince
made  a  treaty  and  covenant,  and  sware  by  the  Holy

"Eidms,  confirming  his  oath  by  vows  plighted  on  the  p.  49.
glorious  Kur'dn,  to  this  effect: "You  shall  not  be
molested;  return  to  your  own  places." Since  their
provisions  had  for  some  time  been  exhausted,  so  that
even  of  the  skins  and  bones  of  horses  nought  re-

,  mained,  and  they  had  subsisted  for  jeveral  days  on
pure  water,  they  agTeed.  When  they  arrived  at  the
army  food  was  prepared  for  them  in  a  place  outside
the  camp.  They  were  engaged  in  eating,  having
laid  aside  their  weapons  and  armour,  when  the  soldiers
fell  on  them  on  all  sides  and  slew  them  all.  Some
have  accounted  this  valour  displayed  by  these  people
as  a  thing  miraculous,  but  when  a  band  of  men  are
besieged  in  some  place  where  all  avenues  and  roads
are  stopped  and  all  hope  of  deliverance  is  cut  off
they  will  assuredly  defend  themselves  desperately
and  display  bravery  and  courage.  p.  50.

In  Zanjdn  and  Nfrfz  likewise  at  the  decree  of
erudite  doctors  and  notable  lawyers  a  bloodthirsty
military  force  attacked  and  besieged.  In  Zanjin  the
chief  was  MulU  Muhammad  'Alf  the  mujtaliid,  while  in
NWz  Seyyid  Yahyd  of  Dirdb  was  the  leader  and
arbiter'. At  first  they  soughir  to  bring  about  a

1  For  full  accounts  of  the  siege  of  Zanjan  see  Gobineau,
p.  233 — 254;  Kazem-Beg  ii,  p.  196—224;  and  compare  Watson,
p.  387—392;  Lady  Shell's  Bianj,  p.  181. Kazem-Beg  alone  of


40 A  traveller's  narrative.

reconciliation,  but,  meeting  with  cruel  ferocity,  they
reached  the  pitch  of  desperation;  and,  the  over-
powering force  of  the  victorious  troops  having  cut  off
every  passage  of  flight,  they  unclosed  their  bunds  in
resistance.  But  although  they  were  very  strong  in
battle  and  amazed  the  chiefs  of  the  army  by  their
steadfastness  and  endurance,  the  overwhelming
military  force  closed  the  passage  of  flight  and  broke
p.  51.^  their  wings  and  feathers.  After  numerous  battles
they^  too  at  last  yielded  to  covenants  and  compacts,
oaths  and  promises,  vows  registered  on  the  Kur'An,
aiyCthe-- wonderful  stratagems  of  the  officers,  and
were  alj  put  to  the  edge  of  the  sword.

Were  we  to  occupy  ourselves  in  detail  with  the
wars  of  Nirlz  and  Zanj4n,  or  to  set  forth  these  events
from  beginning  to  end,  this  epitome  would  become  a
bulky  volume.  So,  since  this  would  be  of  no  ad-
vantage to  history,  we  have  passed  them  over  briefly.
During  the  course  of  the  events  which  took  place
at  Zanjdn  the  Prime  Minister  devised  a  final  and
trenchant  remedy.  Without  the  royal  comn:and,
without  consulting  with  the  ministers  of  the  subject-

these  four  authorities  gives  an  account  of  the  evuiits  at  Niriz
(ii,  p.  224 — 239),  but,  as  it  appears  to  me,  he  deals  very
unjustly  with  the  character  of  Seyyid  YahyA  of  Diiriib.  This
much  at  least  is  certain,  that  tlie  Bdbis  still  regard  him  as  one
of  their  saints,  which  at  any  rate  shews  that  they  entertain
no  doubts  either  of  his  sincerity  or  his  loyalty.  See  Note
H  at  end.


A  traveller's  narrative.  41

protecting  court,  he,  acting  with  arbitrary  disposition,
fixed  determination,  and  entirely  on  his  own  authority,
issued  commands  to  put  the  Bdb  to  death.  This
befel  in  brief  as  follows.  The  governor  of  Azar-  p-  52.
baijdn.  Prince  Hamz6  Mlrzd,  was  unwilling  that  the
execution  of  this  sentence  should  be  at  his  hands',
and  said  to  the  brother  of  the  Amfr,  Mirzd  Hasan
Khdn,  "This  is  a  vile  business  and  an  easy  one  ;  any-
one is  capable  and  competent.  I  had  imagined  that
His  Excellency  the  Eegent  would  commission  me
to  make  war  on  the  Afghans  or  Uzbegs  or  appoint
me  to  attack  and  invade  the  territory  of  Russia  or
Turkey."  So  Mfrz4  Hasan  Kh^n  wrote  his  excuse
in  detail  to  the  Amir.

Now  the  Seyyid  B4b  had  disposed  all  his  affairs
before  setting  out  from  Chihrfk  towards  Tabriz,  had
placed  his  writings  and  even  his  ring  and  pen-case
in  a  specially  prepared  box,  put  the  key  of  the  box
in  an  envelope,  and  sent  it  by  means  of  MuUd  Bdkir,
who  was  one  of  his  first  associates,  to  MuUd,  'Abdu'l-  p.  53.
Karfm  of  Kazvfn^ This  trust  MulU  B^kir  deUvered

'  According  to  Gobineau  (p.  259  et  seq.),  however,  Hamz6
Mirza  took  the  leading  part  in  the  examination  and  condem-
nation of  the  Bab.

°  Mulla  'Abdu'l-Earim  was  also  known  amongst  the  B4bls
by  the  name  of  Mirza  Ahmad-i-^at(6  (the  Scribe),  inasmuch
as  he  acted  as  amanuensis  to  the  Bab  and  later  to  Mirza
Yahya,  Subh-i-Ezel.  He  was  one  of  the  twenty-eight  victims
put  to  death  in  August  1852  in  Teheran,  and  fell  by  the  hands


42  A  traveller's  narrative.

over  to  Mulld  'Abdu'l-Karfm  at  Kum  in  presence  of
a  numerous  company.  At  the  solicitations  of  those
present  he  opened  the  lid  of  the  box  and  said,  "I  am
commanded  to  convey  this  trust  to  Beh^'u'lMh :
more  than  this  ask  not  of  me,  for  I  cannot  tell  you."
Importuned  by  the  company,  he  produced  a  long
epistle  in  blue,  penned  in  the  most  graceful  manner
with  the  utmost  delicacy  and  firmness  in  a  beautiful
minute  shikasta  hand,  written  in  the  shape  of  a  man
so  closely  that  it  would  have  been  imagined  that  it
was  a  single  wash  of  ink  on  the  paper'.  When  they
had  read  this  epistle  [they  perceived  that]  he  had
produced  three  hundred  and  sixty  derivatives  from
the  word  Behd.  Then  MulM  'Abdu'l-Karim  con-
p.  54,  veyed  the  trust  to  its  destination.

Well,  we  must  return  to  our  original  narrative.
The  Prime  Minister  issued  a  second  order  to  his
brother  Mfrzd  Hasan  KhAn,  the  gist  of  which  order
was  this  : — "Obtain  a  formal  and  explicit  sentence
from  the  learned  doctors  of  Tabrfz  who  are  the  firm
support  of  the  Church  of  Ja'far  (upon  him  be  peace)

of  the  artillerymen,  apparently  without  having  undergone
previous  torture  which  he  had  much  feared  and  wherefrom  he
had  prayed  frequently  to  be  delivered.

^  An  epistle  of  this  sort  written  by  the  Bkh  I  have  seen.  It
was  in  the  form  of  a  pentacle,  and  most  beautifully  executed
as  above  described.  Cf.  Kazem-Beg  ii,  p.  498.  For  a  specimen
of  the  'derivatives'  produced  by  the  Bab  from  the  word  Behd
see  Note  R  at  end.


A  traveller's  narrative.  43

and  the  impregnable  stronghold  of  the  Shi'ite  faith  ;
summon  the  Christian  regiment  of  Urumiyj^a ;  sus-
pend the  Bdb  before  all  the  people  ;  and  give  orders
for  the  regiment  to  fire  a  voUey."

Mfrzd  Hasan  Khdn  summoned  his  chief  of  the
farrdshes,  and  gave  him  his  instructions.  They  re-
moved the  Bdb's  turban  and  sash  which  were  the
signs  of  his  Seyyid-hood,  brought  him  with  four  of
his  followers'  to  the  barrack  square  of  Tabrfz,  con-
fined him  in  a  cell,  and  appointed  forty  of  the
Christian  soldiers  of  Tabrfz  to  guard  him.  P-  ^^■

Next  day  the  chief  of  the  farrdshes  delivered  over
the  Bdb  and  a  young  man  named  Ak4  Muhammad
'Ah  who  was  of  a  noble  family  of  Tabrfz  to  S4m
Khdn,  colonel  of  the  Christian  regiment  of  Urumiyya,
at  the  sentences  of  the  learned  divine  MulU  Mu-
hammad of  _M4mdkdn,  of  the  second  ecclesiastical
authority  Mfrzd  B4kir,  and  of  the  third  ecclesiastical
authority  Mulld  Murtazd,-Kulf  and  others.  An  iron
nail  was  hammered  into  the  middle  of  the  staircase
of  the  very  cell  wherein  they  were  imprisoned,  and
two  ropes  were  hung  down.  By  one  rope  the  B4b
was  suspended  and  by  the  other  rope  Ak4  Muhammad
'Alf,  both  being  firmly  bound  in  such  wise  that  the

1  These  four  would  seem  to  have  been — (1)  Aka  Muhammad
'Ali  of  Tabriz ;  (2)  Aka  Seyyid  Huseyn  of  Yezd,  tlie  Bab's
amanuensis;  (3)  Aka  Seyyid  Hasan  of  Yezd,  his  brother;
(4)  Aka  Seyyid  Ahmad  of  Tabriz. See  Note  S  at  end.


44  A  traveller's  narrative.

head  of  that  young  man  was  on  the  B4b's  breast.
The  surrounding  house-tops  billowed  with  teeming
crowds.  A  regiment  of  soldiers  ranged  itself  in  three
files. The  first  file  fired ; then  the  second  file,  and

p.  56.  then  the  third  file  discharged  volleys.  From  the  fire
I  of  these  volleys  a  mighty  smoke  was  produced.  I
When  the  smoke  cleared  away  they  saw  that  young
man  standing  and  the  B4b  seated  by  the  side  of  his
amanuensis  Akd,  Seyyid  Huseyn  in  the  very  cell  from
the  staircase  of  which  they  had  suspended  them.  To
neither  one  of  them  had  the  slightest  injury  resulted.
S4m  Kh^n  the  Christian  asked  to  be  excused ;
the  turn  of  service  came  to  another  regiment,  and
the  chief  of  the  farrusheH  withheld  his  hand.  Akd
J4n  Beg  of  Khamsa,  colonel  of  the  body-guard,
advanced  ;  and  they  again  bound  the  B4b  together
with  that  young  man  to  the  same  nail.  The  Bdb
uttered  certain  words  which  those  few  who  knew
Persian  understood',  while  the  rest  heard  but  the
sound  of  his  voice.

p.  57, The  colonel  of  the  regiment  appeared  in  person  :

and it  was  before noon on the twenty-eighth of

Sha'b^n  in  the  year  [a.h.]  one  thousand  two  hundred

1  The  Azarbaij4n  dialect  of  Turkinh  is  the  language  gener-
ally spoken  in  Tabriz,  and  only  persons  who  have  either
received  some  education  or  travelled  in  other  parts  of  Persia
understand  Persian.  Indeed  Turkish  prevails  as  far  east
as  Kazvin,  is  widely  spoken  in  Teheran,  and  is  understood  by
many  even  as  far  south  as  Kum.


A TRAVELLEE  S NARRATIVE.  45

and  sixty-six'.  Suddenly  he  gave  orders  to  fire.  At
this  volley  the  bullets  produced  such  an  effect  that
the  breasts  [of  the  victims]  were  riddled,  and  their
limbs  Tvere  completely  dissected,  except  their  faces,
which  were  but  little  marred.

Then  they  removed  those  two  bodies  from  the
square  to  the  edge  of  the  moat  outside  the  city,  and
that  night  they  remained  by  the  edge  of  the  moat.
Xext  day  the  Russian  consul  came  with  an  artist  and
took  a  picture  of  those  two  bodies  in  the  posture
wherein  they  had  fallen  at  the  edge  of  the  moat.

On  the  second  night  at  midnight  the  B4bis  carried
away  the  two  bodies.

On  the  third  day  the  people  did  not  find  the
bodies,  and  some  supposed  that  the  wild  beasts  had  p.  58.
devoured  them,  so  that  the  doctors  proclaimed  from
the  summits  of  their  pulpits  saying,  "The  holy  body
of  the  immaculate  Imdm  and  that  of  the  true  Shi'ite
are  preserved  from  the  encroachments  of  beasts  of
prey  and  creeping  things  and  wounds,  but  the  body
of  this  person  have  the  wild  beasts  torn  in  pieces."
But  after  the  frillest  investigation  and  enquiry  it  hath

^  July  9th  1850.  I  have  already  pointed  out  (B.  i,  p.  512)
that  Kazem-Beg  is  in  error  in  placing  the  Bab's  death  in  1849.
As  to  the  events  contemporary  with  the  Founder's  martyrdom,
the  siege  of  Zanjan  was  in  progress,  while  the  Nlriz  insurrec-
tion had  just  been  quelled.  Indeed  Aka  Seyyid  Tahya  of
Darab  according  to  reliable  tradition  suffered  martyrdom  on
the  same  day  as  the  B4b.


46  A  traveller's  narrative.

been  proved  that  when  the  B4b  had  dispersed  all  his
writings  and  personal  properties  and  it  had  become
clear  and  evident  from  various  signs  that  these  events
would  shortly  take  place',  therefore,  on  the  second
day  of  these  events,  Suleymdn  KhAn^  the  son  of
Yahy^  Kh^n,  one  of  the  nobles  of  Azarbaijdn  devoted
to  the  B^b,  arrived,  and  proceeded  straightway  to
the  house  of  the  mayor  of  Tabriz.  And  since  the
mayor  was  an  old  friend,  associate,  and  confidant  of
p.  59.  his ;  since,  moreover,  he  was  of  the  mystic  tem-
perament and  did  not  entertain  aversion  or  dislike
for  any  sect,  Suleym^n  Kli4n  divulged  this  secret  to

1  There  is  no  doubt  that,  as  Gobineau  states  (p.  258),  the
Bab  fully  expected  to  suffer_martyrdom.  He  even  issued
instructions  as  to  the  disposal  of  his  remains,  which  he
desired  should  be  placed  near  the  shrine  of  Shah  'Abdu'l-
'Azim  some  five  miles  to  the  south  of  Teheran.  "  The  place
of  Shdh-'Abdu'l-'Azlm,"  he  wrote,  "is  a  good  land,  by  reason
of  the  proximity  of  Walnd"  (i.e.  Subh-i-Ezel,  whose  name,
Yahya,  is  equivalent  numerically  to  Wahid,  cf.  B.  ii,  997)
'  'for  keeping;  and  God  is  the  Best  of  Keepers."  The  bodj',  as
here  stated,  was  presently  sent  along  with  that  of  Aka
Muhammad  'Ali,  the  Bab's  fellow-sufferer,  from  Tabriz  to
Teheran.  It  was  committed  to  the  care  of  Aka  Mahdi  of
K4shan,  who  deposited  it  in  a  little  shrine  called  Imdm-zddi-i-
Ma's/im  situated  near  the  Imdm-zdde-i-Hasan  on  the  road  from
Teherin  to  Eibat-Karim.  Here  it  remained  in  charge  of  the
custodian  of  the  shrine  (who  was  paid  to  keep  watch  over  it)
till  about  the  year  1867,  when  it  was  removed  elsewhere  by
command  of  Beh&'u'Uah.

-  Concerning  Suleym4n  Khan's  martyrdom  in  August  1852
at  Teheran  see  Note  T  at  end.


A  traveller's  xaeeative.  47

him  saying,  "To-niglit  I,  with  several  others,  will
endeavour  by  every  means  and  artifice  to  rescue  the
body.  Even  though  it  be  not  possible,  come  what
may  we  will  make  an  attack,  and  either  attain  our
object  or  pour  out  our  lives  freely  in  this  way."
"Such  troubles,"  answered  the  mayor,  "are  in  no
wise  necessary."  He  then  sent  one  of  his  private  ser-
vants named  Haji  A114h-ydr,  who,  by  whatever  means
and  proceedings  it  was,  obtained  the  body  without
trouble  or  difficulty  and  handed  it  over  to  -EL^ii^
Sule}'mdn  Khdn.  And  when  it  was  morning  the
sentinels,  to  excuse  themselves,  said  that  the  wild
beasts  had.  devoured  it.  That  night  they  sheltered
the  body  in  the  workshop  of  a  Bdbi  of  ilildn :  next  P-  60.
day  they  manufactured  a  box,  placed  it  in  the  box,
and  left  it  as  a  trust.  Afterwards,  in  accordance
with  instructions  which  arrived  from  Teheran,  they
sent  it  away  from  Azarbaijdn.  And  this  transaction
remained  absolutely  secret.

2s'ow  in  these  years  [ah.  one  thousand  two
hundred  and|  sixty-six  and  .^ixt}--seven  tliroughout
all  Persia  fire  feU  on_th£_households  of_  the  Bdbis,
and  each  one  of  them,  in  whatever  hamlet  he
might  be,  was,  on  the  slightest  suspicion  arising,  put  i
to  the  sword,  ilore  than  four  thousand  souls  were
.slain',  and  a  great  multitude  of  women  and  children,

1  The  most  notable  massacres  dnring  this  period  were  at
Zanjan  and  Niriz. Concerning  the  martyrdom  of  the  "  yeven"


48 A  traveller's  narrative.

left  without  protector  or  helper,  distracted  and  con-
founded, were  trodden  down  and  destroyed.  And  all
these  occurrences  were  brought  about  solely  by  the
arbitrary  decision  and  command  of  Mirz4  Taki  Khdn,

p.  61,  who  imagined  that  by  the  enactment  of  a  crushing
punishment  this  sect  would  be  dispersed  and  dis-
appear in  such  wise  that  all  sign  and  knowledge  of
them  would  be  cut  off.  Ere  long  had  passed  the
contrary  of  his  imagination  appeared,  and  it  became
certain  that  [the  Bdbfe]  were  increasing.  The  flame
rose  higher  and  the  contagion  became  swifter  :  the
affair  waxed  grave  and  the  report  thereof  reached
other  climes.  At  first  it  was  confined  to  Persia :
later  it  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Quaking
and  affliction  resulted  in  constancy  and  stability,
j  and  grievous  pains  and  punishment  caused  acceptance
and  attraction.  The  very  events  produced  an  im-
I  pression  ;  impression  led  to  investigation  ;  and  in-
^  vestigation  resulted  in  increase.  Through  the  ill-
considered  policy  of  the  Minister  this  edifice  became
fortified  and  strengthened,  and  these  foundations
firm and solid. Previously  the  matter  used  to  be

p.  62.  regarded  as  commonplace  : subsequently  it  acquired
a  gTave  importance in  men's  eyes. Many  perafliia_
from  all  parts  of  the  world  set  out  for  ^ersia,  and

Martyrs  "  at  Teher4n  (amongst  whom  was  the  Bkh's  maternal
uncle  Mirza  Seyyid  'All)  which  hkewise  took  place  at  this  time
some  information  will  be  found  in  Note  B  at  end.


A  traveller's  narrative.  49

began  to  seek  with  their  whole  hearts.  For  it  hath
been  proved  by  experience  in  the  world  that  in  the  '
case  of  such  matters  of  conscience  laceration  causeth
healing  ;  censure  produceth  increased  diligence  ;  pro-
hibition induceth  eagerness ;  and  intimidation  createth
avidity.  The  root  is  hidden  in  the  very  heart,  while
the  branch  is  apparent  and  evident.  When  one
branch  is  cut  off  other  branches  grow.  Thus  it  is
observed  that  when  such  matters  occur  in  other
countries  they  become  extinct  spontaneously  through
lack  of  attention  and  exiguity  of  interest.  For  up
to  the  present  moment  of  movements  pertaining  to
religion  many  have  appeared  in  the  countries  of
Europe,  but,  non-interference  and  absence  of  bigotry  p.  63.
having  deprived  them  of  importance,  in  a  little  while
they  became  effaced  and  dispelled.

After  this  event  there  was  wrought  by  a  certain
Bibi  a  great  error  and  a  gTave  presumption  and  crime,
which  has  blackened  the  page  of  the  history  of  this
sect  and  given  it  an  ill  name  throughout  the  civilized
world.  Of  this  event  the  marrow  is  this,  that  during
the  time  when  the  Bdb  was  residing  in  Azarbaij^n  a
youth,  S4dik  by  name,  became  affected  with  the  .
utmost  devotion  to  the  B^b,  night  and  day  was  busy
m  serving  him,  and  became  bereft  of  thought  and
reason.  Now  when  that  which  befel  the  BAb  in
Tabriz  took  place,  this  servant,  actuated  by  his  own
fond  fancies,  fell  into  thoughts  of  seeking  blood-
B.  4


50  A  traveller's  narrative.

revenge.  And  since  he  knew  naught  of  the  details
of  the  events,  the  absokite  autocracy  of  the  Amir-
Nizam,  his  unbridled  power,  and  sole  authority ;  nor

p.  64.,  [was  aware]  that  this  sentence  had  been  promul-
igated  absolutely  without  the  cognizance  of  the  Eoyal
Court,  and  that  the  Prime  Minister  had  presump-
tuously issued  the  order  on  his  own  sole  responsi-
bility; since,  on  the  contrary,  he  supposed  that
agreeably  to  ordinary  custom  and  usage  the  atten-
dants of  the  court  had  had  a  share  in,  and  a  know-
ledge of  this  sentence,  therefore,  [impelled]  by  folly,
frenzy,  and  his  evil  star,  nay,  by  sheer  madness,
he  rose  up  from  Tabrfz  and  came  straight  to  Teheran,
one  other  person  being  his  accomplice.  Then,  since
the  Eoyal  Train  had  its  abode  in  Shimrdn,  he  thither
directed  his  steps.  God  is  our  refuge !  By  him  was
wrought  a  deed  so  presumptuous  that  the  tongue  is
unable  to  declare  and  the  pen  loath  to  describe  it.
Yet  to  God  be  praise  and  thankfulness  that  this
madman  had  charged  his  pistol  with  shot,  imagining
this  to  be  preferable  and  superior  to  all  projectiles'.

p.  65. Then  all  at  once  commotion  arose,  and  this  sect

• became  of  such  ill  repute  that  still,  strive  and  struggle

as  they  may  to  escape  from  the  curse  and  disgrace

1  Of  the  attempt  on  the  Shah's  life  a  very  graphic  account
is  given  by  Gobineau  (chapter  xi).  See  also  Watson's  Histonj
of  Persia,  dr..  pp.  407—410,  Lady  Sheil's  Diary,  pp.  273—282,
and  Note  T  at  end.


A  teayeller's  xakeativi:.  51

and  dishonour  of  this  deed,  they  are  unable  to  do  ^o.
They  Tvill  recount  from  the  first  manifestation  of  the
B4b  untU  the  present  time ;  but  when  the  thread  of
the  discourse  reaches  this  event  they  are  abashed  and
hang  their  heads  in  shame,  repudiating  the  presump-
tuous actor  and  accounting  bim  the  destroyer  of  the
edifice  and  the  cause  of  shame  to  mankind.

Xow  after  the  occurrence  of  this  grave  matter  all
of  this  sect  were  suspected.  At  first  there  was
neither  investigation  nor  enquiry ' ,  but  afterwards  in
mere  justice  it  was  decided  that  there  should  be
investigation,  enquirj-,  and  examination.  All  who
were  known  to  be  of  this  sect  fell  under  suspicion.
Behi'u'Uih  was  passing  the  summer  in  the  village  of  p.  66.
Afcha  situated  one  stage  irom  Teherdm  WTien  this
news  was  spread  abroad  and  punishment  began,  every
one  who  was  able  hid  himself  in  some  retreat  or  fled
the  country.  Amongst  these  ^lini  Yahyd^  the
brother  of  Behd'u'llih,  concealed  himself,  and,  a
bewildered  fugitive,  in  the  guise  of  a  dervish,  with
kashkul'  in  hand,  wandered  in  mountains  and  plains

1  ie.  at  first  everyone  who  was  suspected  of  belonging  to
the  Babi  community  was  put  to  death  without  enquiring  as  to
whether  he  had  any  share  in  the  conspiracy  against  the  king.

-  See  Gobinean,  pp.  277 — 279,  and  Note  TV  at  end.

2  A  hollow  receptacle  of  about  the  size  and  shape  of  a
cocoa-nut,  round  the  orifice  of  which  two  chains  are  attached
at  four  points  to  serve  as  a  handle.  It  is  used  by  dervishes  as
an  alms-basket.

4—2


52  A  traveller's  narrative.

on  the  road  to  Resht.  But  Behd'u'lldh  rode  forth
with  perfect  composure  and  calmness  from  Afcha,  and
came  to  Niydvard,n,  which  was  the  abode  of  the
Royal  Train  and  the  station  of  the  imperial  camp.
Immediately  on  his  arrival  he  was  placed  under
arrest,  and  a  whole  regiment  guarded  him  closely.
67.  After  several  days  of  interrogation  they  sent  him  in
chains  and  fetters  from  Shimrdn  to  the  gaol  of
Teherd,n.  And  this  harshness  and  punishment  was
due  to  the  immoderate  importunity  of  Hdji  'Ah  KhAn,
the  H^i!ibuMJDawla,^ijnor  did  there  seem  any  hope  of
deliverance,  until  His  Majesty  the  King,  moved  by
his  own  kindly  spirit,  commanded  circumspection,
and  ordered  this  occurrence  to  be  investigated  and
examined  particularly  and  generally  by  means  of  the
ministers  of  the  imperial  court.

Now  when  Beha'u'lUh  was  interrogated  on  this
matter  he  answered  in  reply,  "  The  event  itself  indi-
cates the  truth  of  the  affair  and  testifies  that  this  is
the  action  of  a  thoughtless,  unreasoning,  and  igno-

1  Concerning  thia  infamous  monster  who,  amongst  in-
numerable other  wickednesses  and  cruelties,  volunteered  to
carry  out  the  sentence  of  death  on  his  fallen  benefactor,
Mirza  Taki  Kh4n,  see  Watson's  History  of  Persia,  &c.  pp.  403—
404.  ^yr_Vo\^^Persien;  das  Land  und  seine  Bewohner,
Leipsic,  1865,  vol.  1,  p.  352)  describes  him  as  "  ein  Mann  ohne
Herz  und  auf  Commando  zu  jeder  Grausamkeit  hereit,"  and
then  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  ghastly  tortures  which  he
devised  for  the  Babis.


A  traveller's  narrative.  53

rant  man.  For  no  reasonable  person  would  charge
his  pistol  with  shot  when  embarking  on  so  grave  an
enterprise.  At  least  he  would  so  arrange  and  plan
it  that  the  deed  should  be  orderly  and  systematic.
From  the  very  nature  of  the  event  it  is  clear  and  p.  68.
evident  as  the  sun  that  it  is  not  the  act  of  such  as
myself."

So  it  was  established  and  proven  that  the  assassin
had  on  his  own  responsibility  engaged  in  this  grievous
action  and  monstrous  deed  with  the  idea  and  design
of  taking  blood  revenge  for  his  Master,  and  that  it
concerned  no  one  else'.  And  when  the  truth  of  the
matter  became  evident  the  innocence  of  Beh4'u'lld,h
from  this  suspicion  was  established  in  such  wise  that
no  doubt  remained  for  anyone ;  the  decision  of  the
court  declared  his  purity  and  freedom  from  this
charge ;  and  it  became  apparent  and  clear  that  what
had  been  done  with  regard  to  him  was  due  to  the

1  According  to  G-obineau  (p.  280)  three  Babis  actually  took
part  in  the  attempt  on  the  Shah's  life  and  others  were  con-
cerned in  the  plot.  According  to  the  Ndsikhu't-Taii-dr'ikh ,
which  gives  the  most  circumstantial  account  of  the  occurrence^
Mulla  Sheykh  'Ali  (called  by  the  Babis  Jeimh-i-'Azm)  first\
proposed  the  attempt,  for  the  carrying  out  of  which  twelve!
persons  volunteered.  Of  these  twelve,  however,  there  were
but  three— Sadik  of  Zanjan  (or  Milan),  Mulla  Fathu'llah  of
Kum,  and  MIrza  Muhammad  of  Nirlz — whose  hearts  did  not
fail  them  at  the  last.  Of  these  three  the  first  was  killed  on
the  spot,  the  other  two  were  put  to  death  afterwards.  See
Note  T  at  end.


54  A  traveller's  narrative.

efforts  of  his  foes  and  the  hasty  folly  of  the  HAjibu'd-
Dawla. Therefore did  the government of  eternal

p.  69.  duration  desire  to  restore  certain  properties  and
estates  which  had  been  confiscated,  that  thereby
it  might  pacify  him.  But  since  the  chief  part  of
these  was  lost  and  only  an  inconsiderable  portion  was
forthcoming,  none  came  forward  to  claim  them.  In-
deed Beh4'u'll4h  requested  permission  to  withdraw
to  the  Supreme  Shrines  [of  Kerbel4  and  Nejef]  and,
after  some  months ',  by  the  royal  permission  and  with
the  leave  of  the  Prime  Minister,  set  out  accompanied
by  one  of  the  King's  messengers  for  the  Shrines.

Let  vis  return,  however,  to  our  original  subject.
Of  the  Bib's  writings  many  remained  in  men's  hands.
Some  of  these  were  commentaries  on,  and  interpreta-
tions of  the  verses  of  the  Kur'4n ;  some  were  prayers,
homilies,  and  hints  of  [the  true  significance  of  certain]
passages ;  others  were  exhortations,  admonitions,  disser-
tations on  the  different  branches  of  the  doctrine  of  the
Divine  Unity,  demonstrations  of  the  special  prophetic
mission  of  the  Lord  of  existing  things  [Muhammad],
and  (as  hath  been  understood)  encouragements  to
amendment  of  character,  severance  from  worldly  states,

p.  70.  and  dependence  on  the  inspirations  of  God^ But

1  According  to  Nabil's  chronological  poem  (B.  ii,  p.  983
987)  Beha'u'Uah  was  imprisoned  in  Teheran  for  four  months.

=  For  an  enumeration  of  the  Bab's  writings  see  Note  U  at
end.


A  traveller's  xarkatite.  55

the  essence  and  purport  of  his  compositious  were  the
praises  and  descriptions  of  that  Reaht}-  soon  to  appear
which  was  his  only  object  and  aim,  his  darhng,  and
his  desire.  For  he  regarded  his  own  appearance  as
that  of  a  harbinger  of  good  tidings,  and  considered
liis  own  real  nature  merely  as  a  means  for  the  mani-
festation of  the  gxeater  perfections  of  that  One.
And  indeed  he  ceased  not  from  celebrating  Him  by
night  or  day  for  a  single  instant,  but  used  to  siguify
to  all  liis  followers  that  they  shoidd  expect  His
arising :  in  such  ivise  that  he  declares  in  his  writings,
"I  am  a  letter  out  of  that  most  mighty  book  and  a
dew-drop  from  that  limitless  ocean,  and,  when  He
shall  appear,  my  true  nature,  my  mysteries,  riddles,
and  intimations  will  become  evident,  and  the  embryo
of  this  rehgion  shall  develop  through  the  grades  of
its  being  and  ascent,  attain  to  the  station  of  'the
most  Cornell/  o//orms\'  and  become  adorned  with  the  p.  71.
robe  of  'blessed  be  God,  the  Best  of  Cnators'.'  And
tliis  event  will  disclose  itself  in  the  j-ear  [a.h.  one
thousand  two  hundred  and]  sisty-nine,  which  corre-
sponds to  the  number  of  the  year  of  'a/ter  a  uJiile^,'

'  Kttr'an,  xct.  4.

-  Kur'an,  xsiii  14.  For  tests  from  Beyan  illnstrating  this
passage,  see  Xote  T  at  end.

^  The  year  of  'a  ichile'  (^jj.  ,ai„)  is  68  {^  =  ^-  iS  =  10,
J  =  50),  and  the  year  of  '  afttr  a  while'  therefore  corresponds
to  69,  vrhich  is  the  nvimber  after  68.  It  was  not,  however,  till
A.H.  1283  (a.d.  ISiiO — 67)  that,  according  to  Xabil  (B.  ii.  pp.  9S4.


56  A  traveller's  narrative.

and  'thou  shalt  see  the  onountains  which  thou  thinhest
so  solid  passing  away  like  the  jmssing  of  the  clouds^'
shall  be  fulfilled."  In  short  he  so  described  Him
that,  in  his  own  expression,  he  regarded  approach  to
the  divine  bounty  and  attainment  of  the  highest
degrees  of  perfection  in  the  worlds  of  humanity  as
dependent  on  love  for  Him,  and  so  inflamed  was  he
with  His  flame  that  commemoration  of  Him  was  the
bright  candle  of  his  dark  nights  in  the  fortress  of
Mdku,  and  remembrance  of  Him  was  the  best  of  com-
panions in  the  straits  of  the  prison  of  Chihrlk.  There-
by he  obtained  spiritual  enlargements;  with  His
wine  was  he  inebriated  ;  and  at  remembrance  of  Him
did  he  rejoice.  All  of  his  followers  too  were  in
p.  72.  expectation  of  the  appearance  of  these  signs,  and
each  one  of  his  intimates  was  seeking  after  the  fulfil-
ment of  these  forecasts.

Now  from  the  beginning  of  the  manifestation  of
the  B4b  there  was  in  Teheran  (which  the  B^b  called
the  Holy  Land)  a  youth  of  the  family  of  one  of  the
ministers  and  of  noble  lineage  ^  gifted  in  every  way,

988),  Beha  openly  declared  himself  as  'He  ■whom  God  shall
manifest.'

1  Kur'an,  xxvii.  90.

2  Beha'u'llah  (Mirza  Huseyn  'Ali)  and  Subh-i-Ezel  (Mirza
Yahya)  were  both  sons  of  Mirza  'Abbas  (better  known  as
Mirza  Buzurg)  but  by  different  mothers.  This  is  confirmed
beyond  all  doubt  by  Subh-i-Ezel  and  others  who  have  the  best
means  of  knowing,  though  Gobineau  (p.  277)  gives  a  different


A  traveller's  narrative.  57

and  adorned  with  purity  and  nobility.  Although  he
combined  lofty  lineage  with  high  connection,  and
although  his  ancestors  were  men  of  note  in  Persia
and  universally  sought  after  \  yet  he  was  not  of  a  race
of  doctors  or  a  family  of  scholars.  Now  this  youth  was
from  his  earliest  adolescence  celebrated  amongst  those
of  the  ministerial  class,  both  relatives  and  strangers,
for  single-mindedness,  and  was  from  childhood  pointed
out  as  remarkable  for  sagacity,  and  held  in  regard  in
the  eyes  of  the  wise.  He  did  not,  however,  after  the
fashion  of  his  ancestors,  desire  elevation  to  lofty  ranks
nor  seek  advancement  to  splendid  but  transient  posi-
tions. His  extreme  aptitude  was  nevertheless  admit-  P-  ^^•
ted  by  all,  and  his  excessive  acuteness  and  intelligence
were  universally  avowed.  In  the  eyes  of  the  common
folk  he  enjoyed  a  wonderful  esteem,  and  in  all  gather-
ings and  assemblies  he  had  a  marvellous  si^eech  and
delivery.  Notwithstanding  lack  of  instruction  and
education'  such  was  the  keenness  of  his  penetration

account.  There  was  another  brother  called  Miisa,  now  deceased,
one  of  whose  sons  is  at  present  residing  at  Acre.

1  Lit.  "  the  place  where  the  camels'  saddles  are  put  down,"
i.e.  people  whose  houses  are  frequented  by  guests  and  visitors.
See  Lane's  Lexicon,  Book  i.  Part  in.  p.  1053.

^  Beha  himself  says  in  the  earlier  portion  of  his  Epistle  to
the  King  of  Persia  not  included  in  the  extract  therefrom  given

further  on:—^j\^\  olij  U  ^  f^\  J.  ij.UI  jit  U  oly  L
iiot  studied  the  sciences  which  men  have,  neither  have  I  entered


58 A  TRAVELLERS  NARRATIVE.

and  the  readiness  of  his  apprehension  that  when
during  his  youthful  prime  he  appeared  in  assemblies
where  questions  of  divinity  and  points  of  metaphysic
were  being  discussed,  and,  in  presence  of  a  great
concourse  of  doctors  and  scholars  loosed  his  tongue,
all  those  present  were  amazed,  accounting  this  as  a
sort  of  prodigy  beyond  the  discernment  natural  to
the  human  race.  From  his  early  years  he  was  the
hope  of  his  kindred  and  the  unique  one  of  his  family
and  race,  nay,  their  refuge  and  shelter.

However,  in  spite  of  these  conditions  and  circum-
p.  74.  stances,  as  he  wore  a  kuldh '  on  his  head  and  locks
flowing  over  his  shoulder,  no  one  imagined  that  he
would  become  the  source  of  such  matters,  or  that  the
waves  of  his  flood  would  reach  the  zenith  of  this
firmament.

When  the  question  of  the  Bd,b  was  noised  abroad
signs  of  partiality  appeared  in  him.  At  the  first
he  apprized  his  relatives  and  connections,  and  the
children  and  dependents  of  his  own  circle ;  subse-
quently he  occupied  his  energies  by  day  and  night  in

the  colleges:  ask  the  citij  wherein  I  was  that  thou  may  est  be  sure
that  I  am  not  of  those  wlio  lie. "

1  The  Persian  lamb-sldn  hat  ■worn  by  Government  employes
and  civilians.  The  words  4sc;  (hatted)  and  ^„^  (turbaned)
are  commonly  used  to  distinguish  the  laity  or  civilian  class
from  the  clergy  or  learned  class.  The  latter  usually  shave
the  head,  while  the  former  wear  their  hair  in  zulf  descending
below  the  level  of  the  ears.


A  traveller's  narrative.  59

inviting  friends  and  strangers  [to  embrace  the  new
faith].  He  arose  with  mighty  resolution,  engaged
with  the  utmost  constancy  in  systematizing  the  prin-
ciples and  consolidating  the  ethical  canons  of  that
society  in  every  way,  and  strove  by  all  means  to
protect  and  guard  these  people.

"When  he  had  [thus]  established  the  foundations
in  Teherdn  he  hastened  to  Md,zandardn,  where  he
displayed  in  assemblies,  meetings,  conferences,  inns,  p-  75.
mosques,  and  colleges  a  mighty  power  of  utterance
and  exposition.  Whoever  beheld  his  open  brow  or
heard  his  vivid  eulogies  perceived  him  with  the
eye  of  actual  vision  to  be  a  patent  demonstration,  a
latent  magnetic  force,  and  a  pervading  influence.  A
great  number  both  of  rich  and  poor  and  of  erudite
doctors  were  attracted  by  his  preaching  and  washed
their  hands  of  heart  and  life,  being  so  enkindled  that
they  laid  down  their  lives  under  the  sword  dancing
[with  joy].

Thus,  amongst  many  instances,  one  day  four
learned  and  accomplished  scholars  of  the  divines  of
Niir  were  present  in  his  company,  and  in  such  wise
did  he  expound  that  all  four  were  involuntarily  con-
strained to  entreat  him  to  accept  them  for  his  service.
For  by  dint  of  his  eloquence,  which  was  like  'evi-
dent sorcery,'  he  satisfied  these  eminent  doctors  P-  76.
that  they  were  in  reality  children  engaged  in  the
rudiments  of  study  and  the  merest  tyros,  and  that


60  A  traveller's  narrative.

therefore  they  must  read  the  alphabet  from  the  be-
ginning. Several  protracted  conferences  were  passed
in  expounding  and  elucidating  the  Poinf  and  the
Alif  of  the  Absolute,  wherein  the  doctors  present
were  astounded,  and  filled  with  amazement  and  aston-
ishment at  the  seething  and  roaring  of  the  ocean  of
his  utterance.  The  report  of  this  occurrence  reached
the  hearing  of  far  and  near,  and  deep  despondency
fell  on  the  adversaries.  The  regions  of  Niir  were
filled  with  excitement  and  commotion  at  these  events,
and  the  noise  of  this  mischief  and  tmuble  smote  the
ears  of  the  citizens  of  B4rfuriish.  The  chief  divine
of  Niir,  Mulld  Muhammad,  was  in  KishUkl When

1  The 'Pom* '  (aLi),  '  Point  of  Revelation.'  (OL  '.lU;),  and
'First  Point'  (J)\  t  aki)  were  the  titles  assumed  by  the  B4b
during  the  latter  part  of  his  mission,  and  it  is  by  one  of  these
titles,  or  by  the  phrases w  Oj-aa-  ('Hii<  Highness  the  Supreme'),

Jc-y\  tij  Cjj^  {'His  Highness  my  Lord  the  Supreme '),  that
he  is  mentioned  amongst  the  B4bis.  (See  Gobineau,  p.  156.)
The  Alif,  in  the  phraseology  of  the  mystics,  indicates  the  un-
manifested  Essence  of  God.

2  Kishldk  is  a  word  of  Turkish  origin  (from  'J  winter)
applied  generally  to  the  warmer  low-lying  districts  where  the
winter  is  passed,  the  highlands  where  the  summer  is  spent
being  called  YlJdk  or  YiJngh.  It  is  also  applied  as  a  proper
name  to  several  places  in  the  north  of  Persia.  Kisiildk  of  Ndr
is,  as  appears  from  the  Shith's  Diary  of  his  journey  through
M^zandariin,  a  district  bordering  on  the  coast,  of  which  the
chief  town  is  Khurram4bad.  Niir  itself  is  situated  in  the
mountains.


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  Gl

he  heard  of  these  occurrences  he  sent  two  of  the  most
distinguished  and  profound  of  the  doctors,  who  were
possessed  of  wondrous  eloquence,  effective  oratorical  P-  '^'^•
talent,  conclusiveness  of  argument,  and  brilliant
powers  of  demonstration,  to  quench  this  fire,  and  to
subdue  and  overcome  this  young  man  by  force  of
argument,  either  reducing  him  to  penitence,  or  causing
him  to  despair  of  the  successful  issue  of  his  projects.
Glory  be  to  God  for  His  wondrous  decrees !  When
those  two  doctors  entered  the  presence  of  that  young
man,  saw  the  waves  of  his  utterance,  and  heard  the
force  of  his  arguments,  they  unfolded  like  the  rose  and
were  stirred  like  the  multitude,  and,  abandoning  altar
and  chair,  pulpit  and  preferment,  wealth  and  luxury,
and  evening  and  morning  congregations,  they  applied
themselves  to  the  furtherance  of  the  objects  of  this
person,  even  inviting  the  chief  divine  to  tender  his
allegiance.  So  when  this  young  man  with  a  faculty  p.  78.
of  speech  hke  a  rushing  torrent  set  out  for  Amul  and
SAti  he  met  with  that  experienced  doctor  and  that
illustrious  divine  in  Kishl^k  of  jN^iir.  And  the  people
assembled  from  all  quarters  awaiting  the  result.  His
accomplished  reverence  the  divine,  although  he  was
of  universally  acknowledged  excellence,  and  in  science
the  most  learned  of  his  contemporaries,  nevertheless
decided  to  have  recourse  to  augury  as  to  [whether  he
should  engage  in]  discussion  and  disputation.  This
did  not  prove  favourable  and  he  therefore  excused


62  A  traveller's  narrative.

himself,  deferring  [the  discussion]  until  some  other
time.  His  incompetency  and  shortcoming  thereby
became  known  and  suspected,  and  this  caused  the
adherence,  confirmation,  and  edification  of  many.

In  brief  outline  the  narrative  is  this.  For  some
while  he  wandered  about  in  those  districts.  After
the  death  of  the  late  prince  Muhammad  Shdh  he
returned  to  Teherd-n,  having  in  his  mind  [the  inten-
tion of]  corresponding  and  entering  into  relations
p.  79.  with  the  Bdb.  The  medium  of  this  correspondence
was  the  celebrated  MuUd  'Abdu'l-Karfm  of  Kazvln',
who  was  the  BAb's  mainstay  and  trusted  intimate.
Now  since  a  great  celebrity  had  been  attained
for  Beh4'u'lUh  in  Teherdn,  and  the  hearts  of  men
were  disposed  towards  him,  he,  together  with  MulU
'Abdu'l-Karirn,  considered  it  as  expedient  that,  in
face  of  the  agitation  amongst  the  doctors,  the  ag-
gressiveness of  the  greater  part  of  [the  people  of]
Persia,  and  the  irresistible  power  of  the  Amir- Ni-
zam, whereby  both  the  B^b  and  Beh^'u'lUh  were  in
great  danger  and  liable  to  incur  severe  punishment,
some  measure  should  be  adopted  to  direct  the  thoughts
of  men  towards  some  absent  person,  by  which  means
Behd'u'lUh  would  remain  protected  from  the  inter-
,  ference  of  all  men.  And  since  further,  having  regard
to  sundry  considerations,  they  did  not  consider  an
outsider  as  suitable,  they  cast  the  lot  of  this
1  See  above,  p.  41  and  note.


A  traveller's  narrative.  63

augury  to  the  name  of  Beh^'u'114h's  brother  Mirz^
Yahyd'.

By  the  assistance  and  instruction  of  Behi'u'lUh,  p-  80.
therefore,  they  made  him  notorious  and  famous  on
the  tongues  of  friends  and  foes,  and  wrote  letters,
ostensibly  at  his  dictation,  to  the  B4b.  And  since
secret  correspondences  were  in  process  the  Bdb  highly
approved  of  this  scheme.  So  Mirzd  Yahyd  was  con-
cealed and  hidden  while  mention  of  him  was  on  the
tongues  and  in  the  mouths  of  men.  And  this  mighty
plan  was  of  wondroiis  efficacy,  for  Behi'u'lUh,  though
he  was  known  and  seen,  remained  safe  and  secure,
and  this  veil  was  the  cause  that  no  one  outside  [the
sect]  fathomed  the  matter  or  fell  into  the  idea  of
molestation,  until  Behd'u'Udh  quitted  Teheran  at  the
permission  of  the  King  and  was  permitted  to  withdraw
to  the  Supreme  Shrines.

When  he  reached  Baghdad  and  the  crescent  moon
of  the  month  of  Muharram  of  the  year  [a.  h.  one  p.  81.
thousand  two  hundred  and]  sixty-nine  (which  was
termed  in  the  books  of  the  Bdb  "  the  year  of  '  after  a
while^'  "  and  wherein  he  had  promised  the  disclosure
of  the  true  nature  of  his  religion  and  its  mysteries)
shone  forth  from  the  horizon  of  the  world,  this  covert
secret,  as  is  related,  became  apparent  amongst  all
within  and  without  [the  society].  Behi'u'lldh  with
mighty  steadfastness  became  a  target  for  the  an-ows
1  See  Note  W  at  end.  ^  See  note  3  at  foot  of  p.  55.


64  A  traveller's  narrative.

of  all  amongst  mankind,  while  Mirzd,  YahyA  in  dis-
guise passed  his  time,  now  in  the  environs  and  vicinity
of  Baghdad  engaged  for  better  concealment  in  various
trades,  now  in  Baghdad  itself  in  the  garb  of  the
Arabs.

Now  Beh4'u'lld,h  so  acted  that  the  hearts  of  this
sect  were  drawn  towards  him,  while  most  of  the
inhabitants  of  'Ir^k'  were  reduced  to  silence  and
speechlessness,  some  being  amazed  and  others  an-
82.  gered.  After  remaining  there  for  one  year  he  with-
drew his  hand  from  all  things,  abandoned  relatives
and  connections,  and,  without  the  knowledge  of  his
followers,  quitted  'Ir^k'  alone  and  solitary,  without
companion,  supporter,  associate,  or  comrade.  For
nigh  upon  two  years  he  dwelt  in  Turkish  Kurdistan,
generally  in  a  place  named  Sarkalii,  situated  in  the
mountains,  and  far  removed  from  human  habitations.
Sometimes  on  rare  occasions  he  used  to  frequent
Suleymd,niyy6.  Ere  long  had  elapsed  the  most  emi-
nent doctors  of  those  regions  got  some  inkling  of  his
circumstances  and  conditions,  and  conversed  with
him  on  the  solution  of  certain  difhcult  questions
connected  with  the  most  abstruse  points  of  theology.
Having  witnessed  on  his  part  ample  signs  and  satis-
factory explanations  they  observed  towards  him  the

1  Here  and  in  subsequent  passages  where  'Irak  is  mentioned
'Irdk-i-'Arab  (especially  Baghdad)  is  intended,  not  Irdk-i-
'Ajam.


A  tbaveller's  narrative.  65

utmost  respectfulness  and  deference.  In  consequence
of  this  he  acquired  a  great  fame  and  wonderful  p.  83.
reputation  in  those  regions,  and  fragmentary  accounts
of  him  were  circulated  in  all  quarters  and  directions,
to  wit  that  a  stranger,  a  Persian,  had  appeared  in  the
district  of  Suleymdniyy^  (which  hath  been,  from  of
old,  the  place  whence  the  most  expert  doctors  of  the
Sunnites  have  arisen),  and  that  the  people  of  that
country  had  loosed  their  tongues  in  praise  of  him.
From  the  rumour  thus  heard  it  was  known  that  that
person  was  none  other  than  Beh4'u'U^h.  Several
persons,  therefore,  hastened  thither,  and  began  to
entreat  and  implore,  and  the  urgent  entreaty  of  all
brought  about  his  return.

Now  although  this  sect  had  not  been  affected
with  quaking  or  consternation  at  these  grievous
events,  such  as  the  slaughter  of  their  chief  and  the
rest,  but  did  rather  increase  and  multiply ;  still,
since  the  B4b  was  but  beginning  to  lay  the  founda-  p.  84.
tions  when  he  was  slain,  therefore  was  this  community
ignorant  concerning  its  proper  conduct,  action,  beha-
viour, and  duty,  their  sole  guiding  principle  being  love
for  the  Bdb.  This  ignorance  was  the  reason  that  in
some  parts  disturbances  occurred ;  for,  experiencing
violent  molestation,  they  unclosed  their  hands  in
self-defence.  But  after  his  return  Beh4'u'lld,h  made
such  strenuous  efforts  in  educating,  teaching,
training,  regulating,  and  reconstructing  this  com-
B.  5


66  A  traveller's  narrative.

munity  that  in  a  short  while  all  these  troubles  and
mischiefs  were  quenched,  and  the  utmost  tranquillity
and  repose  reigned  in  men's  hearts ;  so  that,  ac-
cording to  what  hath  been  heard,  it  became  clear

p.  85.  and  obvious  even  to  statesmen  that  the  fundamental
intentions  and  ideas  of  this  sect  were  things  spiritual,
and  such  as  are  connected  with  pure  hearts ;  that
their  true  and  essential  principles  were  to  reform  the
morals  and  beautify  the  conduct  of  the  human
race,  and  that  with  things  material  they  had  abso-
lutely no  concern.

When  these  principles,  then,  were  established  in
the  hearts  of  this  sect  they  so  acted  in  all  lands  that
they  became  celebrated  amongst  statesmen  for  gentle-
ness of  spirit,  steadfastness  of  heart,  right  intent,  good
deeds,  and  excellence  of  conduct.  For  this  people
are  most  well-disposed  towards  obedience  and  sub-
missiveness,  and,  on  receiving  such  instruction,  they
conformed  their  conduct  and  behaviour  thereto.  For-
merly exception  was  taken  to  the  words,  deeds,  de-

p.  86.  meanour,  morals,  and  conduct  of  this  sect :  now  objec-
tion is  made  in  Persia  to  their  tenets  and  spiritual
state.  Now  this  is  beyond  the  power  of  man,  that
he  should  be  able  by  interference  or  objection  to
change  the  heart  and  conscience,  or  meddle  with  the
convictions  of  any  one.  For  in  the  realm  of  con-
science nought  but  the  ray  of  God's  light  can
command,  and on the throne of  the heart none


A  traveller's  narrative.  67

but  the  pervading  power  of  the  King  of  Kings  should
rule.  Thus  it  is  that  one  can  arrest  and  suspend
[the  action  of]  every  faculty  except  thought  and
reflection  ;  for  a  man  cannot  even  by  his  own  volition
withhold  himself  from  reflection  or  thought,  nor  keep
back  his  musings  and  imaginings.

At  all  events  the  undeniable  truth  is  this,  that
for  nigh  upon  thirty-five  years'  no  action  opposed
to  the  government  or  prejudicial  to  the  nation  has  p.  87.
emanated  from  this  sect  or  been  witnessed  [on  their
part],  and  that  during  this  long  period,  notwithstand-
ing the  fact  that  their  numbers  and  strength  are
double  what  they  were  formerly,  no  sound  has  arisen
from  any  place,  except  that  every  now  and  then
learned  doctors  and  eminent  scholars  (really  for  the
extension  of  this  report  through  the  world  and  the
awakening  of  men)  sentence  some  few  to  death.  For
such  interferebce  is  not  destruction  but  edification
when  thou  regardest  the  truth,  which  will  not
thereby  become  quenched  and  forgotten,  but  rather
stimulated  and  advertised.

I  will  at  least  relate  one  short  anecdote  of  what

1  This  passage  clearly  shews  that  our  history  was  composed
not  more  than  four  or  five  years  ago,  probably  during  the
year  1886.  For  since  the  attempt  on  the  Shah's  life  in  the
month  of  Shawwal,  a.h.  1268  (August  1852),  the  Babis  have
taken  no  action  hostile  to  the  Persian  government,  and  the
month  of  Shawwal,  a.h.  1303  (35  years  from  this  date)  began
in  July,  1886.

5—2


68  A  travellee's  naerative.

actually  took  place.  A  certain  person  violently
molested and grievously injured a certain B&hi.

p.  88.  The  victim  unclosed  his  hand  in  retaliation  and  arose
to  take  vengeance,  unsheathing  his  weapon  against
the  aggressor.  Becoming  the  object  of  the  censure
and  reprimand  of  this  sect,  however,  he  took  refuge
in  flight.  When  he  reached  Hamad^n  his  character
became  known,  and,  as  he  was  of  the  clerical  class,  the
doctors  vehemently  pursued  him,  handed  him  over  to
the  government,  and  ordered  chastisement  to  be
inflicted.  By  chance  there  fell  out  from  the  fold  of
his  collar  a  document  written  by  Behd'u'lldh,  the
subject  of  which  was  reproof  of  attempts  at  retalia-
tion, censure  and  reprobation  of  the  search  after
vengeance,  and  prohibition  from  following  after  lusts.
Amongst  other  matters  they  found  these  expressions
contained  in  it : — "  Verily  God  is  quit  of  the  sedi-

p.  89.  tious,"  and  likewise  : — "  If  ye  he  slain  it  is  better  for
you  than  that  ye  should  slay.  And  when  ye  are  tor-
mented liave  recourse  to  the  controllers  of  affairs  and
the  refuge  of  the  people'^ ;  and  if  ye  be  neglected  then
entrust  your  affairs  to  the  Jealous  Lord.  This  is  the
marh  of  the  sincere,  and  the  characteristic  of  the

^  i.e.  "  If  you  be  wronged  or  persecuted,  appeal  for  pro-
tection and  redress  to  the  legally  constituted  authorities ;  and
if  they  will  not  help  you,  then  be  patient  and  put  your  trust  in
God,  but  do  not  attempt  by  force  to  obtain  redress  for  your-
selves."


A TRAVELLEES XAREATIYE.  G9

asgiirnl."  "Wlien  the  governor  became  cognizant  of
tids  -writing  lie  addressed  that  person  sadng,  "By
tlie  decree  of  that  cliief  whom  you  yo\irself  obey
correction  is  necessary  and  punishment  and  chastise-
ment obhgatory."  "  K,"  rephed  that  person,  "  you
will  CArry  out  all  his  precepts  I  shall  have  the  utmost
pleastue  in  [submittiug  to]  punishment  and  death."
The  governor  smiled  and  let  the  man  go.

So  Beha'u'llah  made  the  utmost  eflbrts  to  edu-
cate [his  people]  and  incite  [them]  to  morahty.  the
acquisition  of  the  sciences  and  arts  of  all  countries,
kindly  dealing  with  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,
desire  for  the  welf.ire  of  all  peoples,  sociability,  con-
cord, obedience,  submissiveuess.  instruction  of  [their]  p.  90.
children,  prodtiction  of  what  is  needful  for  the  human
race,  and  inauguration  of  true  happiness  for  mankind :
and  he  continu;dly  kept  sebding  tracts  of  admonition
to  all  parts,  whereby  a  wonderful  eflect  was  prodticed.
Some  of  tliese  epistles  have,  after  extreme  search  and
enquiry,  been  examined,  and  some  portions  of  them
shall  now  be  set  down  in  writing\

'  For  some  aeoonnt  of  Bella's  v:uiDns  writings  see  B.  ii.
pp.  942 — ?S1.  A  specimen  of  the  j'il\  in  the  original  may  be
found  in  Bosen's  JiSS.  Pcrfjr.s.  pp.  32 — 51.  ajid  a  part  of  the
liCi  *.-■»-  in  iiif  -V5S.  Arabes.  pp.  191 — 212.  Baron  Eosen
intends  shortly  to  publish  the  whole  of  the  ^s^^  «iji_
including  the  Epistles  to  Ihi  Kings  (j-l."^  ^i»'\  ^*'^''  ^^
hxs  been  kind  enough  to  send  me  the  proof-sheets of  this


70  A  traveller's  narrative.

All  these  epiBtles  conwHted  of  [exliortatioiiH  to]
purity  of  morals,  eiicoiiraKeinent  to  t^ood  conduct,  re-
probation of  certain  individuals,  ;md  complaiiitH  of  the
seditious.  An]ongstotlic.rMthiss(tntcnccvv;isrc(;ordcd:—
"My  captivUy  is  not  my  ((JxiM'ineid  :  by  wy  l.ije,  it,  'is
ii/i/i'i'darjlory  iml,<i  me!  liiU  tlie  iiJHi.snw'ii/,  /.v  ///c  w:-
p.  !)1.  tioii  of  myfrmids  who  amncrl  llu'/ivudwn  wiUi.  ii.s  (mil
follow  tlis  (l.i'!iM  in  iJwk  iu;lhiv,s.  Am.owisl,  timm  ix  he
iv/io  tuMh  lust  mid  tn.rw'th  anldf.  from  what  is  com-
manded; and  amouf/sf,  tlmm  is  he.  wlu)  follovmth  ihi:
triUh  ill  rifjht  <jii,idawr.  As  for  tlmse  who  cimimit  sin
and  cliwj  to  tlw  world  they  am  assii/ri'dly  not  (f  the,
•people  of  Bella."

So  again : —

"  Well  is  it  with  him  v)lw  is  ailoriied  'with  the
decoration  of  manners  and  morals:  'eerily  he  is  of
those  'who  help  their  Lord  with  clear  perspicwius  ac-

tlO'll.

"lie  is  God,  exalted  is  J I  is  state,  'wisdom  antl
utterance.  The  'JVue  One  (glorious  is  His  glory)  for
the  shewing  forth  of  the  gems  of  ideals  from  the  mine
of  man,  hath,  in  every  age,  sent  a  trusted  orn;.  Tlie
primary  foundation  of  the  faith  of  God  and  the
religion  of  God  is  this,  that  they  should  not  make
diverse  sects  and  various  paths  the  cause  and  reason  rtf
hatred. These  principles  and  laws  and  li  rm  sure  roarls

important  work  as  they  are  printed  off. Further  information
will  be  lound  in  a  BubBequent  foot-note.


A  traveller's  narrative.  71

appear  from  one  dawning-place  and  shine  from  one
dayspring,  and  these  diversities  were  out  of  regard  for
the  requirements  of  the  time,  season,  ages,  and  epochs,  p-  92.
0  unitarians,  make  firm  the  girdle  of  endeavour,  that
perchance  rehgious  strife  and  conflict  may  be  removed
from  amongst  the  people  of  the  world  and  be  an-
nulled. For  love  of  God  and  His  servants  engage  in
this  great  and  mighty  matter.  Religious  hatred  and
rancour  is  a  world-consuming  fire,  and  the  quenching
thereof  most  arduous,  unless  the  hand  of  Divine
Might  give  men  deliverance  from  this  unfruitful
calamity.  Consider  a  war  which  happeneth  between
two  states  :  both  sides  have  foregone  wealth  and  life :
how  many  villages  were  beheld  as  though  they  were
not !  This  precept  is  in  the  position  of  the  light  in
the  lamp  of  utterance."

"  0  people  of  the  world,  ye  are  all  the  fruit  of  one
tree  and  the  leaves  of  one  branch.  Walk  with  perfect
charity,  concord,  affection,  and  agreement.  I  swear  p.  93.
by  the  Sun  of  Truth,  the  light  of  agreement  shall
brighten  and  illumine  the  horizons.  The  all-knowing
Truth  hath  been  and  is  the  witness  to  this  saying.
Endeavour  to  attain  to  this  high  supreme  station
which  is  the  station  of  protection  and  preservation  of
mankind.  This  is  the  intent  of  the  King  of  inten-
tions, and  this  the  hope  of  the  Lord  of  hopes."

"  We  trust  that  God  will  assist  the  kings  of  the
earth  to  illuminate  and  adorn  the  earth  with  the


72  A  traveller's  narrative.

refulgent  light  of  the  Sun  of  Justice.  At  one
time  we  spoke  in  the  language  of  the  Law,  at
another  time  in  the  language  of  the  Truth  and  the
"Way ;  and  the  ultimate  object  and  remote  aim  was
the  shewing  forth  of  this  high  supreme  station.  And
God  sufficethfor  witness."
p.  94.  "0  friends,  consort  with  all  the  people  of  the
world  with  joy  and  fragrance.  If  there  be  to  you
a  word  or  essence  whereof  others  than  you  are  devoid,
communicate  it  and  shew  it  forth  in  the  lang-uage  of
affection  and  kindness :  if  it  be  received  and  be  effec-
tive the  object  is  attained,  and  if  not  leave  it  to
him,  and  with  regard  to  him  deal  not  harshly  but
pray'.  The  language  of  kindness  is  the  lodestone  of
hearts  and  the  food  of  the  soul ;  it  stands  in  the  re-
lation of  ideas  to  words,  and  is  as  an  horizon  for
the  shining  of  the  Sun  of  Wisdom  and  Knowledge."

"  If  the  unitarians  had  in  the  latter  times  acted
according  to  the  glorious  Law  [which  came]  after
His  Highness  the  Seal  [of  the  Proj)hets°]  (may  the
life  of  all  beside  him  be  his  sacrifice !),  and  had  clung
to  its  skirt,  the  foundation  of  the  fortress  of  religion

'  i.e.  "  If  you  have  a  message  or  gospel  wherein  others  are
not  partakers,  then  convey  it  to  those  about  you  in  kind  and
gentle  words.  If  they  accept  it  you  have  gained  your  object ;
if  not,  leave  it  to  ripen  and  bear  fruit,  and  pray  that  it  may  do
so,  but  on  no  account  strive  to  force  its  acceptance  on  any
one."

2  Muhammad.


A TRAVELLES5 XAJRBATm:.  73

would  not  have  been shaken,  and  populous  cities
woiild  not  hare  been  ruined,  but  rather  cities  and  p.  95.
Tillages  would  have  acquired  and  been  adorned  with
the  decoration  >:<i  peace  and  serenity.'

"  Tivrouirh  the  iieeales-Le--  and  'ii-r-ordance  of
the  fiaToured  people  and  the  smoke  of  wicke<i  sc'iil-
the  Fair  Xati in  is  ^een  to  be  darkened  and  enfeecleti
Had  they  aote^i  [aocoriiing  to  what  they  knew]  they
would  not  hare  been  hee-He--  of  the  light  of  the  Sim
of . Justice."

"This  victim  hath  from  earliest  clays  until  now
been  amictel  at  the  hands  of  the  heecUes-.  They
exiled  us  ^nr^^i'it  cause  at  one  time  to  Irak',  at
another  time  to  A'irianople,  and  thence  to  Acre,
which  was  a  place  oi  esile  for  murderer*  and  robbers  :
neither  is  it  iiown  where  and  in  what  spot  we  shall
take  up  OUT  abode  after  this  greatest  prisc'n-hc'use.
Erv'Arl^ge  li  irltk  G'>i,  the  Lyrd  of  thf  T}i:ron>i  and
of  th.K  du-it  and  tk-:  I/yrd  of  th^^  t'-f^y  •~'-'''^-  In  what-
exer  place  we  may  be,  and  whatever  befal  us,  the
sairrs  mn-t  gaze  with  pierfect  steaclfa^tness  and  conli-
dence  towards  the  .S'lpreme  Horizon  and  occupy  p.  96.
themselves  in  the  reformation  of  the  world  and  the
educ-ation  of  the  narlons.  What  hath  be&Uen  and
-ball  beM  hath  been  and  is  an  instrument  and  means
for  the furtherance of  the  Word  of  17nity. To.};e

-  Sa  no:e  on  p.  64.


74  A  traveller's  narrative.

Iwld  of  the  command  of  God  and  cling  thereto:
verily  it  hath  been  sent  down  from  beside  a  wise
Ordainer."

"With  perfect  compassion  and  mercy  have  we
guided  and  directed  the  people  of  the  world  to  that
whereby  their  souls  shall  be  profited.  I  swear  by
the  Sun  of  Truth  which  hath  shone  forth  from  the
liighest  horizons  of  the  world  that  the  people  of  Behd
had  not  and  have  not  any  aim  save  the  prosperity
and  reformation  of  the  world  and  the  purifying
of  the  nations.  With  all  men  they  have  been  in
sincerity  and  charity.  Their  outward  [appearance]  is
one  with  their  inward  [heart],  and  their  inward  [heart]
identical  with  their  outward  [appearance].  The  truth
p.  97.  of  the  matter  is  not  hidden  or  concealed,  but  plain
and  evident  before  [men's]  faces.  Their  very  deeds  are
the  witness  of  this  assertion.  To-day  let  every  one
endowed  with  vision  win  his  way  from  deeds  and  signs
to  the  object  of  the  people  of  Beh4  and  from  their
speech  and  conduct  gain  knowledge  of  their  intent.
The  waves  of  the  ocean  of  divine  mercy  appear  at
the  utmost  height,  and  the  showers  of  the  clouds
of  His  grace  and  favour  descend  every  moment.
During  the  days  of  sojourn  in  'Ir4k'  this  oppressed
one  sat  down  and  consorted  with  all  classes  without
veil  or  disguise. How  many  of  the  denizens  of  the

1  See  note  on  p.  64.


A TRAVELLER  S  SAERATIVE.  "5

hoiifflivns"  entered  in  enmirr  and  went  fonli  in  jym-
paihy :  The  dc>OT  of  gracv  wuj  open  before  the  fsee*
o{  all  With  rel>eIliou<  snd  obedient  did  we  ont-
■wanily  ccairerse  after  one  iashion.  that  perehanoe
the  evil-dc>eis  might  win  their  war  to  the  ocean  of
'ivvaidlesj  fordTenesSw  The  jplendonrs  of  the  Name
of  the  CMioealer^  were  in  jiioh  wise  manifested  that
the  evil-doer  inia.gined  that  he  was  acxvnnted  of  the  p.  ?S.
gvvxL  ]!Vo  messenpex  wuj  disappointed  and  no  en-
qoirei  was  tamed  baok.  The  oanses  of  the  aversion
and  avoiviance  of  men  weie  certain  of  the  doctors
of  Peraa  and  the  nnseemh-  deeds  of  the  ipioisnt.
Bt  ^the  term]  "doctors"  in  the^se  passag-es  are  si^ined
those  persons  who  have  withheld  mankind  from  the
shore  of  the  Ocean  of  Unity :  btit  as  for  the  learned  who
pTactii<e  their  tnowled^^  and  the  wise  who  aet  jnstiy.
they  are  as  the  spirit  tinto  the  body  of  the  world.  Well
is  it  with  that  learned  man  whose  head  is  adorned
with  the  crewn  of  justioe,  and  whv>se  body  irloiieth
in  the  omament  of  honesty. The  Pen  of  Admonition

-  if.  Hie  pecTkf  rf  ail  lasi^.

-  -The  CoiKesjeir"  ljc_i''  i?  exj  cfl  ii)e  Nszrsts  ci  G-r^i  (ise

Xs;^:;^  liic  Prc^fis  are  ihe  znirrcT;  ^t  tIs«s  n  liiiriic-saiics:

^.»^\ In ibciT s«i^:i; ihf Kvine  ATtrir--jes  Tbilisi

Bcii's  eosaocffiJEseM  en'  his  ieeaajs  ii  i^re  aesaibed  ai  a


76  A  traveller's  narrative.

exhorteth  the  friends  and  enjoineth  on  them  charity,
pity,  wisdom,  and  gentleness.  The  oppressed  one'
is  this  day  a  prisoner ;  his  allies  are  the  hosts  of  good
deeds  and  virtues;  not  ranks,  and  hosts,  and  g-uns,
p.  99.  and  cannons.  One  holy  action  maketh  the  world  of
earth  highest  paradise.

"0  friends,  help  the  oppressed  one  with  well-
pleasing  virtues  and  good  deeds !  To-day  let  every
soul  desire  to  attain  the  highest  station.  He  must
not  regard  what  is  in  him,  but  what  is  in  God.  It  is
not  for  Mm  to  regard  ivhat  shall  advantage  himself,  hut
that  whereby  the  Word  of  God  which  must  be  obeyed
shall  be  tip^-aised.  The  heart  must  be  sanctified  from
every  form  of  selfishness  and  lust,  for  the  weapons
of  the  unitarians  and  the  saints  were  and  are  the
fear  of  God.  That  is  the  buckler  which  guardeth
man  from  the  arrows  of  hatred  and  abomination.
Unceasingly  hath  the  standard  of  piety  been  vic-
torious, and  accounted  amongst  the  most  puissant
hosts  of  the  world.  Thereby  do  the  saints  subdue  the
p.  100.  cities  of  [men's]  hearts  by  the  permission  of  God,  the
Lord  of  hosts.  Darkness  hath  encompassed  the  earth :
the  lamp  which  giveth  light  was  and  is  wisdom.  The
dictates  thereof  must  be  observed  under  all  circum-
stances. And  of  wisdom  is  the  regard  of  place  and
the  utterance  of  discourse  according  to  measure  and

'  Throughout  his  writings  by  the  terms  '  tlie  oppressed  one,'
'  this  oppressed  one,'  '  this  servant,'  &c.,  Beha  intends  himself.


A  traveller's  narrative.  77

state.  And  of  wisdom  is  decision;  for  man  should
not  accept  whatsoever  anyone  sayeth\

"  Under  all  circumstances  desire  of  the  True  One
(glorious  is  His  glory)  that  He  will  not  deprive  His
servants  of  the  sealed  wine^  and  the  lights  of  the
Name  of  the  Self-subsistent.

"  0  friends  of  God,  verily  the  Pen  of  Sincerity  en-
joineth  on  you  the  greatest  faithfulness.  By  the  Life
of  God,  its  light  is  more  evident  than  the  light  of  the
sun !  In  its  light  and  its  brightness  and  its  radiance
every  light  is  eclipsed.  We  desire  of  God  that  He  p.  101.
will  not  withhold  from  His  cities  and  lands  the  radiant
effulgence  of  the  Sun  of  Faithfulness.  We  have
directed  all  in  the  nights  and  in  the  days  to  faithful-
ness, chastity,  purity,  and  constancy;  and  have  en-
joined  good deeds  and  well-pleasing  qualities. In

^  i.e.  Of  the  dictates  of  wisdom  one  is  this,  that  the  believer
should  in  speaking  have  regard  to  fitness  of  time  and  place  and
not  with  undiscriminating  zeal  lay  bare  his  convictions  to  all
persons  or  in  all  companies;  and  another  is  this,  that  he
should  be  firmly  established  in  his  belief  and  not  be  '  tossed  to
and  fro  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine.'

^  By  the  '  sealed  wine '  are  meant  the  ordinances  of  God.
Thus  in  the  'Most  Holy  Book'  {^j^J\  JvS"  rather  than  ^^\  ^  j
by  which  name  I  formerly  described  it,  B.  ii.  972 — 981)  it  is

written r—p^^ii^jl  Jj-_fll  oi.  Uii  J.  f.lsC»Vl  ^  \i'j,  tl  (>-»  V
^  ^IjsVI  )  i'jjiJI  ».UL  "-Do  not  consider  that  we  have  re-
vealed unto  you  ordinances,  but  rather  that  we  have  opened  the
seal  of  the  sealed  wine  with  the  fingers  of  might  andpozoer."


78  A  traveller's  narrative.

the  nights  and  in  the  days  the  shriek  of  the  pen
ariseth  and  the  tongue  speaketh,  that  against  the
sword  the  word  may  arise,  and  against  fierceness
patience,  and  in  place  of  oppression  submission,  and
at  the  time  of  martyrdom  resignation.  For  thirty
years  and  more,  in  all  that  hath  befallen  this
oppressed  community  they  have  been  patient,  re-
ferring it  to  God.  Every  one  endowed  with  justice
and  fairness  hath  testified  and  doth  testify  to  that
which  hath  been  said.  During  this  period  this
oppressed  one  was  engaged  in  good  exhortations  and
efficacious  and  sufficient  admonitions,  till  it  became
p.  102.  established  and  obvious  before  all  that  this  victim  had
made  himself  a  target  for  the  arrows  of  calamity
unto  the  shewing  forth  of  the  treasures  deposited  in
[men's]  souls.  Strife  and  contest  were  and  are  seemly
in  the  beasts  of  prey  of  the  earth,  [but]  laudable
actions  are  seemly  in  man.

"  Blessed  is  the  Merciful  One :  Who  cre<Ui'cl  man :
and  taught  him  utterance.  After  all  these  troubles,
neither  are  the  ministers  of  state  content,  nor
the  doctors  of  the  church.  Not  one  soul  was
found  to  utter  a  word  for  God  before  the  court
of  His  Majesty  the  King  {may  God  perpetuate
his  kingdom).  There  shall  not  befal  us  aught
save  that  which  God  hath  decreed  unto  us.  They
acted  not  kindly,  nor  was  there  any  shortcoming
in the display of evil. Justice became like the


A  traveller's  narrative.  79

phoenix',  and  faithfulness  like  the  philosopher's
stone:  none  spake  for  the  right.  It  would  seem
that  justice  had  become  hateful  to  men  and  cast  p.  103.
forth  from  all  lands  like  the  people  of  God.  Glory
be  to  God!  In  the  episode  of  the  land  of  Td^  not
one  spoke  for  that  which  God  had  commanded.
Having  regard  to  the  display  of  power  and  parade
of  service  in  the  presence  of  the  King  {may  God
perpetuate  his  kingdom)  they  have  called  good  evil
and  the  reformer  a  sedition-monger.  The  like  of
these  persons  would  depict  the  drop  as  an  ocean,
and  the  mote  as  a  sun.  They  call  the  house  at
Kalin^  'the  strong  fortress,'  and  close  their  eyes
to  the  perspicuous  truth.  They  have  attacked  a
number  of  reformers  of  the  world  with  the  charge

1  The  'Ankd  (in  Persian  Simurgh),  a  mythical  bird  dwelling
in  the  mountains  of  Kdf,  which  bound  the  world  according  to
the  old  Arabian  cosmography.  Hence  anything  very  rare  or
hard  to  find  or  of  which  the  name  is  heard  but  the  form  is  not
seen  U^\  j  •«»  (wVl iy-y)  i^  compared  to  it.

2  '  The  land  of  Td'  (u,  ^j|)  means  Teheran. So  in  the

Kitdb-i-Akdag  Khuikskn is called i\^\ ,^,\ and  Kirman

^\J\  3  ijis3l  ijijl  ;  while  in  the  Persian  Beyan  we  find
mention  of  the  land  of  Alif  (Azarbaijan),  the  land  of  'Ayn
('Irak),  the  land  ofFd  (F^rs),  and  the  land  of  Mim  (Mazandaran).
This  use  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  to  designate  places
and  people  is  very  common  amongst  the  Babis.  See  the  note
on  the  colophon  at  the  end  of  the  book.

3  Concerning  Kalin  (less  correctly  Kuleyn)  see  p.  14  supra
and  note  3  thereon.


80  A  traveller's  narrative.

of  seditiousness.  As  God  liveth,  these  persons  had
and  have  no  intent  nor  hope  save  the  glory  of  the
state  and  service  to  their  nation !  For  God  they
spoke  and  for  God  they  speak,  and  in  the  way  of
God  do  they  journey.

p.  104.  "  0  friends,  ask  of  Him  who  is  the  Desire  of  the
denizens  of  earth  that  He  will  succour  His  Majesty
the  King  (may  God  perpetuate  Ms  kvngdom)  so  that
all  the  dominions  of  Persia  may  by  the  light  of  the
Sun  of  Justice  become  adorned  with  the  decoration
of  tranquillity  and  security.  According  to  state-
ments made,  he,  at  the  promptings  of  his  blessed
nature,  loosed  those  who  were  in  bonds,  and  bestowed
freedom  on  the  captives.  The  representation  of
certain  matters  before  the  faces  of  [God's]  servants
is  obligatory,  and  natural  to  the  pious,  so  that
the  good  may  be  aware  and  become  cognizant
[thereof].  Verily  He  inspireth  whom  He  pleaseth
ivith  what  He  desiretli,  and  He  is  tlie  Powerfiol,  the
Ordainer,  the  Knowing,  the  Wise.

"A  word  from  that  land  hath  reached  the  oppressed
one  which  in  truth  was  the  cause  of  wonder.  His
Highness  the  Mu'tamadu  'd-Dawla,  Farh^d  Mlrzd,\
said  concerning  the  imprisoned  one  that  whereof  the

p,  105.  repetition  is  not  pleasing.  This  victim  consorted
very  little  with  him  or  the  like  of  him. So  far  as  is

1  Farhad  Mlrza  was  the  uncle  of  the  Shah. He  died  in
1888.


A  traveller's  narrative.  81

recollected  on  [only]  two  occasions  did  lie  visit
Murgh-Mahalla  in  Shimirdn'  where  was  the  abode  of
the  oppressed  one.  On  the  first  occasion  he  came
one  day  in  the  afternoon,  and  on  the  second  one
Friday  morning,  returning  nigh  unto  sundown.  He
knows  and  is  conscious  that  he  should  not  speak
contrary  to  the  truth.  If  one  enter  his  presence  let
him  repeat  these  words  before  him  on  behalf  of  the
oppressed  one: — '0  Prince!  I  ash  justice  and
fairness  from  your  Highness  concerning  tliat  which
hath  befallen  this  poor  victim.'  Well  is  it  for  that
soul  whom  the  doubts  of  the  perverse  withhold  not
from  the  display  of  justice,  and  deprive  not  of  the
lights  of  the  luminary  of  equity.  0  saints  of  God !  p.  106.
at  the  end  of  our  discourse  we  enjoin  on  you  once
again  chastity,  faithfulness,  godliness,  sincerity,  and
purity.  Lay  aside  the  evil  and  adopt  the  good.  This
is  that  whereunto  ye  are  commanded  in  the  Book  of
God,  the  Knowing,  tlie  Wise.  Well  is  it  with  those
wlio  practise  [this  injunction].  At  this  moment  the
pen  crieth  out,  saying,  '  0  saints  of  God,  regard  the
horizon  of  uprightness,  and  be  quit,  severed,  and  free
from  what  is  beside  this.  There  is  no  strength  and
110 power  save  in  God.'"

'  Shimiran  or  Shimritn  (sometimes  used  in  the  plural,
Shimranat)  is  the  name  applied  generally  to  the  villages  and
mansions  situated  on  the  lower  slopes  descending  from  Elburz
which  serve  as  summer  residences  to  the  wealthier  inhabitants
of  Teheran.

B.  6


82  A  traveller's  narrative.

In  short,  formerly  in  all  provinces  in  Persia
accounts  and  stories  concerning  this  sect  diverse
and  discordant,  yea,  incompatible  with  the  character
of  the  human  race  and  opposed  to  the  divine  endow-
ment, passed  on  the  tongues  and  in  the  mouths  of
men  and  obtained  notoriety. But  when  their  prin-

p.  107.  ciples  acquired  fixity  and  stability  and  their  conduct
and  behaviour  were  known  and  appreciated,  the  veil
of  doubt  and  suspicion  fell,  the  true  character  of  this
sect  became  clear  and  evident,  and  it  reached  the
degree  of  certainty  that  their  principles  were  unlike
men's  fancies,  and  that  their  foundation  differed  from
[the  popular]  opinion  and  estimate.  In  their  conduct,
action,  morality,  and  demeanour  was  no  place  for
objection ;  the  objection  in  Persia  is  to  certain  of  the
ideas  and  tenets  of  this  sect.  And  from  the  indica-
tions of  various  circumstances  it  hath  been  observed
that  the  people  have  acquired  belief  and  confidence
in  the  trustworthiness,  faithfulness,  and  godliness  of
this  sect  in  all  transactions.

Let  us  return  to  our  original  topic.  During  the
period  of  their  sojourn  in  'Irdk  these  persons  became
notorious  throughout  the  world. For  exile  resulted

p.  108.  in  fame,  in  such  wise  that  a  great  number  of  other
parties  sought  alliance  and  union,  and  devised  means
of  [acquiring]  intimacy  [with  them].  But  the  chief
of  this  sect,  discovering  the  aims  of  each  faction,  acted
with  the  utmost consistency, circumspection, and


A  TBAYELLERS NARRATITE.  S3

firmness.  Eeposing  confidence  in  none,  he  applied
liimself  as  &r  as  possible  to  tlie  admonition  of  eacli,
inciting  and  urging  them  to  good  resolutions  and
aims  beneficial  to  the  state  and  the  nation.  And
this  conduct  and  behariour  of  the  chief  acquir^i
notoriety  in  'Irak.

So  likewise  dnring  the  period  of  their  sojourn  in
"Irak  certain  functionaries  of  foreign  gOTemments
were  desirous  of  intimacy,  and  sought  friendly  rek-
tions  [with  them] :  but  the  chief  would  not  agree.
Amongst  other  strange  haps  was  this,  that  in  Irak  p.  109.
certain  of  the  Eoyal  Family  came  to  an  understanding
with  these  [foreign]  governments,  and,  [induced]  by
promises  and  threats,  conspired  with  them.  But  this
sect  unloosed  their  tongues  in  reproach  and  began  to
admonish  them,  saying,  "What  meanness  is  this,  and
what  evident  treason:  that  man  should,  for  worldly
advantages,  personal  profit,  easy  circumstances,  or
protecrion  of  life  and  property,  cast  himself  into  this
great  detriment  and  evident  loss,  and  embark  in  a
course  of  action  which  will  conduce  to  the  greatest
abasement  and  involve  the  utmost  infemy  and  dis-
grace both  here  and  hereafter !  One  can  support  any
bareness  save  treason  to  one's  country,  and  every  sin
admits  of  pardon  and  forgiveness  save  [that  of]  dis-
honouring one's  government  and  injuring  one  s
nation."'  And  they  imagined  that  they  were  acting
patriotically, displaying sincerity  and  loyalty,  and  p.  UO.


84 A  travellee's  narrative.

accounting  sacred  the  duties  of  fidelity ;  which  noble
aim  they  regarded  as  a  moral  obligation.  So  rumours
of  this  were  spread  abroad  through  'Irdk-i-'Arab,  and
such  as  wished  well  to  their  country  loosed  their
tongues  in  uttering  thanks,  expressing  approval  and
respect.  And  it  was  supposed  that  these  events  would
be  represented  in  the  Royal  Presence ;  but  after  a
while  it  became  known  that  certain  of  the  Sheykhs  at
the  Supreme  Shrines'  who  were  in  correspondence
with  the  court,  yea,  even  with  the  King,  were  in
secret  continually  attributing  to  this  sect  strange
affinities  and  relations,  imagining  that  such  attempts
would  conduce  to  favour  at  the  Court  and  cause
111.  advancement  of  [their]  condition  and  rank.  And
since  no  one  could  speak  freely  on  this  matter  at  that
court  which  is  the  pivot  of  justice,  whilst  just
ministers  aware  [of  the  true  state  of  the  case]  also
regarded  silence  as  their  best  policy,  the  'IhiAdenes-
tion,  through  these  misrepresentations  anMliness  ot^
assumed  gravity  in  Teheran,  and  was  #'-,  ,^  iy
exaggerated.  But  the  consuls-general,  being  :^'.<)gni-
zant  of  the  truth,  continued  to  act  with  modeiation,
until  Mfrz4  Buzurg  Kh4n  of  Kazvln"  became  consul-

1  Kerbel4  and  Nejef.

-  According  to  Subh-i-Ezel's  statement,  Mirza  Buzurg
Khan  became  incensed  against  the  Babls,  partly  because  they
would  not  consent  to  secure  his  goodwill  by  a  bribe,  partly
because  Beh4'u'llah  took  to  wife  the  daughter  of  a  merchant
whom  he  wished  to  marry. At  all  events  his  enmity  was  such


A  TRAVELLERS  NARRATIVE. 85

general  in  Baghdad.  Now  since  this  person  was
wont  to  pass  the  greater  portion  of  his  time  in  a  state
of  intoxication  and  was  devoid  of  foresight,  he  be-
came the  accomplice  and  confederate  of  those  Sheykhs
in  'Irdk,  and  girded  up  his  loins  stoutly  to  destroy
and  demoKsh.  Such  power  of  description  and
[strength]  of  fingers  as  he  possessed  he  employed  in  p- 112.
making  representations  and  statements.  Each  day
he  secretly  wrote  a  dispatch  to  Teherdn,  made  vows
and  compacts  with  the  Sheykhs,  and  sent  diplomatic
notes  to  His  Excellency  the  Ambassador-in-chief '  [at
Constantinople].  But  since  these  statements  and
depositions  had  no  basis  or  foundation,  they  were  aU
postponed  and  adjourned ;  until  at  length  these
Sheykhs  convened  a  meeting  to  consult  with  the
[Consul-]  General,  assembled  a  number  of  learned
doctors  and  great  divines  in  the  [mosque  of  the]  'two
Kdzims'^  (upon  them  be  peace),  and,  having  come  to

that  he  strove  to  incite  the  'Ulama  of  Baghdad  to  declare  a
jihad  or  religious  war  against  the  Babis,  and  this,  according  to
Subh-i-Ezel,  they  would  have  done,  had  not  Namik  Pasha,
then  governor  of  Baghdad,  prevented  them,  saying, '  These  are
not  rebels,  and  you  shall  not  kill  them '.

^  Mirza  Huseyn  Khau  was  at  this  time  Persian  ambassador
at  Constantinople.

^  '  The  tombs  of  the  '  two  Kdzims  '  (i.e.  the  seventh  Imam,
Mfisa  Kazim,  and  the  ninth  Imam,  Muhammad  Taki)  are
situated  about  3  miles  N.  of  Baghdad,  and  constitute  one  of
the  principal  places  of  pilgrimage  of  the  Shi'ites.  Around  them
has  grown  up  a  considerable  town,  chiefly  inhabited  by  Per-
sians, known  as  Kdzimeyn.'


86 A  traveller's  naerative.

an  unanimous  agreement,  wrote  to  the  divines  of
KerbeM  the  exalted  and  Nejef  the  most  noble,  con-
voking them  all.  They  came,  some  knowing,  others
not  knowing.  Amongst  the  latter  the  illustrious  and
expert  doctor,  the  noble  and  celebrated  scholar,  the
p.  113.  seal  of  seekers  after  truth,  Sheykh  Murtazi',  now
departed  and  assoiled,  who  was  the  admitted  chief  of
all,  arrived  without  knowledge  [of  the  matter  in
hand].  But,  so  soon  as  he  was  informed  of  their
actual  designs,  he  said,  "I  am  not  properly  acquainted
with  the  essential  character  of  this  sect,  nor  with  the

^  In  the  Epistle  to  the  King  of  Persia  (OLU-  j;_jl)  Sheykh
Murtaza  is  especially  exempted  from  the  condemnation  pro-
nounced against  the  majority  of  the  Shi'ite  doctors,  and  held
up  as  an  example  of  a  truly  pious  and  God-fearing  divine  (see
p.  129  infra).  I  was  informed  by  Subh-i-Ezel  that  he  not
only  refused  to  pronounce  sentence  against  the  Babis  or  sanc-
tion a  jihad  'against  them,  but  that  he  also  withheld  the  Shah
from  persecuting  the  Sheykhis  (concerning  whom  see  Note  E
at  end) saying,  "  May  it  not  become like  the  affair  of  the

Babis!"  The  book  called  .iJ^OI  ^a^  {Stories  of  Divines),
published  at  Teheran  A.  H.  1304,  gives  a  brief  account  of
Sheykh  Murtaza,  whose  lectures,  as  it  appears,  the  author  of
the  work  in  question  attended  for  a  while.  According  to  this
account  Sheykh  Murtaz&  was  a  native  of  Shushtar,  but  spent
the  greater  part  of  his  life  at  Nejef,  where,  at  the  age  of  80,  he
died  and  was  buried. Neither  the  date  of  his  birth  nor  that

of  his death  is given. His  works — not  very numerous

are  mentioned,  and  his  remarkable  piety  and  learning  highly
praised.  Indeed  it  is  stated  that  after  Sheykh  Muhammad
Hasan  he  was  the  most  eminent  of  all  the  Shi'ite  doctors.


A  traveller's  narrative.  87

secret  tenets  and  hidden  theological  doctrines  of  this
commiinit)'' ;  neither  have  I  hitherto  witnessed  or
perceived  in  their  demeanour  or  conduct  anything  at
variance  with  the  Perspicuous  Book  which  would
lead  me  to  pronounce  them  infidels.  (Therefore  hold
me  excused  in  this  matter,  and  let  him  who  regards
it  as  his  duty  take  action."  Now  the  design  of  the
Sheykhs  and  the  Consul  was  a  sudden  and  general
attack,  but,  by  reason  of  the  non-compliance  of  the
departed  Sheykh,  this  scheme  proved  abortive,  re-
sulting, indeed,  only  in  shame  and  disappointment.
So  that  concourse  of  Sheykhs,  doctors,  and  common
folk  which  had  come  from  KerbeU  dispersed.  P-  Un-

just at  this  time  mischievous  persons — [including]
even  certain  dismissed  ministers — endeavoured  on  all
sides  so  to  influence  this  sect  that  they  might  per-
chance alter  their  course  and  conduct.  From  every
quarter  lying  messages  and  disquieting  reports  con-
tinually followed  one  another  in  uninterrupted  and
constant  succession  to  the  effect  that  the  deliberate
intention  of  the  court  of  Persia  was  the  eradication,
suppression,  annihilation,  and  destruction  of  this
sect ;  that  correspondence  was  continually  being
carried  on  with  the  local  authorities ;  and  that  all
[the  Bdbfs]  in  'Irdk  would  shortly  be  delivered  over
with  bound  hands  to  Persia.  But  the  B&his  passed
the  time  in  calmness  and  silence,  without  in  any  way
altering  their  behaviour  and  conduct.


88  A  traveller's  narrative.

So  when  Mi'rzd  Buzurg  Khdn  failed  to  effect  and
accomplish  the  designs  of  his  heart  by  such  actions
also,  he  ill-advisedly  fell  to  reflecting  how  he  might

p.  115.  grieve  and  humiliate  [the  Bdbis].  Every  day  he
sought  some  pretext  for  offering  insult,  aroused
some  disturbance  and  tumult,  and  raised  up  the
banner  of  mischief,  until  the  matter  came  nigh  to
culminating  in  the  sudden  outbreak  of  a  riot,  the
lapse  of  the  reins  of  control  from  the  hand,  and  the
precipitation  of  [men's]  hearts  into  disquietude
and  perturbation  and  [their]  minds  into  anguish  and
agony.

Now  when  [the  BAbfs]  found  themselves  unable  to
treat  this  humour  by  any  means  (for,  strive  as  they
would,  they  were  foiled  and  frustrated),  and  when
they  failed  to  find  any  remedy  for  this  disorder  or
any  fairness  in  this  flower,  they  deliberated  and  hesi-
tated for  nine  months,  and  at  length  a  certain  number
of  them,  to  stop  further  mischief,  enrolled  themselves
as  subjects  of  the  Sublime  Ottoman  Government,  that
[thereby]  they  might  assuage  this  tumult. By  means

p.  116.  of  this  device  the  mischief  was  allayed,  and  the  consul
withdrew  his  hand  from  molesting  them;  but  he
notified  this  occurrence  to  the  Royal  Court  in  a
manner  at  variance  with  the  facts  and  contrary  to  the
truth,  and,  together  with  the  confederate  Sheykhs,
applied  himself  in  every  way  to  devices  for  distracting
the  senses  [of  the  Bdbls]. Finally,  however,  being


A  traveller's  narrative.  89

dismissed,  and  overwhelmed  with  disaster,  he  became
penitent  and  sorry.

Let  us  proceed  with  our  original  topic.  For
eleven  years  and  somewhat  over,  Beh4'u'114h  abode
in  'Ir4k-i-'Arab.  The  behaviour  and  conduct  of  the
sect  were  such  that  [his]  fame  and  renown  increased.
For  he  was  manifest  and  apparent  amongst  men,
consorted  and  associated  with  all  parties,  and  would
converse  familiarly  with  doctors  and  scholars  con-
cerning the  solution  of  difficult  theological  questions
and  the  verification  of  the  true  sense  of  abstruse
points  of  divinity.  As  is  currently  reported  by  p.  117.
persons  of  every  class,  he  used  to  please  all,  whether
inhabitants  or  visitors,  by  his  kindly  intercourse  and
courteous  address ;  and  this  sort  of  demeanour  and
conduct  on  his  part  led  them  to  suspect  sorcery  and
account  him  an  adept  in  the  occult  sciences.

During  this  period  Mirzd  Yahy4  remained  con-
cealed and  hidden,  continuing  and  abiding  in  his
former  conduct  and  behaviour,  until,  when  the  edict
for  the  removal  of  Behd'u'Mh  from  Baghdad'  was
issued  by  His  Majesty  the  Ottoman  monarch,  Mirz4
Yahy4  would  neither  quit  nor  accompany  [him] :  at
one  time  he  meditated  setting  out  for  India,  at
another,  settling  in  TurkistAn^;  but,  being  unable  to

1  It  would seem that  the  departure of  the  Bahls  from
Baghdad  took  place  during  the  summer  of  1864.

-  Perhaps  Turkistdn  is  here  intended  to  signify,  not  the


90  A  traveller's  narrative.

decide  on  either  of  these  two  plans,  he  finally,  at  his
p.  118.  own  wish,  set  out  before  all  in  the  garb  of  a  dervish,
in  disguise  and  change  of  raiment,  for  Karkiik  and
Arbil.  Thence,  by  continuous  advance,  he  reached
Mosul,  where,  on  the  arrival  of  the  main  body,  he  took
up  his  abode  and  station  alongside  their  caravan'.
And  although  throughout  this  journey  the  governors
and  officials  observed  the  utmost  consideration  and
respectfulness,  while  march  and  halt  were  alike
dignified  and  honourable,  nevertheless  was  he  always
concealed  in  change  of  raiment,  and  acted  cautiously,
on  the  idea  that  some  act  of  aggression  was  likely  to
occur.

In  this  fashion  did  they  reach  Constantinople,
where  they  were  appointed  quarters  in  a  guest-house
on  the  part  of  the  glorious  Ottoman  monarchy.  And
at  first  the  utmost  attention  was  paid  to  them  in
p.  119.  every  way.  On  the  third  day,  because  of  the  strait-
ness  of  their  quarters  and the greatness of  their

country  properly  so  called,  but  merely  the  country  of  the
Turks,  in  which  case  we  should  rather  translate  '  remaining  in
Turkey.'

1  Mirza  Yahya,  according  to  his  own  account,  went  from
Baghdad  to  Karktik  in  8  days ;  thence  to  Mosul  in  i  days ;  thence
to  Diy^r  Bekr  in  20  days  ;  thence  to  Kharpfit  in  7  or  8  days.
From  Kharpfit  he  went  to  Siv4s,  thence  to  Samsfin,  and  thence
by  sea  to  Constantinople.  The  whole  journey  from  Baghdad
to  Constantinople,  including  halts,  occupied  between  three  and
four  months.  By  Nabil  also  the  duration  of  this  exodus  is
stated  as  four  months  (B.  ii.  pp.  984,  987.  v.  8).


A  tkaveller's  narrative.  91

numbers,  they  migrated  and  moved  to  another  house.
Certain  of  the  nobles  came  to  see  and  converse  with
them,  and  these,  as  is  related,  behaved  with  modera-
tion. Notwithstanding  that  many  in  their  assemblies
and gatherings continued to condemn and  vilify
them,  saying,  "This  sect  are  a  mischief  to  all  the
world  and  destructive  of  treaties  and  covenants ;  they
are  a  source  of  trouble  and  baleful  to  all  lands  ;  they
have  kindled  a  fire  and  consumed  the  earth ; and
though  they  be  outwardly  fair-seeming  yet  are  they
deserving  of  every  chastisement  and  punishment,"
yet  still  the  BAbis  continued  to  conduct  themselves
with  patience,  calmness,  deliberation,  and  constancy,
so  that  they  did  not,  even  in  self-defence,  importune
[the  occupants  of]  high  places  or  frequent  the  houses
of  any  of  the  magnates  of  that  kingdom. Whomso-
ever amongst  the  great  he  [Behd.]  interviewed  on  his  p.  120.
own  account,  they  met,  and  no  word  save  of  sciences
and  arts  passed  between  them ;  until  certain  noble-
men sought  to  guide  him,  and  loosed  their  tongues
in  friendly  counsel,  saying,  "  To  appeal,  to  state  your
case,  and  to  demand  justice  is  a  measure  demanded
by  custom." He  replied  in  answer,  "Pursuing  the
path  of  obedience  to  the  King's  command  we  have
come  to  this  country. Beyond  this  we  neither  had
nor  have  any  aim  or  desire  that  we  should  appeal  and
cause  trouble. What  is  [now]  hidden  behind  the
veil  of  destiny  will  in  the  future  become  manifest.


92  A  traveller's  narrative.

There  neither  has  been  nor  is  any  necessity  for
supplication  and  importunity.  If  the  enlightened-
minded  leaders  [of  your  nation]  be  wise  and  diligent,
they  will  certainly  make  enquiry,  and  acquaint  them-
selves with  the  true  state  of  the  case ;  if  not,  then

p.  121.  [their]  attainment  of  the  truth  is  impracticable  and
impossible.  Under  these  circumstances  what  need  is
there  for  importuning  statesmen  and  supplicating
ministers  of  the  Court?  We  are  free  from  every
anxiety,  and  ready  and  prepared  for  the  things
predestined  to  us.  'Say,  all  is  from  God^'  is  a  sound
and  sufficient  argument,  and  '  If  God  toucheth  thee
with  a  hurt  there  is  no  dispeller  thereof  save  Him^'  is
a  healing  medicine."

After  some  months  a  royal  edict  was  promulgated
appointing  Adrianople  in  the  district  of  Roumelia  as
their  place  of  abode  and  residence.  To  that  city  the
B4bis,  accompanied  by  [Turkish]  officers,  proceeded
all  together,  and  there  they  made  their  home  and
habitation.  According  to  statements  heard  from
sundry  travellers  and  from  certain  great  and  learned
men  of  that  city,  they  behaved  and  conducted  them-
selves there  also  in  such  wise  that  the  inhabitants  of
the district  and  the government officials  used  to

p.  122.  eulogize  them,  and  all  used  to  shew  them  respect
and  deference. In  short,  since  Behd,'u'114h  was  wont

1  Kur'an,  iv,  80.

2  Kur'an,  vi,  17;  x,  107.


A  traveller's  narrative.  93

to  hold  intercourse  with  the  doctors,  scholars,  mag-
nates, and  nobles,  [thereby]  obtaining  fame  and
celebrity  throughout  Roumelia,  the  materials  of
comfort  were  gathered  together,  neither  fear  nor
dread  remained,  they  reposed  on  the  couch  of  ease,
and  passed  their  time  in  quietude,  when  one  Sey3dd
Muhammad'  by  name,  of  Isfahdn,  one  of  the  followers

1  Haji  Seyyid  Muhammad  Isfahanl  was,  together  with  his
nephew  Mirza  Riza-Kuli,  amongst  the  Bzelis  (followers  of
Mirzd  Yahya,  Subh-i-Ezel)  killed  at  Acre  by  some  of  Beha's
followers.  (See  B.  i.  p.  517).  His  death  is  evidently  alluded  to
in  a  passage  of  the  u»J9l  v'^  addressed  to  MIrza  Yahy^  which

runs  as  follows : — tji-^, J^l f'  (jiUiVl (_'  ij''-'*^' f^ h J*

yi»a Jl "^Jj  illjl U  i5j^ji Jc  iJ'}'' '-'/^ •^ "'''' (3'^' ijji

^j,tll  Jt  «JJl  j-s,  ^>JUI  j>  i/'  J  «il  j;l  j!,'i\  Afij  j>l.Vl  i
J.JI& iS^  U'U C^  jl  /'jl  |u ail  i^c  »j^ ILii  Jc aJLlj J»  y_^l

i»»ji  He"  01  'ju  ^^Aiji  jxUi  ^^\  a  ou  j»  'jtiii  u  c^  }

J^j sLl f^ jsiu dil iilUpl ^ t-j»J V ^ «01 «^>.y 4.J9-V1 ^,iii ^^P

^  tjLj^s  iHJil  01  aiil  "t^y  iji9t<a:^  Uil  f>^jS^H  j^^  ^  Vl  *)1  V  aJit  J«
j^  »il  jii-l  jl  ^|,-j>  »»_y.  y^v'l  L«'^'  ij*  ^  ''^  u^  '''.J  '-''  >^^'  ijl
_j^  iJLj  01  iX't-  Ite  >^  Oil  "^UJc l»iU.  UiU. aJI jj-jlj  Ijl  iJI^I

^  p-*"^!  ./j^'  v'yJ'
"  Say, '  0  Source  of  Perversion,  cease  closing  thy  eyes;  then


94 A  traveller's  narrative.

[of  the  Bdb],  laid  the  foundations  of  intimacy  and
familiarity  with  Mirz4  Yahyd,  and  [thereby]  became
the  cause  of  vexation  and  trouble.  In  other
words,  he  commenced  a  secret  intrigue  and  fell  to
tempting  Mirzi  Yahyd,  saying,  "The  fame  of  this
sect  hath  risen  high  in  the  world,  and  their  name
hath  become  noble:  neither  dread  nor  danger  re-
maineth,  nor  is  there  any  fear  or  [need  for]  caution
p.  123.  before  you.  Cease,  then,  to  follow,  that  thou  mayest
be  followed  by  the  world ;  and  come  out  from  amongst
adherents, that thou mayest become celebrated

confess  to  the  truth  amongst  mankind.  By  God,  my  tears
have  flowed  over  my  cheeks  for  that  I  behold  thee  advancing
toward  thy  lust  and  turning  aside  from  Him  who  created  thee
and  fashioned  thee.  Remember  the  favour  of  thy  master  when
we  brought  thee  up  during  the  nights  and  days  for  the  service
of  the  Religion.  Fear  God,  and  be  of  those  who  repent.  Grant
that  thine  affair  is  dubious  unto  men :  is  it  dubious  unto  thy-
self ?  Fear  God :  then  remember  when  thou  didst  stand  before
the  Throne  and  \%'rite  what  we  did  propose  to  thee  of  the  verses
of  God,  the  Protecting,  the  Powerful,  the  Mighty.  Beware  lest
jealousy  withhold  thee  from  the  shore  of  [the  Divine]  Unity :
turn  unto  Him,  and  fear  not  because  of  thy  deeds :  verily  He
pardoneth  whom  He  pleaseth  by  a  favour  on  His  part :  there  is
no  God  but  Him,  the  Forgiving,  the  Kind.  Verily  we  do  but
advise  thee  for  the  sake  of  God:  if  thou  advancest,  it  is  for
thyself;  and  if  thou  turnest  aside,  verily  thy  Lord  needeth  not
thee,  nor  such  as  foUow  thee  in  evident  error.  God  hath  taken
away  him  who  led  thee  astray  :  return  then  unto  Him  humble
contrite,  abased :  verily  He  will  put  away  from  thee  thy  sins  :
verily  thy  Lord  He  is  the  Repeuter,  the  Mighty,  the  Mer-
ciful.'"


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  95

throughout  the  horizons."  Mfrza  Yahyd,  too,  through
lack  of  reflection  and  thought  as  to  consequences,  and
want  of  experience,  became  enamoured  of  his  words
and  befooled  by  his  conduct.  This  one  was  [like]
the  sucking  child,  and  that  one  became  as  the  much-
prized  breast.  At  all  events,  how  much  soever  some
of  the  chiefs  of  the  sect  wrote  admonitions  and
pointed  out  to  him  the  path  of  discretion  saying,
"  For  many  a  year  hast  thou  been  nurtured  in  thy
brother's  arms  and  hast  reposed  on  the  pillow  of
ease  and  gladness ;  what  thoughts  are  these  which
are  the  results  of  madness  ?  Be  not  beguiled  by  this
empty  name,'  which,  out  of  regard  for  certain  con-

1  The  name  alluded  to  is  of  course  that  of  Ezel  (the  Eternal)
bestowed  on  Mirza  Tahya  by  the  Bab.  Gobineau  (p.  277)  calls
him  Hazrat-i-Ezel  ('  I'Altesse  Etemelle '),  but  his  correct  desig-
nation, that  which  he  himself  adopts,  and  that  whereby  he  is
everywhere  known,  is  Subh-i-Ezel  ('  the  Morning  of  Eternity ').
The  epistles  addressed  to  him  by  the  Bab  (of  some  of  which
copies  are  in  my  possession)  invoke  him  either  as  'Ismu'l-
EzeV  ('Name  of  the  Eternal')  or  ' Ismu'l-Wahid'  ('Name  of
the  One ') — for  the  latter  and  the  reason  of  its  employment,  see
B.  ii.  996-997.  According  to  his  own  statement  he  was  the
fourth  in  the  Babi  hierarchy  {■^h)  of  19.  The  first  was  of
course  the  Bab  himself ;  next  in  rank  was  Mulla  Muhammad
'Ali  Barfuriishi  (Jendh-i-Kuddus) ;  then  Mulla  Huseyn  of  Bush-
raweyh  {Jendb-i-Bdbu'l-Bdb);  then  Mirza  Ynhya,  (Subh-i-Ezel).
After  the  fall  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi  and  the  death  of  the  two
'Letters'  who  intervened  between  him  and  the  Bab,  he  attained
the  second  place  in  the  hierarchy,  and,  on  the  Bab's  death,
became  the  recognized  chief  of  the  sect. The  '  considerations  '


96 A  traveller's  narrative.

siderations and as a matter of expediency, was

bestowed  [upon  thee] ;  neither  seek  to  be  censured  by

the  community. Thy  rank  and  worth  depend  on  a

p.  124.  word',  and  thine  exaltation  and  elevation  were  for  a

which,  according  to  the  somewhat  different  account  of  our  his-
torian, rendered  the  recognition  '  expedient '  will  be  seen  on
pp.  62 — 63  above.

1  A  passage  in  the  ^^^ Cjf  illustrates  this  expression. It

runs  as  follows: — jl  ftiUwl  jl  ^jf^\  ^'^  -'^^  -'■*  ■^^^^^  ^cS  y  I

pa jT  j  ^j  OLijI  aUa  _5  ^j  ^  jL*  All  o  li  ijl*«l  ^^1  JuJjl».»i  u-acijtft  Jlo^

_j tU«) olj^cati ^ x;Ui  ^J^li A.i*> -'9^  .^' "^^^  ?^y'^j^  j  **  U  I»»jLp

t_jl5«lj»-li 4i ^^ Alia-*^ e^ Jl^ _^ JJj^^XJ k_.>ci9wi Otij^ ilia jl CjIjUI


"Had  they  reflected,  they  would  not  on  my  second  mani-
festation have  been  veiled  from  my  Beauty  by  a  Name  amongst
my  Names.  This  is  the  state  of  these  men  and  their  rank  and
station!  Cease  to  mention  them  and  what  flows  from  their
pens  and  comes  forth  from  their  mouths.  Although  I  com-
manded all  my  servants  in  all  the  tablets  of  the  Beysln  not  to
continue  heedless  of  my  subsequent  manifestation  or  be  veiled
by  the  veils  of  Names  and  signs  from  the  Lord  of  Attributes,
consider  now,  not  satisfied  with  being  veiled,  how  many  stones
of  doubt  they  cast  without  cessation  or  interruption  at  the
tree  of  my  hidden  Glory! And  even  this  did  not  suffice,  till  a


A  traveller's  narrative.  97

protection  and  a  consideration,"  yet  still,  the  more
they  admonished  him,  the  less  did  it  affect  him ;  and
how  much  soever  they  would  direct  him,  he  continued
to  account  opposition  as  identical  with  advantage.
Afterwards,  too,  the  fire  of  greed  and  avarice  was
kindled,  and  although  there  was  no  sort  of  need,
their  circumstances  being  easy  in  the  extreme,  they
fell  to  thinking  of  salary  and  stipend,  and  certain
of  the  women  dependent  on  Mlrzd  Yahyd  went  to  the
[governor's]  palace  and  craved  assistance  and  charity.
So  when  Behd'u'Udh  beheld  such  conduct  and
behaviour  on  his  part  he  dismissed  and  drove  away
both  [him  and  Seyyid  Muhammad]  from  himself

Then  Seyyid  Muhammad  set  out  for  Constantinople
to  get  his  stipend,  and  opened  the  door  of  suffering.
According  to  the  account  given,  this  matter  caused

Name  amongst  my  Names,  whom  I  created  by  a  word,  and  on
whom  I  bestowed  life  with  a  breath,  arose  in  war  against  my
Beauty."  I  have  already  pointed  out  in  another  place  (B.  ii.
949 — 953)  the  important  position  occupied  by  the  epistle  above
cited,  since  it  appears  to  be  one  of  the  earliest  of  Beha's
writings  wherein  he  distinctly  claims  to  be  a  new  '  manifesta-
tion '  of  the  divinity,  and  it,  more  than  any  other  writing
which  I  have  seen,  throws  light  on  that  period  of  conflict  and
travaU  in  the  Babi  church  which  made  so  memorable  the  latter
days  of  the  Adrianople  period  and  marked  a  new  development
in  the  short  but  eventful  history  of  the  new  faith.  When  I
wrote  the  passage  above  referred  to,  I  believed  that  the  only
copy  of  this  epistle  in  Europe  was  in  my  possession,  but  I  have
since  learned  from  Baron  Rosen  that  another  copy  is  included
in  his  own  library  at  St  Petersburg.

B.  7


98  A  traveller's  narrative.

p.  125.  the  greatest  sorrow  and  brought  about  cessation  of
intercourse.  In  Constantinople,  moreover,  he  pre-
sumptuously set  afloat  certain  reports,  asserting,
amongst  other  things,  that  the  notable  personage
who  had  come  from  'Ir4k  was  Mirzii  Yahyd.  Sundry
individuals,  perceiving  that  herein  was  excellent
material  for  mischief-making  and  a  means  for  the
promotion  of  mutiny,  ostensibly  supported  and  ap-
plauded him,  and  stimulated  and  incited  him,  saying,
"You  are  really  the  chief  support  and  acknowledged
successor :  act  with  authority,  in  order  that  grace  and
blessing  may  become  apparent.  The  waveless  sea
hath  no  sound,  and  the  cloud  without  thunder  raineth
no  rain."  By  such  speech,  then,  was  that  unfortunate
man  entrapped  into  his  course  of  action,  and  led  to
utter  vain  words  which  caused  the  disturbance  of
[men's]  thoughts. Little by  little  those  who were

p.  126.  wont  to  incite  and  encourage  began  without  exception
to  utter  violent  denunciations  in  every  nook  and
corner,  nay  in  the  court  itself,  saying,  "The  Bdbls
say  thus,  and  expound  in  this  wise :  [their]  behaviour
is  such,  and  [their]  speech  so-and-so."  Such  mischief-
making  and  plots  caused  matters  to  become  misap-
prehended, and  furthermore  certain  schemes  got  afloat
which  were  regarded  as  necessary  measures  of  self-
protection  ;  the  expediency  of  banishing  the  Bihis
came  under  consideration ;  and  all  of  a  sudden  an
order came, and Beh^'u'lUh was removed from


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  99

Roumelia ; nor  was  it  known  for  what  purpose  or
whither  they  would  bear  him away'. Diverse ac-

1  It  is  difficult  amidst  the  conflicting  statements  of  the  two
parties  and  the  silence  of  disinterested  historians  to  discover
precisely  what  were  the  causes  which  led  to  the  removal  of  the
Babis  from  Adrianople.  Further  investigation  inclines  me  to
abandon  the  view  (B.  i.  p.  515)  that  overt  acts  of  hostility  be-
tween the  two  factions  made  it  necessary  to  separate  them,  for
Mirza  Yahya  appears  to  have  been  almost  without  supporters
at  Adrianople,  so  that,  according  to  his  own  account,  he  and
his  little  boy  were  compelled  to  go  themselves  to  the  market  to
buy  their  daily  food.  His  version  of  the  events  which  led  the
Turkish  government  to  change  their  place  of  exile  is  this : —
that  two  of  the  followers  of  Beha  set  out  from  Adrianople  for
Constantinople,  ostensibly  to  sell  horses,  but  really  to  carry
controversial  books.  The  Pasha  of  Adrianople,  being  apprized
of  their  object,  telegraphed  to  the  first  halting-place  on  the
road  which  they  had  to  traverse  and  caused  them  to  be  arrested.
The  followers  of  Beha,  believing  that  Mirza  Yahya  had  given
information  to  the  Pasha,  retaliated  by  lodging  information
against  Aka  Jan  Beg,  one  of  Mirzd  Yahya's  followers  then  in
Constantinople — the  same  who  was  afterwards  killed  in  Acre
(B.  i.  517) — who  was  at  this  time,  though  a  Persian,  serving
in  the  Turkish  artillery.  Aka  Jan  Beg  had  in  his  possession
certain  Babi  books  destined  for  Baghdad.  Unable  to  find
means  for  transporting  them  thither  and  apparently  warned
in  some  way  of  impending  danger,  he  was  contemplating  the
advisability  of  destroying  them  by  burying  them  or  throwing
them  into  the  sea  when  he  was  arrested.  He  appears  to  have
been  examined  both  by  the  Turkish  authorities  and  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  Persian  government  in  Constantinople,  parti-
cularly by  a  certain  Mirza  Ahmad  then  attached  to  the  Persian
legation.  Ak^  Jan  Beg — an  honest  straightforward  man  in-
capable of  concealing  the  truth  by  falsehood — frankly  admitted
his  connection  with  "  the  people  at  Adrianople,"  his  belief  in

7—2


100  A  traveller's  narrative.

counts  were  current  in  [men's]  mouths,  and  many
exaggerations  were  heard  [to  the  effect]  that  there  was
no  hope  of  deliverance.

Now  all  those  persons  who  were  with  him  with  one
accord  entreated  and  insisted  that  they  should  [be  per-
mitted to]  accompany  him,  and,  how  much  soever  the
p.  127.  government  admonished  and  forbade them,  it  was
fruitless. Finally  one  Hdjf  Ja'far'  by  name  was  moved

the  B^bi  doctrines,  and  the  existence  of  certain  of  their  books
in  his  possession.  These  books  were  thereupon  seized  and
laid  before  the  Sheykhu  '1-Islam,  who,  it  would  seem,  hesitated
to  pronounce  sentence  of  heresy  against  their  author,  but
desired  to  see  him  himself.  However  in  this  wish  he  was  not
gratified,  for  he  was  soon  after  dismissed,  and  the  books  passed
into  the  hands  of  another  Sheykhu  '1-Islam,  who,  after  carefully
examining  them,  declared  that  they  did  not  contain  actual
heresy,  although  they  had  a  very  heretical  look.  Aka  Jan
Beg,  however,  was,  in  spite  of  his  former  good  services  to  the
Turkish  government  (he  had,  I  believe,  distinguished  himself
at  the  recapture  of  Damascus),  dismissed  the  army  and  im-
prisoned for  four  and  a  half  months.  Prom  this  imprisonment
he  went  forth  with  hair  and  beard  whitened  by  premature
old  age  an  exile  to  Acre,  there  shortly  to  meet  with  a  violent
death.  Whatever  may  be  the  respective  values  of  these  two
accounts,  they  both  point  to  this,  that  the  detection  of  some
fresh  attempt  at  propagandism  on  the  part  of  the  Babis  im-
pelled the  Turkish  government  to  change  their  place  of  exile
once  more.

1  Haji  Muhammad  Ja'far  of  Tabriz  is  twice  referred  to,
though  not  by  name,  in  my  first  paper  on  the  Babis ;  first  at
p.  493,  where  he  is  simply  mentioned  as  '  a  Persian  merchant
belonging  to  the  sect '  to  whom  two  Bitbi  missionaries  were
forbidden  to  speak  during  their  voyage  to  Alexandria;  and


A  traveller's  narrative.  101

to  lamentation,  and  with  his  own  hand  cut  his  throat.
When  the  government  beheld  it  thus,  it  gave  per-
mission to  all  of  them  to  accompany  him,  conveyed
them  from  Adrianople  to  the  sea-shore  \  and  thence
transported  them  to  Acre^  Mirzd  Yahyd  they  sent
in  like  manner  to  Famagusta^.

again  at  p.  516,  where  the  episode  here  related  is  briefly  men-
tioned. Space  does  not  allow  me  to  do  more  than  refer  to
the  first  incident  here.  As  regards  the  second  it  is,  as  I  have
already  pointed  out  (B.  ii.  p.  962),  alluded  to  in  the  Epistle
from  Beha  known  as  ^j-fj  Z.^. I  here  quote  the  passage  in

the original : — aJy.  ^J"^  f^  ^  tj"^  **-^^  »L>.Vl  ^^a  J>-I  iS:a  ^

jvjail  tj^  rtJiU,^"^!  U  Ija  ujji^^  O^^l  ^^ A)  bio../  V  U  Ija  dji  L^

# ^jJjl j.idij\ jj 4jl ^  ajJti  \jUi\ "And  one  from  amongst

the  Friends  sacrificed  himself  for  myself,  and  cut  his  throat  with
his  own  hand  for  the  love  of  God.  This  is  that  [t/ie  like  of]  which
we  have  not  heard  from  former  ages.  This  is  that  which  God
hath  set  apart  for  this  dispensation  as  a  shewing  forth  of  His
Power :  verily  He  is  the  Powerful,  the  Mighty."  It  appears
that  the  Turkish  government  at  first  intended  to  send  only
Beh^  and  his  family  to  Acre,  and  to  give  his  followers  pass-
ports and  money  to  return  to  their  homes,  but  the  unforeseen
determination  of  the  Beha'is  not  to  be  separated  from  their
chief  compelled  it  to  change  its  plans.

1  GallipoU  was  the  port  whence  they  embarked.  It  seems
that  they  were  first  taken  direct  to  Alexandria,  and  there,
without  being  permitted  to  land,  transhipped  into  vessels
bound  for  their  respective  places  of  exile.

2  They  arrived  at  Acre  on  August  31st,  1868  (see  B.  i.  p.  526,
and  B.  ii.  pp.  984  and  988,  v.  12).

3  See  Note  W  at  end. An  official  document,  dated  De-


102  A  teaveller's  narrative.

-^During  the  latter  days  [passed]  in  Adrianople
BehA'u'llAli  composed  a  detailed  epistle  setting  forth
dU  matters  clearly  and  minutely.  He  unfolded  and
expounded  the  main  principles  of  the  sect,  and  made
clear  and  plain  its  ethics,  manners,  course,  and  mode
of  conduct:  he  treated  certain  political  questions  in
detail,  and  adduced  sundry  proofs  of  his  truthful-
ness: he  declared  the  good  intent,  loyalty,  and
p.  128.  sincerity  of  the  sect,  and  wrote  some  fragments  of
prayers,  some  in  Persian,  but  the  greater  part  in
Arabic.  He  then  placed  it  in  a  packet  and  adorned
its  address  with  the  royal  name  of  His  Majesty  the
King  of  Persia,  and  wrote  [on  it]  that  some  person
pure  of  heart  and  pure  of  life,  dedicated  to  God,  and
prepared  for  martyr-sacrifice,  must,  with  perfect
resignation  and  willingness,  convey  this  epistle  into
the  presence  of  the  King.  A  youth  named  Mirz4
Badi",  a  native  of  Khi;rds4n,  took  the  epistle,  and

eember  9th,  1884,  from  the  Muhdsebeji's  (Accountant's)  office  in
Cyprus,  and  embodying  information  relative  to  the  Babi  exiles
required  by  the  Receiver  General,  states  that  the  original
fermdn  of  banishment  cannot  be  found,  but  that  "  from  an
unofficial  copy  of  the  fermdn  received  at  the  time  of  banish-
ment of  these  exiles  it  appears  that  the  date  of  their  banish-
ment is  5th  Eabi'ul-Akhir,  1285  a.h.  (26th  July,  1868  a.d.)."
According  to  other  documents,  the  date  of  the  arrival  in  the
island  of  Subh-i-Ezel  and  those  with  him'was  August  20th.

1  Cf.  B.  ii.  pp.  956-957.  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  the
proper  name  of  Mirza  Badi'.  His  father  wag  named  H&ji
'Abdu  '1-Majid. After  the  martyrdom  of  his  son  he  visited


A  traveller's  narrative.  103

hastened  toward  the  presence  of  His  Majesty  the
King.  The  Royal  Train  had  its  abode  and  station
outside  Teheran,  so  he  took  his  stand  alone  on  a  rock
in  a  place  far  off  but  opposite  to  the  Royal  Pavilion,
and  awaited  day  and  night  the  passing  of  the  Royal  p- 129.
escort  or  the  attainment  of  admission  into  the  Im-
perial Presence.  Three  days  did  he  pass  thus  in  a
state  of  fasting  and  vigilance :  an  emaciated  body  and
enfeebled  spirit  remained. On  the  fourth  day  the

Acre,  and  on  one  occasion  during  this  visit  Beh4  addressed  him
in  these  strange  words — J^  oJ>UI  jj  Ijx^j  (jj>-  Ci^^j  J..I
"  Make  this  lamp-spilt  oil  an  offering  for  the  Imdmzddg,"  which,
as  I  understand,  are  applied  proverbially  to  one  who  offers  up
that  which  has  become  of  little  value  to  him,  as  the  oil  which
has  been  upset  from  the  lamp.  Some  time  afterwards  he  suf-
fered martyrdom  in  Khurasan,  and  it  was  this  which  Beha's
words  were  believed  to  have  shadowed  forth.  For  by  the  death
of  his  son  in  whom  his  hopes  centred  had  Hajl  'Abdu  '1-Majid's
life  lost  its  sweetness  for  him  and  become  a  thing  of  little
worth,  and  this  life  thus  marred  did  he  offer  up.  Mirza  Badi'
was  not  more  than  20  or  21  years  of  age.  He  had  left  Acre
after  accomplishing  his  pilgrimage  thither  when  news  reached
him  of  the  letter  to  be  carried  to  Teheran  and  of  the  conditions
under  which  it  must  be  taken.  These  were,  that  the  bearer
must  refrain  from  speaking  to  or  visiting  any  of  his  co-reli-
gionists during  the  whole  journey,  proceed  directly  and  alone
to  Teheran,  and  give  the  letter  himself  into  the  hands  of  the
king.  The  letter  was  written  on  one  side  of  a  large  sheet  of
paper  with  the  conditions  incumbent  on  the  bearer  inscribed
on  the  back.  The  text  of  these  conditions,  published  by
Rosen,  will  appear  in  vol.  vi.  of  the  ColUctiom  Scientifiques,
d-c,  p.  192-193.


104 A  TRAVELLERS  NARRATIVE.

Royal  Personage  was  examining  all  quarters  and
directions  witli  a  telescope  when  suddenly  liis  glance
fell  on  this  man  who  was  seated  in  the  most  respect-
ful attitude  on  a  rock.  It  was  inferred  from  the
indications  [perceived]  that  he  must  certainly  have
thanks  [to  offer],  or  some  complaint  or  demand  for
redress  and  justice  [to  prefer].  [The  King]  com-
manded one  of  those  in  attendance  at  the  court  to
enquire  into  the  circumstances  of  this  youth.  On
interrogation  [it  was  found  that]  he  earned  a  letter
which  he  desired  to  convey  with  his  own  hand  into
the  Royal  Presence.  On  receiving  permission  to
p.  130.  approach,  he  cried  out  before  the  pavilion  with  a
dignity,  composure,  and  respectfulness  surpassing  de-
scription, and  in  a  loud  voice,  "0  King,  I  have  come
unto  thee  from  Sheba  with  a  weighty  message^ ! "  [The
King]  commanded  to  take  the  letter  and  arrest  the
bearer.  His  Majesty  the  King  wished  to  act  with
deliberation  and  desired  to  discover  the  truth,  but
those  who  were  present  before  him  loosed  their
tongues  in  violent  reprehension,  saying,  "This  person
has  shewn  great  presumption  and  amazing  audacity,
for  he  hath  without  fear  or  dread  brought  the  letter
of  him  against  whom  all  peoples  are  angered,  of  him
who  is  banished  to  Bulgaria  and  Sclavonia,  into  the

1  Cf.  Kur'an,  xxvii,  22,  where,  however,  the  words  addressed
to  Solomon  by  the  hoopoe  differ  slightly  from  those  uttered  by
Mlrz&  Badi'.


A  TBAVELLSSS XASSATITE.  1 .  o

pr^ser-,."^  <s"  -die  Kioi:. If  ?:•  be  lis*  be  ic-  !;:••:  ir-

irK'Kase  ca  lids  gnesj  jiref^mrri -^.^ S-:'  liie  -  ---'—^^
of  lie  LX^'an  sdzricea  ^liiaT  is'  sb.:--iL,i  Kirer"  — ^-W--
laenT  saii  ioviopsa  liir  T.:'mi:?f. As  vie  drsr  Tcrzie-": :
liirT  sjpiied  xbr i?hsr"T: ar:d  is«i ssTiur, ""Mak:e

ir-c^-Bx  liiT  ccher  irjezids  "Lrai  ihvx:  riLayesr  re  deJiT-erer.

f?:-in  ex^'rut'i&air^  Ticnnsiise-T,  sii.i  riske  ir  c-.:^-

TiJtz^eiii  cf  "iiie  cLain  and  rhe  ieiexiess  cf  •Lie  sir:-ra.'"

Sni,  T-:crnrre,  rcsiii  aai  Toi!::ie:it  '•""  ss  "neT  '^".-- — -


7-:>e  T.:in-


cLsiDs  rirXreaiji  lie  s's^C'Ta  »f':2i  xtcfeji  H'^edess  ai-i
iV-siT'CiS'ire  ■-  ill  nei  s-rT  aiii  lesirovei  "  ,  Tii;
Tibc'"r.,-crir!i  I  sei.7  f:-r.  ii;i  f:czii  -s-.-riij  cf  ;i::iTeii-
xiSiictQ.  ir-r  le  "sn&s  seaTei  "srrn  froi:ierfi.  iimrrr

yo'sr  -sriifin  EEs  Ma;-ft?TT-  lie  TT-j  isd  jensei  r-  -SS^

oerain  jasssLxres-  si:d  re^vese  KC"'ffir-:  :f  tie  kitcIis
if  itie  ejis-ije,  le  "sn^s  ni.M  iii^iTieo.  ai  'siiaa  isi
laiesi  Tsl&.ie  asi  n&iiifesxei  K\crfT.  r>e?s:isf  lis
tvciiiris  isil  Sttai  lasn-T  azii  rciT  uto  exe'ii;:!.  s
sefcre  jcusmjeni  Ji  ;s  efeii  re_ii6i  Tr.s*  le  sa;i
lin,:*,  "T^C'ti  azir  ccEse  icxisi caie  -wio  is  rci lie


106  A  traveller's  narrative.

channel  of  correspondence?"  Tlien  the  Royal  Com-
mand was  issued  that  their  Reverences  the  learned
doctors  and  hononrable  and  accomplished  divines
should  virite  a  reply  to  that  epistle.  But  when  the
most  expert  doctors  of  the  capital  became  aware  of
the  contents  of  the  letter  they  ordained : — "That  this
person,  without  regarding  [the  fact]  that  he  is  at
variance  with  the  Perspicuous  Religion,  is  a  meddler
with  custom  and  creed,  and  a  troubler  of  kings  and
p.  ia3.  emperors.  Therefore  to  eradicate,  subdue,  repress,
and  repel  [this  sect]  is  one  of  the  requirements  of  the
Well-established  Path',  and  indeed  the  chief  of  obli-
gations."

This  answer  was  not  approved  before  the  [Royal]
Presence,  for  the  contents  of  this  epistle  had  no
obvious  discordance  with  the  Law  or  with  reason,
and  did  not  meddle  with  political  or  administrative
matters,  nor  interfere  with  or  attack  the  Throne  of
Sovereignty.  They  ought,  therefore,  to  have  dis-
cussed the  real  points  at  issue,  and  to  have  written
clearly  and  explicitly  such  an  answer  as  would  have
caused  the  disappearance  of  doubts  and  the  solution
of  difficulties,  and  would  have  become  a  fulcrum  for
discussion  to  all.

Now  of  this  epistle  sundry  passages  shall  be  set
forth  in  writing  to  conduce  to  a  better  understanding
[of  the  matter]  by  all  people.  At  the  beginning  of
1  The  religion  of  IsUm. Cf.  Kur'4n,  v,  62.


A  teaveller's  narrative.  107

the  epistle  was  a  striking  passage  in  the  Arabic
language  [treating]  of  questions  of  faith  and  assurance ;  p.  134.
the  sacrifice  of  life  in  the  way  of  the  Beloved ;  the
state  of  resignation  and  contentment ;  the  m\iltiplicity
of  misfortunes,  calamities,  hardships,  and  afflictions;
the  falling  under  suspicion  of  seditiousness  through
the  machinations  of  foes;  the  establishment  of  his
innocence  in  the  presence  of  His  Majesty  the  King;
the  repudiation  of  seditious  persons  and  disavowal  of
the  rebellious  party;  the  conditions  of  sincere  belief
in  the  verses  of  the  Kur'4n ;  the  needfulness  of
godly  virtues,  distinction  from  all  other  creatures  in
this  transitory  abode,  obedience  to  the  command-
ments, and  avoidance  of  things  prohibited ;  the  evi-
dence of  divine  support  in  the  affair  of  the  B4b ;  the
inability  of  whosoever  is  upon  the  earth  to  with-
stand a  heavenly  thing;  his  own  awakening  at  the
divine  afflux,  and  his  falling  thereby  into  unbounded
calamities ;  his  acquisition  of  the  divine  gift,  his  P- 135-
participation  in  spiritual  God-given  grace,  and  his
illumination  with  immediate  knowledge  without  study;
the  excusableness  of  his  [efforts  for  the]  admonition
of  mankind,  their  direction  toward  the  attainment  of
human  perfections,  and  their  enkindlement  with  the
fire  of  divine  love ;  encouragements  to  the  directing
of  energy  towards  the  attainment  of  a  state  greater
than  the  degree  of  earthly  sovereignty;  eloquent
prayers  [written]  in  the  utmost  self-abasement,  devo-


108  A  traveller's  narrative.

tion,  and  humility ;  and  the  like  of  this.  Afterwards
he  discussed  [other]  matters  in  the  Persian  language.
And  the  form  of  it  is  this' :

"  0  God,  this  is  a  letter  which  I  wish  to  send  to
the  King;  and  Thou  knovjest  that  I  have  not  desired

1  This  letter  to  the  Shah  of  Persia  I  discussed  briefly  in
my  second  paper  on  the  Babis  (pp.  954—960).  Therein  I
expressed  a  doubt  as  to  whether  another  letter,  addressed  in
part  to  the  King  of  Persia,  which  had  been  minutely  described
by  Baron  Rosen  (3ISS.  Ardbes,  p.  191  et  seq.),  was  to  be
attributed  to  Beha.  I  am  now  convinced,  however,  both  by
Baron  Rosen's  reasonings  and  my  own  further  enquiries,  that
I  was  wrong.  However  we  may  account  for  the  undoubted
difference  of  tone  between  the  two  letters — a  difference  marked
and  striking— there  is  no  doubt  that  both  of  them  emanated
from  the  pen  of  Beha.  Baron  Rosen  is  about  to  publish  not
only  the  letter  to  the  King  of  Persia  and  the  other  '  Epistles  to

the  Kings'  but  the  whole  of  the  jsCjs  ojo-.  of  which  (though,
as  it  would  seem,  originally  written  separately)  they  now  form
a  part.  To  the  publication  of  Baron  Rosen's  edition  of  these
Epistles  (which  wOl  appear  in  the  sixth  volume  of  the
Collections  Scientifiques  de  I'Institut  des  Langues  Orientales  of
St.  Petersburg)  all  interested  in  the  elucidation  of  Babi
doctrine  and  history  must  look  forward  anxiously.  Baron
Rosen  has  kindly  continued  to  forward  to  me  the  proof-sheets
of  his  work  as  they  are  printed  off,  and,  therefore,  knowing  as
I  do  that  in  a  short  while  a  reliable  text  of  this  epistle  will  be
available  to  students,  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary,  as  I
might  otherwise  have  done,  to  mention  in  my  notes  all  the
variants  from  the  present  text  presented  by  another  ms.  which
I  obtained  in  Kirman.  The  variants  presented  by  the  Kirman
MS.  (henceforth  denoted  by  K.)  are  numerous;  in  one  page  of
25  lines  there  are  no  less  than  32. As  a  rule  the  readings  of


A  traveller's  narrative.  109

aught  of  him  save  the  display  of  his  justice  to  Thy
people,  and  the  shewing  forth  of  his  favours  to  the
dti-ellers  in  Thy  Kingdom.  And  verily,  hy  my  soul,  I
have  not  desired  aright  save  wlmt  Thou  hast  desired,
neither,  hy  Thy  Might,  do  I  desire  aught  save  what
Tlwu  desirest.  Perish  that  being  which  desireth  of  p.  136.
Thee  aught  save  Thyself!  And,  by  Thy  Glory,  Thy
good  pleasure  is  the  limit  of  my  hope,  and  Thy  Will
the  extremity  of  my  desire !  Be  merciful  then,  0  God,
to  this  poor  [soul]  who  hath  caiight  hold  of  the  skirt  of
Thy  richness,  and  to  this  humble  [suppliant]  who  calleth
on  Thee,  for  Thou  art  indeed  the  Mighty,  the  Great.
Help,  0  God,  His  Majesty  the  King  to  execute  Thy
laws  amongst  Thy  servants  and  to  shew  forth  Thy
justice  amidst  TJiy  creatures,  that  he  may  rule  over
this  sect  as  he  ruleth  over  these  who  are  beside  them.
Verily  Thou  art  ttie  Potent,  the  Mighty,  the  Wise.

the  present  text  are  preferable,  but  not  always;  e.g.  in  several
cases  what  is  in  K.  a  rhyming  clause  is  altered  here  to  one  not
rhyming.  But  it  is  the  omissions  of  the  present  text  that  are
most  significant,  inasmuch  as  they  often  consist  of  clauses
which  either  give  a  greater  force  and  precision  to  the  passages
wherein  they  occur,  or  else  imply  in  a  more  unequivocal
manner  the  position  claimed  by  the  writer.  Such  divergences
between  the  two  texts — whether  it  be  a  question  of  omission  or
alteration — will  be  noted  at  the  foot  of  each  page  as  they  occur,
but  only  in  English.  As  regards  the  Arabic  exordium  (which
in  K.  occupies  5  pages  of  the  17  filled  by  the  whole  epistle)  a
translation  of  it  (based  on  the  text  of  K.)  will  be  found  in
Note  X  at  end.


110  A  teaveller's  narrative.

"Agreeably  to  the  permission  and  consent  of  the
King  of  the  age,  this  servant  turned  from  the  place  of
the  Royal  Throne'  toward  'Ir4k-i-'Arab,  and  in  that
land  abode  twelve  years.  During  the  period  of  [his]
sojourn  [there]  no  description  of  his  condition  was
p.  137.  laid  before  the  Royal  Presence,  neither  did  any
representation  go  to  foreign  states.  Relying  upon
God  did  he  abide  in  that  land,  until  a  certain  func-
tionary^ came  to  'Irak,  who,  on  his  arrival,  fell  to
designing  the  afSiction  of  a  company  of  poor  unfortu-
nates. Every  day,  beguiled  by  certain  of  the  doctors
of  Persia,  he  persecuted  these  servants;  although
nothing  prejudicial  to  Church  or  State,  or  at  variance
with  the  principles  and  customs  of  their  country-men
had  been  observed  in  them.  So  this  servant  [was
moved]  by  this  reflection: — 'May  it  not  be  that  by
reason  of  the  deeds  of  the  transgressors  some  action
at  variance  with  the  world-ordering  counsel  of  the
King  should  be  engendered!'  Therefore  was  an
epitome  [of  the  matter]  addressed  to  Mlrzd  Sa'id
Kh4n^  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  that  he  might

^  Teheran. Cf.  p.  54  supra.

2  Evidently  Mirza  Buzurg  Khan  of  Kazvin.  See  above,
p.  84  et  seq.

'  It  was  at  the  hands  of  this  minister  and  his  myrmidons
that  MuUa  Huaeyn  of  Khurasan  (who,  with  Aka  Muhammad
of  Isfahan,  had  been  entrusted  with  the  conveyance  of  the
Bab's  remains  from  Tabriz  to  Teheriin)  met  his  death  in
August  1852. See  Note  T  at  end.


A  traveller's  narrative.  Ill

submit  it  to  the  [Royal]  Presence,  and  that  it  might
be  done  according  to  that  which  the  Royal  command  p-  138.
might  promulgate.  A  long  while  elapsed,  and  no
command  was  issued;  until  matters  reached  such  a
state  that  it  was  to  be  feared  that  sedition  might
suddenly  break  out  and  the  blood  of  many  be  shed.
Of  necessity,  for  the  protection  of  the  servants  of
God,  a  certain  number  [of  the  Bd,bfs]  appealed  to  the
governor  of  'Irdk'.  If  [the  King]  wiU  consider  what
has  happened  with  just  regard,  it  will  become  clear  in
the  mirror  of  his  luminous  heart  that  what  occurred
was  [done]  from  considerations  of  expediency,  and
that  there  was  apparently  no  resource  save  this.  The
Royal  Personage  can  bear  witness  and  testify  to  this,
that  in  whatever  land  there  were  some  few  of  this
sect  the  fire  of  war  and  conflict  was  wont  to  be
kindled  by  reason  of  the  aggression  of  certain
governors.  But  this  transient  one  after  his  arrival
in  'Ir4k  withheld  all  from  sedition  and  strife;  and  the  p.  139.
witness  of  this  servant  is  his  action,  for  all  are  aware
and  will  testify  that  the  multitude  of  this  faction  in


1  i.e.  the  Turkish  governor  of  Baghdad  and  '  Irak-i-'Arab,
prohably  the  Bame  Namik  Pasha  mentioned  in  the  third  line  of
the  foot-notes  on  p.  84.  In  this  passage  it  is  explained  to  the
King  that  the  Babis  were  compelled  to  enrol  themselves  as
subjects  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  in  order  to  escape  the  malice
of  the  Persians,  especially  that  of  Mirza  Buzurg-Khan  the
Persian  Consul  at  Baghdad.


112  A  traveller's  narrative.

Persia  at  that  time'  was  more  than  [it  had  been]
before,  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  none  transgressed
his  proper  bounds  nor  assailed  any  one.  It  is  nigh
on  fifteen  years ^  that  all  continue  tranquil,  looking
unto  God  and  relying  on  Him,  and  bear  patiently
what  hath  come  upon  them,  casting  it  on  God.  And
after  the  arrival  of  this  servant  in  this  city  which  is
called  Adrianople  certain  of  this  community  enquired
concerning  the  meaning  of  'victory^.'  Diverse  an-
swers were  sent  in  reply,  one  of  which  answers  will  be
submitted  on  this  page,  so  that  it  may  become  clear
p.  140.  before  the  [Royal]  Presence  that  this  servant  hath  in
view  naught  save  peace  and  reform.  And  if  some  of
the  divine  favours,  which,  without  merit  [on  my  part],
have  been  graciously  bestowed  [on  me],  do  not  become
evident  and  apparent,  this  much  [at  least]  will  be
known,  that  [God], in  [His]  abounding  grace and

1  i.e.  at  the  time  Beha  was  in  Baghdad  (a.d.  1853 — 1864).
K.  reads  here  "  that  the  multitude  of  this  faction  was  more  in
'Irak  than  in  all  [other]  countries."

^  Taking  the  attempt  on  the  Shah's  life  in  August  1852  as
the  last  act  hostile  to  the  Persian  government  for  which  the
Babis  can  be  held  in  any  way  responsible,  full  16  solar  years
must  have  elapsed  between  that  date  and  the  composition — or
at  any  rate  the  completion — of  this  epistle,  since  allusion  is
made  in  it  to  the  impending  banishment  to  Acre,  which  did  not
occur  till  August  1868.

3  K.  reads  "certain  of  the  people  of  'IrAk  and  elsewhere
asked  concerning  the  meaning  of  the  'victory'  which  hath  been
revealed  in  the  Books  of  God. "


A.  tbavellee's  xabkative.  113

imdeserved'  mercy,  hath  nor  deprived  this  oppressed
■  ine'  of  the  ornament  of  reason.  The  form  of  words
which  was  set  forth  on  the  meaning  of  'cirtory'  is
thi^:—

"He  U  God,  ixaltid  is  He.

"  '  It  hath  been  known  that  God  ''glorious  is  His
mention)  is  sanctified  from  the  world  and  what  is
therein,  and  that  the  meaning  of  "victory"  is  not
this,  that  any  one  should  fight  or  strive  with  any  one.
The  Lord  of  He  doeth  v:hi.t  He  v:ilP  hath  committed
the  kingdom  of  creation,  both  land  and  sea,  into  the
hand  of  kings,  and  they  are  the  manifestations  of  the  p.  141.
Divine  Power  according  to  the  degrees  of  their  rank  :
'■erily  He  is  the  Potent,  the  Sovereign'^.  But  that
which  God  '  glorious  is  His  mention)  hath  desired  for
Himself  is  the  hearts  of  His  servants,  which  are  trea-
sures of  praise  and  love  of  the  Lord  and  stores  of
divine  knowledge  and  wisdom.  The  wiH  of  the  Eter-
nal King  hath  ever  been  to  purify  the  hearts  of  [His]
servants  from  the  promptings  of  the  world  and  what
is  therein,  so  that  they  may  be  prepared  for  illumina-
tion by  the  effulgences  of  the  Lord  of  the  Xames  and

^  Lit.  'preceding  mercy,'  i.e.  mercy  not  earned  or  deserved
by  previous  good  actions  at  the  time  it  is  bestowed.

'  E.  reads  'the  heart"  instead  of  "this  oppressed  one."

'  'K.zj'ka,  iii,  3-5;  vrii,  19.

'  K.  substimtes  here,  "if  they  happen  [to  be]  in  the  shadows-
of  God.  they  are  accotmted  of  God ;  and  if  not,  then  verily
t'.y  Lord  it  knowing  and  informed.'

B.  S


114  A  teavelleb's  narrative.

Attributes.  Therefore  must  no  stranger  find  his  way
into  the  city  of  the  heart,  so  that  the  Incomparable
Friend  may  come  unto  His  own  place — that  is,  the
effulgence  of  His  Names  and  Attributes,  not  His
Essence  (exalted  is  He),  for  that  Peerless  King  hath
been  and  will  be  holy  for  everlasting  above  ascent  or
p.  142.  descents  Therefore  to-day^  "victory"  neither  hath
been  nor  will  be  opposition  to  any  one,  nor  strife
with  any  person  ;  but  rather  what  is  well-pleasing  is
that  the  cities  of  [men's]  hearts,  which  are  under  the
dominion  of  the  hosts  of  selfishness  and  lust,  should
be  subdued  by  the  sword  of  the  Word,  of  Wisdom,
and  of  Exhortation.  Every  one,  then,  who  desireth
"victory"  must  first  subdue  the  city  of  his  own  heart
with  the  sword  of  spiritual  truth  and  of  the  Word,

^  Beha  here  guards  himself  from  the  doctrines  of  Jy»-,

jl»l,  and  the  like,  held  by  certain  heretical  sects,  viz.  the
belief  that  God  can  pass  into  man,  or  man  become  essentially
one  with  God.  Jami  very  beautifully  distinguishes  the  doc-
trine of  annihilation  in  God  from  that  of  identification  with
God  in  the  following  verse : —

*  'A^  ■>'■  J>->  "■>'■  J 3'  '^-~''  ■>}  *  ^Jf-  j:  J 3^  "^  "J  ui'  if.  ^'^■^

*  ^Jf-  j:  Jy  y 'f  cTJ  J^  *  ^J^  ■^  f^  '^]  3  '^  3^'  i  /

"So  tread  this  path  that  duality  may  disappear,
For  if  there  be  duality  in  the  path,  falsity  will  arise :
Thou  wilt  not  become  He; but,  if  thou  strivest.
Thou  wilt  reach  a  place  where  thou-ness shall  depart
from  thee."

2  K.  inserts  "the  meaning  of."


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  115

and  must  protect  it  from  remembering  aught  beside
God :  afterwards  let  him  turn  his  regards  towards  the
cities  of  [others']  hearts.  This  is  what  is  intended  by
"victory:"  sedition  hath  never  been  nor  is  pleasing
to  God,  and  that  which  certain  ignorant  persons  for-
merly wrought  was  never  approved.  If  ye  he  slain
far  His  good  pleasure  mrily  it  is  better  far  you  than
that  ye  should  slay.  To-day  the  friends  of  God  must  p.  143.
appear  in  such  fashion  amidst  [God's]  servants  that
by  their  actions  they  may  lead  all  unto  the  pleasure
of  the  Lord  of  Glory.  I  swear  by  the  Sun  of  the
Horizon  of  Holiness  that  the  friends  of  God  never
have  regarded  nor  will  regard  the  earth  or  its  transi-
tory riches.  God  hath  ever  regarded  the  hearts  of
[His]  servants,  and  this  too  is  by  reason  of  [His]
most  great  favour,  that  perchance  mortal  souls  may
be  cleansed  and  sanctified  from  earthly  states  and
may  attain  unto  everlasting  places.  But  that  Real
King  is  in  Himself  suf&cient  unto  Himself  [and  inde-
pendent] of  all :  neither  doth  any  advantage  accrue
to  Him  from  the  love  of  contingent'  beings,  nor  doth
any  hurt  befal  Him  from  their  hatred.  All  earthly
places  appear  through  Him  and  unto  Him  return,  and

1  By  'contingent'  or  'possible'  being  is  meant  the  material
or  phenomenal  world,  of  which  the  being  or  not-being  are
alike  possible  and  conceivable,  as  contrasted  with  'Necessary
Being'  (God)  of  which  the  not-being  is  inconceivable  and
impossible.

8—2


116  A  traveller's  narrative.

p.  144.  God  singly  and  alone  abideth  in  His  own  place  which
is  holy  above  space  and  time,  mention  and  utterance,
sign,  description,  and  definition,  height  and  depth.
And  none  knoweth  this  save  Him  and  whosoever  hath
knowledge  of  tlie  Book.  Tliere  is  no  God  but  Him,
the  Mighty,  the  Bountiful.' Finis.

"  But  good  deeds  depend  on  this ',  that  the  Royal
Person  should  himself  look  into  that  [matter]  with
just  and  gracious  regard,  and  not  be  satisfied  with
the  representations  of  certain  persons  unsupported  by
proof  or  evidence.  We  ask  God  to  strengthen  the
King  unto  that  which  He  willeth:  and  wlmt  He
willeth  should  he  the  wish  of  the  worlds.
■^  "  Afterwards  they  summoned  this  servant  to  Con-
stantinople. We  reached  that  city  along  with  a  num-
ber of  poor  unfortunates,  and  after  our  arrival  did

p.  145.  not  hold  intercourse  with  a  single  soul,  for  we  had
nought  to  say  [unto  them],  and  there  was  no  wish  save
that  it  should  be  clearly  demonstrated  by  proof  to  all
that  this  servant  had  no  thought  of  sedition  and  had
never  associated  with  the  seditious.  And,  by  Him
in  jjraise  ofw/tose  spirit  the  tongues  of  all  things  speak,

1  This  sentence  is  rather  ambiguous,  and  would  at  first
sight  appear  to  signify  that  the  continuance  of  the  Babis'  good
conduct  depends  on  their  being  treated  with  more  justice  and
fairness  than  they  have  hitherto  met  with  on  the  part  of  the
Persian  government.  But  I  think  the  real  meaning  is  rather
that  the  attribution  of  good  actions  to  the  Shah  depends  on
his  now  acting  justly.


A  traveller's  narrative.  117

to  turn  in  any  direction  was  difficult  in  consideration
of  certain  circumstances  ;  but  these  things  were  done
for  the  protection  of  lives '.  Verily  my  Lord  hiwwetli
what  is  in  my  soul,  and  verily  He  is  witness  unto  what
I  say.  The  just  king  is  the  shadow  of  God  in  the
earth ;  all  should  take  refuge  under  the  shadow  of
his  justice  and  rest  in  the  shade  of  his  favour.  This
is  not  the  place  for  personalities,  or  censures  [directed]
specially  against  some  apart  from  others;  for  the
shadow  tells  of  him  who  casteth  the  shadow  ^  God
{glorious  is  His  mention)  hath  called  Himself  the
Lord  of  the  worlds '  for  that  He  hath  nurtured  and  p.  146.
doth  nurture  all ;  exalted  is  His  favour  which  Imth
preceded*  contingent  beings  and  His  mercy  which  hath
preceded  the  worlds.

"This  is  sufficiently  clear,  that,  [whether]  right
or  wrong  according  to  the  imagination  of  the  people,
this  community  have  accepted  as  true  and  adopted
the  religion  for  which  they  are  notorious,  and  that
on  this  account  they  have  foregone  what  they  Imd,
seeking  after  what  is  with  God.  And  this  same  re-
nunciation of  life  in  the  way  of  love  for  the  Merciful

^  Allusion  is  made  to  the  action  of  the  Babis  in  enrolling
themselves  as  Turkish  subjects. See  p.  88,  supra.

^  i.e.  the  action  of  subordinates  reveals  the  temper  of  their
masters.

2  As,  for  example,  in  the  first  verse  of  the  opening  chapter
of  the  Ku'ran.

''  See  note  1  on  p.  113,  supra.


118  A  traveller's  narrative.

[God]  is  a  faithful  witness  and  an  eloquent  attest
unto  that  whereimto  they  lay  claim.  Hath  it  [ever]
been  beheld  that  a  reasonable  man  renounced  his
life  without  proof  or  evidence  [of  the  truth  of  that
for  which  he  died]  ?  And  if  it  be  said,  '  This  people
are  mad,'  this  [too]  is  very  improbable,  for  it  is  not
[a  thing]  confined  to  one  or  two  persons,  but  rather
p.  147.  have  a  great  multitude  of  every  class,  inebriated  with
the  Kawthar '  of  divine  wisdom,  hastened  with  heart
and  soul  to  the  place  of  martyrdom  in  the  way  of  the
Friend.  If  these  persons,  who  for  God  have  foregone
aU  save  Him,  and  who  have  poured  forth  life  and
wealth  in  His  way,  can  be  belied,  then  by  what  proof
and  evidence  shall  the  truth  of  that  which  others
assert  concerning  that  wherein  they  are^  be  estab-
lished in  the  presence  of  the  King  ?

"The  late  H4jl  Seyyid  Muhammad^  {may  God

^  Kawthar  primarily  signifies  abundance,  but  it  is  also  the
name  of  a  river  in  Paradise.

^  That  is,  the  religion  which  they  profess.

'  The  event  here  alluded  to  occurred  in  the  year  a.  h.  1241
(A.D.  1825).  The  Persians,  exasperated  by  rumours  of  op-
pression and  insult  on  the  part  of  the  Russians  towards  their
Musulmdn  subjects,  especially  in  the  then  recently  ceded
provinces  of  the  Caucasus,  were  incited  by  the  clergy  headed
by  k\k  (here  called  H4jl)  Seyyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan  to
declare  a,jihdd  or  holy  war  against  their  northern  enemies,  in
which,  though  at  first  encouraged  by  some  measure  of  success,
they  were  eventually  totally  vanquished,  the  campaign  ending
in  the  capture  of  Tabriz by  the  Russians  and  the  treaty  of


A  traveller's  narrative.  119

exalt  Ms  station  aivd  overwhelm,  Mm  in  the  depth  of
the  ocean  of  His  mercy  and  forgiveness),  although  he
was  of  the  most  learned  of  the  doctors  of  the  age  and
the  most  pious  and  austere  of  his  contemporaries,  and
although  the  splendour  of  his  worth  was  of  such  a
degree  that  the  tongues  of  all  creatures  spoke  in
praise  and  eulogy  of  him  and  confidently  asserted  his
asceticism  and  godliness,  did  nevertheless  in  the  war
against  the  Russians  forego  much  good  and  turn  back  p.  148.
after  a  little  contest,  although  he  himself  had  decreed
a  holy  war,  and  had  set  out  from  his  native  country
with  conspicuous  ensign  in  support  of  the  Faith.  0
would  that  the  covering  might  be  withdrawn,  and  that
what  is  hidden  from  [men's]  eyes  might  appear !

"  But  as  to  this  sect,  it  is  twenty  years '  and  more
that  they  have  been  tormented  by  day  and  by  night
with  the  fierceness  of  the  Royal  anger,  and  that  they
have  been  cast  each  one  into  a  [different]  land  by  the
blasts  of  the  tempests  of  the  King's  wrath. How

Turkmanohay.  See  Watson's  History  of  Persia,  pp.  207—238.
Watson,  however,  credits  Aka  Seyyid  Muhammad  with  some
degree  of  moderation,  observing  (p.  209)  that  "he  seems  to
have  retained  some  sKght  remnant  of  prudence,  after  that
quality  was  no  longer  discernible  in  the  conduct  and  language
of  his  professional  brethren."

1  The  first  interference  with  the  Bab  and  his  followers  took
place  in  August  1845,  so  that  if  we  suppose  this  letter  to  have
been  written  near  the  end  of  the  Adrianople  period  (which  came
to  a  close  in  August  1868)  nearly  23  years  of  persecution  had
then  been  endured  by  the  Bibis.


120  A  traveller's  narrative.

many  children  have  been  left  fatherless  !  How  many
fathers  have  become  childless  !  How  many  mothers
have  not  dared,  through  fear  and  dread,  to  mourn
over  their  slaughtered  children ' !  Many  [were]  the
servants  [of  God]  who  at  eve  were  in  the  utmost
p.  149.  wealth  and  opulence,  and  at  dawn  were  beheld  in  the
extreme  of  poverty  and  abasement !  There  is  no  land
but  hath  been  dyed  with  tlieir  blood  and  no  air  tvhere-
unto  tlieir  groanings  have  not  arisen.  And  during
these  few  years  the  arrows  of  affliction  have  rained
down  without  intermission  from  the  clouds  of  fate.
Yet,  notwithstanding  all  these  visitations  and  afflic-
tions, the  iire  of  divine  love  is  in  such  fashion  kindled
in  their  hearts  that,  were  they  all  to  be  hewn  in  pieces,
they  would  not  forswear  the  love  of  the  Beloved  of

'  This  is  no  mere  figure  of  speech.  Ussher  writes  in  his
Journey  from  London  to  Persepolis  (London  1865),  p.  629,  "  It
was  enough  to  be  suspected  of  Babeeism  to  be  at  once  put  to
death,  and  many  old  feuds  and  injuries  were  avenged  by
denouncements  and  accusation  of  being  tainted  by  the  fatal
doctrines.  No  time  was  lost  between  apprehension  and
execution.  Death  was  the  only  punishment  known ;  the
headless  bodies  lay  in  the  streets  for  days,  the  terrified
relatives  fearing  to  give  them  burial,  and  the  dogs  fought  and
growled  over  the  corpses  in  the  deserted  thoroughfares.  At
last  the  European  missions  remonstrated,  the  reign  of  terror
ceased,  and  although  still  proscribed  and  put  to  death  without
mercy  whenever  discovered,  the  Babees  are  supposed  yet  to
reckon  many  seeming  orthodox  Moslems  among  their  numbers,
the  southern  parts  of  the  country  being  thought  to  be  the
most  tainted  with  the  detested  heresy."


A  traveller's  narrative.  121

all  the  dwellers  upon  earth ;  nay  rather  with  their
whole  souls  do  they  yearn  and  hope  for  what  may
befal  [them]  in  the  way  of  God.

"  0  King !  The  gales  of  the  mercy  of  the
Merciful  One  have  converted  these  servants  and
drawn  them  to  the  region  of  the  [Divine]  Unity —

'  The  witness  of  the  faithful  lover  is  in  his  sleeve ' " —

but  some  of  the  doctors  of  Persia^  have  troubled  the
most  luminous  heart  of  the  King  of  the  age  with  p.  150.
regard  to  those  who  are  admitted  into  the  Sanctuary
of  the  Merciful  One  and  those  who  make  for  the
Ka'ba  of  Wisdom.  0  would  that  the  world-ordering
judgement  of  the  King  might  decide  that  this  servant
should  meet  those  doctors  ^  and,  in  the  presence  of
His  Majesty  the  King,  adduce  arguments  and  proofs  !
This  servant  is  ready,  and  hopeth  of  God  that  such  a
conference  may  be  brought  about,  so  that  the  truth
of  the  matter  maj'  become  evident  and  apparent
before  His  Majesty  the  King.  And  afterwards  the
decision  is  in  thy  hand,  and  I  am  ready  to  confront
tlie  throne  of  thy  sovereignty ;  then  give  judgement  for
me  or  against  me.  The  Merciful  Lord  saith  in  the
Furkd.n'',  which  is  the  enduring  proof  amidst  the  host

1  i.e.  the  faithful  lover  carries  his  life  in  his  hand,  or,  as
the  Persians  say,  in  his  sleeve.

2  K.  reads  'outward  [or  formal]  doctors.'

3  K.  reads  'the  doctors  of  the  age.'

*  i.e.  the  Kur'an,  the  supernatural  eloquence  of  which  is


122  A  traveller's  narrative.

of  existences,  'Desire  death,  then,  if  ye  be  sincere'.'
He  hath  declared  the  desiring  of  death  to  be  the

p.  151.  proof  of  sincerity ;  and  it  will  be  apparent  in  the
mirror  of  the  [King's]  luminous  mind  which  party  it
is  that  hath  this  day  foregone  life  in  the  way  of  Him
[who  is]  adored  by  the  dwellers  upon  earth.  Had
the  doctrinal  books  of  this  people,  [composed]  in
proof  of  that  wherein  they  are",  been  written  with  the
blood  which  has  been  shed  in  His  way  (exalted  is
He),  books  innumerable  would  assuredly  have  been
apparent  and  visible  amongst  mankind.

"  How,  then,  can  one  repudiate  this  people,  whose
words  and  deeds  are  consistent,  and  accept  those
persons  who  neither  have  foregone  nor  will  forego
one  atom  of  the  consideration  [which  they  enjoy]  in
the  way  of  [God]  the  Sovereign  ?

"  Some  of  the  doctors  of  Persia  who  have  de-
nounced this  servant  have  never  either  met  or  seen
him, nor  [even]  become  cognizant  of  [his]  intent :

p.  152.  nevertheless  they  said  wluat  tJiey  desired  and  do  what
they  will.  Every  statement  requires  proof,  and  is
not  [established]  merely  by  assertion  or  by  outward
gear  of  asceticism.

"A  translation  of  some  passages  from  the  con-

the  '  permanent  miracle '  and  '  enduring  proof '  of  its  divine
origin.

1  Kur'an,  ii,  88 ;  Ixii,  6.

^  i.e.  '  that  which  they  believe.'


A  TRiVELLEB'S  NARRATIVE. 123

tents  of  the  Hidden  Book  of  Fdtima'  (upon  her  be

^  I  was  at  first  donbtful  as  to  whether  the  passages  here
cited  were  really  translated  by  Beha  from  some  Arabic  work
bearing  this  mime,  or  whether  they  were  in  truth  extracts  from
a  work  of  his  own  called  '  Hidden  Word»'  {^^^  iUlT  )  whereof
I  had  heard  frequent  mention  amongst  the  Babis.  The
following  passage  on  p.  379  of  Mr  Merrick's  translation  of  a
work  on  Shi'it-e  theology  called  v>^'  «^  seemed  to  bear
on  the  question: — "After  the  Prophet's  death  Fatima  was
affected  in  spirit  to  a  degree  which  none  but  God  knew.
Jebra'U  was  sent  down  daUy  to  comfort  her,  and  'Ali  wrote
what  the  angel  said,  and  this  is  the  Book  of  Fatima  which  is
now  with  the  Imam  Mahdi."  On  consulting  Eieu's  Catalogue
of  the  Persian  3/.?.?.  in  the  British  Museum,  I  found  mention  (vol.

ii,  p.  829  b.)  of  a  work  entitled  c_^i  f<cS^  oUJ^  composed
by  Mnlla  Muhsin-i-Feyz  of  Kashan,  and  described  as  consisting
of  "  one  hundred  sayings  of  Imams  and  Sufis  in  Arabic,  with
Persian  commentary."  I  seized  the  first  opportunity  of  ex-
amining this  work,  but  a  search  of  about  two  hours  through  its
pagesrevealed  nothing  resembling  the  passages  in  the  text  before
us.  Finally  I  wrote  to  Acre,  asking,  amongst  other  questions,
what  might  be  the  true  nature  of  the  work  here  alluded  to.
The  following  answer  (which  is  authoritative)  was  returned : —
[Translation]  "Fifth  Question.  Concerning  the  mention  of
the  matters  in  the  Hidden  Book  of  Fatima  (upon  her  be  the
peace  of  God).  The  answer  is  this,  that  the  sect  of  Persia,
that  is  the  Shi'ites,  who  regard  themselves  as  pure,  and  the
[rest  of  the]  world  (we  take  refuge  with  God !)  as  unclean,
believe  that  after  His  Highness  the  Seal  of  the  Prophets
[Muhammad]  Her  Highness  Fatima  (upon  her  be  the  blessings
of  God)  was  occupied  night  and  day  in  weeping,  wailing,  and
lamenting  over  the  fate  of  her  illustrious  father.  Therefore
was  Jebra'il  commanded  by  the  Lord  Most  Glorious  to  com-
mune, converse,  and  associate  with  Her  Highness  Fatima ;  and


124 A  traveller's  narrative.

the  blessings  of  God)  which  are  apposite  to  this  place
will  [now]  be  submitted  in  the  Persian  lang-uage,  in
order  that  some  things  [now]  concealed  may  be
revealed  before  the  [Royal]  Presence.  Those  ad-
dressed in  these  utterances  in  the  above-mentioned
book  (which  is  to-day  known  as  'Hidden  Words')
are  those people who are outwardly  notable for

he  used  to  speak  words  causing  consolation  and  quietude  of
heart. These  words  were  collected  and  named  '  The  Booh  of

Fdtima'  (Jj^li  ^ij.,^).  And  they  [i.e.  the  Shi'ites]  beheve
that  this  Book  is  with  His  Highness  the  Ki'im  [i.e.  the  Imam
Mahdi]  and  shall  appear  in  the  days  of  his  appearance.  But
of  this  Book  nought  is  known  save  the  name,  and  indeed  it  is
a  name  without  form  and  a  title  without  reality.  And  His
Highness  the  Existent  [i.e.  Beha'u'U&h]  wOled  to  make  known
the  appearance  of  the  K^'im  by  intimation  and  implication ;
therefore  was  it  mentioned  in  this  manner  for  a  wise  reason
which  he  had.  And  that  which  is  mentioned  under  the
name  of  the  Book  in  the  Epistle  to  His  Majesty  the  King  [of
Persia]  (may  God  assist  him)  is  from  the  '  Hidden  Words '
[4;_jiSi  oUj  ]  which  was  revealed  before  the  Epistle  to  His
Majesty  the  King.  The  '  Hidden  Words '  was  revealed  in  the
languages  of  eloquence  (Arabic)  and  of  light  (Persian).  It  hath
been  commanded  that  some  portion  of  it  shall  be  written  and
sent  specially  for  you,  that  you  may  become  cognizant  of  the
truth  of  the  matter.  At  all  events  both  the  Persian  and  the
Arabic  thereof  were  revealed  in  this  manifestation.  As  to  the
pronoun "  [I  had  asked  whether  the  pronoun  in  A^jif
referred  to  God,  or  to  Gabriel,  or  to  Fatima,  i.e.  whether  its
subject  was  masculine  or  feminine]  "  he  says,  '  It  refers  to  the
Hidden  Unseen,  from  the  heaven  of  whose  Grace  all  verses  are
revealed. ' "


A  traveller's  narrative.  125

science  and  piety,  but  who  are  inwardly  subservient
to  their  passions  and  lust. He  says  : —

"  '  0  faithless  ones  !  Why  do  ye  outwardly  claim
to  be  shepherds,  while  inwardly  ye  have  become  the
wolves  of  my  sheep  ?  Your  likeness  is  like  unto  the  P- 153.
star  before  the  morning^,  which  is  apparently  bright
and  luminous,  but  really  causeth  the  misguidance
and  destruction  of  the  caravans  of  my  city  and
country.'

"  So  Hkewise  he  saith —

'  0  outwardly  fair  and  inwardly  faulty !  Thy
likeness  is  like  unto  clear  bitter  water,  wherein  out-
wardly the  utmost  sweetness  and  purity  is  beheld,
but  when  it  falleth  into  the  assaying  hands  of  the
taste  of  the  [Divine]  Unity  He  doth  not  accept  a
single  drop  thereof.  The  radiance  of  the  sun  is  on
the  earth  and  on  the  mirror  alike ;  but  regard  the
difference  as  from  the  guard-stars"  to  the  earth ;
nay,  between  them  is  a  limitless  distance.'

1  There  is  a  star  which  appears  before  the  morning  star  and
resembles  it,  and  this  the  Persians  call  kdravdn-kush  (the
caravan-killer)  or  diarvaddr-kush  (the  muleteer-killer),  because
it  entices  the  caravan  to  start  from  its  halting-place  in  the
belief  that  the  dawn  is  at  hand,  and  so  causes  it  to  lose  its
way  and  perish.

*  Farkaddn,  the  two  Farkads,  are  two  bright  stars  near  the
pole-star  ifi  and  y  of  Ursa  Jlinor).  See  Lane's  Arabic-English
Lexicon  s.v.  jj  i.  In  English  they  are  properly  called  the
"Guards"  or  "Guardians" — "'of  the  Spanish  woii guardare,'
saith  Hood,  '  which  is  to  beholde,  because  they  are  diligently


126  A  traveller's  narrative.

"  So  likewise  he  saith  : —

'  0  child  of  the  world  !  Many  a  morning  hath
the  effulgence  of  my  grace  come  iiuto  thy  place  from
the  day-spring  of  the  place-less,  found  thee  on  the
p.  164.  couch  of  ease  busied  wfth  otlier  thin^^s,  and  returned
like  the  lightning  of  the  spirit  to  the  bright  abode  of
glory.  And  I,  desiring  not  thy  shame,  declared  it
not  in  the  retreats  of  nearness  to  the  hosts  of  holi-
ness.'

"  So  likewise  he  saith  : —

'  0  pretender  to  my  friendship  ! In  the  morning
the  breeze  of  my  grace  passed  by  thee,  and  found
thee  sleeping  on  the  bed  of  heedlessness,  and  wept
over  thy  condition,  and  turned  back.'
Finis.

"  In  the  presence  of  the  King's  justice,  therefore,
the  statement  of  an  adversary  ought  not  to  be
accepted  as  sufficient.  And  in  the  PurkAn,  which
distinguisheth  between  truth  and  falsehood,  He  says,
'  0  ye  wlio  believe,  if  there  come  unto  yna  a  ahnicr
with  a  message,  then  discriminate,  lest  you  fall  irjwii
a  people  in  ignorance  and  on  tlie  morrow  repent  of
p.  166.  wliat  ye  have  done' .' And  it  hath  come  down  in  holy

to  be  looked  unto,  in  regard  of  tliu  singular  use  which  they
have  in  navigation. ' "  (Smyth  and  Chambers'  Cycle  of  Celctlial
Objects,  Oxford,  1881.)

'  Kur'An,  xLix,  6.  Concerning  the  occasion  of  the  revelation
of  this  passage  see  the  notes  on  it  in  Sale's  and  Palmer's
translations  of  the  Kur'4n.


A  teavellee's  naeeative.  127

tradition,  '  Credit  -not  the  calumniator.'  The  matter
hath  been  misapprehended  by  certain  doctors,  neither
have  they  seen  this  servant.  But  those  persons  who
have  met  [him]  testify  that  this  servant  hath  not
spoken  contrary  to  that  which  God  hath  ordained  in
the  Book,  and  recite  this  blessed  verse  : — He  saith
(exalted  is  He)  'Do  ye  disavow  nsfor  aught  save  that
we  believe  in  God,  and  what  hath  been  sent  down  unto
us,  and  what  was  sent  down  before^?'

"  0  King  of  the  age !  The  eyes  of  these  wan-
derers turn  and  gaze  in  the  direction  of  the  mercy  of
the  Merciful  One,  and  assuredly  to  these  aflBictions
shall  the  greatest  mercy  succeed,  and  after  these
most  grievous  hardships  shall  follow  great  ease.  But
[our]  hope  is  this,  that  His  Majesty  the  King  will
himself  turn  his  attention  to  [these]  matters,  which
thing  will  be  the  cause  of  hope  in  [our]  hearts^  And  p.  156.
this  is  unmixed  good  which  hath  been  submitted,
and  God  sufficeth  for  a  witness.

"  Glory  be  to  Thee,  0  God !  0  God,  I  bear  witness
that  the  heart  of  the  King  is  between  the  fingers  of
Thy  power:  if  Thou  pleasest,  twn  it,  0  God,  in
the  direction  of  mercy  and  kindliness :  verily  TJiou  art
the  Exalted,  the  Potent,  the  Beneficent:  there  is  no
God  but  Thee,  the  Mighty  from  whom  help  is  sought.

1  Kur'an,  v,  64.

2  K.  reads  v^:*^  J^j  vr-  ("the  cause  of  the  good  pleasure
of  the  Beloved  ")  in  place  of  ^j^  iil=-j  ■— —


128  A  traveller's  narrative.

"  Concerning  the  qualifications  of  the  doctors,  he
saith' : — 'But  amongst  tlie  lawyers  he  who  guardeth
himself,  observeth  his  religion,  opposeth  his  lust,  and
obeyeth  tJie  command  of  his  Lord — it  is  incumbent  on
tlie  people  to  follow  him...'  unto  the  end.  And  if  the
King  of  the  age  will  regard  this  utterance,  which
proceeded  from  the  tongue  of  the  recipient  of  divine
inspiration,  he  will  observe  that  those  characterized
p.  157.  by  the  qualities  transmitted  in  the  afore-mentioned
tradition  are  rarer  than  the  philosopher's  stone.
Therefore  the  claim  of  every  person  pretending  to
science  neither  hath  been  nor  is  heard.

"So  likewise  in  describing  the  lawyers  of  the
latter  time  he  says  : — '  Tlie  lawyers  of  that  time  are
the  most  evil  of  lawyers  under  the  shadow  of  Jiearen :
from  them  cometh  forth  mischief,  and  unto  them  it
returneth'.'

"And  if  any  person  deny  these  traditions,  the
establishing  thereof  is  [incumbent]  on  this  servant ;
but  since  [our]  object  is  brevity  therefore  the  detail
of  the  authorities'  hath  not  been  submitted.

"Those  doctors  who  have  indeed  drunk  of  the

1  The  preposition  appears  to  refer  to  the  Prophet  Muham-
mad.

2  K.  here  adds,  "So  likewise  he  saith,  'when  the  standard
of  the  Truth  appeareth  the  yeople  of  the  East  and  of  the  West
curse  it.'"

3  i.e.  the  jt„l,  or  chain  of  narrators  whereby  a  reliable
tradition  is  substantiated,  is  omitted  for  lack  of  space.


A  traveller's  narrati-\-e.  129

cup  of  renimciatioii  never  interfered  with  tMs  ser-
vant, even  as  the  late  Sherkh  Miirtaza'  {mai/  God
exalt  his  station  and  cause  him  to  dwell  under  the
shadow  of  the  domes  of  His  grace)  used  to  shew  [us]
atfection  during  the  days  of  [our]  sojourn  in  'Irak,
and  used  not  to  speak  concerning  this  matter  other-  p- 15?
irise  than  God  hath  permitted.  We  ask  God  to  help
'1.U  [men]  unto  that  irhich  Be  loveth  and  approceth.

"  Xow  all  people  have  shut  their  eyes  to  all
[these]  matters,  and  are  hent  on  the  persecution  of
this  sect ;  so  that  should  it  be  demanded  of  certain
persons,  who  (after  God's  grace)  rest  in  the  shadow
of  the  King's  clemency  and  enjoy  unbounded  blessings.
'  In  return  for  the  King's  favour  what  service  have  ye
wrought  1  Have  ye  by  wise  poHcy  added  any  country
to  [his]  countries  ?  Or  have  ye  applied  yourselves  to
atight  which  would  cause  the  comfort  of  the  people,
the  prosperity  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  continuance
of  fair  fame  for  the  stat€  ? ',  they  have  no  reply  save
this,  that,  falsely  or  tridy,  they  designate  a  number
of  persons  in  the  presence  of  the  King  by  the  name  of
Bahis,  and  forthwith  engage  in  slaughter  and  plunder ;  p.  159.
even  as  in  Tabriz  and  elsewhere^  they  sold  certain

'  See  note  1  on  p.  86  supra.

-  E.  reads  'and  Mansiirivya  ot  Egypt."  The  onlv  record
I  can  find  of  any  of  the  Babis  being  sold  into  slavery  is  in  the
Tdnkh-i-Jadui,  which,  after  describing  the  massacre  oi  most
of  those  Trho  STirrendered  at  Sheykh  Tabarsi.  continues — "The
remainder  of  the  companions  who  were  left  aJive  they  carried

B.  9


130 A  traveller's  narrative.

ones,  and  received  much  wealth ;  and  this  was  never
represented  before  the  presence  of  the  King.  All
these  things  have  occurred  because  of  this,  that  they
have  found  these  poor  people  without  a  helper.
They  have  foregone  matters  of  moment,  and  have
fallen  upon  these  poor  unfortunates.

"Many  sects  and  diverse  tribes  rest  tranquil  in
the  shadow  of  the  King,  and  of  these  sects  one  is  this
people.  Were  it  not  best  that  the  lofty  endeavour
and  magnanimity  of  those  who  surround  the  King
should  so  be  witnessed :  that  they  should  be  scheming
for  all  factions  to  come  under  the  King's  shadow,  and
that  they  should  govern  amidst  all  with  justice?  To
put  in  force  the  ordinances  of  God  is  unmixed  justice,
p.  ifiO.  and  with  this  all  are  satisfied ;  nay,  the  ordinances
of  God  [ever]  have  been  and  will  be  the  instrument
and  means  for  the  protection  of  [His]  creatures,  «.s
He  saith  (exalted  is  He)  'And  in  retaliation  ye  li<i/m


in  fetters  and  chains  to  Barfuriisli.  Several  they  told,  such  as
Alihuncl-i-Mulla  Muhammad  8adik  of  Khur4s4n,  Ak4  Seyyid
'Azim  the  Turk,  H&ji  Nasir  of  Kazvln,  aod  Mirzi  Huseyn  of
Kum.  And  some  they  sent  to  S4ri,  and  there  martyred  them."
But  it  is  not  clear  that  these  were  sold  into  slavery :  they  may
have  been  ransomed  by  their  friends,  as  certainly  happened  in
some  cases.  More  recent  instances  are  evidently  alluded  to
here.  Probably  the  B4bls  sent  to  Khartum  in  the  Soudan
about  the  period  when  this  letter  was  written,  and  afterwards
released  by  General  Gordon,  were  sold  as  slaves.  (See  B.  i,
pp.  i'j'6-4'.)5.)


A TRAVELLERS XAERATIYE.  131

life,  0  j.vople  of  understandiiiffK'  [But]  it  is  far  from
the  jiistice  of  His  Majesty  the  King  that,  for  the
faiilt  of  one  person,  a  number  of  persons  should  be-
come the  objects  of  the  scourges  of  wrath.  God
(glorious  is  His  mention)  saith: — 'S^ane  shall  bear
the  burden  of  another'.'  And  this  is  sufficiently
e%"idenr,  that  in  every  community  there  haye  been
and  win  be  learned  and  ignorant,  wise  and  foolish,
sinful  and  pious.  And  to  commit  abominable  actions
is  far  from  the  wise  man.  For  the  wise  man  either
^eeketh  the  world  or  abandoneth  it.  If  he  aban-
doneth  it.  assuredly  he  wiU  not  regard  aught  save
Grod,  and,  apart  from  this,  the  fear  of  God  will  with-
hold him  from  committing  forbidden  and  culpable
actions.  And  if  he  seeketh  the  world,  he  will  as-  p.  161.
suredly  not  commit  deeds  which  will  cause  and  induce
the  aversion  of  [God's]  servants  and  produce  horror
in  those  who  are  in  all  lands;  but  rather  will  he
practise  such  deeds  as  wiU  cause  the  adhesion  of
mankind.  So  it  hath  been  demonstrated  that  detest-
able actions  have  been  and  wiU  be  [wrought  only]
by  ignorant  persons'.  We  ask  God  to  kefp  His
~n\itits  from regarding aught but Him, and to

1  Kar'an,  ii.  175.

-  Kur'an,  vi.  164;  xvii.  16;  rsxv.  19;  xxsix.  9;  Uii.  39.

■*  Compare  the  argument  on  pp.  oi— 53  wherewitli  Beha,
meets  the  charge  brought  against  >iiin  of  complicity  in  the
attempted  assaisination  of  the  Shah.


132  A  traveller's  narrative.

bring  them  near  to  Him:  verily  He  is  potent  over  all
things.

"  Glory  he  to  Thee,  0  God!  0  my  God,  Thou  hearest
my  groaniitg,  and  seest  my  state  and  my  distress  and
my  affliction,  and  knowest  what  is  in  my  soul.  If
my  cry  be  sincerely  for  Thy  sake,  then  draw  thereby
tlie  hearts  of  Thy  creatures  unto  the  horizon  of  the
lieaven  of  Thy  recognition,  and  turn  the  King  unto  the
right  hand  of  the  throne  of  Thy  Name  the  Merciful;
p.  162.  then  bestow  on  him,  0  my  God,  the  blessing  which
hath  descended  from  the  lieaven  of  Thy  favour  and
the  clouds  of  Thy  mercy,  that  he  may  sever  himself
from  that  which  he  hath  and  turn  toward  the  region
of  Thy  bounties.  0  Lord,  help  him  to  support  the
oppressed  amongst  [Thy]  servants^,  and  to  raise  up
Thy  Word  amidst  Thy  people;  tlien  aid  him  with  the
hosts  of  the  unseen  and  the  seen,  that  he  may  subdue
cities  in  Thy  Name  and  rule  over  all  who  are  upon
the  earth  by  Thy  power  and  authority,  0  Thou  in
whose  hand  is  the  Kingdom  of  creation:  and  verily
Thou  art  He  who  ruleth  at  the  beginning  and  in  the
end:  there  is  no  God  save  Thee,  the  Potent,  the  Mighty,
the  Wise.

"They  have misrepresented  matters  before  the

presence  of  the  King  in  such  a  way  that  if  any  iU

deed  proceed  from  any  one  of  this  sect  they  account

it  as  [a  part]  of  the  religion  of  these  servants. But,

1  K.  reads  "to  support  Thy  religion."


A  TRAVELLER  S  XAEEATITE. 138

Of  G:-L  I' ■?•'-:':  triom  tJiere  i^  none  oth^r  G::t  this
servant  hath  not  sanctioned  the  committing  of  sins.  p.  IpS.
mnch  less  that  whereof  the  proliibirion  hath  been
exs^iicitly  revealed  ia  the  Book  of  God!  God  hath
prohibited  imto  men  the  dririkir^  of  ■nine',  and  tiie
■■.nlavaVJness  thereof  hc.h  been  revealed  and  recorded
in  the  Book  of  Gvxi^,  and  the  doctors  of  the  a^e  t^m-iy
G:d  miitip'y the  Hie  0/  them) have  i:::animo.:5iy

-  The  Mr.ha",— so^nj  are  in  tie  "naci:  e:  sZeging  ivcsini:
:he  Ei'iif  (c:  -^h;*;  :er:e;>  :iey  sre.  wi:h  very  rire  exc-tVTi.n;.
P'erfecdy  igncrsr:'  5r^r.irv  false  and  ::i.=,l;ei::L!  eharzei  calcr.-
la'Te-A  CO  ii^orxrii:  ciein  in  :iie  eyes  of  ri:e  world,  si.  for
ins'Anoe.  that  ihey  are  c^iiiiiizrlj;;;  cjiat  thej  allow  nice
ii^iscan-ls  :^  one  "woman;  zh^z  thev  drink  wine  azd  are
cnilTy  of  eiher  nnlawtnl  y-icticT;;.  The>r  i:i:rmen:,5  have
rten  repealed  bv  many  Enr?riean  wric^rs  deriving  their  imor-
niasion  either  dineedy  cr  inlirecdy  rrv'im  M:Lhinin:ia-.ian  i:nro;;,
.;nd  especially  from  :he  Persian  scale  clireni,;le5  called  S :.-<■.-
:''...':-Tatc-arilk  and  Jl .::.-:.;::.'>- 5. :-i. 0:  ties;  s.^'mewhac  rartial

and  one-sided  records  site  former  has  ihe  foUowinc  passage ; —
■In  every  honse  where  they  [i.e.  the  Ea'cis'  -issemlled  they
nsed  iO  drink  wine  and  ecmmi:  ocner  aonons  forhiilen  by  :he
Law:  and  they  nsei  co  order  iheir  women  c?  come  nnveiled

wine,  and  give  to  drink  :o  me  men  in  ihe  company."  Anyone
knowinr  what  re^ianoe  c-^sn  he  p-aoed  on  :ne  scAcemencs  0:
me  wor.5  m  cnesccon.  wnen  any  motive  :."r  nnsrerresen cation
exiscs.  will  learn  withont  asccnishmenc  cna:  che  Bah  ahs.^lncely
corcaue  cne  ns^  01  wme,  opmm.  an:i  even  coca.'oo,  and  cnac  cne
E.icis  ohierve  the  oUiirscicns  laid  npon  chem  ac  lease  as  well

ever,  ceen  wichdrawn  ty  Beha.

-  Knr'an.  v.  :■;.


134  A  traveller's  narrative.

prohibited  unto  men  this  abominable  action;  yet
withal  do  some  commit  it.  Now  the  punishment  of
this  action  falls  on  these  heedless  persons,  while  those
manifestations  of  the  glory  of  sanctity  [continue]
holy  and  undefiled:  unto  their  sanctity  all  Being,
wketlier  of  the  unseen  or  the  seen,  testifieth.

"Yea,  these  servants  [of  God]  regard  God  as  'doing
what  He  pleaseth  and  ordering  what  He  willeth\'
There  is  no  retreat  nor  way  of  flight  for  any  one  save
unto  God,  and  no  refuge  nor  asylum  but  in  Him.
And  at  no  time  hath  the  cavilling  of  men,  whether
learned  or  unlearned,  been  a  thing  to  rely  on,  nor
p.  164.  will  it  be  so^  The  [very]  prophets,  who  are  the
pearls  of  the  Ocean  of  Unity  and  the  recipients  of
Divine  Revelation,  have  [ever]  been  the  objects  of
men's aversion and cavilling; much more these

^  Kur'an,  ii.  254;  iii.  35;  xxii.  14,  19.  K.  inserts  here: —
"But  they  have  considered  tlie  [further]  appearances  of  the
Manifestations  of  Unity  in  the  World  of  dominion  [i.e.  the
phenomenal  world]  as  impossible;  whereas  if  anyone  regards
this  as  impossible  wherein  does  he  differ  from  those  people
who  regard  the  Hand  of  God  as  passive?  If  they  regard  God
(glorious  is  His  mention)  as  Sovereign,  then  all  must  accept  a
matter  which  appeareth  from  the  Source  of  command  of  that
King  of  Pre-existence."

^  K.  has  this  sentence  differently  as  follows  : — "  That  thing
which  is  necessary  is  the  production  on  the  claimant's  part
of  proof  and  demonstration  of  that  which  he  says  and  that
whereunto  he  lays  claim :  else  at  no  time  hath  the  cavilling  of
men"  Ac.


A  traveller's  narrative.  135

servants.  Even  as  He  saith : — 'Every  nation  schemed
against  thmr  apostle  to  catch  him.  And  they  con-
tended with  falsehood  therewith  to  refute  the  truth\'
So  likewise  He  saith,  '  There  came  not  unto  them  any
apostle  hut  they  moched  at  him'.'  Consider  the  appear-
ance of  the  Seal  of  the  Prophets  ^  the  King  of  the
Elect  (the  sotil  of  the  worlds  be  his  sacrifice);  after
the  dawning  of  the  Sun  of  Truth  from  the  horizon
of  the  Hijiz  what  wrongs  befel  that  Manifestation
of  the  Might  of  the  Lord  of  Glory  at  the  hands  of
the  people  of  error !  So  heedless  were  men  that  they
were  wont  to  consider  the  vexation  of  that  holy  one
as  one  of  the  greatest  of  good  works  and  as  the  means
of  approaching  God  Most  High.  For  in  the  first  years  p.  165.
the  doctors  of  that  age,  whether  Jews  or  Christians,
turned  aside  from  that  Sun  of  the  Highest  Horizon ;
and,  at  the  turning  aside  of  those  persons,  aU,  whether
humble  or  noble,  girt  up  their  loins  to  quench  the
radiance  of  that  Light  of  the  Horizon  of  Ideals.  The
names  of  aU  are  recorded  in  books:  amongst  them
were  Wahb  ibn  R4hib,  Ka'b  ibn  Ashraf,  'Abdu'lldh
[ibn]  Ubayy*,  and  the  like  of  these  persons;  tiU  at

1  Kur'an,  xl.  5.

2  Kur'an,  xv.  11,  xxxvi.  29.
'  Muhammad.

■1  I  can  find  no  mention  of  Wahb  ibn  Kahib.  Perhaps
Wahb  ibn  Yahudha,  one  of  the  Jewish  tribe  of  the  Bani
Kgraydha  who  strenuously  opposed  Muhammad  and  denied
the  Kur'an,  is  intended ;  or  perhaps  Wahb  ibn  Zayd  of  the


136  A  traveller's  narrative.

length  the  matter  reached  such  a  point  that  they
convened  a  meeting  to  take  counsel  as  to  the  shedding
of  the  most  pure  blood  of  that  holy  one,  as  God
(glorious  is  His  mention)  hath  declared  :• — 'yind  whtn
those  who  misbelieved  plotted  against  thee  to  confine
thee,  or  slay  thee,  or  drive  thee  out;  and  they  plotted,
and  God  plotted;  and  God  is  the  best  of  phtters\'
So  likewise  He  saith  : — 'And  if  their  aversion  be
grievous  unto  thee,  then,  if  thou  art  able  to  seek  out
p.  166.  a  hole  down  into  the  earth,  or  a  ladder  up  into  the
sky,  that  thou  mayest  slutw  them  a  sign, — [do  so] :
but  if  God  pleased  He  vjould  assuredly  bring  them
all  to  the  true  guidance:  be  Tiot  therefore  one  of  the
ignorant'.'  By  God,  the  hearts  of  those  near  [unto
God]  are  scorched  at  the  purport  of  these  two  blessed
verses ;  but  the  like  of  these  matters  certainly  trans-
mitted [to  us]  are  blotted  out  of  sight,  and  [men]
have  not  reflected,  neither  do  reflect,  what  was  the

same  tribe,  who  said  that  he  would  believe  if  Muhammad
would  bring  down  a  book  from  heaven,  and  whose  name
is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  "enemies  amongst  the  Jews."
Ka'b  ibn  Ashraf  of  the  tribe  of  Tayy  went  with  forty  Jews
from  Medina  to  Mecca  and  conspired  with  the  arch-enemy  of
the  Prophet,  Abu  Sofy4n,  to  compass  the  death  of  Muhammad.
He  was  subsequently  slain  by  Muhammad  ibn  Maslama  at  the
command  of  the  Prophet.  'Abdu'Uih  ibn  Ubayy  ibn  Saliil  of
the  tribe  of  'Awf  was  called  "the  chief  of  hypocrites."  [See
Ibn  Hishdm's  Life  of  Mal,i,am7iiad,  ed.  Wilstenfcld.]

1  Kur'in,  viii.  30.

2  Kur'4n,  vi.  3.5.


A  traveller's  narrative.  137

reason  of  the  turning  aside  of  [God's]  servants  at  the
appearance  of  the  day-springs  of  divine  lights.

"So  too,  before  the  Seal  of  the  Prophets,  consider
Jesus  the  Son  of  Mary.  After  the  appearance  of
that  Manifestation  of  the  Merciful  One  all  the
doctors  charged  that  Quintessence  of  Faith  with
misbelief  and  rebelliousness;  until  at  length,  with
the  consent  of  Annas,  who  was  the  chief  of  the
doctors  of  that  age,  and  likewise  Caiaphas',  who  was
the  most  learned  of  the  judges,  they  wrought  upon
that  Holy  One  that  which  the  pen  is  ashamed  and
unable  to  repeat.  The  earth  with  its  amplitude  was  P- 167.
too  strait  for  Him,  until  God  took  Him  up  into  the
heaven.  But  were  a  detailed  account  of  the  prophets
to  be  submitted  it  is  feared  that  weariness  might
result  ^

1  John  xi.  49,  50;  xviii.  13-28;  Acts  iv.  6-10.

^  K.  inserts  a  long  passage  here  as  follows: — "And  the
Jewish  doctors  especially  hold  that  after  Moses  no  plenipoten-
tiary prophet  possessed  of  a  [new]  Law  shall  come,  [but  that]
one  from  amongst  the  children  of  David  shall  appear,  who  shall
give  currency  to  the  Law  of  the  Pentateuch,  until,  by  his  help,
the  ordinances  of  the  Pentateuch  shall  become  current  and
effective  between  the  East  and  the  West.  So  too  the  people  of
the  Gospel  regard  it  as  impossible  that  after  Jesus  the  Son  of
Mary  any  Founder  of  a  new  religion  should  shine  forth  from
the  day-spring  of  the  Divine  Will;  and  they  seek  a  proof  in
this  verse  which  is  in  the  Gospel : — '  Verily  it  may  be  that  the
lieaven  and  the  earth  should  pass  away,  but  the  word  of  the  Son
of  Man  shall  never  pass  away.'  And  they  hold  that  what
Jesus  the  Son  of  Mary  hath  said  and  commanded  shall  not


138  A  traveller's  narrative.

"  0  would  that  thou  mightest  permit,  0  King,
that  we  should  send  unto  Thy  Majesty  that  whereby
eyes  would  he  refreshed,  souls  tranquillized,  and  every
just  person  assured  that  with  him  [i.e.  Behd.'u'lldh]  is
knowledge  of  the  Book.  Were  it  not  for  the  turning
aside  of  the  ignm-ant  and  the  wilful  blindness  of  the
doctors,  verily  I  would  utter  a  discourse  whereat
hearts  would  be  glad  and  would  fly  unto  the  air
from  the  mivrmur  of  whose  winds  is  heard,  '  There
is  no  God  but  He.'  But  now,  because  the  time  ad-
mitteth  it  not,  the  tongue  is  withheld  from  utterance,
and  the  vessel  of  declaration  is  sealed  until  God  shall
unclose  it  by  His  power:  verily  He  is  the  Potent,  the
Powerful.
p.  168.  "  Glory  be  to  Thee,  0  God !  0  my  God,  I  ask  of
Thee  in  Thy  Name,  whereby  Tlwu  hast  subdued  whom-
soever is  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  that  Thou  wilt
keep  the  lamp  of  Thy  religion  with  the  glass  of  Thy
power  and  Thy  favours,  so  that  the  winds  of  denial
pass  not  by  it  from  tlie  region  of  those  who  are  heedless
of  the  mysteries  of  Thy  Sovereign  Name:  then  increase

suffer  change,  whereas  He  saith  in  one  place  in  the  Gospel,
'Verily  I  go  and  come  [again]';  and  in  the  Gospel  of  John
likewise  He  giveth  tidings  of  'the  Comforting  Spirit  which
shall  come  after  me ' ;  while  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke  also  certain
signs  are  mentioned.  But,  because  some  of  the  doctors  of
that  faith  have  propounded  for  each  utterance  an  explanation
after  their  own  lusts,  therefore  have  they  remained  veiled  from
the  meaning  intended."


A  traveller's  narrative.  139

its  light  by  the  oil  of  Thy  wisdom :  verily  Thou  art
Potent  over  whomsoever  is  in  Thy  earth  and  Thy  heaven.

"  0  Lord,  I  ask  of  Thee  hy  the  Supreme  Word,
icliereat  whosoever  is  in  the  earth  and  tlie  heaven
feareth  save  him  wJw  taketh  hold  of  the  '  Most  Firm
Handle^,'  that  Tlwu  wilt  not  abandon  me  amongst
Thy  creatures :  lift  me  up  unto  Thee,  and  make  me  to
enter  in  under  the  shadow  of  Thy  mercy,  and  give  me
to  drink  of  the  pure  wine  of  Thy  grace,  that  I  may
dwell  under  the  canopy  of  Thy  glory  and  the  dome^
of  Thy  favours :  verily  Thou  art  powerful  unto  that
Thou  wishest,  and  verily  Thou  art  the  Protecting,  the
Self- Sufficing.

"  0  King !  The  lamps  of  justice  are  extinguished,  V- 169.
and  the  fire  of  persecution  is  kindled  on  all  sides,
until  that  they  Imve  made  my  people  captives^.  This
is  not  the  first  honour  which  hath  been  violated  in  the
way  of  God.  It  behoveth  every  one  to  regard  and
recall  what  befell  the  kindred  of  the  Prophet  until
tliat  the  people  made  them  captives  and  brought  tliem
in  unto  Damascus  the  spacious;  and  amongst  them
was  the  Prince  of  Worshippers^,  the  Stay  of  the
elect,  the  Sanctuary  of  the  eager  (tlie  soul  of  all  beside

1  Kur'an,  ii.  257;  xxxi.  21.

2  K.  inserts  here : — "from  Zawrd  [Baghdad]  unto  Mosul  '  the
prominent'"  (el-hadbd).

2  i.e.  Zeynu'l-'Abidin,  the  fourth  Imim,  son  of  Im&m
Huseyn  and  Shahrbanii  the  daughter  of  Yezdigird.  Being  ill
in  his  bed  at  the  time  of  the  massacre  of  Kerbela  his  life  was.


140 A  traveller's  narrative.

Mm  be  his  sacrifice).  It  was  said  unto  them,  '  Are
ye  seceders  V  He  said,  '  No,  by  God,  we  are  servants
who  have  believed  in  God  and  in  His  signs,  and
through  us  the  teeth  of  faith  are  disclosed  in  a  smile,
and  the  sign  of  the  Merciful  One  shineth  forth;
through  our  mention  spreadeth  Al-Batha},  and  the
darkness  which  interveiied  between  earth  and  heaven-
is  dispelled.'  It  was  said,  '  Have  ye  forbidden  what
p.  170.  Qod  hath  sanctioned,  or  sanctioned  what  God  hath
forbidden?'  He  said,  '  We  were  the  first  who  followed
the  commandments  of  God:  we  are  the  source  of
command  and  its  origin,  and  the  firstfruits  of  all
good  and  its  consummation :  we  are  the  sign  of  the
Eternal,  and  His  commemoration  amongst  the  nations'
It  was  said,  '  Have  ye  abandoned  the  Kur'dn  ? '  He
said,  '  Through  us  did  the  Merciful  One  reveal  it;
and  we  are  gales  of  tlie  All-glorious  amidst  [His]
creatures;  we  are  streams  which  have  arisen  from
the  most  mighty  Ocean  whereby  God  revived  the  earth
after  its  death ;  from  us  His  signs  are  diffused.  His
evidences  are  manifested,  and  His  tokens  appear;
and  with  us  are  His  mysteries  and  His  secrets.'  It
was  said,  '  For  what  fault  [then]  were  ye  afflicted  ? '

after  some  deliberation,  spared,  and  he  was  sent  with  the
women  taken  captive  to  the  court  of  Yezid  at  Damaseus,'where
the  discussion  here  recorded  is  supposed  to  have  taken  place.
(Cf.  At-Tabari's  Annales,  ed.  de  Goeje,  secunda  series,  v.  i.
pp.  367,  et  seq.)
1  Mecca.


A  traveller's  narrative.  141

He  said,  '  For  the  love  of  God  and  our  severance  from
all  beside  Him.'

"  Verily  we  have  not  repeated  his  expressions
(upon  him  be  peace),  but  rather  we  have  made  mani-
fest a  spray  from  the  Ocean  of  Life  which  was
deposited  in  his  words,  that  by  it  those  who  advance
may  live  and  be  aware  of  what  hath  befallen  the  p.  171.
trusted  ones  of  God  on  the  part  of  an  evil  and  most
reprobate  people.  And  to-day  we  see  the  people
censuring  those  who  axited  unjustly  of  yore,  while
they  oppress  more  vehemently  than  those  oppressed,
and  know  it  not.  By  God,  I  do  not  desire  sedition,
but  the  purification  of  [God's]  servants  from  all  that
withholdeth  them  from  approach  to  God,  the  King  of
the  Day  of  Invocation^

"  I  was  asleep  on  my  couch :  the  breaths  of  my
Lord  the  Merciful  passed  over  me  and  awakened  7ne
from  sleep^:  to  this  bear  witness  the  denizens  [of  the
realms]  of  His  Power  and  His  Kingdom,  and  the
dwellers  in  the  cities  of  His  Glory,  and  Himself,  the
True. I  am  not  impatient  of  calamities  in  His

^  i.e.  the  Day  of  Judgement,  "so  called,"  says  the  Arabic-
Turkish  dictionary  called  Akhtari  Kabir,  "because  thereon
the  people  of  paradise  and  the  people  of  hell  shall  call  to  one
another."  The  expression  occurs  once  in  the  Kur'an,  eh.  xl.
V.  34.

^  K.  inserts: — "and  commanded  me  to  proclaim  betwixt
earth  and  heaven:  this  was  not  on  my  part  hut  on  His  part,  and
to  this..."  &c.


142 A  traveller's  narrative.

way,  nor  of  afflictions  for  His  hve  and  at  His  good
pleasure.  God  hath  made  affliction  as  a  morning
shower  to  this  green  pasture,  and  as  a  match  for

p.  172.  His  lamp  whereby  earth  and  heaven  are  illumined.

"  Shall  thai  which  any  one  liath  of  wealth  endure
unto  him,  or  avail  him  to-morrow  with  him  who
holdeth  his  forelocV'i  If  any  should  look  on  those
ivho  sleep  under  slabs"  and  keep  company  with  the
dust,  can  he  distinguish  the  bones  of  the  kings  skull
from  the  knuckles  of  the  slave  ?  No,  by  the  King  of
Kings!  Or  doth  he  know  governors  from  herdsmen,
or  discern  the  wealthy  and  the  rich  from  him  who
was  without  shoes  or  carpet  ?  By  God,  distinction  is
removed,  save  for  him  who  fulfilled  righteousness  and
judged  uprightly.  Where  are  the  doctors,  the  scholars,
the  Tiobles?  Where  is  the  keenness  of  their  glances,
the  sharpness  of  their  sight,  the  subtlety  of  their
thoughts,  t]i£  soundness  of  their  understandings  ?
Where  are  their  hidden  treasures  and  their  apparent
gatids, their bejewelled thrones and their ample

X>.  m.  couches ?  Alas!  All  have  been  laid  waste,  and
the  decree  of  God  hath  rendered  them  as  scattered
dust!  Emptied  is  what  they  treasured  up,  and  dissi-
2Kited  is  what  they  collected,  and  dispersed  is  what
they  concealed: they  have  become  [such that] thou

1  See  Kur'4n,  xcvi.  15,  16,  and  oxi.  2  passim.
=  K.  reads  ,\^j\ cm "undei- marble."


A TRAVELLERS XARRATIYE.  143

seest  naught  but  their  empty  places,  their  gaping  roo/s.
their  uprooted  beams,  their  new  things  waxed  old.  As
for  the  discerning  man,  xerily  wealth  will  not  divert
him  from  regarding  the  end :  and  for  the  prudent
man,  riches  will  not  withhold  him  from  turning  toward
[God]  the  Mich,  the  Exalted.  Where  is  he  who  held
dominion  over  all  whereon  the  sun  arose,  and  who
■^pent  lavishly  and  sought  after  curious  things  in  the
world  and  what  is  therein  created  1  T^'here  is  the
lord  of  the  swarthy  squadron  and  the  yellow  stan-
dard? Where  is  he  who  ruled  in  Zawra',  and  ichere
he  who  icrought  injustice  in  [Damascus]  th^  spacious''
Where  are  they  at  whose  bounty  treasures  were  afraid,  p.  1'^.
at  whose  open-handed ness  and  generosity  the  ocean  was
dismayed?  Where  is  he  who-?e  arm  was  stretched
forth  in  rebelliousne.ss,  whose  h-art  turned  away  from
the  Mtrciful  One  ?  WTi.ere  is  he  icho  used  to  make
choice  of  pleasures  and  cull  the  fruits  of  de.^ires  ?
Where  are  the  dames  of  the  bridal  chambers,  and
the  posse.ssors  of  beauty?  Where  are  their  waving
branches and their spreading boughs, their lofty

^  Baghdad.  Tlie  name  (or  rather  epithet)  of  Zawrd  ('-the
crooked")  is  applied  to  no  less  than  ten  different  places,  i  See
Taknt'i  JIushtartk,  ed.  Wiistenfeld,  p.  235.)  But  in  this  and
similar  places  Baghdad,  the  capital  of  the  perfidious  ■Abbasids
so  detestable  to  every  true  Shi-ite,  is  intended.

-  Al-Feyhd  \"the  spacious'')  is  an  epithet  designating
Damascus.  JIu'awiya,  Tezid,  and  the  Omeyrad  caliphs
^renerallv  are  here  alluded  to.


144 A  traveller's  narrative.

palaces  and  trelUsed  gardens  ? Where  is  the  smooth-
ness of  the  expanses  thereof  and  the  softness  of  tlieir
breezes,  the  rippling  of  their  waters  and  the  murmur
of  their  winds, tlie  cooing  of  their  doves  and  the
rustling  of  their  trees 'i Where  are  their  laughing
hearts  and  their  smiling  teeth  ? ' Woe  unto  them !
They  have  descended  to  the  abyss  and  become  com-
panions to  the  pebbles ; to-day  no  mention  is  heard
of  them  nor  any  sound; nothing  is  known  of  them
p.  176.  nor  any  hint. Will  the  people  dispute  it  while  they
behold  it  1 Will  they  deny  it  when  they  know  it  ?
I  know  not  in  what  valley  they  wander  erringly:
do they  not  see  that  they  depart  and  return  not  ?
How  long  ivill  they  be  famous  in  the  low  countries
and  in  the  high^,  descend  and  ascend  1 'Is  not  the
time  yet  come  to  those  who  believe  for  their  hearts  to
become  humble  for  the  remembrance  of  God^? ' Well
is  it  with  that  one  who  hath  said  or  shall  say,  '  Yea,
0  Lord,  the  time  is  ripe  and  hath  come,'  and  who
severetk  himself  from  all  that  as". Alas!  nought  is
reaped  but  what  is  sown,  and  nought  is  taken  but
what  is  laid  up,  save  by  the  grace  of  God  and  His
favour. Hath  the  earth  conceived  him  whom  the  veils

1  Or  perhaps  "their  heaving  bosoms  [lit.  "dilated  lungs"]
and  their  smiling  mouths."

2  Concerning  the  expression  J»^l  ^  jli see  Lane's  Arabic-
English  Lexicon,  Bk.  i.  Pt.  vi.  p.  2306,  column  3.

'  Kur'to,  Ivii.  15.

*  K.  inserts  "unto  the  King  of  beings."


A  traveller's  narrative.  145

of  glory  prevent  not  from  ascending  into  tlie  Kingdom
of  his  Lord,  tlie  Mighty,  the  Supreme  /  Have  ve  any
good  works  vjherehy  defects  shall  he  rem/jved  or  which
shall  bring  us  near  unto  the  Lord  of  causes'!-  We
ash  God  to  deal  with  us  according  to  His  grace,  not
His  justice,  and  to  make  us  of  those  who  turn  toicard  p- 176.
Him  and  sever  tliemsehes  from  all  beside  Him.

"  0  King,  I  have  seen  in  the  way  of  God  what  no
eye  hath  seen  and  no  ear  hath  heard.  Friends  have
disclaimed  me;  ways  are  .straitened  unto  me;  the
pool  of  safety  is  dried  up;  the  plain  of  ease  is
[.scorched]  yellow\  How  many  calamities  have  de-
scended, and  liffw  many  will  descend !  L  walk  ad-
vancing toward  the  Mighty, the  Bounteous,  while

1  I  am  uncertain  as  to  this  line,  and  incline  to  think
(though  both  jiss.  agree  in  the  pointing  of  the  first  and  the
spelUng  of  the  second  doubtful  word) that  we should read

-o  -
r  Ui!>&«  in  the  first  clause  (which  signifies  shallow  icater  or  a

pool,  and  agrees  in  sense  with  the  verb ■.— i to  dry  up  or  .5/;!/.-

-o  -
into  the  ground),  and ^la-^^ {'aflat,  even  plain,  destitute  of

herbarje  and  containing  small  pebbles')  in  the  second.  At  any
rate  I  can  find  no  other  meaning  of  ^Ui^i  which  would  seem

appropriate  to  the  verb  y.«l.  However,  Baron  Eosen's  text
(Collections  Scientijiques,  etc.,  vol.  vi.  p.  213)  agrees  with  the
two  Mss.  in  my  possession,  and  a  gloss  therein  appended  to  the

passage  before  us  explains  ^Ui»=-i  as  meaning  '  a  pool  of  water'
(jiil  .U), and  ^[^a^  as  meaning  'garden' {'^yj*)-
P.  10


146  A  traveller's  narrative.

behind  me  glides  the  serpent.  My  eyes  rain  down
tears  until  my  bed  is  drenched ;  but  my  sorrow  is  not
for  myself.  By  God,  my  head  longeth  for  tlw  .tpears
for  the  love  of  its  Lord,  and  I  never  pass  by  a  tree  but
my  heart  addresseth  it  [saying],  '  0  would  that  thou
wert  cut  down  in  my  name  and  my  body  were  cruci-
fied upon  thee  in  the  way  of  my  Lord ; '  yea,  because  I
see  mankind  going  astray  in  their  intoxication,  and
p.  177.  they  know  it  not :  they  have  exalted  their  lusts,  and
put  aside  their  God,  as  though  they  took  the  command
of  God  for  a  mockery,  a  sport,  and  a  plaything ;  and
they  think  that  they  do  well,  and  tliat  they  are
harboured  in  the  citadel  of  security.  The  matter  is
not  as  they  suppose :  to-morrow  they  shall  see  what
they  [now]  deny.

"  We  are  about  to  shift  from  this  most  remote
place  of  banishment^  imito  the  prison  of  Acre.  And,
according  to  what  they  say,  it  is  assuredly  the  most
desolate  of  the  cities  of  the  world,  tlie  most  un-
sightly of  them  in  appearance,  the  most  detestable  in
climate,  and  the  f oldest  in  water ;  it  is  as  though  it
were  the  metropolis  of  the  owl;  there  is  not  heard
from  its  regions  aught  save  the  sound  of  its  hooting.
And  in  it  they  intend  to  imprison  the  servant,  and  to

1  Adrianople.  In  K.  this  sentence  runs  as  follows: — "The
lords  of  command  and  wealth  are  about  to  send  us  forth  from
this  land,  which  is  named  Edirni  [Adrianople],  tmto  the  city  of
Acre,"  etc.


A  travelleb's  narrative.  147

shut  in  our  faces  the  doors  of  leniency  and  taJce  away
from  us  the  good  things  of  the  life  of  the  ivorld  during
U'hat  remaineth  of  our  days.  By  God,  though  dreari-
ness should  iveaken  me,  and  hunger  should  destroy  me,
though  my  couch  should  be  made  of  the  hard  rock  and
my  associates  of  the  beasts  of  the  desert,  I  icill  not  P-  178.
blench,  but  irill  be  patient,  as  the  resolute  and  deter-
mined are  patient,  in  the  strength  of  God,  the  King  of
Pre-existence,  the  Creator  of  the  nations ;  and  under
all  circumstances  I  give  thanks  unto  God.  And  we
hope  of  His  graciousness  {exalted  is  He)  the  freedom
of  our  necks  from  chains  and  shackles  in  this  im-
prisonment: and  that  He  loill  render  [all  men's]
faces  sincere  toward  Him,  the  Mighty,  the  Bounteous.
Verily  He  answereth  him  who  prayeth  unto  Him,  and
is  near  unto  him  icho  calleth  on  Him.  And  we  ask
Him  to  make  this  dark  calamity  a  buckler  for  the
body  of  His  saints,  and  to  protect  them  thereby  from
■sharp  SKoi'ds  and  piercing  blades.  Through  affliction
hath  His  light  shone  and  His  praise  been  bright
unceasingly :  this  hath  been  His  method  through  past
ages  and  bygone  times.

"  The  people  shall  know  tvhat  to-day  they  under-
stand not  lohen  their  steeds  shall  stumble,  their  beds  be  p.  179
rolled  up,  their  sicords  be  blunted,  and  their  footsteps
slip.  I  know  not  how  long  they  shall  ride  the  steed  of
desire  atid  wander  erringly  in  the  desert  of  heedlessness
and  error. Of  glory  shall  any  glory  endure,  or  of

10—2


148  A  traveller's  narrative.

abasement  any  abasement!  Or  shall  lie  endure  vlin
used  to  stay  himself  on  high  cushions,  and  wlw  attained
in  splendmir  the  utmost  limit  1  No,  by  my  Lord  tin-
Merciful!  '  All  that  is  thereon^  is  transient,  and  there
remaineth  [only]  the  face  of  my  Lord'  the  Mighty,  the
Beneficent.  What  buckler  hath  not  the  arrow  of
destruction  smitten,  or  what  pinion  hath  not  the  hand
of  fate  2}lucked  ?  From  what  fortress  hath  the  mes-
senger of  death  been  kept  back  ivhen  lie  came  ?  What
throne  hath  not  been  broken,  or  what  palace  hath  not
been  left  desolate  1  Did  men  but  know  what  pure  wine"
of  the  mercy  of  their  Lord,  the  Mighty,  the  All-know-
ing, was  beneath  the  seal,  they  would  certainly  cast
p.  ISO.  aside  reproach  and  seek  to  be  satisfied  by  this  ser-
vant;  but  now  hare  they  veiled  7ne  with  the  veil  of
darkness  which  they  hctve  woven  with  tlie  hands  oj
doubts  and  fancies.  This  White  Hand  ^  sliall  cleave
an  opening  to  this  sombre  night'^.  On  that  day  the
.servants  [of  God]  shall  say  what  those  cavilling
u'omen  said  of  yore^,  tliat  there  may  appear  in  the

1  i.e.  on  the  earth. See  Kur'an,  It.  26,  and  cf.  27.
-  See  above,  p.  77,  note  2.

2  Alluding  to  the  miracle  of  Moses.  See  Kur'an,  vii.  105;
xxvi.  32 ;  xx.  23 ;  xxvii.  12 ;  and  xxviii.  32,  especially  the  two
last  passages.

"^  K.  inserts,  ''and  God  will  open  into  His  city  a  gate
[hitherto]  shut  [or,  a  great  gate].  On  that  day  men  shall  enter
in  in  croxods,  and  shall  say  what  the  cavilling  loomen  said,"  etc.

°  Alluding  to  what  was  said  by  the  women  who  had
censured  Potiphar's  wife  Zuleykha  for  her  love  of  Joseph  when


A  traveller's  narrative.  149

end  what  began  in  tlm  heginning.  Do  they  desire
to  tarry  when  their  foot  is  in  the  stirrup  ?  Or  do
they  see  any  return  in  their  going  ?  Ho,  by  the
Lord  of  Lords,  save  in  the  Resurrection  !  On  that
day  men  shall  arise  from  the  tombs  and  shall  be
questioned  concerning  their  riches.  Happy  that  one
wliom  burdens  shall  not  oppress  on  that  day  ivltereon
the  mountains  shall  pass  away  and  all  shall  appear
for  the  questioning  in  the  presence  of  God  the  Exalted !
Verily  He  is  severe  in  punishing.

"  We  ask  God  to  sanctify  the  Iwarts  of  certain  ofv- 181.
the  doctors  from  rancour  and  hatred  that  they  may
regard  tilings  with  eyes  ivhich  closure  overcometh  not ;
and  to  raise  them  unto  a  station  ivhere  the  world
and  the  lordship  thereof  sliall  not  turn  tliem  aside
from  looking  toicard  tlie  Supreme  Horizon,  and
wliere  [anxiety  for]  gaining  a  llceUliood  and  [pro-
viding] liousehold  goods  shall  not  dicert  tliemfrom  [the
thought  of]  tliat  day  wlwreon  tlie  mountains  shall  be
made  like  carpets.  Though  they  rejoice  at  tliat  whicli
liath  befallen  us  of  calamity,  there  shall  come  a  day
wliereon  tliey  shall  wall  and  weep.  By  my  Lord,
were  I  given  tlie  choice  between  the  glory  and  opulence,
tlie  wealth  and  dignity,  tlie  ease  and  luxury  wherein
they  are,  and  the  distress  and  affliction  wherein  I
am,  I  would  certainly  choose  that  wherein  I  am  to-

they  afterwards  beheld  the  latter: — "This  one  is  none  other
than  a  gracious  angell" See  Kur'an  xii.  especially  v.  31-32.


150 A  traveller's  narrative.

day,  and  I  would  not  now  exchange  one  atom  of  tliese
afflictions  for  all  that  hath  been  created  in  tlis  kingdom
of  production ! Were  it  not  fm-  afflictions  in  tlw  way

p.  182.  of  God  my  continuance  ivould  have  no  sweetness  for
me,  nor  woidd  my  life  profit  one.  Let  it  not  he  hidden
from  the  discerning  and  such  as  look  towards  the
chiefest  outlook  that  I,  during  the  greater  part  of  my
days,  was  as  a  servant  sitting  beneath  a  sword  sus-
pended by  a  single  hair  who  knowetk  not  when  it
shall  descend  upon  him,  whether  it  shall  descend
instantly  or  after  a  while.  And  in  all  this  we  give
thanks  to  God  the  Lord  of  the  worlds,  and  we  p)raise
Him  under  all  circumstances :  verily  He  is  a  witness
unto  all  things.

"  We  ask  God  to  extend  His  shadow\  that  the
unitarians  may  haste  thereto,  and  that  the  sincere
may  take  shelter  tlierein ;  and  to  bestow  on  [these]
servants  flowers  from  the  garden  of  his  grace  and
stars  from  the  hyrizon  of  his  favours ;  and  to  assist
him  in  that  lohich  he  liketh  and  approveth;  and  to  help
him  unto  that  which  shall  bring  him  near  to  the
Day-spring  of  His  Most  Comely  Names,  that  he  may
not  shut  his  eyes  to the  wrong  which  he  seeth,  but

p.  183.  may  regard  his  subjects  with  the  eye  of  favour  and
p-eserve them  from  violence^. And  ive  ask  Him

1  By  "  the  Shadow  of  God"  is  meant  the  King  of  Persia.
-  K.  inserts  here: — "And  we  ask  Him  [exalted  is  He)  to
gather  all  together  by  the  gulf  of  the  Most  Mighty  Ocean  cohere-


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  151

(exalted  is  He)  to  make  thee  a  helper^  unto  His
religion  and  a  regarder  of  His  justice,  that  thou
mayest  rule  over  [His]  servants  as  thou  rulest  over
those  of  thy  kindred,  and  mayest  choose  for  them
what  thou  wouldest  choose  for  thyself.  Verily  He  is
the  Potent,  ths  Exalted,  the  Protecting,  the  Self-
subsistent."

Xow  since  suitable  occasion  hath  arisen  it  hath
been  considered  appropriate  that  some  of  the  precepts
of  Behd'u'lldh  which  are  contained  in  tracts  and
epistles  should  also  be  inserted  briefly  in  this  treatise,
so  that  the  main  principles  and  practice  and  [their]
foundations  and  basis  may  become  clear  and  ap-
parent. And  these  texts  have  been  copied  from
numerous  tracts.

Amongst  them  [is  this] : — "  Consort  with  [people
of  all]  religions  with  spirituality  and  fragrance'' .. .

of  each  drop  crieth,  '  Verily  He  is  the  giver  of  good  tidings  to
the  Worlds  and  the  quichener  of  the  worlds;  and  praise  he  to
God  the  King  of  the  Day  of  Judgement.' "

1  Perhaps  there  is  an  allusion  here  to  the  name  of  the
Shah  of  Persia — Ndsiru'd-Din — 'the  helper  of  religion'  or
'defender  of  the  faith,'  and  a  prayer  is  uttered  that  he  may
indeed  become  that  which  his  name  implies.

^  The  words  "  tJiat  they  may  perceive  in  you  the  scent  of  the

Merciful  One"  (^y^J\  i_j_^  pSdi  I^ajJ)  proper  to  this  passage
are,  whether  intentionally  or  accidentally,  omitted  in  the  text,
but  they  occur  in  aU  mss.  of  the  Kitdb-i-Akdas,  from  which
this  quotation  is  taken.


152  A  traveller's  narrative.

p.  184.  Beivare  lest  the  zeal  of  ignorance  possess  you  amongst
mankind.  All  originated  from  God  and  returneth
unto  Him:  verily  He  is  t/m  Source  of  creation  and
the  Goal  of  the  worlds."

And  amongst  them  [is  this]: — "  Ye  are  forbidden
sedition  and  strife  in  the  hooks  and  epistles;  and
herein  I  desire  nought  save  your  exaltation  cmid  ele-
vation, whereunto  heareth  witness  the  heaven  and  its
stars,  the  sun  and  its  radiance,  the  trees  and  their
leaves,  the  seas  and  their  waves,  and  the  earth  and  its
treasures.  We  ask  God  to  continue  His  saints  and
strengthen  them  unto  that  which  hejitteth  them  in  this
blessed,  jjrecious,  and  wondrous  station,  and  we  ask
Him  to  assist  those  wlw  surround  me  to  act  according
to  that  whereunto  they  Imve  been  commanded  on  the
part  oftJie  Supreme  Pen."

And  amongst  them  [is  this]: — "The  fairest  tree
of  knowledge  is  this  sublime  word : — '  Ye  are  all  the
fruit  of  one  tree  and  the  leaves  of  one  branch.'  Pride
is  not  for  him  who  loves  Ms  country,  but  for  him  wlm
loves  the  [whole]  imrld."

p.  185.  And  amongst  them  [is  this] : — "  Verily  he  who
educateth  his  son,  or  one  of  the  sons  [of  another],  it  is
as  though  he  educated  one  of  my  sons.  Upon  him  be
the  splendour  of  God,  and  His  grace,  and  His  mercy
which  preceded  the  worlds^."

1  This  quotation  is  also  from  the  Kitdb-i-Akdas.


A  traveller's  narrative.  153

Amongst  them  [is  this]: — "0  people  of  Behd, !
Ye  have  been  and  are  the  dawnings  of  affection  and
the  day-springs  of  divine  grace :  defile  not  the  tongue
mth  cursing  or  execration  of  any  one,  and  guard  the
•eye  from  that  which  is  not  seemly.  Shew  forth  that
which  ye  have:  if  it  be  accepted,  the  object  is  at-
tained; if  not,  interference  is  vain':  leave  him  to
himself,  [while]  advancing  toward  God,  the  Pro-
tecting, the  Self-suhsistent.  Be  not  a  cause  of  grief,
much  less  of  strife  and  sedition.  It  is  hoped  that
ye  will  be  nurtured  in  the  shade  of  the  lote-tree  of
Divine  Grace,  and  practise  that  which  God  desireth.
Ye  are  all  leaves  of  one  tree  and  drops  of  one  sea." p- 186.

Amongst  them  [is  this] : — "  The  faith  of  God  and
religion  of  God  hath  been  revealed  and  manifested
from  the  heaven  of  the  Will  of  the  King  of  Pre-
existence  only  for  the  union  and  concord  of  the
dwellers  upon  earth :  make  it  not  a  cause  of  discord
and  dissension.  The  principal  means  and  chief
instrument  for  [bringing  about]  the  appearance  and
irradiance  of  the  luminary  of  concord  is  the  religion
of  God  and  the  Law  of  the  Lord ;  while  the  growth  of
the  world,  the  education  of  the  nations,  and  the
peace  and  comfort  of  those  in  all  lands  are  through
the  divine  ordinances  and  decrees.  This  is  the
principal  means  for  this  most  great  gift; it  giveth

1  Cf.  p.  72  su]}ra.


154  A  traveller's  narrative.

the  cup  of  life,  bestoweth  everlasting  life,  and  con-
ferreth  eternal  blessedness.  The  chiefs  of  the  earth,
especially  the  exemplars  of  divine  justice,  must  make
strenuous  efforts  to  guard  this  state  and  to  upraise

p.  187.  and  preserve  it.  So  likewise  that  which  is  necessary-
is  enquiry  into  the  condition  of  the  people,  and  cog-
nizance of  the  deeds  and  circumstances  of  each  one  of
the  different  classes.  We  desire  of  the  exemplars  of
God's  power,  namely  of  kings  and  chiefs,  that  they
will  make  endeavour:  perchance  discord  may  de-
part out  of  [their]  midst,  and  the  horizons  may  be
illumined  with  the  light  of  concord.  All  must  hold
to  that  which  floweth  from  the  Pen  of  Reminder,  and
practise  it.  God  witnesseth  and  [all]  the  atoms  of
existences  testify  that  we  have  mentioned  that  which
will  be  the  cause  of  the  exaltation,  elevation,  education,
preservation,  and  reformation  of  the  dwellers  upon
earth.  We  desire  of  God  that  He  will  strengthen
[His]  servants.  That  which  this  oppressed  one  seeketh
of  all  is  justice  and  fairness :  let  them  not  be  satisfied
with  listening ;  let  them  ponder  on  what  hath  become
manifest  from  this  oppressed  one.  I  swear  by  the
Sun  of  Revelation,  which  hath  shone  forth  from  the

p.  188.  horizon  of  the  heaven  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Merci-
ful One,  that,  if  any  [other]  expositor  or  speaker  had
been  beheld,  I  would  not  have  made  myself  an  object
for  the  malevolence  and  the  calumnies  of  mankind."
Finis.


A  TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE.  155

By  these  sentences  a  clue  to  the  principles,  ideas,
line  of  conduct,  behaviour,  and  intentions  of  this  sect
is  placed  in  the  hand ;  whereas  if  we  seek  to  become
acquainted  with  the  truth  of  this  matter  through  the
accounts  and  stories  which  are  in  the  mouths  of  men,
the  truth  will  be  entirely  concealed  and  hidden  by
reason  of  their  manifold  differences  and  contrariety.
It  is  therefore  best  to  discover  the  principles  and
objects  of  this  sect  from  the  contents  of  their  teachings,
tracts,  and  epistles.  There  is  no  authority  nor  are
there  any  proofs  or  texts  superior  to  these,  for  this  is
the  foundation  of  foundations  and  the  ultimate  cri-
terion. One  cannot  judge  of  the  generality  by  the
speech  or  action  of  individuals,  for  diversity  of  states  p.  189.
is  one  of  the  peculiarities  and  concomitants  of  the
human  race.

At  all  events,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  one
thousand  two  hundred  and  eighty-five  [a.h.]  they
transferred  Behi'u'lMh  and  all  those  persons  who
were  with  him  from  Adrianople  to  the  prison  of  Acre,
and  Mirzd  Yahyd  to  the  fortress  of  Famagusta,  and
there  they  remained'.  But  in  Persia  after  a  while
sundry  persons  who  were  discerning  in  matters,  no-
table for  wise  policy,  and  aware  and  cognizant  of  the

'  According  to  Natil's  chronological  poem,  Beha'u'Uah  and
his  companions  left  Adrianople  on  the  20th  of  Rabi'  II.  a.h.
1285  (August  10th,  a.d.  1868)  and  reached  Acre  on  the  12th  of
Jemddi  I.  (August  31st).  See  notes  2  and  3  on  p.  101,  and
note  W  at  end.


156  A  traveller's  narrative.

trutli  of  the  earlier  and  later  events,  made  representa-
tion before  the  presence  of  His  Majesty  the  King-
saying,  "What  has  hitherto  been  reported,  related,
asserted,  and  alleged  concerning  this  sect  in  the  Royal
Presence  was  either  an  exaggeration,  or  else  [the
speakers]  fabricated  statements  with  a  view  to  [their

p.  190.  own]  individual  designs  and  the  attainment  of  personal
advantages.  If  so  be  that  His  Majesty  the  King  will
investigate  matters  in  his  own  noble  person,  it  is
believed  that  it  will  become  clear  before  his  presence
that  this  sect  have  no  worldly  object  nor  any  con-
cern with  political  matters.  The  fulcrum  of  their
motion  and  rest  and  the  pivot  of  their  cast  and
conduct  is  restricted  to  spiritual  things  and  confined
to  matters  of  conscience ;  it  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  affairs  of  government  nor  any  concern  with  the
powers  of  the  throne;  its  principles  are  the  with-
drawal of  veils,  the  verification  of  signs,  the  education
of  souls,  the  reformation  of  characters,  the  purification
of  hearts,  and  illumination  with  the  gleams  of  en-
lightenment. That  which  befits  the  kingly  dignity

p.  191.  and  beseems  the  world-ordering  diadem  is  this,  that  all
subjects  of  every  class  and  creed  should  be  the  objects
of  bounty,  and  [should  abide]  in  the  utmost  tran-
quillity and  prosperity  under  the  wide  shadow  of  the
King's  justice. For  the  divine  shadow'  is  the  refuge

1  i.e.  "the  royal  protection";  for  a  King  is  called  "the
shadow  of  God  on  the  earth."


A  traveller's  narrative.  157

of  ail  the  dwellers  upon  earth  and  the  asylum  of  all
mankind;  it  is  not  limited  to  one  party.  In  par-
ticular, the  true  nature  and  real  doctrine  of  this  sect
have  [now]  become  evident  and  well  known :  all
their  writings  and  tracts  have  repeatedly  and  fre-
quently fallen  into  [our]  hands,  and  are  to  be  found
preserved  in  the  possession  of  the  government.  If
they  be  perused,  the  actual  truth  and  inward  verity
will  become  clear  and  apparent.  These  pages  are
entirely  taken  up  with  prohibitions  of  sedition,  [re-
commendations of]  upright  conduct  amongst  man-
kind, obedience,  submission,  loyalty,  conformity',  and
acquisition  of  laudable  qualities,  and  encouragements  p.  192.
to  become  endowed  with  praiseworthy  accomplish-
ments and  characteristics.  They  have  absolutely  no
reference  to  political  questions,  nor  do  they  treat  of
that  which  could  cause  disturbance  or  sedition.
Under  these  circumstances  a  just  government  can
[find]  no  excuse,  and  possesses  no  pretext  [for  further
persecuting  this  sect]  except  [a  claim  to  the  right  of]
interference  in  thought  and  conscience,  which  are  the
private  possessions  of  the  heart  and  soul.  And,  as
regards  this  matter,  there  has  [already]  been  much
interference,  and  countless  efforts  have  been  made.
What  blood  has  been  shed  !  What  heads  have  been
hung  up  ! Thousands  of  persons  have  been  slain ;

1  i.e.  conformity  to  the  royal  commands,  civil  laws,  and  all
such  observances  and  customs  as  are  harmless,  even  if  useless.


158  A  traveller's  narrative.

thousands  of  women  and  children  have  become
wanderers  or  captives ;  many  are  the  buildings  which
have  been  ruined;  and  how  many  noble  races  and
families  have  become  headless  and  homeless  !  Yet
nought  has  been  effected  and  no  advantage  has  been

p.  193.  gained ;  no  remedy  has  been  discovered  for  this  ill,
nor  any  easy  salve  for  this  wound.  [To  ensure]
freedom  of  conscience  and  tranquillity  of  heart  and
soul  is  one  of  the  duties  and  functions  of  govern-
ment, and  is  in  all  ages  the  cause  of  progress  in
development  and  ascendency  over  other  lands.  Other
civilized  countries  acquired  not  this  pre-eminence,  nor
attained  unto  these  high  degrees  of  influence  and
power,  till  such  time  as  they  put  away  the  strife  of
sects  out  of  their  midst,  and  dealt  with  all  classes
according  to  one  standard.  All  are  one  people,  one
nation,  one  species,  one  kind.  The  common  interest
is  complete  equality;  justice  and  equality  amongst
mankind  are  amongst  the  chief  promoters  of  empire
and  the  principal  means  to  the  extension  of  the  skirt

p.  194.  of  conquest.  From  whatever  section  of  earth's  deni-
zens signs  of  contentiousness  appear,  prompt  punish-
ment is  required  by  a  just  government;  while  any
person  who  girds  up  the  loins  of  endeavour  and  carries
off  the  ball  of  priority  is  deserving  of  royal  favours
and  worthy  of  splendid  and  princely  gifts.  Times  are
changed,  and  the  need  and  fashion  of  the  world  are
changed. Interference  with  creed  and  faith  in  every


A  traveller's  narrative.  159

country  causes  manifest  detriment,  while  justice  and
equal  dealing  towards  all  peoples  on  the  face  of  the
earth  are  the  means  whereby  progress  is  effected.  It
is  right  to  exercise  caution  and  care  with  regard  to
poKtical  factions,  and  to  be  fearful  and  apprehensive
of  materialist  sects;  for  the  subjects  occupying  the
thoughts  of  the  former  are  [designs  of]  interference
in  political  matters  and  [desire  of]  ostentation,  while
the  actions  and  conduct  of  the  latter  are  subversive  p.  195.
of  safety  and  tranquilhty.  But  this  sect  are  steadfast
in  their  own  path  and  firmly  established  in  conduct
and  faith;  they  are  pious,  devoted,  tenacious,  and
consistent  in  such  sort  that  they  freely  lay  down  their
lives,  and,  after  their  own  way,  seek  to  please  God;
they  are  strenuous  in  effort  and  earnest  in  endeavour ;
they  are  the  essence  of  obedience  and  most  patient  in
hardship  and  trouble;  they  sacrifice  their  existence
and  raise  no  complaint  or  cry ;  what  they  utter  is  in
truth  the  secret  longing  of  the  heart,  and  what  they
seek  and  pursue  is  by  the  direction- of  a  leader.  It  is
therefore  necessary  to  regard  their  principles  and
their  chief,  and  not  to  make  a  trivial  thing  a  pretext.
Now  since  the  conduct  of  the  chief,  the  teachings  of
his  epistles,  and  the  purport  of  his  writings  are
apparent  and  well  known,  the  line  of  action  of  this  p.  196.
sect  is  plain  and  obvious  as  the  sun.  Of  whatever
was  possible  and  practicable  by  way  of  discourage-
ment, determent, eradication, intimidation, repre-


160  A  traveller's  narrative.

liension,  slaughter,  banishment,  and  stripes  there  was
no  lack,  yet  nothing  was  thereby  effected.  In  other
countries  when  they  perceived  severity  and  persecution
in  such  instances  to  be  identical  with  stimulation  and
incitement,  and  saw  that  paying  no  attention  was
more  effectual,  they  abated  the  fire  of  revolution.
Therefore  did  they  universally  proclaim  the  equal
rights  of  all  denominations,  and  sounded  the  liberty
of  all  classes  from  east  to  west.  This  clamour  and
outcry,  this  uproar  and  conflagration,  are  the  con-
sequences of  instigation,  temptation,  incitement,  and
provocation.  For  thirty  years  there  has  been  no
p.  197.  rumour  of  disturbance  or  rebellion,  nor  any  sign  of
sedition.  Notwithstanding  the  duplication  of  ad-
herents and  the  increase  and  multiplication  of  this
body,  through  many  admonitions  and  encouragements
to  virtue  this  sect  are  all  in  the  utmost  repose  and
stability :  they  have  made  obedience  their  distinctive
trait,  and  in  extreme  submissiveness  and  subordination
are  the  loyal  subjects  of  the  King.  On  what  lawful
grounds  can  the  government  further  molest  them,  or
permit  them  to  be  slighted?  Besides  this,  ijiterference
with  the  consciences  and  beliefs  of  peoples,  and  perse-
cution of  diverse  denominations  of  men  is  an  obstacle
to  the  expansion  of  the  kingdom,  an  impediment  to
the  .conquest  of  other  countries,  an  obstruction  to
multiplication  of  subjects,  and  contrary  to  the  es-
tablished principles  of  monarchy. In  the  time  when


A  teaveller's  narrative.  161

the  mighty  government  of  Persia  did  not  interfere
with  [men's]  consciences,  diverse  sects  entered  in  and
abode  beneath  the  banner  of  the  great  king,  and  p.  198.
[many]  different  peoples  reposed  and  served  under  the
shadow  of  that  mighty  government's  protection.  The
extent  of  the  empire  increased  from  day  to  day ;  the
greater  portion  of  the  continent  of  Asia  was  under  the
just  rule  of  its  administration;  and  the  majority  of
the  different  religions  and  races  were  [represented]
amongst  the  subjects  of  him  who  wore  its  crown.
But  when  the  custom  of  interference  with  the  creeds
of  aU  sects  arose,  and  the  principle  of  enquiring  into
men's  thoughts  became  the  fashion  and  practice,  the
extensive  dominions  of  the  empire  of  Persia  dimin-
ished, and  many  provinces  and  vast  territories  passed
out  of  her  hands,  until  it  reached  such  a  point  that
the  great  provinces  of  Tiirdn,  Assyria,  and  Chaldsea
were  lost ;  until — what  need  of  prolixity  ? — the  greater
part  of  the  regions  of  Khurdsdn  likewise  passed  out  of
the  control  of  the  government  of  Persia  by  reason  of
the  interference  with  matters  of  conscience  and  the  p- 199.
fanaticism  of  its  governors.  For  the  cause  of  the
Afghan  independency  and  the  revolt  of  the  Turcoman
tribes  was  in  truth  this  thing,  else  were  they  at  no  time
or  period  separate  from  Persia.  In  face  of  its  evident
hannfulness  what  necessity  is  there  for  persecuting
the  harmless?  But  if  we  desire  to  put  in  force  the
sentence  [of  the  doctors  of  religion]  no  one  will  escape

B.  11


162  A  traveller's  narrative.

fetters  and  chains  and  the  keenness  of  the  sword,  for
in  Persia,  apart  from  this  sect,  there  exist  diverse
sects,  such  as  the  Mutasharri's,  the  Sheykhfs,  the
Siifis,  the  Nuseyris',  and  others,  each  one  of  whom
regards  the  other  as  infidels  and  accuses  them  of
crime.  Under  these  circumstances  what  need  that
the  government  should  persecute  this  one  or  that  one,
p.  200.  or  disturb  itself  about  the  ideas  and  consciences  of  its
subjects  and  people  ?  All  are  the  subjects  of  the
king,  and  are  under  the  shadow  of  the  royal  pro-
tection. Every  one  who  hears  and  obeys  should  be
undisturbed  and  unmolested,  while  every  one  who  is
rebellious  and  disobedient  deserves  punishment  at  the
hands  of  his  Majesty  the  King.  Above  all,  the  times
are  completely  changed,  while  principles  and  institu-
tions have  undergone  alteration.  In  all  countries
such  actions  hinder  development  and  progress,  and
cause  decline  and  deterioration.  Of  the  violent
agitation  which  has  befallen  the  supports  of  Oriental
government  the  chief  cause  and  principal  factor  are  in
truth  these  laws  and  habits  of  interference;  while
that  state  the  seat  of  whose  dominion  over  the
Atlantic  and  the  Baltic  is  in  the  furthest  regions  of

1  Concerning  the  Sheykhis  see  Note  E  at  end.  Concerning
the  Nuseyris  see  note  1  on  p.  14.  The  Mutasharri's  are  those
■who  conform  to  the  Sharl'at  or  Sacred  Law  founded  on  the
Kur'an  and  traditions,  or,  in  other  words,  the  orthodox  party.
The  Stifis — those  mystical  pantheists  of  Persia — are  too  well
known  to  need  description.


A  traveller's  narrative.  163

the  North  has,  by  reason  of  equal  dealing  with  its  C;  •
different  subjects  and  the  establishment  of  the  uni-
form political  rights  of  diverse  nationalities,  acquired  p.  201.
extensive  colonies  in  each  of  the  five  continents  of
the  world.  Where  is  this  little  island  in  the  North
Atlantic,  and  where  the  vast  territory  of  the  East
Indies?  Can  such  extension  be  obtained  save  byi
equal  justiceto  _  all  peoples^  and  classes?  At  all
events,  by  means  of  ju^t  laws,  freedom  of  conscience,
and_uniform  deaUng  and  equity  towards  all  nation-
alities and  peoples,  they  have  actually  brought  under
their  dominion  nearly  all  of  the  inhabited  quarter
pf_the  world,  and  by  reason  of  these  principles
of  freedom  they  have  added  day  by  day  to  the
strength,  power,  and  extent  of  their  empire,  while
most  of  the  peoples  on  the  face  of  the  earth  celebrate
the  name  of  this  state  for  its  justice.  As  regards
religious  zeal  and  true  piety,  their  touchstone  and
proof  are  firmness  and  steadfastness  in  noble  qualities,
virtues,  and  perfections,  which  are  the  greatest  p.  202.
blessings  of  the  human  race;  but  not  interference
with  the  behef  of  this  one  or  that  one,  demolition  of
edifices,  and  cutting  off  of  the  human  race.  In  the
middle  _ages^  whereof  the  Jaeginning  was  the  time  of
the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  the  end  the
capture  of_  Constantinople  at  the  hands  of  [the
followers  of]  IsMm,  fierce  intolerance  and  molestation
of  far  and  near  arose  in  [all]  the  countries  of  Europe

11—2


164  A  traveller's  narrative.

by  reason  of  the  paramount  influence  of  religious
leaders.  The  matter  came  to  such  a  pass  that  the
edifice  of  humanity  seemed  tottering  to  its  fall,  and
the  peace  and  comfort  of  chief  and  vassal,  king  and
subject,  became  hidden  behind  the  veil  of  annihilation.
Night  and  day  all  parties  were  slaves  to  apprehension
and  disquietude :  civilization  was  utterly  destroyed :

p.  203.  the  control  and  order  of  countries  was  neglected :
the  principles  and  essentials  of  the  happiness  of  the
human  race  were  in  abeyance :  the  supports  of  kingly
authority  were  shaken :  but  the  influence  and  power
of  the  heads  of  religion  and  of  the  monks  were  in
all  parts  complete.  But  when  they  removed  these
differences,  persecutions,  and  bigotries  out  of  their
midst,  and  proclaimed  the  equal  rights  of  all  subjects
and  the  liberty  of  men's  consciences,  the  lights  of
glory  and  power  arose  and  shone  from  the  horizons  of
that  kingdom  in  such  wise  that  those  countries  made
/^  progress  in  every  direction ;  and^liereas  the  mightiest
1  monarchy  of  Europe  had  been  servile  to  and  abased
before  the  smallest  government  of  Asia,  now  the  great
states  of  Asia  are  unable  to  oppose  the  small  states  of
Europe. These are effectual and sufficient  proofs

p.  204.  that  the  conscience  of  man  is  sacred  and  to  be  re-
spected; and  that  liberty  thereof  prodxices  widening
of  ideas,  amendment  of  morals,  improvement  of
conduct,  disclosure  of  the  secrets  of  creation,  and
manifestation  of  the  hidden  verities  of  the  contin-


A  traveller's  narrative.  165

gent'  world.  Moreover,  if  interrogation  of  conscience,
which  is  one  of  the  private  possessions  of  the  heart
and  the  soul,  take  place  in  this  world,  what  further
recompense  remains  for  man  in  the  court  of  divine
justice  at  the  day  of  general  resurrection?  Con-
victions and  ideas  are  within  the  scope  of  the  com-
prehension of  the  King  of  kings,  not  of  kings;  and
soul  and  conscience  are  between  the  fingers  of  control
of  the  Lord  of  hearts,  not  of  [His]  servants.  So  in
the  world  of  existence  two  persons  unanimous  in  all
gTades  [of  thought]  and  all  beliefs  cannot  be  found.
'  The  ways  unto  God  are  as  the  number  of  the  breaths
of  [His]  creatures^'  is  a  mysterious  truth,  and  'To
every  [people]  We  have  appointed  a  [separate]  rite^'
is  one  of  the  subtleties  of  the  Kur'dn.  If  this  vast
energy  and  precious  time  which  have  been  expended  p.  205.
in  persecuting  other  religions,  and  whereby  no  sort  of
result  or  effect  has  been  obtained,  had  been  spent  in
strengthening  the  basis  of  the  monarchy,  fortifying  the
imperial  throne,  making  prosperous  the  realms  of  the
sovereign,  and  quickening  the  subjects  of  the  king,
ere  now  the  royal  dominions  would  have  become
prosperous,  the  seed-plot  of  the  people  would  have

'  On  the  meaning  of  'contingent'  being,  see  note 1  on
p.  115.

'^  This  is  a  very  well-known  and  often  quoted  tradition.
•'  Kur'an  xxii.  35. The  verse  is  inaccurately  quoted  here.

It  should  be  SJI i>l js3  '  to  evei-y  people,' etc.


166  A  traveller's  narrative.

been  watered  by  the  bounty  of  princely  justice,  and  the
splendour  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia  would  be  evident
and  apparent  as  the  true  dawn  throughout  the
horizons  of  the  world."

These  questions  and  considerations,  at  all  events,
certain  persons  have  reported.  But  let  us  return  to
our  original  subject.  The  Royal  Personage  was
pleased  to  investigate  the  hidden  secret  in  his  omi
noble  person.  According  to  the  account  transmitted,
it became clear and  obvious before the [Royal]

p.  206.  Presence  that  most  of  these  suspicions  arose  from  the
intrigues  of  persons  of  influence  who  were  continually
engaged  in  fabricating  matters  behind  the  veil  of
fancy  and  casting  suspicion  upon  the  community,
and  who,  to  attain  advantages  for  themselves  and
preserve  their  own  positions,  were  wont  to  make
motes  appear  as  globes,  and  straws  as  mountains  in
the  mirror  of  their  imagination.  For  these  suspicions
there  was  absolutely  no  foundation  or  basis,  nor  had
these  assertions  any  proof  or  verisimilitude.  What
power  and  ability  have  the  helpless  people,  or  what
boldness  and  strength  have  poor  subjects  that  they
should  inflict  injury  or  hurt  on  the  sovereign  might,
or  be  able  to  oppose  the  military  forces  of  the
crown  ?

From  that  time  till  now  disturbance  and  sedition
have  been  on  the  wane  in  Persia,  and  clamour  and

p.  207.  strife  have  ceased ;  although  [still]  on  rare  occasions


A  traveller's  narrative.  167

certain  of  the  official  doctors  do,  for  their  own  per-
sonal and  private  advantage,  stir  up  the  common
folk,  raise  a  hue  and  cry,  and,  by  their  importunity
and  pertinacity,  molest  one  or  two  individuals  of  this
sect,  as  happened  ten  or  twelve  years  ago  in  Isfahan.
For  there  were  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  Isfahan
two  brothers,  Seyyids  of  Tab^^abd,  Seyyid  Hasan
and  Seyyid  Huseyn,  celebrated  in  those  parts  for
piety,  trustworthiness,  and  nobility ;  men  of  wealth,
engaged  in  commerce,  behaving  towards  all  men  with
perfect  kindliness  and  courtesy.  And  to  all  outward
appearance  no  one  had  observed  in  either  of  these
two  brothers  any  swerving  from  what  was  best,  much
less  any  conduct  or  behaviour  which  could  deserve
torment  or  punishment ;  for,  as  is  related,  they  were  P-  208.
admitted  by  all  [pre-eminent]  in  all  praiseworthy  and
laudable  qualities,  while  their  deeds  and  actions  were
like  exhortations  and  admonitions.  These  had  trans-
acted business  with  Mi'r  Muhammed  Huseyn  the
Im4m-Jum'a  of  Isfahd,n;  and  when  they  came  to
make  up  their  accounts  it  appeared  that  the  sum  of
eighteen  thousand  tumdns^  was  due  to  them.  They
[therefore]  broke  off  [further]  transactions,  prepared
a  bond  for  this  sum,  and  desired  it  to  be  sealed.
This  thing  was  grievous  to  the  Imd,m-Jum'a,  so  that
he  came  to  the  stage  of  anger  and  enmity. Finding

1  About  £5400.


168  A  traveller's  narrative.

himself  in  debt,  and  having  no  resource  but  to  pay,
he  raised  clamour  and  outcry  saying  "  These  two  bro-
thers are  Bdbi's  and  deserve  severe  punishment  from
the  king." A  crowd  at  once  attacked  their  house,

p.  209.  plundered  and  pillaged  all  their  goods,  distressed
and  terrified  their  wives  and  children,  and  seized  and
despoiled  all  their  possessions.  Then,  fearing  that
they  might  refer  the  punishment  to  the  step  of  the
king's  throne  and  loose  their  tongues  in  demand  of
redress,  he  [i.e.  the  Im^m-Jum'a]  fell  to  thinking
how  to  compass  their  death  and  destroy  them.  He
therefore  persuaded  certain  of  the  doctors  to  co-
operate with  him,  and  they  pronounced  sentence  of
death.  Afterwards  they  arrested  those  two  brothers,
put  them  in  chains,  and  brought  them  before  the
public  assembly.  Yet  seek  as  they  might  to  fix  on
them  some  accusation,  find  some  fault,  or  discover
some  pretext,  they  were  unable  to  do  so.  At  length
they  said,  "  You  must  either  renounce  this  faith,  or
else lay  down  your  heads beneath the sword of

p.  210.' punishment."  Although  some  of  those  present  urged
them  saying,  "Say  merely  'We  are  not  of  this  sect,'
and  it  is  sufficient,  and  will  be  the  means  of  your  de-
liverance and  protection,"  they  would  by  no  means
consent,  but  rather  confirmed  and  declared  it  with
eloquent  speech  and  affecting  utterance,  so  that  the
rage  and  violence  of  the  Im4m-Jum'a  boiled  over,
and,  not  satisfied  with  killing  and  destroying  them.


A  traveller's  narrative.  169

they  inflicted  sundry  indignities  on  their  bodies  after
death  to  mention  which  is  not  fitting,  and  of  which
the  details  are  beyond  the  power  of  speech.  Indeed
in  such  wise  was  the  blood  of  these  two  brothers
shed  that  even  the  Christian  priest  of  .Julfd  cried  out,
lamented,  and  wept  on  that  day;  and  this  event
befel  after  such  sort  that  every  one  wept  over  the
fate  of  those  two  brothers,  for  during  the  whole  p.  211.
period  of  their  life  they  had  never  distressed  the
feelings  even  of  an  ant,  while  by  general  report  they
had  in  the  time  of  famine  in  Persia  spent  all  their
wealth  in  relieving  the  poor  and  distressed.  Yet,
notwithstanding  this  reputation,  were  they  slain  with
such  cruelty  in  the  midst  of  the  people !

But  now  for  a  long  while  the  justice  of  the  King
has  prevented  and  mthheld,  and  none  dares  attempt
such  grievous  molestations '.

VALE.


^  Unfortunately  in  face  of  the  martyrdom  of  Aka  Mirza
Ashraf  of  Ab^de  at  Isfahan  in  or  about  October  1888,  and  the
still  more  recent  persecutions  at  Si-dih  near  Isfaian,  this
statement  can  no  longer  be  taken  as  true.  For  some  remarks
on  these  persecutions,  and  some  further  account  of  the
martyrdom  of  Seyyid  Hasan  and  Seyyid  Huseyn,  with  which
our  history  concludes,  see  B.  i.  pp.  489-491,  B.  ii.  pp.  998-999,
and  Note  Y  at  end.


170  A  traveller's  narrative.

There  ceased  from  the  irriting  of  this  its  2Mor  writer

tlie  Letter  Zd

on  the  night  of  Friday  the  18th  of

Jamddi-ul-  Uld

A.H.  1307".

1  January  10th,  a.d.  1890.  Concerning  "the  Letter  Za"
{Zeynu'l-MuJcarrah'm),  and  the  colophons  wherewith  Hss,
written  by  his  hand  conclude,  see  Note  Z  at  end.


NOTES.


NOTE  A.

Persian  and  European  Accounts  of  the  Bab  and  his
Religion.

I. Persian  Accounts.

Four  vrorks,  besides  the  present,  ■written  in  the  Persian
language  treat  more  or  less  fully  of  the  history  of  the  Bihi
movement.  Two  of  these,  the  Ndsikhu't-Tawdrikh  and
the  Bawzatii  s-8afd,  are  general  histories  compiled  by
Musuhndn  historians  ;  one,  the  Tdrilth-i-Jadid,  is  a  mono-
gTaph  on  the  said  movement,  whereof  the  author,  if  not
actually  a  Edbi,  at  least  sympathised  warmly  with  the
reformers  :  one,  the  Kisasu'l-'Ulamd,  is  a  biography  of
Shi'ite  divines,  which  deals  incidentally  at  some  length  with
the  Bdbi  doctrines  and  the  history  of  their  originator  and  his
precursors.  Each  of  these  works  I  shall  now  consider  in
detail.

1. The  Ndsikhu't-Tawdrikh.

This  is  a  general  history  of  the  world,  intended,  as  its
name  implies,  to  supersede  all  preceding  works  of  a  similar
character.  Its  author  is  Mirz4  Takl  Mustawfi,  better
known  by  his  poetical  nom-de-guerre  of  Sipihr  and  his
oificial  title  of  Lisdnu'l-Mulk  ('  The  Tongue  of  the  King-
dom ').  Gobineau,  at  p.  454  of  his  interesting  work  Trois
Am  en  Asie  (Paris,  1859),  gives  a  description  of  the  social
aspects  of  this  historian  (to  whom  he  is  indebted  for  the
greater  part  of  the  facts  relating  to  the  Bdbi  movement  so
graphically  pourtrayed  in  his  Religions  et  Philosophies  dans
VAsie  Centrale),  and  of  Rizd-Kulf  Khdn,  the  author  of  the
work  to  be  next  mentioned.  The  Ndsikhu't-Tawdrikh
consists  of  a  series  of  large  volumes,  each  of  which  deals


174  XOTE A — BIBLIOGEAPH-X.

with  a  particular  period  of  history.  The  last_  volume  is
entirely  devoted  to  the  K4j4r  dynasty,  and  with  it  alone  are
we  here  concerned.  It  is  divided  into  three  parts,  of  which
the^rs^  treats  of  the  origin  and  rise  of  the  K^j^rs  and  the
reigns  of  AkA  Muhammad  and  Path- 'Ah  Shd,h  ;  the  second
of  the  reign  of  Muhammad  Shdh  ;  and  the  third  of  the  reign
of  Ndsiru'd-Din,  the  present  Sh4h,  down  to  the  year  a.  h.
1267  (a.d.  1850 — 1851).  A  further  supplement  pubhshed
separately  carries  the  history  down  to  the  year  a.h.  1273
(a.d.  1856—1857).  All  that  relates  to  the  BAhis  is  contained
in  the  second  and  third  parts  of  the  main  volume  and
in  the  supplement,  of  the  contents  of  which  I  shall  imme-
diately give  a  brief  abstract.  My  intention  was  to  have
made  this  abstract  a  complete  index  of  contents,  but,  having
already  written  more  than  half  of  it,  I  perceived  that  it
would  occupy  more  space  than  could  conveniently  be  spared,
and  I  was  therefore  compelled  to  confine  myself  to  a  mere
summary  of  the  chief  heads  of  the  narrative,  deferring  a
fuller  presentation  thereof  till  some  future  occasion.  This
is  the  less  to  be  regretted,  inasmuch  as  almost  everything
relating  to  the  subject  before  us  which  is  contained  in  this
history  has  been  embodied  in  the  works  of  Gobineau  and
Kazem-Beg.  The  whole  of  the  Ndsikhu't-Tawdrikh  has
been  lithographed  at  Teherdn,  but  unfortunately  the  pages
are  unnumbered  and  there  is  no  index  save  occasional  mar-
ginal references  to  the  chief  events  narrated  in  the  text.
The  numeration  of  the  pages  here  given  is  supplied  by
myself.  It  is  re-commenced  for  each  part  and  for  the  sup-
plement, but,  inasmuch  as  my  copy  of  the  latter  has  no
title-page  and  appears  to  be  incomplete,  it  cannot  in  this
case  be  regarded  as  having  more  than  a  relative  value.

Contents  of  Part  ii  of  the  Kdjdriyya  volume  in
so  far  as  they  relate  to  the  Bd,bfs.

P.  130.  Events  of  the  year  a.h.  1260  (a.d.  1844).
Appearance  of  the  B4b — His  parentage,  education,  and
character — Development  of  his  claims — Peculiarities  of  his
doctrines  and  ordinances — Reception  accorded  to  him  by
different  classes.


XASIKHU'T-TAWARfKH,  175

P.  131.  Proofs  advanced  by  the  B4b — His  innovations
in  matters  of  religion — Accusations  against  the  chastity
and  temperance  of  his  followers — The  B4b's  pilgrimage  to
Mecca  and  return  to  Bushire — Action  taken  against  him
and  his  missionaries  by  Huseyn  KhAn  Ajuddn-bdsM  the
governor  of  F4rs — The  Bib  confined  to  his  house.

P.  132.  The  B4b  is  entrapped  by  a  stratagem  of  Hu-
seyn Khdn's  into  a  too  free  enunciation  of  his  doctrines —
He  is  punished,  and  imprisoned  with  greater  rigour  for
six  montLs — Minuchihr  Khdn  Mu'tamadidd-Dawla,  the
governor  of  Isfahan,  sixcceeds  in  effecting  the  B4b's  release
and  bringing  him  to  Isfahan,  where  he  treats  him  with  con-
sideration and  kindness.

P.  133.  Huseyn  Kh4n  expels  Seyyid  Yahy4  and  other
prominent  Bdbi's  from  Shfrd.z — Miniichihr  Kh4n,  anxious  to
test  the  B4b's  knowledge,  summons  a  number  of  learned
men  to  confer  and  dispute  with  him. [See  Note  J,  infra.']

P.  134  [first  7  lines].  Conclusion  of  this  conference —
Mintichihr  Khin  conceals  the  B^b  in  his  house  and  sets
afloat  a  rumour  that  he  has  sent  him  to  Teheran.


P.  175  [last  3  lines]. Account  of  the  B^b's  first  exami-
nation before  the  clergy  of  Tabriz  in  a.h.  1263  (a.d.  1847).

p'  .„„'  I  Continuation  of  the  same. [See  note  M,  «w/r«.]

P.  178  [first  9  lines]. Conclusion  of  the  same — The
B4b  is  bastinadoed  untU  he  recants.


Contents  of  Part  iii  of  the  Kdjdriyya  volume  in
so  far  as  they  relate  to  the  Bdbis.

P.  45.  Events  of  the  year  a.h._  1264  (a.d.  1848).  Kur-
ratu'l-'Ayn,  her  parentage,  education,  beauty,  learning  and
eloquence — She  embraces  the  B4bf  doctrines.

P.  46  [first  12  lines].  The  devotion  inspired  by  Kur-
ratu'l-'Ayn  in  her  followers— She  discards  the  veil,  and
openly  preaches  the  new  doctrines — Anger  of  her  uncle,
Mulld  Muhammad  Takl — He  drives  her  from  his  house —
He is assassinated by  B4bis— Kurratu'l-'Ayn flies  from


176  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Kazvfn,  but  continues  lier  propaganda  elsewhere. [See  Note
Q,  infra.]

*****

P.  53  [last  line].  Mulld  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh  and  the
B4bi  insurrection  in  Md,zandard,n.

P.  54.  Mulld.  Huseyn  is  converted  to  Bdbfism — His
missionary  journey — His  reception  and  adventures  in  Isfa-
han, Kd-shdn,  and  Teherd,n.

P.  55. Mulld  Huseyn  attempts  to  attach  Muhammad

Sh^h  and  H^ji  Mirzd  Akdsf  to  the  B^b's  cause — He  is
compelled  by  threats  to  leave  Teherdn — He  proceeds  to
KhurAsd,n  —  Conversions  to  Bdbiism — Measures  adopted
against  the  Bihis — Hamz6  Mirz4  imprisons  MulU  Huseyn
in  his  camp  at  RMagdn — Escape  of  MulU  Huseyn  from
custody — His  journey  westward,  successes,  and  rebuffs.

P.  56.  Continuation  of  MuUd  Huseyn's  journey  to-
wards M4zandardn — Encounter  with  the  populace  at  Mi-
yAmi  and  defeat  of  the  BAhis — Altercation  with  MuUd
Muhammad  KAzim,  the  mujtahid  of  Sh^hriid — Death  of
Muhammad  Shih— Account  of  H4ji  Muhammad  'Ali  of
B^rfurush — He  falls  in  with  the  B4b  on  the  pilgrimage  to
Mecca  and  embraces  his  doctrines — He  returns  to  Bdr-
furtish — He  joins  Mull4  Huseyn  at  Mash-had — Returns
thence  on  the  arrest  of  his  colleague — At  Badasht  near
BisMm  meets  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  and  her  followers  who  have
arrived  from  Kazvin.

P.  57.  Kurratu'l-'Ayn's  address — Its  effect  on  the  au-
dience— She  returns  with  H^ji  Muhammad  'Ali  towards
MAzandar^n — Imputations  on  the  conduct  of  Kurratu'l-
'Ayn  and  H4jf  Muhammad  'All — They  are  attacked  by
the  people  of  Hazdr-Jarib — They  separate,  he  returning  to
B^rfuriish,  and  she  continuing  to  wander  through  MAzan-
dar^n  preaching — Mull4  Huseyn  joins  his  colleague  at
B^rfuriish— Success  of  the  B4W  propaganda — Enmity  of
the  Sa'idu'l-'UlamA — Preparations  for  battle — Khdnlar
Mfrzd's  aid  invoked  by  the  orthodox  party  to  put  down
the  innovators.

P.  58.  The  B4bis  retreat  from,  but  return  to,  Bdr-
furush— 'Abb^s-Kuh  Khdn  of  Lirijdn  interferes — Collision
between  the  two  parties  in  the  city — Terms  offered  by  the


NASIKHU'T-TAWARfKH.  177

Bdbis  and  accepted  by  'Abbd,s-KuH  Kbdn — The  Bdbfe
retire  accompanied  by  an  escort  sent  by  'Abb4s-Kuli  Khdn
— After  tbe  escort  leaves  them  they  are  attacked'  by  Khus-
raw  of  KAdi-Kal4  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  plunderers —
Khusraw  is  killed  and  his  followers  routed — The  Bdbis
take  up  their  quarters  at  the  Tomb  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi.

P.  59.  The  Bdbis  fortify  their  position  strongly  without
let  or  hindrance,  most  of  the  nobles  and  chiefs  of  the  pro-
vince having  gone  to  assist  at  the  Shd,h's  coronation  at
Teherin — Description  of  these  fortifications — Garrison  and
commissariat  of  the  B4bis — Mull^  Huseyn  continues  his
propaganda — Extreme  veneration  paid  to  H4jf  Muhammad
'Alf  by  the  Bdbis — Mulld  Huseyn's  encouragements  and
exhortations  to  his  followers.

P.  60.  A  letter  arrives  from  the  Bdb  containing  this
passage : —

ili^Vl 'a  iflll  jlc-  b'l  9^  Ojtoi  J.

'  They  [the  B4bis]  shall  descend  from  tJie  Green  Isle  [Md-
zandard,n]  MHto  the  foot  of  the  mountain  of  Zawrd  [Teherin],
and  shall  slay  about  twelve  thousand  of  the  Turks ' — The
Government,  informed  of  the  Bd,bis'  proceedings,  instructs
the  Mdzandardnl  chiefs  to  take  action  against  them — Akd
'Abdu'lUh  marches  against  Sheykh  Tabarsi  with  some
Afghan,  Kurdish,  and  Turkish  tribesmen  and  volunteers
from  K4df-Kald — MuUd  Huseyn  makes  a  night-attack  on
the  besiegers.

P.  61.  Akd  'Abdu'lldh  is  slain  and  his  force  routed
with  a  loss  of  thirty  killed — The  fugitives  flee  to  the  village
of  Farrd,  which  is  sacked,  burned,  and  razed  to  the  ground
by  the  B4bfs,  and  its  inhabitants  put  to  the  sword — Rage
of  JN'dsiru'd-Dfn  Sh4h  on  hearing  this  news — Prince  Mahdi-
Kuli  Mirz4  is  ordered  to  proceed  against  the  BAbis  with  all
speed  and  exterminate  them — He  quits  Teherd,n  at  the
end  of  Muharram  [a.h.  1265  =  Christmas,  a.d.  1848]  for
M4zandard,n — 'Abbds-Kuli  Khdn  marches  by  another  route
to  join  him — The  Prince  takes  up  his  quarters  at  Vdsaks

B.  12


178  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

near  'Ali-db4d — His  negligence — Stormy  weather  and  snow
come  on.

P.  62.  MulU  Huseyn  makes  a  sortie  with  300  resolute
men  before  dawn  on  Safar  15th  [a.h.  1265  =  January  10th
A.D.  1819] — By  means  of  a  stratagem  he  enters  Vdsaks,
surrounds  and  fires  the  Prince's  quarters,  and  defeats  and
disperses  the  enemy,  of  whom  many  are  killed,  including
two  princes,  SulUn  Huseyn  Mirz4  and  DA'M  Mirz4—
Prince  Mahdi'-Kiill  Mfrzd  escapes  with  difficulty— Hdjf
Muhammad  'Alf  is  wounded  in  the  mouth.

P.  63.  Courageous  stand  made  by  the  men  of  Ashraf
against  the  Bdbis — Cowardice  of  the  other  troops — Triuna-
phant  return  of  the  B&his  to  their  fortress — The  Prince  is
discovered  and  harboured  by  a  peasant,  and  his  troops  gra-
dually re-assembled — He  declines  to  risk  another  encounter
— Arrival  of  'AbbAs-Kull  Khdn  with  his  troops  before
Sbeykh  Tabarsf — His  foolhardiness  and  negligence — Mulld
Huseyn  at  the  head  of  400  B4bis  makes  a  sortie  before  dawn
on  Rabi'u'l-Avval  10th  [a.h.  1265  =  February  3rd  a.d.  1849].

P.  64.  Description  of  the  engagement — Rout  of  the
besiegers — MulM  Huseyn  is  mortally  wounded — The  Bdbis
retire  in  good  order  to  their  stronghold — After  their  depar-
ture and  the  dawn  of  day  some  of  the  scattered  besiegers
return,  bury  their  own  dead,  decapitate  the  B4bl  corpses,
and  retire.

P.  65.  How  the  news  of  the  defeat  is  communicated
to  Prince  Mahdi-Kuli  Mirz4— Death  of  MulU  Huseyn  after
re-entering  Sheykh  Tabarsi — His  dying  injunctions — His
burial  in  the  shrine — Thirty  other  Bibls  die  of  their  wounds
— The  B4bls  go  out  to  bury  their  dead,  find  them  decapi-
tated, and  in  retaliation  exhume  and  decapitate  the  Musul-
m4n  corpses  and  fix  their  heads  on  posts  round  the  gate  of
the  fortress — How  the  news  of  the  defeat  is  received  by  the
Prince — After  much  hesitation  he  advances  against  the  B^bis
and  encamps  at  Kiyd,-Kal4.

P.  66.  On  reaching  Sheykh  Tabarsi  the  Prince's  courage
fails  him — He  retires  to  K4sht,  and  there  meets  'Abbds-Kull
Kh4n — Preparations  for  the  siege  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi —
Arrival  of  artillery — Discontent  and  insubordination  amongst
the  besieging  troops  caused  by  the  wilfulness  and  incapacity
of  Mahdi-KuH  Mlrzil.


NASIKHU'T-TAWARfKH.  179

P.  67.  Sortie  of  200  B4bis— They  capture  one  of  the
towers  erected  by  the  besiegers — Cruelty  of  Mahdi-Kulf
Mirz4  to  one  of  his  wounded  officers — Renewed  anger  of
the  Shdh  because  the  siege  has  lasted  for  four  months
without  any  decisive  advantage  having  been  gained —
Threats  and  reproaches  addressed  by  the  Shdh  to  the
besiegers.

P.  68.  Suleymdn  Kh^n  Afsh^r  is  sent  from  Teheran
to  superintend  the  siege — Revival  of  the  courage  of  the
besiegers — A  breach  is  effected  in  the  Bdbi  fortifications
by  means  of  a  mine  sprung  under  the  western  tower  of  the
fortress — A  vigorous  attempt  to  storm  the  breach  fails,
once  again  through  the  incapacity  of  Mahdi-Kuli  Mirzi —
Desertions  from  the  Bdbi  camp — Fate  of  A\&  Rasiil  and
thirty  other  deserters.

P.  69.  Desertion  of  Riz4  Khd.n  and  some  others  from
the  B^bi's — They  receive  promises  of  pardon  from  the
Prince — They  are  placed  in  the  custody  of  Hidi  Khin  of
Xur — The  B4bis,  having  consumed  all  their  provisions,  are
reduced  to  eating  grass,  leaves,  boiled  leather,  and  broth
made  from  the  bones  of  dead  horses — They  make  another
desperate  sortie,  and  attempt,  but  fail,  to  capture  the  tower
erected  by  the  besiegers  against  the  western  gate — The
B^bi's  capitulate  on  receiving  a  written  promise,  signed  and
sealed  by  the  Prince,  that  their  lives  shall  be  spared.

P.  70.  Evacuation  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi  and  entry  of  the
surviving  Bdbi's  (216  in  number)  into  the  royalist  camp —
They  are  reassured  by  the  manner  in  which  they  are  at
first  received,  but  on  the  foUomng  day  are  perfidiously
massacred,  except  H4ji  Muhammad  'All  and  some  of  the
other  chiefs,  who  are  reserved  to  grace  the  Prince's  trium-
phal entry  into  B^rfuriish — The  Prince  visits  the  deserted
fortress,  marvels  at  the  skill  displayed  in  its  construction,
and  carries  off  the  spoils  accumulated  by  the  B4bis — Execu-
tion of  H4ji  Muhammad  'Ali  and  the  other  B4bi  chiefs  by
command  of  the  Musulm^n  clergy — During  the  whole  war

in  Md,zandar4n  1500  B4bis  and  500  soldiers  perished.
*  *  *  *  *

P.  83  [last  12  lines].  Troubles  at  Zanjd,n— Mull4  Mu-
hammad 'All  Zanjd,ni — His  character  and  previous  career —
ilis  innovations,  and  disagreements  with  the  other  clergy.

12—2


180  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

P.  84.  He  is  summoned  to  Teherdn  by  Muhammad
Shiih  and  forbidden  to  return  to  Zanj4n — On  the  death  of
that  king  he  escapes  in  disguise  and  returns  home — He  is
received  with  acclamation  by  his  admirers — He  begins  to
l^reach  the  B4bi  doctrines,  and  soon  gains  15,000  adhe-
rents— Action  is  taken  against  him  by  the  government — ■
ColHsion  between  him  and  AsUn-Khdn  the  governor  of
ZanjAn.

P.  85.  The  Bdbis  assume  the  offensive — Their  organiza-
tion and  preparations — Fighting  begins  on  Rajab  5th  [a.h.
1266  =  May  17th,  a.d.  1850.  In  the  Nusilliut-Tawdr'ikh
these  events  are  described  under  the  year  a.h.  1265,  but
this  is  an  error,  as  proved  by  the  accounts  of  Watson  and
Lady  Shell] — Names  of  some  of  the  killed  and  wounded,
who  number  about  forty  in  all — Execution  of  a  B^bl  pri-
soner named  Sheykhi  remarkable  for  his  valour — Attack  on
Asliin  Kh4n's  residence  by  a  party  of  Bilbi's  led  by  one  Mir
SAlih — Repulse  of  the  B4bfs  and  death  of  their  leader —
Names  of  some  of  the  killed  and  wounded.

P.  86.  Arrival  of  Sadru'd-Dawla  on  Rajab  20th  [June
3rd],  and  of  Seyyid  'Ah'  Kh4n  of  Ffruzkuh,  Shahbd,z  Khdn
of  MarAgha,  Muhammad  'All  Khd,n  Shahsivan,  K^zim  Kh^n
Afshdr,  and  Mahmud  Kh4n  of  Khiiy  with  large  reinforce-
ments of  cavalry  and  artilUery  on  Sha'bin  2nd — 5th  [June
13th— 16th]— Capture  of  a  B4bi  position  held  by  Mash-
hadi  Piri  on  Sha'bAn  20th  [July  1st] — Impatience  of  the
Government — Mustafa  Kh4n  K4jAr,  colonel  of  the  16th
(Shak^ki)  regiment,  is  sent  to  join  the  besiegers — Capture
of  a  B4bi  position  held  by  Mi'rzA  Faraju'lUh  after  a  des-
perate struggle  on  Ramaz^n  15th  [July  25th] — Besiegers
further  reinforced  by  N4siriyya  regiment  and  a  corps  of
picked  marksmen,  and  threatened  with  severe  punish-
ment unless  they  quickly  bring  the  siege  to  a  close —
General  attack  on  the  BAbfs  on  RamazAn  25th  [August
4th].  ■  ^ ^

P.  87.  The  day  goes  against  the  Biibis  till  Mull4  Mu-
hammad 'All  creates  a  diversion  by  setting  fire  to  the
bazaar— On  Shaww4l  8th  [August  17th]  the  besiegers  are
further  reinforced  by  Muhammad  Khd,n  Begler-begi  with
3000  troops,  6  cannons,  and  2  mortars — On  the  same  day
the  Ndsiriyya  and  Shak^kf  regiments  are  ordered  to  attack


^\iSIKHU'T-TAWARfKH.  181

the  Bdbis— The  stratagem  whereby  Mulld,  Muhammad  'All
throws  the  Ndsiriyya  regiment  into  confusion— Description
of  the  Bd.bi  defences — The  Begler-hegi  tries  conciliatory-
measures,  wherein  he  is  seconded  by  'Aziz  Kh4n  Ajudctn-
hasM  and  Mfrz4  Hasan  Khin  the  Ainir-Klzdms  brother,
both  of  whom  happen  to  pass  through  Zanj4n  at  this  time
— Conciliation  failing,  a  fresh  attack  is  made.

P.  88.  Failure  of  this  attack — Punishment  inflicted
on  certain  officers — The  Sadru'd-Dawlrj,  is  replaced  by
Farrukh  Khdn  (the  son  of  Yahy4  KhAn  of  Tabriz  and  the
brother  of  Suleym^n  Kh4n  the  Bdbi),  who  reaches  Zanj^n
on  Zi'1-Ka'da  4th  [September  11th] — Arrival  of  fresh  rein-
forcements— A  way  of  escape  is  intentionally  left  open
for  the  Bibi's— The  Bibis  again  turn  to  account  the  covet-
ousness  of  the  troops  to  inflict  on  them  fresh  losses — Ex-
traordinary courage  of  the  B4bf  women — Letter  from  the
Amir-Nizdm  to  Farrukh  Kh^n — The  stratagem  whereby
the  B4bis  decoy  Farrukh  Kh4n  to  his  destruction.

P.  89.  Capture  of  Farrukh  Khdn  by  the  B4bis— He
and  two  renegades  are  tortured  to  death  and  their  heads
cast  into  the  camp  of  the  besiegers — Anger  of  the  King  at
this  news — More  artillery  is  sent  against  Zanjin — Kenewed
attack  on  the  B^bfs — Capture  of  the  Castle  of  'Ah-Mard4n
Kh4n  and  other  Bdbi  positions— Twenty  BAbls  taken  pri-
soners.

P.  90.  Execution  of  these  prisoners — Desertion  and
capture  of  twenty-five  Bd,bis — Their  ultimate  fate — Mulld
Muhammad  'Ali  is  wounded — He  survives  his  wound  for
one  week — His  dying  instructions — His  death  and  burial —
His  followers  capitulate  on  receiving  promise  of  pardon —
Entry  of  the  royal  troops  into  ZanjAn — Mull4  Muhammad
'Ah"s  body  is  exhumed  and  dishonoured — Bad  faith  of  the
royalist  leaders — Plunder  of  the  B4bl  quarter — Massacre  of
the  B4bf  prisoners  on  the  third  day  after  the  surrender.

P.  91  [first  7  lines].  Hd,jf  K^zim  Kaltiiki  and  Mash-
hadf  Suleymdn  the  cloth-maker  are  blown  from  the  mouths
of  mortars — Approval  of  the  Sh^h — Some  of  the  Bibi  chiefs
are  brought  to  Teherdn — Mirzd  Rizi,  Hdji  Muhammad  'Alf,
and  Hiji  Muhsin  are  put  to  death  at  the  command  of  the
Amir-Nizam,  while  the  rest  are  cast  into  prison. * *

[Fourth  and  third  lines  from  the  bottom.] Suleymin


182  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Khiin  Afsh^r  arrives  at  Tabriz  with  the  death-warrant  of
the  B4b.


P.  93.  MirzA  Taki  Kh^n  the  Amir-Kizdm  advises
N4siru'd-Dfn  Shd,h  to  order  the  B4b  to  be  put  to  death-
Discussion  between  the  King  and  the  Minister— The  B4b's
execution  is  finally  decided  on— Suleym^n  Kh4n  Afshd-r  is
sent  to  Tabriz  with  the  B^b's  death-warrant  and  instruc-
tions to  Hamzf5  Mlrzd,,  the  Prince-Governor  of  Azarbaijdn,
as  to  the '  method  of  procedure— The  B^b  and  his  amanu-
ensis, Ak^  Seyyid  Huseyn  of  Yezd,  are  brought  from
Chihrlk  to  Tabriz — Ak4  [here  called  MulU]  Muhammad

'All  of  Tabriz  is  also  arrested — His  brother,  Ak4  'Abdu'lUh,
unsuccessfully  attempts  to  induce  him  to  recant — Hamz6
Mlrzd,  desires  the  clergy  of  Tabriz  to  dispute  with  and  con-
fute the  B4b — They  decline.

P.  94.  The  B4b  is  brought  before  Hamzt^  Mlrzd,,  Mlrz4
Hasan,  H4ji  Mlrz4  'AH,  and  Suleym^n  Kh4n  Afsh^r  by
night— Hamz^  Mlrz4  asks  him  to  recite  verses  concerning
a  crystal  candlestick — The  B4b  complies,  and  these  verses
are  writtten  down — Hamzd  Mlrz4  requests  the  B4b  to
repeat  these  verses— They  are  repeated  differently — It  is
decided  to  kill  the  B4b  with  the  utmost  publicity — He  is
taken  to  the  houses  of  three  prominent  members  of  the
clergy,  H4ji  Mlrz4  B4kir,  MulU  Muhammad  M4mak4nl,

and  Ak4  Seyyid  Zanvazl,  who  ratify  the  sentence  of  death

— Ak4  Seyyid  Huseyn  of  Yezd  recants — The  steadfastness

of  Ak4  Muhammad  'All — The  execution  takes  place  on
Sha'bkn  27th  [a.h.  1266,  not  1265  as  stated  by  Sipihr  and
Kazem-Beg. See  pp.  45  and  186 — 187] — The  firing-party

is  formed  of  Christian  soldiers — At  the  first  volley  Ak4
Muhammad  'All  is  killed,  but  the  B4b,  released  from  his
bonds  by  the  bullets,  falls  uninjured  to  the  ground — He
takes  refuge  in  the  rooms  of  one  of  the  soldiers.

P.  95  [first  9  lines].  Reflections  on  this  strange  occur-
rence— The  B4b  is  dragged  forth  from  his  retreat  by  Kuch
'Kli  SulUn,  again  bound,  and  once  more  fired  on  by  the


NASIKHU  T-TAWARfKH.  183

soldiers — This  time  he  is  killed — Indignities  offered  to  his
body.


P.  112  [last  half].  The  insurrection  at  Nirfz — Aki
Seyyid  Yahyd  of  D4rd,b — His  character,  and  that  of  his

father  Ak4  Seyyid  Ja'far-«-^asA/r— Seyyid  Yahy^  is  con-
verted to  the  Bihi  doctrines — He  goes  to  Teherd,n  to
preach  the  new  faith — He  goes  to  Yezd — The  Yezd  insur-
rection and  its  failure — Seyyid  Yahyd,  goes  to  Fasd,  in  Fdrs
— Bahrdm  Mirzd  having  been  dismissed  from  the  govern-
ment of  Fdrs,  and  Ffriiz  Mirz^  not  having  yet  arrived  to
take  his  place,  Mirz^  Fazlu'lUh  Nasiru' l-Mulk  is  the
supreme  authority  in  the  province — The  nobles  of  Fasd.
request  him  to  put  a  stop  to  Seyyid  Yahyd's  propaganda.

P.  113.  The  Nasiru  I- Blulh  writes  a  letter  to  Seyyid
Yahyd, — He  receives  a  reassuring  reply — Fresh  complaints
are  made — Another  message  to  Seyyid  Yahyd,  proves  equally
ineffectual^Seyyid  Yahy4  goes  to  Nlriz  with  the  force
which  he  has  collected — IDisaffection  of  Nlriz,  and  unpopu-
larity of  its  governor,  Zeynu'l-'Abidfn  Kh^n — Seyyid  Yahy4,
with  300  followers,  occupies  an  old  castle  near  Nirfz — The
Nadrii  l-Midk  sends  him  a  third  message — His  answer —
He  makes  a  night  attack  on  Nlriz,  sacks  the  town,  and  puts

Zeynu'l-'Abidin  Kh4n  to  flight — Hereupon  many  recruits
join  the  B4bfs,  so  that  their  forces  amount  to  more  than
2000  men.

P.  114.  Flriiz  Mirz4  the  new  governor,  when  distant
four  stages  from  Shirdz,  receives  news  of  the  success  of  the
Nlriz  insurgents — He  sends  a  messenger  to  Shfrd,z  instruct-
ing Mihr  'Ali  Khdn  Niiri  Blmjd'ul-Mulk  and  Mustafd,-Kuli
Khdn  to  proceed  against  Seyyid  Yahyd  with  two  K4ra-
giizlti  regiments — The  NaHiriiH-Mulk  writes  to  Zeynu'l-
'Abidin  Khd,n  the  fugitive  governor  of  Nfriz  ordering
him  to  collect  what  forces  he  can  and  join  the  attacking
force — The  royalist  forces  combine  and  proceed  to  Nfriz
— Preliminary  skirmish — Siege  operations  commenced^^
Failure  of  Mustafd-Kulf  Khdn's  attempts  to  bring  about  a
peaceable  settlement — Seyyid  Yahyd,  supplies  his  followers
with  amulets— Sortie  of  300  Bdbfs — Failure- of  the  sortie


184  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

after  prolonged  fighting,  during  which  150  Bdbis  and  four
soldiers  are  slain — Desertions  amongst  the  Bdbis — Second
sortie  of  the  Bdbis.

P.  115  [first  half].  Repulse  of  B4bf  sortie— Valf  Khdn
is  sent  with  reinforcements  from  Shfrdz— Seyyid  Yahy^  is
induced  to  quit  his  fortress,  and,  accompanied  by  one
attendant,  to  return  to  his  house  in  Nirfz— On  his  way
thither  he  is  met  by  the  sons  of  'All  'Askar  Kh4n  who  kill
him  in  revenge  for  their  father's  death — Seyyid  Yahy^'s
two  sons  and  thirty  of  his  followers  are  brought  to  Shiriz —
The  former  are  spared  in  consideration  of  their  being  sey-
yids,  but  the  latter  are  put  to  death  by  order  of  Firiiz
Mirzd.

Contents  of  the  Supplement  to  the  Kdjdriyya  volume
in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the  Bdbfs.

P.  22.  Eventsof  the  year  A.H.  1268  [a.d.  18521.  Im4ni-
Kuli  Mirzd  is  appointed  governor  of  Kirmdnshdh — His
energy  in  restoring  order  to  his  province — He  arrests  Mulld
'All  Asghar,  a  B4bl  missionary,  and  sends  him  in  chains  to
Teherdn — One  Teymiir'  of  Kal'a-Zanjiri  claims  to  be  the
vicegerent  of  the  Absent  Imdm  and  draws  to  himself  a
great  number  of  people — He  is  seized  and  put  to  death  by
Im4m-KuH  Mfrzd — Account  of  the  attempt  on  the  Sh4h's
life — Digression  on  the  character  and  doctrines  of  Sheykh
Ahmad  Ahs4'f.

P.  23.  Hijf  Seyyid  Kdzim  of  Resht  succeeds  Sheykh
Ahmad — Dissensions  amongst  his  followers  after  his  death
— MuUd,  Huseyn — H4jf  Muhammad  Karfm  Kh4n — How
MulU  Huseyn  persuades  many  of  the  Sheykhfs  to  follow
Mi'rz^ 'Alf  Muhammad  theB^b — His  journey  to  Khurdsdn —
Mulld,  Sheykh'  'All  [whom  the  Bibls  entitle  Jenub-i-'Aztm]
becomes  a  B4bl  and  engages  in  active  propaganda— He  goes
from  KerbeU  to  Kdsh^n,  where  he  sees  and  attempts  to

1  Subh-i-Ezel  informed  me  that  this  Teymiir  was  not  a  Bibl
but  advanced  a  claim  on  his  own  account.  After  his  death,
however,  a  youth  calling  himself  Seyfiir,  who  loas  a  Bdbf,  ap-
peared, and  used  to  declare  that  he  was  Teymiir  returned  again
from  the  dead.


NASIKHU'T-TAWARfKH.  185

convert  Mirzd  Akd  Khdn  of  Niir,  afterwards  Scidr-i-A'zam
(Prime  Minister)^He  goes  to  Teherdn,  where,  under  various
names  and  in  diverse  disguises,  he  continues  his  attempts
at  proselytizing — During  the  ministry  of  the  Amir-Nizdm
he  meditates  a  rising  to  be  inaugurated  by  the  slaughter  of
Mirzd  Abii'l  Kisim  the  Imdm  Jum'a — This  plot  is  discovered
by  government  spies  and  reported  to  the  Amtr-Nizdm —
Mirz4  'Abdu'r-Rahim,  the  brother  of  MuUd,  Muhammad
Taki  of  Herdt,  one  of  the  disciples  of  MulU  Sheykli  'All,  is
arrested.

P.  24.  Mirzd  'Abdu'r-Rahlm  refuses  to  betray  his
confederates — Mfrzd  Tdhir,  fellow-lodger  of  the  above,  is
questioned — H^ji  Seyyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan  is  beguiled
hy  a  forged  letter  into  revealing  MuUd  Sheykh  'All's  abode
— A  servant  of  Mulld  Sheykh  'All's  is  arrested  and  tor-
tured, but  discloses  nothing — He  is  put  to  death,  but  Mirz4
'Abdu'r-Rahlm's  life  is  spared — MulU  Sheykh  'All  escapes
and  takes  refuge  in  Sh^h  'Abdu'l-'Azfm,  whence  he  pre-
sently flies  to  Azarbaij4n — On  the  fall  of  the  Amtr-Nizam,
Mull^  Sheykh  'All  returns  to  Teheri,n  and  begins  to  or-
ganize the  conspiracy  against  the  Shah's  life — The  house
■of  Hdji  Suleym^n  Khdn  of  Tabriz  becomes  the  meeting-
place  of  the  conspirators,  and  there  MuU^  Sheykh  'All
takes  up  his  quarters — Seventy  persons  are  involved  in  the
■consjaracy — Nature  of  the  plot — Twelve  BAbls  volunteer
for  the  attempt,  amongst  them  being  Muhammad  S4dik  [of
Zanjdn],  Mlrzd,  'Abdu'l-Wahhib  of  Shikz,  Mulk  Fath-
u'Uih  of  Kum,  and  Muhammad  B4kir  of  Najaf^b^d.

P.  25.  The  attempt  on  the  Shah's  life  is  made  on
Sunday,  Shawwdl  28th  [a.h.  1268  =  August  15th,  1852]—
Account  of  the  attempt  and  its  failure. [See  infra,  Note  T.]

P.  26.  Fate  of  the  assassins — Consternation  of  the
ministers — Conjectures  as  to  the  originators  of  the  plot —
Firmness  of  the  Prime  Minister  (Sadr-i-A'z(im).

P.  27.  Messengers  despatched  to  all  parts  of  the  king-
dom to  announce  the  Shdh's  safety — The  search  for  the
Bdbis  begins — Arrest  of  Hd,jl  Suleym^n  Kh4n  and  twelve
of  his  confederates — On  information  obtained  from  some  of
these  prisoners  36  Bdbfs  are  captured,  amongst  whom  is
MuUA  Sheykh  'All.

P.  28. The  Hdjibu'd  Bawla  cuts  off  Mulld  Sheykh


186  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

'All's  ear — Examination  of  the  prisoners — Mirzd  Huseyn
'Ali  Niiri  [apparently  Behd,'u'lMli  himself],  Mkzi  Suley-
m^n-Kulf,  Mirz4  Mahmiid,  AkA  'Abdu'lUh,  Mirzd  _Jawd,d
of  Kliur^sin,  and  Mirzd  Huseyn  of  Kum  are  imprisoned,
there  not  being  suf&cient  evidence  to  incriminate  them  in
the  plot :  the  other  B&hi  prisoners  are  apportioned  amongst
the  different  departments  and  classes  each  to  be  slain  in
such  fashion  as  shall  please  those  to  whom  he  has  been
assigned — The  slaughter  takes  place  on  the  last  day  of
Zi'1-Ka'da  [a.h.  1268  =  September  15th,  ad.  1852]— Ac-
count of  the  executions  [see  infra,  Note  T].

P.  29.  Account  of  the  executions  continued,  including
that  of  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  [see  injra,  Notes  Q  and  T] — Public
rejoicings.


Whoever  carefully  examines  the  arrangement  of  matter
in  the  Ndsikku  t-Tawdrfkh  as  indicated  in  the  above  table
of  contents  will  perceive  that  this  arrangement  is  not
strictly  chronological,  although  ostensibly  intended  to  be
so.  A  desire  not  to  interrupt  the  continuity  of  the  narra-
tive in  relating  an  episode  often  induces  the  historian  to
include  under  the  year  in  which  the  episode  which  he  is
describing  first  began,  events  properly  belonging  to  subse-
C[uent  years.  Thus  the  first  public  appearance  of  the  B4b
wa.s  in  the  year  a.h.  1260,  but  the  narrative  is  carried  on
without  interruption  not  only  to  the  time  of  his  return  from
Mecca  to  Bushire,  which  certainly  did  not  occur  till  a.h.
1261,  but  to  the  period  of  his  concealment  by  the  Mu-
' tamadii  d-Dmvla  in  Isfahan,  which  belongs  to  the  year
a.h.  1262.  So  likewise  the  beginning  of  the  insurrection
in  M^zandar^n  was  in  a.h.  1264,  while  its  final  suppression
did  not  take  place  till  a.h.  1265;  yet  the  whole  insurrec-
tion from  its  earliest  beginning  to  its  ultimate  conclusion  is
described  under  the  year  a.h.  1264,  the  only  indication  of
a  change  of  year  being  afforded  by  the  rotation  of  the
month.s.  Other  instances  might  be  adduced,  but  these  are
sufficient  to  prove  a  fact  which  it  is  most  important  to
bear  in  mind.  The  erroneous  dates  given  for  the  siege  of
Zanj^n  and  the  Bdb's  martyrdom  (of  which  events,  accord-
ing to  all testimony, the latter  took  place during  the


xasikhu't-tawarikh.  187

former)  cannot,  however,  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  in
this  way ;  and  I  am  forced  to  suppose  that  in  this  case  the
Lisdnu'l  Mulk  has  committed  a  positive  error,  which,  as  it
has  been  copied  and  reproduced  by  Kazem-Beg  and  a
number  of  writers  who  have  followed  him,  it  is  necessarj^
to  expose  in  the  clearest  manner  possible.  This  I  strove  to
do  in  my  first  paper  on  the  Bdbi's  in  the  Journal  of  the
Boyal  Asiatic  Society  for  1889  (pp.  511 — 513),  where  I
attempted  to  prove  that  both  of  the  events  in  question  were
to  be  assigned,  not,  as  stated  in  the  KdsiMu  t-Tau-drtk/t
and  repeated  by  those  who  have  unreservedly  followed  it,
to  the  year  a.h.  1265  (a.d.  1849),  but  to  the  year  a.h.  1266
(a.d.  1850).  It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  repeat  in  this
place  the  arguments  there  adduced  to  support  an  opinion
in  which  further  study  of  the  matter  serves  but  to  cnnfimi
me ;  I  will  only  observe  that  further  corroboration  of  that
opinion  is  afforded  not  only  by  the  present  work  {siq^ra,
pp.  44 — 45)  and  the  Rawzatu  s-Safd,  but  also  by  Dr  A.  H.
Wright's  memoir  contributed  to  the  Z.  D.  M.  G.  in  1851,
wherein  the  B4b's  execution  is  described  (p.  385)  as  having
occurred  "last  year,"  and  by  Binning  {Journal  of  Tiro
Years'  Travel  in  Persia  d-c,  London,  1857,  vol.  i,  p.  407),
who,  in  a  passage  written  in  1850  or  early  in  1851,  remarks,
after  describing  the  B^b's  execution,  that  "a  large  number
of  them  [i.e.  the  Bdbi's]  are  now  up  in  arms  in  ZenJ£ln."

Complete  impartiality  is  a  quality  we  could  not  reason-
ably expect  to  find  in  the  court  historian  of  a  despot  whose
ears  must  hear  what  is  pleasant  rather  than  what  is  true,
and  whose  actions  must  be  not  only  justified  but  extolled
as  models  of  wisdom  and  virtue.  When  we  consider  that,
apart  from  this,  the  Lisdnu'l-Mulk,  as  a  presumably
orthodox  Shi'ite  Muhammadan,  was  bound  to  disparage
and  traduce  in  every  way  possible  those  whose  object  was
nothing  less  than  the  complete  overthrow  of  Isl4m  and  the
abrogation  of  its  ordinances,  we  cannot  but  admire  the
candour  which  he  displays;  for  if,  on  the  one  hand,  he
brings  against  the  BAbi's  many  unfounded  and  absurd  accu-
sations, on  the  other  hand  he  pourtrays  with  a  fidelity
scarcely  surpassed  by  the  witty  and  sarcastic  Comte  de
Gobineau  the  cowardice,  incapacit)',  and  treachery  of
Mahdi-Kulf  Mirzd,  the  courage  of  Mulld  Huseyn  of  Bush-


188  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY,

raweyh,  tlie  constancy  of  Aki  Muhammad  'Alf  of  Tabriz,
and  the  heroism  of  the  B4bf  women  of  Zanjdn.

Each  page  of  the  Ndsikhut-Tawdrtkh  consists  of  29
lines  containing  on  an  average  21  words  each,  so  that  a
page  is  equivalent  to  about  600  words.  That  portion  of
the  narrative  which  refers  to  the  B4bfs  occupies  in  all  not
less  than  46  pages,  and  cannot  contain  fewer  than  27,000
words.

2. The  R(Mvzatii,' s-Safd.

The  Teheran  lithogTaphed  edition  of  this  work,  whereof
the  pubhcation  was  completed  in  Rabl'u'1-Awal  a.h.  1274
(Oct. — Nov.,  A.D.  1857),  consists  of  ten  volumes  bound  in
two.  Of  these  ten  volumes  the  first  six  composed  by
Mirkhwdnd  (d.  a.d.  1498)  and  the  seventh  composed  by  his
grandson  Khw4ndamir  (d.  a.d.  1534)  constitute  the  whole
of  what  is  generally  understood  by  European  writerswhen
they  speak  of  the  Rav)zatu' s-Hafd.  The  three  last  (eighth,
ninth,  and  tenth)  volumes,  which  supplement  the  older
work  and  bring  the  nan-ative  down  to  our  own  days,
were  written  by  that  most  talented  and  learned  scholar
Rizd-Kuli  Kh4n  'Lele-BusM,'  of  whose  life  and  works  a
most  valuable  account  from  the  pen  of  Mr  Sidney  Churchill
will  be  found  in  vol.  xviii  (New  Series)  of  the  Journal  of
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  pp.  196 — 206.  All  that  relates
to  the  B4bis  is  contained  in  the  last  (tenth)  volume,  with
which  alone,  therefore,  we  are  here  concerned.  The  nume-
ration of  the  pages  in  this  volume  is  supplied  by  my  hand,
the  pages  in  the  original  being  unnumbered.  As  the
narrative  of  the  BAbi  movement  here  given  agrees  very
closely  for  the  most  part  with  that  contained  in  the
Ndsikhu  t-Tav)drtkh,  I  shall  in  the  summary  of  its  contents
about  to  be  given  indicate  very  briefly  that  portion  of  it
dealt  with  in  each  page,  except  in  cases  where  some  fact  is
added  or  differently  stated.

Contents  of  vol.  x  of  the  Ran-zatu  s-Hafd
in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the  Bdbls.

P.  69  [last  1 7  lines]. From  the  first  appearance  of  the


EAWZATUS-rATA.  IS!'

Bab  to  the  iTraTagem  -wherebir  H-.ijeTii  Khan  Aj^d-ln-B-'if/'^
iniiiie?  Tiim  to  expose  hi-:  iiei~  without  reserve.

P.  TO  lirit  IS  line-?  .  From  the  Bab's  di^r'naii-in  with
the  cleriy  of  Shiraz  *•:■  the  death  of  Miniiohihr  Kiif.n  in
Eabiu  hAwal  a,h.  1263  and  the  Bab's  removal  x:<  ChiimL
Eede-jtions  on  the  eau-es  which  led  tj  the  rapid  spread  C'f
his  d'i'jtriiie-.  He  is  aeciised  of  hi:'_.iiiu;-  and  teaolii'-u-  the
doctrine  of  metempsyoho-i-.

*****

P.  ll^  last  26  linesh  From  the  oezinninz  of  MtHa
H:-re}T:  s  propaganda  to  his  e~:ape  li-jra  !Mash-ha  i  and
advance  on  Mazandaran  with  3(X)  or  40')  f  h  w-ri.  It  i-
-tated  that  his  criminal  intention  was  to  prc^eed  to  I'ihlir.k
and  liberate  the  Bab.  The  ha-t  three  Knes  oi  t:vi^  p'a^'e  begin
the  accotmt  of  the  Bab-  hr-t  examination  a.k.  li'63=A-D.
l^il  by  the  clerg}-  C'f  Tabriz  presided  over  by  the  present
Shah,  at  that  time  Crown-Prince.  The  accotnt  of  the  pr>
cee-iinr-  of  tjii-  assembly  'h  f'rofe~-^:uy  eopie'l  "'without
lavonr  or  enmity"  from  the  ret":'rt  written  by  Haji  Mitha
ilahmud  the  Xiz'r/ri'Al-'UI'rind.  Concerning'  this  con-
ference see  iupra.  pp.  1> — i'l,  and  infra.  ^C'te  M.

p  ,  .-,„  .- AccC'iint  01  the  conierence  cc^nrjined.

P.  121.  C-n'i'hi-icn  C'f  the  conference,  an^l  puni-hment
of  the  Bab,  who  i~  aftervari-  ~ent  back  tc.  Chhjtk — Exa—
peration  of  the  Bat:~  on  hearin^  what  iniigi.itie-  have  been
offered  to  their  master — M-iha  Muhammad  Ah  of  Bar-
foni-n— Kirrartl-'Ayn— The  meerig  at  Bada^ht— The
attack  on  the  Bab:s  at  Hazar-Janb — The  death  of  Muham-
ma-l  .Shah  .Shawwal.  a.h.  12h4=Aiigti^t  31?t — .Septemlier
2Sth,  A.D.  1^4^'  — Beg-inning  of  the  Mazandaran  insor-
ic'jtijn-

P.  122.  Eeoapithation  of  Mulla  HtseiTi  s  earHer  ad-
ventixres  and  behavi--ir — Narrative  of  event;  from  the
collision  between  MuHa  Hu^eyn's  7i)0  or  ?'.'0  white-robed.
white-rtirliianed  follc'wer-  and  the  Musulmans  of  Barfmis::
to  the  ■:'Ccupation  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi  by  the  fanner — De-
scription of  the  Babi  f  jrtre-=-.

1  AcC'jrding  to  W£.-.i;.ii Hir.onj  of  Perria.  p.  3-54  .  the  deat::.

of  Mnhammad  .-^L.i  tc-jk  I'lace  on  .■~-; -e:^':>er  4tL,  l;-i^.


190  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

P.  123.  Continuation  of  narrative  of  the  i'Mzandardn
insurrection  to  the  surprise  and  discomfiture  of  Mahdi-Kuh'
Mirz4  by  the  B^bis  at  V4saks.

P.  124.  Continuation  of  narrative  to  the  night  attack
of  the  Bihis  led  by  Mulld,  Huseyn  on  'Abb^s-Kuli  Khan's
army.  The  date  of  this  event  is  here  stated  as  Rabi'u'l-
Avval  10th  A.H.  1266  (January  24th,  a.d.  1850),  which
is  a  mistake.  The  correct  date,  Rabi'u'l-Avval  (10th)
A.H.  1265  (February  3rd,  a.d.  1849)  is  given  in  the
Nasikh  u  t-  TaivArikh.

P.  125.  From  the  death  of  MulU  Huseyn  to  the
second  advance  of  Mahdi-Kuli  Mirzd  against  Sheykh
Tabarsf.

P.  126.  Continuation  of  the  narrative  to  the  arrival  of
Ja'far-Kulf  Kh4n  and  Tahmdsp  Kuh  Kh4n  with  reinforce-
ments for  the  besiegers.

P.  127.  Continuation  of  the  narrative  to  the  B4bi
sortie,  which  results  directly  in  the  death  of  Tahmdsp-KuH
Kh^n,  and  indirectly  in  that  of  his  uncle  Ja'far-Kuli  Khdn
through  the  wanton  and  inconsiderate  cruelty  of  Mahdf-
Kuli  Mirzi.

P.  128.  Conclusion  of  the  narrative  of  the  Mdzandardn
insurrection.  Beginning  of  the  narrative  of  the  Zanjd,n
insurrection.

P.^  129.  Continuation  of  the  narrative  to  Seyyid  'Ah
Khan's  unsuccessful  attempt  at  pacification.

P.^  130.  Continuation  of  the  narrative  to  Farrukh
Khan's  capture  and  terrible  fate.

P.  131.  Continuation  of  the  narrative  to  Hasan  Khan's
unsuccessful  attempt  at  pacification.  (According  to  the
NuslMu't-Tawartkh  this  event  preceded  the  last,  and  this
version  is  on  the  face  of  it  more  probable.)

P.  132.  Conclusion  of  the  narrative  of  the  Zanjdn  in-
surrection—Brief account  of  the  execution  of  the  B4b  at
Tabriz.  (The  date  of  this  event  is  here  correctly  stated  as
A.H.  1266.  The  account  itself  is  most  meagre,  amounting
m  substance  merely  to  this :  that  the  B4b  was  brought  from
Chihrik  to  Tabriz,  condemned  to  death  by  the  clergy  of
that  city,  and  suspended  and  shot,  together  with  two  of  his
disciples,  by  the  Christian  regiment,  his  body  being  after-
wards cast  outside  the  city  as  food  for  wolves  and  dogs.


KAWZATU  .s-SAFA.  191

No  mention  is  made  of  liis  miraculous  escape  from  the  first
volley  fired  by  the  soldiers.) — Begiuuing  of  the  narrative  of
the  XMz  insurrection.

P.  133.  Conclusion  of  the  narrative  of  the  Nirfz  insur-
rection. (According  to  this  account,  Ak4  Sejyid  Yahya  of
DArdb  the  insurgent  leader  was  brought  to  Shlriz  and  there
put  to  death.  AUusion  is  also  made  to  the  second  B&hi
rising at Niriz and the assassination of the  governor

Zeynu'l-'Abidfn  Khan,  which  events  occurred  about  two
years  later. See  Note  H,  infra.)

*****

P.  167  [last  21  lines].  _  The  attempt  on  the  Shdh's  Hfe
(see  Note  T,  iii/ri().  Preliminary  recapitulation  of  similar
attempts  on  the  lives  of  kings  and  ministers  made  by
members  of  heretical  sects — Eulogies  of  N^siru'd-Din
Shah.

P.  168.  After  the  death  of  the  Bab  a  new  leader  (whom
the  author  of  this  history  appai'ently  believes  to  have  been
ilulU  Shej'ldi  'Ah  'Jeiiub-i-'Azfm')  is  chosen  by  his  fol-
lowers— The  Babi  conspiracy — The  assassination  is  planned
b}-  twelve  B4bis,  who  arrange  that  the  attempt  shall  take
place  on  the  morning  of  Sunday  the  2Sth  of  Shawwiil  a.h.
126S  (August  15th,  A.D.  1852)  as  the  Shah  is  riding  out  on  a
hunting  expedition  fi-om  his  summer  residence  at  Niydvarin
— Description  of  the  Royal  Cavalcade  and  the  approach  of
the  conspirators  in  the  guise  of  suppliants.

P.  169.  Of  the  twelve  assassins,  six  fail  to  arrive  in
time,  while  three  lag  behind — The  three  who  are  ready
approach  the  Sliali  as  petitioners,  surround  liim,  and  fii-e
two  shots  at  him — The  Shah's  retainers  come  up  and  kill
one  of  the  conspirators — Another  shot  is  tired  wounding  the
Shah  in  the  shoulder — The  two  survi-s-ing  conspirators  are
seized  and  retained  for  examination — The  Shah  wishes  to
continue  liis  expedition,  but  is  dissuaded  by  the  Prime
Minister — Panic  in  TeherAn — The  Shah  holds  a  pubhc
reception  on  tlie  following  day.

P.  170.  ^Messengers  are  despatched  in  all  directions
to  announce  the  ShdJi's  safety — Certain  malicious  persons
strive  unsuccessfully  to  cast  suspicion  on  the  Prime
^linister  and  Muhammad  Hasan  Khan  of  Erivan—  It  is


192  NOTE A— BIBLIOGRAPHY.

discovered  that  70  Bihis  are  in  the  habit  of  resorting  to
the  house  of  H4ji  Suleym^n  Khdn,  on  which  accordingly  a
raid  is  made,  resulting  in  the  capture  of  Suleymdn  Kh4n
and  twelve  others— MulU  Sheykh  'AH  and  thirty-six  other
Mhis  are  also  arrested— Account  of  the  execution  of  these
—The  Shiih  returns  to  Teherto  from  Niy^vardn  amidst
general  rejoicings  on  Friday,  Zi'1-Ka'da  17th,  a.h.  1268
(September  2nd,  a.d.  1852).


Riz^-Kuli  Khdn's  naiTative  substantially  agrees  with
that  of  the  Lmmu'l-MttU-,  but  is  on  the  whole  less  full,
more  bombastic,  and  more  vituperative,  execrations  and
curses  on  the  BAbfe  severally  and  generally  being  freely
introduced  throughout.  Some  new  dates  are  added,  and
some,  such  as  that  of  the  ZanjAn  troubles,  which  are
erroneously  stated  in  the  Ndsikhu't-Tawdrihh,  are  here
correctly  given ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  some  fresh  chrono-
logical errors,  notably  in  the  case  of  MulM  Huseyn's  last
sortie  and  death,  are  introduced.  The  account  given  of
the  B^b's  death  is  extremely  meagre ;  and  in  other  parts  of
the  narrative  we  miss  that  abundance  of  detail  and  fulness
of  description  which  render  the  Ndsikhut-Tawdrikh  so
readable  and  so  gxaphic.

Each  page  of  the  Rawzatu  s^-Safd  cont&ms.  33  lines,  and
each  line  an  average  of  26  words,  making  about  858  words
to  the  page.  The  number  of  pages  devoted  to  the  B4bis  is
in  all  twenty  and  a  half,  so  that  the  whole  narrative  above
summarized  contains  not  fewer  than  17,500  words,  and  is
about  two-thirds  of  the  length  of  the  account  given  in  the
Ndsihliu  t-Tmrdrtkh.


3. The  Tdrthli-i-Jadtd.

Of  this  work,  which  exists  only  in  manuscript,  two
copies  only,  so  far  as  I  know,  have  reached  Europe'. One,

1  Quite  recently,  as  I  have  learned  from  Baron  Rosen,  another
MS.  of  this  work,  obtained  by  M.  Tumanski  at  Ishkdbiid,  has
been  added  to  the  library  of  the  Institut  des  Langues  Orientales
of  St  Petersburg.


TAEIKH-I-JADID.  193

obtained  by  Mr  Sidney  Churchill,  is  in  the  library  of  the
British  Museiun,  and  is  numbered  Or.  2942.  The  other  is
in  my  o-mi  possession,  and  is  briefly  described  at  p.  496  of
my  first  paper  on  the  Bdbis  in  the  /.  i?.  A.  S.  for  1889,  and
at  pp.  1002 — 1003  of  my  second  paper  in  the  same  volume.
Of  the  maimer  in  which  I  first  became  acquainted  with  this
work,  of  the  means  whereby  I  obtained  the  ms.  now  in  my
possession,  of  my  intention  of  pubUshing  it,  and  of  the
causes  which  led  me  to  lay  aside  (I  trust  but  for  a  season)
the  text  and  translation  on  which  I  was  engaged  in  favour
of  the  present  work,  I  have  ah-eady  spoken  in  the  Introduc-
tion. As  the  Tdrtifi-i-Jadid  is  not  at  present  generally
available  to  scholars,  I  shall  confine  myself  to  giving  a  brief
statement  of  its  contents  based  on  my  own  ms.  Before
doing  so,  however,  a  few  words  must  be  said  concerning  the
British  Museum  codex,  which  is  superior  alike  in  accuracy,
neatness,  and  caUigraphy  to  my  own.

In  the  MS.  catalogue  of  recent  acquisitions  the  MS.  in
question  is  described  thus : —

"Or.  2942.  Tdn'kh-i-Jadid.  A  history  of  the  Babi's.
A.H.  1298  (1881). Persian."

On  its  cover  it  bears  the  following  inscription : —


BRIT. MUS. ! TARIKH  JADID
OR.  2942  i  PERSIAN


Inside  the  cover  is  written : —

The  blank  leaf  at  the  beginning  bears  the  name  of  the

work  (jbjb-  Sj  jIj)  t»oth  in  Arabic  and  English  characters,

the  date  July  1882,  and  Mr  Sidney  Churchill's  signature,
substituted  for  that  of  ilr  Henry  Churchill  through  which
a  pen  has  been  drawn.

At  the  end  of  the  text  is  the  following  colophon : —

(Rajab  a.h.  1298  =  May  30th— June  28th  A.D.  1881).
B.  13


194  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

A  final  note  states  that  the  MS.  was  bought  of  Mr  S.
Churchill  on  October  10th,  1885.  It  consistsof  177  fol.
(354  pp.).  Quotations,  headings,  and  the  initial  words  of
sentences  are  sometimes  written  in  red.  The  paper  is  of  a
bluish  colour.  The  text,  so  far  as  I  have  collated  it,  offers
a  good  many  variants  from,  and  some  additions  to,  my  MS.,
and  its  readings  are  generally  preferable.

My  MS.  consists  of  374  pp.,  each  of  which  contains  19
lines  numbering  on  an  average  10  words  apiece.  The
whole  history  may  be  estimated  to  contain  over  70,000
words.

As  regards  the  authorship  of  the  work,  it  is  concealed
for  obvious  reasons;  and  indeed  the  author  goes  out  of  his
way  to  describe  himself  as  a  traveller  who,  having  visited
all  parts  of  Europe  and  India,  undertook  a  journey  to
Persia  for  scientific  purposes  and  especially  geogTaphical
research.  He  expresses  thankfulness  to  God  that  he  does
not  belong  to  the  Persian  nation,  whose  faults  he  exposes
unsparingly.  He  pourtrays  himself  as  a  non-Muhammadan
open  to  conviction  on  matters  of  religion  and  associating
freely  with  all  sects.  And  at  the  conclusion  of  his  work
he  apologizes  for  his  lack  of  literary  style,  advances  as  an
excuse  the  statement  that  Persian  is  not  his  native  tongue,
and  alludes  to  a  "  treatise  written  in  his  own  language  in
French  writing "  wherein  the  matter  in  hand  is  more
eloquently  set  forth.  Now  that  any  European  should  have
been  capable  or  desirous  of  composing  such  a  work  is  on  the
face  of  it  extremely  improbable,  and  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  author  advanced  the  statements  above
alluded  to  merely  as  a  blind.  Of  the  B4bls  whom  I  have
questioned  on  the  subject  some  attribute  the  authorship
of  the  work  to  a  certain  well-known  and  widely-travelled
resident  in  the  Persian  capital,  whom,  as  he  is  still  living,  I
do  not  feel  myself  justified  in  indicating  more  particularly;
others  to  his  mtrzi'i,  or  secretary,  now  dead.  It  appears  not
improbable  that  it  was  the  joint  product  of  these  two.
Whoever  the  author  or  authors  may  have  been,  the  informa-
tion set  forth  is  so  detailed  and  so  minute  that  it  must  have
been  derived  for  the  most  part  from  persons  who  had  con-
versed with  actual  eye-witnesses  of  the  events  described,  if
not  from  eye-witnesses  themselves. The  author,  whether


TlRfKH-I-JADID.  195

he  had  really  embraced  the  B4bf  faith  or  not,  was,  on  his
showing,  a  warm  admirer  of  the  Bdb  and  his  apostles  and
disciples,  and  was  during  the  compositiou  of  his  work  in
continual  communication  with  certain  prominent  members
of  the  sect.  Yet  the  work  when  completed — perhaps  be-
cause of  the  violence  wherewith  it  denounces  the  Musulmin
clergy  and  reproaches  the  Persian  nation,  perhaps  because
of  the  slight  mention  which  it  makes  of  Beh4'u'll4h  (of
Subh-i-Ezel  it  makes  no  mention  at  all)  and  the  exaggerated
veneration  paid  to  the  Bd,b — did  not  meet  with  the  approval
of  the  B&hi  chiefs  at  Acre,  and  as  early  as  the  spring  of  1888
I  learned  in  Shirdz  that  instructions  had  been  issued  for  the
compilation  of  a  new  history  more  in  accordance  with  the
views  entertained  by  those  chiefs.  Of  these  instructions
the  history  now  offered  to  the  public  is  the  outcome.

Summary  of  the  contents  of  the
Tdrikh-i-Jadid.

Pp.  1—38". Introduction.

„ 39—40. Hdji  Seyyid  Kdzim  of  Eesht  foretells  the
approaching  '  manifestation '  and  dies.

Pp.  41 — 47.  Conversion  of  Mulld,  Huseyn  of  Bushra-
weyh.

Pp.  48 — 50.  Conversions  of  Hd,jf  Muhammad  'AH  of
Bdrfunish  ('Jendb-i-Kuddus'),  MulM  Muhammad  S4dik  of
Khurdsd,n  {'Mukaddas'),  and  others.

Pp.  51 — 55.  From  Mulld  Huseyn's  journey  to  Khurd-
sdn  to  his  entry  into  Bd,rfurilsh  with  H4jf  Muhammad  'All
and  their  combined  followers.

Pp.  56 — 114.  Prom  the  first  collision  between  the  BAbfs
and  the  Musuhndns  in  B4rfurtish  to  the  fall  of  the  Castle  of
Sheykh  Tabarsf.

Pp.  115 — 132.  Biographies  of  certain  eminent  Bdbls
who  suffered  martyrdom  in  Mdzandardn,  with  some  reflec-
tions on  the  heroism  displayed  by  the  besieged.

Pp.  133 — 155.  The  struggle  at  NMz,  and  reflections
thereon. (See  Note  H,  infra.)

1  The  pagination  refers  to  my  own  lis.,  not  to  the  British
Museum  Codex.

13—2


196  NOTE A— BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Pp.  156—163. The  siege  of  Zanjdn.

Pp.  164 — 166. Reflections  thereon.
„ 167 — 176. Account  of  a  disputation  between a
learned  Bihi  and  an  assembly  of  MusulmAn  divines.

Pp.  177 — 201.  The  decadence  of  the  Persian  empire
and  the  deterioration  of  its  people  traced  to  the  complete
ascendency  obtained  by  the  clergy,  whose  ignorance,  wicked-
ness, and  arrogance  are  unsparingly  exposed.

Pp.  202—222.  Personal  history  of  the  B^b  from  the
beginning  of  his  mission  until  his  exile  to  M4ku.

Pp.  223 — 236.  Sufficiency  of  the  testimony  given  by  a
host  of  martjrrs  of  every  class  to  the  truth  of  Bdbiism.
Objections  answered.

Pp.  237 — 240.  Personal  history  of  the  Bd.b  continued
until  his  removal  from  MAkii  to  Chihrfk.

J-

Pp.  241—243. History  of  the  'Indian  believer'  {  -^  ^

Pp.  244 — 246. History  of  Se3ryid  Baslr  the  Indian.
„ 247 — 249. Eulogy  on  the  devotion  and  self-sacri-
fice of  the  Bdbis.

Pp.  250—261.  History  of  the  'Seven  Martyrs.'  (See
Note  B,  infra!)

Pp.  262—264. Reflections  thereon.

_  „  265—277.  History  of  Kurratu'l-'Ayn.  (See  Note
Q,  infra.)

Pp.  278—280.  First  examination  of  the  Bdb  at  Tabriz.
(See  Note  M,  infra.)

Pp.  281 — 286.  Reflections  on  the  unfairness  of  the
proceedings.

Pp.  287—300.  Personal  history  of  the  BAb  until  his
martjTdom.

Pp.  301 — 305.  Review  of  former  prophetic  dispensa-
tions and  comparison  of  these  with  the  present  '  manifesta-
tion.'

Pp.  306—322.  Discussion  of  the  kind  of  proof  neces-
sary to  establish  the  truth  of  a  new  revelation,  and  reflec-
tions on  the  hard-heartedness,  obstinacy,  and  stiff-necked-
ness_  of  the  Musulmdns  in  general  and  their  clergy  in
particular,  together  mth  further  proofs  of  their  want  of


kisasu'l-'tjlama.  197

fairness  illustrated  by  additional  details  concerning  the
conference  at  Isfahan. (See  Note  J,  infra.)

Pp.  323 — 331.  The  irrational  behefs,  absurd  traditions,
and  gross  ignorance  of  the  generality  of  Slii'ite  divines.

Pp.  332 — 369.  Account  of  a  discussion  which  took
place  ia  the  author  s  presence  between  a  Babi  and  a  inujta-
hid,  and  discomfiture  of  the  latter.

Pp.  370 — 372.  Refutation  of  certain  charges  falsely
alleged  against  the  B^bis.

Pp.  373—374:. Conclusion.

4. The  Klfi-ful-'UInmu.

This  is  a  work  of  350  pages  containing  biographical
notices  of  153  eminent  Shi'ite  divines,  amongst  whom  the
author,  Mirz4  Muhammad  ibu  Suleymdn-i-Tanatabunf,
includes  himself.  It  was  published  for  the  second  time
at  Teheran  in  A.H.  1304  (a.d.  1886 — 7),  together  with  two
treatises  composed  by  Senad  Murtaza,  '  'Ilmu'l-Huda,'
which  are  included  in  the  same  volume.  The  second
biography  in  this  volume,  extending  from  p.  12  to  p.  43,  i«
devoted  to  H^ji  Mull^  Muhammad  Taki  ibn  Muhammad
al-Burgh^ni  al-Kazvini,  called  by  the  Shiites  Shalud-i-
Thdlith  ('the  Third  ^Martyr'),  and  treats  incidentally  at
some  length  of  the  Bdbis,  with  whom  the  stibjeot  of  the
memoir  in  question  came  into  such  fatal  collision.  Of  the
book  under  consideration  we  axe  here  concerned  •\vith  this
section  alone,  and  indeed  only  with  a  part  of  that.

Hdji  Mulld  Muhammad  Taki  was  the  eldest  of  three
brothers,  of  whom  the  second,  Hdji  ilull^  Muhammad  Sahh,
was  also  a  divine  and  jurisconsult,  while  the  third,  Haji
MuUi  'All,  was  first  a  disciple  of  Sheykh  Ahmad  Ahsa'i
and  afterwards  a  partisan  of  the  Bab.  Xow  Hdji  Mulld
Muhammad  Taki  detested  Shej-kh  Ahmad  and  his  doctrines,
and  was  indeed  the  iirst  amongst  the  Shiite  cierg}-  to
denounce  him  as  a  dangerotis  heretic  ;  but  if  his  detesta-
tion of  the  She^khis  was  great,  much  bitterer  and  more
violent  was  his  hatred  of  the  Babis.  The  fact  that  not
only  his  youngest  brother  Hdji  Midld  'Ali,  but  also  his
niece  and  daughter-in-law  Zam'n-Tdj  (or,  to  give  her  the
title  whereby  she  has  become  for  ever  famous,  Kurratu'l-


198  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

'Ayn),  had  embraced  the  doctrines  which  he  so  abhorred,
must  have  greatly  conduced  to  an  intensification  of  this
hatred,  which  rose  to  such  a  pitch  that,  as  we  learn  from
the  present  work,  he  was  during  the  last  year  of  his  life
chiefly  engaged  in  violent  public  denunciation  of  the  Bdb
and  his  religion.  This  cost  him  his  life ;  for  at  length
certain  BAbi's,  stung  by  his  words  into  uncontrollable  anger,
fell  upon  him  early  one  morning  as  he  was  praying  in  the
mosque,  and  with  knives  and  daggers  inflicted  on  him
eight  wounds,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  expired  two
days  later.  He  was  buried  at  Kazvfn  in  the  precincts  of
Sh^hzddd  Huseyn.

Contents  of  the  Kisasu'l-'  Ulamd  in  so  far  as  they
relate  to  the  Bdbls.

P.  20.  Hiijl  MulU  Muhammad  Takl  first  denounces
Sheykh  Ahmad  Ahsd,'f  as  a  heretic — Account  of  Sheykh
Ahmad.

'  Pp.  21—30.  Account  of  Sheykh  Ahmad  and  Hdji
Seyyid  K^zim — Exposition  and  refutation  of  their  doctrines.
(See  Note  E,  infra,  and  B.  ii,  pp_.  890—892.)

Pp.  30 — 35.  Account  of  H4ji  Muhammad  Karfm  Khd,n
of  Klrmdu — Further  remarks  on  the  Sheykhl  doctrines.

P.  36. Account  of  the  assassination  of  H4jf  Mulld

Muhammad  Taki  by  certain  BAbls  in  a.h.  1264  (a.d.  1848).

_  P.  37. Account  of  Mfrzi  'Ali  Muhammad  the  B4b—

His  diligent  attendance  at  Hd,ji  Seyyid  Kdzim's  lectures.

(See  B.  ii,  p.  894.)

P.  38.  How  the  attention  of  the  author  was  first
drawn  to  the  Biib  (see  B.  ii,  pp.  894,  895)— The  Bd,b
returns  to  Bushire  and  begins  to  practise  austerities— He
composes  a  'Kur'd,n' — The  heresy  of  his  doctrines  exposed.

P.  39.  Imprisonment  of  the  Bdb  at  Chihrlk — His  first
examination  before  the  clergy  of  Tabriz.  (See  Note  M,
infra. )

Pp.  40,  41.  Account  of  the  B4b's  examination  con-
tinued and  concluded — He  is  bastinadoed — Further  parti-
culars concerning  Hdjl  Muhammad  Karfm  Khdn.

Pp.  42,  43.  Disparagement  of  Hdji  Muhammad  Karfm
Khdn,  and  proofs  of  his  lack  of  scholarship.


KA'ANf — BUSTANf — SAJII BEY.  199


11. Other  Writings  in  Oriental  languages  -wherein

INCIDENTAL REFERENCE  TO THE BabIs  IS  MADE.

Besides  the  Persian  works  above  noticed  which  bear
directly  on  the  history  of  the  Bd,bl  movement,  we  may
observe  that  the  Persian  poet  K4'4nl  has  two  kasidas
written  to  celebrate  the  Shdh's  escape  from  the  attempt  on
his  life'.  These,  however,  as  one  would  naturally  expect,
throw  very  little  new  light  on  the  facts  of  the  case.  It  is
said  that  KA'dnl  was  at  first  disposed  to  regard  the  Bdb
with  favour,  and  that  the  kasida  beginning  : —

"  The  ensample  of  men  and  jinn  hath  appeared.
The  leader  of  these  and  those  hath  appeared,"

was  written  in  his  honour.  If  this  be  so,  it  is  by  no  means
the  only  instance  of  inconstancy  wherewith  this  talented
but  fickle  poet  can  be  taxed.

In  Arabic  there  is  an  article  on  Bd,biism  in  the  Ency-
clopaedia (^JjLJI  i ;|^)  of  Butrusu'l-Bustdnl  (Beyrout,

1881)  which_  contributes  some  important  facts  not  pre-
viously published,  but  also  contains  one  or  two  gTave
errors.  It  comprises  about  1600  words,  and  is  based  on
information  communicated  by  Seyyid  Jemd,lu'd-Dfn  al-
Afghdn.  Of  a  portion  of  this  I  published  a  translation  in
my  second  paper  on  the  Bd,bis  {J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889,
pp.  942—943).

In  Turkish  a  short  article  of  about  240  words  in  vol.  ii
of  Sdmf Bey's  Dictionnaire Universel  d'Histoire  et  de

Geographie {=rj^'i\ ^^^, Constantinople, a.h. 1307)

contains  no  new  facts,  but  several  new  errors.

1  See  infra,  Note  T.


200  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.


III. European  Accounts.

Numerous  accounts  of  the  B4b  aud  his  religion  have
been  pubhshed  in  Europe,  and  these,  so  far  as  they  are
known  to  me,  I  shall  now  enumerate  in  the  order  of  their
publication,  noting  as  far  as  possible  whence  each  work
derives  the  information  which  it  embodies.  A  mere  casual
remark  of  some  traveller  often  sheds  a  fresh  ray  of  light  on
the  matter,  or  helps  to  decide  some  doubtful  date,  and
therefore  I  shall  include  in  my  list  several  works  wherein
only  a  few  paragraphs  are  devoted  to  the  Bdbis  ;  while  on
the  other  hand  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  refer  to  all
of  the  numerous  articles  on  the  subject  which  have  appeared
in  various  encyclopaedias  and  magazines,  since  these  for
the  most  part  merely  repeat  more  or  less  fully  and
eloquently  the  facts  recorded  by  other  writers.

[a.d.  1851.]  Bcib  tmd  seine  Secte  in  Persien,  by  A.  H.
Wright  of  the  American  Mission  at  Uriimiyya,  Persia,
contributed  by  J.  Perkins,  also  of  the  aforesaid  Mission,
to  the  German  Oriental  Society,  and  published  in  Vol.  v
of  the  Z.  D.  M.  G.  (Leipzig,  1851,  pp.  384—385).  From  a
note  appended  by  the  Editor  we  learn  that  the  MS.  of  this
article,  dated  March  31,  1851,  was  forwarded  with  a  letter
from  Mr  Perkins  dated  March  29,  and  that  another  copy
of  the  same  article  was  sent  to  the  American  Oriental
Society.  From  the  Journal  of  the  last-named  society  it
appears  that  this  paper  was  read  at  one  of  their  meetings,
but,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  it  was  not  published,  so  that
we  have  it  only  in  its  German  dress.  This  document  is  of
capital  importance,  and  I  have  more  than  once  had  occasion
to  refer  to  it  in  my  notes.

[a.d.  1856.]  Glimpses  of  Life  and  Manners  in  Persia,
by  Lady  Shell  (London,  1856).  The  authoress  of  this  work
also  was  resident  in  Persia  during  the  B4bi  troubles,  and
much  valuable  information  is  supplied  by  her.  That  this
information  was  derived  for  the  most  part,  if  not  entirely,
from  bitter  enemies  of  the  new  faith,  or  in  other  words
from  persons  attached  to  the  Persian  Court,  is  sufficiently


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS.  201

evident.  Some  of  the  statements  advanced  seem  to  be
traceable  to  one  or  other  of  the  Court  historians  whose
works  have  been  already  noticed.  Others — especially  one
to  the  effect  that  the  Bdb,  while  resident  at  Baghdad  or
KerbeU,  was  arrested  by  the  Turkish  authorities,  and  only
saved  from  execution  at  their  hands  by  the  intervention  of
the  Persian  consul  (p.  177) — stand  alone,  and  are  unsup-
ported by  other  testimony.  What  relates  to  the  Bdbls  in
this  work  is  as  follows  :

P.  176. Origin  of  the  sect.

P.  177. Personal  history  of  the  Bdb  until  his  deatL

P.  178. Confessions  of  ex-B4bis.

P.  179. B4bi  doctrines  exposed.

P.  180.  Bibis  compared  to  Assassins  and  Mazdaldtes
— M4zandar4n  and  Yezd  insurrections — Execution  of  the
'  Seven  Martyrs.'

P.  181. Rising  at  Zanjdn— Probabilitj'  that  the  Bdbf

faith  is  spreading.

*  *  *

Pp.  273—282.  Accounts  of  the  attempt  on  the  Shih',-
life  and  of  the  B4bf  executions  which  followed  it,  the
latter  translated  from  the  '  Teheran  Grazette  '  in  which  it
appeared.

[a,d.  1857.]  Journal  of  Two  Years  Tracel  in  Persia.,
Ceylon,  etc.,  by  Piobert  B.  M.  Binning,  Esq.,  of  the  ]*ladras
Ci^Tl  Service  (London,  1857,  2  vols.).  Some  few  pages  of
the  twentieth  chapter  of  this  work  (vol.  i,  pp.  403 — 408)
are  devoted  to  the  Bdbis.  Of  aU  accounts  which  I  have
read,  not  excluding  those  given  by  the  Musuhndn  historians,
this  is  the  most  hostile,  the  most  unfair — I  had  almost  said
the  most  hbellous.  The  writer,  not  content  with  Ukening
the  B^bi's  to  Mormons  and  Sadducees  and  describing  their
Founder  as  a  kind  of  oriental  .Joe  Smith,  casts  aspersions
on  the  B4b's  honesty,  and  almost  accuses  him  of  theft  in
so  many  words.  This  should  not,  perhaps,  cause  us  much
surprise  in  one  who  considers  that  the  Gospel  of  Christ
would  be  best  commended  to  the  people  of  Persia  by  the
annexation  of  their  country  by  some  "  Christian  State,"
and  who  thinks  that  King  Niishirvin  acted  "very  properly"
in  ordering  the  massacre  of  ]\Iazdak  and  his  adherents. In


202  NOTE A— BIBLIOGRAPHY.

point  of  accuracy,  too,  this  account  leaves  much  to  be  desired.
Thus  the  author,  writing  in  1850—1851,  describes  the  Nfrfe
insurrection  and  the  death  of  Seyyid  YahyA  as  having
occurred  "about  five  years  ago,"  and  states  that  the  B4b
himself  travelled  into  IVMzandariin,  evidently  confusing  him
with  Muhammad  'All  of  BMuriish.  _  Yet,  open  to  criticism
as  it  is,  Mr  Binning's  narrative  has  its  value,  and,  as  I  have
shown  above  (p.  187),  helps  to  determine  some  doubtful
points  of  chronology.  Mr  Binning  appears  to  have  left
Persia  by  way  of  Bushire  on  February  7,  1852,  having
learned,  almost  at  the  moment  of  his  departure,  the  tragic
fate  of  Mirz^  Takf  Kh^n  Amir-Nisdm,  which  befel  in
January  of  that  year.

[a.d.  1864,  65.]  In  the  Bulletin  de  I'Academie  Imperiale
de  St  Petersbourg,  dated  December  22,  1864  (vol.  viii,  pp.
247—248),  is  a  most  valuable  article  by  Dorn  on  certain
B4bi  Mss.  belonging  to  the  St  Petersburg  collection.  One
of  these — described  as  "  the  Koran  of  the  B4bis  " — derives
special  value  from  the  fact  that  it  was  written  by  the  Bdb's
own  secretary,  and  by  him  placed  in  European  hands.
A  portion  of  this  text  given  by  Dorn  as  a  specimen  was
pronounced  by  Subh-i-Ezel  (to  whom  I  submitted  it)  an

extract  from  the  ^00^  ()/iV«TOes('*[,^')/ 1  .-jLO'  The  other
MS.  described  is  a  history  of  the  M4zandardn  insurrection
composed  in  the  M4zandard,ni  dialect,  and  was  obtained  by
Dorn  during  his  sojourn  in  that  province  in  1860.  From
the  abstract  given  of  its  contents  it  would  appear  to  be  of
the  highest  interest,  even  though  it  be  not  in  all  respects
worthy  of  credence.  A  short  postscript  referring  to  the
authenticity  of  these  two  mss.  is  added  in  the  Bulletin  for
February  8,  1865.  Concerning  the  occurrences  in  Mdzand-
ardn,  Dorn  also  refers  to  a  previous  article  of  his  at  p.  353
of  vol.  iv  of  the  Bulletin  {Melanges  Asiatiques,  vol.  iv,
p.  442),  but  this  I  have  not  seen.

[a.d.  1865.]  Les  Religions  et  les  Philosophies  dans  I'Asie
Centrale,  by  M.  le  Comte  de  Gobineau  (Paris,  1865  and
1866).  This  most  brilliant,  most  graphic,  and  most  charm-
ing work  is  too  well  known  to  need  any  detailed  description.


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS.  203

Though  largely  based  on  the  Lisanu'l-Mulh's  account  of
the  B4bi  movement,  it  embodies  also  many  statements
derived  from  B4bf  sources  ;  and  not  only  are  the  facts  thus
obtained  sifted  with  rare  judgment  and  arranged  with
consummate  skill,  but  the  characters  and  scenes  of  this
stirring  drama  are  depicted  in  a  manner  so  fresh,  so  vivid,
and  so  lifelike  that  the  work  in  question  must  ever  remain
a  classic  unsurpassed  and  indeed  unapproached  in  the
subject  whereof  it  treats.  The  account  of  the  B4bi  books
and  doctrines  (occupying  50  pages)  is  of  the  utmost  value,
being  based  on  B4bl  MSS.  (now  in  the  Biblioth^que  Nationale
at  Paris)  obtained  by  the  author ;  and  the  translation  of

the Book  of  Precepts (oljCa-l i_)LS^))  which  forms  an

Appendix  of  82  pages,  is  still  the  only  complete  translation
into  any  European  language  of  a  B4bl  sacred  book.  Of  the
543  pages  composing  this  volume,  299  are  devoted  to  the
Bdbis.

[a.d.  1865.]  Persien.  Das  Land  und  Heine  Bewohner ,\iY
Dr  Jakob  Eduard  Polak,  formerly  Physician  to  the  Sh4h  of
Persia  and  Professor  at  the  Medical  College  of  Teherdn
(Leipzig,  1865,  2  vols.).  This  work,  embodying  as  it  does
researches  into  every  phase  of  Persian  life  made  by  one
whose  position  gave  him  rare  opportunities  of  observing
facts  which  his  scientific  training  enabled  him  to  describe
with  precision  and  accuracy,  is  also  of  the  highest  value.
What  relates  to  the  B4bls  occupies  only  four  pages  (pp.
350 — 353)  of  the  first  volume.  Of  these  four  pages  the
contents  are  briefly  as  follows : —

P.  350.  The  B^b  and  his  teaching — Its  rapid  spread,
especially  amongst  Seyyids,  men  of  learning,  and  women  of
the  most  cultured  class — Kurratu'l-'Ayn — Alleged  use  of
narcotics  such  as  hashish  by  the  B4bls — Determination
of  the  Amir-Nizdm  to  put  the  BAb  to  death.

P.  351.  Execution  of  the  B4b— Insurrections  in
Mdzandar^n  and  Zanjd,n.  [Both  of  these  risings  are  here
described  as  having  taken  place  subsequently  to  the  Bd,b's
death,  whereas  in  fact  the  former  had  terminated  and  the
latter  was  in  progress  when  this  event  occurred.] — Attempt
on  the  Shd,h's  life  in  1852.


204  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

P.  352.  Attempt  on  the  Shell's  life— Persons  suspected
— "Macchiavellian  means"  adopted  for  the  extirpation  of
the  B4bis— H^jl  'All  Khdn  the  Farrash-BdsM—B.\s,  cruel
disposition — Partition  of  the  B^bl  prisoners.

P.  353.  Horrible  cruelties  perpetrated  on  the  B4bis
— Their  extraordinary  fortitude — The  tortures  inflicted
on  the  beautiful  Kurratu'l-'Ayn,  and  the  "superhuman
courage"  wherewith  she  endured  her  lingering  death.  [Of
this  execution  Dr  Polak  was  himself  a  witness.] — Persecu-
tions in  the  provinces — Activity  of  the  BAbis  continued,
though  concealed.

[a.d.  1865.]  Journey  from  London  to  Persepolis,  by  John
Ussher,  F.KGr.S.  (London,  1865).  This  work  contains
(pp.  627 — 629)  some  mention  of  the  B4bis,  and  depicts
in  vivid  colours  the  reign  of  terror  which  succeeded  the
attempt  on  the  Sh4h's  life.  A  portion  of  this  description
is  quoted  in  a  footnote  on  p.  120,  supra.

[a.d.  1866.]  Bab  et  les  Babis,  an  article — or  rather  a
series  of  five  articles — communicated  to  the  Journal  Asia-
tiqiie  for  1866  by  Mirza  Kazem-Beg.  The  Journal  Askdiqm
for  each  year  being  divided  into  two  volumes  in  the  second
of  which  the  pagination  is  recommenced,  I  have,  for  the
sake  of  brevity,  denoted  all  that  portion  of  Mirza  Kazem-
Beg's  article  which  occurs  in  vol.  vii  (6th  series)  by  the
abbreviation  'Kazem-Beg  i,'  and  that  which  occurs  in  vol.
viii  by  'Kazem-Beg  ii,'  whenever  I  have  had  occasion  to
refer  to  them.  The  whole  article  amounts  to  251  pages
distributed  in  the  two  volumes  as  follows : —

Vol.  vii  (sixifeme  s6rie),  pp.  329 — 384.  Preface,  and
biography  of  the  Bd,b  in  16  sections.

Pp.  457—522.  The  Sheykhl  doctrines.  History  of
the  Bdbfs,  until  the  final  suppression  of  the  M^zandardn
insurrection.

Vol.  viii  (sixifeme  s^rie),  pp.  196 — 252.  History  of  the
Bdbls  concluded.  (Insurrections  of  Zanjd,n  and  Niriz,
attempt  on  the  Shdh,  persecution  of  a.d.  1852.)

Pp.  357—400.  The  doctrine  of  the  Bdbls,  and  its
antecedents.

Pp. 473—507. Two  letters  from  a B^bl Seyyid—


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS.  205

Changes  in  the  original  doctrine  of  the  B4b  wrought  by  his
followers — Translations  from  a  Bd.bi  work  of  a  devotional
character.  [This  work,  as  I  have  attempted  to  show
on  pp.  897 — 899  of  my  second  paper  on  the  B4bls  in  the
/.  B.  A.  S.,  is  none  other  than  the  Ziy&rat-nama — the  so-
called  "R^cit  du  P^lerinage" — composed  by  the  B4b.] —
Conclusion.

The  sources  from  which  Mirza  Kazem-Beg  drew  his
information  are,  as  stated  by  himself  in  a  note  on  p.  332
(vol.  vii),  the  following  : —

(a) The  Ndsikliu't-Tawdrikh.

(13)  The  MS.  History  in  the  Md,zandard,nl  dialect  described
by  Dorn  (see  p.  202,  siqwa).  Its  author  calls  himself  Shey-
khiil-'Ajam.  Kazem-Beg  describes  the  work  in  question  as
"fuU  of  inexactitudes,"  "of  no  historic  value,"  and  "curious
only  because  composed  in  the  dialect  of  M4zandard,n."

(y)  A  memoir  on  the  Bdbis  by  M.  S6vruguin,  who
resided  for  twenty  years  in  Persia.

(8)  Another  memoir  by  M.  Mochenin,  who  was  in
Persia  at  the  time  of  the  B4bi  troubles,  and  who  (vol.  vii,
p.  371)  was  so  fortunate  as  to  be  at  Chihrlk  in  June  1850,
and  even,  as  it  would  appear,  to  see  the  B4b  addressing  the
multitudes  who  flocked  thither.

Some  of  Kazem-Beg's  dates  and  facts  I  have  already
had  occasion  to  criticize  (though  in  almost  all  such  cases  it
is  the  Ndsikhu't-Taw&rtkh  which  is  ultimately  responsible) ;
neither  can  I  concur  in several of  the  views  which  he

advances  (especially  his  estimate  of  the  characters  of  Ak^

Seyyid  Huse)Ta  of  Yezd  and  Aki,  Seyyid  Yahyd  of  D^rdb
and  his  theory  of  the  passive  part  taken  by  the  B^b  in  the
formation  of  the  new  doctrines);  but,  whatever  new  light
further  research  may  throw  on  the  subject  treated  of  by
Mirza  Kazem-Beg,  there  is  no  doubt  that  his  work  will
always  remain  one  of  the  chief  authorities  thereon.

[a.d.  i866.]  History  of  Persia  from  ihe  beginning  of  the
Nineteenth  Century  to  the  Year  1858,  by  Robert  drant
Watson,  formerly  attached  to  Her  Majesty's  Legation  at
the  Court  of  Persia  (London,  1866).  This  work  is  also  of
the  utmost  value,  since  the  author,  from  the  position  which


206  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

he  occupied,  had  at  his  disposal  the  best  means  for  arriving
at  the  truth  of  matters  of  historical  fact  (especially  of
chronology),  and  was,  moreover,  by  no  means  disposed
unreservedly  to  follow  the  Musulmd,n  historians,  of  whose
unreliability  he  was  well  aware.  What  refers  to  the  B^bls
in  this  work  is  as  follows  : —

Pp.  347 — 352.  Origin  of  the  movement— Early  life  of
the  B4b — The  treatment  experienced  by  him  at  the  hands
of  Huseyn  Kh4n — Edicts  against  the  Bd,bfa.

*  *  *

Pp.  360 — 362.  Rising  at  Yezd  (not  described  in  this
passage  as  B4bi).

P.  385. Yezd  rising  described  as  a  Bd,bl  movement.

P.  386. Account  of  the  '  Seven  Martyrs.'

P.  387. Siege  of  Zanj4n.

Pp.  388—392. Execution  of  the  B^b— Fall  of  Zanjdn.

*  *  »

Pp.  407—410.  Attempt  on  Shdh's  life— Executions  of
B^bfs.

[a.d.  1867.]  Meine  Wanderungen  und  Eiiebnisse  in
Persien,  by  Hermann  Vd,mbdry  (Pest,  1867).  This  well-
known  traveller,  a  propos  of  a  conversation  which  he  had
during  his  passage  through  M^zandardn  with  some  of  the
inhabitants  of  'Ah-4b4d,  in  whose  minds  the  recollection  of
the  siege  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi  was  still  fresh,  gives  a  disserta-
tion on  the  B4bis  which  extends  from  p.  286  to  p.  303
of  this  work.  This  account  seems  to  be  based  ahnost
entirely  on  what  be  was  able  to  learn  from  the  Persians,
though  Gobineau's  work  is  occasionally  quoted.  The
details  here  given  concerning  Suleym4n  Khdn's  martyrdom
(which  differ  somewhat  from  those  embodied  in  other
traditions)  will  be  referred  to  in  Note  T,  infra.

[a.d.  1868.]  Geschichte  der herrschenden  Ideen  des  Mams,
by  Baron  Alfred  von  Kremer  (Leipzig,  1868).  Twenty
pages  of  this  work  (pp._  202—222)  are  devoted  to  Bab  mid,
seine  Lehre,  which  article  constitutes  sect,  vii  of  Book  ii.
One  of  the  B4bi  mss.  in  the  British  Museum  (Or.  3114)
was,  as  appears  from  a  note  on  the  first  page,  bought  from


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS.  207

Baron  von  Kremer,  and  contains  a  short  note  in  pencil
in  his  handwriting,  but  it  does  not  seem  that  he  made
use  of  this  in  the  compilation  of  the  article  in  question.

[a.d.  1869.]  L'Annee  PhUosophiqim  for  this  year  con-
tains an  article  by  F.  Pillon  referred  to  with  approbation
in  the  last  edition  of  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  (vol.
iii,  s.  V.  Babi).

[a.d.  1872.]  Essays  und  Studien,  by  Dr  Hermann  Ethd
(Berlin,  1872).  Of  this  work  61  pages  (pp.  301—362)  are
occupied  by  an  essay  on  the  Bdb  and  his  doctrine  entitled
Ein  moderner  Prophet  des  Morgenlandes  and  based  on  the
works  of  Gobineau,  Kazem-Beg,  Vdmbdry,  and  Perkins.
This  essay  is  written  in  a  sympathetic  spirit,  and  the  Bdbf
doctrines  are  expounded  in  a  very  lucid  and  logical
manner.

[a.d.  1873.]  The  Journal  Aslatique  for  this  year  (7th
series,  vol.  ii,  pp.  393 — 395)  contains  an  article  "Sur  les
sectes  dans  le  Kurdistan"  by  M.  T.  Gilbert  wherein  is
included  a  short  notice  of  the  B4bis.  After  briefly  de-
scribing the  beliefs  attributed  to  them  by  their  neighbours,
M.  Gilbert  estimates  the  number  of  those  settled  in
Kurdistto  at  about  five  thousand.

[a.d.  1874.]  Persia — Ancient  and  Modern,  by  John
Piggot,  F.S.A.,  F.G.S.,  F.R.G.S.  (London,  1874).  The
account  of  the  Bdbi  movement  given  in  this  work  is  full  of
inaccuracies.  Thus,  on  p.  104,  speaking  of  the  Bd,bis  up
in  arms  at  Yezd  in  May  1850,  the  writer  says,  "failing  in
this"  (i.e.  their  attempt  to  capture  the  citadel)  "they
retired  to  Zinjan";  and  he  further  describes  the  B^b  as
having  been  present  in  person  amongst  the  besieged  in
that  city,  and  as  having  been  captured  "in  one  of  the
assaults  of  the  Shah's  troops"  and  executed  there.

[a.d.  1874.]  Gurrei-ul-Eyn:  Ein  Bild  aus  Persiens
Neuzeit,  by  Marie  von  NajmAjer  (Vienna,  1874).  This  is  a
poem  in  six  cantos  in  honour  of  the  Bd,bi  heroine  Kurratu
'l-'Ayn,  which,  if  not  possessing  much  historic  value,  is  at


208  NOTE A — BIBLIOGRAPHY.

least  a  graceful  and  pleasing  tribute  to  the  memory  of  ii
noble  woman.

[a.d.  1875.]  Journey  in  the  Caucasus,  Persia,  and
Tti/rhey  in  Asia,  by  Lieut.  Baron  Max  von  Thielmann,
translated  into  English  by  Charles  Henneage,  P.R.G.S.
(London,  1875,  2  vols.).  The  first  volume  of  this  work
contains  (at  p.  262)  a  brief  reference  to  the  Bfibfs  a  propus
of  Mun-idism!  The  second  volume  contains  (at  p.  .'^2)  an
allusion  to  the  B4b's  execution  in  the  citadel  {arg)  of
Tabrfz,  which  event  is  wrongly  described  as  having  occurred
in  A.D.  1843;  and  (at  pp.  90 — 91)  an  interesting  account  of
a  Bd.bl  named  H4jl  Muhammad  Ja'far'  who  was  the  author's
fellow-traveller  from  Tabriz  to  Mosul.

[a.d.  1877.]  CollectUms  Scientifiques  de  VInstitut  dfs
Lawjnes  Ovivntales,  vol.  i,  Maniiscrits  Arahes,  by  Baron
Victor  Rosen  (St  I'etersburg,  1886).  To  this  most  valuable
contribution  to  our  knowledge  I  have  had  occasion  to  refer
frequently,  both  in  my  second  paper  on  the  B^bis  (pp.  886,
905—909,  954—960,  &c.),  and  in  the  present  work.  Of
the  two  BAbi  mss.  described,  the  first  is  conjectured  by
Baron  Rosen  (and  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  his
conjecture  is  right)  to  be  the  Commentary  on  tlie  Sura  of

.Tosej)h  (..Ji^aj *aj 3.* ,-Jij)  composed  by  the  Btib  at  the

beginning  of  his  mission ;  the  second,  concerning  which  I  was
unable  to  arrive  at  a  definite  conclusion  in  my  second  paper
im  the  B4bfs  (p.  954 — 958),  has  since  been  proved  beyond  all
(Question  to  be  a  copy  of  Beh4's  Sura-i-Heykal,  whereof  the
Epistles  to  the  Kings  (including  the  Epistle  to  the  Sh4h,
a  complete  translation  of  which  is  given  in  the  present
work^)  form  a  portion.  Baron  Rosen's  convincing  arguments
(which  he  has  kindly  allowed  me  to  see  in  prof)f)  are
prefixed  to  the  text  of  the  ms.,  which  will  be  published  ///

'  Baron  von  Thielmann's  fellow-travellor  is  very  probably
identical  with  the  HAji  Muhammad  Ja'far  mentioned  on  p.  100,
supra,  and  in  note  1  on  the  same  page.

2  See  pp.  108 — 151,  supra,  and  Note  X,  in/ra.  The  latter
contains  a  translation  of  that  portion  of  the  Arabic  exordium
which  is  not  cited  in  the  Persian  text.


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS.  209

extenso in vol. vi of the Collections Scientifiques  dx.,
shortly  to  appear  (p.  145  ei  seq.).

[a.d.  1879.]  The  Deutsche  Rundschau  (vol.  xviii,  pp.
284 — 291)  contains  an  article  entitled  Orientalischer  Social-
ismus  by  Professor  T.  Noldeke,  in  which  the  tenets  of  the
Bdbfs  are  briefly  discussed,  and  compared  with  those  of  the
Mazdakites.

[a.d.  1886.]  Collections  Scientifiques  &c.,  vol.  iii,  Manu-
scrits  Persans,  by  Baron  Rosen  (St  Petersburg,  1886).
This  volume,  equally  valuable  with  the  other,  contains
descriptions  of  mss.  of  the  Persian  Beydn  (pp.  1 — 32)  and

the  tk&n  (pp.  33—51).

[a.d.  1887.]  The  Revue  Critique  d'Histoire  et  de  Litte-
ratwre  for  April  18th  of  this  year  contains  (pp.  297 — 298)
a  review  of  Baron  Rosen's  Manuscrits  Persans  by  M.  E.
Fagnan.  Special  notice  is  taken  of  the  B4bi  mss.  described
by  Baron  Rosen,  and  some  valuable  information  is  given
concerning  the  five  Bdbl  mss.  brought  by  Gobineau  from
Persia,  which,  on  the  death  of  their  owner,  were  bought  by
the  Biblioth^que  Nationale.

[a.d.  1887.1  Haifa,  or  Life  in  Modern  Palestine,  by
Laurence  Oliphant  (Edinburgh  and  London,  1887).  This
work  consists  of  a  series  of  letters  or  essays  on  different
subjects  connected  with  the  Holy  Land,  of  which  the
twenty-first,  entitled  "the  Babs  and  their  Prophet"  (pp.
103 — 107),  gives  an  account  of  a  visit  paid  by  the  writer  to
one  of  Behd's  gardens  in  the  vicinity  of  Acre,  together
with  such  information  as  to  the  history  of  the  Bdb  and  the
Bdbis  and  the  personal  character  and  claims  of  Beh^  as  he
was  able  to  collect.  This  account  is  very  noteworthy,
since  it  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  first  published  notice  of
Behd  and  the  Bdbf  colony  at  Acre.  Several  erroneous
statements  are  made,  especially  one  to  the  effect  that  Behd,
"is  visible  only  to  women  or  men  of  the  poorest  class,"  and
that  "his  own  disciples  who  visit  him  are  only  allowed
a  glimpse  of  his  august  back."  I  myself,  during  the  week
which I spent  at Acre (April 13th— 20th, 1890), was

B.  14


210  NOTE A— BIBLIOGRAPHY.

admitted  to  the  august  presence  four  times,  each  interview
lasting  about  20  minutes ;  besides  which  on  one  occasion  I
saw  Behi  walking  in  his  garden  of  Janayn  surrounded  by  a
dozen  or  so  of  his  chief  disciples.  Not  a  day  passes  but
numerous  Bdbis  of  all  classes  are  permitted  to  wait  upon
him.

[a.d.  1887.]  Note  sur  trois  ouvrages  Bdbis  communi-
cated by  M.  Clement  Huart  to  the  Journal  Asiatique  for
1887  (eighth  series,  vol.  x,  pp.  133—144).  Of  the  first
of  the  three  mss.  described  I  submitted  an  extract  to
Subh-i-Ezel,  who  pronounced  it  to  be  (as  M.  Huart  had
conjectured)  from  his  own  work  the  Kitdb-i-Nur  ('Book
of  Light'),  or  rather  from  one  of  the  two  works  which  go
by  that  name.  The  translation  of  Subh-i-Ezel's  words
(contained  in  a  letter  written  at  the  end  of  September  1889)
will  be  found  in  Note  TJ  infra.  The  other  two  mss.  de-
scribed by  M.  Huart  appear  to  be  from  the  same  source.
Baron  Rosen  alludes  to  another  article  about  these  mss.  by
M.  Huart  in  the  Revue  de  I'Histoire  des  Religions  (vol.
xviii,  p.  279 — 296),  which  I  have  not  seen.

[a.d.  1889.]  La  Religion  de  Bab,  a  little  volume  of  64
pages,  also  by  M.  Huart,  forming  one  of  the  series  known
as  the  BibliotKique  Orientale  Elzevirienne  (Paris,  1889).
This  contains  some  translations  from  the  above  mss.  The
historical  portion  supplies  us  with  no  new  facts.

[a.d.  1889.]  The  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society
[New  Series]  vol.  xxi  contains  my  two  papers  on  the
B4bfe,  whereof  the  first  (throughout  this  work  referred  to
as  B.  i)  is  entitled  The  Bdbis  of  Persia.  I.  Sketch  of  their
History  and  Personal  Experiences  amongst  them,  and  the
second  (referred  to  as  B.  ii)  The  Bdbis  of  Persia.  II.
Their  Literature  and  Doctrines.  These  two  papers  embody
the  results  of  my  investigations  on  this  subject  during  the
year  which  I  spent  in  Persia  (1887 — 1888).

[a.d.  1889.]  Baron  Rosen's  Zapiski  (vol.  iv,  parts  1  and
2,  pp.  112 — 114)  contains  a  short  account  of  four  B4bi
works  recently  brought  to St Petersburg. These  four


EUROPEAN  ACCOUNTS.  211

works  are: — (1)  A  MS.  of  the  jlil  ; (2)  A  copy  of  the

Bombay  lithographed  edition  of  the  oiil ;  (3)  A  MS.  of  the

^^^1  >_>b^  (which  work  I  wrongly  named J^\  ^  J  in

my  papers  on  the  Bdbls  in  the  J.  R.  A.  S.) ; (4)  A  MS.

of  the  ilj.UI  Ijj^  (or  (Jxa  *aj^). A  much  fuller

description  of  all  these  will  be  found  in  vol.  vi  of  the
Collections  Scientifiqties  when  it  appears.  See  immediately
below.

[To  appear  shortly.]  Collections  Scientifiques,  vol.  vi,
by  Baron  Rosen.  Although  this  volume  is  not  yet  pub-
lished, the  kindness  of  the  learned  author  in  sending  me
the  proof-sheets  as  they  were  printed  off  has  enabled  me
to  make  reference  to  it  when  occasion  required.  It  will
contain,  amongst  much  other  valuable  matter,  the  complete
text  of  the  Sura-i-Heyhal.

See  also  articles  in  the  Encyclopwdia  Brltannica  s.v.
Bdbi  (vol.  iii,  1875,  pp.  180 — 181),  Persia,  Modern  History
(vol.  xviii,  1885,  pp.  650 — 651),  and  Sunnites  and  SM'ites
(vol.  xxii,  1887,  p.  665) ;  and  articles  in  the  following
periodicals: — Contemporary  Review  (vol.  xi,  p.  581;  vol.
xii,  p.  245),  Chambers'  Journal  (vol.  xxix,  p.  45),  All  the
Year  Round  (vol.  xxii,  p.  149),  Hours  at  Home  (vol.  viii,
p.  210),  and  The  Nation  (vol.  ii,  p.  793).


NOTE  B.
The  Martyrdom  of  Mirza  Seyyid  'Ali  the  Bab's

MATERNAL  UnCLE  AMONGST  THE  'SeVEN  MaRTYRS.'

"This  year,"  says  Lady  Shell  writing  in  September
1850,  "seven  Babees  were  executed  at  Tehran  for  an
alleged  conspiracy  against  the  life  of  the  Prime  Minister.
Their  fate  excited  general  sympathy,  for  every  one  knew
that  no  criminal  act  had  been  committed,  and  suspected
the  accusation  to  be  a  pretence. Besides  this  Babeeism

14—2


212  NOTE B — MfRZA SEYYID 'ALI

had  spread  in  Tehran  too.  They  died  with  the  utmost
firmness.  Previously  to  decapitation  they  received  an
offer  of  pardon,  on  the  condition  of  reciting  the  Kelema,  or
creed,  that  Mahommed  is  the  Prophet  of  God.  It  was
rejected,  and  these  visionaries  died  steadfast  in  their  faith.
The  Persian  minister  was  ignorant  of  the  maxim  that
persecution  was  prosel3d;ism ' ".  Amongst  these  seven — 'the
Seven  Martyrs '  as  they  are  called  by  the  B^bls — was  the
B4b's  uncle  Hiiji  Mlrz4  Seyyid  'All.  The  other  sufferers
were  Hijl  Mull4  Isma'il  of  Kum,  Mirzd  Kurbin  'All  the
dervish,  Ak^  Seyyid  Huseyn  of  Turshlz  the  mujtahid,
H4ji  MulU'Naki  of  Kirin^n,  Mlrzd  Muhammad  Huseyn  of
Tabriz,  and  Mulld,  S^dik  of  Mar^gha.  Of  their  martyrdom
the  T&rikh-i-Jadid  gives  a  long  and  touching  account,  oi
which  I  here  append  an  abridgement.

What  led  to  this  tragic  event  was,  as  stated  by  Lady
Shell,  a  report  conveyed  to  Mirz4  Takl  Khdn  the  Prime
Minister  that  the  B^bis  in  Teherdn  meditated  a  rising.
Thirty-eight  persons  suspected  of  belonging  to  the  obnoxious
sect  were  therefore  arrested  and  cast  into  prison.  After  a
few  days  it  was  decided  that  all  of  these  who  would  consent
to  renounce  or  repudiate  their  connection  with  the  B4b  and
his  doctrines  should  be  released,  but  that  those  who  refused
to  do  so  should  suffer  death.

When  this  news  was  brought  to  the  prisoners,  Hdji
Mull4  Isma'il  of  Kum,  who  was  one  of  the  earliest  believers
and  who  had  been  present  at  the  conference  at  Badasht
[see  Gobineau,  pp.  180 — 184],  arose  and  addressed  his
fellow-captives,  announcing  his  own  intention  of  standing
firm  in  the  faith  even  unto  death,  and  exhorting  others
like-minded  with  himself  and  not  hindered  by  any  im-
pediment to  follow  his  example,  "  for,"  said  he,  "  if  we  do
not  show  forth  the  religion  of  His  Highness  the  Kuim,
who  then  will  show  it  forth  ? "  At  the  same  time  he
declared  that  those  whose  faith  was  weak,  or  who  were
prevented  by  domestic  ties  from  freely  laying  down  their
lives,  must  judge  for  themselves  as  to  the  duty  incumbent
upon  them,  and  decide  whether  they  were  justified  in
making  a  formal  renunciation  of  the  Bdb's  doctrine.

1  Lady  Shell's  Life  and  Manners  in  Persia,  pp.  180 — 181.


THE SEVEN MARTYRS.  213

Accordingly  of  the  thirty-eight  prisoners  seven  (in-
cluding H4jl  Mulld  Isma'il)  determined  to  adopt  the  more
courageous  course,  while  the  others  for  various  reasons
were  not  prepared  to  forfeit  their  lives,  and  decided  to
recant.  The  latter  were  therefore  released :  the  former
were  led  out  to  die.

In  spite  of  the  wide-spread  sympathy  felt  for  the
sufferers  there  were  not  lacking  wretches  to  deride  and
mock  them  as  they  were  led  forth  to  the  place  of  execu-
tion'. Some  of  these  threw  stones  at  them ;  others  con-
fined themselves  to  abuse  and  raillery,  crying  out,  "  These
are  Bdbfs  and  madmen."  Thereupon  H4jf  MuUd  Isma'il
turned  towards  them  and  said,  "  Yes,  we  are  Bdbls ;  but
mad  we  are  not.  By  God,  0  people,  it  is  for  your  awakening
and  your  enlightenment  that  we  have  foregone  life,  wealth,
wife,  and  child,  and  have  shut  our  eyes  to  the  world  and
its  citizens,  that  perchance  ye  may  be  warned  and  may
escape  from  uncertainty  and  error,  that  ye  may  fall  to
making  enquiry,  that  ye  may  recognize  the  Truth  as  is
meet,  and  that  ye  may  no  longer  be  veiled  therefrom."

Now  when  they  were  come  to  the  place  of  execution,
one  came  to  Hdjf  MuUd  Isma'il  and  said,  "Such  an  one  of
your  friends  will,  on  condition  of  your  recanting,  give  a
sum  of  money  in  order  that  they  may  not  kill  you.  To
save  your  life  what  harm  is  there  in  saying  merely  '  I  am
not  a  Bdbl'?"  To  this,  however,  ffijl  MulU  Isma'il
would  by  no  means  consent ;  and,  when  greatly  importuned,
he  drew  himself  up  and  said,

\_ ' ja**.^  Jo  **w ^  _  ■ . .  ■  a  \ (_^  a.) ^ *.  I " '  ^ y &'Ji^

"  0  zephyr !  Say  from  me  to  Ismd'lP  destined  for  sacrifice,
'  To  return  alive  from  the  street  of  the  Friend  is  not  the
condition  of  love.' "

1  This,  as  I  have  heard,  was  the  square  called  Sabz-i-Meyddn,
adjoining  the  northern  limit  of  the  bazaars,  but  according  to  the
T&rihh-i-Jadid  the  execution  took  place  in  the  Meyddn-i-Shah.

2  According  to  the  Muhammadans  it  was  Ishmael  [Ismd'fl]  not
Isaac  [Is-hdk]  whom  Abraham  designed  for  a  sacrifice  to  God.


214  NOTE B — MfEZA SEYYID 'ALf.

Then  he  took  off  his  turban  and  said  to  the  executioner,
"  Go  on  with  thy  work;  "  and  the  latter,  filled  with  amaze-
ment, struck  the  fatal  blow.

The  next  victim  was  Mfrz^  Kurb^n-'Ali  the  dervish,  an
old  man  highly  respected  and  beloved  of  all,  who  had  spent
the  last  night  in  prison  in  exhorting  and  encouraging  his
comrades  and  reciting  verses  appropriate  to  their  condition.
So  high  was  the  consideration  in  which  he  was  held  that
the  Shah's  mother  exerted  her  influence  with  her  son  to
have  him  pardoned,  declaring  that  it  was  impossible  that
he  could  be  a  Bdbf.  So,  as  he  stood  there  awaiting  death,
messengers  came  from  the  palace  to  give  him  another
chance  of  saving  his  life.  "  Thou  art  a  dervish,"  said  they,
"and  art  a  man  of  excellence  and  virtue:  they  have
thrown  suspicion  upon  thee,  but  thou  art  not  of  this
misguided  people."  "  I  consider  myself  as  one  of  the  dis-
ciples and  servants  of  His  Highness  [the  B4b],"  answered
the  old  dervish,  "though  whether  He  hath  accepted  me
into  _  His  service  or  not  I  know  not."  And  when  they
continued  to  press  him  and  urge  him  to  save  his  life  he
cried,  "  This  drop  of  blood — this  poor  life — is  nought  :
were  I  possessed  of  the  lordship  of  the  world,  and  had  I  a
thousand  lives,  I  would  freely  cast  them  before  the  feet  of
His  friends."  So,  when  they  perceived  that  their  efforts
were  of  no  avail,  they  desisted  therefrom,  and  signified  to
the  executioner  that  he  should  proceed  with  his  work.
The  first  blow  struck  only  wounded  the  old  man's  neck  and
cast  his  turban  to  the  ground.  He  raised  his  head  and
exclaimed,

"  0  happy  that  intoxicated  lover  who  at  the  feet  of  the
Friend
Knoweth  not  whether  it be his head or his turban
which  he  casteth!"

Then  the  executioner  quickly  dealt  him  another  blow  which
slew  him.


THE SEVEN MARTYRS.  215

After  him  was  slain  Akd  Seyyid  Huseyn  the  mujtaMd
of  Turshiz,  who,  returning  homewards  from  Kerbeld  to  visit
his  friends  and  family,  had  been  arrested  in  Teherdn.  He
too  died  with  the  utmost  firmness  and  alacrity.

Then  came  the  turn  of  the  Bdb's  uncle  H4ji  Mlrzd
Seyyid  'AH.  A  merchant  of  his  acquaintance  wished  to
ransom  him  for  the  sum  of  three  hundred  tumdns,  but  he
declared  that  to  suffer  martyrdom  was  his  greatest  desire.
Then  he  took  off  his  turban,  and,  raising  his  face  towards
heaven,  exclaimed,  "  0  God,  Thou  art  witness  of  how  they
are  slaying  the  son  of  Thy  Most  Honourable  Prophet  with-
out fault  on  his  part."  Then  he  turned  to  the  executioner
and  recited  this  verse: —

"How  long  shall  grief  of  separation  from  him  slay  me?
Cut  off  my  head,  that  Love  may  bestow  on  me  a  head'."

When  he  had  said  this  he  too  submitted  himself  to  the
executioner's  hands.

After  this  the  other  three  victims,  each  in  his  turn,  met
their  death  with  like  heroism.  Of  the  martyrdom  of  one
of  these  not  specified  by  name  but  described  as  "  a  young
Sejryid  of  pleasing  countenance  and  attractive  aspect "  ;  of
the  attempt  to  save  him  made  by  Hdjf  'AH  Kh4n  the
H4jibu'd-Dawla  (see  p.  52,  note  1),  who  was  superintending
the  execution  and  was  moved  to  a  compassion  rare  in
him  at  the  sight  of  so  youthful  and  comely  a  sufferer ;
and  of  the  refusal  of  the  youthful  Bdbl  to  escape  death
and  secure  wealth,  luxury,  and  a  fair  bride  as  the  price  of
a  simple  recantation,  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  gives  a  detailed
account,  which,  notwithstanding  its  pathetic  interest,  lack
of  space  compels  me  to  omit  in  this  place.

When  the  executioners  had  completed  their  bloody
work,  the  rabble  onlookers,  awed  for  a  while  by  the  patient
courage  of  the  martyrs,  again  allowed  their  ferocious  fanati-

1  Masnavi,  Book  vi,  p.  649,  1.  2  (ed.  'Ali  'ud-Dawla).


216  NOTE B — MIRZA SEYYID 'ALf.

cism  to  break  out  in  insults  to  the  mortal  remains  of  those
whose  spirits  had  now  passed  beyond  the  power  of  their
malice.  They  cast  stones  and  filth  at  the  motionless
corpses,  abusing  them,  and  crying  out,  "  This  is  the  recom-
pense of  the  people  of  affection  and  of  such  as  pursue  the
Path  of  Wisdom  and  Truth ! "  Nor  would  they  suffer  their
bodies  to  be  interred  in  a  burial-ground,  but  cast  them  into
a  pit  outside  the  Gate  of  Sh&h  'Abdu'l-'Azim,  which  they
then  filled  up.

After  detailing  the  occurrences  briefly  set  forth  above,
the  B4bl  historian  proceeds  to  point  out  the  special  value
and  unique  character  of  the  testimony  given  by  the
"Seven  Martyrs."  They  were  men  representing  all  the
more  important  classes  in  Persia — divines,  dervishes,  mer-
chants, shop-keepers,  and  government  officials;  they  were
men  who  had  enjoyed  the  respect  and  consideration  of  all;
they  died  fearlessly,  willingly,  almost  eagerly,  declining  to
purchase  life  by  that  mere  lip-denial,  which,  under  the
name  of  ketm&n  or  takiya,  is  recognized  by  the  Shi'ites  as
a  perfectly  justifiable  subterfuge  in  case  of  peril ;  they  were
not  driven  to  despair  of  mercy  as  were  those  who  died  at
Sheykh  Tabarsl  and  Zanj4n ;  and  they  sealed  their  faith
with  their  blood  in  the  public  square  of  the  Persian  capital
wherein  is  the  abode  of  the  foreign  ambassadors  accredited
to  the  court  of  the  Shdh.  And  herein  the  B4bi  historian
is  right :  even  those  who  speak  severely  of  the  B4bl  move-
ment generally,  characterizing  it  as  a  communism  destruc-
tive of  all  order  and  all  morality,  express  commiseration  for
these  guiltless  victims.  To  the  day  of  their  martyrdom  we
may  well  apply  Gobineau's  eloquent  reflection  on  a  similar
tragedy  enacted  two  years  later: — "Cette  journ^e  donna
au  B4b  plus  de  partisans  secrets  que  bien  des  predications
n'auraient  pu  faire.  Je  I'ai  dit  tout  k  I'heure,  I'impression
produite  sur  le  peuple  par  Teffroyable  impassibility  des
martyrs  fiit  profonde  et  durable.  J'ai  souvent  entendu
raconter  les  scenes  de  cette  journ^e  par  des  t^moins  ocu-
laires,  par  des  hommes  tenant  de  prfes  au  gouvernement,
quelques-uns  occupant  des  fonctions  ^minentes.  A  les
entendre,  on  eut  pu  croire  ais^ment  que  tous  ^talent  bibys,
tant  ils  se  montraient  p6n6tr6s  d'admiration  pour  des
souvenirs  oh.  1' Islam  ne  jouait  pas  le  plus  beau  r61e,  et  par


THE SEVEN MARTYRS.  217

la  haute  id^e  qu'ils  avouaient  des  ressources,  des  esp^rances,
et  des  moyens  de  succfes  de  la  secte'."

With  regard  to  Riji  Mlrzd  Seyyid  -'Alf  the  B4b's  uncle,
with  whom  we  are  more  particularly  concerned,  the  TdrikJi-
i-Jddid  gives  the  following  additional  particulars.  Before
leaving  Shirdz  (where,  as  it  would  appear,  he  had  re-
mained after  the  Bib  departed  to  Isfahan)  he  set  all  his
affairs  in  order  and  paid  all  his  creditors  in  person,  as
though  in  anticipation  of  a  speedy  death.  Then  he  took  a
tender  farewell  of  all  his  friends  and  relatives,  besought
them  to  pardon  any  fault  which  he  might  have  committed
in  regard  to  them,  and  set  out  for  Teheran,  apparently
with  the  intention  of  proceeding  thence  to  Chihrik  to  visit
the  B^b.  Perhaps  on  his  arrival  at  the  capital  he  was  met
with  the  news  of  his  nephew's  mart3rrdom  at  Tabriz  on
.July  9th  1850 :  at  aU  events  it  would  appear  that  he  con-
tinued there  till,  not  two  months  later,  he  himself  met
mth  a  similar  fate.

As  the  B4bl  historian  does  not  omit  to  point  out,  no
stronger  evidence  of  the  marvellous  personal  influence  of
the  Bd.b  over  aU  with  whom  he  came  in  contact  can  be
found  than  the  devoted  attachment  to  him  manifested  by
his  aged  uncle,  who,  knowing  him  from  his  childhood  up-
wards, and  being  fuUy  conversant  with  his  daily  life,  was
one  of  the  first  to  embrace  the  faith  for  which  he  died.  Of
the  extraordinary  purity  and  piety  of  the  Bib's  life,  indeed,
we  have  ample  evidence.  His  bitterest  enemies  cannot
asperse  his  personal  character.  Hence  those  who  knew
him  best  loved  and  revered  him  most.  I  was  fortunate
enough  to  meet  at  Acre  one  who  was  the  Bib's  cousin,
comrade,  play-fellow,  and  brother-in-law.  He  was  a  gentle
old  man  with  hght  blue  eyes  and  white  beard.  I  begged
him  to  give  me  some  account  of  the  Bib's  personal
character.  "He  was  very  dignified  and  gentle  in  his
manner,"  replied  he,  "yet  at  times,  when  any  attempt  to
treat  him  unfairly  or  discourteously  was  made,  he  could
be  very  stem.  Once  I  remember  while  we  were  engaged  in
business  at  Bushire  a  custom-house  ofiicer  attempted  to

1  Gobineau,  Religions  et  Philosophies  dans  VAsie  Centrale,  2nd
ed.  p.  303.


218 NOTE  C — PROOFS  OF  BAB'S  AGE

extort  money  from  him  wrongfully  and  treated  him  with
disrespect.  Thereupon  the  Bd,b,  finding  remonstrance  un-
availing, struck  his  assailant  with  his  shpper  once,  accom-
panying the  blow  with  a  look  of  such  majestic  anger  that
the  latter  instantly  became  silent  and  took  his  departure."


NOTE  C.
Texts  from  the  Persian  Beyan  giving  the  Bab's  age  at

THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS MISSION, AND THE DaTE
THEREOF.

The  B^b  mentions  his  age  in  two  passages  in  the  Persian
Beydn.  The  first  of  these  occurs  in  Vdhid  n,  ch.  1  and
runs  as  follows  in  my  ms.  The  variants  of  the  British  Mu-
seum codex  marked  Or.  2819  are  here  and  hereafter  given
at  the  foot  of  each  page.  This  codex  is  denoted  by  the
letter  B.

*— L?^ p_jj (jiH ul>- ^ ^^y. t-$tiUo illi JjiJs L^i)

1  B  inserts  jiT".  ^  B  omits.  3  B  inserts  j\ ,

*  B  reads  ^Sl,.  ^  B  reads  u^Sl..  "  B  adds  ^j.

7  B  adds  j.


FROM PERSIAN BEYAN.  21&

J  C.""it 'UJl Jllc ^\a J  J  (Jj iS C ' "^—^ _5  aJoAi

J^ i>Ss>- flJaA) -iL^^I J*^ >>■' U jaC J_3I jl JiKjUlc

j^  ii^5»-  jl  L^l  Jj c i >■' J  ^'^  ""  c«-i  ,^"Jj

i') 0-<l (Vl jl |J>-I J  jcl "Ull vol Vl _5 aJjJ ^jjs»-
^^b ^q.MMA dC^llu 5I yC- jlj 91 j^ O^U** >Jjy O'^^

"  And  if  anyone  should  reflect  on  the  appearance  of  this
Tree'^,  he  will  without  doubt  admit  the  loftiness  of  God's
religion.  For  in  one  from  whose  life  [only]  twenty-four
years  had  passed,  who  was  devoid  of  those  sciences  wherein
aU  are  learned,  who  now  recites  verses  after  such  fashion
Avithout  thought  or  hesitation,  who  in  the  course  of  five  hours
writes  a  thousand  verses  of  supplications  without  pause  of
the  pen,  who  produces  commentaries  and  learned  treatises
of  so  high  a  degree  of  wisdom  and  understanding  of  the
Divine  Unity  that  doctors  and  philosophers  confess  their
inability  to  comprehend  those  passages,  there  is  no  doubt
that  all  this  is  from  God. What  pains  do  these  doctors

1  B  reads  j,l.^. ^  B  inserts  jf ,  ^  B  inserts  1^1.

*  B  omits.  ^  B  inserts  '.  ^  B  inserts  j». .

'  B  omits.  *  B  omits.  ^  B  reads  jji^^ .

"•  B  reads  aj  ^^ .  i^  B  inserts  ;l .

12  i.e.  the Bdb,  who  repeatedly  calls  himself  "the  Tree  of
Truth."


220 NOTE  C — PROOFS  OF  BAB'S  AGE

take  who  study  diligently  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of
their  lives  when  writing  a  single  line  in  Arabic  !  Yet  after
all  [the  result]  is  but  words  which  are  unworthy  of  mention.
All  these  things  are  for  a  proof  unto  the  people  ;  else  is  the
religion  of  God  too  mighty  and  glorious  for  one  to  be  able
to  understand  it  by  aught  other  than  itself ;  rather  by  it  is
all  else  understood."

The  second  passage  occurs  in  Vdhid  vi,  ch.  11,  which
prohibits  the  cruel  beating  of  children  and  defines  the
penalties  incurred  by  schoolmasters  and  teachers  who  in-
fringe this  injunction.  After  stating  these  in  full  it  con-
tinues as  follows : —

iJS 4JS...VJJJ Oljj jjjil O."! (\-)' y^'y (Vi' *rw

I^J JjU ^Ji^ i?'^*" -^'-^l^^ Jb»-a^ ^1 .i  *»- ('e-l J'
*lJLu &lj  _j  C. I OLj dJaflj  J^  J IjdOJl*- i^uajm

"  The  fruit  of  these  ordinances  is  this,  that  perchance
no  sorrow  may  befal  that  Soul  from  the  ocean  of  whose
bounty  all  are  endowed  with  existence.  For  the  teacher
doth  not  recognize  the  Teacher  of  himself  and  of  all,  even
as  in  the  manifestation  of  the  Furkdn  [i.e.  the  Kurdn]
none  recognized  that  Sun  of  Truth  till  forty  years  had
passed,  and  in  the  [case  of  the]  Point  of  Revelation  [i.e.
the  B4b]  for  twenty-five  years."

In  my  first  paper  on  the  Bdbis  in  the  J.  B.  A.  S.
(B.  i,  pp.  509 — 511),  I  was  disposed  to  beHeve  that  in  each
of  these  two  passages  the  B4b  referred  to  his  actual  age  at

'  B  inserts  .^T.  "^  B  reads if  ^.Jj  oi.  '  B  omits.

■•  B  reads  ^  .r^Ll;.  "  B  reads  \j.


FROM PERSIAN BEYAN.  221

the  time  of  writing,  and  that  this  was  why  he  described
himself  in  one  passage  as  being  twenty-four  years  of  age
and  in  the  other  as  twenty-five.  Starting  with  this  h)rpo-
thesis,  I  attempted  to  fix  as  nearly  as  possible  the  date
when  the  first  of  these  passages  was  written,  and  decided
that  it  must  have  been  about  the  end  of  a.d.  1847  or  the
begiiming  of  a.d.  1848.  From  this  I  conchided  that  the  B4b
must  have  been  bom  not  earlier  than  a.d.  1824,  and  that  he
was  consequently  only  nineteen  years  old  at  the  commence-
ment of  his  mission,  as  alleged  by  Gobineau  (pp.  142 — 143)
and  by  some  of  the  Bd,bis  whom  I  saw  in  Kirmdn.  Further
information  as  to  the  date  of  the  B^b's  birth,  which  reached
me  after  the  publication  of  my  first  paper,  compelled  me  to
abandon  this  view'.  Indeed,  had  I  not  been  unduly  influ-
enced by  the  idea  that  the  Bdb  was  nineteen  years  of  age
at  the  commencement  of  his  mission,  and  had  I  more  care-
fully considered  the  second  of  the  two  passages  above  quoted,
I  should  have  perceived  that  the  Bih  speaks  of  his  own  age
and  that  of  Muhammad  at  the  beginning  of  their  respective
missions  when  their  prophetic  of&ce  was  first  disclosed  to

mankind. In  the  >...,  Jj^  ^  (Seven  Proofs)  the  Bib  also
describes  himself  as  jj^  uij^  3 ^"-^ j' ^ O^


a


ji^^


'  of  an  age  which  did  not  exceed  five  and  twenty."


When  in  Cyprus  I  one  day  enquired  of  Mfrzd  Yahyd  Subli-
i-Ezel  how  old  the  Bd,b  was  at  the  time  of  the  '  manifesta-
tation.'  He  replied  without  hesitation  "  twenty-four,  and
entering  on  his  twenty-fifth  year."  Now  the  date  of  the
'  manifestation'  is  given  in  the  Persian  Bey  an  (the  passages
will  be  quoted  immediately)  as  .Jamddi-ul-Ul4  5th  a.h.  1260
(May  23rd  a.d.  1844).  It  therefore  follows  that  the  Bdb,
being  at  that  date,  according  to  his  own  statement,  over
twenty-four  and  under  twenty-five  years  of  age,  must  have
been  bom  on  Muharram  1st  a.h.  1236  (October  9th,  a.d.
1820)  rather  than  on  Muharram  1st  a.h.  1235  (October
20th,  A.D.  1819)  as  stated  at  p.  2  of  the  present  work. The

1  This  information  will  be  found  at  p.  993 of  my  second
paper  on  the  Bdbis.


-222  NOTE C — PROOFS OF BAB  S AGE

correctness  of  the  former  date  is  further  corroborated  by
the  enquiries  kindly  undertaken  by  a  friend  of  mine  at
Shh&z  who  is  himself  connected  with  the  B^b's  family  (see
B.  ii,  p.  993),  and  I  think  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it
is  the  true  one.

The  first  passage  in  the  Persian  Beyan  where  the
date  of  the  '  manifestation '  is  given  occurs  in  Vahid  ii,
oh.  7,  which  treats  of  the  real  meaning  of  the  Resurrection.
It  commences  as  follows :  —


iZas>-  "J'y"  Jig  gl^  fa)  OaLs  P  »J  j\  .il>a  JOsii  i_)li  jV'
\j  OiLs  P  *)  ix^M  j)\  (_$Jb-l  aS  .>  a.,','..«>i  aJi&Llo  _5  C*>.u'
tUjI  ^A^  d.)  4  3jj>J  rt^JJ  L^^  U  a&ajo  i>Jl  JIJI,U  aJL<k^
J  L.iJlJ>  '■^^'"^  3jljj  OlJ&-  «Ull  JCC  d^l  jj  .Jjljlj  OlJ»-
0>U f_^ jl J^.^afl« ifla- JaI 'Is^ JCc _j  diji jLi;  i^l

1  B  reads  aj. 2  B  reads  \j-^i.  3  B  inserts  *<*.

-i  B  omits. 5  B  reads  ^ji..  0  B  reads  ^ii^.

'  B  omits.  8  B  omits. 0  B  omits.  w  B  omits.

1'  B  reads  i»i.

12  These  four  words,  essential  to  the  sense  of  the  passage,  are
omitted  in  my  MS.  and  supplied  from  B.


FROM PERSIAN BEYAN.  223

(»_y_ t <Ull Jj— ^ Ciu ^_JJ 'Ol jl Jk«) J :iy J^VI

.Cl< y^U=>  iJlAJto- i  ptZj  iS J  oj -,„,c C^Ls o'  fr  9  £

w-i, jl dflij La^Jilj jJ CffL j3 jl Jlju jl J_5l
*  i  »

Xuy (JUi /"Ifla! n ^w  A> '  )ij L--"l JljS OsLs  Cajs*-

1  B  here  inserts  the  following  passage  : —

*  •-

OUj  01  jj  aiil  J^  U aT"  I^J  j^  J^  jIj  I^  j^  i»*  lT^  >*  ^

2  B  omits.  3  3  reads  ij .  *  B  reads  jij .

5  B  inserts  ^.  ^  B  reads  oL.  '  B  reads  aj„^.

*  B  reads  cj jL .  ^  B  omits.  i"  B  reads  j^Vl .

11  Breads  all!}^. i^  Breads  <i^_I^„. "  Breads  ij.
M  B  reads  j .,  and  omits  ^ .


224 NOTE  C — PROOFS  OF  BAB'S  AGE

s-

'J^  ^U'l  ^j)/  ^3e-  l^'  J>&^  Jj'  jl  _5  ji.  ,_5^
•yo  jj-^  ^  jl  oL)  OaL^  J  -^jA*  j*^  '-"^  V (*^

'  jL)  JUi^  ^1  '(il a^r&^. (> J^4^  Jj' J-*  ^ ^

"  Tfe  seventh  chapter-  of  the  second  Vdhid.  In  explana-
tion of  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  The  quintessence  of  this
chapter  is  this,  that  what  is  intended  by  the  Day  of  Resur-
rection is  the  day  of  the  appearance  of  the  Tree  of  Truth :
but  it  is  not  seen  that  any  one  of  the  Shi'ites  hath  under-
stood the  Day  of  Resurrection ;  rather  have  they  fancifully
imagined  a  thing  which  with  God  hath  no  reality.  [And
that  which  hath  no  reality  with  God  hath  no  reality.]  But
what  is  meant  by  God  and  by  those  who  are  wise  amongst
the  people  of  truth  by  the  Day  of  Resurrection  is  this,  that
from  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  the  Tree  of  Truth,  at
whatever  period,  and  under  whatever  name  [or  form]  (it  be),
until  the  moment  of  its  disappearance  is  the  Day  of  Resur-
rection. For  example,  from  the  (first)  day  of  the  mission
of  Jesus  till  the  day  of  His  ascension  was  the  Resurrection
of  Moses,  for  during  that  period  the  manifestation  of  God
[appeared  in  the  form  of  that  Truth,  who  rewarded  by  His
word  everyone  who  believed  in  Moses,  and  punished  by  His
word  everyone  who  did  not  believe.  For  what  God  regarded
at  that  time]  was  what  God  beheld  in  the  Gospel.  And
after  the  (first)  day  of  the  mission  of  the  Prophet  of  God

1  B  reads  oi .  ^  B  inserts  ^ .  '  B  reads  jj .

*  B  omits.  ^  B  inserts  o-l .  "^  B  reads  oi  ^' .

'  B  reads  x^_.


FROM  PEBSIA^  BETAX.  225

till  the  day  of  his  ascension  was  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus,
■wherein  the  Tree  of  Truth  appeared  in  the  form  of  Mu-
hammad, rewarding  hy  his  word  every  one  who  was  a  be-
liever in  Jesus,  and  tormenting  by  his  word  every  one  who
was  not  a  believer  in  Him.  And  from  the  moment  when
the  Tree  of  the  Beydn  appeared  until  it  disappeareth  is  the
Eesurrection  of  the  Prophet  of  God  which  God  hath  pro-
mised in  the  Kur'4,n;  of  which  appearance  the  beginning
was  when  tiro  hours  and  fifteen  minutes  (had  passed^ /rwH

the  eve  of  [Friday  the  fifth  of]  Jamddi-ul-  Lid  (a.h.)  1260,
which  is  the  year  1270  of  the  mission  (of  Muhammad).
(This)  was  the  beginning  of  the  Day  of  Resurrection  of  the
Kur'dn.  And  until  the  disappearance  of  the  Tree  of  Truth'
is  the  Resurrection  of  the  Kur'dn.  For  of  no  thing  doth
the  Resurrection  occur  till  it  reacheth  the  stage  of  perfec-
tion. The  perfection  of  the  rehgion  of  Isldm  was  consum-
mated ere  the  beginning  of  this  Manifestation,  and  from
the  beginning  of  this  Manifestation  till  the  moment  of  dis-
appearance the  fruits  of  the  Tree  of  IsUm,  whatever  they
are,  will  become  apparent.  And  the  Resurrection  of  the
BeyAn  is  from  the  (first)  appearance  of  Him  whom  God
shall  manifest ;  for  to  day  the  Beydn  is  in  the  stage  of  seed,
but  at  the  beginning  of  the  manifestation  of  Him  whom
God  shall  manifest  the  ultimate  perfection  of  the  Beydn
wiU  become  apparent,  when  He  shall  gather  the  fruits  of
the  trees  which  have  been  planted."

The  second  passage  giving  the  date  of  the  '  manifesta-
tion' occurs  in  Viihid  vi,  ch.  13  and  runs  as  follows  : —

—  ^  s-

#  Ji,,.ial t><J*>

1  See  note  12  at  the  foot  of  p.  219.

2  B  omits. ^  B  omits. *  B  inserts  ^T". ^  B  omits.
'  B  omits.  '  B  inserts  a, .  '  B  inserts  ^alt .

B.  15


226  NOTE D — MEANING OF '  BAB  '

"  And  after  the  planting  of  the  Tree  of  the  Kur'dn  the
perfection  thereof  was  attained  in  one  thousand  two  hun-
dred and  seventy  years.  Had  the  maturity  thereof  been
(attained)  at  two  o'clock  on  the  night  of  [Thursday]  the  fifth
of  JamMi-ul-Uld,,  it  (i.e.  the  new  manifestation)  would  not
have  appeared  five  minutes  later."

The  above  quotations  also  illustrate  what  I  have  had
occasion  to  notice  in  my  first  Paper  on  the  Bdbis  (B.  i,
p.  507),  viz.  that  the  Bib  prefers  to  date  not  from  the  flight
of  Muhammad  but  from  the  beginning  of  his  mission,
which  he  places  ten  years  earlier.  Hence  he  usually  states
the  beginning  of  his  own  mission  as  having  occurred  not  in
the  year  1260  A.H.,  but  "  1270  years  after  the  mission  of
Muhammad."  Cf  Persian  Bey&n,  Vahid  ii,  ch.  7  ;  iv,  14 ;
iv.  16  ;  iv,  18 ;  vi,  7 ;  vi,  8 ;  vi,  13  (bis).


NOTE  D.

The  meaning  of  the  title  'Bab.'

Every  writer  who  has  made  mention  of  the  B4b  has
pointed  out  that  this  title  assumed  by  him  at  the  begin-
ning of  his  mission  signifies  in  Arabic  '  Gate'  or  'Door,'  but
in  specifying  that  whereunto  he  professed  to  be  the  '  Gate '
they  are  no  longer  in  accord.  Kazem-Beg  says  (i,  p.  343)
that  one  day,  falling  into  an  ecstasy,  Mlrzi  'Alf  Muhammad
"discovered  that  he  was  the  Bab,  the  Gate  of  Truth,"  and
a  few  lines  lower  he  says,  "  Je  ne  sais  si  les  paroles  du
Christ :  _ '  Je  suis  la  porte '  lui  dtaient  connues ;  mais  il
n'ignorait  sans  doute  pas  que  Mahomet  avait  dit :  '  Je  suis
la  ville  du  savoir  et  Ali  (son  gendre)  est  la  porte  de  cette
ville'."  Gobineau  (pp.  149—150)  says,  "II  annonga  qu'il
6tait  le  B^b,  la  Porte  par  laquelle  seule  on  pouvait  parvenir
k  la  connaissance  de  Dieu."  Lady  Shell  says  (p.  176),
"this  amiable  sect  is  styled  Babee,  from  Bab,  a  gate,  in


GIVEN  IN  nasikhu't-tawarikh.  227

Arabic,  the  name  assumed  by  its  founder,  meaning,  I
suppose,  the  gate  to  heaven."  Watson  (p.  348)  gives  the
clearest  and  most  correct  statement  of  the  meaning  of  the
title  in  question.  He  says,  "  He  (Mirz4  'Ali  Muhammad)
now  gave  out  that  as  Ali  had  been  the  gate  by  which  men
had  entered  the  city  of  the  prophet's  knowledge,  even  so
he  was  the  gate  through  which  men  might  attain  to  the
knowledge  of  the  twelfth  Imam.  It  was  in  accordance  with
this  doctrine  that  he  received  the  distinguishing  appellation
of  Bab,  or  gate ;  from  which  his  followers  were  styled
Babis."

As  regards  the  Muhammadan  historians,  the  Ndsikhu
H-Tawdrikh  of  Sipihr,  which  gives  the  fullest  account  of
the  B4bi  movement,  and  which  has  served  as  a  basis  of
information  to  most  European  writers,  says  in  speaking  of
the  beginning  of  what  it  calls  "the  mischief  {fitna)  of
Mfrzd,  'Ali  Muhammad  the  B4b  "  :—

Jj_5l>- L^U-J Ol^>- (Vjl f^^ -**-" lj^'*' ^3^

1^1 J <dlj ,1 \jjl O'j v) Li jl ry JlJ>- .ia^j Jlijl

J CJiiAf Ly^.3^ Cjy&\ j Cj.>I&^. lyUjyi i^Lgj j^

i^n  n  n  lyt^  i^  _J'  _J  .>  aai..  n  Oa^J  •'3^  '—'■^U'-'.
OaJl I  aJa-.ib ■  ^1" >_)U ^a CflK»a jl U JLL^ J=1>-

1^ t Jil.^ jl) IjL^Iji Jj3 j JLuJ L^Ij^ Jlft.1^ dS^

15—2


228  NOTE D — MEANING OF 'BAB.'

Jff ijj-^ t-^Sj t')jj J"^ JjLJ Ojl>-l  _J M^ j'^-^

"  When  HAjl  Seyyid  K4zim  departed  from  this  world  to
the  Eternal  Abode,  he  [Mirz^  'All  Muhammad]  carried  off
several  of  his  disciples  and  retired  for  vigils  and  worship  to
the  mosque  of  Kilfa,  where  he  abode  forty  days.  All  at
once  his  disposition  swerved  aside  from  rectitude.  Then  he
secretly  seduced  men  to  his  own  austerities  and  doctrine,
inviting  them  to  devote  themselves  to  him.  And  in  whom-
soever he  felt  confidence,  to  him  he  would  say,  '  I  am  the
Gate  of  God  :  miter,  tlien,  houxes  by  their  gateit :  one  cannot
enter  any  house  otherwise  than  by  the  gate  thereof.  Who-
soever desireth  to  come  to  God  and  to  know  the  religion  of
God  cannot  do  so  until  he  seeth  me  and  receiveth  permis-
sion from  me.'  Therefore  he  became  known  as  '  Mfrzd
'All  Muhammad  the  Bdb ' ;  and  when  a  few  days  had
passed  he  was  named  '  the  Bib,'  and  his  own  name  rarely
crossed  men's  tongues."

During  the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Muhammad  Shdh
when  the  B4b,  then  in  captivity  at  Chihrlk,  was  brought  to
Tabriz,  and  examined  concerning  his  doctrine  by  a  council
of  divines  and  doctors  presided  over  by  the  present  Shdh
of  Persia,  then  Crown-Prince,  he  was  required  to  explain
the  title  which  he  had  assumed  and  to  state  what  meaning
he  attached  to  it.  The  account  given  of  this  examination
in  the  present  history  (pp.  19 — 21,  supra)  is  brief  compared
to  the  accounts  contained  in  the  supplement  of  the  Eaw-
zatu's-Safd,  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid,  and  the  KimMil-'Ulamd
(concerning  which  works  see  above.  Note  A).  Of  the
proceedings  of  this  council  a  fuller  account  compiled  from
the  above  sources  will  be  found  in  Note  M.  For  our
present  purpose  it  is  sufficient  to  observe  that  when  the
Bdb  was  asked  by  his  inquisitors,  "  What  is  the  meaning  of
[the  name]  Bab  ? "  he  answered,  "  The  same  as  in  the  holy
tradition,  '  I  am  the  City  of  Knowledge  and  'Ali  is  the  Gate
thereof."


EARLIER USE OF TITLE.  229

Voo  Kremer,  in  the  account  of  the  Bdb  which  he  gives
in  his  Ilen-sch'i/di'/!  Id^vn  de,<!  Ishnns,  quotes  tliis  same
tradition  as  the  probable  source  whence  Mirzi  'AM  Muham-
mad derived  his  title,  and  further  points  out  (p.  209)  that
he  was  not  the  first  to  adopt  it,  one  Abi'i  Ja'far  Muhammad
ibn  'All  ash-Shalmagli4nf,  generally  known  as  Ibn  Abi
Azdkir,  having  suffered  death  under  the  Caliph  Ar-Rddhi
for  assuming  this  same  title  of  Bdb  and  teaching  new  and
heretical  doctrines  which  included  the  tenet  of  metempsy-
chosis. In  his  case  also  the  title  was  explained  by  Ibn
AbdAs,  one  of  his  followers,  as  signifying  "  the  door  which
led  to  the  expected  Im^m."  So  likewise  Abu'l-Kd,sim
;il-Huseyn  ibu  Euh',  a  contemporary  of  ash-Shalmagbdni
who  died  a.h.  326  (a.d.  937 — 938),  was  regarded  by  his
disciples  as  one  of  the  "  doors  leading  to  the  Lord  of  the
Age"  (JSiW/ibuz-Zaman).  Lack  of  space  forbids  further
discussion  on  the  history  of  this  title  and  its  employment.
Those  who  desire  fuller  information  ma}'  considt  the  autho-
rities referred  to  by  von  Kremer,  ri:.  Ibn  Khallikdn,  ed.
Wiist.,  p.  129,  Vita  186  ;  Bai-on  MacGuckiu  de  Slane's
translation  of  Ibn  Khallikiln,  vol.  i,  pp.  436 — 437,  and
notes  on  p.  439  ;  Hammer-Purgstall,  Litt.  Gc^c/zichtc  di^r
Artdh'r.  vol.  v,  p.  283  ;  and  Ibnu'l-Atlilr,  vol.  viii,  p.  217.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  as  is  clearly  explained
by  Gobineau  (jip.  150  and  156)  and  Watson  (p.  348),  the
title  of  Bdb  was  only  provisionally  and  temporarily  adopted
by  ilirza  'Ah' Muhammad,  nor is he  now  generally  so

styled  by  his  followers,  who  call  him  U|  jj  J^^  ('rAltcssf
N«/'//w('' of  Gobineau),  JLi  ^ l-ai  OJaa-  ('His  Highness
the  Pouit  of  Revelation'), K| iUJ; ,;•, "  ^ ('His

Highness  the  First  Point'),  or  even U'N/I ,  , OjJ»-

('His  Highness  my  Lord  the  Supreme').  In  the  Persian
Bei/dii  he  applies  to  himself  other  titles  in  addition  to  the

'  For  further  particulars  concerning  this  personage,  see  Note
O,  infra.


230  NOTE D — MEANINfJ OF '  BAB  '

second and third of  those above enumerated, such as

Caos-  4^  (the  'Tree  of  Truth'),  ^.^  o^^  olj
(the  '  Person '  or  '  Essence  of  the  Seven  Letters,'  because

his  name,  jLo^a Je  >  contains  seven  letters),  and  the  like.

But  amongst  the  Behd'ls  there  is  a  tendency  (very  evident
in  the  present  work,  where  the  term  Bah  is  used  throughout,
and  no  mention  is  made  of  the  fuller  development  of  doc-
trine and  exaltation  of  rank  which  marked  the  later  period
of  Mlrzd  'All  Muhammad's  mission)  to  suppress  the  higher
titles  implying  a  supremacy  which  they  would  reserve  for

Behd,  and  to  speak  of  the  Bdb  as j^ d  sU»- ('His

Highness  the  Evangelist').  In  reading  the  present  history,
the  fact  that  it  represents  throughout  the  view  of  the
Behd'fs,  not  of  the  original  Bibis  or  the  Ezells  of  to-day,
must  never  be  lost  sight  of.  When,  in  the  words  of  (lobineau
(p.  156),  Mirzd.  'All  Muhammad  "d(5clara  qu'il  n'dtait  pas  le
Bab,  comme  on  I'avait  cru  jusqu'alors,  comme  il  I'avait  pensd!
lui-mfime,  c'est-^-dire  la  Porte  de  la  connaissance  dcs  v(5ritds,
mais  qu'il  ^tait  le  Point,  c'cst-k-dire  le  gcndrateur  meme  dc?
la  v6rit^,  une  apparition  divine,  une  manifestation  toute-
puissante,"  then,  to  continue  the  quotation,  "  le  titre  de
Bab,  ainsi  devenu  libre,  pouvait  d^sormais  r(3coii)j)enser  \'.
pieux  d^vouement  de  I'un  des  neophytes,"  and  it  was  on
Mulld.  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh  that  it  was  bestowed.  Ac-
cordingly by  Subh-i-Ezel  this  illustrious  champion  of  the

new  faith  is  always  spoken  of  as  ,_,[, ^[v,. ,  while  in  the

Turikh-i-Jfidid  lie  is  called  ^U|  ^_,[,  ^\^  'His  Excellency

the  Gate  of  the  Gate. '

In  his  earlier  writings  (e.g.  the  Commentary  (in  the
Silra-i-  Yusuf,  for  specimens  of  which  see  Rosen's  MHS.
Arabes,  pp.  179—191)  Mlrzd,  'All  Muhammad  repeatedly
uses  the  term  Bah  and  apparently  applies  it  to  himself.
In  the  Persian  Beydn,  wnich  was  composed  during  his
imprisonment  at  Md.kii  and  embodies  his  fully  developed
doctrine,  he  continues  to  use  the  term,  but  no  longer  limits


IN PERSIAN BEYAN.  231

it  to  himself,  though  still  occasionally  employing  it  as  his
own  title,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  following  passage  in
Vdkid  ii,  ch.  1 : —


v_)UJ OJ^ LI Ai :tj9- oLl) ^jj>ji Jl_^ Jij'jti-

i
ajlij ijL) _j Ols^ OL  J^ t^  J^ ^^  -'^ aJ  ji Jl  a--

J bj JL£ ^ J5^ «lUl^ V XiU ajaVI ^jl J_jJlu.

J>^^ Jjl) Jlc JiJ_jljl>- Jlw jLaj'^l _^_5l )i\ yi  X) \a

' ^\j\  J c*^l <ul J j.-'j jujm iJLl) />^o jl di

"God  demanded  in  His  own  speech,  'Whose  book  is  the
Kur'^n  ? '  All  the  believers  said  to  Him,  '  It  is  the  Book
of  God.'  Afterwards  it  was  asked,  '  Is  any  difference  seen
between  the  Furkdn  [i.e.  the  Kur'^n]  and  the  Beydn?'
The  spiritually-minded  answered,  '  No,  by  God,  all  is  from
our  Lord ' :  and  none  are  mentioned  but  those  endowed
with  discernment.  Then  the  Lord  of  the  World  [thus]
revealed  : — '  That  Word  is  by  the  tongue  of  Muhammad
the  Apostle  of  God,  and  this  is  my  Word  by  the  tongue  of
the  Person  of  the  Seven  Letters,  the  Gate  of  God'."

In  other  passages,  however,  the  term  is  employed  (often
in  the  plural)  in  a  more  general  sense. Thus  the  last  four


1  B  reads  ,-.,.,;  Jl  ^\:S'.

2  B  reads  3^ U .

3  B  reads  ^  f-^S'  iy,  J^l aT.

*  B  omits.

*  B  reads  ,-.,.,:,!  }.

"  B  omits.

232  NOTE D — MEANING OF '  bAb  '

chapters  of  the  first  Vdhid,  consisting,  as  it  would  appear,
of  mere  titles  uncommentated  and  undeveloped,  stand  as
follows  : —


^L  iCLl  jj Jj'^l jt>-ljjl ^  j^ »jLJi i_>u1

511  ^L'


^1)  iJol  j^ J_jVI ja-l_^!l j_y> ^;Jlc ^lill v-jUI

^li  ijCjI  ji Jj"^l ji3-l^l ^  ^^ lu^lil ^_)Lli

511  ^j

"  T lie  sixteenth  clmpter  of  the  first  Vdhid.  Concerning
this,  that  the  First  Gate  (Bah)  hath  returned  to  the  world
with  everyone  who  believed  in  him  truly  or  otherwise."

"  Ths  seventeenth  chapter ■■  ■&€.  Concerning  this,  that
the  Second  Gate..."  &c.

"The  eighteenth  chapter.. .Ac.  Concerning  this,  that
the  Third  Gate..."  &c.

"The  nineteenth  chipter . . ■&c.  Concerning  this,  that
the  Fourth  Gate..."  &c.

In  one  of  my  interviews  with  Subh-i-Ezel  I  asked  him


IN PERSIAN BETiX.  233

who  were  intended  by  these  '  Bdbs '  or  '  Gates,'  and  he
answered  that  Sheykh  Ahmad  Ahsd'i  and  HAjl  Seyyid
K4zim  of  Resht  [see  Xote  E,  infra,  and  also  B.  ii,  pp.  884 —
885  and  888 — 892]  were  two  of  them.  But  this  would
only  signify  that  in  them  reappeared,  or  'returned  to  the
world,'  two  of  the  four  origiiial  "'  Gates.'  And  by  these
can  only  be  meant  those  four  persons  who,  during  the
period of  seclusion  of  the  twelfth  Im4m  known  as  the

"Lesser  Occultation"  (|  jLs  0-c)>  acted  as  intermedi-
aries between  him  and  his  followers.  These  four  were,
according  to  the  it-Ill jtlac-'  (1)  ■^'^  'Umar  'Othmin  ibn

Sa'id ;  (2)  Abii  Ja'far  Muhammad  ibn  'Othm4n,  son  of  the
above ;  (3)  Huseyn  ibn  Riih  [see  Xote  0,  infra,  and  the
beginning  of  this  note,  p.  229]  ;  (4)  Abii'l-Hasan  'Ah  ibn
^Muhammad  Simari.

So  also  in  Vdhid  ii,  ch.  iv,  this  sentence  occurs  :  —

Ja^-.l aL) lj3  a^ aU) aijjoJS OjWa J|_5  Jl>- iS  \jlJ

lyj  ....  .i?*-  i_$L^_jl  >— ''vli  |_aLj  \j^a>-  l5Ls>_51)J
ab /  V^ du»jb au ^ iJ^O^ au ,  V^ U?-**' j* ^^ ^

^ 0*wi A.fejb aU) <  V^ ' ''^-'L) a  Lj o U^^^  j*

"  For  God  hath  assimilated  refuge  in  Himself  to  refuge
in  His  Apostle,  and  refuge  in  His  Apostle  to  refuge  in  His
executors  (i.e.  the  Imims),  and  refuge  [in  His  executors  to

refuge]  in  the  Gates  {Abwdb  or  Bdbs)  of  His  executors

For  refuge  in  the  Apostle  is  identical  with  refuge  in  God,

1  B  reads  ^i  iLo^L at. ^  B  omits. ^  B  reads  ^  iU»^l.
i  B  reads  ajl  •  °  B  inserts  o-l .


234  NOTE E — THE SHEYKHfS.

and  refuge  in  the  Imd,ms  is  identical  with  refuge  in  the
Apostle,  and  refuge  in  the  Gates  is  identical  with  refuge  in
the  Imdms."

So likewise in other  passages "Gates of  the Fire"

(jUI  i_>lajl)  ^'■^  spoken  of  as  identical  with  "Letters  of
Denial"  (  i;  ^»^,.),  both  terms  signifying  such  as
vehemently  oppose  the  Truth  and  lead  men  to  hell.


NOTE  E.  '

The  SheykhiSj  and  their  doctrine  concerning  the
'Fourth  Support.'

_  The  founder  of  the  Sheykhi  school,  with  which  in  its
origin  the  Bihi  movement  is  so  closely  connected,  was
Sheykh  Ahmad  of  Ahs4  (often,  but  apparently  erroneously,
written  Lahs4)  in  the  province  of  Bahreyn.  The  following
is  a  brief  account  of  his  life,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  the
kindness  of  one  of  my  Persian  fi-iends  in  Teheran.  The
genealogy  therein  contained  purports  to  be  based  on  an
account  -vvritten  by  the  Sheykh  himself  for  his  son  Sheykh
Muhammad  Taki.

Sheykh  Ahmad  was  the  son  of  Sheykh  Zeynu'd-Dfn
AhsA'i,  son  of  Sheykh  Ibrahim,  son  of  Sheykh  Sakr,  son  of
Sheykh  Ibrahim,  son  of  Sheykh  Ddghir,  son  of  Sheykh
Ramadhto,  son  of  Sheykh  R^shid,  son  of  Sheykh  Dililm,
son  of  Sheykh  Shamrilkh  of  the  tribe  of  Sakr,  one  of  the
most  important  tribes  of  the  Arabs.  From  Sheykh  Sham-
riikli  to  Sheykh  Ramadh^n  the  family  were  ostensibly  not
of  the  Im4mite  (Shi'ite)  faith,  but  conformed  outwardly  to
the  practices  of  the  Sunnites.

According  to  my  correspondent's  statement,  the  year  of
Sheykh  Ahmad's  birth  is  represented  by  the  chronogram


SHEYKH AHMAD AHSA'i.  235


^JuJI  (Jail  (a-H.  1166  =  A.D.  1752—53).  I  thmk,  how-
ever, that  it  should  be  ^\jj\ ^\ ,  "the  u-ater-courses

overflowed."  This  sentence  yields  the  date  1 157  A.H.,  which
agrees  with  the  other  particulars  given,  and  also  conveys
an  intelligible  meaning,  neither  of  which  conditions,  so  far
as  I  can  see,  are  fulfilled  by  the  first  chronogram.  The
year  of  his  death  (a.h.  1242  =  a.d.  1826—27)  is  contained
in  the  following  chronogram  : —

•^^  Ly--*"  u^^  u"-  'i  '^-?^  ^3^^y  "^y

"  Thou  hast  victoriously  attained  unto  Paradise,  0  Ahmad
son  of  Zeynud-Din!"  Sheykh  Ahmad  was  eighty-five
years  old  at  the  time  of  his  deatL

From  his  youth  upwards  Sheykh  Ahmad  was  pious,
devout,  and  ascetic  in  his  hfe.  At  the  direction  of  his
spiritual  guides  he  quitted  his  native  countrj^  and  went  to
'Irdk  (KerbeU  and  2^ejef),  where  he  took  up  his  abode  and
occupied  himself  in  teaching  and  diffusing  rehgious  know-
ledge. He  soon  acquired  great  fame,  and  many  students
gathered  round  him.  His  fame  continuing  to  increase,  he
was  invited  by  Fath-'Ali  Shih,  Prince  Muhammad  'Ah'
Mirzd  Euknud-Dauia,  and  other  eminent  personages,  to
■^•isit  Persia.  He  accordingly  came  to  Teherdn  ;  thence  he
proceeded  to  KirmdnshdhAn,  and  thence  to  Yezd,  where  he
abode  for  twelve  years.  He  performed  the  pilgrimage  to
Mecca  several  times,  and  on  the  last  occasion  of  doing  so
died  two  stages  from  Medina,  where  he  was  buried  in  the
cemetery  called  Baki"  [-ul-Gharkad.  See  Lane's  Arahic-
English-Lexicon,  Book  L  Part  i,  p.  235].

The  account  of  Sheykh  Ahmad  Ahsa'i  contained  in  the
Kisasu  1-'  LlamcV  differs  somewhat  fi-om  that  above  given.
Thus  it  is  asserted  that  he  came  direct  firom  Bahreyn  to
Yezd  where  he  abode  some  time  ;  that  from  Yezd  he  went
to  Kirm^Dshahdn,  where  he  received  yearly  the  sum  of  700
tumdns  from  Fath-'Ah  Shih's  son  Muhammad  'Ali  ilirzd

'  See  Note  A,  pp.  197 — 198,  supra.


236  NOTE E— THE SHEYKHfS.

RuJcnu'd-Dawla  ;  and  that  thence  he  went  to  KerbeM
where  he  finally  took  up  his  abode.  It  would  appear,
however,  that  he  again  visited  Persia  towards  the  end  of  his
life,  and  that  on  this  occasion  he  passed  through  Kazvfn,
where  he  paid  a  visit  to  H4jl  MulU  Muhammad  Takl'.
The  latter  questioned  him  concerning  his  views  on  the
resurrection,  and,  after  a  violent  altercation,  declared  them
to  be  heretical.  In  consequence  of  this  many  other  divines,
who  had  hitherto  regarded  Sheykh  Ahmad  almost  as  a
saint,  began  to  look  askance  at  him  or  even  to  display  open
hostility,  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  leave  Kazvfn.  He
intended  to  proceed  to  Mecca,  but  died  on  his  way  thither
at  Basra.

The  chief  points  wherein  Sheykh  Ahmad's  doctrine  is
regarded  as  heterodox  are  stated  as  follows.  He  believed
that  the  body  of  man  was  compounded  of  parts  derived
from  each  of  the  nine  heavens  and  the  four  elements  ;  that
the  grosser  elemental  part  perished  irrevocably  at  death ;
and  that  only  the'  more  subtle  celestial  portion  would
appear  at  the  resurrection. This  subtle  body  he  named

LSjaA  ^^>-  (tlie  word  Huwarkilya  being  supposed  to  be
of  Greek  origin)  and  believed  to  be  similar  in  substance  to
the  forms  in  the  "World  of  Similitudes"  (Jt^.  Jb).
Similarly  he  denied  that  the  Prophet's  material  body  had,
on  the  occasion  of  his  night-journey  to  heaven  (^|jta)»

moved  from  the  spot  where  it  lay  in  a  trance  or  sleep.  He
was  much  given  to  fasts,  vigils,  and  austerities,  and  believed
himself  to  be  under  the  special  guidance  of  the  Im^ms,
especially,  as  it  would  appear,  the  Im4m  Ja'far-i-S4dik.
He regarded the Im4ms as creative  forces,  quoting  in

support  of  this  view  the  expression -Jlll^l -..^l tjjl

"  God,  the  Best  of  Creators,"  occurring  in  Kur'dn  xxiii,  14 ;
"for,"  said  he,  "if  God  be  the  Best  of  Creators  He  cannot
be  the  sole  Creator." He  also  adduced  in  support  of  this

1  The  maternal  uncle  and  father-in-law  of  Kurratu'l-'Ayn,
see  Note  Q,  infra,  and  pp.  197 — 198,  supra.


WORKS OF SHEYKH AHMAD.  237

view  the  tradition  wherein  the  following  words  are  attributed
to  'Ali  :—

U^jVI  _j  ol**JI  ^U-  lil  "I  am  the  Creator  of  the
heavens  and  the  earth."  He  even  went  so  far  as  to  assert
that  in  reciting  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Kur'dn  (i  j^^

iseJliJl)  the  worshipper  should  fix  his  thoughts  on  'Alf  as

he  repeats  the  words  j^j^ fJLI  "  Thee  do  we  worship."

Sheykh  Ahmad  composed  a  number  of  works,  amongst
which  the  following  are  enumerated  by  the  author  of  the
Kisasu'l-  Ulamd  : —

^jS'  ijtA>- OjLj r  r^ Commentary  on  the  Ziydrat-

i-Jdmi'a,  in  four  vols. According  to  Subh-i-Ezel's  state-
ment it  is  in  this  work  that  the  doctrine  of  the  subtle  body

(LJajo* ^^.^  or lb> J  Is)  which  survives  the  dissolu-
tion of  the  material  frame  is  elaborated.

lJjLa]! ii  a».l Answers  to  questions.

^f-  r  r-  Commentary  on  the  ' Arshiyya  of
Mulld  Sadrd\

^Lia  r-  Z,  Commentary  on  the  Mashd'ir  of
Mulld  Sadrd.

« s.

ia^c  a  y^.'>  p-  Z,  Commenta/ry  on  tJie  Tabsira-i-' Al-
Idma".

'  Concerning  MulM  Sadrd  and  his  doctrines  see  Note  K,  infi-a.

2  Concerning  'Alldma  ('the  Sage'),  i.e.  Jemdlu'd-Dfn  Hasan
ibn  Yiisuf  ibn  'Ah  of  Hilla,  see  a  footnote  on  Note  M,  infra.
The  full  title  of  the  work  here  mentioned  appears  to  be  ij^

ij^SA flSS-l J  j>;J»ull  ("The Enlightenment  of  students on the
ordinances  of  Religion.")


238  NOTE E — THE SHEYKHfS.

Jill  ,9 r ' 3 -*i'»9 -^^^^ Fawuid and Commentary

thereupon.

Sheyldi  Ahmad  Ahs^'i  was  succeeded  at  his  death  by
his  disciple  Hiijf  Seyyid  Kizim  of  Resht,  of  whose  hfe  the
following  brief  account  was  supplied  to  me  by  the  same
friend  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  the  biography  of  Sheykh
Ahmad  given  at  the  beginning  of  this  note.  His  family
were  merchants  of  repute.  His  father  was  named  Akd
Seyyid  K4sim.  When  twelve  years  old  he  was  living
at  Ardabil  near  the  tomb  of  Sheykh  Safi'ud-Din  Is-hdk,
the  descendant  of  the  seventh  Im4m  Mils4  Kdzim  and
the  ancestor  of  the  Safavl  kings.  One  night  in_  a  dream
it  was  signified  to  him  by  one  of  the  illustrious  pro-
genitors of  the  buried  saint  that  he  should  put  himself
under  the  spiritual  guidance  of  Sheykh  Ahmad  Ahsd'l,  who
was  at  this  time  residing  at  Yezd.  He  accordingly  pro-
ceeded thither  and  enrolled  himself  amongst  the  disciples
of  Sheykh  Ahmad,  in  whose  doctrine  he  attained  such
eminence  that  on  the  Sheykh's  death  he  was  unanimously
recognized  as  the  leader  of  the  Sheykhl  school.  He  died
at  Baghdad  ere  he  had  attained  his  fiftieth  year  a.h.  1259
(a.d.  1843—1844). The  date  of  his  death  is  contained  in

the  following  chronogram:  i^jA\ jji v_jIc  .  "The  moon

of  guidance  hath  disappeared."  His  works  are  said  to
exceed  300  volumes.

Up  to  this  point  the  Sheykhfs  were  a  united  body,  for
the  succession  of  H4ji  Seyyid  K4zim  would  seem  to  have
been  approved  and  accepted  by  all.  This  unanimity  was
no  longer  to  continue.  Seyyid  Kdzim  had  not  explicitly
nominated  a  successor ;  indeed  according  to  the  B^bf  his-
torian he  had  hinted  that  the  transitional  state  of  things
under  which  he  and  his  master  Sheykh  vUimad  had  assumed
the  guidance  of  the  faithful  was  with  his  declining  life
drawing  to  a  close,  and  that  a  brighter  light  was  about  to
shine  forth  from  the  horizons  of  the  spiritual  world.  Let
the  B4bi  historian,  the  author  of  the  Tur/,kh-i-J<idid,  take
up  the  tale,  and  describe  in  the  words  of  his  informant  the
closing  scenes  of  the  life  of  Seyyid  K4zim.

"  When  H4jf  Seyyid  Kdzim  had  but  recently  departed


Ti3<  ijf.  I  ir£x«d  ii  sisf  StLTC^i&f  ScrtTc-*  ^frciiiii  izi..-.
^iiiiT  ii-,x~  ixtJj  jljJ  jcaurc: liso.  .v^ririLC  rij  ];iiC  tw: rr

iisi  isrxTiersaizii:  tie  ^/i^tiisf  :;  tin:-  Xistrcr  ,-i:  ti^  T-ijCfc.-

:c TTHciiiic  StJimjTi  Sid  Su:rrjKmii-rt£  i.  "rL-dj;-  irf vis

-j;  Vis  fxTcC'Siirsrc  rT  ,~c&f  ,"c  iif  frKQ,"if  iD,".  i5s:~urs.  ^cuk

ir ria.1  jsr.xfi. "Suj.-^ifiilj  iz.  Art: i£.Tc~?_ ic.l s:ill
^T-sadiiic-  lasd;  r;ci?sssL'Eia:ir  i:-j:<: — 1  ii-fj  s£^£i  i  -ris<;c:

r:r^jaL  3j  Ti25v  Tiisj  ilj  .ii^irnirf  r-:ax  ir^  v.rii.  s  --r"  i:

iSiuQ-- is,- _ iLiSC i'," ^ii£LC*£-. Hb> Trrr-iiirr-.-.-v; iri; Vi~

ii-J  icn.-crr  "Jt  TJ>r  w^.Tj.,  j^ii  :viiLtf  Tc  ii  foi-  iai.  i:js  oj
HT  issa  ^."'■J^^^'i'J "^Ttt  i:^:"  t^j  ^jt^xI  is.-,  :nr,.- rlei.  re^issj

lit  TruK  C*K  iCjr.xji  irct-uc  '  ^

J  3^  5i  ij  I  lii^r  ifSiri.  d  fr.iiL  Hi- -'-:«,rx1-i[-;— jCfr

,^r[Dsr^^.•TD.•m^  jis-  i  veirss-i7.-c  ,'c'  rif  i-iticSv  i.c  is  t-bs  z>:i:  .-cl^

■a.'ii.  rcc"  "v-jt  iis:  ib; ^^r^ir  .•f  ■£&;  5^iti  <  isitir- v-i:r!rsj:7  ±-.-iii:
r^ijsrKt  7^- Ticc-i H-i;  •?;£» j:su:i  Sr.tr 'Ear sec: ,£  Ti.t7-i


240  NOTE E — THE SHEYKHfS.

heard  as  follows  : — '  The  late  Seyyid  specially  promised  me
that  I  should  myself  apprehend  the  Manifestation,  saying,
"Thou  shah  be  there  and  shalt  apprehend."  Now  the
utterance  of  these  words  and  good  tidings  by  him  [Seyyid
K4zim]  as  here  described  is  a  matter  of  notoriety  and  a
thing  universally  admitted  amongst  his  intimates,  being
authenticated  by  several  letters  from  well-known  persons  to
others  who  accepted  the  new  Manifestation  also*.  Indeed
some  of  those  [who  were]  present  in  that  assembly  are  still
alive,  and  confess  to  having  heard  that  announcement  from
the  late  Seyyid.  MulU  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh,  one  of  the
most  distinguished  of  divines,  who  was  moreover  intimately
acquainted  with  the  late  Seyyid,  made  urgent  enquiry  as  to
the  manner  in  which  the  Manifestation  should  come  to
pass.  The  latter,  however,  only  replied,  ' "  Permission  is
not  accorded  unto  me  to  say  more  than  this*."  But  from
whatever  quarter  the  Sun  of  Truth  shall  arise  it  will
irradiate  all  horizons  and  render  the  mirrors  of  believers'
hearts  capable  of  receiving  the  effulgences  of  the  lights  of
■wisdom.'  At  all  events  after  his  return  from  Surra-man-ra'a
the  revered  Sejryid  departed  this  life  as  he  had  foretold."

Whatever  credence  we  may  be  disposed  to  attach  to
this  narrative,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Sheykhfs  were,  in
general,  anxiously  expecting  the  appearance  of  someone
who  should  assume  the  leadership  of  their  party.  A  number
of  the  late  Seyyid  Kdzim's  immediate  disciples  repaired
directly  after  his  death  to  the  mosque  at  Ktifa,  and  there,
wdth  fasting,  vigils  and  prayers,  sought  for  God's  guidance
in  the  choice  of  a  spiritual  director.  Having  completed
their  religious  exercises  they  dispersed  each  in  his  own
way.  MuUd,  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh  proceeded  to  Shlrdz,
and  on  his  arrival  there  paid  a  visit  to  Mlrz4  'All  Muham-
mad, with  whom  he  had  become  acquainted  at  KerbeU.
To  him  first  of  all  did  the  young  prophet  announce  his

1  "The  new  Manifestation"  (»,i  j»Ji)  may  mean  only  the

dispensation  inaugurated  by  the  Bdb,  but  the  force  of  the  "also"
(oa)  which  follows  leads  me  rather  to  conjecture  that  the  dispen-
sation of  Behd  is  intended.

2  This  quotation  is  from  the  beginning  of  the  first  book  of  the
Masnavi.


KAEfM KHAN OF KIRMAN.  241

divine  mission,  adducing  in  proof  thereof  his  Commentary
on  the  Sura  of  Joseph,  and  showing  other  signs  whereby
Mulld  Huse3Ti,  after  a  mental  struggle  which  lasted  several
days,  became  firmly  convinced  that  the  Master  so  eagerly
sought  for  and  so  earnestly  desired  had  at  length  been
found.  No  sooner  was  he  himself  convinced  than,  with
that  fiery  energy  which  so  pre-eminently  distinguished  him
even  amongst  the  eager  active  spirits  who  were  soon  to
carry  the  new  doctrine  throughout  the  length  and  breadth
of  the  Persian  land,  and  cause  the  echo  of  its  fame  to
reverberate  through  the  civilized  world,  he  hastened  to
apprise  his  friends  and  comrades  of  his  discovery. Thu.s

did  he  become  the  "Gate  of  the  Gate"  (^|J|  J^),  the
"First  Letter" (j^| o^). t^ie "First to  beheve"

(  Vol  ^  Jjt)« The  rapidity  with  which  the  new  doctrine

spread  was  wonderful,  representatives  of  all  classes  hastening
to  tender  their  allegiance  to  the  young  Seer  of  ShMz,  but
it  was  from  the  old  Sheykhi  party  that  the  most  eminent
supporters  of  the  new  faith  were  for  the  most  part  derived.
It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  all  the  followers
of  the  late  Seyyid  Kdzim  accepted  the  new  doctrine.  A
considerable  number,  headed  by  H^jf  Muhammad  Karim
Khdn  of  Kirmin,  utterly  declined  to  admit  the  Bdb's  pre-
tensions (for  so  they  regarded  his  claims),  and  these  became
the  bitterest  and  most  violent  of  his  persecutors.  Of  those
doctors  who  heaped  insult  on  the  Bdb  during  his  first
examination  at  Tabriz,  and  those  who  two  years  later
ratified  his  death-warrant  in  the  name  of  religion,  several
were  Sheykhfs.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  recognize  clearly
the  diiFerence  between  the  relations  of  B^biism  to  the  old
and  the  new  Sheykhi  school.  From  the  bosom  of  the  former
it  arose,  and,  in  great  measure,  derived  its  strength ;  with
the  latter  it  was  ever  in  fiercest  conflict.  Of  Sheykh
Ahmad  Ahs4'i  and  Seyyid  Kdzim  of  Resht  both  B^bfs  and
Sheykhis  speak  with  reverence  and  affection ;  but  H4ji
Muhammad  Karim  Kh^n  and  his  followers  are  as  odious  in
the  eyes  of  the  Bdbfs  as  Mirz4  'AH  Muhammad  the  B^b

B.  16


242  NOTE E — THE SHEYKHfS.

and  his  adherents  are  execrable  in  the  opinion  of  the  modern
Sheykhls. The  Biib  stigmatized  Hiji  Muhammad  Karfm

Kh4n  as  "the  Quintessence  of  Hell-fire"  (jK^  aI  as-- »**»-

j\t)  and  "the  [infernal]  Tree  of  Zakkum  "  (see  B.  ii,  pp.

910—911),  while  HAjl  Muhammad  Karim  Khin  wrote  at
least  two  treatises  (one  called  "the  crushing  of  Falsehood,"

i_U=UI  Ol&jl)  in  refutation  and  denunciation  of  the  Bihi

doctrines.  Of  the  bitter  enmity  which  subsists  between
these  two  sects  I  had  ample  evidence  during  the  two  months
which  I  spent  at  KirmAn  in  the  summer  of  1888,  and  pn
more  than  one  occasion  when  representatives  of  both  parties
happened  to  visit  me  simultaneously  their  scarcely  disguised
animosity,  which  seemed  ready  at  the  slightest  opportunity
to  burst  forth  into  open  conflict,  caused  me  the  liveliest
disquietude.

I  trust  that  I  have  succeeded  in  making  clear  the
relations  which  exist  between  the  B4his  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  old  and  new  Sheykhis  on  the  other ;  for  a  proper
appreciation  of  these  is  essential  to  a  clear  understanding
of  the  history  of  B4bfism.  Indeed  we  cannot  consider  that
we  have  thoroughly  fathomed  the  drift  and  purport  of  the
Bd,bf  movement  until  the  writings  of  Sheykli  Ahmad  AhsA'i
and  HAji  Seyyid  KAzim  of  Resht  shall  have  been  submitted
to  careful  and  minute  examination  and  study.  This,  how-
ever, is  a  labour  still  unaccomplished,  and,  with  the  exception
of  one  point  to  be  noticed  immediately,  I  shall  say  no  more
about  the  Sheykhf  doctrines  in  this  place.  Some  further
information  concerning  them  will  be  found  in  Kazem-Beg's
articles  on  the  Bd,bls  {Journal  Asiatique,  1866,  6me  sdrie,
tome  vii,  pp.  457 — 464) ;  in  von  Kremer's  Herrschenden
Ideen  des  Maiiig  (pp.  206 — 208) ;  and  in  my  second  article
on  the  B^bls  in  the  J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889  (pp.  884—885  and
888— 892)._

The  point  of  doctrine  above  mentioned  as  demanding
some  explanation  (for  it  is  alluded  to  in  the  present  text)  is

that  of  the  "Fourth  Support"  (  \j  -{J).  What  I
shall  say  concerning  it  is  derived  from  notes  of  a  conversa-


THE 'FOURTH SUPPORT.'  243

tion  which  I  had  in  June  1888  with  a  Sheykhi  doctor  of
Kirmin  named  Mull4  GhuUm  Huseyn.  I  asked  him  to
explain  to  me  wherein  the  doctrine  of  the  Sheykhls  chiefly
differed  from  that  of  other  Shi'ites.  His  answer  was  in
substance  as  follows: — "The  BdUsarls  [i.e.  non-Sheykhl
Shi'ites]  hold  that  the  'Supports,'  or  essential  principles  of

religion  {^^  J_j^l),  are  five,  to  wit  (1)  Belief  in  the
Unity  of  God  (jls-jJ)  ; (2)  Belief  in  the  Justice  of  God

( J  Jc) ;  (3)  BeUef  in  Prophethood  {^y) ;  (4)  Belief  in  the
Imdmate  {cAS)\ (5)  Belief  in  the  Resurrection  (^,1^^).

Now  two  of  these  (Nos.  2  and  5)  we  refuse  to  admit  as
separate  principles,  for  why  should  we  specify  behef  in  the
Justice  of  God  as  one  of  the  essentials  of  faith  and  omit
belief  in  the  Mercifulness  of  God,  the  Wisdom  of  God,  the
Power  of  God,  and  all  the  other  Attributes  ?  These,  more-
over, as  well  as  belief  in  the  Resurrection,  are  really
included  in  the  third  principle,  for  belief  in  Prophethood
involves  behef  in  the  Prophet,  and  this  again  involves  belief
in  his  book,  wherein  these  two  so-called  principles  are  set
forth  and  whence  only  they  are  known.  Of  the  five  '  prin-
ciples '  of  the  Bd,Usaris,  therefore,  we  only  accept  three,  viz.
(1)  Belief  in  the  Unity  of  God  ;  (2)  Belief  in  Prophethood  ;

(3)  Behef  in  the  Imdmate ;  but  to  these  we  add  another,

which  we  call  the  'Fourth  Support' {j\j 'fj)> '''-■

(4)  that  there  must  always  be  amongst  the  Shi'ites  some

s-

one  perfect  man  (whom  we  call  AilS^ ^^  ■"■■  '  ^^^  perfect

Shi'ite ')  capable  of  serving  as  a  channel  of  gTace  (aJa^L

Vai)  between  the  Absent  Imdm  and  his  church. Such  is

]ur  doctrine  of  the  'Fourth  Support,'  and  it  is  evident  that,
ivhereas  four  supports  are  under  all  circumstances  necessary
■■or  stability,  a  greater  number  than  this  is  unnecessary."^

As  so  explained,  the  'Fourth  Suppm-t'  is  a  term  applic-
able rather  to  that  article  of  faith  which  declares  that  there
nust  always  exist  in  the  Church  of  the  ImAms  some  visible

16—2


244  NOTE E — THE SHEYKHfS.

head  who  enjoys  their  special  spiritual  guidance  and  serves
to  convey  their  wishes  and  their  wisdom  to  all  true  Shi'ites,
than  to  the  actual  personage  who  fulfils  this  function.  Yet
outside  the  Sheykhi  circle,  both  amongst  the  B4Msaris  and
the  Bdbis,  it  certainly  bears  the  second  meaning  as  well ;
and  it  is  commonly  asserted  that  H^jl  Muhammad  Karfm
Khdn  regarded  himself,  and  was  regarded  by  his  followers,
as  being  this  'Fourth  Bupport'  or  Channel  of  Grace  from
the  Spiritual  World.  It  is  evidently  this  second  meaning
which  the  term  bears  in  the  present  text,  and  if  it  bore  it
from  the  first  it  is  evident  that  there  was  originally  very
little  difference  between  the  pretensions  of  Mirzd  'AJi
Muhammad  the  B4b  and  those  of  H4jf  Muhammad  Karfm
Kh^n,  since  both,  in  the  first  instance,  claimed  to  be  neither
more  nor  less  than  intermediaries  between  the  absent  Imdm
and  his  Church,  exactly  in  the  same  sense  as  were  the  four
original  '  Gates '  {Abwdb,  or  Bdbs)  who  served  as  a  con-
nection between  the  Twelfth  Imdm  and  his  followers  during
the  period  of  the  'Lesser  Occultation.'  [See  end  of  Note
D,  supra.^

As  regards  the  actual  condition  of  the  Sheykhis  at  the
present  day,  their  head-quarters  are  still  at  Kirmdn,  near
which  city,  in  a  little  village  called  Langar,  situated  two  or
three  miles  from  Md,hd,n  (the  burial-place  of  the  great
dervish  Sh4h  Ni'matu'Udh),  several  of  the  sons  of  H4ji
Muhammad  Karim  Kh4n  still  reside.  During  my  stay  at
Kirm4n  I  visited  Langar  and  was  permitted  to  sit  for  half
an  hour  at  the  feet  of  'the  Masters'  {AMydn)  as  they  are
called  by  their  followers.  The  elder  'brothers  were  at
Kerbel4  at  that  time  (where,  I  believe,  they  were  very
coldly  received,  being,  indeed,  prevented  from  preaching  in
the  mosque  as  they  desired  to  do),  but  two  younger  brothers
were  engaged  in  expounding  the  doctrines  of  Sheykh  Ahmad
to  an  appreciative  audience  of  heavy-turbaned  votaries.
At  the  conclusion  of  the  lecture  I  had  some  conversation
with  them,  but,  though  I  had  no  reason  to  complain  of  lack
of  courtesy  on  their  part,  I  cannot  say  that  I  was  greatly
impressed  with  their  wisdom.  After  Kirmdn  I  believe  that
Tabriz  contains  more  Sheykhls  than  any  other  city  in
Persia,  but  they  are  to  be  found  in  most  of  the  large  towns.
They  are  generally  regarded  by  orthodox  Shi'ites  with
considerable  dislike  and  suspicion.


NOTE F — SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIES.  245


NOTE  R  '


Additional  Inpormation  concbrnikg  some  of  the
Persons  mentioned  on  p.  5.

Concerning  several  of  the  persons  mentioned  in  the
passage  to  which  this  note  refers,  the  information  at  pre-
sent at  my  disposal  is  deplorably  scanty.  Such  as  it  is,
however,  I  set  it  down,  hoping  that  others  may  be  able  in
the  future  to  supplement  these  meagre  notes  with  further
details.

Mtilld  Hiiseyn  of  Bushraweyh  ('  The  Gate  of  the  Gate,'

._)IJI  v_jL  ._ib>-)-  Concerning  this  illustrious  personage  we
have  the  fullest  information.  The  Ndsikhu  t-Taivdrikh  de-
votes some  10  pages  (each  containing  about  600  words)  to
his  history,  and  the  Rawzatii  s-Safd  gives  an  almost  equally
detailed  account  of  his  career.  Gobineau  and  Kazem-Beg
both  treat  of  his  life,  work,  and  gallant  death  at  Sheykh
Tabarsi  very  fully,  and  in  the  present  work  a  sufficient
summary  thereof  is  contained.  Some  account  of  his  con-
version will  be  found  in  Note  E  above.  Nothing  further
need  be  added  here  except  that,  so  far  as  I  can  learn,  his
mortal  remains  stiU  repose  in  the  little  inner  room  of  the
shrine  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi  where,  at  the  direction  of  MuM
Muhammad  'Alf  B^rfuriishi,  they  were  reverently  laid  by
the  hands  of  his  sorrowing  comrades  in  the  beginning  of
the  year  a.d.  1849.

Mired  Ahmad  ofAzghand  is  mentioned  in  the  Tdrikh-
i-Jadid  in  the  following  passage  : —


246  NOTE F^SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIES.

# Jl)3^_ fljlj^ jLjii'

"  In  short,  after  a  while  His  Excellency  '  the  Gate  of  the
Gate '  [i.e.  Mulld  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh  above  mentioned]
.set  out  for  KhurAs^n.  And  after  that  there  emanated  from
the  Source  of  Command  [i.e.  the  B4b]  an  epistle  to  confer
honour  on  the  faithful,  wherein  it  was  made  incumbent
upon  them  to  proceed  to  Khurdsto  in  the  case  of  this  being
possible  and  their  being  able. And  in  the  epistle  addressed

to  kkk  Mlrz4  Ahmad  Azkandf,  who  was  one  of  the  chief
disciples  of  the  late  Seyyid  [Kdzim  of  Resht],  he  [the  Bdb]
foreshadowed  the  catastrophe  of  Mdzandardn."  In  only  one
other  passage  in  the  Tarikh-i-Jadid  can  I  find  any  reference
to  Mlrzd,  Ahmad  of  Azghand,  and  this,  consisting  of  a  mere
list  of  the  names  of  learned  and  pious  persons  who  believed
in  the  B^b  and  "most  of  whom  attained  the  lofty  rank  of
martyrdom,"  throws  no  further  light  on  the  matter.  I  cannot
find  any  other  mention  of  this  Mirz4  Ahmad  in  any  of  the
documents  at  my  disposal.

Mulld [Miikammad] Sddik, entitled "  the Holy "

(^Jflo  ,_ib..).  or  "the  Holy  one  of  Khurdsdn"  (  j^
oLj\jS.),  was, according  to the Tdnkh-i-Jadid,  one  of

the  first  converts  gained  by  Mulld  Huseyn  to  the  new
faith.  He  was,  previously  to  his  conversion,  a  midarris,
or  professor,  at  one  of  the  colleges  of  Isfahan.  On  the
arrival  of  MulU  Huseyn  in  that  city  (the  first  visited  by
him  on  the  missionary  journey  which  at  the  command  of
his  master  he  undertook)  MulU  Sddik  sought  and  obtained
an  interview  with  him,  listened  to  his  arguments,  examined
the  sacred  books  of  the  new  creed,  and,  after  a  brief  but
severe  mental  struggle,  wherein  love  of  truth  finally  tri-
umphed over  fear  and  prudence,  embraced  the  doctrines  of


NOTE F — SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIKS.  247

the  Bdb.  "We  next  find  liim  some  months  later  (Sept.  23rd
or  2-4th,  A.D.  1845)  at  Shirdz,  sufFering  the  penalty  of  his
zeal  as  described  in  the  text.  Expelled  from  ShMz,  he
seems  to  have  made  his  way  to  Mdzandarau  ;  at  all  events
we  find  him  amongst  the  number  of  the  besieged  at  Sheykh
Tabarsi,  and  after  the  capitulation  he  was  one  of  those
reserved  from  the  general  massacre  to  grace  the  triumphal
entry  of  Prince  ]Mahdi-Kuli  Mirz^  into  Birfurtish.  Here
again  fortune  so  far  favoured  him  that  he  was  saved  by
being  sold  into  slavery '  from  the  direr  fate  which  overtook
ahnost  all  of  his  companions.  What  befel  him  after  this
I  know  not,  but  from  the  manner  in  which  he  is  referred
to  in  the  Tdnlh-i-Jadid  it  would  appear  that  he  was  no
longer  alive  at  the  time  when  that  work  was  composed.

Sheykh  Ahu  Tiirab  of  Ashtahurd  is  only  twice  alluded
to  in  the  TurU-h-i-Jadid,,  and  I  can  find  no  further  account
of  him  elsewhere.  In  the  second  of  these  passages  his  name
is  merely  mentioned  in  the  list  of  eminent  men  converted
to  the  new  faith  of  which  I  have  afready  spoken.  In  the
first  it  is  stated  that  he  \vas  married  to  the  sister  of  MuU^
Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh,  a  woman  of  extraordinary  ^-irtue
and  piet}',  who,  from  association  with  the  celebrated  Kur-
ratu'l-'Ayn  [see  Xote  Q,  infra\_  had  attained  to  the  highe.st
degree  of  excellence  and  learning.  Although  the  Sheykh
Abu  Turdb  here  mentioned  is  described  as  Kazvini,  not  as
Ashtahdrdi,  I  think  that  the  same  person  is  intended  in
both  passages.

Mullet  Ymuf  of  Ardabil.  See  Kazem-Beg  {Journal
Asiatique,  .sixieme  s^rie,  tome  vii,  pp.  357,  358,  467,  468,
473,  477,  486,  and_  522).  Mull4  Yiisuf  was  one  of  the
Bib's  most energetic missionaries, and  was  deputed  to

preach  the  doctrine  in  Azarbaijdn.  Through  his  instra-
mentahty  the  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of  MlMn  were
converted.  He  afterwards  attempted  to  join  the  Bibfs  at
Sheykh  Tabarsi,  but  on  his  way  thither  fell  into  the  hands
of  Mahdi-Kuli  Mfrzd,  who  detained  him  as  a  prisoner  till
the  conclusion  of  the  siege,  when,  in  company  with  several
of  the  Bdbi  chiefs  reserved  from  the  general  massacre  to
grace  the  Prince's  triumph,  he  was  led  captive  into  Bdr-

'  See,  however,  note  2  at  the  foot  of  p.  129  supra.


248  NOTE F — SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIES.

furush.  There,  according  to  M.  S^vrugiiin's  account  quoted
by  Kazem-Beg  {loc.  cit.,  p.  522),  he  was  blown  from  the
mouth  of  a  cannon.  The  remainder  of  Kazem-Beg's  account
differs  from  that  given  in  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadi.d,  in  that  it
represents  him  not  only  as  reaching  the  Castle  of  Sheykh
Tabarsf,  but  as  taking  a  prominent  part  in  the  defence
thereof

Mulld  JaUl  of  Uramiyya  and  ]\faUd  Mahdi  of  Kand
are  merely  mentioned  in  the  list  of  illustrious  martyrs  con-
tained in  the  Tarikh-i-Jadid.

Of  Bheykh  8n'id  the  Indian  I  can  find  no  other  men-
tion.

Mulld  'All  of  Bistdm,  according  to  the  Tdrikh-i-Jddtd,
was  one  of  those  who,  on  the  death  of  H4j(  Seyyid  Kd,zim
of  Resht,  assembled  in  the  mosque  at  Kiifa  to  fast  and  pray
for  guidance.  Subli-i-Ezel  in  December  1889  wrote  for  me
a  short  account  of  the  history  of  the  Bdbf  movement,  which
at  some  future  date  I  hope  to  publish.  In  this  occurs  the
following  passage : —

"  His  Excellency  Mull4  'Alf  Bist4mf,  who  was  noted  for
his  sanctity  (for  he  is  'the  Holy  One  of  KhurAsdn'),  set  out
towards  Turkey,  but  in  Baghdad  they  took  him  and  impri-
soned him.  Then,  at  the  decision  of  the  Muftt,  they  sent
him  off  towards  Constantinople,  but  martyred  him  by  poison
at  a  place  near  Baghdad  called  Bad-r4'f."  In  one  of  the
interviews  which  I  had  with  §ubh-i-Ezel  during  my  stay  at
Famagusta  in  March 1890  he  communicated  to  me  the


XOTE  G KaB's PlXORUtAGE.  2*9

foUo^ring  atkiiTaimal  parrifukrs  :— "■  MiiDa  "AL  of  K^razQ
■w-as  lie  fc-T  msTtTT.  aaxi  tL^  onlT  oiie  ■orLo  d:eii  ly  xhf
iands  cf  tlie  Osscsnh  Turks.  His  mairyTiicim  ix-r.irrtd
in  tie  s«'C«nd  ctr  tiiird  Teax  of  tJie  '  Mamffs-taiica "  _a.  h.
l:»t;2 — Jv.  A-B.  1S4^ — T"k  He  T»^a*  air^^-ed  ax  Es^Liisd  aad
trasT  into  •rai-soai.  All  the  m^nfi^  rf  Bairnda.i  }i?ad£<d  'br
Maiim'id  Efendi  and  SlirTii  Mdhsmsad  Hs.-5an\  sipaed
iis  deaiih-wairauu  save  ctne,  MiAsJn  v'^i  Hasan  rv  iiar:e,
'irio  refused.  ssTiiu:  tihai  lie  ■srss  dord-Tfiil  as  to  lie  r'irbt-
fnlness  if  so  doiiur.  SiilriseqiieiiTlT  xhe  Bab  addressed  tiese
■wc-rds  T.0  the  abeTe-mentirindd  Munsin  ctr  Hasari  in  tlie

BmI  ./  XawM^-  {^ ^.;_<^) ;— •  Ee^.^i:se  yen d:-b-ed

aihi  de-c-lined  w  take  part  in  lids  mirrde-.  iLerefi'-re  Laxh
G-ixi  deL'reed  tiai  in  liie  Bar  of  EesTureftioii  liie  ire  shall
HOT  K'Ticii  votl"  "


NOTE  G-

The  Bis's  PiifiiirMAtti:  to  Meoca  asT'  liEm^  to  SsiRii.

As  Tiie  aK-oimts  rdTLerro  TT-Hisied  of  ihe  Bab's  n:;.T-e-
menTs  dniirij:  The  earlieT  jtrioO.  cf  Lis  Tnis!s:C':n  a:re  sc:iLetrria':
•wmra-diowrc,  it  bas  steemed  to  me  adxisabie  to  emr-odr  ir
tie  j-!K«eiiT  note  all  titai  I  bare  beeii  able  to  lesm  on  t^is
martiex.  T-OireTbej  ■onTb  Tbe  oonc-irisions  •srnic-ii  niay  r^e  faarJr
ded'.ioed  from  tbe  ia^Ts  aT  presenT  sT-ailabile,

PirsT  of  all  leT  ns  ennmersT-e  biiedr  ibe  fs-i'ts  "srniob
sseem  to>  be  siifflaenTiT  esivabJisbed  bv  g-ood  eTiden;-e.

tl^  Mirsa  'Ai  Mubaimnad..  afrenrards  xbe  Bab.  •s^as
biorn  ai  Siurai  eitiei  on  Mnbairam  1st  a.e.  12o6  'Oc-t.  ?tZi.
AJV  I*;:?!**,  or  on  Mn'harram  IsT  lf-;>5  Oc-t.  i^^Ti.  a-T'.  iSli-'.
most  probablr  ifor  the  reasscins  ad"ranced  in  Xc-Te  0.  p.  551.
,<ii}T(i)  Tie  fonaej.

'  Prob&Kv  the  saEM  Sbeyth  Mr-hi^masd  Has&zj  -h^o  :>  msq-
sarad  in  xbe  Xsr-fr-i-JfiirW  see  S,  ii.  iv  ti5*0  .


250  NOTE O— UAH'S I'II/1IUMA(!I';.

(2)  Whilst  liii  was  siill  of  tender  n<^i;  he  lost  his  fiither,_
Soyyid  Muhammad  Rizii,  and  was  \)h,vA-A  under  tlio  care  of
his  maternal  uncle,  Mfr/.d  Seyyid  'Alf  {supra,  ]>.  '■^)■

(3)  On  attaining  years  of  discretion  fpnibably,  as
Kazem-Bcfr  states  at  p.  ;-5:-}5  of  his  first  article,  when  about
fourteen  or  fifteen  years  old)  he  was  sent  to  Bnshire  to  lielp
in  his  uncle's  business  (supra,  \>.  2).

(4)  Disinclined  by  nature  to  the  callinf,'  for  wliich  he
was  destined,  be  proceeded  at  soirn^  timi!  antcci^dent  to  the
year  A.ii.  1 259  (in  which  yiiar  Seyyid  Kiizini  died,  see  p.  238,
supra)  to  Kerbelii,  where  lie  residi^l  for  somk;  time  (two
months,  according  to  the  Tarikli.-i-.fadul),  occasionally
attending  the  lectures  of  lliijf  Seyyid  Kiizim  of  llcslit.

(.5)  In  A.ii.  1258  (a.I).  1842)  when  in  bis  twenty-third
year  he  ujarried  (B.  ii,  ]>.  !ll)3).  There  is  no  positive  evi-
dence to  show  whether  this  marriage  took  place  at  Shfrdz  or
Kerbel4,  but  the  former  hypothesis  appears  more  prob;i,ble.
By  this  marriage  he  had  (according  to  a  statttment  made
by  Subh-i-Ezelj  one  son  named  (if  my  nicinory  serves  me
aright)  Ahmad,  who  died  in  infancy.  The  loss  of  this  c-bild
is  said  to  be  allud(;d  to  in  the  (JmivinnUary  on  tlic.  Kara  of
JosK])h.

(6)  Oti  Jam4d(-ul-Ulii  5tli,  a.ii.  1200  (May  2;ird,  K.h.
1844)  Mfrz4  'AH  Muhammad — then  "twenty-four  years  of
ago  and  entering  on  his  twenty-fifth  year"  as  Subh-i-Ezel
states,  or,  in  his  own  words,  "at  an  age  which  did  not  exceeil
five  and  twenty"  (see  p.  221,  supra) — first  became  clearly
conscious  of  the  divine  mission  laid  upon  him,  and  (ap-
jjarently  without  much  delay)  began  to  announce  hhnscH'as

the  B4b.  If  by  the  '  manifostatio/i '  (  ^  1^)  we  are  to  under-
stand that  period  at  which  tin;  views  of  the  young  Seer  first
became  definitely  formulated  ratbe.r  thari  that  at  which  tticy
wi;re  first  made  known  to  others,  it  is  of  course  pcjssible
that  some  little  while  elajised  between  the  'njanifestation'
ami  its  disclosure.  This  hypothesis  is  supjiortiid  by  the
narrative  of  the  Tarlkli-l-Jadld,  accord! rjg  to  which  MulU
Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh  (who  was,  as  is  urjariiiijously  ad-
mitted, and  as  his  titles  'the  First  liottei-'  and  the  'First
who  believed'  imply,  the  earliest  convert)  came  to  Sh(rd/>
shortly  after  the  death  of  Seyyid  K4zim,  visited  Mfrz4  'AH


NOTE G — BABS PILGRIMAGE.  251

Muhammad  (with  whom  he  had  been  previously  acquainted
at  KerbeU),  and,  during  this  first  \  isit,  was  surprised  by  his
former  fellow-student  demanding  of  him  '  whether  he  saw  in
him  the  signs  which  must  characterize  Seyyid  Kdzim's  suc-
cessor r  (see  B.  ii,  pp.  902 — 903).  On  the  other  hand  it  is
clear  that  not  more  than  a  month  or  two  can  have  elapsed
between  the  time  of  the  'manifestation'  and  its  disclosure,
firstly,  because  the  beginning  of  the  Bd,bi  propaganda  is
placed  by  both  of  the  Musulmdn  historians  in  this  same
year  of  a.h.  1260;  secondly,  because  seven  mouths  after  the
'manifestation'  (as  wiU  be  shown  immediately)  the  B4b,
having  laid  the  foundations  of  his  religion  at  Shlrdz,  was
away  performing  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.

We  have  now  reached  the  point  to  which  this  note
specially  refers — the  Bdb's  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  Concern-
ing this  Gobineau  says  simply  (pp.  141 — 115),  "II  fit  tr^s-
jeune  le  p^erinage  de  la  Mecque...Il  est  bien  probable  que
ce  fut  dans  la  viUe  sainte  eUe-meme  qu'il  se  d^tacha  absolu-
ment  et  d^finitivement  de  la  foi  du  Proph^te,  et  qu'il  con9ut
la  pens^e  de  ruiner  cette  foi  pour  mettre  ^  sa  place  tout
autre  chose."  Kazem-Beg  says  (i,  p.  314),  "  Apres  avoir  semd
bon  gr^  mal  gT^  quelques  mauvais  grains  dans  cette  terre  de
Chiraz  si  fertile  en  pr^jugt^s  et  en  superstitions,  le  Kerbt-lai
Seid  Ali-Mohammed  se  rendit  en  p^lerinage  ^  la  Meeque."
In  this  instance  Kazem-Beg  is  undoubtedly  right;  it  was
after,  not  hefare,  the  manifestation  that  the  Bdb  went  to
Mecca.  The  Xusilhu' t-Tawartkh  is  clear  on  this  point.
"To  proceed  with  the  narrative,"  it  says,  "when  the  B4b
had  laid  the  foundations  of  such  an  edifice,  he,  according  to
his  promise,  set  oiit  for  ilecca  the  venerable."  The  promise
alluded  to  in  this  passage  is  thus  noticed  on  the  preceding-
page:  "Since  tradition  affirms  that  His  Higlmess  the
Ki'im  (i.e.  the  Im4m  Mahdl)  shall  come  forth  from  Mecca
the  venerable,  he  (the  Bdb)  used  to  tell  his  disciples  that
next  year  he  would  announce  his  claim  in  Mecca  and  come
forth  with  the  sword."  A  statement  of  Subh-i-Ezel's  to
the  effect  that  the  manifestation  was  in  Shirdz  (not  in
Kerbela,  as  stated  in  the  XusMu't-TairariM),i)i&.t^inM
HusejTi  first  beheved,  and  that  soon  after  this  the_B4b  set
out  on  the  pilgrimage  to  [Mecca,  taken  in  conjunction  with
the  above  testimony,  seems  to  prove  conclusively  that  the


262  NOTE  G — bab's  pilgrimage.

pilgrimage -journey took  place shortly after the 'mani-
festation.'

Now  since,  as  we  have  seen,  the  'manifestation'  was  on

Jamd,dl-ul-UU  5th  a.h.  1260,  and  since  the  pilgrimage
must  be  performed  in  the  month  of  Zi'1-Hijj^  (the  last
month  of  the  Muhammadan  year),  it  follows  that  Kazem-
Beg's  statement  (i,  p.  346)  that  "at  the  end  of  the  year
1260  (1844)  he  (i.e.  the  Mh)  returned  from  Mecca  to
Bandar-Bushire,  where  he  was  arrested  in  the  month  of
October,  by  order  of  the  Nlz/nnud-Dawla  Huseyn  Kh4n,
governor  of  Shir4z,"  is  erroneous.  For,  according  to  the
Nasikhu't-Taiodrfkh,  the  horsemen  sent  to  Bushire  to
arrest  the  B4b  set  out  from  Shlrd,z  on  Sha'bd,n  16th,  and
returned,  bringing  with  them  their  prisoner,  on  liamazin
19th.  The  latter  of  these  dates  is  confirmed  by  the
Rawzatu's-Safu;  while  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadtd,  after  mention-
ing that  the  Bd,b's  return  to  Bushire  occurred  in  a.h.  1261,
says  that  he  was  brought  before  Huseyn  Kh^n  on  the  eve
of  Ramaz^n  21st.  Though  neither  of  the  Musulm^n
historians  mentions  the  year',  it  is  evident  that  a.h.  1261
is  intended,  for  in  RamazAn  a.h.  1260  the  B4b  had  not
yet  started  for  Mecca.  We  may  therefore  add  to  the  facts
previously  stated  about  the  Bib's  earlier  movements —

(7)  That  towards  the  end  of  the  year  a.h.  1260,  and
presumably  in  the  month  Zi'1-Ka'da  of  that  year  (November,
A.D.  1844),  he  set  out  from  Slilrdz  for  Mecca.

(8)  That  he  remained  at  Mecca  at  any  rate  till  Zi'l-
Hijj(^  13th  A.H.  1260  (December  24th,  a.d.  1844)  for  "the
completion  of  the  rites  incumbent  on  pilgrims.

(9)  That  he  returned  by  sea  some  time  during  the  first
half  of  the  year  a.h.  1261  (a.d.  1845)  to  Bushire,  whence  he
sent  missionaries  to  Shlr4z,  he  himself  remaining  at  the
former  place. (See  supra,  p.  5.)

(10)  That  on  Sha'bin  2nd  a.h.  1261  (August  6th,
A.D._  1845)  strong  measures  were  adopted  by  Huseyn  Khdn
against  these  missionaries. (See  supra,  pp.  5 — 6.)

(11)  That  on  Sha'b4n  16th  a.h.  1261  (August  20th,
1845)  horsemen  were  sent  from  Shlrdz  to  arrest  the  B4b  at
Bushire.

1  Compai-e  the  remarks  on  pp.  186 — 187,  sxipra.


NOTE H — SEYYID YAHYA OF DARAB.  253

(12)  That  these  horsemen  re-entered  Shird,z  with  their
prisoner  on  Ramazdn  19th  a.h.  1261  (September  21st,
A.D.  1845),  and  that  on  that  same  day  (according  to  the
Bawzatu  s-Sa/d),  or  on  the  evening  of  the  following  day
(according  to  the  Tdrlkli-i-Jadid),  the  B4b  was  brought
before  Huse3rri  Khdn.

There  is  not  at  present  sufficient  evidence  to  determine
definitely  the  following  points  : —

(1)  At  what  age  the  B4b  lost  his  father.

(2)  At  what  age  he  first  left  Shir^z  and  went  to
Bushire.

(3)  How  long  he  remained  at  Bushire  engaged  in
commerce.

(4)  When  he  went  to  Kerbeld,  how  long  he  remained
there,  and  whether  he  married  before,  during,  or  after  his
sojourn  there.

(5)  Whether  he  returned  directly  to  Bushire  after  per-
forming the  rites  of  the  pilgrimage  at  Mecca  and  visiting
Medina,  or  whether  he  remained  some  few  months  in
Arabia.

The  B^b  was  accompanied  on  the  pilgrimage  by  Hijl
Muhammad  'AH  BArfuriishl  (Kazem-Beg,  i,  p.  344,  note ;
confirmed  by  Subh-i-Ezel),  and  was  (according  to  Subh-i-
Ezel)  joined  later  by  H^ji  Suleymdn  Khdn.


NOTE  H.

Aka  Setyid  Yahya  of  DarIb  and  the  NMz
Instjhrection.

Gobineau  makes  no  mention  of  the  Ni'riz  insurrection.
Kazem-Beg  gives  a  long  account  of  it,  occupying  fifteen
pages  (ii,  pp.  224 — 239),  which  contains  neither  much  more
nor  much  less  than  the  Ndsikhu' t-Tawdrikh.  His  error
as  to  the  date  of  the  Zanjd,n  siege  (see  supra,  p.  187)  has
led  him  to  give  a  wrong  date  for  this  event  likewise.
Ak4  Seyyid  Yahyd's  death — the  closing  catastrophe  of  the
Ni'riz  insurrection — occurred,  not,  as  he  implies,  early  iu
A.D.  1850,  but  on  Sha'bdn  28th  a.h.  1266  (July  9th,  a.d.


254  NOTE H — SEYYID YAHYA OF DARAB.

1850,  see  siqyra,  p.  45,  note  1).  The  Bawzatii  i^-8afd
contains  a  much  briefer  account  of  the  matter,  which  agrees
in  the  main  with  those  above  alluded  to.  The  Tdrikh-i-
Jadtd,  on  the  other  hand,  differs  considerably  from  the
Musulmdn  histories,  and  supplies  us  with  much  new
matter.  As  the  versions  embodied  in  the  latter  are  ren-
dered sufficiently  accessible  to  the  European  reader  by
Kazem-Beg's  narrative,  I  shall  confine  myself  here  to  gmng
a  brief  presentation  of  the  account  according  to  the  B^bf
tradition.

Seyyid  Yahy4's  father  Seyyid  .Ja'far,  surnamed  Kashfi
or  Kashshaf  ('the  Discloser')  because  of  his  skill  in  the
exegesis  of  the  Kur'dn  and  the  visions  which  he  claimed
to  have,  seems,  according  to  all  accounts,  to  have  been
universally  respected  and  revered.  Before  the  events  with
which  we  are  concerned  took  place  he  left  his  native  town
of  Dki&h  and  settled  in  Buriijird.  His  son  Seyyid  Yahyd
would  seem  to  have  resided  at  Teherdn  for  some  time
previously  to  the  Bdb's  appearance,  but  for  how  long  does
not  appear.  At  all  events,  shortly  after  this  took  place  he
(at  the  command  of  Muhammad  Sh4h  as  stated  at  p.  7  of
the  present  work,  at  the  request  of  his  disciples  and
followers  according  to  the  T&rikh-i-Jarl'id)  proceeded  to
Shir^z  with  the  express  object  of  enquiring  into  the  Bdb's
claims;  and  was  present,  according  to  the  NAsikhu't-
Tavdrikh,  at  the  B^b's  examination  before  Huseyn  Kh4n
on  Ramazdn  21st  a.h.  1261  (Sept.  23rd,  a.d.  1845).  Al-
though, if  we  are  to  give  credence  to  the  Musulm^n
historian's  assertions,  the  Bd,b  scarcely  emerged  from  this
ordeal  with  flying  colours,  Seyyid  Yahyd  was  sufficiently
impressed  by  what  he  saw  of  the  young  reformer  to  desire
fuller  opportunities  of  conversing  with  him.  The  usual
result  followed.  After  a  brief  period  of  hesitation  and
doubt,  Seyyid  Yahy4  eagerly  embraced  the  new  faith.  A
long  account  of  his  conversion  is  given  in  the  Tdrikh-i-
Jadid,  which,  interesting  as  it  is,  lack  of  space  compels  me
to  omit.

Sejryid  Yahy4  does  not  seem  to  have  remained  in  Shlr^z
long  after  his  conversion.  The  present  history  (p.  S)  states
that  he  "hastened  to  Buriijird  to  his  father  Seyyid  Ja'far";
the  TanM-i-Zarffif?  describes  him  as  "setting  outforYezd";


XOTE  H — SEYYID  YAHTA  OF  PAKAB, 255

while  the  Xa-^'LHu't-Tiinirfi-h  assert^  that  at'rer  the  Bab's
rti^uT  to  Isfahan  he  was  informed  by  H\ise>"n  Khan  that
"  liis  farther  sojourn  in  Fars  was  undesirable. '  and  that
aoeordinglv  he  betook  liimself  to  Yezd.  Whatever  his
immediate  movements  on  quitting  Sluraz  ii.av  have  been
(and  it  is  not  improbable  thar  he  may  have  %Tsired  many
towns  besides  those  mentioned  to  preach  the  new  faith,
Knui',  as  would  appear,  commissioned  by  the  Bab  so  to  do>
he  would  seem  to  have  a^rain  visited  Tehenin.  and  there  to
have  remained  for  ^ome  considerable  time.  Subh-i-tel.  in
reply  to  a  r.;e<:ion  which  I  addressed  t^^  him  as  to  the  cha-
vaeter  of  Aka  Se^^nd  Yahya  and  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the
chai^  of  pertidy  bro\uT.:  against  him  by  a  certain  writer

Kazem-Bej:.  ii,  p.  -oi*'.  wrote  thus: — "The  -s-irtiie  and
l>erfev'tious  of  His  Excellency  Aka  Se\^"id  Tahya  were
lieyoud  all  limits  and  b-^uuds.  He  was  not  ^^.  ";.  as  that
';u>torian  lias  described.  I  bear  witness  I  y  God  and  His
S'oirit  that  this  [liistorian]  has  written  d':'w:;r-;_li:  false-
hood. M^st  of  the  people  of  Persia  admitre-i  i-is  virtue
a.ud  perfe.tious.  1  myseh'  in  the  day-  of  my  youth  met
liim  several  times  at  ni_li:  in  my  own  iiouse  and  elsewhere,
and  w::r,essed  the  perfection  of  bis  ^^rtlle^  and  endow-
ment s."

The  iuformati'."'U  at  our  Oiisposal  is  insiirrioient  t'^  enable
us  :o  trace  Se}"}'id  Yahya-  movements  from  the  period  of
his  c  '-iversiou  in  tiie  autumn  of  a.p.  1'^4o  till  we  find  him
involvexi  in  the  troubles  at  Yezd  in  May  ISon.  If  the  re-
iterateii  fisserrions  n'  the  TjrfJ:h-i-Ji':i'.i  to  the  etieet  that
he prweeded  direttly  from  S::ra;to  Yezd,  returned  directly
from  Ye-d  to  Sburaz  and  Xin:,  and  also  \-isitei  Teheran,
are  to  be  cretlited.  we  must  supp  se  that  he  visited  Yezd
tu-ice  at  least  duriuz:  this  peri: a.  At  all  events  in  iMay
1^0"  we  find  him  in  that  city,  busily  enpuei  ui  prea-nini
the  iBabi  doctrines,  an  i  surrounded  by  a  cvr.s:ierab.e  numter
of  fo".  wers.  The  covemor  of  Yezd,  Aka  Kuan,  at  length
considered  it  ad^  i<able  to  interfere,  and  sent  men  to  arrest
Se\'A'id  Yaihya,  who  retire-i  with  ;  me  of  b-:s  f.nlowei-s  to
the  citadel  and  prepared  ti  defend  b.imsei:.  An  unsuc-
cessful attack  on  the  insur_en:s'  position  resulte-.I  in  a  loss

■i  tbirtv  lives  to  the  be-ie..ei-s  and  seven  to  the  Babis.


256  NOTE H — SEYYID YAHYA OF DARAB,

Seyyid  YahyA,  however,  does  not  seem  to  have  been
altogether  satisfied  with  his  position.  One  night  he  said,
"  If  anyone  could  lead  out  my  horse  so  that  I  could  go
forth  to  put  an  end  to  this  matter  and  convey  myself  to
some  other  place,  it  would  not  be  a  bad  thing."  A  youth
named  Hasan,  distinguished  by  a  singular  devotion  to
Seyyid  Yahyd,,  at  once  volunteered  to  make  the  attempt,
and  persisted  in  his  purpose  in  spite  of  his  master's  warning
that  he  would  be  taken  and  slain.  This  actually  befel.
Hasan  was  captured  by  the  enemy  and  brought  before  the
governor,  who  ordered  him  to  be  blown  from  the  mouth  of
a  gun.  So  little  did  this  terrible  sentence  affect  the  brave
youth  that  he  requested  that  he  might  be  bound  with  his
face  towards  the  cannon  so  that  he  might  see  the  match
applied.  In  spite  of  this  untoward  event  Seyyid  YahyA
succeeded  in  effecting  his  escape  from  Yezd  in  company
with  one  of  his  disciples.  He  first  made  his  way  to  Shlrdz,
whence  he  proceeded  to  Nirlz.  After  his  departure,  the
Bdbls  at  Yezd  were  soon  subdued  by  the  governor,  who
punished  some  with  death,  some  with  imprisonment,  and
some  with  fines.

No  sooner  had  Seyyid  Yahyd  reached .  Nirfz  than  he
again  began  his  propaganda,  undeterred  by  the  remon-
strances and  threats  of  the  governor  Zeynu'l-'Abidfn  Khdn.
The  latter  finally  called  upon  the  people  of  Nlriz  to  assist
him  in  forcibly  expelling  the  disturber.  Seyyid  YahyL
being  apprised  of  this,  repaired  to  the  mosque  where  his
father  had  been  wont  to  preach,  and  addressed  to  the
people  there  assembled  an  affecting  discourse,  wherein  he
reminded  them  of  their  former  love  for  himself,  declared
that  his  only  object  was  to  make  them  partakers  in  that
faith  which  had  been  to  him  a  source  of  such  great  happi-
ness, and  concluded  by  conjuring  them  by  the  veneration
in  which  they  held  his  father's  memory  not  to  suffer  them-
selves to  be  made  the  instniments  of  the  governor's  malice.
Having  finished  his  discourse  he  left  the  town  accompanied
by  seventeen  of  his  followers,  and  took  up  his  abode  at  an
old  ruined  castle  in  the  neighbourhood.

Seyyid  Yahyd  was  not  suffered  to  remain  long  undis-
turbed. _  His  foes  soon  discovered  his  retreat  and  proceeded
to  lay  siege  to  it. At  first  they  were  unsuccessful,  Seyyid


SURRENDER OF THE BABLS.  257

Yahyi  having  apparently  been  joined  by  a  larze  number  of
supporters  (three  hundred  according  to  the  ^lu-uhadn  his-
torian) ;  and  indeed  the  Bdbi's  gained  at  least  one  decided
victor}-  over  their  foes.  But  in  a  short  while  the  besiegers
were  re-inforced  by  troops  sent  from  Shirdz  at  the  command
of  Finlz  Mirzd,  the  new  governor  of  Fars,  and  commanded
by  Mihr  'Ah  Khin  Shuja'ul-MuU:  of  Xur  and  Mustafa-
Kuli  Khin  Kdra-giizliL  The  arrival  of  these  troops  greatly
dispirited  the  be-ieged  ;  many  of  the  less  ardent  desened,
and  in  a  short  time  the  occupants  of  the  castle  were  re-
duced to  seventy.

In  spite  of  the  defections  from  their  ranks,  the  Babi's
(according  to  the  Tdr)kh-i-Ja<lAd)  continued  to  defend
themselves  with  such  vigour  that  the  besiegers  were  fain
to  have  recourse  to  treachery  .similar  in  character  to  that
whereby  She^-kh  Tabarsi  and  Zanjan  were  finally  subdued.
They  sent  a  message  to  .Se}"yid  Yahyi  asking  him  to  come
to  their  camp  and  hold  a  peaceful  consultation  with  the
ro3^alist  leaders,  and  assuring  him  with  oaths  registered  on
the  Kur'dn  that  no  harm  should  befal  him  at  their  hands.
Se^yid  Yahyd,  in  spite  of  the  remon.strances  and  warnings
of  his  followers,  acquiesced  in  the  proposed  arrangement,
and  forthwith  betook  himself  to  the  besiegers'  camp.  He
was  at  first  received  with  courtesy  and  treated  with  all
respect,  but  when,  on  the  foUowiug  morning,  he  attempted
to  leave  the  tent  which  had  been  assigned  to  him,  he  was
prevented  by  the  sentinels  from  so  doing.  The  Babfs,
becoming  aware  in  some  way  of  the  insult  offered  to  their
chief,  made  a  sudden  sortie  and  succeeded  in  greatly  dis-
comfiting their  foes.  Thereupon  the  officers  of  the  besiegiag
army  hastened  to  •?e37id  Yahyd's  tent  and  remonstrated
with  him  on  the  action  of  his  followere,  reminding  him
that  he  had  agreed  to  co-operate  with  them  in  striving  to
bring  about  a  peaceful  settlement.  Seyyid  Yahyd  in  turn
reproached  them  with  wanton  violation  of  good  faith  in
confining  him  to  his  tent,  which  conduct  on  their  part,  he
assTired  them,  was  the  sole  cause  of  what  had  now  occurred.
The  royalist  officers  apologized  for  the  irtsult  offered,  which,
they  declared,  they  had  in  no  wise  sanctioned,  and  finally
prevailed  on  Seyyid  Yahyi  to  write  to  his  followers  in-
structing them to  lay  down  their arms, evacuate  their

B.  17


258  NOTE H — SECOND RISING AT NfefZ.

fortress,  and  return  to  their  homes.  The  BdWs  faithfully
obeyed  the  commands  of  their  chief,  but  no  sooner  were
they  disbanded  and  scattered  than  they  were  seized  by  the
soldiers  and  brought  in  chains  to  the  camp,  while  their
houses  were  given  over  to  plunderers.

The  besiegers,  having  now  gained  their  object,  readily
forgot  their  oaths  and  plighted  troth.  Seyyid  YahyA  was
strangled  with  his  own  girdle  by  one  whose  two  brothers
had  been  killed  during  the  siege,  and  the  other  Bihis  like-
wise died  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner.  The  heads  of
the  victims  were  stuffed  with  straw',  and,  bearing  with
them  these  grim  trophies  of  their  prowess,  together  with
some  forty  or  fifty  B4bl  women  and  one  child  of  tender  age
as  captives,  the  victorious  army  returned  to  Shlrdz.  Their
entry  into  that  city  was  made  the  occasion  of  general
rejoicings ;  the  captives  were  paraded  through  the  streets
and  bazaars  and  finally  brought  before  Prince  Flrdz  Mlrzd,
who  was  feasting  in  a  summer-house  called  Kuldh-i-Fi-
rangi.  In  his  presence  Mihr  'All  KhAn,  Mirzd  Na'fm,
and  the  other  officers  recounted  the  details  of  their  victory,
and  received  congratulations  and  marks  of  favour.  The
captive  women  were  finally  imprisoned  in  an  old  cara-
vansaray  outside  the  Isfahan  gate.  What  treatment  they
experienced  at  the  hands  of  their  captors  is  left  to  our
conjecture.  Twelve  Bdbis  who  had  escaped  from  NMz
to  Isfahan  were  there  captured  and  sent  to  Shfrdz  where
they  were  executed.  Thus  ended  the  first  Niriz  insur-
rection.

The  second  insurrection  occurred  about  two  years  later.
A  number  of  B4bis  took  refuge  with  their  wives  and  chil-
dren in  the  mountains  about  Niriz,  and  for  a  long  while
offered  a  vigorous  and  successful  resistance  to  those  who
strove  to  dislodge  them. They  even  attacked  the  town  and

killed  the  governor  Zeynu'l-'Abidin  Khdn — the  chief  author
of  their  suff'erings —while  he  was  at  the  bath.  Finally
troops  were  sent  from  Shirdz  by  the  governor  Tahmdsp
Mlrz4,  and  these,  aided  by  the  tribesmen  of  Ddrdb  and
S4biln4t,  succeeded  at  length  in  stamping  out  the  insurrec-

1  Concerning  this  disgusting  practice  compare Eastwick's
Diploniate^s  Residence  in  Persia,  vol.  ii,  pp.  55 — 56.


PROPHECIES FULFILLED.  259

tion. The  fate  of  the  captives  was  in  every  respect  similar
to  that  which  had  befallen  their  predecessors.

The  author  of  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  in  concluding  this
narrative  takes  occasion  to  point  out  how  literally  was  ful-
filled in  these  events  the  prophecy  contained  in  a  tradition
referring  to  the  signs  which  shall  mark  the  appearance  of
the  Imd,m  Mahdi :—

Jjj!l  J  il^l  ^_^JJ iSi\^  Us rtji-jj  i~S:>\^  J  iiLj  j,

*  ^  jV\j\

"In  him  [shall  be]  the  jyerfection  of  Moses,  tlw  precioiis-
ness  of  Jesus,  and  the  patience  of  Job;  his  saints  shall  he
abased  in  his  time,  and  their  lieads  shall  be  exclmnged  as
presents,  even  as  the  heads  of  tlie  Turk  and  the  Deylamite
are  exchanged  as  presents;  they  shall  be  slain  and  burned,
and  shall  he  afraid,  fearful,  and  dismayed;  the  earth  shall
he  dyed,  with  their  blood,  and  lamentation  and  irailing  shall
precail  amongst  their  women;  tliese  are  my  saints  indeed." '

When  I  was  at  Yezd  in  the  early  summer  of  1888,  I
became  acquainted  with  a  Bd,bl  holding  a  position  of  some
importance  under  government,  two  of  whose  ancestors  had
taken  a  prominent  part  in  the  suppression  of  the  Nfriz
insurrection.  Of  what  he  told  me  concerning  this  the
following  is  a  summary  taken  from  my  diary  for  May  18th,
1888:—

"  My  maternal  grandfather  Mihr  'All  Khdn  Shujd'u'l-
Mulk  and  my  great-uncle  Mirzd  Na'im  both  took  an  active

'  This  tradition,  called  _^u-  >i«Jo.,  is  also  quoted  from  the
Kdfi  (one  of  the  principal  compilations  of  Shi'ite  traditions)  in
the  Ihdn.

17—2


260  NOTE H — NfRfZ INSURRECTION.

part  in  the  Nfriz  war — but  on  the  wrong  side.  When  orders
came  to  ShirAz  to  quell  the  insurrection,  my  grandfather
was  instructed  to  take  command  of  the  expedition  sent  for
that  purpose.  He  did  not  like  the  task  committed  to  him
and  communicated  his  reluctance  to  two  of  the  '  Ulamd,  who,
however,  re-assured  him,  declaring  that  the  war  on  which
he  was  about  to  engage  was  a  holy  enterprise  sanctioned  by
Religion,  and  that  he  would  receive  reward  therefor  in
Paradise.  So  he  went,  and  what  happened  happened.
After  they  had  killed  750  men,  they  took  the  women  and
children,  stripped  them  almost  naked,  mounted  them  on
donkeys,  mules,  and  camels,  and  led  them  through  rows  of
heads  hewn  from  the  lifeless  bodies  of  their  fathers,
brothers,  sons,  and  husbands  towards  Shlrd,z.  On  their
arrival  there,  they  were  placed  in  a  ruined  caravansaray
just  outside  the  Isfahan  gate  and  opposite  to  an  Imum-
zdde,  their  captors  taking  up  their  quarters  under  some
trees  hard  by.  Here  they  remained  for  a  long  while,
subjected  to  many  insults  and  hardships,  and  many  of  them
died.

"  Now  see  the  judgement  of  God  on  the  oppressors;  for
of  those  chiefly  responsible  for  these  cruelties  not  one  but
came  to  a  bad  end  and  died  overwhelmed  with  calamity.

"  My  grandfather  Mihr  'Ali  Khdn  presently  fell  ill  and
was  dumb  till  the  day  of  his  death.  .Just  as  he  was  about
to  expire,  those  who  stood  round  him  saw  from  the  move-
ment of  his  lips  that  he  was  whispering  something.  They
leant  down  to  catch  his  last  words  and  heard  him  murmur
faintly  'Bdbi!  Bdhi!  BdM!'  three  times.  Then  he  fell
back  dead.

"My  great-uncle  Mirzd  Na'fm  fell  into  disgrace  with
the  government  and  was  twice  fined,  10,000  tumdns  the
first  time,  15,000  the  second.  But  his  punishment  did  not
cease  here,  for  he  was  made  to  suffer  diverse  tortures.  His
hands  were  put  in  the  el-cheV  and  his  feet  in  the  tang-i-
Kdjdr^; he  was  made  to  stand  bare-headed  in  the  sun

1  The  torture  called  el-chek  consists  in  placing  pieces  of  wood
between  the  victim's  fingers,  binding  them  round  tightly  with
cord.  Cold  water  is  then  thrown  over  the  cord  to  cause  its
further  contraction.

^  The  tang-i-Kdjdr  or  'Kdjdr  squeeze'  is  an  instrument  of


NfRfz  A  bIbi  stronghold.  261

vnth  treacle  smeared  over  his  head  to  attract  the  flies ;  and,
after  suifering  these  and  other  torments  yet  more  painful
and  humiliating,  he  was  dismissed  a  disgraced  and  ruined
man."'

Ak4  Se)ryid  Yahyd  was,  as  Subh-i-Bzel  informed  me,
not  more  than  forty  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  death.

A  certain  Bdbl  named  Biyuk  Akd  used  to  say  jestingly,
"I  like  a  handsome  'Commander  of  the  Faithful'  like
Seyyid  Yahyd,  not  an  ugly  old  man  bent  double  with  age
likeMulU'Sheykh'Ah."

Major-General  Sir  Frederick  Goldsmid  was  kind  enough
to  call  my  attention  to  the  following  passage  in  Lovett's
Surveys  mi  the  road  from  SMrciz  to  Bam  {Journal  of  the
Royal  Geographical  Society ,  1872): —

"It  (i.e.  Niriz)  is  divided  into  three  parishes  or  mahal-
las;  that  to  the  South,  termed  the  ' Mahalla-i-Bdbi'  is  well
known  to  be  peopled  almost  entirely  by  B4bis,  who,  though
they  do  not  openly  profess  their  faith  in  the  teachings  of
Seyyid  'Alf  Muhammad  the  B4b,  still  practise  the  principles
of  communism  he  inculcated.  It  is  certain,  moreover,  that
the  tolerance  which  was  one  of  the  precepts  inculcated  by
the  Bdb  is  here  shewed,  for  not  only  was  I  invited  to  make
use  of  the  public  hammdm,  if  I  required  it,  but  quarters
were  assigned  to  me  in  a  madrasa."

Is  it  in  the  least  degree  probable  that,  if  Se5fyid  Yahyd's
conduct  had  been  such  as  Kazem-Beg  describes  it,  Nlrfz
should  have  continued  so  long  one  of  the  strongholds  of
that  faith  whereof  he  was  the  apostle  ?


torture  resembling  the  'boot'  once  used  in  England,  for  the
introduction  of  which  (as  its  name  implies)  Persia  is  indebted  to
the  dynasty  which  at  present  occupies  the  throne.

1  Another  yet  more  striking  instance  of  Divine  vengeance  was
related  to  me  in  the  same  connection,  but  1  omit  it  as  not
bearing  on  the  present  subject.  The  belief  prevalent  amongst
the  Bdbis,  that  signal  punishment  befalls  those  who  are  most
active  in  persecuting  them,  is  strangely  supported  not  only  by
the  above  instances  but  by  the  fates  of  the  Amir-Nimm  (Gobineau,
pp.  253—254),  of  Mahmiid  Khin  the  Kaldntar  (Gobineau,  p.  295),
of  Sheykh  Biikir,  and  others  (B.  i,  pp.  491—492).


262  NOTE I — THE bAb's ESCAPE

NOTE  I. "
The  BAb's;  ekcapb  from  SiifRAz  to  Isi'aiiAn.

According  to  the  Twn.kh-i-JadId  the  Bdh,  after  his
examination  before  Huseyn  Kh4n  on  llainazdn  iilHt,  a.h.
1261  (Sept.  23rd,  a.d.'  1845),  was  confined,  not,  as  stated  in
this  history  (p.  6),  in  the  honse  of  his  uncle  Hiiji  Scyyid
'AH,  nor,  as  asserted  by  the  Musuhn4n  liistorians,  in
prison,  but  in  the  house  of  'Abchi'l-Hamfd  Kh4n  the
Ddrughd  or  chief  constable  of  Shfrdz.  That  for  some
portion  of  the  six  months  which  elapsed  between  his  arrest
and  his  escape  to  Isfahdn  the  BAb  was  an  inmate  of  the
house  of  this  official  would  appear  certain,  for  Subh-i-liJzel,
whom  I  questioned  on  the  subject,  affinned  this  to  liave
been  the  case,  adding,  in  answer  to  further  questions  as  to
how  strict  was  the  custody  in  which  lie  was  kept,  that  the
rawza-kliivunyi  or  religious  recitations,  of  which  the  con-
stable's house  was  frequently  the  scene,  afforded  oppor-
tunities to  the  Biibfs  of  seeing  and  conversing  with  tneir
Master.

That  some  attack  on  the  Biib's  house  sucli  as  that
described  at  p.  10  of  the  present  work  did  take  place
ap]iears  to  be  proved  by  the  following  passage  from  one  of
the  B^b's  works,  for  wifiich  I  am  also  indebted  to  Subh-i-
Ezel  :—

1 -cLk:^!  U  ijjbi-l  _j j^j Ic  J  Jail  ilJ  i)  3>-  i*l>-.i

*  <sjc  oiil  ijJ  (j.^'jlfljl  jbju  jX J  J J.CL  Uj

"His  IH.irty  cidi'Ti'd  hi  unto  'my  house  on  tin'  '  Night  of
Worth' ^  and  took  what  they  cuidd  of  that  'irhi(di  my  Jjord
Imth  caused,  me  to  possiwn,  at  the  romimmid  of  the  ruler  of
Furs,  upon  whom  be  the  curse  of  (Jod!"

'  The  Leylatvn-kadr  ("Night  of  Worth"  or  "Dcoroos")  w
generally  suppoHcd  to  bo  tho  night  between  the  2.3rd  and  24th
of  Raniazaij.  (See  Salo'H  translation  of  the  Kur'dn,  note  on
sura  xovii.)


FROM SHfRAZ TO ISFAHAN.  263

The  account  of  the  Bdb's  escape  from  Shfr^z  contained
in  the  Tdrtkh-i-Jadid  differs  somewhat  from  that  here
given,  and  is  in  substance  as  follows.  When  the  plague
broke  out  in  Sliirdz  the  son  of  'Abdu'l-Hamld  Kh4n  was
amongst  those  stricken  by  that  awful  malady.  'Abdu'l-
Hamid  Khdn  in  his  distress  and  anxiety  appealed  to  the
Bdb,  entreating  him  to  pray  for  the  youth's  recovery.
This  shortly  took  place ;  whereat  the  grateful  father  sought
out  his  illustrious  guest,  and,  with  profuse  expressions  of
thankfulness,  assured  him  that  he  might  consider  himself
free  to  go  where  he  pleased.  According  to  the  Musulm^n
accounts  (which,  together  with  a  note  containing  a  very
pertinent  criticism  on  their  intrinsic  improbability,  will  be
found  in  Kazem-Beg's  first  paper,  pp.  348 — 349)  Min^ichihr
Khdn  Mu'tamadu  d-Dawla,  the  governor  of  Isfahan,  sent
horsemen  to  Shlrdz  expressly  to  deliver  the  Bdb  from  his
captivity  and  bring  him  to  Isfahan.  It  is  but  fair  to  add
that  Subh-i-Ezel  also  attributed  the  Bdb's  release  directly
to  Miniichihr  Khdn's  efforts.

Of  the  Bdb's  journey  to  Isfahan  in  company  with  Ak^

Huseyn  of  Ardistdu  and  Aka  Seyyid  Kdzim  of  Zanj4n
(who  died  shortly  after  reaching  Isfahdn)  the  Turikh-i-
Jadid  gives  a  detailed  account  on  the  authority  of  Hdji
Mfrzd  JAni  of  Kdshdn,  who  had  heard  it  from  the  above-
mentioned  Akd  Muhammad  Huseyn  himself  The  most
noteworthy  feature  of  this  account  is  its  evident  tendency
to  invest  the  Bdb's  slightest  actions  with  a  miraculous
character.

The  B4b  probably  reached  Isfahan  early  in  the  summer
of  A.D.  1846,  since,  according  to  both  the  Musulmdn  his-
torians, his  captivity  at  Shlrdz  lasted  six  months,  and  since,
according  to  the  present  history  (p.  11),  the  hot  weather
(which  seldom  sets  in  till  the  beginning  of  May  at  the
earliest)  had  already  begun  ere  he  left  Shfrdz.  On  ap-
proaching Isfahdn  he  addressed  a  letter  to  the  governor
Miniichihr  Khdn  asking  permission  to  enter  the  city  and
craving  protection.  Of  this  letter  Kazem-Beg  (i.  p.  3.52
and  note)  gives  a  translation,  which,  as  it  appears  to  be
derived  from  authoritative  sources,  I  here  reproduce  : —
"Poursuivi par  tous,  persdcut^,  j'accours  me  placer  sous


264  NOTE J — THE CONFERENCE

votre  (Jgide  ;  j'attends  votre  r^ponse  an  seuil  de  la  capitale,
et  n'y  entrerai  pas  avant  d'avoir  obteiui  Tassurance  de
votre  protection."

During  the  first  forty  days  of  his  sojourn  in  Isfahan  the
Bd,b  was,  as  stated  at  p.  11  of  tlie  present  work  and  also  in
the  Tankli-i-.hulUl,  the  guest  of  the  Im4in-Jum'a,  who
at  first  treated  him  with  great  respect,  and  at  whose  re-
quest he  wrote  the  Commentary  on  the  Hunttu'l-'Aifr.  Of
this  work  I  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  obtain  a  MS.
quite  recently. [See  infra  at  the  end  of  Note  U].


NOTE  J.

Tub  conference  at  Isfahan.

Of  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the  conference,  and
the  considerations  which  induced  the  majority  of  the  clergy
invited  to  take  part  in  it  to  absent  themselves  therefrom,
the  T<'ir1l-h-i-.J<uVul  gives  the  following  account.  Although
the  '  Ulamd  of  Isfahan  headed  by  the  Imdm-Jum'a  had  at
first  behaved  towards  the  B4b  with  respect,  and  expressed
themselves  favourably  with  regard  to  him,  they  Ijcgan  after
a  while  to  be  alarmed  at  his  increasing  influence  over  the
governor  Minuchihr  Kh4n.  Alarm  presently  passed  into
hatred  :  they  began  to  speak  ill  of  him  whom  they  had
professed  to  admire,  and  even  destroyed  certain  books  which
he  had  composed  at  their  request.  Miniichihr  Khdn  on
hearing  this  was  greatly  incensed,  and  bitterly  reproached
these  divines  with  the  fickleness  of  their  conduct.  "At
first,"  he  said,  "you  praised  and  admired.  What  has
happened  now  to  cause  you  to  become  so  hostile  and
envious  and  induce  you  to  speak  so  ill  ?  There  is  no  sense
in  denunciation  without  investigation  or  enquiry.  If  you
are  in  truth  searchers  and  strivers  in  matters  of  faith  and
religion,  then  choose  one  of  three  places — the  Imdm-Jum'a's
house,  my  house,  or  the  Masjid-i-Sh^h — and  hold  discussion
with  him  [the  ]3ib].  If  he  can  establish  and  prove  the
truth  of  his  claim  so  as  to  persuade  and  convince  you,


AT ISFAHAN.  2G5

admit  it,  so  that  the  clergy  of  Persia  may  not  oppose  and
resist  it  without  reason,  or  turn  away  from  the  truth
without  cause.  If  he  cannot  succeed  in  estabhshing  his
claim,  then  do  you  be  the  first  to  rebut  it,  so  that  this
mischief  may  cease,  and  mankind  may  be  set  at  ease.  But
it  is  a  condition  that  I  myself  be  present  and  that  only  one
person  at  a  time  speak,  for  if  once  wrangling  begins  and
clerical  tricks  are  resorted  to,  the  matter  will  not  be  under-
stood."

The  clergy  agreed  to  this  proposal,  and  selected  the
Masjid-i-Shdh  as  the  scene  of  the  conference.  On  the
appointed  day  Mi'r  Seyyid  Hasan  Mudarris,  Hdji  MuM

Hasan  'All  of  Tilsirkin,Akd  Muhammad  Mahdf  Kalbdsf,
and  other  members  of  the  clergy  who  were  to  take  part  in
the  discussion  met  at  the  house  of  Hiji  Muhammad  Ja'far
of  F^rs,  intending  to  proceed  with  him  to  the  iVIasjid-i-Shdh.
Hiji  Muhammad  Ja'far,  however,  who  was  the  oldest  and
most  learned  of  those  present,  expressed  a  strong  opinion
to  the  effect  that  they  would  act  most  wisely  in  refusing  to
take  any  part  in  the  projected  discussion  with  the  Bdb,
"for,"  said  he,  "if  you  prevail  over  him  you  will  add  but
httle  to  your  reputation,  seeing  that  he  is  confessedly  un-
learned and  untrained  in  science ;  while  if  he  prevail  over
you,  you  will  be  for  ever  shamed  and  disgraced.  Under
these  circumstances  it  is  best  that  we  should  sign  a  declara-
tion stating  that  we  are  convinced  of  the  heretical  character
of  his  doctrines,  and  refuse  to  have  any  further  dealings
with  him."  This  expedient  was,  after  some  discussion,
unanimously  adopted,  and  the  declaration  was  sent  to
Minlichihr  Khin,  who  was  greatly  incensed  thereat.

That  some  of  the  clergy  who  had  been  invited  to  take
part  in  the  discussion  refused  to  attend  is  a  fact  vouched
for  by  both  of  the  Bibl  historians,  though  as  to  the  names

of  the  absentees  they  are  not  in  complete  accord,  Ak4
Muhammad  Mahdf,  for  instance,  being  specially  designated
in  the  present  work  (p.  12)  as  having  been  present  at  the
conference.  The  Ndsikhu  't-Tavmrikh  gives  a  totally
different  account  of  the  matter,  including  a  report  of  the
discussion. This  account  is  in  substance  as  follows.

Minlichihr  Kh4n,  anxious  to  test  the  B4b's  wisdom,  one


266  NOTE J — THE CONFERENCE

night  invited  to  his  house  several  eminent  members  of
the  clergy  of  Isfahan,  amongst  these  being  Mirzd  Seyyid
Muhammad  Imdm-Jum'a,  Akd  Muhammad  Mahdf  Kalbdsf,
and'Mi'rzd  Muhammad  Hasan  of  Nur.  Shortly  after  these
had  arrived  the  B4b  entered  and  was  placed  in  a  seat  of
honour. The  following  colloquy  then  took  place  : —

AM  Muhammad  MaJidi. — "Persons  who  follow  the
path  of  Religion  belong  to  one  of  two  classes  :  either  they
themselves  deduce  and  determine  religious  questions  from
history  and  tradition,  or  else  they  follow  some  competent
authority  (mujtakid)" .'

Bab : — "  I  follow  no  one,  and  moreover  I  regard  it  as
unlawful  for  each  one  to  act  after  his  own  fancy."

A.  M.  M.—"  To-day  the  Gate  of  Knowledge  {Bdb-i-
'ilm)  is  shut,  and  the  Proof  of  God'  absent.  Unless  you
hold  converse  with  the  Imdm  of  the  Age  and  hear  the
explanation  of  questions  of  truth  from  his  tongue,  how  can
you  attain  certainty  and  be  assured?  Tell  me,  whence
have  you  acquired  this  knowledge,  and  from  whom  did  you
gain  this  assurance  ? "

£db. — "You  are  educated  in  tradition  and  are  as  a
child  learning  the  alphabet.  The  '  Station  of  Praise  and
of  the  Spirit'  is  mine.  You  cannot  speak  with  me  of  what
you  know  not."

Mirzd  Hasan  {tlie  Platonist  and  follower  of  Mulld
Sadrd). — "  Stop  at  this  statement  which  you  have  made  !
We  in  our  terminology  have  assigned  a  station  to  '  Praise
and  the  Spirit,'  whereunto  whosoever  attaineth  is  conver-
sant with  all  things  ;  from  him  nothing  remains  concealed,
and  there  is  nothing  which  he  knoweth  not.  Do  you
recognize  the  'Station  of  Praise  and  of  the  Spirit '  as  such,
and  does  your  nature  thus  comprehend  all  things  ? "

Bdb  (without  hesitation). — "It  is  even  so.  Ask  what
you  please."

M.  H. — "  One  of  the  miracles  of  the  Prophets  and
Saints  was,  as  it  appears,  the  [instant]  traversing  of  the

1  He  who  follows  is  called  miihallid,  and  he  who  leads,
mujtahid.  Everyone  belonging  to  the  former  class  is  at  liberty
to  select  his  own  guide  from  the  latter.

^  i.e.  the  Twelfth  Imdm.


AT ISFAHAN.  267

eartL  Tell  me  now,  that  I  may  know,  how  the  earth  can
be  thus  traversed.  For  instance.  His  Holiness  Jawdd'
(upon  him  be  peace)  lifted  up  his  foot  in  Medina  and  put
it  down  in  Ttis.  Whither  went  the  space  which  was
between  Medina  and  Tiis  ?  Did  the  ground  between  these
two  cities  sink  down,  so  that  Medina  became  contiguous  to
Tus  ?  And  when  the  Imdm  (upon  him  be  peace)  reached
Tils,  did  the  earth  again  rise  up  ?  This  cannot  have  been,
for  how  many  cities  are  there  between  Medina  and  Tiis,  all
of  which  must  in  that  case  have  been  swallowed  up  and
every  living  thing  therein  destroyed  !  And  if  you  say  that
the  lands  [between  themj  were  agglomerated  so  that  they
became  amalgamated,  this  too  is  impossible,  for  in  that  case
how  many  cities  would  have  been  obliterated  or  would  have
passed  beyond  Medina  or  Tiis,  whereas  [in  fact]  no  part  of
the  earth  was  altered  or  moved  from  its  place.  And  if  you
say,  '  The  Imim  flew,  and  leapt  with  his  mortal  body  from
Medina  to  Tus,'  this  likewise  agreeth  not  with  sound
reasonings.  Say  also  how  'Ali  the  Prince  of  Believers
(upon  him  be  peace)  was  in  one  night — nay,  in  one  moment
— a  guest  in  forty  [different]  houses.  If  you  say,  '  It  was
not  'Ah',  but  a  simulacrum  [of  him]  appeared,'  we  admit  it
not,  for  God  and  the  Prophet  lie  not,  neither  was  'All  a
juggler.  And  if  it  was  in  truth  he,  how  was  it  so  ?  So
likewise  it  is  [stated]  in  tradition  that  the  heavens  moved
swiftly  in  the  time  of  Sultdn  .I4bir,  but  had  a  .slow  motion
in  the  time  of  the  Imdms.  Xow  firstly  how  can  there  be
two  sorts  of  motion  for  the  heavens?  And  secondly  the
Ome,Yya,di  and  'Abbd,sid  Kings  were  contemporary  with  our
Imdms  (upon  them  be  peace),  so  that  the  heavens  must  at
one  time  have  had  both  a  slow  and  a  swift  motion.  Discover
this  mystery  also."

Bdb. — "If  you  wish,  I  will  explain  these  difiiculties
verbally  ;  if  not,  I  will  write  [their  solutions]  with  fingers
and  pen  on  paper."

M.  H. — "The  choice  is  yours.  Do  whichever  you
please."

Then  the  Bdb  took  pen  and  paper  and  began  to  write.

1  Jawdd  ("the  Generous")  is  one  of  the  titles  as.signed  to  the
ninth  Imdm,  Muhammad  Taki.


268  NOTE K MULLA SADRA,

At  this  moment  supper  was  brought  in.  Mirzd  Hasan
picked  up  the  paper  on  which  the  B4b  had  written  a  few
lines,  and,  after  glancing  at  it,  said,  "  It  appears  that  you
have  begun  a  homily,  and  have  only  written  an_  exordium
of  praise  to  God  and  a  few  words  of  prayer,  without  ac-
quainting us  with  that  which  we  desired  to  know."  Here
the  discussion  dropped,  and  after  partaking  of  supper  each
one  returned  to  his  own  home.

Whatever  may  be  the  truth  about  this  conference  and
the  behaviour  of  the  clergy  of  Isfahdn  towards  the  B^b,  one
fact  is  clearly  proved  by  all  accounts,  namely,  that  from
first  to  last  Miniichihr  Kh4n  shewed  himself  a  sincere  and
faithful  friend  to  the  B4b.  "Whether,  as  stated  by  Subh-i-
Ezel,  he  wrote  to  Muhammad  Sh4h  telling  him  that  "it
was  unseemly  for  the  Government  to  engage  in  a  quarrel
with  a  private  individual,"  and  offered  all  the  money  at
his  disposal  and  even  the  rings  on  his  hand  to  the  B4b ;  or
whether,  as  asserted  by  the  Tarikh-i-Jadid,  he  even  went
so  far  as  to  offer  to  place  50,000  troops  at  the  Bdb's
disposal,  march  on  Teher4n,  and  compel  the  King  to
accept  the  new  faith  and  bestow  the  hand  of  one  of  his
daughters  on  its  founder,  must  remain  doubtful ;  but  this
much  at  least  is  certain,  that  almost  the  only  period  of
comparative  peace  and  comfort  enjoyed  by  the  B4b  from
the  beginning  of  his  mission  till  his  martyrdom  was  the
year  which  he  passed  in  Isfahan  under  the  protection  of
the  wise  and  powerful  Georgian  eunuch.


NOTE K.^


MuLLA  Sadr.4  and  His  Philosophy.

Gobineau  in  his  Religions  et  Philosophies  dans  _  I'Asie
Centrals  (pp.  81 — 91)  has  given  so  admirable  an  account  of
the  life  of  this  gTeat  philosopher  and  of  the  part  played  by
him  in  the  revival  of  metaphysical  learning  in  Persia  that
any  very  detailed  notice  of  his  career  on  my  part  would  be
superfluous. I  shall  therefore  confine  myself  to  reproducing


HIS LIFE AND PHILOSOPHY.  269

a  brief  sketch  of  his  biograph)^  as  it  was  related  to  me  by  a
most  learned  and  amiable  scholar — himself  a  pupil  of  Hijl
Mulld  Hd,di  of  Sabzawdr,  whose  fame  as  a  metaphysician
has  almost  eclipsed  that  of  the  illustrious  MuUi  Sadr4 —
with  whom  it  was  my  privilege  to  study  for  some  time  in
Teheran.  This  account  agrees  in  the  main  with  Gobineau's,
but  differs  in  some  few  points.

Mulld  Sadr^'s  father  was  a  rich  merchant  of  Shifdz,  but
though  he  had  reached  an  advanced  age  he  had  no  child  to
whom  he  might  bequeath  his  wealth.  This  caused  him
much  sorrow,  and  he  prayed  earnestly  to  God  that  a  son
might  be  vouchsafed  to  him,  making  a  vow  that  if  his
prayer  were  granted  he  would  bestow  a  tumun  a  day  in
alms  on  the  poor.  Shortly  after  this,  that  which  he  so
earnestly  desired  came  to  pass,  and  a  son — afterwards  the
great  Mulld,  Sadrd — was  born  to  him.  From  an  early  age
the  boy  gave  indications  of  extraordinary  talent  and  virtue.
When  his  father  died,  he  decided,  after  consulting  his
mother,  to  give  the  gTeater  portion  of  the  wealth  which  he
had  inherited  to  the  poor,  reserving  only  what  was  suffi-
cient for  his  modest  needs.  He  then  left  ShMz  and  took
up  his  residence  in  Isfahan,  which  was  at  that  time  un-
rivalled in  Persia  as  a  seat  of  learning.  On  his  arrival
there  he  enquired  who  were  the  best  teachers  of  philosophy,
and  was  answered  that  they  were  three — Mir  D^mdd,  Mir
Fandariskf,  and  Sheykh  Beh4.  To  the  first  of  these  he
forthwith  presented  himself,  and  a.sked  advice  as  to  the
course  of  study  which  he  should  pursue.  "  If  you  want
sheer  ideas,"  replied  Mir  BimM,  "go  to  Mfr  Fandariski ;
if  you  want  merely  eloquence,  go  to  Sheykh  Beh^  ;  if  you
want  both,  come  to  me."  MulU  Sadr4  accordingly  attended
with  diligence  the  lectures  of  all  three,  but  chiefly  those  of
Mir  Di,mdd.  After  a  while  Mfr  D4mdd,  wishing  to  make
the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  bade  a  temporary  farewell  to  his
students,  and  instructed  each  of  them  to  compose  during
his  absence  a  treatise  on  some  branch  of  Philosophy.  On
his  return  he  asked  to  see  the  results  of  their  labours.
These  he  glanced  over  in  private,  and  all  of  them  he  laid
aside  after  a  cursory  inspection  save  the  treatise  composed
by  MulU  Sadr^  under  the  name  of  ShawaMd-i-Bubuhiyya
('Evidences of  Divinity') — a treatise to this day  most


270 NOTE  K — mullI  sadra's  philosophy.

highly  esteemed  in  Persia.  A  few  days  after,  as  he  was
riding  through  the  streets  attended  by  his  disciples,  he
called  MulU  Sadr4  to  him  and  said  : — "  Sadrd  jaii !
Kitdb-i-mard  as  mmjdn  hurdil"  ("My  dear  Sadr^,  you
have  done  away  with  my  book  ! "),  meaning  to  signify  that
the  pupil  had  superseded  the  teacher.  Shortly  after  this
MulU  SadrA,  having  completed  his  studies,  went  to  Kdshdn,
and  thence,  after  a  while,  to  Kum,  in  the  mountains  around
which  city  he  long  lived  a  secluded  and  studious  life,
troubled  occasionally  by  the  malice  and  hostility  of  the
mullds.

Gobineau  says  {loc.  cit.,  p.  89)  that  MulU  Sadrd's  phi-
losophy was  simply  a  revival  of  Avicenna's  and  contained
nothing  new;  but  this,  as  he  himself  remarks,  is  not  the
general  opinion  in  Persia.  The  following  three  points,  as
I  was  informed,  constitute  the  chief  original  features  of
Mull4  Sadrd's  system  : —

(1)  The  aphorism

Ljjs t|<-^. lyi _5 1 1-1/ Ji  I (Ju) ifljiscjl nil,..;

"  The  elementary  Reality  is  all  things,  yet  is  no  one  of
them."

(2)  The  doctrine  of  "  the  Union  of  the  Intellect  with

the  Intelligible"  (J^^a«/>  L  Jslc  jlseil),  according  to  which

the  clear  apprehension  of  an  idea  implies  and  involves  the
establishment  of  a  kind  of  identity  between  it  and  the  mind
which  apprehends  it.

(3)  The  doctrine  of  "the  Incorporeality  of  Imagina-
tion" (JL»-  ^j>^) — a  doctrine  involving  the  important
consequence  that  Reason  (or  the  development  of  that  prin-
ciple which  stands  above  Imagination  in  the  evolution  of
the  spiritual  faculties)  is  not  a  necessary  condition  of  im-
mortahty,  and  hence  that  not  infants  only  but  even  animals
possess  a  spiritual  part  which  survives  the  death  of  the
body.

MulU  Sadrd,  composed  a  great  number  of  works,  whereof
the  As/dr  '('Treatises'),  in  two  large  volumes,  and  the  S/ia-


NOTE L — BAB'S journey TO JIAKU.  271

wiihid-i-Bububiyya  ('  Evidences  of  Divinity')  mentioned
above,  are  the  most  important.  His  influence  on  Persian
thought  has  been  great ;  and  his  relations  with  the  later
developments  thereof — especially  with  the  Sheykhi  school
(concerning  which  see  Xote  E  gupra) — merit  a  much  more
careful  study  than  they  have  yet  received.


XOTE  L.
The  Bab  at  'Slksxj  and  C'HiHKrK.

The  Bdb  was  accompanied  on  his  journey  to  Mdkii  by
his  amanuensis  Ak^  Seynd  Huseyn  of  Yezd,  Mull^  Shevkh
'AH  'Jendb-i-Azhn  ,  Mulla  Muhammad  'Jla'allim-l-yftrt'
(afterwards  killed  at  Sheykh  Tabarsi)',  and  an  escort  of
twelve  horsemen  under  the  command  of  Muhammad  Beg
Chapdrjf.  A  full  account  of  this  journey,  on  the  authority
of  H^ji  Mi'rzi  Jd,m'  of  Kashdn,  who  had  it  directly  from  the
aforesaid  Muhammad  Beg,  is  contained  in  the  Tdrikh-i-
Jadid. The  substance  of  this  account  is  as  foUows : —

When  Muhammad  Beg  was  ordered  to  conduct  the  Bab
to  Tabriz  and  there  deliver  him  over  to  Bahman  Mi'rza  the
governor,  he  was  so  averse  to  undertaking  this  charge  that
he  feigned  illness  in  hopes  of  being  excused  so  thankless  a
task.  His  orders,  however,  were  peremptorily  repeated,
and  he  was  obliged  to  set  out.  He  had  been  instructecl
not  to  take  the  Bdb  into  the  towns  which  they  must  pass
on  the  road,  and  accordingly  on  approaching  Zanjdn  he
called  a  halt  at  a  stone  caravansaray  situated  outside  and
at  some  distance  from  the  city.  In  spite  of  this,  no  sooner
did  their  arrival  become  known  than  numbers  of  the  in-
habitants came  out  in  the  hopes  of  being  able  to  get  a

1  This  is  according  to  Subh-i-Ezel's  statement.  According  to
the  Tanhh-i-Jadid  his  companions  were,  besides  the  escort,
Aka  Mirza  'Abdul- Wahhab,  ilulla  Muhammad,  Aka  Seyyid
Huseyn  the  amanuensis,  his  brother  Aka  Seyvid  Hasan  of  Tezd,
and  Se_\-yid  Murtaza.


272  NOTE  L — bab's  journey  to  maku.

glimpse  of  the  B4b.  Muhammad  Beg,  being  occupied  with
other  business,  took  no  heed  of  what  was  passing,  while  the
other  men  who  composed  the  escort  only  oifered  such  oppo-
sition to  the  entry  of  each  group  of  eager  visitors  as  sufficed
to  procure  for  themselves  a  gift  of  money.  Presently  an
urgent  message  was  brought  from  Ashraf  Kh4n  the  governor
of  Zanj^n  (who  was  greatly  alarmed  at  the  popular  excite-
ment caused  by  the  B^b's  proximity  to  the  town)  ordering
Muhammad  Beg  at  once  to  start  again  and  proceed  to  some
spot  further  distant.  Muhammad  Beg  accordingly  informed
the  B4b,  with  many  apologies  and  expressions  of  regret,  that
he  must  prepare  to  resume  his  journey  without  delay,  to
which,  with  a  single  expression  of  surprise  and  regret  at  the
governor's  harshness,  he  submitted,  and  they  pushed  on  to
a  brick  caravansaray  two  farsahhs  beyond  Zanjdn.  At
MiUn  the  B4b's  arrival  was  the  signal  for  a  similar  de-
monstration of  enthusiasm  on  the  part  of  the  populace,
and  some  two  hundred  persons  who  had  come  out  of  mere
curiosity  were  converted  to  the  new  faith.

Before  Tabriz  was  reached  Muhammad  Beg  too  began
to  experience  that  marvellous  fascination  which  the  Bdb
exerted  over  almost  everyone  with  whom  he  came  in  con-
tact, and  ere  the  journey  was  completed  he  had  become
an  avowed  believer  in  the  divine  mission  of  the  captive
whom  he  was  conducting  into  exile. Of  those  disciples

who  accompanied  the  B4b  on  this  journey  two  only — Akd
Seyyid  Huseyn  and  Seyyid  Murtaza — allowed  it  to  appear
that  they  were  his  companions.  The  others  used  to  follow
at  some  distance  behind,  and  only  on  halting  for  the  night
did  they  seek  to  find  some  pretext  for  approaching  their
beloved  Master.  In  spite  of  these  precautions,  Muhammad
Beg,  whose  faculties  were  perhaps  quickened  by  his  own
recent  conversion,  did  not  fail  in  time  to  discover  what
they  wished  to  keep  secret  from  him,  for  of  the  change
which  had  been  wrought  in  his  opinions  and  feelings  they
were  not  yet  aware.  One  day,  however,  he  opened  his
heart  to  them,  declaring  that  when  he  reflected  on  the
service  in  which  he  was  engaged  he  felt  himself  to  be  worse
than  Shimr  and  Yazfd,  and  expressing  the  warmest  admira-
tion for  the  patience,  sweetness,  gentleness,  and  holiness  of
the  B4b,  "for,"  said  he,  "had  he  chosen  to  give  the  slightest


yOTE L — THE BAB AT ilAKU.  273

hint  to  the  people  of  Zanjdn  or  Milan  that  they  shovild
effect  his  deUverance,  they  Troiild  not  have  given  us  time  to
draw  our  breath  ere  they  had  effected  their  object."

Muhammad  Beg  was  in  hopes  that  he  might  be  appoiated
to  accompany  the  Bdb  to  Mdku — his  ultimate  destination —
and  this  hope  he  communicated  to  the  Bab,  who,  however,
replied  that  this  was  by  no  means  a  thing  which  he  desired,
for  that  iu  that  journey  there  would  be  harshness  and  cruelty
shewn  whereiu  he  would  not  that  Muhammad  Beg  should
hear  any  part.  When  they  had  come  within  a  stage  of
Tabriz  the  Bdb  requested  Muhammad  Beg  to  go  on  in
advance  and  announce  his  approach  to  Bahman  MirzA,  to
whom  he  also  sent  a  message  praying  that  he  might  not  be
sent  to  M^ku  but  might  be  allowed  to  remain  in  Tabriz.
To  this  message  the  Prince  merely  repHed  that  it  had
nothing  to  do  with  him,  and  that  the  instructions  given  at
the  capital  must  be  complied  witL  Much  distressed  at
being  the  bearer  of  such  tmwelcome  tidings.  Muhammad
Beg  retiirned  to  meet  the  Biib,  whom  he  brought  in  to  his
own  house  at  Tabriz.  There  the  Bdb  remained  for  several
days  until  the  fresh  escort  which  was  to  conduct  him  to
Maku  arrived.  Then  the  Bab  sent  Muhammad  Beg  with
a  second  message  to  the  Prince,  again  renewing  his  request
for  permission  to  remain  at  Tabriz.  To  this  message  also
Bahman  Mirz^  turned  a  deaf  ear ;  and  such  was  Muhammad
Beg's  chagrin,  and  so  great  the  sorrow  which  he  experienced
on  parting  from  the  Bab  (whose  new  escort  would  suffer  no
farther  delay  in  staiting),  that  he  fell  iU  of  a  fever  which
did  not  quit  him  for  two  months.

!Xo  so'mer  had  Muhammad  Beg  recovered  his  health
than  he  set  out  for  M^kii  to  visit  the  Bdb.  On  his  arrival
there  he  fell  at  the  B^b's  feet,  entreating  him  to  overlook
and  condone  any  fault  of  which  he  might  have  been  guilty.
The  Bab  answered  that  he  was  not  willing  that  even  his
enemies  shoitld  suffer,  much  less  his  friends,  and  that  he
freely  forgave  all  who  had  wittingly  or  unwittingly  trespassed
against  liim.  He  then  enquired  concerning  the  details  of
the  disgrace  which  had  befallen  two  of  those  who  had
sliirhted  him — Ashraf  Khan  and  Bahman  Mirza — with
which  Muhammad  Beg  forthwith  proceeded  to  acquaint
him  ;  and,  on  hearing  the  indignities  to  which  Ashraf  Khdn

E.  18


274  NOTE L — THE BAB AT MAKtJ.

had  been  subjected  by  the  relatives  of  a  woman  whom  he
had  seduced,  he  expressed  sorrow  that  so  severe  a  punish-
ment should  have  overtaken  him.

The  confinement  to  which  the  B^b  was  subjected  at
M4kii  was  by  no  means  an  excessively  rigorous  one. Not

only  his  amanuensis  Akd  Seyyid  Huseyn,  but  also  (ac-
cording to  Subh-i-Ezel)  MulU  Sheykh  'Alf,  and  apparently
others  amongst  the  most  earnest  and  devoted  of  his
followers,  were  constantly  with  him,  while  many  others
flocked  to  M4kii  from  all  parts  of  Persia  and  were  per-
mitted to  hold  almost  unrestricted  converse  with  their
Master.  Besides  this,  continual  correspondence  was  carried
on  between  the  B4b  and  his  most  active  apostles,  in  spite
of  the  instructions  given  to  'All  Khdn  the  warden  of  Mdkii

Castle  by  the  Prime  Minister  H^ji  Mfrzd  Ak^si  to  the  effect
that  no  such  correspondence  was  to  be  permitted.  Whether
'Ali  Khdn  found  himself  unable  to  prevent  this  corre-
spondence (at  any  rate  without  risking  a  popular  tumult),
or  whether  he  simply  connived  at  it  either  from  indolence,
indifference,  or  partiality  for  the  Bdb,  does  not  very  clearly
appear.  It  would  at  any  rate  seem  that  he  always  treated
his  prisoner  with  the  utmost  respect  and  deference,  toiled
daily  up  the  steep  road  from  the  village  to  the  Castle
(which  stood  on  the  summit  of  a  neighbouring  hill),  and,
when  questioned  by  his  friends  as  to  the  opinion  which  he
had  formed  of  the  Bdb,  would  reply  that,  although  he  was
not  clever  enough  to  understand  his  sayings,  he  was  con-
vinced of  his  greatness  and  holiness.

During  his  sojourn  at  Mdkii  the  Bdb  composed  a  great
number  of  works,  amongst  the  more  important  of  which
may  be  especially  mentioned  the  Persian  Beyan  and  the
'Seven  Proofs'  {Dalail-i-Sab'a),  both  of  which  contain
ample  internal  evidence  of  having  been  written  at  this
period  (B.  ii,  pp.  912—913).  Indeed,  if  we  may  credit  a
statement  made  in  the  T&rikh-i-Jadid  on  the  authority  of
Mirzd,  'Abdu'l-Wahhdb,  the  various  writings  of  the  Bdb
current  in  Tabriz  alone  amounted  in  all  to  not  less  than  a
miUion  verses!  The  Prime  Minister  himself,  Hdjf  Mfrz^
Akdsi,  was  made  the  object  of  a  homily  entitled  "The

Sermon  of  Wrath  "  (iijji  'dJai)  "  which,"  says  the  author


NOTE L — THE BAB AT CHIHRIK.  275

of  the  Tarfk/i-i-J(idfd,  "if  au3'oue  will  peruse,  he  shall
understand  the  true  meaning  of  inward  Strength  and
Power."  Whether  this  document  reached  the  eyes  of  him
for  whom  it  was  intended  and  roused  him  to  take  further
steps  for  the  more  effectual  isolation  of  its  author  is
uncertain  :  but  at  all  events  fresh  instructions  of  a  more
peremptory  chiuacter  were  despatched  by  the  Prime
Minister  to  the  Warden  of  ilakii  commanding  him  at  once
to  put  a  stop  to  the  interchange  of  letters  between  the
Bab  and  his  followers.  'Ah'  Khan  replied  that  he  was
absolutely  unable  to  do  this;  whereupon  orders  were  issued
by  the  Prime  Minister  for  the  removal  of  the  B;lb  fi-om
^Makii  to  Chilink.  'Ali  Khan,  though  his  own  action  had
brought  about  this  transference,  communicated  the  an-
nouncement thereof  to  the  Btlb  with  every  expression  of
distress  and  concern,  but  the  latter  stenil>-  cut  short  his
apologies  saying.  ■■  Why  dost  thou  lie  I  Thou  didst  thy-
self \n'ite,  and  dost  thou  excuse  thyself  T'  So  tJie  B;ib  was
talcen  to  Cliilu-ik  and  placed  in  the  custody  of  Yahya  Kh^n.
The  Tdrilh-i-JadM,  ever  disposed  towards  tlie  mar-
vellous if  not  the  miraculous,  relates  that  Yahya  KhAn
saw  tlie  Bab  in  a  dream  a  short  time  before  his  actual
an-ival  at  Chihrik.  and  that  this  dream  he  related  to
Jeix'ih-i-'Aitm  (^lullfi  Slieykh  'All),  declaring  at  the  same
time  that  should  tlie  Bab's  appearance  prove  to  be  such  as
he  had  seen  in  his  vision  he  would  know  for  a  surety  that
tliis  was  indeed  the  promised  Im.im  ilahdi.  On  the  Bab's
arrival  Yahy;i  Khiiu  went  out  to  meet  hfm  and  beheld  his
fiice  even  as  the  face  in  the  dream.  Thereupon,  being
greatly  moved,  he  bowed  himself  in  reverence  before  the
Bab,  and  brought  liim  in  witli  all  honour  into  his  own
house,  neither  would  he  sit  down  in  liis  presence  without
permission.  In  consequence  of  the  impression  thus  pro-
duced on  Yahya  Khiln,  the  Bab,  in  spite  of  Haji  ]\lirzii

Akasi's  stringent  orders,  was  not  much  more  isolated  from
his  followers  at  Chihrik  than  he  had  been  at  ^laku.

Subh-i-Ezel's  version  is  quite  different,  and  is  not  only
much  more  probable  in  itself,  but  also  rests  on  much  better
authority,  since  tlu-ough  his  hands  passed  the  greater  part
of  the  correspondence  which  was  carried  on  witli  the  Bab.
According  to  this  version,  the  Bab's  confinement  at  ChUirik

18—2


276 NOTE  L — THE  BAB  AT  CHIHRfK.

was  of  the  most  rigorous  kind,  and  it  was  only  with  the
greatest  difficulty  that  letters  could  be  conveyed  to  or  from
him.  Some  of  the  expedients  resorted  to  for  this  purpose
were  described  by  Mulld,  Sheykh  'AH  to  Subh-i-Ezel  and
by  him  to  me.  Sometimes  the  letter  to  be  conveyed  to  the
B^b  was  carefully  wrapped  up  in  a  waterproof  covering,
weighted,  and  sunk  in  a  vessel  filled  with  mast  (curdled
milk),  which  vessel  the  Biibf  messenger  would  pray  the
guards  to  convey  as  a  trifling  present  to  the  captive.
Sometimes  the  letter  was  enclosed  in  a  candied  walnut  of
the  kind  called  juzghand.  The  bearer,  on  his  arrival  at
Chihrlk,  would  enter  into  conversation  with  the  sentries,
offer  them  a  share  of  his  juzghands,  and  finally,  having
sufficiently  ingratiated  himself  with  them,  request  them  to
carry  a  handful  of  sweetmeats  to  their  prisoner.  If  they
consented  to  do  this,  the  walnut  containing  the  letter  was
dexterously  slipped  into  the  handful  destined  for  the  Bdb.

A  passage  from  M.  Mochenin's  memoir  quoted  by
Kazem-Beg  (i.  p.  371)  would  seem,  however,  to  imply  that
even  at  Chihrlk  the  B4b  was  permitted  to  address  those
who  came  to  hear  and  see  him.  "The  concourse  of  people,"
he  says,  "  was  so  great  that,  the  court  not  being  spacious
enough  to  contain  all  the  audience,  the  greater  number
remained  in  the  street  listening  attentively  to  the  verses
of  the  new  Kur'dn."  But  at  all  events  the  B4b  was
subjected  to  a  closer  and  more  rigorous  confinement  at
Chihrik  than  he  had  been  at  M^kii. Hence  he  used  to  call

the  former  "the  Grievous 31  ountain"  (jiijC,  J»>-)\  and  the

latter  "tJie  Open  Mountain"  (ia^l)  Jj>-).  His  gaoler  at
Chihrik  was  moreover  a  coarse  and  unsympathetic  creature,
to  whom  Ak4  Seyyid  Huseyn  of  Yezd  gave  the  name  of

" Fierce  and  Terrible"  (.iljii  ii^li)''.

The  last  point  which  requires  discussion  is  this : — of
the  three  and  a  half  years  which  elapsed  between  the  death

1  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  numerical  value  of  the  word  j,ji,
(318)  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  name  Chihrik  (ji^p.)  for  which
it  stands.

2  Kur'an,  Ixvi.  6.


NOTE il — BAB EXAMINED AT TABRfZ.  277

of  Mimicliihr  Khdn  (Rabi'ul-Avval  a.  h.  1263  =  Feb.—
March  a  d.  1847)  and  the  execution  of  the  B4b  (Sha'bdn
27"'  a.h.  1266  =  July  S""  a.d.  1850)  what  portion  was  passed
by  the  B4b  at  M4kli  and  Chihrik  respectively?  As  the  Bdb
did  not  leave  Isfahan  till  after  Miniichihr  Khan's  death,
we  may,  allowing  for  the  time  consumed  in  travelling  and
probable  delays,  assume  that  he  did  not  reach  Mikii  much
before  June  a.d.  1847.  Kazem-Beg  says  that  he  remained
there  six  months  ere  he  was  transferred  to  Chihrik,  where,
if  this  statement  be  correct,  he  must  have  arrived  about
the  beginning  of  a.d.  1848.  From  Chihrik  he  was  brought
to  Tabriz  to  undergo  his  first  examinatipn  (see  subsequent
note)  during  the  life  of  Muhammad  Shdh,  who  died  on
Sept.  4"",  A.D.  1848 ;  and  from  Chihrik  he  was  again  brought
to  Tabriz  in  July  a.d.  1850  to  suffer  martyrdom.  It  would
therefore  seem  that  of  the  last  three  years  of  the  Bdb's
life  six  months  (from  June  to  December,  a.d.  1847)  were
spent  at  M4ku,  and  two  years  and  a  half  (January  a.d.
1848— July  A.D.  1850)  at  Chihrik.


NOTE M.
The  first  examination  of  the  Bab  at  Tabriz.

Of  what  took  place  in  this  assembly  we  have  four
accounts  besides  that  which  is  contained  in  the  present
work,  whereof  two — those  contained  in  the  Eaivzatu  's^
Sqfd  and  the  Kisasu  'l-Ulamd — are  almost  identical.
The  version  contained  in  the  Ndsikku  't-Tawdrikh  is  sub-
stantially a  mere  condensation  of  these,  and  contains  little
new  matter,  though  the  order  of  the  proceedings  is  some-
what differently  given.  The  account  contained  in  the
Tdrikh-i-Jadid  is  relatively  very  brief,  and  in  the  main
agrees  with  what  is  stated  in  the  present  work.  Bdbl
tradition,  in  short,  supplies  us  with  no  detailed  narrative
of  this  event,  the  reason  for  this  being  apparently  that  the
assembly  in  question  was  held  with  closed  doors,  and  that


278  NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABEfZ.

the  Bd.b  (so  far  as  we  can  tell)  was  unsupported  by  the
presence  of  a  single  friend.

As  to  the  credibility  of  the  Muhammadan  version,
Kazem-Beg  has  some  very  pertinent  remarks  in  his  first
article  (pp.  360—363).  While  fully  sharing  the  doubts
which  he  expresses  as  to  the  historical  value  of  this  version,
I  have  nevertheless  thought  it  worth  reproducing  in  this
place,  believing  that,  whether  it  be  true  or  false,  it  will  not
be  found  altogether  uninteresting  as  a  specimen  of  the
method  of  judicial  enquiry  adopted  by  an  Ecclesiastical
Court  in  Persia.  I  have  in  the  main  followed  the  account
given  in  the  Bawzatu  's-Safd  and  the  Kisasu  'I-  Ulamd,
except  in  a  few  cases  where  a  question  or  answer  seemed  to
be  more  clearly  put  in  the  Ndsikhw  't-Tawdrtkli.

In  the  Ndsikhu  't-Tawdrikh  this  conference  is  described
as  havijig  taken  place  in  the  year  a.h.  1263.  If  this  were
so ',  it  must  have  been  at  the  close  of  that  year  (which  ended
on  December  8th,  a.d.  1847),  inasmuch  as  the  Bdb  was,
according  to  all  authorities  (including  Dr  A.  H.  Wright  of
Uriimiyya),  brought  to  Tabriz  from  Ghihrik,  whither  (as  I
have  attempted  to  shew  in  the  previous  note)  he  was  not
transferred  much  before  the  beginning  of  a.d.  1848.

The  chief  persons  who  took  part  in  this  examination  of
the  B4b  were  : —

Ndsiru  'd-Dh  Mirzu,  now  King,  then  Crown-Prince,
of  Persia,  who  was  at  this  time  about  sixteen  years  old,

and  on  whom  the  government  of  AzarbaijAn  had  only
recently  been  bestowed;  IMji  Mulld  Mahmud  entitled
Nizdmu'l-' Ulamd,  the  young  Prince's  tutor;  Mulld  Mu-
hammad Mdmakdm  entitled  Hujjatu  'l-Isldm,  an  eminent
Sheykhf  divine ;  Hdjt  Muriaad-Kidi  Marandi  entitled
'Ilmu  'l-Hudd;  Hdji  Mirzd  'Alt' Asgliar  the  Sheykhu'l-
Isldm  ;  and  (according  to  the  present  work)  Slirsd  Ahmad
the  Imdm-Jum'a.  Shortly  after  these  had  assembled  the
BAb  was  brought  in,  and  (according  to  the  Musulm4n,  but
not  the  Bdbf,  accounts)  was  motioned  to  a  seat  of  honour.
The  following  dialogue  then  ensued  : —

Hdji  Mulld  Mahmud. — "The  command  of  His  Im-
perial Majesty  the  King  is  that  you  should  set  forth  your

1  But  see  remarks  on  pp.  186—187  mpra.


NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIz.  279

claims  in  the  presence  of  the  doctors  of  Isldm,  so  that  the
truth  or  falsehood  thereof  may  be  established.  Although
I  myself  am  not  one  of  the  learned  and  only  occupy  the
position  of  an  attendant,  I  am  free  from  prejudice,  and  my
conversion  will  not  be  without  importance.  Now  I  have
three  questions  to  ask  of  you.  Firstly,  are  these  books
composed  in  the  fashion  and  style  of  the  Kur'dn,  of  Epistles,
and  of  Prayers,  and  disseminated  through  all  parts  and
regions  of  Persia  yours,  and  did  you  compose  them,  or  do
men  [wrongly]  attribute  them  to  you  ?"

Bab.—"  They  are  from  God."

H.  M.  M. — "  I  am  no  great  scholar  :  if  they  are  yours,
say  so  ;  and  if  not,  don't."

Bab.—"  They  are  mine."

H.  M.  M.  "The  meaning  of  your  saying  'They  are
from  God'  is  that  your  tongue  is  like  the  Tree  on  Sinai' —

*  ij^.  '— ^  J^  'JJ  ^3^  b?"


* ^y  <Ul  Xc-  ^yL-  j\  i>-jJ


Bdb. — "  Mercy  be  upon  you !"

H.  M.  iff.— "They  call  you  'Bab.'  Who  gave  you  this
name,  and  where  did  they  give  it  ?  What  is  the  meaning
of  ' Bab' I And  are  you  content  with  this  name  or  not  ?"

Bdb. — "  God  gave  me  this  name."

H.  M.  i(f.— "Where?  In  the  House  of  the  Ka'ba,  or
in  the  'Holy  House,'''  or  in  the  'Frequented  House'?"*

1  i.e.  The  Burning  Bush.  Cf.  Kur'dn  xxvii,  7 — 9 ;  and  xxviii,
29—30.

2  "  If  [to  say]  '  I  am  the  Truth '  (i.e.  God)  be  right  in  a  tree,

Why  should  it  not  be  right  in  some  favoured  man  ? "

3  See  note  1  at  the  foot  of  p.  23  supra.
*  Jerusalem.

^  See  Kur'dn  lii,  v.  4,  and  explanations  in  the  commentaries.


280  NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABRfZ.

Bdb. — "  Wherever  it  was,  it  is  a  divine  name."
H.  M.  M. — "  In  that  case  of  course  you  are  content
with  a  'divine  name.' What  is  the  meaning  of  '  Bdb'V
Bdb.— "The  same  as  the  word  'Bdb'  in  [the  tradition]—


* LjI) jc  _5 J«]l ijjla


ff.  M.  M.  -"  Then  you  are  the  '  Gate  of  the  City  of
Knowledge '  ? "

Bdb.— "Yen."

H.  M.  M. — "Praise  be  to  God  !  For  forty  years  have
I  journeyed  seeking  to  meet  with  one  of  the  '  Gates.'  and  it
was  not  granted  to  me.  Now,  praise  be  to  God,  you  have
come  to  me  in  my  own  country,  even  to  my  very  pillow !
If  it  be  so,  and  I  can  but  assure  myself  that  you  are  the
'  Gate,'  give  me,  I  pray,  the  office  of  shoe-keeper!"

Bab.—"  Surely  you  are  H4ji  MulU  Mahmiid?"

H.  M.  M.—"  Yes."

Bdb. — "Your  dignity  is  great;  great  offices  should  be
bestowed  upon  you."

H.  M.  M. — "  I  only  want  that  office,  and  it  is  sufficient
for  me. "

The  Prince. — "  We  too  will  leave  and  deliver  over  this
throne  to  you  who  are  the  '  Gate.' "

H.  M.  M. — "  As  the  Prophet  or  some  other  wise  man
hath  said —


Ul^


I  ask,  then,  in  Medicine,  what  occurs  in  the  stomach
when  a  person  suffers  from  indigestion  ?  Why  are  some
cases  amenable  to  treatment  ?  And  why  do  some  go  on  to
permanent  dyspepsia  or  s3mcope,^  or  terminate  in  hypo-
chondriasis ? "

1  "  I  am  the  City  of  Knowledge  and  'Alf  is  its  Gate  {Bdb)."

2  "  Knowledge  is  twofold — knowledge  of  bodies,  and  know-
ledge of  religions ; "  i.e.  Medicine  and  Theology  are  the  only  two
branches  of  science  which  are  really  worthy  of  attention.

3  oLii,  swooning  or  syncope.  For  fainting-fits  in  connection
with  dyspepsia,  see  Avicenna's  Kdniin  (Rome,  a.d.  1593),  vol.  i,
p.  440.


NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABEfZ.  281

Bab. — "I  have  not  studied  Medicine."

The  Prince. — "If  so  be  that  you  are  the  'Gate  of  Know-
ledges,' yet  say  'I  have  not  studied  Medicine,'  this  is  quite
incompatible  with  your  claim!"

H.  M.  M. — [To  the  Prince)  "It  is  of  no  consequence,
for  this  is  but  the  art  of  the  veterinarian  and  is  not  included
amongst  sciences ;  so  that  herein  is  no  incompatibility  with
B4b-hood."  {To  the  Bab)  " Theology  consists  of  the  sciences

of  'Principles' (Ja-^l) and  'Applications'  (p jiJ)- The

science  of  'Principles'  has  a  beginning  (Iju)  and  a  con-
clusion (.>l*fl).  Say  then:  are  [the  Divine  Attributes  of]
Knowledge,  Hearing,  Seeing,  and  Power  identical  with  the
[Divine]  Essence,  or  otherwise?"

Bab. — "Identical  with  the  Essence."

H.  M.  M. — "Then  God  is  multiple  and  composite;  the
I)ivine]  Essence  and  the  [Divine]  Knowledge  are  two  things
ike  vinegar  and  syrup  which  have  yet  become  identical;
God  is]  compounded  of  [the  Divine]  Essence  plus  Know-
edge,  of  [the  Divine]  Essence  plus  Power,  and  so  on.
besides  this,  the  [Divine]  Essence  is  'without  Opposite,
without  Antithesis.'  But  Knowledge,  which  is  identical
with  the  [Diviae]  Essence,  has  an  opposite,  which  is  Igno-
rance. Besides  these  two  objections,  God  knows,  the  Prophet
knows,  and  I  know:  we  [therefore]  partake  in  Knowledge.
We  also  have  a  'ground  of  distinction';  for  the  Knowledge
of  God  is  from  Himself,  while  our  knowledge  is  from  Him.
Therefore  God  is  compounded  of  a  'ground  of  distinction'
and  a  'ground  of  identity.' But  God  is  not  composite."

Bab.—"  I  have  not  studied  Philosophy."  {The  Prince
smiles,  but  preserves  silence.)

H.  M.  M. — "The  science  of  'Applications'  is  elucidated
from  the  Book  and  the  Code',  and  the  understanding  of  the
Book  and  the  Code  depends  on  many  sciences,  such  as
Grammar,  Rhetoric,  and  Logic.  Do  you  who  are  the  Bdb
conjugate  Kola  ?"

i?a6.— '"'What  I^alaV

'  i.e.  the  Kur'dn  and  the  Traditions.


282  NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIz.

H.  M.  M.—-"Kdla,  yakulu,  kawlan."  (Begins  to  say
the  past  tense  after  the  fashion  of  a  scJwol-hoy—" Kula,
kdla,  kdlu;  kdlat,  kdlatd,  kulnd."  Then,  addressing  the
Bdh)  "Do  you  say  the  rest."

Bob.— "I  learned  it  in  childhood,  but  I  have  for-
gotten it."

H.  M.  itf.— "Give  the  derivatives  oi  Kdla."

Bdb. — "How  give  the  derivatives?"

H.  M.  M.  {after  giving  some  of  the  derivatives) — "Now
give  the  rest. "

Bdb. — "I  told  you,  I  have  forgotten."

H.  M.  M. — "Explain  this  verse  of  the  Glorious
Kur'dn  :—


0^0-° JJ J


and  tell me  also what is the construction of \sy>-


UJ=


3


Bdb. — "I  don't  remember."

H.  M.  M. — "  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  tradition  : —

*  Sjb-I^l  ^1  CuJii  \^^  0_jjJI  4Jill  J«l  ?"'

Bdb.—"  I  don't  know."

H.  M.  M. — "  Explain  the  meaning  of  this  tradition  of
what  passed  between  Ma'miin  the  Caliph  and  His  Highness
Riz^  the  eighth  Imdm  : —


1  "/i  is  He  who  niaketh  you  to  hehold  the  lightning,  a  fear  and
a  hope." Kur'An,  xiii,  13.

2  "  May  God  curse  the  eyes,  for  verily  they  have  acted  unjustly
towards  the  one  eye.'"  I  regret  to  say  that  I  have  failed  to
ascertain  by  whom  and  on  what  occasion  these  words  were
uttered  or  to  what  they  allude.


NOTE M— BAB EXAMINED AT TABKfZ.  283

*  jj^L  C-Ci  LjU  ')i'_jl  Jls  kSL)  V^jl  Jli  Liil  il  Jls

What  was  the  nature  of  the  argument  employed  by  Riz4
(on  him  be  peace),  and  what  the  point  of  Ma'miin's  objec-
tion and  of  Kiz4's  reply  thereto  ? "

^a6.—"  Is  it  a  tradition  ? "

H.  M.  it/.— "Yes."  {Cites^  authorities.)  "The  cir-
cumstances under  which  the  Suratu  'l-Kawthar  was  re-
vealed were,  as  is  well  known,  the  following  : — His  Highness
the  Prophet  was  passing  by.  'As  said,  '  This  is  the  child-
less man  ! '  Shortly  afterwards  he  died,  leaving  no  children.
His  Highness  the  Prophet  was  grieved,  and  so  this  Siira
was  revealed  for  his  consolation.  Tell  me  now,  what  was
the  nature  of  the  consolation  which  it  contained?"'

Bab. — "Were  these  indeed  the  circumstances  under
which  it  was  revealed  ? "

^  "  Ma'mHn  said,  '  What  is  the  proof  for  [the  right  to]  the
Caliphate  of  thine  ancestor  'All  iim  AM  TdlibV  He  [i.e.  Rizd]  said,
'  The  sign  of  ourselves.'  He  [i.e.  Ma'mun]  said,  '  If  it  were  not  for
our  wives!'  He  [i.e.  Eiza]  said,  'If  it  were  not  for  our  sons!'
Then  Ma'mim  vjas  silent."  By  his  first  answer  the  Imdm  Riza
means  that  the  right  of  'Ali  and  his  descendants  to  the  CaUphate
is  sufiiciently  proved  by  their  being  what  they  are  and  connected
as  they  are  with  the  Prophet.  Ma'miln  objects,  'Yes,  that  is  all
very  well,  but  we  too  are  related  to  the  Prophet  on  the  female
side;'  to  which  objection  the  Im^m  Riza  replies,  'But  our
connection  is  in  the  male  line ; '  for  connection  in  the  male  hne
is  a  much  closer  tie,  as  expressed  in  the  following  verse  from  an
old  Arab  poet  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  my  friend  Mr  Khalll
Khayydt  of  Beyrout : —

"Our  sons'  sons  are  our  sons,  but  as  for  our  daughters
Their  sons  are  the  sons  of  strange  men."
This,  at  least,  appears  to  me  to  be  the  explanation  of  the
tradition.

2  Concerning  the  circumstances  under  which  the  Siiratu
'l-Kawthar  was  revealed  see  Ibn  Hish&m's  Life  of  Muhammad,  ed.
Wustenfeld,  p.  261.


284  NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABRfZ.

H.  M.  3/.— "Yes." {Cites  authorities.)

(The  Bab  asks  for  time  to  think.)

H.  M.  M. — "  In  the  days  of  our  youth  we  used,  accord-
ing to  the  dictates  of  our  age,  jestingly  to  repeat  this
sentence  of  'AUd'ma\  whereof  I  desire  you  now  to  explain
to  me  the  meaning  : —


Why  should  this  be  so  ? "

Bab. — {after  reflecting  for  a  while)  "  Is  this  sentence
from  'Alldma  ? "

Tlie  audience  {unanimously). — "  Yes  !  "

H.  M.  M. — "  Suppose  it  is  not  'Alldma's  but  mine,  do
you  nevertheless  explain  its  meaning.  After  all  you  are
the  '  Gate  of  Knowledge' !  "

Bab. — "  I  cannot  think  of  anything."

H.  M.  M. — "  One  of  the  miracles  of  the  Arabian  Pro-
phet is  the  Kur'^n,  and  the  miraculous  character  thereof  is
derived  from  its  fasdhat  and  its  baldghat.  What  is  the
definition  of  fasdhat  and  baldghat  ?  Is  the  relation  which
subsists  between  them  tabdyun,  tasdwi,  'umum  wa  khiisus
mill  ivajh,  or  'umum  wa  khums-i-mutlakV'^

'  The  title  of  'AUdma  ("the  very  erudite")  is  used  by  the
Shi'ites  to  designate  one  of  their  great  theologians  named  Hasan
ibn  Yiisuf  ibn  'Ah'  of  Hilla.  According  to  the  Kisam'l-'  Ulamd
he  was  born  on  KamazSn  19th,  a.h.  648  (December  15th,  A.D.  1250),
and  died  on  Muharram  11th,  a.h.  726  (December  18th,  a.d.  1325).
No  less  than  seventy-five  of  his  works  are  enumerated.

2  "Si  vir  cum  liermaphrodito,  herinaphroditus  cum  muliere rem
kabet,  ah  hermaphroclito  requiritur  ut  aqv/l  se  purget,  non  vero  a
viro  et  muliere.

^  Fasdhat  and  baldghat  both  signify  in  general  "  eloquence,"
but  the  former  especially  denotes  correctness  of  diction  and
chasteness  of  style,  the  latter  moving  and  affecting  language  which
reaches  the  hearts  of  the  hearers  or  causes  the  speaker  to  reach
his  object. (See  Lane's  Arabic-English  Lexicon,  s.v.  ii  and  Siaj.)


NOTE  M — BAB  EXAMINED  AT  TABRfZ. 285

Bab. — "  I  don't  know."  (The  audience  nvmifest  signs
of  anger  and  impatience.)

H.  M.  M. — "  If  you  were  in  doubt  between  two  and
three  [inclinations  in  prayer]  what  would  you  do?'"

Bab. "  I  would  assume  two."

Mulld  Muhammad  Mdmdkdni: — "0  impious  one!
You  do  not  even  know  what  to  do  in  cases  of  doubt  iu
prayer,  and  yet  you  claim  to  be  the  B4b  !  "

Bdb. — "  I  would  assume  three."

The  "  four  relations  "  recognized  by  Muhammadan  logicians  and
here  enumerated  are  in  detail  as  follows : — (1)  TasdvA  ("  Equi-
valence" or  " Co-extensiveness "),  as  "man"  and  "endowed  with
articulate  speech."  (2)  Tabdyun  ("Diversity"),  as  "man"  and
"stone."  (3)  'Vmimi  wa  khus{is  i-mutlak  ("Relation  of  genus
and  species  absolutely"),  as  "animal"  and  "man."  (4)  '■Umiim
via  khv^O^  min  wajh  ("  Relation  of  genus  and  species  under  one
aspect "),  as  "  animal "  and  "  white."

1  This  question,  with  what  immediately  follows  it,  refers  to  the
duty  incumbent  on  a  Musulman  who,  while  engaged  in  the
performance  of  one  of  the  prescribed  prayers,  becomes  conscious
of  a  doubt  as  to  whether  he  has  duly  fulfilled  some  one  or  more
of  its  essential  elements,  e.g.  as  to  whether  he  has  performed  two
or  three  inclinations  (rak'a).  Every  possible  case  of  doubt  is
provided for  in that section of Sluhammadan  jurispnidenoe

which  is  entitled  ij^l  J  oill  concerning  which  see  Querry's
Droit  Mvstdman  (Paris,  1871)  vol.  i,  pp.  107 — 109.  The  general
rule  is  thus  stated  at  p.  21  of  the  catechism  called  Sv'dl  it,  Jawdh
("  Questions  and  answers")  composed  by  Hdjl  Seyyid  Muhammad
Bdkir  of  Isfahan  and  printed  at  Teherdn  in  a.h.  1247  (a.d.  1831 —
2) : — "  He  who  is  doubtful  assumes  the  [performance  of  the]  act
concerning  which  he  doubts,  whether  it  relates  to  the  number  of
inclinations  (rak'a)  or  not;  except  in  cases  where  [the  per-
formance of]  the  act  concerning  which  he  doubts  would  cause
nullity  [of  the  prayer],  when  he  assumes  its  omission.  If,  then,
he  be  doubtful  whether  it  is  two  or  three  inchnations  [which  he
has  performed],  he  assumes  three ;  if  he  be  doubtful  whether  he
has  performed  the  inclination  or  the  prostration  or  not,  he
assumes  that  he  has  performed  them;  and  if  he  be  doubtful
whether  he  has  performed  the  recitation  {kard'at),  he  assumes
that  he  has  performed  it.  But  [on  the  other  hand]  if  he  be
doubtful  whether  he  has  inclined  twice  or  once  he  assumes  that
he  has  inclined  [only]  once ;  and  if  he  be  doubtful  whether  he  has
performed  four  inclinations  of  prayer  or  five,  he  assumes  that  it
is  four."


286  NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABRfZ.

M.  M.  M.  "  Evidently  if  it  is  not  two  you  must  say
three."

//.  M.  M.  "  Three  is  also  wrong.  Why  did  you  not
ask  whether  it  was  in  the  morning  or  evening  prayer  that
I  was  in  doubt,  and  whether  it  was  after  the  inclination  or
before  the  inclination,  or  after  the  completion  of  two  pros-
trations ? "

M.  M.  M. — "You  ought  to  give  thanks,  for  had  he
said  '  I  would  assume  two '  (inasmuch  as  engaging  in  an
indubitable  duty  demands  fulfilment  of  that  indubitable
duty)  what  would  you  have  done  then^?" (To  the  Bah)

"Did you write:— L .  ^  -, , • I . IJ  ?2

Is  this  expression  yours  or  not?"

Bab. "Yes,  it  is  mine."

M.  M.  M. — "Then  in  that  case  you  were  the  leader
and  they  were  followers,  and  you  must  be  superior  to
them?"

Hdji  Murtaza-KuK  Marandf. —"  The  Lord  of  the
Universe  has  said  : —


(Ja.>*|Jj _5 iu.,^j^ cCU Ob -M j\a rt-A.^ UJi I  iolci  J


'  If  I  have  rightly  understood  this  rather  obscure  expression

(ja,l^»^  ^^  ft^i  ^\j,  jJk  4..J  Jjbi)  it  means  that  the  undertaking
of  an  obligation  such  as  prayer  necessitates  and  requiras  the  due
discharge  of  all  that  is  properly  involved  therein,  without  which
it  is  null  and  void.  Hence  if  it  were  necessary  in  a  case  of  doubt
such  as  is  indicated  above  to  assume  that  only  two  inclinations
had  been  performed  (or,  in  other  words,  to  assume  the  minimum
instead  of  the  maximum),  then  all  persons  who  had  followed  the
rule  ordinarily  received  would  have  been  guilty  of  numerous  sins
of  omission  for  which  they  would  be  held  responsible.

2  "  The  first  to  believe  in  me  vias  the  Light  of  Muhammad  and
[the  Light  of]  'AU."

3  "A'nd  knov}  that  whenever  ye  seize  anything  as  a  spoil,  to

God  belongs  a,  fifth  thereof,  and  to  His  Apostle " Kur'dn,

viii,  42.


NOTE il — BAB EXAMrSED AT TABKfZ.


while  you  in  yoiir  Kiiran  say iLJ"'. On  what  authority,
and  whyi'

B.il: — ••  A  thiivi  i<  the  hall'  of  a  fifth. "^Hiat  difterence
does  it  make?'

(The  audience  lanoh).
H.  M.-K.  JI. —  "  In  how  many  way?  ij  nine  di\-i>ible  ?"

(The  Bab  eilve^  iio  ans[r,tr\
H.  M.  M.

J^!^  J J^-^ J ^'•^' JiJ -^


I  am  not  ried  down  to  words ;  shew  me  a  miracle  suit-
able TO  your  claims,  so  rhat  1  may  become  yoiir  follower,
and  on  my  sironiission  many  wiU  set  their  f  Mjtsieps  witlun
the  circle  of  devotion  to  you,  for  1  am  weU  kaown  as
learned,  and  the  learned  man  wiU  never  foUow  the
ignorant."'

Bilt: — "  liVhat  miracle  do  you  desire  V

H.  M.  J/ — "His  Majesty  the  King  Muhammad  Skvh
is  sick Kestore  him  to  liealtb.."

Tr.e  Prince. — "  Wliy  go  sc<  far  ?  Are  not  you  present  ?
Let  him  e:sert  an  indiienee  over  your  being  and  restore  j"ou

^  -A  1r.ir:i  tr-erecf."  As  a  marter  of  fact  the  ordinances
contcdned  in  the  Fcr5;;.ii  £:;:.■:-;  relative  to  the  tiisposal  of  spoUs
tcien  from  inhdels  do  not  accord  with  the  statement  here  made,
which  IS  probc.bly  quite  dctiticns.  They  will  be  t'ctnd  in
I'l!.".;'.:'  V,  c.:.  vi.  -.ind  are  in  stt'ostance  as  follows  ; — ^I'  One-tilth  of
the  stvils,  tocether  with  whatever  is  incomparable  in  valite  or
beauty.  bei:"rs  to  "he  Ba"o.  If  he  be  no  longer  alive  it  is  to  be
held  in  trust  :'-  r  "■  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest."  iJ"  Of  what
remains  the  wiitI :rs  who  have  won  it  take  what  snmces  for  their
neevis.  3  T-e  residtie  is  civen  tc-  the  poor,  all  of  whom,  so  far
as  p:s.sible,  are  to  be  made  pajrtakers  in  the  bottnty.  Shotild
Ctnyt'nin;  stiU  remain  over,  it  may  be  expended  on  baildirj  or
repoiring:  shrines  etc.

'  " Ho'c  lon.j  tie^  '..-■:-nX<<  and  thi^  conCKalmei',:  ..:  :.:'  r-.izapho'r  ■
I  >.■:■: \.ld  b'.irn,  bum,  and  aeqtdesix  in  '.r.at  l'-.'-i\ii\,]."

M,tsnav. ed,  ' Ala  a  d-Dawla,  p,  143,  line  ?  .


288  NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABEfZ.

to  youthfulness,  so  that  you  may  ever  continue  in  attendance
on  our  stirrup.  We  too,  on  witnessing  the  accomplishment
of  this  miracle,  will  resign  this  throne  to  him." '

Bab. — "  It  is  not  in  my  power."

H.  M.  if.— "Then  honour  is  not  rendered  without
some  reason.  0  dumb  in  the  realms  of  words  and  dumb  in
the  realms  of  ideas,  what  virtue  then  do  you  possess  ?"

Bdb. — "I  can  utter  eloquent  words"  {Recites)

{pronouncing  the  last  word  with  final  fat-ha).
Prince  {smiling). —


Bdb. — "My  name  'Ah  Muhammad  corresponds  with
i?a66"  (Lord)."

H.  M.  M.—"  Every  'All  Muhammad  and  Muhammad
'All  corresponds  with  Rabb.  Besides  in  that  case  you
should  claim  to  be  the  Lord  rather  than  the  Bdb."

Bdb. — "I  am  that  person  for  whose  appearance  ye
have  waited  a  thousand  years."

H.  M.  il/.— "That  is  to  say  you  are  the  Mahdl,  the
Lord  of  Religion?"^

1  There  is  something  almost  ludicrous  in  the  eagerness  where-
with the  Crown-Prince  interposes  to  check  the  miracle  designed
to  restore  his  dying  father  to  health.

2  "Praise  be  to  God  ivho  created  the  heavens."

^  "  That  which  forms  its  plural  in  alif  and  td  is  pointed  with
hesra  alike  in  the  objective  and  in  the  dependent  cases."  This
sentence  is  from  the  well-known  versified  Arabic  Grammar
called  the  Alfiyya,  and  will  be  found  on  p.  19  of  Dieterioi's
edition  of  that  work  (Leipsic,  1851).

*  The  sum  of  the  letters  in  'Ali  Muhammad  is  202,  which  is
also  the  numerical  equivalent  of  Rahb.

5  i.e.  the  Twelfth  Imdm. See  Note  0  i7ifra.


. NOTE M — BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ.  289

Bab.— "Yea."

H.  M.  M. — "The  same  in  person,  or  generically  ? "

Bab. — "  In  person."

H.  M.  M. — "  What  is  your  name,  and  what  are  the
names  of  your  father  and  mother  ?  Where  is  your  birth-
place ? And  how  old  are  you  1 "

Bab. — "  My  name  is  'AH  Muhammad  ;  my  mother  was
named  Khadfja  and  my  father  Miizi  Rizd  the  cloth-seller ;
my  birth-place  is  Shirdz ;  and  of  my  life,  behold,  thirty-
five  years  have  elapsed."'

If.  M.  ilf.— "The  name  of  the  Lord  of  Religion  is
Muhammad  ;  his  father  was  named  Hasan  and  his  mother
Narjis ;  his  birth-place  was  Surra-man-Ra'a ;  and  his  age
is  more  than  a  thousand  years.  There  is  the  most  complete
variance. And  besides  I  did  not  send  you."

Bab.—"  Do  you  claim  to  be  God  ? "

H.  M.  M. — "  Such  an  Imdm  is  worthy  of  such  a  God."

Bab. — "I  can  in  one  day  write  two  thousand  verses.
Who  else  can  do  this  ? "

H.  M.  M.—"  When  I  resided  at  the  Supreme  Shrines  I
had  a  secretary  who  used  to  write  two  thousand  verses  a
day.  Eventually  he  became  blind.  You  must  certainly
give  up  this  occupation,  or  else  you  too  will  go  blind."

The  conference  then  broke  up,  and  the  Bd.b  was  taken
back  to  the  house  of  Muhammad  Kdzim  Khdn  the  Farrdsh-
bdsM.  Next  day  he  was  again  brought  before  the  Prince
and  the  doctors,  who  sentenced  him  to  the  bastinado.  The
Muhammadan  historians  admit  that  the  farrdshes  were
stiU,  in  spite  of  what  had  taken  place  at  the  examination
on  the  previous  day,  so  strongly  inclined  to  sympathize
with  the  Bdb  that  they  positively  refused  to  take  part  in
administering  the  punishment  decreed,  the  execution  of
which  therefore  devolved  on  the  servants  of  Hdji  Mulld,
Mahmiid  and  the  Sheyku  '1-IsMm. It  is  of  course  asserted

1  Kazem-Beg  (i,  p.  334,  note  4)  bases  the  calculation  whereby
he  arrives  at  the  date  of  the  Bdb's  birth  on  this  passage,  which,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  affords  a  strong  proof  of  the  falsity  of  the  whole
narrative  wherein  it  occurs,  since  the  Bdb's  age  certainly  did  not
exceed  29  years  at  this  time  (see  Note  C  supra).

B.  19


290 NOTE N — BAB'S claim to be the MAHDf.

by  the  Musulm4n  historians  that  the  B&h  again  recanted
and  revoked  all  his  claims  under  the  chastisement  inflicted
upon  him,  whereupon  he  was  released  and  sent  back  to
Chihrik.

It  is  difficult  to  decide  to  what  measure  of  credence  the
above  narrative  is  entitled.  Very  probably  such  questions
as  are  there  recorded — and  assuredly  some  of  them  are
sufficiently  frivolous  and  even  indecent — were  asked ;  but,
even  though  the  B4b  may  have  been  unable  to  answer
them,  it  is  far  more  likely  that,  as  stated  in  the  Tdrtkh-i-
Jadid,  he  preserved  a  dignified  silence  than  that  he  gave
utterance  to  the  absurdities  attributed  to  him  by  the
Muhammadan  writers.  These,  indeed,  spoil  their  own  case ;
for,  desiring  to  prove  that  the  Bdb  was  not  endowed  with
superhuman  wisdom,  they  represent  him  as  displaying  an
ignorance  which  we  can  scarcely  credit.  That  the  whole
examination  was  a  farce  throughout,  that  the  sentence  was
a  foregone  conclusion,  that  no  serious  attempt  to  apprehend
the  nature  and  evidence  of  the  Bdb's  claim  and  doctrine
was  made,  and  that  from  first  to  last  a  systematic  course  of
brow-beating,  irony,  and  mockery  was  pursued  appear  to
me  to  be  facts  proved  no  less  by  the  Muhammadan  than  by
the  B4bf  accounts  of  these  inquisitorial  proceedings.


NOTE N.
The  Bab's  claim  to  be  the  Imam  Mahdi.

The  Bdb's  original  claim  was,  as  has  been  already  ex-
plained in  Note  D,  that  he  was  the  '  Gate '  whereby  men
could  communicate  with  the  K4'im,  Im^m-Mahdf,  or  Twelfth
Imd,m.  At  a  later  period  of  his  mission,  however,  he  de-
clared himself  to  be  none  other  than  the  Im4m  himself,  and,
as  has  been  set  forth  in  the  previous  Note  (p.  288  supra),
it  was  this  claim  which  he  boldly  advanced  before  his
inquisitors  at  Tabriz.  The  advancement  of  this  claim
certamly  marks  a  very  important  point  in  the  development
of  the  B^b's  doctrine,  but  as  Gobineau  (p.  159)  very  acutely


EVIDENCE OF TAEfKH-I-JADfD.  291

observes  in  speaking  of  MulU  Huseyn's  announcement
thereof  to  Miniichihr  Khdn,  "  il  faut  dire  ici,  pour  pr^venir
toute  erreur,  qu'en  assimilant  le  B4b  au  douzi^me  Imam,  le
missionnaire  cherchait  k  se  faire  comprendre  de  la  foule  et
k  gagner  ses  sympathies,  absolument  comme  saint  Paul
lorsqu'il  r^v^lait  aux  Ath^niens  que  le  Dieu  qu'il  leur
annon9ait  dtait  ce  Dieu  inconnu  auquel  ils  avaient  d6^k
6lev6  un  autel.  C'^tait  des  deux  parts  une  fagon  de  parler,
et  on  verra  plus  tard  qu'il  n'y  a  aucun  rapport  entre  I'id^e
que  les  Babys  se  font  du  Point,  et  ce  que  les  musulmans
pensent  au  sujet  de  I'lmam  Mehdy."

From  the  present  history  (pp.  20  and  24)  it  would
appear  that  this  new  claim  was  publicly  advanced  by  the
Bdb  for  the  first  time  during  his  examination  before  the
'Ulamd  of  Tabriz  at  the  end  of  a.d.  1847  or  the  beginning
of  A.D.  1848.  The  following  passage  in  the  Tdrikk-i-Jadid
affords  corroborative  evidence  of  this  : —

(j|>. ^^ dXjUj U _J  JU.Jo.aJ ^J»aJ _J jijw jva oLjI

(LaJU ."<  j.^-a- Ou C ' 'j ^  Jr^ '--i'^ kX^^^^ iJluottX*-

,".I..U'.'oa ^ OU j kSCsuS>\  j^ O »-a>- (Ji  _3 ji.>J_jl _o

J^ \j^^>- iJIuajS jLg-i=' -^^ Jljilyul _J C»ft>^>- _J (.1^1 /in

ai lo t-flSjJ ijLsj _;=>-lj' J.i  ,_<'^ "^^P j!.ijJij9  ^^^,^J>-

* JLjIOus

"After  His  Highness  [the  Bdb]  had  removed  to  the

19—2


292 NOTE N — BAB'S claim to be  the MAHDf.

Castle  of  Chihrfk,  his  companions  and  friends,  notwith-
standing the  rigorous  prohibition  of  the  late  Hdjf  [Mfrzd

Akdsi],  still  continued  to  hold  intercourse  with  him  in  a
cautious  manner,  and  a  number  of  persons  in  that  neigh-
bourhood attained  the  dignity  of  belief  and  were  converted.
And  so  long  as  Yahyd,  Kh4n  held  the  office  of  governor  he
used  to  observe  the  utmost  respect  towards  His  Highness
[the  Bdb].  And  His  Highness  [the  Bdb],  having  regard  to
the  exigencies  of  the  time,  the  requirements  of  expediency
and  caution,  and  the  capacity  of  men,  [first]  made  himself
known  as  the  Kd'im  in  Chihrfk ;  though  some  believe  that
[he  did  so]  during  the  latter  part  of  the  period  of  his
sojourn  at  M4kti."

In  the  Persian  Beydn  (of  which  the  greater  part,  if  not
the  whole,  was  composed  at  Md.kli)  I  have  found  two
passages  wherein  the  B6h  identifies  himself  more  or  less
clearly  with  the  Im4m  Mahdf .  The  first  of  these  passages
occurs  in  VdMd  viii,  ck.  17,  and  runs  as  follows : —

Ol ji_ "L<SJ  J L$JUi  J \j^jCjjs JU>-I Jlijioj Jsula J-^ll

1  B  omits.  2  B  oujitg  3  b  oujjtg  *  g  ^g^^^g  _^_

5  B  reads  jcT.  0  B  reads  t^iji.  7  g  o^jitg.


EVIDENCE  OF  PERSIAN  EETAN.  293

Ijijtjji iSJ^  J^^ Jij^sCU <U3l {jyj^ UT"^ lP

ils^  oLa  i^  obi  "W  J*  'Tc-l]  ^Lt  ji^Li
jptail  JpeJi  jjj  J  s_«i  lOsil  JL>-  J  oLjI  Ji  j3  ^^o-"!

"  As  thou  hast  heard,  at  the  manifestation  of  the
Nukta-i-Furlcan  [i.e.  Muhammad,  who  was  in  his  time  the
'  Point  of  Revelation ']  all  those  who  were  believers  in  the
Gospel  were  expecting  the  promised  Ahmad,"  and  thou  hast

1  B  inserts  c.  ^  B  reads  j;j^  _,£ii.  '  B  reads  «^l^.

*  B  reads  jajiu. .  *  B  reads  L'l .  ^  B  omits.

'  B  omits.  *  B  omits.  '  B  reads  lii.  i"  B  omits.

"  B  reads  iSjo.| ,  12  g  inserts  ^.  ^'  B  omits.

"  B  omits.  1°  B  reads  i:u-ili^.

1^  In  Muhammadan  tradition  Christ  is  said  to  have  foretold

s  f

the  coming  of  Muhammad  in  the  words  ji^l  4»..t  j>l  i^jjl,  j;i  JL
"One  shall  come  after  me  whose  name  is  Ahmad". This  tra-


294 KOTE  N — BAB'S  claim  to  be  the  MAHDf.

heard  what  befel  that  Sun  of  Truth  during  the  twenty-
three  years  of  his  mission,  so  that  he  said,  'No  prophet
hath  been  afflicted  as  I  have  been  afflicted.'  _  Yet  all  were
entreating  and  craving  his  appearance,  and,  in  the  words  of
Jesus,  working  for  him.  Praise  be  to  God  that  in  that  day
thou  wast  not !  But  thou  wast  in  the  manifestation  of  the
NuUa-i-Beydn  [i.e.  the  Bdb,  the  'Point  of  Revelation']
when  all  believers  in  the  Apostle  of  God  were  expecting  the
appearance  of  the  promised  Mahdi;  for  this  tradition  is
from  the  Apostle  of  God,  and  all,  simple  and  gentle,  are
agreed  therein.  Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  substance
of  Faith  was  confined  to  the  Shi'ites,  and  that  the  sect  of
IsMm  is  this  same  outward  sect  whereof  the  adherents  call
themselves  Shi'ites;  while  men  avowedly  call  Fdrs  the
'Abode  of  Knowledge':'  Yet,  although  the  Tree  of  Truth
arose,  not  one  of  the  people  recognized  it  [even]  after
perceiving  it.  The  degree  of  their  remoteness  is  evident,
for  this  sufficeth  unto  their  abasement ;  yet  night  and  day
they  exclaim  '  speed !  speed ! ' '

The  second  passage  occurs  in  V&hid  ix,  ch.  3,  and  runs
as  follows:^

j^  O-"' ^y^^  jl-^ >^'  ^ Olfllli  i3^  lJ^  .  *— '^''^"  ^
jj.^J=> Ji^y^ a JjA) (VjJj ij— ^ U_>^.  |V!]J=-l.'n L(j5  J  Ji 1


dition  is  based  on  the  prophecies  relating  to  the  coming  of  the
rtapoxXi^roj,  for  which  word  the  Muhammadans  would  substitute
nfputXuTor,  whereof  the  signification  is  nearly  the  same  as  Ahmad
or  Muhammad.  (See  Ibn  Hishdm's  Life  of  Muhammad,  ed.  "Wiis-
tenfeld,  pp.  149—150.)

1  The  official  title  of  Shh-dz  is  m\  Ji  "The  Abode  of  Know-
ledge ".

^  The  Shi'ites,  whenever  they  mention  the  Imdm  Mahdf,  add

the  formula  to._^  «3i  j^.^  "May  God  hasten  his  joy !"

3  B  reads  iS'  jj>j.  *  B  omits.  ^  B  omits.


EVIDENCE OF PERSIAN BEY  AN.  295

^y  JU&  \^y\  dT] jc/ jij J5^  J^\ liS^]  (3^

VF ^  flu-  ^i^>

"  Consider  with,  due  attention,  for  the  matter  is  very-
strait,  even  while  it  is  more  spacious  than  the  heavens  and
the  earth  and  what  is  between  them.  For  instance,  if  all
those  who  were  expecting  [the  fulfilment]  of  the  saying  of
Jesus  had  been  assured  of  the  manifestation  of  Ahmad  [i.e.
Muhammad],  not  one  would  have  turned  aside  from  the
sapng  of  Jesus.  So  likewise  in  the  manifestation  of  the
Nukta-i-Beyan  [i.e.  the  Bdb]  if  all  should  be  assured  that
this  is  that  same  Mahdi  [whose  coming  was]  promised,
whom  the  Apostle  of  God  foretold,  not  one  of  the  believers
in  the  Kur'4n  would  have  turned  aside  from  the  saying  of
the  Apostle  of  God.  So  likewise  in  the  manifestation  of
Him  whom  God  shall  manifest  behold  the  same  thing,  for
should  all  be  assured  that  he  is  that  same  '  He  whom  God
shall  manifest '  whom  the  Nukta-i-Beyan  foretold,  not  one
would  turn  aside."

^  B  reads  ail  J».,j  j^oaJ.  ^  B  inserts  if , ^  B  omits,

■i  B  reads  j;j,i^.  '  B  reads  |j^.  ^  B  adds  | ,.

'  B  omits.  8  B  omits.  "  B  reads  >SjL .


296  NOTE  O — CERTAIN  SHI'ITE  BELIEFS.


NOTE 0.

On  certain  points  of  Shi'ite  doctrine  referred  to  in

THE  text.

1.  Th^  Occultation  of  the  Twelfth  Imam.  The  cardinal
point  wherein  the  Shi'ites  (as  well  as  the  other  sects  in-
cluded under  the  more  general  term  of  Imdmites)  differ
from  the  Sunnites  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Imdmate.  Accord-
ing to  the  belief  of  the  latter,  the  vicegerency  \CJ>'^)
of  the  Prophet  is  a  matter  to  be  determined  by  the  choice
and  election  of  his  followers,  and  the  visible  head  of  the
Musulmdn  world  is  qualified  for  the  lofty  position  which
he  holds  less  by  any  special  divine  grace  than  by  a  com-
bination of  orthodoxy  and  administrative  capacity.  Accord-
ing to  the  Imdmite  view,  on  the  other  hand,  the  vicegerency
is  a  matter  altogether  spiritual ;  an  office  conferred  by  God
alone,  first  by  His  Prophet,  and  afterwards  by  those  who  so
succeeded  him,  and  having  nothing  to  do  with  the  popular

choice  or  approval.  In  a  word,  the  Caliph  (iiJU-)  of  the
Sunnfs  is  merely  the  outward  and  visible  Defender  of  the
Faith:  the  Imdm  of  the  Shi'ites  is  the  divinely-ordained
successor  of  the  Prophet,  one  endowed  with  all  perfections
and  spiritual  gifts,  one  whom  all  the  faithful  must  obey,
whose  decision  is  absolute  and  final,  whose  wisdom  is  super-
human, and  whose  words  are  authoritative.  The  general
term  Imdmite  is  applicable  to  all  who  hold  this  latter  view
without  reference  to  the  way  in  which  they  trace  the
succession,  and  therefore  includes  such  sects  as  the  Bdkiris
and  Isma'tlis  as  well  as  the  Shi'ites  or  "Church  of  the

Twelve"  \i^jl&  ^\  .^ajlo),  as  they  are  more  specifically

termed,  with  whom  alone  we  are  here  concerned.  According
to  these,  twelve  persons  successively  held  the  office  of  Imdm.
These  twelve  are  as  follows  : —

1.  'All  ibn  AM  Tdlib,  the  cousin  and  first  disciple  of
the  Prophet,  assassinated  by  Ibn  Muljam  at  Kiifa,  a.h.  40
(a.d.  661).


OCCULTATION OF TWELFTH IMAM,  297

2.  iTagaji,  son  of  Alf  and  Fdtima,  bomA.H.  2,  poisoned
by  order  of  Mu'dwiya  I.  a.h.  50  (a.d.  670).

3.  Huseyn,  son  of  'AK  and  Fdtima,  born  a.h.  4,  killed
at  KerbeM  on  Muharram  10*,  a.h.  61  (Oct.  10*,  a.d.  680).

4._  _  'All,  son  of  Huseyn  and  Shalirbdn^  (daugbter  of
Yezdigird  ^tbe  last  Sd,sdman  king),  generally  called  Imam
Zeynul-Abidin,  poisoned  by  WaHd.  [See  also  note  3  on
p.  139.]

5.  Muhammad  Bdkir,  son  of  the  above-mentioned
Zeynu'l-'Abidin  and  bis  cousin  Umm  'Abdi  'llAh  the
daughter  of  Imim  Hasan,  poisoned  by  Ibrahim  ibn  Wahd.

6.  Ja'far-i-Sadik,  son  of  Imdm  Muhammad  Bdkir,
poisoned  by  order  of  Mansiir  the  'Abbdside  Caliph.  [See
note  3  at  foot  of  p.  24.]

7.  Musd  Kdzim,  son  of  Imdm  Ja'far-i-Sddik,  born
A.H.  129,  poisoned  by  order  of  H4riinu  'r-Rashld  a.h.  183.

8.  'All  ibn  Musd  er-Rizd,  generally  called  Imdm  Rizd,
bom  A.H.  153,  poisoned  near  Tiis  in  Khurdsdn  by  order  of
the  Caliph  Ma'miin,  a.h.  203,  and  buried  at  Mesh-hed,
which  derives  its  name  and  its  sanctity  from  him.

9.  Muhammad  Taki,  son  of  Imd,m  RizA,  born  a.h.  195,
poisoned  by  the  Caliph  Mu'tasim  at  Baghdad  a.h.  220.

10.  'All  Naki,  son  of  Imdm  Muhammad  Takl,  born
A.H.  213,  poisoned  at  Surra-man-Ra'a  a.h.  254.

11.  Hasan  'Askari,  son  of  Imdm  'AH  Naki,  born  a.h.
232,  poisoned  a.h.  260.

12.  Muhammad,  son  of  Imdm  Hasan  'Askari  and
Narjis  Khdtiin,  called  by  the  Shi'ites  "Imam  Mahdi" ,
"Hujjatu  'lldh"  ("the  Proof  of  God"),  "Bakiyyatu  'llah"
("the  Remnant  of  God"),  and  " Kd'im-i-dl-i-Muhammad"
("He  who  shall  arise  of  the  family  of  Muhammad").  He
bore  not  only  the  same  name  but  the  same  kunya — Abu'l-
Kdsim — as  the  Prophet,  and  according  to  the  Shi'ites  it
is  not  lawful  for  any  other  to  bear  this  name  and  this
kunya  together.  He  was  born  at  Surra-man-Ra'a,  a.h.
255,  and  succeeded  his  father  in  the  Imdmate  a.h.  260'.
The  Shi'ites  hold  that  he  did  not  die,  but  disappeared  in

1  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  '  Manifestation'  of  Mfrzd  'Alf
Muhammad  the  BAb  took  place  exactly  one  thousand  years  after
this  date.


298  NOTE  O — CERTAIN  SHI'ITE  BELIEFS.

an  underground  passage  in  Surra-man-Ra'a,  a.h.  329 ;  that
he  still  lives,  surrounded  by  a  chosen  band  of  his  followers,
in  one  of  those  mysterious  cities,  Jdbulkd,  and  J4buls4 ;  and
that  when  the  fulness  of  time  is  come,  when  the  earth  is
filled  with  injustice,  and  the  faithful  are  plunged  in  despair,
he  will  come  forth,  heralded  by  Jesus  Christ,  overthrow  the
infidels,  establish  universal  peace  and  justice,  and  inaugurate
a  millennium  of  blessedness.  During  the  whole  period  of  his
Imdmate,  i.e.  from  a.h.  260  till  the  present  day,  the  Imdm
Mahdi  has  been  invisible  and  inaccessible  to  the  mass  of
his  followers,  and  this  is  what  is  signified  by  the  term

"  Occultation"  (o-i).  After  assuming  the  functions  of
Imdm  and  presiding  at  the  burial  of  his  father  and  predeces-
sor, the  Im4m  Hasan  'Askari,  he  disappeared  from  the  sight
of  all  save  a  chosen  few,  who,  one  after  the  other,  continued
to  act  as  channels  of  communication  between  him  and  his

followers. These  persons  were  known  as  "Gates"  (■—jIojJ

See  Note  D,  pp.  229  and  233  supra).  The  first  of  them
was  Abii  'Umar  'Othm4n  ibn  Sa'ld  'Umarf;  the  second
Abii  Ja'far  Muhammad  ibn  'Othmdn,  son  of  the  above ;
the  third  Huseyn  ibn  Riih  Naw-bakhti  (concerning  whom
somewhat  will  be  said  directly) ;  the  fourth  Abii  '1-Hasan
'All  ibn  Muhammad  Simarf.  Of  these  "Gates"  the  first
was  appointed  by  the  Imdm  Hasan  'Askari,  the  others  by
the  then-acting  "Gate"  with  the  sanction  and  approval  of
the  Imdm  Mahdi.  This  period — extending  over  sixty-nine
years — during  which  the  Imdm  was  still  accessible  by  means
of  the  "Gates"  is  known  as  the  "Lesser"  or  "Minor  Occul-
tation' (iSj*^  ^-rf^)-  Thiswas  succeeded  by  the  "Greater"
or  "Major  Occultatioti"  (iSjf  O^).  When  Abii '1-Hasan
'Ali,  the  last  of  the  "Gates",  drew  near  to  his  latter  end,  he
was  urged  by  the  faithful  (who  contemplated  with  despair
the  prospect  of  complete  severance  from  the  Imdm)  to  nomi-
nate a  successor. This,  however,  he  refused  to  do,  saying

iijihjSt,  ^1  dJO  "  God  hath  a  purpose  ivkich  He  will  accom-
plish." So  on  his  death  all  communication  between  the


Jabulka  and  jabulsa.  299

Imdm  and  his  Church  ceased,  and  the  "Major  Occultation"
began  and  shall  continue  until  the  Eeturn  of  the  Imdm
take  place  in  the  fulness  of  time.  Besides  these  two
Occultations  mentioned  in  the  text,  another,  called  the

"Least  Occultation"  (  jL^I  O-c/,  is  recognized  by  Shi'ite

theologians.  This  last,  however,  refers  to  the  future,  and
indicates  a  period  extending  from  noon  on  Friday  to  the
morning  of  Saturday  the  10'"  of  Muharram,  during  which
the  Im4m  will  temporarily  disappear  ajfter  his  Return.

2.  The  mystical  cities  of  Jabulka  and  Jabulsa.  Con-
cerning these  I  will  confine  myself  to  citing  two  passages
illustrating  the  light  in  which  they  are  regarded  by
Muhammadan  cosmographers.  The  first  passage  is  from
M.  Reinaud's  introduction  to  his  translation  of  Abu'l-fed4's
Geography  (Paris,  1848),  and  occurs  at  p.  cclvii  of  that
work.  It  runs  as  follows : — "  Thabary,  se  pla9ant  sous  un
autre  point  de  vue,  reproduit  la  l^gende  sur  la  montagne
de  Caf,  qui  entoure  la  disque  de  la  terre,  et  il  place  deux
villes  aux  points  est  et  ouest:  Djaboulka  k  I'orient,  et
Djaboulsa  k  I'occident."  The  second  passage  which  I  wish
to  quote  occurs  in  al-Kazvinf's  celebrated  work  on  cos-
mography. The  text  thereof  will  be  found  on  pp.  17 — 18
of  Wiist  enfeld's  edition. The  translation  is  as  follows : —

"  Jabaesa.  a  city  in  the  remotest  regions  of  the  East.
On  the  authority  of  Ibn  'Abbd,s  (may  God  be  satisfied  with
him): — he  says,  'In  the  remotest  East  is  a  city  whereof  the
name  is  Jd,bars,  and  its  inhabitants  are  of  the  children  of
Thamiid.  And  in  the  remotest  West  is  a  city  whereof  the
name  is  Jdbalk,  and  its  inhabitants  are  of  the  children  of
'Ad.  And  in  each  one  are  remnants  of  these  two  peoples.'
The  Jews  say  that  the  children  of  Moses  (upon  him  be
peace)  fled  in  the  fight  with  Bukht-Nassar  [Nebuchad-
nezzar], and  God  (Exalted  is  He)  caused  them  to  journey
towards  Jdbars  and  to  alight  therein.  And  in  that  place
they  dwell ;  none  can  come  unto  them  nor  reckon  their
number.  Again  [it  is  related]  on  the  authority  of  Ibn
'Abbd,s  (may  God  be  satisfied  with  him)  that  the  Prophet
(may  God  look  favourably  upon  him  and  grant  him  peace)


300  NOTE  ,0 — CERTAIN  SHl'lTE BELIEFS.

on  the  night  wherein  he  made  the  night-journey  said  to
Gabriel  (upon  him  be  peace),  'I  wish  to  see  the  people
concerning  whom  God  (exalted  is  He)  hath  said,  "  Of  the
people  of  Moses  there  is  a  party  who  are  guided  in  truth,
and  act  justly  according  to  the  same."'  [Kur'dn  vii,  159].
'  Between  thee  and  them,'  said  Gabriel  (upon  him  be  peace),
'is  a  journey  of  six  years  to  go  and  six  years  to  return;
and  between  thee  and  them  is  a  river  of  sand  which  runs
swiftly  as  the  flight  of  an  arrow  and  ceaseth  not  save  on  the
Sabbath  day;  but  ask  of  thy  Lord.'  So  the  Prophet
prayed,  and  Gabriel  said  '  Amen ' ' ;  and  God  revealed  unto
Gabriel,  '  Grant  him  what  he  hath  asked.'  So  he  mounted
Burdk,  who  took  a  few  steps,  and  behold  he  was  in  the
midst  of  the  people.  Then  he  saluted  them,  and  they
asked  him  '  Who  art  thou  ? '  He  said,  '  I  am  the  un-
lettered Prophet.'  They  said,  '  Yea,  thou  art  he  concerning
whom  Moses  was  given  good  tidings,  and  verily  the  angels
would  take  thy  people  by  the  hand,  were  it  not  for  their
faults.'  '  I  saw  their  tombs,'  saith  the  Apostle  of  God,
'  at  the  doors  of  their  abodes,  and  I  said  unto  them,
"Wherefore  this?"  They  answered,  "That  we  may
remember  death  morning  and  evening ;  for  did  we  not  do
thus,  we  should  only  remember  it  from  time  to  time.'"
Then  he  said,  '  How  is  it  that  I  see  your  buildings  equal
[in  height]  ? '  They  answered,  '  That  none  of  us  may  over-
look another,  and  that  none  may  shut  out  .the  air  from
another.'  Then  he  said,  '  How  is  it  that  I  see  no  King  or
judge  amongst  you?'  They  said,  'We  are  just  one  to
another  and  give  what  is  due  of  ourselves,  wherefore  we
need  not  any  to  deal  out  justice  in  our  midst.'  Then  he
said,  '  Wherefore  are  your  streets  empty?'  They  answered,
'  We  all  sow  and  all  reap,  and  every  man  amongst  us
taketh  what  sufficeth  him  and  leaveth  what  remaineth  for
his  brother.'  Then  he  said,  'Wherefore  do  I  see  these
people  laughing  V  They  replied,  '  One  amongst  them  hath
died.'  He  said,  'Why  then  do  they  laugh?'  They
answered,  '  For  joy,  because  he  hath  been  taken  away  in

1  At  the  suggestion  of  my  friend  Mr  A.  A.  Bevan  of  Trinity
College  I  have  ventured  to  read  ^^i  for  joi .


jabtjlkA  and  jabulsa.  301

the  belief  of  the  Unity.'  He  said,  '"What  aileth  these  that
they  weep?'  They  answered,  'A  child  hath  been  born  unto
them,  and  they  know  not  in  what  faith  he  will  be  taken
away.'  He  said,  '  When  a  male  child  is  born  unto  you,  tell
me  what  you  do  ?'  They  said,  '  We  fast  for  a  month  in
thankfulness  to  God.'  He  said,  'And  if  a  girl  be  bom  unto
you?'  They  answered,  'We  fast  two  months  in  thankful-
ness to  God,  because  Moses  hath  told  us  that  resignation
on  account  of  a  female  child  hath  a  greater  reward  than
resignation  on  account  of  a  male  child.'  He  said,  'Do  ye
commit  adultery?'  They  said,  'Doth  any  one  do  this  thing
whom  the  heaven  stoneth  not  with  pebbles  from  above,  and
whom  the  earth  swalloweth  not  from  beneath  ?'  He  said,
'Do  ye  take  usury?'  They  answered,  'He  alone  taketh
usury  who  beheveth  not  in  the  provision  of  God.'  He  said,
'Do  ye  sicken?'  They  said,  'We  sin  not,  neither  do  we
sicken;  thy  people  are  afflicted  with  sickness  only  as  an
atonement  for  their  sins.'  He  said,  '  Have  ye  wild  beasts
and  reptiles?'  They  answered,  'Yes;  they  pass  us  by  and
we  pass  them  by,  and  they  hurt  us  not.'  Then  the
Prophet  proposed  unto  them  his  Law;  and  they  asked,
'How  shall  we  do  as  regards  the  Pilgrimage,  for  between  us
and  it  is  a  great  distance?'  Then  the  Prophet  prayed,
'  and,'  saith  Ibn  'Abbds,  '  the  earth  was  rolled  up  for  them
so  that  those  of  them  who  would  perform  the  Pilgrimage
might  do  so  with  [the  rest  of]  mankind.  And  when'
(saith  he)  '  it  was  morning,  the  Prophet  told  this  [to]  such
as  were  present  of  his  people,  amongst  whom  was  Abii
Bekr  (may  God  be  satisfied  with  him).  And  he  said,
"Verily  it  is  well  with  the  people  of  Moses,  and  God
(Exalted  is  He)  knew  what  was  in  their  hearts,  and  revealed
'  Of  those  whom  We  ham  created  is  a  nation  wlw  are  guided
in  truth  and  thereby  act  with  equity.'"  [Kur'^n  vii,  180.]
And  Abii  Bekr  fasted  for  a  month  and  set  at  liberty  a  slave,
because  God  had  not  preferred  the  Church  of  Moses  to  the
Church  of  Muhammad  (may  God  look  favourably  upon  him
and  grant  him  peace).'"  Such  are  the  cities  of  Jdbulkd  and
Jdbulsd — the  Muslim  '  Land  of  Cocagne ' — wherein,  accord-
ing to  the  Shi'ite  belief,  the  Imdm  Mahdl  dwells.

3. Huseyii  ibn  Ruh  has  been  already  mentioned  in


302  NOTE 0 — CERTAIN SHI'ITE BELIEFS.

this  note  as  one  of  the  vicars  or  'Gates'  of  the  Imdm
Mahdf.  The  following  note  concerning  him  occurs  on
p.  439  of  Baron  Mac  Guckin  de  Slane's  translation  of  Ibn
Khallikdn's  Biographical  Dictionary  (London,  1842): —
"  Abti'l-K^sim  al-Husain  Ibn  Ruh  was  a  holy  shaikh  and
one  of  the  doors  leading  to  the  Sahib  az  Zamdn  {the  lord  of
the  time,  or  last  grand  Im^m,  according  to  the  Shilte
doctrine;  see  Druzes,  introd.  p.  65).  He  was  chosen  by
Abfi  Jaafar  Muhammad  Ibn  Othm^n  al-Omari  as  his
lieutenant,  and  when  the  latter  classed  the  Shiites  according
to  their  degrees  {of  initiation),  Abft'l-Kflsim  was  authorized
to  enter  into  his  presence  the  first  of  them  all. — He  then
went  to  see  Ibn  as-Shalmagh^ni "  [see  supra,  Note  D,
p.  229],  "and  gained  over  so  many  proselytes,  that  the
vizirs,  ex-vizirs,  and  other  persons  of  high  rank  rode
{publicly)  to  visit  him.  He  continued  to  be  treated  with
the  greatest  deference  till  H^mid  Ibn  Abb^s  became  vizir
{to  al-Muktadir)  and  ordered  him  to  be  arrested.  He
remained  in  prison  for  five  years,  but  was  liberated  im-
mediately after  the  deposition  of  al-Muktadir,  a.h.  317
(a.d.  929).  From  that  time  till  his  death,  which  took  place
A.H.  326  (a.d.  937 — 8),  he  never  ceased  to  be  highly
respected,  but  at  the  moment  in  which  his  influence  had
attained  its  utmost  pitch,  and  his  plans  were  ripe  for
execution,  God  preserved  {the  Khalifat)  from  his  evil
designs.  He  had  been  accused  of  inviting  the  Karmats  by
letter  to  lay  siege  to  Baghdad,  but  he  defended  himself
with  great  ability,  presence  of  mind,  and  learning.  He  was
a  benefactor  to  the  Shiites,  and  held  a  very  high  rank
among  them. — (Ad-Dahabi's  Tdrihh-al-Isldm,  No.  646,
in  anno.)"

4. Ibn  Mihriydr. Of  this  person  I  can  find  mention
only  in  two  works  of  Shi'ite  theology,  viz.  the  'Tenets  of  the

Shi'ites'  Vi«^l  Jjlflc),  and  the  'Garden  of  the  Shi'ites'
[LlJlW  iaijo-l,  in  each  of  which  his  name  is  written  diffe-
rently. In  the  first  he  is  called  jL  j^  rii^y}  u'  '•**^'
and  in  the  second  jIj^  ^y\  ^j\  Jj  JU^- In  both  works


THE "guardians" AND "HELPERS."  303

he  is  mentioned  amongst  those  who,  during  the  period  of
the  "Minor  Occidtation,"  obtained  access  to,  or  corre-
sponded with,  the  Im^m ;  and  in  both  he  is  described  as
a  native  of  Ahw^z.  What  "  tradition  "  of  his  is  specially
referred  to  in  the  text,  I  am  unable  to  say.

5.  The  Guardians  and  the  Helpers.  These  constitute
two  grades  of  a  spiritual  hierarchy  whereof  the  members
are called generically "Men of  the Unseen World"

\.-^\  {]orjh  and  at  the  head  of  which  is  the  "Pole"
(wJas)- Al-Jorj4ni  in  his  Definitiones  (ed.  Fliigel,  p.  266)

describes  the  "Guardians"  or  "Overseers"  (*Uj)  as
follows  : — "They  are  those  who  have  discovered  the  Inward
Name  so  that  they  look  into  the  hearts  of  men  and  discern
secret  thoughts,  because  for  them  veils  are  withdrawn
from  the  faces  of  mysteries.  And  they  are  of  three  kinds : —
Superior  Souls,  which  are  embodiments  of  [Divine]  com-
mands ;  Inferior  Souls,  which  are  mundane ;  and  Inter-
mediate Souls,  which  are  human  essences.  And  in  each
one  of  them  God  (Exalted  is  He)  hath  a  trust  deposited
which  compriseth  mysteries  divine  and  mundane.  And
they  are [in number] three hundred." Concerning  the

"Helpers"  (""L^)  he  says  (p.  259):— "They  are  forty,  and
they  are  engaged  in  bearing  the  burdens  of  creatures,
generally  such  accidents  as  human  strength  cannot  cope
with.  And  this  [they  do]  by  reason  of  their  abundant
natural  pity  and  mercy,  neither  do  they  desist  [therefrom]
save  for  the  sake  of  another,  for  no  increase  of  advancement
is  [possible]  to  them  save  by  this  channel."  What  is  meant
by  the  "flight"  of  these  is,  as  I  suppose,  described  in  a
passage  of  the  'Akaidu'sh-Shi'a  of  which  this  is  a  trans-
lation : — "  And  amongst  them  "  [i.e.  the  signs  of  the  Return
of  the  Im^m]  "  are  the  Men  of  the  Unseen,  who  are  thirty
or  forty  persons  who  in  a  week  traverse  the  whole  surface
of  the  earth,  spending  each  day  in  a  different  region.
Every  Friday  they  appear  before  His  Holiness  [the  Imdm
Mahdl]  for  the  Friday  prayers Then,  when  it  is  morning.


304  NOTE 0 — CERTAIN SHIITE BELIEFS.

they  traverse  the  earth  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  and
appear  before  His  Holiness,  or  else  come  riding  upon  a
cloud  and  stand  in  attendance  on  Him."

6.  The  Conquest  of  the  East  and  West  which  will  be
effected  by  the  Imdm  Mahdi  on  his  appearance,  of  which  it
is  one  of  the  signs,  needs  no  detailed  notice.

7.  The  Ass  of  Antichrist.  Concerning  Anticlirist
(Dajjdl),  and  the  ass  on  which  he  is  mounted,  the
' Akd'idii  sh-SM'a  has  the  following  passage : — "  The  forty-
sixth  of  the  signs  of  the  appearance  [of  the  Imdm  Mahdl]
is  the  coming  forth  of  Antichrist.  And  the  name  of  that
accursed  one  is  S4'id  ibn  Sayd.  The  traditions  concerning
him  are  various.  Some  imply  that  he  has  existed  from  the
time  of  Adam  until  now,  as  it  is  related  in  a  tradition  that
the  Apostle  of  God  went  to  one  of  the  houses  in  Medfna
wherein  was  a  babbling  madman  with  his  mother.  The
Prophet  pointed  him  out  to  his  companions  and  said,
'  0  people,  God  hath  not  sent  any  prophet  without  filling
his  church  with  the  fear  of  Antichrist,  whom  he  has
respited  and  left  until  your  time.  And  this  man  shall
come  forth  with  a  mountain  of  bread  and  a  river  of  water ;
and  he  will  appear  in  a  time  of  famine.  Most  of  his
followers  will  be  Jews,  women,  Arabs,  and  nomads.  He  will
enter  into  all  quarters  and  regions  of  the  earth  save  Mecca
and  its  two  mountains,  and  Medfna  and  its  two  mountains.
And  whenever  he  comes  forth  he  will  claim  to  be  God,
although  he  is  one-eyed  and  God  is  not  one-eyed.'  And
in  some  traditions  it  hath  come  down  that  he  was  born  in
the  time  of  His  Highness  [the  Prophet];  that  he  had  a
beard  and  spoke  when  he  was  born ;  that  the  Prophet  went
to  his  house  ;  that  he  claimed  the  rank  of  a  prophet  and
said  '  I  am  one  sent  of  God ' ;  that  then  His  Highness  [the
Prophet]  commanded  an  angel  which  was  in  the  form  of  a
great  bird  to  carry  him  away  and  cast  him  into  a  well
situated  in  one  of  the  Jewish  villages  near  Sajistdn  or
Isfahan ;  and  that  he  is  chained  [there]  till  such  time  as  he
shall  receive  permission  to  come  forth.  And  he  has  an  ass
whereof  each  step  covers  a  mile  (three  miles  being  equal  to
one  parasang),  and  on  the  body  of  his  ass  are  white  spots


A>-riCHRIST AXD ^OFYAy.  305

like  a  leopari  Xow  :iie  eharaoTexisticj  of  Anriciiriji  are
'b.eje: — hi;  riciiT  eye  is  crufiied;  iiis  left  eye  is  in  his
toreiiead.  and  ghrxerf  as  though  it  were  the  morning  star.
and  in  it  is  a  piece  of  blood,  so  that  it  seems  to  be  pervaded
with  blood ;  between  his  two  eyes  it  is  written  that  he  is  a
niisbelieyer,  so  tkir  everyone,  whether  learned  or  unlearned,
can  read  it:  he  is  a  skill ai  magician,  who.  by  his  magic.
descends  into  the  oceans :  with  bim  travels  the  sun :  before
his  face  is  a  moiintain  of  smote,  and  behind  iiis  back  is
a  white  mountain,  and  Thror.jrh  [his]  niiido  it  seemeth
Ln  men's  eyes  that  they  are  two  moimtains  of  water  and
bread.  Though  in  truth  it  is  not  so.  but  a  mere  .i'Oiggle ;  he
tr-.iverseth  ail  ^veans,  and  over  wiiatsoever  ocean  or  water  he
ixisseth  it  sinketh  down  and  cometh  forth  no  more  tiU  the
Pay  of  Judgement ;  before  him  Satan  dances,  and  the  devils
oaase  him  and  his  ass  to  appear  pleasing  in  men";  eyes,  and
this  is  a  mischief  for  the  proving  of  mankind.  And  he
crieth  out  so  that  the  dwe"ers  in  the  East  and  in  the
West,  whether  oi  J'^a  or  of  mankind.  Le;vr  his  voice,  and
he  saith.  "  0  my  friends.  I  am  that  God  who  createxi
and  lasliioned  the  members  and  parrs  of  the  world;  I
am  that  God  who  predestined  the  ahairs  of  [His]  servants
and  guided  and  odrected  mankind:  I  am  your  Supreme
Lcrd...'  And  most  of  his  followers  are  women,  Jews,  lastards.
and  musicians.  But  when  he  cometh  to  'A\it-a->-Ajf':.
which  is  a  mountain  in  S^~ria.  His  Highness  the  Ka  im
>hall  slay  him  at  the  third  hoiir  on  Friday,  and  shall
cleanse  the  world  of  the  hlth  and  foumess  of  tn.at  Accursed
One.'  Many  other  wonderftd  uu;\lities  are  attributed  to
the  ass  of  Anticiirist.  as.  for  instance,  that  the  distance
between  its  ears  is  a  ftill  mile,  that  each  of  its  hairs
zives  forth  n^jvishing  strains  of  musio.  and  the  like,  of
wiiich  things  the  fanher  enumerati:n  appears  to  be  un-
prohtable  and  unnecess<'.ry,

f,  TJu  appi  trjjict  •:>'  Sc-'j;an.  In  enumerating  tne
si^^ns  which  shall  usher  in  the  return  of  the  Imam  ^Iah^h.
the  'Atd'idu's'i->''  'a  first  mentions  the  appearance  of  Son'an
in  thcse  words : — "His  name  is  Othmiui  the  son  of  Ataba
t  the  children  o:  Yaad  ibn  Muawiva  ibn  Abi  S-.ifyan.
He is a thick-ict man  with an  ill  coiuitenance.  a  face

B.  1\-1


306 NOTE P — EXECUTION OF "  JENAB-I-KUDDI^S."

pitted  with  small-pox,  a  large  head,  and  blue  eyes.  He
has  never  rendered  service  to  God,  nor  seen  Mecca  or
Medina,  and  his  eyes  seem  to  squint.  He  will  appear
during  the  month  of  Rajab  from  the  direction  of  Mecca  in
a  desert  devoid  of  water  and  grass,  and  will  send  his  army,
which  will  cause  much  ruin  and  act  right  foully,  westward
and  towards  Baghdad.  He  will  destroy  the  region  of
Najaf  the  Most  Noble,  and  will  plunder  Medina  for  three
days.  He  will  sojourn  in  Kufa,  and  will  proclaim,  'Who-
soever shall  bring  the  head  of  one  of  'All's  sectaries,  to  him
will  I  give  a  thousand  gold  pieces.'  Then  men  will  yield
one  another  into  the  hand  of  that  Acctirsed  One,  for  all
the  chiefs  of  that  time  are  base-born.  And  the  time  of  his
empire  shall  be  eight  months,  and  in  his  hands  are  five
cities : — Damascus,  Homs,  Falastfn,  Ardin,  and  Falzin.
The  decline  of  his  dominion  corresponds  with  the  appear-
ance of  the  triumph  of  the  Truth,  and  a  great  number  of
his  army  shall  sink  down  in  Beyd^,  which  is  the  name  of  a
place  near  Medina."  A  few  pages  further  on  in  the  same
work  the  following  passage  occurs: — "At  that  time  [i.e.  at
the  time  when  the  bearded  woman  Sa'fda  and  the  crusader
Mazid  shall  appear]  a  man  shall  come  forth  from  the
direction  of  Mecca  whose  name  is  Sofyd,n  ibn  Harb.
Perhaps  he  may  be  that  same  Sofy^n  who  has  been  pre-
viously mentioned,  whose  dominion  endureth  eight  months
and  continueth  until  the  empire  of  the  K4'im  of  the  race
of  Muhammad  doth  appear.  And  perhaps  Harb  may  be
his  father  and  'Ataba  his  grandfather."


NOTE  P.

The  execution  of  Mulla  Muhammad  'Ali  of  BArfurush.

When,  in  the  summer  of  a.d.  1849,  the  remnant  of  the
brave  defenders  of  Sheykh  Tabarsl,  beguiled  by  the
treacherous  promises  of  Prince  Mahdi-Kulf  MirzA,  evacu-
ated the  fortress  which  they  had  held  so  long  and  so
gallantly,  and  yielded  themselves  up  to  the  besiegers,  they
were at first  received  with  an  apparent  friendliness  and


CONDUCT OF  THE  SA'fOU'L-'ULAMA.  807

even  respect  which  served  to  lull  them  into  a  false  securit}'
and  to  render  easy  the  perfidious  massacre  wherein  all  but
a  few  of  them  perished  on  the  morrow  of  their  surrender.

From  this  massacre  some  of  the  Bdbi  chiefs  were  re-
served to  grace  the  Prince's  triumphal  entry  into  B4rfuriish.
Amongst  these  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  mentions  the  follow-
ing : — MuU4  Muhammad  'Ali  of  Bdrfurilsh,  called  by  the
Bdbls  "His  Excellency  the  Most  Holy"  {Jenab-i-Kuddus) ;

Ak4  Mlrzd  Muhammad  Hasan,  the  brother  of  Mulld,
Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh ;  MulU  Muhammad  S4dik  of
Khurds^n  ;  Hdjl  Mlrz4  Muhammad  Hasan  of  Khur^sdn ;
Sheykh  Ni'matu  'lldh  of  Amul ;  H^jl  Nasir  of  Kazvln;
MulU  Yiisuf  of  Ardabil ;  and  AU  Seyyid  'Abdu'l-'Azfm
of  Khiiy.

Jen4b-i-Kuddiis  (for  the  sake  of  brevity  I  shall  make
use  of  the  title  in  preference  to  the  name  of  him  who  is  the
subject  of  this  note)  requested  the  Prince  to  send  him  to
Teherdn  there  to  undergo  judgement  before  the  Shdh.
The  Prince  was  at  first  disposed  to  grant  this  request,
thinking,  perhaps,  that  to  bring  so  notable  a  captive  into
the  Royal  Presence  might  serve  to  obliterate  in  some
measure  the  record  of  those  repeated  failures  to  which  his
unparalleled  incapacity  had  given  rise.  But  when  the
Sa'idu'l-'Ulam^  heard  of  this  plan,  and  saw  a  possibility  of
his  hated  foe  escaping  from  his  clutches,  he  went  at  once
to  the  Prince,  and  strongly  represented  to  him  the  danger
of  allowing  one  so  eloquent  and  so  plausible  to  plead  his
cause  before  the  King.  These  arguments  were,  according
to  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  (from  which  these  particulars  are
taken),  backed  up  by  an  offer  to  pay  the  Prince  a  sum  of
400  (or,  as  others  say,  of  1000)  tumdns  on  condition  that
Jen4b-i-Kuddiis  should  be  surrendered  unconditionally  into
his  hands.  To  this  arrangement  the  Prince,  whether
moved  by  the  arguments  or  the  tumdns  of  the  Sa'idu'l-
'Ulamd,  eventually  consented,  and  .Jendb-i-Kuddiis  was
delivered  over  to  his  inveterate  enemy.

The  execution  took  place  in  the  meyddn,  or  public
square,  of  BArfuriish.  The  Sa'idu'l-'Ulamd.  first  cut  off  the
ears  of  Jen4b-i-Kuddiis  and  tortured  him  in  other  ways,
and  then  killed  him  with  the  blow  of  an  axe. One  of  the

20—2


308 NOTE P — EXECUTION OF "  JENAB-I-KUDD6s."

Sa'ldu'l-'Ulamd's  disciples  theu  severed  the  head  from  the
hfeless  body,  and  others  poured  naphtha  over  the  corpse  and
set  fire  to  it.  The  fire,  however,  as  the  Bihis  relate  (for
Subh-i-Ezel  corroborates  the  Tdnhh-i-Jadtd  in  this  par-
ticular), refused  to  burn  the  holy  remains ;  and  so  the
Sa'i'du'l-'Ulamd,  gave  orders  that  the  body  should  be  cut  in
pieces,  and  these  pieces  cast  far  and  wide.  This  was  done,
but,  as  H4ji  Mirzd  Jdnf  relates,  certain  Bdbfs  not  known  as
such  to  their  fellow-townsmen  came  at  night,  collected  the
scattered  fragments,  and  buried  them  in  an  old  ruined
madrasa  or  college  hard  by.  By  this  madrasa,  as  the
Bd,bf  historian  relates,  had  Jen4b-i-Kuddiis  once  passed  in
the  company  of  a  friend  with  whom  he  was  conversing  on
the  transitoriness  of  this  world,  and  to  it  he  had  pointed
to  illustrate  his  words,  saying,  "This  college,  for  instance,
was  once  frequented,  and  is  now  deserted  and  neglected ;
a  little  while  hence  they  will  bury  here  some  great  man,
and  many  will  come  to  visit  his  grave,  and  again  it  will  be
frequented  and  thronged  with  people."

Jenib-i-Kuddiis  is  said  to  have  foretold  his  death  and
the  manner  thereof  to  several  other  persons,  including  his
wife  and  her  mother ;  and  Subh-i-Ezel  told  me  that  he
had  seen  at  Teher4n  a  letter  in  his  handwriting,  taken
from  his  pocket  when  he  was  buried,  wherein  the  date  and
manner  of  his  death  were  clearly  set  forth ;  also  that  he
had  previously  to  the  siege  of  Sheykh  Tabarsi  written  a
letter  to  Mulld  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh  wherein  the  follow-
ing sentence  occurred : —

"It  is  as  though  I  had  buried  myself  in  the  earth  with
seventy  righteous  men."  This  letter  Subh-i-Ezel  had  copied
at  Baghdad.

As  for  the  Sa'idu'l-'Ulami,  he  did  not  escape  the
Divine  vengeance ;  for,  as  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  relates,  all
the  vital  heat  seemed  to  be  withdrawn  from  his  body,  and
even  in  the  midst  of  summer  he  used  to  suffer  so  severely
from  cold  that  when  he  went  to  the  mosque  two  chafing-
dishes  full  of  burning  charcoal  were  carried  with  him  and


NOTE  Q — kureatu'l-'ayn.  809

placed  on  either  side  of  him.  Yet,  in  spite  of  these  and
the  thick  skin  cloak  which  he  wore,  he  could  hardly  remain
long  enough  to  perform  his  prayers,  and  used  to  hasten
back  as  soon  as  he  was  able  to  his  house,  where,  enveloped
in  wraps  and  covered  with  quilts,  he  would  sit  shivering
over  his  hursP.

Concerning  the  writings  of  Jendb-i-Kuddils,  see  note  1
at  the  foot  of  p.  30  supra.


NOTE  Q.
Kureatu'l-'Ayn.

The  appearance  of  such  a  woman  as  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  is
iu  any  country  and  any  age  a  rare  phenomenon,  but  in  such
a  country  as  Persia  it  is  a  prodigy — nay,  almost  a  miracle.
Alike  in  virtue  of  her  marvellous  beauty,  her  rare  intel-
lectual gifts,  her  fervid  eloquence,  her  fearless  devotion,  and
her  glorious  martyrdom,  she  stands  forth  incomparable  and
immortal  amidst  her  countr3rwomen.  Had  the  B4bl  religion
no  other  claim  to  greatness,  this  were  sufficient — that  it
produced  a  heroine  like  Kurratu'l-'Ayn.

In  this  note  I  do  not  propose  to  repeat  facts  with  which
everyone  who  has  studied  the  subject  is  acquainted,  neither
shall  I  attempt  to  re-tell  a  tale  which  has  been  already  set
forth  by  Gobineau  in  language  far  more  eloquent  than  I
can  command.  My  purpose  is  merely  to  add  such  new
particulars  as  I  have  been  able  to  glean  from  the  Tarihh-i-
Jadid  and  from  oral  tradition.  Before  proceeding  to  do
this,  I  wish  once  more  to  call  attention  to  the  graceful  poem
by  Marie  von  Najmdjer  whereof  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  is  the
heroine  (see  supra  p.  207).

1  The  kiirsi—mwoh  used  by  the  Persians  during  winter— is,
roughly  speaking,  like  a  large  table  with  very  short  legs.  A
chafing-dish  containing  ignited  charcoal  is  placed  beneath  it,  as
are  also  the  legs  of  those  who  sit  round  it.  With  a  good  supply
of  quilts,  pillows,  and  amusing  books,  it  affords  the  means  of
passing  a  cold  winter's  day  very  comfortably.


310


NOTE Q — KUEBATU'L-'AYN.


The  following  table,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the
remarks  on  pp.  197—198  sii,pra,  will  sufficiently  serve  to
indicate  Kurratu'l-'Ayn's  family  relationships  :—

Muhammad  el-Burghdni  el-Kazvinl.

I

, + !

I


Haji  MulU  Muham-
mad Taki,  called  by
the  Shi'ites  Shahid-
t-?'Aaiii;A('TheThird
Martyr').


Hdji  MuUd,  Muham-
mad Sdlih.


Hdjf  Mulla  'All,
who  embraced
the  Bdbf  doc-
trines.


MulM  Muhammad. =  Kurratu'l-'Ayn.

The  following  particulars  are  derived  from  the  Tdrikh-
i-Jadid.  During  the  life  of  H4ji  Seyyid  K4zim  of  Eesht
Kurratu'l-'Ayn  visited  KerheU,  where  she  became  ac-
quainted not  only  with  Seyyid  K^zim  himself,  but  with
many  of  his  chief  followers,  including  MulU  Huseyn  of
Bushraweyh.  "When,  on  the  death  of  Se}'yid  Kdzim,  MulM
Huseyn  set  out  for  Shlr4z,  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  wrote  a  letter  to
liim  begging  that  should  he  succeed  in  finding  the  spiritual
guide  whom  they  were  expecting  (see  pp.  239 — 240  supra)
he  would  at  once  inform  her.  This  letter  Mull4  Huseyn
on  his  conversion  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  B4b,  who,
recognizing  the  rare  qualities  and  attainments  of  which  it
gave  evidence,  included  its  writer  amongst  the  eighteen

"Letters  of  the  Living"  (^  cJajja-)  who  composed  the

"  First  Unity  "  of  the  B4bl  hierarchy.

Kurratu'l-'Ayn  continued  for  some  time  at  KerbeM,
where,  seated  behind  a  curtain,  she  used  to  lecture  and
preach  to  the  disciples  of  the  late  Seyj^id  Kizim.  The
governor,  becoming  aware  of  this,  wished  to  arrest  her,  but
she  hastily  quitted  Kerbeld,  without  a  passport  and  went  to
Baghdad,  where  she  proceeded  directly  to  the  house  of  the
chief  Mufti,  before  whom  she  defended  her  creed  and  her
conduct  with  great  ability.  The  question  whether  she
should  be  allowed  to  continue  her  teaching  was  submitted
first  to  the  Pdshd  of  Baghdad  and  then  to  the  central
government,  the  result  being  that  she  was  ordered  to  leave


NOTE Q — KURKATU'L-'AYN.  311

Turkish,  territory.  During  her  journey  from  Baghdad  to
Kirm^nshdh  and  Hamad^n  she  continued  to  preach,  and
made  several  converts  to  the  B^bl  faith,  amongst  these  being
Sheykb  S4lih  the  Arab,  Sheykh  T4hir,  Mulld,  Ibrahim  of
Mahalldt,  and  Sheykh  Sultan  the  Arab.  Certain  of  the
Bdbfs,  however,  were  at  first  disposed  to  regard  her  efforts
with  disapproval,  and  some  of  these  even  wrote  to  the  Bd,b
asking  whether  it  was  seemly  for  a  woman  to  preach
publicly  to  men.  In  reply  the  B4b  not  only  sanctioned  her
preaching  and  applauded  her  zeal,  but  bestowed  on  her  the
title  of  Jendb-i-Tdhira  ("Her  Excellency  the  Pure"),
whereupon  those  who  had  been  disposed  to  censure  her
expressed  contrition  and  penitence,  and  her  high  position  in
the  B^bi  church  became  uncontested.

From  Hamadto  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  intended  to  go  to
Teherdn,  hoping,  it  is  said,  to  be  able  to  convert  Muham-
mad Shdh  himself ;  but  her  father  Hdjf  Mulld  Muhammad
S^lih,  being  apprized  of  this  plan,  sent  servants  to  intercept
her  and  bring  her  home  to  Kazvfn.  Perhaps  it  was  on  her
return  thither  that  she  was  married  to  her  cousin  MuUd
Muhammad  the  son  of  H4jl  MulU  Muhammad  Takf,  but
of  the  date  when  this  marriage  was  contracted  I  can  find
no  indication.  At  all  events  the  marriage  must  have  been
a  most  unhappy  one,  for  MulU  Muhammad  seems  fully  to
have  shared  his  father's  hatred  of  the  Sheykhfs  and  B4bfs,
and  finally  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  refused  to  live  with  him  any
longer.

The  position  of  Kurratu'l-'Ayn,  sufficiently  irksome  and
even  precarious  already,  was  rendered  perilous  in  the
highest  degree  by  the  death  of  her  uncle  at  the  hands  of
certain  B4bis  (see  p.  198  supra).  Some  have  hinted  that
Kurratu'l-'Ayn  was  privy  to  this  assassination,  but  of  this
there  is  absolutely  no  proof,  and  we  may  be  sure  that,  had
there  been  any  evidence  of  her  complicity,  the  Musulmdns
would  not  have  failed  to  make  use  of  it  to  rid  themselves
of  one  who  was  well  known  to  be  amongst  the  most  zealous
supporters  of  the  BAb.  As  it  was,  she  was  brought  before
the  governor  of  Kazvfn,  charged  by  her  husband  with
complicity  in  the  murder  of  his  father,  and  acquitted.
Several  of  the  Bdbfs  were  arrested  and  tortured,  until
finally one — Mfrzd, S4lih of Shfr4z, according to the


312  NOTE  Q— ?:urratu'l-'ayn.

Tarikh-i-Jadtd,  SAlih  TAhir  according  to  Subh-i-Ezel—
confessed  that  he,  alone  and  unabetted,  had  compassed  the
death  of  the  murdered  mujtahid,  in  proof  of  which  he
described  in  detail  how  the  murder  had  been  committed,
and  where  the  blood-stained  knife  with  which  the  deed  was
done  might  be  found.  This  S^lih  was  sent  to  TeherAn
with  several  others  suspected  of  complicity,  but  he  succeeded
in  making  his  escape,  fettered  as  he  was,  to  MAzandardn,
where  he  was  subsequently  killed  at  Sheykh  Tabarsl.  As
to  the  others  arrested,  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  and  Subh-i-
Ezel  are  not  completely  in  accord.  Both  agree,  however,
that  Sheykh  S^lih  the  Arab  and  MulM  Ibrahim  of  MahalMt
(who,  as  we  have  already  seen  were  amongst  the  first
proselytes  gained  by  Kurratu'l-'Ayn)  were  of  their  number.
The  first  of  these  was  killed  at  Teheran ;  the  second  was
taken  back  to  Kazvin,  where,  in  company  with  another
(Sheykh  T^hir  according  to  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid,  Hdji
Muhammad  'Alf  according  to  Subh-i-Ezel),  he  was  cruelly
done  to  death  by  the  populace.  These  were  the  first
Bdbis  who  were  put  to  death  in  Persia.  The  Tdrikh-i-
Jadid  adds  the  name  of  another — an  old  man  called  Hijf
Asadu'lUh — who  died  of  cold  and  fatigue  during  his
conveyance  to  TeherAn.

Although  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  had  been  acquitted  of  all
share  in  her  uncle's  death,  it  was  clearly  impossible  for  her
to  remain  in  Kazvin  any  longer,  even  had  she  desired  to  do
so,  which  scarcely  seems  probable.  She  accordingly  set
out  by  way  of  Teherdn  for  KhurAs^n,  and  was  present  at
the  celebrated  meeting  of  the  B4bi  chiefs  at  Badasht  (see
Gobineau,  pp,  180 — 184).  From  Badasht  she  turned  back
with  MulU  Muhammad  'All  of  B^rfuriish  and  his  party
towards  M^zandar4n.  At  this  point  the  narrative  of  the
Tdrikh-i-Jadid  breaks  off,  neither  is  it,  in  spite  of  the
author's  promise,  again  renewed  ;  while  all  other  written
histories  are  equally  silent  as  to  what  befel  Kurratu'l-'Ayn
from  the  time  that  she  separated  from  Mulld,  Muhammad
'Alf  and  his  followers  to  the  time  when  she  was  brought
captive  to  Teherdn  and  placed  in  the  custody  of  MahmM
Kh^n  the  Kaldntar.  From  Subh-i-Ezel,  however,  I  learned
the  following  particulars.  After  separating  from  the  Bd,bfs
who  went  to  fonn  the  garrison  of  Sheykh  Tabarsf,  Kurratu'l-


HER EXECUTION.  313

'Ayn  went  to  Ndr,  where  she  remained  unmolested  till  the
final  suppression  of  the  Mizandardn  insurrection.  She  was
then  delivered  up  to  the  government  authorities  by  the
people  of  Niir  and  sent  to  Teherdn.  On  her  arrival  there
she  was  brought  before  Ndsiru'd-Dfn  Shdh,  who,  on  seeing
her,  said : —

Jli/U jljOvj wJll ja (^3^" 11*'" ''^ j'

"I  like  her  looks :  leave  her,  and  let  her  be."

She  was  accordingly  placed  under  the  custody  of  Mah-
miid  Khdn  the  Kaldntar,  and  in  his  house  she  remained
till  her  execution  in  August  a.d.  1852.  Her  imprisonment
was  not  very  rigorous,  and  she  was  occasionally  seen  by
different  Bdbls  under  various  pretexts.  Her  life,  indeed,  was
in  no  jeopardy  till  the  disastrous  attempt  on  the  Shih's  life
by  certain  B^bls  (see  Note  T  infra  and  pp.  49 — 50  supra)
made  the  mere  profession  of  the  Bd,bi  faith  a  crime  deserving
not  death  only,  but  the  most  horrible  tortures,  and  gave
rise  to  that  reign  of  terror  which  has  been  so  vividly
described  by  Gobineau  (pp.  301—303),  Lady  Shell  (pp.  273
—282),  Polak  (pp.  352—353),  and  Ussher  (pp.  627—629).
Even  then  Kurratu'l-'Ayn  might,  by  abjuring  her  faith,
have  escaped  death,  and  exchanged  glorious  martyrdom  and
immortal  fame  for  a  few  brief  years  of  life ;  but  this  her
noble  spirit  scorned  to  do.  That  she  met  the  cruel  fate
reserved  for  her  with  "  superhuman  fortitude  "  is  a  fact  to
which  Dr  Polak,  who  actually  witnessed  her  execution,
testifies  in  the  following  words : — "  Ich  war  Zeuge  von  der
Hinrichtung  der  Kurret  el  ayn,  die  vom  Kriegsminister  und
seinen  Adjutanten  vollzogen  wurde;  die  schone  Frau
erduldete  den  langsamen  Tod  mit  uhermenschUcher  Stdrhe."
In  what  manner  death  was  inflicted  I  have  not  been  able  to
learn.  Gobineau  says  that  she  was  burned,  but  that  the
executioner  first  strangled  her ;  Subh-i-Ezel  says  that  the
accounts  of  her  death  are  various,  one  being  that  she  was
strangled  with  the  bowstring  in  the  B4gh-i-Il-Khd,nf ;
some  with  whom  I  conversed  in  Persia  stated  that  she  was
killed  in  the  BAgh-i-Ldl^-zdr  ;  others  that  she  was  cast  into
a  dry  well  in  the  garden  of  the  palace  called  NigAristdn,


314  NOTE Q — KURRATU'L-'AYN.

which  well  was  then  filled  up  with  stones.  However  this
may  be,  we  have  it  on  Polak's  authority  that  her  death
was  painful  and  lingering,  and  that  she  met  it  as  a  heroine
should  do.

I  was  anxious  to  discover  from  Subh-i-Bzel  whether  it
was  true,  as  has  often  been  alleged,  that  Kurratu'l-'Ayn
discarded  the  veil.  His  reply,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,
was  as  follows : — "  It  is  not  true  that  she  laid  aside  the
veil.  Sometimes,  when  carried  away  by  her  eloquence,  she
would  allow  it  to  slip  down  off  her  face,  but  she  would
always  replace  it  after  a  few  moments."

Kurratu'l-'Ayn's  fame  as  a  poetess  is  great,  but  during
my  sojourn  in  Persia  I  only  succeeded  in  obtaining  three
of  the  poems  attributed  to  her,  viz.  two  short  but  very-
beautiful  gfutzals  and  a  long  nmsnavi.  Of  one  of  these
ghazals  I  published  the  Persian  text  with  a  translation
into  English  verse  in  my  second  paper  on  the  B^bfs  in  the
J.  R.  A.  8.  for  1889  (pp.  936—937  and  991).  I  now  give
the  second,  which,  though  its  authorship  is  more  disputed,
certainly  savours  strongly  of  Bdbf  doctrines  and  modes  of
expression.


^  Xj uJ.g.'.'.ll IJI A.^ _?  J-' •^ -^  ft a  g  a o JaLJLi


HEB  POETRY.  315

J^ j^ ■^dia.) ^j ^j^  c>^' ^-' ->^^-^ t^r
Vj.lj_L;= {S'jS'xLi, isS3^i J d_L5C5Clj

(Translation.)

"  The  effulgence  of  thy  face  flashed  forth  and  the  rays  of

thy  visage  arose  on  high;
Why  lags  the  word  '  Am  I  not  yoiur  Lord  ? ' '  Yea,  that

t/iou  art'  let  us  make  reply'.
'Am  I not's'  appeal  from  thy  drum  to  greet  what  '  Yeas'

do  the  drums  of  devotion  beat;
At  the  gate  of  my  heart  I  behold  the  feet  and  the  tents

of  the  host  of  calamity^.

'  i.e.  "  Why  do  you  hesitate  to  lay  claim  to  a  divine  nature  ?
Were  you  to  do  so,  all  of  us  would  admit  your  claim."  See
Kur'dn  vii.  171,  and  B.  ii.,  pp.  917 — 918  and  note.

2  Tiie  following  lines  from  a  poem  attributed  to  Nabfl  express
a  similar  idea ; —

"If  one  should  choose  my  path  to  go  I  will  cry  to  him  that

he  well  may  know
That  none  shall  escape  from  grief  and  woe  who  is  once  affiioted

with  love  for  me."


316  NOTE Q — KUERATU'L-'AYN.

That  fair  moon's  love  for  me,  I  trow,  is  enough,  for  he

laughed  at  the  hail  of  woe,
And  exulting  cried  as  he sank below, 'The Martyr of

KerbeM  am  I."
When  he  heard  my  death-wail  drear,  for  me  he  prepared,

and  arranged  my  gear  for  me,
He  advanced  to  lament  at  my  bier  for  me,  and  o'er  me

wept  right  bitterly.
What  harm  if  thou  with  the  fire  of  amaze  should' st  set  my

Sinai-heart  ablaze
Which  thou  first  mad'st  fast  in  a  hundred  ways  but  to

shake  and  shatter  so  ruthlessly?^
To  convene  the  guests  to  his  feast  of  love  all  night  from

the  angel-host  above
Peals  forth  this  summons  ineffable  '  Hail,  sorrow-stricken

community ! '
Can  a  scale  of  the  fish  of  amaze  like  thee  aspire  to  sing  of

Being's  Sea?
Sit  still  like  T4hira,  hearkening  to  what  the  monster  of

'  No '  doth  cryl"


'  i.e.  Imdm  Huseyn,  with  whom  the  Bdb  repeatedly  declares
himself  to  be  identical  in  essence.

^  i.e.  "  You  first  strengthened  my  heart  with  knowledge,  and
inspired  it  with  zeal  and  enthusiasm;  then  you  crushed  and
subdued  it  with  love.  Were  it  not  well  if  you  would  now
kindle  on  it,  as  on  Movmt  Sinai,  that  fire  whence  comes  the  cry

Jl  U  jl  'Verily  I  am  God'?"  Cf.  Kur'iln  xxviii.  30,  and  vii.  139.
^  i.e.  "How  can  you,  who  are  but  as  a  scale  on  some  little
fish  which  swims  wonderingly  in  the  vast  expanses  of  the  sea,
speak  fittingly  of  the  Ocean  of  Being  ?  Sit  still  then,  as  I,
Kurratu'l-'Ayn  {Jendh-i-Tdhira),  do,  and  listen  to  the  roar  of  the
monster,  whale,  crocodile,  or  Leviathan  which  continually  cries

111  y\  Ajl  V  'There  is  no  God  but  me'."  Some  versions  of  this
poem  have  ^j.  (>j  ^  J»y»  >>■  Cr~^  "&ii  still  like  a  parrot"  &c.
at  the  beginning  of  the  second  hemistich  of  this  couplet.


note  b — deeivative  attributes.  317

On  the  BIbi  system  of  forming  derrmtites.

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  stjie  especially  aifected  by
the  B4b  is  the  employment  of  all  theoretically  possible
derivatives  of  roots,  whether  sanctioned  by  usage  or  not.
The  number  of  these  derivative  forms  in  Arabic  is  great,
but  of  course  no  single  root  is  susceptible  to  all  the  modifi-
cations which  they  represent.  Custom  and  authority,  as
well  as  the  intrinsic  meaning  of  each  root,  limit  the  number
of  actual  derivatfis  employed  in  any  given  case  to  a
fractional  part  of  those  theoretically  possible.  It  would
appear  that  the  B4b  believed  some  special  talismanic  virtue
to  reside  in  each  possible  form  of  every  Attribute  of  God.
Thus  in  the  Persian  Beyin  {Vdhid,  viii.,  ck.  2),  he  says: —

Ofl& ii iflJJ*- >-J C*J» Jl ^>J '~'J' ■" *-^ r>^*" 'V^?*'

7

1  B  reads  _,j.  -  ;My  MS.  reads  ^^ .

2  B  substitutes  'ajj  jj.  *  B  reads  .:J^.

^  B  reads  j;l^  ii^  O'L.  "^  E  transposes  j>l^  and  jj.^.

'  B  reads  j»  »« ,


318  NOTE R — DERIVATIVE ATTRIBUTES.

"  The  quintessence  of  this  chapter  is  this,  that  inasmuch
as  the  degrees  of  Unity  are  fulfilled  in  seven  letters,  which
are  the  Letters  of  Affirmation,  therefore  it  hath  been  ordained
that,  according  to  the  Mystery  of  the  Truth,  none  shall
inherit  from  the  dead  save  seven  persons,  even  as  one  can
invoke  God  by  every  Attribute  in  seven  degrees  of  that
Attribute,  as  Unissimus,  Unator,  Unicus,  Unus,  Unatus,
Unificiens,  Unifica  tus ' . "

The  '  Booh  of  Names '  (Lwl  ^j11)  ),  of  which,  according
to  Subh-i-Ezel's  assertion,  the  extracts  from  a  Bd,bf  MS.
published  by  Dorn  in  the  Bulletin  de  I' Academic  Imperiale
de  St  Petersbourg  for  December  22nd,  1864,  form  part,
appears  to  consist  in  great  measure  of  these  permutations^.
With  regard  to  the  derivatives  formed  as  described  in

the  text  from  the  root  Behd  \\^),  the  following  passage,
occurring  in  a  MS.  presented  to  me  by  Subh-i-Ezel  and
called  by  him  <u».^  jyi  "the  Five  States"  or  "Grades"
(because  it  contains  specimens  of  each  of  the  five  styles
into  which  the  BAb  divides  his  writings,  concerning  which
see  infra,  Note  U)  may  serve  to  give  us  some  idea  of  what
the  letter  in  question  must  have  been  like.  No  attempt
has  been  made  to  translate  what  is  hardly  capable  of
translation.

^vi  ^vi  y^  VI  ill  V  dii ^vi  ^y\  ^\  ^

^\  _^  VI  aJI  V  ^\ ^\  ^11  y^  VI  ill  V  4il

1  I  trust  that  I  may  be  pardoned  the  use  of  such  words.
Only  in  this  way  can  one  convey  some  idea  of  the  original  to  the
Euj-opean  reader  unacquainted  with  Arabic.

2  See  p.  202  supra.


NOTE  S — THE  BAB  S LAST  MOMENTS.  319

iJl V 4iil ^1 ^1 yt. VI  ill V 4LI ^1
oIjaJI *1^,  jLjt)  ^_j^_  <u  _j i-^y  jb-l_^l  yh  '^1

Jwki jl ''l^l t5i Jj (J_^ ^1 dJUl Js abi ^_^jtla

Olj)ft....)l i3 V Jt>-I /> 'ijU'.l OLkL. oULo 'jC -:'.'>)■ ol

* Ljt; L&L *[ji; 0l5^ Ail Ljt^) U V _j (j^jVI J V J

This  short  extract,  containing  over  a  dozen  derivatives
of  the  root  in  question,  not  more  than  half  of  which,  if  so
many,  could  be  supported  by  previous  authority,  will  suffice
to  give  an  idea  of  this  style  of  composition.

NOTE  S.
The  Bab's  last  night  on  earth.

The  account  of  the  B^b's  condemnation  and  execution
contained  in  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid  agrees  in  the  main  with
the  narratives  of  Gobineau  and  Kazem-Beg,  but  adds  some
curious  particulars  concerning  what  passed  in  the  prison  on
the  eve  of  the  martyrdom.  Of  this  passage  I  here  give  a
translation.

"They  imprisoned  him  who  was  athirst  for  the  draught
of  martyrdom  [i.e.  the  B4b]  for  three  days  [after  sentence
of  death  was  passed],  along  with  Akd  Seyyid  Huseyn  [of
Yezd]  the  amanuensis,  and  Akd  Sej^yid  Hasan,  which  twain


320  NOTE S — THE BAB'S LAST MOMENTS.

were  brothers  wont  to  pass  their  time  for  the  most  part  in
the  B4b's  presence.

"Now  before  this  event  the  B&h  had,  for  the  completion

of  the  proof,  graciously  sent  by  means  of  Akd  Seyyid
Ahmad  of  Tabriz  known  as  'the  scribe",  Mlrzd,  Muhammad
'Ah  of  Tabriz,  and  two  other  persons,  sundry  epistles  con-
taining exhortations,  admonitions,  and  declarations  of  his
truth  to  the  doctors  of  Tabriz.  At  the  time  when  these
epistles  were  delivered  one  of  the  doctors  had  desired  to
show  contempt  and  disrespect  towards  the  blessed  epistle.
These  forerunners  of  the  field  of  courage  put  forward  the
foot  of  bravery  to  prevent  this,  and,  their  dispute  ending
in  strife,  were  incarcerated  in  the  prison  of  His  Highness
Prince  Hamz4  MfrzA ;  where,  as  is  currently  reported,  two
of  them  would  seem  to  have  been  poisoned,  though,  ac-
cording to  one  account,  the  Prince  released  them  unknown
to  the  doctors.  But  Mirzd  Muhammad  'Alf  was  incar-
cerated till  such  time  as  the  B^b  was  brought  to  the  prison,
and  there  obtained  the  honour  of  meeting  him.

"On  the  very  eve  of  the  day  whereon  they  martyred
that  gem  of  created  essences  [i.e.  the  Bdb]  he  said  to  his
companions,  'Tomorrow  they  will  martyr  me  with  bound-
less shame  and  dishonour.  Let  one  of  you  now  arise  and
slay  me,  so  that  I  may  not  have  to  suffer  all  this  dishonour
and  humiliation  from  the  adversaries ;  for  it  is  far  pleasanter
for  me  to  be  slain  by  the  hand  of  friends  than  by  the  hands
of  enemies.'  His  companions,  with  expressions  of  sorrow
and  grief,  sought  to  excuse  themselves,  save  Mlrzd  Muham-
mad 'Alf,  who  at  once  made  as  though  he  would  obey  the
command.  His  comrades,  however,  anxiously  seized  his
hand,  crying,  'Such  boldness  and  rashness  is  not  the
characteristic  of  true  service.' 'This  act  of  mine,'  replied

1  The  author  appears  to  have  confounded  this  AkA  Seyyid
Ahmad  of  Tabriz  (who,  according  to  Subh-i-Ezel's  statement,
disappeared  altogether  and.  broke  off  all  communications  with
the  B4bis  after  his  escape  from  Tabriz)  with  MulM  'Abdu'l-
Karlm  of  Kazvin,  who  was  commonly  known  amongst  the  Bihis
by  the  name  of  Mirzi  Ahmsid-i-Edtib  ('the  Scribe').  There
seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  they  were  quite  distinct  persons,  and
that  the  title  Kdtib  is  wrongly  applied  to  the  Ahmad  here
spoken  of. Cf.  note  2  on  p.  41  supra.


NOTE S — THE BAB's LAST MOMENTS.  321

he,  'is  not  clue  to  boldness,  but  rather  to  an  excessive
obedience,  being  [undertaken]  in  conformity  with  his  com-
mand. After  carrying  out  the  order  of  His  Highness  [the
B^b],  I  will  assuredly  pour  out  my  own  life  also  at  his
feet.'  His  Highness  [the  Bdb]  smiled,  and,  applauding  his
faithful  devotion  and  sincere  belief,  said,  '  Tomorrow,  when
they  ask  of  you,  renounce  [me]  and  conceal  your  belief,  for
thus  is  the  command  of  God  now  laid  upon  you,  especially
on  Akd  Seyyid  Huseyn,  with  whom  are  the  gems  of  know-
ledge', which  he  must  convey  to  the  people  of  God  and  the
seekers  after  the  way  of  true  guidance.'  The  [B^b's  other]
companions  agreed,  but  Mirz^  Muhammad  'Ah  fell  at  the
feet  of  His  Highness  [  the  Bdb]  and  began  to  entreat  and
implore,  thus  praying  with  utmost  self-abasement: — 'De-
prive not  this  thy  faithful  servant  of  the  blessing  of  thy
presence,  and  gTaciously  grant  to  this  worthless  dust  and
mote  permission  to  lay  down  his  life.'  How  much  soever
His  Highness  [the  B4b]  would  have  prevented  him,  he
continued  to  pray,  crave,  and  entreat,  until  [the  B4b],
through  the  exceeding  kindness  of  his  disposition,  con-
sented.

"Xow  when  a  little  while  had  elapsed  after  the  rising
of  the  sun,  they  brought  them  without  cloak  ['«&«]  or
coat  [kabd],  and  having  [only]  their  vests  on  their  breasts
and  their  nightcaps  on  their  heads,  to  the  governor's  palace,

where it  was decreed that  they should  be  shot. Ak4

Sey}'id  Huseyn  the  amanuensis  and  Akd  Seyyid  Hasan  his
brother  renounced  [the  Bdb]  as  they  had  been  commanded,

and  were  released,  and  Akd,  Se3^id  Huseyn  bestowed  the
gems  of  knowledge  treasured  in  his  bosom  upon  such  as
sought  for  them  and  were  worthy  of  them,  and,  according
to  his  instructions,  conveyed  and  carried  certain  secrets  of
the  religion  to  those  who  were  entitled  to  receive  them.
He  [subsequently]  attained  to  the  rank  of  martyrdom  in
Teherdn."  (Here  follows  the  account  of  the  execution  of
the  B4b  and  Mlrzd.  Muhammad  'All,  which,  as  it  agrees
substantially  with  that  given  in  the  present  work  and  in
other  published  accounts,  I  omit.)

'  i.e.  the  Bab's  last  words,  behests,  and  directions.
B.  21


322  NOTE S — THE BAB'S LAST MOMENTS.

According  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  the  B&h  signified  his  _  ac-
ceptance of  MirzA  Muhammad  'Ah's  request  that  he  might
share  in  the  glorious  martyrdom  of  his  Master  in  these
words : —

"  Verily  Muhammad  'All  [shall  be]  ^^^th  us  in  Paradise."

If  these  words  be  authentic  (and  there  is  no  reason  for
doubting  that  they  are)  they  offer  a  most  striking  analogy
to  one  of  the  last  utterances  of  Jesus  Christ  (Luke  xxiii.  43).

Whether  the  narrative  of  the  TarU-h-i-JacMd  be  alto-
gether worthy  of  credence  or  not,  there  seems  no  reason  to
doubt  that  Seyyid  Huseyn  recanted,  not,  as  Kazem-Beg
asserts  (i.  pp.  375 — 377),  from  a  craven  dread  of  death,
but  in  accordance  with  the  command  of  his  master,  the
object  of  this  command  being  the  preservation  of  the  last
words  and  writings  of  the  BAb.  When  we  consider  how
rare  was  the  fear  of  death  and  torture  amongst  the  B^bis,
and  how  readily  Seyyid  Huseyn  himself  met  his  fate  two
years  later  (cf.  Gobineau,  pp.  300 — 301),  it  seems  most
improbable  that  he  of  all  the  B4bis,  he,  the  chosen  com-
panion, amanuensis,  and  intimate  friend  of  the  Bd,b,  should
exhibit  so  craven  a  fear.  Amongst  the  Bdbis,  at  least,  no
stigma  of  even  a  temporary  and  bitterly  repented  failure
of  courage,  such  as  is  supposed  by  Gobineau,  lies  on  the
memory  of  Seyyid  Huseyn.  It  is  at  least  certain  that  he
continued  to  correspond  mth  Suleym4n  Khd,n  and  the
other  B4bi  chiefs  after  the  B4b's  execution. Some  of  these

letters,  wherein  he  alludes  to  Tabriz  as  ^_j^  (J^  ('the
Place  of  the  Blow')  and  ji^JU  ('the  Place  of  Martyrdom'),

were  shewn  to  me  by  Subh-i-Ezel.  From  these  letters
and  Subh-i-Ezel's  statements  it  would  appear  that  Se3^id
Huseyn  was  kept  in  custody  for  at  any  rate  some  con-
siderable portion  of  the  two  years  by  which  he  survived  his
master.

Of  the  touching  and  beautiful  letter  written  by  Mirz4
Muhammad  'All  from  his  prison  to  his  elder  brother  the
text  will  be  found  at  p.  992  and  the  translation  at  p.  938
of  my  second  paper  on  the  B4bis  in  the  /.  R.A.  S.  for  1889.


NOTE T — ATTEMPT OX THE SHAH'S LIFE. 323


NOTE  T.

The  attempt  on  the  Shah's life and the massacee
OF  Teheran.

The  attempted  assassination  of  Nd,siru'd-Din  Sli4h  on
Sunday  August  15tli,  1852,  though  very  hghtly  touched  on
in  the  present  work,  is  so  fully  described  by  the  two
Musulmin  historians,  Lady  Shell,  Gobineau,  Polak,  Kazem-
Beg  and  others,  that  I  shall  confine  myself  here  to  re-
producing the  substance  of  what  was  told  me  about  this
3vent  by  the  nephew  of  one  of  the  three  BAbis  actually
engaged  in  the  plot.  This  account  naturally  exhibits  the
Shdh's  behaviour  in  a  less  heroic  light  than  do  the  Musul-
[nd,n  chroniclers  Sipihr  and  Riz4-Kuh  KhAn.  I  give  it  only
for  what  it  is  worth,  thinking  that  here,  as  elsewhere,  the
truth  may  lie  between  the  two  extremes.

According  to  this  account,  then,  the  B4bi  conspirators
were  originally  seven  in  number,  but  four  of  them  drew
back  at  the  last  moment  from  the  projected  enterprise.
The  three  who  actually  made  the  attempt  were  MuUd,
Pathu'Uih  of  Kum,  S4dik  of  Zanj4n,  and  Mirz^  Muhammad
of  iN'iriz'.  These  three  approached  the  Shd,h  as  he  was
riding  out  to  the  chase  somewhat  in  advance  of  his  retinue
from  the  Palace  of  Niy^vardn.  The  Shdh,  supposing  that
they  had  some  petition  to  prefer,  allowed  them  to  draw
near  without  suspicion.  When  within  a  short  distance  of
him  one  of  the  three  Bdbis  (apparently  the  Nfrizf)  drew  a
pistol  from his pocket and  fired at  the Sh^h. MulU

1  According  to  the  AYisikhu't-Taimrikh  the  conspirators  were
originally  twelve  in  number.  Of  these,  the  names  of  four  only —
Sadik  of  Zanjan,  Mi'rza  'Abdu'l-Wahhdb  of  Shi'raz,  MuUd  Fathu'-
liah  of  Kum,  and  Muhammad  Bdkir  of  NajafdbAd— are  given.  It
is  subsequently  stated  that  all  save  three  drew  back  at  the  last,
a,nd  that  of  these  three  one  was  "  a  man  of  NMz  "  (presumably
the  same  Mirza  Muhammad  mentioned  aljove).  Lady  Shell
[op.  cit.,  p.  274)  says  that  four  Bdbi's  took  part  in  the  attack.

21—2


324 NOTE T — ATTEMPT ON THE SHAH'S LIFE.

Fathu'lMh  of  Kiim  then  threw  himself  upon  the  King  and
dragged  him  from  his  horse  on  to  the  ground,  meaningto
cut  his  throat'.  The  Shdh,  having  almost  fainted  with
terror,  was  ab-eady  incapable  of  offering  any  further  resist-
ance, when  2kfarrush  (still  li\'ing,  and,  thanks  to  the  service
rendered  by  him  on  that  day,  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  good
pension)  came  up,  struck  the  would-be  assassin  in  the
mouth,  and  cut  down  one  of  the  other  two  conspirators.
A  moment  after,  one  of  the  mustawfis  arrived  on  the  spot
and  threw  himself  as  a  shield  on  the  Shah's  body.  The
Sh4h,  imagining  that  it  was  another  assassin,  cried  out,
"Why  do  you  wish  to  kill  me?  What  harm  have  I  done?"
"  It  is  I,"  answered  the  mustawfi,  "  all  danger  is  past.
Fear  not."  All  danger  was  in  fact  over.  As  soon  as  it
was  evident  that  the  attempt  had  failed  and  that  the  Shdh
still  lived,  other  retainers,  who  had  at  first  hung  back^,
hastened  forward  to  bear  a  part  in  the  seizure  of  the  two
surviving  assassins  (for  S4dik  of  Zanj4n  had  already  been
killed).  The  two  captives,  on  being  interrogated,  declared
that  they  were  Bibis,  and  that  they  had  made  the  attempt
with  a  view  to  avenging  the  blood  of  their  Master.  In
spite  of  their  frank  confession,  it  was  at  first  believed  that
the  object  of  the  attempt  was  political,  and  that  it  had  been
instigated  by  some  rival  claimant  to  the  throne.  Sddik  of
Zanj4n,  who  was  killed  on  the  spot,  was  described  by
Subh-i-Ezel  as  a  youth  of  short  stature  with  very  small
eyes.  He  was  the  servant  of  MulU  Sheykh  'Alf  {'Jendb-i-
'AzCm')  from  whom  he  is  said  to  have  received  the  pistol
with  which  he  was  armed.  According  to  Subh-i-Ezel  he
alone  fired  at  and  wounded  the  Sh4h,  but  the  Ndsikhut-
Tawurikh  states  that  each  of  the  three  assassins  discharged
his  pistol.

With  regard  to  the  Shah's  behaviour,  it  may  not  be
altogether  uninstructive  to  compare  with  the  above  account
the  following  passage  from  the  Ndsikhu't-Tawdnkh: —
"  The  dust  of  perturbation  settled  not  on  the  skirt  of  the

1  According  to  Gobineau  (p.  282)  the  conspirators  did  not
succeed  in  unhorsing  the  King.  See  also  p.  289  of  the  same
work.  Lady  Sheil,  however,  [op.  cit.,  p.  274)  says  that  the  Shd,h
was  dragged  to  the  ground.

2  Of.  Polak's  Persien,  vol..  i.  p.  .352.


NOTE T — ATTEMPT ON THE SHAH'S LIFE. 325

patience  and  self-control  of  the  King,  whose  elemental
Qiaterial  God  the  Creator  had  leavened  with  the  liver
of  the  lion,  the  heart  of  Ardashir,  the  ardour  of  Shdpiir,
and  the  majesty  of  Ti'miir  ;  nor  did  the  pellucid  stream  of
his  mind  become  troubled  by  the  foulness  and  filth  of  these
events.  Neither  did  he  urge  his  horse  to  leap  aside,  nor
did  he  utter  a  word  indicative  of  alarm  or  consternation.
He  kept  his  place  on  his  poplar-wood  saddle  like  some
mountain  of  massive  rocks,-  and,  notwithstanding  that
wound,  turned  not  aside  in  any  direction,  and  carried  not
his  hand  to  his  hurt,  so  that  those  present  in  his  escort
knew  not  that  any  hurt  had  befallen  the  king  or  that
he  had  suffered  any  wound."

K4'dni  of  Shirdz,  the  most  famous  and  the  most  talented
of  modern  Persian  poets,  has  two  kasidas  in  celebration  of
the  Shih's  escape  from  this  danger.  These  will  be  found
respectively  at  p.  26  and  p.  254  of  the  edition  of  his  works
published  at  TeherAn  in  a.h.  1302  (a.d.  1884).  Although
they  add  no  new  facts  to  the  sum  of  our  knowledge,  they
agree  with  the  authorities  already  cited  in  stating  that  the
attempt  took  place  at  the  end  of  the  month  of  Shaww41,
and  that  those  actually  concerned  therein  were  three  in
number. Thus  in  the  first  kasida  K4'dni  says  :—


\—>l3j i_ijLo 5^>- l_^J (V'^ L$\-&j~^

"  At  the  end  of  ShawwAl  the  King  rode  forth  to  hunt,
Heaven  by  his  reins  and  the  sun  beside  his  stirrup.
When  suddenly  three  persons  sprang  forth  from  ambush,

and  swiftly  hurled
Fiery  darts  towards  the  King,  the  Lord  of  [men's]  necks."


326 NOTE T — ATTEMPT ON THE SHAH'S LIFE.

So  in  the  second  kasida  he  says : —

u^  -^ Lr>, Ui^ ^^  J^  IjJl^  >-l
jl^.i y^  jl Li  o*cj \j&[^ olj-i  Ls>-

"  Henceforth  keep  the  end  of  Shaww4l  as  a  festival  every

year;
Invite  the  servants  of  the  King  from  every  quarter.
Ho,  say,  '  Come,  0  beloved !  Go,  0  anchorite !  Give,  0

treasurer ! '
Ho,  say,  '  Give,  0  cup-bearer  !  Play,  0  harper  ! Sing,  0

minstrel ! '
Name  it  '  the  Feast  of  Sacrifice  of  the  King,'  and,  like

sheep'.
Cut  off  the  heads  of  enemies  in  the  path  of  the  victorious

King."

Between  the  attempt  on  the  Shah's  life  and  the  fearful
vengeance  wherewith  it  was  visited  on  the  B^bis  a  whole
month  appears  to  have  elapsed,  for  the  executions  are
stated  by  the  JVasikhu't-Tawarikh  to  have  taken  place
on  Wednesday  the  salkk  (i.e.  the  last  day)  of  Zi'l-Ka'da
A.H.  1268  (September  15th,  a.d.  1852).  It  must  not  be
supposed,  however,  that  this  month  was  idly  spent  by  the
government  officials. Messengers  were  at  once  despatched

1  The  custom  of  shewing  honour  to  a  gi-eat  man  returning
home  from  a  journey  by  decapitating  a  sheep  and  throwing  the
bleeding  head  across  his  path  is  .still  maintained  in  Persia.


ARRESTS AND TRIALS.  327

to  all  parts  of  the  kingdom  to  publish  the  failure  of  the
plot  and  the  safety  of  the  Sh4h.  The  police  of  Teheran,
instructed  to  make  a  diligent  search  for  members  of  the
obnoxious  sect',  succeeded  in  surprising  a  gathering  of  a
dozen  B4bis  in  the  house  of  Hdji  Suleymd.n  Khd,n^  the  son
of  Yahy4  Khin  of  Tabriz,  and  other  arrests  soon  raised  the
total  number  of  captives  to  nearly  forty.  Some  few  of
these  were  able  to  prove  their  innocence  in  a  manner
which  satisfied  even  their  judges,  little  disposed  as  they
were  towards  acquittals.  Amongst  these  the  Nusikhu't-
Tawurikh  mentions  five,  to  wit: — Mirzd,  Huseyn  'All  of
Nur  [Beh4'u'll^h] ;  Mirzd  Suleymdn-Kuli ;  Mirzd,  Mahmud,

nephew  of  the  above ;  Akd,  'Abdu'lMh,  the  son  of  Akd,
iluhammad  Ja'far  ;  and  Mirz4  Jaw4d  of  Khurd,sdn ;  all  of
whom  were  committed  to  prison  pending  further  investi-
gations.

The  majority  of  those  arrested,  however,  were  con-
demned to  death  ;  and,  according  to  the  list  given  in  the
Ndsikhu't-Tawdrikh,  twenty-eight  of  them  expiated  their
faith  with  their  lives.  I  say  '  their  faith '  advisedly,  for
some  of  those  doomed  to  death,  such  as  Kurratu'l-'Ayn

and  Ak4  Seyyid  Huseyn  of  Yezd,  had  long  been  in  strict
confinement,  and  could  not  by  any  possibility  have  been
concerned  in  the  conspiracy.  Others,  such  as  ilull4  Huse3m
of  Khur4sdn,  were  convicted  solely  on  the  evidence  of  B4bf
writings  found  on  their  persons  or  in  their  houses.  When
a  verdict  of  '  Not  Guilty '  bids  fair  to  jeopardize  the  judge's
reputation  for  loyalty,  if  not  to  place  him  in  actual  peril,
acquittals  in  such  a  country  as  Persia  are  hard  to  win.

Weak  as  the  evidence  of  criminality  was  in  many  cases,
there  could  be  little  hope  of  averting  the  impending
butchery;  for  so  audacious  an  attempt  demanded  a  com-
mensurate revenge  calculated  to  strike  terror  into  the
hearts  of  all.  Efforts  were  nevertheless  made  by  some  of
the  European  representatives  at  the  Persian  court  to  induce
the  Shd,h  to  content  himself  with  the  execution  of  the
condemned  without  subjecting  them  to  the  tortures  which
there  was  but  too  much  reason  to apprehend  would  be

'^  Cf.  ( {obineau,  p.  284  et  ,seij.
2  JarilchuH-  Tavxu-lkh.


;>2.S  NOTE T — THE MASSACRE

sujjeradded  to  the  death-penalty'.  These  efforts  were  fruit-
less. The  Shah's  alarm  and  anj^er,  far  from  diniinishiii^r,
were  constantly  stimulated  by  the  re])resentatii)ns  of  liis
ministers,  who  succeeded  in  convincing  liim  of  the  e.xistcmce
of  a  wide-spread  disaffection  which  could  only  Ik^  I'hcckcd
by  the  most  stringent  measures".  Nor  was  this  sense  of
dread  confined  to  the  King:  it  reacted  on  those  who  had
inspired  it,  until,  in  (iobincau's  words,  "On  ne  savait  ]ilus
sur  (piel  terrain  on  se  trouvait,  et,  faute  do  rca.litc's  (pi 'on
ne  saisissait  pas,  (pii  fuyaient  devant  toutes  les  recherclies,
on  voyait  crrcr  autour  de  soi  une  multitude  do  fantomes.

L'(3pouvante  deviut  gcncral(^  au  camp  du  roi En  face,  on

avait  une  ([uarantnine  de  captifs  muets  ;  mais  par  derricre,
savait-on  ce  qui  s'agitait?""

Then,  because  of  this  great  fear,  was  devised  that
devilish  scheme  whereby  all  classes  of  society  should  bo
made  to  share  in  the  bloodshed  of  that  fatal  day.  It  ^vas
suggested  that  if  the  responsibility  for  the  doom  of  the
captives  rested  solely  on  the  Shd,h,  the  Prime  Minister,  or
the  ordinary  administrators  of  the  law,  tlieso  would  become
thereafter  targets  for  the  vengeance  of  the  Biiljfs.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  a  partition  of  the  jirisoners  were  made
amongst  the  different  classes;  if  a  representative  body  of
each  of  these  classes  were  made  responsible  for  the  o-xccution
of  one  or  more  Bd.bfs;  and  if  it  were  further  signified  to
the  persons  thus  forced  to  act  the  part  of  executioners  tlmt
the  Shdh  would  be  able  to  estimate  their  loyalty  to  himself
by  the  manner  in  which  they  disposed  of  their  victims \
then  all  classes,  being  e(iually  i)artakers  in  tlie  blood  of  the
slain,  would  be  equally  exjjosed  to  the  retaliation  of  the
survivors,  from  wlioin  they  would  be  therefore  effectually
and  permanently  alienated,  while  at  the  same  time  the
HMh  himself  would  avoid  incurring  the  odium  of  the
massacre.  Such  were  the  "Machiavellian  means ""  adopted
for  the  extirpation  of  the  supposed  conspirators.

Of  the  victims  of  that  day  the  N(1s/7i//n't-7'ii//r(irf/,/i

1  Lady  Shell's  (JUmpxex  of  I/iff.  (tvd  Maii/iirr.i  in,  J'erKi'n,  p.  276.

'^  Polak's  /'crxirv,  vol.  I.  p.  3.52.

^  Gobineau,  p.  290.

■'  Gobineau,  p.  292.

f'  Polak's  I'crsic.ii,,  vol.  i.  p.  352.


OF TEHERAN.  329

gives  a  complete  list,  which  I  here  append.  This  list  I  read
over  to  Subh-i-Ezel.  The  comments  thereon  made  by  him
are  added  in  square  brackets.

(1)  MulU  Sheykh  'All  ("  Jendb-i-'Aztm")  was  killed
by  the  '  Ulamd.

(2)  Seyyid  Hasan  Khurds^nl  was  hacked  in  pieces  by
the  Princes.

(3)  MuUd  Zeynu'l-'Abidfn  of  Yezd  was  killed  by
the  Mustawfis.  [The  Mustawfi' ul-memdlik  (Secretary  of
State),  unwilling  to  shed  blood,  shut  his  eyes  and  fired  his
<j\\n  in  the  air,  while  another  Mustawft  named  Ibrahim  of
Niir  only  touched  the  prisoner  with  his  penknife,  leaving
the  bloody  work  to  others  less  scrupulous.  MulU  Zeynu'l-
'Abidfn  had  succeeded  once  in  escaping  from  his  pursuers
at  Kum  by  throwing  a  handful  of  dust  in  their  eyes.]

(4)  Mulld  Huseyn  of  Khurdsdn  was  killed  by  the
Nizdmul-Mulk ,  Mirzd.  Sa'ld  Khin,  and  the  employes  of
the  Foreign  Office.  [He  had  held  no  communication  with
Hdjl  Suleymdn  Khin  or  the  other  chief  Bdbls  at  Teherdn,
where  he  had  but  recently  rented  a  house.  A  fragment  of
Bdbi  writing  found  in  his  house  was  the  sole  ground  where-
on he  was  convicted.]

(.0)  MlrzA  'Abdu  '1-Wahh4b  of  Shlr4z  ['a  youth  of
good  understanding']  was  killed  by  Ja'far-Kuli  Khan  the
Prime  Minister's  brother,  and  his  sons  Mfrzd  'All  KhAn,
MAsd  Khdn,  and  Zu'1-Fikdr  Kh4n.

(6)  MulU  Fa'thu'lUh  of  Kum,  the  son  of  Mulld  ;Ah
^ahhuf,  who  had  fired  the  shot  which  wounded  the  King,
was  killed  by  Hdji  'All  Khdn  the  Hajibu'd-Dairla  and  his
farrdshes.  Several  incisions  were  made  in  his  body,  and  in
these  lighted  candles  were  inserted.  After  he  had  been
tortured  in  this  fashion  for  some  time,  the  Hdjibu'd-Dawla
shot  him  in  the  back,  and  he  was  then  hacked  in  pieces  by
the  farrdxhi^it  with  knives.  His  execution  took  place  at
Niydvardn.  [Subh-i-Bzel  confirmed  the  fact  that  he
suffered  torture  by  lighted  candles  inserted  in  wounds
inflicted  on  his  body,  but  asserted  that  he,  together  with
HAjf  Suleymin  Khdn,  was  sawn  in  two.]

(7)  Sheykh  'Abbds  of  Teherdn  was  killed  by  the
Khdns  and  nobles.  [According  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  however,
he  was  suffered  to  escape  privily.]


330  NOTE T — THE MASSACRE

(8)  Muhammad  Biikir  of  Najaf^bdd  (near  Isfahd,n),
who  had,  on  his  own  confession,  taken  an  active  part  in  the
insurrections  of  M4zandarin  and  Zanj^n,  was  killed  by  the
phh-khidmats  (pages  in  waiting).

(9)  Muhammad  Taki  of  Shird,z  was  delivered  over  to
the  Mir-dkhur  (Master  of  the  Horse)  and  the  attendants
of  the  Royal  Stables.  These  first  nailed  iron  horse-shoes
on  his  feet,  and  then,  in  the  words  of  the  Musulm^n
historian,  "broke  up  his  head  and  body  with  clubs  and
nails."

(10)  Muhammad  of  Najaf4b4d  was  killed  by  the
Eshik-akdsi-bdsM,  the  JdrcM-bdshi,  the  Nasakchi-basM,
and  their  attendants.

(11)  Mfrz4  Muhammad  of  Nlriz,  who  had  fought  for
the  B4bi  cause  at  Nirfz,  Sheykh  Tabarsi,  and  Zanj4n',  was
killed  by  Mirz4  iluhammad  Kh4n  the  Sar-kisMk  (captain
of  the  guard)  and  the  Yuz-bdsMs  (centurions).

(12)  Muhammad  'All  of  Najaf^bM  was  delivered  over
to  the  artillerymen.  They  first  plucked  out  his  eyes,  and
then  blew  him  from  the  mouth  of  a  gun.

(13)  Akd,  Seyyid  Huseyn  of  Yezd  (see  preceding  note,
pp.  319 — 322)  was  killed  by  'Aziz  Khd,n  Ajuddn-bdshi,  and
the  brigadier-generals,  colonels,  captains,  and  other  officers.

(14)  KM,  Mahdi  of  K4sh4n  (see  note  1  on  p.  46  supra)
was  slain  by  the  farrdshes.

(15)  Mirz4  Nabi  of  Damivand  [a  youth  about  twenty-
one  years  of  age]  was  sent  to  the  College  {Ddru  l-funun)  of
Teheran,  by  the  professors  and  students  of  which  he  was
torn  in  pieces.

(16)  Mirz4  Rafi'  of  Niir  [a  relation  of  Subh-i-Ezel's,
aged  about  fifty  years,  and  noted  for  his  skill  in  calli-
graphy] was  killed  by  the  cavalry.

(17)  Mirzii  Mahmiid  of  Kazvi'n  was  hewn  in  pieces
with  daggers  and  knives  by  the  men  of  the  camel-artillery
{zamhurakcMydn).

(18)^  Hu!seyn  of  iliUn,  called  by  the  B4bis  "  Abii  'Ab-
di  'll4h,"  was  slain  by  the  soldiers  with  spears. [According

1  As  the  risings  at  Zanj4n  and  Ni'riz  were  almost  simultaneous,
thougt  the  former  was  not  suppressed  for  two  months  after  the
termination  of  the  latter,  it  would  appear  very  improbable  that
any  one  pei'son  could  have  taken  an  active  part  in  both.


OF TEHERAN.  331

to  Subh-i-Ezel,  Huseyn  of  Mildn  acted  most  discreditably,
being  at  once  the  most  turbulent  and  eager  for  mischiet
and  the  most  pusillanimous  of  those  who  professed  to
follow  the  BAb.  When  he  came  to  Teherdn  from  Tabriz,  he
took  up  his  abode  in  the  house  of  H4ji  Suleymdn  Kh&ii.
While  resident  there,  he  began  to  advance  various  claims
to  spiritual  authority,  first  declaring  himself  to  be  a  re-
incarnation of  the  Im4m  Huseyn,  and  then  "  He  whom  God
shall  manifest,"  whose  coming  the  BAb  had  foretold.  A
considerable  number  of  persons  became  his  disciples,  and,
encouraged  by  this  success,  he  seems  to  have  meditated
some  act  of  violence,  which  was,  however,  discovered  and
frustrated  by  Subh-i-Ezel.  He  had  a  brother  named
Ja'far,  who  gave  himself  out  as  "King  of  Baghdad."
Huseyn  of  MiUn,  when  arrested,  would  have  saved  himself
by  recanting  and  disclaiming  all  fellowship  with  the  B&his,
but,  while  he  was  under  examination,  a  child  came  in,  and
mockingly  greeted  him  with  the  words  "  Es-seldmu  'aky-
kum,  yd  Imam  Huseyn"  ("Peace  be  upon  you,  0  ImAm
Huseyn!").  This  sufficed  to  secure  his  conviction.  It  is
worth  noting  that  three  other  persons'  besides  Huseyn  of
MiUn  advanced  vain  claims  to  supreme  authority  in  the
Bd,bf  church,  to  wit,  Mirzd,  Asadu'lUh  of  Tabriz  surnamed
Deyydn  (see  Gobineau,  pp.  277 — 278);  Seyyid  Huseyn  of
Hindiy^n  near  Muhammara,  who  gathered  round  him
about  forty  disciples,  and  who,  though  not  recognized  or
accredited  by  the  Bibi  chiefs,  continued  to  send  greetings
to  them  while  they  were  in  exile  at  Baghdad  ;  and  Sheykh
Isma'il,  believed  to  be  still  alive,  who  subsequently  with-
drew the  claim  which  he  had  advanced.]

(19)  MulM  'Abdu'l-Karfm  of  Kazvi'n  (called  by  the
Bibi's  "  Mirz4  Ahmad-i-^a^/6  " ;  see  note  2  on  p.  41  siqyra)
was  killed  by  the  artillerymen.

(20)  Lutf-'Ali  of  Shlr4z  was  put  to  death  by  the  royal
footmen.

(21)  Xajaf  of  Khamsa  was  delivered  over  to  the  people
of  the  city,  who  "  with  sticks  and  stones  crimsoned  the
earth  with  his  blood."

'  But  see  Xote  W  infra,  where,  on  the  authority  of  the
Ezeh'  controversial  work  called  Hasht  Bihisht,  other  pretenders
are  mentioned.


332  NOTE T — THE MASSACRE

(22)  H4jf  Mirzii  Jiim'  of  K^sh^n,  the  merchant,  was
delivered  over  to  Ak4  Mahdi  the  chief  of  the  merchants
(Maliku't-tujjdr),  and  the  other  merchants  and  shop-keepers
of  the  city,  "  each  of  whom  inflicted  a  wound  on  him  until
he  perished."  [According  to  Suhh-i-Ezel,  Hdjf  Mfrzd,  Jdnf
took  refuge  in  the  sanctuary  of  Shih  'Abdu'l-'Azlm,  which
is  situated  about  four  miles  south  of  Teherdn.  The
sanctuary  was,  however,  not  respected  in  his  case,  and
he  was  dragged  forth.  In  compensation  for  this  violation
of  the  holy  place  the  Sh4h  plated  or  replated  the  roof  of
the  shrine  with  gold.  Of  Hdj(  Mfrzd  Jdnl's  death  Subh-i-
Ezel  gave  a  different  version,  according  to  which  he  was
strangled  with  the  bowstring.  After  he  was  let  down,
being  supposed  to  be  dead,  he  half  raised  himself,  opened
his  eyes,  gazed  at  his  executioners,  and  then  fell  back  dead.
He  had  three  brothers,  two  of  whom  were  also  B4bfs.  Of
these  two,  one,  Hdjl  Mirzd  IsmA'il,  died  in  Teherdn.  The
other,  H4ji  Mirzd  Ahmad,  was  killed  in  Baghdad  by
certain  Behd,'is',  he  being  one  of  those  who  refused  to
transfer  their  allegiance  from  Subh-i-Ezel  to  Beh4.  The
Turikh-i-Jadid  makes  frequent  mention  of  Hdji  Mfrzd
J4ni',  and  repeatedly  quotes  from  a  history  of  the  B4hi
movement  which  he  wrote.]

(23)  Hasan  of  Khamsa  was  slain  by  Nasru'lUh  Khdn
the  superintendent  of  the  royal  kitchen  and  his  myrmidons.

(24)  Mu.hammad  B4kir  of  Kuhpdyd  was  slain  by  the
K4j4r  chiefs  with  their  swords.

(25)  The  body  of  Sddik  of  Zanjdn,  who  was  slain,  as
above  narrated,  while  attacking  the  Sh4h,  was  cut  into
several  pieces,  which  were  suspended  from  the  different
gates  of  Teherdn.

(26)  Hiiji  Suleymdn  Khdn,  the  son  of  Yahyd  Khdn  of
Tabriz,  and —

(27)  Kdsim  of  Nfriz,  who  regarded  himself  as  the
successor  of  Seyyid  Yahyd,  of  D4r4b,  were,  by  command  of
Akd  Hasan  the  deputy-chief  of  the  farruslies,  wounded  in
many  parts  of  their  bodies,  and  in  these  wounds  lighted
candles  were  inserted.  The  two  unfortunate  men  were
thus  paraded  through  the  streets  and  bazaars  of  the  city  to

1  See  Note  W  infra.


OF TEHERAN.  333

the  sound  of  minstrelsy,  while  dust  and  ashes  were  hurled
upon  them  by  the  spectators.  After  being  made  to  traverse
a  great  distance  in  this  fashion,  they  were  led  out  of  the
city,  and  sawn  asunder  into  four  quarters  outside  the  Shdh
'Abdu'l-'Azim  gate  by  the  farrashes  of  the  gaol.  Their
mangled  remains  were  then  attached  to  the  city  gate^;.
[Vdmb^ry  (Wanderungen  und  Erlebnisse  in  Perslen,  Pest,
1867,  p.  299)  gives  a  quite  different  account  of  Suleym^n
Kli4n's  mart)Tdom,  which  runs  as  follows : — "  Suleiman
Chan,  ein  wohl-beleibter  Mann,  hatte  zuerst  vier  Schnitte
in  die  Brust  bekommen,  in  welche  brennende  Kerzen
gesteckt  wurden  und  man  fiihrte  ihn  so  lange  im  Bazar
herum,  bis  das  Wachs  der  Kerzen  von  den  Flammen  ver-
zehrt  war  und  der  Docht  sich  spater  am  herausfliessenden
Fett  des  Delinquenten  nahren  musste.  Darauf  wurde  ihm
gllihende  schwere  Hufeisen  auf  die  nackten  Fusssohlen
angeschlagen  und  aufs  Neue  wurde  er  herum  gefiihrt,  bis
man  ihm  endlich  alle  Zahne  vom  iluiide  herausriss  und  in
der  Form  eines  Halbmondes  auf  den  Schadel  einschlug.  Da
starb  er  erst."  The  extraordinary  heroism  with  which
Suleym^n  Kh4n  bore  these  frightful  tortures  is  notorious,
and  I  have  repeatedly  heard  it  related  how  he  ceased  not
during  the  long  agony  which  he  endured  to  testify  his  joy
that  he  should  be  accounted  worthy  to  suffer  martyrdom
for  his  Master's  cause.  He  even  sang  and  recited  verses  of
poetry,  amongst  them  the  following  : —

^i.l[«Jl ^^^ '•^ I* Jul j\s ^ aajlc 1)

"  I  have  returned  ! I  have  returned  ! I  have  come  by  the

way  of  Shi'rdz!
I  have  come  with  winsome  airs  and  graces! Such  i.s  the

lover's  madness ! "

"Why  do  you  not  dance,"  asked  the  executioners
mockingly,  "since  you  find  death  so  pleasant?"  "Dance!"
cried  Suleymdn  Khdn —


334  NOTE T — THE MASSACRE OF TEHERAN.

'"In  one  hand  the  wine-cup,  in  one  hand  the  tresses  of

the  Friend —
Such  a  dance in  the  midst  of  the  market-place  is  my

desire'"']

(28)  Last  but  not  least  amongst  the  victims  of  that
fatal  day  was  the  beautiful  and  accomplished  Kurratu'l-
'Ayn,  who  had  been  imprisoned  for  two  or  three  years
previously  in  the  house  of  Mahmiid  Khdn  the  Kaluntar.
Concerning  her  life  and  death,  see  Note  Q,  siqnxi.

Gobineau  (pp.  301 — 302)  and  V4mb^ry  (op.  cit.,  pp.
299 — 300)  both  assert  that  amongst  the  martyrs  of  that
day  were  women  and  children,  who  rivalled  the  men  in  the
fortitude  wherewith  they  met  death ;  but  of  this  assertion
(except  as  regards  Kurratu'l-'Ayn)  I  have  been  unable  to
obtain  any  corroborative  evidence  from  Musulmd-n  or  B^bi
tradition.  The  crimes  and  cruelties  which  that  day  beheld
are  black  enough  without  going  beyond  even  the  Muham-
madan  chronicles,  and  one  would  be  reluctant  to  add  to
them,  unless  compelled  to  do  so  by  convincing  evidence.
The  wife  of  HAji  Suleym^n  Kh4n  would  appear  from
Subh-i-Ezel's  account  to  have  been  in  imminent  peril,
but  by  eating  flies  she  induced  so  violent  an  attack  of
vomiting  that  her  gaolers,  believing  her  to  be  stricken  with
a  mortal  sickness,  released  her.  Two  women  related  to
Subh-i-Ezel  were  arrested  and  imprisoned  for  a  while  in
the  house  of  Mahmiid  Khd,n  the  KaUntar,  but  were  subse-
quently sent  back  to  their  homes  at  Nur.  A  large  reward
was  offered  for  the  apprehension  of  Subh-i-Ezel  (then
residing  at  Niir),  who  actually  conversed  for  some  time
with  one  of  those  sent  out  to  arrest  him  without  being
recognized.


NOTE U — WRITINGS OF THE BAB.  335

NOTE U.

"Writings  or  the  Bab  and  Subh-i-Ezel.

On  October  11th,  1889,  I  received  a  letter  from  Captain
Young  (dated  September  30th)  enclosing  a  letter  and  sundry
other  documents  from  Subh-i-Bzel.  Amongst  these  docu-
ments was  a  list  of  some  of  the  writings  of  the  B4b  and
Subh-i-Ezel  written  out  by  the  latter.  Although  this  list
does  not  profess  to  be  complete,  comprising  only  such
works  as  were  carried  by  the  Bdbi  exiles  to  Baghdad,  and
although,  in  the  absence  of  detailed  information  about  the
works  enumerated  therein,  it  is  incapable  of  affording  much
help  in  the  identification  of  B4bi  Mss.,  I  here  append
a  translation  of  it,  in  the  hope  that  it  may  serve  in  some
measure  to  throw  light  on  the  very  imperfectly  explored
bibliography  of  the  sect.  Explanatory  notes  of  my  own  are
added  in  square  brackets.

[Writings  of  the  Bab.]

"  What  was  collected  of  the  books  of  the  Beydn  of  the
remnant  left  from  Persia,  which  iras  taken  mvay  in
Baghdad,  carried  off  by  the  relations  of  this  humble  one
[i.e.  Subh-i-Ezel].

[1]  Commentary  on  the  Kur'dn  in  the  style  of  the
Kur'4n,  complete,  1  vol.

[2]  Answers  and  Commentaries  \  .^J\£  g  i)o.5-l)>
1  vol.  ■^-  '^  •

[3]  Commentary  on  the  Kur'dn  in  the  fashion  of  the
verses  of  the  Kur'dn,  complete,  1  vol.

[4] The  Fire  Grades  {iu^as- O^),  1  vol. [A  MS.  of

this  work  was  forwarded  to  me  by  Subh-i-Ezel  with  the
letter  above  referred  to.  It  comprises  395  pages  of  14  lines
each,  and  contains  selections  of  pieces  in  each  of  the  "  five


336  NOTE U — WRITINGS OF THE BAB.

grades"  or  "styles"  employed  by  the  B4b,  the  nature  of
which  will  be  briefly  discussed  at  the  end  of  this  note.]

[5] Verses  (oM),  2  vols.

[6] T/ie  Book  of  Becompeme  (lj>-  «_ito  ),  2  vols. [A

small  fragment  of  this  work,  transcribed  by  Subh-i-Ezel,  is
in  my  possession.  One  peculiarity  thereof  is  the  occurrence
of  groups  of  verses  differing  from  one  another  only  in  one  or
two  words.  By  combining  the  first  letters  of  the  divergent
words  or  clauses  proper  names  are  formed,  so  that  the
book  would  appear  to  be  in  part  a  cabbalistic  register  of  the
names  of  believers.  In  the  following  specimen,  which  will
render  the  nature  of  this  procedure  more  clear,  the  catch-
words are  indicated  by  a  line  drawn  over  them : —


O'jA-JI jj dJJ _5 * LJic Lie <1)1 oLi J L^ L


_j u^^^. La  _j (jlajisl _j ujlna 11 OaA-lo i3 >"*  "jJ' ^'j'^


"THE BOOK OF RECOMPENSE."  337


U^-Lj  U  _j [^_;^i  _j O'aA^I uj OJ  J * lib. r?C >  9 hi

*LJic Jc *ljU li 4^1 jlS^ _j

By  combining  the  first  letters  of  the  catch- words  in  the
above  extract  (after  discarding  the  definite  article,  in  cases

where  this  is  prefixed)  we  get  the  name  ^JlkJI  Sc-  ,^1=>-
Hdji  'Abdu'l-Muttalib. Similarly  the  verses  immediately

succeeding  these  give  the  name  l^-^js  JU^  ^fr^  H4jf

Muhammad  Mahdi.]

[7] Supplications  and  Visitations  VCjIjij j  j  oU-L),

1  vol.  [In  my  second  article  on  the  B4bfs  in  the  J.B.A.S.
for  1889,  I  described  one  of  these  "Visitations"  under
the  name  Ziy&rat-ndme  (pp.  894—902,  1000),  and  at-
tempted to  prove  its  identity  with  Gobineau's  "  Journal  du
P^lerinage"  and  with  a  Bd,bi  ms.  described  by  Mirza
Kazem-Beg  (ii,  pp.  498—502).  At  that  time  I  was  not
aware  that  the  Bdb  had  composed  more  than  one  work

R  22


338  NOTE U — WRITINGS OF THE BAB.

of  this  character.  I  subsequently  enquired  of  Subh-i-Ezel
as  to  the  authenticity  of  this  work.  In  reply  he  wrote  as
follows : — "  The  '  Book  of  Visitation '  (Kitab-i-ziydrat)
which  you  alluded  to  is  from  His  Highness  the  Point
(i.e.  the  B^b),  and  was  after  the  '  Manifestation,'  as  its
contents  testify.  He  wrote  many  '  Visitations ' :  it  is  not
limited  to  one.  But  there  is  also  a  '  Book  of  Visitations '
by  myself  That  is  in  another  style,  but  there  is  in  this
land  but  a  small  portion  thereof."  Some  of  these  '  Visita-
tions' are  included  in  the  ms.  of  the  'Five  Grades'  mentioned
above,  amongst  them  being  one  designed  for  the  use  of
pilgrims  visiting  the  graves  of  the  martyrs  who  fell  at
Sheykh  Tabarsi.  This,  according  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  was  also
composed  by  the  B4b.]

[8] Prayers  \Cj\^:>),  1  vol.

[9] Various  Grades  {iJs^i.  O^i,  unbound,  1  [vol.].

[10]  Writings  of  the  Scribe  [probably  Ak^  Seyyid
Huseyn  of  Yezd  or  Mulld  'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Kazvi'n]  com-
prising what  was  revealed  at  Slnrciz  and  Isfahan  and
during  the  journey  of  tlie  Pilgrimage  [to  Mecca],  3  vols.

[11] The  Best  of  Stories  {^.^iW  ^-^1),  1  vol. [This

work,  better  known  as  the  '  Commentary  on  the  Siira  of
Joseph,'  is  so  called  in  allusion  to  Kur'dn  xii,  3,  where  the
history  of  Joseph  is  thus  characterized.  Specimens  of  it  have
been  published  by  Baron  Rosen  in  vol.  i  of  the  Collections
Scientifiques  de  Vlnstitut  des  Langues  Orientates  (St  Peters-
burg, 1877),  pp.  179 — 191.  Some  description  of  it,  based
on  the  extracts  published  by  Baron  E,osen,  is  given  at
pp.  904 — 909  of  my  second  article  on  the  B4bfs.  See  also
p.  3  supra,  and  note  3  thereon.]

[12] The  Book  of  Names  (L^l ^l3  ),  comprising  361

Names,  amongst  which  is  the  Name  ' Musakhin'  ('the
Calmer'),  incomplete,  2  vols.  [The  extracts  from  a  B^bi
MS.  in  the  St  Petersburg  collection  published  by  Dorn  in  the
Bulletin  de  I'Academie  Imperiale  de  St  Petersbourg  of
Dec.  22nd,  1864,  were  pronounced  by  Subh-i-Ezel,  to  whose
inspection  I  submitted  them,  to  belong  to  this  work.]


NOTE U — WRITINGS OF THE BAB.  339

[13]  Writings  of  the  deceased  Akd  >ieyyid  Huseyn
[of  Yezd],  original  copy,  2  vols.

[14] Various  Grades  (iik^  Oaii),  1  vol.

[15] The  Book  of  Figures (JS^La ^\S^), 1 vol.

[See  note  1  on  p.  42  supra,  Mirza  Kazem-Beg,  ii,  p.  498,
and  Gobineau,  p.  498,  note  1.]

[16] Sundry  (is^),  1  vol.

[17]  Things  appertaining  to  Jendh-i-Sheykh-i-' Asim
[MuM  Slieykh_ 'All,  see  Note  T,  p.  329  supra],  3  vols.,
together  with  his  effects.

[18] Copies  and  originals  of  writings \J«:>I j 9-  ^

Llljj),  tied  up  together  in  four  bundles.

[19]  Bey  an,  1  vol.  [Concerning  the  application  of  this
name  see  below.]

[20] Prayers  {c^y^i),  1  vol.

[21] Prayers and Visitations \Cj\j\ij ^ olacj),

1  vol.

[22] The  Best  of  Stories  [see  No.  11  supra],  and  another

Beydn  which  is  missing  \Cm^  aJ^  V-  j^  ^ P^^  oLj)'

2  [vols.].  -J-  - -

[23] The  Five  Grades  [see  No.  4  supra\  1  vol.

[24] Sundry  (ii^fllo).

[25] Anot/ier  Book,  1  vol.

"  Besides  what  was  destroyed  in  Persia,  some  of  which
never  reached  [my]  hand,  and  what  went  to  foreign  lands
and  was  therefore  ignored  in  [making  out  the  catalogue  of]
the  trust.  What  was  promulgated  [by  the  Bdb]  at  first
in  Shlrdz  and  other  places  [included]  the  Book  of  seven

hundred  Suras (ajo^  A^r'os  ,_)lxi ); the Book  of  the

Proof  (iiuio- *<i(Laa^  > sic) ;  the  Book  of  the  two  Sanctu-

22—2


340  NOTE U — WRITINGS OF SUBH-I-EZEL.

aries  {i\^j>-  *<!uije-=>);  the  [Book  of]  Jitstice  (iJje);  the
Prayer  of  the  two  alifs  (or,  of  the  two  thousand,  rJa\\  v_jl5  j'

Epistles  of  the  earlier  period  of  tlie  dispensation  (Jjl ^Ij-'l

jS),  each  of  which  was  sent  to  a  different destination;

the  Commentary  on the ' Bismi'lldh' UL-j  ^j-^)'i ^"^^

the  Commentary  on  [Siira  ciii  of  the  Kur'dn  beginning]
'Wa'l-'asr'  (see  supra,  p.  11).

"  As  to  what  appertained  to  [i.e.  was  composed  by]  the

'Name  of  the  Last'  (.  .»-l ^\)  [by  which  title,  as  Subh-i-

Ezel  explained  elsewhere,  MulU  Muhammad  'Alf  of  Bdr-
furlish,  called  by  the  B^bls  Jendb-i-Kuddus,  is  intended],
but  little  remained  in  [my]  hands.  All  the  rest  passed
into  the  hands  of  strangers.  Amongst  other  things  the
Commentary  on  [the  opening  chapter  of  the  Kur'4n  entitled
'Al-'\Hamd,'  [the  eloquence  of]  which  was  beyond  the  power
of  man,  was  entirely  destroyed,  and  no  copy  remained  in
[my]  possession."

[Writings  or  Subh-i-Ezel.]

"  What  appertaineth  to  this  humble  one  [i.e.  Subh-i-
Ezel],  apart  from  that  whereof  the  existence  in  Persia  is
unknown  [i.e.  besides  what  may  exist  in  Persia  unknown  to
me].

[1] The  Book  of  Light  {jy J{S^), 1 vol. [See

Gobineau,  pp.  312—313;  B.  ii,  pp.  939—942;  and  M.  C.
Huart's  Note  sur  trois  ouvrages  Bdbis  in  the  Journal
Asiatiqm  for  1887  (s^rie  viii,  tome  x,  pp.  133 — 144).
M.  Huart  identified  the  first  of  the  three  works  which
he  described  with  the  Book  of  Light  mentioned  by  Gobineau,
but  did  not  fail  to  observe  the  discrepancy  in  size  between
the  "  assez  gros  in-folio  "  of  the  latter  writer  and  the  small
volume  which  was  the  subject  of  his  own  description.  The
solution  of  the  difficulty  appears  to  be  that  there  are  two
separate  works  bearing  the  same  name,  both  composed  by


"THE BOOK OF LIGHT."  341

Subh-i-Ezel.  I  forwarded  an  abstract  of  M.  Huart's  de-
scription of  the  supposed  Book  of  Light  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  who
replied  as  follows  : — "  The  Book  of  Light  is  by  this  humble
one  [i.e.  by  myself],  but  there  are  two  Lights,  a  first  and  a
second.  If  it  be  the  second,  it  wiU  be  worthy  of  attentive
perusal,  and  will  be  a  voluminous  work.  Some  of  the
names  of  the  suras  which  you  wrote  are  from  the  Book  of
Light,  provided  that  there  be  not  therein  interpolations
of  enemies,  such  as  my  relatives  have  effected  in  some
cases,  inserting  their  own  calumnies  in  certain  epistles;
though  to  him  who  hath  knowledge  of  God  this  will  be
apparent."  The  Book  of  Light  mentioned  in  this  list  is,  as
I  ascertained  during  my  sojourn  at  Famagusta,  the  larger
of  the  two  works  bearing  this  name.]

[2] The  Highest  Heaven  (  -jjc),  1  vol. [Of  this  work

Subh-i-Ezel  mentioned  two  copies,  one  in  Persia,  and  one
(the  same  here  mentioned)  in  the  hands  of  the  Behd'ls  at
Acre.]

[3] Miscellaneous  (iflb^),  1  vol.

[4] The  Wakeful,  <fcc.  \lssC^,  1  vol. [A  copy  extant
in  Persia.]

[5] Writings  of  the  Scribe  (>_Jl5 Jajias-),  2 vols.

[By  "the  Scribe,"  as  subsequently  explained  by  Subh-i-
Ezel,  MulU  'Abdu'l-Karlm  of  Kazvln  is  intended.  See
note  2  on  p.  41  supra.]

[6] Tracts,  &c.,  of  [the  nature  of]  Visitations  {ikst^

[7] Another  book,  miscellaneous,  1  vol.

[8] Commentary  an  the  Kasida,  and  other  miscellaneous

writings  \is^  j  aJU«a9 C^''  unbound,  1  vol.

[9] [Book  of]  Light,  unbound,  1  vol. [The  same  as
No.  1  supra.]

[10] Verses  (oLJ),  1  vol.

"Besides  what  may  exist  unknown  [to  me]  in  other


342 NOTE U — FATE OF THE BAB'S WRITINGS.

lands,  and  entirely  apart  from  [what  exists  in]  the  prison  of
this  land.  All  these  books  and  epistles  have  disappeared,
save  what  have  remained  in  other  countries  and  the  few
which  remain  in  this  land."

In  the  letter  accompanying  this  list  Subh-i-Ezel  vrrote
as  follows  concerning  the  fate  of  the  B4b's  works  generally
and  of  those  above  enumerated  in  particular; — ■

"As  to  what  you  asked  concerning  the  existence  of
certain  epistles,  it  is  even  as  you  have  heard,  leaving  out  of
account  that  which  from  first  to  last  passed  into  the  hands
of  strangers,  whereof  no  copy  was  preserved.  At  the  time
of  the  martyrdom  [of  the  Bd,b]  at  Tabriz,  as  they  wrote
from  thence,  many  of  the  original  writings  passed  into  the
hands  of  persons  belonging  to  the  country  of  your  Excellency
or  to  Eussia,  amongst  these  being  even  autograph  writings
of  His  Highness  the  Point  [i.e.  the  Bdbl.  Search  is  neces-
sary, for  to  read  the  originals  is  difficult.  If  this  humble
one  be  applied  to,  copies  thereof  will  be  sent.  What  I
myself  arranged  and  copied  out  while  at  Baghdad,  and
what  was  commanded  to  be  collected  of  previous  and  subse-
quent [writings]  until  the  Day  of  Martyrdom  [of  the  Bdb],
was  nigh  upon  thirty  volumes  of  bound  books.  I  myself
^vrote  them  with  my  own  hand,  and  up  to  the  present  time
I  have  written  many.  The  originals  and  copies  of  these,
together  with  what  was  in  the  writing  of  others,  sundry
other  [books]  written  in  proof  of  this  religion  by  certain
learned  friends',  and  what  I  myself  wrote  and  compiled,
amounted  to  numerous  volumes,  as  [recorded  in]  the  list
thereof  [which]  I  have  sent.  For  some  years  all  of  these
were  in  a  certain  place  in  the  hands  of  a  friend  as  a
trust. Afterwards  they  were  deposited  in  another  placed

1  In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  the  nature  and  authorship  of
the  works  here  alluded  to,  Subh-i-Ezel  informed  me  that  the  Bih
declared  it  to  be  a  meritorious  action  for  each  of  his  followers
who  was  competent  thereunto  to  compose  a  treatise  in  defence  of
the  Faith.  Many  such  treatises  were  accordingly  composed  by
the  more  learned  B4bfe,  amongst  them  being  one  by  Jendb-i-
'Azhn  (Mull4  Sheykh  'Ah),  and  one  called  ifUv-  {'The  seven
hundred')  by  Jendb-i-Tdhira  (Kurratu'l-'Ayn).

-  One  of  these  depositaries,  as  I  subsequently  learned  from


"THE FIVE GRADES."  343

Eventually  I  entrusted  them  to  my  own  relatives  \  [in
whose  keeping]  they  were  preserved  for  a  while ;  for,  inas-
much as  the  friends  of  this  recluse  [i.e.  myself]  had  attained
unto  mart3rrdom  through  the  equity  and  justice  of  the
oppressors  of  the  age,  who  consider  themselves  as  seekers
after  truth  and  just  men,  there  was  no  resource  but  that
this  humble  one  [i.e.  myself]  should  make  his  relatives  his
trustees.  So  did  this  humble  one;  and  whatever  [was
mine]  of  books  and  epistles  was  [deposited]  in  their  house.
The  vicissitudes  of  the  world  so  fell  out  that  these  also
unsheathed  the  sword  of  hatred  and  wrought  what  they
would.  They  cruelly  put  to  the  sword  the  remnant  of  [my]
friends  who  stood  firm^,  and,  making  strenuous  efforts,  got
into  their  hands  such  of  the  books  of  His  Highness  the
Point  as  were  obtainable,  with  the  idea  of  destroying  them,
and  [thereby]  rendering  their  own  works  more  attractive.
They  also  carried  off  my  trust  [i.e.  the  books  above  referred
to  committed  to  their  care],  and  fell  not  short  in  anything
which  can  be  effected  by  foes."

As  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  Bey  an,  Subh-i-Bzel
writes  in  another  passage  of  the  same  letter  as  follows : —

"But  in the  Beyun  different  grades (dib^ U_jll) are

observed.  The  first  grade  is  like  [i.e.  in  the  style  of]
previous  [sacred]  books; the  second  [is]  of  the  nature  of

supplications  and  prayers  \CJ^:>  ^  oU-bo);  the  third  [is]

the  grade  of  homilies  (wJaa-),  wherein  he  had  regard  to
clearness  and  eloquence; the /o«r^^  [comprises]  scientific

treatises  (<uJc  ijaii),  commentaries,  and  answers  to  en-

Subh-i-Ezel,  was  Ak4  Seyyid  JawAd,  who  died  lately  at  Kirmdn.
The  other  was  a  ceiiain  merchant  of  great  wealth  whom  I  cannot
more  particularly  designate.

1  By  his  'relatives'  Subh-i-Ezel  means  his  half-brother
Beha'u'llah  and  those  of  hi's  kindred  who  followed  him.  I  never
heard  Subh-i-Ezel  allude  to  Behd'u'llah  and  his  followers  by  name.
When  he  spoke  of  them  at  all  (which  he  did  but  rarely)  it  was  as
his  '  relatives,'  the  '  people  at  Acre,'  or  the  '  Mfrzd'ls.'

2  See  Note  W  infra.


344  NOTE U — THE BAB's WRITINGS.

quirers;  t\ie  fifth  [comprises  what  is  written]  in  the  Persian
language,  which  is  [in  substance]  identical  with  the  afore-
mentioned grades,  'for  that  all  this  is  watered  with  one
water'."

This  statement  of  what  is  meant  by  the  term  Beydn  is
(with  the  exception  of  some  slight  differences  in  the
arrangement  of  the  'grades')  fully  corroborated  by  the
Persian  Beydn,  which,  at  the  beginning  of  Vdhid  iii,  ch.  17,
has  the  following  passage : —

(jLl i .a.nn diaftj jlj'l ,Ji iSsil ^ll ^1 if^

J«J _J Ci".-' oil  I) , yta!^ d^J^jl iSLJa^ ^\ jV' ilj C*-"'

Aju'j  diflSj iWC Jo-^ ^laa J3 Jju ^ iiZS\i iSLSI^^ yj^'ib

ia^Lj^ O^U=>' liu-ujsU- iSU» iu^J& OuJj /*ifto J3 JljU j^

*  (_9u»eIu<U y jS- is O**"! Oul ,  ya!^ |^»ul yl ^^

"  The  substance  of  this  chapter  is  this,  that  all  the
writings  of  the  Point  [i.e.  the  Bdb]  are  named  Beydn.
But  this  name  is,  in  its  primary  nature,  peculiar  to  verses
[i.e.  verses  written  in  Arabic  in  the  style  of  the  Kur'dn];
then  it  is  uttered  in  its  secondary  nature  in  regard  to
supplications;  then  in  its  tertiary  nature  in  regard  to
commentaries;  then  in  its  quaternary  nature  in  regard  to
scientific  treatises;  then  in  its  quinary  nature  it  is  used  in
regard  to  Persian  words  [i.e.  writings  and  discourses].  But
properly  speaking  this  name  [of  Beydn]  is  peculiar  to  verses,
and  [is  applicable]  to  nought  else."

Again  in  Vdhid  vi,  ch.  1,  the  following  passage  occurs : —


MEANING OF THE TERM "  BEYAN."  345

Cj[j>-\JaS «-9DU=1 Aj^LT <iifl_Aj>- .J J aJl.a-_5 <Ujl .Ic

jilaJ (JuS '-'5*" ti^ iJl.^1 Joiala ^ J*^ J-^ O^l

"  The  name  Beydn  is,  in  its  primary  nature,  applied  to
verses  alone,  for  they  are  the  chiefest  proof  and  greatest
argument,  which  point  not  save  unto  God  alone.  But  in
its  secondary  nature  it  is  applied  to  supplications;  in  its
tertiary  [nature]  to  commentaries;  in  its  quaternary  [nature]
to  scientific  treatises;  and  in  its  quinary  [nature]  to  Persian
words.  But  all  [these]  are  mentioned  in  the  shadow  of
[i.e.  as  subsidiary  or  subordinate  to]  verses,  for,  although
that  mysterious  eloquence  which  is  apparent  in  the  first
[grade]  is  also  observable  [or,  if  we  adopt  B's  reading,
latent]  in  the  last,  yet,  since  all  cannot  understand,  they
[i.e.  the  lower  grades]  are  not  mentioned  [as  a  proof]."

From  all  this  it  follows  that,  although  the  book  generally
known  as  the  Persian  Beydn  is  a  definite  work  of  limited
extent,  we  can  no  longer  employ  the  term  Arabic  Beydn  in
an  equally  definite  sense.  As  Subh-i-Ezel  states  in  another
letter,  as  a  rule  only  those  books  which  were  composed  by  the
Bdb  during  the  earlier  part  of  his  mission  received  special
names,  while  at  a  later  date  all  that  he  'uttered'  or
'  revealed '  was  named  collectively  Beydn  ('  Utterance  '  or
'  Revelation '). Some  of  these  '  utterances '  (such  as  the


1  B  reads


jy-^.


346  NOTE U — THE BAB'S WRITINGS.

'  verses '  recited  by  the  B4b  before  his  judges  at  Tabrfz,
concerning  which  see  Gobineau,  pp.  261 — 262)  can  hardly
have  been  preserved  at  all,  much  less  were  all  ever  collected
into  a  single  work,  though,  according  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  a
selection  in  nineteen  volumes  was  compiled,  or  ordered  to
be  compiled,  during  the  Bib's  lifetime.  Gobineau,  with
his  usual  acumen,  appears  to  have  clearly  apprehended  this
peculiar  and  elastic  use  of  the  term  Beyd,n,  for  he  says
(p.  311): — "Le  mot  Biyyan,  une  fois  employi^  par  le  Bab,
lui  parut  convenir  trfes-bien  pour  designer  la  sphere  d'iddes
dans  laquelle  sa  pensfe  se  mouvait,  et  il  le  donna  dfes  lors
pour  titre  k  tout  ce  qu'il  composa."  When,  therefore,  he
speaks  of  "  a  Bey^n  written  in  Persian,  which  is  not  the
commentary  on  the  first  Beyin  written  in  Arabic,"  and  of
"a  third  Bey4n,  likewise  composed  by  the  first  Bdb,"
he  apparently  intends  merely  to  signalize  certain  specially
noteworthy  parts  of  that  almost  limitless  mass  of  religious
literature  emanating  from  the  B4b  which  is  known  col-
lectively as  the  Beyd,n.

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  evident  that  the  short
list  of  the  Bib's  works  which  I  gave  at  the  end  of  my
second  article  on  the  Bibi's  in  the  J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889
(pp.  1000 — 1002)  requires  much  alteration  both  in  the  way
of  correction  and  extension.  The  sum  total  of  the  Bib's
■\vritings  would  appear,  both  from  the  Persian  Beyin  and
from  the  TArikh-i-Jadid,  to  have  been  enormous;  and,
though  much  of  this  mass  of  literature  perished,  much  is
still  preserved  in  Persia  and  elsewhere  in  the  East.  Quite
recently  I  received  from  Subh-i-Ezel  mss.  of  the  Commentary
on  the  8uratu'l-'asr  (see  supra,  p.  11,  and  B.  ii,  p.  912)
and  the  Commentary  on  the  Buratul-Bakara  (see  B.  ii,
pp.  902 — 903,  912),  which  had  been  brought  from  Persia
to  Cyprus  during  the  present  year  (1890).  Of  the  genuine-
ness of  these  mss.  I  entertain  no  doubt.  Four  other  mss.  of
different  works  composed  by  the  Bib  (amongst  which  are
included  the  Commentaries  on  the  Siiras  called  Kawthar
and  Yusuf)  were  brought  to  Cyprus  at  the  same  time,  but
of  these  I  have  not  yet  obtained  copies  \ Of  the  Sura-i-

1  Since  writing  the  above  I  have  received  two  of  these  four
MSS. One  of  tliem  is  the  commentary  on  the  SiirattCl-Kawthar


NOTE V — "HE WHOM GOD SHALL MANIFEST." 347

Yusuf  at  least  two  copies  are  preserved  in  Europe,  one
(numbered  Or.  3539)  in  the  British  Museum,  and  one'  (fully
described  by  Baron  Rosen  at  pp.  179 — 191  of  vol.  i  of  the
Collections  Scientifiques  &c.)  at  St.  Petersburg.


NOTE  V.
Texts  from  the  Persian  Betan  illustrating  the  Bab's

VIEW OF HIS relation TO '  HiM WHOM GOD SHALL
MANIFEST.'

(i) The  whole  Beydn  revolves  round  the  saying  of

'  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest.'

\_Vdhid  in,  ch.  3.]


xs


^  ji  JUl  jl  J  jJIdl  jb-l_j]l  ^  ^hll  »_>1JI

U  J  <U)1  U^J  JaSm  (J  a3  J  a>-  (3  <-JuLL  iuS  ^  j
dl_^ J_ja- ^i ^Lk di ^Jja J aVjl j,  '[aJcJ "Oil Jjj

ji ^^J  y i^  ^ Jhj '^' '  1/ '•^'  (V°  L?9*^  ^1  c<""''

above  mentioned.  It  contains  227  pages,  and  is  dated  Zi'1-Hijj^
4th,  A.H.  1296  (Nov.  19,  a.d.  1879).  The  other,  a  much  larger
work,  is  named  by  Subh-i-Ezel  "  Commentary  on  the  Names "

^  B  omits.  2  B  omits.

3  Omitted  in  my  own  MS.  and  B,  but  supplied  from  the  por-
tion of  the  text  published  by  Baron  Rosen  {MSS.  Persans,  p.  14).

*  B  reads  •VjI.  ^  B  reads  Ji^.


348  NOTE V — RELATION OF THE BAB

.  .  ...■>■  j& i>J|.,'.'.mI jl  jl (^  n.,.;  Jb .';l9UJlo OL) <1) /y^mu j

"  The  third  chapter  of  the  third  Vdhid.  Concerning
this,  that  the  Beydn  and  wlwsoever  is  therein  revolve  round
the  saying  of  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest,  even  as  the
Alif\i.e.  the  Gospel,  InjWl  and  whosoever  was  therein  re-
volved round  the  saying  of  Muhammad  the  Apostle  of  God,
and  as  that  which  God  revealed  unto  him  at  first  and  who-
soever was  therein  revolved  round  that  which  he  said  at  the
period  of  his  later  manifestation.  The  quintessence  of  this
chapter  is  this,  that  the  gaze  of  the  Beydn  is  not  extended
save  towards  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest,  for  none  but
He  hath  raised  or  doth  raise  it  up,  even  as  none  but  He
hath  sent  or  doth  send  it  down.  And  the  Beydn  and  such
as  are  believers  therein  yearn  more  after  Him  than  the
yearning  of  any  lover  after  his  beloved."

(ii) A  thousand  perusals  of  the  Beydn  are  not  equal

to  the  perusal  of  one  verse  of  what  shall

be  revealed  by  '  Him  whom  God

shall  manifest.'

[  Vdhid  V,  ch.  8.]

Cij^JJ 'jOLj Aj^ jIJ* iSsjl jl ■"■  ■■.! .Lu Xi

1  B  reads  jy^,.  2  g  omits.

3  B  reads  _^  ^  j^.  ^  B  reads  •«,!.


TO "HIM WHOM GOD SHALL MANIFEST." 349

"  1  swear  by  the  Most  Holy  Essence  of  God  (Glorious
and  Splendid  is  He  !)  that  in  the  day  of  the  manifestation
of  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest  if  one  should  hear  a
single  verse  from  Him  and  recite  it,  it  is  better  than  that
he  should  recite  the  Bey4n  a  thousand  times."

[The  same  assertion  is  repeated  in  slightly  different
words  in  Vahid  vi,  ch.  6.]

(iii) The  Beydn  is  to  day  in  the  stage  of  seed,  but  in  the

day  of  'Him  whom  God  shall  manifest'  it  will

arrive  at  the  degree  of  fruition.

[Vdkid  a,  ch.  7.  The  passage  referred  to  will  be
found  in  Note  C  at  pp.  224—225].

(iv) All  the  splendour  of  the  Bey4n  is  '  He  whom
God  shall  manifest.'
[  Vdkid  iii,  ch.  14.]

"All  the  splendour  [Behd\  of  the  Bey^n  is  He  whom
God  shall  manifest.  All  mercy  be  on  him  who  believeth,
and  all  chastisement  on  him  who  believeth  not  in  Him."


NOTE  W.

MiRzA  YahyA  "Subh-i-Ezel."

After  the  Bdb  himself  Behd'u'lUh  and  Subh-i-Bzel  are
without  doubt  the  most  important  figures  in  the  history  of
B^bfism. To  the  words  and  deeds  of  the  former  a  large

1  B  inserts  y, .


350 NOTE W — MlRZi. YAHYi. "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

portion  of  the  present  work  is  devoted,  while  the  latter,
when  mentioned,  is  spoken  of  slightingly  as  a  mere  "man
of  straw."  One  whose  knowledge  of  Bihi  history  should  be
limited  to  the  account  given  in  this  Travellers  Narrative
would,  therefore,  by  no  means  properly  apprehend  the
importance  of  the  part  actually  played  by  Subh-i-Ezel.  In
my  opinion  it  is  proved  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  B4b  ere
his  death  chose  him  as  his  successor,  duly  appointing  him
as  such  by  the  form  of  words  which  I  pubhshed  at  pp.
996—997  of  my  second  paper  on  the  BAbfs  in  the  J.B.A.S.
for  1889,  and  that  during  the  period  which  elapsed  from
the  Bdb's  death  till  the  advancement  of  Beh4'u'll4h's
claim  to  be  "He  whom  God  shall  manifest"  (i.e.  from
1850  to  1864  at  any  rate)  he  was  recognized  by  all  the
B^bls  as  their  spiritual  chief  Even  now  the  number  of  his
followers,  though  small  in  comparison  to  that  of  the  Beh^'fs,
is  considerable ;  and  since,  in  addition  to  all  this,  the  old
Bihi  doctrines  and  traditions,  which  have  undergone  con-
siderable modification  at  the  hands  of  Beh4'u'lld,h,  are
preserved  intact  by  Subh-i-Ezel,  I  have  considered  it  in-
cumbent on  me  to  embody  in  a  separate  note  all  the  more
important  facts  relating  to  him  which  I  have  been  able  to
ascertain,  together  with  a  complete  account  of  the  Bdbls
exiled  to  Cyprus  based  on  the  most  authentic  documents.

The  sources  from  which  my  information  is  derived  are,
broadly  speaking,  four  in  number,  as  follows  : —

(1)  Letters  received  from  Subh-i-Ezel  himself  between
August  1889  and  the  present  time,  the  correspondence  still
continuing.  In  only  one  or  two  of  these  letters,  however,
does  he  speak  of  his  own  adventures  and  circumstances
with  any  approach  to  freedom.

(2)  Conversations  between  Captain  Young  or  myself
on  the  one  hand  and  Subh-i-Ezel  or  his  sons  on  the  other.
In  the  numerous  and  protracted  interviews  which  I  had
with  Subh-i-Ezel  between  March  22nd  and  April  4th,  1890,
I  was  able  to  recur  for  my  own  satisfaction  to  almost  every
point  which  the  preliminary  enquiries  kindly  undertaken
by  Captain  Young  had  first  elicited.

(3)  Official  documents  relative  to  the  exiles  preserved
in  the  archives  of  the  Cyprus  government.  Sir  Henry
Bulwer,  with  a  kindness  and  courtesy  for  which  I  cannot


MATERIALS FOR HIS BIOGRAPHY.  351

sufficiently  express  my  gratitude,  permitted  me  freely  to
inspect  and  copy  all  the  more  important  of  these  documents,
and,  with  one  exception,  to  make  use  of  the  information
therein  contained,  as  has  been  set  forth  in  detail  in  the
Introduction.

(4)  A  bulky  MS.  of  a  hitherto  unknown  Ezell  contro-
versial work  entitled  Hasht  Bihisht  ("  The  Eight  Paradises  "),
which  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  obtain  a  few  days  ago
(February  2nd,  1891)  from  a  learned  Ezeli  resident  in
Constantinople.  The  whole  of  this  work  is  not  at  present
in  my  possession,  10  fasciculi  (160  pp.)  out  of  the  middle
having  unfortunately  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines
after  they  had  been  written  out  by  the  scribe.  The  original
MS.  is,  however,  in  safe  keeping,  and  in  the  course  of  a
month  or  two  I  hope  to  receive  a  fresh  transcript  of  the
missing  portion,  which  extends  from  p.  128  to  p.  329
inclusive'.  The  whole  work  contains  nearly  450  pp.,  and
deals  chiefly  with  the  philosophical  basis  of  B4biism,  its
superiority  to  other  religions,  and  the  proofs  of  its  divine
origin ;  but  a  great  deal  of  information  is  also  givea  about
the  history,  especially  the  later  history,  of  the  movement.
The  account  given  of  the  schism  which  separated  the
Behd'is  from  the  Bzeli's  is,  especially  when  taken  in  con-
junction with  the  version  given  in  this  present  work,
extremely  instructive ;  and  the  polemical  portion,  wherein
the  claims  of  Beh4  are  attacked,  and  those  of  Subh-i-Ezel
defended,  is  full  of  interest.  At  some  future  date  I  hope
to  give  a  fuller  notice  of  this  valuable  work,  but  for  the
present  I  must  needs  content  myself  with  extracting  from
it  the  chief  facts  recorded  concerning  the  life  of  Subh-
i-Ezel.

How  best  to  deal  with  the  information  scattered  through
these  numerous  documents,  notes,  and  letters  in  a  manner
which  shall  combine  reasonable  brevity  with  sufficient  full-
ness is  a  matter  which  has  cost  me  considerable  thought.
The  plan  which  I  have  finally  decided  to  follow  is  to  give
firstly,  a  full  and  literal  translation  of  a  short  section  of  the
Hasht  Bihisht  entitled  Sharh-i-Ml-i-Hazrat-i-Thamara-i-

1  The  fresh  transcript  of  the  missing  portion  reached  me  on
March  2.3rd,  1891.


352  NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL.

Beydn  ("  Elucidation  of  the  circumstances  of  His  Highness
the  Fruit  of  the  Beyd,n  ") ;  secondly,  a  brief  abstract  of  the
account  given  in  the  same  work  of  the  origin  and  progress
of  the  schism;  thirdly,  an  epitome  of  the  information
derived  directly  from  Subh-i-Ezel,  either  by  letter  or  in
conversation ;  and  lastly,  a  resum,e  of  the  official  documents
preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  Cyprus  government.

I. Translation  from  Hasht-Bihisht.

"  Now  during  the  two  last  years  [of  the  Bdb's  mission],
when  the  five  years'  cycle'  of  the  '  Minor  Resurrection'  had
come  to  an  end,  the  manifestation  of  His  Highness  the
Eternal  {Hazrat-i-Esel)  took  place.  And  he,  being  then
nineteen  years  of  age,  appeared  in  the  hamlet  of  Takiir
in  [the  district  of]  Nur  of  Mdzandardn,  and  began  with
untaught  tongue  (lisdn-i-ummt)  to  utter  the  Innate  Word
(kcdima-i-zdti)  and  spontaneous  verses  (dydt-i-fitri).
When  the  first  letter  from  him  was  conveyed  by  means  of
Mirzd,  'Ah  Sayy4h  to  His  Highness  the  Point  [i.e.  the
BAb],  the  latter  instantly  prostrated  himself  to  the  earth  in
thankfulness,  saying,  '  Blessed  be  God  for  this  mighty
Luminary  which  hath  dawned  and  this  noble  Spathe  which
hath  arisen  in  the  night  V  testifying  of  him  that  he  spoke
spontaneou.sly  and  by  the  Self-Shining  Light,  which  is  the
Innate  Word,  the  Natural  Reason  {'akl-i-fitrt),  the  Holy
Spirit,  the  Immediate  Knowledge  {'ilm-i-ladunt),  the  Suffi-

1  A  passage  in  the  Dald'il-i-sab'a  ("  Seven  Proofs"),  to  which
I  referred  at  p.  913  of  my  second  paper  on  the  Bdbi's  in  the
J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889,  aiFords  confirmatory  evidence  of  what  is  here
alleged  concerning  the  date  of  Subh-i-Ezel's  first  appearance.
This  passage  runs  as  follows  :  _,L-ii.  i^y j^ tSl\ _,. JUj. j.i.

O^l j^ ^J^^^ ji $ t^, Ji-^l) 'a£^ ijo-Vl tjjo- iulj ji y  jJi\ aJit  ^1


HIS TITLES.  353

cing  Light  {nur-i-mustahfi),  or,  after  another  manner  of
speech,  by  Inspiration  {wafiy),  Revelation  {lanztl),  and
Illumination  {farddb  ufartab).

"  At  this  time  His  Highness  the  Point  was  imprisoned
on  the  mountain  of  Mdkti,  and  he  therefore  sent  the
writings  of  His  Highness  the  Eternal  for  each  of  the
Letters  of  the  Living  and  the  chief  believers,  testifying  to
his  [i.e.  Hazrat  or  Subh-i-Ezel's]  innate  capacity  (fitrat),
and  calling  him  by  the  names  of  '  Fruit  of  the  Bey^n '
{Thamara-i-Beydn),  'Morning  of  Eternity'  (Subh-i-Ezel),
'  Countenance '  ( Wajh),  '  Splendour  of  God '  (Behd'ulldh),
'  Mirror '^(J/zVai),  'Crystal'  (Bellur),  'Essence  of  Sweet
Perfume '  {Jawhar-i-Kdfur) ',  '  Sun  of  Eternity '  (Shams-i-
Ezel),  'Second  Point'  {Nukta-i-thdni) ,  'One'  {Wahidy,
'the  Living,  the  Speaking'  '{Hayy^-i-Ndtik),  and  sundry
other  titles.  Having  designated  Hazrat-i-Ezel  as  his
successor,  he  made  over  to  him  generally  and  particularly
all  the  affairs  of  the  Beydn,  even  transferring  to  him  the
[right  of]  disclosing  the  eight  '  paths '  (manliaj)  of  the
Beydnic ordinances*  which  had  [hitherto]  remained  con-

1  Cf.  Lane's  Arabic-English  Lexicon,  Book  i,  part  vii,  p.  2622,
coL  3,  s.  V.  jp\S',  and  Kur'dn,  liivi,  5.  For  an  instance  of  the
employment  of  this  expression  (which  occurs  repeatedly  in  the
B^b's  writings),  see  Mirza  Kazem-Beg's  last  article  on  the  Bdbfs
in  the  Journal  Asiatique  for  1866  (sixifeme  serie,  vol.  viii)  p.  501,
last  line.

2  The  numerical  equivalent  of  Wahid  (28)  is  the  same  as  that
of  Yahyd.  [See  my  second  paper  on  the  Bibis  in  the  J.  B.  A.  S.
for  1889,  pp.  996—997.]

3  Concerning  the  sacred  nature  of  the  word  -- ,  see  Gohineau,
p.  320.  Subh-i-Ezel's  name  Yahyd  not  only  contains  the  root
hayy  (indeed  by  merely  altering  the  vowel-points  it  becomes
Yuhyi,  "he  quickens,"  or  "gives  life"),  but  is  also,  as  has  just
been  pointed  out,  numerically  equivalent  to  Wahid  "  One,"  ano-
ther word  of  singular  virtue.

*  By  these  '  eight  paths'  of  the  Beydn  are  evidently  intended
the  unrevealed  Vdhids.  Gohineau,  whose  penetration  suffered
nothing  to  escape  him,  has  not  failed  to  notice  that  the  Beydn —
or  rather  Beydns,  for,  as  has  been  pointed  out,  there  are  several —
are  purposely  left  incomplete.  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  his
own  words  (p.  332) : — "  Le  Biyyan  ^tant  le  livre  divin  par  excel-
lence, doit  ndcessairement  gtre  constitu^  sur  le  nombre  divin,

B.  23


354 NOTE W — MfEZi. YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL  "

cealed  within  the  Divine  Volition  (whereon  their  disclosure
depended),  in  case  the  time  should  demand  this.

"  In  short,  during  the  two  last  years  [of  the  Bdb's  life
and  mission]  all  that  emanated  from  the  Supreme  Pen  bore
reference  to  His  Highness  the  Fruit  [of  the  Bey^n],  whom
he  [i.e.  the  B4b]  recommended  to  all  the  people  of  the
Bey4n,  saying  that  should  they  bring  sorrow,  even  to  the
extent  of  the  mention  of  aught,  on  his  holy  heart,  all  their
good  works  and  devotions  would  become  as  scattered  dust.
Of  the  words  of  His  Highness  the  Point  [i.e.  the  Bd,b]  still
extant  at  the  present  day,  what  bears  reference  to  the
Fruit  [of  the  Bey4n,  i.e.  Subh-i-Ezel]  exceeds  20,000  verses,
not  counting  what  has  disappeared.  And  for  ten  years
after  [the  death  of]  His  Highness  the  Point  all  the  people
of  the  Beydn  were  unanimous  and  agreed  as  to  the  bestowal
of  the  successorship  on  His  Highness  the  Eternal  [i.e.
Subh-i-Ezel].  And  he  abode  for  more  than  two  years  in
Teheran  and  Shimirdn,  whence  he  departed  into  Mdzan-
dar4n,  whence  again  (because  men  had  been  stirred  up  on
behalf  of  the  government  to  seek  him  out)  he  set  out
disguised  in  the  garb  of  a  dervish  for  Hamad4n  and
Kirm4nshdhdn\  Thence  he  proceeded  to  the  Abode  of
Peace  of  Baghdad  ^  and  in  reference  to  this  the  '  Tongue  of
the  Unseen'  [i.e.  the  poet  Hdfiz]  says  : —

c'est-^-dire  sur  le  nombre  19.  II  est  done  compose,  en  principe,
de  19  unites  ou  divisions  principales,  qui,  k  leur  tour,  se  subdivi-
sent  chacune  en  19  paragraphes.  Mais  le  BS,b  n'a  ^crit  que  onze
de  ces  unites,  et  il  a  laiss^  les  huit  autres  au  v&itable  et  grand
E^v^lateur,  k  celui  qui  compl^tera  la  doctrine,  et  k  regard  duquel
le  B4b  n'est  autre  chose  que  ce  quMtait  saint  Jean-Baptiste
devant  Notre-Seigneur."

'  Cf.  pp.  51 — 52  supra.

2  Daru's-saldm  ("the  Abode  of  Peace")  is  the  official  title  of
Baghdad,  just  as  Teherdn  is  caMe^d.  Ddru'l-khildfat  ("the  Abode
of  the  Caliphate"),  Isfahdn  Ddru  's-saltanat  ("  the  Abode  of  the
Sovereignty"),  SWr^z  Ddrti  'l-Hlm  ("the  Abode  of  Knowledge"),
Yezd  Ddru  'l-Hhddat  ("the  Abode  of  Worship"),  Kirmdn  Ddrw  7-
amdn  ("  the  Abode  of  Security"),  and  the  like.  The  BdWs,  so
prone  to  regard  such  coincidences,  attach  great  importance  to
this  title  of  Baghdad  (which  for  eleven  or  twelve  years  was  their
head-quarters  and  rallying- point  and  the  home  of  their  chiefs),

and  quote  as  prophetic  Kur'dn  vi,  127  : — ^  ^  (>^ _,  ja;  f  %JI  jlj  <^  }


AT BAGHDAD.  355

{Couplet)

'  Baghdad  shall  be  filled  with  tumult ;  one  with  lips  like

sugar  shall  appear ;
I  fear  lest  the  disturbance  of  his  lips  may  cast  Shirdz  into

confusion^'

"At  this  juncture  Mlrz4  Huseyn  'Ali  [i.e.  Behd'u'lUh],
the  elder  brother  of  His  Highness  [Subh-i-Ezel],  came  to
Baghdad  with  two  other  brothers  and  several  of  the
believers,  and  these  gathered  round  that  Most  Mighty
Light,  who,  in  accordance  with  instructions  which  His
Highness  the  Point  of  Revelation  [i.e.  the  Bdb]  had  given
him,  passed  his  nights  and  days  behind  the  curtains  of
seclusion  apart  from  believers  and  others —

{Couplet)

'  Behind  a  veil  sits  that  moon-browed  beauty ;

He  has  rent  asunder  the  veils  of  the  world,  yet  sits  behind

a  veil ' —
and  none approached  him  save  his  brothers  and  certain
favoured  followers. But  from  behind  that  veil  issued  forth
letters,  epistles  {alwah),  and  books  [written]  in  reply  to
men's  questions  and  petitions."

Here  ends  that  section  of  the  Hasht  Bihisht  which  I
deemed  it  desirable  to  translate  in  full.  It  is  followed  by  a
section  entitled  Shark- i-hdl-i-'ijl  u  Sdmiri  ("  Elucidation
of  the  circumstances  of  the  Calf  and  Sdmiri")'',  which  in

o^  \y\f  la,  ^j  ("  Theirs  is  an  Abode  of  Peace  beside  their
Lord,  and  He  is  their  Protector  by  reason  of  that  which  they
have  done").

1  This  verse  I  have  generally  heard  somewhat  differently
quoted  ;  see  B.  ii,  pp.  993 — 994  and  note  2  at  foot  of  former  page.
My  MS.  of  the  Hasht  Bihisht  puts  "  Ahwaz"  in  the  margin  as  an
alternative  reading  for  '■'■  Shirdz^  The  couplet  is  not  to  be  found
in  the  DivAn  of  Hdfiz — at  least  in  any  of  the  copies  which  I  have
seen.

^  Allusion  is  made  to  the  Golden  Calf  which  the  Children  of
Israel  were  misled  by  Simiri  into  worshipping.  (See  Kior'in,  vii,
146  ;  IX,  87,  et  seq. ;  and  numerous  other  passages.)  By  '  the
Calf'  the  Ezeh  controversialist,  of  course,  means  Beh^'u'Uih  (or,

23—2


356 NOTE W — MIBZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

turn  is  succeeded  by  another  entitled  Sharh-i-hdl-i-fitne-i-
saylam  ("Elucidation  of  the  Direful  Mischief"),  by  which
is  meant  the  secession  (according  to  the  Ezell  view)  of  Beh4
and  his  followers.  These  sections  occupy  many  pages,
are  of  a  violently  polemical  character,  and  contain  grave
charges  against  the  Beh^'fs  and  vehement  attacks  on  their
position  and  doctrines.  The  gist  of  their  contents  is  given
in  the  following  abstract.

II. Abstract  from  Hasht  Bihisht.

Subh-i-Ezel  having  retired  into  a  seclusion  inviolable
save  to  a  chosen  few,  his  elder  brother  Mirz^  Huseyn  'All
[Beh4'u'll4h]  found  the  practical  direction  of  affairs  in  his
own  hands.  Now  he  was  a  man  who  from  his  youth
upwards  had  associated  and  mixed  with  men  of  every  class,
whereby  he  had  acquired  a  certain  "breadth  of  disposition"
{wus'at-i-mashrab)  and  "  religious  pliability  "  {rakhdwat-i-
maz-Jiah)  which  attracted  round  him  men  of  like  mind,  to
whom  some  slackening  of  the  severer  code  of  the  Beyd,n
was  not  unwelcome.  Certain  of  the  old  school  of  B^bls,
such  as  MulU  Muhammad  Ja'far  of  Nir^k,  MuUd.  Rajab
'Ah  "  Kahir,"  H4ji  Seyyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan',  Hdji
Se3ryid  Jawd,d  of  KerbeU,  H4ji  Mirz4  Ahmad- i-^«*i6^,  the
M'utawalK-bdsM  (Chief  Custodian  of  the  Shrine)  of  Kum,
Hdjf  Mirz4  Muhammad  Rizd,  and  others,  perceiving  this
tendency  to  innovation  and  relaxation,  remonstrated  so
vigorously  with  Mlrz4  Huseyn  'All  that  he  left  Baghdad  in

as  he  calls  him  throughout,  Mi'rza  Huseyn  'Alf),  and  by  '  Sdmiri,'

Akd  Mi'rzd  Akd  Jdn  (abusively  designated  as  the  "  scald-headed
soap-seller  of  Kdshdn"),  to  whom  he  attributes  a  role  similar
to  that  wherewith  Seyyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahdn  is  credited  by
the  Behd'is  at  pp.  93 — 98  of  the  present  work. Concerning  Akd

Mfrzd  Aki  Jdn  (called  by  the  Behd'is  Jendh-i- Khddimu  'IWi,
"  His  Excellency  the  Servant  of  God")  see  Introduction,  and  also
B.  i,  p.  519.

^  See  pp.  93 — 98  supra.

2  MuUd  'Abdu'l-Karfm  of  Kazvin  is  generally  designated  by
this  title  (see  siipra,  pp.  41 — 42,  and  footnote  to  former),  but,  as
he  was  killed  at  Teherdn  in  1852,  either  this  must  be  a  mistake,
or  some  other  person  bearing  the  same  name  must  be  intended.


BEGINNINGS OF DISCORD.  357

wrath  and  went  towards  Suleymd,niyy^,  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  which  he  abode  amongst  the  Kurds  for  nearly  two
years  \  During  all  this  period  his  whereabouts  was  un-
known to  the  Bdbis  at  Baghdad.  When  at  length  it
became  known,  Subh-i-Ezel  wrote  a  letter  to  him  inviting
him  to  return.

About  this  time  Mlrzd  Asadu'lUh  entitled  " Deyydn^"
(one  of  the  second  group  of  "Letters  of  the  Living"  or
"Second  Unity"),  called  by  the  author  of  the  Hasht
Bihisht  "the  Judas  Iscariot  of  this  people,"  who  had  been
appointed  by  the  Bd,b  amanuensis  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  and  who
was  learned  in  the  Hebrew  and  Syriac  languages,  declared
himself  to  be  "He  whom  God  shall  manifest";  and  one
Mirzd,  Ibrdhim  forthwith  believed  in  him.  Mirzd  Huseyn
'Alf  [Beh4'u'lldh],  after  a  protracted  discussion  with  him,
instructed  his  servant  Mirz^  Muhammad  of  Mdzandar4n  to
slay  him,  which  was  accordingly  done.  Shortly  after  this,
Mlrzd  'Abdu'll4h  called  Ghawghd  ["  Conflict "]  advanced
the  very  same  claim;  and  he  in  turn  was  followed  by
Huseyn  of  Mildn,  commonly  known  as  "  Huseyn  J^n,"
who  made  the  same  pretension  in  Teherdn^  The  matter
did  not  end  even  here,  for  these  pretenders  were  followed
by  Sejryid  Huseyn  of  Isfahan'',  and  Mirzd  Muhammad
" Nabil"  of  Zarand,  called  "the  tongue-tied"  (akhras)';

'  Of.  pp.  64 — 65  supra,  and  verse  6  of  Nabil's  chronological
poem  at  pp.  983  and  987  of  my  second  paper  on  the  Bdbis  in  the
J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889.  Subh-i-Ezel  also  mentioned  that  Behd'u'Mh
withdrew  for  some  while  from  Baghdad  because  he  "  got  angry"
{kahr  hard).

2  See  Gobineau,  pp.  277 — 278.  The  passage  is  quoted  in  full
on  p.  365  infra.

3  See  supra,  pp.  330 — 331.  If  Huseyn  of  Mflan  was  killed  at
Teherdn  in  1852,  it  is  evident  that  whatever  claim  he  advanced  was
long  anterior  to  this  period,  for,  according  to  Nabfl's  chronologi-
cal poem  (B.  ii,  pp.  983—984  and  987,  verses  6  and  7),  BehA'u'lldh
was  40  years  old  when  he  returned  from  Kurdistdn  to  Baghdad,
which,  as  he  was  bom  in  a.h.  1233,  must  have  been  in  a.h.  1273
(=  A.D.  1856— 7).

*  Or  of  Hindiydn. See  p.  331  supra,  and  of.  Gobineau,  p.  278.

5  The  same  Nabfl  who  is  now  at  Acre,  and  who  wrote  the
chronological  poem  referred  to  in  the  last  footnote  but  one.  Some
poems  attributed  to  him  and  written apparently  during  the


358 NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

until,  to  quote  verbatim  from  the  Hasht  Bihisht,  "the
matter  came  to  such  a  pass  that  everyone  on  awakening
from  his  first  sleep  in  the  morning  adorned  his  body  with
this  pretension."

Now  when  Mfrzd  Huseyn  'Alf  beheld  matters  in  this
disordered  state,  he  bethought  himself  of  advancing  the
same  claim  himself  (considering  that  from  the  prominent
position  which  he  had  long  held  as  practical  director  of
affairs,  he  stood  a  better  chance  of  success  than  any
previous  claimant),  and  in  this  idea  he  was  greatly  en-
couraged by  Ak^  Mi'rzA  Akd  Jdn  of  K4shd,n.  Little  by
little  his  resolution  took  more  definite  shape,  and  he  fell  to
thinking  how  he  might  compass  the  destruction  of  such  of
the  Bdbfs  as  were  likely  to  oppose  his  contemplated  action.

About  this  time  the  Muhammadan  clergy  of  Baghdad,
KerbeU,  and  Nejef  began  to  complain  loudly  because  of
the  large  number  of  Bd-bis  who  continued  to  flock  thither
from  Persia,  and  the  Persian  Government  accordingly  in-
structed MirzA  Huseyn  KhAn  Alushiru  d-dawla,  its  repre-
sentative at  the  court  of  the  Ottoman  Sultan,  to  petition
the  Turkish  authorities  for  the  removal  of  the  Babls  to
some  part  of  their  dominions  remote  from  the  Persian
frontier'.  To  this  request  the  Turkish  authorities,  anxious
to  put  a  stop  to  the  quarrels  which  were  continually  arising
between  the  BAbis  and  Muhammadans,  acceded.  The  Bd.bls
were  summoned  to  Constantinople ;  whence,  four  months
after  their  arrival,  they  were  sent  to  Adrianople.  On  their
arrival  in  that  city,  Mlrzd,  Huseyn  'All,  still  instigated  and

period  of  his  claim  are  in  my  possession.  In  one  of  them  the
following  verse  occurs  : —

^ Ol^J y 01^ j^ alA ul^ aSja J>tJ:,

■"  I  am  the  uplifted  Tree  of  Life  ;  I  am  the  hidden  and  apparent
Fruit ;
I  am  the  King  of  Kings  of  the  BeyAn,  and  by  me  is  the  Beydn
exalted."

1  Of  pp.  82—89  swpra.


"THE DIREFUL MISCHIEF."  359

encouraged  by  AkA  Mfrzd  Akd  Jd,n,  gradually  made  public
bis  claim  to  be,  not  only  "  He  wbom  God  shall  manifest,"
but  an  Incarnation  of  the  Deity  Himself,  and  began  to  send
letters  and  epistles  in  all  directions.  And  now,  according
to  the  Ezeli  historian,  began  a  series  of  assassinations  on
the  part  of  the  Behd'is.  All  prominent  supporters  of  Subh-
i-Ezel  who  withstood  Mfrzd  Huseyn  'All's  claim  were  marked
out  for  death,  and  in  Baghdad  Mulld,  Rajah  'Alf  "  Kahir"
and  his  brother,  H^ji  Mlrz4  Ahmad,  Hdji  Mirzd  Muhammad
Rizi,  and  several  others  fell  one  by  one  by  the  knife  or
bullet  of  the  assassin'.  But  the  author  of  the  Hasht
Bihisht  brings  a  yet  graver  charge  against  Mirzd,  Huseyn
'Ah,  and  asserts  that  he  caused  poison  to  be  placed  in  one
side  of  a  dish  of  food  which  was  to  be  set  before  himself
and  Subh-i-Ezel,  giving  instructions  that  the  poisoned  side
was  to  be  turned  towards  his  brother.  As  it  happened,
however,  the  food  had  been  flavoured  with  onions,  and
Subh-i-Ezel,  disliking  this  flavour,  refused  to  partake  of
the  dish.  Mirzd,  Huseyn  'Ali,  fancying  that  his  brother
suspected  his  design,  ate  some  of  the  food  from  his  side  of
the  plate ;  but,  the  poison  having  difi^used  itself  to  some
extent  through  the  whole  mass,  he  was  presently  attacked
with  vomiting  and  other  symptoms  of  poisoning.  There-
iipon  he  assembled  his  own  followers  and  intimates,  and
declared  that  Subh-i-Ezel  had  attempted  to  poison  him^

Shortly  after  this,  according  to  the  Ezeli  writer,  another
plot  was  laid  against  Subh-i-Ezel's  life,  and  it  was  arranged
that  Muhammad  'Alf  the  barber  should  cut  his  throat
while  shaving  him  in  the  bath.  On  the  approach  of  the
barber,  however,  Subh-i-Ezel  divined  his  design,  refused  to
allow  him  to  come  near,  and,  on  leaving  the  bath,  instantly

1  Cf.  B.  i,  p.  517,  and  B.  ii,  pp.  995—6.

^  The  Behd'i's  reverse  this  story  as  well  as  the  following
in  every  particular,  declaring  that  Mfrz^  YahyA  Subh-i-Ezel  at-
tempted to  poison  Mfrza  Huseyn  'All  Behd'vUldh,  and  after  his
failure  spread  abroad  the  report  that  the  attempt  had  been  made
on  himself.  Behd'u'llAh's  version  will  be  found  in  the  SUra-i-
Heykal  at  pp.  154 — 155  of  Baron  V.  Eosen's  forthcoming  work.
The  text  and  translation  of  this  passage,  which  Baron  Rosen  has
most  kindly  permitted  me  to  copy  from  the  proof-sheets  of  his
still  unpublished  work,  will  be  found  a  few  pages  further  on.


360  NOTE W MfRZA VAHYA "  ,SUBH-I-EZEL."

took  another  lodging  in  Adriauople  and  separated  himself
entirely  from  Mirzil  Huseyn  'Alf  and  his  followers.

Some  while  after  this,  says  the  author  of  the  Hasht
BiJiisht,  Mirzd.  Huseyn  'All  devised  a  new  stratagem.  A
number  of  letters  were  written  in  different  handwritings

by  Akd,  Mirzd  Akd  J^n,  Mushkln  Kalam,  'Abbd,s  Efendi,
and  other  partisans  of  Mfrz4  Huseyn  'Ali  to  sundry  Turkish
statesmen  and  officials  to  the  following  effect : — "  About
thirty  thousand  of  us  Bibis  are  concealed  in  disguise  in
and  around  Constantinople,  and  in  a  short  while  we  shall
rise.  We  shall  first  capture  Constantinople,  and,  if  Sultdn
'Abdul- 'Aziz  and  his  ministers  do  not  believe  [in  our
religion],  we  shall  depose  and  dismiss  them  from  their  rule
and  administration.  And  our  King  is  Mirzd,  Yahy4  Suhh-
i-Ezel."  These  letters  were  left  by  night  at  the  Sultan's
palace  and  the  houses  of  the  different  ministers  by  Mushkin
Kalam  and  other  partisans  of  Mlrzd,  Huseyn  'AH  resident
in  Constantinople.  When  next  day  these  letters  were
discovered,  the  Turkish  Government,  which  had  treated
the  B^bis  with  kindness,  and  afforded  them  shelter  and
hospitality,  was  naturally  greatly  incensed.  The  letters
were  forthwith  laid  before  the  Persian  Ambassador,  and,  at
a  joint  assembly  of  Turkish  and  Persian  officials,  it  was
decided  to  exile  the  Bdbi  chiefs  to  some  remote  island  or
fortress  on  the  coast'.

Meanwhile  Hd,jf  Seyyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan,  a  philo-
sopher of  note,  and  Akd,  Jd,n  Bey,  nicknamed  Kaj-kuldh
("  Skew-cap  ")^  who  held  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel
(kd'im-maMm)  in  the  Turkish  army,  discovered  how
matters  stood,  and  made  known  to  the  Ottoman  authorities
the  hostility  which  existed  between  the  two  brothers  at
Adrianople.  The  only  good  result  which  followed  from
their  intervention  was  that  it  was  decided  by  the  Turkish
government  to  exile  Mfrz4  Yahy^  Suhh-i-Ezel  and  Mirzd
Huseyn  'All  Behaw'lldh  not  to  the  same  but  to  two
different  places  ;  the  former  was  ordered  to  be  sent  with  his

1  Cf.  the  Beh4'i  account  of  the  events  which  led  to  the  removal
of  the  B&bf  chiefs  from  Adrianople  at  pp.  98 — 99  supra,  and
Subh-i-Ezel's  account  in  note  1  at  the  foot  of  the  latter  page.

2  See  B.  i,  p.  517,  and  note  1  at  foot  of  p.  99  supra.


ASSASSINATION OF EZELfS.  361

family  and  four  of  BeM'u'lldh's  followers,  to  wit  Mushkin-
Kalam',  Mirz4  'All  Sayyih,  [Muhammad]  B^kir,  and
'Abdu'l-Ghafi'4r,  to  Famagusta  [Mdghusa]  in  Cyprus;  the
latter,  with  his  family,  about  80  of  his  adherents,  and  four
of  Subh-i-Ezel's  followers,  to  wit  H4jl  Seyyid  Muhammad
of  Isfahan,  AkA  Jd.n  Bey,  Mirzd  Riz4-Kuli  of  Tafrish,  and

his  brother  Akd  Mfrz^  Nasru'lldh,  to  Acre  ['Akka]  in
Syria.  Before  the  transfer  was  actually  effected,  however,
Mlrzd  Nasru'lUh  was  poisoned  by  Mlrz4  Huseyn  'All  at
Adrianople.  The  other  three  Ezelis  were  assassinated
shortly  after  their  arrival  at  Acre  in  a  house  which  they
occupied  near  the  barracks,  the  assassins  being  'Abdu'l-
Karim,  Muhammad  'All  the  barber,  Huseyn  the  water-
carrier,  and  Muhammad  Jaw4d  of  Kazvfn.

After  remarking  that  Adrianople  is  called  "  the  Land  of

the  Mystery"  ( oiO^  because  therein  took  place  the

separation  between  the  Light  and  the  Fire,  the  People  of
the  Right  Hand  and  the  People  of  the  Left  Hand,  the  Good
and  the  Evil,  the  True  and  the  False,  the  EzeK  historian
proceeds  to  describe,  with  much  censure  and  animadversion,
the  propaganda  by  letters  and  missionaries  set  on  foot
throughout  Persia  by  Mlrz4  Huseyn  'Ah,  the  extravagant
claims  advanced  by  him,  and  the  high-sounding  titles
conferred  on  his  wives,  sons,  and  chief  followers.  Amongst
the  titles  so  conferred  are  enumerated  the  following: —
(on  his  wives)  Mahd-i-  Ulyd  ("the  Supreme  Cradle" — a
title  reserved  for  the  Queen-mother  in  Persia);  Waraka-t
'Ulyd  ("the  Supreme  Leaf");  (on  his  sons)  Ghmn-i-
A'zam  ("the  Most  Mighty  Branch");  Gkusn-i-Akbar'
("the  Most  Great  Branch");  Ghusn-i-At-har  ("the  Most

Pure  Branch");  (on  Akd  Mlrzd  Ak4  J4n  of  Kdshdn)
Avvalu  man  dmcma  ("the  First  to  believe")  and  Jendb-

1  See  B.  i,  p.  516,  and  B.  ii,  p.  994. Fuller  particulars  con-
cerning all  of  these  will  be  foiuid  at  the  end  of  this  Note.

2  Moreover  the  sum  of  the  letters  in  the  word  _^  (Mystery)  is
the  same  as  in  the  word  «jjj|  (Adrianople),  viz.  260.

3  See  B.  i,  p.  518.


362 NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

i-Kliddimu'Udh  ("His  Excellency  the  Servant  of  God")';
(on  others  of  his  followers)  Mushkin-i-EuM  ("Divinely-
Fragrant  ") ;  Zeynul-Miikarrahin^  {"  the  Ornament  of  the
Favoured");  Ghuldmiii-Khuld  ("the  Servant  of  Para-
dise"); Jabra  il-i-Amin  ("Gabriel  the  Trusty");  Kannadu's-
Samaddniyyat  ("t\\e.  Confectioner  of  the  Divine  Eternity");
Kkahbdzu' l-Wdhidiyyat  ("the  Baker  of  the  Divine  Unity");
Dalldku'l-HaMkat  ("  the  Barber  of  the  Truth") ;  Malldhu'l-
Kuds  ("  the  Sailor  of  Sanctity  ") ;  and  the  like.

The  author  of  the  Hasht  Bihisht,  after  indulging  in  a
good  deal  of  strong  invective,  garnished  with  many  allusions
to  Pharaoh,  the  Golden  Calf,  and  SAmiri,  brings  forward
further  charges  against  the  BehA'i's.  Certain  persons,  he
says,  who  had  at  first  been  inclined  to  follow  Mirz^  Huseyn
'All,  subsequently  withdrew  and  separated  themselves  from

him. Some of  these,  such  as Ak4 'Abdu'1-Ahad, Akd

Muhammad  'All  of  Isfahan,  Hd,jl  Ak4  of  Tabriz,  and  the
son  of  H^jf  Fattdh,  fled  from  Acre ;  but  the  Khayydt-bd^M
(chief  tailor)  and  H4ji  Ibrahim  were  assassinated  in  the
Caravansaray  of  the  corn-sellers  {Khdn-i-gandum-firushdn)
and  buried  in  quick-lime  under  the  platform,  which  was
duly  mortared  up  over  their  bodies.  After  a  while,  how-
ever, the  smell  of  the  decomposing  corpses  became  so
offensive  that  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  caravansaray
complained  to  the  local  authorities,  who  instituted  a  search
and  discovered  the  bodies.  Without  mentioning  what
further  action  was  taken  by  the  Turkish  government  in  the
matter  (a  point  certainly  demanding  elucidation,  for  we
cannot  suppose  that,  if  what  the  Ezeli  historian  relates  be
true,  they  took  no  action  at  all  to  punish  the  murderers)
the  author  proceeds  with  his  indictment.  H^ji  Ja'far,  says
he,  had  a  claim  of  1200  pounds  against  Mirz4  Huseyn  'All,
and  demanded  the  payment  of  this  debt  with  some  violence

and  importunity.  Mfrz4  Ak4  J4n  of  K^sh^n  thereupon
instructed  one  'All  of  Kazvfn  to  slay  the  old  man  and
throw  his  body  out  of  the  window  of  the  upper  room  which

1  See  Introduction,  and  B.  i,  p.  519.

2  The  writer  of  the  MS.  from  which  the  fac-simile  forming
vol.  i  of  the  present  work  is  taken. See  Note  Z,  mfra.


ASSASSINATION OF EZELfS.  363

he  occupied  into  the  courtyard  of  the  caravaiisaray.  It  was
then  put  about  that  he  had  "cast  himself  out  and  died,
yielding  up  his  life  to  the  Beloved."  Another  disappointed
creditor,  a  native  of  Khurdsdn,  is  said  to  have  gone  mad  in
Acre  from  chagrin  and  deferred  hope.  Other  assassinations
in  other  places  are  alleged,  the  following  being  specially
notified : — Ak4  Seyyid  'Alf  the  Arab,  one  of  the  original
"Letters  of  the  Living,"  was  killed  in  Tabriz  by  Mfrzd,
Mustafd,  of  Nirdk  and  Sheykh  [name  omitted]  of  Khur4s4n ;
Mulld  Rajab  'All  Kahtr,  also  one  of  the  "Letters,"  was
killed  at  KerbelA  by  N4sir  the  Arab ;  his  brother  Ak4  'Alf
Muhammad  was  killed  in  Baghdad  by  'Abdu'l-Karim;  and,
in  short,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  Ezell  writer,  most  of  the
more  prominent  B4b(s  who  withstood  Mirzd.  Huseyn  'All's
pretensions were sought out and slain wherever they

chanced  to  be,  amongst  these  being  H4jf  Ak4  of  Tabriz.

The  indictment  does  not  stop  here. Amongst  those
who  had  at  first  inclined  to  follow  Mirzd.  Huseyn  'Ali  was,

according  to  the  Haslit  Bihisht,  a  merchant  named  Akd,
Muhammad  'All  of  Isfahan,  who  at  this  time  resided  in
Constantinople.  Owing  to  certain  discoveries  which  he  had
made,  however,  his  faith  had  undergone  considerable  abate-
ment, and  signs  of  coolness  had  been  observed  in  him.
Mlrzd,  Abu'l-Kdsim  the  Bakhtiy^ri  robber  was  consequently
despatched  from  Acre  with  instructions  to  "bleed  that
block  of  heedlessness  whose  blood  is  in  excess."  On  his
arrival  in  Constantinople  he  took  up  his  lodging  with  the
unsuspecting  merchant  in  the  Khdn-i-SkarM,  Here  he
remained  till  one  day  he  found  opportunity  to  break  open
his  host's  private  safe  and  abstract  therefrom  X350.  A
part  of  this  sum  he  retained  for  himself ;  with  the  remainder
he  bought  clothes,  stuffs,  and  other  goods  which  he  sent  to
Acre.  In  return  for  this  service  he  received  the  following
epistle : — "  0  phlebotomist  of  the  Divine  Unity!  Throb  like
the  artery  in  the  body  of  the  Contingent  World,  and  drink
of  the  blood  of  the  '  Block  of  Heedlessness '  for  that  he  turned
aside  from  the  aspect  of  thy  Lord  the  Merciful'!" Here

1  The  original  text  of  this  epistle  stands  as  follows  in  the
Hasht  Bihisht : —


364 NOTE W— MfEZA YAHfi. "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

ends  the  list  of  charges  alleged  against  the  Behd'ls  by  the
Ezehs,  and  what  follows  is  of  a  purely  controversial  nature,
consisting  of  refutations  of  the  claims  advanced  by  Mlrzd
Huseyn  'Ali  Behd'u'llah,  and  arguments  to  prove  the  rights
of  Mirz^  Yahyd  Subh-i-Ezel.  This  controversial  portion,
interesting  as  it  is,  I  am  forced  to  omit  here  for  lack  of
space.

It  is  with  great  reluctance  that  I  have  set  down  the
gTave  accusations  brought  by  the  author  of  the  Hasht
Bihisht  against  the  Beh^'is.  It  seemed  to  me  a  kind  of
ingratitude  even  to  repeat  such  charges  against  those  from
whom  I  myself  have  experienced  nothing  but  kindness,  and
in  most  of  whom  the  outward  signs  of  virtue  and  dis-
interested benevolence  were  apparent  in  a  high  degree.
Yet  no  feeling  of  personal  gratitude  or  friendship  can
justify  the  historian  (whose  sole  desire  should  be  to  sift
and  assort  all  statements  with  a  view  to  eliciting  the  truth)
in  the  suppression  of  any  important  document  which  may
throw  light  on  the  object  of  his  study.  Such  an  action
would  be  worse  than  ingratitude ;  it  would  be  treason  to
Truth.  These  charges  are  either  true  or  false.  If  they  be
true  (which  I  ardently  hope  is  not  the  case)  our  whole  view
of  the  tendencies  and  probable  influences  of  Behd's  teaching
must  necessarily  be  greatly  modified,  for  of  what  use  are
the  noblest  and  most  humane  utterances  if  they  be  associ-
ated with  deeds  such  as  are  here  alleged  ?  If,  on  the  other
hand,  they  be  false,  further  investigation  will  without  doubt
conclusively  prove  their  falsity,  and  make  it  impossible  that
their  shadow  should  hereafter  darken  the  page  of  Bdbi
history.  In  either  case  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that
they  should  be  confronted,  and,  to  this  end,  that  they
should  be  fully  stated.  Inasmuch  as  the  Hasht  Bihisht
only  fell  into  my  hands  as  I  was  beginning  to  write  this
note,  and  as  several  of  the  charges  alleged  in  it  against  the
Behd'is  are  new  to  me,  I  regret  that  I  cannot  at  present
offer  any  important  evidence  either  for  their  support  or


CREDIBILITY OF HASHT BIHISHT.  365

their  refutation.  Certain  points,  liowever,  which  are  con-
nected with  the  narrative  of  the  Ezeh  controversialist  and
can  be  checked  by  other  testimony  are  as  follows  : —

(1)  For  the  claim  advanced  by  Mirzd  Asadu'lUh
" Deyydn"  of  Tabriz,  and  the  fate  which  it  brought  down
upon  him,  we  have  Gobineau's  testimony,  given  (at  pp.
277 — 278  of  his  work)  in  the  following  words: — "L'^lection
[c-k-d.  de  Hezret-^-Ezel]  avait  €i€  toute  spontan^e  et  elle
fut  reconnue  imm^diatement  par  les  babys.  Cependant,  un
des  membres  de  FUnit^,  qui  n'^tait  pas  k,  T^hdran  au
moment  oh  elle  eut  heu,  et  qui  se  nommait  Mirza-Asad-
Oullah,  de  Tebriz,  surnomm^  Deyydn,  ou  '  le  Juge  supreme,'
personnage  trfes-important  et  membre  de  rUnit6  prophd-
tique,  entreprit  de  se  faire  reconnaltre  lui-meme  pour  le
nouveau  Bab.  II  courut  dans  I'Arabistan  et  chercha  k  y
rdunir  un  parti.  Mais  les  religionnaires  se  mettant  sur  ses
traces,  I'atteignirent  pr^s  de  la  frontifere  turke,  et  lui
attachant  des  pierres  au  cou,  le  noyferent  dans  le  Shat-el-
Aiab.  Cette  tentative  malheureuse  n'encouragea  pas  les
dissidents."  From  Gobineau's  account  we  are  led  to  infer
that  this  episode  occurred  very  soon  after  the  death  of  the
B^b  and  the  election  of  MirzA  YahyA  Subli-i-Ezel,  that  is
to  say  some  time  before  the  Baghdad  period.

(2)  For  the  claim  advanced  by  Huseyn  of  MiUn  we
have  Subh-i-Ezel's  evidence  (see  Note  T,  p.  331  supra),  but
since,  as  has  been  already  pointed  out,  this  Huseyn  was
amongst  the  Bdbi's  killed  at  Teheran  in  1852,  this  event
has  no  more  connection  than  the  last  with  the  Baghdad
period.

(3)  That  Nabil  advanced  a  similar  claim  which  he
subsequently  withdrew  is  a  statement  which  I  have  heard
made  once  if  not  oftener  by  Bdbfs  (of  the  Beh4'i  sect)  in
Persia.  Some  of  the  poems  attributed  to  him,  if  really  his,
afford  confirmatory  evidence,  as  has  been  already  observed
(p.  357,  note  5,  supra).

(4)  The  assertion  that  Behi'u'llih  alleges  against
Subh-i-Ezel  an  attempted  fratricide,  of  which,  according  to
the  Ezell  writer,  he  was  in  reality  himself  the  author,  is
fully  borne  out  by  the  following  passage  in  the  earlier  part
of  the  Sura-i-Heykal,  which  Baron  Rosen  has  most  kindly
permitted  me  to  quote  from  his  still  unpublished  work : —


366 NOTE  W— MfRZA YAHYA "  §UBH-I-EZEL."

•^lou (jLi jjc Ja L$i (JS j^ ^ aUiiaa- j i^

C.flfl5>- j! II a_^l ijff LjIs _5 "Jib* _5 <Ull jS^Jj ifli=lj
L^lj U _ii O' * 0»-oy^js Juc v_J)jj Jgi'i.j  _j A'.'.'nlxi

Js^l  ^Ijl  ol  Jl  Q^^S^I  ^3i=.  ^  L  _j  i^jL'i  jiSe


beha's  version  of  the  matter.  367

ii JLlsl _5 jLuflJ & iJlJ«-u U <LuI. UJa lJ_J iKJs ^a3 ^^1

VI  all  V  (^Jdl  'a)l_^ '-^j^r^  M^-'^'  t> 6"-?^ -T^'

aJL>-_j 1^1^ I (^ LuL>- _j >J«J jY" *LuU ^ J  ii Li»jj(j

yoVI  oL •JLiai  LsJ  iil  f*^;^!  (j'^:*^'  ''^'  J^  '^^

c5JlII  a9 .ij^ajl ij*j' ''J'il'. '_5^' ft4>d-*j' Ji'-'-=' l3  'UajLlI
4JUl iijS»- J ^^J>- f^ ilJ ^ ^'^ fj^' '^PH. ^ •*


3G8 NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

"  Then  tell  them  that  we  chose  out  one  from  amongst
our  brethren,  and  sprinkled  upon  him  drops  from  the  depths
of  the  Ocean  of  Knowledge ;  then  we  arrayed  him  in  the
raiment  of  one  of  the  [Divine]  Names',  and  upraised  him
unto  [such]  a  station  that  all  arose  to  praise  him ;  and  we
preserved  him  from  the  hurt  of  every  hurtful  thing  in  such
wise  as  [even]  the  powerful  cannot  do.  We  were  alone
against  the  dwellers  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth  in  the
days  when  all  men  arose  to  slay  me,  and  we  were  in  their
midst,  speaking  in  commemoration  of  God  and  His  praise,
and  steadfast  in  His  affair,  until  the  Word  of  God  was
realized  amongst  His  creatures,  and  its  tokens  became
public,  and  its  power  waxed  high,  and  its  dominion  shone
forth;  whereunto  testify  favoured  servants.  Verily  my
brother,  when  he  saw  that  the  matter  had  waxed  high,
discovered  in  himself  pride  and  error ;  then  he  came  forth
[from]  behind  the  veils,  and  warred  with  me,  and  contended
with  my  signs,  and  denied  my  proof,  and  repudiated  my
tokens ;  neither  was  the  belly  of  the  glutton  sated  till  that
he  desired  to  eat  my  flesh  and  drink  my  blood,  whereunto
bear  witness  those  servants  who  fled  into  exile  with  God,
and  beyond  them  those  brought  nigh.  And  herein  he  took
counsel  with  one  of  my  attendants,  tempting  him  unto
this.  Then  God  helped  me  with  the  hosts  of  the  Invisible
and  the  Visible,  and  preserved  me  by  the  truth,  and
revealed  unto  me  that  which  withheld  him  from  what  he
purposed,  and  brought  to  naught  the  device  of  those  who
denied  the  signs  of  the  Merciful  [God]:  are  they  not  a
people  unbelieving?  And  when  that  whereunto  his  passion
[had]  seduced  him  was  divulged,  and  those  who  [had]  fled
into  exile  became  aware  thereof,  outcry  arose  from  these,

'  Cf.  pp.  95 — 96  supra,  and  footnotes  thereon.


beha's  veesion  of  the  matter.  369

and  attained  such  a  pitch  that  it  was  within  a  little  of
being  published  throughout  the  city.  Then  we  restrained
them,  and  revealed  unto  them  the  word  of  patience,  that
they  might  be  of  those  who  are  patient ;  and  by  God,  than
whom  there  is  none  other  god,  we  were  assuredly  patient  in
this,  and  enjoined  patience  and  self-restraint  on  [God's]
servants,  and  went  out  from  amongst  these,  and  dwelt  in
another  house,  that  the  fire  of  hatred  might  be  quenched  in
his  bosom  and  he  might  become  of  those  rightly  directed.
Neither  did  we  interfere  with  him  nor  see  him  afterwards ;
we  sat  alone  in  the  house  watching  for  the  Grace  of  God,
the  Protector,  the  Self-subsistent.  But  he,  when  he  became
aware  that  the  matter  had  become  publicly  known,  took
the  pen  of  falsehood,  and  wrote  unto  the  people,  and
attributed  all  that  he  had  done  to  my  peerless  and  wronged
Beauty,  seeking  mischief  in  himself,  and  the  introduction
of  hatred  into  the  breasts  of  those  who  [had]  believed  in  God
the  Mighty,  the  Loving.  By  Him  in  whose  hand  is  my  soul,
we  are  amazed  at  his  device,  nay  rather  all  being,  invisible
and  visible,  is  amazed  !  Yet  withal  he  rested  not  in  himself
till  he  committed  that  which  the  pen  cannot  set  down,  that
whereby  he  dishonoured  me,  and  God,  the  Potent,  the
Mighty,  the  Praised.  Should  I  describe  that  which  he  did
unto  me,  the  seas  of  the  earth  would  not  complete  it  were
God  to  make  them  ink,  neither  would  all  things  exhaust  it
were  God  to  turn  them  into  pens.  Thus  do  we  reveal  that
which  hath  befallen  us,  if  ye  [will]  know  it."

I  never  heard  Subh-i-Ezel  himself  allude  to  the  events
in  question,  for  he  is  little  addicted  to  complaints,  and
reticent  as  to  all  that  concerns  his  brother  Behd'u'lldh,  but
his  son  'Abdu'l-'Ali  gave  me  the  same  account  as  is  set
forth  in  the  Hasht  Bihiskt.

(5)  The  account  of  the  forged  letters  circulated  by  the
Behd'ls  is  improbable  in  itself  (for  the  catastrophe  which
they  were  intended  to  produce  was  bound  to  involve  all  the
Bdbfs  at  Adrianople),  and  is  at  variance  with  the  versions
given  by  Behd'u'lldh  {supra,  pp.  98—99)  and  Subh-i-Ezel
{supra,  p.  99,  note  1).

(6)  The  names  of  the  Behd'is  exiled  with  Subh-i-Ezel
to  Famagusta  are  stated  correctly,  as  proved  by  the  docu-
ments of  the  Cyprus  Government  shortly  to  be  cited.

B  24


370  NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

(7)  As  to  the  assassination  of  the  three  Ezelfs,  Akd
J4n  Bey,  H^ji  Seyyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahd,n,  and  Mfrzd.
Rizd-Kull  of  Tafrfsh,  by  some  of  Behd's  followers  at  Acre,
there  can,  I  fear,  be  but  little  doubt;  for  the  account  of
this  event  which  I  published  at  p.  517  of  my  first  paper  on
the  Bihis  in  the  J.  R.  A.  8.  for  1889  was  given  to  me  by  a
Beh^'i  who  had  during  his  visit  to  Acre  seen,  and,  I  think,
conversed  with  some  of  the  perpetrators  of  this  deed.  It  is
curious  that  he,  so  far  from  attempting  to  minimize  the
matter,  raised  the  number  of  the  victims  and  assassins  from
three  and  four  to  seven  and  twelve  respectively.  Subh-i-
Ezel's  account  (B.  ii,  pp.  995 — 6)  agrees  with  that  contained
in  the  Hasht  Bihisht.  There  is,  however,  no  evidence  to
prove  that  the  assassins  acted  under  orders,  though  the
passage  in  the  Kitdb-i-Akdas  alluding  (apparently)  to
H4jl  Se3ryid  Muhammad's  death,  which  is  quoted  at  the
foot  of  p.  93  sujjra,  proves  that  Behd,'u'lldh  regarded  this
event  with  some  complaisance.  His  son  'Abb^s  Efendi
would  also  seem  to  have  interceded  for  the  murderers
(B.  i,  p.  517).  Mr  Oliphant  in  his  work  entitled  Haifa
(see  supra,  pp.  209 — 210),  after  speaking  of  the  mystery
which  surrounds  BehA'u'llAh  and  the  difficulty  of  seeing
him,  says,  in  a  passage  which  appears  to  bear  reference  to
these  assassinations  {op.  cit.,  p.  107) : —

"  Not  long  ago,  however,  public  curiosity  was  gratified,
for  one  of  his  [i.e.  Beh4'u'114h's]  Persian  followers  stabbed
another  for  having  been  unworthy  of  some  religious  trust,
and  the  great  man  himself  was  summoned  as  a  witness.

" '  Will  you  tell  the  court  who  and  what  you  are  ? '
was  the  first  question  put.

" '  I  will  begin,'  he  replied,  '  by  telling  you  who  I  am
not.  I  am  not  a  camel-driver' — this  was  an  allusion
to  the  Prophet  Mohammed — 'nor  am  I  the  son  of  a
carpenter' — this  in  allusion  to  Christ.  'This  is  as  much
as  I  can  tell  you  to-day.  If  you  will  now  let  me  retire,  I
will  tell  you  tomorrow  who  I  am.'

"Upon  this  promise  he  was  let  go;  but  the  morrow
never  came.  With  an  enormous  bribe  he  had  in  the
interval  purchased  an  exemption  from  all  further  attendance
at  court."

Since  these  assassinations  took  place  within  the  last


ETHICS OF ASSASSINATION.  371

23  years,  it  is  not  too  much  to  hope  that  further  investi-
gation may  serve  to  throw  fulJer  light  on  the  matter.  The
examination  of  Turkish  official  records  (should  this  be
possible)  would  probably  do  more  than  anything  else  to
elicit  the  truth.

Of  the  other  assassinations  alleged  by  the  author  of  the
Hasht  Bihisht,  those  of  the  following  persons  were  inde-
pendently mentioned  by  §ubh-i-Ezel: — Mulld, Rajab  'Alf

Kahir;  hkk  'All  Muhammad  of  Isfahan,  brother  of  the
above;  Mirzd  Nasru'llkh;  H^jf  Mlrzd  Ahmad,  brother  of
Mirzd  J4nl  (see  Note  T,  p.  332  supra) ;  and  H4ji  Ibrahim.
The  last  was  stated  to  have  been  at  first  a  fanatical  Behd'f,
and  to  have  cruelly  beaten  Hdjf  Seyyid  JVIuhammad  of
Isfahan  the  Ezeli  on  board  the  ship  which  bore  the  exiles  to
Acre,  of  which  action  he  subsequently  repented  sincerely.
The  following  three  persons,  not  mentioned  in  the  Hasht
Bihisht, were  also stated  by  Subh-i-Ezel to have  been

assassinated: — Huse)rn  'Ali  and  Ak4  'Abdu'l-K4sim  of
Kishdn;  Mirz4  Buzurg  of  Kirmdnshdh.  This  raises  the
total  number  of  alleged  assassinations  of  Ezelfs  to  sixteen
(unless,  as  appears  probable,  one  of  the  last  three  be
identical  with  the  " Khayydt-hdshi"  mentioned  in  the
Hasht  Bihisht),  which  agrees  pretty  well  with  Subh-i-Ezel's
statement  to  Captain  Young  (B.  ii,  p.  996)  that  about
twenty  of  his  followers  were  killed  by  the  Behd'ls'.

It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  the  removal
of  persons  inimical  to  a  religious  movement  by  violent
means,  or  in  other  words  religious  assassination,  is  a  thing
far  less  repugnant  to  the  Eastern  than  to  the  Western
mind.  Since  the  first  beginning  of  Isl4m  (not  to  go  further
back)  it  has  been  freely  practised;  and  the  Prophet
Muhammad  gave  to  it  the  sanction  of  his  example  on
numerous  occasions.  Nothing  can  illustrate  in  a  more
striking  manner  the  difference  between  the  Oriental  and
the  Occidental  attitude  of  mind  than  a  narrative  given  by

1  The  words  "  at  Acre"  added  to  this  statement  are  clearly
due  to  a  misapprehension  of  the  interpreter,  and  should  read  "  of
Acre,"  for  Subh-i-Ezel  distinctly  and  repeatedly  alluded  to  the
majority  of  these  assassinations  as  having  taken  place  at  Baghdad
and  elsewhere.

24—2


372 NOTE  w — mIeza  yahya  "  subh-i-ezel."

Ibn  Hishdm  in  his  Life  of  Muhammad  (ed.  Wiistenfeld,
pp.  553 — 555)  to  which  my  attention  was  first  called  by
my  friend  Mr  A.  A.  Bevan.  This  narrative  is  briefly  as
follows.  There  were  in  the  time  of  Muhammad  two
brothers,  of  whom  the  younger,  named  Muha)ryisa,  had
embraced  IsUm,  while  Huwayyisa,  the  elder,  still  remained
a  pagan.  Muhayyisa,  at  the  command  of  the  Prophet,
assassinated  a  Jewish  merchant  named  Suneyna  (or
Subeyna)  with  whom  Huwayyisa  was  on  terms  of  friend-
ship. Huwayyisa,  on  hearing  of  this,  fell  upon  his  younger
brother  with  blows  and  reproaches,  saying,  "  0  enemy  of
God,  hast  thou  slain  him  ?  By  God,  many  a  fat  morsel
of  his  wealth  has  gone  into  thy  maw !  "  To  this  the
other  replied,  "  By  God,  I  was  ordered  to  kill  him  by  one
at  whose  command  I  would  smite  off  thy  head  were  he  so
to  direct  me!"  "  Would'st  thou  indeed  slay  me  if  Muham-
mad should  order  it? "  asked  Huway3dsa.  "  Yes,"  answered
the  other,  "  by  AlUh,  were  he  to  command  me  to  cut  oft"
thy  head  I  would  assuredly  do  so."  "By  AlUh,"  said  the
elder  brother,  "a  religion  which  hath  brought  thee  to  this
is  assuredly  a  marvellous  thing  ! "  and  he  thereupon  adopted
the  Muhammadan  faith.  The  legend  of  Khizr  and  Moses
in  the  Kur'dn  {sura  xviii,  v.  64 — 81),  and  the  first  story  in
the  Masnavi  of  Jal41u'd-Din  Rilmi  (well  styled  by  Jd,ml
"the  Kur'd,n  in  the  Persian  language"),  which  describes
with  the  utmost  nonchalance  how  a  poor  goldsmith  is  slowly
poisoned  by  a  saintly  personage  to  gratify  the  ignoble
passions  of  a  king,  afford  further  illustration  of  this  attitude
of  mind,  which  also  revealed  itself  to  me  very  clearly  in  a
conversation  which  I  had  with  a  Bdbl  Se3ryid  of  Shfrdz
with  whom  I  was  disputing  about  the  divine  origin  of
Isldm.  In  the  course  of  the  discussion  I  animadverted  on
the  bloodshed  and  violence  resorted  to  by  Muhammad  and
his  followers  for  the  propagation  of  their  religion.  "  Surely,"
replied  the  Seyyid,  with  a  look  of  extreme  surprise,  "  you
cannot  pretend  to  deny  that  a  prophet,  who  is  an  in-
carnation of  the  Universal  Intelligence,  has  as  much  right
to  remove  anyone  whom  he  perceives  to  be  an  enemy  to
religion  and  a  danger  to  the  welfare  of  mankind  as  a
surgeon  has  to  amputate  a  gangrened  limb  ? "

I  have  insisted  thus  strongly  on  this  point  because  we


HIS EARLY LIFE.  373

cannot  properly  estimate  the  probability  or  improbability
of  an  action  alleged  but  not  proved  to  have  been  committed
by  a  given  body  of  men  unless  we  are  in  a  position  to
form  a  just  judgment  on  their  opinions  as  well  as  their
character.  The  idea  of  secret  assassination  is  so  repug-
nant to  us,  and  so  incompatible  with  our  notions  of  virtue
and  moral  rectitude,  that  we  naturally  shrink  from  im-
puting it  without  the  clearest  evidence  to  a  man  or  body
of  men  of  whose  character  and  qualities  we  have  otherwise
formed  a  high  opinion.  But  in  Asia,  where  human  life  is
held  cheap,  and  religious  fervour  runs  high,  a  different
standard  of  morality  prevails  in  this  matter  ;  and  we  must
beware  of  being  unduly  influenced  in  our  judgment  by
our  own  sentiments.


III. Additional  information  derived  directly  from
Suhh-i-Ezel.

MirzA  Yahy4  Subh-i-Ezel  is  the  son  of  Mirz4  'Abbds
(better  known  as  Mirzd  Buzurg)  of  the  district  of  Niir  in
M4zandardn,  and  the  half-brother  of  Mfrz4  Huseyn  'Alf
Behau'lldh  (see  note  2  on  p.  56  supra),  to  whom  he  is
junior  by  13  years'.  He  was  bom  in  Teherdn  about  the
year  a.d.  1830^ His  father  died  when  he  was  7  years  old.

1  This  is  according  to  the  first  statement  made  to  Captain
Young,  but  on  another  occasion  the  difference  was  stated  as  1 1  or
12  years.  Since,  however,  Behi'u'Udh  was,  according  to  Nabfl
(see  B.  i,  p.  521,  and  B.  ii,  pp.  983  and  986),  bom  in  the  year  A.D.
1817,  and  since  Subh-i-Ezel  would  seem  to  have  been  bom  in
A.D.  1830  or  1831,  thirteen  years  is  the  probable  difference
between  their  ages.

2  The  Persians  are,  as  a  rule,  very  careless  about  dates,  and
even  well-educated  men  are  often  unable  to  state  their  exact  age.
To  this  rule  Subh-i-Ezel  is  no  exception.  Thus  in  November
1884  (according  to  official  documents)  he  gave  his  age  as  56,
while  in  October  1889  he  informed  Captain  Young  that  he  was
58  or  59  years  old.  Perhaps,  however,  the  former  figure  may  be
due  to  a  misunderstanding  on  the  part  of  the  official  engaged  in
drawing  up  the  report  on  the  exiles,  for  several  remarl^  which
Subh-i-Ezel  made  to  me  point  to  the  correctness  of  the  latter.
Thus  on  one  occasion  he  said,  pointing  to  his  son  'Abdu'l-Wahld
(a  youth  of  apparently  about  17  years  of  age),  "  I  was  quite  young


374  NOTE W — MfEZi. YAHYA "SUBH-I-EZEL."

When  and  how  he  was  brought  to  embrace  the  Bi\
doctrines  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain,  but  he  wa
appointed  by  the  B4b  as  his  successor  after  the  deaths  c
MulU  Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh  and  Mulld  Muhammad  'A.
of  Birfurilsh  (who  was  killed  in  the  summer  of  a.d.  1849^
the  appointment  (for  text  and  translation  of  which  se
B.  ii,  pp.  996 — 997)  being  written  from  Chihrik.  Fror
that  time  until  a.d.  1852  he  generally  resided  during  th
summer  at  Teheran  or  Shimr4n,  and  during  the  winte
in  the  district  of  Nur  in  M^zaudard,n,  being  continual!
occupied  in  teaching  and  diffusing  the  B^bf  doctrines.  A
the  time  of  the  B^b's  martyrdom  (July  1850)  he  wa
residing  at  the  village  of  Zargand^  near  Teherd,n. Mfrz

Ak4  Kh4n  of  Niir,  who  succeeded  Mfrzd  Takf  Khdn  a
Prime  Minister  at  the  end  of  a.d.  1851  under  the  titl
of  8adr-i-A'zam,  was  related  to  Subh-i-Ezel.  Althougl
formerly,  when  living  in  retirement  at  K4shdn,  he  ha(
pretended  to  be  favourably  disposed  towards  the  B4bfs
and  had  even  had  several  interviews  with  MuUd  Sheykl
'Alf  Jenab-i-'Azim,  he  now  shewed  the  utmost  hostilit;
towards  them,  especially  towards  Subh-i-Ezel.  Indeed  hi,
brother,  Ja'far-Kuli  Khdn,  who  was  on  extremely  bat
terms  with  him,  strongly  advised  Subh-i-Ezel  to  keep  ou
of  his  power,  and,  if  possible,  to  avoid  both  Teherdn  anc
Nlir.

When  the  attempt  on  the  Shah's  life  was  made  ii
August  1852,  Subh-i-Ezel  was  at  Niir,  and  so  escapee
arrest,  though  the  Sh^h  oifered  a  reward  of  1000  tumdn.

like  him  when  I  left  Persia"  (in  a.d.  1852).  "About  seventeen?'
I  enquired.  "  No,"  he  answered,  "more  than  that ;  about  20  o:
21."  A  Turkish  dervish  who,  impelled  by  curiosity  to  see  S(
celebrated  a  heresiarch,  visited  him  soon  after  his  arrival  ii
Cyprus,  remarked  with  surprise  jj  ^^  i»j  "  He  is  still  but  i
child  !"  Gobineau  (p.  277)  makes  his  'age  only  16  at  the  time  o
the  Bdb's  death  (a.d.  1850),  but  it  is  more  probable  that  this  wai
his  age  when  he  was  designated  by  the  Bdb  as  his  successor
in  which  case  he  would  be  about  1 9  when  he  actually  succeeded
Bearing  in  mind  the  extraordinary  virtue  attributed  by  the  Bdbii
to  this  mystical  number,  we  may  well  beUeve  that  such  a  coinci
dence  would  strongly  influence  the  choice  of  the  faithful  in  hii
favour.


THE RAID ON NtJE.  37-5

for  his  capture,  and  though  on  one  occasion  he  actually
met  and  conversed  with  an  Arab  who  had  been  sent  to
apprehend  him  but  failed  to  recognize  him.  It  was  probablj-
immediately  after  this  that  he  set  out,  disguised  as  a
dervish  (pp.  51 — 52  and  p.  354  supra),  for  Baghdad,  where
he  arrived,  according  to  his  own  statement,  "in  the  year
A.H.  1268,  a  few  days  after  the  arrival  of  Beh4'u'114h."
Since,  however,  Beh4'u'll4h  was  imprisoned  in  Teherdn  for
four  months  after  the  attempt  on  the  Shdh's  life,  i.e.  till
December  1852,  and  since  the  year  a.h.  1268  ended  on
October  14th,  1852,  this  date  would  appear  to  be  erroneous.
Forty  days  after  the  attack  on  the  Shdh,  after  Subh-i-
Ezel  had  fled  in  disguise  as  above  described,  a  raid  was
made  on  Nlir  by  two  regiments  of  soldiers  under  the
command  of  Mi'rzd  Abil  Tdlib  Khdn.  It  appears  that  the
Shdh  was  induced  to  sanction  this  raid  by  representations

made  by  Mi'rz4  A\&  Khin  the  Sadr-i-A'zam  to  the  effect
that  Subh-i"Ezel  had  "  arrived  there,  declared  himself  to  be
the  Im4m-^Iahdi,  and  collected  about  a  thousand  followers."
illrzf  Abii  Tdlib  Khdn,  though  related  to  Subh-i-Ezel  by
marriage  (his  sister  being  wedded  to  Subh-i-Ezel's  eldest
brother),  shewed  no  compunction  in  carrying  out  the  designs
of  his  uncle  the  Sadr-i-A'zam  with  the  utmost  rigour,  and,
indeed,  totally  disregarded  the  remonstrances  and  pleas  for
mercy  which  some  of  his  subordinate  officers  ventured  to
advance  on  its  appearing  that,  so  far  from  there  being  any
rising,  such  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  doomed  village  as  had
not  fled  into  the  mountains  were  unarmed  and  entirely
unprepared  for  resistance.  The  village  (containing  some
sixty  houses)  was  sacked  and  plundered;  two  of  its  in-
habitants, who  were  B4bis,  were  killed ;  Siibh-i-Ezel's  house
was  occupied  by  the  principal  officers ;  and  his  female
relatives  were  confined  to  the  iipper  rooms.  A  day  or  two
after  this  a  pursuit  of  the  fugitives  was  organized ;  a
shepherd  betrayed  their  retreat;  and  the  soldiers,  falling
upon  them  unawares,  killed  some  (including  Mfrzd.  Muham-
mad Taki  Khdn),  wounded  others  (including  MulU  Fattdh,
who  subsequently  died  in  prison),  and  carried  off  26  or  27
(amongst  whom  were  two  women)  to  Teheran  as  captives.
These  captives,  except  the  two  women,  were  compelled  to
perform  the  journey on  foot  and in chains. On  their


376  NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

arrival  at  Teherdn  they  happened  to  meet  the  Russiai
Ambassador,  who  was  moved  with  compassion  at  the  sigh
of  their  misfortunes,  and  addressed  a  remonstrance  to  thi
Shih.  He,  finding  on  enquiry  that  there  had  been  m
insurrection  at  all,  ordered  them  to  be  set  at  liberty ;  bu
the  Sadr-i-A' zain  contrived  to  detain  them  in  prison  oi
various  pretexts,  and  there  most  of  them  died  of  erysipelas
gaol-fever,  and  other  diseases  which  rage  in  Persian  prisons
or  were  secretly  made  away  with.  The  ravaged  district  o
Niir  was  made  over  to  the  Sadr-i-A' zam,  and  one  of  tin
two  houses  possessed  by  Subh-i-Ezel  in  Teheran  was  confis
cated  by  the  Sh^h,  the  other  being  sold  by  Beh4'u'lUh.

As  I  have  embodied  in  previous  footnotes  all  the  mon
important  particulars  which  I  learned  from  Subh-i-Eze
relative  to  the  expulsion  of  the  Bdbls  from  Baglidad  (p.  84
note  2  supra),  the  journey  from  Baghdad  to  ConstantmopL
(p.  90,  note  1  supra),  and  the  expulsion  of  the  B^bfs  fron
Adrianople  (p.  99,  note  1  supra);  and  as  the  Ezeli  versioi
of  the  state  of  things  which  prevailed  in  the  Bihi  com
munity  at  Baghdad  and  Adrianople  is  sufficiently  set  fortl
in  the  earlier  portion  of  this  note,  I  may  now  pass  on  t(
consider  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  state  archives  pre
served  in  Cyprus.


IV. State  papers  preserved  by  t/te  Cyprus  Government.

These  documents,  to  which,  as  explained  in  the  Intro
duction,  the  kindness  and  courtesy  of  Sir  Henry  Bulwe
allowed  me  so  free  an  access  during  my  stay  in  Cyprus,  an
very  numerous,  and  range  from  August  1878  (the  year  o
the  English  occupation)  to  June  1889.  The  majority  o
them  are  written  in  English,  and  to  those  written  in  Turkisl
English  translations  are  always  appended.  All  the  paper
of  importance  bearing  on  the  subject,  with  the  exception  o
certain  despatches,  were  placed  at  my  disposal,  and  durinj
the  four  days  for  which  they  remained  in  my  hands  I  wa
able  to  make  a  complete  transcript  of  them.  This  transcrip
occupies  32  pages  of  foolscap.

With  these  documents  a  desire  to  avoid  undue  prolixit;
compels  me  to  deal  as  briefly  as  may  be. Many  of  then


THE CYPRUS EXILES.  377

indeed,  would  not  be  worth  reproducing  in  fall  in  anj^  case,
while  others  are  abrogated  by  fuller  and  later  reports,  and
there  are  naturally  a  good  many  repetitions,  besides  dis-
cussions of  the  basis  whereon  the  pensions  of  the  exiles  are
to  be  calculated,  which  may  well  be  omitted  or  abbreviated ;
but,  were  space  of  no  object,  there  are  several  which  I
would  fain  have  inserted  in  full.  As  it  is,  I  can  only  give
the  substance  and  not  the  form  of  the  papers;  while,  to
save  explanations  and  prevent  confusion,  I  have  normalized
the  spelling  of  names  in  accordance  with  the  system
adopted  throughout  this  work,  besides  correcting  obvious
errors.  With  these  preliminary  observations  I  proceed  to
the  examination  of  the  documents  in  question.

When  the  Turks  evacuated  Cj-prus  in  1878  they  left
behind  them  certain  prisoners  who  had  been  interned  in
the  fortress  of  Famagusta.  In  August  of  that  year  the
Chief  Secretary  requested  the  Commissioner  of  that  town
to  report  on  the  number  of  these  prisoners,  their  terms  of
imprisonment,  their  offences,  and  the  like.  The  Com-
missioner of  Famagusta  stated  in  a  brief  reply  (dated
August  8th,  1878)  that  the  prisoners  in  question  were
five  in  number,  to  wit  (1)  a  Greek  named  K4tirji  Yini,
sentenced  for  life  for  robberies  committed  in  S3Tia;  (2)  a
Bosnian  named  Mustafa,  (3)  a  Turk  named  Yiisuf,  sentenced
for  life  for  "speaking  against  the  Turkish  rehgion,"  and
two  Persians,  (4)  Subh-i-Ezel,  and  (5)  Mushkin  Kalam,
whose  crime  and  punishment  are  described  as  follows: —
"'  They  wished  to  invent  some  new  religion,  and,  when
pressed,  fled  from  Persia  and  settled  in  Turkey.  After  a
time  they  again  tried  to  carry  out  their  madness,  and  were
consequently  condemned  by  the  Turkish  authorities  to
imprisonment  for  life."

Nearly  three  months  after  this  date  further  information
concerning  the  prisoners  was  demanded  by  the  Chief  Secre-
tary, with  the  especial  object  of  determining  the  amounts  of
the  pensions  or  allowances  which  they  were  drawing.  In
his  reply  (dated  Xovember  5th,  1878)  the  Commissioner  of
Famagusta  states  that  he  "cannot  get  any  official  in-
formation about  them.  The  S^azi  says  if  there  were  any
papers  about  them  the  late  Kd'iin-maMm  destroyed  them,
or  his  secretary  lost  them,  for  there  are  none  forthcoming


378  NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

now."  He  then  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  two  Persian
prisoners  as  follows,  premising  that  all  the  information
which  he  has  been  able  to  obtain  was  "  gathered  from  the
men  themselves" : —

"  1st,  Subh-i-Ezel.  Handsome,  well-bred  looking  man,
apparently  about  50.  In  receipt  of  pias.  1193  per  month
(the  Kuzi  only  gets  pias.  1020).  States  that  he  was  for  a
long  time  at  the  Persian  Court,  where  his  brother'  was
next  officer  in  rank  to  the  vizier.  He  afterwards  went  to
Stamboul  and  then  to  Adrianople,  where  he  was  accused
of  plotting  against  the  Porte  and  the  religion  of  Isldm.
Sentence — for  life. Been  here  11  years.

"2nd,  Mushkin  Kalam.  From  Khur^sdn.  Allowed
pias.  660  per  month.  Sentence — for  life.  Been  here  11
years.  Came  here  at  same  time  as  Subh-i-Ezel.  Sentenced
for  religious  offence  against  Porte.  Is  53  years  old.  Has
two  families,  one  here,  and  one  in  Persia.  In  appearance
is  a  dried-up,  shrivelled  old  man,  with  long  hair  almost  to
the  waist."  Similar  accounts  of  the  other  prisoners  follow,
and  the  report  concludes  with  the  statement  that  the  late
Kd'im-maMm  had  left  some  old  books,  which,  being
alleged  to  contain  only  accounts  for  past  years,  were  used
in  the  office  as  Account  and  Military  Police  books,  but
that  some  old  books  still  left  would  be  searched  for  further
particulars.

The  next  document  of  interest  is  a  petition  from
Mushkin-Kalam  addressed  to  "His  Excellency  the  High
Commissioner  of  Cyprus"  and  dated  August  15th,  1879.
The  original  of  this  petition  (apparently  written  by  Mushldn
Kalam  himself)  is  in  Turkish,  but  an  English  translation  is
appended.  In  it  Mushkin  Kalam  states  that  he  is  a  native
of  KhurAsdn ;  that,  having  proceeded  to  Mecca  by  way  of
Diydr  Bekr,  he  had  extended  his  journey  to  Adrianople  to
see  his  "  Sheykh  "  Mfrzd,  IJuseyn  'AH  [Bekau'lldk] ;  that,
after  accomplishing  this  object,  he  was  arrested  in  a.h.  1284
("  A.D.  1867  ")"  and  exiled  to  Famagusta,  where  he  had  now

1  Probably  this  is  a  mistake  for  "  fatlier,"  as  Subh-i-Bzel
repeatedly  described  the  position  of  liis  father  Mirzd  Buzurg  in
these  very  words.

2  A  report  from  the  Muhds^Mji's  (Accountant's)  Office  dated
December  10th,  1884,  states  that,  although  the  original  fermdn  oi


THE CTPP.rS EXILES.  379

resided  for  12  yeari;  and  that  he  has  suffered  much  grief
by  reason  of  his  long  banishment  and  separatii^in  from  his
familj".  In  conolusi'-in,  he  beg~  the  High  Commis-ioner
"to  pity  his  po-ition,  deprived  so  long  of  his  femilr,  and
to  deliver  him  from  such  a  hard  punishment."  The  im-
mediate effect  of  this  petition  was  to  call  forth  another
demand  for  fuller  information  from  the  Chief  .Secretary,
who  desired  e-pecially  to  he  informed  on  what  authority
Mushkin  Kalam  had  been  permitted  to  reside  'jut-ide
Famaguirta  his  petition  having  been  ient  in  from  Nicosia).
The  Commissioner  of  Famaguista  rephed  that  the  permission
in  qnesrion  had  been  granted  by  a  letter  from  the  Chief
Secretary  dated  June  20th,  1879,  and  that,  iti  the  absence
of  any  official  Turkiih  register,  a  report  based  on  the
-tatements  of  the  pri-oners  themselves  and  informarion
sujjplied  by  the  Turkish  K6' im-maMm  had  been  compiled
by  the  Local  Commandant  of  ]\Iilitar\-  PoUce.  This  report
iiiscu.-se.~  the  cases  of  seven  "prisoner-^,"  to  wit  those  five
previously  mentioned,  a  woman  named  Khadija  charged
with  incendiari-m,  and  an  old  blind  man  named  Khudi-
verdi,  formerly  in  the  Turkish  artillery,  who  proved  not  to
be  a  prisoner  at  all  but  a  pensioner '  That  portion  of  the
report  which  deals  with  the  cases  of  Subh-i-Ezel  and  Mtish-
kin  Kalam  is  as  follows : —

"  Xo.  3.  Subh-i-Ezel  of  Mn.  Tradf  1  XiL  Crime  ''.
Falsely  accu-ed  of  preaching  again-t  the  Turkish  religion.
Wlmrei  Adrianople.  Who  iras  charoe  made  by  1  A  man
of  Irin.  By  whom  tried!  Came  from  Baghdad  and  went
to  Adrianople  where  charge  was  made.  Vdh'  of  Adrianople
ordered  him  to  Constantinople,  where  he  was  examined  by
Elmil  Pdshi  (^Prime  ilinister).  When  ]  Twelve  yeara  ago.
Preciovs  imprisonment  before  corning  here!-  Five  months
in  Con-rtantiaojjle,  before  coming  here  under  arrest,  five
years at  Adrianople. Undergone  here '. Twelve years.

banishmerit  c&nnot  be  found,  an  unofficial  copy  of  it,  received  at
the  rliue,  gives  the  date  of  their  banishment  as  Ro.bVul-AHdr  -^th
A.H.  \ihb  "{hAj  26th,  a.d.  Wi^,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  this
is  the  correct  date.  The  reckoning  called  Rfrriu  Turkish,,  which
is  more  than  a  year  behind  the  h.ijra,  wa.s  probably  u-sed  by
ilushkin  Kalam,  and  misapprehended  by  the  traiLsIator.


380  NOTE W— MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

Pension'}  38|  piastres  a  day  current.  Do.  he/orel  38 J
piastres  a  day  Government  exchange.  Has  a  family  of  17.
His  father  was  Chief  Secretary  of  State  to  the  present  Shdh
of  Persia  (Nd,siru'd-Din  Shdh).

"  No.  4.  ■  Mushkln  Kalam  Efendi.  Trade  1  _  "Writer.
Grime?  Being  in  company  with  a  preacher  against  Ma-
liometanism  who  came  from  Persia  and  Acre  in  Syria.
Where'f  Constantinople.  Punishment  1  Transported  for
life,  and  to  be  imprisoned  in  Famagusta  fortress.  By
whomt  Authority  of  SulUn  'Aziz.  Datet  November
A.H.  1284  (a.d.  1868)'.  [in  the  original  document  the
corresponding  Christian  year  is  erroneously  given  as  "a.d.
1876,'  ].  Previous  Imprisonment  1  Six  months  in  Constanti-
nople. Has  undergone'?  Twelve  years.  Any  lodging?
The  fermun  ordering  banishment  stated  that  he  was  to  get
free  lodging,  but  he  has  not  had  any  \sc.  free]  lodging.
This  man  has  sent  a  petition  to  government  abotit  a  week
ago. 23/6/'79."

A  document  based  on  records  of  the  Temyiz  Court  and
dated  March  8th,  1880,  first  mentions  BAblism  ("  i.e."  it
explains,  "  communism  ")  as  the  crime  with  which  Subh-i-
Ezel  and  Mushkfn  Kalam  were  charged.  It  is  further
stated  that  they  were  deported  under  Imperial  Permdn,
and  not  sentenced  by  a  judicial  tribunal.  The  next  docu-
ment (undated),  embodying  the  results  of  further  enquiries
at  Famagusta,  gives  the  date  of  their  arrival  in  the  Island
as  August  24th,  a.h.  1284.  [As  the  month  and  year  are
seemingly  given  according  to  the  Turkish  style,  this  would
correspond  to  September  5th,  a.d.  1868.]  In  this  document
mention  is  first  made  of  Sheykh  'All  Sayydh,  who  arrived
as  an  exile  at  Famagusta,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  five
children,  in  A.ii.  1285  (a.d.  1869— 70) \ He  died'  on  July

'  See  preceding  footnote.

^  According  to  a  statement  made  to  me  by  Subh-i-Ezel,
Sheykh  'AH  Sayydh  (who  was  only  about  35  years  old)  died  very
.suddenly  as  though  from  poison,  scarcely  having  time  to  summon
his  wife  to  his  side  ere  he  e.xpired.  He  was  arrested  in  company
with  'Abdu'l-Ghaffdr  and  Muhammad  Bdkir  (immediately  to  be
mentioned),  and  banished  with  them  to  Famagusta.  He  con-
tinued till  his  death  to  profess  friendship  towards  Subh-i-Ezel,
declaring  that  his  only  object  in  keeping  on  good  terms  with  the


THE CYPRUS EXILES.  881

■2-2m\.  A.ii.  1-J87  ("August  4th,  .\.D.  187  T  ").  and  au  allowance
of  2^  pirtstvos  a  d;iy  to  his  \A-idow  and  each  of  his  children
was  made  by  the  government,  iliislikiu  Kalam  subse-
(luently  married  the  -widow,  and  drew  her  pension  in
addition  to  his  own.  At  the  end  of  this  document  it
is  mentioned  tliat  "  a  note  in  the  Re.i^ister  of  Orders  in  the
Mii/ul<,Ji&ii"s  [Accountant's]  office  states  that  an  allowance
of  4  piastres  a  day  for  14  persons  in  all,  and  2  servants
at  ;")  piastres  the  two"  was  gi-auted  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  Shevldi
'Ah  Sa\>-ah,  ]\Iuslikiu  Kalam,  and  their  respective  families.
The  next  document  of  importance  is  a  report  in  Turkish,
dated  M:irch  11th,  1880.  from  tlie  Mu/MSche/f's  office,  to
which  au  Eni^lish  translation  is  appended.  Pi-om  this  it
appears  that  the  original  number  of  Babi  exiles  sent  to
FamagustA  was  14  ;  that  these  were  accompanied  by  2
servants;  that  to  eacli  of  the  former  4  piastres  a  day  and
to  e;ich  of  tlic  latter  2\  piastres  a  day  (making  a  total  of
61  piastres  a  day)  were  allowed ;  that  'Abdu'l-Ghaffilr
succeeded  in  effecting  his  escape  fi"om  the  Island  on  Sep-
tember 17th,  A.H.  128G'  i^'Sept.  29th,  a.d.  1870");  that
[Shcxkli]  'Ah  Sa>->-ah  of  Kara-Bagh  died  on  July  22nd,
A.H.  1287  (see  preceding  parjigraph);  that  Fatima,  one  of
Subh-i-E.',ers  Jaugliters,  died  on  August  17th,  a.h.  1287
V"Aug.  20t]i,  A. P.  1871 ") ;  and  that  Muhammad  Bakir  died
on  November  lOth,  .\.h.  1288  ("  Xov.  22nd,  a.p.  1872'");
that  in  consequence  of  tliis  diminution  in  the  number  of
the  exiles  a  deduction  of  16  piastres  a  day  was  made,
thus  reducing  tlie  daily  allowance  to  45  piastres  ;  btit  that
subsequently,  by  an  order  dated  September  25th,  a.h.  1289
(?  Oct.  7th,  A.D.  1873),  2 A  piastres  a  day  were  ;\llowed  to

Behd'is  \v;is  t^J  eudedvom-  to  bring  .ibout  :i  recouciliation  and  heal
the  schism.  Subh-i-E-!ol,  however,  held  nJoof  from  him,  and  dis-
reganleil  his  overtures  From  the  Jlashi  BiJiii^/it  ^seo  p.  ;^,'si;,  f?/jva'^
it  would  ^ippiwr  th:)t  the  tii-st  commuuio.itions  between  the  B:ib
and  Siibl;-i-£zel  pivssed  through  him.

■  Id  this  lUid  the  sucoeeiling  ihites  wherein  Ohristiiui  months
are  combined  with  Muhammadau  ye.irs  the  Tm-kish  reckoning
(which,  aj5  ahwidy  noted,  is  more  than  a  year  behind  the  normal
Muhivmmadan  reckoning')  seems  to  he  employed.  The  Christian
dates  here  given  in  inverted  commas  are  derived  from  another
doctmient  dattni  October  13th,  1884.


382  NOTE W— MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL."

the  widow  and  each  of  the  five  children  of  Sheykh  'AH
Sayydh,  thus  raising  the  daily  allowance  of  the  exiles  again
to  60  piastres'.

The  following  document  in  Mr  Oobham's  handwriting,
dated  March  11th,  1880,  gives  some  additional  statements
made  by  Mushkln  Kalam  about  himself : —

"  It  appears  that  in  1867  Mushkln  Kalam  Bfendf  came
from  Mesh-hed  in  Khurds^n  to  Constantinople. His  fame

as  a  scribe  had  preceded  him,  and  Fu'dd  and  'All  PAshds
asked  him  to  remain  in  Constantinople.  He  refused  both
pension  and  presents  offered  him  by  [SulUn]  'Abdu'l-'Azlz,
for  whom  he  executed  some  illuminations.

"  Presently  he  was  accused  by  one  Subh-i-Ezel,  a  Persian
then  at  Adrianople,  himself  a  member  of  some  schismatic
sect,  of  heresy.  He  had  lived  six  months  at  Constantinople,
where  he  was  imprisoned,  without  question  or  trial,  for
another  six  months,  and  then  sent  to  Famagusta.

"  Subh-i-Ezel  was  exiled  at  the  same  time  on  a  similar
charge  of  heresy."

The  next  document  of  importance  is  a  petition  in
Turkish  addressed  by  Subh-i-Ezel  to  the  Commissioner
of  Famagusta,  bearing  the  date  April  27th,  a.d.  1881.
From  this  it  appears  that  on  the  24th  of  the  preceding
month  Subh-i-Ezel  had  been  informed  that  he  might  con-
sider himself  free  to  go  where  he  pleased.  For  this  per-
mission he  expresses  the  warmest  gratitude,  and  further
prays  that,  if  it  be  possible,  he  may  become  an  English
subject,  or  be  taken  under  English  protection,  so  that
he  may  with  safety  return  to  his  own  country  or  to  Turkey.
To  this  request,  however,  the  Government  did  not  see  fit  to
accede.

The  next  group  of  documents  belong  to  the  latter  part
of  the  year 1884,  when a  fresh attempt  was made to

1  It  appears  that  Sheykh  'AH  Sayy4h's  wife  and  five  children
(or  such  of  them  as  were  then  born)  joined  him  in  Cyprus  some
time  subsequently  to  his  banishment,  and  hence  were  not  in-
cluded in  the  enumeration  of  the  original  exiles,  and  were  not
entitled  to  a  pension.  But  in  any  case  the  rule  appears  to  be
that,  unless  specially  continued  by  the  Government,  pensions  to
the  families  of  exiles  cease  on  the  death  of  their  head.


THE CYPRUS EXILES.  383

establish  the  amount  of  the  pension  paid  to  the  exUes  on  a
definite  basis.  To  this  end  it  became  important  to  discover
(1)  who  were  the  original  exiles  ;  (2)  which  of  them  had  died
or  quitted  the  island,  and  when ;  (3)  which  of  their  children
had  been  born  previously  to  and  which  subsequently  to  their
banishment.  For  the  elucidation  of  these  points  several
lengthy  reports  were  compiled  in  the  ilukasebeji's  (Ac-
countant's) office.  As  it  was  also  decided  that  any  one  of
the  exiles  entitled  to  a  pension  lost  that  pension  on  quitting
the  island,  but  might  recover  it  on  returning  thither,  their
subsequent  movements  were  carefully  recorded.  The  details
of  apportionment  of  these  pensions  are  of  little  historic
interest,  and  I  therefore  omit  them;  but  it  is  a  most
fortunate  circumstance  that  they  were  apportioned  in  this
way,  inasmuch  as  the  full  record  of  facts  embodied  in  these
documents  is  entirely  due  to  this  circumstance.  These
various  reports  and  tables  I  have  striven  to  combine  in
the  following  tabular  form,  wherein  is  incorporated  also
information  derived  from  Captain  Young  and  Mr  Houston
independently  of  the  reports.  The  names  of  the  original
exiles  (described  as  14  "masters"  and  2  servants)  are
printed  in  italics,  and  after  each  of  these  is  placed  in
heavier  t3rpe  the  number  which  they  bear  on  the  pension-
roll.  The  names  of  those  who  subsequently  settled  or
were  bom  in  the  island  are  printed  in  ordinary  type.  To
the  names  of  all  alike  ordinal  numbers  are  prefixed.


384


NOTE W— MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL.'


ec5


a  a


as


DD


c3 rS  .2


OD  OJ ^ O Lj


S  ^  -^  '^ r^  _!3  j3


9  rf-SO'~'f^c3?i  ^' — '^


e  5  ^  5  -a  0)  e  ^  ■«  §  ft

S  J  ■"  ».  b^  5  ^  p.^  a  V

«  ^  «  cT-C  ^  c  o  Th  -r^  ^


art H  "i^ H  J2 >; oj
<D  ^ w >4 510  o  ^

"  3).a  <s  >,  g  ^  •"

'C G OJ ^'rt O ^rt M

^-i  ftS.s.g  s-s

05  .—I S  (H a>

5£  '^  9i i^  -2  §  .t3

.s.sisgs.»-g

Jh W o  -rH Q^  H  .+:>

to ^ > S^aj-*3
n.(D>,CUW>03m

a  .a  2  ^-S  &  -S  N  W
^3  oa^  all

^  >S^  S=2-S  "
§  a  ScQ.  a.Scn-5


CD OJ

§a


.2 =3


^  ra .


M eg


00

^-1  2  a

aJ  s  a

a  1)

C3  o  „,

a  o  S


3-3,3


M


fel


CO-


s


12;


THE CYPRUS EXILES.


385


c'2


r£3 DO

TO ©
'5 IH


n3 ft

S CO


a  _


o-


•43 .m


a


^ at  S


" -S  '-^  ^3  -rj  1-H

Oh g-«3-p  S^
-  -tf »-(  a

-^■o  ja  I,  §  0^  §
g .  02  s  I  g  S


"S  " <" a


o  a  a


«  a


a


,w


•9  _  -o  5 .2  s  a .


-'^^  I


ird =8


n  eg


05.23


c3 tiO


g°


-  ^  a

T-  ,m  ns
5  15 o

a


■>  t3 s.*


5  bo  a  a

a^a--


SH


a  j-

"  s  -»=  ,a  „■  .3


a


P5


oP


d  OJ  ^


s-s


OQ.


'-' oj ^


^33.5


.■  o  a>
.a  o>.Q  — '

2  'Ph  ^ ^

'a  o  oj  °
c3  a  oj  J-

o =1 oj'C

§  »-a  ^


1 '-'

t~

M

(N

rH

0

1 m

(M

oq

<M

(M

G<<

m


C

o


-a

Q


<N


-^


CO.


^.


o ^


B.


25


386


a


NOTE W-

!>s  >-<

r-*' CD

'sa

2  o

a

a  2

o  a

as

o ^

o  o

o o

GO

these
Id  dis
nee.

efH P OJ

^

o  o  -s

'J

»  ='.S

a

V H

CM

?n

0) »  Ji

^

^■^^

•tf!

-*^ ^,  =*-^

a

o

=J ?£

^^2

r^

H

—  MfllZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL.


■^  d  H  o

.'  o  »  d

^  =«  s  s

.,  flP^ CD

"^  d  -a

o  =«^^


f1\  'TJ


a:s


go5


oj cl ?■ M

a  i  s^

n  2  tfl
d 0-5

^pa5


S  >


-^

ca

p<

s

si

■-O

f^

=^  s

nS

tM

O

a

J 3

'A

di

c=  o

^

-s

00  c-i

4)

-s

f
■^

3  o
^  a

£

4M

to*

-c-

o

■<j

•  J

QJ

3 "

o

<  s

s

to

3

ts

Q

A

CO •
CO ^

1 — 1
(71

-t

>

,.

_«

a

bo

^

^

;-<

rt

03

cu

^

0)

s

T3

w

(50

fl

3

cS

trt

a

Q

o

I I


'-^'

S^i .

sr^ja

.S  bl

^■a

wPq

1 £6

^^ ^

•

vrt

H

cS

:§M

STjIf-l

+J*

T3

^o

p^

^5^

^

CO

OS

d

1 — 1

T— 1

Ol

■2  P.S


THE CYPRUS EXILES.  387


a

CQ

1

o3

a

<U

'^

■s

n

3

1

r^

5M
fl  a

>

M-

■  OQ

Ph

■s

OS

-Q -I-'  S  Sf  I-  >^ ^  S& ^flo .'^^s^ Sb-c^cr

•ag-2^  g».S ^i^ -^  M^  S  _  g  § - ^ .  =  >..--

2  'i  ^  rC  to  Ph.S ft  £?

^ q  j5 P..3  as  M

5  ^


rH CO „ rfl . _ rl &■  .S  _fl . c3  ro  ^^ H _"-*- td ™


I I


-73  _^ >-.  C3

^  a  —  >»

a  .-3 s  3

=?  '^  /;■  ^


■l:i-


388


NOTE W — MfRZA YAHYA "  SUBH-I-EZEL.'


bcoo


e3  03 JH ^^
^-  ie !3 H o

, QJ >^ ^  ^


>< d  •'-' -^ « QJ

^3.  a  "^  s

53  .a  O  fl, .


(D Pi m
to "  00

i  s  i

^ CO

p


^i=l

i!


•U Ell
'^  ^ c3

^ at o
!=> ea -

? 83 2

^  OH

O 'r-t

ea  -5  '^


to J, <»  "^  tS
'-Mood

a  "  §  «  "^


.g  ■S  "3  '=  3


S  •-'  -e  ^
I  O I o  ^^


^  ca

.r-« tS


2 -i


oQ  ,£5  :^  « .-H  o
^  ca  *s  H


■:^  ca  ■


a


ra-^-


<^  a  n  a  a

"-^"S-s  a

■^  rg  S  a
o,*^  a  K
fftc a  g


^ J^ OJ  QJ .— .  -^2,
_-w  <}  H-l o  -^ g

g;.S^g^a


a  c

GI2-S


8  e  & ^

■sis 3'


^  a

-a  a
03  a


as

la."

■13  -CO


W


c
>
a


oa


i


3^


>
■a

o

a


THE CYPRUS EXILES.


389


za


i  °  ="  -^  -^'

-*= -e  o

|§^-^

-»  2  H  ®  ®
„  —  2  !>  c

•°-  "^-^  a

•ill:  I


.^  o
CO


5d>-i


P4-M -M  ^


=^ 3 O-S O S
M)  O  g  10 bts


o;


p.-!


C3 tq g


^ ra


aiW


_■ 60
^2 *^  S  -^^l  '(S OJ

o'S  3  6o-t>Td  g

•a  3  g-.s  a  o  "

g  £  o  J  J  f  «  I
gi-i.3«J!<.  p  S  a


iz;
a


W


eo


03


S


w


1°


390  NOTE X — THE SUPERSCRIPTION OF

NOTE  X.

Translation  of  the  superscription  and  exordium  of
THE  Epistle  to  the  King  of  Persia.

My  original  purpose  was  to  give  in  this  note  nothing
more  than  a  translation  of  that  portion  of  the  "Epistle  to
the  King  of  Persia"  which  is  omitted  in  the  text,  but  the
permission  so  generously  accorded  to  me  by  Baron  Rosen
to  make  full  and  free  use  of  the  proof-sheets  of  his  still
unpublished  work  enables  me  to  add  the  text  and  trans-
lation of  the  instructions  given  to  the  bearer  of  the  missive.
[See  p.  102  supra,  and  footnote.]  The  text  of  these
instructions  is  as  follows : —

Jl«j' 4Jlll ^

JLkUl  i^JiaJ  J  J.  L *U=I  lil  J  oiyvi  3L  J.J  i^j

Jj-^i a^_^ _;fia .5JI_5 lil ^ oLlaJUl jflfl J I \r..  ...  a
>_)LJvll «9j dLtaUi ^!)U= O  jgK lil _j avjio iff Paflj


THE EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA.  391

^3h  3  '-*^'  >»  Jl  ^_^.  J  <UAi  i  v^J=^  V  JilL
J  CjJk  J  £j^^  ^Li  j:U  L  juJ-l  a  vJ  ^1

^'yOl  y^L.  V  J  J.^.  J.  y  o>  L  diiV  jJUl

Translation.

"  This  is  a  copy  of  what  was  written  on  the  back  of  tlie
Epistle  to  the  King.

'  He  is  God,  exalted  is  He.

'We  ask  God  to  send  one  of  His  servants,  and  to  detach
him  from  Contingent  Being,  and  to  adorn  his  heart  with
the  decoration  of  strength  and  composure,  that  he  may
help  his  Lord  amidst  the  concourse  of  creatures,  and,  when
he  becometh  aware  of  what  hath  been  revealed  for  His
Majesty  the  King,  that  he  may  arise  and  take  the  Letter,  by
the  permission  of  his  Lord,  the  Mighty,  the  Bounteous,  and
go  with  speed  to  the  abode  of  the  Bang.  And  when  he  shall
arrive  at  the  place  of  his  throne,  let  him  alight  in  the  inn.


392 NOTE X — EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA.

and  let  him  hold  converse  with  none  till  he  goeth  forth  one
day  and  standeth  where  he  [i.e.  the  King]  shall  pass  by.
And  when  the  Eoyal  harbingers  shall  appear,  let  him  raise
up  the  Letter  with  the  utmost  humility  and  courtesy,  and
say,  "It  hath  been  sent  on  the  part  of  the  Prisoner'."
And  it  is  incumbent  upon  him  to  be  in  such  a  mood  that,
should  the  King  decree  his  death,  he  shall  not  be  troubled
within  himself,  and  shall  hasten  to  the  place  of  sacrifice
saying,  "  0  Lord,  praise  be  to  Thee  because  that  Thou
hast  made  me  a  helper  to  Thy  religion,  and  hast  decreed
unto  me  martyrdom  in  Thy  way !  By  Thy  Glory,  I  would
not  exchange  this  cup  for  [all]  the  cups  in  the  worlds,  for
Thou  hast  not  ordained  any  equivalent  to  this,  neither
do  Kawthar  and  SalsablP  rival  it!"  But  if  he  [i.e.  the
King]  letteth  him  [i.e.  the  messenger]  go,  and  interfereth
not  with  him,  let  him  say,  "  To  Thee  be  praise,  0  Lord  of
the  worlds !  Verily  I  am  content  with  Thy  good  pleasure
and  what  Thou  hast  predestined  unto  me  in  Thy  way,  even
though  I  did  desire  that  the  earth  might  be  dyed  with  my
blood  for  Thy  love.  But  what  Thou  wiliest  is  best  for  me :
verily  Thou  knowest  what  is  in  my  soul,  while  I  know  not
what  is  in  Thy  soul ;  and  Thou  art  the  All-knowing,  the
Informed." '  "

Baron  Rosen,  after  quoting  the  version  of  Mirz4  Badl'  's
mission  and  martyrdom  which  I  published  at  pp.  956 — 957
of  my  second  paper  on  the  B4bls  in  the  J.E.A.8.  for  1889,
observes  that,  considering  the  text  of  the  above  instruc-
tions, and  the  minute  obedience  yielded  by  Beh4'u'lUh's
followers  to  his  slightest  wish,  this  version  is  extremely
improbable.  He  says : — "  S'adresser  au  souverain  de  la
Perse,  en  lui  disant  'j'ai  un  fermto  pour  vous'  etc., — cela
n'est  certes  pas  I'humilit^  parfaite  dont  parle  I'h^r^siarque."
The  opinion  thus  expressed  by  Baron  Rosen  is  entirely
borne  out  by  the  present  work  (see  pp.  102 — 105  supra),
and  I  am  now  quite  convinced  that  it  is  correct.  He
further  adds,  "  Quant  k  la  date  de  I'^v&ement,  j'ai  toutes
raisons  de  croire  qu'il  s'est  pass6  au  mois  de  Juillet  de
I'ann^e  1869,  indiqude  par  M.  Browne."

1  Cf.  p.  104  supra.

2  The  names  of  two  rivers  in  Paradise.


the  arabic  exordium.  393

Translation  of  the  Exordium  of  the  Epistle.

"  This  is  wltat  was  revealed  in  the  '  HeykaP '  for  His  Majesty
the  King.  '  He  is  God,  exalted  is  His  state  [in]
Might  and  Power.

'  0  King  of  the  earth,  hear  the  voice  of  this  servant.
Verily  I  am  a  man  who  hath  believed  in  God  and  His
signs,  and  I  have  sacrificed  myself  in  His  way ;  to  this  do
the  afflictions  wherein  I  am  (the  like  of  which  none  amongst
mankind  hath  borne)  testify,  and  my  Lord  the  All-knowing
is  the  witness  to  what  I  say.  1  have  not  summoned  men
unto  aught  save  unto  thy  Lord  and  the  Lord  of  the  worlds.
In  love  for  Him  there  hath  come  upon  me  that  whereof  the
eye  of  creation  hath  not  beheld  the  like :  in  this  will  those
servants  whom  the  veils  of  humanity  have  not  withheld
from  confronting  the  Chiefest  Outlook  bear  me  out,  and
beside  them  He  with  whom  is  the  knowledge  of  all  things
in  a  Preserved  Tablet.  Whenever  the  clouds  of  fate  rain
down  the  darts  of  affliction  in  the  way  of  God  the  Lord  of
the Names,  I  advance  to  meet  them; to  this  testifieth

1  These  numerals,  as  remarked  by  Baron  Rosen  (pp.  146 —
147),  clearly  stand  for  the  equivalent  letters  U, ,  Behd.

2  Concerning  the  8ii/ra-i-Heykal  (of  which  the  Epistles  to  the
Kings  collectively  form  only  a  portion)  see  note  1  at  the  foot  of
p.  108  supra  ;  B.  ii,  p.  954  ;  and  p.  149  of  Baron  Rosen's  forth-
coming work.  My  Kirmdn  MS.  lacks  this  heading,  for  which  the
following  is  substituted  : — "  This  Epistle  was  revealed  in  Adria-
nople  specially  for  His  Majesty  the  King.  This  servant,  the  con-
fidential attendant  of  their  Excellencies  [apparently  Behd-'u'lMh
and  his  sons],  sends  it  for  you  to  peruse.  The  meanings  of  sundry
Arabic  phrases  which  were  in  my  mind  have  been  written  down
agreeably  to  the  command  of  God's  Most  Mighty  Branch
[Qhumu'lldhi  'l-a^zam]."  The  original  from  which  the  Kirmdn
text  and  the  glosses  appended  to  it  (which  agree  almost  exactly
with  those  given  by  Baron  Rosen)  were  derived  would  therefore
appear  to  have  been  communicated  to  the  Bdbls  in  Persia  by
Akd  Mlrzi  Ak^  Jdn  {"■  Jendh-i-Khddimu'lldh")  at  the  command
of'  Behi'u'lliih's  eldest  son  'Abbiis  Efendl  [See  Introduction  ;
Note  W,  p.  361  supra;  and  B.  i,  pp.  518—519.]


394 NOTE X — EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA.

every  fair  and  rightly-informed  person.  How  many  are
the  nights  wherein  the  wild  beasts  rested  in  their  lairs,  and
the  birds  in  their  nests,  while  this  servant  was  in  chains
and  fetters,  and  found  for  himself  none  to  succour,  nor  any
helper !  Remember  the  grace  of  God  towards  thee  when
thou  wast  in  prison  with  sundry  others,  and  He  brought
thee  out  thence,  and  succoured  thee  with  the  hosts  of  the
Invisible  and  the  Visible,  until  the  King  sent  thee  to
'Ird,k'  after  that  We  had  disclosed  to  him  that  thou  wast
not  of  [the  number  of]  the  seditious.  Verily  such  as  follow
[their]  lusts  and  turn  aside  from  virtue,  these  are  in
evident  error.  And  as  for  those  who  work  sedition  in  the
earth,  and  shed  blood,  and  falsely  consume  meu's  wealth,
we  are  quit  of  them,  and  we  ask  God  not  to  associate
us  with  them  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come,
unless  they  repent  unto  Him;  verily  He  is  the  Most
Merciful  of  the  merciful.  Verily  it  behoveth  him  who
turneth  towards  God  to  be  distinguished  in  all  actions  from
what  is  apart  from  Him,  and  to  conform  to  that  which  is
enjoined  upon  him  in  the  Book:  thus  is  the  matter  decreed
in  a  Perspicuous  Book.  As  for  such  as  cast  the  command
of  God  behind  their  backs  and  follow  after  their  lusts,  they
are  in  grievous  error.

'  0  King,  I  conjure  thee  by  thy  Lord  the  Merciful  to
regard  [His]  servants  with  the  gaze  of  pitiful  eyes^  and  to
rule  with  justice  in  their  midst,  that  God  may  award  His
favour  unto  thee:  verily  thy  Lord  judgeth  as  He  pleaseth.
The  world  shall  perish  with  whatsoever  of  glory  and  abase-
ment is  therein,  while  dominion  remaineth  unto  God,  the
Supreme  and  All-knowing  King.  Say,  Verily  He  hath
kindled  the  Lamp  of  the  Beydn",  and  He  will  continue
it  with  the  oil  of  ideas  and  expression :  exalted  is  thy  Lord
the  Merciful  beyond  this,  that  created  beings  should  with-
stand His  command.  Verily  He  will  shew  forth  what  He
pleaseth  by  His  authority,  and  will  guard  it  with  a  cohort
of  the  Proximate  Angels.  He  controlleth  His  handiwork
and  compelleth  His  creation  :  verily  He  is  the  All-knowing,
the  Wise.

'  i.e.  Baghdad.

2  Literally,  "  with  the  glances  of  the  eyes  of  thy  clemency."

3  Or  "  of  Utterance"  or  "  Revelation."


THE ARABIC EXOEDIUM.  395

'  0  King,  verily  I  was  as  [any]  one  amongst  mankind,
slumbering  upon  my  couch.  The  gales  of  the  All-Glorious
passed  by  me  and  taught  me  the  knowledge  of  what  hath
been.  This  thing  is  not  from  me,  but  from  One  [who  is]
Mighty  and  All-knowing.  And  He  bade  me  proclaim
betwixt  the  earth  and  the  heaven,  and  for  this  hath  there
befallen  me  that  whereat  the  eyes  of  those  who  know
overflow  with  tears.  I  have  not  studied  those  sciences
which  men  possess,  nor  have  I  entered  the  colleges :  enquire
of  the  city  wherein  I  was,  that  thou  mayst  be  assured  that
I  am  not  of  those  who  speak  falsely.  This  is  a  leaf  which
the  breezes  of  the  "Will  of  thy  Lord  the  Mighty,  the
Extolled,  have  stirred.  Can  it  be  still  when  the  rushing
winds  blow?  No,  by  the  Lord  of  the  Names  and  Attri-
butes !  Rather  do  they  move  it  as  they  list,  [for]  Being
belongeth  not  to  Nonentity  in  presence  of  the  Eternal.
His  decisive  command  did  come,  causing  me  to  speak  for
His  celebration  amidst  the  worlds.  Verily  I  was  not  save
as  one  dead  in  presence  of  His  command,  the  hand  of  thy
Lord  the  Merciful,  the  Clement,  turning  me.  Can  any  one
speak  on  his  own  part  that  for  which  all  men,  whether  low
or  high,  will  persecute  him  ?  No,  by  Him  who  taught  the
Pen  eternal  mysteries,  save  him  who  is  strengthened  by
One  Mighty  and  Strong.

'The  Supreme  Pen  addressetli  me,  saying,  "Fear  not ;
[but]  relate  unto  His  Majesty  the  King  what  hath  come
upon  thee.  Verily  his  heart  is  between  the  lingers  of  thy
Lord  the  Merciful:  perchance  He  will  cause  the  sun  of
justice  and  kindness  to  dawn  from  the  horizons  of  his
heart."  Thus  was  the  command  revealed  from  the  All-
Wise.

'  Say,  "  0  King,  look  with  the  gaze  of  justice  upon  thy
servant;  then  decide  according  to  the  right  concerning
what  hath  befallen  him.  Verily  God  hath  appointed  thee
His  shadow  amongst  [His]  servants',  and  the  sign  of  His
Power  to  the  dwellers  in  the  land :  judge  between  us  and
those  who  have  oppressed  us  without  proof  or  clear  warrant.
Verily  those  who  surround  thee  love  thee  for  their  own
sakes,  while  [thy]  servant  loveth  thee  for  thine  own  sake ;

1  See  footnote  on  p.  156  supra.


396 NOTE X — EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA.

nor  dotli  he  desire  aught  save  that  he  may  bring  thee  nigh
unto  the  station  of  Grace  and  turn  thee  unto  the  right
hand  of  Justice:  thy  Lord  is  witness  unto  that  whicli
I  say."

'  0  King,  if  thou  wouldest  hear  the  cry  of  the  Supreme
Pen,  and  the  murmur  of  the  Dove  of  Eternity  on  the
branches  of  the  Lote-tree  beyond  which  there  is  no  passing'
in  praise  of  God,  the  Maker  of  the  Names,  the  Creator  of
the  earth  and  the  heaven,  verily  this  would  cause  thee
to  attain  unto  a  station  whence  thou  wouldest  behold  in
existence  naught  save  the  effulgence  of  [God]  the  Adored,
and  [whence]  thou  wouldest  regard  dominion'  as  a  thing  of
least  account  in  thine  eyes,  leaving  it  to  him  who  desireth
it,  and  turning  toward  a  horizon  illumined  with  the  lights
of  [God's]  countenance ;  neither  wouldest  thou  ever  endure
the  burden  of  dominion,  unless  [it  were]  to  help  thy  Lord,
the  High,  the  Supreme.  Then  would  the  people  of  the
Supreme  Concourse  magnify  thee  [saying],  "How  good  is
this  most  glorious  state,"  if  thou  wouldest  [but]  ascend
thereunto  by  authority  accorded  unto  thee  in  the  Name  of
God.

'  Amongst  mankind  are  some  who  say  that  this  servant
desireth  naught  save  the  perpetuation  of  his  name,  and
others  who  say  that  he  desireth  the  world  for  himself,
notwithstanding  that  I  have  not  found  during  the  days  of
my  life  a  place  of  safety  such  that  I  might  set  my  feet
therein,  but  was  ever  [overwhelmed]  in  floods  of  affliction,
whereof  none  wots  save  God:  verily  He  knoweth  what
I  say.  How  many  were  the  days  wherein  my  friends  were
disquieted  for  my  distress,  and  how  many  the  nights
wherein  the  sound  of  wailing  arose  from  my  family  in  fear
for  my  life  !  None  will  deny  this  save  him  who  is  devoid  of
truthfulness.  Doth  he  who  regardeth  not  [his]  life  [as
assured]  for  less  than  a  moment  desire  the  world?  [I]
marvel  at  those  who  speak  after  their  lusts,  and  wander
madly  in  the  desert  of  passion  and  desire.  They  shall  be
questioned  as  to  that  which  they  have  said;  on  that  day
they  shall  not  find  for  themselves  any  protector  nor  any

1  See  Kur'^n,  liii,  14.

'■'  Or,  "  the  world,"  for  the  word  au  bears  this  meaning  also.


THE ARABIC EXORDIUM.  397

helper.  And  amongst  them  are  those  who  say,  "  Verily  he
denieth  God,"  notwithstanding  that  all  my  limbs  testify
that  there  is  no  God  but  Him,  and  that  those  whom  He
quickened  with  the  truth  and  sent  for  [men's]  guidance  are
the  manifestations  of  His  Most  Comely  Names,  the  day-
springs  of  His  Supreme  Attributes,  and  the  recipients  of
His  revelation  in  the  realm  of  creation ;  by  whom  the  Proof
of  God  unto  all  beside  Himself  is  made  perfect,  the
standard  of  the  [faith  of  the]  Unity  is  set  up,  and  the
sign  of  renunciation  becomes  apparent ;  and  by  whom  every
soul  taketh  a  course  towards  the  Lord  of  the  Throne.  We
bear  witness  that  there  is  no  God  but  Him;  everlastingly
He  was,  and  there  was  nothing  beside  Him;  everlastingly
He  will  be,  even  as  He  hath  been.  Exalted  is  the  Merciful
One  above  this,  that  the  hearts  of  the  people  of  wisdom
should  ascend  unto  the  comprehension  of  His  Nature,
or  that  the  understanding  of  such  as  inhabit  the  worlds
should  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  His  Essence.  Holy  is  He
above  the  knowledge  of  all  save  Himself,  and  exempt  is  He
from  the  comprehension  of  what  is  beside  Him :  verily  in
Eternity  of  Eternities  was  He  independent  of  the  worlds.

'  Remember  the  days  wherein  the  Sun  of  Bat-h4'  shone
forth  from  the  horizon  of  the  Will  of  thy  Lord,  the  High,
the  Supreme,  [how]  the  doctors  turned  aside  from  him,  and
the  cultured  found  fault  with  him  ;  that  thou  mayst  under-
stand what  is  now  hidden  within  the  Veil  of  Light.  Matters
waxed  grievous  for  him  on  all  sides,  until  those  who  were
[gathered]  round  him  were  dispersed  by  his  [own]  com-
mand^ ;  thus  was  the  matter  decreed  from  the  Heaven  of
Glory.  Then  remember  when  one  of  them  came  in  before
the  NejashV"  and  recited  unto  him  a  sura  of  the  Kur'dn.
He  said  to  those  around  him,  "  Verily  it  hath  been  revealed
on  the  part  of  One  All-knowing  and  Wise.  Whosoever
accepteth  what  is  best,  and  believeth  in  that  which  Jesus
brought,  for  him  it  is  impossible  to  turn  aside  from  what

1  i.e.  Muhammad. Bat-h4  is  here  synonymous  with  Mecca.

2  Allusion  is  made  to  the  flight  of  the  persecuted  and  unpro-
tected Muslims  from  Mecca  in  the  fifth  year  of  Muhammad's
mission.

3  Nejdshi  is  a  generic  name  for  the  Kings  of  Abyssinia,  as
Kisra  is  for  the  Persian,  and  Kaysar  for  the  Roman  emperors.


398 NOTE X — EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA.

hath  been  read :  verily  we  testify  unto  [the  truth  of]  it,
even  as  we  testify  unto  [the  truth  of]  what  is  with  us-  of
the  books  of  God^  the  Protecting,  the  Self-Subsistent."

'  By  God,  0  King,  if  thou  wouldest  hear  the  strains  of
the  dove  which  cooeth  on  the  branches  with  varied  notes
by  the  command  of  thy  Lord  the  Merciful,  thou  wouldest
assuredly  put  away  dominion  behind  thee  and  turn  unto
the  Ghiefest  Outlook,  the  station  from  the  horizon  of  which
the  Book  of  the  Dawn  is  seen,  and  wouldest  spend  what
thou  hast,  seeking  after  that  which  is  with  God.  Then
wouldest  thou  find  thyself  in  the  height  of  glory  and
exaltation,  and  the  zenith  of  greatness  and  independence :
thus  hath  the  matter  been  written  in  the  primaeval  reve-
lation^ by  the  Pen  of  the  Merciful  One.  There  is  no  good
in  what  thou  dost  possess  to-day,  for  another  shall  possess
it  to-morrow  in  thy  stead.  Choose  for  thyself  that  which
God  hath  chosen  for  His  elect :  verily  He  will  bestow  upon
thee  a  mighty  dominion  in  His  Kingdom.  We  ask  God
that  He  may  help  thy  Majesty  to  hearken  unto  the  Word
whereby  the  world  is  illumined,  and  preserve  thee  from
those  who  are  remote  from  the  region  of  nearness.

'  Glory  be  to  Thee,  0  God !  0  God,  how  many  heads
have  been  set  up  on  spears  in  Thy  way !  How  many  breasts
have  advanced  to  meet  arrows  for  Thy  good  pleasure!
How  many  hearts  have  been  riddled  for  the  exaltation  of
Thy  Word  and  the  diffusion  of  Thy  Religion  !  How  many
eyes  have  overflowed  [with  tears]  for  Thy  love!  I  ask
Thee,  0  King  of  kings,  Pitier  of  thralls,  by  Thy  Most
Great  Name,  which  Thou  hast  made  the  day-spring  of  Thy
Most  Comely  Names  and  the  manifestation  of  Thy  Supreme
Attributes,  to  lift  up  the  veils  which  intervene  between
Thee  and  Thy  creatures,  withholding  them  from  turning
towards  the  horizon  of  Thy  revelation ;  then  draw  them,  0
God,  by  Thy  Supreme  Word  from  the  left  hand  of  fancy
and  forgetfulness  to  the  right  hand  of  certainty  and  know-

1  i.  e.  the  Sacred  books  which  we  now  possess,  the  Gospel.

2  Literally  '■'■the  Mother  of  Revelation"  or  "o/  the  Beydn"  a

phrase  evidently  copied  from  the  expression  ^jbSCji  .i,  which
occurs  in  several  places  in  the  Kur'an  {sdras  iii,  5  ;  xiii,  39  ;  xliii,
3,  &c.).


THE ARABIC EXORDIUM.  399

ledge,  that  they  may  know  what  Thou,  in  Thy  bounty  and
grace,  desirest  for  them,  and  may  turn  towards  the  Mani-
festation of  Thy  religion  and  the  Day-spring  of  Thy  signs.
0  God,  Thou  art  the  Gracious,  the  Lord  of  great  bounty ;
withhold  not  Thy  servants  from  the  Most  Mighty  Ocean,
which  Thou  hast  made  to  produce  the  pearls  of  Thy
Knowledge  and  Wisdom,  neither  repel  them  from  Thy
Gate,  which  Thou  hast  opened  unto  all  who  are  in  Thy
heaven  and  Thy  earth.  0  Lord,  leave  them  not  to  them-
selves, for  they  know  not,  and  flee  from  what  is  better  for
them  than  whatsoever  hath  been  created  in  Thine  earth.
Look  upon  them,  0  Lord,  with  the  glances  of  the  eyes  of
Thy  favours  and  bounties,  and  free  them  from  passion  and
lust,  that  they  may  draw  nigh  unto  Thy  Supreme  Horizon,
and  may  discover  the  delight  of  remembering  Thee,  and
the  sweetness  of  the  table'  which  hath  been  sent  down
from  the  heaven  of  Thy  Will  and  the  air  of  Thy  Bounty.
Everlastingly  hath  Thy  Grace  encompassed  [all]  contingent
beings,  and  Thy  Mercy  preceded'  [all]  creatures:  there  is
no  God  but  Thee,  the  Forgiving,  the  Merciful.

'Glory  be  to  Thee,  0  God!  Thou  knowest  that  my
heart  is  melted  about  Thy  business,  that  my  blood  boils
in  my  veins  with  the  fire  of  Thy  love,  and  that  every  drop
thereof  crieth  unto  Thee  with  dumb  eloquence''  [saying],
"  0  Lord  Most  High,  shed  me  on  the  earth  in  Thy  way,"
that  there  may  grow  from  it  what  Thou  desirest  in  Thy
books,  but  hast  concealed  from  the  sight  of  Thy  servants,
save  such  as  have  drunk  of  the  Kawthar^  of  knowledge
from  the  hands  of  Thy  grace,  and  the  Salsahtl  of  wisdom
from  the  cup  of  Thy  Isounty.  Thou  knowest,  0  God,  that
in  every  action  I  desire  nothing  save  Thy  business,  and
that  in  every  utterance  I  seek  naught  but  Thy  celebration,
neither  doth  my  pen  move  except  I  desire  therein  Thy

1  Cf.  Kur'&n  V,  112,  114.

2  See  note  1  on  p.  113  supra.

3  Literally,  "the  tongue  of  [its]  state"  (Jlil  OU),  which,  as
contrasted  with  "the  tongue  of  utterance"  (jliJI  OU),  signifies
the  words  wherewith  the  state  of  an  inarticulate  thing  may  ap-
propriately be  described.

*  Kawthar  and  Salsabil,  the  names  of  two  rivers  in  Paradise.


400  NOTE Y — RECENT PERSECUTIONS.

good  pleasure  and  the  setting  forth  of  what  Thou  hast
enjoined  upon  me  by  Thy  authority.  Thou  seest  me,  0
God,  confounded  in  Thine  earth :  if  I  tell  what  Thou  hast
enjoined  on  me,  Thy  creatures  turn  against  me;  and  if  I
forsake  what  Thou  hast  enjoined  on  me  on  Thy  part,  I
should  be  deserving  of  the  scourges  of  Thy  wrath,  and  far
removed  from  the  gardens  of  nearness  to  Thee.  No,  by
Thy  Glory,  I  advance  toward  Thy  good  pleasure,  turning
aside  from  what  the  souls  of  Thy  servants  desire  :  and
accept  what  is  with  Thee,  forsaking  what  will  remove  me
afar  off  from  the  retreats  of  nearness  to  Thee  and  the
heights  of  Thy  Glory.  By  Thy  Glory,  for  Thy  love  I  flinch
not  from  aught,  and  for  Thy  good  pleasure  I  fear  not  all
the  afflictions  in  the  world  :  this  is  but  through  Thy
Strength  and  Thy  Might  and  Thy  Grace  and  Thy  Favour,
not  because  I  am  deserving  thereof"

The  Epistle  then  continues  as  in  the  text  (pp.  108—151
supra).


NOTE Y.
The Martyrs of  Isfahan,  the  martyrdom of Mirza

ASHRAF OF k^koi, and THE PERSECUTIONS OF Sl-DIH.

(1) The  Martyrs  of  Isfahan.

Of  the  martyrdom  of  Seyyid  Hasan  and  Seyyid  Huseyn
(called  by  the  Beh4'is  Mahbubu sli-skuhada  "the  Darling  of
Martyrs  "  and  HultCinu  sh-skukada  "  the  King  of  Martyrs"),
with  which  the  present  history  concludes,  I  gave  the
substance  of  what  I  had  heard  at  Isfahan  and  Shirdz  at
pp.  489 — 592  of  my  first  paper  on  the  B^bls  in  the
J.B.A.8.  for  1889.  That  account  will  be  found  to  agree
in  all  material  details  with  the  version  contained  in  this
work,  and,  as  regards  the  actual  facts  of  the  case,  I  have
but  little  to  add,  except  that,  according  to  Subh-i-Ezel,  one
of  his  followers  named  Mull4  K4zim  (of  whose  martyrdom
the  Behd'is  make  no  mention)  was  put  to  death  in  Isfahd,n
at  or  about  the  same  time  (see  B.  ii,  p.  995,  note  on  p.  490).


THE MARTYRS OF ISFAHAN.  401

During  my  stay  in  Kirmdn,  however,  I  became  intimate

with  a  certain  Sheykh  S (not  the  B4bf  courier  whom,

in  Note  Z,  I  have  designated  by  the  same  abbreviation),
a  dervish  endowed  with  considerable  intellectual  gifts  not
yet  whoUy  destroyed  by  excessive  indulgence  in  narcotics
and  stimulants,  who  had  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  life
in  that  eager  and  restless  search  after  religious  novelties
called  by  such  as  pursue  it  seyr-i-kulub  (an  expression
which  I  can  render  but  clumsily  as  "spiritual  sight-seeing"),
and  who,  so  far  as  the  prevailing  antinomianism  of  his
character  can  permit  one  to  describe  him  as  holding  any
definite  religion  at  all,  was  an  adherent  of  the  Bd.bl  faith,
for  which  in  his  youth  he  but  narrowly  escaped  martyrdom.

One  evening  this  Sheykh  S ,  being  in  a  communicative

mood,  gave  me  au  account  of  a  conversation  alleged  to
have  taken  place  between  himself  and  the  Shdh's  eldest
son, the Prince Zillu's-Sultto, relating in part  to the

martyrdom  of  these  two  Seyyids. That  Sheykh  S 's

story  is  substantially  true  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt,  inas-
much as  many  other  things  which  he  related  to  me  have
subsequently  been  confirmed  by  other  testimony,  and,  so
far  as  I  could  judge,  untruthfulness  was  not  one  of  his
faults.  At  all  events  his  narrative  is  too  characteristic  to
be  consigned  to  oblivion,  and  I  therefore  give  it  for  what  it
is  worth  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember  in  his  own  words.

"When  I  was  at  Isfahan,"  said  Sheykh  S ,  "I  was

for  some  time  living  on  the  bounty  and  in  the  house  of  one
of  the  Zillu's-SulUn's  attendants,  just  as  I  am  now  living

at  the  expense  of  Mfrzd  . This  man  was  himself  one

of  the  'Friends'  {i.e.  the  B^bfs).  Through  him,  as  I
suppose,  the  Zillu's-Sultdn  learned  that  I  had  visited  Acre.
At  any  rate,  one  evening  he  summoned  me  into  his  presence.
On  entering  the  room  where  he  was  sitting,  I  halted  near
the  door  and  made  my  obeisance.  '  Come  nearer,'  said  he.
I  advanced  a  few  paces,  and  again  halted.  '  Nearer,'  said
he  again.  In  short  he  continued  to  bid  me  approach  until
I  was  close  to  him,  when  he  commanded  me  to  be  seated.
'  Now,'  said  he,  '  I  hear  that  you  have  been  to  Acre.  I  do
not  ask  whether  you  are  a  B4bl  or  not.  A  man  may  go
amongst  the  Jews  or  the  Christians  or  the  Guebres  out  of
curiosity  without  becoming  one  of  them,  and  I  will  suppose

B.  26


402 NOTE  Y — RECENT  PERSECUTIONS.

that  you  went  amongst  the  B^bis  for  the  same  reason.
I  ask  you,  then,  being  myself  curious,  what  you  saw  and
heard  from  the  time  that  you  entered  Acre  to  the  time
when  you  left  it  two  stages  behind  you  ? '  Seeing  his
humour,  I  perceived  no  better  course  than  to  relate  to  him
all  that  I  saw  and  heard,  even  as  I  have  related  it  to  you '.
When  I  had  finished,  the  Prince  said,  '  Stand  up.'  I  did
so,  and  he  cast  over  my  shoulders  a  costly  shawl,  exclaiming
as  he  did  so,  '  Bravo !  You  have  told  me  the  truth  without
exaggeration  or  suppression.' Then  he  asked  me  to  let  him

see  the  epistle  (^_^)  with  which  I  had  been  honoured.

I  gave  it  to  him,  and  he  read  it  attentively.  When  he  had
finished  it  he  laid  it  down  and  remained  silent  for  a  while
wrapped  in  thought.  Then  he  said,  '  Let  me  keep  this
by  me  to-night:  I  will  return  it  to  you  to-morrow.'  I
accordingly  withdrew,  leaving  the  epistle  in  his  hands.  On
the  morrow,  when  I  went  to  receive  it  back,  the  Prince  said,
'  You  have  heard,  of  course,  how  I  killed  those  two  Seyyids
here  because  they  were  Bihis ? '  'I  was  not  in  Isfahan  at
the  time,'  I  answered,  'but  of  course  I  heard  about  it.'
'  Well,'  said  the  Prince,  '  I  will  tell  you  how  it  happened.
The  Imdm-Jum'a  and  Sheykh  B4kir  owed  those  two  Seyyids
money,  and  coveted  their  wealth  and  possessions,  wherefore
they  fell  to  compassing  their  death,  so  that  they  might
plunder  their  houses  and  recover  the  bonds  which  they  had
given  to  them.  On  their  information  and  complaint  I
arrested  the  two  Seyyids  and  cast  them  into  prison,  for  I
feared  these  doctors  of  religion,  and  they  had  said  to  me,
"  Either  you  will  slay  these  two  Seyyids,  or  you  will  cease
to  be  governor  of  Isfahan."  On  the  second  or  third  day
after  this,  in  the  evening,  I,  being  alone  with  the  Binanu'l-
Mulk  and  my  secretary,  caused  the  two  Seyyids  to  be
brought  before  me,  and  thus  addressed  them : —  "  I  do  not
wish  to  kiU  you.  I  would  not  willingly  shed  the  blood  of  a
Seyyid.  But  I  fear  Sheykh  Bd,kir  and  the  Imdm-Jum'a.
If  you  will  but  curse  that  Seyyid  of  Shirdz^,  I  will  at

1  The  substance  of  Sheykh  S 's  narrative,  which  I  heard

him  repeat  several  times,  will  be  found  at  p.  519  of  my  first  paper
on  the  Bdbls  in  the  J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889.

2  i.  e.  Mivzi.  'Ali  Muhammad  the  Bdb.


THE MARTYES OF ISFAHAN.  403

ODce  release  you,  and  thenceforth,  neither  I  nor  the  clergy-
will  have  any  right  to  interfere  with  you  further."  "  We
cannot,"  they  replied,  "do  this  thing  which  you  ask  of  us."
I  then  said,  "  Look  at  the  matter  in  another  way;  either  you
regard  this  Se)ryid  as  God,  or  you  do  not.  If  you  do  not,
then  curse  him.  If  you  do,  then  he  is  a  boundless  sea  of
light,  and  your  cursing  him  will  no  more  harm  him  than
casting  a  dog  into  the  ocean  would  render  it  impure."
When  I  had  said  this,  the  younger  of  the  two  brothers,
Seyyid  Huseyn,  raised  his  head  and  answered,  "You  are  a
prince  and  the  King's  son;  such  words  beseem  you  not."
On  hearing  these  words  I  was  overcome  with  anger,  and,
standing  up,  smote  the  speaker  on  the  face.  Directly  I  had
done  so  I  was  sorry,  and  ordered  them  to  be  taken  back
to  prison.  As  they  still  refused  to  recant,  they  were
executed  in  the  Meyddn-i-Shdh.  Afterwards  their  bodies
were  dragged  by  the  feet  through  the  streets  and  bazaars,
and  cast  out  of  the  gate  beyond  the  city  walls.'  When
the  Prince  Zillu's-Sultdn  had  concluded  his  narrative  he
swore  thrice  '  by  the  death  of  JaUlu'd-Dawla '  ('  bi-marg-i-
Jaldlud-Dawla'y  saying,  'for  three  days  after  this  I  could
neither  sleep  nor  eat  for  thinking  of  those  Se)ryids.'  There
was  a  third  brother,  younger  than  the  two  who  were  killed,
who  cursed  the  Bdb,  abjured  the  Bdbf  faith,  and  was
released."

1  To  swear  by  the  death  of  any  one  presumably  dear  to  one's
self  is  a  very  common  form  of  asseveration  amongst  the  Persians.
The  oath  implies  "  may  So-and-so  die  if  I  speak  falsely."  Hence
the  dearer  the  friend  whose  death  is  sworn  by,  the  more  binding
and  solemn  the  oath.  This  is  why  a  Persian  always  swears
^^hi-marg-i-khvdat"  ("by  thy  death"),  never  ^'■bi-marg-i-kkudam"
("  by  my  own  death"),  for,  since  one  is  bound  to  regard  one's  own
life  as  of  little  value,  the  latter  oath  would  be  considered  far  less
solemn.  Jaldlu'd-Dawla  is  the  title  of  Prince  Zillu's-SulUn's
eldest  son,  who  was,  till  March  1888,  governor  of  Shiriz  and  the
province  of  Fdrs.


26—2


404  NOTE Y — RECENT PERSECUTIONS.

(2) The  Martyrdom  of  Mirzd  Ashraf  of  Abdde  in
October  1888.

Concerning  this  event,  which  occurred  very  shortly
after  I  left  Persia,  but  of  which  I  heard  for  the  first  time
from  General  Houtum-Schindler  at  the  meeting  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society  on  April  15th,  1889,  before  which  I
read  my  first  paper  on  the  Bd,bfs,  I  received  on  August  3rd
a  letter  from  one  of  my  Persian  friends  at  Shfr^z  dated
July  3rd,  1889.  Of  this  letter  I  published  a  translation  at
pp.  998 — 999  of  my  second  paper.  As  the  matter  is  of
considerable  interest  and  is  not  likely  to  be  chronicled
elsewhere,  I  think  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  reproduce
here  the  original  text  of  the  letter,  which  runs  as  follows : —

«flL>o 0.iL^  ^1  jVo ^J^  J'^-'^.  L^-^ l3^J

.ia)  oJLi.  Lil  i_)L>.l  jl  yis  JCs~  L  oLkUl  (JJi  >_jla.)'
3jJ  flj_^  «uL)  yil  ^j[)  \jj)]  ^ajbi  OJll  ij  V-.0  lil  _j
'J^  '-''  Xmj^  0\h\..\\  (JJi  o.il^Ulr  lisjM  fl^9  V'
IJj! IjwJJaji 1^ J;aJSj C^J iS XLi js Cji' (J^


MARTYRDOM OF MIRZi. ASHRAF.  405

jyJsl  ^y\  ^  Ljl  f^A)  OUjI  ia^uoJ  ^1  astoo  Ay  J
OUJ jh IjO^I \jj^ Lil JjJ> aJji .^Lg-'.'.cl Ij^jl

^a JU&JLa ■ ''9*" ^"'  "ft dfljliajl _j\ aj a5 Jll^>ja (Jla.*«<

0»>- J&,Xa i—llq*- j\J lytl  'i. I jj I Jlj  aJVa (^^''aaJ

a^KiLu a ji-il)  ^^LX»aJ ^\u sj4»j jftLi= (V* j^. U'' L^Jj

^.i»a  _j  Uic  J  a^i  A'.'.M.S  ij^aa^uj  ^\  jj  I  d_)  JOvus
-^ ^J  a>- Jil ajlj L5a3 rt* Ulc  _j XLS ^ ^jaJL

Jji  4i  1^5^  ajl  UbLi  (jl  jl  JUj  JLlJo  C-*iI  ^!)U>  Jftis
J^j^_da  lj_jl  «*/  ^JLLl/  iiojKS  jl  J&Xo  O  -ll  'Jj^  Is'
jjiJi Ij ^JL_>- Ol jl j_jj<-i X'j>>a jlj.1. Ijl_jl J«J _J


406  NOTE Y — RECENT PERSECUTIONS

Ulc L^l j^ _5 ^Jb^ I^LliI ^Jijj ^_^ ^3 4J \AAi

Ijjl jl)  j»jul  ^  j[/r^  '-^W-^  ■^'  ^ \AA1  JL  j3

On  August  4tli,  the  day  after  I  received  the  above
letter,  I  wrote  to  a  friend  at  Isfahan,  on  whose  kindness  I
felt  sure  I  might  rely,  for  information  which  no  one  was
better  qualified  than  himself  to  give.  On  October  8th,
just  a  year  after  Mlrz4  Ashraf's  martyrdom,  I  received  his
answer,  which  bore  the  date  September  6th,  1889. "  Yes,"

he  wrote,  "  it  is  quite  true  that  Aga  Mirza  Ashraf  of  Abftd^
was  put  to  death  for  his  religion  in  the  most  barbarous
manner  in  Ispahan  about  October  last.  The  hatred  of  the
MuUas  was  not  satisfied  with  his  murder,  but  they  muti-
lated the  poor  body  publicly  in  the  maidan  in  the  most
savage  manner,  and  then  burnt  what  was  left  of  it."

(3) The  persecutions  of  Si-dili  and  Najafdhdd.

The  same  letter  from  which  the  above  extract  is  quoted
continues  immediately  as  follows: — "Since  then  we  have
had  two  other  persecutions  of  B4bfs,  one  in  Sihdih  and  the
other  in  Nejifabad.  In  Sihdih,  where  the  B4bl  community
is  small,  their  houses  were  burned  and  their  wives  and
children  ill-treated.  The  men  saved  themselves  by  flight
to  Tehran,  and  I  am  told  that  about  25  of  them  have  just
returned  to  Ispahan  and  are  in  the  Prince's  Stables  in
bast^.  In  Nejifabad  there  are  about  2000  Bdbfs.  They
1  Sanctuary.


AT SI-DIH AND NAJAFABAD.  407

tried  the  same  game  with  them,  but  some  hundreds  of
them  took  refuge  iii  the  English  Telegraph  Office  in  Julfa,
and  the  Prince  [Zillu's-SulUn]  took  their  part  and  banished
from  Nejifabad  to  Kerbela  the  Mujtahid  who  persecuted
them.  So  the  result  is  that  they  are  freer  now  than  they
have  ever  been.  I  take  very  great  interest  in  the  poor
people,  not  only  for  their  own  sakes  but  for  the  sake  of
Persia  also,  as  if  liberty  is  gained  for  them  it  will  be  a
great  step  towards  shaking  the  power  of  the  MuMs  and
getting  liberty  for  all.  Just  before  the  last  persecution
of  the  Bdbls  the  Mujtahids  in  Ispahan,  especially  Hdji
Nejifi,_  tried  a  persecution  of  Jews  also,  and  threatened
Christians  with  the  same.  The  13  rules  of  Omar  (I
believe,  at  least,  most  of  them  may  be  traced  to  him)
were  enforced  for  a  short  time: — (1)  That  no  Jew  should
wear  an  'aba'.  (2)  That  they  should  wear  a  mark  on  their
dress.  (3)  Not  to  ride  any  beast  of  burden  in  the  city.
(4)  Not  to  leave  their  houses  on  a  wet  day^  (5)  Not  to
purchase  merchandize  from  a  Moslem.  (6)  That  when  a
Jew  meets  a  Moslem  he  is  to  salute  him  and  walk  behind
him.  (7)  Not  to  return  abuse.  (8)  Not  to  build  a  house
higher  than  a  Muslim  neighbour.  (9)  Not  to  eat  in
presence  of  a  Muslim  during  the  Ramazdn,  &c."

On  May  16th,  1890,  I  received  from  one  of  my  friends
in  Teherdn  a  letter  dated  April  13th.  Knowing  the  interest
which  I  took  in  the  BAbls,  he  was  kind  enough  to  include  in
this  letter  a  brief  account  of  these  persecutions,  which  runs
as  follows  : —

"You  have  doubtless  heard  of  the  late  Bihi  massacre
at  Isfahan,  and  I  will  only  therefore  tell  you,  in  case  you
have  not,  the  principal  points.  They  are  inhabitants  of
a  district  called  Seh-deh,  and  last  summer  a  number  of

^  A  kind  of  cloak  worn  over  the  kabd.

2  All  non-Muhammadans  are  regarded  by  the  Persian  Shi'ites
as  unclean  [najis),  but,  as  is  the  case  with  other  impurities,  the
true  believer  is  only  defiled  by  touching  them  or  their  garments
when  they  are  moist,  for  what  is  dry  does  not  pollute.  Hence
this  enactment,  which  is  generally  enforced  against  the  Zoroas-
trians  at  Yezd.  I  have  heard  of  a  Zoroastrian  being  punished
with  the  bastinado  for  venturing  into  the  bazaars  with  wet
clothes  on  a  rainy  day.


408 NOTE  Y — RECENT  PERSECUTIONS

them,  owing  to  constant  persecution,  left  their  villages  and
came  to  Isfahan,  whence  after  a  time  they  returned  home,
with  the  exception  of  a  certain  number  who  came  to
Tehran.  On  the  return  of  these  men  to  their  homes  about
six  weeks  ago  they  were  attacked  by  a  mob  headed  by  a
man  called  Agha  Nedjefy,  and  seven  or  eight  of  them  were
killed  and  their  bodies  burnt  with  oil.  They  then_  took
refuge  at  the  Telegraph  Office,  and  finally,  after  persistent
representations  from  this  [i.e.  the  British]  Legation,  have
been  received  by  the  Deputy  Governor.  It  is  hoped  that
on  the  Zil's^  return  in  a  few  days  they  will  be  able  to
go  home.  Agha  Nedjefy  has  been  summoned  to  Tehran
and  well  received.  Of  course  they  are  said  to  be  Bdbis,
though  there  seems  to  be  no  real  proof  that  they  are  of
that  persuasion.  When  the  murders  took  place  they  were
under  the  care  of  an  escort  which  was  intimidated  by  the
mob  and  left  them."

From  a  comparison  of  the  above  extracts  it  would
appear  that  the  B4bis  of  Si-dih  and  Najaf4b4d  were  sub-
jected to  two  separate  persecutions.  The  first  of  these,
which  took  place  previously  to  September  1889,  seems  to
have  been  limited  to  the  destruction  of  property,  and  not
to  have  resulted  in  actual  bloodshed.  The  second,  which,
according  to  the  last  extract  cited,  must  have  taken  place
about  March  1st,  1890,  was  brought  about  by  the  return  of
the  fugitive  BAhis  to  their  homes,  and  resulted  in  the  death
of  seven  or  eight  persons.

Almost  at  the  very  time  when  the  second  letter  from
which  I  have  quoted  was  being  written,  I  heard  at  Acre
some  account  of  the  latest  phase  of  this  episode. On  the

last  day  of  my  sojourn  there  (April  20th,  1890)  Ak4  Mlrzd

Ak4  JAn  "  Khddimu'lldh"  came  into  the  room  where  we
were  sitting,  bearing  in  his  hand  a  letter  which  had  just
arrived  from  Persia.  From  this  letter  he  read  out  what
purported  to  be  an  exact  copy  of  a  telegram  sent  from
Teher4n  by  the  Prince  Zillu's-Sultin  to  his  deputy  at
Isfahan. The message  was a  long one and I had  no

1  i.  e.  the  Zillu's-Sultdn,  the  Shah's  eldest  son,  till  February
1888  Prince-Governor  of  the  greater  part  of  Southern  Persia,  and
still  Governor  of  Isfahan  and  the  surrounding  districts.


AT SI-DIH AND NAJAEABAD.  409

opportuDity  of  copying  it,  but  its  general  tenour  I  re-
member perfectly  well,  while  some  of  the  expressions
contained  in  it  were  too  remarkable  to  be  forgotten.  It
contained  the  most  positive  orders  couched  in  the  most
emphatic  language  to  put  au  effectual  stop  to  these  un-
provoked molestations  of  the  B4bls.  "If  you  do  not
instantly  restore  order  and  quiet,  silence  these  mischief-
makers  who  disturb  the  peace  of  my  government,  and  give
efficient  protection  to  quiet  law-abiding  folks,  I  will  come
myself,  post,  and  give  you  a  lesson."  Then  followed  a  string
of  threats  and  reproaches,  ending  in  these  most  significant
words — "  After  all  you  know  me.  It  is  not  necessary  for
me  to  introduce  myself^."  That  the  contents  of  a  telegram
sent  from  the  Prince-Governor  of  Isfahan  to  his  deputy
should  be  known  at  Acre  may  appear  astonishing,  but  I
have  more  than  once  been  amazed  at  the  rapidity  and
completeness  with  which  the  Bdbls  become  informed  of  all
that  concerns  their  interests.

The  intercession  of  the  British  Minister  with  the
Persian  Government  on  behalf  of  the  persecuted  Bdbfs
called  forth  a  violent  protest  from  the  Teherdn  corre-
spondent of  the  Aklitar''.  Of  a  portion  of  this  article,
which  was  dated  Sha'bd,n  9th,  a.h.  1307  (=  March  31st,
1890)  from  Teherdn,  and  appeared  in  the  issue  of  Shawwd,!
8th  (=  May  26th)  of  the  same  year,  I  append  a  translation.

"  Some  little  time  ago  troubles  arose  in  Isfahan  by
reason  of  an  assault  made  by  a  party  of  Jews  on  a
[Musulmdn]  student  [of  theology],  and  the  towns-folk
attacked  the  Jews,  with  whom  it  went  ill.  After  that
again  a  disturbance  occurred  in  Si-dih  of  Isfahan,  and
several  of  the  innovators  ^  who  were  wont  to  disparage
the  conduct  of  the  Musulmdns,  suffered  injury  and  loss.

^  The  Akhtar  (Star)  is  the  chief  Persian  newspaper,  and
almost  the  only  one  which  contains  any  news  as  we  understand
the  word.  It  is  published  weekly  at  Constantinople,  and  has
a  large  circulation  throughout  the  Bast.  Lately,  however,  it  has
for  some  reason  been  suppressed.

3  A  euphuism  for  the  Bdbfs,  whom  other  Persians  are  as
a  rule  very  loath  to  mention  by  name.


410  NOTE Y — RECENT PERSECXJTIONS.

The  Imperial  Government  made  strenuous  efforts  to  put  a
stop  to  the  mischief,  and  did  not  allow  the  flame  of  that
disturbance  to  spread ;  but  the  most  astonishing  thing  is
the  interference  of  the  Bnghsh  Embassy  in  such  matters,
and  the  submission  of  the  ministers  of  the  Persian  Govern-
ment to  sach  conduct,  which  oversteps  the  rights  of  states
and  nations,  on  the  part  of  the  afore-mentioned  Embassy.
"What  has  come  to  the  English  Embassy  that,  in  face  of  the
autonomy  of  the  Persian  Empire  of  eternal  duration,  it
should  send  a  special  representative  to  Isfahd,n  for  the
investigation  of  this  matter,  take  down  the  names  of  these
mischievous  and  seditious  innovators,  and  thus  embolden
these  misleaders  of  men,  who  are  hostile  alike  to  Church
and  State,  and  are,  indeed,  enemies  to  the  whole  human
race,  in  their  sedition  ?

"  All  these  things  are  the  result  of  the  heedlessness  of
that  day  when  the  ministers  of  state  first  admitted  the
interference  of  foreigners  under  the  guise  of  benevolent
intercession  in  such  contingencies,  until  now  they  have
changed  intercession  into  arrogance,  and  benevolence  into
hostility,  and  have  carried  intervention  to  such  a  pitch
that  within  the  Persian  dominions  they  meddle  in  a  quarrel
between  two  subjects  of  the  Sh4h  between  whom  and
themselves  no  sort  of  connection  or  relation  subsists,  and
send  thither  the  second  secretary  of  the  Embassy  to  conduct
investigations.  Yet  no  one  asks  of  them,  '  Sir  Ambassador,
what  concern  of  thine  is  it  ?  Should  such  an  event  happen
in  your  coimtry,  would  you  allow  another  to  meddle  with
it?  Show  us  then  by  what  right  you  have  been  led  to
interfere  in  this  matter  V"

On  the  whole,  however,  the  B&his  are  much  less  liable
to  suffer  molestation  now  than  they  were  formerly,  and  not
uncommonly  the  malicious  attempts  of  their  inveterate  foes
the  Mull4s  to  inaugurate  a  persecution  prove  abortive,  as
is  shewn  by  the  following  translation  from  a  letter  written
to  me  from  Shir4z  on  October  19th,  1888,  by  the  correspon-
dent whose  account  of  Mirz^  Ashraf  s  mart3rrdom  I  have
already  quoted.

"  You  asked  me  concerning  the  trouble  about  the  B&his
in  Shirdz.  It  was  not  of  such  consequence  as  to  be  worth
writing  about. A  black  maid-servant  had  stolen  sundry


CHECKS TO FANATICISM.  411

articles  from  the  house  of  K Khdn,  and,  out  of  mere

enmity  towards  her  master,  had  got  possession  of  a  copy  of
the  Ikdn  which  was  amongst  his  books.  This  she  laid
before  Seyyid  'Ah  Akbar,  one  of  the  'TJlama  of  Shlr^z
notorious  for  boundless  fanaticism. He  attempted  to  induce

the  authorities  of  Shlrdz  to  put  K Kh4n  and  several

other  persons  to  death,  but  the  Government  paid  no  heed  to
his  representations,  and,  indeed,  censured  and  upbraided
him.  A  telegram  also  came  from  Teheran  sternly  forbidding
him.  When  he  perceived  that  he  was  not  supported  or
countenanced  by  the  Government  authorities,  he  was  dis-
comfited and  reduced  to  silence.

"In  Bushire  also  one  of  the  Mullds  wished  to  act  ill
towards  several  persons  of  this  sect.  Sa'du'l-Mulk,  the
Governor  of  Bushire,  promptly  issued  an  order  for  the
expulsion  of  the  MulU  himself ;  though  at  length,  by  much
intercession,  it  was  decreed  that  he  might  remain  on  con-
dition of  never  [again]  meddling  in  such  matters."

An  event  which  took  place  still  more  recently  in  the
Russian  dominions  may  perhaps  have  a  salutary  effect  in
checking  the  ferocious  intolerance  of  the  Mull^s,  at  any
rate  outside  Persia.  Baron  Rosen  has  described  this  occur-
rence, from  notes  made  on  the  spot  by  M.  Toumansky,  in
connection  with  two  epistles  from  Beh4  to  the  "revelation"
of  which  it  gave  rise.  This  account,  together  with  the  text
of  these  epistles,  will  be  found  at  pp.  247 — 250  of  the
forthcoming  sixth  volume  of  the  Collections  Scientifiques  <tc.
Availing  myself  of  Baron  Rosen's  generous  permission  to
make  full  use  of  his  still  unpublished  work,  I  conclude  this
note  with  a  translation  of  his  narrative.

"At  7  a.m.  on  September  8th  (August  27th,  old  style)
1889,  two  fanatical  Persian  Shi'ites,  Mash-hadi  'Ali  Akbar
and  Mash-hadi  Huseyn,  threw  themselves,  dagger  in  hand,
on  a  certain  H4jf  Muhammad  Rizd,  of  Isfahan,  who  was
peaceably  traversing  one  of  the  most  frequented  streets  of
'Ishkdbdd,  and  inflicted  on  him  72  wounds,  to  which
he  succumbed.  Hdjf  Muhammad  Riz^  was  one  of  the
most  respected  of  the  Bdbfs  of  'IshkdbM.  The  crime  was
perpetrated  with  such  audacity  that  neither  the  numerous
witnesses  of  the  occurrence,  nor  the  constable  who  was  on
the  spot  could  save  the  victim  of  this  odious  attack. The


412  NOTE Z — ZEYNU 'L-MUKAREASfN

assassins  yielded  themselves  up  to  the  police  without  any
resistance  ;  they  were  placed  in  a  cab  andconveyed  to  the
prison.  During  the  transit  they  fell  to  licking  up  the  bipod
which  was  dripping  from  their  daggers.  The  examination,
conducted  with  much  energy  by  the  military  tribunal,_  gave
as  its  result  that  Muhammad  Riz4  had  fallen  a  victim  to
the  religious  bigotry  of  the  Shi'ites.  Fearful  of  Muhammad
Eizd's  influence,  the  Shi'ites  of  'Ishkdbdd,  acting  in  ac-
cordance with  the  orders  of  MulUs  who  had  come  expressly
for  this  purpose  from  Khurisfin,  resolved  to  cut  short
the  Bdbl  propaganda  by  killing  Hdjf  Muhammad  Rizd.
Knowing  well,  however,  that  the  crime  would  not  remain
unpunished,  they  left  it  to  chance  to  determine  what
persons  should  sacrifice  themselves  for  the  Shi'ite  cause.
Thus  it  was  that  the  individuals  named  above  became  the
assassins  of  Muhammad  Riz4,  who  had  never  injured  them
in  any  way.  The  sentence  of  the  tribunal  was  severe :
'All  Akbar  and  Huseyn,  as  well  as  two  of  their  con-
federates, were  condemned  to  be  hanged,  but  the  penalty
of  death  was  commuted  by  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  to
hard  labour  for  life.

"This  sentence  was  hailed  by  the  Bd.bis  with  an  en-
thusiasm easy  to  understand.  It  was  the  first  time  since
the  existence  of  the  sect,  i.e.  for  nearly  fifty  years,  that  a
crime  committed  on  the  person  of  an  adherent  of  the  new
religion  had  been  punished  with  all  the  rigour  of  the  law.
The  impression  produced  on  the  chief  of  the  sect,  Behi,
appears  to  have  been  equally  profound.  The  two  reve-
lations  which  we  shall  submit  to  the  reader  sufficiently
prove  this.  They  are  also  interesting  from  another  point
of  view  :  they  are  almost  the  only  Bdbl  documents  of  which
we  can  understand  all  the  meanings,  all  the  allusions."


NOTE  Z.

Zeynu'l-MukarrabIn,  his  colophons,  and  the  light
thrown  by  these  on  the  basf  method  of  reckon-
ING TIME.

The  information  which  I  possess  about  Ze}aiu'l-Mukar-
rabin  the  Behd'f  scribe  (or,  as  he  prefers  to  call  himself,


AND HIS COLOPHONS.  413

Harfu  z-Zd  "  the  Letter  Z  ")  is,  unfortunately,  very  scanty.
Before  I  visited  Acre,  I  had  heard  his  fame  in  Kirmin,  but
all  that  I  learned  definitely  about  him  was  that  his  real

name  was  Zeynu'l-'Abidfn ;  that  he  had  resided  for  many
years  at  Mosul ;  that  all  the  best  and  most  correct  manu-
scripts of  the  sacred  books  were  written  or  revised  by  him  ;
and  that  Sheykh  ^^^^^^,  the  B4bi  courier  mentioned  at
pp.  496—498  of  my  first  paper  in  the  J.  B.  A.  8.  for  1889,
visited  him  yearly  on  his  return  journey  from  Acre  to
Southern  Persia.

During  my  stay  at  Acre  in  April  1890  I  learned  that
he  had  resided  there  for  some  years,  but  I  did  not  see  him,
at  any  rate  to  my  knowledge.  Many  manuscripts  were,
however,  lent  me  to  read  while  I  was  there,  and  all  of
these,  so  far  as  I  remember,  were  written  by  his  hand.
From  some  of  these  I  transcribed  the  colophons  of  which  I
shall  speak  directly.  Two  manuscripts  written  by  him
were  given  to  me  on  my  departure  from  Acre,  viz.  the
present  history,  whereof  the  text  is  now  offered  to  the

public  m  facsimile,  and  a  copy  of  the  Ikdn.  His  industry
must  be  prodigious,  the  aforesaid  ms.  of  Ikdn,  for  instance,
being,  as  stated  in  the  colophon,  the  67th  copy  which  he
had  transcribed!  The  present  history,  being  written  to
some  extent  for  general  circulation,  is  dated  only  in  the
Muhammadan  fashion;  but  all  MSS.  of  the  sacred  books
proper  are  also  dated  according  to  the  Bdbl  method.
Though  I  have  not  ascertained  exactly  when  Zeynu'l-
Mukarrabin  came  from  Mosul  to  Acre,  it  appears  from
the '  colophons  directly  to  be  quoted  that  in  a.h.  1296
(a.d.  1879)  he  was  still  at  the  former  place,  and  that  in
A.H.  1305  (a-D-  1887—8)  he  was  abeady  at  the  latter.

Of  the  Bdbl  system  of  reckoning  time,  and  of  the  names
applied  to  the  days  and  months,  I  gave  an  account  at
pp.  921 — 922  of  my  second  paper  in  the  J.  R.  A.  S.  for
1889.  Being  uncertain  as  to  whether  these  names  had
been  fixed  by  the  B4b  himself  or  by  the  Behd,'is,  I  was
carefal  to  enquire  about  them  from  Subh-i-Ezel,  not  teUing
him,  of  course,  what  I  had  heard  previously.  He  wrote
down  their  names  for  me,  and  this  list  which  he  gave  me  I
here  reproduce. It  will  be  found  to  correspond  with  the


414  NOTE Z — ZEYNU 'L-MUKARRAB1n

information  obtained  from  the  Behd'fs,  save  that  the  8th
and  9th  months  are  transposed ;  and  from  this  I  assume
that  these  names  were  fixed  previously  to  the  _  schism,
probably  by  the  B4b  himself  Gobineau  also,  in  his  trans-
lation of  the  Kitdb-i-Ahkdni,  mentions  the  month  "Aid"
as  the  last  of  the  19  months  of  the  year.

List  of  the  19  Bibi  months  in  order,  as  given
by  Subh-i-Ezel.


ojji  \r

oLir Y

>.  ^

J> \i

1.  „l A

6-^  ^

JjLw. \o

jur 1

JU  r

<SjL \\

OJc \  •

r-.r^hr. i

oLkL \Y

C.n'.n W

jy 0

dlL \A

C-A>-j 1

As  the  year  contains  19  months,  so  does  the  month
contain  19  days,  and  the  same  names  therefore  serve  for
both'.  Provisionally,  however,  the  following  new  nomen-
clature has  been  applied  to  the  old  week  of  seven  days : —

Sunday, JUsJI py.  Wednesday,  Jlji«!l ^oj.

Monday, JLjjl j»_^_.  Thursday,  J]>U^VI ^y-

Tuesday,  JUaall |>j.j.  Friday,  ^yk^)l\ ^y_.

Saturday,  J^)1?e]I poj.

1  The  analogy  between  this  and  the  system  of  nomenclature
in  the  Zoroastrian  calendar  is  very  remarkable.


AND HIS COLOPHONS.  415

Of  this  arrangement  Subh-i-Ezel  said  nothing,  so  that  it
may  possibly  have  originated  with  the  Beh&'ia.  I  now
proceed  with  the  transcription  and  translation  of  three
colophons  copied  by  myself  at  Acre  from  manuscripts
written  by  Zeynu'l-Mukarrabfn,  concluding  with  a  fourth

appended  to  the  ms.  of  the  Ikdn  above  mentioned.

1. Colophon  from  a  MS.  written  at  Mosul  in  a.h. 1296
(=A.D.  1879).

jjj ,_j(-^' i — ^ i\o Aft  Ktll «i-^  (> ajjfljl P-^ J^UEX^il
alj9 <Sj^ L ^_jj OUI ikflj jjf^ iy> ij,^^ -b-l^l

0*u  <!i ^  ■J3i-^  (_V°  '^'^'  l53u>j»- >^--u  (V> «jLJJ  [fljuajs

* ly^Lli _5 LL.I)  _5 \j4-\ J, Vjl

"There  ceased  from  the  transcription  of  this  its  poor
writer  the  Letter  Zd  on  the  day  of  Istijldl  [Thursday],  the
day  of  Kudrat  [the  13th  day]  of  the  month  'Azimat  [the
4th  month]  of  the  36th  year,  [that  is  the  year]  iJaAf  [the
seventeenth]  of  the  second  Vdhid  after  the  manifestation
of  the  Point  of  Revelation  [i.e.  the  Bdb]  (may  the  life  of
all  beside  him  be  his  sacrifice),  corresponding  to  the  7th  of
the  month  Jemddf  II  of  the  months  of  the  year  1296,  six
and  ninety  and  two  hundred  after  the  Millennium  of  the
Flight  of  the  Prophet  (upon  its  fugitive  be  a  thousand


416  NOTE Z — ZEYNU 'L-MUKARRASfN

salutations  and  greetings).  And  I  was  [at  this  time
resident]  in  [Mosul]  al-Hadbd'.  And  this  is  the  seventh
copy  which  God  hath  helped  me  to  write  according  to  this
arrangement.  Praise  be  to  God  first  and  last,  inwardly  and
outwardly."

2.  Colophon  from a  MS. written  at Acre  in  a.h.  1305

(=A.D.  1887).

sj)j>-  jiljl  ij"l5^  ij^l  vjbOl  IJas  iL'T'  ^y  ^j>

^y>M wi-i r^a )L.V„>.ftU liLkii kduLll J9-I^l y jl^l

"  There  ceased  from  the  transcription  of  this  perspicuous
book  its  poor  writer  the  Letter  Z4  on  the  day  of  Kemdl
[Monday]  the  day  of  'Ilm  [the  12th  day]  of  the  month  of
'Izzat  [the  10th  month]  of  the  44th  year  [^that  is  the  year]
Vdv  [the  sixth]  of  the  third  Vahid,  corresponding  to  the
MustahaW  [first]  of  the  month  of  Muharram  the  sacred
[a.h.]  1305  in  the  city  of  'Ayn  \_'A]iJcu  or  Acre].  Praise  be
.to  God  as  beseems  Him."

3.  Colophon  from a  MS.  written at  Acre  in  a.h.  1306

(=A.D.  1889).

1  See  note  2  on  p.  139  supra.

2  This  word  I  misread  and  transcribed  as  j.^^^.,  which  gives
no  appropriate  meaning.  To  the  kindness  of  Baron  Rosen  I  am
indebted  for  the  correction  here  made,  which  is  evidently  needed.


AND HIS COLOPHONS.  417

L$:>\a>- uSi ^ ^"ySU C-<'\ IfljLko Oull Jk>-Ul ^ JjVI

"  There  ceased  from  the  transcription  of  this  perspicuous
book  its  poor  writer  the  Letter  Z4  on  the  day  of  Jemdl
[Sunday]  the  day  of  'Aid  [the  19th-  day]  of  the  month  of
ilulk  [the  18th  month]  of  the  45th  year  [that  is  the  year]
Abad  [the  seventh]  of  the  third  Vdkid,  corresponding  to
the  twenty-third  of  the  montli  of  Jem4dl  II  in  the  year
1306  after  the  Flight  of  the  Prophet  (upon  its  fugitive  be  a
thousand  salutations  and  greetings).  Praise  be  to  God  who
hath  helped  me  to  complete  it,  such  praise  as  is  worthy  of
the  court  of  His  sanctity.

In  the  city  of  'Ayn  ['Akkd]. Number  10."

4. Colophon  from  my  MS.  of  the  Ikdn  written  at  Acre
in  A.H.  1306  (=  A.D.  1889).

Jto-I^l ry> J>y\ ill-- ^y> v_i^JI j^ ^ JsLJI  iU

iJJL  Iju»-  AiiLiV  ^j^j  'S3.\  'Ui  -ui"-!  ^  iptJ  _$  ^'^
B.  27


418  NOTE Z — ZEYNU'L-MUKARRABfN

"  There  ceased  from  the  transcription  of  this  its  poor
writer  the  Letter  Zd,  on  the  night  of  Jemdl  [Sunday]  the
night  of  Masail  [the  15th  day]  of  the  month  of  Sharqf
the  16th  month]  of  the  45th  year  [that  is  the  year]  Abad
the  seventh]  of  the  third  VdJiid,  corresponding  to  the
eleventh  of  the  month  of  Jem^di  I  of  the  months  of  the
year  1306  after  the  FHght  of  the  Prophet  (upon  its  fugitive
be  a  thousand  salutations  and  greetings).  Praise  be  to
God  who  hath  helped  me  to  complete  it,  such  praise  as  is
worthy  of  the  Court  of  His  sanctity.

Number  67."
For  the  further  elucidation  of  the  matter  I  here  re-
produce the  single  Bdbi  colophon  which  I  wa-s  able  to  cite
in  my  second  paper  in  the  /.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889  (p.  922).

5. Colophon  from  a  Commentary  on  the  Kitdb-i-Akdas
seen  at  Shir^z  in  April  1888.

"  He  wrote  it  on  the  day  of  Kenidl  [Monday]  the  day
of  'Aid  [the  19th  day]  of  the  month  of  Nur  [the  5th
month]  of  the  year  Badi  [which  would  be  the  16th  year,
but,  for  the  reason  given  in  the  footnote,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  this  is  a  mistake  for  Baki,  the  seventeenth  year]
of  the  second  Vdhid,  a.h.  1296."

From  the  above  colophons  we  perceive  that,  besides  the
division  of  the  year  into  19  months  of  19  days  each,  the
years  elapsed  since  the  '  Manifestation '  are  also  arranged

1  sic  in  copy,  but  from  analogy  the  word  ^  appears  redundant.

2  This  is  evidently  a  mistake  for  ^i,  for,  as  we  see  from
the  first  colophon  quoted  in  this  note  {supra,  p.  415),  the  13th
day  of  the  4th  mouth  of  the  year  Bahi  {i.  e.  the  36th  year  of  the
'■Manifestation,'  or  the  17th  year  of  the  second  Vdhid  of  nineteen
years)  fell  in  a.h.  1296,  the  same  year  in  which  this  colophon  was
written  ;  and  in  all  that  relates  to  the  Bd,W  method  of  reckoning
time  ZejTiu'l-Mukarrabin's  authority  is  incontrovertible.


AND HIS COLOPHONS.  419

in  Vdhids  or  cycles  of  19,  and  that  to  eacli  year  is  given  a
name '  which,  by  the  sum  of  its  component  letters,  indicates
the  position  of  the  year  in  its  own  Vdhid,  e.g. —

The  36th  year  after  the  Manifestation  is  called  "  the

year  BaM  [i_$+a+v_)  =  10  +  5  +  2  =  17]  of  the  second
Vdkid"  [19  +  17  =  36].

The  44th  year  after  the  Manifestation  is  called  "the
year  Ydv  [^  =  6]  of  the  third  Vdhid"  [(2  x  19)  +  6  =  44].

The  45th  year  after  the  Manifestation  is  called  "the
year  Abad  [j  +  ^  +  I  =  4  +  2  +  1  =  7]  of  the  third  Vdhid  "
[(2  X  19)  +  7  =  45].

The  general  arrangement  of  the  B4bi  calendar  is  now
sufficiently  clear,  and,  inasmuch  as  all  Bibi  colophons
would  appear  to  give  the  Muhammadan  date  as  well  as
the  B4bi  date,  this  is  perhaps  all  that  we  need  know.
Nevertheless,  since  MSS.  may  subsequently  be  discovered  in
which  the  date  is  given  according  to  the  Bd,bi  method
only,  and  since  the  matter  is  one  calculated  to  arouse
our  curiosity,  I  feel  impelled  to  discuss  two  questions
which  must  be  solved  ere  we  can  feel  that  we  have  fully
mastered  the  problem  before  us.

These  questions  are  : —

(1)  From  what  fixed  point  does  the  reckoning  begin  ?

(2)  Does  the  year  consist  of  361  (i.e.  19  x  19)  days
only,  or  is  any  system  of  intercalation  adopted  to  keep  it  in
correspondence  with  the  solar  year  ?

1  That  some  special  method  of  enumerating  years  was  em-
ployed by  the  Babis  I  conjectured  in  my  second  paper  in  the
J.  R.A.  S.  for  1889  (p.  922,  note  1),  but,  having  only  one  colophon
before  me,  I  altogether  failed  to  understand  its  application,  or  to
perceive  that  the  iiwmerical  value,  not  the  meaning,  of  the  name
of  each  year  was  the  true  guide  to  its  position  in  the  Vdhid
or  cycle  of  years.  Hence  1  failed  to  see  that  Badl  (jj.)  was
a  mere  numerical  expression  or  chronogram,  and,  imagining  that
it  meant  '■'first,"  vainly  perplexed  myself  over  the  chronolo-
gical difficulties  involved  in  this  supposition.  However,  as^  1
have  already  pointed  out,  Badi  in  this  colophon  is  clearly  a  mis-
take for  BaM  {^,  so  that  I  might  have  failed  to  deduce  the
truth  even  if  1  had  guessed  it.

27—2


420  NOTE Z — BABf CALENDAR.

Before  discussing  these  questions  further,  let  us  see
what  is  said  on  the  matter  (1)  by  the  B^b  in  the  Persian
Beydn,  and  (2)  by  Behd'u'lld.h  in  the  Kitdb-i-Akdas.


(1) Ordinances  of  the  B^b  concerning  tlie  arrangement  of
the  calendar.

[From  the  Persian  Beydn.]

(_P a:taji3 |^'I>- Jiff J')_jlj>- iKil •_>!< /.s\ ,ia>da
_3 4.iO Jl^ j^ a-^jjj l^'l J ^ (J-J -iJff Ujji^

flXol)  '''yc \jj>-\ _j  ■*  Lj 'jJ  s'

_jl  J_33- J3 ^_yS- J_j^ J C*-! iiaaj  ^^>ul. Jjl ^^^  J

(J^  Ijtjl  J  J  ^^  ol  *Iji^  <i_f  c.^1  jLJ^  Jia  -iyt""


PERSIAN BEYAN QUOTED.  421

_5 aJiU C-^uJ Ja-I_3 v-ij_;S- jl ^_j^o [yl jl «aj A

Cu-&  <i)l  VI  ill  V  |>_^  ol  Oo-l  jj)j^  ijT'  Jjl  >_jj

^-^'  3'  J->  i-^  OliU  JJ>  Ovul  iJaflj  Jia  P_^  ijl  Jia
J  J 1^)1 jf-^ J jJjU-io Jj.C jl i_$j^ _j JljJLa i^^Li-

(_yj  j-i  J^'i  _$  0-5I3  jl^ ^11  <^jj>-  oli  oL)  iJaflj

CjI a:ijjij3 j\ji <Ul a«Jii ^y" tj"_j^ ■J3r^

"  The  third  clmpter  of  tlie  fifth  Ydhid.  In  explanation
of  the  knowledge  of  the  years  and  the  months.  The  quint-
essence of  this  chapter  is  this,  that  the  Lord  of  the
Universe  hath  created  all  the  years  by  His  command,  and
by  the  manifestation  of  the  Bey4n  hath  appointed  'the
Number  of  All  Things'  [361  =  19  x  19]  as  the  number  of
every  year,  and  hath  appointed  it  [to  consist  of]  nineteen
months,  and  hath  appointed  each  month  nineteen  days ;
that  all  may  advance  through  the  nineteen  degrees  of  the
'  Letters  of  the  Unity '  from  the  point  of  entrance  into  [the
sign  of]  the  Earn  to  the  limit  of  its  course  which  terminates
in-  [the  sign  of  the]  Fish.  And  He  hath  called  the  first
month  Behd  and  the  last  'Ala

"And  the  first  month  is  the  month  of  the  'Point,'  and

around  it  revolve  the  months  of  'the  Living'  [^>-  =  18];

and  it  is  like  unto  the  sun  amidst  the  months,  the  other
months  being  like  mirrors  wherein  shineth  forth  the  light
of  that  month,  and  wherein  naught  is  seen  save  that  month.
And  it  hath  been  named  by  the  Lord  '  the  month  of  Behd '


422  NOTE Z — BABI CALENDAR.

[i.e.  splendour  or  brightness]  in  this  sense,  that  the  bright-
ness of  all  the  months  is  in  that  month.  And  [God]  hath
set  it  apart  for  '  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest/  and  hath
assigned  every  day  of  it  to  one  of  the  'Letters  of  the
Living.'  And  the  first  day  [thereof],  which  is  the  Nawruz,
is  the  day  of  '  there  is  no  god  but  God ' ;  the  like  of  that
day  is  as  the  '  Point '  in  the  Beydn,  from  which  all  are
created,  and  unto  which  all  return.  And  He  hath  made
the  manifestation  thereof  in  the  '  Point  of  the  Beyd,n,'  the
'Person  of  the  Seven  Letters,"  and  hath  made  it  the  throne
of  '  Him  whom  God  shall  manifest '  in  this  manifestation."
The  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  sixth  Vdhid  is  entirely
devoted  to  the  glorification  of  the  Nawruz  and  the  de-
scription of  the  ceremonies  and  rejoicings  with  which  it
should  be  observed.  This  ancient  festival,  here  called  'the
day  which  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  hath  set  apart  for
himself  amidst  the  days,  and  hath  named  'the  Day  of
God'"  {Yawmu'lldli),  is  defined  as  "the  day  when  the  sun
passes  from  the  sign  of  the  Fish  into  the  Ram,"  and  it  is
ordained  that  the  actual  moment  of  this  passage  "  whether
it  occur  during  the  night  or  during  the  day "  shall  be  the
signal  for  the  inauguration  of  these  ceremonies.


(2) Ordinances  of  Beh4'u'lUh  concerning  the  arrangement
of  the  calendar.

[From  the  Kitdb-i-AMas.]
Oal ^y> ^_>ll^=ill  ^1 j^ oUI  ^_y^ CjU>I S\JS^

jj^il  ^c  ■iJ\J\  (.M  l_jUI  ol Jul  J  *jull  dJlU

1  See  p.  230  supra.


KITAB-I-AKDAS QUOTED.  423

J  ^LJI Jc  j_^  >»LjVI  ji_3J>  ^^Svs- di]jL^=  f>ii-^'

^\  'Oil  .3jjt>-  iit  >_)1&^I  JiJ*ll  _?^  AJ'  aJ^  ^  'j^
^l_5lj  lydj  ^I^VI  J  ^ijll  (i  JcVI  ^Iflll  Jyo  C^^J
1/ °'l J  nitOl l_5Jl>-l (ji'^i (V* '  ^J?^ 'S _3 <ioLx>-l 9 4Ul

J Jjli ijJiSI JJaflll IJ1& ^_^ l-^JfJ' f>^='*^ ^ jl


"  0  Supreme  Pen !  Say,  '  0  concourse  of  creation,  We
have  ordained  unto  you  the  fast  during  [a]  limited  [number
of]  days,  and  We  have  appointed  the  Nawruz  as  a  festival
unto  you  after  the  completion  thereof ;  thus  doth  the  Sun
of  Revelation  shine  forth  from  the  horizons  of  the  Book  on
the  part  of  the  Lord  of  origin  and  return. Place  the  days


424  NOTE Z — BABf CALENDA}1.

■whic}i  are  in  cxccsh  over  the  inonths'  before  the  month  of
fasting;  verily  We  liave  made  them  types  of  the  [letter]
]M  [=  5]  amonffst  the  nights  and  the  days,  therefore  were
they  not  included  witfun  tlie  limits  of  the  year  and  the
months.  In  them  it  is  incumbent  on  those  who  are  in
lieha  to  feed  tliomsclvcs  and  [their]  relatives,  then  the
poor  and  the  nceily,  and  to  confess  and  magnify  and  glorify
and  praise  their  Lord  with  joy  and  gladness.  And  when
the  days  of  giving  before  [the  days  of]  abstinence  are
ended,  let  tfi(.')u  enter  upon  the  fast.  Thus  ordairjctfi  the
Lord  of  men :  there  is  no  obligation  [to  fast]  on  the
traveller,  on  him  wlu)  is  sic]?,  on  the  pregaiant  woman,  or
on  her  who  giveth  suck;  these  hath  (iod  excused  as  a
favour  on  His  jtart ;  verily  He  is  the  Miglity,  the  Bountiful.
'J'hese  are  the  ordinances  of  God  which  have  been  written
by  the  Supreme  I'en  in  the  books  and  the  epistles:  hold
firmly  to  the  commands  of  God  and  His  ordinances,  and  be
not  of  those  who  adopt  their  own  principles  and  fling  God's
])rinciples  behind  them  for  that  they  follow  imaginations
and  fancies.  Abstain  from  eating  and  drinking  from  dawn
till  sundown;  beware  lest  lust  withhold  you  from  this
favour  which  hath  been  decreed  in  the  Book.'"

From  all  this  it  would  seem  that  the  restoration  of  the
old  Vf.rv'vAM  solar  year  in  place  of  the  Arabian  lunar  year  ;
the  solemn  sanctioning  of  the  great  national  festival  of  the
N(i/ivna,  which  corresjiouds  with  the  beganning  of  this
solar  year,  the  quickeriing  of  the  earth  after  its  winter's
torpor,  and  the  entry  of  the  Sun  into  the  sign  of  Aries;
the  division  of  the  year  into  Yd  months  of  19  days  each;
and  the  nomenclature  certainly  of  some  and  probably  of
all  of  these  months  were  integral  portions  of  tije  system
devised  by  the  B4b ;  while  the  jjrovision  of  the  five  inter-
calary days  (corresponding  to  what  the  Muhammadans  call

iij-.u^  °<iu-A3-  "the  stolen  five")  and  the  enactments  relating

to  their  observance  were  supplementary  details  introduced
by  Beh^.  The  fast  of  one  month  of  19  days  (or,  in  the
case  of  tho.se  who  have  not  reached  maturity,  11  days,

1  i.e.  the  days  required  to  bring  the  BdW  year  of  .361  (19  x  V.))
days  intf)  correspondence  with  the  solar  year.


COMMEXCEMENT OF ERA.  i'lo

"' aoeordiiig  to  the  number  of  ii'")  i#  al<o  enjoined  in  the
Pei-sian  Bei/an  {Viihid  viii,  ck.  1S\  but  the  month  does
uor  appear  to  be  there  specitied.  though  in  the  Kltab-l-
Ahhim  (Gobineau,  p.  Ji.o^  the  mouth  of  'Aid,  the  last  in
the  Babi  year,  is  appointed  for  it.  The  only  part  of  the
Babi  calendar  as  it  at  present  exists  with  which  Beha  can
be  crediteil  v^^nd  that  not  certainly)  is  the  introduction
of  the  intercalary  da\  s  needed  to  bring  the  Babi  year  into
correspondence  with  the  solar  year.  It  is  evident,  more-
over, that  otily  so  many  of  these  hve  iuterealar}-  days  are
to  be  used  as  may  be  neeessary  to  bridge  over  the  interval
between  the  last  day  of  the  month  '.I';  and  the  Xairriiz.

Lastly  it  is  clear  that  the  Babi  era  commences  not,  as
we  might  prima  /acit  have  expected,  on  May  Jord  a.d.
1S44  ^see  p.  3  and  note,  and  pp.  ■2-21 — -'it;  f:Hpra),  but  on
the  -V'( "•/■'?,■  of  that  year  (a.h.  litiO'.  which,  according  to
the  y'.i>i,':'in' t-Ta irdri'th,  fell  on  "Wednesday  the  last  day
lS,.^'/■^^  of  Sat'ar  (Wednesday,  March  20th,  a.p.  lS-t4\  AVe
can  easily  verify  this  by  working  out  the  dates  in  the  above
colophons.  Let  us  take  one  only,  the  tlrst,  as  au  example.
In  it  the  Babi  date  i~  the  13th  day  of  the  -1th  month  of  the
;i6th  year,  it.  i,S  \  li>)  -  13  =  lo  days  after  the  Xawrii-.
which  always  falls  on  or  about  March  20th.  Seventy  days
fivm  this  briugs  u<  to  May  I'^th  (11  days  in  March  +  30  in
April  -  -i!  in  May  =  TO  daysV  Looking  out  the  Muham-
madan  date  in  the  colophon  i^Tth  of  Jemadi  IL  a.h.  1-296)
in  AViisteufeld's  table-  we  tind  that  it  does  actually  corres-
pond with  Mav  L>;>th,  ISTi^.  The  Babi  year  being,  like  our
own.  solar,  is  easily  calculated  b)'  counting  the  number  of
complete  years  which  have  elapsed  since  March  iOth  a.i>.
1S4J:,  the  commencement  of  the  era.  In  this  case,  for
instance,  the  35th  year  terminated  on  Mai-ch  19th,  a.p,
IST;'  ^1S4-1  -r  3o),  and  the  3Gth  year  therefore  extends  from
March  i>Oth,  l-^Ti'  to  Maivh  19th,  If-^-O.


INDEX.


Abad,  the  year,  417 — 419
'AbbasEfendi.Beha'u'llah'seldest

son  (entitled  Ghusn-i-A'zwn

and  A  kd  Sirru'lhlh),  xxxv —

xxxvi,  360,  370,  393,  n.  2
'Abbas,  Rlirza,  commonly  called

Mirza  Buzurg,  the  father  of

Beha'u'llah  and  Subh-i-Ezel,

56,  n.  2,  373
'Abbas,  Sheykh,  of  Teheran,  one

of  the  martyrs  of  1852,  p.  329
'Abbas-kuli  Khan  of  Larijan,  88,

176—8,  190
'Abdu'1-Ahad,  secedes  from  Beha

'u'llah,  362
'Abdu'l-'Ali, Subh-i-Ezel's son,

xxiii — xxvi,  369,  385
'Abdu'l-'Azim  of  Khuy,  Seyyid,

307
'Abdu'l-'Aziz,  Sultan,  380,  382
'Abdu'l-Ghaffar,  one  of  the  Cyprus

exiles, 361, 380,  n. 2, 381,

389
'Abdu'l-Hamid  Khan,  the  ddmghd

of  Shiraz,  10,  11,  262—3
'Abdu'l-Karim,  of  Kazvin,  MuUa.

See  Ahmad-i-Katib
'Abdu'l-Karim,  one  of  those  who

assassinated  the  Ezelis,  361,

363
'Abdu'l-Kasim,  of  Kashan,  one  of

the  Ezelis  assassinated,  371
'Abdu'llah,  Aka,  brother  of  Aka

Muhammad  'Ali  of  Tabriz,

182'


'Abdu'Uah, Aka, son of Aka

Muhammad  Ja'far,  acquitted

with  Beha'u'llah,  186,  827
'Abdu'llah,  Aka,  of  Mazandaran,

slain  in attacking Sheykli

Tabarsi,  177
'Abdu'llah,  Mirza,  called Ghau-

ghd, claims  to  be  "  Him  whom

God  shall  manifest,"  357
'Abdu'llah  b.  Ubayy,  a  strenuous

opponent  of  Muhammad,  185

and  n.  4
'Abdu'l-Majid, Haji, father of

Mirza  Badi',  102,  n.  1
'Abdu'l-Muttalib  of  Isfahan,  Haji,

239,  837
'Abdu'r-Eahim,  Mirza,  disciple  of

Jenab-i-'Azim,  185
'Abdu'l-Wahhab,  Mirza,  of  Shiraz,

one  of  the  martyrs  of  Teheran,

185,  271,  n.  1,  274,  323,  n.  1,

329
'Abdu'l-Wahid, one of Subh-i-

Ezel's  sons,  xxiv,  373,  n.  2,

386
Abdus,  Ibn,  follower  of  ash-Shal-

maghani,  229
Abii  'Abdi'llah,  830. See  Huseyn

of  Milan
Abu'l-Kasim,  Mirza,  the  Imam-

Jum'a,  185
Abu'l-K&sim,  Mirza,  the  Bakhti-

yari,  earns  the  title  of  "Phle-

botomist  of  the  Divine  Unity, ' '

363


428


INDEX.


Abu  Talib  Khan,  Mirza,  conducts

a  raid  on  Nur,  375
Abii Turab, Sheykh, of  Ashta-

Mrd,  5,  247
Abwab,  pi.  of  Bab,  q.i\
Acre,  my  object  in  visiting,  xx —
xxi
,,  account  of  visit  to,  xxvii — xliii
,,  Beha'u'Uah  and  his  followers
exiled  to,  101  and  footnotes,
155,  n.  1,  361
,,  called  "the  most  desolate  of
cities"  {akhrabu'l-bildd),  xxx,
146
,,  Laurence  Oliphant's  account
of  the  Babi settlement  at,
209—210
,,  Ezelis  assassinated  at. See

Assassination
„  Mushkin  Kalam  leaves  Cyprus

for,  387—388
,,  Prince Zillu's-Sultan ques-
tions Sheykh  S —  concerning
his  visit  to,  401—2
,,  called  in  colophons  "the  City
of  'Ayn,"  416,  417
'Adila, Subh-i-Ezel's grand-
daughter,' 386
Adrianople  (Edim(5),  B4bi  chiefs
exiled  to,  73,  92,  112,  358
,,  causes of removal of  B4bis

from,  99,  n.  1,  360—1,  369

,,  date  of  removal  of  BAbis  from,

119,  n.  1,  155,  n.  1,  378,  n.  2

,  called  "this  most  remote  place

of  banishment,"  146  and  n.  1

,,  Beh^'u'llah's  claim  advanced

in,  xvii,  359
,,  schism  begins  in,  358 — 361
,,  called "the Land of the
Mystery,"  361  and  n.  2
Afcha,  a  village  near  Teher&n  in
which  Behi'u'Uah  was  resid-
ing in  1852,  51,  52
Ahmad,  name  of  the  Bab's  son

who  died  in  infancy,  250
Ahmad,  one  of  Subh-i-Ezel's  sons,

385,  386
Ahmad Ahs4'i, Sheykh, the
founder  of  the  Sheykhi  school,
30,  184,  197—8,  234—244


Alunad  Ahsa'i,  Sheykh,  his  doc-
trines, wherein accounted
heterodox,  236
,,  his  works,  237—8

Ahmad,  Aka  Seyyid,  of  Tabriz,
imprisoned  with  the  B4b,
43,  n.  1,  320  and  n.  1

Tiimad-i-K&tib,  Mirza,  (  =  Mulia
'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Kazvin),
41  and  n.  1,  42,  62,  320,  n.  1,
331,  338,  341,  356

Ahmad,  Haji  Mirza,  brother  of
Haji  Mirz4  J4ni  of  Kash4n,
assassinated  by  Beha'is  at
Baghdad,  332,  359,  371

Ahmad,  Mirza,  Im4m-Jum'a  of
Tabriz,  present  at  Bab's  ex-
amination, 19,  278

Ahmad,  Mirz4,  of  the  Persian
Embassy  at  Constantinople,
99,  n.  1

Ahmad,  Mirza,  of  Azghand,  5,
245—6

Ahsanu'l-Kisas.  See  Commentary
on  the  Siira-i-  Ynsuf

Ajud4n-b4shl. See  Huseyn  Kh4n

Aka,  'Abb4s  Efendi  so  called  by
the  Beha'is,  xxxvi

Aka,  Haji,  of  Tabriz,  secedes
from  Beha'u'lMh,  362;  is
assassinated,  363

Aka  Jan  Beg  "  Kaj-Kulah,"  one
of  the  Ezelis  assassinated  at
Acre,  99,  n.  1,  360—1,  870

Aka  Jan  Beg  of  Khamsa,  officer
in  charge  of  Bab's  execution,
44

Aka  J4n,  Mirz4,  of  Kashan.  See
Khadimu'Uah

'Aka'idu'sh-Shi'a,  work  of  Shi'ite
theology,  233,  302,  303—4,
304—6

AkA  Khan  of  Niir,  Sadr-i-A'zam,
185,  374—6

Aka  Khan,  governor  of  Yezd  in
1850,  255

Aka  Sirru'Uah,  a  title  of  'Abbas
Efendi,  q.v.

Akayan,  Karim  Khan's  sons  so
called  by  the  Sheykhis,  244


INDEX.


429


Akdas,  Kitab-i-,  quoted,  79,  n.  2,
93,  n.  1,  151,  n.  1,  152,  219,
n.  1,  370,  422—4

Akdas,  Kitab-i-,  formerly  mis-
named Lawh-i-Akdas,  211

Akhir,  Ism-i-,  a  title  of  MuUa
Muhammad '  Ali  of  B4rfurush,
340"

Akhtar,  Persian  newspaper,  409,
n.  2,  410

Alfeyn,  or  Alifeyn,  Kitab-i-,  340

Alfiyya  quoted,  288

'Ali  PAsha,  382

'Ali,  of  Kazvin,  assassinates  Haji
Ja'far,  362

•Mib.Abi  TAIib,  thefirst  Imam,296

'Ali,  Haji  Mulla,  imcle  of  Kur-
ratu'l-'Ayn,  197,  310

'Ali,  Mh-za  (or  Haji)  Seyyid,  the
B4b's  maternal  uncle,  2,  6,
11,  47,  n.  1,  211—218,  250

'Ali,  Aka  Seyyid,  the  Arab,  one
of  the  "Letters  of  the  Liv-
ing," assassinated  in  Tabriz,
363

'Ali,  MuUa,  of  Bistim,  called
Jlnkaddas-i-Khur'isdn'i,  5,
248—9

'Ali,  MuUa  Sheykh,  called  by  the
Bkhis  Jeiiiih-i-Azim,  sxi,  53,
n.  1,  184—5,  191—2,  261,
271,  274—6,  324,  329,  339,
342,  n.  1,  374

'Ali  Akbar,  Mulla,  of  Ardistan,  5

'Ali  Akbar,  Seyyid,  of  ShirAz,  a
fanatical  divine,  411

'Ali  Akbar,  Mash-hadi,  assas-
sinates a  Babi  at  'Ishkab4d,
411—412

'AliAsghar,MulU  (or  Haji  Mirz4),
Sheykhu'l-Islam,  20,  278

'Ali  Asghar,  MuUa,  a  Babi  mis-
sionary, 184

'Ali  'Askar  Khan,  his  sons  kill
Seyyid  Yahya,  184

'Ali  Khan,  Haji,  Hdjibu'd-Daiola,
the  Farrash-bashi,  52,  54,
185,  -204,  215,  329

'Ali  Kh^n,  warden  of  Makii,  17,
274—5


'Ali  Khan,  Mirza,  nephew  of
Prime  Minister,  takes  part
in  massacre  of  Teheran,  329
'Ali  Khan,  Seyyid,  of  Firiizkiih,
present  at  siege  of  Zanj4n,
180,  190

'Ali  MardAn  Khan,  Castle  of,  at
Zanjan,  181

'All  Muhammad,  Ak4,  of  Isfahan,
one  of  the  Ezelis  assassinated
in  Baghdad,  363,  371

'Ali  Muhammad,  Mirza  (or  Sey-
yid). See  Bab

'Ali  Naki,  the  tenth  Imam,  297

AllAhu  abha,  salutation  used  by
Beha'is,  xxxviii

A114h-Yar,  Haji,  recovers  Bab's
body,  47

'Allama  (Jem41u'd-Din  Hasan  b.
Yiisuf  b.  'Ali  of  Hillaj,  a  great
Shi'ite  theologian,  237,  n.  2,
284,  n.  1

Alwah-i-Salatin  (Beha'u'Uah's  E-
pistles  to  the  Kings),  xiv,  69,
n.  1,  108,  n.  1,  208,  211.  Sec
also  Corrigenda,  p.  Iv,  supra.

Amir-Nizam  (Mnza  Taki  Khan),
32  and  n.  3, 40—41,  48, 50, 62,
181—2,  185,  202,  203,  212,
261,  n.  1,  374

Anis,  a  title  given  by  the  Babis  to
Suleyman  Kliau  b.  Y'ahyA
Khan,  q.v.

'Ankil,  mythical  bird,  79,  n.  1

Annas,  137

Annihilation  in  God,  defined  by
Jami,  114,  n.  1

Antichrist  and  his  ass,  26,  304 —
305

Arbil,  90

Arz. See  Land

'As,  mocks  the  Prophet,  283

Asadu'U&h,  Haji,  an  aged  Babi
killed  by  Ul-usage,  312

Asadu'llah,  Mirza,  of  Tabriz.  See
Deyyan

Asfai-  of  MulM  Sadra,  270

Ashraf,  Aka  Mirza,  of  Abad^,  his
martyrdom,  169,  n.  1,  404 —
406


430


INDEX.


Ashraf  Khan,  governor  of  Zanj&n,

_  272,  273
Asian  Khan,  governor  of  Zanjan,

180
AssassinationofEzeUsbyBeha'is,
93,  n.  1,  99,  n.  1,  343,  359—

365,  370—1
,,  of a Babi at Ishkabad by

Muhammadans,  411 — 412
,,  of Muhammadans  by  Babis,

]75,  198,  258,  311
,,  countenanced  by  the  Prophet

Muhammad,  135,  n.  4,  371—

372'
„  ethics  of,  371—3
Assassins,  Babis  compared  with,

by  Lady  Sheil,  201
Avicenna  cited,  280,  n.  3
Avvalu-man-amana  (the  First  to

believe), MuUa Huseyn so

caUed  by  the  Bab",  241,  250 ;

Akit  Mirza Aka  Jan  of  Kashan

so  called  by  Beha'u'llah,  361
'Ayn,  city  of. See  Acre  »

Azakir,  Ibn  Abi,  229
'Azim, Aka Seyyid, the Turk,

129, n.  2
'Azim,  Jenab-i-. See  'Ah,  Mulla

Sheykh
'Aziz Khan,  Ajiidan-bashi, 181,

330

Bab  (  =  6ate,  pi.  Abwab),  title  of,

its  meaning,  3,  7,  226—234,

244,  279—280,  298
,,  title of, conferred on those

who  had  access  to  the  Twelfth

Imam  during  his  seclusion,

229,  233,  298
,,  title  of,  assumed  by  a  heresi-

arch  of  the  tenth  century,  229
,,  title  of,  conferred  on  Sheykh

Ahmad  Ahsa'i,  233
,,  title  of,  conferred  on  Seyyid

Kazim  of  Kesht,  233
,,  title  of, conferred  on Mulla

Huseyn  of  Bushraweyh,  230
,,  title  of,  its  meaning  as  applied

to  Mirza  'Ali  Muhammad,  3,

7,  226—234,  279—280


Bab,  Mirz4  'All  Muhammad of
Shiraz  : —
„  birth,  date  of,  2,  221—2,  249
„  parentage,  2,  250,  289
„  early  life,  2,  249,  250,  253
,,  character,  217 — 218
,,  his  mission  foreshadowed  by

Seyyid  Kazim,  238—240
,,  dateandmannerof  his  "Mani-
festation,"  3—4, 218—226,

227—228, 240—241, 250—

251,  297,  n.  1
,,  pilgrimage  to  Mecca, 5, 29,

249—253
,,  arrest  atBushire,  6,  252 — 253
„  imprisonment at Shiraz, 6,

262
„  flight  to  Isfahan,  11,  262—264
,,  protected  by  Miniichihr  Khan,

11—13,  175,  186,  263—265,

268
„  conference  at  Isfahan,  12 — 13,

264—268
,,  sent  towards  Teheran,  13 — 16
,,  sent  to  Malm, 15—17,  271—

277
„  sent  to  Chihrik,  17—18,  275—

277
,,  first  examination  at  Tabriz,

19—21,  189,  228,  277—290
,,  claims  to  be  the  Imam  Mahdi,

20,  24,  25,  n.  1,  275,  288-9,

290—295
,,  his  death  decided  on,  40 — 41
,,  his  last  dispositions,  41 — 42,

46,  u.  1
,,  his  condemnation,  42 — 43
,,  his  last  moments,  319—322
,,  his execution, 43 — 45, 182,

190,  321—2
,,  disposal  of  his  remains,  45 —

46,  110,  n.  3
,,  accorded only a secondary

rank by Beh4'is, xv — xvi,

xlv,  230
„  other  titles  of,  229—230
„  his  writings,  3, 4,  8,  11,  27,

n.  1,  41—42,  54—55,  335—

347
Babu'1-Bab,  230,  241. See  Hu-
seyn, Mulla,  of  Bushraweyh


INDEX.


431


Badasht,  conference  at,  176,  189,

212,  312
Badi,  the  year,  418,  and  n.  2,  419,

and  n.  1
Badi',  Mirza,  the  bearer  of  the

Epistle  to  the  King  of  Persia,

xlv,  102—5,  390—392
Bad-ra'i,  near  Baghdad,  first  Babi

martyr  slain  at,  248 — 9
Badr-i-Jihan, name of Subh-i-

Ezel's  wife,  384,  386
Baghcha,  xxxvii. See  Behi6
Baghdad  (generally  alluded  to  as

'Irdk-i-'Arab, q.v.), Babis

exiled  to,  63—4,  84,  n.  2,  85,

89, 90,  111,  n.  1, 112, 354—358
Bahi,  the  year,  415,  418,  n.  2,

419  and  n.  1
Bahjat-Eaf'at, Subh-i-Ezel's

daughter,  385
Bahman  Mirza,  271,  273
Bahram  Mirza,  183
Bakir,  Imam  Muhammad,  297
Bakiris,  a  sect  of  the  Imamiyya,

■  296

Bakir,  [Haji]  Mirza,  ratifies  Bab's

death-warrant,  43,  182
Bkkix,  H4ji  Seyyid  Muhammad,

mujtahid, of Isfah4n, 285,

n.  1
Bakir,  Muhammad,  of  Najafabad,

one of  the  Babis  killed  in

1852,  185,  323,  n.  1,  330
Bakir,  Muhammad,  of  KuhpayS,

one  of  the  Babis  killed  in

1852,  332
Bakir, Muhammad, one  of  the

■  Cyprus' exiles,  361,  380,  n.  2,
381,  389

Bakir, MuUa,  one  of  the  Bab's

associates,  41
Bakir,  Sheykh,  of  Isfahan,  261,

"  n.  1,  402
Baki'ul-Gharkad, cemetery of,

■  235

Bakiyyatu'Uah ("Eemnant of

■  God"),  3,297

Balaghat,  wherein  it  difiers  from

fasdhat,  284,  n.  3
Balasaris, orthodox Shi'ites  so

called  by  Sheykhis,  243


B&rfunish,  execution  of  Babis  at,
307—309.  See  also  Tabarsi,
Sheykh;  Muhammad  'Ali,
MuUa,  of  Barfuriish ;  and
Huseyn,  MuUa,  of  Bushra-
weyh
Basir,  Seyyid,  the  Indian,  196
Bat-ha,  a  name  of  Mecca,  140,

■  397
Beating children forbidden by

the  Bab,  220
Beha, derivatives of the  word,

42,  318—319
Beha,  month  of,  421
Beha,  Sheykh,  a  philosopher  of

note,  269
Beha'u'Dah  (Mirza  Huseyn  'Ali
of  Niir),  42,  61—4,  56—65,
69,  82—4,  89,  91—2,  97—
100,  155, 186, 195,  327,  355—
373

birth,  date  of,  373,  n.  1
parentage,  56,  n.  2
early  life,  56 — 58
adopts  and  preaches  the  Babi
faith,  58—62
corresponds  with  Bab,  62
„  position  accorded  to  him  by
Bab,  xvi,  42,  62—3
arrested  in  1852  at  Teheran,
52,  186,  327
imprisoned  for  four  mouths,
54,  n.  1
,,  acquitted  and  released,  53 — 4

retires  to  Baghdad,  54,  63
,,  retires  into  seclusion  in  Kur-
distan, 64—65,  356,  357,  n.  1
,,  returns  to  Baghdad,  65
„  at  Baghdad,  82—3,  89
„  at  Constantinople,  90,  91
„  at  Adrianople,  92—101,  102,

358—360
,,  at  Acre,  101,  155
„  personal  impressions  of ,  xxxix

— xli
,,  seclusion  observed  by,  xxvii,
xli

views  of  his  claim  and  charac-
ter entertained  by  Beha'is,
xvi,  59,  65—66,  69,  82—3,
95—6,  107-8,  159


432


INDEX.


Beha'u'Uah, views  of  his  claim

and  character  entertained  by

Ezelis,  343  and  n.  1,  351,  355,

n.  2,  356,  358—364
„  writings,  27,  n.  1,  69, n. 1,

123,  n.  1
,,  writings  or  words quoted  in

original,  57,  n.  2,  77,  n.  2,

93,  n.  1,  96,  n.  1,  100,  n.  1,

364,  366—8,  390—1
,,  writings  or  words  quoted  in

translation,  xl,  52 — 3,  68 — 9,

70—81, 108—154, 368—9,

370,  391—400
Beha'u'llah,  Subh-i-Ezel  so  called,

353
Behj6,  name  of  Beh4'u'llah's  resi-
dence at  Acre,  xxxvi — xli
"Best of Stories" {Ahsanu'l-

Kisas). Sec  Commentary  on

the  Swra-i-Yusuf
Beyan,  meaning  of  term,  343 —

346
Beyan,  Persian,  when  composed,

274,  292
,,  purposelyleft  incomplete,  353,

n.  4
„  quoted, 218—220, 222—226,

231—234, 292—295, 317—

318,  344—345,  347—349,  420

—422
Biddulph,  Sir  Eobert,  xxii,  xxvi
Bigotry,  its  evils  exposed,  71, 163

—166
Binanu'1-Mulk,  402
Binning  (Journal  of  Two  Years'

Travel  in  Persia),  187,  201—

202
Biyuk  Aka,  261
"Block  of  Heedlessness"  (Jar-

thumu' l-gh ijlat),  363
"Blow,"  "Place  of  the,"  Tabriz

so  called,  322
Bondage, Babis sold into, 129,

n.  2
Book, Most Holy. See  Akdas,

Kitab-i-
,,  of 3?atima, 123, n. 1. See

F4tima
„  of Figures (Kitdb-i-heydkil),

339


BookoiJustice{Kitnl)-i-'acniyya),

340
„  of Light (Kitdh-i-mh), 210,

340—1
,,  of  Names  (Kitdb-i-asmd),  202,

318,  338
,,  of  Precepts (Kitdb-i-aliMm),

203,  414,  425
,,  of  Proof  (Kitdb-i-lmjjatiyya),

339
,,  of  Becompense  (Kitdb-i-jezd),

336—7
,,  of  Seven  hundred  siiras(7irifa6-

i-haftsad  sura),  339
,,  of  Two  Sanctuaries  (Kitdb-i-

harameyn),  339—340
Bulwer,  Sir  Henry,  xxii,  xxvi,  350,

376
Buzurg, Mirza, father  of  Beha

'u'llah  and  Subh-i-Ezel. See

'Abbas,  Mirza
Buzurg,  Mirza,  of  Kirmanshah,

one  of  the  Ezelisassassinated,

371
Buzurg  Khan,  Mirza,  of  Kazvin,

Persian  consul  at  Baghdad,

84—5, 88, 110, n. 2, 111,

n.  1

Caiaphas,  137

Calendar,  Babi,  413—425

Charvadar-kush,  name  of  a  star,

125,  n.
Chihrik,  17,  18,  21,  41,  275—7
Churchill,  Mr  S.,  188,  193,  194
Churchill,  Mr  H.,  194
Cobham,  Mr  C.  D.,  xix,  xx,  xxii —

xxiii,  382,  388
Commentary  on  the  Suratu'l'Asr,

11,  264, 340,  346; Bakara,

346 ;  Hamd,  340  ;  Kawthar,

8,  346"
„  on  the  Kur'dn,  335
,,  on  the  Names,  346,  n.  1
,,  on  the  Surat-i-Yiisuf,  3,  208,

230,  241,  250,  338,  339,  346
Communism, Babiism  described

as  a  form  of,  216,  261,  380
Concord  commended,  71,  154
Constantinople, Babis sent to,

90—92,  116


INDEX.


433


Contingent  Being  [imkdn),  mean-
ing of  term,  115,  n.  1
Cyprus,  information  about  Babis
exiled  to,  how  obtained,  xviii
— xix
,,  object  in  visiting,  xx — xxi
,,  description  of  visit  to,  xxii —

xxvi
„  documents relative to Babi
exiles  preserved  in,  xxii,  xxvi,
101,  n.  3,  350—1,  376—889

Dala'il-i-sab'a  (Seven  Proofs),  27,

n.  1,  221,  274,  352,  n.  1
DaUaku'l-Hakikat  ("  Barberof  the

Truth"), title  conferred  on

oneof  Beha'u'Uah'sfoUowers,

362
D4ru'l-aman,  Kirm4n  so  called,

354,  n.  2
Daru'l-'ibadat,  Yezd  so  called,  354,

n.  2
Daru'l-'ilm,  Shiraz  so  called,  294,

354,  n.  2
Daru'l-khilafat,  Teheran  so  called,

354,  n.  2
Daru's-salam,  Baghdad  so  called,

354,  n.  2
Daru's-saltanat,  Isfahan  so  called,

354,  n.  2
Danigha.  See'Abdu'l-HamidKhan
Da'iid  Mirza,  killed  at  Vasaks,

178
Day of Invocation (yawmu't-

tandd)  =  'Day  of  Judgement,

141,  n.  1
Days,  names  of,  in  Babl  calendar,

414
„  intercalary,  419,  423 — 5
Death,  swearing  by, of  persons

dear  to  one's  self,  403,  n.  1
Derivative  Attributes, 42, 317 —

319
Deyyan (Mirza Asadu'Uah of

Tabriz),  331,  357,  365
"Direful  Mischief"  (fitna-i-say-

lam),  356  et  seq.
Dom,  Babi  writings  described  by,

202,  318,  338
Dyspepsia, swooning in, 280,

n.  3

B.


Easter,  how  observed  by  Syrian
Christians,  xxxiii — iv

Elchek,  an  instrument  of  torture,
260,  n.  1

England  commended,  162 — 3

Epistles  to  the  Kings. See  Al-
wah-i-Salatin

Essence,  identical  or  not  identical
with  Attributes,  281

Eth6,  Dr  H.,  essay  on  Babiism,
207

Eyres,  Mr,  British  consul  at  Bey-
rout,  xxviii — xxxiii

Ezel,  title  of Mirza  Yahya, 95,
n.  1. See  Subh-i-Ez'el

Ezehs,  sect  of  Babis,  xvii — xviii
,,  assassination  of. See  Assas-
sination

Fagnan,  M.  E.,  review  of  Baron

Eosen's  work,  209
Famagusta,  xix,  xx,  xxiii — xxvi,

101,  n.  3,  155,  361,  369,  377

— 389,  passim
Fandariski,  Mir,  a  philosopher  of

note,  269
Farahil,  sack  of,  37,  n.  2
Faraju'llah, Mirza, one of the

I3abi  officers  at  Zanjan,  180
Farhad Mirza {Mu'taniadu'd-

dawla),  uncle  of  the  present

Shah, 80
Farkadan, Arabic  name of  two

stars called in English

"Guards"  or "Guardians,"

125,  n.  2
Farrfi,,  sack  of,  177
Farrash-bashi. See 'Ali Khan,

Haji
Farrukh  Khan,  brother  of Haji

Suleyman Khan, killed by

Babis  at  Zanjan,  181,  190
Fars,  called  the  Land  of  Fa,  79,

n.  2
,,  called  the  Abode  of  Knoioledge,

294,  354,  n.  2
Fasa,  Seyyid  Yahya  at,  183
Fasaiiat,  wherein  it  diliers  from

bald  ghat,  284,  n.  3
Fassadu'l-Ahadiyyat  ("  Phleboto-

mist  of  the  Divine  Unity"),

28


434


INDEX.


title  earned  by  one  of  BehA

'u'114h's  followers, 363  and

n.  1
Fasting,  ordinances  of,  424
Fathu'Uah,  Mulla,  of  Kum,  one

of those who attempt the

Sh4h's  life, 53,  n. 1, 185,

323—4,  329
Fatima, Hidden Book of (or

Hidden Words),  123,  n. 1;

quoted,  125—6
Fatima,  Subh-i-Ezel's  wife,  384
,,'his  daughter,  381,  886
„  his  daughter-in-law,  386
,,  Sheykh 'Ali Sayyah's and

afterwards  Mushkin  Kalam's

wife,  387
Fattah,  Haji,  his  son  secedes  from

B'eha'u'llah,  262
Fattah, Mulla,  a  Babi slain at

Nur,  375
Fazlu'U4h, Mirza {Naslru'l-

■  Mulk),  183
Feyha, Al- ("  the spacious "),

Damascus  so  called,  143,  n.  2
First  to  believe.  See  Avvalu-man-

amana
Finiz  Mirz&,  183,  257—8
Five Grades {Shu'un-i-khamsa),

318, 335—6, 338—9,  343—

347
Four  Eelations,  284,  n.  3
Fourth Support {Rukn-i-rdbi'),

4,  242—4
Freedom  of  conscience  the  right

of  all,  165
Freemason,  a  Greek,  xxxiv
Fu'ad,  Subh-i-Ezel's  son,  386
Fu'ad  P'ashi,  382

Gate,  Gates. See  B4b,  Abw4b

Gates  of  the  Fire  (ahwdbu'n-ndr),
234

Ghawgha,  Mirza  'Abdu'llah,  357

Ghiy4th,  xvii

Ghul4m  Huseyn,  Mulla,  of  Eir-
md,n,  Sheykhi  doctrines  ex-
plained by,  243

Ghulamu'l-Khuld,  title  conferred
by  Beh^'u'llah  on  one  of  his
followers,  362


Ghusn-i-Akbar, Ghusn-i-At-hs
Ghusn-i-A'zam, Titles
Beha'u'Uah's  sons,  called  ci
lectively Aghsdn, 361, 3£
n.  2. See  also  'Abbas  Efen

Gilbert,  M.  T.,  notice  on  Bal
settled  in  Kurdistan,  207

Gobineau,  M.  le  Comte  de,  ix — 3
xlvi,  li,  202 — 3,  and  throug
out  the  work  passim

Golden  Calf,  Beha'u'Uah  Ukeni
to it  by  Ezelis,  355,  n.
362

Goldsmid,  Major-General  S
Frederic,  xxii,  261

Gordon,  General,  Babi  exiles  r
leased  from  Khartum  b'
129,  n.  2  ■  '

Gospels  quoted,  137,  n.  2
„  aUuded  to  in  Persian  Beyai

224
„  called  the  AUf  (Injll),  348

Guardians  (mtkaba),  26,  303

Guard-stars  (called  in  Arabi
Farkaddn),  125,  n.  2

Guebre  converted  to  Babiism,  3'

GuiUemard,  Dr  F.  H.  H.,  xix

Gurgin  Khan,  succeeds  Miuuchib
Khan  in  government  of  Isft
han,  13

Ha,  the  letter  (  =  5),  424
Hadba,  Al- ("the  prominent"

Mosul  so called, 139,  n.  i

416
Hadi,  Subh-i-Ezel's  son,  385
Hadi,  Haji  Mulla,  of  Sabzawai

the  philosopher,  269
Hadi  Khan  of  Niir,  B4bi  deserter

placed  in  charge  of,  179
Hadikatu'sh-Shi'a ("Garden c

the  Shi'ites  ") ,  work  on  Shi'it

theology,  302
Haifa,  Laurence  Oliphant's  work

209—210,  370
Hair,  how  worn  by  Babis,  xxxi

n.  1,  xxxiv
H4ji  Mirza  Akasi,  13,  18,  2] ,  n.  1

22—4,  274—5,  292
H4jibu'd-dawla. See  'Ali  Kh4n

Haji


INDEX.


435


Hamze  Mirza,  41,  176,  182,  320

Hasan,  Imam,  297

Hasan,  a  young  Babl  put  to  death
at  Yezd,  256

Hasan,  Aka  Seyyid,  of  Yezd,
brother  of  the  Bab's  amanu-
ensis, 43,  n.  1,  271,  n.  1,
319—321

Hasan,  Aka,  deputy-chief  of  the

famishes,  332
Hasan  of  Khamsa, one  of  the

victims  of  the  Teheran  mas-
sacre, 332
Hasan  Khan,  Mirza,  brother  of

Mirza Taki Khan Amir-

Nizdm,  41—3,  181—2,  190
Hasan, Mir Seyyid (or  Mirza),

of Niir, the Platonist, 12,

265—8
Hasan,  Seyyid,  of  Khurasan,  one

of  the  victims  of  the  Teheran

massacre,  829
Hasan,  Seyyid,  of  Tabataba. See

Isfahan,  Martyrs  of
Hasan 'Abdu'r-Kahman Efendi,

husband of Subh-i-Bzel's

daughter  Safiyya,  385
Hasan  'Ali,  H4ji  Mulla,  of  Tiisir-

kan,  265
Hasan  'Askari,  Imam,  297
Hashish, Babis charged with

making  use  of,  203
Hasht Bihisht, Ezeli  historical

work  called,  331,  n.  1,  351—

373
Hayatu'l-kulub,  work  on  Shi'ite

theology,  123,  n.  1
Hayy ("the  Living"), title of

Subh-i-Ezel,  353  and  n.  3
Hazar-Jarib,  attack  on  Babis  at,

176,  189
Hazrat-i-A'14,  229. See  Bab
„  '-i-Ezel. See  Subh-i-Ezel
,,  -i-Kuddus. See  Muhammad

'Ali,  Mulla,  of  Barfuriish

„  -i-Nukt6-i-Beyan,229.  SceBab

„  -i-Nukt^-i-Ula,  229. See  Bab

„  -i-Eabbi-ul-A'la,  229.  See  B4b

Helpers  (nujahd),  26,  303

Hermaphrodite,  284


He  whom God shall manifest

(Man  yudh-hiruhu'lMh],  xvii,

18,  n.  1,  55,  287,  n.  1
Heykal,  Sura-i-,  69,  u.  1,  108,  n.

1,  208,  211,  359,  n. 2,  365,

393 and n. 2. See also

Corrigenda,  p.  Iv,  supra
Hidden Words {Kalwidt-i-mak-

m'lna). See  Patima,  Hidden

Book  of
Houston,  Mr  G.  L.,  xix
Houtum-Schindler,  General,  404
Huart,  M.  C,  210,  340—1
Hujjatu'l-Islam.  See  Muhammad,

Mulla,  Mamakani
Hujjatu'Uah, Imam Mahdi so

called,  297
Huruf-i-Hayy. See  Letters  of  the

Liviug
Huseyn,  Imam,  28,  n.  2,  297
Huseyn  ibn  Eiih. See  Ibn  Eiih
Huseyn  of  Milan  (called  Huseyn

Jan and Abu 'Abd'i'Uah),

330—1,  357,  365
Huseyn  the  Water-carrier,  takes

part in assassination of

Ezelia,  361

Huseyn,  Aka  Seyyid,  of  Yezd,  the
Bab's  amanuensis,  43,  n.  1,
44,  182,  205,  271  and  n.  1,
272,  274,  276,  319—322,  327,
330,  338,  339

Huseyn,  Aka  Seyyid,  of  Turshiz,
one  of  the  Seven  Martyrs,
212,  215

Huseyn,  Aka,  of  Ardistan,  ac-
companies Bab  from  Shiraz
to  Isfahan,  263

Huseyn,  Mirza,  of  Kum,  129,
n.  2,  186

Huseyn,  Mulla,  of  Bushraweyh
(called  Jendh-i-Bdb,  Jendb-i-
Bdbu'l-Bdb,  Avvalu-man-dm-
ana,  Harf-i-avval,  Ism-i-
avval,  &c.),  xxi,  xliii,  5,  29,
35—8,  95,  n.  1,  176—8,  184,
189—190,  192,  195,  230,  240
—1,  245,  250—1,  310,  374

Huseyn,  Mulla,  of  Khurasan,  110,
n.  3,  327,  329

28—2


436


INDEX.


Huseyn,  Seyyid,  of  Isfahan,  or  of
Hiudiyan,  331,  357

Huseyn,  Seyyid,  of  Tabataba.
See  Isfahan,  Martyrs  of

Huseyn  Khan,  Ajuddn-idsM,
Governor  of  Fars,  10, 11, 175,
189,  262

Huseyn  Khan,  Niishiru'd-dawla,
Persian  Ambassador  at  Con-
stantinople, 85,  n.  1,  358

Huseyn  'Ali,  Mirza,  of  Niir.  See
Beha'u'Uah

Huseyn  'All,  of  Kashan,  one  of
the  Ezelis  assassinated,  371

Ibn  Hisham,  narrative  cited  from,

372
Ibn  Mihriyar,  26,  302—3
Ibn  Muljam,  the  murderer  of  'Ali

b.  AM  Talib,  296
Ibn  Biih,  Huseyn,  25,  229,  233,

298',  301—2
Ibrahim, Haji. assassinated at

Acre,  362,  371
Ibrahim,  Mulla,  of  Mahallat,  311,

312
Ikan,  a  controversial  work  of  the

Babis,  xiv,  xlii,  27,  n.  1,  211,

259,  411,  413,  415
'Ilmu'1-Huda,  197. See  Murtaza,

Seyyid
Imamate,  doctrine  of,  296 — 9
Imams, regarded as creative

powers  by  Sheykh  Ahmad  of

Ahsa,  236—7
Imam-Jum'a, of Isfahan, 402.

See  Muhammad  Huseyn,  Mir
Imam-kuli Mirza, governor of

Kirmanshiih,  184
'Imarat-i-Khurshid,  13,  n.  2
'Imarat-i-Sadr,  13,  n.  2
India,nBe\iei!ey:{Mu'min-i- Hindi),

196
Intolerance  deprecated,  71,  72
'Irak-i- 'Arab,  64,  n.  1. See  Bagh-
dad
Isfahan,  conference  of,  264 — 8
„  martyrs  of,  xlv,  167 — 9,  400 —

403
Islam  perfected  in  this  Manifesta-
tion, 225


'Ishkabad,  assassination  of  a  Babi

at,  411—2
Ism-i-Akhir. See  Akhir,  Ism-i-
Isma'il,  Haji  Mirza,  of  Kashan,

brother  of  Mirza  Jani,  332
Isma'il,  Haji  Mulla,  of  Kum,  one

of  the  Seven  Martyrs,  212—

213
Isma'il,  Sheykh,  331
Isma'iUs,  296
Iz-haku'l-Batil  ("the  Crushing  of

Falsehood  "),  attack  on  Babi

doctrines written by Haji

Karim  Khan,  242

Jabal-i-Basit  ("the  Open  Moun-
tain "),  276. See  also  Makii
Jabal-i-Shadid ("the Grievous

Mountain"), 276. See  also

Chihrik
Jabir,  Hadith-i-,  259  and  n.  1
Jabir,  Sultan,  267
Jabra'il-i-Amin, one of Beha'u

'Uah's  followers  so  called,  362
Jabulka, fabulous city of, 25,

298—301
Jabulsa, fabulous city of, 25,

298—301
Ja'far-i-Sadik,  Imam,  24  and  n.  3,

236,'  297
Ja'far,  Abu,  Muhammad  b.  '0th-

man,  233,  298
Ja'far,  Abii,  Muhammad  b. 'Ali

ash-Shalmag'haui,  229,  302
Ja'far,  brother  of  Huseyn  of  Milan

iq.v.), self-styled "King  of

Baghdad,"  331
Ja'far,  Haji,  murdered  at  Acre,

362
Ja'far, Haji [Muhammad], of

Tabriz,  100  and  n.  1,  208
Ja'far-i-Kasbfi,  Seyyid,  the  father

of  Seyyid  Yahya  of  Darab,

8,  183,  254
Ja'far-kuU  Khan,  officer  of  besieg-
ing army  at  Sheykh  Tabarsi,

190
Ja'far-kuli  Khan,  brother  of  Sadr-

i-A'zam,  329,  374
Jalalu'd-bawla, Prince, son of


INDEX.


437


Prince  Zillu's-Sultan,  403  and

n.  1
Jalalu'd-Din,  son  of  Sheykh  'Ali

Sayyah,  387
Jain,  MuUa,  of  Urumiyya,  5,  248
Jamalu'd-Din,  son  of  Sheykh  'Ali

Sayy&h,  387
Jamaliyya,  daughter  of  Sheykh

'Ali  Sayyah,  387
Jami  cited,  114,  n.  1
Janayn,  name  of  one  of  Beha'u

'llah's  gardens  at  Acre,  210
Jani,  Haji  Mirza,  of  Kashan,  263,

271,  308,  332
Jarthiimu'l-ghiflat ("  Block of

Heedlessness"),  363  audn.  1
Jawad,  a  title  of  the  ninth  Imam,

267  and  n.  1
Jawad,  Aka  Seyyid  [of  Kerbela],

an  influential  Ezeli  who  died

about seven years ago at

Kirman,  342,  n.  2
Jawad,  Mirza,  of  Khurasan,  ac-
quitted with  Beha'u'Uah,  186,

327
Jemalu'd-DinBeyof  Beyrout,  xxx
Jemalu'd-Din  Hasan  b.  Yusuf  b.

'Ali,  of  Hilla. See  'Allama
Jemalu'd-Din  al-Afghan,  Seyyid,

199
Jenab-i-'Azim. See 'Ali, MuUa

Sheykh
,,  -i-Bab, or Babul-Bab. See

Huseyn, Mulla,  of Bushra-

weyh
„  -i-Kuddiis. See Muhammad

'Aii,  Haji  MuUa,  of  Barfuriish
,,  -i-Mukaddas [-i- Khurasan].

See Sadik, MuUa [Muham-
mad], of  Khurasan
,,  -i-Tahira. See  Kurratu'l- 'Ayn
Jesus  Christ,  137,  224—5

,,  Beha'u'Uah  compared  to,  xvi
Jews,  persecution  of,  in  Isfahan,

407
John  the  Baptist,  the  Bab  com-
pared to,  xvi
Jorjani  cited,  303 — 4
Joseph,  Sura  of.  Commentary  on.
See  Commentary


Julfa,  Christian  priest  of,  169
Juzghands  (candied  walnuts)  used

by  the  Babis  for  conveyance

of  letters,  276

Ka'ani,  his  poems  cited,  199,  325
—326

Ka'b  b.  Ashraf,  a  strenuous  op-
ponent of  Muhammad,  135
and  n.  4

Kafi,  book  of  Shi'ite  traditions,
259,  n.  1

Kahir. See  Bajab  'Ali,  MuUa

Ka'im,  28,  297.  See  also  Mahdi,
Imam

Kalimat-i-Makniina.  See  Patima,
Hidden  Book  of

Kalin  (or  Kuleyn),  village  of,  14,
79

Kamalu'd-Din,  son  of  Sheykh  'Ali
Sayyah,  387

Kamil  Pasha,  379

Kannadu's-Samadaniyyat  ("Con-
fectioner of  the  Divine  Etern-
ity"), 362

Kaniin  of  Avicenna,  280,  n.  3

Karavan-kush,  name  of  a  star,
125,  n.  1

Karim  Khan,  Haji  Muhammad,
198,  241—2,  244

Karkiik,  90

Kashfi.  See  Ja'far-i-Kashfi,
Seyyid

Kasht,  in  Mazandaran,  178

Kasim  of  Niriz,  one  of  the  victims
of  the  Teheran  massacre,  332

Kawthar,  a  river  in  Paradise,  118,
392
,,  Commentary on Suratu'l-.

See  Commentary
„  Suratu'l-,  283

Kazem-Beg,  Mirza,  li — Hi,  174,
187,  204—5,  and  through-
out the  work  passim

Kazim, Haji Seyyid, of  Eesht,
■  29,  31,  184,  195,  198,  228,
238—241,  250
Kazim  Kaltuki,  Haji,  blo^vn  from

mortar  at  Zanjan,  181
Kazim  Khan  Afshar,  present  at
siege  of  Zanjan,  180


438


INDEX.


Kazim  Khan,  Muhammad,  Far-
rdsh-bdsM,  289

Kazim, MuUa, Ezeli killed at
'  Isfahan,  400

Kazim,  MuUa  Muhammad,  muj-
"  tahid  of  Shahriid,  176

Kazim,  Seyyid,  of  Zanjan,  ac-
companies Bab  to  Isfahan,
11,  263

K4zimeyn,  shrine  of,  near  Bagh-
■  dad,  85,  n.  2

Kazvini  cited,  299—301

Kerbela,  massacre  of,  139,  n.  3

Ketman  (concealment  of  religious
convictions),  216

Khabbazu'l-Wahidiyyat  ("Baker
of  the  Divine  Unity"),  362

Khadijd,  the  Bab's  mother,  289

Khadimu'Uah  (Aka  Mirza  Aka
Jan  of  Kashan) ,  xli,  355,  u.  2,
358—362,  393,  n.  2,  408

Khan-i-gandum-firiishan,  at  Acre,
362

Khan-i-sharki,  at  Constantinople,
363

Khanlar  Mirza,  176

Khartum,  Babis  exiled  to,  129,
n.  2

Khayyat-bashi,  assassinated  at
Acre,  362,  371

Khilafat,  office  of,  how  regarded
by  Sunnis,  296

Khusraw  of  Kadi-kala,  36,  37,
n.  2,  177  ■

Khutb6-i-KahriyyS  ("the  Sermon
of  Wrath"),  274—5

Kinar-i-gird,  14

Kisasu'l-'Ulama  (Stories  of  Di-
vines), work  of  Shi'ite  bio-
graphy, 86,  n.  1,  197—8,
235—6,  277—8

Kishlak  of  Nur,  60  and  n.  2

Kitab-i-Alfeyn or Alifeyn. See
Alfeyn,  Kitab-i-
,,  -i-Akdas. See  Akdas,  Kitab-i-

Kitab. See  Book

Kiy^-kala,  in  Mazandaran,  178

Kremer,  Baron  A.  von,  206 — 7,
229,  242

Kuch  'Ali  Sultan,  one  of  the  Bab's
executioners,  182


Kulah-i-Firangi,  summer-house  at
Shiraz,  258

"  Knr'4n  of  the  Babis,"  198,  202

Kurban  'Ali,  Mirza,  the  dervish,
one  of  the  Seven  Martyrs,
212,  214

Kurdistan,  Babis  in,  207
,,  Beha'u'Uah's  retirement  into,
64—5,  356,  857,  n.  1

Kurratu'l-'Ayn  (Zarrin-Taj,  en-
titled also  Jenab-i-Taidra),
xxi,  30—32,  175,  186,  189,
196,  197—8,  203—4,  207—8,
247,  309—316,  327,  334,  342,
n.  1

Kiirsi,  how  used  in  Persia,  309,  n.  1

Lahsa'I  (more  accurately  Ahsa'i),
234. See Ahmad Aisa'i,
Sheykh
Land  of  Alif  (  =  Azarbaijan),  79,
n.  2
„  of  'Ayn(='Irak),  79,  n.  2
„  of  Fa  (  =  Fars),'79,  n.  2
,,  of  Kaf  and  Ba (  =  Kirman),

79,  n.  2
,,  of  Kha  (  =  Khurasan),  79,  n.  2
,,  of  Mim  (  =  Mazandaran),  79,

n.  2
„  of  Tk  (  =  Teher4n),  79,  n.  2
,,  of  the  My  stery  ( =  Adrianople),
361  and  n.  2
Langar, near Kirman, present
head-quarters of  the  Shey-
khis,  244
Lawh-i-Akdas, a  misnomer for
the  Kitab-i-Akdas,  211. See
also  Akdas,  Kitab-i-
,,  -i-Nasir,  quoted,  96,  n.  1
,,  -i-Ka'is,  quoted,  100,  n.  1
,,  -i-Sult4n,  how  sent  and  re-
ceived, 102—8
,,  -i-Sultan,  translation  of,  108
— 15i,  390—400
Lel^-Bashi, 188. See  Eiza-kuli

Khan
Letter,  the  First (Harf-i-avval),
241,250.  S^eHuseyn,  Muim,
of  Bushraweyh
Letters  of  Denial  (Huruf-i-nafy),
234


INDEX.


439


Letters  of  the  Living  (Huriifat-i-
Hayy),  xvi,  xxiv,  95,  n.  1,
353,  357,  421—2

Leylatu'1-Kadr,  262,  n.  1

Lisanu'1-Mulk  (Mirz4  Taki,  Mus-
tawfi,  better  known  as  Sipihr,
author  of  the  Nasikhu't-
Tawarikh,  q.v.),  173,  187,
203,  323

LoTett,  surveys  on  the  road  from
Shiraz  to  Bam,  261

Lutf-'Ali,  Mirza,  the  chamberlain,

■  8

Lutf-'Ali,  Mirza,  the  secretary,  36
Lutf-'Ali  of Shiraz, one  of  the
victims  of  the  Teheran  mas-
sacre, 331

Madness attributed to Babis,

xxxviii,  213
Mahalla-i-Babi  in  Niriz,  261
Mahan,  burial-place  of  Shah  Ni'-

matu'llah,  244
Mahbiibu'sh-Shuhada  ("the  Be-
loved of Martyrs "). See

Isfahan,  Martyrs  of
Mahdi,  Imam,  25,  n.  1,  259,  289,
■ 294,  n.  2,  297—9
„  Imam,  Bab's  claim  to  be  the,

20,  24,  25,  n.  1,  275,  288—9,

290—5
Mahdi,  Aka.ilfah'fcii't-TMjij'ar,  takes

part in Teheran massacre,

332,
Mahdi,  Aka,  of  Eashan,  entrusted

with  keeping  of  Bab's  body,

46,  n.  1;  martyred  at  Teheran,

330
Mahdi,  Mulla,  of  Kand,  5,  248
Mahdi-kuli  Mirza,  37, n. 2, 38,

177—9,  190,  247,  306—7
Mahd-i-'Ulya,  oneof  Beha'u'Uah's

wives  so  entitled,  361
Mahmud  Efendi,  mufti  of  Bagh-

■  dad,  249

Mahmud,  Haji  Mulla,  Nizdmu'l-
''Ulamd,  19,  189,  278-289

Mahmud  Khan,  the  Kaldntar,  31,
'261,  n.  1,  312—313,  334

Mahmud  Khan,  of  Khiiy,  present
'  at  siege  of  Zanjan,  180


Maimiid,  Mirza,  acquitted  with
'Beha'u'Uah,  186,  327

Mahmud,  Mirza,  of  Kazvin,  one
of  the  victims  of  the  Teheran
massacre,  330

Makii- (called  by  Bab  "Jabal-i-
Basit,"  q.v.),  15—17,  271—7

Mallahu'i-Kuds  {"the  Sailor  of
Sanctity"),  one  of  Beha'u
'Uah's  followers  so  entitled,
362

Ma'mun,  the  Caliph,  his  argu-
ment with  the  Imam  Eiza,
283,  n.  1

Manifestation  (zuhur). See  Bab

Maryam,  Subh-i-Ezel's  daughter,
386

Masjid-i-Shah  in  Isfahan,  264 — 5

Masnavi  quoted,  23  and  n.  1,  287
and  n.  2
,,  illustration  from,  372

Mast  (curdled  milk),  letters  con-
veyed in,  276

Mazandaran  insurrection.  See
Tabarsi,  Sheykh

Mazandarani  dialect,  history  com-
posed in,  202,  205

Mazdakites,  JBabis  likened  to,  201,
209

Merrick  quoted,  123,  n.  1

Metempsychosis  alleged  to  be  a
Babi  tenet,  189

Meydan-i-Shah,  in  Teheran,  213,
n.  1
,,  in  Isfahan,  403

Mihr  'Ali  Khan  of  Niir,  Shujd'u'l-
Mulk,  183,  257—260

Milan,  47,  247,  272—3

Minuchihr  Khan,  Slu'tamadu'd-
Dawla,  11—13,  175,  189,
263—5,  277

Miracles  demanded  of  the  Bab,
287—8

Mir  Damad,  a  philosopher  of  note,
269—270

Mir  Fandariski,  a  philosopher  of
note,  269

Mirza  Buzurg.  See  Buzurg,  Mir-
za

Mirza'is,  Beha'is  so  called  by
Ezelis,  343,  n.  1


440


INDEX.


Moohenin,  M.,  his  memoir  on  the

B4bis,  205,  276
Months,  names  of  Babi,  414
Mormons,  Babls  compared  to,  201
Moses,  his  dispensation,  noticed

in  Persian  Beyan,  224
Mosul,  90,  208,  413
„  called al-Hadbd, 139, n. 2,

416
Mu'allim-i-Nuri  (Mulla  Muham-
mad), 271
Mubashshir, Hazrat-i-, Bab so

called  by  Belia'is,  230
Muhammad, Subh-i-Bzel's son,

'386
Muhammad b. Maslama, slays

Ka'b  b.  Ashraf  at  the  com-
mand of  the  Prophet, 185,

n.  4
Muhammad,  Aka,  of  Isfahan,  one

of  those  who conveyed  the

Bab's remains to Teheran,

110,  n.  8
Muhammad Beg, Chdpdrji, 16,

'271—3
Muhammad  of  Mazandaran,  Be-

ha'u'Uah's  servant,  857
Muhammad  of  Najafabad,  one  of

the  victims  of the  Teheran

massacre,  330
Muhammad,  Haji  (or  Aka)  Seyyid,

of  Isfahan,  miijtahid,  118  and

n.  8
Muhammad, Mirza Seyyid, of

Isfahan,  Iiiu'im-Jum'a,  266
Muhammad Khan, Begler-begi,

present  at  siege  of Zanjan,

180—1
Muhammad Nabll, MirzA. See

'Nabil
Muhammad  b.  Suleyman-i-Tana-

kabuni,  Mirza,  author  of  Kis-

asu'l-'Ulama,  197
Muhammad,  Mirza,  of  Niriz,  one

of  the  victims  of  the  Teher4n

massacre,  53,  n.  1,  328  and

n.  1,  330
Muhammad, Mulla, Kurratu'l-

'Ayn's  husband,  311
Muhammad, Mull4, Mamakani,
'19,  43,  182,  278,  285—6'


Muhammad,  MuUa,  of  Niir. See

'Mu'allim-i-Niiri
Muhammad,  Mulla,  of  Niir,  avoids

discussion  with  Beha'u'llah,

60—2
Muhammad, (HAji) Seyyid, of

Isfahan, the  Ezeli, 93 and

n.  1,  97,  185,  356,  360,  861,

370,  371
Muhammad  Shah,  7,  10,  21,  32,

'62,  176,  189,  277
Muhammad  'Ali  of  Barfuriish  (or

Mazandaran), [Haji] Mulla

(or Mirza), called by the

IJabis  "  Jendb-i-Kuddus,"  5,

29, 95, n. 1, l'76— 9, 195,

253,  306—9,  374;  his  writ-

ings,  30,  n.  1
Muhammad  'AH  of  Zanjan,  Mulla,

'9—10,  39,  179—181
Muhammad  'Ali  of  Tabriz,  Aka

'(or  Mirza,  or  Mulla),  43,  46,

n.  1,  182,  820—2
Muhammad  'Ali  of  Isfahan,  Aka,

secedes from Beha'u'llah,

362—3
Muhammad 'Ali of Najafabad,

one of the victims of the

Teheran  massacre,  330
Muhammad  'Ali  the  barber,  one

of  those  engaged  in  the  assas-
sination of  the  EzeUs, 359,

361
Muhammad 'Ali, Haji, a Babi

killed  at  Kazvin,  812
Muhammad 'Ali, Haji, a Babi

executed after the ZanjAn

rising,  181
Muhammad  'Ali  Khan  Shahsivan,

present  at  Zanjan  siege,  180
Muhammad Bakir. See Bakir,

Muhammad
Muhammad  Hasan,  Aka  Mirza,

brother  of  Mulla  Huseyn  of

Bushraweyh,  307
Muhammad  Hasan,  Haji  Mirza,

of  Khurasan,  one  of  the  Babis

taken captive at Sheykh

Tabarsi,  307
Muhammad  Hasan  Kh4n,  of  Eri-

van,  suspected  of  complicity


INDEX.


441


in  the  plot  against  the  Shah,

191
Muhammad Hasan, Mirza, of

'Nur,  the  Platonist,  266—8
Muhammad  Hasan,  Sheykh,  86,

"n.  1,  249  and  n.  1
Muhammad  Huseyn,  Aka,  of  Ar-

distan,  accompanies  Bab  on

journey  to  Isfahan,  263
Muhammad  Huseyn,  Mir,  Imam-

Jum'aof  Isfahan(g.ii.),  167 —

169
Muhammad Huseyn, Mirza, of

Tabriz, one of the Seven

Martyrs,  212
Muhammad  Ja'far,  Haji,  of  Fars,

one  of  the  clergy  of  Isfahan,

265
Muhammad Ja'far, MuUa, of

Nirak, remonstrates with

Beha'u'llah,  356
Muhammad Jawad of Kazvin,

murderer  of  Ezelis,  361
Muhammad  Mahdi,  Aka,  Kalbasi,

one  of  the  clergy  of  Isfahan,

12,  265—6
Muhammad  Mahdi, Haji, mention-
ed in  Kitdb-i-Jezd,  337
Muhammad  Eiza,  Haji,  of  Isfa-
han, assassinated  byMuham-

madans  at  'Ishkabad,  411 —

412
Muhammad Eiza,  Haji, one  of

the  murdered  Ezelis,  356,  359
,  Muhammad Eiza, Seyyid, the
'Bab's  father,  2,  250,  289
Muhammad Sadik. See Sadik,

Mulla[Muhammad],of  Khur-
asan
Muhammad  Salih,  Haji  MuUa,  of

Kazvin,  father  of  Kurratu'l-

'Ayn,  197,  310—1
Muhammad  Taki,  Imam,  297
Muhammad  Taki  Khan, Mirza,

'kiUed  at  Niir,  375
Muhammad Taki, Mirza, kills

Khusraw of  Kadi-kala, 36,

n.  2
Muhammad  Taki,  Haji  Mulla,  of

Kazvin,  called  Shahid-i-TM-


lith,  uncle  of  Kurratu'l-  'Ayn,
175,  197—8,  236,  310—1

Muhammad  Taki,  Mulla,  of  Herat,
'185

Muhammad  Taki  of  Shiraz,  one
of  the  victims  of  the  Teheran
massacre,  330

Muhayyisa,  assassinates  a  Jew  by
command  of  the  Prophet
Muhammad,  372

Muhsin,  one  of  the  muftis  of
'Baghdad,  249

Muhsin,  Haji,  a  Babi  executed
after  the  Zanjan  rising,  181

Mujtahid,  meaning  of  the  term,
266,  n.  1

Mukallid,  meaning  of  the  term,
'266,  n.  1

Mukaddas-i-Khurasan,  246.  See
'  Sadik,  MuUa  [Muhammad],
of  Khurasan,  and  'Ali,  Mulla,
of  Bistam,  both  of  whom
appear  to  have  enjoyed  this
title

Mumia-i-Hindi  ("the  Indian  be-
liever"), 196

MiirchS-Khiir,  near  Isfahan,  13
and  n.  1

Murgh  Mahalla,  in  Shimran,
Beha'u'Uah's  residence,  81

Murtaza,  Sheykh,  of  Shushtar,
an  instance  of  true  piety
amongst  the  Shi'ite  clergy,
86  and  n.  1,  129

Murtaza,  Seyyid,  'Ilmu'l-Hudu,
197

Murtaza,  Seyyid,  accompanies
the  Bab  to  Makii,  271,  n.  1,
272

Murtaza-kuli,  Haji  [or  MuUa],
M'ara'ndi,  43,  278,  286—7

Miisa,  brother  of  Beha'u'Uah,
xxxiv,  56,  n.  2

Miisa  Kazim,  Imam,  85,  n.  2,  297

Miisa  Khian,  takes  part  in  mas-
sacre of  Teheran,  329

Mushkin  Kalam,  xxiii,  360,  361,
377—382,  387—9

Mushkin-i-Ilahi,  title  conferred
on  one  of  Beha'u'Uah's  fol-
lowers, 362


442


INDEX.


Mustafa,  Mirza,  of  Nirak,  one  of
the  murderers  of  the  Ezelis,
363

Mustafa  Khan,  Kajar,  colonel  of
the  Sbakakl  regiment,  180

Mustafa-kuli  Kh4n  Kara-giizlii,
takes  part  in  suppression  of
Niriz  insurrection,  183,  257

Mustaghath,  xvii

Mu'tamadu'd-Dawla.  See  Minvi-
chihr  Khan  andFarhadMirza

Mutasharri's,  sect  of,  162  and  n.  1

Nabi,  Mirza,  of  Damavand,  one
of  the  victims  of  the  Teher4n
massacre,  330

Nabil,  Mirza  Muhammad,  of
Zarand,  "the  tongue-tied"
(al-akhras),  his  claim  to  su-
premacy, 357  and  n.  5,  365;
his  chronology,  xvii,  54,  n.  1,
55,  n.  3,  90,  n.  1,  155,  u.  1,
373,  n.  1

Na'im,  Mirza,  takes  part  in  sup-
pression of  Niriz  insurrection,
258,  259;  his  disgrace  and
punishment,  260 — 1

Najaf  of  Khamsa,  one  of  the
victims  of  the  Teheran  mas-
sacre, 331

Najaf4bad,  near  Isfahan,  perse-
cution of  Babls  at,  406^10

Najafi,  Aka,  persecutes  Babis,
408

Naim4jer,  Marie  von,  authoress
of  the  poem  Gurret-Ul-Eyn,
207—8,  309

Nakl,  Haji  Mirza,  of  Kirman,  one
of  the  Seven  Martyrs,  212

Namik  Pasha,  governor  of  Bagh-
dad, 84,  n.  2,  111,  n.  1

Namiisi,  a  kind  of  mosquito-cur-
tain, XXXV

Narcotics. See  Hashish,  Opium

Narjis  Khatiin,  mother  of  Imam
Mahdi,  289,  297

Nasikhu't-Tawarikh,  173—188,
205;  quoted,  227—8,  251,
265—8,  277—8,  324—5,  326,
327,  328—334


Nasiru'd-  Din  Shah,  20  and  n.  2,

■  151,  n.  1,  278,  280,  287,  288
,,  attempt  on  life  of,  xlvi,  49 —

51, 53, n. 1, 191—2, 201,

323—8
,,  Beha'u'llah's  epistle  to. See

Lawh-i-Sultdn
Nasir, Haji, of Kazvin, taken

captive at  Sheykh  Tabarsi,

129,  n.  2,  307
Nasir  the  Arab,  assassinates  MuUa

'  Eajab-'Ali  the  EzeU,  363
Nasiriyya  regiment,  180 — 1
Nasiru'1-Mulk. See Fazlu'Uah,

Mirza
Nasru'Uah, Aka Mirza, one of

the  Ezelis  assassinated,  361,

371
Nasru'Uah  Khan, takes  part in

Teheran  massacre,  332
Nawruz, ordinances  concerning,

422—6
Nejasbi,  397
Ni'matu'llab,  Sheykh, of  Amul,

taken  captive  at  Sheykh  Ta-
barsi, 307
Ni'matu'llab,  Shah,  his  shrine  at

Mahan,  244
Niriz,  insurrection  at,  39 — 40,  47,

n.  1,  183—4,  191,  195,  202,

263—261
Niyavaran,  52
Nizamu'1-Mulk, takes part in

massacre  of  Teheran,  329
Nizamu'l-'Ulama. See  Mahmiid,

■  H^jiMuUa
Noeldeke,  Professor,  li,  209
Nubuvvat  -  i  -  Khassa ( ' '  Special

Mission"), treatise on, by

Bab,  11,  54
Nujaba. See  Helpers
Nukaba. See  Guardians
Nukta, Hazrat-i-, xvi, 60,  n.  1,

■  229, '422. See  also  Bab
Niir,  Kitab-i-. See  Book  of  Light
Nur,  raid  on,  375 — 6
Niiru'llah,  Subh-i-Ezel's  son,  384
Nusej'ris,  14  and  n.  1,  162  and

'  n.  1
Niishirvan,  King,  201


INDEX.


443


Oocultatiou  (phaybat)  of  Twelfth

Imam,  25,  233,  244,  296—9
Oliphant, Laurence, 209 — 210,

370
'Omar,  the  13  rules  of,  407
Opium,  its  use  prohibited  by  Bab,

133,  n.  1
Ordinances  of  God  called  "Sealed

Wine" (rahik-i-makhtiim),

77,  n.  2
Ordinances  of  God  called  "  Pure

Wine,"  148
'Othman  b. Sa'id,  Abvi 'Umar,

233,  298

Paraclete,  293,  n.  1

P^erinage,  Journal  du. See  Zi-

yarat-nama
Persecution, disastrous conse-
quences of,  160 — 1,  164
,,  uselessness  of,  48,  49,  67,  157

—158,  160,  165
Persecutions,  abortive,  of  Babis,

410—411
"  Phlebotomist of the Divine

Unity" {Fassfldu'l-Ahadiy-

yat),  363  and'n.  1
Piggott,  207
Pillon,  F.,  207
Piri,  Mash-hadi,  one  of  the  Babis

of  Zanjan,  180
Point. See  Nukta  and  Bab
Polak,  Dr,  203^,  313,  314
"Preceding  Mercy"  (rahmat-i-su-

hika),  meaning  of  term,  113,

n.  1

Querry,  Droit  Musulman,  285,  n.
1

Eadagan,  Hamze  Mirza's  camp  at,
176

Eafi',  Mirza,  of  Niir,  one  of  the
victims  of  the  Teheran  mas-
sacre, 330

Eajab  'All,  MuUa,  Kahir,  one  of
the  Ezehs  assassinated  at
Baghdad,  356,  359,  363,  371

Easiil,  Aka,  deserts  from  Sheykh
Tabarsi,  179


Eawzatu's-Safa,  188—192,  277—
278

Eeiuaud,  M.,  his  translation  of
Abu'1-Feda  cited,  299

Eenan,  massacre  of  Teheran  how-
characterized  by  him,  xlv

Eesurrection,  how  understood  by
Bab,  224,  225

Eiza,  Imam,  282,  283  and  n.  1,
■_297

Biza  Khan,  one  of  the  Babis  at
Sheykh  Tabarsi,  179

Eiza,  Mirza,  one  of  the  Babis
executed  at  the  conclusion  of
the  Zanjan  siege,  181

Eiza, Seyyid Muhammad, the

■  Bab's  father,  2,'  250,  289
Eiza-kuli  Khan,  LeU-Bc'ishi,  188,

323

Eiza-kuU,  Mirza,  of  Tafrish,  one
of  the  Ezelis  assassinated  at
Acre,  93,  n.  1,  361,  370

Eizvan  'Ali,  Subh-i-Ezel's  son,
xxiv,  XXV,  385

Eosen,  Baron  Victor,  liii,  27,  n.  1,
69,  n.  1,  96,  n.  1,  102,  n.  1,
108,  n.  1,  208—9,  210—11,
305, 390—2,  411—2, 416,  and
passim  throughout  the  work.
See  also  Corrigenda,  p.  Iv,
supra

Eukayya,  Subh-i-Ezel's  wife,  384

Eukayya, servant of Mushkin

■  Kalam,  387
Euknu'd-Dawla,  Muhammad  'All

Mirza,  bestows  ou  Sheykh
Ahmad  Ahsa'i  a  yearly  pen-
sion, 235 — 6

Eussia,  war  of  1825  with  Persia,
118,  n.  3,  119

Eussian  ambassador  intercedes
for  Babis,  376

Eussian  government,  assassins  of
a  Babi  punished  by,  411 — 2

S,*«**, Sheykh, the Babi

courier,  413
S,,^**,.,  Sheykh, his  account

of  what  passed  between  him

and  the  Prince  Zillu's-Sultan,

401


444


INDEX.


Sabz-i-Meydan,  in  Teher4n,  213,
n.  1

Saddueees,  Babis  likened  to,  201

Sadik,  IVIulU,  of  IVIaragha,  one  of
the  Seven  Martyrs,  212

Sadik,  Mulla  [Muhammad],  of
Khurasan,  called  by  the  Babis
Jenab-i-Mukaddas  and  Mu-
kaddas-i-Khurdsdn,  5,  129,
n.  2,  195,  246—7,  307.  See
also  'Ah,  Mulla,  of  Bistam,
who,  according  to  Subh-i-
Ezel  (248—9),  also  bore  this
title

Sadik,  of  Zanjan  (or  Milan),  49,
53,  n.  1,  185,  323—4,  332

Sadr. See  Aka  Khan  of  Niir

Sadr4,  Mulla,  the  philosopher,
12,  268—271

Sadru'd-Dawla,  takes  part  in  siege
of  Zanjan,  180 — 1

Sa'du'1-Mulk,  governor  of  Bu-
shire,  411

Safiyya,  Subh-i-Ezel's  daughter,
384-5

Sa'ida,  the  bearded  woman,  306

Sa'id  Khan,  Mirza,  Minister  of
Foreign  Afiaira,  110,  329

Sa'id,  Sheykh,  the  Indian,  5,  248.
(It  seems  possible  that  this
person  may  be  identical  with
the  "  IndianBeliever"  spoken
of  in  the  Tdrikh-i-Jadid.  See
p.  196)

Sa'idu'l-'Ulama,  one  of  the  clergy
of  Barfuiiish,  30,  35,  176,
307—9

Salih,  Haji  Mulla  [Muhammad],
of  Kazvin,  the  father  of
Kurratu'l-'Ayn,  30,  197,  310
—311

Salih,  Mir,  one  of  the  Zanjan  in-
surgents, 180

Salih,  Mirza,  of  Shiraz,  the
murderer  of  Haji  Mulla  Mu-
hammad Taki,  311—2

Salih,  Sheykh,  the  Arab,  one  of
Kurratu'l-Ayn'sconverts.put
to  death  at  Teheran,  311 — 2

S41ih  T4hir,  312


Sam  Khan,  colonel  of  the  Christian
regiment  of  Uriimiyya,  43 —
44

Sami  Bey,  199

Samiri,  355,  n.  2,  362

Sarkalii,  the  place  of  Beha's  re-
tirement in  Kurdistan,  64

Sayyah,  Sheykh  (or  Mirza)  'Ali,
one  of  the  Cyprus  exiles,  352,
361,  380  and  n.  2,  381,  382
and  n.  1,  386—7

Sedition  disavowed  and  censured,
116,  1.52,  394

Seven  Letters,  Person  of  the
(Zd.t-i-Jiiirdf'i-&abUt),  a  title
of  the  Bab,'  230,  231,  421—2

Seven  Martyrs  (Shuhadd-i-sab'a),
xlv,  47,  n.  1,  196,  201,  211—
218

Seven  Proofs. See  Dala'il-i-sab'a

S^vruguin,  M.,  his  memoir  on  the
Babis,  205,  248

Seyfiir,  184,  n.  1

Seyr-i-kuhib  ("  spiritual  sight-
seeing"), 401

Shah.  See  Muhammad  Shah,
and  Naairu'd-Din  Shah

Shah  'Abdu'l-'Azim,  Shrine  of,
46,  n.  1,  185,'  216,  332

Shahbaz  Khan,  of  Maragha,
presentat  siege  of  Zanjan,  180

Shahid-i-thalith.  See  Muhammad
Taki,  Haji  Mulla,  of  Kazvin

Shah  Ni'matu'Uah,  his  shrine  at
Mahan,  244

Shahzad6  Huseyn  at  Kazvin,  198

Shakaki  regiment  at  siege  of
Zanjan,  180

Shalmaghani,  ash-,  229

Shawahid  -  i  -  Eububiyya  ("  Evi-
dences of  Divinity"),  by
Mull4  Sadra,  269—271

Sheep,  decapitation  of,  honour
shewn  to  great  men  by,  326,
n.  1

Shell,  Lady,  200—1,  211—212,
226—7

Sheykhis,  sect  of  the,  4,  162,
234—244

Sheykhi,  a  Bibi  executed  at
Zanjan,  180


INDEX.


445


Sheykh Tabarsi, castle  of. See

Tabarsi
Sheykhu'l-'Ajam, author of a

history of  the Mazandaran

insurrection  in  the Mazan-

darani  dialect,  205
Shi'ite  doctrine,  certain  points  of,

296—306
Shimr,  272

Shimran,  50,  52,  81  and  n.  1
Shiraz,  called  Ddru'l-'Ilm  ("the

Abode  of  Knowledge"),  294,

n.  1,  354,  n.  2
Shuja'u'1-Mulk. See Mihr 'Ali

Khan,  of  Niir
Shu'iin-i-khamsa. See Five

Grades
Si-dih,  persecutions  at,  169,  n.  1,

406—410
Sidon,  Babi  agent  at,  xliii
Sipihr. See  Lisanu'l-Mulk
Slane,  Baron  Mac  Guckin  de  — 's

translation  of  Ibu  Khallikan,

229,  302
Slavery, Babis sold into, 129,

n.  2,  247
Smith,  Joe, founder  of  theMonnon

sect,  Bab  likened  to,  201
Sofyan,  appearance  of,  26,  305 —

306
Special  Mission. See  Nubuvvat-

i-Khassa
Straw,  heads  stuffed  with, 258

and  n.  1
Style affected  by  Babis,  xlvi —

xlviii
Su'al  u  Jawab,  work  on  Shi'ite

jurisprudence,  285,  n.  1
Subh-i-Ezel (Mirza Yahya) : —

chief  references  : xv — xxvi,

51,  63—4,  89—90,  93—101,

349—389
,,  other  titles,  95,  n.  1,  353
„  birth, date of, 373  and nn.

1  and  2
,,  parentage  and  early  life,  56,

n.  2,  373
,,  first  becomes  prominent,  62 —

63,  3.^2—4
,,  how regarded by  Bab, xvi,

xxiv,  95,  n.  1,  350,  352—4


Subh-i-Ezel,howregardedbyBeha
and  the  Beha'is,  93,  n.  1  (Ki-
tdb-i-Akdas);  96,  n.  1  {Lawh-
i-Nasir)  ;  xlv  (Traveller's
Narrative)  ;  195  [Tdrikh-i-
Jadld);  xxiii  (MushkinKalam)
„  in  Persia,  63,  354,  374  '
,,  escapes to Baghdad, 51 — 2,

354,  375
„  at  Baghdad,  63—4,  355—8
,,  departure from  Baghdad to
Constantinople,  89,  90,  n.  1,
358
,,  at  Adrianople,  92  et  seq.,  99,

n.  1,  358—361
,,  date  of  banishment  to  Fama-
gusta,  101,  n.  3,  373,  n.  2,
378,  n.  2,  380,  382
,,  visited  at  Famagusta,  xxiv —

xxvi
,,  his  family,  xxiv,  384 — 6
,,  his statements quoted, 41,
n.  2, 46,  n.  1,  84,  n.  2,  86,n.  1,
202, 221, 248—9,  261,  262,
308,  312—3,  314,  334,  335—
344,  &c.
„  his  writings,  210,  335,  340—2
Sufis,  Gobineau's  opinion  of,  x
Suleyman, Mash-hadi, executed

at  Zanjan,  181
Suleyman  Khan  Afshar,  179, 182,

239,  n,  1
Suleyman  Khan,  Haji,  son  of
Yahya  Khan  of  Tabriz,  xxi,
46—7,  185,  192,  239,  n.  1,
253,  322,  327,  329,  331, 332—
334
Suleyman-kuli, Mirza,  acquitted

with  Beha'u'Uah,  186,  327
Suleymaniyy^,  visited  by  Beha'u

'Uah,  64—5
Sultan  Huseyn  Mirza,  killed  at

■  Sheykh  Tabarsi,  178
Sultan, Sheykh,  the  Arab, con-
verted by  Kurratu'l-'Ayn,  311
Sultauu'sh-Shuhada.  Seelsfaian,

Martyrs  of
Suneyna (or Subeyna), a Jew
assassinated  by  command  of
Muhammad,  372
Siira-i-Heykal. See  Heykal


446


INDEX.


Siira  of  Joseph  or  Yiisuf.  See
Commentary

Siira  of  Kawthar.  See  Com-
mentary

Siira  of  Wa'l-'Asr.  See  Com-
mentary

Swooning  in  dyspepsia,  280

Tabari,  wherein  his  special  value
as  a  historian  consists,  li

Tabarsl,  Sheykh,  castle  of,  xxi,
n.  1,37— 9,95,  u.  1,129,  n.  2,
177—9,  189,  195,  247,  306—
307
,,  form  of  prayer  appointed  for
"visitation  of,  338

Tabataba,  Seyyids  of,  167.  See
Isfahan,  martyrs  of

Tabayun,  one  of  the  "four  rela-
tions," 284  and  n.  8

Tabriz,  called  Mahall-i-Zarh  and
Mash-had,  322. See  also  Bab

T&hir,  Mirz4,  185

Tahir,  Sheykh,  one  of  Kurratu'l-
'Ayn's  converts,  311—312

Tahira,  Jenab-i-.  See  Kurratu'l-
'Ayn

Tahmasp  Mirza,  governor  of
Shiraz,  258

Tahmasp-kuli  Khan,  190

Takiya  (concealment  of  opinions),
'  216

Taki  Khan,  Mirza.  See  Amir-
Nizam

Taki'u'd-Din,  Subh-i-Ezel's  son,
xxiv,  xxvi,  886

Takur  in  Mazandaran,  Subh-i-
Bzel's  native  place,  352

Tal'at,  Subh-i-Ezel's  daughter,
384—5

Tang-i-Kaj4r,  an  instrument  of
torture,  260

Tarikh-i-Jadid,  xiv — xv,  xlii,  xliv,
192—7
„  cited  or  appealed  to,  212 — 218,
288—240,  245—8,  250,  254—
259,  268,  264—5,  271—7,  291
—292,  307—9,  809—312,  319
—322

Tasawi,  one  of  the  "four  rela-
tions," 284  and  n.  3


Teheran,  called  "the  Holy  Land"

(Arz  -  i -  akdas), 56  ; — called

"  the  Land  of  Ta,"  79,  n.  2
Teheran  Gazette,  201
Teymiir,  of  Kal'a-Zanjiri,  put  to

death  at  Kirmanshah,  184
Thielmann,  208
Tobacco, use  of, prohibited  by

Bab,  xxvi,  138,  n.  1
,,  avoided  by  Ezelis,  xxvi
,,  permitted  by  Beha,  188,  n.  1
Tolerance advocated by  Babis,

153, 163, 261. See also

Bigotry
Toumansky,  M.,  192,  n.  1,  411
Treason  reprobated,  83. See  also

Sedition
Tree  of Truth {Shajara-i-Haki-

kat),  Bab  so  called,  219,  n.  12,

224,  225,  230,  294
Turks,  MuUa  'Ali  Bistami  put  to

death  by,  249
Turkish  language  in  Persia,  44,

n.  1
Turkish protection sought by

Babis,  88,  111  and  n.  1,  117

and  n.  1

Unity  {Vdliid),  xvi,  xxiv,  95,  n.  1,
421.  See  also  Letters  of  the
Living

Uriimiyya, Bab's reception at,
19  and  n.  1
,,  Christian  regiment  of,  43

Ussher,  120,  n.  1,  204

Vahid. See  Unity

Vali  Khan,  sent  against  Niriz,  184

Vambery,  Professor  Arminius,
206,  333

Varoshia,  suburb  of  Famagusta,
xxiii

Vasaks,  surprise  of,  177,  190

Vav,  the  year,  416,  419

Victory  (nusrat),  meaning  of,  ex-
plained by  Beha'u'llah,  112—
115

Visitations. See  Ziyarat

Wahb  b.  Eahib,  185  and  n.  4
,,  b.  Yahudha,  135  and  n.  4


INDEX.


447


Wahb  b.  Zayd,  135  and  n.  4
Wahid, title  of  Subh-i-Ezel,  95,

n.  1,  353  and  u.  2
Wa'l-'asr,  Commentary  on  Sura

of. See  Commentary
Waraka-i-'Ulya, title  of  one  of

Beha'u'llah's  wives,  361
Watson,  History  of  Persia,  180,

189,  n.  1,  205—6,  227,  229
"White  Hand,"  148
White  garments  worn  by  Babis,

xxxi  and  n.  1,  xxxiv,  xliii
Wine,  use  of, contrary  to  Babi

religion,  133  and  n.  1
Wright,  Dr  A.  H.,  of  Unimiyya,

19,  n.  1,  187,  200,  278
Wright,  Dr  William,  his  canon

of  translation,  xlviii — ix

Yahya,  Mlrza. See  Subh-i-Ezel
Yahya, Aia Seyyid, of Darab,

7—8,  '39,  45,  n. 1, 183—4,

191,  202,  205,  253—261
Yahya  Khan  the  Kurd,  warden  of

Chihrik,  17,  275,  292
Yawmu'llah  ("  the  Day  of  God  ")

=  Nawruz,  422
Yazid,  272
Year  of  "after  a  while"  {sene-i-

ba'da  hm),  55,  n.  3,  63
Yezd  insurrection,  183,  201,  206,

207,  255—6
Young, Captain, xix — xxv,  350,

373,  nn.  1  and  2,  384
Yusuf ,  Mulla,  of  Ardabil,  5,  247—

248,  307

Za,  the  letter,  xlii,  170  and  n.  1,
412^19

Zanjan,  Babi  doctrines  first  reach,
9;  a  stronghold  of  Babiism,
271—3;  siege  of,  39—40,  47,


n.  1,  179—181,  186—7,  188,

190,  192,  196,  201,  203,  204,

206,  207
Zanvazi, Akk Seyyid, ratifies

Bab's  death-warrant,  182
Zapiski,  Baron  Rosen's,  210
Zarb,  Mahall-i-,  Tabiiz  so  called,

322
Zargand^,  Subh-i-Ezel'a  residence

at,  374
Zarrin  Taj ("Golden Grown").

See  Kurratu'l-'Ayn
Zawra,  Baghdad  so  called,  139,

n.  2,  143,  n.  1
„  Teheran  so  called,  177
Zeynu'l-'Abidin, Imam, 139 et

seq.  and  n.  3,  297
Zeynu'l-'Abidin,  Mulla,  of  Yezd,

one  of  the  Teheran  martyrs,

329 ,
Zeynu'l-'Abidin  Khan,  governor

of  Niriz,  183,  191,  256,  258
Zeynu'l-Mukarrabin, 362. See

also  Za,  the  letter,  supra
Zillu's-Sultan, Prince, 401—3,

407,  408,  409  and  n.  1
Ziyarat-nama  (Gobineau's  Jour-
nal du  Pelerinage),  205, 337 —

338
Ziyarat,  other,  337—8,  339,  341

Ziya'u'd-Din, Subh-i-Ezel's  son,

386
Zoroastriau  converted  to  Babiism,

34
Zoroastrians maltreated, 407,

n.  2
Zoroastrian calendar, analogy

with  Babi  calendar,  414,  n.  1
Zuhiir  (Manifestation).  See  Bab
Zu'1-Eikar Khan, takes part  in

massacre  of  Teheran,  329


CAMEEIDGK; FEINTED  BY  C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, AT  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
