M8NT0
LiBRARnf


P??a;'i


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Archive

in  2007  witin  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/dissertationonriOObrowuoft


^j^7^?a


A

DISSERTATION

O  N TH  E
RISE, UNION, and  POWER,

THE

ProgreiTions,  Separations,  and  Corruptions,

OF

POETRY  and  MUSIC

To  which  is  prefixed.

The Cure of SAUL.

A
SACRED ODE.

Written  by  Dr.  B  R  O  W  N.


Grata  Teftudol — Laborum
Duke  Lenimen!  Mibi  cunquefahe.
Rite  votanti.


LONDON;,

Printed  for  L.  Davis  and  C.  Reywers  againft  Grafs-Inn^  Holbourn.  ^

Printers  to  the  Royal  Society.  ^^^^^""'ACh

MDCCLXIII.  \0-.^*


Advertifement

*Tbe  Relation  which  the  following  Ode  and  Difertation  bear
to  each  other,  thd  perhaps  not  apparent  at  Jirji  Sight,  ren-
dered it  necejjary  to  publijh  tbfm  in  this  united. Manner..


PN

Blfc


I.


THE

A R G U M E N T

OF THE

O  D  E.

SAUL,  for  his  Dif obedience  to  Heaven,  is  affliSied'
•with  the  Fiend  of  Mel AtiCHOLYy  p.  5. David  >
isjentfor,  to  cure  him  by  the  Power  of  Mufc,  p.  6.
He  comes,  attended  with  a  Choir  of  Shepherds ;  and, ,
as  the  means  of  difpelling  Saul's  Defpair, he  fngs
the  Creation  of  the  World,  and  the  happy  Eflate  of
our  fr/l  Parents  in  Paradife, ib.  to  9. Saul is >
'  mofved  by  the  Reprefejjtation ', but  expoflulates  with
David,  "  why,  when  others  are  happy,  Hejhould  be
miferable,'^  p.  i o.  David,  to  convince  him  that  Guilt
is  the  Source  of  Mifery,  fmgs  the  Fall  of  Man,  and
his  Expuljion  from  Paradife, ib. This  alarms  the
Mo7iarcUs  Pride ;  and  ijiflead  of  reclaiming,  provokes
him  to  Refentment  a7jd  Rage,  p^i  i<  David,  fuperior '
to  his  Threats,  awakens  his  Co77fcience-i  and  terrifes
him,  by  fnging  the  Fate  and  Piinijhment  of  Guilt,  in
the  Deft ruSi ion  of  the  rebellious  "Tribe  of  Chokxu  by  an  -
Earthquake,  and  of  the  guilty  World  by  the  general^

B-'2-  F)eluge^^


iv The  A  R  G  U  M  E  N  T of  the O  D  E.

Deluge,  p.  1 1, 12, 13.  SkiJLyJlrucJi  with  Horror^
attempts  to  kill  himfelf^  p- I4«  But  being  prevented
by  his  FrieJids,  T> aw it>  fooths  his  Anguijh,  by  invoking
Repentance  and  divine  Mercy  to  compofe  his  Pajftons^
p.  14.  Saul  relents  into  virtuous  Sorrow,  P-  '^S*
But  his  Defpair  returning^  David  calls  on  his  at-
tendant Choir  to  raife  a  more  fuhlime  afid  affeEling
Strain,  p.  1 6.  T^is  hath  its  EffeEl\  and  Saul  melts
into  'Tears  of  Penitence,  ib.  David  7iow  comforts
him  with  the  Returfi  of  the  divine  Favour,  p.  1 7.
To  banifh  the  Remains  of  Pride,  he  then  fngs  his  awn
Happinefs  in  the  humble  Station  of  a  Shepherd,  ib.
Still  farther  to  compofe  the  Monarches  Griefs,  by  a
Strain  of  foft  Mufic  he  throws  him  into  a  gentle
Slumber  y  invoking  celeflial  Vifio?is  to  tranfport  him
to  the  Regions  of  the  Blejfed,  and  change  his  Anguifh
into  yoy,  p.  1 8 .  The  defired  EffeSls  appear  in  his
Countenance :  The  Fiend  departs  :  And  S a  u  l  awakes
in  perfeSi  Tranquillity,  p.  18.  David  then  con-
cludes with  a  Song  of  Triumph  on  the  Powers  of
Harmoffy,  and  the  feraphic  Hymn  that  attended
her,  as  the  Minifler  of  Heaven,  on  the  Creation  of
the  World,  P*  'Q*

THE


THE

CURE

O  F

S A U L.

A SACRED ODE.

«XTENGEANCE,  arife  from  thy  Infernal  Bed ;
•^ «*  And  pour  thy  Tempeft  on  his  Guilty  Head !"

Thus  Heav'n's  Decree,  in  Thunder's  Sound,

Shook  the  dark  Abyfs  profound.  — •

The  unchain'd  Furies  come  I

Pale  Melancholy  ftalks  from  Hell  c

Th'  abortive  Offspring  of  her  Womb,

Defpair  and  Anguijb  round  her  yell.

By  fleeplefs  Terror  Saul  poffefs'd.
Deep  feels  the  Fiend  within  his  tortur'd  Breaft.

Midnight


6  T  H  E,  G  U  R  E O  F S  A  U  L.

Midnight  Spedres  round  him  howl ;  .  '
Before  his  Eyes
In  Troops  they  rife ;
And  Seas  of  Horror  overwhelm  his  Soul.  .

Haflfr;  to  Jesse's  Son  repair:  -
He  beft  can  fweep  the  Lyre,
Wake  the  folemn  founding  Air,  .
And  lead  the  vocal  Choir  :
On  ev'ry  String  foft -breathing  Raptures  dwell,  .
To  footh  the  Throbbings  of  the  troubled  Breaft ;
Whofe  magic  Voice  can  bid  the  Tides  of  Paffion  fwell,'.
Or  lull  the  raging  Storm  to  Reft.

Sunk  on  his  Couch,  and  loathing  Day,

The  heav'n-forfaken  Monarch  lay  :
To  the  fad  Couch  the  Shepherd  now  drew  near;

And,  while  th'  obedient  Ghoir  ^oA  round,
Prcpar'd  to  catch  the  Soul-commanding  Sound,
He  drop'd  a  gen'rous  Tear.  —

Thy  pitying  Aid,  O  God,  impart !

For  '^'\  thy  poifon'd  Arrows  drink  his  Heart  f

The


A SACREDODE.

The  mighty  Song  from  Chaos  rofe.  —
Around  his  Throne  the  formlefs  Atoms  fleep.
And  drowzy  Darknefs  broods  upon  the  Deep  :—

Confujion,  wake !
Bid  the  Realms  of  Chaos  fhake  !

Roufe  him  from  his  dread  Repofe  f  —
Hark  !  loud  Difcord  breaks  her  Chain  :
The  hoftile  Atoms  clafh  with  deafning  Roar :
•Her  hoarfe  Voice  thunders  through  the  drear  Domain  ;
And  kindles  evVy  Element  to  War.  -^

"  Tumult  eeafe !
-*«  Sink  to  Peace  !
"  Let  there  be  Light !" — Th'. J/m^hfj  faid  :

And  lo,  the  radiant  Sun,

Flaming  from  his  orient  Bed,

His  endlefs  Courfe  begun.

See,  the  twinkling  Pieiads  rife::
Thy  Star,  Orion,  reddens  in  .the  Skies.: .

While  flow  around  the  northern  Plain,

ArStuna  >A^heels  his  nightly  Wane,


Thy


8


THE CURE OF'^AULv


thy  Glories,  too,  refulgent  Moon,  he  fung  j
Thy  myftic  Mazes,  and  thy  changeful  Ray:
O  faireft  of  the  ftarry  Throng!
Thy  folemn  Orb  of  Light
Guides  the  triumphant  Carr  of  Night
O'er  Silver  Clouds,  and  (heds  a  fofter  Day  1

Ye  Planets,  and  each  circling  Con/ielhtion,
In  Songs  harmonious  tell  your  Generation !
Oh,  while  yon  radiant  Serafb  turns  the  Spheres.
And  on  the  ftedfaft  Pole-Star  ftands  fublime  j

Wheel  your  Rounds

To  hcav'nly  Sounds  j
And  footh  his  Song-inchanted  Ears.

With  your  celeftial  Chime.

In  dumb  Surprize  the  lift'ning  Monarch  lay  j
(His  Woe  fulpended  by  fweet  Mufic's  Sway)
And  awe-ftruck,  with  uplifted  Eye
Mus'd  on  the  new-born  Wonders  of  the  Sky.

Lead  the  foothing  Verfe  along:

He  feels,  he  feels  the  Pow'r  of  Sbng.  —


A SACRED ODE,


9


Ocean  haftens  to  his  Bed  :
The  lab'ring  Mountain  rears  his  rock-encumber'd  Head  :
.  Down  his  fteep  and  ihaggy  Side

The  torrent  rolls  his  thund'ring  Tide ;
Then  fmooth  and  clear,  along  the  fertile  Plain
Winds  his  majeftic  Waters  to  the  diftant  Main.

Flocks  and  Herds  the  Hills  adorn  :  ,-

Tlie  Lark,  high-foaring,  hails  the  Mom.
And  while  along  yon  crimfon-clouded  Steep
The  flow  Sun  deals  into  the  golden  Deep,

Hark  !  the  folemn  Nightingale

Warbles  to  the  woodland  Dale,
See,  defcending  Angels  ihow'r

Heav'n's  own  Blifs  on  Ederis  Bow^r :

Peace  on  Nature's  Lap  repofes ;

Pleafure  ftrews  her  guiltlefs  Rofcs :

Joys  divine  in  Circles  move,

Link'd  with  Innocence  and  Love.
Hail,  happy  Love,  with  Innocence  combin'd  1
All  hail,  ye  finleis  Parents  of  Mankind !

They  paus'd  :  —  the  Monarch,  proilratc  on  his  Bed,
.Submiflive  bow'd  his  Head  ;

C  .^dor'd


lo  T  H  E C  U  R  E O  F S  A  U  L.

Ador'd  the  Works  of  bouodlefs  Pow'r  divine  :
Then,  Anguifli-flruck,  he  cry'd  (and  fmote  his  Breaft);
Why,  why  is  Peace  the  welcome  Gueft
Of  ev'ry  Heart  but  Mine  !

Now  let  the  folemn  Numbers  flow.

Till  he  feel  that  Guilt  is  Woe.

Heav'nly  Harp,  in  mournful  Strain
O'er  yon  weeping  Bow'r  complain :
What  Sounds  of  bitter  Pangs  I  hear  I
What  Lamentations  wound  mine  Ear  I

In  vain,  devoted  Pair,  thefe  Tears  ye  ihed  :
Peace  with  Innocence  is  fled-
The  Meffengers^  o|  prace  depart :
Death  glares,  and  ftiakes  the  d,readful  Dart  If

Ah,  whither  fly  ye,  by  yourfelves  abhor'd.

To  (hun  that  frowning  Cherub's  firey  Sword  ?  — .

Lo  I

Haplefs,  haplefs  Pair,

Goaded  by  Defpair,

Forlorn,  thro'  defert  Climes  they  go  I

Wake,  i»y  Lyre  !  can  Pity  fleep.

When  Heav'n  is  moNf'dj.  an^  Angel?  weep  !


Flow,.


A S  A  C  R  E  D O  D  E.  ii

Flow,  ye  melting  Numbers,  flow ;
Till  he  feel,  that  Guilt  is  Woe.  —


The  King,  with  Pride,  and  Shame,  and  Anguifh,  tom>

Shot  Fury  from  his  Eyes,  and  Scorn.

The  glowing  Youth,

Bold  in  Truth,
(So  ftill  ihould  Virtue  guilty  Pow'r  engage)

With  Brow  undaunted  met  his  Rage.
See,  his  Cheek  kindles  into  generous  Fire  :

Stern,  he  bends  him  o'er  his  Lyrej

And,  while  the  Doom  of  Guilt  he  fmgs,

Shakes  Horror  from  the  tortur'd  Strings.

What  Sounds  of  Terror  and  Diftrefs
Rend  yon  howling  Wildernefs  !

The  dreadful  Thunders  found  ;
The  forked  Lightnings  fla(h  along  the  Ground.

Why  yawns  that  deep'ning  Gulph  below?  —

Tis  for  Heav'n's  rebellious  Foe  :  —

Fly,  ye  Sons  of  Israel,  fly,

Who  dwells  in  Korafos  guilty  Tents  muft  die!  —

They  fink  !  — Have  Mercy,  Lord! —  Their  Cries

In  dreadful  Tumult  rife !

C  e  Hark,


iz. T  H  E e  U  R  E O  F S  A  U  L.

Hiirk,  from  the  Deep  their  loud  Laments  I  heai?!
They  leffen  now,  and  leffen  on  the  Ear  !

Now,  Deftrudlion's  Strife  is  o'er !

The  countlefs  Hofl

For  ever  loft !
The  Gulph  is  clos'd I—Thfir  Cries  are  heard  no  more!--.

But  Oh,  my  Lyre,,  what  Accents  can  relate
Sinful  Man's  appointed  Fate  !

He  comes,  he  comes !  th'  avenging  God  !
Clouds  and  Darknefs  round  him  rowl :
Tremble,  Earth  !  Ye  Mountains,^  nod !'
He  bows  the  Skies,  and  fliakes  the  Pole.
The  gloomy  Bankers  of  his  Wrath  unfurl'd.
He  calls  the  Floods,  to  drown  a-  gui-liy  World  ^
"  Ruin,  lift  thy  baleful  Head :
"  Rouze  the  guilty  World  from  Sleep ;
"  Lead  up  thy  Billows. from  their  cavern'd  Bed,.
«  And  burft  theRocks  that  chain  thee  in  theDeep."— ^
Now,  th'impetuous  Torrents  rife  ;.
The  hoarfe-afcending  Deluge  roars  :
Down  rufli  the  Catarads  from  the  Skies;
The  fwelling  Waves  o'erwhelm  the  Shores.


A S  A  C  R  E  D O  D  E.  ij

Juft,  O  God,  is  thy  Decree !
Shall  guilty  Man  contend  with  Thee  1  *
Lo,  Hate  and  Etivy,  lea-intomb'd.
And  Rage  with  Lvji  in  Ruin  fleep ;
And  fcoffing  Luxury  is  doom'd

To  glut  the  vafl:  and  rav,'nous  Deep  !

In  vain  from  Fate  th'  aftoni(h'd  Remnant  flies :

**  Shrink,  ye  Rocks !  Ye  Oceans,  rife !" -

The  tottering  Cliffs  no  more  the  Floods  controul  y
Sea  following  Sea  ingulphs  the  Ball :
O'er  the  funk  Hills  the  watry  Mountains  row!.
And  wide  Dejlrtt^ion-  fwallows  all !  —
Now  fiercer  let  th'  impaffion'd  Numbers  glow :
Swell  die  Songi  ye  mighty  Choir !
Wing  your  dreadful  Darts  with  Fire  f  ■
Hear  me.  Monarch !  —  Guilt  is  Woe !  \

Thus  while  the  frowning  Shepherd  pour'd  alongr

The  deep  impetuous  Torrent  of  his  Song ;
Saul,  flung  by  dire  Defpair,
Gnafli'd  his  Teeth,  and  tore  his  Hair ;  .
From  his  Blood,  by  Horror  chill'd,

A  cold  apd  agonizing  Sweat  diftill'd :


.14 THE CURE OF SAUL.

"TThen,  foaming  with  unutterable  Smart,
He  aim'd  a  Dagger  at  his  Heart.
His  watchful  Train  prevent  the  Blow  j

-And  call  each  lenient  Balm,  to  heal  his  frantic  Wjoe:
But  pleas'd,  the  Shepherd  now  beheld
His  Pride  by  Heav'n's  own  Terrors  quell'd :
Then  bade  his  potent  Lyre  controul
The  mighty  Storm  that  rent  his  Soul.

Ccafe  your  Cares:  the  Body's  Pain

A  fweet  Relief  may  find :
But  Gums  and  lenient  Balms  are  vain,

To  heal  the  wounded  Mind.

Come,  fair  Repentance^  from  the  Skies,

O  fainted  Maid,  with  upcaft  Eyes !

Defcend  in  thy  celeftial  Shrowd,

Vefted  in  a  weeping  Cloud !

Holy  Guide,  defcend,  and  bring

Mercy  from  th'  eternal  King !

Calm  his  Soul,  your  Beams  impart.

And  pour  your  Comforts  o'er  his  Heart !  — '

They  come.:  O  King,  thine  Ear  incline :
-Liften  to  their  Voice  divine  :


Their


A S  A  C  R  E  D O  D  E.  15

Their  Voice  fhall  every  Pang  compofe.
To  gentle  Sorrow  n^elt  thy  Woes ;
Till  each  pure  Wifh  to  Heav'n  fhall  foar.
And  Peace  return,  to  part  no  more  !

Behold,  obedient  to  their  great  Command,
The  lifted  Dagger  quits  his  trembling  Hand :

Smooth'd  is*  his  Brow,  where  fullen  Care
And  furrow'd  Horror  couch'd  with  fell  Defpair:

No  more  his  Eyes  with  Fury  glow;
But  heav'nly  Grief  fucceeds  to  hell-born  Woe.— -

See,  the  Signs  of  Grace  appear  :

See  the  foft  relenting  Tear,

Trickling  at  fweet  Mercy's  Call  I

Catch  it,  Angela^  ere  it  fall !

And  let  the  heart-fent  Offering  rife,

Heav'n's  bell-accepted  Sacrifice  !  —

Yet,  yet  again  ? — Ah  fee,  the  Pang  returns !
Again  with  inward  Fire  his  heaving  Bofom  burns  I

Now,  Shepherds,  wake  a  mightier  Strain  i

Search:  the  deep,  heart  rending  Pain  ;

Till  the  large  Floods  of  Sorrow  roll.

And  quejich  the  Tortures  o£  his  Soul.

\  Alnaighty


i6  THECUREOFSAUU

Almighty  Lord,  accept  his  Pang  fincerc  '
Let  heav'niy  Hope  difpell  each  dark  Temptation  J
And,  while  he  .pours  the  penitential  Tear,
O  vifit  him  with  thy  Salvation  !  —

Stoop  from  Heav'n,'ye  rapturd  Throng:

Sink,  ye  fwelling  TiHes  of  Song  I
For  lo,  diflblv'd  by  Mufic's  melting  Pow'f,
Celeftial  Sorrow  rolls  her  plenteous  Show'r.

O'er  his  wan  Cheek  the  Colours  rife ;
And  Beams  of  Comfort  brighten  in  his  Eyes.

Happy  King,  thy  Woes  are  o'er !

Thy  God  ihall  wound  thy  Heart  no  more  ,•

The  pitying  Father  of  Mankind

Meets  the  pure-returninfg  Mind.
No  more  fhall  black  Defpair  afflidt  his  Soul :
Each  gentler  Sound,  ye  Shepherds,  now  combine :

Sweetly  let  the  Numbers  roll :

-Sooth  him  into  Hope  divine.

Now  lowly  let  the  ruftic  Meafure  glide.
To  quell  the  dark  Remains  of  felf-confuraing  Pride  ;
Till  Nature's  home-fprung  Bleflings  he  confefs.
And  ovm  that  calm  Content  is  Happinefs.  — >


Yc


A S  A  C  R  E  D O  D  E.  ly

Yc  Woods  and  Lakes,  ye  Cliffs  and  Mountains !
Haunted  Grots,  and  living  Fountains!

Liflen  to  your  Shepherd's  Lay,

Whofe  artlefs  Carols  clofe  the  Day.

Bounding  Kids  around  him  throng ;

The  fteep  Rock  echoes  back  his  Song  :

While  all  unfeen  to  mortal  Eye,

Sliding  down  the  evening  Sky,

Holy  Feacey  tho'  born  above.

Daughter  of  Innocence  and  Love,

Quits  her  Throne  and  Manfion  bright.

Her  Crovirn  of  Stars,  and  Robe  of  Light,

Serene,  in  gentle  Smiles  array 'd.

To  dwell  beneath  his  Palm-Tree  Shade.

Hail,  meek  Angel !  awful  Gueft  !

Still  pour  thy  Radiance  o'er  my  Breaft  !

Tride  and  Hate  in  Courts  may  fhine :

The  Shepherd's  calm  and  blamelefs  Tent  is  Thine  !

Softly,  foftly  breath  your  Numbers  ;
And  wrap  his  weary 'd  Soul  in  Slumbers !

Gentle  Sleep,  becalm  his  Breaft,

And  clofe  his  Eyes  in  healing  Reft  \

D  bcfcend.


t8  THE CURE OF SAUI..

:Defcend,  ccleftial  Vifions,  yc  who  wait,

'God's  miniftring Pow'rs,  at  Heav'n's  eternal  Gate!
Ye  who  nightly  Vigils  keep^
And  rule  the  filent  Realms  of  Sleep,
Exalt  the  Jull  to  Joys  refin'd.
And  plunge  in  Woe  the  guilty  Mind  j
Defcend !  —  Oh,  waft  him  to  the  Skies,
And  open  all  Heav'n's  Glories  to  his  Eyes'!

Beyond  yon  ftarry  Roof,  by  Seraphs  trod.

Where  Light's  unclouded  Fountains  blaze .;
Where  Choirs  immortal  hymn  their  Gon,

Intranc'd  in  Ecftafy  of  ceafelefs  Praife.
.Angels,  heal  his  Anguifh !
^Your  Harps  and  Voices  joyn1
:His  Grief  to  Blifs  fhall  languifb.
When  footh'd  by  Sounds  divine.

jBehold,  with  dawning  Joy  each  Feature  glows !

See,  the  bhfsful  Tear  o'erflows  ! —
The  Fiend  is  fled!  — Let  Mujics  Rapture  rife^
J^ow,  Harmony,  thy  ev'ry  Nerve  employ :
Shake  the  Dome,  and  pierce  the  Skies  ^
Wake  him,  wake  him  into  J07. —


What


A S  A  C  R  E  D O  D  E.  19

What  Pow'r  can  every  Paffion's  Throe  controul  ?
What  Pow'r  can  boaft  the  Charm  divine.
To  ftill  the  Tempeft  of  the  Soul  ?

Celeftial  Harmony,  that  mighty  Charm  is  Thine!
She,  heav'nly-born,  came  down  to  vifit  Earth,.

When  from  God's  eternal  Throne
The  Beam  of  all-creative  W'tfdom  fhone,,

And  fpake  fair  Order  into  Birth.
At  TFifdom's  Call  fhe  robed  yon  glittering  Skies,.
Attun'd  the  Spheres,  and  taught  confenting  Orbs  to  rife.

Angels  wrapt  in  Wonder  jflood.
And  faw  that  All  was  Fair,  and  All  was  Good.

'Twas  then,  ye  Sons  of  God,  in  bright  Array,

Ye  fhouted  o'er  Creation's  Day  :.

TJicn  kindling  into  Joy,

The  Morning  Stars  together  fung ;.

And  thro'  the  vaft  etherial  Sky

Seraphic  Hymns  and. loud. Hofannahs  rung,.


THEE  N>  0:.


D  I  S  S  E  R  T  ATI  ON

ON THE

RISE, UNION,  and POWER,

THE.

Frogreffions,  Separations,  and  Corruptions^

o  F

POETRY and MUSIC


/


^be  Reader  is  defired'  to  correS  the  follomng:
ERRATA,

eccqfioned  hy  tU  Author's  Lijiance  front  the  Prefsi

Pag. lin.

64. IS,  16.  for  "  ThereM'-'  r.  «  Tiere^.  ,  ^. ' . „,

6c.  29.  for"  Phrygian cr  Dorian  Mtafuri'  r.  "  LjdianMuifure?,.

69*.  note  1.  4.  for  "  Spartan,"  r.  "  the  Spartan,".

70.  26.  ioi ''Multl/olkitf  T."MultiplUity"..
132. 6.  for  "  Subjea^'  r.  '•  a  Subjeff',.
zaj. q.  fot"  la plu^  t."  It  fM'-


THE

CONTENTS

O  F T  H  E

DISSERTATION,

SECTION I,

'J^HE  Design.  J>ag.  25

SECT, II,

T&e  prtpofed  Method  of  Enquiry.  2^

SECT. Ill,

Of  Mufic^  Dance y  and  Poem,  in  thefavage  State.  27

SECT. IV,

Of  the  natural  Confequences  ofafuppofed  Civilization, .36

SECT. V.

An  Application  of  thefe  Principles  to  the  Melody,  Dance^
and  Song,  of  ancient  Greece.  46

SECT, VI.

Of  the  Progreffions  of  Mufic  in  ancient  Gre  e  c  e  .  g^

SECT. VII.

Of  the  Origin  andProgreffions  of  Comedy  in  ancient  Greece.

SECT,


xxiv  The CONTENTS, &c.

SECT. VIII.

Of  the  natural  Union  and  Progreffions  of  Melody  and  Song
in  other  European  Countries,  Pag.  155

S  EC  T. IX.

Of  the  natural  Union  and  Progreffions  of  Melody  and  Song
in  Cum  A, PERUt  and  India.  166

SECT. X.

Of  the  natural  Union  -and  Progreffions  of  Melody  and  Song
amongjl  the  ancisTit  Hebrews.  \  y^

SECT. XI.

Of  the  State  And  Separation  of  Mufic  and  Poetry  in  ancient
Rome.  18?

SECT. XII.

Of  the  State  and  Separation  of  Mufic  and  Poetry  among  the
polijhed  Nations  of  "Europe  through  thefucceeding  Ages.

194

SECT. XIII.

Of  the  poffible  Re-union  of  Poetry  and  Mufic,  221

SECT. XIV.

Conclusion.  238


A  DIS-


[25]


DISSERTATION,  ^c.


SECTION I.

U'&e  Design.

Y~\  LEST  Pair  of  Syrens,  Pledges  of  Heaven's  Joyt '
_^j Sphere-born  harmonious  Sifters,  Voice  ««i/ Verse,
Wed  your  divine  Sounds,  and  mix'd  Pow'r  employ  !

So  faid  the  fublime  Milton,  who  knew  and  felt  their
Force :  But  Thofe  whom  Nature  had  thus  joined  toge-
ther, Man,  by  his  falfe  Refinements,  hath  moft  unnaturally
put  afunder.

The  Purpofe  of  the  following  Differtation,  therefore,  is
to  trace  the  Rife,  Union,  and  Progrefjion  of  Poetry  and
Mufc,  as  they  are  found  to  exift  in  their  feveral  Kinds  and
Gradations  among  Mankind;  thence  to  confider  the  Caufes
which  have  produced  that  Separation  under  which  they
now  lie,  and  have  often  lain,  among  the  more  poliflied
Nations;  and  in  Conclufion,  to  point  out  the  Circumjlances
in  which,  and  the  Means  by  which,  they  may  poffibly  be
again  united.

E  SECT.


^


26  ^Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.


w


SECT. II.

TZt'  propofed  Method  of  Inquiry.

HATEVER  is  founded  in  fuch  Pajions  and
Principles  of  Acftion,  as  are  common  to  the  whole
Race  of  Man,  will  be  moft  effectually  inveftigated,  as  to
its  Origin  and  Progrefs,  by  viewing  Man  in  hisjavage  or
uncultivated  State.  Here,  before  Education  and  Art  have
caft  their  Veil  over  the  human  Mind,  its  various  Powers
throw  themfelves  out,  and  all  its  Workings  prefent  them-
L_  felves  inftantly,  and  without  Difguife.

It  may  be  affirmed  with  Truth,  that,  for  Want  of  begin-
ning our  Inquiries  at  this  early  and  negledted  Period,  and
by  viewing  Man  under  his  State  of  Civilization  only,  many
curious  and  interefting  Queftions  have  been  left  involved
in  Darknefs,  which  might  have  been  clearly  unfolded  by  a
free  and  full  Refearch  into  the  Paffions,  Propenfities,  and
Qualities  oi  favage  Man.

This  the  Writer  hopes  to  make  appear  in  a  vnoxG.  exten-
Jive  Degree,  and  on  Subjedls  of  higher  Importance,  through
the  Courfe  of  a  future  Work  [a]  ;  of  which,  fome  of  the
Principles  here  delivered  will  make  an  incidental  Part.  In
the  mean  Time,  he  intends  to  treat  the  prefent  Subject  in
the  Way  now  propofed,  by  deducing  his  Argument  from
the  firft  great  and  original  Fountain  of  favage  Life  and
Manners.

[a]  The  Work  advertifed  at  the  Ejid  of  this  Difleitation.

SECT.


<p/*  POETRY and  MUSIC.

SECT. III.

Of  Mufic,  Dance,  and  Poem,  in  the  favage  State.


BY  examining  favage  Life,  where  untaught  Nature
rules,  we  find  that  the  agreeable  Fajfions  of  Love,
•  Pity,  Hope,  Joy,  and  Exultation,  no  lefs  than  their  Con-
traries of  Hate,  Revenge,  Fear,  Sorrow,  and  Defpair,  op-
prefllng  the  human  Heart  by  their  mighty  Force,  are
thrown  out  by  the  three  Powers  of  Adlion,  Voice,  and
articulate  Sounds.  The  Brute  Creatures  exprefs  their  •
Paffions  by  the  two  firft  of  Thefe  ;  fome  by  ASlion,  fome
by  Voice,  and  fome  "by  both  united :  Beyond  thefe,  Man
has  the  added  Power  of  articulate  Speech:  The  fame
Force  of  Ajjociatlon  and  Fancy  which  gives  him  higher
Degrees  and  a  wider  Variety  of  PaJJion,  gives  rife  to  this
additional  Power  of  expreffing  thofe  Paffions  which  he
feels.

Among  the  Savages  who  are  in  the  loweji  Scale  of  the
human  Kind,  thefe  feveral  Modes  of  expreffing  their
Paffions  are  found  altogether  fuited  to  their  wretched  State.
Their  Gejlures  are  uncouth  and  horrid:  Their  Voice  is
thrown  out  in  Howls  and  Roarings :  Their  Language  is
like  the  Gabblingof  Geefe.

But  if  we  afcend  a  Step  or  two  higher  in  the  Scale  of
favage  Life,  we  (hall  find  this  Chaos  of  Gejlure,  Voice,  and ^
Speech,  rifing  into  an  agreeable  Order  and  Proportion. The
natural  Love  of  a  meafured  Melody,  which  Time  and  Ex-
perience produce,  throws  th?.  Voice  into  Song,  the  Gejlure
into  Dance,  the  Speech  into  Verfe  or  Numbers. The  Ad- _  .1
dition  of  mufical  Injlruments  comes  of  Courfe:  They  are

E  2  but


n


28 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

but  Imitations  of  the  human  Voice,  or  of  other  natural
Sounds,  produced  gradually  by  frequent  Trial  and  Ex-
periment.

Such  is  the  Generation  and  natural  Alliance  of  thefe
three  Sijier-Graces,  Mujic,  Dance,  and  Foem,  which  we
find  moving  Hand  in  Hand  among  the  favage  Tribes  of
every  Climate.

For  the  Truth  of  the  Fadl,  we  may  appeal  to  moft  of  the
Travellers  who  defcribe  the  Scenes  of  uncultivated  Nature:
All  thefe agree  in telling  us,  that  Melody,  Dance,  and
Song,  make  up  the  ruling  Paftime,  adorn  the  Feafts,  com-
pofe  the  Religion,  fix  the  Manners,  ftrengthen  the  Policy,
and  even  form  the  future  Paradife,  of  favage  Man. That
having  few  Wants,  and  confequently  much  Leifure,  the
barbarous  Tribes  addi<Sl  themfelves  to  thefe  alluring  Arts
with  a  wonderful  Degree  of  Paflion,  unlefs  where  their
Manners  are  corrupted  by  an  incidental  Commerce  with
the  Off-fcum  of  civilized Nations. By  thefe  attractive
and  powerful  Arts  they  celebrate  their  public  Solemnities  ;
by  thefe  they  lament  their  private  and  public  Calamities,
the  Death  of  Friends,  or  the  Lofs  of  Warriors :  By  thefe
united, they  exprefs  their  Joy  on  their  Marriages,  Har-
vefts.  Huntings,  Vidiories; praife  the  great Adtions  of
their  Gods  and  Heroes ; excite  each  other  to  War  and
brave  Exploits,  or  to  fuffer  Death  and  Torments  with  un-
{haken  Conftancy.

Thefe  are  the  Circumflances  moft  common  to  the  favage
Tribes :  Befides  thefe,  there  are  many  peculiar  Modes,
which  arife  from  their  different  Climates,  Situations,.  Opi-
nionSj  Manners., Among  fome  Tribes  \!!ixz  joyous  Paffions,

among


?/•  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^W  M  U  S  I  C.  29  -

among  fome  tlic  gentle,  among  others  the  ferocious,  pre-
dominate and  take  Place.  To  give  all  the  Varieties  of  thefe
favage  and  feflal  Solemnities,  were  an  endlefs  Labour.
Let  the  following  Account  fuffice,  as  a  general  Image  of  the
reft ;  which  is  fingled  out,  not  only  becaufe  it  is  the  moft
circumftantial ;  but  likewife  for  the  particular  Relation
which  it  will  be  found  to  bear  to  a  following  Part  of  this
Inquiry.

The  Iroqijois,  Hurons,  and  fome  lefs  confiderable
Tribes,  are  free  and  independent  Savages,  who  inhabit  the
northern  Continent  of  America  ;  and  extend  their  Set-
tlements from  the  Back  of  the  BritiJJj  Colonies  to  the  Bor-
ders of  the  Great  Lakes,  along  the  Skirts  of  Louisiana,
and  dov/n  the  River  Ohio,  towards  the  Mi&sisiPi,  and
the  Gulph  of  Florida.  Father  Lafitau  [b'\  gives  the
following  Defcription  of  their  feftal  Solemnities  -,  which  it
is  neceffary  to  tranfcribe  at  large,  in  order  to  give  an
adequate  Idea  of  their  Manners  and  Charadler.

*'  On  the  appointed  Day,  early  in  the  Morning,  they
**  prepare  the  Feaft  in  the  Council-Cabbin,  and  there  they
"  difpofe  all  Things  for  the  AfTembly. — In  the  mean-
**  time,  a  public  Crier  goes  through  the  Village,  and  gives
"  Notice  that  the  Kettle  is  hung  on  in  fach  a  Cabbin :
**  The  common  People,  and  even  the  Chiefs,  bring  with
**  them  their  little  Kettle.  It  doth  not  appear,  that  there
"  is  any  Diftindtion  of  Ranks  among  them,  except  that
"  the  old  Men  occupy  the  foremoft  Matts.  The  Iro-
"  QjJOisE  Women  afliil:  not,  that  I  know  of,  at  thefe  Kind
*'  of  Feaftsi nor  are  they  invited. The Children,  and


[^]  Maeurs  da  Sauviges,  tcnit  ii.  p.  213,  &;.  12"


yotmg_


3©  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

*'  young  Men,  who  are  not  as  yet  chofen  into  the  Body
"of  Warriors,  mount  upon  the  Scaffolds  which  are  placed
**  over  the  Matts,  and  even  upon  the  Roof  of  the  Cabbin
"  itfelf,  and  look  down  through  the  Hole  at  which  the
*■*  Smoke  goes  out.

"  While  the  Affembly  is  forming,  -He  who  makes  the
"  Feafl,  or  He  in  whofe  Name  it  is  made,  Jings  alone.  —
"  The  Defign  of  this  is  to  entertain  the  Company,  on
**  fuch  Things  as  have  Relation  to  the  Subjed.  on  which
"  they  affemble.  Thefe  Songs,  for  the  mofl  Part,  are  fill-
"  ed  with  the  Fables  of  ancient  Times,  the  heroic  Deeds  of
"  their  Nation;  and  are  compofed  in  an  antiquated  Style ;
"  fo  old,  that  often  they  underftand  not  what  they  fay.
"  The  Singer  hath  fometimes  an  Afliftant,  who  relieves
"  him  when  he  is  fatigued:  For  they  fing  with  all  their
**  Force.

"  The  Speaker  then  opens  the  Scene,  by  afking  in  Form,
"  if  all  who  are  invited  are  come.  He  then  names  the
"  Perfon  who  makes  the  Feaft,  he  declares  the  Occafion
"  on  which  it  is  made,  and -enters  into  a  particular  Detail
"  of  all  that  is  in  the  Kettle.  At  every  thing  which  he
*'  names,  the  whole  Choir  replies  by  a  repeated  Shout  of
"  Approbation.

"  The  Speaker  then  gives  an  Account  of  every  thing,

**  which  it  is  of  Importance  that  the  Public  fhould  know.

"  For  thefe  Song-Feajls,  being  made  on  all  weighty  Occa-

"  fions  which  regard  the  Village  or  the  Nation;  this  is  the

««  proper  Time  for  public  Affairs,  as  that  of  renewing

"  a  Name,  hearing  Ambajfadors,  or  proclaiming  War by

**  Song.

- «'  When


c/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  31

«■*  When  the  Orator  hath  done  fpeaking,  fometimes  they
"  begin  to  eat  before  they  fing,  that  they  may  have  the
•*  better  Spirits  :  Sometimes  they  ling  before  they  eat:  If
*'  the  Feaft  is  to  continue  for  the  whole  Day,  the  Kettle
"  is  in  Part  empty'd  in  the  Morning,  and  in  Part  referved
"for  the  Evening;  and  in  the  Intervals  they  ^ng  and
"  dance.

"  The  Mafter  of  the  Feaft  touches  nothing.  He  bufies
"  himfelf  only  in  feeing  that  the  Company  be  ferved,  or
♦*  in  ferving  them  himfelf;  naming  aloud  the  Pieces  v/hich
«  he  deftines  and  prefents  to  each.  The  beft  Morfels  are
"  given,  by  Way  of  Preference,  to  thofe  whom  he  chufeth
"  to  diftinguifti.

"  After  the  Repaft,  the  Mafter  of  the  Feaft  begins  the
**  Athonront,  a  Song  and  Dance  peculiar  to  the  Men.  They
«*  relieve  each  other,  by  beginning  with  thofe  of  maft
**  Conjiderationy  and  pafllng  gradually  down  to  the  Toung-
"  ejl.  They  have  that  Civility  and  Attention  to  each
«*  other,  that  every  one  waits  till  another  of  fuperior  Dig-
*'  nity  enters  the  Lifts,  and  takes  the  Lead.

"  The  Ancients  and  Men  of  Dignity  often  do  no  more
"  than  rife  from  their  Seats ;  and  content  themfelves,  while
"  x!(\tyftng,  with  making  fome  Inflexions  with  their  Head,
"  Shoulders,  and  Knees,  in  order  to  accompany  znAfuJiain
**  their  Song.  Others  fomewhat  lefs  grave,  take  a  few
**  Steps,  and  walk  along  the  Cabin  around  the  Fires.  Every
«<  one  hath  his  particular  So7ig;  that  is,  an  Air,  to  which
«*  he  adjujls  a  very  few  Words,  which  he  repeats  as  often
»*  as  he  pleafeth,  I  have  obferved,  that  they  even  retrench
4.  "  or


^2  ^Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

"  or  Jir ike  offiorwt  Syllables  from  their  Words,  as  if  they
*♦  were  Verfes,  or  meafiired  Words,  but  without  Rhyme.

"  He  who  means  to  dance,  begins  by  rifing  from  his
*'  Matt;  and  the  whole  Company  anfwers  him  by  a  gene-
*•  ral  Shout  of  Approbation  :  As  he  pafleth  along  before
"  every  Fire,  they  who  fit  on  each  Side  beat  the  Meafure
"  or  Cadence  of  his  Song  by  a  cor tefpon dent  Motion  of
"  the  Head ;  and  by  throwing  out  continual  Shouts  which
"  they  redouble  at  certain  Times,  where  the  Meafure  de-
"  mands  it,  with  fo  much  Truth,  that  they  never  err;  and
"  with  fuch  a  Delicacy  of  Ear,  as  the  French,  who  are  moft
"  pradlifed  in  their  Cufloms,  cannot  attain  to.  When  he
**  pafleth  to  a  fecond  Fire,  They  of  the  firft  take  Breath  :
"  They  of  the  more  diftant  Fires  are  like  wife  filent :  But
"  the  '^fime  is  'always  beat  by  thofe  before  whofe  Fire  he
"  fings  and  dances.  The  Song  concludes  by  a  general
"  Ehoue!  of  the  whole  Choir ;  which  is  a  fecond  Shout
**  of  Approbation.

"  The  young  Men  have  their  Songs  of  a  more  lively,  and
*'  their  Dances  of  a  more  vigorous  Caft ;  fuch  as  are  fuit-
**  able  to  their  Age.  When  the  Dance  is  much  animated,
"  they  dance  two  or  three  together,  each  at  his  own  Fire  :
"  Nor  does  this  Mixture  ever  occafion  any  Confufion.

"  Among  thefe  T>zncQ5,  fome  are  no  more  than  2ifiinpk
"  and  noble  Manner  of  marching  up  to  an  Enetny ;  and  of
''facing  Danger  with  Intrepidity  and  Gaiety  of  Mind.

"  A  fecond  Sort  of  Dance,  but  (till  of  the  fame  Kind,  Is

"that  of  the  Pantomimes : Which  confifls  in  reprefenting

•'  an  AdHon  in  the  Manner  in  which  it  pafled,  or  fuch  as

"  they  conceive  it  to  have  been. Many  of  thofe  who  have

2  "  lived


of  POET  RY and  MV  SIC.  33

lived  among  the  Iroquois,  have  aflured  me,  that  after  a
Chief  of  War  hath  circumftantially  recounted,  at  his
Return,  all  that  had  pafled  in  the  Expeditions  he  had
undertaken,  and  the  Battles  he  had  fought,  they  who  are
prefent  at  the  Recital  often  rife  on  the  fudden  to  dance,
and  reprefent  thofe  Adtions  with  great  Vivacity,  as  if
they  had  been  prefent :  And  all  this,  without  any  pre-
vious Concert  or  Preparation.

"  In  their  Songs  they  praife  not  only  their  Gocis  and
Heroes,  but  they  likewife  praife  them/elves :  In  this  they
are  not  fparing  :  and  are  even  prodigal  in  their  Praife  of
others,  whom  they  think  worthy  of  it.  He  who  is  thus
applauded,  anfwers  by  a  fliout  of  Thanks,  as  foon  as  he
hears  himfelf  named.

"  They  are  flill  quicker  at  rallying  each  other ',  and  fuc-
ceed  'to  a  Wonder  in  This.  He  who  dances,  takes
whomfoever  he  pleafeth  by  the  Hand,  and  brings  him
forth  into  the  midft  of  the  Aflembly :  to  which  he
yields  without  Refiftance.  Meanwhile  the  Dancer  con-
tinues tofing;  and  fometimes  in  his  Song,  and  fome-
times  in  the  Intervals,  he  throws  his  Sarcafms  on  the
Patient,  who  hears  him  without  Reply.  —  At  every  Bon
Mot,  loud  Feals  of  Laughter  arife  along  the  Galleries,
who  animate  this  Sport,  and  often  oblige  the  Patient  to
cover  his  Head  in  his  Mantle.

"  They  have  another  Kind  of  Dance,  in  which  the  whole
Choir  dances :  and  this  is  common  both  to  Men  and  Wo-
men, As  this  is  very  different  from  the  preceeding  ones,
they  do  not  ufe  it  in  their  Song-Feajis.  Their  Pretenders

F  "to


•<>r


34  -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

"  to  Magic  [c]  often  ordain  it  as  an  A5i  of  Religion,  for  the
**  healing  of  the  Sick  :.  it  is  alfo  one  of  their  Modes  of  Di-
*'  vination.  It  is  Hkewife  pradtifed,  at  Tinies,  as  a  mere
*•  Exercife  of  Pleafure,  at  the  Feafts  and  Solemnities  of
"  the  Village,  The  Manner  is  as  follows.  Notice  is
"  given  early  in  the  Morning  through  all  the  Cabins,  for
"  the  Performance  of  this  Ceremony:  Every  Cabin  de-
**  putes  a  certain  Number,  either  of  Men  or  Women,  who
"  drefs  themfelves  in  all  their  Finery,  that  they  may  go
"  and  perform  their  Part.  They  all  appear  at  the  ap-
**  pointed  Hour  (which  is  proclaimed  by  a  public  Crier)
"  either  in  the  Council-Cabin,  or  fome  other  Place  deftined
**  for  the  Purpofe.  In  the  middle  of  the  Place  or  Cabin
"  they  build  a  littl,e  Scaffold  ;  and  on  this  they  raife  a  fmall
."  Seat  for  the  Singers  who  are  to  accompany  and  a7iimate  the
"  Dance.  One  holds  in  his  Hand  a  Tambour  or  little
"  Drum,  the  other  a  Tortoife  Shell.  While  thefe  fing,  and
"  accompany  their  Song  with  the  Sound  of  their  Inflru-
'*  ments  (which  is  farther  Strengthened  by  the  Spectators,
"  who  beat  with  little  Sticks  upon  the  Kettles  that  are
"  before  them)  they  who,  dance,  go  round  in  a  circular
"  Movement ;  but  without  taking  Hands,  as  they  do  in
"  Europe.  Each  Dancer  makes  various  Motions  with  his
*'  Feet  and  Hands,  as  he  pleafeth:  And  though  all  the
"  Movements  are  different,  according  to  the  Whim  and
"  Caprice  of  their  Imagination,  none  of  them  ever  lofe  the
"  "Time. They who  are mofl  expert  in varying  their

[<•]  Charlatans, —  a  Word  with  which  we  have  none  precifely  coriefpon-
dent  in  our  Language  :  It  fignifies  here,  one  who  is  a  Pretender  to  Mede-
lint  by  the  Arts  of  Magu.

"  Poflures*


o/'  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  35

Poflures,  and  throwing  themfelves  into  Adion,  are
'  reckoned  to  excel  the  reft.  The  Dance  is  corapofed  of
"  feveral  Returns :  Each  Return  lafts  till  the  Dancers  are
"  out  of  Breath  -,  and  after  a  fhort  Interval  oi  Repofe,  they
"  begin  another.  Nothing  can  be  more  animated  than
**  thefe  Movements :  To  fee  them,  one  would  fay,  they
"  were  a  Troop  of  furious  and  frantic  People.  What  muft
**  fatigue  them  ftill  more  is,  that  not  only  by  their  Move-
'*  ment  but  likewife  with  their  Voice,  they  follow  the  Sing-
■•*  ers  and  their  Inftruraents  to  the  End  of  each  Return;
"which  is  always  clofed  by  a  general  and  loud  Oueb !
"  which  is  a  Shout  of  Approbation,  implying  that  the  Re~
'*  turn  hath  been  well  performed.

-'*  Although  I  have  not  fpoken  particularly  of  any  Na-

"  tions but  thofe  of  the  Iroquois  and  Hurons, yet  I

"  may  truly  fay,  that  I  have  defcribed,  at  the  fame  Time,

*'  a//  the  other  barbarous  Nations  of  America, as  to

**  what  is  ejfential  and  principal. For  though  there  ap-

"  pears  to  be  a  great  Difference  between the  Monarchic

'*  and  Oligarchic  State,  yet  the  Genius  of  their  favage  Po-

**  licy  is  every  where  the  fame :  We  find  the  fame  Turn

■**  for  public  Affairs,  the  fame  Method  of  conducting  them,

*'  the  fame  Ufe  of  fecret  and  folemn  AfTemblies,  the  fame

•"  Charader  in  their  Feajls,  their  Dances ,  and  their  Di-

'**  verjions.

■"  The  Mujic  and  Dance  of  the  Americans  have  fome-
"  thing  in  them  extremely  barbarous,  which  at  fiirft  dif-
"  gufts.j  and  of  which  no  Idea  can  be  formed  by  thofe
**  who  have  not  feen  and  heard  them.  We  grow  recon-
**  ciled  to  tliem  by  Degrees,  and  in  the  End  partake  of
■**  them  with  Pleafure. As  to  the  Savages  themfelves,  they

F  2  *'  are


36 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c,

"  are  fond  of  thefe  Feafts  even  to  Diftradlion.  They  con-
**  tinue  them  whole  Days  and  Nights  entire  j  and  the
"  Shouts  of  their  Choir  are  fo  violent,  as  to  make  the  Vil-
•*  lage  tremble."

Thus  far  the  learned  Father  Lafitau  :  For  whofe
Detail  no  Apology  needs  be  made  to  the  curious  Reader.
But  the  more  particular  Reafons,  why  it  is  here  given  at
Length,  will  appear  in  the  following  Sedtions.

SECT. IV.

Of  the  natural  Confequences  of  a  fuppofed  Civilization.

WHILE  thefe  free  and  warlike  Savages  continue
in  their  prefent  unlettered  State  of  Ignorance  and
Simplicity,  no  material  Improvements'  in  their  Song-Feajls
can  arife.  But  let  us  fuppofe  that  the  Ufe  of  Letters
{hould  come  among  them,  and,  as  a  Caufe  or  Confequence
of  Civilization,  be  cultivated  with  that  Spirit  which  is
natural  to  a  free  and  adive  People;  and  many  notable
Confequences  would  appear.  Let  us  confider  the  moft
probable  and  flriking  among  thefe  natural  Eifed:s.

I .  Their  Idea  of  Mujic,  in  its  mofl  inlarged  Senfe,  would
comprehend  the  three  Circumftances  of  Melody,  Dancer
and  Song.  For  thefe  three,  as  we  have  feen,  being  na-
turally conjoined,  becaufe  naturally  producing  each  other,
would  not  feparatily  command  the  Attention  of  fuch  a
People  at  their  public  Feftivals.  Therefore  Injirumental
Melody,  without  &ong,  would  be  little  attended  to,  and  of
,  no  EJleem;  becaufe  it  would  want  all  thofe  Attractions
which  mud  arife  from  the  corrcfpondent  Dance  and  Song.

i.  la


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y  tfW  M  U  S  I  C;  37

2.  Iti  the  early  Periods  of  fuch  a  Commonwealth,  the
Chiefs  or  Legijlators  would  often  be  the  principal  Mujicians,  i|.
The  two  Characters  would  commonly  coalefce; for  we

find,  that,  among  the  favage  Tribes,  the  Chiefs  are  they
who  moft  fignalize  themfelves  by  Dance  and  Song  j  and
that  their  Songs  rowl  principally  on  the  great  AStions  and
Events  which  concern  their  own  Nation.

3.  Hence,  their  moft  ancient  Gods  would  naturally
be  ftyled  Singers  and  Dancers.  For  the  moft  ancient  Gods
of  civilized  Pagan  Countries,  are  generally  their  early
Legijlators,  who  taught  their  People  the  firft  Arts  of  Life.
Thefe  deceafed  Legiflators,  therefore,  when  advanced  to
the  Rank  of  Gods,  would  naturally  be  delivered  down  to
Pofterity  with  the  fame  Attributes  and  Qualities  by  which
they  had  diftinguifhed  themfelves  in  Life :  And  it  ap-
pears, from  the  laft  Article,  that  thefe  Qualities  would
naturally  be  thofe  of  Dance  and  Song.

4.  Meafured  Periods,  or  in  other  Words,  Rythm,  Num- "^
oers,  and Verfe, would naturally  arife. For  meafured  *
Cadence,  or  Time,  is  an  cffential  Part  of  Melody,  into
which  the  human  Ear  naturally  falls. And  as  the  fame

"Forceof  Ear  would  lead  the  Adtion  or  Dance  to  cor-
refpond  with  the  Melody,  fo  the  Words  or  Song  muft,  on

a  like  Principle,  keep  Pace  with  Both. Among  the  fz" i

vage  Americans  we  fee the firft Rudiments of  poetic

Numbers,  emerging from  this Source. For  "  as the

"  Means  of  a.-ljufting  the  Words  to  the  Air  or  Melody,,

«*  they  fometimes  ftrike  off  Syllables  from  their  Words."  ,

And  fuch  is  the  natural  Generation  of  Rythm  and  Ferfe.

5.  Their  earlieft  Hijlories  would  be  written  in  Ferfe.
For  we  fee,  that  among  the  favage  Tribes,  the  Adions  of

2  their


38  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

their  Heroes  and  Gods,  and  the  great  Events  of  their
Nation,  make  a  principal  Part  of  their  SongSi  When-
ever, therefore,  the  Ufe  of  Letters  fliould  come  among
fuch  a  People,  thefe  ancient  Songs  would  naturally  be  Jirji
recorded,  for  the  Information  and  Ufe  of  future  Times,

6.  Their  moft  ancient  Maxims,  Exhortations,  Proverbs,
or  Laws,  would  probably  be  written  in  Verfe.  For  thefe
would  naturally  make  a  Part  of  their  Songs  of  Celebration,
and  would  by  Degrees  be  feleSled  from  thence,  would  in
Time  become  the  Standard  of  Right  and  Wrong,  and  as
fuch,  be  treafured  up  and  appealed  to  by  the  improving
Tribe.

7.  Their  religious  Rites  would  naturally  be  performed  or
accompany 'd  hfDance  and  Song.  For  it  appears  from
Fad:  that  the  great  Adtions  of  their  Gods  and  Heroes  are
the  moft  general  Subjedl  of  the  favage  Dance  and  Song ;
and  the  common  End  of  Pagan  Rites  hath  ever  been,  to
praife  the  Gods  of  the  Country,  and  by  thefe  Means  (as
well  as  .by  Sacrifice)  to  appeafe  their  Wrath,  or  fecure
their  Favour.

8.  Their  earliejl  Oracles  would  probably  be  delivered
in  Verfe,  and  fung  by  the  Prieft  or  Prieftefs  of  the  fuppofed
God.  For  thefe  Oracles,  being  fuppofed  to  be  infpired  by  a
deceafed  Chief  (now  a  Deity  J  who  had  himfelf  delivered
his  Exhortations  in  this  enthufiajiic  Manner ;  and  being  ad-
drefTed  to  a  Tribe  among  whom  this  Mode  of  Inftrudlion
univerfally  prevailed,  no  other  Vehicle  but  that  of  Ferfe
and  Song  could  at  firft  gain  thefe  Oracles  either  Credit
or  Reception.

9.  Their  Melody  would  hefmple;  and  derive  a  confider-
able  Part  of  its  Power  from  its  Rythm  or  Meafure,  without

any


^  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  39

any  Mixture  of  artificial  Compofition.  Firft,  becaufe  this
Kind  would  be  moft  fuited  to  the  Powers  of  the  barbarous
Legijlators  or  Bards,  at  once  Compofers  and  Performers,
among  whom  nothing  artificial  or  refined  could  as  yet  take
Place.  Secondly,  becaufe  this  Simplicity  of  Manner  would
be  beft  adapted  to  the  Capacity  of  the  furrounding  People,
incapable,  in  this  early  Period,  to  be  attracted  or  moved  by
any  thing  but  what  Nature  didtates.

10.  The  Force  of  this  fimple  Melody  would  be  mucli  "^
increafed  by  the  Power  of  early  Ajj'ociation  and  continued
Habit. For  this,  by  appropriating  certain  Sounds  to  certain
Subjedis,  would  raife  their  Melody  into  a  Kind  of  natural  -

and  exprefllve  Language  of  the  Pafllons.

1 1 .  Their  Songs  would  be  of  a  legijlative  Caft  -,  and  being
drawn  chiefly  from  the  Fables  or  Hiftory  of  their  own
Country,  would  contain  the  effential  Parts  of  their  religious,
moral,  and  political  Syftems.  For  we  have  feen  above,
that  the  Celebration  of  their  deceafed  Heroes  would  of
Courfe  grow  into  a  religious  Ad  :  That  the  Exhortations
and  Maxims  intermixed  with  thefe  Celebrations,  and  found-
ed on  the  Example  of  their  Heroe-Gods,  would  naturally
become  the  Standard  of  Right  and  Wrong ;  that  is,  the
Foundation  of  private  Morals  and  public  Law :  And  thus,
the  whole  Fabric  of  their  Religion,  Morals,  and  Polity^
would  naturally  arife  from,  and  be  included  in  their  Songs,
during  their  Progrefs  from  favage  to  civilized  Life.

12.  Music,  in_dieextended  Senfe  of  the  Word  (that  is,
including  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song)  would  make  an  ef-
fential and  principal  Part  in  the  Education  of  their  Chil-
dren. For  the important Principles  of  their  Religion,


Morals,  and  Polity,  being  delivered  and  inculcated  in  their
4  .  Songs,


40 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  5cc.

Songs,  no  other  Met'iod  could  be  devifed,  which  would  fb
ftrongly  iniprefs  the  youthful  Mind  with  the  approved
Principles  of  Life  and  ASlion.

13.  Music  therefore  (in  this  extended  Senfe)  mufV  gain
a  great  ^nA  univerfal  Power  over  the  minds  and  Adlions  of
fuch  a  People.  For  through  the  Force  of  early  and  conti-
nued Habit,  together  with  the  irrefiftible  Contagion  of
general  Example,  while  everything  pleafmg,  great,  and  im-
portant, was  conveyed  through  this  Medium,  and  through
this  only,  fuch  flrong  Impreffions  would  firike  themfelves
into  the  growing  Mind,  as  would  give- it  its  ruling  Colour
through  Life,  and  fuch  as  no  future  Incidents  could  eafily

^ weaken  or  efface.

'  14.  In  the  Courfe  of  Time,  and  the  Progrefs  of  Polity

and  Arts,  a  Separation  of  the  feveral  Pa.rts  or  Branches  of
Mufic  (in  its  extended  Senfe)  would  naturally  arife.  Till
a  certain  Period  of  Civilization,  Letters,  and  Art,  the  feve-
ral Kinds  would  of  courfe  lie  confufed,  in  a  Sort  of  un-
diftinguifhed  Mafs,  and  be  mingled  in  the  fame  Compofi-
tion,  as  Inclination,  Enthufiafm,  or  other  Incidents  might
impel.  But  repeated  Trial  and  Experiment  would  natu-
rally produce  a  more  artificial  Manner;  and  thus,  by  De^
grees,  the  feveral  Kinds  of  Poem  would  affume  their  legi-

1^ timate  Forms.

15.  If  their  warlike  Charafter  continued,  the  Dance
would  mtXiXz[\yfeparate{voTCiihQ  Song-,  and  would  itfelf
^become  2idijtin6i  Exercifeov  Art,  for  the  fake  ofincreafing
,their  Strength  and  Agility  of  Body,  as  the  Means  of  ren-
(dering  them  invincible  in  War.  For  the  Dance  or  Adlioi)
of  their  Song-Feafts,  being  only  fecondary,  and  merely  an
Appendage  to  the  Song,  would  not  be  of  a  Charadler  fufti-

ciently


of  VOETRY and  MV  SIC.  41

cicntly  fevere  for  the  fierce  and  ftubborn  Contention  ofthofe
who  were  deftined  to  the  immediate  Toils  of  warhke  Service.

16.  After  a  certain  Period  of  Civilization,  the  complex
Charader  of  Legijlator  and  Bard  would  feparatCy  or  be
feldom  united.  For  as  the  Society  grew  more  populous,
and  the  increafing  Arts  of  Life  increafed  the  Labours  and
Cares  of  Government,  the  mujical  Art  (in  its  extended
Senfe)  would  of  courfe  be  delegated  by  the  civil  Magi-
ftrate,  to  fuch  Men  of  Genius  and  Worth,  as  might  apply
it  to  its  proper  Ends,  the  Inftruftion  and  Welfare  of  Man-
kind.

17.  Hymns  or  0</<?j  would_ be  compofed,  and  Sun^  by"
_theirCompolers  at  their feftaj  Solemnities. For  thefe,  in

their  fimple  State,  are  but  a  Kind  of  rapturous  Exclama'-
tions  of  Joy,  Grief,  Triumph,  or  Exultation,  in  Confe-
quence  of  fome  great  or  difaftrous  Adlion,  known,  alluded
to,  or  exprefled :  A  Species  of  Compofition  which  naturallf
arifeth  from  the  favage  Song-Feail.

18.  The  Epic  Foem  would  naturally  arife,  and  be  fung
by  its  Compofers  at  their  public  Solemnities. For  it  ap-
pears above  [^],  that  their  earlieft  Hiftories  would  be  writ-_
teiLin.  Verfe,  and  make  a  Part  of  their  public  Song-Feafts.

_^ow  the  Epic  Poem  is  but  a  Kind  oi  fabulous  Hijioryt
rowling  chiefly  on  the  great  Anions  of  ancient  Gods  and
Heroes,  and  artificially  compofed  under  certain  Limi-
tations with  Refpeft  to  its  Manner,  for  the  Ends  of  Plea-
fure.  Admiration,  and  Inftrucflion.

19.  From  an  Union  of  thefe  two,  a  certain  rude  Outline
of  tragedy  would  naturally  arife.  We  may  fee  the  firft
Seeds  or  Principles  of  this  Poem,  in  the  Condud:  of  the
iiivage  Song-Feajj. A  Chief  Jings  fome  great  Adion  of  a

[^]  Article  5.

G  God


Oi?  (  Q-caJL>


>


42  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  6cc.

God  or  Heroe  :  The  furrounding  Choir  anfwer  him  at  Iii'-
tervals,  by  Shouts  of  Sympathy  or  concurrent  Appro-
bation.

20.  In  Procefs  of  Time,  this  barbarous  Scene  would
improve  into  a  more  perfedt  Form  :  Instead  of  relating,
they  would  probably  rcprefent,  by  Adlion  and  Song  united,
thofe  great  or  terrible  Atchievements  which  their  Heroes
had  performed.  For  of  this,  too,  we  finds  the  Seeds  or
Principles  in  the  favage  State.  "  After  a  Chief  of  War
*'  hath  recounted,  the  Battles  he  had  fought,  they  who
"  are  prefent  will  often  rife  up  to  dance,  and  jeprefent
«'  thofe  Adtions  with  great  Vivacity."  If  to  tljis  we  add
the  ufual  Exclamatioils  of  the  furrounding  Choir,  we
here  behold  the  firft  rude  Form  of  favage  Tragedy.
•  21.  If  the  Choir  fliould  be  ejiab/ified  by  general  Ufe,  and
fliould  animate  the  Solemnity  by  Dance  as  well  as  Song  j
the  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song  would  of  courfe  regulate  each
other,  and  the  Ode  or  Song  would  fall  into  Stanzas  of  feme
particular  Kind. This  appears  from  the  third  Article.

22.  Another  Confequence  of  an  ^fl(^///7W  C<6wr  would
be  an  unvaried  Adherence  to  the  Unities  of  Place  and  Time.
For  a  numerous  Choir,  maintaining  their  Station  through
the  whole  Performance,  muft  give  fo  forcible  a  Con-
vid:ion  to  the  Senfes,  of  the  Samenefs  of  Place,  and  Short-
nefs  of  Time,  that  any  Deviation  from  this  apparent  Unity
muft  fhock  the  Imagination  with  an  Improbability  too  grofs
to  be  endured.

■  23.  Not  only  the  Part  of  the  tragic  C/60/r,  but  the
Ep'ifode  or  interlocutory  Part  would  be  zKofung.  For  as  the
Ode  and  Epic  would  hefung  from  the  earlieft  Periods ;  fo
when  they  became  united,  and  by  that  Union  .formed  the

tragic


of  POETRY  and  MUSIC.  43

tragic  Species,  they  of  Courfe  maintained  the  fame  Ap-
pendage oi  Melody,  which  Nature  and  Cuflom  had  already;
given  them.

24.  While  the  Nation  held  its  fierce  and  warlike  Cha-
rad:er,  the  tragic  Reprefentations  would  chiefly  turn  on
Suhje&s  di/lrejsfu I  or  terrible.  For  thus  they  would  ani-
mate each  other  to  ViSlory  and  Revenge,  by  a  Reprefenta-
tion  of  what  their  Friends  had  done  ^ndfuffered.  Thefe
Subjects  would  likewife  be  moft  accommodated  to  the"
natural  Tafte  of  the  poetic  Chiefs  of  fuch  a  People ;  whofe
Atchievements  muft  produce  and  abound  with  Events  of
Diftrefs  and  Terror.  They  alfo  would  be  befl  fuited  to  the
Genius  and  Ends  of  their  State  and  Polity  :  For  as  the
leading  View  of  fuc'h  a  fierce  and  warlike  People  muft  be  to
deftroy  Pity  and  Fear;  fo  this  would  moft  effedlually  be
done,  by  making  themfelves  familiar  with  diftrefsful  and
terrible  Reprefentations.  The  gentle  Paflions,  and  lefs
affecting  Adtions,  which  might  fill  the  Spedlacles  of  a  mild
and  peaceful  Nation,  would  be  infipid  to  the  Tafte,  and
incompatible  with  the  Charafter,  of  fuch  a  warlike  People.

25.  As  their  Tragedy  would  be  intended  as  a  vi/ible
Kefrejentation  of  their  ancient  Gods  and  Heroes,  fo  it  would
be  natural  for  them  to  invent  fome  Means  oi firertgthening.
the  Voice,  and  aggrandifing  the  Vifage  and  Perfon,  as  the
means  of  compleating  the  Refemblance  :  For  in  all  Savage
Countries,  the  taiLfi  and firongcfi  Men  are  generally  feledied
as  their  Chiefs.

26,  As  their  Tragic  Poets  would  be  Singers,  fo  they
would  be  AEio'rs,  and  perform  fome  capital  Part  in  their
own  Pieces  for  the  Stage.  For  we  fee  thefe  different  Cha-
raders  are  naturally  united  in  the  favage  State : There-

G  2  fore.


44<  ^Dissertation  oiu  the  Union,  Scc^

fore,  till  fome  extraordinary  Change  in  Manners  and  Prin-
eiples  ihould  enfue,  this  Union  would  of  Gourfe  continue^
27.  Mujical  Contejis  would  be  admitted  as  fublic  Exer"-
cifes  in  fuch  a  State. For  we  have  feen,  that  the  impor-
tant Articles  of  Religion,  Morals,  and  Polity ,.would  natu-
rally make  a  Part  of  their  public  Songs :  therefore  public
ConteftS  of  this  Kind  would  be  regarded  as  tlie  beft  and.
fureft  Means  of  railing  an  Emulation  of  a  moft  ufeful  Na-
ture j  and  of  ftrengthening  the  State,  by  inforcing  all  the,
fundamental  Pfinciples  of  Society  in  the;mofl  ftriking  and*.
effedual  Manner.

28.  The  Profeffion  of  Bard  or  Mufician  would  be  held
as  very  honourable,  and  of  high  Efteem.- For  he  would-
be  vefted  with  a  Kind  of  public  CharaSier  :  and  if  not  an  -
original  Legiflator,  yet  ftill  he  would  be  regarded  asa:-
Cubordinate  and  ufeful  Servant  of  the  State.

29.  Odes,  or  Hymns,  would  naturally  make  a  Part  of  theirr
domejiic  Entertainments:  and  the  Chiefs  Vfoxxld  be  proud.
to  lignalize  themfelves  by  their  Skill  in  Melody  and  Song.
For  their  Songs  being  enriched  with  alV  the  great  and  im^
portant  Subjefts  rdative  to  the  public  State ;  nothing  could .
be  more  fuitable  to  a  high  Station  in  the  Commonwealth, ,
than  a  Proficiency  in  this  fublime  and  legiflative  Art.

30.  When  Mujic  had  attained  to  this  State  of  relative
Perfedlion,  it  would  be  regarded  as  a  necejfary  Accom-
fiijhment..  And  if  any  Man,  or  Society  of  Men,  were
unacquainted  with  the  Practice  and  Power  of  Mufic,  their
Ignorance  in  this  Art  would  be  regarded  as  a  capital  De-
i^Q(. :  For  it  would  imply  a  Deficiency  in  the  three  great
leading  Articles  of  Education,  Religion^  Mdra/sr^ad  Pd^
lity.  ~  ~  ~

3.1.  The


ol  P  O  E  T  RY'^w^  M  tr  S  1  C."  43

51.  The  Genius  of  their  Mijfic  Would  njgry  4lon^


tfeieir  MannefsTFoT  Manners  being  the  leading  and  moft  -
effential  Quality  of  Man  j All  his  other  Taftes  and  Ac-
quirements naturally  correfpond  with  Thefi; and  accom-  -
modate  themfelves  to  his  Manners,  as  to -their  chief  an4  •
original  Caufe.

32.  As  a  Change  of  Manners  muft:  influence  their  Mu-  •
fie,  fo,  by  a  reciprocal  Action,  a  Change  in  their  Mufic
muft  influence  Manners : For  we  have  ieen,  that  Mufic
was  ^Cic_eji lab lijhed  Vehicle  of  all  the  great  Principles  of
Education  : Therefore  a  Change  in  Mufic  muft  tend  to  '
bring  on  a  Change  in  Tbefe.

33.  A  Provident  Community  of  Principles,  uncommonly,
fevere,  would  probably  fix  both  the  Subjed:s  and  Move-  -
ments  of  Song  and  Dance,  by  Law : This  would  ^arife  '
from  their  Knowledge  of  the  mutual  Influence -of -Man- -
irers  and  Mufic  on  each  other.  .

34,,  In  a  Society  of  more  libertine  and  relaked  Princi-  -
pies,  the  Corruption  of  Mufic  would  naturally  arife,  along  '
with  the  Corruption  of  Manners ;  for  the  Reafons  no\r
affigned : and  the  Miificians,  Bards,  or  Poets,  would  be
the  immediate  Inftruments  of  this  Corruption.  -  For  being
educated  in  a  corrupt;  State  they  would  be  ap^  to  debaf©  -
their  Art  to  vile  and  immoral  Purpqfes,  as  the  meany  or
gaining  that  Applaufe  which  would  be  the  natural  Ob-
jeft  of  their  Ambition.  -

35.  In  Confequence  of  this  COrroption,  a  gradual  and i
total  Separation  of  the  Bards  or  Mujicians  complex  Cha-
rafter  would  enfue. For  the  Chief  would  now  no  logger
pride  himfelf  on  the  Charafter  of  Poet  or  Performer;
liOr  the  Man  of  Genius  and  U^orthd^ktnjX  to  the  Profeflion  -


4^  ^Dissertation  *«7/6i'  Union,  &c.

of  Lyrijl,  Singer,  or  A5lor:  Becaufe  thefe  ProfeflioRS,
which  had  formerly  been  the  Means  of  inculcating  every
thing  laudable  and  great,  would  now  (when  perverted  to  the
contrary  Purpofes)  be  difdained  by  the  Wile  and  V^ir-
tuous.

36.  Hence  the  Power,  the  Utility  and  Dignity  of
Muficvio\Adi  fink  into  ageperal  Corruption  and  Contempt.
This  Confe^uence  is  fo  plain,  as  to  need  no  lUuftration.

S  E  C  T. V.

jln  Application  of  thefe  Principles  to  the  Melody, Dance,,
and  Song,  of  ancient  Greece.

SUCH  may  feem  to  be  the  Confequences  which  would
naturally  arife  in  a  favage,  free,  and  warlike  State,
fhould  Letters  be  introduced  and  cultivated  among  fuch  a
fpirited  and  a(ftive  People  In  Support  of  the  Truth  of
thefe  Dedudlions,  let  us  now  endeavour  to  realize  them  j  by
fhewing  that  fuch  Confequences  did  in  Fa6l  arife  in  ancient
Greece.  In  the  Courfe  of  this  Review,  which  will  con-
tain the  Rife,  Progrefs,  Power,  Perfedlion,  Separation,  and
Corruption,  of  their  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song,  we  may  per-
haps be  fortunate  enough,  on  the  Principles  here  given,  to
fix  fome  Things  which  have  been  held  doubtful,  to  unfold
others  which  have  hitherto  been  confeffedly  unaccountable,
and  to  refolve  others  into  their  proper  and  evident  Caufes,
which,  have  been  attributed  to  fuch  Caufes  as  never  had
Exiftence.

I.  "» Their  Idea  of  Mufic,  in  its  mofl  inlarged  Senfe,

"  comprehended  the  three  Circumftancesof  Mf/o^,  Dance,

"  and  Song." — Thi-s  appears  from  the  concurrent  Tefti-

:2  '■  "  mony


of  FO-E  TRY and  M  U  S  I  C.


47


mony  of  many  ancient  Authors  : The  following  one  from
th.z  Alcibiades  of  Plato  may  alone  be  a  fufficient  Autho-
rity. "  Socr.  Tell  me  firfl,  what  Art  is  that,  to  which  it
"  belongs  properly  to  Jing,  to  play,  and  dance  f Cannot
*"  you find  a  Name  for  this  comprehenlive.Art  ? — Alcib.
"  I  cannot. — Sscr. Try  a  little  : Who  are  the  Goddefles
**  that  prefide  over  this  Art  ? — Alcib. Do  you  mean  the
**  Muses  ^—-Socr. I  do  : Confider  then,  what  Name  the
*'  V^rt  receives  from  them. — Alcib. You  feem  to  hint  at
"  Music. — Socr.  You  are  right  [^]." — The  fame  Truth
is  no  lefs  evident  from  the  circumftantial  Account  which
AxHENiEus  gives  of  the  old  Arcadian  Miijic -,  which,
in  its  general  Acceptation, included  Melody, Dance,  and
Song\f'\. It  appears, then,  that  this  Combination or
Union  of  thefe  three  Sijier-Graces  arofe  naturally  in.  ancient
Greece,  from  an  Improvement  of  the  Javage  State  into  a
certain  Degree  of  Civilization. They  needed  no  Art  to
joyn  them  :  For  as  they  naturally  produce  each  other,  and
gre  naturally  conjoyned  in the  fayage  and uncyltivated
State,  this  Union  would  of  Courfe  continue,  till  fome  vio-
lent Change  in  Manners  or  Principles  fliould  break  that
Union  which  Nature,  had  eftablilhed. — It  appears  no  lefs
evidently  from  ancient  Writers,  that  what  we  call  Injlru-
mental  Mujic,  that  is,  the  Melody  of  Instruments, unac-
company'd  by  Dance  or  Song,  was  a  Thing  :never.  held  in
Efteem  till  the  later  Periods  of  Antiquity, in  which  a
general  Separation  took  Place.  .  This  will  appear  more  at
large  hereafter. Plato  calls  Inflrumental  Mufic  "  an  ««-
."  meaning  Thing,  and  an  Abufe  of  Melody  [g]." ,

[e]  Plato,  Alcibiades. [/]  Deipnofoph.  \,  xiv.  [g}  De  Legi-

bus,  \,  i.

^,.  "  la.  .


1


/


.4^  ^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  tec.

2.  *' In  the  earlieft  Perlcids  of  the  Gr^i?>f  States,  theif
"  Legiflators  were  often  Bards,  or  their  Bards  were  Legif-
"  lators."  Such,  in  a  more  eminent  Degree,  were  A-
,  POLLo,  Orpheus,  Amphion,  Linus,  and  Mus^irs  [y6]..
Of  this  Rank  too,  was  Thales  the  Cretan  Lawgiver;
who  compofed  Laws  in  Verfe,  and  fung  them  to  his
Lyre  [i\.  It  hath  been  generally  fuppofed,  that  ttic  ftory'd
Power  of  their  Lyres  and  Songs  meant  no  more,  than  by  a
metaphorical  Exprefllon  to  convey  a  ftrong  Idea  ot  tlieir
Eloquence  and  legiflative  Art,  in  producing  Order  from
Vonjujion.  Thus  Plutarch  tells  us,  that  "  the  An-
**  cients  reprefented  the  Statues  of  the  Gods  with  Mufical
•'  Inftruments  in  their  Hands,  not  as  being  really  Lyres  or
*' Flutes;  but  becaufe  they  thought,  that  nothing  fo
**  much  fuited  the  Charader  and  Office  of  the  Gods,  as
**  Harmony  and  Order  \k'\ ."  Thus  too,  a  noble  Writer  of
pur  ownCountry  declares  his  Opinion,  and  fays,  that  "7r<2-
*'  dition,  which  (oon  ^ttw  Jabulous,  could  not  better  repre-
<**  fent  the  firft  Founders  or  Eftablifliers  of  large  Societies,
'*  than  as  real  Songjlers  [/J  ".  But  real  Songjlers,  be-
yond Doubt,  they  were ;  nor  was  Tradition  fabulous  in
thus  reprefenting  them.  For  from  a  View  of  human  Na-
ture, as  emerging  from  the  favage  State,  it  is  evident,
that  the  Song  and  Lyre  (as  foon  as  the  Lyre  was  invented)
muft  be  the  natural  Means  or  Inftruments  of  Civilization,
iby  conveying  the  Legiflator's  Precepts  to  the  furrounding
People.  For  we  have  feen  that,  among  the  favage  Tribes,
the  Chiefs  are  prqud  to  fignalize  themfelves  by  Song;  that
they  prefide  at  the  Song^  Feajis ; and  that  their  Songs  rowl


{h]  Plato  de  Rep.  1.  ii.

[k]  Plut.  de  Procrcat,  Aninye,  &c.


[/]  StraboGm^.  1.  X.

[/J  CharaiiirijUcSi  vol.  i.  p.  237.

principally


of  VOET  Rt  and  M  U  S  I  G.  49

'principally  on  the  great  Adlicns,  Affairs,  and  Events  o?

'their  own  Nation. — A  concurrent  Proof  of  this  natural

Union  of  the Bard's  and Legiflator's Oilice  might be

drawn,  were  it  necefTary,  from  the  Name  which  the  clj

.Thessalians  gave  thek  Magi/lrates :  Theyflyl^ci  thcrn

^Brpj)S5;^ijr'?§Ef,  or  "  the  Leaders  of the Dance and So'-.g-

*'  Feall:[/;;]  :"  A  Circimiftance  which  plainly  points  out

its  own  Origin,

3.  "  Their  moft  ancient  Gods  were  Rihd  Singers  and,
«*  Dancers."  .Thus  Horace  calls  Apollo  the  Singer  [n].
Pindar  fliles  him  the  i)5;?a'r  [oj.  Homer,  or  the  Au-
-thor  of  the  Hymns  that  pafs  under  his  Name,  gives  him
the  fame  Appellation [^].  Rhea,  the  Mother  of  Ju pit er»
is  faid  to  have  taught  her  Priefts  the  Art  of  Dancing,  both.
in  Phrygia  and  Crete  [q]  :  As  Castor  and  Pollux
inftructed  the  Lacedemonians  i  n  the  fame  Art  [r] .  E u m  e  l  u •
or  Arctinus  the  Corinthian  brings  in  even  Jupiter
■himkM  dancing,  in  thefe  Words,

Among  them  <lanc'd  the  Sire  of  Gsds  and  -Men  [si.
Whence  it  arofe,  that  thefe  ancient  Gods  were  reprc-
"fented  as  Sii'gers  and  Dancers,  and  vefted  with  a  Quality
"*which  at  firfl  Sight  feems  altogether  foreign  to  their.  Cha-
racter, hath  not  as  yet  been  accounted  for.  We  now  ^c
the  true  and  natural  Origin  of  thefe  Appellations.  For  the
moft  ancient  Gods,  among  the  civilized  Greeks,  were  their
-early  Legiflators,  who  taught  the  favage  Tribes  the  firfl:  Arts
of  LiTe!  Thefe  dcceafed  Legiflators,  therefore,  when  ad-
vanccXto  the  Rank  of  Gods,  were  naturally  delivered  down

[w]  LuciAN.  de  Saltallone.  [«] Ep.  ad  Pifanes.  [a] Ode.

Ip]  Hymn,  in  A/ioUinem.  [q]  LvciAH.  de  Sii/tfjtiane.  £rj  Ibid.

Is]  Jpud  ATHEiiJEVU Deipn.  I.  i.

H  to


jD -rf  Dissertation- (?;»  the  Union,  &c.

to  Pofterjty,  with  the  fame  Attributes  or  Qualities  by..
which  they  diftinguifhed  themfelves  in  Life  : and  it  ap-
pears from  a  View  of  the  Chiefs  of  the  favage  Tribes,,
that  thefe  Qualities  would  naturally  be  thofe  oi  Dance  and.
Song.

4.  ♦•  Meafured  Periods,-  or,  .in  other  Words,  Rythm,.,
*'  Numbers,  and  Verfe,  did  naturally  arife.'!  The  general  /
Reafon  is  affigned  in  the  fourth  Article  of  the  lafl  Se<5lion ;
And  needs  not  to.  be  repeated  here.  But  as  fome  particular .
Confequences  arife  from  this  Foundation,  relative  to  the  -
moft  ancient  Hijlory,  Laivsy  and  Oracles,  thefe  will  deferve  -
a  feparate  Confideration.

5.  "  Their  earlieft  Hiftories  were  written  in  Verfe."
This  Fadl  is  indifputable ; but  feems  not,  as  yet,  to  have
been  refolved  into  its  true  Caufe. Strabo  informs  us,  ,
that, **  The  Poetic  Form  firft  appeared  : They  who  imi-
tated it,  dropped  the  Meafure :  Such  vrere  Cadmus  the
Milefan,  Pherecydes  andHECAT^ffius  [/]. Thefe  were
the  firft  Greek  Hiftorians  who  writ  in  Profe. Another
learned  Ancient  confirms  this  Account ;  and  fays,  "  In  .
**  thefe  early  Times, fo  general was  the  Inclination  to
•'  Rythm  and  Numbers,  that  all  Inftrudtion  was  given  in
*'  Verfe  : There  was  neither  Hijiory  nor  Philofophyrnor  any
*'  Action  to  be  defcribed,  but  what  was  dreffed  by  the
"  Mufes  [a]". Not  only  the  Greek  Writers  give:  a  con-
current  Teltimony  concerning  the Priority  of  hifiorkat
Verfe  to  Profe,  but  the  Records  of  all  Nations  unite  in  con-
firming it. The  oldeft  Compofitions  among  the  Arabs
are  in  Rythm  or  rude  Verfe ;  and  are  often  cited  as  Proofs

\t\  Strabo,  J.  i.  [«■]  Plutarch.


»f  P  O  E  T  RT  and  M  U  S  I  G.  ■yi

'6^  the  Truth  of  their  fubfequent  Hiftory  [w]. The  Ac-
counts we  have  of  the  Peruvian  Story  confirm  the  fame
Fadl : For  Gar  ci  las  so  tells  us,  that  he  compiled  a  Part
of  his  Commentaries  from  the  ancient  Songs  of  the  Coun-
try [x]. Nay  all  the  American  Tribes  who  have  any  Com-
pofitions,  are  found  to  cftablifh  the  fame  Truth  [y'\. Nor-
thern Europe  contributes  its  Share  of  Teflimony :  For
there,  too,  we  find  the  Scythian  or  Runic  Songs  (many  of
them  hijlorical)  to  be  the  oldeft  Compofitions  among  thefe
barbarous  Nations  \z\. Odin  is  faid  to  have  boafted,  that
**  his  Hunic  Poems  were  given  him  by  the  Gods  [tf]." A
Circumftance  which  proves  them  to  have  been  of  the  high*
eft  Antiquity.

The  Fad:,  then,  is  clear  and  certain :  And  as  it  is  fome-
what  myfterious  to  common  Apprehenfion,  various  Solu-
tions have  been  attempted  by  the  Learned ;  though,  in  my
Opinion,  without  Succefs,  I  fhall  give  them,  as  they  ap-
pear in  various  Writers.

Long  IN  us  hath  aimed  at  fomething  lik«  a  Reafon,  Ihl
the  following  Paflage:  *♦  Meafure  belongs  naturally  ta
*'  Poetry,  as  its  Province  is  the  Defcription  and  Language
*'  of  the  PaJJions  %  together  with  FiSlion  or  Fable,  which
*'  product  Numbers.  Hence  it  was  that  the  Ancients  (evea
"  in  their  common  Difcourfe)  ufed  Meafure  and  Verfe,
**  rather  than  Profe  \by  It  can  hardly  be  necefiary  to
obferve,  that  the  celebrated  Critic,  in  this  Paffage,  gives  a
jnere  'Affirmation  inftead  of  an  Argument. He  fays,  indeed,

[w]  Hifl.  de  las  Guerras  Civil,  de  Grenada.  [*]  Comment.  Real.'

[y'\  Lafitau.  [z]  Bartholin,  de  Conteinptu  Mortis,  &c.

HicKES  The/.  Septentr.  fa]  Sheringham  Orig.  Gent.  Angl.

\b1  'LoKGlN.  de  Metr.

H  z  «that


52 A  Dissertation  07i  the  I/nion,  &c.

. «'  that  the  Language  of  the  Paflions,  and  FIdlon, natu-
*'  rally  produce  Meafure  and  Numbers :"  But  the  Reafoa  •
is  ftill  to  feek. It  were  to  be  wiflied,  that  in  many  Parts
©f  his  Writings,  he  had  not  given  us  more  Inftances  of
.his  fine  Tafte,  than  his  Power  of  Reafonijig^  .

A  learned  Modern  of  our  own  Nation  hath  try'd  his
Talent  in  this  curious  Queftion.  "  They  (the  Ancients)  ^
.«*  thought,  it  would  feem,  that  Language  was  the  firft
**  Tamer  of  Men  ;  and  took  its  Origin  to  have  been  cer-
"  tain  rude  accidental  Sounds,  which  that  naked  Company
"  of  fcrambling  Mortals  emitted  by  Chance.  Upon  this
"  Suppofitioia  it  will  follow,,  that  at  hril  they  uttered  thefe
"  Sounds  in  a  much  higher  Note  than  we  do  our  Words
**  now;  <:>cc^^\ow£,^iy perhaps,  by  their  falUng  on  them  under
•*  fome  Paflion,  Fear,  Wonder,  or  Pain  j  and  then  ufing'
■««*  the  fame  Sound,  either  when  the  Objedt  or  Accident  re-
*'  curred,  or  when  they  wanted  to  defcribe  it  by  what  they*
"  felt  from  its  Prefence.  Neither  the  Syllables  nor  the
"  T^ojie  couH  be  afcertaincd:  but  when  prompted  by  the
"  Return  of  the  Paffion,  under  which  they  invented  them,
«  they  extended  their  Throats  and.  put  IJeveral  of  thefe-
**  Marks  together,  they  would ^^w  tOj^ng.  Hence  avSauv
»<  fignified  at  firft  fimply  to  /peak,  or  utter  the  Voice ;
"  which  now,  with  a  fmall  Abbreviation  [ahiv)  fignifies  to-
tfjing:  And  hence  came  the  anclont  Opinion,  which  ap-
«  pears  iojlrange  to  t/>,  that  Poetry  was  before  Profe  \c\"
Here  we- fee  an  ingenious.  Writer-  toiling  in  v-ain-to  prop  a-
^iftaken  Principle.  For,  to  omit  all  the  weak  Parts  of
i}ie  Paragraph.  whi(sh  might  expofe  it  to  Ridicule,  if  nei-

\c^  ^n^.  into  the  Life- of  HoJ^^Rj.  p.^^S.

theft-


.♦/^POETRY  and  M  U  S  I  C.  53

ther  Syllables  nor  To7ies  could  be  afcerfained,  it  follows,  that
neither  Meafure  nor  Melody  could  arife ; and  therefore  it  .
muft  even  continue  to  appear  as  ftrange  as  ever,  •*  that
"  Poetry  fhould  be  before  Profe."'

Mr.  De  Voltaire  talks  more  fpecioufly  (after  Akis-  -
TOTLE  and  Plutarch  [d])  on  this  Subjed:. "  Before  :
"  Heiiodotus,  even  Hiftory  was  not  written  but  in  Ytx(c  ■
"  among  the  Greeks, who  had  borrowed  this  Cuftom
*'  from  the  ancient  Egyptians, the  wifeft,  the  beft  po-
"liced,  and  the  moft  knowing  People  upon  Earth. This
"  Cuftom  was  very  reafonable :  for  the  End  of  Hiftory  was
•'  to  preferve  to  Poilerity  the  Memory  ©f  thofe  few  great
"  Men,  whofe  Example  might  be  of  Service  to  Mankind,
"They  only  writ  what  was  worthy  of  being  retained  by  .
"Heart.. This- is  the  Reafon  why  they  laid  hold  of  the.  .;
**  Harmony  ai  Verfe -,  that  they  might  aid  the  Memory:  -..
"  And  hence  it  was,  that  the  firft  Fhilofopherst  Legiflators^  ,
"  and  Hifiorians,  were  all  Poets  {e\."

As  this  is  the  moft  plaufible  Reafon  that  hath  as  yet> ,
been  afligned  for  this  myfterious  Fadl,  it  will  deferve  a
particular  Confideration. The  Caufe  afligned  feems,  there-
fore, to  reft  on  no  probable  Foundation,  for  the  following
Reafons.

'  Ficft,  becaufc  it  feems  to  take  for  granted  the  Exiftencer
of  the  very  Thing  which  it  is  faid  to  have  produced.  I£.
we  fuppofc  Rytkm,  Numbers,  and  Verfe,  to.exift  and  bo
in  general  Ufe,  they  would  undoubtedly  become  the  natu-.
ral  Means  of  Memory  and  Record  among  a  barbarous  Pep-,
gle. But  to  invcn:  the  Vehicle  of  Rytbm,  from  -^Forefiglyj  .

[^]  See  the  foJlowiag  Ajticks, ..  [/■]  Frefau-k  Oed'if,


QiV


■54-  J^  Dissertation  on  /^v  Union,  6cc.

of  its  being  the  befl:  Inftrument  of  Memory,  without  any
.prior  Impulfe  from  unaflifted  Nature,  feems  altogether  in-
compatible with  the  general  Character  of  the  favage  Tribes:
JFor  in  the  Period  of  favage  Manners,  the  Power  of  ab-
JlraEi  Reafoning  is  always  weak,  and  is  often  found  to
have  no  Place.

Again :  The  XJniverfality  of  the  Fad:  adds  greatly  to  the
Improbability  of  the  Caufe  affigned.  Though  we  (hould
"iuppofe  it  poffible  or  probable,  that  one  favage  Chief  might
by  Dint  of  Reafon  ftrike  out  this  new  method  of  recording
-Hiftory  j  yet  that  All  favage  Chiefs,  in  every  known  Age
and  Climate,  (hould  unite  in  the  fame  Contrivance,  is
highly  improbable.  If  one  of  more  exalted  Capacity  de-
livered his  Stories  in  Verfe,  another  of  inferior  Reach  and
Invention  would  naturally  give  them  to  Pofterity  in  plain
Profe:  Nay,  the  acknowledged  Difficulty  oi  Verjijication
would  naturally  make  the  profaic  Manner  the  more  com-
mon, though  lefs  effeiSual  Method  of  the  two.  Now,  the
contrary  to  this  is  acknowledged  to  be  true,  even  by  thofe
-who  contend  for -the  Truth  and  Sufficiency  of  the  Caufe
affigned.  The  Univerfality  of  the  Fadl  is  allowed  by  All.
5uch  an  univerfal  Coincidence,  therefore,  muft  fpring  from
ibme  other  Caufe,  fuch  as  arifeth  unalterably  from  Na-
ture, and  takes  Place  among  the  favage  Tribes  in  an
univerfal  and  unvaried  Mannec.

Farther '. If  the  ancient  Songs,  prior  to  profe  in  every

"Nation,  had  been  coolly  compofed,  for  the  Sake  of  Tradition

and  Information  only,  they  would  have  been  circumflantial

and  precife : Whereas  the  contrary  appears  in  their  Con-

ilruftion  :  They  are  jgenerally  vague  and  ejithufaflic ; and

bear


ofPO-ETKY and  MUSIC.  55

bfear  all  the  Marks  of  being  the  genuine  EfFedls  of  favage
'RaJJion  and  Enthujtafm. So  far  are  they  from  containing
any  regular  iS^r/w  of  Fadls, that  Fafts  are often  hinted
only; while  the  mere  Celebration  of  the  Heroe  forms  the--
chief  Weight  and  Burthen  of  the  Song.

Laftly,  .the  univerfal  Connexion  of  the  old  Poetry  Vfix)[{
Melody,  and  the  unvary'd  Cuftom  oijinging  it,  amounts  to
the  ftrongcft  Proof,  that  the  mere  End  of  Memory  and
'Tradition  could  not  be  its  original  Caufe.  For  had  the
fole  Intention  of  the  Song  been  that  of  Record  only,  a  mere
Recitation  of  the  Vcrfes  would  have  anfwered  the  fame
Purpofe.  And  we  may  affirm  it  to  be  a  moral  hnpojjibility
that  an  univerfal  Union  of  Verfe  and  Melody  could  have  j
taken  Place  on  this  Foundation.

Since,  therefore,  the  Caufe  hitherto  afligned  feems  altb--
gethcr  inadequate  to  the  EiFe<5l} can  we  reafonably  enter-  -
tain  a  Doubt,  in  refoJving  it  into  that  Principle  which  we
hiive  already  found  univerfally  predominant  in  favage  Life?  ;
I  mean,  the  natural  Pafiion  for  Melody  and  Dance,  which  .
neceffarily  throws  the  accompanying  Song  into  a  correfpon-  -
dint  Rythm. Plence,  the  Ufe  of  Rythm  and  Verfe  muft
naturally  arife  in  Greece (as  in  every  other  Country _>
emerging  from  Barbarity)  becaufe  Melody,  Dance, and't
Song,  made  a  principal  Employment  of  their  favage  State.  .
And  hence,  their  earlleft  Hiftories  muft  of  courfe  be  writ--
ten  in  Verfe  j becaufe  the  Adlions  of  their  Gods  and  He-
roes made  a  principal  Part  of  their  Songs  -,  and  therefore,
when  the  Ufc  of  Letters  came  among  them,  thefe  ancient
Songs  were  naturally j^V/?  recorded,  that. is,  they  becarrtc

thsir,.'


.  5^  ^Dissertation  on  fhe  Vmos,  &c.

-  thtir  eailieft  Hrjlories,  for  the  Information  and  Ufe  of  fiH
ture  Times.

As  this  Caufe,  when  viewed  in  itfelf,  feertis  amply  and

^clearly  to  account  for  the  Effecft,  fo  it  will  receive  farther
Confirmation,  if  we  cdnfider  how  naturally  it  removes  all
thofe  Objed:ions  which  load  the  Opinion  here  controvert-
ed. For  it  neither  requires  nor  fuppofeth  any  Power  of
abJlrnB  Reafomng  among  the  favage  Tribes,  but  is  the
mere  EfFedt  of  Pajjion  and  uncultivated  Nature.  Its  Uni-
verfality,  therefore,  becomes  highly  probable  ;  bccaufe  the
Principles  of  favage  Nature  (making  Allowance  for  the
Difference  of  Soil  and  Climate)  are  every  where  the  fame.
The  Genius  of  the  ancient  Songs  of  every  Nation  adds  new

'.  Degrees  of  Evidence  :  For  they  are  generally  irregular  and
enthufiaflic  i and  therefore  the  genuine Produdtions  of

.  unlettered  Knthufiafm.  Laflly,  their  univerfal  Connexion
^\\!i\  Melody,  and  the  unvary'd  Pradlice  of  y?;?^//?^  themj
comes  up  to  a  full  and  direct  Proof,  of  the  Reality  of  the
Caufe  now  afllgned.

It  mufl  not  be  difguifed,  that  the  mofl  learned  Vossiirs
was  fo  flruck  with  the  Difficulty  of  accounting  for  this
Appearance,  that  he  thinks  it  befl  to  deny  the  Fad:.  "  To
"  me  the  contrary  feems  true  -,  that  Profe  was  firft  writ-
"  ten,  and  then  Poetry.  Tis  natural  to  walk  on  Foot
**  before  we  mount  on  Horfeback ;  and  it  is  certain  that
*'  Men  ^vikfpoke  in  Profe,  and  then  in  Numbers.  We  have
**  nothing  more  ancient  than  the  Writings  of  Moses  j
*•  and  thefe  are  in.Profe,  with  Songs  intermixed  [fy  On
.this  Reafoning  it  may  be  remarked,  that  although  it  be

[/J  ^>  -^rtis  Peil.  Nat.  tt  Conjly  c.  i.

certain


-H-


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y «;?//  M  U  S  I  C.  ^y

certain  that  Men /poke  in  Pro/e  before  they /poke  in  Ferfe }
yet  the  Confequence  follows  not,  that  therefore  they  muft
write  in  Pro/e  before  they  wn'f-  in  Fer/e.  The  fole  Queftion
is,  what  would  be  deemed  beft  worth  recording,  on  the
firfl:  Rife  of  the  icriting  Art?  Surely,  the  Adtions  and
Celebrations  of  their  Anceftors,  Gods,  and  Heroes:  Now
thefe,  we  have  already  feen,  muft  naturally  make  the  chief
Subjedt  of  their  feftal  Songs ;  and  therefore  their  fcjial
Songs  wereof  Courfe  ihejirji  things  written  or  recorded.

With  refpedl  to  the  Inftance  alledged  by  the  learned
Critic,  of  the  Writings  of  Moses,  and  the  Pradlice  of  an-
cient Egypt,  this,  when  properly  explained,  will  confirm
the  Truth  of  the  Caufe  here  given.  Moses,  we  know,
was  learned  in  all  the  Wifdom  of  the  Egyptians:  Egypt
was,  in  his  Time,  become  z.  polijbed  Nation ;  and  therefore,
according  to  the  natural  Courfe  of  Things  (as  will  appear
below)  Pro/e  had  been  introduced  before  the  Time  of
Moses,  as  it  was  afterwards  in  Greece  by  Hecat^eus
and  others.  As  to  the  intermixed  Songs  in  the  Writ-
ings of  Moses,  it  is  now  a  Point  agreed  among  the
Learned,  that  they  are  written  in  Mea/ure ;  and  correlpond
in  all  Refpedts  with  the  Principle  here  delivered.  And
that  Song  was  the  oldeft  Form  of  Compofition  in  Egypt,
we  learn  clearly  from  two  ancient  Writers :  The  Firft  in-
forms  us,  that  their  Mufic  and  Songs  had  continued  un-


changed, for  upwards  of  three  thoufand  Years  [g] : The


other  gives  a  more  particular  Account  of  their  Nature,  and
Manner  of  being  fung.  **  The  firft  of  the  Priefts  who
'"  ufed  to  appear  in  the  religious  Proceffion,  was  a  Cioragus,

[g]  Plato  de  Rep.  1.  vii.

I  *«  BarJ,


58  ^Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

"  Bard,  or  Singer,  who  carried  the  Symbol  of  Mufic,  an4i
"  could  repeat  by  Heart  the  two  firft  Books  of  Mercur  Y  j
^'  the  firft  containing  Hymns  in  Honour  of  the  Gods ;  the-
"  fecond  containing  Sentences  or  Maxims  for  the  Condudl-
«  of  a  King  [-6]."

6.  *'  Their  mofl;  ancient  Maxims,  Exhortations,  Pro-
"  verbs,  or  Laws  were  written  in  Verfe."  Having  traced.
the  Antiquity  of  Song  and  poetic  Hijiory  to  its  true  and^
natural  Caufe,  die  prefent  Article  will  be  of  eafy  DifcufTion.
For  as  the  Greek  Songs  and  poetic  Stories  were  fraught
with  the  great  Aftions  of  their  Gods  and  Heroes,  fo
Maxims  of  Exhortation,  which  in  barbarous  Countries
hold  the  Place  of  Laws,  muft  of  Courfe  make  a  Part  of
thefe  public  Songs,.muftby  Degrees  be  feledled  from  them,
and  in  Time  be  appealed  to,  as  the  Standard  of  Right  and
Wrong.

However,,  as  Aristotle  hath  hinted  at  another  Caufe,,
the  flighteft  Gonjedure  of  fo  great  a  Name  muft  not  pafs-
unnoticed.  He  puts  the  Queftion  thus.  "  Why  are  many.'
"  Songs  called  by  the  name  of  Laws  ?  Was  it  becaufe,  be-
*'  fore  the  Invention  of  the  Art  of  Writing,  Laws  were:
**fung,  left  they  fhould  he  forgotten  {JY?"  On  this  Paffage.
it  will  be  only  necefTary  to  remark,  Firft,  that  the  Opinion?
is  delivered  as  a  mere  Conjefture.  Secondly,  that  all  tha
Difficulties  which  load  the  common  Opinion  concerning;

[A]  Clemens  Alexandr.  Stromat.  1.  vi.

[/]  Probbm.  Seift.  xix.  Art.  28.  He  is  followed  in  this  Opinion  by  the
learned  Mr.  Gocuet,  in  his  late  Book  on  Laws  arid  Government.  "  The
"  eariieft  Legiflators  fct  their  Laws  to  Muftc,  that-thoy  might  be  moreeafily
««  retained." Tanu  ii.  L.  i.  Art.  8..

the-


«/  P  O  E  T  R  Y fi;;^  M  U  S  1  C.  55

the  firft  Rife  oi poetic  Mijiory,  lie  equally  heavy  upon  this :
And  laftly,  that  the  fame  Solution  leads  us  up  to  the  true
Caufe,  on  the  natural  Principles  of  the /(ivage  Song-Feaji..
This  Solution  may,  perhaps,  in  the  Opinion  of  fome,  re-
ceive additional  Confirmation  from  the  concurrent  Autho-
rity of  Casaubon  ;  who  declares  it  his  Belief  (though  he
affigns  no  Reafon)  that  the  Songs  called  Nomoi  wtre  Frag-
ments of  ancient  Poetry,  which  had  been  feledlcd  and  pre-
ferved  on  Account  of  their  Utility  [;'].

7.  "  Their  ea.r\ie{\:re/igious  Rites  were  performed  or  ac-
'■*'  companied  by  Dance  and  Song." — The  Orgys  of  Bac-
chus, celebrated  in  this  Manner,  were  famed  through  all
the  Ages  of  Antiquity.  Strabo  tells  us,  that  "  the
*'  Greeks  retained  the  Cuftom  common  to  the  Barbarians,
*«  of  celebrating  their  Sacrifices  to  the  Gods  with  Mufic,
**  confiding  of  Dance,  Melody,  and  Song :"  And  highly
■cxtolls  this  Practice,  **  as  tending  to  unite  the  Soul  with
<'God[^]."  Plutarch  adds  his  Teflimony,  and  in-
forms us,  that  in  Greece  "  the  firft  Application  of  Mufic
**  was  to  religious  Ceremonies,  in  Honour  of  the  Gods  [/J,"
All  this  flows  naturally  from  the  view  we  have  given  of
favage  Life  and  Manners^  For  we  have  feen  that  the
Praifes  of  their  Chiefs  are  the  moft  general  Topic  of  the
favage  Dance  and  Song ;  and  the  Grecian  Gods  were  no
other  than  their  deceafed  Chieftains^

8.  "  Their  earlieil  Oracles  were  delivered  in  Verfe,  and
**  fung  by  the  Prieft  or  Prieftefs  of  the  fuppofed  God."
The  natural  Caufe  of  this  Facfl  hath  been  afiigned  in  the
Article  which  correiponds  with  this. The  ancients  knew

[.rj  In  Laert.  Ikl  Strabo,  1.  \l\  Plvt.  de  Mu/ica.

I  2  and


6o  A  Dissertation  on  the  Unions  &c.

and  confelTed  the  Fadt,  but  were  fo  entirely  ignorant  of  the
true  Caufe,  that  they  laboured  more  in  this  Point,  than-
even  in  accounting  for  the  Rife  oi poetic  Hijiory  and  Laios.
This  will  appear  from  Plutarch,  who  hath  written  a
Difcourfe  on  the  following  Queftion,  "  Why  the  Pythia
**  no  longer  gives  her  Oraeles  in  Verfe  ?"  Now,  before  he
afiigned  the  Caufes  why  this  Pradlice  of  Oracular  Verfe
had  ceafed,  it  was  natural  that  he  fhould  inquire  how  it  firft
began :  And  the  Caufes  (if  fuch  they  may  be  called)  whiehi
he  affigns,  are  thefe.

Firft,"  The  ancient  Times  produced  a  Race  of  Men,  who
"  had  naturally,  and  from  Sodily  Temper amejit,  a  ftronger
<*  Turn for Poetry." Secondly,  "  There  was  a  Time,,
«  when,  inftead  of  the  Art  of  Writing,  Men  ufed  Metre,,
**  Verfe, or Songs; adapting Hiftory, and other the.
*'  weightieft  Subjeds>  to  Pbetry  and  Mufic." **•  Thus  they
"  celebrated  the  Gods ; and  told  their  Fables  in  Verfe,
"  fome  through  the  Force  of  Genius,  and  others  by  the
"  Power  of  Cw/?(9OT;" "Therefore  the  God  permitted  the-
*'  Application  of  Verfe  and  Song  to  his  Oracles,  and  would
**  not  drive  the  Mufes  fi-om  his  Tripod." Thirdly,  "The
*'  Utility  of  Poetry  is  in  nothing  more  confpicuous,  than :
"  in  its  Afliftance  to  the  Memory,  by  the  Means  of  Num—
"  bers. The  Ancients  had  great  Need  of  This,  beyond'.
"  the  Moderns,  becaafe  the  Oracles  referred  to  Perfons, .
**  Things,  and Places, which were  often  unknown  to-
"  them  [w\"

Thus  the  learned  Plutarch  -,.  whofe  weak  Reafonings
(weak  becaufe  he  wanted  Fadls  to  lead  him  to  the  Truth)

[m']  Plut. Dijf.  Cur  nunc  Pythia  non  rtddat  craeula  carmine.

hardly


o/-  P  O  E  T  R  Y  <?W  M  U  S  I  C.  6i

Hardly  need  a  Confutation.  For  how  came  it  Co  to  pafs,
that  the  firft  Race  of  Men  were  by  natural  bodily  Tempera-
ment oizjironger  Turn  to  Poetry  ?  How  came  it  fo  to  pafs,
that  they  told  their  Fables  in  Verfe,  fome  by  the  Force  of
Genius,  others  by  the  Power  of  Cujiom  I*  Thefe  Affirma-
tions take  for  granted  the  very  Point  in  Queftion.

With  Refpedt  to  the  laft  Reafon  which  the  great  Author
afljgns,  "  The  Utility  of  Numbers,  as  an  Afliflance  to  the
**  Memory;"  This,  when  applied  to  Oracles,  is  not  only  in-
c-umbered  with  all  the  Difficulties  which  load  the  common  ■
Syftem  concerning  the  Origin  oi poetic  Hijlory  and  Laws ;
but  is  contrary  to  the  clear  Evidence  of  Fadts,  which  affure
u«  that  the  earlieft  poetic  Oracles  were  the  Eifedt  of  Enthu-
Jiafm. ForApoLLo,  the  God  oi  Mujic,  was. their  Author ;
The  Pythia  or  Priejiefs  was  his  Vicegerent  i  and  Pausa-
NiAS  informs  us,  that  Ph-^monoe  (the  Sifter  of  Apollo)  >
was  the  firft..  Prieftefs ; and  that  "  fhe  delivered  her  pro-
**  phetic  Infpirations  with  frantic  Geftures  f Dance  J  and  in.;
'•  heroic  Verfe  and  Song  [«]." Plutarch  tells  us  farther
concerning  this  favage  Heroine,  that  "  (he  is  faid  to  have
"  celebrated  Her/elf  in  her  Songs ; and  boafted,  that  ftie
*♦  fliould  not  ceafe  to  prophecy  after  her  Death  : That  (lie
*»  would  afcend  to  the  Moon,  and  be  metamorphofed.  into
"  that  Face  which  we  fee  in  the  Moon's  Body  [o]." Thefe
PalTages,  compared  with  what  hath  here  been  delivered  oa  •
the  favage  Song-F.eajis,  unveil  the  true  Origin  of  the  old
poetic  Oracles  of  Greece. Hence  it  appears  why  the  .
God's  Vicegerent  was  a  Woman: For  his  own  Sijler  firft
aiiumed  that  Office,  and  was  naturally  fucceeded  by  one  of


[n]  Paus.  in  Pbaclch.  [«]  Locofupra  citato.


hsr>


■62  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

her  own  Sex.  And  the  whole  Account  of  her  Self-Celcbra"
tions,  her  frantic  Ge/Iures,  Verje,  and  Song,  contains  a  true
Pifture  of  an  enthufiajiic  Savage:  For  it  appears  abovc^
•'  that  Mufic,  Dance,  and  Song,  are  one  of  the  common
"  Modes  oi Divination,  among  the  favage  Iroquois  [/]•"
9.  *' Their  Melody  v^as  Jimple ;  and  derived  a  confider-
"  able  Part  of  its  Power  from  its  Rythm  or  Meafure,  with-
*'  out  any  Mixture  oi  artificial  Compojition."  Much  hath
been  faid  on  this  Subje<ft,  in  fupport  of  the  contrary  Opi-
.nion ;  and  with  a  View  of  proving,  that  the  ancient
Melody  which  wrought  fuch  Wonders  in  Greece,  was
learned,  artificial,  and  complex.  With  others,  an  Author
no  lefs  confiderable  than  Sir  William  Temple  hath


concurred  in  that  Oplmon  [y] :  And  all  the  Writers  on
this  Subjedt  feem  to  have  given  us  a  Parade  of  Words
without  any  determinate  Ideas  annexed  to  them.  I
fhall  therefore,  firft,  aflign  the  Reafons  why  it  appears  to
jne,  that  we  have  no  adequate  Idea  of  the  ancient  Greek
Melody  j  and  then,  (hall  colledl  certain  collateral  Circum-
flances,  which  may  prove,  that  although  we  are  ignorant
of  its  particular  Nature,  yet  that  it  was  of  ajimple  and  /«*
artificial  Conftrudlion,

Firft,  with  Refpedt  to  the  three  Genera  or  Ki7icls  of  the
Greek  Melody ;  as  they  are  delivered  and  interpreted^y  the
Writers  on  ancient  Mufic,  they  are  incompatible  with  all
thole  Intervals  andTrqgreflions  cfSound  which  are  agree-
iible  to  the  human  Ear,


As  to  the  Enharmonic  Kind,  it  is  confefledly  imprac-
ticable. For  it  is  faid  to  have  proceeded  by  two  Diefes  or

[/>]  See  the  Paflage  irom  Lafitau.  [y ]  On  Poetry,  &c.

4  garter-


0/  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^/7^  M  U  S  I  C.  6^

farter-Notes  ; (with  a  ftated  intermixture  of  two  whole
T^nes)~an  Interval  which  no  human  Ear  can  precifely  dif—
tinguifli,  nor  any  human  Voice precifely  follow. This.
Fadt  is  fo  notorious,  and  ftrikes  fo  ftrongly  on  the  Senfes,,
that  the  Bigots  to  the  ancient  Melody  have  generally  been
fllent  on  it,  or  at  moft,  have  revered  it  as  a  profound  My-
flery. The  Abbe du  Bos may  be  regarded  as  an  Ex-
ception to this  general  Remark  : For  He  is  of  Opinion,,
that  the  ProgrefTion  of  the  Voice  by  ^tarter-Notes  might.
be  in  general  Ufe  in  the  theatrical  Declamation  [r]. To-
this  it  may  be  fufficient  to  reply,  that  the  Abbe  confefleth.
himfelf  ignorant  of  the  Principles  of  .Mufic  [j], and  that
this  Opinion  is  a  Proof  of  his  being  fo. The  Quarter-
Note  is  a  Progreffion  which,  although  an  Italian  Cas-
TRATO  (who  hath  laboured  at  this  Refinement  through
his  whole Life) may  nearly  and  incidentally  accomplidi ;
yet  even  He  fhall  never  be  able  JtriBly to  pradlife  in  the
general  Courfe  of  his  Performance  : But  it  is  a  Progreffion,
equally  impradlicable  to  the  Voice, and  fhocking  to  the
Ear  of  the  Generality  of  Mankind.

The  Chromatic  feems,  at  firrt  View,  to  be  more  intelligi-
ble ;  as  it  is  generally  faid  to  have  proceeded  by  Half-^
NoteSf  of  which  the  human  Ear  hath  an  adequate  and  pre-
cife  Conception.  But  This  too,  on  a  nearer  Examination,
will  be  found  abfolutely  at  Variance  with  that  which.
We  ftile  the  Chromatic  ;  (though  by  moft  modern
Writers  it  is  fuppofed  to  be  the  fame)  and  altogether  in-
compatible with  thofe  Progreffions  of  Sound  into  which  a
modern  Voice  can  fall. For  the  modern  Chromatic  Kind.

[r] Reflex.  Cr'tt.  Part.  iii.  c.  ix.  [j]  Ibid.


64 .--^Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

visjan  zwc/^^K/^/ Afcent  or  Defcent  by  Half-Notes,  with  a
•variable  Intervention  of  whole  Notes,  introduced,  under

•  certain  Reftridtions,  at  the  Compofer's  Will :  But  the  an-

•  cient  Chromatic,  as  delivered  by  the  Writers  on  this  Sub-
jeft,  was  an  U7ivaried  Progreffion,  by  two  Half-Notes,  and
a  ''Third  €\\\\tx greater  or  lefs  \t\

The  Diatonic  Kind,  according"  to  the  common  Concep-
tion of  it,  is  perfedUy  underftood  j  and  is  generally  faid  to
be  the  fame  with  that,  in  which  our  modern  Mufic  is  com-
monly compofed  :  Yet  nothing  is  lefs  true  than  this  :  For
our  common  Scale  is  a  Progreflbn  of  whole  Notes,  with
the  Intermixture  of  two  half  Notes  only,  and  thefe  at  the
Diftance  of  "s^  fifth  from  each  other  in  xhtjharp  Key,  and
2.  fourth  from  each  other  in  the  fat  Key:  Whereas  in  the
ancient  Diatonic  Scale  it  is  quite  other  wife  :  For  There,
Here,  one  Semitone  and  two  whole  Tones  are  ordained  to
fucceed  each  other  invariably:  A  Circumflance  utterly
incompatible  with  the  modern  Diatonic  Scale.

The  Confequence  <lrawn  from  thefe  Reafbnings,  is  not,
that  the  Ancients  talked  or  pradtifed  abfurdly ;  or  that  the
Moderns  want  Ears  or  Underftanding^  but  only  This,  that
we  do  not  adequately  underftand  the  Terms.

What  leads  me  farther  to  believe  this,  is  a  Circumflance
in  the  Spartan  Decree  againft  Timotheus  (given  at  large
""  below)  where  it  is  faid,  that  he  corrupted  the  Simplicity  of
the  Enharmonic,  and  introduced  the  Refinements  of  the
Cbromaftc'.  NowThis  is  an  abfolute  Contradidtion  to  AH
that  we  underftand  concerning  the  Nature  of  thefe  two
Kinds, For,  as  the  Diatojiic,  which  proceeds  by  whole

[/]  See  Alvpius;;  at  the  End  of  the  Phanomena  of  Aratus  :  To
whom  I  refer  for  the  Truth  of  thefe  Remarks  on  the  three  Genera.

Tones,


of  ?  O^  r.KY  and  MUSIC,  65

'ToneSj.  is  more  fimple  than  the  Chromatic,  -which  proceeds
b}7  Ha  If -Tones ;_  fo  This,  in  .its  Turn,  is  more  fimple  than
the  Enharmonic  J  which  is  faid  to  have  proceeded  by  far-
ter-Tones :  All  which  is  in  diredt  Contradiction  to  the
Tenor  of  the  Spartan  Decree.

Secondly,  with  Regard  to  the  various  Modes  of  ancient
Melody,  we  are  often  as  much  in  the  dark. We  read  of
no  lefs  than  fifteen,  introduced  at  different  Periods; but
the  Commentators  on  the  ancient  Writers  upon  this  Sub-
jedt,  are  at  Variance  with  each  other,  concerning  the  Na-
ture and  Xii^  of  thefe  different  Modes. Some  are  of  Opi-
nion, that  the  Difference  lay  in  the  Degree  of  Gravity  or
Acutenefs  only  : Others  maintain,  that  the  Mode  fignified
the  Rythm,  or  Meafure : Others  again,  that  the  Effence  of
the Mode confifled, in a  diferent Species  of Diapafon,  ■
There  is  Reafon  to  believe,  that  the  Word  was  ufed  at  va-
rious Times,  and  by  different  Writers,  in  all  thefe  Senfes,
and  that  each  of  thefe  Authors  may  be  right  in  his  Turn.
From  the  Defcription  of  an  Inflrument  given  by.  Athe-
arnvs it  appears,  that  by  Mode  was  ibmetimes meant
Gravity  or  Acutenefs  of  Sound  :.  For  he  tells  us,  that  the
Mufician  had  three  Lyres  placed  on  a  moveable  Tripod
which  turned  on  an  Axis;  ^nd  that  by  whirling  it  round
with  his  Foot,  he  could  inflantly  play  .in  three  various
Modes  [«]. That  Mode  was  fomettmes  ufed  for  Meafure,
feems  evident,  becaufe  in  a  Fragment  of  an  ancient  Author
cited. by  At  11  ei^^ us,  we reaxi  that  2i  Hymn  vf-HiS  writ-
ten  in the  Lydian  Mode  \w}  ; which can only mean,
the  Phrygian  or  Dorian  Meafure. And ^sMode  was  ■  ap'-
. plied  to  Numbers,  fo was  it likewife to  Dance: The-'
lonici  Motus,  which  ancient  Writers,  fpeak  of,  are  a  clear  _

,  [«]  L.  xir.  [wj Ibidr

K  Proof


66  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Proof  of  This.  That  Mode  was  ufed  in  the  third  of  thele
Acceptations,  as  a  particular  iS^fc/V/ of  jDm/)^«,  hath  been
made  clear  by  a  late  Writer,  in  a  judicious  and  accurate
Treatife  [*■}.  Thus  by  the  promifcuous  Ufe  of  the  Word
Mode,  lignifying  either  Pitch,  Meafure,  or  Species  of
Diapafon,  it  hath  come  to  pafs,  that  fome  times  the  Signi-
fication of  the  Word  is  clear,  at  others  it  is  only  probable,
often  it  is  obfcure  and  doubtful.

Thirdly,  to  complete  our  Ignorance  of  the  particular
Nature,  of  their  Melody,  the  Conflruction  of  their  Mufical
Inflrunients  is  unknown.  We  only  know,  that  the  Chords
of  the  Lyre,  were  augmented  gradually  from  Jour  to  forty  i
but  whether  the  Strings  afcended  by  Quarter-Notes, Half-
Notes,  whole  Notes,  or  by  larger  Intervals,  of  all  this  we
know  nothing  certain.  Our.  Ignorance  of  their  Pipes  or
Flutes  is  not  lefs  remarkable.  Commentators  and  Critics
ring  Changes  on  their  fingle,  double,  obhque,  right-handed,
and  left-handed  Flutes ;  but  what  was  their  precife  Make,
Tone,  Compafs,  or  Powers,  the fe  Gentlemen  cannot,  with
any  Certainty,  inform  us.  -  The  learned  Isaac  Vossius
is  one  of  the  warmeft  Champions  for  the  Excellence  of  an-
cient Inftrument«  ■:  but  whoever  reads  him  without  Parti-
ality, will  find  all  his  Endeavours  amount  to  no  more  than
what  is  here  affirmed  \y\

Since,  therefore,  the  particular  Nature  and  Conftrudlion
of  the  ancient  Melody  is  utterly  unknown  to  us  ;  we  muft
have  Recourfe  to  cx)llateral  Proofs,  drawn,  from  Fads  which
were  connected  with  this,  unknown  Melody ;  and  from
Thefe  we  may,  I  think,  indiredly  arrive  fo  far  at  a  Know-
ledge of  its  general  Character,  as  to  conclud£  with  Cer-

{*]  By  Sir  Fr.  Evxes  Stiles.  [  >]  De  Poem.  Cantu^  Sec.

tainty.


£/•  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^W  M  U  S  I  C.  &y-

tainty,  that  in  the  ear/y  Periods  (in  which  Mu^c  boafted
its  greateji  Power  J  the  ruling  Charadler  of  the  Melody  was
that  of  Simplicity ;  and  that  it  derived  a  chief  Part  of  its
Force  from  its  mere  Rythm  or  Meafure.

Simplicity  was  its  ruling  Character  j  becaufe  we  find
that  Mujic  had  then  its  greateft  Power,  when  the  Melody
was  mofl  confined  in  its  Compafs.  Mercury  was  the  In-
ventor of  the  Lyre ;  which  had  but  four  Strings,  and
thefe  were  ftretched  on  a  Turtle's  Shell  \z\.  Am"
PHioN  was  his  Difciple,  and  increafed  the  Number  of
Strings  tofieven[a].  Apollo  contented  himfelf  with
the  fame  Compafs  of  Notes;  and  fo  did  Orpheus  [^5].
This  Number  of  Strings  continued  to  be  eftablifhed  by
Law  at  Sparta,  fo  late  as  the  Age  of  Timotheus,  wha
attempted  an  Innovation  of  Jour  more,  and  was  puniflied
for  it  [c].  Yet  all  the  mighty  EfFedts  and  Powers  of
Mu/ic,  which  we  read  of  in  ancient  Greece,  arofe  within
this  Period,  and  while  the  Melody  was  confined  within  this
fmall  Compafs.

The  Lyre,  therefore,  in  its  moil:  ancient  Forms,  being  in-
capable either  of  a  great  Variety,  or  a  multifarious  Com-
bination of  Sounds ;  a  flrong  Probability  arifeth  from  its
very  Nature,  that  Counterpoint,  or  an  artificial  Compofition
in  various  Partly  was  altogether  unknown.  It  appears
to  me  (from  many  Paliages  ot  ancient  Authors  compared
together,  but  too  long  to  infert  here)  that  the  Ancients
fving  and  played  firfl  in  Unifons,  Odtaves,  and  Fifteenths  j
then  in  Thirds  and  Tenths ;  and  in  the  later  Periods  in
Fourths  and  Fifths,  as  appears  from  Plutarch  ;  though
in  Aristotle's  Time,  it  is  evident, thefe-  lalt  were  not

[z]  Pausanias,  1.  ix,  {a]  Ibid.  {b]  Ibid.

[c]  Sec  the  Spartan.  Decree  againft  Timotheus,  given  at  large  below,

K  2  pradlifed.


is A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

praftifed.  It  is  likewife  evident,  that  in  the  later  Period?,
the  injirumental  Accompanyment  was  different  from  the
Songi  yet  this  only  in  the  Way  o^  Divifwn  upon  t\\t  fun-
damental Notes.  Farther  than  thefe  Methods  of  redoubling
or  dividing  the  fame  Melody,  I  find  nothing  like  Compo-
filion  in  "various  Farts.

On  the  contrary,  there  are  many  Rcafons  which  may
convince  us,  that  nothing  like  the  modern  Counterpoint
was  known  to  the  Ancients.  The  Silence  of  all  their
Mufical  Writers  colledted  by  Meibomius,  on  this  great
Article,  is  a  Proof  fufficient  that  they  were  ignorant  of  it..
Their  Divifions  of  the  mufical  Art  are  precife  and  fyftema-
tical;  and  therefore,  if  this  had  made  a  Part  of  it,  as  its
Rules  muft  have  been  more  complex  than  thofe  of  any
other  Branch,  beyond  all  Doubt,  they  would  have  been
diflinftly  treated  of.

The  fame  Confequence  feems  clearly  to  arife  from  a-
PafTage  in  Aristotle,  who  fays,  that  "  it  is  much  eafier
*♦  to  keep  the  'Time  in  Mufic,  when  a  Number  ling  toge-
**■  ther,  than  when  a  iingle  Voice  only  fings  [^ :"  Which  is
true,  if  we  fuppofe  a  numerous  Choir  to  fing  the  fame  Part,
becaufe  one  Voice  tends  to  corredl  the  Inequalities  of  an-
other j  but  in  diredt  Contradiction  to  the  Truth,  if  we
fuppofe  them  to  fing  in  Counterpoint ;  becaufe,  here,  the
various  Parts  have  a  Tendency  to  confound  each  other.

Their  Ignorance  of  Counterpoint  appears  farther  from
hence,  that  no  Difference  is  remarked  between  the  Com-
pofitions  for  the  Flute  znd  thofe  for  the  Lyre,  with  Refpedt
to  the  Multiplicity  of  Farts.  One  Inftrument  they  ufed,,
wiiich  had  two  Strings  to  every  Note,  and  thefe  two  were
tuned  in  tAirds  to  each  other  : This  liiilrumeiit  was  called.

[d]  PrabL Seft.  xix.  the


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y and  MUSIC.  69

the  Magadis",  and  even  this  diftant  Approach  towards
playing  in  Counterpoint  was  regarded  as  a  Thing  fo  fm-
gular,  that  to  play  in  thirds  was  called  [^ccyaSi^m.  If  there-
fore any  other  Kind  of  Performance  had  been  ufed  more
complex  than  this,  it  muft  have  been  noted  as  a  Circum-
flance  ftill  more  fingular.

It  appears  farther,  that  in  Homer's  Hymn  to  Mer-
cury, the  Poet  reprefents  Apollo  as  holding  his  Lyre  in
one  Hand,  and  playing  with  a  Pledlrum  with  the  other.
In  an  ancient  Sculpture  which  reprefents  the  Deification
of  Homer,  fome  of  the  Figures  which  dance,  are  at  the
fame  Time  playing  on  the  Lyre,  which  they  hold  with
one  Hand,  and  ftrike  with  the  other.  Thus  too,  when
Sophocles  played  on  the  Lyre,  and  at  the  fame  Time
led  the  Dance  [f],  he  muft  have  managed  his  Inftrument  in
the  fame  Manner.  And  again,  it  appears,  that  even  in  the
latter  Periods,  the  moft  celebrated  Lyrifts  played  with  one
PkSlrum  [/].  Now,  all  thefe  Circumflances  center  in  the
Proof  of  this,  that  the  Melody  which  they  played  v/zsfmgle.

We  may  farther  obferve,-that  their  mufical  Notation  (fa-
far  as  it  is  fuppofed  to  be  underflood)  generally  implies  a

[^]  Deipnofoph,  I.  i.

[/]  Ibid.  I.xiv.  They  fometjmes  touched  the  String  with  a  P/^<f7ra«,
fcmetimcs  with  the  Fingir,  But  that  the  Cufloin  of  playing  with  the
PkSlrum  was  the  more  ancient,  appears  from  a  curious  Fafl  related  by  H.
Stephens,  from  Plutarch,  "  that  Spartans  puniftied  a  Lvriit  for  the
"  Innovation  of  playing  with  his  Finger."  [Thef.  Ling.  Grsec.  Voc.
!t(9ap»(?u.]  Virgil  introduccth  Mus^rus,  as  playing  in  both  thefe  Ways
in  the  Elyfan  Fields  : — "  Nunc  Digito,  nunc  Peiiine  pulfat  eburno"— But
this  proves  little  more  than  that  Both  were  in  Ufe  in  the  Time  of  Virgil.-^
'Tis  certain,  that  on  the  iirft  rude  Formation  of  Inftruments,  the  PhSinm
would  give  the  more  cleaV-and  effeaual  Stroke  :  As  Inftrumepts  grew  more,
more  delicate,  the  Finger  would  come  into  Ufe.  This  (as  will  appear  be-
low, Art.  33.)  explains  the  Eoundation  of  the  Spartan  Conduift.

2  fingle^.


'7^0  A  Dissertation  on  ?/&^  Union,  &c.

finglc,  and  that  a  very  Inartificial  Species  of  Compofition.
Nay,  the  Letters  which  compofed  their  mufical  Notation
feem  very  inadequr.tely  to  exprefs  even  2. Jingle  Part,  did
not  the  Meafure  of  the  Verfe  in  fome  Degree  fix  that  of  the
Melody.

Add  to  all  thefe  Arguments  this  farther  Confirmation,
that  their  Poets  (who  were  generally  at  the  fame  Time
Warriours,  Priefts,  or  Statefmen)  not  only  compofed  the
Melody  to  their  own  Verfes,  but,  in  the  early  Periods,
played  and  fung  them  at  their  Feflivals  :  And  that  People
of  all  Ages  and  Degrees  were  commonly  able  to  bear  a  Part
in  the  Chorus,  both  in  public  and  private  Entertainments.
All  thefe  concurrent  Circumflances  center  in  one  fufiicient
and  fatisfadlory  Proof,  that  their  Melody  was  not  only
Jingle,  but  of  the  rsxo^fimple  ConJiruSlion.

One  Kind  of  Addition  did  undoubtedly  in  many  Inftances
take  Place  :  I  mean  that  of  the  Tympanum,  the  SiJlrum,  or
the  Cymbal  added  as  an  unvaried  Groundwork,  and  accom-
modated to  the  Meafure  of  the  ruling  Melody :  But  this
was  no  more  than  the  modern  Drum  added  to  the  Fife  or
Trumpet,  the  Tabor  to  the  Pipe,  or  the  Drone  to  the  Bag-
pipe: A  Kind  of  Addition  which  we  find  in  the  Mufic  of
almoft  every  barbarous  Country,

Since  therefore  it  appears,  that  the  Force  of  the  ancient
Greek  Melody  confided  neither  in  its  Compafs,  its  Multi-
folicity  of  PartSj  nor  its  artificial  Conilrudtlon;  let  us  now
proceed  to  confider  .the  oply  Circuxnflance  from  which  its
chief  Power  could  arife,  I  mean,  its  Rythm  or  Meafure.
That  this  was  its  real  Source,  may  be  evident  from  the
following  Confiderations.

Firft,  The  Greek  Language  was  admirably  fitted  for  a
various  and  powerful  Rythm  or  Meafure,  by  its  V^'arjety  of

Feet ;


0/"  POET  RY ^//./  MUSI  C.  71

£iv/j  which,  when  thrown  into  all  their  dift'erent  Combi-
nations, formed  fuch  a  Variety  of  Numbers,  as  gave  Room
for  an  equal  and  correfpondent  Variety  of  Meafure  in  the
annexed  Melody,  beyond  any  other  Language  in  the  known
World.  When,  therefore,  fuch  a  Language  offered  itfelf  as
an  Afliftant  to  the  Mufician's  Art,  it  was  altogether  natu-
ral that  he  (hould  accommodate  his  Melody  to  the  peculiar
and  happy  Genius  of  his  Native  Tongue.

Secondly,  fuch  a  Melody  as  this,  marked  by  ftrong
Changes  and  Varieties  of  Meafure,  mufl  have  greater  Ef-
fects than  the  moft  extenfive  or  moft  artificial  Melody
when  unaffifted  by  it.  This  argument  is  well  purfued  by
the  learned  Isaac  Vossius:  I  fliall  therefore  give  it  in
his  own  Words ;  the  rather,  becaufe  it  is  the  moft  judicious  ■
and  philofophic  Paflage  in  his  whole  Work;  and  contains
as  it  were  the  Kernel  of  z  large  Traftj  a  confiderable  Part
of  which,  it  muft  be  owned,  may  juflly  be  thrown  alide  as  ■
Hu^  and  SM/.

"  Wherefore,  I  cannot  enough  wonder  at  thofe  who  in  1
"  the  prefent  and  paft  Age  have  written  on  Mufic  5  that
*'  while  they  diligently  explained  other  Things,  they  fhould  •
"  either  have  faid  nothing  on  Rythm,  or- elfe  written  in  .
"  fuch  a  Manner,  as  to  prove  themfelves  ignorant  of  its  -
*'  Nature.  They  confine  themfelves  entirely  to  Counter-  -
'*  point,  neglecting  that  which  is  principal  in  Melody.—  -
**  For  certainly,  as  neither  an  Unit  can  produce  Number,  .
••  nor  "X  Jingle  Word  make  Senfe  j  fo  neither  can  zny  Jingle  •
"  Sound,  feparatcly  confidered,  have  any  Poiver :  Or  if  it  "
*•  hath,  it  muft  be  very  inconfiderable.  For  what  Effedt
••  in  moving  the  Pafiions  can  arife  from  the  Collifion.of  .
•'  Stones  or  Wood,  or  even  from  the  flriking  of  one  Strings .

"if .


•73  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  6cc

"  If  Numbers  and  Rytbm  be  wanting,  and  we  hear  nothiag
"  but  a  mere  Sound  [^]  ? Or  if  we compound  various
«<  Sounds,  and  thefe  be  even  harmonic  and  concordant,  not
"  even  This  will  produce  any  EfFedt. Such  an  Harmony
"  of  Sounds  may  pleafe  the  Ear ;  but  the  Plealure  will  only
"  be  fuch,  as  if  Words  were  (agreeably)  fpoken,  which
'*  are  either  unmeaning  or  not  underftood. That  the  Soul
"  may  be  affedled,  it  is  necelTary  that  the  Sound  Ihould
**  imply,  or bring  before  us,  fomething  which  we  can
*♦  comprehend. That  Sounds,  therefore,  may  have  their
"  full  Effed:,  the  Melody  muft  be  animated  by  fuch  Move-
*'  ments,  as  contain  in  themfelves  the  Reprefentations  or
*'  Images  of  thofe  Things  which  we  mean  to  exprefs  or
*'  imitate  by  Song:  And  This  if  we  can  do,  we  may  be
"  fure  to  command  the  Paffions  of  the  Soul. But  that  we
"  may  indeed  catch  and  call  forth  thefe  Images,  we  muft
"  employ  that  Variety  of  Mufical  Feet,  in  which  are  fo
*'  fully  contained  all  the  feveral  Kinds  of  Movements,  that
*'  no  Affedtion  can  be  conceived,  which  they  do  not  moft
*'  exactly  exprefs. For  the  Expreflion  of  light  and  voluble
.  **  Motions,  as  of  the  Dances  of  Satyrs,  the  Pyrrichius  and
.4(  Tribrachys  are  proper:  Tht  grave  zndjlow  are  exprefled
"  by  the  Spondee  and  Moloffus:  Whatever  ^^foft  and  tender,
*'  the  T'rochee,  and  fometimes the  Amphibrachys  will  de-
«*  fcribe,  which  itfelf  moves  with  a  broken  and  effeminate
"  Pace. The Iambic  is fierce and  vehement; and the
"  Anapceji  nearly  of  the  fame  Nature,  as  it  imitates  violent
"  and  warlike  Motions. If  we  mean  to  exprefs  what  is
"  chearful  znd  joyous,  we  muft  employ  the  DaSlyl,  whofe

\.i\  ^^^  learned  Writer  is  miftaken  in  this  Paragraph.  The  mere
Sound  of  Thunder  excites  Fear  \  other  Souads  excite  Sorrow,  others  J'^y.
x$ee  the  next  Article.

."  Movements


of  POET  RY  and  M  15  SIC.  75

'<  Movements  are  of  a  correfpondent  Nature.  Whatever
"  is  ^arJ  and  rugged,  the  Antifpajl  will  happily  defcribe.
"  If  we  require  Numbers  that  may  exprefs  Fury  and  Mad-
"  nefs,  not  only  the  Anapeeji  is  at  Hand,  but,  what  is  ftill
**  more  powerful,  the  P^o«  quartus. — Ofthefe  various
"  Meafures,  artificially  combined,  did  the  ancient  Greek
**  and  Roman  Mufic  confift  :  And  while  this  flourifhed,  fo
"  long  did  Mufic  maintain  its  Empire  over  the  Paflions[/6]".
Thus  the  learned  Vossias:  Whofe  Admiration  of  the
Rythm  of  the  ancient  Melody  leads  him  into  fome  falfc
Conclufions,  as  will  appear  below.  In  the  mean  Time,  this
general  Exhibition  of  the  Genius  of  the  Greek  Numbers
may  {land  as  a  farther  accumulative  Proof,  that  the  Power
of  the  ancient  Melody,  which  was  univerfally  accommo-
dated to  this  Variety  of  exprejfive  Numberj,  lay  chiefly  in
its  Rythm  or  Meafure.

Laftly,  thefe  Arguments  are  much  confirmed  by  the  ex-
prefs Teftimony  ;of  Plutarch  j  who,  fpeaking  of  the
Variations  which  the  Genius  of  ancient  Mufic  had  under-
gone in  the  Progrefs  of  Time,  fays,  "  If  we  compare  An-
*•  tiquity  with  the  prefent  Times,  we  fhall  find,  that  in
'*  ancient  Days,  there  was  a  great  Variety  oi  Meafure,  and
"  this  Variety  often  employed.  Por  in  that  early  Period,
•*  the  Variety  of  Feet  and  Time  was  more  highly  efteemed :
*'  We  now  ftudy  and  attend  to  Variety  of  Modes,  the  An"
"  cients  to  Variety  oi Rythm  or  Meafure  [^'J."  This  Change
he  regards  as  one  of  the  Corruptions  of  Melody ;  he  gives
an  Account  of  the  Inventors  of  the  feveral  new  Modes,
Melanippides,  PfliLoxENus,TiMOTHEUS,andothersj
ajnd  infifts,  that  the  Art,  which  formerly  had  fuch  Power  in

.{AJ  Vqssws  dt  Poem,  Cmtu  et  Viribus  Rythmic  p.  72. [;J  De  Mufua.

L  the


74  ^Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c. ~

the  Education  of  Youth,  was  now  funk  into  a  mere  Amuie-
pient  of  the  Theatre  \k\.  A  clear  and  full  Indicanon,
that  the  ancient  Greeks  relied  on  Meafure  or  Rythm  for
the  Force  of  their  Melody ;  and  that  as  it  grew  more  arti^
Jicial,  it  grew  lefs  powerful.  Thefe  Fads  fully  coincide
with  the  Reafons  given  above,  on  which  this  Article  is
founded;  *•  Becaufe  a  Simplicity  of  Melody,  whofe  Power
**  arofe  from  mere  Rythm  or  Meafure^  was  mod  fuited.
**  to  the  Powers  of  the  firft  barbarous  Legiflators  or  Bards^
•*  as  well  as  to  the  Capacity  of  the  furrounding  People."

lo.  "  The  Force  of  this  fimple  Melody  was  much  in-
**  creafed  by  the  Power  of  early  Ajfociation  and  continued
"  Habit.  For  This,  by  appropriating  certain  Sounds  to^
"  certain  Subjects,  raifed  their  Melody  inta  a  Kind  of
**  natural  and  expreffive  Language  of  the  Paflions." — In
the  firfl  rude  E flays  towards  an  expreflive  Melody  m  bar-
barous Countries,  certain  imperfed:  Modes  of  Sound  mufl
of  Courfe  be  applied,  as  being  expreffive  of  certain  Subjeds^
or  Paffions.  The  fucceeding  Generation  will  be  naturally
bred  up  to  a  like  Application  of  the  fame  Sounds.  Hence
thefe  Modes  of  Melody,  though  imperfeSl  in  Expreflion,
being  imprefled  on  infant  Minds  with  all  the  Force  of  an
early  Application,  muft  acquire  a  Power  over  Thefe,  which
unaccuftomed  Minds  can  never  feel.  Thus  certain  Sounds
being  appropriated  by  Ufe,  and  having  become  the  com-
mon Indications  of  Grief,  Terror,  Joy,  Pity,  Rage,  or
any  other  Paflion,  will  naturally  excite  their  refpedive
AfFedions  among  thofe  who  have  adopted  uiem ;  while  a
Hearer  from  another  Country,^  whofe  Ailociations,  and.
Habits  are  different,  will  be  little,  or,  if  at  all,  perhaps  very

{k]  De  Mufica.
a  differentlj^


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^?«</  M  U  S  I  C.  y^

■differently  affefted  by  them.  Laf it  Au's  Account  of  the
Mufic  of  the  Iroquois  h  a  clear  Confirmation  of  this  Truth:
"  The  Mufic  and  Dance  of  the  Americans  have  fomething
*•  in  them  extremely  barbarous,  which  at  firft  difgvjis :
"  We  grow  reconciled  to  them  by  Degrees,  and  in  the  End
■"  partake  of  them  with  Pleafure.  As  to  the  Savage?
**  themfelves,  they  -^rtjond  of  them  even  to  DiJiraSiion  [/]."
"What  we  are  told  of  the  Swifs  Song  gives  additional  Con-
firmation to  this  Principle.  This  Song,  which  to  foreign
Ears  is  uncouth  and  barbarous,  hath  fuch  an  Effed:  on  the
Natives  of  Switzerland,  among  whom  it  is  generally
taught  and  imprefled  on  the  infant  Mind,  that  it  is  forbid
to  be  fung  among  their  Regiments  hired  in  the  Service  of
other  Nations,  left  it  fhould  tempt  them  to  defert,  and  re-
turn to  their  own  Country.  The  yews,  Chinefe,  Germans,
French, -Italians,  have  all  fome  peculiar  Appropriations  of
a  fimilar  Nature,  which  gives  their  native  Mufic  a  general
Power,  which  no  other  Mufic  can  ever  obtain.  Among
ourlelves,  the  Sound  of  Bells,  Drums,  Organs,  "TriimpetSt
have  all  an  Appropriation  of  the  fame  Nature :  And  a
Highlander  has  the  fame  warlike  Ideas  annexed  to  the
Sound  of  a  Bagpipe  (an  Inftrument  which  an  Englijhman
derides)  as  the  Englijhman  has  to  that  of  a  Trumpet  or  a
Fife.  Melody  therefore  is  to  be  confidered  as  a  relative
thing,  founded  in  the  particular  Afibciations  and  Habits  of
each  People  -,  and  by  Cuftom  (like  Language)  annexed  to
their  Sentiments  and  Paffions :  Thus  it  becomes  the  natural
Vehicle  of  tbefe  Sentiments  and  Pafiions;  but  a  Vehicle,
which  can  never  extend  farther  than  to  Thofe,  upon  whom
fuch  particular  Impreflions  have  been  made.  This,  added
to  the  Fowcr  of  Rythm,  affords  a  natural  Solution  to  the
[/]  See  above,  Sc6t.  iit

L  2  Difficulties


y(>  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

(  Difficulties  raifed  concerning  the  Po\yer  of  the  Greek
Melody  :  For  as  it  was  taught  and  imprefled  on  the  infant
Mind  by  early  and  continued  Application  (as  will  imme-
diately appear)  fo  it  naturally  acquired  the  Power  of  a
Language  of  the  PaJJions,  which,  with  Refpedt  to  other
Nations,  if  it  now  exifted,  it  would  not  pofTefs^

There  is  a  collateral  Argument  often  urged  in  Favour  of
the  artificial  Excellence  of  the  ancient  Greek  Melody ;.  and
drawn  from  what  we  know  of  the  Elegance  and  Perfeftioa
of  ancient  Greek  Sculpture. But  the  Weaknefs  of  this
Argument  wilV  appear  from  the  Principles  here  given  ;
the  Effects  of  the  two  Arts  being  by  no  means  parallel,
but  rather  contrary  to  each  other. The  Excellence  of  Sculp-
ture is  the  EfFeft  of  repeated  Experience,  which  refers,
itfelf  to  the  Works  of  Nature,  as  to  its  Archetype  :  And
the  Pleafure  arifing  from  the  Contemplation  of  this  Art
confifts  in  feeing  the  Perfeftion  of  the  Imitation ;  and  is
tie  Refult  of  a  fine  Tafle,  founded  on  a  corredl  Judgment.
But  the  Forceof  Melody  on  the  Paflions  depends  not  on  its
artificial  CJonftrudtion  or  Elegance,  b«t  folely  on  its  being;
adapted  to  the^f^ings,  PaflionSy  and  Conceptions  of  the
Hearer,  be  they  juft  or  falfe,  polifhed  or  barbarous. Hence
we  {hall  find,  that  the  Force  of  the  two  Arts  will  be.
generally  in  an  inverfe  Proportion. For  the  Attention  to .
Sculpture, beiivg  founded  on  a  rejlex  A£l  of  the  Under-
ftanding,  will'  always  increafe  with  increafing  Taftc  and
Knowledge:  But  the  Power  of  JWi?/?^,  being  founded  io-
Paffion,  will  there  be  moft  general  and  ftrong,  where  Fear, .
Joy,  Wonder,  Terror,  and  Aftonifhment,  are  moil  eafily.
and  moft  frequently  excited  :  And  it  is  certain,  thefe  natu-
ral Paffions  are  not  fo  common  in  a  State  highly  polirtied^,
as  in  that  of  Barbarity  orfimple  Civilization. 'Tis  granted*
J  iudecdj.,


e/"  POETRY  ^«i  MUSIC. ^^

indeed,  nay  infifted  on,  that  the  ancient  Melody  grew
more  artificial  in  the  later  Periods  :  But  the  fame  Authors
who  inform  us  of  this[»2],  affure  us  that  its  Power  was
greateft  in  the  early  and  barbarous  Times ;  that  this  Power
continued  longeft  in  that  Society  which  continued  longefl
in  Barbarity,  I  mean  the  Commonwealth  of  Sparta  r
and  that  as  it  grew  'more  artificial,  it  degenerated  every
where  into  a  mere  Amufement,  and  loft  its  Influence  on
the  Paflions  and  the  Mind.

n\  "  Their  Songs  were  of  a  legijlative  Caft ;  and  being
**  drawn  chiefly  from  the  Fables  or  Hiftory  of  their  ovfVf
**  Country,  contained  the  eflential  Parts  of  their  religious,
**  political,  and  moral  Syftems."  We  have  feen  above,  that
the  Celebration  of  their  deceafed  Heroes  became  naturally
a  religious  A5l :  That  the  Maxims  or  Exhortations  inter-
mixed with  thefe,  and  founded  on  the  Example  of  their
Heroe-Gods,  became  of  Courfe  the  Standard  of  Right  and
Wrong,  that  is,  the  Foundation  of  private  Morals  and  of
public  Law ;  and  thus  the  whole  Fabric  of  their  Religion,
Morals,  and  Polity;  arofe  naturally  from  their  Song-Feajis,
in  their  Progrefs  from^'u^^g'^to  civilized  Life.

The  Records  that  remain  concerning  the  Bards  of  an-
cient Greece  unite  in  confirming  this  Principle.  Of  this
illuftrious  Catalogue,  Linus  was  perhaps  the  firft  :  He
writ  the  Exploits  of  the  firft  Bacchus  j  and  fung  the
Generation  of  the  World  and  the  Rife  of  Things  [«J.l
Pampho  is  fuppofed  to  have  been  his  Difciple  :  And  He
compofed  Hymns  in  Honour  of  the  GbdS;  and  fung  the-.
Rape  of  Proserpine  by  Pluto  [o].

[m']  Aristotle,  PLUTARCH„and  others,  [«J  Diodorus,  I.  iiL

and  Laertius.  [o]  Pausanias  in  Baoticis.


yS u4  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

The  next  great  poetic  and  mufical  Sage  was  Orpheus:
He  is  faid  to  have  fung  of  Chaos  and  Creation  -,  and  a
Variety  of  other  Subjedts  religious  and  philofophical  \p\.
Some  fine  Fragments  remain  under  his  Name ;  but  there  is
Reafon,  from  fome  internal  Marks  in  the  Compofition,  to
believe  them  fpurious.

Mus^us  is  faid  to  have  been  theDifciple  of  Orpheus:
He,  too,  w^rit  Hymns  and  Prophecies,  and  fung  the
Motions  oi  \hs.  Stars,  and  the  Battles  of  the  Giants  [q].
Thamyris  was  not  lefs  diflinguiflied  by  the  legijlative
Genius  of  his  Songs  :  For  he  was  not  only  the  Author  of
a  Titans  War ;  but  celebrated  the  Gods  in  Hymns,  and
fung  the  Generation  of  the  Worldlr].

Thefe  are  the  mofl  celebrated  ^^r</j-  of  ancient  Greece,
whofe  Songs  have  periflied  in  the  Wreck  of  Time.  If
we  come  down. to  the  moll  famous  of  thofc,  whofe  Writ-
ings have  been  preferved,  we  fhall  find  their  Songs  com-
pofed  in  the  fame  legijlative  Style  and  Genius.

Hesiod  feems  to  Hand  at  the  Head  of  thefe,  in  the  Order
of  Time.  And  his  Theogony  is  a  living  Witnefs  how  far
HIS  legijlative  Turn  accords  to  the  Principles  here  deliver-
ed. He  gives,  in  Form,  the  Generation  of  all  the  Gods  of
Greece  ;  and  raixeth  his  Narration  with  their  A^s  and
Traifes.

Homer  appears  next  in  the  Order  of  Time  :  And  in
his  unrivaled  Songs we  find the  Religion, Polities,  and
Manners  of  ancient  Greece difplayed  with  all  the  Ap-
pearances of  Truth,  becaufe  delivered  with  all  their  Imper-
fe'Bions. During  the  early  Periods  of  Civilization, the

[/>]  SuiDAS  in  Orpheo.  [j]  Laertius  in  Proam.

[']  SuiDAs  in  Tham,

legijlative


of  POETRY and'  MUSIC.  79

kgijlathe  Art  is  always  of  an  imperfeSf  Form.  In  the  rude
Progrefs  of  barbarous  Manners,  the  mora/ Idezs  are  conjinedy
and  little  diftinguiflied.  If  the  People  be  fierce  and  war-
like (as  were  the  Tribes  of  Greece)  Strength,  Courage,
Agility,  and  Cunning,  are  the  ruling  Virtues.  Hence  it
follows,  that  the  Pictures  both  of  Gods  and  Men  will  ac-
cord to  this  Principle  in  fuch  a  Period  :  And  hence  many
of  the  Fables  of  Homer  himfelf  were  of  a  Cafl  fo  different
fsom  the  Spirit  of  improved  Legijlation,  that  Plato  re-
fufed  them  Admittance  into  his  Republic  [s\.

And  here,  while  we  acknowledge  Homer  as  the  fupreme
Painter  of  natural  Manners,  and  of  a  Genius  truly  legijlative
according  to  the  Principles  of  his  Timej  critical  Juftice  de-
mands, that  we  take  off  fome  of  thofe  falfe  Colourings  of
Praife,  which  both  Ancients  and  Moderns  have  lavifhed  on.
him,  in  Regard  to  the  Excellence  of  the  Morals  which  he
taught.  Horace,  it  is  well  known,  hath  fet  him  above
the  old  Philofophers,  as  a  Teacher  of  all  Virtue  [/]»
Plutarch,  in  his  Life  of  Homer,  hath  advanced  the
fame  Pofitions  :  But  whoever  will  examine  his  Poems  with
an  impartial  Eye,  will  find  a  very  deficient  Plan  of  Morals
prevailing  through  them.  There  is  not  the  leafi;  Veftige
or  Appearance  of  thofe  abftrad;  general  Principles  of  moral
Excellence  or  Blame,  which  take  Place  in  the  more  refined

f  j]  De  Rep.  1.  ii,  iii. — It  is  generally  affirmed  and  believed,  that  PLATa
was  for  banifhing  Poetry,  without  Exception,  from  his  perfefl:  Republic.
So  far  is  this  from  being  true,  that  he  affirms  dire<a:ly,  "  that  he  only  means
"  to  banlfli  That  which  is  pernicious  ;  but  to  retain  That  which  is  ufeful."
[De  Rep.  1.  X.]  Nay,  he  hath  written  a  whole  Book  [De  Leg.  1.  ii.]
to  prove  the  Utility  of  Mujic  in  the  Education  of  Youth  :  Through  the
Courfe  of  which,  it  is  evident^  that  in  His  Idea,  Poetry  makes  the  moft
cffential  Part  of  MuJic.

^q  ^i  quid  puUhrum,  &c.  Pcrlods


So  y^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

iPeriods  of  fecial  and  polifhed  Life:  His  Gods  and  Heroes
fight  and  plunder,  kill  and  ravifh,  boaft  and  lyej  are
generous,  fierce,  prodigal,  rapacious,  cruel,  or  unrelenting,
without  much  Controul  from  moral  Ideas  within,  or  front
a  refined  iegijlati've  Art  without.

It  is  remarkable  th^t  Plutarch,  after  labouring  in
vain  through  many  Pages,  to  prove  that  the  Principles  of
all  the  Virtues  are  to  be  found  in  Homer,  is  forced  at
length  to  conclude;  "  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  bad KQi\or\%
**  and  Principles  are  intermixed  and  defcribed  in  the  fame
"  Manner;  which  was  neceiTary,  for  the  Introduflion  of
"  the  Sublime  and  Wonderful :  But  this  only  makes  the
"  Contraft  the  ftronger  -,  fo  that  the  Reader  is  neceflarily
«*  led  to  feledi  the  Ooody  and  reje£t  the  Bad[uy'  But  as
this  great  Ancient,  along  with  others,  allow  that  neither
the  good  nor  the  bad  is  actually  recommended  by  the  Poet ;
the  Confequence  follows,  that  the  Reader  (if  fo  difpofed)
ma,y  as  eafily  eleSl  the  bad,  and  rejeSi  the  good:  That  Ho-
METi  was  a  compleat  natural  Painter  of  the  Ways  of  Men ;
but  an  imperfedt  moral  Painter  from  the  unpolijhed  Genius
and  barbarous  Legijlation  of  the  Age  in  which  he  lived.

The  Inconfiftency  of  a  late  learned  Writer  on  this  Sub-
je<ft  is  too  glaring  to  pafs  unnoticed.  He  juftly  criticifeth
Virgil,  as  being  ihackled  by  the  refined  Manners  of  his
Times,  and  the  political  Forms  of  his  Country.  With
equal  Truth  he  difplays  the  free  Vein  of  Nature,  which
runs  through  Homer's  Poems.  "  The  natural  Greek,  in
"*•  Homer's  Days,  covered  none  of  his  Sentiments  :  He
"  frankly  owned  the  Pleafures  of  Love  and  Wine :  He  told
*'.how  voracioufly  he  eat  when  he  was  hungry;  and  how

[«]  In  Vita  HoMERi.

'"horribly


»/  P  O  E  T  H  Y ^«^ M  U  S  I  C.  8^^

"^  horribly  he  was  frighted  when  he  faw  an  approaching
*'  Danger  :  He  looked  on  rio  means  as  bafe  to  efcape  it ;
*«  and  was  not  at  all  ajhamed  to  relate  the.T'rzV;^  or  Fetch
*'  that  had  brought  him  ofF." — "  Even  Agamemnon  is
*'  not  afhamed  to  own  his  Pafiion  for  a  captive  Maid,  iii
"  the  Face  of  the  whole  Army:  He  tells  them  plainly^
"  that  he  likes  her  much  better  than  his  Lady,  the  beautiful
«'  Clytemnestra,  of  the  prime  Grecian  Nobility  [w]."
AH  this  Criticifm  is  juft  and  fine.  But  who  can  but
wonder  at  what  follows  ? — "  His  Work  is  the  great
<«  Drama  of  Life  adting  in  our  View  :  T/jere  we  fee  Virtue
*' 2iX\6.  Piety  praifed;  public  Religion  promoted ;  Temperancef
"  Forglvenejs,  and  Fortitude,  rewarded i  Truth  and  Cha»-
*'  radter  followed;  and  accordingly  find  it  ftanding  at  the
*'  Head  of  human  Writings  [x]."  As  a  natural  PiSlure  of
Manners,  its  Superiority  is  acknowledged:  As  amoral Pidiure,
its  DrfeSis  are  no  lefs  confpiciioiis . — Where  is  Virtue  praifed  ?
Is  it  in  the  Condudt  of  the  natural  Greek,  who  looked
upon  no  means  as  bafe  to  efcape  Danger  ?  Nor  was  at  all
ajhamed  to  relate  the  Trick  or  Fetch  that  brought  him  off?
Is  it  in  the  Condudl  of  Agamemnon,  who  declared  his
PaJJion  for  a  Captive,  and  his  NegleSi  of  his  ^een,  in  the
Face  of  the  whole  Army  ? — Where  is  Piety  praifed  ?  Is  it
in  the  Feat  of  Diok;  Se,  who  attacked  and  wounded  one
cf  the  Gods  ? — Wher.;  ;s  public  Religion  (in  the  improved
Senfe)  promoted?  Is  it  m  his  Defcriptions of  ifc^'um  and
Hell?  In  xhtjirjl  of  which  the  Adultery  of  Mars  and
Venus  is  treated  as  a  Jcji  by  all  the  Gods :  In  thtfccond,
the  Souls  of  the  be/i  Mcn^ro.  rep'cfented  wandering y^r/yra
and  comfort  I  cfs.  "

[u]  Enquiry  into  thi  Life  arJ  irritlngi  of  HoMER,  p.  338. [.v]  IbiJ.

M  In


82  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

In  all  this,  the  Poet  is  not  blameable:  He  painted  what
he  faw,  and  believed,  and  painted  truly.  The  Fault  lay  in
the  Opinions  and  Manners  of  the  Times :  In  the  Defedts
of  an  early  and  barbarous  Legiflation,  which  had  but  half-
civilized  Mankind,

Our  great  Tranjlator  of  Homer  hath  often  departed,
from  the  Charadler  of  his  Original  in  this  Refpedl :  He
hath  frequently  thrown  in  fine  moral  Traits,  of  which
there  is  not  the  leafl  Footftep  in  his  Author.  By  this,  in^
deed,  he  hath  given  us  a  Poem  more  accommodated  to  the  •
Tafte  of  our  own  Times ;  but  hath  loft  the  native  and  un-
poliihed  Simplicity  which  diftinguifhes  the  venerable  old
Prince  oiEpic  Son^.

The  next  great  legijlative  Bard  whom  I  (ball  now  men-
tion, was  Pindar. At  the  Period  when  He  flouriflied,.
the  Fortune  and  Glory  of  Greece  were  rifing  to  their
Meridian  :  The  kgijlative  Arts  had  now  obtained  a  higher
Degree  of  PerfeBion :  And  accordingly  we  find,,  in  his
fublime  Songs,  the  fulleft  and  moft  perfeft  Union  of  falutary
Principles,  thrown  out  in  Maxims  religious,  political,  and
moral. No  Vices  or  Imperfedlions, either  of  Gods  or
Men,  are  there  applauded  or  palliated ; nor  ever  recited,
but  to  be  condemned  :  All  Adlions  are  praifed  or  cenfured,
according  to  their  Influence  on  the  public  Happinefs, The
Intent  of  thefe  Songs,  fung  by  their  Author  at  their  moft  ge-
neral and  renowned  Feftivals,  was  to  infpire  his  Coimtrymen
"with  theLove  of  Glory  and  of  VirtueT To  this  great  End,
he  animj(ted  them,  not  only  by  the  Example  and  Praife-
of  the  Vidlors  in  the  Olympic  Games ; but  afcended into
paft  Times,  and  drew  from  thence  the  ftiining  A6ts  of  Gods
and  Heroes,  who  had  diftinguilhed  themfelves  by  Valour,.
Arts,  or  Virtues,  And.


of  POETRY and MU  SIC.  83

And  here,  in  Juftice  to  this  great  Poet  we  muft  obferve,
that  Pindar's  Songs,  confidered  in  this /^^^/Z^/^w  View,
afford  an  eafy  and  internal  Solution  of  a  Difficulty  which
hath  at  all  Times  embarraffed  his  Commentators  and  Cri-
tics ;  who  have  ever  cenfured  his  feeming  Irregularities
and  fudden  Flights,  from  the  declared  Heroe  of  his  Poem,
to  Gods  and  deceafed  Chieftains.  But  on  the  Principle  here
given,  it  appears,  that  the  Heroe  of  the  Day  was  but  the
occafional  and  incidental  Subjedl  of  his  Ode.  The  main
Intent  was  the  Praife  of  his  Country's  Gods  and  Heroes,
who  had  fignalized  themfelves  by  Adiions  beneficent  and
great.  When  therefore  he  feems  to  'wander  into  the  Cele-
bration of  their  Names,  he  is  \xid.tt^  fever ely  true  to  the
leading  SubjeSi  of  his  S:?2g.

The  very  Objedtion  itfelf,  as  it  is  urged  by  fome  of
Pj-NDAr's  Critics,  leads  us  to  the  Solution  here  given.  A
Fxench  Writer  thus  cxprefleth  it.  "  He  is  not  always
"  content  with  praifing  the  Country  of  his  Heroe  ;  he  pro-
"  ceeds  to  celebrate  the  great  Men  which  it- h-xd  produced,
*'  and  then  it  is  that  he  wanders  indeed.  So  when  his  Heroe
*'  is  of  Eg  IN  A,  after  having  celebrated  the  Ifle  in  general,
"  he  defcends  to  particulars,  and  praifeth  ^Eacus,  Pe-
"  LEtJs,  Telamon,  Achilles,  and  Neoptolemus,
"  Ajax  and  Teucer,  who  all ^rww^  from  thence:  He
«' mentions  Cyprus,  Salamine,  Phthia,  Epirus,
*♦  which  were  Colonies  founded  by  thefe  Heroes  [  y].'*
There  cannot  be  a  better  Illuftration  of  the  Solution  here
given,  than  this  very  ObjeSlion  thus  prefented  at  large.

There  is  a  fabulous  Story  told,  which  llrongly  confirms
the  Principle  here  delivered ; and  proves  it  to  have  been

\.y\  ti\fl-  ^'  I'Acai.  Royale  des  Infcrip.  t.  V.  p.  96.

M  2  the


84- y/  Dissertation on  the  Union, &c.

the  Opinion  of  ancient  Greece,  that  a  Partof  thefe  feflal
Celebrations  was  due  to  the  Gods  and  Heroes ;  and  that  it-
was  even  a  Crime  to  omit  their  Praifes. "  The  Poet  Simo^
'<  NiDES, having agreed  with  an  Olympic  ViBor,  called
"  ScoPAS,  for  an  Ode  of  Celebration  j Simonides,  ac:^-
*'  cording to Cuftom, went largely  into  the Praife  of
*'  Castor  and  Pollux. On  this.  Scop  as  gave  him  the
*<  third  Part  of  the  Price, and  told  him,  that  he  muft.
"apply  to  Castor and Pollux for the Remainder.
'*  ScoPAS  being  afterwards  at  a  Banquet  with  Simonides,
"  Word  was  brought,  that  two  Men  covered  with  Sweat.
".  and  Dufl  were  at  the  Door,^  and  ddlred  to  fpcak  with
♦<-  Simonides  :  He  went  out  of. the  Chamber,  and  imme-
"  diately  the  Roof  fell  in, and  buried  Scop  as in the,
«'  Ruins  [z]."

The  three  Greek  Tragedians  are  the  laft  of  this  il-.
luftrious  Catalogue  of  legiflative  Bards  : And  their  Writ-
ings, though  very  different  in  their  Style  and  Manner,  yet,
all  unite  in  holding  forth  the  leading  Principles  of  the .
Greek  Religion,  Polity,  and  Morals.

EscHYLUs,  who  ftands  firft  in  Order  of  Time,  partakes,
much  of  the  rude  Genius  of  the  early  Periods.  ^His
Imagery  and  Sentiments  are  greats  his  Style  rugged' and
abrupt ;  and  of  a  Caft  fo.  totally  different  from  that  of
Homer,  that  it  is  aftonifhing  to  hear  the  Critics,  one
after  another,  affirming  that  Homer  was  his  Model  [a].
His  Writings  prefent  to  us  all  the  CharadVers  of  a  fubhme,
original,  and  uncultivated  Genius,  which  fcorned  any  other
Tutorefs  than  Nature. He  was  Himfelf  a  great  Warriourj^

{%]  Cicero  deOratore,  1.  ii. Quintil.'I.  xi.  c.  2.
[a]  See  this  Point  confidered .below,  Art.  20. .


of  V  OETKY and  MUSI  C.  %

and  his  warlike  Genius  threw  itfelf  out,  in  Subjedts  that
were  grand  and  terrible.  Hence  his  Tragic  Songs  abound
with  the  moft  gloomy  and  tremendous  Exploits  of  the  Gre-
cian Heroes,  flriking  the  Soul  with  Admiration,  Aflonifh-
ment-,  and  Terror.

Sophocles  appeared  next;  of  a  more  fedate  and  tem-
pered Majefty:  He  improved  on  Eschylus  both  in  Plan
and  Morals.  For  the  legijlative  Arts  were  now  advancing
at  Athens  with  great  Rapidity.  No  Wonder,  therefore,  .
that  the  Difciple  conquered  his  Mafter;  when  he  had  the
improving  Senfe  of  his  Country  to  elevate  and  inlarge  his
Genius.  But  flill  the  Gods  and  Heroes  of  Greece  were
the  conftant  Subjeft  of  his  Song.

Euripides,  confidered  in  the  legiflative  View,  was  on  a
Level  with  his  Mailers  with  Refped:  to  the  Subjedt  of  hi*  ;
Tragedies  (for  thefe  were  always  drawn  from  the  Grecian  -
Gods  or  Heroes) but  pofleffed  himfelf  of  the  Advantage
which  the  ftill  improving  State  of  his  Country  gave  him»  .
For  Philofophy  was  now  in  its  Afcendant :  The  Poet  was
the  Difciple  of  an  eminent  Sage:  Hence  the. Genius  of
Euripides  carried  the  legiflative  Power  of  Song  to  its-
laft  Perfedion ;  and  threw  itfelf  out,  in  fuch  a  Variety  of "
Maxims,  political  and  moral,  as  far  outwent  the  Art  of,  his
Predeceffors.

Such  then,  through  the  various  Ages  of  ancient  Greece,
was  the  legiflative  Genius  of  their  Songs;  which,  in  their
feveral  Periods,.contained  the  leading  Principles  of  their  i?^-
ligion,  Morals, and  Polity ;  and  thus  became  the  natural I
and  proper  Objedl  of  the  public  Attention  and  Regard.

12.  **^  Mu-  -


•^6 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

12.  "  Music,  in  its  more  extenfive  Meaning,  that  is,  in-
"  eluding  Melody  and  the  Song  [/^],  either  with  or  without
"  the  Dance'  (for  this  laft,  as  will  appear  below  [c],  was
foon  feparated  from  the  other  two,  for  an  important  End),

■  "  bore  a  principal  and  eflential  Part  in  the  Education  of
"  their  Children."  The  Authorities  which  prove  this,
are  abundant,  and  even  fuperfluous.  Some  of  the  principal
may  fuffice.  "  Among  the  Ancients"  (fays  the  wife
Plutarch)  "  Mufic  in  Theatres  was  not  known:  I'hey
♦«  employed  all  their  Art  in  the  Worfhip  of  the  Gods,
"  and  the  Education  of  their  Youth  \d]."  The  fame  Author
gives  feveral  Inftances  of  mufical  Education  in  Crete
and  Sparta  J  and  tells  us,  that  "  By  Mufic  the  young
"  Men  were  taught  to  abjlain  from  every  thing  indecent  in
*'  ^or^and  Deed;  and  to  obferve  Decorum,  Teftiperatzcc,
"  and  Regularity  [t-]."  Again :  "  Mufic  was  the  Foun-
"  dation  of  a  virtuous  Education ;  becaufe  it  was  allied
"  with  Philofophy,  Morals,  and  Heroifm :  Achilles  w^as
"  taught  by  Chiron,  and  played  and  fung  the  great  ASl'ions
*' oi  Heroes  \f^"  Elfewhere  he  informs  us,  that  "  the
"  Spartans  in  their  Songs  talked  high  of  what  'Exploits  they
"  had  performed  :  And  that  the  -^oung  Men  echoed  back
"  their  'Triumphs  in  their  Songs,  proclaiming  their  Refo-
"  lution  to  equal  the  Valour  of  their  Forefathers  [^]."

Such  was  the  Nature  of  ancient  Mujic  when  applied  to
Education  ; and  not  a  mere  Proficiency  in  the  playing  or

fmging  Art,  as  it  hath  been  generally  mifunderflood, and
ignorantly  ridiculed  by  many  Moderns. Hence  it  v/as,

[i]  See  above,  Art.  i. [<:]  See  Art.  15.  [^/J  Plut,  de  Mufxa,

W  Ibid.  [/J  Ibid.  [g-l  In  Lycurgo.

that


^/^  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^«^  M  U  5  I  C.  87

that  their  greateft  Captains  and  Statefmen  ftudied  Mufic,
as  an  eilential  Part  of  Education.  7'hus  Pericles  was
taught  by  Damon,  who  was  likewife  fuppofed  to  have  in-
ftrudted  him  in  Pohtics  [/6].  Thus  Epaminondas  was
eminent  in  Mufic ;  though  the  Roman  Hiftorian  [z],  who
informs  us  of  the  Fad:,  fpeaks  like  one  who  knew  not  the
Nature  and  Extent  of  Mufic  among  the  earlier  Greeks.

Plato  confirms  thefe  Authorities ;  and  recites  more  at
large  the  particular  Method  of  Education  ufed  in  ancient
Greece.  "  What  then  is  the  mofl  proper  Difcipline?
"  Will  it  not  be  difficult  to  find  a  better,  than  what  was
"  long  ago  eftabliflied  ?  One  Part  of  this  is  the  Gymnajitc,
"  which  relates  to  the  Body ;  the  other  is  Mufic,  which
"  relates  to  the  Mind.  This  Difcipline  ought  firft  to  be-
"  gin  with  Mufic ;  and  when  we  fpeak  of  Mufic,  we  in-
"  dude  the  Subjedt,  Words,  or  Song.  Of  this  there  are
"  two  Kinds,  the  true  znd  fabulous.  Both  ought  to  be  ap-
"  plied  ;  but  the  fabulous  firfl.  Yet  the  Fables  ought  to
"  be  regulated  left  the  young  Mind  being  tinctured  with
"  fuch  as  are  improper,  it  fhould  be  neceifary  at  a  more
"  adult  Age  to  counterwork  the  firft  ImprefTions  [k]."  He
then  proceeds  to  a  particular  Detail  of  Fables  proper  and
improper  in  the  Work  of  Education,  pointing  out  what
ought  to  be  admitted  or  rejected,  lu  another  Dialogue,  he
fpeaks  again  of  the  Remains  of  this  Method  of  Inftrudlion,
which  were  found  among  the  wifer  Sort,  even  in  his  own
Times;  although  in  general  (as  will  appear  below  [/])
Miijic  was  then  totally  corrupted.  "  The  Parents  commit
"  their  Children  to  the  Care  of  Mafters ;  and  are  more

[/)]  Plut.  in  Perlcle. [/]  Corn.  Nepos  in  Prafat.  F»V..EpAminond.
ik\  De  Repub.  1.  ii,  [/]  Art.  34,  35.

**  follicitous-


38 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

*'  follicitous  about  their  Morals,  than  their  Proficiency  in
"  Learning,  or  playing  on  the  Lyre. As  foon  as  they  have
"  attained  a  Knowledge  of  Letters,  and  are  able  to  under-
' «'  ftand  what  they  read,  the  M.ifters  give  them  the  Works
*'  of  the  beji  Pods  to  perufe  and  get  by  Heart,  efpecially
'*  fuch  as  contain  the  Praifes  of  their  Forefathers  renowned
"  for  great  A5lions,  that  the  Boys  may  be  fired  with  an
"  Emulation  to  imitate  their  Virtves. The  Mufic-Mafters
*'  are  above  all  things  careful  to  give  them  Habits  of  Wif-
*'  dom  and  Temperance,  and  to  fee  that  they  commit  no
"  unworthy  Adlion. As  foon  as  they  have  learnt  to  play
**  on  the Lyre,  the  Mafter  proceeds  to  inftrudl  them  in
■"  the  Songs  of  the  mofl;  famous  Poets :  Thefe  \he.^  Jing  to
*'  the  Lyre  j  and  the  Preceptors  endeavour  to  bring  their
"  Boys  to  a  Love  of  the  Rythms  and  Numbers ;  that  by
"  this  Difcipline  they  may  be  more  mild,  modejl,  and  orderly
"  in  their  Manners,  and  become  ufeful  both  in  Speech  and
■"  A^ion  [m]."

Suitable  to  this  Method  of  Education  Is  Plato's  Di-
reftion  in  his  Book  of  Laws.  "  Therefore  the  Legiflator
"  will  take  Care,  that  the  Youth's  Mind  may  be  fo  formed,
"  that  his  Pleafures  and  Difpleafures  may  accord  to  the
•**  Laws,  and  to  the  Tafte  of  mature  Age :  And  If  It  be
""  necefTary,  he  will  compel  the  Poet  to  defcribe  the  Aclions
♦'  oi  brave  and  good  Men  j  and  to  compofe  fuch  Numbers
**  and  Harmonies  as  maybe  fuited  to  the  Subjedts  [«]."

In  the  fame  Place  he  afilgns  a  particular  Reafon  for  this

JMethod  of  Education :  "  Becaufe  the  youthful  Mind  is  not

"  apt  to  attend  to  ferlous  Study, therefore  the  pleafmg

**  Vehicle  of  Song  is  to  be  admlnifiiered  [o]." He  then  pro-

[m]  In  Protag.  [«]  De  LegibuSj,  1.  ii.  [«]  Ibid.

2  xeed»


P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^;7^  M  U  S  I  C.  89'

ceeds  even  to  the  particular  moral  Maxims  which  ought  to
be  inftilled  by  the  Poet  and  Mufician,  on  the  Principles  of  a
wife  Legiflator.

As  thefe  Authorities  are  cleat  and  decifive,  we  may  here
properly  obviate  an  Error  of  the  excellent  Montesquieu,
arifing  from  his  Mifapprehenfion  of  the  true  Nature  and
Extent  of  ancient  Mufic.  He,  with  moft  other  Writers,
fuppofeth  it  to  have  confifted  (according  to  the  modern
Acceptation  of  the  Word)  in  the  iingle  Circumfknce  of
Melody.  In  Confequence  of  this,  when  he  comes  to  in-
quire why  the  ancient  Greeks  applied  Mufic  fo  univerfally
in  the  Education  of  their  Children,  he  fays,  "  As  they
"  were  a  warlike  People,  and  therefore  in  Danger  of  de-
"  generating  into  a  favage  Ferocity  of  Manners,  they  em-
"  ployed  Mufic,  as  the  beft  Means  of  foftening  their  Tem-
**  pers  into  a  milder  Charadler;  and  this,  becaufc  Mufic,
"  of  all  the  Pleafures  of  Senfe,  has  the  leaft  Tendency  t«
*'  corrupt  the  Soul  [/»]."  And  fo  far,  indeed,  is  true,  that
the  ancient  Creeks  did  confider  this,  as  one  of  the  falutary
Effeds  arifing  from  the  Application  of  Mufic  [^3.  But
we  now  find,  that  the  Matter  lay  much  deeper :  That
Mufic,  in  its  ancient  Senfe,  implied  not  only  Melody  but
Verfe  or  Song :  That  it  was  the  ejlablijhed  Vehicle  of  all  the
leading  Principles  of  their  Religion,  Morals,  and  Polity ;
and  therefore  was  the  natural  and  moft  important  Inftru-
ment  or  Means  in  the  Education  of  their  Children.

The  learned  Da cii;R  falls  into  the  fame  Error,  with  Re-
fpedt  to  the  wonderful  Efficacy  of  Mujic,  in  the  Education
cf  the  Arcadians,  and  the  fatal  Want  of  it  among  the  In-

]J^3  L'E/prit  des  Loix,  1.  ir.  c.  8.  [q]  Plato  de  Rep.  1.  iii.

iN  habitants


90  A  Dissertation  on.  the  Union,  &;c.

habitants  of  Cyn^the,  as  the  fadlis  recorded  by  Poly-
Bius and  Athen;eus. " If (fays the Critic) Po-
"  LYBius fpeaks thus of  Mitjic, and if  he  accufetb
•'  Ephorus  of  having  advanced  a  thing  unworthy  of  him»
"  in  faying  that  this  Art  was  invented  to  deceive  Mankind^.
•*  what  may  we  not  fay  of  'tragedy,  of  which  Miijic  is  but
"  a  fmall  Orn.iment,  and  which  as  far  furpalTeth  Mufic,  as
"  Speech  is  beyond  inarticulate  and  unmeaning  Sounds  \t'\."
In  this  PafTage,  the  learned  Writer  evidently  fuppofeth  that
the  ancient  Mujicy  which  wrought  fuch  Wonders  in  the
Education  of  the  Arcadians,  was  no  more  than  mere  Melody
or  unmeaning  Sound. But  the  Account which  both  Po-
LYBius  and  ATHENiEUS  give  of  the  mufical  Education
of  the  Arcadians,  confirms  all  that  hath  been  here  advanced  j.
and  proves,  that  it  confifled  in  the  Application  of  the  united
Powers  of  Dance,  Melody,  and  Song.

The  moft  learned  Vossius  proceeds  on  the  fame  Miflake
in  his  firft  Book  De Natura  Artium: And continues
under  the  Influence  of  this  fundamental  Error,  through  his.
whole  Differtation  on  Mufic. As  it  may  feem  unaccount-
able,  how fo  capital  a  Miftake fhould creep into the
Writings  of  thefe  great  Authors,  let  me  here  obferve,  as  an
Apology  for  them  all,  that  Ari&totle,  and  fome  fuc-
ceeding  Writers,  fpeak  of  Mufic  as  an  Art  diJlinSi  front
Poetry  [«]  .* It was  therefore natural  enough  for  thefe
Writers  to  draw  their  Ideas  of  ancient  Mufic  from  the  great
Mafter- Critic  of  Greece. How  it  came  to  pafs,  that,
Aristotle  {hould  fpeak  of  thefe  Arts  as  two,  which  the
elder  Writers  confidered  as  one, will  clearly  appear  bc~

[/] Dacier  Piet.  d'Jri/Iote.  Pre/act.  [«]  Pe'et.  p/iffim:

low;


of  V  OETTir and  UVSIC.  91

iow  [w]i where  we  (hall  fee,  that  in  the  Time  of  Aris-
>^TOTLE,  a  Separation  of  the  Melody  and  Song  had  taken
place ; that  the  firft  retained  the  Name  of  Mujic,  and  the
fecond  aflumed  that  of  Poetry.

13.  "  Music,  in  its  inlarged  Senfe,  acquired  a ^r^-^// and
-"  general  Power  over  the  Minds  and  Anions  of  the  ancient
^'  Greeks."  It  is  prefumed,  that  we  have  now  gained  an
Afcent,  from  whence  thi«  Truth  will  appear  evident  and
indifputablej  though  it  hath  long  been  regarded  by  many,
as  an  incredible  Paradox. — How,  or  whence,  fuch  an
univerfal  Paflion  for  Mufic  fhould  have  arifen  in  Greecej
or,  after  it  had  arifen,  how  it  gained  fuch  a  general  Efta-
blifliment  in  the  important  Article  of  Education ;  or,
after  it  was  thus  eftabliftied,  how  it  could  work  fuch
mighty  Eifedls  upon  the  Mind,  fuppofing  it  to  confift  only
in  mere  Melody  j — are  Queftions  which  wife  Men  have
^fked,  and  Bigots  to  Antiquity  have  weakly  anfwered  :  For
ihe  common  Reply  hath  been,  that  their  MuJic  (meaning
their  Mehdy)  was  of  a  kind  fo  much  fuperior  to  ours,  that
all  its  wonderful  EfFe(5ls  followed  from  its  more  exalted
Nature.  —  On  the  contrary,  it  appears,  that  as  to  its  par-
ticular Conftrudlion,  we  are  ignorant  of  it :  That  we  have
no  precife  or  pradlicable  Idea  of  their  Genera,  their  Modes ;


nor  the  Make,  nov  Power  of  their  Injlruments  :  iJut  that  by
collatergKArguments  we  can  prove,  that  their  Melody  was
lomething  altogether^/w/^  and  inartificial;  fuch  as  Statef-
men,  WarrjourSj_jind  Bards,  occupied  in  other  Purfuits,
could  compofe ;  and  fuch  as  high  and  low.  Children  and
'Men  bufied  in  other  concerns  of  Life,  could  learn  and
pradtife. That  lience  we  are  led  to  believe,  that  what-

[w]  Art.  35.

N  2  ever


92  ^Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &;c.

ever Effects  arofe  from  the  mere  Melody,  arofe  from  iis  ,
Rythm  or  Meafure, heightened  by  early  Ajj'octation  aixd
continued  Habit ; .  by  which  it  became  a  kind  of  natural
Language  of  the  PalTions. It  appears  farther,  that  Melody-
formed  but  a  Bart.oi  the  ancient  Mujic ;  and  that  its  moft  ,
important  and  eflentiaJ  Branch  was  that  oi  Verfe  ox.&j>/g;..
But  for  a  clear  and  full  View  of  the  Origin  and  Union  of
their  Melody  and  Song,  it  was  neceflary  to  go  back,  and  be-
gin our  Inquiries  at. the  early  Period  of  favage  Life,  in
which  all  the  Seeds  and  Principles  of  civilized  Society  apr
pear  ill  their  native  and  uncultivated  State.. This  Method
of  Inveftigation  hath  opened  to  us  an  involved  and  clouded
Subjedt. Hence  it  appears,  that  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song,
naturally  arofe  in  Unton  ; that  Meafure,  Rythm,  and  Nutn-
hcrs,  were  the  certain  Confequence  : That  in  the  earlieft
Times  of  GREECE,.the.Charafters  of  Legijlator  and  Bard
did  often  and  naturally  coalefce: That  hence  their  earlieft
Hiilories,  Laws,  and  Oracles,  were  of  courfe  written  in
Verfe; tTiat  their  religious  Rites  were  naturally,  and  withr-
out  pofitive.  Appointment,  performed,  or  accompanied  by
Melody,  Dance,  and  Song:. That  through  the  feveral  im-
proving Periods  of  Time,  their  Songs  were  more  and  more
of  a  true  legiflative  Caft  ;  that  they  included  all  the  great
Adtions  of  their  Gods  and  Heroes,  and  that  in  thefe  were
contamed  the  leading  Principles  of  their  Religion,  Morals,
and  Polity  :  That  Miific,  in  this  its  inkrged  Senfe,  bore
an  eflential  and  principal  Part  in  the  Education  of  theii-
Children  j being  the  pleafing  and  powerful  Vehicle,  by
which  all  the  important  Precepts  of  Life  were  inftilled  into
their  tender  Minds. — Thus  naturally  M/V/?^  arofe,  and  was
foiiferfully  ejlablijhed  in  ancient  Greece: And  from  this

Vic^K.


^POETRY  ^W  M  U  S  TC.  93

View  of  its  Nature  and  eftabliriiment,  its  general  Injluence
mufl  unavoidably  follow  : "  For  through  the  Force  crf^

*  early  and  continued  Habit,  together  with  tha  irrefiftible

*  Contagion  of  public  Example  maintained  by  the  gene-

*  ral  Practice  of  the  whole  Community,  who  had  received.

*  the  fame..  Impreflions  in  their  infant  State ;  and  while

*  every  thing  pleafing,  great,  and  important,  was  conveyed
♦through this Medium; fuch ftrong  AfTociations  did

*  ftrike-themfelves  into  the  Tribes  of  Greece,  as  natu-

*  rally  produced  the  moft  lafting  Effects,  and  fuch  as  no

*  future  Incidents  of  Life  could  eafily  weaken  or  efface."
On  thefe  principles  we  may  naturally  explain  fome  of

he  recorded  Effects  of  ancient  Mulic,  which  according  .to
he  common  Interpretation  of  the.  Word,,  have,  been  liable
o  the  Derifion  of  modern  Critics. .

We  read,  that  fuch  was  the  Power  of  ancient  Mufic,  that
when  Agamemnon  went  t©  Troy,  the  defigning  Egis-
THUS  could  not  debauch  Clitemnestra,  till  he  had
decoyed  away  the  Mufician  that  was  retained  in  the  Palace.
This  Account,  if  we  underiland  by  Mufic  no  more  than
Melody,  hath  much  the  Air  of  Hyperbole  and  Fable.  But
if  we  regard  the  Mufician  as  what  indeed  he  was,  the  Dil-
pcnfer  of  religions  and  moral  Principles,  and  that  he  urged
the  great  Duty  of  conjugal  Fidehty  with  the  united  Powers
of:  poetic  Eloquence  and  Songj  and  urged  them  to  one
whofe  Education  had  made  her  fufceptible  of  fuch  Im-
preflions, the  fabulous  Appearances  diflblve  -,  and  we  fee,
that  no  other  Method  could  have  been  devifed,  fo  effedlual
for  the  Prefervation  of  a  weak  Woman's  Virtue.

Again ;  we  are  told,  that  certain  young  Men  heated
with  Wine,  had  agreed  to  aflault  the  Doors  of  a  modcft

Woman  V.


94 -^  Dissertation  oh  the  Umion,  &c.-

'Woman,  and  abufe  her  as  a  ProftitHte :  but  that  an  able
Mufician  comhig  part,  he  fung  and  played  to  them  in  the
Dorian  Mode ;  on  which  they  were  flruck  with  Shame,
and  defifted  from  their  Enterprizc  \x]. This,  to  modern
.  Comprehenfion, hath  ftill  more  the  Air  of  Fable : But
Avhen  the  Fadt  is  well  explained,  the  Ridicule  vaniflieth
with  the  Myftery. For  every  different  SubjeSi  had  a  diffe-
rent Mode  annexed to  it. This  appears  at large  from
Plato. "  You  muft  adapt  the  Mode  to  the  Subjeft  and
'  **  Words,  not  thefe  to  the  Mode  or  Harmony :  On  thefe
*'  Matters  we  will  farther  deliberate  with  Damon,  ssdiat
"  Feet  or  Meafures  are  fitteft  to  exprefs  Illiberality,  Petu-
"  lance,  frantic  Folly,  and  other  Vices ;  and  what  Meafures
**  beft  exprefs  their  contrary  Virtues. Hence  it  is,  that
**  Rythm  and  Numbers  gain  their  Power  in  the  muficalEdu-
-*'  cation,  and  exercife  their  mighty  Influence  on  the  Paflions
**  of  the  Soul  [jk]." Tis  plain,  therefore,  that  when  the
Hiftorian  tells  us,  that  the  Mufician  conquered  the  young
Debauchees  by  an  Application  of  the  Dorian  Mode, he
means  to  iignify,  that  the  Melody  was  accompanied  bya
poetic  Exhortation  fuited  to  the  Numbers  ', and  this  could
be  no  other  than  a  Leflbn  of  Modejiy  zn^.  'Temperance i
which  being  conveyed  by  the  pleafing  Vehicle  of  Melody
and  Son^, addrefled  to  thofe  who  by  the  Tenoi'  of  their
Education  mufl  feel  its  Force,  and  given  by  one  whofe  Pro-
feflion  they  had  been  taught  to  reverence,  could  hardly  fail

{x]  This  Story  is  ridiculed  in  the  Memoirs  of  Martinus  Scriblerus  :
And  the  Ridicule  is  founded  on  an  entire  Mifapprehenfion,  or  MiC-
reprefentation,  of  the  true  nature  of  ancient  Music.

[y]  Dt  Repub.  ].  iii.


£/•  P  O  E  T  R  Y  fl«^  M  U  S  I  C.  95

of  its  defigned  Effedls,  unlefs  their  Intemperance  had  pre-
vented all  Attention.

There  are  other  recorded  Effeds  of  ancient  Mufic  of  a
fimilar  Nature,  which  it  is  not  neceflary  to  produce  here,
becaufe  they  may  all  be  accounted  for  on  the  fame  Prin-
ciple. With  Refpedl  to  the  traditionary  Influence  of  this
Art  onwildBeafts,  Stocks,  and  Stones,  as  it  came  down  from
the  ignorant  and  fabulous  Times,  fo  nothing  can  bejuftly
concluded  from  it,  but  the  Force  of  Mufic  over  the  Minds
of  uninftrucled  and  wondering  Barbarians.

Thus  the  boafted  Power  of  the  ancient  Greek  Mufic  feems
naturally  and_ fully  accounted  for.  And  in  Confirmation
of  this  Solution,  we  may  finally  appeal  to  the  favage  Tribes
with  whom  this  Inquiry  began.  For  by  Means  parallel
in  moft  other  Refpedls,  fave  only  in  the  Article  of  Legifla-
tion  and  Letters,  they  animate  each  other  by  the  early  and
continued  Ufe  of  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song,  to  Valour  ia
Arms,  to  Conftancy  in  Torments  and  Death  [2;].  This  is
found,  in  Fad:,  to  be  an  Education  of  fuch  mighty  In-
fluence, that  the  War-Song  and  Death-Song  infpire  whole
Tribes  with  a  Degree  of  Fury  and  Indurance,  which  hath
become  the  Aftonifhment  of  all  who  have  J'ecn  but  never
Jelt  their  Power.

S  E  C  T. VI.

Of  the  ProgreJJions  of  Mujic  in  ancient  Greece,

THE  Origin,  Nature,  and  Power,  of  the  ancient  Greek
Mufic  being  thus  explained ; let  us  now  proceed  to
a  like  Application  of  the  remaining  Articles  of  the  fourth

{z]  Lafitau,  torn.  iii.  p.  171.  torn.  iv.  p.  9.

Scdion  J


■96  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

'Sedlion  j  in  which  we  fhall  endeavour  to  unfold  the  various
Progrejjions  of  this  Art  in  Greece,  and  purfue  it  through
its  feveral  Advances  towards  PerfeSlion,  to  its  final  Cor-
ruption and  Decay.

14.  "  The  Dance  was  feparated  from  the  Song;  and
"  with  or  without  Melody  became  itfelf  a  diftindt  Exercife
"  or  Art,  under  the  Title  of  Gymnajiic,  for  the  Sake  of
"  increafing  their  Strength  and  Agility  of  Body,  as  the
«  Means  of  rendering  them  invincible  in  War."  This  was
the  natural  Effedt  of  their  warlike  Charadler,  for  the
Reafon  given  above  [^].  And  that  this  was  the  real
Generation  of  the  Gymnajiic  Art,  appears  evidently  from
Plato's  Book  of  Laws:  where,  having  fpoken  of  the
three  conftituent  Parts  of  a  compleat  Choir  (Melody,
Dance,  and  Song)  he  proceeds  to  deduce  from  thefe  the
Origin  of  the  Gymnajiic  Art.  "  Is  not  this  the  leading
"  Principle  of  the  Gymnajiic  Art,  that  every  Creature  is
♦'  born  with  a  natural  Inclination  to  leap  or  bound?  But
**  Man,  being  endowed  with  a  Senfe  of  Rythm  or  Numbers^
"  naturally  formed  his  Motions  into  Dance :  Melody  natu-
*'  rally  begets  Rythm ;  and  thefe  two  united  form  the
"  Gymnajiic. —  For  That  we  call  the  Gymnajiic,  when  the
"  Dance  is  fo  artificially  applied,  as  to  improve  the  Powers
*'  of  the  Body  [b'\."  That  this  Art  was  applied  by  the  an-
cient Greeks  to  the  End  of  public  and  warlike  Service,  is
generally  known  :  However,  if  it  needs  a  Proof,  another
Pailage  of  the  fame  Author  will  fufficiently  confirm  it.
*'  After  thefe  Inftrudtions  (in  Mufic)  the  Parents  fend  their
^«  Sons  to  the  Mafters  of  the  Gymnajiic  Schools,  that  by

[«]  Sec  Sea.  iv.  Art.  14.  {b]  De  Leg.  \.\\.

S  •  "gaining


of  P  O  ET  RY and  MIJ  S  1  C.  97

"  gaining  a  firm  Habit  of  Body,  which  may  fecond  a  well-
"  formed  Mind,  they  may  be  able  to  indure  the  Toils  of
**  Enterprije  and  War  \c].".

We  trace  the  Foundation  and  Progrefs  of  the  Gymnajiic
Art  no  lefs  clearly  in  Lucian's  Account.  **  The  Spar-
•♦  tans,  having  received  this  Art  (of  Dancing)  from  Cas-
*♦  TOR  and  Pollux,  went  dancing  to  Battle,  to  the  Sound
«♦  of  Flutes:  Their  Application  to  Mulic  did  not  leflen
<'  their  Attention  to  Arms  :  For  a  Mufician  fat  in  the
*•  midft  of  the  AlTembly,  and  played  on  the  Flute,  beating
**  Time  with  his  Foot ;  while  they  regularly  followed  the
*'  Meafure,  in  a  Variety  of  warlike  Poftures  \d]."

To  confirm  thefe  Evidences,  we  may  add  another  In-
ftance  of  a  warlike  Dance,  which  approacheth  neareft  to
the  Eftablifliment  of  the  Gymnajiic  Exercife,  of  any  record-
ed by  Antiquity.  Xenophon,  in  his  "  Expedition  of
**  Cyrus,"  defcribes  one  of  thefe  Dances  in  the  following
Manner.  *•  The  Feaji  being  ended,  the  Libations  made,
*'  and  the  Hymn  fung,  two  Thracians,  completely  armed,
*'  began  to  dance  to  the  Sound  of  the  Flute  :  After  fkir-
*•  miftiing  for  fome  time  with  their  Swords,  one  of  them
**  (as  wounded)  fell  down,  on  which  the  Paphlagonians
*'  fet  up  a  loud  Cry.  The  Conqueror  having  ftripped  his
"  Adverfary,  departed,  fmging  his  Vidlory." — Here  we
fee  a  near  Approach  to  the  Forms  of  the  Gymnajiic  Exer-
cife in  their  moft  effential  Circumflances,  yet  the  original
Form  of  the  Dance  remains.

Thus  the  Origin  of  the  Gymnajiic  Arts  is  clearly  un-
folded, as  being  no  more  than  a  Part  of  the  favage  Song-

[i\  In  Prota£,  [d]  De  Saltatione.

O  FeaJi',


98  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Feajl-y  but  feparated  from  thence  for  the  Ends  of  war-
like Service.  For  Want  of  th!s  Information,  the  learned
Vossius,  among  other  Authors,  ftiles  \k\&T>ance  a  Branch
of  the  Gymnajlic,  inftead  of  regarding  the  Gymnajiic  as  the
Offspring  of  the  Dance  [e^.

Here  we  may  farther  obferve,  that  this  View  of  th»
Gymnajiic,  confidered  as  having  been  originally  a  Branch
of  the  Miiftcal  Art,  clears  up  a  Difficulty  with  which  every
other  Account  of  it  is  encumbered.  Thus  a  late  Writer
fays,  "  The  Exercife  oi  leaping  in  the  Pentathlon  was  ac-
"  companied  by  Flutes,  playing  Pythian  Airs,  as  Pausa-
"  NIAS  informs  us.  Whence  this  Cuftom  was  derived,
"  I  cannot  fay  :  And  the  Reafon  afligned  for  it  by  that
•*  Author,  which  is  certainly  not  the  true  one,  may  induce
"  us  to  think,  that  in  this  Matter  the  Ancients  were  aS'
"  ignorant  as  we  [y  ]."  But  on  the  Principle  here  given,
the  Cuftom  accounts  for  itfelf.  In  the  firfl:  Inflitution  of
the  Gymnajiic  Arts,  it  appears  that  Melody  made  a  Part  of
them  :  This  Part  had  been  difufed  (by  Courfc  of  Time)*:
in  the  other  Exercifes,  but  had  been  retained  in  that  of
Leaping  in  the  Pentathlon.

15.  "  After  a  certain  Period  of  Civilization,  the  complex
'*  Chara(5ler  oi  Legijlator  and  Bard  did.  fej^arate,  and  were
••  feldom  united."  This  Separation,  it  hath  been  fhewir
above,  would  of  courfe  follow  from  decreafing  Enthufiafm,,
and  the  increahng  Labours  of  Government.  And  fuch
v/as  the  natural  Rife  of  the  ao.ooi.  or  Bards  of  ancient
Greece  :  Of  whofe  Proj'eJJion  and  Art  a  late  learned  Au-
thor [^]  hath,  in  many  Circumftaaces,  though  not  in  all,

[tf]  DeNot.  Art.  1.  i.  c.  3.  [/]  West's  TmvJI.  ef  Pindar's

Oais  :  tref.  [^]  Enquiry  into  thi  Life  and  JFritings  of  lltjU^K.

given


3=


of  POETRY  and  MV  SIC.  99

given  a  juft  Idea. Of  its  original  Dignity  and  Importance,
in  the  moft  ancient  Times,  he  did  not  rightly  conceive ;
-through  his  Ignorance  of  its  true  Rife,  and  original  Union
with  the  Legiflator's  Office. He  reprefents  them  as  wan-
dering Muficians  only, who  were  welcome  to  the  Houfes
of  the  Great. Such  indeed  they  were,  in  the  later  Periods;
when  the  Separation  had  been  long  formed, and  their
Office  become  rather  an  Affair  of  Amufement  than  Utility.
But  as  in  the  earliefl  Periods  the  LegifMtors  themfelves
were  often  Bards,  fo  when  the  Separation  of  CharatSer  was
firft  made,  the  known  Influence  and  Importance  of  their
Office  could  make  them  no  other  than  AJJiJiants  to  the
Magijlrate,  in  the  high  Tafk  of  governing  the  People.
Of  this  we  have  a  clear  Inftance  in  the  Commonwealth  of
Sparta  (which  maintained  all  its original  Inflitutions
the  moft  pure  and  unchanged)  where  a  dangerous  Infur-
redtion  arofe ;  nor  could  be  quelled  by  the  Magiftrate,  till
the  Bard  Terpander  came,  and  played  and  fung  at  theit"
public  Place  of  Congrefs  \_h'].

Hesiod,  who  was  himfelf  of  this  Order,  hath  given  us
a  noble  Defcription  of  their  Office  and  Dignity  :  Which,
as  it  ftrongly  confirms  the  Genealogy  here  given,  I  fliall
tranflate  at  large ;  together  with  his  Pidlure  of  the  Ma-
gijlrate; along  with  whom  the  5^r^  appears  to  co-operate
in  the  public  Welfare,  as  ihzfecond  Charafter  in  the  Cof?f-
nmnity.  "  Therefore  Kings  (Magifl:rates)  are  watchful,
«'  that  they  may  do  Juflice  to  the  injured,  at  the  Place  of
•«  public  Congrefs,  foothing  the  Paffions  of  Men  by  per-
"  fuafive  Speech  : The  People  reverence  him  as  a  God,

[/^]  SuiDAS,  on  the  Lejhian  Sovg.

O  2,  "  while


loo A  Dissertation  on  the  U.niok,  &c.

**  while  he  pafles  through  the  City. — Kings  are  from
"  Jove  :  Bards  are  from  the  Mufes  and  the  far-fhooting
*'  Apollo.  Happy  is  He  whom  the  Mufes  love ;  His
*♦  Lips  flow  with  fweet  and  foothing  Accents.  If  any
«•  hath  a  keen  and  inward  Grief,  frefh-rankling  in  his
*♦  Soul ;  the  Bard,  the  Mufes  Minifler,  no  fooner  fings  the
"  Praife  of  ancient  Heroes,  and  the  Gods  who  inhabit
"  Olympus,  than  he  forgets  his  Sorrows,  and  feels  na
"  more  his  Anguifh. — Hail,  Daughters  of  Jove!  Infpire
**  Me  with  your  perfuafive  Song  [/"]."

It  feems  probable  that  the  original  Dignity  of  the  Bard's
Charadter  was  always  maintained  longer  in  Commonwealth f
than  under  defpotic  or  kingly  Governments:  For  at  the
Court  of  Alcinous,  fo  early  as  the  Age  of  Homer's  He-
roes, it  appears,  from  the  Picture  given  of  Demodocus,.
to  have  funk  into  a  Charadter  of  Dependancel^k]^  The
Reafon  is  manifeft  :  The  Republican  Form  fubfifls  by  aa
united  Exertion  of  the  Powers  of  every  Rank  :  Under  the
defpotic  Rule,  the  Influence  of  thefe  various  Powers  is
fwallowed  up  in  the  abfolute  Will  of  one.  We  (hall  fee
the  Bard's  Character  riling  again  in  its  dignified  State,  in>
the  early  Periods  of  other  barbarous  Nations  [/].

16.  "  In  the  Courfe  of  Time,  and  Progrefs  of  Polity
"  and  Arts,  a  Separation  of  the  feveral  Kinds  of  Song  did
"  arife.  In  the  early  Periods  they  lay  confufed  ;  and  were
"  mingled  in  the  fame  Compolition,  as  Inclination,  En-
"  thufiafm,  or  other  Incidents  might  impel." — This  Fadt
is  manlfeft  enough,  from  the  Catalogue  already  given  of
the  Writings  of  the  moft  ancient  Bards  of  Greece  ;  for

[1]  Hes.  Theog.  [-{]  04/  [/J  See  below,  Sea.viii.

by


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^wd'  M  U  S  I  C.  loi

by  this  it  appears,  that  they  ranged  at  large  through  the
Fields  of  Poetry  and  Song,  without  giving  any  precife  or
legitimate  Form  to  their  Compofitions;  which  feem  moft
generally  to  have  been  a,  rapturous  Mixture  of  Hymn,
Hijiory,  Fable,  and  Mythology,  thrown  out  by  the  en*-
thuiiaitic  Bard  in  legiflative  Songs,  as  different  Motives  or
Occafions  prefented  themfelves,  and  according  to  the  Exi-
gencies or  Capacity  of  his  furrounding  Audience. — "  But
*♦  repeated  Trial  and  Experiment  produced  a  more  artiti-
"  cial  Manner  ;  and  thus  by  Degrees,  the  feveral  Kinds  of
*•  Poem  affumed  their  legitimate  Forms." — For  the  Truth
of  this,  we  refer  to  the  following  Articles.

\'j.  "Hymns  or  Odes  were  compofed,  ^vAJung  by  their
*<  Compofers  at  their  feftal  Solemnities,"  This  Species  of
Song  hath,  in  the  Way  of  Preheminence,  and  beyond  any
other,  gained  the  Title  of  lyric  Poetry.  Nor  can  we  won-
der at  this,  if  we  confider,  that  from  its  Nature  it  muft.
have  arifen  firft,  muft  have  been  firft  moulded  into  Form>
and  muft,  from  its  peculiar- Genius,  continue  united  with
Melody  longer  and  more  univerfally  than  any  other.  It
arofe  firft,  becaufe  it  was  natural  for  the  favage  Mind,  to
throw  itfelf  out  in  fudden  Exclamations  of  Grief  or  Joy,
Love,  Revenge,  or  Anguifh,  before  it  could  find  Means  or
Leifure  to  recite  at  large  the  Occafions  of  thefe  powerful
Feelings:  It  muft  be  firft  moulded  into  Form,  becaufe  its
Extent  is  the  fmalleft,  and  its  Plan  moft  fimple  :  It  muft
continue  united  with  Melody  longer  and  more  univerfally
than  any  other  Species,  becaufe  the  very  Eflence  of  its  Sub—
jed:  is  that  which  the  other  Kinds  only  catch  incidentally,,
I  mean,  the  fudden  Shocks  and  Emotions  of  the  Soul ;
which  are  found  to  be  the  powerful  Bands  of  Nature,  by
.  4  which


'102 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

•which  Melody  and  Song are  moft  clofcly  bound toge-
ther.

Plutarch  confirms  this  Reafoning  concerning  the
Priority  of  the  hymnal  Species  ;  and  fays,  that  "  Mufic  was-
*'  Jirjl  ufed  in  religious  Ceremonies,  being  employed  in  the
*•  Praifes  of  the  Gods  ',  and  that  afterwards  it  was  applied
**  to  other  Subjects  [m]."  Accordingly  we  find,  that  in
the  feveral  fucceflive  Periods,  Algous,  Stesichorus,
Tyrt^us,  and  others,  compofed  and  fung  their  Odes  at
the  public  Feftivals.  The  fublime  Pindar  was  not  more
celebrated  for  his  mighty  Strains,  than  for  hrs  powerful
Performance  of  them  at  t\\Q  Olympic  Games  :  Nay,  fo  high
Avas  his  Fame  in  this  Regard,  that  he  had  a  golden  Chair
appropriated  to  him  in  the  Temple  of  Delphi,  where  he
poured  forth  the  Torrent  of  his  Songs,  which  were  attend-
ed to,  and  revered  as  Oracles  ifTuing  from  the  Infpiration
of  the  God.

1.8.  "  The  EpicVoem  arofe ;  and  was  fung  by  its  Com-
>"  pofers  at  their  feftal  Solemnities." — When  the  firll  Fire
of  Enthufiafm  had  vented  itfelf  in  the  Rapture  of  Hymns
^nd  Odes,  it  naturally  afiumed  a  more  fedate  Manner  -,  and
found  Time  to  relate  at  large  thofe  Actions  which  in  its
firft  Agitations  it  could  only  celebrate  by  fudden  Burfts  of
.Paflion  and  Praife.  Accordingly,  \\&  find  many  of  the  elder
Poets  of  Greece  mixing  the  hymnal  and  enthufiafiic  with
the  htjlor'ic  or  narrative  Species.  The  Exploits  of  Bac-
•CHUS,  the  Rape  of  Proserpine,  the  Wars  of  the  Titans,
were  among  their  fiivourite  Themes.  After  thefe,  came
the  Authors  of  the  Herciiliad  and  Thejiad : Demodocus,

[wj  Dc  Itlufica,

prior


ofPOETRY  and  MUSIC.  103

prior  to  Homer,  fung  the  Ambufh  of  the  Trojan  Horfe :
Phemius  fung  the  Return  of  the  Greeks  under  Agamem-
non :  The  little  Iliad  comprifed  moft  of  the  fubfequent
Adventures  of  the  Trojan  War.  A  Thebaid  was  alfo  writ-
ten, the  Author  of  which  is  not  certainly  known  ;  though
Pausanias  tells  us,  it  was  by  many  afcribed  to  Ho-
mer [«].  As  Example,.  Habit,  and  improving  Arts  and
Polity,  are  the  neceflary  Means  of  Progrefs  in  every  Art,
fo  thefe  Accounts,  though  imperfectly  conveyed  to  us  (be-
caufe  the  Poems  they  allude  to  are  loft)  fufficiently  imply,
that  the  'Epic  Mufe  advanced  _^rj^a^/^  towards  Perfedlion  j .
till  at  length  fhe  appeared  in  full  Splendor,,  in  the  Perfoii
of  her  favoured  Homer.

Herodotus,  indeed,  has  thrown  out  a  Hint,  as  if  the
Iliad  was  prior  to  the  oldeft  of  the  Poems  afcribed  to  thefe.
moft  ancient  Bards  [0].  Velleius  Paterculus  af-
firms the  fame  thing  in  ftronger  Terms  [/>] :  And  Mr.
Pope  goes  into  this  Opinion  [y].  It  muft  be  confefled,
the  Pliftory  of  thefe  remote  Ages  is  fo  dark  and  fabulous,
that  nothing  can  witli  Certainty  be  colledled  from  them.
But  the  very  Strudlure  of  Homer's  Poem  carries  in  itielf
fuch  an  internal  Evidence,  as  turns  the  Scale  againft  the
Hiftorian's  Conjedure.  If  we  confider  the  Nature  of  the
human  Mind,  we  ftiall  be  led  to  believe,  that  theJS/>/c-
Poem  muft  have  received  a  ^r^zd^z^^/ Improvement  throngh
that  long  though  unknown  Trad  of  Time,  during  whichs
its  unpolifhed  Rudiments  exifted  before  the  Age  of  Ho-
mer. The  mere  Powers  of  Fancy  and  Execution  nnyy.,

[«]  L.  ix.  [«]  /n  Euterpe.  [/>}  L.  i.  c.  5.

[f]  Diir.  prefixed  to  his  Tranf.  of  tlie  Iliad,

indeed.


I04 -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

indeed,  arrive  at  their  highelT:  Perfeiftion  by  the  Efforts  of  a
Jingle  Mind :  For  what  belongs  to  Nature  only,  Nature
only  can  complete;  and  thus  our  immortal  Shakes  pear
arofe  :  But  that  an  Rpic  Plan,  fo  complex,  fo  vajl,  and  yet
fo  perfe£l  as  that  of  the  Iliad;  whicli  requires  an  uncom-
mon Penetration  even  to  comprehend  in  all  its  Variety  and
Art;  which  the  thoughtful,  the  literate,  the  poliflied
Virgil  attempted  to  rival,  and  only  proved  his  utter  In-
ability by  his  Attempt ;  which  fucceeding  Poets  have  made
their  Model,  yet  none  have  ever  equalled  or  approached,
fave  only  the  all-comprehending  Mind  of  the  fublime
Milton  ; — -that  fuch  a  Plan  as  This,  which  required  the
highefl  Efforts  of  an  improved  Underflanding,  opened
and  ilrengthened  by  a  Succeffion  of  preceding  Examples,
(hould  at  once  emerge  in  all  the  Extent  of  Art,  in  th^
midfl  of  rude  and  unformed  Fables,  fung  at  Feflivals  as
vague  Enthufiafm  might  infpire ; —  this  is  an  Opinion  re-
pugnant to  all  our  Notices  concerning  the  Progrefs  of  the
Powers  of  the  human  Mind.  We  may  as  rationally  fup-
pofe  that  St.  Paul's  was  the  firfl  built  Temple,  its  Organ
the  firfl  mufical  Inftrument,  the  Laocoon  and  his  Sons  the
firfl  Attempt  in  Statuary,  the  Transfiguration  the  firft
Eflay  in  Picture,  as  that  ihc  Jiupendous  Iliad-,  the  Wonder
of  all  fucceeding  Ages,  was  the  Jirjl  Attempt  in  Epic
Poetry.

What  the  Nature  of  the  Thing  fo  ftrongly  declares,
Aristotle  feems  to  confirm  in  his  Poetics  :  For  he  fays,
that  "  although  we  know  not  the  Names  either  of  the
^*  Poems  or  their  Authors  ;  yet  there  is  Reafon  to  believe
«  that  many  had  been  written  before  Homer;  and  that
"  his  Margites  brought  this  Species  to  its  Perfedion,  in

"  the


c/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^7z^  M  U  S  I  C.  105

**  the  fame  Manner  as  the  Iliad sluA  Odyjfey  had  complcated
**  the  Form  of  the  Epic  Poem  [r]."

We  may  reafonably  conclude,  therefore,  that  from  the
Days  of  Linus,  down  to  thofe  of  Homer,  there  had  been
a  Succeffion  of  Writers,  among  whom  the  Form  of  the
JLpic  Poem  had  been  gradually  advancing  towards  Per-
feftion,  till  it  received  its  full  Completion  in  the  Birth  of
the  Iliad.

That  thefe  Epic  Songs,  in  their  feveral  Periods,  were
fung  by  their  Compofers  to  the  furrounding  People,  we
have  the  general  Teftimony  of  ancient  Writers.  This
Fa6l  is  fo  clear,  with  Refped:  to  the  elder  Poets  of
Greece,  that  it  is  much  queftioned  whether  ever  their
Songs  were  committed  to  Writing:  Whether  they  were
any  more  than  the  extempore  Efforts  of  a  fudden  En-
thufiafm,  kindled  by  the  fympathetic  Power  of  religious
Rites,  or  State-Fejiivals.  That  Homer  followed  the
honourable  Profefhon  of  a  Bard,  and  fung  his  own  Poems
at  the  public  Feafts,  hath  been  proved  at  large  by  a  learned
Writer  [j].  Hesiod  was  of  the  fame  Order;  and  feems
to  have  maintained  it  with  truer  Dignity  [/] :  Terp  ander
held  the  fame  Employment,  and  fung  both  his  own  Poems
and  thofe  of  Homer  [a].

19.  "  From  an  Union  of  thefe  two  Kinds,  a  certain  rude
"  Outline  of  Tragedy  arofe," — For  when  a  Bard  fung  the
great  or  terrible  Atchievements  of  a  Heroe  or  God,  the
furrounding  Audience,  fired  to  Enthufiafm,  and  already
prepared  by  a  correfpondent  Education,  would  naturally

[r]  P«^/.  c.  iv. [/]  £(/iof  Homer,  Se£t.  vii,  viii. [/]  Theog.
Exord.  vet,  i3»  &c. [«]  Plutarch  dt  Mufica,

P  break


io6 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

break  forth  into  the  Raptures  of  a  choral  Song. — This
Progreflion  of  Poetry  is  fo  natural,  that  it  is  Matter  of
Aftonifhment  to  hear  the  learned  at  all  Times  afcribing
the  Rife  of  Tragedy  to  Caufes  merely  accidental;  and
confining  it  to  the  fingle  Adventure  of  Thespis  and  his
Route,  fmging  the  Praifes  of  Bacchus  at  a  cafualVva-
tage.  Thus  Dacier,  among  others,  affirms  roundly,
that  "  The  firft  dramatic  Perfon  which  Th:e.spis  invenUd,
**  was  only  defigned  to  give  Refpite  to  the  Choir;  and
*'  what  he  recited  was  no  more  than  an  Appendage  to
"  Tragedy  [w]."  In  the  fame  Manner  the  fenfible  and
learned  Brumoy  delivers  at  large  the  common  Syftem,
with  Refpedt  to  the  Birth  and  Progrefs  of  the  tragic
Species  \x].  All  this  is  in  Contradidlion  to  the  Workings
of  Nature;  and,  without  Proof,  fuppofes  That  to  be  a
cafual  In'uention  in  a  particular  Inftance,  which  was  indeed
the  natural  Progrefs  of  Paffion  expreffed  by  Melody,
Dance,  and  Song.  We  have  feen,  that  an  Union  of  Nar-
ration and  concurrent  Shouts  of  Praife  takes  Place  even  in
the  rude  Feftivals  of  the  favage  Tribes  :  'Tis  altogether
repugnant,  therefore,  to  the  Nature  of  Things  to  fup-
pofe,  when  Letters  had  given  Accents  to  the  Rapture  of
the  furrounding  Audience,  and  moulded  the  Ode  into
Form,  that  this  natural  Union  (hould  not  be  upheld.
Though,  therefore,  the  firft  Rife  and  Progrefs  of  the  tragic
Species  in  Greece  were  hid  in  Darknefs,  through  a
Want  of  recording  Hiftory,  yet,  from  a  Similarity  of  Caufes
and  Effedts  which  we  find  among  the  barbarous  Nations
of  America,  we  might  fairly  conclude,  that  it  had  not  a

[w]  Sur  hs  Poet  D'JriJt.  p.  47.  [*]  TleaL  da  Grtts^

torn,  vi.  p.  310,  &c,

cafual.


o/  P  O  E  T  RY and  MUSIC.  107

cafual,  but  a  certain  Rife  from  Nature  j  according  to  the
Principles  here  given.

But  ancient  Hiftory  is  not  filent  on  this  Subjeft.  It
gives  us  a  Variety  of  Fadls,  which  overturn  the  common
Syftem,  and  tend  to  confirm  what  is  here  advanced.
Plato  fays  exprefly,  that  "  Tragedy  was  very  ancient  in
*'  the  City  of  Athens,  and  praftifed  there,  long  before
*«  the  Age  of  Thespis  \_yy  We  are  aflured,  on  the  Au-
thority of  other  Writers,  that  "  a  Report  prevailed  in
*«  Greece,  that  certain  tragic  Poets  had  in  ancient  Times
«*  contended  at  the  Tomb  of  Theseus  [«]."  Suidas
even  mentions  one  Epigenes  by  Name,  a  tragic  Poet,
prior  to  the  Age  of  Thespis.

But  a  ftill  ftronger  Evidence  prefents  itfelf :  For  even
the  very  Subftance  and  Form  of  one  of  thefe  rude  Out-
lines of  favage  Tragedy  remains  in  a  refpedable  Author  of
Antiquity.  *'  In  ancient  Times  (faith  Strabo)  there
''  was  a  Conteft  of  Muficians  who  fung  Paans  in  Cele-
•"  bration  of  the  God  Apollo:  This  was  eftablifhed  by
,"«« the  Inhabitants  of  Delphi,  after  the  Chrijfaan  War."
The  Defcription  of  this  Conteft  is  not  incurious.  "  The
*«  Poem  was  compofed  by  Timosthenes  :  The  Subjedt
■»*  was  the  Vidtory  of  Apollo  over  the  Serpent :  The  Jirji
'*  Part  was  the  Prelude  to  the  Battle ;  the  fecond  was  the
<'  Beginning  of  the  Engagement ;  the  third,  the  Battle  it-
«'  felf ;  ^c fourth  was  the  Pcean  or  'Triumph  on  the  Vic-
*'  tory ;  xhtffth  was  an  Imitation  of  the  Agonies  and  Hif-%,
"  fng  of  the  dying  Serpent  [a]."

ly]  Minos.  [2]  Sec  Vossius  Psi't,  1.  ii.  0.  12.

[a]  Strabo,  I.  ix.

P  2  Here


io8  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Here  we  have  the  very  Form  and  Subftance  of  a  firil
rude  Eflay  tov^ards  Tragedy,  compounded  of  Narration
and  correfpondent  Songs  of  Triumph.

Nay,  as  a  farther  Confirmation,  not  only  of  this  parti-
cular Article,  but  of  the  general  Principles  on  w^hich  this
Diflertation  is  built,  w^e  learn  from  other  Authors,-  that
Apollo  himfelf  was  the  Founder  of  thefc  ConteJls^F)^:
that  the  God  was  the  firjl  vAiofung  his  own  Exploit  j  that
He  firft  defcribed  his  Engagement  with  the  Serpent ;  and
that  a  Part  of  the  Conteft  confifted  in  an  Imitation  of
Apollo,  who  danced  after  his  Vi£iory\c\.  In  this  whole
Scene,  of  the  God  of  Mufic  Jinging,  dancing,  and  praijing
his  cwn  Atchievements,  we  have  the  genuine  Picture  of  a.
favage  Chieftain  [^].

It  appears,  therefore,,  that  Tragedy  had  a  much  earlier
and  deeper  Foundation  in  ancient  Greece,  than  the  acci-
dental Adventure  of  Thespis  and  his  Rout :  That  it  arofe
from  Nature,  and  an  unforced  Union  and  Progrejion  of
Melody,  Dance,  and  Song.

At  the  fame  Time  it  is  manifeft,  that  Thespis  added
fomething  to  the  rude  and  favage  Form  of  Tragedy,  as  it
exifted  in  his  Age.  'Tis  probable  that  He  was  the  frji
Reclaimer  or  Interlocutor  to  his  own  Choir ;  that  he  firfl
eftablifhed  the  Profejjion  of  a  Player  in  Attica,  and  firft
tranfported  his  Company  from  one  Village  to  another;.,
whereas,  before  his  Time,  the  Exhibitions  of  the  rude
tragic  Scene  had  been  fixed,  and  merely  incidental[e'].  This
Inftitution  of  an itinerant  Company  muft  neceflarily  in-

[b]  See  J.  ScALiGER  P,ct.  1.  i.  c.  23.  [c]  Jul.  Poli.  Onomaji.

1.  iv.  c.  10. {(r\  See  above,  Scd.  ii.  [^]  HoR.  £/>.  rtiPis. —
Djog.  Laert.  Solon.

4  creafe


of  ?  OETKY  and"  M\J  SIC.  109

crcafe  the  general  Attention  of  Attica  to  thefe  rude  tra-
gic Scenes :  And  hence  the  Opinion  feems  firft  to  have
arifen,  that  Thespis  was  the  Inventor  of  this  Species  [/"].

20.  "  In  Procefs  of  Time,  this  barbarous  Scene  im-
"  proved  into  a  more  perfedl  Form  :  Inftead  of  relating,
'*  they  reprefented  by  an  affumed  CharaBer,  and  by  ASfion
'*  and  Song,  thofe  great  or  terrible  Atchievements  which
"  their  Heroes  had  performed."  How  foon  the  favage
Tribes  fall  into  this  Kind  of  dramatic  Reprefentation,  we
have  already  feen  [g]  :  How  natural  fuch  a  Progreflion  of
Art  muft  be  to  the  human  Mind,  will  appear  by  refledting,
that  dramatic  jiSiion  is  but  another  Mode  of  Narration ;
and  that  even  the  Narration  of  the  favage  Tribes  is  found
to  have  fuch  a  Mixture  oi  ABion  in  it,  as  ftrongly  tends  to
produce  the  dramatic  Imitation  \h\  Time,  therefore,
and  repeated  Efforts  muft  naturally  advance  the  narrative

[/]  The  moft  learned  Bentley  fell  into  the  common  Syftem,  with
Regard  to  the  Rife  of  Tragedy  :  Attempting  to  prove,  that  Thespis  was
its  Inventor.  Thus,  for  Want  of  the  true  Data^  and  from  an  Unac-
quaintance  with  Man  in  his  favage  State^  this  great  Critic  hath  thrown
out  a  Chain  of  Errors  :  White,  if  be  had  been  led  up  to  the  true  Foun-
tains of  Information,  he  would  probably  have  caught  the  various  Pro-
greffions  of  Poetry  at  a  Glance.

Mr,  Boyle,  in  his  Examination  of  Bentley's  Diflertation^  feems  once
or  twice  to  get  out  of  the  common  Track,  of  Criticifm  on this  Subjedt :
Yet,  for  Want  of  knowing  the  true  Origin  of  Tragedy,.as  founded  in  hu-
man Nature,  he  throws  little  or  no  Light  upon  the  Queftion. He  infifts,
that  Tragedy  is  more  ancient  than  Thespis,  on  the  Authority  of  Plato  .
and  Laep.tius  : But  he  falls  again  into  the  vulgar  Track,  in  affirming,.
that  till  the  Time  of  Thespis,  the  Epifode  had  no  Exiftence,  but  only  the  ■
Choir. In  Confutation  of  which  Opinion  we  have  now  (hewn,  that  the
full  Form  of  favage  Tragedy  had  appeared  many  Ages  before,  in  the  firft'
1j\^\l\iv.on  oi  t\\e.  Pythian  Garrut,.

[?]  Above,  Sea.  ii.  [^]  Ibid.

Epjfidg^-


,110 ^  Dissertation  o«;/>&^. Union,  &c.

Epifode  into  perfonal  Reprefentaiion.  And  thus  we  are
arrived  at  the  Form. which  Tragedy  wore,  when  the  in-
ventive Genius  ofEscHYLUs  advanced  the  Art  one  Step
higher ;  and  by  adding  a  fecond  Per/on  to  the  Drama,
brought  in  the  Ufe  oi. Dialogue.

Here,  for:  the  Sake  of  Truth,  we  muft  again  depart  from

:the  general. Body  of  Critics;  moftofwhom, from  Aris-

.TOTLE  down  to  our  own  Times,  unite  in  fuppofing  rhat

.EscHYLUS  was  only  a  cafual Imitator  of  Homer, and

(drew  the  Idea  of  all  his  Tragedies  from  the  Iliad. A

:  noble  Critic  of  our  own  Country  hath  affirmed  tliis  in  the

feweft  and  ftrongeft  Terms ;  and  fays,  that  **  There  was

'*  no  more  left  for  Tragedy  to  do  after  him  (Homer)  than

"  to  credt  a  Stage,  and. draw  his  Dialogues  and  Charadlers

"  into  Scenes  [t\."

It  may  be  deemed  prefumptuous,  perhaps,  to  queftion  a
Point  wherein  the  great  Mafter-Critic  of  Greece  hath
himfelf  decided.  But  let  us  remember,  that  the  Days  are
now  paft,  when  it  was  held  a  Point  of  Honour,  to /wear
to  the  Opinions  of  a  Majler.  Aristotle  is  o/ten  ad-
mirable, generally  judicious,  yet  fometimes  perhaps  mif-
taken,  even  in  his  Judgment  of  Men  and  Things  relative
to  his  own  Country.  He  was  more  efpecially  capable  of
teing  mifled  by  the  common  Opinion  in  this  Point ;  in
which  neither  He  nor  any  of  his  Countrymen  could  be
fufficiently  informed,  for  Want  of  a  competent  Knowledge
of  the  Genius  and  Charadler  of  favage  Manners.

That  EscHYLUs  was  not  a  mere  Imitator  of  Homer,  that
he  was  a  great  and  original  Poet,  who  exalted  his  Art  one
Degree  beyond  his  Predeceflbrs  in  his  own  Country,  feem*

[/J  CharaSferiJiia^  vol.  i.  p.  197.

a  Point


of  ?  OETRY and  MUSIC.  in

a-'  Point which collateral Arguments  flrongly  confirm.
We are informed,  in  general Terms, that  there  were
no  lefs  than  fifteen  tragic  Poets  who  writ  before  him  :
And  the Probability is much  flronger, that he fhould  •
draw  his Improvement  from  the  fcenic  Reprefentations  ■
already  eftabliftied,  in  which  he  found  one  dramatic  Perfon  ;
and anaceompanying  Choir,  which,  in  all  Probabitity.  .
ftood  in  the  Place  of  a  fecond  Perfon,  and  often  fuftained
~a  Kind  of  Dialogue  with  the  principal  Interlocutor  \k\ ;
than  that  he  fhould  have  Recourfe  to  Homer's  Poems,  in
which  no  dramatic  Reprefentation  was  to  be  found.

To  this  Argument  may  be  added  another,  drawn  from
the  Style  and  Manner  of  Esch ylus,  fo  different  from  that
of  Homer.  For  Homer  is.  equal,  large,^  flowing,  and
harmonious:  Eschylus  is  uneven,  concife>  abrupt,  and
rugged :  The  one  leads  you  through  the  grand  but  gentle
Declivities  of  Hill  and  Dale  ;  the  other  carries  you  over  a
continued  Chain  of .  Rocks^  and  Precipices.  Now  if
Homer  had  been  the  Model  of  Eschylus,  fome  Similarity
of  Manner  would  probably  have  enfued.

A  third  and  ftill  flronger  Proof  arifes  from  the  efTential
Difi'erence  of  their  Subje(3:s,  both  in  Extent  and  Nature  :
In  Extent,  becaufe  the  one  is  of  long,  the  other  oijhort
Duration  :  In  Nature,  becaufe  Homer's  Poems  are  chiefly
employed  in  the  Exhibition  of  CharaSler  and  Manners ;
thofe  of  Eschylus  in  the  Reprefentation  of  Terror  and
Dijlrefs.  Had  he  been  that  mere  Imitator  of  Homer
which  the  Critics  have  adjudged  him,  and  had  nothing  to

[il  This  Opinion  receives  a  ftrong  Confirmation  from  the  following
Circumftance,  that  in  the  Greek  Tragedies  which  have  come  down  to  us,
whenever  there  is  z.fmgle  Interlocutor  on  the  Stage,  the  Chv'ir  frequently
maintains  a  Dialogue  with  him.  .

2  do^


«T* A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

'do  but  to  ere£t  a  Stage,  and  to  draw  Homer's  Dialogues
into  Scenes,  he  would  have  been  content  to  have  taken  his
Subjects  from  the  Iliad,  and,  according  to  Horace's  fober
Rule,  have  never  ventured  beyond  the  Siege  of  T'roy  [/J.
He  would  have  brought  upon  the  Stage  the  Anger  of
Achilles,  the  Battle  of  Paris  and  Menelaus,  the  Part-
ing of  Hector  and  Andromache,  the  Feats  of  Dio-
medej  and  would  have  contrafted  the  Jirength  of  AjAx
with  the  Cunning  of  Ulysses.  Nothing  of  all  this  ap-
pears :  On  the  contrary,  his  SubjeBs  and  Manner  are  equal-
ly his  own  i  and  hoth  of  a  Genius  oppofite  to  thofe  of
Homer.

What  Plutarch  fays  of  Homer,  though  brought  for
the  contrary  Purpofe,  tends  to  confirm  all  that  is  here  ad-
vanced. "Even  Tragedy  took  its  Rife  from  Homer:
•'  For  his  Poems  comprehend  every  thing  that  is  fublime
"  and  great  [m]."  This,  you  will  fay,  is  a  very  infufficient
Reafon,  becaufe  the  Critic  forgets  the  pathetic  and  the
terrible,  which  were  the  eflential  Conftituents  of  the  Greek
Tragedy.  But  mark  the  Sequel ;  which  is  ftill  more  ex-
traordinary. <*  Neither  do  they  (Homer's  Poems)  con-
"  tain  Defcriptions  of  thofe  atrocious  ASlions  which  have
**  been  feigned  by  the  later  Tragedians,  fuch  as  Incejl,  and
*'  the  Murder  oi  Parents  or  Children.  Nay,  whenever  he
*"*  happens  to  touch  on  any  thing  of  this  Kind,  he  always
*^  foftens  and  throws  it  into  Shades  [«]."  Thus  while
Plutarch  is  labouring  to  prove,  that  the  Greek  Tragedy
was  drawn  from  Homer,  he  proves,  that  Homer's  Poems
were  deJHtute  of  that  which  was  of  the  EJfence  of  the
Creek  Tragedy.

£VJ  Rectius  Iliacos,  &c. {«]  In  Vita  Homeri.  [«]  Ibid.

Scaliger


o/  P  O  E  T  R  Y fl«^  M  U  S  I  C.  113

'ScALiGER  is  a  venerable  exception  to  the  general
Body  of  the  Critics  on  this  Subjed ;  and  feems  to  have
-viewed  the  Queftion  in  its  true  Light.  *•  In  the  Iliad
-"  (faith  he)  there  is  nothing  like  the  ProgreJJion  of  a
•**  Tragedy,  if  you  take  the  whole  together :  For,  from
■**  Beginning  to  End,  there  is  a  perpetual  Succeffion  of
-^y  Deaths:  He  begins  with  a  Peftilence,  which  deftroys
*'  more  Men  than  the  whole  War  [<?]."  The  Critic  then
goes  on  to  prove,  by  a  large  Enumeration  of  Circumftances,
the  Iliad  hath  very  few  of  the  eiTential  Charaderiftics  of
Iragedy.

We  may  fairly  conclude,  then,  that  the  Improvement
■which  Tragedy  received  from  Eschylus  was  not  cafual,  but
*he  Refult  of  a  natural  ProgreJJion :  That  he  drew  not
from  Homer's  Poems,  as  a  mere  Imitator;  but  exalted  his
Art  one  Step  higher,  from  the  Force  of  true  Genius  in  the
tragic  Species.

What  followed  is  well  known :  Sophocles  added  a
third  Perfon  to  the  Drama  :  And  by  this  Improvement  is
faid  by  the  Critics  to  have  compkated  the  Form  of  Tragedy.
The  Truth  of  their  Decilion  I  much  doubt :  but  this
Difquifition  lies  beyond  the  Limits  of  our  prefent  En-
quiry.

2  u  "  As  the  Choir  was  eftablifhed  by  Nature  and
**  Cuftom,  and  animated  their  Solemnities  by  Dance  as
"'  well  as  Song ;  the  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song,  did  of
"  Courfe  regulate  each  other ;  and  the  Ode  or  Song  natu-
*'  rally  fell  into  Stanzas  of  fome  particular  Kind."  This
arofe  by  an  eafy  Progreflion  from  the  favage  State ;  where

{«]  Poit.  1.  i.  c.  5.

Q  "  they


114  -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  Set.

"  they  who  dance,  go  round  in  a  circular  Movement,  and
'*  after  a  fliort  Interval  being  a  fecond  [/>]•"  The  Greeks
not  only  fell  into  this  Manner,  but  improved  upon  it :
They  went  round,  firft  to  the  one  Hand,  then  to  the  other,
and  then  paufed.  The  Learned  have  found  out  myflical
Reafons  for  thefe  circular  Movements;  referring  them  to
the  Motion  of  the  Planets  [q'\.  Much  Labour  cannot  be
neceflary  for  the  Confutation  of  thefe  Refinements,  as  the
Pradice  arofe  fo  evidently  from  the  Didlates  of  Nature  :
It  was  a  natural  and  fenfible  Improvement  j  for  the  plain
Reafon  oi preventing  Giddinefs,  which  arifeth  from  running
round  in  the  fame  Circle.

Let  us  attend,  therefore,  to  its  Confequences.  As  each
Dance  or  Return  was  marked  by  its  peculiar  Meafure,  this
of  Courfe  fixed  both  the  Melody  and  poetic  Numbers  of
the  accompanying  Song  :  And  as  they  likewife  fung  during
the  Interval  of  Reji,  we  fee,  that  from  this  eafy  Improve-
ment on  the  favage  Song-Feaft,  the  Strophe,  Antijlrophe,
and  Epode,  naturally  arofe^

22. "  Another  Confequence of  the eflabliflied Qhoir-
'f  was  a  flridt  and  unvaried  Adherence  to  the  Unities  of
«*  PLice  and  "Time." This  Effedl  is  fo  manifeft  as  to  need,
little  lUuftration. A  numerous Choir,  maintaining  their
Station  through the  whole  Performance,  gave  fo  forcible
a  Convidlion  to  the  Senfes,  of  the  Samenefs  of  Place,  and.
the  Shortnefs  of  T'ime,  that  any  Deviation  from-  this  ap-
pareat  Unity  muft  have  fhocked  the  Imagination  with  an
Improbability  too  grofs  to  be  indured. Notwithftanding
all  tlije  Panegyrics  of  the  Critics,  tlierefore,  upon  the  Greek
TruLcdians  an  Account  of  thefe  Unities-, it  is  evident,.

[/>]  See  ScSt..  ii.  [yj  Athsk^tus  Df/.  1.  i..

4  they-


0/  P  O  E  T  R  Y fi/;^  M  U  S  I  C.  115

they  arofe  in  the  rudeft  Periods ;  and  were  conthiued
through  the  more  polifhed  Ages,  on  the  fame  Principle
of  untaught  Nature  and  eftabHfhed  Cuftom.

23. "  Not  only  the  Part  of  the  tragic  Choir, but the
"  Epifode, or  interlocutory Part, was  alfo  Sung." The
raoft  fenfible  of  the  Critics have  ever  regarded this  as
a Circumftance equally unnatural and unaccountable.
Thus  Dacier fpeaks. "It  muft  be  owned, that  we
«'  cannot  well  comprehend,  how  Mufic  (Melody)  could
••  ever  be  confidered  as  in  any  Refpedl  making  a  Part  of
"  Tragedy  :  For  if  there  be  any  thing  in  the  World  that
'<  is  at  Variance  with  tragic  ASlion,  it  is  Song\i-'\." The
learned  Critic  is  fo  fhocked  with  this  fuppofed  Union,  in
Appearance  fo  unnatural,  that  upon  the  whole  he  queftions
its  Exiftence;  and  is  of  Opinion,  that  when  Aristotle
fpeaks  of  Mufic,  as  being  annexed  to  Tragedy,  he  fpeaks
of  the  Choir  only  [j.]. This,  however,  is  contrary  to  the
united  Voice  of  Antiquity,  which  univerfally  admits  the
Fadl,  though  its  Origin  was  never  accounted  for. But
how  naturally  this  union  took  Place  in  ancient  Tragedy,
we  now  clearly  difcover,  by  inveftigating  the  Rife  and  Pro-
grefs  of  this  Poem  from  the  favage  State. For  it  appears,
that  the  Epic  and  Ode  were  both  fung  from  the  earlieft
Periods ;  and  therefore,  when  they  became  united,  and  by
that  Union  formed  the tragic Species,  they  of  Courfe
maintained  the  fame  Appendage  of  Melody,  which  Nature
and  Cuftom  had  already  given  them.

The  Abbe  du  Bos  endeavours  to  prove,  indeed,  that  the
Song  which  was  employed  in  the  Epifode  of  ancient  Tra-

[r]  Sur  ArisT0T€,  p.  85,  &c.  \j\ Ibid.

0^2  gcdy


ii6 A  Dissertation  on  /j6^  Union,  &c..

gedy  was  no  more  than  a  Kind  of  regulated  ox.  meafure£
Declamation  \f\. But  his Inquiries  are  partial; for  he
goes  no  higher  than  to  the  Pradice  of  the  Romans :  And.
it  is  probable,  from feveral  Circumflances, that  in  the
late  Period  when  the  Romans  borrowed  their  Muiic  from*
the  Greeks,  the  Tragic  Eong  had  been  brought  down  from-
a  meafured  Melody  to  a  kind of  regulated  Declamation..
Thus, TuLLY mentions  the Cantus Subobfcurus ; and
again  faith,  ♦*  Delicatiores  funt  faUae  Voculae  quam  certae.
"  et  fevers." But  though  thefe,  with  feveral  other  Argu-
ments alledged  by  the  Abbe,  feem  to  imply  that  the  tragic
Song  was  little  more  than  a  meafured  Recitation  ;  yet  this-
will  by  no  means  prove,  that  a  more  full  and  diredt  Song
had  not  been  ufed  in  Tragedy  thro'  the  more  early  Periods.
In  the  Courfe  of  this  Diffcrtation,  the  Pra<flice  oi  Jinging
Tragedy  hath been  traced  from  its  firfl  Rife  in  lavage
Manners ;  which  at  once  deftroys  the  Improbability  of  the
Cuflom,  and  proves  that  it  was  even  founded  in  Nature  j
a  Circumftance,  of  which  the  Abbe  had  not  the  leaft  Suf-
picion. This  Foundation  being  laid,  we  cannot  but  liflen
attentively  to  what  the  early  Writers  of  Greece tell  us
on  this  Subjed: :  Now  thefe  unite  in  informing  us,  that
the  Epifode  of  Tragedy  was  Sung;  and  even  name  the
Modes  of  Mufic  which  were  appropriated  to  the  Epifode,
in  Contradiftinction  to the Choir  [u]. That the  Song
ihould  approach  nearer,  by  Degrees,  to  mere  Declamation,
will  appear  probable,  when  we  confider  the  gradual  Sepa-
rations which  fucccffively  took  Place  in  the  mufical  Art,
during  the  fuccelTive Periods of  Greece and  Rome.

[/]  Refec.  Crit.  Part  iii.  c.  4,  &c.  [u'[  Aristot.  Prob.  19.

To


of  P  OETKY and  MUSIC,  \ij

To  mention  only  one  Inftance  here,  fimilar  to  what  we
now  treat  of:  Aristotle  informs  us,  that  in  His  Time
the  Rhapfodi/ls,  whofe  Profefllon  it  was  tojing  the  Poems
of  Homer  and  Hesiod,  were  beginning  to  make  In-
roads into  the  ancient  Pradlice;  and  now  recited  thofc
Poems,  which  m  former  Times  had  been  alwaysy««^['a:;].

The  Aobe  falls  into  an  Error  with  Refpedl  to  the  Dance,
parallel  to  that  which  he  adopts  with  Regard  to  the  Melody
of  the  Ancients.  As  he  infifts  that  their  tragic  Melody
was  only  a  meafured  Recitation,  fo  he  affirms,  that  their
tragic  Dance  was  no  more  than  ASlion  \x\.  It  is  true,
that  in  the  later  Periods  o£  Rome,  when  the  mufical  Sepa-
rations had  taken  Place,  this  was  the  general  Meaning  of
thc'W  or  A  Saltatio :  And  hence,,  as  in  his  Opinion  of  the
tragic  Song,  his  Miftake  arofc  For  it  is  evident  from  the
concurrent  Teftimony  of  the  elder  Greek  Writers,  that  the
tragic  Dance  was  performed  in  the  very  Manner  here  de-
fcribed.  We  now  fee,  that  this  Dance  (no  lefs  than  the
tragic  Song  J  arofe  from  untaught  Nature;  and  that  it  was
the  genuine  Parent  of  the  Strophe,  Antijlrophe,  zn&Epode..

24.  "^  As  the  Greek  Nation  was  of  zferce  and  warlike
"  Charafter,  their  tragic  Reprefentations  rowled  chiefly
"  on  Subjedls  of  Dijlrefs  and  Terror." — On  this  Topic,.!
doubt  whether  Aristotle  hath  not  miftaken  zn  EffeSi
for  a  Caufe.  For  he  fays,  that  **  Tragedy,  by  means  of
*■'-  Pity  and  Terror,  purgeth  in  us  Thofe  and  other  fuch  like
"  PaJJio7ts  [jx]."  Marcus  Aurelius  [«],  Milton  [«],
Dacier  \b'\,  and  Brumoy  [c],  all  underlland  him,  as

[w]  PoH.  c.  26,  [*•]  Refiec,  Part.  iii.  c.  13. [_y]  Poet.  c.  6.

[z]  L.  xi.  Art.  6.  I  a] Preface  to  Samson  Agonistes.

Ihl  Pat.  d'AriJi.  [<:]  Thtat.  dcs  Grecs,  .torn.  i.  p.  85.

meaning


;ii8 ^Dissertation cfi  the  Union,  &c.

meaning  that  Tragedy  was  formed  with  this  View. It  is
not  the  Writer's  Defign  to  remark  on  this  great  Critic,  far-
ther than  what  relates  to  his  main  Subjedl. Therefore  it
will  fuffice  to  fay,  that  if  Aristotle  meant  to  aflign  thi?
moral  End,  as  the  Caufe  why  Tragedy  aflumed  this  Form
in  ancient  Greece,  and  adopted  Subjedls  oi  Dijirefs  and
Terror,  He  fcems  to  l:ave  taken  That  for  a  Caufe,  which
was  a  natural  Effe£l  of  the  ruling  Manners  of  the  Greek
Republics. The Reafons which fuppcrt the general
Truth,  already  given  in  the  correfpondent  Article,  will  hold
their  Force  when  applied  here.  For  thus  the  Greeks  animat-
ed each  other  to  ViSlory  and  Revenge,  by  a  Reprefentation
of  what  their  Friends  \\-xd  dme^ndfuffered. Thefe  Sub-
jedls  would  likewife  be  moft  accommodated  to  the  natural
Talle  of  the  poetic  Chiefs  of  fuch  a  People; whofe'^/-
^hievements  produced  and  abounded  with  Events  of  Dif-
trefs  and  Terror. Such  then  was  the  natural  Origin  and
Adoption of  thefe  Subjedls  in  the  Greek  Tragedy : But
after  they  were  eftablifhed  on  this  Foundation,  'tis  proba-
ble that  the  Statefmen  encouraged  and  applied  them  to
the Ends of  Policy. For as the  leading  View  of  a
fierce  and warlike People muft  be  to  dejlroy  Pity  and
Fear;  fo  This  would  moft  effedtually  be  done,  by  making
themfelves  familiar  with diftrefsful  and  terrible  Repre-
fentations. Under  thefe Reftridlions, the Opinion of
Aristotle may  have  a  Foundation  in  Nature  :  Farther
than  this  ;  and  as  applied  to  any  People  whofe  End  is  not
War  and  Conqueji,  it  carries  the  Appearance  of  a  refined
Idea,  which  hath  no  Foundation  in  Nature. The  grand
/cenic  Reprefentations  of  the  Peruvians  and  Cbinefe  (as

will


of  P  O  E  T  RY an(/  M  U  S  I  C.  119

will  appear  below  [^J)  whofe  leading  Objed:  was  Peace,
are  known  to  be  of  a  quite  contrary  Nature,  formed  on
their  gentler  Manners;  and  fuch  as  would  have  been  alto-
gether incompatible  with  the  warlike  Character,  and  in-
lipid  to  the  Tafte  of  the  Tribes  of  ancient  Greece.

25. "  Their  Tragedy  being  defigned  as  a  vifible  Repre-
"  fcntation  of  their  ancient  Gods  and  Heroes,  they  in-'
**  vented  a  Method  of  ftrengthening  the  Voice,  and  ag-
"  grandizing  the  Vifage  and  Perfon,  as  the  Means  of  com-
"  pleating  the  Refemblance." It  is  generally  known,  that
the  old  Grecian  Gods  were  fuppofed  to  be  of  a  Stature  ex-
ceeding that  of  ordinary  Men  :  And  the  true  Reafon  of  that
Opinion  was,  becaufe  in  the  early  Ages  they  (like  every
other  barbarous  People  [£>])  feledled  the  tallejl  zxiiijlrongeji
Men  for  their  Chiefs :  Which  Chiefs  in  Courfe  of  Time-
became  their  Gods. Hence  the  Bujkin  and  Mafque  hzd
their  natural  Birth  : For  the  firft  htghtened  the  Stature,  as
the  fecond  inlarged  the  Vifage,  zxidfrengihened  the  Voice  of
the  dramatic  Ad:or. And  although  the  common  Accounts
mention  nothing  of  the  Inlargement  of  the  Body  ;  yet  we-
learn  from  Lucian, that  the  Breaji,  Back,  and  all  the-
Limbs,  were amplified in Proportion  to  the Vifage  and
Stature  \f] :  Manifcflly.  as  the  Means  of  compleating  the  -
Refemblance  of  their  Gods  and  Heroes.

By  thus  tracing the  Bufin  "S.nA  Mafque  to  their  true

Origin, we  (hall now be  able  to  give  a  Reafon for  a.

Fact,,  which  hath  hitherto  been regarded as  merely  the

Effed:  of  Whim  and Caprice. Thespis  and  his Cojn--

pany  bedaubed  their  Faces  with  the  Lees  oiWine. Whence

arofe this Prailice, feemingly  fo wild?  Thespis and;

\_d\  Seft.  viii.  ,  [?J  See  LAFiTAL',.ftiid  other  Travellers..

\J\  De  Saltatione, .

his:;


j^o A  Dissi:rtation  on  the  Union,  &c.

his  Company  were  the  Votaries  of  Bacchus,  and  exhihited
his  Exploits,  and  fung  his  Praifes  to  their  Countrymen  ;
Their  ufc  of  the  Lees  of  Wine,  therefore,  was  intended  as
the  Means  of  compleating  the  Rejemblance  of  thc'iv  drunken
God  and  h;s  Crew.

26.  "  As  their  tragic  Poets  were  Singers,  £0  they  were
•*'  ASlorst  and  generally  performed  fome  capital  Part,  in
•*•  their  own  Pieces  for  the  Stage." This  Fadt  hath  gene-
rally been  held  extraordinary  and  unaccountable  : And
hath  been  refolved,  it  feems,  by  fome  Talkers  on  this  Sub-
jedl,  into  the  Want  of  Actors  in  the  early Periods. W«
now  clearly  difcover  a  contrary  Caufe  :  The  Pradtice  took
Place  when  the  highejl  Characters  were  proud  to  fignalize
themfelves  as  ABors : When  Legiflators and  Bards  af-
fumed  the  Lyriji's  and  ASior's  Charafter,  as  the  Means  of
civilizing  their furrounding  Tribe : Therefore, till Ibme
extraordinary  Change  in  Manners  and  Principles  fhould
«nfue,  the  original  Union  eftablifhed  by  Nature  and  Cuftom
was  of  courfe  maintained  in  Greece. Sophocles  was
the  firft  on  Record  who  quitted  this  honourable  Employ ;
And  He,  only  becaufe  his  Voice  was  unequal  to  the  Vaft-
nefs  of  the  Athenian  Stage. That  he  quitted  it  on  this
Principle  alone,  appears  from  his  Condudt  on  other  Oc-
cafions  :  For  he  not  only  Sung  his  oivn  Verfes,  but  likewife
led  the  Dance  at  a  public  Triumph  [^].

27.  "  Musical  Contejls  were  admitted  as  public  Ex-
"  ercifes  in  the  Grecian  States."  For  the  Truth  of  This,
we  have  the  concurrent  Evidence  of  .many  ancient  Wri-
ters. That  Union  of  Gymna/iic  and  mujical  Exercifes
which  took  Place  in  the  early  Periods  of  the  Greek  Repub-

lz\  Athen.  Deipn.  1.  L
£  lies.


o/  P  O  E  T  R  Y and MUSIC.  121

K

lies,  hath  by  fome  Writers  been  regarded  as  unnatural:
by  all,  as  accidental.  Thus  a  learned  Author  fays,  "  To
**  thefe  Gymnajlic  Exercifes  were  added  others  of  a  quite
**  different  Nature^h]."  But  by  following  this  Eftablifli-
ment  up  to  its  firfl  Principles,  we  have  now  found,  that  in
Fadt  the  Gymnajlic  Exercifes  were  originally  a  Part  of  the
mujical  [/],  being  no  more  than  the  improved  Dance,  which
was  a  Branch  of  ancient  Mujic.  In  Procefs  of  Time,  as
hath  been  proved,  the  Dance  or  Gymnajlic  Art  was  gene-
rally feparated  from  the  Melody  and  Song:  But  it  is  re-
markable, that  in  all  their  public  Games  or  Contefts,  from
the  earlieft  to  the  lateft  Periods,  thefe  feveral  Branches  of
Mufic,  either  feparate  or  in  Union,  compofed  the  efTential
Parts  of  their  public  Exhibitions.

The  learned  Strabo  hath  left  us  the  mofl  particular
Account  of  the  Rife  and  Progrefs  of  the  Pythian  Games  ;
which  entirely  coincides  with  the  Principles  here  given  [k^.
*'  In  ancient  Times,  there  was  a  Contefl  of  Muficians,
**  who  fung  Pseans  in  Celebration  of  the  God  Apollo.
**  This,  was  eftabli(hed  at  Delphi,  after  the  Cri£eean
"  War." — So  far,  we  fee,  the  mufical  Contefl  maintained
its  original  Savage  Form,  without  any  Separation  of  the
Dance.  "  Afterwards,  the  AmphiSlyons,  under  Eury-
**  LOCH  us,  inftituted  the  equejirian  2ind  gymnajlic  Conttil ;
**  appointing  a  Crown  as  the  Conqueror's  Reward:  And
"thefe  Games  were  called  the  PytMan[l\."  Here,  xvc
fee,  in  a  later  Period,  the  Eflabliflimertt  allumed  its
political Form; a  Separation enfned; the Dance was

heightened  into  the  Gymnajlic  Art,  for  the  ReHji'^ns  afliewed
above.  it.w. 1. 1 u a "i -i''.

[A]  Potter  Arch.  Grac.  \i\  See  above.  Art.  19. [^J  Ibid.

\t\  Strabo,  ib.

R  We


122 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

We  have  already  feen  the  Form  of  Uiis  raufical  Contefi,
as defcribed  by  Strabo  \vi\. We  have obferved. that
other  ancient  Authors, with  great  Shew  of  Probabihty,
deduce  its  Origin  from  Apollo  himfelfi«]. Scaliger,
fpeaking  of  the  Rife  of  thefe  Pythian  Games,  makes  no
Doubt  of  their  having been inflituted  bv Apollo  [o].
But  not  knowing  the  true  Origin  of  the  Gymnafiic  Art,  as
having  originally  made  a  Part  of  the  mujical,  and  fuppofing
(according  to the common Syftem).  that thefe Games
were  eflablifhed  as  an  imitative  Memorial  of  the  particular
ASiion  performed,  he  adds  with  great  Candour,  "  I  won-
"  der, confidering that  he killed the Python  with an
"  Arrow,  that  he  did  not  inftitute  a  Contention  o^  Archers,
^'rather  than  Mtijicians  [p]." This  Doubt,  fo  candidly
expreffed,  throws  new  Light  upon  the  Queftion  j  and  is  a
collateral  Circumftance  of  Proof,  that  thefe  Games  had
their  Origin  in  the  favage  Song-Feaji,  which  in  aftertimps
branched  out  into  the  Gymnajlic  Arts.

So  much  concerning  the  Rife  and  Progrefs  of  the  Py-
/>6i<?n  Games ;  which  fufficiently  clears  our  Subjedt.  As
to  the  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  the  Olympic  Games,  it  is
much  hid  in  the  Darknefs  of  diftant  Ages.  They  are
generally  afcribed  to  the  Idcean  Hercules,  who  is  faid  to
have  given  them  the  Name  of  Olympic.  But  if  we  attend
to  Arguments  of  Probability,  arifing  from  the  Analogy
of  Names,  we  fhall  rather  be  led  to  attribute  their  In-^
ftitutlon  to  the  Olympian  Jupiter  j  efpecially,  as  Tra-
dition fupports  this  Conjedture  at  lead  as  ftrongly  as  the
other. For Pausanias  informs  us,  that  **  there  are

[ot]  Art.  J9i  [n]  Ibid.  [#]  Peet,  1,  i.  c.  23,

if]  IWt*

'♦who.


«/"  POETRY ^«^  MUSIC.  123

"  who  fay,  that  Jupiter  contended  for  Empire  witht
**  Saturn,  in  this  very  Place :  Others  affirm,  that  having
*•  vanquifhed  the  Titans,  He  (Jupiter)  inrtituted  thefe
**  Games,  in  which  others  too  are  faid  to  have  been  Con-
**  querors  ;  that  Apollo  vanquifhed  Mercury  in  the
"Race,  and  overcame  Mars  at  boxing  \^q'\."  All  this
agrees  fo  entirely  with  the  Charadler  and  Contentions  of
favage  Chieftains,  as  to  create  a  flrong  Probability  of  the
Truth  of  the  Tradition.  This  we  know,  however,  that
Mufical  Contefls  made  an  efTential  Part  of  thefe  magnifi-
cent Exhibitions  J  and  that  Pindar  fung  his  Odes,  and
was  often  crowned  as  ViSior  in  thefe  public  Contefls.

The  IJlhmian  and  Nemean  Games,  having  been  inflituted
in  later  Periods,  when  a  Separation  of  the  Dance  had  been
already  made,  and  confequently  the  Gymnajlic  Arts  already
eflabliflied,  we  cannot  properly  draw  any  Conclufions  from
Thefe,  relative  to  the  prefent  Queftion.

The  tragic  Contejis,  which  followed  on  the  Improve-
ment of  that  Species  of  Poetry,  are  too  well  known  to
need  any  particular  Delineation.  Let  it  fuffice,  that  we
have  traced  them  up  to  their  firfl  rude  Form  and  Origin,
in  the  mufical  Contefl  at  Delphi,  as  defcribed  by  Stra-
Bo[r].  They  were  re-eflablifhed  in  their  more  improved
State  by  Cimon,  when  that  General  brought  the  Remains
of  Theseus  to  Athens.  The  three  great  tragic  Bards,
Eschylus,  Sophocles,  and  Euripides,  all  contended
and  were  crowned  by  turns.

This  general  Eflablifhment  of  mufical  Contefls,  which
hath  been  fo  often  held  trifling  and  unaccountable,  appears

[f]  Pausanias,  1.  v.  [r]  See  aboife.  Art.  19.

R  2  now


124 -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

now  to  have  been  founded  in  true  Policy  and  Wifdom.
"  For  as  the  leading  Articles  of  their  Religion,  Morals,
"  and  Polity,  made  a  Part  of  their  public  Songs  ;  fo,  pub-
♦*  lie  Contefts  of  this  Kind  were  juftly  regarded  as  the
"  fureft  Means  of  keeping  up  an  Emulation  of  a  moft  ufe-
"  ful  Nature  -,  and  of  ftrengthening  the  State,  by  inforcing
"  the  fundamental  Principles  of  Society,  in 'the  moft  agree-
*'  able,  moft  ftriking,  and  moft  efFedlual  Manner."

28.  "  The  Profeffion  of  Bard  or  Mujician  was  held  as
^*  very  hofiourable,  and  of  high  Efteem."  We  have  feen
the  Foundation  of  This,  in  the  fifteenth  Article  of  the
prefent  Sedlion.  For  he  was  vefted  with  a  Kind  of  public
Charadler ;  and  if  not  an  original  Legiflator,  was  at  leaft  a
fubordina'te  and  ufeful  Servant  of  the  State :  And  as  the
Utility  of  his  Profefuon  was  fuch  as  arofe  from  Genms,
perfooal  Refpeft  and  Honour  was  the  natural  Confequence
in  a  well  ordered  Republic.  The  Fails  which  fupport
this  Truth,  with  regard  to  ancient  Greece,  are  commonly
known,  from  the  Crotims,  Triumphs,  and  other  Marks  of
public  and  appointed  Regard,  beftowed  on  the  ViBors  in
the  mufical  Contefts.

29.  "  Odes  and  Hymns  made  a  Part  of  their  domeftic  En-
**  tertainment;  and  the  Chiefs  were  proud  to  fignalizethem-
*'  felves,  by  their  Skill  in  Melody  and  Song." — This  is  gene-
rally known  ;  and  needs  no  particular  Proof.  It  is  introduc-
ed here,  that  it  may  be  accounted  for ;  Becaufe  it  hath  been
hdd  a  Pradtice  unworthy  the  Charadter  of  Legijlators  and
Heroes,  to  be  ambitious  oijinging  and  playing  on  the  Lyre.
But -if  we  examine  the  Nature  of  the  ancient  Songs  of
Greece,  we  fliall  find  that  the  Performance  of  them  was
worthy  of  the  higheft  Charadters.  It  was  ufual  for  all
5  who


of  TOE  TRY and MV  SIC.  125

who  were  at  their  Entertainments,  firft  to  ling  together
the  Praifes  of  the  Gods  [s] :  Then  they  fung  fucceflively,
one  by  one,  holding  a  Branch  of  Myrtle  in  their  Hand,
which  was  fent  round  the  Table  [/].  In  later  Times,
when  the  Lyre  came  more  into  Ufe,  this  Inftrument  was
fent  round  inflead  of  the  Myrtle ;  and  in  this  Period  it  was,
that  their  Songs  aifumed  the  Name  of  Sco/ia  [a].

The  Songs  were  chiefly  of  the  three  great  ClafTes,
religious,  political,  and  moral.  Of  the  firft  Clafs,  Athe-
NiEUS  hath  preferved  no  lefs  than  five:  One  to  Pallas,
one  to  Ceres,  one  to  Apollo,  one  to  Pan,  and  one  to  all
the  tutelary  Gods  of  Athens  [to].

Of  the  fecond  Clafs,  the  political,  in  which  their  Heroes
were  celebrated,  though  not  advanced  to  the  Rank  oiGods,
the  fame  Author  hath  given  us  feveral ;  in  which,  AjAjX,
Telamon,  Harmodius,  the  Heroes  who  fell  at  Leipsy-
DRioN,  Admetus,  the  Oly?npic  Vidlors,  and  others,  were
celebrated  at  their  private  Entertainments  [x].

Of  the  third  or  ?noral  Clafs  Athen^us  hath  likewife
tranfmitted  to  us  a  Colledlion.  Of  this  Kind  we  find  one
upon  the  Vanity  and  Mifchiefs  oi  Riches,  one  upon  Pru-
dence, one  upon  the  comparative  Excellence  of  the  Goods
of  Life;  one  upon  Vriendjhip,  one  upon  the  Choice  of
Friends,  one  upon  falfe  Friends;  and  a  fine  one  of  Aris-
totle on  t\\&  Force  of  Virtue,  which  may  be  faid  in  fome

Meafure  to  comprehend all the three Kinds, religiousy,
political,  and  Moral.

[j]  Plut.  Symp.  I.  i.q.i. Athen.  Dcip.  1.  xv.  [/]  Plut.  ib.  .

[«]  Plut.  ib. Athen.  ib. [w]  Athen.  ib. [*]  Athen.  ib.  .
[jij  Athen.  ib.

Such


126- A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Such  being  the  Nature  of  the  old  Grecian  Songs,  and  the
whole  Nation  having  been  prepared  to  perform  and  liften  to
them  with  Reverence  by  a  correfpondent  Education  ;  no
Wonder  that  the  higheft  Charaders  in  the  Commonwealth
bore  a  Part  in  their  Performance  at  private  Entertainments :
"  For  their  Songs  being  enriched  with  the  great  and  im-
*'  portant  Subjedis  relative  to  their  public  State,  and  being
**  the  ejiablijhcd  Vehicle  of  Religion,  Morals,  and  Polity ;
*'  nothing  could  be  more  fuitable  to  a  high  Station  in  the
*'  Commonwealth,  than  a  Proficiency  in  this  fuM/ne  and
"  legijlathe  Art."

30.  "  When  Mufic  had  attained  to  this  State  of  relative
*'  PerfeSlion,  it  was  efteemed  z.  necejfary  AccompliJJjment :
*'  And  an  Ignorance  in  this  Art  was  regarded  as  a  capital
*'  Defedl."  Of  this  we  have  an  Inftance,  even  in  The-
MiSTOCLES  himfelf,  who  was  upbraided  with  his  Igno-
rance in  Mufic  [z].  The  whole  Country  of  Cynathe
laboured  under  a  parallel  Reproach  [a] :  And  all  the
enormous  Crimes  committed  there,  were  attributed  by  the
neighbouring  States  to  the  NegleB  of  Mujic^  —  What
Wonder  ?  For  according  to  the  Delineation  here  given  of
the  ancient  Greek  Mufic,  their  Ignorance  in  this  noble  Art
implied  a  general  Deficiency  in  the  three  great  Articles  of  a
ibcial  Education,  Religion,  Morals,  and  Polity.

31.  "  The  Genius  of  their  Mufic  varied  along  with
*'  their  Manners."  Of  this  Truth  we  have  had  abundant
Proofs,  in  the  Courfe  of  this  Difi'ertation  j  where  we  have
feen Mufic (in  its  ancient  and  inlarged  Senfe)  emerge

[  from  the  Rudenefs  of  barbarous  Life,  and  improve  throOgh

[zj  Cicero  fufc.  1.  i.  [a]  Athenjews,  Polybius.

the


. «/  P  O  E  T  R  Y rt;?^ M  U  S  I  C.  127

the  fucceffive  Periods  of  improving  Manners.  We  fhall
foon  fee  a  parallel  Decline  of  this  noble  Art,  ariiing  from
an  equivalent  Caufe:  For  Manners  being  the  leading  and
"  moft  elfential  Quality  of  Man,  All  his  other  Taftes  and
"  Acquirements  naturally  correfpond  with  Thefe ;  and
"  accommodate  themfelves  to  his  Manners,  as  to  their
«'  original  Caufe."

32.  "  As  every  Change  of  Manners influenced  their
Mufic,  fo  by  a  reciprocal  Aftion,  every confiderable

'*  Change  of  Mufic  influenced  their  Manners."  The  Fafis
which  prove  this,  will  be  given  in  the  thirty  fourth  Ar-
ticle. In  the  mean  Time,  the  Reafon  is  evident :  For  not
only  the  Paflion  forj^ve/ty  and  Change  was  immediately
"5angerous"lothe  Stability  of  fmall  Republics  -,  but  flill
fcrther,  as  Mufic  was  the  cftablifhed  Vehicle  of  all  the
great  Principles  of  Education,  a  Change  in  Mujic  inevitably
brought  on  a  Change  in  Thefe..  _

33.  "  There  was  a  provident  Community,  of  Principles
»*  uncommonly  fevere,  which  fixed  the  Subjedls  and  Move-
"  ments  of  Song  and  Dance,  by  Law."  This  provident
Community  was  that  of  Sparta..  The  Pradlice  was
not  peculiar  to  this  wife  though  barbarous  Commonwealth..
It  was  borrowed  from  Crete;  and  came  originally  from
Egypt  j  where  the  fame  provident  Infl:itution  had  taken
Place  in  earlier  Ages.  —  In  that  great  Fountain  of  ancient
Polity,  not  only  the  Art  of  Mufic  in  its  inlarged  Senfe,  but
even  that  of  Painting,  was  fixed  and  made  unalterable  by
Law  [b].  Plato,  who  informs  us  of  This,  gives  a  par-
ticular Detail  of  the  mufical  Eftablifliment,  which  fets  the
Principle  in  a  clear  Light,  and  corroborates  what  is  here

[i]  Plato  tie  Legibus,  1.  ii.

advanctdi.


128 • A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

tidvanced.  "  All  their  Songs  and  Dances  are  confecrated
*'  to  the  Gods  :  It  is  ordained,  what  Sacrifices  fhall  be
*'  offered  to  each  Deity,  and  what  Songs  and  Choirs  fhall
"  be  appointed  to  each  Sacrifice  :  But  if  any  Perfon  makes
«*  ufe  of  Hymns  or  Choirs  in  the  Worfhip  of  the  Gods,
"  other  than  what  is  appointed  by  Lana^  the  Priefts  and
"  Magiflrates  expel  him  the  Community  \c\.  "  Hence
(faith  Plato  in  another  Place)  "  their  Mufic  is  found  to
*'  have  continued  uncorrupted,  and  the  fame,  for  thoufands
"  of  Years  [d]."  A  Stroke  of  Polity,  fatal  indeed  to  Art,
but  excellent  with  Refpeft  to  the  Stability  and  Duration^
of  a  State.  This  uncommon  Effort  o^gyptian  Legillation
the  Spartan  Lawgiver  adopted  from  Crete  ;  and  by  this
fevere  Eflablifliment  is  faid  "  three  Times  to  have  faved
«'  the  State."  Innovations  were  attempted  by  tliree  diffe-
rent Muficians,  Terpander,  TiMOTHEUs,and  Phryn-
Nis  [^]  :  And  as  the  very  Sentence  of  the  Spartan  Senate
againfl  one  of  thefe  Incroachers  on  the  fevere  Simplicity  of
the  Commonwealth  is  yet  prefervcd;  it  may  not  be  dif-
agreeable  to  the  Reader,  to  prefent  him  with  this  curious
Remnant  of  Antiquity.  "  Whereas  Timotheus  the
■"  Milefian,  coming  into  our  City,  and  defpifing  the  ancient
•'  Mutic ;  rejedting  alio  that  Melody  which  arifeth  from
*•  fevcn  Strings  J  and  fetting  off  his  Mufic  by  a  Multiplicity
"  of  Strings,  and  a  new  Species  of  Melody,  corrupts  the
■•*  Ears  of  our  Youth ;  and  inflead  of  That  which  is  legiti-
•"  mate  and  pure,  corrupting  the  Enharmonic  by  new,
•'*  various,  and  Chromatic  Sounds  ;  and  being  called  to  the
"  Elei'Jinian  Myllcries,  did  divulge  the  Secrets  of  that  Infli-

[i]  I^e  Leg.  1.  vii. [il]  Ibid,  1.  ii.  [^]  krmn.  Deip.  1.  xiv.

"  tutionj


>


>


0f  POUTRY and  HIJ  SIC.  129

**  tiition ;— It  feemed  good  to  the  SenaU  and  Rhetors,  that
<*  TiMOTHEus  (hould  be  called  to  Account  for  thefe  Pro-
«  ceedingsj  that  he  (hould  be  compelled  to  cut  off  the
*•  four  fuperfluous  Strings  from  his  Lyre,  leaving  the  kven
**  ancient  Tones  j  and  that  he  be  banifhed  to  a  Diftancc
-•*  from  the  City ;  that  hence  forward  none  may  dare  to
*«  introduce  any  new  and  dangerous  Cuftom  into  Sp  art  A  j
**  left  the  Honour  of  our  mufical  Contefts  ftiould  be  de-
-  filed  [/]."

In  this  Edid:,  we  fee  the  jealous  Spirit  of  a  Republic,
which  could  only  fubfift  by  a  rigorous  Simplicity  of  Man~
ners,  and  an  unalterable  Obedience  to  its  Laws.  Thera
hath  been  much  ill-founded  Ridicule  thrown  on  the
Spartans  for  this  Decifion  :  For  if  we  confider  the  danger-
ous EfFedls  of  mere  Innovation  in  fmall  Republics,  and  th«
clofe  Connexion  between  the  Melody  and  the  SubjeSi  in
ancient  Mujic,  together  with  the  early  and  continued  Ap-
plication of  Thefe  to  the  Education  of  their  Youth,  we  fliall
find,  that  in  this  Inftance  the  Spartans  onlj^adted  a  cautious
and  confiftent  Part.  Their  Principle  was,  to  admit  no
Change  in  Manners,  and  therefore  no  Change  in  Mujic^
The  defigned  Innovation  of  Timotheus,  therefore,  would
have  deftroyed  the  firft  leading  Principle,  the  very  Genius
of  their  Republic  j  and,  confequently,  muft  have  been  fatal
to  the  Republic  itfelf.

34.  "  In  the  Commonwealths  which  were  of  more  li-
*'  bertine  and  relaxed  Principles,  and  particularly  in  that
**. of  Athens,  the  Corruptit>n  of  Manners  brought  on  the
**  Corruption  of  Mufic;  and  this Corruption  of  Mufic

[/]  Arati  PHiENOMENA,  Ed.  Oxon.  at  the  End  of  which  this  Edift
is  preferved.


130 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  Sec.

"  ftill  farther  corrupted  Manners  -,  the  Muficians,  Bards,
'*  or  Poets,  being  the  immediate  Inftruments  of  the  Cor-
•«  ruption."  This  mutual  Influence  of  Manners  and  Mu-
fic  on  each  other  hath  been  already  explained  in  two  pre-
ceding Articles  [_g-].  And  the  Truth  of  thefe  Reafonings
is  confirmed  by  Fads,  which  Plato  gives  us  at  large,
in  the  following  moft  remarkable  PafTage.

"  The  People  (of  Athens)  did  not  in  former  Times
**  controul  the  Laws,  but  willingly  obeyed  them.  I  mean
"  thofe  Laws  which  were  made  concerning  Mufic.  For
"  Mufic  was  then  precifely  diflinguifhed  into  its  feveral
*'  Kinds  :  One  was  appropriated  to  the  Supplication  and
**  Praifes  of  the  Gods :  Thefe  were  called  Hymns.  An-
"  other  Species  was  the  lamenting  or  pathetic :  A  third
"  was  the  Pcean  or  Song  of  Triumph  :  A  fourth  was  the
"  Dithyrambic  j  and  a  fifth  confifted  in  finging  ancient
"  Laws  or  Provtrbs  [b'\.  In  Thefe  and  other  Subjedts
**  eftabliflied  by  Law,  it  was  not  allowed  to  ufe  one  Kind
**  of  Melody  inftead  of  another :  Each  Kind  had  its  par-
**  ticular  Appropriation.  The  Power  of  deciding  on
*«  Thefe,  and  of  condemningiiTCafe  of  Difobedience.  was
**  not  committed  to  the  HifTes  and  foolifh  Clamours  of
**  the  Multitude,  as  is  now  the  Pradtice:  Neither  was
*'  the  Liberty  of  intemperate  Praife  allowed  to  a  noiiV
**  Croud:  This  Decifion  was  left  to  Men diilinguifhed  by
«  their  Senfe  and  Knowledge ;.  and  a  general  Silence  was
«*  maintained,  till  they  had  heard  the  Conclufion  of  the
«  Work.  The  young  Men,  their  Governors,  and  all  th&
««  People,  were  obedient  to  the  Motions  of  a  Wand.
«  While  this  good  Order  was  maintained,  the  Multitudei

C^]  Art.  31,  3«..  \h]  See  Art.  6.

**  willingly


£/•  P  OETRY  fl«</  MUSIC.  ijt

**  willingly  obeyed,  nor  dared  to  decide  any  thing-  iiv  a
"  tumultuous  Manner.  But  in  Courfe  of  Time,  the  Poets
"  themfelves  were  acceflary  to  a  fatal  Change  in  Mufic :
'•  They  wanted  not  Genius  ;  but  had  no  Regard  to  what
"  was  juft  and  legitimate;  running  into  Extravagance,,
"  and  too  much  indulging  the  Vein  of  Pleafure.  Hence
"  they  confounded  all  the  feveral  Kinds  together;  affirm-
**  ing  that  mere  Tajie  and  Pka/ure,  whether  it  were  that
"  of  a  gooci  or  a  wicked  Man,  was  the  only  Criterion  of
'«  Mujic.  In  Confequence  of  this,  they  compofed  their
«*  Poems  on  the  fame  Principle ;  and  thus  rendered  the
"  Multitude  fo  bold  and  daring  againft  the  ejlablijhed  MuJic,
"  that  they  aflumed  to  themfelves  the  fole  Right  of  de-
**  ciding  on  it.  Hence  the  Theatres  beg:an  to  be  in  Up-
'*  roar,  where  formerly  Silence  had  reigned :  And  thus  the
*'  t'rivilege  oi  judging  fell  from  the  Rulers  of  the  State  to
"  the'iJr^^j  ol  the  People.  Had  this  Authority  been
"  afTumed  by  the  liberal  Part  of  th%  City,  no  great  Harm
*•  had  followed  :  But  now,  from  this  corrupt  Change  in
"  MuJic,  a  general  Licentioufnefs  of  Opinion  hath  enfued. —
*'  The  Confequence  of  this  hath  been,  that  we  no  longer
*'  are  difpofed  to  obey  the  Magiftrate :  Hence  too,  that
"  other  Evil  flows,  that  we  defpife  the  Authority  and
"  Precepts  of  our  Parents,  and  the  Advice  and  Wifdom  of
"  Old  Age.  And  as  we  are  riling  towards  the  Extreme
"  of  this  Corruption,  we  now  refufe  Obedience  to  the
"  Laws :  And  to  fill  up  the  Meafure  of  our  Iniquities,  all
**  Religion  and  mutual  Faith  zxtlojl  among  us  [/]."

Such  is  the  Pidlure  which  the  philofophic  Plato  hath
left  of  his  Time  and  Country  :  A  Pidlure  too  well  con-

[tj  De  Legibus^  1.  jii.

S  2  fifmei


J32  -^  Dissertation  on  the  ITnion,  &c^

firmed  by  the  concurrent  Teftimony  of  Xenophon  [^"] ;;
in  whofe  Accounts,  together  with  thofe  of  Plutarch  [7]^
we  fhall  f^on  fee  a  particular  Delineation  of  the  Progrefs  of
•rfiis  Evil,  which  Plato  here  defcribes  in  general  Terms.

Let  us  conclude  this  Article  with  the  Explanation  of
Subjedls  which  hath  not  hitherto been  clearly  treated  of^
for  want  of  a  jufi:  Idea  of  the  ancient  Greek  Mufic. The
learned  Vossius  thus  expreffeth himfelf :  "  It  is  a  doubtful:
**  Point,  whether  we  (hould  fey,  that  oji  a  Change  of
*'  Mufic,  a  Change  of  Manners  enfues  ^  or  that  a  Change
**  of  Manners  produceth  a  Change  in  Mufic  :  The  firft
"was  Damon's  Opinion  which Plato  follows:  But.
"  Cicero  leans  to  the  latter  Syflem  [w]."  On  this  Paflage
it  is  neceflary  firft  to  obferve,  that  both  Vossius  andi^
Cicero  ufe  the  Word  Mufic  in  its  modern  Acceptation,  as.
implying  mere  Melody. No  Wonder,  therefore,  if  they
had  but  an  imperfect  Comprehenfion  of  Plato's  Axgu-
ment. Secondly,  On  the  Principles  delivered  in  this  Dif-
fertation,  it  will  appear,  that  Plato  was  of  both  thefe
Opinions, *'  That  Manners  influenced  Mufic,  and  Mufic
«  influenced  Manners." In  the  Pafliage  which  Vossius^
refers  to,  where the Opinion  of  Damon is  delivered,.
Plato  fpeaks  of  a  Change  in  Mufic  a&  influencing  thg-
"Manners  of  a  Commonwealth.;  This  Change  he  regards,
SIS  opening  a.  Door  for  Confufion  and  Novelty  in  an  Affair
of  public  Confequence;  fimilar  to  a  Negledt  of  Reverence
to  old  Men,  Parents,,  or  Magiftrates,  or  any  other  ancient
and  approved  Cuftoms  that  were  connedted  with  the  public
Welfare :  and  in  this  Refpe<5l,.the  Influence  of  the  Greek.

\l\  Sec  belowj  Seft.  vJiU  Art*  s»  [/J  See  ib, {ml  Vossius.

Miiiic,,


V  P  O  E  T  R  Y  and  MUSI  C^  133

Mufic,  as  now  explained,  on  the  Manners  of  Mankind  is
too  evident  to  need  any  farther  Proof.

On  the  other  Hand,  it  is  no  lefs  evident,  that  Plato


was  of  Opinion,  that  a  Corruption  of  Manners  muft  cor-
rupt Mufic.  He  hath  (hewn  us  in  the  Paflage  given
above,  that  the  Boldnefs  and  Degeneracy  of  the  People  of
Athens  firft  allured  the  Poets  to  debafe  their  Art,  by
finging  fuch  Poems  as  were  accommodated  to  their  vicious
Tafte  founded  on  their  vicious  Manners :  That  as  Man-
ners had  thus  debafed  Mufic,  fo  this  corrupt  Mufic  by  a
natural  Reaftion  ftill  farther  corrupted  Manners,  and  com-
pleated  the  Deftrudtion  of  Religion  and  Virtue.

35.  "In  Confequence  of  thefe  ProgreflHons,  a  gradual.
"  and  total  Separation  of  the  Bard's  complex  Charadter
"  enfued. The  Leader  of  the  State  no  longer  was  ambi-
**  tious  of  the  mufical  Art;  nor  the  Poet  defcended  to  the-
"  Profeffion  of  Lyrift, Singer,  or  Adtor  :  Becaufe  thefe
*'  Profeflions,  which  in  the  earlieft  Ages  had  been  the
"  Means  of  inculcating  every  thing  laudable  and  great,
**  grew  by  Degrees  of  iefs  and  lefs  Importance  ;  and  being
*'  at  length  perverted  to  the  contrary  Purpofes,  were  in  the
**  End  difdained  by  the  wife  and  virtuous." Thefe  gra-
dual  Separations  of  the  feveral Branches  of  the  Bard's -
complex  Office,  and  of  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song,  are  not.
incurious  in  their  Progreffion.  —We  have  feen,  that  in  the
earlieji  Ages,  the  Gods  or  Legijlators  themfelves  afliimed  the
full  and  complex  Charafter ;  that  they  were  Poets,  Lyrijis, ,
Singers  and  Dancers.  The  Dance  feems  firfi:  to  have  been  fe-
pated  from  the  Melody  and  Song,  being  foon  heightened  into
the  Gymnajiic  Art.  The  Legijlators  by  Degrees  quitted  the

ileveral  Paints  of  thcMu^cian's  Charadter^  a  Separation  which

naturally


134 ^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

naturally  arofe  from  decreafing  Enthufiafm,  and  Increafing
Cares  of  Government,  As  Linus  and  Orpheus  were
the  firft,  fo  Pythagoras  and  Solon  feem  to  have  been
the  laft,  who  compofed  Songs  zndfung  them  to  the  fur-
rounding  People. — The  Profeflion  of  Bard  ov  Mufician
was  now  become  zfecondary,  but  refpeSlable  Charadler,  as
being  an  Afliftant  to  the  Magiftrate,  and  an  ufeful  Servant
©f  the  State,  a  Teacher  of  Religion  and  Morals.  The
BAxdfung  and  p/ayed  always,  and  led  the  Dance  occafion-
ally:  But  when  Homer's  Poems  had  eclipfed  every  other
Epic  Strain,  another  Separation  followed  :  The  Rbapfodijis
arofe  in  Greece  :  They  fung  Homer's  Poems  to  large
furrounding  Audiences :  They  were  ftridtly  his  Reprefen-
tatives,  who  now  gave  his  Poems  to  the  People,  with  that
poetic  Fire  and  Rapture  which  the  Bard  himfelf  had
pofTefTed  and  exerted  :  For  in  Plato's  lofi,  the  Rhapfodiji
fays,  that  "  when  he  fings  a  piteous  Tale,  his  Eyes  fwim
**  with  Tears ;  when  he  fings  a  terrible  Event,  his  Heart
<♦  beats,  and  his  Hair  ftands  eredt."  In  the  earlier  Ages
of  Tragedy,  the  Poet  both  afted  and  fung:  But  in  the
Time  of  Sophocles,  another  Separation,  parallel  to  the
iaft,  enfued ;  and  the  Province  of  ylBor  began  to  be  di-
ftind:  from  that  oi  Poet. — Soon  after  this  Time,  we  find
in  the  Paflage  quoted  above  from  Plato,  that  a  Separa-
tion of  the  iphole  Art  of  Mujic  from  its  proper  Ends  took
Place  at  Athens:  Its  falutary  Effed:s  were  now  loft:
and  as  at  this  Period  the  Palfion  for  illiberal  Comedy  came
on,  fo  we  learn  from  the  concurrent  Teftimony  of  Plu-
tarch [«]  and  other  Authors  [<?],  that  the  Exhibition  of

[n]  Sympof.  I.  vii,  [aj  JusTiN,  1.  vi,

l^ragedy


of  V  O  E  r  RY  and  M  U  S  I  C.  135

Tragedy  at  Athens  had  now  degenerated  into  mere  Pomp
and  Shew,  equally  expenfive  and  pernicious.  The  fame
refpedtable  Ancient  affures  us,  that  the  Dance,  which  had
formerly  been  feparated  from  the  Song  for  warlike  Pur-
pofes,  was  now  corrupted  by  the  Mimes  in  a  very  extra-
ordinary Degree  \_f\.  The  CoJifequence  of  thefe  Corrup-
tions foon  (hewed  themfelves  in  a  fubfequent  Period :
Hence,  in  the  Age  of  Plato,  another  Separation  had
come  on  :  For  now  the  complex  Name  of  oatSoq  or  Bard
was  diiufed  j  and  that  of  woirrn;?  or  Poet  had  affumed  its
Place :  And  as  the  Legijlators  Office  had  formerly  been
feparated  from  the  Bard's;  fo  now,  in  Confequence  of
this  Corruption,  and  as  a  natural  Effedt  of  Mufic's  finking
into  a  mere  Amufement,  the  Poet's  Charad:er  became  quite
diftindt  from  that  of  Chorift,  ASlor,  or  Dancer,  and  thefe
diftindt  from  each  other  [q].  For  the  moral  End  being
now  forgot,  and  nothing  but  Amufement  attended  to,  a
higher  Proficiency  in  thefe  Arts  became  necefTary,  and
^Onfequently  a  iqore  levere  Application  to  each. — We
muft  now  go  back  a  little,  to  catch  the  Kile  ot  another
Separation :  An  Inroad  was  made  into  the  Mufe's  Terri-
tories :  The  public  mufical  Contentions  admitted  Profe,,
as  an  Afpirant  to  the  Palm  originally  due  to  Poetry  and
Song.  Herodotus  was  the  firft  who  was  crowned  for
•writing  znA  fpeaking  (or  more  properly  ^oxfmging)  Hijiory
at  the  public  Conteft  [r]  :  And  it  is  remarkable,  that  al-
though He  brought  down  the  Song  to  the  profaic  Manner,
yet  ftill  his  Work  retained  the  fabulous  Air,  as  v/ell  as  the

f^3  Sympof.  1.  ix.  qu.  15.  [q]  Plato  dt  Repuh.  1.  ii.

\jC\  LUCJAN,  HZRODOTUS,

Appellation,


136 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Appellation  of  the  Mufes  :  All  which  Circumftances,  con-
fidered  in  Union,  may  lead  us  to  the  true  poetic  -ssA  fabling
Genius  of  his  celebrated  Hiftory .  Thucidides  hints  at  this
Pradlice  in  the  Beginning  of  his  noble  Work  [j]  :  Declar-
ing, that  he  means  it  not  as  a  mere  Exercife  for  the  public
Conteji  -,  but  as  a  valuable  Poffeflion  for  After-Aga.  In
later  Times  it  became  a  common  Pradtice  for  Sophijis
and  Rhetoricians  to  contend  in  Profey  at  the  Olympic  Games,
for  the  Crown  of  Glory  [/]. — The  Delphic  Oracles  kept
Pace  with  thefe  progreflive  Separations  :  In  the  early
Periods  they  were  delivered  by  the  Fythia^  with  frantic
Geflure  f Dance  J  Melody  ^  and  Rythm  [k].  In  a  fucceeding
Age,  we  find  the  Pythia  hath  quitted  her  complex  Cha-
rafter ;  Poets  are  appointed  for  the  Service  of  the  Tem-
ple, and  turn  the  Oracles  into  Verfe-z  But  in  the  later
Times,  this  Practice  had  alfo  ceafed;  and  the  Oracles
'  ivere  given  in  plain  Profe  [w]. — In  the  Days  of  Aris-
totle, a  general  and  almoft  a  total  Separation  had  taken
Place.  The  Art  of  playing  on  the  Lyre^  which  had  been
the  Glory  of  their  early  Legijlatorsy  was  now  regarded  as
2i  Reproach  to  a  young  King:  The  Art  of fnging,  which  had
once  b;  en  a  diftinguifhing  Attribute  of  their  GoJs,  was  now
reckoned  ah  ignoble  Pradtice  for  a  Man  [x] :  The  Chorus  of
fome  of  their  Dramas  gave  Way  to  Melody  merely  injru"
mental,  which  now  firft  afTumed  the  Name  of  Mufic:  The
Rhapfodijis  had,  about  this  Time,  begun  to  quit  a  Part
of  Their  Profeflion  j  and  inftead  of  fmging,  often  recited

[i]  L.  i.  c.  6.  [/]  LuciAN  de  Salt.  [»]  Above,  Art.  8.

[w]  Strabo,  1.  ix. Cicero  de  Div.  1.  ii.  [x]  Aristot.

Ptiit.  1.  viii.  c.  5.

r  Homer's


o/-  P  O  E  T  R  Y  and  MUSIC.  137

Homer's  Poems  [y'[.  To  conclude  all,  the  great  Mafter-
Critic  and  Politician  of  Greece,  viewing  Mufic  in  that
corrupt  State  which  it  held  in  his  own  Time,  though  he
ftill  aflerts  its  Ufe  in  private  Education,  gives  up  the
public  Mufical  Exhibitions,  as  only  fit  to  gratify  the  Tafte
of  an  abandoned  people  [z].  But  in  the  later  Period  when
Plutarch  writ,  its  Utility  had  vaniftied  even  in  private
Life :  For  He  declares,  that  Mujic,  which  had  formerly
been  fo  important  and  falutary  in  its  EfFedts,  was  now  be-
come a  mere  Amufement  of  the  Theatre,  and  no  longer
applied  to  the  Education  of  Youth  [a^.

36.  "  Hence  the  Power,  tlic  Dignity,  and  Utility  of
**  Mufic  funk  into  a  general  Corruption  and  Contempt."
This  is  a  Confequence  too  maiiifeft  to  need  a  Proof.  —
And  thus  we  have  attempted  to  unfold  the  Nature,  Rife,
Progrefs,  Power,  Perfe(3:ion,  and  Corruption,  of  Music  in
ancient  Greece;  from  the  earlieU  Times,  when  it  was
the  Glory  of  their  JLegtjlators,  down  to  the  later  Periods
when  it  became  the  Employment  of  their  Slaves.

SECT. VII.

Of  the  Origin  and  Progrejion  of  Comedy  in  ancient  Greece.

THERE  is  one  coniidcrable  Branch  of  the  Music
of  ancient  Greece,  I  mean  Comedy,  the  Rife
and  Progreffion  of  which,  together  with  their  Caufes,
have  been  defignedly  pafTed  in  Silence  :  Becaufe,  if
this  Difquifition  had  been  mixed  with  what  hath  been

{y]  Aristot.  Poet.  c.  26.  [z]  PoUt.  1.  viii.  c,  7.>

[a]  De  Muftca.

T  delivered


138 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  5cc.

delivered  concerning  the  Ode^  Epic,  and  Tragedy,  the
Chain  of  Argument  would  have  been  broken ;  and  that
Order  and  Clearnefs  deftroyed,  which  it  was  necefiary  to
preferve  as  much  as  poffible  in  this  involved  Subjed:.

Let  us  now  proceed,  therefore,  to  reduce  ths  Origin  and
Progrefs  of  the  Greek  Comedy  to  their  natural  and  efiential
Caufes. — To  point  out  the  Rife  of  this  Poem  from  favage
Life;  to  unfold  the  true  Reafons  why  it  was  fo  late  in
taking  its  legitimate  Form  in  Greece  ;  and  then  to  ex-
plain, on  what  Foundation  the  old,  middle,  and  nemv  Comedy,
'appeared  in  their  refpeftive  Succejfions.

In  the  Defcription  of  the  favage  Song  Feafls,  given
'above  from  Lafit  A  u,  it  appears  that  thefe  warlike  Tribes
**  are  ftill  quicker  at  rallying,  than  at  praifing,  each  other.
**  He  who  dances,  takes  whomfoever  he  pleafeth  by  the
*'  Hand;  and  brings  him  forth  into  the  midfl  of  the  Aflem-
**  bly ;  to  which  he  yields  without  Refiftance.  Mean
**  while  the  Dancer  continued  iojtng,  and  fometimes  in
**  his  Song,  and  fometimes  in  the  intervals,  he  throws  his
♦*  Sarcafms  on  the  Patient,  who  hears  him  without  Re-
»t  ply. — At  every  bon  Mot,  loud  Peals  of  Laughter  arife
"  along  the  Galleries,  who  animate  this  Sport,  and  often
*•  oblige  the  Patient  to  cover  his  Head  in  his  Mantle  [b]."

Now,  if  we  again  fuppofe,  as  we  have  already  done,  that
the  Ufe  oi  Letters  fhould  come  among  thefe  favage  Tribes,,
and  be  cultivated  with  that  fpirit  which  is  natural  to  a
free  and  adlive  People  j.  from  this  Pidture,  as  given  by
Lafitau,  the  following  Confequences  would  naturally
.•arife^

[i]  See  above,  Seft.  ii.

I .. "  Their


of  P  O  E  T  RY  and  MV  ^  I  C.  139

1.  "  Their  cafual  Strokes  of  Raillery  would  Improve
«'  into  written  Invedives,  which  would  occafiona  lly  be
«*  fung  by  their  farcaftic  Choirs."  Becaufe  nothing  could
be  more  alluring  to  a  People  of  this  fatyric  Turn,  than
fuch  a  Repofitory  of  Wit  and  Raillery;  which,  like  a
Quiver  ftored  with  the  keenefl  Arrows,  would  be  ever  at
Hand,  ready  to  bedifcharged  againft  the  occafional  Objedls
of  their  Refentment.

2.  "  Narrative  or  Epic  Poems  of  the  inveSiive  or  comic
**  Kind  would  likewife  arife,  and  be  occafionally  fung  at
**  their  pubhc  Feftivals."  For  the  Spirit  of  Sarcafm  being  .
once  awakened,  it  would  of  courfe  proceed  from  occafional
Strokes  of  Raillery,  to  the  Recital  of  ridiculous  Ad;ions,
for  the  Gratification  and  Entertainment  of  a  lively  and
fatyric  People.

3.  "From  thefe  two  Species  [the  chora/ and  narrative
*'  united)  the  firft  rude  Outline  of  Comedy  would  arife."
We  have  feen  how  Tragedy  arofe  from  parallel  Caufes  :
And  Thefe  would  naturally  take  Place  in  producing  Comedy.
For  the  Narrative,  already  animated  by  Adtion,  would
eafily  Hide  into  dramatic  Reprefentation,  as  in  the  Rife  of
Tragedy;  and  the  correfpondent  Peals  of  Laughter  (by  the
AfTiftance  of  written  Invedlives)  would  afTume  the  Form
of  a  comic  Choir.

4.  "  While  the  falutary  Principles  of  Legillation  fliould
**  prevail.  Comedy  thus  formed,  would  be  little  encouraged
**  by  the  Leaders  of  the  State."  For  the  grander  Kinds
of  Poetry,  already  treated  of,  containing  the  Principles  of
Religion,  Polity,  and  Morals,  would  draw  their  main
Attention ;  while  their Comedy,  being  no  more  than  the

T 2  Vehicle


140 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Vehicle  of  Ridicule  and  vague  Invedive,  would  (at  moil)
be  only  enduredhy  prudent  Legillators.

5.  **  A  provident  Community,  of  Principles  uncom-
"  monly  fevere,  might  even  banifh  this  Species  of  Poem,
<*  as  deftruftive  to  their  State."  Becaufe  nothing  could
be  more  dangerous  to  a  Commonwealth  eftablifhed  on
Severity  of  Manners,  than  the  unbounded  Licentioufnefs
of  Sentiment  and  Speech,  which  this  Comedy  muft  tend  to
produce.

6.  "  If  in  a  State  of  more  relaxed  Principles,  where
"  fuch  Comedy  had  been  tolerated,  a  general  Corruption
•*  of  Manners  fliould  take  Place  among  the  People ;  and
"  if  by  any  means,  fuch  a  corrupt  People  ihould  over-
"  power  the  Magiftrates,  and  aflume  to  themfelves
••  the  Reins  of  Government;  then,  this  Species  of  Co-
"  medy  would  rife  into  Credit,  and  be  publicly  efta-
"  blifhed."  For  the  upright  Leaders  of  the  State  being
depofedt  and  the  Creatures  of  fuch  a  corrupt  People  being
feated  in  their  Place,  that  Comedy  would  now  be  authorized
by  Law,  which  was  moil:  accommodated  to  the  'Tajie  and
Vices  of  fuch  a  corrupt  People.

7.  "  The  Ridicule  and  Invedlive  of  their  Comedy,  thus
"  eftablifhed,  would  be  pointed  chiefly  againft  thofe  Ma-
**  giftrates,  or  private  Men,  whofe  Qualities  would  be
"  hateful  to  the  debauched  Populace."  For  Corruption
being  now  eftablifhed  as  it  were  by  Law ;  that  is,  by  the
Voice  of  a  degenerate  People  which  ftood  in  the  Place  of
Law ;  the  Poets  would  find  it  neceflary  to  gratify  the
People's  Vices  as  the  fureft  Road  to  Succefs ;  and  the  mofl
certain  Road  to  this  muft  be  by  the  Ridicule  of  Virtue.

5  8.  «  If


tf/"  PO  E  TRY  /z«</  MUS  I  C.  141

8.  **  If  a  'Tyranny  (hould  fuddenly  eredl  itfelf  on  the
"  Ruine  of  fuch  a  People,  it  would  by  its  Authority 7?Z?«f^
«  this  Species  of  Comedy" — For  every  thing  hateful  to
the  People  being  now  the  eftabliihed  Subjedt  of  the  comic
Mufe,  the  Tyrants,  who  had  taken  away  the  public
Liberty,  muft  expedl  to  become  the  Subjed  of  Comedy,  if
permitted  to  revel  in  its  former  Licentioufnefs.

9.  "  The  Poets  would  probably  find  a  Subterfuge,  for
"  the  Gratification  of  the  People ;  and  continue  to  repre-
*'  fent  real  CharaSiers  under  feigned  Names."  For  this
would  be  the  only  Species  of  Comedy  they  could  purfue
with  a  Probability  of  Succefs  :  And  this  might  be  conti-
nued without  much  Danger,  if  they  were  cautious  with
Refpedt  to  the  Perfons  of  the  Tyrants.

10."  If  a  great  Conqueror  fhould  arife,  and,  by  fub-
*'  duing  a  Variety  of  Nations,  fliould  open  a  Communi-
"  cation  between  fuch  a  State  and  others  of  more  luxurious
"  and  refined  Manners,  this  fecond  Species  of  Comedy
*«  would  naturally  receive  a  PoHJh;  and,  inftead  of  the  in-
"  diredl  perfonal  Invedlive,  would  affume  the  more  deli-
"  cate  Form  of  general  Raillery,  and  become  a  Pidlure  of
"  human  Life." — For  one  of  the  firft  Efforts  of  a  growing
Politenefs  is  to  avoid  all  Occafions  of  Offence ;  and  this,
without  Refpedl  to  any  Confequences,  either  good  or  bad,
which  may  affedl  the  Public;  but  merely  from  a  felfifh
Regard  to  the  Opinion  of  Elegance,  and  the  Pride  of
Urbanity.

In  Support  of  thefe  Dedudions,  let  us  now  endeavour
to  realize  them ;  by  (hewing,  that  fuch  Confequences  did
arife  in  Greece  :  And  in  the  Courfe  of  this  Argument,
the  Writer  hopes  he  fhall  be  able  to  difclofe  the  true  Caufes.


14* A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

of  the  Progreflion  of  the  ancient  Comedy,  fo  different
from  that  of  the  higher  Kinds  of  Poetic  Compofition.

I.  "In  the  earHefl:  Periods  of  the  Greek  States,  their
**  Cafual  Strokes of  Raillery  were  improved  into  written
«'  Inveftives,  and  were  occalionally  fung  by  their  farcaftic
"  Choirs." Thefe written  Invectives  were  in  Faft fo
early,  that  all  the  Greek  Writers  with  one  Voice  confefs
themfelves  altogether  ignorant  of  their  Origin. Their  firft
Appearance  is  afcribed  by  different  Authors  to  different
Nations  [c];  and  no  Wonder  if  Evidence  be  wanting  in
Support  of  each  Pretence,  when  it  is  probable,  that  thefe
farcaftic  Choirs  arofe  in  many  of  the  Greek  States  nearly
at  the  fame  Time  j  that  is,  in  or  about  the  firft  Periods  of
Civilization  and  Letters. For  we  have  feen,  that  fuch  a
Period  would  naturally  produce  them  : "  Becaufe  nothing
««  could  be  more  alluring  to  a  People  of  the  fatyric  Turn,
*♦  than  fuch  a  Repofitory  of  Raillery  and  Sarcafm." How-
ever, we  muft  not  omit  to  obferve,  that  their  Traditions
are  much  more  accommodated  to  Nature  and  Probability
on  this  Subjeft,  than  on  the  Rife  of  the  tragic  Choir,  which
they  feem  generally  to  have  attributed  to  the  fingle  Prac-
tice of  the  drunken  Votaries  of  Bacchus.

2.  "  Narrative  or  Epic  Poems  of  the  inveftiveor  comic
"  Kind  arofe,  and  were  occafionally  fung  at  their  public
"  Feftivals."  For  the  truth  of  this  Fadt  we  have  the
Teftimony  of  Aristotle,  who  tells  us,  "  that  although
"  we  know  not  the  names  either  of  thefe  Poems  or  their
*'  Authors  ;  yet  there  is  Reafon  to  believe  that  many  had
♦'  been  written  before  Homer; and  that  his  Margites

[f]  See  Vossius  Injl.  Peitt.  I.  ii.  c.  23.

'  «*  brought


^  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^;7^  M  U  S  t  C.  143-

«'  brought  this  Species  to  its  Perfedion  in  the  fame  Manner
"  as  the  Iliad  and  Odyjey  had  compleated  the  Form  of
"  the  Epic  Poem  \d\"  That  Homer,  as  v/ell  as  other
Bards  of  the  early  Periods,  fung  their  comic  Poems  at  tlie
feftal  Solemnities,  needs  no  farther  Proof  here.

3. "  From  thefe  two  Species  (the  Choral -saxdi  Narrative'
"  united)  the  firft  rude  Outline  of  Comedy  arofe." The
Narrative,  already  animated  by  a  lively  Adion,  did  eafily
Aide  into  drafiiatic  Reprefentation ; and  the  correfpondent
Peals  oi Laughter  excited  among  the  furrounding  Audience,.
by  means  of  written  Invedives,  affumed  the  Form  of  the
comic  Choir. In this  Point,  we  have again to contend
with  the  general  Body  of  Critics,  from  Aristotle  down
to  the  prefent  Times,  who  all  concur  in  afcribing  the.
Rife  of  the  legitimate Form  of  Comedy  to  Homer's
Margites ;  in  the  fame  Manner  as  they  have  aferibed  the
Rife  of  7ragedy  to  the  Iliad  and  Odyffey. But  notwith-
flanding  this  general Concurrence  of  Opinion,  it  feems
evident  that  the  Progreflron  of  Comedy  was  founded  in  the
fame  Caufes  with  that  of  Tragedy:  That  they  both  natu-
rally arofe  in  the  Courfe  of  Things,  from  an  Union  of  the
Narration  and  the  Choir,  without  any  Refped  had  to  Ho-
mer's Poems. The  fame  Arguments  that  have  proved  the
one,  will  confirm  the  other. We  fee  the  natural  Seeds  of
Comedy  and  fcenic  Reprefentation  in  favage  Life,  no  lefs
than  thofe  of  Tragedy  \e'\ ;  Nay,  even  in  the  earliefl  Periods
of  Greece  itfelf,  we  fhall  find  the  firft  rude  Form  of
Comedy,  arifing  from  an  Union  of  dramatic  Reprefentation^
and  a  Choir,  long  before  Homer  exifted. In  the  Account.

\i\Po'H,  C.4..  t#]  See  above>  Seft.  ii.

already*


144 •^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

already  cited  from  Strabo  and  others,  of  the  mujical
Conteji  eftablifhed  at  Delphi,  which  in  Time  branched
out  into  the  Pythian  Games,  as  we  have  found  the  firfl
rude  Form  of  Tragedy;  fo  now  we  fhall  find  likewife
a  faint  OutUne  of  the  firfl:  rude  Form  of  Comedy,  For  it
appears,  that  Apollo  with  his  Choir,  and  his  Worfhipers
in  after-times,  not  only  reprefented  his  Vi<flory,  and  fung
a  P^an  in  Confequence  of  it  (in  which  Union  we  fee  the
firfl:  rude  Form  of  Tragedy)  but  likewife,  in  the  Way  of
Ridicule  they  reprefented  the  Hijfes  of  the  dying  Serpent,
and  fung  an  InveBive  or  Sarcafm  on  his  overthrow  [/].
For  fo  I  underftand  the  Word  (a/tSo?  and  uifA&i^etv,  ufed  by
tliefe  ancient  Writers  on  this  Occafion  ;  as  implying  only
Sarcajlic  Verfes,  and  not  Iambics  in  the  ftridt  Senfe  ',  which
are  generally  believed  to  have  been  firfl  formed  by  Archi-
LOCHUS,  many  Ages  after  the  Fad:  here  alluded  to.  And
hence  the  true  Reafon  appears  ,why  the  Greek  Comedy  was
written  in  Verfe  ;  becaufe  it  was  originally y««^. — Now,
in  this  Union  of  comic  Reprefentation  and  z.  fatyrical  Choir y
we  fee  the  genuine,  though  imperfedt  and  rude  Form  of
the  old  Greek  Comedy.

4.  "  While  the  falutary  Principles  of  Legiflation  pre-
*•  vailed.  Comedy,  thus  formed,  was  little  encouraged  by
"  the  Leaders  of  the  State."  The  Authority  of  Aris-
totle is  clear  and  decifive  on  this  Point.  "  Comedy
*'  remained  obfcure  and  unknown,  becaufe  little  Regard
"  was  had  to  it  from  the  Beginning;  the  Magiftrate
"  being  late  in  appointing  it  a  Choir."  He  affigns  no
Reafon  for  this  Condudt  of  the  Magiftrate :  But  a  fufiicient

f/J  See  the  Authors  cited  above,  Sed.  v..  Art.  16.

Reafon


^  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^W  M  U  S  f  C.  145

3leafon  appears  to  be  given  above.  "  For  the  grander
<'  Kinds  of  Poetry  containing  the  Principles  of  Religion,
"  Polity,  and  Morals,  drew  their  main  Attention  j  while
■"  their  Comedy,  being  no  more  than  the  Vehicle  of  Ridi-
•**  cule  and  vague  Inveitive,  was  only  endured  by  prudent
**  Legiflators."  The  Truth  of  this  Article  will  receive
Confirmation  from  the  two  fucceeding.

5,  "  There  was  a  provident  Community,  of  Principles
"  uncommonly  fevere,  which  even  banifhed  this  Species  of
*'  Poem,  as  deftrudive  to  their  State."  We  have  already
feen  the  Providence  and  Caution  of  the  Spartans  in  regu-
lating their  Mujic  for  the  Security  of  their  Republic  \g\.
We  ihall  now  fee  the  admirable  Confiftency  of  theif
Condudl,  with  Refpeft  to  the  very  Beginnings  of  Comedy,
when  it  firft  dawned  among  them  in  the  Verfes  of  Archi-
LOCHUS.  "  The  Spartans  ordered  the  Writings  of
"  Archilochus  to  be  baniflied  from  their  City,  becaufe
*'  they  thought  the  Perufal  of  them  was  dangerous  to  the
"  Purity  of  Manners,  They  did  not  chufe  that  the  Minds
^*  of  their  Children  (hould  be  tainted  with  them,  left  they
"  (hould  more  hurt  their  Morals,  than  fharpen  theif
«  Wit  [h]."

6.  "  In  the  Republic  of  Athens,  which  was  of
<*  more  relaxed  Principles,  where  this  Comedy  had  been
**  tolerated,  a  general  Corruption  of  Manners  took  Place

[g'\  See  above.

[/;]  Vell.  Paten.  1.  vi.  c.  3. — In  after  Times," when  the  fevere  Man-
ners and  the  Glory  of  this  Republic  funk  together,  v/e  find  its  Conduct
altogether  correfpondent  with  thefe  Principles.  The  Mimes,  the  mod
diflblute  Species  of  Comedy,  were  then  admitted.  See  Suidas,  Athe-
-K^us,  and  other  Authors  of  the  later  Periods.

U  .  **  anion^


446 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

"  among  the  People  :  The  corrupt  People  overpowered
♦'  the  Magiftratesj  aflumed  to  themfelves  the  Reins  of
*♦  Government,  and  on  this  Foundation  the  old  Comedy
"  arofe  into  Credit,  had  a  Choir  appointed  by  the  Magi-
*•  ftrate,  and  was  publicly  eftablifhed."  This  was  the
natural  and  necefl'ary  Confequence  of  the  Power  of  a
corrupt  People.  For  the  upright  Magillrates  being  de-
pofed,  and  the  Creatures  of  this  corrupt  People  feated  in
their  Place,  that  Comedy  was  now  authorized  by  Law,
which  was  moft  accommodated  to  the  Vices  and  Tafte  of
a  diflblute  Populace.

Thefe  Caufes  clearly  account  for  the  Eftabliihment
of  the  old  Comedy,  at  that  very  Period  when  it  took.
Place.  But  as  other  Caufes,  void  of  all  Foundation,  have
been  afligned  for  this,  by  various  Authors ;  it  will  be
neceflary  to  prove  the  Truth  of  the  Caufes  here  alledged^
from  the  Authority  of  the  Greek  Writers.

Plato,  in  the  Paffage  cited  above  [/J],  gives  us  the
Hiftory  of  the  Corruption  of  the  People,  and  of  Mufic  ;
but  in  fuch  general  Terms,  that,  without  fome  farther
Evidence,  it  is  impoflible  clearly  to  fix  the  Time  when,
or  the  Means  by  which,  this  Change  was  brought  about,
fo  fatal  to  the  Republic  of  Athens.  It  happens  fortunately,
that  Plutarch  hath  recorded  the  Event  with  fuch
Particularity  of  Circumflance,  as  leaves  no  Room  to  doubt
on  this  Subjedt.  Pericles  was  the  Man,  who  for  his
own  private  Ends  of  Popularity,  efTedled  this  ruinous.
Change :  For  "  By  giving  the  People  the  Plunder  and
"  PoffelTion  of  the  Lands  taken  from  the  Enemy,  and  by

[ij  See  Sea.  v.  Art.  34.

♦*  fquandering


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^W  M  U  S  I  C.  147

"  fquanderiog  the  public  Monies  (formerly  referved  for  the
«*  Ufes  of  War)  in  Shews  and  Plays  for  their  Enter-
*'  tainment,  and  by  Grants  of  LargeiTes  and  Penfions,  he
*'  changed  them  from  a  fober,  modefl,  and  thrifty  People,
**  who  maintained  themfelves  by  their  own  Labour,  into  a
**  riotous  and  debauched  Multitude;  and  thus  roufed  them
"  into  fedition  againft  the  Court  of  the  Areopagus  \r\."
From  this  Paflage  it  is  evident,  that  Pericles  not  only
debauched  the  Athenian  People ;  but  that  the  Exhibition
of  Plays  and  Shews  was  one  of  the  very  Engines  of  Cor-
ruption [;«]. — The  concurrent  Teftimony  of  Xenophom
clears  the  whole  Affair  j  and  gives  as  a  full  View  of  the
Confequences  of  this  general  Corruption,  fo  far  as  the  old
Comedy  is  concerned.  For  in  his  Difcourfe  on  the  Athe-
nian Republic,  he  informs  us,  \Ji,  That,  at  the  Period  we
have  now  fixed,  "  The  Body  of  the  People  expelled  All
"  Good  Men  from  the  Magiftracy,  and  advanced  wicked
"  Men  in  their  Places."  2dly,  That  "  they  took  the
"  Gymnajlic  and  Mujical  Exercifes  out  of  the  Hands  of  the
««  better  Sort ;  and  gave  the  Pradlice  and  Profit  of  them
"  to  the  Dregs  of  the  People." -^dly.  That  "  in  their

[/]  In  Pericle.

[»;]  Thus  Cicero  fpeaks  of  the  old  Greek  Comedy. — "  Efto  :  popu-
"  lares  Homines,  improbos,  in  Rempublicam  feditiofos,  Clconem,  Cleo-
"  phontem,  Hyperbolum  lasfit : — Patiamur: — Sed  Periclem,  cum  jam  fuas
"  Civitati  maxima  Audoritate  plurimos  annos  Domi  et  Bello  praefuiflet,
*'  violari  Verfibus,  et  eos  agi  in  Scena,  non  plus  decuit,  quam  fi  Plautus
"  nofter  voluiflet,  aut  Nicvius,  P.  et  Cn.  Sdpion'i^  aut  Cacilius  M.  Caton't^

*'  maledicere." Ex  Frag.  Cic.  de  Rep.  1.  iv. Where, we  may  ob-

ferve,  the  Judgment  of  Cicero  is  falfe  concerning  Pericles  :  As  it  ap-
pears, that  he  was  the  firft  Corrupter  of  the  People  :  And  it  feems  to  have
been  a  juft  Puniftiment,  that  he  was  laftied  by  that  illiberal  Comedy,  which
His  own  Influence  firft  let  in  upon  the  State.

U  2  *♦  Comedies


446 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

"  among  the  People  :  The  corrupt  People  overpowered
♦<  the  Magiftratesj  affumed  to  themfelves  the  Reins  of
*♦  Government,  and  on  this  Foundation  the  old  Comedy
"  arofe  into  Credit,  had  a  Choir  appointed  by  the  Magi-
*'  ftrate,  and  was  publicly  eftablifhed."  This  was  the
natural  and  necefl'ary  Confequence  of  the  Power  of  a
corrupt  People.  For  the  upright  Magiftrates  being  de-
pofed,  and  the  Creatures  of  this  corrupt  People  feated  in
their  Place,  that  Comedy  was  now  authorized  by  Law,
which  was  moft  accommodated  to  the  Vices  and  Tafte  of
a  diflblute  Populace.

Thefe  Caufes  clearly  account  for  the  Eftablifhment
of  the  old  Comedy,  at  that  very  Period  when  it  took
Place.  But  as  other  Caufes,  void  of  all  Foundation,  have
been  afligned  for  this,  by  various  Authors  j  it  will  be
neceflary  to  prove  the  Truth  of  the  Caufes  here  alledged,
from  the  Authority  of  the  Greek  Writers.

Plato,  in  the  Paffage  cjted  above  [i],  gives  us  the
Hiftory  of  the  Corruption  of  the  People,  and  of  Mulic  ;
but  in  fuch  general  Terms,  that,  without  fome  farther
Evidence,  it  is  impoflible  clearly  to  fix  the  Time  when,,
or  the  Means  by  which,  this  Change  was  brought  about,
fo  fatal  to  the  Republic  oi  Athens.  It  happens  fortunately,
that  Plutarch  hath  recorded  the  Event  with  fuch
Particularity  of  Circumftance,  as  leaves  no  Room  to  doubt
on  this  Subjedl.  Pericles  was  the  Man,  who  for  his
own  private  Ends  of  Popularity,  efFecled  this  ruinous-
Change  :  For  "  By  giving  the  People  the  Plunder  and
"  PoiTeiTion  of  the  Lands  taken  from  the  Enemy,  and  by

[ij  See  Sea.  v.  Art.  34.

♦'  fquandering


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^W  M  U  S  I  C.  147

'  fquanderiug  the  public  Monies  (formerly  referved  for  the
'  Ufes  of  War)  in  Shews  and  Plays  for  their  Enter-
'  tainment,  and  by  Grants  of  LargefTes  and  Penfions,  he
'  changed  them  from  a  fober,  modeft,  and  thrifty  People,
'  who  maintained  themfelves  by  their  own  Labour,  into  a
*  riotous  and  debauched  Multitude;  and  thus  roufed  them
'  into  fedition againft  the  Court  of  the  Areopagus  [ly
From  this  Paflage  it  is  evident,  that  Pericles  not  only
debauched  the  Athenian  People ;  but  that  the  Exhibition
of  Plays  and  Shews  was  one  of  the  very  Engines  of  Cor-
ruption [;«]. — The  concurrent  Teftimony  of  Xenophon
clears  the  whole  Affair ;  and  gives  as  a  full  View  of  the
Confequences  of  this  general  Corruption,  fo  far  as  the  old
Comedy  is  concerned. For  in  his  Difcourfe  on  the  Athe-
nian Republic,  he  informs  us,  iji.  That,  at  the  Period  we
have  now  fixed, "  The  Body  of  the  People  expelled  All
*•  Good  Men  from  the  Magiftracy,  and  advanced  wicked
"  Men  in  their Places." zdly.  That  "  they  took  the
"  Gymnajiic  and  Mufical  Exercifes  out  of  the  Hands  of  the
"  better  Sort ;  and  gave  the  Practice  and  Profit  of  them
"  to  the  Dregs  of  the  People." ^dly,  That  *<  in  their

[/]  In  Pericle.

[ni]  Thus  Cicero  fpeaks  of  the  old  Greek  Comedy. — "  Efto  :  popu-
"  lares  Homines,  improbos,  in  Rempublicam  feditiofos,  Cleortem,  Clea-
"  phontem,  Hyperbolum  laefit : — Patiamur  : — Sed  Periclem,  cum  jam  fuai
"  Civitati  maxima  Au(Storitate  plurimos  annos  Domi  et  Bello  praefuiflet,
"  violari  Verfibus,  et  eos  agi  in  Scena,  non  plus  dccuit,  quam  fi  Plautui
"  nofter  voluiflet,  aut  N/vvius,  P.  et  Cn.  Sclpionl,  aut  Ceecilius  M.  Caioni,

"  maledicerc." Ex  Frag.  Cic.  de  Rep.  1.  iv. Where, we  may  ob-

ferve,  the  Judgment  of  Cicero  is  falfe  concerning  Pericles  :  As  it  ap-
pears, that  he  was  the  firft  Corrupter  of  the  People  :  And  it  feems  to  have
been  a  juft  Puniftiment,  that  he  was  laflied  by  that  illiberal  Comedy,  which
His  own  Influence  firft  let  in  upon  the  State.

U  2  *•  Comedies


1,48 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,,  &c.

"  Comedies  they  fuffered  none  to  be  ridiculed,  but  thofe
''  of  higher  Station  and  Worth;  unlefs  one  of  their  owa
"  Rank  happened  to  diftinguifti  himfelf  by  fomething
**  praifc  worthy ;  and  then  He  became  the  Objedl  of
"  theatrical  Derilion  [«]."

Thefe  Evidences  are  fo  clear  and  precife,  as  to  leave  na
Foundation  of  a  Doubt  on  this  Subjecl.

Lord  Shaftesbury  hath  greatly  miftaken  this  Matter.
in  his  Advice  to  an  Author  \o\ ;  and  is  as.carelefs  or  defec-
tive here  in  the  Circumflance  of  Erudition,  as  at  other  timeS'
ifi  that  of  Reafoning.  He  feems  in  one  Paflage  to  attri-
bute the  late  Cultivation  and  Eftablilliment  of  the  old
Comedy  to  its  being  of  more  difficult  Compofition  than
Tragedy  :  '■<  In  this  Part  (Tragedy)  the  Poets  fucceeded
<^  fooner  than  in  Comedy,  or  the  facetious  Kind ;  as  it  was
*'  natural  indeed  to  fuppofe,  fmce  this  was  in  reality' the-
'^  eafieft  (eafier)  Manner  of  the  two."  This  is  deciding  a
doubtful  Point  by  a  mere  Affirmation:  For  the  com-
parative Difficulty  of  thefc  two  Kinds  hath  been  treated'
aj  large  by.  a  learned  and  moil  judicious  Writer,  who  after
a  candid  and  profound  Difcuffion  of  the  Queftion,  thinks
it  beft  to  leave  it  undecided  [/>].  The  noble  Writer,
next,  feems  to  attribute  the  late  Cultivation  of  Comedy
tp  "the  Spirit  of  literary  Criticifm,  which  in  the  Nature,

[«]  Xenophon  V^  Rep.  Athen,  [«]  CharaSferiJiks,  vol.  i.

[/)]  Brumoy  Theatre  des  Gfecs,  torn.  vi. — This  Queftion  hath  indeed  -
been  faid,  by  a  learned  Writer,  to  admit  of  a  decifive  Anfwer,  on  this
Principle;  that  "Tragedy,  whofe  End  is  the  Pathos,  produces  ft  by
"  Jsiion,  while  Comedy  produces  its  End,  the  Humorous^  by  CharaSier.  .
'*  Now  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  paint  Manners,  than  to  plan  Aiiion ;
'^  becaufe  That  requires  the  Philofopher's  Knowledge  oi  human  Nature;
*?  this,  only '  the  Hijiorian's  Knowledge  of  human  Events." — But  in  the
ifeQurfe  of  thi?  Argument,  it  feems  entirely  forgot,  that  the  tragic  Poet's

'f-  of,.-


of  V  O  E  T  R  Y and  MUSIC:.  149.

"of  things  could  not  arife,  till  it  had  Materials  to  work
"■  on  j  and  This  he  fuppofeth  to  have  been  thtfolfe  Sublime
"  of  their  'tragedies,  which  were  often  parodied  in  the
"  old  Comedy." — But  neither  can  this  Caufe  be  fufficient
to  account  for  the  EfFedt ;  becaufe  it  appears  that  the
befl  Men,  as  well  as  the  beft  Tragedies,  were  parodied
or  ridiculed  more  commonly  than  the  worft.  Of  this,  the
Fate  of  Socrates  may  fland  as  a  convincing  Proof..
This  Fad  could  not  entirely  efcape  the  Notice  of  the  noble .
Writer;  for  he  acknowledges,  that  "  even  this  Remedy  it-
"  felf  was  found  to  turn  into  a  Difeafe  [r]."  But  we  have
already  proved,  that  it  was  a  Difeafe  even  on  its  firft  Appear-
ance. In  a  Word,  the  Authorities  given  above,  in  Support
of  the  true  Caufes  of  the  Cultivation  and  Eftablifhment  of
the  old  Greek  Comedy  at  Athens,  contain,  the  cleareft
Proof  that  the  noble  Writer's  Deductions  on  this  Subjedl
zx&Jpecious,  but  not/olid;  and  that  he  difcovers  but  little  of
what  he  feems  to  value  fo  much,  "  a  Comprehenfion  of

Province  is  not  only  to  plan,  but  to  paint  too.  Had  he  no  farther  Tafk,
than  what  depends  on  the  mere  Hijiorian's  Knoivledge  of  human  Events^
the  Reafoning  would  hold.  But  as  it  is  the  firft  and  moft  eflential  Effort
of  his  Genius,  in  the  Conftrudion  of  a  compleat  Tragedy,  to  invent  and
order  a  pathetic  Plan,  conjijlent  in  all  it's  Parts,  and  rifing  towards  it's  Com-
pletion by  a  Succejpon  of  Incidents  which  may  keep  up  and  continually  in-
creafe  Terror  or  Pity ;  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  Perfeilion  of  his  Plan  depends
not  on  hia  mere  hijioric  Knowledge  of  human  Events.,  but  on  his  philofophic
Difcernment  of  human  PoJJions  ;  aided  by  a  warm  and  enlarged  Invention  :
Talents  as  rare,  at  leaft,  as  the  Knoivledge  or  Difcernment  of  human  Cha-  '
rasters. — If  to  this  we  add  the  fubfequent  Tafk,  of  giving  the  high  Colourings
oi.PaJJion  to  the  tragic  Plan  thus  ordered,  the  Difficulty  of  writing  a  compleat
Tragedy  may  feem  to  be  in  fome  Refpedls  equal,  in  others  fupcrior  to  that  of
producing  a  compleat  C««^^:  For  in  the  ConduSi  of  this  lafl  Species,  it  is
acknowledged,  that  zfmall  Degree  oi  poetic  Invention  will  fupport  it.
[r]  P.  148.

Sr^  «'•  ancients


150 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

*'  ancient  Manners  and  ancient  Hiftory." — But,  what  is
odd  enough,  after  having  feparately  afllgned  thefe  fidli-
tious  Caufes  as  being  each  the  Foundation  on  which  the
old  Comedy  arofe  and  was  eftaWiftied,  He  at  length  glances
accidentally  upon  the  true  one  :  Yet  manifeftly  without
any  particular  Knowledge  of  the  Fads  which  fupport  it.
**  According  to  this  Homerical  Lineage  of  Poetry,  Comedy
*'  would  naturally  prove  the  Drama  of  lateji  Birth.  For
*'  though  Aristotle  cites  Homer's  Margites  as  analo-
"  gous  to  Comedy,  yet  the  ///Wand  Odyff'ey,  in  which  the
*'  heroic  Style  prevails,  having  been  ever  higheji  in  EJleim,
**  were  likelieft  to  be  Jirjl  wrought  and  cultivated  [s]."
We  may  conclude,  then,  upon  the  Authority  of  the  three
great  Ancients  cited  above,  that  "  the  Cultivation  and
"  Rjiablijijment  of  the  old  Greek  Comedy  arofe  from  the
<'  united  Corruption  and  Power  of  the  Athenian  Peo-
"  pie  ."

7.  **  The  Ridicule  and  Invedlive  of  their  Comedy,  thus
*'  eflablifhed,  was  pointed  chiefly  againft  thofe  Magiftrates
**  or  private  Men,  whofe  Qualities  were  hateful  to  the
*'  debauched  Populace."  For  the  Proof  of  this,  the  Read-
er is  referred  to  the  Pailages  already  cited  from  Plato,
and  Xenophon:  And  on  this  Solution,  the  Fate  of  So-
crates is  clearly  accounted  for.  Nor  could  any  thing
be  more  natural,  if  the  Caufes  here  affigned  for  the  Efta-
blifhment  of  the  old  Comedy  be  true.  '*  For  Corruption
*'  being  now  eftabliihed,  as  it  were,  by  Law :  that  is,  by
*'  the  Voice  of  a  degenerate  People,  which  flood  in  the
*'  Place  of  Law;  the  Poets  found  it  necefTary  to  gratify
*'  the  People's  Vices,  as  the  fureft  Road  to  Succefsj  and

[s]  CharaSleriJIks,  vol.  i.  p.  253.  Notes.'

4  .  "  the


0/  P  OE  TRY ^W  MUSIC.  151

"  the  only  Road  to this,  was  now  by  the  Ridicule  of
"  Virtue."

8.  "  A  Tyranny  fuddenly  ereded  itfelf  on  the  Ruins  of
**  the  corrupt  Athenian  People,  and  at  once  ftlenced  this
•*  Species  of  Comedy."  This  Event  happened  on  the  taking
of  Athens  by  Lysander  -, and  thro'  the  Authority  of
the  thirty  Tyrants  whom  he  eftabliflied  there. Thefe  Op-
prejfors  did  That  from  Fear^  which  upright  Magiftrates
would  have  done  from  Virtue. The  plain  Reafon  hath
been  affigned  above  :  "  Becaufe  every  thing  hateful  to  the
"  People  being  now  tlie  eftablifhed  Subjed:  of  the  comic
"  Mufe,  the Tyrants who had deftroyed the public
♦*  Liberty,  muft  expedl  to  become  the  Subjedt  of  Comedy,
"  if  permitted  to revel in  its former Licentioufnefs."
Here  again  the  noble  Author  of  the  Charadleriftics  feems
to  aflign  a  fictitious  Caufe  for  this  Event,  drawn  from  his
own  Conjedlures,  injflead  of  Hiflory. "  Nothing  could
"  have  been  the Caufe  of  this  gradual  Reform  in  the
"  Commonwealth  of  Wit,  beiide  the  real  Reform  of  Tafle
•'  and Humour  in  the Commonwealth  or  Government
•'  itfelf." — For,  faith  he,  "  it  little  concerned  x}c\z  Foreigners
"  in  Power  (the  thirty  Tyrants)  after  what  Manner  thofe
•'  Citizens  treated  one  another  in  their  Comedies ;  or  what
*•  fort  of  Wit  or  Humour  they  made  Choice  of,  for  their
"  ordinary  Diverfions  [t]." It  can hardly  be neceffary
to  point  out, in  what  Circumftance  this  Reafoning  is
defedive. Had  the  private  Citizens  buffooned  each  other,
only  in  their  Comedies,  the  Thirty  Tyrants  would  indeed
have  had  little  to  fear:  But  as  it  is  evident,  that  the. public
Magifirates,  and  their Conduct, had been the  {landing

[<]  CharaiieriJlUsy  vol.  i.  p.  250.  249.

Objeds


1,52 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

■Objeds  of  theatrical  Ridicule,  it  certainly  much  concerned
thefe  Foreigners  in  Power,  to.  prevent  that  farcaftic  Repre-
fentation  of  their  oppreflive  Government,  which  they  muft
neceflarily  expedt  from  the  keen  Spirit  of  an  exafperated
and  licentious  People.  The  noble  Writer  endeavours  to
confirm  his  Opinion  by  a  parallel  Inftance  drawn  from
the  Roman  Commonwealth ;  where  a  fimilar  Prohibition
took  Place  with  regard  to  the  Atellane  Fables,  at  a  Time,
when  no  Effedls  of  foreign  "  Power,  or  of  a  home  Ty-
*'  ranny  can  be  pretended  \u\"  But  this  Inftance,  joyned
to  the  Evidences  already  given  on  the  Subjedt,  inftead
of  confirming,  overturns  his  Syftem:  It  only  proves  what
was  alledged  above,  that  the  Athenian  Tyrants  did  that
from  Fear,  which  the  Roman  Magijlrates  did  from  Virtue.
9,  *'  The  Poets  found  a  Subterfuge,  for  the  Gratification
"  of  the  People  j  and  continued  to  reprefent  real  Cha-
*'  rafters  under  feigned  Names."  Thus  the  middle  Co-
medy was  naturally  eftablifhed.  For  this  was  the  only
Species  which  they  could  now  purfue  with  any  Proba-
bility of  Siiccefs  :  And  this  was  continued  without  much
Danger,  as  we  find  they  were  cautious  with  Refpeft  to
the  Perfons  of  the  Tyrants. —  That  fuch  was  the  true
Origin  of  this  Change  in  the  Charafter  of  the  Greek
Comedy,  appears  farther  from  the  two  following  Con-
fiderations.  Firft,  there  is  not  the  leaft  Reafon  to  be-
lieve the  Athenian  People  were  at  all  changed  from
their  coarfe  Manners  and  profligate  Charafter,  at  the
Time  when  the  old  Comedy  was  filenced  ;  And  fecondly,
by  the  Accounts  left  concerning  the  Genius  of  the  mid-
dle  Comedy,  it  appears,  that  it  was  in all Refpedts  as

.M  P.  251.

illiberal


•pf  P  O  E  T  R  Y and  MUSI  C.  1$^

illiberal  and  buffooning,  in  its  Beginnings  as  the  old
Comedy  had  been  ;  the  fingle  Circumftance  of  nominal
Defignation  only  accepted.  .

lo.  "A  great  Conqueror  zroCe:  And;,by  fubduing  a
**  Variety  of  Nations,  opened  a  Communication  between
*'  the  Commonwealth  of  Athens,  and  theea^ern  King-
-"  doms  which  were  of  more  luxurious'  and  refined  Man-
**  ners :  On  this  Event,  the  fecond  or  middle  Species  of
"  Comedy  naturally  received  a  Polifij ;  and,  laying  afide  the
**  indiredl  perfonal  Iiwedtive,  affumed  the  more  delicate
**  Form  of  general  Raillery ;  and  became  a  Picture  of
**  human  Life."  The  learned  Reader  will  eafily  fee,  that
Alexander  the -Great  is  the  Conqueror  here  alluded  to:
•in  his  Reign  it  was,  and  not  till  that  late  Period,  that
the  middle  Comedy  was  poliflied  into  the  new.  This  was
the  natural  Effe(ft  of  that  Politenefs,  which  was  introduced
at  Athens  by  a  frequent  and  familiar  Commerce  with
the  effeminate  Nations  of  the  Eaft.  Till  then,  although
the  Athenians  juftly  boafted  a  Superiority  in  the  ArtJt
yet  in  their  Converfe  and  Treatment  of  each  other,  the
concurrent  Authority  of  ancient  Hiftorians,  as  well  as  the
more  certain  Teftimony  of  their  own  remaining  Comedies,
affure  us,  that  they  were  of  an  illiberal  and  buffoonmg
Turn.  But  no  fooner  were  the  AJiatic  Luxuries  and  Re*
finements  brought  to  Athens,  by  the  Conquefls  of
Alexander,  than  their  coarfe  Manners  melted  gradually
into  falfe  Politenefs  and  Effeminacy.  Now,  "  one  of  the
"  firft  Effeds  of  a  growing  Politenels,  is  to  avoid  all
-"  Occafions  of  Offence;  and  this,  without  RefpecS:  to  any
•*'  Confequences,  either  good  or  bad, which  may  affedl

X  «  the


156 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

the  Model  of  the  fevere  Egyptian  Legiflatioii.  Af'teir
MiNos,  Thales  arofe :  In  whom  we  find  the  united
Charadlers  of  Legifktor  and  Mufician :  He  compofed
Laws,  for  the  Cretan  State,  and  fiing  them  to  his  Lyre  [y].
But  Mufic  being  fixed  to  certain  Forms  by  Law,  we  are
not  to  wonder  that  its  Progreffion  flopped,  as  at  Sparta  ;..
which  Commonweahh  was  modelled  on  the  rigorous  Efta-
blifhment  of  Crete.

With  Refpedt  to  Egypt,  the  Beginnings  of  that  famous-
Kingdom  are  fo  loft  in  its  Antiquity,  that  we  know  no-
thing of  the  firft  Advances  there  made  in  Mufic  from  its
original  Savage  State.  We  only  read,  that  in  fome  early
Period  of  Civilization  its  Forms  were  unalterably  fixed
by  Law,  and  therefore  all  Improvement  and  CorrnpttoiK
alike  prevented.

As  to  the  more  northern  Nations  of  Europe,  it  is  re-
markable, that  we  know  little  of  them  from  ancient  Hif-
tory  till  the  fecond  Period  of  Mufic  commenced,  that  is,
till  the  Legijlators  Charadter  had  been  JeparateJ  hom  tha>
of  the  Mufician.  The  cleareft  Inftaqce  of  the  Union  of
ihe  Legijlators  and  Bard's  Charadler  is  found  in  Snorro-
Sturloson,  who,  about  five  Hundred  and  fifty  Years
ago,  was  at  once  the  chief  Legijlator  and  moil  eminent
Bard  in  the  Ifle  of  Iceband  [x].  In  the  fegond  Period,,
we  meet  with  the  poetic  and  mufical  Character  united  in
almoft  every  northern  Clime,  under  the  revered  Denomi-
nation of  6'c^/<// or  ^^rrt'j-.  It  hath  been  already  obferved,
that  Odin  the  Scythian  Legillator,  boafted  that  the  Runic.

[>•]  As  Thales  fucceedtd"  RHADAiViANXHUS  and  Minos,  who  had
both  copied  the  Egyptian  Forms  of  Legiflation  ;  his  compofing Laivf  in
Verfe  could  only  be  the  EfFedl  of  mere  Imitation.

[zj  Preface  to  Nicholson's  hijh  Hiji^  Lih-ary.

Songs.


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^;?^  M  U  S  I  C.  1 57

Songs  had  been  given  him  by  the  Gods  [a].  A  Circum^
ftance  which  proves,  that  the  Charadler  of  Heroe  and
\  Mujician  had  been  united  in  the  Chiefs  of  that  fierce  and
>  favage  People,  in  the  Period  which  immediately  preceded
him.  We  learn  from  Sheringham  and  Bartholine,
that  after  the  firil:  Separation  had  been  made,  the  Scaldi,
Mujicians,  or  Bards,  were  a  Race  of  Men  highly  honoured
among  the  Scythian  or  Danijh  Tribes  :  That  their  Songs
were  of  the  legijlative  Caft ;  that  they  fung  the  great
Actions  of  their  Anceftors,  were  themfeives  renowned  War-
riors, and  kindled  the  Valour  of  their  Armies  by  their
Songs  :  That  none  were  admitted  of  the  Order,  but  thofe
of  the  moft  diftinguifhed  Families  ^b]  :  That  they  were
above  the  Meannefs  of  Flattery;  and  were  revered,  even'
in  the  Courts  of  Kings  [c].

We  meet  with  the  Gaulij'b  Bards  under  the  fame  Period  '--
of  Separation  :  But  their  Spirit  feems  to  have  been  con-
trouled  by  a  more  peaceable  Species  of  Legiflation.  For
St R ABO  tells  us,, that  "  throughout  the  whole  Diftrid:  of
"  Gaul,  there  are  three  Kinds  of  Men,  v/ho  are  held  in
*'  fingular  Honour :  The  Bards,  the  Fates,  and  the  Druids:
"  The  Bards  are  Poets,  and  Jing  their  Hymns  :  The
."  Fates  perform  Sacrifice,  and  contemplate  the  Nature  of
"  Things  :  The  Druids,  befides  this,  hold  Difcourfes  on
^^  Morals.  They  are  efteemed  thejufteft  of  Men  j  and
•'  therefore  are  intrufted  with  the  Determination,  of  all
"  Differences,  public  and  private;  and  fometimes  peace-
"  ably  end  a  Quarrel,  when  Armies  are  drawn  out,  and
"ready  to  decide  it  by  the  Sword  [^J." The  Evidence  of

{a]  See  above,  Sefl.  v.  [^]  Sheringham //? //»^/.  Orig.  p,  173.

[<■]  Bartholinus  d:  Contemptu  Mortis  apud  Danes,  1.  i. c.  8.  10.
y^ L-  '•'"  D I  ODOR  it's


158  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

DiODORus  is  ftill  more  particular;  and  proves,  that  they
were  not  infenfible  to  the  original  Sallies  of  comic  and
farcaftic  Wit.  "  They  fing  (faith  He)  to  Inftruments
**  refembling  our  Lyres ;  praijing  fome,  and  fatyrizing
"others.  When  Armies  are  ready  to  engage,  if  they
"  but  come  between,  they  immediately  put  an  End  to
"  the  Battle;  as  if  their  Warriors  were  fo  many  wild
'<  Beafts,  which  they  had  charmed  by  the  Power  of  their
«'  Songs  [d]."

The  Britijh  Bards,  about  the  fame  Time,  were  precifely
of  the  fame  Charaderj  as  we  learn  from  their  contem-
porary iJowf?;?  Authors  [^].  In  a  fucceeding  Period,  when
the  Diftradtions  of  our  Country,  had  driven  the  native
Britons  into  Wales,  an  Eriglip  King  ftill  felt  their  Power,
amidfl  the  Mountains  and  Poverty  of  that  barren  Region.
He  was  fo  highly  exafperated  by  the  Influence  of  their
Songs,  which  breathed  the  Spirit  of  Liberty  and  War,  and
retarded  his  Conquefl  over  a  hardy  People,  that  he  bafely
ordered  them  to  be  flain :  An  Event,  which  hath  lately
given  Birth  to  an  elegant  and  fublime  Strain  of  Poetry  \f].

Of  the  Genius*of  thofe  Britijh  Bards  who  inhabited  the
northern  Diftridls  of  the  Ifland,  we  have  a  noble  Proof
in  the  Poems  lately  publifhed  under  the  Name  of  Ossi  an.
Thefe  appear  to  have  been  compofed  and  fung,  during
the  fecond  Period  of  Mufic  ;  that  is,  when  the  Bard's  Pro-

[d]  DiOD.  1.  V.

1e}  A  fingular  Circumftance  relative  to  the  Britifl)  Bards  ^eferves  No-
tice. It  is  raid,  that  "  although  they  were  inferior  to  the  Druids  in  Rank^
*'  yet  they  were  prior  in  Antiquity."  [Sammes's  Phocnic.  Ant.  of  Brit. '\
A  Circumftance  which,  though  improbabje  in  it's  firft  Appearance,  is
clearly  accounted  for,  on  the  Principles  of  this  Diflertation ;  as  it  only
implies  thit  Melody  and  Seng  were  prior  to  religious  Rites.  [See  SetS.  v.
Art.  7.]  [/]  An  Ode,  by  Mr.  Gray.

feffion


e/ POETRY  tfW  MUSIC.  155^

ftflion  had  feparated  from  that  of  the  Legiflator,  yet  flill
retained  its  Power  and  Dignity  in  full  Union.  For
OssiAN,  the  declared  Author  of  the  Poems,  was  the  Son
of  the  royal  Fin  gal,  accompanied  him  in  his  Wars,
and  fung  his  Atchievements  to  the  Harp.  Thefe  Poems
give  a  noble  Confirmation  to  many  of  the  Principles  ad-
vanced in  this  Analyfis.  They  are  of  various  Forms  j
though  none  of  them  properly  unmixed.  The  Song,  m
the  Days  of  this  fublime  and  original  Bard,  appears  evi-
dently to  have  worn  the  inartificial  and  mixed  Forms  of
Gompofition,  which  we  have  found  generally  and  of
Courfe  to  prevail  in  the  early  Periods. .  Thus,  Fin  gal
is  chiefly  Epic ;  yet  the  hymnal  Species  abounds  in  it :
Others  are  dramatic;  yet  in  thefe,  the  narrative  often  takes
Place :  Others,  again,  are  in  the  Form  of  Odes;  yet  even
thefe  are  flrongly  mixed  and  marked  with  the  Epic  and  .
dramatic  Manner  [y].

The  natural  Flame  of  favage  Mufic  and  Poetry  is  now
almofl  entirely  quenched  in  the  feveral  Parts  of  this  Ifland :

[y]  As  thefe  Circumftances  are  internal  Proofs  of  the  Antiquity  of  the
Poems  ;  fo  there  are  other  collateral  Evidences  of  the  fame  Nature,  which.
feem  clearly  to  confirm  it.  Such  are  the  grand  Simplicity  of  Imagery  .
and  Didtion,  the  ftrong  Draughts  of  rude  Manners  and  uncultivated  Scenes
of  Nature,  which  abound  in  all  thefe  Poems ;  Pidtures,  which  no  civilized
Modern  could  ever  imbibe  in  their  Strength,  nor  confequently  could  ever
throw  out.  Such,  again,  are  the  frequent  Allufions  (wrought  into  the
very  Effence  of  the  Poems)  to  the  Principles  of  the  old  Celtic  Religion,
which  in  ancient  times  had  overfpread  thefe  Kingdoms :  Of  this  Nature
is  That  which  the  Tranflator  calls  the  mojl  extravagant  FiSlion  in  all
Ossian's  Poems  j  I  mean,  tlie  Battle  between  Fingal,  and  the  Ghoft
«r  Spirit  of  Loda  *  :  Now  this,  though  it  carries  the  Appearance  of
Extravagance  and  ill-judged  Improbability,  yet,  upon  a  nearer  View,
■will  be  found  to  contain  an  internal  Evidence  of  the  Antiquity  of  the
•  Carric-Thura:  A  Poem.

2  In


j6o yf  Dissertation  tn  the  Union,  &;c.

In  England,  it  loft  its  Power  by  the  Migration  of  the
ti&t'ive  Brkofis  into  Wales  :  In  Wales,  it  was  quenched
by  the  Cruelty  of  Edward  :  In  the  Highlands  of  Scot-
land, the  Writer  is  well  informed,  that  the  Bard's  Pro-
feflion  was  upheld  in  fome  Degree  of  Honour,  till  near
the  Beginning  of  this  Century.  About  which  Time,  the
Communication  of  the  Inhabitants  with  the  more  civilized
Parts  of  the  Kingdom  by  Degrees  affimilated  their  Man-
ners to  thofe  of  their  Neighbours.;  by  which. means  the
Profeffion  became  extindl  [g] .

The  Hiftory  of  the  Ifi/h  Bards  is  perhaps  of  all  others
the  moft  extraordinary  J  and  will  therefore  deferve  a  par-
ticular Regard.  Hiftory  doth  not  carry  us  up  to  the
iirft  PeriocJ,  in  which  the  Legijlators  and  Bard's  Cha-
rafter  are  united  in  the  ^me  Perfon.  But  of  the  fecond
.Period  we  have  large  Account.<!  in  the  Irifi  Hiftorians.
For  we  are  informed,  there  were  three  principal  Tribes
.among  the  ancient  Irijh.  "  The  Firft  were  Leaders^
*'  Chiefs,  or  Legijlators:  The  Second  were  Druids  or
•'*•  Priejls:  The  Third  were  Bards. The  two  laft:  were

Poem;  as  it  is  drawn  from  the  very  Effence  of  the  old  Celtic  Belief.
Thus  fpeaks  the  learned  Bartholine  : — "  Summa  Audacia  credebatur
*'  Ludla  cum  Spcdris  non  formidataf."  "  It  was  efteemed  the  higheft
"  Acft  of  Courage,  to  dare  to  encounter  a  Ghoft." — But  it  muft  be  ob-
.ferved,  that  the  Spirit  of  their  chief  God  Odin  was  an  Exception  to  this
Rule  :  The  Living  and  the  Dead  were  all  deemed  fubje£l  to  his  Controul:
therefore,  the  Spirit  of  LoDA  was  not  the  Spirit  of  Odin,  but  of  fome
inferior  Deity.

[^3  About  the  Clofe  of  the  laft  Century,  John  Glass  and  Johm
Macdonald,  Bards  by  Profeffion,  who  refided  and  were  refpefted  as
fuch  in  the  Houfes  of  two  Highland  Chiefs,  traveled  fifty  Miles  and  met
by  Appointment  in  Lochabar,  to  vindicate  their  own  Honour  and  that
of  their  refpedive  Chiefs  at  a  public  Meeting,  in  z poetic  and  muftcal  Conteji.
•f-  De  Contcmptu  Mortis  apud  Danes,  1.  ii.  c.  2.

"  honoured


ef  POET  RY and  MV  SIC. ' i6i

honoured  with  an  Appellation  equivalent  to  the  Name
cfGoiIs[g],

The  Bards  had  eftates  fettled  on  them,  that  they  might
be  free  from  worldly  Cares :  They  lived  in  perfed:  In-
dependence, and  were  obliged  to  no  Service  :  Their  Per-
fons  were  inviolable  :  To  kill  them,  was  efteemed  the
blacked  Crime;  and  it  was  held  an  Acl  of  Sacrilege  to
fcize  their  Eftates,  even  for  the  public  Service,  and  in
Times  of  the  greateft  Diflrefs  [/>].

The  Profeflion  was  hereditary  :  But  when  the  Bard
died,  his  Eftate  defccnded  not  to  his  eldeft  Son,  but  to  the
moll  accomplilhed  of  his  Family  in  the  mufical  Profcflton.
A  Law  was  made  by  Ollamh  Fodhla,  one  of  their
greateft  Kings,  that  none  rtiould  be  invefled  with  the
Dignity  of  a  Bard,  but  thofc  of  the  moft  illuftrious
Families  [/].

The  Bards,  the  Druids,  and  Nobility,  were  fummoned
by  the  fame  King,  to  a  triennial  Fejiival,  which  was  thus
by  him  eflabliflied,  to  tranfmit  to  Pofterity  the  Authentic
Songs  of  the  Bards,  as  the  Materials  of  their  future  Hif-
tories.  In  Confequence  of  this,  the  approved  Songs  of
the  ancient  Bards  were  preferved  in  the  Cuflody  of  the
King's  Antiquary  J  and  are  appealed  to  by  Keating,  as
the  Foundation  of  his  Hiftory  [/^],  Many  of  them  were
fabulous  ;  but  this  Circumftance  hath  no  eflential  Relation
to  our  prefent  Inquiry,

Garments  of  different  Colour  were  appropriated  to  the
various  Ranks  of  the  Kingdom  :  So  high  was  the  Power

Ig]  KtATiKG'i  Hi/l.  of  Ireland,  p.  48.  [h]  lb.  p,  13*,  &c.

£/■]  Ibid.  [i]  lb.  ^  132.  k  Preface,  p.  23.

Y  and


i62 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

ancj  Dignity  of  the  Bards, that  they  wore  xhtfame  Colour
with  the  royal  Family  [I].

Thus  inverted  with  Honours,  Wealth,  and  Power ;  and
pofl'efled  of  an  Art  which  gave  them  a  natural  Influence
ov'erthe  Minds  of  the  People;  we  find,  that  about  the
year  558,  they  had  become  infolent,  deeply  corrupted,
and  dangerous.  Hence,  the  reigning  King  convened  a
general  Council  of  the  Nobility  and  Gentry  (for  Chrifti-
anity  being  now  planted  in  Ireland,  the  Druids  were
no  more)  with  Intention  to  expel  them  the  Ifland.  They
were  now  become  a  Kind  of  facred  Order,  or  College  ;•
which  was  grown  fo  numerous,  that  one  third  of  the
Kingdom  is  faid  to  have  ranked  therafelves  in  this  Clafs,.
as  a  fafe  Afylum  for  Idlenefs  and  Hypocrify.  When  the
Principal  Bards  aflembled  in  a  Body  to  divert  this  im-
pending Storm,  they  met,  to  the  Number  of  a  Thoufand.
This  may  account  for  the  Num,bers  that  claimed  to  be
of  the  Profeflion  ;  for  every  Principal  Bard  retained  thirty
of  inferior  Note,  as  his  Attendants ;  and  a  Bard  of  the
fecond  Order  was  followed  by  a  Retinue  oi  fifteen.  In
this  Convention,  after  many  Debates,  it  was  refolved  that
they  fliould  leave  the  Ifland,  and  retire  into  Scotland,  be-
fore the  Sentence  of  their  Banifliment  was  pronounced, —
However,  the  Sentence  was  mitigated :  They  were  al-
lowed to  difperfe  themfelves  over  the  Ifland,  and  promifed
to  live  in  a  Manner  lefs  ofl^enfive  to  the  Public  [w].

In  a  fucceeding,  and  no  very  diftant  Period, we find'
them  again  grown  troublefome  to  the  Kings,  who  com-,

[/]  Keating's  Hj/?.  of  Ireland, p.  127.  [«]  lb.  370,  &c.

plained


of  POETRY anJ  MV  SIC.  163

plained  of  them,  as  a  Burthen  to  the  People,  lazy,  covet-
ous, and  infatiable.  On  this,  their  Number  was  leffened
and  regulated:  By  the  Advice  of  St.  Colum  Cill,
every  provincial  Chief  had  om  learned  Bard  allowed  him
in  his  Retinue,  \.o  record  t\iQ  Atchievements  of  his  Family:
Their  Independance,  with  a  competent  Revenue,  was
preferved :  And  this  Regulation  was  the  Standard,  by
which  the  Society  of  Bards  were  dired:ed  in  fucceeding
Ages  [«].

'Tis  to  be  obferved,  that  in  fome  unrecorded  Period,  a
Separation  had  taken  Place  in  the  Bard's  ProfelTion :  In
the  early  Times,  the  Offices  of  Poet  and  Lyriji  were
united  in  the  fame  Perfon  :  In  the  later  Ages,  it  appears,
that  the  Bard  only  compofed  the  Poem ;  and  that  it  was
fling  by  a  Rhapfodiji  or  Harper  at  the  public  Feftivals.

However,  we  find  that  on  the  Extinction  of  Learn-
ing, and  Increafe  of  Barbarifm  in  this  Kingdom,  the
native  Vigour  of  the  poetic  Stock  again  Ihot  up  in  a
fucceeding  Age;  and  for  Want  of  a  proper  Culture,
was  again  become  one  of  the  ruling  Evils  of  the  Coun-«
try,  in  the  Time  of  Spenser  j  Who  gives  the  follow-
ing animated  Defcription  of  their  Songs  and  Cha^
raSler :  "  There  is  amongft  the  Irijh  a  certain  Kind  of
"  People  called-  Bardes,  which  are  to  them  inflead  of*
♦'  Poets,  whofe  Profeffion  is  to  fet  forth  the  Praifes  of
"  Difpraifes  of  Men  in  their  Poems  or  Rythmes ;  thd
"  which  are  had  in  fo  high  Regard  and  Eftimation  amongft
"  them,  that  none  dare  difpleafe  them  for  Fear  to  run
.  **  into  Reproach through  their  Offence,  and  to  be  made

{n}  Keating's  Hj/l.  of  Ireland, p.  380,  381.

Y  2  ••  infamous


164. -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

"  infamous  in  the  Mouths  of  all  Men. For  theif  Verfes
"  are  taken  up  with  a  general  Applaufe,  and  ufually  y?/;;g-
**  at all  Feajls and Meetings by certain other Ferfons,
**  whofe proper Furuflion  that  is, who  alfo  receive for
"  the  famegreat  Rewards  and  Reputation  amongl>  them."—
«*  Thefe  Irtjh  Bardes  are  for  "the  moft  Part  fo  far  from
**  inftructing  young  Men  in  moral  Difcipline,  that  they
**  themfelves  do  more  deferve  to  be  fharply  difciplined  :
*•  For they feldom  ufe  to  choofe unto  themfelves  the
*'  Doings  o? good  Men  for  the  Arguments  of  their  Poems,-
"  but whomfoever they find to be  moft licentious of
"  Life,  moft  bold  and  lawlefs  in  his  Doings,  moft  danger-
"  ous  and  defperate  in  all  Parts  of  Difol'jedience  and  rebel-
"  lious  Difpofition  j  Him  they  Jet  up  and  glorify  in  their
"  Rythmesy  Him they  praife  to  the  People,  and  to  young
."  Men  make  an  Example  to  follow." — Thus  **  evil  things
*'  being decked and attired with the  gay Attire of
**  goodly  Words,  may  eafily  deceive  and  carry  away  the
,«<  AfFedlion  of  a  young  Mind  that  is  not  well  ftayed,  but
•«  defirous  by  fome  bold  Adventures  to  make  Proof  of
"  himfelf. For  being  (as  they  all  be)  brought  up  idely
•*  without  Awe  of  Parents,  without  Precepts  of  Mafters,
♦*  and  without  Fear  of  OiFence  -,  not  being  diredled,  nor
**  employed  in  any  Courfe  of  Life  which  may  carry  them
''  to  Virtue;  will  eafily  be  drawn  to  follow  fuch  as  any
M  fhall fet  before  them  :  For  a  young  Mind  cannot  reft  :
*'  If  he  be  not  ftill  bufied  in  fome  Goodnefs,  he  will  find
"  himfelf  fuch  Bufinefs,  as  ftiall  foon  bufy  all  about  him.
•'  In  which,  if  he  (hall  find  any  to  praife  him,  and  to
**  give  him  Encouragement,  as  thofe  Biirdes  and  Rythmers
"  do  for  little  Re\vard,  or  a  Share  of  a  Jloln  Cow,  then
a  "  waxeth


0/  P  O  E  T  R  Y and  MUSI  C.  \t^

**  waxeth  he  mofl:  infolent  and  half  mad  with  the  Love
**  of  himfelf,  and his  own lewd Deeds. And as for
"  Words  to  fet  off  fnch  Lewdnefs,  it  is  not  hard  for  them
*•  to  give  a  goodly  and  painted  {hew  thereunto,  borrowed-
**  even  from  the  Praifes  which  are^  proper  to  Virtue  itfelf :
*<  As of  a moil: notorious "Thief  and  wicked Outlaw,
"  which  had  lived  all  his  Life  Time  of  Spoils  and  Robberies,
"  one  of  their  Bardes  in  his  Praife  will  fay,  that  he  was
"  none  of  the  idle  Milk-Sops  that  was  brought  up  by  ther-
"  Fire-fide;  but  that  moft  of  his  Days  he  fpent  in  Arms
'"  and valiant  Enterprifes : That he did  never eat  his
".Meat,  before  he  had  won  it  with  his  Sword  :  That  he
"  lay  not  all  Night  (lugging  in  a  Cabin  under  his  Mantle; .
"  but  ufed  commonly  to  keep  others  waking to  defend
**  their  Lives;  and  did  light  his  Candle  at  the  Flames  of.
"  their  Ploufes,  to  lead  him  in  the  Darknefs  :  That  the
■•*  Day  was  his  Night,  and  the  Night  his  Day  :  That  he
**  loved not  to  be  long  wooing  of  Wenches  to  yield  to
"  him;  but  where  he  came,,  he  took  by  Force  the  Spoil
♦'  of  other  Men's  Love,  and  left  but  Lamentation  to  their
'*  Lovers :  That  his  Mufic  was  not  the  Harp,  nor  La}-*
"  of  Love,  but  the  Cries  of  People,  and  the  claOiing  of
"  AroKJur:  And  finally,  that  he  died,  not bewailed  of
"  many,  but  made  many  wail  when  he  died,,  that  dearly
"  bought,  his  Death." — "I  have  caufed  divers  of  thefe
"  Poems  to  be  tranflated  unto  me,  that  I  might  under-
"  ffand  them:  And  furely, they favoured  oi  fwect  Wit
"  and  good  Invention ;  hwt  fkilled  not  of  the  goodly  Ortm-^
*'  ments  of  Poetry:  Yet  were they  fprinkled  with fome •
"  pretty  Flowers  of  their  natural  Device,  which  gave  good
"Grace  and  Comelinefs  unto  them: The  vvliich  it is.

great


i.'66 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

**  great  Pity  to  fee  fo  abufed,  to  the  gracing  of  Wickednefs
*<  and  /^/^^,  which  with  ^roo^  ^fag^  would  ferve  to  adorn
"  znd beautijy  Virtue  [<?]."

This  Account  of  the  Irifi  Bards  is  not  inferted  here,  as
a  mere  Hiftory  of  Fadts ;  but  wilh  a  fai  ther  View  of
confirming  the  Principles  on  which  this  Diliertation  is
built.  And  the  Writer  thinks  that  all  the  Fadls  (from
the  early  State  of  the  Bards  when  they  were  efteemed  as
Gods,  down  to  their  laji  Condition  when  they  were  funk,
into  the  Abetters  of  Thieving  and  Robbery  J  arife  fo  naturally
from  the  Principles  given  above,  that  he  is  difpofed  to
leave  the  particular  Application  to  the  Reader's  Sagac'ty.

SECT. IX.

Of  the  natural  Union  and  BrogreJJions  of  Melody  and  Song  in
China,  Peru,  and  India.

SUCH  have  been  the  natural  Union  and  ProgreJJions  of
Melody  and  Song,  in  the  babarous  Nations  of  Europe.
If  we  travel  to  the  Extremes  of  Eaft  and  Weft^_on  the
vaft_Con tinen ts  of  Asia  and  America,  we  fhall  find
new  and  ftrong  Confirmations  of  the  Pro^refjiofiso^\it(z
Arts,  as  they  have  been  here  deduced  from  favageLife  and'
Manners.

The  Chinefe  hav£  ever  been  of  a  mild  and  peaceable  Cha-
rafter :  Their  Mujic  will  be  found  analogous,  'Tis  generally
fuppofed,  thatCoNFUciuseftabhllied  i\^<t\x  Mujic  zn^Rites :
but  it  appears  from  fome  curious  Fragments  of  ancient
Chinefe  Hiftory,  that  Mufic  and  the  Rites  exifted  in  Union,
long  before  the  Age  of  that  Philofopher  [/>]. "  Tcho-

[o]  Spenser's  View  of  the  State  of  Ireland,  \p\  Extraits  des

Hiji.  Chinois,  publiflied  by  Mr.  Goguet,  p.  550,

4  " YONG,


tff  P  O  E  T  R  Y ff«/  M  U  S  I  C.  167

''  YONG,  the  fixteenth  Emperor  of  the  ninth  Period,  hearing
**  a  Concert  of  Birds,  invented  a  Species  of  Mulic,  whofe
**  Harmony  was  irrefiftible.  It  touched  the  intelligent
"  Spul,  and  calmed  the  Heart  of  Man ;  fo  that  the  exter-
"  nal  Senfes  were  found,  the  Humours  in  a  juft  Poife,^
*'  and  the  Life  of  Man  lengthened  [$']."  Here  we  find
the  genuine  Pidlure  of  a  Chief,  at  once  Legijlator  and
Bard,  civilizing  a  favage  People.

The  Dance  was  improved  in  the  fame  Manner,  by  the
twentieth  King  of  the  ninth  Period,  to  the  Ends  of  peace-
ful Life  [r].  And  of  fuch  Importance  has  this  Branch
of  the  mufical  Art  been  always  held  in  China,  that  it
it*  is  an  eftablifhed  Maxim,  *'  that  you  may  judge  of  any
"  King's  Reign,  by  the  Dances  that  are  then  in  Ufe  [s]."

Thefe  Evidences  are  traditionary,  and  relate  to  the
fabulous  Times  :  But  even  in  a  later  Period,  we  find  the
kingly  and  mufical  Characters  united,  in  the  Perfonof  Fou-
Hi,  their  firft  great  imperial  Legiflator.  "  Fou-Hi  de-
"  livered  the  Laws  of  Mufic  :  After  he  had  invented  the
"  Art  of  Fijhing,  he  compofed  a  Song  for  thofe  who  ex-
"  ercifed  that  Art.  He  made  a  Lyre,  with  Strings  of
"  Silk,  to  banifli  all  Impurity  of  Heart :  And  in  his  Time
*' the  Rites  and  Mw/^t- were  in  gxtzX.  Perfe£iion\^t'\."  All
this  is  evidently  in  the  true  Spirit  of  a  peaceable  Legifla-
tion.  "Chin-nong  (a  fucceeding  Emperor)  compofed
"  Songs  on  the  Fertility  of  the  Earth.  He  made  a  beauti-
"  ful  Lyre,  and  a  Guitar  adorned  with  precious  Stones^
"  which  produced  a  noble  Plarmqny,  curbed  the  Pafilons,,
"and  elevated  Man  to  Virtue  and  heavenly  Truth\uy

[q']  Extraits  des  Hiji.  Chinoh,  publilhed by  Mr.  Goguet,  p.  552.
['•]  lb.  555. W  lb.  p.  556. [/j  lb.  p.  567. [u-\.  lb.  p.  572.

Thia>


a68 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

This  is  the  fame  Character  continued  under  a  Period  of
higher  Civilization.  The  lail:  Emperor  whom  I  find  to
have  retained  the  poetic  or  Mufical  Charadter,  was  Chao-
Haoj  who  is  faid  to  have  invented  "  a  new  Species  of
*'  Mufic,  to  unite  Men  with  fuperior  Beings."  After  him,
the  complex  Office  feems  to  have  feparated:  And  the
firft  great  Bardlike  Charadter  we  meet  witli  is  Confu-
cius, who  eftaWifhed  Mufic  and  the  Rites,  according
to  that  Form  which  they  flill  maintain  in  China  [to].
Por  here,  as  in  ancient  Egypt,  Crete,  and  Sparta,
every  thing  is  unalterably  fixed  by  Law;  by  which  Means,
Improvement  and  Corruption  are  alike  prevented.

With  Refpedt  to  the  Extent  of  the  Trogrejjion  of  Mufic
in  this  vaft  Empire ;  it  appears,  that  they  have  no  mufical
Notation  j  that  Compofition  in  Parts  is  altogether  un-
known; and  that  the  whole  Choir  fings  xhcfame  Melody:
That  their  Mufic  is  altogether  of  the  diatonic  Kind,  and
even  wretched  to  an  European  Ear  [x]  :  Yet  they  boaft  of
its  wonderful  Powers  in  former  Times  :  Whence  fome
of  the  Hifiiorians  feem  to  guefs  that  it  hath  degenerated ;
while  in  reality,  no  other  Confequcnce  can  be  juftly
drawn,  but  that  either  the  People  arc  lefs  ignorant  and
barbarous ;  or  that  Mufic  is  now  lefs  afiiduoufly  and
powerfully  applied;  or  that  certain  Separations  have  en-
/ued,  fimilar  to  thofe  which  took  Place  in  ancient  Greece  :
Any  of  which  Caufes  muft  naturally  defiiroy  its  Force.

It  appears,  however,  that  the  Progreflion  had  advanced
£o  far  in  fome  former  Period,  prior  to  Confucius,  as  to
jproduce  dramatic  Reprejentation,  mixed  with  Song:  And

[wj  Du  Halde  H't/l.  Chimis,  [*]  See  Specimens  of  it,  in

X)u  Hajlos.

in


of  POETRY and  MV  SIC.  169

in  Conformity  to  the  Principles  given  above,  we  find,
that  as  they  regard  not  the  Unities  of  A6tion,  Place,  or
Time,  fo  neither  is  any  continued  Choir  in  ufej  though
there  be  rhanifeft  Remains  of  it  in  their  Plays :  For  at  the
Conclufion  of  Scenes  or  Adls,  as  well  as  at  other  Times
when  a  pathetic  Circumftance  occurs,  the  Perfons  of  the
Play,  inftead  of  dec/aiming,  begin  to  Jing.  The  Prologue
refembles  that  uncouth  one  of  Greece,  that  is,  he  tells
you  who  he  is,  and  what  is  his  Errand.  All  their  Plays
have  a  moral  or  political  Direction,  fuited  to  the  Genius  of
the  People  and  the  State.  They  know  not  the  Difference
between  Tragedy  and  Comedy,  another  Circumftance  which
confirms  the  Principle  given  above,  concerning  the  trueRifft
and  Diftinftioa  of  thefe  two  Kinds  in  Greece  :  For  the
Chinefe,  as  they  have  ever  been  of  a  timid  and  peaceable  Cha-
radter,  fo  neither  are  they  given  toRaillery  or  Sarcafm,  but  al-
together to  Civility  and  mutual  Refpe£i.  Hence,  neither  the
Tragic  nor  comic  Drama  could  probably  arife,  fb  as  to
be  marked  as  a  dijlinB  Species.  Accordingly,  their  Plays
are  generally  of  an  intermediate  Caft,  between  Terror
and  Pity  on  the  one  Hand,  Sarcafm  or  Ridicule  on  the
other.  The  "  little  Orphan  of  China,"  indeed,  which  is
given  as  a  Specimen  by  Du  Halde,  borders  on  the
tragic  Species  :  But  this  Play  is  but  one  of  a  hundred,
moft  of  which  are  of  a  different  Caft ;  and  was  feletfted
by  him,  ^)ecaufe  he  thought  it  the  beft  adapted  in  its
Genius,  to  the  Spirit  and  Tafte  of  the  Europeans  :  For  he
tells  us  exprefly,  that  the  general  Charadier  of  their  Play«
are  altogether  different  from  this  ;  that  they  are  commonly
of  a  middle  Kind,  and  neither  Tragedy  nor  Cdmedy.  Another
Circumftance  of  ihe  Progreffio.i  muft  be  marked ;  which

Z  iSj


170 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

is,  that  their  A6iors  are  i.feparate  Rank  from  their  Poetri
that  they  arc  formed  into  Companies,  and  have  loft  their
original  Digftity  of  Office  and  Character.

In  the  ancient  Kingdom  of  Peru,  the  Progreffion  of
Miijic had  reached  the  fame  Period, though fomewhat
different in its Circumftances. Garcilasso de la
Vega informs  us, that  their  fabulous Songs  were  in-
numerable j  that  he  had  heard  many,  and  learnt  fome  of
them,  from  his  Anceftors,  who  were  the  laft  of  the  royal
Family  of  the  Incas. They were of  various Kinds,
founded  on  a  Variety  of  Paffion,  religious,  warlike,  and
amorous. They  had invented  a  Kind  of  unequal  Pipe,
formed  of  Reeds  of  different  Lengths,  precifely  the  fame
with  that  of  ancient  Greece. They  had  alfo  a  Species  of
Piute,  with  four  or  five  Stops  : Their  Mufic  was  fimplci
like  that  of  all  unpolifhed  Countries. Their  Incas  or
Chiefs  had  been  Poets  or  Mitfictans  in  the  early  Periods  j
and  the  Author  of  the  Commentaries  gives  a  Poem  com-
pofed  by  one  of  them,  which  bears  all  the  Marks  of  a
fpirited  and  favage  Original. They  had  their  dramatic  Re-
prefentations,  in  Part  refembling,  and  in  Part  differing  from
thofe  of  the  Chinefe. Their  Manners  and  Charadter,  hrave
though  not  ferocious, had naturally  produced Tragedy,
though  of  a  Kind rather  grand  than  terrible\_x]. But
their  mild  Temper,  in  Time  of  Peace  little  given  to  Sarcaftn,
feems  to  have  prevented  the  Birth  of  Comedy. Garci-
lasso, indeed, divides their  Drama  into  Tragedy  and
Comedy : But  this  was  manifeftly  the  Effedl  of  his  ow.i
preconceived  Opinions,  arid  arofe  from  a  Habit  of  con-
fidering all dramatic Compofition as belonging  to  one
[*]  See  above,  Scd.  vi.  Art.  24.


0/  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^«^  M  U  S  r  C.  171

of  thefe  Species.  For  he  tells  us  that  "  their  Tragedies
"  reprefented  their  military  Exploits  -,  the  Triumphs,
*'  Victories,  and  heroic  ASiions  of  their  renowned  Men  :
**  And  the  Subjed  or  Defign  of  their  Comedies  was  to
"  demonftrate  the  Manner  of  good  Hujhandry  in  culti-
*'■  vating  and  manuring  their  Fields,  and  to  fhew  the
"  Management  of  domeftic  Affairs,  with  other  familiar
"  Matters."  A  Circumftance,  which  ought  to  give  them
the  Title  of  Bucolic  or  Georgic  Drama,  rather  than  that  of
Comedy.  For  not  a  Word  occurs  concerning  Ridicule  or
Charadler ;  the  Umon  of  which  two  Circumftances  may
feem  to  conflitute  the  Ejfence  of  true  Comedy.  Thefe
Plays  were  compofed  by  the  Amautas  or  Bards,  whofe
Office  was  feparatcd  from  that  of  the  Incas,  but  ftill
held  in  Honour,  as  in  other  barbarous  Polities.  But  in
another  Refpedl,  the  Progreffion  was  different  from  that
in  China.  The  ASlors  maintained  the  original  Dignity
which  they  had  held  in  the  early  Periods :  For  the  Lords
and  Officers  of  the  Court  were  the  A5iors  j  and  as  foon
as  the  Play  was  ended,  they  took  their  Places  according
to  their  Degrees  [y'\.
To  thefe  we  may  add  one  Inftance  more,  concerning  the
natural  Union  and  Progreffion  of  Mufic  and  Poetry  :  An
Inftance  lefs  known,  yet  more  Angular  than  any  of  thefe
already  given.  When  the  Chrijiian  Mijjionaries  arrived
on  the  Coaft  of  proper  India,  they  found  a  Sedl  called  the
"  Chrijlians  of  St.  Thomas,"  living  in  great  Simplicity
and  Innocence ;  and  retaining  many  of  the  original  Cuf-
toms  of  their  favage  Forefathers  \z\ :  among  others,  they

[;>]  Garcilasjo  de  la  Vega  Comment.  Real.  1,  li,  c.  14,  15.
[z]  La  Croze  Hi/?,  du  Chrijl.  p.  38,  &c.

Z  2  found


J7* ^Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

found  thefe  Chriflians,  as  well  as  the  Pagans  of  the  Coun-
try, poffefled  of  rude  Miijic  and  Poetry,  in  their  natural
Union  and  Power.  They  acquiefced  in  the  Application
of  thefe  Arts,  already  made  by  the  Chriftian  Tribe,  and
wifely  laid  hold  of  their  Influence,  for  the  Converfion  of
the  Pagan  Natives.  Under  thefe  Circumftances,  the
following  Accounts  will  appear  natural  and  probable,  on
the  Principles  already  delivered.

Firft,  it appears that  the general and Fundamental

Pra(ftice  of  Jinging  the Praife  of  great  Men, had  been

maintained  from  the  moft  ancient  Times. In  Confequence

of  this,  *•  The  Synode  being  ended,  the  Partifans  of  the

'•  Union  compofed  in  the  Malabar  Tongue  a  long  Ode  or

**  Song,  which  contained  the  whole  Hijiory  of  the  Portu-

**  5""{/^  Prelate,  and  a  pompous  Detail  of  what  had  paffed

"  at  the  Synod. This  Nation  hath  preferved  the  ancient

"  Cuftom  of  confccrating  to  Pofterity  by  this  Kind  of

"  Poem  all  the  moft  remarkable  Events. The  Song  was

•*  caught  and  immediately  difperfed  every where; and

"  during  the  Vilits  which  the  Prelate  made,  the  •  People

"  fung  it  in  his Prefence; which  together  with their

"  Dances  and  Mujic  made  the  chief  Part  of  his  EntQrtain-

"  ment[rt]. When  he  went  to  Angamale,  the  Way

"  was  fpread  with  Carpets :  And  it  was  a  fine  Sight,  to

"  fee  a  Child  of  fix  Years  old, very  beautiful,  and  richly

"  drefied, who  fung melodioufly the whole Song  we

"  have  fpoken  of,  as  containing  the  Labours  of  the  Pre-

"  late  [by

The  religious  Song  and  Dance  were  no  lefs  -remarkably
and  Angularly  maintained  in  a  Kind  of  imperfect  Union,

[tf]  La  Croze  Hj/?.  du  Chrifi.  p.  28a.  [*]  lb.  p.  294.

2  *S


c;r  POETRY  and  MUSIC.  173

as  they  had  been  transferee!  from  Pagan  Objedts  to  thofe
of  Chrijiiamty.  "  In  the  fame  Place,  the  Chrijlian  Mala-
*'  bars,  to  amufe  the  Archbifliop,  gave  him  a  Ball  after
"  the  Manner  of  the  Country.  It  was  of  fo  fingular  a
*'  Nature,  that  I  am  perfuaded,  the  Reader  will  not  be
'*  difpleafed  with  the  Defcription.  Thefe  Dances  are
**  generally  pra<3:ifed  at  Night.  This  begun  at  eight  in
*'  the  Evening,  and  lafled  till  an  Hour  after  Midnight.
*'  None  but  the  Men  dance;  and  their  Modefty  and.
"  Referve  are  admirable.  Before  \h& .Dance  begins  they
"  all  make  the  Sign  of  the  Crofs,  and  fmg  the  Lord's
**  Prayer,  which  is  followed  by  a  Hymn,  in  Honour  of  St.
"  Thomas.  Their  other  Songs  rowl  chiefly  on  the  illujlrious
*'  A6lions  of  their  Forefathers,  or  the  Virtues  of  their
"  Saints.  In  a  Word,  this  Entertainment  has  all  the  Air
**  of  an  AB  of  Devotion^  on  which',  the  Portuguefd
"  Hijiorian  takes  Occafion  to  inveigh  againft  the  prophane
**•  Songs  of  the  Europeans,  which  feem  compofed  only  to
**•  infpire  Debauch  and  Immodefly  \c\."

The  Miflionaries  who  have .  vifited  the  oppofite  Coaft
of  CoROMANDEL,  give  US  Proof,  that  the  Progreffion  oi
Mufc  and  Poetry  had  not  flopped  at  this  early  Period,  but.
advanced  to  theatrical  Reprefentation ;  which,  we  fhall
fee,  they  were  bold  enough  to  apply  even  to  the  great
■tPurpofe  of  Converfon.  "  In  this  Country  they  have  an
«*  extreme  Paflion  for  the  Theatre.  Good  Poets  are  held
'*-  in  great  Veneration  among  this  People,  who  are  by  no
♦<  means  of  a  barbarous  Caft.  In  India,  Poetry  enjoys
«'  the  Favour  of  the  Great.  They  give  its  young  Pro-
**  feflbrs  the  Honour  of  the  Palanquin,  which  is  a  very

[f]  La  Croze  Hiji,  du  CbriJU  p.  296.  .  • t.  *  i

•high


«.


174 -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union^  &c.

"  high  Diftindion. The  Theatre,  which  was  prepared

*'  near  our  Church,  was  of  vafl:  Extent. Indeed  I  found

"  not  there  the  Rules  of  Horace  or  Boileau  put  in

<*Pra6licej but  was  agreeably  furprized  to  find  the -^^^

**  diftinguillicd, and  varied  with  Interludes  or  Choirs^  the

*'  Scenes  well  connedted, the  Machines  judicioufly in-

*'  vented,  Art  in  the  Condud  of  the  Piece,  Tafte  in  the

"  Dreffes,  Propriety  in  the  Dances,  and  a  kind  of  Mujic,

"  harmonious though  irregular  and  'wild. The A£lors

"  difplayed great Freedom and  Dignity  in  their  Speech-:

*'  They  were  taken  from  one  of  the  Superior  Orders  or

**  Cajies. Their  Memory  was  good, and  there  were  no

**  Prompters. That  which  edified  me  mofi:  was,  that  the

**  Piece  began  with  an  authentic  ProfelTion  of  Chriflianity-:

<*  And  contained  the keeneft Ridicule and  fevereft  In-

<'  veSiives  on  the  Gods  of  the  Country. Such  are  the

*'  Chrijiian  Tragedies,  which they  oppofe  here  to  the  pro~

**  phane  Tragedies  of  the  Idolaters  [^]  j  and  they  are,  for

*'  this Reafon,  an excellent  Mean of  Converfion  \e\ —

"  The  Audience  was  compofed  of  at  leaft  twenty  thoufand

"  Souls,  who  liftened  in  profound  Silence. — The  Charac-

"  ter  of  their  Theatre  is  that  of  a  lively  and  perpetual

"  ABion  y  and  a  ft  rid:  Caution  of  avoiding  long  Speeches,

"  without  proper  Breaks[f'\."

Such  is  the  State  of  Melody  and  Song  in  proper  India.
Some  of  its  Appearances  are  fingular  j  and  at  firft  View,
may feem unnatural. But after a  mature Confidera-

[</]  Hence  it  appears  that  the  Hi/lory  of  their  Gods  made  the  Subjefl
«f  their  native  theatrical  Reprefentations.

[f]  How  far  this  was  a  proper  Method  of  Converfion,  will  be  confidered
in  the  Work  advertifed  at  the  End  of  this  DifTertation.

[/J  Lettres  Edifiantes,  Recut'd,  xviii.  p.  28.

:tion


of POETRY and MUSIC.  tj.^

tion  of  what  hath  been  delivered  on  the  Union,  Pro-
greffion,  and  Separation  of  thefe  Arts  in  ancient  Greece,
'tis  prefumed,  the  fenfible  Reader  will  eafily  account  for  all
thefe  apparent  Singularities.

SECT. X.

Of  the  natural  Union  and  ProgreJJtons  of  Melody  and  Song
amongfi  the  ancient  Hebrews.

LET  us  now,  in  Conclufiorr,  analyze  the  State  of  Me-
lody and  Song,  among  the  ancient  Hebrews.

The  leading  Singularity  of  this  extraordinary  People  was
their  Rejection  of  Idolatry,  and  their  eflablifhed  Wocfhip  ■
of  the  one  God,  the  Creator  of  the  World.  As  this  Cir-
cumftance  gave  a  peculiar  Colour  to  their  Religion;  fo,
upon  the  Principles  of  this  Dilfertation  it  will  follow,
that  it  muft  give  a  Peculiar  Turn  to  their  Mujic;  becaufe
we  have  feen,  that  the  Genius  of  the  original  Mufic  of
every  Country  depends  on  its  Religion  as  its  chici  Bafis.

In  Confequence  of  this  Principle,  their  Song  or  Poem
was  chiefly  dedicated  to  the  Celebration  of  the  true  God,
the  Creator  of  all  things  :  At  other  Times  it  is  compofed
of  moral  Exhortations,  delivered  as  the  Didlates  of  his
Will,  or  thrown  out  in  prophetic  Raptures  concerning
the  great  Intents  of  his  Providence. — Hence  the  Hymn,
Ode,  or  poetic  Rapture,  which  we  have  found  to  be
naturally  the  firft  Form  of  Compofition  among  all  Na-
tions, appeared  with  unrivaled  Splendor  in  the  Hebrew
Poetry,  becaufe  its  ObjeB  is  fo  much  Superior  to  that  of
other  Nations  :  The  one  being  no  more  than  the  limited
and  najrow Power  of  fuppofed  local  Gods  -, the  other, ,

the-


176 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

the  Omnipotence  and  Wifdom  of  an  eternal  and  univerfal
Creator.  Of  this  Diftindtion  their  Bards  were  fully  itn~
fible.  "  As  for  the  Gods  of  the  Heathen,  they  are  but
"  Idols ;  but  it  is  the  Lord,  that  made  the  Heavens"
The  Book  of  Pfalms,  the  Lamentations,  the  Songs  of
Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  and  other  Prophets,  all  written
in  Meafure,  and  fung  by  thofe  who  compofed  them,  arc
fo  many  ftriking  Inftances  of  the  true  and  unequaled
^Sublime.

With  Refpeft  -to  the  Form,  it  may  be  obferved,  that
their  Songs  or  Hymns  are  of  that  mixed  Species  which
naturally  arifeth  firft,  before  any  Separations  take  Place,
or  produce  the  feveral  Species  of  Compofition.  Though
the  hymnal  Form  be  chiefly  predominant,  yet  we  find  them
frequently  to  be  a  Mixture  of  Ode,  Narration,  and  Dih-
logue;  and  thus  they  contain  the  Seeds  or  Principles  of
the  three  great  fucceeding  Kinds,  of  unmixed  Ode,  Epic^,
•and  Tragedy.

It  may  be  regarded  as  an  extraordinary  Circumftance,
^hat  this  firft  mixed  Form  of  Compofition  {hould  have
-continued  unchanged  for  a  Period' of  at  leaft  a  thoufand
Years ;  and  that  from  firft  to  laft  it  (hould  never  move
forward,  fo  as  to  produce  the  Epic  and  Dramatic  Species :
•But  on  Examination  it  will  appear,  that  the  fame  Caufe
.(the  Worftiip  of  the  one  God)  which  produced  the  higheft
Degree  of  Sublime  in  the  hymnal  Species,  naturally
■checked  the  Courfe  of  Poetry  among  the  Jews  j  and  pre-
rven ted 'that  Progrejfion  wliich  we  have  found  to  arife  from
?the  natural  State  of  Things,  in  Pagan  Countries.

With  Refpedlrto  the  ,£/)zc  Poem,  we  have  feen  that,  in
iX&  firft  and, original  Conception  and  Formation,  it  is  no
. .  other


c/~  P  O  E  T  R  Y and MUSIC.  177

other  than  "  A  fabulous  Hiftory,  fowling  chiefly  on  the
**  great  Adlions  of  the  Gods  and  Heroes  of  the  Nation  ;
*'  and  compofed  under  certain  Limitations  with  Refpeil  to
"  its  Manner,  for  the  Ends  of  Pleafure,  Admiration,
*'  and  Inftrudtion."  Hence,  the  true  God  being  the  fole
Objedt  of  the  Adoration  of  the  Hebrews,  and  their  Re-
cords being  the  facred  Depofitary  of  the  Hi/iory  of  his
Prowdence,  the  Truth  of  which  it  was  deemed  the  highefl
Crime  to  violate ;  the  Invention  and  Conllruftion  of  an
Epic  Fable  could  never  be  the  Refult  of  a  natural  and  un-
taught Progrefilon.

If  the  Epic  Form  was  thus  naturally  prevented  by
the  Severity  of  Truth,  the  firft  Form  of  Tragedy,  and
dramatic  Exhibition  muft  of  Courfe  be  checked  from
the  fame  Principle  :  For  we  have  feen  that  the  native  and
original  tragic  Species  is  but  an  Union  of  the  Ode  and
Epic  Fable,  animated  by  perfonal  Reprefentation.  To
this  we  may  fubioiji,  that  an  additional  Abfurdity  would
here  prefent  itfelf:  The  Abfurdity  of  cloathing  the  Deity
in  a  vifible  and  human  Form :  A  Circumftance  flridtly
forbidden  by  the  Jeivijh  Law.

If  it  be  faid,  that  although  thefe  Reafons  are  good,
againft:  their  introducing  the  Deity  as  the  leading  Subjedt
either  of  Epic  or  dramatic  Fable,  yet  ftill  their  Heroes
might  have  furniflied  Subjedls  for  Both:  We  may  reply,
that  all  the  great  Adtions  of  their  Heroes  were  fo  inti-
mately connefted  with  the  important  Hiftory  of  Provi-
dence, which  this  People  were  deftined  both  to  execute
and  preferve,  that  even  Thefe  became  improper  Subjedts
for  the  Mixture  and  Alloy  of  Fable.  And  farther;  The
-very  Tendency  of  Fancy  towards  fuch  a  Progreffion  of

A a  Poetry


17^ A  Dissertation  ««  the  Union,  &c»

Poetry  was  quenched  here  alfo,  in  its  firft  Conception.
» For  the  firft and  original Enthufiafms  of  an untaught
i Tribe  are  awakened  by  the BeHef, that their  deceafed
I' Heroes  are  advanced  to  the  Rank  of  Gods,  and  ftill  main-
*  f tain  their  former  Relation  and  Affedtion  to  their native
i Country : Hence  the  Imagination  is  kindled  by  Hope  of
their  Favour  and Afliftance : Hence  Adoration rifeth ;
flattering  Fables  of  their  Power,  Prowefs,  and  Atchieve-
ments,  are  invented ;  and  the  Genius  of  Epic  and  Tragic
Song  is  awakened into Adtion. But  where (as  among
the  Jews) their greateft  Men are  reprefented  as  what
they  were,  weak,  ignorant,  and  mortal ;  often  humbled  for
their  Sinsj always  under  the  Controul  of  an  over-ruling
Providence  j and  after  Death,  loft  to  every  earthly  Con-
nexion ;  here,  the  firft  natural Enthufiafms  of  the  Soul
could  meet  with  no  Objeds  to  excite  them  :  A  Collifion
was  wanting ;  And  the  artlefs  Mind,  inftrudted  only  in
facred  Things,  returned  of  itfelf  to  the  unmixed  and  in-
artificial Celebration  of  the  all-ivife  2indL  all-poiverful  Goo.
As,  from  thefe  Caufes,  the  Forms  of  their  Song  never
had  any  Progrefiiion;,  fo,  it  feems  probable, that  their
Melody  flood  ftill, in  the  fame  Manner. Its  Application
was  chiefly  to  the  Service  of  Religion  ;  and  as  their  Hymn,
continued' unchanged  in  its  G.nius,  we  may  reafonably.
believe  that  the  Melody  which  accompanied  it,  had  the
fame  Fate. For though  there  was nothing particular
ordained,  with Refpedl  to Mufic, in  the  Mofaic  Lawj
yet,  where  almoft  every  other  Circumftance  relative  to
Worftiip  was  particularly  prefcribed,  this  Severity  of  In-
ftitution  would  give  a  Kind  of  Sandtity  to  every  ancient
Cuftom  that  ftood  connefted  with  it; and  hence  their
Modes  of  Melody  would probably remain unchanged.

Clemens


o/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  179

Clemens  Alexandrinus  informs  us,  that  their  Hymn i
were  compofed  in  the  Dorian  Mode  [^] :  Which,  what-
ever it  was,  we  know  to  have  been  one  of  the  mofl  art'-
cient,  as  well  as  grave  zndfedatei  and  therefore  fit  for  the
Service  of  the  Temple. — Their  Inftruments  were  various,
but  fimple:  That  which  David  chiefly  ufed,  appears
to  have  been  the  Nabla  or  Trigonon ;  a  three-cornered
Inftrument,  of  the  Harp-Species.  Its  Compafs  we  know
from  his  own  Authority  -,  and  that  it  was  an  Inftrument
of  fen  Strings.  We  may  be  affured,  too,  that  his  Melody
was  not  only  fimple,  but  fingle  :  For  he  muft  have  held
his  Harp  with  one  Hand,  and  played  with  the  other*,
when  he  led  the  religious  Dance  before  the  Ark.

As  their  So?tg  and  Melody,  io  their  Dance  feems  to
have  been  chiefly  employed  in  the  Service  of  Religion,
The  mofl:  frequent  Exercife  of  this  religious  Rite  devolved
upon  the  Women.  It  appears  too,  that  the  Prophets
had  fome  Kind  xi{ Jolemn  Movements,  fuited  to  the  State
and  Circumftances  of  their  divine  Enthufiafm :  This
Branch  of  the  triple  mufical  Alliance  feems  (as  in  other
Countries)  to  have  made  the  earlieft  Separation.  It  ap-
pears to  have  been  chiefly  exercifed  by  the  lower  Ranks,
in  the  Time  of  David  :  And  hence  it  was,  that  Mich  al,
the  Daughter  of  Saul,  like  a  true  fine  Lady,  defpifed
that  Monarch,  for  exercifing  a  Mode  of  Piety,  which  in
her  Days  was  no  longer  fafiionable.

As  to  the  united  or  complex  Character  of  Legijlator  and
Bard,  it  is  remarkable,  that  this  was  preferved  among  the
Jews  through  a  longer  Succeflion  of  Ages  than  in  any
«ther  Nation,  from  the  fame  Caufe  which  prevented  any

\g]  Stromat.  1.  vi.

A  a  2  Progreflion


i8o '^Dissertation  07i  the  Union,  &c.

Progreffion  or  Change  in  the  Forms  of  their  Song  :  For
the  muiical  Art  being  chiefly  exercifed  in  the  Praifes  of
the  true  God,  was  in  lefs  Danger  of  being  corrupted,  and
therefore  not  only  its  Utility  was  longer  preferved,  but
likewife  its  Profejfors  were  in  lefs  Danger  of  being  debafed,
than  in  other  Countries  where  trifling  or  immoral  Ap-
plications of  the  Art  enfued.  Confequently,  the  Rulers-
of  the  People  could  have  no  Temptation  to  quit  any  Part
of  that  Charadcr  or  Office,  which  ftiU  maintahied  it&
prifline  Ufe  and  Dignity.  Accordingly,  we  find,  that  from.
Moses  down  to  Solomon,  during  a  Period  of  at  lead  a
thoufand  Years,  the  complex  Char^i&cr  of  Legi/lator  and  Bard
often  appeared  in  the  moft  diflinguifhed  Leaders  of  their
State,  and  from  firft  to  laft  remained  unbroken.  Moses,
their  firft  great  Lawgiver,  led  the  Song  of  Triumph,  on-
the  Overthrow  of  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red-Sea  [6] :
Miriam,  a  diftinguifhed  Prophetefs,  led  the  female  Dance
and  Choir,  on  the  fame  Occafion  [i].  While  the  Judges
ruled  in  Israel,  this  complex  Office  ftill  remained:
Deborah  isanlnftanceof  thisTruth  :  SheyWj^^^IsRAEL;
and  fung  her  noble  Song  of  Triumph,  on  the  Death  o£
Si  SERA  and  Jabin.  We  find,  that  whoever  was  raifed
to  the  Station  of  a  Judge,  or  C&'ief,  was  commonly  inverted
not  only  with  the  prophetic  but  the  bard-ltke  Charadier :
For  we  know,  that  the  Prophets  generally  fung  their  pro-
phetic Raptures  to  the  Harp  \k'\.  In  Afrer-times,  when
Saul  was  eledled  King,  he  too  affiamed  at  once  the  pro-
phetic and  mufical  Office.  The  Songs  and  bard-like
Powers  of  David,  his  kingly  SuccefTor,  are  too  well  known

[/^3  Exodus.  [/]  Ibid,  [>(]  i  Sam.  x.— i  Chron.  xxv.

to


Of''  P  O  E  T  R  Y and  MV  SIC.  i^i

to  need  an  Illuftration.  The  fame  mulical  and  poetic
Character  maintained  its  Union  with  that  of  King,  in  his  Son
Solomon  ;  whofe  ^ongs,  we  are  told,  were  no  lefs  than  a
thou/and  and  fiije.  After  him  the  comflex  Office  of
Legijlator  and  Bard  i^QW\%  to  h.'axe  feparated :  The  peculiar
Caufes  which  had  fo  long  upheld  it  in  the  Jewijh  3tate^
now  began  to  ceafe  :  For  Idolatry  more  and  more  pre-
vailed, Manners  became  corrupt,  and  public  Mifery  and
Ruin  enfued.  The  Prophets  and  Bards  were  now  no  lon-
ger found  in  the  Courts  of  Kings,  or  among  the  Rulers
of  the  People :  Yet  flill  they  continued  to  throw  out  the
Emanations  of  prophetic  and  moral  Truth,  accompanied
with  the  Enthufiafm  of  Song,  in  the  more  retired,  and.
yet  uncorrupt  Situations  of  private  Life  :  And  fuch  were
the  later  Prophets,  whofe  Writings  flill  remain  in  Scrip-
ture.

As  this  appears  to  be  a  true  Analyfis  of  the  State  of
Mujic  among  the  ancient  Hebrews  ;  it  will  now  lead  us
to  an  eafy  Solution  of  a  Fadl  which  hath  been  regarded
as  myfterious  by  fome  of  the  Learned ;  "  That  while  moft
"  other  Nations  had  their  Bards  or  Poets;  the  Jews,
♦'  though  their  Compoiitions  are  uncommonly  fublime,
*•  never  had  any  Poets  by  ProfeJJion,  nor  even  a  Word  in
"  their  Language  which  denotes  the  Charadier  [/]."  The
Principles  here  given  aftbrd  a  clear  Solution  of  this  Sin-
gularity. Their  Prophets  were  indeed  their  Bards ;  and  •
appear  to  have  been  invefted  with  all  the  Dignity  belong-
ing to  that  Office  in  its  moft  honoured  State.  But  as  the
Almighty  God,  and  the  great  Events  of  his  Providence:,  ■,


\l\  Calmet.  Bijirt./Mr  la  Poefu,  &c.

were;


itz A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  ^c.

were  the  continued  ObjeSl  of  their  Songs  ;  fo,  the  poetic  or
mufical  Charadler  was  but  fecondary  to  the  religious:
Therefore  the  Name  of  Bard  was  fwallowed  up  and  loft
in  the  higher  Title  of  "  The  Prophet  of  the  most
"  High."

S  E  C  T. XI.

Of  the  State  of  Mufic  and  Poetry  in  ancient  Rome.

WE  have  now  traced  the  Progrefs  of  Melody  and  Song^
through  the  moft  remarkable  Periods  of  thole
various  Nations,  in  which  their  Rife,  Union,  and  Progrefs
was  natitje  and  original.  Let  us  now  view  them  in  their
more  isoeak,  borrowed,  and  feparate  State :  This  Inquiry
will  bring  us  down  to  our  own  Times :  And  here  we
muft  occafionally  quit  the  ancient  Names  of  Melody  and
.Song;  and  fometimes  adopt  thofe  Titles  which  the  two
Arts  (now  feparate)  received  in  the  later  Ages  ofGREECE,
and  which  they  have  ever  fince  retained  among  the
polifhed  Nations  of  Europe,  I  mean  thofe  of  Music  and
Poetry.

The  firft  Flight  which  Mii/ic  and  Poetry  took  from
Greece  was  to  Rome  :  For  in  this  imperial  City,  they
were  not  native.  The  Caufes  of  this  original  Defeft,
together  with  the  State  and  Progrefllons  of  thefe  Arts  at
Rome,  on  their  Arrival  from  Greece,  will  make  the  S.ub-
jedl  of  this  Sedlion.

The  only  Caufe  that  hath  been  afllgned  for  the  Want  of

Mufic  and  Poetry  among  the  Romans  in  the  early  Ages  of

the  Republic,  hath  been  "  that  their  Attention  to  War

»"  and  Conqueft  fwallowed up  all  other  Regards; and

'2  «*  therefore


e/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y  and  MUSIC.  igj

"  therefore  Mufic  and  Poetry  were  of  courfe  neglcded."
This  Reafoning  might  hold,  if  thefe  Arts  made  no  more
than  a  mere  Amufement  in  the  early  Ages,  as  they  gene-
rally do  in  the  later  Periods  of  a  State.  But  as  it  appears
in  the  Courfe  of  this  Diflertation,  that  Melody  and  Song
are  the  natural  Produce  of  favage  Life,  however  warlike  j
that  the  Continuance  of  this  warlike  Charadter  tends  ra-
ther to  heighten  than  extinguifh  their  Power ;  and  that
the  Hiftory  of  human  Nature  confirms  this  Truth  -,  We
muft  therefore  feek  for  this  peculiar  Defedl  in  fome  other,
and  more  hidden  Caufe.

There  is  a  Principle  w^ich  relates  to  the  Eftabliftiment
and  Chara<fter  of  Colonies,  which  will  hereafter  appear  at-
tended with  extenfive  Confequences,  and  which  will  affid
us  in  unfolding  the  true  Foundation  of  this  Defedt.

Melody,  Dance,  and  Song,  being  the  natural  EfFedls  of
favage  Manners  continuing  through  feveral  Ages,  it  muft
follow, that  Colonies  will  in  general  be  found  to  pofTefs
tbem  in  a  very  imperfed;  State. For  Colonies  are  feldom
fent  out,  till  that  early  Period  is  pail,  when  the  Legijlator's
and  Bard's  Charadter are united  in the  fame Perlbn.
Hence,  the  Leader  of  the  new  Colony  not  being  poffefTed
of  the  poetic  and  mufical  Enthufiafm,  can  neither  have
Ability  nor  Inclination  to  inllil  or  propagate  •  thefe  Arts
among his  Followers. Thus  the  firlt  leading  Flame  of
Enthufiafm  is  quenched  :  And  the  inferior  Ranks,  being
bufied  in  the  Affairs  of  their  new  Settlement,  have  not .
that  Leifure  which  the  unemployed  favage  State  affords, ,
to  turn  their  Attention  on  thefe natural  Pleafures:  For:
Colonies  of  Men  feldom  depart  from  their  native  Country,.,
unlefs  when  driven  by  fome  Kind  of  Necejjity :  And  there-
fore.


b84 -^  Dissertation on  the  Union,  &c.

•fore  muft  betake  themfelves,  for  Subfiftance,  either  to
Indujlry  or  War.  The  laft  of  thefc  was  the  chief  Occu-
.pation  of  the  Roman  State :  And  thus,  not  becaufe  they
were  a  warlike  People,  but  becaufe  they  were  a  needy
■Colony,  the  mufical  Arts  which  were  fo  powerful  in  early
Greece,  were  fo  weak  in  early  Rome.

This  Obfervation  will  hold  true  of  moft  other  Countries
peopled  by  foreign  Nations  after  a  certain  Period  of  Civi-
lization. Thus  Carthage  was  a  Colony  which  went
out  from  Tyre:  And  Miific,  which  was  of  Weight  in
the  native  City,  was  of  no  Confideration  in  the  defcendant
State.  Thus  again,  the  Irijh,  WelJJj,  and  Scots,  are  ilri(flly
natives ;  and  accordingly,  have  a  Mufic  oi their  own:  The
Englijh,  on  the  contrary,  are  a  foreign  Mixture  of  late-
eftabli£hed  Colonies ;  and  as  a  Confequence  of  this,  have
no  native  Mufic.  He  who  would  find  the  original  Mujic  of
England,  muft  feek  it  in  Wales.

Here,  then,  appears  the  true  Caufe  of  this  Defedl  in  the
early  Ages  of  Rome.  So  ignorant  were  the  '■Trojan  Found-
ers of  the  Empire  in  the  mufical  Arts,  that  they  had  no,t
even  the  firft  Rudiments  of  Song :  For  we  are  told  by  a
learned  Roman,  that  when  Eneas  brought  the  Images  of
the  Gods  to  Shore,  "  the  Women  hoiv led  3ind  Janced  &t  the
"  Solemnity  [m]."

The  Hiftory  of  the  mufical  Arts  in  Rome  confirms  this
general  Principle :  Their  Mufic  and  Poetry  was  always
Sorrowed  and  adopted:  Let  us  trace  its  Progrefs  through
the  feveral  fucceeding  ages.

[ot]  Dionys.  Halicarn. 1.  i.  c.  55.

NUMA


ef  POETRY and  MUSIC.  185  -

-NuMA  PoMPiLius  firft  introduced  thefe  Arts  into  the
Roman  religious  Ceremonies.  Had  he  been  a  Native  of
Rome,  he  had  been  a  clear  Exception  to  the  Principle
here  given  :  But  inftead  of  overturning,  he  confirms  it :
For  he  was  a  retired,  philofophic,  and  illuflrious  Sabine  ;
And  the  Salian  Priefts  which  he  eftablifhed,  were  Mujicians
or  Bards,  who  had  been  brought  by  Evander  from
Arcadia  into  Italy  [«].  Thus,  the  Salian  Songs
were  not  native,  but  tranfplanted  into  Rome.

We  find  no  farther  Progrefs  in  the  mufical  and  poetic
Arts,  for  many  Ages  :  Save  only,  that  a  vague  Rumour
prevailed  in  the  later  Periods  of  the  Commonwealth,  that
in  ancient  Times  it  had  been  ufual  to  fing  the  Praifes  of
great  Men  at  Feafts[o].

The  next  Progreflion  of  the  mufical  Arts  in  Rome,  was
the  Adoption  of  the  Thufcan  Shews :  Thefe,  as  LivY  in-
forms us,  were  called  in  from  Etruria  during  a  fatal
Peftilence,  with  a  View  of  appeafing  the  angry  Gods  [/>].
The  borrowed  Flame  was  foon  caught  and  fpread  among
the  Roman  Youth;  who  by  Degrees  gave  Voice  to  the
mute  ASiion  of  the  Thufcans.

To  thefe  the  Atellane  Plays  fucceeded  ;  being  in  the  fame
Manner  borroiiPedzridi  adopted  by  the  Roman  People  from  the
Osci,a  neighbouring  Province:  Both  thefe, and  xhtThufcan
Shews  feem  to  have  been  native  in  their  refpeftive  Diftrifts ;
and  therefore  we  need  go  no  farther  in  Queft  of  their
true  Origin,  than  to  the  untaught  Progreflion  and  Se-
paration of  Melody,  Dance,  and  Song : But  on  their  firft

[«]  DioNYJ.  Hal.  1.  i.  [»]  Cicero  dt  Leg.  1.  ii. [p]  Lir.

Hi/i.  1,  vii.

B  b  Entrance


i86 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Entrance  into  Rome,  thefe  dramatic  fliews  were  no  longer
in  their  natural,  but  in  i^n  ingrafted  State.  The  firft  Idea,,
then,  of  Comedy  was  caught  by  Adoption  in  this  Repubhc:
Here,  as  in  the  Adoption  of  the  Salian  Songs,  they  were
*nere  Imitators.  And  thus,  contrary  to  the  natural  Courfe
of  Things  (as  we  have  proved  above  [q\)  Comedy  had,  by
Accident,  an  Eftablifhment  prior  to  Tragedy  in  ancient
Rome.

As  it  appears  that  in  the  firfl  Periods  of  theatrical  and
dramatic  Reprefentation,  it  is  natural  for  the  Poet  to  aSi  a
Part  in  his  own  Plays  [r]  j  fo  Livius  Andronicus,  the
firft  known  dramatic  Poet  of  Rome  [j-],  maintained  this
natural  Union  of  the  Po£t  and  A3hr,  which  he  had  received
from  the  adopted  Shews.  But  fo  little  were  theatrical
Reprefentations  the  EfFe£t  of  Nature  at  Rome,  and  fo
much  were  they  received  as  mere  Shews  of  Pleafure  and
Amufement,  that  even  at  this  early  Period  an  unexampled.
Separation  comrnencedj  a  Separation  more  abfurd  than
any  that  had  taken  Place  in  Greece.  For  now,  "  Livius
"  adting  his  own  Play  according  to  the  Guftom  of  the
**  Times,  was  compelled  by  the  People  to  repeat  fome
"  favourite  PafTages,  till  his  Voice  grew  hoarfe :  On  which,.
**  he  obtained  Leave  to  fubftitute  a  Slave  Xafing  the  Poem;
"  along  with  the  Mufician,  while  he  himfelf  performed
**  the  ASiicn  in  dumb  Shew  [/]/'  Thus  an  abfurd  Separa-^
tion  was  eftablifhed ;  and  continued  fo  eftablifhed  through,
the  fucceeding  Ages  of  the  'Roman  Empire  [«].  HencB:
Roscius himfelf,  of  whom  the World  hath heard fo,

lq\  Sea.  viii  [/-]  Sea.  vi.  {s\  Art.  26..

[/] Liv.  /-///?. 1.  vii.  [;/]  LucJAN  ^c  5tf//.,

mucli^.


c/'  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^W  M  U  S  I  C.  187

much,  was  often  no  more  than  an  Imitator  by  7nute  A<5lion.
We  may  fafely  pronounce  it  impoflible  that  this  Separation
coqld  have  come  on,  unlefs  the  theatric  Reprefentations
had  already  degenerated  into  a-  mere  Amiifement.  When
tijlavewfzs  permitted  to  fmg  the  Poein,  we  may  be  fure
the  chief  Attention  was  turned  on  the  Gejiiculation  of  the
ASior.  That  which  in  2i  found  State  of  things  had  been
fubordinate,  was  now  become  principal.

However,  the  theatrical  Shews  in  thi^  Period  ieem  to
have  had  little  EfFeit;  the  Manners  of  the  People  con-
tinuing much  the  fame  with  thofe  of  more  ancient  Times,
After  the  Succeffion  of  a  few  Ages,  the  principal  Pro-
greffions  came  on  -,  and  thefe  arofe  from  their  Acquaint-
ance with,  and  their  Conqueft  of  Gkeece.

As  this  Event  happened  many  Years  after  the  mufical
Arts  had  loft  their  Union,  their  proper  Ejzds,  and  original
Genius  in  the  Mot  her -Country ;  fo  it  was  natural,  that
the  Romans  (now  verging  towards  a  Decline  of  Manners)
fhould  greedily  borrow  and  adopt  them,  in  thztfeparate,
imperfeSi,  and  perverted  State  which  thefe  Arts  held  when
the  Greeks  were  conquered  by  the  Romans.  Let  us  there-
fore trace  them  from  their  firft  to  their  laft  Progreffions
in  Rom  e  ;  where  we  fhall  find,  that  from  being^fjr^ere
Amufemcnt  or  little  Utility,  they  degenerated  by  Degrees
into  Things  pernicious,

In  the  early  Periods  of  Greece,  the  Poet  compofed  the
Melody  for  his  Plays :  In  the  Decline  of  the  Greek  States,
the  Melody  was  the  diftind  Labour  of  another  Perfon  [ii].
This Separation the Romans  maintained  : A Conduct

[«]  Sec  above,  Seft.  vi.  Art.  35.

B  b  2  natural


*?$ A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

natural  among  thofe  who  confidered  thefe  Arts  as  the  In-
ftruments  of  Pleafure  only.  The  necefiary  Gonfequencc
of  this  was  the  gradual  Introdudlion  of  an  effeminate  and
luxuriant  Melody;  of  which  both  Cicero  [w]  and
Horace  \x\  in  their  refpeftive  Times  complain.

In  Confequence  of  thefe,  a  new  and  fatal  Separation  eo-
fued.  The  'Player^  who  in  the  uncorrupted  Ages  of
Greece  was  often  of  thejirji  Rank  in  the  Republic,  was
generally  oi  Jlav'tflo  Birth  at  Rome;  and  was  by  Law  ex-
cluded from  the  Freedom  of  the  City  [j)/].

A  whimfical  Change  was  made  in  the  Form  of  the
Mafque:  For  in  order  to  give  a  Variety  o{  Expre^on,  "which
became  necefiary  as  the  Fable  of  their  Comedy  grew  more
complicated,  the  two  Sides  were  marked  with  different  Paf~
Jions.  "  The  Father,  who  is  a  principal  Character  in  the
•*  Comedy,  as  he  is  foraetimes/)/?^j/f'^,  and  fometimes  angry,
*'  hath  one  of  his  Eyebrows  even,  and  the  other  r«^</ aloft  i
"  and  the  Roman  Aftors  take  Care  to  fliew  that  Side  of
**  the  Mafque  to  the  Audience  which  fuits  with  his  prefent.
"  Temper  [z]^"

-With  Refpedl  to  the  Siibje5ls  of  their  Tragedy,  they
were  here  no  lefs  mere  Imitators.  For  although  they  had
one  Species  in  which  their  own  Great  Men  were  the.
Heroes  of  the  Poem,  yet  even  this  was  not  original,  but
altogether  built  on  the  Grecian  Model.  But  farther,  we
learn  from  Horace,,  that  the  moll  approved  Subjefts-
were  thofe  which  were  drawn  from  Homer's  Poems..
He  gives  this  as  a  Rule  to  the  Poets  of  his  Time  and

[if]  De  Leg.  1.  li.  [*•]  Eplji.  ad  Plf.  [ j]  Liv.  Hljl.

I.  xxiv.  [z]  QyiNTU.  Iitft.  1..  ii, c.  ii.

Country ;;


e;^  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^»/  M  U  S  I  C.  189

Country;  "  That  to  throw  the  Fables  of  the  Iliad  into
"  tragic  Scenes  is  a  fafer  and  better  Pradlice,  than  to  at-
"  tempt  Subjedls  yet  untouched."  A  Faffage  which  con-
tains the  cleareft  Proof,  that  Tragedy  was  now  feparated
from  its  higheft  Purpofes ;  and  that  the  great  Ends  of
this  Poem,  which  gave  it  fo  much  Power  in  Greece,
were  utterly  loft  to  the  Roman  People.

The  primary  Applications  of  Tragedy  being  thus  little
known  in  Rome,  even  on  its  firft  Admiflion;  we  cannot
wonder  that  it  became  a  weak  and  languid  Amufement :
Efpecially,  among  a  People  whofe  Manners  were  now
finking  into  That  Charafter  which  tended  to  give  Comedy
the  Afcendant,  as  in  the  declining  Period  of  the  Greek
States.  Thus  the  true  Caufe  appears,  why  Comedy  was
cultivated  fo  much  more  than  Tragedy,  in  every  Period  of
this  Republic.

The  Ode  or  hymnal  Species  feems  to  have  been  as  ef- ('^^  A^a^  j:>  vAoa^
fedlually  feparated  from  the  Ends  of  Public  Utility,  as  the  tya  «i

Tragic  Poem.  Horace  often  declares  his  Inabihty  to
attempt  any  thing  Great  in  this  Kind.  The  general  Cha-
radter  of  his  Odes  correfponds  much  with  his  ovt^n  Sen-
timent :  They  are  always  elegant,  feldom  majeftic.  His
Irreligion  even  difqiialified  him  from  excelling  in  the  highejl
Species  of  the  Ode:  For  of  this,  we  have  feen,  Religion
muft  be  the  ObjeSl :  And  although  there  be  a  variety  of
fine  wore/ Apothegms,  and  frequent  Alluiions  to  the  public
State  of  Rome  ;  yet  thefe  are  always  checked,  and  made
fubfervient  to  the  Favour  of  M^cenas  and  August os..
In  a  Word,  they  are  but  fecondary :  Urbanity  of  Senti-
ment, Elegance  of  Phrafe,  and  of  Compliment  to  his  Maf-
fcers,  were  manifeftly  his^rjl  Object..

4.  .  With.


igo A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

\-.  With  Regard  to  the  Charader  of  the  famed  Roman
J  \/Epic  Poem;  notwithftanding  the  inordinate  Praifes  that
have  been  laviflied  on  Virgil's  Mueid,  it  may  with
Truth  be  affirmed,  that  neither  the  original  nor  legijlative
Spirit  of  ancient  Greece  appear  with  any  uniform  Splen-
dor through  the  Courfe  of  this  celebrated  Work.  Elegant
in  Didtion,  a  Mailer  in  Rythm  and  Numbers,  nervous  in
Figures,  majeftic  in  Defcription,  pathetic  in  tragic  Inci-
dents, ftrong  in  the  Delineation  of  Charader,  accom-
plifhed  in  all  the  fecondajy  ^lalities  of  an  Epic  Poet ;  yet
Aill  Virgil  wanted  that  all-comprehenfive  Genius  which
alone  can  conceive  and  ftrike  out  a  great  original  Epic
Plan,  no  lefs  than  that  independent  Greatnefs  of  Soul  which
was  quenched  by  the  ruinous  Policy  of  the  Times,  and  which
alone  caiT^nimate  true  Genius  to  a  full  Exertion^fTTs"
Powers  in  the  Caufe  qj  public  Virtue  and  Mankind.  Through
the  firft  of  thefe  Defers,  the  Mneid  abounds  with  Inci-
dents that  are  borrowed,  unconnedled,  broken,  and  ill-
placed;  through  the  fecond,  though  here  and  there  the
Spirit  oi  general  he gijlation  appears,  yet  the  great  Subjedts
peculiarly  relative  to  the  Roman  State,  the  Glories  of  the
Republic,  the  Atchievements  of  its  Heroes,  all  thefe  are  cafl
into  Shades,  and  feen  as  through  a  Veil;  while  the
1  Jirongejl  Lights  and  highejl  Colourings  of  his  Pencil  are
Y  projlituted  to  the  Vanity  of  the  ruling  tyrant.

As  both  the  Ode  and  Epic  had  thus  degenerated  from
their  original  Charafter  in  Greece,  fo  we  fliall  find  that
the  Recitation  of  them  kept  Pace  with  this  fpurious  Birth.
We  have  already  feen,  that  in  the  more  early  Perioc-s  of
the  Greek  Republics,  their  Poems  were  fu7ig  to  the  fur-
jrounding  Audience  for  the  important  Ends  of  Religion,

Morals,


o/"  POE  TRY  ^W  MUS  re.  191

Morals,  and  Polity.  In  Rome,  as  in  the  later  Periods  of
Greece,  we  find  the  Song  brought  down  to  Recitation^
and  thefe  great  Purpofes  fwallowed  up  and  loft  in  the
Vanity  and  Self- Importance  of  the  Poet.  Hence  we  find.
their  beft  Writers  declaring  their  Dillike  to  the  Pradticc
oi public  Recitation,  becaufe  Flattery  was  now  become  the
Food  of  every  reciting  Poetafter.  The  whole  Farce  and
Foppery  of  this  Praiftice,  which  was  indeed  no  other
than  the  fpurious  liTue  of  the  old  Grecian  Song-Feajl,  is
given  at  large  by  Vossius,  to  whom,  for  Brevity's  Sake,  we
refer  [a].

The  mufical  Arts,  being  ihnB  feparated,  ^nd  perverted
fi-om  their  proper  Ends,  no  Wonder  that  we  hear  fo  little
of  their  being  applied  to  the  Education  of  Youth,  in  any
Period  of  ancient  Rome.

On  the  contrary,  as  Manners  and  Principles  grew  more'
profligate,  along  with  the  inordinate  growing  Power  and
Luxuries  of  the  Empire  ;  fo  the  Genius  of  the  poetic  and
mufical  Arts  kept  Pace  with  them.  Poem,  which  in  the
Days  of  ancient  Greece  had  been  the  Handmaid  oi  Vir-
tue^ was  now  declared  to  be  the  Ba'ivd  of  Licentioufnefs ;
and  to  write  immodefi  Verfes  was  held  a  blamelefs  Prac-
tice \b\  Thus  the  Art  funk  fo  low,  that  the  Name  of
Poet,  was  held  unworthy  a  Man  oi  Age  or  'Dignity  {c^.
The  mimetic  and  mufical  Arts  grew  not  only  an  intolerable
Burthen,  but  became  at  length  of  moft  pernicious  In-
fluence on  the  State.-  The  Attention  to  the  mimetic  Art
was  now  carried  to  a  moft  ridiculous  Extreme.  Cicero
informs  us,  that  the  Players  pradtifed  feveral  Years,  before

[a]  De  Imitatione,  c.  7,  &c.  [/>]  Cajium  dectt  ejfe  P oelam :  Ipfos

Jierficulu  nihil  necejfe  e/i..  [f]  Turpe  ejf  SenemVerJus  fcribere..

the)r.


192 -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

they  ventured  upon  the  Stage  \d\ :  That  the  A6tors,  In
Imitation  of  the  degenerate  Greeks,  gradually  awakened
their  Powers  of  Speech  in  the  Morning,  left  by  too  fudden
an  Exertion  they  {hould  endanger  the  Voice  [^].  They
gargled  the  Throat  with  a  Compofition  proper  for  the
Purpofe :  And  the  Methods  of  managing  and  improving
the  Voice  were  now  formed  into  a  feparate  Science  \f\
In  a  Word,  Livy  complains,  that  "  an  Amulement  which
*'  was  harmlefs  in  its  Beginnings,  had  «ow  grown  to  fuch
**  a  Madnefs  of  Expence,  that  the  wealthieft  Kingdoms
«'  were  hardly  equal  to  it  \g\"

In  the  later  Periods  the  Mifchief  grew  ftill  more
intolerable :  For  now,  the  ferious  Arts  were  cultivated
by  Few  :  Nothing  was  heard  but  light  and  effeminate
Mufic :  The  Singer  took  the  Philofopher's  Place ;  the
X-ibraries  were  fhut  up ;  and  the  general  Attention  was
turned  upon  mufical  Inftruments  proper  to  accompany  and
Xuftain  the  Gefticulation  of  the  Adtors,  The  Effeds  of
this  DifTolute  Tafte  foon  appeared:  For  Quint ili an
tells  us,  that  **  the  effeminate  and  immodeft  Mufic  of
<*  the  Stage  had  no  inconfiderable  Part  in  deftroying  that
**  fmall  Degree  of  manly  Character  which  had  been  left
"  among  them  \h\"

The  Evil  flill  increafed  :  So  that  in  the  Time  of  Nero,
•*'  The  City  fwarmed  with  Pantomimes :  Every  private
**  Houfe  now  became  a  Theatre;  arid  the  Hufband  and
**  Wife  contended,  which  fliould  raoft  fuccefsfuUy  pro-
\ ^itute  themfelv£s  to  the  Favour  of  the  ASiors  [/J."

[0  Cic.  de  Oratore^  1.  I.  [*]  Ibid.  [/]  Persius  Sat.  I.

l£}  L.  yii.  [/Tj  JnjL  1.  i.  [i]  Seneca  Nat.  ^lajl.  I.  viL

There


^  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^»^  M  U  S  I  C.  193

There  is  a  Time,  when  Nature  ftrnggles  hard  to  free
herfelf  from  peccant  and  deadly  Humours.  This  Tim*
was  now  come  at  Rome  ;  but  it  came  too  late  :  The  Body
politic  was  expiring,  and  was  not  able  to  fliake  off  the
Evil:  The  Pantomimes  were  twice  expelled;  but  ftill
returned  again  [k].  At  length,  the  barbarous  Nations
of  the  North  broke  in  upon  the  dying  Empire.  Totila
attacked  and  pillaged  Rome:  The  degenerate  Arts  funk
with  the  degenerate  City  :  And  the  Patrician  Ladies,  who
lately  had  reveled  amidfl  the  Spoils  of  a  fubjeded  World,
now  begged  before  their  own  Doors.

The  extravagant  PafTion  of  fome  of  their  later  Emperors
for  the  mufical  Arts,  and  thefe  too  of  the  moft  debauched
and  profligate  Charafters,  particularly  Caligula  and
Nero,  is  too  well  known  to  need  a  Delineation  :  This
EfTay  is  not  intended  as  a  Hijiory  of  FaSfs,  but  an  Invejii-
gation  of  the  Caufes  that  produced  them.  On  this  Subject,
therefore,  there  is  one  Circumflance  which  may  demand
our  attention.  We  have  feen  above,  that  the  firft  original
Legiflators  turned  their  Attention  ftrongly  on  the  mufical
Arts;  and  we  now  find,  that  the  abandoned  Rulers  of  a
decaying  Empire  adopt  them  with  no  lefs  Eagernefs :
Doth  not  this  Contrariety  of  Fadts  feem  to  fliake  fome  of
the  Principles  which  we  have  attempted  to  eilablifli  ?  So
far  from  this,  that  it  confirms  them :  For  in  both  In-
ftances,  MuficwTLS  ma.de.  fu^fervient  to  the  Fiews  or  ruling
Fajjions  of  thofe  who  led  the  People.  The  honeft  Legif-  \
lators  of  early  Times  employed  it  for  the  Ends  of  public
Utility  J  the  profligate  Emperors  abufed  it  to  the  Purpofes

[ij  Tac.  An.  1.  xiii,  xiv.

C  c  of


194 -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

of  LIcentioufnefs.  Among  the  former,  by  a  legitimate
JJfe,  it  became  the  Inftrument  of  eftablifhing  Common-
wealtEi":  Among  the  latter,  by  a  perverted  Application,
it  rtiook  the  Foundations  of  Empire  :  Orpheus  drew
the  barbarous  Tribes  from  Theft,  Adultery,  and  Murder,
by  his  Songs  and  Lyre  :  Nero  plundered  his  Patricians
of  their  Eftates  to  load  his  Muficians  with  Wealth  ;  and
amidft  the  forced  Acclamations  of  a  corrupted  Theatre,
violated  a  veftal  Virgin  on  the  Stage.

SECT. XII.

Of  the  State  and  Separation  of  Mujic  and  Poetry  among  fae
polijhed  Nations  of 'E.vv.o^z  through  the  fucceeding  Ages,

THUS  the  mufical  and  poetic  Arts  funk  along  with
the  Roman  Empire. — But  Mankind,  emerging
from  the  Ruins  of  Luxury,  Profigacy,  and  Invajion,  are
©f  a  different  Charadler  from  that  of  human  Nature
arifing  from  mere  Barbarity  into  Civilization.  We  have
traced  the  natural  Progrefs  of  thefe  Arts  in  the  lajl  of
thefe ;  but  from  the  former,  nothing  confiftent  or  fteady
can  arife.  The  Views,  Manners,  Principles,  and  Paflions
of  a  furious  Conqueror,  meeting  and  mixing  with  thofe
of  a  fubdued  and  abandoned  People,  produce  fuch  a  Com-
pound of  diffimilar  and  contending  Caufes,  as  approach
in  their  Effects  to  the  Appearance  of  mere  Chance  or
Fortune.

But  the  Circumflance  mofl  worth  remarking  is this,

that  in  fuch  a  Period,  all  the  natural  Seeds  and  Principles

of  the  mufical  Arts  are  lofl. The  whole  local  Fabric  of

2  Religion.)


^  P  O  E  T  R  Y tf«i/  M  U  S  I  C.  195

Religion,  Polity,  and  Morals,  is  commonly  funk  In  the
general  Ruin ;  and  a  barbarous  Conqueror  followed  by  an
enraged  Soldiery,  who  have  left  their  own  Country  to
invade  another,  have  generally  the  Vices  of  Savages,  with-
out their  Virtues.

Hence  the  mufical  Arts  could  not  arife  from  the  Ruins
of  the  Roman  Empire,  but  from  the  inefFedlual  Principle
of  mere  Imitation.  They  wanted  that  native  Force  and
Vigour  which  had  given  them  fo  free  and  full  a  Growth
in  ancient  Greece.

Such  therefore  being  the  Birth  of  the  modern  Poetry  and
Mtijic  oi  Europe  j  having  been  the  cafual  Offspring  of
the  corrupted  Roman  Arts,  which  were  themfelves  no
more  than  partial  Imitations  of  the  Greek,  in  their  State  of
Separation  and  Weaknefs;  no  Wonder  if  the  modern
^ranfcript  be  inferior,  not  only  to  the  Original,  but  the
frJiCopy.

This  general  Principle  being  given,  we  might  perhaps
end  our  Inquiry  here :  Leaving  the  more  particular  In-
veftigation  to  the  good  Senfe  and  Judgment  of  Mankind  :
But  to  give  all  poflible  Satisfadion  on  a  Subjed:  which
may  by  fome  be  regarded  as  a  Matter  of  Curiofity,  we  fhall
trace  the  Rife  and  Progrefs  of  thefe  Arts  in  their  chief
Appearances,  fo  far  as  they  have  Relation  to  each  other.
Before  the  Roman  Empire  fell  to  Ruin,  its  Rulers  took
Care,  to  the  utmoft:  of  their  Power,  to  extirpate  the  native
Mufic  of  the  barbarous  Countries  which  they  conquered.
Of  this  Julius  C^sar,  Ammianus  Marcellinus
and  Suetonius  inform  us.  This  was  a  high  Stroke
of  Policy  :  For  their  native  Songs  being  (as  in  ancient
Greece)  the  Repofitory  of  their  Religious  and  Political

C  c  2  Syfteni,


196 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Syftem,  nothing  could  fo  effedually  fubdue  the  Minds  of
thefe  Barbarians,  as  the  B..nifiinient  or  Deftrudlion  of  their
Bards  and  Druids.  We  have  already  feen  Edward  the
Firftof  England  acting  the  fame  Tragedy  in  Wales,
on  the  fame  Principle.

On  the  Revival  of  Learning,  the  three  greater  Kinds  of
Poetry  were,  in  many  Inflances, necelTarily  divorced  from
Mufic. For  the  Greek  and  Roman  Poets being  the  only
approved  Models,  could  be  read  and  imitated  by  Scholars
only. Thus,  the  ^r/  which  in  ancient  Greece  had  been
the  genuine  Effedl:  of  natural  Enthufufm,  and  aided  by  a
native  and  corrcfpondent  Melody,  had  been  delivered  to
the  People  by  the  inraptured  Bard,  could  now  be  ilud.ed
and  attained  only  by  the  Jequejlered  Few,  who  were  fwal-
lowed  up  by  a  literary  Application,  often  ignorant  of  the
Powers  of  Mufic,  arjd  little  acquainted  with  Society  and
Mankind. — Hence the  Efiic  Poet (the  Manners of  the
Times  likewife  forbidding  [/])  could  no  longer  appear  at  the
Place  of  public  Concourfe,  with  his  Lyre  and  feflal  Robes,
to charm the liftening Audience with his legiilative
Songs  i but  retired  to  the  Clofet,  and  with  a  more  com-
pofed  Mien  delivered  his  Infpirations  in  written  Verfe,
for  the  Pleafure,  Admiration,  and  Inftrudtion  of  Mankind.  "
— This  might  have  been  indured  : Becaufc  fome  of  the
general  Ends  of  that  calmer  Species  may  b«  obtained  by
a  Home-application. But  the Misfortune  was,  that  even
Tragedy  and Ode,  whofe End  is  to  {hake  the  8oul  with
Terror,  Pity,  or  Joy,  by  a  theatrical  Exhibition  [w],  and  the

[/]  See  below,  Se£t.  xiii.

[w]  It  hath  become  a  favourite  Topic  among  certain  Perfons,  to  decry
the  theatrical  Exhibition  of  Tragedy,  as  an  Obj«ct  belcrw  the  Ambitioti  of

Powers


^/POETRY  and  MUSIC.  197

Powers  of  Mufic; — even  thefe,  in  many  Inftances  and  in
different  Periods,  were  dhorced  from  their  Ajjifiant  Arts,
and  became  the  languid  Amufement  of  the  Clofet.  For  be-
ing often  written  by  retired  and  fpeculative  Men,  unac-
quainted with  the  Workings  of  the  human  Soul,  and  at-
tending only  to  the  external  Form  and  poetic  Ornaments  of
the  Greek  Drama  ;  their  Vanity  hath  been  either  to  foar
or  dive  into  Obfcurity,  to  fubftitute  mere  Imagery  in  the
Place  of  PaJJion,  to  plan  and  write  in  a  cold  Style,  fo  far
removed  from  Nature,  as  to  be  incapable  of  a  living  Re~
prefentation ;  in  a  Word,  to  compofe  Tragedies  that  cannot
1  be  a^ed,  and  Odes  that  cannot  he  Jung.

This  falfe  Tafte  in  Ode-writing  hath  fo  ftrongly  efta-
blifhed  itfelf  in  England,  that  an  Ode  of  the  true  Cha-
racter is  ftilcd  (by  Way  of  Diflindtion)  An  Ode  for  Mujic :
Of  this  Kind  we  have  two  noble  ones  in  our  Language,

a  Poet.  Whether  any  faftidious  tragic  Mufe  hath  privately  knocked  at
the  Door  of  the  Theatre,  and  been  refufed  Admittance,  we  (hall  not  here
affrm  :  But  it  belongs  to  our  Subjeft  to  fliew  on  what  Foundation  the
theatrical  Exhibition  makes  an  eflential  Part  of  Tragedy ;  and  that  with-
out it,  the  tragic  Poem  is  an  Imperfeff  Species.

The  Epic  Poem  not  only  imitates  Aftions,  Sentiments,  Charaftcrs,  and
Paffions  j  but  likewife  delineates  their  chief  external  and  attendant  Cir-
cumftaiices  of  Place,  Perfon,  Voice,  Countenance,  Attitude,  and  Gefture  :
And  hence  a  full  and  perfeft  Imitation  enfucs.  In  the  Dramatic  or
Tragic  Poem,  little  of  this  latter  Kind  can  be  admitted,  without  violating
the  Piobability  and  Power  of  the  Dialogue  :  On  this  Foundation,  the
Defcription  of  thefe  external  and  attendant  Circumftances  is  neceflarily
left  to  the  Condud  of  the  Aflor ;  who,  in  thefe  Articles,  affumes  the  Pro-
vince of  the  Poet,  and  is  a  real  Imitator.  Hence  a  dramatic  Poem,  written^
but  not  reprefented,  is  capitally  defeflive  in  the  great  Article  of  Imitation  ;
and  is  therefore  a  Species  ejjfentially  imperfed. — Aristotle  hath  over-
looked this  capital  Diftindion  between  the  Epic  and  Tragic  Poem,  in  his
Comparifon  of  thefe  two  Species. Poet.  c.  xxvi.

by


igS A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

by  Dry  DEN  and  Pope  :  But  thefe  will  be  confidered  more
at  large  below.

As  the  modern  Poetry thus  became  often unfit for
Mufic,  fo  from  a  Angular  Caufe  the  Separation  was  con-
firmed, and  Mufic  in  its  Turn  became  often  unfit  for  Poe-
try. After many Centuries had paffed in Darknefs,
GuiDO  arofe  : And with  a  Force  of  Genius  furpaffing
that  of  all  his  Predeceflbrs,  invented  the  Art  of  Counter-
point, or  Compofition  in  Parts :  Yet  this  very  Circumftance,
which  feemed to  promife  fo  noble  an  Improvement  in
Mufic,  was  a  fi:rong  concurrent  Caufe  of  compleating  its
Divorce from Poetry. .  For now, injlrumental  Mufic,
having  aflumed  a  new  and  more  inviting  Form,  and  be-
ing ennobled  by  the  principles  of  a  complex  and  varied
Harmony, was introduced  as  being  of  itfelf  a  compleat
Species,  independent  of  Poetry  or  Song. This  gave  it  an
artificial  and  laboured  Turn ; while  the  Compofer  went
in Queft  of  curious  Harmonies,  Difcords, Refolutions,
Fugues,  and  Canons  -,  and  prided  himfelf  (like  the  Poet)  inl
a  pompous  Difplay  of  Art,  to  the  Negledt  of  Expre^onj
and  true  Patios. And thus  modern  Mufic,  on  its  firfl'
Rife,  was  in  a  Manner  divorced  from  Poetry,  Legi/lation,
and  Morals.

Thefe  Caufes  fufiiciently  account  for  the  prefent  State
of  the  two  Sifter  Arts,  in  every  Inftance  of  their  total
Separation.  Let  us  now  confider  them  in  thofe  Situations
where  their  Union  is  indeed  in  fome  Sort  maintained,  but
this  in  an  improper  and  ineff'e(5tual  Manner.

The  four  diftindl  Forms  in  which  thefe  two  Arts  ftill
^maintain  an  imperfect  Union  are,  i.  The  common  .S'(?«^
S)X  Canzonette. z.  The  O^erOy  or  Drama  for  the  Stage.

%.  The


of  POETRY  and  MV  SIC.  199

3.  The  Anthem,  or  Motet,  for  the  Church. 4.  The  Ora-
torio, or  facred  Drama.

I .  The  common  Song  or  Canzonette  hath  funk  from  the
original  Dignity  which  it  maintained  in  ancient  Greece,
from  two  evident  Caufes.  Firft,  The_Separation  of  Mufic
and  Poetry  from  their  important  Ends,  and  from  each
other,  naturally  prevented  the  modern  Poets  and  Muficians
from  confidering  this  Species  as  being  much  worthy  of
their  Attention.  Secondly,  The  nobler  Applications  of
the  Song  being  thus  relinquiiEed  and  loft,  no  Wonder
if  Men  of  high  Station  and  moral  Dignity  difdained  the
Practice  of  it  (even  where  they  had  Ability)  as  being  an .
Ubjedt  unworthy  ot  their  Regard.  Hence  it  hath  come
to  pafs,  that  this  Species  is  hardly  fuppofed  to  touch  on
any  Subjedl  religious,  political,  or  moral,  unlefs  it  be  in
J^Ji[n]'  And  thus  the  reigning  Topics  of  the  Song  are
generally  Love  and  JVine.  The  French  and  'En^lifh  have
^adopted  both  thefe  Subjedts  :  The  Chan  fans  a  boire  of  the
former,  and  the  drinking  Catches  of  the  latter,  are  Proofs
of  their|ollitv£a^er  than  Tafte:  Yetjhey  clearly  difplay
the  different  Charadters  of  the  two  Nations.  A  parallel
Remark  might  perhaps  be  made  on  their  Love- Songs :
With  this  Exception,  however,  that  in  a  Song  of  this
Kind,  PuRCEL  hath  left  us  one  of  the  fineft  and  beft  va-
ried Pieces  of  mufical  Expreffion  that  ever  was  com-
pofed  [0] :  And  in  Juftice  to  the  prefent  Times  it  muft
be  farther  obferved,  that  in  England, this  Species  is

[?i]  There  are  fome  Exceptions  to  this  general  Obfervation ;  but  they
take  Place  chiefly  among  the  Vulgar  ;  among  whom  the  Ballad-Song  com-
monly retains  its  moral  and  political  Applications,

\j1  Froa>  r^fy  Bowers^  (iff.

now


f


200 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

now  in  a  good  Degree  refcued  from  its  former  Indelicacy.
JrThe  Italians  and  Scots  have  chiefly  turned  the  Song  on
/  the  Subjeft  of  Love.  With  Refpecl  to  the  Poetry,  the
/  Italian  Canzonettes  are  more  elegantly  written  than  the
/  Scotch,  though  with  lefs  Nature  and  PalTion.  In  the
Mufic  of  the  Italian  Canzonettes  there  is  little  Variety :
They  foon  difguft,  by  their  Samenefs  of  Expreflion  :  The
Scotch  Airs  are  perhaps  the  truefl  Model  of  artlefs  and
pathetic  mufical  Expreifion,  that  can  be  found  in  the
whole  Compafs  of  the  Art.  Some  of  them  are  faid  to
have  been  the.  Compofition  of  David  Rizzio,  who  is  fup-
pofed  to  have  ingrafted  the  Italian  Regularity  and  Elegance
of  Song,  on  the  original  wild  and  pathetic  Manner  of  the
Scots.  This  Tradition  carries  the  Appearance  of  Truth  :
For  the  Scotch  Airs  are  of  two  different  Kinds,  eafily  diftin-
guilhable  from  each  other  :  The  one  regular,  and  fubjedl  to
the  Rules  of  Counterpoint :  The  other  wild  and  defultory,
and  fuch  as  do  not  eafily  receive  the  Accompanyment  of  a
Bafs.  The  firft  of  thefe  may  feem  to  have  been  the  Com-
pofition or  Reform  of  Rizzio  ;  but  in  Force  of  Ex-
preflion and  Pathos,  the  latter  generally  excel  them  :  A
Circumftance  which  proves  how  little  the  Rules  of  mo-
dern Counterpoint  have  to  do  with  the  Powers  of  Mufic.

The  State  of  the  Opera  will  deferve  a  more  particular
Elucidation  :  And  to  this  End  we  mufl  endeavour  to
trace  it  to  its  Origin,  which  lies  in  great  Meafure  hid  in
Darknefs.  Riccoboni  is  of  Opinion  that  the  firft  ever
reprefented,  was  that  which  the  Doge  and  Senate  of
Venice  exhibited  for  the  Entertainment  of  Henry  the
third  of  France,  in  the  Year  1574  [/]. But  this  Ac-

0]  Theat.  &c.

count


o/'  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  . 201

count  is  by  no  means  fatisfadtory :  For  Sulpitius,  an  ^
Italian,  fpeaks  of  the  mujical  Drama,  as  an  Entertainment
known  in  Italy  in  the  Year  1490  [/>].

Hiflory  traces  the  Rife  of  the  Opera  no  farther :  But  a
Circumftance  mentioned  by  Sulpitius,  who  was  a  Man
of  Letters,  may  feem  to  lead  us  up  to  its  true  Origin.
He  is  by  fome  fuppofed  to  have  been  the  Inventor  of  this
tmifical  Drama  -,  but  he  ingenuoufly  tells  us  himfelf,  that
he  only  revived  it  [y].  We  have  feen  above,  that  the
Tragedy  of  the  ancient  Greeks  was  accompanied  with
Mufic  \  that  the  fame  Union  was  borrowed  and  main-
tained through  the  feveral  Periods  of  the  Roman  Empire  :
If  therefore  we  fuppofe,  what  is  altogether  probable,  that
the  Form  of  the  ancient  Tragedy  had  been  flill  kept  up
in  fome  retired  Part  of  Italy,  which  the  Barbarians
never  conquered  ;  we  then  obtain  a  fair  Account  of
the  Rife  of  the  modern  Opera,  which  hath  (o  much  con-
founded all  Inquiry.

As  Venice  was  the  Place  where  the  Opera  firft  appeared
in  Splendor,  fo  it  is  highly  probable,  that  there  the  an~
dent  Tragedy  had  flept  in  Obfcurity,  during  the  Darknefs
of  the  Barbarous  Ages.  For  while  the  reft  of  Italy  was
over-run  by  the  Nations  from  the  North,  the  Seas  and
Morafles  of  Venice  preferved  Her  alone  from  their  In-
curlions :  Hence,  Hiflory  tells  us,  the  People  flocked  to
Venice  from  every  Part  of  Italy  :  Hence  the  very
Form  of  her  Republic  hath  been  maintained  for  thirteen
hundred  Years  :  And  from  thefe  Views  of  Security ,  it  was
natural  for  the  helplefs  Arts  to  feek  an  Afylum  within

J^J  MtNETRlBR  des  Reprefentat'ions  en  Mufique.  [f]  Ibid.

D  d  her


202 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

her  Canals,  from  the  Fury  and  Ignorance  of  a  barbarous-
Conqueror.

Other  Circumftances  concur,  to  ftrengthen  this  Opinion .^
The  Carnaval  firfl:  appeared  in  Splendor,  and  ftill  wears  it
at  Venice,  beyond  every  other  Part  of  Italy  :  Now
the  Carnaval  is,  in  many  Circumftaiices,  almoft  a  Tranfcript
of  the  ancient  Saturnalia  of  Rome.

In  the  Venetian  Comedy,  the  ASlor  wears  a  Mafque :
A  palpable  Imitation,  or  rather  Continuance,  of  the  old
Roman  Cuftom.

That  the  modern  Opera  is  no  more  than  a  Revival  of  the
old  Roman  tragedy,  and  not  a  new-invented  Species,  will
appear  ftill  more  evident,  if  we  confider,  that  it  is  an  Exhi-
bition altogether  out  of  Nature,  and  repugnant  to  the
univerfal  Genius  of  Modern  Cuftoms  and  Manners.  We
have  feen  the  natural  Union  of  Poetry  and  Mufic,.  as  they
rife  in  tlie  favage  State  ;  and  how  this  Union  forms  th«
tragic  Species  in  the  natural  ProgrefTion  of  Things.
Hence  we  have  deduced  the  mufical  Tragedies  of  ancient
Greece  :  But  in  ancient  Rome,  it  appears,  they  arofe
merely  from  Imitation  and  Adoption.  Nor  could  it  be
otherwife;  becaufe  the  Romans  wanted  the  firfl  feeds  or
Principles  from  whence  the  mufical  Tragedies  of  the
Greeks  arofe.  The  fame  Reafoning  takes  Place,  with
Refpeft  to  the  modern  Opera:  It  emerged  at  a  Time,'
when  the  general  State  of  Manners  in  Europe  could  not
naturally  produce  it.  Had  it  been  the  Refult  from  Nature,
its  Production  would  have  been  more  general.  It  emerged
in  that  very  City,  where  moft  probably  it  muft  have  lain
hid :  In  a  City,  whofe  other  Entertainments  are  evidently
borrowed  from  thofe  of  ancient  Rome.  And  if  to  thefe
2  Arguments-


cf  ?  OUT  KY  anJ  MUSIC.  203

Arguments  we  add  this  farther  Confideration,  that  the
Subjedts  of  the  very  firft  Operas  were  drawn  from  the
Fables  of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome  [q],  and  not  from
the  Events  or  Atchievements  of  the  Times  j  and  farther,
that  in  their  Form,  they  were  exadt  Copies  of  the  ancient
Drama;  thefe  accumulated  Proofs  amount  to  near  a  De-
monftration,  that  the  Italian  Opera  is  but  the  Revival  of
the  old  Roman  Tragedy  [r].

Such  being  the  Birth  of  the  modern  Opera,  no  Wonder
it  inherits  the  Weaknefs  of  its  Parent:  For  we  have  feen,
that  the  Roman  Tragedy  never  had  its  proper  EfFedls,
confidercd  in  a  legifMtive  Viewj  having  been  feparated
from  its  important  Ends  before  its  Arrival  from  Greece,
As  therefore  it  had  declined  into  a  mere  Amufement  when
it  was  firft  adopted  by  Rome  ;  and  as  we  have  feen,  that
in  Proportion  as  the  Roman  Manners  grew  more  diflblute,
"Tragedy  funk  ftill  lower  in  its  Charadter,  till  at  length
it  became  no  more  than  a  Kind  of  mere  Subfiratum  or\
Groundwork,  on  which  the  Adtors  difplayed  their  Abilities
in  Singing  and  Gejiiculation ;  it  was  altogether  natural
that  it  fhould  rife  again  in  the  fame  unnerved  and  effemi-  \
nate  Form.

From  thefe  Caufes,  therefore,  we  may  trace  all  the
Features  of  the  modern  Opera,  however  unnatural  and
dijiorted  they  may  appear. The  Poem,  the  Mujic  and  the

[^J  The  Subjedls  of  the  firft  Operas  were  Apollo  and  Daphne,
Orpheus  and  Euridice,  Alcestes  and  Atys  ;  which  laft,  in  the
Title  Page  of  the  oldeft  extant  Edition,  is  called  a  mufical  Tragtdi).

[r]  As  thefe  Circumftances  prove  that  the  modern  Opera  is  a  Revival
of  the  old  Roman  Tragedy ;  fe,  we  arc  led  from  hence  to  a  probable  Con-
jecture concerning  the  meafurtd  Recitation  of  the  Roman  Tragedians:
And  that  it  was  fomething  of  the  Nature  of  modern  Rtcttatlvt.

D  d  a  Performance,


204 A  Dissertation  oii  the  Union,  &c.

Performance,  as  they  now  exift  in  Union,  are  the  manifeft
Effefts  of  this  fpurious  Origin.

Firil:,  That  the  Subject  of  the  Poem  {hould,  even  on  its
firft  Appearance,  be  drawn  from  Times  and  Countries  httle
interefting,  and  Gods  and  Wonders  and  celejiial  Machinery
introduced,  which  neither  the  Poet  nor  his  Audience
believed  in,  could  only  be  the  Effedt  of  a  blind  Principle  of
Imitation,  tending  to  mere  Amnfement. —  The  eftablifhed
Separation  of  the  Poet's  from  the  Mufician's  Art  was  pro-
dudive  of  parallel  Eftefts :  For  the  Poet,  ambitious  only
of  fhining  in  his  particular  Sphere,  became  generally
more  Intent  on  Imagery  than  Pathos :  Orelfe,  infl:ead  of
being  principal,  he  beczme  Ji^bJ'ervient  to  the  Compofer's
Views  ;  from  whence  arofe  a  Motley  kind  of  Poem  (calcu-
lated only  for  a  Difplay  of  the  Mufician's  Art)  which
degenerated  by  Degrees  into  a  mere  Pajiicio.

Secondly  ;  the  fame  Caufes  account  for  all  the  Ab-
furdities  of  the  Mufic. — The  Recitative,  or  perpetual  mu-
fical  Accompanyment  in  the  declamotary  Parts,  is  a
Praftice  fo  much  at  Variance  with  modern  Manners,
that  it  extorted  the  following  Cenfure  from  a  candid
Critic:  "  I  beg  Pardon  of  the  Inventors  of  the  mu-
**  Jical  Tragedy,  a  Kind  of  Poem,  as  ridiculous  as  it  is
«<  ne'wy — "  If  there  be  any  thing  in  the  World  that  is  at
"  Variance  with  tragic  A£tion,  it  is  Song."  "  The  Opera
"  is  the  Grotefque  of  Poetry ;  and  fo  much  the  more  in-
<*  tolerable,  as  it  pretends  to  pafs  for  a  regular  Work  [j]."
Now  if,  along  with  DXcier,  we  regard  the  Opera  as  a
modern  Invention,  this  Circumftance  of  the  perpetual
mulical  Accompanyment  is  indeed  unaccountable :  But  if
we  regard  it  as  a  mere  Imitation  or  Continuance  of  the  old
[i]  Dacier  Remfur  AniJloU,  p.  85.

Roman


c/  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  205

Roman  Tragedy,  and  trace  this  upwards  to  its  true  Foun-
tain, the  Greek  Drama;  and  again  follow  this  to  its  original
Source,  the/avage  Song-Feaji ;  we  then  fee  how  naturally
thefe  extremes  unite;  and  difcern  the  rude  Melody  and
Song  of  the  barbarous  Greek  Tribes  gradually  melted  into
the  Refinements  of  the  modern  Opera. — Again,  as  the  Sepa-
ration of  the  Poet's  from  the  Mulician's  Art  produced  an
improper  Poetry;  fo  the  Separation  of  the  Mufician's  from
the  Poet's  Charadter  was  produdlive  of  improper  and  tmaf-
feSlingMufic:  For  the  Compofer,  in  his  Turn,  intent  only
ox\  jhining,  commonly  wanders  into  unmeaning  Divifion,
and  adopts  either  a  delicate  and  refined,  or  a  merely  popular
Mulic,  to  the  Negled  of  true  mufical  Expreflion.  Hence,
too,  thejD<2  Capo  had  its  natural  Origin  :  A  Pradtice  whicb
tends  only  to  tire  and  difgufl:  the  Hearer,  if  he  comes  with
^Lj^tenTofnbeing  affeSled  by  the  tragic  ABion,  or  with
any  other  View  than  that  oi  lijleningio  a  Song  [/].

Thirdly,  with  Regard  to  the  Performance  of  the  Opera.-^
The  theatrical  Reprefentation  is  of  a  Piece  with  the  Poetry
and  Mufic  :  For,  having  been  regarded,  from  its  firfl:  Rife,
more  as  an  Aifair  of  aftonifning  Shew  than  of  affefting  Re-
femblance,  it  is  gaudy,  flaunting,  and  unnatural.  The  Sing-
ers (like  the  Poet  and  MuJicianJ  being  confidered  merely  as

[/]  The  Da  Capo,  which is  fo  ftriking an Abfurdity  in  the more
modern  Operas, was  not  ufed  in  thofe  of  older  Date. Even  Colonna,  ., ...

who  lived  about  the  middle  of  the  ftuwanth  Century,  employed  it  not ;  as , ciC*^^.  ^-<2-£'-fi//

appears  by  one  of  his Operas  performed  at  the  Academy  in  Bologna,  »»

A.-  D.  1688.  But  in  an  Opera  of  Old  Scarlatti  (intitled  La  Teodord)
compofed  in  1693,  the  Da  Capo  is  found,  though  not  in  all  his  Songs.
After  that  Period,  the  Ufe  of  it  feems  to  have  become  general:  For  in  an
Opera  of  Gasparini  (intitled  IlTartaro  nella  China)  compofed  in  1715,-
the  Da  Capo  is  found  in  every  Song.

2  Objedts.


jto5 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c,

Objeds  of  Amufement, no  Wonder  if  their  Ambition
feldom  reacheth  higher  than  to  the  Difplay  of  an  artificial

J  Execution. — As  a  Confequence  of  thefe  Principles,  the
Cajlrati  were  introduced  into  all  Sorts  of  Charadters,  in
fpite  of  Nature  and  Probability ;  and  ftill  continue  to
reprefent  Heroes  and  Statefmen,  Warriours  and  Women. —
The  flouriflied  Clofe  or  Cadence  arofe  naturally  from  the
fame  Sources :  From  a  total  Negledt  of  the  Subje<!t  and
Expreffion,  and  an  Attention  to  the  mere  Circumftance  of
Execution  only. — The  frequent  Encore,  or  Demand  of  the
repeated  Performance  of  particular  Songs  was  the  natural
Effeft  of  the  fame  Caufes.  No  Audience  demands  the
Repetition  of  a  pathetic  Speech  in  Tr^^g^,  though  per-
formed  in  the  fineft  Manner,  becaule^  their  Attention  is

'  Turned  on  the  Subject  oFlhe  Drama :  Thus  if  the  Au-
3ience  were  -warmed  by  the  SubjeSl  of  an  Opera,  and  took
Part  in  the  main  ABion  of  the  Poem,  the  Encore,  inftead
of  being  dejireable,  would  generally  difgujl :  But  the  whole
being  confidered  as  a  mere  mufical  Entertainment,  and  the
tragic  ASlion  commonly  forgot ,  the  artificial  Performance  of
a  Song  became  naturally  a  chief  Objefl:  of  Admiration,  and
the  Repetition  of  it  a  chief  ObjeB  of  Requeft.

Thus  the  whole  Farrago  of  the  modern  Opera  feems
^refolved  into  its  clear  and  evident  Principles  -:  And
hence  the  SubjeB,  the  Mujic,  the  ABion,  the  Drefs,  the
Execution,  Decorations,  and  Machinery,  are  fuch  a  glar-
ing Compound  of  trifling  and  abfurd  Improbabilities,  that
the  tragic  Influence  is  overlaid  and  Jojl ;  nor  is  it  pofli-
ble  for  any  impartial  and  rational  Spedlator  to  take  Part
in  the  dramatic  Adion,  or  he  moved  hy  the  ill-feigned
Dijlrefs.

Let


^POETRY and  MUSIC.  toy

Let  not  the  Writer  be  thought  to  derogate  from  the
Ability  or  Merit  of  all  the  Poets,  Mujicians,  and  Singers^
who  devote  their  Labours  to  the  Opera.  He  knows  there
are  Exceptions  in  each  of  thefe  Departments  [/].  Neither
let  him  be  fuppofed  to  cenfure  the  Opera,  as  an  Enter-
tainment unworthy  all  Attention,  confidered  as  a  mere
Amufement :  On  the  contrary,  whoever  is  inclined  to
hear  a  Succeflion  of  Symphonies  and  Songs,  fet  off  with  all
the  Decorations  that  can  dazzle  the  Eyey  and  all  the
Refinement  of  Execution  that  can  inchant  the  Ear,  let
him  attend  the  Opera,  and  he  will  find  his  Tafte  highly
gratihecL  But  this  Inquiry  aims  at  a  far  more  im-
portant Purpofe  :  Its  Intention  is,  to  point  out  the  Union,
the  Powers  and  primary  Ends  of  Poetry  and  Mujic :  And
when  the  modern  Opera  is  viewed  in  this  Light,  the
Writer  prefumes,  its  Defedts  are  too  confpicuous  to  admit
a  Vindication.

'Tis  faid,  indeed,  that  the  Weaknefs  and  Impropriety  of

this  Entertainment  is  chiefly  found  in  foreign  Countries,

where  the  Italian  Poetry  and  Mufic  are  not  native ;  but

that  in  Italy,  its  Power  and  Influence  are  confiderable.

This  the  fenfible  Rousseau  affirms  in  his  Diflertation  on

the  French  and  Italian  Mufic. But  particular  and  well

attefted  Fafts  are  ftubborn  Things,  and  will  not  bend  to

general  Affirmations :  And  of  this  Fadt,  the  concurrent

Teflimony  of  all  obfervant  Travellers  aflJures  us ;  That  ia

the  Italian  Theatre,  the  Seats  of  the  chief  Hearers  refem-

ble  fo  many  feparate  Apartments,  where  the  Nobility  fit

retired,  converfing  on  indifferent  Subjedts,  and  regardlefs

of  the  Progrefs  of  the  Drama,  till  fome  celebrated  Singer

[<]  Some  of  Metasta3Io's  and  Quinault's  Operas  are  fine  Tra-
gedies in  three  A£is.

comeft


2o8 A  Dissertation  on  the  Ukion,  &c.

comes  upon  the  Stage  j  and  then,  and  then  only,  enfues
a  Burft  of  Rapture,  of  Bravo  s.  Encores,  and  Applaufe.
The  Paflion,  therefore,  thus  expreffed  on  this  Occafion,  is
^  evidently  the  EfFedl,  not  of  a  true  Feeling  of  the  SuhjeSl
or  tragic  ABion,  which  is  entirely  dlfregarded,  but  (as  in
the  later  Periods  of  ancient  Rome)  of  an  extravagant
Admiration  of  the  Singer's  Ability  and  Art.

3.  The  modern  State  of  the  Anthem,  Motet, or  Hymn,
comes  next  under  Confideration. — With  Refpedl  to  the
facred  Poetry  that  hath  ever  been  ufed  in the Chrijiian
Chtirc'%  it  is  various  in  different  Countries.  It  appears  that
in  Italy,  it  hath  been  an  allowed Cuftom  from the
.carlieft  Ages,  to  permit  the  AdmifTion  of  Hymns  or  Motets
as  a  Part  of  divine  Service. This  Practice,  in  Courfe  of
Time,  produced  wild  and  incoherent  Compofitions  :  For
the  poetic Charadtcr  being feparated from  the  mufical ;
the  Compofers,  little  fkilled  in  the  Art  of  Poetry,  and  yet
xonfidering  themfelves  as  Principals,  have  often  formed
their  Motets  of  Sentiments  and  Paffions  inconfijlent  with
each  other  [w]. Another  Separation  here,  too,  enfued  : I
mean  the  total  Separation  oi  Senfe  from  Sound:  For  thefe
Motets  are  generally  compofed  in  the  Latin  Tongue,  and
therefore  unintelligible  to the  greateft  Part  of  thofe  who
hear  them.

As  to  the  Church  Mufic  of  Italy  and  its  once  appendant
Provinces,  it  hath  aflumed  a  Variety  of  Shapes,  and  in
different  Times  hath  undergone  great  Changes.  In  the
fecond  Century, it  appears  that  the  pagan  Melody  was

[u']  For  an  Inftance  of  this  Kiod,  take  the  following,  which  is  one  of
Carissimi's  moft  celebrated  ^(7i?/j;  "  PeCcavi,Dominc,  &  miferere  -nei  j
"  te  diligit  Anima  mea,  te  femper  quasfivit  Cor  nieum  ;  Ergo,  mi  Jefu,
iJii  Creator,  mi  SaJvator,  dimittcCulpas,  parce  Peccatis  meis,"  &c.

adopted.


of  P  OETKY and MU  SIC.  209

adopted,  and  allowed  under  certain  Reftridiions  of  Modefiy
and  Decorum  [w].  It  was  afterwards  eftabliQied  at  Con-
stantinople by  CoNSTANTiNE;  then  at  Alexan-
PRIA,  by  Athan  Asius.  This  Eflablilhment  was  found
to '  have  bad  EfFedls,  through  the  effeminate  Genius  of
the  Mufic  then  in  Vogue,  and  was  therefore  banifhed
from  the  Church  of  Alexandria.  No  Wonder,  if  it
was  infedled  with  the  Genius  of  the  pagan  Mufic  of  the
Times,  which  we  find  to  have  been  diffolute  and  ener-
vate [x].  From  the  general  Prevalence  of  this  debauched
Talle,  Augustine  was  tempted  to  banifli  Mufic  from
the  Church:  But  Ambrose  reformed  the  Office  of  the
Church  of  Milan  J  and  eftabliflied  a  Melody  auflere  in
the  Extreme:  This' was  improved  by  Gregory  ;  whofe
Melody  fucceeded,  and  was  eftabliflied  in  the  following
Century :  And  now,  the  Devaflations  of  the  Barbarians
coming  on,  this  P/at'n  Song  naturally  lay  hid  unchanged
in  the  Chriftian  Church,  during  the  fucceeding  Ages  of
Ignorance  and  Cruelty.

On  the  faint  Revival  of  Arts  in  the  eleventh  Century,
the  Appearance  of  GuiDO  gave  a  new  Genius  to  the  Mufic
of  the  Roman  Church.  For  according  to  the  natural
Tendency  of  his  Invention  of  the  Art  of  Counterpoint,
Gassendi  tells  us  that  all  the  World  now  run  mad  after
an  artificial  Variety  of  Parts.  About  four  hundred  Years
after  Guido,  the  debauched  Art  once  more  palTed  over
into  Italy  from  Greece:  Certain  Greeks,  who  efcaped
from  the  taking  of  Constantinople,  brought  a  refined
and  enervate  fpecies  of  Mufic  to  Rome:  Where,  meeting
with  a  congenial  Eflfeminacy,  under  the  gay  and  difTolute

[■uj]  Just.  Mart,  ^/r^  107.  [*]  See  above,  Se£l.  xi.

E  e  .  Pontificate


tio ^Dissertation  sn  the  Union,  &c..

Pontificate  of  the  Princes  ef  the  Houfe  of  Medici,  it  ran
into  fuch  an  Extreme  of  Indecorum,  that  Po^^  Pius  thC'
fourth  formed  a  Refolution  to  expel  it  from  the  Church..
PAL-ffiSTRiNi  had  the  Art  and  Addrefs  to  divert,  this  im—
Spending  Storm i by  compofing  fome Pieces  of  fuch  a
majeftic  Gravity,  as  convinced  the  "Pope  that  Mufic  thus,
truly  facred  might  be  made  fubfervient  to  the  nobleft  Pur-
pofes. This  Severity  of  Compofition  ftill  remains  in  the
Popes  Chapel;  where,  ever  fince  the  Reform  laft  men-
tioned, even  mufical  Inftruments  are  not  admitted,  for  fear
of  creating  new  Abufes. But  the  common  Genius  of
'their  modern  Church  Mufic  or  Motets  i&  altogether  dif-
ferent: It  is  infedted  with the  fame Puerility  of  Stile
with  their  Opera  Airs :  An  unbounded  Compafs,  extrava-^-
gant  Divifions  on  fingle  Syllables^  a  Play  upon  particular
Words  to  the  Negledl  of  the  general  Tenor  of  the  Song,,
form  its  general  Character. How  can  it  be  otherwife?
When  the  fame  Muficians,  (and  thefe  feldom  much  in-
terefted  in  the  Subjed:,  or  acquainted  with  the  Language
of  their  facred  Poetry)  generally  compofe  both  for  the
Opera  and  the  Church. Some  noble  Exceptions,  however,
may  be  found  to  this  general  Remark;  Of  thefe,  Caris-
51  Ml  is one : But the moft eminent Inftance is in
Benedetto  Marcello a  noble Venetian; many  of
whofe  Pfalms,  if  we  confider  their  Exprefilon  either  as
fublime,  tender,  graceful,  or  joyous,  clearly  excel  the  vocal
Compofitions  of  all  his  Countrymen,  in  Variety, Sim-
plicity, and  Truth  [y].

With  Refpeft  to  the  Performance  of  their  Church  Mufic
in  Italy,  it  hath  naturally  too  much  followed  the  Genius
[>']  It  muft  be  obfervqd,  that  Marcello's  Compofitions  are  not  fet  to
th£  Latin  TranJIatm }  but  to  an  Italian  Paraphrafe  of  the  Pfalms.

of


0/^  POETRY and  MUSIC.  iit

<X  the  Art  itfelf.  They  have  no  eftablifhed  Choirs  of
Priefts  :  The  Cajlrati  are  the  chief  Singers  in  the
Church :  In  Rome,  thefe  Performers  go  round  the  City
in  BandSj^s  they  are  accidentally  hired;  and  bring  no
great  Credit  to  the  facred  Mufic,  either  by  their  Cha-
radierS  or  perfonal  Appearance.  The  Truth  is.  Church  \
Mufic,  in  Italy,  like  that  of  the  Operuy  is  confidered
more  as  a  Matter  of  Amufement  than  Devotion.  Hence
the  Decorations  and  mufical  Exhibitions  of  their  Churches^
in  the  Time  of  Carnaval,  approach  towards  thofe  of  the
'Theatre  at  an  Opera :  And  the  general  Attention  is  fo  far
from  being  turned  on  facred  Subjedls,  that  it  is  chiefly
exercifed  in  Debates  and  parrels  about  the  Excellence  and
Superiority  of  the  performing  Cajlrati.

Such  then  have  been  the  Separations  and  ProgreJJions  of
facred  Poetry  and  Mujic  in  the  Mother  Country,  from
whence  they  have  been  chiefly  derived  and  tranfmitted  to
the  reft  of  Europe.  However,  as  they  wear  an  Afpedt
fomewhat  different  in  France  and  England,  it  may  ht
proper  lo  point  out  the  chief  Variations,  together  with  the
Caufes  that  have  produced  them.

In  France  the  facred  Poetry  of  their  Motets  or  Hymns
is,  in  its  general  Turn,  much  fuperior  to  that  of  Italy  :
For  in  France  it  is  moft  commonly  feledled  and  borrowed*
if  not  tranfcribed,  from  the/acred  Writings^  This  infures  to
it  a  confiderable  Degree  of  Propriety,  Dignity,  and  Force.
How  this  came  to  pafs,  we  may  learn  from  an  Authority
no  lefs  than  that  of  the  great  Colbert  j  who,  in  his
political  Teftament,  acknowledges  this  among  other  Obli-
gations which  the  Church  of  France  hath  owed  to  their
Intercourfc  with  the  Protejlants^  that  it  hath  given  them  a

E  9  2  more


212 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

more  general  and  intimate  Acquaintance  with  the  holy
Scriptures. — Their  facred  Mufic,  though  not  poflefled  of
that  Grace  which  the  bell:  Italian  may  truly  boaft,  yet  it
may  be  juftly  regarded  as  the  beft  that  France  hath  pro-
duced j  becaufe  it  is  fet  to  a  much  better  mufical  Language
than  their  own  :  For  the  Latin  Tongue  hath  a  Variety
of  Accent  and  Meafure,  which  adapts  itfelf  happily  to-
mufical  Expreflion  i  whereas  the  French  Language  is
hoarfe,  ill-accented^  or  of  ambiguous  Accent,  void  of  Har-
mony andVari£ty^_andincu^^  But  ftill,  the
Compoiition  of  their  Motets  in  the  Latin  Tongue  is  at-
tended with  the  fame  abfurd  Confequence  as  in  Italy;
that  the  People  in  general  do  not  underfland  them. —  In
one  Refpedt,  however,  their  facred  Mufic  hath  not  de-
parted from  its  proper  Charadter  fo  far  as  the  modern
Italian  i  I  mean,  in  its  Gravity  of  Stile  :  And  this,  it  fecms
probable,  hath  been  owing  in  Part  to  the  eilablifhed
Choirs  in  France,  which  are  compofed  of  regular  Eccle-
Jiajiicst  and  therefore  not  fo  eafily  feduced  to  adopt  a  light-
and  flaunting  Species  of  Mufic,  as  the  wandering  Bands  -
of  Italian  Cajirati..  Another  concomitaat  Gaufe  of  this
referved  and  fober  Mufic  may  probably  have  been  the
Mixture  of  the  Proteftant  Party  in  France  :  For  thefe'
(according  to  the  Genius  of  every  new-reformed  Seft)
adopted  a  grave  and  fimple  Melody:  They  were  therefore
a  falutary  Check  upon  the- eftablifhed  Church,  tending  to
the  Prevention  of  open  and  fcandalous  Abufes. — Laftly,
with  Regard  to  the  Article  o(  Perfdrmance,  the  French
have  greatly  the  Advantage  in  Point  of  Propriety  and'
Decorum ;  for,  as  we  have  obferved,  their  Choirs  are  com-
ptofcd  of  an  eftablifhed  Priefthood,  who  attend  to  this
► 4  peculiar


cf  FOETRY anJ MU  ^IC.  2ij

peculiar  Profeffion  j  whofe  Charafters  are  of  higher  Con-
fideration  than  thofe  of  the  Italian  Bands;  and  whofe
Learning,  as  well  as  Religion  and  Manners,  naturally  lead
them  to  a  more  reverent  and  devout  Execution  of  their-
facred  Office.

In  England  the  State  of  Things  is  in  fome  Refpedls'
better,  and  in  fome  Refpedls  worfe  than  in  France.  Our
facred  Poetry,  fung  in  the  Cathedr-ah,  is  tranfcribed  ftridtly
from  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  moft  commonly  from  the
Book*  of  Pfalms  :  Except  only  the  Te  Deum,  which  is
one  of  the  moft  anclent^and^approveH^Hymns  of  the
Church.  This  Reftriftion,  by  which  no  Hymns  of  new
Invention  are  admitted  as  a  Part  of  divine  Service,  we  owe-
to  the  grand  Reformation :  This  opened  to  us  the  Foun-
tain of  the  facred  Writings,  which  had  before  been  locked
up,  as  in  Italy.  From  the  fame  Caufe,  our  Anthems-
are  likewife  given  in  our  own  Tongue  -,  which  though
not  fo  various  as  the  Latin.,  is  yet  generally  round  and'
fonorous,  clearly  accented,  and  capable  of  bein^  adapted  to
a  Variety  of  mufical  Expreffion.  But  while  we  juftly- ad-
mire the  y^'crf  J  P(?f/rj  of  our  Cathedral' SQTv'ict,  muft  we
not  lament  the  State  of  it  in  our  parochial  Churches,
where  the  cold,  the  meagre,  the  difgufting  Dulnefs  of
Sternhold  and  his  Companions,  hath  quenched  all  the
poetic  Fire  and  devout  Majejly  of  the  royal  Pfalmiji.

The Charadler  of  our Cathedral  Mufic  is  of  a  middli
Kind :  Not  of  the  firft  Rank  in  the  great  Quality  of  Ex-
prejjion ;  nor  yet  fo  improper  or  abfurd,  as  to  deferve-a  ge-
neral  Reprobation. Too ftudious  a  Regard  to  Fuguer]
and  an  artificial  Counterpoint  appears  in  the  old,  and  too-/
airy  and  light  a  Turn,  to  the  Negled  of  a  grand  Simpli  J


214 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

city,  in  the  new: Two  Extremes  which  tend  equally,

though  from  oppofite  Caufes,  to  deflroy  mufical  Expref-

■Jion  \y'\. Yet,  there  are  -Paflages  in  Purcel's  Anthems,

which  may  fairly  ftand  in  Competition  with  thofe  of  any

Compofer,  of  whatever  Country. There  are  others  wha

y^  may  juflly  claim  a  confiderable  Share  of  Praife. Handel

ilands  eminent,  in  his  Greatnefs  and  Sublimity  of  Style.

— Our  parochial Mujic,  in  general,  is  folemn  and  devout:

Much better  calculated  for  the  Performance  of  a  whole

Congregation,  than  if  it  were  more  broken  and  elabctfate.

In  Country  Churches,  wherever  a  more  artificial  Kind

liath  been  imprudently  attempted,  Confufion  and  DifTon-

rance  are  the  general  Confequence.

The  Performance  of  our  Cathedral  Mufic  is  defedive :
We  have  no  grand  eftabliftied  Choirs  of  Priefts,  as  in
France  ;  whofe  Dignity  of  Charadter  might  in  a  proper
Degree  maintain  That  of  the  divine  Service.  This  Duty
is  chiefly  left  to  a  Band  of  Lay-Singers,  whofe  Rank  and
Education  are  not  of  Weight  to  preferve  their  Profeflion
from  Contempt.  The  Performance  of  our  parochial
Pfalms,  though  in  the  Villages  it  be  often  as  mean  and
meagre  as  the  Words  that  are  fung ;  yet  in  great  Towns,
where  a  good  Organ  is  fkilfully  and  devoutly  employed  by
a  fenfible  Organift,  the  Union  of  this  Inftrument  with
the  Voices  of  a  well-inilrudted  Congregation,  forms  one  of
tEe^randefTScenes  of  unafFe<Sted  Piety  that  human  Nature
^an  afford.  The  Reverfe  of  this  a,ppears,  when  a  Com-
pany of  illiterate  People  form  themfelves  into  a  Choir
.diftindt  from  the  Congregation. Here  Devotion  is  loft,

[yl  For  a  full  View  of  "this  Subject,  fee  Mr.  Avison's  Efay  en  mufual
■Exprejfion.

I  between


^  '^  ,4; '""  Pi^'^


tf/  POETRY ^W MUS  IC.  215,

between  the impotent  Vanity  of  thofe  who  Jing,  and  the
ignorant  Wonder  of  thofe  who  lijlen.

4.  The  Oratorio  is  a  dramatic  Reprefentation  of  fome
Story  taken  from  the  facred  Scriptures,  or  the  Records  of
the  Church,  accompanied  with  Mufic. Its  Origin  is  at-
tributed to  the  barbarous  Period  of  the  Croifades  -,  when .
Companies of  Pilgrims, returning from Jerusalem,
formed  themfelves  into  Choirs, and  fung  the  Praifes  and
Atchievements  of  Saints  and  Martyrs  [2;]. Thus  it  is  faid.
to  have,  arifen  and  been eftabliflied  in  France. But:
how  it  could  afllime  the  Form  of  dramatic  Reprefentation  •
accompanied  with  Mujic,  is  hard  to  fay,  without  fuppofing
it  (like  the  Opera)  to  have  been  the  EfFedt  of  an  Imitation.
On  this  principle  we  may  trace  it  to  a  probable  Origin.
It  is  well  known,  that  the  Pagan  Shews  were  often  ex-
hibited in  the  Temples,,  or  at  the  Tombs  of  deceafed
Heroes : 'Tis  no  lefs  certain, that  the  early  Chriftians,
adopted the  Practice, with  a  due  Change  of Objedls,
either  from  a  mere  Imitation  of  the  Pagan  Cuftom,  or
with  a  View  to  the  Converlion  of  Idolators. Nothing,^
therefore,  could  be  more  natural,  than  that  the  mufical
Accompanyment  fhould  remain,  though  the  Objedls  were
changed. Of  this  Mode  of  Piety  we  have  a  clear  Inflance
in  a  Difcourfe of  Augustine, who condemned the
Practice  j,  where,  fpeaking  of  Cyprian's  Tomb,  he  fays, ,
"  Not  many  Years  ago,  the  Petulance  of  the  Dancers  had
**  invaded  this  facred  Place,  where  the  Martyr's  Body  is
<«  laid  : All  Night  long  prophane  Songs  were  fung,  and
**  were  accompanied  with  theatrical  Gefticulations  \<i\"

[z]  Menetrier  dei  Reprefent,  en  Mufiqut.  \a'\  Aug.  5?rOT.-

»■«  naU  Divi  Cvf  riani..

Now.


2i6 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Now  fuppofing  this  Pradtice  to  have  ftill  fubfiiled  in  fomc
remote  or  obfcure  Part  of  Asia  or  Greece,  it  might  na-
turally be  adopted  by  Companies  of  devout  Pilgrims,  in
their.  Peregrinations  to  the  holy  Land :  And  thus  the  fa-
cred  mufical  Drama  would  be  naturally  produced.

In  Italy  the  Origin  of  the  Oratorio  is  faid  to  have
been  more  recent,  and  clearly  the  Effeft  of  an  Imitation.
We  are  told,  that  the  famous  Philip  de  Nery,  a  Na-
tive of  Florence,  and  Founder  of  the  Congregation  of
the  Priefls  of  the  Oratory  in  the  Year  1 540,  obferving  the
flrong  PafTion  of  the  Roman  People  for  mujical  Reprefent-
ationst  invented  the  facred  Drama,  with  a  View  to  their
Improvement  in  Piety.  Hence  it  is  faid  to  have  received
the  Name  of  Oratorio,  which  it  ftill  wears.  The  Opera,
already  cftabliflied  at  Venice  and  Rome,  was  his  Model :
He  had  little  more  to  do,  than  to  change  the  Objedts  from
Pagan  to  Chrijlian:  And  thus  from  Itai-y  it  ipread  into
other  Parts  of  Europe  \b\

The  capital  Impropriety  and  Defedl  of  this  Entertain-
ment, while  it  wears  the  dramatic  Form,  is  the  perpetual
Recitative  0%  mufical  Accompanyment  in  the  interlocutory
Parts,  fimilar  to  that  of  the  Opera.  This  is  a  Circum-
flance  fo  repugnant  to  modern  Manners,  and  therefore  fo
far  out  of  Nature,  that  no  Audience  can  be  much  affected
by  the  Reprefentation.,  or  take  Part  in  an  Adiion  fo  impro-
bably feigned.  TJie  neceflary  Effedt  of  This  glaring  Im-
probability is  a  general  Inattention  to  the  SubjeSl,  and  a
Regard  centered  chiefly  on  the  Mufic  and  Execution.

Of  this  Species  of  Poem  the  Italians  have  fome  fine  ones,
written  by  Metastasio. They  cannot  perhaps  be  rank-

[i]  BouRDELOT  Hijl.  it  la  Mufique,  torn.  i.  p.  256.

ed


ff/  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ««^  M  U  S  I  C.  217

ed  in  the  firft  Clafs,  either  for  Sublimity  or  Pathos.  But
Elegance  of  Style,  Simplicity  of  Plan  and  Condudt,  ani-
mated by  a  noble  Spirit  of  Devotion,  prevails  throughout
thefe  Compofitions.  The  Mufic  of  the  Oratorio  in  It  a  l  y
too  much  refembles  That  of  the  Opera :  Simplicity,  Ma-
jefty,  and  devout  Expreffion,  are  facrificed  to  the  Com-
pofer's  Vanity  or  ill-diredted  Art.

The  Performance  of  this  facred Drama  in  It  aly  is  faid
to  be  attended  with  maay  of  the  fame  Circumflances  of
Impropriety  with  that  of  the  Opera,  from  which  it  had  its
Origin ;  All  tending  to  render  it  rather  a  Subjedt  of  mere
Amufement,  than  of  Piety  and  Virtue.  Add  to  this,  that
being  performed  in  the  Churches,  it  may  be  queftioned
whether  the  Drama  be  dignified,  or  the  Temple  prophaned,
by  fo  inadequate  a  Reprefentation.

In  France,  I  do  not  find  the  Oratorio  is  now  in  Ufc :
Its  firft  rude  Form  produced  Comedy  and  'Tragedy  in  that
Kingdom  :  But  the  Parent  feems  to  have  died  at  their
Birth  [c].

In  England,  this  facred  Drama  is  in  fomc  Refpeds
ivell,  in  others,  ///  conduded.  Next  to  the  perpetual
mufical  Accompanyment,  the  leading  Impropriety  hath
arifen  from  an  entire  Separation  of  the  Poet's  and  Mufcians
Office.  Even  when  the  Poet  remains  principal,  this  Sepa-
ration tends  to  bad  Eifedls  :  But  to  compleat  the  Evil,  the
Mufcians  Charadter hath  here,  in  many  Inftances,  alTumed
the  Precedence  i  and  the  Pcet  become  fubfervient  to  him,
as  his  Diredlor.  How  this  came  to  pafs,  may  be  eafily
explained. This  Kind  of  Poem  being  unknown  in  Eng-

[f]  BoiLEAU,  Art  Poet.

F f  LANI?


^iS yf  DissERTATtoK  on  the  Uwion,  &e»

LAND  when  Handel  arrived;  and  that  .great  Mulician
being  the  firft  who  introduced  the  Or^/or/o  ;TTt  became  a
Matter  of  Neceffity,  that  he  fl:iould  employ  fome  Writer  in
his  Service.  Now  this  being  a  Degradation,,  to  which
Men  of  Genius  would  not  eafily  fubmit,  he  was  forced  to
apply  to  Verjifiers  instead  of  Poets.  Thus  the  Poem  was
the  EfFedt  either  of  Hire  or  Favour,  when  it  ought  to
have  been  the  voluntary  Emanation  of  Genius*  Hence,
moft  of  the  Poems  he  compofed  to,  are  fuch,  as  would
have  funk  and  dilgraced  any  other  Muiic  than  his  own  J

But  although  his  exalted  Genius  bore  itlelf  up  againil
this  Weight  of  Dulnefs ;  yet  fuch  a  leading  Defedt  could
not  fail  to  have  eflential  EiFeds  on,  the  Mufician's  Art.
For  although  no  Man  ever  polTefled  greater  Powers  of
mufical  Expreffion  -,  yet,  when  the  Writer  gave  him  fome-
times  little,  and  fometimes  nothing  to  exprefs,  the  main
Foundation  of  his  Art  failed  him  :  He  was  in  the  Situation
of  a  great  Painter^  who  fhouJd  be  deflined  to  give  Life  by
Colours,  to  a  dead  and  unmeaning  Defign  [^j.  Nay,  even
where  any  Degree  of  poetical  Expreffion  happened  to.
give  Play  to  his  expreffive  Powers,  yet  ftilU  the  general,

[d]  The  Messiah  is  an  Exception  to  this  general  Remark  :  Though  that
grand  Mufical  Entertainment  is  called  an  Oratoria,  yet  it  is  not  dramatic;
but  pr«perly  a  Collection  of  Hymns  or  Anthems  drawn  from  the  facred
Scriptures:  In  ftridl  Propriety,  therefore,  it  falls  under  another  Clafs
of  Compofition,  which  we  have  already  confidered.-*-The  Oratorio  of
Samson  is  properly  dramatic:  But  the  Poem  is  fo  much  changed  in
the  Attempt  towards  accommodating  it  to  Mufic,  that^it  can  hardly  b«-
regarded  as  the  Work  of  MitxcN. — The  L'Allsgro  and  It  Penseroso
are  two  elegant  Poems ;  and  are  finely  fet  to  Mufic  by  Handel  :  But\
being  merely  defcriptivi,  and  in  no  Degree  pathetic,  they  cannot  be  ranked
among  the  higheft  Forms  of  Poetry ;  nor  could  they  give  Play  to  his  higheft^
i^owiys^of  E;<pi«ffion.

Comgofitiona


e/- POETRY  /7«^  MUSIC.  ai$

Compofition  being  unconne(fled,  weak,  and  unafFedling,
there  could  be  neither  Contraft  nor  Succeflion  of  pathetic
Songs  and  Choirs ;  which,  when  properly  united  in  one
great  Subjecl)  heighten  each  other  by  a  continued  Pro-
greflion,  like  the  facceflive  Scenes  of  a  ivell-pland  Tragedy^
Bad  Handel's  Airs  and  Choirs  been  compoied  in  this
connecled  Manner,  and  the  Probability  of  the  Reprefen-
tation  in  other  Refpedts  preferved,  their  Effed  had  been
proportionable.  At  prefent,  being  often  disjoined,  and
deprived  of  that  Connexion  which  ought  to  arife  from  the
Poet's  Art,  they  lofe  all  the  Force  which  an  Accumulation
of  Paflion  would  have  produced.  They  fland  finglei
While  in  a  well-condu6ted  Poem,  the  EfFeft  of  evtryjuc-
ceeding  Song  or  Choir  would  be  heightened  by  the  Power
of  the  preceding.

But  while  we  pay  all  due  Regard  to  the  Memory  of  this
great  Mufician,  and  acknowledge,  nay  maintain,  that  his
Compofitions  often  arife  to  the  highefl:  Pitch  of  Sublimity
and  Pathos;  critical  Juftice  demands  fome  farther  Remarks
on  this  Subjeft,  for  the  Sake  of  future  Artifts. — As  a  neccf-~h^
fary  Confequence,  therefore,  of  the  Separation  of  the  '
Poet's  and  Mvfician's  Province,  and  of  his  too  great  At-
tention to  the  latter ;  his  Mufic  is  fometimes  improperly
condudled,  even  where  it  is  not  influenced  by  the  Defedls
of  the  Poem.  ';  From  this  Separation,  in  which  he  only
complied  with  the  eftablifhed  Pradtice  of  the  Times,
the  following  incidental  Defedh  naturally  arofe.  i .  Too
much  mufical  Divifion  upon  fingle  Syllables,  to  the
Negledt  of  the  Senfe  and  Meaning  of  the  Song.—
2.  A  partial  Imitation  of  incidental  Words,  inftead  of
a  proper  Expreflion  of  the  ruling  Sentiments ;  even
when  fuoh  Words and  Sentiments  happen  to  be  con-

F  Jf  2  trary


220 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

trary  to  each  other.  —  3.  Solo  Songs  often  too  much
lengthened,  without  the  Intervention  of  the  Choir,  to  in-
fpirit  and  fuftain  them :  Efpecially  the  T)a  Capo  is  almoft
in  every  Inftance  of  bad  Effedt,  as  it  renders  the  firft  and
capital  Part  of  the  Song  infipid  by  an  unmeaning  Repeti-
tion.— 4.  Choirs  fometimes  too  much  lengthened,  without
the  Intervention  of  iingle  Songs  or  Duets,  for  the  necefTary
Repofe  of  the  Ear,  which  is  apt  to  be  fatigued  and  dif-
gufted  by  fuch  a  long-continued  and  forcible  Impreflion. —
5.  Choirs  fometimes  (though  feldom)  calculated  more
for  the  Difplay  of  the  Compofer's  Art,  in  the  Conflrudion
of  Fugues  and  Canons,  than  for  a  natural  Expreflion  of
the  Subj-e<fl. — 6.  The  Choir  in  many  Inflances  (and  the
Jingle  Song,  in  fome J  not  fudden  enough  in  its  Intervention  j
being  generally  prepared  hy  a  correfpondent  Symphony  of
inftrumental  Mufic  ;  which  creates  Expedlation  and  Pre-
fcntimentj  4eftroys  Surprize,  and  thus  leJJ'ens  \kvt  ImpreJJion
and  Effect.  '
J^  Inftances  might  be  produced  of  all  thefe  Defeds,  in  the
."Compofitions  of  this  great  Mafter:  But  they  arofe  not  fo
much  from  Himfelf,  as  from  the  Period  ia  vyhich  he  lived.
The'refore  the  Writer  chufeth  to  call  them  into  Shades,
refering  them  to  the  Qbfervation  and  Regard  of  mufical
Profeflbrs  rather  than  feem  to  fix  a  Mark  of  Difrefpedl  on
any  particular  Compofition  of  a  Man  whofe  exalted  Genius
he -reveres.  And  upon  the  whole,  his  Airs,  Duets,  and
Choirs,  as  they  furpafs  every  thing  yet  produced,  in  Gran-
deur and  Expreflion;  fo,  they  will  ever  be  the  richeft
Fountain  for  Imitation  or  Adoption;  and,  even  fingly  taken,
will  juftly  command  the  Regard  and  Admiration  of  all
fucceeding  Ages.

The


?/•  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  221

The  Performance  of  the  Oratorio  in  England,  under
ks  prefent  defedlive  State, in  fome  Refpefts  may  be  cen-
fured ;  in  others,  is  to  be  approved. The  Exhibition  of
the  Choir  and  accompanying  Band  is  not  only  decent,  but
grand  and  ftriking :  A  becoming  Gravity  attends  it,  both
among  the  Performers  and  the  Audience. The  Airs  and
Choirs  are  often  fung  with  a  Decorum  not  unfuitable  to
the  Dignity  of  the  Occafion. Gn  the  other  Band,  there,
are  Defeds  which  naturally  arife  from  the  Separation  of]
the  Performer's  from  the  Poet's  and  Mufician's  Art. — The.j
Singers  are  not  always  fo  animated  in  their  Manner,  as  to'
create  a  Belief  in  the  Audience  (whenever  a  true  poetic -
and  mufical  Expreflion  are  united)  that  they  feel  the  Sen-
timents they  exprefs. If  a  grand  Simplicity  of  Performance
were  ftill  more  ftudied,  it  would  give  an  additional  Luftre
to  their  Talents. Above  all,  the  flourijhed  Clofe  or  Ca-
dence  is  belowr  the Dignity of  the  facred  Drama, and
abfolutely  deftrudVive  of  all  truemufiical  Expreflion.

Thus  we  have  traced  the  Rife,  Union,  Power,  Progref-
fions.  Separations,  and  Corruptions,  of  Poetry  and  Mujic,
together  with  the  Caifes  of  thefe  feveral  Gradations ;  from
their  firft"  Appearance  in  the  favage  State  down  to  their :
prefent  Forms  in  the  mort  polijhed  Nations  of  Europe.  .

SECT. XIII.

Of  the  pofjible  He-union  of  Poetry  and  Mufic, .

IT  remains  now  to  conlider  the  Circumilances  in  which,
and  the  means  by  which,  'tis  poflible, that  the  Arts .
of  Poetry  and  Mufic  may  again  be  powerfully  and  ef-
fe<^ualJy  united,  after  thefe  Separations  have  taken  Place.

The.


222  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

The  Legijlator's  and  Bard's  Charadler  cannot  again
be  generally  and  fully  united.  We  have  feen,  they  na-
turally feparate  in  an  early  Period  of  Civilization  ;
And  the  Departments  become  fo  diftin<S,  as  to  create
a  general  Incompatibility  and  Repugnance  too  clear  to
need  an  Illuftration.  But  although  the  Legiflator  can-
.«ot  generally  maintain  the  poetic  and  mufical  Charadter,
he  may  ftill  continue  to  proteSl,  and  fometimes  even  to
poffefs  it :  And  when  Poetry  and  Mufic  are  united  in  their
proper  Ends,  there  are  fev/  fecondary  Accomplijkments
which  do  truer  Honour  even  to  the  higEefTStations.  It
was  indeed  a  ridiculous  Vanity  in  a  late  Emperor  to  fing
4n  an  Opera  j  as  it  was  in  Louis  the  Fourteenth  to  dance
on  a  parallel  Occafion ;  becaufe,  in  thefe  Inftances,  the
Arts  were  feparated  from  their  Important  Ends.  But  it
was  a  noble  Example  in  CharlemAg'ne,  when  he  dig-
nified his  Choir,  by  joining  them  in  the  public  Adl  of
Religion,  and  finging  divine  Service  in  his  imperial  Robes,
HjSNRY  the  Second,  and  Francis  theFirfl,  of  France  j
Charles  the  Great,  of  Germany;  Alfrid  the  Great,
of  England;  w^re  all  diftinguifhed,  not  only  by  their
Love  and  ProteSiion  of  the  mufical  and  poetic  Arts,  but
by  their  Proficiency  in  them,  as  a.ppUed  to  their  higheil
Ends.

And  as  the  Legiflator  may  ftill  incidentally  retain  a  Part
•of  the  Poet's  Dignity;  fo  the  Poet,  though  no  longer  a
Legiflator,  may  ftill  occafionally  exert  his  falutary  Power,
by  his  Influence  on  the  Paflions  of  the  Soul. — Charles
the  Ninth  of  France  (who  not  only  compofed  and  per-
formed Church  Mufic,  but  writ  elegant  Verfes)  addrefiTed
a  little  Poem  to  Ronsard,  which  does  equal  Honour  to
■the  Prince  and  the  Poet,  And  as  it  fo  nobly  aflerts  the
I  Dignity


tf/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^;7^  M  U  S  I  C.  223

Dignity  of  the  mulical  and  poetic  Arts,  and  points  at  their-
original  Alliance  with  the  legiflative  Charadler,  the  fol-
lowing Citation  feems  to  claim  a  Place  under  this  Article..

Ton  Efprit  enjiatmne  d'une  celefle  Ardeur,

Eclatteparfoy-meme,  &  moy  par  ma  Grandeur.

T.a  Lyre  qui  ravit  par  de  Ji  doux  Accords
T'ajfervit  les  Efprit s,  dont  je  nay  que  le  Corps :
Elle  t'en  rend  le  Maitre,  &  tef^ait  introduire,
Ou  la  plusjier  Tyran  ne  peut  avoir  d' Empire.
The  Poet's  and  Mujician's  Office  cannot  probably  be-
again  united  in  their  full  and  general  Power. For  in  their,
prefent  refined  State,  either  of  their  Arts  feparately  con-
fidered,  is  of  fuch  Extent,  that  although  they  may  inci-
dentally meet  in  one  Perfon,  they  cannot  often  be  found
together. — One  Expedient  there  is,  indeed,  by  which  the
two  Arts  may  be  practically  united  by  the  fame  Perfon.
That  is,  if  the  Poet  feleft  and  adapt  proper  Mujic  to  his
Poem ;  or  the  Mujician  feleft  and  adapt  proper  Poetry  to
his  Mufic. Let  us  then  confider,  which  of  thefe  Methods
i$  moft  likely  to  fucceed,  in  uniting  the  two  Arts  effeSlually,.
No^y,  though  we  fuppofe  the  Mufician  to  be  of  fufficient
Ability  to  diftinguifh  good  Poetry  from  bad; we  muft,
ferther  obferve,  that  to  colledt  various  PafTages  from  vari-
ous Poets,  and  form  them  into  one  whole  with  Propriety
and  Force,  would  be  a  Taik  difficult,  if  not  impoffible :
For the  Expreffions  of  Poetry  are  particular,  and un-
alterably appropriated  to  their  Subject : They  are  therefore
generally  incapable  of  a  fecond  Application. The  Fadt,
is  quite  otherwife  in  Mufic :  For  here,  the  Expreffions
are  general  and  vague :  it  is  the  Poetry  to  which  they  are
applied,  which  fixeth  and  gives  them  their  particular  Exi^-

prejjion,.


t


•424 A  Dissertation  on  the  Unio^,  &c.

treffion.  Therefore,  a  Seleftion  of  various  Pieces  may  be
made,  and  united  in  one  'whole,  with  Propriety  and  EfFedt.
This  Union  is  indeed  fometimes  made  in  an  unmeaning
Way,  in  what  the  Italians  call  a  Pajiicio:  Where  we
commonly  fee  a  Series  of  Songs  thrown  together,  without
Connexion  or  Defign.  But  if  we  fuppofe  a  Poem  properly
conducted,  and  adapted  to  Mufic  of  the  firft  Excellence,
in  Subferviency  to  the  Genius  of  the  Poem  i  'tis  plain,  that
the  Mufic  fo  applied  may  acquire  a  Force  of  Ejtpreflion  more
.powerful  in  the y^^row^  Application  than  in  iht  Jirji.  As  (to
refume  a  former  Allufion)  the  fame  Kind  of  Colours  may
acquire  a  flronger  EfFecfb,  by  being  employed  on  2,  forcible
than  an  injipid  Drawing.  This  is  an  Union  far  eafier  to
•attempt,  than  to  accomplijh.  However;  thus  much  it
-feemed  proper  to  remark,  left  every  Endeavour  of  this  Kind
fliould  be  regarded  as  a  mere  Pajiicio.

The  Singers  Profeflion  can  feldom  be  united  with  that
of  the  Poet,  and  not  generally  with  that  of  the  Mufician.
The  fame  Caufe  will  maintain  the  Separation  here,  as  in
the  poetic  and  mufical  Profeflions.  The  Arts,  in  their
prefent  refined  and  complicated  State,  feparately  demand
fuch  continued  Application  and  various  Qualities,  as  feldom
meet  in  the  fame  Perfon. — 'Tis  the  Performer's  Province,
therefore,  in  this  State  of  Separation,  to  conform  to  the
Genius  of  the  Poem  and  the  Mufic.  As  the  Mufician  is
j  fubordinate  to  the  Poet,  fo  the  Performer  is  fubordinate

{  to  Both.

The  Epic  Poem  cannot  be  again  united  with  Mufic.

The  Reafons  may  be  colledted  from  the  preceding  Parts  of

this Differtation. The long Narratiofts, the frequent

- Dialogue,  the  Mixture  of  calm  Defcription  and  unim-

paflioned


cf  VOETKY and  MU  SIC.  225

paffioned  Sentiment,  all  thefe  are  clearly  incompatible  with
the  mufical  Alliance,  unlefs  where  long-continued  Cuftom,
and  a  Pre-Eftabliftunent  drawn  from  favage  Manners,  had
produced  and  confirmed  an  Union.  But  this,  once  broken,
can  never  be  effeftually  reftored  :  For  it  muft  ever  want
that  Foundation  of  Habit,  on  which  it  firft  arofe,  and  gain-
ed its  Power  [d\.

The  Tragic  Poem  can  never  again  be  powerfully  united
with  Mufic.  This  repugnance  arifeth  from  the  fame
Caufe  with  the  laft.  For  here,  the  continued  mufical
Accompanyment,  mixing  itfelf  with  the  dramatic  Cha-
rader  and  the  perpetual  Dialogue,  forms  a  ivhole  fo  incom-
patible with  modern  Manners,  and  fo  far  out  of  known
Nature,  as  deftroys  that  Probability  which  is  the  firfl
Foundation  of  a  true  Pathos.

The  Ode,  or  hymnal  Species,  may  be  again  properly  and
forcibly  united  with  Mufic.  We  have  already  feen  the
Foundation  on  which  this  Species  is  more  univerfally  al*
lied  with  Melody  than  any  other  [e\.  The  great  Mean  of
their  powerful  Union  muft  be  a  pathetic  and  correfpondent
■Simplicity  of  Compofition  in  Both. —  With  Refpe<5l  to
the  pathetic  Simplicity  of  the  Ode;  although  the  obfcure,
the  learned,  the  cold,  the  florid,  the  wordy,  the  amufing.
Style,  hath  been  too  generally  adopted  by  the  Moderns ;
yet  this  falfe  Manner  is  not  fo  ftrongly  eftabli{hed,  as  to
preclude  all  Poffibility  of  a  general  Reform  :  For  we  find,
that  where  the  Poem  is  written  in  the  fimple,  intelligible,
and  pathetic  Form,  it  is  more  generally  approved  (except
only  by  mere  Scholars  who  are  ignorant  of  Nature) than

Id}  Sec  above,  Se£t.  vi.  Art.  10.  {e]  Sedl.  vi.  Art.  17.

G  g  th«


226 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

the  oppofitc  Manner  of  falfe  Refinement.  In  Proof  of
this,  we  need  only  alledge  the  two  noble  Odes  of  Pope
and  Dryden;  which  the  world  in  general  underiland,
feel,  and  admire.

hjimple  and  pathetic  Melody  may  be  no  lefs  fuccefsfully
"adopted,  and  applied  to  Poetry.  This  is  evident,  from  the
incidental  and  frequent  Practice  of  the  greateft  Mafters.  ,
Handel,  Marcello,  Bononcini,  Corelli,  Gemi-
ni an  i,  and  their  beft  Difciples,  are  often  admirable  in
the  pathetic  Simplicity  of  Song :  More  efpecially  they  are
fo,  when  they  are  fortunate  enough  to  forget  the  Oftenta-
tion  and  Parade  of  Art.  The  Succefs  is  anfwerable  to
.  their  Defert :  For  this  Simplicity  of  Style  is  admired  be-
yond the  artificial,  by  All,  except  only  a  Fewy  whofe  Taftc
(like  that  of  the  mere  S.choIar-'TriheJ  is  debauched  by  their
own  falfe  Refinements  [yj.

^ —  [/J  Here  it  may  be  proper  to  point  out,  on  what  Foundatbn  a  fmple
Melody  is  moK  pathetic  than  a  complex  and  artificial,  i.  In  the  Expreffion
of  the  Paffions,  Nature  doth  not  offer  mufical  Sounds  to  the  human  Ear.  For
though  the  natural  Tones  o( Grief  znd  Joy  (the  two  Paffions  which  are  moft
effe(Slually  expreffled  by  Mufic)  approach  nearer  to  mufical  Precifion  than  any
other,  yet  ftill  they  are  in  a  certain  Degree  inconcinnous  and  unmuficaL
2.  As  the  Tones  of  the  Paffions  are  in  fome  Degree  unmufical,  fo  are
they  generally  more  fimple  in  their  Compofition  or  Succeffion,  than  the
Tones  which  are  commonly  employed  to  form  a  regular  Melody.  From
I  the  firft  of  thefe  Remarks  it  follows,  that  all  mufical  Expreffion  of  the
■  Paffions  muft  be  imperfect :  For  the  mufical  Sounds  not  being  found  in.
Nature,  if  the  Artift  ftridlly  imitates  the  Sounds  he  hears,  they  will  be  un-
mufical; if  he  varies  from  Nature,  fo  as  to  make  them  mufical,  the
Imitation  will  be  defeftive.  Yet  Imagination  hath  a  Power  of  im-
pofing  its  impreflions  oa  Reafon,  in  a  certain  Degree.  This  we  find
sd  the  proper  Reprefcntation  of  a  Tragedy  ;  where,  though  the  Scenery,
the  Pcrfons,  the  DrelTes,  the  Compofition,  and  other  accompanying  Ob-
jeds,  are  not  a  precife  Tranfcript  from  Nature,  that  is,  though  the  Imir
lation  be  defcaive,  yet  ftill  it  is  highly  affecting :  But  if  the  Reprefcntation

Yet


e/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y  ^W  M  U  S  i  C.  227

Yet  there  is  one  Circumftance,  in  which  modern  Poetry
and  Mufic,  though  both  reduced  to  their  full  Simplicity,
cannot  obtain  that  perfeft  Union  which  they  held  in  an-
cient Greece. The  Numbers  of  the  Poem  and  the  Mea-

departs  from  Nature  beyond  a  certain  Degree,  Reafon  then  revolts,  and
theaiFeding  Power  is  loft:  And  thus  mufical  Imitation,  though  imperfe£k
in  a  certain  Degree,  ftill  boafts  its  Power  :  If  imperfeft  beyond  a  certain
Degree,  its  afFeding  Power  is  loft.  But  as  it  follows  from  the  fecond  Re-
mark, that  the  farther  mufical  Sounds  depart  from  Simplicity,  the  farther
they  depart  from  Nature  ;  fo,  the  Gonfequence  is  clear,  that  Tiftmple  Melodf
(though  an  imperfeft  Imitation)  may  ht  pathetic ;  while  a  complex  and
artificial  Melody  (by  departing  from  Nature  beyond  a  certain  Degree)  will
entirely  lofe  its  affeSling  Power.

This  naturally  leads  to  the  Confideration  of  a  myfterious  Circumftance,
which  lies  yet  unaccounted  for,  at  the  very  Foundation  of  mufical  Ex-
preffion. The  Faft  is  this ;  that  "  mufical  Sounds  which  are  employed
*'  to  exprefs  Paffions  (as  Grief  or  Joy)  by  an  imperfeSi  Imitation,  are  often
«'  more  affeSting  than  the  natural  or  pirfeSf  Voice  of  thefc  Paflions,  when
*'  given  without  mufical  Intonations."— It  feems  not  eafy  to  aflign  a  clear
and  fufficient  Caufe  for  this  Appearance. Let  the  following  Conjs^urcs
have  what  Weight  they  may.— i.  Have  not  mufical  Sounds  a  mechanical
Power  over  the  human  Frame,  by  which  they  awaken  it  into  a  higher
Degree  of  Senfibility  and  Sympathy,  than  it  poflefleth  in  its  more  cool  and
torpid  State  ? — 2.  Arc  we  not  generally  fo  conftitutcd,  as  to  fympathire
much  more  ftrongly  with  thofe  in  whom  we  find  amiable  Qualities,  than
their  Oppofites  ?  And  as  Pity  melts  the  Soul  to  Love,  fo  doth  not  Love
melt  the  Soul  to  Pity  ?— 3.  Doth  not  2.fweet  Voice,  like  zfine  Countenance,
create  a  ftrong  Prejudice  in  Favour  of  its  Pojfejfor, and  induce  a  Belief  oi
■amiable inherent  ^alities? — 4.  May  not  the  Voice  and  Figure  of  a
diftrefifed  or  joyous  Objeft  be  fo  horrid  or  uncouth,  ridiculous  or  ugly,  as
in  a  great  Meafure  to  leffen,  if  not  totally  to  deftroy  the  Sympathy  of
thofe  who  hear  and  fee  it  ? — If  thefe  Obfervations  be  true,  then  by  carrying
the  Voices  or  Exprcffions  of  Grief  or  Joy  into  fweeter  Tones  and  higher
Degrees  of  Melody  than  they  poffefs  in  Nature,  yet  ftill  preferving  the
Refemblance  fo  far  as  not  to  deftroy  Probability,  may  we  not,  on  the
Principles  here  given,  create  a  higher  Degree  of  Affeaion  and  Sympathy,
than  the  natural  Voice  of  the  Paffions  can  give  ?

G  g  2  furc


J28 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

fure  of  the  Mufic  will  inevitably  fometimes  clafli.  Tliat
Variety  of  Feet  with  which  the  Greek  Tongue  abound-
ed, gave  fuch  Play  to  the  Mulician's  Art,  in  adapting  a
various  and  correfpondent  Melody,  as  no  living  Language
can  boaft.  For  Want  of  this  Variety  of  Feet,  there  is
generally  a  dead  Uniformity  in  the  Structure  of  modern
Verfe.  The  mufical  Rythm  or  Meafure,  therefore,  mufl:
either  want  the  neceflary  Variety,  or  mufl  fometimes  be
at  Variance- with  the  poetic  Numbers.

The  Arts  of  Poetry  and  Mufic, thu^  properly  united
j^nd  improved,,  may  poffibly  by  Degrees  be  made  a  Part  of
Education, and  applied to  the Culture  of  the  youthfuj
Mind,  in  Subjedis  religious,  political, and  moral. This  is
a  large  Field  of  Obfervation,  which  at  prefent  it  may  be
more  prudent  rather  to  open  than  to  tread. In  Favour  of
this  Opinion,  we  may  recoiled:  the  wonderful Powers  of
thefe  united  Arts,  exhibited  above,  not  only  in  the  Scenes
of  favage  Nature,  but  among  the  civilized Republics  of
ancient  Greece. And  as  vye  poflefs  a  nobler  Syftem  of
Religion,  Polity,  and  Morals,  than^  they  could  ever  boaft^
"loathe  Application  of  the  Sifter  Arts  to  thefe,  ugder  a  AnQ:
Subordination  to  Truth,  might  feem  to  promife  the  nobleft
Confequences  in  the  Education  of  Youth. Yet  on  the
other  Hand,  it  rauft  be  owned,  that  under  the  prefent
State  of  Manners,  and  the  eftabjiflied  Forms  of  Education,
this  event  is  rather  to  be  wiflied  than  hoped  fpr. Inftead,
therefore,  of  urging  a  Theory  which  might  be  regarded  as
vifionary  and  chimerical ;  the  Writer  will  for  the  prefent
content  himfelf  with  pointing  out, •*  In  what  Refpedts
<*  the  four  principal  Kinds,  in  which  Poetry  ajid  Mufic
*i.  are  now  united,  may  be  either  improved  ia  their  Form,
«-«f  more,efFe(a:ually  directed  to  their  proper  Ends."

I.  The,


»/  P  O  E  T  R  Y tfW  M  U  S  I  C.  229

J:.  The  firft  of  thefe,  the  common  Song  or  Canzonette,
may  perhaps  be  judged  an  Objedl  too  inconfiderable  for
any  ferious  Propofal  of  a  Reform. But  the  Writer  will
not  be  afliamed  to  follow  the  Example  of  the  greateft'
Authors  among  the  ancient  Greeks^  in  recommending  the-
early Pra(5tice  of  a proper  domeftic  Mufic, as  tending
powerfully  to  footh  the  difcordant  Paflions,  to  influence
the  Tafte,  and  fix  the  morals  of  Youth. If  we  refledt,
now  apt  the  youthful  Ear  is  to  catch  muiical  Impreffions,
and  how  open  the  Heart  to  every  Impreffion  fo  forcibly
convey'd,  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  Matter  of  Indifference
(among  thofe  who  underfland  the  Force  of  early  Habits)
whether  thefe  firfl  imprefHons  be  properly  or  improperly  •
direfted. It  may  feem  a  Paradox,  though  perhaps  a  cer-
tain Truth,  that  the  future  and  leading  Colour  of  the  :
Paflions,  in  both  Sexes,  hath  often  been  determined  by  a  .
Song. Poets  and  Muficians,  therefore,  would  do  them-  -
felves  the  truefl  Honour,  if  they  would  religioufly  abflain  ,
from  lending  the  attraftive  Colours  of  their  refped:ive  :
Arts  to  the  Embellifhment  of  Licentioufnefs  and  Vice.

The  Writer  would,  not  fubjeft  himfelf  to  fuch  an  Im-
putation  of  Ignorance, as  to  fuggefl  the  Poffibility  of?
renewing  the  old  Grecian  Pradtice,  when  Men  of  the  firfl
Rank  and  Dignity  difdained  not  to  grace  the  Feafl  with  ,
Songs  religious,  political ^  and  moral;  with  the  Celebration  .
of  Gods,  Heroes,  and  Virtues :  At  the.  very  Mention  of  .'
this  obfolete  Pradice,  he  fees  Ridicule  pouring  in  from  .
every  Quarter. 'Tis  enough  to  hope  from  the  prefent
fajhionable  World, that  they  will  abjiain  .  from  Songs  .  of  /
an  oppofite  Nature,


230


A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

As  the  prafticable  Utility  of  the  common  Song  or  Can-
zonette  feems  to  Ue  chiefly  among  the  younger  ranks,  an
.  eafy  and  familiar  Simplicity  of  Style  and  Manner  feems
'  peculiarly  its  proper  Charafter.  To  this  ought  to  be
added  (where  the  Subjedl  will  admit)  a  certam  Feftivity
and  Brilliancy  of  Tafte;  that  the  mod  attradive  Colours
of  the  Arts  may  be  thrown  on  Virtue ;  and  Benevolence,
Generofity,  and  Greatnefs  of  Soul,  may  habitually  mix
themfelves  with  domeftic  and  focial  Amufement.

2.  The  Anthem,  with  Refpeft  to  its  SubjeB,  neither
needs  nor  admits  Improvement ;  being  drawn  from  the  fa-
cred  Scriptures  [g\.  A  proper  SeleBion  of  Words  for  Mufic
is  indeed  a  Work  of  Importance  here :  And  though  m
many  Inftances  this  be  well  made,  yet  it  were  to  be  wifhed,
that  fome  fuperior  Judgment  would  overfee,  and  fometimes
(negatively  at  leaft)  direB  the  Compofer,  for  the  Preven-
tion of  Improprieties.  A  parallel  remark  will  extend  it-
felf  almoft  to  the  whole  Book  of  Pfalms,  as  they  arc
verfified  by  Sternhold,  for  the  Ufe  of  parochial
Churches.  There  are  few  Stanzas  which  do  not  prefent
Expreflions,  to  excite  the  Ridicule  of  fome  Part  of  every
Congregation.  This  Verfion  might  well  be  abolifhed,  as
it  expofeth  one  of  the  nobleft  Parts  of  divine  Service  to
Contempt : Efpecially  as  there  is  another  Verfion  already

\g\  Although  it  be  a  prudent  Referve  in  the  Church  of  Encl/lnd,
to  admit  no  other  Poetry  than  the/acr«f,  into  divine  Service  ;  yet  itill,  tor
the  hieh  Purpofe  of  domeftic  or  private  Devotion  and  Praajcc,  the  t.om-
pofition  of  Hymns  would  be  a  noble  Addition  to  the  Poetry  and  Mufic
ef  a  rational  Society  of  Chriftians.  Here,  the  Poet  woud  have  Room
for  a  Difplay  of  that  Genius,  which  the  Prudence  of  the  eftabhfhed  Church
hath  prevented,  in  the  wife  Regulation  of  her  public  Service.  Of  this
Kind  may  be  juftly  regarded  that  fine  Odt  of  PoPE,intitled,  ''The  dying
Chriftian  u  his  Saul."  privileged,


fl/  P  O  E  T  R  Y ««^  M  U  S  I  C.  i  jn

privileged,  which  though  not  excellent,  is  however  not  in-
tolerable.— The  parochial  Mujic  feems  to  need  no  Reform  ;,
Its  Simplicity  and  Solemnity  fuit  well  its  general  Defti-
aation ;  and  it  is  of  Power,  when  properly  performed,
to  raife  AfFedlions  of  the  nobleft  Nature. It  were  to  be


wifhed,  that  the  Cathedral  Mufic  were  always  compofed
with  a  proportioned  Sobriety  and  Referve.  Here,  as  we  have
©bferved,  the  whole  is  apt  to  degenerate  too  much  into  a^i
Affair  of  Art.  A  great  and  pathetic  Simplicity  of  Style,
kept  ever  in  Subferviency  to  the  facred  Poetry,  ought  to
be  aimed  at,  as  the  trueft,  and  the  only  Praife.  The
fame  devout  Simplicity  of  Manner  may  be  attained  in  the;
Performance,  and  ought  to  be  ftudied  by  the  Organift  and
Choir :  Their  Ambition  fhould  lie  in  a  natural  and
dignified  Execution,  not  in  a  curious  Difplay  of  Art.  The
Maxim  of  Augustine  was  excellent,  and  deferves  the
ferious  Attention  both  of  thofe  who  perform,  and  thofe
who  hear :  *'  I  always  think  myfelf  blameable,  when  I  am
**  drawn  to  attend  more  to  the  Singer  than  to  what  is
**  Sung."  But  an  additional  Circumftance  feems  neceffary,
as  a  Means  of  bringing  back  Church  Mufic  to  its  original
Dignity  and  Ufe :  We  have  feen,  in  the  Courfe  of  this
DiflTertation,  how  the  Separations  follow  each  other  in  the-
Decline  of  the  poetic  and  mufical  Arts.  And  for  the
{ake  of  Truth,  we  muft  here  obferve,  that  in  the  Per-
formance of  Cathedral  Mufic,  a  Separation  hath  long  taken
Place,  fatal  to  its  true  Utility.  The  higher  Ranks  of  the
Church  do  not  think  themfelves  concerned  in  the  Per-
formance. It  were  devoutly  to  be  wifhed,  that  the  mufical
Education  were  fo  general,  as  to  enable  the  Clergy,  o£"
whatever  Rank,  to  join  the  Choir  in  the  Celebration  oi
1  their.


232  A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  8cc.

their  Creator,  in  all  its  appointed  ^Forms :  The  Laity-
would  be  naturally  led  to  follow  fo  powerful  an  Exam-
ple.— There  is  Reafon  to  believe,  that  this  Separation  was
in  Part  occafioned  by  the  Introdudlion  of  an  artificial
Mufic,  which  became  too  difficult  in  the  Execution  for
any  but  profefled  Muficians  :  Here,  then,  we  find  an  ad-
ditional Motive,  for  bringing  down  the  Cathedral  Mufic
from  its  prefent  complex  and  artificial  Style,  to  that  of
Simplicity  and  eafy  Execution.

3.  With  Refpedt  to  the  two  dramatic  Forms,  the  Opera
and  Oratorio, we  have  already  pointed  out their  chief
Defedls,  as  they  exifl:  in  their  prefent  State. But  as  to
an  effectual  Reformation,  fuch  as  may  produce  their  proper
Ends, it feems utterly impradlicable, while the dra-
matic Form  and the  mufical  Accompanyment  remain in
Union. To  hear Kings,  Warriours,  Statefmen,  Philo-
fophers. Patriarchs,  Saints, and  Martyrs, holding long
Converfations  with  each  other  in  mufical  Recitative,  is
a  Circumflance  fo  totally  out  of  Nature,  that  the  Imagin-
ation immediately  revolts,  and  rejeds  the  Reprefentation
.  as  abfurd  and  incredible. The  Recitative,  therefore,  or
perpetual  mufical  Accompanyment  which  prevails  in  both,
being thus unalterably at  Variance  with the dramatic
Form,  the  one  or  the  other  muil  be  dejlroyed  ere  Proba-
bility and  Pathos  can  arife.

One  Method  of  a  Reform  may  be  efFedted,  by  deflroying
the  Recitative,  or  perpetual  mufical  Accompanyment  :
And  in  this  Cafe,  the  Interlocutory  Part  would  fink  into
the  common  Form  of  Tragedy.  A  mufical  Choir,  diftindt
•irom  tlie  Perfons  of  the  Drama,  might  flill  be  introduced

acca/ionally.


of  POETRY  /?«i  MUSIC.  2^3

occajionally,  with  much  Propriety  and  Effedl  [^].  Above
all,  the  Occafions  muft  have  a  ftrong  Reference  to  th»
mofl  pathetic  Situations  of  the  tragic  a6tion  :  The  Choir
cnuft  coniift  of  fuch  Charaders,  as  may  with  Probability
appear  in  the  mufical  Department :  The  Ode  mulT:  bo
written  in  the  Style  of  Paffioni  not  with  the  Parade  of
tinaffefting  Imagery,  or  tedious  Allegory  ^  which,  inftead
of  rowzing  an  Audience,  would  lull  them  to  Repofe :
The  Mulic  and  Performance  muft  be  of  a  correfpondent
Nature.  In  pointing  out  this  Reform  of  the  mufical
Drama,  the  Writer  may  feem  to  feparate  the  two  Sifter

[AJ  I  fay,  occaftonaUy :  For  the  continuing  Choir  of  the  old  Greek  Tra-
gedy would  be  a  Circumftance  as  far  out  of  Nature,  as  the  Recitative  it-
felf.  Befidcs,  the  perpetual  and  continuing  Choir  would  rob  modern
Tragedy  of  half  her  Powers  and  Graces :  A  ftrift  Unity  of  Place  and
Time,  as  we  have  feen,  are  its  neceflary  Confequences  *:  But  with  Rcfpe<9:
to  what  is  of  far  greater  Importance,  I  mean  the  yfifion,  its  EfFefls  upon  the
whole  were  bad.  'Tis  true,  that  even  here,  it  had  the  natural  EfFeft  of
producing  Unity :  But  while  it  fecured  the  Unity  of  the  Aifion,  it  gene-
rally deftroyed  its  Force.  For  there  are  few  great,  diftrefsful,  or  terrible
Adlions,  which  do  not  require  fome  Variety  of  Place,  in  Order  to  unfold
them  in  all  their  moft  pathetic  Situations  and  ftriking  Afpefts :  Many  of
thefe,  therefore,  muft  be  loft  to  the  Poet  and  his  Audience,  and  a  feeble
and  meagre  Fable  muft  generally  arife  from  that  ftrift  Unity  of  Place
which  the  continuing  Choir  produced.  Hence  we  often  find  the  Greek
Tragedians  reduced  to  the  Neceflity  of  conveying  by  Narration  many
affefting  Incidents,  which  would  have  formed  capital  Scenes,  could  they
have  been  introduced  confiftently  with  the  Unity  of  Place.  Were  it
neceflary  to  inlarge  on  this  Subjeft,  which  is  not  incurious,  it  might  be
proved  by  an  Indudlion  of  particulars,  that  there  is  not  a  great  and  afFeding
Tragic  A£lion  in  the  whole  Compafs  of  Antiqufty,  but  what  is  miferably
•cramped  and  maimed  by  this  Conftraint ;  That  of  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus
only  excepted,  which  indeed  feems  nearly,  if  not  abfolutely  perfedl,  in  all
the  Parts  ©fits  Conftruaion.

•  See  above,  Seft-vi.  Art.  22.

H  h  Arts,


234  ^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

Arts,  inftead  of  uniting  them  :  But  in  Reality,  he  only
propofes  their  Separation  in  one  Circumftance,  as  the
neceffary  means  of  compleating  their  Union  in  another.

But  left  this  fliould  feem  to  confine  the  mufical  Art  to
an  Alliance  with  the  mere  Ode  or  Hymn  only,  and  to
banifli  it  entirely  from  the  Reprefentation  oi  ASlions  \  let
us  now  proceed  to  another  and  more  perfedt  Kind  of  Re-
form, in  which  many  of  the  SubjeSfs  of  the  Opera  and
Oratorio  may  be  exhibited  m  full  Union  with  the  Powers  of
Mufic,  joined  with  Probability  and  Nature.

We  have  feen  above,  that  from  an  Union  of  the  Ode
and  Epic,  a  firft  rude  Outline  of  Tragedy  naturally  arofe,
compounded  of  mujical Narration  and  choral  Song  [/] .  Here
then  let  us  fix,  for  the  proper  Form  of  the  mufical  Exhi-
bition of  great,  terrible,  or  pathetic  Adlions.  This  Union
forms  what  may  properly  be  ftyled  the  Narrative  or  Epic
Ode.  It  arofe*  from  Nature,  at  a  Period  when  the  Adlions
reprefented  were  of  thcjimplejl  Kind  [k].  This  Simpli-
city of  Adtion  is  ftill  neceflTary  to  be  preferved,  for  the
Perfection  of  this  Species  -,  becaufe  a  complicated  Adlion
would  inevitably  produce  long  and  unanimated  Narra-
tions, would  unnerve  the  mufical  Recitation,  and  deftroy
the  very  Genius  of  the  Poem.  Suppofing,  then,  the
Aftion  to  be  fimple  and  impaflioned ,-  the  Poem,  the
Mujic,  and  Performance,  if  well  condudled,  will  be  at-
tended with  fuch  a  Degree  of  Nature  and  Probability,  as
will  give  the  Alliance  of  Poetry  and  Mufic  their  higheft
Power  and  Pathos.  The  intermixed  Narrations  muft  be
fliort  and  animated :  The  Songs  and  Choirs  various  and

[/]  See  above,  Seift.  vi.  Art.  19.  [k"]  See  ibid.

cxpreflive :


^POETRY  /z«i  MUSIC  13 j

cxpreffive ;  and  being  frequently  interrupted  by  the  brief
Recitals,  may  by  thefe  Means  be  infpirite'd  far  beyond  the
fimple  and  continued  Ode,  which  from  its  unbroken
Length  often  degenerates  into  Languor.  By  this  Union,
all  the  ftriking  Parts  of  the  Adtion  may  be  brought  forth
to  View,  while  every  thing  that  is  cold,  improbable,  and
unaffcdling,  may  be  veiled  in  Darknefs. — The  Recitative,
or  mufical  Accompanymentin  the  narrative  Parts,  will  here
lofe  a  great  Part  of  that  Improbability  which  incumbers  it
in  the  dramatic  Reprefentation  :  For  here,  the  Reciter  is
a  profefTed  Mufician,  whofe  Province  lies  in  the  Enthu-
iiafm  of  Songi  and  the  Narrations  being  Jhort  and  animated,
beyond  what  is  poflible  in  the  continued  \5it  of  Dialogue,
they  approach  nearer  to  the  Genius  of  the  Ode,  and  there-
fore may  without  Improbability  or  Impropriety  receive  a
mufical  Accompanyment  which  approaches  nearer  to  a  full
and  dire<3;  Song. — And  laftly,  the  Songs  and  Choirs  are  in
their  Performance  fo  far  from  being  unnatural,  that  they
are  no  more  than  a  powerful  Tranfcript  from  Nature,
impelling  thofe  who  hear  the  Recital  of  the  Adtion,  and
are  inftrudted  in  the  Laws  of  Melody,  to  join  in  every
xeprefented  Scene  of  Joy,  Triumph,  Terror,  Exultation,
Devotion,  or  Diftrefs.

Of  this  narrative  or  Epic  Ode,  we  have  two  fine  Exam-
iples  in  our  Language,  written  by  Pope  and  Dryden.
In  Force  of  Paflion,  and  Variety  of  corrcfpondent  Verfi-
fication  [/J,  they  are  admirable. The  Songs  and  Choirs

[7J  W«  have  fliewn  above,  that  the  Return  of  t\\tfame  Meajure  in  the
Strophe,  Antijrophe,  and  Epade,  of  the  ancient  Greek  Ode,  was  the  natural
Confequence  of  its  Union  with  the  Dance,  But  this  Union  being  irre-
coverably loft,  the  unvaried  Meafure  of  the  Ode  becomes  at  beft  an  un-

H  h  2  are


±^6 A  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

are  by  Turns  tender,  joyous,  and  majeftic,  and  are  oftersi
calculated  for  the  nobleft  and  mod  powerful  Union  of
Poetry  and  Mufic.  On  the  other  Hand,  while  tlieir  un-
rivalled Excellence  is  admitted,,  critical  Juflice  demands,
that  we  point  out  fome  Blemifhes  in  thefe  two  immortal
Odes,  left  an  undiftinguifliing  Principle  of  Imitation  fhould
lead  to  an  Adoption  of  their  Faults  along  with  their  Beau-
ties.— With  Refpedl  to  Mr.  Pope's  Ode  on  St.  Cecilia's
Day,  the  SitbjeSl  feems  to  want  Unity:  It  is  not  a  Recital
of  one  great  Adlion,  but  rather  a  poetic  Defcription  of  the
Adventures  of  Orpheus. — Mr.  Dryden's  Ode  is  perfect
in  the  Unity  of  the  Adlion ;  but  imperfeSf  in  the  moral
End :  For  it  is  a  Reprefentation  of  the  abufed  Power  of
Mufic,  in  firing  a  young  Prince  to  an  Adt  of  Revenge
and, Cruelty.  In  the  Execution,  there  is  but  one  Er-
ror of  Confequence  ;  which  feems  to  run  through  both
thefe  Odes,  fo  juftly  celebrated:  The  Narrative  Part  is
not  always  fufficiently  dijiinguijhed  from  the  Song.  They  i
run  into  each  other  in  fuch  a  Manner,  that  the  mulical.
Compofer  muft  often  find  himfelf  embarafled,  whether  to
accompany  with  Recitative,  or  a  more  compleat  Melody.'
Indeed,  it  is  manifeft,  that  thefe  illuftrious  Poets  were
not  aware  of  this  Diftinftion  :  And  hence  it  came  to  pafs,
that  many  PaflTages  which  they  evidently  meant  for  Songy,
are  in  the  Form  of  Narration.  But  let  this  be  added,  as
a  Juftice  due  to  thefe  celebrated  Names,  that  the  Nar-

meaning  Thing ;  and  is  indeed  an  abftird  one,  as  it  deprives  the  Poet  of
that  Variety  of  Meafure,  which  often  gives  a  great  Energy  to  the  Com-
pofition,  by  the  incidental  and  fudden  Intervention  of  an  abrupt  or  lengthened
Verfification.  The  two  Odes  here  mentioned,  contain  a  -Variety  of  fiae
Examples  in  this  Kind  of  Beauty.

rations


^  P  O  E  T  R  Y  <7K^  M  U  S  I  C.  237-

rations  are  in  fome  Parts  fo  highly  animated,  that  without*
any  ftriking  Impropriety  they  admit  the  Accompanymenf
either  of  the  Song  or  Choir.  'Tis  obvious  to  remark,
that  Handel  wasfometimes  perplexed  by  this  Irregularity;
of  the  poetic  Compofition,  when  he  fet  Dryden's  Ode
tx)  Mufic:  For  forae  Parts  are  thrown  into  Recitative
which  might  feem  rather  to  demand  the  Songj  and  others
are  thrown  into  Song,  which,  in  their  prefent  Narrative
Form,  feem  rather  to  demand  the  Recitative. — A  Poet  of
inferior  Rank  [m]  hath  attempted  to  reftify  this  Diforder
in  Dryden's  Ode.  But  he  had  not  fufficiently  eftimated
his  own  Strength,  when  he  adventured,  to  tamper  with  the
Bow  of  U  L  Y  s  s  E  s ..  Whenever  he  hath  attempted  a  Change,
he  hath  quenched  the  poetic  Fire..

The  Subjeds  of  the  narrative  or  Epic  Ode  may  be  drawn
with  Propriety  either  from  ethnical  ox  f acred  Story. The
ethnical  v/iW  furnifh  thofe  which  are  moral  ox  political ;  the
facred  is  a  rich Field  of  Subjefts  moral  and religious.^
There  is  a  peculiar  Propriety  in  exhibiting  the  facred  Story
in  this  Manner  of  the  Epic  Ode;  becaufe  in  the  dramatic
Jleprefentation of  antique Subjefts, through the  great
Diffimilarity  of  ancient  Manners  to  our  own,  'tis  difficult
to  avoid  the  Introdudion  of  Circumftances  which  will  not
be  either  manifeftly  incongruous,  or  contemptible  to  an  Eye-
merely  modern; two  Appearances,  which  are carefully
to  be  avoided  in  the  Reprefentation  of  facred  Story.. The.-
Way  of  Narration,  therefore,  is  highly  preferable;  be-
caufe in  this,  the  Poet-  can  produce  the  greateft  and  mofb
ftriking  Situations,  and  at  the  fame  Time  preferve  both
'Probability,  and  RefpeSi,  by  throwing  the  reft  into  Shades..

[/n]  Mr.  Hughes..

ThaJ.


238 -^  Dissertation  on  the  Union,  &c.

That  this  Reprefentation  of  facred  Subjects  is  the  higheft
jind  moft  interefting  Union  of  Poetry  and  Mufic,  needs  no
elaborate  Proof:  It  ftands  intimately  connected  with  all
the  fublime  Truths,  the  great  and  afFeding  Events  of  our
Religion,which,  when  thus  exhibited  by  the  united  Powers
ci  Poem  ^nASong,  call  forth  all  the  nobleft  Emotions  of
the  human  Soul;  -and  exalt  it  to  the  highefl:  Pitch  of
.Elevation  that  our  mortal  Condition  will  admit.

SECT. XIV.
Conclusion.

THUS  far  then,  at  lead,  the  poetic  and  mufical  Arts
may  admit  an  effedual  Re- union,  fo  as  to  produce
their  nobleft  Ends.  As  to  any  farther  Confequences,  they
muft  be  the  Effeft  of  this  firft  Reform  :  And  therefore,  till
fomething  be  done  here,  it  can  be  of  no  Importance  to
point  out  higher  Improvements,  which  in  the  prefent
€tate  of  Things  would  certainly  be  efteemed  chimerical.

Let  us  then,  for  the  prefent,  conclude  with  offering  a
Queftion,  •*  Whether  our  Age  and  Nation  mi^ht  not  ftill
«'  farther  diftinguifh  itfelf  in  its  Regard  for  the  nobler
*'  Arts,  by  the  Inftitution  of. ^Poetic  and Mujical  Academy ,
«<  for  the  more  effectual  Re-union  .of  thefe  two  Arts,  and
"their  better  DireBion  to  their  higheji  Ends?" — The
Judgment  of  an  able  and  difinterefted  Society,  eftablifhed
:for  this  Purpofe,  might  perhaps  effeft  every  Reform  here
.propofed  in  the  four  diftinft  Species  in  which  the  two
Arts  are  ftill  imperfeftly  and  improperly  united.  The
Prize  muft  be  Honour  only;  left  mercenary  Spirits
.2,  fliould


e/"  P  O  E  T  R  Y rfW  M  U  S  I  C.  2^9

ihould  intrude  upon  the  Walk  of  G.  nius. It  may  be  fup-
pofed,  that  the  befl:  Poets,  of  the  rifing  Age  at  leaft,  would
court  the  Approbation  of  fuch  an  Academy  :  And  from
this  Inftitution, as  from  a  Nurfery  of  thefe  Sifter-Arts,  a
Succeflion  of  approved Poems  would  naturally  arife,  in
every  Form  that  could  properly  receive  the  Colourings
and  Embellifhments  of  Mufic. — The  familiar  Song,  com-
pofed  for  domeftic  and  focial  Entertainment,  when  thus
chaflifed  by  the  moral  Decrees  of  the  Academy, would,
gradually  rife into  its ancient Dignity  and  Ufe. — The
Seledlion  of  the  Anthem  from  the  facred  Scriptures  might
receive  the  p«blic  Approbation  of  the  Society :  And  the
Hymn,  controuled  by  the  fame  fober  Judgments,  would  af-
fume  that  pathetic  Sublimity  and Simplicity  of  Style,
which  tends  to  elevate  the  Soul  to~the  Contemplation  and
Love of  divine Things. — The  tragic Choir, properly
reftrained and  limited  by  fuch  an  Authority,  might  oc^-
cafionally  be  introduced  and  applied to the  Increafe  of
Pity  and  Terror,  and  to  all  the  moral  Ends  of  the  dramatic
Species. The  Epic  Ode,  diredled  by  the  Tafte  and  Wif-
dom  of  this  Academy, would obtain its Completion,
The  greateft  and  moil  affedting  Subjeds,  drawn  from  the
Hiftory  of  our  own  or  other  Countries,  would  rife  before
US;  while  the  fublimeft  and  mofl  interefting  Events  re-
corded in  the  facred  Scriptures,  thus  recommended  and
adorned,  would  make  their  Way  through  the  nobler  Paf-
lions  to.  the  Heart.

The  State  and  Character  of  our  Mufic  would  be  no  lefs
influenced  by  the  Authority  of  fuch  an  Inftitution.  The
Poems  which  fhould  receive  its  unbiafled  Approbation,
would  naturally  become  Obje<fls  of  the  Ambition  of  our

belt


:e40 a  Dissertatktn  on  the  Union,  6cc.

beft  Co}7tpofers :  Whofe  Genius,  thus  chaftifed  and  di-
.t-edled  to  its  proper  Ends,  would  no  longer  wander  into
the  illegitimate  Fantafies  of  Songj  but  in  juft  Subor-
dination to  the  poetic  Expreflions,  would  only  be  am-
bitious of  joining  its  Powers,  for  the  Produdlion  of  a  true
Pathos.

The  Performance  of  thefe  approved  Poems  thus  heighten-
ed by  approved  Mufic,  would  naturally  correfpond  with
the  Genius  of  Both,  if  under  the  Controul  of  the  fame
wife  Judgments.  The  Singers  would  no  longer  think
tfeemfelves  at  Liberty  to  defert  their  Subjeft  for  the  Pride
of  Execution  :  But,  under  the  Infpedtion  of  a  fuperior
Tafle  and  Authority,  would  be  led  to  adopt  a  true  Sim-
plicity of  Manner;  and,  like 'the  juft  ASlor^  would  be
only  ambitious  of  aflifting  the  Poet  and  Mufician,  in  adorn-
.ing  and  compleating  the  intended  Reprefentation.

The  Importance  of  fuch  an  Inftitution  may  deferve  our
imoft  ferious  thoughts.  We  have  i^^vi  above,  how  con-
genial the  poetic  and  mujical  Arts  are  wij:h  the  Frame  and
Paculties  of  Man :  That  in  every  Period  of  Manners,
whether  favage,  barbarous,  civilized,  refined,  or  cor-
rupted, their  Influence  hath  been  felt  in  every  Nation  of
.the  Earth.  So  univerfal  and  powerful  are  their  EfFefts
on  the  Paffions  of  the  Soul,  that  perhaps  no  Period  of
human  Nature  can  be  afllgned  (at  leaft,  the  Writer
knows  of  none)  in  which  they  have  not  been  eithery2?/«-
.tary  or  pernicious :  In  which  they  have  not  either  tended
to  promote  and  confirm  Religion,  Virtue,  and  public  Hap-
pinefs ;  or  been  the  Inftruments  of  Licentioufnefs, '  and
•public  Ruin.

3.  Add


o/-  P  O  E  T  R  Y ^«^  M  U  S  I  C.  24?

Add  to  this,  that  whoever  will  look  back  into  the  pre-
'ceding  Pages,  will  find  that  in  all  poliJlKd  States  thefq
Arts  have  a  natural  Tendency  towards  Corruption^  unlefs
checked  and  chaftifed  by  wholefome  Inftitutions.  This
Tendency  arifeth  not  from  the  Nature  of  the  Arts  them-
felves;  but  from  that  Period  of  Manners,  which  tends  to
pervert  them  from  their />ro/'<fr  Ends. — Would  you  quench
this  natural  Flame  implanted  in  the  human  Bread:  ?  The
Attempt  were  Folly.  You  muft  deflroy  our  Eyes  and
Ears,  thofe  Inlets  to  the  Powers  of  Foetry  and  Mufic,
before  you  can  accomplifli  fuch  a  Purpofe.  What  then
is  to  be  done,  but  to  regulate  this  mighty  Stream,
which  will  inevitably  run  either  in  the  Channel  of  Vice  or
Virtue  ?

More  particularly,  in  a  great  and  powerful  Kingdom,
where  additional  Degrees  of  Wealth  fhould  flow  in  with
every  Tide ;  thefe,  efpecially  in  a  Time  of  Peace,  muft  in-
evitably be  followed  by  new  Degrees  of  inventive  Luxury,
and  an  unwearied  Paflion  for  Diffipation  and  Amufement.
Hence  the  peculiar  Danger  would  arife,  even  where  no
ill  Intentions  fhould  dwell,  of  a  Perverfion  of  the  mimetic,
and  efpecially,  of  the  poetic  and  mufical  Arts,  from  their
proper  and  exalted,  to  their  improper  and  ignoble  Ends, —
If  in  fuch  a  Kingdom,  .their  loweft  Forms  fliould  be
fought  for,  while  their  higher  were  negledled ;  if  Tragedy
ihould  give  Way  to  Comedy,  and  Comedy  to  Farce,  and
Farce  to  Pantomime ;  if  Privileges  fhould  be  denied  to  the
Labours  of  Genius,  which  were  indulged  to  the  Tricks  of
Harlequin  and  Pierot ; — what  could  be  more  juftly  feared,
than  a  general  Decline  of  Tafte,  which  by  filent  and  un-
perceived  Degrees might infenfibly  Aide into  the  fan;ie

I  i  fatal


242 A  Dissertation  on  the  Unionj  &c.

fatal  EfFedls,  which  marked  the  later  Periods  of  the  Greek-
Republics,  and  the i^ow^;?  Empire?  ~

/  On  the' contrary;  an  effeftual  Union  of  thefe  two  power-
ful Arts,  directed  to  their  proper  Ends,  would  be  pro-
dudlive  of  the  nobleft  Confequences :  It  would  renew  and

1  augment  the  Dignity  of  every  elegant  Accomplifliment ;
would refine  the  Tafte,  inforce  the  Religion,  purify  the
Morals, ftrengthen  the  Policy, of  the  mofl  profperous  ■
Kingdom  j in  a  Word,  would  give  a  proper  and  falutary
Diredtion  to  that  Overflow  of  Wealth,  which  muft  either
adorn  or  overivhelm  it.
An  Injiitution,  therefore,  which  may  promote  fuch  im-
portant Endsy  may  feem not  only  to  claim  the  Atten-
.  tion  of  the  Wife  and  Good  in  every  private  Station ; but
might  perhaps  be  regarded  as  not  unworthy  the  ProteSlion..
of  the  bejl  and  greateji  King.  ^


THE END,


[  243 ]


APPENDIX.

The  following  Memoir,  -which  was  lately  communicated  to  the
Author  by  an  honourable  Gentleman,  hath  Reference  to
p.  160.  of  the  preceding  DiJJertation:  And  though  it  was
not  received  fdon  enough  to  be  infer  ted  in  its  proper  Placcy
yet  the  Author  thought  it  but  Jujiice  to  the  curious
Reader,  to  add  it  as  an  Appendix,

*'  By  the  Queen;

**  TT^LizABETH,  by  the  Grace  of  God,  of  England,
1  V  "  France,  and  Ireland,  Queen,  Defender  of  the
"  Faith,  &c:.  To  our  trufty  and  right  well  beloved  Sir
«*  Richard  Bulkely  Knight,  Sir  Rees  Griffith  Kt.  Ellis
"Price  Efq.  Dr.  in  civil  Lav^r,  and  one  of  our  Council  in
*'  the  Marchefle  of  Wales,  William  Moflyn,  Jeuen  Lloyd
"  of  Yale,  John  Salifbury  of  Rhug,  Rice  Thomas,  Maurice
"Wynne,  William  Lewis,  Pierce  Moftyn,  Owen  John
"  ap  Howel  Fichan,  John  William  ap  John,  John  Lewis
"  Owen,  Morris  Griffith,  Symmd  Thelwat,  John  Griffith, ,
"  Ellis  ap  William  Lloyd,  Robert  Pulefton,  Harri  ap  -
"  Harri,  William  Glynn,  and  Rees  Hughes  Efqs.  and  to
"  every,  of  them  Greeting."

"  Whereas  it  is  come  to  the  Knowledg  of  the  Lord
"  Prefident,  and  other  our  Council  in  our  MarchefTe  of
"  Wales,  that  vagrant  and  idle  Perfons  naming  themfelves
"  Minjlrels,  Rythmers,  and  Bards,  are  lately  grown  into
"  fuch  intolerable  Multitude  within  the  Principality  of
«*  North  Wales,  that  not  only  Gentlemen  and.  others  by

I  i  2  "  their  -


244  APPENDIX.

**  their  Jlmmelefs  Diforders are  oftentimes  difquleted  in
**  their  Habitations,  but  alfo  the  expert  Minjlrels  and  Mufi-
"  dans  in  Tonge  and  Cunynge  thereby  much  difcouraged  to
**  travaile  in  the  Exercife  and  Pradlife  of  their  Knowledg,
"  and  alfo  not  a  little  hindred  fofj  Livings  and  Prefer-
"  ment ;  The  Reformation  whereof,  and  the  putting  thefe
**  People  in  Order,  the  faid  Lord  Prefident  and  Council
•*  have  thought  very  neceflary  : And  know^ing  you  to  be
•♦  Men  of  both  Wifdom  and  upright  Dealing,  and  alfo  of
'*  Experience  and  good  Knowledge  in  the  Scyence,  have
'*'  appointed  and  authorized  You  to  be  Commiffioners  for
*'  that  Purpofe : And  forafmuch  as  our  faid  Council,  of
"  late  travailing  in  fome  Part  of  the  faid  Principality,  had
"  perfedl  Underftanding  by  credible  Report,  that  the  ac-
*'  cuftomed  Place  for  the  Execution  of  the  like Com-
"  miflion  hath  been  heretofore  at  Cayroes  in  our  County
"  of  Flynt,  and  that  William  Moftyn  Efq.  and  his  Ance1:ors
"  have  had  the  Gift  and beftowing  of  the  Sylver  Harp
*' "appertaining  to  the  Chief  of  that  F acuity , and  that  a
**  Tears  Warning  (at  lead)  hath  been  accuftomed  to'  be
"  given  of  the  Ajfembly  and  Execution  of  the  like  Coin-
*'  miflion ;  Our  faid  Council  have  therefore  appointed  the
"  Execution  of  this  Commiffion  to  be  at  the  faid  Town  of
"  Cayroes,  the  Monday  next  after  the  Feaft  of  the  Blefled
*'  Trinity  which  fliall  be  in the  Year  of  our  Lord 1568.
•'  And  therefore  we  require  and  command  You by  the
■<«  Authority  of  thefe  Prefents,  not  only  to  caufe  open  Pro-
"  clamation  to  be  made  in  all  Fairs,  Market -'Towns,  and
■"  other  Places  of  Affembly  within  our  Counties  of  Aglere,
"  Carnarvon,  Meryonydd,  Denbigh  and  Flynt,  that  all  and
**  £very  Perfon  and  Perfons  that  intend  to  maintain  their


"  Living


APPENDIX.  245

*<  Living  by  name  or  Colour  of  Minjlrels,  Rythmers,  or
**  Bards y  within  the  Talaith  of  Aberffraw,  comprehending
«*  the  faid  five  Shires,  fhall  be  and  appear  before  You  the
'*  faid  Day  and  Place  X.o  Jl^ew  their  Learnings  accordingly :
"  Butalfoi  that  You,  twenty,  nineteen,  eighteen,  feventeen,
**  fixteen,  fifteen,  fourteen,  thirteen,  twelve,  eleven,  ten,
"  nine,  eight,  feven,  or  fix  of  you,  whereof  You  the  faid
"  Sir  Richard  Bulkely,  Sir  Rees  Griffith,  Ellis  Price,  and
"  William  Moflyn  Efqs.  or  three  or  two  of  you,  to  be  of
"  the  Number ;  to  repair  to  the  faid  Place  the  Days  afore-
**  faid,  and  calling  to  you  fuch  expert  Men  in  the  faid  Faculty
"  of  the  Wcipi  Mujick  as  to  You  fhall  be  thought  con-
"  venient,  to  proceed  to  the  Execution  of  the  Premifes,
*'  and  to  admit  fuch and  fo  many,  as  by  your  Wifdoms
"  and  Knowledges  you  fhall  find  worthy,  into  and  under
"  the  Degrees  heretofore  fin  UfeJ  in  femblable  Sort  to  ufe,
*'  exercife,  ^nA.  follow  the  Sciences  and  Faculties  of  their  Pro-
"  fejjions,  in  fuch  decent  Order  as  fhall  appertain  to  each
*'  of  their  Degrees,  and  as  your  Difcretions  and  Wifdoms
"  fhall  prefcribe  unto  them  :  Giving  flreight  Monition  and
"  Commandment  in  our  Name  and  on  our  Behalf  to  the
"  reft  not  worthy,  that  they  return  to  fome  honeft  Labour,
"  and due  Exercife,  fuch  as  they  be  mofl  apt  unto  for
"  Maintenance  of  their  Living,  upon  Pain  to  be  taken  as
**  flurdy  and  idle  Vagabonds,  and  to  be  ufed  according  to
*'  the  Laws  and  Statutes  provided  in  that  Behalf;  letting
♦*  You  with  our  faid  Council  look  for  Advertifement,  by
"  Certificate  at  your  Hands,  of  your  Doings  in  the  Execu-
**  tion  of  the  faid  Premifes  ;  forefeeing  in  any  wife,  that
"  upon  the  faid  Afl'embly  the  Peace  and  good  Order  b^
"  obferved and  kept  accordingly ;  afcertaining  you  that
•*  the  faid  William  Moflyn  hath  promifed  to  fee  Furniture

«'  and


246  APPENDIX.

«•  and  Things  neceffary  provided  for  that  AfTembly,  at  the
*<  Place  aforefaid-

«'  Given  under  our  Signet  at  our  City  of  Chefter,  the
*<  twenty  third  of  Odtober  in  the  ninth  Year  of  our
*'  Reign,  1567."

**  Signed
«'  Her  Highnefs's  Counfail

•'  in  the  Marchefle  of  Wales.

«'  N.  B.  This  Commiflion  was  copy'd  exactly  from  the
"Original  now  at  Moftyn,  A.  D.  1693:  Where
"  the  Silver  Harp  alfo  is."

From  this  Commiflion  it  appears,  I**,  That  although
many  of  the  Bards,  were  maflacred  by  Edward  the  Firft,
yet  the  whole  Order  was  by  no  means  exterminated.
2^'y,  That  in  the  Reign  of  Elizabeth,  Abufes  had  crept
on  among  the  Weljh  Bards,  firailar  to  thofe  which  are  re-
corded of  the  Irifi.  3"* >,  That  public  Contejis  for  poetic
and  jnujical  Fame  had  been,  eftabliflied  in  Wales  from  an-
cient Times. 4''''>,  That  thefe  Contefts  are  now  ceafcd.

In  Wotton's  '•  Leges  Wallicae,"  (Append,  p.  547,  548.)
there  are  two  Laws  of  Henry  the  Fourth  recorded,  which
relate  to  the  Prevention  of  the  Abufes  of  the  Bard's  Pro-
feflion ;  but  in  fuch  general  Terms,  that  nothing  relative
to  the  particular  State  of  their  Mufic  and  Poetry  can  be
eollefted  from  them.

The  Author  will  efteem  it  a  Angular  Favour,  if  any
Gentleman  can  tranfmit  to  him  an  authentic  Account  of
the  final  Decline  of  the  Bard's  Profeffion  in  Wales.

AN


AN

INSCRIPTION,

Written  at  a  favourite  Retirement,
in  May 1758.

Finemque  tueri,
Naturamquefequi.

TT  THAT  tha'  nor  glittering  Turret  rife-,
^  ^ Nor  Splendor  gild  thefe  mild  Retreats  ?
Yet  Nature  here,  in  modefl  Guife,
Difplays  her  unambitious  Sweets :

Along  each  gentle-fwelling  Lawn
She  ftrays,  with  ruftic  Garlands  crown 'd"j

And  wakes  the  Flow'rs  at  early  Dawn,
To  fling  their  bofom'd  Fragrance  round.

Here  teach  thy  Vot'ry,  blamelefs  Guide,
To  trace  thy  Step  ferene  and  free;

To  fhun  the  toilfome  Heights  of  Pride,
Thro'  thefe  calm  Scenes  to  follow  Thee-.

His  fllent  Walk  do  Thou  adorn,

"O'er  thefe  green  Slopes,  from  Tumult  far  j

Whether  he  greet  the  blufhing  Mora,

•Or  welcome  up  yon  evening  Star:

•2  '  Intent,


244  AN IN  S  C  Rg[P  T  I  O  N,  &c.

Intent,,  while  thro'  thefe  tufted  Bow'rs
Thy  generous  Whifpers  charm  his  Ear,

To  hail  from  Heav'n  thy  kindred  Pow'rs,,
And  meet  fair  Peace  and  Freedom  .here.

Yet  prompt  to  ftay  his  Country's  Fall,
The  flormy  City's  War  he'll  join.

When  Thou,  and  Truth,  and  Freedom  call :
For  Freedom's  Voice,  and  Truth's,  are  Thine^


THE END.


By  the  fame  AUTHOR,
With  all  convenient  Speed  will  be  piiblijhed,

FRINGIPLES

OF

CHRISTIAN LEGISLATION,
IN EIGHT BOOKS.

BEING

An  Analyfis  of  the  various  Religions,  Manners,  and  Polities
of  Mankind,  in  their  feveral  Gradations :

O  F

The  Obftrudions  thence  arifing  to  the  general  Progrefs  and:
proper  Effedts  of  Chriftianity  :

A  N  D O  F

The.  moft  pra(5licablc  Remedies  to  thefe  Ohftrudtions. .


I.  T^SSAY

J — 4 of Sh


Lately  publijloed,
in OCTAVO.
AYS  on  the  Characteristics  of  the  Earl

AFTSBURY.

I.  On  Ridicule,  confidered  as  a  Teft  of  Truth,
II.  On  the  Motives  to  Virtue,  and  the  neceflity
of  Religious  Principle.
III.  On  Revealed  Religion  and  Christianity.
The  Fourth  Edition.

II.  An  Estimate  of  the  Manners  and  Principle's
of  the  Times.  2  vol. The  Seventh  Edition.


In  the  Prefsj
In  One  Volume,  OcSlavo.

TEN SERMONS

ON

VARIOUS O  C  C  A  S  I  O  N  5.

By  J  O  H  N BROWN, D.  D.


V


PN  Brown,  John

lOi^  s\  dissertation  on  the  rise,

B76  union,  and  power, the

progressions, separations,
and  corruptions, of  poetry  and
music


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
