ea


ie: mn ke Husburyé Lh arackins :
5 ON ee ones hae


? ; . f f
— Uv op coll. uct: Ainge 7


yk


= me
*
ef Ee Sie
wr $
.


re x
“ee ee


ESSAYS


CHARACTERISTICS


OF THE


eS te ee a2 Fr, - =
Ye ‘ a #. *


Earl of SHaFrespury.


I, On RIDICULE, confidered as a
Teft of Truth.


II. On the Motives to Virtue, and the


; Neceflity of Religious Principle.

| III. On Revealed Rexiicion, and Curis-
TIANITY.

a: THE FOURTH EDITION.

es : Me,


- ESSAYS.


ON THE


CHA RACT ERISTICS.


= BY


JOHN BROWN, ih


Chaplain to the Right Reverend the Lord
Bifhop of Cartisxe.


LONDON,
eas Printed for C. Dayis, againft Gray’ ‘-Inn-Gate, Ailborn,


MDCCLY.,


| BIBLTOTHECS
i REGIA
1 MONACENSTS,


|


Wer ea ee it, 4 ee eee Aes - 6 ly yew pal fle ed
s


Ralph Allen, Efq.


§1R,


LD this Addrefs aim no —
further than at the com-
mon End of Dedicators, I fhould


_ have been proud enough tohave


declined the Trouble, and Yoz
too wife to have approved this
public Manner of offering i it.
To praife You, were smper-
tinent ; and to tell othersof my
Obligations to You, would have
the Appearance rather of Va-
nity than Gratitude.
a THE


il _ Dedication.


Tue Truth is; I make free |


with Your Name on this Oc-
cafion, not fo much to proteé?


my Book,. as to complete: my


Argument. :
1 HAVE ventured to criticize
the Works of a very celebrated


Writer, who took. it into his

Head to oppofe the folid Wit

dom of the Go/pe/, by the Vifi-
ons of falfe Philofophy. As


His, at beft, is but the Caufe of
Wit and Eloquence, all theSup-
port he could give it was only
to tell ‘us how PLATO wrote:
Mine being that of Truth, and
Chriftianity, | have the Advan-
tage of realizing all I fay, in
bidding the World take Notice
how You live.

| In


Dedication. i


In a word; I. was willing
to bring the Queftion toa fhort
Iffue; and fhew, by a kvown
EXAMPLE, to what an Eleva- —
tion true Chriftianity can exalt
human Nature. Till there-
fore philofophic Ta/fe can pro-
duce a parallel Effect, Re/igion
muft bear the Palm; and -
CurIsTIANITY, like her Pa-
rent \WisDoM, will be juftified
of her Children.


I am, SIR,
_ Your moft obliged,


humble Servant,


Joun Brown.


‘ ot es


a a Paes RO -


gee.


Bh Rag cace S


CONTENTS.


ESSAY I.
On Rivicure confidered as a Teft of
Truth.


Sect.
i PINDICATION of the noble
Writer's Zeal for Freedom.


Page 1.
Il. Of bis Method of treating the Queftion
concerning Ridicule. p


m,
Ill. Of the different Kinds of Compofition ;
Poetry, Eloquence, and Argument.


“pe 12s
IV. That Ridicule is a Species of Elo-
quence. p-41.

V. A Confirmation of the foregoing Truths
by an Appeal to Fa. p. 48.

VI. Of the noble Writers Arguments in
Support of bis new Theory; particns

larly the Cafe of Socrates. p. 54.

VU, His


pees : =
vi CONTENTS:
SECT.
VII. His Tae, Reafonings examined.
p- 64.
VIII. Of bis main Argument; relating to
Protefiantifm and Chriftianity.
, P- 74-
IX. Of the Opinion of Gorcias quoted by
bis Lordfhip from ARISTOTLE.
p. 81.
X. The Reafoning of one of his Followers
in this Subject, examined. _ p. 88.
XI. Of the particular Impropriety of ap-
plying Ridicule. to the Inveftigation
of religious Truth, “p.99.


Bo SA YIP:


On the Motives to Virtun, and
the Neceffity of Religious Prin-
ciple.


SECT.
“I. Introduétion, Page 109.
ae That the Definitions which Lord
SuaFrrespury, and feveral other
Moralifis have given of Virtue, are
inadequate and defective. p. 111.
Ill. Of the real Nature of Virtue. p. 123.
: nem IV. Of


; +

CONTENTS. vit

Sect. ne Ae
IV. Of an Objeétion urged by Dr. Man-
DEVILLE againft the permanent
Reality of Virtue. page 137.
V. Examination and Analjis of The
Fable of the Bees. p. 146.
VI. Of the natural Motives to virtuous
Aétion. p- 158.
VII. How far thefe Motives can in Reality
influence all Mankind. The Errors
of the Stoic and Epicurean Parties ;
and the moft probable Foundation of
thefe. Errors, — p. 167.
VIII. The noble Writer’s additional Reafon-
ings examined; and fhown to be
without Foundation. p. 187.
IX.: That the religious Principle, or Obedi-
ence to the Will of God, can alone
produce a uniform and permanent
‘Motive to Virtue. The noble Wri-
ter’s Objections examined. p. 206.
X. Of the Efficacy of the religious Prin-
ciple. Conclufion, Pp: 223.


ESSAY


Cn ap a ere


age 7
vill CONTEN TS.
ESSAY HL


On Revealed Reticion, and
CHRISTIANITY,


Sr ou

I, Of the noble Writer’ s Manner of treat-

_ . ing Chriftianity. _ Page 241.
UL. Of bis Objections to the Truths “yt ita-
tural Religion. » 245¢

Ill, Of the Credibility of the Gofjol-Tii-
ory. p. 256.

IV. Of the Scripture-Miracles, —p. 271.
V. Of Enthufia{m. Pp» 294.
VI. Of the religious and moral Doéirines of
Chriftianity. Pp. 314.

VII. Of feveral detached — “ the
Charateriftics. 349-

VIL. Of the Style and Compoftion oF the
Scriptures. p- 371.
IX. Of the noble Writer's Treatment of
the Englifh Clergy. p- 391.


DE IO


ESSAYS


Bayerische -
Stactshiblicthek


tit abil


ESSAYS


ON THE


Characteriftics, etc.


ESSAY I;


‘On Ridicule, confidered as a Teft
: of Truth,


SECTION L


/ hath been the Fate of Lord Suarrés-S$ zc T%
[ee s Characteriftics, beyond that of

moft other Books, to be idolized by one
Party, and detefted by another. While
the firft regard it asa Work of perfect Ex=
cellence, as containing every Thing that can
render Mankind wife and happy ; the lat-
ter are difpofed to rank it among the mott
pernicious of Writings, and brand it as one
B conti-


2 Effay on Ripicute.


Es sa ycontinued Heap of Fujian, Scurrility, and
___Falfebood.
Tuts Circumftance hath always Some
rto mea Demontftration, that Paffion “and
‘Prejudice have had a greater Share ‘than
Reafon, in deciding upon the Merits of this
Work ; which many read with Difpleafure,
more with Admiration, but few with im-
sg Judgment.) *Tis s probable; theT rath
es between the two Extremes of thefe
_difcordant Opinions: and that the noble
Writer hath mingled Beauties and Blots,
Faults and Excellencies, with a liberal and
unf{paring Hand.
~ "TyeEse, fo far as they relate’ to Religion
and Morals, it is my prefent Intention to
point out, without regard to the bigoted
Cenfures of his Friends or Enemies : While
I forefee, that fome will frown upon me
for allowing him any Thing, and others
treat me with a contemptuous Smile for pre-
~ fuming to differ with him at all.

Tue firft Thing that occurs to an unpre-
judiced Mind, in the Perufal of the Cha-
raéteriftics, is that generous Spirit of Free-
dom which fhines throughout the whole.
The noble Author every where afferts that
natural Privilegeof Man, which hath been

x fe


Effay on Ripieurs. © 3

fo often denied him, of feeing with his own S £¢ r-
Eyes, and judging by his own Reafon, It__~_.
may poflibly appearftrange to fome, why.
he fhould fo exttemely labour a Point fo
plain. But in Juftice to his Lordhip thefe
Gentlemen muft remember, or be informed,
that in former Times, fome well-defigning.
Men among ourfelves, from a groundlefs
Dread of an unlimited Freedom of the;
Prefs, attempted to make a moft unnatural
and cruel Separation between Truth and.
Liberty. Having fhaken off the Corrup-
tions of Popery, and eftablifthed what they
thought a pure and perfect Syftem, they,un=
happily {topped fhort in their full Carrier of
Glory ; prepofteroufly attempting to deprive
others of that common Privilege which they
had fo nobly exercifed themfelves, . This:
miftaken Spirit feemed entirely fubdued by
the excellent Locke and others, about the.
Time of the Revolution ; But at the Period
when our noble Author wrote, °it,not only’
revived, but was heightened by a terrible
Acceflion of Bitternefs and Rancour. Hence
thofe frequent Sallies of Inveétive, which he
throws out againft this intolerant Principle,
which he juftly ftigmatizeth as equally im-
politic, irrational, and unchriftian,

B 2 ’Tis


a —$ $$
—~- ———OOoooo
.


»


vii CONTENTS.


ESSAY Ill.


On Revealed Reticion, and
CHRISTIANITY.


eee
I, Of the noble Writer's Manuer of treat~
_ ing Chriftianity. _ Page 241.
Ul. Of bis Objections to the Truths la~
tural Religion. » 245.
Ill, Qf the Credibility of the Gofpol- Hi.
ary. p 256.
IV. Of the Scripture-Miracles. pp. Hee
V. Of Enthufiafm. p.2
VI. Of the religious and moral Doéirines f


Chriftianity. Pp. 314.
VII. Of feveral detached — ¢
Charatteritftics.
VII. Of the Style and Compoftion i “ss
Scriptures. p- 371.
IX. Of the noble Writer's Treatment of
the Englifh Clergy. p- 391.
OSES


ESSAYS


sche...“
sient


hi WUHEN


ESSAYS


ON THE


Charaéterittics, etc,


E..8: SoA. ¥°


On Ridicule, confidered as a Teft
of Truth,


SECTION L


hath been the Fate of Lord SHarTés+S 2 ¢ Te

[oe Charaéeriftics, beyond thatof _)
moft other Books, to be idolized by one
Party, and detefted by another. While
the firft regard it asa Work of perfec? Ex-
cellence, as containing every Thing that can
render Mankind wife and happy ; the lat-
ter are difpofed to rank it among the moit
pernicious of Writings, and brand it as one
B conti-


ar @


2 Effay on Rrpicute.


Ess $4 continued Heap of =e gentility, and
enn __ abe o0d i ~
Tis Circumftance hath always pea

rto me a Pemonftration that Paffion ’ and

‘Prejudice have had a greater Share ‘than
Reafon, in deciding upon the Merits of this
Work ; which many read with Difpleafure,
more rch Admiration, but few with im-
partial Judgment. Tis robable, theT rath
lies betWeen the two go Soo of thefe
_difcordant Opinions: and that the noble
Writer hath mingled Beauties and Blots,
Faults and Excellencies, with a liberal and
unf{paring Hand.

“Turse, fo far as they relate ’to Religion
and Morals, it is my prefent Intention to
point out, without regard to the bigoted
Cenfures of his Friends or Enemies : While
I forefee, that fome will frown upon me
for allowing him any Thing, and others

. treat me with a contemptuous Smile for pre-

~» ~~ fuming to differ with him at all.

Tue firft Thing that occurs to an unpre-
judiced Mind, in the Perufal of the Cha-
ratteriftics, is that generous Spirit of Free-
dom which fhines throughout the whole.
The noble Author every where afferts that
natural Privilege of Man, which hath been

‘i fe


Effay on Rivicue. 3

fo often denied him, of feeing with his own § £.¢ r-
Eyes, and judging by hisown Reafon. It__*_.
may poflibly appearftrange to fome, why
he fhould fo extternely labour a Point fo:
plain. But in Juftice to his Lordthip thefe
Gentlemen muft remember,.or be informed;
that in former Times, fome well-defigning.
Men among ourfelves, from a groundlefs
Dread of an unlimited Freedom of. the
Prefs, attempted to make a moft unnatural,
and cruel Separation between Truth and.
Liberty. Having fhaken off the Corrup-
tions of Popery, and eftablifhed what they
thought a pure and perfect Syftem, they,un-
happily ftopped fhort in their full Carrier of
Glory ; prepofteroufly attempting to deprive
others of that common Privilege which they
had fo nobly exercifed themfelves, . This
miftaken Spirit feemed entirely fubdued by
the excellent Locke and others, about the
Time of the Revolution : But at the Period
when our noble Author wrote, \it,not only
revived, but was heightened by. a terrible
Acceffion of Bitternefs and Rancour. Hence
thofe frequent Sallies of Invective, which he
throws out againft this intolerant Principle,
which he juftly ftigmatizeth as equally im-
politic, irrational, and unchriftian,

B 2 *T1s


4 Effay on Rivicue.


Essay "Ts the Glory of our Days, that this ac
~———curfed Spirit of Perfecution is at leaft dying
away. What Pity that we cannot add, it
is wholly extinguifhed! Itis true, we moft
of us profefs ourfelves Friends to a Free-
dom of Inquiry, in the main. But why, in
the main? Why that needlefs Circumftance
of Hefitation ? Would we embrace Error ?
Or do we think that Truth can fuffer by
the moft rigid Scrutiny ? On the contrary,
not only the Perfection, but the very Being ©
of Knowledge depends on the Exercife of
Freedom. For whatever fome may fear
from an open and unlimited Enquiry, it
feems evidently the only Means vouch-
fafed us for the Attainment of Truth. The
Abufe of it may be hurtful, but the Want of
it is fatal. Such, indeed, are the clear and
undoubted Principles of our Religion: Nei-
ther fure can thefe Declarations furprife us.
For if human and political Eftablifhments
had been facred or inviolable, where had
been our Proteffantifm; nay, where our
Chrifitanity? Dare we then to defert or dif-
countenance a Principle, on which not only
the Purity, but the very Exiftence of our
Religion depends? Nor is this Principle
lefs confonant with the ftricteft Reafon. It


4 3§


Effay on Rivicute, 5


is Falfehood only that loves and ‘retires intoS  ¢ T-
Darknefs. Truth delights inthe Day ; and__"_.
demands no more than a juft Light, to ap-

- pear in perfeét Béauty. A rigid Examina-

tion is its only Teft: For Experience hath

taught us, that even Od/inacy and Error

can endure the Fires of Perfecution : But

it is genuine Truth, and that alone, which

comes out pure and unchanged from the
Jeverer Tortures of Debate.

Ir will ever be our trueft Praife there-
fore, to join the noble Apologift in his En-
comiums on Freedom ; the only permanent
Bafis on which Religion or Virtue can be
eftablifhed. Nor can we lefs approve his
frequent Recommendations of Politenefs,
Chearfulnefs, and Good-bumour, in the Pro-
fecution of our moft important Inquiries.
The morofe,contemptuous, and furlySpecies
of Compofition is generally an Appendage
to Bigotry, as appears in Inftances innu-
merable, both among the miftaken Friends
and Enemies of Religion. On the con-
trary, the amiable Qualities of Chearful-
nefs and Good-humour, caft a Kind of Sun-
fhine over a Compofition, and naturally en-
gage us in Favour of the Writer. They
refemble that gentle Smile that often lights


ae ; up


je a


‘
.


6 Effay oa Ripvicuue:
Es s4¥up the human Countenance, the never-
——_—— failing Indication’ of a humane Temper.

How naturally then muft we be difpofed to
liften; how open our Minds to receive
Conviction, when we. perceive our Oppo-
nent’s Intention is benevolent ? When we
perceive that his Aim is not Vidtory, but
Information: that he means not to in/ult,
but to infirué us ?

So far, out of an unfeigned Regard to
Truth, it fhould be my Boaft to take Party
with the noble Writer: On the fame Prin-
ciple it will now be neceffary to depart from
him. For, not content with eftablithing
the free Exercife of Reafon, and the Way of
Chearfulnefs, in treating the Subjects of
Religion and Morals; he revolts from the
Principle on which the rational Advocates
for Religion were willing to have joined

_ him, and appeals to a new Teft, the Teft of
Ridicule. ‘This, in his two firft Treatifes,
he attempts to eftablifh asa furer Method
of Conviction: And that Ridicule, which
had hitherto been employed in difgracing
known Falfebood, he informs us, may be fuc-
cefsfully applied to the Inveffigation of un- ~
known Truth,
Hz


i


Effay on Ripievee® 3

He hath gained a numerous Train of Sz cr. ~
Followers in thisnew Opinion : It may be’
therefore neceflary to examime its Foun-—
dations, —


“SECTION I.


’T IS great Pity the noble Author hath$§ © ¢ rT.
not condefcended to a little more Precifion__—
in treating the Queftion now before us, He
indulges the Gaiety of Spirit, the Freedom
of Wit and Humour fo far, that a Reader,
who feeks Information rather than’: Amufe-
ment, is often at a Lofs to know where his
Argument, or even his Opinion, lies. This, '
no doubt, was in part owing to a generous °
Abhorrence of that Pedantry, which he
takes all Occafions of expofing toContempt.’
Yet a better Reafon may poffibly be alledg-
ed: For in recommending the Uje of R:-
dicule, what could be more. natural and
proper than the Power of Ridicule itfelf ?’
To draw a ftriking Picture of demure Fol-
ly and folemn Impofture, was a Matter-
piece of Prudence: But to have argued /e-
rioufly, would have deftroyed his Argu-
ment: It had been a.tacit Confeflion, that
_ there is a deeper Foundation, on which
B4 Ridicule


il


Effay on Ruvicue.


Es say¥Ridicule itfelf muft reft, he muft therefore.


have overturned, even while he intended
to eftablith this new Pillar, and Ground of


Truth.


Here then we difcover why the noble
Author is fo witty in Defence of Wit, and
chufes to maintain the Caufe of Raillery by
Raillery itfelf. He {miles at his Adverfary,
who had attempted to find Coherence in
his firft Letter*, He glories in being an
Adventurer in the Way of .Mi/cellany ;
where ‘‘ Cuttings and Shreds of Learning,
“« with various Fragments and Points of
Wit, are drawn. together and tacked in
** any fantaftic Form. Where the Wild .
*© and Whimfical, under the Name of the
«© Odd and Pretty, fucceed in the Room of


“* the Graceful and Beautiful: Where Juft-


“© nefs and Accuracy of Thought are fet
afide, as too conftraining, and of too
*« painful an Afpect, to be endured in the
agreeable and more eafy Commerce of
«© Gallantry and modern Wit?.” Hence
with Reafon he proceeds to his Conclufion,


' that ‘* Grounds and Foundations are of na


*< Moment, in a Kind of Work, which, ac-
“Vol. iii, p. 18, 20. * Ibid. p. 5, &c.


as cording


° =


Effay on Ripicute. - eg.
* cording to modern Eftablithment, hasS# ¢ T+
** properly neither Top nor t Bottom, Begin-__ as
“ ning nor End,”
IT mutt be confeffed, that j in the Con~
duct of the literary Warfare, they who de-
pend on the Regularity and Force of Argu- ;
ments, have but a forry Chance againft
thefe nimble Adventurers in the Sallies. of
Wit and Ridicule; thefe Hufars in Dif-
‘putation, who confide more in their Agi-
lity, than Strength or Difcipline; and by
fudden Evolutions and timely Skulking, can
do great Mifchiefs, without receiving any.
Ill qualified, indeed, is the /aturnine Com~
plexion of the dry Reafoner, to cope with
this mercurial Spirit of modern Wit: The
Formalift is under a double Difficulty ; not
only to conquer his Enemy, but to find him.
Though it muft be owned, the Search is.a
harder Tafk than the Viéfory; and more
mortifying, as it ends in fhewing us that
this redoubted Figure of Ridicule, armed at
all Points like Reafon, is no other than an
airy Phantom, tricked up by the Goddefs
of Folly, to confound formal Wifdom ; as
that other in the Poet, to miflead his Hero ;
€ Vol. iti, pi8.


eae: se Tum


Io Effay on Ripicue.
Ess 4 ¥ Tum dea nube cava tenuem fine viribus umbram -»
*__ In faciem Enez (vifu mirabile monftrum)
Dardaniis ornat telis: clypeumque, jubafque -
Divini affimilat capitis ; dat inania verba,
Dat fine mente fonum, greflufque effingit euntis.
Hlum autem abfentem AEneas in przlia pofcit.
Tunc levis haud ultra /atebrasjam querit imago,
Sed fublime volans, ubi {e immifcuit atree *.
Srncr, therefore, the noble Writer de-
clines treating this Subject in the Way of
clofe Argument; we muft take our Chance
with him upon the Terms he hath been
pleafed to prefcribe. We mutt be content
. to goa Gleaning for his Opinions, and pick
them up as they lie thinly fcattered through
a wide Extent of Pages.
~ Bur, however his Lordfhip’s high Qua-
lity may exempt him from the eftablifhed
Forms of Argument, it were the Height of
Imprudence in Writers of inferior Rank, to
attempt an Imitation of his peculiar Man-.
ner. His delicate Raillery, therefore, will
beft be repayed by fober Reafoning. This
fure, his moft zealous Admirers cannot take
amifs: It is the noble Author’s allowed
Maxim, that “a Jeft, which will not bear a
‘* ferious Examination, is certainly falfe
 Wit*.” Neither was he a Stranger.to |


*Virg. En. x. ¥ 636, &c.  ¢ Vol.i. p. 74.
the


Effay on Ripicure. 56g
the methodical Species of Compofition: AgS 55 +
appears from his Enquiry concerning Vike.
tue; where he proceeds with a Pace equal-
ly regular and majeftic. Indeed fhould we
form our Idea of him from the Attitudes
in which his forry Mimics prefent him to
éur View, we fhould fee him labouring
through a confufed Mafs of Words and
random Half-meanings, entangled in his
own Argument, and throwing himéfelf into
every unnatural and aukward Pofture, to
make his Way, though in vain, into Senfe..
But this is a very bad Picture of the noble
Author: Though it be all his affected Ad-
mirers can exhibit of him in their own
Prodytions. Deformitiesare eafily copied : .
True Features and graceful Attitudes are
caught by the Hand of a Mafer only.
And in Reality, none ever knew the Value
of Order and Proportion better than Lord
SHAFTESBURY. He knew that Confufion
can only tend to di/grace Truth, or difguife
Falfehood. Method, indeed, may dege-
nerate into Stiffnefs, but to defpife Order,
is the fillieft Afectation. Efpecially when
the flovenly and confufed Form of the Com-
pofition pretends to the Character of Elen
gance,


rz Effay on Rivicute.
Ess Ygance, it becomes of all others the groffeft:


I _and moft contemptible Pedantry.


SECTION IU.


marcia: T HE divine Author of our Being having

I. given us feveral different Powers, Senfe, Ima-
gination, Memory, and Reafon, as the Inlets,
Prefervers, and Improvers of Knowledge ;
it may be proper here briefly to remark their
refpective Provinces. As the Sen/és are the
Fountains whence we derive all our Ideas ;
fo thefe are infinitely combined and aflo-
ciated by the Imagination: Memory preferves
thefe Affemblages of Things: Rea/on com-
pares, diftinguifhes, and feparates them:
By this Means determining theirDifferences,
and pointing out which are rea/, and which
fictitious,

Tue Pafions are no more than the fe-
veral Modes of Pleafure and Pain, to which
the Author of Nature hath wifely fubjeGted
us, for our own and each other’s Prefer-
vation.


s¢ Love, Hope, and Joy, fair Pleafure’s fmiling
“¢ Train;
« Hate, Fear, and Grief, the Family of Pain.”


To


Effay on Ripicure. 3
To thefe we may add two more of a att ECT.
Kind, Pity and Contempt, which feem to...
partake of both Pain and Pleafure.

As the Senfes and Imagination are the
Sources of all our Ideas, it follows that they
are the Sources of all our Modes of Plea-
fure and Pain: That is, of all our Paffions.
Nor is any Paffion frongly excited in the
Soul by mere Knowledge only, till the Jma-
gination hath formed to itfelf fome Kind of
Piéture or Reprefentation of the Good or
Evil apprehended. Thus ArisToTiejuft-
ly defines Fear to be a Kind of Pain arifing
from the Phantafy or Appearance of future
Evil‘. Confiftently with this, he again
truly obferves, that though all Men know
they muft die, yet, while Death is at 2
Diftance, they never think of it*. ‘The
fame may be obferved concerning the Be-
lief of future Exiftence; which never fways
the Condué& of Mankind, till the Zmagi-
nation is ftrongly impreffed by fteady and
repeated Contemplation.

* Esw deQoboc, avay tis y tagaxyy ex SANTA
SIAE peRovres xaxov. Arift. Rhet. 1. ii. c. 5.


5 Icacs yag martes, dts amobavouvta’ wAA’ drs


Gux eyyvs, ovdev DgovriZovew. Ib. Lil, c. 5.
As


rz Effay on Ripicure.
Ess Ygance, it becomes of all others the groffeft:
I. and moft contemptible Pedantry.


SHC TION IIL


T HE divine Author of our Being having
I. given us feveral different Powers, Senfe, Ima-
gination, Memory, and Reafon, as the Inlets,
Prefervers, and Improvers of Knowledge ;
it may be proper here briefly to remark their
refpective Provinces. As the Sen/és are the
Fountains whence we derive all our Ideas ;
fo thefe are infinitely combined and affo-
ciated by the Imagination: Memory preferves
thefe Affemblages of Things: Reafon com-
pares, diftinguifhes, and feparates them:
By this Means determining theirDifferences,
and pointing out which are rea/, and which
fictitious,

Tue Pafions are no more than the fe-
veral Modes of Pleafure and Pain, to which
the Author of Nature hath wifely fubjeGted
us, for our own and each other’s Prefer-
vation.


s¢ Love, Hope, and Joy, fair Pleafure’s {miling
“¢ Train;
« Hate, Fear, and Grief, the Family of Pain.”


To


Effay-on Rivicure. 13
To thefe we may add two more of a ei ECT.
_ Kind, Pity and Contempt, which feem (0 neh
partake of both Pain and Pleafure.

As the Senfes and Imagination are the
Sources of all our Ideas, it follows that they
are the Sources of all our Modes of Plea
fure and Pain: That is, of all our Paffons.
Nor is any Paflion frongly excited in the
Soul by mere Knowledge only, till the Ima
gination hath formed to itfelf fome Kind of
Piéture or Reprefentation of the Good or
Evil apprehended. Thus ArisToT ve juft-
ly defines Fear to be a Kind of Pain arifing
from the Phantafy or Appearance of future
Evil‘. Confiftently with this, he again
truly obferves, that though all Men know
they muft die, yet, while Death is at a
Diftance, they never think of it*. ‘The
fame may be obferved concerning the Be-
lief of future Exiftence; which never fways
the Condué& of Mankind, till the Imag:-
nation is ftrongly impreffed by fteady and
repeated Contemplation.


f Esw de Dobos, Avay tis 4 THeaHy ex DANTA~
ZIAE peRovros xaxov. Arift. Rhet. 1. ii.c. 5.

5 Tcacs yag martes, cri amobavouvta’ arr’ dre
ux ey yVS> ovdevPeavtiZovery, 1b, 1. il, C. 5


As


14 Effay om Rivicute.
Essay As therefore it appears to be the Pros
vince of Senfe and Imagination to prefent
and affociate Ideas, but not to mark their
real Differences; and as the Paffions are
always excited according to the Suggeftions
of thefe two Powers; it follows, that ap-
parent, not real Good and Evil, are univer-
fally the Objects of all our Paffions. Thus”
the refpective Objects of Joy, Fear, An-
ger, are apparent Good, apparent Danger,
apparent Injury. Univerfally, whether the
Object be real or fictitious, while it is ap-
parent (that is, while the Imagination re-
prefents it as real) it will produce its rela-
tive Paffion.

Ir is the Province of Reafon alone, to
correé thePaffions, Imagination and Paf-
fion can never correct themfelves. Every
Affemblage of Ideas, every Impreffion made
upon them, hath an Object apparently real:
Therefore without the Aids of Reafon, the
active and feparating Power, the Mind can
never diftinguith real from fictitious Obje€ts.
Again, as it is the Province of Reafon only,
thus to regulate the Senfes and Imagination,
and to determine when they imprefs a Truth,
or fuggeft a Falfhood: fo itis no lefs the
Province of the fame corrective Power, to

deter=


pails


Effay on Ripicure. “15
_determine concerning the Modes of appa+S8-¢
rent Good and Evil, ‘and thus to fix both.
_ our Opens and Poff on their wer :
Objects *.
Upon this. juft Daieodane of lage.

nation and Paffion on the fuperior and lead-
_ ing Faculty of Reafon, the whole Weight

‘of this Queftion concerning the Application

and Ufe of Ridicule depends. . But that we

may obtain as widea View as poflible of our
Subject, it may be proper. to afcertain the
Nature, Limits, .and Ends of the different
Kinds of literary Compofition, which take
their Rife from thefe three different Powers,

as they fubfift in Man. Thus we fhall dif-
cover, to. which of them the Way of Ridi-
cule is to be referred, and determine how far


. re of thefe Truths are both finely and philo-
fophically exprefled by our great Poet in the follow-
ing Paflage :

But know, that in the Soul
Are many leffer Faculties, that ferve
Reafon as chief: Among thefe, Fancy next
Her Office holds : Of all external Things
Which the five watchful Senfes reprefent,
She forms Imaginations, aery Shapes,

. Which Reafon joining or dis-joining, frames,
All what we affirm, or what deny, and call
Our Knowledge, or Opinion.

Parad, Loft, B.v. #100, &c.


it


16 Effay on Rivicure.
‘XQ eT may, ot may not, with Propriety be re-

——— garded as a Te? of Truth. .
Prruaps there is no Species of Writing
(except only that of mere Narration) but
what will fall under the Denomination of
Poetry, Eloquence, or Argument. ‘The firft
‘Jays hold of the Imagination; the fecond,
through the Imagination, feizes the Paffions;
the laft addreffeth itfelf to the Reafon of
‘Mankind, The immediate, efential End
therefore of Poetry is to pleafe, of Elo-
quence to perfuade, of Argument to inffrudt.
“To this End, the Poet dwells on fuch
Images as are beautiful ; the Orator felects
every Circumftance that is affecting; the
Philofopher only admits what is true. But
‘as all thefe, in their feveral Kinds of Writ-
ing addrefs themfelves to Man, who is
compounded of Imagination, Paffion, and
Reafon ; fo they feldom confine themfelves
to their refpective Provinces, but lay hold
of each other’s Art, the more effectually to
gain Admiffion and Succefs to their own. _

Yet ftill the Mafers in thefe various Kinds
of Compofition, know how to keep their
feveral Boundaries di find 5 not to make un-
warrantable Inroads into each other’s Pro-
vinces, nor remove thofe Lines which Na-
ture


Effay on Ripicure. 17
ture hath prefcribed: But fo to limit theirS = ¢ 7
Excurfions, that the Intelligent may always
know: what is defigned, a Poem, an Oration,
or: ain Argument’,

Tuos the judicious Poet, though his im-
mediateand univerfal Aim is beautiful Imita-
_ tion, yet in order to become more plea/ing,
endeavours often to be /ntere/fing, always to
be rational. His Application being made
to Man, fhould he let loofe Imagination to
its Random-flights, he muft fhock the Rea-
Jon of every penetrating Obferver. Hence
appears the Neceflity of cultivating that
Maxim in poetical Compofition, which the.
two beft of French Critics, Bolleasiania Box:
hours have fo much infifted on; that all
«« poetical Beauty muft be founded in,
“ Truth *.” Becawfe in the unlimited Ex.
curfions of Fancy though one Faculty
fhould approve, yet another is difgufted :


i Would it not carry us too far from our Subject, it
might perhaps be both a new and pleafing Speculation,
‘to point out the Writers in thefe feveral Kinds, who
have beenmoft remarkably excellent or defective, with
“Regard.to, this jufkUnion of the/e three Species of Com-
pofition, At prefent it muft fuffice, to have hinted fuch
aCriticifm, which the Reader may eafily profecute.

© Que fi om me demande ce que c’eft cet agré-
ment et ce fél—a monavis, il coniifte principalement
4 ne jamais prefenter au leCteur que des pen/ces vrais,


Though


———


18 Effay on Ripicure.
EssayThough Imagination acguiefce in falfe
1. Beauty, Reafon will reje it with Difdain.


Thus, although the primary and effential
End of Poetry is to pleafe by Imitation ; yet
as it is addreffed to Man, In/truétion makes
a neceflary, tough an adventitious Part of
its Character’.

From this View of Things we may, in
paffing, further fee the Nature, Limits,and
comparative Excellence of the various Kinds
of Poetry. The Defcriptive holds entirely


et des expreffions juffes. Ocuvres de Boileau, tom.i.
Pref. p. 29.

ar enfin, pour vous dire un peu par ordre ce que je
penfe la deffu, /a verité eft la premiere qualité, et com-
me le fondement des penf€es : les plus belles font viti-
eufes; ou plitét celles qui paflent pour belles, et qui
femblent l’étre, nele font pasen effet, fice fonds leur
manque. Bowhours, Man. de bien penf. p. 11.

* Hence the Debate mentioned by Strabo (1.i.) be-
tween Erato/thenes, and fome of the Ancients, may eafily
be decided. The firft infifting that Plea/ure, the other
that Jnfiruction, was the only End of Poetry. They
were both wrong: as it appears that thefe two Ends
muft always be united in fome Degree. However, Era-
tofthenes was nearer the Truth, as healledged the e/fential
End. ’Tis no bad Defcription, given by Mr. Dryden,
and others, of the End of Poetry, that it is ‘* to inffrué?,
by pleafing :”” Though upon the whole, itthrows more
Weight on theCircumftance of Jnftruétion, than the
Thing will bear. Perhaps it had better been faid, that
it is * to pleafe, confiftently with Inftruétion.’ The
Admirers of Lord §. who love pompous Declamation,


may fee a great deal faid.on this Subje@, and with


little Precifion, in Strada’s Third Prolufion.
. of


Effay on Rivicure. 19
of the Imagination, and may be termed pure S £ ¢ T.
Poetry or Imitation ; Yet, with Regard to
the fecondary End of Inftruction, it feems to
merit only the loweft Place, becaufe it is
then perfect when it fatisfies the Imagina-
tion ; and while it offends not Reafon, or
the Affections, nothing further with Regard
to thefe Faculties, is expected from it. The
Tragic, Comic, Satiric, and the Elegy, as
they chiefly regard the Paffons and the
Heart of Man, fo they draw much of their
Force from the Sources of Eloquence. On
the other hand, the Didaéfic, as it makes its .
chief Application to Reafon, though it re-
tains fo much of the*Graces of Imagina-
tion, as to merit the Name of Poetry, is
principally of the/gical Species. The Epic,
-by its great Extent, includes all thefe Kinds
by turns, and is therefore the nodleft, both
in its primary and fecondary Intention.
Much indeed hath been occafionally afferted
by feveral Writers, concerning the fuperior
Dignity of the tragic Species™: But this
hath been more in the Way of Affirmation
than Proof. Their Opinion feems to have
™ ‘Thus the excellent Mr. Addi/on : * A perfe& Tra- ,


‘¢ gedy is the nobleft Production of human Nature.”
Speétator, N° 39.


°
_
aa <


C2 been


20 Effay on RipicuLe.
Es i been founded on a miftaken Interpretation
of ArisrorTie, whofe fuppofed Authority.
‘on this Subjet hath generally paffed un-
queftioned. | But whoever hall thoroughly,
examine the Sentiments of the grand Mafter,
will find he only meant to affert, that the
Mode of Imitation in Tragedy is more forci=,
ble, and therefore fuperior to that of the
Epic Kind; becaufe in the laft, the AGion —
is only told, i in the former, it is vs/ibly repren
Jfented. This is the Truth, But if we. con-
fider, not the Mode of Imitation, but the
Subjeéts imitated ; if we confider the com-
parative Greatne/s of the Action which —
- thefe two Kinds of Poetry can comprehend;
and the moral Ends of Inffruétion, no lefs
than the Variety and Beauty of Defcription,
which conftitutes the very Effence of Poe-
try ;, we fhall find the Epic greatly fuperior,
on account of the Extent and Importance: ;
of .thofe Actions, and the Variety. of Cha~ “a
raéters which it is capable of involving. ae
Thus, for inftance, fuch an A@tion asthe =
Death of Orpipus or Cato may be more
perfectly imitated (becaufe vi/fibly repre-
fented) in Tragedy, than in the Epos: But
a much greater and more extenfive. Action, —


fuch as the Efablifhment of an Empire, with
all |


Effay on Ripicute. bs


all its fabordinate Epifodes, religious, poli-S ECT.
tical, and moral, cannot be comprehended Hl. ¢
or exhibindin ragedy, while yet they may

be perfectly defcribed in the Epopée.

So much concerning Poetry will be found
to have Relation to our Subject. But as the
Queftion concerning Ridicule will turn
chiefly on the proper Subordination of E/-
quence, it will be neceflary to confider this
Kind of Compofition in a more particular
Manner.

Etoquence then is no other than a
Species of Poetry applied to the particular
End of Perfuafion. For Perfuafion can only
be effected by rowzing the Paffions of the
Soul; and thefe, we have feen, are only to
be moved by a Force impreffed on the Ima-
gination, affuming the Appearance of Truth;
which is the effential Natare of Boatiodl
Compofition. Thus the Lord Verutam:
** In all Perfuafions that are wrought by
*« Eloquence, and other Impreffion of like
** Nature, which paint and difguife the true
** Appearance of Things, the chief Recom-
“ mendation unto Rea/on, is from the Jma-
“* gination®.” And the judicious Strabo,
confiftently with this Theory, tells us, that

® De Aug; Scient, 1. ii.
39 in


22
Ess avin Fact “ the oratorial Elocution. was but _


?


: I _« an Imitation of the poetical: This ap- fii


Effay on Ren reuriie


« peared firft, and was approved: They
« who imitated it, took off the Meafures,
« but ftill preferved all the other Parts of
** Poetry in their Writings: Such were
« Capmus the Milefian, PHerecypes, and
«. Hecarzus, Their Followersthen took
“ fomething more from what was left, and
** at length Elocution defcended into the
* Profe which is now among us°.”

Tuus as the Paffions muft have an ap-
parent Object of Good or Evil offered by the
Imagination in order to excite them; fo
Eloquence muft offer apparent Evidence,
ere it can be received and acquiefced in:
For the Mind cannot embrace known Falfe-
hood. So that every Opinion which Elo-
quence inftills, though itbe the pure Refult
of certain fictitious Images imprefled on the
Fancy, is always regarded as the Refult of
rational Conviction, and received by the |
Mind as Truth,


PMeailisn yae 4 morlixy xalaonevn waeyrber es oo
peor, nous evdoxipancer® ila: exetvyy poyaxuatvor, Avoarles
mptleoy, + arAw de Quaatarles ra worrlinay cvveyear
sav of wees Kadpov, xouDegexvdyy, xat Exalasov’ eile
of Usegor, aPoxpvles wer ts Twv qosvlav, eg TO vuV e1dos
walnyayov ws ayane dds tives. Strabo, lib. i.


HENCE


4
Effay. ow RIDICULE. | Ss
Hence we may perceive the juft Foun-S £ ¢ r.
dation of the well-known Maxim in rheto- :
rical Compofition, Artis eff celare artem.
In every other Art, where the End is Plea-
fure, Inftruction, or Admiration, the greater
Art the Mafter difplays, the more effe€tu-
ally he gains his Purpofe.» But where the
End is Perfuafion, the Difcovery of his Art
muft defeat its Force and Defign. For
ere he can perfuade, he muft feem to apply
to his Hearer’s Reafon, while, in Faét, he is
working on his Imagination and A ffections:
Now this, once known, muft defeat. his
Purpofe; becaufe nothing can perfuade but
what has the Appearance of Truth.
HENCE too we may fee’ where the true
Medium lies between the too frequent U/e,
and delicate Avoidance of poetical Images,
in Eloquence. Metaphors, Similies, bold
Figures, and glowing Expreffions are pro-
per, fo far as they point the Imagination to
the main Subject on which the Paffion is to
beexcited : When they begin to amufe, they
grow abfurd. And here, by the way, lies
the effential Difference between the Epic
and Iragic Compofition. For the Epic,
tending chiefly to Admiration and Inftruc-
tion, allows a full Difplay of Art: But
C4 the


24 £EffaymRivicure. *
Es saythe Tragic, being of the perfuafive Kind,

* — att _ tele only regard and touch upon pact:
Images i in this fingle View, as they tend to
rowze the Paffons of the Soul. Macro-
Bius ? hath collected many elegant Exam-
ples of this poetic Elocution from the Eneid:
: He hath ranged them in Clafles,and pointed
. out the Fountains whence. the great Poet
' drew his Pathos: and fure it may with
' Truth be ‘affirmed, that “ the Mafter-
« ftrokes of that divine Work are rather of

« the Tragic than the Epic Species.”
Turse Remarks will enable us to difco-
ver the Impropriety of an Opinion com-
monly held‘; ‘ that the Reafon why Elo-
«© quence had fuch Power, and wrought
“ fuch Wonders in Athens and Rome, was, ,
“© becaufe it had become the general Tafte
** and Study of the Times: That confe-
“* quently thefe Cities were more fenfible
“* to itsCharms, and therefore more warmly
“* affected by it.” Now, though with re-
gard to pure Poetry or ftrid Argument,
where either Pleafure or Truth are the pur-
pofed Ends, this Reafoning might hold ;
yet, when applied to Eloquence, it feems to


p Saturnal. |. iv. paflim.  ¢ See Mr. Hume’s Effay
on Eloquence.
be


Effay on Rivicure. <* ee
be without Foundation. For where Igno- s i Te toe
rance is predominant, there any Application ____.
to the Fancy orthe Paffions is moft likely
to wear the Appearance of Reafon, .and
therefore the moft likely to perfuade. As
Men improve in Knowledge, fuch Appli- ©
cation muft proportionably lofe its Force,
and true Reafoning prevail. Hence it fhould -
feem, that they who make the conftituent
Principles of Eloquence - familiar to their
Imagination, mutt of all others be beft ena-
bled to feparate Truth from its Appearances,

-and diftinguifh between Argument aud Co-
louring. An artful Oration will indeed af-
ford great Pleafure to one who hath applied
himfelf to the Study of Rhetoric: Yet, not
fo as that he thall be perfuaded by it: On
the contrary, his Pleafure confifts ina reflex
A&t of the Underftanding ; andarifesfrom ”
the very Circumftance which prevents Per-
fuafion, a Difcovery of the Mafter’s Art.
Tue true Reafon therefore, why Elo-
quence gained fuch mighty Power in thefe
famed Republics was, ‘‘. becaufe the Ora-
** tors addrefied themfelves to the People as
** their Yudges.”’ Here the Art triumphed :
for it had not Reafon to.inftru&, but Imagi-
nation and Paffion to controul. Accordingly
we


26 Effay on Rivicure.


ms ; 4Ywe find, that no fooner was the popular

-~—___. Government deftroy’d, and the fupreme
Power lodged in a fingle Hand, than Elo-
quence began fenfibly to languifh and de-
cay: The mighty Orators, who could fway
the Paffions of a mixed Multitude, found
their Art baffled and overthrown when op-
pofed to the cool Determinations of cunning
Minifters, or the fantaftic Will of arbi-
trary Mafters. Thus with great Judgment,
though not much Honefty, the Roman Poet
exhorts his Countrymen to difdain the low ‘
Accomplifhments of Eloquence : He knew
they belonged to a Republic :


eae SN Skee es ee i) ae


Excudent alii fpirantia mollius z2ra —

Orabunt caufas melius

Tu regere imperio populos, Romane, me-

mento :

He tibi erunt artes ¢,
With the fame Penetration he lays the
Scene in a popular Affembly, when he gives
us a Picture of Eloquence triumphant. I
mean in that fine Paflage where he com-
pares Neptune flilling the Noife of the
Waves, to an Orator appeafing the Madnefs
of the People :


¢ Eneid, J. vis


Ac


Effay on Ripicure. 27
Ac veluti magno in populo cum feepe coorta eft § f T.
Seditio, fevitque animis ignobilevulgus;
Jamque faces et faxa volant; furor arma mi-
niftrat ;
Tum pietate gravem ac meritis fi forte virum
quem ;
Confpexere, filent, arrec#ifque auribus aftant :
Ille regit dictis animos, et pectora mulcet :
Sic cunctus pelagi cecidit fragor *, —~


| omenememmeteen il


"Tis true, we have a fuppofed Inftance on
Record, of the Power of Tuity’s Elo-
quence, after Liberty was deftroy’d, even.on
the great Defroyer himfelf. When we
’ read the Oration‘, we ftand amazed at its
Effects : For fure there is nothing equal to
them in the Compofition itfelf: fo that. it
appears an Event almoft unaccountable, that
Cesar, who was himfelf an accomplifhed
Orator, who knew all the Windings of the
Art, and was at the fame Time of the moft
determined Spirit, fhould be fo fhaken on
this Occafion as to tremble, drop his Papers,
and acquit the Prifoner. Though many
have. attributed this to the Force of Tut-
Ly’s Elocution’; it feems rather to have
been the Effect of Crsar’s Art, We


En. 1. i. ‘Pro Ligario, ¥ Cafaubon, Sir W.
Temple; Mr. Hume, &c.


know


28 Effay on Ripicue.

Ess.aYknow with what unwearied Application he
courted Crcrro’s Friendfhip; he faw where

his Vanity and his Weaknefs lay: With

perfect Addrefs therefore he play’d back the
Orator’s Art upon himfelf ; His Concern

was feigned, and his Mercy artificial ; ashe \

a


knew that nothing could fo effectually win
Tuty to his Party, as giving him the Pride
of having conquered Cesar. :
Bur whatever of Truth there may be
in this Conjecture; fo much is evident, that
the Scene where alone Eloquence can work
its mighty Effects, is that of a popular Af-
Jembly. An abfolute Monarchy quencheth
it atonce. Nor can public Freedom itfelf
give it any confiderable Play, where the
public Freedom hath any firmer Bafis, than
that of a mere Democracy. For where the
Councils of a Nation depend on the united —
Reafon of elected Reprefentatives, or pro-
vident Statefmen, though the laboured Ef-
fays of Eloquence may often amufe, they
will feldom determine. ‘This feems to be
the Cafe of our own Age and Country:
And were it neceffary to enlarge on this
Subject, it might be made appear, that they
who complain of the Decay of public Elo-
quence among us, aflign a Caufe which hath
no


Effay on Rrpreute. z9


noireal Exiftence, when they attribute that $ £ ¢ Tt.
Decay to a Negleé of the Art “, while, in cope
Fat, it neceffarily arifes from the ruling
Principles of the Times, and the Nature of
our Conftitution. :

. Trus Eloquence gains its End of Per-
fuafion by offering apparent Truth to the
Imagination ; as Argument gains its proper
End of Conviction by offering real Truth’
to the Underftanding. Mr. Hoxses feems’
to have been well aware of this DiftinGtion.
“ This, fays he, viz. laying Evidence be-
“* fore the Mind, is called reaching; the
‘“« Hearer is therefore faid to earn: But if
“ there be not fuch Evidence, then ‘fuch
** teaching is called Perfuafion, and beget-
‘© teth no more in the Hearer, than what is
‘in the Speaker's bare Opinion*.”

- Here then we perceive, that the Confe-.
quences of Eloquence, with regard to fpe+
culative Infiruétion and Inquiry, are of a very’
different Nature from thofe which relate to
Morals and Aétion. ‘To Inftruction or In-
quiry, every Species of Eloquence muft for
ever be an Enemy : For though it may lead:
the Mind to acquiefce in a juft Opinion, yet’

“w See Mr. Hume’s Effay on bi pt x Hobbes
on Hum, Nature.


ee eee


it


30 Effay on RrpicuLe. .
Ess avit leads it to acquiefce upon a falfe Founs
"dation: It puts the Hearer or Reader inthe —
Speaker’s or Writer’s Power: And though

he be fo honeft as to lead him in the Path =

of Truth, yet ftill he leads him bhind-fold,

In this Senfe, and under this Limitation,

Mr. Locxr’s Remark is true: ‘‘ We muft |

** allow thatallthe Art of Rhetoric, befides

**- Order and Clearnefs, all the artificial and

* figurative Application of ‘Words Elo-

‘* quence hath invented, are for nothing elfe

“ but to infinuate wrong Ideas, move the

“* Paffions, and thereby miflead theJudgment,

‘¢ and fo indeed are perfect Cheats %.”

Bur if we regard what is of more Im~
portance to Man, than mere fpeculative
Truth, I mean the praétical Ends of hu-
man Life and moral AGtion; then Elo-
quence aflumes a higher. Nature: Nor
is there, in this practical Senfe, any ne-
ceflary Connexion between moving the.

_ Paffions, and mifleading the Judgment. For
though the Ends of Truth and Perfuafion ©
are then effentially different when the Ora-,
tor ftrikes the Imagination with fictitious
Images, in which Cafe Falfehood becomes
apparent Truth, and Eloquence the Inftru-


Y Locke on Hum. Und,


ment


Effay on Ripicuue. » 31

ment of Deceit ; yet the Ends of PerfuafionS = ¢ T-
and Conviction, Opinion and Knowledge
concur, when fuch Impreffions are made on

the Imagination and Paffions, as confift with

the Diétates of right Reafon, . In this Cafe,
Eloquence comes in to the Aid of Argu-

ment, and impreffes the Truths which Lo-

gic teaches, in a warmer and more effectual
Manner. It paints real Good ‘and Evil in

all the glowing Colours of ' Imagination,

and thus inflames the Heart with double

Ardor to embrace the one, «and reject the

other.

Nay, fo far is Eloquence from being the
univerfal Inftrument of practical Deceit ;
that on the contrary, it fhould feem, the
moral is more natural than the 7mmoral Ap-
plication of it. Becaufe, ere the difhoneft
Application can -take place, Circumftances
muft. be wrefted, and Mifreprefentations
impofed on the Fancy, in Oppofition to
Truth and Reafon: Whereas in the proper
Application, nothing further is neceflary,
than to draw out and impre(s thofe Images
and Analogiesof Things, ame really exift-
in Nature,

Ir may be further obferved, that as Elo-
quence is of a vague, unfteady Nature,

. merely
£L


32 Effay on Ripicue, !
Essa¥merely relative to the Imaginations and’
_"___ Paffions of Mankind; fo. there muft be
_ feveral Orders or Degrees of it; fubordinate
to each other in Dignity, yet each perfec
in their Kind. ‘The common End of each
is Perfuafion: The Means\are different —
according to the various Capacities, Fan-
cies, and. Affections of thofe whom the
Artift attempts to perfuade, The pathetic
Orator, who throws a Congregation of En-
thufiafts into Tears and Groanings, would
raife Affections of a very different Nature,
fhould he attempt to profelyte an Englifh
Parliament: Ason the other hand, the
fineft Speaker that ever commanded she
Houfe, would in vain point the Thunder
of his Eloquence on a Quaker-meeting.
So again, with regard to the Oratory of
the Bar, at a Country Afize (for the higher
Courts of Juftice admit not Eloquence)
itis eafy to obferve, what a different Tour’
the learned Council: takes, in addreffin
himfelf to the fudge or Fury: He is well
aware, that what paffes with the ome for
Argument of Proof, would be derided by
the other as idle Declamation. This Dif-
ference in the Kind, with refpec to the
Eloquence of the Pu/pit, is no lefs remark~
able


Effay on Ripicute. : 33


able in different Countries. Thus the very SF ¢ 7,
agreeable and fenfible VotTarre obferves,

that “ in France (where Reafoning hath lit-
“* tle Connexion with Religion) a Sermonis a
** long Declamation, {fpoken with Rapture
‘© and Enthufiafm: That in Italy (where
 Tafte and Vertu give a Tincture to Super-
“< ftition itfelf) a Sermon is a Kind of de-
“* votional Comedy; That inEngland (where
“ Religion fubmits to Reafon) it is a folid
* Differtation, fometimes a dry one, which
*‘ is read to the Congregation. without
<< Adtion or Elocution’.””. And he juftly
concludes, that the Difcourfe which raifeth '
a French Audience to the higheft Pitch of
Devotion, would throw an Engli/b one into
a Fit of Laughter.

HENCE too, and hence alone, we may
account for a Fact, which, however feem-
ingly improbable, is too well-known to be
doubted of: * That although in France,
** the applauded Pulpit-Eloquence is of the


2 The Paffage in the Original, is thus: ‘¢ Un fermon
‘* en France eft une longue declamation fcrupulufe-
“© ment divifée en trois points, & recitée avec enthou-
“© fiafme. En Angleterre un fermon eft une differtation
‘© folide, et quelquefois feche, qu'un homme lit au peu-
*¢ ple fans gefte, et fans aucune éclat de voix. En Ita-
“ lie ¢’eft une comedie fpirituelle.”


De “© Enthu-


32, Effay on RipicutE,

Essay¥merely relative to the Imaginations and’

1 Paffions of Mankind ;" fo. there muft be

 feveral Orders of Degrees of it; fubordinate

to each other in Dignity, yet each perfect

in their Kind. ‘The common End of each —

is Perfuafion: The Means are different —

according to the various Capacities, Fan-—

cies, and. Affections of thofe whom the

Artift attempts to perfuade, The pathieac

thufiafts into Tears and’ Groanings, would
raife Affections of a very different Nature, —

fhould he attempt to profelyte an Englifh

Parliament: Ason the other hand, the

fineft Speaker that . ever commanded #be

Houfe, would in vain point the Thunder —

of his Eloquence on a Quaker-meeting.

So again, with regard to the Oratory of —

the Bar, ata Country Affize (for the high

Courts of Juftice admit not Eloquence)! —

itis eafy to obferve, what a different Tour’
the learned Council: takes, in  addreffin
himfelf to the fudge or Fury: He is w

aware, that what paffes with the ome for

Argument of Proof, would be derided by

the other as idle Declamation. This Dif-

ference in the Kind, with refpe@ to the

Eloquence of the Pu/pit, is no lefs remark~

able


s


Effay om RIDICULE. 3 33


able in different Countries. Thus the very S = ¢ 7,
agreeable and fenfible Vorrarre obferves,
that “‘ in France (where Reafoning hath lit-
“tle Connexion with Religion) a Sermonis a
** long Declamation, fpoken with Rapture
‘© and Enthufiafm: That in Italy (where
* Jafte and Vertu give a Tinéture to Super=
“< flition itfelf) a Sermon is a Kind of de-
‘* yvotional Comedy: That inExgland (where
© Religion fubmits to Reafon) it is a folid
* Differtation, fometimes a dry one, which
*‘ is read to the Congregation. without
«« Action or Elocution’.””. And he juftly
concludes, that the Difcourfe which raifeth |
a French Audience to the higheft Pitch of
Devotion, would throw an Engli/h one into
a Fit of Laughter.

Hence too, and hence alone, we may
account for a Faét, which, however feem-
ingly improbable, is too well-known to be
doubted of: “ That although in France,
** the applauded Pulpit-Eloquence is of the


”


* The Paffage in the Original, is thus: ‘¢ Un fermon
‘* en France eft une longue declamation ferupulule-
‘* ment divifée en trois points, & recitée ayec enthou-
“© fiafme, En Angleterre un fermon eft une differtation
“© folide, et quelguefois feche, qu'un homme lit au peu-
‘¢ ple fans gefte, et fans aucune éclat de voix. En Ita-
* lie c’eft une comedie fpirituelle.”


Dr: “° Enthu-


| Essarte Enthufaflic, in England of the fevere and


_Effay on Rivicote.


“« rational Species ; yet the Tafte of at
“ two Nations in Tragedy or Theatrical

S¢ Eloquence, is mutually reverfed: The 4
 Englifh are enthufiaftic ; the French fe-
«© vere and rational.” Now, though this
Fact may carry the Appearance of Self


down, the known Circumftances of the two ;
Kingdoms, will explain it {ufficiently. | rh re S
England, a general Spirit of Reafoning and
Enquiry hath extinguifhed the natural En- _
thufiafms of the human Mind in religious _

Subjects; while our unreftrained Warmth |

of Imagination, and habitual Reverence for -
the noble Irregularities of SHAKESPEAR,
‘concur to make us defpife the rigid Laws
of the Stage: On the contrary, in France, —
the Severities of the Academy have utterly

quenched the high Tragic Spirit ; while, as -
yet, religious Criticifm hath made but little 1 : 2
Progrefs among the Subjects of the mgt
Chriftian King. Nad.
In further Proof of this Principle, we
‘may appeal to ancient Fact: To the Pro-
grefs of Eloquence in Greece. There we
find, it firft appeared, decked in all the glow-
ing Colours of Poetry: afterwards, in an
‘ Age


st, ae
é
<9!
~


Re, ay


_ Effay on Rivicure. 35
‘Age of more polifhed Manners and exten-S & ¢ rT.
five Knowledge, when the Rhetors at- ed
tempted to carry this Kind of Eloquence to
a fill higher Degree, they found the Times
would not bear it: ‘They were baflled in
their Attempt. As fucceeding Ages grew
more knowing, they grew more faftidious
and refined: The Orators were obliged
gradually to lower and bring down Elo-
quence from its high Standard : “Till at
length it gained a Form and Character en-
tirely new, as we find it in XENoPHON’s
chaftifed Manner of tic Elegance*.
To conclude with one Proof more in Fa-
vour of this Principle. It appears that thefe
different Kinds were acknowledged fuffici-
ently in ancient Rome; though the true
Diftinétion between them feems not to
have been thoroughly perceived, unlefs by
Tutty himfelf. The corre&t and Attic
Species having gained a Number of Ad-
mirers under the Patronage of SaLtust,
who firft encouraged it in Rome, many


* See the Paflage quoted above from Strabo, p. 22.

a

* Sic Salluftio vigente, amputatz fententiz, et verba
ante expectatum cadentia, et obfcura brevitas, fuere
- cultu. Senec, Epi/?,


D2 were


* 2
s- 8 €
~ -


36 -Effay on iepieon? ae
“Ess av were the Debates ‘eoncerning the ne ior
1. Force and Propriety of this or the ‘more i
‘elevated Manner. The Patrons of the Bit
- Style derided Crcero, as being loofé, tumid, —
and exuberant: On the contrary, he tc
had his Partizans, who defpifed the clits ty
and correct Species, as void of Energy and
Power‘. Thus by overlooking the relative
Nature of Eloquence, they mutually fell
into an Extreme; both forgetting that ci-
ther of thefe Kinds might be of fuperior
Propriety and Force, according to the Ima-
' ginations, Paffions, and Capacities of thofe
to whom they fhould be applied. But» ine
TuLty, with a fuperior Sagacity, faw clears K
ly where the true Diftinétion lay: For, 2%
fpeaking of Cazvus, a Patronizer of the — Rae

_ Attic Manner, he fays, ‘ Hence his Elo-
“* quence gained a high Reputation among —


“ the Learned and Attentive; but among — te
| hem. be


« Conftat nec Ciceroni quidem obtretatares defuifle, >
quibus inflatus et tumens, nec fatis preflus, fupra mo- — has ad
dum exultans, et fuperfluens, et parum Atticus videre-_ pe e & as
tur. Dialog. apud Tacit.

4 Mihi falli multum videntur, qui folos effe Atticos
credunt tenues et lucidos et fignificantes, fed qua- #
dam eloquentiz frugalitate contentos, ac manum
femper intra pallium continentes. Quintil.


< the


- Effay. on ‘Ruvicute. “87
“$8 the Vulgar, for whom Eloquence. ahaa ECT:
dies «“ chiefly formed, it was of no Efteem*.” set
Now among thefe feveral Kinds of Elo-

) quence, Juttnefs of Thought and Expreffion,
Atriking Figures, Argument adorned with
every pathetic Grace, are the Characters of
the higheff: Sophiftry and Buffoonry, am-
biguous and difhoneft Hints, coarfe Lan-
guage, falfe and indecent Images, are the
Characters of the /oweff. Between thefe
two Extremes, there lies a Variety of inter-

mediate Kinds, each afcending towards the
higheft, in proportion as they abound with
its: proper Characters. . For as the Imagi-
nation and Paffions are then, moft refined
and juft, when they bear to the fame Point
with Reafon; fo, that Species of Eloquence
is the nobleft which tends to conduct them
thither‘, .On this Principle, and on this


* Sed ad Calvum revertamur—ejus oratio, nimia re-

4 ligione attenuata, doétis et attente audientibus erat il-

juftris ; a multitudine autem et a-foro, cui nata elo-
_quentia eft, devorabatur. In Brut.

Les Egyptiens comparoient ceux qui preférent leco-
Joris au deffein dans la peinture, a ceux qui en matiere
d’éloquence et de poefie preférent les penfées brillantes
aux penfées juftes. »Ciceron, le maitre et le modelede
Véloquence latine, a dit en appliquant fa refle&tion a
Yorateur, que nous laiffons bientét des Tableaux qui
nous attirent d’abord par la force du coloris; au lieu que


D 3 alone,


ae = = ce: jphiareds
Ess exalone Schad Prodieytnat


determine the comparative Excellence and
’ Dignity of thofe who afpire tothe Palm: of as


ie AL On this renee it — e “


Tuus we are at length arrived at the ©
Poirit where Eloquence and Argument, ©
Perfuafion and Conviction unite; wherethe _
Orator’s Art becomes fabfervient tothe In-
terefts of Truth, and only labours to a ag

‘and recommend Her.


We now come to the third Species of. ps *


Compofition, that of Argument : Which


applying folely tothe Reafon of Man, and


to the Proof or Inveftigation of Truth, is


of a more fimple and uncompounded Na- — A :
ture in its Principles, and therefore needs


not to be fo particularly explained. For —
Pleafure being the primary End of Poetry, _
and Perfuafion that of Eloquence, the real
Nature of Things is often in part difguifed,
and compelled to bend to the Imagination


nous revenons toujours 4 ceux qui excellent par la beauté
du deffein, qui eft le vrai caraétere de V’antique. Se-
thos, \. ii. p. 80.

& See Dr, Swift’s Letter to a young Clergyman


f and


-


Effay on RIDICULE.


| oa
_ and the Paftions: But Truth being the End $= ¢ r.
of Argument, the varying Colours of Ima-__
- gination and Paffion muft be drawn off ;
and human Reafon itfelf bend to the real,
uniform Nature of Things.
Yet on this Occafion it may be proper
to remark, that the rational Faculty in Man
cannot be comprehenfive or perfect in its.
Operations, without a Union with a frong
Imagination. And this, not only in the Arts
of Poetry or Eloquence, but in the /evere/
Inveftigations of Truth. . For Reafon alone
cannot fearch out new Ideas, but only com-
pare and diftinguith thofe which Senfe and.
Imagination prefent to her ; and the Senfes
being of {mall Extent, Imagination is there-
fore the great univerfal Inftrument of hu-
man Knowledge and human Action. With-
out the Aids of Imagination therefore Rea-
fon works in a contracted Sphere being
deftitute of Materials ; unable to make the
neceflary Excurfions into the Immentfity of
Nature; and wanting that Power which
alone can range through the whole Extent
of created Being, and bring home all the
poffible and apparent Analogies of Things,
-fetting them before her difcerning Eye, and
fubmitting them. to her fovereign Appro-
D 4 bation


46 | - Bifay on Rioicvinl


E's sa - adiide Diflike. From this noble Union

/ arifes that Boundlef; Penetration, which fo >
far furpafleth mereYudgment: and whichjac-
cording as it is exerted in Poetry, Eloquence,
Philofophy, Morals, or Religion, ftrikes into
the various and untrodden Paths of Nature-
and Truth; forms the diftinguifhed Names
of Hissin, SHAkeEspEaR, Mitton, De- _

_ MOSTHENES, TuLty, ARIsToTLE, BAcon,
Locke, Baye, Pascat, NEwTon,
Hooker, BERKLEY, WARBURTON, giving. .
that effential Superiority and Preheminence,
which hath ever been, firft the Envy, aud wee
then the Admiration of Mankind. ra

Tus as it appeared above, how neceial ;
the Reftraints of Reafon are, to the Per- —
fe€tion of Works of Imagination ; fo here
it is evident, that a full Union of Imagi-

~ nation is neceflary to the perfect Operations
of Reafon. Taken fingly, they are each -
defective : When their Powers are jaae 5
they conftitute TRuz Genrvs.

But, however requifite the Force of Ima-
gination may be, to the Perfection of Rea-
fon and the Production of true Genius, yet
ftill Reafon remains the fuperior and cor-
rective Power: Therefore every Repre- —
fentation of Poetry or Eloquence, which

only


Te aes


Effay on Ripicutz.


4u


only apply to. the Fancy and Affedtions, ECT.


mutt finally be examined and decided upon,"


_ mutt be tried, rejeéted, or received, as the


reafoning Faculty thall determine.
_ Anp thus Reason alone is the Detedfer


of Falfebood, and the Tust or TRurn.


SECTION IV.


H E_who would judge aright of theSr er,


Proportions’ of a fpacious Dome, muft not


‘creep from one Corner to another by the


Help of a glimmering Taper, but rather
light up a central Branch, which may illu-
minate the whole. By doing fomething
like this in our Remarks on the three
different Kinds of Compofitions, we have
enabled the intelligent Reader to fee with
eafe: ‘* That Wit, Raillery, and Ridicule,
‘* in every Shape they can poffibly affume,
** are no other than fo many Species of
** Poetry or Eloquence.”

Pure Wit, when not applied to the Cha-
racters of Men, is properly a Species of Poe-
try. It amufes and delights the Imagi-
nation by thofe fudden Affemblages and
pleafing Pi@ures of Things which it creates:
and from every common : Occafion ean raife

fach


IV.


4r |“ Effey on Rinicocas. a
Bea vfuch Asiking Appearances, as throw hie te
moft phlegmatic Tempers intoaConvulfion
of good-humoured Mirth, and unde fgning bie :
Laughter. a

But Ridicule or siRaillrys iwtcheid pve is
Subject of our Inquiry, hatha further Scope
and Intention. It folely regards the Opi-
nions, Paffions, Actions, and Charaéters of
Men: and may properly be denominated
*¢ that Species of Writing which excites
Contempt with Laughter.” :

STILL more particularly we may ob-
ferve, that as Eloquence in general is but =
the Application of Poetry to the End of =
Perfuafion, fo Ridicule in ‘particular is no a, ge
more than the Application of that particu-
lar Species of Poetry called Wit, to the fame-
End of Perfuafion. It tends to exciteCon=
tempt, in the fame Manner as the other’
Modes of Eloquence raife Love, Pity, Ter-
ror, Rage, or Hatred, intheHeart of Man.

Now, that Contempt which certainOb- _
jects raife in the Mind, is a particular Mode —
of Pafion. ‘The Objects of this Paffion are:
apparent Fal/ehood, Incongruity, Impropriety,
or Turpitude of certain Kinds. But as the
Obje& of every excited Paffion muft be
examined by Reafon ere we can determine.

RA whether


oe :
a :


MRSS a 2b laa al


Effay on Rivicute,


43


whether it be proper or improper, real orS # ¢ T-


fictitious; fo, every Obje& that excites"


Contempt muft fall under this general Rule,
Thus, before it can be determined whether
our Contempt be ju/?, Reafon alone muft


__ examineCircumftances, feparate Ideas, diftin-


guifh Truth from its Appearances, decide
upon, reftrain, and correct the Paffon.

Tuus Ridicule is no other than a Species
of Eloquence: and accordingly we find it
mentioned and exprefsly treated as fuch, by
the beft Writers of Antiquity. ArrstTo-
TLE, asin every Subject, leads the Way.’
“« As Ridicule feems to be of fome Ufe in
** pleading, it was the Opinion of Gorcras,
** that you ought to confound your Adver-+
* fary’s ferious Argument by Raillery, and
“ his Razllery by ferious Argument. And
* he judged well®.”” Here he firft gives
the Sentiments of a Sage; and then con-
firms them by his own Authority.

To offer all that Tutty hath faid upon
the Subject of Ridicule, would be to tranf-
cribe a confiderable Part of his fecond Book


* wees Je toy yeroruv, exerdy river doxer Konow every
ev tos aywor, xr dav Dy Topyias ryv ev omovdyy
JiaPbegev tov evavisov yerali, tov de yerwle omoudy*


oebws Aeyor. Arift. Rbet. 1. iii. c.18.
De


«


aa a)


4A Effay om Ripicure.
_ Essay De Oratore. After having gone through fe- ~
ek veral Topics of Rhetoric, he comes at
3 length to thisof Ridicule: and aflignsto the
elder Cresar the Tafk of explaining thes ;
Force and Application of this. Art. In


Courde of his eee on this Subjed, ;


of Eloquence j ” adly, That certain Kinds :
of Turpitude or Incongruity are its proper
Object *....3d/, That the Orator muft be
temperate in the Application of it}. 4thly, — (es
That its Force may confift either in Thought
or Expreffion, but that its PerfeCtion lies ipo
a Union of both™ And laftly, That af


i Eftantem plane oratoris movere rifum—Res nite)
po argumentis dilui non facile eft, joco, rifuque diflol


mt Locus autem et regio quafi ridiculi, turpitudine. qua-
dam et deformitate continetur.—Nec infignis improbi-_
tas et fcelere junéta, nec rurfus miferia infignis agitata
ridetur.—Quamobrem materies omnis ridiculorum eft —
in iftis vitiis, qua neque odio magno, nec mifericor-
dia maxima digna funt.
* In quo, non modo illud precipitur, ne quid infulfe ;
fed etiam, fi quid perridicule poflis: vitandum eft ora-.
' tori utrumque, ne aut f{currilis jocus fit, aut mimicus.
~ ™ Duo funt genera facetiarum, quorum alterum re-
traGtatur, alterum di&to.—Nam quod quibufcunque
verbis dixeris, facetum tamen eft, re continetur : quod,
mutatis verbis, falem amittit, in verbis habet leporem at)
omnem.—maxime autem homines deleétari, fi quando ;
rifus conjun&e, re, verboque moveatur,


ter


Se ee a


—S


Effay on Rubicure. 45
ter all, it is but the loweft Kind of Elo-S ot
quence ”. ;


QuinTittan builds chiefly on TULLY,
when he treats of Ridicule in the fixth
Book of his Inftitutions. He too confiders
it as a Branch of Eloquence, and gives
Rules for its Efficacy and Reftraint°.

Now, in confequence of thefe Proofs, @
few Obfervations will naturally arife with
regard to Ridicule in particular, fimilar to
thofe which were made in the laft Section,
-upon Eloquence in general.

As firft: Ridicule muft render every Pro-
pofition it fupports apparently true, ere it
can be received and acquiefced in. Thus
every Opinion which Ridicule inftills, tho’
it be the pure Refult of certain Images im-
preffed on the Imagination, by which the
~ Paffion of Contempt is excited, is always


n Eft, mea fententia, vel tenuiffimus ingenii fru@ius,
De Oratore, 1. ii. paffim.

° Rifumjudicis movendo, et illos triftes folvit affeftus,
et animum ab intentione rerum frequenter avertit: et
aliquando etiam reficit, & a fatietate vel a fatigatione re-
novat.—Habet enim, ut Cicero dicit, fedem in deformi-
tate aliqua et turpitudine.—Rerum autem fepe, ut
dixi, maximarum momenta vertit, cum odium iram-
que frequentifiime frangat.—Ea que dicit vir bonus,
omnia falva dignitate ac verecundia dicet: nimium
enim rifus pretium eft, fi probitatis impendio conftat.


Quint. Jf, kevia
regarded


~ . «


received sihy the Mind as Truth. peers a
ae, offering apparent Truth, Ridicule gains
its End of Perfuafion. ae
AGAIN, it may be obferved, that ‘the es
Confequences of Ridicule with Regard to —
fpeculative Inftruction or Inquiry, are ofa
very different Nature from thofe which re-
‘fate to Morals and A@ion. To the firft it. ; ?
muft ever be an Enemy: But to the latter
it may bean Enemy or Friend according as

it is fairly or difhoneftly applied: It comes —
in to the Aid of Argument, when its Im-
preffions on the Imagination and Paffions
are confiftent with the real Nature of
Things : When it ftrikes the Fancy and Af-
fetions with fictitious Images, it becomes
the Inftrument of Deceit. © 2
_ Tuus Ridiculemay befriendeither Truth
or Falfehood; and as it is morally or im-—
morally applied, may illuftrate the one, or —
difguife the other. Yet it fhould feem, that —
the moral is more natural, than the immo-
ral Application of Ridicule ; inafmuch as —
Truth is more congenial to the Mind than
Falfehood, and fo the real more eatfily
made apparent, than the fidfitious Images

of Things.

RIDICULE,


Bina
2


t


SSS
ae ies


ae fn


ee


ee ? —
a r +


* — Effay on Rivicure.


47


Ruorcuts, therefore, being of a vague, 5 £ cr.


unfteady Nature, merely relative to the
Imaginations and Paffions of Mankind,
there muft be feveral Orders or Degrees of


it, fuited to the Fancies and Capacities of


thofe whom the Artift attempts to influence.


Among thefe feveral Kinds of Ridicule, .
Juftnefs of Thought and Expreffion, adorn-


ed with ftriking Figures, is the bighe/f:


Coarfe Language, Buftoonry, falfe and inde-


cent Images, are the Characters of the /ow-
eft. For as the Imagination and Paffions
are then moft refined and juft, when they


‘bear to the fame Point with Reafon; fo,


the fpecies of Ridicule is moft genuine
which tends to conduc them thither.
But, however Ridicule may imprefs
the Idea of apparent ‘Turpitude or Falfe-
hood on the Imagination ;. yet ftill Reafon
remains the fuperior and corrective Power.


‘Therefore, every Reprefentation of Ridi-
‘cule, which only- applies to the Fancy and
-AffeCtions, mutt fizally be examined and de-
cided upon, mutt be tried, rejected, or receiv=
ed, as the reafoning Faculty thall determine.


Anp thus Ridicule can never be a De-
tector of Falfehood, or a Teft of Truth,


SEC T-


48 Effay on Ripicure.


Essay
I


PA bee “SECTION V.


Sect. IN further Confirmation of thefeTruths, °
V. _ the direét Proofs of which may poffibly lie
fomewhat remote from common Appre-
henfion, let us appeal to Experience ; to the
general Senfe and Practice of Mankind.
And here we fhall find, that Contempt and
Ridicule are always founded on preconceived
Opinion, whatever be the Foundation of it,
whether Reafon or Imagination, Truth or
Falfehood.

For in fact, do not we fee every diffe
rent Party and Affociation of Men defpifing
and deriding each other according to their
various Manner of Thought, Speech, and
Aétion? Does not the Courtier deride the
Fox-hunter, and the Fox-hunter. the Cour-
tier? What is more ridiculous to a Beau,
than a Philofopher: to a Philofopher than
a Beau? Derunkards are the Jeft of fober
Men, and fober Men of Drunkards. Phy- .
ficians, Lawyers, Soldiers, Priefis, and Free-
thinkers, are the ftanding Subjects of Ridi-
cule, tooneanother. Wifdom and Folly, —
the Virtuous and the Vile, the Learned and
Ignorant, the Temperate and Debauched,

i all


— Effay on Rivicute. 49
all give and return the Jeft. According to $ ~ Te
the various Impreflions of Fancy and Af-_ "4
fection, the Afpeéts of Things are varied ;

and confequently the fame Objects feen un
der thefe different Lights and Attitudes,
‘muft in one Mind produce Approbation, in
another Contempt. iS
Ir we examine the Condud of political
Bodies or religious Seéts,we fhall find it of a
fimilar Nature. Each of thefe razily every
other, according to the Prejudices they have
imbibed in Favour of their own Syftem:
How contemptible and ridiculous are the
European Forms of Government, in the
Eyes of an Afatic’? And do not we on
this Side the Helle/pont repay them in their
own Kind? Are we a whit more united
among ourfelves in our Ideas of the Ridi=
culous, when applied to Modes of Empire?
What is more contemptible to an Englifh-
man, than that flavifh Submiffion to arbi-
trary Will and lawlefs Power, which pres
 vails almoft univerfally on the Continent ?
And they are little acquainted with the State °


4% A Venetian was introduced to the King of Pegu :
When this Prince was informed by him, thatthe Venes.
tians had no King, he laughed fo exceflively, that he loft
his Breath, and could not {peak for a good While.
Recueil des Voyages, Fc. F f

1.


Ca had


50


es Yof Affairs abroad, who know not that,


Effay on Ripicuug.


———-—Within the Precin&ts of Tyranny, Engl
Freedom is one of the commoneft Topics of
Raillery and Ridicule: Every Man’s judg-


ing for himfelf, is the Subject of the French-
man’s Drollery : One Man’s judging for ail,


is the fubject of ours: The Cafe is parallel
with regard to religious Tenets,where Peo-


ple are at Liberty to fpeak. their Thoughts.


Is there any Species of Inveétive which the
Church of Rome hath not exercifed upon all
who have diffented from its Meafures? And
have not the Divines of the reformed
Churches been as arrant Drolles, in Vindi-
cation of their refpective Syftems? What
Ribaldry and coarfeBanter hath been thrown
(nay rather, what hath not been thrown) by
the Freetbinkers, on Religion and Chriftia-
nity? And how bafely have fome of our
Divines proftituted their Pens in former


Days, by defcending tothe fame dirty Le-
_ vel? Even the Sourenefs of Puritanifm, nay,


the Sullennefs of Qyakeri/m have fometimes


' relaxed, and yielded themfelves up to the
Love of Yoking: And fly Hints, in demure.


Phrafe and fober Countenance, have as
plainly fpoken their Contempt of thofe they
pitied, as the loud Laughter and Grimace

of


tiie aie Maeno ’
y
:


armas
7


ih Saale ied Seed hel


_ Effay on Rivreute.


of Woitaly Men, the Difdain of thofe they § i T.


profefs to hate.
But what need we wonder that a Diffe-


_ rence of Opinion in fuch weighty Affairs as


thofe of Government and Religion fhould
infpire a mutual Contempt, when we fee
that any confiderable Variation of Manners
in the moft ordinary Circumftances of Life
has the fame Effe&t? The Cuftoms of an-
cient Times have been’ held fo ridiculous
by many Moderns,that honeft Homer hath
been branded as a Dunce, only becaufe he
hath recorded them. What Raillery hath
been thrown on the venerable Bard, as well
as the Hero he defcribes, only becaufe he
hath told us, that PArRoctus acted in the
Capacity of Cook for himfelf, and his Friend
Achilles’: That the Princefs Nauficaa, fol-
lowed by all her Maids, went down to
wath the King’s and Queen’s Cloaths along
with her own *? Rebecca and her Hijforian *
have fallén under the fame ignorant Cen-
fure, becaufe fhe went down fo draw Wa-
ter: And fo have the Daughters of Au-
cusTus,for {pinning their Father’s Cloaths,


4 Th * Ody/f. s Genefis,
E 2


when


-


sz —s Efay ow Ruvicute. m
Essay when he was Mafter of the World. Thus __
I. ‘the undebauched Simplicity of ancient |
Times, becomes the Jeft of modern Luxury
and Folly. From the fame Principle, any.
new Mode of Speech or Action, feen in our
_own Times,appears ridiculous to thofe who.
give Way to the Sallies of uninformed Con-
tempt and Laughter. » What fuperior Airs
of Mirth and Gayety may be feen ina Club
_ of Citizens,pafling Judgment on the Scotch,
the Weffern, or any other remote provincial
_ Dialeét?- while at the other End of the
Town, the Stream of Ridicule runs as ftrong
on the Manners and Dialect of the Ex-
change. ‘The leaft unufual Circumftance
of Habit, beyond what the Fafhion pre-
{cribes, is by turns fo fenfibly ridiculous, —
_ that one half ofthe Expence of Drefsfeems
_ to confift in accommodating it to the Dic-
tates and Caprice of the current Opinion.
Nay, it is a juft Complaint of the greateft
Tragic Poet of the Age, that this indulged ©
Spirit of Ridicule is a fundamental Ob-
_ ftruction tothe Improvement of the French
_ Theatre. ‘ We dare not, fays he, ha- —
“* zard any thing new upon the Stage, in
4 ‘ the Prefence of a People whofe conftant
*« Practice


Effay on Rivicute. 53.


« Practice is, fo ridicule every thing that is Suc.
* not fa, afbionable *. ae x
NEITHER is the Tafte of Mankind lefs
€apricious with regard to the Methods of
Ridicule’, than the Objets of it. How
many Sayings and Repartées are recorded
from Antiquity as the Quinteflence of Rail-
ery, which among us only raife'a Laugh,
becaufe they are infpid? Tutty himfelf
often attempts in vain to extort a Smile
- from his modern Reader. Even the
fales Plautini have in great Meafure loft
their Pozgnancy. ‘There is a certain Mode
of Ridicule peculiar to every Age and
Country. What a curious Contraft to each
other are an Italian and a Dutch Buffoon?
And I fuppofe the Raillery of a French and
a Ruffian Drole areas different, as the nim-
ble Pranks ofa Monkey, from the rude Gam-
bols of a Bear. Even the fame Countiy
hath numerous Subdivifions and under


|


i Nous craignons de hazarder fur la fcene de f{pecta-
eles nouveaux devant une nation accoutumée a tourner
en ridicule tout ce qui n’eft pas d’U/fage. Voltaire,
Difes Jur la Trag.

Y Quznam tandem in loquendo, aut in fcribendo,
quafi titiHatione rifum laceflunt ? diétum unum, autal-
terum : brevicula narratio: nonnihil repentinum, et
fortuitum, et recens, et novitate fua primum. Vavaflor,
De ludicra diétione.


E 3 Species


g4 : Effay ow RipICULE.


: pines Species of Ridicule. What is high Hu= ; :
~ mour at Wapping, i is rejected as naufeousin


~ the City: What is delicate Raillery in
the City, grows coarfe and intolerable as you
approach Sz. fames'’s: And many a well
meant Joke,that pafleth unheeded in all thefe
various Diftri¢ts, would fet an innocent
Country Village in an Uproar of Laugh-
‘ter.
_ Tuts Subjet might be much enlarged
on: For the Modes and Objects of Ridi-
cule are as indefinite as the imagined Com-
binations of Things, But from thefe Ex- _
amples drawn from the Conduct of Parti-
culars, it appears no lefs than from the ge-
neral Nature and Faculties of Man, that
Ridicule hath no other Source than Imagi- _
nation, Paffion, Prejudice, and preconceived —
Opinion : And therefore can never be the
Deteétor of Falfebood, or Teft of Truth.


SECTION. VL


“See n THE Caufe might be fafely refted here.


VI. Yet, to throw a ftill clearer Light on the
SubjeQ of our Enquiry, let usnow examine
what his Lordfhip hath advanced in Sup-
port of his new Method of Inveftigation.

And


y


_-Effay on Rivreure.
And as the noble Writer hath not thought
it expedient to defcend often to the argu-


of what we find in him that Rizk like a
Reafon.

He tells his Friend, that “ acainaes is ri-
*« diculous except what is deformed; nor is
* any thing Proof againft Raillery, except
“* what is handfome and juft :---one may


_€ defy the World to turn real Bravery and


“ Generofity into Ridicule... A Man mutt
“ be foundly ridiculous, who, with all the
“* Wit imaginable, would go about to ridi-
“ cule Wifdom, or laugh at Honefty or
** good Manners ¥.”


Son


Fro ictiens > .


mentative Way ; we muft make the moft »


2


Here we have a Mixture of equivocal:


Language and pompous Declamation. If
he means to affert, that “ nothing is ridicu-
* lous, except what is apparently deform-
* ed,” the. Propofition is true, but foreign
to the purpofe: Becaufe, through the Er-
ror of Imagination, Things apparently de-
Sormed may be really beautiful. If he means
to affert,that “‘ nothing can be made to ap-
“pear ridiculous, but what is really de-
“* formed,” I fhould be glad to know where
the noble Author had converfed: In the
- © Vol. i. p. 128, 129, :
E 4 Platoni¢


6. > Effay om RiDIcuLE. fe
Eas: 4 ¥ Platonic Republic, it may be fo: But, in our
~-__— Gothic Syftems, Matters go quite otherwife ;_
Levi © far as common Obfervation reaches, itis —
eafieft of all Things to make that appear rie
diculous, which is not really deformed :
And how fhould it be otherwife, while the
human Imagination is liable to be impofed
on, and capable of receiving ae fon
real Reprefentations.
Tue noble Author tells us nents hos . }
* nothing is Proof againft Raillery, except _
5° what is handfome and juft.”---No indeed,
nor that neither, at all Times. Though it
be true, that nothing of the oppofite Kind
is proof againft Raillery ; yet fure it is a
ftrange Miftake to imagine, that what is
really handfome and juft is always Proof a-
gainft it. For, by fictitious Images im-
prefied on the Fancy, what is really hand=
fome and juft, is often rendered apparently _
falfe and deformed ; andthusbecomes ac-
tually contemptible and ridiculous. es
Bur “ one may defy the World to turn ©
** real Bravery and Generofity into Ridi-
* cule.” True, my Lord; while they
retain their native Appearance, and Beauty
ef Proportion. But alas, how eafy is it to
: difgui @ them! It is but concealing, varying,
et


Effay on Rivicute. 57

or adding a Circumftance that may ftrike SE¢T+# _
the Fancy, and they at once aflume new __—"_,
Shapes, new Names, and Natures. Thus :
the Virtues, which, feen in a dire& Light,
} attract our Admiration by their Beauty;
when beheldthrough the oblique Mediums
k: of Ridicule ftart up in the Forms of Ideots,
| Hags, and Monflers.

Bur the noble Writer enforces thefe ge-
neral Appeals to Fact, by one extraordinary
Inftance. He tells us, ‘“‘ The divineft Man
“© who had ever appeared in the Heathen
*¢ World,was in the Height of witty Times,
* and by the wittieft of all Poets, moft
*‘ abominably ridiculed, in a whole Co-
** medy writ and acted on Purpofe: But
** fo far was this from finking his Repu-
* tation, or fupprefiing his Philofophy, that
*¢ they each increafed the more for it *.” It
muft be owned, this.is an extraordinary Af-

.! fertion, unlefs he means to affirm, that the
Reputation and Philofophy of SocraTEs
arofe from his Blood,as “‘ the Chriffian Se&
*« {prung from the Blood of Martyrs’.”’ For
it appears from all the Records of Antiquity,
that the Wit of ArisropHanes was the
moft formidable Enemy that ever attacked


* Vol. i, p. 31. ¥ Vol. i.


si ada aaa >--- =
r :


a


errr


the


ie 2 i 2 A ee


58 ' Effay spon eieee
Essay the divine Philofopher: This whetted che
=. Rage of a mifled Multitude, and dragged to
Death that Virtue which hath ever fince
been the Admiration of Mankind. In this —
Opinion, we have the Concurrence of the
firft Writer of the prefent Age*: And the
Confeffion of another, who although of a
Turn conceited and fantaftical enough, is
yet of unqueftioned Credit for his Inge-
nuity and Learning. This Writer, fpeak-—
ing of the wild Wit ofan ARIsTOPHANES,
tells us, that “ the Comedy infcribed The
“ Clouds, is an execrable Attempt to ex-
** pofe one of the wifeft and beft of Men
«© to the Fury and Contempt of a lewd
“© Multitude, in which it iis but foo much
“ec “© Succe/s*. oe
Tis true PALMERIUs, a visenea French
Critic of the laft Age, had from the Num-
‘ber of Years between the acting The Clouds
of ArisTopHANEs, and the Death of So-
CRATES, pretended that EL1AN was mif-
taken in affigning this Play as one of the
principal Caufes of his Deftruction. P.
Brumoy,who hath wrote fo excellently of
the Greek Theatre, after having examined


* Ded. to the Div. Leg. of Mafes, p. 20. * Letters
on Mythology, p. 262.
the.


‘ te ,


~ Effay on RIDICULE.


59


the Affair with the utmoft Candour, con- Sec 9:


cludes thus: ‘ His Account (AEr1An’s)


_  feems only defective, in that he hath not


‘* remarked the long Interval that paffed be-
*< tween the Reprefentation of The Clouds,
*“ and the Condemnation of SocraTes.
** But although the Comedy did not give
“ the finifhing Stroke to SocraTss ; yet it
** might have indifpofed the Minds of the
« People, fince thefe comic Accufations be-


“ came very ferious ones, which at length


** deftroyed the wifeft of the Greeks>.”
But fince the noble Author feems to have
adopted the other Opinion, and,as I am told,
fome fhallow Mimics of modern Platonifm
have lately ftolen Patmertius’s Criticifm,
and revived this ftale Pretence, of the Num-
ber of Years between the Reprefentation of
The Clouds, and the Death of Socrates;
it may be neceffary to tranfcribe the follow-
ing Paflage from Piato’s Apology, which
puts the Matter beyond all Doubt : “ But it


» Son recit ne femble defectueux que pour n’avoir pas
marqué le long intervalle qui fe pafla entre la reprefen-
tation des Nuees, et la condemnation de Socrate. Con-
cluons que, bien que fa comedie n’ait pas porté le der-
ier coup a Socrate, elle a pu indifpofer les efprits, puif-


«gue les accufations comiques devinrent des accufations


tres ferieufes, qui perdirentenfiule plus fage des Grécs.
‘Tom. v. p. 360.
“ is


°
’


60 Effay ov Rivicute:
Essay “ is juft, O Athenians, that I -fhould firft
I & reply to the: falfe Charge of my First
** AccuseRs. Becaufe feveral laid their

“ groundlefs Accufations againft me, MANY
* Years Aco: whom I pREAD MoREthan
*« the Adberents of ANyTus ; though thefe -

“‘too be very powerful in Perfuafion: But

* thofe are ftill more powerful,who have pof-

“ fefled andfway’d you FROM Your VERY IN-

“ paANcy, in laying falfe Accufations againft
“« me. Many, indeed, have been thefe my

* Accufers, and LONG HAVE THEY CON-

“* TINUED thus to accufe me, and perfuaded

“* and mifled you atthat EARLY AGE, when

“< you were MOST EASY OF BELIEF: While

** J, in the mean Time, was without one

** Defender. And what is worft ofall, I

*< know not fo much as their very Names,

“© except only that of THE CoMEDIAN.—-

“* What then do my Accufers fay ?---So-

** CRATES is criminal, in that he enquires

*“ too curioufly concerning what is under
‘* the Earth, and in the Heavens, and in.

“< that he can make the worfe appear the

** better Reafon; and that he teaches thefe

** Things to others. Such then is the Ac-

* cufation: For fuch Things you faw in

© ARI~


Effay m Rivicute.


¢ ARISTOPHANES’s ComEDy, where aSecrT-
“ fi€titious SocraTEs 7s carried about, af- be
firming, that he takes Journeys through


* the Air,and talking much more idle Stuff
** of the fame Nature ‘.”

Here we fee,thePhilofopher refers their
Accufation to its original Caufe: And this


_ he pofitively affirms, was no other than the


old impreffions made againft him on the


© Tlewroy pev ov dinaios ers amorolnc actos, w ovdees
Abyvaior, weos ta mewra ps Levdy xalylognmevas not
wees Tus mews xalylogous’—cu0v yae woos Kolly-
yoco yeyovacs Wes vas, Has DHA WorAAw 04 ETN
xasovdey adnybes Asyovres’ ovs eye uaraovy Qoboujras #
Tos auds Avurov, xoumee ovTas nou ToUTOUS desyous*
GAA’ Exesvos desvolegor, w aWees, OF UMW seus mOAAOUE
&% mouduv macgrapavortes, emettoy exon naTnyoooUy
euovovdev aayles’ emerta eros ovTos osxalyyopos oAAGl,
nox moruy 04 xeovov xalyloeyncles* cede ev rauln tq


adincee Aslovles eos Ywac, evn av Parise EmisevcaTe,


masdes ovles evsor vuwv nai prewoxin aleyvas, sonny
xclyfogouvres, amoncloupevovovdeves’ o de marlav whoye-
Tallov, Ols ovde ree ovopcila osoy te cwluv esdevarsnors ermrenv*
BAny eilis napodomoros tuly,cver cov.—zs de Aslovles due-
Cadrarcy ordiabarAcvresi——Luxedilys adiner, xr megiegia~


L Cero Cnr wy TH TE UM YN Kos TH ETOVeKVIE” KaL TOV


ntl Aolov neers] Woy’ neck BAAS Tavle dsdacnmv'


mcury Tis est. Tolle yop swecle nar cures ey 7H
_ AessoQavovs xopwdser, Laxegrtny tive exer megaPego-
POV, DaTKaVTE re.azeoCarev, nos QAAKY WoAAgY QAVA-


esav Davagowra. Plat. Apol, Soc,
‘Minds


62 =e
Essay Minds of the Athenians, by the Comedy of
L d 1? ; 3

_Tue Croups *.


_ Effay on Ripicure. ©


So much for the Silencing, which is the
only Conviction, of Obftinacy and Igno-
rance. But in Reality, it is a Matter of
fmall Confequence, in the prefent Queftion,
Whether the Ridicule of the comic Poet
was in Fact deftrictive to the divine Philo-
fopher or not. As it demonftrably was,
it is therefore a Cafe in Point. However, .
fuppofe it was not; what is the Confe-
quence? Why, only this: That difhoneft


* As fo much ftir has been made about the Cafe of
Socrates with regard to Ridicule, it may not be amifs to
fhew what is Opinion of it was in general, when con-
fidered asa Te/t of Truth. Inthe fifth Book of Plate’s —
Republic, Socrates propofes that Women fhould enga
in all the public Affairs of Life, along with Men. This,
to Glauco, appears ridiculous in fome of its Circum-
ftances. Socrates replies, “* That may be: But let us
“go to the Merits of the Queftion, /etting afide all
<< Raillery, advifing the Railleurs to be /erious, and put-
“¢ ting them in Mind, that the very Practice now ap-
*© proved in Greece (of Men appearing naked) was, not
*¢ long ago, treated there with the higheft Ridicule :
“¢ as it is to this Day among many Barbarians
wopevreov meas MTegKY mY vouov, deybeot re TOW,
pn te culev mectlev, wAAw omoudaCey 5 xo vroMvyoa=
Cw ots ov Morus yeovos e& ov mis EAAyowy edones CUT OG
Fiver Ko YEAOIG ame WY TIS MoAADS TV BapCapars

vous avdegs oegc bar, ‘The following Part of this
Paltage I would recommend to the modern Patronizers


of the Way of Ridicule,


Ridicule


Effay on Ripicue. 63
Ridicule failed of its defired Succefs, in one § <a
Inflance. And how does this affect the___"_,
Queftion, fo long as Ten thoufand other
Inftances may be alledged to the contrary,
which no Man,that is not void of common
Senfe or common Honefty, can poffibly
deny?

From the Appeals to Fact, already
made‘,may be drawn innumerable Inftances
of this Nature. There we fee Truth, Wit
dom, Virtue, Liberty, fuccefsfully difgufed
and derided ; by this very means the Caufe
of Falfehood, Folly, Vice, Tyranny, main-
tained: If to thefe it were neceflary to add
more ; we cannot perhaps in Hiftory find a
more fageane Proof of the Power of Ridi-
cule againft Virtue berfelf,than in that Heap
of execrable Comedies, which have been the
Bane and Reproach of this Kingdom thro’
a Series of ninety Years. During this Pe-
riod,the Generality of our comic Poets have
been the unwearied Miniffers of Vice: And

have done her Work with fo thorough an

Induftry,that it would be hard to find one

Virtue,which they have not /acrificed at her

Shrine. As Effeéts once eftablithed are not

-eafily removed, fo not only this, but the
“# See above $5.

fucceed-


64 Effay on Rinse |
Es £4 ¥ fucceeding Generation will probably retain ae
the Impreffions made in the two preceding
ones; when Innocence was the Sport of ~—
abandoned Villany ; and the fuccefiful Adul-
terer decked out with all.the Poet’s Art, at ~~
the Expence of the ridiculed and injured
Hufband : When moral Virtue and Religi-
on were made the Jeft of the dcentious ; and
female Modefty was banifhed, to make Way
for thamelefs Effrontery :


The Fair fat panting at a Courtier’s Play, _ ’
And not a Mafk went unimprov’d away : :
The modeft Fan was lifted up no more,

And Virgins /mil’dat what they blwh’dbeforef, .


SECT MON: VHA >a


Sect. HER-Ethen we have accumulated
VIL. Proofs: of the fatal Influences of Ridicule,
when let loofe from the Reftraints of Rea-
fon. ‘
Yer fill his Lordfhip infifts that
“© Truth, tis fuppofed,may bear all Lights®.”.
To which it is replied, that “ Truth will ©
** indeed bear every Light, but a falfe one.”
He adds, that “ one of thofe principal
** Lights or natural Mediums by which
-£Eflay on Criticifm,  & Vol. i. p. 61.
1 s Things


‘
_ & ) a oe


Effay on Ripicuey,


&, Things, are to be.viewed, in order to aS & ¢ 1


« thorow Recognition, is Ridicule itfelf».” _Y1"


This is full as wife.a, Method to. manifeft
the|Reétitude and. Truth of Things as. it
would: be to fhew the Redtitude of a ruling
Staff, by immerging one Part of it in clear
Water. The Staff indeed would ftill con-
tinue ftrait, but the two Mediums, in which
it lies, though both wetural. ones, would
concur to make it appear crooked. Juft fo
- might it fare with Truth, when half fhewn


by the Medium of Reafon, and the other half,


by the Medium of Ridicule.

Bur the noble Writer afks us, ‘* How
** can. any one of the. leaft Juftnefs of
** Thought endure. a. Ridicule wrong
* placed ‘?”---I anfwer, by being mi/led or
miftaken ; and then Men are ready to dear


any thing. Shew me him whofe Imagi--


nation never received or retained a falfe Im-
preffion, and I. fhall readily allow he can


never endure a Ridicule wrong placed. But


of this infallible Race I know none, except
the Inhabitants of Utopia. ’Tis true, he
candidly acknowledges, that “the Vulgar
** may fwallow any fordid Sef, any mere
_-& Drollery and Buffoonry *.” Indeed! How
*Vol.i.p.61. ‘Ibid. p. rx, k Tbid.

BR ae then


65


66


Effay on Rivicuxs:


Ess ayYthen can he defy the World to turnreal Bra?


very or Generofity into Ridicule, or laugh fuc-


cefsfully at Honefty or Good-manners? And


where was the Wonder or Improbability,
that the Wit of ArtsropHanes fhould in-
cite a lewd Multitude to deftroy the divine
Philofopher) ? | ou
Bur then he tells us, “ it muft be a
«< finer and truer Wit that takes with the
« Men of Senfe and Breeding™.” ‘This


Sentence it muft be owned is artful enough: ~


Becaufe it obliges one to make a Separation
that may look like 7//-natured, before one
can expofe its Weaknefs. A truer Wit
indeed may be neceffary to take with the
Men of Senfe ; but thefe, I apprehend, may
fometimes be diftinguifhed from the Men of
Breeding : For it is certain, that in moft


Countries the Vulgar are a much more con-—


fiderable Body, than is generally imagined,


. Yet, although neither Rea/on nor the Paf-
‘fons gain any Advantages from sigh Life, |


1 L?Impudence qu’i! avoit de tourner en ridicule lare-
ligion, devoit tre reprimée: car une refutation ferieufe
ne fait pas a beaucoup prés tantde mal, que les raille-
ries d’un homme d’efprit. Les jeunes gens fe Jaiflent
gater par ces fortes de moqueurs plus.que l’on.ne fgau~
roit dire. Bayle, art, Bron,

m Volvi, p. ri. 7

it


Effay. on Ripicune. : 67


it muft be owned, the Imagination acquires $ £ ¢ Ts

a certain Delicacy, which the low Vulgar are___"_

generally Strangers to. The coarfe Pranks

of a merry Andrew that engages the At.

tention of a Country Fair, would make but

a poor Figure at St, fames’s. But ftill it is

only in the Modes, not the Objects of Ridi-

cule, with Regard to which the Courtier dif-

fers from the Clown. The Peafant and his

Lord are equally fufceptible of falfe Im-

preffions ; equally liable to have Falfehood

obtruded on them for Truth, Folly forWif-

dom, Vice for Virtue: The Methods only

of Ridicule, the Engines of Deceit mutt

vary; muft be accommodated to the dif-

ferent Views of Things and Circumftances

of Life, among which they have refpectiyely_

been converfant; . Thus it muft indeed be

a finer, but by no means a éruer Kind ,of

Wit, that takes with the Men of Breed-

a

_ Tue noble Writer proceeds to afk,.

“ What Rule or Meafure is there in the

“© World, exceptin the confidering the real

“© Temper of Things, to find which are

* truly ferious, and which ridiculous? And,

« how can this be done, unlefs by applying,
B2 Fane


68


Effay on Ripicute.


Essay the Ridicule, to fee whether it. with


Pad


“ bear" ?---Yes fure, there is another Rule:


The Rule of Reafon: Which alone can
diftinguifh Appearances from Realities, and
fix the true Nature of Things: From whofe
Determinations alone, we ever can diftin-
guifh true from pretended Gravity, juft
from groundlefs Raillery. But the Way of
Inveftigation here propofed by his Lordfhip,
inverts the very Order and Conftitution of
Things : By this means Appearances take
the Place of Realities ; Imagination ufurps


the Sovereignty which belongs to Reafon ;


and RipIcULE Is MADE THE TEST OF
WHAT ISRATIONAL, INSTEAD OF REA-
SON BEING MADE THE TEST OF WHAT IS
RIDICULOUS. .

_ Yer ftill the noble Author fufpeéts ill
Confequences : That Subjects “may be very
*< grave and weighty 2 our Imagination, but
“« very ridiculous and impertinent in their
“ own Nature®.” True: and on the other
hand, Things may appear ridiculous and


impertinent i our Imagination, which are


very grave and weighty in their own Na-
ture. What then is the Confequence in
either Cafe ? Why, only this: That Da-


® Vol.i.p.12,  ° Ibid. p. x1. '
gination,


Effay on Rivicute. &y
gination, and therefore Ridicule which de- § = ge
pends upon it, can never be a Tef of Truth. bs

Bur his Lordfhip infifts, that ‘« Gravity
* isof the very Effence of Impofture ?.”’
Yet this will do little for his Purpofe, un-
lefs he can prove too, that ‘‘ Impofture is
** of the Effence of Gravity.” And if fo, |
what will become of the Inquiry concerning
Virtue? Gravity, it is true, iscommonly an
Attendant of Impofture: And fo is Laugh-
ter, generally fpeakingy of Folly.: With as
much Reafon therefore as the noble Writer
infers from hence, that Gravity is Impofture,
we may infer, that Laughter is Folly in Dif-
guife. In truth, the Inference is ground-
lefs in both Cafes. Though every Knave
fhould affect Gravity, yet every grave Man
is nota Knave: Though every Fool willbe
Laughing, yet every Man that laughs is not
a Fool: We may be ferious and honeft, as
well as merry and wife. Mirth and Gra-
vity are both harmlefs Things, provided
they be properly applied: And we have
feen that it is the Province of Reafon alone,
to determine when they are fo.

Bur after all, the Propofition, that Gra-
wvity is of the Effence of Impofture, is falfe :
PVol.i. porr

Fa3 ' It


76 Effay on Ripicuts. :
«Essa eta is only an occafional, though, indeed, @ |
pretty clofe Attendant, in confequence of a “4
‘Maxim long ago taken for granted, that
Reafon was the Teft of Truth. Let once his
Lordfhip’s be generally embraced, that Ri- :
dicule is the Teft of Truth, and we fhould +
foon fee Buffoonry as clofe an Attendant on
Impofture, as now Gravity. 'The Tryal has
been made; and fuccefsfully enough too, by
him who has kept the Multitude in Opi- 1
nion for twenty Years, that Learning and
Religion are better taught in his Conven-
ticle, than in all the Univerfities and
Churches of Chri/fendom put together. And
fare if any thing be the Effence of a Im-
pofure, it is Buffoonry.

Anp here let us not forget to obtsevd,
that the noble Writer often (as in the Paf-
fage laft cited) confounds Mirth, Urbanity,
or Good-bumour, with Raillery or Ridicule :
Than which, no two Things in Nature are.
more diametrically oppofite. The firft, as
it arifeth folely from fudden and pleafing Re-
femblances imprefied on the Imagination, is
juftly regarded by all, as the beft Mediator
in every Debate. The laft, as it: arifeth
folely from Contempt, is thefefore no lefs :
— regarded by moft, as an Embroiler and.
Incendiary.


Effay on Ripicute. 71
Incendiary. He fets out with a formal Pro-§ & ¢ Tr.
feffion of proving the Efficacy of Humour
and Ridicule in the Inveftigation of Truth:
Yet; by fhifting and mixing his Terms, he
generally flides infenfibly into mere Enco-
miums on Good-breeding, Chearfulnefs, Ur-
banity, and free Enquiry ; and then, from
thefe Premifes, often draws Confequences
in Favour of Ridicule, as if it were an equi-
valent Term. This indeed keeps fome-
thing like an Argument on Foot, and mif-
leads the fuperficial Reader.

Bur the noble Author triumphs in an-
other Obfervation ; When {peaking of mo-
dern Zealots, he tells us, that ‘‘ whatever
** they think grave and folemn, they fup-
** pofe muft never be treated out of a grave
** and folemn Way. Though what another
** thinks fo, they can be contented to treat
** otherwife;.And are forward to try the.
_ © Edgeof Ridicule againft any Opinions be-
** fides their own4,” Now, if this be fo;
how is Gravity of the Effence of Impofture,
as he had before affirmed? But whatever
becomes of that Propofition, the Remark is
juft. And whomfoever he means to com-
pliment with the Name of Zealots, whee

9 Vol. i. p. 60.
F4 ther


72 Effay on Ripicue.
6 = a in Religion or Freethinking, I thall
~——-—- hot compliment as Exceptions to the Truth
of it. There is {carce a Topic of Religion, —
either for its Difhonour or Support, that
hath not been expofed to the illiberal Jokes
of fome Bungler in Controverfy. And a
much Coarfer Advocate in the Caufe of Ri-
dicule’, hath wrote an elaborate and moft te-
dious Differtation, to prove that theWay of
Raillery hath been fuccefsfully applied by
every Sect of Religionifts and Infidels, to
the Deftruction of each other’s Tenets, and
the Eftablifhment of theirown. How he
gains his Conclufion, that an Engine which °
tends to fix Mankind in their preconceived
Opinions, and eftablifh fo many Species of
Error, is of Importance and Efficacy in the
Search of Truth, may not be fo eafy to de-
termine. Inthe mean time, in Reply to
his whole Treatife, as well as to the laft
mentioned Remark of our noble Author, it
may be fufficient to obferve, that Mankind
often retain their own, and oppofe other’s
Opinions, from an imperfect View of the
Nature of Things: Their peculiar Tenets
in Religion, as in other Subjects, are often
founded in Imagination only: Their Ob-
* Suppofed to be Mr, Collins.
> jections


Effay on Rivicuts. 73
jections to thofe of others are often ry ST
groundlefs and fanciful. How natural then".
is it for them to communicate their Opi-
nions on that Foundation on which they re-
ceive them? How natural, that they fhould
throw the Colours of their own Imagination
on the Tenets they oppofe? That they
fhould obtrude the like fititious Images on
others, which themfelves have embraced as
Truth? That they fhould hold forth Ap-
pearances for Realities; employ Eloquence .
inftead of Logic ; and endeavour to perfuade
whom they fhould, but cannot; convince ?

Ir feems therefore that his Lordthip’s
Obfervation (which contains the Quintef-
fence of his Affociate’s Work, and which
probably was the Leaven that leavened the
whole Lump of Malice and Dulnefs) inftead
being favourable to Ridicule as a Teft of
‘Truth can only tend to difgrace it. . For
fince every religious and unbelieving Sect
hath alike fucce/sfully employed it in fupport-
ing their-refpective Tenets, and in render-
ing thofe of their Adverfaries contemptible ;
it follows, inafmuch as Doétrines which are
effentially repugnant cannot all be true, that
RIDICULE Is ONE OF THE MOST POWER-
fa FUL


£


74


Effay on Ripicute.


Essay put ENGINES, BY WHICH ERROR CAN BE
MAINTAINED AND ESTABLISHED,


ppacennioasss


Seen.
VIIL


SECTION. VIIL
WE hall only mention one more of the


noble Writer’s Arguments in Favour of his
. new Te: But it is, indeed, the very Key-
Stone of this vifionary Arch, which he hath
with fuch fantaftic Labour thrown over the
Depths of Error, in order to invite Mankind ~
over it as a fhort and fecure Paffage to the
Abode of Truth and Witdom.


He tells us, that a new Species of En-


thufiafts (French Prophets) having lately
rifen up among us, “‘ We have delivered


e


them over to the cruelleft Contempt in
the World. I am told for certain, that
they are at this very Time the Subject
of a choice Droll or Puppet-fhow at
Bart'Imy-Fair.---And while Bart’lmy-
Fair is in Poffeffion of this Privilege, I
dare ftand Security to our national Church,
that no Sect of Enthufiafts, no new Vend-
ers of Prophecy or Miracles, fhall ever
get the Start, or put her to the Trouble
of trying her ore with them, in any
Cafe*.”


* Vol.i. p. 27, 28,
| Sa


Effay on Ripicuxz. 95

- So far, for Peace-fake, we venture toSe ct.
agree with the noble Writer: But now VU!
comes a finifhing Stroke indeed.

For he proceeds to congratulate the pre-
fent Age, that in the Beginnings of the Re+
formation, when Popery had got Poffeffion;
Smithfield was ufed in a more tragical Way.
And that ‘ had not the Priefts, as is ufual,
“* preferred the Love of Blood to all other
‘ Paflions, they might, in a merrier Way,
‘© perhaps, have evaded the greatef? Force
*¢ of our reforming Spirit.”

AnD, now, for Form’s fake, let us fuppofe
the noble Author to be what he aflumes, a
Friend to Religion and Reformation: Un-
der this Character, he recommends Ridicule
to us, as of fovereign Ufe to inveftigate
Truth, try Honefty, and unmafk formal
‘Hypocrify and Error. To prove this Ufe,
he tells us, what we fhould leaft have ex-
pected, that if, inftead of the tragical Way
of Smithfield, the Romifh Priefts had pre-+
ferred the comic Drollery of Bart’lmy-Fair;
they had perhaps gained their Point, and
evaded the greateft Force of | our reforming
Spirit. Here the noble Writer forgets his
Part, which is that of a Beever and a Pros

* Vol.i. p. 28,
tefant;


76 Effay on Ripicute, »

Ess avfefant; alledging an Inftance, which none
I _buta ftaunch Papift could confiftently apply =
And in his Scarcity of Proofs for the Ufe

of Ridicule in the Effablifhment of Truth,

he hath offered at one, which, if a Faat,

would fufficiently have evinced the Power

of Ridicule in its De/fruétion. Here then

lies the Dilemma: Let his Followers get

him off as they can. If their Mafter be a
Believer, he has reafoned ill; if a Freethink-

er, he has managed worfe. Had he beena

little more knowing in the Times he {peaks

of, he might have found an Inftance. more
pertinent to his Argument, and more con-
formable to his Character; an Inftance

which fhews, not what Ridicule might be
fuppofed capable of doing, but whatit aétu-

ally effected. And this not to ftop Refor-
mation, but to difcredit Popery. Bithop
Burnet tells us, that in the Year 1542,

** Plays and Interludes were a great Abufe:

‘© In them, Mock-Reprefentations were

‘ made both of the Clergy and of the Pa-
** geantry of their Worfhip. The Clergy
** complained much of thefe as an Intro-
** duction to Atheifm, when Things facred
“* were thus laughed at: And faid, they that
‘* begun to laugh at Abufes, would not ceafe
“till


“”


.


Effay on Ripicute. Re a
* till they had reprefented all the MyfteriesS a
“of Religion as ridiculous: The graver
Sort of Reformers did not approve ofit :
But political Men encouraged it ; and
* thought nothing could more efecfually.
“* pull down the Abufes that yet remained,
‘* than the expofing them to the Scorn of
**’the Nation ¥,”” _
_ Tuts curious Piece of Hiftory is re-
markable ; and tends no lefs to fupport our
general Argument, than to recommend,
what the noble Writer is pleafed to {near
at, the Sobriety of our reforming Spirit.
Political Men, fays the Hiftorian, whofe
Bufinefs, and therefore whofe aim, was to
perfuade, encouraged the Way of Ridicule :
But the graver Sort of Reformers, whofe
nobler Miniftry, and confequently whofe
Purpofe, was to convince, did not approve
of it.

Bur his Lordthip is fo fond of his Re-
flection, that he pufhes it ftill further. «* ¥
‘<never heard (fays he) that the ancient
** Heathens were fo well advifed in their 77
“* Purpofe of fuppreffing the Chrifian Re-

** ligion in its firft Rife, as to make ufe at
** any time of this Bart’Imy-Fair Method.
' Hiftory of the Reformation, A. D, 1542.
I Bur


78 Effay on Ripicute,
Essay But this I am perfuaded of, that, had the.
I _“ Truth of the Gofpel been any way fur-
“ mountable, they would haye bid much
fairer for the filencing it, if they had
** chofen to bring our primitive Founders
“* upon the Stage in a pleafanter Way, than
“€ that of Bear-Skins and Pitch-Barrels ¥.””
Was ever an Argument fo unfortunately ap-
plied ?---What?---Could nothing /urmount
and deffroy the Truth of the Gofpel, except
only Ridicule, the very Tef of Truth?---
And as to the Sfews, he fays, that “ with all
“ their Malice and Inveteracy to our Savi-
“< our and his Apoftles after him, had they
“* but taken the Fancy to act fuch Puppet-
“«* Shows in his. Contempt, as at this Hour
the Papifts are acting in his Honour ; I
« am apt to think they might poffibly have
“« done our Religion more Harm, than by
“ all their other Ways of Severity *.”” ?
Wuar a Favourite is that facetious Droll “4
of Wood and Wire, the Bart’ lmy-Fair Hero, |
with thefe modern Advocates for Mirth and
Raillery! And indeed, not without Caufe,
for of him they feem to have learnt their
very wittieft Practices. Who taught them
to turn their Backs upon their Betters? to,
© Vol.i.p.2g. = Ibid.


difturb


Effay on Ripicute. 79


difturb the moft ferious Scenes, with an wn-S vi rel
favory Joke; to be at once blind and bold,
and make a Jeft of the Devil? Indeed they
have fo well taken off his Manners, that one
Defcription will ferve them both. And
whether you fuppofe the fine one which
follows to be meant of the Original, or one
of the Copies, you areequally fure you have
a good Likenefs.
Sed preter reliquos incedit Homuncio, rauca
Voce firepens ,—Pygmeum territat agmen }
Major, et immanem miratur turba gigautem.
Hic magna fretus mole, imparibufque lacertis
Confifus, gracili jafat convitia vulgo,
Et crebro folvit (/epidum caput ! ) ora cachinno,
Quanquam res agitur folenni /eria pompa,
Spernit follicitum intraétabilis ille rumultum,
Et vi/y importunus adeft, atque omnia turbat?.
Bur to return to our Argument. Be
you well affured of this, kind Reader, that
whatever Impreffions are made upon a Po-
pulace in the Way of Scenery and dramatic
Reprefentation, are no more than fo many
Kinds of filent Eloquence and Perfuafion :
That Faéts which ought to be proved, are
always taken for granted, and Things and
Perfons often rendered apparently abfurd,
which really are not fo, That the Vulgar
» 9 Mufe Angl. Macu. Gest. by Mr. Addifen.
3 (both


- : eas


~-


80 Effay on Ripicue,


Es So (both digh and low) are apt to fwallow any.
fordid ‘fe or Buffoonry, {o it be but accom=
modated to their preconceived Opinions :
That thisWay of Ridicule, like every other,
as it is fairly or difhoneftly applied, will
fweep away Truth or Falfehood without
Diftin@tion: That it will confound French
Prophets with Englifh Reformers, and on
the fame falfe Foundation eftablith the
Truths of Proteftantifm, or the Abfurdities
of Popery. That as Virtue herfelf cannot
bear up againft a Torrent of Ridicule, fo
neither can Religion : That therefore Chrifti-
anity had indeed more to fear from the
contemptuous Mifreprefentations, than the
bittereft Rage of its Enemies : That Chrifti-
anity did in Faé endure this more than fiery
Trial: That its divine Founder: was de-
rided * as well as crucified : That they who
in fucceeding Times fuffered for the Faith,
endured cruel Mockings no lefs than Scourg-
ings, Bonds, and Imprifonment: That many
a brave Martyr offered up his Prayers to
Heaven, that he might be releafed by Death
from the Contempt of hisEnemies: And af-
ter being baited in the Bear-Skin, found a
Refuge in the Faggot, or the Pitch-Barrel,


& Prophefy unto us, who it was that fmote thee!


SEC T-


Effay on Rivicute. Sr


SECTION IX. |

HOWEVER, the noble Writer’sMo-¢ , ¢ +,
defty muft not be forgotten. For while he IX.
might have arrogated to himfelf the Glory’
of this wondrous Difcovery, he hath in-
formed us of an ancient Sage, whofe Idea of
Ridicule coincided with his own. “T'was.
“ the Saying of an ancient Sage, that Hu-
« mour was the only Teft of Gravity +.”

Tuer Reader will probably be furprized
to find that the Paffage here referred to by
the noble Writer, is no other than what
- hath been already quoted from ArisTo- |
TLE as a Direction to the Conduct of an
Orator. ’*Tis likewife remarkable, that his
Lordfhip, in quoting the original Paffage in
his Margin, has, by the prudent Omiffion
of an emphatical Expreflion, converted it -
from a particular Rule of Rhetoric into a
general Maxim of Philofophy*. But ’tis
of all moft remarkable, that in his pretended
Tranflation, he hath entirely perverted the
Senfe of the Author, whofe se he
attempts to build upon,


6 Vol.i. p. 74. » See above, p. 43, ¢ The
Words, sey evcevrseey — Adverfariorum—gre omitted.


G As


Sz Effay on RipicuLe..
Essay < As Ridicule (fays the great Philofo-
 < pher) feems to be of fome Ufe in Plead-
“ ing; it was the Opinion of Gorcias,
“* that you ought to confound your Adyer- —
“ fary’s ferious Argument by Raillery, and
*© his Raillery by ferious Argument.” This
is almoft a litteral Tranflation of the Paf-
fage. But how the noble Author could fo
far impofe upon himfelf or others, as to
ftrip i it of its native Drefs, and difguife it
‘under the fantaftical Appearance of a
Maxim, ‘‘that Humour is the only Teft
* of Gravity, and Gravity of Humour,’--=
this is not fo eafy to account for, ;
_ However this came to pafs, tis cer- -
tain, that the Obfervation, as it lies in Ari-
STOTLE, is a juft anda fine one: as it lies
in the noble Writer’s maimed Tranflation,
it is fal/e, if not unmeaning.
Tuar an Orator fhould cake bis
‘Adverfary’s Raillery by ferious Argument,
is rational and juft. By this means he tears
off the falfe Difguifes of Eloquence, and
diftinguifheth real from. apparent Truth,
That he fhould confound his Adverfary’s
Serious Argument by Raillery, is, if not a.
juft, yet a legal Practice. The End of the
Advocate or Orator is Perfuafion only; to
ae Sy . Truth


ee ——- —


_Effay on Ripicvre. 83
‘Truth’ or Falfehood. as it happens. If heS 2c 7-
hath 'Fruth on his Side, it is likely what he_*_
will have then to do, will be ta confound his
| Adverfary’s Raillery by ferious Argument.
If Truth be againft him, he will be forced
to change Weapons with his Adverfary,
whofe ferious Argument be muft try to» con»
found by Raillery. This is all the Myftery
there is in the Matter: By which it appears,
that whenever in this cafe Ridicule is op-
‘pofed to reafoning, it is fo far from being
the Tef or Support, that it is the Defruction
of Truth. And thejudicious QUINTILIAN
fairly confeffes it, where he affigns the
Caufe why Ridicule is of fuch mighty
Force in Oratory---‘‘ Quia animum ab in-
“ tentione rerum frequenter avertit”---Be-
caufe tt draws off the Mind from attending to
the real Nature of Things. ‘Thus you fee
the Propriety and Beauty of the Saying of
aur ancient Sage, when fairly reprefented.
But as the noble Writer hath tranflated
' the Paffage, it is a Curiofity indeed. “* Hu-
** mour is the only Teft of Gravity, and
“* Gravity of Humour.” He applies it not
to Eloquence, but Philofophy : not to Per-
fuafion, but Conviction. And fo by the
ftrangeft Converfion in Nature, makes the
G2 Trier,


84 Effay on Rivicure.

Essay Trier, and the Thing tried, each in their
turns, become Agent and Patient to one an-
other. But what Artift ever attempted to —
try the Juftnefs of his Square or Level, by
the Work which he has formed by the Af
fiftance of thofe Inftruments? Or was ever
the Gold which hath been put to the Teft,
reciprocally applied to ¢ry the Touch-ftone?
If therefore Gravity, or Reafoning, be the
'Teft of Humour ; Humour never cah be the
Teft of Gravity: As on the other hand, if
Humour be the Teft of Gravity, then Gra-
vity can never be the Teft of Humour.

Since therefore this /ee-/aw Kind of
Proof returns into itfelf, and confequently
ends in an Abfurdity; .’tis plain, that one
half of the noble Writer’s Propofition muft
effectually. deftroy the other:. Let us fee-
then, which Moiety deferves: to be fup-
ported... His own Comment on: the Paf-
fage will help us to determine: Which,
however, he feems defirous his Reader
fhould receive as a Part of the Saying of his
ancient Sage: But whoever will turn:tothe
Paflage, as itliesin Ar1stoT e, will find
that Gore1as is entirely innocent of the
whole affair,
‘“ GRAVITY,


Effay ou Rivicuce. 85
. Gravity, fays his Lordthip, is theS = ¢ r.

“ Teft of Humour: Becaufe a Jeft that will =
‘< not bear. a ferious Examination, is cer-

“« tainly falfe Wit.”” True: here we have a.
rational Teft eftablifhed. . Next he inverts:

the, Propofition, fets it with i its Head. downs.
wards, like a.Traytor’s Scutcheon,- and.
now, fays he, behold ‘‘ Humour is.the Teft,

‘s of Gravity.” - To prove this, Reafon re-
quires he fhould have added, ‘‘ Becaufe an:

““ Argument, which, can be fuccefSfully ri-,

‘* diculed, is certainly falfe Logic.” . But,

this was too hardy, a Propofition -to be di-
rectly advanced: .He therefore contents,
himfelf with hinting, that “ a Subject which)

« will not bear Raillery is fufpicious!”... Now!

we know that Sufpicion is often groundlefs :'
That what is.fufpected. to, be. falfe, may”

yet be true. So that the noble Writer:
again fuffers this new. Teft to flip: through

his Fingers, even while he is holding it up;

to your Admiration. . But if any. thing fur-,

ther be yneceflary to clear up this Point,. it,

may be.obferved.in fhort, that Gravity.or_
Argument is the Teft of Humour,’ becaufey
Reafon . marks :the real. Differences » of ;
Things: ‘That Humour can ;never .beythes


Soi Mee ce et 8


6 Effay onRivicure:


Es s ay Teft of Gravity, becaufe Imagination ¢ can


only fuggeft their apparent Analogies. -

Tuus the Sentiment of Goer k i is
grofsly miftaken or defignedly mifrepre-
fented by the noble Writer: as it lies in
ARISTOTLE, it is rational and confiftent :
as it is taken up by his Lordfhip, it is =
merical and groundlefs.

~ Ir might have been difficult to affign a
Reafon, why the noble Writer fhould have
attempted to’‘eftablith this two-fold Method
of Proof, had not he explained his Intention
in another Place. He there * wifely re-
commends the old /cholaftic Manner to the
Clergy, as being’ moft fuitable to their Abi-
lities and Character: The Way of Ridicule
he appropriates to the Men of 'Tafte and
Breeding; declaring it ought to be kept
facred from the impure Touch of an Eccle-
fiaftic. For as Clubs and Cudgels have long
been appropriated to Porters and Footmen,
while every Gentleman is ambitious to un=


derftand a Sword; fo the Clumfy Way of


Argumentation is only fit for Priefts and
Pedants, but pointed Wit is the Weapon for
the Man of Fafhion : ‘This decides a Quarrel
handfomely. The pretty Fellow is at-your

@ Vol. iii, Mife. v.c. 2. § 65, &c
Vitals


Effay on Rivicute. 87

Vitals in a Moment; while the Pedant §£.c¢ vr.
keeps labouring at it for an Hourtogether. _. ee i

Bor ftill higher is the noble Writer’s
Idea of Wit and Ridicule: While he ap-
plies it not only to Congue/?, but Invefiiga-
ti: And we muft own, it was an At-
tempt worthy of his Genius, ‘to eftablith -
this new and expeditious Method of Search
and Conviction. In which, by the fole Ap-
plication of fo cheap and portable an In-
frument as that of Raillery, a Gentleman
might obtain the certain Knowledge of the
true Proportion of Things, without the te-
dious and vulgar Methods of Menfuration.
In the mean time, we, whom the noble
Author hath fo often condefcended to dif-
tinguifh by the honourable Title of For-
malifts and Pedants, finding ourfelves inca-
pable of this /ublime Way of Proof, mutt be
content to drudge on in the old and beaten
Tract of Reafoning. And after all, ’tis
probable this'new Attempt will fucceed no
better than the curiousConceit of the arned
Taylor in Laputa : Who being employed in.
making a Suit for the facetious GuLLIVER ;
difdained the vulgar Meafures of his Pro=
feffion, and took that Gentleman’s Aititude
by the Help of a Quadrant. This, it mutt
e: G 4 , be


88 Effay on Ripicure.


Essavbe acknowledged, was.a Theory no lefs
—____ fublime than our noble Author’s: Yet it
failed miferably when applied to Praétice : |
For the fagacious. Traveller informs us, that,
notwithftanding the Acutenefs and Pene-
tration of the Artift, his Cloaths were.
wretchedly ill made. ;


S:EeC Fid,O1N »X


_ WE havenow obviated every Thing ma-
terial, that the noble Writer hath advanced
- in Support of his new Syftem. But as one
of his moft zealous Followers hath under-
taken in Form to explain and defend his
Notions on this Subjeét*, it may be proper —
to examine how far this Gentleman’s Ar-
gument is confiftent with Truth.
He tells us, that ‘* to afk whether Ridi-
“ cule be a Teft of Truth, is in other
*¢ Words to afk, whether that which is ri-
« diculous can be morally true, can be juft
** and becoming; or whether that which is
‘« juft and becoming, can be ridiculous.’’
Here, as the Foundation of all, we fee
the fame Kind of Ambiguity lurking, as


* See a Note on the Phafures of hae a Poem,
Book iii. .
was


Effay on Ripreute. 89
was obferved.in the noble Writer, in the Paf-S £ ¢ T-
fage already remarked on‘. Forif by ‘that_""_.
“ whichis ridiculous,” he means that which
is really ridiculous, it is allowed this can ne-
ver be morally true: But this is fo far from
proving Ridicule to be a Teft of Truth, that
it implies the contrary:: It implies. fome
further. Power, which may be able to dif-
tinguifh what is really ridiculous, from what
is only apparently fo. . On the contrary, if
by ‘* that which is ridiculous,” he means
that which is apparently ridiculous, it may
be affirmed, this may be morally true : Be~
caufe Imagination and.Paffion often take up
with Fidtions inftead of Realities, and can
never of themfelves diftinguith ‘them from
each other. . Hetells us his Queftion ‘‘ does
** not deferve a ferious Anfwer.”’ - At leaft
it wanted an Explanation. +a
Tue Gentleman proceeds: For ‘it. is
‘© moft evident, that as in a metaphyfical
“ Propofition offered to the Underftanding
** for its Affent, the Faculty of Reafon exa-.
“* mines the Terms of the Propofition, and.
“ finding one Idea which was fuppofed:
** equal to another, to be in Fact unequal, :
of Confequence rejects the Propofition 2 as


z


f See gbove, p. 55. she
** a Falfe-


99° Effay on Rivicure,:

Es «<a Falfehood : Soin Objects offered to the
~——— ‘Mind for its Efteem or Applaufe, the
“Faculty of Ridicule feeling an Incongruity
‘in the Claim, urges the Mind to reject

“it with Laughter and Contempt.” "a
» Here the Faculty of Reafon is excluded
from the Examination of moral Truths, and
anew Faculty, never before heard of, the
Patulty of Ridicule, is fabftituted in its
Place. "Now when a Stranger is introduced
into good Company, and fure thefe can be
no better than the Pudiic, it is ufual not only
to tell his Name, but what be is, and what
his Character : This the Gentleman hath
not condefcended to do: ’Tis true, in a
preceding Page, he tells us, that “‘ the Sen-
“© fation of Ridicule is nota bare Perception
“of the Agreement or Difagreement of
“ Tdeas ; but a Pafion or Emotion of the
“ Mind, confequential to that Perception.”
In another Place he exprefsly calls it “‘ a gay
“ Contempt.” Now, if the Faculty of Ri-
dicule be the fame as the Senfation of Ridi-
cule; or a gay Contempt, then by fubftituting
the plain old Term of Contempt, inftead of
the Faculty of Ridicule, we fhall clearly fee
what the above-cited Paflage contains,’
‘* As ina metaphyfical Propofition, the Fa-
* culty


Effay on Ripicure. ot
«culty of Reafon examines the Terms, and 5 #¢ Ts
« rejects the Falfehood; fo in Objeéts of-
“© fered to the Mind for itsEfteem and Ap-
« plaufe, the Paffion of Contempt feeling an
« Incongruity in the Claim, urges the Mind
“to reject it with Laughter and Con-
“* rempT !”---Why was not honeft Reafon
admitted of the Council, and fet on the
Seat of Yudgment, which of right belongs
to her? The Affair would then have ftood
thus: “ As in a metaphyfical Propofition,
* the Faculty of Reafon examines the,
«* ‘Terms, and rejects the Falfehood ; fo. in
“* Objects offered to the Mind for its Efteem
“or Applaufe, the fame Faculty of Reafon
“« finding an Incongruity in the Claim, urges
** the Mind to reje& it with Contempt and
** Laughter.’ This would have been Senfe -
and Argument ; but then it had not been,
Charatterifiical,

We fhall now clearly difcover the Dif-
tinétion that is to be made on the following
Paflage : ‘* And thus a double Advantage is
“ gained: For we both deteé? the moral
* Falfehood fooner than in the Way of {pe~.

« culative Enquiry, and imprefs the Minds
“* of Men with a ie Senfe.of the Va-
“nity


“


92 #ffay om Rivicute,


Es Be at “€ nity and Error of its Authors *,”’---Here
’tis evident, that the Defign “ of detecting
© the moral Falfehood /oover than in the
Way of fpeculative Enquiry” is an ab-
furd Attempt: But that “to imprefs the
‘Minds of Men with a ftronger Senfe of
. “the Vanity and Error of its Authors,”
when Reafon hath made the proper Search,
is both a parable and a rational Inten-
tion.
<a Bur. it is faid, continues he, that the
** Practice is dangerous, and may be incon-
* fiftent with the Regard we owe to Ob-
« je€ts of real Dignity and Excellence *.”
Yet this is but a fecondary Objection : The
principal one is, that the Attempt is abfurd.
However, the Circumftance of Danger is
not without its Weight : Nor is the Gen-.
tleman’s Reply at all fufficient---‘ that the
“ Practice fairly managed can never be dan-
“< gerous.”” For though Men.are not dif-
honeft in obtruding falfeCircumftances upon.
us, we may be fo weak as to obtrude them, _
upon ourfelves. Nay, it can hardly be
otherwife,.if, inftead of exerting our Rea-
fon to correct the Suggeftions of Fancy and
Paffion we give them an unlimited Range,


_ Ibid. p. 106. Ibid. 106.


and


- Effay on RivicELe. 93
‘and acquiefce in their partial or groundlefsS © Ec T.
. Reprefentations, without calling in Reafon
to decide upon their Truth or Falfehood.
By this means we {hall often “ view Ob-
jets of real Dignity and Excellence,” in |
fuch Shapes and Colours as are foreign to
their Nature ; and then fit down and laugh
moft profoundly at the Phantoms of « our |
own creating.

Bur ftill he infifts, that though fale Cir-
cumftances be impofed upon us, yet “ the
** Senfe of Ridicule always judges right ;”
or in more vulgar Terms, “ The Paffion of
“© Contempt alwaysjudges right.” Where-
as, in truth it never judges at all; being
equally excited by Objects real or imagina-
ry that prefent themfelves.

OxsERVE therefore what a Number of
new Phrafes and blind Guides this of Ridi-
cule, if once admitted, would bring in upon
us, ‘and all on equal Authority. For with
the fame Reafon, as the Paffion of Contempt
is ftyled the Senfe of Ridicule, the Paffion of
Fear may be called the Senfeof Danger, and
Anger the Senfe of Injury. But who hath
ever dreamt of exalting thefe Paffions into fo
manyTefts of the Reality of their Refpective
ev > The Defign muft have been ré-

! jected


=.


94 _ Effay o# Ripicute.
E aan ¥ jected as abfurd, becaufe it is the Province
~~ of Reafon alone, to correct the blind Sallies
of every Paffion, and fix it on its proper
Obje&t. - Now, the Scheme of Ridicule is
of the fame Nature. It propofes the Paf-
fion of Contempt as the Teft of moral
Falfehood, which, from the very Terms,
appears to be a Project full as wife, as to
make Fear the Teft of Danger, or Anger
the Feft of Injury.
Tue Gentleman proceeds next to the
Cafe of Socrates. - He owns ‘ the So-
“ crates of ARISTOPHANES is as truly ri-
‘*¢ diculous a Charaéter as ever was drawn:
‘ But it is not the Character of Socrates,
“¢ the divine Moralift and Father of ancient
“* Wifdom.”---No indeed : and here lay the
Wickednefs of the Poet’s Intention, and the
Danger of hisArt : in impofing Fictions for
Realities on the mifled Multitude ; and put-
ting a Fool’s Coat on the Father of ancient
Wifdom. ’Tis true, the People laughed at
the ridiculous Sophift ; but when the ridi-
culous Sophif} was doomed to drink the Poi-
fon, what think you became of the Father
of ancient Wifdom ?
- Bwr then he tells us, that as the comic


Poet introduced foreign Circumftances into
the


EEO _


Effay on RIDICULE, * 95>

the Character of Socrares, and built hisS ec Té
Ridicule upon thefe ; “ So hasthe Reafon-_*
“ing of Spinoza made many Atheifts;
« he has founded it indeed on: Suppofitions.
“ utterly fal(e, but allow him thefe, and his
“ Conclufions are unavoidably true. And:
“ if we muft reject the Ufe of Ridicule;
“ becaufe, by the Impofition of falfe Cir-

“* cumftances, Things may be made to feem
** ridiculous, which are not .fo in them-.
“* felves; why we ought not to reject the
«© Ufeof! Reafon, becaufe, by proceeding on
** falfe Principles, Conclufions will appear
“ true which are impoflible in Nature, let
“< the vehement and obftinate Declaimers
“ againft Ridicule determine '.

But why fo much Indignation againft
Declaimers in one who writes in. Defence
of Ridicule, a Species of Declamation ? Then.
as to rejecting the Ufe of Ridicule, a very
material Diftinction is to be made: Asa
Mode of Eloquence nobody attempts totally
to eject it, while it remains under the Do-
minion of Reafon: But as a Tef of Truth,
I hope the Reader hath feen fufficient Rea-
fon totally to reject it.

_ Nerruer will the Parallel by any means.
1 Page 106.
hold


96  Effay omRivicure.

E ssavhold good, which the Gentleman hath at-
3 tempted to draw between the Abufe of Rr-
dicule and Reafon. Becaufe the Imagina-
tion, to which the Way of Ridicule applies,
is apt to form to itfelf innumerable fictitious —
Refemblances of Things which tend to con-
found Truth with Falfehood : Whereas the
natural Tendency of Reafon is to feparate
thefe apparent Refemblances, and determine
which are the rea/, and which the fictitious.
Although therefore Sp1noza hath advanced
many Falfehoods in the Way of fpeculative
Affirmation,and founded his Reafonings on
thefe, yet ftill Reafon will be her own Cor-
rectrefs, and eafily difcover the Cheat. But
if the Imagination be impreffed with falfe
Appearances, and the Paffion of Contempt
ftrongly excited, neither the Imagination nor’
the Paffon can ever corre& themfelves ; but
mutt inevitably be mifled, unlefs Rea/on be
called in to rectify the Miftake, and bring

back the Paffion to its proper Channel.
Nay, fo far is the Ufe of Ridicule, when
prior to rational Conviction, from being par-
allel to Reafon, or co-operative with it ;
that, onthecontrary, it hatha ftrong Ten-
dency to prevent the Efforts of Reafon, and
to confound its Operations. It is not pre-
tended


Effay on Ruvicute. 97


tended that human Reafon, though the w/-S x cr.
timate, is yet inall Cafes an adequate Teft of
Truth: It is always fallible, often errone-
ous: But it would be much lefs erroneous,
were every Mode of Eloquence, and Ridi-
cule above all others, kept remote from its
Operations; were no Paffion fuffered to
blend itfelf with the Refearches of the
Mind. For Ridicule, working on the Ima-
gination and Paffions, difpofes the Mind to
receive and acquiefce in any Opinion with-
out its proper Evidence, Hence Prejus
dice arifes ; and the Mind, which thould be
Jree to examine and weigh thofe real Cir-
cumftances which PRove Socrates to be
indeed a divine Philofopher, is drawn by
the prior Suggeftions of Ridicule to receive
and acquiefce in thofe falfe Circumftances,
which paint him as a contemptible Sophift.
To conclude: ’Tis no difficult Matter to
point out the Foundation of this Gentle-
man’s Errors concerning Ridicule. They
have arifen folely from his miftaking the
Paffion of Contempt for a judicial Faculty:
Hence all thofe new-fangled Expreffions
of---** the Faculty of Ridicule”---“ the
** Senfe of Ridicule’ ---and * the feeling
** of the Ridiculous:” Inthe Ufe of which


98


Effay on Ripicue.


EssaYhe feemis to have impofed upon himfelf new:


Phrafes for Realities, and Words for Things.


I cannot better illuftrate this Remark, than.
by tranfcribing a Paffage from the incom-
parable Locker. --- “ Another great Abufe


“


cc


of Words is, the taking them forThings.
‘To this Abufe Men are moft fubject,
who confine their Thoughts to any one
Syftem, and give themfelves up to the.
firm Belief of the Perfection of any re-
ceived Hypothefis ; whereby they come:


tobe perfuaded, that the Terms of that:


Seé& are fo fuited to the Nature of Things,
that they perfectly correfpond with their
-real Exiftence. Who is there that has
been bred up in the Peripatetic Philofo-
phy, who does not think the ten Names
under which are ranked the ten Predica-


“ments, to be exactly conformable to the
- Nature of Things? Whois there of that.


School, that is not perfuaded, that /ub-
ftantial Forms, vegetative Souls, Abborrence:-
of a Vacuum, intentional Species, etc. are
fomething real ?---“* There is fcarce any
Seét in Philofophy has not a diftiné Set
of Terms that others underftand - not:
But yet this Gzbderifb, which, in the
Weaknefsof human Underftanding, ferves

o cc © fo ;


Effay on Rivicutt. 99°
fo well to palliate Men’s Ignorance, and s ts eT.
‘cdver their Errors, comes ‘by familiar Ufe -
«© amonegft thofe of the fame’Tribe, to feem
«* the moft important Part of Language, and
“* of all other the Terms the moft fignifi+
“ cant*.”” And now to fave the Trouble
of Repetition, the Reader is left to deter-
mine how far “ the Faculty of Ridicule
** feeling the Incongruity’’---and “ the Sen/e
‘*\ of Ridicule always judging right’’---may
with Propriety be placed among the learned
Gibberifh above-mentioned.

’Ts ftrange this Gentleman fhould have
etred fo widely in fo plain a Subje@; when
we confider, that he hath accidentally
thrown out a Thought, which, if purfued,
would have led him to a full View of the
Point debated :.“‘'The Senfation of Ridi-
“* culeiis not a barePerception of the Agree-
“mentor Difagreement of Ideas; but 2
“* Paffion ot Emotion of the Mind confe-

* quential to that Perception'.”


s


cal


SECTION Xt


TO return therefore to the noble Wri-S ECT:
ter. . As it is evident, that. Ridicule cannot


k Locke on Sal Under landing; B.ili, co 10; §: te
1 Pit03.
, He 2 olicivg in


100 Effay on Ripicute.
Es s avin general without Abfurdity be applied as
a Teft of Truth ; fo can it leaft ofall be
admitted in examining Religious Opinions, in.
the Difcuffion of which his Lordfhip feems
principally to recommend it. Becaufe, ** by
** infpiring the contending Parties with mu-
‘* tual Contempt, it hath a violent Tendency
** to deftroy mutual Charity, and therefore
*© to prevent mutual Convittion.”’

To illuftrate this Truth, Jet .us confider
the following Inftance, which feems clear
and full to the Point.

THERE is not perhaps in any Language a
bolder or ftronger Ridicule, than the well-
known Apologue of The Tale ofa Tub, Its
manifeft Defign is to recommend the Eng-
lifh Church, and to difgrace the two Extremes —
of Popery and Puritanifm ™. Now, if we
~ m Some indeed have pretended otherwife. Thus Mr.
Wotton, in his RefleGions on Learning, fays, ‘It is a de-
“<< figned Banter upon all that is efteemed facred am
«© Men.” And the pious Author of the Independent
Whig affirms it was *¢ the fole open Attack that had been
“* made upon Chri/tianity fince the Revolution, except
‘© the Oracles of Reafon, and was not inferior in Ban-
*¢ ter and Malice, to the Attacks of Cel/us, or Fulian,
“° or Porphyry, ot Lucian.” p. 399. Where by the
Way, the Oddity of the Contraft is remarkable enough;
that he fhould pronounce the Tale ofaTub tobe a Libel
on Chriftianity, while it is in Faét a Vindication of our
Ecclefiaftical Eftablifoment ; and at the fame time entitle
his own Book a Vindication of our Ecclefiaftical Efta~
biifoment, while in Fa& it is @ Libel on Chriftianity.

'  eonfider


Effay on Rivicure.. 101

confider this exquifite Piece of Raillery asaS xz ¢ r.
Teft of Truth, we fhallfind itimpotentand  “* _
vain: For the Queftion ftill recurs, whether
Martin be a juft Emblem of the Enghi/h,
Fack of the Scotch, or Peter of the Roman
Church. All the Points in Debate between
- the feveral Parties are taken for granted in
the Reprefentation : And we mutt have Re-
courfe to Argument, and to that alone, ere
we can determine the Merits of the Que-
ftion.

Ir we next confider. this Mafter-piece
of Wit asa Mode of Eloquence, we fhali
find it indeed of great Efficacy in confirm-
ing every Member of the Church of England
in his own Communion, and in giving him
a thorough Diftafte of thofe of Scotland and
Rome: And fo far as this may be regarded
as a Matter of public Utihty , fo far the Ri-
dicule may be laudable.

Bur if we extend our Views fo asto
comprehend a larger Plan of moral Uje ; we
fhall find this Method of Perfuafion is fuch
as Charity can hardly approve of: For by
reprefenting the one of thefe Churches un-
der the Character of Craft and Knavery,
the other under that of incurable: Madnefs,
it muft needs tend to.infpire every Member

«Ae. Wie of


Effay on Ripicure.


Essayof the Engli/b Church who believes the Ree


prefentation, with fuch Hatred of the one,

and Contempt of the other, as to prevent all

Sriendly Debate, and rational Remonftrance.
Irs Effect on thofe who hold the Do-


Gtrines of Catvin, or of Rome, muft be ©


yet worfe: Unlefs it can be proved, that


_ the Way or attract the Love, and convince


the Reafon of Mankind, is to fhew that we
hate to defpife them. While they revere
what we deride, ’tis plain, we cannot doth
wiew the Subject in the fame Light: And
though we deride what appears to us con
temptible, we deride what to them appears
facred. They will therefore accufe us of
mifreprefenting their Opintaniy and abhor
us as unjuft and impious.

Tuus although this noted Apologue be
indeed aVindication of our Engli/b Church,
yet it is fuch as had been better {pared : Be-
caufe its natural Effect is to create Preju-
dice, and infpire the contending Parties with
mutual Diftafte, Contempt, and Hatred,

But if theWay of Ridicule is thus wholly
to be rejected in treating every controverted
religious Subject; it will probably be afked,
*s Where then is it to be applied? Whether
f it is teafanable to calumniate and blacken

‘ “ 2 it


ao «» Died?) CWE os |


Effay on Ripicurs,. 103


** it without difiinétion? And whether it isS ec 7.
** not Impiety, thus to vilify the Gifts of _*t
* our Maker ?”

ANp ’tis certain, that to do this, wereab-
furd and impious: As on the other hand, °
there is an equal Abfurdity and Impiety in
confounding that Order of Things which
the Creator hath eftablifhed, and endeavour-
ing to raife a blind Paffion into the Throne of
Reafon. . One Party or other in this Debate
hath certainly incurred the Cenfure:, The
Cenfure is fevere, and let it fall where it is
deferved. I know none that endeavour. to
vilify and blacken Ridicule without Dif-
tinGion, unlefs when it prefumes to elevate
itfelf into a Te of Truth: And then, asa
Rebel to the Order and Contftitution of Na=
ture, it ought to be refolutely encountered
and repelled, till it take Refuge in its own
inferior Station.

Tue proper Ufe of Ridicule therefore is, ©
** to difgrace knownFalfehood:” And thus,
negatively at leaft, ‘* to enforce known
“ Truth.” Yet this.can only be affirmed
of certain Kinds of Falfehood or Incon-
gtuity, to which we feem to have appro-
priated the general Name of Folly; And
among the feveral Branches of this, chiefly,

H 4 I think,


104 Effay on Rivicute.

Essay] think, to AFFECTATION. For as every
__"_ Affectation arifes from a falfe Pretence'to
Praife, fo a Contempt incurred tends to con-
vince the Claimant of his Error, and thus
becomes the natural Remedy to the Evil.
‘Mucu more might be faid on this Head.

We might run through numerous Divifions

and Subdivifions of Folly: Butas the Tafk

would be both infignificant and endlefs, I

am unwilling to trouble the Reader with

- fuch elaborate Trifles.

Ir feems an Obfervation more worthy of
our Attention and Regard ; that Contempt,
whence Ridicule arifes, being a /e/fi/h Paffion,
and nearly allied to Pride, if not abfolutely
founded on it; we ought ever to keep a.
ftric&t Rein, and in general rather curb than
forward its Emotions. Is there a more im-
portant Maxim in Philofophy than this, that
we fhould gain a Habit of controuling our
Imaginations and Paffions by the Ufe of
Reafon? Efpecially thofe that are rather of
the felfith than the benevolent Kind? That
we fhould not fuffer our Fears to fink. us in
Cowardice, our Joys in Weakne(s, our An+
ger inRevenge? And fure there is nota
Paffion that infefts human Life, whofe Con-
fequences are fo generally pernicious as thofe


of


Effay on Rivicute. 105
of indulged Contempt. As the commonS 2c?
Occurrences of Life are the Objeéts which _—__.
afford it Nourifhment, fo by this means it is
kept more conftantly in Play, than any other
' Affe@tion of the Mind: And is indeed the
general Inftrument by which Individuals,

_ Families, Seéts, Provinces, and Nations, are
driven from a State of mutual Charity, into
that of Bitternefs and Diffention. We pro-
ceed from Raillery to Railing ; from Con-
tempt to Hatred. Thus if the Love of Ri-
dicule be not in itfelf.a Paffion of the male-
volent Species, it leads at leaft to thofe
which are fo. Add to this, that the moft
ignorant are generally the moft contemptu-
ous; and they the moft forward to deride, |
who are moft incapable or moft unwilling
to underfiand. Narrow Conceptions of
Things lead to groundlefs Derifion: And
this Spirit of Scorn, in itsTurn, as it cuts us
off from all Information, portals us in our
preconceived and groundlefs Opinions.

Tuts being the real Nature and Ten-
dency of Ridicule, it cannot be worth while
to defcant much on its Application, or ex-
plore its Subferviency to the Ufes of Life.
For though under the fevere Reftrictions of
noe it may be made a proper Inftru-
ment


106 Effoyen a | ‘3


Essay ment-on many - Occafions, for difgracing
____ Anown Folly; yet the Turn of Levity it gives
the Mind, the Diftafte it raifes to all.candid
and rational information, the Spirit of Ani-
mofity it js apt to excite, the Errors. in which
it confirms us when its Suggeftions are falfe,
the Extremes to which it is apt to drive us,
even when its Suggeftions are true; all
thefe confpire to tell us, it is rather to be
wifhed than hoped, that its influence upon
the whole can be confiderable in the Ser-
vice of Wifdom and Virtue.

Lorp Suarrespury himfelf, in many
other Parts of his Book, ftrongly infifts on
the Neceflity of bringing the Imagination
and Paffions under the Dominion of
Reafon.. “| The only Poifon to Reafon, fays
** he, is Paffon : for falfe Reafoning is {oon
“ redrefled, where Paflion is removed *.”
And it is difficult to affign any Caufe that
will not reflect fome Difhonour on the no-
ble Writer, why he fhould thus  ftrangely
have attempted to privilege this Paflion of
Contempt from fo neceflary a Subjection.
Let it fuffice, in Conclufion, to obferve,
that Inconfiftencies muft ever rife and be
perfifted in, when a roving Fancy, con-


= Wit and Humour, Part ii. § 1.
ducted


Effay on Rivieute. 107
conduéted by Spleen and Affeétation, goes in§ Sa
quett of idle Novelties, without fubje@ing
itfelf to the juft Reftraints of Reajon.

Upon the whole: This new Defign of
difcovering Truth by the Vague and un-
fready Light of Ridicule, puts one in mind
of the honeft Trifhman, who applied his
Candle to the Sun-Dial, in order to fee how
the Night went.


ESSAYS


[ 109 J


ESSAYS


Charaéterittics, etc.


ES SAY IW:


On the Motives to Virtue, and the
Neceflity of Religious Principle.


SECTION IL


AVING confidered the noble Wri-S £ c .
ter’s two firft Treatifes, fo far as they I.

regard the Ufe of Ridicule, we now come to
his Sokloguy, or Advice to an 4uthor, And
here, bating only a few accidental Paflages,
which will be occafionally pointed out here-
after, we fhall have little more to do, than
to approve and admire: The whole Differ-
tation being, in its general Turn, one con-


; tinued
& c | -


110 On the Motives t6 VirtTuE.

Ess ¥tinued Inftance of its Author's Knowledge
"__and refined Tafte in Books, Life, and Man-=
ners. I.could dwell with Pleafure on the
Beauties of this Work, if indeed they needed

an Explanation : But that noble Union of
Truth and Eloquence which fhines through
the whole, as it fuperfedes, fo it would dif-
grace any Attempt of this Kind. To the
Work-itfelf therefore I- recommend ~the

Reader.

~ Ti noble Writer having thus prepared”

us for the Depths of Philofophy, by enjoin-
ing an unfeigned and rigorous Se/f-Exami-
nation; proceeds to that higheft and moft
interefting of all SubjeGts, Zhe Motives to
virtuous Action. And here it will proba-
bly appear, that with a Variety of ufeful
Truths, he hath blended -feveral plaufible
Miftakes, which, when more nearly view-
ed, feem to be attended with a Train. of
very ‘extraordinary Confequences. What~

he hath given us on this Subject, lies chiefly

in the two Treatifes, which compofe his fe-
cond Volume: But as he frequently refers

us to the other Parts of his Writings, where
he hath accidentally treated the fame Points

in a more’ explicit Manner; fo the fame
Liberty of comparing one Paflage with an- ©
gaaet other,


ay ls es
a ae Se ee ee,


Qn the Motives to VirtTur. rrr


other; will, I apprehend, be judged reafona- $ # es
ble by the: candid Reader.. Thus we fhall ,
more effectually: penetrate. into his true

Scope and Intention ; and draw off, as far

as may be, that Veil of Myfery, in which,

for Reafons beft known to himfelf, he hath.

fo often wrapped his Opinions.


S BvC&t T OoNs2Ik
*TIS no uncommon Circumftance in 5 ® ¢ ™
Controverfy, for the Parties to engage in all____.
the Fury of Difputation, without. precifely
inftructing their Readers, or truly knowing
themfelves, the Particulars about which they
differ. Hence that fruitlefs Parade of Ar-
gument, and thofe oppofite Pretences ' to
Demonftration, with which moft Debates,
on every Subje&, have been infefted.
Would the contending Parties firft be fure
of their own Meaning (a Species of Self-
Examination, which, I think, the noble:
Writer hath not condefcended to mention)
and then communicate their Senfe to others
in- plain Terms and Simplicity of Heart, the
Face of Controverfy would foon be changed:
And real Knowledge, inftead of imaginary
Conqueft, would be the noble Reward of
literary Toil. .
~+ In .


r1z2 On the Motwes to Virtue.
Essay In the mean time, a Hiftory of Logo-
machies* well executed, would be no unedi-
fying Work. And in order to open a Path
to fo ufeful an Undertaking, I will venture
to give the prefent Sectionas an Introduction
to it: For fure, among all the Queftions
which have exercifed the Learned, this con-
cerning the Motives to Virtue hath given
Rife to the greateft Profufion of loofe Talk
and ambiguous Expreflion. The Argument
hath been handled by feveral of great
Name: And it might poflibly be deemed
Prefumption to differ from any of them,
had they not fo widely differed among ©
themfelves. Much hath been faid, and
various have been their Opinions concern-
ing our Motives to Virtue ; but little hath
been faid in any definitive Manner, on the
previous and fundamental Queftion, What
Virtue is? By which I donot mean, what
- AGtions are called Virtuous, for, about
that, Mankind are pretty well agreed ; but,
what that charaéteriftic Circumfance is, on
account of which, thefe Actions are called
virtuous. Till we have determined this
with all poflible Precifion, we cannot de-
termine “ upon what Foundation Man-

* A Strife about Words.

x «© kind


Be ee teh the eee pee


On the Motives to VirtTuR. 113


*¢ kind can be moved to the Practice of 5 = $e
“them.” Qur firft Inquiry therefore muft__"
be, concerning the Nature of Virtue: In
the Inveftigation of which the Moralifts

of moft Ages feem to have been remarkably
defective.

Ler us firft confider what our noble Au-
thor hath faid on this Subje&. He tells
us, “ The Mind cannot be without its Eye
‘ and Ear; fo as to difcern Proportion, dif-
‘© tinguifh Sound, and {can each Sentiment

‘and Thought which comes before it. It
can let nothing efcape its Cenfure. It
feels the foft and harfh, the agreeable
and difagreeable in the AffeGtions ; and
finds a foul and fair, an harmonious and a
diffonant, as really and truly here, as in
any mufical Numbers, or in the outward
Forms and Reprefentations of fenfible
“« Things. Nor can it withhold its Admi-
ration and Extafy, its Averfion and Scorn,
any more in what relates to one, than to
“¢ the other of thefe Subjects. So that to
deny the common natural Senfe of a
fublime and beautiful in Things, will ap-
“© pear an Afectation merely to any one
“¢ who confiders duly of this Affair®.”” The


> Inquiry concerning Virtue, Part iii. § 3.


I Per


“
o4


«ec


II4,
Es +4 ¥Perception of this Beauty he calls the moral
___ Senfe or Tafte ; and affirms, that Virtue con-


On the Motives to VintTur.


fifts in ‘* a perfect Conformity of our Af.


** fections and Actions with this fupreme
“© Senfe and Symmetry of Things.” Or,»


to ufe his own Words, “‘ The Nature of
** Virtue confifts in a certain juft Difpofition
** or proportionable Affection of a rational
** Creature towards the moral Objects of
‘* Right and Wrong *.”

Tue next Writer I fhall mention is the
learned and amiable Dr. Crarxer.. He
thinks it neceflary to reject this Idea of Vir-
tue, which the noble Writer had eftablith-
ed; and as a furer Foundation, than what
mere Affection, Senfe, or Taffe could pro-
duce, lays the Bafis of Virtue in Reafon :
And infifts that its true Nature lies in “ a
‘** Conformity of our Actions, with certain
“ eternal and immutable Relations and Dif-
“ ferences of Things, That from  thefe,
* which are neceffarily perceived by every
* rational Agent, there naturally arifes cer-


“ tain moral Obligations, whichare of them- —
“© felves incumbent on all, antecedent to all’


** pofitive Inftitution, and to all Expectas
© tion of Reward or Punifhment *.”
- © Inquiry concerning Virtue, Part iii. § 1,
4 Clarke’s Demon/t. paflim.
AFTER


On the Motives to VirtTug. 115


Arter thefe, comes an ingenious and £c r.
candid Writer, and in oppofition to both #
thefe Schemes of Moral, fixes the Nature
of Virtue in ‘‘ a Conformity of our ACtions
‘© with Truth.” He affirms, that “ no A&,
*‘ whether Word or Deed, of any Being,
“ to whom moral Good and Evil are im-
‘© putable, that interferes with any ¢rwe Pro-
“« pofition, or denies any thing to be as it is,
** can be right. That, on the contrary,
“€ everyA@ is right which does not contra-
**« di&t Truth, but treats every thing as be-
‘* ing what it is °.”
-Tuere are, befides thefe, feveral other
philofophical Opinions.concerning the Na-
ture of Virtue: As, that it confifts in fol-
lowing Nature-—-in avoiding all Extremes
_-=-in the Imitation of the Dezty. But thefe

are ftill more loofe and indeterminate Ex-
preffions, if poflible, than the former. If
therefore the firft fhould appear vague and“
ineffeGtual, the latter muft of Courfe fall
under an equal Cenfure.

Now it will appear, that all the (eee
Definitions of Virtue, which LordSuarres-
BuRY, Dr. CLARKE, and Mr, Wot.asrTon.
have given us, in defigned. Oppofition to


« Wollafton’s Rel. of Nat. §1. paffim.
I 2 each


116 On the Motives to Virtus:


Essaveach other, are equally defective ; ‘* Bes

Hl. _ « caufe they do not give us any more parti-
“ cular or determinate Ideas, than what we
*« have from that jingle Word, which with.
« {> much fruitlefs Labour they it;
$* to define.”

Ler us firft examine the noble Writer’s
Definition in this View. He fays, that
** Virtue confifts in a Conformity of ourAf-
“ fections with our natural Senfe of the
** Sublime and Beautiful in Things, or with
© the moral Objeéts of Right and Wrong. 5
--- Now; what new Idea do we gain from
this pompous Definition? Have we not the
fame general Idea from theWord Virtue, a8
from the more diffufed Expreffion of #be
Sublime and Beautiful of Things? And can=
not we gather as much from either of thefe,
as from the fubfequent Phrafe, ** the moral
Objetts of Right and Wrong ? —-They are
all general Names, relative to fomething
which is yet unknown, and which is no
more explained’by the pretended Definition,
than by the Word which is attempted to
be defined. Indeed, when his Lordthip
further affirms, that to relieve theNeedy, or
help the Friendlefs, is an Inftance of this
Sublime and Beautiful of Things, we then
3 obtain


On the Motives to Vixtut. 117
obtain a more determinate Idea,* with re-S z ¢ r;
gard to that particular Cafe. But ftill we eR
are as much as ever at a Lofs for a general
Criterion or Teft, by which theVirtue of our
other Adtions is to be determined. To fay;
therefore, that Virtue confifts in acting ac-
cording to the fair; the handfome, the fub-
lime, the beauti iful, the decent, the moral Ob-
jeéts of Right and Wrong; is really no more
than ringing Changes upon Words, We
might with equal Propriety affirm, ‘‘ that
“ Virtue confiftsin aéting virtuoufly.” This
Deficiency Mr. WortasTon clearly faw.

. They (fays he) who reckon nothing to be
‘* (morally) good, but what they call ho-
nefium, may denominate Adtions accord-
_ «© ing as that is, or is not, the Caufe or End
“ of them: But then, what is bone/tum ?
Something is ftill wanting to meafure
«© Things by, and to feparate the hone/ta
‘* from the snparigfia £3
Dr. Crarke’s Definition feems not to
include any thing more precife or determi-
nate than the noble Writer’s. He affirms,
that Virtue confifts in a Conformity of our
‘« A@tions with right Reafon, or the eter-
§ nal and immutable Relations and Dif-
£ Rel. of Nat. p. 22.
I 3 *« ferences


118


On the Motives to Vi RTUE..


Essay ferences of Things.” Here then a paral


___lel Queftion arifeth, “ What is right Rea=
eS Jon, and what thefe eternal Relations which
*« are affirmed, by the learned Writer, to be
« the Teft or Criterion of Virtue?” “And
*tis obfervable, that when he comes to prove
the Truth and Reality of thefe Relations, he
is forced to refolve it into a felf-evident Pro-
pofition. ‘* Thefe Things (faith he) are fo


* notorioufly plain and /e/f-evident, that no- -


“thing but the extremeft Stupidity of
«© Mind, Corruption‘of Manners or Per-
“* verfenefs of Spirit, can poffibly make any
«« Man entertain the leaft Doubt concerning
“them.” Thus too, his ingenious Advo-
cate, when pufhed by his Adverfary to de-
clare, whether he perceives the Truth of
thefe Relations by Proof or Intuition, con-
fefles “‘ they may be looked upon as /é/f-
<< evident®”’ Herethen wemay obferve 2
ftrong Coincidence between the noble Wri-
ter’s Syftem of Expreffion, and this of Dr.
CLARKE: For as one affirms, that the


Sublime and Beautiful of Things is felf-—


evident, fo the other affirms the fame of the
Fit and Reafonable. Andas the Sublime and


s Demonft. p
& Balguy’s Foun 2d is of Mor. Goodne/s, p. 10-


Beautiful


al A


On the Motives to Virtur. 119
Beautiful give us no more determinate Ideas Sz ¢ 1,
than the Virtuous, fo neither can we obtain
any additional information from the Fit and
Reafonable. We are equally at a Lofs to
know. what is fit and reafonable, as to know
what i is virtuous: ‘Therefore the one can ne-
ver be an adequate Definition of the other.
' Here too Mr, WorzasrTon plainly faw the
Want of Precifion. <‘ As to thofe (he faith)
© who make right Rea/on to be a Law --~
“< jt.is true, that whatever will bear to be
“< tried by right Reafon, is right ; and that
«which iscondemned by it, wrong :---But
«the Manner in which they have delivered
“ themlelves, is not yet explicit enough. It
“leaves Room. for fo many Difputes and
_** oppofite right Reafons, that nothing can be
“* fettled, while every one pices that Ais
** Reafon is right!,”

Now it will doubtlefs appear a Circum-
ftance of Singularity that Mr. WoxLas-
ToN, who faw the efflential Defects of thefe
two Definitions, thould himfelf offer a third,
which is precifely liable to the fame Ob-
jection, ‘‘ Virtue (faith this learned Wri-
“ ter) confifts in a Conformity of our
“ Actions with Truth; in treating every

Rel. ? Nat. p. 23.
I 4 « thing


120 = On the Motwwes to Vir tut.
Ess av« thing as being whatit is.” Well: Be it
—_fo. Yet the Queftion ftill recurs, What is
moral Truth? And this demands a Definition
no lefs than Virtue, which was the Thing
to be defined. Had Lord SuHarrespury ~
lived to fee this new Theory propofed, how
naturally would he have retorted Mr.Wot-
LAsTon’s Objection? ‘ You, Mr. Wor-
““ LasToN, reckon nothing to be morally
“* Good, but what you call Truth : And you
“ thay indeed denominate Actions, accord=
‘* ing as that is, or is not, the Caufe or End
“ of them: But then, what is Truth 2?
** Something further is ftill wanting to mea-
“* fure Things by, and to feparate Truth
** from Falfebood.”’---Thus too would Dr.
CLarxe have naturally replied: “Tis
“© true, that whatever will bear to be tried
“* by Truth, is right; and that which is con-
‘© demned by it, wrong: But the Manner
** jn which you have delivered yourfelf, is
*¢ not yet explicit enough. You have ra-
“« ther confounded my Definition, than gi-
*« ven anew one of your own: All that
«* you have added, is in an Impropriety of
“ Speech. I fpeak of the Reéttude of
« AGtions, you of the Truth of Adtions ;
«© which I call an Impropriety of Speech,
« ‘becaule


On the Motives to Virtue. 12t


becaufe Truth relates to Affirmations, not § iL ”
to Aétions ; to what is faid, not to what____+
is done. But fuppofing the Propriety of
your Expreffion, what further Criterion
have yougained? Youconfefs, that Truth
is difcovered by Reafon only; for you
fay, that to deny Things to be as they are,
“* 4s the Tranfgreffion of the great Law of our
“* Nature, the Law of Reafon*. If fo, then
“* Reafon is as good a Guide as Truth;
We can as certainly know what is right
“* Reafon, as what is Truth. If therefore
my Definition is defective, your’s muft be
fo too. If mine leaves Room for fo many
* Difputes and oppofite right Reafons, that
nothing can be fettled, while every one
pretends that his Reafon is right ; your’s
“* muft of neceffity be liable to the fame
Objection, muft leave Room for fo many
** Difputes, and oppofite Truths, that nothing
can be fettled, while every one pretends
“¢ that his Idea of Truth is the right one.
‘¢ Truth, then, can never be a better Cri-
“‘ terion than Reafon, becaufe our Idea of
“ Truth muft always depend upon our
S Reafon,”


ce


k Rel. of Nat. p. 15.
Tuus


122


Bo: - 4¥. .Tuus it fhould feem,. that


Ou the Motives to Virtur.


_ Jt _Iebrated Writers have not given. the Satif=—


tt our three'ce


 faGtion which might have been expected in


an Affair of fach philofophical Importance.
Their common. Attempt: is to define the
Nature, or fix the Criterion of Virtue: ‘To.
this End, the firft affirms, it confifts ina —
Conformity | of our Actions to the Fair and
Handfome, the Sublime and, Beautiful | a
Things: : The Second, the Fitnefs, Reafons,


Truth of Things. But inafmuch as thefe —


general Terms of Beauty, Fitnefs, Truth,


conyey not any more determinate Idea, than
that of Virtue, which they are brought to


define; the feveral pretended Definitions
are therefore teedequate and defective’.


'Let it be Boiewiedl onde for all, that the Definitions
here cenfured as defective, are little more than dire:
‘Tranfcripts of what the old Greek Phifofophers, and
Tully after them, have {aid on the fame Subje@. To
fhew how generally this Kind of Language infeéts the
Writers on Morality, we need only: tranferibe the fub-
fequent Paflage from a Follower of the noble Writer.


«We need not therefore be at a Lofs, faid he, for a —


“< Defeription of the fovereign Good—We may call it
“© Reétitude of Conduct. —If that be too contraéted, We
*€ may enlarge, and fay, ’tis—to live perpetually fele&-
“© ing and rejecting according to the Standard of our Be-
“¢ ing. If we are for ftill diftcrentViews, we may fay,
“ *tis—to live in the Difcharge of Moral Offices—to


WuaT


sat
>


and Relations of Things: The Third,’ the ag


“J


On the Motives to Virtuz. 123.


 -‘Wuar then is Virtue? Let us confider § ae T.
its true ‘Nae in the following Section.


doe setae ato Ill.


THERE are few among Mankind, whos ¢ cv.
have not been often ftruck with Admira- III:
tion at the Sight of that Variety of Colours
and Magnificence of Form, which appear
in an Evening Rainbow. The uninjfiruct-
ed in Philofophy confider that fplendid
Object, not as dependent on any other,
but as being pofiefled of a felf-given and
original Beauty. But he who is led to
to know, that its Place and Appearance al-
ways varies with the Situation of the Sun;
that when the latter is in his Meridian, the
former becomes an inconfiderable Curve
fkirting the Horizon ; that as the Sun de-
{cends, the Rainbow = oe ; till at the Time
of his Setting, it encompafies the Heavens
with a glorious Circle; yet dies away when
he difappears ; the Inquirer is then con-

_ vinced, that this gay Meteor did but thine


«‘ live according to Nature—To live according to Virtue
“© To live according to ju/?- Experience of thofeT hings
«¢ which happen around us,” Three ,Treatifes by
j. H. Treat. 3d, p. 27.


with


124 On the Motives toVikT UE.


E say with a Jorrowed Splendor, derived from thé
——— Influence of that mighty Luminary,

Tuus, in like manner, though the Beau-
ty, Fitnefi, Truth, or Virtue, of all thofe
Aédtions which we term morally Good, feeri
at firft View to refide in the feveral AGtions,
in an original and independent I Manner ; $
yet on anearer Scrutiny we thall find, that,
properly {peaking, their Naturearifeth from
their Ends and Confequences; that as thefe
vary, the Nature of the feveral Aétions
varies with them; that from thefe alone,
A@tions gain their Splendor, are denomi-
nated morally Good, and give us the Ideas
of Beauty, Fitne/s, Truth, or Virtue.

Tue firft Proofs in Support of this
Opinion fhall be drawn from thofe very
Writers who moft zealoufly oppofe it. And
here ’tis firft remarkable, that ‘‘ while they
“* attempt to fix their feveral Criterions of
** abfolute independent Beauty, Fitnefs,
** and Truth; they are obliged to admit
“* Exceptions, which effectually deftroy what
“© they defign to eftablith.” The follow-
ing Inftance, from one of thefe celebrated
Writers, is equally applicable to the other
two,

Mr.


~ On the Motives to Virtue. 125


Mr.Wo ttaston fpeaks in the following § = T.
Manner: ‘To talk to a Poft, or otherwife_
*© treat it as if it was a Man would furely
*€ be reckoned an Abfurdity, if not Dif-.
** traétion. Why? Becaufe thisis to treat
“ it as being what it is not. And why
© fhould not the Converfe be reckoned as
*© bad; that is, to treata Man as a Poft ?
«© As if he had no Senfe, and felt not In- .
** juries which he doth feel; as if to him
‘*¢ Pain and Sorrow were not Pain ; Hap-
** pinefs not Happinefs™.” Now, you fee
that on his Scheme of abfolute irrelative
‘Truth, the Abfurdity of talking to a Poft is
precifely of the fame Nature with that of
injuring a Man: For in both Cafes, we
treat the Poft and the Man, as being what
they are not. _Confequently, on this Philo-
fophy, if it be morally Evil, to injure a Man,
’tis likewife morally Evil to talk to a Poft.
Notthat I fuppofe Mr.WotLaston would
have maintained this Confequence. He
knew that the firft of thefe Abfurdities
would only deferve the Name of Fully ;
the latter, of a Crime. As therefore he
allows that Truth is equally violated in —
either Cafe ; as there is fomething highly
» Reb of Nat. prs.”
immoral


126 © Oxnthe Motwes to Virtue.
Essa¥ immoral in the one, and nothing immoral in
the other, here is an Exception which over-
turns his Principle: which proves that the —
Morality or Immorality of Actions depends
on fomething di/liné from mere ania
irrelative Truth.

Tur fame Exception muft be admitted
oh Dr. CLarxKr’s Syftem of Expreffion,
For fure, ’tis neither fit nor reafonable, nor
agreeable tothe Relations of Things, thata
Man fhould talk to a Poft. Yet, although
it be admitted as irrational and abfurd, 1
do: not imagine, any of Dr. CLaARKE’s De-+
fenders would fay it was zmmoral. So
again, with regard to Lord SHAFTESBURY,
tis clear there can be nothing of the Sublime
or Beautiful in this ACion of talking toa
Poft : On the contrary, there is (to ufe his
own Manner of Exprefiion) an apparent
Indecency, Impropriety, and Diffonance in
it. Yet, although his Admirers might
juftly denominate it zncongrucus, they would
furely be far from branding it as vik,
Here then the fame Exception again takes
place, whichdemonftrates, that Virtue cane
not confift either in abfrac& Fitnefs or
Beauty; but that fomething further isre-


quired in. order to conftitute its Nature.
PossIBLY


On the Motives to VintTvuE., 127
'. Possrany therefore, the Patrons of thefe Sz c 1,
feveral ‘Theories may alledge, that Actions a
which relate. to inanimate Beings only, can
properly be called no more than zaturally
beautiful, fit, or true: But that moral Fit.
nefs, Beauty, or Truth, can only arife from
fuch’' AGtions as relate to Beings that are
Senfible or intelligent. Mr. Baiouy ex-
prefily makes this Exception: He affirms,
that ‘* moral Aétions are fuch as are know-
** ingly directed towards fome Object in-
** telligent or fenfible’.”
Awp fo far indeed: this Refinement ap-
proaches towards the Truth, as it excludes
all inanimate Things from being the Ob-
jeéts of moral Good and Evil. Yet even
this Idea of moral Beauty, Fitnefs, or Truth,
is highly indeterminate and defective: Be-
caufe innumerable Inftances may be given,
of AGtions direéted towards Objects fenfible
and intelligent, fome of which Adtions are
manifeftly becoming, fit, or true; others as
manifeftly zxcongruous, irrational, and falfe ;
yetnone of them, in any degree, virtuous
or vicious, meritorious or immoral. ‘Thus
to fpeak to a Man in a Language he under-
ftands, is an Action becoming, fit, or true;


® Firft Treat. on Moral Goodnefs, p. 28. iy
3 tis


128


On the Motives to Virtur.


Essay’tis treating him according to the Order,


—_—_—_—


Relations, and Truth of Things; ’tis treat-


ing him according to what he is. On the
contrary, to fpeak to him ina Language he
underftands not, is an Action neither Je-


coming, fit, not true; ’tis treating him ac~
cording to what he is not ; ’tis treating him’


asa Pof. But although the firft of thefe
Adtions be undeniably becoming, fit, or
true, who will call it Virtue? And though
the latter be undeniably incongruous, irra-
tional, and falfe, who will call it Vice? Yet
both thefe Actions are diretted towards a
Being that is fenfible and intelligent. It
follows therefore, that an Aétion is not
either morally Good or Evil, merely becaufe
it is conformable to the Beauty, Fitnefs,


or Truth of Things, even though it be di-


rected towards an Object both /enfible and
intelligent ; but that fomething ftill further,


fome more diftinguifhing and chara¢teriftic _


Circumftances is neceflary, in order to fix its
real Effence.

Wuart this peculiar Circumftance may
be, we come now to inquire. And the
firft Lights in this Inquiry fhall be bor-
rowed from thefe very celebrated Writers,
whom we have here ventured to oppofe.

For


a


On the Motives. to Virt UR.


For fuch is the Force and Energy ¢ of Truth, $ zc
that, while they are atteriipting to ‘involve 5 a re


her in a Cloud of Metaphyfics; the breaks
through the myftic Veil they had prepared
and woven for her with fo much Art, and
diffufeth a Stream of genuine Luftre, which
the moft obdurate Prejudice can hardly
withftand.

_ Anp firft, though the zod/e Writer every
where attempts to fix an original, indepen-
dent, moral Beauty of Aétion, to which
every thing is to be referred, and which it-


felf is hot to be referred to any thing fur-.


ther": Yet when he comes to an Enume-
ration OF thofe particular A@tions, which
may be called morally Beautiful, he always
fingles out fuch as have a Wired and necef-
fary Tendency to the Happinefs of Mankind,
Thus he talks of the Notion of a public In-
tereft °, as neceflary towards a proper Idea of
Virtue: He fpeaks of public Affection in
the fame Manner ; and reckons Generofity,
Kindnefs, and Compaffion, as the Qualities
which alone can render Mankind truly vir-
tuous. So again, when he fixes the Bounds
of the focial Affections, he evidently refers


" Bifay on Wit — Soliloquy — Enquiry — Moralifts
Mifcellanies---pafim,  ° Engu. B.i. p. 2. § 3+
K us


129


Fi


Ts


130 On the Motives to Virtue.
_Essavus to the fame End of human Happinefs.
il If Kindnefs or Love of the moft natural
*€ Sort be immoderate, it is undoubtedly
“¢ vicious. For thus over-greatTendernefs
& deftroys the Effect of Love; and exceflive
*« Pity renders us incapable of giving Suc-
“ cour ‘.’” When he fixes the proper De-
" grees of the private Affections, he draws his
Proof from this one Point, ‘ that by
“ having the Self-Paffions too intenfe or
* ftrong, a Creature becomes miferable'.”
Laftly, when he draws a Catalogue of fuch
Affections, as are moft oppofite to Beauty and
moral Good, hefeleéts “* Malice, Hatred of
** Society---Tyranny---Anger---Revenge--=
‘© Treachery---Ingratitude’.” 1n all thefe
Inftances, the Reference to human Happi-
nefs is fo particular and ftrong, that from
thefe alone an unprejudiced Mind may be
convinced, that the Production of buman
Happine/s is the great univerfal Fountain,
whence our Actions derive their moral
Beauty.

Tuus again, though the excellent Dr.
CLARKE attempts to fix the Nature and
Effence of Virtue in certain Differences,
Relations, and Fitnefles of Things, to which

9 Enqu. Bi ic po 2. § 3. t Tbid. * Ibid.

our


Ou the Motivesio Virtus. 431


otir Actions ought ultimately to be referred; § tie CT.
/yetin enumerating the feveral A@ions which 2
he denominates morally Good, he mentions
none but what evidently promote the fame
great End, “the Happinefs of Man.” He
juftly {peaks of the Welfare of the Whole, as
being the zeceffary and. moft important Con-
fequence of virtuous AGtion. He. tells us,
‘* That it is more fit that Gop fhould regard
** the Good of the whole Creation, than that
** he thould make the Whole continually
** miferable : That all Men fhould endea-
** vour to promote the wnzverfal Good and
“* Welfare of all; than that all Men fhould
“* be continually contriving the Ruiz and
“ Deftruétion of all‘.’ Here again, the
Reference is fo dire&t and ftrong to the
Happinefs of Mankind, that even from the
Inftances alledged by the worthy Author, it
appears, thata Conformity of our Actions to
this great End, is the very Effence of moral

ReGitude.

Mr, Woxtasron is no lefs explicit in
this Particular: For in every Inftance he
brings, the Happine/s of Man is the fingle
End to which his Rule of Truth verges in
an unyaried Manner. Thus in the Paflage

' Demonft. p. 455 bc.

we Ue already


132 On the Motwes toVir tur:
Ess avalready cited, though he confiders the talk-
———__ ing to a Poft as an Abfurdity, he is far from
condemning it as an immoral Action: But
in the fame Paragraph, when he comes to
give an Inftance of the Violation of moral
Truth, he immediately has Recourfe toMan;
and not only fo, but to the Happinefs ‘at
Man. ‘ Why (faith he) fhould not the
“© Converfe be reckoned as bad ; that is, to
“© treat a Man as a Poft, as if he had no
« Senfe, and felt not Injuries, which he
© doth feel; as ifto him Pain and Sorrow
‘© werenot Pain; HappinefsnotHappinefs?”
At otherTimes he affirms, that “the Impor- ~
«© tance of the Truths on the one and the
“© otherSide fhould be diligently compared’.”
And I would gladly know, how oneTruth
can be more important than another, un-
lefs upon this Principle, and in reference
to the Produétion of Happinefi. Himfelf
indeed, confirms this Interpretation, when
he fpeaks as follows: “‘ The Truth violated
** in the former Cafe was, B hada Property
“< in that which gave him fuch a Degree of
** Happinefs : That violated in the latter was,
** B had a Propriety in that which gave him
“* a Happinefs valtly fuperior to the other:
Rel, of Nat. p 19.


”~


& The


On the Motwes to Vintur. 133.


«< The Violation ¢herefore in the latter Cafe S # ¢ Te
<< was upon this Account a vaftly greater
‘* Violation than in the former *.”’ ;

Turse Evidences may feem. fafficient:.
But that all poffible Satisfaction. may be gi-
ven in a Circumftance which is of the ©
greateft Weight in the prefent Queftion, |
thefe-further Obfervations may be added..

‘As therefore thefe celebrated Writers,
give no Inftances of moral Beauty, Fitnefs,
or, Truth, but what finally relate to the
Happinefs of Man; fo, if we appeal to the
cominon Senfe of Mankind, we {hall fee,
that the Idea of Virtuehath never been uni-
' verfally affixed to any A@ion or Affection
ofthe Mind, unlefs where this Tendency
to iptoduce Happinefs was at leaft apparent.
What are all the black Catalogues of Vice
or moral Turpitade, which we read in
Hiftory, or find in the Circle of our own
Experience, what are they but fo many In-
ftances of Mifery produced? And what are
the fair and amiable Atchievments of Le-
giflators, Patriots, and Sages, renowned, in
Story, what but fo many Efforts to raife
Mankind from Mifery, and eftablith the
public Happinefs on a fure Foundation ?


* Rel. of Nat. p. 21. :
K 3 Fhe


134 Onthe Motives toVirtus.
a a4’ The firt are vicious, immoral, deformed, bee
~——__caufe there we fee Mankind affiéted, or de~
ftreyed: The latter are virtuous, right, beau-
tiful, becaufe here we fee Mankind pre-
Jerved and afffted. j
Bur that Happinefi is the latt Criterion:
or Teft, to which the moral Beauty, Truth,
or Reétitude of our Affections is to be re-
- ferred, the two following Circumftances de-
monfirate: Firft “thofe very Affections and
«« AGions, which, in the ordinary Courfe of
“Things, are approved as virtuous, do
e change their Nature, and become vicious
“in the ftri€teft Senfe, when they contra-
«di this fundamental Law, of the greateft
** public Happinefs.” Thus, although in
general itisa Parent’s Duty to prefer a Child’s
Welfare to that of another Perfon, yet,
if this natural and juft Affection gain fuch
Strength, as to tempt the Parent’ to violate
the Public for his Child’s' particular Wel-
fare ; what was before a Duty, by this be-
comes immoderate and criminal. ‘This the
noble Writer hath allowed: ‘If Kindnefs.
“ or Love of the moft natural Sort be im.
“* moderate, itisundoubtedly vicious’.” And
hence, he fays, ** the Excefs of motherly
¥ Eng. on Virtue.
sree « Love


On the Motives to VinTUge


135


«© Love is owned to be a vicious Fond-S e.¢ r.


« nefs*.. The fame Variation takes place
with regard to every other Relation between
Man and Man. Infomuch, that the fupe-
rior Regards which we owe to our Family,
Friends, Fellow-Citizens, and Countrymen
---Regards which, in their proper Degree,
afpire to the amiable and high Names of
domeftic Love, Friendfbip, Patriotifm,---
when once they defert and violate the grand
Principle of univerfal Happinefs, become a


eee


vicious Fondnefs, a mean ‘and odious Parti-—


ality, juftly ftigmatized by all, as toa
nious and unworthy. .

SECONDLY, with fuch uncontrouled ves
thority does this great Principle command
us; that “ Actions, which are in their own
“Nature moft theckine to every humane
s¢ Affection, lofe at once their moral Defor-
« mity, han they become fubfervient to
“ the general Welfare; and. affume both
“the Name and the Nature of Virtue.”
For what is more contrary. to every gentle
and kind Affe@tion, that dwells in the hu-
man Breaft, than to fhed the Blood, or de-
ftroy the Life of Man?. Yet the ruling Prin-
ciple above-mentioned, can reconcile us

= Enq. on Virtue,
K 4 even


136  Onthe Motives to Virtue.

E ssaveven to this. And when the Neceflity of
Tl. public Example compels us to make a Sa~
_ ¢rifice of this Kind; though we may la-
ment the Occafion, we cannot condemn the
Fat : So. far are we from branding it as
Murder, that we approve it as ‘fu/tice : and
always, defend it on this great Principle
alone, that it was neceffary for the public

Good. 3 Pies tsig healt
_ Tus it appears, that thofe Aétions
which we denominate Virtuous, Beautiful,
Fit, or True, have not any abfolute and in-
: dependent, but a relative and reflected Beau-
ty: And that their Tendency to produce
Happinefs is the only Source from whence
they derive their Luftre. Hence therefore
we may obtain a juft and adequate Defi-
nition of Virtue: Which is no other than
« the* Conformity of ourA ffections with the


- ».®'TheGentlemen'above examined feem to have mif-
taken the Attributes of Virtue for its Effence. Virtue is
procuring Happinefs: To procure Happinels is beauti~
ful, reafonable, true ; thefe are the Qualities or Attri-
butes of the Action: But the Adtion itfelf, or its B/-
fence, is procuring Happinefs.

The Reader who is curious to examine further into
this Subje&t, may confult the Prelim. Differt. to Dr.
Law’s Tranflation of K1na’s Origin of Evil : Toge-
ther with feveral Paffages in the Tranflator’s Notes,
where he will find Senfe and Metaphy/ics united ina
yery eminent and extraordinary Degree.


** public


On the Motives to Viktur, — 137
* public Good : ” Or “the voluntary Prov $ new
« duétion of the greatett Flippinels. _ =


—


SECTION W.


IT, may poffibly feem ftrange that fo Seer).
nivich has been thought neceflary tobeop=_
pofed to thefe metaphyfical Refinements con=
cerning the Nature of Virtue: But in Rez
ality, ’tisa Point of the utmoit Confequence:
For thefe Refinements have given Rife to’a
plaufible Objection, which shath been re
tailed ina popular Manner bya late wordy
Writer ;° whofe leaft Merit it is to have fup>
plied our modith Coffee-houfe Philofophers
with fuch a Variety of fa{hionable Topics,
that they have never felt the leaft Want of
that antiquated Afliftance derived from
Knowledge, Parts, and Learning.

Tuts Gentleman taking Advantage of
thefe metaphyfical Refinements, and parti~
cularly of the noble Writer’s imaginary
‘Scheme of 2b/olute, irrelative Beauty, ‘* the
** Hunting after which: (he elegantly “af.
** firms) is not much better than a wild
© Goofe Chafe > ;” attempts from hence to
demonftrate, forthe Benefit of his Country,
b Fable of the Bees, vol. i. 1p. 380. 0&. Ed.

that


138  Onthe Motives to VirtTuR,


& ssaythat; we are utterly miftaken, when we
« look upon Virtue and Vice as permanent,
“© Realities, that muft ever be the fame in
‘¢ all Countries and all Ages*: And thus
he profecutes his Argument. iS

.- ©. "Tus Worth or Excellence of every thing
AS fays, varies according to, Fancy or Opi-
nion. ‘ Even in human Creatures, what
‘* ‘is beautiful in one Country, is not fo in
“* another. --- Three hundred Years ago,
“«-Men were fhaved as clofely as they are
“now; fince that, they have wore Beards. —
‘« ~--How mean and comical a Man looks,
** that is otherwife well-dreffed,in a narrow-
* brimed Hat, when every body wears
‘broad ones ? And again, how monftrous
** isa very great Hat,* when the other Ex-
** treme has been in Fafhion for a confidera-—
** bleTime?---The many Ways of laying out
** a Garden judicioufly are almoft innumera-
** ble’; and whatis called Beautiful in them,
“ varies according to the different Ta/le of
‘© Nations and Ages‘. Thus capricious
and uncertain, he tells us, are our Ideas of
natural Beauty ; and thefe he brings home
to the Point of Morals: ‘ In Morals there
‘is no greater Certainty : Plurality of

© Fable of the Bees, p.372 4 P. 376.
«Wives.


On the Motives to VirTuE. 139
“Wives is odious among Chriftians, and all S.® ¢ 7
“ the Wit and Learning of a great Genius ___"_.
“* in Defence of it, has been rejected with .
“* Contempt. But Polygamy is not fhock-

“* ing to a Mahometan. What Men have
“¢ Jearnt from their Infancy enflaves them,
*t-and the Force of Cuftom warps Nature,
“< and at the fame time imitates her in fuch
‘** a Manner, that. it is often difficult to
** know, which of them we are influenced
““ by. In the Eaft formerly, Sifters mar-
*« ried Brothers, and it was meritorious for
** a’Man to marry his Mother, Such Al-
S* liances are abominable: But it is certain,
** that whatever Horror we -conceive,at the
‘ Thoughts of them, there is nothing in

_* Nature repugnant againft them, but what)
** is built upon Mode and Cuftom.....A re-
** ligiousMabometan may receive as great an
© Averfion againit, Wine ‘.”.. Hence, with
great Stretch of Reafoning, he concludes,
** that Virtue and Vice are not. permanent
** Realities,” .but vary as other Fathions,
and are fubjeé to no other Law, than that
of Fancy and) Opinion. -
Anp fo far indeed, this Ciitlonas feems
to have argued juftly, while. he .contends


¢ Fable of the Bees, p. 3773 379: ig
that


E40 On the Motives to. Virtur.

Es Say that tnereApprobation and Diflike, the mere
~~ Idea ‘of “Beauty and Deformity, Truth or
 Rectitude, -without Reference to fome fur-
ther End, ‘can never conftitate a real or per
qanent Foundation of Vice ot Virtue. For,
as he hath obferved, there Aave indeed been
confiderable “Differendes) of ‘Opinion upon
Jone Kinds of moral Beauty and Deformity,
in the different Nations: and Ages of the
World: Atid each Age and Nation hath
ever been alike pofitive im afferting the Pro-
ptiety of itsown. Therefore, unlefs wé
have fome further Teft, fome other diftin-
guifhing and characteriftic-Circumftance td
refer 'to, befides ‘that of mere Approbation
and Diflike; ow fhall'iwe ever know,
which of : thefe anomalous Opinions are right
or wrong?” If we have nothing further to

. appeal to, than the mere Propriety of Ta/z,

| though each may be thoroughly fatisfied of

the Juftnefs of his own ;' yet: he ought in
Reafon to allow the fame Right of Choice
to the reft of Mankind in every Age and
Nation: And thus indeed, moral Beauty and

_ Deformity, Virtue and Vice, could have no

- Other Law, ‘than that of Fancy and Opinion.

Bur when the great End of'public Hap-

| pinefs is oltinwely referred to, as the one,

1 uniform


On the Motives to Virtue, I4r
uniform Circumftance that ‘conftitutes ‘the § = ¢ ™
Reétitude'of human Actions ; “then indeed —__-_,
Virtue and Vice affame amore real and per-
manent Nature: The common Sen/e, nay,
the very Necefities of Mankind, will urge
them to make an unvaried ahd juft Dife
tinétion: For Happinefs and Mifery make
too ftrong an Appeal to all the Faculties of,
Man, to be borne down by the Caprice of
Fancy and Opinion. ‘That it was either anv
accidental or a defigned Inattention to the
great Principle of Happine/s, that gave this
coarfeWriter an Occafion to call in queftion
the permanent’ Reality of Vice and Virtue,
the following Confiderations may fuffici-
ently convince us.

SHOULD any one afk; whether Health and
Sicknefs are two different Things, no doubt
we fhould anfwer in the Affirmative: And
would furely fufpe& any Man’s Sincerity,
who fhould tell us, that what was accounted
Health in one Age or Nation, was ac-
counted Sicknefs in another. There are
likewife fuch Things as wholefome Food
and Poifons: Nor would we entertain a
much better Opinion of him who fhould
affirm that a depends upon Fancy; that
Breaa or Milk are nourihing or deftructive,
that


142 On the Motives to Virtus:


‘Es say that Arfenic and Sublimate are wholefome
or poifonous, as Imagination and Opinion
diétate. On the contrary, we know their
Nature with refpeét to Man, is invariable :
The one, univerfally wholefome, the other,
poifonous. Further : we know there have
been Debates among Phyficians, about Re»
gimen and Diet: That fome have main-
tained the Wholefomenefs of animal, others
of vegetable Food : Some recommended the
Drinking of Water, others of Wine. Yet
none was ever fo weak as to conclude from
thefe different Opinions about wholefome

- Diet, that the nourifhing Qualities of Bread
or the noxious ones of Arfenic, were not
permanent Realities with regard to Man;
or, that the firft could be made _poifonous,
the latter, wholefome, by Dint of Fancy
and Opinion. .

Now, the Cafe we are debating is exact-
ly parallel. For fure, the Happine/s and
Mifery of Mankind are Things as diftinct as
Health and Sicknefs: Whence it follows,
that certain A@tions, under the fame Cir=
cumftances, muft univerfally produce Hap-
pinefs or Mifery, as naturally as Food pro-
duceth Health, or Poifon Sicknefs and
Death. We have already feen, that what-

3 ever


On the Motives to Virtur. 143


ever tends to the Good of all, is, by the con- 5 # ¢ T-
fent of all, denominated Virtue ; that what-__
ever is contrary to this great End, is univer- os
fally branded as Vice ; in the fame Manner,
as whatever nourifhes the Body is called
Food; whatever deftroys it, Poifon, Ac-
cordingly, we find the Agreement among
Mankind as uniform on the one Subjeé, as
on the other. All Ages and Nations having
without Exception or Variance maintained,
that Humanity, Fidelity, Truth, Tem-
perance, and mutual Benevolence, do as na-
turally produce Happinefs, as Food gives
Health to the Body: That Cruelty, Trea-
chery, Lying, Intemperance, Inhumanity,
Adultery, Murder, do as naturally give Rife
to Mifery, as Poifon brings on Sicknefs and
Death.

Bur hath not this Author given fuch
Infta nces as prove, that what is detefted as
Vice in one Country, is applauded as Virtue
in another ? That Polygamy and incefluous
Marriages have been in fome Nations re-
puted /awful, in others meritorious? And if
oneVirtue or Vice be imaginary or variable,
doth it not clearly follow that all are fo?

Now a Man of a common Turn of
Thought would be apt to make a very dif-

ferent


144 On. the Motives to Virtuz.


Es vee ¥ ferent Inference. . If from the Variety of


os


Opinions among Mankind as to Some Vir-


~ tues or Vices, he concluded fhe/e were va=


riable ; 3; then from the univerfal Agreement
of Mankind. with, regard t to other Virtues

and Vices, he would conclude thefe were
fxed a and invariable. The Confent of Man-
kind in the one, proves as much as their
Difagreement in. the other. And ’tis evident
that both their Confent and Difagreement
arife from the fame Principle : A Principle
which deftroys the Tenets, which this Au-
thor labours to eftablifh. For, to refume
our Illuftration, as the various Opinions
concerning the fuperior Wholefomenefs of


this or that Kind of Diet, does not change .


the Nature of Bread or Potfon; fo neither
can the various Opinions concerning Polys
gamy or Inceft, affect or change the Nature
of Benevolence and Generofity, Adultery and
Murder. ’Tis plain, thefe various Opinions
have been formed “‘ upon fuch Actions only


“as are not univerfally and clearly con-


*€ nected with the Happinefs or Mifery of


*© Mankind.” As thefe Adtions have been |


deemed productive of the one or the other,
they have been regarded as Virtues or
Vices: But this Variety of Opinions does no

more


On the Motes toVintuk. 45
thore unfettle the Nature of thofe Aétions, S a
whofe Tendency is clear and certain; than Sr
the Debates on the fuperior Wholefomenefs
of animal or vegetable Diet can change the
Nature of Bread and Poifon. Hence it ap-
pears, that Virtue and Vice are permanent -
Realities, and that their Nature is fixed;

certain, and invariable. Z
Tuus one Extreme! produceth dnother;
For the noble Writer and this Gentleman,

through a ftrong Diflike of each other’s

Syftem, have doth endeavoured to prove
too much, and in Confequence have proved
nothing. ‘The one, contending for the per-
manent Reality of Virtue, and, not content
to fix it on its proper Bafis, attempts to efta-
blith certain abfolute. and immutable Forms
of Beauty, without Regard to any further
End; and thus, by laying a chimerical
Fousidandh, betrays the Caufe which he fo
generoufly defends, The other, intent on
deftroying the permanent Reality of Virtue
_ and Vice, and perceiving how weak a Bafis
the noble Writer had laid for their Efta-
blifhment, after proving ¢bis to be imagi-
nary, as wifely as honeftly infers, there is
_noreal one in Nature. We now fee the
Folly of thefe Extremes: That as on the
ly one


146 Onthe Motives toVirtun. |


Essa Yone Part, Virtue and Vice are Things meres


S£t¢c7T
Vv.


ly relative to the Happinefs of Man; foon
the other, while Man continues what he
is, all thofe Relations which concern his
Happinefs, and arife from his prefent Man-
ner of Exiftence, are likewife permanent
and immutable.


SECTION V.


. . BUT this idle Objection againft the per-


manent Reality of Virtue and Vice, is not
the only one which the Writer laft men-
tioned hath laboured, for the Deftruction of
Religion and Virtue. For the main Drift


and Intention of his Book is to prove no lefs -


a Paradox than this, that “‘ private Vices are
«* public Benefits.” Now, till this Ob»
jection be removed, our Idea and Definition
of Virtue can never be thoroughly efta-


-bilithed. For if private Vices be public Be-


nefits, then private Virtues are public Mi/-
chiefs. And if fo, what becomes of our
Definition?

Tue firft notable Circumftance in this
formidable Affertion of Dr. MANDEVILLE,
is its utter Inconfiftency with all that he
hath advanced in order to deftroy the


Reality of Vice and Virtue, For if indeed
4  thefe


On the MotiwvestoVintur. 147
thefe bé mere Names, the Creatures of Séc ri
Fancy and Opinion, how can they be at-__ 1+,
terided with any uniform Effects? How can
they be either public Benefits, or public
Evils ?---If, on the contrary, they really
produce certain uniform Effects, as he hath
attetnpted to prove, how can they be meré
Non-Entities, the Créatures of Fancy and
Opinion? Here lies a grofs and palpable
Incoherence: ‘Take which of his two
Theories you pleafe, the other abfolutely
deftroys it. If Vice bea public Benefit, it.
mutt be a permanent Reality : Ifit is not a
permanent Reality, it cannot be a public
Benefit.

Let us now examine the Foundations
on which he hath built this ftrange Hypo-
thefis. His Book may be analyfed into four
different Principles, which he hath varioufly
combined, or rather jumbled together, ac-
cording as each in their Turn would beft
ferve his Purpofe.

Tue firft Principle he lays down, or
rather takes for granted, is, “ that Man is
‘* a Compound of evil Paffions:” In other
Words, ‘ that the Gratification of the na-
*« ‘tural Appetites is in itfelf aVice.”” There
are ih his Book at leaft a hundred Pages

Li 2 of


ia


148 On the Motives to Vir tur.


Ess a¥of the loweft common-Place Declamation,

7 founded on this one Principle, brought
from the folitary Caves and Vifions of the
Defart. Thus the Defire of being efteem-
ed by others, he ftigmatizes with the Name
of Pride: The natural Defire of focial
Converfe between the two Sexes, he diftin-
guifheth by a groferAppellation. Ina word,
through the whole Courfe of his Argument,
he fuppofes that every felffh Appetite (that
is, every Appetite which hath regard to our=
Jelf) isin its own Nature vileand abominable.
This the candid Reader will probably think
a little hard upon human Nature: That no
Man can he virtuous, while he endeavours
to be efeemed, while he loyes to quench
his Thirft, minifter to Pofterity, or eat his’
Dinner. On the Weight of thefe plain
Inftances, the Value of this firft Principle
may be fafely left to any Man’s impartial
Trial.

Havine thus branded every Gratifi-
cation of the natural Appetites; he gains
from hence a proper Foundation for the
fecond Pillar of this Temple of Vice. For
he acquaints us with great folemnity, that,
of all other Vices, that of Luxury is moft
beneficial to a State: And that if this were

banifhed,


On the Motives to Vintuz. 149 —

banithed the Nation, all Kinds of manual § ig
Occupations would immediately languifh___"_.
and decay‘. He fays indeed, that Pedants
make Objetions to this Vice of Luxury,
and tell you, that it exervates aPeople: But
he adds, that, ‘‘ fince he has feen the World,
“© the Confequences of Luxury to a Nation
** feem not fo dreadful to him as they dids.”
Had he left the Matter here, we fhould .
have been at a Lofs to know how he would
have made out this ftrange Tale: But the.
Riddle is cleared up at once, when we hear _
him fay, that “ every thing is Luxury, that
‘* is not immediately neceflary to makeMan
** fubfift as he is a living Creature *.”

_ We fhould have been ftartled perhaps
had he affured us, that he had a Wind-mill’
which laid Eggs, and bred young ones: But
how eafily had he reconciled us to his Ve-
racity in only faying, that by a Wind-mill
he meant a Goofe, or a Turkey 2

Tus, when heaffirms that Luxury pro-
duceth public Happinefs, we ftand ready
for fome deep and fubtile Speculation, to’
fupport fo wondrous a Paradox, But when
he poorly tells us, ‘* that every thing is
f
; Fath rg ee Bees, pafim, — s Ibid. p, 247.
L 3 §* Luxury


350 On the Motwes to Virrur.

Essay Luxury that is not immediately neceffary
“© to make Man fubfift as he is a Living
“ Creature ; 3” we laugh not fo much at his
Impudence, as at our own Folly in giving
Ear to fo idle a Prater, who, when we
thought we had him reforming States, and
new-modeling Philofophy, 1 is all the while
playing at Crambo.

Lzst it fhould be fufpected, that the
Features of this Man’s Folly are here ag-
gravated, take a Copy of his Countenance
ia one Inftance out of many that might be
given. ‘ The Confequences (faith he) of
*¢ this Vice of Luxury to a Nation, feem
** not fo dreadful to me as they did.”---For
*¢ clean Linen weakeng a Man no more
“ than Flannel’.” Now from thefe Paf-
fages laid together, it appears; firft, that
Luxury isa Vice; fecondly, that to wear
clean Linen is Luxury ; and therefore, it
comes out as clear as the Day, ** that fo.
wear clean Linen is a Vice.”

Serioust¥: The Sophiftry here em-
ployed is fich an Infult as hath been but
feldom offered to the human Underftanding.
Did ever any Man before---except only a
Set of ‘wrong-headed Enthufiatts, whofe


’ Fable of the Bees, p. 1 19.
' Vifions


On the Motives to Virtour.


Vifions he is here obliged to adopt---didS # ¢ Tr. |


ever any Man maintain, that to ufe the
Bounties of Nature, or enjoy the Conveni-
ences of Life was a criminal Indulgence?.,
Did ever any Man maintain, that he could
be vicioufly luxurious, who neither burt his
Neighbour nor bimfelf? At this Rate, by.
an arbitrary Ufe of Words, and putting one ,
Expreffion for another, we might boldly
advance the moft palpable Contradictions,
and maintain that Dr. M-——-p—LE was
a Man of Modefty and Virtue.

Tuus far we have feen this Writer en-
deavouring to throw the falfe Colours of
Vice, upon the natural Paffins, and fuch a
Ufe of the Gift of Nature as is really In~
nocent. In examining his two remaining
Principles, we fhall find him acting a Part
the very reverfe; and with the fame Ef-
frontery, endeavouring to throw the fale
Colours of public Utility on {uch Aéfions and.
Affections as are really criminal and de-
fruthive.

To this Purpofe he boldly felects fome
of the moft flagrant Crimes ; and affures us,
that without their happy Influence the Pub-
lic would fuffer exceedingly. Who had
ever dreamt, that Mankind receives Benefit

L 4 from


152)


On the Motives to Virtus.


Essay from Thieves and Houfe-breakers 2? Yet he


Jee tells us, that < if all People were ftridtly
s honeft, half the Smiths in the Nation


3 would want Employment *? 7?


HicHwAYMEN too, and Rodbers are ufe- 2
ful in their Generation. For “ ifa Mifer
* fhould be robbed of five hundred or a
«© thoufand Guineas’, it is certain, that as"


¢ foon as this Money fhould come to circu=


‘* Jate, the Nation would be the better for


** the Robbery, and receive the fame and as
‘* real a Benefit from it, as ifan Archbifhop
«© had left the fame Sum to the Public ™,”


HE is abundantly rhetorical on ‘ the large
“© Catalogue of folid Bleffings that accrue


** from, and are owing ,to intoxicating
s* Gin*.” Infomuch, that if the Drunken-


* Fable of the Bees, p. 82.

' There is acommon Error with regard to Mifers,,
on which this. pretended Argument is built. They are
generally accounted the greateft Enemies of Society,
becaufe they | hoard the W ealth which ought tocirculate.
Now, to give even a Mifer his Due, this is really a


_ groundlefs Charge: For they feldom hoard more than


certain ufelefs Papers in the Shape of Notes, Bonds,
and Mortgages ; While the Wealth which they thug
hoard inImagination, circulates freely among all Ranks
of People. The Guilt of the Mifer’s Paffion lies in
it’s bank eflentially deftru&tive both of Juftice and Be-
nevolence.
® Fable of the Bees, p.83. . ” Ibid. p. 89.
) nefg


On the Motives to Virtur. — 53.
nefs and Frenzy arifing from the exceffive S £¢ T.
Ufe of this falutary Liquor were curbed by ~ =
the Magiftrate, he feems to foretell the moft .
fatal Confequences to the public Wealth
and Welfare. Bs ip

Here then he entmerates feveral real
Crimes,'which are neceffarily attended with
great Evils ; and thefe he demonftrates, are
accidentally produ€tive of fome Good. And.
this indeed is the only Part of his Argu-
ment, that is attended with any Degree of
Plaufibility : For here, it muft be owned,
there is Room for a difhoneft Mind to con-
found, though by no means to convince an
impartial Reader. Becaufe the Confe-
quences of thefe Crimes being of a various
and di/cordant Nature, fome having the Ap-
pearance of Good, and others of J// to So-
- ciety; a rhetorical Difplay of the former
may poflibly induce a fuperficial Inquirer,
who is caught by a Glare of Eloquence, to.
doubt whether she do not really predomi-
nate. But a moderate Share of Attention,
will convince us, that this is impoffible,.
Becaufe all the real Vices he mentions,
though they be accidentally productive of
fome Good ; yet ’tis fuch as might effeétu-
ally be obtained without them, Thus the
| Money


154.


=
-


On the Motives to Virtue?


Es Ls AY Money taken wrongfully by Stealth or Rob-


*
‘7


bery, is only of Service to the Public by its:
~ Circulation : But Money may circulate with-
out Stealth or Robbery ; and therefore tis,
neither the Stealth rior Robbery that is of.
Service to the Public, On the other part,
there are great and fabftantial Evils, which
thefe Crimes, and thefe alone give Rife to.
On this Occafion.one might be very large
on the Terrors and Diftrefs, the Murders,
and confequent Miferies, which: the Villa-
nies patronized by this Writer do necefla~
rily produce.. One who was Mafter of Dr.
ManDeEvILiz's Town- Experience, might
draw a ftriking Pidure of honeft and in-
duftrious Families roufed from Sleep at.
Midnight, only to be plundered and de-
ftroyed ; of the horrid Attempts of aban-
doned Wickednefs, let loofe from Fear by
the Security of Darknefs; the Shrieks of
ravifhed Maids and Matrons; the dying.
Groans of Brothers, Fathers, Hufbands,
weltring in their Blood; the Cries of in-
nocent and helplefs Orphans weeping over


- their murdered Parents, deprived at once


of all that were dear to them, of all that

could yield them Confolation or Support ;

and fuffering every vile Indignity, that un-
relenting


oa


On the Motivesto Vintun. 55


relenting Villainy can fuggeft or perpetrate.S # & rai:
And how, think you, does this Scene of __. °°


domeftic Horror change its original Nature,
and rife at length into a public Bleffing ?
Why, becaufe the Adventurers, having
made off with their Booty, may poflibly
*« lay it out upon a Harlt, or {quander it
“* in a Night-Cellar or Ginfbop?.” And
thus the Money circulates through the Na-
tion. But, in the mean time, our Philofo-
pher hath forgot the helplefs Family reo
duced to Beggary by the Prowefs of his»
nocturnal Heroes: He hath forgot that the
fond and indulgent Parent might no lefs’
probably have laid out the Money in the»
temperate Maintenance and liberal Educa->
tion of his Children, which is now {quan-
dered in unprofitable Riot and Excefs : That
thefe Deftroyers of other Mens Happinefs
and their own, had they been employed in:
honeft Labour, in the Cultivation of Lands,’
or the Improvement of Manufactures, might’
have done fubftantial Services to the Public
and themfelves, without the guilty Ay
of unprovoked Mifchief. From thefe Cir-
cumftances, impartially compared, ’tis evi-
dent, that the only effential Confequence of
? Fable of the Bees, p. 84, 85.
private


156 On the Motives to Virtur

aes ves ptivateVice is public Mifery: And thus our
~__.._ Author’s new-fathioned Syftem of ae
falls back again into nothing. y"
His fourth Principle is much lefs vlna
fible.. Indeed he never applies to this, buf
when reduced to the laft Neceffity : When.
therefore every other Foundation fails him,
he attempts to impofe upon his Reader’s
Negligence or Simplicity,’ by reprefenting’
Vice as a Caufe, where in Reality ’tis a Con-'
Sequence. Thus he tells us, “* GreatWealth:
«* and foreign Treafure will ever {corn to:

“¢ come among Men, unlefs you'll admit

“¢ their infeparable Companions, Avarice and

¢¢ Luxury: Where Trade is confiderable,

«* Fraud will intrude. To be at once well-
‘© bred and fincere, is no lefs than a Contra-.
*€ diction: And therefore whilft Man ad-:

*¢ vances in Knowledge, and his Manners
*¢ are polifhed, we muft expect to'fee at the’.

*¢ fame time his Defires enlarged, ‘his Ap-
‘© petites refined, and his Vices increafed®.”*
So again, having been driven from his other.
ftrong Holds by certain impertinent Re-»
markers, whom he wifely dififfeth with
an Air of Superiority and Contempt, ‘he
takes refuge in the fame ambiguous Phrafes;..


? Fableof the Bets, p. 20%.
As


| | On the Motives to Virtue, 157
As that “ Vice is infeparable from great and 8 ot
= potent Societies, in the fame Manner as___,
“ dirty Streets are a necceflary Evil, infe-

“© parable from the Felicity of London.” »

_. Now, though this happy Simile may
work Wonders in a Coffee-houje, amongft
thofe who fee every dirty Alley pregnant
with Demonftration; yet, ’tis to be hoped,
more ferious Readers may diftinguith bet-
ter ; and be enabled to tell him, that be-

b fore they grant his Pofition, that private

7 Vice is public Benefit, they expect he fhould

7 prove, ‘ that the Dirt in London Streets, is

“ the Caufe or Inftrument whereby London

| _ © becomes a populous and flourifhing City:”

A Propofition almoft as remote from com-
mon Apprehenfion, as that Tenterden Steeple
is the Caufe of Goodwin Sands. Thus, we
fee how dexteroufly he puts the Change upon
the unwary Reader ; and while he pretends
to, exhibit an effential Caufe, furs him off
with an accidental Confequence..

_ Into thefe four Principles, all evidently
Falfe or Foreign to the Purpofe, his whole
Book may be juftly analyfed. Nor is there
one Obfervation in the Compafs of fo many
hundred Pages, which tends to fupport the

1 Fable of the Bees; Preface, p. 9, 8x.
Zz pernicious


“158 |
Essay pernicious Falfehood that difgraceth hig 3


Ff
On the Motives to Vir Tus.


Title-Page, but what will naturally refolve
itfelf into one or other of thefe wretched
Sophifms. ”Tis therefore unneceffary to lead
the Reader through all the Windings of
this immenfe Labyrinth of Falfehood ; ’tig
enough, to have given the C/ue which may


’ fafely condué him through them.


ECT.


SECTION VI
HAVING at length gained an ade-


hes quate Idea of Virtue, and found that it is no


other than “ the voluntary Produétion of
“¢ the greateft public Happinefs;” we may
now fafely proceed to confider, “* what are
the Motives by which Mankind can be
« induced to the Praétice of it?”

Anp here we fhall find another meta-
phyfical Cloud refting upon this Path, in
itfelf plain and eafy to all Mankind. For
the very Notion of the Motives to Virtue
hath been as much confounded by moral.
Writers, as the Idea of Virtue itfelf.. And
here we might travel through another Syf-
tem of Logomachies ; while one afferts, that
we ought to be moved to love and purfue
Virtue, becaufe fhe is beautiful; another,

becaufe


a


? ae On the Motives to Virtue af¥9
‘becauufe Virtue’ is good ; ‘ariother, becaufe Sr ¢ t
Virtue is good in itfelf; a fourth, ‘becaufe _
‘Virtue is Truth; a fifth, becaufe it is agree

able to Nature ; a fixth, becaufe it is agree-

able to the Relations of Things: »

‘Bur ’tis fuppofed that the intelligent
Reader, from a Review of the firft Section
cof this Effay, may be convinced, that all
“thefe amufing Expreflions amount to no
-more than this, * that there is fome Rea-
*< fon or other why we ought to practife
-* Virtue; but that the particular Reafon
** doth not appear, notwithftanding all this
refined Pomp of Affirmation.” And as
i it hath already been made evident, that the
Effence of Virtue confifts ina Conformity of
: our Affections and Adtions, with the greateft
public Happinefs; fo it will now appear,
that “ the only Rea/on or Motive, by which
“* Individuals can poffibly be induced to the
‘* Practice of Virtue, muft be the Feeling
“ immediate, or the Profpec# of future
“private Happinefs.” >
-» Dovusriess, the noble Weiter’ s Admirers
will defpife and reje& this, as‘an unworthy
Maxim. For fo it hath happened, that in
the height of their Zeal, for fupporting his
Ap they generally ftigmatize private
7 Happinef


160 On the, Motives toVirtur,

Pa Happinef, as a Thing {carce worth a wife Ki
——— Man’s inquiring, after. “Indeed, the many |
a ambiguous Phrafes of their Matter have .
contributed not a little to. this wiger Error.
‘For in one-Place, he brands the modern
Philofophers and Divines. with the Name |
of Sophifters and Pedants, “for rating Life
‘© by the Number and Exquifitenefs of the
“© pleafing Senfations'.” At.other. Times
he fpeaks of Pleafure, with all the Con-
tempt of an ancient Stoic’. In the fame
high Style of the Athenian Porch, he paf-
feth Judgment on the Hopes of the Reli-
gious: “ They have made Virtue fo mer-

** cenary a Thing, and have talked.fo much ,
“ of its Rewards, that one can hardly tell :
“what there is in it, after all, which can
“* be worth rewarding*.” Soagain, he de«

tides thofe “‘ modern Projectors, who would

-*© new-frame the human Heart; and have

** \a mighty Fancy to reduce all its Motions,

‘* Balances, and Weights to that one Prin

** ciple and Foundation of a .cool.and deli-

‘* berate Selfifbnefs: And thus, Love of
“one’s Country, and Love of Mankind,

£* mutt alfo be Se If- Love.”


* Wit and Hum, Past iii. $4, * Moral. Pati § 3
¢ Wit, Part ii §3.
Now


_- — — <


. . On the Motives to Virtus. 68

‘Now ere we proceed further, it may be Sec r-
neceflary to temiark, that in fome Degree
there hath been a Strife about Words in this
Particular too. For thefe Expreffions of
Selfy Ufone and Difintereftedne/s have been
ufed in a very /oofe and indeterminate Man-
ner. In one Senfe a Motive is called difin-
tercfied; when it confifts in a pure Jenevo-
lent Affe&tion, or a Regard to the moral
Senfe. In another, no Motive is djfn-
terefied: For even in acting according to
thefe Impulfes of Benevolence and Con-
fcience, we gratify an Inclination, and aé
upon the Principle or zmmediate Feeling of
private Happinefs. Thus when we fay, «We
< love Virtue for Virtue’s Sake; ” ‘tis only
implied, that we find immediate Happinefs
from the Love and Pra¢tice of Virtue, with-
out Regard to external or future Confe~
quences.

ANoTHER Source of mutual Mifappre-
henfion on this Subject hath been * the In-
*€ troduction of metaphorical Exprefiions in-
“< ftead of proper ones.” Nothing is fo
common among the Writers on Morality,
as “the Harmony of Virtue.”---“ The Pro-
** portion of Virtue.” ‘So the noble Writer
frequently exprefleth himfelf, But his fa-

M


vourite


[iesamemeaal


1 On ™" Motives toVinTvE. |


Ess AY vourite Term, borrowed indeed. from “the '
gage is ic the Braury of Virtue.’ VD


lowers, ecune: the . moft ingenious « “of
fF them *, are fo enamoured, that they feem ut-
terly to have forgot they are talking in Me-
taphor, when they defcribe the Charms of
| this fovereign Fair. Infomuch, that an
unexperienced Perfon, who fhould. read
their Encomiums, would naturally fall i into
the Miftake of him, who afked the Philo-
fopher “ Whether the Virtues were. not
« living Creatures’ ?” Now this figurative
Manner, fo effentially interwoven into phi-
lofophical Difquifition, hath been the Oc-
cafion of great Error. It tends to miflead
us both with segard to the Nature of Vir-
tue, and our Motives to the Practice of it.
For firft, it induceth a Perfuafion, that
Virtue is excellent without Regard to any of
its Confequences: And fecondly, that he —
mutt either want Eyes, or common Difcern-
ment, who doth not at. firft Sight fall i in
Love with this mateble/s Lady.

Tuererore fetting afide, as cguctg as
may be, all ambiguous Expreffions, it feems
. © Cicero.) * Mr. Hutchefon, ¥ Senece Ep'ft. cxiv.

4 evident


On'the Motives to Vintur. 16: 3
evident, that “a Motive, from its very Na-Se¢r.
ture, muft be fomething that affects our-——
« felf.” If any Man hath found out a Kind
of Motive which doth not affect bimfelf, he
hath made a deeper Inveftigation into the
* Springs, Weights, and Balances” of the
human Heart, than I can pretend to. Now
what can poflibly affect ourfelf, or deter-
mine us to Action, but either the Feeling
or Profpett of Pleafure or Pain, Happi-
nefs or Mifery ?

Bur to come tothe dire@ Proof: Tis
evident, even to Demonftration, that no
Affeétion, can in the {trict Senfe, be more
or lefs feififb or difinterefied than another ;
becaufe, whatever be its Oljedt, the 4f-
Seétion itfelf is fill no other than, a Mode
either of Pleafure or of Pain; andis there-
fore equally to be referred to the Mind or
Feeling of the Patient, whatever be its ex-
ternal Occafion. Indeed, a late Writer of
Subtilty and Refinement, hath attempted ta
make a Diftinction here. He fays, “ It
© hath been obferved, that every At of
Virtue or Friendfhip is attended witha
© fecret Pleafure; from whence it hath
“been concluded, that Friendfhip and Vir-
tue could not be difinterefted. But the

M 2 Fallacy


164 Ox the. ‘Motives to VIRTUE.


Ess aye Fallacy of this is obvious. The virtuous —
en bes: Sentiment or. Paffion produces the Plea-
. «* fure, and does not arife from it. I feel
« a Pleafure in doing good to my Friend,
* decaufe I love him : but I do not love him
«for the Sake of that Pleafure*.” Now
to me, the Fallacy of this is obvious. For
in Fad, neither the Paffian, nor the Plea-
Jfure, are either the Cau/e or the Confequence
of each other; they neither produce nor
arife from each other ; becaufe in Reality,
they are the fame Thing under different Ex-
preffions. ‘This will beclear, if we ftate the
Cafe as follows: ‘ To /ove my Friend is
* tofeela Pleafure in doing him Good:”” And.
converfely ; ‘* to feel a Pleafure in doing
“© Goed to my Friend, is to love bim,”?
Where ’tis plain that the Terms are fynomy-
mous. The Pleafure therefore is the very
Pafion itfelf ; and neither prior nor poferior
to it, as this Gentleman fuppofeth.

Acaltn, that. the Pleafures of Benevo-
lence, and the moral Senfe, are ftrictly °
Selfifb, in this Senfe of the Word, like —
every other Enjoyment, feems evident from
fome -parallel Conceffions- of the noble
Writer. For thefe feemingly difinterefted

* Hume’s Effays, Mir, and. Poljt, p. 125. “ia
Pleafures


i! se, s)he


On the Motives to Virtue: 165.


Pleafures he perpetually fets on'a Level with Sx ¢ 7.
the ‘Perceptions of natural Beauty, Order,
Harmony, and Proportion. ‘Thefe laft are, ’
by all, acknowledged: to be of the felfith
Kind ; therefore the other are fo too; ber
ing ‘only a higher Order of the fame, and ex-
pee called fo by the noble Writer®,
‘He Reafons why the great’ univerfal
Principle of private Happine/s hath not been
fo’ clearly feen in the Benevolent, as in the
Self-Paffions ; feem to be thefe. Firft, Am-~
biguous Expreffions, fuch as have been re-—
marked above. | 2d/y, Perhaps fome De-
gree’ of Pride, and Affe@ation of Merit ;
becaufe’ ‘Merit feems to appear in’ what is
called «Difinteref. <3.dly, And pethaps*
priiicipally, becaufe in the Exercife of the
benevolent Paffions, the Happinefs is effen-
tially concomitant with the Paffion itfelf,
and therefore is not eafily feparated from it
by the Imagination, {6 as to be confidered
asa’ di/tinét End. Whereas in the Paffions
called ‘Seifi/h, the Happinefs fought after is
often unattainable, ‘and therefore eafily and
neceffarily diftinguithed by the Imagination
as a pofitive End. This Circumftance of
Union however, as is judicioufly remarked
» Moralifts, Parti. By,
M 3 | by


166 On the Motes to Virtues,
Essay by one of the noble Writer’s Followers,


—_____ proves the great Superiority and Excellence '

~ of the benevolent A ffections, confidered as.a~

Source_of Happinefs, beyond the Paflions.

and Appetites, commonly called the, Se/fi/b.,
Bur although thefe Obfervations be ne-.

ceflary, in order to clear.up,an Affair, which

hath been much perplexed with philofophi- —


cal, or unphilofophical Refinements ; 3 yet, on


a clofer Examination, it will appear, in the
moft direét Manner, from the noble Writer»
himfelf, that ‘ there is no other. Principle.
“ of human Adton, but that of the. imme--
« diate or forefeen Happinefs of the Agent;’”.
That all thefe amufing Speculations con-.
cerning the Comely, Fit, and Decent ; | all.


thefe verbal Separations: between Plea/ure,


Intergft, Beauty, and Good, might have been-
funk in one precife and plain Difquifition, -
concerning fuch Actions and. Affections as


yield.a lafting, and. fuch as. afford only. a
fhort and tranfient Happinefs. _ For thus,
after all, his Lordfhip explains himfelf:
“* That Happine/s is to be purfued,..and, in
« Fact, is always fought after; that) the
** Queftion is not, who /oves himfelf, and


> Three Treatifes, by 7. H. Treat, 3d. On Happi-


nefs, p. 189. fh
s¢ wha


On thé Motives to Virtue. iés


«who not ; but who loves and Jerves himfelf 8 4 T.
* ‘the rightef, and after the true/f Manner.--.—__~
‘* That ’tis the Height of Wi/dom,no doubt,
“to be rightly Selfifh.” --- Even to leave

a Family, Friends, Country, and Society

“ -.-in good Earneft, who would not, if it
“* ‘were Happinefs to do fo°?”

Turse Expreffions are fo ftrongly point-
da as to leave no further Doubt concern-
ing the noble Writer’s Sentiments on this
Subje@t. Indeed, they are the natural Dic-
tates of common Senfe unfophifticated with,
falfe Philofophy. In every fubfequent De-
bate therefore, wherein his Lordthip’s Opi-
nions are concerned, we may fafely build on
this as an acknowledged and fure Foun- ~
dation, “ that the Motives of Man to the
*¢ Practice of Virtue, can only arife-from a
*< Senfe of his prefent, or a Profpect of his
“future Happinefs,” Ee


SECTION VIL


N-O W this Conclufion will carry us to Src r.
another Queftion of a very interefting and 5 ink
abftrufe Nature: That is, ‘* How far, and
‘upon what Foundation, the uniform

© Wit and Humour, Part iti. § 3.
M 4 S Practice


On the Motives to Vinture.


Essaye Practice of Virtue, is really and clearly


«ce


connected with the Happinefs of every
“* Individual?” For fo far, as we have feen,
and no further, can every Individual be na-
turally moved to the Praétice of it.

Tuts is evidently a Queftion of Fadt:
And as it relates to the Happinefs of Man,:
can only be determined by appealing: to his
Confiitution, If this be indeed uniform and.
invariable ; that is, if every Individual hath:
the fame Perceptions, Paflions, and Defires.;
then indeed the fources of Happinefs mutt,


be fimilar and unchangeable. If, on the con-.
trary, different Men be differently confti-~:
tuted ; if they have different Perceptions,
Paffions, and Defires; then mutt the.


Sources. of their Happinefs be. equally va-
Tidus.

Ir fhould feem therefore, that ‘* while
** Moralifts have been enquiring into hu-
‘* man Happinefs, they have generally con-


** fidered it as arifing from an wniform and


** particular Source, inftead of tracing it up
** to thofe various Fountains whenceit really
“* {prings; which are indefinitely various,
** combined, and indeterminable.” And
this feems to have been the moft general


Foundation of Error. -
ly


j On the Motives to Virtur. 169


* Ir we {peak with Precifion, thereare butS # ¢ T-
three Sources in Man, of Pleafure and Pain,
-Happinefs. and Mifery :.'Thefe ‘are Senfe,
Imagination, and’ the Pafions.. Now the’
flighteft Obfervation will convince us, that
thefe are aflociated, feparated, and combined:
in Man, witha Variety almoft infinite. In:
fome, the Pleafures and Pains of Sen/fe pre->
dominate ; Imaginationis dull ;-the Paflions’
inactive. In othérs,a more’ delicate Frame?!
awakens: all the Powers of Imagination ;
the Paffions are refined ; the Senfes-difre=*
garded, ' A third» Conftitution’ is carried)
away by the Strength of Paffion: The Calls
of Senfe:are contemned ; and Imagination
becomes no more than the neceflary In-
ftrument of fome further Gratification.
From overlooking this plain Fact, feems
to have arifen the Difcordance among’ Phi-
lofophers concerning the Happinefs of Man.
And while each. hath attempted to exhibit
one favourite Picture, as the Paragon or
Standard of human Kind; they have ai/
omitted fome Ten thoufand other Refem-
blances which actually fubfift in Nature.
Tuus, moft of the Epicurean Sect, tho’
not the Founder of it*, have difcarded Be-
s Emimoveos © Qidoroos ems tase, &c. Epicurus,
; nevolence


170 = Oz the Motives to Virtus.
E oi nevolence and Virtue from-their Syftem of
——.. private Happinefs. ‘The modern Patro-

nizers of this Scheme, Mr. Hozses, Dr. ,
Manpevitte, and feveral French Writers,
after heaping up’ a Collection of fordid In-
ftances, which prove the /en/ual Inclinations
and Selfi/hnefs of Man, leap at once to their _
. defired Conclufion,:that the pretended pub-
Tic Affe@tions are therefore no more than:
the fame low Paffions in Difguife. . That
Benevolence makes no Part of Man’s Na~
ture; that the human Kind are abfolutely’
unconneéted with each other in Point of
Affection: And that every: Individual /eeks
and finds his private Happinefs inand from =
himfelf alone.
Tur noble Writer, on the contrary,
viewing the brighter Parts of human Na-
ture, through the amiable Medium of the
Socratic Philofophy ; and fixing his Atten=
Philofophus, in libro quem Ratas Opiniones infcribit,
vitam cum Fu/fitia conjun€tam : perturbatione vacare
pronunciat ; | inju/fam vero perturbatione quamplurima
refertam elle; brevi ditto multe vere fententiz, et, J
ut faummatim di¢atur, id quod hominum improbitatem
probe corrigere queat, complexus. Injuftitia enim
metropolis omnium malorum, non inime tantum
conditionis hominibus, fed femel ut comprehendamus


omnia, etiam gentibus, et civitatum populis et regibus,
maximas producit calamitates. Diadorus Sic. Eclhog.


1,25.


7
i ‘
es ere eer ee Tr) ee Oe |


tion


On the, Motives to Virtue. Soars
‘tion on the public Affections, as the Inftru-S: oa #.
ments both, of public aiid private Happi-_
nefs; rejects: the ‘Epicurean’s Pretences:with
Difdain: And fully confcious of the high
Claims and. Energy.of Virtue; (affirms that
the: private Affections are;*by no meansy:a
Foundation for private Happinefs : That,
on the contrary, wei muft univerfally pro-
mote’ the Welfare-of others, if we would
effectually fecure our own: And :thatin
every Cafe, ‘* Virtue. is. the Gud and: aa
« the Ill of every one £23 }¥ 2k

Tis plain;-no two Sytem! of Philofophy
can be more:difcordant than thefe ; -yeteach
of them. have obtained a Number of Parti+
zans in, all\ Ages of the World... The Que+
{tion relates to: a Fad, and: the Fae lies
open to-the » perfonal. Examination of all
Mankind., Whence  thenocan fo ftrange an
Oppofition, of Sentiments arife?!

. Tuts: feems to have.arifen, not from:a
Jalfe, but apartial View and Examination
of the Subject. The Stoic Party dwell alto-
gether on:the /ocial or public, the Epicurean
nolefson the private or felfifh Affections::
On thefe refpectively they declaim ; fo that)
according to the one, Mankind are naturally
© Inquiry concerning Virtues paffim.
a Race


172 On the Motives to Virtur.

Ess ay.a Race of Demi-Gods; according to the
other, a. Crew of Devils.' Both forgetting;
what is unqueftionably the Truth, that
thefe focialand private Affections are ‘blend!
ed in an endlefs Variety of Degrees, ‘and
thus form an infinite Variety of Inclinations
and of Charaéters, . Many of the particular
Faéts, therefore, which thefe two Seéts al-
ledge, are true: But the general Confe-
quence they draw  from-thefe particular

Fadts, is groundlefs and imaginary. ‘Thus,
’tis true, that Mankind reap high Enjoy-
ments from the Senfes, Imagination, and
Paffions, . without any Regard to the public
Affe@tions | But the Confequence which
the Epicuream would draw from hence, that
** therefore the Public AffeCtions are never,
“in any Cafe, a Source of private Happi-
* nefs;” this is.entirely void of Evidence:
It fuppofeth Mankind. to: be one uniform
Subject, while it isa Subject infinitely va-
rious; that every Individual. has the fame
Feelings, Appetites, Fancies, and A ffections,
while,, in Fact, they are mixed and com-
bined in anendlefs Variety of Degrees. So,
on the contrary, it muft appear to every im-
partial Obferver, that ** the Exercife of the’
£* public A ffectionsis a Source of the higheft
© Grati~


' On the Motives to Virtue. a75


‘* Gratification to many Individuals.” But $= ¢ 7,
the Stoic’s Conclufion, that ‘* therefore je
‘« uniform Exercife of the public Affections,
“< in Preference to every other, is the only
“* Source of Happinefs to every Individual ;”
this is a Conclufion equally void of Evi-
dence. For, like its oppofite Extreme, it
fuppofeth Mankind to be one uniform Sub-
ject, while, in Fad, it is a Subject indefi-
nitely various. » It fuppofes that every Indi-
vidual has the fame Feelings, Appetites,
Fancies, and AffeCtions, while, in Reality,
‘they are mixed and combined in an endlefs
Variety of Degrees,
Ler us now affign the moft probable
Foundation, on which thefe narrow. and
\ partial Syftems have been fo commonly
embraced. For, that two Theories fo op-
pofite, and fo devoid of all rational Support,
fhould have made their Way in the World,
without fome permanent Caufe beyond the
Inftability of mere Chance, feems hardly
credible.

Ir fhould feem therefore, that ‘ while
** the Patronizers of thefetwo Syftems have »
**_ attempted to give a general Picture of the
** human Species, they have all along taken
** the Copy from themfelves: And thus

“ theic


{
i
:


174 On the Motives to Virtue.
E oer their Philofophy, inftead of being a true


——_. * Hiftory of Nature, is no more than the


 Hiftory of their own Imaginations or Af-
* fections.”—~This Truth may receive fuf-
ficient Confirmation from the Lives and
Conduét of all the old Philofophers, from
the elegant Paro walking on his rich Car-
pets, to the wnbred Cynrc fnarling in his
Tub. As every Man's Conftitution led him,
fo he adopted this or that Se& of Philofo-
ply, and reafoned concerning Fitne/:, De-
cency, and Good, -Read the Characters of
Caro and Cesar, and you will clearly dif-
cover the true Foundation on which the
one became a rigid Storc, the other, a grofs
Epicurean. The firft, yet a Boy, difcovered
fuch an inflexible Adherence to the Privi-
leges of his Country, that he refufed his Af-
fent to what he thought 4 Violation of
them, though threatened with immediate
Death *, The J/atter, yet unpractifed in the
Subtilities of Philofophy, and under the fole
Dominion of natural Temper, difcovered, at
his firft Appearance in the World, fuch
Traits of Art, Spirit, and Ambition, that
Syxra declared, he faw fomething more
formidable’ than Marius rifing in him «.
Plutarch Cato'Utic. ~ 8 Suetonii Fulins Cefar.
To


On the Motives toVintur. =. 175


- ‘To bring down the Obfervation to modern § vA ms
Times; ’tis evident, that the Patronizers
of thefe two Syftems inlift themfelves ac-
cording to the fecret Suggeftions of their
feveral Paffions. Tis well known, that
the Writer of the Fable of the Bees was nei-
ther a Saint in his Life, nor a Hermit in his
Diet: He feems to have been Matter of a
very confiderable Sagacity, much Knows
ledge of the World, as it appears in popu-
lous, Cities, extremely fenfible to all»the
grofler bodily Enjoyments ; but for Delicacy
of Sentiment, Imagination, or Paffion, | for
an exquifite Ta/e either in Arts or Morals,
he appears to have been incapable of it. ---
The noble Writer is known to have been of
a Frame the very Reverfe of this : His Con-
Jfiitution was neither more nor lefs oppofite
to Dr. Manpevixir’s, than his Philofo-
phy. His: fenfual Appetites were weak ;
his Imagination all alive, noble, and capaci+
ous; his Paffions were accordingly refined,
and his public AffeCtions (in Fancy at leaft)
predominant. To thefe Inftances, a mo-
derate Share of Sagacity and Knowledge of
the World may add others innumerable, in
obferving the Temper and Conduct of the
Followers of thefe two Syftems; who al-
ways


;
i
;
\
’
\,


i ay
176. On the Motives to Virtur.
— ¥ ways take Party according tothe Biafs of ©
their own Contftitution. Among the Epi-'
cureans weever find Men of high ‘Health,
florid Complexions, firm Nerves, and a Ca+
pacity for Pleafure: OF the Store Party are
the delicate or fickly Frames Men incapa-
ble of the groffer fenfual Enjoyments, and
who either are, or think thermfelves, virtu-
ous. Now from thefe accumulated Proofs
we may be convinced, that “ they who give
“us thefe uniform Pictures of a Subje& fo
** various aS Mankind, cannot have drawn
«© them from: Nature: That, on the con
*< trary, they have copied them from their
“awn Hearts or Imaginations ; and fondly
** erected themfelves into a: general Standard
of the human Species.”

Burt although thefe Observations may
afford fufficient Proof, that the Stoée and
Epicurean Pictures of Mankind are equally
partial; yet ftill it remains:to be enquired
how far, upon the whole, the human Kind
in Reality leans towards the ove or the other :

That is, ‘* how far, and in what Degree,
it Ze the uniform Practice of Virtue conftitutes
wt thie Happinefs of individuals?’’) Now the

- only Method of determining this Queftion,
will be to felet fome of the moft ftriking
Features


: a
Sc

av

=


Ou the. Motwes to Virtues We


Features of the human Heart: By thisS £.¢ r.
Means we may approach towards. a teal Vik
Likenef;, though, from that infinite Variety
which. fubfifts, in nature, the Draught,
mutt, ever be inadequate a and defeétive.. ose

To begin with the loweft Temperature
of the, human ime Be ‘ there are. great;


“3 < and Pain, » To the: ‘Harmony of attics
the Beauty .of Forms, the Decorum of
Adtons, they are utterly infenfible.. They,
are.fagacious and learned; in all the Grati-,
fications of Senfe; but if you talk to them,
of the public. AffeGtions, of Generofity;
Kindnefs, Friendthip, Geod-will, you talk
ina Language they underftand not... They
feem, i ina Manner, unconnected with the;
teft-of their Kind ;, they view the Praifes,
Cenfures, Enjoyments, . and. Sufferings of
others, with an Eye of perfect, Indifference.
To Men thus formed, how can Virtue gain
Admittance? Do you .appeal to their Tafte’
% ESA p They have none, ' To their
nowledged Perceptions of Right and.
Wrone? Thefe,they meafure by their pri-
vate Inter eft To the Force of the public
Affettions 2. They. never felt them, ... Thus
ere 2 N every


178 Onibe Motives to Virtur.


Essay every Avenue is foreclofed, by which Virtue
_l.thould enter.

‘Te next remarkable Peculiarity is,
<¢ where not the Senfes, but Jmagination is
“< the predominant Source of Pleafure.”
Here the Tafte always runs into the elegant
Refinements of polite Arts and Acquire-
ments; of Painting Mufic, Architecture,
Poetry, Sculpture: Or, in Defect of this
truer Tafte, on the falfe Delicacies of Drefs,
Furniture, and Equipage. Yet Experience
tells us, that this Chara€ter is widely dif-
ferent from the virtuous one: That all the
Powers of Imagination may fubfift in their
full Energy, while the public Affections and .
moral Senfe are weak or utterly inactive,
Nor can there be any neceffary ConneCtion
between thefe different Feelings ;. becaufe
we fee Numbers immerfed in all the finer
Pleafures of Imagination, who never once
confider them as the Means of giving Plea-
Jure to others, but merely a_Jelfifb Gratifica-
tion. This the noble Writer feems to have
been aware of; and, not without great Ad-
drefs, endeavours to convert the Faét into a
Proof of his main Theory, though, in Rea~«
lity, it affords the ftrongeft Evidence againft
him. ‘The Venuflum, the Honefum, the

. © Decorum


On the Motives to Virtue. 179


Decorum of Things, ‘will force its Way. 8 ‘fF Te
They who refufe to give it Scope in the",
« nobler Subjects of a rational and moral
“ Kind, will find its Prevalency elfewhere,
* in an inferior Order of Things---aseither
*¢ in the Study of common .4r#s, ot in the
“ Care and Culture of mere mechanic
“ Beauties.---The Speétre ftill will haunt us,
“in fome Shape or other; and when driven
“ from our cool Thoughts, and frighted
from the Clofet, will meet us evenat .
“ Court, and fill our Heads with Dreams of
«* Grandeur, Titles, Honours, ,and a falfe
“ Magnificence and Beauty.” All this is
ingenious and plaufible: And the very cle~
gant Allufion, of ** the Speétre ftill haunt-
*< ‘ing usin fome Shape or other,” feems at
firft View to imply, that even the moft ob-
ftinate Endeavours to get rid of the Force
of moral Beauty, are ineffectual and vain.
But a nearer Examination will convince US, -
that the nobleWriter applies here to Eh-
quence, rather than Argument; and puts us
off with a Metaphor inftead of a Reajon,
For the Pleafures of Imagination, whether
they run in the Channel of polite Arts, Fur-
niture, Planting, Building, or Equipage, are

> Wit and Hum. Part iv. § 2.
N 2 indeed


On the Motives to Virtues


Es ss jf indeed no Spectre, but independent Reali=


ties fairly exifting in the Mind: ‘They have
~~ no immediate. or neceflary Connexion. with
the Happinefs of Mankind, which is often
and defignedly violated in order to gain the
Poffeffion of them. Tis true, the Pleafures
of Imagination and Virtueare often united in
the fame Mind; but ’tis equally true, that
they are often Je éparate ; 3 that they who are .
moft fenfible 1 to the one, are entire Strangers
to the ofber ; that one Man, to purchafea
fine Pidture, will opprefi his Tenant ; that
another, to relieve his diftreffed Tenant;
will Jell his Statues or his PiGures. The
Reafon is evident: The one draws his chief
Pleafure from Imagination ; the other from
Affection only, _?Tis clear therefore, that
‘ where ‘Imagination is naturally the pre-
« dominant Source of Pleafure,” the. Mo-
tives to Virtue muft be very partial and
qeak, fince the chief Happinefs arifeth from
a Source entirely diftin® from the benevolent
Affections.

' ANOTHER, and very P iditicent Pecipens
ture of the Heart of Man is, that “ wherein
‘© neither Senfe nor Imagination, but the
** Passions are the chief Sources. of Plea-
*“fure and Pain,” This often forms the


bef


On thé Motwes toVintun. 181 .
beft or the tworf? of Charaéters. As it runs Src 1
either, Firft, Into the Extreme ‘of -Selfith- - V4- 4
hefs, Jealoufy, Pride, Hatred, Envy, and
Revenge; or, 2d/y, Into the amiable Af-
fections of Hope, Faith, Candour, Pity,
Generofity, and Good-will ; or, 3d/y, Into
a various Mixture or Combination of thefe ;
which is undoubtedly the moft common
‘Temperature of human Kind.
~ Now to the firft of thefe Tempers, how
can we affirm with Truth, that there is a
natural Motive to Virtue? On the contrary,
it fhould feem, that, if there be any Mo- 3
tive, it muft beto Vice. For ’tis plain,
that from the Loffes, Difappointments, and
Miferies of Mankind, fuch vile Tempers
draw their chief Felicity. The nobleWri-
ter indeed, in his Zeal for Virtue, confiders
‘thefe black Paffions as znnatural, and brands
them as a Source of conftant Miferyi. And
fare it would be matter of Joy. to all good
“Men; to find his Proofs convincing. But
if indeed this be not a true Reprefentation
of the Cafe, I fee not what Service can be
done to the Interefts of Virtue, by di/guifing
‘Truth. *Tis not the Part of a Philofopher
‘to write Panegyrics, but to inveftigate the
2° i Enquiry,
ec N 3 real


r82 On the Motives toVintur.

Ess a¥real State of human Nature ; and the only
e—-—— Way of doing this to any good Purpofe, is
to do it im «sg For with regard to
human Nature, as well as Individuals,
* Flattery is a Crime no lefs than Slander.”

Wuen therefore the noble Writer calls
‘thefe Affections unnatural, he doth not fuf-
ficiently explain himéelf. If indeed by their
being unnatural, he means that “ they are
** fuch in their Degrees or Objects as to
** violate the public Happinefs, which isthe
«¢ main Intention of Nature;”’ in this Senfe,
"tis acknowledged they are unnatural. But
this Interpretation is foreign to the Que-
ftion ; becaufe it affects not the Individual,
But if, by their being unnatural, he would
imply, that they are ‘a Source of conftant
** Mifery to the Agent ;” this feems a Pro-
pofition not eafy to be determined in the

Affirmative,
For the main Proof which he brings in
Support of his Affertion, is, “ that the
*© Men of gentle/t difpofitions, and bef of
** Tempers, have at fome timeor other been
*€ fufficiently acquainted with thofe Dit
 turbances, which, at ill Hours, even {mall
*¢ Occafions are apt to raife. From thefe
§ {lender Experiences of Harfhnefs and ill
** Humour,


On the Motiwes toVintur. 183
«Humour, they fully know and will con- § 5 ¢ T.
* fefs the ill Moments which are paffed, oy
“ when the Temper is ever fo little galled
“ and fretted. How mutt it fare therefore
“ with thofe, who hardly know any better
** Hours in Life; and who, for the greateft
“ Part of it, are agitated by a thorow aéfivé
“* Spleen, a clofe and fettled Malignity and
“© Rancour *?”

Now, this Inftance is by no means fuf-
ficient to fupport the Affirmation. For
’tis plain, that in the Cafe of the * Men of
** gentleft Difpofitions, and beft of Tem-
*¢ pers, occafionally agitated by ill Humour,”
there mutt be a ftrong Oppofition and Dif-
cordance, a violent Confliét between the ha-
bitual AffeCtions of Benevolence, and thefe
accidental Eruptions of Spleenand Rancour ~
which rife to obftruét their Courfe. A
Warfare of this Kind muft indeed be a State
of complete Mifery, when all is Uproar
within, and the diftraéted Heart fet at Vari-
ance with itfelf. But the Cafe is widely
different, where “‘athorow active Spleen
“ prevails, a clofe and /éttled Malignity and -
** Rancour.” For in this Temper, there
is ho parallel Oppofition of contending Paf-
* Enquiry, Book ii, Partii, § 3, i‘
fions ¢


184 On the Motives to Virtur:
Es\* 4¥fions: Nor therefore any fimilar Founda?
———. tion for inward Difquiet and intenfe Mifery.
So much the noble Writer himfelf is obliged
to own elfewhere. ‘‘ Is there that fordid’
** Creature on earth, who-does not prize
** his own Enjoyment ?---Is not Malice and
S* Cruelty of the bigheft Rehifh with fome
 Natures!?”’ Again, and ftill more fully’
to the Purpofe: ‘‘ Had we Senfe, wefhould’
“* confider, ’tis in Reality the ¢horow Profli-
s* gate, the very complete unnatural Villain
* alone, who can any way bid for Happine/s
<* with the honeft Man. True Intereft is’
«“ wholly on the one Side or the other.’
«* Allbetween is Inconfiftency, Irrefolution,
‘© Remorfe, Vexation, and an Ague-fit™.’”’»
Neither. is this Acknowledgment peculiar
to himfelf: ‘To be con/fent either in Vir~
“© tue or in Vice,” was the fartheft that
fome of the moft penetrating among the
Ancients could carry the Point of Morals*,
Thus where the /e/fjfh or malevolent Af>
fe€tions happen to prevail, there can are
internal Motive to Virtue.
On the contrary; where the netuble Afe
fections of Hope, Candour, Generofity, and’
“! Moralifts, Parti. = ™ int and Hum. Parti iy. §1.
# See Arrian. Epi/?, lib, iii. ¢. 1.55)
 Benevor


7 7


«


_, Onthe MorwestoNintur. 185
“Benevolence predominate, in this beft andS x ¢ 7.
happieft of ‘Tempers, Virtue hath indeed all__ V2.
‘the Force. and Energy, which the noble
‘Writer attributes to her Charms, © For
-where the Calls of Senfe are weak; ‘the
“Imagination active and refined, the. public

Affe€tions predominant; there the mordl
Senfe muft naturally reign with uncontroul-

-ed Authority 5» muft produce all that Self&

Satisfaction, that Confcioufnefs of merited

‘Kindnefs and Efteem, in which, his Lord-
fhip affirms, the very Effence of our Mo-
-tives to Virtue doth confift. . This fhall
with Pleafure be acknowledged, ‘nay’ af-
-ferted; as “the happieft of all Tempera-
“¢* ments,” whenever it can be found or ac-
‘quired. To a Mind thus formed, Virtue
‘doth indeed bring an zmmediate and ample
‘Reward of perfect Peace and fincere Happi+
nefs in ‘all’ the common Situations of Life,
It may therefore be with: Truth. affirmed,
' that a Temper thus framed muft indeed be
naturally and internally moved to the uni-
form Pratice of Virtue. -

Tuere are, befides thefe, an ble Vax
tiety of Characters formed: from the vati-
,ous Combinations of thefe effential Ingre-
peents 3 which. are ‘not ‘ defigned as’ a full
. Exprefion


186° On” the Motives to Vintut.

E “eA¥ Exprefion of all the Tempers of Mankind’:
——— They are the Materials only, out of which
_ thefe Characters are formed. They are no
more than the feveral Species of. fimple Co-

fours \aid;..as it were, upon the Pallet;
which, varioufly combined and affociated by

the Hand of an experienced Mafter, would
indeed call forth every ftriking Refemblance,
every changeful Feature of the Heart of

Man. :

Now, among all this infinite Variety of
Tempers which is found in Nature, we fee

there cannot be any uniform Motive to Vir-

tue, fave only ‘* where the Senfes are weak,

‘* the Imagination refined, and the public

* AffeGtions ftrongly predominant.” For

in every other Charaéter, where either the
Senfes, grofs Imagination, or felfith Paffions
prevail, a natural Oppofition or Difcordance

muft arife, and deftroy the uniform Motive

to Virtue, by throwing the Happinefs of

the Agent into a different Channel. How
feldom this fublime Temper is to be found,

is hard to fay: But this may be affirmed

with Truth, that every Man is not really
pofleffed of it in the Condué of Life, who

enjoys it in Imagination, or admires it in his
Clofet, as it lies in the Enquiry concerning
Virtue.


On the. Motes to Virtus. 187
Virtue. A Charaéter of this fapreme Ex-$ 26 7+
cellence muft needs be approved by moft:
And the Heart of Man being an unexhauft-
ed Fountain of Se/f-Deceit, what it approves,
is forward to think itfelf poffeffed of. Thus
a lively Imagination and unperceived Se/f-

Love, fetter the Heart in certain ideal Bonds
of their own creating : ‘Till at length fome
turbulent and furious Paffion arifing in its

Strength breaks thefe fantaftic Shackles
which Fancy had impofed, and leaps to its
Prey like a Tyger chained by Cobwebs:


SECTION VII.


F ROM thefe different Views of hu- S¥ <7
man Nature, let us now bring this Argu-————e
ment to a Conclufion.
Tue noble Writer’s Scheme of Morals
therefore, being grounded on a Suppofition,
which runs through the whole Courfe of
his Argument, that ‘all Mankind are natu-
*¢. rally capable of attaining a Taf or Relifh
** for Virtue, fafficient for every Purpofe
** of focial Life,” feems effentially defec-
tive. For, from the Enquiry already
made into the real and various Conftitution
of Man, it appears, that a great Part of the
Species


388 © Owzhe Motives to Virtit,


Ess 4s ¥Species ‘are naturally incapable’ of this fan— | :
pine, CHEM: Excellence. That the various Mix 4
ture and Predominancy of Sen/2, Imagina~ Ke


tion, and. Paffion, give a different Caft and’
Complexion of Mind to every Individual = |
That the Feeling or Profpect of Happinefs
canonly arifefrom thisCombination: That:
confequently, “where the benevolent Af-
fections and moral Senfe are weak, the
felfith Paffions and Perceptions headftrong,
there can be no internal Motive to the con-
JSiftent. Practice of Virtue.
Tue moft plaufible Pretence I could ¢ ever
meet with, amidft all the Pomp of Decla- .
mation thrown out in Support of this //- a
) fufficiency of a Tafte in Morais, is this :
___ © That although the Force and Energy of
*« this Tafte for Virtue appears not in every
** Individual, yet the Power lies dormant in
«every human Breaft ; and needs only be
** called forth by a voluntary Self- difeipline,
** in order to be brought to it’s jutt Per-
** fection. That the Improvement in our
«* Tafte in Morals is parallel to the Progrefs
§* of the Mind in every other Art and Ex-
** cellence,in Painting, Mujic, Architeture,
** Poetry: In which, a true Tafte, how-
€* ever natural to Man, is*not barn with
| “him,


— ee ee ee


t


On- the, Motwes'toVirtur.  a89

* him, but formed and brought forth toS= YEG
<¢ A@ion by a proper Suny eat Applica:
« tion.”

» Tue, ania Writer dissdes ris
Paflages. of this Kind: So many indeed;
that it were Labour loft to tranferibe them,
And one of his Followers hath. affirmed in
Rill more emphatical Expreflions, -if poffi,
ble, than his Mafter, <‘ that: the Height ea
S Virtuofofbip is VirTvz®.”»

Now this ‘State of the Cafe, though. at
firft View it carries {ome Degree.of Plaufis
bility, yet on a clofer Examination, .deftroys
the whole Syftem. » For if, as it certainly
is, the Capacity for. a Tatte; in Morals, .be
fimilar to a Capacity for a 'Tafte in Arts;
*tis clear, that the moft afliduous Culture, or
Self-Difcipline can never make it even ge>
neral, much \efs univerfal.. One Man,.we
fee, hath a Capacity or Genius for Painting;
another for Mufic, a third for Architecture,
a fourth for Poetry. Tortureeach of them
as you pleafe, you cannot infufe a Tafte for
any, but his own congenial Art. . If you at-
tempt to make the Poet an Architect, or'the
Painter a Mufician, you. may make:a pre-
| © Charaé?. ‘paffim. P sakets of Hydafpes to Phi-
“emen, Let, vi. ,
; _ tending


@ a"


1900 = On the Motives to Vintur.
Es a tending Pedant, never an accomplithed
—_____ Mater, *Tis the fame in Morals: Where

the benevolent Affections are naturally
ftrong, there is a Capacity for a high Tafee in
Virtue: Where thefe are weak or wanti
there is in the fame Proportion /itt/e or 3
Capacity for a Taffe in Virtue. To harangue,
therefore, on the fuperior Happinefs attend-
ing the Exercife of the public Affections, is
quite foreign to the Purpofe. This fuperior
Happinefs is allowed, where the public Af-
feétions can be found, or made, predominant.
But how can any Confequence be drawn
from hence, fo as to influence thofe who
never felt the Impulfe of public Affection ?
Are not the Pleafures of Poetry, Painting,
Mufic, fublime, pure, and lafting, to thofe.
who tafe them? Doth it therefore follow,
that all Mankind, or any of them, can be
harangued into a Jaffe and Love of thefe
elegant Arts, while the very Capacity of re-
ceiving Pleafure from them is wanting ?
Thus in Morals, wherea fimilar Incapacity
takes place through the natural Want of a
lively Benevolence, no Progrefs can ever be
made in the Ia/fe or Relifh for virtuous En-
joyment. ‘Though therefore you fhould
prove, as indeed one of Lord Suarres~
a BURY’S


On the Motivesto Virtus. 191
suRyY’s Followers hath done, ‘* that VirtueS = ¢.-
“¢ is accommodate to all Places and’ Times,
“< is durable, fe elf-derived, and indeprivable’,”
whence he concludes, it has the beft Title
to the Character of the fovereign Good ;
yet all the while, the main Point in Debate
is taken for granted, that is, ‘‘ whether the
 Pofleffion of it be any Good at all.’ Now
to thofe who receive no Incteafe of saternal
Happinefs from it, it cannot be a Good :
And where there is a natural Defeé# of be-
nevolent Affe@tion, it can give no énternal
Happinefs: Confequently, though it have
all the other Characters of the Summum
Bonum, though it be durable ee
and indeprivable, it can never, by fuch, be
regarded as the fovereign Good.

"Ts pleafant enough to obferve the Ar-
gumentation of the Writer laft mentioned.
After defcribing “ the faireft and moft ami-
© able of Objects, the true and perfect Man,

* that Ornament of Humanity, that god-
“ like Being, without Regard either to Plea-
‘© fure or Pain, uninfluenced either by Pro-
* f{perity or Adverfity, fuperior tothe W orld,
‘¢ and its beft and worft Events’ ’---He then
raifeth an Objection--- * Does not this


tT. hree Treat, by 7. H. Treat, 3d. On Happinefi.
“ Syftem


192
Essay
TL;


Dera ae


On the Motives to Virtvuz.
**. Syftem border a: little'upon the Chimeri~


« cal?---On my Word; a fhrewd Que~


ftion, and well worth a good Anfwer ;, and
thus he clears.it up.---‘‘ It feems to require,


<< faid I, .a Perfection to which no Indivi= _


© dual ever arrived, , That very Tranfcen-


dence, faid he, is an Argument on its Bex
“half. ‘Were. it of a! Rank. inferior, it
<¢ would not -be that. Perfection which we
<« feek... .Would you have it, faid I, beyond
“¢ Nature? Ifyoumean, replied:he, beyond
*¢ any. particular or individual Nature, moft
s*. undoubtedly I would'.”.'Tis not theres
fore to be wondered at, that,thisGentlemans
wrapped up in Vifons. of ideal, Perfection,


fhould exprefs “his Conternpt of thofe|fu-


€¢ perficial Cenfurers, who profefs to refute
«¢ ~what they want even. Capacities to com-
&. prehend‘.”, , Doubtlefs he means thofe
groveling-Obfervers, who draw their Ideas
of Mankind “ from particular or) individual


“ Natures,” and have not yet rifen to ‘‘the
« beatific Vifion* of the perfect Man.”


Indeed, the Gentleman frankly owns, ‘‘ that


§ Practice too often ereeps, where ‘Theory


* Three Treat. by 7. H. Treat. 3d. On Happinefss
Pp 2 5:  fibid. p. 108. * Ibid, ;
hah me . © can


*


On the Motives to Virtur. 193
& can fear.” And this I take to be a true ee ™
Account of the Matter. on ata
Tuus, as, according to thefe Moralifts,
the Reli/h or Taffe for Virtue is fimilar toa
Tafte for Arts; fo what is faid of the Poet, -
the Painter, the Mufician, may in this Re-
gard with equal Truth be faid of the Man
of Virtue---Nafcitur, non fit. Hence it is
evident, that the noble Writer’s Syftem,
which fuppofeth all Men capable of this
exalted Tafte, is chimerical and groundlefs.
Bur even fuppofing all Men capable of
this high Tafte in Morals, there would
arife an unanfwerable Objection againft the
Efficacy of this refined Theory. ‘Though it
were allowed, that all Mankind have the
fame delicate Perception of moral, as fome
few have of natural Beauty, yet the Parallel
would by no Means hold, that “ as the Vir-
“© ¢uofo always purfues his Tafte in Arts
‘¢ confiftently, fo the Man of Virtue mutt be
“© equally confiffent in Aétion and Beha-
« wiour.” For the Virtuofo being only en-
gaged in mere Speculation, hath no oppo-
fite Affe&tions to counteract his ‘Tafte : He
meets with no Obftructions in his Admira-
* tee Treat. by J. H. Treat. 34. Ox Happine/:,
p: Io
O tion


194 On the Motives to Virtus.


Bs 1, tion of Beauty : His Enthufiafm takes its :
unbounded Flight, not retarded by any Im-
pediments of a difcordant Nature. But the
Man of Virtue hath a different and more
difficult Tafk to perform : He hath often a
numerous Train of Paffions, and thefe per-_
haps the moft violent to oppofe: He muft
labour through the furrounding Demands ,
and Allurements of felfith Appetite: Muft .
fubdue the Sollicitations of every the moft
natural Affection, when it oppofes the Dic-
tates of a pure Benevolence. Hence even
fuppofing the moft refined Tafte for Virtue ,
common to all, it muft ever be retarded in
its Progrefs, often baffled and overthrown
amidft the Struggle of contending Paffons.

Tuts feems to be a full and fufficient
Reply to all that can be urged in Support of
this fantaftic Syftem from a View of human
Nature. But as the noble Writer hath at-
tempted to confirm his Theory by fome
collateral Arguments, of another Kind, it
may be proper here to confider their real
Weight.

He urges, therefore, the Probability at
leaft, if not the certain Truth ofhis Hypo- —
thefis from hence, ‘‘ That it would be an
** Imputation on the Wifdom of the pat |

ce to J


*


On the Motives toVintur. 195
** to fuppofe that he had formed Man fo Sx cr.
‘ imperfect, that the true Happinefs of the ~
‘* individual fhould not always coincide
“ with that of the whole Kind.” And
beyond Queftion, the Affertion is true: But
the Confequence he draws from it, “ that:
‘© therefore human Happinefs mutt always
“< confift in the immediate Feeling of virtu-
ous Enjoyment,” is utterly groundlefs.
This Inference feems to have been drawn
from a View of the Brute Creation ; in
- which we find, In/tinéts or immediate Feel-
ings are the only Motives to Action; and in
which we find too, that thefe immediate
Propenfities are /ufficient for all the Pur-
pofes of their Being. In this Conftitution
of Things the Creator’s Wifdom is emi-
nently difplayed ; becaufe, througha Defect
of Reafin or Reflexion, no other Kind of
Principle could poffibly have taken place.
But: the Conclufion drawn from thence,
** that Man muft have a fimilar Strength of
‘© Inftin& implanted in him, in order to di-
«* re& him to his fupreme Happinefs,’’
this is without Foundation: Becaufe the
Deity hathgiven him not only prefent Per-
ceptions, but Reafon, Reflexion, anda Fore=


na


O 2 Sight


196 On ithe Motives to Virtus.


Es sa¥ fight of, ‘future Good and Evil, together with
I. “a fufficient Power to obtain the one, and
avoid the other. As therefore Man hath
fafficient Notices of the moral Government
of Gop, which will at length produce a
perfect Coincidence between the virtuous -
Conduét and the Happinefs of every Indivi-
dual, it implies no effential Defect of Wife —
dom in the Creator, to fuppofethat he hath
not given this wniverfal and unerring Biafs
towards Virtue to the whole human Species,
Man is enabled to purfue and obtain his pro-
per Happinefs by Reafon; Brutes by Inftiné..
Acatn, the noble Writer often attempts

to ftrengthen his Argument, by “‘reprefent-
ing the external Good which naturally
‘< flows from Virtue, and the external Evils

“* which naturally attend on Vice*.” But
fure this is rather deferting than confirming
his particular Theory ; which is, to prove.
that Happinefs is effential to Virtue, and
infeparable from it: ‘* That Mifery is
“« effential to Vice, and infeparable from
“ jt.”’---Now,, in bringing his Proofs from’
“Happinefs or Mifery of the external Kind,
he clearly deferts his original Intention : Be-
caufe thefe Externalsare not immediate, but
* Enquiry, B. ii. pri. § 3

f cone


ae
ee oe 5 Pe ree ee -


eddicta. 1a bt Ec Siatat ek =


On the Motives toVirTuE. 197

confequential; not certain, but contingent : SEcT,
They are precifely of the Nature of Reward Li
and Punt/hment ; and therefore can haveno
Part in the Queftion now before us; which
relates folely to “* that Happinefs or Mifery
“ arifing from the inward State of the
“ Mind, Affections, and moral Senfé, on the -
“ Commiffion of Vice, or the Practice of
“ Virtue.” And this hath been already
confidered at large, )

However, that nothing may be omitted
which can even remotely affect the Truth ;
we may obferve, in paffing, that after all the
laboured and well-meantDeclamation on this
Subje&, ’tis much eafier to prove, “ that
“* Vice is the Parent of external Mifery, than
“ that Virtue is the Parent of external Hap-
** pinefs.” *Tis plain, that no Man can be
vicious in any confiderable Degree, but he
mutt fuffer either in his Health, his Fame, or
Fortune. Now the Generality of Moralifts,.
after proving or illuftrating this, have taken
it for granted,as a certain Confequence, that
_ the external Goods of Life are, by the Law
of Contraries, in a fimilar Manner annexed
to the Practice of Virtue. But in Reality
the Proof can reach no further than to thew
the happy Confequences of Innocence, which


0 3 is


198 On the Motives to Virtur. yer
Ess ayis a very different Thing from Virtue? for
“*__ Innocence is only the abfaining from Evil ;
Virtue, the aétual Production of Good, Now
tis evident indeed, that by abfaining from
Evil, (that is, by Innocence) we muff ftand
clear of the Miferies to which we expofe
_ ourfelves by the Commiffion of it: And this’
is as far as the Argument will go. But if
we rigoroufly examine the external Confe-
quences of an aé#veVirtue, in fuch aWorld ©
as this; we fhall find, it muft be often
maintained at the Expence both of Health,
Eafe,and Fortune ; often the Lofs of Friends,
and Increafe of Enemies ; not to mention
the unwearied Diligence of Envy, which is —
ever watchful and prepared to blaft diftine
guifhed Merit. In the mean time, the z#-
noxious Man fits unmolefted and tranquil ;
loves Virtue, and praifeth it; avoids the
Miferies of Vice, and the Fatigue of aédtive
Virtue ; offends no Man, and ‘therefore is
beloved by all; and for the reft, makes it,
up by fair Words and civil Deportment.
* Thus Jnnocence, and not Virtue; Ab-
‘* finence from Evil, not the Produétion of
*© Good, is the furtheft Point to which
Mankind in general can be carried, from
a Ree


TT rey


On the Motives to VirntTuE. 199
« a Regard to the i Confequences of Seer
“¢ Action,” Vee
Bur whenever Aisle grow too
ftrong againft the noble Writer’s Syftem, :
he takes Refuge in an --- apage Vulgus! ---
As he had before allowed, ‘* that the Vul-
‘* gar may {wallow any fordid Jeft or Buf-
“ foonry,” fo here he frequently fuggefts,
that among the fame Ranks, “‘ any kind of
“ fordid Pleafure will go down.” ‘* But as
*« it muft be a finer Kind of Wit that takes
** with the Men of Breeding,” foinMorals  __
“ the Relifh or Tafte for Virtue, is what na- _
turally prevails in the higher Stages of
“ Life: That the diberaland polifbed Partof
Mankind are difpofed to treat every other
Principle of Action as groundlefs and ma-
ginary : But.that among thefe, the Tafte
in Morals, if properly cultivated, muft
** needs be fufficient for all the “el a2 of
se Virtue st\i:./
. In reply to this, which is pening the
weakeft Pretence ofall that the noble Wri-
ter hath alledged, we need only obferve,
that thofe who are born to Honours, Power,
and Fortune, come into the World with the


¥ See Mife, 3d. ¢, 2. and many other detached Paf-
fages.


-
seaneneneamanne


O4 fame


Ou the Motives to Virtus.


Ess SAY fame various Mixture and Predominancy of


———— Senfe, Imaginations, and Affections, with the
iweft Ranks of Mankind. So that if they
really enjoy better Opportunities of being
completely virtuous, thefe muft azife not


from their internal Conffitution, but their.


external Situation of Life. Let us examine
how far this may give a Biafs either towards
Vice or Virtue.

Now ’tis plain that, with regard to the
Senjes or bodily Appetites, the Pofleflion of
Power and Fortune mutt be rather hurtful
_ than favourable to Virtue. Wealth gives


Opportunity of Indulgence, and Indulgence.
naturally iajlames, Hence the Habits of .


fenfual Inclination mutt in general be ftronger

in the Lord than the Peafant: Therefore,
as nothing tends fo much to imbrute the
Man, and fink every nobler AffeGtion of the
Mind, as a fervile Attendance on fenfual
Pleafure; fo in this Regard, the Pofleffion
of Power and Fortune is’ rather dangerous
than favourable to Virtue.

Tue fame may be affirmed in refpect to
the Paffions or Affections.. Can any thing
tend fo much to tender any Paffion ungo-
vernable, as to know that we weed not go-
vern it? That our Power, Riches, and Au-

thority,


a
-*


~~ <€


Bal : -
———"  =- se ee eee


On the Motrves to VirtTut.: 204
thority, raife us above Controul? That we £ ¢ T+
can hate, opprefs, revenge, with Impunity 2?
Are not the Great, of all others, moft ob-
noxious to Flattery ? Does not this tend to’
f produce and’nourith an overweening Opinion
of zhemfelves, an unjuft Contempt of others ?°
and is not true Virtue more likely to belo
than improved, amidft all thefe ee
‘Temptations ?
; Tue Imagination sr is often wsbsid:
and Reafon improved, in the higher Ranks
of Life, beyond the Reach of the mereVul-
gar. But they are little acquainted with
human Nature, who think that Reafon and
Imagination, among the Bulk of Mankind,
are any thing more than the Miniffers of the
ruling Appetites and Paffions:: Efpecially
where the Appetites and Paffions are in- ~
flamed by the early and habitual Pofleffion
of Honours, Power, and Riches,
Bur ftill-it will be urged, that the Great
are under the Dominion of a powerful Prin-
ciple, which is almoft unknown among the
Vulgar : --- The Principle of Honour---
which is a perfect Balance againtt all thefe
furrounding prams and a full ents
fe Virtue,


Were


202


Ess AY


‘Ez ~


On the Motives to Virtur.
With tegard to this boafted Principle, a’:


__very material DiftinGtion muft be made.


By Honour, is fometimes. meant “an Af-.
“* fection of Mind determining the Agent:


to the Practice of what is right, without


*< any Dependance on other Mens Opi-
* nions.”’ Now this is but the moral.
Senfe, under a new Appellation: It arifeth’
too, not from any particular Sztwation of
Life, but from the natural Confiitution of the


_ Mind. » Accordingly, it is not confined to:


any one Rank of Men, but is feen promif-
cuoufly among the Great and Vulgar. ’Tis
therefore entirely beyond the prefent Que-.
ftion, which only relates to fuch Circum-
ftances as are peculiar to high Life.

Tue other, and more common Accep-'
tation of the Word Honour, and in which
alone it belongs peculiarly to the Great, is
“* an Affection of the Mind determining the
« Agent to fuch a Condué, as may gain
“ himthe Applaufe or Efteem of thofe whofe:
“© good Opinion he is fond of.”. Now
this Love of Fame, and Fear of Di/grace,
though as a fecondary Motive to Action, it
be often of the higheft Confequence ‘in
Life ; though it often counterfeits, fome~
times even riva/s Benevolenceitfelf ; yet as

a prine


On the Motives to Virtur. 203

a principal Motive, there cannot be a more SE¢ T

precarious Foundation of Virtue. For the

Effects of this Principle will always depend

on the Opinions of others: It will always

take its particular Complexion from thefe,

and muft always vary with them. Thus

*tis a Matter of mere Accident, whether its

Confequences be good or bad, wholefomeor

pernicious. If the applauded Maxims be

founded in Benevolence, the Principle will

fo far lead to Virtue: If they be founded in

Pride, Folly, or Contempt, the Principle will

lead to Vice. And, without any defigned

Satire on the Great, it muft be owned, the

latter of thefe hath ever been the predomi-

nant Character of Honour. It were falfe

indeed to affirm, that the Principle hathno

Mixture of benevolent Intention; yet ‘tis

equally clear, that its chief Defign is not fo

much to fecure the Happinefs of all, as to

maintain the Superiority of afew: And

hence this Principle hath ever led its Vota-

ries to abhor the Commiffion, not fo much

of what is unjuft, as of what is contemptible,

Thus it is clear, that the Principle of Ho-

nour, as diftinguifhed from benevolent Af-

fection and the moral Senfe, can ever be a
fufficient


204.
E “nt fufficient Foundation for the uniform nin


On the Motives toVirvur.


tice of Virtue.

Turse arethe mainArguments by which
the noble Writer hath attempted to fupport
this imagined dl/ufficiency of the Reli/b or

Taftein Morals. Had human Nature been
indeed that uniform and nobleThing, which


_hefeems to have thought it, he had furely


been right in fixing the Motives to Virtue,
on fo generous and amiable a Principle,
But as on Examination it appears, that he
hath all along fuppofed his human Nature —
to be what it 1s not, his Syftem is vifionary
and groundlefs ; and his applauded Theory
only fit to find a Place with the boafted
Power of the great old Geometer, when he
faid---des we so, nas tly ylu unyrw*.
Most full indeed and clear to this Pur-
pofe are the Words of the noble Writer
himfelf: Who, in his mifcellaneous Capa
city, and in a merry Mood, feems to have
{poken more of Truth, than, I believe, he
would care to ftand to.---“¢ Such has been
* of late our,dry Tatk. _No wonder if it:
*< carries, indeed, a meagre and raw Ap-
S* pearance, it may be looked on in Philo-.
- * Give me but a Place to fet my Foot on, and I will
move the whole Earth,
*¢ fophy,.


On the Motives to Virtue. 265


-& fophy, as worfe than a mere EgyptianS va
“«« Impofition. . For to make Brick without
“ Straw or Subble, is perhaps an’ eafier
“< Labour, than to prove Morals without a
“© World, and eftablith a Conduct of Life,
«« without the Suppofition of any Thing

“ living or extant befides our immediate

«Fancy, or World of Imagination*.”

Turse Sallies might poffibly have feem> —

ed difficult to account for, had not the no-
ble Writer himfelf faved us the Labour of
this Tafk. For he elfewhere tells us, that
*¢ all found ove and Admiration is Enruvs
** stasm: The Tranfports of Poets, Ora+
‘* tors, Muficians, Virtuofi; the Spirit of
*« ‘Travellers and Adventurers; Gallantry,
& War, Heroifm ; all, all Enthufiafin! ’Tis
** enough: Iamcontent tobe thisnew En-
«© THusrIaAstT ””’---And thus inanotherPlace
he defcribes the Effects of this high Paffion’:
That “* Enthufiafmis wonderfully powerful
** and extenfive ; --- For when the Mind is
*< taken up in Vifion,---its Horror, Delight;
*€ Confufion, Fear, Admiration, or whatever
** Pafion belongs to it, or is uppermoft on
* this Occafion, will have fomething vaf,
** immane, and, as Painters fay, BEYOND

- 9 Mife. iv. c.2.  * Moralifts, fab fin.
us et RIFE.


206 , :
Essay“ Lirg, And this is what gave Occafion


On the Motives to ViRTUE.
to the Name of Fanatici/m, as it was ufed
by the Ancients in its original Senfe, for


an APPARITION tran/porting theMinp°.”


SECTION IX,


. HAVING fafficiently evinced the finay,


though: curious, Contexture of thefe Cobweb
Speculations /pun in the Clofet, let us now
venture abroad into the World ; let us pro-
ceed to fomething applicable to Life and
Manners; and confider what are the real _
Motives, by which Mankind may be fway’d
to the uniform Practice of Virtue,

Anp firft, in Minds of a gentle and Senea
rous Difpofition, where the fenfual Appetites
are weak, the Imagination refined, and the
benevolent Affections naturally predomi-
nant ; thefe very Affections, and the moral
Senfe arifing from them, will in all thecom-
mon Occurrencies of Life fecure the Prac-
tice of Virtue. To thefe fine Tempers
thus happily formed, the inward Satisfa@tion
of a virtuous Conduct exceeds that of every
outward Acquifition; and affords to its Pols
feffor a more true and lafting Happinefs,


¢ Letter on Enthufiafn,
than


Outhe. Motives to Virntur. 207
- than Wealth, or Fame, or Power can ben S ae CT.
ftow. ‘
; SECONDLY, Where the fame Degrees
public Affection fubfift, \ but ftand oppofed

by fenfual or felfith, Paffions of equal Vio-
lence, even here the Agent may rife to. very
high Degrees of Virtue, but not without

the Aids of Difcipline and Culture. Yet

tis obfervable, that the Virtues of fuch a
‘Temper arerather confpicuous than con/iffent >
Without fome ftrengthening Affiftance, the
Progrefs of the Mind towards Perfection is
often broke by the Sallies of difendered
Paffion.

THERE is yet another. Charaaer, eri

tially different from thefe, but feldom dif-
tinguifhed, becaufe generally taken for the
jitft. Many efteem themfelves, and dre
efteemed by others, as having arrived at the
moft confummate Virtue, whofe Condu& ,
never merits a higher Name than that of
being zmnoxious. This is generally the Cafe
of thofe who love Retreat and Contemplation,
of thofe whofe Paffions are naturally weak,
or carefully guarded by what the World calls
Prudence. Now, as in the laft mentioned
Character, a Curb from Irregularity was re
quite, fo here a Spur to AGion is equally

e neceflary


208 OntheMotwes to Vinton
_ Essay neceflary for the Support and Security of
Stic a, ViNCOE. . x vad
As we defcend through more common
and inferior Characters, the internal Motives
to virtuous Adtions grow lefs and lefs ef.
fe&tual. Weak or no Benevolence, a moral
Senfe proportionably du//, ftrong fenfual 4p-
petites, a clamorous Train of felfjh Af-
fe&tions, thefe mixed and varied in endlefs
Combinations, form the real Charater of
the Bulk of Mankind: Not only in Cottages,
but in Cities, Churches, Camps, and Courts.
. So that fome ftronger Ties, fome Motives
more efficacious are neceflary, not only for
the Perfection of Virtue, but the Welfare,
nay, the very Being of Society.
- >T1s not denied, nay, tis meant and in-
fifted on, that among all thefe various Cha~.
racters and Tempers, the Culture of the be
“nevolent Affections ought to be affiduoufly
regarded. For though we have feen that
the Defign of introducing an univerfal high
Relifh or Tafte for Virtue be vifionary and
vain, yet ftill'a lower, or a lower Degiee
may pofibly be inftilled. We have only at-
‘tempted to prove, that the Capacity for this
high Tafte in Morals ‘is not univerfally or
effentially interwoven with the human
. I Frame,


Effay on Rivicute. 209

Frame, but difpenfed in various Degrees, in § a
the fameManner as theCapacity for a Tafte oo ara
in inferior Beauties, in Architecture, Paint-
ing, Poetry, and Mu/ic.

To remedy this Defect of unerring In-
ftinét in Man, by which he becomes a Crea-
ture fo much lefs confiftent than the Brute
Kinds, Providence hath afforded him not
only a Senfe of prefent, but a a of
Suture Good and Evil.

Hence the Force of human Laws; 3
which being eftablifhed by common Con-
fent, for the Good of all, endeavour, fo far
as their Power can reach, by the Infliction
of Punifhment on Offenders, to eftablith the
general Happinefs of Society, by making
the acknowledged Intereft of every Individual
to coincide and unite with the “yi deal
fare.

But as human Laws cannot reach the
“Heart of Man; as they can only infli@
Punifhment on Offenders, but cannot beftow
Rewards on the Obedient; as there are
many Duties of imperfect Obligation which
they cannot recognize ; as Force will fome-
times defy, and Cunning often elude their
Power ; fo without fome further Aids, fome
Motives to Action more univerfally intereft-

P


ing,


: : ; :
210 = On the Motives to Vintur. 7”
Ess Ying, Virtue mutt fiill be left betrayed and
-mnspetcien ORLETEN, }
Now as it is clear from the Courfe of
thefe Obfervations, that nothing can work
this great Effect, but what can produce
. © an entire and univerfal Coincidence be-
** tween private and public Happinefs;”’ fo
is it equally evident, that nothing can ef-.
fetually convince Mankind, that their own
Happinefs univerfally depends on procuring,
or at leaft not violating the Happinefs of
others, fave only ‘ the lively and active Be-
‘© lief of an all-feeing and all-powerful Gop,
“« who will hereafter make them happy or
‘* miferable, according as they defignedly
‘* promote or violate the Happinefs of their
‘¢ Fellow-Creatures.” And this is the E/-
Jence of Rericion, wr
Tus, at firft View, fhould feem a Mo-
tive or Principle of Action, fufficient for all
the Purpofes of Happinefs and Virtue. In-
deed the Bulk of Mankind feem agreed in
this Truth, Yet refining Tempers, who
love to quit the common Tratts of Opi-
nion, have been bold enough to call even
this in Queftion. Among thefe, the noble»
“Writer hath been one of the moft diligent:
aw | ~


Tel


&


ee


On the Motives to Virtur.


It will therefore be neceffary to confider the § ol


Weight of his Objections.

To prevent Mifinterpretation, it may be
proper to obferve, that Lord Suarrespury
fometimes talks in earneft of the Noblene/s
and Dignity of Religion. But when he ex-
plains himfelf, it appears, he confines his
Adea of it to that Part which confifts folely
in Gratitude to, and Adoration of the fu-
preme Being, without any Profpect of fu-
ture Happinefs or Mifery. Now, though
indeed this be the nobleft Part, yet it is be-
yond the Reach of all, fave only thofe who
are capable of the moft exalted Degrees of
Virtue. His Theory of Religion therefore
is precifely of a Piece, with his Theory of
the moral Senfe; not calculated for Ufe, but
Admiration ; and only exifting in the Place
where they the their Birth; thatis, as the
noble Writer well expreffeth it, in a Mind
taken up in Vifion.

He fometimes talks, or feems to talk, in
earneft too, on the Ujefulne/s of Religion, in
the common Acceptation of the World.
With regard to which ’tis only néceffary to
obferve, that whatever he hath faid on this
Subject I readily affent to: But this is no
Reafon why it may not be neceflary to ob-

ra viate


..


212  Onthe Motives to Virtue. 4


Essa 4 ¥iate every thing he hath thrown out to the
contrary, to prejudice common Readers ;
againft Religion, through theVanity of be-
ing thought Original.. To invent what is
juft or ufeful, is the Character of Genius; |
.?Tisa far different Thing, to broach A6-
Surdities. oe
First, therefore, he often afferts, that |
‘* the Hope of future Reward and Fear of
.* future Punifhment is utterly unworthy
_“ of the free Spirit of a Man, and only fit
** for thofe who are deftitute ofthe very
_* firtt Principles of common Honeftys ie =
* calls it miferable, vile, mercenary :- And
_* compares thofe who allow it any Weight,
“* to Monkies under the Difcipline.of. the
© Whip ¢.”
.. In Anfwer to thefe general Cavils ( bats
bably aimed chiefly at Revelation) which |
care only difficult to confute, as they are
vague and fugitive, let it be obferved, firft,
that whatever can be objected againft re/i-
gious Fear, holds good againft the Fear of bu-
man Laws. They 40th threaten the De-
. linquent with the Infliction of Punifhment,
nor is the Fear of the one more unworthy,
than of the other. Yet the noble Writer
3 Wit and Humour--- Enquiry---&¢,
himfelf


On the Motwes to Virtur. 213
himfelf often {peaks with the higheft Re-S = c r.
fpect of Legiflators, of the Founders of.
Society and Empire, who, by the Eftablith-
ment of wife and wholefome Laws, drew
Mankind from their State of natural Bar-
barity, to that of cultivated. Life and focial

‘Happinefs: Unlefs indeed he fuppofes that
Orpuevs and the 'reft of them did their
Bufinefs /iterally by Tafte and a Fiddle. If
therefore the juft Fear of human Power ©
might be inforced without infulting or vio-
lating the Generofity of our Nature, whence
comes it, that a juft Fear of the Creator
fhould fo miferably degrade the Species ?
The religious Principle holds forth the fame
Motive to Action, and only differs from the
other, as the Evil it threatens is infinitely
greater and more lafting.
Furtuer: If we confider the religious
Principle in its true Light, ‘there is nothing
in it either mean, flavifh, or unworthy. To:
be in a Fright indeed, to live under the Sug-"
geftions of perpetual Terror. (in which, the
noble Writer would perfuade us, the religi-
ous Principle confifts) is far from anamiable ,
Condition. But this ‘belongs only to the
Superfictious or the Guilty. The firft of
thefe are faifely religious; and to the laft I
P


3 imaging


214 On the Motives to Vinton. ;
Essayjmagine the noble Writer’s moft zealous
Hl. Admirers will acknowledge, it ought to: be~
long. But to the reft of Mankind, the re=
_ ligious Principle or Fear of Gonis of a quite —
different Nature. It only implies lively —
and habitual Belief, that we fhall be here-
after miferable, if we difobey his Laws.
Thus every wife Man, nay, every Man of
common Underftanding, hath a ke Fear of
every pofible Evil; of the deftructive Power
of natural Agents, of Fire, Water, Serpents,
Poifon : Yet none of thefe Fears, more than
the religious one, imply a State of perpetual
Mifery and Apprehenfion : None of them
are inconfiftent with the moft generous
Temper of Mind, or trueft Courage. None
of them imply more than a rational Senfe of
thefe feveral Kinds of Evil; and from that
Senfe, 4 Determingtion to gvoid them. 'Thus
the noble Writer himfelf, when it anfwers.
a different Purpofe, acknowledges, that “a.
“* Man of Courage may be cautious without
«¢ real Fear*.” Now the word Caution, in
its very Nature, implies a Senfe of a Poffi-
bility of Evil, and from that Senfe a Deter-
ination to avoid it: Which is the very


¢ Enquiry, By iis Part ii, § 3
Effence


eee


On the Motives to Vintur. 215


Effence of the religious Principle or theS

Fear of Gov. : _
Anp as to the other Branch of religious
Principle, ‘ the Hope and  Profpe& of
“* higher Degrees of future Happinefs and
** Perfection:” --- What is there of mean,
Slavifh, or unworthy init? Are all Mankind
to be blown up into the Mock-majefly ofthe
kingly Store, feated on the Throne of 4r-
rogance, and lording it in an empty Region
of Cuimara’s? Is not the Profpeét of
Happinefs the great univerfal Hinge of hu-
mam Aétion? Do:not all the Powers ofthe
Soul centre in this one Point? Doth not the
noble Writer himfelf elfewhere acknow-
ledge this‘; and that our Obligations to
Virtue itfelf can only arife from this one
Principle, that it gives us real Happinefs ?
Why then fhould the Hope of a happy Im-
mortality be branded as Jae and flavi/h,
while the Confcioufnefs or Profpeét of a
happy Life on Earth is regarded as a juft

and honourable Motive ?
Tue nobleWriter indeed confeffeth, that
“ if, by theHope of Reward, be underftood
“‘ the Love and Defire (he ought to have
 faid, the Hope) of virtuous Enjoyment, it

¥ See above, Seét. VI. of this Z/ay

P4 is


tennant


216


On the Motives to Virtue.


haa SAY is notderogatory to Virtue.” But that in


——_—every other Senfe, the indulged Hope: of
Reward is not only mean and mercenary,


but even hurtful toVirtue and common Hu-—


manity: *° For in this religious Sort of Dif-


<< cipline, the Principle of Se/f-Leve, which’


“¢ is naturally fo prevailing in us (indeed 2)
“| being no way moderate or reftrained,


‘© fions in the Subject of more extended Self-


“ hend left the Temper ofthis Kind fhould
“extend itfelf in general through all. ae
“* Parts of Life.”

Tuis, to fay the beft of it, is the very
pony of Virtue. Religion propofeth
true Happinefs as the End and Confequence
of virtuous Action: This is granted. It
propofeth it by fuch Motives as muft in-
fluence Self-Love, and confequently hath


given the beft Means of procuring it. Yet, .


it feems, Self-love being not  reftrained,
but made ftronger, will:make Mankind mifs
of true Happinefs.. That. is, by leading
Self-Love into the Path of true Happinefs,
Religion will inevitably conduét it to a fal/e;
by commanding us~to cherifh our public

Affections,


‘but rather improved and made ftronger ¢
‘* every Day, by the Exercife of the Paf- —


Intereft ; there may be Reafon to appre-


On the Motives to Virtue.


A ffections, it will certainly inflame the pri- Seer


vate ones; by afluring us, that if we would _
be happy hereafter,. we muft be virtuous
and benevolent, it will beyond Queftion ren-
der us: vile and void of Benevolence. But
this Mode of Reafoning is common with-
the noble Writer. .


‘ . However, at other Times his Lordthip


can defcend to the Level of common Senfe ;
and profecute his Argument by Proofs dia-
metrically oppofite to what he here ad-
vanceth, For in difplaying the Motives:to’
Virtue, after having modelled the inward —
State of the human Mind according to his
own Imagination, he proceeds to confider
the Pafions which regard. eurfelves, and
draws-another and indeed a ftronger Proof
from thefe.---He there proves § the Folly of


. avicious Love of Life, ‘‘ becaufe Life itfelf


‘* may often prove a Misfortune.” So of
Cowardice, ‘ becaufe it often robs us of
“* the Means of Safety.” --- Exceffive Re-
fentment, “ becaufe the Gratification is no
‘more than an Alleviation of.a racking
‘* Pain.” ---'The Vice of Luxury. “ creates
** a Naufeating, and Diftafte, Difeafes, and
§* conftant Craving.”’ He urges the fame
& Enquiry, B, ii, Part ii. §'3.
Objections


218 On the Motives to Virtur. —
Ess ay Objections againft intemperate Pleafure of -
T. the amorous Kind. He obferves that Am-
bition is ever “‘ fufpicious, jealous, captious,
“¢ and uncapable of bearing the leaft Dif-
‘* appointment.” He then proceeds thro’
a Variety of other Paffions, proving them all
‘to be the Sources of fome internal or ex- —
ternal Mifery. Thus he awakens the fame.
Paffions of Hope and Fear, which, in a reli-
gious View, he fo bitterly inveighs againft.
Thus he exhibits a Picture of future Re-
wards and Punifbments, even of the moft
Jelife Kind: He recommends the Confor-—
mity to Virtue, on the Score both of pre-
fent and future Advantage: He deters his
Reader front the Commiffion of Vice, by
reprefenting the Mifery it will produce.
And thefe too, fuch Advantages and fuch
Mijferies, as are entirely diftin& from the
mere Feeling of virtuous Affection or its
contrary: From the Confiderations of Safe-
ty, Alleviation of dodily Pain, the Avoid-
ance of Diftafte and Difeafes. Now doth
not his own Cavil here recoil upon him?
“« That in this Sort of Difcipline, and by
*« exhibiting fuch Motives as thefe, the Prin-
“ ciple of Self-Love muft be made ftronger,
* by the Exercife of the Paffions in.a Sub-
jee


ST  r
4 ‘


On the Motes to Virtus. 219

*¢ ject of more extended Self-Intereft: And 5 = ¢ T-
*¢ fothere may be Reafon to apprehend, left__—_.
“< the Temper of this Kind fhould extend
“ itfelf in general through all the Parts of
* Life.” Thus the Objection proves equal-
ly againft both: In Reality, againit neither,
For, as we have feen, the Senfe, or Pro-
jpe of Happinefs, is the only poffible
Motive to Action ; and if we are taught to
believe that virtuous Affection will produce’
Happinefs, whether the expected Happinefs
lies in this Life or another, it will tend, and
equally tend, to produce virtuous Affection.
The noble Writer, therefore, and his Ad-
mirers, might as well attempt to remove
Mountains, as to prove that the Hope and
_ Profpeé of a happy Immortality, can juftly
be accounted more fervile, mercenary, or
burtful, than the View of thofe tranfient and
earthly advantages, which: his Lordfhip
hath fo rhetorically and honeftly difplay’d,
for the Intereft and Security of Virtue. In
Truth, they are precifely of the fame Na-
ture and only differ in Time, Duration, and
Degree. They are both. eftablithed by our
Creator for the fame’ great End of Happi-
nefs. And what Gop hath thus conneéfed,

at


220


On the Motives toVirtTur.


rer


; E $$ AY it were abfurd, as well as impious, to at


tempt to feparate*. Fee
THERE: is yet another Circumftance, ob=
feryable:in human Nature, which ftill fur-
ther proves, that the Hope of a happy Im-.
mortality hath no Tendency to produce’
felfith Affection, but its contrary. For let
the floical Tribe draw what, Pictures they
pleafe of the human Species, this is an un-
doubted Truth, “ that Hope is the moft uni-|
* verfal fource of human Happinefs: And


® Hence we may fee the Weaknefs and Miftake of
thofe fal/ely religious, who fall into an Extreme dire&tly
oppofiteto this of the nobleWriter ; whoare /candalized '
at our being determined to the Purfuit of Virtue through
any Degree of Regard to its happy Confequences in’ _
this. Life ; which Regard they call worldly, carnal,
profane. For it is evident, that the religious Motive is
precifely of the fame Kind; only ftronger, as the _
Happinefs expeéted is greater, and more lafting. While


‘therefore we fet the proper and proportioned Value


upon each, it is impoflible we can act irrationally, or
offend that Gop, who eftablifhed doth.

This naturally leads to a further Obfervation, which
fhews the Danger, as well as Folly, of groveling in
Syftems. Virtue, we fee, comes recommended and en-
forced on three Principles. It is attended with natural
and immediate hg pt or Advantage:---It is com-
manded by human s :---Itis enjoined by Religion.
---Yet the Religioni/ts have often decry’d the firft of:
thefe Sanétions: The fanatical Morali/ts, the laff; And:
even the /econd hath not efcaped the Madnefs of an en-
thufiaftic Party ; which, however, never grew confider-
able enough in this Kingdom, to merit Confutation.


© that.


é


On the Motives to Vintur. 221

«© that Man is never fo fincerely and heartily$ &¢ tT. -
“* benevolent, as whem he is truly happy in ao
“ himfelf.’” ‘Thus the high Confcioufhefs

of his being numbered among the Children

of Gop, and that his Lot is among the
Saints; that he is deftined to an endlefs Pro-
greffion of Happinefs, and to rife from high
to higher Degrees of Perfection, muft needs
infpire him withthat Tranquillity and Joy,
which will naturally diffufe itfelf in Acts of
fincere Benevolence to all his Fellow-Crea-
tures, whom he looks upon as. his Com-

_ panions in this Race of Glory. Thus will
every noble Paffion of the Soul be awakened

into’ Ation :» While the joylefs Infidel,
-poffeffed with the gloomy Dread of Anni-
hilation, too naturally contracts his Affec-
tions as his Hopes of Happinefs decreafe ;
while he confiders and defpifeth himfelf, and

his Fellow-Creatures, as no more than the
Beafts that perifh.

Tue nobleWriter indeed infinuates, that

“< there is “‘a certain Narrownefs of Spirit,

‘ occafioned by this Regard to a future

“* Life, peculiarly obfervable in the devout

“ Perfons and Zealots of almoft every reli-

£* gious Perfuafion‘,”” In reply to which,


Enquiry, B. i, Part. iii. § 3.
*tis


222  Onthe Motsves to Virtus.
Essay ’tis only neceflary to affirm, what may be
_l. affirmed with Truth, that with regard to

devout Perfons the Infinuation is a Falfhood.
It was prudently done indeed, to jointhe
Zealots (or Bigots) in the fame Sentence;
becaufe itis true, that thefe, being under the
Dominion of Superflition, forget the true
Nature and End of Religion; and are there- —
fore {crupuloufly exa& in the Obfervation
of outward Ceremonies, while they neglect
the fuperior and ¢ffential Matters of the
Law, of Fu/tice, Benevolence, and Mercy.
Anp as to the Notion of confining the
Hope of future Reward to “ that of virtu-
“* ous Enjoyment only:’”’ This isa Refine-
ment parallel to the reft of the noble Wri- —
ter’s Syftem ; and, like all Refinements, -
contracts inftead of enlarging our Views.
Tis allowed indeed, that the Pleafures of
Virtue are the higheft we know of in our
prefent State ; and ’tis therefore commonly
fuppofed, they may conftitute our chief Fe-
licity in another. But doth it hence follow,
that no other Sources of Happinefs may be
difpenfed, which as yetare utterly unknown
tous? Can our narrow and partial Imagi-
nations fet Bounds to the Omnipotence of
God? And may not our Creator vouchfafe
us


ee tee
~


—Onthe Motives to Virtus. 232


us fuch Springs of yet untafted Blifs, as thall $= *-
exceed even the known Joys of Virtue, as_~_"_.
far as thefe exceed the Gratifications of

Senfe ? Nay, if we confider, what is gene-

rally believed, that our Happinefs will arife

from an Addition of new and higher Facul-

ties ; that in the prefent Life, the Exercife

- of Virtue itfelf arifeth often from the Jmper-
JSeétion of our State; if we confider thefe
Things, it fhould feem highly probable, that

our future Happinefs will confift in fome-

thing quite beyond our prefentCompre- ~
henfion: Will be “‘ fuch as Eye hath not

“* feen, nor Ear heard, neither hath it en-

‘* tered into the Heart of Man to conceive.”,


SECTION X.

BU T beyond thefe Objections, the no-5 a
ble Writer hath more than once touched _“"__.
upon another, which merits a particular
Confideration. For he affirms, that “ after
“« all, tis not merely what we ¢all Princi-

“ ple, but aTafe, which governs Men.”
That “ even Confcience, fuch as is owing
** to religious Difcipline, will make but a
“« flight Figure, where this Tafte is fet
“ amifs *.”,
& Mifer itis cuit, aig
THE


224 On the Motives to Virtur.


Essay Tux Notion here advanced is not pecu-

"liar to himfelf. He feems to have drawn —
it from a much more confiderable Writer,
who hath endeavoured to fupport the fame
Propofition by agreatVariety of Examples '.
Several Authors of inferior Rank have bor- —
rowed the fame Topic, for popular Decla-
-mation.. Nay, one hath gone fo far as to
affert, “that Man is fo unaccountable a
« Creature, as to act moft commonly a-
© gainft his Principle®.”

Tue Objection, indeed, carries an Ap-
pearance of Force: Yet on a near Exami-
nation it entirely vanifheth.

Ir. mutt be owned, that in moft Coun-
tries, aconfiderable Part of what is called
Religion, deferves no other Name than that
of Abfurdity made. facred, And it were
ftrange indeed, fhould Bigotry and falfe Re-
ligion produce that Uprightnefs of Heart,
that Perfection of Morals, which is the ge-
nuine Effect of Truth.

Ir muft be owned, that with Regard to
religious Principle, as well as moral Prac-
tice, every Man has the Power of being a
Hypocrite. That Knaves, in order to be


1 Baxxe, Penf: fur une Comete.
m Fable of the Begs.


accounted


On the MotwestoVirtur. 215
accounted hone/t; may appear devout. AndS=¥c rt.
we may reafonably fuppofe, if we confider
the innumerable Artifices of Villany, that
the outward Profeffion of Religion becomes _

a frequent Difguife to an Rsk Se: and cor-
rupted Heart.

' Burt though thefe Skcuuiees may
fufficiently account for the Appearance in
many particular Cafes, yet, with Regard to
the general Fact, here feems to lie the pro-
per Solution of the Difficulty. ‘‘ That even
‘* where true Religion is known, profeffed,

** and in Speculation affented to, it is feldom
** fo thoroughly inculcated as to become a
‘© Principle of Action®.” We have feen
that Imagination is the univerfal Inftrument
of human Aétion ; that no Paffion can be
ftrongly excited in the Soul by mere Know-
ledge or Affent, till the Imagination hath
formed to itfelf fome kind of Picture or
Reprefentation of the Good or Evil appre-
hended*. Now the Senfes and their attend -
ant Paffions are continually urging their
Demands, through the immediate Prefence
of their refpective Objects : So that nothing
but the v7vid Image of fome greater Good
or Evil in Futurity can poffibly refift and
® See above, Effayi. § 3.
Q


ca


over-


Ox the. Motwes to Virtur.


Es s A Y overbalance their Solicitations. The. Idea :


——therefore of future Happinefs and Mifery,
muft be. ftrongly impreffed on the Imagi-+
nation, ere they can work their full Effects,


becaufe they are di ‘fant and. unfeen: Butthis.
Habit of Reflexion is {eldom properly fixed. —
by Education; and thus for want.of a pro= —


pet Impreffion, “ religious Principle i is fel-
«< dom gained, and therefore feldom ope-
ia3 rates.’ f

Bur wherea fincereand lively Jenninli
takes place; where. the Mind is convinced


of the Being of a Gop; that, he 7 is, and is a.


Rewarder. of them that diligently. feck him ;


where the Imagination hath gained a Habit.


of connecting this great Truth with every


Thought, Word, and Action; there it,may.


be juftly affirmed, that Piety, and Virtue can-


not but . prevail. To fay, ina Cafe.of.this,


Nature, that Man will not act according to,
his Principle, is to contradict the full Evi-
dence of known Facts. We fee how, true,
Mankind commonly are to their Principle.
of Pride, or miftaken Honour; how. true;
to their Principle of Avarice, or miftaken,
Intereft; how. true to their Principle of a
Regard to Auman. Laws. Why. are,they,
fo? Becaufe they have ftrongly and habi-

tually


agit. ath ‘alle


‘1


a ad
ae Peed


ee


Eee ee ee a ee


On the Movives to V1 RTUR.


217


tually connected thefe Principlés in their ECT.
Imagination with the Idea’ of their own.


Happinefs. Therefore, whenever the reli-


. gidus Principle becomes in the fame Man-
ner habitually conneéted in the Imagination,


witli the Agent’sHappinefs ; that is, when-


ever the religious Principle takes place at.


all) it niuft needs bécome infinitely more


powerfl than any other ; becaufe the Good
it’ promifeth, and the Bull it threatens, are


infinitely greater and more lafting. Hence
it'appéars, that the Corruption of Mankind,


even where the pureft Religion is profefed,


and'iti Theory affented to, doth not arife
from’ the Weakne/s of religious Principle,
but the Want of it.

AwNDp indeed on other Occafions, and to
ferve different Purpofes, thé noble Writer
and his Partizans can allow and give Exam-
ples‘of all that is here contended for. No-
thing is fo common’ among thefe Gentle-
mien, as to declaim againft the terrible Ef-


fects of prieftly Potdéer. Tis the favourite”


Topic, to reprefent Mankind as groaning
undér the Tyranny of the facred Order.
Now what does this Reprefentation imply,
but “‘ the Force of religious Principle im-
«properly directed?” If Mankind can be


w22 {wayed


\


On the Motives to Virtus.


z ee Siuiend by religious Hope and Fear, to re-


fign their Paffions and Interefts to the Arti-


fice, or Advantage of the Prie#, why not to


the Benefit of Mankind? °Tis only impref-
fing a different Idea of Duty : The Motive


to Action is in both Cafes the fame, and
confequently muft be of equal Efficacy..


Thus if religious Principle were void of
Force, the Priefthood muft be void of
Power. The Influence therefore of the
Priefthood, however difhoneftly applied, is
a Demontftration of the Force of religious
Priaciple.


Tus therefore feems to be the Truth. .


Although, by timely and continued Cul-


ture, the religious Principle might be made _.


more univerfally predominant ; yet even as
itis, though not fo thoroughly inculcated


as to become generally a confiftent Princi-


ple of Action ; in Fact it hath a frequent
and confiderable, though partial and imper-
feét influence. None but the thoroughly
Good and Bad a& on continued or con-
fiftent Principles; all the intermediate De-
grees of Good and Bad act at different
‘Times on various and inconfiftent Princi-
ples 5 that is, their Imaginations are by turns
given up to, Linprefions of a different, or

even


a


On the Motwesto Virtur; tag
even contrary Nature. This explains theS # ¢ r~
whole Myftery: For, hence it appears that__*-
the confiftent or ‘inconfiftent Condu& of
Men. depends not on the Nature of their
Principles, but on having their Principles,
whatever they are, counteracted by oppofite
ones, Although therefore, through a Fai-
lure of timely Difcipline, Numbers of Men
appear to be of that capricious Temper as —
not to be fteddy to any Principle, yet ftill
the religious one will mx with the reft, and
naturally prevail in its Turn. ‘This is cer-
tainly a common Circumftance among the
loofer and more inconfiderate Ranks of Men’;
who, although by no means uniformly
fwayed by the Precepts of Religion, are
yet frequently ftruck with Horror at the
Thought of Actions peculiarly vile, and
deterred by the Apprehenfion of an all-
feeing Gop from the commiffion of Crimes
uncommonly atrocions.

Here then lies the effential Difference
between the Efficacy of Ta/fe and religious
Principle: That the firft, being a Feeling
or Perception difpenfed in Various Degrees,
and in very weak ones to the Bulk of Man-
kind, is incapable, even through the moft
affiduous Culture, of becoming an univerfal


Q 3 or


230 © On the Motives toVintue.


E ssAYor confiftent Motive to Virtue: But the re-
ligious Principle, arifing from fuch Paffions,
as are common to the whole Species, muft,


if properly inculcated, univerfally prevail. \y
_ ’Tis evident therefore, that in the very
firft Dawns of Reafon, Religious Principles | a


ought to be imprefféd on the Minds of Chil.
‘dren; and this early Culture continued .
through the fucceeding Stages of Life. ’
But as the noble Writer hath ftrangely at- :
‘tempted to ridicule and difhonour Religion :
in every Shape; fo here, he hath endea-
voured to throw an Odium on this Method
of religious Difcipline, by reprefenting it as -
the Enemy to true Morals and practical Phi- |
lofophy, as it fetters the Mind with early ‘ai
Prejudices. “ Whatever Manner in Phi-
** lofophy happens to bear the leaft Refem-
«© blanceto that of Catechifm, cannot, lam.
** perfuaded, of itfelf feem very inviting.
** Such a fimart Way of queftioning our-
** felves in our Youth, has made our Man-
« hood more averfe to the’ expoflulatory Dif-
« cipline: ‘And. though the’ metaphyfical
** Points of our Belief, are by this Method
*« with admirable Care and Caution inftilled
** into tender Minds; yet the Manner of
€ this anticipated “eget may make
+ the


ii i


Onthe Motivesto Virtur.: 23%
** the After-work of Reafon, and the in- 5 al
* ward Exercife of the Mind at a riper
** Age, proceed the more heavily, and with
** greater Reluctance. --- ’Tis hard, after
** having by fo many pertinent Interroga-
** tories and decifive Sentences, declared
** qho and what we are; to come leifurely
** in another, toinquire concerning our real
** Self and End, the Judgment we are to
** make of Interef, and the Opinion we
“ fhould have of Advantage and Good:
** Which is what muft neceflarily determine
“us in our Condué#, and prove the leading
f* Principle of our Lives °.” ;
In reply to this of philofophical Para-
- graph, let it be obferved, that it is not the
Defign of Religion to make Sophi/fs, but
good Subjeéts of Mankind. That Man be-
ing defigned, not for Speculation, but Action,
religious Principle is not to be inftilled in a
philofophical but a moral View: Therefore
with Regatd to Praéfice, nothing can be
more fit and’ rational than to imprefs ac-
knowledged Truths at an Age when the Re-
crpient is incapable of their Demon/trations ;
in the fame Manner as we teach the Me-


° Advice, Fe. Partiii, § 2.
Q4 chanic


232


- -
:


Ou the Motives to Virvur.


Essaychanic to work on Geometric Principles,


IL.


while the Proofs are unknown to him. —
Bur then, the Prejudices of Education---

yes, thefe are the great. Stumbling-block to

a modern Free-thinker: It ftill runs in his


‘Head, that all Mankind are born to difpute


de omni feibili’, Let therefore this minute
Philofopher reflect, firft, that a Prejudice
doth not imply, as is generally fuppofed,
the Fa Yebood oft the Opinion inftilled ; but
only that it is taken up and held without
its proper Evidence. 'Thusa Child may be
prejudiced in Favour of Truth, as well as
Falfehood ; and in him neither the one nor
the other-can properly be called more than
an Opinion. Further: The human Mind
cannot remain in a State of Indifference,


with regard either to Opznion or Praétice :


Tis of an active Nature ; and, like a fertile
Field, if by due Cultivation it be not made
to produce good Fruit, willcertainly {pring
up in Tares and Thiftles.. Impreflions, Opi-
nions, Prejudices, of one kind or other a
Child will inevitably contraé, from the
Things and Perfons that furround him :
and if rational Habits and Opinions be not
infufed, in order to anticipate Abfurdities ;
4On all Subjeds,
5 OP. Abfur-


On the Motives to Virtue.


Abfurdities will: rife, and anticipate ‘all S = J T.


rational Habits and Opinions. His. Rea-
Jon and ‘his Paffons will put themfelves in
Aétion, however untoward and inconfiftent,
in the fame mannerias his Limbs will make
an Effort towards progrefflive Motion, how-

ever awkward and abfurd. The fame Ob-
jection therefore that lies againft inftilling a
falutary Opinion, will arife againit teaching
him towalk ereé#: For this too, is a kind

of “ anticipating Philofophy:” And fure, a

Child left to his own Sel/f-Difcipline, ** till

“ he could come /e/urely to inquire con-.

** cerning his real Se/f and End,” would

ftand as fair a Chance to grovel in Abfurdity,

and bring. down his Reafon to the fordid

Level of Appetite, as to crawl upon all four,

and dabble in the Dirt. Thus the noble

Writer’s Ridicule would fweep’ away the

whole Syftem of Education along with the

religious Principle : Not an Opinion or In-

clination muft be controuled, or fo much as

controverted; ‘ left by this anticipating

** Philofophy, the Work of Reafon, and the

** inward Exercife of the Mind, ata riper

“© Age, fhould proceed the more heavily,

“© and with greater Reluctance.” The Ca-

price of Infancy muft rule us, till the very:

Capacity


234 On the Motives to Virtue. io


Es re Y Capacity of Improvement fhould be dew
——__ frroyed; and we mutt turn Savages, in order
to be made perfect in the fovereign Philo=


’T 1s no difficult Matter therefore to de-
termine whether a Child fhould be left to
the Follies of his own weak Underftanding
and xafcent Paffions ; be left to imbibe the
Maxims of corrupt Times and Manners ;
Maxims which, fetting afide all Regard to -
their fpeculative Truth or Falfehood, do -
lead to certain Mifery; or, on the other
hand, fhall be happily conduéted to embracé
thofe religious Principles, which have had
the Approbation of the beft and wifeft Men
in every Age and Nation; and which are
known and allowed to be the only Means
of true Happinefs to Individuals, Families,
and States.

Tuts therefore ought to be the early and
principal Care of thofe who have the Tui-
tion of Youth: And they will foon find the
happy Effects of their Inftruction. For as
the Child’s Underftanding thall improve,
what was at firft inftilled only as an Opinion,
will by Degrees be embraced as Truth: _
Reafon will then affume her juft Empire ;

__ and the great, univerfal, religious Principle,
a rati-


a Siena


Ou the Motives to VIRTUE. \ 235


a rational Obedience to the Will of Gol, S ct.
will raife him to his utmoft Capacity of _*:
moral Perfection ; will be a wide and firm ;
Foundation, on Sich the whole Fabric of
Virtue may rife in its juft Proportions ; will
extend and govern his Benevolence and moral
Senfe; will ftrengthen them, if weak ; will
confirm them, if ftrong; will fupply their
Want, if naturally defeétive: In fine, will
dire&all his Paffions to their proper Objeé#s
and Degrees’; and, as the great Mafter_/pring
of Aion, at once promote and regulate
every Movement of his Heart.
Ir muft be owned, the noble Writer’s

Caution againft this “ anticipating Philo-

“< fophy” hath of late been deeply imbibed.
‘ In confequence of it, we have feen religious
Principle declaimed againft, ridiculed, la-
mented. The Effeét of this hath been, an
abandoned Degree of Villainy in one Clafs _
of Mankind; a lethargic Indifference to-
wards Virtue or Vice in another; and in
the third, which boafts the Height of mo-
dern Virtue, we feldom fee more than the:
firft natural Efforts, the mere Buddings of
Benevolence and Honour, which are too
generally blafted ere they can ripen in+
to Aétion, "Fhis Contempt of Religion
Real. hath


a


«


ee ee MME etre eT mee ar


236 ; On the Motives to Virtur.
Es eX hath'always been a fatal Omen to free States.
_-"__ Nor, if we may credit Experience, can we
entertain any juft Hope, that this fantaftic
Scheme, this boafted Reli/h for Beauty and
Virtue, can ever give Security to Empire,

- without the more folid Supports of religious
Belief. For it is remarkable, that in the
Decline of both the Greek and Roman States,
after Religion had loft its Credit and Effi-
cacy, this very Tafe, this fovereign Philofo-
phy ufurped its Place, and became the com-
mon Study and Amufement (as it is now
among ourfelves) both of the Vile and Vul-
gar. The Fa&, withregard to Greece, is
fufficiently notorious ; with regard to Rome;
it may feem to demand a Proof. And who |
would think, that QuinTILIAN in the fol-
lowing Paffage was not defcribing our own
Age and Nation? ‘‘ Nunc autem quae vel-
“* ut propria philofophiae afferuntur, paflim —
“© tractamus omnes: Quis enim modo de
** JUSTO, AEQUO, ac BONO, non et VIR
“* pessimus loquitur?”’--- What was for-
merly the Philofopher's Province only, is now
invaded by all: We find every wicked and
worthlefs Fellow, in thefe Days, haranguing
on VirtTurE, Beauty, andGoop. What


4 Quint. Procemium.


this


On the MotwvestoVirtTur. 237
this Leprofy of falfe Knowledge may end in, § £¢ 7%
I am unwilling to fay: But this may be faid _-"_.
with Truth, becaufe it is juftified by Expe- ee
rience; that along with the Circumftance
now remarked, every other Symptom is rif-
ing among us, that hath generally attended
the dark and troubled sags: of a Com-
monwealth,
DovusTLess, many will treat thefe Ap-

prehenfions with Derifion: But this De-
rifion is far from being an Evidence of their
Falfehood. For no People ever fell a Sa-
crifice to themfelves, till Ju//ed and infatuated
by their own Paffions., Blind Security is an
effential Characteriftic of a People devoted
to deftruction. The Fact is equally un-
deniable, whether it arifeth from the moral
Appointment of Providence, or the Con-
nexion of natural Caufes.. Though this is
feen and acknowledged by thofe who are
converfant with the Hiftory of Mankind;
_ yet ’tis hard to convey this Evidence to thofe_
who feldom extend their Views beyond their
own fhort Period of Exiftence; becaufe they
fee the Prevalence of the Caufe afligned,
’ while yet the pretended Confequence appears
not. But they who look back. into ancient
Time are convinced, that the public Effects

; of


238 Ow the Motes toVirtuE.

Es a of Irreligion have nevét been'fudden or ii
—___. "diate... Onle Age is Salfely polite, irreli-
(gious; and vile's\ the next: is funk in Servis
tude and Wretchednefs: This is analogous
to'the Operation of other Caifes: “A Man
may. be intemperate! for twenty Years, be+
fore’he féels the Effects of Intemperance ori
his Conftitution. The Sun and Moon’ raife
the Tides ;- yet'the Tides rife not to their
Height; till a confiderable’ Time after the
Conjuntion-of thefe two Luminaries: We |
cannot therefore! juftly decide concerning
the future Effects of Irreligion; from its
fent'State,, The Examples of formet Times
area much better Criterion: And’thefeare
fuch; as-ought to make! every’ Man among
us, that regards Pofterity; tremble: for his
Pofterity while he reads them:

For this is' but too juft'an Epitome of the
Story of Mankind. That'Tyranny and
SupERsTITIONy have’ ever gone’ Hand’ in’
Hand ; mutually fupporting and fupported ;
taking their Progrefs, and fixing’ their Do-’ =
minion over'alh the Kingdoms of the Earth ; ;
overwhelming’ itin’ one general Deluge, as
the Waters cover the Sea:' Here and there’

a happy: Nation! emerges 3 breathes for’ a!
while in theenlightened Region of Know-
LEDGE,


On the Motives to Virtue. 239


LEDGE, RELiGIGN, VirTvE, Freepom: 52° T#
*Till, in their appointed Time, IRRELIGION
and LicENTIOUSNESS appear; mine the,
Foundations of the Fabric, and fink it in

the general Aby{s of IcNoRANcE and Op-

PRESSION.

Possisty the fatal Blow may yet be
averted from us. "Tis furely the Duty of
every Man, in every Station, to contribute
his Share, however zneconfiderable, to this
_ great End. This muft be my Apology for
oppofing the noble Writer’s fantaftic Sy-
ftem ; which by exhibiting a falfe Picture
of human Nature, is, in Reality, an Inlet to
Vice, while it feems moft favourable to Vir-
tue: And while it pretends to-be drawn
from the Depths of Phihfopby, is, of all
others, mof? unphilofophical. :


ESSAYS


[241 J


ESSAYS


ON THE


-Charaécteriftics, etc.


ESSAY Il.


On Hevealed| Rev ord N, and


CHRISTIANITY,


SECTION I.


N the Courfe of the preceding Eff ,SECT


LT we have feen the noble Writer affum-
ing the Character of the profefied Dog-
matift, the Reafoner in. Form. .In what re-


mains to be confidered, concerning Revealed


Religion and CurisrianiTy, we fhall find
him chiefly affe@ting he mifctllaneous Capa-
R city ;


« pod


242 Ou Revealed Reicion ae
E coe city ; theWay of Chat, Raillery, Innuendo,or
"_. Story-telling : In a word, that very Species’
of the prefent modifh Compofition, which —
he fo contemptuoufly ridicules; “where, as
“he tells us, Juftice and Accuracy of
‘ Thought are fet afide as too conftraining:;
*« where Grounds and Foundations are of —
“no Moment; and which hath properly —
“ neither Zep nor Bottom, Beginning nor
« End*.” In this, however, his Lordfhip
is not quite fo much to blame asmightbe =
imagined.. In his Critical Progrefs, he had —
treated this difhabille of Compofition, asthe =
Man in the Fable did his Pears; unconfci-
ous he fhould be ever afterwards reduced
to diet on them himfelf. The Truth of —
‘the Matter is, that the broken Hints, the
ambiguous Expreflion, and the Ludicro-
{erious of the gentle Effayift, perfectly fe-
cure him from the rough Handling of the
Logical-Difputer. be pert
-Inpeep the noble Author has a double
Advantage from this Cloud, in which the
Graces {fo frequently fecure their Favourite.
He not only eludes the Force of every Ar=
gument the Defenders of Chriftianity alledge
in its Support,but even pleads thePrivilege of


*Sce above, Effayi, § 2.


4 «
TY. ee


being


and CuRISTIANITY, 243
being ranked in the Number of fincere Chrif-S £.¢ 1.
- tians. Hetakes frequentOccafions of exprefi- Te ;


ing his Abhorrence of idle Scepticks and
«picked Unbelievers in Religion: .He declares


 himéfelf of a more refined Underftanding, a


ductile Faith, ready to be moulded into


‘any fhape that his fpiritual fuperiors fhall


prefcribe. At other Times, and in innu-
merable Places, he featters fuch Infinuations
againft Chrifizanity, and that too with all the
Bitternefs of Sarcafm and Inveétive, as muft
needs be more effectual in promoting Irre-
ligion, than a formal and avowed Accufation.
For in the Way of open War, there is fair
Warning given to put Reafon upon Guard,
that no pretending Argument be {uffered to
pafs without Examination. On the con-
trary, the noble Writer’s concealed Method
of Raillery, teals infenfibly on his Reader ;
fills him with endlefs Prejudice and Sufpi-
cion’; and, without paffing thro’ the Yudy-
ment, fixeth fach Impreflions on the Imagi-
nation, 2s Reafon, with all its Effeéts, will
be hardly able afterwards to efface.

Turse inconfiftent Cireumftances in his
Lordfhip’s Conduct, have made it a Quef-
tion among fome; what his real Sentiments
were concerning Religion: and Chrifianity.
| R 2 If


On RevealedRELIGion


_Essavyif it be neceflary to decide this Queftion,


——


we may obferve, that. a difguifed Unbe-
liever may have his Reafons for making a
formal Declaration of his Affent to the Re-
ligion of his Country: But it will be hard
to find what fhould tempt a real Chriflian
to load Chrifianity with Scorn and Infamy.
Indeed, the noble Writer, to do him Juftice,
never defigned to leave us at a Lofs on this
Subject. For he hath been fo good, fre-


-quently to remind his Reader, to Jook out


for the true Drift of his Irony, left his real


‘Meaning fhould be miftaken or difregarded.


Here then lies the Force of his Lorfhip’s
Attack on Chriflianity ; ‘< In exciting Con-
“ tempt by Ridicule.” A Method which, as
we have already {een °, tho’ devoid of all ra-


tional Foundation, is yet more powerful and


efficacious in working upon vulgar Minds,
Thus the Way of Jrony and falfe Enco-
mium, which he fo often employs againft


the bleffed Founder of our Religion, ferves
him for all Weapons ; the deeper he ftrikes


the wound, the better he thields himfelf.
WE are not therefore to be furprized, if
we find the noble Writer frequently affect-
ing a Mixture of folemn Phrafe and low
b E/fay i. paslim, 8

Buffoonry ;


and CHRISTIANITY. 245
Buffoonry ; not only in the fame Traé?, but Se cr.
in the fame Paragraph. In this Refpe@,_
he refembles the facetious Drole I have
fomewhere’ heard of, who wore a tranfpa-
rent Mafque: Which, at a Diftance, exhi-
bited a Countenance wrapt up in profound
Solemnity ; but thofe’ who came nearer,
and could fee to the Bottom, found the
native Look diftorted into all the-ridiculous
Grimace, which Spleen and Vanity could
imprint,


SECTION IL


BUT as natural Religion is the only's , . 5.
Foundation of revealed; it will beneceflary, I.
ere we proceed to the laft, to obviate any
Infinuations which the noble Writer may
have thrown out againft the Former.

Asto the Expeation of future Happinefs
confidered, as the natural Confequence of
virtuous Action; his Lordfhip. hath not,.
that I know of, either affirmed, or infinuated
any thing againft its Reafonablenefs. But
with regard to the other Branch of Reli-
gion, ‘ the Belief of a future State of Mifery
** or Punifhment, confidered as: the ‘ap-’
sf pointed Confequence of Vice,” this he

Re3 hath


246 On Revealed Rettcion


b. 8 ‘it ¥ hath frequently endeavoured to difcredit in :)
___ fuch a Manner as would be no fmal! De- 3
gree of Guilt to tranfcribe, were it not to :
fhew at once the Impiety and Falfehoodof = =
his Affirmations, 7 ea

In his Letter on Enthufiafm, he hath ob- :
liged us with feveral Paffages of this Kind. be
Thefe, it muft be owned, are fo obfcure,
that we muft be content, to refer them i
rather to the Reader’s equitable Conftruc-
tion, than urge them as direct Proofs, #

Tur Apprehenfion and Fear of fome- >
thing /upernatural, {o univerfal among Man-
kind, he feems all along to deride, as a :

' vifionary and groundlefs Panic, He adds


that, ‘ while fome Sects, fuch as the Py- Be
“ thagorean and latter Platonick, joined in of
¢ with the Superftition and Enthufiafm of iy
* the Times; the Epicurean, the Academic nee
s* and others, were allowed to ufe all the om
*¢ Force of Wit and, Raillery againft it*.”* *
To convince us how much-he approves the
Condué of thefe libertine Sects, he boldly ’


follows their Example. He aflures us that

* fuch is the Nature of the liberal, polifh-

*¢ ed and refined Part of Mankind; fo

‘* far are they from the mere Simplicity of
° Lett,en Enthuf. pafim, “Ib

£* Babes


and CHRISTIANITY. 347
ie Babes and Sucklings ; that, inftead of Src ‘T.
« applying the Notion of a future Reward. *"
‘* or Punifhment, to their immediate aces
haviour in Society; they are apt much
«< rather, thro’ the whole Courfe of their
“* Lives, to thew evidently, that they look
on the pious Narrations to be indeed: no’
“* better than Children’s Tales, and the.
« Amufement of the mere Vulgar*.” He
confirms thefe Opinions by afligning the
Reafon why Men of Senfe fhould ftand
clear of the Fears of a Futurity: “Gop
*« is fo good, asto exceed the very beft of us
in Goodnefs: And after this Manner we
can have no Dread or Sufpicion'to render
us uneafy; for it is Malice only, and not
Goodnefs, which can make us afraid f,’”
Is this the Philofopher and Patriot, the
Lover of his Country and Mankind! This
the Admirer of ancientWifdom, of venera-
ble Sages, who founded ‘‘ Laws, Conttitu-
‘* tions, civil and religious Rites, whatever
“ civilizes or polifhes Mankind®,”


“ n a
n n rn


."
n


Tu Pater et Rerum inventor! Tu patria eg 3

» Suppeditas precepta !
Tus, fure, is unhinging Society to ‘the
* Mif.iii.c. 2. ‘Lett.onEnth. & Moralifts, P.i. § 3.
R 4 utmoft


% . * oe
248. On Revealed RELIGION : ™


Es 84¥ utmoft of his Power: For the Force of ew
'__ligious Sanétions depends 2s much on their
~ being believed, as the Forceof bumanLaws
depends on their being executed. To de-— +4
frroy the Belief of the one therefore, is equi-- .«
valent to fufpending the other, : ’

- Bur as the prefent Debate concerns not — 9


the Usility, but the Truth of Religion, tis
chiefly incumbent on us, to fhew, that the
noble Writer’s Opinion and Reafoning, on
on this Subject, are void of all Foundation. —


- *T 1s obferveable therefore, Firft, that his a
Lordfhip, in other Places, allows, that If” Pi
«© there be naturally fuch a Paffion as Enthu- — 23
<* fiafm, *tis evident, that Religionitfelf isof e
«the kind, and mutt be natural therefore to qa
“ Man*.” And in his Letter on Enthufiafm, 7
even while he derides the Pronenefs of my
Mankind to the confcientious Fear, he adds, ee
“ that tho’ Epicurus thought thefe Appre-  *
‘* henfions were vain, yet he was forced to = ‘
. €€ allow them in a Manner innate :’’--- af


*¢ From which Conceffion, a Divine, me-
** thinks, might raife a good Argument
“¢ againft him, for the Zruth as well as
. © Ufefulnefs of Religion.” Now as fome
may poffibly be at a Lofs to determine here,


® NMGife.ii, ci
ife ‘eZ .


se «eT


whether


and CHRISTIANITY. .


whether the noble Writer be in Sef orS Ei
Earneft, the Argument he hints at is plainly"


this: That if we look round the Works of
Nature, we fhall findan Analogy eftablith- |
ed, which feems a Proof, that this natural
Fear, which pofefeth fo univerfally on the
human Mind, hath a real and proportioned


~ Obje&. The Argument hath been urged


by many of great Name, in Favour of the.
Hope of future Good; and ’tis furely of.
equal Force, whatever the Force may be,. -
when apply’d to the Fear of future Ji,
For we fee thro’ the whole Creation, every.
Animal, of whatever Species, directed by its
Nature, or the Hand of Providence, to fear
and fhun its proper and appointed Enemy.
We find thefe Apprehenfions univerfally
fuited to the Nature and Prefervation of
every Species. among Birds, Beafts, Fifhes,
Infe&ts. Nor is there one Fear, tho’ fome-
times exceffive in its Degree, that is erroneous
with regard to its Object. The religious
Fear, therefore, which forceth itfe/f fo uni-
verfally on the human Mind, in every Age
and Nation, ignorant or knowing, civilized
or barbarous ; hath probably an Object fuited
to its Nature, ordained for the Welfare of
the human Species, . At leaft, this Argu-


ment


250 On Revealed RELIGION
Essayment muft éver be of Weight with thofe,
who draw their Ideas of future Exiftence
from the Inftincts, Hopes, and Expectations.
of the human Mind.

IndEED, on the noble Writes’ s refinéd
Scheme of Morals, in which the natural
Affections of the Mind are reprefented, as
all-fufficient for the Purpofes of human
Happinefs, this Argument muft lofe its
Force; becaufe, on this Suppofition, the re-

Figious Fear is /upernumerary and ufelefs :
But then this thews the Suppofition itfelf to
be monfirous, abfurd, and contrary to the
eftablifhed Courfe of Nature; becanfe Na-
ture gives no Power or Paffion, but to fome
proper and appointed End: The very Ex-
iftence of the Paffion, therefore, isa Proof =
of its Neceffity.

Now, if indeed the religious Fear be
neceffary, as, we prefume, hath been fuffi-
ciently proved in the preceding Effay ; -
then, from hence will arife a ftrong and
convincing Proof, that the Object of reli-
gious Fear is real. For we find thro’ the
whole Extent of created Being, that the
Author of Nature hath annexed to all his
Defigns and Purpofes, the proper Means or
Objects, by which they may be fulfilled,

As


SE eT


ra see
< P


and CHRISTIANITY? |


251


As therefore the religious Fear is not only § ‘1 T.


interwoven with the Frame of Man, but."
abfolutely necefjary to his Happinefs, its ore.
je muft be real; becaufe, if not, you fup-
pofe the Creator to have given a NEeESSA-
RY Pafion, without its proper and appointed
Object; which would be a Contradiétion
to thé aniverfal and known Conflitution of
Things.

On this Oceafion, we may: obferve the
Weakneis of thieHpiewrean Syftem, concerns
ing Providence: For that Se& hath ever
deny’d, that the Deity’ concerns himfelf
with the moral Conduét of Man. But frony
the wife and benevolent Conftitution of the
natural World itfelf, a ftrong Proof arifeth
in Support of Gop’s moral Government of
it, and of the Truth of the Fears’ and Ex-
pectations of the human Mind. For if we
allow that he regards and preferves the
natural Order and Symmetry of the Crea-
tion; that he hath formed this immenfe
Syftem of Being, and fecur’d its- Contiriu-
afice and Welfare, by certain Laws, necef-
fary to the Happinefs of his Creatures’; then
we muft on the fame’ Foundation conclude,
that he hath likewife’ eftablithed fach Mo-
tives and Laws of Action; as may determine

Man


252 Ow Revealed RetiGion

Ez nf ¥ Manto profecute the fame End. It were

——__an Imputation on the Wifdom of the Deity,
to conceive him as doing the one, andomit-
ting the other : Unlefs Mind and Morals be
lefs worthy of his Regard, than Mutter and
Motion. f Ther

Bur ftill the noble Writer proceeds in
the Spirit of Derifion, to expofe the Ab-
furdities and Mifchiefs this mifguided_reli-

_ gious-Principle hath occafioned; he often
expatiates on the /uper/titious’ Horrors, and
furious Zeal which have had their Source’
in this Principle ; and thence, in the Way
of Infinuation, concludes it. irrational and.
groundlefs. i

. Tue Fads, it muft be owned, are no-
torious and undeniable: But the Confe-
quence is no lefs evidently chimerical and
vain. Lord SHarresspury himfelf hath ©
obferved, that in Failure of a juft Prince”
or Magiftrate, Mankind are ready to fub-
mit themfelyes even toa Tyrant: ‘ Like:
“© new-born Creatures, who have never
** feen their Dam, they will fancy one for
‘* themfelves, and’ apply (as by Nature.
«< prompted) to fome like Form for Favour
** and Protection. In the Room of a true.
¢ Fofter-Father and Chief, .they will take.
“ after


and CHRISTIANITY. | 253
“ee after a falfe one; and in the Room of aS fcr.
ke peg Government and juft Prince, obey.
* even a Tyrant'.” And: hence he draws
a Aliens Proof of the Force of the /ocial’ or
berding Principle, even from defpotie Power
itfelf. Again he hath remarked, that He-
“© roi{m and Philanthory are almoft one and
“the fame; ~ yet by a fmall Mifguidance
of the Affection, a Lover of Mankind
becomes a Ravager; a Hero and Deli-
“© verer becomes an Oppreffor and Deftroy-
“ erk” ?>Tis the fame in Religion. Where
the human Mind (ever reftlefs'in it’s Search
for the great Centre of created ‘Being, ‘on
which alone it can perfectly repofe itfelf)
feeks, but cannot find the true Gop) it
naturally fets up a falfe one in his Place:
Here too, Mankind, * like new-born Crea
** tures, who have never: feen their Dam,
** will fancy one for themfelves, and apply
*< (as by Nature prompted) to fome like:
** Form for Favour and Protection. In the
“Room of a true Fofter-Father, they will
« take after a falfe one; and-in the Room
« of anall-perfe& Gon, worfhip even an
“‘Ydol.’ The religious Principle, thus
mifguided, breaks forth indeed, into Enor4
F : 1 Wit and Elum, Pyiii. § “Tb. § 2.


aes


mMities


254 On Revealed Reticion ‘eee
_Essa¥ mities the moft pernicious and deftrudtive 4 :
Ul. Hence indeed, “ by a {mall Mifguidance of
*« the Affection, a Lover of Mankind be
© comes a Ravager; a Saint, an Oppreffor
“and Deffroyer.” But as from the Abufe
of the focial Principle, fo here, in that of |
the religious one, no other Confequence can

be juftly drawn, but that it is natural and
ftrong. E
But further, the noble Writer finds the

Notion of future Punifhment, inconfiftent

- with his Idea of divine Goodne/s. Therefore,
fays he, ‘‘ Wecan have no dread or Sut
“ picion to make us uneafy: For it is

_ Malice only, and not Goodaet which
« can make us afraid !.’

Yer, on another Occafion, his Laretoag

can affirm, and juftly, that, ‘a Man of Tem=
** per may refift or punifth without Anger.”
And if fo, why may not divine Goodnefs
make us afraid? For as divine Goodnefs
regards the greateft Happinefs of all it’s
Creatures ; fo, if Punifhment be neteflary =
to that End, divine Goodnefs will therefore ee
ORDAIN PunisHMENT. Tothis Purpofe, =
a Writer of diftinguifhed Rank and Pene-
tration: ‘ In Reality, Goodnefs is the natu-


"Eng. B. ii. Part ii, §2. >


ral


*Y


a


ear


and CuRISTIANITY.


255


ral and juft Objeft of Fear toan ill Man. S£¢ ¥-°


Malice may be appeafed or fatiated :_“"__


Humour may change : But Goodnefs is


‘as a fixed, fteady immoveable Principle


of Aétion. If either of the former holds
the Sword of Juftice, there is plainly
Ground for thegreateft of Crimes to hope
for Impunity. But if it be Goodnefs,
there can be no poffible Hope, whilft
the Reafons of Things, or the Ends of
Government call for Punifhment. ‘Thus
every one fees how much greater Chance
of Impunity an ill Man has in a partial
Adminiftration, than in a juft and up-


right one. It is faid, that the Intereft or’


Good of the whole, muft be the Intereft
of the univerfal Being ; and that he can
have no other. Beit fo. This Author
(Ld. S.) has proved that Vice is naturally
the Mifery of Mankind in this World :


‘¢ Confequently it was for the Good of the


whole, that it fhould be fo. What
Shadow of Reafon then is there to affert,

that this may not be the Cafe hereafter ?
Danger of future Punifhment (and if


there be Danger, there is Ground of Fear)


no more fuppofes Malice; than the pre-


‘© fent Feeling of Punifhment does®.” *


® Dr. Builer’s Sermons, Preface, p. 21.
, Tuus


256 | On RevealedReuicion |
(Eig + ¥ Tuus the noble Writer’s Derifion and
___Argumentation are equally chimerical and ;
impious; as it appears, that the natural a
Fears and Expectations of the human Mind )
are at leaft founded in Probability.


SECTION Il. i


HIS Lordfhip’s Opinions being {0 litte S
favourable to natural Religion, we cannot f
wonder, if we find him, on every _poffible.
Occafion, throwing out Infinuations and
virulent Remarks, in order to difgrace re-
vealed. The firft that. will deferve our
Notice, are fuch as tend to invalidate.the
Credibility of Scripture Hiftory.

He tells us, “« He who fays he believes
*€ for certain, or is affured of what he be-
<< lieves, either {peaks ridiculoutfly, or fays in
“* effect, he believes ftrongly, but is notfure:

“© So that whoever is not confcious of Reve-=
** lation, nor has certain Knowledge of any _
“© Miracle or Sign, can benomore than {cep-
© tick in the Cafe: And the beft Chriftian in
“ theWorld,who being deftitute of the Means
“* of Certainty, depends only on Hiftory and
** Tradition for his Belief of thefe particu-
« lars, is at beft but a {ceptick Chriftian ».


® Mife, ii.c. 2s 1
a Now


ond CHRISTIANITY.


Now it thould feem, that the DexteritySr¢7*


of this Paflage lies in a new Application of
two or threeWords. For, by “ certain and
* afured’”’ he means more, by “ Sceptici{m”
he means much lefs, than it is ever ufed to
fignify. And thus as in Dr. Mandeville's


~ Philofophy, (already ° criticized) wherever


we have not Demontftration, ’tis plain we
mutt needs be Sceptics.

Bur if indeed we muft be Sceptics in
Revealed Religion on this Account ; the
fame Confequence will follow, with Regard
to every other Kind of Knowledge that de-
pends on human Teftimony. We muft be
Sceptics too, in ourBelief of every paftTranf-
action ; nay of every thing tranfacted in otir


- own Times, except only of what falls with-


in the narrow Circle of our proper Obfer-


‘vation, The Manners of Men, the Site of


Countries, the Varieties of Nature, theTruths
of Philofophy, the very Food we eat, and
Liquids we.drink, are all received on the
fole Evidence of human Teftimony. But
what Name would he merit among Men,
who in thefe Inftances fhould fay, ** he does
* not believe for certain, or is not affured
“* of what he believes,” till in every Cafe he
© See above, E/fay ii.


$ fhould


257


258 On Revealed Ra.icion


E aaa ¥ fhould be impelled by the Force of Demon-
__firation, or the Evidence of Senfe ?
_ Anp indeed, on other Occafions, where ,
Chriftianity is not concerned, the noble
Writer can {peak in a very different, and
much jufter Manner. For thus he appeals
to Nature; in Proof of the Wifdom and
Goodnels of the Creator. ‘‘ Thus, too, in |
‘ the Syftem ofthe diggerWorld. See there :
‘* the mutual Dependency of Things: The |
*« Relation of one to another; of the Sunto
«¢ this inhabited Earth; and of the Earth
“ and other Planets tothe Sun! TheOrder, ~
“© Union, and Coberence of the whole! And
“« know, my ingenious Friend, that by this
-** Survey you will be obliged to own the
“¢ univerfal Sytem, and coherent Schemeof ==
*« Things; to be efabl ifoed 0” ABUNDANT |
Proor, capable of convincing any fair — >
-*© and juft Contemplator of the Works of
«© Nature’.” His Lordfhip’s Argument is
furely juft. Yet, is there one to be found
among five hundred of thofe, who are thus
convinced of the wife Structure ofthe Uni-
-verfe, who have ever taken a Survey of this
immenfe Syftem, except only in the Books
and Diagrams of experienced Philofopbers 2


P Moralift, P. ii. § 4.


How


and CHRISTIANITY. 259


How few are capable even of comprehend- Sz ¢ tr.
ing the Demonftrations, on which the Truth ___"_
of the Copernican Sytem is eftablifhed ; or ‘
receiving on any other Proof than that of
human Teftimony, ‘the Relation of theEarth
' & and other Planets to the Sun, the Order,
“ Union, and Coberence of the whole?” It
cannot be fuppofed, that even the noble
Writer himfelf ever went thro’ the tedious
Procefs of Experiment and Calculation, which
alone can give abfolute Certainty in this ex-
tenfive Subject, Yet we find, he is not in
any Degree, ‘‘ fceptical in the Cafe ;” but
very rationally determines, that the Wifdom
of the Deity, in “ this univerfal Syftem,
“ is offablifhed on abundant Proof, capable
_ © of convincing any fair and ju/t Contem-
*€ plator of the Works of Nature.”

Ir appears then, that a Confidencein the
Veracity of others is not peculiar to the
Belief of Revealed Religion : The fame takes
Place in almoft ever Subje&t. More par-
ticularly, we fee, that in the Hifory of Na-
ture, as in that of Revelation, the Evidence
of human Te/fimony is the only Sort of
Proof that can be given to Mankind: And
whoever allows this Proof, as being ‘ adun--
“ dant and convincing” in the one, and dif-

S 2 allows


’


260 On Revealed Revicton


E s savallows or defpifeth it in the other, how felf-
fatisfied foever he may be in his own Imagi-
nation, is neither a fair nor a juf? Contem-
plator of the Works and the Ways of Pro-
vidence.

Ir therefore any Objection lies againft
the Credibility of the Scripture Hifory, it
muft confift in maintaining, not ‘ that
*« human Teftimony is infufficient to fup-
“ port it,” but ‘ that, in Fadt, it is not fuffi-
*« ciently fupported by the Evidence of
«« human Teftimony.” If fo; this Defect
mutt arife, either from a Want of External
Evidence: Or, Secondly, becaufe the Facts,
Doétrines, and Compofition of the Bible, are
fuch, that no Teftimony whatever can con-
vince us that it isa divine Revelation.

Wits Regard to the firft of thefe, ‘ the
“< ‘Teftimony on which the Authenticity of
«< the Gofpel Hiftory is founded:” This
the noble Writer hath attacked by a long
Chain of Infinuations, in his laft Mz/cellany 4.
Where, in the Way of Dialogue, he hath
indeed amply repaid the Treatment, which
in the preceding Chapter he charges upon
the Clergy. For here he hath introduced
two of that Order, who, to ufe his own: Ex-

8 Mife. ve tv 3e
prefiion,


oe ee


and GHRISTIANITY. 264


preffion, “ are indeed his very legitimate andS #7.
** obfequious Puppets, who co-operate in the :
‘* moft officious Manner with the Author,
towards the Difplay of ‘his own proper’
* Wit, and the Eftablifhment of his pri-
vate Opinion and Maxims *.” ‘* Where
after the poor Phantom or Shadow ofan —
“* Adverfary, has faid as little for his Caufe
as.can be imagined, and given as many
Opens and Advantages as could be de-

** fired, he lies down for good and all ; and
paflively fubmits to the killing Strokes of
his unmerciful Conqueror s.”

To. thefe Gentlemen the noble Writer
affigns the Herculean Labour, of proving
the Neceflity of an abfolute Uniformity in
Opinion. A hopeful Project indeed! as his
Lordfhip calls it elfewhere. No Wonder
he comes off Conqueror in fach a Debate.
But here lies the Peculiarity of his Condué :
That while he pretends only to prove, that
the Scripture cannot be ‘a Foundation for
‘Uniformity of Opinion in all Things; he
hath thrown out fuch Infinuations, as evi-
dently imply, that there can be no Founda-
tion for believing the Truth of any thing
the Gofpel Hiftory contains, He fays, he


¥ Tbserg. *°°9 "Tb.
$3 began


262


On Revealed Revicion


Es, s aybegan by defiring them “ to explain the


«ee


ral


¢


na
nn


Word Scripture, and by enquiring into
the Original of this Collection of anti-
enter and later Tra¢ts, which in general


_they comprehend under that Title:


whether it were the apocryphal Scripture,
or the more canonical? the full or balf-
authorized? the doubtful or the certain ?
the controverted or uncontroverted? the
Jingly read, or that ‘of various Reading ?
The Texts of thefe Manufcripts or of
thofe? the Tranfcripts, Copies, Titles,


Catalogues of this Church and Nation, —
‘or of that other? of this Sect and Party,


or of another? of thofe in one Age called
Orthodox, and in Poffeffion of Power, or
of thofe, who, in another, overthrew their
Predeceflor’s Authority; and, in their
Tarn alfo, affumed the Guardianfhip and
Power of holy Things? For how thefe
facred Records were guarded in thofe
Ages, might eafily (he faid) be imagined
by any one who had the leaft Infight


into the Hiftory of thofe Times, which


we called Primitive, and thofe Charace
ters of Men, whom we ftyled | Fathers of
the Church *.”
‘Mile. Vo C. 3
Here,


"3
,
*!
f


and CHRISTIANITY.


263


Here, as his Lordthip drags us into the Se s Tr.
beaten Tra of Controverfy, the beft Com- ;


pliment that can be paid the Reader, is to
carry him thro’ it by the fhorteft Way. The
ftale Objections here raked together by the
noble Author have been fo often, and fo
fully refuted, by a Variety of excellent
Writers, that, to many, it may feem a
needlefs Tafk, even to touch upon the
Subject *.

However, for the Satisfaction of thofe
who may think it neceffary, a fummary
View of the Evidence is here fubjoined.

Tue Authenticity, therefore, of the
Books of the new Teftament, appears to be
founded on the ftrongeft moral Evidence,
becaufe, from the earlieftAges, we find them
afcribed to the Apoftles and Evangelifts,
whofe Names they bear. Thus St. Pauvt’s
Epiftles are mentioned by St. PeTEr, and
cited by Clemens Romanus, who lived in
the Reign of Craupius, even before St.
Paut was carried Prifoner to Rome. Po-


_ Lycarp and Irenmus were for fomeTime


contemporary with St. Joun : They both cite


Y Du Pin, Le Clerc, Tillemont, Whitby, Lardner,Phil.
Lipfienfis, &c. and very lately Mr. Fortin, in his learn-
ed Remarks on Ecclefiaftical Hiftory.

rade a aR the


*?


sx


264 On Revealed Ruvicion |
(& * St) ‘the four Gofpels, and affirm they were all
written by theA poftles andEvangelifts, whofe
Names they bear. _ Justin Martyr and.
Cremens ALEXANDRINUS confirm their
Accounts in the following Century: And
the great On1GEN, with whom I thall clofe.
the Catalogue, and who lived in the Reign
of Severus, in his Book againft Crxsus,
hath cited all the Go/pels, and moff, if not all
theEpz/tles, under the Names they now bear;
And the Words of the feveral Citations per-
fectly agree with thofe of the NewTeftament,
now in ufe. Such a full Proof of the
Genuinenefs of thefe facred Records, as is
not to be parallel’d, concerning any other
Book, of equal or even of much /e/s Anti-
guity,

The internal Proof of their Genuinenefs,
arifing from their Styleand Compofition, is
no le{s eminentand particular. The Genius
of every Book is fo perfectly agreeable to
the Character and Education of it’s re{pec-
tive Author; every Cuftom defcribed or :
alluded to, either Fewifh, Greek, or Roman, ae
fo entirely fuited to the Times; every Inci- |
dent fo natural, fo occafional, fo particular,
fo perfectly identify’ d, that it werethevery

Extreme


~~ i, = ‘
i" Sey
and CHRISTIANITY. 265
_ Extreme of Ignorance and Folly, to raife aSecr.
Doubt on this Subject. a

Tuat theGofpel-Hittory hath been tran
mitted to us, pure and uncorrupted, we have
no lefs Reafon to believe... ’Tis well known
how zealous the primitive Chriftians were
in the Prefervation of the Scriptures: We
know, they regarded them as their chief
and deareft Treafure ;: and.often laid down |
their Lives, rather than -deliver the facred
Records to their Enemies, who ufed every
Art of Terror, to feize and deftroy them.
Again, the Scriptures were not then locked
up from the Laity, as now in the Roman
Church : But Copies were taken, difperfed,
and became immenfely numerous. They
were univerfally read at the Times of pub-
lic Worthip, in different Nations. of the
World. Tothis we may add, thatas now,
fo then, different Seéts and Parties fubfifted,
who all appealed to Scripture for Proof of
their feveral Opinions; and thefe, ’tis evi-
dent, muft have been fo many Checks upory
each other, to the general Exclufion of
Miftake and Fraud *,

x The Jews and SAMARITANS were Checks upon


each others in the fame Manner, for the Prefervation of
the Purity of the Pentateuch, The Samaritan Penta-


Tuis


266 On Revealed Revicton
Essay Tis being the real State of the Cafe ; let
——-~~- Us now confider the nobleWriter’s Queftions.

He atks, whether by Scripture be under-
ftood ‘* the apoeryphal or mare canonical ?
** the fall or halfauthorizéd? the doubtful
*s or the certain? the controverted or un-
“ controverted?” Thefe Queftions are
neatly fynonymous, and one fhort Reply
will clear them all. There are many
Books, concerning which there never was
any Doubt.'There are fome, concerning
which the Doubts have been fully cleared
up. ‘There are others, concerning which a
the Doubts have been confirmed. ‘Of the
firft Kind are all the Gofpels, and ‘mof of
the Epifles : Of the fecond, are the Epiftle
to the Hebrews, the fecond of Peter, fecond
and third of ohn, that of Sfude, and the
Apocalypfe : Of the third Kind, are the
apocryphal Books; therefore indeed fo
called.

Tue noble Author goes on. “ The
“ fingle read, or that of various Reading ?”


o a ie ences FPS


teuch was printed in the laft Century: And, < after
© Two thoufand Years Difcord between the two Na-
<* tions, varies as little from the other, as any Claffic
* Author in lefs Traé of Time has difagreed from it-
“* felf by, the unavoidable Miftakes of fo many Tran-
“ feribers.” See Phil. Lipfien/.

> : My


and CHRISTIANITY. 267 |


My Lord, if by /imgle read, you mean a Book § th
in which there are no various Readings,
there are none fingle read: Nor, probably,
was there ever any Book figle read, that
went thro’ moreithan one Edition : at leaft,
before the Invention of Printing. And as
the Scriptures wereooftner tranfcribed than
any other Book, fo, a gveater Variety of
Readings muft naturally‘take place. But
I muft inform your Lordthip, from the
learned PoiLELeuTHERUs LipsiEeNsis, that
this is the moft illiterate of all Cavils: For
that in Faét, we have the See of thofe an- ~
cient Authors moft entire, where the vari-
ous readings are moft numerous: As, of
thofe Authors where the Varieties are few-
ef, the Senfe is moft mutilated or obfcure’,
But if by jingle read, your Lordfhip means
an authentic Text collected and compofed
out of the various Readings, I beg leave to
inform you, there is no fuch in the Proteft-
ant Churches. They have been too. mo-
deft to attempt any fuch thing. | Nor does
the Truth fuffer by it: For as the learned
Critic, juft before quoted, obferves, the moft
faulty Copy of the new Teftament now in


y Fora full View of this Argument, See Phil, Lip-


fenf.


being,


268 Ou Revealed Re.icion


Essa ybeing, does not obfcure one moral Doc- sf
_ trine, or one Article of Faith.
Acain the noble Writer goes on, ina — 4
Profufion of fynonymous Terms: ‘ The ;

*< Tranfcripts, Copies, Titles, Catalogues, —_
“* of this Church or that? of this Set or :


«« Party, or another? of thofe in one Age
** called orthodox, or thofe who in another
“« Ageoverthrewthem?” Whatunexperi-
enced Perfon would not imagine from hence,
that different Churches, Sects, or Parties, had
each of them a Bible different from the reft?
Yet ’tis certain, that however thefe Par-
ties differed in Opinions, we find from
their Writings now {ubfifting, that they all
appealed to one common Scripture for their
Support. -
Tue noble Writer takes his Leave by.
_ paying a Compliment to thefe primitive
Writers, called the Fathers of the Church.
“* How thefe facred Records were guarded
“* in thofe Ages, might be eafily zmagined,”
&c. --- But to imagine, is a much eafier
Tafk than to prove; efpecially when Ima-
gination is helped forward by Inclination.
Guarded indeed they were, as we have feen,
from Interpolation and Falfehood. But if
he means to infinuate, that they were guard-


ed


and CHRISTIANITY. 269


ed from Infpeétion and Criticifm, he does § oF
great Injuftice to Chriftianity. For what-____
ever Marks of fecular Views may be difco-
vered in the Condué of the ancient Chrif-
tians in the fucceeding Ages, we may fafe-
ly bid Defiance to the noble Writer’s Ad- |
mirers, to fhew any thing of this Kind in
the Characters of thofe to whofe Teftimony
we have here appealed; and on whofe
Teftimony, joined to that of their nume-
rous and ingenuous Contemporaries, the
Authenticity of the Gofpel-Hiftory depends.
They were far from acting or writing with

a View to temporal Advantage ; they were
ftruggling under the Weight of heavy Per-
fecutions ; had no Motives to preach or
write, but the great Expectation of Happi-
nefs hereafter, founded on a firm Belief of
that holy Religion, which they propagated
with an Effect almoff, if not indeed, mira-
culous..

On this Occafion I cannot but obferve a
ftrange Infinuation thrown out elfewhere
by the noble Writer; which, however, is
fo glaring a falfehood, that he finds himfelf
obliged to difavow it, even while he labours
to imprefs it on his Reader’s Imagination,
in all the Colours of Eloquence. « If,

* fays


*


270 Ou Revealed Revicion


Essay fays he, the collateral Teftimony of other
Hl. _« ancient Records were deftroyed, there
«© would be lefs Argument or Plea remain-
“ ing againft that natural Sufpicion of thofe
** who are called Sceptical, that the holy
* Records themfelves were no other than
«< the pure Invention or artificial Compile-
“< ment of an interefted Party, in Behalf of |
“© the riche Corporation, and moft profita-
‘© ble Monopoly in the World*.” Now if
his Lordfhip be indeed in earneft in urging
this Infinuation, he muft believe, that one
Set of Men preached, and wrote, and en-
dured Bonds and Imprifonment, Torments -
and Death; to the End that another Set of
Men, fome ‘three or four hundred Years
after, might enjoy the rich Corporations and
profitable Monopoly of Church Preferments.
How far this may be a Proof of the noble
Writer’s Sagacity, I thall leave others to de«
termine. But if he deleves not the Infinua-
tion, as indeed he feems to difbeheve it,
then we cannot furely hefitate a Moment
concerning the Meature of his Srncerity,
Tue Gentleman therefore who makes
fo ridiculous a Figure in the fuppofed Cons


—_--_


2 Mifry. cis


verfation


and CHRISTIANITY. 271


verfation, had he not been a poor obfequious § tect
Puppet, might have returned one general _—
and fatisfactory Anfwer to all thefe extraor-
dinary Queftions,. He might have defired
his Lordfhip “‘ to chufe which he fhould
“like deff or wor/t among all thefe contro-
“* verted Copies, various Readings, Manu-
ee {cripts, and Catalogues adopted by what-
“* ever Church, Sect, or Party.” Nay, he
might havedefired him to chufe any of the
almoft infinite Number of Tranflations
made of thefe Books in diftant Countries
and Ages: And taking that to be the Scrip-
ture he appealed to, might fafely have re-
lied on it, as amply fufficient for all the
great Purpofes of Religion and Chriftianity.


SECTION IV.


SINCE therefore the Seripture Hiffory § ' or
appears to be fupported by bigher Degrees —_—.
of human Teftimony, than any other anci-
ent Writing ; the only Objection of real
Weight againft it, muft be drawn from its
internal Structure; from the Faéts it relates,
the Doétrines it zmculcates, or the Form of
its Compo/ition.

Tue Faé#s related, being as it were the
Foundation of all, will naturally come firft

under


27h


~ On Revealed Revicion


“¢ Jous or out of Nature, -and therefore ab-
“ furd: For as they can prove nothing, {o it
*< is impoflible that Accounts of this Kind
“ could be fo effentially mingled with a
** Religion that fhould come from God.”
On this Foundation the noble Writer


hath taken frequent Occafion to deride what


he calls the “‘ Mockery of Miracles*;” par-
ticularly thofe of our Saviour’, Here we


fhall find him ftriking at the very Bafis of _


all revealed Religion, while he afferts, that,
even fuppofing the Truth of the Fats,
“* Miracles cannot witnefs either for God or
“Men, nor are any Proof either of Divi-


** nity or Revelation’.” But that his Ar-


gument may be fairly reprefented, let it
appear in his own Words. ‘ The Con-
** templation of the Univerfe, its Laws
“« and Government, was (I aver’d ) the
“© only Means which could eftablifh the
* found Belief of a Deity. For what tho’
** innumerable Miracles from every Part
‘ aflailed the Senfe, and gave the trembling
* Soul no Refpite? What tho’ the Sky
* fhould fuddenly open, and all kinds of
© Mifeii. 2. Ibs. 3
¢ Maaiit, Partii, § 5. pafim.

3 * Prodi«


.


™..


Ess aYunder Confideration. ‘ Now thefe, fay’


Ill.  « the Enemies of Chriftianity, are miracu-


and CHRISTIANITY. 273


*« Prodigies appear, Voices be heard, orSéc r.
* Characters read? What would this evince
more, than that there were certain Powers
“could do all this? But what Powers ;
whether one or'more; whether fuperior
* or fubaltern ; mortal or immortal ; wife or
* foolith ; juft or unjuft; good or bad: This
would ftill remain a Myftery; as would
“ the true Intention, the Infallibility or Cer-
“© tainty of whatever thefe Powers afferted*.”
’*T 1s remarkable, that the noble Writet
pretends here only to thew, that Miracles
are no Proof of the Exiffence of God: Yet
in the Conclufion of his Argument, he
brings it home to the Cafe of Revelation :
To “the true Intention, the Infallibility or
“* Certainty of whatever thefe Powers as-
“SERTED.” ‘This is clearly the Scope of
his Argument: And foindeed hath it been
underftood by his Under-workmen in Infide-
_ ity, who have with great Indultry retailed
‘this Objetion, “As it is a Circumftance of
the laft Importance in regard to the Truth
‘of Chriftianity, it cannot be an unfeafonable
Tafk, to thew in the fulleft Manner the
Vanity and Error of this trite Cayil.
, Bur, ‘inftead of confidering fingle Acts
‘of fupernatural-or miraculous Power, as be-
} 1b. .
T ™ ing


274 On Revealed ReirGion
Essa ving performed in Atteftation of any particu-
______lar Doétrine, (which hath been the general
Way of treating thisQueftion) ’tismy Defign

to confider as one Object,.“ that vaft Series


“< and Concatenation of miraculous Acts, —


“© recorded in the Oldand NewTeftament,
‘© wrought thro’ a long Succeffion of Ages,
*« for the Carrying on, Support, and Com-

“* pletion of the Cbri/tian Di/penfation.”
Wir# this View therefore let us firft
confider the Means by which Mankind are
juftly convinced of the Being of a God. Now
this Conviction, ’tis allowed by all, arifeth
from an Union of Power, Wifdom, and Good-
nefs, difplayed in thevifible Creation. From
this Union alone arifes the Idea of an ail-
perfect Being: So that a Failure in any of
thefe three effential Circumftances, would
deftroy the Idea of a God. The Good-
nefs of the Deity is {een in the defigned End
or Purpofe of the Creation, whichis, ‘* The
<* Hlappinefs of all his Creatures:” His Wif-
dom is feen, in the proper Means employed
for the Accomplifhment of this great End :
His Power fulfills what Goodnefshad intend-
ed and Wifdom contrived, by putting thefe
Means in Execution. Hence then alone we
obtain the Idea of a Divinity, from a Union
of a cainar Wifdom, and Power.
z ’T Is


and CiRIsTIANITY. 445
*T'1s likewife, I think, acknowledged by 8 £ ¢ #.
all Theis, that, as to the divine Power, it” *..
may work its Intentions, either ‘by a con- ;
tinued and uninterrupted Superintendency,
or Agency on Matter, or by impreffing
certain original and permanent Qualities
‘upon it. Which of thefe two Kinds of
Operation may really prevail in Nature, is
perhaps beyond the Reach of humanKnow-
ledge, clearly to determine; The Newto-
nian Philofophy indeed renders it highly
probable, that the continued Agency of God
prevails, But a Determinationin this Sub-
ject is indeed of no Confequence ; fince,
which foever of thefe Methods be ordained,
the divine Power is eaually difplay’d, while
it ‘minifters to the Ends of Goodnefs and
Wifdom.
’T 1s ‘equally plain, that, if the divine
Goodnefs fhould determine to raife Man-
kind to higher Degrees of Knowledge and
Virtue, than what they could attain to by
the pre-eftablifhed Laws of Nature; or
“to free them from Defeffs and Miferies,
occafioned by any incidental and voluntary
Corruptions, poflerior to their Creation; ’tis
equally plain, I fay, that an Exertion of
Supernatural Power for the Accomplithment
T 2


274 On Revealed Rei1cion


Es s 4¥ing performed in Atteftation of any particu
* Jar Doétrine, (which hath been the general
Way of treating thisQueftion) ‘tis my Defign
to confider as one Object,,“* that vaft Series


« and Concatenation of miraculous Acts, .


“© yecorded in the Oldand NewTeftament,
« wrought thro’ a long Succeffion of Ages,
« for the Carrying on, Support, and Com-
« pletion of the Chriftian Difpenfation.”
Wirn this View therefore let us firft
confider the- Means by which Mankind are
juftly convinced of the Being of a God. Now
this Conviction, ’tis allowed by all, arifeth
from an Union of Power, Wifdom, and Good-
nefs, difplayed in thevifible Creation. From
this Union alone arifes the Idea of an ail-
perfect Being: So that a Failure in any of
thefe three effential Circumftances, would
deftroy the Idea of a God. The Good~
nefs of the Deity is feen in the defigned End
or Purpofe of the Creation, whichis, “ The
«¢ Happinefs of all his Creatures:”” His Wif-
dom is feen, in the proper Means employed
for the Accomplifhment of this great End:
His Power fulfills what Goodnefshad intend-
ed and Wifdom contrived, by putting thefe
Means in Execution. Hence then alone we
obtain the Idea of a Divinity, from a Union
‘of perfeét Goodnefs, Wifdom, and Power.
. I Tis


cal


Gnd CHRISTIANITY. 445
- *T1s likewife, I think, acknowledged by Szc ot.
all Theiffs, that, as to the divine Power, it,‘
may work its Intentions, either ‘by a con-
tinued and uninterrupted Superintendency,
or Agency on Matter, or by impreffing
certain original and permanent Qualities
‘upon it. Which of thefe two Kinds of
Operation may really prevail in Nature, is
perhaps beyondthe Reach of humanKnow-
ledge, clearly to determine. The Newto-
nian Philofophy indeed renders it highly
probable, that the continued Agency of God
prevails, But a Determinationin this Sub-
je is indeed of no Confequence ; fince,
which foever of thefe Methods be ordained,
the divine Power is eaually difplay’d, while
it minifters to the Ends of Goodnefi and
Wifdom.
_ ’T1s equally plain, that, if the divine
Goodnefs fhould determine to raife Man-
kind to higher Degrees of Knowledge and
Virtue, than what they could attain to by
the pre-eftablifhed Laws of Nature; of
‘to free them from Defefs and Miferies,
occafioned by any incidental and voluntary
Corruptions, poflerior to their Creation; ’tis
equally plain, I fay, that an Exertion of
Supernatural Power for the Accomplifhment
T 2 of


—


.


276


ocieeatomee.


On Revealed Revicion


Es pe of this End, would be a Di/play, Proof, or


Revelation of the Divinity, entirely fimilar
to that which arifes from the Works of
Nature... For both dere, and in the Works
of Nature, the Proof of the Divinity arifeth,
not from mere uniform Acts of Power, but
from the Subferviency of divine Power
to this one great End, the Produétion of
human Happine/s, Here then, the noble
Wiiter’s ObjeCtion is effentially defective :
What he affirms is either fal/e, or foreign to


the Queftion. For if we fuppofe (and the


prefent Queftion is put upon this Footing
only) that the miraculous or fupernatural
Effects are evidently fubfervient to fimilar
Ends of Wifdom and Goodnefi, as appear in
the Works of the Creation; then fure, we
have equal Reafon to conclude,. and be
convinced, that they are the Effects of one
Power; --- of one fuperior and immortal
Power ;--- of one Power, wife, juff, and
good ; --- In a word, of that Power, which
firft brought Nature into Being, eftablifhed
Laws for the Welfare of his Creatures ;
and when the Happinefs of his Creatures
requires an Interpofition, gives  ftill further
Evidences:of his Goodnefi, Wifdom, and Om-

nipotence,


‘and CuRIsTIANITY. 279

nipotence, by controuling thofe Laws which Ske r.
himfelf had eftablithed.
. Let us now apply thefe Principles to
the Chrifiian Difpenfation. ‘“ This, we
«« fay, was a Scheme of Providence, which
ftill continues operating ; whereby the
Deity determined to raife fallen and cor-
rupted Man to higher Degrees of Know-
ledge, Virtue, and Happinefs, than what'
«« by Nature he could have attained.”” In
this Defign, the divine Goopness 1 is emi-
nently difplayed.

Tur Means, whereby this great Defign
‘was accomplifhed, was, “ by feparating a
** peculiar People from the reft of Man-
‘ kind; not for their own Sakes, but for
** the Sake of all; by preferving them
“ amidft their Enemies ; by leading them
forth into a diftant Country ; by eftablith-
ing there theWorfhip of the oe God, in
‘* Oppofition to the Idolatries of furround-

ing Nations: Till, when the Fulnefs of
Time fhould come, and Mankind be ca-
pable of receiving a more perfe& Reve-

_ lation, a Saviour Jesus Curist fhould be
fent, to free Mankind from the Power of
Ignorance and Sin ; to bring Lifeand Im-
: wag a to Light, and communicate to
a T.3 «all


we


et ee


«ec


a


«ec


“ec


278 On RevealedRe.icion


Es it ¥* all Men the moft perfect practical Know
"_“ ledge of the true God, and of every moral.
** Duty,” In this Difpenfation is no lefs
eminently difplayed the divine Wispom.
Burt what lefs than Omnipotence itfelf
could fecure the perfeét Execution of a Plan
fo mighty and extenfive? Which reaching
thro’ the Compafs of many, and diftant
Ages, muft combat the Power, controul
the Prejudices, and work its Way thro’ the
difcordant Manners and Opinions of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth. On this Account
the immediate Exertion of divine Power
was neceflary for its Proof, Support, and
Completion. Accordingly, we find its om-
nipotent Author, carrying on the Scheme of
Wifdom and Goodnefs, with a mighty Hand,
and an out-/tretched Arm. ‘ He fent a
_** Man before his People, even ~Josrpn, |
** who was fold to be a Bond-Servant: He
*« increafed his People exceedingly, and
*¢ made them ftronger than their Enemies,
*¢ He fent Moszs his Servant, and AARon:
€¢ And thefe thewed his Tokens among them ;
“© and Wonders inthe Land of Ham. He
€* fentDarknefs,and it was dark; and turned
“« their Waters into Blood. Their Land
* bropght forth Frogs; yea, even in their


f King’ $


and CHRISTIANITY. 279

“¢ King’s Chambers. He gave them Hail-S = ¢ =

“« ftones for Rain, and Flames of Fire in
“ their Land. He fpake the Word, and
«¢ the Locufts came innumerable, and de-
‘© voured the Fruit of their Ground. He
“< {mote all the Firft-born in their Land,
*¢ even the chief of all their Strength, He
brought forth his People from among
“ them: He fpread out a Cloud to be a
** Covering, and Fire to give them Light in
“ the Night-Seafon. He rebuked the Red-
‘¢ Sea alfo, and it was dried up; fo he led
“¢ them thro’ the Deep as thro’ a Wilder-
“ nefs, Attheir Defire he brought Quails,
“and filled them with theBread of Heaven.
“He opened the Rock of Stone, fo that
~ Rivers ran in dry Places.---Yet within a
while they forgat hisWorks, and tempt-
** ed God in the Defart: Then the Earth
** opened, and fwallowed up Dathan, and
* covered the Congregation of Abiram.
«« ‘They joined themfelves unto Baal-Peor,,
and provoked him with their own Inven-
tions; fo the Plague was great amongft
“them; Then, being chaftifed, they turn-
“ed to their God. He led them over ‘for-
“« dan; theWaters divided to let them pafs.
* He difcomfited their Enemies: At his
a ae ss Word,


280


Essay“ Word the Sun abode in the Midt - ;


On Revealed Rettcion |


“* Heaven ; and the Moon ftood ftill, and _
“* hafted not to go down for a whole Day. ©


Til.


** So he gave the Kingdoms of Cangan to


‘* be an Heritage unto his People; that all
‘* the Nations of the World might know
** that the Hand of the Lord is mighty,
‘* and that they might fear the Lord con-


“* tinually.’’


Here then we fee, that this mighty Se-
ries of miraculous Acts recorded in the Old
Teftament, being the very Means of preferv~
ing and feparating the Isr arLiTEs from the
reft of Mankind, and at the fame time de-
figned to imprefs them with a lafting Idea
of the uncontroulable and immediate Power
of God; were generally awakening Inftances


_ of Omnipotence, often of Juftice and Terror,


in the Punifhmant of cruel Ecyprrans,
rebellious Jews, and idolatrous Nations.

In purfuing this vaft Concatenation af
divine Power thro’ the Series of. Miracles
recorded in the New Teftament, andwrought
for the fame End, the Completion of Chri/fi-
anity, we {hall find them of a very different
Nature and Complexion : Yet ftill, admira-
bly fuited to accomplifh the fame defigned


Ends of Providence. For now the Fulnefs


of


and Gunes ants 184


of Time was come, in which theWifdom of S zc r.
the Deity ordained the immediate Eftablith-_*""_
ment of a Religion of perfect Purity —:
boundlefs Love. Accordingly, the Series of
miraculous Acts wrought for this great End,
were fuch as muft naturally engage Mankind
toa favourable Reception of Chrifianity ;
were the very Image andTranfcript, expreff-
ed the very Genius of that moft amiableRe-
ligion they were brought to fupport and efta-
blifh; in a word, were continued Inftances
of Omnipotence, joined with unbounded Cha-

rity, divine Compaffion, and Benevolence.

Tue Birth of Jesus was proclaimed by
a glorious Apparition of fuperior Beings,
who declared the End of his coming in that
divine Song of Triumph, ‘‘ Glory to God
*< in the higheft, andon Earth Peace, Good-
‘* Will towards Men!” His Life was one
continued Scene of divine Power, Wifdom,
and Beneficence. He gave Eyes to the
Blind; Ears to the Deaf ; and Feet to the
Lame: He raifed the Dead to Life, re-
buked the raging Elements, and made the
Winds and Seas obey him. When, to ful-
fill the Decrees of Heaven, and complete
_the great Work of Man’s Redemption, he
fubmitted to an ignominious Death, the
Veil


928% On RevealedReiicton _

Essay Veil of the Temple was rent intwain: A
‘__ general Darknefs involved, and an Earth-
quake fhook, the City. The fame Omni-
potence by which he wrought his Miracles,
raifed him from the Grave; and after a
fhort Stay on Earth, during which he
ftrengthened and confirmed his defponding
Followers, tranflated him to Heaven. And
now, a new and unexpected Scene of divine
and miraculous Power opened on Mankind, —
for the full Eftablifhment of Chriftianity.
The Spirit of God came down, and dwelt
with the Apoftles; they wereall filled with
the Holy Ghoft, and fpake with other
Tongues, as the Spirit gave them Utterance.
They were invefted with fupernatural Power

to heal difeafes; were impowered to ftrike
dead the deceitful Ananras and SapPHi-
RA; and when imprifoned were delivered
by the immediate Hand of Gop. By thefe
Means, Chriftianity gained a numerous
Train of Profelytes among the Jews; but
the great Work of converting the Gentiles
wasnot yet begun. To this End the Apoftle
Paut was deftined; and converted to
Chriftianity by an amazing AG of fuper-
natural and divine Power. In this impor-


tant Miniftry he was frequently preferved
i aso. by


and CHRISTIANITY, 283
by the miraculous Care of Providence ; did S ® gi
himfelf perform ftupendous Acts of Power’ __
and Beneficence; by thefe Means convert-
ing Multitudes among the Gentiles, and
planting Chriftianity in the moft knowing
and polifhed Nations of the Earth. .

To this irrefiftible Chain of Evidence,
atifing from the miraculous Exertion of
divine Power, we may add another collate-
ral Proof, arifing from the miraculous Em-
anations of divine Fore-knowledge, recorded
in the Bible, and delivered in Propurcy
thro’ a Series of Ages, all centering in the
fame Point, the foretelling the Completion
of this immenfe Plan of Wifdom and Good-
nefs. Thefe Prediétions were fulfilled in
the Advent, Life, Death, and Refurre@tion
of our Saviour; who himfelf foretold the
Succefs of his Apoftles among the Gentiles,
and the final Diffolution of the Jewith Po-
lity. This came to pafs in the Deftru@tion
of the Temples And when a bitter Enemy
to Chriftianity attempted to make void the
Decrees of Heaven in rebuilding this Temple,

(the only Circumftance of Union that could
ever make the Jews once more a People) the
very Foundations were rent in Pieces by an.

Earthquake,


284. On Revealed RELIGION
Essay Earthquake, and the mad Affailants againft


__"__ Omnipotence buried in the Ruins, Sri

| From this mighty Union, therefore
arifeth a Proof fimilar to that which we ob-
tain from the Works of Nature. For as
in thefe we fee the Happinefs of the Crea-
tion. intended, plann'd, and produced, and
from hence: difcover . the Agency of the
Deity ; fo in the Progrefs and Completion
of Chriftianity we find a parallel Difplay of
the divine Attributes: We fee the Advance- |
ment of Man’s Happinels determined by |
divine Goopness, plann’d by divine Wis-
DoM, foretold by divine Know.eper, ac-
complifbed by divine Power: And hence, as
in Nature, obtain a full Mani fefation,
Proof, or Revelation of the Deiry.

As this feems to be the true Light, in
which the Evidence arifing from the Scrip-
ture-Miracles ought to be Placed, it may
be proper now to add a few Obfervations on
what hath been offered on this Subject,
both by the Defenders and the Adverfaries
of Chriftianity.

I. As to the Degree of Proof or Evi-
dence arifing from a Jingle Miracle in Sup-
port of any particular Doétrine 3 whatever
Force it may carry, ’tis a Point, which we
are


and CHRISTIANITY. 285

‘are by no means at prefent concerned to de-S £ ¢ T-
termine: Becaufe, as we have feen, in the.
-Progrefs of the Chriftian Difpenfation,
there is a vat Series or Chain, all uniting in
-one common End. It might be confidered,
in the fame Manner, by thofe who write in
‘Proof of the Being of a’God, ‘ What Evi-
~*© dence of ‘his being would arife from 2
« fingle Vegetable or Animal, unconnected
‘* with the reft of the Creation.” But how-
ever fatisfying a fingle Fact of this Kind
may be to impartial Minds, it were furely
_ weak to argue on this Foundation only,

‘while we can appeal to that mighty Union
of Defign which appears in the Works of
Nature. It fhouldtherefore feem, that the
Defenders of Chriftianity have generally
fet this Evidence in too detached and par-
tieular a Light: «For tho’ the Proof arifing
from a fingle Miracle, in Support of a par-
ticular Do&trine may be of fufficient Force
to convince an equitable Mind; yet fure,
*tis infinitely ftronger and more fatisfactory,
if we view at once the whole Chain of Mira-
cles by which the great Scheme of Chri/fi-
anity was propagated, as ome vatt Object:
Becaufe in this: View, we difcover innumer-
rea Circumftances of mutual Relation and
. Agrecment,


284. On Revealed Reicion


Essay Earthquake, and the mad Afiailants agtintt
ae Omnipotence buried in the Ruins.
From. this: mighty Union, therefore .

arifeth a Proof fimilar to that which we ob-

tain from the Works of Nature. For as
in thefe we fee the Happinefs of the Crea-
tion, intended, plann’d, and produced, and
from hence difcover the Agency of the

Deity ; fo in the Progrefs and Completion

of Chriftianity we find a parallel. Difplay of

the divine Attributes: We fee the Advance-
ment of Man’s Happinefs determined by ;

divine Goopness, plann'd by divine Wis- .

pom, foretold by divine KNOWLEDGE, ac-

complifbed by divine Power: And hence, as

in Nature, obtain a full Manifefation,

Proof, or Revelation of the Deiry.

As this feems to be the true Light, in
which the Evidence arifing from the Scrip-
ture-Miracles ought to be placed, it may
be proper now to add a few Obfervations on
what hath been offered on this Subject,
both by the Defenders and the Adverfaries
of Chriftianity.

I. As to the Degree of Proof or Evi-
dence arifing from a /ingle Miracle in Sup-
port of any particular Doétrine ; whatever
Force it may carry, ’tis a Point, which we

are


and CuRIsTIANITY. 285
are by no means at prefent concerned to de-§ £ ¢ T-
termine: Becaufe, as we have feen, in the
Progrefs: of © the Chriftian Difpenfation,
there is a vaft Series or Chain, all uniting in
-one common End. It might be confidered,
in the fame Manner, by thofe who write in

‘Proof of the Being of a'God, “* What Evi-
-«© dence of ‘his being would arife from 2
ae fingle Vegetable or Animal, unconneéted
* with the reft of the Creation.” But how-
ever fatisfying a fingle Fact of this Kind

may be to impartial Minds, it were furely

_ weak to argue on this Foundation only,
“while we can appeal to that mighty Union
of Defign which appears in the Works of
Nature. It fhouldtherefore feem, that the
Defenders of Chriftianity have generally
fet this Evidence in too detached and par-
tieular a Light: «For tho’ the Proof arifing
from a fingle Miracle, in Support of a par-
ticular Do€trine may be of fufficient Force
to convince an equitable Mind; yet fure,
*tis infinitely ftronger and more fatisfactory,
if we view at once the whole Chain of Mira-
cles by which the great Scheme of Chri/fi-
anity was propagated, as one vatt Object:
Becaufe in this View, we difcover innumer-
rable Circumftances of mutual Relation and
. Agrecment,


286 On Revealed Reuicion . o
E oy ¥ Agreement, fimilar to thofe which are Proofs “
"_of final Caufes in the natural World: Ina :
word, we difcover that Union of Dejign, 4
that Concurrence of infinite Goodne/s, Wif- |
dom, and Power, which is the fire udian-
tion of the Divinity.

II. Ir ina Difpenfation thus proved: to :
be from God by all thefe concurring Sig-
natures of Divinity, any incidental Circum-~
frances fhould be found, which are unae-
countable to human Reafon; ’tis the. Part..of
human Reafon to acguiefce in this myfterious
and unknown Part, from, what is clear and
known. Becaufe ina Syftem or Difpenfa-
tion planned by infinite Wifdom, there
mutt of necefflity be fomething-which finite
Wifdom cannot comprehend. This the
noble Writer follows with regard to» the
Works of Nature. <“‘ If, faith he, in this
“< mighty Union, there be fuch Relations of
*«* Parts one to another as are not eafily dif«
*° covered; if on this Account, the End and
“ Ufe of Things does not every where ap-
“« pear, there is no Wonder; fince ’tis in-
“ deed no more than what mu? happen of
“« necefity, Nor could fupreme Wifdom
** have otherwife ordered it. Forin an In-
* finity of Things thus relative, 2 Mind

“ which


———— - = i. - wy


and CHRISTIANITY, 287


© which fees not. infinitely, can fee nothing S nese
« ully ae
ria Hence therefore, snay be evinced
the Vanity of thisCavil, ‘that nothing can
“be proved tobe a divine Revelation which
*< is not difcoverable by human Reafon ;
“* fince whatever is reafonable needs noMi-
** racle to confirm it, and whatever is be=
** yond the Reach of Reafon cannot bemade
** to appear reafonable by any Miracle what-
« foeverf.” Hence, I fay, the Vanity of
this Cavil is evident, Becaufe, as in Nature,
fo in Revelation, the full Evidence of Di-
vinity is founded, not on fingle detached
Circumftances, but on a mighty Union or
Concatenation of Facts, implying the moft
perfe& Wifdom, Power, and Goodnefs. This
Foundation being once laid, if any thing in-
cidental in either Cafe appears unaccounta-
ble as to its End or Ufe, it is naturally and
properly involved, or taken in as a Part of
this zmmenfe Defign, which, thro’ its yaft
Extent, muft needs be incomprehenfible to
human Reafon.
IV. As to the Objeétion, ‘ that Mira-
cles may be wrought by inferior or fub-


* Moralifis, P. ii. §4.  £ An Objection urged b
Tindal, ys and others, é


s¢ altern


~ 5 . ’


288 On Revealed Reticton
Essay altern Beings:”- This vanifhes at once
_ I with regard to the Chriflian Difpenfation,


on the Evidences here ftated. For as the
miraculous Aéts‘of Power recorded in the
Bible were wrought for the Support and
Accomplifhment of a Difpenfation full of
Goodnefs and Wifdom, we have the fame
Proof that they were the Work of the /z-
preme God, as we have, that Nature is fo.
*Tis true, that in either Cafe, for ought we
we know, inferior or fubaltern Beings may
have been commiffioned by the Supreme,
as immediate Agents. But this Poffibility,
in either Cafe, can be a Matter of no Con-
fequence to us, while it is manifeft that the
delegated Beings, whatever they might be,
acted in full Subferviency to the Goodnefs,
Wifdom, and Omnipotence of the one eternal
Gop.

V. To the noble’ Writer’s Objection,
_§* that, while we labour to unhinge Nature,


eS ee ~


** we bring Confufion on the World, and |


** deftroy that Order from whence the one

“* infinite and perfect Principle is known®;”

+--the Reply is eafy and convincing. For

while the fupernatural Power is directed to

advance the Happinefs of Mankind, ’tis fo
5 Moral. Pi § 5° a

far


7+


and CHRISTIANITY. 289
fat from deftroying any’ Principle from § ee
whence. the one perfect Being is known;
that, on the contrary, it gives us ftill clearer
and -more fatisfying Notices of the divine
Providence. ’*Tis ‘allowed on all Hands,
that there are Imperfections in the Crea-
tion: And tho’ there may be, and doubtlefs
are, good Reafons ‘unknown to us; why
thefe fhould not in® every Inftance be re-
moved by a particular Exertion of fuperna-
tural Power; yet when the divine Wifdom
fees fit thus to interpofe, for the further Ad-
vancement of his Creatures _Happinefs,
can any thing be ‘more irrational than to
fay, that ** this is bringing Confufion on the
« World?” The only Queftion is, Whether
“* Happinefs thall be deftroyed for the Sake
“© of a pre-eftablithed Law; or a pre-efta-

“* blithed Law be fu/pended for the Sake of
‘* Happinefs?”’ In other Words, whether
Power fhall be fubfervient to Goodnefs, or
Goodnefs yield to Power ? A Queftion which
no “found hei? canbe left at a Lofs to
anfwer. As therefore the Exertion of di-
vine Power, in Nature, is for the Pro-
duction of Happinefs ; the miraculous Exer-
tion of Power, forthe further Advancement

of Man’s mei is fo far from “ bring
** ing


«290. On Revealed Revicion


Essay “ ing Confufion on the World, either the
. mil. “« Chaos and Atoms of the rhes/ts, or the
-*© Magick and Demons of the Pony THE-
“ iss,” that it is even the cleareft Proof,
or Revelation of the Divinity.

VI. Wiruour this apparent Sublervi-
ency to the Defigns of Wifdom and Good-
nefs, all Accounts of miraculous Facts muft
be highly improbable. Becaufe we have
no Reafon to believe that the Deity. will
ever counteract the eftablifhed Laws of
Nature; unlefs for the Sake of advancing
the Happinefs of his Creatures.

VII. On this Account, moft of the pre-
tended Miracles recorded in the. Heathen
Story, are highly improbable. For it doth
not appear, they were ever faid to have
been wrought in any Series of Chain : they
never wete directed to the Accomplifhment
of any one End, thro’ different Periods of
Time: Were frequently far from being
beneficent: Seldom accommodated even to
any rational Purpofe; but generally, mere
pretended Acts of arbitrary and unmeaning
Power. Thus they are effentially diftin-
guifhed from the Scripture Miracles ; -and
"are utterly mpens of that INTERNAL ~

Evidence


4
~)


and CHRISTIANITY, 191
‘Evidence which’ arifeth from an Union of S ‘y vr.
Defign.

Vill. Haven we may teat difcover
the Reiko, why the wifer Heathens ridi-
culed ‘the ews, even to a Proverb, for
their extravagant Regard to Miracles. They
knew their own to be abfurd and irratro-
nal, this at once prevented them from en-
quiring into the real Nature of the ‘fewi/b
Miracles; and at the fame time, led them
to deride: and reje# thefe boafted Wonders,
as being no better than their own.

IX, But on the Evidence as here ftated,
the Scripture Miracles become even proba-
ble, from the Cireumftances under which
they are recorded. As they are beneficent :
As they were wrought thro’ different Pe- —
riodsof Time in Support of one Difpenfation
full of Wifdom and Goodnefi : As it is highly
improbable that’ this Difpenfation could .
have been completed in all its immenfe Vart-

ety of Circumfances without fuch an imme-
diate Interpofition of divine Power.

X. Anp now we {hall plainly fee the
Reafon why we reject the Accounts of

~ Miracles given by Heathen Writers, while
we believe the other Parts of their Story ;
a yet ee reje& the FYewi/h and Chrif-
U2 tian


cman


292 On Revealed Revicion
Ess aygijan Miracles, without reje@ting at thé fame
time the whole Hiftory in which they are
contained: For in the firft Cafe, as’ the
- Miracles,are wfele/s, unmeaning, and uncon-
need with the reft of the Facts, it appears
‘they are merely political. But the Yewifh


and Chbriflian Miracles make an effential _


Part of the feveral Events related; they
are ftrongly connected with this great H1-
sTORY of PRovIDENCE, and are indeed the
very Means by which Providence completed
its gracious Purpofe, ‘ the Eftablifhment
‘¢ of Chriftianity.”” We cannot therefore
reject thefe miraculous Accounts without re-
jecting all the zatural Events with which
they are thus intimately interwoven: And
this we cannot do, without deftroying every
received Principle of Affent, and fhaking
the Faith of all ancient Hiftory.

I cannot conclude this Argument with-
‘out tranfcribing a noble Paflage from the
Book of Wifdom, where feveral of thefe
Truths are finely illuftrated: And which

“may convince us, how juft an Idea the
' Jews entertained of miraculous Interpofition,
- beyond what their Enemies have induftri-
oufly reprefented. The Writer, after re-
counting the ftupendous Chain of Miracles
wrought


and CHRISTIANITY.” 293


wrought for the Deliverance of the chofen$®.¢-Té
People, concludes thus. ‘“ In all things, “~"_
“* O Lord, thou haft magnified and glori-

** fied thy People, and haft- not defpifed to

*< affift them in every Time and Place,---
“for every Creature in its: Kind was fa-_ .
_ -fhioned a-new, and ferved in theirown ~~’
* “ Offices enjoined them, that thy Children 2
“« might be kept without Hurt.--+For the

“* things of the Earth were changed into

“* things of the Water, and the thing that

‘* did {wim went upon the Ground. The

“‘ Fire had Power in the Water, ‘contrary
“to his own Virtue ; and the Water forgat

** his own Kind:to quench. --- Thus; the
_* Elements were changed among themfeves
* by a Kind of Harmony, aswhen one Tune
-“* is changed upon an Inftrument of Mufic,
i and the Melody fill remaineth,”.

»Tuus he nobly expreffeth the Sud/ervi-
_ency, of the Elements to. the divine Will :
_and under the, Image of sa. mufical Inftru-
ment, which the fkilfulMafter sunes,changes,

and direé#s to the one Purpofe of Harmony,
-he.aptly. and. beautifully reprefents the
_ whole. Creation asan.Infirument in the Hands

of Gop, which he orders, varies, and con-

: shat: 3 _trouls,


204 On Revealed Revicion
ms ¥ ¢rouls, to the one unvary "d End of sie


€ es


SECTION V.


Sects HAVING vindicated the i
.._¥+ _sMiracks frota the noble Writer's Objec- _
ctions; and fhewn that they are fo far ek

being ufilefvor abfurd, that the grand Scheme

‘of Providence could neither have been evi-

denced nor accomplifhed without them ; ‘we |
have deftroyed the chief Foundation on
‘which ‘his Lordfhip hath attempted to fix

his Cavils againft Chriftianity on another
Subject; I mean that of Enthufia/m; which
naturally offers itfelf next to our Confidera-

tion. As this is the noble Writer's favourite
Topic, we may reafonably expeét to fee

him fhine in it: And in one Refpeet indeed
she'does, He never touches on the Suibjed,

‘but he rifeth above himfelf: His Imagi-
-nation kindles ; he catches the Fire he de-
{eribes; and his Page’ glows with all the

Ardors of this high Paffion. °

Ir will, I prefume,” be unneceffary to

make any Remarks'on'the large and emi-
nent Lift of Enthufafts, Poets, : ‘Orators,
Heroes, Legiflators, Muficians, and Philo-
fophers,


‘and CHRISTIANITY, © 295
fophers, which his. Lordfhip cites fromS #c tT.
Prato. He may call them Enthufa/fls, if. x
it feem good tohim; and may juftly rank
himfelf in the Number too,: if by that
Name be underftood no more, than a Man
_ of uncommon Strength or Warmth of Ima-

gination; for this indeed is the: requifite
Foundation of Excellence, in any of the
-Charaters here enumerated.

Tue only Circumftance we are concern-
ed calmly to examine, is that of religious En-
thufiafm: Chiefly, to point out the effential
‘Qualities and Characteriftics which dif
tinguith ¢bis from divine Infpiration: Hence
to prove, that our Saviour and his Apoffles
were not religious Enthufia/ts, as the noble

“Writer hath fuggefted.
’T1s indeed,-as his Lordfhip obferves,
“© a greatWork to judge of Spirits, whether
they be of God.” We fhall willingly
join him in this Principle too, ‘‘ that in or-
of der to this End, we muft antecedently
‘© judge our own Spirit, whether it be of
-' © Reafonor found Senfe, free of every
© byaffing Paffion, every giddy Vapour, or
“© melancholy) Fume. © This is the. firft
‘“* _Knowledge; and previous Judgment; to
Ss aiaeees: ourfelves, and know what
| U4 “* Spirit


On Revealed Revic10N


Essavec Spirit'we are of. | Afterwards we- may


———-___ *f judge the Spirit in others,’ confider what
‘© their perfonal Merit is, and prove the Va-
*. lidity of their Teftimony by the Solidity
** of their Brain.” | On'this epee ce —
let the Caufe be determined.

In examining this Subject, sere belil we
fhall find, Firft, that in fome Refpetts, En-
thyfiafjm muft, from ‘it’s Nature always re-
femble divine Infpiration. Secondly, that.
in others it-hath generally attempted 'a fur-
ther Refemblance, but hath always betrayed
itfelf. ‘Thirdly, that in other Cireum-
{tances it is diametrically. oppofite to divine
Infpiration, and void even of all foogig
Refemblance.

First, Enchuifcfiee muft, from it's very
Nature, in fome Refpects always refemble
divine Infpiration. They both have: the
Deity for their Obje&; and ‘confequently
mutt both be attended with a devout Turn
of Mind. ‘They muft both be fubje& to
ftrong and ufnuual Impreffions ; the one
Jupernatural, the other preternatural, that
is, beyond the ordinary Efforts of Nature,
tho’ really produced by Nature: / Zhefe; thro’
their uncommon Force, willoften refemble,
and not eafily be whingnilien from thofe

which


Ls oo


and CHRISTIANITY. 2.97.


which are the real: Effect of Supernatural oey Te
Power. This Circumftance deferves a par-
- ticular Attention: For thefe two Qualities
which are common to both, have induced:
many to reject..the very Notion of divine
Infpiration, as mere. Enthufiafm.,. Whereas
we fee, that, fuppofing fuch a thing as di-
vine Infpiration, it cannot-but refemble En-
thufiafm in thefe two Charaters.

Bur tho’ it were ftrange, if Counterfeits
did not hit off fome Features of their genuine
Originals; yet it were more ftrange, if
they. fhould be able to adopt them all, by
fuch a perfec Imitation as to prevent their
being detected,

THERE are, . therefore, fecondly, other
Circumftances in which Enthujiafm hath
generally attempted a further Refemblance
of divine Infpiration, but in thefe hath, al-
ways betrayed itfelf fpurious,

Tue firft of this Kind is, .‘* A Pretence
‘* to, and Perfuafion of the Power of work-
* ing Miracles.”’ This. Perfuafion mutt
needs be natural to the Enthufiait; becaufe
he imagines himfelf in all things - highly
favoured of Heaven: The Notion of a
Communication, of divine Power will therg-
fore be among the chief of his Dehkriums.

In 3 #


298 On Revealed Ravicton


Essay In this the Enthufiaft hath been deteGted,”
Jometimes by the Abfurdity of the Miracle —
attempted, ahways by his Inability to per-’
form what he propofed. There is fearce
an Abjurdity fo great, but what hath fome:
‘Time or other been ‘aimed at by Enthu-
fiafts, in the Way of miraculous Power.
Their Attempts have ever been void of all
rational Intention, void of Beneficence, void
of common Difcernment: And hence mani-

feftly the Effects of a heated Imagination.
That they have always failed in their At-
tempts is no ‘lefs known. But thefe are
Truths fo willingly allowed by the Enemies
of Religion, that we need not enlarge ‘on
them. © On the contrary, we have feen, the
Miracles of the Gofpel are rational, bene-
ficent, united in one great End; perforins
ed before Numbers, before Enemies; record-
ed by Eye-Witneffes. His Lordthip indeed
objects or infinuates, that the Teftimony
even of Eye-Witneffes cannot in this Cafe
be'a Foundation for Affent, unlefs weknow
‘them to have been “ free both ftom any
i particular Enthufiafm, and a general Turn ©
** to Melancholy.” “But with regard to the
“Miracles of the Gofpel, we know that many
“were converted by them from: their former
Prejudices ; 3


and CHRISTIANITY. 299


Prejudices ; and ‘therefore could not pof-S' ¢ 7.
fibly be under the Influence of the Chriffian__"*_-
Enthufiafm, fappofing it fuch. And as to
their being free from Melancholy; for this
we may fafely appeal to’ the rational and
confiftent Accounts given by the facred
Penmen. Melancholy and Enthufiafm muft
ever produce inconfiftent Vifions. Fora
Proof t hat the- “Scripture Miracles are not of
this Nature, ‘we appeal to what hath been
already faid on this Subject in the preceed-
ing Section
“~ Bur shire is one miraculous Gift, the
Gift of Tongues, which hath more generally
been fuppofed the peculiar Effect of Infpi-
ration. . We have an Account of this Kind
recorded in holy Writ’, And this Account
the noble Writer hath thought it expedient
to turn to Ridicule; by reprefenting this
fuppofed miraculous Gift, asthe mere Ef-
fect of ftrong Melancholy, and natural Ine-
briation. ‘To this Purpofe, having obferved
from Dr. More, that “the Vapours and
** Fumes of Melancholy partake of the Na~
“* ‘ture of Wine;” he adds, ‘“‘ One might
** conjecture from hence, that the malicious
** OppofersofearlyChriftianity were not un-
§ ABs ii.
* verfed


309


On Revealed Revicion


Essay « verfed in this Philofophy 5. when they fo=
aca phiftically objected againft the apparent.


“© Force of the divine Spirit {peaking. in di-


“vers Languages;-and attributed it to the
Power of new Wine*.”  Agreeably to this
infinuated.Charge, he tells us. of ‘“ A Gen-
“ tleman who. has writ lately j in Defence of


_* revived Prophecy, and has fince fallen


‘ himfelfintothe propheticEcttacies.” ” The
noble Writer adds, ‘I faw, him lately un-
«: der.an Agitation (as they call:it) uttering


“ Prophecy in a pompous Latin Style, of


*¢ which, out of his Ecftafy, it feems,; be
“is wholly, incapable’? .
. HERE we may fee, how. ready Soe


People are to ftrain at a Gnat, and yet fwal-


low a Camel. .'The noble Writer ridicules
the Gift of Tongues from. divine Infpira-
tion, as abfurd and impoffible: Yet he be-
lieves, youfee, or affects to believe, that
this Mancould {peak Latin by the fole Force
of Imagination and Enthufiafm, A com-
pendious Method this, of learning Lan-


guages ! !. I have fomewhere met with a very


rational Remark, That whereas it was charg-
ed -by.Festus;.upon St. Paut, . < that
& Learning had made him mad,” this No-


* Mifc.ii. $2. Lett, on Enthuf. § 6.
~VeB tion


sand CHRISTIANITY, 308


tion inverts the:Charge ; for thus “ ites s a
§& onefs may make a Man learned.” :— :
Bur leaving his Lordthip’s Asdmingese: to

dicuniie which is the greater Miracle; a

Gift of Tongues from God,.or -a Gift of
Tongues from Melancholy; ‘tis our Part to

fhew the effential. Characters of Diftin@ion
between. the Reality: of one, and the Pretences

of the other:.\ Now this will appear moft
evident, :if we comparé them, both in their
Manner and their, End...-Asto:the Manner
‘of this new prophecying Sect, the noble Wri-
ter him(felf tells -us, it was’ that of Ecfafy

and Convulfion ; and. that he: faw this Gen-
tleman under an Agitation'when he had the
Gift of Tongues. As to the End pretended

in-this miraculous Gift; It. appears there

was really mone: For the pompous Latin
wStyle was uttered among a People, who, in
general, underftood: the Engi/b. Language
‘only: It could therefore ferve to no rational
Purpofe.. Onthe contrary, it appears that
' the miraculous Gift of Tongues conferred on
“the Apoftles, was rational both in its Man- —
-ner and its End. ‘There. is, not the leaft
Mint of its having been attended with Ec

tafies or Convulfions; nay, it appears from
; the


302 On Revealed Reticron
Essay the Account, that it could not have been‘fo
______ attended: ‘And from the'Occafion it appears.
how proper it was, with regard to its End.
The Recital is noble and -rational :-Let_
it anfwer for itfelf. ‘ And: there were
© dwelling at Jerufalem, Jews, devout
«Men out of every Nation under Heaven.---
«« And they were all amazed, and marvelled,
“« faying one to another, Behold) are’ not
all thefe which fpeak, Galileans ?°/And
« how hear we every Man in our own Tongue,
“ wherein we were born?) Parthians, and
‘Medes, and Elamites, the Dwellers in Me-
6 fa opotamia, and in Fudea, and Cappadocia,
‘* in Pontus and Afia, Phrygia and Pam-
“* phylia, in Egypt, and in the Parts of Libya
* about-Cyrene: And Strangers of ‘Rome;
“ Fews and Profelytes, Cretesand Arabians;
“ we do bear them {peak in our Tongues
“ the wonderful Words. of God !” How juft
an Effort: of divine Power! which fhould
at once give Inftruétion to’thofe who moft
wanted it; and be the natural Means of
conveying and difperfing the glad Tidings of
the Gofpel to every Nation under Heaven !---
It fhould feem probable, therefore, that the
Men who “‘ mockediand faid, Thefe Menare
full of new Wine,” were the Natives of
Judea.


and CHRISTIANITY. 303
_ Judea. For Perer, we find, immediately Sz c+.
arofe, and addreffed himfelf to thefe in par-__V-_

ticular, <“ Ye Men of Yudea,” &c. And —

_it was natural for them to entertain this
Sufpicion ; becaufe they neither underftood
what the Apoftles uttered, nor could imagine
how they fhould obtain a Knowledge. of fo
many various Tongues... They mutt, there-
fore, naturally fufpect, that the Apoftles
were uttering wnmeaning Sounds: And this
they regarded as the Effect of Wine.

AnoTBER remarkable Circumftance, in
which Enthufiafts have often pretended to
refemble the divinely infpired, is, « the Gift
** of Prophecy.” Which, indeed, is nomore

“than another Kind of Miracle. In this too,
Enthufiafm, hath always betrayed itfelf.
‘Firft, and principally, with ‘regard to the.
Event. The frequent Attempts of this Kind,
and their perpetual Failure, need not here
be enumerated : They are known fufficiently.
This cannot be charged on the Apo/fles with
the leaft Appearance of Reafon: For it is
a Gift they hardly ever pretended to. Our
Saviour. .indeed foretold many and_ great
Events---the DefeGtion of Perr ; his own
Sufferings, Death, RefurreGion, and Afcen-
fion; the Defcent of the Holy Spirit, the
Lids: 31 ~ Perfecution


ss


304 °On Revealed Re.icion
a I Petfecution of his Difciples, the Propagation —
-of his Religion among the Gentiles, the ap-
‘proaching Miferies and final Deftruction of |
_ Serufalem. Now all thefe Events were
-clearly accomplifhed: So far, therefore,
“are they from proving him an Enthufiaft,
‘that they demonftrate him pofleffed of di~
~vine Fore-knowledge.
Bur befides the Event, there is a nota-
ble Circumftance in the Manner, which hath
ever diftinguifhed real from pretended, true
from falfe Prophecy: And which the noble
‘Writer's groundlefs Affirmations have made
it neceflary to infift on.
He fays, “* I find by prefent Experience,
*< as well as-by all Hiftories facred and pro-
“* phane, that the Operation of this Spirit
“* is every where the fame as to the bodily
“ Organ™.” In Confirmation of this he cites
- ‘a Paflage from the Gentleman who was fub-
je@ to the prophetic Ecftacies, which in-
forms us, ‘ that the ancient Prophets had
*« the Spirit of God upon them under Ec-
“ ftafy, with divers ftrange Geftures of Body
“ denominating them Madmen (or Enthu-
© fiafts) as appears evidently, fays he, in
© the Inftances of Balaam, Saul, David,


= Leit. on Enth. § 6.


wa


« Ezekiel


and CHRISTIANITY.  =— 305

 ‘Beekiel, Daniel®;’? &c. And he adds,S #¢ T-

the Gentleman “ proceeds to juttify this by"

“ the Praétice of the apoftolic Times, and

“by the Regulation which the Apoftle

“ himfelf applies to thefe feemingly irregu-

“¢ Jar Gifts®,” In this Inftance it is not

unpleafant to obferve the different Views of

his Lordfhip, and: the Gentleman he refers

to; in their Endeavours to eftablifh this
pretended Fa&t. The one was zealous to

fix a Refemblance between the o/d and the

new prophetic Manner, in order to ftrengthen

the Credit of the revived Prophecy: The

other’s Intention plainly was, by that very

Refemblance, which he was willing fhould

pafs for real, to deftroy the Credit of the

Scripture Prophecies, well knowing that

the other deferved none. © -

Bur fo it happens, that the noble Wri-

ter’s Friend proves as bad an Hifforian, as

he was a Prophet: And fails as miferably
in relating paf Events, as in foretelling
future. The Truthvis, that both his Lord-

fhip and the Gentleman feem to have been

ina Fit.of Enthufiafm, and have therefore

been induced to mingle a little pious Fraud,

thro’ a Zeal for their refpective TLheories.


2 Ib, S\Ibs 4
x. For,


Esse A*Fot in Reality, this pretended


On Retrakcd naieiane .


is utterly fiGitious. There is not t
Hint i in Scripture, that any of the
mentioned as true Prophets, were e
je& to thefe. ecftatic, convulfive
which the enthufiaftic Gentle
Tribe were always feized. with.

Regulation made by the Apoftle P
whoever confults the Place will =
is no Mention made of Eeftafes, Com
or extraordinary bodily, Motions.
clear, that our Saviour always de
Prophecies on every penath. - Occ
under all the common pap bitese
man Life; calm, ferene, and with ua od

Daelibesasion: So that the whole Checgeiiy”

a bold, continued Falfehood, void of Eraeiay »

and even the Appearance of its. 2

InpEED, from the inflendés which the

noble Writer cites from Virei and. Livy; |
"tis evident, that the old heathen Pretenders
to Prophecy were affected in the fame com _
vulfive Manner, as the modern Chriftian En-.
thufiafts, His Lordthip might have cited! —
twenty more from. ancient Writers. And —
what can be rationally inferred from them ?

What. but this ---“ That this convulfive


® 1 Corinth, chy xive ois
“ Agitation


-—)
Se
* -


and CHRISTIANITY, 307
* Agitation of the bodily Organs is a Cir- S 2 Tr.
* cumftance that effectually betrays Enthu- oe
« fiafm ; and diftinguifheth it from the real :
“" In[pirations recorded in holy Writ.”
Tress are the Circumftances in which
Enthufiafm will generally feem to refemble
real Infpiration: Tho’ on a nearer Scrutiny,
thefe very Circumftances will always detect
it. We come now to enumerate thofe other
Qualities peculiar to Enthufiafm, in which
. it bears no Refemblance to divine Infpira-
tion, and in which they are, at firft View,
clearly diftinguithed from each other.
And here’ it is remarkable, that, as the
noble Writer dwells on the former, fo he
fearce ever touches on thefe following Cha-
racters of clear Diftinétion. "This pecu-
liar Conduét can hardly be judged acciden-
tal’: For a Man of Wit can eafily improve
a-partial Refemblance into a complete one:
But'to havé added other Features, of abfo-
lute Difimilarity, would have weakened the
Likenefs, atid confequently have difgraced
the intended Reprefentation.
Tue chief Qualities, which clearly and e
at firft View diftinguith Enthufiafm from
divine Jn/piration, I find enumerated by the
X 2 fine


lent Work here ek Tis our
confider them as they may affect ou
our, and the reft of his 9 ferret Ba
brief Confideration may fuffice: Fc
(except the laft) are fo repugnant to |
Characters, that the very Mention of 1
refutes the Imputation. ) ane

Wits Regard to the firtt of thefe Q dua~
lities, “« uncommon Heat of Temper,” ”
of all others moft abhorrent from our Sa-
viour’s Charaéter. He is every where a oa
cool, and unmoved, even under the moft


_ every where appears a perfect Model of
Benevolence, Meeknefs, and mild Mey. .
_ The fame Temper generally prevails among
his Apoftles : More particularly we may
obferve of the Evangelifis, who are the im=
mediate Evidences, that in their Writings .
they difcover the moft perfect Coolne/s. Had
*they been of a firey Difpofition, they had -
4 See Dr. Law’s Life of Chri/? ; Where his Cha- »
racter is defcribed at large. ter
ats not


and CHRISTIANITY. 309


- not failed to load the Enemies of their cru-S ¢ r.
cified Lord, with the bittereft Sarca/ms.
Wirn aslittle Reafon can Melancholy be
charged on the Founders of Chriftianity.
Our Saviour came, “ eating and drinking :””
So entirely open, unreferved, and focal, that
he was branded by his Enemies, as a Friend
of Publicans and Sinners. Another Cir-
cumftance, befides the Paffion for Solitude
hath ever diftinguifhed Melancholy: ‘That
is, ‘an Over-fondne/s and Defire to fuffer
‘* in the apprehended Caufe of Truth, be-
“¢ yond the juft and rational Ends of Suffer-
“* ing.” Now this is diametrically oppofite
to the Character of our Saviour and his
Apoftles: For even Jesus himfelf was in
an Agony at the Apprehenfion of his ap-
proaching Sufferings. So far were his Dif-
ciples from being tainted with this Melan-
choly, that they difcovered unmanly Fear ;
for they all forfook him and fled. "Tis true,
they afterwards endured the fevereft Trials
with unfhaken Conftancy ; yet ftill, with
the refigned Spirit of Martyrs; not the Ea-
gernefs and fanatic Vaunts of all known
Enthufiafts*.
For a remarkable Inftance of this, fee a Story re-
lating toSAVANOROLA. Charadt. Mife. ii, c.1. in


the Notes,
X 3 THE


=


310 On Revealed Rescion :
Essay up Charge of Credulity hath no bet
Foundation. To our Saviour himfelf
“in it’s very Nature utterly inapplicable.
Difciples have been often charged wi
_ dulity, But on impartial eet
_ appear, that the Charge i is ‘groundlefs,. _F
this is an unvarying Circumftance in t -
Credulity of an Enthufiaft, “ that itmever
admits a Doubt.” But it is evident, from
the united Accounts of the Gofpel-Hii a
that they often, nay always, doubted of our
Saviour’s Death, tho’ himfelf foretold = les
’Tis equally evident, they not only doub ~ ae
of, but almoft difbelieved, his Refurr jon,
till overcome by irrefiftible Evidence. Thefe eo
Circumftances afford another collateral Proof, ae) *
that the Apoftles were not Enthufi afts: Be-
caufe it is effentially of the Nature of En-
thufiafm, “ to run on headlong in, the ri
«Chanel of the Fir/t conceived Opini 4
Now ’tis evident, they changed their fig
Opinion concerning the temporal Dominion
of Curist, into the firm Beliefof his Death,
Refurreétion, and fpiritual Kingdom: We
cannot therefore juftly charge them with
that Credulity, which is the Charaéteriftic
of Enthufiafm*.
$ See this Point treated with great Panticlaity of
THE.


we


and CHRISTIANITY. 311
Tue next Circumftance, Self-Conceit, SECT.

which hath ever beén one of the moft dif-___"__
tinguifhing Qualities of Enthufiafm, is fo
diftant from the Character of Jesus and
his Apoftles, that it hath never, I believe,
been laid to their Charge. ‘The Enthufiaft

is perpetually boafting of immediate Con-
verfe’ and Communication with the Deity ;,

and overflows with a Contempt of all, who

are not of his own Syftem. In our Saviour

we difcover the moft unfeigned Humility and
Compajffion towards all Men. When urged

to fhew his Pretenfions to a divine Miffion,

fo far is he from refolving them into i7-
ward Feelings, Impulfes, or Notices from

God (the conftant PraGtice of every Enthu-

fiaft) that, on the contrary, he calmly ap-
peals to his Works and Doétrines*; adding,

ina Strain the Reverfe of all Enthufia/m,
that, “in what we bear Witnefs only to
-* ourfelves, our Witnefs cannot be efta-

** blifhed as a Truth.” The fame Turn of
Mind appears in the Apoftles. They affect


no Superiority themfelves, nor exprefs or


Proof, in a- Pamphlet intitled, «* 4 Difcourfe, proving
‘* that the Apoftles were no Enthufiafts.” By A. Camp-
bell, S.T. P.

* Matth, vii. 16,» Fobnv. 31.


X 4 difcover


. 4
a


On Revealed Reuicion


& STIL 4¥ difcover any Contempt or ihiciooas Pride
Ri Regard to others,

The laft Quality common to ar
is thatof Ignorance. This hath been fome-_ =
times charged on our Saviour himfelf: Of


ten on his s A poftles with an Air of Triumph,


But fo it is, that feeming Objections againft —


Truth become often the ftrongeft Evidence


in Support of it. This will eminently ap-


pear in the prefent Cafe, if we confider
“* that Ignorance or Want of Letters, when ;


* joined with Enthufiafm, muft always —
“ produce the moft inconfiftent Vifions, S


** whimfical Condu@, and pernicious Doc-
* trines.” Thefe Effects, Ignorance and En-
thufiafn have wrought, wherever they ap-
peared, in every Age and Nation. Nor can


it indeed be otherwife: Fora J/ettered En-


thufiaft may be fuppofed to have an inter-
nal Balance, which mutt in fome Degree


counteraé and regulate his Vifions; while _


the unlettered is fubje& to no Controul, but


muft become the Sport and Prey to the de+


firious Flights of an unreined Imagination.
Now, that the Apoftles and Evangelifts.
were unlearned, muft needs be granted :
And tho’ the noble Writer hath taken upon
him to deride them on this Account; yet


this


e


and CHRISTIANITY, 313
_ this very Circumftance compared with their § ’¢ T.
Conduét and. Writings, clears them at once
from. the Charge..of Enthufiafm..- So far

_were they from the Ravings of.this Paffion,
common to all ignorant Enthufiafts, that-we
may. defy the Enemies of Chrifianity to

produce. any Inftance, either. of Speech or
Praétice, that hath the fmalleft Tincture -of
Extravagance.. Their Condu& was regu-
lar and exemplary; their Words were ¢he
Words of Truth and Sobernefi.

As to the Charge of Ignorance apaintt
our Saviour, the Enemies. of | Chriftianity
have been more cautious: Yet it hath been
infinuated. And indeed, that he had not
the common Aids of human: Learning, is
not only acknowledged, butinfiffed on. Could

ignorant and blind Enthufiafm then have

produced the fublime religious Doctrines and _
moral Precepts which'the Evangelifts have
recorded from his Mouth?. With as much
Truth it might be affirmed, that the Crea-
tion is the Produce of Chance. With Reafon
then may we afk»the noble Writer this
Queftion, ‘* Whence then had this Man
** fuch Wifdom, feeing he {pake as never Man
** {pake?” And the Anfwer fure is ove only,
** That as it. was not from Man, it mutt
: © have


314 On Revealed ReviGton
Essay “have been from Gon.”*: Foréven ec

____2mies of ‘Chriftianity have born’ Witn .

its Excellence, even when they intenileaPto, 235

rear it: While with fruitlefs Labour

they have attempted to prove, “thatthe

 moft exalted Truths and Precepts of the

»€ \Gofpel may be found fcatteredamong the
“Writings of the heathen Sages.” 9

» From thefe concurrent: Circumftances,

sthereleire, we obtain a fall internal. ‘Proof,

that the Founders of Chriffianity were not

‘Enthufiafts, as the noble Writer hath, by
‘the moft laboured and repeated pear

attempted to reprefent them.


SECTION VI.


Sect. SINCE therefore we. have pe
to the religious and moral Doétrines of
Chriftianity, as a concurrent Proof of its
divine Original; it will be neceflary now to
examine what the noble Writer hath al-
ledged or fuggefted againft this moft i
tial Part of our Religion.

Anp firft, it appears from the. genceal
Turn of the Charaéteriftics, that the noble
Author regards religious Eftablifbments as

being quite at a Diftance from Philfophy
and -


—


realy Wate tees En


and CHRISTIANITY, 315.

and Truth, with which, he tells us, in ancient §  ¢ *,
Times they never interfered: He therefore _
derides every Attempt to make them co-
alefce. Thus he tells us, ‘* Not only Vifio-
“< nories and Enthufiafs of all Kinds were
“ tolerated by the Ancients; but, on the
“¢ other Side, Philofophy had as free a
“ Courfe, and was permitted as a Balance
© againft Superftition,---Thus Matters were
‘ happily balanced; Reafon had fair Play;
“‘ Learning and Science flourifhed. Won-
“ derful was the Harmony and Temper
‘* which arofe from all thefe Contrarieties”.”
Such therefore. being his Lordfhip’s Idea of
a. Public Religion, which he ever oppofes to
private Opinion and Philofophy ; ’tis no
Wonder he fhould infinuate the Folly of
Chriftianity, which promifeth to.all its Pro-
_ felytes, “* that they fhall know the Truth,
“ and the Truth thall make them free.”

Bur notwithftanding the noble Writer’s
Partiality to the Syftem of ancient Paganifm,
which he had deeply imbibed from - his fa~
miliar Converfe with ancient Writers; no
unprejudiced. Mind can hefitate a Moment,
in determining the fuperior Excellence of
the Chriflian Religion, compared with thefe


w Lett. on Enthuf.


well.


[ae


On Revealed REw1Gion


Essa vqwell-meant, but defective Schemes of heather
Policy. For, as grofs Error, and Mifap-
prehenfion of the divine Nature and Attri-
butes, was deeply interwoven with ancient
Paganifm; fo, ’tis well known, thatinFa@,
_ the moft horrid Enormities were committed


upon Principle, under the Authority and
Example of their pretended Gods. Lord
SHAFTEsBURY himfelf owns, what indeed
it were Folly to deny, that the Imitation of
the Deity is a powerful Principle of Adtion *.
If fo, it follows, that to communicate a juft
Idea of the divine Perfections to all Man-


kind, muft tend to fecure their Virtue, and
promote their Happinefs. Tis therefore —
- equally ungenerous and impolitic, to faffer


Mankind to live in Ignorance and Idolatry.
Hence ’tis evident, that Reformations in Re-
ligion are not the ridiculous Things his
Lordthip would reprefent them ; and that
Chriftianity, if indeed it reveals the Truth,
isa Religion in it’s Tendency much more
beneficial to Mankind than ancient Pa-
ganifm.

Tis no difficult Tafk to aflign the ori-
ginal Caufe of this fo different and even op-
Pofite Genius of the Pagan Syftems from that


* Eng, on Virtue,


of


and CHRISTIANITY. 317
of Chriftianity.. In early and ignorantS = ¢ 7-
Ages, the Neceffity of religious Belief and___"_
religious: Eftablifhments was feen by the
Leaders of Mankind: On this Account
they inftituted the moft /a/utary Forms and
Do@trines, which their unexperienced Reafon
could fuggeft. As Nations grew wifer and
more polifhed, they faw the Weaknefs and
Abfurdity of thefe eftablifhed Syftems ; but
thro’ a Regard, and perhaps a miffaken one,
to the public Good, were unwilling to dif-
cover thefe Defects and Abfurdities to the
People. Hence probably the Rife of ex-
oteric and efoteri¢ Dotrines. For the fur-
theft that human Policy dared to go, was
to reveal the Truth to a few Initiated:
While the Bulk of Mankind, even in the
wife? and politeft Ages, continued the Dupes
to the Prejudices and Superftitions of the
moft ignorant ones. On the contrary, it
was a main Defign of the Chriftian Dif-
penfation, to difpel this Cloud of Ignorance,
which excluded Mankind from all Partici-
pation of divine Truth; to reveal thofe juft
and. fublime Ideas.of the Divinity, which
are the nobleft, as they are the fureft Foun-
dation, not only of Pzety, but of Morals:
And which, ‘fo far as they can affect cither
I Piety


*®


i


318 On Revealed Ret iti


E s ty mg ot Morals (fach’ i is the Triv
_l_Chriffianity over the laboured Ri
of falfe Wifdom) are no lels intelligible
Peafant than the Philofopher. Or this
count, Chriftianity was perfect (relatively
perfect) in it’s firft Delineation: Beng ee
tempts to — or add to its


And Baepeilesice every Day more bie i

- convinceth us, that the only Method of
taining a pure and uncorrupt Syftem of
Praétical Religion and’ moral Precepts, is to
fearch for them in the uncommented - —
of the Gofpel.

Tuvs, what was the Effet of Necefity)
among the Heathens, the noble Writer very
partially attributes to Choice> He miftakes’
a’ Defect for an Excellence: And blindly —
prefers the Weaknefs of Man to the wi”
dom of Gop.

AnoTuer Cavil frequently urged or in-
finuated by his Lordthip againft Chriffianity, —
feems to have been the natural Confequence’
of the laft-mentioned. He much’ admires
the Pagan Religions, as having been fociable,
and mutually incorporated into each other:
And often reprefents Chriffianity, as of an
unfociable, furly, and folitary Complexion,

tending


7 HCL


and CHRISTIANITY. 319
tending to de/froy every other butitfelf.. TheS v1. te
Confequence of this, he tells.us, hath been__"__
““ anew Sort-of Policy, which extends it-

“< felf to another World, and hath made us.
‘* leap the Bounds of natural Humanity;
*< and out of a fupernatural Charity, has
“* taught us the Way of plaguing one an- |
_ © other moftdevoutly’.”’. Now withregard
to this pretended wnfociable Temper of
Chrifiianity ; it muft be owned indeed, that
our Religion tends. to fwallow. up and de-
ftroy every other, in. the fame Manner: as
Truth in every Subjeét tends to deftroy
Falfehood : That is, by rational ConviGtion.
The fame Objeétion might be urged againft
the Newtonian Philofophy, which deftroyed
the Cartefian Fables: Or againft the Coper-
mican Syftem, becaufe the clumfy Vifions-of
Ptalomy and: Tycho-Brabe vanithed before it.
The fame may be urged againft the Ufe-
fulnefs of the great Source of Day, becaufe
it dims and extinguifhes every inferior Luftre:
For the glimmering Lamps of humanKnow-=.
ledge, lighted up by the Philofophers,
ferved indeed to. conduct them as a Light
Shining in a dark Place; but thefe muft
naturally be funk in a fuperior Luftre, when:


Y Lett. on Enthuf. ;
foe


2
vores
320 On Revealed Revicion» ‘
Essay the Sun of Righteoufnefs Srould arife. The x
_1ll.  Gofpel ‘therefore is fo far unfociable, asto
difcredit Error; and is incompatible: with |
this, as Light with Darknefs: But not fo
unfociable, as to. compel the Erroneous. As to”
the religious Debates, then, which Chrifti-
anity hath occafioned, and the Wars and
Mafilacres confequent upon them, which the
noble Writer fo juftly detefts; Chriftianity -
ftands clear of the Charge, till. it can be
fhewn that it countenanceth the inhuman
Principle of Intolerance: And this, its
bittereft Enemies can never do, ’Tis, true,
that if we be fo irrational as to take our Idea
of Chriftianity from the Reprefentations of
Enthufiafts and Bigots, nothing can aps)
peat more abfurd.and mifchievous: As, in’
like Manner, if we confider the Heavens
under the perplexed Revolutions and «ma=
lignant Afpects of the old Aftronomers and
Aftrologers, nothing can be more unworthy’
either of divine Wifdom or Goodnefs., But:
how can thefe falfe Images affe& the noble’
Simplicity and Benignity -of the Gofpel, or’
the Solar Sytem? To the Works and the’
Word of God,’ we muft repair, for a true _
Idea of ‘their \undifguifed Perfection: .And
there we fhall read their divine Author, in
the


a ae


——_


i


and CHRISTIANITY. 324


the brighteft CharaGters of Wifdom andS sc 7.
Goodnefs. So far therefore is Chriftianity
from encouraging Wars and Maflacres, on
account of a Difference in Opinion, that
its divine Founder hath exprefily warned
his Followers againft the Suggeftions of
this horrid Temper *: .Nor can thefe fatal
Confequences ever arife among Chriftians,
till they have divefted themfelves of Chri/ti-
an Charity, and * miftaken the very Prin-
ciples of their Profeffion. _

~ But the noble Writer proceeds to ftill
more bitter Invectives, if poffible, againft
Chriftzanity. For he often infinuates, that
the Profpe& of Happinefs and Mifery in
another Life, revealed in the Gofpel, tends
to the Deftruétion of all ¢rue Virtue’. In-
deed we cannot much wonder that his
Lordfhip fhould treat Chriftianity in this’ —
Manner, when we confider what he hath
thrown out againft Religion in general, in
this Refpect. Thefe Cavils have already
been confidered at large: Whatever there-
fore he hath infinuated againft our Religion
in particular, will naturally be referr’d to,
and effectually be refuted by thefe more
general Obfervations*. However, there are
* Lukeix.  * Ib. > Wit and Hum, P.ii. § 3.
© See above, Ef, ii. $9.
two


322 On Revealed Rericion


Es s Avtwo or three Paflages on this Subjeét fo re-
_... markable, that they may deem to. deferve a
rr feparate Confideration.

Arrer having ridiculed and beaded
Chriftianity, as deftroying the difintere/ted
Part of Virtue, he tells us, ‘“‘ The Yews as
“ well as Heathens were left to their Philo-—

* § fophy to be inftructed in the fublime Part’

“ of Virtue, and induced by Reafon to'that —
“ which was never enjoined them byCom-
** mand. No Premium or Penalty being
<< inforeed in thefe Cafes, the difinterefted
“ Part fubfifted, the Virtue was a free
“ Choice, and the Magnanimity of the
“ A& was left entire ¢.”

Here again the noble Writer hath got
to his Peculiarities. What other Title this
Paffage may deferve, we fhall foon difcover.
For, firft, fuppofing his Affertion true,
-what he notes in the Yew/b and Heathen
Religions as an Excellence, had certainly been
a Defec. For are not Hottentots, wild In-
dians, and Arabs, “ left to their Philofo-

« phy, to be induced by Reafon to that
*e which was never enjoined them by
* Command? No Premium or Penalty


° Witgnd Hum, P. ii. § 3. ; ' :
 Deing :


and CHRISTIANITY. 323
*¢ being inforced in thefe Cafes, the difin- = ¢ .
*« terefted Part fubfifts, the Virtue is a free___"_
“« Choice, and the Magnanimity of the A@
** is left entire.” Thus the nobie Writer
would: again debafe us into Savages*; and,
rather than not difgrace Chriftianity, would
put the State of Pale/line, Greece, and Rome,
on a Level with that of the Cape of Good
Hope: Blindly (or thall we fay, knowingly?)
difparaging, what he elfewhere fo juftly ap-
plauds, ‘“ Laws, Conftitutions, civil and
‘© ReELIGIous Rites, whatever civilizes or
“< polifbes rude Mankind ‘.” .
Bur in Faét, neither the Jews nor
civilized Heathens were ever tainted with
this Phrenzy. They faw the Neceflity of
., feligious Belief; and as they faw its Ne-
’ ceffity, fo they inforced it. With regard
to the Jews, the noble Writer contradicts
himfelf within the Compafs of ten Lines :
For there he fays, “ their Religion taught
** no future State, nor exhibited anyRewards
** or Punifhments, defides fuch as were tem-
** poral.> "Phis is the very Truth. Here
then he owns a femporal Sanétion of Pre-
mium and Penalty, Reward and Puni/b-’
ment: Yet in the Paffage above cited, and
© See above, Rfii. § 10. f Morali/?, Parti. § 3.
4,2 which


a


324 On Revealed Reticion


Essay which ftands clofe by the other in the Ori-

__ ginal, he fays, “ there was no Premium

_ § or Penalty inforced, no Reward or Pu- —
* nifhment!” His Lordthip deals as fairly
and conjiftently by the civilized Heathens ;
For, could he indeed have forgot the dif-
tinguifhed Rank, which, in the Ehjfan
Fields, was affigned to thofe who fell to
fave their Country? tx
Hic Manus ob Patria pugnando vulnera pafi—
Omnibus bis nivea cinguntur tempora vitta’,


Anp now let the Impartial determine,
whether the noble Writer’s Obfervation
hath more of Sagacity or of Truth in it.

Bur the Chriftian Do@trines relating to_
an Hereafter, are to undergo a yet feverer

- Inquifition from the noble Writer : They
are to be tortured and mangled on the Rack,
of Wit thall IJ fay, or of Buffoonry ? ‘© The
‘* Misfortune is, we are feldom taught to
‘* comprehend this Sexr, by placing it in

a diftinct View from its Reprefentative

§* or Counterfeit. In our oly Religion,

** which, for the greateft part, is adapted to

** the very meaneft Capacities, ’tis not to

f° be expected, that a Speculation of this


“ Enzid. lib, vi, . a” ;
* Kind, )


and CHRISTIANITY. 325
-* Kind thould be openly advanced, *Tis $= ¢ 7.
_ enough that we have Hints given us ofa___"_,
* nobler Sevr,than that which is commonly
‘< fuppofed the Bafis and Foundation of our
« A@tions.. Se/f-Interef is there taken as it
is vulgarly conceived—In the fame Man-
ner as the celeftial Phenomena are in
‘ the facred Volumes generally treated ac-
cording to common Imagination, and the
then current Syftem of.Aftronomy and
natural Science; fo the moral Appear-
ances are in many Places _preferved
without Alteration, according to Vulgar
Prejudice.--- Our real and genuine Se/f
is fometimes fuppofed that ambitious one,
which is fond of Power and Glory; fome-
:* times that childi/h one, which is taken
with vain Shew, and is to be invited to
Obedience by Promife of finer Habitations,
precious Stones, and Metals, fhining Gar-
ments, Crowns, and other fuch dazling
Beauties, by which another Earth, or
material City is reprefented *.”
- Tus Paflage contains two infinuated
Charges of a very different Nature. The
one is true, but no Objection: The other
would indeed be an Odjeétion, but that it is
® Solil. Part iii. § 1.
wi3 abfolutely


326 On Revealed Raric1on.


Essa Yabfolutely groundlefs, "Tis true, * that oar
matty: 8 ‘Religion is, for the greateft part, adapted
“/to the very meaneft Capacities ; ; andithat
“ the celeftial/ Phenomena are in the facred
« Volumes generally ‘treated according to
“common Imagination,” &c. And would
‘the noble Writer indeed have had it other-—
‘wife? Would he indeed have ‘had them
fpoken of, according to the philofophical
Conftru@tion ofthe Univerfe, rather than
the received Notions of Mankind? With
how little Reafon, we may foon be con-
vinced, if we confider, Firft, thatthe End -
of Revelation was not to make Mankind
Proficients in Philofophy, fince the Situa-
tion of the Generality can never admit it
And had the Scriptures fuppofed this, (as
indeed fuch a Conduét would have fuppofed
it) this very Circumftance had been an
Argument of their Falfehood. Secondly,
even Philofophers themfelves, tho’ inti-
mately acquainted with the Conftruétion of
the Univerfe, do ftill defcend to the Level
of Mankind, when they fpeak of the Phe-
nomena of Nature: The Sun fets and rifes,
as it did three thoufand Years ago: ‘The
Moon changes, wains, is new, and old :
The Stars are in. the Firmament, the Sua
ftill


and CHRISTIANITY. a3,


ftill rules the Day, and the Moon the Night.S ee
The Reafon is evident: Becaufe Off onomti~ nme
cal Difcoveries have not the leaft Influence

on the Praéice of Mankind: Becaule,

altho’ the natural Appearances of Things are
merely relative to the Imagination only, yet

they are, for that very Reafon, neceflary to

be referred to, as the Imagination is the great
univerfal Inlirument of Life and human
Aétion.

An Objection therefore to the Scriptures
on this Account, betrays either a grofs
Mifapprebenfion of human Nature, or the
moft unpardonable Jnfincerity ; yet we find
Objections of this kind frequently urged;
as if, becaufe the facred Penmen were im-
powered by God to reveal to us-a certain
Meafure of religious and moral Truth, fuited
to our prefent State, they muft therefore
be endued with Ommifcience ; in order to
make all Men not only good Subjects, . but
good Affronomers too!

Bur tho’ it were Folly to object againft
the facred Penmen, becaule they appear not
to. have been ommifcient ; yet I cannot con-
clude this Argument, without producing a
remarkable Inftance, wherein their very [g-
norance of thefe /pecylativeand unnecefary

eh ger’ Truths


e388: On ‘Revealed ReLicion é a :
“Essay Truths becomes a convincing Proof of their
_ dL Veracity: A Circumftance which much
more nearly concerns us.’ We read in the
Book of Yofbua, “ And he faid in the Sight
* of Irael, Sun, ftay thou in Gibeon, and
*« thou Moon, in the Valley of Ayalon:
« And the Sun abode, and THE Moon .
“€ sToop STILL, --- and hafted not to go
«© down for a whole Day’.” Here, the —
jranding fill of thefe Luminaries is related
in fuch a Manner as concurs with the com-
imon Appearances of Things; and yet con-
fifts with the beft Difcoveries in Aftronomy,
tho’ unknown to the Writer. For we are
now affured, that, if the Sun /tood fill, it mutt
have been by fufpending the diurnal Rotation
of the Earth: The franding fill of the Moon
was therefore the neceffary Confequence. This _
the Writer appears not to have known:
Yet he.relates the Faé#, tho’ it was of no
Importance with regard to that Event for
which the Miracle was wrought. It is
therefore of fingular Force in proving the —
Veracity of the Writer, becaufe, had it not
been true in Fact, it is a Circumftance which
could never have occurr’d to him.
“THe noble Writer’s other Charge re- »
lating to the moral Reprefentations of. the
i Fofbua, x. Scriptures,


and CHRISTIANITY. 329


Scriptures, would indeed be of Weight, ifSecr.
it were founded in Truth : But fo far from.¥!
this, that he hath utterly revered the Fad.
For in Reality, thefe fenfible Reprefenta-
tions of vifible Beauty and Glory, are
only ccafionally or accidentally hinted ;
‘while the whole Weight and Energy of
the Gofpel is employed in inforcing the
‘Idea of moral Perfection, of our nobler
Setr, of Self-Intereft in the bigher Senfe,
of the Neceflity of extirpating every meaner
Paffion, and cherifhing the great one of un-
bounded Love, as the neceflary and only
‘Difcipline that can qualify us for future
Happinefs. ’Tis evident that the noble
- Writer lays the principal Strefs of his
‘Charge, on the Apocalypfe; a Work in
it's whole Turn /ridtly Allegorical, and '
therefore neceffarily converfant in Imagery
and vifible Reprefentation. ‘To this he hath
moft perverfely added a figurative Expreffion
of St. Paut, who, writing to a People
among whom the Prize-Races prevailed,
reprefents the Chriftian Progre/s as a Conte/t
of this Kind; and fhews it’s Superiority
over the Former, ‘ becaufe, faith he,
“ they labour to obtain a corruptzble, but
* we an incorruptible Crown.” In the mean
Time


330 On Revealed Rewicion


Essav Timehe hath omitted the many Di/cour/es,
ip Parables, Maxims, of our Saviour, in which
he perpetually exhorts his Difciples to en-
deavour after unfeigned Virtue and univer-
fal Benevolence, as the only Means that can
bring them to future PerfeCtion. He hath
forgot too the repeated Exhortations of St.
Pauz, who fets Cuarity fo high above
every other Gift or Poffeflion, and adds,
the Reafon of it’s Preheminence, ‘‘ becaufe
*¢ it fhall never fail.” ’Tis true, indeed, as |

ahe noble Writer obferves (with what In-
tention, tis no difficult Matter to determine)
“< that our holy Religion is for the greateft
“< part adapted to the very meaneft Capa-
** cities: We may add, “ and to the very
« worft of Difpofitions too.’ And ’tis one
of it’s chief Glories, that it is fo. There-
fore we find it inforcing every Motive that
can work on every Mind: Which muft
furely be acknowledged as the Character of
the Religion that fhould come from him
«who knew what wasin Man. But if the
noble Writer would further infinuate, that.
the Idea of future Happinefs ought to be
confined to» that of virtuous Enjoyment,
whereas the Chrif/fian Religion doth not fo
confine it: We havealready feen, that, from
the »


~ * o. 2 -
— Se i ee


and CHRISTIANITY. 338
the Nature of Things, this Refinement isS«c rT.
vifionary and groundlefs*. ME


We now come to the Examination of a
Paffage more extraordinery and original than
any yet produced. The noble Writer tells’ .
us, “ I could be almoft tempted to think,
** thatthe true Reafon why fome of the moft
“* beroic Virtues have fo little Notice taken
of them in our ho/y Religion, is, becanfe —
there would have-been no Room left for
“* Difintereflednefi, had they been intitled
“toa Share of that infinite Reward, which
“* Providence has Jy Revelation afligned to
“other Duties. Private Friendjhip, and
“* Zeal for the Public and our Country, are
“* Virtues purely voluntary in a Chrifizan.
They are no effential Parts of his Charity.
** He is not fo tied to the Affairs of this
** Life; nor is he obliged to enter into:fuch
Engagements with this wer World, as
are of no Help to him in acquiring a better.
‘* His Converfation isin Heaven. Nor has
he Oceafion for fuch fupernumerary Cares
** and Embarrafiments here on Earth, as
*““ may obfrudét his Way thither, or retard
“ him in the careful Tafk of working out
‘© his own Salvation'.”

~ * See above, Eff ii. $09. | Witand H. Partii. § 3.
We


a
332 On Revealed Revicion
Essay We have already feen, that the reab
_Nature of Virtue confifts “* in procuring or
** promoting the greateft public Happi-
* nefs:’” And that this Truth is often,
occafionally, acknowledged by Lord Shafte/~
bury himfelf. ‘Confequently, the dighe/# or
‘mott heroic Virtue, is that which tends to
accomplifh this great End: Nor can any
pretended Virtue be either great or heroic .
‘that tends to obftrudt or deftroy it. 392
On this plain Principle, felf-evident to
unbyafled Rea/on, let us examine the Paflage
now before us. And firft, as to private
Friendfhip, which, the noble Writer fays,
‘© is a Virtue purely voluntary in a Chrif-
“© tian.”---Let us confider how far it may -
be regarded as a Virtue af all. --- Now,’ on
ftric&t Inquiry we fhall find, that the ex-
treme Degree of Friendfhip recommended
- and applauded by the Ancients, and here pa-
tronized by the noble Author, is effentially
repugnant to trueVirtue: In Friend/bip they
placed the chief Happinefs : --- And if this
confifts in the fupreme Love of ome, it mutt
needs diminifh, if not extinguifb, the Love
of al/; becaufe our chief or whole A¢tten-
_ tion mutt be employed, our every View and
Dif ign centered in giving Pleafure or procuring


Happinefs


and CHRISTIANITY. 333
Happinefs to one Individual. And this is ® ¢ +.
the very faireft Light it can be view'd in. . bs:

For we fhall further. fee; how little it |
generally partakes of the Nature of true
Virtue, if we. confider whence it hath it’s —
Rife. This is univerfally allowed to be
**.a Similarity of Difpofition, Wil, and
“© Manners.” This Circumftance demon-
ftrates, that in general it muft be contrary
‘to Virtue: For hence the general. Good
muft be often facrificed to gratify the Will
of one. . Of this dreadful Effect, Inftances
‘might be produced almoft. innumerable.
Let one fuffice. ** Between Tizerrus
““ Graccuus and C. Brossius, a dear and
“ perfect Friendfhip fabfifted: The latter
** being feized for aiding the former in his
“< Confpiracy, was brought before the Con-

‘ fuls. He pleaded his Friendthip toGrac-
‘** cuus in Excufe for his Crime.” He was
‘* then afked, ‘* What, fuppofe he had bid
you fire the Capitol, would you have done,
*‘ it?” To this he boldly replied, “‘ He
** never would have laid me under fuch a
“ Neceffity; but if he had, J. would have

~§ obeyedhim™. A thorough Friend fare:
But a Vile Citizen; notwithftanding the


™ Cic. Lelius,


CHa re SSPE


Lal


artfal


334 © Ow Revealed Revici0on
E ln! ¥ artful Glofs of an ingenious Modern, who
hath attempted to make out the Innocence |


ofhis Intentions *.

’T 1s true, the Adwecates for this Attach.
ment fometimes affert, that it cannot confit
but with Virtue. That it ought not, is cer-
tain: That it cannot, or doth not, is a ground-
lefs Conceit; unlefs they chufe to make this
Circumftance a Part of the Definition,
which were idleSophiftry. But if byFriend-
fhip be meant, what indeed is always meant,

_ a violent Love and Attachment to another
<< on account of a Similarity of Manners ;”
this, tis certain, hath often, nay moft com-
monly, fubfifted without Virtue: Among
Savages, Robbers, Heroes, and Banditti. In
Lucran’s Trac on Friendthip we find,
that out of Twelve notable Inftances al-
ledged, near half the Number were fup-
ported at the Expence of ‘fu/fice or Huma-
‘nity ; either by the Commiffion of Rapine,
Adultery, or Murder, or by aiding the Ef
cape of thofe who ought to have fuffered
for thefe enormous Crimes. Will any one
alledge the Emperor TrBer10vs, or his Fa- -
vourite Szpanus, as Patterns of Virtue?
Yet their Friendfhip was fo remarkable,


*" See Montaigne’s £fay on this Subject. :
that, }


gud CHRISTIANITY. 335
that, in Honour of it, Altars were dedicated S x C Te


ry


+ oat eieier 22.) eS


to. Friendfhip by a fenatorial Decree. Nay, **_
fome of the applauded Inftances appealed


to, by the noble Author, in his Comment on


this Paffage,are even notorious in, this Re-
fpect. Such were Tueszuvs and Piri-
THOUS, equally remarkable for Friend/hip, -
Rapes, and Plunder. And fuch Inftances
may {till be found in every /avage Country;
where the ftrongeft Friendfhips are com-
monly formed: Where Men thus /eagued
go upon bold Adventures; and hazard
Life for each other without Reluctance,
while they ravi/h their Neighbours Wives,
and carry off their Castle. .

Wirw as little Reafon can it be urged,
that Friendfhips in general are difinterefted,
fo as.to afpire to the Name of Merit. For
Merit, if it exifts, can only arife from Vir-
tue: And Virtue, we have feen, doth not
effentially belong to Friendfhip, Nay, in
Lucian’s Tract, ‘tis warmly debated be-
tween the contending Parties, whether 4/-
feétion or private Advantage hath a more
confiderable Share in this applauded Union.
Indeed the civilized and haughty Greek
f{tands upon the Pundtilio of Honour, and
piques geo on the Notion of Difintereft:

But


fae
50 >


336 On Revealed Revicion *


“: 34 ¥ But the undifguifed Scythian infifts, that mu-— r~
I. _tual Advantage a and Support are the ruling }
Motives. However, in Conclufion they —

fairly agree, in comparing a Set of faft —

Friends to Geryon with three Heads and :
Jix Hands, enabled, thro’ this Increafe of
Strength, to overturn all Oppofition®. But
fuppofe Affection the ruling Principle, as
unqueftionably it often is; where is the —
Merit, while confined to one Perfon? Nay,
it muft rather lean toward Demerit, be-
caufe it appears, ’tis rather dangerous than —
favourable to public Affection and Virtue. —
’Tis evident then, that the friendly Afettion
is no more meritorious than the. conjugal, ae
paternal, or filial Affection; which being of
‘a contraéted Nature, are often confiftent
with great Bafenefs of Mind, and deftruétive
of a more erilarged Benevolence’, - And


° Luciani Toxaris.

P Thus a Writer of diftinguifhed Abilities : « May:
__€ Inftances occur in Hiftory and daily Experience, of
‘ € Men, not afhamed to commit bafe and felfith Enor-

~€ mities, who have retained a Tendernefs for their
*< Pofterity by the ftrong and generous Inftin& of Na-
“¢ ture. The Story of Licinius Macer, who was Father
“¢ to Calvus the great Orator, is very remarkable, as
‘¢ related by a Roman Annalift. Having gone thro”
¢ the Office of Pretor, and governed a Province, he
*¢ was accufed, upon returning home, of Extertion


what


¥:

_ @nd CHRISTIANITY, 337°
what Degree of Merit or Difinteref thereS © ¢ t.
is in. Regards of this Nature, when fepa- Mil
rate from-more extenfive ones, we ma
learn from the noble Writer himfelf, who |
fays, “ there is a Selfifhnefs in the Love that
* is paid to a Wife, and in the Attendance
“© on a Family, and all the little Affairs of
* it, which, had I my full Scope of Adtion
** inthe Public, I fhould hardly have fub- |
** mitted to 4.”

So far then is clear, That Priend/bip, or
*< a violent Affection founded on a Simila-
“rity of Difpofition and Manners,” is
more likely to produce Vice than Virtue; as
it tends to fix fuch Habits of Mind as_muft
leffen our Concern for the general Good.
And in Fa@t, every one’s Experience. will
point out to him Numbers of Men, natu-
rally benevolent zo a//, but fo ftrongly by-
affed and drawnin by particular Aitach-


‘and Abufes of his Power. The very Morning of
“his Trial he ftrangled himfelf, after having fent —
*¢ Word to Cicero, who was preparing to plead againft

*s him, that, being determined to put an End to his
«¢ Life before Sentence, (tho’ the Penalty did not extend

“¢ to taking it away) the Profecution could not go on,
« and his Fortune would be faved tothe Benefit of his
s¢ Son.” — Canfiderations on the Law of Forfeiture,

+ 32.
abe 3 Ld.§.’s Lett. to Mr. Molelworth, Lett. ix.


Z ments,


338 ' On Revealed Rihana


Essa 4¥ments, that their Regards and Beneficencé
are centered wholly on a jeleé Few; wl E
the reft of Mankind pafs unheeded snd an”
affifted, and have no Share in their Bene-
volence, further than what Self-Deceit :
throws out, in Shecaning, Wifhes for i, a
Welfare. ma eel

Ts no lefs evident, Sue thro’ the aie =
ral Advantages of this partial Alliance, —
Mankind muft ever be prone to embrace it,
in Exclufion of more extenfive Affections, ©
where no fuch Advantages can follow. It
would therefore have been a Defe# in the ’
Chri riftian Religion, to have enjoined or
even recommendedit inthisExtreme. Ac-
cordingly we find, in the Gofpel, every At-
tachment of this Kind, however natural
and alluring it may be, fet very little above —
the lowe/t Selfifhnefs, and juftly reprefented —
as entirely confiftent with it. ‘“ If ye do
** good to them which do good to you,
“* what thank have ye? Do not the Publi-
“* cans even the fame '?”

Brsipes ; there is fomething fo extraor-
dinary in the noble Writer’s Scheme of
** enjoining Friendthip,” as fufficiently ex-
pofeth its own Weaknefs. - Friendfhip, his

* Matth. v.


Lordfhip


and CHMISTIANITY. 339


Lordthip allows, can only arife “ fromaSezc rv.
** Confent and Harmony of Minds‘.” How __" =
then could Chriftianity have enjoined us —
Practice of this /uppofed Virtue? What muft
it have enjoinedus? Why, togo in quef? of
a Mind refembling our own. It might
with equal Propriety have enjoined us to
go in queft of a Face refembling our own:
And with as much Reafon, for all the Pur-
poles of true Virtue.

Bur if by Friendhip be meant, what
indeed is wot generally meant, ‘“ A parti-
** cular Love and Efteem for the virtuous
“* or worthy,” in which Senfe alone it can
have any Tendency to produce true Virtue ;
then we may juitly affirm, that it is recom~
mended in the Gofpel, both by Example and
by Precept. It is naturally involved in that
all-comprehenfive Command of univerfal
Charity : For tho’ many have been zealous
in their Friendfhips, while they were in-
fenfible to public Affe@tion; yet, fuch is

‘the Temperament of hiudan Nature, that
“no Inftance was ever known, of a Man
zealous for the Happinefs of ail, yet remifs
in or incapable of a true Friendfhip for the
Worthy. . It is recommended by St, Pau,


£ In the Note.
Z2 who


330. On Revealed Ratizivenne


E oe Y who fays, that ‘‘ peradventure for a good
"__“ Man, one would even dare to die.” It is
recommended by our Saviour’s Example,
who felected a beloved Difciple as his bofom —
Friend, whofe Writings are the Overflow-_
ings of a Heart filled with the pureftand
moft unbounded Love'.’’ Above all, it is”
recommended by our Saviour in that noble
and divine Paflage; “‘ Who is my Mother
** or my Brethren? Even he that doth the
“« Will of my Father which is in Heaven, he —
** ismy Brother, and Sifter, and Mother™.” ~
So much for the fpurious Virtue of :pri-
vate Friendip: Let us next confider the
noble Writer’s ‘Charge againit Chriflianity, —
on account of its:not.enjoining <a Zeal
“* for the Public and our;Country:” For’
this'too, it feems, ‘isa Virtue purely va
“* luntary ina Chriftian.” Now all the Ab-
furdities which load his Charge with Re-
gard to Friend/hip, fall with equal Weight
on this groundlefs Imputation. For if by
*¢ Zeal for the Public and our Country,” ”
be meant, a Zeal that is inconfiftent with:
the Rights and,common Welfare.of Man-
kind, ’tis fo far from being a Virtue, that,
as in the Cafe of Friend/hip,. it :is .really a
© St. Fobu. » Matth. xii.


Crime,


«


and CHRISTIANITY.» 341


Crime, becaufe it tends to produce the moft $F cr
fatal Confequences. ‘And an. ‘Army of
victorious Warriors returning triumphant

on this vile:Principle, however graced with

the flattering Title of Heroes, and Enfigns

of Ghry, are in Truth no- better than a

Band of public Robbers: or, as our great

Poet, a Chriftian and a Lover ed ci a

ssi eptedicte it,.’


An impious Gite:
Of Men y con lpiring to uphold their State,
By wore than boStile Deeds , violating the Ends
For which our Country is a Name fo dear ™.


Now ’tis evident beyond a Doubt, that at
the Time when our Saviour appeared, this
deftructive Partiality, this avowed Confpi-
racy againft the common Rights of Man-
kind, was univerfally prevalent among the
mott civilized Nations. The Jews were
not exempted from this common Excefs.
“ Inter ipfos Fides obftinata, adverfus alios
“© hoftile Odium,” was their Character among
the Heathens. The Greeks and Romans
committed and boafted of the moft cruel
Enormities, conquered and inflaved inno-
cent Nations, plundered Cities, and laid
™ Sampfon Agonifies.
eo Am wafte


342 On Revealed Revision


Essa ¥ wafte Kingdoms, thro’ this abfurd and - ies
Ms ___.___ Pious Love of their Country; a Principle n ‘
better in many of its Confequences, tha ;
the moft horrid and accurfed Bigotry, Tt
had therefore been an effential Defect, 1 nay”
rather a mifchievous Abfurdity, in the
Chriftian Religion, to have enjoined, eo
couraged, or countenanced a Partiality un un- 4
jut i in it(elf; to which, from Views | of .
private Advantage, Mankind muft ever be - ¥
prone; and which, at the Time when _
Chriftianity. began to fpread, was ina

the reigning and predominant Error.
But if by “ Zeal for the Public, dea: x
“ Love of our Country” be meant, fuch a Ke
Regard to its Welfare as hall induce usto
facrifice every View of private Intereft for
its Accomplifhment, yet ftill in Subordina-
tion to the greater Law of univerfal SJupice,
this is naturally, nay neceflarily involved
in the Law of univerfal Charity, The
noble Writer indeed affirms, “ it is no effen-
** tial Part of the Chriftian’s Charity.” On’
» the contrary, it is achief Part of the Chri.
tian’s Charity. It comes nobly recommend-
ed by the Examples of Jesus and St. Paut :
The one wept over the approaching Defo-
lation of his Country : The other declared
=


and CHRISTIANITY. : 343


tian Community, if by this Means he might___"_
fave his Countrymen. And that it necefla-
rily arifeth from the Principle of univerfal
Love will be evident, if we confider the
Nature and Situation of Man. His Nature
is fuch, that he, inevitably contraéts the
frongeft Affection for thofe with whom he
converfeth moft intimately ; and whofe Man-
ners and Relations, civiland rehgious, are moft
nearly connected with bis own, His Situ-
ation is fuch, that he feldom hath an Oppor-
tunity of doing good Offices to any Society
_of Men, fave only thofe of his cw Country ,
‘all others being naturally removed beyond
the narrow Sphere of private Beneficence.
Hehce the great Precept of univerfal Charity
doth. effentially involve ‘ a Zeal for the
** Public, and Love of our Country:” At
once it curbs the Exorbitance of this natu-
ral Partiality, and carries it to its full Per-
fettion.

Tue Neceffity of this great regulating
Principle will further appear, if we confi-
der, that, with regard to the Conduct of
feparate States and Kingdoms towards each
other, no Sanétions of human Law can ever

_ take place. In this refpect all Nations muft
ever be in a State of Nature. There was
Z 4 therefore


hisWillingnefs to be cut off from the Chrif-S = er.


344 On Revealed Re.1Gi0on


Essaytherefore a more particular Neceffity, on =~
= ____this Account, of regulating their Conduct
“towards each other, by the great Law of
univer fal Charity.

Ir may feem ftrange, that the noble
Writer fhould be ignorant of thefe Truth;
But after the Imputations he hath heft
thrown on Chriftianity, it will farely appear
more firange, that he was not ignorant of
them: And that thefe bitter Sarcafms were
thrown out againft the clear Conviétions of
his own Mind. Yet nothing is more evi-
den’, as will now appear. ‘That he under
ftood the Nature of Chri/fian Charity, is”
indifputable : He defines it, and properly,
in the Note annexed to the Paffage here re-
ferr’d to. In another Place, he calls it “ the
« Principle of Love, the greateft Principle
“¢ of our Religion *. ” In a following Para-
graph he calls it ** that divine Love which
“ our Religion teaches’.”” But what is of
all moff remarkable ; he fets it under the new
and whimfical Denominations of Good-Na-
ture and Friend/hip to Mankind, far above
private ¥riendthip and Love of our Country.
Take the Paflages as they lie in the noble
Writer. ‘* Can any Friend/bip be fo heroic


* Moralif, Part ii. § 3, YIb,


* 9g”


and CHRISTIANITY. 345

“© as that towards Mankind? or particularS 7 *

» © Friendfhip well fabfift, without fuch an :

“< inlarged Affection?’ Again: “* Thcocles

‘had almoft convinced me, that to bea —
Friend to any one in particular, “twas
“ neceflary firft to be a Friend to Man-
“ kind*.” Laftly, and above all: “| And
can your Country, and what is more, your
“ Kinp, require lefs Kindnefs from you,
or deferve lefs to be confider’d, than even
*< one of thefe Chance-Creatures? ---O Phi-
Jocles, how little do you know the Extent
and Power of Good- Nature, and to what
“* an. heroic Pitch a Soul may rife, which
knows the thorow Force of it; and diffri-
buting it rightly, frames in itfelf an equal,
“© juft, and univerfal Friendfhip’?” Were
then we fee the former Paragraph utterly
reverfed. For “ univerfal Love is now the
© only heroic Principle: And “ private
“« Friendfbip and the Love of our Country
© are only somumncndabte, as they. make

“* fubordinate Parts of it,’

To this aftonifhing and wilful Peters
fion of the moral Principles of Chriftianity,
we may add the fubfequent Part of the
fame invenomed Paragraph. For he pro-

Alb. '§ 1°) 8 Tbe G2. * The $x.
4 ceeds


«ec


>
’ aT


*


346 On Revealed Revtcion
Essa A rceeds to infinuate, as if Chriftian


“its Profelytes to a State of mere Con
tion and Inaction, without Regard
- Life, and the Affairs of this lower We
We may defy the noble Writer's moft: C2
Admirers to find any other ration
ftruction for the following Paffage.
“‘ Chriftian, he fays, is not obliged 1
“ ter into fuch Engagements with this
“ World, as are of no help to him in
“ quiring @ better. . His Conver fation is
“< Heaven. Nor has he Occafion for
€ fupernumerary Cares and Embarraffine
* here on Earth, as may obfiruét bi |


s of wolkaip out bis own Salvation
exampled Prevarication! thrown out”
gainft that Religion which enjoins an aéfs
Virtue, a Regard to the prefent Happi

of Man in every pofible Relation, as
Way to obtain Felicity hereafter:
that Religion, whofe Founder did a Aly
harangue in a Clofet upon Beauty, Virtue, 3
and Decorum, amidft the Indolence and Pride
of Life; but praétifed the divine Truths <
taught, and “ vent about doing Good,” a-—


"a mongit ote


>


and CHRISTIANITY. 347
mongft the meaneft and moft defpifed of Sz cr,
his Fellow-Citizens. 2 alae Ss

To be unmoved on this Occafion were
‘ Stupidity ; nottoconfefs it, Cowardice, Er-
- ror fhould be expofed with Ca/mnefi; but
Difbonefty merits our Abhorrence.
Yet from thefe Cavils tho’ groundlefs,
and Mifreprefentations tho’ Voluntary, we
may draw an Obfervation which highly re-
- commends Chriftianity. We may hence
fee the fuperior Excellence and Dignity of
its moral Precepts, above the moft applaud-
ed among the Heathen: And how nobly,
by one great Principle, it rectifies every lit-
tle Partiality to which the human Heart is
fubje&t. For this is clear, that in one Age
_ or Nation, Friend/bip hath been idolized as
- the fupreme Virtue; in another, Hofpitali-
ty; ‘ina Third, the Love of our Country ;


‘Indeed the noble Writer purfuing the fame kind
Intention to Chriftianity, pretends that the Law of
Hofpitality, or Regard to Strangers, among the anci-
ent Heathens, was equivalent (nay he gives a very dif-
ingenuous Suggeftion, as if it was far /uperior) to
Chriftian Charity. “ Such, fays he, was ancient Hea-
‘¢ then Charity, and pious Duty towards the whole of
«¢ Mankind ; both thofe of different Nations and diffz-
“* rent Worfbips.” (Mife. iii. c.1. in the Notes, ) a
Inftances of this he is forced to go back as far as Ho-
mer, who indeed has given us fome fine: Pi@tures of
ancient Manners of this kind, in his Odyfzy. The


mM


SLES FS LES SS


bs


—


348 On Revealed Rei1ci0n


Ess a¥in a Fourth, enthufiattic Contemplation; a
il. _a Fifth, the Aufterities of the Hermit; in
a Sixth, the external Praétice of Religion ;
in a Seventh, which is the fa sfhitnable Bex
culiarity of our own Times, occafional Ads,
of Humanity and Compaflion, while the —
more extenfive and public Views of Bene-
ficence are negleéted or even derided. How
different, how fuperior, is the great Chrif-
tian Principle of univerfal Love! Which ~
rifing gradually, by a Progrefs thro’ all he


noble Writer might have found others, inno Ref ,
inferior, in the Old Teftament, recorded long befor
univerfal Charity was ever thought of, in the Stories
of Abraham and Lot. The Truth is, the Guef oF
Stranger was held facred, becaufe he was under the
Proteétion of his Hof? : It was therefore deemed crimi-
nal, to violate a Tru/? thus repofed. But it happens
unfortunately for his Lordfhip’s Argument, that in
thefe Old Times Rapine and Plunder were as much in
Vogue as either Friendfhip or Hojfpitality, and equally
creditable. Thefe phantom Appearances of Virtue are
ftill to be feen in the Arabian Deferts as frequently as .
ever. If a Traveller comes to the Door of a wild
Arab’s Tent at Night, he is received with fo bound.
lefs an Hofpitality, that the Ha oft would expofe himfelf,.
his Wife, and Children, to certain Deftruction, to fave
the Life of his Gue?. Had this ho/pitable Savage met

the Traveller in the Deferts at Noon, he would have
Jtrip’d him to the Skin, and, on the leaft Refiftance,


laid him dead at his Feet. And this was the true
Extent of the noble Writer’s boafted Heathen Chas , .
rity.

lefs 1


and CHRISTIANITY, ~~ 349
lefs enlarged’ Affections’ towards: Parents;S£¢7- _
_ Children, Friends, Country, and f{preading___"_.
till it. embraceth all Mankind, and every
Creature that hath Life, forms that perfect
Virtue in which baman Weaknefs is moft
“prone to’ be defeéfive, and’ which implies
and includes every moral Perfection. Chrif-
tianity alone hath kindled in the Heart of
Man this vital Principle; which beaming
there as'from a Center, like the great Foun-
tain of Light and Life that fuftains and
chears the attendant Planets, renders its
Profelytes indeed.“ burning and Shining
“ Lights,” dhedding their kindly Influence .
on all-around them, in that juft Proportion,
which their oe Difiances may de-
mand.


“SECTION VIL


“THE preceding Remarks may fuffici- S ¥ ¢ t.
ently obviateevery Cavil of the nobleWrit-_—*_
er againft ‘the efential Parts of Chri/fianity.

But “as his Lordfhip ‘hath cafually interfper-
fed feveral Random-Infinuations, we muft
be content to-receive them as they ‘happen
to appear, fince they are of that disjointed
Kind as to be incapable of Connection.
In


350 On Revealed Revicion
Es i. - Ina ee Note, he gives an f


~ Egypt, scl the Conduct of Moses.
thinks proper to reject the clear /
which the fewi/h Legi iflator hime


_ the true God ;” and Srepotberondll re~
firs WhatSeMinwe and Justin have faid y a,
on that Subject; who affirm indeed, but
without Proof, “that the Yews were driven 3
** out of Egypt on account of their Lepro-
“© fy’ This Partiality might of itfelfappear
myferious enough, when we confider
particular and confiftent Account give
by the very Leader of the Expedition: Fo or,
what fhould we think of the Man, who |
fhould prefer the random Conjectures of an
ignorant Modern to XenopHon’s Retreat,
or Casar’s Commentaries? But the noble
Writer’s Partiality will appear ftill more un-_
accountable, if we confider the following
Paflage of Srrazo; a Writer as muc .
yond Tacrrus in Candour, as a
Justin (ifindeed Justin and not TRogus —
Pompetus, be anfwerable for this ‘Siigien
der) in true Judgment. This Author, —
Srraso, fecond to none in Antiquity,

4M ‘i ii. c. 1. Notes,


fj peaks,


and CHRISTIANITY. 351
- {peaks thus: “ Moses, an Egyptian Prieft,S = ¢ 7.
“© retreated along with a Number of religious
‘* Followers. For he affirmed and taught,
* that the Egyptians were miftaken, who
*¢ imaged the Deity under the Forms of the
** Brute-Creation ; as likewife the Libyans
“and Greeks, who reprefented the Gods
* under the buman Shape. He held that
‘ alone to be God, which comprehends eve-
** ry living Creature, the Earth, and Sea ;
‘¢ which is called Heaven, the World, or the
“* univerfal Nature; whofe Image, who
“* that is in his right Mind, would dare to
*¢ form out of any earthly Materials? Re-
“« jeéting therefore all Ufe of Images, he de-
“* termined to dedicate to him a Temple
‘* worthy of his Nature, and worfhip him
** without Images. — On this Principle he.
“* perfuaded and brought over many wel/-
“* difpoled Men, and led them forth into
** that Country where now Jerufalem is
“* built.” A noble Teftimony, fure, from


a


© Macis yag tig tov Avyunliv segewv oomyeey
sxetct. EQy yae eneivos xas edidacuey ws ux oglus
Poovscw os Avyumlios Ongross emaCovles xo Booxnwacs
0 berov" xd’ ov AiGves. vx cv de xd’ os EAalwes axvdow-
wouoePus rumevles: em yore ev tyro povoy Geos to mee
CiXov unas amcvlas nas ynv nas bararlar, o xuruer


a Heathen


352 Ou Revealed Revicton” :
Essaya Heathen Writer: Le/s he could 1 ict
I if he was well informed; and, unlefs he
had embraced the  Sewifh Religion, be could
not have faid more.

Tuere is another Paflage (Mi oe 1 ),
which difcovers fomewhat of unfair dealing
in the noble Writer. In the’ ‘Margin, he
prettily enough criticizes the Preface to St.
Luxe’s Gofpel. But in the Text ‘he hath
paraphrafed the Evangelift’s Expreffion, in
a Manner fo different from any thing St. Luxe
either wrote or meant, as muft not a little ‘
aftonith every candid Reader. St. LuKE
fays, ‘ It feemed good to him to write in Or
“ der the Things that he knew.” To which 3
the noble Writer adds, “ As there were
“© many, it feems, long afterwards, who did ;

«© and-undertook accordingly, to write in
“ Order, and as feemed good to them, Ge
What fhall we fay of the noble Writer on
this Occafion? Why, this only; ‘ © That


—-__


ovgavoy nas xocuov, xa Tyv rev ovlwy Ducie Ter 4
de tis av emova mAatlew Oapeysee vere exw omoray
Tie THY mae’ HUI, AM sev der wacav Loavomosiavy

seevog aPogicarias xan cynxov aksoroyoy THe edus

wets. Exewos pcv sv tosaula Asywv emeioey evyva-

Povas avdpas, By OAIY¥S, Ka amnyaryer emi TOY TOmOD

selov, ome vm ese 70 Ev tOIg LegoroAupsars anagem

Strabo, 1. xvi.


“cc in-


“a


and CuRisTIANITY, 353
‘* inafmuch as it /eemed good to bim to inter- 92 ¢ T-
** pret this Preface of St. Luxe, he there-_"*"__
** fore thought himfelf at Liberty to inter-—
** pret’ it as it feemed good to him.”
Tere are three more Subje@ts, which
his Lordfhip hath thought fit to reprefent
in the Manner which feemed good to bim.
Thefe are, firft, the divine Fore-knowledge
communicated to Josepx in the Interpre-
tation of Paraon’s Dreams. Secondly,
the Rife of Bigotry, or religious Intolerance
and Perfecution. Thirdly, and principal-
ly, The Relation which the ‘Yews/h Infti-
tutions bear to the Egyptian’. In all
thefe, the noble Writer hath employed
every Art of Infinuation and Addrefi, that
he might throw an Odium on the Mofaic
Difpenfation. Thefe -Paflages might well
merit a particular Confideration, had I
not been happily prevented by my moft
learned Friend, who hath fully expofed
their Weaknefs in that ineftimable Trea-
fure of all true Knowledge, ‘The divine
Legation of Moses. Thither the Reader
is refer’d ; where he will find thefe Quef-
tions treated with that Reach and Maftery


f See Mifz. iis C. Is
Aa fe


354 On Revealed ReviGion


BR it ¥ fo as: to the Author of shay acl
Work *. |
Ir may now be neceflary to oma =
third Chapter of the noble Writer's fecond —
Mifcellany ; where he makes it his Pretence
“ to prove the Force of Humour in Religion.”
Of which it may be faid, that it isthe trueft
Piece of Random-Work, the moft genuine
Farce, that is perhaps to be met within any
Writer of whatever Age or Nation. He
divides it (as every Farce ought to be divid~
ed) into three 44s. In its Progrefs we are
carried into a very Fairy-Land of Thought,
if not more properly a confufed Chaos. For>
firft, he fets about, with great Solemnity, -
to prove, “ that Wit and Humour are
** corroborative of Religion, and promotive
“of true Faith:” To prove this, a Story
is told, by which it appears, that not Wit
and Humour, but good Humour or Eafinels of
Temper is thus corroborative and promotive :
Then, in Conclufion, Wit and Humour come.
in again, to overturn all that hath been
done, and fhew that good Humour hath fuf-
fered itfelf to be ridiculoufly zmpofed upon. _ |


‘s With relation to the firft of thefe Points, fee the a
Div, Leg. vol. ii. p. 164. For the fecond, fee Jb. Book |
ii. §..6, For the thinds fee Bookiv. § 6. paffim. d


Tuo’


—<r


and CiirtsTtaniry.


355


Tuo’ it déth not appear that our mo-S¢¢


dern Advocates for Wit and Humour are fo.


nearly interefted in their Fateas they feem


to think themfelves; yet it muft be owned


their Genetofity is fo much the more to be’


applauded, in thus pleading the Caufe of
Clients who never employed them, How-
ever, taking for granted what feems to be
the real Foundation of their Writings on
this Subject, “ that talking in Praife of Wit
“* and Humour is a Proof of their being
* poffeffed of them, and that confequently
“ they are Parties in the Caufe;’? I thall
not envy the noble Writer any Man’s Admi-
ration, who may think proper to efteem
him a Wt, on account of the grote/gue Ap<
pearances he affumes throughout this pre-
fent Mifcellany. *Tis my Intention only to
convince the plain Reader, that this /uppofed
Wit is by no means philofophical.
Tue firft Head, therefore, he tells us, is
** to make it appear, that Wit and Humour
‘are corroborative of Religion and promo-
* tive of true Faith.” To this Purpofe he
tires us with a Story, not the moft elegantly
plann’d, in my Apprehenfion, of a “Club
** of merry Gentlemen, who in a travelling
** Expedition meeting with forry Roads and
Aaz “ worle


356 On Revealed Rr LIGION


Essay worfe Fare, laugh’d themfelves into a
ey as Belief, that both Roads, Accommodations,
«« and Cookery, were perfectly good.” -
What follows is the Moral or Application
of this curious Conceit. ‘* Had I to deal
«« with a malicious Reader, he might per-
“¢ haps pretend to infer from this Story of
* my travelling Friends, that I intended to
“* reprefent it as an eafy Matter for People
*< to perfuade themfelves into what Opinion
“ or Belief they pleafed.” °
Now without troubling oncielies to en-
quire, how far this Story is a Proof of the
noble Writer’s fundamental Maxim, “‘ That
*€ Ridicule is a Teft of Truth ;” let us pro-
ceed to the intended Mora/; which feems
evidently calculated to throw a falfe Light
on religious Belief ; by reprefenting it as the
mere Effe& of Prejudice, Sejf-Impofition,
and Deceit. 'To refcue it, therefore, from
this infinuated Calumny, we need not deny,
but infft, that the Paffions, falfe Interefts,
and Prejudices of Mankind, muft indeed for
ever hang as a Byafs upon their Opinions. ;
But it muft be further obferved too, that
thefe Paffions and falfe Interefts will at leaft
as often prejudice them .againft Religion, as
in its Favour,, ’Tis true, there are Preju-
~ * dices


Sal


|


and CHRISTIANITY. 357
dices in Favour of Religion, arifing fromS® ¢ 7
Education; but there are Prejudices againtt ‘
‘it too, arifing from vicious Paffions. Some
are fanguine in their Hopes, and hence,
while their Conduct is virtuous, wi/h, and
therefore believe Religion to be true: O-
thers are fanguine in their Hopes, but aban-
doned in their Condu&, and therefore /ve
themifelves into a Belief that Religion is fa//e.
Some, thro’ a Dread of Annihilation, per-~
fuade themfelves beyond the Strength of
Evidence: Others, thro’ the Prevalence of
a fufpicious Caft of Mind, reject even what
is probable. Thus Paffions and Prejudices
work powerfully indeed; but they work
both for and againft Religion. It fhould
feem, then, that the noble Writer’s Moral,
which he aims at Religion, may with equal
Force be apply’d to Infidelity : For it is but
fuppofing a Man given up to Vanity or Vice,
and we fhall foon “ fee him enter into fuch
“a Plot as this againft his own Under-
‘* ftanding, and endeavour by all poflible
_ “Means. to perfuade both himfelf and o-
© thers of what he thinks convenient and
“ ufefulto DISBELIEVE.” Tis idle, there-
fore to infiit on the Prejudices either for or
againft Religion; They will both naturally
Aa 3 arife ;


358 On Revealed Rertcion

Essay arife; and it is the Part of Reafon to con-

——__troul them. But we may fafely leave it to —

any one’s Determination, which Temper of
Mind is. the moft amiable, that which en-
tertains Prejudices 12 favour of Religion, or —

againfiit.  :
TuE noble Writer proceeds to his fecond —

' Head ;. but feems. at the fame time confci-~
ous how. little it was.to any good Purpofe.
However, in Failure of Truth and Method,
he again hath recourfe to what he feems
to think Wit and Humour ; and which, for
aught I know, may pafs for fuch among
his Admirers. ‘‘ However, fays he, left I
*© fhould be charged for being worfe than
** my Word, I thall endeavour to fatisfy my

‘ Reader, by. purfuing my Method ‘pro-

“« pofed; if peradventure he can call to ~

«* Mind what that Method was. Orifhe *

** cannot, the Matter is not fo very impor-

*< tant, but that he may fafely purfue his

‘“« Reading without further Trouble.”»
But tho’ it was prudently done in the

noble Writer, to throw the Subject of his

Jecond Head into Shades; yet for the Sake

of Truth, we muft drag it into Light. It

was therefore to prove, ‘‘ That Wit and Hu- :
(€ mour are ufed as the proper Means of .
* pro=


Lal


and CHRISTIANITY. 359

<* promoting true Faith, by the holy Found-S F ¢ r-
“ers of Religion.” But when we come a
to the Point, for Wit and Humour, by vir-

tue of a certain Dexterity of Hand, the
Reader is again unexpectedly prefented

with good Humour in their Stead. This,

it will be faid, is nimble dealing ; but what

of that, fo long as it may tend to difgrace
Chriftianity and its Founder? The noble
Writer’s Application, therefore, is ftill more
-extraordinary. ‘‘ The Affection and Love

«* which procures a. true Adherence to the

“« new religious Foundation, muft depend
- either ona real or counterfeit Goodnef in

“ the religious Founder : Whatever ambitious

“© Spirit may infpire him ; whatever favage
© Zeal or perfecuting Principle may lie in
© referve, ready to difclofe itfelf when Au-
-“ thority and Power is once obtained; the

“* Jfirft Scene of Doétrine, however, fails not
:“ to prefent us with the agreeable Views .
of Foy, Love, Meeknefs, Gentlenefs, and
“Moderation.” —To {peak my inmoft Sen-
timents of this Paffage, it is of too black °a
Nature to deferve a Reply. There are
_ certain Degrees of Calumny fo flagrant, as
injured Truth difdains to anfwer ; and this ©
is of the Kind. On’ this ‘Occafion, there-
Aa 4 fore,


cal


360 On Revealed Revici0n


Essa *¥ fore, we fhall leave the noble Writer to the
Reflections of every honeff Man; in Con-
-formity to the Example of that bleffed Per-
fon, ‘‘ who when he was beret reviled not
“* again,” e:
Tue next Ghiemnitanen in holy writ,
that falls under his Lordfhip’s Animadver-
fion, is what he calls ‘* The famous Entry —
“ or bigh Dance performed by Davip in
‘* the Proceffion of the facred Coffer.” In
which he hath again reprefented Things
as it feemed good to him. Here, by confound-
ing ancient with modern Manners (in fuch
a Way as is quite unworthy of his Charac-
ter, and fuited only to the Genius of a
Coffce-boufe Freethinker) he hath endeavour-
ed to bring down the falemn Proceffion of a
grand religious Fefiival, to a Level with the
Merriments of an Apifh Dancing-Mafter.
This Reprefentation may very. probably
pafs current among many of his Admirers ;
fo that it had been neceffary. to fet the Mat-
ter in its true Light; but that here too, I
am happily prevented by a judicious Wri-
ter, who hath done all imaginable Juftice
to the Argument; and. effectually ex-.


* See above, § 3, of this fay, p.269.
Ard pofed


and CHRISTIANITY. =: 36k
pofed the ible Writer’s Weaknefs and In- 5 £ tt :


fincerity +. Lacaseaes
His Lordfhip t now provéeds to the Story
of the Prophet Jon au, which he hath bur-
lefqued and turned to Farce wirh that De-
licacy, fo peculiar to himfelf. The Story
itfelf is indeed authenticated by our SAvi-
ouR’s Mention of it, as emblématical of his
own Death and Refurrection. | Its Moral is
excellent ; being anilluftrious Difplay of the
divine Mercy to penitent and returning Sin-
ners, exemplified in Gon’s remitting the
Punifhment denounced, and‘fparing a de-
voted City on its fincere Repentance ; asalfo
of the Frailty and Imperfection of the beft
of Men, fet forth in the Prophet's Behaviour
on the Occafion. To this we may add
‘¢ the Propriety of the Miracle recorded,”
which was itfelfan extraordinary and moft
awakening ‘‘ Inftance of Punifhment infii-
“< ed on Difobedience, and remitted on Repen-
“* tance; and therefore bearing a /irong Re-
lation to the Event for which it was wrought,
being peculiarly adapted, when made known
to the Ninevites, to induce them to hearken
to the Prophet’s Preaching, to believe what


i See Dr. Leland’s Anfwer tothe Moral Philofopher,
pe 2g, &c,
he


: Let :

362 On. Revealed ReviGion
Es it ¥ he denounced and promifed, and rouze them:
at once into a Fear of Gop’s ufice, and a
Reliance on his Mercy *.

Sucu then being the real Nature of the
Fa@; the Secret of the noble Writer’s po-
lite Reprefentation. lies in his burlefquing
the Circumftances of the /uppofed Dialgue
between Gop and the Prophet; anealy _
Tafk for any one who is difingenuous or
ignorant enough to reprefent as ftridly
literal, what is evidently parabolical; ac-
_cording tothe frequent and known Manner

of Compofition in the earlieft Ages’. This
his Lordfhip feems to have been aware of :
«* Whatfoever of this Kind may. be allego-
‘* rically underftood, or in the Way of Pa-
** rable or Fable, &c.” Now had he treat-
ed the Scripture-Story with the fame Can-
dour which he. affords to other ancient
‘Writers, he would not have abufed this
Paflage in fo unworthy aManner. A Writer
of no Abilities, if provided only with a fuf
ficient Quantity of Spleen and falfe Con-

* In the xith Chapter of St. Luke, our Saviour fays,

that ¢¢ jones was a Sicn unto the Ninevites.’’? This
evidently implies, that he confidered this Miracle, and
the Fate of ‘Yonas, as an Example of Warning to that

People 5 in the Manner here reprefented,
1 See the Div. Leg. vol. ii. wherea full Account is
given of the wags and Progrefs of this kind of Writing.
ceit,


and CHRISTIANITY. 363


ceit, might eafily ridicule his favourite Piece, § & ¢ 7.
“* The Judgment of Hercures:” Andto
a raw Imagination, difgrace that inftrudtive
‘Fable, by burlefquing the fuppofed Confe-
rence between the Goddeffes and the Heroe,
Vireit hath in Faé been fo ferved.. And
if Works of mere Invention, and of the he-
roic Kind, ftudioufly contrived to avoid
every thing low, obfcure, or equivocal, are
fubject to this Abufe; can we wonder, if
the fucciné& Hiftory of an ancient Fact,
recording the Difpenfations of Providence,
a Matter very obfcure in itfelf, and relative
to ancient Manners fo diftant from our own,
fhould be liable to the falfe and difhoneft
Lights of Buffoonry; We may further ob-
ferve, that the nobleWriter’s Ridicule fome-
times falls on divine Providence itfelf; ‘ His
“ Tutor had good Eyes, and a long Reach;
‘* he overtook the Renegade at Sea, &c.---
Could. an Epicurean have ufed more pases

_cent Language?

His Lordfhip goes on, to ridicule « sos
“ Defcriptions, Narrations, Expreffions, and
“* Phrafes” of holy Scripture: But thefe we
fhall pafs over at prefent, as they will de-
ferve a feparate Confideration. He touches
once more on the Patriarch ABRAHAM;
and


364
Essay
Hi.


ree


On Revealed Ruticion
and they who are curious enough to look


for the Objection, may find a full Anfwer


to it in the Place here referred to ™. .
Tue next, and only remaining Circum-


ftance worthy of Notice in this Mifcellany, _


is a pretended Tranflation from PLUT ARCH :
In which the nobleWriter deals as honour-
ably by that Author, as before by Goraras


or ARISTOTLE”. But here too, Iam pre-


vented by the learned PuiteLEuTHERUS
Lirsrensts: However, as his Lordfhip’s
Condué is remarkable on this Occafion, it
may not be improper to exhibit a View
of it in the great Critic's Words; who, it
muft be owned, hath chaftifed the noble
Writer fomewhat roughly, and Arifarchus-
like. cet!

« He (Mr. Coririns) quotes the Place
“* as it is tranflated forfooth in the Charac-


“< teriftics, a Book writ by an Anonymous, —


<< but whoever he is, a very whimfical
“© and conceited Author. O wxetched
« Grecians (fo that Author renders Piu-
* rarcn) who bring into Religion that


« frightful. Mien of fordid and vilifying ©


“ Devotion, ill-favoured Humiliation and


= Div. Leg, vol iis p, 620. - * See above, Effayi.


Come


and CHRISTIANITY. 365


* Contrition, abjed- Looks and Countenances,® © ¢ Ts
< Confternations, Proftrations, Disfigurations,
‘ and, in the A& of Worfbip, Diftortions,
“* conftrained and painful Pofures of the
s Body, wry Faces, beggarly Tones, Mump-
“* ings, Grimaces, Cringings, and the reft
“of this Kind, --- Thus far that namelefs
** Opiniatre : and our worthy Writer (Mr.
“ CoLuins) introduces it with a grave
“ Air, that Prurarcn thus fatirizes the
“« public Forms of Devotion; which yet are
“« fuch, as,in-almoft all Countries, pafs for
“* the true Worfbip of God.---'This would
** partly be true, if thofe were really the
Words of PLurarcu: But as not one
Syllable of them is found there, what
muft we think of this Couple of Corrupt-
ers and Forgers? There is nothing in all
this, but their own Disfigurations and
“* Diftortions of the Original; their own
Mumpings, and beggarly Tones, while
they pretend to {peak in PLuTarcn’s
Voice.--- PLuTtarcu having obferved,
that Superftition alone allows no Eafe
‘nor Intermiflion, even in Sleep ;_ their
Dreams, adds he, doas much torment
them then, as their waking Thoughts did
“ before; they feek for Expiations of thofe
y © Vifions *


3 66 On Revealed Revicton
Essay Vifions nocturnal; Charms, Sul; ifurations,
III. .<<' Dippings in the Sea, hig all ae

‘< the Ground.


« O Greeks, bawnlees of } Bechasian Us,


*< whofe Superftition has devifed Rowlings 3
“ in the Mire and in the Kennels, Dippings
“in the Sea, Grovelings and Throwings
“upon the Face, deformed Sittings on the —
“ Earth, abfurd and uncouth Adorations.
“ This is a verbal Interpretation of that
‘© Place---and now I dare afk the Reader,
“ if he has feen a more flagrant Inftance
“* of Unfaithfulnefs and Forgery, than this of
“* our two Writers? Humiliation and Con- —
“< trition, known Words in your Exgh/h
“* Liturgy, are to be traduced here under
« Piurarcn’s Name. Where do thofe
“‘ and their other Phrafes appear in the
“* Original? or where do the Rites, he
« really fpeaks of, appear in your Form of
“© Worthip? who among you row/ them-
<< felves in Mire, or wallow in Kennels? a
“ Ceremony fit only to be enjoined to fuch
“ crackbrained and fcandalous Writers °””
Tue remaining Part of this random
Effay, is fo completely vague and unintel-
, ligible, that although.it be evidently de--


. & Phil. Lipfienf. p. 210, &c. .
figned,


and CHRISTIANITY. 367

figned, as a continued Sneer at Chriftia-S ec 7.
nity, ’tis impoffible to pick fo much as an V!
Objection, of even an Idea out of it. ’Tis
therefore below Criticifm.- To conclude ;
when I fee the noble Writer debafe himfelf

in this ftrange Manner, exercifing at once’
the loweft Derifion; and inflicting aes
lieft Wounds on Religion and Chriftianity ; I

muft own, the Appearance he makes, calls

up tomy Imagination a Remark of his own,

‘* ‘That there cannot be a Sight more fhock- —
‘** ing and contemptible, than that of a
Man acting at once the Part of a Merry-
Andrew, andan Executioner ®.”
Ir may be neceflary, finally, to obviate
his Lordfhip’s' perpetual Sneer at the My-
Series of our Religion. Thefe, when parti-
cular Topics fail him, are the ftanding Ob-
jects of his Raillery. To cite particular
Paflages of this Kind, were needlefs, be-
caufe they are innumerable. The plain Im-
plication of all his grofs Banter, is, ‘* That

“ becaufe in the Chri/ian Difpenfation,

** there are fome things, which furpafs hu-
man Comprehenfion, Chrif/tianity is there-
“© fore abfurd and ridiculous.”

- Wit Regard to this Cavil, therefore,

P Wit and H. Parti. § iii


“ce


“¢


_ tis


368 On Revealed Rerioion
Brine ‘tis not my Intention to infifton proving the
—__—“ Difference between Things being above
Se Reafon aad Things being contrary to Rea~
«* fon; or that Propofitions may be true,
4s though they are above our Reafon, fo
* Jong as they are not contrary toit.’’ Full
enough has been faid on this Subje&t, and
by no body better than by. the excellent
Mr. Boyle. .’Tis a Queftion of more Im-
portance to decide, “‘ Why any thing my-
- « fterious fhould be admitted intoa Religion, —
“ revealed for the Ufe of Man?” Andin
Anfwer to this, we need only obferve, that —
Revealed Religion being defigned for Man’s
Ufe, its effential Doetrines are plain, intelligi-
ble to all, accommodated to the Nature and
Faculties of the human Kind. But as this
Syftem not only reveals to us our Duty, but
all Motives too which may induce us to
practife it; fo, in order-to znforce thefe, ‘and —
convince us of the Truth of their divine Ori-
ginal, it was neceflary that a Hiffory of Pro-
vidence, or Gon’s Difpenfation, thould be
revealed along with them. . Hence fome-
thing my/flerious muft needs arife; unlefs you
fuppofe Man infinitein Knowledge. For as
this Syftem reveals to us feveral Particulars
Ko far as they ftand connected with Piety
and


;


 @gnd CHRISTIANITY.


and Morals) which relate to the Nature of Sz ¢ 7.


Gop, the State.of other, and fuperior Be-


ings, the original Condition of Man, the In-


terpofition. of Providence for his Redem-
ption, the Change.of his Nature and Facul-
ties, through the future Periodsof his Exift-.
ence; in all which Circumftances, his pre-
fent Reach of 'Thought could give him no
Information ; ’tis evident, that in thefe Ac-
counts, many Subjects muft be touched upon,
and other Syfems of Being occafionall

glanced at, the full Knowledge of whick,
muft be far beyond his prefent Compre-
henfion. Now fo far as thefe Truths and
Fa@s, though zmperfeétly revealed, have
any Tendency to enlighten his Mind, as to
the general Plan of Providence, or ftand
connected in any other Manner with Re/i-
gion and Virtue, fo as.to encourage and pro-
mote them, they muft furely be admitted as
ircumftances of great Propriety and Ufe. ~
Or even fuppofing fome of them to be of
none, yet if they ftand fo effentially conneé#-
éd with others which are, fo that the one —
cannot be deftréyed without the other;


-this very Circumftance of effential Union,


effectually deftroys every Objection againft
their being of divine Original. 5 2
Bb THERE


Re


ReeA®,


On Revealed Reticion |
THERE may be, likewife, and undoubt-
edly are, fome few Myfteries of another
Kind in the Mofaic .Difpenfation : Such, I
mean, as may feem, to fome Apprehen-
fions, not fo eafily reconcileable. to the mo=
ral Attributes of God: Of which Kind
there are fome too, in the Conftitution of —
the, natural World. . Now here in Reve-_
lation, as in Nature, ‘tis the Part of human
Reafon to acquiefce in this myfterious. and
unknown Part, from what is clear and known *.
Of this Kind, perhaps, is the Expulfion of


_ the Canaanites under Fofhua, which the


noble Writer hath taken fuch Pains to vili-
fy. He might with as much Reafon in-
fult the Creator, for the Admiffion of Storm,
Famine, or Pefiilence, For as in. Nature,
fo in revealed Religion, we are not to judge
of the whole Conftitution or Difpenfation of
Things, from /mal] and feeming Exceptions +
On the contrary, ‘tis the Part of Wifdom _
to determine concerning thefe feeming Ex-
ceptions froma full View of the whole Dif-


penfation. If this evidently tend to Good,


the unprejudiced Inquirer into Nature: and
Revelation attributes the Doubt and Deets


“a See Ure: $i. nO ae r Avice, I iti.


pe


_ and CHRISTIANITY. 371


nefs, which may involve any particular $F ¢ r.
Part, to his own Incapacity and Ignorance.
And juftly; for as the noble Writer hath
told us on this very Occafion, ‘ In an In-
“ finity of Things. thus relative, a Mind,
‘« which fees not znfinitely, can fee nothing
“c fully ae?

Ler us therefore, while as yet we fee but
as through a Glafs and darkly, contemplate
the Works of God with Reverence and Sub-
miffion. Let us wait the happier Hour,
when we fhall know even as we are known:
when we fhall be raifed toa more inlarged
Comprehenfion of our Creator’s immenfe
Defigns ; and the whole intelligent Crea-
tion fhall join, in confefling and adoring
the. unerring Rectitude of all his n,
tions.


SECTION VIL


HITHERTO we have feen theSrc 7.
noble Writer buffooning and difgracing hr
Chrifiianity, from a falfe Reprefentation of
its material Part: We ‘hall now confider
what he hath thrown out againft the Com-
pofition, Style, and Manner of the facred


£ Mor. Part ii. § 4.
Bb 2 Scriptures ;


372 On Revealed Revie10n


Ess ax Scriptures ; for on this too, he has thought
ns ________ it expedient to point his Raillery, ©
‘He tells us, in the ironical Fone, “ that
“ the fcriptural Defcriptions, Narrations,
«« Expreflions, and Phrafes, are in them-
“* felves many Times exceedingly pleafant,
“* entertaining, and facetious. --- That our
** Saviour’s Style, --- his Parables, Simi-
«* Jes, Comparifons, --- his Exhortations to
« his Difciples, the Images under which
«* he often couches his Morals and pruden-
“* tial Rules---carry with them a certain
“ Fefivity, Alacrity, and good Humour
«* {o remarkable, that I fhould look upon
“ it as impoffible not to be mov’d in a ic
_« fant Manner at their Recital” To
thefe general’ Cavils he hath added a ‘ot
in another Mifcellany, which, as is ufual
with all fanciful Writers, is to ftand for an
Argument. He fays, “Tis no otherwife
“< inthe grammatical Art of Characters, and
“ painted Speech, than in the Art of Paint-
“« img itfelf. I have {een, in certain Chrif-
‘ tian Churches, an antient Piece or two,
“ affirm’d, on the folemn Faith of prieftly
“ Tradition, to have been angelically and
‘« divinely wrought, by a fupernatural
* Mifcii, €. 3. é
¢ Hand


and CuRISTIANITY. Ise
«« Hand and facred Pencil. Had the PieceS # c 1.
“< happen’d to be of a Hand like Rapna- VUL
« pr’s, I could have found nothing cer-
“< tain to oppofe to this Tradition. But
“ having obferved the whole Style and
‘“* Manner of the pretended heavenly Work-
‘ manfhip to be fo indifferent, as to vary
“* in many Particulars from the Truth of
«< Art, I prefum’d within myfelf to. beg
‘© Pardon of the Tradition, and affert con-
* fidently, that, if the Pencil had been
“* Heaven-guided,.it never could have been
“ fo Jame in it’s Performance’.” This in-
genious Conceit, in the fubfequent Para-
graph, he very clearly, tho’ flyly, applies to
the holy Scriptures.
*Tis the Province of Wit to form Com-
parifons ; of Philofophy to detec their Weak-
ne/s, when they ate obtruded on us asa.
-Tef of Truth. On Examination therefore
I will venture to fay, the noble Writer’s
Parallel will be found highly irregular and
defective.
For there is an ¢ffential Difference be-
tween Paintings and Writing, both in their
End and Execution, Paintings, with.Re-
gard to their End, are Things of mere 4-
‘ Mife. v. e.-1.
Bb 3 mufement


374 On Rewsaled RELIGION


E ase: ¥ mufement and Tafte : Confequently all their
—____Value lies in the Exguifitenefs of the Art,
and the fine Hand of the Mafter. ’Tis
likewife a Species of Art, that lies chiefly
among the Few: The Bulk of Mankind (or
in the noble Writer’s more elegant Phrafe,
the mere Vulgar) being incapable, thro’a .
Want of Leifure, of gaining any Proficien-
cy in this Tafe ; or of acquiring that curious
Difcernment in Ordonnance, Drawing, and
Colouring, which is at once the Pride and
Pleafure of the Virtuofo-Tribe.

- Bur with refpeét to Language, the Af-
fair is otherwife: It’s Ends are various:
From the four different Kinds of literary
Compofition, as explained above*, there
mutt arife a correfpondent Variety of Style,
the Poetical, the Oratorial, the Hifforical,
‘and Didaéic. The Firft of thefe Kinds
alone partakes of the Nature of Piéfure, and
therefore can alone be properly compared
with it; as they are both referr'd to the
Imagination, for the End of Pleafure: The
other three Species of Compofition, tend-
ing chiefly to Urility, by the Means of
~Perfuafion or Infiruétion, draw their prime
Value from Plainnefs, Clearnefs, and Pre-

* See Efay i. § 3, ; ;

cifion :


‘and CHRISTIANITY. 37g


cifom: From being adapted, not to the Sze r.
Tafte of the faftidous Critic, but to the Ca-__Y Ul
pacities of thefe who are the intended Ob-

jects of Perfuafion or Inftruétion. Here

then the noble Writer’s Parallel is effential-

ly defective: Since it was the Intention of
Providence, inthe facred Scriptures, to
condefcend to what his Lordfhip’s Quality

and refined Wifdom intitle him to difdain,

even fo inftrut the mere Vulgar: Whereas

the End of Painting, is only the Amufe-
ment of the Few,

In regard to the Execution, we {fhall
find as wide a Difference. There is, in
philofophical Strictnefs, ‘but~ one unvary’d
Language or Style in Painting ; which is
** fuch a Modification. of Light or Colours as
‘** may imitate whatever Objects we find in
‘© Nature.” This confifts ‘not in the 4p-
plication of arbitrary Signs; but hath it’s
Foundation in the Senfes and’ Reafon of
Mankind; and is therefore the fame in eve-
ry Age did Nation. But in the literary Style
or Language, the Matter is “far otherwife,
For Language being the voluntary Appli-
cation of arbitrary Signs, according to the
Confent of different Men and Nations, there
is no jingle uniform Model of Nature to be

Bb 4 follow-


¢ ‘ ~33


376 On Revealed Rewicion:


3 $s A 4 y followed. Hence Gracefulnefs or Strength :
"of Style, Harmony ot Softne/s, copious Ex.
~ preffion, terfe Brevity, or contrafted Peri-
ods, have by turns gained the Approbation
of particular Countries. Now all thefe
Suppofed . Beauties of Speech are relative, le .
cal, and capricious; and confequently un-
worthy the Imitation of a divine Artift;
who, to fit the Speech he ordains, to the
great Work of univerfal Inftruétion, would,
we may reafonably fuppofe,  ftrip it of evée-
ry local, peculiar, and grote/que Ornament;
and convey it unaccompany’d by all; but
the more univerfal Qualitities common to
every Tongue.

Tus noble Writer, then, might with
fome Shew of Reafon have objected to the
Style of Scripture, had the Writers boaft= _
ed it’s Elegance, as MAnomert did that of —
his Koran, and defy’d all his Oppofers'to
write any thing approaching it in this Ré- -
fpe&t. But the facred Writers difcover no
Defgn or Defire of excelling as fine Writ= -

.On the contrary, St. Paux fays,
« HH came not with the Power of human
** Speech,” and gives a Reafon for it which -
does Honour to his Miffion.
Tuo’.


a.


eer


and. GURISTIANITY. 377


Tuo’ this Scrutiny alone might be fuffi- aaa
cient to-detect and difcredit the Wantonnefs
of the noble Writer’s Comparifon ; yet it
will further lead us to a full Difclofure of
the Truth; by thewing that to be the pecu-
liar Charaéteriftic of the Scripture Compo/i-
tion, which hath ever held the firft Rank a-
mong the Qualities of human Writings; I
mean; that of wmadorned SimPLICITY.

As much hath been faid by many Writ-
ers on the Subject of Simplicity, with very
little Precifion ; and particularly by the
noble Writer, who feems to feparate the

Simple Manner. from the fablime, as if they .
were incompatible’ ; and indeed in his own

-Compofitions prepofteroufly deferts the one,
when ever he attempts.the other*: It may
be neceflary here to fix the Idea of a ju/f
SimpLiciTy,. This may be faid to confit
“in Irath and Weight of SentimMENT,
*¢ cloathed in fuch Imaces and STYLE, as
“* may moft effectually convey it tothe Read-
“* er’s Mind.” — If any of thefe Circumftan-

_ Ces be wanting ; ifthe Sentiment be/falfe

or trifling, if the Imaces or Styxe be

fuch as tend rather to fix the Attention on
y Advice, Part ii. § 2. 2 See the Moralifis,
paffim.


4 : them-


378 Ox Revealed RatGion


‘Es SA ¥ themfelves, than on the Sentiment they are
employed to convey, the juff Simplicity is.
deftroyed. This, as might be proved t x a
large Induction of Particulars, is the Cir
cumftance in which the beft Critics of A %
tiquity placed the fupreme Excellence of
Writing. And, in this Ufe of the Term,
it appears, that not only the familiar, the
narrative, the didaétic, but the pathetic, and
fublime Manner too, are fo far from being
inconfiftent with Simplicity, that they are
then only in their Perfection, — —_—
‘on it.

*Tis true indeed, that the fered Re-
cords are, as the noble Writer calls them,
** multifarious, and of different Charaéters,
* varying according to the Situation, Inten-
“< tion, and natural Capacity of the Writers’, i.
Yet amidtft all this Variety of Manner, the |
reigning Quality of Simplicity is fo uniform
and confpicuous, that the boldeft Enemy of
Chriftianity will not be forward: to hazard
the Credit of his Tafe, by a it in
Queftion.

Ir we examine them in this Light, we
fhall find, that, according to the Divifion
made abovg>, they confift of Four diffe-
rent Kinds, the poetic, oratorial, biftorical,

® Mife. v.c1. > Effayi.§ 3.


and


Py eae


and CHRISTIANITY. 379


and didaétic Forms. The poetic lies chief=$ = ¢
ly in the Book of Palms, of ‘fob, and feve- Pk
ral detached: Paffages in the Prophets, parti-
cularly of J/aiah. ‘They contain many

noble Efforts of unmixed Poetry or pure Imi-
tation; yet thefe, being all centered in one.
Intention, that of extolling the Works, and
celebrating the Power, Wifdom, and Good-

nefs of the Deity, do generally partake of

the Character of Eloquence, being chiefly of

the Jyric Kind In all thefe, the great
Character of Simplicity is fo ftrongly predo-
minant, that every Attempt to emdellifb

them, by adding the fupernumerary Deco-
rations of Szy/e in Tranflation, hath ever

been found to weaken and debafe them.

As to the oratorial or pathetic Parts, innu-
merable might be produced, equal if not
_ fuperior to any recorded by prophane An-
tiquity. In thefe, the leading Character of
Simplicity is no lefs remarkable. Our Sa~
~viour’s Parables and Exhortations are ge-
nerally admirable in this Quality: Filled
with unfeigned Compaflion for the Weak-
nefs and Miferies of Man, they breathe no-
thing but the pureft Benevolence. St.
Paut’s laft Converfation: with his Friends

SE ffay i. $3.
at


380 On Revealed Revicion
be cA Tat Ephefus, on his Departure for Yerufa-
*_lem®; his Difcourfe on the Refurredtion and
on Charity ; his Reproofs, his Commenda~
tions, his Apologies, efpecially that before —
AGRIPPA ‘, are wrote in the nobleft Strain -
of Simplicity, And as a perfect Model of
this Kind, we may give the Story of Jo-
sepu and bis Brethren, which for Tender-
nefs, true Pathos, and unmixed Simplicity,
is beyond Compare fuperior to any hee
that appears in ancient Story. .
But as the moft important Part of Sorin
ture lies inthe Aifforical and preceptive Part;
efpecially in the New Teffament, whence
chiefly our Idea of Duty muft be drawn;
fo we find this uniform and Ample Manner
eminently prevailing throughout, in every —
Precept and Narration. 'The Hiftory is
conveyed in that artlefs Strain which alone
could adapt it to the Capacities of all Man-
kind; the Precepts delivered by our Savi-
our are drawn from the Principles. of com-
mon Senfe, improved by the moft exalted —
Love of Gop and Man ; and either expref-
fed in clear and direé&t Terms, or couched
under fuch Images‘and Allufions, as are every
where to be found zz Nature, fuch as are,
@ As, c. XX. . *Ib.c. xxvi.
and


| ae and CHRISTIANITY. 385


and muft ever be univerfally known, and fz-S —
_miliar to all Mankind‘; in which we may___
further obferve, his Manner ofteaching was
greatly fuperior even to the noble Writer’s
juftly applauded Socrates, who for the
moft part drew his Images and Allufions
from the le/s known Arts and Manners
of the City®. Through all this Variety of
ftriking Allufion and moral Precept, the Style
ever continues the fame, unadorned, fimple,
and, even by the noble Writer’s own Con-
feflion, “ vehement and majeftic® ;” yet never
drawing the Reader's Attention on itfelf,
but on the divine Sentiments it conveys.

To this we may further add, that thefe
feveral Kinds of Compofition are mixed and
united with fuch Propriety and Force, as is
fcarce to be equalled in any other Writings,
The poetical Parts are heightened by the
great Strokes of Eloquence and Precept ; the
pathetic, by the nobleft Imagery, and juft-
eft Morals ; andthe preceptive is ftrengthen-


£See Newton on Daniel; —Mr. Jortin’s Difcourfes ;
—Dr. Law’s Life of Curis.

& Not indeed without Reafon; fince his Defign was
def extenfive, ashe aimed not at the Inftrution of all

~ Mankind, but of the more literate Part of his Felgv>

Citizens.

A Mifer ii. 6.3. ah
ed


382 On Revealed Reticion —
Ess aved and inforced by all the Aids of Poetry,
Hl. Eloquence, and Parable; calculated at once

to engage the Imagination, to -touch the
Paffons, and command the Reafon of Man-
kind. iol
_T1s true, this unadorned Simplicity fo
confpicuous in the Scripture Compofition,
hath often given Offence to -puerile Critics.
The noble Writer. hath but revived the
Objection; it was weakly urged by Cr1-
sus in the Infancy of the Chriftian Reli-
gion‘, At the Period when Letters reyiv-
ed in Europe, the florid Tafte was fo pte-
valent in Ita/y, under the Pontificate of Leo
the-Tenth, that the Compofition of the
Scriptures was on this Account held in ge-
neral Contempt; and one of the fine Gen-
tlemen in Literature *, of thofe Days, is
known to have declared, ‘ that he dared
** not to read the Bidie, left it fhould: e2-
“ danger bis Style.” We may eafily form
a Judgment of the Tafte of that Age from.
this one Circumftance, “ that their moft
‘t.elaborate. and celebrated Compofitions _
“ were all wrote in a dead Language: For
thus they, becatite mere. Imitators, even to a


“4 Origen contra Celf. 1. vil, ~* Cardinal Pre=
TRO Bemso.


bs Degree


\


and Cunistiantty. 383
Degree of Servility. And 'tis fufficjent for $ ¥ ¢ ©.
the Defenders of the Bible to obferve, that“
along with it, every other great Model of
ancient Writing fell into the fame Difgrace
at the above-mentioned Period; while the
general Tafte and Attention was turned
from Weight of Sentiment, and Strength of
Image and Expreffion, to the /ocal and ca-
pricious Decorations of Style and Language.
But the Reign of this falfe Tafte was of
fhort Duration; fo that for a long Time
paft, the comparative Merit of ancient
Writers hath been we7ghed ina jufter Scale.
Now if we examine the Writers whofe
Compofition: hath ftood the Teft of Ages,
and obtained that higheft Honour, ‘* the
“* concurrent Approbation of diftant Times
‘© and Nations,” we fhall find that the Cha-
racter of Simplicity is the unvarying Cir-
cumftance which alone hath been able to
gain this univerfal Homage from Mankind.
Among the Greeks, whofe Writers in gene-
ral are of the fmple Kind, the divineft Poet},
the moft commanding Orafor, the fineft
Hiftorian, and deepeft Philofopher °, are,
above the reft, con{picuoufly eminent. in
this great Quality. The Roman Writers
“IHomer. ™Demofthenes. “Xenophon: ° Ariftotle;
rife


|
b
:
E


384 On Revealed Revici0n


Essa¥ rife towards Perfection according to that
Ul. Meafure of true Simplicity which they min-
gle in their Works. Indeed they are all
inferior to the Greek Models. But who
will deny, that Lucrerivs, Horacr,.
Vircit, Livy, Terence, TuLry, are
at once the /impleff and bef of Romaw Wri-
ters? Unlefs we add the noble Aunalifi*,
who appeared in After-times; who, not-
withftanding the political Turn of his Ge-
nius, which fometimes interferes, is admira-
ble in this great Quality; and by it, far fu-
perior to his Contemporaries. Tis this
one Circumftanee that hath raifed the ye-
nerable Dante, the Father of modern Poe-
try, above the fucceeding Poets of his
Country, who could never long maintain
the Jocal and temporary Honours beftowed —
upon them; but have fallen under that jaft =
Negleé, which Time! will: ever decree to
thofe who defert a suff Simplicity for the
forid Colourings of Style, contrafted Phra-
fes, affected Conceits, the mere Irappings
of Compofition, and Gothic Minurrait


P ‘Tacitus.
* Even their moft applauded Poet, the famed Tor-
QuaTo Tasso, runs fo often into this little Manner,
that nothing but the reigning falfe Tafte of the Age in
which he lived, if indeed even ¢het, can plead his


‘Tm:


and CurisTIANITY, > => — 3.85
’Tis this hath given to Borteau “he moft S£¢ 7


lafting Wreath in France, toSHAKESPEAR
and Mitton in England ; efpecially to the

laft, whofe Writings are more unmixed in

this Refpeét; and who had formed himfelf
entirely on the imple Model of the beft

Greek Writers, and the /acred Scriptures’.


-Excufe. The great Portuguese Genius, CAMoENS,
to whofe Lufiade Tasso hath been much obliged,
was much lefs faulty in this Particular, tho” he and the
Italian were nearly Contemporaries.

*Mr. DraypEN fomewhere obferves, ‘* that Mit-
&¢ pon never finks fo far below himfelf, as when he
S¢ falls on fome Trac of Scripture.” ”Tis equally true,
that he never rifes fo far above, bimfelf, as when he
falls on fome Traé? of Scripture. ”Tis eafy to guefs
what was the Drift of Mr. Drypen’s Remark. But
the Obfervations made above (Effayi. § 3.) will eafily
reconcile thefe feeming Contradictions. When Mi1-
ToN adopts the poetical Parts of Scripture, he rifes
above himfelf: But byan injudicious Application of the
hiftorical or didaétic Parts, he often falls indeed.

Turs naturally leads us to an Obfervation on Mr,
Hume’s Effay on Simplicity and Refinement in Write.
ing. He hath attempted to fix a certain Union of
thefe two Qualities, which, he fays, conftitutes the
moft perfect Form of Compofition. It were to be

wifhed he had given us fome better Rea/ons in fupport
of this Opinion, which itfelf feems to be a mere Re-
| Jinement. The Progrefs of his Argument is remarkable.
: — He draws all his Inftances from Poets; and having
given fome Examples of Poets, who are both /imple and
unpoetical in the Extreme, he arbitrarily throws. the
: Cenfure on the too great Degree of Saplesiy, inftead
| of fixing it where he ought, wiz. on the too great


Ce As


386


Essay


r


Ou Revealed Revicion


As it appears from thefe Inftances, that
Simplicity is the only univerfal Charaéteri-
ftic of juft Writing ; fo the fuperior Emi-
nence of the facred Scriptures in this prime


“Quality hath been generally acknowledged:


One of the greateft Critics in Antiquity;
himfelf confpicuous in the fublime and fim-
ple Manner, hath born thisTeftimony to the
Writings of Moses and St.Paur*. And
by Parity of Reafon wemuft conclude, that,
had he been converfant with the other fa-
cred Writers, his Ta/le and Candour would
have allowed them the fame Encomium. —


Mixture of the hifforical, oraterial, or argumentative
Species. In Proof of this, we need only alledge the


Examples of Homer, Pinpar, and CALLIMACHUS, ~


where Simplicity, and at the fame time Sudblimity and
the true poetic Forms, are in their laft Perfection. ‘Thus
all he proves is, ‘¢ that a Poet ought not to be wmpoetical.”
—Next he puts Vircit and Racine on a Level, as
having attained the neareft to this imagined Union f£
Simplicity and Refinement. Here he obligeth us again to
call his Tafte in Queftion: For every Page of RACINE
is full of Turns, both of Phrafe and Sentiment : Where-
as we fcarce meet with three Inftances of this Kind inall
Vircit’s Writings. He then gives ushis Idea of Sim-
plicity : ** Thofe Compofitions which have the Recom-
“¢ mendation of Simplicity, have nothing furprizing in


«¢ the Thought, when divefted of that Elegance of Ex~


“ preffion, and Harmony of Numbers, with which it is
cloathed.” From thefe extraordinary Premi/es, we are
naturally prepared to expect his Conclufon, *¢ that Ca=
“ TULLUs and PARNEL are his favourite Authors!”

* Longinus,
Bur


and CHRISTIANITY. 387,


~ Bur we need not have Recourfe to Au-S ec Tr.
thorities, for the Proof of the fuperior ssi
Weight and Dignity of the facred Scrip-
tures, in this great Quality. “Tis evident
to Demonftration from the following. Cir-
cumftance.. It hath been often obferved,
even by Writers of no mean Rank, that
« the Scriptures fuffer in their Credit by
«© the Difadvantage of a literal Verfion,
«© while other ancient Writings enjoy the
« Advantage of a free and embellifhed Tranf-
‘© Jation.” But in Reality thefe Gentle-
mens Concern is ill placed and groundlefs.
For the Truthis, ‘“* That moft other Wri-
“ tings are indeed zmpairedby aliteral Tranf-
‘ Jation; whereas, giving only a due Re-
<< gard to the Idioms of different Languages,
* the facred Writings when Literally tranfi
_ © Jated, are then in their full Perfection.”
“Now this is an internal Proof, that in all
_other Writings there is‘a Mixture of Jocal,
relative, exterior Ornament; which _ is
often loft in the Transfufion from one Lan-
guage to another. But the internal Beau-
‘ties which depend not on the particular
Conftruction of Tongues, no Change of Tongue
can deftroy. Hence the Béble-Compo/fition
prelerves it’s native Beauty and Strength,
C62 alike


| acs
|


ns ie
-


Neen nn amnesia tiated a e


388 = On Revealed RELIGION —


Es WL alike in every Language, by the fole Ener-
gy of unadorned Phrafe, natural Images,
Weight of Sentiment, and great Simpli-
cit
OTs in this Refpeét, like a rich Vein of
Gold, which, under the fevereft Trials of
Heat, Cold, and Moifture, retains its. origi-
nal Weight and Splendor, without either Lofs
or Alloy ; while bafer Metals are corrupted
by Earth, Air, Water, Fire, and aflimilated __
to the various Elements thro’ which they _
S. Set"
Tuts Circumftance then may be juftly
regarded as fufficient to vindicate the Com-
pofition of the facred Scriptures ; as it is at
once their chief Excellence, and greateft Se-
curity. °Tis their Excellence, as it renders
them intelligible and ufeful to all; ’tis their
Security, as it prevents their being difguifed
by the falfe and capricious Ornaments of
vain or weak Tranflators.
WE may fafely appeal to Experience and
‘Fact for the Confirmation of thefe Remarks _
on the fuperior Simplicity, Utility, and Ex-
-cellence of the Style of holy Scripture.
Is there any Book in the World, fo perfect-
‘ly adapted to all Capacities? that contains
fuch fublime and exalting Precepts, convey'd
in


Ta


and CHRISTIANITY.


in fuch an artlefs and intelligible Strain ? thatS= ¢ *-


can be read with fuch Pleafure and Advan-


tage, by the lettered Sage and the unlettered


Peafant 2 To whom then would the noble
Writer fend Mankind for religious and mo-
ral Inftruétion? To the divine PLaro, it
may be fuppofed; or, more probably, to the


‘inraptured Strains of Puriocies and THE-,


octes. ‘And fure, Mankind muft reap
much Inftruétion and Advantage from the
puffed Epitaphs and fuftian Style of a philofo-
phical Romance. Wemay treafonably hope
indeed, foon to fee (nay, do we not already
fee?) the happy Effeéts of this high Difci-
pline. For in Fact, the noble Writer’s
Charaéteriftics are now the ftanding Oracle
in the Office, the Shop, nay, asl am inform-
ed, fometimes, even in the Codler’s Stall,
We need not wonder therefore, that in thefe
new Habitations of Ta/e, fublimed Phraje,
and abftrufe Philofophy, the /imple Strains of
the Gofpel are damned and difcarded.

To return then to the noble Writer’s
Comparifon, (if indeed we have departed
from it) thefe united Obfervations may con-
vince us, that the only Circumftance in
Painting, which can with any Propriety
be compared to literary Sty/e, is that of

Cc 3 Colouring.


a Ree Py _* a
gee “ee
390 On Revealed Revicgion
Es ae ¥ Coluuring. And on this Principle we may =
. os _forther confirm all that hath been faidon
==" the fuperior Excellence of the /imple. Man- me
‘ner. For ’tis well known, and the noble S
Writer knew it, that, while the Mathai
“this fine Art confined the Pencil to the ge- _
nuine Forms of Grace and Greatnefs, and
only fuperadded to thefe the temperate Site
~ bellifhments of a chaftifed and modeffCo-
Jouring, the Art grew towards its Peon E: ;
* tion: ~-But_ no fooner was their fo
turned from Truth, Simplicity, and Defign, —
to the gaudy Decorations of a rich an a.
lufcious Colouring, than their Credit declin
ed with their Art: And the xo a 3
Eye, which contemplates the old Pidtures o
with Admiration, furveys the modern wilt Re
Indifference or Contempt. ar
To conclude. We fee. there are two ¥
Kinds of Compofition, effentially oppofed
to each other. The one turns the Atten-
tion on i¢/elf; the other on the Truths it.com=
veys. The firft may be juftly compared
to a Sun-Beam playing on the Surface of
the Water, which attraé/s and dazzles the
Beholder’s Eye by its own ufelefs Splendor.
The laft is like a Sun-Beam darting to the
Bottom; which, while itfelf is unfeen, or
unobferved,


and CHRISTIANITY, 3982
unobferved, communicates its Brightnefs, and $ ca a
illumines every Objett on which it falls. Dadsaacber

How far the fir/ of thefe may belong to
the; noble Writer, let others determine. .
Tis fufficient to have proved, that the. /a/ .

-is the wnvaried Style and Manner = the -
Sacred Scriptures.


WScE CesT NE TX ES ;


IT would have been ftrange, had his§ yc 7,
Lordthip emptied fo much of his Gall on 1X.
Chriftianity, without beftowing a Share on™
its Minifters. It may therefore be ex-
pected, that fomething fhould be faid on
his Treatment of the Engli/h Clergy.

' So far as his Spirit of Satire may have
been provoked by the perfecuting and into-
lerant Principles of fome of the Clergy in
his Time, ’tis highly commendable. | It
matters not in what Rank, Order, or Pro-
feffion, the Enemies of Freedom may ap-
! pear. What Shape or Pretence foever they
i mayaffume, ’tisa Work of true Charity to
ftigmatize and difgrace them, as the Ene-
; mies of Mankind,

But it appears ‘too evidently, that the
noble Writer’s Spleen arofe from another
Foundation. ‘For his Satire is not fo often


Cc 4 pointed -


”
i


392. On Revealed Reic10Nn
E “tr pointed againft them, as being the Enemies
of Freedom, as the Friends of Chriftianity, —
With a View of difgracing them in this
Regard, he hath ridiculed and abufed their
Writings, their Preaching, and even their
Perfons. Jt will only be neceflary to fele&
a few Inftances of this Kind, from an infi-
nite Number; in all which, the Delicacy
~ of the Raillery is fo confpicuous, as to me

no Illuftration.

In his Soliloquy, he hath paid his Coma
plimentsto the Writings of the Clergy, under
the Title of ‘ Candidates for Authorfhip
“ ofthe fandify’d Kind.” << Thefe, he
*« fays, may be termed a: fort of P/eudoe
“ Afcetics, who can have no real Converfe
‘* either with themfelyes or with Heaven.”
---* And although the Books of this fort,
“by a common Idiom, are called good
* Books, the Authors for certain are a forry
*« Race.” --- “ A Saint-Author, of all Men |
“ leaf values Politene/s.---He is above the
** Confideration of that, which, ina narrow _
** Senfe, we call Manners: Nor is he apt
** to examine any other Faults, than thofe
** which he calls Sins ‘.” .


* Solil. Part i. § 1,
Tuvus


and CHRISTIANITY. 393
''Tuvs he deals with the Clergy, when S®¢ t-
they are dull enough to write ferioufly on
the moft interefing Subjects. But if any
of the Order happens to fall into a gayer
_ Turn of Compofition, the Charge is re-
i newed under another Form. Then, “ the
‘© burlefque Divinity grows mightily in
** vogue ; and the cry’d up Anfwers to He-
“* terodox Difcourfes are generally fuch as
‘are written in Drollery---‘foy to the Re- |
*¢ yverend Authors, who can afford to be
_* thus gay, and condefcend to correé& us in
“ this Lay-Wit’.”

Tueir Preaching isanother ftanding Sub-
ject of Derifion: And ridiculed they muft
be, whether they divide their Difcourfe, or
divide it not. If the firft, then the follow-
ing Stroke of Raillery is prepar’d for them :
** Come we now (as our authentic Rhetori-
“* cians exprefs themfelves)' to our fecond
‘¢ Head*.’ If the latter, then ‘ our reli-
«© gious Paffors have changed their Manner
“* of diftributing to us their Spiritual Food

--. they have run into the more favory
way of Jearned Ragout and Medley. "The
| elegant Court-Divine exhorts in Mifcel-


YMife. t Cy Oy * Mife. ics 3.
“© Jany,


On Revealed Reticion.


Essay“ Jaay, and is athamed to bring his Tao's


“© and. Three's before a fafhionable Affem-


« bly.” !


. The Defenders of Chriftianity are baited.
in. their. Turn. . ‘ For Example,, let-a.
‘* zealous Divine and flaming Champion of.
** our Faith, when inclined to thew him--
“* felf in Print, make choice of fome tre-°
“* mendous Myftery of Religion, oppofed:
‘* heretofore by fome damnable Herefiarch.”*
--- “ A Ring is made, and Readers gather’
“* in Abundance... Every one takes Party’
“« and encourages his own Side.”  “* This»
<* ‘foal be my Champion !—This Man for my
‘* Money !—Well bit on our Side!— Again,
“a good Stroke !—There he was even with
** bim!—Have at him next Bout !|—~Excel-,
“* lent Sport?!” / ‘i

The fame familiar Elegance of Compo-’
fition, joined with a furprifing Effort in:
the noble. Writer’s own Sublime, rans’
through the following Paragraph ; where’
he compares a Controverfy in Divinity, to
a Match at Foot-Bal/, ‘* So have 1 known’
“ a crafty Glazier, in time of Froft, pro~
*“« cure aFoot-Batz, to draw into the
* Street the emulous Chiefs of the robuft

I Mift.iinc. 3, * Mife.i, cas”
S Youth.


-;


y


a aR A Wa
Diba, a


. and CHRISTIANITY.


«Youth. The-tumid: Bladder-bounds at$ © ¢ vr.
“every Krex, burfs the withfanding =


“ Casements; the Chaffys, Lanterns, and


“all the: drittle ‘vitreous Ware. The
“ Noife of Blows and Out-cries fills the


«© wHote NEIGHBOURHOOD’; and the
“© Ruins of Glafs cover the./fony Pavements:
** till the bloated battering Engine, fubdued
“by Force of Foor and: Fist, and tyéeld-
‘ing up its Breath at many’a fatal CRAN-
“ ny, becomes lank and harmlefs, finks
‘* in its Flight, and’ can no longer uphold


_ “ the Spirit of the contending Parties +.” =~


Nor content “with thefe /evere Strokes of
Raillery, the noble Writer prepares a more
deadly Blow at the Clergy ;\ even no lefs
than ruining their Fortunes among the
Fair-Sex. And here the difcerning Rea-’
der will: readily. guefs, that his Ridicule
muft be needs levelled at their Perfons.’
He introduces, or drags in, ‘the Story of
OrnHeEto and Despemona ;y reprefents the
one as: a miraculous Story-teller, ‘the other:
as, a .credulous’ Hearers He then adds, *
“* But why. the» Poet, amongft his Greek
‘* Names; fhould have chofen one which
*§ denoted the Lady /uperffitious, 1 can’t

8 Mifer is cs Wo
imagine;


396 On Revealed Rivicion,
Essay * imagine; unlefs, as Poets are fometimes
Ml. «Prophets too, he fhould figuratively, un-
‘« der this dark Type, have reprefented to
*© us, that, about a hundred Years after his
*< Tiine, the: Fair Sex of this Ifland fhould,
‘© by other monftrous Tales, be fo feduced, as
*< to turn their Favour chiefly on the Ta/e-
“© tellers ;.and change. their natural Incli-
® nation for fair, candid, and courteous —
“< Knights, into a Paffion for 2 safaris
‘© Race of black Inchanters >.”
I cannor think this elegant Paffage de-
ferves a particular Reply. | ’Tis fuppofed,
the noble Writer defigned it only.as a Proof,
“ That the Saint-Author of all Men leat
“* walues Politenefs;’ as a Proof how inca=
pable he was of violating his own Rule, or
exercifing any Degree of “ that grofs fort of
“* Raillery, which is fo offenfive in good Com-
Indeed all the delicate Paragraphs here
cited are much of the fame Nature; and
afford an undeniable Proof, how great a
-Mafter his Lordfhip was, in» the true re=
Jined Manner of Attic Wit. I fhall only’
add, that if, according to the Noble Wri-
ter’s projected Scheme of Confutation, the*


» Soli. Partii. § 3. ¢ Witand H, Parti. §2.
Englifh


and CuRISTIANITY, 397


Englifh Clergy fhould ever be baited in the § a
way.of Puppet-fhow: at Bart l mew-Fair; I
would recommend the above Paflages, with
many parallel ones in the Charaéeriftics, to
the Managers of the Drama ;, as being ad-
mirably fuited to the Genius of their. waoden
Dros, whether he fhould chufe to fwag-
ger inthe Sock, or frut in the Bufkin.
Were the Clergy difpofed toreturn.thefe
Compliments, zz Kind, it may be queftioned
whether his Lordfhip’s. Admirers. would
acquit them of coarfe Manners. But how-
ever fome of that Body may dlindly hate,
and others as d/indly admire, the Author, of
the Charaéterifiics; yet the beft and wifeft
of the Profeffion, fo far as I have been able
to learn from their Converfation, would
probably rather chufe to return his Saluta-
tions in the following Manner :
‘ Notwithftanding the fuperior Airs of
* Contempt, which on all Occafions your
‘ Lordfhip is pleafed to afflume, we. cannot
_ *£ think you of fuch Ability, as you feem to
“© appear inyour own Eyes: Neither can we
‘ think this overweening Opinion. of your-
* felf, this Difdain of all who adopt not '
‘ your peculiar Tenets, is any Proof of real
£ Wifdom, fince yourfelf hath taught us


ee


398


a


-* fhall prove lef conceited.” ‘Though we
* feorn to revile you, yet we judge our- —
* felves well intitled to tell you the Truth


«


fecond, confiderable ; in the laft, we mutt —


wnmnnananaaanA hh A AH A ll lCUce UR UBL aA Oe CU


OF Revealed RECN ee


‘to believe, = that as Wwe grow wifer ah


on every Subject." We regard, therefore, 1. £5
fine Imagination, an extenfive Know me
and a commanding ‘fddgment, as three
Qualitiesindependent on each other. In =
the firft, we think you eminent ; in the a


be'excufed, if we think you either emi-
nent nor confiderable: Andon this Account —
we can allot you 70 high Rank, in the Scale —
of true Genius. Suitable to this, a
Yafte in Arts is much fuperior to your — ar
Talents for Philofophy. The only Chain
of Reafoning you have exhibited, is found
in your Enquiry concerning Virtue : Nor |
is even this faftened to the Throne of Truth, —
but hangs trembling from a /hadowy and
aerial Fabric, blown up by a fportive
Imagination. You have indeed obtained
the Charatter ofan original Writer in | Phi- 4
lofophy : how little you deferve this mutt
needs be known to all who. are verfed in
the Greek Schools ; for thence the rational
Part of your Syftem is chiefly drawn.
What youborrow, you: often embe ifo,
‘ fome-


and Geter, 399


© fometimes difguife, never frengthen : but S = en,
“when you attempt to become original, -

* you only convince us how’ ill qualified

© you are for fuch a Tafk. Accordingly,

© wefind in the general Turn of your Writ-

‘ ings, meagre Sentiments ftudioufly adorned

© by a Glare of Words, and a Wafte of Ima-

‘ gery: with thefe you amufe the common

© Reader; like the unqualified Painter, who,

‘ unable to reach the Beauties of a juft and
© wigorous Expreffion, covers a lifelefs Fi-
* gure with gaudy Draperies. And we

* cannot but think, that, had you ftudied the

* Writings of that great and excellent Man

* whom you fo weakly deride *, your Vo-

©. lumes, whatever they had loft ia Bulk,

© would have gained in Weight and Splendor.
© Wiru regard to the Buffoonries, which
* you have occafionally exercifed on Chrif-

¢ ftianity, in what you call “ your Random

_ © Effays;” they are fo much below the
© Character of the Philofopher, that it is

¢ matter of Surprize to us, that you could

‘ think they can become the Man of Wit.

© It is true, among thofe whom you moft

* defpife, the mere Vulgar, they have gained

© you the Character of an in7mitable Author ;

4 Mr. Locke. See Advice, &c, ‘Part iii. § r.

Je * Le among


4.00 On Revealed Reuicion


Essay ¢ among Readers of that Rank “ who are
et ready to fwallow any low Drollery or
“< ef ;” among thofe whom you have elfe--
‘ where defcribed, “ who, while they pre-
“* tend to fuch a Scrutiny of other Evidences,
“¢ are the readieft to take the Evidence of the
“< the greateft Deceivers in the World, their
“< own Paflions:.” But whatever thefe
* Paflages may be in their Confequences, we
* cannot but think them,.in their own Na-
* ture, even contemptible. For, to ufe your
* own 4ttic Phrafe, “ to twitch, fnap, fnub
“< up, or banter, to torture Sentences and
“ Phrafes, and turn a few Expreflions into
“« Ridicule, is not fufficient to conflitute
“ what is properly efteemed a Writer.”
‘ On this Account we look upon thefe
* boafted Paflages in your Book, to be of
* that Kind which are calculated only * to
“© create Diverfion to. thofe who look no fur-
*« ther®;” and in which, as you elfewhere
““obferve, ‘* the mof confufed Head, if
«« fraught witha little Invention, and provid-
‘© ed with Common-Place-Book Learning,
“© may exert itfelf to as much Advantage,
“ as the moft orderly and well-fettled Fudg-
‘* ment», Wecannot therefore exprefs any
© Mor.P.ii.§ 1. Mife. vite2e € Miferivcet. * Ib,
I © Efteem


aud CHRISTIANITY. 401


* Efteem either for the Scurrilities of theSzc x.
© coarfe JesTER, or the trim Delicacy and

‘ Self-Admiration of the literary NARcIs-
© sus.

‘ But, my Lord, Pet lies a heavier
¢ Charge againgt be than. that of dad Writ-
* ing. We mean the Indecency and Immo-
© rality of your Condyé, in your Manner of
* attacking Chriflianity. You would be
‘ thought a, Lover of your Country ; yet
you, pour Cor upon its Laws and In-
© flitutions. You allow the Propriety of a

* religious Efabli Yoment; yetyou take every
_ © Qecafion to deride it. You contend for a
* public Leading in Religion; yet you per-
* petually infinuate, that Mankind are /ed by
* the Nofe. You fay, ‘ The Public ought
‘< not to be infulted to its Face;” yet your
© Writings are one continued Infult upon its
© Opinions, Our excellent and unrivaled
‘ Conftitution allows a perfect Freedom of
* Inquiry; had youthen argued ingenuou/ly
‘ and fairly againft Chriflianity, without
* attempting Ridicule ; whatever Opinion
¥.


we might have entertained of your Head,
we might at leaft have thought favourably
of your Heart, But in direct Oppofition
to this Rule, you always ridicule, {carce

D § ever


Pak hee


(


. b
iz 402 On Revealed RELIGION. Piatt ;


Essay * ever argue; you endeavour to inftil legal —
a se Opinions, without bringing any Evidence 5
* to fupport either their Ujefulnefsor Truth : ek
* You give. thefe crude Buffoonries to ‘the q

* € World in Print; and is not this infulting

© the Public to its Facet this Inftance,

© we ‘mutt think you a bad€itizen; andto

£ be ranked among thofomw’ om a Writer, ‘.

» * by no means prejudiced in Favour of Re- ~

‘ ligion, thus juftly er. “ Who I

“ hardly know for what End, have written

“* againft the Religion of their Country, ‘and

“© without pretending to Subfpitute any thing

“« better, or more practicable, in its Place,

** qwould deprive us of our happy Eftablifo-

“< ment, merely, as it fhould Jeem, for the

“« Pleafure of pulling down and doing | Myf-

“ chief ',” Béfides this, my Lord, we muft

‘ take the Liberty to fay, that you betray

© fuch frequent Marks of Infincerity and de«
 figned Mifreprefentation in yourT'reatment

© of Chriftignity, as but ill confifts with that

* Reverence which you owe to Truth and to

‘ yourfelf ; fuch as becomes not @ Man,

© much lefs a Man whom the Public Con=

* fent hath diftinguithed with the Title ay

£ Ricut HonouraBLe,


i Rigidity into Homer’s Life and Writings, § 6. ee
{ Wha


Fe :
and CHRISTIANITY. — 403
© What your particular Motives may haveS Ec 7.
© been tothis Treatment of Chri/fianity, you _
© beftknow. The moft excufable Tempta-
‘ tion to this range Condudt, that we can
* aflign, muft have been the natural Preva-
« lence of Spleen. Mgr, as you obferve, * all
* fplenetic Pédple have a neteffary Propen-
‘« fity to Criticaxm and Satire.” — The
© Spirit of Satire rifes with the ill Mood;
“* and the. wlll fn of Men thus difeafed
* and thrown out OF good Humour, is to find
“© Fault, cenfure; unravel, confound, and

leave nothing without Exception and Con-
.troverfy *.”

‘ Far be it from us to derogate from
your private Virtues ; tho’ we cannot but
* with, that in your Treatment of Chriflia-
‘ nity, you had given better Proofs of that
« univerfal Charity, which you fo warmly
‘ profefs ; even while you are reviling that
© Religion where alone it is to be found.—
© There is another Circumftance, that fure
« the more humane Part of your Admirers
would hefitate upon; we mean, that ex-
treme Contempt you exprefs for thofe you
call the mereVulgar. Your Regard feems
folely centered in eftablifhing your peculiar
£ Syflem among thofe you call “ Men of:

* Mife. ii. c. 3.
Dd2z “© Fafhion


~


«


ce


€


F | . “ah \: were
404 «= On Revealed Raurovon
Essay Fafhion and Breeding ;” whileyougiveup


_ «the Pulear, that is (to fpeak with dueRe-


© verence of the Works of Gop) theBulkof =
« your Fellow-Creatures, as a proper Prey to
‘ the fuppoled Delufions and Tyranny of
« thofe, whorn you buafid as the Enemies
“of Mankind. How thisContempt forthe —
* greateft Part of your Species can confit
« with true Virtue or Charity, we are ata _
* Lofs to comprehend. "Tigteertain, Gbri-
© flionity would have taught you otherwife. -
‘ Nay; my Lord, a reat Roman, as much
« your Superior in Station, as in Genius and
‘ aétive Virtue, would have told you, * that ;
“ true Goodnefs extends itfelfto the Mul-
« titude, that Virtue is not difdainfal or
** proud; but regards all Ranks of Mén,
** and confults their Welfare; which it VG
~ could not do, if it defpifed the Vulgar
‘ Chriflianity hath nobly heightened this _
‘ Principle; and recommends the Weak, the —
* Poor, the Ignorant, as the proper Objects —
* not only of our Charity, but Infiruction, —
‘ And however mortifying it may beto
* proud Minds, we muft fay, that we fre-
* quently meet with Men in the lower Ranks —
‘ of Life, fometimes even in Cities, often


i Cicero, Lel,


r = he a ys
-, : —_> rene,
x ‘. faa a 2


Fe  @nd CurisTIANITY. qos.
in Cottages, who when infruéted in theS®¢ T+
Principles of true Chriffianity, are fuperiot_—_,
in Knowledge, Worth, and Happinefs, to —

thofe who hold them in Contempt.

‘ WirxH regard to your Treatment of
* ourfelves: It gives us no Concern. Fort
© in one Word, Calumnies thrown on whole ©


a a a a


Bodies of Men, are unmeaning and felf-
confuted. ‘* You may therefore proceed
“ in your Invectives; beftowing as free _
« Language of that Kind, as yout Charity
“ and fupetior Breeding will permit. You
“¢ may liberally deal your courtly Compli-
“© ments and Salutations in what Diale& you
i “* think fit; fince for our own Part, neither
“ the Names of Bigots, Impoftors, Pedants,
“ Formalifts, Gladiatorian Penmen, Flaming
“< Champions of the Faith, Black Tribe, or
** Black Inchanters ™, will in the leat {can-
** dalize us, while the Sentence comes only
** from the Enemies of our Majer. Onthe
* contrary, we rather ftrive with ourfelves
** to fupprefs whatever Vanity might natu-
** rally arife in us, from fuch Favour be-
** ftowed. For whatever may, in the Bot-
*< tom, be intended us, by fachaTreatment,


-'@ Namesbeftowed on the Englith Clergy throughout
the Charaéteriftics.
<¢ *ti5


406 On Revealed ReviGion |

B Bae YAH tis impofible for us to term it other than

“__“ Favour, fince there are certain Enmities

“ which it will be ever efteemed a os
“* Honour to have merited"

* You have indeed wifely and artfally

* endeavoured to zwtimidate us from expof+

* ing the Folly of your Jnfu/ts on Religion

© and Chriftianity ; by reprefenting fuch an


Attempt as being in itfelf Contemptible.

For thus you are pleafed to fpeak: “ It
“* muft be cwned, that when a Writer of any
“* Kind is fo confiderable as to deferve the
“« Labour and Pains of fome threwd Heads
“to refute him in Public, be may, in the
‘* Quality of an Author, de ju/lly congratu-
** Jated on that Occafion. ’Tis fuppofed ne-
** cefjarily, that he muft have writ with fome
“ kind of Ability or Wit°.”

* To obviate this Remark, is the only fur-
ther Trouble we fhall give your Lordthip
onthe prefent Occafion. And here, without
any particular Application to yourfelf, we
muft beg Leave to offer the plain Reafon
why we think your Obfervation, however
plaufible and commonly received, is yet
entirely groundlefs, Indeed, with regard
to Writings of mere Speculation or Criti-

® See Mf. v.c.3 9% MGf.i, c. 2.


‘ cifm,


ra n n n “ a a“ n


; . € Mankind, “ if Authors write ill they are. ania
F « defpifed” and forgotten. At leaft, as
© the Satirif obferves, they ought tobe fo" :
* And on this Account, many Parts of the
© Charaéterifiics will, Provably; tse for
© ever uncenfured by us. © ~
‘ Bur there are other Kinds of bid .
© Writing, which will ever bid fair to hive
¢ and be admired. We mean, fuch as mini-
© fler to the low Paffions and Vices of Man-
« kind; among which, Riprcuve on Re- ©
© r1G10Nn is ofall others the moft favourite
‘Topic. ‘And even where thefe A ffections
i ‘ do not prevail, the Generality of Men, thro’
* the Weaknefs of Nature, are eafily mifled
‘in Matters even of the neareft Concern-
‘ment, by Sopbifiry or Buffoonry ; by a
* Hint, a Sarcafm, or an Allufion. Now in
* this Cafe, ‘tis furely a proper and rational,
* tho’ perhaps no ea/y Tatk, to detec? Mifre-
‘ prefentation, and lead Mankind back again
» ‘ to the Paths of Truth and Happinefs. For
‘ the Effects of Ridicule on the Mind, re=


P Quel Demon vous irrite, & vous porte 2 medire ?
Un Livre vius deplait : Qui vous force a le lire?
Laiffez mourir un Fat dans fon Obfeurité.
. Un Auteur we peut il poustir en Sureté ?
*
Boileau, Sat. ix.


© femble


; ‘ % - x a
We ss
i SO aae hae


and CHRISTIANITY. 407
© cifim, which affe& not the Happinefs. of S ate Ts


Naar lo t
‘ Lordthip’s full Acknowledgment;


« JustNess of Thnushe, is reais


teadlopt and conclude with your ¢ es Ex:
€ preffion, “ In the fame.
“ zicrous Censure, craftily wore
* pronounced with ASSURANCE, is
« pafs with Mankind for SHREWD
s* foa VIRULENT (or a VISIONARY )
“4m, in bold Exprefions, tho’ witha


Bt i
for TRUE Puriosopuy..”


¢ Miratifs, Poin Vane


FINI Ss.


Bayeri sch 8


Staatsbibliothek
MUNCHEN


Be ie MDZ PiatcseunysZentrun
taatsBibliothe! Digitale Bibliothek


Brown, John,


Essays on the characteristics of the earl of Shaftesbury


London 1755


P.o.angl. 38 w
urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb10745034-4
